■b


■HW


BOSTON
PUBLIC
LIBRARY


a


r^w


THE


GULISTAN


OR    ROSE    GARDEN.


BY


MUSLE-HUDDEEN    SHEIK   SAADI,

_  OF  SHIRAZ.

TRANSLATED   FROM   THE   ORIGINAL   BY

FRANCIS   GLADWIN.

WITH   AN    ESSAY   ON    SAADl's   LIFE  AND   GENIUS,

By  JAMES   ROSS,

AND  A  PREFACE,

By   R.    W.    EMERSON.


BOSTON :
TICKNOR    AND     FIELDS
1865.


fZCf


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1864,  by

TICKNOR    AND    FIELDS,

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  District  of  Massachusetts.


University  Press:

Welch,   Bigelow,   and  Company,

Cambridge.


PREFACE


TO   THE  AMERICAN    EDITION.


HILST  the  Journal  of  the  Oriental
Society  attests  the  presence  of  good
Semitic  and  Sanskrit  scholars  in  our
colleges,  no  translation  of  an  East-
ern poet  has  yet  appeared  in  America.  Of  the
two  hundred  Persian  bards  of  whose  genius  Von
Hammer  Purgstall  has  given  specimens  to  Ger-
many, we  have  had  only  some  fragments  col-
lected in  journals  and  anthologies.  There  are
signs  that  this  neglect  is  about  to  be  retrieved.
In  the  interval,  whilst  we  wait  for  translations
of  our  own,  the  publishers  have  wished  to  give
this  old  book,  which  now  for  six  hundred  years
has  had  currency  in  other  countries,  a  popular
form  for  the  American  public.  Of  three  re-
spectable English  translations,  that  of  Gladwin
has  been  preferred,  for  its  more  simple  and  forci-
ble style ;  and  the  Essay  of  Mr.  James  Ross,
on  the  Life  and  Genius  of  Saadi,  has  been  pre-
fixed.    Mr.  Gladwin  has  not  thought  fit  to  turn


iv  PREFACE.

into  rhyme  the  passages  of  verse  with  which  the
Gulistan  is  interspersed.  It  is  the  less  impor-
tant, that  these  verses  are  seldom  more  than  a
metrical  repetition  of  the  sentiment  of  the  para-
graph.

The  slowness  to  import  these  books  into  our
libraries  —  mainly  owing,  no  doubt,  to  the  for-
bidding difficulty  of  the  original  languages  —
is  due  also  in  part  to  some  repulsion  in  the
genius  of  races.  At  first  sight,  the  Oriental
rhetoric  does  not  please  our  Western  taste.  Life
in  the  East  wants  the  complexity  of  European
and  American  existence  ;  and  in  their  writing
a  certain  monotony  betrays  the  poverty  of  the
landscape,  and  of  social  conditions.  We  fancy
we  are  soon  familiar  with  all  their  images.
Medschun  and  Leila,  rose  and  nightingale,  par-
rots and  tulips  ;  mosques  and  dervishes  ;  desert,
caravan,  and  robbers  ;  peeps  at  the  harem  ;  bags
of  gold  dinars  ;  slaves,  horses,  camels,  sabres,
shawls,  pearls,  amber,  cohol,  and  henna  ;  insane
compliments  to  the  Sultan,  borrowed  from  the
language  of  prayer ;  Hebrew  and  Gueber  le-
gends molten  into  Arabesque;  —  'tis  a  short
inventory  of  topics  and  tropes,  which  incessant-
ly return  in  Persian  poetry.  I  do  not  know  but,
at  the  first  encounter,  many  readers  take  also
an  impression  of  tawdry  rhetoric,  an  exaggera-
tion, and  a  taste  for  scarlet,  running  to  the  bor-


PREFACE.  v

ders  of  the  negrofine,  —  or,  if  not,  yet  a  push-
ing of  the  luxury  of  ear  and  eye  where  it  does
not  belong,  as  the  Chinese  in  their  mathematics
employ  the  colors  blue  and  red  for  algebraic
signs,  instead  of  our  pitiless  x  and  y.  These
blemishes  disappear  or  diminish  on  better  ac-
quaintance. Where  there  is  real  merit,  we  are
soon  reconciled  to  differences  of  taste.  The
charge  of  monotony  lies  more  against  the  nu-
merous Western  imitations  than  against  the  Per-
sians themselves,  and  though  the  torrid,  like  the
arctic  zone,  puts  some  limit  to  variety,  it  is  least
felt  in  the  masters.  It  is  the  privilege  of  genius
to  play  its  game  indifferently  with  few  as  with
many  pieces,  as  Nature  draws  all  her  opulence
out  of  a  few  elements.  Saadi  exhibits  perpetual
variety  of  situation  and  incident,  and  an  equal
depth  of  experience  with  Cardinal  de  Retz  in
Paris,  or  Doctor  Johnson  in  London.  He  finds
room  on  his  narrow  canvas  for  the  extremes  of
lot,  the  play  of  motives,  the  rule  of  destiny,  the
lessons  of  morals,  and  the  portraits  of  great
men.  He  has  furnished  the  originals  of  a  mul-
titude of  tales  and  proverbs  which  are  current
in  our  mouths,  and  attributed  by  us  to  recent
writers;  as,  for  example,  the  story  of  "Abra-
ham and  the  Fire-worshipper,"  once  claimed  for
Doctor  Franklin,  and  afterwards  traced  to  Jere-
my Taylor,  who  probably  found  it  in  Olearius.


vi  PREFACE.

The  superlative,  so  distasteful  in  the  temper-
ate region,  has  vivacity  in  the  Eastern  speech.
"A  tax-gatherer,"  says  Saadi,  "fell  into  a  place
so  dangerous,  that,  from  fear,  a  male  lion  would
become  a  female."  In  his  compliments  to  the
Shah,  he  says  :  "  The  incurvated  back  of  the
sky  became  straight  with  joy  at  thy  birth."  Of
dunces  he  says,  with  a  double  superlative :
"  If  the  ass  of  Christ  should  go  to  Mecca,  it
would  come  back  an  ass  still."  It  is  a  saying
from  I  know  not  what  poet :  "  If  the  elegant
verses  of  Dhoair  Fariabi  fall  into  thy  hands,
fail  not  to  steal  them,  though  it  were  in  the
sacred  temple  of  Mecca  itself."  But  the  wild-
ness  of  license  appears  in  poetical  praises  of  the
Sultan  :  "  When  his  bow  moves,  it  is  already
the  last  day  (for  his  enemies) :  whom  his  onset
singles  out,  to  him  is  life  not  appointed ;  and
the  ghost  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  not  sure  of
its  time."

But  when  once  the  works  of  these  poets  are
made  accessible,  they  must  draw  the  curiosity
of  good  readers.  It  is  provincial  to  ignore  them.
If,  as  Mackintosh  said,  "  whatever  is  popular
deserves  attention,"  much  more  does  that  which
has  fame.  The  poet  stands  in  strict  relation
to  his  people :  he  has  the  over-dose  of  their  na-
tionality. We  did  not  know  them,  until  they
declared  their  taste  by  their  enthusiastic  welcome


PREFACE.


vn


of  his  genius.  Foreign  criticism  might  easily
neglect  him,  unless  their  applauses  showed  the
high  historic  importance  of  his  powers.  In
these  songs  and  elegies  breaks  into  light  the
national  mind  of  the  Persians  and  Arabians.
The  monotonies  which  we  accuse,  accuse  our
own.  We  pass  into  a  new  landscape,  new  cos-
tume, new  religion,  new  manners  and  customs,
under  which  humanity  nestles  very  comfortably
at  Shiraz  and  Mecca,  with  good  appetite,  and
with  moral  and  intellectual  results  that  corre-
spond, point  for  point,  with  ours  at  New  York
and  London.  It  needs  in  every  sense  a  free
translation,  just  as,  from  geographical  position,
the  Persians  attribute  to  the  east  wind  what
we  say  of  the  west.

Saadi,  though  he  has  not  the  lyric  flights  of
Hafiz,  has  wit,  practical  sense,  and  just  hioral
sentiments.  He  has  the  instinct  to  teach,  and
from  every  occurrence  must  draw  the  moral,
like  Franklin.  He  is  the  poet  of  friendship,
love,  self-devotion,  and  serenity.  There  is  a
uniform  force  in  his  page,  and,  conspicuously,
a  tone  of  cheerfulness,  which  has  almost  made
his  name  a  synonyme  for  this  grace.  The  word
Saadi  means  fortunate.  In  him  the  trait  is  no
result  of  levity,  much  less  of  convivial  habit,
but  first  of  a  happy  nature,  to  which  victory
is  habitual,  easily  shedding  mishaps,  with  sensi-


viii  PREFACE.

bility  to  pleasure,  and  with  resources  against
pain.  But  it  also  results  from  the  habitual  per-
ception of  the  beneficent  laws  that  control  the
world.  He  inspires  in  the  reader  a  good  hope.
What  a  contrast  between  the  cynical  tone  of
Byron  and  the  benevolent  wisdom  of  Saadi !

Saadi  has  been  longer  and  better  known  in
the  Western  nations  than  any  of  his  countrymen.
By  turns,  a  student,  a  water-carrier,  a  traveller,
a  soldier  fighting  against  the  Christians  in  the
Crusades,  a  prisoner  employed  to  dig  trenches
before  Tripoli,  and  an  honored  poet  in  his  pro-
tracted old  age  at  home,  —  his  varied  and  se-
vere experience  took  away  all  provincial  tone,
and  gave  him  a  facility  of  speaking  to  all  condi-
tions. But  the  commanding  reason  of  his  wider
popularity  is  his  deeper  sense,  which,  in  his
treatment,  expands  the  local  forms  and  tints  to
a  cosmopolitan  breadth.  Through  his  Persian
dialect  he  speaks  to  all  nations,  and,  like  Homer,
Shakespeare,  Cervantes,  and  Montaigne,  is  per-
petually modern.

To  the  sprightly  but  indolent  Persians,  con-
versation is  a  game  of  skill.  They  wish  to
measure  wit  with  you,  and  expect  an  adroit,  a
brilliant,  or  a  profound  answer.  Many  narra-
tives, doubtless,  have  suffered  in  the  translation,
since  a  promising  anecdote  sometimes  heralds  a
flat  speech.     But  Saadi's  replies  are  seldom  vul-


PREFACE.  ix

gar.  His  wit  answers  to  the  heart  of  the  ques-
tion, often  quite  over  the  scope  of  the  inquirer.
He  has  also  that  splendor  of  expression  which
alone,  without  wealth  of  thought,  sometimes
constitutes  a  poet,  and  forces  us  to  ponder  the
problem  of  style.  In  his  poem  on  his  old  age,
he  says  :  "  Saadi's  whole  power  lies  in  his  sweet
words :  let  this  gift  remain  to  me,  I  care  not
what  is  taken."

The  poet  or  thinker  must  always  be,  in  a
rude  nation,  the  chief  authority  on  religion.
All  questions  touching  its  truth  and  obligation
will  come  home  to  him,  at  last,  for  their  answer.
As  he  thinks  and  speaks  will  intelligent  men
believe.  Therefore  a  certain  deference  must
be  shown  him  by  the  priests,  —  a  result  which
conspicuously  appears  in  the  history  of  Hafiz
and  Saadi.  In  common  with  his  countrymen,
Saadi  gives  prominence  to  fatalism,  —  a  doctrine
which,  in  Persia,  in  Arabia,  and  in  India,  has
had,  in  all  ages,  a  dreadful  charm.  u  To  all
men,"  says  the  Koran,  "  is  their  day  of  death
appointed,  and  they  cannot  postpone  or  advance
it  one  hour.  Wilt  thou  govern  the  world  which
God  governs  ?  Thy  lot  is  cast  beforehand,
and  whithersoever  it  leads,  thou  must  follow."
"  Not  one  is  among  you,"  said  Mahomet,  u  to
-  whom  is  not  already  appointed  his  seat  in  fire

or  his  seat  in  bliss."

1*


x  PREFACE.

But  the  Sheik's  mantle  sits  loosely  on  Saadi's
shoulders,  and  I  find  in  him  a  pure  theism.  He
asserts  the  universality  of  moral  laws,  and  the
perpetual  retributions.  He  celebrates  the  om-
nipotence of  a  virtuous  soul.  A  certain  inti-
mate and  avowed  piety,  obviously  in  sympathy
with  the  feeling  of  his  nation,  is  habitual  to
him.  All  the  forms  of  courtesy  and  of  busi-
ness in  daily  life  take  a  religious  tinge,  as  did
those  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Age.

With  the  exception  of  a  few  passages,  of
which  we  need  not  stop  to  give  account,  the
morality  of  the  Gulistan  and  the  Bostan  is  pure,
and  so  little  clogged  with  the  superstition  of  the
country,  that  this  does  not  interfere  with  the
pleasure  of  the  modern  reader :  he  can  easily
translate  their  ethics  into  his  own.  Saadi  praises
alms,  hospitality,  justice,  courage,  bounty,  and
humility  ;  he  respects  the  poor,  and  the  kings
who  befriend  the  poor.  He  admires  the  royal
eminence  of  the  dervish  or  religious  ascetic.
"  Hunger  is  a  cloud  out  of  which  falls  a  rain
of  eloquence  and  knowledge  :  when  the  belly
is  empty,  the  body  becomes  spirit ;  when  it  is
full,  the  spirit  becomes  body."  He  praises  hu-
mility. "  Make  thyself  dust  to  do  anything
well."  cc  Near  Casbin,"  he  tells  us,  "  a  man,
of  the  country  of  Parthia,  came  forth  to  accost
me,  mounted  on  a  tiger.     At  this  sight,  such


PREFACE.  xi

fear  seized  me  that  I  could  not  flee  nor  move.
But  he  said  :  4  O  Saadi,  be  not  surprised  at  what
thou  seest.  Do  thou  only  not  withdraw  thy
neck  from  the  yoke  of  God,  and  nothing  shall
be  able  to  withdraw  its  neck  from  thy  yoke.' "

In  a  country  where  there  are  no  libraries  and
no  printing,  people  must  carry  wisdom  in  sen-
tences. Wonderful  is  the  inconsecutiveness  of
the  Persian  poets.  European  criticism  finds  that
the  unity  of  a  beautiful  whole  is  everywhere
wanting.  Not  only  the  story  is  short,  but  no
two  sentences  are  joined.  In  looking  through
Von  Hammer's  anthology,  culled  from  a  para-
dise of  poets,  the  reader  feels  this  painful  dis-
continuity. 'Tis  sand  without  lime,  —  as  if  the
neighboring  desert  had  saharized  the  mind.  It
was  said  of  Thomson's  Seasons,  that  the  page
would  read  as  well  by  omitting  every  alternate
line.  But  the  style  of  Thomson  is  glue  and
bitumen  to  the  loose  and  irrecoverable  ramble
of  the  Oriental  bards.  No  topic  is  too  remote
for  their  rapid  suggestion.  The  Ghaselle  or
Kassida  is  a  chapter  of  proverbs,  or  proverbs
unchaptered,  unthreaded  beads  of  all  colors,
sizes,  and  values.  Yet  two  topics  are  sure  to
return  in  any  and  every  proximity,  the  mistress
and  the  name  of  the  poet.  Out  of  every  am-
bush these  leap  on  the  unwary  reader.  Saadi,
in  the  Gulistan,  by  the  necessity  of  the  narra-


xii  PREFACE.

tive,  corrects  this  arid  looseness,  which  appears,
however,  in  his  odes  and  elegies,  as  in  Hafiz
and  Dschami.  As  for  the  incessant  return  of
the  poet's  name,  —  which  appears  to  be  a  sort
of  registry  of  copyrights,  —  the  Persians  often
relieve  this  heavy  custom  by  wit  and  audacious
sallies.

The  Persians  construct  with  great  intrepidity
their  mythology  and  legends  of  typical  men.
Jamschid,  who  reigned  seven  hundred  years,
and  was  then  driven  from  his  throne,  is  their
favorite  example  of  the  turns  of  fortune.  Karun
or  Corah,  the  alchemist,  who  turned  all  things
to  gold,  but  perished  with  his  treasures  at  the
word  of  Moses,  is  their  Croesus.  Lokman,  the
iEsop  of  the  East,  lived  to  an  enormous  age,
was  the  great-grandson  of  Noah,  &c.  Saadi
relates,  that  Lokman,  in  his  last  years,  dwelt
on  the  border  of  a  reedy  marsh,  where  he
constructed  a  cabin,  and  busied  himself  with
making  osier  baskets.  The  Angel  of  Death
appeared  to  him,  and  said  :  "  Lokman,  how  is
it,  that,  in  three  thousand  years  that  you  have
lived  in  the  world,  you  have  never  known  how
to  build  a  house  ? "  Lokman  replied :  "  O  Azra-
el !  one  would  be  a  fool,  knowing  that  you  were
always  at  his  heels,  to  set  himself  at  building  a
house."  Hatem  Tai  is  their  type  of  hospitality,
who,  when  the  Greek  emperor  sent  to  pray  him  to


PREFACE.  xiii

bestow  on  him  his  incomparable  horse,  received
the  messenger  with  honor,  and,  having  no  meat
in  his  tent,  killed  the  horse  for  his  banquet,
before  he  yet  knew  the  object  of  the  visit.
Nushirvan  the  Just  is  their  Marcus  Antoninus,
or  Washington,  to  whom  every  good  counsel
in  government  is  attributed.  And  the  good
behavior  of  rulers  is  a  point  to  which  Saadi
constantly  returns.  It  is  one  of  his  maxims,
that  the  cc  bons  mots  of  kings  are  the  kings  of  bons
mots"  One  of  these  is:  "At  night  thou  must
go  in  prayer  a  beggar,  if  by  day  thou  wilt  carry
thyself  as  a  king."  Again:  "A  king  is  like  a
great  and  massive  wall :  as  soon  as  he  leans
from  the  perpendicular  (of  equity),  he  is  near
his  ruin."  Again  :  "  You,  O  king,  sit  in  the
place  of  those  who  are  gone,  and  of  those  who
are  to  come  :  how  can  you  establish  a  firm
abode  between  two  non-existences  ?  "  Dzoul
Noun,  of  Grand  Cairo,  said  to  the  Caliph':
"  I  have  learned  that  one  to  whom  you  have
given  power  in  the  country  treats  the  subjects
with  severity,  and  permits  daily  wrongs  and  vi-
olences there."  The  Caliph  replied:  "There
will  come  a  day  when  I  will  severely  punish
him."  "Yes,"  returned  the  other,  "you  will
wait  until  he  has  taken  all  the  goods  of  the  sub-
jects ;  then  you  will  bestir  yourself,  and  snatch
them    from    him,   and    will    fill    your    treasury.


xiv  PREFACE.

But  what  good  will  that  do  to  your  pooF  and
miserable  people  ? "  The  king  was  ashamed,
and  ordered  the  instant  punishment  of  the  of-
fender.

It  appears,  from  the  anecdotes  which  Pro-
fessor Graf  has  rendered  from  the  Calcutta
manuscripts,  that  Saadi  enjoyed  very  high  re-
spect from  the  great  in  his  own  time,  and  from
the  Sultan  of  the  Mongolian  court  ;  and  that
he  used  very  plain  dealing  with  this  last,  for
the  redress  of  grievances  which  fell  under  his
notice.  These,  with  other  passages,  mark  the
state  of  society  wherein  a  shepherd  becomes  a
robber,  then  a  conqueror,  and  then  sultan.  In
a  rude  and  religious  society,  a  poet  and  traveller
is  thereby  a  noble,  and  the  associate  of  princes,
a  teacher  of  religion,  a  mediator  between  the
people  and  the  prince,  and,  by  his  exceptional
position,  uses  great  freedom  with  the  rulers.
The  growth  of  cities  and  increase  of  trade  rap-
idly block  up  this  bold  access  of  truth  to  the
courts,  as  the  narrator  of  these  events  in  Saadi's
life  plainly  intimates.  "  The  Sultan,  Abake
Khan,  found  great  pleasure  in  the  verses.  Tru-
ly, at  the  present  time,  no  learned  men  or  Sheiks
would  dare  to  utter  such  advice,  even  to  a  gro-
cer or  a  butcher ;  and  hence,  also,  is  the  world
in  such  bad  plight  as  we  see."

The  Persians  have  been  called  "  the  French


PREFACE.  xv

of  Asia  "  ;  and  their  superior  intelligence,  their
esteem  for  men  of  learning,  their  welcome  to
Western  travellers,  and  their  tolerance  of  Chris-
tian sects  in  their  territory,  as  contrasted  with
Turkish  fanaticism,  would  seem  to  derive  from
the  rich  culture  of  this  great  choir  of  poets,  per-
petually reinforced  through  five  hundred  years,
which  again  and  again  has  enabled  the  Persians
to  refine  and  civilize  their  conquerors,  and  to
preserve  a  national  identity.  To  the  expansion
of  this  influence  there  is  no  limit ;  and  we  wish
that  the  present  republication  may  add  to  the
genius  of  Saadi  a  new  audience  in  America.


R.  W.  E.


Concord,  February,  1864.


CONTENTS.

— « —

Pagb
An  Essay  on  the  Life  and  Genius  of  Sheik  Saadi,

by  James  Ross 19

Preface 93

CHAPTER    I.
On  the  Morals  of  Kings .    Ill

CHAPTER    II.
On  the  Mokals  of  Durwaishes 169

CHAPTER    III.
Of  the  Excellency  of  Contentment  ....    218

CHAPTER    IV.
Of  the  Advantages  of  Taciturnity    ....    256

CHAPTER    V.
Of  Love  and  Youth 266

B


xviii  CONTENTS.

CHA  PTER    VI.
On  Imbecility  and  Old  Age   ......    297

CHAPTER    VII.
Of  the  Effects  of  Education 306

CHAPTER    VIII.
Rules  for  Conduct  in  Life 336


AN    ESSAY


ON    THE


LIFE     AND     GENIUS


OF


Sheik  Saadi.


By   JAMES    ROSS.


<*»<£>


The  Life  and  Genius  of

Sheik   Saadi.


HIRTY  years  ago,  when  I  first  de-
voted myself  to  the  study  of  the


Oriental  languages,  it  was  my  cus-
r£  torn  to  translate  into  English  any
classic  which  my  Munshi  had  recommended  for
my  perusal ;  and,  among  other  Persian  books,
I  had  in  this  way  made  translations  of  the  Gu-
listan  and  Bustan  of  Saadi :  and  now,  with  much
diffidence,  publish  that  of  the  Gulistan,  with
an  abridgment  of  a  larger  work,  being  an  Es-
say on  the  Life  and  Genius  of  the  author;
intending  to  follow  this  up  next  year  with  my
translation  of  the  Bustan,  with  a  prefatory  cri-
tique on  Saadi's  works,  and  making  a  volume
equal  in  size  to  this ;  but  each  will  otherwise
be  a  distinct  work.

Saadi  has  ever  been  with  me  a  favorite  Per-
sian  classic;   and  after  many  and  diligent  pe-


22  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

rusals  of  his  Kulliat,  or  works,  I  flatter  myself
with  having  not  only  mastered  the  compara-
tively easy  task  of  folly  appreciating  his  in-
tellectual faculties,  but  also  the  more  difficult
one  of  portraying  the  features  and  passions  of
his  mind.  In  tins  sketch  of  Saadi's  life,  I  shall
duly  avail  myself  of  my  Asiatic  authorities.  As,
however,  Oriental  notions  of  biography  differ
so  essentially  from  ours,  that  little  is  to  be
gleaned  from  them  that  can  interest  the  Euro-
pean reader,  I  am  fortunate  in  finding  that  an-
ecdotes of  the  temper,  manners,  and  habits  of
so  excellent  a  moralist  and  writer  are  constantly
occurring  in  his  own  works;  and  I  have  only
to  quote  them  to  give  a  perfect  insight  into  his
character.

Silghur,  a  Turkish  officer  in  the  service  of
the  Saljuc  Sultans,  usurped  the  government
of  Pars,  and  was  the  origin  of  that  dynasty  of
Atabaks,  or  Attabegs,  who  reigned  there  A.  H.
543-668.  And  of  them  Atabak  Toklah,  or
Toglah,  reigned  A.  H.  571-591,  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  his  brother  Atabak  Saad-bin-Zungi,
who  reigned  A.  H.  591  -  623 ;  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  his  son  Atabak  Abubakr,  A.  H.  623
—  658 ;  and  he  again  was  succeeded  by  his  son
Saad-bin-Abibakr,  who  died  within  a  twelve-
month ;  and  after  a  few  and  feverish  reigns
of  women  and  infants,  consisting  altogether  of


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  23

nine  years,  the  dynasty  became  extinct,  A.  H.
668.  All  these  reigns  are  included  within  the
first  three  fourths  of  Saadi's  life :  but  Dowlat
Shah  must  mistake  in  dating  Saadi's  death  under
one  of  this  Silghur,  or  Silaghur  dynasty  ;  or
there  must  have  been  a  second  dynasty  of  them.

Dowlat  Shah,  in  his  Tuzkirrah-ashshaara,  or
Lives  of  the  Persian  Poets,  says,  that  Saadi's
father  held  some  office  at  the  Shiraz  court;
and  from  what  Saadi  himself  says,  in  a  Kitah,
or  fragment  of  his  book  of  Sahibayah,  more
immediately  under  the  Diwan,  or  prime  minis-
ter. Speaking  in  eulogy  of  him :  "  My  father
was  thy  old  domestic ;  he  passed  his  whole  life
in  thy  service :  thy  born  slave,  when  he  first
saw  the  light,  naturally  cast  his  eyes  up  to  thy
cpuntenance :  I  can  never  seek  the  patronage
of  another,  who  have  been  the  nurtured  child
of  thy  bounty."

In  the  first  year  of  Atabak  Toklah's  reign,
or  A.  H.  571,  A.  D.  1194,  Saadi  was  born  at
Shiraz,  the  capital  of  Pars,  or  Persia  proper ;
and  the  epithet  of  Shirazi  applies  equally  to
him  and  Hafiz,  as  much  honored  natives  of  that
Dar  u'lilom,  or  seat  of  learning.  Dowlat  Shah
says,  that  his  proper  name  was  Moslih  u'd-din,
or  the  Umpire  of  the  faith ;  but  he  was  better
known  afterwards  by  that  of  Sheik  Saadi  Shi-
razi,—  Sheik  properly  signifying   the   head   of


24  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

an  Arabian  tribe ;  and  among  Mussulmans  it
was  anywhere  conferred  upon  a  senior,  who
commanded  the  love  and  esteem  of  his  neigh-
bors  from  authority,  age,  genius,  tir  piety ;  and,
on  account  of  the  two  last  virtues,  is  among
the  Persians  more  especially  applied  to  Nizami
and  Saadi ;  and  it  is  no  small  compliment,  that
though  the  former  is  the  senior,  and  next  to
Firdausi  the  best  Persian  heroic  poet,  yet  Saadi
is  appropriately  called  the  Sheik!

Again,  Sadi,  or  Saadi,  signifying  felicity,  is
his  Tokhullus,  or  poetical  name ;  and  was,  ac-
cording to  Dowlat  Shah,  given  to  him  by  Ata-
bak  Saad-bin-Zungi.  This  is  probable  ;  but  he
is  wrong  in  saying  that  Saadi  was  born  in  that
prince's  reign.  This  mode  of  appellation  a
writer  in  the  East  does  not  affect  till  he  has
established  his  character  as  a  poet ;  when,  after
being  confirmed  to  him,  like  a  title  of  nobility,
by  some  sovereign  prince,  he  takes  the  first
opportunity  of  introducing  his  Tokhullus  into
the  Shah-bayit,  or  last  stanza  of  a  ghazal,  or
other  poem,  and  seldom  omits  to  use  it  thus
afterwards :  and  Cowley,  among  ourselves,  has
happily  adopted  this  Oriental  custom  :  —

"  The  wise  example  of  the  heavenly  lark,
Thy  fellow-poet,  Cowley,  mark  ;
Above  the  clouds  let  thy  proud  music  sound,
Thy  humble  nest  build  on  the  ground  ! "


OF  SHEIK   SAADI.  25

Jami  calls  Saadi  Sharf-u'd-din  Mislah,  son  of
Abdullah ;  and  an  Alowi,  or  descendant  of  Ali.

Saadi's  father  and  mother  were  alive  within
his  own  recollection  ;  for  he  often  mentions  the
first  (Bustan,  ii.  2  ;  ix.  13,  15,  &c),  and  his
mother,  very  feelingly  (Gulistan,  vi.  6)  ;  but,
from  his  calling  himself  an  orphan,  both  must
have  died  while  our  Sheik  was  yet  a  stripling.
For  he  says  (Bust.  ii.  2)  :  "  If  the  orphan  come
to  cry,  who  will  soothe  him  ?  if  he  be  pettish,
who  will  put  up  with  his  ill-humors  ?  take  heed
that  he  weep  not;  for  the  throne  of  the  Al-
mighty is  shaken  to  and  fro  when  the  orphan
sets  a  crying.  Once  my  head  was  lofty  as  that
which  wears  a  crown,  for  then  I  could  lay  it
upon  the  bosom  of  a  father :  had  a  fly  but
dared  to  settle  on  my  body,  it  would  have  been
enough  to  alarm  a  whole  family ;  but  were  my
enemies  ready  to  make  me  now  their  captive,
none  of  my  friends  would  come  to  my  rescue  :
I  can  feel  a  sympathy  for  the  helplessness  of
infancy,  because  in  my  childhood  I  lost  my
father"

In  his  Nafhat-u'1-ans,  or  Memoirs  of  the
Sufis,  Jami  says,  that  he  was  descended  from
the  Sharif,  or  noble  house  of  Abdullah  Hafaif.
But  however  dignified  Ins  birth,  or  lucrative
his  station  at  court,  both  advantages  must  have
died  with  the  father ;  otherwise  we  should  not

2


2G  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

find  Saadi  using  his  interest  with  Shamsud-din
to  exempt  his  brother  from  some  extortion  in
his  mean  occupation  of  retailing  figs.  This
prime  minister,  then,  it  would  seem,  viceroy  on
the  part  of  Abaca-an,  at  Shiraz,  acted  hand-
somely on  the  occasion  by  laying  a  thousand
gold  dinars  at  Saadi' s  feet,  as  a  compensation
to  his  brother ;  but  would  not,  as  the  story
adds,  think  of  offering  any  money-compliment
to  a  darwesh  like  himself.  In  the  Risallah,  or
tract  on  the  questions  of  the  Lord  Diwan,  this
same  generous  friend  sends  him  five  hundred
dinars,  under  the  pretence  of  supplying  food
for  his  buds ;  of  which  the  servant,  considering
himself  as  one  of  Saadi' s  birds,  purloins  a  hun-
dred and  fifty;  being,  like  the  Irishman,  not
aware  that  the  letter  which  accompanied  this
gift,  and  its  answer,  would  detect  him.  On  as-
certaining this  knavery,  the  messenger  is  forth-
with sent  back  with  an  order  for  Saadi  on  the
Shiraz  treasury  for  10,000  gold  dinars!  And
on  another  occasion,  he  and  his  brother  Ula-ud-
din,  joint  ministers  of  that  son  and  successor  of
the  Tartar  emperor,  Halaku  Khan,  sent  Saadi,
then  an  old  resident  in  his  hermitage  at  Shiraz,
a  bag  of  50,000  dinars,  or  about  £  24,000  of
our  money,  which  he  was  to  lay  out  in  building
a  caravansary  under  the  citadel  of  Cohindar,
near  Shiraz,  and  which  Saadi  had  much  at  heart


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  27

in  completing.  By  the  mother's  side  Saadi's
relations  were  some  of  them  eminent  for  learn-
ing ;  and  Mola  Cnt'b  Alamah,  his  maternal
uncle,  is  noticed  as  his  first  master  in  science.

Jami  says,  that  Saadi  was  a  Sufi  of  profound
learning,  or  master  in  every  branch  of  science,
and  accomplished  in  the  polite  arts :  for,  ac-
cording to  Dowlat  Shah,  "  he  commenced  his
studies  at  the  Nizamiah  College  of  Baghdad,"
which,  during  five  centuries,  had  been  the  chief
seat  of  Oriental  learning,  and  the  magnificent
residence  of  the  Khalifs :  and  there  he  held  an
Idrar,  or  fellowship  (Bustan,  vii.  14)  ;  having
had  for  his  tutor  in  science  the  learned  Ab'ul
Firah-ibin-Jozi  (Gul.  ii.  21),  and  in  theology
Abd-u'1-cadir  the  Gilani ;  and  with  the  last  he
made  his  first  pilgrimage  to  Mecca;  which  he
repeated  fourteen  times,  and  chiefly  on  foot;
and  he  often  makes  his  adventures  on  such  oc-
casions the  subject  of  an  apologue  (Gul.  ii.  25,
26,  &c).

Being  a  classical,  as  well  as  a  spoken  idiom
and  court  dialect,  the  Tazi,  or  modern  Arabic,
under  the  illustrious  patronage  of  the  Khalifs,
reached  as  great  perfection  as  has  ever  been
the  lot  of  any  human  tongue.  Saadi  knew  and
wrote  it  well ;  and  carried  the  practice  of  del-
uging the  Persian  language  with  ^  to  a  greater
length  than  any  of  his  predecessors  had  done.


28  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

In  his  Gulistan  (v.  21)  he  refers  with  fondness,
to  its  currency  in  A.  D.  1256,  at  Baghdad,  little
thinking  that,  in  the  course  of  two  years,  he
should  have  occasion  to  pen  in  it  a  Casidah,  or
elegy,  on  its  being  sacked  by  Halaku  the  Tar-
tar, its  palaces  and  colleges  plundered,  and  the
Khalif  Mustasim,  the  last  of  the  Abissites,  and
all  that  were  dignified  and  learned,  with  a  mil-
lion and  a  half  of  its  inhabitants,  barbarously
murdered.  Saadi  wrote  a  book  of  Tazi  elegies ;
but  that  city  and  its  university  were  his  alma
mater,  the  seat  of  the  religion  he  revered,  and
the  muses  he  adored ;  and  he  consequently  felt
a  pathos  on  this  horrible  event ;  and  all  that
understand  it  must  relish  its  propriety  and  ele-
gance.

Saadi  mentions  himself  to  have  been  twice
married.  Of  his  first  marriage,  at  Aleppo,  he
tells  a  pleasant  story,  to  which  (Gul.  ii.  30)  I
beg  to  refer  the  reader ;  desiring  him  to  recol-
lect, that  though  Saadi,  as  a  Mussulman,  had,
like  the  Jews,  a  legal  right  to  repudiate  his
troublesome  wife,  yet  in  that  case  he  must
have  repaid  her  dowry;  and  he  was  all  his  life
too  improvident,  if  not  poor,  to  do  that.  Besides,
a  sense  of  family  honor  will  deter  one  of  the
orthodox  from  idly  parting  with  the  woman  of
his  former  affections :  also,  he  is  obliged  to  give
three  notices  of  his  intention  to  the  Cazy;  and


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  29

though,  during  the  heat  of  passion,  instances
occur  of  a  first,  aud  perhaps  a  second  notice,
after  twenty  years'  intercourse  with  them,  I
never  heard  of  a  third,  which  was  to  complete
it.  Of  his  other. wife,  at  Sanaa,  the  capital  of
Yamin,  he  makes  no  mention  ;•  but  in  Bustan
(ix.  25)  laments  their  loss  of  an  only  son  with
the  feelings  of  a  parent :  "If  despair  over-
whelm thee  in  this  abode  of  gloom,  be  wise
and  prepare  for  thyself  a  place  of  greater  cheer-
fulness :  wishest  thou  the  night  of  the  grave
to  be  luminous  as  day,  carry  along  with  thee,
ready  trimmed,  the  lamp  of  good  works."  Thus
could  Saadi  reconcile  himself  to  a  heavy  loss  ;
the  duties  of  his  religion  inculcating  the  sin
of  complaining,  and  his  philosophy  teaching  him
that  it  were  fruitless  to  repine  for  what  he  could
not  recall.  Two  such  trials  terrified  a  man  of
Saadi's  disposition  from  another  such  connection.
He  thought,  perhaps,  like  Cicero,  who,  being,
after  his  divorce  from  Tullia,  invited  to  a  second
marriage,  replied,  he  could  not  —  "  simul  amare
et  sapere  —  be  wise  and  in  love  at  the  same
time!"  or,  as  Saadi's  old  friend  answered,  "I
do  not  like  to  marry  an  old  woman ! '  "  Why,"
said  his  adviser,  "  do  you  not,  now  you  are  rich,
choose  a  young  one  ?  '  "  Because,"  he  replied,
"when  I  was  young  myself,  I  did  not  love  old
women ;  and  cannot  hope  that,  now  I  am  old,
a  young  woman  can  love  me."     (Gul.  vi.  8.)


30  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

Instead  of  the  comforts  of  a  family  circle,
Saadi  was  doomed  to  pass  the  sixty  or  seventy-
last  years  of  his  extreme  long  life  in  the  cell
of  a  hermit ;  and  latterly  seems  to  have  im-
bibed a  reprehensible  portion  of  that  ancient
Grecian,  as  well  as  Oriental,  contempt  for  the
fair  sex ;  and  to  have  entertained  a  prejudiced
and  strange  notion  about  our  posterity  and  the
marriage  duty.  (Gul.  vi.  5.)  In  Gulistan,  viii.
55,  he  says :  "  Consilium  fceminis  invalidum :
it  be  bad  to  hold  counsel  with  women  "  ;  or,  as
he  adds  on  another  occasion,  "  Take  your  wife's
opinion,  and  act  opposite  to  it ! '  And  again
(Bustan,  vi.  24)  :  "  Choose  a  fresh  wife  every
spring,  or  new-year's  day ;  for  the  almanac
of  last  year  is  good  for  nothing ! '  According
to  the  Mussulman  creed,  prayers  five  times  a
day  bring  the  good  believer  half-way  towards
the  Deity ;  and  in  this,  as  absolutely  necessary
to  corporal  purification,  ablution  is  each  time  in-
cluded ;  but  with  women  certain  physical  impuri-
ties (Bustan,  ix.  13)  prevent  this  ceremonial  for
some  days  monthly  ;  yet  Saadi  adds,  those  do
not,  according  to  our  European  vulgar  notion,
exclude  women  from  Paradise.  Nor,  though
he  recommends  selfishness  (Bustan,  ii.  7), —
"  Because  the  property  of  my  father  descended
to  me,  it  needs  not  be  left  to  descend  to  my  chil-
dren :  eat  and  drink,  spend  and  enjoy  it  thyself,


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  31

for  why  shouldst  thou  trouble  thyself  about
those  who  are  to  succeed  thee,"  —  yet  he  car-
ries not  this  misanthropy  so  far  as  our  prince
of  existing  fashionable  poets  has  done.

"  But  amidst  the  crowd,  the  ham,  and  shock  of  men,
To  hear,  to  see,  to  feel,  and  to  possess,
And  roam  along,  the  world's  tired  denizen,
With  none  who  bliss,  none  whom  we  can  bliss ;
None  with  kindred  consciousness  endued :
This  is  to  be  alone,  and  mj  loved  solitude ! "

That  he.  was  not  a  domestic  man,  and  had
no  surviving  family,  was  no  fault  of  Saadi :  like
Socrates  he  put  wedlock  to  the  double  ordeal  of
a  trial ;  and  if  he  enjoyed  not  the  social  retire-
ment of  a  Solon,  he  felt  not  the  misanthropic
celibacy  of  a  Thales.  After  those  experiments
he  prided  him  in  his  tempered  kinaat  or  con-
tentment ;  and  supported  himself,  with  unaffect-
ed indifference,  on  the  casual  charity  of  his
admirers,  during  the -two  last  third  parts  of  his
life,  either  as  a  wandering  mendicant  or  solitary
recluse.  u  Never,"  does  he  honestlv  exclaim
(Gulistan,  iii.  19),  "  did  I  complain  of  my  for-
lorn condition  but  on  one  occasion,  when  my  feet
were  bare,  and  I  had  not  wherewithal  to  shoe
them.  Soon  after,  meeting  a  man  without  feet,
I  was  thankful  for  the  bounty  of  Providence
to  myself,  and  with  perfect  resignation  submit-
ted to  my  want  of  shoes."


32  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

Many  such  anecdotes,  incidents,  and  adven-
tures, that  occurred  to  him  during  his  travels,  we
meet  in  his  works ;  and,  whether  creditable  or
not,  told  with  the  same  ingenuousness.  Crimes,
vices,  and  misfortunes  chiefly  occupy  the  nar-
ratives of  such  adventurers  among  ourselves;
but  even  in  romance  the  hero's  life  generally
concludes  in  his  first  wedlock.  Our  rigid  law
would  construe  Saadi's  adventure  with  the  Brah-
min at  Sumnaat  (Bustan,  viii.  15),  and  Moses'
slaughter  of  the  Egyptian,  into  murder ;  other-
wise, however  unfortunate,  his  personal  adven-
tures seldom  have  the  stain  of  crime,  or  even
vice.  Nay,  after  he  had  ceased  to  be  a  married
man  and  enterprising  traveller,  his  life  contin-
ues to  interest,  and  himself  to  be  useful ;  for,  as
an  ascetic,  he  was  visited  by  the  first  charac-
ters of  his  time,  and  consulted  by  his  contem-
porary princes  and  kings.

Dowlat  Shah  says,  "  that « the  first  thirty  years
of  Saadi's  long  life  were  devoted  to  study,
and  laying  up  a  stock  of  knowledge ;  the  next
thirty,  or  perhaps  forty,  in  treasuring  up  expe-
rience, and  disseminating  that  knowledge,  dur-
ing his  wide-extending  travels ;  and  that  some
portion  should  intervene  between  the  business
of  life  and  hour  of  death,  and  that  with  him
chanced  to  be  the  largest  share  of  it,  he  spent
the  remainder  of  his  life,  or  seventy  years,  in


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  33

the  retirement  of  a  recluse,  when  he  was  ex-
emplary in  his  temperance,  and  edifying  in  his
piety."  Even  when  a  boy,  he  confesses  him-
self to  have  been  overmuch  religious  (Gul.  ii.  7),
and  ingenuously  mentions  this  reproof  of  his
father:  "You  had  better,"  said  that  sensible
parent,  "  have  been  yourself  asleep,  than  to  be
thus  calumniating  your  neighbors."  In  Gulistan,
v.  18,  he  says,  "  that  On  the  death  of  a  young
friend,  and  himself  still  a  young  man,  he  had
vowed  to  pass  a  life  of  retirement,  and  to  fold
up  the  carpet  of  enjoyment."  And  in  the  Pre-
face of  the  Gulistan  he  is  enticed  by  another
friend  to  quit  such  a  state  of  abstraction  and  re-
tirement. He  would  seem  to  have  been  sincere
and  affectionate  in  his  friendships ;  and  many
such  disappointments,  and  an  habitual  love  of
seclusion,  had  often  disgusted  him  with  social
life,  and  early  inured  him  to  the  habits  of  a
hermit.  (Gul.  ii.  30.)  However,  real  want,  I
fear,  had  often  brought  him  back  into  the  busy
world ;  for  he  positively  tells  us,

"  Paupertas  impulet  audax
Ut  verses  facerem,"

that  he  wrote  for  his  bread  (Bustan,  vi.  5)  :
"  The  belly  puts  manacles  upon  the  wrists,  and
fetters  upon  the  ankles  ;  the  bounden  slave  of
the  belly  is  constrained  in  his  devotions:  had
Saadi's  belly  in  any  shape  resembled  his  back,

2  *  C


34  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

that  is,  been  tolerant  of  its  load,  nobody  would
at  this  day  have  been  criticising  his  writings."
And  in  Bustan,  vii.  6,  he  alludes  to  his  having
commenced  to  write  at  a  late  period ;  and  that,
having  once  begun,  he  had  no  alternative  but
that  of  proceeding.

Jami  relates,  "  that  Saadi  had  travelled  much
and  far,  and  visited  many  strange  countries;
he  had  often  made  the  pilgrimage  of  Mecca  on
foot,  and  once  penetrated  so  far  as  the  pagoda,
or  bot-Jcadah,  image-temple,  at  Sumnaat,  on  the
Malabar  coast,  where  he  overthrew,  and  broke
in  pieces,  the  great  idol.  He  had  much  relig-
ious and  moral  intercourse  with  Sheik  Shohab-
ud-din  and  other  reverend  gentlemen.  For  a
length  of  time  he  led  the  life  of  a  Sacayi,  or
water-drawer,  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  was  thus
administering  to  the  thirsty  traveller,  till  found
worthy  of  an  introduction  to  the  prophet  Khizr,
Elias  or  the  Syrian  and  Greek  Hermes,  who
moistened  his  mouth  with  the  water  of  im-
mortality. A  descendant  of  Ali  disputed  the
truth  of  this  with  Saadi,  and  got  reproved  in
a  dream,  by  the  prophet,  for  his  incredulity.
Another  gentleman  had  also  doubted  it,  and
next  night  had  a  dream,  or  rather  vision ;  for
it  seemed  to  him  as  if  the  gates  of  heaven  were
thrown  open,  and  a  host  of  angels  descending
with  salvers  of  glory  in  their  hands.     On  asking


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  35

one  of  them  for  whom  those  were  intended,
he  answered,  for  Shaik  Saadi  of  Shiraz,  who
has  written  a  stanza  of  poetry,  that  has  met
the  approbation  of  God  Almighty,"  as  follows:
"  To  the  eyes  of  the  intelligent  the  foliage  of
the  grove  displays,  in  every  leaf,  a  volume  of
the  Creator's  works."

"  The  meanest  floweret  of  the  vale,
The  simplest  note  that  swells  the  gale,
The  common  sun,  the  air,  and  skies,
To  him  are  opening  paradise  !  "

"  On  recovering  from  his  reverie,  that  holy
man  forthwith  proceeded  to  the  door  of  Saadi's
cell,  in  order  to  apologize  for  his  incredulity,
and  to  congratulate  him  upon  this  auspicious
vision.  He  found  the  Sheik  sitting  up,  with
a  lighted  taper  before  him,  and  chanting  to
himself ;  and,  on  listening  attentively,  found  that
he  was  singing  the  above  stanza."  Incredible
as  this  is,  one  of  the  fathers  of  our  Church,
St.  Chrysostom,  tells  us,  "  that,  on  consecrating
the  element  of  bread  and  wine,  he  has  instan-
taneously seen  a  multitude  of  white-robed  an-
gels surrounding  the  altar,  and  bowing  their
heads,  as  soldiers  do  in  making  their  homage
to  the  sovereign  !  "

In  his  Life  of  Khosraw  of  Delhi,  Jami  tells
us  that  this  poet  also  asked  Khizr  for  a  mouth-
ful of  this  inspiring  beverage ;  but  he  told  him


36  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

that  Saadi  had  got  the  last  of  it.  Yet  Hafiz,
who  is  on  this  account  called  Sadie  sani,  or  a
second  Saadi,  tells  us  in  one  of  his  ghazals :
"  Yesterday,  at  dawn,  God  delivered  me  from  all
worldly  affliction  ;  and  amidst  the  gloom  of  night
presented  me  with  the  water  of  immortality ! '

Saadi  states  himself  to  be  at  Delhi  during
the  Patan  Aglamish's  time,  who,  after  a  reign
of  twenty-six  years,  died  A.  H.  633,  or  in  Saadi's
sixty-second  year ;  and  if  Amir  Khosraw,  de-
scended from  the  Amirs,  or  princes^  of  the  noble
tribe  of  Lachin  in  the  province  of  Balkh,  was,
as  Jami  says  and  as  is  generally  believed,  the
youth  whom  Saadi  (in  Gul.  v.  17)  got  so  much
enraptured  with  at  Cashghur,  and  who  died  at
Delhi,  A.  H.  715,  in  his  seventy-fourth  year,  —
allowing  Khosraw  to  have  been  fourteen  when
they  met,  Saaxli  was  still  a  traveller  in  A.  H.
641,  or  his  seventieth  year  !

In  the  course  of  reading  his  works,  I  have
remarked,  that  he  mentions  himself  to  have
visited  in  person  Europe,  Barbary,  Abyssinia,
Egypt,  Syria,  Palestine,  Armenia,  Asia  Minor,
the  three  grand  divisions  of  Arabia,  and  every
province  of  Iran  and  many  parts  of  Turan,
or  of  Persia  and  Tartary,  from  Busrah  and
Baghdad  to  the  Scythian  Wall,  and  at  Rudbar,
Deilman  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  Cashghur  beyond
the  Jihun,  or  Oxus,  across  the  Sind'h,  or  Indus,


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  37

and  into  many  parts  of  Hindustan,  &c.  ;  and
from  a  poem  in  his  book  of  Fragments  it  ap-
pears that  he  had  a  practical  knowledge,  for
he  quotes  a  line  in  each,  of  eighteen  idioms,
dialects,  and  languages,  as  spoken  in  the  many
regions  into  which  he  had  thus  travelled.

Engelbert  Kaempfer,  who  visited  Shiraz,  A.D.
1686,  says  of  Saadi,  "  that  videt  Egyptiam  et
Italiam ;  and  that  he  was  much  skilled  in  the
Oriental  languages ;  nay,  that  he  had  studied
the  Latin  tongue,  and  had  diligently  perused  the
works  of  Seneca  ! '  But*  any  partiality  for  the
blemishes  of  this  Roman  metaphysician  would
better  apply  to  Jami  than  to  Saadi.

A  man  of  Saadi's  character  and  fame  was
recollected  with  fondness  and  veneration  in  the
many  regions  he  thus  visited,  and  few  of  them,
especially  those  under  Mussulman  governments,
but  retain  some  local  memorial  of  him ;  and
in  their  collections  of  Persian  anecdotes,  —  and
these,  like  our  Joe  Miller's  jests,  abound  all
over  the  East,  —  their  writers  accommodate  him
with  a  niche ;  as  he  had  himself  complimented
an  ^Esop  or  Lucman,  Socrates  or  Plato,  Hip-
pocrates or  Galen,  and  even  St.  John  the  Bap-
tist and  our  blessed  Saviour!  Two  examples
I  shall  here  translate  from  his  Badaya,  or  book
of  rhetorical  ghazals  ;  and  first :  "  No  man  can
in  this  world  listen  to  the  lamentations  of  Saadi,


38  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

that  must  not  bear  testimony  to  his  complaints,
as  originating  in  the  very  extremity  of  pain:
if  Plato  in  his  wisdom  is  mysterious  in  defining
love,  the  veil  shall  ultimately  be  withdrawn
from  the  face  of  his  hidden  secret."

This  alludes  of  Gourse  to  the  Platonic  love,
which  was  not  so  much  a  doctrine  of  Plato  as
of  his  refining  followers ;  and  winch  the  fol-
lowers of  Saadi  construed  into  downright  Su-
fism  and  mystery.

Again  :  "It  is  the  vernal  season  :  for  the
heart  is  eveiy  moment*  longing  to  walk  in  the
garden  ;  and  every  bird  of  the  grove  is  melo-
dious in  its  carols,  as  the  nightingale.  Thou
wilt  fancy  it  the  dawning  zephyr  of  an  early
spring,  or  new  year's  day  morning ;  but  it  is
the  breath  of  Isa,  or  Jesus ;  for  in  that  fresh
breath  and  verdure  the  dead  earth  is  reviving."

Of  our  blessed  Saviour,  Saadi  and  all  the
best  Persian  poets  often  speak,  and  always  with
respect  and  reverence ;  and  here,  as  on  many
other  occasions,  he  admits  of  his  power  of  work-
ing miracles,  if  not  his  divinity ;  and  I  wish
I  could  speak  as  well  in  the  converse  of  our
Christian  missionaries  in  the  East !  And  in
Gul.  ii.  10  we  find  Saadi  praying  at  St.  John
the  Baptist's  tomb  at  Damascus ;  and  asked,  by
the  prince  of  that  province,  to  intercede  for  him
in  his  supplications.


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  30

In  fact,  Saadi  was  not  only  inspired  by  Khizr
with  the  faculty  of  poetry,  but  also  with  that
of  working  miracles ;  for  Dowlat  Shah  tells  us :
"  That,  when  finally  settled  as  an  ascetic,  the
middling  and  common  orders  of  his  neighbors
supplied  him  with  a  daily  and  plenteous  stock
of  dressed  provisions,  the  only  charity  he  would
receive ;  of  which  he  would  himself  sparingly
partake  ;  but  the  best  part  he  hung  in  a  basket
from  the  balcony  of  his  cell,  that  the  poor  wood-
cutters might  take  it  home,  on  returning  with
their  faggots  from  the  wilderness.  One  day  a
thief,  disguised  like  a  wood-cutter,  made  free
with  the  basket,  when  his  arm  became  instantly
blasted;  and,  with  a  lamentable  noise,  he  called
on  the  Sheik  to  relieve  him.  He  answered
him  in  reproach,  If  you  are  a  wood-cutter,
where  are  the  callousness  and  scars  of  your
business  ?  and  if  a  robber,  where  that  hardihood,
that  would  deaden  your  feelings  to  so  trifling  a
wound  ?  He  then  prayed  for,  and  healed  him,
and  dismissed  him  with  a  portion  of  his  pro-
visions."

Nor  was  he  on  all  occasions  an  idle  traveller ;
for  he  had  fought  against  the  enemies  of  his
faith ;  and,  in  the  holy  wars  with  the  Christians
and  Hindus,  added  to  the  name  of  Haji,  or
a  pilgrim  to  Mecca,  the  epithet  of  Ghazi,  or
a  holy  warrior.     Dastards  are  scurrilous;   but


40  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

the  generous  speak  well  even  of  their  foes.
In  Bustan,  vii.  18,  Saadi  asks  a  brother  recluse,
who  was  railing  at  the  Christians,  "  whether  he
had  ever  been  engaged  in  the  holy  wars  with
the  Franks."  Yet  he  can  confess  that,  any
more  than  Horace  or  Otway,  he  was  no  warrior
by  profession ;  for  he  and  another  gay  youth,
tricked  out  in  all  the  habiliments  of  war,  sub-
mitted to  be  plundered  of  them  by  two  Hindu
robbers  in  the  territory  of  Balkh,  rather  than
risk  their  lives  in  defending  them.  (Gul.  vii.  13.)
Ibrahim  Khan  of  Banares,  in  his  Sohofi  Ibra-
him, says :  "A  few  of  the  illustrious  results
of  Saadi's  extensive  travels  were  the  sight  of
strange  cities  and  territories,  the  detail  of  mar-
vellous adventures,  the  vicissitudes  of  life,  con-
versation of  enlightened  sages,  the  acquisition
of  science  and  knowledge,  and,  above  all,  a
mouthful  of  the  prophet  Khizr's  water  of  im-
mortality ! '  Or,  as  he  says  himself,  in  his
Bustan  (vi.  16)  :  "  Was  not  this  globe  shaken
to  its  centre,  before  it  came  to  rest  ?  Was  not
Saadi  obliged  to  travel,  before  he  obtained  sci-
ence and  knowledge,  the  objects  of  his  heart  ? '
On  his  worldly  experience,  I  refer  the  reader
to  Gul.  hi.  28,  where  a  father  dissuades  his
able-bodied  son  from  roaming  from  home,  and
anticipates  his  disappointments  abroad.  And
of  his  own  unsettled   state,  whether  from  ne-


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  41

cessity  or  habit,  he  speaks  with  his. usual  phi-
losophy (Bustan,  v.  2)  :  "  Fortune  so  ordained,
that  I  should  leave  Ispahan,  for  I  had  no  means
of  subsisting  any  longer  at  that  place :  my
destiny  removed  me  from  Irac  into  Syria,  and
in  this  happy  land  I  made  a  pleasant  sojourn :
the  cup  of  my  allotted  abode  in  Syria  again
overflowed,  and  a  long-ino;  desire  to  see  home
drew  me  thence  ;  and  chance  again  ordained,
that,  on  my  return,  I  should  pass  through  the
province  of  Irac."

The  following  story  must  be  familiar  with  the
Persian  tyro  of  Bengal,  being  an  extract  of  the
Travels  of  Hatim  Tayi,  and  the  first  Persian
book  put  into  his  hands ;  and  is  no  doubt  the
prototype  of  that  wonderful  German  romance
of  Leonora,  which  some  twenty  years  ago  was
popular  in  two  or  three  able  translations  into
English.

"  On  one  occasion,  Saadi  had  made  a  long
enough  stay  in  Armenia  to  unite  himself  in  the
bonds  of  friendship  with  a  youth  of  his  own
age.  In  that  country,  people  then  died  not  the
natural  death  they  died  elsewhere ;  but,  on  a
particular  day,  once  a  year,  they  met  on  a  plain
by  their  chief  cities,  where  they  occupied  them-
selves in  recreation  and  amusement ;  hi  the
midst  of  which,  individuals  of  every  age  and
rank  would  suddenly  stop,  make  a  reverence  to


42  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

the  west,  gird  up  their  loins,  and,  setting  out
full  speed  towards  that  quarter  of  the  desert,
were  no  more  seen  nor  heard  of.  Saadi  had
often  remarked,  that  this  was  the  lot  of  many
who  were  fathers,  mothers,  brothers,  and  sisters
of  some  or  other  of  his  acquaintance ;  but  these
seemed  indifferent  to  the  event,  and  were  re-
served in  explaining  it.  At  last,  on  such  an
anniversary,  he  saw  that  friend  of  his  affection
preparing  to  set  off,  when  he  seized  upon  his
girdle,  and  insisted  upon  knowing  what  it
meant.  The  youth  solemnly  enjoined  him  to  let
him  go,  for  that  the  Malic-al-mo-at,  or  Angel
of  Death,  had  already  called  on  him  twice ;  and,
on  the  third  call,  his  destiny  would  drag  him
on,  whether  he  would  or  not.  Yet  Saadi  kept
his  hold ;  and  found  himself  carried  along  with
such  a  velocity  a's  soon  deprived  him  of  all  pow-
er of  knowing  whither  they  went.  At  last,  they
stopped  at  a  verdant  plain  in  the  midst  of  the
desert,  when  the  youth  stretched  himself  upon
the  earth,  and  the  turf  opened  like  a  grave,  and
swallowed  him  up !  "  After  throwing  dust  over
his  body,  Saadi  sat  for  some  days  by  the  head
of  the  grave  ;  and  of  his  manifold  lamentations
the  following  is  one :  "  On  the  day  when  thy
foot  was  pierced  with  the  thorn  of  death,  would
to  God'  that  the  hand  of  fortune  had  clove  my
head  with  the  sword  of  annihilation !  that  my


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  43

eyes  might  not  this  day  have  seen  the  world
without  thee ;  such  am  I  seated  at  the  head  of
thy  dust,  as  the  ashes  are  on  my  own  head ! '
After  this,  he  had  his  way  to  find  back  over
rivers  of  molten  gold,  silver,  and  copper,
through  deserts  and  wildernesses,  and  over
mountains  of  snow,  winch  he  accomplishes  after
many  other  adventures.

During  his  many  years  of  travel,  Saadi  had
to  traverse  a  sufficiency  of  clime,  and  encoun-
tered a  diversity  of  adventure,  without  driving
us  to  the  shift  of  carrying  him  thus  into  fairy-
land, and  making  him  the  hero  of  one  of  his
own  fables  ;  and,  amidst  the  real  distress  of  pov-
erty, and  the  dissipation  of  a  wandering  and  un-
settled life,  he  rose  to  eminence  in  wisdom  and
learning ;  for,  ill  supplied  with  the  gifts  of  for-
tune, the  most  precious  part  of  that  life  was  a
continued  sojourn  from  city  to  city,  and ,  from
kingdom  to  kingdom ;  first,  perhaps,  led  by  a
hope  of  patronage  and  preferment,  and  after-
wards through  choice  and  habit.  During  this
period,  though  he  began  them  late  in  life,  his
Kulliat,  or  works,  were  composed ;  and  amidst
a  roving  activity  he  contrived  to  write  more
than  another  might,  in  a  like  condition,  have
managed  to  read.

Dowlat  Shah  says :  "  The  learning  and  wit
of  Saadi  have  been  the  continued  theme  of  the


44  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

eloquent  ever  since  his  time :  his  works  con-
tain much  variety  of  poetry  and  prose ;  and  of
the  former  there  are  nearly  twenty  thousand
verses."  Dowlat  Shah  lived  two  hundred  years
after  Saadi,  when  Persian  literature  was  upon
its  decline,  and  speaks  of  his  fame  in  Asia ;
and  in  the  course  of  four  hundred  and  eighty
years  more,  Europe  is  getting  a  relish  for  him.
Kaempfer,  speaking  of  Saadi  and  Hafiz,  says,
"  that  both  are  held  in  such  esteem  throughout
the  East,  that  he  can  scarce  be  considered  as  a
respectable  character  who  has  not  read  their
works,  and  treasured  up  their  wisdom,  so  as  to
make  them  the  rules  of  his  future  life."  And
Jami  and  Ibrahim  Khan  both  tell  us,  "that
men  of  genius  have  called  the  Diwan,  or  po-
etical works  of  Saadi,  the  Namakdan,  or  Salt-
cellar of  Poets;  and  reputable  writers  have  de-
clared that  Saadi  was  inspired";  in  confirmation
of  which,  Molana  Hatifa,  the  nephew  of  Jami,
and  his  superior  in  genius,  penned  the  follow-
ing stanza :  "  Notwithstanding  what  the  prophet
Mohammed  has  said,  that  after  me  no  prophet
can  come,  yet  there  are  among  the  poets  three
men  endowed  with  divine  inspiration ;  namely,
Firdausi  in  heroics,  Anwari  in  elegy,  and  Saadi
in  the  ghazal  or  ode."

Mulowi   Mohammed   Rashid,    the    able   and
learned  collator  of  the  printed  Calcutta  edition,


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  45

in  two  folio  volumes,  A.  D.  1791-2,  says  in  his
Persian  Introduction  :  "  It  must  not  be  omitted,
that  the  original  collector  and  editor  of  Sheik
Saadi's  Kulliat,  or  Works,  was  Ali-ben-Ahmad
of  Bisitun ;  and  in  the  Preface,  which  he  com-
posed at  the  same  time,  and  which  has  ever  since
been  the  constant  antecedent  of  the  Works,  he
accounts  for  the  occasion  of  this  compilation ;
and  gives  the  date  of  A.  H.  726  and  734,  or
thirty-three  and  forty-one  years  after  Saadi's
demise."  Bisitun,  the  birthplace  of  this  friend
of  Saadi,  and  the  site  of  the  statuary  Farhad's
operations,  lies  in  the  southern  part  of  Irac
Ajim,  and  on  the  high  road  from  the  city  of
Hamadan  to  Gilanac  and  Baghdad.

D'Herbelot,  as  in  many  of  his  other  Oriental
statements,  leads  Sir  W.  Jones  astray,  in  mak-
ing the  Works  of  Saadi  to  consist  of  only  three
books,  namely,  the  Gulistan,  Bustan,  and  Mu-
lumaat ;  and  even  Major  Stewart,  hi  his  late
catalogue  of  Tippoo  Sultan's  library,  makes
them  to  consist  only  of  seventeen  books ;  but
Ali-ben-Ahmad  more  correctly  enumerates  twen-
ty-two, to  wit :  —

1st.  Ra  sail  ah,  or  Tract ;

2d.  Rasallah,  or  Tract ;

3d.  Rasallah,  or  Tract ;

4th.  liasallah,  or  Tract ;

5th.  Rasallah,  or  Tract ;


46  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

6th.    Rasallah.  or  Tract ;
7th.    Gulistan,  or  Flower  Garden  ;
8th.    Bustan,  or  Fruit  Garden  ;
9th.    Arabian  Casaids,  or  Elegies ;

10th.    Persian  Casaids,  or  Elegies ;

11th.    Mirazi,  or  Dirges  ;

12th.  Mulumaat,  or  mixed  Poems  of  Persian
and  Arabic  ;

13th.    Turjiyat,  or  Poems  with  burdens  ;

14th.  Taybaat,  or  plain  and  less  mystical
Ghazals ;

15th.  Badaya,  or  rhetorical  and  more  mys-
tical Ghazals  ;

16th.  Khowatim,  or  what  Saadi  wrote  in  his
old  age  ;

17th.  Kudim,  or  what  he  wrote  in  his  young-
er days  ;

18th.  Sahibi}^ah,  or  Poems  of  eulogy  and  ad-
monition, chiefly  addressed  to  his  patron  Shums-
ud-din ;

19th.    Macaittaat,  or  Fragments  •

20th.  Khubisaat,  or  prose  and  poetry  on  im-
pure and  ludicrous  subjects ;

21st.  Robiayat,  or  Tetrastics  with  regular
rhymes  ;

22d.  Muflridaat,  or  Distichs  with  regular
rhymes.

Of  these  two-and-twenty  books,  the  six  books
of  Rasallahs,  the  Gulistan,  and  part  of  the  Khu-


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  47

bisaat,  are  prose,,  and  all  the  rest  poetry ;  the
Bustan  consists  of  couplets,  or  the  heroic  line
of  Firdausi  and  Nizami,  of  ten  and  eleven  syl-
lables, and  corresponding  with  that  of  Pope  and
Addison  in  English  ;  the  rest  are  chiefly  casaids,
or  elegies,  and  ghazals,  or  odes,  the  first  two
lines  forming  a  couplet  of  eleven  to  seventeen
syllables,  and  the  alternate  lines  throughout  the
poem  rhyming  to  this,  and  in  a  manner  peculiar
to  Persian  and  Arabic  poetry.  The  14th  book,
or  that  of  Taybaat,  forms  of  itself  nearly  a  Di-
wan,  or  collection  of  ghazals  ;  the  two  first  lines
of  the  first  four  of  them  terminate  in  an  Alif,  and
the  others  in  succession  in  each  letter  of  the
alphabet.  Ibrahim  Khan  says,  "  that  it  must  not
be  concealed  from  the  decorators  of  the  poetical
grove,  that  the  ghazal  bower  was  first  reared
by  Saadi."  But  in  this  he  was  mistaken ;  for
Khacani,  Jabali,  and  many  others,  his  seniors,
write  ghazals ;  and  indeed  the  word  Chamah
in  old  Persian  has  the  same  signification  as  the
Arabic  word  Ghazal,  as  Chaghanah  has  of  Ca-
sidah ;  and  poems  of  these  two  forms,  of  the
ode  and  elegy  respectively,  must  have  been
common  with  the  Persians  from  time  imme-
morial. Nor,  whatever  Hafiz  may  be,  can  I
subscribe  to  Dowlat  Shah's  opinion  "  of  Amir
Khosraw  being  superior  to  Saadi  in  the  ghazal."
In  the  library  at  the  India  House,  London,


48  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

there  is  a  curious  copy  of  Saadi's  Kulliat,  of
a  date  previous  to  the  collated  copy  of  Ali-bin-
Ahmad :  it  had  been  deposited  there  by  my
old  shipmate,  Sir  Harford  Jones,  who  had  re-
ceived it,  I  think,  as  a  present  during  his  last
embassy  to  Persia.  I  had  it  for  a  few  minutes
in  my  hand  in  1814 ;  and,  from  the  little  I
could  thus  see  of  it,  should  esteem  it  a  valuable
reference  to  any  future  publisher  of  Saadi's  text.
I  had  myself  a  personal  knowledge  of  the
Calcutta  printed  edition  of  Saadi's  works,  in
t\yo  small  folio  volumes,  being  collated  with
much  skill  and  diligence  by  Mulowi  Mohammed
Rashid,  from  four  valuable  MS.  copies,  some  of
which  I  also  recognized  in  that  library  ;  but  the
text  one,  once  honored  with  a  place  in  the
library  of  the  mighty  and  great  Moghul  Shah
Jihan,  is  now  in  my  possession.  Of  that  print-
ed copy  the  text  of  the  Gulistan  occupies  nearly
a  third  of  the  first  volume,  or  a  sixth  of  the
whole,  and  from  that  I  made  my  collated  trans-
lation, and  should  still  prefer  it ;  but  Mr.  Glad-
win chose,  as  the  basis  of  his  Calcutta  edition,
the  text  of  Gentius ;  and  a  reprint  of  that
having  been  made  in  London,  1809,  under  the
superintendence  of  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  and  pat-
ronized by  the  professors  of  the  East  India
Company's  colleges,  and  my  chief  view  in  this
translation  being  to  facilitate  the  studies  of  their


OF  SHEIK   SAADI.  49

Persian  pupils,  I  was  tinder  the  necessity  of
modelling  it  to  their  taste.  Any  particulars  I
shall  specify  in  a  memorandum  at  the  conclusion
of  this  Essay.

Saadi  had  a  personal  acquaintance  with  some
of  the  principal  poets  and  literary  characters
of  his  time  :  some,  however,  and  particularly
he  and  Jilal-uH-din  Rumi,  commonly  known  as
the  Mulowi  Manowi,  or  mystical  doctor,  and
equally  patronized  by  Shums-ud-din,  the  prime-
minister  of  Abaca-an,  make  no  mention  of
each  other.  Hakim  Nizari  and  Saadi  meeting
accidentally  in  the  market-place  at  Shiraz,  and
having  some  conversation,  each  soon  recognized
a  mutual  poet  in  his  wit ;  and  Saadi  having  of
course  invited  him  to  his  dwelling,  and  happen-
ing to  be  flush  of  cash,  most  sumptuously  en-
tertained him.  Some  time  after,  they  met  in
Khorasan,  where  Nizari  in  turn  received  Saadi
as  his  guest ;  and,  as  a  satire  on  his  prodigality,
the  first  day  treated  him  with  a  pot  of  boiled
milk  and  bread,  the  second  day  with  a  dish  of
fish,  and  the  third  with  a  joint  of  roast  meat,
observing  to  him  at  the  same  time,  "  I  can
afford  to  entertain  you  thus  for  years ;  but  the
expensive  style  in  which  you  entertained  me
could  not  have  lasted  many  days."  Yet  Nizari
was  in  fact  an  epicure,  drunkard,  and  debau-
chee ;  whereas  Saadi  was  habitually  temperate,

3  D


50  THE  LIFE  AND  GENIUS

sober,  and  chaste.  When  Saadi  met  hini  at
Shiraz,  he  asked  whether  he  recollected  any
of  Nizari's  verses;  and  he  answers  him  by
quoting  the  Motla,  or  first  stanza,  of  one  of
his  own  ghazals :  "  It  was  rumored  abroad,  that
I  *was  penitent,  and  had  forsaken  wine ;  but
this  is  a  gross  calumny,  for  what  have  I  to  do
with  repentance  ?  "

Swift,  Sterne,  and  other  wits  of  our  last  and
the  preceding  age,  could  relish  indecency  and
nastiness ;  and  it  is  creditable  perhaps  to  the
present  generation,  that  it  has  no  taste  for  such
grossnesses.  This  was  not,  however,  the  case
in  the  age  and  country  in  which  Saadi  flour-
ished, any  more  than  it  was  in  the  early  and
best  parts  of  our  own  literary  history.  The
works,  not  only  of  Saadi,  but  of  many  other
Persian  poets  and  moralists,  afford  too  many
examples  of  coarseness  and  indelicacy,  both  of
thought  and  expression ;  and,  what  is  singular,
Firdausi,  Nizami,  Khacani,  and  all  their  best
heroic  poets,  have  scarcely  any  of  them.  Nor
is  it  in  his  Khubisaat,  or  book  of  professed
impurities,  that  Saadi  thus  violates  decency  ;  for
even  the  morality  of  the  Gulistan  and  Bustan
is  occasionally  tarnished  with  such  indecorous
allusions :  but  in  this  way,  of  all  the  Persians,
Sozni,  a  vigorous  writer  otherwise,  is  the  great-
est culprit.


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  51

On  my  way  to  Europe,  having  occasion  to
pass  the  months  of  December  and  January,
1796-7,  in  Calcutta,  I  put  my  translation  of
the  Gulistan  into  the  hands  of  my  friend  Mr.
Gladwin,  wishing  to  have  his  opinion  of  it ;
when  he  told  me  he  had  also  projected  a  trans-
lation of  it,  and  meant  to  obviate  another  indeli-
cate allusion,  particularly  in  the  fifth  chapter,
by  chanonno;  the  male  for  the  female  character.
That  I  see  he  has  done ;  and  he  has  otherwise
endeavored,  by  castrating  the  English  of  it,  to
purify  Gentius's  text.  But  he  has  overlooked
the  occasional  instances  of  grossness  and  indeli-
cacy of  sentiment  and  expression,  to  which  I
allude  above ;  and  which  I  have  obviated  by
the  simpler  process  of  leaving  out  the  transla-
tion of  a  few  words  of  the  Persian  text,  the
first  example  of  this  occurring  in  Gulistan,  i.
40.  However,  in  all  such  instances,  it  has  been
my  endeavor  to  preserve,  as  much  as  common
decency  will  permit  of  it,  the  English  of  Saadi's
text,  that  the  college  student  may  not  be  disap-
pointed ;  particularly  as  the  author  would  seem
here  alone  to  indulge  in  obscurity.  For  such
passages,  —  "  nudi  enim  sunt,  recti,  et  venusti,
omne  ornatu  orationis  tanquam  veste  detracto" —
the  best  apology  I  would  offer  is  the  simplicity
of  heart  and  nakedness  of  diction  of  Oriental
writers,   examples   of  which  occasionally  occur


52  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

in  our  Old  Testament ;  and  them  the  profound
scholars  of  James's  reign,  conscious  of  purity
themselves,  translated  into  downright  and  in-
telligible English  ;  and  if  I  am  in  any  instance,
with  the  view  of  being  intelligible  in  like  man-
ner,  coarse,  let  the  reader  skip  over  it,  as  some
of  our  queasy  clergy  do  in  reading  the  morning
and  evening  lessons.  Yet — liorresco  referens  —
I  must  not  overlook  another  propensity,  to  which
Saadi  is  accused  of  alluding  with  a  reprehensible
levity.  An  example  of  this  nature  occurs  in
Gulistan,  v.  20,  where  the  Cazi  of  Hamadan,
a  character  in  the  East  equally  venerable  and
sanctified  as  a  judge  or  bishop  with  us,  is  in
the  first  instance  sentenced  to  condign  death
and  annihilation,  but  afterwards  his  abomination
is  made  the  subject  of  wit  and  repartee.  But,
whatever  levity  he  may  sport,  it  in  no  instance
appears  that  he  criminally  countenanced,  and
still  less,  as  some  who  have  slightly  inspected
his  works  suspect,  practised  this  vice  ;  for  on
other  occasions  he  speaks  of  it,  and  its  abettors,
with  all  due  scorn  and  abhorrence ;  a  notable
example  of  which  occurs  Gul.  iii.  14.

In  the  Kholasah-u'1-Ashaar,  from  which  I  also
copied  the  above  story  of  Nizari,  it  is  related,
"  that  Kh'ajah  Humam-ud-din  of  Tabriez,  or
Tauris,  had  a  son  exquisitely  handsome ;  and
that  Saadi,  who  was  a  great  admirer  of  human


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  53

beauty,  travelled  to  Tabriez,  that  he  might  see
him.  He  was  one  day  in  the  public  bathing-
room  at  Tabriez,  when  the  Kh'ajah  entered,
accompanied  by  this  son ;  and  as  he  always  con-
cealed him  from  public  view,  he  was  offended
at  meeting  Saadi,  and  asked  him,  Whence  come
you  ?  Saadi  answered,  From  Shiraz.  It  is  sin-
gular, said  Humam,  that  in  my  city  the  Shi-
razians  should  be  more  than  the  dogs  and  cats  !
In  my  city,  replied  Saadi,  it  is  the  reverse ;  for
there  the  Tabriezians  are  less !  Like  many  of
his  townsmen,  Saadi  was  bald.  Humam,  turn-
ing the  ewer  he  was  using,  as  is  customary  in
Oriental  ablution,  upside  down,  asked  Saadi,
How  comes  it  that  the  head  of  a  Shirazian
should  resemble  tins  utensil?  Saadi  promptly
answered  him,  by  presenting  his  own  ewer  with
the  empty  mouth  upwards,  and  saying,  Why
is  the  head  of  a  Tabriezian  so  very  like  this  ?
The  Kh'ajah,  who  was  himself  a  poet,  and
gentleman  of  considerable  eminence  and  for-
tune, was  vexed  at  these  two  smart  replies ;
and,  making  his  son  sit  down  behind  him,  asked
Saadi,  Have  you  ever  heard  of  any  of  Kh'ajah
Humam's  poetry  at  Shiraz?  Saadi  answered,
Yes  ;  and  repeated  this  fragment :  "  Humam  is
a  veil  between  me  and  my  beloved;  but  the
hour  is  fast  approaching  when  that  too  shall  be
removed."     The  Kh'ajah  was  now  made  aware


54  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

that  this  could  only  be  Saadi ;  and,  having  made
him  the  usual  compliments  of  marked  respect,
took  him  home  to  his  mansion,  where  he  con-
tinued for  a  length  of  time  absorbed  in  con-
templating the  charms  of  the  son.  D'Herbelot,
in  his  BibUotheque  Orientate,  414,  quotes  La-
mai's  Duftar-u'1-Lataif,  or  record  of  witticisms,
in  the  Turkish  language,  as  his  authority  for
one  of  the  above  repartees,  and  says,  "  The
veil  here  alluded  to  is  the  human  body,  which
prevents  our  seeing  God ;  and  that  by  this
verse  he,  namely  Humam,  intimated  his  ap-
proaching death."  And  in  Ibrahim  Khan's
relation  of  it  there  is  a  play  upon  the  word
Run,  no  uncommon  thing  among  modern  Per-
sian scribblers,  but  which  decency  again  forbids
me  to  translate.

We  are  told  in  the  Sayr-u'1-mota-kharin,
or  modern  history,  of  Gholam  Hosain,  that,
among  other  men  of  rank  and  education  who
fled  from  Persia  in  Saadi's  days,  in  order  to
escape  the  rapacity  and  cruelty  of  the  illiterate
Jinghiz  Khan  and  his  Tartar  successors,  were
Amir  Khosraw  and  Amir  Hasan,  both  poets
of  genius  and  learning ;  when  they  found  an
elegant  and  literary  retirement  with  that  ac-
complished prince  Sultan  Mohammed,  the  son
of  Giyath-ud-din  Boltan,  the  Guri  king  of
Delhi ;  who,  in  his  father's  lifetime,  held  a  sort


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  55

of  sovereign  authority  over  Multan,  and  other
Hindustani  provinces  bordering  on  Persia ;  in
defence  of  which  he  afterwards  (A.  H.  683,
A.  D.  1284)  fell  fighting  gloriously  in  battle.
One  day  those  noble  exiles  were  holding  forth,
in  the  presence  of  their  munificent  patron,  on
the  wit  and  erudition  of  Sheik  Saadi  of  Shiraz ;
which  both  were  so  liberal  in  praising  as  to
induce  the  Shahzadah,  or  heir  apparent,  to  de-
pute a  special  messenger,  with  many  valuable
gifts,  to  the  Sheik,  and  an  invitation  to  come
and  reside  at  Multan,  where  he  ens;aa;ed  to
build  him  a  monastery,  and  endow  it  with  vil-
lages and  lands ;  but  Saadi,  because  of  his  ex-
treme age  and  feeble  frame,  being  then  in  his
ninety-second  year,  declined  this  friendly  offer.
However,  in  return  for  the  prince's  handsome
attention,  he  sent  him  a  volume  of  pleasant  and
elegant  verses,  and  the  Bustan  and  Gulistan
copied  with  his  own  hand ;  and  like  a  man  of
real  learning  himself,  he  had  the  generosity  of
availing  himself  of*  this  opportunity  "  to  recom-
mend Amir  Khosraw  to  the  prince,  and  bestow
a  candid  approbation  on  his  works  " ;  which,
by  the  by,  are  very  voluminous  ;  for  his  poetry
alone  consists  of  between  four  and  five  hundred
thousand  verses !

I  shall  quote  one  more  instance  of  the  respect
in  which  Saadi  was  held,  from  the  sixth  Rasal-


56  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

lah  of  his  own  works ;  where  it  is  called  his  in-
terview with  Sultan  Abaca-an,  then  king  of
Persia.

Saadi  tells  us,  saying :  "  When,  on  my  return
from  a  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  Mecca,  I  arrived
at  that  seat  of  sovereignty,  Tabriez,  and  had
enjoyed  an  intercourse  with  some  learned  and
pious  men,  whose  society  did  me  much  honor,
I  got  desirous  of  seeing  those  two  illustrious
noblemen  Kh'ajahs  Ula-ud-din  and  Shums-ud-
din,  -as  many  claims  of  friendship  had  of  old
subsisted  between  us ;  and  having  set  out  one
day  with  the  view  of  calling  on  them,  I  chanced
to  meet  them  on  my  way,  riding  on  horseback,
in  company  with  Abaca-an,  the  sovereign  of
the  universe.  Seeing  them  so  engaged,  I  did
not  judge  it  proper  to  intrude  upon  them  with
a  friendly  visit,  and  was  in  the  act  of  taking
myself  aside,  when  they  both  dismounted,  and,
following  me  on  foot,  bowed  themselves  to  the
earth,  and,  on  coming  close  up  to  me,  kissed
my  hands  and  feet,  and,  congratulating  this
wretched  creature  on  his  safe  arrival,  said,  this
was  not  just  that  we  had  not  been  apprised
of  the  auspicious  approach  of  our  august  and
venerable  father !  After  attending  to  this  cere-
mony, Sultan  Abaca-an  remarked,  How  many
years  has  Shums-ud-din  been  in  my  service,
and   has   known  me    as   the    sovereign    of  the


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  57

universe,  yet  he  never  made  me  such  homage
and  respect  as  he  has  shown  this  man  !  And
on  the  two  brothers  rejoining  him,  and  remount-
ing their  horses,  he  turned  round  to  Shums-
ud-din  and  said,  Who  is  that  person,  whom  you
accosted  so  humbly,  and  received  so  civilly  ?
Shums-ud-din  answered,  O  Sire  !  this  was  our
father!  Then  the  Sultan  said,  Oftentimes  have
I  asked  after  your  father,  and  you  were  answer-
ing me,  He  is  dead  ;  and  now  you  said,  This  was
our  father !  He  replied,  He  is  our  father  and
our  Sheik :  possibly  the  renowned  name  of
Sheik  Saadi  of  Shiraz  may  have  reached  Ins
royal  highness's  ear,  for  his  sayings  are  cele-
brated all  over  the  world.  Abaca-an  com-
manded them,  saying,  You  must  introduce  him
to  me.  They  replied,  We  have  heard,  and  shall
obey.  Accordingly,  after  associating  with  the
Sheik  for  some  days,  they  asked  him  to  attend
the  king ;  but  he  was  declining  their  invitation,
and  savins;,  Relieve  me  from  this  ceremonv,
and  make  my  excuses.  They  said,  You  will
assuredly  go  for  our  sakes,  and  shall  be  your
own  master  in  every  matter  else."  The  Sheik
adds :  "  For  their  satisfaction  I  agreed  to  accom-
pany  them ;  and  havhig  attended  at  court,  and
had  an  audience  of  the  king,  when  about  to
take  my  leave,  his  majesty  was  pleased  to  say,

Give  me  a  maxim  of  advice.     I  replied,  You
3*


58  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

can  take  along  with  you,  from  this  world  into
the  next,  nothing  but  reward  or  punishment;
now,  or  in  this  world,  be  thou  charitable  and
righteous  !  Abaca-an  said,  Put  the  purport  of
this  sentiment  into  verse."  And  the  Sheik  ut-
tered this  extemporary  fragment  on  Equity  and
Justice :  "  That  king  who  is  the  pastor  of  the
people,  let  his  revenue  be  sacred,  for  it  is  the
hire  of  the  shepherd ;  but*  if  not  the  people's
guardian,  let  it  be  his  deadly  poison,  for  what-
'ever  he  exacts  is  an  imposition  on  the  faithful."
Abaca-an  wept,  and  repeatedly  asked,  Am  I
that  pastor  or  not  ?  And  the  Sheik  each  time
answered,  If  you  are,  the  first  couplet  is  in
favor  of  your  case ;  otherwise,  the  second  liter-
ally applies  to  it.  The  Sheik  adds,  that  on
taking  my  final  leave,  I  repeated  these  few
verses :  "A  king  is  the  shadow  of  God ;  and
a  shadow  should  be  the  image  of  its  principal :
the  disposition  of  the  subject  is  not  capable  of
good,  unless  it  be  restrained  by  the  sword  of
the  sovereign :  any  peaceable  demeanor  that
is  found  in  this  world  originates  in  the  justice  of
its  princes  :  that  sovereign's  government  never
can  be  just  whose  entire  judgment  is  founded
in  wickedness."  Which  met  Abaca-an's  full-
est concurrence.  Ali-bin- Ahmad  adds,  "  that
in  his  days  pious  and  learned  men  would  not
venture    to    admonish    even   a   common    shop-


OF  SHEIK  SAADL*  59


keeper  after  this  manner ;  and  tliat  in  matters
of  right  the  times  had  degenerated  to  what
they  then  were."  Thus  have  moralists  in  all
ages  complained  of  the  degeneracy  of  their
own  days,  and  occasionally  ventured  on  such
advice.  Agatho,  the  poet  and  friend  of  Eurip-
ides, admonished  Archelaus,  king  of  Macedon,
saying,  "  A  prince  should  keep  in  mind  three
maxims :  1st.  that  he"  rules  over  men ;  2d.  that
he  ought  to  rule  according  to  law ;  and,  3d.  that
he  cannot  rule  forever."  Also,  it  is  proper
to  warn  the  reader,  that  there  must  have  been
two  Shums-ud-dins ;  one,  the  minister  of  a  king
of  the  Atabak  dynasty,  who  reigned  at  Shiraz,
and  patronized  Saadi's  father ;  and  another  the
Diwan,  or  prime  minister  of  Abaca-an,  A.  H.
663,  680,  by  whom  he  was  employed  in  offices
of  great  trust ;  but  was  put  to  death,  A.  H.
683,  by  the  son  and  successor,  Sultan  Arghun
Khan,  on  the  strange  charge  of  having  poisoned
his  father,  Abaca-an^  and  such  a  circumstance
must  have  tended  to  embitter  the  latter  days
of  Saadi.

Yet  why  should  he  regret  the  death  of  his
illustrious  friend  and  patron,  who  if  a  good  man
only  went  before  him  to  be  happy,  where  he,
as  a  good  man  himself,  and  long  dead  to  life's
enjoyments,  might  hope,  nay,  wish,  soon  to  join
him.     Early  or  late  we  must  all  go ;  and  the


60  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS


heartiest  and  most  sanguine  of  us  is  as  much
dead  to  that  part  of  his  life  that  is  gone  as
that  friend  then  was ;  and  must  soon  be  to  what
remains  of  it.  Saadi's  life  was  unusually  long ;
but  the  latter  part  of  it  was,  I  fear,  too  un-
happy for  him  —  like  the  old  Persian  (Gul.  vi.  1)
he  was  called  upon  to  visit  at  Damascus  —  to
regret  his  at  last  parting  with  it.

And,  at  its  best,  the  longest  life  is  but  a  drop
of  rain  falling  from  a  cloud  into  the  ocean  of
eternity,  where  it  is  swallowed  up  and  lost  in
this  immensity,  unless  it  find  the  body  of  a
Saadi  to  nurture  it  into  that  pearl,  the  Gulistan,
in  its  original  classical  Persian.  This  I  have
attempted  to  translate  into  English ;  but  it  is  a
translation,  and,  in  order  to  make  it  useful,
necessarily  a  literal  one ;  therefore  the  reader
must  not  be  disappointed  if  he  find  the  bright
water  of  Saadi's  pearl  again  evaporated  into  the
clouds,  and  little  else  left  but  the  shell  that  once
contained  it.  Yet  will  my  object  be  obtained
if  this  translation  shall  enable  the  young  student
to  understand  Saadi's  Persian  text;  and,  by
relishing  such  a  classic,  recover  that  pearl  which
I  was  forced  to  drop.

However  much  his  biographers  vary  in  the
specific  number,  they  all  agree  in  making  him
above  a  hundred ;  and  Dowlat  Shah  and  Ibra-
him Khan  say,  that  Saadi  lived  a  hundred  and


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  61

two  years.  But  Jami,  who  was  Dowlat  Shah's
contemporary,  and,  as  a  brother  poet,  more  in-
terested in  the  exact  truth,  states  him  as  having
been  born  at  Shiraz,  A.  H.  571,  or  A.  D.  1194,
and  as  having  died  at  the  same  place,  A.  H.
690 ;  by  which  it  would  appear  that  he  reached
the  very  advanced  age  of  one  hundred  and
twenty  lunar,  or  one  hundred  and  sixteen  solar
years !  This  date  of  his  death  Dowlat  Shah
also  confirms ;  for  he  says,  "  that  Saadi  de-
parted tins  life  at  Shiraz,  in  the  reign  of  Atabak
Mohammed  Shah,  the  son  of  Muzuffar  Sila-
ghur  Shah-bin-Saad-bin-Zungi ;  and  that  a  dear
friend  records  the  date  of  that  noble  personage's
demise  as  follows.  It  was  on  .the  evening  of
Friday,  or  the  Mohammedan  Sabbath,  in  the
month  Showal,  of  the  Arabian  year  six  hundred
and  ninety,  that  the  eagle  of  the  immaterial
soul  of  Sheik  Saadi  shook  from  his  plumage
the  dust  of  his  body."  This  sublime  senti-
ment was  no  doubt  borrowed  from  the  following
two  lofty  couplets  of  Saadi's  own  Bustan  (vi.  1)  :
"  Now  that  the  falcon  of  his  soul  would  tower
into  the  zenith  of  the  sky,  why  hast  thou  bur-
dened his  pinion  with  a  load  of  covetousness  ?
hadst  thou  released  his  skirt  from  the  talons  of
carnal  desires,  he  would  have  soared  on  high
into  the  angel  Gabriel's  abode."

In  fact,  a  dozen  equally  appropriate  and  beau-


62  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

tiful  epitaphs  might  be  selected  from  his  works.
As  in  some  parts  of  Scotland,  it  is  customary
with  the  people  in  the  East  to  plant  rose-bush-
es, and  other  flowering  shrubs,  round  the  plain
graves  of  their  defunct  friends ;  in  allusion  to
which  Saadi  says  (Gul.  vii.  16)  :  "  Alas !  I
said,  how  grateful  didst  thou  prove  to  my  heart,
so  long  as  the  verdure  of  thy  existence  flour-
ished in  the  garden !  Have  patience,  he  replied,
O  my  friend !  till  the  return  of  the  spring,  and
thou  mayst  again  see  verdure  and  flowers  shoot-
ing from  my  bosom."  Or,  as  my  own  master  in
rhetoric,  Doctor  Beattie,  beautifully  expresses  it :

"  Nor  yet  for  the  ravage  of  winter  I  mourn  :

Kind  Nature  the  embryo  blossoms  will  save  ;
The  roses  shall  bloom  round  my  mouldering  urn,
And  spring  again  dawn  on  the  night  of  my  grave."

But  these  last  six  couplets  of  Bustan,  iv.  16,
are  still  more  appropriate :  "  Take  heed,  ye
that  tread  on  my  ashes :  by  the  dust  of  the  gen-
erous I  crave  your  remembrance ;  that  though
Saadi  be  mouldered  into  dust,  what  has  he  to
apprehend,  who,  during  his  lifetime,  had  also
been  humble  as  the  dust?  In  helplessness  he
laid  his  body  prostrate  on  the  earth,  and  then
he  encompassed  the  globe  like  the  wind  (by
travelling  over  it)  :  it  may  soon  happen  that
the  earth  shall  consume  him,  and  the  wind
may  again  whirl  him  like  dust  round  the  uni-


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  63

verse  !  Behold,  while  the  rose-bower  of  mysti-
cism blossomed,  in  it  no  nightingale  warbled  so
melodiously ;  now  it  were  strange,  when  that
nightingale  is  dead,  if  roses  did  not  spring  from
its  bones."

Dowlat  Shah  says,  that  Saadi's  tomb  is  sit-
uated in  a  charming  spot,  in  the  midst  of
fountains  and  buildings,  and  is  held  in  much
estimation  as  a  place  of  pilgrimage :  and  Ibra-
him Khan  speaks  of  it  under  the  name  of
Sadiyah ;  but  he  means,  I  fancy,  that  gate  of
Shiraz  which  formerly  led  to  it.  Kaempfer
mentions  those  buildings  to  be  the  numerous
cemeteries  of  other  great  and  learned  men ;
and  among  them  that  of  Hafiz :  but  the  whole
was  in  his  time,  A.  D.  1686,  rather  neglected
and  dilapidated.  My  friend,  Colonel  W.  Frank-
lin, found  it,  in  A.  D.  1787,  "just  in  the  state
it  was  when  Saadi  was  buried,"  and  as  Kaemp-
fer had  found  it,  with  the  sides  engraved  with
many  sentences  in  the  old  Noskhi  character,
whieh  neither  of  those  gentlemen  thought  of
copying.  The  Colonel  visited  it  in  Karim  Khan's
time,  a  great  adorner  of  Shiraz  and  that  neigh-
borhood, who  built  a  new  monument  for  Hafiz,
but  left  Saadi's  as  it  was  :  however,  he  needs
no  such  frail  support ;  for  in  his  literary  works
he  erected  a  monument,  which,  like  that  of
Horace,  must  outlast  the  Pyramids.


64  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

With  respect  to  the  externals  of  Saadi's  per-
son, from  some  pictures  of  him  in  a  richly  em-
blazoned copy  of  his  works,  now  in  the  library  at
the  India-House,  and  one  of  the  four  I  men-
tioned above,  his  head  isj  represented  as  bald,
and  illuminated  with  rays  of  glory.  From  dif-
ferent passages  of  his  Bustan  and  Gulistan  we
may  judge  that  his  stature  was  low,  and  habit
of  body  spare  and  slim ;  and  from  a  carelessness
of  dress,  too  common  with  literary  men,  a  per-
son naturally  compact  carried,  from  its  small-
ness,  a  mean  and  perhaps  shabby  look.  (Bust,
iv.  6.)  In  order  to  cover  such  defects  with  the
least  trouble  to  himself,  he  wore  over  Ins  inner
garments  the  Kharcah-moshayakh,  or  long  blue
gown  of  the  Darwaishes  (Gul.  iv.  19)  ;  and
in  the  picture  adjoining  to  his  tomb  Colonel
Franklin  found  him  represented  hi  this  dress
with  a  pastoral  staff  in  his  hand,  another  em-
blem of  a  pilgrim  and  hermit.

Like  the  Menippian  and  Varronean  satire,  of
which  Petronius,  Seneca,  and  Boetius  were  the
chief  Latin  composers,  and  Colonel  Forrester's
Polite  Philosopher  is  an  example  in  English,  the
Gulistan  is  written  partly  in  prose  and  partly
in  poetry.  Better  than  twenty  years  ago  I
sent  to  our  Asiatic  Society  at  Calcutta  an  Essay
on  the  Coincidences  of  the  Oriental  and  Euro-
pean Apologue,  the   former  chiefly  extracts  of


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  65

Saadi's  works,  and  particularly  of  the  Gulistan.
To  the  Apologues  of  this  I  give  a  more  epi-
grammatic form  by  leaving  out  the  poetry,
which  is  in  fact  only  a  repetition  in  most  in-
stances of  the  sentiment,  as  expressed  before
in  prose.  Part  of  that  Essay  appears  in  the
Asiatic  Annual  Register,  XII.  403,  416 ;  part,
or  the  whole  majlis  and  fifth  sermon,  in  the
Bombay  Literary  Transactions,  I.  146, 158 ;  and
part  in  the  Asiatic  Journals  of  April  and  June,
1817,  April  and  June,  1818,  and  December,
1821.

The  manuscript  copies  of  the  Gulistan,  used
throughout  the  East-India  Company's  empire
of  Hindustan  as  a  common  school-book,  three
of  which  I  have  in  my  possession,  are  perhaps
a  sixth  part  larger  than  what  is  there  called  the
Balaat,  or  the  Calcutta  printed  text  of  1791 ;
partly  in  Consequence  of  absurd  insertions  of
many  corresponding  passages  of  Saadi's  other
works,  and  partly  from  foreign  interpolations.

The  Rosarium  Politicum  of  Georgius  Gen-
tius,  published  at  Amsterdam,  A.  D.  1651,  with
a  Latin  translation,  I  had  in  my  possession  for
some  years ;  and  found  its  Persian  text  agree
nearer  with  the  Calcutta  printed  copy  than  with
any  of  the  common  Bengal  manuscripts.  A  few
small  additions  and  corrections,  which  indeed  I
have  made  in  the  margin  of  my  own  copy  of  it,

E


66  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

would  improve  it  much ;  and  if  there  should  be
a  demand  soon  for  a  reprint  of  this  text-book
as  used  in  the  Company's  colleges,  I  am  also
ready  to  superintend  it ;  and  prevent  such  fre-
quent errors  as  the  two  last  lines  of  the  first
page,  or  a  fitrat  of  prose,  being  mistaken  and
written  as  poetry ;  and  the  second  line  of  the
next  bayit,  or  couplet,  having  three  feet  of  its
text  omitted  !  The  Persianischer  Rosenthal  of
Olearius  (Schleswic,  1654)  I  never  saw.

Commentaries  and  keys  of  the  Gulistan,  after
the  plan  of  our  Clavis  Homerica,  have  been
composed  both  in  Persian  and  Arabic ;  one  of
them,  called  the  Sharahi- Gulistan,  I  also  had
once  in  my  possession;  and  Mr.  Gladwin  showed
me  one  in  Arabic :  likewise  he  gave  me  a  man-
uscript copy  of  the  notes,  as  numbered  for  Gen-
tius's  Rosarium,  but  omitted  in  my  copy.  All
of  them,  however,  seemed  to  me  equally  bald
and  uninteresting.

Few  authors  are  more  original  in  their  com-
positions, more  just  in  their  conception  of  a
subject,  or  more  fortunate  in  their  choice  of  an
expression,  than  Saadi :  yet  he  is  a  mannerist
sui  generis  ;  not  as  implying  a  servile  imitation
of  any  preceding  admired  model  in  Persian,
but  as  constantly  recurring  to  a  manner  of  de-
liverance peculiarly  his  own.  Perhaps  Firdausi
is   the    only  Persian   author  exempt  from  this


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  67

charge  of  either  copying  others  in  his  characters,
or  of  being  the  mannerist  of  himself:  he  has  as
many  distinct  warriors,  for  example,  as  Homer
and  Virgil  have  put  together ;  yet  his  Zal-zar
and  Rostam,  his  Sohrab  and  Ispindiyar,  have
their  appropriate  characteristics  and  epithets,
and  are  distinguished  from  the  warriors  of  all
other  poets,  and  from  each  other :  and  so  it  is
with  his  females ;  for  no  critic  would  think  of
confounding  Rudabah,  Tahiminah,  the  Gord-
afrid,  or  Shirin,  with  each  other :  and,  in  ex-
pressing himself,  his  favorite  mode  is  either  pa-
thos or  sublimity,  with  an  unaffected  hardness,
the  special  gift  of  real  inspiration ;  whereas
Nizami,  whose  favorite  mode  is  energy  and
strength,  combines  withal  a  brevity  and  obscu-
rity, which  act  as  a  constant  drawback  on  his
otherwise  vigorous  language,,  and  the  philosophic
justness  of  his  reflections  ;  and  Mulowi  Manowi,
whose  favorite  mode  again  is  enthusiasm  and
rapture,  has  such  a  perpetual  medley  of  carnal
and  divine  love,  and  tendency  to  a  reunion  with
the  Deity,  as  resolves  everything  into  Sufism
and  mystery.  On  the  other  hand,  Saadi's  fa-
vorite mode  is  a  simplicity  and  tenderness  of
heart,  a  delicacy  of  feeling  and  judgment,  and
that  exquisitely  natural  vein  in  which  he  relates
his  many  apologues  and  parables,  with  a  sort  of
sententious  and  epigrammatic  turn ;  where,  how-


68  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

ever,  like  the  Greek  epigram,  the  point  is  so
very  fine,  that,  in  order  that  his  European
reader  may  perceive  and  feel  it,  his  translator
must  give  it  some  substance,  otherwise  this
manner,   constituting   the  very   essence    of  his

original,  shall  entirely  escape  him

Engaged  in  such  a  task,  a  translator  finds
considerable  difficulty  in  transferring  this  real
manner  of  his  author  with  spirit  and  fidelity,
even  from  one  language  of  Europe  into  another ;
and  still  more  from  an  Oriental  language,  hav-
ing  the  additional  obstacles  of  a  change  of  man-
ners, customs,  laws,  and  religion  to  encounter
by  the  way.  There  are  two  ways  of  turning
the  sentiments  of  an  author  from  one  lanmiao-e
into  another,  namely,  translation  and  imitation;
and  Pope  with  ourselves  tried  both,  and,  in  his
imitations  of  Horace's  Satires  and  Epistles,  is
thought  to  have  succeeded  ;  but  as  Bentley  told
himself,  his  translation  of  Homer,  though  a  very
pretty  poem,  can,  to  a  person  that  does  not  un-
derstand the  original  Greek,  give  no  idea  of  Ho-
mer. Cowper  says,  it  is  impossible  to  give  in
rhyme  a  just  translation  of  any  ancient  poetry
of  Greece  or  Rome  ;  and  still  less  of  Arabic
and  Persian :  Cowper  tried  his  hand  at  Homer
in  blank  verse,  and  was  still  more  unfortunate
than  Pope.  A  translation,  to  succeed,  must
not  violate  simplicity  on  the  one  hand,  nor  sink


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  69

into  tameness  on  the  other;  and  for  this  pur-
pose a  prose  translation,  even  of  poetry,  is  pref-
erable either  to  rhyme  or  blank  verse.

But  a  perfect  idea  of  any  author  can  be
formed  only  by  understanding  him  in  his  origi-
nal ;  and  for  this  purpose  all  such  translations
and  imitations  as  those  of  Pope  —  and  we  have
an  abundance  of  them  done  out  of  all  foreign
languages  into  English  —  are  of  little  or  no
use

During  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  Chris-
tian  centuries,  when,  with  the  view  of  translating
the  Scriptures,  our  English  doctors  turned  their
minds  to  Oriental  learning,  many  of  them  became
proficients  in  the  sister  dialects  of  Hebrew,  Sy-
riac,  and  Arabic ;  but,  finding  the  Persian  so
different  from  those  three  in  idiom,  though  other-
wise much  the  simpler  and  easier  language,  they
had  little  or  no  knowledge  of  it;  accordingly,
Bishop  Walton's  first  edition  of  the  polyglot
Scriptures,  which  he  dedicated  to  Cromwell,  has
no  Persian  text ;  the  four  Ingil,  or  Evangelists,  in
this  dialect  having  been  added  afterwards  to  the
edition  dedicated  to  Charles  the  Second.  When
the  Great  Moghul  Acbar,  A.  D.  1580-90,  ap-
plied to  the  Pope  for  a  copy  of  our  Scriptures,
he  asked  only  for  the  Tawrit,  or  Pentateuch,
having  already,  he  said,  copies  of  the  Psalms
and  Evangelists  in   Persian ;  and  this  last  was


70  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

what  Bishop  Walton  or  some  of  his  coadjutors
had  got  through  the  Germans.  But  it  is  not  so
well  known  in  Europe,  that  copies  of  the  Zabur,
or  Psalms,  were  also  common  at  that  time  in
the  East,  in  the  Pahlowi  dialect,  in  which  Ni-
zami  specifically  states  David  to  have  written
them  !

Nor  is  it  generally  known  among  us,  that  no
two  languages  differ  more  in  idiom  and  words
than  the  Persian  and  Arabic :  yet  when  Persia
was  subdued  by  the  immediate  successors  of
Mohammed,  they  made  a  special  point  of  for-
cing their  language,  as  well  as  religion,  upon
their  new  subjects;  but  after  three  centuries  of
this  unnatural  tyranny,  on  the  decline  of  the
Khalifat,  the  Persians,  under  native  princes,
recovered  not  the  Pahlowi,  which  had  been  the
court  dialect  during  the  Sasan  dynasty,  but  the
Parsi,  which  had  been  the  dialect  of  the  Kayan
dynasty,  and  I  fancy  all  along  the  current  dia-
lect of  Persia :  and  in  the  Gulistan,  Baharistan,
Nagaristan,  and  other  popular  prose  Persian  clas-
sics, the  Parsi  and  Arabic  are,  as  Sir  W.  Jones
observes,  so  blended  "  that  one  period  often  con-
tains both  languages,  wholly  distinct  from  each
other  in  expression  and  idiom,  but  perfectly
united  in  sense  and  construction,  not  as  Roman
and  Saxon  words  are  in  this  sentence :  4  The
true  law  is  right  reason,  conformable  to  the  na-


OF  SHEIK   SAADI.  71

ture  of  tilings,  which  calls  us  to  the  duty  by
commanding,  deters  us  from  sin  by  forbidding ' ;
but  as  the  Latin  and  English  are  in  this  :  '  The
true  lex  is  recta  ratio,  conformable  natural,
which  by  commanding  vocat  ad  officium,  by  for-
bidding a  fraude  deterreat.'  '

And  a  striking  instance  of  this  occurs  in  Saa-
di's  panegyric  of  the  Prophet  in  the  Preface  of
his  Gulistan,  the  three  last  lines  of  the  second
page  of  the  Persian  text  being  a  prose  medley
of  Persian  and  Arabic ;  the  next  two  lines,  at
the  top  of  the  third  page,  a  couplet  of  pure  Ara-
bic ;  the  next  two  lines  a  couplet  of  pure  Per-
sian ;  and  the  next  four  lines  a  tetrastic  of  pure
Arabic !

Every  classic  scholar  admires  the  address
with  which  Virgil  introduces  his  apostrophe  of
"  et  tu  Marcellus  eris  "  ;  and  this  is  a  happy  ex-
ample of  the  same  figure  of  rhetoric.  Indeed,
his  commencement  of  this  graceful  Preface  with
a  thanksgiving  to  the  Deity,  this  praise  of  his
Prophet,  his  panegyric  of  the  King,  his  enco-
mium on  the  heir-apparent,  and  eulogy  of  the
prime-minister,  are  all  felicitous  instances  of  that
manner  which  I  have  noted  as  characteristic
of  Saadi  in  his  Persian  and  Arabian  composi-
tions.

The  chief  difficulty  in  translating  any  such
Arabian  quotation  is  its  being  in  common  a  text


72  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

of  the  Koran,  or  a  tradition  of  the  Prophet,
which  though  ready  in  the  memory  of  a  pious
Mohammedan  gentleman,  —  and  however  much
our  flippant  travellers,  and  even  learned  doctors,
choose  to  declaim  on  his  ignorance,  a  believer
in  the  Koran  can  applicably  quote  it  as  the  rec-
ord of  his  law  and  the  guide  of  his  morals,  —
yet,  to  a  translator  like  myself,  such  a  passage
is  often  obscure  even  when  complete,  and  still
more  so  when  only  a  portion  of  it  is  thus  no-
ticed ;  as,  for  example,  in  the  Gulistan,  i.  1,
where  the  well-disposed  Vizier  says,  "  such  as
are  restraining  their  anger,  and  forgiving  their
fellow-creatures  :  and  Qod  tvill  befriend  the  be-
nevolent"—  without  using  the  explanatory  pre-
liminary of  "  Paradise  is  for  such  as  are"  —
which  I  am,  I  fancy,  the  first  who  has  correctly
supplied  by  a  reference  to  the  whole  in  the  Ko-
ran ;  and  there  we  see  a  striking  imitation  of
Matthew  v.  3  —  11,  where  are  enumerated  the
successive  orders  of  good  doers,  for  whom  para-
dise is  designed,  as  their  ultimate  and  blessed
place  of  residence.

And  another  constant  source  of  trouble  to
a  translator  is  the  ambiguity  of  the  Arabian
moods. and  tenses  ;  for  not  only  the  same  tense,
for  example,  answers  for  the  present  and  future,
but  he  is  often  obliged  to  give  the  preterite
tense  a  present  signification,  —  and,  if  he  had  its


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  73

immediate  context,  this  might  be  managed, — but
with  such  fragments  of  sentences  as  that  I  have
quoted,  if'  I  am  obliged  to  adapt  the  Arabian
quotation  to  the  Persian  context,  the  scholar,
who  is  capable  of  detecting  this,  will  I  d@ubt
not  be  also  liberal  enough  in  overlooking,  or  ad-
mitting the  necessity  of  it.  «

What  our  travellers  and  doctors  thus  assert
of  Mussulmans  considering  Marafat,  or  the  di-
vinity of  the  Koran,  as  comprehending  all  neces-
sary knowledge,  might  have  been  true,  as  far  as
respected  Mohammed  himself,  and  his  four  im-
mediate successors,  as  residents  at  Madainah ;
for  we  can  all  recollect  the  Khalif  Omar's  reply,
when  Amru,  the  conqueror  of  Egypt,  asked
him  what  was  to  be  done  with  the  library  at
Alexandria.  He  answered,  "  What  is  con-
tained in  these  books  you  mention  is  either
agreeable  to  what  is  written  in  the  Koran,  or
book  of  God,  or  it  is  not ;  if  it  be,  then  the
Koran  is  sufficient  without  them  ;  if  otherwise,
it  is  fit  they  should  be  destroyed. '  But  on
the  establishment  of  the  Khalifat  at  Damascus,
and  still  more  of  the  Abassi  dynasty  at  Bagh-
dad, the  Tazi,  or  modern  Arabic,  was  gradually
enriched  with  words,  so  as  to  admit  of  its  tech-
nically expressing  the  terms  of  the  arts  and
sciences,  which  a  Harun  Rashid  had  translated
into  it  from  the  Persian,   Coptic,   and  Greek  ;

4


74  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

and  modern  Europe  owes  chief  part  of  what  it
derived  from  the  first  two,  and  even  more  of  its
Greek  knowledge,  to  translations  through  the
Arabic,  than  immediately  from  the  originals  of
them,  or  the  Greek.

Whereas  the  more  ancient  Greeks,  as,  for
instance,  Hippocrates  in  physic,  we  now  find,
copied  their  knowledge  direct  from  the  Per-
sians ;  for  all  Ms  medicines  have  pure  Persian
names :  and  down  to  the  times  of  Galen  and
Dioscorides,  those  Greeks  and  their  copyists,
the  Romans,  were  content  with  simples,  which
are  hence  called  Galenicals.  Kimiya,  signi-
fying art,  trick,  imposture,  chemistry,  &c,  is
also  a  pure  Persian  word,  which  the  Arabs
borrowed  with  the  art  from  the  Persians ;  and
the  manufacture  and  use  of  chemical  medicines
and  drugs,  as  applied  to  physic  and  the  other
arts,  modern  Europeans  owe  immediately  to
the  Arabs.  Nay,  the  chemical  preparations  of
quicksilver,  now  found  so  serviceable  in  all  vis-
ceral obstructions,  were  first  adopted  into  Euro-
pean practice,  within  my  recollection,  by  Dr.
Peasely,  of  Madras,  in  the  case  of  Lord  Pigot ;
and,  as  a  simple,  meadow-saffron  root  has  been
used  lately  and  successfully  for  the  gout ;  and
I  could  mention  a  dozen  other  articles,  each  of
the  most  active  and  best  medicines,  either  for  in-
ternal or  external  use,  that  have  of  late  been  in-


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  75

troduced  into  our  physical  and  surgical  practice
from  that  of  the  Hakims  and  Cub-rajes  of  our
English  empire  in  the  East.

In  the  writings  of  Michael  Servetus,  who
lived  a  century  before  Harvey,  there  is  a  hint
respecting  his  curious  discovery  of  the  circu-
lation of  the  blood ;  but  the  following  distich
of  Saadi's  Bustan,  viii.  3,  contains  one  more
pertinent :  "  The  venal  system  of  thy  body,  O
well-disposed  man  !  is  a  meadow,  through  which
are  flowing  three  hundred  and  sixty  rivulets."
And  the  two  distichs,  Bustan,  viii.  14,  contain
our  most  correct,  and  what  we  fancied  modern,
theory  of  respiration  and  digestion  :  "  Were  not
the  fresh  air  to  pass  by  respiration  into  the  lungs,
the  intestine  heat  would  throw  the  body  into  a
ferment ;  and  did  not  the  pot  of  the  stomach
duly  concoct  the  food,  the  fan*  and  plm^p  form
of  the  body  would  get  shrunk  and  withered."
The  Persian  word  Khun,  or  blood,  has  also  the
idiomatic  signification  of  the  soul  and  life,  as
existing  in  the  blood :  did  the  ingenious  John
Hunter  borrow  his  idea  of  the  life  of  the  blood
from  this  ?

On  the  subject  of  aerostatics,  I  offer  the  fol-
lowing curious  extract  of  my  copy  of  the  Per-
sian dictionary,  the  Farhangi  Jihangiri,  the
manuscript  being  itself  upwards  of  one  hundred
and  fifty  years  old :  it  is  in  explanation  of  the


76  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

compound  idiomatic  word  "  Tasht-wo-Khayah,
the  basin  and  egg,  or  the  exhibition  of  filling  the
membranous  coat  of  an  animal's  testicle  with
Shobnim,  or  night-dew  ;  and,  after  tying  up  the
vent,  placing  it  on  a  brass  vessel  heated  in  the
sun,  or  over  the  fire  ;  and,  as  the  air  within  it
gets  warm,  the  vapor  will  rarefy  and  expand
it ;  when,  raising  itself  on  one  end,  it  will  hop
up  and  down  for  a  while,  as  if  dancing,  and  at
last  mount  into  the  air,  and  fly  out  of  sight."
I  remember  the  late  Doctor  Black,  in  his  chem-
ical lectures  at  Edinburgh,  1777-78,  when  on
the  subject  of  factitious  air,  suggesting  this  pre-
cise experiment ;  but  the  French,  some  years
afterwards,  had  the  credit  of  putting  it  in  prac-
tice on  the  large  scale  of  balloons.  Also,  Saadi
alludes  to  this  same  phenomenon  in  his  Bustan,
iv.  14  :  "  Why  should  that  befall  you  which  be-
falls the  fierce-burning  torch,  —  that  you  should
fly  from  yourself,  as  the  bubble  flies  up  from
the  water?"

Likewise,  in  the  Farhangi  Jihangiri,  in  its
idiomatic  sense,  the  Fanus-khiyat,  another  sup-
posed modern  invention,  is  mentioned ;  namely,
"  a  magic-lantarn,  with  which  they  show  off
images  and  figures,  and  with  a  sort  of  phospho-
rus, or  artificial  fire,  give  them  the  appearance
of  being  in  a  flame "  ;  and  a  couplet  of  the
Persian  poet    Ghazali  is  quoted,    signifying  as


OF  SHEIK  SAADL  77

follows  :  "  The  celestial  sky  is  a  magic-lantern  ;
and  this  globe  is  on  its  progress  moving  through
it,  while  mankind  are  wandering  over  the  globe,
like  the  figures  of  a  magic-lantern."

And  would  not  the  bulk  exceed  all  reason-
able bounds,  I  could  quote  many  such  sound,
and  what  we  in  Europe  consider  as  modern,
hints  of  philosophy  immediately  from  Saadi.

The  detailed  minutiae  of  the  arts  and  sciences
are  lost  in  the  changes  and  translations  of  lan-
guages, and  in  such  revolutions  of  government
as  Persia  has  been  specially  subject  to ;  yet  its
remaining  monuments  are  sufficient  to  prove,  to
the  latest  posterity  of  Adam,  the  originality  and
superiority  of  Persian  knowledge  ;  and  the  value
in  this  sense  of  such  books  as  the  Gulistan,  in
winch  glimpses  remain  of  that  knowledge.

Of  the  sublime  and  stupendous,  we  have  in
Europe  no  monuments  of  human  structure  that
can  compare  with  the  Chihl-minar,  or  palace  of
many  columns,  at  Istikhar,  the  Persepolis  of
the  Greeks ;  the  statues  of  Khosraw  and  Shirin,
and  other  massy  works  of  the  statuary  Farhad
at  Bisitun,  in  Irac  Ajem ;  the  still  more  ancient
images  of  the  Sorkh-bot  and  Khing-bot,  so
called  from  being  one  of  a  red  and  the  other
of  a  gray  colored  stone,  and  said  to  be  ea«h
fifty-two  gaz,  or  yards,  high,  and  believed  by
the  Persians  to  represent  then'  first  King  Gayu-


78  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

mars,  and  his  wife,  at  Bamiyan,  near  the  city
of  Balkh,  and  in  that  part  of  Cabul  bordering
on  Badakhshan ;  and  the  many  sculptures  and
excavations  in  the  contiguous  rocks  and  moun-
tains ;  the  tower  of  Babel ;  the  aqueduct'  of
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates ;  the  wall  of  the  Dar-
band,  supposed  to  be  built  by  Alexander,  and
repaired  by  Nushirowan :  but  above  all  in  that
mode  of  subterraneous  irrigation  peculiar  to  Per-
sia, and  managed  most  ingeniously  by  sinking
Karezes,  or  shafts,  and  connecting  these  with
Mings,  or  underground  canals,  where  springs
are  found  at  the  foot  of  mountains,  and  extend-
ing for  fifty  or  sixty  miles  over  the  contiguous
champagne  country.

In  mechanism  the  ancient  Persians  no  doubt
excelled  us :  for  even  now  we  are  at  a  loss  to
explain  how  such  massy  buildings  were  reared,
otherwise  than  like  our  forefathers,  when  they
first  discovered  many  of  them  during  the  dark
ages,  and  ascribed  them  to  Kimiya,  or  magic.
In  the  modern  and  more  comparative  architect-
ure of  the  East,  I  would  refer  to  the  mauso-
leum of  Taj-Mahal,  the  favorite  Sultana  of  the
great  Moghul  Shah  Jihan,  at  Agra,  a  building
equal  in  extent  to  Saint  Paul's,  London,  includ-
ing the  church-yard;  and  the  meanest  material
which  enters  its  composition  is  the  purest  white
marble.     Had  that  magnificent  sovereign  con-


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  79

•

eluded  his  reign  in  peace,  he  had  projected  a
similar  one  for  himself  on  the  opposite  side  of
that  noble  river  the  Jumna ;  and  to  unite  the
two  with  a  bridge  of  the  same  valuable  mate-
rials :

*«  Her  bed  is  India ;  there  she  lies  —  a  pearl."

But  the  last  seven  years  of  his  life  he  was,  by
that  hypocrite  Aurangzib,  his  son,  doomed  to
pass  in  honorary  confinement;  and  having,  in
1803,  visited  the  apartments  he  in  that  durance
occupied  in  the  palace  at  Agra,  I  had  some  of
the  plaster  chipped  off,  and  found  the  walls
richly  gilded ;  for,  as  his  memoirs  tell  us,  he
had  them  done  over  with  common  mortar,  as
more  suitable  to  his  humbled  condition.  The
centre  dome  had  some  years  before  been  injured
by  a  cannon-ball ;  and  a  peepil  tree,  one  of  the
most  destructive  for  such  buildings,  was  grow-
ing out  of  it ;  but  Marquis  Hastings  has,  with
much  taste,  and  at  a  great  expense,  had  it  since
repaired ;  and  it  is  now  as  fresh  as  the  day,  one
hundred  and  eighty  years  ago,  it  was  built.
Also,  the  Jamai  Masjid,  at  Delhi,  is  another
specimen  of  the  many  elegant  and  modern  Ori-
ental structures  which,  even  in  the  present  de-
generacy of  the  arts,  rival  any  buildings  of
modern,  and  perhaps  ancient  Europe,  wheth-
er we  regard  the  symmetry  of  the  parts,  or
sublimity  of  the  whole.     Recent  from  viewing


80  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

*

those,  before  I  took  my  last  passage  to  Europe,
I  had  an  opportunity  of  comparing  the  Gover-
nor-General's palace  at  Calcutta,  then  finished,
at  an  enormous  expense,  by  Marquis  Wellesley ;
which,  notwithstanding  its  marble  hall  and  other
pompous  apartments,  I  found  a  heavy  and  clum-
sy mass  of  brick  and  mortar  !

In  their  taste  for  gardening,  specimens  of
which  often  occur  in  the  beautiful  descriptions
of  their  poets,  the  Persians  much  excelled  us.
Milton,  who  travelled  over  the  East  in  books,
and  had  a  judgment  which  qualified  what  he
read,  availed  himself  of  those  descriptions  in
laying  out  his  Paradise ;  and  Addison  gave  the
English  nation  a  taste  for  Milton,  nature,  and
good  gardening,  which  modern  Europe  has  since
been  endeavoring  to  copy.

The  Persians  have  a  saying,  that  it  was  as
absurd  for  a  person  ignorant  of  geography  to
write  history,  or  for  a  person  ignorant  of  alge-
bra to  write  upon  astronomy,  as  for  one  igno-
rant of  grammar  to  write  poetry.  In  moral
philosophy  they  excel,  and  particularly  in  what
we  call  polite  literature ;  no  bad  specimens  of
which  are  the  two  works  of  Saadi  which  I
have  undertaken  to  translate,  namely,  the  Gu-
listan  and  Bustan,  and  Pilpay's  Fables,  which
are  ready  to  follow.  And  as  I  have  said,  in
this  favorite  department  of  literature  we  have


OF  SHE  IK  SAADI.  81

frequent  glimpses  of  their  skill  in  the  more  ab-
struse branches  of  natural  and  experimental
philosophy,  of  mathematics,  algebra,  decimal
notation,  and  ciphering  in  arithmetic,  of  whose
characters  the  ancient  Persians  were  no  doubt
the  inventors;  of  the  phenomena  of  light  and
colors ;  of  electricity,  of  which  they  specify
many  facts  besides  the  attractive  power  of  am-
ber, as  it  is  detailed  by  our  European  ancients ;
of  printing ;  of  gunpowder  and  fire-works  (the
last  is  noticed  by  Saadi,  Gul.  vti.  14)  ;  of  gems,
of  which  they  give  the  most  rational  classifica-
tion we  yet  have,  and  detail  some  particulars
in  their  composition  of  which  Sir  H.  Davy  has
lately  availed  himself;  and  of  their  treatise  on
this  last  we  have  lately  recovered  a  copy ;  —
and  however  vague  their  hints  may  seem  at
knowledge  which  we  have  not  yet  attained,  we
are  from  time  to  time  obliged  to  give  them
credit  for  things  that  once  appeared  incredible,
and  which  they  certainly  derived  from  sources
still  more  ancient  than  themselves,  and  perhaps
antediluvian.  It  is  curious  that  what  happened
to  the  Israelites,  in  their  conquest  of  the  Holy
Land,  and  the  idolatrous  nations  they  dispos-
sessed of  it,  also  happened  to  the  Persians
under  Gayumars,  when  they  descended  from
the  Kordistan  mountains,  and  dispossessed  the
Dives   of   Persia ;    and  Firdausi    tells   us    that

4  ^  P


82  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

those  Dives  taught  the  arts  to  their  conquerors :
but  what  is  still  more  curious,  the  Brahmins  of
India  admit  themselves  to  be  those  Dives,  and
that  they  came  into  India  from  Persia.

Among  the  smaller  articles  of  Persian  taste  I
would  mention  three  in  particular :  —  1st.  The
wool,  or  rather  hair,  of  a  species  of  goat  found
in  many  parts  of  Persia,  as  well  as  in  Thibet,
from  which  they  have,  from  time  immemorial,
manufactured  that  beautiful  fabric,  the  sJiawl,
and  to  which  our  best  staple  broadcloth  is  so
much  inferior.  2d.  The  murrhine  vase,  so  high-
ly esteemed  by  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist,  xxxvii.  2),
and  which,  as  he  correctly  supposes  it  to  be,  is
also  the  produce  of  Persia ;  and  what  is  called
with  us  the  Portland  vase  is  a  specimen  of  it ;
and  of  this  the  late  ingenious  porcelain  ware^-
man,  Mr.  Wedgewood,  energetically  remarked,
"  that  the  composition  of  it  implied  a  knowledge
of  chemistry  of  which  modern  Europe  had  not
yet  reached  the  elements."  Indeed,  our  boast-
ed chemical  improvements  can  neither  produce
the  materials  of  those  sculptured  and  colored
vases,  cups,  gems,  and  rings,  now  collected  by.
our  curious  travellers  in  Persia ;  nor  supply  any
instruments  of  a  sufficiently  hard  temper  to  cut
and  carve  them.  3d.  The  Sohaili,  or  what
Europeans  call  Morocco  leather,  which  forms
the  binding  of  most  of  the  old  Persian  manu-


OF  SHEIK   SAADL  83

scripts,  and  has  a  fragrance  and  quality  in  it
that  preserves  them  from  being  destroyed  by  in-
sects. This  is  a  distinct  article  from  the  Kai-
makht,  another  preparation  of  the  hides  of
animals  made  in  Persia  into  a  sort  of  shagreen,
and  used  for  the  handles  of  swords,  dirks,  &c.
To  prove  that  all  those  three  articles  are  indige-
nous to  Persia,  in  the  Persian  dictionaries  they
have  each  perhaps  a  dozen  of  names,  all  of  them
pure  Persian  words.

And  besides  them  I  may  mention  the  glossy
smoothness  of  the  Yizd  silks,  the  delicacy  of
the  fabric  of  cotton  into  Tuz  muslin,  and  flax
into  Tattah  cambric  ;  their  embroidery  on  satin,
leather,  and  other  stuffs,  at  Ispahan ;  their  glass
of  Shiraz,  or  cutlery  of  that  place,  and  of  Kho-
rasan ;  their  Nishampur  filigree  of  gold  and
silver ;  their  penmanship  of  manuscripts ;  the
animalisism  at  Hirat  of  colored  silk  and  cotton
stuffs  ;  the  carpets  of  that  city ;  the  richness  of
their  dyes  ;  and  the  freshness  and  durability  of
their  paints,  a  bright  and  beautiful  azure  speci-
men of  which  I  have  often  admired,  while,  in
1803,  ascending  into  the  fort  of  Gwalior,  where
it  has  remained  on  the  face  of  the  palace  for
centuries,  exposed  to  the  open  air.

Persian  horsemanship  and  archery  have  been
proverbial  from  time  immemorial ;  and  the  breed
of  horses,  camels,  asses,  mules,  sheep,  and  other


84  THE  LIFE  AND  GENIUS

domestic  animals,  are  superior  to  any  other.
Saadi,  in  his  Bustan  (i.  1),  says  he  met  a  person
riding  on  a  Hon,  and  using  a  snake  as  a  whip !
But,  seriously,  who  ever  thought  of  taming
elephants,  rhinoceroses,  lions,  tigers,  and  ser-
pents, but  the  patient  and  ingenious  Asiatic  ?

But  the  best  use  of  education  is  that  of  in-
structing a  fellow-being,  which  gives  dignity  to
the  creature,  and  enables  him  properly  to  know
and  respect  his  Creator.  And  what  is  more
simple  than  that  useful  system  of  educating  the
poor,  which  Dr.  Bell  had  the  credit  of  adopting
from  the  Asiatics,  and  applying  to  the  European
charity  schools  at  Madras;  and  Mr.  Lancaster
of  bringing  into  practice  for  the  cheap  and  easy
instruction  of  the  illiterate  of  all  denominations
in  England ;  and  since  that,  very  generally  over
the  continent  of  Europe.  See  Gulistan,  vii.
passim.

These  are  a  few  of  many  positive  facts  which
readily  suggest  themselves  to  any  Oriental  schol-
ar ;  and  which  I,  who  passed  twenty  of  the
most  precious  years  of  my  life  in  India,  and  in
familiar  and  daily  intercourse  with  all  descrip-
tions of  natives,  and  am  well  read  in  their
books,  set  in  opposition  to  the  trifling  remarks
of  idle  sojourners,  and  the  dogmatical  censures
of  some  superficial  travellers,  who  have  lately
visited  the  East,  and  have  presumed  to  disgorge


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  85

their  ill-digested  opinions  upon  the  European
world,  without  possessing  either  language  or
intuition  to  instruct  it  in  the  history  and  an-
tiquities, in  the  laws,  manners,  customs,  and
religions,  or  in  the  literature  and  arts,  of  past
or  present  Asia.

Mankind,  emerging  from  barbarity,  fall  into
some  regularity  of  government ;  and,  getting
ashamed  of  their  ignorance,  feel  desirous  of  lit-
erary information,  and  improvement  in  the  arts;
but,  before  they  reach  any  superior  excellence,
they  too  often  exchange  the  elegance  of  nature
for  the  gorgeousness  of  art.  Nor  could  Persia,
in  its  many  revolutions,  escape  such  transitions ;
but  though  it  suffered  temporary  eclipses  from
the  barbarity  and  envy  of  such  conquerors  as
Zohhac,  Afrasiyab,  Alexander,  Omar,  Jingiz
Khan,  Timur,  Nadir  Shah,  and  Mohammed
Aga,  yet  the  basis  was  so  broad,  that  the
column  of  true  taste  has  never  been  totally
overthrown ;  and  has,  during  such  reigns  of
barbarity,  stood,  amidst  a  waste  of  apathy,  a
monument  of  what  had  been  magnificent,  and
served  as  a  copy  for  the  native  dynasties  of  a
Firedown,  Kai-cobad,  Ardishir  Babigan,  Saboc-
tagin,  Alap  Arselan,  the  Atabaks  of  Syria  and
Faristan,  a  Shah  Abbas,  Acbar,  and  Shah  Ji-
han,  and  a  Karim  Khan,  and  Fatah- Ali-Shah-
shahan,  to  patronize  and  imitate.


86  THE  LIFE  AND   GENIUS

We  should  recollect  that  the  Persian  is  not
only  the  sole  language  of  the  many  and  exten-
sive provinces  of  Persia,  but  the  medium  of  of-
ficial and  polite  intercourse  of  the  rich  and
populous  regions  of  Hindustan,  Turkey,  and
the  wide  domains  of  Tartary.

Versed  as  many  Oriental  scholars  among  our-
selves now  are  in  the  literature  and  poetry  of
Persia,  and  some  of  them  inclined  like  myself
to  communicate  their  knowledge,  we  cannot  but
lament  that  obstinacy  in  our  English  critics  of
taking  every  direct  and  collateral  occasion  of
peremptorily  degrading  its  language,  as  that  only
of  conceit  and  false  thoughts,  and  of  rating  us  as
admirers  of  tinsel  instead  of  gold.  In  charity
to  their  knowledge  and  their  judgment,  we  must
conclude,  that  they  speak  rather  of  Jami  and
his  imitators,  than  the  host  of  Persian  poets,
who  adorned  the  long  period  of  five  hundred
years  previous  to  his  time.  If  Athens  had  its
Periclesan,  and  Rome  its  Augustan,  Persia  also
had  its  classic  age,  not  terminating  in  a  solitary
or  short  reign,  nor  confined  to  the  narrow  limits
of  one  city  or  province,  but  extending  to  ten
ages,  and  embracing  places  within  herself  a
thousand  miles  apart.

The  taste,  words,  and  style  of  the  language
of  every  polished  nation  must  suffer  in  the  vicis-
situdes of  time  and  fortune,  and  bad  poetry  will


OF  SHEIK  SAADI.  87

be  engendered  ;  but  is  Persia  alone  to  be  called
to  so  rigid  an  account  for  the  extravagance  and
folly  of  the  dregs  of  her  poets  ?  Nay,  I  will  ad-
mit that  examples  of  hyperbole  may  be  quoted
from  the  pages  of  Firdausi,  Nizami,  Jabali,  Kha-
cani,  Jilal-u'd-din  Rumi,  and  Saadi ;  but  if  thus
nice  in  marking  every  deviation  from  propriety
of  sentiment  and  metaphor,  what  would  become
of  Shakespeare  and  Milton  among  ourselves,  of
Dante  and  Ariosto  with  the  Italians,  or  perhaps
of  even  Homer  and  Virgil  ?

A  company  of  British  merchants  have  estab-
lished an  empire  of  the  finest  provinces  of  Asia,
nearly  equal  in  population  and  extent  to  all  Eu-
rope, where  Persian  is  the  language  of  law,  re-
ligion, commerce,  and  in  fact  of  all  civilized
usages;  and,  instead  of  falsifying  and  abusing
this  language,  our  duty,  as  well  as  interest,  as
Englishmen,  point  out  the  justice  of  righting
and  supporting  it :  and  let  our  scholars,  now
brought  up  to  a  classical  knowledge  of  it,  at  the
East-India  company's  colleges,  endeavor  to  weed
what  they  will  find  the  current  language  of
Hindustan  of  its  vicious  metaphors,  immoderate
hyperboles,  silly  conceits,  prettinesses,  bombast,
and  idle  verbiage  of  the  last  three  centuries,  or
since  A.  D.  1450  ;  and  restore  it  to  the  sublime
and  pathetic  imagery  and  the  just  diction  of  its
golden  age,  from  Dakiki  and  Rodaki,  A.  D.  950,


88         LIFE  AND   GENIUS   OF  SAADI.

to  Jami  and  Hatifa;  and  rescue  it  from  being
mangled  by  men  learned  and  respectable  in  their
knowledge  of  Greek  and  Latin,  but  vulgar  and
illiberal  in  their  ignorance  and  prejudices  in
whatever  respects  the  languages  and  literature
of  the  East,  and  in  particular  of  this  scientific,
diplomatic,  financial,  legislative,  and  commercial
dialect  of  a  hundred  millions  of  our  fellow-
subjects  !

January  1,  1823.


£i


The    Gulistan


OF


MUSLE-HUDDEEN    SHEIK    SAADI,


OF    SHIRAZ.


TRANSLATED    BY


FRANCIS     GLADWIN.


<S»<£>~


To    THE    MOST    NOBLE

MARgUIS    WELLESLEY,  K.  P.,  &c.,&c.,&c,

the  illustrious  patron  of  Oriental  Literature,  this  edition  of
The  Gulistan  of  Saadi,  completed  during  his  Lordship's  glo-
rious administration  of  British  India,  is  humbly  dedicated  by
his  Lordship's  most  faithful  and  devoted  servant,

FRANCIS  GLADWIN.
Patna,  Jan.  12,  1806.


B^2z


PREFACE

TO    THE    GULISTAN    OF   MUSLE-HUDDEEN    SHEIK
SAADI,    OF    SHIRAZ.


j—  r  >.-.C-f


In  the  Name  of  the  most  merciful  Crod.

§ff  RAISE  to  the  God  of  majesty  and
glory,  whose  service  is  the  means
of  approach !  and  to  offer  him  grate-
$*^^=^»  ful  acknowledgments  insures  an  in-
crease of  bounty.  Every  breath  when  inhaled-
sustaineth  life,  and  when  respired  it  exhilar-
ates the  body ;  consequently  every  breathing
includes  two  benefits,  each  of  which  demand-
eth  a  distinct  acknowledgment.  What  hand  or
tongue  can  fulfil  his  praise  ?  Sing  praises,  ye
posterity  of  David,  for  few  of  my  servants  are
grateful.  It  is  best  for  the  servant  to  confess
his  weakness,  and  implore  forgiveness  at  the
court  of  Heaven,  since  no  one  is  able  to  fulfil
his  duty  towards  God.  The  rain  of  his  infinite
mercy  refresheth  all  places ;  and  the  table  of  his


94  THE   GULISTAN.

bounty  is  spread  far  and  near.  Amidst  the
enormous  sins  of  his  servants,  he  rendeth  not
the  veil  of  their  reputation ;  and  during  the
commission  of  atrocious  offences,  ceaseth  not  to
bestow  their  daily  bread.

O  merciful  God,  who  out  of  thine  hidden
treasures  affordest  daily  sustenance  to  the  Gue-
bre  and  the  infidel,  how  canst  thou  exclude  thy
friends,  thou  who  deignest  thus  favorably  to
regard  thine  enemies?  He  commandeth  his
chamberlain,  the  zephyr,  to  spread  the  emerald
carpet,  and  ordereth  the  vernal  clouds  to  foster
the  infant  plants  in  the  cradle  of  the  earth.
He  clotheth  the  bodies  of  the  trees  with  verdant
foliage,  the  festal  garments  of  spring,  and,  in
celebration  of  the  return  of  that  season,  crown-
eth  the  youthful  branches  with  garlands  of  blos-
soms. By  his  power,  the  juice  of  the  cane  is
converted  into  delicious  honey ;  and  by  his  dis-
cipline, the  kernel  of  the  date  becometh  a  lofty
tree.  Clouds  and  wind,  the  moon,  the  sun,  and
the  sky  are  all  busied,  that  thou,  O  man,
mayest  obtain  thy  bread,  and  eat  it  not  in
neglect.  For  thy  sake,  all  these  revolve  and
are  obedient :  it  is  not  therefore  consistent  with
the  rules  of  justice  that  thou  only  shouldest
not  obey.  There  is  a  tradition  of  the  chief  of
created  beings,  the  most  noble  of  existences,
the  mercy  of  the  universe,  the  purest  of  man-


PREFACE.  95

kind,  and  completion  of  tke  revolution  of  ages,
Mohammed  Mustafa,  (upon  whom  be  blessing
and  peace !)  the  intercessor,  the  obeyed,  the
gracious  prophet,  the  bountiful,  the  majestic,
the  affable,  the  sealed.  Why  should  the  wall
of  the  faithful  suffer  anxiety,  which  has  such  a
supporter?  Why  should  he  dread  the  waves
of  the  sea,  who  hath  Noah  for  his  pilot  ?  His
perfections  procured  him  exaltation,  his  come-
liness dispelled  the  darkness ;  liberal  are  all  his
endowments  ;  blessing  be  on  him  and  on  his
race  !  The  tradition  is  this :  That  when  a
sinful  servant,  conscious  of  his  guiltiness,  lifteth
up  the  hands  of  repentance,  in  hopes  of  obtain-
ing pardon  at  the  court  of  the  just,  the  glorious
and  sublime  Being,  the  Almighty  regardeth  him
not :  again  he  supplicates,  and  is  again  disre-
garded :  once  more  he  prayeth  with  humility
and  sorrow,  and  then  the  just  God  saith,  "  O
my  angels,  of  a  truth  I  am  ashamed  on  behalf
of  mv  servant,  who  hath  no  other  Providence
than  myself,  and  therefore  verily  do  I  pardon
him.  I  have  heard  his  prayer,  and  have  grant-
ed his  petition ;  because  I  am  ashamed  of  the
excessive  supplication  and  sorrow  of  my  ser-
vant."

Behold  the  mercy  and  kindness  of  God :  he
is  himself  ashamed  that  his  servant  hath  sinned !
Those  who  constantly  reside  at  the  temple  of


96  THE   GULISTAN.

his  glory  confess  the  insufficiency  of  their  wor-
ship, saying,  "  We  have  not  worshipped  thee  in
the  manner  that  thou  oughtest  to  be  served."
And  they  who  would  describe  the  form  of  his
beauty  are  rapt  in  amazement,  declaring,  "  We
have  not  known  thee  as  thou  oughtest  to  be
known."  If  any  one  should  require  me  to  de-
scribe him,  how  shall  the  disheartened  describe
that  which  hath  no  form  ?  The  lovers  are  slain
by  the  beloved,  and  no  voice  proceedeth  from
the  dead.  A  devout  man  in  deep  contempla-
tion, with  his  head  reclined  on  the  bosom  of
meditation,  was  immersed  in  the  ocean  of  vision.
When  he  recovered  from  that  state,  one  of  his
companions,  by  way  of  pleasantry,  said,  "  What
miraculous  present  have  you  brought  us  from
this  garden,  which  you  have  been  visiting  ? '
He  answered,  "  It  was  my  intention,  that,  when
I  reached  the  rose-bush,  I  would  fill  my  lap  with
flowers,  for  presents  to  my  friends  ;  but  when  I
came  to  the  spot,  the  odor  so  overpowered  my
senses,  that  my  skirt  dropped  out  of  my  hands."
O  bird  of  the  desert,  learn  thou  love  of  the
moth,  who,  being  burnt,  expire th  without  a  sigh.
They  who  pretend  to  be  informed  are  ignorant,
for  they  who  have  known  him  have  not  yet  re-
covered their  senses.  O,  thou  art  beyond  the
reach  of  imagination,  conjecture,  or  thought;
surpassing  all  that  has  been  related,  and  excel-


PREFACE.  97

ling  everything  that  I  have  heard  or  read.  The
banquet  is  concluded,  and  the  period  of  life  is
arrived.  I  continue  describing  thee  the  same
as  at  the  commencement.

The  Virtues  of  the  Monarchy  of  Islamism,  may
God  perpetuate  his  Reign !

The  favorable  mention  of  Saadi  which  has
fallen  from  the  mouths  of  people  in  general,
and  the  fame  of  his  sayings,  that  has  spread  over
the  whole  surface,  of  the  globe,  so  that  the
words  of  his  friendly  pen  are  eaten  like  sugar ;
and  the  value  given  to  his  scraps  of  writings,
insomuch  that  they  pass  current  like  bills  of  ex-
change ;  —  all  this  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the
perfection  of  his  own  merit  and  eloquence,  but
is  owing  to  the  monarch  of  the  earth,  who  is  the
axis  of  the  revolution  of  time,  the  representa-
tive of  Solomon,  the  defender  of  the  faithful,
the  mighty  king  of  kings,  the  illustrious  Atabuk
Mozuffaruddeen  Aboobukr,  the  son  of  Sad,  the
son  of  Zungy,  the  shadow  of  God  on  earth  ;  ap-
prove him,  O  Lord,  and  grant  his  desires  !  He
regarded  me  with  the  eye  of  kindness,  loaded
me  with  commendation,  and  showed  a  sincere
attachment ;  and  therefore,  for  his  sake,  persons
of  all  descriptions  have  taken  a  fancy  to  me :
for   mankind  readily   adopt  the   sentiments   of


98  THE   GULISTAN.

their  king.  From  the  time  that  you  have
looked  kindly  on  my  humble  state,  my  merits
are  more  manifest  than  the  sun.  If  your  ser-
vant was  made  up  of  defects,  every  fault  that  the
Sultan  might  commend  would  be  construed  into
an  excellence.  One  day  in  the  bath  a  piece  of
perfumed  clay  came  to  me  from  the  hand  of  a
friend ;  I  said  to  it,  "  Art  thou  musk,  or  an  arti-
ficial compound  of  sweets?  for  I  am  charmed
with  thy  delightful  odor."  It  answered,  "  I
was  a  worthless  piece  of  clay,  but  having  for  a
season  associated  with  the  rose,  the  virtue  of  my
companion  was  communicated  to  me  ;  otherwise
I  am  the  same  identical  earth  that  I  was  at
first."  O  God  !  bestow  happiness  on  the  Mos-
lems by  a  long  continuance  of  his  life  ;  increase
the  reward  of  his  virtues  and  perfections ;  exalt
the  dignity  of  his  friends  and  of  his  governors ;
and  send  destruction  on  his  avowed  and  secret
foes,  for  the  sake  of  those  sayings  recorded  in
the  verses  of  the  Koran.  O  Lord !  protect  his
kingdom,  and  be  thou  the  guardian  of  his  son  !
Of  a  truth  the  world  enjoys  happiness  through
his  means  ;  may  his  own  good  fortune  be  perpet-
ual, and  may  God  befriend  him  with  the  stand-
ard of  victory :  in  such  wise  may  the  branch
also  flourish  of  which  the  king  is  the  root ;  since
the  goodly  produce  of  the  soil  dependeth  on  the
excellency  of  the  seed.     May  the  most  mighty


PREFACE.  99

and  holy  God  preserve  the  land  of  Shiraz  in
perfect  peace  until  the  day  of  resurrection,
through  dread  of  the  justice  of  its  governors,
and  by  the  blessings  entailed  on  those  who  act
conformably  to  wisdom  !  Know  you  not  why  I
delayed  some  time  abroad  on  my  travels  ?  I
departed  out  of  dread  of  the  Turks ;  for  I  be-
held the  country  in  disorder,  like  the  hair  of
an  Ethiopian.  Their  form  was  human ;  but
like  wolves  their  claws  were  reeking  in  blood.
Within  the  city  were  men  with  minds  virtuous
as  angels,  and  without  was  an  army  of  warlike
lions.  On  my  return  I  found  the  land  at  peace  ;
the  tigers  having  forsaken  their  savage  disposi-
tions. Thus  at  first  I  beheld  the  world  full  of
tumult,  sorrow,  and  strife,  and  it  has  changed
to  its  present  happy  state  in  the  reign  of  the  just
monarch  Atabuk  Aboobnkr  Ben  Sad  Zungy.
The  land  of  Persia  is  in  no  danger  of  suffering
distress  so  long  as  it  is  governed  by  one  like
thyself,  who  art  the  shadow  of  God.  At  this
day,  no  one  can  point  out  on  the  surface  of  the
earth  an  asylum  of  comfort  like  the  threshold
of  thy  gate.  It  is  thy  duty  to  support  the  help-
less, and  it  behooveth  us  to  offer  up  grateful  ac-
knowledgments, whilst  the  reward  is  with  God,
the  Creator  of  the  universe.  O  God,  preserve
the  land  of  Persia  from  the  storms  of  strife,
as  long  as  the  earth  and  the  air  shall  endure.


100  THE   GULISTAN.

The  Cause  of  writing  the  Grulistan.

One  night  I  was  reflecting  on  the  time  which
had  elapsed,  and  lamenting  that  so  much  of  my
life  was  spent ;  I  pierced  the  stony  mansion  of
my  heart  with  adamantine  tears,  and  repeated
the  following  lines  as  applicable  to  my  condi-
tion :  —

In  every  moment  of  thy  life  a  breath  is  ex-
pended, so  that  what  remaineth  is  but  of  small
account.  Alas !  thou  hast  spent  fifty  years  in
sleep,  excepting  these  five  days  that  thou  hast
been  awakened  to  reflection.  Shame  on  that
man  who  departed  without  finishing  his  work ;
who,  when  the  drum  was  beaten  for  marching,
had  not  made  up  his  burden.  Sweet  sleep  on
the  day  of  marching  withholds  the  traveller
from  his  way.  Every  one  who  came  erected  a
new  fabric  ;  he  departed  and  evacuated  the  ten-
ement for  another  to  enter ;  and  this,  in  like
manner,  formed  new  schemes :  but  no  one  ever
finished  the  building.  Place  no  reliance  on  an
unsteady  friend :  the  liar  deserveth  not  belief.
Since  both  the  good  and  the  bad  must  die,  hap-
py is  that  man  who  carries  off  the  ball  of  vir-
tue.* Send  to  your  own  tomb  the  provisions  for
the  journey ;  no  one  will  bring  them  after  you,
therefore  despatch  them  before  your  departure.

*  Alluding  to  the  game  of  Chowgong,  or  the  Mall.


PREFACE.  101

Life  is  snow,  and  the  summer  sun  advanceth :
only  a  small  part  remain eth  un melted ;  art  thou
yet  slothful  ?  You  who  have  gone  empty-hand-
ed to  market,  I  fear  will  not  return  with  a  full
napkin.  Whosoever  eateth  Ins  wheat  before  it
is  ripe,  must  glean  ears  of  corn  at  the  time  of
harvest.  Listen  attentively  to  the  admonition
of  Saadi :  the  road  is  such  as  I  have  described
it ;  be  of  good  cheer,  and  proceed  on  your
journey.  After  deliberating  on  the  subject,  it
appeared  to  me  advisable  that  I  should  make
choice  of  retirement,  and,  withdrawing  myself
from  society,  erase  from  the  tablet  of  my  mem-
ory all  vain  words,  and  refrain  from  conversa-
tion.

One  deprived  of  the  faculty  of  speech,  who
sitteth  in  a  corner  deaf  and  dumb,  is  prefera-
ble to  him  who  cannot  govern  his  tongue.  At
length  one  of  my  friends,  the  intimate  and  fa-
miliar partner  of  my  travels,  and  companion  of
my  cell,  entered  the  door,  and  accosted  me  after
his  usual  manner ;  but  in  return  for  all  his
pleasantry  and  mirth,  and  inclination  to  familiar
intercourse,  I  gave  no  answer,  nor  raised  up  my
head  from  the  knees  of  adoration.  He  looked
displeased,  and  said,  "  Whilst  you  have  the
power  of  utterance,  speak,  O  my  brother,  with
favor  and  kindness,  for  to-morrow,  when  the
messenger   of  fate    arriveth,  you  will   through


102  THE   GULISTAN.

necessity  be  silent."  One  of  my  comrades  in-
formed him  how  matters  stood,  saying,  "  Such
an  one  hath  positively  resolved  to  spend  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  in  devotion,  and  to  observe
silence  ;  follow  his  example,  if  you  are  able,
and  keep  him  company."  He  replied,  u  I  swear
by  the  great  God,  and  by  our  long  uninterrupt-
ed friendship,  that  I  will  neither  breathe  nor
stir  a  step  until  he  hath  answered  with  his  ac-
customed freedom ;  for  it  is  folly  to  distress
our  friends,  when  an  inconsiderate  oath  can  be
easily  expiated.  It  is  contrary  to  justice,  and
opposite  to  the  sentiments  of  the  wise,  that  the
sword  of  Ali  should  remain  in  the  scabbard,
or  that  the  tongue  of  Saadi  should  cleave  to  the
roof  of  the  mouth.  To  what  shall  be  likened
the  tongue  iu  a  man's  mouth  ?  It  is  the  key  of
the  treasury  of  wisdom  :  when  the  door  is  shut,
who  can  discover  whether  he  deals  in  jewels  or
in  small  ware?  Although,  in  the  estimation  of
the  wise,  silence  is  commendable,  yet  at  a  prop-
er season  free  speech  is  preferable.  Two  things
indicate  an  obscure  understanding,  —  to  be  silent
when  we  ought  to  converse,  and  to  speak  when
we  should  be  silent."  To  be  brief,  I  was  not
able  to  restrain  my  tongue  from  speaking  to
him :  I  thought  it  inhuman  to  turn  my  face
from  him,  because  he  was  an  agreeable  and  sin-
cere friend.     When  you  determine  to  fight,  be


PREFACE.  103

sure  either  that  you  are  stronger  than  your  ad-
versary, or  that  you  have  a  swifter  pair  of  heels.
Thus  through  necessity  I  spoke ;  and  went
abroad  in  good  humor.  It  was  the  season  of
spring ;  the  air  was  temperate,  and  the  rose  in
full  bloom.  The  vestments  of  the  trees  resem-
bled the  festive  garments  of  the  fortunate.  It
was  mid-spring,  when  the  nightingales  were
chanting  from  the  pulpits  of  the  branches ;  the
rose  decked  with  pearly  dew,  like  blushes  on
the  cheek  of  a  chiding  mistress.  It  happened
once,  that  I  was  benighted  in  a  garden,  in  com-
pany with  one  of  my  friends.  The  spot  was  de-
lightful, the  trees  intertwined ;  you  would  have
said  that  the  earth  was  bedecked  with  glass
spangles,  and  that  the  knot  of  the  Pleiades  was
suspended  from  the  branch  of  the  vine.  A
garden  with  a  running  stream,  and  trees  from
whence  birds  were  warbling  melodious  strains :
that  filled  with  tulips  of  various  hues ;  these
loaded  with  fruits  of  several  kinds.  Under  the
shade  of  its  trees  the  zephyr  had  spread  the  va-
riegated carpet.  In  the  morning,  when  the  de-
sire to  return  home  overcame  our  inclination  for
remaining,  I  saw  in  his  lap  a  collection  of  roses,
odoriferous  herbs,  and  hyacinths,  which  he  had
intended  to  carry  to  town.  I  said,  "  You  are
not  ignorant  that  the  flower  of  the  garden  soon
fadeth,  and  that  the  enjoyment  of  the  rose-bush


104  THE   GULISTAN.

is  but  of  a  short  continuance  ;  and  the  sages
have  declared,  that  the  heart  ought  not  to  be  set
upon  anything  that  is  transitory."  He  asked,
"  What  course  is  then  to  be  pursued  ?  '  I  re-
plied, "  I  am  able  to  form  a  book  of  roses,
which  will  delight  the  beholders,  and  gratify
those  who  are  present ;  whose  leaves  the  tyran-
nic arm  of  the  autumnal  blasts  can  never  affect,
nor  injure  the  blossoms  of  its  spring.  What
benefit  will  you  derive  from  a  basket  of  flowers  ?
Carry  a  leaf  from  my  garden  :  a  rose  may  con-
tinue in  bloom  for  five  or  six  days ;  but  tin's  rose-
garden  will  flourish  forever."  As  soon  as  I  had
uttered  these  words,  he  flung  the  flowers  from
his  lap,  and,  laying  hold  on  the  skirt  of  my  gar-
ment, exclaimed,  "  When  the  beneficent  prom-
ise, they  faithfully  discharge  their  engagements."
In  the  course  of  a  few  days,  two  chapters  (one
on  the  comforts  of  society,  and  the  other  con-
taining rules  for  conversation  *)  were  written
out  in  my  note-book,  in  a  style  that  may  be
useful  to  orators,  and  improve  the  skill  of  letter-
writers.  In  short,  whilst  the  rose  was  yet  in
bloom,  the  book  entitled  the  Rose  Garden  was
finished  :  but  it  will  be  truly  perfected  on  gain-
ing a  favorable  reception  at  court,  and  when  it
obtains  an  indulgent  perusal  from  that  prince
who  is  the  asylum  of  the  world,  the  shadow  of

*  The  7th  and  8th  chapters.     Suroory.


PREFACE.  105

the  Most  High,  the  ray  of  providential  benefi-
cence, the  treasury  of  the  age,  the  refuge  of
religion,  the  favorite  of  Heaven,  the  mighty  arm
of  the  victorious  empire,  the  lamp  of  the  re-
splendent religion,  the  most  splendid  of  man-
kind, the  aggrandizer  of  the  faith,  Sad,  son
of  Atabuk  the  great;  that  potent  monarch  to
whom  nations  bend  the  neck ;  lord  paramount
of  the  kings  of  Arabia  and  Persia ;  sovereign  of
land  and  sea ;  inheritor  of  the  throne  of  Solo-
mon, MozufFuruddeen,  may  God  perpetuate  the
good  fortune  of  both,  and  prosper  all  their
righteous  undertakings  !  If  ornamented  with
the  sovereign's  approbation,  it  is  a  gallery  of
China  paintings,  and  the  designs  of  Urzung.*
I  trust  that  he  will  not  look  dissatisfied,  since
the  rose-garden  is  not  a  fit  place  for  displeasure ;
and  more  especially  as  its  fortunate  Preface  is
inscribed  to  Sad  Aboobukr  Ben  Zungy.

Celebration  of  the  great  A?neer,   the  Fortunate
Fukrruddeen,  Aboobukr  Ben  Aboo  Nusr.

Once  more  the  bride  of  my  imagination,
conscious  of  her  want  of  beauty,  raiseth  not  her
head,  but  in  a  desponding  mood  modestly  looks
down  upon  her  feet,  not  venturing  to  make  her
appearance  in  the  assembly  of  beautiful  youths,

*  The  paintings  of  the  impostor  Mani.

5*


106  THE   GULISTAN.

unless  she  be  decked  with  the  jewels  of  appro-
bation from  the  great  Ameer,  who  is  learned
and  just,  assisted  by  Heaven,  the  conqueror  of
his  enemies,  the  support  of  the  throne  of  em-
pire, counsellor  of  the  state,  the  asylum  of  the
indigent,  and  refuge  of  the  stranger,  the  patron
of  the  learned,  and  friend  of  men  of  piety,  the
glory  of  the  Persian  race,  and  strength  of  the
arm  of  empire ;  of  royal  endowments,  the  glory
of  the  state  and  of  religion,  the  succor  of  the
faith  and  of  the  faithful,  the  confidant  of  kings
and  emperors,  Aboobukr  Ben  Aboo  Nusr,  may
God  prolong  his  life,  increase  his  dignity,  en-
lighten his  breast,  and  augment  his  reward  !  for
he  is  celebrated  amongst  all  the  nobles  of  the
earth,  and  is  the  confluence  of  laudable  actions.
Whosoever  enjoyeth  the  shadow  of  his  kindness
his  sin  is  pardoned,  and  his  enemy  becometh  his
friend.  Every  other  individual  servant  and
domestic  hath  some  duty  appointed  him,  in  the
performance  of  which  should  he  be  somewhat
negligent  or  slothful,  he  would  most  certainly
incur  displeasure  and  reprehension ;  but  for  the
class  of  Durwaishes,  whose  duty  it  is  to  be
grateful  for  the  kindness  of  their  superiors,  to
celebrate  their  virtues,  and  to  implore  blessings
for  them  ;  such  service  is  better  performed  when
absent  than  when  present,  because  in  the  latter
case  their  behavior  may  border  on  speciousness,


PREFACE.  107

whilst  the  other  is  void  of  ceremony  and  more
acceptable.  The  sky's  incurvated  back  became
straight  through  delight  when  Dame  Nature
brought  forth  a  son  like  thee.  It  is  a  pure  in-
stance of  divine  mystery  when  the  Creator  of
the  universe  out  of  his  benevolence  distinguishes
a  servant  for  the  instruction  of  mankind.  He
hath  obtained  immortality,  whose  fame  liveth,
because  after  his  departure  the  renown  of  his
virtue  insures  existence  to  his  name.  It  is  mat-
ter of  indifference  whether  the  learned  praise
thee  or  not,  for  the  face  of  a  beloved  mistress
require  th  not  the  art  of  the  tire-woman.

Excuse  for  the  Omission  of  Personal  Service;
and  the  Cause  of  choosing  Retirement.

My  deficiency  and  backwardness  in  the  stren-
uous discharge  of  personal  service  at  the  palace
of  sovereignty  resembles  the  story  told  of  Bu-
zerchemeher ;  how  that,  when  a  number  of  the
sages  of  Hind  were  discoursing  of  his  virtues,
they  could  discover  in  him  only  this  fault,  that
he  hesitated  in  his  speech,  so  that  his  hearers
were  kept  a  long  time  in  suspense  before  he  de-
livered his  thoughts.  Buzerchemeher  overheard
their  conversation,  and  observed,  "  It  is  better
to  deliberate  before  I  speak,  than  to  repent  of
what  I  have  said."     Old  men   of  experience,


108  THE   GULISTAN.

who  know  the  value  of  words,  reflect  and  then
speak.  Expend  not  your  breath  in  talking  idly  ;
speak  to  the  purpose,  and  mind  not  if  your  de-
livery should  be  slow.  First  think,  and  then
speak,  but  stop  before  they  say,  It  is  enough.
Man  excelleth  the  brute  creation  by  the  faculty
of  speech,  but  you  are  beneath  the  brute  if  you
make  an  improper  use  of  that  gift.  How  then
could  I  venture  to  make  my  appearance  in  the
assembly  of  grandees  of  sovereignty,  the  con-
fluence of  men  of  piety,  and  the  centre  of  pro-
found scholars,  where,  if  in  the  course  of
conversation  I  should  feel  animated,  I  might  be
presumptuous  ?  Small  is  the  capital  stock  which
I  could  produce  before  the  Vizier :  glass  beads
amongst  jewellers  are  not  worth  a  barley-corn ;
a  lamp  in  the  face  of  the  sun  emitteth  not  a
ray  of  light;  and  a  lofty  turret  at  the  foot  of
Mount  Alwund  appears  diminutive.  Whoso-
ever stretcheth  out  his  neck,  claiming  conse-
quence, is  beset  by  enemies  from  all  quarters.
Saadi  lies  prostrate,  freed  from  worldly  desires :
no  man  attempteth  to  combat  with  one  who  is
down  on  the  ground.  Consideration  should
precede  speech :  they  first  lay  the  foundation,
and  then  build  the  wall.  I  understand  making
artificial  flowers,  but  am  not  a  professed  garden-
er!   I  sell  a  beauty,  but  not  in  Canaan.*    They

*  Alluding  to  Joseph,  who  on  account  of  his  beauty  was
styled  the  moon  of  Canaan.


PREFACE.  109

asked  Locman  of  whom  lie  had  learned  philos-
ophy :  he  answered,  "  Of  the  blind,  because  they
never  advance  a  step  until  they  have  tried  the
ground."  Try  your  way  before  you  stir  your
foot.  Be  assured  of  your  manhood,  and  then
marry.

Although  the  cock  is  dauntless  in  battle,  yet
to  what  purpose  shall  he  .strike  against  a  hawk
with  brazen  talons  ?  The  cat  is  a  tiger  in  seiz-
in e  the  mouse  ;  but  is  herself  a  mouse  when
engaged  with  the  tiger.

But,  relying  on  the  liberal  disposition  of  the
great,  who  shut  their  eyes  on  the  defects  of  the
humble,  and  strive  not  to  expose  the  faults  of
inferiors,  I  have  in  a  summary  form  comprised
in  this  book  morals  and  choice  tales,  embellished
with  verses  and  relations  of  meritorious  deeds  of
kino-s  :  in  collecting  materials  for  which,  I  have
spent  a  considerable  part  of  my  life.  These
were  my  reasons  for  writing  the  Gulistan.  May
God  favor  me  with  his  aid  !  These  verses  and
recitals  will  last  for  years,  when  every  particle
of  dust  of  which  I  am  compounded  will  be  dis-
persed. The  intention  in  drawing  this  picture
is,  that  it  may  remain  after  me ;  seeing  that  ex-
istence is  fleeting,  unless  a  devout  person  should
one  day,  out  of  compassion,  bestow  his  blessing
on  the  works  of  the  Durwaishes.  Having  ma-
turely deliberated  on  the  general  arrangement


110  THE   GULISTAK

of  the  book,  the  order  of  the  chapters,  and
abridging  the  style  of  the  language,  it  seemed
advisable  that  this  verdant  garden,  planted  like
paradise,  should  also  resemble  it  by  having
eight  gates  ;  and  I  abridged  the  work,  that  it
might  not  be  thought  tedious.

Chapter  I.  On  the  Morals  of  Kings.

II.  On  the  Morals  of  Durwaishes.

III.  On  the  Excellency  of  Contentment.

IV.  On  the  Advantage  of  Silence.
V.  On  Love  and  Youth.

VI.  On  Weakness  and  Old  Age.
VII.  On  the  Force  of  Education.
VIII.  Rules  for  Conduct  in  Life.

Date  of  the  book.  At  the  time  when  I  en-
joyed a  cheerful  mind,  in  the  year  six  hundred
and  fifty-six  of  the  Hegira  era ;  *  my  design
was  to  give  advice,  and  I  have  spoken  accord-
ingly. I  committed  the  work  to  God,  and  de-
parted.

*  A.  D.  1258.


THE    GULISTAN.


CHAPTER  I.


On  tJie  Morals  of  Kings.

TALE    I.

HAVE  heard,  that  a  certain  mon-
arch having  commanded  a  captive  to
be  put  to  death,  the  poor  wretch,  in
a  fit  of  despair,  began  to  abuse  and
reproach  the  king,  in  his  own  language ;  accord-
ing to  the  saying,  "  Whosoever  washeth  his
hands  of  life,  uttereth  whatever  is  in  his  heart."
"  A  man  without  hope  speaketh  boldly ;  as  the
cat,  when  driven  to  despair,  seizeth  the  dog :  in
the  time  of  need,  when  it  is  impossible  to  es-
cape, the  hand  graspeth  the  sharp-edged  sword."
The  king  asked,  "What  doth  he  say?"  One
of  the  viziers,  who  was  of  a  benevolent  dispo-
sition, replied,  "  O  my  Lord,  he  said,  the  Al-
mighty befriendeth  him  who  stifleth  his  anger,


112  THE  GULISTAN.

and  is  merciful  to  his  fellow-creatures."  The
king  had  compassion  on  him,  and  spared  his
life.  Another  vizier,  of  a  contrary  temper,
said,  "  It  become th  not  persons  of  our  rank  to
speak  anything  but  truth  in  the  presence  of
monarchs ;  that  man  reviled  the  king,  and  spoke
indecently."  The  king  was  displeased  at  his
speech,  and  said,  "  I  am  more  satisfied  with
that  falsehood  than  with  this  truth  which  you
have  uttered ;  because  that  was  well  intended,
and  this  is  founded  on  malignity  ;  and  the  sages
have  declared,  that  falsehood  mixed  with  good
advice  is  preferable  to  truth  tending  to  excite
strife.  When  a  king  is  guided  by  the  advice  of
another,  woe  be  unto  him  if  he  speaketh  any
thing  but  good.  On  the  portico  of  the  hall  of
Feredoon  was  written,  The  world,  O  my  broth-
er, continueth  not  to  any  one ;  place  your  affec-
tions on  the  Creator  of  the  universe,  and  that
will  suffice.  Make  no  reliance,  neither  rest
upon  the  kingdom  of  this  world  ;  seeing  how
many  like  yoursel  it  hath  nourished  and  killed."
When  the  pure  soul  is  about  to  depart,  what  is
the  difference  between  expiring  on  a  throne  or
on  the  bare  ground?


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.         113


TALE    II.

ONE  of  the  kings  of  Khorasan  saw  in  a
dream  Sultan  Mahmood  Sebuktegeen  an
hundred  years  after  his  death,  when  the  whole
of  his  body  had  fallen  into  pieces  and  become
dust,  excepting  his  eyes,  which  moved  in  the
sockets,  and  looked  about.  All  the  philosophers
were  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  meaning,  excepting
a  Durwaish,  who,  after  making  his  obeisance,
said,  "  He  is  still  looking  about,  because  his
kingdom  is  possessed  by  others."  Many  men
of  renown  whom  they  have  buried  in  the  ground
have  not  left  any  traces  of  their  existence  on
the  surface  of  the  earth.  That  old  corpse  which
they  had  deposited  in  the  grave,  his  dust,  is  so
decayed  that  not  a  single  bone  of  him  remains.
The  happy  name  of  Nushirvan  still  exists
through  his  liberality,  although  a  long  season
hath  elapsed  since  his  departure.  Do  good,  O
man,  and  account  your  life  as  gain,  before
the  report  is  spread  that  such  an  one  is  no
more.


114:  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    III.

I  HEARD  of  a  king's  son,  who  was  low  in
stature  and  ill-favored,  whilst  all  his  brothers
were  tall  and  handsome.  Once  on  a  time,  his
father  looked  at  him  with  disgust,  which  the  son
had  sagacity  enough  to  discover,  and  said :  "  O
father !  a  short  man,  who  is  wise,  is  preferable
to  him  who  is  tall  and  ignorant.  Not  every-
thing is  valued  according  to  its  height;  the
sheep  is  clean,  and  the  elephant  an  unclean  an-
imal. Sinai  is  one  of  the  most  inconsiderable
mountains  of  the  earth,  but  verily  it  is  the
greatest  before  God  in  rank  and  dignity.  Have
you  heard  what  was  said  one  day  by  a  wise
lean  man  to  a  fat  blockhead  ?  One  Arab  horse,
though  lean,  is  preferable  to  a  stableful  of
asses."  The  father  laughed,  the  courtiers  ap-
plauded, and  the  brothers  were  mortified  to  the
very  soul.  Until  a  man  hath  spoken,  his  de-
fects and  his  skill  are  concealed.  Imagine  not
every  desert  to  be  empty,  for  perhaps  a  tiger
may  be  there  asleep.  I  heard  that  at  that  time
a  powerful  enemy  appeared  against  the  king,  and
when  the  two  armies  met,  the  first  person  who
impelled  his  horse  into  the  action  was  this  young
prince,  calling  out,  "I  am  not  him  whose  back
you  shall  see  in  the  day  of  battle,  but  my  head


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         115

may  be  found  in  dust  and  blood ;  for  whosoever
fighteth  the  battle  staketh  his  own  life,  and  he
who  flieth  sporteth  with  the  blood  of  his  troops."
Having  thus  said,  he  attacked  the  troops  of  the
enemy,  and  overthrew  several  men  of  renown.
When  he  came  to  his  father,  he  bowed  down  to
the  earth,  and  said,  "  O  ye,  to  whom  my  form
appeared  contemptible,  without  considering  the
force  of  my  valor ;  in  the  day  of  battle  the  slen-
der steed  is  useful,  and  not  the  fattened  ox."  It
is  reported  that,  the  enemy  having  many  troops,
and  this  side  but  few,  a  body  of  the  latter  were
giving  way,  upon  which  the  prince  vociferated,
"  Exert  yourselves  like  men,  that  you  may  not
wear  the  dress  of  women."  The  troopers,  ani-
mated by  this  speech,  joined  in  the  general  at-
tack, and  are  reported  to  have  gained  the  victory
over  the  adversary  on  that  day.  The  king
kissed  his  head  and  eyes,  and  folded  him  in  his
arms,  and  his  affection  towards  him  increased
daily,  till  at  length  he  appointed  him  his  suc-
cessor. The  brothers  became  envious,  and  put
poison  into  his  food.  His  sister  seeing  this  from
a  window,  flapped  to  the  shutters,  and  he,  un-
derstanding the  signal,  withdrew  his  hand  from
the  dish,  and  exclaimed :  "  If  the  wise  should  be
deprived  of  life,  it  would  be  impossible  for  the
unskilful  to  supply  their  place.  No  one  would
go  under  the  shade  of  the  owl,  if  the  Homai


116  THE   GULISTAN.

was  annihilated  from  the  earth."  They  in-
formed the  father  of  the  circumstances,  who
sent  for  the  brothers,  and,  after  rebuking  them
properly,  he  gave  to  each  of  them  a  suitable
portion  of  his  kingdom,  that  all  cause  of  strife
and  bickering  might  subside.  "  It  has  been
observed  that  ten  Durwaishes  may  sleep 'upon
one  blanket,  but  that  one  kingdom  cannot  con-
tain two  kings."  If  a  pious  man  eateth  half  a
loaf  of  bread,  he  bestoweth  the  other  half  on
the  poor.  If  a  king  possesseth  the  dominion  of
a  whole  climate,  he  longeth  to  have  the  same
enjoyment  of  another.


TALE    IV.

A  GANG  of  Arabian  robbers  had  assembled
on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  blocked
up  the  road  of  the  caravan.  The  inhabitants
were  distressed  by  their  stratagems,  and  the
troops  of  the  Sultan  overpowered  ;  because  the
thieves,  having  possessed  themselves  of  a  for-
tress on  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  made  this
stronghold  their  fixed  residence.  The  counsel-
lors of  the  king's  party  consulted  together  how
to  remove  this  grievance,  because,  if  they  were
suffered  to  continue  any  time  in  this  state,  they


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.         117

would  become  too  powerful  to  be  subdued.
The  tree  that  has  only  just  taken  root  may  be
pulled  up  by  the  strength  of  a  man,  but  should
it  continue  some  time  in  that  state,  it  could  not
be  eradicated  even  by  a  windlass.  It  is  possible
to  stop  the  course  of  a  spring  with  a  bodkin,
which,  when  formed  into  a  full  stream,  cannot
be  forded  by  an  elephant.  They  came  to  the
determination  to  send  one  as  a  spy,  to  watch  the
opportunity  when  the  thieves  should  be  gone  to
attack  a  tribe,  and  the  place  evacuated.  They
detached  a  party  of  approved  men,  who  con-
cealed themselves  in  the  pass  of  the  mountains.
In  the  evening,  when  the  robbers  returned  from
their  expedition  with  their  plunder,  they  laid
aside  their  weapons,  and  deposited  their  spoil.
The  first  enemy  who  attacked  them  was  sleep,
about  the  end  of  the  first  watch  of  the  night.
The  sun's  disk  passed  into  shadow,  Jonas  en-
tered into  the  whale's  belly.  The  gallant  men
sprang  out  of  the  ambush,  and  pinioned  the
robbers  one  after  another.  In  the  morning
they  were  brought  to  the  palace,  when  the  king
gave  orders  for  them  all  to  be  put  to  death.
There  happened  to  be  amongst  them  a  lad,  the
first  fruits  of  whose  youth  were  yet  immature ;
the  freshness  of  his  cheeks  resembled  a  rose-bud
in  early  spring.  One  of  the  viziers  kissed  the
foot  of  the  king's  throne,  and  bowed  his  head


118  THE   GULISTAN.

to  the  earth  in  intercession,  saying,  "  This  boy
hath  not,  like  the  rest,  tasted  the  fruit  of  the
garden  of  life,  nor  ever  enjoyed  the  harvest  of
the   season  of  youth.     I  therefore   venture  to
hope,  from  your  Majesty's  known  clemency,  that
you  will  oblige  your  servant,  by  sparing  the  lad's
blood."     The  king  looked  displeased  at  these
words,  as  they  did  not  accord  with  his  enlight-
ened understanding,  and  he  observed  that  an
evil  root  will  not  thrive  in  a  goodly  shade.     "  To
educate  the  worthless,  is  like  throwing  a  walnut
upon  a  dome  :  it  is  better  to  eradicate  them  al-
together; for  to  extinguish  the  fire,  and  suffer  a
spark  to  remain,  or  to  kill  the  snake,  and  pre-
serve the  young,  is  not  acting  like  a  wise  man.
Though  the  clouds  should  pour  down  the  water
of  life,  you  would  never  gather  fruit  from  the
branch  of  the  willow.     Waste  not  your  time  on
low  people,  for  we  can  never  obtain  sugar  from
the  reed."     When  the  vizier  heard  these  words,
he  reluctantly  approved  of  them,  and  praised  the
king  for  his  just  observation,  saying,  "  May  the
kino-  live  forever !  nothing  can  be  more  true  than
what  my  lord  hath  pronounced,  that,  if  he  had
continued  with  these  wicked  wretches,  he  would
naturally    have    fallen    into    their    evil    courses,
and    would    have    become    one    of    them ;    but
your  servant  entertains  hopes  that  this  boy,  by
associating  with  men  of  probity,  will  receive  in-


ON  THE   MORALS   OF  KINGS.         H9

struction,  and  imbibe  virtuous  sentiments ;  for
being  but  a  child,  his  principles  cannot  be  taint-
ed with  the  lawless  and  inimical  disposition  of
that  banditti ;  for  in  the  Hadees  it  is  recorded,
4  Of  a  truth  every  one  is  born  with  a  disposition
to  Islamism,  and  it  is  owing  to  his  parents  his
becoming  a  Jew,  a  Christian,  or  a  Majoosie.'
Lot's  wife  associated  with  the  wicked,  and  his
posterity  forfeited  the  gift  of  prophecy ;  but  the
dog  of  the  companions  of  the  cave,  by  long
converse  with  the  virtuous,  became  a  rational
creature."  The  vizier  having  thus  concluded
his  speech,  some  of  the  courtiers  joined  in  his
petition,  till  at  length  the  king  spared  the  life  of
the  youth,  and  said,  "  I  grant  your  request,  al-
though I  disapprove  of  it.  Know  you  not  what
Zal  said  to  Rustam  ?  Consider  not  any  enemy
as  weak  and  contemptible.  I  have  frequently
seen  water  issue  from  a  small  spring,  which  so
increased  in  its  course  that  it  carried  away  the
camel  with  his  load."  Summarily,  the  vizier
took  the  youth  into  his  family,  and  educated
him  with  kindness  and  attention.  An  able  mas-
ter was  appointed  his  tutor,  who  taught  him
how  to  ask  a  question  and  return  an  answer
with  elegance,  together  with  all  the  accomplish-
ments requisite  for  court,  so  that  his  manners
met  with  general  approbation.  Once  when  the
vizier  mentioned  to  the  lung  some  particulars  of


120  THE   GULISTAN.

the  youth's  disposition  and  manners,  and  was
saying  that  wise  education  had  made  impression
on  him,  and  that  his  former  ignorance  was  root-
ed out  of  his  mind,  the  king  laughed  at  those
expressions,  and  said,  "  The  wolf's  whelp  will
at  length  become  a  wolf,  although  it  be  brought
up  along  with  men."  Two  years  after  this  con-
versation, a  set  of  vagabonds  of  the  town  en-
tered into  a  conspiracy  with  him,  and,  taking  an
opportunity,  he  killed  the  vizier,  and  his  two
sons,  carried  off  an  immense  booty,  and,  succeed-
ing his  father  as  the  head  of  the  gang,  became
an  avowed  offender.  The  king,  apprised  there-
of, in  the  emotion  of  amazement  exclaimed,
"  How  can  any  one  form  a  good  sword  out  of
bad  iron?  O  ye  philosophers,  it  is  impossible
to  convert  a  worthless  wretch  into  a  good  man.
The  rain,  in  whose  nature  there  is  no  partiality,
produces  tulips  in  the  garden,  but  only  weeds  in
a  barren  soil.  A  sterile  soil  will  not  yield  spike-
nard ;  waste  not  then  seed  upon  it.  To  show
favor  to  the  wicked  is  in  fact  doing  injury  to  the
good."


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.         121


TALE    V.

I  SAW  at  the  gate  of  Ughulmish  an  officer's
son,  who  was  endowed  with  wisdom  and  sa-
gacity beyond  description :  even  his  childhood
was  distinguished  by  proofs  of  superior  abilities.
The  star  of  sublimity  shone  on  his  head  through
wisdom.  Summarily,  he  obtained  favor  in  the
sight  of  the  Sultan,  on  account  of  his  beauty
and  acute  understanding,  according  to  the  saying
of  the  sages,  "  Ability,  and  not  riches,  consti-
tutes worth :  greatness  dependeth  on  skill,  and
not  on  years."  His  companions  became  envi-
ous, and,  accusing  him  falsely  of  dishonesty,
made  a  fruitless  attempt  to  deprive  him  of  life.
But  what  can  the  enemy  do  against  him  who
hath  an  assured  friend  ?  The  king  asked  him,
"  What  is  the  cause  of  their  striving  against
you?"  He  replied,  "Under  the  shade  of  your
Majesty's  protection,  I  have  gained  the  good-will
of  every  one,  excepting  the  envious  man,  who
cannot  be  satisfied  but  by  the  decline  of  my
good  fortune ;  and  may  the  wealth  and  pros-
perity of  sovereignty  be  perpetual.  I  can  avoid
injuring  the  mind  of  every  one,  but  what  shall
I  do  to  the  envious  man,  who  carrieth  the  injury
in  his  own  breast  ?  Die,  thou  envious  wretch,
since  thou  canst  not  be   cured  of  the   disease

6


122  THE  GULISTAN.

under  which  thou  laborest  but  by  death.  The
malevolent  man  wishes  that  misfortune  may  be-
fall the  successful.  If  the  bat's  eye  seeth  not  in
the  day,  what  fault  is  on  that  account  to  be  im-
puted to  the  sun  ?  Require  you  truth  ?  It  is
better  for  a  thousand  such  eyes  to  suffer,  than
that  the  brightness  of  the  sun  should  be  ob-
scured."


TALE    VI.

THEY  tell  a  story  of  one  of  the  kings  of
Persia,  that  he  had  stretched  out  the  hand
of  oppression  on  the  property  of  his  subjects,
and  exercised  tyranny  and  violence.  By  his
repeated  acts  of  injustice,  the  people  were  com-
pelled to  emigrate  to  different  countries,  beyond
the  reach  of  his  power.  When  his  subjects
were  diminished,  the  resources  of  his  govern-
ment were  lessened,  his  treasury  was  exhausted,
and  powerful  enemies  pressed  him  on  all  quar-
ters. Whosoever  looketh  for  assistance  in  the
day  of  adversity,  let  him  exercise  humanity  in
the  season  of  prosperity.  If  you  do  not  treat
kindly  the  servant,  with  the  ring  on  his  ear,  he
will  depart ;  show  kindness  in  such  manner  that
the  stranger  may  become  a  willing  servant.
One  day  in  his  presence  they  were  reading,  in


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         123

the  Shahnameh,  the  history  of  the  decline  of
the  kingdom  of  Zohac,  and  the  reign  of  Feri-
doon.  The  vizier  asked  the  king,  "  Since  Feri-
doon  had  neither  money,  nor  territory,  nor
troops,  how  did  it  happen  that  the  kingdom  was
conferred  on  him?"  He  answered,  "  In  the
manner  you  have  heard,  the  people  joined  him,
and  through  their  strength  he  gained  the  king-
dom." The  vizier  rejoined,  "  Seeing  that  col-
lecting people  together  is  the  means  of  forming
a  kingdom,  why  then  do  you  make  them  disperse,
unless  you  do  not  desire  to  govern  ?  It  is  ad-
visable to  cherish  the  army  at  the  risk  of  your
life,  as  the  Sultan  deriveth  his  power  from  his
troops."  The  king  asked,  "  What  methods  are
to  be  taken  to  collect  together  troops  and  sub-
jects ? '  The  vizier  replied,  "  The  monarch
must  be  ju§t,  to  induce  them  to  approach  him,
and  merciful,  that  they  may  enjoy  peace  in  the
shade  of  his  government ;  but  you  possess  nei-
ther of  these  qualities.  A  tyrant  cannot  gov-
ern a  kingdom,  as  a  wolf  cannot  perform  the
office  of  a  shepherd.  The  tyrannic  prince  saps
the  foundation  of  his  own  empire."  The  king
was  offended  at  the  vizier's  wise  admonition,
and  ordered  him  to  be  bound,  and  committed
to  prison.  A  short  time  after,  the  sons  of  the
king's  uncle  commenced  hostilities,  and  appeared
in  arms,  and  claimed  possession  of  their  father's


124  THE   GULISTAN.

dominions. '  A  number  of  people,  who  on  ac-
count of  his  oppression  had  absconded,  now
joined  the  enemy  and  supported  them;  till  at
length  the  king  was  dispossessed  of  the  kingdom
and  they  obtained  it.

The  king  who  suffers  the  poor  to  be  oppressed
will  find,  in  the  day  of  adversity,  his  friends
become  powerful  foes.  Be  on  good  terms  with
your  subjects,  and  sit  down  secure  from  the  at-
tack of  your  enemy ;  for  to  a  just  monarch,  his
subjects  are  an  army.


TALE    VII.

A  KING  was  sitting  in  a  vessel  with  a  Per-
sian slave.  The  boy  having  never  before
seen  the  sea,  nor  experienced  the  inconvenience
of  a  ship,  began  to  cry  and  lament,  and  his
whole  body  was  in  a  tremor.  Notwithstanding
all  the  soothings  that  were  offered,  he  would
not  be  pacified.  The  king's  diversion  was  in-
terrupted, and  no  remedy  could  be  found.  A
philosopher  who  was  in  the  ship  said,  "  If  you
will  command  me,  I  will  silence  him."  T*he
king  replied,  "  It  will  be  an  act  of  great  kind-
ness." The  philosopher  ordered  them  to  throw
the  boy  into  the  sea,  and  after  several  plunges,


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         125

they  laid  hold  of  the  hair  of  his  head,  and
dragging  him  towards  the  ship,  he  clang  to  the
rudder  with  both  his  hands.

When  he  got  out  of  the  water,  he  sat  down
quietly  in  a  corner  of  the  vessel.  The  king
was  pleased,  and  asked  how  this  was  brought
about.  The  philosopher  replied,  "At  first  he
had  never  experienced  the  danger  of  being
drowned ;  neither  knew  he  the  safety  of  a
ship."  In  like  manner,  he  knoweth  the  value
of  prosperity  who  hath  encountered  adversity.
O  thou  who  hast  satisfied  thine  hunger,  to  thee
a  barley  loaf  is  beneath  notice ;  that  seems
loveliness  to  me,  which  in  thy  sight  appears  de-
formity. To  the  nymphs  of  paradise,  purga-
tory would  be  hell ;  and  ask  the  inhabitants
of  hell,  whether  purgatory  is  not  paradise.
There  is  a  difference  between  him  who  clasp-
eth  his  mistress  in  his  arms,  and  him  whose
eyes  are  fixed  on  the  door  expecting  her.


TALE    VIII.

THEY  asked  King  Hormuz,  "  What  crime
have  you  found  in  your  father's  min-
isters, that  you  ordered  them  to  be  impris-
oned?"


126  THE   GULISTAN.

He  replied,  "I  have  not  discovered  any  crime,
but  perceiving  that  they  fear  me  greatly  in
their  hearts,  and  do  not  place  full  reliance  on
my  promise,  I  was  alarmed  lest,  out  of  appre-
hension for  their  own  safety,  they  might  attempt
my  ruin ;  and  therefore  I  have  followed  the
advice  of  the  sages,  who  say,  '  Fear  him  who
feareth  you,  although  you  be  able  to  cope  with
an  hundred  such.  Dost  not  thou  know,  that
the  cat,  when  desperate,  teareth  out  the  tiger's
eyes  with  her  claws  ?  The  snake  biteth  the  foot
of  the  peasant,  from  the  dread  of  having  its  own
head  dashed  against  a  stone.'


5    5?


TALE    IX.

A  KING  of  Arabia  was  sick  in  his  old  age,
and  there  was  no  hope  of  his  recovery,
when  a  horseman  entered  the  gate,  and  brought
these  glad  tidings  :  "  Through  your  Majesty's
auspices,  I  have  taken  such  a  fortress;  the
garrison  are  made  prisoners,  and  the  troops
and  subjects  of  that  quarter  have  one  and  all
submitted  to  your  government."

When  he  heard  these  words  he  sighed,  and
said,  "  This  good  news  concerns  not  me,  but
mine  enemies,  that  is,  those  who  shall  succeed


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS         127

to  my  kingdom.  My  precious  life  hath  been
vainly  spent  in  the  expectation  of  accomplishing
my  wishes,  but  now  to  what  purpose  does  it
serve,  for  I  have  no  hope  that  my  past  life  should
return!  The  hand  of  fate  beats  his  march  upon
the  drum.  Alas !  mine  eyes,  take  your  leave
of  this  head;  hands,  arms,  and  wrists,  bid  adieu
to  each  other.  Death,  a  foe  to  my  desire,  hath
overtaken  me.  For  the  last  time  come  before
me,  O  my  Mends !  my  days  have  been  spent  in
ignorance ;  I  have  not  performed  my  duty ;
shun  my  example*"


TALE    X.

IN  a  certain  year  I  was  sitting  retired  in  the
great  mosque  at  Damascus,  at  the  head  of
the  tomb  of  Yahiya  the  prophet  (on  whom  be
peace  !).  One  of  the  kings  of  Arabia,  who  was
notorious  for  his  injustice,  happened  to  come  on
a  pilgrimage,  and  having  performed  his  devo-
tions, he  uttered  the  following  words :  "  The
poor  and  the  rich  are  servants  of  tliis  earth,
and  those  who  are  richest  have  the  greatest,
wants."  He  then  looked  towards  me  and  said,
"  Because  Durwaishes  are  strenuous  and  sin-
cere in  their  commerce  with  heaven,  unite  your


128  THE   GULISTAN.

prayers  with  mine,  for  I  am  in  dread  of  a  pow-
erful enemy."

I  replied,  "  Show  mercy  to  the  weak  peasant,
that  you  may  not  experience  difficulty  from  a
strong  enemy.  It  is  criminal  to  crush  the  poor
and  defenceless  subjects  with  the  arm  of  power.
He  liveth  in  dread  who  befriendeth  not  the  poor,
for  should  his  foot  slip,  no  one  layeth  hold  of  his
hand.  Whosoever  soweth  bad  seed,  and  looketh
for  good  fruit,1  tortureth  his  imagination  in  vain,
making  a  false  judgment  of  things.  Take  the
cotton  out  of  thine  ear,  and  distribute  justice  to
mankind  ;  for  if  thou  refusest  justice,  there  will
be  a  day  of  retribution.

"  The  children  of  Adam  are  limbs  of  one  an-
other, and  are  all  produced  from  the  same  sub-
stance ;  when  the  world  gives  pain  to  one
member,  the  others  also  suffer  uneasiness.  Thou
who  art  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  others
deservest  not  to  be  called  a  man."


TALE    XI.


ADURWAISH,  who  never  prayed  in  vain,
made  his  appearance  at  Baghdad.  Hojaj
Yousuf  sent  for  him,  and  said,  "  Offer  up  a
prayer  for  me."     He  said,  "  O  God,  take  away


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.         120

his  life."  Hojaj  asked,  "  For  God's  sake,  what
kind  of  prayer  is  this  ?  '  He  answered,  "  It
is  a  salutary  wish  for  yourself  and  for  all  Mos-
lems.  O  thou  powerful  wretch,  who  oppressest
the  weak,  how  long  will  this  violence  continue  ?
Of  what  use  is  thy  government?  It  is  better
that  thou  shouldst  die,  because  thou  art  an  op-
pressor of  mankind."


TALE    XII.

A  CERTAIN  tyrannical  king  asked  a  re-
ligious man,  "  What  kind  of  devotion  will
be  most  meritorious  for  me  to  perform  ?  '  He
replied,  "  That  you  sleep  at  noon,  because  in
that  one  moment  you  will  not  oppress  man-
kind."

When  I  saw  a  tyrant  sleeping  at  noon,  I  said,
"  He  is  a  tyrant,  it  is  best  that  he  should  be
overcome  with  sleep.  He  who  is  better  asleep
than  awake,  death  is  preferable  to  such  an  evil
life."


6*


130  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XIII.


I  HEARD  of  a  king,  who  had  spent  the  night
in  jollity,  and  when  he  was  completely  in-
toxicated, he  said,  "  I  have  never  in  my  life
experienced  a  more  pleasant  moment  than  the
present,  for  I  have  no  thoughts  about  good  or
evil,  and  am  not  plagued  with  any  one."  A
naked  Durwaish,  who  had  been  sleeping  with-
out, in  the  cold,  said,  "  O  king,  there  is  none
equal  to  thee  in  power.  I  grant  that  you  have
no  sorrow  of  your  own  ;  but  what  then,  hast
thou  no  concern  about  us  ? "  The  kino;  was
pleased  at  this  speech,  and  threw  out  of  the  win-
dow a  bag  of  a  thousand  dinars,  and  said,  u  O
Durwaish,  hold  out  your  skirt."  He  answered,
"  Whence  shall  I  produce  a  skirt,  who  have  not
a  garment?  "

The  king  the  more  pitied  his  weak  estate,
and  in  addition  to  the  money  sent  him*a  dress.
The  Durwaish,  having  consumed  the  whole
sum  in  a  short  time,  came  again.  Riches  re-
main not  in  the  hand  of  the  pious,  neither  pa-
tience in  the  heart  of  a  lover,  nor  water  in  a
sieve.  At  a  time  when  the  king  had  no  care
about  him,  they  related  his  case.  He  was  angry,
and  turned  away  his  face  from  him :  and  to  this
point  men  of  wisdom  and  experience  have  ob-


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         131

served,  that  we  ought  to  guard  against  the  fury
and  rage  of  kings,  for  frequently  their  thoughts
are  engrossed  by  important  affairs  of  state,  and
they  cannot  endure  interruption  from  the  vul-
gar. Whosoever  watches  not  a  fit  opportunity
must  expect  nothing  from  the  king's  favor.  Till
you  perceive  a  convenient  time  for  conversing,
lose  not  your  own  consequence  by  talking  to  no
purpose.  The  king  said,  "  Drive  away  this  in-
solent, extravagant  fellow,  who  has  dissipated
such  an  immense  sum  in  so  short  a  time  ;  since
the  Biet  ul  mal  is  designed  to  afford  a  mouthful
for  the  poor,  and  not  to  feast  the  fraternity  of
devils.  The  blockhead  who  burns  a  camphor
candle  in  the  daytime,  you  will  soon  see  without
oil  in  his  lamp  at  night."  One  of  the  viziers,  a
good  counsellor,  said,  "  O  king,  it  seems  expe-
dient that  stated  allowances  should  be  settled  for
people  of  this  class  separately  for  their  mainte-
nance, that  they  may  not  live. extravagantly;  but
what  you  commanded  in  displeasure,  to  exclude
them  altogether,  is  repugnant  to  the  principles  of
true  generosity,  —  to  fill  one  with  hopes  through
kindness,  and  then  to  destroy  him  with  despair ;
a  monarch  cannot  admit  people  into  his  presence,
and,  when  the  door  of  liberality  is  open,  then
shut  it  upon  them  with  violence.  No  one  seeth
the  thirsty  pilgrims  on  the  sea-shore  ;  wherever
there  is  a  spring  of  sweet  water,  men,  birds,  and
ants  flock  together."


132  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    XIV.


ONE  of  the  former  kings  was  negligent  in
protecting  his  dominions,  and^having  suf-
fered his  troops  to  be  in  distress,  when  a  power-
ful enemy  appeared  they  forsook  him.  When
pay  is  withheld  from  the  troops,  they  are  unwill-
ing to  put  their  hands  to  their  swords.  Being
intimately  acquainted  with  one  who  had  desert-
ed his  post,  I  reproached  him,  saying,  "It  is
base,  disreputable,  mean,  and  ungrateful,  when,
upon  a  trifling  change  of  condition,  a  man  for-
sakes Ins  old  master,  unmindful  of  the  favors  of
many  years."  He  replied :  "  If  I  should  tell
you  the  state  of  the  case,  you  would  acquit
me ;  perhaps  my  horse  was  without  barley  and
my  saddle-cloth  in  pawn  ;  and  the  prince  who
through  avarice  withholds  the  pay  of  his  sol-
diers does  not  deserve  that  they  should  expose
their  lives  in  his  service.  Give  money  to  the
gallant  soldier,  that  he  may  expose  his  head ;  for
if  you  do  not  pay  him,  he  will  seek  his  fortune
elsewhere.  The  strong  man,  if  his  belly  is  full,
will  fight  valiantly,  but  when  hungry  he  will
run  away  stoutly."


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.         133


TALE    XV.

A  CERTAIN  vizier,  being  dismissed  from
his  office,  joined  a  society  of  Durwaishes,
the  blessing  of  whose  company  made  such  an
impression  as  bestowed  comfort  on  his  mind.
The  king  was  again  favorably  disposed  towards
him,  and  ordered  that  he  should  be  reinstated ;
to  which  the  vizier  would  not  consent,  saying,
that  degradation  was  preferable  to  employment.
"  They  who  are  seated  in  the  corner  of  retire-
ment, close  the  dog's  teeth  and  men's  mouths.
They  tear  their  papers  and  break  their  pens,  and
are  delivered  from  the  hands  and  tongues  of
slanderers."  The  king  said,  "  Of  a  truth  we
stand  in  need  of  a  man  of  such  sufficiency  for
the  administration  of  our  government."  The
vizier  observed  that  the  proof  of  a  man's  being
sufficiently  wise  was  his  not  engaging  in  such
matters.  The  Homai  is  honored  above  all  oth-
er birds,  because  it  feeds  on  bones,  and  injures
not  any  living  creature.

Parable.  They  asked  a  Syagoosh,  Why  do
you  choose  the  servile  society  of  the  lion  ?  He
replied,  "Because  I  eat  the  remains  of  his  hunt-
ing, and  live  guarded  from  the  machinations
of  my  enemies,  under  the  protection  of  his  val-
or."    They  asked,  "  Now  that  you  are  under


134  THE   GULISTAN.

the  shadow  of  his  protection,  and  gratefully  ac-
knowledge his.  beneficence,  why  do  you  not
approach  nearer,  so  as  to  be  brought  into  the
circle  of  his  principal  servants,  and  to  be  num-
bered amongst  his  favorite  ministers  ?  '  He  re-
plied,  "  I  am  not  so  confident  of  my  safety  from
his  severity."  If  the  Gueber  lights  the  fire  an
hundred  years,  yet  should  he  fall  into  it,  for  an
instant,  he  would  be  burnt.  It  may  happen
that  a  king's  minister  obtains  money ;  or  he  may
chance  to  lose  his  head.  The  sages  have  said,
"Beware  of  the  inconstant  disposition  of  princes,
who  sometimes  are  dissatisfied  at  a  salutation ;
and  sometimes  in  return  for  rudeness  will  bestow
a  dress  of  honor."  And  they  have  also  observed
wit  is  an  accomplishment  in  a  courtier,  but  a
blemish  in  the  character  of  a  wise  man.  Pre-
serve the  dignity  of  your  own  character,  and
leave  sport  and  buffoonery  to  courtiers.


TALE    XVI.


ONE  of  my  companions  was  complaining  to
me  of  the  unfavorableness  of  the  times,
and  said :  "  I  have  but  small  means  with  a  large
family,  and  am  not  able  to  support  the  burden
of  poverty.     It  has  frequently  come   into  my


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         135

mind  to  go  to  some  other  country,  that  by  what-
ever way  I  might  maintain  myself,  no  one
would  know  of  my  good  or  bad  fortune.  Many
a  person  has  slept  an  hungered  without  any  one
knowing  who  it  was.  Many  a  vital  spirit  has
departed,  over  winch  no  one  has  wept.  Again,
I  reflect  on  the  malevolence  of  my  enemies,  who
in  my  absence  would  scoffingly  laugh  at  my  con-
duct, and  impute  my  exertions  for  the  benefit
of  my  family  to  want  of  humanity,  and  might
say,  Behold  that  shameless  wretch,  who  will
never  experience  good  fortune ;  he  consults  his
own  ease,  and  abandons  to  distress  his  wife  and
children.  I  have  some  skill  in  arithmetic,  as
you  know ;  and  if  through  your  interest  any
office  can  be  obtained  that  will  be  the  means  of
making  my  mind  easy,  during  the  remainder
of  my  life  I  shall  not  be  able  to  express  my
gratitude."  I  said :  "  Alas  !  my  friend,  the  ser-
vice of  princes  has  two  sides,  —  the  expectation
of  a  livelihood,  and  the  dread  of  losing  one's  life ;
and  it  is  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  wise
for  the  sake  of  such  hope  to  fall  into  such  dan-
ger. No  one  cometh  to  the  poor  man's  house,
saying,  Pay  the  taxes  on  your  ground  or  gar-
den ;  either  be  prepared  to  encounter  anxiety
and  grief,  or  expose  your  intestines  to  the  crow."
He  replied :  "This  speech  is  not  applicable  to  my
case ;  you  have  not  answered  my  question :  have


136  THE   GULISTAN.

you  not  heard  the  saying,  that  whosoever  is
guilty  of  dishonesty,  his  hand  trembles  on  ren-
dering his  account  ?  Rectitude  is  the  means  of
conciliating  the  Divine  favor.  I  never  saw  any
one  lost  on  a  straight  road ;  and  the  sages  have
remarked,  that  four  kinds  of  persons  are  mor-
tally afraid  of  four  others,  —  the  oppressor  dreads
the  king,  the  thief  dreads  the  watchman,  the
adulterer  dreads  the  informer,  and  the  harlot  the
Mohtesib ;  but  he  who  has  a  clear  conscience,
what  has  he  to  apprehend  from  investigation  ?
Live  not  extravagantly  while  in  office,  if  you
wish  that  on  your  removal  from  it  your  enemy
may  have  no  power  to  injure  you.  Be  upright
in  your  conduct,  O  my  brother,  and  stand  not
in  awe  of  any  one.  The  fuller  beats  foul  cloths
only  against  the  stone."  I  replied :  "  The  story
of  the  fox  suits  you  exactly,  who,  on  being  seen
running  away  and  limping,  some  one  asked  what
calamity  occasioned  Mm  so  much  trepidation.
He  replied,  4 1  hear  that  they  are  going  to  press  a
camel  into  the  service.'  The  other  observed,  '  I
like  your  impudence  ;  what  relationship  is  there
between  you  and  a  camel,  and  what  resem-
blance have  you  to  that  animal  ?  '  He  replied,
'  Be  silent,  for  if  the  malignant,  out  of  evil  de-
sign, should  say,  This  is  a  camel,  and  I  should  be
seized,  who  would  be  so  solicitous  for  my  relief
as  to  order  an  inquiry  into  my  case  ?  and  before


ON   THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         137

the  antidote  can  be  brought  from  Irak,  he  who
has  been  bitten  by  the  snake  may  be  dead.'
Thus,  although  you  possess  such  worthiness  and
integrity,  yet  the  envious  are  in  ambush,  and  the
enemy  sitting  in  a  corner,  if  they  should  misrep-
resent your  worthy  disposition,  and  you  should
incur  the  king's  displeasure,  and  fall  under  his
resentment,  who  will  be  able  to  speak  in  your
behalf?  It  seems  most  advisable  that  you  should
moderate  your  desires,  and  give  up  all  thoughts
of  preferment ;  for  the  sages  have  remarked,
that  in  the  sea  there  are  good  things  innumer-
able ;  but  that  if  you  wish  for  safety,  you  must
seek  it  on  the  shore."  My  friend  heard  these
words,  was  displeased,  looked  angrily,  and  be-
gan to  speak  with  a  degree  of  asperity,  saying :
"In  all  this  what  is  there  of  wisdom,  propriety,
intelligence,  or  penetration  ?  and  the  words  of
the  sages  are  verified,  namely,  that  friends  are
serviceable  in  prison,  for  that  at  table  enemies
assume  the  appearance  of  friends.  Account  not
those  your  friends  who  in  prosperity  boast  of
their  attachment  and  brotherly  affection.  I
consider  him  as  my  friend  who  takes  me  by
the  hand  in  the  season  of  adversity  and  dis-
tress."

I  perceived  that  his  mind  was  perturbated,
and  that  he  considered  my  advice  as  an  excuse
for  not  serving  him.     I  therefore  waited  on  the


138  THE  GULISTAN.

superintendent  of  the  finances,  and,  through  the
means  of  an  intimacy  which  had  formerly  sub-
sisted  between  us,  I  represented  the  circum-
stances, in  consequence  of  which  he  gave  my
friend  some  small  appointment.  In  a  short  space
of  time,  they  saw  the  worthiness  of  his  charac-
ter, and  his  good  management  met  with  appro-
bation. His  affairs  prospered,  and  he  gained
preferment ;  so  that  the  star  of  his  good  fortune
ascended,  until  he  gained  the  meridian  of  his
wishes,  and  became  a  favorite  with  the  Sultan,
an  object  of  general  admiration,  and  the  confi-
dant of  illustrious  personages.  I  rejoiced  at  the
state  of  his  prosperity,  and  told  him  not  to  be
uneasy  about  his  affairs,  nor  to  suffer  his  heart
to  be  distressed,  since  the  water  of  immortality
is  in  the  land  of  darkness.  O  brother,  who  art
in  distress,  be  not  disheartened,  for  God  hath
many  hidden  mercies.  Repine  not  at  the  ver-
satility of  fortune,  for  patience  is  bitter,  but  the
fruit  is  sweet.

At  that  juncture  it  happened  that,  in  com-
pany with  a  number  of  my  friends,  I  under-
took a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  When  we  re-
turned from  the  pilgrimage,  hey  came  out  two
days'  journey  to  meet  me.  Seeing  him  in  dis-
tressed circumstances,  habited  like  a  Durwaish,
I  asked  him  the  cause,  to  which  he  replied :  "  It
has  happened  just  as  you  predicted:  some  per-


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.        139

sons  out  of  envy  charged  me  with  unfair  prac-
tices ;  the  kino;  did  not  order  investigation  of  the
circumstances,  and  my  old  acquaintances  and
kind  friends  tfpened  not  their  lips  in  my  justifi-
cation, forgetful  of  our  former  intimacy.  When
'by  the  will  of  God  any  one  falls,  the  whole
world  trample  upon  his  head.  When  they  see
good  fortune  befriending  him,  they  praise  him
with  their  hands  upon  their  breasts.  In  short,
I  was  overwhelmed  with  persecutions,  until  this
week,  when  the  good  news  of  the  safe  arrival  of
the  pilgrims  being  received,  I  was  released  from
close  confinement,  with  the  confiscation  of  my
patrimonial  estate."  I  replied:  "  At  that  time
you  would  not  listen  to  my  suggestion,  that  the
service  of  kings  is  like  voyaging  on  the  sea, —
profitable,  but  hazardous :  either  you  acquire
riches,  or  perish  in  the  waves.  The  merchant
either  gains  the  shore  with  both  hands  full  of
gold,  or  else  one  day  the  waves  cast  him  dead
upon  the  beach."  I  did  not  think  it  advisable
to  afflict  his  inward  wound  with  more  scratch-
ing, nor  to  sprinkle  salt  upon  it,  but  satisfied
myself  with  repeating  the  two  following  lines  :
Know  you  not,  that  you  will  see  your  feet  in
fetters,  when  you  listen  not  to  the  admonition
of  mankind.  Another  time,  if  you  are  not  able
to  endure  the  sting,  put  not  your  finger  into
the  scorpion's  hole.


140  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XVII.

I  WAS  used  to  associate  with  a1x)dy  of  men,
whose  conduct  had  the  appearance  of  cor-
rectness ;  a  person  of  consequence  entertained
very  favorable  sentiments  of  them,  and  had  as-
signed a  fixed  pension  for  their  support;  but
one  of  them  having  done  something  unbecom-
ing  the  character  of  Durwaishes,  they  forfeited
his  good  opinion,  and  their  market  was  injured.
I  wanted,  by  some  means  or  other,  to  obtain  for
my  friends  a  restitution  of  the  pension.  I  went
to  wait  on  the  great  man,  but  the  porter  rudely
refused  me  admittance.  I  excused  him,  in  con-
formity to  the  saying,  that,  if  you  approach  the
gate  of  either  the  Meer,  the  Vizier,  or  the  Sul-
tan, without  any  one  to  introduce  you,  when
the  dog  and  the  porter  discern  that  you  are
poor,  this  seizes  your  collar,  and  the  other  lays
hold  of  your  skirt.  When  the  great  man's
principal  attendants  were  apprised  of  my  case,
they  conducted  me  in  with  respect,  and  as-
signed me  a  place  of  distinction  ;  but  I  humbly
seated  myself  lower,  and  said,  "  Excuse  me,  for
I  am  an  inferior ;  suffer  me  to  seat  myself  in
the  rank  of  servants."  One  of  them  replied,
"  O  God,  what  a  hard  saying  is  this  ?  if  you  seat
yourself  on  my  head  and  eyes,  I  admit  your


ON  THE  MORALS  OF  KINGS.         141

gallantry,  for  you  are  amiable."  Summarily,
I  seated  myself,  and  conversed  on  various  sub-
jects, till  the  circumstance  of  my  friend's  indis-
cretion was  brought  in.  I  asked,  "  What  fault
was  discovered  by  my  most  bountiful  lord,  that
should  have  rendered  his  servant  hateful  in  his
sight  ?  To  God  alone  belongeth  perfect  great-
ness and  benignity,  who  discovereth  the  crime,
and  yet  withholdeth  not  daily  bread."  The
great  man  approved  of  this  speech,  and  ordered
that  my  friend's  stipend  should  be  restored,  and
the  arrears  discharged.  I  praised  his  generosity,
made  my  obeisance,  and  apologized  for  my  bold-
ness ;  and  at  the  time  of  taking  leave  made  the
following  observation :  "  Because  the  temple  of
Mecca  is  the  bestower  of  our  wants,  multitudes
resort  to  it  from  many  farsangs ;  you  must  there-
fore suffer  the  importunity  of  such  as  myself,
since  no  one  flings  a  stone  into  a  tree  that  hath
no  fruit."


TALE    XVIII.

A  PRINCE  inherited  from  his  father  abun-
dance of  wealth.  He  opened  the  hand
of  liberality,  and  bestowed  innumerable  largesses
and  gifts  on  his  troops  and  subjects.

No  odor  issues  from  a  tray  made  of  lignum


142  THE   GULISTAN.

aloes ;  place  it  on  the  fire,  that  it  may  diffuse
fragrance  like  ambergris.  If  you  wish  to  be  es-
teemed magnificent,  be  bountiful ;  for  grain
groweth  not  unless  it  be  scattered.  One  of  the
courtiers  inconsiderately  began  his  admonition,
saying,  "  that  former  monarchs  accumulated  this
treasure  with  labor,  and  stored  it  up  against  a
time  of  need ;  therefore  restrain  your  liberality,
for  events  being  in  front,  and  enemies  on  the
rear,  you  must  not  deprive  yourself  of  resources
against  the  time  of  necessity.  If  you  were  to
lavish  your  treasure  on  the  multitude,  each
head  of  a  family  would  not  receive  more  than
a  grain  of  rice  for  his  share ;  why  do  you  not
exact  a  grain  of  silver  from  each  individual,
which  will  produce  you  a  treasure  daily  ? '
The  prince  looked  displeased  at  this  discourse,
so  contrary  to  his  own  sentiments,  and  he  said,
"  The  Eternal  and  Almighty  God  has  made  me
king  of  these  nations,  that  I  might  enjoy  and
distribute  ;  I  am  not  a  sentinel  to  watch  the
treasure."

Karoon,  who  had  forty  chambers  full  of  treas-
ure, was  destroyed;  but  Nowshirvan  died  not,
having  left  an  immortal  name.


ON   HIE   MORALS   OF  KINGS.         143


TALE    XIX.

THEY  have  related  that  Nowshirvan,  being
at  a  hunting  seat,  was  about  to  have  some
game  dressed,  and  as  there  was  not  any  salt,  a
servant  was  sent  to  fetch  some  from  a  village  ;
when  the  monarch  ordered  him  to  pay  the  price
of  the  salt,  that  the  exaction  might  not  be-
come a  custom,  and  the  village  be  desolated.
They  say  to  him,  "  From  this  trifle,  what  injury
can  ensue  ?  '  He  replied :  "  Oppression  was
brought  into  the  world  from  small  beg-innings,
which  every  new-comer  has  increased,  until  it
has  reached  the  present  degree  of  enormity.
If  the  monarch  were  to  eat  a  single  apple  from
the  garden  of  a  peasant,  the  servants  would
pull  up  the  tree  by  the  roots :  and»  if  the  Sul-
tan orders  fivej?ggs  to  be  taken  by  force,  his
soldiers  will  spit  a  thousand  fowls.  Th.e  iniqui-
tous tyrant  remaineth  not,  but  the  curses  of
mankind  rest  on  him  forever."


144  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XX.

I  HE  ARD  of  a  collector  of  the  revenues,  who
desolated  the  houses  of  the  subjects,  in  or-
der to  fill  the  king's  coffers ;  regardless  of  the
maxim  of  the  sages,  which  says,  "  Whosoever
offendeth  the  Most  High  to  gain  the  heart  of  a
fellow-creature,  God  will  make  that  very  crea-
ture the  instrument  of  his  destruction."  The
burning  flame  from  wild  rue  raises  not  such  a
smoke  as  is  occasioned  by  the  sighs  of  the
afflicted  heart.  They  say  that  the  lion  is  the
kino;  of  beasts,  and  the  ass  the  meanest  of
animals ;  but  the  sages  all  agree,  that  the  ass
who  carries  burdens  is  preferable  to  the  lion
that  destroyeth  mankind.  The  poor  ass,  al-
though devoid  of  understanding,  yet  on  account
of  carrying  burdens  is  very  valuable.  The
laboring  ox,  and  the  ass,  are  preferable  to  men
who  injure  their  fellow-creatures.

The  king,  on  hearing  some  part  of  his  base
conduct,  ordered  him  on  the  rack,  and  tortured
him  to  death.  You  will  not  obtain  the  appro-
bation of  the  king,  unless  at  the  same  time  you
strive  to  gain  the  hearts  of  his  subjects.  If
you  wish  that  God  should  be  bountiful  to  you,
do  good  unto  his  creatures.  One  whom  he  had
oppressed  passed  by  at  the  time  of  his  execution,


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         145

and  said,  "  Not  every  one  who  possesses  minis-
terial power  and  dignity  can  devour  the  prop-
erty of  men  with  impunity ;  you  may  swallow
a  hard  bone,  but  it  will  tear  the  belly,  when  it
sticks  under  the  navel."


TALE    XXI.

THEY  tell  a  story  of  an  oppressor,  who
flung  a  stone  at  the  head  of  a  pious  man.
The  Durwaish,  not  having  power  to  revenge
himself,  kept  ttie  stone,  till  a  time  when  the
king,  being  displeased,  ordered  the  other  to  be
thrown  into  a  pit.  The  Durwaish  then  came,  and
bruised  his  head  with  the  stone  ;  upon  which  he
exclaimed,  "  Who  art  thou,  and  why  hast  thou
flung  this  stone  at  my  head  ?  "  He  answered,
"  I  am  such  an  one,  and  this  is  the  identical
stone  that  on  such  a  day  you  flung  at  my
head  ?  '  He  proceeded,  "  Where  were  you  all
this  time  ?  '  The  Durwaish  replied,  "  I  was
afraid  of  your  dignity ;  but  now  that  I  see  you
in  the  pit,  I  consider  it  a  favorable  opportunity
to  avenge  myself.  Whilst  the  worthless  man
is  in  a  state  of  prosperity,  the  wise  think  it
proper  to  pay  him  respect.  When  you  have
not  a  nail  sufficiently  sharp  for  tearing,   it  is


146  THE   GULISTAN.

prudent  not  to  contend  with  the  wicked.  Who-
soever grapples  against  an  arm  of  steel,  will
injure  his  own  wrist,  if  it  is  of  silver:  wait
until  fortune  ties  his  hands,  when  to  the  satis-
faction of  your  friends  you  may  pick  out  his
brains."


TALE    XXII.

A  CERTAIN  king  'had  a  terrible  disease,
the  nature  of  which  it  is  not  proper  to
mention.  A  number  of  Greek  physicians  agreed
that  there  was  no  other  remedy*for  this  disease
but  the  gall  of  a  man,  of  some  particular  de-
scription. The  king  ordered  such  an  one  to
be  sought  for,  and  they  found  a  peasant's  son
with  the  properties  which  the  physicians  had
described.  The  king  sent  for  the  lad's  father
and  mother,  and  by  offering  a  great  reward
gained  their  consent,  and  the  cazy  gave  his
decision  that  it  was  lawful  to  shed  the  blood  of
a  subject  for  restoring  the  health  of  the  mon-
arch. The  executioner  prepared  to  put  him
to  death,  upon  which  the  youth  turned  his
eyes  towards  heaven,  and  laughed.  The  king
asked  what  there  could  be  in  his  present  condi-
tion which  could  possibly  excite  mirth.  He
replied :   "  Children   look   to   their  parents  for


ON   THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         147

affection ;  a  suit  is  referred  to  the  eazy ;  and
justice  is  expected  from  the  monarch.  Now
my  father  and  mother,  seduced  by  vain  worldly
considerations,  having  consented  to  the  shedding
of  my  blood,  the  judge  having  sentenced  me
to  die,  and  the  king,  for  the  sake  of  his  own
health,  having  consented  to  my  death,  where
am  I  to  seek  refuge  excepting  in  the  high  God  ?
unto  whom  shall  I  prefer  my  suit,  since  it  is
against  you«that  I  seek  justice  ?  '  The  king's
heart  being  troubled  at  these  words,  the  tears
stood  in  his  eyes,  and  he  said,  "  It  is  better  for
me  to  die,  than  that  the  blood  of  an  innocent
person  should  be  shed."  He  kissed  his  head
and  eyes,  and  embraced  him,  and,  after  bestow-
ing considerable  gifts,  set  him  at  liberty.  They
say  also  that  in  the  same  week  the  king  was
cured  of  his  distemper.  In  application  to  this,
I  recollect  the  verse  which  the  elephant-driver
rehearsed  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Nile :  "If
you  are  ignorant  of  the  state  of  the  ant  under
your  foot,  know  that  it  resembles  your  own
condition  under  the  foot  of  the  elephant."


148  THE   GU LI  ST  AN.


TALE    XXIII.


ONE  of  the  slaves  of  Umroolais  having  ab-
sconded, a  person  was  sent  in  pursuit  of
him,  and  brought  him  back.  The  vizier,  being
inimical  to  him,  commanded  him  to  be  put  to
death,  in  order  to  deter  other  slaves  from  com-
mitting the  like  offence.  The  slave  prostrated
himself  before  Umroolais,  and  said*  "  Whatever
ma j  happen  to  me  with  your  approbation  is
lawful ;  what  plea  can  the  slave  offer  against  the
sentence  of  his  lord  ?  But  seeing  that  I  have
been  brought  up  under  the  bounties  of  your
house,  I  do  not  wish  that  at  the  resurrection
you  shall  be  charged  with  my  blood  :  if  you
are  resolved  to  kill  your  slave,  do  it  conforma-
bly to  the  interpretation  of  the  law,  hi  order
that  at  the  resurrection  you  may  not  suffer  re-
proach." The  king  asked,  ''After  what  man-
ner shall  I  expound  it? '  He  replied,  "  Give  me
leave  to  kill  the  vizier,  and  then,  in  retaliation  for
him,  order  me  to  be  put  to  death,  that  you  may
kill  me  justly."  The  king  laughed,  and  asked
the  vizier  what  was  his  advice  on  the  occasion.
He  replied,  "  O  my  Lord,  as  an  offering  to  the
tomb  of  your  father,  liberate  this  rogue,  in  order
that  I  also  may  not  fall  into  calamity.  The
crime  is  on  my  side,  for  not  having  observed  the


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         149

words  of  the  sages,  who  say,  When  you  com-
bat with  one  who  flings  clods  of  earth,  you
break  your  own  head  by  your  folly :  when  you
shoot  at  the  face  of  yOur  enemy,  be  careful  that
you  sit  out  of  his  aim."


TALE    XXIV.

A  KING  of  Zuzan  had  a  minister  of  a  be-
neficent spirit  and  amiable  disposition,
who  treated  all  persons  with  civility  when  pres-
ent, and  spoke  well  of  them  when  absent.
It  happened  that,  some  action  of  his  having
displeased  the  king,  he  mulcted  him,  and  or-
dered him  to  be  chastised.  The  king's  officers,
mindful  of  his  former  benefits,  considered  them-
selves pledged  thereby  to  show  him  gratitude :
therefore,  whilst  he  was  under  their  custody,
they  treated  him  with  courtesy  and  kindness,
neither  exercised  any  severity  nor  allowed  any
reproaches.  If  you  wish  to  preserve  peace  with
your  enemy,  whenever  he  slanders  you  in  your
absence,  in  return  praise  him  to  his  face ;  at
any  rate,  as  the  words  will  issue  from  the  lips
of  the  pernicious  man,  if  you  wish  that  his
speech  should  not  be  bitter,  make  his  mouth
sweet.     He  was  acquitted  on  some  of  the  king's


150  THE   GULISTAN.

accusations,  and  for  the  remainder  he  continued
in  prison.

One  of  the  neighboring  princes  privately
sent  him  a  message,  saying,  "  The  monarchs
of  that  quarter  know  not  the  value  of  such
excellence,  and  have  dishonored  you:  if  the
precious  mind  of  such  an  one  (may  God  pros-
per his  future  undertakings!)  will  condescend
to  look  towards  us,  we,  out  of  reverence  to
his  virtue,  will  exert  our  utmost  endeavors
to  satisfy  him,  since  the  rulers  of  these  do-
minions will  be  honored  by  the  sight  of  him,
and  impatiently  expect  his  answer  to  the  let-
ters." The  minister  understood  the  contents,
and,  reflecting  on  the  danger  to  which  he  was
exposed,  wrote  a  short  answer,  such  as  to  him
appeared  advisable,  on  the  back  of  the  letter,
and  despatched  it.  One  of  the  king's  attend-
ants, being  informed  of  the  circumstances,  ap-
prised the  king  thereof,  and  said  such  an  one,
whom  you  ordered  into  confinement,  holds  cor-
respondence with  the  neighboring  princes.  The
king  was  wroth,  and  ordered  that  the  affair
should  be  investigated.  They  seized  the  courier,
and  read  the  letter,  on  the  back  of  which  was
written  as  follows :  "  The  good  opinion  of  the
great  exceeds  the  merit  of  this  servant,  but  it
is  impossible  to  accept  the  offer  which  you  have
made  me  ;  for  having  been  nourished  by  the


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         151

bounty  of  this  illustrious  house,  I  cannot  be
ungrateful  to  my  benefactor  on  account  of  a
trifling  change  in  his  sentiments ;  for  it  has
been  said,  Excuse  him  who  hath  conferred  con-
tinual benefits,  if  during  the  course  of  your  life
he  doeth  you  only  a  single  injury."  The  king
commended  his  fidelity,  bestowed  on  him  a
largess  and  a  dress  of  honor,  and  asked  his  for-
giveness, saying,  "  I  committed  a  mistake,  and
injured  you  who  are  innocent."  He  replied,
"  O  my  lord !  your  servant  does  not  consider
you  as  criminal  in  this  case ;  but  since  it  was  the
decree  of  Heaven  that  a  misfortune  should  befall
me,  it  was  best  that  it  should  come  from  that
hand  which  had  for  so  long  a  time  bestowed
favor  and  kindness  on  this  servant.  Grieve  not
if  thou  shouldest  suffer  injury  from  mankind,
since  neither  tranquillity  nor  distress  cometh
from  them :  know  that  from  God  proceed  the
contrarieties  of  enemy  and  friend,  the  hearts
of  both  being  under  his  guidance  :  although  the
arrow  issues  from  the  bow,  yet  those  who  are
wise  look  to  the  archer."


152  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    X  XV.

A  KING  of  Arabia  commanded  his  minis-
ters to  double  the  stipend  of  some  one,
because  he  was  constant  in  his  attendance,  and
always  attentive  to  his  duty,  whilst  the  rest  of
the  courtiers  were  dissipated  in  their  manners
and  negligent  of  their  business.  A  man  of
penetration,  hearing  this,  remarked,  that  the
high  ranks  of  servants  in  the  court  of  heaven
are  conferred  in  the  same  manner.

If  a  person  is  vigilant  in  the  service  of  a
monarch  during  two  days,  on  the  third  day
he  will  certainly  be  regarded  with  kindness.
The  sincere  worshippers  entertain  expectation
that  they  shall  not  return  from  the  threshold  of
God  unrewarded.  Obedience  insures  greatness,
whilst  disobedience  leads  to  a  repulse :  whoso-
ever possesseth  the  qualities  of  righteousness
placeth  his  head  on  the  threshold  of  obedience.


TALE    fxVI.

THEY  tell  a  story  of  an  oppressor  who  pur-
chased firewood  from  the  poor  by  force,
and  gave  it  gratuitously  to  the  rich.     A  judi-


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         153

cious  man  passing  that  way  said,  "  Yon  are  a
snake  that  bites  every  one  yon  see,  or  an  owl
that  destroys  every  place  where  you  sit ;  although
your  injustice  may  pass  unpunished  amongst  us,
it  will  not  escape  the  observation  of  that  God
to  whom  all  secrets  are  revealed.  Injure  not
the  inhabitants  of  this  world,  that  the  sighs  of
the  oppressed  may  not  ascend  to  heaven."  The
oppressor  was  displeased  at  his  words,  frowned
on  him,  and  took  no  further  notice  of  him,  until
one  night,  when  fire,  issuing  from  the  kitchen,
caught  the  stock  of  wood,  and  consumed  all  his
goods ;  when  his  soft  bed  became  a  seat  of
warm  ashes.  It  happened  that  this  same  judi-
cious person,  passing  by,  and  hearing  him  say
to  his  friends,  "I  know  not  from  whence  this
fire  fell  upon  my  house,"  replied,  "  From  the
smoke  of  the  hearts  of  the  poor."  Beware  of
the  groans  0f  the  wounded  souls,  since  the  in-
ward  sore  will  at  length  break  out ;  oppress  not
to  the  utmost  a  single  heart,  for  a  single  sigh
has  power  to  overset  a  whole  world.  On  the
crown  of  Kaikusrou  was  the  following  inscrip-
tion :  "  For  how  many  years,  during  what  space
of  time,  shall  men  pass  over  my  grave  ?  as  the
kingdom  came  to  me  by  succession,  in  like
manner  shall  it  pass  to  the  hands  of  others.'


7*


5?


154  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXVII.


A  PERSON  had  arrived  at  the  head  of  his
profession  in  the  art  of  wrestling;  he
knew  three  hundred  and  sixty  capital  sleights  in
this  art,  and  every  day  exhibited  something  new ;
but  having  a  sincere  regard  for  a  beautiful  youth,
one  of  his  scholars,  he  taught  him  three  hundred
and  fifty-nine  sleights,  reserving  however  one
sleight  to  himself.  The  youth  excelled  so  much
in  skill  and  in  strength,  that  no  one  was  able  to
cope  with  him.  He  at  length  boasted,  before
the  Sultan,  that  the  superiority  which  he  allowed
his  master  to  maintain  over  him  was  out  of  re-
spect to  his  years,  and  the  consideration  of  hav-
ing been  his  instructor ;  for  otherwise  he  was  not
inferior  in  strength,  and  was  his  equal  in  point
of  skill.  The  king  did  not  approve  of  this  dis-
respectful conduct,  and  commanded  that  there
should  be  a  trial  of  skill.  An  extensive  spot
was  appointed  for  the  occasion.  The  ministers
of  state,  and  other  grandees  of  the  court,  were
in  attendance.  The  youth,  like  a  lustful  ele-
phant, entered  with  a  percussion  that  would
have  removed  from  its  base  a  mountain  of  iron.
The  master,  being  sensible  that  the  youth  was
his  superior  in  strength,  attacked  with  the  sleight
which  he  had.  kept  to  himself.     The  youth  not


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.        155

being  able  to  repel  it,  the  master  with  both
hands  lifted  him  from  the  ground,  and,  raising
him  over  his  head,  flung  him  on  the  earth.  The
multitude  shouted.  The  king  commanded  that
a  dress,  and  a  reward  in  money,  should  be  be-
stowed on  the  master ;  and  reproved  and  derid-
ed the  youth,  for  having  presumed  to  put  him-
self in  competition  with  Ins  benefactor,  and  for
having  failed  in  the  attempt.  He  said,  "  O
king,  my  master  did  not  gain  the  victory  over
me  through  strength  or  skill ;  but  there  remained
a  small  part  in  the  art  of  wrestling  winch  he
had  withheld  from  me,  and  by  that  small  feinf  he
got  the  better  of  me."  The  master  observed,
"  I  reserved  it  for  such  an  occasion  as  the  pres-
ent ;  the  sages  having  said,  Put  not  yourself  so
much  in  the  power  of  your  friend,  that  if  he
should  be  disposed  to  be  inimical,  he  may  be
able  to  effect  his  purpose.  Have  you  not  heard
what  was  said  by  a  person  who  had  suffered  in-
jury from  one  whom  he  had  educated  ?  Either
there  never  was  any  gratitude  in  the  world,  or
else  no  one  at  this  time  practises  it.  I  never
taught  any  one  the  art  of  archery,  who  in  the
end  did  not  make  a  butt  of  me."


156  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    XXVIII.

A  SOLITARY  Durwaish  had  taken  up  his
abode  in  a  corner  of  a  desert.  The  king
passed  him,  and  the  Durwaish,  because  retire-
ment is  the  kingdom  of  contentment,  did  not  lift
lip  his  head,  nor  show  any  signs  of  politeness.
The  monarch,  conscious  of  his  superior  dignity,
was  chagrined,  and  said,  "  This  tribe  of  ragged
mendicants  resemble  the  brute  beasts."  His
vizier  said  to  the  Durwaish,  "When  the  mon-
arch of  the  terrestrial  globe  passed  by  you,  why
did  not  you  do  him  homage,  nor  behave  even
with  common  good  manners?'  He  replied,
"  Tell  the  monarch  of  the  earth  to  expect  ser-
vice from  him  who  hopes  to  receive  benefits;
and  let  him  know  also,  that  the  monarch  is  for
the  protection  of  his  subjects,  and  not  the  sub-
jects for  the  service  of  the  king.  The  king  is
the  sentinel  of  the  poor,  although  affluence,
pomp,  and  power  are  his  portion.  The  sheep
are  not  for  the  shepherd,  but  the  shepherd  is
for  their  service.  To-day  you  will  see  one  pros-
perous, and  another  laboring  under  an  afflicted
heart;  wait  only  a  few  days,  when  the  earth
will  consume  the  brains  of  the  vain  thinker.
The  difference  between  royalty  and  servitude
ceases,  when  the  decrees  of  fate  are  fulfilled.


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         157

If  any  one  should  open  the  grave,  he  could  not
distinguish  the  rich  man  from  the  poor."  This
speech  of  the  Durwaish  made  a  favorable  impres-
sion on  the  king,  who  commanded  him  to  make
known  his  wishes.  He  replied,  "I  desire  you
not  to  trouble  me  again."  The  king  said,  "  Give
me  some  good  advice."  He  replied,  "  Reflect,
whilst  you  enjoy  power,  that  wealth  and  domin-
ion pass  from  one  to  another."


TALE    XXIX.

A  VIZIER  went  to  Zool-noon  of  Egypt,  and,
.  asking  his  blessing,  said,  "  I  am  day  and
night  employed  in  the  service  of  the  king,  hop-
ing for  some  good  from  him,  and  dreading  his
wrath."  Zool-noon  wept,  and  said,  "  If  I  had
served  God  as  you  have  feared  the  king,  I
should  have  been  reckoned  in  the  number  of
the  just.  If  there  was  no  expectation  of  re-
ward and  punishment,  the  foot  of  the  Durwaish
would  be  on  the  celestial  sphere ;  and  if  the
vizier  feared  God  as  much  as  he  dreads  the
king,  he  would  be  an  angel."


158  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXX.


A  KING  having  commanded  an  innocent
person  to  be  put  to  death,  he  said,  "  O
king,  seek  not  your  own  injury  by  venting  your
wrath  on  me."  The  king  asked,  in  what  man-
ner. He  replied,  "  This  torture  will  cease  with
me  in  an  instant,  and  the  crime  thereof  will
remain-  with  you  forever.  The  space  of  life
passeth  away,  like  the  wind  over  the  desert;
bitterness  and  sweetness,  deformity  and  beauty,
all  shall  cease.  The  tyrant  imagineth  that  he
committeth  violence  against  me ;  but  it  remain-
eth  on  his  own  neck,  and  passeth  over  me."
The  advice  was  profitable  to  the  king,  who
spared  his  life  and  asked  forgiveness.


TALE    XXXI.

THE  ministers  of  Nowshirvan  were  con-
sulting on  state  affairs  of  great  impor-
tance, and  every  one  gave  his  opinion  accord-
ing to  the  best  of  his  judgment:  the  king,  in
like  manner,  delivered  his  sentiments.  Buzer-
chemeher  preferred  the  king's  opinion.  The
other  ministers  asked  him,  in  private,  why  he


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         159

had  preferred  the  king's  opinion  to  those  of  so
many  wise  men.  He  replied,  "  Because  the
event  is  not  known,  and  the  opinion  of  every-
one depends  upon  God,  whether  it  shall  prosper
or  fail ;  therefore  it  is  safest  to  conform  to  the
king's  opinion ;  because  if  it  should  fail,  my  ob-
sequiousness will  secure  me  from  his  reprehen-
sion. To  strive  to  think  differently  from  the
king,  is  to  wash  the  hands  in  one's  own  blood.
If  he  call  the  day  night,  it  is  prudent  to  say,
Behold  the  moon  and  the  Pleiades."


TALE    XXXII.

A  CERTAIN  impostor  who  had  twisted  his
ringlets,  pretending  to  be  a  descendant  of
Ah,  entering  the  city,  along  with  the  caravan
from  Hejaz,  said  he  was  a  pilgrim  from  Mecca,
and  presented  the  king  with  an  elegy,  as  his  own
composition.  One  of  the  courtiers,  who  in  that
year  had  returned  from  a  journey,  said,  "  I  saw
this  man  during  the  Eed  of  Uzhah  at  Busrah ;
how  then  can  he  be  a  Hajee  ? '  Another  said,
"  His  father  is  a  Christian  at  Mulatyeh ;  how
then  can  he  be  of  the  sacred  stock  ?  '  and  they
discovered  his  verses  in  the  Dewan  of  Unwu-
ree.     The  king  ordered  that  he  should  be  pun-


160  THE   GULISTAN.

■

ished  and  driven  away,  and  asked  him  why  he
had  uttered  sueh  falsehoods.  He  replied,  "  O
king  of  the  earth,  I  will  speak  one  word  more,
and  if  it  should  not  be  true,  I  shall  deserve  any
punishment  that  you  may  command."  The
king  asked,  "  What  is  that  ?  "  He  replied,  "  If
a  seller  of  milk,  curds,  &c.  brings  you  butter-
milk, two  parts  of  it  are  water,  and  one  spoon-
ful is  sour  milk ;  be  not  therefore  offended  if
your  slave  should  have  uttered  an  inconsiderate
speech,  for  a  traveller  tells  many  lies."  The
king  laughed,  and  said  he  had  never  made  a
truer  speech  in  his  life,  and  ordered  that  what
he  had  asked  should  be  granted.*


TALE    XXXIII.

THEY  have  related  that  a  certain  vizier  had
shown  clemency  towards  those  of  an  in-
ferior decree,  anc[  had  sought  to  accommodate
every  one.  It  happened  that,  having  fallen  un-
der the  king's  displeasure,  they  all  exerted  their
interest  to  obtain  his  release,  and  those  to  whose
custody  he  was  committed  showed  him  great
indulgence  in  guarding  him,  and  the  other  gran-

*  The  allowance  given  to  Syeds,  or  descendants  of  Mo-
hammed.


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         161

dees  represented  his  virtues  to  the  king,  till  at
length  the  monarch  pardoned  his  fault.

A  righteous  man,  when  apprised  of  the  cir-
cumstances, said,  "  Sell  even  your  patrimonial
garden  to  gain  the  hearts  of  your  friends.  In
order  to  boil  your  well-wisher's  pot,  it  is  advisa-
ble to  burn  all  your  furniture.  Do  good  even
unto  the  wicked ;  for  it  is  best  to  close  the  dog's
mouth  with  a  morsel."


TALE    XXXIV.

ONE  of  the  sons  of  Haroon  ur  Rusheed  went
to  his  father  in  a  rage,  complaining  that
the  son  of  a  certain  officer  had  spoken  disre-
spectfully of  his  mother.  Haroon  asked  his
ministers  what  was  the  just  punishment  for  such
an  offence.  One  was  for  having  him  put  to
death ;  another  said  that  his  tongue  ought  to  be
cut  out ;  and  another,  that  he  should  be  fined
and  banished.  Haroon  said,  "  My  son,  charity
requires  that  you  should  pardon  him  ;  but  if  you
have  not  strength  of  mind  to  do  this,  then  abuse
his  mother  in  return,  but  not  so  much  as  to  ex-
ceed the  bounds  of  vengeance,  for  then  the  in-
jury would  be  imputable  to  our  side."  In  the
opinion  of  the  wise,  he  is  not  a  brave  man  who

K


162  THE   GULISTAN.

combats  with  a  furious  elephant ;  but  he  is  a
man  indeed,  who,  even  in  wrath,  uttereth  not
idle  words.  A  man  of  a  bad  disposition  abused
another,  who  took  it  patiently,  and  called  him  a
hopeful  youth.  "  I  am  worse  than  you  can  say
of  me,  for  I  know  my  own  defects  better  than
you  can  possibly  discover  them."


TALE    XXXV.

•

1WAS  sitting  in  a  boat,  in  company  with
some  persons  of  distinction,  when  a  vessel
near  us  sunk,  and  two  brothers  fell  into  a  whirl-
pool. One  of  the  company  promised  a  mariner
an  hundred  dinars,  if  he  would  save  both  the
brothers.  The  mariner  came  and  saved  one,
and  the  other  perished.  I  said,  "  Of  a  truth,
the  other  had  no  longer  to  live,  and  therefore  he
was  taken  out  of  the  water  the  last."  The
mariner  laughing,  replied,  "  What  you  say  is
true ;  but  I  had  also  another  motive  for  saving
this,  in  preference  to  the  other,  because  once,
when  I  was  tired  in  the  desert,  he  mounted  me
on  a  camel ;  and  from  the  hand  of  the  other  I
received  a  whipping  in  my  childhood."  I  re-
plied, "  Truly,  the  great  God  is  just,  so  that
whosoever  doth  good  shall  himself  experience


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         163

good ;  and  he  who  committeth  evil  shall  suffer
evil.  As  far  as  you  can  avoid  it,  distress  not
the  mind  of  any  one,  for  in  the  path  of  life  there
are  many  thorns.  Assist  the  exigencies  of
others,  since  you  also  stand  in  need  of  many
things."


TALE    XXXVI.

THERE  were  two  brothers,  one  of  whom
was  in  the  service  of  the  king,  and  the
other  ate  the  bread  of  his  own  industry.  Once
the  rich  man  said  to  his  poor  brother,  "Why  do
you  not  enter  into  the  service  of  the  king,  to
relieve  yourself  from  the  affliction  of  labor  ?  "
He  asked,  u  And  why  do  you  not  work,  that  you
may  be  relieved  from  the  baseness  of  servitude  ?
for  the  sages  have  said,  that  to  eat  one's  bread,
and  to  sit  down  at  ease,  is  preferable  to  wearing
a  golden  girdle,  and  standing  up  in  service ;  to
use  your  hands  in  making  mortar  of  quicklime,
is  preferable  to  placing  them  on  your  breast  in
attendance  on  the  Umeer.  Precious  life  has
been  spent  in  these  cares,  What  shall  I  eat  in
the  summer,  and  with  what  shall  I  be  clothed
in  the  winter?  O  ignoble  belly,  satisfy  your-
self with  a  loaf  of  bread,  that  you  may  not  bend
your  back  in  servitude."


164  THE  GULISTAK


TALE    XXXVII.

SOMEBODY  brought  to  Noushirvan  the  Just
the  good  tidings,  that  the  God  of  majesty
and  glory  has  taken  away  such  an  one,  who  was
your  enemy.  He  asked,  "  Have  you  heard  that
he  will  by  any  means  spare  me  ?  The  death  of
my  enemy  is  no  cause  of  joy  to  me,  since  neither
is  my  own  life  eternal."


TALE    XXXVIII.

AT  the  court  of  Kisra  a  number  of  wise
men  were  debating  on  some  affair,  when,
Buzerchemeher  being  silent,  they  asked  him
why  in  this  debate  he  did  not  say  anything.
Pie  answered :  "  Ministers  are  like  physicians,
and  the  physician  administers  medicine  to  the
sick  only;  therefore,  when  I  see  that  your
opinions  are  judicious,  it  would  not  be  consistent
with  wisdom  for  me  to  obtrude  my  sentiments.
When  a  business  can  be  managed  without  my
interference,  it  is  not  proper  for  me  to  speak
on  the  subject ;  but  if  I  see  a  blind  man  in
the  way  of  a  well,  if  I  keep  silence,  it  is  a
crime."


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         165


TALE    XXXIX.

HAROON  ur  Rusheed,  when  he  had  com-
•  pleted  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  said,  "  As
a  contrast  to  that  rebel,  who,  through  the  pride
of  his  possessing  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  boasted
that  he  was  God,  I  will  bestow  this  kingdom  on
the  meanest  of  my  slaves."  He  had  an  Ethio-
pian blockhead,  named  Khosaib,  to  whom  he
gave  the  kingdom.  They  say  that  this  man's
wisdom  and  knowledge  were  so  great,  that,  when
some  of  the  farmers  of  Egypt  were  complaining
that  an  unseasonable  fall  of  rain  had  destroyed
the  cotton  which  they  had  sown  on  the  banks
of  the  Nile,  he  said  that  they  ought  to  sow
wool.  A  man  of  discernment,  upon  hearing
this,  said,  "  If  the  augmentation  of  wealth  de-
pended upon  knowledge,  none  would  be  so  dis-
tressed as  an  ignorant  fellow ;  but  God  bestows
on  a  single  fool  as  much  wealth  as  would  aston-
ish an  hundred  men  of  wisdom.  Wealth  and
power  depend  not  upon  skill,  and  cannot  be  ob-
tained without  the  assistance  of  Heaven.  It
often  happens  in  the  world,  that  the  imprudent
are  honored,  and  the  wise  are  despised.  The
alchemist  died  of  grief  and  distress,  whilst  the
blockhead  found  treasure  under  a  ruin."


166  THE   GULISTAN.

TALE    XL.

THEY  having  brought  a  Chinese  girl  to  a
certain  king,  whilst  he  was  intoxicated,
he  wanted  to  have  connection  with  her ;  but  she
refused  compliance,  at  which  he  was  so  much
enraged,  that  he  gave  her  to  one  of  his-  negro
slaves.  This  fellow's  upper  lip  reached  above
his  nostrils,  and  the  lower  one  hung  pendent  on
his  breast;  his  countenance  was  such  that  the
demon  Sakreh  would  have  fled  from  him  in
terror,  and  a  fount  of  pitch  distilled  from  his
arm-pits.  You  would  say  that  to  the  end  of
the  world  he  will  be  considered  as  the  extremity
of  ugliness,  the  same  as  Joseph  is  looked  upon
as  the  standard  of  beauty.  One  of  so  detestable
an  aspect,  that  it  is  impossible  to  describe  his  ug-
liness, and  from  his  arm-pits, — good  God  defend
us !  —  the  stench  was  like  a  corpse  exposed  to  the
sun  in  the  month  of  August.  The  negro,  in  the
fury  of  his  lust,  violated  her  chastity.  In  the
morning  the  king  inquired  for  the  girl,  and  they
informed  him  what  had  happened.  He  was  en-
raged, and  commanded  that  the  negro  and  the
girl  should  be  bound  fast  together  by  their  hands
and  feet,  and  precipitated  from  the  roof  of  the
palace  into  the  moat.  One  of  the  ministers,  a
man  of  virtuous  disposition,  bent  his  forehead  to


ON  THE  MORALS   OF  KINGS.         167

the  earth,  and  implored  mercy,  saying,  "  The

neoro  is  not  criminal  in  this  instance,  since  all

©  *

the  slaves  and  servants  of  the  court  are  accus-
tomed to  receive  princely  gifts  and  largesses."
The  king  observed,  that  he  might  have  re-
strained his  passion  for  one  night.  He  replied,
"Alas!  my  lord,  have  you  not  heard  the  saying?
When  a  person  parched  with  thirst  arrives  at
the  limpid  spring,  imagine  not  that  he  will  be
terrified  at  a  furious  elephant.  So,  if  an  hun-
gry infidel  be  alone  in  a  house  filled  with  viands,
reason  will  not  believe  that  he  would  pay  any
regard  to  the  fast  of  Ramzan."  The  king  was
pleased  at  the  joke,  and  said,  "  I  make  you  a
present  of  the  negro,  but  what  shall  I  do  with
the  girl  ?  '  He  replied,  "  Give  her  to  the  ne-
gro, as  no  one  would  like  to  eat  his  leavings.
Never  associate  with  one  who  frequents  filthy
places.  A  man,  although  thirsty,  cannot  relish
sweet  water  half  drunken  by  one  who  hath
stinking  breath.     When  an  orange  hath  fallen

©  ©

into  the  dirt,  how  can  it  again  be  offered  to  the
king's  hand.  How  can  the  heart  of  the  thirsty
wish  for  water  out  of  a  flagon  which  has  been
touched  by  ulcerated  lips?'


©

>5


168  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XLI.


THEY  asked  Alexander  the  Great,  "By
what  means  have  you  extended  your  con-
quests from  east  to  west,  since  former  monarchs,
who  exceeded  you  in  wealth,  in  territory,  in
years,  and  in  the  number  of  troops,  never  gained
such  victories?  "  He  replied,  "  Wnen,  with  the
assistance  of  God,  I  subdued  a  kingdom,  I  never
oppressed  the  subjects,  and  always  spoke  well
of  their  monarchs.  The  wise  consider  not  him
illustrious  who  speaketh  ill  of  the  great.  All
the  following  objects  are  nothing  when  passed,
wealth  and  dominion,  command  and  prohibition,
war  and  conquest :  injure  not  the  name  of  those
who  have  died  with  a  good  reputation,  in  order
that,  in  return,  your  own  good  name  may  be
immortal."


CHAPTER  II.


Of  the  Morals  of  Durwaishes.


TALE    I.

CERTAIN  personage  asked  a  devout
man  what  he  said  of  a  particular
Abid,  of  whose  character  others  had
spoken  disrespectfully.  He  replied,
"  I  see  no  fault  in  his  exterior,  and  am  ignorant
of  what  is  concealed  within  him.  Whomsoever
thou  seest  in  a  religious  habit,  consider  as  a  pi-
ous and  a  good  man,  if  you  know  not  what  is
hidden  in  his  mind :  what  business  hath  the
Mohtesib  with  the  inside  of  the  house  ?  "


TALE    II


I  SAW  a  Durwaish,  who,  having  placed  his
forehead  on  the  threshold  of  the  temple  of
Mecca,  was  lamenting  and  saying :  "  O  gracious
and  most  merciful  God,  thou  knowest  what  can

8


170  THE   GULISTAN.

proceed  from  the  most  unjust  and  ignorant  of
men,  that  is  fit  to  be  offered  unto  thee ;  I  implore
pardon  for  my  imperfections,  since  I  can  have
no  claim  of  return  for  any  performance  of  duty.
The  wicked  repent  of  their  sins :  they  who
know  God  ask  forgiveness  for  the  imperfectness
of  their  worship.  The  Abid  seeks  reward  for
his  obedience,  and  merchants  require  the  value
of  their  capital  stock  ;  but  I,  who  am  a  servant,
have  brought  hope,  not  obedience,  and  am  come
to  beg,  not  to  traffic.  Do  unto  me  that  which
is  worthy  of  thee ;  and  treat  me  not  according
to  my  desert.  Whether  you  slay,  or  whether
you  pardon,  my  face  and  head  are  on  thy
threshold.  It  is  not  for  a  servant  to  direct :
whatsoever  thou  commandest,  I  shall  perform."
At  the  gate  of  the  Kaba  I  saw  a  mendicant
who  was  weeping  bitterly,  and  saying,  "  I  ask
not  that  thou  shouldst  approve  my  services ;
draw  the  pen  of  forgiveness  over  my  offences."


TALE    III.


UBDULKADUR  Gilanee,  having  placed
his  forehead  on  the  pebbles  before  the
gate  of  the  temple  of  Mecca,  was  saying,  "  O
God,  pardon  my  sins ;  but  shouldst  thou  doom


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  171

me  to  punishment,  then  at  the  resurrection  raise
me  up  blind,  in  order  that  I  may  not  be  put  to
shame  in  the  presence  of  the  righteous.  Pros-
trate in  weakness,  with  my  face  on  the  earth,
every  morning,  as  I  awake  to  reflection,  I  ex-
claim, O  God,  never  will  I  forget  thee ;  wilt  thou
bestow  a  thought  upon  me  ?  "


TALE    IV.

A  THIEF  got  into  the  house  of  a  religious
man,  but,  after  the  most  diligent  search,
had  the  mortification  not  to  find  anything.  The
good  man,  discovering  his  situation,  threw  the
blanket  on  which  he  had  slept  in  the  way  which
the  thief  had  to  pass,  in  order  that  he  might
not  be  disappointed.  I  have  heard,  that  those
who  are  truly  pious  distress  not  the  hearts  of
their  enemies ;  how  canst  thou  attain  to  this
dignity,  who  art  in  strife  and  contention  with
thy  friends  ?  The  affection  of  the  righteous  is
the  same  in  presence  as  in  absence,  not  like
those  who  censure  you  behind  your  back,  but
before  your  face  are  ready  to  die  for  you ;  when
you  are  present  meek  as  a  lamb,  but  when  ab-
sent, like  the  wolf,  a  devourer  of  mankind.
Whosoever  recounts  to  you  the  faults  of  your


172  THE   GULISTAN.

neighbor  will  doubtless  expose  jour  defects  to
others.


TALE    V.

SOME  travellers  were  journeying  together,
partakers  of  each  other's  cares  and  com-
forts ;  I  wanted  to  associate  myself  with  them,
to  which  they  would  not  consent.  I  remarked
that  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  benevolent
manners  of  religious  men,  to  turn  away  their
faces  from  the  poor,  and  to  deny  them  the  ad-
vantage of  such  company ;  that  I  knew  myself
to  possess  such  a  degree  of  energy  as  would
make  me  an  active  friend,  and  not  an  incum-
brance to  them.  Although  I  am  not  mounted
on  a  beast,  I  will  endeavor  to  carry  your  bur-
dens.

One  amongst  them  said,  "  Be  not  uneasy
at  the  words  which  you  have  heard,  for  not
long  ago  a  thief,  under  the  appearance  of  a  Dur-
waish,  got  into  our  company.  How  can  one  man
know  what  is  under  another's  garment  ?  The
writer  knows  the  contents  of  the  letter.  To  re-
turn to  my  story :  as  the  condition  of  a  Durwaish
is  everywhere  approved,  they  did  not  entertain
any  suspicion  of  his  sanctity,  but  admitted  him
into  their  society.     The  outside   of  religion  is


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  173

a  Durwaisli's  dress ;  this  is  sufficient  with  a
mortal  face  :  let  jour  actions  be  good,  and  put
on  any  dress  you  choose ;  either  wear  a  crown
on  your  head,  or  carry  a  flag  on  your  shoulders ;
for  it  is  not  coarse  clothing  that  constitutes  the
Zahid;  be  truly  pious,  and  dress  in  satin.  Sanc-
tity consists  in  forsaking  the  world,  with  its  lusts
and  appetites,  not  merely  in  changing  the  dress.
In  warfare  manhood  is  required ;  of  what  use
would  armor  be  to  an  hermaphrodite  ?  Sum-
marily, one  day  we  had  travelled  until  dark,
and  during  the  night  slept  at  the  foot  of  a  castle  ;
the  graceless  thief,  under  pretence  of  going  to
perform  his  ablutions,  carried  off  the  water-pot
of  one  of  his  companions,  and  then  went  in
quest  of  plunder.

''  Behold  this  person,  who  covered  his  body
with  a  religious  dress,  made  the  veil  of  the  Kaba
a  housing  for  an  ass.  As  soon  as  he  had  got
out  of  sight  of  the  Durwaishes  he  scaled  a  bas-
tion,  and  stole  a  casket.  By  the  time  it  was
daylight,  the  dark-minded  wretch  had  gone  a
great  distance  ;  and  in  the  morning  his  innocent
companions  (whom  he  had  left  asleep)  were  all
carried  to  the  castle,  and  committed  to  prison.
From  that  day,  we  resolved  not  to  increase  our
company,  but  henceforward  to  lead  the  lives  of
recluses ;  because  in  solitude  there  is  tranquillity.
When  one  of  any  tribe  commits  an  act  of  folly,


174  THE   GULISTAN.

there  is  no  distinction  between  high  and  low,
'the  whole  being  dishonored.  Have  you  not  ob-
served that  a  single  ox  belonging  to  an  herd  will
contaminate  all  the  oxen  of  the  village?"

I  replied,  "  Thanks  to  the  God  of  majesty  and
glory,  I  am  not  destitute  of  the  benefits  which  are
enjoyed  by  the  religious,  although  I  am  sepa-
rated from  their  company ;  for  I  have  derived
instruction  from  this  story,  which  will  serve  men
of  our  character  for  admonition  during  the  re-
mainder of  life.

"  By  the  means  of  one  disorderly  person  in  a
company,  the  hearts  of  many  wise  men  become
afflicted.  If  you  fill  a  cistern  with  rose-water,
and  a  dog  should  fall  into  it,  it  would  thereby
become  impure."


TALE    VI.

AZAHID  was  invited  to  a  feast  by  a  king ;
when  he  sat  down  at  the  table,  he  ate
more  sparingly  than  he  was  accustomed  to  do ;
and  when  he  stood  up  to  prayers,  he  was  longer
than  usual ;  in  order  that  they  might  form  an
high  opinion  of  his  piety.  I  fear,  O  Arab,  that
thou  wilt  not  arrive  at  the  Kaba,  because  the
road  which  thou  art  pursuing  leads  to  Turkistan.
When  lie  returned  home,  he  ordered  the  table


MORALS  OF  DURWAISIIES.  175

to  be  spread  that  he  might  eat ;  his  son,  who  had
an  acute  understanding,  said,  "  Why,  father,
did  you  not  eat  anything  at  the  king's  feast  ? '
He  answered,  "  In  his  presence,  I  ate  nothing,
to  serve  a  purpose."  The  son  replied,  "  Per-
form also  your  prayers  over  again,  as  you  did
nothing  that  will  serve  your  purpose."

O  thou,  who  exposest  thy  virtues  on  the  palm
of  the  hand,  and  hidest  thy  vices  under  the  arm-
pit !  vain  wretch,  what  canst  thou  expect  to
purchase  with  thy  base  coin  in  the  day  of  dis-
tress ?


TALE    VII.

1  REMEMBER  that  in  the  time  of  child-
hood I  was  very  religious :  I  rose  in  the
night,  was  punctual  in  the  performance  of  my
devotions,  and  abstinent.  One  night  I  had  been
sitting  in  the  presence  of  my  father,  not  having
closed  my  eyes  during  the  whole  time,  and  with
the  holy  Koran  in  my  embrace;  whilst  numbers
around  us  were  asleep.  I  said  to  my  father,
"Not  one  of  these  lifteth  up  his  head  to  perform
his  genuflexions :  but  they  are  all  so  fast  asleep,
that  you  would  say  they  are  dead."  He  replied,
"  Life  of  your  father,  it  were  better  if  thou  al-
so wert  asleep,  than  to  be  searching  out  the


176  THE   GULISTAN.

faults  of  mankind.  The  boaster  sees  nothing
but  himself,  having  a  veil  of  conceit  before  his
eyes.  If  he  was  endowed  with  an  eye  capable
of  discerning  God,  he  would  not  discover  any
person  weaker  than  himself.'


TALE    VIII.

IN  a  company  where  every  one  was  praising
a  religious  man,  and  extolling  his  virtues,  he
raised  up  his  head,  and  said :  "  I  am  such  as  I
know  myself  to  be,  whilst  thou  who  reckonest
up  my  good  works  judgest  from  the  external,
but  art  ignorant  of  the  interior.  My  external
form,  in  the  eyes  of  mankind,  is  a  goodly  object,
but  from  the  baseness  of  the  interior  I  bow
down  my  head  with  shame.  Mankind  praise  the
peacock  for  his  beautiful  plumage,  but  he  is
ashamed  of  his  ugly  feet."


TALE    IX.


ONE  of  the  religious  men  of  Mount  Liba-
nus,  whose  piety  and  miracles  were  famed
throughout  Arabia,  entered  the  great  mosque


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  177

of  Damascus,  and  was  purifying  himself  on
the  edge  of  the  cistern  of  the  well,  when,  his
feet  slipping,  he  fell  into  the  water,  and  with
great  difficulty  got  out  of  it.  When  divine  ser-
vice was  finished,  one  of  his  companions  said,
he  had  a  difficulty  which  required  explanation.
The  Sheik  asked  what  it  was :  he  replied,  "  I
recollect  that  you  walked  on  the  surface  of  the
sea  of  Africa,  without  your  feet  being  wetted,
and  to-day  you  had  nearly  perished  in  this  wa-
ter, which  is  not  deeper  than  the  height  of  a
man  :  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  '  He  sunk
his  head  into  the  bosom  of  reflection,  and  after
a  considerable  pause  looked  up,  and  said,  "  Have
you  not  heard  that  the  prince  of  the  world,  Mo-
hammed Mustufa,  upon  whom  be  the  peace  and
blessing  of  God !  said,  There  is  a  time  in  which
God  has  given  me  a  degree  of  power,  that  is
not  allowed  either  to  the  nearest  angel,  nor  to
any  mortal  prophet  sent  from  God ;  but  he  did
not  pretend  that  this  was  always  the  case.
Sometimes,  in  the  manner  which  he  described,
neither  Gabriel  nor  Michael  has  possessed  it,
and  at  another  time  it  has  happened  to  Hufzeh
and  to  Zynub.  The  vision  of  the  pious  con-
sists of  revelation  and  obscurity.  It  discovers
and  it  conceals.  Thou  showest  thy  countenance,
and  thou  hidest  it ;  by  enhancing  thy  value,  thou
increasest   our   desire.      When   I   behold  thee

8*  L


178  THE  GULISTAN.

without  an  intervention,  it  affects  me  in  such  a
manner,  that  I  lose  my  road.  It  kindles  a  flame,
and  then  quenches  it  by  sprinkling  water,  on
which  account  you  see  me  sometimes  in  ardent
flames,  and  sometimes  immersed  in  the  waves."


TALE    X.

SOMEBODY  said  to  him  who  had  lost  his
son  (meaning  JacoF),  O  thou  of  illustrious
race,  wise  old  man,  seeing  that  you  were  able  to
perceive  at  the  distance  of  Egypt  the  perfume
of  his  garment,  how  happened  it  that  thou  wert
not  able  to  discover  him  in  the  well  of  Canaan  ?
He  replied :  "  Our  condition  is  like  the  darting
lightning,  one  instant  flashing,  and  the  next  dis-
appearing. Sometimes  we  are  seated  above  the
fourth  heaven,  and  at  other  times  we  cannot  see
the  back  of  our  feet.  If  the  Durwaish  were
always  to  remain  in  one  state,  he  would  cease
to  desire  both  worlds."


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  179


TALE    XI.

IN  the  great  mosque  at  Balbuk  I  was  reciting
some  words  by  way  of  admonition  to  a  com-
pany whose  hearts  were  withered  and  dead,  in-
capable of  applying  the  ways  of  the  visible  to  the
purposes  of  the  invisible  world.  I  perceived  that
what  I  was  saying  had  no  effect  on  them,  and
that  the  fire  of  my  piety  had  not  kindled  their
green  wood.  I  became  weary  of  instructing
brutes,  and  of  holding  a  mirror  in  the  way  of
the  blind  ;  but  the  door  of  signification  continued
open,  and  the  concatenation  of  discourse  was  ex-
tended in  explanation  of  this  verse  of  the  Koran,
"  We  are  nearer  to  him  than  his  jugular  vein."
My  discourse  had  got  to  such  a  length,  that
I  said,  A  friend  is  nearer  to  me  than  myself;
but  what  is  more  wonderful,  I  am  far  from  him.
"  What  shall  I  do,  to  whom  shall  I  address  my-
self, since  he  is  in  my  arms,  whilst  I  am  sepa-
rated from  him  ?  I  am  intoxicated  with  the  wine
of  his  discourse,  and  the  dregs  of  the  cup  are  in
my  hand."  At  this  time  a  traveller  passing  by
the  company  was  so  much  animated  by  my  last
words,  that  he  exclaimed  with  an  emphasis  that
produced  the  acclamations  of  the  whole,  and  the
senseless  company  joined  in  enthusiastic  rap-
ture.    I  said :  "  O  God,  those  who  are  afar  off


180  THE  GULISTAN.

know  thee,  whilst  those  who  are  near  and  igno-
rant are  at  a  distance ;  when  the  hearer  does
not  understand  the  discourse,  expect  not  any
effect  of  genius  from  the  orator :  first  extend  the
plain  of  desire,  in  order  that  the  orator  may
strike  the  ball  of  eloquence."


TALE    XII.

ONE  night,  in  the  desert  of  Mecca,  from  the
great  want  of  sleep,  I  was  deprived  of  all
power  to  stir ;  I  reclined  my  head  on  the  earth,
and  desired  the  camel-driver  not  to  disturb  me.
How  far  shall  the  feet  of  the  poor  man  proceed
when  the  camel  is  weary  of  his  load  ?  Whilst
the  body  of  the  fat  man  is  becoming  lean,  the
lean  man  may  die  of  fatigue.  He  replied :  "  O
brother,  Mecca  is  in  front,  and  robbers  in  the
rear ;  by  proceeding  you  escape,  and  if  you  sleep
you  die.  It  is  pleasant  to  sleep  on  the  road  in
the  desert  under  the  acacia-tree  in  the  night
of  decampment,  but  you  must  consider  it  as
abandoning  life."


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  181


TALE    XIII.

I  SAW  on  the  sea-shore  a  religious  man,  who
had  a  wound  from  a  tiger,  which  could  not
be  cured  by  any  medicine.  He  had  been  a  long
time  in  this  woful  state,  and  was  continually
thanking  God,  saying,  "  God  be  praised  that  I
am  afflicted  through  misfortune,  and  not  through
sin.  If  that  dear  friend  assigns  me  to  the  place
of  slaughter,  then,  in  order  that  you  may  not
accuse  me  of  being  at  that  instant  afraid  of  my
life,  I  will  ask,  "What  crime  has  your  slave  com-
mitted, that  your  heart  is  offended  at  me  ?  This
reflection  only  is  the  cause  of  my  sorrow."


TALE    XIV.

ADURWAISH,  having  some  pressing  oc-
casion, stole  a  blanket  from  the  house  of
a  friend.  The  judge  ordered  that  they  should
cut  off  his  hand.  The  owner  of  the  blanket
interceded,  and  said  that  he  absolved  him.  The
judge  replied,  that  he  should  not  forego  the
legal  punishment  at  his  intercession.  He  re-
joined :  "  You  have  said  rightly ;  but  whosoever
stealeth  any  property  dedicated  to  religious  pur-


182  THE   GULISTAN.

poses  is  not  subject  to  the  punishment  of  ampu-
tation ;  because  the  beggar  is  not  the  proprietor
of  anything,  neither  is  he  the  property  of  any
one,  whatever  the  beggar  hath  being  devoted  to
the  benefit  of  the  necessitous."  The  judge  re-
leased him,  and  said,  "  Was  the  world  so  narrow
that  you  should  steal  only  from  such  a  friend  as
this  ?  '  He  replied :  "  O  my  lord,  have  you  not
heard  the  saying  ?  Sweep  the  houses  of  your
friends,  but  knock  not  at  the  doors  of  your  ene-
mies. When  you  fall  into  distress,  resign  not
yourself  to  despair ;  strip  your  enemies  of  their
skin,  and  your  friends  of  their  jackets."


TALE    XV.

A  CERTAIN  king  said  to  a  religious  man,
"  Do  you  ever  think  of  me  ?  '  He  an-
swered, "Yes,  whenever  I  forget  God."  He
fleeth  everywhere  whom  God  driveth  from  his
gate  ;  but  whomsoever  God  inviteth,  he  will  not
suffer  to  run  to  the  door  of  any  one.


MORALS   OF  DURWAISIIES.  183


TALE    XVI.

A  CERTAIN  pious  man  saw  in  a  dream  a
king  in  paradise,  and  a  holy  man  in  hell ;
lie  asked  what  could  be  the  meaning  of  the  exal-
tation of  one,  and  the  degradation  of  the  other,
as  the  contrary  is  generally  considered  to  be  the
case  ?  They  replied,  "  The  king  has  obtained
paradise  in  return  for  his  love  of  holy  men ;  and
the  religious  man,  by  associating  with  kings,  has
got  into  hell."  Of  what  use  are  the  coarse  frock,
the  beads,  and  patched  garments  ?  Abstain  from
evil  deeds,  and  there  is  no  need  of  a  cap  of
leaves ;  possess  the  virtues  of  a  Durwaish,  and
wear  a  Tartarian  crown.


TALE    XVII.

AFOOT  traveller,  bareheaded,  and  without
shoes,  came  from  Cufeh,  and  accompa-
nied the  caravan  to  Mecca.  He  proceeded  mer-
rily, saying :  "  I  am  neither  mounted  on  a  camel,
nor  like  a  mule  under  a  load.  I  am  no  lord  -of  a
vassal,  neither  the  slave  of  any  king.  I  have  no
concern  either  about  the  present  or  the  past.  I
draw  my  breath  freely,  and  pass  my  life  in  com-


184  THE   GULISTAN.

fort."  One  mounted  on  a  camel  said  to  him,
"  O  Durwaish,  whither  art  thou  going  ?  return,
or  thou  wilt  perish  in  distress."  He  paid  no
attention,  but  entered  the  desert,  and  proceeded
on  the  journey.  When  we  arrived  at  a  place
called  Nukleh  Mahmood,  the  rich  man's  destiny
being  accomplished,  he  died.  The  Durwaish
came  to  his  pillow,  and  said,  "  I,  after  encoun-
tering difficulties,  am  here  alive,  whilst  you  ex-
pired riding  on  a  dromedary."  A  person  wept
all  night  by  the  side  of  a  sick  person ;  in  the
morning  he  died,  and  the  sick  man  recovered.
O  my  friend,  many  fleet  horses  have  fallen  down
dead,  whilst  the  lame  ass  has  come  alive  to  the
end  of  his  journey.  It  has  frequently  happened
that  those  in  the  vigor  of  health  have  been  earned
to  their  graves,  whilst  the  wounded  have  recov-
ered.


TALE    XVIII.

A  CERTAIN  king  sent  an  invitation  to  a
religious  man.  He  thought  by  taking
medicine  to  make  himself  weak,  in  order  that
the  king  might  entertain  a  high  opinion  of  him.
It  is  said  that  he  happened  to  swallow  a  ■  deadly
poison,  and  expired.

He  who  appeared  to  me  plump  as  a  pistachio-


MORALS   OF  DURWAISIIES.  185

nut,  had  coat  upon  coat,  like  an  onion  !  Re-
ligious men,  who  look  towards  the  world,  pray
with  their  backs  towards  Mecca.  When  any
one  calleth  himself  a  servant  of  God,  it  behoove  th
him  to  know  none  besides  God.


TALE    XIX.

IN  the  land  of  Greece  a  caravan  was  attacked
by  robbers,  and  plundered  of  immense  wealth.
The  merchants  made  grievous  lamentations,  and
besought  them  by  God  and  his  Prophet,  but
without  effect.  When  the  dark-minded  robbers
have  got  the  victory,  what  care  they  for  the
tears  of  the  caravan  ?  Lokman  the  philosopher
being  amongst  them,  one  of  the  caravan  said  to
him,  "Utter  some  sentences  of  wisdom  and  ex-
hortation, which  may  induce  the  robbers  to  re-
lease some  part  of  the  goods ;  for  it  is  cruel  to
lose  so  much  wealth."  Lokman  replied :  "  It
would  be  in  vain  to  preach  philosophy  to  them.
When  rust  has  eaten  into  the  iron,  you  cannot
remove  it  by  polishing.  To  what  purpose  is  it
to  offer  admonition  to  a  depraved  heart?  an  iron
nail  will  not  penetrate  stone  ?  '  In  the  days  of
your  prosperity,  assist  those  who  are  in  distress,
as  by  befriending  the  poor  you  avert  evil  from


186  THE   GULISTAN.

yourself.  When  the  beggar  implores  your  char-
ity, afford  him  relief,  lest  the  oppressor  should
deprive  you  of  your  substance.


TALE    XX.

NOTWITHSTANDING  all  that  was  said
to  me  by  Sheik  Shumsuddeen  Abulfureh
Ben  Jowzee,  who  ordered  me  to  forsake  music
meetings,  and  to  lead  a  life  of  retirement,  the
spring-tide  of  youth  prevailed,  the  desire  of
sensual  gratification  not  admitting  of  restraint ;
and,  in  contradiction  to  the  advice  of  my  patron,
I  abandoned  myself  to  the  enjoyments  of  sing-
ing and  of  convivial  society.  When  the  Sheik's
advice  occurred  to  my  recollection,  I  used  to
say,  "If  the  Cazy  were  of  our  party,  he  would
rub  his  hands  together  in  rapture ;  if  the  Mohte-
sib  would  drink  wine,  he  would  excuse  him  who
is  intoxicated."  One  night  I  entered  into  the
society  of  a  tribe,  amongst  whom  was  such  a
minstrel,  you  would  say  that  the  sound  of  his
bow  would  break  the  arteries,  and  his  voice  was
more  horrid  than  the  lamentations  of  a  man  for
the  death  of  his  father.  Sometimes  the  audi-
ence put  their  fingers  into  their  ears,  that  they
might  not  hear  him ;  and  sometimes  they  placed


MORALS   OF  DURWATSIIES.  187

their  fingers  on  their  lips,  as  a  signal  for  him  to
be  silent.  The  heart  may  be  captivated  by  the
sound  of  sweet  melody,  but  such  a  singer  as
thou  art  can  only  give  delight  by  being  silent.
No  one  will  experience  pleasure  from  your  sing-
ing excepting  at  the  time  of  your  departure,
when  you  stop  your  breath.

When  this  harper  began  singing,  I  said  to  the
master  of  the  house,  "For  God's  sake  put  quick-
silver into  my  ears,  that  I  may  not  hear;  or  else
open  the  door,  that  I  may  escape."  In  short,
out  of  regard  to  my  friends,  I  accommodated
myself  to  their  inclination,  and  with  great  exertion
passed  the  night  until  daybreak.  The  Mouzzin
proclaimed  prayers  out  of  season,  not  knowing
how  much  of  the  night  had  elapsed.  Ask  the
length  of  the  night  from  my  eyelids,  which  have
not  been  closed  a  single  moment.  In  the  morn-
ing,  by  wray  of  benediction,  I  took  the  turban
from  my  head,  and  my  direms  out  of  my  girdle,
and,  presenting  them  to  the  singer,  I  embraced
him,  and  returned  him  many  thanks.  My  com-
panions, seeing  me  behave  towards  him  in  so
unusual  a  manner,  imputed  it  to  weakness  of
understanding,  and  laughed  wdthin  themselves.
One  of  them  extended  the  tongue  of  opposition,
and  began  reprimanding  me,  saying,  "  In  this
matter  you  have  not  acted  as  becometh  a  wise
man,  to  have  given  part  of  your  professional


188  THE  GULISTAN.

dress  to  a  singer,  who  during  his  whole  life  never
at  one  time  had  a  direm  in  his  hand,  nor  ever
saw  a  particle  of  gold  on  his  drum ;  such  a  singer
(far  may  he  remain  from  this  happy  mansion)
no  one  ever  saw  him  twice  in  the  same  place.
Of  a  truth,  when  the  sound  came  out  of  his
mouth,  it  made  men's  hair  stand  on  end.  The
sparrow  flies  away  from  the  dread  of  him  ;  he
distracts  our  intellects,  and  tears  his  own  throat."
I  answered,  "  You  should  stop  your  railing,  be-
cause, in  my  opinion,  he  possesses  miraculous
talents."  He  replied,  "  Communicate  this  dis-
covery, in  order  that  we  may  unite  with  you,
and  ask  pardon  for  the  joke  which  has  passed."
I  replied,  that  my  Sheik  had  repeatedly  en-
joined me  not  to  frequent  singing  parties,  and
had  given  me  many  admonitions,  to  which  I  had
paid  no  attention,  until  this  night,  when  the  star
of  auspiciousness  and  good  fortune  guided  me  to
this  house,  where,  by  the  means  of  this  singer,
I  had  made  a  vow  never  again  to  approach  sing-
ing or  convivial  parties.  A  pleasant  voice  from
a  sweet  palate,  mouth,  and  lips,  whether  tem-
pered with  musical  art  or  not,  captivates  the
heart;  but  the  musical  modes  of  Ushak,  Sifu-
han,  and  Hejaz,  from  the  windpipe  of  a  con-
temptible minstrel,  are  disgusting.


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  189


TALE    XXI.

THEY  asked  Lokman  from  whom  he  had
learnt  urbanity ;  he  replied,  "  From  those
of  rude  manners  ;  for  whatsoever  I  saw  in  them
that  was  disagreeable,  I  avoided  doing  the  same.
Not  a  word  can  be  said,  even  in  the  midst  of
sport,  from  which  a  wise  man  will  not  derive
instruction  ;  but  if  an  hundred  chapters  of  phi-
losophy are  read  to  an  ignorant  person,  it  will
seem  to  his  ears  folly  and  sport."


TALE    XXII.

THEY  tell  a  story  of  a  certain  religious  man,
who  in  one  night  would  eat  ten  pounds
of  food,  and  who  before  the  morning  would  have
,  completely  finished  the  Koran  in  his  devotions.
A  holy  man  hearing  this,  said,  "  If  he  had  eaten
half  a  loaf,  and  slept,  it  would  have  been  much
more  meritorious."  Keep  your  belly  unencum-
bered with  food,  in  order  that  you  may  be  able
to  discern  the  light  of  divine  knowledge.  You
are  void  of  wisdom,  because  you  are  crammed  up
to  your  nose  with  food.


190  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXIII.

TO  one  who  through  wickedness  had  for-
feited the  divine  favor,  the  lamp  of  grace
shone  on  his  path,  whereby  he  entered  into  the
circle  of  the  religious ;  and,  by  the  blessing  of
their  society  and  righteousness,  his  depravities
were  exchanged  for  virtuous  deeds,  and  he  ceased
to  entertain  any  sensual  inclinations :  neverthe-
less, the  tongue  of  calumny  was  still  exercised
on  his  character ;  his  former  manners  being  re-
membered, and  no  credit  given  to  his  piety  and
virtues.

By  means  of  repentance  you  may  be  delivered
from  the  wrath  of  God ;  but  you  cannot  escape
from  the  tongues  of  men.  Unable  to  support
the  violence  of  reproachful  tongues,  he  lamented
his  situation  to  his  superior.  The  Sheik  wept,
and  said,  "  How  can  you  be  sufficiently  grateful
for  this  blessing,  that  you  are  better  than  they
suppose  you  to  be  ?  how  often  will  you  repeat,
'  Evil-minded  and  envious  men  are  seeking  out
my  faults,  wretch  that  I  am  ! '  If  they  rise  up
to  shed  your  blood,  or  if  they  sit  down  wishing
you  evil,  be  thou  good,  although  mankind  speak
evil  of  you,  which  is  better  than  being  bad,
whilst  they  think  you  good.  But  look  at  me,
.of  whose  perfection  mankind  entertain  an  high


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  191

opinion,  at  the  same  time  that  I  am  imperfection
itself.  If  I  had  performed  what  they  ascribe  to
me,  I  should  indeed  be  a  man  of  virtue  and
piety.

"  Of  a  truth,  I  conceal  myself  from  the  eyes
of  my  neighbors ;  but  God  knowetli  my  secret
and  public  actions.  I  shut  the  door  against  men,
that  they  may  not  discover  my  faults  ;  what  ad-
vantage is  there  in  shutting  the  door,  as  the
Omniscient  knowetli  both  what  is  hidden  and
what  is  manifest?"


TALE    XXIV.

1  LAMENTED  to  a  venerable  Sheik,  that
some  one  had  accused  me  falsely  of  lasciv-
iousness.  He  replied,  "Put  him  to  shame  by
your  virtue.  Let  your  conduct  be  virtuous,
when  it  will  not  be  in  the  power  of  the  detractor
to  convict  you  of  evil.  When  the  harp  is  in
tune,  how  can  it  suffer  correction  from  the  hand
of  the  musician  ?  "


192  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXV.


THEY  asked  one  of  the  Sheiks  of  Damas-
cus what  was  the  condition  of  the  sect  of
Soofies  ?  He  replied :  "  They  formerly  were,  in
the  world,  a  society  of  men  apparently  in  dis-
tress, but  in  reality  contented;  but  now  they
are  a  tribe  in  appearance  satisfied,  but  inwardly
discontented."

When  your  heart  is  continually  wandering
from  one  place  to  another,  you  will  have  no
satisfaction  in  solitude.  Though  you  possess
riches,  rank,  lands,  and  chattels,  if  your  heart  is
with  God,  you  are  a  recluse.


TALE    XXVI.

I  RECOLLECT  that  once  I  had  travelled  the
whole  night  with  the  caravan,  and  in  the
morning  had  gone  to  sleep  by  the  side  of  a
desert.  A  distracted  man,  who  had  accompa-
nied us  in  the  journey,  set  up  a  cry,  took  the
road  of  the  desert,  and  did  not  enjoy  a  moment's
repose.  When  it  was  day,  I  asked  him  what
was  the  matter  ?  He  replied,  "  I  heard  the
nightingales  on  the  trees,  the  partridges  in  the


MORALS    OF  DURWAISHES.  193

mountains,  the  frogs  in  the  water,  and  the  brutes
in  the  desert,  uttering  their  plaintive  notes  and
doleful  lamentations ;  I  reflected  that  it  did  not
become  a  human  being,  through  neglect  of  my
duty,  to  be  asleep,  whilst  all  other  creatures
were  celebrating  the  praises  of  God."  Last
night,  towards  morning,  the  lamentations  of  a
bird  deprived  me  of  reason,  patience,  power,  and
sensation.  When  my  voice  reached  the  ears  of
a  sincere  friend,  he  said,  "  I  could  not  have  be-
lieved that  the  notes  of  a  bird  would  hi  such  a
maimer  have  deprived  you  of  your  senses."  I
replied,  "  It  is  not  consistent  with  the  laws  of
human  nature,  that,  whilst  a  bird  is  reciting  the
praises  of  God,  I  should  be  silent."


TALE    XXVII.

ONCE  I  travelled  to  Hejaz  along  with  some
young  men  of  virtuous  disposition,  who
had  been  my  intimate  friends  and  constant  com-
panions. Frequently,  in  their  mirth,  they  re-
cited spiritual  verses.  There  happened  to  be  in
the  party  an  Abid,  who  thought  unfavorably  of
the  morals  of  Durwaishes,  being  ignorant  of  their
sufferings.  At  length  we  arrived  at  the  grove
of  palm-trees  of  Beni  Hullal,  when  a  boy  of  a

9  M


194  THE   GULISTAN.

dark  complexion  came  out  of  one  of  the  Arab
families,  and  sang  in  such  a  strain  as  arrested
the  birds  in  their  flight  through  the  air.  I  be-
held the  Abid's  camel  dancing,  and  after  fling-
ing his  rider,  he  took  the  road  of  the  desert.
I  said :  "  O  Sheik,  those  strains  delighted  the
brutes,  but  made  no  impression  on  you :  know-
est  thou  what  the  nightingale  of  the  morning
said  to  me  ?  What  kind  of  a  man  art  thou,  who
art  ignorant  of  love  ?  The  camel  is  thrown  into
ecstasy  by  the  Arabic  verses,  for  which,  if  thou
hast  no  relish,  thou  art  a  cross-grained  brute.
When  the  camel  is  captivated  with  ecstatic
frenzy,  that  man  who  can  be  insensible  is  an
ass.  The  wind  blowing  over  the  plains  causes
the  tender  branches  of  the  ban-tree  to  bend
before  it,  but  affects  not  the  hard  stone.  Every-
thing that  you  behold  is  exclaiming  the  praises
of  God,  as  is  well  known  unto  the  understanding
heart :  not  only  the  nightingale  and  the  rose-
bush are  chanting  praises  to  God,  but  every
thorn  is  a  tongue  to  extol  him."


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  195


TALE    XXVIII.

A  CERTAIN  king,  when  arrived  at  the  end
of  his  days,  having  no  heir,  directed  in
his  will,  that  in  the  morning  after  his  death,  the
first  person  who  entered  the  gate  of  the  city,
they  should  place  on  his  head  the  crown  of  roy-
alty, and  commit  to  his  charge  the  government
of  the  kingdom.  It  happened  that  the  first
person  who  entered  the  city  gate  was  a  beggar,
who  all  his  life  had  collected  scraps  of  victuals,
and  sewed  patch  upon  patch.  The  ministers  of
state,  and  the  nobles  of  the  court,  carried  into
execution  the  king's  will,  bestowing  on  him  the
kino;dom  and  the  treasure.  For  some  time  the
Durwaish  governed  the  kingdom,  until  part  of
the  nobility  swerved  their  necks  from  his  obe-
dience, and  all  the  surrounding  monarchs,  engag-
ing in  hostile  confederacies,  attacked  him  with
their  armies.  In  short,  the  troops  and  peasantry
were  thrown  into  confusion,  and  he  lost  the
possession  of  some  territories.  The  Durwaish
was  distressed  at  these  events,  when  an  old
friend,  who  had  been  his  companion  in  the  days
of  poverty,  returned  from  a  journey,  and,  finding
him  in  such  an  exalted  state,  said :  "  Praised  be
the  God  of  excellence  and  glory,  that  your  high
fortune  has  aided  you,  and  prosperity  been  your


196  THE   GULISTAN.

guide,  so  that  a  rose  has  issued  from  the  brier ;
aud  the  thorn  has  been  extracted  from  your  foot,
and  you  have  arrived  at  this  dignity.  Of  a
truth,  joy  succeeds  sorrow ;  the  bud  sometimes
blossoms,  and  sometimes  withers ;  the  tree  is
sometimes  naked  and  sometimes  clothed."  He
replied:  "O  brother,  condole  with  me,  for  this  is
not  a  time  for  congratulation.  When  you  saw
me  last,  I  was  only  anxious  how  to  obtain  bread ;
but  now  I  have  all  the  cares  of  the  world  to
encounter.  If  the  times  are  adverse,  I  am  in
pain ;  and  if  they  are  prosperous,  I  am  capti-
vated with  worldly  enjoyments.  There  is  no
calamity  greater  than  worldly  affairs,  because
they  distress  the  heart  in  prosperity  as  well  as  in
adversity.  If  you  want  riches,  seek  only  for
contentment,  which  is  inestimable  wealth.  If
the  rich  man  should  throw  money  into  your  lap,
consider  not  yourself  obliged  to  him ;  for  I  have
often  heard  it  said  by  pious  men,  that  the  pa-
tience of  the  poor  is  preferable  to  the  liberality
of  the  rich.  If  Bahrain  should  roast  an  ona-
ger to  be  distributed  amongst  the  people,  it
would  not  be  equal  to  the  leg  of  a  locust  to  an
ant."


MORALS  OF  DURWAISI1ES.  197


TALE    XXIX.

A  CERTAIN  person  had  a  friend  employed
in  the  office  of  Dewan,  with  whom  he  had
not  chanced  to  meet  for  some  time.  Somebody
said  to  him,  "  It  is  a  long  time  since  you  saw
such  an  one."  He  answered,  u  Neither  do  I
wish  to  see  him."  It  happened  that  one  of  the
Dewan's  people  was  present,  who  asked  what
fault  his  friend  had  been  guilty  of,  that  he  was
not  inclined  to  see  him.  He  replied,  "  There  is
no  fault ;  but  the  time  for  seeing  a  Dewan  is
when  he  is  dismissed  from  his  office.  In  great-
ness and  authority  of  office,  they  neglect  their
friends ;  in  the  day  of  adversity  and  degrada-
tion, they  impart  to  their  friends  the  disquiet-
ude of  their  hearts."


TALE    XXX.

ABU  HORIERA  used  every  day  to  visit
Mustefa  (Mohammed),  upon  whom  be
the  blessing  and  peace  of  God !  The  Prophet
said,  "  O  Abu  Horiera,  come  not  every  day,
that  so  affection  may  increase."  They  observed
to  a  holy  man,  that,  notwithstanding  the  benefits


198  THE   GULISTAN.

which  we  derive  from  the  sun's  bounteousness,
we  have  not  heard  any  one  speaking  of  him
with  affection.  He  replied,  "  That  is  because
he  can  be  seen  every  day,  excepting  in  the  win-
ter, when,  being  veiled,  he  is  beloved."

There  is  no  harm  in  visiting  men,  but  let  it
not  be  so  often  that  they  may  say,  It  is  enough.
If  you  correct  yourself,  you  will  not  need  repre-
hension from  another.


TALE    XXXI.

HAVING  become  weary  of  the  company
of  my  friends  at  Damascus,  I  retired  into
the  desert  of  Jerusalem,  and  associated  with  the
brutes,  till  I  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Franks,
and  consigned  to  a  pit  in  Tripoli,  to  dig  clay,
along  with  some  Jews.  But  one  of  the  princi-
pal men  of  Aleppo,  with  whom  I  had  formerly
been  intimate,  happening  to  pass  that  way,
recollected  me,  asked  me  how  I  came  there,
and  in  what  manner  I  spent  my  time  ?  I  an-
swered, "  I  fled  into  the  mountains  and  deserts
to  avoid  mankind,  seeing  on  God  alone  reliance
can  be  placed ;  conjecture  then  what  must  now
be  my  situation,  forced  to  associate  with  wretches
worse  than  men.     To  have  our  feet  bound  with


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  199

chains  in  company  with  our  friends,  is  preferable
to  living  in  a  garden  with  strangers."  He  then
had  compassion  on  my  condition,  redeemed  me
for  ten  dinars  from  the  Franks,  and  took  me
with  him  to  Aleppo.  He  had  a  daughter,  whom
he  gave  me  in  marriage,  with  an  hundred  dinars
for  her  dower.  When  some  time  had  elapsed,
she  discovered  her  disposition,  which  was  ill-na-
tured, quarrelsome,  obstinate,  and  abusive ;  so
that  she  destroyed  my  happiness,  in  the  manner
that  has  been  said.  A  bad  woman,  in  the  house
of  a  good  man,  is  his  hell  in  this  world.  Take
care  how  you  connect  yourself  with  a  bad  wo-
man ;  defend  us,  O  Lord,  from  this  fiery  trial !
Once  she  reproached  me,  saying,  "  Art  thou
not  he  whom  my  father  redeemed  from  captivity
amongst  the  Franks  for  ten  dinars  ?  "  I  an-
swered, "  Yes,  he  ransomed  me  for  ten  dinars,
and  put  me  into  your  hands  for  a  hundred."

I  have  heard  that  a  certain  great  man  deliv-
ered a  sheep  from  the  teeth  and  claws  of  a  wolf,
and  the  night  following  applied  a  knife  to  lus
throat.  The  expiring  sheep  complained  of  him,
saying,  "  You  delivered  me  from  the  claws  of  a
wolf,  but  I  have  seen  you  at  length  act  the  part
of  the  very  wolf  towards  me."


200  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXXII.


A  CERTAIN  king  asked  a  religious  man
how  he  passed  his  valuable  time ;  he  re-
plied, "  All  night  I  pray,  in  the  morning  I  offer
up  my  vows  and  petitions,  and  the  whole  day  is
spent  in  regulating  my  expenses."  The  king
commanded  that  they  should  provide  him  a  daily
subsistence  to  relieve  his  mind  from  the  cares  of
his  family.  O  thou,  who  art  enthralled  with
the  cares  of  a  family,  look  not  for  freedom  in
any  other  respect ;  sorrow  for  children,  bread,
raiment,  and  subsistence  incapacitates  you  for
contemplating  the  invisible  world.  The  whole
day  I  am  reflecting  that  at  night  I  shall  be  em-
ployed in  my  devotions ;  and  at  night,  when  I
begin  my  prayers,  I  am  thinking  how  I  shall  be
able  to  provide  food  for  my  children  next  morn-
ing.


TALE    XXXIII.'

ONE  of  the  hermits  of  Damascus  had  passed
many  years  in  the  desert,  in  devotion,
feeding  on  the  leaves  of  trees.  The  king  of  that
country,  having  gone  to  visit  him,  said,  "It
seems  advisable  to  me  that  I  should  prepare  a


MORALS' OF  DURWAISHES.  201

place  for  you  in  the  city,  where  you  may  per-
form your  devotions  more  conveniently,  and
others  be  benefited  by  the  blessing  of  your
company,  and  take  example  from  your  good
works."  The  hermit  would  not  consent  to  this
proposal.  The  ministers  of  state  said,  "It  is
necessary,  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  majesty,  that
you  should  remove  into  the  city  for  a  few  days,
to  make  an  experiment  of  the  nature  of  the  place,
when,  if  you  should  find  your  precious  time  dis-
turbed by  the  society  of  others,  the  choice  will
still  remain  in  your  power."  They  have  related,
that  the  hermit  came  into  the  city,  and  that  the
king  prepared  for  his  reception  a  garden  belong-
ing to  the  palace.  A  delightful  situation,  refresh-
ing the  spirits ;  red  roses  vying  with  the  cheeks
of  a  beautiful  damsel ;  hyacinths  resembling
the  ringlets  of  a  beloved  mistress.  Although
in  the  depth  of  winter,  yet  these  flowers  had  the
freshness  of  new-born  babes,  who  had  not  tasted
the  nurse's  milk.  The  branches  of  the  trees
were  ornamented  with  scarlet  flowers,  suspended
amongst  verdant  foliage,  shining  like  fire.  The
king  sent  him  immediately  a  beauteous  hand-
maid ;  her  face,  fair  as  the  crescent  moon,  would
fascinate  an  anchorite  ;  and  her  angelic  form,
arrayed  in  all  the  peacock's  pride  and  splendor,
would  at  the  first  view  deprive  the  most  rigid

moralist  of  the  command  of  his  passions.     She
9*


202  THE  GULISTAN.

was  followed  by  a  youth  of  rare  beauty,  and
most  exquisite  symmetry  of  form.  He  is  sur-
rounded by  mortals  parched  with  thirst,  whilst
he  who  hath  the  appearance  of  a  cup-bearer
bestoweth  not  drink.  The  eyes  could  not  be
satisfied  with  the  sight  of  him,  like  one  afflicted
with  the  dropsy  beholding  the  Euphrates.  The
hermit  began  to  feast  on  dainties,  was  arrayed  in
elegant  attire,  regaled  himsejf  with  fruits  and
perfumes,  and  took  delight  in  the  company  of  the
virgin  and  her  attendant.  The  sages  have  said,
"  that  the  ringlets  of  fair  maids  are  chains  for
the  feet  of  reason,  and  a  snare  for  the  bird  of
wisdom.  In  your  service,  I  have  lost  my  heart,
my  religion,  and  my  reason.  In  truth,  I  am  now
the  bird  of  wisdom,  and  you  are  the  snare."
To  be  brief,  his  state  of  enjoyment  began  to
decline,  in  the  manner  as  has  been  said,  "When-
ever a  lawyer,  a  teacher,  a  disciple,  or  an  orator,
possessed  of  pure  spirit,  descends  to  mean  world-
ly concernments,  he  will  find  himself  enthralled,
like  flies  with  their  feet  in  honey."  Once  the
king,  having  an  inclination  to  see  him,  found  the
holy  man  much  altered  in  his  appearance,  having
become  plump,  with  a  clear  and  rosy  complex-
ion. He  was  reclining  on  a  pillow  of  damask
silk,  and  the  fairy-formed  boy  stood  behind  him
with  a  fan  made  of  peacock's  feathers.  The
king  rejoiced  at  his  happy  condition,  and  they


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  203

talked  on  various  subjects,  until  the  king  con-
cluded the  conversation  by  saying,  "  I  have  an
affection  for  two  descriptions  of  men  in  the
world,  the  learned,  and  the  recluse."  A  vizier,
a  man  of  wisdom  and  experience,  being  present,
said,  O  king,  the  law  of  benevolence  requires
that  you  should  do  good  to  both  of  them ;  give
money  to  the  learned,  that  others  may  be  in-
duced to  study ;  but  give  nothing  to  recluses,  in
order  that  they  may  continue  such.  Durwaishes
require  not  direms  and  dinars;  when  they  re-
ceive money,  look  out  for  other  Durwaishes.
Whosoever  possesseth  a  virtuous  disposition,  and
has  his  mind  devoted  to  God,  is  a  religious  man,
without  feeding  on  consecrated  bread,  or  beg-
ging for  broken  victuals.  The  finger  of  a
beautiful  woman,  and  the  tip  of  her  ear,  are
handsome  without  an  ear-jewel  or  a  turquoise
ring.  He  is  a  Durwaish  who  is  virtuous  and
wise,  although  he  tasteth  not  holy  bread,  nor
the  fragments  of  beggary.  The  lady  endowed
with  an  elegant  form  and  a  beautiful  face  is
charming  without  paint  or  jewels.  Whilst  I
have  anything  of  my  own,  and  covet  the  goods
of  others,  if  you  do  not  call  me  a  religious  man,
perhaps  you  will  not  be  mistaken.


204  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    XXXIV.

THE  following  story  will  exemplify  what
has  been  said  above.  A  king,  having
some  weighty  affairs  in  agitation,  made  a  vow
that,  in  case  of  success,  he  would  distribute  a
certain  sum  of  money  amongst  men  dedicated
to  religion.  When,  on  his  wish  being  accom-
plished, it  was  necessary  to  perform  the  condi-
tions of  his  vow,  he  gave  a  purse  of  direms  to
one  of  his  favorite  servants,  to  distribute  amongst
the  Zahids.  It  was  said  that  the  youth  was
wise  and  prudent.  The  whole  day  he  wandered
about,  and  at  night,  when  he  returned,  he
kissed  the  money,  and  laid  it  before  the  king,
saying,  that  he  had  not  found  any  Zahids.  The
king  replied,  "  What  a  story  is  this !  since  I
myself  know  four  hundred  Zahids  in  this  city."
He  replied,  "  O  Lord  of  the  world !  those  who
are  Zahids  will  not  accept  of  money,  and  they
who  take  it  are  not  Zahids."  The  king  laughed,
and  said  to  his  courtiers,  "  So  much  as  I  want
to  favor  this  body  of  men,  the  worshippers  of
God,  this  saucy  fellow  thwarts  my  inclination,
and  he  has  justice  on  his  side.  If  a  Zahid  ac-
cepts direms  and  dinars,  you  must  seek  some-
where else  for  a  religious  man."


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  205


TALE    XXXV.

THEY  asked  a  certain  wise  man,  what  was
his  opinion  of  consecrated  bread  ?  He  re-
plied :  "If  they  receive  it  in  order  to  compose
their  minds,  and  to  promote  their  devotions,  it  is
lawful ;  but  if  they  want  nothing  but  bread,  it
is  illegal.  Men  of  piety  receive  bread  to  enjoy
religious  retirement,  but  enter  not  into  the  cell
of  devotion  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  bread."


TALE    XXXVI.

ADURWAISH  came  to  a  place  where  the
master  of  the  house  was  of  a  hospitable
disposition.  The  company  consisted  of  persons
of  understanding  and  eloquence,  who  separately
delivered  a  joke  or  pleasantry  in  a  manner  be-
coming men  of  wit.  The  Durwaish,  having
travelled  over  the  desert,  was  fatigued,  and  had
not  eaten  anything.  One  of  the  company  ob-
served to  him,  merrily,  that  he  also  must  say
something.  The  Durwaish  replied,  that  he  did
not  possess  wit  and  eloquence  like  the  rest,  and
neither  being  learned,  he  hoped  they  would  be
satisfied  with  his  reciting  a  single  distich.    They


206  THE   GULISTAN.

one  and  all  eagerly  desired  him  to  speak,  when
he  said,  "  I  am  a  hungry  man,  in  whom  a  table
covered  with  food  excites  strong  appetite;  like  a
youth  at  the  door  of  the  female  bath."  They
all  applauded,  and  ordered  the  table  to  be  laid
for  him.  The  host  said,  "  O  my  friend,  stop  a
little,  as  my  servants  are  preparing  some  minced
meat."  The  Durwaish  raised  up  his  head,  and
said,  "  Forbid  them  to  put  forced-meat  on  my
table,  for.  to  the  hungry  plain  bread  is  a  savory
dish."


TALE    XXXVII.

A  PUPIL  complained  to  his  spiritual  guide
of  being  much  disturbed  by  impertinent
visitors,  who  broke  in  upon  his  valuable  time,
and  he  asked  how  he  could  get  rid  of  them.
The  superior  replied :  "  To  such  of  them  as  are
poor,  lend  money,  and  from  those  that  are  rich
ask  something,  when  you  may  depend  upon  not
seeing  one  of  them  again.  If  a  beggar  was  the
leader  of  the  army  of  Islamism,  the  infidels
would  flee  to  China  through  fear  of  his  impor-
tunity."


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  207


TALE     XXXVIII.

A  LAWYER  said  to  his  father:  "Those
fine  speeches  of  the  declaimers  make  no
impression  on  me,  because  I  do  not  see  that
their  actions  correspond  with  their  precepts.
They  teach  people  to  forsake  the  world,  whilst
themselves  accumulate  property.  A  wise  man,
who  preaches  without  practising,  will  not  im-
press others.  That  person  is  wise  who  abstain-
eth  from  sin,  not  he  who  teacheth  good  to  others,
whilst  himself  committeth  evil.  The  wise  man
who  indulges  in  sensual  gratifications,  being  him-
self bewildered,  how  can  he  guide  others  ? '
The  father  replied :  "  O  my  son  !  you  ought  not,
merely  from  this  vain  opinion,  to  reject  the  doc-
trines of  the  preacher,  thus  pursuing  the  paths
of  vanity,  by  imputing  errors  to  the  learned;
and  whilst  you  are  searching  for  an  immaculate
teacher,  are  deprived  of  the  benefits  of  learning ;
like  the  blind  man,  who,  one  night  falling  into
the  mud,  cried  out,  '  O  Muslems,  bring  a  lamp
to  show  me  the  way.'  An  impudent  woman,
who  heard  him,  said,  4  You  cannot  see  a  lamp  ;
what,  then,  can  it  show  you  ?  '  Moreover,  the
society  of  the  preacher  resembles  the  shop  of  a
trader,  where,  until  you  pay  money,  you  cannot
carry  away  the  goods :  and  here,  unless  you  come


208  THE   GULISTAN.

with  good  inclination,  you  will  not  derive  any
benefit.  Listen  to  the  discourse  of  the  learned
man  with  the  utmost  attention,  although  his
actions  may  not  correspond  with  his  doctrine.
It  is  a  futile  objection  of  gainsayers,  that  how
can  he  who  is  asleep  awaken  others  ? '  It
behooveth  a  man  to  receive  instruction,  although
the  advice  be  written  on  a  wall.


TALE   XXXIX.

A  CERTAIN  holy  man  having  quitted  a
monastery,  and  the  society  of  religious
men,  became  a  member  of  a  college.  I  asked
what  was  the  difference  between  being  a  learned
or  a  religious  man,  that  could  induce  him  to
change  his  society  ?  He  replied,  "  The  devotee
saves  his  own  blanket  out  of  the  waves,  and  the
learned  man  endeavors  to  rescue  others  from
drowning."


TALE    XL.


A  DRUNKEN   man  was  sleeping   on  the
highway,  overcome  by  the  power  of  in-
toxication :  a  devotee  passed  by,  and  beheld  his


MORALS  OF  DURWAISHES.  209

condition  with  detestation.  The  young  man
lifted  up  his  head  and  said :  "  When  you  meet
an  inconsiderate  person,  pass  him  with  kind-
ness ;  and  when  you  see  a  sinner,  conceal  his
crime,  and  be  compassionate.  O  thou,  who
despisest  my  indiscretion,  why  dost  thou  not
rather  pity  me  ?  O  holy  man,  avert  not  thy
face  from  a  sinner,  but  regard  him  with  benig-
nity. If  my  manners  are  unpolished,  neverthe-
less behave  yourself  towards  me  with  civility."


TALE    XLI.

A  COMPANY  of  dissolute  men  came  to
dispute  with  a  Durwaish,  and  made  use
of  improper  expressions ;  at  winch  being  of-
fended, he  went  to  his  spiritual  guide,  and  com-
plained of  what  had  happened.  He  replied:
u  O  my  son,  the  habit  of  a  Durwaish  is  the  gar-
ment of  resignation ;  whosoever  weareth  this
garb,  and  cannot  support  injuries,  is  an  enemy
to  the  profession,  and  is  not  entitled  to  the  dress.
A  great  river  is  not  made  turbid  by  a  stone  ;  the
religious  man  who  is  hurt  at  injuries  is  as  yet
but  shallow  water.  If  any  misfortune  befalleth
you,  bear  with  it ;  that,  by  forgiving  others,  you
may  yourself  obtain  pardon.     O   my  brother,

N


210  THE   GULISTAN.

seeing  that  we  are  at  last  to  return  to  earth,
let  us  humble  ourselves  in  ashes  before  we  are
changed  into  dust."


TALE    XLII.

ATTEND  to  the  following  story.  In  the
city  of  Baghdad  there  happened  a  conten-
tion between  the  flag  and  the  curtain.  The
flag,  disgusted  with  the  dust  of  the  road  and
the  fatigue  of  marching,  said  to  the  curtain  in
displeasure :  "  You  and  myself  are  schoolfel-
lows, both  servants  of  the  Sultan's  court.  I
never  enjoy  a  moment's  relaxation  from  busi-
ness, being  obliged  to  travel  at  all  seasons  ;  you
have  not  experienced  the  fatigue  of  marching,
the  danger  of  storming  the  fortress,  the  perils
of  the  desert,  nor  the  inconveniences  of  whirl-
winds and  dust :  my  foot  is  more  forward  in
enterprise,  —  why,  then,  is  thy  dignity  greater
than  mine  ?  You  pass  your  time  amongst  youths,
beautiful  as  the  moon,  and  with  virgins  odorif-
erous as  jasmine.  I  am  carried  in  the  hands  of
menial  servants ;  and  travel  with  my  feet  in
bands,  and  my  head  agitated  by  the  wind."
The  curtain  replied,  "  My  head  is  placed  on
the  threshold,  and  not,  like  yours,  raised  up  to
the  sky :  whosoever  through  folly  exalts  his
neck,  precipitates  himself  into  distress."


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  211


TALE    XLIII.

A  HOLY  man  saw  a  wrestler  distracted
and  foaming  at  the  mouth  with  rage  :  he
inquired  the  cause,  and  was  told  some  one  had
given  him  abuse.  He  said  :  "  This  paltry  fel-
low, who  can  lift  a  stone  of  a  thousand  pounds'
wreight,  is  not  able  to  bear  a  single  word.  Re-
sign your  boasting  pretensions  to  strength  and
fortitude,  you  weak-spirited  wretch !  What  is
the  difference  between  such  a  man  and  a  wo-
man ?  Show  your  power  by  engaging  others
to  speak  kindly  to  you  :  it  is  not  courage  to
drive  your  fist  against  another  man's  mouth,
if  you  are  able  to  tear  the  front  of  an  elephant ;
he  is  no  man  who  hath  not  humanity.  The
sons  of  Adam  are  formed  of  humble  earth  ;  if
you  possess  not  humility,  neither  are  you  a
man."


TALE    XL  IV.

THEY  interrogated  a  learned  man  concern-
ing; the  character  of  his  brethren,  the
Sufis.  He  answered :  "  The  meanest  of  their
excellences  is,  that  they  prefer  gratifying  the
desire  of  their  friends  to  attending  to  their  own


212  THE   GULISTAN.

affairs ;  and  the  sages  have  said,  '  The  brother
who  is  intent  upon  his  own  affairs  is  neither
brother  nor  relation :  your  fellow-traveller,  if
he  walks  faster  than  yourself,  is  not  your  com-
panion :  place  not  your  affections  on  any  one
who  is  not  attached  to  you.  If  there  be  not
religion  and  piety  amongst  relatives,  it  is  best
to  break  off  connections  with  our  kindred.'  I
recollect  that  an  adversary  objected  to  the  sen-
timent in  the  above  distich,  and  said,  that  in  the
Koran  the  Most  High  God  has  forbidden  that
we  should  break  off  comiection  with  relatives,
and  has  commanded  us  to  prefer  friendship  with
relations  to  that  of  others ;  and  that  what  I
had  said  above  was  contrary  to  this  precept.
I  replied,  "  You  are  mistaken,  it  agrees  with
the  Koran.  God  said,  If  your  parents  insist
that  you  should  join  as  partners  with  me  those
things  of  which  you  are  ignorant,  then  do  not
obey  them.  A  thousand  relations,  who  are  ig-
norant of  God,  ought  to  be  sacrifices  for  one
stranger  who  acknowledges  him."


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  213


TALE    XLV.

A  MERRY  fellow  of  Baghdad  married  his
daughter  to  a  shoemaker.  The  little  man,
having  a  flinty  heart,  bit  the  girl's  lips  in  such
a  manner,  that  they  trickled  with  blood.  In  the
morning,  her  father,  beholding  her  in  such  plight,
went  to  his  son-in-law,  and  said  to  him,  "  O  you
worthless  fellow  !  what  kind  of  teeth  have  you
got  thus  to  chew  her  lips,  as  if  they  were  made
of  leather?  I  am  not  speaking  in  jest,  leave
off  your  jokes,  and  have  your  legal  enjoyment.
When  bad  manners  become  habitual,  they  can-
not be  got  rid  of  until  death."


TALE    XLVI.

A  CERTAIN  lawyer  had  a  very  ugly  daugh-
ter, who  was  marriageable ;  but  although
he  offered  a  considerable  dower,  and  other  val-
uables, no  one  was  inclined  to  wed  her.  Bro-
cade and  damask  will  appear  disgustful  on  a
bride  who  is  ugly.  In  short,  through  necessity,
he  married  her  to  a  blind  man.  It  is  said  that
in  the  same  year  there  arrived  from  Ceylon  a
physician  who  could  restore  sight  to  the  blind.


214  THE   GULISTAN.

They  asked  the  father  why  he  would  not  have
his  son-in-law  cured.  He  said,  "  Because  he
was  afraid  that,  if  he  should  recover  his  sight,
he  would  divorce  his  wife.  It  is  best  that  the
husband  of  an  ugly  woman  should  be  blind."


TALE    XLVII.

A  CERTAIN  king  regarded  with  contempt
the  society  of  Durwaishes,  which  one  of
them  having  the  penetration  to  discover,  said,
uO  king!  in  this  world  you  have  the  advan-
tage of  us  in  external  grandeur,  but  with  re-
gard to  the  comforts  of  life  we  are  your  supe-
riors ;  at  the  time  of  death  we  shall  be  your
equals  ;  and  at  the  resurrection  our  state  will
be  preferable  to  yours."  Although  the  con-
queror of  kingdoms  enjoyeth  absolute  sway  at
the  same  time  that  the  Durwaish  may  be  in
want  of  bread,  yet  in  that  hour  when  both  shall
die  they  will  carry  nothing  with  them  but  their
winding-sheets.  When  you  wish  to  make  up
your  burdens  for  quitting  this  world,  the  state
of  the  beggar  will  be  preferable  to  that  of  the
monarch.  The  Durwaish  exhibits  a  patched
garment  and  shaved  hair,  but  in  truth  his  heart
is  alive  and  his  passions  subdued.     He  is  not  a


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  215

person  that  will  advance  his  pretensions  among
mankind  ;  and  if  men  oppose  his  inclination,  he
will  not  en<rao;e  in  strife.  If  a  millstone  should
roll  down  from  a  mountain,  he  has  but  little
faith  who  gets  out  of  the  way  of  it.  The  Dur-
waish's  course  of  duty  consists  in  invoking  and
praising  God,  in  obeying  and  worshipping  him,
in  giving  alms,  in  being  content,  in  believing
the  unity  of  the  deity,  and  in  reliance  on  God,
with  patient  resignation  to  his  will.  Whosoever
is  endowed  with  these  qualities  is  a  Durwaish
indeed,  although  he  be  arrayed  in  a  robe  ;  and
on  the  contrary,  an  idle  prater,  who  neglects
his  prayers,  and  is  a  slave  to  his  passions,  who
turns  day  into  night  in  sensual  gratifications,
and  night  into  day  in  drowsy  indolence,  eating
anything  that  falls  in  his  way,  and  saying  what-
ever comes  uppermost,  such  an  one  is  a  profli-
gate, although  he  wears  nothing  but  a  blanket.
O  thou,  whose  inward  parts  are  void  of  piety,
and  whose  outside  beareth  the  garb  of  hypoc-
risy, hang  not  a  gorgeous  curtain  before  the
door  of  a  house  constructed  of  reeds.


216  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE     XLVIII.

I  SAW  some  nosegays  of  fresh  roses  tied  to
a  dome  with  some  grass.  I  said,  "  What
is  this  worthless  grass,  that  it  should  thus  be  in
the  company  of  roses  ?  '  The  grass  wept,  and
said:  uBe  silent;  the  benevolent  forget  not  their
associates  ;  although  I  have  neither  beauty,  nor
color,  nor  odor,  still  am  I  not  the  grass  of  God's
garden  ?  I  am  the  servant  of  the  munificent
God,  nourished  from  of  old  by  his  bounty  ;
whether  I  possess  any  virtue  or  not,  yet  I  look
for  the  mercy  of  God.  Although  I  have  not
any  worth,  neither  possess  the  means  of  show-
ing my  obedience  ;  he  is  able  to  save  his  ser-
vant, although  destitute  of  all  other  support.
It  is  the  custom  that  masters  should  liberate
their  old  slaves.  O  God,  who  hast  ornamented
this  world  with  thy  creatures,  bestow  liberty  on
this  thine  old  servant.  O  Saadi,  pursue  the
road  to  the  temple  of  resignation.  O  man  of
God,  walk  in  the  path  of  righteousness.  Un-
fortunate is  that  person  who  turns  his  head
from  this  gate,  since  he  will  not  be  able  to  find
another."


MORALS   OF  DURWAISHES.  217


TALE    XLIX.

THEY  asked  a  wise  man  which  was  prefer-
able, fortitude  or  liberality  ?  he  replied  :
"  He  who  possesseth  liberality  hath  no  need  of
fortitude.  It  is  inscribed  on  the  tomb  of  Bah-
ram-Goar,  that  a  liberal  hand  is  preferable  to  a
strong  arm."  Hatim  Tai  no  longer  exists  ;  but
his  exalted  name  will  remain  famous  for  virtue
to  eternity.  Distribute  the  tithes  of  your  wealth
in  alms,  for  when  the  husbandman  lops  off  the
exuberant  branches  from  the  vine,  it  produces
an  increase  of  grapes.


10


CHAPTER  III.

Of  the  Excellency  of  Contentment.
TALE    I.

;N  African  mendicant  at  Aleppo,  in  the
quarter  occupied  by  the  dealers  in
linen  cloths,  was  saying,  "  O  wealthy
Sirs,  if  there  had  been  justice  amongst
you,  and  we  had  possessed  contentment,  there
would  have  been  an  end  of  beggary  in  this
world."  O  contentment,  make  me  rich !  for
without  thee  there  is  no  wealth.  Lokman  made
choice  of  patience  in  retirement.  Whosoever
hath  not  patience,  neither  doth  he  possess  phi-
losophy.


TALE    II.

IN  Egypt  dwelt  two  sons  of  a  nobleman,  one
of  whom  acquired  learning,  and  the   other
gained  wealth  ;   the  former  became   the   most


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.    219

learned  man  of  his  time,  and  the  other  prince
of  Egypt.  Afterwards  the  rich  man  looked
with  contempt  on  his  learned  brother,  and  said,
"  I  have  arrived  at  monarchy,  and  you  have
continued  in  the  same  state  of  poverty."  He
replied,  "  O  brother  it  behooveth  me  to  be  the
more  thankful  to  the  divine  Creator,  since  I
have  found  the  inheritance  of  the  prophets,  that
is  wisdom  ;  and  you  have  got  the  portion  of
Pharaoh,  and  Haman,  or  the  kingdom  of  Egypt.
I  am  the  ant  which  men  tread  under  their  feet,
and  not  the  wasp  of  whose  sting  they  complain.
How  shall  I  express  my  grateful  sense  of  such
blessing  that  I  am  not  possessed  of  the  means
of  oppressing  mankind  ?  '


TALE    III.

I  HEARD  of  a  Durwaish  who  was  suffering
great  distress  from  poverty,  and  sewing  patch
upon  patch,  but  who  comforted  himself  with  the
following  verse  :  "I  am  contented  with  stale
bread,  and  a  coarse  woollen  frock,  since  it  is
better  to  bear  the  weight  of  one's  own  neces-
sities than  to  suffer  the  load  of  obligation  from
mankind."  Somebody  said  to  him,  "  Why  do
you  sit  quiet,  whilst  such  an  one  in  this  city  has


220  THE  GULISTAN.

a  liberal  mind,  and  possesses  universal  benev-
olence, being  ever  willing  to  assist  the  pious,
and  always  ready  to  comfort  every  heart.  If
he  were  apprised  of  your  condition,  he  would
consider  it  an  obligation  to  satisfy  your  wants."
He  replied,  "  Be  silent,  for  it  is  better  to  die
of  want  than  to  expose  our  necessities  to  any
one  ;  for  they  have  said  that  to  sew  patch  upon
patch  and  be  patient,  is  preferable  to  writing  a
petition  to  a  great  man  for  clothing."  Of  a
truth,  it  is  equal  to  the  torments  of  hell  to  enter
into  paradise  by  the  help  of  one's  neighbor.


TALE    IV.

ONE  of  the  kings  of  Persia  sent  a  skilful
physician  to  Mustufa,  upon  whom  be
peace  !  He  had  been  some  years  in  Arabia
without  any  one  having  come  to  make  trial  of
his  skill,  neither  had  they  applied  to  him  for
any  medicine.  One  day  he  came  to  the  prince
of  prophets  and  complained,  saying,  "  They  sent
me  to  dispense  medicines  to  your  companions,
but  to  this  day  no  one  hath  taken  notice  of  me,
that  I  might  have  an  opportunity  of  performing
the  service  to  which  I  had  been  appointed."
Mohammed  replied,   "  It  is  a  rule  with  these


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.    221

people  never  to  eat  until  they  are  hard  pressed
by  hunger,  and  to  leave  off  eating  whilst  they
have  a  good  appetite."  The  physician  said,
"  This  is  the  way  to  enjoy  health."  He  then
made  his  obeisance  and  departed.  The  physi-
cian begins  to  speak  when  evil  would  result  from
his  silence ;  either  when  there  is  eating  to  ex-
cess, or  when  death  might  ensue  from  too  much
abstinence.  Then  doubtless  his  speech  is  wis-
dom, and  such  a  meal  will  be  productive  of
health.


TALE    V.

A  CERTAIN  man  having  made  many  vows
which  he  broke,  a  venerable  personage
said  to  him,  "I  know  that  you  make  it  a  practice
to  eat  a  great  deal ;  and  that  your  inclination  to
restrain  your  appetite  is  weaker  than  a  hair,
whilst  your  appetite  in  the  manner  you  indulge
it  would  break  a  chain  :  but  a  day  may  come
when  this  intemperance  may  destroy  you.
Somebody  nourished  a  wolf's  whelp,  which
when  full-grown  tore  his  master  to  pieces."


222  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    VI.


IN  the  annals  of  Ardsheer  Babukan,  it  is  re-
corded, that  he  asked  an  Arabian  physician,
what  quantity  of  food  ought  to  be  eaten  in  the
course  of  a  day.  He  answered,  that  the  weight
of  one  hundred  direms  was  sufficient.  The
kino;  asked  what  strength  could  be  derived  from
so  small  a  quantity  ?  The  physician  replied,
"  This  quantity  is  sufficient  to  support  you,  and
whatever  more  you  eat,  you  must  carry.  We
eat  to  live  and  praise  God ;  you  believe  that  you
live  to  eat."


TALE    VII.

TWO  Durwaishes  of  Khorasan,  who  had
entered  into  strict  intimacy,  travelled  to-
gether ;  one,  who  was  infirm,  would  fast  for  two
days,  and  the  other,  who  was  robust,  used  to  eat
three  times  a  day.  It  happened  that  they  were
seized  at  the  gate  of  a  city  on  suspicion  of  being
spies,  were  both  confined  in  the  same  room,  and
the  door  closed  up  with  mud.  After  a  fortnight
it  was  discovered  that  they  were  innocent.  On
opening  the  door,  they  found  the  strong  man


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  223

dead,  and  the  infirm  one  alive.  They  were
astonished  at  the  circumstance;  but  a  philoso-
pher said,  that  the  contrary  would  have  been
more  wonderful,  for  the  one  who  was  a  great
eater  was  not  able  to  support  abstinence  ;  and
the  other,  who  was  weak,  having  his  body  in
subjection,  and  being  used  to  fasting,  had  happily
escaped.  A  person  who  has  accustomed  himself
to  eat  sparingly,  when  difficulty  occurs,  bears  it
easily ;  but  if  in  time  of  prosperity  he  has  been
used  to  pamper  himself,  when  he  meets  with  dis-
tress he  sinks  under  it.


TALE    VIII.

A  CERTAIN  wise  man  admonished  his  son
against  eating  to  excess,  because  repletion
occasions  sickness.  The  son  answered,  "  O  fa-
ther! hunger  killeth;  and  have  yOu  not  heard
the  saying  of  the  sages,  that  it  is  better  to  die
of  excess,  than  to  suffer  the  pangs  of  hunger  ? '
The  father  replied,  "  Be  moderate,  for  God  hath
said,  Eat  ye  and  drink,  but  not  to  excess.  Eat
not  so  much  as  to  cram  yourself  up  to  the  throat,
neither  so  little  that  you  should  die  of  weakness.
Although  food  is  the  means  of  sustaining  life,
yet,  when  taken  to  excess,  it  becomes  injurious.


224  THE  GULISTAN.

If  you  eat  conserve  of  roses  without  inclination
it  is  pernicious,  but  dry  bread  after  fasting  is  as
delicious  as  conserve  of  roses."


TALE    IX.

THEY  asked  a  sick  man,  what  his  heart  de-
sired ?  he  replied,  "  Only  this,  that  it
may  not  desire  anything."  When  the  stomach
is  oppressed,  and  the  belly  suffering  pain,  there
is  no  benefit  in  having  all  other  matters  in  per-
fection.


TALE    X.

A  BUTCHER  in  the  city  of  Wasit,  to  whom
the  Sufis  had  contracted  some  debts,  was
every  day  importuning  them  for  payment,  and
made  use  of  very  harsh  language.  The  society
was  much  distressed  at  his  reproaches,  but  had
no  remedy  besides  patience.  A  holy  man  of
their  fraternity  said,  "  It  is  easier  to  satisfy  the
appetite  with  a  promise  of  food,  than  to  put  off
the  butcher  with  promise  of  payment.  It  is
better  to  relinquish  the  favor  of  the  great  man,
than  to  suffer  violence  from  his  porter.     It  is


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  225

better  to  die  for  want  of  meat,  than  to  endure  the
importunities  of  the  butcher."


TALE    XI.

A  CERTAIN  gallant  man  was  grievously
womided  in  an  expedition  against  the  Tar-
tars ;  somebody  said,  Such  a  merchant  has  an
unguent,  of  which  perhaps  he  might  give  you
a  little  were  you  to  ask  it.  The  merchant  was
notorious  for  his  parsimony.  If  the  sun  had
been  on  his  table  instead  of  bread,  no  one  would
have  seen  light  in  the  world  until  the  day  of
judgment.  The  gallant  man  replied :  "If  I
ask  for  the  unguent,  it  is  uncertain  whether  he
will  give  it  or  not,  and  if  he  should  give  it,  the
effect  is  doubtful.  On  every  account  to  ask  of
such  a  man  is  a  deadly  poison."

That  which  you  obtain  by  entreaty  from  mean
people  may  benefit  the  body,  but  it  injures  the
soul ;  and  the  sages  have  said,  If  the  water  of
immortality,  for  example,  was  to  be  sold  in  ex-
change for  reputation,  the  wise  man  would  not
purchase  it ;  for  an  honorable  death  is  prefer-
able to  a  disgraceful  life.     If  you  eat  colocynth

from  the  hand  of  a  kind  man,  it  is  preferable  to
10*  o


226  THE  GULISTAN.

a  sweetmeat  given  by  one  who  has  a  crabbed
countenance.


TALE    XII.

A  CERTAIN  learned  man  who  had  a  large
family  to  support,  with  very  scanty  means,
represented  his  case  to  a  great  man  who  enter-
tained a  favorable  opinion  of  him.  He  disap-
proved of  the  application,  deeming  it  unworthy
of  a  man  of  spirit.  When  you  are  dissatisfied
with  your  fortune,  approach  not  your  dearest
friend,  or  you  will  turn  his  pleasure  into  sorrow.
When  you  expose  your  distress,  preserve  a  lively
and  smiling  appearance  ;  he  never  fails  in  his
pursuit,  who  maintains  a  joyful  countenance.  It
is  said,  that  the  great  man  increased  his  pension
a  little,  but  treated  him  with  less  respect  than
formerly.  After  some  lime,  perceiving  this  dim-
inution of  affection,  he  said :  "  Evil  is  that  food
which  you  obtain  in  the  time  of  distress ;  the
kettle  is  indeed  upon  the  hearth,  but  your  rep-
utation is  diminished.  He  increased  my  bread,
and  lessened  my  honor ;  it  is  better  to  be  desti-
tute of  means,  than  to  suffer  the  disgrace  of  so-
licitation."


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  227


TALE    XIII.

ADURWAISH  having  a  pressing  want,
somebody  said  to  him,  "  Such  an  one  has
inconceivable  wealth,  and  were  he  apprised  of
your  condition,  he  would  not  suffer  any  delay  to
happen  in  supplying  you."  He  answered,  a  I
do  not  know  him."  The  other  said,  "  I  will
conduct  you  "  ;  and,  taking  hold  of  his  hand,
showed  the  way  to  his  house.  The  Durwaish,
on  beholding  one  sitting  who  had  a  hanging  lip
and  a  severe  countenance,  said  nothing,  but  re-
turned.

The  other  asked  what  he  had  done.  He  re-
plied, "  I  gave  his  bounty  in  exchange  for  his
visit.  Expose  not  your  want  to  one  of  a  sour
countenance,  for  you  will  be  distressed  by  his
ill-nature.  If  you  disclose  the  sorrows  of  your
heart  to  any  one,  let  it  be  to  him  whose  pleas-
ant countenance  will  assure  you  prompt  pay-
ment."


228  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    XIV.

THERE  happened  one  year  such  a  drought
at  Alexandria,  that  men  could  not  support
it  with  patience ;  the  doors  of  heaven  were  shut
against  the  earth,  and  the  lamentations  of  all
creatures  reached  the  sky.  There  was  neither
bird,  beast,  fish,  nor  insect  which  had  not  sent
up  its  petitions  to  heaven.  It  is  wonderful  that
the  smoke  of  the  aspirations  from  the  hearts  of
all  creatures  should  not  have  collected  in  the
form  of  clouds,  and  their  tears  been  converted
into  an  inundation  of  rain.  In  such  a  year  an
hermaphrodite  (far  be  such  an  one  from  our
friends  !)  —  as  using  words  to  describe  him  is
contrary  to  good  breeding,  especially  in  polite
company ;  but  at  the  same  time,  it  is  not  proper
to  pass  him  over  in  silence,  because  some  people
might  impute  it  to  the  ignorance  of  the  relator.
Therefore  I  shall  abridge  my  meaning  in  the
following  verses.  From  a  little  we  judge  of
much ;  an  handful  is  a  sample  of  an  ass-load.
If  a  Tartar  should  kill  that  hermaphrodite,  no
one  could  require  his  blood  in  retaliation.  How
long  will  he  continue  to  resemble  the  bridge  at
Bughdad,  which  has  water  running  under,  whilst
men  are  passing  over  it  ?  —  This  person,  of  whom
I  have  given  some  description,  was  at  that  time


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.    229

possessed  of  immense  wealth ;  amongst  the  needy-
he  distributed  gold  and  silver,  and  provided  a
table  for  the  entertainment  of  travellers.  A
company  of  Durwaishes,  perishing  with  want,
were  inclined  to  have  accepted  Ins  invitation,
and  came  to  ask  my  advice.  I  dissuaded  them
from  their  inclination,  and  said :  "  The  lion  will
not  eat  the  dog's  leavings,  although  he  should
perish  with  hunger  in  his  den.  In  the  present
case,  submit  to  the  pangs  and  cravings  of  hun-
ger, and  hold  not  up  your  hand  to  implore  char-
ity from  a  mean  wretch.  If  a  man  destitute  of
virtue  should  equal  Feridoon  in  wealth  and
power,  yet  account  him  nobody.  The  vari-
egated silk  and  fine  linen  on  the  back  of  a
blockhead  are  lapis  lazuli  and  gold  on  a  wall."


TALE    XV.

THEY  asked  Hatim  Tai,  if  he  had  ever
seen  or  heard  of  any  person  in  the  world
more  noble-minded  than  himself.  He  replied:
"  One  day,  after  having  sacrificed  forty  camels,
I  went  along  with  an  Arab  chief  to  the  skirt  of
a  desert,  where  I  saw  a  laborer,  who  had  made
up  a  bundle  of  thorns ;  whom  I  asked  why  he
did  not  go  to  the  feast  of  Hatim  Tai,  to  whose


230  THE   GULISTAN.

table  people  were  repairing  in  crowds  ?  he  an-
swered, '  Whosoever  eateth  bread  from  his  own
labor  will  not  submit  to  be  under  obligation  to
Hatim  Tai.'  I  considered  this  man  as  my  supe-
rior in  generosity  and  liberality."


TALE    XVI.

MOSES  the  prophet, upon  whom  be  peace  !
saw  a  Durwaish,  who,  for  want  of  clothes,
had  hidden  himself  in  the  sand ;  he  said,  "  O
Moses,  implore  God  to  bestow  on  me  a  subsist-
ence, for  I  am  perishing  in  distress."  Moses
prayed,  and  God  granted  him  assistance.  Some
days  after,  when  Moses  was  returning  from  per-
forming his  devotions,  he  saw  the  Durwaish
apprehended,  and  a  crowd  of  people  gathered
round  him.  On  inquiring  what  had  happened
to  him,  they  replied,  "  Having  drank  wine,  he
made  a  disturbance,  and  killed  a  man  :  now  they
are  going  to  exact  retaliation."  If  the  poor  cat
had  wings,  she  would  not  leave  a  sparrow's  egg
in  the  world ;  and  if  a  mean  wretch  should  hap-
pen to  get  into  power,  he  would  become  insolent,
and  twist  the  hands  of  the  weak.  Moses  ac-
knowledged the  wisdom  of  the  Creator  of  the
universe,   and  asked  pardon   for   Ins   boldness,


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.    231

repeating  the  following  verse  of  the  Koran,  "  If
God  were  to  open  his  stores  of  subsistence  for
his  servants,  of  a  truth  they  would  rebel  on  the
earth."  O  vain  man,  what  hast  thou  done  to
precipitate  thyself  into  destruction?  Would
that  the  ant  had  not  been  able  to  fly  !

When  a  mean  wretch  obtains  promotion  and
wealth,  of  a  truth  he  requires  a  thump  on  the
head.  Is  not  this  the  adage  of  a  sage  ?  It  were
better  for  the  ant  not  to  have  wings.  Our
Heavenly  Father  hath  honey  in  abundance,  but
his  son  is  affected  with  a  feverish  complaint.
He  who  doth  not  make  you  rich,  knoweth
what  is  good  for  you  better  than  you  do  your-
self.


TALE    XVII.

I  SAW  an  Arab  sitting  in  a  circle  of  jewellers
of  Basrah,  and  relating  as  follows :  "  Once
on  a  time,  having  missed  my  way  in  the  desert,
and  having  no  provisions  left,  I  gave  myself  up
for  lost :  when  I  happened  to  find  a  bag  full  of
pearls,  I  shall  never  forget  the  relish  and  delight
that  I  felt  on  supposing  it  to  be  fried  wheat ;  nor
the  bitterness  and  despair  which  I  suffered,  on
discovering  that  the  bag  contained  pearls.  In
the  parched  desert  of  quicksands,  pearls  or  shells,


232  THE   GULISTAN.

in  the  mouth  of  the  thirsty  traveller,  are  alike
unavailing.  When  a  man  destitute  of  provisions
is  fatigued,  it  is  the  same  thing  to  have  in  his
girdle  gold  or  potsherds."


TALE    XVIII.

AN  Arab  laboring  under  excessive  thirst,
exclaimed,  "  I  wish  that  for  one  day  be-
fore my  death  this  my  desire  may  be  grati-
fied,—  that  a  river  dashing  its  waves  against
my  knees,  I  may  fill  my  leather  sack  with
water."

In  like  manner  a  traveller,  who  had  lost  his
way  in  the  great  desert,  had  neither  strength
nor  provisions  remaining ;  but  a  few  direms  in
his  girdle.  He  had  wandered  about  a  long
time  without  finding  the  road,  and  perished  for
want.  A  company  of  men  arrived,  and  saw
the  direms  lying  before  his  face,  and  the  follow-
ing words  written  on  the  ground :  "  If  the  man
destitute  of  food  were  possessed  of  pure  gold,  it
would  avail  him  nothing.  To  a  poor  wretch  in
the  desert,  parched  with  the  heat  of  the  sun,
a  boiled  turnip  is  of  more  value  than  virgin
silver."


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  233


TALE    XIX.

I  NEVER  complained  of  the  vicissitudes  of
fortune,  nor  murmured  at  the  ordinances
of  Heaven,  excepting  once,  when  my  feet  were
bare,  and  I  had  not  the  means  of  procuring  my-
self shoes.  I  entered  the  great  mosque  at
Cufah  with  a  heavy  heart,  when  I  beheld  a
man  who  had  no  feet.  I  offered  up  praise  and
thanksgiving  to  God  for  his  bounty,  and  bore
with  patience  the  want  of  shoes.  A  broiled
fowl  in  the  eyes  of  one  who  has  satisfied  his
appetite,  is  of  less  estimation  than  a  leaf  of
greens  on  a  dish ;  but  to  him  who  hath  not  the
means  of  procuring  food,  a  boiled  turnip  is  equal
to  a  broiled  fowl.


A


TALE    XX.

CERTAIN  king,  attended  by  some  of  his
principal  nobility,  on  a  hunting  party,  in
the  winter,  was  benighted  at  a  long  distance
from  any  town.  Having  discovered  the  cottage
of  a  peasant,  the  king  said,  "  Let  us  go  there  for
the  night,  that  we  may  not  suffer  inconvenience
from  the  cold."  One  of  the  courtiers  replied,
It  is  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  monarch  to  take


..


234  THE   GULISTAN.

shelter  in  the  cottage  of  a  mean  peasant;  we
will  pitch  a  tent  on  this  spot,  and  light  a  fire."
The  peasant  being  apprised  of  the  circumstance,
prepared  such  food  as  he  could  provide,  which
he  brought,  and  presented  to  the  king,  and  kiss-
ing the  earth,  said,  "  The  Sultan's  high  dignity
will  not  suffer  any  degradation  by  this  conde-
scension ;  but  these  gentlemen  are  not  willing
that  the  peasant's  humble  state  should  be  ex-
alted." The  king  approved  of  his  speech,  and
passed  the  night  in  the  cottage.  In  the  morning,
he  bestowed  on  the  peasant  a  dress  and  money.
I  heard  that  he  accompanied  the  king's  stirrup
a  few  paces,  and  said,  "  The  king's  dignity  and
splendor  have  not  suffered  any  diminution  by
his  condescension  in  suffering  himself  to  be
entertained  under  the  peasant's  roof,  but  the
corner  of  the  rustic's  cap  has  been  exalted  to
the  sun  by  such  a  monarch  having  overshadowed
his  head."


TALE   XXI.


THEY  tell  a  story  of  a  horrible  mendicant,
who  was  possessed  of  considerable  wealth.
A  certain  king  said  to  him,  "It  appears  that
you  are  exceedingly  rich,  and  as  I  have  a  press-
ing demand,  if  you  will  assist  me  with  a  small


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  235

sum  out  of  your  wealth,  by  way  of  loan,  when
the  public  finances  are  in  a  flourishing  state  I
will  repay  you."  He  replied,  "  It  does  not  suit
the  high  dignity  of  the  Lord  of  the  world  to  soil
the  hand  of  ambition  with  money  belonging  to
such  a  beggar  as  myself,  who  has  collected  it
grain  by  grain."  He  replied,  "Don't  distress
yourself  on  that  account,  as  I  shall  pay  it  away
to  the  Tartars.  Filthy  things  are  fit  for  those
who  are  impure.  They  say  that  dung  does  not
make  clean  plaster,  and  we  answer  that  we
want  it  to  stop  dirty  holes.  If  the  water  of  a
well  belonging  to  a  Christian  is  impure,  what
signifies  this,  if  we  use  it  to  wash  the  corpse  of  a
Jew  ?  "  I  heard  that  he  slighted  the  king's
command,  began  to  dispute,  and  to  behave  with
insolence.  Whereupon  the  king  ordered  that
the  subject  of  disputation  should  be  taken  from
him  with  violence  and  reproach.

When  an  affair  cannot  be  accomplished  by
kind  treatment,  it  becomes  necessary  to  effect  it
by  harshness.  When  a  person  is  not  ready  to
contribute  of  himself,  it  is  proper  that  some  one
should  force  him.


236  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    XXII.


I  SAW  a  merchant  who  possessed  one  hun-
dred and  fifty  camels  laden  with  merchan-
dise, and  fifty  slaves  and  servants.  One  night,
in  the  island  of  Kish,  he  entertained  me  in  his
own  apartment,  and  during  the  whole  night  did
not  cease  talking  foolishly,  saying,  "  I  have  such
and  such  property  in  Turkistan,  and  such  goods
in  Hindostan ;  these  are  the  title-deeds  of  such
a  piece  of  ground ;  and  for  this  matter,  such  an
one  is  security."  Sometimes  he  would  say,  "  I
have  an  inclination  to  go  to  Alexandria,  the  air
of  which  is  very  pleasant";  then  again,  "No,  I
will  not  go,  because  the  Mediterranean  Sea  is
boisterous.  O  Saadi,  I  have  another  journey  in
contemplation,  and  after  I  have  performed  that,
I  will  pass  the  remainder  of  my  life  in  retire-
ment, and  leave  off  trading."  I  asked  what
journey  it  was.  He  replied,  "  I  want  to  carry
Persian  brimstone  to  China,  where  I  have  heard
it  bears  a  very  high  price  ;  from  thence  I  will
transport  China  ware  to  Greece :  and  take  the
brocades  of  Greece  to  India ;  and  Indian  steel
to  Aleppo ;  the  glass-ware  of  Aleppo,  I  will
convey  to  Yemen,  and  from  thence  go  with
striped  cloths  to  Persia ;  after  which  I  will  leave
off  trade,  and  sit  down  in  my  shop."     He  spoke


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  237

so  much  of  this  foolishness,  that  at  length,  being
quite  exhausted,  he  said,  "  O  Saadi,  relate  also
something  of  what  you  have  seen  and  heard."
I  replied,  "  Have  you  not  heard,  that  once  upon
a  time,  a  chief,  as  he  was  travelling  in  the  desert
of  Ghoor,  fell  from  his  camel  ?  He  said  that
the  covetous  eye  of  the  worldly  man  is  either
satisfied  through  contentment,  or  will  be  filled
with  the  earth  of  the  grave."


TALE    XXIII.

I  HEARD  of  a  certain  rich  man,  who  was  as
notorious  for  parsimony  as  Hatim  Tai  for
liberality.  His  external  form  was  adorned  with
wealth,  but  the  meanness  of  his  disposition  was
so  radicated,  that  he  never  gave  even  a  loaf  of
bread  to  any  one  ;  he  would  not  have  bestowed
a  scrap  on  the  cat  of  Abu  Horaira,  nor  thrown
a  bone  to  the  dog  of  the  companions  of  the  cave.
In  short,  no  one  ever  saw  his  door  open,  nor  his
table  spread.  A  Durwaish  never  knew  his
victuals,  excepting  by  the  smell ;  no  bird  ever
picked  up  any  crumbs  that  fell  from  his  table.
I  heard  that  he  was  sailing  on  the  Mediterranean
Sea  towards  Egypt,  with  all  the  pride  of  Pha-
raoh in  his  imagination,  according  to  the  word


238  THE   GULISTAN.

of  God,  "  until  the  time  that  he  was  drowned."
Suddenly  a  contrary  wind  assailed  the  ship  in
the  manner  as  they  have  said,  "  What  can  the
heart  do  that  it  may  not  accord  with  your  sor-
rowful disposition  ?  the  north-wind  is  not  always
favorable  for  the  ship."  He  lifted  up  the  hands
of  imploration,  and  uttered  ineffectual  lamenta-
tions, God  hath  said,  "  When  you  embark  on
ships,  offer  up  your  prayers  unto  the  Lord."

Of  what  benefit  will  it  be  to  the  servant  in
the  time  of  need,  to  lift  up  his  hands  in  implora-
tion, which  are  extended  during  prayers,  but
when  any  favor  is  wanted  are  folded  under  his
arms?  Bestow  comfort  on  others  with  silver
and  gold,  and  from  thence  derive  also  benefit
yourself.  "  Know  thou,  that  this  edifice  of  yours
will  remain ;  use,  therefore,  bricks  of  gold  and
bricks  of  silver."  They  have  related,  that  he
had  poor  relations  in  Egypt,  who  were  enriched
with  the  remainder  of  his  wealth.  At  his  death
they  rent  their  old  garments,  and  make  up  silk
and  damasks.  In  that  same  week,  I  saw  one
of  them  riding  a  fleet  horse,  with  an  angelic
youth  running  after  him.  I  said,  "  Alas  !  if  the
dead  man  should  return  amongst  his  tribe  and
relations,  the  heirs  would  feel  more  sorrow  in
restoring  him  his  estate  than  they  suffered  on
account  of  his  death."  On  the  strength  of  the
acquaintance  which  had  formerly  subsisted  be-


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  239

tween  us,  I  pulled  his  sleeve,  and  said,  "  Enjoy
thou,  O  good  man  of  happy  endowments,  that
wealth  which  the  late  possessor  accumulated  to
no  purpose."


TALE    XXIV.

A  POWERFUL  fish  fell  into  the  net  of  a
debilitated  fisherman,  who  not  being  able
to  hold  it,  the  fish  got  the  better  of  him,  snatched
the  net  out  of  his  hand,  and  escaped.  A  boy
went  to  fetch  water  from  the  river ;  the  flood
tide  came  in,  and  carried  him  away.  The  net
had  hitherto  always  taken  the  fish,  but  tins  time
the  fish  escaped,  and  carried  away  the  net.
The  other  fishermen  grieved  at  the  loss,  and
reproached  him,  that,  having  such  a  fish  in  his
net,  he  had  not  been  able  to  hold  it.  He  re-
plied: "Alas,  my  brethren  !  what  could  be  done,
seeing  it  was  not  my  lucky  day,  and  the  fish
had  yet  a  day  remaining  ?  A  fisherman  with-
out luck  catcheth  not  fish  in  the  Tigris,  neither
will  the  fish  without  fate  expire  on  the  dry
ground."


240  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXV.

ONE  who  had  neither  hands  nor  feet  having
killed  a  milleped,  a  pious  man  passing  by
said,  "  Holy  God,  although  this  had  a  thousand
feet,  yet  when  fate  overtook  him  he  could  not
escape  from  one  destitute  of  hands  and  feet."
When  the  enemy  who  seizes  the  soul  comes
behind,  fate  ties  the  feet  of  the  swift  man.
At  that  moment  when  the  enemy  attacks  us
behind,  it  is  needless  to  draw  the  Kianyan
bow.


TALE    XXVI.

IS  AW  a  fat  blockhead  clad  in  a  rich  dress  and
mounted  on  an  Arab  horse,  with  fine  Egyp-
tian linen  round  his  head.  Some  one  said,  "  O
Saadi,  what  is  your  opinion  of  this  notable  dress
on  this  ignorant  brute  ?  "

I  replied :  "  It  is  like  bad  writing  executed  in
water  gold.  In  truth,  amongst  men  he  is  an
ass  with  the  form  and  bleating  of  a  calf.  You
cannot  say  this  brute  resembles  a  man,  ex-
cepting in  his  garment,  his  turban  and  exter-
nal form  ;  of  all  his  property,  estate,  and  bodily
faculties,  it  is  not  lawful  to  take  anything  but


EXCELLENCY  OF   CONTENTMENTt  241

his  blood.  If  a  man  of  noble  birth  should  hap-
pen to  be  poor,  imagine  not  that  his  dignity  will
be  thereby  lessened ;  but  should  a  Jew  be
so  rich  as  to  drive  a  gold  nail  into  his  silver
threshold,  do  not  on  that  account  esteem  him
noble."


TALE    XXVII.

A  THIEF  said  to  a  mendicant,  "  Are  you
not  ashamed  to  hold  out  your  hand  to
every  sordid  wretch  to  obtain  a  grain  of  silver?"
He  replied,  "It  is  better  to  stretch  out  the
hand  for  a  grain  of  silver,  than  to  have  it
cut  off  for  having  stolen  a  dang  and  a  half."


TALE    XXVIII.

THEY  tell  a  story  of  a  wrestler,  who  from
adverse  fortune  was  reduced  to  the  ex-
tremity of  misery.  With  a  craving  appetite,
and  destitute  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  he
came  complaining  to  his  father,  and  requested
leave  to  travel,  if  perchance  by  the  strength  of
his  ami  be  might  be  able  to  accomplish  his
wishes.  Talents  and  skill  are  of  no  value  with-
11  p


242  •  THE  GU LI  STAN.

out  being  exhibited ;  they  put  lignum  aloes  on
the  fire,  and  rub  musk.  The  father  said :  "  O
son,  get  out  of  your  head  impracticable  imagina-
tions, and  draw  back  the  foot  of  contentment
within  the  skirt  of  safety ;  for  the  sages  have  said,
'  Riches  are  not  to  be  obtained  by  bodily  exertion,
but  the  remedy  against  want  is  to  moderate  our
desires.  No  one  can  seize  the  skirt  of  wealth
by  force  ;  it  is  lost  labor  to  anoint  the  eyes  of  the
blind  with  salve.'  If  every  hair  of  your  head
possessed  two  hundred  accomplishments,  they
would  be  of  no  use  when  fortune  is  unpropitious.
What  can  a  strong  but  unfortunate  man  do?
The  arm  of  fortune  is  better  than  the  arm  of
strength."

The  son  said :  "  O  father !  the  advantages  of
travelling  are  many,  the  recreation  of  the  mind,
profitable  attainments,  to  see  wonders,  and  to
hear  strange  things ;  the  view  of  cities ;  the
conversation  of  mankind,  the  acquisition  of  hon-
or, and  attainment  of  manners ;  the  increase  of
wealth,  the  means  of  gaining  a  livelihood,  form-
ing intimate  connections,  and  the  experience  of
the  world,  in  the  manner  as  has  been  observed
by  men  of  piety,  4  As  long  as  you  stick  to  your
shop,  and  to  your  house,  never,  O  simpleton!
will  you  become  a  man.  Go  and  travel  over  the
world,  before  the  time  shall  arrive  for  your  quit-
ting it.' "


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.    243

The  father  made  answer :  "  O  son,  the  advan-
tages of  travelling  in  the  manner  that  you  have
set  forth  are  doubtless  very  great;  hut  most
especially  so  for  five  classes  of  men :  First,  the
merchant,  who,  possessing  wealth  and  dignity,
with  beautiful  slaves  and  handmaids  and  active
servants,  may  pass  every  day  in  a  new  city,  and
every  night  in  a  different  place,  and  may  every
minute,  in  delightful  spots,  recreate  himself  with
worldly  luxuries.  The  rich  man  is  not  a  stran-
ger, neither  in  the  mountains  nor  in  the  deserts ;
wherever  he  goes  he  pitches  his  tent  and  takes
up  his  quarters ;  whilst  he  who  possesses  not  the
comforts  of  life,  but  is  destitute  of  the  means  of
supporting  himself,  is  a  stranger,  and  unknown
in  his  native  country.  Secondly,  a  learned  man
who  on  account  of  his  sweet  speeches,  powerful
eloquence,  and  store  of  knowledge,  wherever  he
goes  is  universally  sought  after,  and  respected.

"  The  presence  of  a  wise  man  resembles  pure
gold,  because  whithersoever  he  goeth  they  know
his  intrinsic  value  and  consequence.  An  ig-
norant son  of  a  rich  man  is  like  leather  money
passing  current  in  a  particular  city,  but  which
in  a  foreign  country  no  one  will  receive  for  any-
thing. Thirdly,  the  beautiful  person,  to  whom
the  hearts  of  the  virtuous  are  inclined,  set  a
high  value  on  his  company,  and  consider  it  an
honor  to   do  him   service.     According  to  the


244  THE   GULISTAN.

saying,  'A  little  beauty  is  preferable  to  great
wealth.'  A  beautiful  person  is  the  balm  for  a
wounded  heart,  and  is  the  key  of  the  locked
door.  The  beautiful  person,  wheresoever  he
goes,  meets  with  honor  and  respect,  even  if  his
father  and  mother  should  turn  him  out  with  dis-
pleasure. I  saw  a  peacock's  feather  in  the
leaves  of  a  Koran.  I  said,  '  I  consider  this  an
honor  much  greater  than  your  quality  deserves.'
He  replied, '  Be  silent ;  for  whosoever  has  beauty,
wherever  he  puts  his  foot,  doth  not  every  one
receive  him  with  respect  ?  The  son  who  is
endowed  with  elegance  and  beauty  careth  not
for  his  father's  anger.'

"  He  is  a  rare  pearl,  let  him  not  remain  in  the
parent  shell ;  and  of  a  precious  pearl  every  one
will  be  the  purchaser.  Fourthly,  a  sweet  singer,
who  with  the  throat  of  David  arrests  the  waters
in  their  course,  and  suspends  the  birds  in  their
flight ;  consequently,  by  the  power  of  this  per-
fection, he  captivates  the  hearts  of  mankind  in
general,  and  the  religious  are  desirous  of  asso-
ciating with  him.  My  attention  is  engaged  in
listening  to  a  sweet  voice :  who  is  this  beautiful
person  playing  on  the  double  chord  ?  How
delightful  is  a  tender  and  plaintive  voice  at  the
dawn  of  day,  in  the  ears  of  those  intoxicated
with  love  !  A  sweet  voice  is  better  than  a
beautiful  face  ;  for  the  one  gives  sensual  delight,


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.   245

and  the  other  invigorates  the  soul.  Fifthly,  the
mechanic,  who  gains  subsistence  by  the  labor  of
his  arm,  that  his  good  name  may  not  be  dis-
graced by  the  want  of  bread.  According  to  this
saying  of  the  wise  :  —

"  '  If  a  mechanic  goes  a  journey  from  his  own
city,  he  suffers  not  difficulty  nor  distress  ;  but  if
the  king  of  Neemroze  should  wander  out  of  his
kingdom,  he  would  sleep  hungry.'  The  above-
mentioned  qualities,  which  I  have  explained,  are
the  means  of  affording  comfort  to  the  mind  in
travelling;,  and  are  the  bestowers  of  sweet  de-
light ;  but  he  who  does  not  possess  them  will
enter  the  world  with  vain  expectations ;  and  no
one  will  hear  his  name,  nor  see  any  signs  of  him.
Whomsoever  the  revolutions  of  Heaven  in  malice
afflict,  the  world  betrays.  The  pigeon  who  is
not  to  see  his  nest  again,  fate  conducts  to  the
grain  and  snare."

The  son  said,  5*  O  father,  how  can  I  contra-
dict another  maxim  of  the  sages,  which  says,
'  The  necessaries  of  life  are  distributed  to  all,  yet
the  attainment  thereof  requires  exertion ;  and
although  misfortune  is  decreed,  it  is  our  duty
to  shun  the  way  by  which  it  enters '  ?  Al-
though our  daily  bread  doubtlessly  may  come
to  us,  yet  reason  requires  that  we  should  seek
it  out  of  doors.  Although  no  one  can  die  before
it  is   decreed   by   fate,  you   have   no   occasion


246  THE  GULISTAN.

to  run  into  the  jaws  of  the  dragon.  In  my
present  situation,  I  am  able  to  encounter  a  furi-
ous elephant,  and  to  combat  a  devouring  lion ;
and  I  have  besides  this  inducement  to  travel,
that  I  am  no  longer  able  to  suffer  indigence.
When  a  man  falls  from  his  rank  and  dignity,
what  has  he  more  to  concern  himself  about  ?  he
is  a  citizen  of  the  world.  A  rich  man  repairs  at
night  to  his  palace,  but  wheresoever  the  Dur-
waish  is  overtaken  by  night,  that  place  is  his  inn."
This  he  said,  took  leave  of  his  father,  asked
his  blessing,  and  departed.  At  his  departure
he  was  heard  to  say,  "  The  artist  to  whom  for-
tune is  not  propitious  goeth  to  a  place  where
his  name  is  not  known."  He  travelled  until  he
arrived  on  the  banks  of  a  river,  so  rapid  that
stones  dashed  against  stones,  and  the  noise  was
heard  at  many  miles'  distance.  It  was  a  tre-
mendous water,  in  which  even  waterfowls  were
not  in  safety ;  and  the  smallest  of  its  waves
would  impel  a  millstone  from  the  shore.  He
saw  a  number  of  people  sitting  at  the  ferry,  each
of  whom  had  a  small  piece  of  money,  and  they
were  making  up  their  bundles  for  the  passage.
The  young  man,  having  no  money,  used  suppli-
cations, but  without  effect,  they  saying,  "  You
cannot  here  commit  violence  on  any  one,  and  if
you  have  money,  there  is  no  need  of  force."
The   inhuman   boatman   laughed   at   him,  and


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  247

turned  away,  saying,  "  You  have  no  money,
and  you  cannot  cross  the  river  by  means  of  your
strength.  Of  what  avail  is  the  strength  of  ten
men  ?  Bring  the  money  of  one."  The  young
man,  incensed  at  this  sarcasm,  wished  to  be
revenged  on  him.  The  boat  had  put  off;  he
called  out,  "  If  you  will  be  satisfied  with  this
garment,  which  I  have  on  my  back,  I  will  freely
give  it  you."  The  boatman  being  greedy,
brought  back  the  boat.  Covetousness  sews  up
the  eyes  of  the  cunning,  and  covetousness  brings
both  bird  and  fish  into  the  net.  As  soon  as  the
young  man's  hands  were  in  reach  of  the  boat-
man's beard  and  collar,  he  dragged  him  towards
him,  and  knocked  him  down  without  ceremony.
One  of  his  comrades  stepped  out  of  the  boat  to
help  him,  but  experienced  such  rough  treatment
that  he  desisted.  They  both  thought  it  advisa-
ble to  pacify  the  young  man,  and  compromised
with  him  for  the  fare.  When  you  see  fighting,
be  peaceable,  for  a  peaceable  disposition  shuts
the  door  of  contention.  Oppose  kindness  to  per-
verseness ;  the  sharp  sword  will  not  cut  soft  silk.
By  using  sweet  words,  and  gentleness,  you
may  lead  an  elephant  with  a  hair.  In  expia-
tion of  what  had  happened,  they  fell  at  his  feet,
and  after  bestowing  hypocritical  kisses  on  his
hands  and  face,  brought  him  into  the  boat,  and
carried  him  over,  until  they  came  to  a  pillar  of


248  THE   GULISTAN.

Grecian  building  that  stood  in  the  river,  when
the  boatman  called  out,  "  The  boat  is  in  danger !
let  one  of  you  who  is  the  strongest  and  most
courageous  get  upon  this  pillar,  and  lay  hold  of
the  boat's  rope,  that  we  may  save  the  vessel."
The  young  man,  in  the  vanity  of  his  strength,  of
which  he  had  boasted,  thoughtless  of  the  offended
heart  of  his  enemy,  paid  no  attention  to  this
maxim  of  the  sages,  "  If  you  have  committed  an
•  offence  towards  another,  and  should  afterwards
confer  a  hundred  kindnesses,  think  not  that  he
will  forget  to  retaliate  upon  thee  that  single
offence ;  for  the  arrow  may  be  extracted  from
the  wound,  but  the  sense  of  injury  still  rankles
in  the  heart."  What  excellent  advice  gave
Yuktash  to  Khiltash!  If  you  have  scratched
your  enemy,  do  not  consider  yourself  safe.
When  from  your  hand  the  heart  of  another
hath  suffered  injury,  expect  not  to  be  free  from
affliction  thyself.  Fling  not  a  stone  against  the
walls  of  a  castle,  lest  perchance  a  stone  may  be
thrown  at  you  from  the  castle.  As  soon  as  he
had  gathered  the  rope  round  his  arm,  and  had
reached  the  top  of  the  pillar,  the  boatman
snatched  the  rope  out  of  his  hand  and  drove
forward  the  vessel.  The  helpless  young  man
remained  astonished:  for  two  days,  he  suffered
much  distress,  and  underwent  great  hardship  ;
the  third  day  sleep  overpowered  him  and  flung


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  249

liira  into  the  river.  After  a  day  and  a  night  he
reached  shore  with  some  small  remains  of  life.
He  fed  on  leaves  of  trees  and  roots  of  grass,
until  he  had  somewhat  recruited  his  strength,
when  he  bent  his  course  to  the  desert,  and
arrived  thirsty  and  hungry,  and  faint,  at  a  well.
He  saw  a  number  of  people  gathered  round  it,
who  were  drinking  a  draught  of  water  for  a
small  piece  of  money.  The  young  man,  having
no  money,  beseeched  them  for  water,  which
they  denying,  he  attempted  to  obtain  it  by  force,
but  in  vain ;  he  knocked  some  of  them  down
and  beat  them.  They  at  length  overpowered
him,  beat  him  unmercifully,  and  wounded  him.
A  swarm  of  gnats  will  engage  an  elephant,
notwithstanding  all  his  strength  and  valor.
The  little  ants,  when  they  meet  with  an  oppor-
tunity, will  strip  off  the  skin  of  the  fierce  lion.
Sick  and  wounded,  he  fell  in  with  a  caravan,
which  from  necessity  he  followed.  In  the  even-
ing they  arrived  at  a  place  that  was  infested  by
robbers.  He  saw  the  people  of  the  caravan
trembling  through  fear,  and  looking  as  if  they
expected  to  die.  He  said,  i  Be  not  afraid,  for  I
am  one  amongst  you,  who  will  encounter  fifty
men,  and  other  men  will  support  me.'  The  men,
encouraged  by  his  boasting,  rejoiced  at  being  in
his  company,  and  they  supplied  him  with  victuals

and  drink.     The  cravings  of  the  young  man's
11*


250  THE   GU  LI  ST  AN.

appetite  being  very  powerful,  he  ate  and  drank
so  much,  that  at  length  the  inner  demon  was
quieted,  and  being  overpowered  with  fatigue,  he
fell  asleep.  An  old  experienced  man,  who  had
seen  the  world,  and  was  in  the  caravan,  said:
"  O  companions,  I  am  more  afraid  of  your  guard
than  of  the  robbers,  for  they  tell  a  story  of
an  Arab,  who,  having  collected  together  some
money,  would  not  sleep  alone  in  his  house,  for
fear  of  being  robbed  by  the  Lowrians,  but  got
one  of  his  friends  to  stay  with  him,  from  the
apprehension  he  had  of  being  alone.  He  stayed
with  him  several  nights,  but  as  soon  as  he  got
intelligence  of  the  direms,  he  seized  them,  and
made  off.  The  next  morning,  they  saw  the
Arab  despoiled  and  lamenting.  They  asked
what  can  be  the  matter,  excepting  that  the
thieves  may  have  stolen  your  money  ?  He  re-
plied, 'By  God,  not  they,  but  the  person  who
was  the  guard.'  I  never  thought  myself  secure
from  the  serpent,  because  I  knew  his  disposition.
A  wound  from  the  teeth  of  an  enemy  is  most
severe,  when  it  is  given  under  the  semblance  of
friendship.  How  do  you  know,  my  friends,  but
what  this  young  man  may  be  one  of  the  thieves,
who  by  stratagem  has  introduced  himself  amongst
us,  in  order  that,  when  he  finds  an  opportunity,
he  may  give  intelligence  to  his  comrades  ?  My
advice,  therefore,  is  this,  that  we  leave  him  asleep


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.   251

and  depart."  The  advice  of  the  old  man  was
approved  by  his  juniors,  and  as  they  were  sus-
picious of  this  strong  man,  they  took  up  their
baggage,  and,  leaving  him  asleep,  departed.  The
young  man,  when  the  sun  shone  on  his  shoul-
ders, lifted  up  his  head,  and  discovered  that  the
caravan  was  departed.  He  wandered  about  a
loner  time  without  being  able  to  find  the  road.
Thirsty  and  without  food,  he  laid  his  head  on
the  ground,  in  a  style  of  despondency :  "  Who
will  converse  with  me  now  that  the  yellow
camels  are  departed  ?  A  traveller  has  no  friend,
besides  a  traveller.  He  is  the  readiest  to  dis-
tress a  traveller,  who  has  not  himself  experienced
the  difficulties  of  travelling."  He  was  uttering
this  sentence,  when  the  king's  son,  having  lost
his  attendants  in  pursuit  of  game,  happening  to
come  to  the  spot,  overheard  him,  and  seeing  him
of  a  good  appearance,  and  in  distressed  circum-
stances, asked  from  whence  he  was,  and  how  he
came  there.  He  gave  a  short  account  of  what
had  befallen  him ;  and  the  king's  son,  compas-
sionating him,  bestowed  on  him  a  garment,  and
money,  and  ordered  a  trusty  perscfn  to  accom-
pany him,  and  see  him  safe  to  his  own  city.
The  father  was  rejoiced  at  the  sight  of  him,  and
thanked  God  for  his  safe  return.  At  night  he
related  to  his  father  what  had  happened  in  the
boat,  of  the  violence  of  the  boatman,  and  of  the


252  THE  GULISTAN.

peasants,  and  the  treachery  of  the  caravan.
The  father  said :  "  O  son !  did  I  not  tell  you,  at
the  time  of  your  departure,  that  the  strong  but
poor  man  has  his  hand  tied ;  and  that  his  foot,
though  resembling  the  paw  of  a  Hon,  is  broken  ?
What  an  excellent  saying  is  that  of  the  needy
gladiator,  —  'A  grain  of  gold  is  worth  more  than
fifty  pounds  of  strength.'  "

The  son  replied :  "  O  father !  of  a  truth,
without  encountering  difficulty,  you  cannot  ac-
quire riches  ;  and  without  you  endanger  your
life,  you  cannot  gain  the  victory  over  your
enemy ;  and  without  sowing  seed,  you  cannot
fill  your  barn.  Don't  you  perceive  that,  in
return  for  the  little  distress  that  I  suffered,
how  much  wealth  I  have  brought  with  me  :  and
for  the  sting  that  I  endured,  what  a  stock  of
honey  I  have  acquired  ?  Although  we  cannot
enjoy  more  than  Providence  has  assigned  us,
we  ought  not  to  be  negligent  in  acquiring  it.
If  the  diver  were  to  think  of  the  jaw  of  the
crocodile,  he  would  never  get  in  his  possession
precious  pearls.  The  lower  millstone  does  not
move,  and  therefore  sustains  a  great  weight.
What  food  can  a  ravenous  lion  find  in  his
den  ?  What  game  can  be  taken  by  a  hawk
that  cannot  fly?  If  you  wait  in  your  house
for  provision,  your  hands  and  feet  will  become
as   thin   as   those   of  a   spider."      The    father


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  253

said :  "  O  son,  Heaven  has  befriended  you  tins
time,  and  good  fortune  has  been  your  guide,  so
that  you  have  been  able  to  pluck  the  rose
from  the  thorn,  and  to  extract  the  thorn  from
your  foot ;  and  a  great  man  met  with  you,  pitied
and  enriched  you,  and  healed  your  broken  con-
dition. But  such  instances  are  rare,  and  we
ought  not  to  expect  wonders.  The  hunter  doth
not  always  carry  off  the  game :  perchance  him-
self may  one  day  become  the  prey  of  the  tiger.
In  like  manner  as  it  happened  to  one  of  the
kings  of  Persia,  who,  possessing  a  ring  set  with
a  valuable  jewel,  went  once  on  a  party  of  pleas-
ure with  some  of  his  particular  associates  to
Mussula  Shiraz,  and  ordered  that  they  should
fix  the  ring  on  the  dome  of  Asud,  with  a  procla-
mation, that  whoever  shot  an  arrow  through  the
circlet  of  it  should  have  the  ring.  It  chanced
there  were  at  that  time  four  hundred  experienced
archers  attending  him,  whose  arrows  all  missed :
but  as  a  boy  was  playing  on  the  terrace  roof  of
the  monastery,  and  shooting  his  arrows  at  ran-
dom, the  morning  breeze  conducted  one  of  them
through  the  ring.  The  prize  was  bestowed  on
him,  together  with  other  rich  gifts.  After  this
the  boy  burnt  his  bow  and  arrows,  and  on  their
asking  him  why  he  had  done  so,  he  replied,
4  That  this  my  first  repute  may  be  lasting.'  It
may  happen   that   the   prudent  counsel   of  an


254  THE  GULISTAN.

enlightened  sage  does  not  succeed ;  and  it  may-
chance  that  an  unskilful  boy,  through  mistake,
hits  the  mark  with  his  arrow."


TALE    XXIX.

I  SAW  a  Durwaish,  who,  having  seated  him-
self in  a  cave,  had  given  up  worldly  society,
regarding  neither  kings  nor  princes.  Whoso-
ever becomes  a  beggar,  will  be  in  want  as  long
as  he  lives.  Forsake  covetousness,  and  reign  as
a  monarch ;  for  the  neck  of  the  contented  man
is  exalted.  A  certain  king  of  that  country  inti-
mated, that,  relying  on  his  benevolence  and  hu-
mane disposition,  he  was  inclined  to  hope  that
he  would  condescend  to  partake  of  his  bread  and
salt.  The  Sheik  consented,  the  acceptance  of
such  invitations  being  conformable  to  the  cus-
tom of  the  Prophet.  Another  time,  when  the
king  went  to  visit  him,  he  arose,  and  embraced
the  monarch,  and  showed  him  kindness.  When
the  king  was  gone,  one  of  the  Sheik's  compan-
ions observed,  that  such  condescension  towards
the  king  was  contrary  to  rule,  and  asked  what
it  meant.  He  replied :  "  Have  you  not  heard
the  saying,  *  At  whosoever's  table  you  sit,  you
ought  to  show  him  respect '  ?    The  ear  may  pass


EXCELLENCY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  255

through  life  without  listening  to  the  sound  of
the  drum,  the  flute,  and  the  harp ;  the  sight  may
abstain  from  the  pleasures  of  the  garden ;  the
smell  may  be  vigorous  without  the  rose  and  the
nusreen  ;  if  the  pillow  is  not  stuffed  with  feath-
ers, sleep  may  be  obtained  with  a  stone  under
the  head ;  and  if  one  has  not  his  mistress  for
a  bedfellow,  he  may  hug  himself  in  his  own
arms ;  but  the  vile  belly,  when  the  intestines
begin  to  grumble,  has  not  patience  for  any-
thing."


CHAPTER  IV.


Of  the  Advantages  of  Taciturnity.


TALE    I.

^  SAID  to  one  of  my  friends,  "  I  have
myself  determined  to  observe  silence,
because  that  in  conversation  there
frequently  happens  both  good  and
evil,  and  the  eye  of  an  enemy  observes  only  that
which  is  bad."

He  replied  :  "  O  brother,  he  is  the  best  ene-
my who  does  not  see  the  good.  To  the  inimical
eye  virtue  is  the  greatest  blemish.  Saadi  is
indeed  a  rose,  but  in  the  eyes  of  his  enemies
he  appears  a  thorn.  The  brother  of  enmity
never  passeth  by  one  who  is  virtuous  without
accusing  him  of  falsehood  and  vainglory.  The
splendor  of  the  orb,  the  fountain  of  light,  which
illumines  this  world,  appears  dim  to  the  eye  of
the  mole."


ADVANTAGES  OF  TACITURNITY.    257


TALE    II.

A  MERCHANT,  having  suffered  a  loss  of  a  .
thousand  dinars,  said  to  Ins  son,  "  You
must  not  mention  this  matter  to  any  one."  He
answered,  "  O  father,  it  is  your  command,  and
therefore  I  will  not  speak ;  but  pray  tell  me,
what  is  the  use  of  keeping  it  secret  ?  '  He  re-
plied, "  In  order  that  we  may  not  suffer  two
misfortunes :  one,  the  loss  of  the  money,  and
another,  the  reproach  of  our  neighbors.  Im-
part not  your  sorrow  to  your  enemies,  for  they
will  exclaim,  God  avert  the  evil !  at  the  same
time  that  they  will  rejoice  at  it."


TALE    III.

A  SENSIBLE  young  man,  who  had  made
considerable  progress  in  learning  and  vir-
tue, was  at  the  same  time  so  discreet,  that
he  would  sit  in  the  company  of  learned  men
without  uttering  a  word.  Once  his  father  said
to  him,  "  My  son,  why  do  you  not  also  say  some-
thing of  what  you  know  ? ':  He  replied :  "  I  fear
lest  they  should  question  me  about  something  of

Q


258  THE  GITLISTAN.

which  I  am  ignorant,  whereby  I  should  suffer
shame.

"  Have  you  not  heard  of  a  Sufi,  that  was  driv-
ing some  nails  into  his  sandals,  when  an  officer,
laying  hold  of  his  sleeve,  said,  '  Come  and  shoe
my  horse  ? '  Whilst  you  are  silent,  no  one  has
any  business  with  you,  but  when  you  speak,  you
must  be  ready  with  your  proofs."


TALE    IV.

A  MAN  famous  for  his  learning,  happened
to  have  a  dispute  with  an  infidel,  and
finding  that  argument  had  no  effect,  he  gave  up
the  contest,  and  retired.  Somebody  said,  "  How
happens  it  that  you,  who  possess  so  much  supe-
riority in  learning,  virtue,  and  wisdom,  are  not
a  match  for  this  infidel  ?  "  He  replied,  "  My
learning  is  the  Koran,  the  traditions  of  the
Prophet,  and  the  doctrines  of  the  fathers,  which
he  will  neither  hear  nor  believe  ;  and  what  use
is  there  in  my  listening  to  his  blasphemy  ?  To
him  who  will  not  be  convinced  by  the  Koran
and  the  tradition,  the  proper  answer  is,  not  to
answer  him."


ADVANTAGES  OF   TACITURNITY.    259


TALE    V.

GALEN,  on  seeing  a  blockhead  lay  hold  of
the  collar  of  a  wise  man,  and  disgrace
him,  said :  "  If  this  man  had  been  really  wise,
matters  would  not  have  come  to  this  pass  with  the
ignorant.  Strife  and  contention  will  not  happen
between  two  wise  men,  and  a  wise  man  will  not
contend  with  a  blockhead.  If  an  ignorant  fellow
in  his  brutality  speaks  rudely,  the  wise  man  will
answer  him  with  mildness.  Two  wise  men  will
not  break  a  hair ;  it  is  the  same  case  between
an  obstinate  person  and  one  of  a  mild  disposi-
tion; but  if  they  are  both  ignorant,  they  will
break  a  chain."


TALE    VI.

SUHBAN  Wahil  has  been  considered  as  un-
rivalled in  eloquence,  insomuch  that,  if  he
spoke  before  an  assembly  for  the  space  of  a  year,
he  did  not  repeat  the  same  word  twice,  and  if
the  same  meaning  recurred,  he  expressed  it  in
a  different  form ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  qualifica-
tions for  a  courtier.  Although  a  discourse  be
captivating  and  sweet,  commanding  belief  and
admiration ;  yet  when  you  have  once  delivered


260  THE  GULISTAN.

it,  repeat  it  not  again  ;  for  when  you  have  once
eaten  sweetmeats,  it  is  enough.


TALE    VII.

I  HEARD  a  sage  say,  that  no  one  confesses
his  own  ignorance,  excepting  he  who  begins
speaking  whilst  another  is  talking,  and  before
the  discourse  is  ended.  "  O  wise  man,  a  discourse
hath  a  commencement  and  a  conclusion.  Con-
found not  one  discourse  with  another.  A  man
of  virtue,  judgment,  and  prudence  speaks  not
until  there  is  silence^"


TALE    VIII..

SOME  of  the  servants  of  the  Sultan  Mah-
mood  asked  Husn  Miemundie  what  the
king  had  said  to  him  about  a  certain  affair.  He
answered,  "  Are  you  also  acquainted  with  it  ? '
They  replied,  "  You  are  the  prime  minister  of
the  empire ;  whatever  the  king  says  to  you,  he
does  not  think  proper  to  tell  to  such  persons  as
we  are."  He  replied,  "  He  tells  it  me,  in  the
confidence  that  I  will  not  declare  it  to  any  one ;


ADVANTAGES   OF   TACITURNITY.    2G1

why  then  do  you  ask  me  ? '  The  wise  man
tells  not  what  he  knows ;  it  is  not  prudent  to
sport  with  one's  head  by  revealing  the  king's
secrets.


TALE    IX.

I  WAS  hesitating  about  concluding  a  bargain
for  a  house,  when  a  Jew  said,  "  I  am  an  old
householder  in  that  quarter ;  inquire  of  me  the
description  of  the  house,  and  buy  it,  for  it  has
no  fault."     I  replied:  "  Excepting  that  you  are

one  of  the  neighbors.     A  house  from  being  in

©  ©

your  neighborhood  would  be  worth  ten  dinars
of  bad  coin ;  but  we  may  entertain  hopes  that
after  your  death  it  may  fetch  a  thousand."


TALE    X.

A  CERTAIN  poet  went  to  the  chief  of  a
gang  of  robbers,,  and  recited  verses  in  his
praise.  He  ordered  him  to  be  stripped  of  his
clothes,  and  expelled  the  village.  The  dogs
attacking  him  in  his  rear,  he  wanted  to  take  up
some  stones,  but  they  were  frozen  to  the  ground.
Thus  distressed  he  said,  "  What  a  vile  set  of


2C2  THE   GU LI  STAN.

men  are  these,  who  let  loose  their  dogs  and
fasten  their  stones."  The  chief  having  heard
him  from  a  window,  laughed  and  said,  "  O  wise
man,  ask  a  boon  of  me."  He  answered:  "I
want  my  own  garment,  if  you  will  vouchsafe  to
bestow  it.  A  man  entertains  hopes  from  those
who  are  virtuous.  I  have  no  expectation  from
your  virtue,  only  do  me  no  injury.  We  are
satisfied  with  your  benevolence  in  suffering  us
to  depart."  The  chief  of  the  robbers  took  com-
passion on  him,  ordered  his  garment  to  be  re-
stored, and  added  to  it  a  robe  of  fur,  together
with  some  direms.


TALE    XI.

AN  astrologer  entered  his  own  house,  and
seeing  a  stranger  sitting  in  company  with
his  wife,  abused  him,  and  used  such  harsh  lan-
guage, that  a  quarrel  and  strife  ensued.  A
shrewd  man,  being  apprised  thereof,  |aid,  "  What
do  you  know  of  the  celestial  sphere,  when  you
cannot  tell  who  is  in  your  own  house  ?  '


ADVANTAGES   OF   TACITURNITY.    263


TALE    XII.

A  PREACHER,  who  had  a  detestable  voice,
but  thought  he  had  a  very  sweet  one,
bawled  out  to  no  purpose.  You  would  say  the
croaking  of  the  crow  of  the  desert  was  the  bur-
den of  his  song,  and  that  the  following  verse  of
the  Koran  was  intended  for  him :  "  Verily  the
most  detestable  of  sounds  is  the  braying  of  an
ass."

When  this  ass  of  a  preacher  brayeth,  it  makes
Persepolis  tremble.  The  people  of  the  town,
on  account  of  the  respectability  of  his  office,  sub-
mitted to  the  calamity,  and  did  not  think  it
advisable  to  molest  him,  until  one  of  the  neigh-
boring preachers,  who  secretly  was  ill  disposed
towards  him,  came  once  to  see  him,  and  said,
"  I  saw  a  dream,  may  it  prove  good !  "  He
asked,  "  What  did  you  see  ?  '  He  replied,  "  I
thought  you  had  a  sweet  voice,  and  that  the
people  were  enjoying  tranquillity  from  your  dis-
course." The  preacher,  after  reflecting  a  little
on  the  subject,  said :  "  What  a  happy  dream  this
is  that  you  have  seen,  which  has  discovered  to
me  my  defect,  in  that  I  have  an  unpleasant
voice,  and  that  the  people  are  distressed  at  my
preaching.  I  have  vowed  that,  in  future,  I  will
read   only  in   a  low  tone.     The   company  of


264  THE   GULISTAN.

friends  was  disadvantageous  to  me,  because  they
look  on  my  bad  manners  as  excellent ;  my  de-
fects appear  to  them  skill  and  perfection;  and
my  thorn  is  regarded  as  the  rose  and  the  jasmine.
Where  is  the  enemy,  with  an  impudent  and
piercing  eye,  who  shall  point  out  my  fault  ? '


TALE    XIII.

A  CERTAIN  person,  who  performed  gratis
the  office  of  mowuzzin  in  the  mosque  of
Sanjaryah,  had  such  a  voice  as  disgusted  all
who  heard  it.  The  intendant  of  the  mosque,
an  Umeer,  a  good,  humane  man,  being  unwilling
to  offend  him,  said,  "  My  lad,  this  mosque  has
mowuzzins  of  long  standing,  each  of  whom  has
a  monthly  stipend  of  five  dinars  ;  now  I  will
give  you  ten  dinars  to  go  to  another  place."
He  agreed  to  this  proposal,  and  went  away.
Some  time  after  he  came  to  the  Umeer  and  said,
"  O  my  lord,  you  injured  me,  in  sending  me  away
from  this  station  for  ten  dinars;  for  where  I
went,  they  will  give  me  twenty  dinars  to  remove
to  another  place,  to  which  I  have  not  consented."
The  Umeer  laughed,  and  said:  "Take  care,  don't
accept  of  the  offer,  for  they  may  be  willing  to
give  you  fifty.     No  one,  with  a  mattock,  can  so


ADVANTAGES   OF   TACITURNITY.     2G5

effectually  scrape  off  clay  from  the  face  of  a
hard  stone  as  your  discordant  voice  harrows  up
the  soul."


TALE    XIV.

A  MAN  with  a  disagreeable  voice  was  read-
ing the  Koran,  aloud,  when  a  holy  man
passing  by  asked  what  was  his  monthly  stipend.
He  answered,  "  Nothing  at  all."  He  resumed,
44  Why  then  do  you  take  so  much  trouble  ? '
He  replied,  "I  read  for  the  sake  of  God."  The
other  rejoined,  "  For  God's  sake  do  not  read ;
for  if  you  read  the  Koran  in  this  maimer,  you
will  destroy  the  splendor  of  Islamism."


12


CHAPTER    V.


Of  Love  and  Youth.


TALE   I.


|HEY  asked  Husn  Miemundee,
"  How  happens  it  that  Sultan  Mah-
mood,  having  such  a  number  of
H£  handsome  slaves,  remarkable  for
their  exquisite  beauty,  has  not  such  regard  and
affection  for  any  one  of  them  as  for  Iyaz,  who
has  nothing  extraordinary  in  his  appearance  ? '
He  replied  :  "  Whatever  affects  the  heart  ap-
pears beautiful  to  the  sight.  On  whomsoever
the  Sultan  places  his  affections,  although  he
doth  everything  that  is  bad,  yet  he  will  appear
seemly.  And  him  whom  the  king  rejects,  not
one  of  the  household  will  caress.  Should  anv
one  look  unfavorably  on  another,  the  beauty  of
Joseph  would  appear  deformity;  and  if  he  casteth
the  eyes  of  desire  on  a  demon,  he  will  seem  a
cherub  in  his  sight."


OF  LOVE  AND   YOUTH.  267


TALE    II.

THEY  tell  of  a  certain  great  man,  who,
having  a  very  beautiful  slave,  for  whom
he  entertained  a  virtuous  affection,  said  to  one
of  his  friends,  "  What  a  pity  it  is  that  this  slave,
who  is  handsome,  should  be  rude  and  insolent."
He  replied :  "  O  brother,  when  you  profess  friend-
ship, look  not  for  obedience  ;  as  between  the
lover  and  the  mistress  the  relationship  of  master
and  servant  has  ceased.  When  the  master  plays
and  laughs  with  his  beautiful  handmaid,  what  is
the  wonder  if  she  coquets  in  her  turn,  and  he
bears  the  burden  of  her  blandishments  like  a
slave?  The  slave  ought  to  be  employed  in
carrving  water  and  making  bricks ;  he  who  is
pampered  becomes  insolent."


TALE    III.

I  SAW  a  religious  man  so  captivated  by  the
beauty  of  a  youth,  that  his  secret  became
public,  insomuch  that  he  suffered  reproach  and
uneasiness  ;  however,  he  did  not  relinquish  his
attachment ;  and  said,  "  I  will  not  quit  the  skirt
of  your  garment,  although  yourself  should  smite


268  THE   GULISTAN.

me  with  a  sharp  sword :  besides  thee,  I  have
neither  asylum  nor  defence :  to  you  alone  can  I
flee  for  refuge."  Once  I  reproved  him,  and
said,  "  What  has  happened  to  your  excellent
understanding,  that  mean  inclinations  sho'uld
have  been  able  to  overpower  it  ? "  After  re-
flecting a  short  time,  he  replied,  "  Wherever
the  king  of  love  cometh,  the  arm  of  piety  hath
not  power  to  resist  him.  How  can  that  poor
wretch  be  clean,  who  has  fallen  up  to  his  neck
in  a  quagmire  ?  "


TALE    IV.

A  CERTAIN  person  having  lost  his  heart,
abandoned  himself  to  despair.  The  object
of  his  affection  being  a  place  of  danger,  a  whirl-
pool ;  not  a  morsel  with  which  you  could  hope
to  gratify  the  palate ;  not  a  bird  that  would  fall
into  the  net.  When  your  sweetheart  will  not
look  at  your  gold,  that  metal  and  earth  appear
alike  in  your  sight.  His  friends  besought  him
to  relinquish  this  vain  imagination,  many  besides
himself  being  seized  with  this  hopeless  idea,  and
held  in  captivity  by  it.  He,  lamenting,  said:
"  Desire  my  friends  not  to  admonish  me,  since
my  destiny   depends    on    the    will    of  another.


OF  LOVE  AND   YOUTH.  2G9

Warriors  kill  their  enemies  by  the  strength  of
their  hands  and  shoulders ;  but  those  who  are
beautiful  destroy  their  friends.  It  is  not  con-
sistent with  the  laws  of  love,  through  fear  of
death  to  relinquish  our  attachment  to  our  mis-
tress. You  who  seek  your  own  ease  cannot  be
true  in  the  game  of  love.  If  you  cannot  obtain
access  to  the  object  of  your  affection,  friendship
demands  that  you  should  die  in  the  pursuit.  I
persist,  because  no  other  course  remains,  even
though  my  adversary  covers  me  with  wounds
from  a  sword,  or  an  arrow.  If  I  should  be  able,
I  will  seize  her  sleeve,  otherwise  I  will  go  and
expire  at  her  threshold."  His  relations,  who
washed  him  well,  and  pitied  his  condition,  admin-
istered advice  ;  and  fettered  him,  but  without
any  benefit.  Alas !  the  physician  prescribes
aloes,  whilst  that  sensualist  requires  sugar.  Have
you  heard  what  a  mistress  whispered  to  one  who
had  lost  his  heart  ?  "  As  long  as  you  maintain
your  own  dignity,  of  what  value  shall  I  appear
in  your  eyes  ? '  They  informed  the  king's
son,  who  was  the  object  of  his  attachment,  "  that
there  frequents  this  place  a  young  man  of  ami-
able manners  and  conversation,  from  whom  we
hear  brilliant  discourses,  and  wonderful  sallies  of
wit ;  but  we  apprehend  that  he  lias  insanity  in
his  head,  and  that  his  heart  is  inflamed,  for  he
has  the  appearance  of  being  distractedly  in  love."


270  THE   GULISTAN.

The  Prince,  who  knew  himself  to  be  the  object
of  the  young  man's  attachment,  and  that  he  had
raised  this  dust  of  calamity,  galloped  his  horse
towards  him.  When  the  youth  saw  that  the
Prince  intended  to  approach  him,  he  wept  and
said,  "  The  person  who  inflicted  the  mortal
wound  is  again  coming  towards  me  :  it  should
seem  that  his  heart  compassionateth  him  whom
he  hath  slain."  Notwithstanding,  the  Prince
showed  him  great  kindness,  and  asked,  "  From
whence  come  you?  what  is  your  name  ?  and  what
profession  do  you  follow  ?  '  The  youth  was  so
immersed  in  the  profundity  of  friendship  and
attachment,  that  absolutely  he  was  not  able  to
utter  a  word.

Although  you  know  the  seven  portions  of  the
Koran  by  heart,  when  you  become  distracted
witli  love  you  will  not  remember  your  alphabet.
The  Prince  said,  "  Why  do  you  not  speak  to  me,
who  am  numbered  amongst  the  Durwaishes,  nay,
am  devoted  to  their  service  ?  '  Beino;  at  length
encouraged  by  the  familiarity  of  his  friend's  dis-
course, he  raised  up  his  head  from  the  bufferings
of  the  billows  of  affection  and  said,  "  It  is  won-
derful how  I  can  exist,  when  admitted  to  your
presence ;  and  that,  having  heard  your  voice,  I
should  be  able  to  reply."  Having  said  thus,  he
uttered  an  exclamation,  and  surrendered  his
soul    to   God.     It  would   not   be   surprising  if


OF  LOVE  AND   YOUTH.  271

one  should  be  killed  at  the  gate  of  his  be-
loved, but  it  would  be  astonishing  if  he  came
there  alive,  and  brought  back  his  soul  in  safety.


TALE    V.

THERE  was  a  certain  youth  of  most  exqui-
site beauty,  to  whom  his  tutor,  through
the  frailty  of  human  nature,  became  so  attached,
that  he  would  be  frequently  reciting  these  words :
"  My  mind  is  not  so  weakly  engaged  in  the  con-
templation of  your  heavenly  face,  that  I  can
preserve  any  recollection  of  myself.  I  cannot
restrain  my  eyes  from  beholding  you,  although
I  perceive  the  arrow  that  comes  directly  against
me."  Once  the  youth  said,  "I  entreat  you  to
give  the  same  attention  to  my  behavior  as  you
bestow  on  my  studies ;  and  if  you  should  deem
any  part  of  my  conduct  reprehensible,  apprise
me  thereof,  that  I  may  endeavor  to  change  it."
He  replied,  "  O  my  son,  require  this  of  some
one  else,  for  the  eyes  with  which  I  view  you  see
nothing  but  virtues.  The  malignant  eye,  which
I  wish  may  be  torn  out,  regards  every  virtue
as  a  blemish;  but  if  you  have  only  one  excel-
lency and  seventy  faults,  the  friend  will  perceive
nothing  but  that  single  virtue."


272  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    VI.

I  REMEMBER  that  one  night  one  of  my
dearest  friends  entered  the  door,  when  I  was
so  impatient  to  receive  him,  that  in  rising  from
my  seat  the  lamp  was  extinguished  by  the
sleeve  of  my  garment.  There  appeared  in  a
vision  a  resplendent  form  whose  brightness  il-
lumined the  darkness  of  the  night.  I  was
astonished  how  my  good  fortune  could  have
bestowed  such  a  treasure.  He  sat  down  and
began  to  complain,  that  at  sight  of  him  I  had
put  out  the  lamp.  I  replied,  "I  thought  it. was
sunrise  ;  and  as  the  wits  have  said,  if  an  ugly
person  should  stand  before  the  candle,  arise  and
smite  him  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly ;  but
should  it  prove  to  be  one  whose  smiles  and
whose  lips  are  sweet,  lay  hold  of  her  sleeve,  and
put  out  the  light."


TALE    VII.

A  PERSON  who  had  not  seen  his  friend
for  a  long  time  said,  "  Where  have  you
been  whilst  I  was  so  anxious  to  hear  of  you  ? '
He  answered :  "  It  is  better  to  desire  than  to
loathe.      You   have    come   late,   O    intoxicated


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  273

idol ;  I  will  not  let  you  escape  from  me  again
quickly.  It  is,  however,  better  to  see  a  sweet-
heart after  intervals  of  absence,  than  to  be
satiated  with  a  continuance  of  her  company.
The  mistress,  when  she  comes  accompanied  by
my  rivals,  can  only  do  so  to  torment  me,  be-
cause such  society  must  excite  envy  and  conten-
tion. When  thou  comest  to  visit  me  accom-
panied by  my  rivals,  although  you  appear
peaceable,  yet  your  intention  is  hostile.  If
my  mistress  associates  with  my  rival  only  for  an
instant,  I  shall  soon  die  of  jealousy."  Smiling,
he  replied,  "  O  Saadi,  I  am  the  candle  of  the
assembly ;  what  is  it  to  me  if  the  moth  will
consume  itself?  "


TALE    VIII.

I  REMEMBER  that  in  former  times  I  asso-
ciated so  continually  with  a  friend,  that  we
were  like  a  double  almond.  A  journey  unex-
pectedly happened.  When  I  returned,  he  began
to  reproach  me  for  having  been  so  long  absent
without  sending  a  messenger.  I  replied :  "  It
seemed  distressing  to  me,  that  the  eyes  of  a
courier  should  be  enlightened  by  your  counte-
nance, whilst  I  was  deprived  of  that  happiness.

12*  R


274  THE   GULISTAN.

Tell  my  old  friend  not  to  impose  a  vow  upon
me,  for  I  would  not  vow  to  relinquish  him  not
from  the  dread  of  a  sword.  I  cannot  endure
the  thoughts  of  any  one  seeing  you  to  satiety.
Again  I  say,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  be
satiated  with  your  company."


TALE    IX.

I  SAW  a  learned  man  captivated  by  ms  at-
tachment for  a  person,  and  submitting  with
incredible  patience  to  his  insolent  behavior.
Once  by  way  of  admonition  I  said  to  him,  I
know  that  there  is  nothing  criminal  in  your
attachment  to  this  person,  and  that  this  friend-
ship is  founded  on  pure  virtue  ;  nevertheless,  it
is  unbecoming  the  dignity  of  a  learned  man  to
expose  himself  to  calumny,  and  to  suffer  insult
from  rude  people.  He  replied:  "  O  friend,  cease
to  reproach  my  destiny,  for  I  have  frequently
reflected  on  the  subject  you  mention,  and  find  it
easier  to  suffer  injury  on  his  account  than  to
relinquish  him ;  and  the  sages  have  said,  that  it
is  easier  to  reconcile  the  heart  to  labor  than  to
refuse  your  eyes  the  sight  of  a  beloved  object.
Whosoever  hath  given  his  heart  to  a  beloved
object,  has   put  his   beard   into    the    hands  of


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  275

another.  If  he  without  whom  you  cannot  live
should  commit  violence,  you  must  submit  to  it.
A  deer  with  a  halter  round  his  neck  cannot  go
where  he  pleaseth."  One  day  I  said  to  him  :
"  Beware  of  this  friend,  and  many  times  since
have  I  implored  forgiveness.  A  lover  cannot
abstain  from  the  object  of  his  affection.  I  have
placed  my  heart  under  her  direction ;  whether
she  calls  me  to  her  in  kindness,  or  rejects  me
with  severity,  it  is  her  pleasure."


TALE    X.

IN  the  season  of  my  youth  it  happened,  as  you
know,  that  I  formed  a  strict  intimacv  with  a
handsome  youth,  because  he  had  a  melodious
voice,  and  a  form  beautiful  as  the  full  moon  just
appearing  above  the  horizon.  The  down  of  his
chin  seemed  nourished  by  the  water  of  immor-
tality ;  whosoever  beheld  his  sweet  lips,  tasted
sugar  candy.  It  happened  that  I  discovered
something  in  his  behavior  that  did  not  accord
with  my  disposition,  whereupon  I  quitted  his
company,  and,  taking  up  the  pieces  from  the
game  of  friendship,  I  said,  "  Get  away,  and  go
where  you  please ;  if  you  will  not  follow  my
advice,  take  your  own  course."     As  he  was  de-


276  THE  GULISTAN.

parting  I  heard  him  say,  "  If  the  bat  does  not
choose  to  associate  with  the  sun,  the  splendor  of
the  luminary  will  not  thereby  be  diminished."
Having  said  thus,  he  set  out  on  a  journey,  and  I
experienced  much  disquietude  at  the  separation.
The  opportunity  of  intercourse  was  lost.  No
one  knows  the  value  of  pleasure  until  he  has
suffered  adversity.  Return  thou  and  put  me  to
death,  for  to  die  in  your  presence  is  better  than
to  live  in  your  absence.  However,  by  the  bless-
ing of  God  after  a  time  he  returned.  But  he
had  lost  the  melodious  voice  of  David ;  and  his
beauty  that  had  resembled  Joseph  was  faded,
his  chin  being  covered  with  dust  like  the  quince,
so  that  the  incomparable  splendor  of  his  beauty
was  obscured.  He  expected  that  I  should  have
catched  him  in  my  arms  ;  when,  stepping  aside,
I  said :  "  At  the  time  that  you  flourished  in  the
flower  of  youth,  you  drove  away  those  who
wrished  to  behold  you  ;  but  now  you  return  in
peace,  with  the  lines  of  manhood  in  your  coun-
tenance. The  verdant  foliage  of  spring  is  be-
come yellow.  Put  not  the  kettle  on  the  hearth,
for  our  fire  is  cooled.  How  long  will  your  pride
and  vanity  last  ?  Reflect  that  the  season  of  your
power  is  elapsed.  Go  to  him  who  wants  you,
sport  yourself  with  those  who  are  willing  to  buy
you.  It  has  been  said  that  verdure  is  delightful
in  the  garden,  and  he   who  says  thus  knoweth


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  217

it ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  down  on  the  chin  of
youth  is  what  we  admired ;  your  garden  is  a
bed  of  leeks,  which  the  more  they  are  plucked
out,  grow  the  stronger.

"  You  departed  last  year  beautiful  as  a  deer,
but  are  returned  spotted  like  a  leopard.  Saadi
admiers  the  down  of  youth,  and  not  hairs  like  a
packing-needle.  Whether  you  allow  your  beard
to  remain  or  pull  it  out,  still  the  season  of  youth
will  pass  away.  If  I  had  such  power  over  my
life  as  you  have  over  your  beard,  it  should  never
depart  until  the  day  of  resurrection."  I  asked
him,  "  What  is  become  of  the  beauty  of  your
face,  that  ants  are  sprung  up  round  the  moon?'
He  smiled  and  replied,  "  I  know  not  what  has
befallen  my  face,  excepting  that  I  am  in  mourn-
ing for  my  departed  beauty."


TALE    XI.

THEY  asked  one  of  the  inhabitants  of
Baghdad  his  opinion  of  handsome  youths.
He  replied :  "  No  good  is  to  be  found  amongst
them,  as  long  as  they  appear  delicate ;  for  then
they  are  insolent ;  but  when  they  become  rough,
they  are  courteous ;  or,  in  other  words,  whilst
handsome  and  delicate   their  behavior  is  rude,


278  THE   GULISTAN.

when  they  become  rough  they  are  kind  and
friendly.  The  youth,  whilst  his  face  continues
smooth,  has  bitter  words  and  a  morose  disposi-
tion ;  when  his  beard  appears,  and  he  is  arrived
at  manhood,  he  mixes  with  society  and  cultivates
friendship."


TALE    XII.

THEY  asked  a  learned  man,  "  If  a  man  is
sitting  in  a  secret  place,  with  a  beautiful
girl,  the  doors  shut,  and  the  rivals  asleep,
the  passions  inflamed,  and  lust  raging,  as  the
Arabs  say,  the  dates  ripe,  and  the  watchman  not
hindering,  whether  he  thought  his  virtue  would
protect  him  ?  "

He  replied :  "If  he  escapes  from  the  beauti-
ful girl,  he  will  not  escape  from  slanderers.  If
the  man  has  not  suffered  his  passions  to  over-
come his  virtue,  yet  the  suspicious  world  will
think  ill  of  him.  One  may  perchance  restrain
his  passions,  but  he  will  not  be  able  to  curb
men's  tongues."


OF  LOVE  AND   YOUTH.  279


TALE    XIII.

THEY  shut  up  a  crow  in  the  same  cage
with  a  parrot,  who,  distressed  at  the
other's  ugly  appearance,  was  saying :  "  What  is
this  detestable  countenance,  this  odious  form,
this  cursed  object  with  unpolished  manners  ?
Thou  crow  of  the  desert,  would  to  God  we  were
as  far  asunder  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.
Whosoever  should  behold  your  face  when  he  is
rising,  it  would  convert  a  goodly  morning  into  a
dark  evening.  Such  an  ill-fated  wretch  should
have  a  companion  like  yourself:  but  where  in
the  world  can  your  equal  be  found  ?  '  What  is
most  strange,  the  crow  was  equally  distressed
by  the  society  of  the  parrot,  and,  lamenting  his
fate,  complained  of  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune,
and,  rubbino;  the  claws  of  sorrow  one  against  the
other,  was  saving :  "  What  ill  luck,  what  mean
fate,  what  a  reverse  of  fortune !  It  suited  my
dignity  to  be  strutting  on  a  garden  wall  in  com-
pany with  another  crow.  It  is  sufficient  im-
prisonment for  a  holy  man,  that  he  should  be
compelled  to  associate  with  profligates.  How
far  have  I  sinned,  that  in  punishment  thereof
my  life  should  be  spent  in  company  with  such  a
worthless,  conceited  prattler.  No  one  will  ap-
proach a  wall  on  which  your  picture  is  painted.


280  THE   GU LI  ST  AN.

If  you  had  admittance  into  paradise,  every  one
would  prefer  hell  to  your  company."  I  have
brought  this  example  to  show,  that,  how  much
soever  men  of  understanding  may  despise  the
ignorant,  these  are  an  hundred  times  more  dis-
tressed  in  the  company  of  the  wise.

A  devotee  being  at  a  singing-party  in  com-
pany with  some  profligates,  one  of  the  beauties
of  Balk  said  to  him :  "  If  you  are  displeased,
don't  look  sour,  for  you  are  bitter  enough  to  us
already.  In  an  assemblage  of  roses  and  tulips,
you  resemble  a  dry  stick  placed  in  the  midst;
or  like  a  contrary  wind,  or  intense  coldness,  or
driven  snow,  or  frozen  ice."


TALE    XIV.

I  HAD  a  friend  with  whom  I  travelled  many
years ;  we  ate  our  bread  and  salt  together,
and  enjoyed  the  rights  of  friendship  to  an  un-
common degree.  Afterwards,  on  account  of
same  paltry  advantage,  he  suffered  me  to  be
displeased,  and  our  intimacy  ceased.  But  not-
withstanding this  difference,  there  still  subsisted
a  cordial  attachment  on  both  sides ;  for  I  heard
that  he  was  one  day  reciting  in  a  company  these
verses   of  mine :    "  When    my  mistress   comes


OF   LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  281

-

with  sweet  smiles,  she  adds  more  salt  to  the
wound  ;  how  happy  should  I  be  if  the  tips  of  her
ringlets  could  fall  into  my  hand,  like  the  sleeve
of  the  liberal  man  into  the  hands  of  the  poor."
A  number  of  friends  who  were  present  praised  the
verses,  not  for  any  merit  that  they  possessed,  but
from  the  generosity  of  their  own  dispositions  ;  he
*  extolled  them  more  than  any  one,  and,  regretting
the  loss  of  a  long-established  friendship,  con-
fessed that  he  had  been  to  blame.  Perceiving
that  he  was  inclined  to  a  reconciliation,  I  sent
these  verses,  and  made  peace  with  him :  "  Was
there  not  a  treaty  of  fidelity  between  us,  that
you  offended  me,  and  showed  me  a  want  of
affection  ?  I  quitted  society  and  fixed  my  heart
on  you,  not  suspecting  that  you  would  so  soon
have  changed.  But  now,  if  you  are  inclined  to
peace,  return ;  and  you  shall  be  dearer  to  me
than  you  were  before."


TALE    XV.

A  PERSON  having  a  handsome  wife  who
died,  her  mother,  a  decrepit  old  woman,
for  the  sake  of  the  dower,  settled  in  his  house.
He  was  teased  to  death  by  her  society,  but,  on
account  of  the  dower,  he  had  no  remedy  for  the


282  THE   GU LI  STAN.

evil.  One  of  his  acquaintance  asked  him  how
he  found  himself  since  his  separation  from  his
dearly  beloved  wife.  He  replied:  "Not  see-
ing my  wife  is  not  so  distressing  as  the  sight  of
her  mother.  The  rose  is  plucked,  but  the  thorn
remains.  They  have  carried  off  the  treasure,
but  the  snake  remains.  It  is  better  to  see  one's
eye  fixed  on  the  point  of  a  spear,  than  to  look  at
the  face  of  an  enemy.  It  is  better  to  break  off
a  thousand  friendships,  than  to  endure  the  sight
of  a  single  enemy."


TALE    XVI.

I  RECOLLECT  that  in  my  youth,  as  I  was
passing  through  a  street,  I  cast  my  eyes  on
a  beautiful  girl.  It  was  in  the  autumn,  when
the  heat  dried  up  all  moisture  from  the  mouth,
and  the  sultry  wind  made  the  marrow  boil  in
the  bones ;  so  that,  being  unable  to  support  the
sun's  powerful  beams,  I  was  obliged  to  take
shelter  under  the  shade  of  a  wall,  in  hopes  that
some  one  would  relieve  me  from  the  distressing
heat  of  summer,  and  quench  my  thirst  with  a
draught  of  water.  Suddenly  from  the  shade  of
the  portico  of  a  house  I  beheld  a  female  form,
whose  beauty  it  is  impossible  for  the  tongue  of


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  283

eloquence  to  describe  ;  insomuch  that  it  seemed
as  if  the  dawn  was  rising  in  the  obscurity  of
night,  or  as  if  the  water  of  immortality  was  issu-
ing from  the  land  of  darkness.  She  held  in  her
hand  a  cup  of  snow-water,  into  which  she
sprinkled  sugar,  and  mixed  it  with  the  juice  of
the  grape.  I  know  not  whether  what  I  per-
ceived was  the  fragrance  of  rose-water,  or  that
she  had  infused  into  it  a  few  drops  from  the
blossom  of  her  cheek.  In  short,  I  received  the
cup  from  her  beauteous  hand,  and  chinking  the
contents,  found  myself  restored  to  new  life.
The  thirst  of  my  heart  is  not  such  that  it  can  be
allayed  with  a  drop  of  pure  water ;  the  streams
of  whole  rivers  would  not  satisfy  it.  How
happy  is  that  fortunate  person  whose  eyes  every
morning  may  behold  such  a  countenance.  He
who  is  intoxicated  with  wine  will  be  sober  again
in  the  course  of  the  night ;  but  he  who  is  in-
toxicated by  the  cupbearer,  will  not  recover  his
senses  until  the  day  of  judgment.


TALE    XVII.

IN  the   same   year   that    Sultan   Mohammed
Khovaruzm  Shall,  for  some  weighty  reason,
made   peace    with   the   king   of  Khatai,  I   en-


284  THE   GUL1STAN.

tered  the  mosque  of  Cashghur,  where  I  saw
a  boy  of  incomparable  beauty,  and  remarkably
elegant  in  his  form,  such  as  those  who  have
been  thus  described  :  —  "  The  master  perfected
you  in  bold  and  captivating  manners,  in  tyranny,
blandishment,  forwardness,  and  severity.  I  never
saw  any  mortal  possessed  of  such  beauty,  such
temper,  such  stature,  and  accomplishments,  but
you  may  have  been  instructed  by  a  Fairy."
He  held  in  his  hand  the  introduction  to  the
syntax  of  Zemukhshery,  and  was  repeating,
"  Zeid  struck  Omar,  and  became  the  injurer  of
Omar."  I  said,  "  Young  man,  Khovaruzm  and
Khatai  have  made  peace ;  and  does  there  still
continue  the  contention  between  Omar  and
Zeid?'  He  laughed,  and  asked  where  I  was
born  ?  I  answered,  at  Shiraz.  He  asked,
"  What  have  you  of  Saadi's  compositions  ?  '  I
replied  in  Arabic,  "  I  am  enamored  with  the
student  of  syntax  who  attacks  me  as  furiously  as
Zeid  does  Omar,  and  is  so  intent  on  repeating
his  lesson,  that  he  lifts  not  up  his  head ;  for  how
can  the  disdainful  person  look  upon  others  ? "
He  replied,  "  The  greater  part  of  his  verses  to
1)0  met  with  in  this  country  are  in  the  Persian
language  ;  if  you  would  repeat  some  of  those,  we
should  more  readily  comprehend  them.  Speak
to  men  according  to  their  capacity."  Whilst
you  fix  your  attention  on  syntax,  our  minds  are


OF  LOVE  AND   YOUTH.  285

bereft  of  reason.  Alas,  thou  ravisher  of  hearts  !  I
am  thinking  on  you  only,  and  you  are  engrossed
by  Omar  and  Zeid.  Probably  some  of  the
caravan  had  told  him  that  I  was  Saadi,  for  on
the  morning  of  our  departure  I  saw  him  come
running  :  he  showed  kindness  and  lamented  my
departure,  saying,  "  How  was  it  that  you  should
have  been  so  long  without  telling  that  you  are
Saadi,  in  order  that  I  might  have  rendered  you
every  service  in  my  power  ?  '  I  answered,  That
I  had  not  power  to  discover  myself  in  his  pre-
sence. He  added,  "  What  objection  can  there
be  to  your  remaining  here,  and  favoring  us  with
your  company  a  few  days  longer  ? '  I  replied,
"  I  cannot  on  account  of  the  following  incident,
which  once  befell  me.  I  saw  in  the  mountain  a
wise  man,  who  having  retired  from  the  world
dwelt  in  a  cave.  I  asking  why  he  did  not  fre-
quent the  city  to  relieve  his  mind,  he  replied,
There  dwelt  many  of  exquisite  beauty ;  and
wdiere  there  is  much  clay  the  elephants  lose
their  footing."  After  making  this  speech,  we
mutually  kissed,  and  bade  each  other  adieu.
What  benefit  is  there  in  kissing  the  cheek  of  a
friend  at  the  instant  that  you  are  bidding  him
adieu  ?  It  is  like  an  apple  with  one  cheek  red
and  the  other  yellow.  If  I  die  not  of  grief  on
the  day  that  I  bid  adieu,  you  will  not  consider
me  faithful  in  friendship.


286  THE  GU LI  ST  AN.


TALE    XVIII.

ADURWAISH  -accompanied  me  in  the
caravan  to  Mecca,  on  whom  one  of  the
nobles  of  Arabia  had  bestowed  a  hundred  dinars
for  the  support  of  his  family.  Suddenly  a  band
of  robbers  of  the  tribe  of  Khufacheh  attacked
the  caravan  and  plundered  it  of  everything.
The  merchants  began  to  cry  and  lament,  and
uttered  useless  complaints.  Whether  you  sup-
plicate, or  whether  you  complain,  the  thief  will
not  restore  the  money.  The  Durwaish  was  the
only  exception  ;  he  remaining  unshaken,  and  not
at  all  affected  by  the  adventure.  I  said  to  him,
"  Perhaps  they  have  not  taken  your  money."
He  answered :  "  Yes,  they  carried  it  off,  but
I  was  not  so  fond  of  it  as  to  be  distressed
at  losing  it.  A  man  ought  not  to  fix  his  heart
on  any  thing  or  person ;  because  it  is  a  difficult
matter  to  remove  the  heart  therefrom."  I  re-
plied :  "  Your  words  suit  my  circumstances  ex-
actly ;  for  in  my  youth  I  contracted  a  friendship
for  a  young  man,  with  so  warm  an  attachment,
that  his  beauty  was  the  Keblah  of  my  eyes,  and
his  society  the  chief  comfort  of  my  life.  No
mortal  on  earth  ever  possessed  so  beautiful  a
form  ;  perhaps  he  was  an  angel  from  Heaven.
After  his  decease,  I  swore  never  again  to  culti-


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  287

vate  friendship,  because  no  other  mortal  can
ever  equal  him.  His  sudden  death  overwhelmed
his  family  in  the  deepest  affliction.  I  continued
at  his  grave  for  many  days,  and  this  is  one  of  the
sentences  which  I  uttered  on  the  loss  of  him :
4  Would  to  God  that  on  the  day  when  fate  over-
took thee,  the  hand  of  destiny  had  also  smitten
me  with  the  sword  of  death,  that  I  might  not
thus  have  been  left  to  behold  the  world  without
thee.  Alas !  here  am  I  on  your  grave,  whilst  I
wish  that  my  head  was  buried  in  the  earth.'

"  He  who  could  never  take  rest  until  he  had
spread  roses  and  narcissuses,  through  the  vicissi-
tude of  Heaven  the  roses  of  his  cheek  are  scat-
tered, whilst  thorns  and  briers  grow  over  his
grave.  After  a  separation  from  him,  I  came  to
a  fixed  determination  that,  during  the  remainder
of  my  days,  I  would  fold  up  the  carpet  of  pleas-
ure, and  abstain  from  society.  It  would  be
profitable  to  explore  the  ocean,  but  for  the  dread
of  the  waves.  The  society  of  the  rose  would  be
delightful,  but  for  the  fear  of  thorns.  Yesterday
I  walked  proudly  as  the  peacock  in  the  garden
of  society ;  but  now,  from  the  absence  of  my
friend,  I  am  contorted  like  the  snake."


288  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XIX.

THEY  related  to  one  of  the  kings  of  Arabia
the  story  of  Leila  and  Mujnoon,  and  the
nature  of  his  insanity,  that,  whilst  endowed  with
eminent  virtues,  and  possessing  uncommon  pow-
ers of  eloquence,  he  had  abandoned  himself  to
distraction,  and  retired  into  the  desert.  The
king  ordered  him  to  be  brought  before  him,  and
when  he  came,  reproachfully  asked  him  what  he
had  seen  unworthy  in  human  nature,  to  have
induced  him  to  assume  the  manners  of  the
brutes,  and  to  relinquish  the  pleasures  of  society.
Mujnoon  wept,  and  said  :  "  Many  of  my  friends
reproach  me  for  my  love  of  Leila :  will  they
never  behold  her  charms,  that  my  excuse  may
be  accepted  ?  Would  to  Heaven  that  they  who
blame  me  for  my  passion  could  see  thy  face,  O
thou  ravisher  of  hearts !  that  at  the  sight  of  thee
they  might  be  confounded,  and  inadvertently
cut  their  hands  instead  of  the  lemon."  The
king  being  curious  to  behold  her  beauty,  that  he
might  be  able  to  judge  of  the  form  which  had
occasioned  so  much  calamity,  ordered  her  to  be
brought.  They  searched  among  the  Arabian
families,  and  having  found  her,  brought  her  be-
fore the  king,  in  the  courtyard  of  the  palace.
The    king   contemplated    her   appearance,    and


OF  LOVE   AND    YOU  TIL  289

beheld  a  person  of  dark  complexion,  and  weak
form,  insomuch  that  he  thought  her  so  con-
temptible that  the  meanest  servant  of  his  harem
surpassed  her  in  beauty  and  elegance.  Mujnoon
having  penetration  enough  to  discover  what  was
passing  in  the  king's  mind,  said :  "  O  king,  the
beauty  of  Leila  must  be  seen  with  the  eyes  of
Mujnoon  !  Thou  hast  no  compassion  on  my  dis-
order ;  my  companion  should  be  affected  with
the  same  malady,  that  I  might  sit  all  day  repeat-
ing my  tale  to  him ;  for  two  pieces  of  wood  burn
together  with  a  brighter  flame.  The  discourse
concerning  the  verdant  plain,  which  has  reached
my  ears  ;  had  the  leaves  on  that  plain  heard  it,
they  wOuld  have  joined  their  complaints  with
mine.  O  my  friends  !  say  to  them  who  are  free
from  love,  O  we  wish  that  you  knew  what
passes  in  the  heart  of  a  lover !  The  pain  of  a
wound  affects  not  those  who  are  in  health.  I
will  not  disclose  my  grief  but  to  those  who  have
tasted  the  same  affliction.  It  were  fruitless  to
talk  of  a  hornet  to  them  who  never  felt  the
sting.  Whilst  thy  mind  is  not  affected  like
mine,  the  relation  of  my  sorrow  seems  only  an
idle  tale.  Compare  not  my  anguish  to  the  cares
of  another  man  ;  he  only  holds  the  salt  in  his
baud,  but  it  is  I  who  bear  the  wound  in  my
body."

13  s


290  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XX.

THEY  tell  a  story  of  a  Cazy  of  Hamadan,
that  he  was  enamored  with  a  farrier's
beautiful  daughter  to  such  a  degree,  that  his
heart  was  inflamed  by  his  passion  like  a  horse-
shoe red  hot  in  a  forge.  For  a  long  time  he
suffered  great  inquietude,  and  was  running  about
after  her  in  the  manner  which  has  been  de-
scribed :  "  That  stately  cypress  coming  into  my
sight,  has  captivated  my  heart  and  deprived  me
of  my  strength,  so  that  I  lie  prostrate  at  her  feet.
Those  mischievous  eyes  drew  my  heart  into  the
snare.  If  you  wish  to  preserve  your  heart,  shut
your  eyes.  I  cannot  by  any  means  get  her  out
of  my  thought :  I  am  the  snake  with  a  bruised
head:  I  cannot  turn  myself."  I  have  heard
that  she  met  the  Cazy  in  the  street,  and  some-
thing having  reached  her  ears  concerning  him,
she  was  displeased  beyond  measure,  and  abused
and  reproached  him  without  mercy,  flung  a  stone,
and  did  everything  to  disgrace  him.  The  Cazy
said  to  a  respectable  man  of  learning  who  was
in  his  company :  "  Behold  that  beauteous  girl,
how  rude  she  is !  behold  her  arched  eyebrow,
what  a  sweet  frown  it  exhibits  !  In  Arabic  they
say,  that  a  blow  from  the  hand  of  her  we  love
is  as  sweet  as  raisins.     To  receive  a  blow  on  the


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  291

mouth  from  thy  hand,  is  preferable  to  eating
bread  from  one's  own  hand."  Then  again  she
tempered  her  severity  with  a  smile  of  benefi-
cence, as  kings  sometimes  speak  with  hostility,
when  they  inwardly  desire   peace.

Unripe  grapes  are  sour,  but  keep  them  a  day
or  two  and  they  will  become  sweet.  The  Cazy
having  said  thus,  repaired  to  his  court.  Some
well-disposed  persons,  who  were  in  his  service,
made  obeisance,  and  said:  "  That  with  permis-
sion they  wrould  represent  a  matter  to  him,  al-
though it  might  be  deemed  impolite,  as  the  Sages
have  said,  It  is  not  allowable  to  argue  on  every
subject ;  it  is  criminal  to  describe  the  faults  of
a  great  personage  ;  but  that,  in  consideration  of
the  kindness  which  his  servants  had  experienced
from  him,  not  to  represent  what  to  them  appears
advisable,  is  a  species  of  treachery.  The  laws
of  rectitude  require  that  you  should  conquer  this
inclination,  and  not  give  way  to  unlawful  de-
sires, for  the  office  of  Cazy  is  a  high  dignity,
which  ought  not  to  be  polluted  with  a  crime.
You  are  acquainted  with  your  mistress's  char-
acter,  and  have  heard  her  conversation.  She
who  has  lost  her  reputation,  what  cares  she  for
the  character  of  another?  It  has  frequently
happened  that  a  good  name  acquired  in  fifty
years  has  been  lost  by  a  single  imprudence."

The  Cazy  approved  the  admonition  of  his  cor-


292  THE   GULISTAN.

dial  friends,  praised  their  understanding  and
fidelity,  and  said  :  "  The  advice  which  my  friends
have  given,  in  regard  to  my  situation,  is  perfectly
right,  and  their  arguments  are  unanswerable.
Of  a  truth,  if  friendship  was  to  be  lost  on
our  giving  advice,  then  the  just  might  be  ac-
cused of  falsehood.  Reprehend  me  as  much
as  you  please,  but  you  cannot  wash  the  blacka-
moor white."  Having  said  thus,  he  sent  people
to  inquire  how  she  did,  and  spent  a  great  deal
of  money,  according  to  the  saying,  "  He  who
has  money  in  the  scales,  has  strength  in  his  arms ;
and  he  who  has  not  the  command  of  money,  is
destitute  of  friends  in  the  world.  Whosoever
sees  money,  lowers  his  head  like  the  beam  of
the  scales,  which  stops  although  it  be  made  of
iron.

To  be  brief,  one  night  he  obtained  a  meet-
ing  in  private,  and  the  superintendent  of  the
police  was  immediately  informed  of  the  cir-
cumstance, that  the  Cazy  passed  the  whole
night  in  drinking  wine  and  fondling  his  mis-
tress.  He  was  too  happy  to  sleep,  and  was
sino-incr,  "  That  the  cock  had  not  crowed  that
night  at  the  usual  hour."  The  lovers  were  not
yet  satisfied  with  each  other's  company;  the
cheeks  of  the  mistress  were  shining  between  her
curling  ringlets  like  the  ivory  ball  in  the  ebony
bat  in  the  game  of  Chowgong.     In  that  instant,


OF  LOVE  AND   YOUTH.  293

when  the  eye  of  enmity  is  asleep,  be  thou  upon
the  watch,  lest  some  mischance  befall  you ;  until
you  hear  the  mouzzin  proclaiming  the  hour  of
prayer ;  or  the  sound  of  the  kettle-drum  from
the  gate  of  the  police  of  Atabuk,  it  would  be
foolishness  to  cease  kissing  at  the  crowing  of  the
foolish  cock.  The  Cazy  was  in  this  situation
when  one  of  his  servants,  entering,  said :  "  Why
are  you  sitting  thus  ?  Arise,  and  run  as  fast  as
your  feet  can  carry  you,  for  your  enemies  have
laid  a  snare  for  you ;  nay,  they  have  said  the
truth.  But  whilst  this  fire  of  strife  is  yet  but
a  spark,  extinguish  it  with  the  water  of  good
management ;  for  it  may  happen  that  to-morrow,
when  it  breaks  out  into  a  flame,  it  will  spread
throughout  the  world."  The  Cazy,  smiling,
looked  on  the  ground  and  said :  "  If  the  lion  has
his  paw  on  the  game,  what  signifies  it  if  the  dog
should  come.  Turn  your  face  towards  your
mistress,  and  let  your  rival  bite  the  back  of  his
hand."  That  very  night  they  carried  intelligence
to  the  king  of  the  wickedness  which  had  been
committed  in  his  dominions,  and  begged  to  know
his  commands.  He  answered :  "  I  believe  the
Cazy  to  be  the  most  learned  man  of  the  age  ;
and  it  is  possible  that  this  may  be  only  a  plot
of  his  enemies  to  injure  him.  I  will  not  give
credit  to  this  story  without  I  see  proofs  with
mine  own  eyes ;    for  the  Sages  have  said,  He


29-1  THE   GULISTAN.

who  quickly  lays  hold  of  the  sword  in  his
anger,  will  gnaw  the  back  of  his  hand  through
sorrow."  I  heard  that  at  the  dawn  of  day,  the
king  with  some  of  his  principal  courtiers  came
to  the  Cazy's  bedchamber.  He  saw  th.e  candle
burning,  and  the  mistress  sitting  down,  with  the
wine  spilt  and  the  glass  broken ;  and  the  Cazy
stupefied  between  sleep  and  intoxication,  lost
to  all  sense  of  his  existence.  The  king  kindly
waked  him,  and  said,  "  Get  up,  for  the  sun  is
risen."  The  Cazy,  perceiving  him,  asked  from
what  quarter  has  the  sun  risen  ? '  The  king
answered,  "  From  the  east."  The  Cazy  replied,
"God  be  praised!  then  the  door  of  repentance  is
stilLopen,  according  to  the  tradition,  the  gate  of
repentance  shall  not  be  shut  against  the  servants
of  God,  until  the  sun  shall  rise  in  the  west";
adding,  "  Now  I  ask  pardon  of  God,  and  vow  to
him  that  I  will  repent.  These  two  things  have
led  me  unto  sin,  —  ill-fortune  and  a  weak  un-
derstanding. If  you  seize  me,  I  deserve  it ;
but  if  you  pardon  me,  forgiveness  is  better  than


vengeance."


The  king  said :  "  Repentance  can  now  avail
nothing,  as  you  know  that  you  are  about  to  suf-
fer death.  What  good  is  there  in  a  thiefs  re-
pentance, when  he  has  not  the  power  of  throwing
a  rope  into  the  upper  story.  Tell  him  who  is
tall  not  to  pluck  the  fruit,  for  he  of  low  stature


OF  LOVE  AND    YOUTH.  205

cannot  extend  his  arm  to  the  branch.  To  you
-who  have  been  convicted  of  such  wickedness,
there  can  be  no  hopes  of  escape."  The  king,
having  said  thus,  ordered  the  officers  of  justice
to  take  charge  of  lrim.  The  Cazy  said,  "  I  have
yet  one  word  to  speak  to  your  Majesty."  He
asked,  "  What  is  it  ?  '  He  replied  :  "  As  long
as  I  labor  under  your  displeasure,  think  not  that
I  will  let  go  the  skirt  of  your  garment.  Although
the  crime  which  I  have  committed  may  be  un-
pardonable, still  I  entertain  some  hopes  from
your  clemency."  The  king  said:  "You  have
spoken  with  admirable  facetiousness  and  wit,  but
it  is  contrary  to  reason  and  to  law  that  your  -wis-
dom and  eloquence  should  rescue  you  from  the
hand  of  justice.  To  me  it  seems  advisable  that
you  should  be  flung  headlong  from  the  top  of
the  castle  to  the  earth,  as  an  example  for  others."
He  replied,  "  O  monarch  of  the  universe,  I
have  been  fostered  hi  your  family,  and  am  not
singular  in  the  commission  of  such  crimes  ;  there-
fore  I  beseech  you  to  precipitate  some  one  else,
in  order  that  I  may  benefit  by  the  example."
The  king  laughed  at  his  speech,  and  spared  his
life,  and  said  to  his  enemies,  "All  of  you  are  bur-
dened with  defects  of  your  own ;  reproach  not
others  with  their  failings.  Whosoever  is  sen-
sible of  his  own  faults  carps  not  at  another's
failing."


296  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XXI.

THERE  was  an  affectionate  and  amiable
youth  who  was  betrothed  to  a  beautiful
girl.  I  have  heard  that  as  they  were  sailing  on
the  ocean,  they  fell  together  into  a  whirlpool.
When  the  mariners  went  to  the  young  man,  that
they  might  catch  his  hand,  and  save  him  from
perishing,  in  that  unhappy  juncture  he  called
aloud,  and  pointed  to  his  mistress  from  the  midst
of  the  waves,  "  Leave  me,  and  take  the  hand  of
my  beloved."  The  whole  world  admired  him
for  that  speech ;  and  when  he  was  expiring  he
was  heard  to  say,  "  Learn  not  the  tale  of  love
from  that  faithless  wretch  who  forgets  his  be-
loved in  the  hour  of  danger."  Thus  ended  the
lives  of  those  lovers ;  hearken  and  leam  from
those  of  experience,  for  Saadi  is  as  conversant
in  the  ways  and  customs  of  love  as  the  Arabic
language  is  familiar  at  Baghdad.  Fix  your
heart  on  the  mistress  whom  you  have  chosen,
and  be  blind  to  every  other  earthly  object.  If
Leila  and  Mujnoon  were  now  living,  they  might
learn  the  historv  of  love  from  this  book.


CHAPTER  VI.


On  Imbecility  and  Old  Age.


TALE    I.

WAS  engaged  in  a  disputation  with
some  learned  men  in  the  Mosque  of
Damascus,  when  suddenly  a  young
man  entering  the  gate  said,  "Is  there
any  one  amongst  you  who  understands  the  Per-
sian language  ?  '  They  pointed  to  me.  I  asked
what  was  the  matter.  He  answered  :  "  An  old
man,  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  age,  is  in
the  agonies  of  death,  and  says  something  in  the
Persian  language  which  we  do  not  comprehend.
If  you  will  have  the  goodness  to  take  the  trouble
to  go,  you  will  obtain  your  reward :  perhaps  he
may  want  to  make  his  will."  When  I  came  to
his  pillow,  he  said :  "  I  was  in  hopes  that  I
should  have  spent  the  small  remnant  of  my  life
in  ease,  but  I  can  scarcely  draw  my  breath.
Alas !  that  at  the  table  of  variegated  life  I  ate
a  little,  and  they  said  it  is  enough."    I  explained

13*


298  THE   GULISTAN.

to  the  Damasciens  in  Arabic  the  signification
of  the  discourse.  They  wondered  that,  at  his
advanced  age,  he  should  grieve  for  worldly  life.
I  then  asked  him  how  he  found  himself.  He
replied :  "  What  can  I  say  ?  Have  you  not
seen  what  pain  he  suffers  who  has  one  of  his
teeth  drawn  out  of  his  mouth  ?  Think,  then,
what  must  be  the  state  in  that  moment  when
the  soul  is  departing  from  this  precious  body."
I  said :  "  Dismiss  from  your  imagination  the
thoughts  of  death,  and  let  not  apprehension
overcome  your  constitution ;  for  the  philoso-
phers have  said,  Although  the  animal  system
be  in  full,  vigor,  yet  we  ought  not  to  rely  on
its  continuance  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  al-
though a  disease  be  dangerous,  yet  it  is  no  posi-
tive proof  of  approaching  death.  If  you  will
give  me  leave,  I  will  send  for  a  physician,  that
he  may  prescribe  some  medicine  which  may  be
the  means  of  your  recovery."  He  replied  :
"  Alas  !  The  master  of  the  house  is  consider-
ing how  to  decorate  his  hall  whilst  the  founda-
tion  is  in  a  state  of  decay.  The  skilful  physician
smites  his  hands  together,  when  he  sees  the  old
man  broken  like  a  potsherd.  The  sick  man  was
lamenting  in  agony,  whilst  an  old  woman  was
anointing  his  feet  with  a  preparation  of  sandal-
wood. But  when  the  animal  temperament  is
destroyed,  neither  amulets  nor  medicines  are  of
any  use."


ON  IMBECILITY  AND  OLD  AGE.      299


TALE    II.

AN  old  man,  telling  a  story  about  himself,
said  :  "  When  I  married  a  young  virgin,
I  bedecked  a  chamber  with  flowers,  sat  with  her
alone,  and  had  fixed  my  eyes  and  heart  solely
upon  her.  Many  long  nights  I  passed  without
sleep,  repeating  jests  and  pleasantries,  to  remove
shyness,  and  make  her  familiar.  On  one  of.
those  nights  I  said,  Fortune  has  been  propitious
to  you,  in  that  you  have  fallen  into  the  society
of  an  old  man,  of  mature  judgment,  who  has
seen  the  world,  and  experienced  various  situa-
tions of  good  and  bad  fortune,  who  knows  the
rights  of  society,  and  has  performed  the  duties
of  friendship,  one  who  is  affectionate,  affable,
cheerful,  and  conversable.

"  I  will  exert  my  utmost  endeavors  to  gain  your
affection,  and  if  you  should  treat  me  unkindly,  I
will  not  be  offended ;  or  if  like  the  parrot  your
food  should  be  sugar,  I  will  devote  my  sweet
life  to  your  support.  You  have  not  met  with  a
youth  of  a  rude  disposition,  with  a  weak  under-
standing, headstrong,  a  gadder,  who  would  be
constantly  changing  his  situations  and  inclina-
tions, sleeping  every  night  in  a  new  place,  and
every  day  forming  some  new  intimacy.  Young
men  may  be  lively  and  handsome,  but  they  are


300  THE  GULISTAN.

inconstant  in  their  attachments.  Look  not  for
fidelity  from  those,  who,  with  the  eyes  of  the
nightingale,  are  every  instant  singing  upon  a
different  rosebush.  But  old  men  pass  their  time
in  wisdom  and  good  manners,  not  in  the  igno-
rance and  frivolity  of  youth.  Seek  for  one  better
than  yourself,  and,  having  found  him,  consider
yourself  fortunate ;  with  one  like  yourself,  you
would  pass  your  life  without  improvement."

He  said:  "I  spoke  a  great  deal  after  this  man-
ner, and  thought  that  I  had  made  a  conquest  of
her  heart ;  when  all  of  a  sudden  she  fetched  a
cold  sigh  from  the  bottom  of  her  heart,  and  re-
plied :  All  the  fine  speeches  that  you  have  been
uttering  have  not-  so  much  weight  in  the  scale
of  my  reason  as  one  single  sentence  which  I
heard  from  my  nurse  ;  that  if  you  plant  an
arrow  in  the  side  of  a  young  woman,  it  is  not  so
painful  as  the  society  of  an  old  man.  In  short,"
continued  he,  "  it  was  impossible  to  agree,  and
our  differences  ended  in  a  separation.  After-
the  time  prescribed  by  law,  she  married  a  young
man  of  an  impetuous  temper,  ill-natured,  and  in
indigent  circumstances  ;  so  that  she  suffered  the
injuries  of  violence,  with  the  evils  of  penury ;
however,  she  returned  thanks  for  her  lot,  and
said,  God  be  praised,  that  I  escaped  from  infer-
nal torment,  and  have  obtained  this  permanent
blessing.     Amidst  all  this  violence,  and  impetu-


ON  IMBECILITY  AND   OLD   AGE.     301

osity  of  temper,  I  will  put  up  with  your  airs,
because  you  are  handsome.  It  is  better  to
burn  with  you  in  hell,  than  to  be  in  paradise
with  the  other.  The  scent  of  onions  from  a
beautiful  mouth  is  more  fragrant  than  the  odor
of  the  rose  from  the  hand  of  one  who  is  ugly."


TALE    III.

IN  the  territory  of  Diarbekr,  I  was  the  guest
of  a  veiy  rich  old  man,  who  had  a  handsome
son.  One  night  he  said :  "  During  my  whole
life  I  never  had  any  child  but  this  son.  Near
this  place  is  a  sacred  tree,  to  which  men  resort
to  offer  up  their  petitions.  Many  nights  at  the
foot  of  this  tree  I  besought  God,  until  he  be-
stowed on  me  this  son."  I  heard  that  the  son
was  saying  to  his  friends,  in  a  low  tone  of  voice,
"  How  happy  should  I  be  to  know  where  that
tree  grows,  in  order  that  I  might  implore  God
for  the  death  of  my  father."  The  father  was
rejoicing  in  his  son's  wisdom ;  whilst  the  son
despised  his  father's  decrepitude.  Many  years
have  elapsed  since  you  visited  your  father's
grave ;  what  piety  have  you  shown  towards
your  parent,  that  you  should  expect  dutimlness
from  your  son  ?


302  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    IV.


ONCE  in  the  vigor  of  youth  I  had  performed
a  long  journey,  and  at  night,  being  fa-
tigued, remained  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain.  A
debilitated  old  man,  who  arrived  after  the  cara-
van, said,  "  Why  do  you  sleep  ?  get  up,  this  is
not  a  place  for  repose."  I  said  to  him,  "  How-
can  I  proceed,  not  having  the  use  of  my  feet  ?  "
He  replied,  "  Have  you  not  heard  how  it  has
been  said,  that  proceeding  and  halting  is  better
than  running  until  you  are  fatigued."  O  ye,
who  wish  to  reach  the  end  of  your  day's  journey
be  not  in  haste  ;  listen  to  my  counsel,  and  learn
patience.  The  Arab  horse  makes  two  stretches
on  full  speed,  and  the  camel  travels  slowly  day
and  night.


TALE    V.

AN  active,  pleasant,  and  merry  youth,  of
agreeable  manners,  was  one  of  our  happy
society ;  sorrow  in  no  shape  entered  his  breast,
laughter  would  not  suffer  him  to  close  his  lips.
A  considerable  time  had  passed  without  my
happening  to  meet  with  him.  Afterwards  I  saw
him  with  a  wife   and   children  :   his  merriment


OX  IMBECILITY  AXD   OLD  AGE.      303

had  ceased,  and  his  countenance  was  much  al-
tered. I  asked  him  what  was  the  matter.  He
replied :  "  When  I  became  the  father  of  children,
I  left  otf  childish  sport.  When  you  are  grown
old,  give  up  puerilities ;  and  leave  play  and  jok-
ing to  youth.  Look  not  for  the  sprightliness  of
youth  in  old  age,  since  the  stream  will  not  re-
turn again  to  the  spring  head.  When  the  field
of  corn  is  fit  for  the  sickle,  it  does  not  wave  in
the  wind  with  that  vigor  as  when  it  was  green.
The  season  of  youth  has  elapsed ;  alas !  those
days  which  enlivened  the  heart.  The  lion  has
lost  the  strength  of  his  paw,  and  like  an  old
leopard,  I  am  now  contented  with  a  cheese."
An  old  woman  having  stained  her  hairs  black,
I  said  to  her,  O  my  little  old  mother,  you  have
made  your  hair  black,  but  cannot  straighten
your  bent  back.


TALE    VI.

ONE  day,  through  the  ignorance  of  youth,  I
spoke  sharply  to  my  mother,  which  vexing
her  to  the  heart,  she  sat  down  in  a  corner  and
wept,  saying :  "  Have  you  forgotten  all  the
trouble  that  you  gave  me  in  your  infancy,  that
you  thus  treat  me  with  unkindness?  What  a
good  saying  was   that  of  an  old   woman  to  her


304  THE   GULISTAN.

son,  when  she  saw  him  able  to  subdue  a  tiger,
having  the  strength  of  an  elephant.  If  you  had
but  recollected  your  time  of  childhood,  when
you  lay  helpless  in  my  arms,  you  would  not
treat  me  with  violence,  now  that  you  have  the
strength  of  a  lion,  whilst  I  am  an  old  woman."


TALE    VII.

RICH  miser  having  a  son  that  was  sick,
his  friends  represented  that  he  ought
either  to  cause  the  Koran  to  be  read  from  be-
ginning to  end,  or  else  offer  sacrifice,  that  the
hioji  God  might  restore  his  son  to  health.  After
a  little  consideration,  he  said,  "It  is  better  to
read  the  Koran,  as  it  is  at  hand,  and  the  flocks
are  at  a  distance."  A  holy  man  hearing  this,
said  :  "  He  preferred  reading  the  Koran  because
the  words  are  at  the  tip  of  his  tongue,  and  the
money  is  in  the  inside  of  his  heart.  Alas !  if
the  performance  of  religious  rites  was  to  be  ac-
companied with  alms,  they  would  remain  like
the  ass  in  the  mire  ;  but  if  you  require  only  the
first  chapter  of  the  Koran,  they  will  repeat  it  an
hundred  times."


ON  IMBECILITY  AND   OLD  AGE.     305


TALE    VIII.

THEY  asked  an  old  man  why  he  did  not
marry.  He  answered,  "  I  should  not  like
an  old  woman."  They  said,  "  Many  a  young
one,  since  you  have  property."  He  replied,
"  Since  I,  who  am  an  old  man,  should  not  be
pleased  with  an  old  woman,  how  can  I  expect
that  a  young  one  would  be  attached  to  me  ?  "


TALE    IX.

I  HAVE  heard  that  not  long  ago  a  decrepit
old  man,  in  his  dotage,  took  it  into  his  head
to  marry ;  and  wedded  a  beautiful  virgin  named
Gem,  who,  like  a  casket  of  jewels,  had  been
concealed  from  the  sight  of  men.  The  nuptials
were  celebrated  with  all  the  splendor  usual  on
such  occasions.  Shortly  after,  he  began  com-
plaining to  his  friends,  and  attempted  to  make  it
appear  that  the  impudent  girl  had  dishonored  his
family.  Such  strife  and  contention  ensued  be-
tween the  parties,  that  at  last  the  cause  was
brought  before  the  superintendent  of  the  police,
and  the  Cazy.  When  matters  had  come  to  this
pass,  Saadi  said,  "  The  girl  is  not  to  blame  ;  how
can  you,  with  your  trembling  hand,  be  able  to
bore  pearls?  "


CHAPTER    VII.


Of  the  Effects  of  Education.


TALE     I.


CERTAIN  Vizier  had  a  stupid  son,
whom  he  sent  to  a  learned  man,  de-
siring him  to  instruct  him,  in  hopes
that  his  capacity  might  improve.  Af-
ter having  instructed  him  for  some  time  without
any  effect,  he  sent  a  person  to  the  father  with
this  message  :  "  Your  son  has  no  capacity,  and
has  almost  distracted  me.  When  nature  has
given  capacity,  instruction  will  make  impression  ;
but  if  iron  is  not  of  a  proper  temper,  no  polish-
ing will  make  it  good.  Wash  not  a  dog  in  the
seven  seas,  for  when  he  is  wetted  he  will  only
be  dirtier.  If  the  ass  that  carried  Jesus  Christ
was  to  be  taken  to  Mecca,  at  his  return  he  would
still  be  an  ass."


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    307


TALE    II.

A  PHILOSOPHER  was  thus  exhorting
his  sons :  "  My  dear  children,  acquire
knowledge,  for  on  worldly  riches  and  possessions
no  reliance  can  be  placed :  rank  will  be  of  no
use  out  of  your  own  country,  and  on  a  journey,
money  is  in  danger  of  being  lost ;  for  either  the
thief  may  carry  it  off  all  at  once,  or  the  possessor
may  consume  it  by  degrees.  But  knowledge  is
a  perennial  spring  of  wealth,  and  if  a  man  of
education  ceases  to  be  opulent,  yet  he  need  not
be  sorrowful,  for  knowledge  of  itself  is  riches.
A  man  of  learning,  wherever  he  goes,  is  treated
with  respect,  and  sits  in  the  uppermost  seat,
whilst  the  ignorant  man  gets  only  a  scanty  fare,
and  encounters  distress.  After  enjoying  power,
it  is  distressing  to  be  obliged  to  obey,  and  he
who  has  been  used  to  caresses  cannot  bear
rough  usage  from  the  world."  There  once
happened  an  insurrection  in  Damascus,  where
every  one  deserted  his  habitation.  The  wise
sons  of  a  peasant  became  the  king's  ministers,
and  the  stupid  sons  of  the  Vizier  were  reduced
to  ask  charity  in  the  village.  If  you  want  a
paternal  inheritance,  acquire  from  your  father
knowledge,  for  his  wealth  may  be  spent  in  ten
days.


308  THE  GULISTAN.


TALE    III.


A  LEARNED  man,  who  had  the  education
of  a  king's  son,  beat  him  unmercifully,
and  treated  him  with  the  utmost  severity.  The
boy,  unable  to  bear  this  treatment,  complained  to
his  father,  and  stripped  himself  to  show  the
marks  of  violence.  The  father's  heart  being
troubled,  he  sent  for  the  master,  and  said,  "You
do  not  use  any  of  my  subjects'  children  in  the
cruel  manner  that  you  treat  my  son ;  what  is
the  reason  of  this  ?  '  He  replied  :  "  To  dis-
course with  propriety,  and  to  have  a  pleasing,
conciliating  manner,  becomes  mankind  in  gen-
eral, but  more  especially  kings ;  because  what-
soever they  say  or  do  will  certainly  be  in  the
mouths  of  every  one,  whilst  the  words  and
actions  of  common  people  are  not  of  so  much
consequence.  If  a  Durwaish  should  commit  a
hundred  improprieties,  his  companions  would
not  remark  one  of  them ;  but  if  a  king  makes
only  one  improper  step,  it  is  circulated  from
kingdom  to  kingdom ;  therefore,  in  forming
the  manners  of  young  princes,  more  labor  and
pains  should  be  bestowed  than  on  the  vulgar.
He  who  is  not  taught  good  manners  in  his
childhood,  will  have  no  good  qualities  when  he
arrives  at  manhood.    You  may  bend  green  wood


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    309

as  much  as  you  please ;  but  when  it  is  dry  it
cannot  be  made  straight  without  fire.  Of  a
truth  you  may  twist  the  tender  branches,  but
will  in  vain  attempt  to  straighten  dry  wood."
The  king,  approving  of  the  master's  wholesome
discipline,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  he  had
delivered  his  speech,  bestowed  on  him  a  dress
of  honor,  and  a  largess,  and  promoted  him.


TALE   IV.

I  SAW  a  schoolmaster  in  Africa,  who  had  a*
crabbed  countenance,  and  a  bitter  tongue ;
he  was  an  enemy  to  humanity,  mean-spirited,
and  impetuous,  so  that  the  sight  of  him  inter-
rupted the  pleasure  of  Moslems,  and  his  reading
of  the  Koran  distracted  the  hearts  of  men.  A
number  of  beautiful  boys,  and  tender  virgins,
who  were  subject  to  his  tyrannic  arm,  dared  not
presume  to  laugh,  nor  venture  to  speak ;  for  he
used  to  smite  the  silver  cheeks  of  the  one,  and
would  sometimes  put  the  crystal  legs  of  the
other  into  the  stocks.  In  short,  I  heard  that
some  part  of  his  conduct  having  been  discovered,
they  beat  him,  and  expelled  him,  and  gave  the
school  to  a  pious,  good  man,  of  so  meek  and
patient  a  temper,  that  he  never  spoke  a  word


310  THE  GULISTAN.

*

but  when  he  was  forced  to  it ;  and  nothing  ever
proceeded  from  his  tongue  that  could  give  of-
fence to  any  one.  The  boys  had  got  the  fear
of  the  old  master  out  of  their  heads,  and  seeing
the  new  one  of  angelic  manners,  they  became
furious  towards  one  another ;  and,  relying  on  his
forbearance,  they  neglected  their  studies,  and
spent  most  of  their  time  in  play,  and,  without
finishing  their  copies,  broke  their  tablets  on  one
another's  heads.  When  the  master  is  relax  in
his  discipline,  the  boys  play  at  leap-frog  in  the
market-place.  A  fortnight  after,  I  passed  by
the  gate  of  the  mosque,  and  saw  the  old  master,
'whom  they  had  encouraged,  and  reinstated  in
his  office.

In  truth,  I  was  concerned,  and  invoking  God,
I  said,  "  Why  have  they  a  second  time  ap-
pointed the  Devil  a  preceptor  for  angels  ?  '  An
experienced  old  man  hearing  me,  laughed,  and
said :  "  Have  vou  not  heard  what  has  been  re-
lated  ?  A  king  sent  his  son  to  school,  and
placed  a  silver  tablet  under  his  arm.  On  the
face  of  the  tablet  was  written  in  gold,  'The
severity  of  the  master  is  better  than  the  indul-
gence of  the  father.' "


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCA  TION.    3 1 1


TALE    V.

THE  son  of  a  religious  man,  who  succeeded
to  an  immense  fortune  by  the  will  of  his
uncle,  became  a  dissipated  and  debauched  profli-
gate, insomuch  that  he  left  no  heinous  crime
unpractised,  nor  was  there  any  intoxicating  drug
which  he  had  not  tasted.  Once  I  admonished
him,  saying :  "  O  my  son,  wealth  is  a  running
stream,  and  pleasure  revolves  like  a  millstone ;
or,  in  other  words,  profuse  expense  suits  him
only  who  has  a  certain  income.  When  you
have  no  certain  income,  be  frugal  in  your  ex-
penses, because  the  sailors  have  a  song,  that  if  the
rain  does  not  fall  in  the  mountains,  the  Tigris
will  become  a  drv  bed  of  sand  in  the  course  of  a
year.  Practise  wisdom  and  virtue,  and  relinquish
sensuality,  for  when  your  money  is  spent  you  will
suffer  distress,  and  expose  yourself  to  shame."

The  young  man,  s.educed  by  music  and  wine,
would  not  take  my  advice,  but,  in  opposition
to  my  arguments,  said :  "  It  is  contrary  to  the
wisdom  of  the  sages  to  disturb  our  present
enjoyments  by  the  dread  of  futurity.  Why
should  they  who  possess  fortune  suffer  distress
by  anticipating  sorrow?  Go  and  be  merry,  O
my  heart-enchanting  friend !  we  ought  not  to
be  uneasy  to-day  for  what  may  happen  to-mor-


312  THE   GU LI  ST  AN.

row.  How  would  it  become  me,  who  am  placed
in  the  uppermost  seat  of  liberality,  and  have
contracted  an  alliance,  so  that  the  fame  of  my
bounty  is  a  topic  of  general  conversation  ?  When
a  man  has  acquired  reputation  by  liberality  and
munificence,  it  does  not  become  him  to  tie
up  his  money-bags.  When  your  good  name
has  been  spread  through  the  street,  you  cannot
shut  your  door  against  it."  I  perceived  that
he  did  not  approve  of  my  admonition,  and  that
my  warm  breath  did  not  affect  his  cold  iron:
I  ceased  advising,  and,  quitting  his  society,  re-
turned into  the  corner  of  safety,  in  conformity
to  the  saying  of  the  philosophers,  "  Admonish
and  exhort  as  your  duty  requires  ;  if  they  mind
not,  it  does  not  concern  you.  Although  thou
knowest  that  they  will  not  listen,  nevertheless
speak  whatever  you  know  that  is  advisable.  It
will  soon  come  to  pass  that  you  will  see  the  silly
fellow  with  his  feet  in  the  stocks,  there  smiting
his  hands  and  exclaiming,  '  Alas  that  I  did  not
listen  to  the  wise  man's  advice  ! ' '

After  s.ome  time,  that  which  I  had  predicted
from  his  dissolute  conduct  I  saw  verified :  he
was  clothed  in  rags,  and  begging  a  morsel  of
victuals.  I  was  distressed  at  his  wretched  con-
dition, and  did  not  think  it  consistent  with  hu-
manity to  scratch  the  Durwaish's  wound  with
reproach,  or  to  sprinkle  salt  upon  it ;  but  I  said


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    313

in  my  heart,  "  Profligate  men,  when  intoxicated
with  pleasure,  reflect  not  on  the  day  of  pov-
erty. The  tree  which  in  summer  has  a  profu-
sion of  fruit,  is  consequently  without  leaves  in
winter."


TALE    VI.

A  KING  placed  his  son  with  a  preceptor,
and  said,  "  This  is  your  son  ;  educate  him
in  the  same  manner  as  one  of  your  own."  The
preceptor  took  pains  with  him  for  a  year,
but  without  success,  whilst  his  own  sons  were
completed  in  learning  and  accomplishments.
The  king  reprimanded  the  preceptor,  and  said,
"  You  have  broken  your  promise,  and  not  acted
faithfully."  He  replied,  "O  king,  the  education
was  the  same,  but  the  capacities  are  different.
Although  silver  and  gold  are  produced  from
a  stone,  yet  these  metals  are  not  to  be  found  in
every  stone.  The  star  Canopus  shines  all  over
the  world,  but  the  scented  leather  comes  only
from  Yemen."


14


314  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    VII.

I  HA  YE  heard  that  a  learned  old  man  was
saying  to  one  of  his  scholar's,  "  If  a  man
would  but  fix  his  mind  as  much  on  God  as  he
does  on  worldly  goods,  he  would  surpass  the
angels.  God  did  not  forget  you  when  you  were
as  yet  unformed  in  the  womb,  but  bestowed  on
you  a  soul,  with  reason,  temper,  intellect,  beauty,
speech,  judgment,  reflection,  and  sensation ;  he
furnished  thy  hands  with  ten  fingers,  and  set
two  arms  on  thy  shoulders.  Dost  thou  think,  O
worthless  wretch,  that  he  will  neglect  to  provide
thee  with  daily  bread  ?  "


TALE    VIII.

I  SAW  an  Arab  who  said  to  his  son,  "  O  my
child,  in  the  day  of  resurrection  they  will
ask  you,  what  have  you  done  in  the  world ;  and
not  from  whom  are  you  descended  ?  '  That  is,
they  will  inquire  about  your  virtue,  and  not
about  your  father.  "  The  cloth  that  covers  the
Kaaba,  and  which  they  kiss,  is  not  famous  from
having  been  manufactured  by  the  silkworm  ;  it
associated  some  days  with  one  who  is  venerable,
on  which  account  it  became  venerable  like  him-
self."


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    315


TALE    IX.

IN  the  writings  of  the  sages,  they  have  related
that  scorpions  are  not  produced  according  to
the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  as  other  animals,
for  that  they  devour  the  mother's  entrails,  and
tear  open  her  belly,  and  flee  to  the  desert ;  and
the  skins  which  are  found  in  the  holes  of  scor-
pions give  proof  of  this  matter.  I  mentioned
this  extraordinary  circumstance  to  a  wise  man,
who  said,  "My  heart  bears  evidence  to  the  truth
of  the  observation  ;  and  it  cannot  be  otherwise  ;
for  since  in  their  infancy  they  behaved  so  to-
wards their  parents,  therefore  they  are  thus  ap-
proved and  beloved  in  riper  age."  A  father
exhorted  his  son,  saying,  "  Young  man,  store  up
this  lesson  in  your  memory,  —  He  who  is  not
grateful  to  those  who  gave  him  birth  will  never
be  favored  by  fortune."  They  asked  a  scorpion
why  he  did  not  stir  abroad  in  the  winter ;  he
replied,  "  What  reputation  have  I  in  summer,
that  I  should  come  again  in  winter  ? '


316  THE   GU LI  STAN.


TALE    X.


THE  wife  of  a  Durwaish  was  with  child,
and  the  term  of  pregnancy  completed.
The  Durwaish,  who  never  yet  had  a  son,  said,
"  If  the  Almighty  will  grant  me  a  son,  I  will
distribute  in  charity  to  the  poor  all  that  I  possess,
excepting  the  religious  habit  on  my  back."  It
happened  that  his  wife  was  delivered  of  a  son,
at  which  he  rejoiced,  and  made  an  entertain-
ment for  his  friends,  conformably  to  his  vow.
Some  years  after,  when  I  returned  from  a  jour-
ney to  Damascus,  I  passed  by  the  place  where
the  Durwaish  had  dwelt,  and  asked  how  he
went  on.  They  told  me  he  was  in  the  town
jail.  I  asked  the  reason.  They  replied,  "  His
son  got  drunk,  had  a  quarrel,  and  killed  a  man,
and  fled  out  of  the  city,  on  which  account  they
had  put  a  chain  about  the  father's  neck,  and
heavy  fetters  on  his  feet."  I  said  :  "  His  own
prayer  brought  down  this  misfortune  from  God.
O  men  of  understanding,  it  is  better,  in  the
opinion  of  the  wise,  that  a  woman  in  labor
should  bring  forth  a  serpent  than  wicked  chil-
dren."


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    317


w


TALE    XI.


T  HEN  I  was  a  boy,  I  was  conversing  with


a  holy  man  about  manhood,  who  re-
plied that  the  greatest  proof  of  being  arrived  at
a  state  of  maturity,  was  one's  being  more  intent
on  the  means  of  pleasing  the  Almighty  than
how  to  gratify  the  passions;  and  he  added,  that
whosoever  possesses  not  this  disposition,  the  pro-
foundly learned  do  not  consider  in  a  state  of
puberty.  A  drop  of  water,  after  remaining  forty
days  in  the  womb,  obftuned  the  human  form;
but  if  a  person  forty  years  of  age  hath  not  under-
standing and  good  manners,  of  a  truth  he  ought
not  to  be  called  a  man.  Manhood  is  composed
of  liberality  and  benevolence  ;  do  not  imagine
that  it  consists  merely  in  the  material  form ;
virtue  also  is  requisite  ;  for  a  human  figure  may
be  painted  on  the  gate  of  the  palace,  with  ver-
milion and  verdigris.  When  a  man  hath  not
virtue  and  benevolence,  what  is  the-  difference
between  him  and  the  figure  on  the  wall  ?  It  is
not  wisdom  to  acquire  worldly  wealth,  but  to
gain  one  single  heart.


318  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XII.

ON  a  certain  year  there  happened  a  quarrel
amongst  the  pilgrims,  who  were  going  on
foot  to  Mecca,  and  I  was  also  of  that  number.
They  recriminated  on  one  another,  but  at  length
we  adjusted  their  differences.  I  heard  one,
sitting  in  a  litter,  say  to  his  companion :  "  How
wonderful  that  the  ivory  pawns  in  the  game  of
chess  on  crossing  the  whole  board  become  viziers
(or  queens),  increasing  their  quality ;  but  that
the  foot  pilgrims  to  Me*cea,  after  passing  the
whole  desert,  are  worse  than  at  first.  Say  from
me  to  the  Hajee  who  injures  and  lacerates  the
skin  of  his  fellow-creature,  Thou  art  not  so  true
a  pilgrim  as  the  poor  camel,  who  feeds  on  thistles
and  carries 'a  load."


TALE    XIII.


AN  Indian  was  teaching  others  how  to  make
fireworks,  when  a  wise  man  said  to  him,
"  This  is  not  a  fit  play  for  you  who  inhabit  a
house  made  of  reeds."

Until  you  are  persuaded  that  the  discourse  is


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    319

strictly  proper,  speak  not;  and  whatever  you
know  will  not  obtain  a  favorable  answer,  ask
not.


TALE    XIV.

A  LITTLE  man,  being  struck  with  a  pain
in  his  eyes,  went  to  a  farrier,  desiring  him
to  apply  a  remedy.  The  farrier,  applying  to  his
eyes  what  he  was  used  to  administer  to  quad-
rupeds, the  man  became  blind ;  upon  which  he
complained  to  the  magistrate.  The  magistrate
said :  "  Get  away,  there  is  no  plea  for  the
damages ;  for  if  this  fellow  had  not  been  an  ass,
he  would  not  have  applied  to  the  farrier.  The
application  of  this  story  is,  that  whosoever  em-
ploys an  inexperienced  person  on  a  weighty
matter,  besides  suffering  repentance,  will,  in  the
opinion  of  the  wise,  be  considered  of  a  weak  un-
derstanding. The  wise  man,  of  enlightened
mind,  intrusts  not  an  important  business  to  one
of  mean  abilities.  The  mat-maker,  although  a
weaver,  yet  is  not  employed  in  the  silk  manu-
factory. "


320  THE   GULISTAN.


TALE    XV.


A  CERTAIN  great  man,  having  lost  a
worthy  son,  they  asked  what  inscription
should  be  put  upon  his  gravestone.  The  father
replied :  "The  verses  of  the  Koran  are  too
sacred  and  holy  to  be  written  on  such  a  place  as
this,  exposed  to  be  effaced  by  the  trampling  of
men's  feet,  and  to  be  denied  by  dogs.  If  there
is  a  necessity  of  writing  something,  the  following
lines  will  be  sufficient :  4  O  the  season  when  ver-
dure bedecked  the  garden,  then  how  blithe  was
my  heart !  Wait,  my  friend,  until  the  return
of  spring,  when  you  will  behold  grass  growing
out  of  my  clay.'  "


TALE    XVI.

A  HOLY  man,  passing  by  a  rich  man  who,
having  bound  a  slave  hand  and  foot,  was
punishing  him,  said  :  "  O  my  son,  God  has  made
subject  to  thee  a  human  creature  like  thyself,
and  has  given  thee  the  superiority  over  him,  for
which  return  thanks  to  God,  and  do  not  suffer
such  violence  to  be  committed.  It  will  not  be
proper  that  to-morrow,  in  the  resurrection,  this


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    321

slave  should  be  better  than  thyself,  and  that
thou  shouldst  suffer  shame."  Be  not  angry  be-
yond measure  with  your  slave ;  oppress  him  not,
neither  distress  his  feelings.  Thou  hast  bought
him  for  ten  direms,  but  after  all  thou  didst  not
create  him.  To  what  length  wilt  thou  carry
this  pride,  insolence,  and  rage?  thou  hast  a  mas-
ter greater  than  thyself.  O  thou  who  hast  for
thy  slaves  Arselan  and  Aghoash,  forget  not
thy  superior  lord.  There  is  a  tradition  of  the
Prophet  having  said,  "  that  the  greatest  mor-
tification at  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  when
the  pious  slave  is  carried  to  paradise,  and  the
wicked  master  condemned  to  hell."  Upon  the
slave  whose  services  you  can  command,  exercise
not  boundless  severity  nor  capriciousness ;  for  it
will  be  disgraceful  in  the  day  of  reckoning  to  see
the  slave  at  liberty  and  the  master  in  chains.


TALE     XVII.

ON  a  certain  year,  I  was  travelling  from
Balk,  with  some  people  of  Damascus,  and
the  road  was  infested  with  robbers.  There  was
a  young  man  of  our  party,  an  expert  handler  of
the  shield,  a  mio-htv  archer,  a  brandisher  of  all

14*  U


322  THE   GULISTAN.

weapons,  so  strong  that  ten  men  could  not  draw
his  bowstring ;  and  the  most  powerful  wrestler
on  the  face  of  the  earth  had  never  brought  his
back  to  the  ground :  but  he  was  rich,  and  had
been  nursed  in  the  shade,  was  inexperienced  in
the  world,  and  no  traveller.  The  thundering
sound  of  the  martial  drum  had  never  reached
his  ear,  neither  had  his  eye  seen  the  lightning  of
the  horsemen's  swords.  He  had  never  been
made  prisoner  by  the  enemy,  nor  had  the  arrows
fallen  in  showers  around  him.  It  happened  that
I  and  this  young  man  were  running  together;
every  wall  that  came  in  his  way  he  pulled  down,
and  every  large  tree  that  he  saw,  by  the  force
of  his  arm  he  tore  up  by  the  roots.  He  was
boasting,  saying,  "  Where  is  the  elephant,  that
you  may  behold  the  shoulders  of  the  hero  ?
where  is  the  lion,  that  you  may  see  the  fingers
and  palm  of  the  brave  man  ?  '  We  were  in
this  situation,  when  two  Indians  lifted  up  their
heads  from  behind  a  rock,  with  intention  to  kill
us ;  one  had  a  stick  in  his  hand,  and  the  other
a  sling  under  his  arm.  I  said  to  the  young  man,
"  Why  do  you  stop  ?  Show  your  strength  and
valor,  for  here  is  the  enemy  within  a  foot  of  his
grave."  I  saw  the  bow  and  arrows  drop  from
the  hand  of  the  young  man,  and  a  trembling
seized  all  his  joints.  Not  every  one  who  can  split
a  hair  with  an  arrow  that  will  pierce  a  coat  of


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    323

mail,  is  able  to  stand  against  the  warrior  in  the
day  of  battle.

We  saw  no  other  remedy  for  ourselves,  but
to  leave  our  accoutrements,  surrender  our  arms,
and  escape  with  our  lives.  On  an  affair  of  im-
portance employ  a  man  of  experience,  who  will
brino;  the  devouring  lion  into  his  trammels.
A  young  man,  though  he  has  strength  of
arm,  and  is  powerful  as  an  elephant,  will  feel
his  joints  quaking  with  fear  in  the  day  of
battle.  A  man  of  experience  is  as  well  qualified
to  act  in  war  as  the  learned  man  is  to  expound
a  case  of  law.


TALE    XVIII.

I  SAW  the  son  of  a  rich  man,  sitting  by  his
father's  tomb,  and  disputing  with  the  son  of
a  Durwaish,  saying,  "  My  father's  monument  is
of  stone,  the  inscription  is  in  gold,  and  the  pave-
ment is  made  of  marble  tessellated  with  turquoise-
colored  bricks.  What  is  your  father's  grave
but  a  couple  of  bricks  laid  together,  and  sprinkled
with  a  handful  of  earth  ?  '  The  son  of  the  Dur-
waish on  hearing  this  said,  "  Hold  your  tongue,
for  before  your  father  can  move  himself  from
under  this  heavy  stone,  mine  will  have  arrived


324  THE  GULISTAN.

at  paradise."  There  is  a  saying  of  the  Prophet,
"  That  to  the  poor  death  is  a  state  of  rest."
The  ass  who  carries  the  lightest  burden  travels
easiest.  In  like  manner  the  Durwaish  who
bears  the  burden  of  poverty  will  enter  the  gate
of  death  lightly  loaded;  whilst  he ^ who  lives
in  affluence,  with  ease  and  comfort,  will  doubtless,
on  that  very  account,  find"  death  terrible.  And,
in  every  view,  the  captive  who  is  released  from
confinement  is  happier  than  the  nobleman  who
is  taken  prisoner.


TALE   XIX.

THEY  inquired  of  a  religious  man  the
meaning  of  this  tradition,  —  "  You  have
not  any  enemy  so  powerful  as  the  passion  of
lust,  which  is  within  you."  He  replied  :  "  Be-
cause that  any  enemy  to  whom  you  show  kind-
ness becomes  your  friend,  excepting  lust,  the  in-
dulgence of  which  increases  its  enmity."  By
abstinence  a  man  may  obtain  the  disposition  of
an  angel,  but  if  you  eat  like  a  beast,  you  will  be
degraded  to  an  inanimate  fossil.  Those  whom
you  gratify,  become  obedient  to  your  command  ;
but  lust,  on  the  contrary,  when  indulged,  is
rebellious.


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    325


TALE    XX.

I  SAW,  sitting  in  a  company,  a  certain  per-
son who  wore  the  habit  of  a  Durwaish,  but
without  possessing  the  disposition  of  one ;  and
being  inclined  to  be  querulous,  he  had  opened
the  book  of  complaint,  and  began  censuring  the
rich.  The  discourse  was  turning  on  this  point,
that  Durwaishes  have  not  the  means,  and  the
rich  not  the  inclination,  to  be  charitable.  Those
possessed  of  liberal  minds  have  no  command
of  money,  and  the  wealthy  worldlings  have  no
munificence.

To  me,  who  owe  my  support  to  the  bounty
of  the  great,  this  language  was  not  at  all  grate-
ful. I  said:  "O  my  friend,  the  rich  are  the
revenue  of  the  poor,  a  storehouse  for  the  re-
cluse, the  pilgrim's-  hope,  and  the  asylum  of
travellers.  They  are  the  bearers  of  burdens
for  the  relief  of  others.  Themselves  eat  alone;
with  their  dependants  and  inferiors,  and  the  re-
mainder of  their  bounty  is  applied  to  the  relief
of  widows,  aged  people,  relations,  and  neighbors.
The  rich  are  charged  with  pious  dedications,
the  performance  of  vows,  the  rites  of  hospital-
ity, alms,  offerings,  the  manumission  of  slaves,
gifts,  and  sacrifices.  By  what  means  can  you
attain  to  their  power,  who  can  perform  only  your


326  THE   GULISTAN.

genuflexions,  and  even  those  with  a  hundred
difficulties  ?  The  rich  perform  both  moral  and
religious  duties  in  the  most  perfect  manner,
because  they  possess  wealth,  out  of  which  they
bestow  alms ;  their  garments  are  clean,  and  their
reputation  spotless,  with  minds  void  of  care.
For  the  power  of  obedience  is  found  in  good
meals,  the  truth  of  worship  in  a  clean  garment.
For  what  strength  can  there  be  with  an  empty
stomach  ?  what  bounty  from  an  empty  hand  ?
how  can  the  fettered  feet  walk  ?  and  from  the
hungry  belly  what  munificence  can  be  expected?
He  sleeps  uneasily  at  night  who  knows  not  how
to  provide  for  to-morrow.  The  ants  store  up  in
summer,  that  in  winter  they  may  enjoy  rest.
Leisure  and  poverty  are  not  found  together,
and  satisfaction  dwelleth  not  with  distress.  One
is  standing  up  to  evening  prayers,  whilst  the
other  is  sitting  down  wishing  for  his  supper.
How  can  these  two  be  compared  together  ?  He
who  possesses  wealth  is  busied  in  devotion,  whilst
he  who  is  distressed  in  his  circumstances  has  a
disordered  heart.  Therefore  the  worship  of  the
rich  is  more  acceptable,  their  minds  being  col-
lected and  not  distracted,  for  as  they  are  possessed
of  the  means  of  subsistence,  they  can  turn  their
whole  thoughts  to  devotion.  The  Arabians  say,
God  defend  me  from  distressful  poverty,  and
from  the  neighborhood  of  him  whom  I  dislike.


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    327

And  there  is  a  tradition  from  the  Prophet,  that
poverty  has  a  black  countenance  in  both  worlds."

My  antagonist  asked,  "  Have  you  not  heard
that  the  Prophet  said,  4  Poverty  is  my  glory '  ?  '

I  replied :  "  Be  silent,  for  the  Prophet  alludes
to  them  who  suffer  in  poverty  of  spirit,  with  sub-
mission to  the  arrows  of  destiny,  and  not  those
who  in  a  religious  garb  sell  the  scraps  which  have
been  given  them  in  charity.  O  loud-sounding,
empty  drum !  how  will  you  manage  on  the  march
without  provisions  ?  If  thou  art  a  man,  free
thyself  from  worldly  avarice,  instead  of  turning
in  your  hand  a  string  of  a  thousand  beads.  A
Durwaish  without  vital  religion,  will  not  rest
until  his  poverty  ends  in  blasphemy.  He  who
is  in  poverty,  is  in  danger  of  blasphemy.  With-
out the  command  of  riches,  you  cannot  clothe
the  naked,  nor  use  means  for  liberating  captives.
How  can  such  as  ourselves  attain  to  their  dig-
nity  ?  and  what  comparison  is  there  between  the
hand  that  bestows  and  that  which  receives  ?  Do
you  not  perceive  that  the  Almighty  revealed  to
us  in  the  Koran  the  enjoyments  of  the  dwellers
in  paradise  ?  For  them  are  appointed  fruits
in  gardens  of  delight,  in  order  that  you  may
know  that  he  who  is  intent  on  gaining  a  subsist-
ence  is  excluded  from  this  portion  of  bliss,  and
that  tranquillity  of  mind  ..requires  a  fixed  in-
come.


328  THE  GULISTAN.

"  To  those  who  are  thirsty,  the  whole  world
appears  in  their  dreams  a  spring  of  water.  You
will  everywhere  see  a  person  who  is  in  distress
commit  atrocious  actions  without  any  hesitation  ;
not  being  deterred  by  the  dread  of  future  punish-
ment, he  discriminates  not  between  lawful  and
unlawful.  If  a  dog  is  struck  on  the  head  with
a  clod  of  earth,  he  jumps  up  with  joy,  thinking
it  to  be  a  bone  ;  and  if  two  persons  should  carry
a  corpse  on  their  shoulders,  a  mean  wretch
might  suppose  it  a  tray  of  victuals ;  but  the  rich
man,  whom  God  hath  regarded  with  the  eye
of  favor,  by  the  performance  of  what  is  lawful
is  preserved  from  the  commission  of  what  is
illegal.  Thus,  although  I  have  not  fully  dis-
cussed the  subject,  nor  adduced  any  substantial
proofs  in  support  of  my  arguments,  I  rely  on
your  justice  for  a  decision.  Did  you  ever  see  a
mendicant  with  his  arms  tied  to  his  back,  or  in
prison ;  or  the  veil  of  innocence  rent,  or  the
hand  amputated  (for  theft),  without  its  having
been  occasioned  by  poverty  ?  Men  intrepid  as
lions  are  driven  by  want  to  undermine  men's
houses,  and  are  in  consequence  bound  by  the
heels.  And  it  is  possible  that  the  Durwaish,  at
the  instigation  of  lust,  not  having  power  to  re-
strain it,  may  commit  sin.  He  who  has  in  his
possession  a  nymph  of  paradise,  what  inclination
can  he  entertain  for  the  damsels  of  Youghma  ?


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    ^29

He  who  hath  in  his  hands  such  dates  as  he
loveth,  never  thinketh  of  flinging  stones  at  clus-
ters on  the  tree.

"  In  general,  those  in  indigent  circumstances
want  chastity ;  as  those  who  are  starving  steal
bread.  When  a  ravenous  cur  gets  meat,  he  in-
quires not  whether  the  flesh  is  of  Saleh's  camel,
or  of  the  ass  of  Bujal.  Many  men,  naturally
well  disposed,  have  been  led  by  poverty  into
wickedness,  and  have  given  then  good  name  to
the  wind  of  disrepute.  Amidst  the  cravings  of
hunger  the  power  of  abstaining  ceases,  poverty
snatcheth  the  reins  out  of  the  hand  of  piety."

At  the  moment  that  I  uttered  these  words,  the
Durwaish's  patience  being  exhausted,  he  at-
tacked me  with  all  the  vehemence  of  loquacity,
and  said :  "  You  have  exaggerated  their  praise
to  such  a  degree,  and  have  talked  so  extrava-
gantly on  the  subject,  that  one  would  suppose
them  to  be  the  antidote  against  the  venom  of
poverty,  and  the  key  of  the  stores  of  Providence.
But  they  are  a  set  of  proud,  arrogant,  self-
conceited,  abominable  fellows,  insatiable  after
money  and  possessions,  intoxicated  with  rank
and  opulence,  who  speak  not  without  insolence,
nor  behold  any  one  but  with  contempt;  the
learned  they  call  beggars,  and  the  indigent  they
treat  with  obloquy.  Proud  of  then  riches  and
vain  of  that  dignity  of  which  they  think  them-


330  THE   GULISTAN.

selves  possessed,  and  vaunting  in  their  super-
ority,  they  treat  all  others  as  their  inferiors;
they  never  think  it  their  duty  to  look  kindly  on
any  one :  ignorant  of  what  the  sages  have  said,
That  whosoever  is  inferior  to  others  in  piety,  al-
though he  may  exceed  them  in  wealth,  though
in  appearance  a  rich,  is  in  reality  a  poor  man.
If  an  empty  fellow,  on  account  of  his  wealth,  be-
haves proudly  towards  a  wise  man,  reckon  such
a  one  an  ass,  although  he  be  an  ambergris  ox."
I  said,  "  Speak  not  disdainfully  of  them,  as
they  are  the  masters  of  generosity."  He  re-
plied :  "  You  speak  erroneously,  for  they  are
slaves  to  their  money.  Of  what  use  are  they,
if  they  are  the  clouds  of  August,  and  do  not
shower  down  benefits  ;  or  of  what  advantage,  if
they  are  the  fountain  of  light,  and  do  not  shine
on  any  one ;  and  are  mounted  on  the  steed  of
power  without  performing  any  course  ?  They
stir  not  a  step  in  the  service  of  God,  and  part
not  with  a  direm  without  distressing  you  with
the  obligation.  They  labor  in  amassing  wealth,
preserve  it  with  avarice,  and  part  with  it  with
regret,  verifying  the  saying  of  the  sages,  That
the  miser's  money  comes  out  of  the  earth  at  the
time  that  he  goes  into  it.  One  person  by  his
exertions  gets  money,  which  another  comes  and
takes  away  without  pains  or  trouble."  I  re-
plied :     "  You  know  nothing  of  the  parsimony


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    331

of  the  wealthy,  excepting  by  means  of  beggary ;
for  otherwise,  whosoever  lays  aside  avarice  sees
no  difference  between  the  bountiful  man  and
the  miser.  The  touchstone  proves  what  is  gold,
and  the  beggar  him  who  is  stingy."

He  said:  "I  speak  of  them  from  experience,
for  they  keep  a  guard  at  their  gate,  and  station
rude,  violent  men  to  deny  admittance  to  their
dearest  friends,  and  these,  seizing  the  collars  of
men  of  distinction,  declare  that  nobody  is  at
home ;  and  verily  they  say  truly.  He  who
hath  neither  wisdom,  liberality,  prudence,  nor
judgment,  of  him  the  porter  says  rightly,  that
no  one  is  in  the  house."  I  replied :  "  In  this
they  are  excusable,  because  they  are  teased
out  of  their  lives  with  importunate  solicitations,
and  tormented  with  beggarly  petitions  :  and  it
is  a  contradiction  to  reason  to  suppose  that,  if
the  sands  of  the  desert  were  converted  into
pearls,  they  would  satisfy  the  eyes  of  the  beg-
gars. The  eye  of  an  avaricious  man  cannot  be
satisfied  with  wealth,  any  more  than  a  well  can
be  filled  by  dew.  Hatim  Tai  was  an  inhabitant
of  the  desert;  had  he  dwelt  in  a  city,  he  would
have  been  overwhelmed  by  the  importunities  of
beggars,  who  would  have  torn  the  clothes  off
his  back."  He  said,  "I  pity  their  condition."
I  replied,  "  Not  so,  for  you  envy  them  their
riches."


332  THE   GULISTAN.

We  were  talking  thus,  opposing  force  to
force,  when  he  advanced  a  pawn ;  I  endeav-
ored to  repel  it ;  and  whenever  he  put  my  king
in  check,  I  relieved  it  by  the  vizier  (or  queen),
until  he*  had  exhausted  all  the  coin  in  his  purse,
and  had  spent  all  the  arrows  of  the  quiver  of
disputation.  Take  care  not  to  throw  down  the
shield  when  combating  with  an  orator,  who  hath
nothing  but  borrowed,  tumid  eloquence.  Prac-
tise thou  religion,  and  serve  God,  for  the  verbose
orator,  who  measures  his  periods,  exhibits  arms
before  the  gate,  but  there  is  nobody  within  side
of  the  castle.  At  length,  when  having  no  argu-
ments left,  I  had  put  him  to  shame,  he  became
outrageous,  and  spoke  incoherently.  It  is  the
way  with  the  ignorant,  when  confounded  by  the
adversary's  arguments,  to  have  recourse  to  vio-
lence, as  Azur  the  idol-maker,  when  he  could
not  convince  his  son  Abraham  by  arguments,
began  to  quarrel,  as  God  hath  said,  "  Of  a  truth,
if  thou  wilt  not  give  up  this  point,  I  will  stone
thee."  He  gave  abuse,  I  retorted  harshly ;  he
tore  the  collar  off  my  garment,  and  I  laid  hold
of  his  beard.  We  were  tumbling  over  one
another,  and  the  people  running  after  us,  laugh-
ing, and  astonished  at  our  conduct.  In  short,
we  referred  our  dispute  to  the  Cazy,  and  agreed
to  abide  by  his  impartial  decision,  in  order  that
a  Mohammedan  judge  might  resolve  what  was


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    333

advisable,  and  discriminate  between  the  rich  and
the  poor.

When  the  Cazy  saw  our  faces,  and  heard
our  discourse,  he  sunk  his  chin  into  the  collar  of
reflection,  and  after  mature  consideration  raised
up  his  head  and  said :  "  O  thou  who  hast  spoken
in  praise  of  the  rich,  I  would  have  thee  to  know
that  there  is  no  rose  without  a  thorp ;  and  that
wine  is  accompanied  with  intoxication ;  hidden
treasure  has  its  dragon ;  in  the  same  place  which
has  royal  pearls  are  ravenous  crocodiles ;  the
enjoyment  of  worldly  pleasure  is  followed  by  the
sting  of  death ;  and  the  lights  of  Paradise  are
intercepted  by  crafty  Satan.
.  "He  ought  to  submit  to  violence  from  an  en-
emy who  wishes  to  enjoy  a  friend,  because  the
treasure  and  the  dragon,  the  rose  and  the  thorn,
sorrow  and  gladness,  are  linked  together.  Ob-
serve you  not  that  in  the  garden  there  are
odoriferous  plants,  as  well  as  dry  trunks?  In
like  manner  in  the  circle  of  rich  men,  there  are
grateful  and  ungrateful  persons ;  and  in  the
number  of  Durwaishes  some  exercise  patience,
and  others  do  not.  If  every  hailstone  was  a
pearl,  the  market  would  be  as  full  of  them  as  of
shells.  The  beloved  of  the  Almighty  consist  of
rich  men,  who  have  the  disposition  of  Dur-
waishes, and  of  Durwaishes  possessed  of  noble
minds.     The  greatest  rich  man  is  he  who  re-


334  THE   GULISTAN.

lieves  the  distresses  of  the  poor ;  and  the  best
of  Durwaishes  is  he  who  looketh  not  to  the  rich
for  his  support ;  for  God  hath  said,  4  He  who
trusteth  in  God,  requires  no  other's  help.'

The  Cazy,  having  ceased  reprehending  me,
turned  towards  the  Durwaish  and  said :  "  You,
who  have  advanced  that  the  rich  spend  their  time
in  wickedness,  and  are  intoxicated  with  luxury  ;
it  is  true  there  are  such  people  as  you  have  de-
scribed, who  are  defective  in  zeal  and  ungrateful
towards  God,  who  gather  money  and  hoard  it ;
who  enjoy  themselves,  and  give  not  to  others  ;  if,
for  example,  there  should  be  a  drought,  or  if  the
world  should  suffer  a  deluge,  they,  confiding  in
their  own  wealth,  would  not  inquire  after  the
distress  of  the  poor,  nor  fear  God.  If  another
should  be  annihilated  by  distress,  I  exist ;  what
has  a  goose  to  fear  from  a  deluge  ?  The  women
who  are  mounted  on  camels  feel  not  in  their
litters  for  him  who  perishes  in  the  sand.  Mean
persons,  when  they  have  escaped  with  their  own
blanket,  say,  What  signifies  it  if  the  whole  world
should  die  ?  There  are  some  of  this  description  ;
but  I  have  seen  others  who,  having  spread  the
table  of  generosity  and  proclaimed  munificence,
with  affable  countenance  seek  reputation,  and
ask  pardon  of  God ;  enjoying  the  things  of  this
world  and  of  futurity ;  like  his  Majesty,  the  king
of  the  world,  who  is  assisted  by  the  grace  of


OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  EDUCATION.    335

God,  the  conqueror  of  his  enemies,  lord  para-
mount of  nations,  defender  of  the  strongholds
(of  religion),  heir  of  the  kingdom  of  Solomon,
surpassing  all  the  monarchs  of  his  time  in  justice,
Mozufferuddeen  Abubekr  Sad,  may  God  pro-
long his  days,  and  grant  victory  to  his  standards  !
A  father  showeth  not  such  benevolence  towards
his  son  as  your  hand  of  liberality  has  bestowed
on  the  human  race.  God  wanting  to  bestow  a
blessing  on  mankind,  through  his  mercy  made
you  king  of  the  world."

When  the  Cazy  had  extended  his  discourse  to
this  length,  and  had  exerted  the  powers  of  elo-
quence beyond  our  expectation,  we  acquiesced
in  his  sentence  with  mutual  forgiveness,  and,
apologizing  for  all  that  had  passed  between  us,
we  took  the  road  of  affability,  and  blaming  our-
selves, we  kissed  each  other's  hands  and  face,  and
the  disputation  concluded  with  these  words  :  "  O
Durwaish,  complain  not  of  the  revolutions  of  this
world,  for  thou  wilt  be  unhappy  if  thou  expire
in  this  imagination.  And  thou,  rich  man,  whilst
thou  hast  thy  heart  and  hand  at  thy  command,
enjoy  and  bestow,  that  thou  mayest  obtain  the
blessing  of  Heaven,  in  this  life  and  in  futurity."


CHAPTER  VIII.


Rules  for  Conduct  in  Life.

No.    I.

IGHES  are  for  the  comfort  of  life,
and  not  life  for  the  accumulation  of
riches.  I  asked  a  holy  wise  man,
Who  is  fortunate  and  who  is  unfor-
tunate ?  He  replied,  He  was  fortunate  who
ate  and  sowed,  and  he  was  unfortunate  who
died  without  having  enjoyed.  Pray  not  over
that  worthless  wretch  who  performed  no  act  of
piety;  who  spent  his  whole  life  in  amassing
money,  without  making  any  use  of  it.


No.    II.


The  prophet  Moses,  upon  whom  be  peace !
thus  admonished  Karoon  :  "  Do  thou  good,  in  the
same  manner  that  God  hath  done  good  unto
thee."  He  did  not  listen,  and  you  have  heard
of  his  end.     He  who  hath  not  done  good  with


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     337

his  money,  hath  lost  his  future  hopes  in  attending
to  the  acquisition  of  riches.  If  thou  wishest  to
derive  benefit  from  worldly  riches,  show  that
kindness  towards  thy  fellow-creatures  that  God
hath  bestowed  on  thee.  The  Arabs  say,  "  Be
bountiful  without  accounting  it  an  obligation,
when  most  certainly  the  benefit  will  return  to
you."  Wherever  the  tree  of  beneficence  takes
root,  it  sends  forth  branches  beyond  the  sky.
If  you  entertain  hopes  of  eating  the  fruit,  culti-
vate the  tree  kindly,  and  put  not  a  saw  at  its  root.
Return  thanks  to  God  that  you  have  been  as-
sisted with  divine  grace,  and  that  he  has  not
excluded  you  from  the  riches  of  his  bounty.
Boast  not  of  holding  an  office  under  the  king,
but  be  grateful  to  God  for  having  placed  you  in
his  service.

No.    III.

Two  persons  took  trouble  in  vain,  and  used

fruitless  endeavors,  —  he  who  acquired  wealth,

without  enjoying  it,  and  he  who  taught  wisdom,

but  did  not  practise  it.     How  much  soever  you

may  study  science,  when  you  do  not  act  wisely,

you  are  ignorant.     The  beast  whom  they  load

with  books  is  not  profoundly  learned  and  wise :

what  knoweth  his  empty  skull  whether  he  car-

rieth  firewood  or  books  ?

15  v


338  THE   GU LI  STAN.

No.    IV.

Science  is  to  be  used  for  the  preservation
of  religion,  and  not  for  the  acquisition  of
wealth.  Whosoever  prostituted  his  abstinence,
reputation,  and  learning  for  gain,  formed  a  gran-
ary and  then  consumed  it  entirely.

No.    V.

A  learned  man,  without  temperance,  is  a
blind  man  carrying  a  link :  he  showeth  the  road
to  others,  but  doth  not  guide  himself.  He
who  through  inadvertency  trifled  with  life,
threw  away  his  money  without  purchasing  any-
thing.

No.    VI.

A  kingdom  gains  credit  from  wise  men,  and
religion  obtains  perfection  from  the  virtuous.
Kings  stand  in  more  need  of  wise  men  than  wise
men  do  of  appointments  at  court.  Listen,  0
King,  to  my  advice ;  for  you  have  not  a  more
valuable  maxim  in  all  your  archives  than  this :
"  Intrust  not  your  affairs  to  any  but  wise  men ;
although  public  business  is  not  the  occupation  of
the  wise."


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     339

No.  VII.

Three  things  are  not  permanent  without
three  things  :  wealth  without  commerce,  science
without  argument,  nor  a  kingdom  without  gov-
ernment.

No.  VIII.

Showing  mercy  to  the  wicked  is  doing  injury
to  the  good,  and  pardoning  oppressors  is  injur-
ing the  oppressed.  When  you  connect  yourself
with  base  men,  and  show  them  favor,  they  com-
mit crimes  with  your  power,  whereby  you  par-
ticipate in  their  guilt.

No.  IX.

You  cannot  rely  on  the  friendship  of  kings,
nor  confide  in  the  sweet  voices  of  boys ;  for
those  change  on  the  slightest  suspicion,  and  these
alter  in  the  course  of  a  night.  Give  not  your
heart  to  her  who  has  a  thousand  lovers ;  but  if
you  should  bestow  it  on  her,  be  prepared  for  a
separation.

No.  X.
Reveal  not  to  a  friend  every  secret  that  you


340  THE   GULISTAN.

possess,  for  how  can  you  tell  but  what  he  may
some  time  or  other  become  your  enemy  ?  Like-
wise inflict  not  on  an  enemy  every  injury
in  your  power,  for  he  may  afterwards  become
your  friend.  The  matter  which  you  wish
to  preserve  as  a  secret,  impart  it  not  to  any
one,  although  he  may  be  worthy  of  confidence ;
for  no  one  will  be  so  true  to  your  secret  as  your-
self.

It  is  safer  to  be  silent  than  to  reveal  one's
secret  to  any  one,  and  telling  him  not  to  men-
tion it.  O  good  man !  stop  the  water  at  the
spring  head,  for  when  it  is  in  full  stream  you
cannot  arrest  it.  You  should  never  speak  a
word  in  secret  which  may  not  be  related  in
every  company.

No.   XI.

A  weak  enemy,  who  becomes  obedient  and
shows  friendship,  does  so  with  no  other  design
but  to  become  a  more  powerful  adversary ;  as
they  have  said,  "  Even  the  sincerity  of  friends
is  not  to  be  relied  on ;  what,  then,  is  to  be  ex-
pected from  the  flattery  of  enemies  ?  '  He  who
despises  a  weak  enemy  resembles  him  who
neglects  a  spark  of  fire.  Extinguish  it  to-day,
whilst  you  are  able ;  for  when  it  issues  into  a
flame,  it  destroys  a  world.     Permit  not  your


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     341

enemy  to  string  his  bow,  whilst  you  are  able  to
pierce  him  with  an  arrow.

No.   XII.

Speak  in  such  manner  between  two  enemies,
that,  should  they  afterwards  become  friends,  you
may  not  be  put  to  the  blush.  Hostility  between
two  people  is  like  fire,  and  the  evil-fated  back-
biter supplies  fuel.  Afterwards,  when  they  are
reconciled  together,  the  backbiter  is  hated  and
despised  by  both  parties.  To  kindle  a  flame
between  two  persons,  is  to  burn  yourself  incon-
siderately in  the  midst.  Whisper  to  your  friends,
in  order  that  your  bloodthirsty  enemy  may  not
overhear  you.  Take  care  what  you  say  before
a  wall,  as  you  cannot  tell  who  may  be  behind  it.

No.    XIII.

Whosoever  formeth  an  intimacy  with  the
enemies  of  his  friends,  does  so  to  injure  the  latter.
O  wise  man !  wash  your  hands  of  that  friend
who  associates  with  your  enemies.

No.    XIV.

When,  in  transacting  business,  you  are  under
any  hesitation,  make  choice  of  that  side  which


342  THE   GULISTAN.

will  produce  the  least  injury.  Speak  not  harshly
to  a  man  of  placid  manners ;  and  with  him  who
knocks  at  the  door  of  peace,  seek  not  hostility.

No.    XV.

As  long  as  an  affair  can  be  compassed  by
money,  it  is  not  advisable  to  put  one's  life  in
danger.  When  the  hand  has  failed  in  every
trick,  it  is  lawful  to  draw  the  sword.

No.    XVI.

Show  not  mercy  to  a  weak  enemy,  for  if  he
becomes  powerful  he  will  not  spare  you.  When
you  see  an  enemy  weak,  twist  not  your  whiskers
in  boasting :  there  is  marrow  in  every  bone,  and
every  coat  covers  a  man.  Whosoever  killeth  a
wicked  man,  relieve th  the  world  from  his  in-
juries, and  delivereth  himself  from  the  wrath  of
God.  Forgiveness  is  commendable,  but  apply
not  ointment  to  the  wound  of  an  oppressor.
Knoweth  he  not,  that  whosoever  spare  th  the  life
of  a  serpent  committeth  injury  towards  the  sons
of  Adam.

No.    XVII.
It  is  not  advisable  to  follow  the  advice  of  an


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      343

enemy ,  you  may  hear  what  he  has  to  say,  in
order  that  you  may  act  contrary  thereto ;  and
which  is  perfect  reason.  Avoid  that  which  an
enemy  tells  you  to  do  ;  for  if  you  follow  his  ad-
vice, you  will  smite  your  knees  with  the  hands
of  sorrow.  If  he  shows  you  a  road  straight  as
an  arrow,  turn  from  it  and  go  the  other  way.

No.    XVIII.

Anger,  when  excessive,  createth  terror  ;  and
kindness  out  of  season  destroys  authority.  Be
not  so  severe  as  to  cause  disgust,  nor  so  lenient
as  to  encourage  audacity.  Severity  and  lenity
should  be  tempered  together ;  like  the  surgeon,
who  when  he  uses  the  lancet  applies  also  a
plaster.  A  wise  man  carries  not  severity  to  ex-
cess, nor  suffers  such  relaxation  as  will  lessen
his  own  dignity.  He  overrates  not  himself;
neither  doth  he  altogether  neglect  his  conse-
quence.  A  shepherd  said  to  his  father,  "  O
thou  who  art  wise,  teach  me  one  maxim  from
your  experience."  He  replied,  "  Be  complacent,
but  not  to  that  degree  that  they  may  insult  you
with  the  sharp  teeth  of  the  wolf."

No.    XIX.
Two  persons  are  enemies  to  a  kingdom  and


344  THE  GULISTAN.

to  religion, —  a  monarch  without  clemency,  and
a  religious  man  without  knowledge.  May  there
never  be  at  the  head  of  a  kingdom  a  ruler  who
is  not  an  obedient  servant  of  God.

No.    XX.

It  behooveth  a  king  not  to  show  wrath  to-
wards his  enemies  to  such  a  degree  as  to  alarm
his  friends ;  for  the  fire  of  wrath  first  falls  on  the
exciter  of  it,  and  then  the  flame  may  reach  the
enemy,  or  not.  It  suits  not  the  earth-born  sons
of  Adam  to  assume  pride,  ferocity,  and  vanity.
You  who  have  so  much  heat  and  pertinacity
I  do  not  consider  as  created  of  earth,  but  of  fire.
In  the  land  of  Baelkan,  I  visited  a  religious  man,
to  whom  I  said,  "  Cleanse  me  from  ignorance
by  your  doctrine."  He  replied,  "  Go,  and  suffer
with  patience,  like  the  earth,  O  learned  in  the
law,  or  else  bury  in  the  earth  all  that  you  have
studied."

No.    XXI.

A  wicked  man  is  a  captive  in  the  hand  of
the  enemy,  for  wherever  he  goeth  he  Cannot  es-
cape from  the  clutches  of  his  own  punishment.
If  the  wicked  man  should  escape  to  heaven
from  the  hand  of  calamity,  he  would  continue  in


RULES   FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      345

calamity  from  the  sense  of  his  own  evil  disposi-
tion.

No.   XXII.

When  you  see  discord  amongst  the  troops  of
your  enemy,  be  of  good  courage  ;  but  if  they
are  united,  then  be  upon  your  guard.  When
you  see  contention  amongst  your  enemies,  go
and  sit  at  ease  with  your  friends ;  but  when  you
see  them  of  one  mind,  string  your  bow,  and
place  stones  upon  the  ramparts.

No.    XXIII.

When  the  enemy  has  failed  in  all  other  arti-
fices, he  will  propose  friendship ;  that  under  its
appearance  he  may  effect  what  he  could  not
compass  as  an  open  adversary.

No.    XXIV.

Bruise  the  serpent's  head  with  the  hand  of
your  enemy ;  which  cannot  fail  of  producing  one
of  these  two  advantages.  If  the  enemy  suc-
ceeds, you  have  killed  the  snake  ;  and  if  the
latter  prevails,  you  have  got  rid  of  your  enemy.

In  the  day  of  battle  consider  not  yourself
safe   because  your   adversary  is  weak  ;    for  he

15*


346  THE   GU  LI  ST  AN.

who  becomes  desperate  will  take  out  the  lion's
brains.

No.  XXV.

When  you  have  anything  to  communicate
that  will  distress  the  heart  of  the  person  whom  it
concerns,  be  silent,  in  order  that  he  may  hear
from  some  one  else.  O  nightingale !  bring  thou
the  glad  tidings  of  spring,  and  leave  bad  news  to
the  owl !

No.  XXVI.

Inform  not  the  king  of  the  perfidy  of  any
one,  excepting  you  are  assured  that  he  will
entirely  approve  of  it ;  for  otherwise  you  are
only  working  your  own  destruction.  When
you  are  purposing  to  speak  anything,  do  it
when  you  know  that  your  words  will  take
effect.

No.  XXVII.

He  who  gives  advice  to  a  self-conceited
man,  stands  himself  in  need  of  counsel  from
another.


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      347


No.  XXVIII.

Be  not  caught  by  the  deceit  of  an  enemy,  nor
be  proud  of  the  praise  of  a  flatterer ;  for  that
has  spread  the  thin  net ;  and  this  has  opened
the  palate  of  avarice.  A  blockhead  is  pleased
with  praise,  like  a  corpse  whose  inflated  heel
has  the  appearance  of  plumpness.  Take  care
how  you  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  flatterer,
who,  in  return  for  his  little  stock,  expects  to
derive  from  you  considerable  advantage.  If  one
day  you  do  not  comply  with  his  wishes,  he  im-
putes to  you  two  hundred  defects  instead  of
perfections.

No.  XXIX.

Unless  some  one  points  out  to  an  orator
his  defects,  his  discourse  will  never  be  cor-
rect. Be  not  vain  of  the  elegance  of  your  dis-
course from  the  commendation  of  an  ignorant
person,  neither  upon  the  strength  of  your  own
judgment.

No.  XXX.

Every  one  thinks  his  own  wisdom  perfect,
and   his  own   child   beautiful.     A   Jew  and  a


348  THE  GULISTAN

Mohammedan  were  disputing  in  a  manner  that
made  me  laugh.  The  Mohammedan  said  in
wrath,  "  If  this  deed  of  conveyance  is  not  au-
thentic, may  God  cause  me  to  die  a  Jew ! '
The  Jew  said,  "  I  make  oath  on  the  Pentateuch,
and  if  I  swear  falsely,  I  am  a  Mohammedan
like  you."  If  wisdom  was  to  cease  throughout
the  world,  no  one  would  suspect  himself  of  igno-
rance.

No.  XXXI.

Ten  men  will  sit  at  one  table,  but  two  dogs
will  not  be  satisfied  with  one  carcass.  The
avaricious  man,  with  the  whole  world  at  his  com-
mand, is  hungry ;  whilst  he  who  is  contented  is
satisfied  with  a  loaf  of  bread.  The  narrow
belly  is  filled  with  a  loaf  of  bread  without
meat ;  but  the  narrow  sight  is  not  satisfied
with  all  the  riches  on  the  face  of  the  earth.
My  father,  when  the  term  of  his  life  was  ex-
pired, gave  me  this  one  advice,  and  departed,
"  Lust  is  a  fire,  shun  it ;  precipitate  not  your-
self into  the  flames  of  hell ;  since  you  will
not  have  strength  to  support  that  burning,
quench  the  present  flame  with  the  water  of
patience."


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     349

No.  XXXII.

He  who  when  he  hath  the  power  doeth  not
good,  when  he  loses  the  means  will  suffer  distress.
There  is  not  a  more  unfortunate  wretch  than  the
oppressor ;  for  in  the  day  of  adversity,  nobody  is
his  friend.

No.  XXXIII.

Life  depends  upon  the  support  of  a  single
breath,  and  worldly  existence  is  between  two
non-existences.  Those  who  sell  religion  for  the
world  are  asses  ;  they  sell  Joseph,  and  get  noth-
ing in  return.  "  Did  I  not  bargain  with  you,
O  sons  of  Adam,  that  you  should  not  serve
Satan  ?  By  the  advice  of  an  adversary,  you  are
breaking  your  promise  with  your  friend  :  behold
from  whom  you  have  separated  and  with  whom
you  have  united  yourselves."

No.    XXXIV.

Satan  cannot  prevail  over  the  righteous,
neither  the  king  against  the  poor.

Trust  not  him  who  neglecteth  his  prayers  to
God,  even  although  his  mouth  be  kept  open  by
fasting ;  for  he  who  performeth  not  the  Divine
precepts,  neither  will  he  care  for  his  debt  to  you.


350  THE   GULISTAN.

I  have  heard  that  in  the  land  of  the  East  they
are  forty  years  jn  making  a  china  cnp :  they
make  a  hundred  in  a  day  at  Baghdad,  and  con-
sequently you  see  the  meanness  of  the  price.  A
chicken,  as  soon  as  it  comes  out  of  the  egg,  seeks
its  food ;  but  an  infant  hath  not  reason  and  dis-
crimination. That  which  was  something  all  at
once,  never  arrives  at  much  perfection ;  and
the  other  by  degrees  surpasses  all  things  in
power  and  excellence.  Glass  is  everywhere,
and  therefore  of  no  value  ;  the  ruby  is  ob-
tained with  difficulty,  and  on  that  account  is
precious.

No.   XXXV.

Affairs  are  accomplished  through  patience  ;
and  the  hasty  man  faileth  in  his  undertakings.
I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  in  the  desert  a  man
who  walked  slowly,  get  before  one  who  went
fast.  The  fleet  steed  was  tired  with  galloping,
whilst  the  camel-drive,r  proceeded  in  an  equal
slow  pace.

No.    XXXVI.

Nothing  is  so  good  for  an  ignorant  man  as
silence  ;  and  if  he  was  sensible  of  this  he  would
not  be  ignorant.     When  you  possess  not  perfec-


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      351

tion  and  excellence,  you  had  better  keep  your
tongue  within  your  teeth.  The  tongue  brings
men  into  disgrace.  The  nut  without  a  kernel  is
of  light  weight.  A  stupid  man  was  training  an
ass,  and  spent  all  his  time  upon  it.  Somebody
said :  "  O  blockhead,  what  art  thou  endeavoring
to  do  ?  for  this  foolish  attempt  expect  reprehen-
sion from  the  censorious.  Brutes  will  not  acquire
speech  from  thee ;  learn  thou  silence  from  them."
Whosoever  doth  not  reflect  before  he  giveth  an
answer,  will  generally  speak  improperly.  Either
arrange  your  words  as  a  man  of  sense,  or  else
sit  quiet  like  a  brute.

No.   XXXVII.

Whenever  you  argue  with  another  wiser
than  yourself,  in  order  that  others  may  admire
your  wisdom,  they  will  discover  your  ignorance.
When  one  manages  a  discourse  better  than
yourself,  although  you  may  be  fully  informed,
yet  do  not  start  objections.

No.     XXXVIII.

Whosoever  associates  with  the  wicked  will
not  see  good.  If  an  angel  should  keep  company
with  a  demon,  he  would  learn  terror,  perfidy,
and  deceit.  You  cannot  learn  virtue  from  the
wicked ;  the  wolf  practises  not  the  tanner's  art.


352  THE   GULISTAN.

No.    XXXIX.

Publish  not  men's  secret  faults ;  for  by  dis-
gracing them  you  make  yourself  of  no  repute.

No.   XL.

Whosoever  acquired  knowledge,  and  did  not
practise  it,  resembleth  him  who  ploughed,  but
did  not  sow.

No.    XLI.

Obedience  is  not  truly  performed  by  the
body  of  him  whose  heart  is  dissatisfied.  The
shell  without  a  kernel  is  not  fit  for  store.

No.    XLII.

Not  every  one  that  is  ready  to  dispute  is
quick  in  transacting  business.  A  form  may  ap-
pear handsome  under  a  sheet,  but  remove  it  and
you  find  a  grandmother.

No.    XLIII.

If  every  night  was  a  night  of  power,  many
of  such  nights  would  be  disregarded.  If  every
stone  was  a  Budukshan  ruby,  the  ruby  and  the
pebble  would  be  of  equal  value.


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     353

No.    XLIV.

It  is  not  every  graceful  form  that  contains  a
good  disposition ;  for  virtue  is  in  the  mind,  not
in  the  appearance.  You  may  know  in  one  day
from  a  man's  manners  to  what  decree  0f  knowl-
edge  he  has  attained ;  however,  be  not  secure
against  his  mind ;  neither  be  proud  of  your  dis-
covery ;  for  a  malignant  spririt  is  not  to  be
detected  in  many  years.

No.    XLV.

Whosoever  contendeth  with  the  great  sheds
his  own  blood.  He  who  thinks  himself  great
has  been  compared  to  one  who  squints  and  sees
double.  You  will  get  a  broken  front  by  sporting
your  head  against  a  ram.

No.    XLVI.

It  is  not  the  part  of  a  wise  man  to  box  with
a  lion,  or  to  strike  his  fist  against  a  sword.
Neither  fight  nor  contend  with  one  more  power-
ful than  yourself;  put  your  hand  under  your
armpit.

No.   XLVII.

A  weak  man  who  contends  with  one  that  is

w


354  THE   GULISTAN.

strong,  befriends  his  adversary  by  his  own  death.
He  who  was  nursed  in  the  shade,  how  is  he  able
to  accompany  the  heroes  to  battle  ?  He  who
hath  not  strength  in  his  arm,  acts  foolishly  in
opposing  one  who  has  a  wrist  of  iron.

No.    XLVIII.

He  who  listens  not  to  advice,  studies  to  hear
reprehension.  When  advice  gains  not  admis-
sion into  the  ear,  if  they  reprehend  you,  be
silent.

No.    XLIX.

The  vicious  cannot  endure  the  sight  of  the
virtuous ;  in  the  same  manner  as  the  curs  of  the
market  howl  at  a  hunting-dog,  but  dare  not  ap-
proach him.

No.   L.

When  a  mean  wretch  cannot  vie  with  another
in  virtue,  out  of  his  wickedness  he  begins  to
slander.  The  abject  envious  wretch  will  slan-
der the  virtuous  man  when  absent ;  but  when
brought  face  to  face,  his  loquacious  tongue  be-
comes dumb.


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     355

No.    LI.

But  for  the  cravings  of  the  belly,  not  a  bird
would  have  fallen  into  the  snare ;  nay,  the
fowler  would  not  have  spread  his  net.  The
belly  is  chains  to  the  hands  and  fetters  to  the
feet.  He  who  is  a  slave  to  his  belly,  seldom
worships  God.

No.   LII.

Wise  men  eat  late ;  holy  men  half  satisfy
their  appetites ;  and  hermits  take  only  what  is
sufficient  to  sustain  life ;  young  men  devour  all
that  is  in  the  dish  ;  the  old  eat  until  they  sweat ;
but  the  Calenders  devour  so  voraciously  that
there  is  not  in  their  stomachs  room  for  drawing
breath ;  nor  is  there  left  on  the  table  a  morsel
for  any  one.  He  who  is  a  slave  to  his  belly,
sleeps  not  f<tr  two  nights  :  one  night  from  a
loaded  stomach,  and  the  next  night  through
want.

No.  LIII.

To  consult  with  women  is  ruin ;  and  to  be
liberal  towards  the  seditious  is  a  crime.  When
you  support  and  favor  the  vicious,  you  commit
wickedness  with  your  power  by  participation.


356  THE  GULISTAN.


No.  LIV.


Whosoever  hath  his  adversary  in  his  power,
and  doth  not  destroy  him,  is  an  enemy  to  himself.
When  there  is  a  stone  in  the  hand,  and  the  head
of  a  snake  under  the  stone,  the  prudent  man
delayeth  not  execution.  To  show  mercy  to  the
sharp-teethed  tiger  would  be  doing  injury  to
the  sheep.  But  others  have  advanced  the  con-
trary, and  said,  that  in  the  execution  of  a  pris-
oner delay  is  best,  because  you  retain  the  power
of  killing  or  of  releasing :  but  should  he  be  put
to  death  without  deliberation,  good  counsel  may
perchance  be  lost,  since  reparation  is  impossible.
It  is  easy  to  take  away  life,  but  impossible  to  re-
store it.  It  is  a  rule  of  reason,  that  the  archer
should  have  patience,  for  when  the  arrow  has  left
the  bow,  it  will  not  return.

No.  LV.

The  wise  man  who  engages  in  a  controversy
with  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  subject,
should  not  entertain  any  expectation  of  gaining
credit.  If  an  ignorant  man,  by  his  loquacity,
should  overpower  a  wise  man,  it  is  not  to  be
wondered  at,  because  a  common  stone  will  break
a  jewel.  Why  is  it  surprising  if  a  nightingale
should  not  sing,  when  a  crow  is  in  the  same  cage  ?


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     357

If  a  virtuous  man  is  injured  by  a  vagabond,  he
ought  not  to  be  sorry,  or  angry.  If  a  worthless
stone  bruise  a  golden  cup,  its  own  worth  is  not
thereby  increased,  nor  the  value  of  the  gold
lessened.

No.  LVI.

If  a  wise  man,  falling  in  company  with  mean
people,  does  not  get  credit  for  his  discourse,  be
not  amazed ;  for  the  sound  of  the  harp  cannot
overpower  the  noise  of  the  drum  ;  and  the  fra-
grance of  ambergris  is  overcome  by  fetid  garlic.
The  ignorant  wretch  was  proud  of  his  loud
voice,  because  he  had  impudently  confounded
the  man  of  understanding.  Are  you  ignorant
that  the  musical  mode  of  Hijaz  is  confounded
by  the  noise  of  the  warrior's  drum  ?  If  a  jewel
falls  into  the  mud,  it  is  still  the  same  precious
stone  ;  and  if  dust  flies  up  to  the  sky,  it  retains
its  original  baseness.  A  capacity  without  edu-
cation is  deplorable,  and  education  without  ca-
pacity is  thrown  away.  Ashes,  although  of  high
origin,  fire  being  of  a  noble  nature,  yet  having
no  intrinsic  worth,  are  no  better  than  dust.
Sugar  obtains  not  its  value  from  the  cane,  but
from  its  innate  quality.  Musk  has  the  fragrance
in  itself,  and  not  from  being  called  a  perfume  by
the  druggist.     The  wise  man  is  like  the  drug-


358  THE  GULISTAN.

gist's  chest,  —  silent,  but  full  of  virtues;  and
the  blockhead  resembles  the  warrior's  drum, —
noisy,  but  an  empty  prattler.  A  wise  man  in
the  company  of  those  who  are  ignorant,  has
been  compared  by  the  sages  to  a  beautiful  girl
in  the  company  of  blind  men  ;  or  to  the  Koran
in  the  house  of  an  infidel.  When  the  land  of
Canaan  was  without  virtue,  the  birth  of  Joseph
did  not  increase  its  dignity.  Show  your  vir-
tue, if  you  possess  nobility  ;  for  the  rose  sprang
from  the  thorn,  and  Abraham  from  Azur.

No.  LVII.

A  friend  whom  you  have  been  gaining  dur-
ing your  whole  life,  you  ought  not  to  be
displeased  with  in  a  moment.  A  stone  is  many
years  becoming  a  ruby ;  take  care  that  you  do
not  destroy  it  in  an  instant  against  another
stone.

•

No.  LVIII.

Reason  is  under  the  power  of  sense ;  as  a  man
becomes  weak  in  the  hand  of  an  artful  woman.
Shut  the  door  of  that  house  of  pleasure,  which
you  hear  resounding  with  the  loud  voice  of  a
woman.


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     359

No.  LIX.

A  purpose,  without  power,  is  fraud  and  de-
ceit; and  power  without  design,  is  ignorance  and
madness.  The  first  requisites  are  judgment,
prudence,  and  wisdom,  and  then  a  kingdom  ;
because  putting  power  and  wealth  into  the  hand
of  the  ignorant,  is  furnishing  weapons  against
themselves.

No.  LX.

The  liberal  man,  who  eats  and  bestows,  is
better  than  the  religious  man,  who  fasts  and
hoards.  Whosoever  hath  forsaken  luxury,  to
gain  the  approbation  of  mankind,  hath  fallen
from  lawful  into  unlawful  voluptuousness.  The
hermit,  who  sitteth  in  retirement,  not  for  the
sake  of  God,  what  shall  the  hopeless  wretch  be-
hold in  a  dark  mirror?  A  little  and  a  little,
collected  together,  become  a  great  deal ;  the  heap
in  the  barn  consists  of  single  grains,  and  drop  and
drop  form  an  inundation.

No.  LXI.    .

A  wise  man  ought  not  to  suffer  the  insolence
of  a  common  person  to  pass  unnoticed,  as  he
thereby  injures  both  parties ;  for  his  own  re-


360  THE   GULISTAN.

spectability  will  be  lessened,  and  the  other  con-
firmed in  his  ignorance.  When  you  speak  to  a
low  fellow  with  kindness  and  benignity,  it  in-
creases his  arrogance  and  perverseness.

No.  LXII.

Sin,  by  whomsoever  committed,  is  detestable,
but  most  so  in  a  learned  man  ;  because  learning
is  the  weapon  for  combating  Satan ;  and  if  the
armed  man  is  taken  prisoner,  the  greater  will  be
his  shame.  An  ignorant  plebeian  of  dissolute
manners  is  better  than  a  learned  man  without
temperance  ;  for  that  through  blindness  lost  the
road,  and  this,  who  had  two  eyes,  fell  into  the
well.

No.  LXIII.

He  whose  bread  people  do  not  eat  in  his  life-
time, when  he  dies  they  mention  not  his  name.
Joseph  the  just,  when  there  was  a  famine  in
Egypt,  ate  not  his  fill,  in  order  that  he  might
not  forget  those  who  were  hungry.  The  widow
relishes  grapes,  and  not  the  master  of  the  vine-
yard. He  who  lives  in  ease  and  wealth,  how
can  he  know  what  it  is  to  be  hungry?  He
knows  the  condition  of  the  distressed  whose
own  circumstances  are  needy.     O  thou  who  art


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      361

mounted  on  a  swift  horse,  reflect  that  the  ass
laden  with  thorns  is  sticking;  in  the  mud.  Ask
not  fire  from  the  house  of  the  neighboring  Dur-
waish,  for  that  which  issues  from  his  chimney
is  the  smoke  of  his  heart.

No.    LXIV.

In  a  season  of  scarcity  and  drought,  inquire
not  of  a  distressed  Durwaish  how  he  does  ;  un-
less you  mean  to  apply  ointment  to  his  wound,
by  giving  him  subsistence.  When  you  see  a
loaded  ass  sticking  in  the  mud,  take  compassion
on  him,  or  at  any  rate  pass  not  over  his  head ;
but  when  you  proceed  and  inquire  how  he  came
there,  bind  up  your  loins  as  becometh  a  man,
and  lay  hold  of  the  ass's  tail.

No.    LXV.

Two  things  are  morally  impossible :  to  enjoy
more  than  Providence  has  allotted,  or  to  die  be-
fore the  appointed  time.  Destiny  will  not  be
altered  by  our  uttering  a  thousand  lamentations
and  sighs,  nor  by  our  praises  or  complaints.
The  angel  who  presides  over  the  treasury  of
winds,  what  does  he  care  if  the  lamp  of  an  old

widow  is  extin mushed?

©

16


/


362  THE   GULISTAK

No.    LXVI.

O  thou  who  art  in  want  of  subsistence,  be
confident  that  thou  shalt  eat.  And  thou  whom
death  hath  required,  flee  not ;  for  thou  canst  not
preserve  thy  life.  With  or  without  your  exer-
tion, Providence  will  bestow  daily  bread;  and
if  thou  shouldst  be  in  the  jaws  of  the  lion,  or  of
the  tiger,  they  could  not  devour  you  excepting
on  the  day  of  your  destiny.

No.   LXVII.

That  which  is  not  allotted,  the  hand  cannot
reach,  and  what  is  allotted  will  find  you  wher-
ever you  may  be.  You  have  heard  with  what
toil  Secunder  penetrated  to  the  land  of  dark-
ness ;  and  that,  after  all,  he  did  not  taste  the
water  of  immortality.

No.   LXVIII.

A  fisherman,  unassisted  by  destiny,  could
not  catch  a  fish  in  the  Tigris ;  and  the  fish  with-
out fate,  could  not  have  died  on  the  dry  land.

The  covetous  man  explores  the  whole  world
in  pursuit  of  a  subsistence,  and  fate  is  close  at
his  heels.


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     363

No.  LXIX.

A  wicked  rich  man  is  a  clod  of  earth  gilded  ;
and  a  pious  Durwaish  is  a  beauty  soiled  with
earth.  This  wears-  the  patched  garment  of
Moses,  and  that  has  the  ulcer  of  Pharaoh
covered  with  jewels.  The  virtuous  man  under
adversity  preserves  a  cheerful  countenance ;  but
the  wicked  man  in  prosperity  holds  down  his
head.  Whosoever  possesses  rank  and  wealth,
and  relieves  not  those  who  are  in  distress,  Inform
him  that  in  the  next  world  he  will  find  neither
dignity  nor  riches.

No.  LXX.

The  envious  man  beorudgeth  the  bountiful
goodness  of  God,  and  is  inimical  to  those  who
are  innocent.

I  heard  a  little  fellow  with  dry  brains  speak-
ing disrespectfully  of  a  person  of  rank.  I  said,
"  O  sir,  if  you  are  unfortunate,  what  crime  have
fortunate  men  committed  ? '  Wish  hot  ill  to
the  envious  man,  for  the  unfortunate  wretch  is
a  calamity  to  himself.  Where  is  the  need  of
your  showing  enmity  towards  him  who  has  such
an  adversary  at  his  heels.


364  THE   GU  LI  STAN.


No.  LXXI.

A  student  without  inclination  is  a  lover
without  money ;  a  traveller  without  observation
is  a  bird  without  wings  ;  a  learned  man  without
works  is  a  tree  without  fruit  ;  and  a  devotee
without  knowledge   is  a  house  without  a  door.


No.    LXXII.

The  Koran  was  revealed  that  men  might
learn  good  morals,  and  not  that  they  should  re-
cite the  written  sections.  The  unlettered  relig-
ious man  is  a  foot-traveller ;  whilst  the  negligent
learned  man  is  a  sleeping  rider.  A  sinner  who
lifts  up  his  hands  in  prayer  is  better  than  a
devotee  who  exalts  his  head.  A  military  officer,
who  is  good-natured  and  courteous,  is  better
than  an  oppressive  lawyer.

No.    LXXIII.

A  learned  man  without  works  is  a  bee
without  honey.  Say  to  the  austere  and  uncivil
bee,  "  When  you  cannot  afford  honey,  do  not

sting."

No.   LXXIV.
A  man  without  virility  is  a  woman ;  and  an


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IX  LIFE.     3G5

avaricious  devotee  is  a  highway  robber.  0  thou
who  hast  put  on  white  garments  to  appear  holy

in  the  sight  of  men,  thou  hast  thereby  blackened

©  j

the  register  of  works :  the  hand  ought  to  be  re-

©  ©

strained  from  worldly  pursuits,  whether  the
sleeve  is  long  or  whether  it  is  short.

No.  LXXV.

Two  persons  never  free  their  hearts  of  regret,

nor  their  sorrowing  feet  from  the  mud.     One  is

©

the  merchant  whose  ship  has  been  wrecked  ;
and  the  other,  the  heir  who  has  got  into  the
company  of  Calenders ;  as  they  have  said,
"  Although  a  dress  bestowed  by  a  monarch  is
valuable,  yet  one's  own  coarse  clothes  are  pref-
erable ;  and  although  the  great  man's  food  is
exquisite,  still  the  scraps  of  one's  own  table  are
more  delicious.  Vinegar  and  pot-herbs,  obtained
by  one's  own  labor,  are  preferable  to  bread  and
lamb  received  from  the  hand  of  the  head  man

of  the  village."

©

No.  LXXVI.

It  is  contrary  to  reason,  and  to  the  counsel
of  the  Avise,  to  take  medicine  without  confidence,
or  to  travel  an  unknown  road  without  accom-
panying the  caravan.


366  THE   GULISTAN.

No.  LXXVII.

They  asked  Iraati  Mursheed  Moh'ammed  Ben
Mohammed  Ghezaly,  on  whom  be  the  mercy  of
God  !  bv  what  means  he  had  attained  to  such  a
degree  of  knowledge  ?  He  replied,  "  In  this
manner,  —  whatever  I  did  not  know,  I  was  not
ashamed  to  inquire  about."  There  will  be
reasonable  hopes  of  recovery  when  you  get  a
skilful  physician  to  feel  your  pulse.  Inquire
about  everything  that  you  do  not  know ;  since,
for  the  small  trouble  of  asking,  you  will  be
guided  in  the  respectable  road  of  knowledge.

No.  LXXVIII.

Whenever  you  are  certain  that  anything
will  be  known  to  you  in  time,  be  not  hasty  in
inquiring  after  it, .  as  you  will  thereby  lessen
your  authority  and  respectability.  When  Lok-
man  saw  that  in  the  hand  of  David  iron  became
miraculously  like  wax,  he  did  not  ask  how  he
did  it ;  being  persuaded  that  without  asking  it
would  be  made  known.

No.    LXXIX.

Amongst  the  qualifications  for  society,  it  is
necessary  either  that  you  attend  to  the  concerns


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     367

of  your  household,  or  else  devote  yourself  to
religion.

Tell  your  story  in  conformity  to  the  temper
of  the  hearer,  if  you  know  that  he  is  well  dis-
posed towards  you.  Any  wise  man  who  asso-
ciates with  Mujnoon  will  talk  of  nothing  else
but  of  the  face  of  Leila.


No.  LXXX.

Whosoever  associates  with  the  wicked,  al-
though he  may  not  imbibe  their  principles,  will
be  accused  of  following  their  wavs ;  in  like
manner,  as  if  a  person  should  go  to  a  tavern
with  intention  to  say  his  prayers,  it  would  only
be  imagined  that  he  went  there  to  drink  wine.
You  have  stigmatized  yourself  with  the  charac-
ter of  ignorance,  from  having  associated  with
the  ignorant.  I  asked  a  wise  man  to  tell  me  a
maxim.  He  replied,  "  Associate  not  with  the
ignorant ;  for  if  you  are  a  man  of  judgment,
you  will  thereby  become  an  ass ;  and  if  you  are
ignorant,  you  will  increase  your  stupidity.'


55


No.  LXXXI.

It  is  well  known,  that  if  a  child  lays  hold  of
the  bridle  of  a  tractable  camel,  he  may  be  led  a
hundred  far-sangs  without  being  in  the  least  dis-


B6S  THE   GULISTAN.

obedient ;  but  if  the  road  becomes  dangerous
and  threatens  death,  and  the  child,  through
ignorance,  wants  the  camel  to  go  that  way,  he
slips  the  bridle  out  of  his  hand,  and  will  not
obey  him  any  longer ;  because  in  the  time  of
danger  courteousness  is  a  crime ;  for  they  have
said,  "  An  enemy  does  not  become  a  friend,
through  indulgence  ;  nay,  it  increases  his  ava-
rice." Be  humble  unto  him  who  shows  you
kindness,  and  to  him  who  acts  contrarily,  fill  his
eyes  with  dust.  Speak  not  with  favor  and  kind-
ness to  a  man  of  austere  countenance  ;  for  rusty
iron  is  not  polished  with  a  smooth  file.

No.  LXXXII.

Whosoever  interrupts  the  conversation  of
others  to  make  a  display  of  his  own  wisdom,
certainly  betrays  his  ignorance.  The  sages
have  said,  that  a  wise  man  speaketh  not  until
they  ask  him  a  question.  Although  the  tem-
perament of  the  discourse  may  be  true,  yet  it  is
difficult  to  admit  his  pretensions.

No.    LXXXIII.

Once  when  I  had  a  sore  under  my  garment,
my  superior,  on  whom  be  the  mercy  of  God  !
every    day    asked   me,    "  How    do   you    do  ? '


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      3C0

Avoiding  to  mention  the  seat  of  my  complaint,
for  it  is  not  decent  to  call  every  part  by  its
name.  He  who  does  not  ponder  his  words,  will
be  offended  at  the  answer  which  he  receives.
As  long  as  you  are  in  doubt  whether  an  expres-
sion is  perfectly  correct,  you  ought  not  to  open
your  mouth.  If  by  speaking  truth  you  should
continue  in  confinement,  it  is  better  than  getting
released  by  uttering  falsehood.

No.   LXXXIV.

Telling  a  lie  is  like  inflicting  a  wound,
which,  when  healed,  leaves  a  scar.  Joseph's
brethren,  having  become  notorious  for  falsehood,
when  they  spoke  truth  it  was  not  believed.
God  hath  said,  "  You  shall  be  interrogated  con-
cerning your  affections."

When  one  who  practises  veracity  commits  a
mistake,  it  is  allowable  to  pass  it  over ;  but
when  he  who  is  notorious  for  falsehood  speaks
truth,  you  will  say  it  is  a  lie.

No.    LXXXV.

Man  is,  beyond  dispute,  the  most  excellent  of

created  beings,  and  the  vilest  animal  is  a  dog  ;

but  the  sages  agree  that  a  grateful  dog  is  better

than  an  ungrateful  man.     A  dog  never  forgets
16*  x


370  THE   GULISTAN.

a  morsel,  although  you  pelt  him  a  hundred
times  with  stones.  But  if  you  cherish  a  mean
wretch  for  an  age,  he  will  fight  with  you  for  a
mere  trifle.

No.   LXXXVI.

A  sensualist  does  not  practise  virtue,  and
he  who  is  unskilful  is  not  fit  to  rule  over  others.
Spare  not  the  voracious  ox,  for  a  glutton  is  given
to  sloth.  If  you  wish  to  fatten  like  an  ox,  sub-
mit your  body  to  the  oppressors  like  an  ass.

No.    LXXXVII.

It  is  said  in  the  Gospel,  "  O  sons  of  Adam,
if  I  should  grant  you  riches,  you  would  be  more
intent  on  them  than  on  me ;  and  if  I  should
make  you  poor,  your  hearts  would  be  sorrowful ;
and  then,  how  could  you  properly  celebrate  my
praise,  and  after  what  manner  would  you  wor-
ship me  ?  Sometimes  in  affluence  you  are  proud
and  negligent ;  and  again  in  poverty,  you  are
afflicted  and  wounded.  Since  such  is  your  dis-
position, both  in  happiness  and  in  misery,  I
know  not  at  what  time  you  will  find  leisure  to
worship  God."


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     371

No.    LXXXVIII.

The  divine  will  displaces  one  from  the  throne
of  royalty,  and  preserves  another  in  the  fish's
belly.  Happy  is  the  state  of  him  who  keepeth
thee,  O  God,  in  continual  remembrance,  al-
though he  were  in  the  belly  of  the  whale,  like
Jonas.

No.    LXXXIX.

If  God  should  unsheathe  the  sword  of  his
wrathful  indignation,  both  prophets  and  saints
would  shrink  back  with  dread  ;  and  if  he  were
to  bestow  a  glance  of  benignity,  the  wicked
would  obtain  virtue.  If  at  the  resurrection  he
should  be  strict  in  judgment,  what  can  even  the
Prophets  plead  in  excuse  ?  Let  us  say,  "  Out
of  thy  mercy  remove  the  veil,  seeing  that  sinners
are  in  hopes  of  pardon."

No.    XC.

He  who  is  not  brought  into  the  road  of  rec-
titude by  worldly  afflictions,  shall  suffer  eternal
punishment.  The  Almighty  said,  "  Of  a  truth,
I  will  cause  you  to  suffer  light  punishment,  and
not  the  greatest  torments."'  Great  men  first
admonish,  and  then  confine  ;  when  they  give
advice,  and  you  listen  not,  they  put  you  in  fet-


372  THE   GULISTAN.

ters.  The  fortunate  take  warning  from  the  his-
tories and  precepts  of  the  ancients,  in  order  that
themselves  may  not  become  an  example  to  pos-
terity.

The  bird  alighteth  not  on  the  spread  net,
when  it  beholds  another  bird  in  the  snare.
Take  warning  by  the  misfortunes  of  others,
that  others  may  not  take  example  from  you.

*

No.    XCI.

He  who  is  born  deaf,  how  can  he  hear ;
and  he  on  whom  the  noose  is  flung,  how  can
he  avoid  going;  ?  To  those  who  are  befriended
by  God,  the  dark  night  is  as  bright  as  the
shining  day ;  but  this  happiness  is  not  pro-
curable by  the  strength  of  the  arm,  until  it
is  granted  by  God.  To  whom  else  shall  I
complain,  since  there  is  no  other  judge,  and
there  bein<x  no  hand  higher  than  thine  ?  Who-
soever  thou  guidest,  cannot  stray ;  and  whosoever
thou  causest  to  wander,  hath  no  guide.

No.   XCII.

A  Durwaish  whose  end  is  good,  is  better
than  a  Kino;  whose  end  is  evil.  It  is  better  to
suffer  sorrow  before,  than  after,  the  enjoyment
of  happiness.


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.      373

No.  XCIII.

The  skv  enriches  the  earth  with  showers',  and
the  earth  returns  it  nothing  but  dust.  A  jar
exudes  whatever  it  contains.  If  my  disposition
is  not  worthy  in  your  sight,  quit  not  your  own
good  manners.  The  Almighty  beholdeth  the
crime,  and  concealeth  it;  and  the  neighbor  seeth
not,  yet  proclaimeth  it  aloud.  God  preserve  us!
if  men  knew  what  is  done  in  secret,  no  one
would  be  free  from  the  interference  of  others.

No.    XCIV.

Gold  is  obtained  from  the  mine  by  digging
the  earth,  and  from  the  miser  by  digging  his
soul.  Men  of  grovelling  disposition  expend
not,  and  hoard  with  care  ;  saying  that  the
hopes  of  expending  is  better  than  having  spent.
You  will  see  one  day,  according  to  the  wish
of  the  enemy,  the  money  left,  and  the  wretch
dead.

No.    XCV.

Those  who  do  not  pity  the  weak,  will  suffer
violence  from  the  powerful.  It  does  not  always
happen  that  the  strong  arm  can  overpower  the
hand  of  the  weak.     Distress  not  the  heart  of  the


374  THE   GULISTAN.

weak,  lest  you  fall  by  one  more  powerful  than
yourself.

No.    XCVI.

The  wise  man,  on  beholding  contention,
withdraweth  himself;  and  when  he  seeth  peace,
droppeth  anchor ;  because  there  is  safety  on
the  beach,  and  here  is  enjoyment  in  the  mid-
dle.

No.    XCVII.

The  gamester  wants  three  sixes,  but  three  aces
turn  up.  Pasture-land  is  a  thousand  times  bet-
ter than  the  plain ;  but  the  horse  has  not  com-
mand of  the  reins.

No.    XCVIII.

A  Durwaish,  in  his  prayer,  said,  "  O  God,
show  pity  towards  the  wicked,  for  on  the  good
thou  hast  already  bestowed  mercy,  by  having
created  them  virtuous."

No.  XCIX.

Jumshaid  introduced  distinctions  in  dress,
and  was  the  first  person  who  wore  a  ring  on  the


RULES  FOR   CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     375

finger.  They  asked  him  why  he  had  given  the
whole  grace  and  ornament  to  the  left,  whilst  ex-
cellence belongs  to  the  right  hand  ?  He  replied,
"  The  right  hand  is  completely  ornamented  by
its  own  rectitude."  Feridoon  commanded  the
Chinese  embroiderers  to  embroider  the  follow-
ing words  on  the  outside  of  his  pavilion,  "  O
man  of  prudence,  do  thou  good  to  the  wicked ;
for  the  virtuous  are  of  themselves  great  and
happy."

No.  C.

They  said  to  a  great  man,  "  Seeing  that  the
right  possesses  so  much  excellence,  what  is  the
reason  of  their  wearing  the  ring  on  the  left
hand?"  He  replied,  "  Don't  you  know  that
the  virtuous  man  is  always  neglected  ?  He  who
hath  appointed  both  happiness  and  misery,  be-
stoweth  either  virtue  or  riches."


No.  CI.

He  is  the  proper  person  to  give  advice  to
kings  who  neither  dreads  the  loss  of  his  head
nor  seeks  for  reward.  He  who  is  orthodox,
whether  you  pour  money  under  his  feet  or
apply  an  Indian  cimeter  to  his  head,  has  neither
hope  nor  fear  from  any  one  ;  and  this  is  the
true  basis  of  piety.


376  THE   GU LI  STAN.

No.    CII.

A  king  is  for  the  restraint  of  oppressors ;  the
superintendent  of  police,  for  guarding  off  mur-
derers ;  and  the  Cazy  for  hearing  complaints
against  thieves.  Two  men  of  honest  intentions
never  refer  their  complaint  to  the  Cazy.

When  you  perceive  what  is  just,  and  that  it
must  be  given,  it  is  better  to  give  it  with  kind-
ness than  with  contention  and  displeasure.  If
a  man  does  not  pay  the  tax  willingly,  the  officer's
servant  will  exact  it  by  force.

No.  cm.

The  teeth  of  every  one  are  blunted  by  sour-
ness, excepting  the  Cazy's,  which  are  affected
by  sweetness.  The  Cazy  who  takes  four  cucum-
bers as  a  bribe,  will  admit  evidence  in  your
favor  for  ten  fields  of  muskmelons.

No.    CIV.

What  can  an  old  prostitute  do  but  vow  not
to  sin  any  more  ?  or  a  degraded  superintendent
of  police,  besides  promising  not  to  injure  man-
kind? A  youth  who  makes  choice  of  retire-
ment, is  a  lion-like  man  in  the  path  of  God;  for
an  old  man  is  not  able  to  move  from  his  cor-
ner.


RULES  FOR    CONDUCT  IN  LIFE.     377

No.    CV.

They  asked  a  wise  man,  why  out  of  many
famous  trees  which  the  Almighty  hath  created,
lofty  and  fruit-bearing,  the  cypress  alone  is
called  free,  although  it  beareth  not  fruit  ?  He
replied,  "  Every  tree  hath  its  appointed  fruit
and  season,  with  which  it  is  atone  time  flourish-
in  o\  and  at  another  time,  destitute  and  withering:
to  neither  of  which  states  the  cypress  is  exposed,
being  always  flourishing,  as  is  the  state  of  those
who  are  free.  Place  not  your  heart  on  that
which  is  transitory  ;  for  the  river  Tigris  will
continue  to  flow  through  Baghdad  after  that  the
Khalifs  shall  have  ceased  to  reign.  If  you  are
able,  imitate  the  date-tree  in  liberality  ;  but  if
you  have  not  the  means  of  munificence,  be  free
like   the  cypress.' *

No.   CVI.

Two  persons  died,  and  carried  with  them
regret ;  —  he  who  had  riches  and  did  not  enjoy,
and  he  who  had  knowledge,  but  made  no  use
of  it.  No  one  ever  saw  a  learned  man,  who  was
a  miser,  that  people  did  not  endeavor  to  point
out  his  faults ;  but  if  a  generous  man  hath  two
hundred  defects,  his  generosity  will  cover  them.


CONCLUSION    OF   THE    BOOK.


Through  God's  assistance,  the  book  entitled
the  Garden  of  Roses  is  now  brought  to  a  con-

CD

elusion.  Throughout  the  whole  of  this  work
I  have  not  followed  the  custom  of  authors,  by
inserting  verses  borrowed  from  former  writers.
It  is  better  to  be  dressed  in  one's  own  old  gar-
ments, than  to  ask  the  loan  of  a  new  vest.  The
discourses  of  Saadi  are  for  the  most  part  cheerful,
and  mixed  with  pleasantry  ;  on  which  account
the  short-sighted  extend  the  tongue  of  reproach,
saying,  that  it  is  not  the  part  of  a  wise  man  to
waste  the  brain  in  vain  pursuits,  and  to  endure
the  smoke  of  the  lamp  without  deriving  any  ad-
vantage ;  however,  the  enlightened  minds  of  the
intelligent,  who  comprehend  the  tendency  of  a
discourse,  are  sensible  that  the  pearls  of  salutary
advice  are  threaded  on  the  string  of  style  ;  and
that  the  bitter  medicine  of  admonition  is  mixed
with  the  honey  of  pleasantry,  in  order  that  the
reader  might  not  in  disgust  refuse  his  acceptance.


CONCLUSION,  379

We  have  offered  our  advice  in  its  proper  place,
and  spent  a  long  time  on  the  undertaking;  if  it
is  not  listened  to  with  the  ear  of  avidity,  yet  the
messenger  performs  his  duty  by  delivering  the
message.  O  thou  who  perusest  this  book,  en-
treat the  mercy  of  God  for  its  author,  and  pardon
for  him  who  transcribed  it,  and  ask  for  your  own
self  whatever  good  you  may  require,  after  which
implore  forgiveness  for  the  owner  of  it.  The
book  is  finished  through  the  aid  of  that  Monarch
who  is  the  bestower  of  all  good  gifts.


THE    END.


Cambridge  :  Stereotyped  and  Printed  by  Welch,  Bigelow,  &  Co.


BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY


3  9999  05987  544  1
