o
oreo
o
e
o
t
-μῬῦννέ
νϑοῦο"
--
S
T
N
e
P
n
At
)
at
eh
te
sep
a
ite
del
ete
Ne

LIBRARY OF
WRELESLEY COLLEGE
PURCHASED FROM
SWEET FUND


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
OR
THE LITTLE GENESIS

OTHER WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
The Apocalypse of Baruch. Translated from the Syriac: Chapters I.-
LXXVIL., from the Sixth Century MS. in the Ambrosian Library of
Milan, and Chapters LX XVIII. -LXXXVII.—The Epistle of Baruch.
—From a New and Critical Text based on Ten MSS. and published
herewith. Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and Indices. 7s, 6d. net.
The Assumption of Moses. Translated from the Latin Sixth Century
MS., the unemended Text of which is published herewith, together
with the Text in its restored and critically emended Form. Edited,
with Introduction, Notes, and Indices. 7s. 6d.
A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life in Israel, in
Judaism, and in Christianity ; or Hebrew, Jewish, and Christian
Eschatology, from pre-Prophetic Times till the Close of the New
Testament Canon. 15s.
The Ascension of Isaiah. ‘Translated from the Ethiopic Version, which,
together with the New Greek Fragment, the Latin Versions, and the
Latin Translation of the Slavonic, is here published in full, Edited
with Introduction, Notes, and Indices. 7s. 6d. net.
A. ἃ C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.
The Book of Enoch. Translated from Dillmann’s Ethiopic Text (emended
and revised in accordance with hitherto uncollated Ethiopic MSS.
and with the Gizeh and other Greek and Latin Fragments), with
Introduction, Notes, and Indices. 8vo, 165,
The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees. Edited from
Four MSS. and critically revised, emended, and restored in accordance
with the Hebrew, Syriac, Greek, and Latin Fragments of this Book.
4to, 12s. 6d.
The Book of the Secrets of Enoch. Translated from the Slavonic by
W. R. MoRFILr, M.A., and edited, with Introduction, Notes, and
Indices, by R. H. CHARLES, M.A. 8vo, 75. θᾶ,
THE CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

THE
BOOK OF JUBILEES
OR
THE LITTLE GENESIS
TRANSLATED FROM
THE EDITOR’S ETHIOPIC TEXT
AND
EDITED, WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND INDICES
BY
R. H. CHARLES, D.D.
PROFESSOR OF BIBLICAL GREEK, TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN
LONDON
ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK
1902

ΔῊ #o rBe iLcEeE Y
Ms | ys Ἷ

TO
ae The Reverend George Salmon, DD.
DOLE.) ED... BBA.
PROVOST OF TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN
WITH AN OLD PUPILS ADMIRATION AND GRATITUDE


PREFACE
I HAD hoped to issue this Commentary on the Book of
Jubilees quite six years ago, as a sequel to my edition of
the Ethiopic and other fragmentary versions of this work;
but after writing a large portion of it, I was obliged to
abandon the task, as I felt that somehow I had failed to
give a satisfactory interpretation of the text, though at the
time I could not understand wherein my disability lay. <A
year or two later when making a special study of the
Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs, I came to discover that
the source of my failure lay in my acceptance of the traditional view that Jubilees was written in the first century of
the Christian era. So long as I wrote from this standpoint,
my notes became more and more a laboured apologetic for the
composition of this work in the first century. The earliest
approximation to the right date appeared in my article on
the “ Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs in the Encyclopedia
Biblica, i. 241, 1899, where, after giving grounds for the
view that the main bulk of that work was written before
100 8.0., I concluded that we should “regard both works
(i.e. the Testaments and Jubilees) as almost contemporary,
and as emanating from the same school of thought.” This
Vii

viii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
view was advocated in the following year by Bohn and by
Bousset on various grounds, and it is from this standpoint
that the present Commentary is written. The difficulties
that beset almost every page of Jubilees vanish for the
most part when once we understand that it was written
by a Pharisaic upholder of the Maccabean dynasty, who
was also probably a priest.
It is difficult to exaggerate the value of Jubilees. The
fact that it is the oldest commentary in the world on
Genesis, is in itself a distinction. But it is not on this
ground that we value it, but rather for the insight it gives
us into the religious beliefs of Judaism in the second
century B.C. Its interests are many sided. It appeals to
the textual critic, as it attests the form of the Hebrew text,
which was current in that century. It appeals to the Old
Testament scholar, as exhibiting further developments of
ideas and tendencies which are only in their incipient stages
in the Old Testament. It appeals to the New Testament
scholar, as furnishing the first literary embodiment of beliefs
which subsequently obtained an entrance into the New
Testament, and as having in all probability formed part of
the library of some of the apostolic writers. It appeals to
the student. of theological doctrine, as providing certain
indispensable links in the process of development. Finally,
to the Jewish scholar, a Pharisaic work of the second
century B.c. cannot fail to be of transcendent interest, as it
gives the earlier forms of certain legislative enactments that
appear in the Mishna, and of legends which in later Judaism
have undergone much transformation.
Although half a century has elapsed since the discovery

PREFACE ix
of Jubilees in its complete form in the Ethiopic Version, no
scholar has hitherto attempted a commentary on the entire
work. Some thirty years ago Rénsch edited a very learned
and laborious work on the Latin Fragments, which constitute
slightly more than one-fourth of the original writing, but
since his time scholars have contented themselves with
short studies on various views of our author.
I cannot conclude without thanking Mr. Cowley for his
help in verifying references in the Talmud.
17 BRADMORE ROAD, OXFORD,
May, 1902.

τ | iN | oy ἘΠ
Vian | VR ἫΝ if akes as t
ነ; UY 4 er Uy ye ANI) t " RR )
iy ἮΝ aA ia ih Ἀ L Ν y) Wy Kn ὉΠ di | , ll 6.ነ ii » one
ἢ oat } ἂν fFv an LN Vi), ) Hi il ᾿ (iN ii cnt ents ai!
t [) = ἢ ] > J ἢ “ : ᾿ ;
ἣν ΤΆ ΟΣ i iy Νὴ: Ἢ we) tie a a Lif rp ie
| ry μ᾿ MY Ste i ΟΝ N CHIH
ὃ = ᾿ ψὶ '
f ἣν
4 | i ; ኝ | iA mys NA
ὺ é As
ἢ 1b Ns » ἫΝ
Ly) ὦ ig
)
TR
|
መ
L
-
~
-
f
"
i
7
‘24
t é
4}
\
=
¢
vu ἐπα: νὴ
; ὶ . |
i
|
—- " rn s Ve >S TA
Z beng ᾿ν ν pad
| ν᾿ 4 2 x h I, ;
3 .
"ὦ
ኣ

CONTENTS
PAGE
INTRODUCTION i i : : . Xxili-lxxxix
§ 1. Short Account of the Book (pp. xiii, xiv)—§ 2. The
Various Titles of the Book (pp. xiv-xx)—§ 3. The
Ethiopic Manuscripts (p. xx)—-§ 4. Editions of the
Ethiopic Version (pp. xx, xxi)—§ 5. Translations (pp.
xxi, xxiil)—-§ 6. Critical inquiries (pp. xxii-xxvi)—§ 7.
The Versions of Jubilees—Greek, Ethiopic, Latin, Syriac
(pp. xxvi-xxix)—§ 8. The Ethiopic and Latin Versions—
Translations from the Greek (pp. xxx, xxxi)—§ 9. The
Greek—a Translation from the Hebrew (pp. xxx-xxxili)—
8 10. Textual Affinities of the Text of the Book of Jubilees
(pp. Xxxiii-xxxix)—§ 11. Lacunae, Dittographies and Dislocations in our Text (pp. xxxix-xlii)—§ 12. Poetical -
Element in Jubilees (pp. xlii-xliii)—§ 13. Jubilees from
one author but based on earlier books and traditions —~
(pp. xliv-xlvii)—§ 14. Jubilees—a Product of the midrashic
tendency at work in the Old Testament Chronicler, but
represented by its author as an Esoteric Tradition (pp.
xlvii-li)—§ 15. Object of Jubilees—the Defence and
Exposition of Judaism from the Pharisaic standpoint of
the second century Bc. (pp. li-lvi)—§ 16. Angelology ——
and Demonology of Jubilees (pp. lvi-lviii)—§ 17. The
Date of Jubilees (pp. lviii-lxvi)—§ 18. The Jubilees and
Years used by our author (pp. lxvii-lxviii)—§ 19. Value of
Jubilees in determining the Dates of the various Sections _
of the Ethiopic Enoch and the Book of Noah (pp. IxviiiIxxii)—§ 20. The relation of Jubilees to the Testaments
of the XII. Patriarchs (Dp. Ixxii)—-§ 21. The author—a
Pharisee who recognised the Maccabean Pontificate and
xi

ΧΙΪ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
PAGE
was probably a priest (p. Ixxiii)—§ 22. Jubilees in Jewish,
Samaritan and Christian non-canonical literature (pp. lxxiiilxxxiii)—§ 23. Influence of Jubilees on the New Testament (pp. Ixxxiii-lxxxvi)—§ 24. Views of the author on _
the Messiah, the Messianic Kingdom, the Priesthood of
Melchizedek, the Law, Circumcision and the Sabbath, the
Future Life, the Jewish Calendar (pp. 1xxxvii-]xxxix).
SYMBOLS AND BRACKETS USED IN THIS EDITION . 3 XC1
TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES ὶ : : 1
INDEX I. : : . : 263
INDEX II. : ὲ ἰ 5 1 J 267

INTRODUCTION
§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Book
THE Book of Jubilees was written in Hebrew by a Pharisee
between the year of the accession of Hyrcanus to the highpriesthood in 135 and his breach with the Pharisees some
years before his death in 105 Bc. It is the most advanced
pre-Christian representative of the midrashic tendency, which
had already been at work in the Old Testament Chronicles.
As the Chronicler had rewritten the history of Israel and
Judah from the basis of the Priests’ Code, so our author reedited from the Pharisaic standpoint of his time the history
of events from the creation to the publication, or, according
to the author’s view, the republication, of the law on Sinai.
In the course of re-editing he incorporated a large body of
traditional lore, which the midrashic process had put at his
disposal, and also not a few fresh legal enactments, that the
exigencies of the past had called forth. His work constitutes an enlarged Targum on Genesis and Exodus, in
which difficulties in the biblical narrative are solved, gaps
supplied, dogmatically offensive elements removed, and the
genuine spirit of later Judaism infused into the primitive
history of the world. His object was to defend Judaism
against the attacks of the hellenistic spirit that had been
in the ascendant one generation earlier and was still powerful, and to prove that the law was of everlasting validity.
xiii

xiv THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
From our author’s contentions and his embittered attacks
on the paganisers and apostates, we may infer that Hellenism had urged that the levitical ordinances of the law were
only of transitory significance, that they had not been
observed by the founders of the nation, and that the
time had now come for them to be swept away, and for
Israel to take its place in the brotherhood of the nations.
Our author regarded all such views as fatal to the very
existence of Jewish religion and nationality. But it is not
as such that he assailed them, but on the ground of their
falsehood. The law, he teaches, is of everlasting validity.
Though revealed in time it was superior to time. Before
it had been made known in sundry portions to the fathers
it had been kept in heaven by the angels, and to its observance henceforward there was no limit in time or in
eternity.
Writing in the palmiest days of the Maccabean dominion,
he looked for the immediate advent of the Messianic kingdom. This kingdom was to be ruled over by a Messiah
sprung, not from Levi—that is, from the Maccabean family,
as some of his contemporaries expected—but from Judah.
This kingdom would be gradually realised on earth, and
the transformation of physical nature would go hand in
hand with the ethical transformation of man till there
was a new heaven and a new earth. Thus, finally, all
sin and pain would disappear and men would live to the
age of 1000 years in happiness and peace, and after death
enjoy a blessed immortality in the spirit world.
δ 2. THe Various TITLES OF THE Book
Our book was known by two distinct titles even in
Hebrew. These were:

INTRODUCTION XY
(a) « Jubilees ” = τὰ Ἰωβηλαῖα or oi ᾿Ιωβηλα=ῖ pο'2ι5n, n 51 and
(Ὁ) “ The Little Genesis” =] λεπτὴ Γένεσις= Nan nwa,
(c) Apocalypse of Moses and other alleged names of our book.
(a) Jubilees— According to the citation of Epiphanius
(Haer. xxxix. 6), ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ιωβηλαίοις εὑρίσκεται, TH καὶ
λεπτῇ Tevéoes, the name Jubilees would seem to have been
its more usual designation, and “the little Genesis” its less
usual. This name is found in the Syriac Fragment entitled
“Names of the Wives of the Patriarchs according to the
Hebrew Book called Jubilees” (see Ceriani, Mon. Sacra, ii.
Fasc. i. 9-10; also my Ethiopic Text of Jubilees, p. 183).
This name is admirably adapted to our book as it
divides into jubilee periods of forty-nine years each the
history of the world from the creation to the legislation
on Sinai. By his peculiar redaction of the biblical history
down to this period, our author has shown that the law
was already in force before its republication as a whole
on Sinai. Moreover, his chronological heptadic system
has received a perfectly symmetrical development. Israel
enters Canaan at the close of the fiftieth jubilee, i.e.
2450. In the Assumption of Moses, where a jubilee period
of fifty years is used, Israel enters Canaan in the year 2500
(see p. lxviil).
(0) The Little* Genesis——The fact that our book was
‘1 In the Hebrew book Josippon xxxii. 3, “The Book of Jubilees”’
is mentioned non “zo (see Eppstein, “ Le Livre des Jubilés,” Revue des
Etudes juives, 1890, xxi. 80-97 ; 1891, xxii. 1-25).
2 Cf. Treuenfels, ‘‘ Die kleine Genesis” in Fiirst’s Literaturblatt des
Orients, 1846, No. 6, Dp. 81.
5 The epithet “little” does not refer to the extent, for it is larger
than the canonical Genesis, but rather to the character of Jubilees.
It deals more fully with the details and minutiae (1.6. τὰ λεπτά) than
the biblical work. Severus of Antioch, ob. 542 A.D., after an account
of the death of Moses and the strife between Michael and the evil
angels for Moses’ body, adds that these matters were said to be
described in a book which gave a more detailed account of the

xvi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
known in Greek, not only as ἡ λεπτὴ Γένεσις but also ἡe
Μικρογένεσις, points quite clearly to an authoritative
Hebrew title, Nb m wna, which was variously rendered
in Greek. There were, indeed, four renderings of the
Hebrew :
1. ἡ«ε λεπτὴ Γένεσις (or Λεπτὴ Γένεσις).
2. ἡ Λεπτογένεσις.
3. τὰ λεπτὰ Γενέσεως.
4. ἡ Μικρογένεσις.
1. ἡ λεπτὴ Téveois.—This title is found sixteen times:
in Epiphanius, Haer. xxxix. 6 (twice); Syncellus 1. 7,
183, 192; Cedrenus i. 6, 9, 16, 48, 53, 85, 87; Zonaras,
p. 18 (twice); Glycas, 206 (twice). As Λεπτὴ Γένεσις in
Syncellus 1. 5, 185, 203 and Cedrenusi. 7. As ἡ λεγομένη λεπτὴ Γένεσις. in Glycas, pp. 198, 392. For the
above passages see pp. Ixxvii-lxxx.
2. ἡ AeTroryéverus.Th—i s form of the title is found
in Didymus of Alexandria (see p. lxxvii) and in one
of the MSS of Epiphanius, Haer, xxxix. 6 (τῇ καὶ
Λεπτογενέσει), where the Cod. Venet. has τῇ καὶ λεπτῇ
Γενέσει. On the other hand, it follows from the Decree
of Gelasius (see p. xxviii) that this form was current among
Latin writers.
3. τὰ λεπτὰ L'evécews.—This form is found in Syncellus
i, 13 (see p. Ixxix),
4. ἡ Muxpoyéveois.—This designation is found only in
Jerome, Epist. 78 ad Fab. See my note on p. 83, where,
instead of Λεπτή (a.l. Μικρογένεσις), we should read simply
Mixpoyéveots. This is Jerome's independent rendering of
the Hebrew title, for Jerome was acquainted with the
original of Jubilees.
creation: Tatra δὲ ἐν ἀποκρύφῳ βιβλίῳ λέγεται κεῖσθαι λεπτοτέραν
ἔχοντι τῆς Γενέσεως ἤτοι τῆς κτίσεως τὴν ἀφήγησιν.

INTRODUCTION xvii
(c) 1. The Apocalypse of Moses.
2. The Testament of Moses.
3. The Book of Adam’s Daughters.
4, The Life of Adam.
1. The Apocalypse of Moses.—This title is found in
Syncellus i. 5 and repeated from him in Cedrenus i. 7:
λεπτῇ ... Γενέσει, ἣν καὶ Moicéws εἶναί φασί τινες ἀποκάλυψιν: and in Syncellus i. 49 : ἐν τῇ Μωῦὐσέως λεγομένῃ
ἀποκαλύψει. From the words φασί τινες and λεγομένῃ we
conclude that this title had some currency in Syncellus’
time. It was undoubtedly a very appropriate designation,
since our author makes Moses the recipient of all the disclosures in his work (see the Greek scholion in my note on
ii. 1). Cedrenus i. 16 speaks of Jubilees as ἡ λεπτὴ
Μωσέως Γένεσις. The Apocalypse of Moses mentioned in
Syncellus i. 48, from which he says Gal. vi. 15 (οὔτε
περιτομή τι ἔστιν οὔτε ἀκροβυστία, ἀλλὰ καινὴ κτίσις) WAS
derived, can have nothing to do with Jubilees, the main aim
of which is the glorification of circumcision.
2. The Testament of Moses=% διαθήκη τοῦ Μωύσέως.----
This was an older title than the preceding. Thus it is
found in the Catena of Nicephorus i. 175, where the
words ἡ διαθήκη precede a quotation from Jubilees x. 21
(see note in loc.). Here ἡ διαθήκη, as Ronsch (p. 275) has
rightly argued, stands for ἡ διαθήκη τοῦ Mwicéws. It is impossible to determine whether the Testament of Moses which
is here to be identified with Jubilees has anything to do with
the διαθήκη Moitcéws mentioned in four catalogues of the
canonical and uncanonical writings. Ronsch (pp. 480-481)
argues for their identification on the ground that the
Assumption of Moses forms a suitable close to the Book of
Jubilees; that they are found together in this order in the
Latin MS which was edited by Ceriani; that the Testament
of Moses and the Assumption are enumerated together and
b

=
22
XVili THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
ae=i
in this order in the Catalogues of Nicephorus, the Ps.
Athanasius and of the Sixty Canonical Books. If, however,
the number of stichoi—1100—assigned to this Testament
of Moses by the first catalogue is right, then this Testament
cannot be the same as Jubilees; for Jubilees is longer than
Genesis which, according to the same catalogue, has 4300
stichoi.
On the other hand, there may have been in circulation
a Testament of Moses which was an expansion of Jubilees
11.-1. To such a work—one-fourth the size of Genesis—
the quotation given in my note on ii. 1 may possibly point,
and probably the statement made by Severus of Antioch (see
footnote on p. xv), and the quotation from a Catena on the Pentateuch in Fabricius ii. 121-122: Est quidem in apocrypho
mysticoque codice legere, ubi de creatis rebus subtilius agitur,
nubem lucidam, quo tempore mortuus est Moses, locum
sepulchri complexam o¢ulos circumstantium perstrinxisse ita,
ut nullus neque morientem legislatorem neque locum videre
potuerit, ubi cadaver conderetur. Here we have a combination of the Testament of Moses and the Assumption of
Moses (see my Asswmption of Moses, pp. xlv. sqq.).
3. The Book of Adam’s Daughters—This book is identified with Jubilees in the Decree of Gelasius (see p. lxviii):
Liber de filiabus Adae, hoc est Leptogenesis, Apocryphus.
The designation is far from inappropriate for our book, as
it aims at giving the names of the wives of all the patriarchs
from Adam onwards. On the other hand, it may not have
been applied to the entire Book of Jubilees but to a short
work based on Jubilees, and consisting mainly or solely
of the names (and histories) of the women mentioned in
Jubilees. Such a collection we find in the Syriac with the
title: “ Names of the Wives of the Patriarchs according to the
Hebrew Book called Jubilees” (see p. xxix). The glosses in
the LXX MS used by Holmes and Parsons, and later_by

INTRODUCTION xix
Lagarde (see p. lxxxii), may point to such a collection; for
these glosses relate to the wives of the patriarchs and go back
ultimately to Jubilees. It is possibly worth while to call
attention to the fact that some of these names are found in
the Annals of the Arabic writer Tabari (see Lidzbarski, De
propheticis, quae dieuntur, Legendis Arabieis, 1893, pp.
11-12).
4. The Life of Adam,—This designation is found only
three times, so far as I am aware, in Syncellus i. 7, and always
as 6 λεγόμενος Bios "Addu. According to Syncellus this life
of Adam recounted the number of days it took Adam to
number the various creatures, the making of Eve, the
entrance of Adam into Paradise, and the subsequent admission of Eve, ete. (i. 7-9): κεῖται γοῦν ἐν τῷ λεγομένῳ Bio
᾿Αδὰμ ὁ τῶν ἡμερῶν ἀριθμὸς τῆς τε ὀνομασίας τῶν θηρίων
καὶ τῆς πλάσεως τῆς γυναικὸς καὶ τῆς εἰσόδου αὐτοῦ ᾿Αδὰμ ἐν
τῷ παραδείσῳ" καὶ τῆς περὶ τοῦ ξύλου τῆς βρώσεως ἐντολῆς
τοῦ θεοῦ πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ τῆς μετὰ τούτου εἰσόδου Εὔα ἐν
τῷ παραδείσῳ, τά τε τῆς παραβάσεως καὶ τὰ μετὰ τὴν
παράβασιν, ὡς ὑποτέτακται... ταῦτα ἐκ τοῦ Βίου λεγομένου ᾿Αδὰμ φιλομαθίας χάριν ἐν συντόμῳ ἐστοιχειώσαμεν.
If Syneellus is right here as to the contents of the Life of
Adam, it treated of the same subjects as Jubilees ii. 1-29.
It may, therefore, have been an excerpt from or a section
of Jubilees, as Rénsch suggests (475-477). Accordingly,
he accepts Treuenfels’ proposal that the words in Syncellus
occurring just before the above extract—é« τῆς λεπτῆς
Tevécews καὶ τοῦ λεγομένου Biov ABSdu — should be
rendered: “from the Leptogenesis, that is, from the so-called
Life of Adam.” Since the statements in the Life of Adam
are fuller than in Jubilees, the former would be an enlarged
edition of a portion of the latter. Both may have been
before Syncellus. From the Life of Adam—the fuller
account—he quotes on pp. 7-9, and continues his narrative on

XX THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
pp. 13-15 from Jubilees. Ronsch quotes in support of this
view the statement of Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch ii. 7, anm.
3: “Ein Theil derselben (der Kleinen Genesis), der von
Adam handelt, wurde das Leben Adam’s genannt und war
den Alten als wet OINT NIDD (Zunz, Die gottesdienstl.
Vortrige der Juden, p. 128; J. First im Zbl. des Orients,
1848, p. 589) bekannt.”
§ 3. Tae Eruiopic MSS
There are four MSS of this book in Europe, a, J, ὁ, d,
which belong respectively to the National Library in Paris,
the British Museum, the University Library of Tiibingen,
and to the collection of M. d’Abbadie. Of these ab (of the
fifteenth and sixteenth cent. respectively) are the most
valuable, but in not a few readings the true text is preserved
by ed (both of recent date). d is more nearly allied to a
and etob. bis the most trustworthy of the four. For a
full description of these MSS the reader can consult
Charles's Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees,
pp. xu sad.
§ 4. EDITIONS OF THE ETHIOPIG VERSION
DILLMANN, Mashafa kifilé sive Liber Jubilacorum, qui
idem a Graeets H Λεπτὴ Γένεσις inscribitur, aethiopice ad
duorum librorum manuscriptorum fidem primum edidit
Dilimann, 1859.
This edition is based on MSS ed.
CHARLES, The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of
Jubilees—otherwise known among the Greeks as Ἢ Λεπτὴ
Téveous—edited from four MSS and critically revised
through a continuous comparison of the Massoretic and
Samaritan Texts, and the Greek, Syriac, Vulgate and Ethiopic

INTRODUCTION Xxi
Versions of the Pentateuch, and further emended and restored
im accordance with the Hebrew, Syriac, Greek and Latin
fragments of this book, which are here published in full,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1895.
This edition is based on the only four MSS hitherto
known. It is from this text that my translation is made.
In some dozen or more passages, however, to which attention
is called in the notes, I have withdrawn emendations which
I had introduced into the text—-some in deference to
criticisms of Drs. Praetorius and Littmann and others as a
result of further study of the text and subject-matter. On
the other hand, I have been enabled, from the much larger
knowledge I now have of the literature than I had in
1893-1895, to discover the true text underlying corruptions
that had defied detection, and likewise to recognise the
occurrence of many dittographies and not a few lacunae
(see § 11). The criticism of the text has been further
greatly advanced by my discovery of a large poetical
element in the book (see § 12).
§ 5. TRANSLATIONS
DILLMANN, Das Buch der Jubilien oder die kleine Genesis,
aus dem <Aethiopischen iibersetst (Ewald’s Jahrbiicher der
bibl. Wissensch. 1850-51, Band 1. 230-256; iii. 1-96).
This translation is based on only one MS.
SCHODDE, The Book of Jubilees, translated from the
_ Ethiopic (Bibliotheca Sacra, 1885-1887).
CHARLES, The Book of Jubilees translated from a text
based on two hitherto uneollated Ethiopic MSS (Jewish
Quarterly Review, 1893, vol. v. 703-708; 1894, vi. 184217, 710-745 ; 1895, vii. 997-398).
The above translation agrees for the most part with the
text which I published subsequently. It is, however,

xxii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
untrustworthy in some passages, and is now superseded by
the very much improved edition of it which appears in the
present volume.
LITTMANN, Das Buch der Jubiliien (Kautzsch’s Apokryphen
und Pseudepigraphen des A. Testaments, 1900, ii. 31-119).
This admirable translation is based mainly on my
Ethiopic text of Jubilees, but occasionally Dr. Littmann
prefers to follow the readings of ed in Dillmann’s text, and
in some cases the grounds for this preference are so good
that I have followed his lead. His translation is on the
whole very accurate, though there are of course some
passages where corrections will be introduced on the
occasion of a second edition. To Dr. Littmann I owe
many corrections of my English translation in the Jewish
Quarterly.
§ 6. CRITICAL INQUIRIES
Fapricius, J. A., Codex Pseudepigraphus Veteris Testamenti, 1713, i. 849-864. Fabricius here collects under
the head of Parva Genesis, passages in Jerome and Greek
writers which are expressly assigned to our book. At the
close of this collection he adds: “Non dubito tum apud
Hieronymum Quaest. et tradit. Hebraeicis in Genesin, tum
apud Georgium Syncellum et Cedrenum plura legi ex parva
Genesi repetita: quoniam tamen diserte illa non indicant,
haec satis esse volui.”
TREUENFELS, Die kleine Genesis nov Tron (First’s
Titeraturbl. des Orients, 1846, Nr. 1-6; 1851, Nr. 15).
Treuenfels ascribes our book to a Jewish author, who wrote
most probably before the Christian era.
DILLUMANN, Das Buch der Jubilien (Ewald’s Jahrbiicher
der bibl. Wissensch. 1851, iii. 72-96).. These pages consist
of a series of learned and masterly notes which throw great

INTRODUCTION Xxiil
light on the text and its interpretation. Dillmann was of
opinion that Jubilees was written originally in Hebrew or
Aramaic in the first cent. A.D. before the fall of Jerusalem.
Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenldénd. Cesellsch.
1857, xi. 161-163.
“ Pseudepigraphen des A. Testaments ” (Herzog’s
Real-Encye. xii. 364-365). Here Dillmann sets the
composition of Jubilees at the beginning of the Christian
era and regards a still earlier date as possible.
“ Beitrage aus dem Buche der Jubilien zur Kritik
des Pentateuch Textes” (Sttzwngsberichte der Kéniglich
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1883,
pp. 323-340). With this contribution to the criticism of
the Ethiopic text and its value in determining the criticism
of the Pentateuch I have already dealt (Hthiopic Vers. of
Heb. Bk. of Jubilees, pp. xviii-xix).
JELLINEK, Ueber das Buch der Jubiliien und das NoahBuch, Leipzig, 1855 (a reprint from the third volume of
his Bet ha-Midrasch). Although the main contention of
this treatise, that Jubilees is of Essene origin, cannot be
sustained, Jellinek’s observations on its relations to Jewish
Midrashim (1.6. Wajissau and Tadshe) and legends generally
are most illuminating and helpful. Jellinek justly recognises
that Jubilees was written when the essential character of
the Jewish calendar was not definitely fixed.
BEER, Das Buch der Jubilien und sein Verhiiltniss zu den
Midraschim, Leipzig, 1856; Noch ein Wort iiber das Buch
der Jubilien, 1857. The former work is the ablest contribution from the Jewish side that has yet been made
towards the interpretation of Jubilees. On pp. 25-39 he
deals with the points of similarity existing between Jubilees
and Jewish tradition, and on pp. 39-56 the points of
divergence. Beer ascribes our book to a Samaritan, who
made use of the Samaritan Pentateuch, the LXX, and

χχὶν THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Jewish tradition, and wrote in Africa. This Samaritan
authorship was shown to be impossible by Ewald (Jahrb. d.
bibl. Wissensch. 1856, viii. 184 sq.), in a short review of
Beer's work, and Dillmann (ZDMG, 1857, xi. 161-163).
In the Monatsschrift f. Gesch. αἰ. Judenthums, 1855, pp. 59-65
and his Leben Abrahams, 1859; Leben Moses, 1863, Beer
has made many valuable indirect contributions to the
exegesis of Jubilees.
FRANKEL, Monatsschrift fiir Gesch. und Wissensch. des
Judenthums, 1856, pp. 311-316, 380-400. Frankel sought
to prove that Jubilees was of Egyptian origin and representative of the cult at the Onias Temple at Leontopolis. To
this view of Frankel, Beer rejoined in the treatise cited above
under his name: Noch ein Wort iiber das Buch der Jubiléen.
KRUGER, “Die Chronologie im Buche ἃ. Jubilien
(ZDMG, 1858, xii. 279-299. Kriiger ascribes the composition of Jubilees to the year 320 B.c., but such a view
has rightly failed to obtain a single suffrage.
LANGEN, Das Judenthum in Paldstina, 1866, pp. 84-102.
Jubilees according to this writer is to be assigned to the
years 30-60 A.D. (p. 100).
SINKER, Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs, 1869, pp. 4243, 81-85.
RUBIN, Das Buch der Jubildéen oder die kleine Genesis in’s
Hebréische iibersetst, mit einer Hinleitung und mit Noten
verschen, Wien, 1870.
GINSBURG, Art. “ Jubilees, Book of” in Kitto’s Cyclopaedia
of Biblical Literature.
RONSCH, Zeitschrift f. wissensch. Theologie, 1871, pp.
60-98; Das Buch der Jubilden, Leipzig, 1874. Ronsch
assigned our book to the years 50-60 AD. It was directed
against the rising Christianity, and was an attempt to draw
together all the opposing parties in Judaism against the
new religion.

INTRODUCTION XXV
HILGENFELD, Zeitschrift 7. wissensch. Theologie, 1874,
pp. 435-441.
DRUMMOND, The Jewish Messiah, 1877, pp. 143-147.
EPPSTEIN, “Midrasch Tadsche,” in Beitreige zur Jiid.
Alterthumskunde, 1887.
“Le Livre des Jubilés, Philon et le Midrasch
Tadsché” (Revue des Etudes wives, 1890, xxi. 80-97; 1891,
xxi 1-25.
Sack, Die altjiidische Religion, 1889, pp. 350-368.
Bacon, “Calendar of Enoch and Jubilees” (Hebraica,
1891-1892, viii. 79-88; 124-131).
DEANE, Pseudepigrapha, 1891, pp. 193-236. We have
here an excellent account of the book from the older standpoint.
THOMSON, Books which influenced our Lord and His
Apostles, 1891, pp. 297-320, 433-439.
BALDENSPERGER, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu,” 1892, pp.
20-24.
KUENEN, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, 1894, pp. 113 sqq.
SOHURER, Gesch. des Jiid. Volkes,” 1898, iii. 274-280.
Schiirer follows the ordinary view as to the date of Jubilees :
“Tt may with considerable probability be assigned to the
first cent. of the Christian era.’ Notwithstanding its many
divergencies from Pharisaic usage and doctrine at that
period he holds that in its essential aspects it represents
the prevailing Pharisaic standpoint. A good bibliography
closes the article.
SINGER, Das Buch der Jubilien oder die Leptogenesis,
I. Theil; Tendenz und Ursprung, zugleich ein Beitrag zur
Religionsgeschichte, Stuhlweissenburg (Ungarn), 1898.
Ronsch, as we have seen above, was of opinion that Jubilees
was directed against Christianity, but Singer thinks that he
can establish that it was the work of a Jewish Christian,
written (about 58-60 A.D.) with a polemic purpose against

ΧΧΥΪ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
the teaching of St. Paul—especially against his doctrine of
the abrogation of the law. This work exhibits much
learning both in the field of Judaism and Christianity.
But the main thesis is not in any sense proved by him nor
is it possible of proof.
HEADLAM, Art. “ Jubilees,” in Hastings’ Bible Dictionary,
1899, τι 791.
CHARLES, Art. “Book of Jubilees, in ney. Biblica,
1899, 1 230-233.
ΒΟΗΝ, “ Die Bedeutung des Buches der Jubilien (Theol.
Stud. und Kritiken, 1900, pp. 167-184). This article
shows admirable insight. Its writer recognises rightly that
the book belongs to the second cent. B.C. He ascribes its
composition to 150 B.c. or thereabouts.
LiTrMANNn, Kautzsch’s Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen
des Alten Testaments, 1900, ii. 31-38. We have here as
good an introduction to our author as was possible from
the stage of criticism at the time, and one that is meritorious alike for its learning and judgment. In 1899 Littmann
reviewed Singer’s book (see above) in the ZDMG, pp.
368 sqq.
§ 7. THE VERSIONS OF JUBILEES—GREEK, ETHIOPIC,
LATIN, SYRIAC
1. The Greek Version—Numerous fragments of this
version have come down to us in J. Martyr (? see note on
p. 41), Origen (see notes on pp. 194, 227), Diodorus of
Antioch (see p. 85), Isidore of Alexandria (see p. lxxxi),
Epiphanius (see notes on pp. 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 32,
33, 47, 59, 61, 68, 69, 73, 74, 75, 77, 84, 86), John
Malala (see notes on pp. 37, 41, 66), Anastasius Sinaita
(flor. seventh cent.—preserved only in Latin; see note on
p. 23), Syncellus (see notes on pp. 41, 59, 66, 68, 69, 71,

INTRODUCTION XXVii
73, 74, 78, 85, 89, 93, 95, 191, 192. It is remarkable
that Syncellus attributed to Genesis what comes from our
text—see note on p. 164, and similarly to Josephus—see
notes on pp. 157, 186, 208), Cedrenus (see notes on
pp. 37, 41, 66, 67, 86, 87, 88, 93, 94, 116, 191, 252),
Suidas (see note on p. 91), Zonaras (see p. 35), Glycas (see
notes on pp. 37, 84, 85, 164), Joel (see notes on pp. 37, 67).
For probable mistranslations in this version see notes on
xxx. 25, xlii. 11, xlvii. 9; for corruptions in the MSS
before the Ethiopic and Latin translators, see notes on i. 29,
ΠΥ kay. 12, xxiii. 10, xxxii. 917, 29
This version is the parent of the Ethiopic and the Latin,
as we shall prove below.
2. The Ethiopic Version,—This version is most accurate
and trustworthy and indeed as a rule servilely literal. It
has, of course, suffered from the corruptions naturally incident
to transmission through MSS. Thus dittographies are
frequent and lacunae are of occasional occurrence (see § 11),
but the version is singularly free from the glosses and
corrections of unscrupulous scribes, though the temptation
must have been great to bring it into accord with the
Ethiopic version of Genesis. To this source, indeed, we
must trace a few perversions of the text: “my wife” in
iii. 6 instead of “wife”; xv. 12 (see note); xvi. 12 (“her
bottle ” instead of “the bottle”); xxiv. 19 (where the words
“a well” are not found in the Latin version of Jubilees,
nor in the Mass. Sam. LXX, Syr., and Vulg. of Gen.
xxvi. 19). In the above passages the whole version is
influenced, but in a much greater degree has this influence
operated on MS a. Thus in iii. 4, 6, 7, 19, 29, iv. 4, 8,
v. 3, vi. 9, etc., the readings of the Ethiopic version of
Genesis have replaced the original text. In the case of ὁ
I can discover only one instance of this nature in xv. 15
(see my Text, pp. xi. sqq.).

xxviii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
For instances of corruption native to this version, see
notes on 11. 9, 7, 91, YL 391, Vi 22,“ 0, οι
xxiv. 20, 29, xxx, 2, xxxix. 4, x11, 19, xlv. 4, εἰν
3. The Latin Version—This version, of which about
one fourth has been preserved, was first published by Ceriani
in his Monumenta sacra et profana, 1861, tom. 1. fase. 1. 1562. It contains the following sections: xiii, 10-21; xv.
20°-31°; xvi. 5°-xvii. 6°; xviii 10°-xix, 25 ax δὲ τὸ
10"; xxi. 2-19"; xxiii 87-99; xxiv. 13-xxv. 193
8-23": xxvii. 11.245. xxviii. 16°-27°; xxix ὃ’. πὶ
1°; xxxi. 9°-18, 29°-32; xxxii. 1-8*, 18>-xxxii, Oe
xxxiv. 5°; xxxv. 3°-12°; xxxvi. 20°-xxxviil. 5°; xxxviil
1°-16°; xxxix. 9-xl 8*; xi. 6°-18; xi ΡΠ τ
8-xlvi. 1, 12-xlviii, 5; xlix. 7°-22. This version was
next edited by Rénsch in 1874, Das Buch der Jubiliéien ...
unter Beifiigung des revidirten Textes der . . . lateinischen
Fragmente. This work attests enormous industry and great
learning, but is deficient in judgment and critical acumen.
Rénsch was of opinion that this Latin version was made in
Egypt or its neighbourhood by a Palestinian Jew about the
middle of the fifth cent. (pp. 459-460). In 1895 I edited
this text afresh in conjunction with the Ethiopic in the
Oxford Anecdota (The Ethiopie Version of the Hebrew
Book of Jubilees). To this work and that of Rénsch above
the reader must be referred for a fuller treatment of this
subject. Here we may draw attention to the following
points. This version, where it is preserved, is almost of
equal value with the Ethiopic. It has, however, suffered
more at the hands of correctors. Thus it has been corrected
in conformity with the LXX in xlvi. 14 where it adds “et
Oon” against all other authorities. The Eth. version of Exod.
i. 11 might have been expected to bring about this addition
in our Ethiopic text but it did not. Two similar instances
will be found in xvi. 5, xxiv. 20. Again the Latin

INTRODUCTION XXix
version seems to have been influenced by the Vulgate in
xxix. 13, xlii. 11 (canos meos where our Ethiopic text =
μου τὸ γῆρας as in LXX of Gen. xlii. 38); and probably also
in xlvii. 7, 8, and certainly in xlv. 12 where it reads in
tota terra for in terra. Of course there is the possibility
that the Latin has reproduced faithfully the Greek and that
the Greek was faulty; or in case it was correct, that it
was the Greek presupposed by our Ethiopic version that
was at fault.
Two other passages are deserving of attention, xix. 14
and xxxix. 13. In the former the Latin version “et
creverunt et juvenes facti sunt ” agrees with the Eth. version
of Gen. xxv. 27 against the Ethiopic version of Jubilees
and all other authorities on Gen. xxv. 27. Here the
peculiar reading can be best explained as having originated
in the Greek. In the second passage, the clause “eorum
quae fiebant in carcere” agrees with the Eth. version of Gen.
xxxix. 23 against the Ethiopic version of Jubilees and all
other authorities on Gen. xxxix. 23.
On the other hand, there is a large array of passages in
which the Latin version preserves the true text over against
corruptions or omissions in the Ethiopic version: cf. xvi. 16,
W011, xx 6; 10, x3 xxi, 5% ete, (see ΤΩΝ
Text, p. Xvi.).
4. The Syriac Version—The evidence as to the existence of a Syriac is not conclusive. It is based on the fact
that a British Museum MS (Add. 12,154, fol. 180) contains
a Syriac fragment entitled, “Names of the Wives of the
Patriarchs according to the Hebrew Book called Jubilees.”
It was first published by Ceriani in his Momeni Sacra,
1861, tom. ii. fasc. 1. 9-10, and reprinted by me as
Appendix III. to my Text of Jubilees (p. 183).

ΧΧΧ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
§ 8. Tus Eraioric AND LATIN VERSIONS— TRANSLATIONS
FROM THE GREEK
Like all the biblical literature Jubilees was translated
into Ethiopic from Greek. We have seen above (p. xxvi)
that the Greek version had a very wide currency. To
show that our text is a translation from the Greek version
it will be sufficient to point out that in xxxiv. 11 we have
a transliteration of ἡλίου (“of the sun”); that in 1. 29, 11. 2,
v. 4, xiv. 12, xxiii. 10, xxviii. 27, xxxii. 4, 97, 29, xlvii. 5
(see notes in doc.) we must retranslate into Greek before we
can discover the source of the various corruptions. Further,
Greek words such as Spys, βάλανος, XN, σχῖνος, φάραγξ,
etc. are transliterated in the Ethiopic. The Greek article is
rendered by the demonstrative ii, 2, iil, 25, xxiv. 19,
29. Finally, proper names are transliterated as they appear
in Greek and not in Hebrew: vii. 5, x. 18, ete.
It is no less obvious that the Latin is also a translation
from the Greek. Thus in xxxix. 12, timoris = δειλίας, a corruption of δουλείας ; in xxxvili. 13, honorem = τιμήν, which
should have been rendered by tributum (so Eth.); in xxxii.
26, celavit = ἔκρυψε, corrupt for ἔγραψε (so Eth.). Again, in
XXXL. 30, orasti orationem is a mistranslation of ηὔξω
εὐχήν, Which here = vovisti votum ; in xxxii. 30, sub glande
= ὑπὸ τῆς βαλάνου, which here = sub quercu. The Greek
article is often rendered by the Latin demonstrative as in
the Ethiopic version: hujus Abrahae, xxix. 16; huic Jacob
. . . huic Istrael, xxxi. 15. Greek constructions are reproduced: memor fuit sermones, xvii. 3 = ἐμνήσθη τοὺς
λόγους : consummavit loquens, xv. 22 = συνετέλεσε λαλῶν:
in omnibus quibus (for quae) dedisti, xxii. 8 = ἐν πᾶσιν οἷς
ἔδωκας. We should observe also the extraordinary mistranslation of μήποτε = (ne forte) by ne quando in xlii, 11.
(See Ronsch, pp. 439 sqq.)

INTRODUCTION XXxi
We have seen above (pp. xxvili-xxix) that the Ethiopic
and Latin versions presuppose in some cases different forms
of the Greek version.
§ 9. THe GreeExX—A TRANSLATION FROM THE HEBREW
The early date and place of composition speak for a
Semitic original, and the following evidence for such an
original is irresistible.
But the question at once arises: was this original
Aramaic or Hebrew? Certain proper names in the Latin
version ending in -in seem to bespeak an Aramaic, as Cettin,
xxiv. 28; Adurin, xxxvii. 8, 9; Filistin, xxiv. 14-16.
But since in all these cases the Ethiopic transliterations
end in -m and not in -n, it is not improbable that this
Aramaising in the Latin version is due to the translator,
who, as Rénsch has concluded on other grounds, was a
Palestinian Jew. Moreover, it is most dangerous to conclude from Aramaic proper names to an Aramaic original;
for Aramaic forms occur not infrequently in the Greek
versions of the Old Testament. Thus this very word Cettim
(Cn) appears as Χεττάν in Symmachus (Gen. x. 4), Χεττείν
in the LXX (B) and Lucian of Judg. i. 26, Χεττιείν in the
LXX (B) of 1 Kings x. 33. As regards Adurin (which in
the Eth. version = ’Adiram), we should observe that this word
appears as ᾿Ανονιράμ, 1.6. ᾿Αδονιράμ, in the sister work Test.
Iud. 9. Thus we may here again conclude to an original
Hebrew form. It is noteworthy also that whereas in
xxxvili. 3 of the Latin we have Adoram, in the Ethiopic we
have ’Adéran. Another Aramaic form is Mastéma (noun
[Μαστιφάμ in Syncellus, Μαστιφάτ in Cedrenus, and Mastima in the Latin version, xviii. 12, xlviii. 2], from the hiphel
participle, Dib). But the presence of such a proper name
in a Semitic document is inconclusive as we have shown
above. Cf. Littmann, in Kautzsch’s Apok. u. Pseud. 11. 34.

ΧΧΧΙΪ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
The grounds, on the other hand, for a Hebrew original
are weighty and numerous :
οδππα: ὐο δόν,
1. A work which claims to be from the hand of Moses
would naturally be written in Hebrew Hebrew, our author
teaches, was the sacred and national language (see notes on
xii. 25-26; ΧΙ]. 15).
2. The revival of the national spirit of the nation is
universally, so far as we know, accompanied by a revival of
the national language—Thus the Psalms of Solomon (7040 8.0.) were written in Hebrew, and the Similitudes in
the Ethiopic Enoch (xxxvii.-lxx.), as I hope to prove later.
As regards the sections of Enoch which were written before
the revival of the national spirit under the Maccabees other
grounds must decide.
3. The teat must be retranslated into Hebrew in order to explain unintelligible expressions and restore the true text.—Thus
in xliii. 11 14°Cléj=a ἐ ν ἐμοί, which is a mistranslation of
‘2. 2 in this context = δέομαι, “ pray, as in Gen. xliv. 18,
which our text reproduces almost word for word. In xvi, 31
lebba dabart (Lat. Vers. corde palmarum) = In 125, where
UD is corrupt for 55. In xlvii. 9 the text = domum Faraonis, but the context demands filiam Faraonis. Hence the
Greek translator here misread 5-na as 5-3 or 5-n3. The
true Aramaic word for daughter is ΤΠ. See also notes on
UPD AL 1B, vied 5, HPAL 22.
Under this head also we might draw attention to the
presence of dittographies already existing in the Hebrew
text. See notes on i. 16, xvi. 15, xxx. 1.
4, Hebraisms survive in the Ethiopic and Latin versions.
—Thus in ii. 9, 25 the Ethiopic wahaba = “ gave” goes back
to jm2, which must here be translated “appointed.” In
xxii. 10 eligere in te is a reproduction of 17772; in xxiv. 25
sermo hic = “this thing = Mi 1277, a purely Hebrew
expression; in xix. 8 in dua . . . in ipsa (so also Eth.)

INTRODUCTION XXXili
=... ἐν αὐτῇ = na WN; in xl. 7 (see note) we have
a transliteration of a Hebrew phrase "Al RL wa ’Abirér
where we should read ’Abirél. Again in iv. 4 ntiha is a
corrupt transliteration of "3. See also vi. 35, Xxxul, 1,
xl, 10.
5. Many paronomasiae discover themselves on retranslation
into Hebrew—Thus in iv. 9 there is a play on Enoch the
son of Cain; on Jared in iv. 15, on Noah in iv. 28, on
Peleg in vil. 8, on Reu in x. 18, on Serug in xi. 6, on
Terah in xi. 12 (see notes ὧν loc.).
6. Many passages of this book are preserved in rabbinic
writings, such as the Hebrew Book of Noah, the Midrash
Wajjissau, the Chronicles of Jerahmeel, the Book of
Jashar, and the Midrash Tadshe. It has also much matter
in common with the Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs
which was also originally written in Hebrew.
§ 10. TEXTUAL AFFINITIES OF THE TEXT OF THE BOOK
OF JUBILEES
In order to understand the position which the Hebrew
text of Jubilees occupied in relation to the texts and versions
of the Pentateuch, it will be necessary to summarise briefly
its affinities with them. We shall now discover that our
text agrees in turn with the Samaritan (twice 2), LXX,
Syriac, Vulgate, and with Onkelos.
In the following list, where the corresponding passages
in Jubilees and the Pentateuch are given without further
corament, the details will be found in the notes accompanying
the translation. Thus in the first sub-heading i. (a), where
xxvi. 34 of our text is equated with Gen. xxvii. 40, the needful
information is given in the notes on xxvi. 34. On the other
hand, where the notes do not supply such details the read6

XXXIV THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
ing given by our text and its supporters and the opposing
text and its authorities are supplied in brackets. Thus we
are to interpret the statement “xli. 14 (‘his shepherd ’)—
Gen. xxviii. 40 (‘his friend’),” which occurs under the subheading ii. (η), “It agrees with the LXX and Vulg. against
the Mass., Sam., and Syr.,’ as meaning that our text, supported by the LXX and Vulg. of Gen. xxviii. 40, reads
“his shepherd,” whereas the Mass., Sam., and Syr. read “ his
friend.” For fuller information the reader can refer to my
Ethiopic Text.
i. First as to its agreement with individual authorities
in opposition to the rest:
(a) It agrees with the Sam. against the Mass., LXX,
Syr., Onk. in iv. 7 (“he called ”)—Gen. iv. 25 (“she called ἢ);
xxvi. 34 (?)—Gen. xxvii. 40.
(8) It agrees with the LXX against the Mass., Sam.,
Syr., Vulg. in ul. 24 (“thy pains”)—Gen. 11. 16 (“thy
conception”); v. 1—Gen. vi. 2; vii. 8—Gen. ix. 22; viii. 1
—Gen. xi. 13; xiii. 2—Gen. xii. 6; xiv. 2, 12—Gen. xv.
2,11; xv. 15 (“her name will be called ”)—Gen. xvii. 15
(“thou shalt call her name”); xvii. 2—Gen. xxl. 2;
xxiv. 25—Gen. xxvi. 32; xxvi. 25 (+“his son”)—Gen.
xxvii. 30 (see my Text, p. 97, note 20); xxviii. 11 (+
Jacob)—Gen. xxix. 32; xxviii. 29——-Gen. xxx. 43; xxix. 4
—Gen. xxxi. 20; xlvi. 14 (“he set over”)—Exod. 1. 11
(“ they set over”).
(y) It agrees with the Syriac version against the Mass.,
Sam., LXX, Vulg. in xii. 15 (“went forth” in sing.)—Gen.
xi. 31 (Mass. =“ went forth” in pl, Sam, LXX, Vulg.=
“led forth”); xviii. 11 (“I have shown ”)—Gen. xxii. 12
(“I know”); xliiii 21 (“by the command of the mouth
of Pharaoh”)—Gen. xlv. 21 (“by the mouth of Pharaoh ”) ;
xlvii. 7—Exod. ii. 7; xlix. 9 (“the guilt ”)—Num. ix. 13
(“his guilt ”).

INTRODUCTION XXXV
(6) It agrees with the Vulg. against Mass., Sam., LXX,
Syr. in vii. 9 (“ their shoulders ”)—Gen. ix. 23 (“both their
shoulders”); xiv. 1 (“and thy reward ”)—Gen. xv. 1 (“thy
reward”); xiv. 22 (“shall build up”)—Gen. xvi. 2 (“shall
be builded up”); xxiv. 3 (“give me”)—Gen. xxv. 30
(feed me”); xxiv. 19 (“living water”)—Gen. xxvi. 19
(“well of water”); xxvi. 31 (“Isaac”)—Gen. xxvii. 39
(“Isaac his father”).
(ε) It agrees with the Targum of Onkelos against
the Mass., Sam. LXX, ὅγε, Vulg. in xii. 20 (“not be
numbered ”)—Gen. xiii. 16 (“be numbered”); xii. 24
Gen xiv. 14; xv. 17 (“rejoiced”)—Gen. xvii. 17
(“ laughed ”).
ii. We shall next give its affinities with two or more of
the above authorities in opposition to the rest.
(a) Its agreement with the Mass. and Sam.:
It agrees with the Mass. and Sam. against the LXX,
Syr., Vulg. in iii. 3—Gen. ii. 20; vi. 7 (“with the life
thereof with the blood”)—Gen. ix. 4 (LXX ἐν αἵματι
ψυχῆς).
It agrees with the Mass. and Onk. against the Sam.,
LXX, Syr., Vulg., Ps.-Jon. in iii. 7—Gen. 11, 24.
(8) Its agreement with the Mass., Sam., Syr., or with
these + Vulg. or + Vulg. and Onk.:
It agrees with Mass., Sam., and Syr. against the LXX
and Vulg. in iii. 25 (“for thy sake,” yq»1ya)—Gen. iii. 17
(LXX (and Vulg.) ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις ov = nay); vi. 8
(“by man ”)—Gen. ix. 6 (LXX ἀντὶ τοῦ αἵματος αὐτοῦ);
xxvi. 27 (“thy firstborn ”)—Gen. xxvii. 32 (LX+ XVul g.
om. “thy”); xxvi. 29 (“unto his father ”)—-Gen. xxvii. 34
(LX+ XVul g. om.); xxvii. 21 (“behold ”)—Gen. xxviii. 13
(LXX + Vulg. om.).
It agrees with the Mass., Sam., Syr., Vulg. against the
LXX in v. 27 (“prevailed ”)—Gen. vii. 24 (LXX ὑψώθη);

XXXVi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
xii, 15 (“from Ur”)—Gen. xi. 31 (LXX ἐκ τῆς χώρας);
xiv. 3 (“out of thine own bowels”)—Gen. xv. 4 (LXX ἐκ
σο=ῦ JO M instead of λυ); xiv. 12—Gen. xv. 11; xv. ὃ
(“ Almighty ”)—Gen. xvii. 1 (LXX σου).
It agrees with the Mass. Sam., Syr., Vulg., and Onk.
against the LXX in xv. 20—-Gen. xvii. 22; xxvi. 23
(“peoples ”)—-Gen. xxvii. 29 (LXX ἄρχοντες = DN")
corrupt for ΘΝ); xxvi. 24 (“brethren ”)—Gen. xxvii. 29
(LXX τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ cov).
It agrees with the Mass., Sam., Syr., Aq., Symm., Vulg.,
and Onk, against the LXX in xiii, 10 (“ towards the south )
—Gen. xii. 9 (LXX ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ).
(vy) Its agreement with the Sam. and LXX or with these
+Syr. or +Onk. or + Vulg. or +Syr. and Vulg.:
It agrees with the Sam. and LXX against the Mass.,
Syr., Vulg. in xiv. 18—Gen. xv. 20; xv. 14—Gen. xvii. 14;
xvii. 1 (“his son”)—Gen. xxi. 8 (om.); xxvii. 11 (“my
father )—-Gen. xxviii. 4 (om.).
It agrees with the Sam., LXX, and Syr. against the
Mass., Vulg., and Onk. in ii. 16—Gen. ii. 2.
It agrees with the Sam., LXX, Syr., and Vulg. against
Mass., Onk., and Ps.-Jon. in xii. 23 (“them that curse ”)—
Gen. xii. 3 (“him that curses”); xvii. 7—Gen. xxi. 13;
xxviii. 8 (“I shall give”)—Gen. xxix. 27 (“we will give”);
xliii, 12 (“with us ”)—Gen. xliv. 31 (omy.
It agrees with the Sam., LXX, Syr., and Vulg. against the
Mass. and Onk. in xv. 16—Gen. xvii. 16; xv. 19 (“and
for his seed ”)—-Gen. xvii. 19 (“for his seed ”).
It agrees with the Sam., LXX, and Onk. against Mass.,
Syr., and Vulg. in iil. 6—Gen. ii. 23.
It agrees with the Sam., LXX, and Vulg. against the Mass.
and Syr. in xiv. 13 (“it was said”)—Gen. xv. 13 (“ He said ”).
(6) Its agreement with the Sam. and Syr. + the Vulg.
or others :

INTRODUCTION XXXVil
Tt agrees with the Sam., Syr., Ps.-Jon., Graec.-Ven. against
the Mass., Vulg., and Itala in xviii. 12 (“a single (= InN)
ram ”)—Gen. xxii. 23 (“behind (nN) him a ram”). Onk.
combines both readings.
It agrees with the Sam., Syr., Vulg., Onk. against Mass.
and LXX in xliv. 16 (“ Phia”)—Gen. xlvi. 13 (“ Puvvah ”).
(ec) Its agreement with the Sam. version + LXX or with
the Sam. version + Syr. and others :
It agrees with the Sam. vers., LXX, Syr. (?), Onk. against
Mass., Sam., Vulg. in xviii. 15—Gen. xxii. 17.
It agrees with the Sam. Vers., Syr., Vulg. (and possibly
Sam.) against Mass. and LXX in xvii. 13 (“hath seen” or
“ seeth ”)—Gen. xxii. 14 (Mass. “will be seen” or “ provided”) (LXX ὠφθη).
(£) Its agreement with the LXX and Syr. and with these
+ others:
It agrees with the LXX and Syr. against Mass., Sam. in
iii. 24 (“thy return ”)—Gen. 11. 16 (“thy desire”); xiv. 2
(“son of my handmaid”)—Gen. xv. 2 (“of my house ?);
xli. 9—Gen. xxxvili. 14.
It agrees with the LXX and Syr. and, in the main, with
the Sam. and Vulg. against the Mass. and Onk. in vi. 32
(“beasts and cattle and birds and every moving thing” ;
LXX πάντα τὰ θηρία καὶ πάντα τὰ κτήνη καὶ πᾶν
πετεινὸν καὶ πᾶν ἑρπετὸν κινούμενον. So Syr. save
that it omits καὶ after πετεινόν ; Sam. and Vulg. agree
with LXX save that Vulg. omits καὶ πᾶν πετεινόν and
Sam. omits καὶ πάντα τὰ xtnvn)—Gen. vill. 19 (“every
beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, whatsoever
creepeth ἢ).
It agrees with the LXX, Syr., and Vulg. against the
Mass. and Sam. in v. 8 (“will . . . abide”)—Gen. vi. 3
(“will . . . strive”); xiv. 4 (“said unto him”)—Gen. xv. 5
(“said”); xv. 16—Gen. xvi. 16; xxiv. 3 (“said to him”)

XXXViii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
—Gen. xxv. 31 (“said”); xliiii 12 (“our father”)—Gen.
xliv. 30 (Mass. “my father ἢ)
(yn) Its agreement with the LXX and Vulg.:
It agrees with the LXX and Vulg. against the Mass.,
Sam., and Syr. (+ “and dancing”) xvii. 4—Gen. xxi. 9 ; xxvii.
8—Gen. xxvii. 46 (+ “of the daughters of Heth”); xxvii.
11 (“after thee ”)—Gen. xxvii. 4 (“ with thee”); xxviii. 1
(“land of the east ”)—Gen. xxix. 1 (“land of the sons of
the east”); xli. 14 (“his shepherd ” = yyn 5)—Gen. xxviii.
20 (“his friend = ny).
It agrees with the LXX, Vulg., and Onk. in xv. 14 (“for
he has broken ”)—Gen. xvii. 14 (“he has broken ”).
(9) It agrees with the LXX (d%e, πατρός μου, but other
MSS give πατρός cov as in the Sam. and Eth. vers.) against
the Mass., Syr., and Vulg. in xxvii. 11—Gen. xxviii. 4 (om.).
Though the above list is not exhaustive it is sufficiently
so for our purposes. It follows from it that our book
attests an independent form of the Hebrew text of the
Pentateuch. Thus it agrees at times with the Sam. or
LXX or Syr. or Vulg. or even with Onk. against all the
rest. Similarly it agrees with various combinations of
these against the rest.
In the next place we infer from the following phenomena
that our book represents some form of the Hebrew teat of the
Pentateuch midway between the forms presupposed by the LXX
and the Syriac. For it agrees more frequently with the
LXX, see i. (8), or with combinations into which the LXX
enters, see 11. (vy), (e), (7), (9), than with any other single
authority or with any combination excluding the LXX.
Next to the LXX it agrees most often with the Syriac, see
i. (y), or with combinations into which the Syriac enters,
see 11. (8), (5). On the other hand its independence of the
LXX is shown by such passages as i. (a), (vy), (δ), (ε), and
its actual superiority in a large array of readings, li. (a), (8),

INTRODUCTION ΧΧΧΙΧ
where it has the support of the Sam. and Mass., or of
these with various combinations of Syr., Vulg. and Onk.
If to the above considerations we add the facts that, so far
as I am aware, (1) it never agrees against all the rest with
the Mass., which is in some respects the latest form of the
Hebrew text; (2) that it agrees in a few cases with Onk.,
oftener with the Vulg., and still oftener with the Syr., and
oftenest with the LXX, against all the rest; (3) that, when
it enters combinations, it is almost universally in attestation
of the earlier reading, it may be reasonably concluded that
the textual evidence points to the composition of our book at
some period between 250 B.c. (LXX version of Pentateuch)
and 100 A.D., and at a time nearer the earlier date than
the latter.
§ 11. Lacunaz, DITTOGRAPHIES AND DISLOCATIONS IN
OUR TEXT
Lacunae.—In addition to the occasional small lacunae
which are supplied from the Latin version or other
independent sources, there are four larger lacunae in
jm 22, ἢ 23, wu.'37, xii. 25. The first. consists of
two clauses according to the Greek authorities: “As there
were two and twenty letters, and two and twenty books,”
but, according to the Midrash Tadshe, only of one: “As
there were two and twenty letters” (see ii. 23 notes).
Since the earliest testimony elsewhere to this reckoning of
the books of the Old Testament as twenty-two is that of
Josephus (c. Apion.i. 8), it is possible that the clause in
question in Epiphanius and Syncellus may be an addition
to the text of Jubilees. This reckoning is mentioned also
by Origen, Athanasius, Cyril of Jerusalem, in the Canons of
the Council of Laodicea, Jerome, etc. (see Ryle, Canon of
the Old Testament, 1892, p. 221). On the other hand, it is

xl THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
not improbable that the disputed clause belongs to the
original text: for its omission by the Midrash Tadshe is
far from conclusive. We have already seen in the notes
on 11. 2-3 that this Midrash (written circ. 1000 AD.) has
deliberately altered the text of Jubilees, where it is rightly
transmitted by Epiphanius and Syncellus, in order to Wine, e
accommodate it to Talmudic Judaism. And in the present
instance the motive for this omission was not wanting;
for the usual reckoning of the books of the Old Testament
in Talmudic writings (Taanith 8a; Shem. rabba 41, etc.)
and later Jewish scholars, such as Isaac Abarbanel, was
twenty-four (see Strack, Herzog’s Real - Encye. Vi.
434-436). Moreover, a passage in Isidore of Seville, which
is clearly based on Jub. 11., supports the evidence of Epiphanius and Syncellus. It runs: Et xxii generationes sunt
ab Adam usque ad Jacob,. . . et xxii libri Veteris Testamenti usque ad Hester et xxii literarum sunt elementa (see
Ῥ. lxxxi for the rest of the quotation). Accordingly, since the
negative evidence of the Midrash is thus largely discounted
and since on the other hand we have the positive evidence
of Epiphanius, Isidore, and Syncellus, and artificial analogies
of this nature are characteristic of our author, I am inclined to accept the clause as original.’
1 Since writing the above I have come across the following excerpt
from the Greek version of Jubilees in Lambros’ Catalogue of the
Greek MSS on Mt. Athos, vol. i, pp. 292, which confirms my view.
It is: ᾿Ιωάννου ἀναγνώστου Κωνσταντινουπόλεως Λεπτῆς Γενέσεως.
Ἔν τῇ Oo [Α]π’ ὧδε διαλαμβάνει βιβλίον τὸ καλούμενον λεπτὴ
γένεσις. “Ev τῷ κειμένῳ: Ἔργα ὡς λέγει ἔκτησεν (read ἔκτισεν) ὁ
Θεὸς ἐν ταῖς ἐξ ἡμέραις, δὲ ὃ καὶ KP’ γράμματα παρ᾽ Ἑβραίοις καὶ κβ'
βιβλία καὶ κη΄ γενεαρχίαι ἀπὸ ᾿Αδὰμ ἕως Ἰακώβ. Κάϊν, ὡς λέγει,
τῆς οἰκίας πεσούσης ἐπ’ αὐτὸν ἀπέθανεν. Lambros wrongly prints
κβ΄ as xn’ twice in the above passage. I owe the corrections to Mr.
Lake, who has just collated it afresh for me on Mt. Athos, The
excerpt is from a thirteenth-cent. MS. The last sentence regarding
Cain is from Jub. iv. 31.

INTRODUCTION xli
The third lacuna in vii. 37 appears to have extended to
two or more verses, which dealt with the right of eating the
fruit of trees in the fifth year after they were planted, and
of sowing and reaping the land during six years and the
duty of letting it lie fallow on the seventh (see notes in /oc.).
The greatest loss which our book has sustained is that
which occurs in xii. 25. Here the text still stands in a
mutilated condition. The subject of the lost verses was
undoubtedly Abram’s pursuit of the kings, his recovery of
the captives, and his meeting with Melchizedek. Since
on other grounds it appears that the Maccabean princes
claimed in some respects to represent the priesthood of
Melchizedek, this loss is most deplorable (see notes on
mim. 20, xxx. 1, xxxvi. 16).
Ditiographies—We have already drawn attention to
three passages where dittographies most probably existed
already in the Hebrew text. These are far from infrequent
in the Ethiopic version. Thus in i. 29, vi. 33, viii 6,
ΡΟΝ EVIL. xix, 10; xxii. 24, “xxi. 18, xxxiv.
13, xxxv. 13, the dittographies are verbal repetitions of
clauses in immediate or mediate juxtaposition. Some of
these repetitions may, of course, have already occurred in the
Greek. But there is another class of dittographies present
in our version which are due to incorporation in the text
of duplicate renderings. Thus in xxx. 16 the clause “and
no consideration of persons” follows immediately on “ And
there will be no respect of persons,” and both are alternative
renderings of καὶ οὐκ ἔσται προσωποληψία or some such
phrase. This conclusion is confirmed by the Latin version
which shows no such dittography. We have the evidence
of the same version for excising the dittography in xxiil.
11. Other duplicate renderings, which have found their
way into the Ethiopic version, our text exhibits in xx. 3,
xxi. 10, 13, xxiv. 3. Possibly in xxxii. 21 “read and

xlii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
read,” which I have emended with the Latin legit et
cognovit into “read and knew,” should be regarded as a
simple dittography within the Ethiopic ; and legit et cognovit
as due to two alternative renderings of ἀνέγνω, where the
first is right.
Dislocations—A most probable instance of this nature
occurs in xxxvii. 20°. These two prose lines intervene in
the midst of a poem. They are corrupt in all the MSS,
but by an easy emendation could be adapted to follow after
the first clause of the preceding verse. See note iw loc.
Another passage is v. 17-18 which deals with the Day
of Atonement. 1 have treated it as interpolated or else as
transposed from after xxxiv. 18-19, which treats of the
first institution of this festival. It is possible, however,
that these verses did belong to the original. Thus 10°-12
refer to the final judgment and the renewal of the world.
The subject of the final judgment is there further dealt with
in its general character in 13-16, and in 17-18 the writer
turns aside to show the special grace accorded to Israel on
that day if they observe the Day of Atonement. But I
still incline to the view that 17-18 are foreign to their
present context.
Again, i. 28 should probably be read before i. 26, and
xxiii, 16 after xxiii. 19.
§ 12. PorricaL ELEMENT IN JUBILEES
Just before completing my commentary on Jubilees, I
was so fortunate as to discover that no small proportion of
it was originally written in verse. Accordingly the reader
will find the following passages arranged as verse: x. 3;
xll. 2-5, 18-20, 23, 29; xv. 6-8; xviii. 15-16; xix. 17,
20-22, 25; xx. 6-10; xxi 21-25; xxii. 11-23; xxii.
29:51: xxiv. 30-32; xxv. 15-23; xxvi. 23-24, 31-34;

INTRODUCTION xliii
xxxi. 15-20; xxxvii. 20-23. This discovery not only adds
to the interest of the book but also illuminates many a dark
passage, suggests the right connections of wrongly separated
clauses, and forms an admirable instrument of criticism
generally. Thus, if the reader turns to xxxviil. 20-23 he
will find a poem—probably an old one—consisting of five
stanzas of three lines each. Our recognition of this fact
enables us to excise as an interpolation the unintelligible
words occurring in the MSS at the close of the first stanza.
Even if we emended these words we should only have a
distich, which would be suspicious in the midst of a poem
consisting of tristichs. But not only is the form against
their genuineness here, but also their subject matter (see
notes im loc. Again, in xxxi. 18 we reject a line both on
the ground of the parallelism and of its being a dittography,
and in xxi, 22 a line on the ground of the parallelism,
The most important of these poems is the apocalypse in
xxiii. 23-31 which consists of ten stanzas, the first nine of
which are tristichs and the last a tetrastich. Of the rest
some are composed in distichs, as xii, 23, 29; xviii. 15-16;
xx. 6-10; xxii. 11-23; xxv. 15-23, xxvi. 23-24, 31-34;
xxxi. 15-20; some in tristichs xix. 17, 25; xxi. 21-25;
XXXVI. 20-23; and the rest partly in distichs and partly in
tristichs in xii. 18-20 (consisting of a tristich + distich
+ tristich + 2 distichs); xv. 6-8 (distich + 2 tristichs);
xix. 20-22 (2 tristichs + 2 distichs). While on the one
hand it must be confessed that in xv. 6-8; xvii. 15-16;
xxxi, 20, and in one or more other passages, it is difficult
to arrive at a satisfactory arrangement; on the other it
seems most probable that much of the first chapter was
originally written in verse; also vii. 10°-12; xxvii.
23-24; xxxii. 18-19, and many passages elsewhere.

xliv THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
§ 13. JUBILEES FROM ONE AUTHOR, BUT BASED ON
EARLIER BOOKS AND TRADITIONS
Our book is the work of one author, but is largely based
on earlier books and traditions. The narrative of Genesis
forms, of course, the bulk of the book, but every page of it
contains materials characteristic of the age of our author.
By referring to Index I. the reader will see at a glance the
books of the Old Testament laid under contribution.
But our present chief interest is the relation of our
author to non-canonical Jewish literature. Thus he borrows
vil. 20-39, x. 1-15 from the Book of Noah. Of this book
happily the greater part of x. 1-2, 9-14 is still preserved
in the Hebrew Book of Noah (see Jellinek’s Bet ha-MidTasch, 111. 155, and my Text of Jubilees, p. 179). Our
author had before him also the greater part of the Book of
Enoch Vi.-xvi., xxiii.-xxxvi., ]xxli.-xce.
Besides these he also made use of current traditions and
legends, which were already reduced to writing, and have
come down to us in Hebrew and Greek in other independent works. Thus the war of Jacob and his sons
against the Amorite kings, xxxiv. 1-9, is found in the
Test. Judah 3-7, a contemporary work, in the Midrash
Wajjissau, which contains if not the original legend,
at all events a very early recast of it, and in the Book
of Jashar—a late work. Again, our author drew on
existing writings for his description of the fratricidal war
between Jacob and Esau in xxxvii-xxxvill. Here the only
contemporary authority that still exists for our text is
Test. Jud. 9. But with a few reservations the same statement may be made of the Hebrew document preserved in
the Jalkut Shimeoni i 132 and the Chronicles of Jerahmeel (see my notes on pp. 214-215),

INTRODUCTION xlv
Other incidents in our text, which are attested also in
the contemporary Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs, are
the story of Bilhah’s dishonour at the hands of Reuben
during Jacob’s absence (Jub. xxxiii. 1-9—Test. Reuben 3);
Levis dream as to the priesthood (xxxii. 1—Test. Levi 2, 4,
5, 8, 9), and his consecration to it by Isaac (xxxi. 13-17
—Test. Levi 9); the names of the wives of Levi and Judah
(xxxiv. 20—Test. Levi 11; Test. Jud. 8, 13, 16); the .
story of Tamar, Er and Onan, and Judah’s repentance (xl.
—Test. Jud. 10, 12, 14, 19); the burial of Jacob’s sons
in Hebron (xlvi. 9—Test. Reub. 7, Levi 19, Jud. 26
Zeb. 10, Dan. 7, Naph. 9, Gad 8, Asher 8; cf. Jos. Ant.
1. 8. 2) during a war between Egypt and Canaan (xlvi. 9—
Test. Sim. 8, Benj. 12 [Arm. Vers.]). Also the insertion of
Kaéiném in vu. 1 is supported by the LXX of Gen.
a. 13.
Other legendary matter in Jubilees, for which contemporary or earlier documents are, as a rule, not at hand,
though most probably belonging to ancient tradition,
furnishes us with a large number of proper names—particularly the names of women—’Awan, wife of Cain (iv. 9),
*Aztira, wife of Seth (iv. 11), Méaléléth, the wife of Kenan
(iv. 14), and the wives of the various patriarchs down to
Merah (see iv. 15, 16, 20, 27, 28, 33; vii. 14, 15, 16;
viii. 1, 5, 6, 7; xi. 9, 14, etc.), and of the twelve sons of
Jacob (xxxiv. 20), and the daughter of Pharaoh (xlvii. 5).
As other proper names of persons we might observe:
Baraki’él (iv. 15), Rastijal (iv. 16), Danél (Gv. 20), and so
on for the fathers of the wives mentioned above (iv. 27, 28,
33; viii. 1, 5, 6, etc.); also Makamaron, king of Canaan
(xlvi. 6), and the filiፅ 1 (V1, 22). Again, as names of places:
Elda (iii. 32), the mount of the East (iv. 26), the three
1 This name is found in the Greek Version (Syncellus) of the Eth.
Enoch vii. 2 as ᾿Βλιούδ,

xlvi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
cities built by Noahs sons (vii. 14, 15, 16), the various
mountains, islands, towns, rivers, and seas mentioned in
vii. 12-ix. 13 (most of which can, however, be identified
with actual places), Erman ( = Heroonpolis, xlvi. 6).
Other legendary matter was in many instances (see notes
in loc.), and possibly in all, the source of the following statements and incidents: the period of five days spent by Adam
in naming the creatures (iii. 1-3), the common language of
all animals before the Fall (iii. 28), the number of Adam’s
sons, 1.6. twelve (iv. 10), his burial—the first that was
made in the earth (iv. 29), the manner of Cain’s death
(iv. 31), Kéiném’s discovery of writings of the Watchers .
(viii. 1-4), the detailed account of the tower of Babel
and its destruction by a mighty wind (x. 21-26), the
beginning of wars and idolatry in Serug’s time (xi. 2-4),
the history of Abraham’s early days and exploits (xi. 16-24),
his campaign against idolatry and burning of a heathen
temple, death of Haran, Abraham’s astronomical knowledge
and miraculous acquisition of Hebrew (xu. 1-8, 12-14,
16-21, 25-27), Abraham’s ten temptations (xvii. 17), the
fact of Zilpah and Bilhah being sisters (xxvii. 9), and of
Zebulon and Dinah being twins (xxviii. 23), rape of Dinah at
the age of twelve (xxx. 1-3), Jacob’s presents to his parents
four times a year (xxix. 14-17, 19-20), Isaac’s blessing of
Levi and Judah (xxxi. 13-20), appointment of Levi to the
priesthood as the tenth son (xxxii. 2-3), the deaths of
Bilhah and Dinah after news of Josephs death (xxxiv.
15-16), Simeon’s marriage to a woman of Mesopotamia on
his repentance (xxxiv. 21), after having first married a
woman from Zephath (xliv. 13), the years of famine traced
to the failure of the Nile (xlv. 9), the temporary stay of
many Israelites in Canaan after burial of the patriarchs
(xlvi. 10), the number of months during which the Hebrew
children were cast into the river (xlvii. 2), the burning of

INTRODUCTION xl vii
the Egyptian gods (xlviii. 5), destruction of 1000 Egyptians
in the Red Sea for every Hebrew child that was cast into
the river (xlvi. 14).
ὃ 14. JupiLers—A PRODUCT oF THE MipRASHIC TENDENCY
AT WORK IN THE OLD TESTAMENT CHRONICLER, BUT
REPRESENTED BY ITS AUTHOR AS AN ESOTERIC TRADITION
Our book represents an extreme product of the midrashic process which is apparent on most pages of
the Old Testament Chronicler. (a) The Chronicler, as we
know, to a certain extent rewrote with an object the earlier
history of Israel and the history of Judah already recounted
in Samuel and Kings. In his hands the history of the
nation is so recast as to make it a history of the church,
the temple and its cultus, and to represent David and his
pious successors as observing all the prescripts of the law
according to the Priests’ Code. (0) In the course of this
process facts that will not square with the writers presuppositions are omitted or transformed in character. This
applies particularly to breaches of the Priests’ Code; also
to statements such as that in 2 Sam. xxiv. 1, which
ascribes Davids temptation to Yahweh. This temptation
the Chronicler attributes to Satan (1 Chron. xxi. 1).
(a) Now the author of Jubilees sought to do for Genesis *
what the Chronicler had done for Samuel and Kings
(observe especially his recasting of 2 Kings xi. in 2 Chron.
XXL. 10-xxiii. 21), and so he rewrote it in such a way as to
1 The procedure of our author is, of course, in direct antagonism
with the presuppositions of the Priests’ Code in Genesis. Thus
according to it “ Noah may build no altar, Abraham offer no sacrifice,
Jacob erect no sacred pillar. No offering is recorded till Aaron and
his sons are ready ” (Carpenter, The Hexateuch, i. 124).

xl viii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
show that the law had been rigorously observed, even by
the patriarchs.
(0) Like the Chronicler our author found many statements in Genesis that did not square with his presuppositions, and accordingly we find that in many instances he
alters the text before him, and in others he simply omits.
Thus he omits” the sending out of the raven (Gen. viii. 7)
possibly on the ground of its being an unclean bird (Lev.
xi. 15), and of the doves, Abraham’s entertainment of the
angels (Gen. xviii, 2-8), his intercession for Sodom (xvii.
22-33), the mention of Lots wife and many details
regarding the destruction of Sodom (Gen. xix. 1-24),
Abraham’s deception of the Egyptians (xii. 11-14, 18),
and of Abimelech in regard to Sarah (Gen. xx. 2-3), Isaac’s
prayer that Rebecca may have offspring, etc. (Gen. xxv.
21-26), his deception of Abimelech in regard to Rebecca
(Gen. xxvi. 7-10), Jacob’s meeting with Rachel and his
welcome by Laban (Gen. xxix. 2-15), the story of the
mandrakes (Gen. xxx. 14-16), Jacob’s devices to increase
his flocks at the expense of Laban (Gen. xxx. 37-42), the
mutual recriminations of Jacob and Laban (Gen. xxxi.
26-32, 36-42), Jacob’s meeting with the angels (Gen.
XXXL. 1-2), his wrestling with the angel (xxxii. 24-32), his
fear of Esau and efforts to propitiate him (Gen. xxxii.-xxxiii.),
the circumcision of the Shechemites and their covenant
with Jacob (Gen. xxxiv. 14-24). The omissions in the
history of Joseph are numerous, but they can be explained
almost wholly on the ground of the author’s desire for brevity.
But as regards Gen. xlix. the case is different. It is
1 See pp. xlix, liv.
2 The narrative about Melchizedek is lost in the course of transmission, but was not omitted by our author (see xiii. 25 note). Nor
yet was the reference to fasting on the Day of Atonement (see xxxiv. 18
note).

INTRODUCTION xlix
purposely suppressed because of its severity on Levi and
its giving the pre-eminence to Judah. Our author throughout reverses this relation, and everywhere sets Levi before
Judah.
Again, like the Chronicler he takes offence at the frequent mention of men being tempted or slain by God in
Genesis and Exodus, and after the example of the Chronicler
he represents the temptation of Abraham to offer Isaac
(Gen. xxii.) as due to Mastéma (Jub. xvii. 16), the attempt
on Moses’s life (Exod. iv. 24) as made by the same evil
agent ; likewise the hardening of the hearts of the Egyptians
(xlviii. 17-——Exod. xiv. 8), and the slaying of the first-born
(xlix. 2—Exod. xii. 29), he ascribes to the activities of
Mastéma and his angels.
Again, just as we must not suppose that the peculiar impress which the Chronicler gave to his historical materials
was the result of his individual activity but rather the outcome of a process, which in the course of successive generations had in many respects been transforming history into
legend, so we must be careful to recognise in our author’s
book only a more advanced stage of the process above
referred to. Possibly this process would not, in the natural
course of things, have thrust the completed law further
back than the time of Moses, but the exigencies of our
author’s time and the corroding influences of Hellenism
seemed to him to demand the recognition of the law as
superior to time, though revealed in time, and valid not
only unto eternity but from eternity. The materials which
suggested such a view were already at hand. If the earthly
tabernacle was only a copy of a heavenly original (Exod.
xxv. 9-40, xxvi. 30), it was but natural to infer that the
various elements of the law, which were established in the
course of tradition, were likewise copies of divine originals
engraven on the heavenly tables. Such a view seemed to
g

1 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
be called for by the necessities of the time. Hellenism had
for many a decade been undermining circumcision and the
observance of the Sabbath,’ which were the bulwarks of
Judaism, before these destructive tendencies came to a head ¥
in the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes (see note on xv. 14).
Our author is a late representative of the strong reactionary |
movement which asserted the everlasting validity and
sanctity of these elements of the law. Thus he teaches
that, though circumcision was first ordained in Abraham’s
time, it had been ordained in heaven from the beginning,
for the two highest orders of the angels had been created
circumcised, and that Israel was through circumcision sanctified together with them (xv. 27 note). Similarly the
Sabbath, though first ordained in Jacob's time (see 11. 23, 31
notes), was originally celebrated in heaven by God and by
the same two chief orders of angels. Israel was to unite
with these angels in observing it. It was to be a sign like
circumcision marking off Israel from all the other nations
of the earth (11. 19-21), and making them one with the two
chief orders of angels in heaven.
Jubilees—an Esoteric Tradition according to rts Author.
—-The Book of Jubilees claims as a whole to be a revelation of God to Moses, and thus to form a supplement to,
and an interpretation of, the Pentateuch, which it calls
“ the first law” (vi. 22). According to 4 Ezra xiv. 6 Moses
was to reveal the latter but not the former. This second
appears from our author to have embraced in a final
authenticated form various revelations which had been
made to the patriarchs, and constituted in their hands an
esoteric tradition. This secret tradition had been handed
down from father to son. Thus Enoch committed it to
Methuselah, and Methuselah to Lamech, and Lamech to
Noah (vii. 38, xxi. 10). Noah in turn entrusted all his
1 See 1 Mace. i. 39, 43.

INTRODUCTION li
books to his eldest son, Shem (x. 14). Between Shem and
Abram the knowledge of the sacred language was lost. But
the latter was taught this language by an angel, and he
thereupon studied “the books of his fathers” (xii. 27).
From these books of his forefathers embracing the writings
of Enoch and Noah, Abraham instructed Isaac (xxi. 10).
These books contained regulations regarding sacrifices as
well as other matters (vil. 38, xxi. 10; οἵ Test. Zeb. 3).
To Jacob also Abraham transmitted the traditions directly
(xxv. 7, xxxix. 6). Again, Jacob educated Joseph from
the writings of Abraham (xxxix. 6-7), and finally handed over
“all his books and the books of his fathers to Levi his son
that he might preserve them and renew them for his
children until this day” (xlv. 16). Thus this secret
tradition was to be preserved in the hands of the priesthood till the time should come for its publication. From
this last statement it would not be unreasonable to infer
that our author was a member of the priestly caste.
§ 15. Ossect oF JUBILEES—THE DEFENCE AND EXPOSITION
OF JUDAISM FROM THE PHARISAIC STANDPOINT OF THE
SECOND CENTURY B.C.
The object of our author is to defend Judaism against
the disintegrating effects of Hellenism.
Our author defends Judaism (a) by glorifying the law as
an eternal ordinance and representing the patriarchs as
models of piety; (Ὁ) by glorifying Israel and insisting on
its separation from the Gentiles; and (6) by denouncing the
Gentiles generally and particularly Israel’s national enemies.
(a) Our author glorifies the law—We have already
(p. 1) drawn attention to our author's glorification of circumcision and the Sabbath, the bulwarks of Judaism, as

lii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
heavenly ordinances, the sphere of which was so far extended as to embrace Israel on earth. The law, as a
whole, was to our author the realisation in time of what was
in a sense timeless and eternal. He is careful to set forth
the historical occasions when the various elements of the
law were first celebrated on earth, and herein he followed
a tendency already well established in post-exilic Judaism.
We shall now enumerate these briefly. The levitical law
of purification after childbirth was enaeted after the creation
of Adam and Eve (iil. 8-14). On the expulsion of Adam
from Eden the law of covering one’s shame was enacted
(iii. 830-32). This law does not belong to the Mishna or
later Jewish legislation. It was manifestly levelled against
the custom of baring the person in the Greek games, and is
not explicable of any other than the early Maccabean period. |
The daily incense-offering began after Adam’s expulsion
from Eden (iii. 27). The law relating to the jubilees was
first set forth by Enoch (iv. 18). The law of retribution in
kind—“ an eye for an eye”—was first carried out in the
case of Cain (iv. 31-32). Noah instituted the feast of
weeks, which had been observed in heaven since the creation
(vi. 17-22), also the feasts on the new moons (vi. 23-27);
he offered sacrifices, which anticipate later ritual (vi. 1-4,
vii. 3-5), and enunciated the laws regarding fruit-trees and
the land keeping Sabbath (vii. 2, 35-37), though he
ascribed these laws to Enoch (vii. 38). Abram enacted the
law of tithes (xiii. 25-29); celebrated the feast of firstfruits of the grain harvest on the 15th of the third month
(xv. 1-2) and instituted the feast of tabernacles (xvi. 20-31),
ordained peace-offerings and the regulations relating to the
use of salt, wood for sacrifices, washing before sacrifices,
and the duty of covering blood (xxi. 7-17), and forbade all
intermarrying with the Canaanites (xxii. 20, xxv. 5), and
adultery (xxxix. 6). Laban set forth the law—unknown to

INTRODUCTION liii
Jewish tradition—that the younger sister should not be given
in marriage before the elder (xxviii. 6). The penalty of death
was ordained for intermarriage with the heathen in connection with the destruction of Shechem (xxx. 7-17). Levi was
ordained priest by Jacob at the feast of tabernacles (xxx. 1823, xxxii. 2-3), and blessed by Isaac as such (xxxi. 13-17).
Jacob offered tithes through Levi at the feast of tabernacles ©
—also the second tithe (xxxii. 4-9), and re-enacted the law
of tithes (xxxii. 10-15 ; see xiii. 25-29); added the eighth
day to the feast of tabernacles as a permanent institution
(XXXL. 27-29). The law regarding incest was published in
connection with Reuben’s outrage (xxxili. 10-20). The day
of Atonement was instituted as a day of fasting and mourning
in commemoration of the day when the news of Joseph’s
death arrived (xxxiv. 18-19; cf.v.18). The law of incest
was re-enacted and extended in connection with Judah’s
sin with Tamar (xli. 25-26). Jacob celebrated the feast of
the first-fruits (xliv. 1, 4).
Glorification of the patriarchs ——This glorification of the
patriarchs was also characteristic of the Priests’ Code (see
Carpenter, Hexateuch, i. 123). They are transformed into
saints by our author. It is for this reason that Gen. xii.
11-13 (which tells of Abrams representing Sarai as his
sister) is omitted, and likewise Isaac’s lie about Rebecca, -
Gen. xxvi. 7. Abram, according to our author, knew the
true God from his youth (xi. 16, 17, xii. 1 sqq.). Jacob is
1 Tn the course of rewriting Genesis from the standpoint of the law
our author explains certain difficulties. According to Gen. ii, 17
Adam was to die on the day that he eat of the tree of knowledge.
This was fulfilled : for one day is a thousand years in the testimony of
the heavens, and Adam died at 930 (iv. 29-30). Esau gave up his birthright because he was suffering from the famine in the land (xxiv. 2
sqq.). This explanation our author arrives at by transposing Gen.
xxvi. 1 before Gen. xxv. 29 sqq. Isaac's failure to recognise Jacob
was due to a dispensation from heaven (xxvi. 18).

liv THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
represented as a model of filial affection and obedience ὦ
(xxv. 4 sqq., xxxv. 9-12). The passages relating to Jacob's
devices for increasing his flocks (Gen. xxx. 35-38) and
his fear of and measures for propitiating Esau (Gen. xxxiLXXXL.) are omitted. Indeed our author represents Jacob as
declaring that he was not afraid (xxvii. 4) and as ultimately
killing Esau (xxxviii. 2). The text in Gen. xliv. 15 is
changed in order to clear Joseph from the charge of divination, and the word “Esau” ? omitted in Gen. xxvil. 24 in
order to cover Jacob’s lie, and the words “his brother is
dead” (Gen. xliv. 20) are changed into “one went away
and was lost” (xliii. 11) in order to avoid making Joseph’s
brethren tell a deliberate lie.”
(b) Glorification of Israel and iis separation from the
Gentiles— Whereas the various nations of the Gentiles were
subject to angels, Israel was subject to God alone (xv. 32).
Not Japheth (Gen. ix. 27) but God was to dwell in the tents
of Shem (vii. 12). Israel, moreover, was God’s son ; and not
only did the nation stand in this relation to God, but also
1 Our author is careful to show that Abram did not leave Terah
(xii. 28-31) unless with the full approval of the latter. Jacob did not
leave Isaac till the latter approved and sent him off with a blessing
(xxvii. 9 sqq.). Esau stole the possessions of his father, but Jacob
supplied all his parents’ need four times a year (xxix. 15 sqq.).
2 To the above class we might add the long addition in chaps. viii.
and ix. regarding the division of the earth under Noah. According to
this division Palestine fell to the descendants of Shem, and thus our
writer justifies the subsequent annihilation of the Canaanites by
Israel. Again, Abraham's marriage with Keturah is defended on the
ground that Hagar was already dead (xix. 11). Reuben was not so
guilty because the law against which he offended had not yet been
revealed (xxxiii. 16). Levi's destruction of Shechem is declared to
be the ground of his election to the priesthood (xxx. 18); his deed was
righteous, for marriage with a Gentile is equivalent to idolatry (xxx.
10). As our author took up this standpoint he had to omit the league
that was formed between Jacob and Shechem and the reception of
circumcision by the latter (Gen. xxx.).

INTRODUCTION lv
its individual members (i. 24, 25, 28, xix. 29). Israel
was to receive circumcision as a sign that they were the
Lord’s (xv. 26), a privilege which they were to enjoy in
common with the two chief orders of angels (xv. 27). They
were also to unite with God and these two orders in the
observance of the Sabbath (ii. 18, 19, 21). Finally, the
destinies of the world were bound up with Israel. The
world was to be renewed in the creation of the true man
Jacob (xix. 24-25, 11. 22), and its final renewal to synchronize with the setting up of God's sanctuary on Zion and
the establishment of the Messianic kingdom (1. 29, iv. 26,
v. 12).
Israel to be separate from the Gentiles—lIsrael was not
in any way to imitate the conduct of the Gentiles (xv. 34,
xxii. 16); not to eat with them (xxii. 16), nor to form
leagues with them (xxiv. 25, 27), nor to intermarry with
them ; for he that gave his daughter to a Gentile, gave her
to Moloch (xxii. 20, xxv. 9, xxx. 7, 10, 11, 13).
(c) The Gentiles denounced generally and particularly
Israel's nationai enemies—With the immeasurable arrogance
of Judaism there went necessarily, hand in hand, an immeasurable hatred and contempt of the Gentiles. Tacitus,
more than two centuries later, called attention to this
characteristic of the Jews (“adversus omnes alios hostile
odium,” Hist. v. 5). Judaism regarded its own attitude to
the Gentiles as not only justifiable but also just, because it
was but a reflection of the divine. God had placed the
nations under the authority of spirits or angelic guardians
with the object of compassing their destruction (xv. 31).
Here, most probably, the ultimate resuit of an action is
declared to be the immediate object of it. Our author denounces particularly the national enemies of Israel, and
these, as we shall have more than once occasion to observe,
were the very nations with whom Israel was frequently

lvi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
at war in the second century B.C. First of all our authors
maledictions are fulminated against the Philistines both in
this world and in the next. The chief cities of this nation
were either subjected or destroyed by the Maccabean princes
(see xxiv. 28-32 notes). Next they are directed against
Edom. Thus Isaac is represented as declaring in the blessing of Esau, that, if Esau’s seed rebelled against Israel, they
should be “rooted out from under heaven” (xxvi. 34). A
war between Jacob and Esau is described in xxxvili, 1-14,
in which Edom was reduced to servitude “until this day.”
Edom was thoroughly subdued by John Hyrcanus and forced
to accept circumcision (xxxvilil. 8 note). Again, in ἃ deseription of a war between Jacob and seven kings of the Amorites,
the writer forecasts the Maccabean victories of later times
(xxxiv. 1-9). In an earlier passage he enumerates the chief
seats of the Amorites. These were associated with Maccabean victories, in which the Amorites were all but annihilated
(xxix. 10-11). Of the Amorites who were “wicked and
sinful” and had “wrought to the full all their sins, our
author grimly remarks “they have no longer length of life
on earth” (xxix. 11). This was practically the result of
the Maccabean wars.
§ 16. ANGELOLOGY AND DEMONOLOGY OF JUBILEES
Angelology.—The angelology of the author, like that of the
Ethiopic Enoch, is in an advanced stage. There are two
supreme classes, the angels of the presence and the angels
of sanctification (ii. 2, 18), and a very large order of inferior
angels who presided over natural phenomena (ii. 2 note). The
two first classes joined with Israel in observing the Sabbath
and circumcision (see p. 1) and other elements of the law,
as the feast of weeks (vi. 18). In addition to the above
there were the (seventy) angels who formed the angelic

INTRODUCTION lvii
patrons of the nations (xv. 31), and the angels who were
the guardians of individuals (xxxv. 17).
The duties assigned to the angels in connection with
mankind are numerous. They brought Adam into the
Garden of Eden and afterwards Eve (iii. 9, 12), and instructed
Adam in tillage in the Garden (Gi. 15). They report to
God all the sin committed on the earth (iv. 6). The order
called “Watchers” descended in the days of Jared to instruct
the children of men (iv. 15), and afterwards sinned with
the daughters of men (iv. 22). The angels showed to
Enoch all that was “on earth and in the heavens” during
294 years (iv. 21), and conducted him into the Garden of
Eden (iv. 23). They bound the fallen Watchers in the depths
of the earth (v. 6); took to Noah the animals that were to
enter the ark (v. 23). In the presence of an angel the
earth was divided among Noah's sons (vill. 10). Angels
bound nine-tenths of the demons in the place of condemnation (x. 9-11), and instructed Noah in the remedies against
all diseases (x. 12); they accompanied the Lord in visiting
the tower of Babel (x. 23). An angel bade Abram to go to
the land of promise (xil. 22), and instructed him in the
knowledge of Hebrew, and explained to him what he found
unintelligible (xii. 26,27). Angels announced to Abraham
the birth of Isaac and admonished Sarah for laughing (xvi.
1-4) ; saved Lot from Sodom (xvi. 7); blessed Abraham and
disclosed to him what had been decreed about him (xvi. 16).
An angel comforted Hagar (xvii. 11), and withheld Abraham’s
hand from sacrificing Isaac (xviii. 10). Angels tested Abrahams patience after the death of Sarah (xix. 3). The angels
will remember unto a thousand generations Levis righteous
judgment on Shechem (xxx. 20). An angel showed Jacob
in a vision of the night seven tablets which recorded all
that would befall him and his posterity, and bade him copy
them (xxxii. 21, 24-25). Angels disclosed to Judah that

[vii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
he was forgiven for his sin with Tamar (xli. 24). An angel
delivered Moses out of the hands of Mastéma (xlviii. 2-4),
Angels prevented the magicians from furnishing any remedies
to the Egyptians (xlviii. 10), and delivered the Israelites out
of the hands of the Egyptians (xlviii. 13), and bound Mastéma
from the 14th to the 18th and let him loose on the 19th,
when they led Israel forth (xlviii. 15-19). An angel made
known to Moses the Sabbaths, year-weeks, and jubilees, etc.
(1. 1-4).
DemonologyOv.er against the angelic kingdom stands
a well-organised demonic or satanic kingdom. This kingdom
is governed by “ the prince of the Mastéma,” 1 where Mastém4
is in point of derivation and meaning the equivalent of
Satan. His subjects comprise both satans and demons.
The demons are the spirits which went forth from the bodies —
of the slain children of the Watchers and the daughters of — 7
men (x. 5; Eth. En. xvi). According to Eth. En. liv. 6
the guilt of the Watchers originated in their becoming subject to Satan. By means of these demons the prince of the ~~
satans is able to compass his evils, which are the seduction ‘~~
and destruction of men. But these have no power over the —
righteous and over Israel (see note on x. 8).
§ 17. Tae DATE or JUBILEES
The date of our book can only be established by a series
of indirect evidence. But this evidence is so plentiful and
powerful, when apprehended, that no room is left for reasonable doubt.
1. First of all the book was written during the pontificate
1 In all the Ethiopic MSS the phrase is wrongly given as “prince
Mastéma” in xvii. 16, xlviii. 2, but ab rightly attest “prince of the
Mastéma” in xviii. 9, 12, xlviii. 9, 12, 15. i

INTRODUCTION lix
of the Maccabean family, and not earlier than 135 B.c.—
Thus in xxx. 1 Levi is called a “ priest of the Most High
God.” Now, the only Jewish high-priests who ever bore
this title were the Maccabean (see note on xxxii. 1). They
appear to have assumed it as reviving the order of Melchizedek when they displaced the Zadokite order of Aaron.
Jewish tradition ascribes the assumption of this title to
John Hyrcanus, but it seems to have been already assumed
by Simon ; cf. Ps. ex. 4: “Thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchizedek,” and 1 Macc. xiv. 41. If, however, we follow the Jewish tradition in this matter, we
must fix on 135 B.c., when Hyrcanus became high-priest,
as the earliest possible date for the composition of Jubilees.
Notwithstanding the objections of the Pharisees to this
_ title, it was used by the Maccabean princes down to the
time of Hyrcanus II. (Jos. Ant. xvi. 6. 2).
il. Next, it was written before 96 B.C., or some years earlier
in the reign of Hyrcanus.—Since our author is of the strictest
sect a Pharisee, and at the same time approves of the Maccabean pontificate, Jubilees cannot have been written later than
96 B.c., when the Pharisees and Alexander Jannaeus came
to open strife. Indeed, it is hard to conceive of its composition after the public breach between Hyrcanus and the
Pharisees which is described in Josephus (Ant. xiii. 10.
5-6), and in the Talmud (Kiddush. 66a) with some variations in names and details. After that event—unfortunately
the year is not given by any authority—Hyrcanus joined
the Sadducean party, and forbade, under penalties, the
observance of Pharisaic ordinances. Hence we may conclude that our book was written between 135 and the year
of Hyrcanus’ breach with the Pharisees.
The above conclusions are confirmed by a large mass of
evidence, which may be arranged under seven heads. Of
these the first four point definitely to the latter half of the

Ιχ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
second century B.C. as the date of the composition of
Jubilees; the remaining three give various grounds for
postulating a pre-Christian date at any rate.
i. Our book points to the period—already past—of stress
and persecution that preceded the recovery of national independence under the Maccabees—-Thus, it is impossible to
ascribe to any other period the causes which led to the
enactment or accentuation of the following laws:
(a) The Jews (“those who know . . . the law”) were
forbidden to expose their persons by a law “ prescribed on
the heavenly tables.” This law was devised to forbid Jews
taking part in the Greek games established by Jason the
high-priest (see iii. 30-31, notes). It was not unnaturally
derived from Gen. iii. 21, and was probably current for a
generation before embodied by our author in his book.
(Ὁ) The law of circumcision is affirmed under the
severest penalties (xv. 11-14, 26, 28). This law was
observed in the creation of the highest angels (xv. 27).
Yet Israel will, our author says, neglect it and “treat their
members like the Gentiles” (xv. 33-34). Antiochus forbade circumcision under the penalty of death (1 Mace.
1. 48, 60,61; 2 Macc. vi. 10). There may be a reference
also in our text to the Jews uncircumcising themselves, a
practice which they resorted to under Antiochus Epiphanes
in order to escape the scoffs of the heathen in the palaestra
(1 Macc. 1 15; Joseph. Ant. xii. 5. 1).
(c) The Sabbath is re-enacted and its profanation is to
be followed by the death penalty (ii 17-32, 1 6-13).
Non-observance of the Sabbath had been prevalent according to our author (xxiii. 19). Antiochus had forbidden the
Jews to keep it (1 Macc. 1. 39,45; 2 Mace. vi. 6). Our
text lays down the strictest sabbatical laws, such as were
not in force at any time save in the second century B.C.
or earlier. Thus war is absolutely forbidden (1. 12),

INTRODUCTION Ixi
and this prohibition was carried out, as we know, in
the early Maccabean wars (see 1. 12, note). But it was
soon found impossible in practice (see note just referred to),
and warfare on the Sabbath was subsequently permitted under
a variety of circumstances (Bab. Shabb. i. 8; Shabb. 19a;
Erub. 45a).
Again, a man is forbidden to cohabit with his wife
(l. 8). This was the practice of the early Chasids; but
this ascetic attitude to marriage is abandoned in the Mishna
(see 1. 8, note).
Again, riding on any beast is forbidden (1. 12), The
enforcement of the law during the Syro-Grecian suzerainty
is mentioned in the Talmud.
(α) Intermarriage with the heathen is absolutely prohibited by the penalty of death (xxx. 7-17). To give one’s
daughter to a Gentile was to give her to Moloch (xxx. 10,
note). This question had for a long time before our
author’s date been of vital importance to Israel. But at
no time could the danger from this source have been
greater than during 200-160 B.C., when the destructive
tendencies of Hellenism on Jewish character and religion
had come to a head.
ii. Our book presupposes as its historical background the
most flourishing period of the Maccabean hegemony.
(a) Only such a period could explain the assured spirit
of triumph which led our author to anticipate a world-wide
dominion and introduce that expectation into God’s promise
to Jacob in Gen. xxxv. 11-12: “I shall . . . multiply thee
exceedingly, and kings will come forth from thee, and they
will judge the sons of men wherever their foot has
trodden." And I shall give to thy seed all the earth
which is under heaven . . . and they will get possession of
the whole earth and inherit it for ever” (Jub. xxxii. 18-19).
1 See note on p. xx note.

Ixii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
(6) Only such a period could explain the pre-eminence
assigned by our book to Levi over Judah. We have
seen above (p. xlviii) that our author omitted Gen. xlix.
because of the absolute pre-eminence above his brethren
which is there assigned to Judah and the denunciation of
Levi. But he goes further. Thus he ascribes to Levis
descendants the supreme offices of high-priest and civil ruler
(XXX. 14-17), but in regard to Judah, only Judah himself
and one of his descendants (1.6. the Messiah) are mentioned
as holding civil authority (xxxi. 18-20). Our author seems
to imply that the royal descendants of David are no more,
and that till the Messiah comes the Maccabees would
hold the offices of high-priest and king. In later days
when the Maccabees became a name of reproach, they
were charged with usurping the throne of David (Pss. of
Solomon xvii. 5, 6, 8) and the high-priesthood (Assumpt,
Mos. vi. 1).
(c) The legend of the conquests of Esau’s sons by the
sons of Jacob in xxxvli.-xxxvii., points very clearly to the
complete conquest of Edom by Judah in the Maccabean
wars. In these wars the Edomites had sided with the
Syrians till they were made tributary by John Hyrcanus.
This subjection of Edom is referred to in xxxviii. 14, “ The
sons of Edom have not got quit of the yoke of servitude
. until this day” (i.e. the authors time). See notes
on xxxvil. 9-10, xxxvill. 4-9, where the fuller account
in the Jalkut refers to ‘Aqrabbim (1 Mace. v. 3), which
as well as Adora were memorable as scenes connected with
the Maccabean struggle.
This period also best explains the hatred which transformed Isaac's blessing of Esau into a curse (xxvi. 34).
(d) Again the Maccabean wars are adumbrated in the
struggle of Jacobs sons with the Amorite kings in
xxxiv. 1-9. This is clearer in the completer narrative in

INTRODUCTION aii
Test. Judah 3-7. The cities, Tappuah, Hazor, and
Bethoron, which are mentioned here, are associated with
notable victories and incidents in the Maccabean war.
See notes on xxxiv. 4. So also Bousset, Zeitschrift 7.
NTliche Wissensch. 1900, pp. 202-205. But the reference
to the Amorites is much more obvious in xxix. 10-11,
where our author enumerates their chief cities and then
grimly adds: “They have no longer length of life on the
earth” (xxix. 10-11). Their practical annihilation, which
is here referred to, was effected by Judas (see notes on
xxix, 10).
(6) Our text reflects accurately the intense hatred of
Judah towards the Philistines in the second cent. B.c. It
declares that they will be put to the sword by the Kittim,
4.6. the Macedonians under Alexander the Great, and
subsequently fall into the hands of “the righteous nation”
(xxiv. 28-29), and be exterminated, as they practically were
by the Maccabees (see xxiv. 28-32, notes).
iii, Our author gives in an apocalypse a history of the
Maccabean times (xxiii. 12-31), from the persecution of
Antiochus Epiphanes to the Messianic kingdom, the advent
of which is just at hand. In this section we have the rise
of the Chasids, who rebuke their elders for forsaking the law
and the covenant (xxiii. 16), the general corruption which
entails judgment on man and beast and leads to civil strife
(xxiii. 17-20), the warlike efforts of the Maccabeans to
reclaim the Hellenisers to Judaism (xxiii. 20-22), the
sufferings of the nation through the repeated attacks of
Syria (xxii. 23-25), Israels return to the law, and its
gradual ethical and physical transformation in the Messianic
kingdom and its triumph over its national foes (xxiii. 26-30).
Our author stands already on the threshold of this happy time.
It is, therefore, in the most prosperous days of the Maccabean
dynasty, i.6., in the days of Simon or John Hyrcanus.

Ixiv Ν THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
iv. Our book was used by the author of Eth. Enoch
xci.-civ., and must, therefore, have been written at latest at
the beginning of the first cent. B.c. (see § 19).
v. The textual affinities of our text connect it more
closely with the form of Hebrew text, which is presupposed
by the LXX (250 Bc.) and found in the Samaritan
Pentateuch, than with that which lay behind the Syriac and
later versions or Targums. From this evidence we may
conclude at all events to a pre-Christian date (see § 10).
vi. Our text preserves older forms of the Haggada and
Halacha than are found in the Talmud and later Jewish
literature. The details will be found on referring to the
notes on the various passages.
Haggada.—In i. 27 (see note) an angel reveals the law
to Moses: according to later Judaism Moses receives it
from God Himself. In ii. 2-3 angels are said to have been
created on the first day: in later Judaism on the second or
fifth. According to ii. 7 the Garden of Eden was created
on the third day: according to later Judaism before the
world. In xi. 2-6 the corruption of mankind is ascribed to
the time of Serug: in later Judaism to that of Enos. In
xii. 1-14 we have the primitive form of the saga so much
developed in later Judaism about Ur of the Chaldees. In
xix. 11 Abraham’s marriage to Keturah is justified on the
ground that Hagar was already dead, whereas later Judaism
identifies Hagar and Keturah. In xxx. 2-6 the praise
given to Levi and Simeon accords with Jewish views of the
first and second cent. B.c. Later Judaism on the whole
accepts the judgment pronounced on them in Genesis.
Again our author records honestly the marriages of Simeon,
Judah, and Joseph, to Gentile women, though such marriages
must have in his eyes been full of offence. But later
tτκAδehὡEς νςοaντ trς et g
Judaism felt the offence to be too grave for toleration, and
sought to establish the Hebrew descent of the women in

INTRODUCTION [xv
question (see xxxiv. 20, xl. 10 notes). In xxxvii.-xxxviii.
we have the oldest form of the legend of the war between
Jacob’s sons and the sons of Esau, and similarly in the case
of the war between Egypt and Canaan in xlvi. 6-11. Later
developments of these legends are found in rabbinic literature. Again, our text retains the original form of the
traditions in Genesis, where later Judaism explained them
away as offensive. Thus in iv. 15 the sons of God are
rightly taken to be angels: in xxxiii. 2 the story of Reuben
and Bilhah is accepted, but later Judaism manages to remove
all that is objectionable in it. See also notes on iv. 12,
ἈΠῸ 10.
Halacha.—tThe severe halacha regarding the sabbath in
1. 8, 12, were indubitably in force in the second cent. B.C.,
if not earlier, but were afterwards mitigated by the Mishna
and later Judaism. Again the strict halacha in xv. 14
regarding circumcision on the eighth day was a current,
probably the current, view in the second cent. B.c. and
earlier, since it has the support of the Samaritan text and
the LXX. This strict law was subsequently relaxed in the
Mishna. In xxxii. 15 the severe law of tithing found in
Lev. xxvii. 15 is enforced, but rabbinic tradition sought to
weaken the statement. As regards the halacha laid down
in ili. 31 regarding the duty of covering one’s shame, it is
highly probable that such a halacha did exist in the second
cent. B.C., when Judaism was protesting against the exposure
of the person in the Greek games. See also iii. 8-14 notes,
and xx. 4 note.
Finally, we might draw attention to the fact that the
Pharisaic regulation about pouring water on the altar (Jer.
Sukk. iv. 6; Sukk. 44a) at the feast of tabernacles appears
to have been unknown to him. We know that the attempt
of the Pharisees to enforce its adoption on Alexander
Jannaeus resulted in a massacre of the former.
6

Ixvi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
vii. The following facts postulate a pre-Christian date αα6a.e »a ee
for the composition of our book :—
(a) The calendar was in an unsettled state when our
author wrote. No strict Pharisee, such as our author, could
have advanced such a system as is laid down in vi. 28-33,
unless at a period when no uniform calendar system was
established. With it we may compare an allied system in
Eth. Enoch Ixxii.-lxxxii. There are good grounds for
believing that our author grounded his system on the
chronological statements regarding the flood in Genesis (see
notes on p. 56).
(Ὁ) The divine title “Most High God.” The use of this
title is frequent in our author. This frequency, as appears
in the note on xxxvi. 16, is characteristic of writings before
the Maccabean era.in the second cent. B.c. When once,
however, the Maccabeans had assumed the title “ priests of
the Most High God,” the divine title would naturally
remain popular amongst those who, like our author,
recognised the validity of the Maccabean pontificate. On
the other hand, we should expect a decline in its use to set
in with the rising unpopularity of the Maccabean dynasty.
This disuse, indeed, is not apparent in the oldest antiMaccabean work, Eth. Enoch xcl.-civ., where the hostility
to the Maccabeans is in an incipient stage. There the title
“Most High” occurs nine times. But in the Pss. of
Solomon and Eth. Enoch xxxvii.-lxx., where the hatred is
open and unconcealed, this title is not found in the former
and only twice in the latter. In the latter half of the first
cent. A.D. there was a revival in its use as its Maccabean
associations were forgotten.
(c) The phrase “feast of Pentecost,’ as a description of
the feast of weeks, seems to have been unknown to our
author (see note on vi. 17), though it was in use in the
first cent. B.C.

INTRODUCTION Ixvii
§ 18. THE JUBILEES AND YEARS USED BY OUR AUTHOR
Our author claims that his chronological system is
derived from the heavenly tables. From these tables it was
made known to Moses directly by the angel of the presence,
who assured Moses with regard to his disclosures on the
solar year of 364 days: “It is not of my own devising, for
the book (lies) written before me, and on the heavenly
tables the division of days is ordained” (vi. 35). For
the convenience of the reader I have reduced the jubilee
reckonings to years and placed them in the margin.
The Jubilees—The chronology is essentially heptadic.
Each jubilee consists of seven year-weeks, and each yearweek of seven years. It is probably on the ground of the
sacred character of the number seven, and possibly also for
the sake of symmetry, that our author makes his jubilee
consist of forty-nine years instead of fifty, which was the
usual reckoning among the Jews. R. Jehuda (Nedarim
61a—quoted by Beer), however, set down the jubilee at
forty-nine years; and in the Samaritan Chronicle (Journal
Asiatique, 1869, tom. xiv. No. 55, pp. 421-467) a system
closely analogous to that of our author is found. Here the
jubilee is reckoned at forty-nine and a fraction, which
varies unintelligibly in extent, if the text is correct. Thus
five jubilees= 246 years, forty jubilees=1968 years, but
sixty jubilees = 2951 years.
It is noteworthy also that, whereas our author applies
the jubilee reckoning from the creation to the date of
Israel’s entering into Palestine, the Talmudic treatise
Erachin 125-134 and the Samaritan Chronicle make the
jubilee to begin with the settlement of Israel in Palestine,
and while the former carries it down to the destruction of
the first temple, the latter carries it down to many centuries
after the Christian era.

Lxviii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
In the Assumption of Moses the jubilee is also used in
the chronological system of its author. Thus (i. 2) he
reckons 2500 years to have elapsed from the creation of
the world to the death of Moses, that is, fifty jubilees of
fifty years each. Again, in x. 12 it is stated that from the
death of Moses to the Messianic kingdom there will be
250 times (ie. year-weeks) that is thirty-five jubilees of
fifty years each. Thus from the creation to the Messianic
kingdom there would be eighty-five jubilees. Cf. Sanh. 9 70.
In one other work, the Seder Olam 23, 25, the jubilee
period is occasionally used in the history of Israel and
Judah contemporary with the reigns of Sennacherib and
Nebuchadnezzar.
The Years.—Our author seems to have used a civil year
and an ecclesiastical year, both of 364 days. The civil year
consisted of twelve months (iv. 17, v. 27, vi. 29-30 note)
of thirty days each and four intercalary days (vi. 23 note),
one at the beginning of each quarter. The ecclesiastical
year consisted of thirteen months of twenty-eight days each,
and in accordance with it were regulated the great festivals,
the Sabbaths, Passover, and Feast of Weeks (see notes on
vi. 29-30, 32). Furthermore, this impossible solar year of
364 days was undoubtedly put forward in Pharisaic circles
in the second cent. B.c., and its currency may date from a
much earlier period. See note on vi. 32.
§ 19. VALUE oF JUBILEES IN DETERMINING the DATES OF
THE VARIOUS SECTIONS OF THE ETHIOPIC ENOCH AND
THE Book oF NOAH.
In my edition of the Ethiopic Enoch in 1893 I was
the first to point out (pp. 25-29, 221-222, 263-264) that
chaps. i.-xxxvi., lxxxiii.-xc., and xci.-civ. were from different
authors. To the two former sections I assigned a date

INTRODUCTION Ixix
anterior to 161 B.c., and to the third a date subsequent to
95 Bc. We shall now find that the above critical results
are confirmed in the main by the evidence of our text.
Thus in my note on iv. 17-23 I have shown that our
author had Eth. Enoch vi.-xvi., xxiii.-xxxvi., lxxii.-xe. before
him. In confirmation of the conclusions in that note we
should observe also that v. 1, 2, vii. 21, 22, 23, 24 of our
text (see notes) presuppose vii. 1, 2, 5, ix. 1, 9 of the Eth.
Enoch (see also Index I.).
Eth. Enoch xei.-civ. later than Jubilees—Next as regards
xci.-civ. we shall prove that it was subsequent to Jubilees
and made use of that work. To begin with, these two
writings exhibit certain resemblances. In both there is a
temporary Messianic kingdom and an immortality of the
soul implied or taught. On the other hand, the tone of
Jubilees is optimistic and was written before the breach
between the Pharisees and the Maccabean rulers, whereas
Eth. Enoch xci.-civ. is pessimistic in tone and was written
after the breach had led to the persecution of the Pharisees.
We shall now adduce a variety of passages from both books
which will establish the dependent relation of this section
of the Eth. Enoch on Jubilees.
(a) From a comparison of vii. 29 (see note) and xxii. 22
of our text with Eth. Enoch ciii. 7, 8 it follows that the
latter is based on the former. In our text Sheol is not
yet associated with fire and burning; but this stage, which
combines the characteristics of Sheol and Gehenna, is
already attained in the latter work.
(Ὁ) In Jub. 1. 16 it is promised to Israel that “they will
be the head and not the tail. In Eth. Enoch ciii. 11 we
have: “they hoped to be the head and have become the tail.”
(c) In Jub. i. 29 a new heavens and a new earth were
promised. In the despondent Eth. Enoch xci. 16 only a
new heaven.

Ιχχ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
(4) According to Jub. xxxii. 18 Israel is to “judge all
the nations according to their desires.”* In Eth. Enoch
xcv. 3 righteous Israel is to “execute judgment on them
(the sinners) according to their desires,’ and in xevi. 1
is to “have lordship over them according to their
desires.”
(6) With Jub. xxiii. 31, “their spirits will have much
joy.” compare Eth. Enoch civ. 4, “ ye will have great joy as
the angels,” where both expressions are applied to the
spirits of the blessed after death. Also ciii. 4, « And your
spirits—the spirits of you who have died in righteousness
—will live and rejoice.”
(7) In Jub. xxii. 16 it is said with regard to the wicked
“become not their associate,” and in Eth. Enoch civ. 6, “ have
no companionship with them,” and in xci. 4, “associate not
with those of a double heart.” In xevii. 4, the wicked
are said to be the “ companions of sinners.”
(g) With Jub. xii. 2,“ What help and profit have we
from those idols,” cf. Eth. Enoch xcix. 7, “No help will be
found in them (7.e. idols).
(1) Eating blood is condemned in Jub. vii. 28, 29, etc.
ef. Eth. Enoch xeviii. 11.
(i) The law is spoken of as “the eternal law” Eth.
Enoch xcix. 2, “the law for all future generations” xciii. 6,
(cf. xcix. 14), as we might expect in a writer influenced by
Jubilees. Throughout all the older sections of Enoch the
law is not mentioned.
(k) The references to “the plant of righteousness” (Eth.
Enoch xciii. 10), or “ of righteous judgment ” (xciii. 5), or “ of
uprightness ” (xciii. 2), may be due in part to Jub. i. 16
“plant of uprightness,” or “a plant of righteousness” (xvi.
1 ΤῊ xxxii. 18 for “judge everywhere wherever the foot of the
sons of men have trodden,” read with Latin “judge the sons of men
wherever their foot has trodden.” Based partly on Deut. xi. 24.

INTRODUCTION Ixxi
26, xxi. 24). The phrase, however, occurs already in Eth.
Enoch x. 16.
(ἢ Eth. Enoch ci. 2: “when he . . . withholds the rain
and the dew from descending on the earth” (cf. ο. 12), is
found almost verbally in Jub. xii. 4, “who causes the rain
and the dew to descend on the earth (cf. xii. 18, xx. 9).
Eth. Enoch, i.-v. later than Jubilees—The evidence in
respect to the relative dates of this section and Jubilees is
not conclusive, but so far as it exists it implies the priority
of the latter.
Thus, in Eth. Enoch 111. the words “all the trees . .
shed all their leaves except fourteen trees,’ most probably
go back to Jub. xxi. 12-13 where fourteen evergreen trees
are enumerated which were to be used on the altar, cp. Test.
Levi 9.
Again, Eth. Enoch v. 9, “They will complete the
number of the days of their life, and their lives will grow
old in peace and the years of their joy will be many,”
seems to be an expansion of Jub. xxiii. 29, “All their
days they will complete and live in peace and in joy.”
Finally, Eth. Enoch i-v. appears to be later than the
Test. XII. Patriarchs, a sister work of Jubilees, but this
subject cannot be pursued further here. |
The Book of Noah—tThis book is referred to twice in
our text, 1.6. in x. 13, xxi. 10. Our author, moreover, has
taken over bodily two considerable sections from it and
incorporated them in vii. 20-39, x. 1-15. Thus the Book
of Noah was written before 135-105 Bc. But its composition goes back to a much earlier date. Chapters vi.-xi.
of the Ethiopic Enoch are clearly from the same source;
for they make no reference to Enoch but bring forward
Noah (x. 1), and treat of the sin of the angels that led to
the flood, and of their temporal and eternal punishment.
This section is compounded of the Semjaza and Azazel

Ixxii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
myths, and in its present composite form is already presupposed by Eth. Enoch Ixxxviii.-lxxxix. 1. Hence in its
present form it is earlier than 166 Bc. Chapters Ix,
Ixv.-lxix. 25, cvi.-cvii. of the same work are also derived
from the Book of Noah and probably xxxix. 1, 2", xli. 3-8,
xliii.-xliv., liv. 7-lv. 2, lix., but not in their present form.
There appears to be no adequate ground for assigning these
sections of that ancient work to a later date than those
above discussed.
The above facts throw some light on the strange vicissitudes to which even the traditional legends were subject.
Thus it would appear that the Noah saga is older than the
Enoch, and that the latter was built up in part on the
debris of the former. And just as the Noah saga made
way for the Enoch, so the Enoch saga in turn made way
for the Seth, as I have shown at some length in the notes
on pp. 33-36.
§ 20. Tue RELATION OF JUBILEES TO THE TESTAMENTS
OF THE XII. PATRIARCHS
From a comparison of the passages in our author and the
Testaments which treat of the same subjects, it is clear that
neither of the two works is dependent on the other, but that
both draw independently from the same sources. See notes
on Xxvill. 9, xxx. 2-6, 18, 25, xxx. 3-4, 13, 15, 16, xxxii.
1, 8, xxxili. 1, 2, 4, xxxiv. 1-9, xxxvii.-xxxviii., xli 8-14,
24-25, xlvi. 6-9.
I hope to treat this question exhaustively in my edition
of the Testaments.

INTRODUCTION [XX
§ 21. ΤῊΝ AvuTHOR—A PHARISEE WHO RECOGNISED THE
MACCABEAN PONTIFICATE AND WAS PROBABLY A PRIEST
From §§ 15, 17 it follows without further need of proof
that our author was a pharisee of the straitest sect. He was
an upholder of the everlasting validity of the law, he held
the strictest views on circumcision, the sabbath and on the
duty of shunning all intercourse with the Gentiles: he
believed in angels and demons § 16, and in a blessed
immortality. In § 14 we have shown that he was an
extreme representative of the midrashic tendency which
had been already at work for centuries.
In the next place our author was a supporter of the
Maccabean pontificate. He glorifies Levi’s successors as
high-priests and civil rulers (xxxi. 13-17), and applies to
them the title assumed by the Maccabean princes (xxxii. 1).
He was not, however, so thorough-going an admirer as the
authors of the Test. Levi 18, or Psalm cx. who expected the
Messiah to come forth from the Maccabean family (see
notes on xxxi. 18-19, xxxii. 1).
That our author was a priest might be reasonably
inferred from the exaltation of Levi over Judah (xxxi.-xxxil.)
and from the statement in xlv. 16, that the secret traditions,
which our author claims to publish, were kept in the hands
of Levi’s descendants.
§ 22. JUBILEES IN JEWISH, SAMARITAN, AND CHRISTIAN
NON-CANONICAL LITERATURE
In Jewish Literature.
In Jewish and Samaritan Literature-—Eth. Enoch i.-v.
(i), xci.-civ.; Wisdom (2), 4 Ezra, Chronicles of Jerahmeel,
Midrash Tadshe, Book of Jashar, Samaritan Chronicle.
On Eth. Enoch i.-v., xci.-civ. see pp. lxix-lxxi above.

Ixxiv THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Wisdom.—It is not possible to establish conclusively
that our book was used by the author of Wisdom. There
are, however, amid great differences, strong affinities between
them. Thus both teach a temporary Messianic kingdom
and a blessed immortality of the soul. In Jubilees
apparently for the first time God is called the Father of the
righteous individual Israelite (i. 24 note): in Wisdom this
view is frequently and emphatically taught (ii. 13, 18, v. 5,
xii. 7, 21). Again in Jubilees the law of retaliation
is enunciated in its most literal form (iv. 31, xlvii. 14,
notes), and the same phenomenon meets us in Wisdom,
x1. 16: δι’ ὧν τις ἁμαρτάνει, διὰ τούτων κολάζεται, Cf. also
xi. 7, xii. 23, xvi. 1, xviii. 4, 5. Finally either xlviii. 14
of our text or some authority of a like nature seems to have
been before the writer of Wisdom xviii. 5:
βουλευσαμένους αὐτοὺς τὰ τῶν ὁσίων ἀποκτεῖναι νήπια
Kal ΕἾ ἑ- νὸς ἐ> κτεθέ’νὔ τος τέ, κνου [καὶ4 σωθέν, τος]
εἰς ἔλεγχον τὸ αὐτῶν ἀφείλω πλῆθος [Téexvov],
καὶ ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἀπώλεσας ἐν ὕδατι σφοδρῷ.
In both passages the destruction of the Egyptians in
retaliation for the casting of the Hebrew children into the
river is dealt with, though this is obscured by the glosses καὶ
σωθέντος and τέκνων, which I have bracketed as additions
of an early scribe who misinterpreted the passage of Moses.
In Jub. xlviii. 14 it is said that 1000 Egyptians were destroyed on account of every Hebrew child that was cast into
the river. This sense we recover from the Greek on omitting
the gloss: “In retribution for even a single child that was
exposed Thou didst take away the multitude of them.” But
the passage is still unsatisfactory, for πλῆθος in the text
which = 279 was corrupt in the original source (? Jubilees) as
in Hosea viii. 12 for a1 = 10,000. Thus we have: “In
1 Observe independently the awkwardness of τέκνων after αὐτῶν.

INTRODUCTION Ixxv
retribution for even a single child that was exposed Thou didst
take away 10,000 of them,” ie. of those who had taken
counsel to destroy the Hebrew children. 10,000 may be
more accurate than the 1000 which stands in Jub. xvi. 14.
I have found the same corruption in Ethiopic MSS.
4 HEzra—There can be little doubt that our book is
referred to in 4 Ezra xiv. 4-6, where it is said of Moses:
Et misi eum et eduxit populum meum de Aegypto, et
adduxi eum super montem Sina et detinui eum apud me
diebus multis, Et enarravi ei mirabilia multa, et ostendi ei
temporum secreta et temporum finem, et praecepi ei dicens :
Haec in palam facies verba et haec abscondes. The haec
here refers to Jubilees (see i. 26 notes), which was handed
down in the tribe of Levi (x1v. 16) till its publication by
our author.
In 4 Ezra vi. 20 the words, libri aperientur ante faciem
firmamenti et omnes videbunt simul, refer to the books in
which the deeds of men are recorded. These books were
kept by Enoch according to our text iv. 23, x. 17.
In x. 46, the date in the words: factum est post annorum tria millia (Syr., Eth., Arab., but Lat. = annos tres)
aedificavit Salomon civitatem et obtulit oblationes, appears to
be based on that given in Jubilees. If with Joseph. (Ani.
vil. 3. 1.) we reckon 592 years from the Exodus to the
building of Solomon’s temple or 588 years with Sulpicius
Severus (Chron. i. 40, 4 sq.) and take, as our author, 2410
to be the year of the Exodus, then we arrive at 3002 or
2998 (see for these and other reckonings Hilgenfeld, Messias
Judeorum, Ὁ. 83). Again on Dp. 109 of the work just
mentioned Hilgenfeld gives good grounds for assuming that
in 4 Ezra xiv. 48 (Syr. Eth.,) the text originally contained
a computation in jubilees. See also Ronsch, Das Buch der
Jubilden, pp. 412-414.
Chronicles of Jerahmeel—This Hebrew work, which has

Ixxvi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
been translated by Gaster, contains a great deal of subjectmatter in common with our book. At times it reproduces
the actual words of our text. I have no doubt that our
text was used by some of the authors of this compilation.
See Index II. for references to the parallel passages.
Midrash Tadshe-—This Midrash was written about the
beginning of the eleventh cent. A.D. by Moses ha-Darshan,
but was based on an early work by Rabbi Pinchas ben Jair
who in turn drew his materials from our text (see Eppstein,
Revue des Ftude juives, 1890, xxi. 80-97; 1891, xxi. 125; Bacher, Die Agada der Tannaiten, ii. 499). By consulting Index 11. the reader will find the passages which
are common to this Midrash and our text.
The Book of Jashar.—This late Hebrew work contains
eCeE
much matter in common with our text, and there is every
probability that some of it is derived from it ultimately as
its source. See Index II. for a list of parallels. The
Hebrew text of this book which I have quoted occasionally,
is that which was published at Venice in 1629. Generally,
however, I have referred to the French translation of it
in Migne’s series.
The Samaritan Chronicle-——This book, to which we have
already drawn attention (see p. lxvii), belongs for the most
part to the twelfth cent. AD. It appears to contain a
deliberate polemic (see vi. 36 note) against the view of our
author that calculations should be made according to the
sun only. In keeping with the fact that our author gives
his calendar in connection with the flood (vi. 29-38), this
Chronicle says that the Samaritan system was known to
Noah in the Ark. For a remarkable point of agreement
between this Chronicle and our text see note v. 22. Also
it cannot be an accident that in the case of the antediluvian
patriarchs, their respective ages on the birth of their eldest
sons agree in both books in every instance except in that of

INTRODUCTION Ixxvii
Seth. Ronsch (Dp. 362) has tabulated the numbers as
follows:
Jub. Sam. Chron.
Adam on the birth of his eldest son was aged 130 130
Seth a i) y 130 60-66
Enoch iS EF i 90 90
Kenan = be 2k 70 70
Mahalalel Bf zs τ 65 66
Jared pF i) ἐς 62 61
Henoch x Σ Ἢ 65 65
Methuselah __,, ἣν 9 67 67
Lamech " i ‘4 53 53
Hence it is not strange that in some cases we are able
to determine missing dates in our text from this Chronicle
(see iv. 28 note). On the other hand these two works
hardly ever harmonise on the ages of the post-diluvian
patriarchs till Terah’s time, and the Chronicle, as we should
expect, omits Kainam which our text (viii. 1) along with
the LXX puts forward as the son of Arpachshad.
In Christian literature—The Christian literature in
which Jubilees is reproduced either by name or anonymously will be treated under the following heads:
1. Authors who cite Jubilees or the Little Genesis by name.
ii. Patristic and other writings which reproduce its text or matter
anonymously.
1. Authors who cite Jubilees or the Little Genesis by name :
DIDYMUS OF ALEXANDRIA (309 or 514 to 394 or 399 A.D.)
in epist. canonicas enarrationes, ad I. Joan. 111. 12 (Gallandi,
Biblioth. patr. vi. 300): Nam et in libro qui leptogenesis '
(MS leprogenesis) appellatur, ita legitur, quia Cain lapide
aut ligno percusserit Abel. See Jub. iv. 31.
EPIPHANIUS (ob. 404 A.D.), Haer. xxxix. 6: ὡς δὲ ἐν
1Cf. Fabricius, Cod. Pseud. V.T. i. 849-864, ii. 120-121 ; Rénsch,
Das Buch der Jubilien, 250-382.

Ixxviii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
τοῖς ᾿Ιωβηλαίοις εὑρίσκεται, τῇ Kal λεπτῇ Γενέσει Kadovμένῃ καὶ τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν γυναικῶν τοῦ τε Κάϊν καὶ τοῦ
ΣὴΘ ἡ βίβλος περιέχει". . . οἵ τε τούτου υἱοὶ συνήφθησαν
ὁ μὲν Κάϊν τῇ ἀδελφῇ τῇ μείζονι Σαυή, οὕτω καλουμένῃ, ὁ
δὲ Σὴθ... τῇ λεγομένῃ αὐτοῦ ἀδελφῇ ᾿Αζουρᾷ, See
Jub. iv. 9, 11 and the continuation of the quotation in my
note on iv. 10. For passages where Epiphanius has used
our text without acknowledgment see Index II.
JEROME (οὗ. 420).—See quotations in notes on x. 21,
xi. 11-13. For other quotations see Index II.
Decretum GelasiimtIn this decree (de libris recipiendis
et non recipiendis), the date of which is doubtful (see Zahn,
Gesch. des Kanons, τι. i. 259-267), our book is included
among the writings to be rejected: Liber de filiabus Adae,
hoc est Leptogenesis, apocryphus.
SEVERUS OF ANTIOCH (ob. 542).—In an exposition of Deut.
xxxiv. 6 this author has (see Nicephorus, Catena, i. 16721673) described the destinies that await the good and the
evil souls on their separation from the body, and various
incidents relating to the contest between Michael and Satan
for the soul of Moses. He adds that his statements are drawn
from our author: ταῦτα δὲ ἐν ἀποκρύφῳ βιβλίῳ λέγεται
κεῖσθαι λεπτοτέραν ἔχοντι τῆς Γενέσεως ἤτοι τῆς κτίσεως
τὴν ἀφήγησιν. On this question see above, p. xv note.
NICEPHORUS, Catena, i. 175.—(This catena, published
over 120 years ago, contains extracts from writers from :
the beginning of the Christian era to the seventh cent.)
Before the words quoted from this work in the note on
x. 21 we find the title of the source given as ἡ διαθήκη.
It is most probable that we should add here tod Μωύσέως
(see p. Xvi).
SYNCELLUS (flor. 800 A.D.), Chronographia (ed. Dindorf),
i. 5: ὡς ἐν λεπτῇ φέρεται Tevéces, ἣν καὶ Moicéws εἶναί
φασί τινες ἀποκάλυψιν. i. 7: ἐκ τῆς λεπτῆς Γενέσεως καὶ

INTRODUCTION Ixxix
τοῦ λεγομένου βίου ᾿Αδάμ. 1.13: ἐκ τῶν λεπτῶν Tevéσεως. i. 14: (see quotation in note on p. 28). i. 49 (see
quotation in note on x. 1). i 183: τὸν κατὰ μητέρα
πάππον τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ ἡ λεπτὴ Vévecis φησιν ὅτι ᾿Αβραὰμ
ἐκαλεῖτο, ἡ δὲ Σάρρα ἀδελφὴ ὁμοπατρία τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ
ὑπῆρχε. 1. 185 (see quotation in note on xii. 26). 1.192:
Μαστιφὰμ ὁ ἄρχων τῶν δαιμονίων, ds φησιν ἡ λεπτὴ
Γένεσις, προσελθὼν τῷ θεῷ εἶπεν, εἰ ἀγαπᾷ σε ᾿Αβραάμ,
θυσάτω σοι τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ (see our text, xvii. 16). 1. 208:
βιασθεὶς Ἰακὼβ ὑπὸ Ἰούδα ἐνέτεινε τόξον καὶ πλήξας κατὰ
τοῦ δεξιοῦ μαζοῦ τὸν Hoa κατέβαλε. τοῦ δὲ θανόντος
ἀνοίξαντες τὰς πύλας οἱ υἱοὶ Ἰακὼβ ἀνεῖλον τοὺς πλείστους.
ταῦτα ἐν λεπτῇ Ἱεν έσει φέρεται (see our text, Xxxviii. 1 sqq.).
For passages where Syncellus has used our text without
acknowledgment see Index II.
CEDRENUS (ed. Bekker), i. 6: ἀπὸ τῆς λεπτῆς Γενέσεως.
1.9: ὡς ἐν λεπτῇ φέρεται Tevéces, ἣν καὶ Μωσέως εἶναί
φασί τινες ἀποκάλυψιν. i. 16 (see quotation in note on
iv. 31-32). 1. 48: ἄγγελος δὲ κυρίου ἐδίδαξεν αὐτὸν τὴν
‘EBpaida γλῶσσαν, καθὼς αὐτὸς ὁ ἄγγελος τῷ Μωῦσῇ
εἶπεν, ὡς ἐπὶ τῇ λεπτῇ Γενέσει. i. 53: ἐν TH λεπτῇ
Γενέσει κεῖται, ὅτε Μαστιφὰτ ὁ ἄρχων τῶν δαιμονίων (and
so on as in Syncellus, i. 192, above), i. 85 (see quotation
in note on xlvil. 3). i. 87: νόμους δὲ πρῶτον Μωῦσῆς
γρά#φ ει τοῖጫς 3 Ἰουδαί͵ο7 ις. . . διδασκόμ/ ενος παρὰΝ τοῦm Sἀ ρχαγγέ,λ ου Γαβριὴ\λ τὰ\ περὶ \ τῆaς γενέ[4σ εως τοῦο ν κό/ σμου... Kal \
τὰς τῶν ἄστρων θέσεις καὶ τὰ στοιχεῖα... ὡς ἐν τῇ
λεπτῇ Γενέσει κεῖται. For some of the passages where
Cedrenus has used our text without acknowledgment see
Index II.
ZONARAS (1081-1118, ed. Pinder), i. 18: oiga μὲν οὖν
ἐν τῇ λεπτῇ Τενέσει γεγραμμένον ὡς ἐν TH πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ καὶ
αἱ οὐρανίαι δυνάμεις πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων ὑπέστησαν παρὰ τοῦ
τῶν ὅλων δημιουργοῦ. Of. our text, ii. 2.

Ιχχχ THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
GLYCAS (circa 1150, ed. Bekker), p. 198: οὐδὲ yap ὡς
πόδας κεκτημένου TO πρότερον καθὰ ᾿Ιωσηππός τέ φησι καὶ
ἡ λεγομένη λεπτὴ Γένεσις νῦν ἀποφαίνεται τὸν ἐπὶ τῇ
κοιλίᾳ περίπατον. See also p. 206. P. 392 (see quotation
in note on ili. 8-14). On p. 206 Glycas wrongly attributes
to Josephus what is found in Jub. xxxii. 2-3. For some
of the passages where Glycas has used our text without
acknowledgment see Index II.
ii. Patristic and other writings which reproduce the text or
matter of Jubilees anonymously :
HippoLtytus.—The Διαμερισμὸς τῆς γῆς which is assigned ~
to this writer is based on Jub. vili-ix. See Gutschmidt, q
Kleine Schriften, v. 239, 587-597, 613 sqq. (quoted by
Schiirer).
Ps.-CLEMENS Romanus, Recognitiones (eire. 200 A.D.).— i
This work contains many echoes of Jubilees, see Rénsch, op. —
cit. 322-325. ‘ |
ORIGEN (185-254) in Genesin in Eusebius’ Praep. Evang. ~
vi. 292 (Migne, xxi. 500). The passage which is quoted |
from Origen in the note on XXX. 21 seems to refer to that
passage. Another quotation will be found in the note on |
xlv. 14. The Προσευχὴ ᾿Ιωσήφ, from which this quotation —
is taken, is cited in the third place in the Synopsis —
of the Ps.-Athanasius and the Stichometry of Nicephorus, |
and in the fifth place of the catalogue in the Cod. ©
Coislinianus used by Montfaucon, and in each catalogue |
immediately after the Πατριάρχαι (cf. Rénsch, p. 332). |
According to Nicephorus it consisted of 1100 stichoi—the —
same number as the Testament of Moses, which was identi- |
fied by some writers with Jubilees. Both Origen (tom. v. q
in Johannen, p. 77) and Glycas (see Fabric. Cod. Pseud. V.T. Ὁ
i. 765, 768) state that it was current among the Hebrews.
Another fragment of Origen preserved in the Catena of
Nicephorus, i. 463, is quoted in the note on xl. 10.

INTRODUCTION Ixxxi
Dioporus OF ANTIOCH (οὗ. 392 ?),—See quotation in note
on x. 35.
ISIDORE PELUSIOTA of Alexandria, who lived in the fifth
cent., gives the following exposition on Deut. xxxiii. 9
(Nicephorus, Cat. i. 1660): ἐπειδὴ ἐπελύτησε τῇ πατρῴᾳ
εὐνῇ ὁ “PovBeip, διὰ τοῦτο οὔτε βασιλείας οὔτε ἱερωσύνης
ἠξιώθη, καίτοι πρωτότοκος ὦν. ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν Λευὶ τρίτος ὧν
οὐ μόνον διὰ τὸ ἐπαγγείλασθαι τὸν πατέρα δεκάτην ἀφιερώety’ κάτωθεν γὰρ ἀριθμούμενος δέκατος ἦν, ἄνωθεν δὲ εἰ
ἠριθμήθη, εἷς τῶν παιδισκῶν ηὑρίσκετο᾽ ἀλλὰ καὶ δι᾽
ὁσιότητα, καὶ τὸ συγγενικῶν αἱμάτων διὰ τὴν εἰς τὸ θεῖον
τιμὴν τὰς χεῖρας ἐμπλῆσαι, ἱερωσύνης ἠξιώθη. . .. ὁ δὲ
Ἰούδας τέταρτος ὦν, διὰ τὴν ἀδέκαστον κρίσιν, καὶ τὴν
ὀρθὴν ψῆφον, βασιλείας ἠξιώθη. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ πολλοὶ τὰ
οἰκεῖα κρύπτοντες πλημμελήματα ἑτέρους καταδικάζουσιν,
οὗτος δὲ ἑαυτοῦ μὲν κατεψηφίσατο, . . . διὰ τοῦτο εἰκότως
τῆς βασιλείας ἠξιοῦτο. ἱερῶντο γὰρ οἱ ἐκ Λευΐ, ἐβασίλευον
δὲ οἱ ἐξ Ἰούδα, οὐ κατὰ κατακλήρωσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀρετῆς γέρας
εἰληφότες. This exposition regarding Levi is based on Jub.
XXXL 2-3, and regarding Judah on xxxi. 18-20, xli.
23-28.
ISIDORE OF SEVILLE (ob. 636), Origines, xvi. 26. 10: In
principio Deus xxii opera fecit. Nam prima die vii opera
fecit, id est: materiam informem, angelos, lucem, coelos
superiores, terram, aquam atque aérem. Secunda die firmamentum solum. fTertia die quattuor: maria, semina,
sationes atque plantaria. Quarta die tria: solem et lunam
et stellas, Quinta die tria: pisces et reptilia aquarum et
volatilia. Sexta die quattuor: bestias, pecudes, reptilia
terrae et hominem. Et facta sunt omnia xxii genera in
diebus sex. Et xxii generationes sunt ab Adam usque ad
Jacob, ... et xxii libri Veteris Testamenti usque ad
Hester, et xxii literarum sunt elementa.
The above is clearly based on our text, although in its
Ji

Ixxxii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
enumeration of the works of the first day it deviates considerably (see Jub. ii. 2 sqq.). Observe that it confirms our
view of a lacuna after 11. 22.
Evutycuivus, Patriarch of Alexandria 933-939, Annales
translated from Arabic into Latin by Pococke, 1658 (also in
Migne, tom. 111, 909-1155).
Ρ. 15. Eva . . . peperit puerum et puellam: puerum |
appellavit Kain, puellam Azrun. Tum rursus . . . puerum
et puellam enixa, puero nomen imposuit Abel, puellae
Owain . . . Cumque provectiores facti essent pueri, dixit
Adam Evae: Ducat Kain Owain . . . Abel autem Azrun. —
be sanity. 1;'8).9,.11.
P. 16. Kain invidit fratri suo . . . ae, lapide caput
ejus feriens, ipsum interfecit. Cf. Jub. iv. 31.
P. 56. Natus et Sharna, cujus temporibus coluerunt |
homines idola, unoquoque quod 5101 alliberet colente.
Sharna is corrupt for Serug. Cf. Jub. xi. 4.
P. 64-65. Accepit ergo Abraham uxorem suam Saram, |
quae et ipsi ex patre soror erat. Cf. Jub. xii 9. For
other parallels see notes on pp. 35, 83.
SUIDAS, a Greek grammarian of the tenth or eleventh
cent. (Fabricius, 1. 336). καὶ τὴν τῶν ἀστέρων κίνησιν, ἐκ
τοῦ πατρὸς γὰρ ἐπαιδεύετο τὴν ἀστρονομίαν K.T.rA. Cf. δὰ}.
ΧΙ. 16. See also note on xii. 2. |
JOEL, Chronographia (ed. Bekker, 1836), extending to the
year 1206 AD. This writer, whom I have referred to
occasionally in my notes, is generally dependent on Syncellus,
Cedrenus or Glycas for any matter which he has in common
with our text. It is possible, as Rénsch (p. 367) urges,
that the phrase καὶ ἐξολοθρεύειν αὐτὸν ἀπειλοῦντος (Joel,
Ρ. 10 (cf. Jub. xxxvii. 23)) testifies to an independent
knowledge of Jubilees, as it is not found in those earlier
chronographers. |
LXX MS (thirteenth cent.), cited as no. 135 in Holmes |

INTRODUCTION Ixxxili
and Parsons’ edition, and as r in Lagarde’s Genesis Graece,
1868. The scholia in this MS attest many of the personal
names which are found in Jubilees. I have cited all of
these in their appropriate places in my Ethiopic Text of
Jubilees, and many of them in the notes to my translation.
See Index IT.
LAA MS zin Lagarde’s edition contains two readings
which come from our text. See notes on v. 31 and vi. 1.
GREGORIUS BARHEBRAEUS (1226-1286)—See note on
xi. 11-13.
§ 23. INFLUENCE OF JUBILEES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT
The points of connection between the gospels and our
author are very slight, except in the beliefs respecting
angels and demons—a subject to which we shall return
later. We shall now place the passages side by side where
the New Testament is dependent on our text, or presupposes
it, or presents a close parallel.
Mark iii, 22 (Matt. xii. 24)—6
Jub. x. 8.—‘“Chief of the
ἄρχων τῶν δαιμονίων. spirits”; xlviii. 9, 12, ‘ Prince
of the Mastéma.”
Luke xi. 49.—“ Therefore also 1. 12.—“And I shall send
said the wisdom of God: I witnesses unto them, that I may
will send unto them prophets and witness against them, but they
apostles, and some of them they will . . . slay the witnesses also
will kill and persecute. and persecute those who seek the
law.”
John xiv. 26—‘“The Holy XXX. 25.—‘I will bring all
Spirit . . . will bring to your things to thy remembrance.”
remembrance all things, etc.” Here God is to cause Jacob to
remember all that he had seen in
a vision.
Acts vii. 15-16.—‘‘ And he xlvi. 9.—‘* And the children
(Jacob) died, himself and our of Israel brought forth all the
fathers, and they were carried bones of the children of Jacob
over unto Shechem, and laid in save the bones of Joseph, and
the tomb that Abraham bought, they buried them in the field in
etc.” the double cave” (z.e. Machpelah).
This is the oldest source of the
tradition in Acts.

Ἰχχχὶν THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Acts vii. 23.—Moses when xlvii. 10-12.— Moses forty-two
“well nigh forty years old” smote years old!
the Egyptian.
Acts vii. 30.—Moses spent forty xlviii. 1.—Moses spent thirtyyears in Midian. eight years
Acts vii. 53.—“‘ Who received i. 27.—“ And He said to the
the law as it was ordained by angel of the presence: Write for
angels and kept it not.” Cf. Moses, ete.” 1.14: “They will
Gal. iii. 19. forget . . . thy law.” Our text
is the earliest authority for the
statement that the law was given
through angels.
Acts ix. 2.—‘‘ If he found any XX. 20.—“‘ Turn them back
that were of the way.” into the way.”
Rom. iv. 15.—‘ Where there XXX. 18 - 16. -- Anticipates
is no law, neither is there trans- this Pauline doctrine.
gression.”
2 Cor. v. 17.—“A new creation” v. 12,—‘‘ A new and righteous
(Gal. vi. 15). nature.”
2 Cor. vi. 18.—“I will be to i. 24.—“T shall be their Father
you a Father and ye shall be to and they will be My children.”
me sons and daughters.”
Gal. ii. 15.—‘ Sinners of the xxiii. 23.—“Sinners of the
Gentiles.” Gentiles” (cf. xxiii. 24).
Gal. iil, 17.— “A covenant xv. 4 sqq. contains the covenant
confirmed beforehand by God, made in 1979 A.M. with Abraham
the law which came 430 years on his circumcision. The law was
later, etc.” Does the confirma- given in 2410. Hence 2410 “--
tion here spoken of mean the 1979=431. Isaac was born in
birth of Isaac? In that case 430 1980, or exactly 430 years before
years exactly elapse between this the legislation on Sinai according
confirmation of the covenant and to Jubilees.
the law according to Jubilees.
Gal. v. 12.—“*I would that Contrast xv. 27, aceording to
they which unsettle you (ae. which the angels were created
Judaisers) would cut off the circumcised.
member” (azroxoovra).
1 Jubilees gives here the oldest dates on this subject. The
Midrash Tanchuma on Exod. ii. 6, which was many centuries later,
gives a tradition practically the same as that in Acts. ‘‘ Moses was in
the palace of Pharaoh twenty years, but some say forty years, and
forty years in Midian and forty years in the wilderness.” Observe
that our author makes Moses stay twenty-one years with his own
people and twenty-one years at Pharaoh’s court.
2 The righteous individual is called “a son of God” first in
Jubilees, so far as 1 am aware. See note on i. 24.

INTRODUCTION Ixxxv
2 Thess. ii. 3.—*“ Son of perdi- x. 3.— Sons of perdition,”
tion.”
1 Tim. 1. 4.—‘“Fables and The Pauline phrases form a
endless genealogies.” iv. 7: “old just description of a large portion
wives’ fables.” Titus iil. 9: of Jubilees. The ‘old wives’
“Genealogies and strifes and fables” may be an allusion to the
fightings about the law.” large role played by women in
it.
James i. 13.—“Let no man The author of Jubilees enforces
say when he is tempted, I am the same view by representing
tempted of God, for God tempteth Mastéma as suggesting the temptano man.” tion of Abraham to sacrifice Isaac
(xvii. 16), as hardening the hearts
of the Egyptians (xlviii. 12, 17),
ete.
James ii. 23.—“ Abraham be- xiv. 6.—“ And he believed on
lieved God and it was counted to the Lord and it was counted to him
him for righteousness and he was for righteousness” (Gen. xv. 6).
called the friend of God.” xix. 9: “He was found faithful
and was recorded on the heavenly
tables as the friend of God.”
2 Peter ii. 5.— “Noah, a vii, 20-39 contains Noahs
preacher of righteousness.” sermon.
2 Peter iii. 13.—“ New heavens i, 29.—“ The heavens and the
and a new earth.” earth shall be renewed, etc.”
2 Peter iii. 8.—%“One day is iv. 30 contains the oldest
with the Lord as ἃ thousand dogmatic statement of this fact.
years.”
Rev. i. 6.—‘“‘A kingdom, xvi. 18.—“A kingdom and
priests.” v. 10: “A kingdom priests.” Our text alone gives
and priests.” this form of Exod. xix. 6 antecedently to Revelation.
Rev. iv. 5 (xi. 19, xvi. 18; οἵ. ii, 2.—“ Angels of the voices
viii. 5)“ Lightnings and voices and of the thunder and of the
and thunderings.” lightnings.”
Angelology—We shall confine our attention here to
notable parallels between our author and the New Testament.
Besides the angels of the presence and the angels of sanctification there are the angels who are set over natural
phenomena (ii. 2). These angels are inferior to the
former. They do not observe the Sabbath as the higher
orders; for they are necessarily always engaged in
their duties (ii. 18). It is the higher orders that are

Ixxxvi THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
generally referred to in the New Testament; but the angels
over natural phenomena are referred to in Revelation:
angels of the winds in vii. 1, 2, the angel of fire in xiv. 18,
the angel of the waters in xvi. 5 (cf. Jub. 11. 2). Again,
the guardian angels of individuals, which the New Testament
refers to in Matt. xviii. 10 (Acts xii. 15), are mentioned, for
the first time, in Jubilees xxxv. 17. On the angelology of
our author see § 16.
Demonology.—The demonology of our author reappears
for the most part in the New Testament:
(a) The angels which kept not their first estate Jude 6;
2 Peter i. 4, are the angelic watchers who, though sent
down to instruct mankind (Jub. iv. 15), fell from lusting
after the daughters of men. Their fall and punishment are
recorded in Jub. iv. 22, v. 1-9.
(b) The demons are the spirits which went forth from
the souls of the giants who were the children of the fallen
angels, Jub. v. 7, 9. These demons attacked men and
ruled over them (x. 3, 6). Their purpose is to corrupt and
lead astray and destroy the wicked (x. 8). They are
subject to the prince of the Mastema (x. 9), or Satan.
Men sacrifice to them as gods (xxii. 17). They are to |
pursue their work of moral ruin till the judgment of ©
Mastéma (x. 8) or the setting up of the Messianic kingdom,
when Satan will be no longer able to injure mankind
(xxiii. 29). |
So in the New Testament, the demons are disembodied
spirits (Matt. xu. 43-45; Luke xi. 24-26). Their chief is ©
Satan (Mark iii. 22). They are treated as divinities of the
heathen (1 Cor. x. 20). They are not to be punished till —
the final judgment (Matt. viii. 29). On the advent of the
Millennium Satan will be bound (Rev. xx. 2-3).
1 See note on x. 8.

INTRODUCTION Ixxxvil
ὃ 24. Views ΟΡ THE AUTHOR ON THE MESSIAH, THE
MESSIANIC KINGDOM, THE PRIESTHOOD OF MELCHIZEDEK, THE Law, CIRCUMCISION AND THE SABBATH, THE
FUTURE LIFE, THE JEWISH CALENDAR
The Messiah—Although our author is an upholder of
the Maccabean dynasty he still clings like the writer of Eth.
Enoch lxxxii.-xe. to the hope of a Messiah sprung from
Judah. He makes, however, only one reference to this
Messiah, and no role of any importance is assigned to him
(see XXX. 18 note). The Messianic expectation showed no
vigorous life throughout this century till it was identified
with the Maccabean family. If we are right in regarding
the Messianic kingdom as of temporary duration, this is the
first instance in which the Messiah is associated with a
temporary Messianic kingdom.
The Messianic Kingdom.—tIn the notes on 1. 29, xxiii.
30 I have dealt at some length with the character of this
kingdom. We have there seen that it was to be brought
about gradually by the progressive spiritual development of
man and a corresponding transformation of nature. Its
members were to attain to the full hmit of 1000 years in
happiness and peace. During its continuance the powers
of evil were to be restrained (xxiii. 29). The last judgment was apparently to take place at its close (see note on
xxiii. 30). On the probable derivation of this view from
Mazdeism see note on i. 29.
The writer of Jubilees, we can hardly doubt, thought
that the era of the Messianic kingdom had already set in.
Such an expectation was often cherished in the prosperous days
of the Maccabees. Thus it was entertained by the writer of
Eth. Enoch 1xxxiii.-xe. in the days of Judas before 161 8.6.
Whether Jonathan was looked upon as the divine agent for

Ixxxviii THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
introducing the kingdom we cannot say, but as to Simon
being regarded in this light there is no doubt. Indeed his
contemporaries came to regard him as the Messiah himself,
as we see from Psalm ex., or the noble Messianic hymn in
Test. Levi 18. The tame effusion in 1 Macc. xiv. 8-15 is
a relic of such literature, which was emasculated by its
Sadducean editor. Simon was succeeded by John Hyrcanus
in 135 B.c., and this great prince seemed to his countrymen
to realise the expectations of the past; for according to a
contemporary writer (Test. Levi 8) he embraced in his own
person the triple office of prophet, priest, and civil ruler
(see note on XXX. 15), while, according to the Test. Reuben —
6, he was to “die on behalf of Israel in wars seen and |
unseen.” In both these passages he seems to be accorded
the Messianic office, but not so in our author as we have
seen above. Hyrcanus is only to introduce the Messianic
kingdom, over which the Messiah sprung from Judah is to
rule. ᾿
Priesthood of Melchizedek.—That there was originally an
account of Melchizedek in our text we have shown in the ~
note xiii. 25, and that the Maccabean high-priests deliber- i
ately adopted the title applied to him in Gen. xiv., we have
pointed out in the note on xxxii. 1. It would be interesting
to inquire how far the writer of Hebrews was indebted to —
the history of the great Maccabean king-priests for the idea —
of the Melchizedekian priesthood, of which he has made so —
fruitful a use in chap. vii. as applied to our Lord. |
The Law.—On our author's conception of the law as the ©
ideal and eternal realised under time relations see pp. li sqq.
1 The belief that the Messianic era had set in appears to have
arisen again under Alexander, 78-69 B.C. «« Under Simon ben Shetach
(and Queen Salome) rain fell on the eve of the Sabbath, so that the
corns of wheat were as large as kidneys, etc.” (Taanith 23a, quoted by
Schiirer, Gesch. jud. Volkes,? i. 290).

INTRODUCTION Ixxxix
Circumcision and the Sabbath—On our author's exalted
conceptions of these two bulwarks of Judaism, see p. 1.
The Future Life—In our text all hope of a resurrection
of the body is abandoned. The souls of the righteous will
enjoy a blessed immortality after death (xxiii. 31). This
is the earliest attested instance of this expectation in the
last two centuries B.c. It is next found in Eth. Enoch
XC1.-Civ.
The Jewish Calendar—For our authors peculiar views
see ὃ 18 and the notes on vi. 29-30, 32, xv. 1.


ABBREVIATIONS AND BRACKETS USED IN
THIS EDITION
a, b, ο, d denote the Ethiopic MSS on which our text is
based.
Mass. = Massoretic text.
Sam. = Samaritan version, and Hebrew text in Samaritan
characters when both agree.
Syr. = the Syriac version of the Old Testament.
Vulg. = Vulgate.
Onk. = Targum of Onkelos.
Ps.-Jon. = Targum of Pseudo-Jonathan.
Jub. = Book of Jubilees.
( ) Words or letters so enclosed are supplied by the
editor from some source mentioned in the notes.
[ ] Words so enclosed are interpolated.
t +t Words so enclosed are corrupt.
XCl


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Moses receives the tables of the law and wstruction on past and
Suture history which he is to imsertbe in a book, 1-4.
Apostasy of Israel, 5-9. Captivity of Israel and Judah,
10-13. Return of Judah and rebuilding of temple,
15-18. Moses’ prayer for Israel, 19-21. Gods
promise to redeem and dwell with them, 22-25, 28.
Moses bidden to write down the future history of the
world (the Book of Jubilees 7), 26. And an angel to
write down the law, 27. This angel takes the heavenly
chronological tables to dictate therefrom to Moses, 29.
Tuis is the history of the division of the days of the law
and of the testimony, of the events of the years, of their
(year) weeks, of their jubilees throughout all the years of
the world, as the Lord spake to Moses on Mount Sinai
PROLOGUE. This short introduction Throughout all the years of the world.
gives an admirable account of the These words are difficult; for they
contents of this book. It is at once a imply that it was the author’s intention
history and a chronological system to write a history from the Creation
dominated by the sacred number seven. till the establishment of the Messianic
The history extends from the Creation Kingdom or Theocracy. See i. 26
to the legislation on Sinai, and thus note.
embraces Genesis and part of Exodus. The Lord NHAC: (a). a
But the writer does not merely reproduce the portions of these books which reads ስምስ “God.” bo omit,
serve his purpose; he rewrites from
ክግዚስብሔጨሔር (which generally =
the standpoint of the strictest Judaism.
κύριος, but often θεός) is generally
See Introduction, §§ 15, 21.
rendered “ Lord” in my translation, but
According to their sevenfold division
occasionally as ‘‘God” when external
Ἢ9 or “ according to their year-weeks”
). evidence so requires.

2 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
when he went up to receive the tables of the law and
of the commandment, according to the voice of Gop as he
said unto him, “Go up to the top of the Mount.”
I. And it came to pass in the first year of the exodus
2450 ANNO
MUNDI. of the children of Israel out of Egypt, in the third month,
on the sixteenth day of the month, that Gop spake to
Moses, saying: “Come up to Me on the Mount, and I will
give thee two tables of stone of the law and of the commandment, which I have written, that thou mayst teach them.”
2. And Moses went up into the mount of Gop, and the
glory of the Lord abode on Mount Sinai, and a cloud overshadowed it six days. 3. And He called to Moses on the
seventh day out of the midst of the cloud, and the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a flaming fire on
the top of the mount. 4. And Moses was on the Mount —
forty days and forty nights, and Gop taught him the earlier
and the later history of the division of all the days of the
Tables. cd read “tables of stone.” Laban bound themselves by mutual
Of the law, etc. See note oni. 1. vows (xxix. 7). |
Go up, etc. Exod. xxiv. 12. We shall see later (vi, 17-18 notes) ©
I. 1. In the third month, on the six- that the feast of weeks was first ob.
teenth day of the month. It will be served on earth in connection with the —
observed that our author supplies a covenant of Noah, and was according
date to the defective text of Exod. xix. 1 to our author designed to celebrate the
“In the third month after the children institution of that covenant, It 15
of Israel were gone forth . . . the same important to recognise this fact, since
day came they.” Ps.-Jon. inserts “on later Judaism held that the feast of
the first day of the month” (xn ἼΠ2). weeks celebrated the legislation on
It will be observed that on the same Sinai (see notes on vi. 17).
date on which Moses went up to receive Come up to Me, etc. Exod. xxiv. 12. 7
the Law, the sixteenth of the third Two tables. The “two” is not in Exod,
month, God appears to Jacob on his way xxiv. 12, but is drawn from xxxi. 18.
down into Egypt (xliv. 5). Of the law and of the commandOn the other hand, we must carefully ment, Exod. xxiv. 12, on which the
distinguish this date and the events text is based, has ‘‘ And the law and the
connected with it from the fifteenth commandment.” But compare Exod.
of the third month and the events con- xxxii. 15, xxxiv. 29; Deut. ix. 11.
nected withit. Onthe fifteenth Abraham 2-49, Based on Exod. xxiv. 15-18.
celebrated the feast of the first-fruits 3. Flaming. A change of one yowe
of the harvest (xv. 1, xliv. 4); Isaac would give “devouring” as in Exod
was born (xvi. 13) (so also in Seder xxiv. 17. Cf. xxxvi. 10.
Olam) ; Abraham died (xxii. 1) ; Judah 4. God taught him the earlier and
was born (xxviii. 15); and Jacob and the later history. Cf. i. 26. Cf,

CHAPTER I. 1-9 5
law and of the testimony. 5. And He said: “Incline thine
heart to every word which I shall speak to thee on this
mount, and write them in a book in order that their generations may see how I have not forsaken them for all the
evil which they have wrought in transgressing the covenant
which I establish between Me and thee for their generations
this day on Mount Sinai. 6. And thus it will come to pass
when all these things come upon them, that they will
recognise that I am more righteous than they in all their
judgments and in all their actions, and they will recognise
that I have been truly with them. 7. And do thou write
for thyself all these words which I declare unto thee this
day, for I know their rebellion and their stiff neck, before
I bring them into the land of which I sware to their fathers,
to Abraham and to Isaac and to Jacob, saying: “ Unto your
seed will I give a land flowing with milk and honey. 8.
And they will eat and be satisfied, and they will turn to
strange gods, to (gods) which cannot deliver them from
aught of their tribulation: and this witness shall be heard
for a witness against them. 9. For they will forget all My
commandments, (even) all that I command them, and they
will walk after the Gentiles, and after their uncleanness,
Mesilla 19 b “The Holy One, blessed be 7. Write for thyself all these words.
He, showed to Moses all the minutiae See note on i. 27.
of the law ... and all that the I know their rebellion and their stiff
Sopherim would renew in later times.” neck. Deut. xxxi. 27.
Also Shem. rabba 40 (W iinsche, p. 282): The land of which I sware to their
“God brought the book of Adam and JSathers, ete. Deut. xxx. 20, Exod.
showed him (Moses) therein all the xxxiii. 1.
generations which should arise from Unto your seed . .. a land flowing
the beginning of Creation till the day with milk and honey. Exod. xxxiii. 1,
of the resurrection.” Beer compares 3; Deut. xxxi. 20.
Menachoth 296 and Wajikra rabba 26. 8. And they will eat . . . to strange
5. Write them, etc. Cf. Exod, xxxiv. gods. Deut. xxxi. 20.
27. See note on i. 27. This witness shall be heard (cd:
How I have not forsaken them for all “witness” ab) for a witness against
the evil. Cf. Ezra ix. 9 ‘‘ Yet in our them. Cf. Deut. xxxi. 20; 2 Kings xvii.
bondage God hath not forsaken us.” 15 “The testimonies which he testified
Transgressing = sthétd emended from against them.” Cf, Deut. xxxi. 19, 26.
"ashét6 of bcd. Cf. vi. 37, 38. 9. Forget all My commandments, etc.
6. And thus it will come to pass . . . Ezra ix. 10, 11.
upon them. Deut. xxx, 1. Walkafter the Gentiles. 2 Kings xvii. 2.

4 THE BOOK ΟΕ JUBILEES
and after their shame, and will serve their gods, and these
will prove unto them an offence and a tribulation and an
affliction and a snare. 10. And many will perish and they
will be taken captive, and will fall into the hands of the
enemy, because they have forsaken My ordinances and My
commandments, and the festivals of My covenant, and My
sabbaths, and My holy place which I have hallowed for
Myself in their midst, and My tabernacle, and My sanctuary,
which I have hallowed for Myself in the midst of the land,
that I should set My name upon it, and that it should dwell
(there). 11. And they will make to themselves high places
and groves and graven images, and they will worship, each
his own (graven image), so as to go astray, and they will
sacrifice their children to demons, and to all the works of
the error of their hearts. 12. And I shall send witnesses
unto them, that I may witness against them, but they will
not hear, and will slay the witnesses also, and they will
persecute those who seek the law, and they will abrogate and
change everything so as to work evil before My eyes. 13.
And I shall hide My face from them, and I shall deliver them
Serve their gods, and these will prove Sacrifice their children to demons.
unto them an offence... and a snare. 2 Chron. xxviii. 3, xxxiii. 6; Ezek.
Exod. xxiii, 33; Deut. vii. 16; Jos. xx. 81. Cf. Deut, xxx 1: fie
xxiii. 13. Enech xcix. 7. See notes on xxii. 17.
10-13. These verses depict the two 12. 7 shall send witnesses unto them,
great catastrophies which befell Israel that I may witness against them, but
(10) and Judah (11-13). they will not hear. 2 Chron. xxiv. 19
10. Partial destruction and captivity “He sent prophets to them. . . and
of Israel. The northern tribes had they testified against them; but they
forsaken the Law and the Festivals would not give ear.” Cf. 2 Chron.
observed by Judah: also the temple xxxvi. 15, 16; Jer. xxv. 4. Cf. Matt.
in Jerusalem. Cf. for diction Deut. xxiii. 84 ; Luke xi. 49.
xxviii. 63, 41; Lev. xxvi. 14, 15, etc. Will slay the witnesses. Neh. ix. 26
And My tabernacle,. . . in the midst “Blew thy prophets which testified —
of theland. Τί these words belong to the against them.”
text, the author must have believed in the Change: read jewélétii (a) inE thiopic
existence of the Tabernacle in Jerusalem text and jewéténi (bcd) in the notes,
during the divided monarchies. To work evil before My eyes. 2 Kings :
11-13. Idolatries and wickedness of ΧΕΙ, τ,
Judah. Their captivity. 13. Hide My face. Cf. xxi) DDN (i
11. Make to themselves high places i. 15, ti
and groves. Cf. Ezek. xx. 28; Deliver them into the hand of the i
Chron. xxxiii. 3. Gentiles, etc. 2 Kings xxi. 14.

CHAPTER I. 10-17 5
into the hand of the Gentiles for captivity, and for a prey,
and for devouring, and I shall remove them from the midst
of the land, and I shall scatter them amongst the Gentiles.
14. And they will forget all My law and all My commandments and all My judgments, and will go astray as to
new moons, and sabbaths, and festivals, and jubilees, and
ordinances. 15. And after this they will turn to Me from
amongst the Gentiles with all their heart and with all their
soul and with all their strength, and I shall gather them from
amongst all the Gentiles, and they will seek Me, so that
I shall be found of them, when they seek Me with all
their heart and with all their soul. 16. And I shall
disclose to them abounding peace with righteousness, and I
shall -fremove them the plant of uprightnesst, with all My
heart and with all My soul, and they will be for a blessing
and not for a curse, and they will be the head and not the
tail. 17. And I shall build My sanctuary in their midst,
and I shall dwell with them, and I shall be their God and
For a prey=lahabl emended from ness” from the outset. The original of the
lahebl. words and of those that follow appears to
14. Judah will forget the service of be Jer. xxxii. 41 “1 will plant them in
God in captivity. Cf. Deut. iv. 28, this land assuredly with all my heart
xxviii. 36, 64. and with all my soul.” These words
15-17. Repentance of Judah, their are used in the very same connection
return from the captivity and the as those in the text. It is not imerection of the temple. probable, therefore, that the words ‘‘in
15. They will turn to Me... with this land”’ have been lost after the verb.
all their soul. Cf. Deut. iv. 30, 29. Next ‘And I will remove them = kai
7 shall gather them from amongst all μεταθήσω αὐτούς =,ny'on\ This last
the Gentiles. Jer. xxix. 14. may be corrupt for ΠΡ). Thus we
They will seek me, so that I shall be should have ‘‘ And I will plant them
found of them, when they seek me with the plant of uprightness in the land.
all their heart. Jer. xxix. 13-142, This reverses the judgment in verse 13
When they seek (bcd). a reads “and ‘J will remove them from the midst
when they seek.” of the land.”
16. And 7 shail disclose (bd). ac They will be for a blessing and not for
read «« 1 will disclose.” a curse. Zech. viii. 13.
+Remove them the plant of upright- They will be the head and not the
ness. Ihave obelized these words as tail. Deut. xxviii. 13.
corrupt. Littmann’s rendering, ‘sie 17. The second Temple. J shall
umandern zu einer Pllanze der Gerechtig- build . . . and I shall dwell with them.
keit,” is hardly possible linguistically. Exod. xxv. 8. J will dwell with them
Moreover, it is against the use of this and I will be their (cd, ab om. “ their”)
phrase. Cf, Eth. Enoch x. 16, xciii. 2, God. Exod. xxix. 45.
5,10. Israel was “the plant of upright- And I shall be their God and they

6 e THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
they will be My people in truth and righteousness. 18. And
I shall not forsake them nor fail them; for I am the Lord
their God. 19. And Moses fell on his face and prayed
and said, “O Lord my God, do not forsake Thy people and
Thy inheritance, so that they should wander in the error of
their hearts, and do not deliver them into the hands of their
enemies, the Gentiles, lest they should rule over them and
cause them to sin against Thee. 20. Let Thy mercy, O
Lord, be lifted up upon Thy people, and create in them an
upright spirit, and let not the spirit of Beliar rule over them
to accuse them before Thee, and to ensnare them from all
the paths of righteousness, so that they may perish from
before Thy face. 21. But they are Thy people and Thy
inheritance, which Thou hast delivered with Thy great power
from the hands of the Egyptians: create in them a clean
heart and a holy spirit, and let them not be ensnared in
their sins from henceforth until eternity.” 22. And the
Lord said unto Moses: “I know their contrariness and their
thoughts and their stiffneckedness, and they will not be
obedient till they confess their own sin and the sin of their
fathers. 23. And after this they will turn to Me in all
uprightness and with all (their) heart and with all (their)
soul, and I shall circumcise the foreskin of their heart and
the foreskin of the heart of their seed, and I shall create in ~
them a holy spirit, and I shall cleanse them so that they
ἣ
1]
ti
will be My people. Lev. xxvi. 12; A holy spirit. Cf. i. 28. See note |
Jer. xxiv. 7, xxx. 22; Ezek. xiv. 11. on xxv. 14. U
18. Deut. xxxi. 6. 22. J know their contrariness...and
19. Do wot forsake . . . Thy inherit- their stiffneckedness. Deut. xxx, 97.
ance, . . and do not deliver them into Confess their own sin and the sin, etc. —
the hands . . lest they should rule over Lev. xxvi. 40; Neh. ix. 2.
them. Cf. 9 Kings xxi, 14; Deut. 23. Turn to Me . . . with all (their)
“a
ix. 26°: (Ps. cvi. 41. heart and with all (their) soul. 2 Chron,
Their enemies, the Gentiles (ac). bd vi. 38.
omit “their enemies.” Circumeise the foreskin of their heart.
20. ‘Greate’. : |; spur. Ps, 11. 10. Deut. x. 16, xxx. 6.
See next ver. A holy spirit. Cf. i, 21.
Beliar. See note on xv. 33. 1 shall cleanse them so that they shall —
21. They are Thy people . . . from the not turn away from Me from that day
hands of the Egyptians. Deut. ix. 26,29. unto eternity. These words imply that

CHAPTER I. 18-26 .
shall not turn away from Me from that day unto eternity.
24. And their souls will cleave to Me and to all My commandments, and they will fulfil My commandments, and I
shall be their Father and they will be My children. 25.
And they will all be called children of the living God, and
every angel and every spirit will know, yea, they will know
that these are My children, and that I am their Father in
uprightness and righteousness, and that I love them. 26.
And do thou write down for thyself all these words which I
declare unto thee on this mountain, the first and the last,
which shall come to pass in all the divisions of the days in
the law and in the testimony and in the weeks and the
jubilees unto eternity, until I descend and dwell with them
Israel shall never again be driven from dictation of the angel (vi. 1). It constitheir own land. tutes, so to say, the book of the second
24. 1 shall be their Father and they law. The Pentateuch, on the other hand,
will be My children (or «sons °). These is ‘the book of the first law” (vi. 22),
words are used in 2 Sam. vii. 14 in which was written by the angel himreference to Solomon ; elsewhere in the self (i. 27). The latter is referred to
OT only in reference to the nation or again in xxx. 12, 21,1.6. In 4 Ezra
sections of it. God is the Father of xiv. 6 Moses is bidden to reveal the one,
Israel, Deut. xxxii. 6; Is. Lai, 16; ὦ.6., the Pentateuch, and conceal the
Jer. xxxi. 9; or of the righteous in other, the apocalyptic tradition. Haec
Israel, even of the righteous individual, in palam facies verba et haec abscondes.
_ Wisdom ii. 16. See also i. 25, 28, xix. In Exod. xxxiv. 27 ‘Moses is bidden
29 of our text. Israel is God’s son: to write down certain commands, but
Exod. iv. 22, 23; Deut. xiv. 1; Is. the decalogue is engraved on the tables
xliii. 6; Wisdom xviii. 13; Jud. ix. of stone by God Himself: Exod. xxxiv.
- 4; or the righteous in Israel are God’s 1, 28 ; Deut. x. 2, 4.
children, even the individuals, Wis- All these words, the first and the last,
dom i. 13, 18, v. 5, xii. 7, 21. For which shall come to pass... until
Talmudic references see Sayings of the eternity. Cf. 4 Ezra xiv. 4,5: Et adduxi
Fathers (ed. Taylor) iii. 22; Β. Bathra eum super montem Sina et detinui eum
10a, Kiddushin 36a, Berachoth 3a. apud Me diebus multis, Et enarravi
In 2 Cor. vi. 18 St. Paul takes directly ei mirabilia multa, et ostendi ei temthese words of 2 Sam. vii. 14 and porum secreta et temporum finem.
applies them to all the Christians. In Ontil I descend and dwell. ..throughthe text they embrace all Israelites. out eternity. Here as in the Prologue
Israelites are God’s children according the implication is that the author
to our author by virtue of their physical intended to write a history of the world
descent from Jacob. Cf. i. 28. from the Creation to the setting up of
25. Children (or “‘sons’’) of the living the Theocracy. (Cf. Prologue; also
God. Hos. i. 10. i. 27, 29.) In a certain sense he has
26. And do thou write down for thy- done so; for references occur to events
self (bc), ad read “And I will write as late as the early Maccabean times
down for thee.” These words appear when the author lived. He was of
to refer to the present work (as Singer opinion that the Messianic Kingdom
p. 15 has recognised), z.¢., Jubilees (cf. would be introduced through the labours
i. 7). Moses is to write it down at the of the Maccabees. For God’s dwelling

8 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
throughout eternity.” 27. And He said to the angel of the
presence: “ Write for Moses from the beginning of creation
till My sanctuary has been built among them for all eternity.
28. And the Lord will appear to the eyes of all, and all
Seee0 e ee r
will know that I am the God of Israel and the Father of all
with man see Eth. Enoch xxv. 3, εὐεργεσίας χωρῆσαι δυνάμεθα, ἃς ἂν
Ixxvil. 1. This was the perfected αὐτὸς προτείνῃ δι’ ἑαυτοῦ μὴ χρώμενος
theocracy which was looked for by ὑπερέταις ἄλλοις.) In the first cent.
those who did not expect a personal A.D. we have frequent references to
Messiah, such as the authors of Eth. this view. Thus in Jos. Ant. xv. 5. 3:
Enoch i.-xxxvi., xci.-civ. ;A ss. Moses x. ἡμῶν δὲ τὰ κάλλιστα τῶν δογμάτων
Our author, however, looked for a καὶ τὰ ὁσιώτατα τῶν ἐν τοῖς νόμοις δι᾽
Messiah sprung from Judah. See ἀγγέλων παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ μαθόντων.
note on xxxi. 18. From Judaism this verse passed over
27. And He said to the angel of the into the NT. Cf. Gal. iii, 19 νόμος
presence. See note oni, 29. Our text .. . διαταγεὶς δι᾿ ἀγγέλων. See also
forms apparently the earliest testimony Acts vii. 53; Heb. ii. 2. The Samarito the idea that the law was given tans also believed in the ministry of
through the ministry of angels. In angels in connection with the law. Cf.
Deut. xxxiii, 2 we have the first Gesenius, Carm. Sam. p. 15 and de
mention of angels in connection with Sacy, Not. et extraits de la Bibl. xii.
the giving of the law, but according to 16. Later Judaism rejected this view
that passage they merely accompany probably on polemical grounds, and
Yahwe. But the way was prepared always represented Moses as receiving
for the conception in Jubilees by the the law directly from God. In Sabbath
development which angelology under- 88 ὁ and Shem. rabba 28 Moses is reprewent in exilic and post-exilic times. sented as ascending into heaven toreceive
Thus from the exile onwards God the law.
communicated no longer directly with Write for Moses, etc. If the interHis servants. In the case of Ezekiel, pretation of this verse adopted on i. 26
who was in the period of transition, the (note) is right, the angel is to write
revelation is sometimes made directly out the Pentateuch for Moses. There
to him (xliv. 2), sometimes indirectly is, however, this difficulty attaching to
through an angel (xl. 5). By the time this interpretation, that the history emof Zechariah the development is com- braced in the Pentateuch is to extend
plete. This prophet receives all his from the Creation to the time when
communications through angels. Natur- Gods ‘‘sanctuary has been built among
ally when we come down to the century them for all eternity.” It is possible
in which our book was written, this that this means nothing more than
usage is universal. Daniel receives even such broad and apparently prophetic
the interpretation of his visions through descriptions of the apostasies of Israel
angels (vii. 16 sqq. ; viii. 15 sqq. etc.), and Judah under their kings, of the
and in a later work of the same century, Exile and the Return from captivity,
Test. XII. Patriarch., Dan. 6, the angel and of the restored theocracy as are
that intercedes for Israel is called “the found in Deut. xxviii.-xxx. It must
mediator between God and man” be confessed that this explanation does
(μεσίτης Θεοῦ Kal ἀνθρώπων). See also not appear adequate.
Levi 5. I am not aware of any other 28. This verse spoils the sequence
references to this conception till the ‘of thought. We should probably read
beginning of the Christian era. Thus it after ver. 25.
Philo, De Somnis, i. 22 (p. 642 M.), Appear to the eyes of all. Cf. Rev.
commenting on Exod. xix. 19, writes its
that we cannot receive God’s benefits God of Israel. Exod. xxiv. 10, ete.
save through the agency of His Father of ail the children of Jacob.
ministers. (οὐδ᾽ ὑπερβαλλούσας. . . Cf. Jer. xxxi. 1. See note on i. 24.

CHAPTER I. 27-29 9
the children of Jacob, and King on Mount Zion for all
eternity. And Zion and Jerusalem will be holy.” 29.
And the angel of the presence who went before the camp of
Israel took the tables of the divisions of the years—from
the time of the creation—of the law and of the testimony
of the weeks, of the jubilees, according to the individual
years, according to all the number of the jubilees [according
to the individual years], from the day of the [new] creation
+when} the heavens and the earth shall be renewed and
King on Mount Zion. Cf. Is. xxiv. = “till.” In any case we should read
23. On Mount Zion see i. 29. “From the day of the creation, till the
29. Angel of the presence. The heavens.”
phrase is derived from 15. lxiii. 9 and The heavens and the earth shall be
found also in Test. XII. Patriarch., Jud. renewed. Weshould observe carefully
25. This angel is probably Michael the nature of the ‘‘renewal” as it
who was the guardian angel of Israel : appears in Jubilees. This renewal of
ef. Dan. x. 13, 21, xii. 1; Eth. Enoch the creation is not to be instantaneous
xx. 5; Slav. Enoch xxii. 6; Weber, and catastrophic, but gradual, and its
Τα, Theologie,? 168. Four of these progress to be conditioned ethically by
angels are mentioned in Eth. Enoch the conduct of Israel. This will be
xl. (where see note on ver. 2 in my seen most clearly in iv. 26 and xxiii.
edition). 26-28 (see notes in loc.), Similar exWho went before the camp of Israel. pressions are found in Is. Ixv. 17,
Exod. xiv. 19. Ixvi. 22. In my Eschatology (pp. 122123) I took these passages in Isaiah
Took the tables of the divisions of the
to denote a sudden and actual re-creayears. From these the angel dictates
tion of the world, and as I conceived
to Moses.
they were at variance with their
Diwisions of the years—from the time
contexts, I marked them as later interof the creation (c)—of the law (a), etc.
polations. I now see that they should
This seems to be the best way of taking
be taken to express a gradual transthe text. My text which follows p=
formation of the world, moral and
“divisions of the years from the creaphysical, and, that thus the argument
tion of the law.”
against their originality falls to the
According to the individual years. ground. This view was probably
Bracketed as an interpolation. 6 omits. adopted from Mazdeism, which accordFrom the day of the [new] creation ing to Sdderblom (La Vie Future
tuhent the heavens and the earth shall @aprés le Mazdéisme, p. 254, Paris,
be renewed. The text is clearly corrupt. 1901) teaches that le monde deviendra
It should furnish us with the termmus peu ἃ peu meilleur et se spiritualisera
ὦ quo and the terminus ad quem. The pendant les derniers temps. ‘his fifthhistory of the “tables of the divisions century view of the writer in Isaiah
obviously embraces everything from the lxv.-lxvi. is reproduced by our author.
creation to the Messianic Kingdom, Heaven and earth and the physical
Hence ‘‘new” (haddas) is to be re- nature of man will be transformed part
garded as an Ethiopic interpolation In pass with man’s spiritual transformaαὖ it follows the word ‘‘ creation” but tion (xxiii, 26-28, 1, 5). According to
in the inferior MSS (cd) it precedes Jubilees xxiii. 27 the righteous should
them. Next in place of “twhent” attain to a thousand years, and accord-
(ama) we should expect «« till,” We can ing to Is. lxv. 20 the sinner should be
recover ‘‘till” by taking ws (= “when’’) prematurely cut off when a hundred
in the Greek to be a corruption of éws years old. So far as I am aware, Is.

THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
IO
all their creation according to the powers of the heaven,
and according to all the creation of the earth, until the
sanctuary of the Lord shall be made in Jerusalem on
Mount Zion, and all the luminaries be renewed for healing
and for peace and for blessing for all the elect of Israel, and
that thus it may be from that day and unto all the days
of the earth,
The history of the twenty-two distinct acts of creation on the
siz days, 1-16. Institution of the Sabbath : its observance
by the highest angels, with whom Israel is afterwards to
(Cf. Gen. i-ii. 3.)
be associated, 17-32.
11. And the angel of the presence spake to Moses
according to the word of the Lord, saying: Write the comIxv.-lxvi., Jubilees and Test. Levi 18 are era of renewal begins with Jacob.
the only Jewish writings which attest Finally when God’s sanctuary and the
this view. But from 100 B.c. Jewish, Messianic Kingdom are established
and subsequently Christian, writers took amongst men, the final renewal will
these expressions in a literal and cata- set in, “when the heavens and the
strophic sense. Thus it is an actual earth shall be renewed” and “all the
re-creation of heaven and earth that is luminaries shall be renewed” i. 29,
foretold in Eth. Enoch xci. 16, Ixxii. 1, iv. 26, v. 12. According to the
xlv. 4; Apoc. Bar. xxxii. 6, lvii. 2; present text of v. 11, 12, the renewal
4 Ezra vii. 75; 2 Peter iii. 138; Rev. of creation after the Deluge is taught ;
pork. but the text is corrupt. In its original
But again to return to our author form it could only refer to the renewal
we find the following novelty. He of the world on the setting up of the
teaches that God is to renew His Messianic Kingdom. There are thus
creation at three distinct periods. The three great eras in this book: the
first was on the occasion of the Deluge creation of the world, its renewal on
when He destroyed all that was the creation of the true man, Jacob,
corrupt (v. 11) and “made for all His and its final renewal on the establishworks a new and righteous nature” ment of the sanctuary. On the
(v. 12). The next renewal was to symbolic values of man and the temple
synchronise with the foundation of the see Eppstein, “Le Livre des Jubilés,”
Jewish community in Jacob, which Revue des Htudes juives, 1890, xxi.
should “serve to lay the foundations 92-97.
of the heaven and to strengthen the Sanctuary of the Lord be made in
earth and to renew all the luminaries Jerusalem, i.e, the Sanctuary in the
which are in the firmament” (xix. 25). Messianic Kingdom. Cf. i. 27, iv.
The idea that a renewal of the world 26. |
began with Jacob follows also from Renewed for healing. Cf. Rev. xxii. —
ii. 22 sqq. According to this passage 2 “for the healing of the nations.” Ἱ
the twenty-two generations that precede II. 1. Angel of the presence, See 1.
Jacob correspond to the twenty-two 29 (note),
works of God at the Creation. A new Write the complete history of the —

CHAPTER II. 1-2 TE
plete history of the creation, how in six days the Lord God
finished all His works and all that He created, and kept
Sabbath on the seventh day and hallowed it for all ages,
and appointed it as a sign for all His works. 2. For on
creation. We find the following day: one only, the firmament. The
Scholion in a MS Coislin. (Fabric. ii. third day, four. He reunited the
120) on Exod. xxiv. 15, which refers waters in one place, brought up the
to Jubilees: ἐνταῦθα ἠξιώθη ὁ μέγας sweet waters from the earth, likewise
Μοωῦσῆς μετὰ τὰς τεσσαράκοντα ἡμέρας herbs and trees. The fourth day, three:
ἰδεῖν BU ὀπτασιῶν, πῶς ἐν ταῖς ἕξ ἡμέραις the sun, moon and stars. The fifth
ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν, day, three: the moving creatures, birds
καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτοῖς κατὰ τάξιν μιᾶς and sea monsters. The sixth day,
ἑκάστης ἡμέρας καὶ συγγράψαι παρε- four: beasts, and cattle, and creeping
κελεύσθη. things, and man. This corresponds
2-3. These verses record the creations to the twenty-two letters of the alphabet
of the first day. They were seven in and to the twenty-two generations from
all: heaven, earth, the waters, spirits, Adam to Jacob (4335) Sky nme 23 Ἴ29
the abysses, darkness, light. We have apy’ Nay Jy OND nነግነግn).
happily the Greek version preserved in In the enumeration of the works of
Epiphanius, περὶ Mérpwv καὶ Σταθμῶν, the first day, we observe a divergency
xxii. (see my critical edition of the between Jubilees (Epiphanius and
Ethiopic text pp. 5, 7): τῇ μὲν yap Syncellus) and the Midrash Tadshe.
πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ἐποίησε τοὺς οὐρανοὺς τοὺς Where Jubilees gives ‘‘ angels,” the
ἀνωτέρους (καὶ) τὴν γῆν (καὶ) τὰ ὕδατα Midrash gives ‘‘the wind.” The
+. . τὰ πνεύματα τὰ λειτουργοῦντα ἐν- ground for this divergency is manifest.
ὦπιον αὐτοῦ ἅτινά ἐστι τάδε ἄγγελοι If we examine Gen. i. 1-4 we find that
πρὸ προσώπου, καὶ ἄγγελοι τῆς δόξης, the list of seven works is drawn from
καὶ ἄγγελοι πνευμάτων πνεόντων, (καὶ) these verses, and that the idea of the
ἄγγελοι νεφελῶν καὶ γνόφων (καὶ) creation of the angels is simply a
χιόνος καὶ χαλάζης καὶ πάγου, (καὶ) development of the word “spirit”
ἄγγελοι φωνῶν (καὶ) βροντῶν καὶ ἀστρα- (nv), ver. 2, But the Midrash Tadshe
πῶν, (καὶ) ἄγγελοι ψύχους καὶ καύματος shuns such an inference from Gen. i.
καὶ χειμῶνος καὶ φθινοπώρου καὶ ἔαρος 2; for Talmudic Judaism held that
καὶ θέρους, καὶ πάντων τῶν πνευμάτων the angels were created on the second
τῶν κτισμάτων αὐτοῦ τῶν ἐν οὐρανοῖς καὶ or the fifth day. In Ber. rabba 1
ἐν τῇ γῇ; (καὶ) τὰς ἀβύσσους τήν τε according to R. Jochanan it was on
ὑποκάτω τῆς γῆς καὶ τοῦ χάους, (καὶ) τὸ the second day (Ps. exv. 4, 5—see also
σκότος, ἑσπέραν καὶ νύκτα, (καὶ) τὸ φῶς, Jerusalem Targum on Gen. i. 26;
ἡμέραν τε καὶ ὄρθρον. An imperfect Chron. of Jerahmeel i. 8), but according
enumeration of the seven works is given to R. Chanina on the fifth (see Gen.
by Syncellus (ed. Dindorf, p. 4), in i. 20; Is. vi. 6), and KR. Luliani bar
which τὰς ἀβύσσους is omitted and Tabrai says that they were not created
νυχθήμερον is substituted. Cedrenus on the first day lest it should be said
(ed. Bekker, p. 7) reproduces Syncellus’ that they had assisted God in the
summary, but with an additional cor- creation. Philo, Leg. Allegor. i. 2,
‘ruption. He omits ra ὕδατα and represents the creation of the angels as
reckons νυχθήμερον as two works, accomplished on the seventh day.
_ The Hebrew work, Midrash Tadshe vi. Philo (de Mundi opijicio, i.77 ) mentions
lines 11-16 (ed. by Eppstein, Beitrige seven objects of creation: οὐρανός, γῆ,
zur jiidischen Alterthumskunde, 1887) σκότος, τὸ ἄβυσσον, ὕδωρ, πνεῦμα, φῶς.
is clearly based on our text. It runs: Here the πνεῦμα retains for the most
“Twenty-two kinds of creatures were part its original force ; for in the next
created in the universe in seven days: chapter Philo says with regard to it:
the first day seven; heaven, earth, TO μὲν γὰρ ὠνόμασε θεοῦ, διότι ζωτικώwaters, darkness, the wind (mn), the τατον τὸ πνεῦμα. On the other hand
abysses (mminann), light. The second he idealises all seven objects of creation

12 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
the first day He created the heavens which are above and
the earth and the waters and all the spirits which serve
before Him—the angels of the presence, and the angels of
of the first day. It is not the actual Hermas, Vis. iii, 4 : Οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ ἅγιοι
but the ideal world that is created on ἄγγελοι τοῦ Θεοῦ οἱ πρῶτοι κτισθέντες,
the first day. Thus he speaks of the οἷς παρέδωκεν ὁ κύριος πᾶσαν τὴν κτίσιν
heaven as ἀσώματος, the earth asadparos, αὐτοῦ, αὔξειν καὶ οἰκοδομεῖν καὶ δεthe darkness and the abyss as the σπόζειν τῆς κτίσεως πάσης. ἱ
ἀέρος ἰδέα καὶ κενοῦ, wind and water All the spirits which serve before
as having an ἀσώματος οὐσία, and the him. This phrase is found in the
light as being νοητός. Notwithstanding, Jerusalem Targum 1. on Gen. i. 26,
it is obvious that Philo was acquainted but there the creation of the angels is
with a cosmology such as is given in assigned to the second day. See further
our text. The Chronicles of Jerahmeel, details in preceding note. With our text
i. 8, enumerate eight works. It compare Rufinus, Hxpositio in Symbol.
duplicates ‘the spirit”? by taking it p. 21 (Fabricius, Cod. Pseud. V.T. ii.
first as “the spirit of God” and next 57), Ut breviter aliqua etiam de secreas ‘fair.’ Its dependence on the tionibus perstringamus, ab initio Deus
Jubilee tradition is possible. cum fecisset mundum, praefecit οἱ et
According to later Judaism, Ber. praeposuit quasdam virtutum caelestiwm.
rabba 3 sqq. four things were created on potestates, quibus regeretur et dispenthe first day, mountains (here on is saretur mortalium genus... Sed et
corrupt for inn, “abyss’’), heaven, horum nonnulli, sicut et ipse quiprinceps
earth, light. On the second—the firma- appellatus est mundi, datam sibi a Deo
ment, hell and the angels. On the potestatem non his quibus acceperant
third—trees, green things, and Para- legibus temperarunt nec humanum
dise. On the fourth—sun, moon and genus divinis obedire praeceptis, sed
stars. On the fifth—birds, fishes and suis parere praevaricationibus docuethe Leviathan. On the sixth—Adam, runt.
Eve and worms. In all nineteen works. The angels of the presence, and the
But according to R. Pinchas, six things angels of sanctification. Cf. ii. 18, xv.
were created on the sixth: Adam, Eve, 27, xxxi. 14. These are the two chief
worms, tame beasts, wild beasts, orders of angels. On the former see i.
demons. 29 note. Both classes are mentioned in
ii. 15: these observe the Sabbath together
2. On the first day he created...
with God and Israel (ii. 18 sqq.), and
the angels. In addition to the remarks
like them Levi and his seed are to serve
made under this head on ii, 2-3
in the sanctuary, XXX. 14. The lower
above we should further observe that
orders who are set over the works of
grounds are furnished for such a connature do not keep the Sabbath. These
ception by Job xxxviii. 7 (cf. i. 6)
angels are, according to the Talmud and
** When the morning stars sang together
no doubt to our author, inferior to
and all the sons of God shouted for
righteous Israelites: Sanh. 93a, pps
joy.” Here the sons of God are remwa ‘axsop anv. See also Ber. rabba
garded as admiring spectators of the
creation. It is probable that earlier 8; Tanchuma 14, na“ pn ‘350 Sew pain
Judaism so understood this verse. At mwa "ON anv (Singer, p. 98). “The
all events, this interpretation appears angels of sanctification” are those who
in patristic literature ; cf. Epiphanius, sing praises to God (possibly the
Haer. \xv. chap. 4: Ei μὴ yap ἅμα trisagion as in Eth. En. 1x, 12), As
οὐρανῷ καὶ γῆ Kal ἄγγελοι ἐκτίσθησαν, Epiphanius has ἄγγελοι τῆς δόξης
οὐκ ἂν ἔλεγε τῷ ᾿Ιὼβ ὅτι, “OTe ἐγενή- (= ἄγγελοι δοξάζοντες), Praetorius proθησαν ἄστρα, ἤνεσάν με πάντες ἄγγελοί poses that we should read weddasé
μου φωνῇ. See also the quotation from instead of qeddasé. But the text can be
Rufinus in the next note. Nearly two defended; for in xv. 27 where the phrase
centuries earlier this idea is attested in recurs, the Latin has sanctificationis.

CHAPTER II. 2-4 13
sanctification, and the angels [of the spirit of fire and the
angels] of the spirit of the winds, and the angels of the spirit
of the clouds, and of darkness, and of snow and of hail and
of hoar frost, and the angels of the voices and of the thunder
and of the lightning, and the angels of the spirits of cold and
of heat, and of winter and of spring and of autumn and of
summer, and of all the spirits of His creatures which are in
the heavens and on the earth, (He created) the abysses and
the darkness, eventide (and night), and the light, dawn and
day, which He hath prepared in the knowledge of His heart.
3. And thereupon we saw His works, and praised Him, and
lauded before Him on account of all His works; for seven great
works did He create on the first day. 4. And on the second
OBR «OF fire. . of © the Of winter... and summer. Cf.
winds, ... of the clouds, ete. The Eth. Enoch Ixxxii. 13-20.
third or lowest order of angels presides (He created) the abysses. abcd read
over the natural phenomena. See Eth. “in all the abysses, connecting the
Enoch lx. 12-21, Ixxv., lxxx.; Slav. phrase wrongly with the preceding
Enoch xix. 1-4. words. ‘The abysses” are one of the
Angels... of fire. Cf. Rev. xiv. seven things created on the first day
18 and must be in the accusative as in G
Of the spirit of fire and the angels. of Epiphanius. The Kuelli=‘‘all”
So bcd. @ and G of Epiphanius omit. may be a corruption of ’ellfi=“‘ these’
Angels... of the winds. Cf. Rev. (a frequent corruption), and the latter a
vii. 1, 2. See Eth. Enoch xviii. 1-5, translation of the Greek article in τὰς
XXXiv.-xxxvi., Ixxvi. on the various ἀβύσσους. G reads Tas ἀβύσσους τήν
functions of the wind. Te ὑποκάτω τῆς γῆς Kal τοῦ χάους. In
Of snow. So Gk. of Epiphanius, my Ethiopic text, omit the three words
χιόνος, which was probably corrupted after qalayat, which are an attempt
into παντός: hence text of ab. ed om. partly to restore and partly to emend
Of snow and of hail and of hoar a into confirmity with the G.
frost. Eth. Enoch 1x. 17, 18. Eventide (and night) ang the
Angels of the voices and of the thunder light, dawn and day. «And night”’
and of the lightning. This is an obscure is supplied from G, a wrongly transphrase. It would be easy if we could poses “eventide” after “day.” bcd
omit the first “and.” Then we should omit “‘and day ” and transpose ‘‘ evenhave the familiar expression ‘‘ voices of tide” after ‘‘ light.”
the thunder.” Cf. Ps. Ixxvii. 18, 3. Seven great works. See note
πόνον! 1, x. 4; xix. δ... On above, p. 11 on ii. 2-3.
the other hand we have in Rev. iv. 5, 4. Works of the second day. Gen.
xi. 19, xvi. 18, ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ καὶ i, 6-7. Cf. Slav. Enoch xxvi.-xxvii.
βρονταί, and in viii. 5, βρονταὶ καὶ φωναὶ G in Epiphanius runs: ἐν δὲ τῇ δευτέρᾳ
kal ἀστραπαί. The phrase in Rev. τὸ στερέωμα τὸ ἐν τῷ μέσῳ τῶν ὑδάτων,
may be derived from our text. The καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐμερίσθη τὰ ὕδατα,
‘ voices may mean the mutterings of τὸ ἥμισυ αὐτῶν ἀνέβη ἐπάνω τοῦ στερεώthe thunder. “Voice” (op) in itself ματος (καὶ τὸ ἥμισυ κατέβη ὑποκάτω τοῦ
means thunder in Job xxxvii. 4. στερεώματος) τοῦ ἐμμέσῳ ἐπὶ προσώπου
Thunder and lightning. Cf. Eth. πάσης τῆς γῆς. τοῦτο μόνον τὸ ἔργον
Enoch lx. 13-15. ἐποίησεν ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ ἡμέρᾳ.

14 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
day He created the firmament in the midst of the waters,
and the waters were divided on that day—half of them
went up above and half of them went down below the
firmament (that was) in the midst over the face of the
whole earth. And this was the only work (God) created on
the second day. 5. And on the third day He commanded
the waters to pass from off the face of the whole earth into
one place, and the dry land to appear. 6. And the waters
did so as He commanded them, and they retired from off the
face of the earth into one place outside of this firmament,
and the dry land appeared. 7. And on that day He created
for them all the seas according to their separate gatheringplaces, and all the rivers, and the gatherings of the waters
in the mountains and on all the earth, and all the lakes,
and all the dew of. the earth, and the seed which is sown,
and all sprouting things, and fruit-bearing trees, and trees
of the wood, and the garden of Eden, in Eden, and all
The clause in brackets, lost by homoio- ed from zajetbalaé according to αὶ
teleuton, I have supplied. βλαστήματα.
Waters were divided on that day. Garden of Eden, in Eden. MSS
According to this view as also of Gen. i. add ‘for pleasure.” This phrase
6 there was a sea in heaven resting on is due either to a corrupt dittothe firmament, which through seven graphy: «e.—latadla is corrupt for
flood-gates (v. 24) let down its waters batadla=év τρυφῇ, a duplicate renon the earth. See the curious specu- dering of jaya: or else tadla is corlation on these waters in Eth. Enoch rupt for taklat=gurd and should be
liv. 7-8. transposed after Καθ], The ‘‘in
5-7. Works of the third day. Cf. Eden” is also superfluous. c omits it.
Gen. i. 9-13; Slav. Enoch xxx. 1. G Garden of Eden. Eden is likewise
in Epiphanius is defective: τρίτῃ δὲ a creation of the third day in Ber,
ἡμέρᾳ... τὰς θαλάσσας . . . τοὺς rabba 15; Slav. Enoch xxx. 1; Book
ποταμούς, τὰς πηγάς... καὶ λίμνας, of Adam and Eve i. 1. This is the
τὰ σπέρματα τοῦ σπόρου, καὶ τὰ βλα- earliest view so far as our evidence goes.
στήματα, τὰ ξύλα τὰ κάρπιμά τε καὶ As early, however, as the latter half
ἄκαρπα καὶ τοὺς δρυμούς. . . καὶ πάντα of the first century a.D., the garden
τὰ φυτὰ κατὰ γένος. ταῦτα τὰ τέσσαρα of Eden was said to have been created —
ἔργα τὰ μέγιστα ἐποίησεν ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τῇ before the world. Thus 4 Ezra iii. 6
τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ. Τὶ is better in Syncellus In paradisum, quem plantavit dextera
1. 4: φανέρωσις γῆς καὶ ἀναξήρανσις, tua antequam terra adventaret. This —
παράδεισος, δένδρα παντοῖα, βοτάναι view arose from taking opp in Gen. ii.
καὶ σπέρματα. 8 to mean “from the beginning”
5. The third day. MSS add ‘‘ He instead of ‘‘on the east.” This new —
made as.” interpretation was adopted by the
7. Cf. Slav. Enoch xxx. 1. Targums and the Syriac and Latin
Sprouting things = zajebaquel emend- Versions, as well as by Aquila, Sym-

CHAPTER II. 5-11 15
(plants after their kind), These four great works Gop
created on the third day. 8. And on the fourth day He
created the sun and the moon and the stars, and set them in
the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon all the earth,
and to rule over the day and the night, and divide the light
from the darkness. 9. And Gon appointed the sun to be a
great sign on the earth for days and for sabbaths and for
months and for feasts and for years and for sabbaths of
years and for jubilees and for all seasons of the years, 10.
And it divideth the light from the darkness [and] for
prosperity, that all things may prosper which shoot and
grow on the earth. These three kinds He made on the
fourth day. 11. And on the fifth day He created great sea
monsters in the depths of the waters, for these were the first
things of flesh that were created by His hands, the fish and
everything that moves in the waters, and everything that
machus and Theodotion; also by Jerome 8-10. Gen.i, 14-19. Cf. Slav. Enoch.
(Quaest. Heb. in Gen. ii. 8) (Migne, xxx. 2-6. G in Epiphanius very deBiblioth. Patr. Lat. tom. 23, col. 940): fective: τῇ δὲ τετάρτῃ τὸν ἥλιον τὴν
Necnon quod sequitur, contra orientem, σελήνην τοὺς ἀστέρας. .. ταῦτα τὰ
in Hebraeo Mecedem (pn) scribitur, τρία ἔργα τὰ μεγάλα ἐποίησε ὁ Θεὸς
quod Aquila posuit ἀπὸ ἀρχῆς : et nos, ἐν τῇ τετάρτῃ ἡμέρᾳ.
ab exordio, possumus dicere. Sym- 9. Appointed the sun. It will be
machus vero, ἐκ πρώτης, et Theodotion, observed here that though the writer
ἐν πρώτοις, quod et ipsum non orientem is basing the text on Gen. i. 16-18 he
sed principium significat, Ex quo makes no reference to the moon. The
manifestissime comprobatur, quod omission is intentional. The writer
priusquam coelum et terram Deus holds that Israel should not be guided
faceret, paradisum ante condiderat, by the moon but by the sun in the
sicut et legitur in Hebraeo: Plantaverat calculations of all their festivals. See
autem Dominus Deus paradisum in vi. 36-38.
Eden a principio. For later Jewish Appointed the sun... for jubilees.
authorities see Weber, Jiid. Theologie,? The period from the entrance of the
198. Israelites into Canaan to the destruction
On the peculiar conception of two of the first temple is measured by
Paradises, the heavenly and the earthly, jubilees in Erachin 12-13 a.
and their connection see Slav. Enoch 10. These three kinds, i.e. the sun,
vi.; Weber, 162 sq., 341. For a moon, and stars. Cf. Syncellus, 1.
history of the various meanings of
Paradise in Apocalyptic literature, see 11-12. Works of the fifth day. Gen.
my Eschatology, pp. 197, 284 sq., i. 20-28. Cf. Slav. Enoch xxx. 7. G
262 sqq. in Epiphanius : τῇ δὲ πέμπτῃ τὰ κήτη
(Plants after their kind.) Supplied τὰ μεγάλα. . . τοὺς ἰχθύας καὶ τὰ
from G in Epiphanius. It is possible, ἄλλα ἑρπετὰ τὰ ἐν τοῖς ὕδασι, τὰ πετεινὰ
however, that “plants” already exists τὰ πτερωτά. , , ταῦτα τὰ τρία ἔργα
in the text in a corrupt form. See τὰ μεγάλα ἐποίησεν ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τῇ πέμπτῃ
note on beginning of verse. ἡμέρᾳ.

16 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
flies, the birds and all their kind. 12. And the sun rose
above them to prosper (them), and above everything that
was on the earth, everything that shoots out of the earth,
and all fruit-bearing trees, and all flesh. These three kinds
He created on the fifth day, 13. And on the sixth day He
created all the animals of the . earth, and all cattle, and
everything that moves on the earth. 14. And after all this
He created man, a man and a woman created He them, and
gave him dominion over all that is upon the earth, and in
the seas, and over everything that flies, and over beasts and
over cattle, and over everything that moves on the earth,
and over the whole earth, and over all this He gave him
dominion. And these four kinds He created on the sixth
day. 15. And there were altogether two and twenty kinds.
16. And He finished all His work on the sixth day—
all that is in the heavens and on the earth, and in the.
seas and in the abysses, and in the light and in the
darkness, and in everything. 17. And He gave us a great
sign, the Sabbath day, that we should work six days, but
keep Sabbath on the seventh day from all work. 18. And
all the angels of the presence, and all the angels of sanctifi18-14. Works of the sixth day. ii. 2% Cf. Exod. xx. 11. Budde
Gen. i, 24-28. Cf. Slav. Enoch xxx. and Ball accept this (= win) as the
8 sqq. G in Epiphanius is defective: original reading of Gen. ii. 2a over
τῇ δὲ ἕκτῃ ἡμέρᾳ τὰ θηρία... τὰ against the Massoretic (=‘prazin). The
κτήνη, τὰ ἑρπετὰ τῆς γῆς, τὸν ἄνθρωπον
severer observance of the Sabbath
... ταῦτα τὰ τέσσαρα μεγάλα ἔργα
belongs certainly to the pre-Christian
ἐποίησεν ὁ Θεὸς ἐν τῇ ἕκτῃ ἡμέρᾳ.
centuries as we shall see later.
14. A man and a woman—instead
17-21. The two chief orders of angels
of the usual “male and female.”
observe the Sabbath together with God.
15. See note on ii. 23. The Greek Israel alone will be chosen to join in
of this verse and the next is found in this observance. Like the third order
Epiphanius, loc. cit.: καὶ ἐγένετο πάντα of angels (see note on ii. 2), 1.6. those
εἴκοσι δύο γένη ἐν ταῖς ἕξ ἡμέραις. καὶ that preside over natural phenomena, the
συνετέλεσεν πάντα τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ Gentiles do not share in this privilege
ἕκτῃ ἡμέρᾳ, ὅσα ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς καὶ (ii. 31).
ὅσα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἐν ταῖς θαλάσσαις καὶ 17. He gave us a great sign, the
ἐν ταῖς ἀβύσσοις, ἐν τῷ φωτὶ καὶ ἐν τῷ Sabbath day. Cf. Exod. xxxi. 13. This
σκότει καὶ ἐν πᾶσι. sign, first appointed between God and
16. On the sixth day. Our text is the two chief orders of angels, was to
supported by the Samaritan text and be established subsequently between
the LXX and Syriac Versions of Gen. God and Israel, ii. 21. See ii. 31 note.

CHAPTER II. 12-23 17
cation, these two great classes—He hath bidden us to keep
the Sabbath with Him in heaven and on earth. 19. And
He said unto us: “Behold, I will separate unto Myself a
people from among all the peoples, and these will keep the
Sabbath day, and I will sanctify them unto Myself as My
people, and will bless them; as I have sanctified the Sabbath
day and do sanctify (it) unto Myself, even so shall I bless
them, and they will be My people and I shall be their God.
20. And I have chosen the seed of Jacob from amongst all
that I have seen, and have written him down as My firstborn son, and have sanctified him unto Myself for ever and
ever; and I will teach them the Sabbath day, that they may
keep Sabbath thereon from all work.” 21. And thus He
created therein a sign in accordance with which they should
keep Sabbath with us on the seventh day, to eat and to
drink, and to bless Him who has created all things as He
has blessed and sanctified unto Himself a peculiar people
above all peoples, and that they should keep Sabbath together
with us. 22. And He caused His commands to ascend as a
sweet savour acceptable before Him all the days. 23.
There (were) two and twenty heads of mankind from Adam
19. Separate wnto Myself a people. again in ii, 31, 1. 9, 10. In 1. 19
1 Kings viii. 53. fasting on the Sabbath is forbidden.
These will keep the Sabbath . See 1. 6 sqq. (notes) for a discussion of
sanctify them. Exod. xxxi. 13, 17; the entire question.
Ezek. xx. 12. See note on ii. 31. A peculiar people above all peoples.
They will be My people, etc. Seei. 17. Deut. vii. 6; cf. Exod. xix. 5; Amos
20. I have chosen the seed of Jacob. iii. 2. The Sabbaths are signs that God
V8 xiv. 1, 2. G in Epi has given to His people to distinguish
phaniu=s 7 will choose, etc. them from other peoples. Cf. verse 31;
From amongst all. This is based on Ezek. xx. 12, 20. ‘Peculiar’ here=
a slight change of a corrupt text. zajatari emended from zajastaré’i.
My first-born son. Exod. iv. 22 ; And that they... with us. This
Ps. 1xxxix. 27; cf. Jer. xxx. 9. seems a dittography of the second
21. A sign. According to Exod. clause of this verse.
xxxi. 13, 17 ; Ezek. xx. 12, the Sabbath 22. His commands, etc. Corrupt.
was to be a sign between God and A sweet savour. Gen. viii. 21;
Israel. See ii. 17 note, 31 note. Exod. xxix. 18; Ezek. xx. 41; 2 Cor.
Keep Sabbath with us. Israel is to ii. 15; Eph. v. 2.
unite with the angels (cf. verses 17, 18) Acceptable before Him. Ezek. xx.
in observing the Sabbath. 41; Rom. xii. 1; 1 Tim. ii. 3.
To eat and to drink, ete. This joy- 23. It is clear from Epiphanius,
ful aspect of the Sabbath is enforced Syncellus and Cedrenus that there is a

18 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
to Jacob, and two and twenty kinds of work were made
until the seventh day; this is blessed and holy; and the
former also is blessed and holy; and this one serves with
that one for sanctification and blessing. 24. And to this
(Jacob and his seed) it was granted that they should always
lacuna in the text after ver. 22. Thus Chronogr. i. 5 (ed. Dind.) ὁμοῦ τὰ
in Epiphanius, De Mensuris et Pon- πάντα ἔργα εἴκοσι δύο ἰσάριθμα τοῖς
deribus, ch. xxii. (ed. Dind. vol. iv. 28) εἴκοσι δύο βραϊκοῖς γράμμασι καὶ ταῖς
after an account of the six days’ creation, εἴκοσι δύο ‘EBpaixats βίβλοις καὶ τοῖς
drawn word for word from Jubilees, he ἀπὸ ᾿Αδὰμ ἕως ᾿Ιακὼβ εἴκοσι δύο γεναρcontinues καὶ ἐδήλωσε OV ἀγγέλου τῷ χίαις, ὡς ἐν λεπτῇ φέρεται Τενέσει, ἣν καὶ
Mwiice? ὅτι (Jub. ii. 23) καὶ εἴκοσι δύο Mwiicéws εἷναί φασί τινες ἀποκάλυψιν.
κεφάλαια ἀπὸ ᾿Αδὰμ ἄχρι τοῦ ᾿Ιακώβ. This statement is reproduced verbally
. καὶ (Jub. ii, 21) ἐκλέξομαι ἐμαυτῷ by Cedrenus, Compendium Histor. vol.
ἐκ τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτοῦ. .. λαὸν i. 9 (ed. Bekker). Next we have the
περιούσιον ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν... evidence of the Hebrew tradition preδιὸ καὶ εἴκοσι δύο εἰσὶ τὰ παρὰ τοῖς served in the Midrash Tadshe vi,
Ἑβραίοις γράμματα, καὶ πρὸς αὐτὰ καὶ (quoted above, Dp. 11): “Twenty-two |
τὰς βίβλους αὐτῶν KB ἠρίθμησαν εἴκοσι kinds of creatures were created in the
ἑπτὰ οὔσας" ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ διπλοῦνται πέντε universe. . . This corresponds to the
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς στοιχεῖα, εἴκοσι ἑπτὰ καὶ twenty-two letters of the alphabet and —
αὐτὰ ὄντα καὶ εἰς KB’ ἀποτελοῦνται, to the twenty-two generations from —
τούτου χάριν καὶ τὰς βίβλους Kf’ οὔσας Adam to Jacob.” Thus we should —
KB’ πεποιήκασιν. Also in i. 1 Dp. 59 probably restore the lacuna as follows:—
(πικουρ.) we find αὗταί εἰσιν αἱ εἰκοσι- As there were two and twenty letters and
επτὰ βίβλοι αἱ ἐκ Θεοῦ δοθεῖσαι τοῖς two and twenty (sacred) books and two ,
᾿Ιουδαίοις, εἰκοσιδύο δὲ ὡς τὰ Tap αὐτοῖς and twenty heads of mankind from
στοιχεῖα τῶν Ἑβραϊκῶν γραμμάτων Adam to Jacob, so there were made two
ἀριθμούμεναι, διὰ τὸ διπλοῦσθαι δέκα and twenty kinds of work, ete. The
βίβλους εἰς πέντε λεγομένας. Again thirty-nine books of the Old Testament
Anastasius, who elsewhere quotes are equalised to the number of letters
Jubilees (see iii. 9 note), seems to refer by the following device. The twelve
to our text here in his work on the minor prophets count as one book,
Hexaemeron (Migne’s Biblioth. Patr. similarly Judges and Ruth, Hzra and
Graec. tom. 89, col. 940): Viginti enim Nehemiah, Jeremiah and Lamentations
duo opera fecisse Deum dicunt, et are taken together, and the two books
Judaeorum et Christianorum interpretes of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles are
. .. propterea viginti quoque duobus reckoned respectively as one each. Thus
libris enumerat omne Vetus suum the thirty-nine are reduced to twentyTestamentum. In Isidore of Seville two. See Introd. § 11. i
(ob. 636), Etymolog. xvi. 26.10 (Migne This is blessed and holy, 1.6., the
Bibl. Patr. Lat. tom. 82, col. 595), we Sabbath.
have an account of the creation agreeing The former also is blessed and holy,
with Jubilees save in one small particu- ὦ.6., Jacob. These two, the Sabbath
lar. It is there shown that there were and Jacob, are intimately related. 5
twenty-two kinds of work just as there the Sabbath comes at the close of the
were twenty-two generations from twenty-two works, so Jacob comes at
Adam to Jacob, twenty-two books in the close of the twenty-second genera
the OT and twenty-two letters. This tion. Not till Jacob’s time, therefore,
account is dependent on Epiphanius. could the Sabbath be rightly observed
Thus it is most probable that originally on earth. Moreover, the Sabbath was
mention was made in the text of the given to Israel alone (ii. 31).
twenty-two Hebrew letters and the 24, They should always, ete. 0
twenty-two books of the Bible, and so bcd. a reads “he should always,’
we find it actually stated by Syncellus ete.

CHAPTER II. 24-29 19
be the blessed and holy ones of the first testimony and law,
even as He had sanctified and blessed the Sabbath day on
the seventh day. 25. He created heaven and earth and
everything that He created in six days, and God made the
seventh day holy, for all His works; therefore He commanded on its behalf that, whoever does any work thereon
shall die, and that he who defiles it shall surely die. 26.
Wherefore do thou command the children of Israel to
observe this day that they may keep it holy and not do
thereon any work, and not to defile it, as it is holier than all
other days. 27. And whoever profanes it shall surely die,
and whoever does thereon any work shall surely die
eternally, that the children of Israel may observe this day
throughout their generations, and not be rooted out of the
land; for it is a holy day and a blessed day. 28. And
every one who observes it and keeps Sabbath thereon from
all his work, will be holy and blessed throughout all days
like unto us. 29. Declare and say to the children of Israel
the law of this day both that they should keep Sabbath
thereon, and that they should not forsake it in the error
of their hearts; (and) that it is not lawful to do any
work thereon which is unseemly, to do thereon their own
pleasure, and that they should not prepare thereon anything
He had sanctified. So cd. abread Rooted out of theland. Deut. xxix. 28.
it had been sanctified.” 29. Ji is not lawful to do any work
And blessed. Soacd. ὃ “and had thereon which is unseemly, to do thereon
been blessed. their own pleasure. In the rendering
The Sabbath day. cd. ab omit. “which is unseemly " I have followed
25. Whoever does any work thereon Barth and Littmann in taking za’ijeshall die, and that he who defiles, etc. kawen za’ijastar’i as representing Noy
Exod, xxxi.14,15. Cf. Exod. xxxv. 2; NI A. See also on iii. 15. It might
Num. xv. 32-36. See also verses 26, 27. be better to connect the following in26. Command the children of Israel finitive with ‘‘unseemly ” and translate
to observe this day that they may keep it “‘which is unseemly to do thereon, (even)
holy. χοᾶ. xx. 8, xxxi. 1. their own pleasure.” Itis usual for NJ
Holier than all other days. Cf. ii.
to be followed by an infinitive in this
30 where it is said to be holier than sense. Cf. Esther ii. 9; Chull. 830;
the jubilee of the jubilees ; also ii. 33.
Nid. vi. 4.
27. Whoever profanes it... who- To do thereon their own pleasure.
ever does thereonsany work. See two Cf. Is. lviii. 13.
preceding verses. Not prepare thereon anything to be

THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
20
to be eaten or drunk, and (that it is not lawful) to
draw water, or bring in or take out thereon through their
gates any burden,} which they had not prepared for themselves on the sixth day in their dwellings. 30. And they
shall not bring in nor take out from house to house on
that day; for that day is more holy and blessed than any —
jubilee day of the jubilees: on this we kept Sabbath in the |
heavens before it was made known to any flesh to keep
Sabbath thereon on the earth. 31. And the Creator of all |
things blessed it, but He did not sanctify all peoples and
eaten or drunk. This law could be should follow immediately on the clause
derived from Exod. xvi. 23, 25. Bak- “anything to be eaten or drunk.” Thus
ing and boiling are forbidden in Exod. we have the provision enforced in Bez. —
xvi. 23, and the making of a fire in 26, that on the Sabbath day nothing ~
Exod. xxxv. 3. should be eaten which had not heen ~
And that they should not prepare expressly prepared on a week day with —
thereon anything to be eaten or drunk a view to the Sabbath.
. . which they had not prepared for On the sixth day. Cf. 1. 9. This ©
themselves on the sixth day. Cf. 1. 9. phrase can equally well be rendered in
It will be observed that by omitting both passages “on the six days.”
“and (that it is not lawful) to draw
30. Bring in nor take out from house —
water, or bring in or take out thereon
to house. Cf. ii. 29, 1.8; Jer. xvii. 22.
through their gates any burden” an
Also Shabb. vii. 2, mynd menp ssi |
excellent sense is restored to the text.
See note on ver. 29,
Besides, the words in question conOn this we kept Sabbath in the
stitute a break in the grammatical
heavens. Similarly it is said in vi. 18,
construction. The words “or bring in
that the feast of weeks was celebrated
or take out thereon through their gates
by the angels in heaven till the days of
any burden” look like a dittography
Noah. The writer most probably held |
of the first clause in ver. 30. They
that the other feasts were likewise
may, however, be genuine, and we can
observed in heaven. The sabbath and ©
restore at once the sense and grammar
the feast of weeks, however, are the
by reading these clauses immediately
two chief feasts in the eyes of the
after the words “their own pleasure.”
writer. According to Ber. rabba 11 |
Thus we have: “ That itis not lawful to
even the godless in Gehenna had rest
do any work thereon which is unseemly,
on the Sabbath. |
to do thereon their own pleasure or to
31. Blessed it, i.e., Israel. MSS omit
draw water or bring in or take out
thereon through their gates any burden. “it” but we have only (with Barth and
And that they should not prepare there- Littmann) to emend baraka into biraka
on anything to be eaten or drunk, which to restore it, a
they had not prepared for themselves He did not sanctify all . . . nations
on the sixth day in their dwellings.” to keep Sabbath thereon, but Israel
Or bring in or take out... any alone. Cf. ii. 19. The Sabbath was
burden. The law is found in ii. 30, the special privilege and distinction
1.8; Jer. xvii. 21, 22, 24, 27. Cf. of Israel. Hence it could not be rightly
Neh. xiii. 19; John v. 10; Shabb. observed on earth till Jacob’s time (see
Vii. 2. ii. 23 note). It was to be a special
Which they had not prepared for sign between God and Israel (ii. 21), as
themselves on the sixth day. This it was already a sign in heaven between

CHAPTERS II. 30-III 4 21
nations to keep Sabbath thereon, but Israel alone: them
alone He permitted to eat and drink and to keep Sabbath
thereon on the earth. 32. And the Creator of all things
blessed this day which He had created for a blessing and
a sanctification and a glory above all days. 33. This law
and testimony was given to the children of Israel as a law
for ever unto their generations.
Adam names all creatures, 1-3. Creation of Eve and enactment of Levitical laws of purification, 4-14. Adam
and Eve in Paradise: their sin and expulsion, 15-29.
Law of covering one’s shame enacted, 30,31. Adam and
Eve live in Bldd, 32-35. (Cf. Gen. i. 18-25, iii.)
III. And on the six days of the second week we
brought, according to the word of God, unto Adam all the
beasts, and all the cattle, and all the birds, and everything
that moves on the earth, and everything that moves in the
water, according to their kinds, and according to their
types: the beasts on the first day ; the cattle on the second
day; the birds on the third day; and all that which moves
on the earth on the fourth day; and that which moves in
the water on the fifth day. 2. And Adam named them all
by their respective names, and as he called them, so was
their name. 3. And on these five days Adam saw all these,
male and female, according to every kind that was on the
earth, but he was alone and found no helpmeet for him.
4. And the Lord said unto us: “It is not good that the
God and the two chief orders of angels in Syncellus, pp. 7-8: τῇ πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ
(ii.17). As no such sign existed between cele ὠνόμασεν ᾿Αδὰμ τὰ ἄγρια ph
God and the inferior angels (who are θείῳ τινὶ χαρίσματι, τῇ pire ἡμέρᾳ...
inferior to Israel, see ii. 2 note), so ὠνόμασε τὰ κτήνη, τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ.
none existed between God and the Gen- ὠνόμασεν τὰ πετεινά " τῇ τετάρτῃ ἡμέρᾳ
tiles. δέν μὰ a τὰ ἑρπετά" τῇ πέμπτῃ
33. A law for ever unto their genera- ΝΣ . ὠνόμασε τὰ νηκτά.
tions = ond oy npn, Exod. xxvii. Ch. Gen. ii. 20. Found. So
21; Lev. vii. 36, xxiii. 14, etc. Nee. Sam.; but LXX, Syr. and Vulg.
III, 1-2. Cf. Gen. ii.19. G is found = “was found.”

22 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
man should be alone: let us make a helpmeet for him.” 5.
And the Lord our God caused a deep sleep to fall upon him,
and he slept, and He took for the woman one rib from
amongst his ribs, and this rib was the origin of the woman
from amongst his ribs, and He built up the flesh in its stead,
and built the woman. 6. And He awaked Adam out of his
sleep and on awaking he rose on the sixth day, and He
brought her to him, and he knew her, and said unto her:
“This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she
will be called [my] wife; because she was taken from her
husband.” 7. Therefore shall man and wife be one, and
therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and
cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. 8. {πὶ
the first week was Adam created, and the rib—his
wife: in the second week He showed her unto him: and
for this reason the commandment was given to keep in their —
4, Gen. ii. 18. Let us make. So is followed in Matt. xix. 5; Mark x.7;_
also LXX and Vulg. Mass., Sam., Eph. v. 31, and seems to have the
Syr.=“I will make.” older attestation.
5-6. Creation of woman on the 13th 8. First week... second ‘week.
day of the creation. Cf, Gen. ii. 21-23. MSS read ‘‘ seventh ” instead of “week” —
In the Targ. Jon. on Gen. ii. 21 the rib in both cases. We obtain the right sense —
is said to have been the 13th on the right by simply emending sib¢ t into say at,
side. On the Talmudic theories as to 8-14. Commandment was given to —
the hermaphroditic character of Adam keep in their defilement, ete. In this —
before the creation of Eve see Weber, passage our author either invents
Jiid. Theologie,? p. 211. historical grounds or else adopts an
5. One rib from amongst his ribs, and already existing legend to account for
this rib... from amongst his ribs. the commands given in Lev. xii. 2-5.
Text literally = “‘one bone from amongst According to Lev. xii. 2, 5 a mother
his bones and this rib (or side)... was to be unclean seven days if she
from amongst his bones.”
bore a man child, and was not to enter
6. [My] wife. The “my” I have the sanctuary till thirty-three days
bracketed as an interpolation. It is later, in all forty days ; and she was to —
found also in the Eth. vers. of Gen. be unclean fourteen days if she bore
ii. 23, but in no other important a maid child, and was not to enter
version. the sanctuary for sixty-six days later,
_ Her husband (= nz xp). So also Sam.
in all eighty days. This law, our
LXX, and Onkelos against Mass., author says, was based on the fact that
Syr., and Vulg. which omit the pro- Adam was created at the close of the
noun. first week and did not enter the
7. Cf. Gen. ii. 24, Garden till forty days after his crea.
They shall be one flesh. So also Mass. tion, and Eve was created at the close
and Onkelos, but Sam. (ὩΣ 1m) ; of the second week and did not enter
LXX, Syr., Vulg., Ps.-J=o ‘n‘t .he y the Garden till eighty days after her
twain shall be one flesh.” This latter creation. This peculiar idea reappears

CHAPTER III. 5-9
23
defilement, for a male seven days, and for a female twice
seven days. 9. And after Adam had completed forty days
in the land where he had been created, we brought him into
the garden of Eden to till and keep it, but his wife they
brought in on the eightieth day, and after this she entered
in various works. Thus in Philo an offering for Cain when he was forty
Quaest. in Gen. ii. 21 (translated by days old and an offering for Cain’s twin
Aucher from the Armenian), where sister Luluwa when she was eighty
Philo is dealing with the creation of days old, when Eve and her daughter
woman from the rib of the man, the approached the altar. Anastasius
text appears to recall the views of our Sinaita (flor. 7th cent.) in his Anagogic.
author: Siquidem ut perfectior et (si contemplat. in Hexaem. (Fabricius, Cod.
liceat dici) duplicior est viri formatio Pseud. V.T. ii. 83; Migne’s Biblioformatione mulieris: sic etiam dimidio theca Patr. Graec. tom. 89, col. 967) is
tempore opus habuit, diebus videlicet the first to refer directly to our text:
xl, ubi imperfectae atque, ut ita Unde Hebraei ex libro qui non est
dicam, dimidiae viri sectioni, scilicet redactus in canonem qui quidem dicitur
mulieri, (opus esset) duplici mensura, Testamentum Protoplastorum, dicunt
nempe diebus lxxx. Our text was quadragesima die ingressum esse Adam
certainly before Syncellus, NSO in Paradisum; sicut etiam videtur
εἰσήγαγεν ὁ Θεὸς τὸν ᾿Αδὰμ ἐν τῷ cuidam historico chronographo Pyrπαραδείσῳ κατὰ τὴν τεσσαρακοστὴν rhoni, et quibusdam expositoribus.
ἡμέραν τῆς πλάσεως αὐτοῦ. τῇ ἐνενη- The Pyrrho here mentioned by Anasκοστῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς κτίσεως Be Cho tasius is likewise referred to by Glycas
εἰσήχθη ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ as the source of this statement.
ἡ τοῦ ᾿Αδὰμ βοηθὸς Εὔα, ἐν τῇ ὀγδοη- Syncellus (p. 8) is the next to use our
κοστῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς πλάσεως αὐτῆς. .. text: εἰσήγαγεν ὁ Θεὸς τὸν ᾿Αδὰμ ἐν
διὰ τοῦτο προσέταξεν ὁ θεὸς διὰ τῷ παραδείσῳ κατὰ τὴν τεσσαρακοστὴν
Mwiicéws ἐν τῷ Λευιτικῷ, ἤτοι διὰ ἡμέραν τῆς πλάσεως αὐτοῦ. Subseτὰς μετὰ τὴν πλάσιν τοῦ χωρισμοῦ quently Glycas (circ. 1150), in his
αὐτῶν ἡμέρας ἐκ τοῦ παραδείσου, ἐπὶ Βίβλος Χρονική (pp. 392-393, ed.
μὲν ἀρρενογονίας ἀκάθαρτον αὐτὴν εἶναι Bekker), quotes our text with disἐπὶ τεσσαράκοντα ἡμέρας, ἐπὶ δὲ θηλυ- approval: ἡ δὲ λεγομένη λεπτὴ Γένεσις,
τοκίας ἕως , ἡμερῶν a’ ἐπειδὴ Kal οὐκ οἷδ ὅθεν συγγραφεῖσα καὶ ὅπως,
᾿Αδὰμ τῇ μ' ἡμέρᾳ τῆς πλάσεως αὐτοῦ φησὶν ὅτι μεθ᾽ ἡμέρας μ' εἰσῆλθεν 6 ᾿Αδὰμ
εἰσήχθη ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ, οὗ χάριν καὶ εἰς τὸν παράδεισον, 7 δὲ Εὔα μεθ᾽ ἡμέρας
τὰ γεννώμενα τῇ τεσσαρακοστῇ ἡμέρᾳ π΄, καὶ τούτου χάριν ἐν ἡμέραις τοσαύταις
εἰσφέρουσιν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ κατὰ τὸν νόμον. προσάγονται τῷ νάῳ τό τε ἄρρεν καὶ τὸ
ἐπὶ δὲ θήλεος ἀκάθαρτον εἶναι αὐτὴν ἐπὶ θῆλυ, ἀναλόγως τάχα τῷ ᾿Αδὰμ καὶ τῇ
ἡμέρας ὀγδοήκοντα, διά τε τὴν ἐν τῷ Ete. On p. 156 Glycas tells us that
παραδείσῳ αὐτῆς εἴσοδον τῇ ὀγδοηκοστῇ Pyrrho in his history writes that Adam
ἡμέρᾳ καὶ διὰ τὸ ἀκάθαρτον τοῦ θήλεος did not enter the Garden of Eden till
πρὸς τὸ ἄρσεν. dipedpos γὰρ πάλιν the 40th day after his creation, and
οὖσα οὐκ εἰσέρχεται ἕως ἑπτὰ ἡμέρας ἐν then adds ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ oiga ποῦ διέτριβε
τῷ ἱερῷ κατὰ τὸν θεῖον νόμον. ταῦτα πρότερον ὁ ᾿Αδάμ, ἔξω τοῦ παραδείσου
ἐκ τοῦ βίου λεγομένου Αδὰμ φιλομαθίας τεσσαράκοντα διάγων ἡμέρας.
χάριν ἐν συντόμῳ ἐστοιχείωσα, ἐν τῷ On the other hand Beer (Das Buch des
πρώτῳ ἔτει τῆς πλάσεως τοῦ ᾿Αδάμ, ἐπ᾽ Jubiliéen, p. 40) points out that there
αὐτῷ τὰ πραχθέντα. is not a trace of such a legend in
In the Book of Adam and Eve trans- Rabbinic literature, and that on the
lated by Malan in 1882 from the contrary it is declared in Shabbath 1354
Ethiopic we find an undoubted re- (a> new wx PRO IY ON! NNT
miniscence of our text. Thus ini, 74 mow don) that the regulations in
and 75 it is recounted that Adam made Ley. xii. 2-5 had no currency before

24 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
into the garden of Eden. 10. And for this reason the
commandment is written on the heavenly tables in regard
to her that gives birth: “if she bears a male, she shall
remain in her uncleanness seven days according to the first
week of days, and thirty and three days shall she remain in
the blood of her purifying, and she shall not touch any
hallowed thing, nor enter into the sanctuary, until she
accomplishes these days which (are enjoined) in the case
of a male child. 11. But in the case of a female child
she shall remain in her uncleanness two weeks of days,
according to the first two weeks, and sixty-six days in the
blood of her purification, and they will be in all eighty ἢ ὶ
days. 12. And when she had completed these eighty ~
days we brought her into the garden of Eden, for it is
holier than all the earth besides, and every tree that is
planted in it is holy. 15. Therefore, there was ordained
regarding her who bears a male or a female child the statute
the legislation of Moses. Yet, notwith- We observe here that the above statestanding Beer’s statement, the tradition ments are attributed to Pinchas. They
in our text is not without attestation in go back ultimately to our text. As
Judaism. Thus in the Midrash Tadshe references to Pinchas, Eppstein (Revue
xv. (see Jellinek’s edition in his Bet des Etudes juives, xxi. 92, 1890)
ha-Midrasch, iii. 164-193 or Eppstein mentions Chullin 7 ὁ, Kethuboth 46a,
in Beitrdge zur jiid. Alterthumskunde, Sota 49 a, Ber. rabba 60.
1887), ‘‘Why did the Holy One, 10. The heavenly tables! In my
blessed be He, ordain seven days of note on xlvii. 3 of the Eth. Enoch 1
purification for a woman who had have touched on the origin and deborne a male child and fourteen days velopment of the idea underlying this
for her who had borne afemale? This expression, and to this I must refer the
is to recall the creation of the first reader. The phrase is found in the
Adam who was created in seven days Eth. Enoch xlvii. 3, Ixxxi. 1, 2, xciii.
tin the first} of the first week, (and) 2, ciii. 2, Test. XII. Patriarch. Levi
the creation of Eve, who was taken v.; Asher. ii, vii. The conception is
from one of his ribs in the second not a hard and fixed one: in Enoch
Ὶ
week, So Pinchas ben Jair (13 ὉΠῚ5 and Test. XII. Patriarch. it wavers
x). The sages however say that both between an absolute determinism and
were created on the eve of the Sabbath, prediction pure and simple: whereas
the sixth day. Wherefore did the Holy in our text, in addition to these signifiOne, blessed be He, ordain that she cations, it implies at times little more
who had borne a male should enter the than a contemporary heavenly record
J
temple after forty days, and that she of events. In fact, in our author, the
who had borne a female after eighty heavenly tables are the divine statute
days? To recall that which God did book of the Theocracy of which the —
regarding the first Adam who was Mosaic law is the reproduction on
created outside the Garden of Eden earth, or a mere contemporary record
and did not enter till later.” of events, or finally they recount the

CHAPTER III. 10-16 25
of those days that she should touch no hallowed thing, nor
enter into the sanctuary until these days for the male or
female child are accomplished. 14. This is the law and
testimony which was written down for Israel, in order that
they should observe (it) all the days. 15. And in the first
week of the first jubilee, Adam and his wife were in the 1-7 aw.
garden of Eden for seven years tilling and keeping it, and
we gave him work and we instructed him to do everything
that is suitable for tillage. 16. And he tilled (the garden),
and was naked and knew it not, and was not ashamed, and
he protected the garden from the birds and beasts and cattle,
and gathered its fruit, and eat, and put aside the residue for
himself and for his wife [and put aside that which was being
future history of the world either pre- Adam was only six hours in the Gardictively or else determinatively. One den. MS a of the Slavonic Enoch xxxii.
meaning, moreover, passes impercep- 2 states that Adam was only five and a
tibly into another. Thus those tables half hours in Paradise. This last clause
record: (1) Laws levitical, criminal, looks like a Christian interpolation, and
and chronological, in some instances may point to the 5500 years which
predetermined and previously observed were to elapse before the coming of
in heaven, in others established for Christ according to the early Fathers.
the first time on earth: purification Instructed him. . . for tillage. In Is.
after childbirth, iii, 8-14; law as xxviii. 26-29 this instruction is attrito covering one's nakedness, iii, buted to God ; but in Ber. rabba 24 it
31; as to murder and those who is assigned, as in our text, to the angels:
witness it, iv. 5; as to retribution, iv. also in the Life of Adam and Eve, 22
32 ; as to the judgment of sinners, v. (Kautzsch, Apoc. und Pseud. ii. 515)
13; as to the feast of weeks, vi. 17 it is stated that God sent Michael with
and the divisions and length of the certain seeds to Adam, and with orders
year, vi. 29-35 ; as to circumcision, xv. to instruct him in husbandry.
25-26; as to the seed of Lot, xvi. 9 Is suitable. So Barth and Littmann
and the feast of tabernacles, xvi. 29 ; take zajastar’i as representing MNJ in
as to the feast of the lord, xviii. 19; the Hebrew. See on ii. 29. But the
as to the Philistines, xxiv. 33; as to
ordinary sense of the word, “‘is revealed,”
the marriage of the elder daughter, may be right here. See preceding note.
xxviii. 6; as to the man who gives his 16. Naked... and was not ashamed.
daughter to a Gentile, xxx. 9; as to Gen. ii. 25.
tithes, xxxii. 15 ; as to the incestuous Protected the garden from the birds,
person, xxxiii. 10; as to the Sabbath, 1. etc. The Greek is found in Glycas (p.
13. (2) Merely a contemporary event : 206, ed. Bekker): 6 ᾿Αδὰμ ἀπεσόβει τὰ
the naming of Abraham as a friend of πετεινὰ καὶ ἑρπετά, συνῆγε τὸν καρπὸν
God, xiv. 9, and of Levi, xxx. 20; ἐν παραδείσῳ καὶ σὺν τῇ γυναικὶ αὐτοῦ
Isaac’s blessing of Levi and Judah,
ἤσθιεν αὐτόν. ;
XXX. 92, (8) Predictions and predeter- [And put aside... kept]. Bracketed
minations : as to the judgment, v. 13 ; as a dittography. Here “which was
as to the Messianic kingdom, xxiii. 92, being kept” = τὸ φυλασσόμενον =
15. Seven years. According to Ber. nግbuisn, a corrupt dittography of nyxwan
rabba 18, Sanh. 380, and Die Schatz- Ξετὸ καταλειφθέν, ‘‘the residue” (or
hihle, p. 7 (translated by Bezold), Jean of JI),

26 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
kept]. 17. And after the completion of the seven years,
which he had completed there, seven years exactly, and in
8 A.M, the second month, on the seventeenth day (of the month),
the serpent came and approached the woman, and the serpent
said to the woman, “ Hath God commanded you, saying, Ye
shall not eat of every tree of the garden?” 18. And she
said to it, “ Of all the fruit of the trees of the garden God
hath said unto us, Eat; but of the fruit of the tree which is
in the midst of the garden God hath said unto us, Ye shall
not eat thereof, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.”
19. And the serpent said unto the woman, “ Ye shall not
surely die: for God doth know that on the day ye shall eat
thereof, your eyes will be opened, and ye will be as gods,
and ye will know good and evil.” 20. And the woman saw
the tree that it was agreeable and pleasant to the eye, and
that its fruit was good for food, and she took thereof and
eat. 21. And when she had first covered her shame with
fig-leaves, she gave thereof to Adam and he eat, and his eyes
were opened, and he saw that he was naked. 22. And he
took fig-leaves and sewed (them) together, and made an apron
for himself, and covered his shame. 23. And God cursed
the serpent, and was wroth with it for ever. . . . 24. And He
was wroth with the woman, because she hearkened to the
17-22. Gen. iii. 1-7. therefore, most probably contained —
19. See on ver. 32. Cf. Syncellus some statement relative to the cutting
i. 18: Ἔκ τῶν λεπτῶν Tevécews: τῷ off of the serpent’s feet. Such a stateἑβδόμῳ ἔτει παρέβη καὶ τῷ ὀγδόῳ ἐξερ- ment would follow naturally on Gen.
ρίφησαν τοῦ παραδείσου, ὥς φησι, μετὰ iii. 14 “upon thy belly thou shalt go.” 7
τεσσαράκοντα πέντε ἡμέρας τῆς παρα- Indeed in the Targ., Ps.-Jon., Gen. iii.
βάσεως, . .. 14 we find this very statement bin
28. Cf. Gen. iii, 14. At the close psspn, “and thy feet will be cut off.”
of this verse I have marked a lacuna in According to the Midrash Koheleth
the text; for Glycas (p. 206) affirms “the ministering angels came down and
that according to Jubilees the serpent and cut off its hands and feet.” Finally ©
had originally four feet: ὁ ὄφις ἀπὸ Josephus (Azt. i. 1. 4) writes that the
κτήνους ἑρπετὸν ἐγένετο, χεῖράς τε Kal serpent was deprived both of language ©
πόδας ἐκέκτητο. ἀφῃρέθη δὲ ταῦτα διὰ and feet, ἀφείλετο δὲ καὶ τὸν ὄφιν τὴν
τὸ τολμηρῶς εἰς τὸν παράδεισον εἰσελθεῖν. φωνὴν ποδῶν Te αὐτὸν ἀπο-.
Syncellus (i. 14) states that the serpent στερήσας σύρεσθαι κατὰ τῆς γῆς ἰλυσπώhad originally four feet. The text, μενον ἐποίησε.

CHAPTER III. 17-29 27
voice of the serpent, and did eat; and He said unto her: “I
shall greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy pains: in sorrow
thou shalt bring forth children, and thy return shall be unto
thy husband, and he will rule over thee.’ 25. And to Adam
also He said, “ Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice
of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat thereof, cursed
be the ground for thy sake: thorns and thistles shall it
bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat thy bread in the
sweat of thy face, till thou returnest to the earth from
whence thou wast taken; for earth thou art, and unto earth
shalt thou return.” 26. And He made for them coats of
skin, and clothed them, and sent them forth from the
Garden of Eden. 27. And on that day on which Adam
went forth from the Garden, he offered as a sweet savour
an offering, frankincense, galbanum, and stacte, and spices
in the morning with the rising of the sun from the day
when he covered his shame. 28. And on that day was
closed the mouth of all beasts, and of cattle, and of birds,
and of whatever walks, and of whatever moves, so that they
could no longer speak: for they had all spoken one with
another with one lip and with one tongue. 29. And He
24. J shall greatly multiply thy sorrow 27. Here the writer antedates the
and thy pains, etc. Gen. iii. 16. incense-offering mentioned in Exod.
Thy pains. So also LXX, but Mass,, XXX. 34. According to Aboda zara 8a
Sam., Syr., and Vulg.=“thy concep- Adam offered an ox whose horns were
tion ” (33157). of earlier growth than its hoof (Beer,
Thy return =] ἀποστροφή cov. So Buch der Jub. p. 40).
also LXX and Syr.= n20wn instead of From the day when he covered his
Mass. and Sam. ynpwn=“ they desire.” shame. Exod, xx. 26, xxviii. 42,
where the priests are bidden to cover
25-26. Gen. iii. 17-19, 21, 24.
their nakedness with breeches when at
25. Of the tree=d7mb τοῦ EvAov. The
the altar, may have been in the mind of
text is “οἵ that tree,” but the demonthe writer, as Beer (op. cit. p. 41)
Strative is a rendering of the Greek
suggests.
art. as frequently.
28. This was undoubtedly a current
Thy bread. So LXX, but Mass.,
belief among certain sections of the
Sam., Syr., Vulg. omit “thy.”
Jews. Thus it is stated without
To the earth... for earth... question in Joseph. Ant, 1, 1. 4 ὁμοunto earth. As LXX uses γῆ to render φωνούντων δὲ κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τῶν
the two Hebrew words ΠΡῚΝ and ἼΞν, so ζῴων ἁπάντων. It appears also in the
did the Greek version of Jubilees. Book of Adam and Eve i. 18 and in

28 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
sent out of the Garden of Eden all flesh that was in the
Garden of Eden, and all flesh was scattered according to
its kinds, and according to its types unto the places which
had been created for them. 30. And to Adam alone did
some form is implied in Philo, Quaest. Gen. 1x.-1xi,, St. Ephraem, and Barin Gen. i. 32 (Armen.). Both our hebraeus (see Assemani, Bibi. OF, iii. 318,
text and Josephus are quoted as teach- 314) were just as confident of the
ing this view in Syncellus, i. 14, τὰ absolute priority of their own language,
θηρία καὶ τὰ τετράποδα Kal τὰ ἑρπετὰ while Solomon Baisorensis reconciled
φησὶν ὁ ᾿Ιώσηππος καὶ 7 Λεπτὴ Τένεσις both views by declaring that originally
ὁμόφωνα εἶναι πρὸ τῆς παραβάσεως τοῖς Syriac and Hebrew were one and the
πρωτοπλάστοις. This statement is re- same.
peated in Cedrenus, i. pp. 9-10 ; Zonaras, In Die Schatzhéhle (transl. by Bezold),
i. p. 23. It seems implied in the text p- 29, the priority of Syriac is polemically
that the common original language of maintained: “Von Adam bis damals
men and animals was Hebrew. That redeten sie alle in dieser Sprache, nimHebrew was the primitive language lich in der syrischen Sprache...
of man, at any rate, was universally denn diese Sprache ist die Konigin
believed among the Jews. Thus accord- aller Sprachen. Die friiheren Schrifting to the Jerusalem Targum on Gen. xi. steller aber irren, indem sie sagen, das
1 all men originally spoke Hebrew, which Hebriische sei die erste gewesen.”
was the language by means of which
Other writers again asserted that
the world was created : nq gp jura
Greek was the primitive speech of
Nay Roa evans jb peo. (Gf, also Ber.
mankind. To this last view Eutychius
rabba 18, 31.) In xii. 25, 26 of our (Nazam, al-j. pp. 53, 54, quoted by
text it is called ‘‘the tongue of the Malan, Book of Adam and Eve, pp. 245,
creation,” which ‘‘had ceased from the 6) assents in these words. ‘This
mouths of all the children of men from approves itself to me. For the Greek
the day of the overthrow (of Babel)” till language is wiser, clearer and broader
the days of Abraham. In Cedrenus, than either the Hebrew or the Syriac.”
i, 22, however, the legend is differently The same view must have been held by
preserved. Because Eber refused to the writer who first derived the name
join in building Babel he did not lose Adam from the initial letters of the
his original language—the language that Greek names of the four quarters of the
Adam spoke—like the rest of his con- world—-dvarony, δύσις, ἄρκτος, μεσημβρία.
temporaries—Tijs τῶν ἄλλων φωνῆς See Slav. En. xxx. 13 (note); Or.
συγχεθείσης ἡ τοῦ Ἕβερ οὐκ ἀπώλετο. Sibyll. iii. 24-26. As for later Jewish
αὕτη δέ ἐστιν ] καὶ ᾿Αδὰμ ἐλάλει. ideas on this subject we find, Sanh.
Hence his descendants called themselves 380, that Adam spoke Aramaic, BN
‘ore peda pein, because Ps. cxxxix.,
Hebrews and their language Hebrew,
and the names of the patriarchs are a which was supposed to be written by
proof that Hebrew was the pre-Babel him, contained an Aramaic (?) word.
language— καὶ ταύτην οἱ τοῦτον δια- In Shabb. 12> on the other hand one
δεξάμενοι ἀπόγονοι πατρωνυμικῶς ἑαυ- is bidden not to pray in Aramaic, YN
τοὺς Ἑβραίους προσηγόρευσαν καὶ sax peda 7.03 ΠΊΦΠ "ORs because the
Ἑβραΐδα τὴν φωνὴν ἐκάλεσαν. τεκ- angels of Service do not understand
μήριον δὲ ταύτην εἶναι τὴν πρὸ τῆς Aramaic (quoted in Levis Neuhebr. u.
συγχύσεως φωνὴν τὰ τῶν παλαιῶν ὀνό- chald. Wérterbuch, i. 168). According
ματα. This view is likewise Jewish: to Abarbanel, in his exposition of
it is found in the Chronicles of Jerah- Zephaniah, fol. 276, col. 1 (see Hisenmeel, xxxviii. 11. But while some menger, ii. 778), Hebrew was the
Syriac writers such as John bar Madani language spoken before the building
and Jacob of Serugh admitted this of Babel and should ultimately be that
claim, others like Theodoret, Quaest. in of all Israelites.

CHAPTER III. 30-35 29
He give (the wherewithal) to cover his shame, of all the
beasts and cattle. 31. On this account, it is prescribed on
the heavenly tables as touching all those who know the
judgment of the law, that they should cover their shame,
and should not uncover themselves as the Gentiles uncover
themselves. 32. And on the new moon of the fourth 8 a,x.
month, Adam and his wife went forth from the Garden of
Eden, and they dwelt in the land of ‘1d, in the land of
their creation. 33. And Adam called the name of his wife
Eve. 34. And they had no son till the first jubilee, and
after this he knew her. 35. Now he tilled the land as he
had been instructed in the Garden of Eden.
31. This verse is of great importance mediately after the expulsion of Adam
from the historical standpoint. It from Eden, $.6., immediately after the
constitutes an emphatic protest on the discovery of his nakedness. Subsepart of the writer against the adoption quently (vii. 20) he represents Noah as
by his countrymen (“those who know enjoining the observance of this ordithe judgment of the law ) of the nance on his children.
customs of the Greeks. The custom, 32. On the new moon of the fourth
which he here protests against, is the month (see note on vi. 23). Syncellus
exposure of the person in the Greek (i. Dp. 18) says that Adam spent fortypalaestra, which was established under five days in the garden after his transthe very citadel of David (2 Mace. iv. gression. This agrees with our text;
12). Here many of the Jewish for, according to iii. 17, Adam sinned on
youths completely stripped themselves the 17th of the 2nd month and the
and joined in the public sports as expulsion followed on the Ist of the
Greek athletes. Even the priests of the 4th. A
Temple forsook their duties to join in In the land of ’Elda, in the land of
these heathen games. On the institu- their creation. Can ’Hlda be a cortion of these and other Greek customs ruption of atv? In that case “land
see 1 Macc. i. 13, 14; 2 Macc. iv. 9-14; of ‘Elda would mean “land of
Jos. Ant. xii. 5. 1. It is hardly nativity.” The phrase “land of their
possible to conceive the shock that such creation” is an interpretation of the
conduct must have given to the re- words in Gen. iii. 23 ‘‘whence he was
ligiously disposed amongst the nation, taken,” which are reproduced in
and especially to such a Pharisee of Onkelos and Ps.-Jon. as “whence he
the Pharisees as our author. In order was created (anx), as in our text.
to emphasise his protest against it he
34. Thus Eve was a virgin till after
did not turn to the laws in Exod. xx.
the expulsion from Eden. Cf. Die Schatz26, xxx. 34, for these had only to do
Rae (ed. Bezold, 1883), p. 7: Als
with the dress of the officiating priest,
Adam und Heva aus dem Paradies
but to Gen. iii. 21 where he found
herausgegangen . . . sie waren jungample justification for extending the
fraiilich.
law of covering one’s shame to all men.
This law, he asserts, was enacted im- 35. Cf. iii. 15.

30 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Cain and Abel and other children of Adam, 1-12. Enos,
Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared, 13-15: Enoch and his
history, 16-25. Four sacred places, 26. Methuselah,
Lamech, Noah, 27,28. Death of Adam and Cain,
29-32. Shem, Ham, and Japhet, 33. (Cf. Gen. iv.-v.).
4-70 A.M. IV. And in the third week in the second jubilee she
1-77a.m, gave birth to Cain, and in the fourth she gave birth to
8-84.a.m. Abel, and in the fifth she gave birth to her daughter Awan.
9-105 a.m. 2. And in the first (year) of the third jubilee, Cain slew
Abel because (God) accepted the sacrifice of Abel, and did
not accept the offering of Cain. 3. And he slew him in
the field: and his blood cried from the ground to heaven,
complaining because’h e had slain him. 4. And the Lord
reproved Cain because of Abel, because he had slain him,
IV. 1. "Awan. A second daughter pp. 373-374, Fabricius, Cod. Pseud.
named’ Azfiri(iv. 8) was born later. Cain V.T. i. 109 sad.)
married the elder’ AwAn,j.e. TNs ‘“wicked- According to Syncellus (i. 14)
Cain was born in the year 70 A.M,
ness,” and Seth the younger, ’Azfira.
Abel in 77, and Asouam ({.6. Awan)
The derivation of the latter is doubtin 85. Though the dates are left
ful. Frankel (Monatsschrift f. Gesch.
indefinite in our text they are no
des Judenthums, 1856, 311-316) thinks
that it is from »nsy=‘‘chaste” (8). doubt derived from it. Thus Cain
married Awan in the year 135 accordProbably it is from mmx, “well
ing to Syncellus, between 134-140
guarded”’ (cf. Syriac Fragment }30))).
according to our text. Awan was
No two of later writers agree as to the then fifty years old (Syncellus).
forms of these names. According to 2-3. Cf. Gen. iv. 4, 5, 8, 10.
the Syriac Fragment they were Aswa 2. The sacrifice of Abel. Soa. bed
and Azura: in Epiphanius, Σανή and read ‘‘the sacrifice at his hand.” —
᾿Αζουρά: in Syncellus, ᾿Ασαυνᾶν Offering. ac, but bd omit.
(Acauvd, ᾿Ασαυρᾶν, ᾿Ασαυρά, ᾿Ασουάμ) Of Cain. Soa. bed “at the hand —
and ᾿Αζουρά. In Glycas and Joel of Cain.”
’Afoupd (᾿Αζουρᾶν) is made the elder 3. Complaining or “making suit.” —
and ᾿Ασουάμ the younger. Quite Cf. Gen. iv. 10; Eth. Enoch xxii. 5, 6.
different names are given in the Pseudo- According to Syncellus (i. 14) Abel
Methodius, i.6., Καλημέρα and Λεβόρα. was twenty-two years old when he
Again the elder appears as Qalmana offered his sacrifice on the new moon
in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel and of the seventh month. Thus the words
Pseudo-Methodius (Lat. vers.), as Luva ‘*in the first of the third jubilee” are
in the Book of Adam and Eve, as Azrun to be taken as the first year of the
in Eutychius, while the youngeris Lebuda jubilee=99 a.m. For the later tradiin Barhebraeus, Aklejam in the Book tions as to the instrument with which —
of Adam and Eve, and Owain or Cain slew Abel, see Fabricius, Cod.
Laphura in Eutychius. (See Rénsch, Pseud. V.T. i. 118.

CHAPTER IV. 1-9 31
and he made him a fugitive on the earth because of the
blood of his brother, and he cursed him upon the earth.
5. And on this account it is written on the heavenly tables,
© Cursed is he who smites his neighbour treacherously, and let
all who have seen and heard say, So be it; and the man who
has seen and not declared (it), let him be accursed as the
other.’ 6. And for this reason we announce when we come
before the Lord our God all the sin which is committed in
heaven and on earth, and in light and in darkness, and
everywhere. 7. And Adam and his wife mourned for Abel
four weeks of years, and in the fourth year of the fifth week aged
A.M
they became joyful, and Adam knew his wife again, and she
bare him a son, and he called his name Seth; for he said
“Gop has raised up a second seed unto us on the earth
instead of Abel; for Cain slew him.” 8. And in the sixth
week he begat his daughter Azra 9. And Cain took 134-140 a.m
*AwaAn his sister to be his wife and she bare him Enoch at
the close of the fourth jubilee. And in the first year of the 190-196 a.m
first week of the fifth jubilee, houses were built on the earth, 197 a.m.
and Cain built a city, and called its name after the name of
4. Cf. Gen. iv. 11,12. <A fugitive. Became joyful. The sense may be
Text ntha is a corrupt transliteration of the same as in Gen. xviii. 12, “ After I
y3, Gen. iv. 12. am waxed old, shall I have pleasure ?”’
5. Cf. Deut. xxvii. 24. He called. So Sam. Nገp", but Mass.,
Treacherously = δόλῳ, the LXX LXX, Syr., Onk., of Gen. iv. 25 read
rendering of nova in Deut. xxvii. 24. “she called.” In Jubilees it is generThe phrase ba’ektij bears the same ally the father that names the child;
meaning in xxix. 7, xxx. 3. In Viii. whereas in J of Genesis it is the mother,
9 it = “secretly.” except in iv. 26, v. 29, xxv. 25, 26;
6. Sin. . . committed in heaven. Exod. ii. 22.
On this old Semitic idea of the possi- For he said. So LXX and Vulg.
bility of sin in heaven, see my Slavonic but wanting in Mass. and Sam.
Enoch pp. xxxiv. sqq. 8. Aziird. Seenoteoniv.1. ‘Azra
7. Mourned for Abel four weeks of was born in the sixth week of the third
years. As Abel was born in 77, and jubilee (134-140) or of the fourth
was twenty-two years old according to (183-189).
Syncellus and our text (see verse 3, 9. Bare him Enoch, etc. Cf. Gen.
note) when killed by Cain, the twenty- iv. 17. Syncellus (i. 16) ascribes to
eight years of mourning extend from this Enoch the invention of the plough.
99 to 127. The Greek is found in Cain built a city, and called its name
Syncellus (i. 15): ἐπένθησαν αὐτὸν οἱ . . Enoch. Cain therefore ceased to
πρωτόπλαστοι ἑβδομαδικοὺς τέσσαρας, be a wanderer. The Book of Jashar,
ἤγουν ἔτη εἴκοσι ὀκτώ. 96, plays on the name Enoch and gives

THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
32
his son Enoch. 10. And Adam knew Eve his wife and
she bare yet nine sons. 11. And in the fifth week of the
fifth jubilee Seth took Azra his sister to be his wife, and in
25-231 A.M.
the fourth (year of the sixth week) she bare him Enos.
235 A.M.
12. He began to call on the name of the Lord on the earth.
13. And in the seventh jubilee in the third week Enos
09-315 A.M.
it the sense of rest in this connection. from one to six Syncellus carried out in
™» 19 an 3 Ἴ2 D3 pan Py ow ne Np? the service of his chronological system
pan oD’ pax. (see Ronsch, 285 sq.).
10. Yet nine sons. Reproduced in 12. He began. So LXX and Vulg.
Epiphanius, Haer. xxxix. 6 (vol. 1.1, 528: implying spn im.
ed. Oehler): Γεγόνασι δὲ τῷ ᾿Αδὰμ καὶ Began to call, etc. The two great
ἄλλοι υἱοί, ὡς ἡ λεπτὴ Γένεσις περιέχει, versions, the LXX and Syr., agree rightly
ἐννέα μετὰ τοὺς τρεῖς τούτους * ὡς εἶναι with Jubilees in giving this sense to
αὐτῷ δύο μὲν θυγατέρας, ἄρρενας δὲ Gen. iv. 26. It was also so understood
δεκαδύο. The Book of Jashar speaks by Josephus, Ant. i. 3. 1, but when we
of three sons and three daughters of
come down to Jerome’s time, most
Adam. Syncellus (i. 18) assigns to Jewish scholars held that the verse rehim thirty-three sons and twenty-seven counted the rise of idolatry (Quaest. in —
daughters. Ps.-Philo, Ant. bibl. Lib. Gen. iv. 26: Tunc initium fuit invop. 41, gives the names of these sons: candi nomen Domini, licet plerique
Acliseel, Suris, Aelamiel, Brabal, Naalt, Hebraeorum aliud arbitrentur, quod
Harama, Zasam, Maathal, Anath. tune primum in nomine Domini et in
11. Cf. Gen. iv. 26. Fourth (year similitudine ejus fabricata sint idola).
of the sixth week). The lacuna here is This latter interpretation may have
supplied from Syncellus. According arisen as early as the first cent. A.D.;
to Syncellus (i. 17) Seth marries in the for it is found in Onkelos (‘the children
year υκέ (=425), and Enos was born in of men ceased prayi—n Rgs”s. . « son)
the year vAé (=435). Thus there was
By Ps.-Jon. the commencement of ©
an interval of ten years between the
idolatry is derived from Gen. iv. 26 by
marriage of Seth and the birth of Enos.
taking ὈΠῚΠ as=profanari. Ber. rabba
It will be observed that there is a
23 recounts that men were exposed to
difference of 200 years between the
demons in the days of Enos, and that —
dates assigned by Jubilees and those by
then for the first time they made for
Syncellus, and that in the following
themselves idols. Shabbath 118 speaks —
ten dates relating to the same events
of man committing idolatry like Enos. —
respectively both books agree in the tens
The same idea recurs in the Book οὗ
and units but differ in the hundreds.
Jashar and a closely related one in
According According the Chronicles of Jerahmeel, xxiv. 9,
to Jubilees. to Syncellus.
xxvi. 20. Yet even in this book traces
Seth born 130
of the older view survive ; for astrology, —
Azra born 134 234
divination and idolatry are assigned to ራ
Seth marries
Serug’s days, though Serug and his
Azuira 225 425
sons are said to have had no part in ©
Enos born 235 | 435
these things (xxvii. 9). Indeed, in the —
Cainan born . 325 625
Book of Jashar (Migne, Dict. des Apocr. —
Cain marries
ii. 1090), it is said that Seth called his
Mifialélét 390 790
son Enos because «« men began to corMahalalel born 395 795
rupt themselves and forsake God for
Jared born 461 960
idols.”
Enoch born 522 1122 Mahalalel, ©
13-15. Enos, Kenan,
This addition of centuries to the Jared.
dates in Jubilees rising progressively 13, 14. Cf. Gen. v. 9, 12.

CHAPTER IV. 10-15 33
took Noam his sister to be his wife, and she bare him a son
in the third year of the fifth week, and he called his name 325 a.m.
Kenan. 14. And at the close of the eighth jubilee Kenan 336-392 a.m.
took Mfaléléth his sister to be his wife, and she bare him a
son in the ninth jubilee, in the first week in the third year 395 a.m.
of this week, and he called his name Mabhalalel. 15. And 449-455 A.
in the second week of the tenth jubilee Mahalalel took unto
him to wife Dinah, the daughter of Baraki’él the daughter of
his father’s brother, and she bare him a son in the third
week in the sixth year, and he called his name Jared; for 461 A.M,
in his days the angels of the Lord descended on the earth,
13. Wédm. Cf. Ps.-Philo, Ant. bibl. tion is made on the authority of the
Lib. p. 41, Noaba. Syriac and Greek, save in viii. 6 and
Kenan. Eth. Kainan. xi. 7 where the Ethiopic preserves the
14, Méaléléth (so also Syr.) is a true text.
feminine form of Malalél ( = bNbHS)= Jared ; for in his days the angels of
“she who praises God.” the Lord descended. We have here a
Mahalalel, Eth. Malalél. play on Jared’s name in the original,
15. Cf. Gen. v. 15. Baraki’él (= vv ods "OND 5 yaa... ΤῊ.
R53), The angels of the Lord descended on
Took unto him to wife . . . the the earth. The later Jewish form of
daughter of his father’s brother. It the myth relating to the fall of the
will be observed that from the descent angels and their intercourse with the
of the angels onwards men cease to daughters of men is constructed on
marry their sisters. Epiphanius (Haier. Gen. vi. 1-4 and Is. xxiv. 21. The
xxxix. 7) remarks: πλατυνθέντων δὲ true interpretation of Gen. vi. 1-4 is
τῶν ἀνθρώπων. .. λοιπὸν οὐκέτι τὰς undoubtedly that given in our text,
αὑτῶν ἀδελφὰς πρὸς γάμον ἤγοντο, the Enoch literature, Testaments of
ἀλλὰ εἰς εὐνομίαν κατέστη καὶ πρὸ τοῦ the XII. Patriarchs, Philo, Jude, Peter,
διὰ Mwiicéws ἐγγράφου νόμου ὁ κατὰ Josephus, Justin Martyr, and most of
τὸν σεμνὸν γάμον θεσμός, καὶ ἐκ τῶν the early Christian writers (see my Eth.
πατραδέλφων αὐτῶν τὰς γαμετὰς ἑαυτῶν Enoch vi. 2, note). But probably at
ἤγοντο. The last clause appears, as the close of the first cent. A.D., or
Ronsch (p. 254) has already remarked, earlier, Jewish scholars protested against
to be taken from Jubilees. This book this interpretation. Thus (Ber. rabba
is cited by Epiphanius in the preced- 26) R. ben Jochai (early in second cent.)
ing chapter under its twofold name of cursed any one who translated Gen.
᾿Ιωβηλαῖα and Λεπτογένεσις. vi. 2 by the phrase ‘‘sons of God,” and
Father's brother. MSS read ’éhta not “sons of the judges.” Similarly,
"abahfi=“ father’s sister ” ; but I have the Jew Trypho condemns this interemended this into éhwa ’abfhti, since pretation, Justin, Dial. c. Tryph. 79.
we find the latter in the Syriac Frag- In the Samaritan Version (ποῦν 523),
ment and in the Greek MS 7 on Gen. and the Targum of Onkelos (Ν᾽ 32 5),
v. 15 (πατραδέλφου αὐτοῦ) and Epi- and Symmachus (viol τῶν δυναστευόν -
phanius, Haer. xxxix. 7: εἰς εὐνομίαν Tey) we have it rendered as =“ sons of
κατέστη Kal mpd τοῦ διὰ Mwicéws ἐγ- themighty.” Inthe Book of Jashar (Dict.
γράφου νόμου ὁ κατὰ τὸν σεμνὸν γάμον des Apocr. ii. 1097) the sons of God were
θεσμός, καὶ ἐκ τῶν πατραδέλφων αὐτῶν “judges and magistrates.” In the Ps.-
τὰς γαμετὰς ἑαυτῶν ἤγοντο. In similar Jon. on Gen. vi. 2 we have both intercases in the sequel the same emenda- pretations side by side, and also in the

᾿
34 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
those who are named the Watchers, that they should
instruct the children of men, and that they should do
Chronicles of Jerahmeel, xxiv. 11-xxv. 8. His exposition is given in Syncellus
Ps.-Philo, Ant. bibl. Lib. p. 42, gives (i. 84 sq.): πλήθους ἀνθρώπων ‘yevosimply the biblical words. Similarly, on μένου ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἄγγελοι τοῦ οὐρανοῦ
theChristian side the traditional interpre- θυγατράσιν ἀνθρώπων συνῆχθον. ἐν
tation came in due time to be denounced, ἐνίοις ἀντιγράφοις εὗρον, οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ θεοῦ.
and “the sons of God” were taken to μυθεύεται δέ, ὡς οἶμαι, ἀπὸ τοῦ Σήθ,
be the good amongst mankind, the ὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος οἱ υἱοὶ θεοῦ προσdescendants of Seth, and the daughters αγορεύονται, διὰ τοὺς ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ γενεαof men to be the descendants of Cain. λογουμένους δικαίους τε καὶ πατριάρχας
So Julius Africanus: of ἀπὸ τοῦ Σὴθ ἀχρὶ τοῦ Σωτήρος. τοὺς δ᾽ ἀπὸ Κάϊν
δίκαιοι (see below), Next, while Hilary ἀνθρώπων ἀποκαλεῖ σποράν, ὡς οὐδέ τι
(ob. 368), Comment, in Ps. exxxii., con- θεῖον ἐσχηκότας διὰ πονηρίαν γένους
tents himself with discrediting the old . εἰ δὲ ἐπ᾿ ἀγγέλων νοοῖτο ἔχειν
myth, Chrysostom, Homi. in Gen. τούτους, τῶν περὶ μαγείας καὶ γοητείας
vi. 1, says that it is necessary to ex- . ταῖς γυναιξὶ τὴν γνῶσιν παραδεamine this passage carefully in order to δωκέναι, ad’ ὧν ἐποιήσαντο παῖδας
subvert the fables of thoughtless praters τοὺς γίγαντας. (Cf. also 1, 16 sq.)
---ἀναγκαῖον τούτου τοῦ χωρίου πολλὴν When we pass from this writer to
τὴν ἔρευναν ποιήσασθαι καὶ ἀναστρέψαι the sixth cent. Book of Adam and
τὰς μυθολογίας τῶν ἀπερισκέπτως πάντα Eve, we find that the new interpreφθεγγομένων. These fables rest on tation has ousted the old from the
a false exegesis; for, as lie proceeds field. Thus the Watchers are throughto show, the sons of God were the out described as the sons of Seth, and
posterity of Seth and Enos—oi ἀπὸ τοῦ in Book III. chap. iv. the question is
Σὴθ καὶ τοῦ "Eyes. Jerome, Comment. discussed at length: the wise men who
in Ps, exxxii., and Augustine, De Civ. said that angels had come down from
Dei, xv. 23. 4, pour discredit and heaven and mingled with the daughters —
contempt on the old myth. Now con- of men had erred: such actions, morecurrently with the increasing acceptance over, were impossible for spiritual —
of the new interpretation, there neces- beings. These “angels of God” were —
sarily set in the growing importance of the children of Seth who were thus ©
Seth, the ancestor of the righteous designated so long as they preserved
generations described in Gen. vi. 1-4 as their virginity, their innocence and —
‘the sons of God.” In this process their glory. But they transgressed and
of glorification the superhuman achieve- mingled with the daughters of Cain. ©
ments and characteristics originally con- It is observable that whereas Seth is an —
nected with other names were gradually extraordinary and superhuman person- |
transferred to Seth, and this notably in age in this work, there is nothing ποῦς
the case of Enoch. Thus in consequence able said of Enoch save that “ he wrote
of this new exegesis the star of Enoch a celebrated book” and that «« many ~
paled before that of Seth. In dealing wonders happened to him. . . but
with such literature this is an important those wonders may not be told in this —
fact, since we are thus frequently justi- place.” For the same view as to the
fied in applying to Enoch the statements Watchers, see Die Schatzhéhle, pp. 8-10. —
of later Christian writers regarding Seth. Our next illustration consists of an,
We shall now show how subordinate anonymous extract prefixed to the works |
the figure of Enoch becomes in later of Malala (circa 600), quoted by Fabii- —
writers, while the glorification of Seth cius, i, 151: ὁ δὲ ᾿Αδὰμ od! ἐτῶν ἣν ὅτε
proceeds apace. First of all in Africanus, ἐγέννησε τὸν Σήθ' οὗτος ὁ Σὴθ πρῶτος,
who lived about the beginning of the ἐξεῦρεν γράμματα Ἑβραϊκὰ καὶ σοφίαν.
third cent., we have, so far as I am καὶ τὰ σημεῖα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τὰς
aware, the first occurrence amongst τροπὰς τῶν ἐνιαυτῶν καὶ τοὺς μῆνας καὶ
Christians of the new exegesis of Gen. τὰς ἑβδομάδας καὶ τοῖς ἄστροις ἐπέvi. 1-4. He adds, it is true, the old θηκεν ὀνόματα καὶ τοῖς πέντε πλανήταιξ
view, but he does not approve of it. εἰς τὸ γνωρίζεσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων

CHAPTER IV. 15, 16 35
judgment and uprightness on the earth. 16. And in the
eleventh jubilee Jared took to himself a wife, and her name 512-518 a.m.
καὶ μόνον, καὶ τὸν μὲν a’ πλανήτην ἐμυήθη τὰ περὶ τῆς παραβάσεως μέλἀστέρα ἐκάλεσε Κρόνον, τὸν δὲ fp’ NovTa ἔσεσθαι τῶν ἔγρηγόρων καὶ τὰ
Δία, τὸν δὲ γ΄ Abpea, τὸν δὲ δ' περὶ κατακλυσμοῦ τοῦ ὕδατος ἐσομένου
᾿Αφροδίτην, τὸν δὲ ε΄ Ἑρμῆν. τοὺς yap . . καὶ γενόμενος ἄφαντος ἡμέρας μ'
δύο φωστῆρας ἥλιον καὶ σελήνην ὁ θεὸς ἐλθὼν ἐξηγήσατο τοῖς πρωτοπλάστοις
ἐκάλεσε. These words form on the ὅσα ἐμνήθη Bc ἀγγέλων. This is an
whole a reasonable description of the exact account of what was originally
achievements assigned to Enoch in the attributed to Enoch. In the Synopsis
two books of Enoch, in Jubilees, and of Cedrenus (eleventh cent.) we meet
the early Christian writers. They are with the same phenomena, but carried
found verbatim in the Chronography of one stage further; for, whereas SynJoel, p. 3 (ed. Bekker, 1836). Next, cellus first gave his own version of
in the Annals of Eutychius, Patriarch the intercourse of the sons of God
of Alexandria (933-939 A.D.), written and the daughters of men, and then
in Arabic and translated by Pococke with remarkable candour the original
(Migne, tom. 111 col, 913), a vigorous account from the Book of Enoch,
protest is made against the old myth: in Cedrenus, on the other hand, the two
qui autem errant neque sciunt quid accounts given by Syncellus are worked
dicant aiunt angelos descendisse ad up into one, and every incident told of
filias hominum, cum intelligendi sint the fallen angels is circumstantially
filii Sethi qui a monte sancto ad filias recounted of the posterity of Seth (i.
Caini maledicti descenderunt: Sethiadae 16-20). In Zonaras (twelfth cent.), i.
enim ob sanctitatem suam et quod mon- 26 (ed. Pinder 1841), the current view
tem sanctum incolerent, appelati sunt is given and the older mentioned only to
Bani Elohim, z.e., filii Dei. Similar be rejected. When we pass from this
statements are made in the Chronikon author we come to the semi-apotheosis
Paschale, i. pp. 38, 39 (ed. Dindorf, of Seth in the writings of Glycas
1832). In Syncellus {circa 800 a.D.), who lived some thirty or forty years
i. 17, 19 the now prevailing inter- later. Thus in the Annals of Glycas
pretation of Gen. vi. 1-4 is repeated. (ed. Bekker, 1836), p. 2338, Seth is
The descendants of Seth were pious and almost regarded as a divine being :—oi
beautiful, and they lived in the heights viol Tov θεοῦ, τουτέστιν οἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ Σὴθ
over against Paradise according to καταγόμενοι---ἐκεῖνον γὰρ διὰ τὴν ἀρετὴν
the command of Adam, but were later αὐτοῦ θεὸν ἔλεγον : and likewise on
seduced through love of the daughters p. 228, Σήθ. . . θεὸς εἶναι διὰ τὴν
of men (p. 17). Thereupon Syncellus ἀρετὴν αὐτοῦ νομιζόμενος. This idea,
cites Gen. vi. 1. Again, on p. 19 he indeed, had already appeared in
writes that two hundred Watchers of the Cedrenus, i. 16, ὠνομάσθη δὲ θεὸς διὰ
posterity of Seth were seduced and τὴν λάμψιν τοῦ προσώπου αὐτοῦ, ἣν
descended and took them wives, etc.— ἔσχεν ἐν ὅλῃ αὐτοῦ τῇ ζωῆ. Thus Seth
οἱ δὲ ἐκ γένους αὐτοῦ (Σήθ) διακόσιοι has at last become incomparably the
ἔγρήγοροι. . . πλανηθέντες κατέβησαν, chief personage among the early Patriκαὶ ἔλαβον ἑαυτοῖς γυναῖκας, κιτ.λ. These archs. In Glycas, p. 228, however, the
statements, first made in Eth. En. vi. persistency of the original Enoch myth
4-6, regarding the two hundred angels is shown in the words: λέγεται δὲ ὅτι
are here transferred to Seth, though ὁ ἐν τοῖς ἀστράσι τεταγμένος ἄγγελος,
Syncellus was perfectly aware of their ὁ θειότατος δηλαδὴ Οὐριήλ, πρός γε τὸν
original bearing ; for in the next para- ΣὴΘ καὶ τὸν ᾿Ενὼχ κατιὼν ἐδίδαξεν
graph he actually cites this chapter of αὐτοὺς ὡρῶν μηνῶν τροπῶν καὶ ἐνιαυτῶν
the Eth. En. Again, on pp. 16-17 Seth, διαφοράς. Just as these Christian
just as formerly Enoch, is said to have writers transferred Enoch’s functions
been carried off by the angels and to to Seth, so Jewish writers after the
have received a revelation regarding the Christian era, though on different
future fall of the Watchers and the grounds, transferred them variously to
Deluge—6 Σὴθ ἁρπαγεὶς ὑπὸ ἀγγέλων Moses, Ezra, Elijah, etc. See my

36 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
was Baraka, the daughter of Rastjal, a daughter of his
father’s brother, in the fourth week of this jubilee, and she
bare him a son in the fifth week, in the fourth year of the
522 A.M.
jubilee, and he called his name Enoch. 17. And he was
Apocalypse of Baruch, xiii. 3 note, lix. Father's brother, Emended from
5-11 notes. ‘*father’s sister,” as in ver. 15.
Watchers. The ony of Dan. iv. 13, 17-23. These verses relating to Enoch
17, 23, in Greek ἐγρήγοροι. See Eth. are of great importance as they help to
En,1 ,0 (note), xx. 1, etc.; Slav. En. determine the sections of the Ethiopic
i, (notes), xviii. (notes); Test. Reub. Enoch which were known to the author
vy. Thus anciently the watchers were of our text. The words “the first ...
always regarded as an angelic class, who learnt writing” may point to the —
but later, owing to a new interpretation phrase in Eth. Enoch xii. 3, “ Enoch
of Gen. vi. 1-4, they were said to be the the scribe”; xii. 4, xv. 1, “Scribe of
descendants of Seth. We have seen in righteousness,” but there is no certainty.
the immediately preceding note how this On the other hand the clause “who
came about. wrote down the signs of heaven accordWatchers instruct the children of men. ing to the order of their months ina
In v. 6 it is said that God sent the angels book that men might know the seasons ~
to the earth. The object with which of the years, etc.” may be accepted as a
the angels here descended to the earth partial description of Eth. Enoch 1xxii.-
(see v. 6, viii. 10 note) seems at first lxxxii. To ver. 18 we shall return §
sight to clash with that which is seem- presently. As regards ver. 19 we can ©
ingly implied in the Eth. Enoch and attain to practical certainty. The
the Slavonic Enoch (see Eth. Enoch vi. words ‘‘ what was and what will be, he
notes). But it is quite possible that saw in a vision of his sleep as it will
our text provides us with the object happen to the children of men...
originally assigned in the myth. In until the day of judgment,” form an
the Chronicles of Jerahmeel xxv. 2-3 exact description of the Dream-Visions |
this view is preserved where Shemchazai in Eth. Enoch Ixxxiii.-xe., which give a
and ‘Azael are represented as receiving history of the world from the creation
permission from God to descend on till the final judgment. Moreover, the
earth in order to sanctify the divine next verse is no doubt indebted to Eth.
name among men. When these angels Enoch Ixxxy. 3 for the name of Enoch’s”
descended they could not resist the wife. It will be observed also that
attractions of the daughters of men the Dream-Visions referred to in ver.
(xxv. 4). Such a view most probably 19 are rightly placed before Enoch’s =
underlies Eth. Enoch vi., lxxxvi. 1. At marriage recounted in ver. 20. It is
all events the idea was a familiar one twice emphatically stated in Eth. Enoch
in the Judaism of the second cent. B.C. Ixxxiii. 2 and lxxxy. 3 that Enoch had
According to Ethiopic Enoch vi.-xxxvi. these Visions before his marriage. We
and )xxii.-lxxxii. Enoch owed all his need, therefore, entertain no doubt as
supernatural knowledge to the instruc- to our author having been acquainted
tion of angels, and according to x. 9-10 with Eth. Enoch lxxxiii.-xc. Now on
of our text Raphael taught Noah the other critical grounds we know that
secrets of medicinal herbs, and an angel Eth. Enoch vi.-xi. are earlier thar
of the presence instructs Moses through- Ixxxiii.-xc. Next, the first clause in
out our book. The way for such beliefs ver. 21, ‘‘he was moreover with the
was prepared by the statements in
Ezekiel, Zechariah and Daniel, bearing years,” offers an explanation of ᾿
on such offices of the angels. For Enoch xii. 1-2, «« Before all these
Talmudic ideas on this subject see events Enoch was translated and ne
Jewish Encyclopaedia, i. 592-598. one of the children of men knew whithe)
16. Rasijal (Gk. MS 75 ἀσουήλ cor- he was translated, and where he ab
rupt for ρασουήλ), 1.6. DNS= “a ccept- and what had become of him. 2.
able to God.”

CHAPTER IV. 27, 18 37
the first among men that are born on earth who learnt
writing and knowledge and wisdom and who wrote down
the signs of heaven according to the order of their months
in a book, that men might know the seasons of the years
according to the order of their separate months. 18. And
he was the first to write a testimony, and he testified to the
sons of men among the generations of the earth, and
Watchers and his days were with the ἔγραψε τὰ σημεῖα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τὰς
holy ones.” Since in ver. 22 the clause τροπὰς καὶ τοὺς μῆνας and in Cedrenus
“testified to the watchers” presupposes (1. 17) οὗτος πρῶτος γράμματα μανθάνει.
such statements as are in Eth. En. xii. In Eth. Enoch lxix. 8, however, the
3-6, xiii. 1-2, xiv. 4-7, xv. 2 sqq., we first instruction of mankind in writing
may conclude, therefore, that our is ascribed to a Satan. On the other
author had also chapters xii.-xvi. of hand, just as we should expect (see
Eth. Enoch before him. To return to note on ἢ. 34), John Malala, p. 5 (ed.
ver. 21 the clause “they showed him Dindorf), attributes Enoch’s achieveeverything which is on earth” appears ments to Seth: οὗτος ὁ Σὴθ πρῶτος
to refer to Enoch’s journeys to the four ἐξεῦρε γράμματα EBpaikd . .. καὶ τὰ
quarters of the earth as well as to its σημεῖα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τὰς τροπὰς τῶν
centre under the guidance of various ἐνιαυτῶν καὶ τοὺς μῆνας. Similarly
angels in Eth. Enoch xxiii.-xxxvi. The Cedrenus (i. 16): ὁ Σὴθ. . . τὴν τῶν
next words “(everything which is)... οὐρανίων κινήσεων σοφίαν ἐπενόησε
in the heavens” are less clear. They . καὶ τὰ EBpaike γράμματα
may point to Hnoch’s translation to συνεγράψατο, and Glycas (p. 228)
heaven in Eth. Enoch xiv. or possibly transfers to the latter the achieveto the celestial phenomena described in ments assigned in the Zeipd above to
lxxii.-lxxxii. Moreover, the next words, Enoch: πρῶτος ἐξεῦρεν ὁ Σὴθ. ..
‘sand the rule of the sun,” seem clearly τὰ σημεῖα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τὰς
to indicate such a passage as Ixxxii. 18- τροπὰς τῶν ἐνιαυτῶν καὶ τοὺς μῆνας.
20. We have already seen that the Cf. Joel, Chron. p. 3.
first clause of ver. 22 manifestly imWrote down. On Enoch the Scribe,
plies such a background as Eth. Enoch
see Eth. Enoch xii. 3, 4, and on the
xii.-xvi. Its second clause, ‘who had
later developments of this legend contransgressed with the daughters of men,”
sult the Slavonic Enoch xxiii. 1-8,
expresses the thought that recurs freThe rest of the verse refers mainly to
quently in these chapters. As regards
Eth. Enoch Ixxii.-lxxxii.
its third, “‘unite themselves, so as to be
defiled with the daughters of men,” the Signs of heaven according to the order
of ther months. The twelve solar
matter of it is found in xv. 8, 4, but
the actual clause word for word is months correspond to the twelve signs
taken from Eth, En. x. 11. Finally of the Zodiac,
ver. 23 points to some tradition like 18. There is nothing in the Eth. or
that at the base of Eth. En. lxx., which Slav. Enoch about the “weeks of the
in its present form is late. From the jubilees” or ‘‘the sabbaths of the
above, therefore, we conclude that our years.” Our author is here at his beauthor refers only to chapters vi.-xvi., loved practice of antedating an event
Xxiil.-xxxvi., Ixxii-xc. of the Eth. or usage he wishes to commend to his
Enoch. countrymen. We shall find (vii. 37,
17. First . , . who learnt writing 38, xxi. 10 note) that he similarly
-. and... wrote down the signs ascribes legalistic elements to Enoch,
of heaven, ete. Quoted in the Σειρά though there is no ground for regardof Nicephorus, i. 123, on Gen. v. 21: ing the books of Enoch as having
Ενωχ πρῶτος ἔμαθε γράμματα καὶ ever contained such matter.

38 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
recounted the weeks of the jubilees, and made known to
them the days of the years, and set in order the months
and recounted the Sabbaths of the years as we made (them),
known to him. 19. And what was and what will be he
saw in a vision of his. sleep, as it will happen to the children
of men throughout their generations until the day of judgment; he saw and understood everything, and wrote
his testimony, and placed the testimony on earth for all
the children of men and for their generations. 20. And
82-588 A.M. in the twelfth jubilee, in the seventh week thereof, he took
to himself a wife, and her name was Edni, the daughter of
Danél, the daughter of his father’s brother, and in the sixth
587 A.M.
year in this week she bare him a son and he called his
name Methuselah. 21. And he was moreover with the
angels of God these six jubilees of years, and they showed
him everything which is on earth and in the heavens, the
rule of the sun, and he wrote down everything. 22. And |
he testified to the Watchers, who had sinned with the
daughters of men; for these had begun to unite themselves, |
so as to be defiled, with the daughters of men, and Enoch ~
testified against (them) all. 23. And he was taken from
amongst the children of men, and we conducted him into
the Garden of Eden in majesty and honour, and behold
19. Saw in a vision, etc. This verse Father's brother. Emended as in |
describes the contents of Eth. Enoch ver. 15.
Ixxxiii.-xe. 21. Was with the angels. See note
The day of judgment, i.e. the final above on 17-23.
judgment. Cf. iv. 24, v. 10. These siz jubilees of years. Sod. A
He... placed the testimony on earth. slight change of vocalisation in b gives —
For references to the books of Enoch the same meaning. ac=“‘six jubilees
ef. Eth. En. i, 2, xxxvii. 2-4, lxxii. 1, in years.” This means 294 years.
xcii. 1, xciii. 10, civ. 11-13, Test. XII. Everything . . . tm the heavens. |
Patriarchs (see my Slavonic Enoch, pp. These words may refer to a fuller
Xxul, xxiv, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 20, 21, etc.). tradition than is found in the Eth. Enoch ©
20. Cf. Gen. v. 21. Edni is men- —perhaps to something which subse.
tioned in Eth. En. lxxxy. 3 where the quently became the groundwork of the
name is written Edna, as Methuselah’s Slav. Enoch, as is the case in regard to
wife is named in iv. 27 of our text where the tradition in ver. 23.
it has the independent support of the 23. Conducted him into the Garden of
Syriac and the Greek. Edn= naay = Eden. Eth. En. lxx. 1-3; Slav. Enoch
“ delight.” : Lxvii. 2.

CHAPTER IV. 19-26 39
there he writes down the condemnation and judgment of
the world, and all the wickedness of the children of men.
24. And on account of it (God) brought the waters of
the flood upon all the land of Eden; for there he was
set as a sign and that he should testify against all the
children of men, that he should recount all the deeds of the
generations until the day of condemnation. 25. And he
burnt the incense of the sanctuary, (even) sweet spices,
acceptable before the Lord on the Mount. 26. For the
There he writesdown . . . the wicked- mountain in question is Mount Ephraim
ness of the children of men. Enoch is (Josh. xvii. 15 sqq.). He argues that
here the Scribe of God. See iv. 23, this is the most easterly of the mountains
x. 17. This idea may be referred to in of Palestine ; that it contains all the
the Eth. En. xii. 8, 4; it is clearly localities of special sanctity among the
expressed in the Slavonic Enoch. See Samaritans, Gerizim, Sichem, Samaria;
my edition x1. 13 note, liii. 2, Ixiv. 5. that Abraham and Jacob had sacrificed
24. And on account of it (God) thereon (Gen. xii. 7, xxxiii. 20) just as
brought the waters of the flood, ete. Cf. sacrifices had been offered by Adam in
Slav. Enoch xxxiv. 3: “And on this Eden, according to iii. 27 of our text
account I will bring a deluge upon the and the Talmud, on Sinai by Moses and
earth” ; also Test. Napth. 4. on Zion by Israel. But as such aninTestify against ali the children of terpretation would imply a Samaritan
men, etc. See x. 17. authorship it is thereby made imUntil the day of condemnation. possible ; for the textual evidence is
Cf. iv. 19. itself decisive against such authorship.
25. Incense of the sanctuary, or “ in- The mention, moreover, of Zion tells in
cense in the sanctuary.” the same direction. There is some
Sweet spices acceptable before the Lord probability in the suggestion of Rénsch,
on the Mount. bcd = «‘ acceptable pp. 505-6, that by the Mount of the
before the Lord on the mountains of East we are to understand Lubar, one
the South” (qatr). But this use of the of the summits of Ararat, on which the
word gatr is unexampled elsewhere. a Ark rested and Noah sacrificed, as
omits it and writes the preceding word this lay to the NE. of Palestine and as
badabr. I have taken it as a corruption there would thus be connected with
of qéta= “r‘s wéee t spices.” The words these four places the notable names of
would point back to Exod. xxx. 7, Adam, Noah, Moses, David. See viii.
arb nip. 19 (note). On the other hand it is
On the Mount. So a. bed read possible that we have here the Mount
“on the mount of the mid-day (or mentioned in the preceding verse as
South).” This mountain may be the that on which Enoch offered incense.
mountain of the Hast. See next note. Now if we may cite the evidence of
26. Three of these places are con- Die Schatzhéhle and the Book of Adam
nected with three decisive turning-points and Eve, Seth and his posterity were
or periods in the history of mankind : commanded by Adam to live on the
the Garden of Eden as the first abode Mount close to Eden and not to descend
of man; Mount Sinai as the place to the plain and mingle with the dewhence the Law was promulgated, and scendants of Cain. Adam’s command
Zion asthe centre ofthe Theocracy. These was observed till the days of Jared.
three are again mentioned in viii. 19. This Mount could rightly be described
What the Mount of the East is, I cannot as the Mount of the East. Or again
determine. In the ZDMG, xi. pp. 730- the Mount of the Hast may be the
733 Rapoport is of opinion that the mountain which is described as the

40 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Lord has four places on the earth, the Garden of Eden, and
the Mount of the East, and this mountain on which thou
art this day, Mount Sinai, and Mount Zion (which) will be
sanctified in the new creation for a sanctification of the
earth ; through it will the earth be sanctified from all (its)
guilt and its uncleanness throughout the generations of the
. world, 27. And in the fourteenth jubilee Methuselah took
unto himself a wife, Edna the daughter of ’Azrifl, the
daughter of his father’s brother, in the third week, in the
first year of this week, and he begat a son and called his
name Lamech. 28. And in the fifteenth jubilee in the
1-707 A.M.
third week Lamech took to himself a wife, and her name
was Béténds the daughter of Barakiil, the daughter of his
father’s brother, and in this week she bare him a son and
he called his name Noah, saying, “ This one will comfort me
throne of God in Eth. Enoch xviii. 6-9, birthday of Noah, and 707 is no doubt
xxiii. 1-3, on which God will sit when the year intended. For in the Samaritan
He comes to visit the earth. It is the Chronicle (see preceding note) it is
highest of the seven mountains which distinctly stated that 707 years elapsed
are in the neighbourhood of the Garden from Adam to the birth of Noah. We
of Eden. Cf. Eth. Enoch xxxii. 1-2, can arrive at this date independently
lxxvii. 3-4. In Enoch, it is true, the also. With the help of the Samaritan
Garden of Eden appears to be in the Chronicle we saw in the notes on iv. 27
NW., but it is in the east in Jubilees: that Lamech was born in 654. Now
see vili. 16. according to the same Chronicle Lamech
Sanctified in the new creation. See was fifty-three when Noah was born:
note on i. 29. hence Noah was born in the year 707.
27. Cf. Gen. v. 25. Edna. See iv. On the other hand there is a discrepancy
20 note. According to the Samaritan between this date of Noah's birth and
Chronicle (translated by Neubauer in that which follows from vi. 18 and x.
the Jowrnal Asiatique, 1869, tom. xiv. 16. In the former it is said that the
No. 55, pp. 421-467) Methuselah was Feast of Weeks was celebrated 1309
sixty-seven when he married. years, from the day of creation till the
Father's brother, Emended as in 15. days of Noah, and that Noah observed
Lamech. The year of Lamech’s birth it 350 years. Hence Noah died in
is not mentioned, but it can be deter- 1659. But since in x. 16 Noah is said
mined from the date of Methuselah’s to have lived 950 years, this would fix
marriage furnished by the Samaritan 709 as the year of his birth.
Chronicle. According to it Methuselah Béténds=wix na. Lagarde’s MS 7 on
was sixty-seven when he married, and Gen, v. 29 gives βεθενως : the Syriac=
as he was born according to our text Enoshi. )
(iv. 20) in the year 587, Lamech was This one will comfort me, “This
probably born in the year 654. one” (ze emended from 2a = whieh),
28. Cf. Gen. v. 29. In the fifteenth Our text follows Gen. v. 29 in attributjubilee in the third week... she bare ing to the name Noah (n3) the meaning
him a son... Noah. This assigns belonging to Menachem (pomp). The
some year in the period 701-707 as the Book of Jashar 13dsays that Methuselah

CHAPTER TV. 27-31 ΔΙ
for my trouble and all my work, and for the ground which
the Lord hath cursed.” 29. And at the close of the
nineteenth jubilee, in the seventh week in the sixth year 930 a.m.
thereof, Adam died, and all his sons buried him in the
land of his creation, and he was the first to be buried in
the earth. 30. And he lacked seventy years of one
thousand years; for one thousand years are as one day in
the testimony of the heavens and therefore was it written
concerning the tree of knowledge: “On the day that ye eat
thereof ye will die.” For this reason he did not complete
the years of this day; for he died during it. 31. At the
close of this jubilee Cain was killed after him in the same
year; for his house fell upon him and he died in the midst
called the child Noah because the earth ἔγνωμεν αὐτὸν μὴ ἀναπληρώσαντα χίλια
would have rest (Ππ2) in his days, but ἔτη. Συνήκαμεν καὶ τὸ εἰρήμενον, ὅτι
Lamech called him Menachem because ἡμέρα Κυρίου ὡς χίλια ἔτη, εἰς τοῦτο
-
“he would comfort us” (ins). The συνάγειν. See also Lactantius, Jnstisame ideas are found in Ber. rabba 25. tution. vii. 14.
These results of learned reflection on 31-32. Cain was killed... in the
Gen. v. 29 appear to be later than same year, etc. In Syncellus, i. 19,
Jubilees. the text is partly reproduced: τῷ αὐτῷ
And for the ground. ΑἸ] authorities INN ἔτει καὶ Κάϊν ἀπέθανεν, ἐμπεσόντος
save the LXX and our text omit ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν τοῦ οἴκου" λίθοις γὰρ καὶ
“and.” αὐτὸς τὸν ABN ἀνεῖλε, In Cedrenus,
29. Land of his creation. See iii, 32 i, 16, more fully: οὗτος ὁ Κάϊν, ὡς ἡ
note. Λεπτὴ Μωσέως Τένεσις φησίν, τῆς οἰκείας
First to be buried in the earth. This πεσούσης ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν τελευτᾷ" λίθοις yap
shows that the legend, which is attested τὸν ἀδελφὸν “ABN ἀπέκτεινε, καὶ λίθοις
in the later Life of Adam and Eve ὁμοίως καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπεκτάνθη. In the
(Tischendorf’s A pocalypses A pocryphae, Ezcerpta Chronologica prefixed to the
p. 21), that the body of Abel was not works of John Malala we have this and
buried till that of Adam was, already the later legend given: kara (μ ετὰ)
existed. δὲ ταῦτα τῆς οἰκίας ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν πεσούσης
30. Cf. Gen. ii. 17. This interpreta- ἀπέθανεν, ὡς ἔνιοί φασιν" ἕτεροι δὲ ὅτι
tion of a day as a thousand years was Λαμὲχ αὐτὸν ἀπέκτεινεν. This latter
current among the Jews. Cf. Ber. rabba account is found also in Glycas 223, in
19, 22. 2 Pet. iii. 8 μία ἡμέρα παρὰ the Book of Adam and Eve, ii. 13, in
Κυρίῳ ὡς χίλια ἔτη. Barnab. Zp. xv. Jarchi’s Comm. on Gen. iv. 23, Tanchuma
ἡ γὰρ ἡμέρα παρ᾽ αὐτῷ χίλια ἔτη. See 6, the Book of Jashar (section Beresheth).
also Slav. En. xxxiii. 1, 2 (note) where For other authorities where the later
the application of this principle of legend is given see Hisenmenger, i. 470interpretation to the six days creation 471. On the other hand, according to
and the seventh of rest issues in the Ber. rabba 22, the Rabbis said that he
doctrine of the Millenium. Justin was killed by a stone, but Simeon the
Martyr (Dial. cum Tryph. \xxxi.) ap- son of Gamaliel stated that he was
parently quotes from the text: ws yap killed by a reed. The latter idea seems
τῷ ᾿Αδὰμ εἴρητο, ὅτι ἣ δ᾽ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ φάγῃ to have been suggested by the likeness
ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου, ἐν ἐκείνῃ ἀποθανεῖται, between jp and nap.

42 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
of his house, and he was killed by its stones; for with a
stone he had killed Abel, and by a stone was he killed in
righteous judgment. 32. For this reason it was ordained
on the heavenly tables: “ With the instrument with which
a man kills his neighbour with the same shall he be killed;
after the manner that he wounded him, in like manner shall
they deal with him.” 33. And in the twenty-fifth jubilee
1205 A.M,
Noah took to himself a wife,and her name was ‘Em zara, the
daughter of Raké’él, the daughter of his father’s brother, in
the first year in the fifth week: and in the third year
1207 A.M.
thereof she bare him Shem, in the fifth year thereof she
1209 A.M.
bare him Ham, and in the first year in the sixth week she
1212 A.M,
bare him Japheth.
31, With a stone he had killed Abel, penalty to the sin is repeatedly dwelt
and by a stone was he killed in on: the unforgiving debtor is refused
righteous judgment, etc. We have here forgiveness, the slothful servant loses
the primitive human law of retaliation what he had, he who will not use his
(eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for affluence to succour a brother’s need
hand, etc., Exod. xxi. 24; Lev. xxiv. will lose it for himself, and the man who
19) described as a law of the divine refuses to part with an offending eye
procedure. This law of exact retribu- or hand will finally lose his whole body
tion is not merely an enactment of in Gehenna. See note on xlviii. 14.
human justice, our author declares ; it According to Beer this halachie inis observed by God in his government terpretation of Exod, xxi. 24 is unof the world. known to traditional Judaism, which
It is noteworthy that the same enacts that the murderer is to be slain
principle of retribution is enforced by with the sword.
historical examples in 2 Macc, v. 10, 33. ‘Em24ra. This name is found in
where speaking of Jason the author the Syriac Fragment and Lagarde’s LXX
writes: ὁ πλῆθος ἀτάφων ἐκρίψας ἀπέν- MS 7. Frankel derives it from πη ox
θητος ἐγενήθη, καὶ κηδίας οὐδ᾽ ἥστινος or Hy CN because she lived in the days
.. « μετέσχεν. Similarly, it is re- of the Flood.
counted of Nicanor (xv. 32, 33) that
Brother. EEmended as in ver. 15.
he was punished in those members with
which he had sinned. Cf. also xiii. 8. Shem . Ham . Japhet. -
In this respect 2 Macc. therefore repre- Cf. x. 14, where again Shem is represents truly this second-cent. B.c. doctrine sented as the eldest. We should observe
of retribution. Taken crassly and here that our author thus understood
mechanically the above law is without aright Syn ns" "nN in Gen. x. 21 as
foundation ; but spiritually conceived te (Shem) . . . the elder brother of
it represents the profound truth enunci- Japhet” (so also Vulg.) over against
ated repeatedly in the N.T. Thus in the Massoretes, Symmachus, and Rashi
Gal. vi. 7 “ whatsoever a man soweth, who wrongly understood it as “brother
that shall he also reap”; Col. iii. 25 of Japheth the elder.” The LXX is
‘she that doeth wrong shall receive similarly wrong: ἀδελφῷ Ἰάφεθ τοῦ
again the wrong that he hath done” ; μείζονος, Ber. rabba 26, 37, and the
2 Cor. v. 10 in the judgment men shall Book of Jashar (in ioc.)., On the other
ct receive the things done in the body.” hand in Sanhedrin 69 6 Shem is said to
In the Parables this kinship of the be two years older than Japhet.

CHAPTERS IV. 32-V. 4 43
The angels of God marry the daughters of men, 1. Corruption
of all creation, 2-3. Punishment of the fallen angels and
their children, 4-9a. Final Judgment announced, 96-16.
Day of Atonement, 17-18. The deluge foretold, Noah
builds the ark, the deluge, 19-32. (Cf. Gen. vi.-viii.
19.)
V. And it came to pass when the children of men
began to multiply on the face of the earth and daughters
were born unto them, that the angels of God saw them on
a certain year of this jubilee, that they were beautiful to
look upon; and they took themselves wives of all whom
they chose, and they bare unto them sons and they were
giants. 2. And lawlessness increased on the earth and all
flesh corrupted its way, alike men and cattle and beasts and
birds and everything that walks on the earth—all of them
corrupted their ways and their orders, and they began to
devour each other, and lawlessness increased on the earth
and every imagination of the thoughts of all men (was)
thus evil continually. 3. And God looked upon the earth,
and behold it was corrupt, and all flesh had corrupted its
orders, and all that were upon the earth had wrought
all manner of evil before His eyes. 4. And He said:
“1 shall destroy man and all flesh upon the face of the
V. 1. Gen. vi. 1,2, 4. On this myth 2. All flesh corrupted its way, alike
of the intercourse of the angels with men and catile and beasts. Gen. vi. 12.
the daughters of men see iv. 15 (note): From the Book of Jashar 136 this
also my Eth. Enoch vi. 1, 2, vii. 1, 2 seems to mean that different kinds of
with notes in loc. animals coupled with each other: and
Angels of God. This is the LXX that man was guilty of bestiality.
rendering of Gen. vi. 2. It is also Began to devour each other. Eth.
found in Philo, De Gigant. 2 (i. 263 Enoch vii. 5.
Mangey), Josephus, Eusebius, Augustine Lawlessness increased, etc. Cf. Gen.
and Ambrose. It is the older Jewish bis att ta
view, but was condemned probably as Every imagination, etc. Gen. vi. 5.
early as the first cent. A.D. See note 3. Gen. vi. 12.
on iv. 15, 4, 5. Gen. vi. 7, 8.
To look upon. Correct printer’s 4. 7 shall destroy. So ad. be
error resi’j into re’ij in my text. =“ He would destroy.”

44 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
earth which I have created.” 5. But Noah found grace
before the eyes of the Lord. 6. And against the angels
whom He had sent upon the earth, He was exceedingly
wroth, and He gave commandment to root them out of all
their dominion, and He bade us to bind them in the depths
of the earth, and behold they are bound in the midst of
them, and are (kept) separate. 7. And against their sons
went forth a command from before His face that they
should be smitten with the sword, and be removed from
under heaven. 8. And He said “ My spirit will not always
abide on man; for they also are flesh and their days shall
be one hundred and twenty years.” 9. And He sent His
sword into their midst that each should slay his neighbour,
and they began to slay each other till they all fell by the
sword and were destroyed from the earth. 10. And their
fathers were witnesses (of their destruction), and after this
they were bound in the depths of the earth for ever, until the
day of the great condemnation, when judgment is executed
4. Which I have created. Emended διαφθεῖραι καὶ ποιῆσαι γένος ἕτερον
from ab which=“He had created.” πονηρίας καθαρόν. See also Philo, De
Corruption could have arisen from Vita Moses, ii. 12. But with the subseconfusion of ἔκτισα and ἔκτισε, as Litt- quent corruption of all the descendants
mann has pointed out. cd = “was of Noah till the time of Abraham and
created.” Possibly we should keep the universal apostasy of the Gentiles
to 6 throughout, and translate ‘‘ He according to ourauthor, suchastatement
would destroy . ... which He had is practically inconceivable. Moreover,
created.” Cf. vi. 20. it is not difficult to discover the origin of
10. Until the day of the great con- the error in our text. Verses 100-16
demnation, i.e, the day of the final are descriptive of the final judgment,
judgment. See iv. 19, 24. Cf, Eth. and simply amplify the last clause of
Enoch x. 13. The intervening period, ver. 10. Thus the time of the verbs
according to Eth. Enoch x. 12, is “destroyed,” ‘‘was,” “made” in 11-12is
seventy generations, wrong andwe should have“shall destroy,”
100-12, Verses 11-12 if the text is “shall be” and “shall make.” “Judged”
correct teach that God recreated the must also be rendered ‘‘shall have
human race and all His other works at judged,” but this last does not necessithe time of the Flood “so that they tate a change in the text of either the
should not sin in their whole nature Ethiopic or Hebrew. The text therefore
forever, but should be all righteous should be translated: «« Until the day
. alway.” In Josephus, Ant, i. 8, of the great condemnation, when judg2 there is a slight approximation to ment shall be executed on all who have
this idea: ὁ δὲ Θεὸς τοῦτον μὲν τῆς corrupted their ways and their works
δικαιοσύνης ἠγάπησε, κατεδίκαζε δ᾽ οὐκ before the Lord, 11. And He shall
ἐκείνων μόνων τῆς κακίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ πᾶν destroy (them) all from their places,
ὅσον ἣν ἀνθρώπινον τότε δόξαν αὐτῷ and there shall not be left one of them

CHAPTER V. 5-17 45
on all those who have corrupted their ways and their works
before the Lord. 11. And He +destroyed+ all from their
places, and there wast not left one of them whom He
judged not according to all their wickedness. 12. And He
+madet for all His works a new and righteous nature, so
that they should not sin in their whole nature for ever, but
should be all righteous each in his kind alway. 13. And
the judgment of all is ordained and written on the heavenly
tables in righteousness—even (the judgment of) all who
depart from the path which is ordained for them to walk in;
and if they walk not therein, judgment is written down
for every creature and for every kind. 14. And there is
nothing in heaven or on earth, or in light or in darkness, or
in Sheol or in the depth, or in the place of darkness (which
is not judged); and all their judgments are ordained and
written and engraved. 15. In regard to all He will judge,
the great according to his greatness, and the small according to his smallness, and each according to his way. 16.
And He is not one who will regard the person (of any),
nor is He one who will receive gifts, if He says that He
will execute judgment on each: if one gave everything
that is on the earth, He will not regard the gifts or the
person (of any), nor accept anything at his hands, for He is
a righteous judge. [17. And of the children of Israel it has
whom He shall not have judged accord- closely on mwyna, and accordingly rening to all their wickedness, 12. And dered them merely as ordinary perfects.
He shall make for all His works, etc.” See Driver, Hebrew Tenses,? Dp. 165.
This corruption of the tenses may 12. New and righteous nature. See
possibly have arisen in the Ethiopic, or note on 1. 29.
in the Greek, but this is very im- 13. Heavenly tables. See note on
probable, as it involves so many changes. iii. 10.
On the other hand it is easy to explain From the path. Sod, where I take
the false text as having originated in the singular suffix to express the article.
a mistranslation of the Hebrew. The Otherwise abo, “from their path.”
above passage=nwyna Syn yn ©)» ty 16. Cf. xl. 8; Deut. x.17; 2 Chron.
w 330 awyn ἸΣΥῚ nen wwe N23 baba SHIR
ND ግ TN onp any xd. . obs Tam 17-18. Interpolated or else transΠΟῪ . . . ody. Here we have to suppose posed here from xxxiy. 18-19 where the
that the Greek translator failed to grasp historical occasion of this feast is given.
the sense of the passage and see that 17. Probably based on Jer. xxxvi.
yaxm and the other verbs followed 8. Cf. Jer. xviii. 8; Jonah iii. 8.

46 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
been written and ordained : If they turn to Him in righteousness, He will forgive all their transgressions and pardon all
their sins. 18. It is written and ordained that He will
show mercy to all who turn from all their guilt once each
year.} 19. And as for all those who corrupted their ways
and their thoughts before the flood, no man’s person was
accepted save that of Noah alone; for his person was accepted in behalf of his sons, whom (God) saved from the
waters of the flood on his account; for his heart was
righteous in all his ways, according as it was commanded
regarding him, and he had not departed from aught that
was ordained for him. 20. And the Lord said that He
would destroy everything which was upon the earth, both
men and cattle, and beasts, and fowls of the air, and that
which moveth on the earth. 21. And He commanded
Noah to make him an ark, that he might save himself from
the waters of the flood. 99 And Noah made the ark in
male
18. The time referred to here is with the death penalty by God or human
obviously the tenth day of the seventh judgment.” And yet we must discrimimonth, ze, the Day of Atonement. nate between the teaching of our text
In Lev. xvi. in spite of the terms in and of the treatise Shebv'oth in favour of
verses 16, 21, the sin-offering atoned the former. In the latter the ceremonial
only for sins committed in error (7332, was of the nature of an opus operatum.
ἀκουσίως), i.e. accidentally or involun- In our text, on the other hand, retarily (Lev. iv. 2, 13, 22, etc.—these pentance is insisted on: God’s mercy
are the ἀγνοήματα in. Heb. ix. 7), not is not to be won on the Day of Atonefor those: committed deliberately and ment save by those who turn (131)
defiantly (nny 13, Num. xv. 30). This from their sins. Thus though our
is the view enforced in the Mishnic text stands midway between the doctrine
treatise Yoma viii. 9: “If a man says I prescribed in Lev. xvi. (also in the
will sin, and then repent . . . Heaven treatise Yoma) and thetreatise Shebu oth,
does not give him the means of practis- with the former it prescribes as necesing repentance ; and if he says, ‘I will sary to atonement the temper of true
sin and the Day of Atonement will repentance: with the latter it maintains
bring atonement,’ the Day of Atone- the efficacy of the atonement for sins of
ment will bring no atonement.” On every description.
the other hand both in our text and in Once each year=dmrakt τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ
the treatise Shebwoth i. 6 it is taught (Heb. ix. 7).
that on the Day of Atonement sins of 19. That the wicked are spared for
every description are forgiven ‘‘ both the sake of the righteous is the idea
the light and the grave, the intentional underlying Gen. xviii. 23-32.
and the unintentional, the conscious 20. Gen. vi. 7; οἷ, ver. 4.
and the unconscious, those relating to 21. Gen. vi. 14. According to vi.
the positive and the negative commands, 25 of our text this command was given
and even those that were to be visited on the new moon of the first month.

CHAPTER V. 18-28 47
all respects as He commanded him, in the twenty-seventh 1307 a.m.
jubilee of years, in the fifth week in the fifth year (on the
new moon of the first month). 23. And he entered in the
sixth (year) thereof, in the second month, on the new
1308 A.M.
moon of the second month, till the sixteenth; and he
entered, and all that we brought to him, into the ark,
and the Lord closed it from without on the seventeenth
evening.
24. And the Lord opened seven flood-gates of heaven,
And the mouths of the fountains of the great deep,
seven mouths in number.
25. And the flood-gates began to pour down water from
the heaven forty days and forty nights,
And the fountains of the deep also sent up waters, until
the whole world was full of water.
26. And the waters increased upon the earth:
Fifteen cubits did the waters rise above all the high
mountains,
And the ark was lift up above the earth,
And it moved upon the face of the waters.
27. And the water prevailed on the face of the earth five
months—one hundred and fifty days. 28. And the
ark went and rested on the top of Libar, one of the
22. Twenty-seventh jubilee. So we Floodgates . . . fountains. Gen.
should emend the reading of all the vil. 11. See note on ii, 4.
MSS “twenty-second jubilee.” In The great deep. The inn of Gen.
my text I have by a slip emended i, 2. See note on ii. 2.
the reading into “twenty-sixth jubilee,” 25, 26. Gen. vii. 12, 18, 20. Ct,
The fifth year of the fifth week of the Eth. Enoch Ixxxix. 8.
twenty - seventh jubilee= 1307 a.m. 27. Gen. vii. 24, viii. 3.
This agrees exactly with the chronology 28. Gen, viii. 4. This name Libar
in the Samaritan Chronicle: “From recurs in vii. 1 (see note), 17. It is
Adam to the birth of Noah was a mentioned also in the Midrashic Book
period of 707 years, and from Adam of Noah (see Appendix I. to my Text)
to the Flood 1307 years” (Samaritan as follows: ἽΝ sap ግnn nba. This
Chronicle translated by Neubauer in verse is reproduced freely by Epiphianus,
the Journal Asiatique, 1869, pp. Ady. Haer. I. tom, i. 4: μετὰ δὲ τὸν
421-469). κατακλυσμὸν “ἐπιστάσης τῆς λάρνακος
23. Closed it, etc. Gen. vii. 16. τοῦ Νῶε ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι τοῖς ᾿Αραρὰτ ἀνὰ
Seventeenth, etc. Gen. vii. 11. μέσον ᾿Αρμενίων καὶ ἹΚαρδυέων ἐν τῷ
24. Seven flood-gates. Eth. Enoch Λουβὰρ ὄρει καλουμένῳ. As Nicolaus
lxxxix. 2. of Damascus reports (Joseph. Ant. 1. 3.

48 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
mountains of Ararat. 29. And (on the new moon)
in the fourth month the fountains of the great deep
were closed and the flood-gates of heaven were restrained; and on the new moon of the seventh month all
the mouths of the abysses of the earth were opened, and
the water began to descend into the deep below. 30. And
on the new moon of the tenth month the tops of the
mountains were seen, and on the new moon of the first
1809 A.M.
month the earth became visible. 31. And the waters
disappeared from above the earth in the fifth week in
the seventh year thereof, and on the seventeenth day
in the second month the earth was dry. 32. And on
the twenty-seventh thereof he opened the ark, and sent
forth from it beasts, and cattle, and birds, and every moving
thing.
Sacrifice of Noah, 1-3 (cf. Gen. viii. 20-22). God’s covenant
with Noah, eating of blood forbidden, 4-10 (cf. Gen.
ix. 1-17). Moses bidden to renew this law against the
eating of blood, 11-14. Bow set in the clouds for a
sign, 15-16. Feast of weeks instituted, history of tts
6) that according to local tradition the on the top of which the ark of the
Ark rested on a great mountain in Chaldean Noah rested.
Armenia called Baris above Minyas, 29. Gen. viii. 2. Cf. Eth. Enoch —
Professor Sayce (Journal of Royal EEE ἦς
Asiatic Soc. xiv. p. 889 note) con30. Gen. viii. 5, 18.
jectures that this is the mountain
31. On the seventeenth day in the
named Lubar in our text, seeing that
second month the earth was dry. In
both are said by Epiphanius and
Gen. viii. 14 it is on the seven-andSyncellus (see note on vii. 1) to be on the
twentieth day that the earth was dry.
borders of Armenia. I am indebted
Part of this verse and the next is quoted
to him also for the following note in
in Lagarde’s LXX MS αὶ on Gen. viii.
which he seeks to account for the
14: ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ μηνὶ ἑπτὰ καὶ
syllable Lu in Lubar. ‘In the Vannic
δεκάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ἐξηράνθη ἡ γῆ καὶ ἑβδόμῃ
cuneiform inscriptions Lulu is the
καὶ εἰκάδι τοῦ μηνὸς ἀνέῳξε τὴν κιβωτόν.
country which is called Urartu (Ararat)
It will be observed that the earth
in Assyria, on the borders of Armenia
became dry exactly a year after Noah
and Kurdistan, and is almost certainly
entered the ark (ver. 23).
the Lulubi or Luluwi of the Assyrian
inscriptions in which was Mount Nizir 32. Cf. Gen. viii. 17, 19.

CHAPTERS V. 29-1 . 4 49
observance, 17-22. Feasts of the new moons, 23-28.
Division of the year into 364 days, 29-38.
VI. And on the new moon of the third month he went
forth from the ark, and built an altar on that mountain.
2. And he made atonement for the earth, and took a kid
and made atonement by its blood for all the guilt of the
earth; for everything that had been on it had been destroyed, save those that were in the ark with Noah. ὃ.
And he placed the fat thereof on the altar, and he took
an ox, and a goat, and a sheep and kids, and salt, and a
turtle-dove, and the young of a dove, and placed a burnt
sacrifice on the altar, and poured thereon an offering mingled
with oil, and sprinkled wine and strewed frankincense over
everything, and caused a goodly savour to arise, acceptable
before the Lord. 4. And the Lord smelt the goodly savour,
and He made a covenant with him that there should not be
any more a flood to destroy the earth ; that all the days of
the earth seed-time and harvest should never cease; cold
and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night
VI. 1. New moon of the third 8. Ox, and a goat, and a sheep, etc.
month. This date is reproduced in In Gen. viii. 20 it is said that Noah
Lagarde’s MS z on Gen. viii. 19: ἐν μιᾷ “took of every clean beast and of every
τοῦ μηνὸς τοῦ τρίτους See ver. 11 on the clean fowl and offered burnt-offerings,
parallel between the covenants on Sinai ete,
and Ararat. On this date also the Mingled with ow,and... wine. These
covenant was made with Abraham, xiv. 1 elements are also additions to the statesqq.; and Jacob started to go down ment in Gen. viii, 20 in conformity
into Egypt, xliv. 1. with later ritual. Cf. Exod. xxix. 40;
Built an altar on that mountain. Lev. ii. 2-5.
Cf. Gen. viii. 20. The mountain is
Frankincense. Lev. ii. 2, 15.
Lubar. According to Ber. rabba 34
4-7. God makes a covenant with
Noah offered this sacrifice in Jerusalem.
Noah, in which He promises not again
In the Targ. Jon. on Gen. viii. 20
to destroy the earth with a flood,
the place is not mentioned, but the altar
makes man ruler over everything that
is identified withthat which Adam built.
is on the earth, and forbids the eating
2. Made atonement for the earth.
of blood and murder.
Though Jewish Haggada knows nothing
4. The Lord smelt the goodly savour.
of this particular act of atonement, it
Gen. viii, 21.
is easy to justify such a conception
from Ley. xviii, 26-28; Num. xxxv. Made a covenant... not... to
33, 34, The earth itself as being destroy the earth. Gen. ix. 11,
defiled needed expiation. Unnatural All the days of the earth, ete. Gen.
vices and murder pollute it, Vili, 22.

THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
50
should not change their order, nor cease for ever. 5. “ And
you, increase ye and multiply upon the earth, and become
many upon it, and be a blessing upon it. The fear of you
and the dread of you I shall inspire in everything that is
on earth and in the sea. 6. And behold I have given unto
you all beasts, and all winged things, and everything that
moves on the earth, and the fish in the waters, and all
things for food; as the green herbs, I have given you
all things to eat. 7. But flesh, with the life thereof, with
the blood, ye shall not eat; for the life of all flesh is in the
blood, lest your blood of your lives be required. At the
hand of every man, at the hand of every (beast), shall
I require the blood of man. 8. Whoso sheddeth man’s
blood by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of
God made He man. 9. And you, increase ye, and multiply
on the earth.” 10. And Noah and his sons swore that
they would not eat any blood that was in any flesh, and
he made a covenant before the Lord God for ever throughout
5. Gen. ix, 7. It is noteworthy Trypho is not found in existing Jewish
that the clause be ὦ blessing (53) sources. See Singer, 295 sq.
corresponds to “multiply” (an) in
7. Gen. ix. 4, 5. Of your lives.
the parallel in Gen. The latter appears
Text = «in your lives ” which is a wrong
to be corrupt for ;>»=LXX καὶ καταrendering of n3°mw53.
κυριεύσατε.
(Beast.) I have here supplied ’énsésa
The fear of you, etc. Cf. Gen. (=beast) which could easily have fallen
ix. 2. out before ‘ahs = I will require.
6. Gen. ix. 2, 3. 8. Gen. ix. 6.
As the green herbs, I have given you 10-14. Noah and his sons swear to
all things to eat. From Gen, ix. 3 the covenant as of perpetual obligation __
save the verb “to eat” which, however, as regards the non-eating of blood —
is only a repetition of the phrase “ for (ver. 10). Because this ordinance —
ood” in the preceding clause. Of the was of perpetual obligation, it was re- Ὁ
argument that concluded from those enacted on Mount Sinai; but, whereas
words that only certain herbs were in Noah's covenant it had been brought —
allowed for food, our text knows forward only on its negative side, in
nothing. This view appears in Justin, the Mosaic legislation it was enforced _
Dial. c. Tryph. 20 βουλομένου αὐτοῦ in its positive side, that is, accordingrto
εἰπεῖν ὡς λάχανα χόρτου . .. ἐπεί the former, blood was not to be eaten, _
τινα τῶν χόρτων οὐκ ἐσθίομεν οὕτω καὶ whereas according to the latter its true
διαστολὴν ἔκτοτε τῷ Νῶε διεστάλθαι use was to sprinkle the worshipper (ver. —
φατέ. According to Goldfahn (Monats- 11) and to make atonement before |
schrift fiir Gesch. d. Jud. 1873, 57 sq.) God (ver. 14). Moreover, as Noah’s
the interpretation here attributed to covenant was instituted in the third —

CHAPTER VI. 5-16 51
all the generations of the earth in this month. 11. On
this account He spake to thee that thou shouldst make a
covenant with the children of Israel in this month upon
the mountain with an oath, and that thou shouldst sprinkle
blood upon them because of all the words of the covenant,
which the Lord made with them for ever. 12. And this
testimony is written concerning you that you should observe
it continually, so that you should not eat on any day any
blood of beasts or birds or cattle during all the days of the
earth, and the man who eats the blood of beast or of cattle or
of birds during all the days of the earth, he and his seed shall
be rooted out of the land. 13. And do thou command the
children of Israel to eat no blood, so that their names and
their seed may be before the Lord our God continually. 14.
And for this law there is no limit of days, for it is for ever.
They shall observe it throughout their generations, so that
they may continue supplicating on your behalf with blood
before the altar; every day and at the time of morning and
evening they shall seek forgiveness on your behalf perpetually before the Lord that they may keep it and not be
rooted out. 15. And He gave to Noah and his sons a sign
that there should not again be a flood on the earth. 16.
He set His bow in the cloud for a sign of the eternal
covenant that there should not again be a flood on the earth
month, so also the Law was given on 14. Supplicating on their (bc) behalf
Sinai in the same month (ver.11). [In with blood. Cf. Lev. xvii. 11.
no passage is it said that the covenants
Morning and evening they shall
of Noah and of Moses were established
seek forgiveness. Cf. Num. xxviii.
on the same day in the third month.
3-8.
Such a connection appears to exist
Forgiveness on your (ἃ. be “their,”
between the date of the covenant of
a “its”) behalf. The reading of
Noah and that of the first celebration
d is to be preferred on the ground of
on earth of the feast of weeks (see notes
the parallelism (Littmann).
on verses 17-18).]
11, A covenant... in this month 15-16. Cf. Gen. ix. 13-15. The
upon the mountain. The law was text after touching on the Mosaic
given on Sinai in the third month development of the covenant of Noah
according to Exod. xix. 1. here returns to the latter (cf. ver. 4),
NLC Liev: xvii. 10, 12, 14; which God confirmed with the sign of
Deut. xii. 28. the bow in the clouds.

52 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
to destroy it all the days of the earth. 17. For this reason
it is ordained and written on the heavenly tables, that they
should celebrate the feast of weeks in this month once a year,
to renew the covenant every year. 18. And this whole
festival was celebrated in heaven from the day of creation
till the days of Noah—twenty-six jubilees and five weeks of
years: and Noah and his sons observed it for seven jubilees
1309-1659
A.M. and one week of years, till the day of Noah’s death, and from
the day of Noah’s death his sons did away with (it) until
the days of Abraham, and they eat blood. 19. But
Abraham observed it, and Isaac and Jacob and his children
observed it up to thy days, and in thy days the children of
Israel forgot it until ye celebrated it anew on this mountain.
20. And do thou command the children of Israel to observe
this festival in all their generations for a commandment unto
᾿-
them: one day in the year in this month they shall celebrate
the festival. 21. For it is the feast of weeks and the feast
17-18. In connection with the πεντηκοστήν.Ό Tob. ii, 1 contains
covenant Noah is bidden to observe another early instance of its use, and
the feast of weeks. Since it follows Philo, De Septenar. 21, a near approach
from xv. 1 (see note) and xliv. 4, 5 to it. For later instances see 1 Cor.
that this feast was celebrated on the xvi. 8; Jos. Ant. iii. 10. 6.
15th of the third month (see note on 18. Twenty-six jubilees and five taaδSeο eτὰe ςs e e
i. 1) we may reasonably assign the wee=k 1s80 9 years. On the slight
promulgation of the Noachie covenant discrepancy in our author's dates see
to the same date. Later Judaism notes on iv. 28 and νυ. 22.
(Maimonides, More Ned. 41) held Pente- Seven jubilees and one week=350
cost to celebrate the giving of the Law years.
on Sinai, and designated this day as Did away with (it) . . . and they eat —
“the day of the giving of the Law” blood. Here again the close connection ~
(aA in» ov). So our author (cf. i. 1), of the feast of weeks and of the
This idea is not found in Philo and covenant with Noah is emphasised.
Josephus ; but it appears in Jerome, Ep. 19. But Abraham. For ‘‘ but (ad)
ad Fab. mansio 12; August. Contra Abraham ” (bcd), bc read «and Abra- —
Faust. xxxii. 12. Observe that our ham alone.” |
author ascribes the covenant with Abram Observed it. ab omit “it.”
to the same date (see note on xiv. 20). Yecelebrated it anew[ = haddaskemw6
17. Feast of weeks. This title is (a)]. bcd read “I have renewed them”
found in Exod, xxxiv. 22 (nay in, or ‘*I have renewed (it) unto them”
ἑορτὴ ἑβδομάδων) Our text is not [ =haddaskewomti (Ὁ ὁ @)].
acquainted with the more familiar 20. One day in the year, This,
designation of this feast, i.e. Pentecost. should perhaps be: “the first day (of
This designation, which is a Greek the week) in every year.” See note on
rendering, ἡ πεντηκοστή (ἡμέρα), of the ver. 22.
rabbinic py own an, is found in 2 21. The feast of weeks was likewise
Macc, xii. 82 μετὰ τὴν λεγομένην known as the feast of the harvest

CHAPTER VI. 17-23 53
of first-fruits: this feast is twofold and of a double nature:
according to what is written and engraven concerning it
celebrate it. 22. For I have written in the book of the first
law, in that which I have written for thee, that thou shouldst
celebrate it in its season, one day in the year, and I explained
to thee its sacrifices that the children of Israel should remember and should celebrate it throughout their generations in
this month, one day in every year. 23. And on the
Exod. xxiii. 16, xp7 an. In the latter troversies that circled round them ; for
respect it was a feast of first fruits we can hardly interpret otherwise the
as in the text, or the day of first- passage in the Rosh ha-Shanah i. 1:
fruits, Num. xxviii. 26, omi2a7 oO, ἡ “On 1st Nisan—beginning of year,
of government and of festivals. On
ἡμέρα τῶν νέων. Why this festival
Ist Ellul, the year of tithing of
should be said to be ‘‘of a double
beasts according to R. Eliezer and
nature” I do not see.
R. Simeon. On Ist Tisri, the calenCelebrate it=gébarai emended from dar year, the Sabbatical year and
Bebra = “its celebration.” jubilee year, and (year) of plants and
22. Book of the first law, %.e., the vegetables. On Ist Sebat, year of
Pentateuch. See note on i. 26. blooming of trees according to school
One day in the year. Eppstein of Shammai but on 15th according to
school of Hillel.” That different usages
(Revue des Htudes juives, xxii. 7-8)
suggests that ‘one day” he=r Jeuép a prevailed at different times follows
clearly from the sacrifices enjoined on
μίΞαε IN N ov, which in its original conthe new moons in Hzekiel xlvi. 6 and
text meant “the first day,” i.e. of the
Num. xxviii. 11-15. The Rabbis
week, Sunday. Thus Pentecost was to
could give no satisfactory explanation
fall on the same day every year, a
of these differences: some indeed were
Sunday, the first of the week. If this
for removing Ezekiel from the Canon,
is right it follows that if we count back
and others denied its authenticity on
seven weeks we arrive at Nisan 22,
account of them. Returning now to
“the morrow after the Sabbath,” which
our text and the parallel passages in
is also the first day of the week, and
the Eth. Enoch, we observe that these
that the author of our book interpreted
four days have a religious signifithe term Sabbath in its strict sense as
cance in the former, but an astrothe weekly Sabbath (see note on xv. 1).
nomical in the latter, In Eth. En.
For somewhat similar directions reIxxy. 1, 2, Ixxxii. 11 they are called
garding the Passover see xlix. 7, 8.
“leaders,” because they lead in the
Its sacrifices, or ‘the sacrifices.”
four quarters of the year. They are
One day in every year. This should also called ‘‘intercalary days” (Eth.
perhaps be “‘the first day (of the week)
Enoch lxxy. 2) ἡμέραι ἐπαγόμεναι, and
in every year” as Eppstein suggests
correspond respectively to the vernal
(see note above), equinox (1st of 1st month), the summer
23. According to Lev. xxiii. 24 only solstice (1st of 4th month), the autumn
the Ist day of the 7th month was a equinox (1st of 7th month), and the
day of remembrance. Nevertheless winter solstice (1st of 10th month).
the special significance assigned to These four days, when added to 360
these four days was a not unfamiliar (z.e., 12 months of 30 days each, Eth.
idea in the second cent, as appears from Enoch Ixxxii, 11), constitute an invarithe Eth. Enoch and our text, both of able year of 364 days (cf. our text v.
which we shall discuss presently in this 82, 88; Eth. Enoch lxxv. 2, Ixxxii.
relation. Even the Mishna appears to 11). On the meaning of this year of 364
preserve some echoes of the early con- days see notes on verses 29-30, 32.

54 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
new moon of the first month, and on the new moon
of the fourth month, and on the new moon of the
seventh month, and on the new moon of the tenth
month are the days of remembrance, and the days of
the seasons in the four divisions of the year. These are
written and ordained as a testimony for ever. 24. And
Noah ordained them for himself as feasts for the generations
for ever, so that they have become thereby a memorial unto
him. 25. And on the new moon of the first month he was
bidden to make for himself an ark, and on that (day) the
earth became dry and he opened (the ark) and saw the
earth. 26. And on the new moon of the fourth month the
mouths of the depths of the abysses beneath were closed. And
on the new moon of the seventh month all the mouths of the
abysses of the earth were opened, and the waters began to
descend into them. 31. And on the new moon of the tenth
month the tops of the mountains were seen, and Noah was
glad. 28. And on this account he ordained them for himself as feasts for a memorial for ever, and thus are they
ordained. 29. And they placed them on the heavenly
tables, each had thirteen weeks; from one to another ©
On the new moon of the first month. Abraham observed the stars in order to
On this date Noah was bidden to make learn the nature of the coming year,
an ark, v. 21, vi. 25; the earth first xii. 16.
became visible after the flood, v. 30, On the new moon of the tenth month.
vi. 25 ; Noah offered a sacrifice, vii. 2, See ver. 27.
38; Abraham erected an altar and 26. See notes on ver. 23. Cf. Gen.
sacrificed thereon, xiii. 8; God appeared viii. 2; Eth. Enoch lxxxix. 7, 8.
to Isaac, xxiv., who forthwith offered 27. See notes on ver. 23. Cf. Gen.
sacrifice, 22, 23 ; Jacob went to Bethel, viii, 5.
xxvii. 19; Levi was born, xxviii. 14, 29, Placed. We have here the im- —
On the new moon of the fourth month. perfect; hence literall=y“ they place”
The following events are assigned to or ‘‘they were placing.”
this date. On it Adam and Eve went On the heavenly tables. Here the
forth from the Garden, iii. 32; the festivals ordained by Noah are entered
mouths of the abysses beneath and on the heavenly tables, See note on —
the flood-gates of heaven were closed, v. iii. 10.
29, vi. 26 ; angels appeared toAbraham, 29-30. Hach had thirteen weeks, etc. —
xvi. 1; Joseph was born, xxviii. 24; According to verses 23-30 the year —
Jacob arrived in Egypt, xlv. 1. consists of four seasons and each season —
On the new moon of the seventh of three months or thirteen weeks.
month. On this date the mouths of The year has, therefore, on this com- —
the abysses were opened, v. 29, vi. 26 ; putation 12 months of 30 days each 4

CHAPTER VI. 24-31 55
(passed) their memorial, from the first to the second, and
from the second to the third, and from the third to the
fourth. 30. And all the days of the commandment will be
two and fifty weeks of days, and (these will make) the entire
year complete. 31, Thus it is engraven and ordained on
the heavenly tables. And there is no neglecting (this com-
(see below) and 4 intercalary days, feast of weeks, ze. Sivan 15, certainly
52 weeks, or 364 days. This our supports Eppstein’s view. This date
author takes to be the duration of a can only be arrived at by reckoning
solar year. A solar year of 12 the 7 weeks from Nisan 22. Thus the
months is likewise presupposed in paschal lamb was offered on Nisan 14:
iv. 17 where the months are said to the feast of unleavened bread began on
be of the same number as the signs of the 15th and ended on the 21st. On
the zodiac ; in v. 27 where five months the 22nd the wave-sheaf was offered.
are described as amounting to 150 days, Now if we count 7 weeks onward from
hence each month consists of 30 days ; this day, that is 1 week in the lst
in xii. 16 Abram makes observations on month, 4 weeks in the 2nd and 2
the 1st of the 7th month to learn the in the 5rd (Sivan), the feast of weeks
character of the ensuing six months falls on the 15th of Sivan as in our
(autumn and winter). They are solar author. Thus the date presupposes
months; for they are six in number, months of 28 days. And since the
xii. 27 ; in xvi. 12-13 a year of twelve months consisted of 28 days each, there
months is implied ; and in xxv. 16 the must have been 13 in this ecclesiastitribes who are to spring from Jacob are cal year, as it consisted of 864 days.
to be of the same number as the months Finally, if Eppstein’s view on the interof the year. In the face of these facts pretation of vi. 22 is correct, it serves
Frankel was quite wrong, as Beer has to confirm the above view; for if the
shown, to assert that Jubilees reckoned year begins on Sunday, the passover
each month at 28 days and added a on Nisan falls on the Sabbath: the
thirteenth month of 28 days. On the offering of the wave-sheaf on Sunday
other hand Eppstein (Revue des Htudes the 22nd and the feast of weeks on
juives, xxii. 10-13) offers the attractive Sunday, Sivan 15.
suggestion that in Jubilees two kinds But on the other hand there is this
of years are used: a civil year of 12 objection to this theory: it is not true
months with eight of 50 days each and that all the festivals in Jubilees are fixed
four of 31 days each ; and an ecclesi- according to this so-called ecclesiastical
astical year of 13 months of 28 days
year ; for the four ordained by Noah
each. Our author, writes Eppstein, in vi. 23-29 are determined according
fixed the dates of the festivals accord- to the 12 solar months of the year
ing to the ecclesiastical year, and by Apart from this objection this theory
such a year managed to make each is the best solution of the problem yet
week, each month and each year to offered. Elsewhere, where two years
begin on Sunday and terminate on the were in use, as amongst the Egyptians
Sabbath. By such an arangement also and later amongst the Abyssinian Jews,
all the festivals fell on Sunday save the civil year was a solar one and the
that of the Day of Atonement, and all ecclesiastical a lunar.
the chronology took a regular and
30. The entire year complete. Sob,
uniform character from the fact that
which alone gives an intelligible sense.
everything had 7 for its point of de31. Neglecting, or “transgressing,”
parture. Thus the week had 7
days: the month 4x 7=28: the year Beer has suggested that ta'adwé here
52x7=364: the year-week 7 years points back to "Say = “intercalation,
and the jubilee 7x7 years. Further, Linguistically, this is possible. Τῇ so,
the date assigned by our author to the our author would be here protesting

56 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
||
mandment) for a single year or from year to year. 32.
And command thou the children of Israel that they observe
the years according to this reckoning—three hundred and:
:
against such systems of intercalating 22, a Sunday (the morrow after the |
days in the lunar year to make it syn- Sabbath), and the feast of weeks on
chronise with the solar, as we find in Sivan 15, a Sunday—that is in case we Ά
{
Eth. Enoch Ixxiv.-lxxv., and the later reckon 13 months of 28 days each, the
systems of the Pharisees. But seeing ecclesiastical year (see note on Vi.
that the same word which I render 29-30). By the assumption, therefore,
“neglecting” is found twice in ver. 33 of an impossible solar year of 12
and in xv. 25, and that it cannot in two months of 364 days in all and of an
of these instances bear the meaning ecclesiastical year of 13 months of the
Beer proposes, I have retained the same number of days consisting of an
ordinary meaning of the word. See arbitrary succession of hebdomads inalso on xlix. 14. dependent of the phases of the moon,
32. Three hundred and sixty-four they seemed to have succeeded in
days. A solar year of the same length is synchronising the civil and ecclesiastialso taught in Eth. Enoch Ixxiv. 10, 12, cal years without resorting to inIxxv. 2; Slav. Enoch xlviii. 1. In Slav. tercalary days. But this year of 364
Enoch xiv. 1 the ordinary reckoning of days goes back in all probability to the
3654 days is found. It is obvious that Exile. It will be observed that our text
we have here to do with an old Jewish brings forward this disquisition on the
reckoning. I have shown in my edition true length of the year in connection |
of the Eth. Enoch pp. 189-191 that the with the account of the flood. Now it
advocates of this system were acquainted is just in the same connection in the
with the Greek octaeteris and the cycle narrative of P in Genesis that a year
of Calippus, and in my edition of of 364 days is presupposed as Bacon
the Slav. Enoch, that its author in (Hebraica, viii. 79-88, 124-189 [1891xvi. 8 was familiar with the Metonic 1892]) points out. Thus, the epochs
cycle. Why then did these writers, of the flood are :—
notwithstanding their knowledge of
the Greek systems, advocate an im- Beginning 2nd month 17th day
possible solar year of 3864 days? Climax τὰ Ὁ, LER
I think their action in this matter Mountain tops
must be attributed to dogmatic appear LOE 7 Labs
prejudice. If they regarded it as Waters dried up 1st Ἢ Ἰδὲς
vital to the validity of their festi- Earth dry ORO? Orthos
vals that they should be celebrated
not only on the same day of the month He points out that the flood, which in
but also on the same day of the week the Babylonian account lasted one year,
from year to year, it seemed possible lasts here from the 17th of the 2nd
to attain this end by enforcing the month of one year to the 27th of the
acceptance of a year of 364 days. If 2nd of the next. Now he argues that,
the solar year were of this duration, it if one reckoned according to Hebrew
would always begin on the same day of lunar months, ten days (cf. Jubilees
the week ; for it would consist of 52 vi. 36) had to be added at the close of
weeks exactly. Furthermore if it began the 12th month in order to reach the
on Sunday, the first day of the week, equivalent date in solar time; for the
the Sabbath would always constitute lunar year was 354 days (=12 x 294:
the 7th day of each of the 52 weeks, and ef. Eth. Enoch Ixxviii. 15). Now if
the great festivals would always fall on the solar year was reckoned at 364
the same day of the week and on the days, we can understand why Noah’s
same day of the month from year to exit is assigned to the 27th and not to
year. Thus the Passover would take the 17th of the 2nd month ; for ten
place on Nisan 14, a Sabbath day, the days represent according to Jubilees
wave-sheaf would be offered on Nisan (vi. 36) and the Eth. Enoch (Ixxiv. 10,

Δ
CHAPTER VI. 32-36 57
sixty-four days, and (these) will constitute a complete
year, and they will not disturb its time from its days
and from its feasts; for everything will fall out in them
according to their testimony, and they will not leave
out any day nor disturb any feasts. 33. But if they
do neglect and do not observe them according to His
commandment, then they will disturb all their seasons, and
the years will be dislodged from this (order), [and they
will disturb the seasons and the years will be dislodged]
and they will neglect their ordinances. 34. And all the
children of Israel will forget, and will not find the path of
the years, and will forget the new moons, and seasons,
and sabbaths, and they will go wrong as to all the order of
the years. 35. For I know and from henceforth shall I
declare it unto thee,and it is not of my own devising;
for the book (lies) written before me, and on the heavenly
tables the division of days is ordained, lest they forget the
feasts of the covenant and walk according to the feasts of the
Gentiles after their error and after their ignorance. 36. For
11, 13) the difference between the still more sublimely defiant of that
lunar and solar years. Thus the flood which is merely practicable. On the
would last one solar year from its other hand, the authors in question,
beginning to its close. though acquainted with the systems
We presume, therefore, writes Bacon, current in Greece, were most probably
that the authors of Enoch or Jubilees ignorant of the astronomical data which
found their peculiar year of 364 days necessarily determined them ; and, as a
(=12 sidereal months of 30 days each civil year of 360 days was current
+4 intercalary days) in the Genesis both in Babylon and Egypt (in the
account of the flood. Considering the former country corrected by intercalaadvanced stage of astronomical science tion), they may not have known any
in the second cent. B.C. among the irrefutable grounds against the adoption
nations in touch with Judaism, it is not of the solar year of 364 days, authenticpossible to explain their adoption of ated as it was by the priestly compilasuch a solar year unless it appealed to tion of the Exile.
them on dogmatic grounds and had 33, 34. Cf. Eth. Enoch lxxxii. 4-6.
at its back an inspired authority. 33. And they will disturb, ete.
Genesis formed the inspired authority, Bracketed as a dittography.
and the dogmatic grounds are obvious Neglect. This word may also be
(see above). That such a scheme is rendered “omit,” “pass by,” ‘‘transimpracticable is really no objection, if gress” (see note on ver. 31).
we consider that the author of Jubilees 35. Not of my own devising. Text
=abp xb, Num. xvi. 28. Cf. Apoc.
is as thorough-going an idealist as the
author of the priestly legislation, and is Bar. xiv. 11,

58 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
there will be those who will assuredly make observations of the
moon—now (it) disturbs the seasons and comes in from year
to year ten days too soon. 37. For this reason the years will
come upon them when they will disturb (the order), and
make an abominable (day) the day of testimony, and an
unclean day a feast day, and they will confound all the
days, the holy with the unclean, and the unclean day with
the holy; for they will go wrong as to the months and
sabbaths and feasts and jubilees. 38. For this reason I
command and testify to thee that thou mayst testify to
them; for after thy death thy children will disturb (them),
so that they will not make the year three hundred and sixtyfour days only, and for this reason they will go wrong as to
the new moons and seasons and sabbaths and festivals, and
they will eat all kinds of blood with all kinds of flesh.
Noah plants a vineyard and offers a sacrifice, 1-5. Becomes
drunk and eaposes his person, 6-9. The cursing of
Canaan and blessing of Shem and Japheth, 10-12 (ef.
Gen. ix. 20-28). Noah’s sons and grandsons and their
36. Our author is decidedly opposed tion is not prematurely advanced or
to the use of the moon in determining delayed by a single day unto eternity,
the seasons and feasts. Thus in ii. 9 and they.” It is true, however, that
it is the sun that is to be man’s guide the Samaritan Chronicle (translated by
as to days and sabbaths, and feasts, Neubauer in the Journal Asiatique, xiv.
and months and years. Again in iv. 21 no. 55, 1869, pp. 421 sqq.), which was
the angels instruct Enoch as to the acquainted with our text, adopts a
lordship of the sun in such matters. hostile attitude to it on this question.
Thus our book seems to be a polemic Thus it declares that we should reckon
against the teaching of Eth. Enoch according to the course of the sun and
lxxiii.-lxxiv. if we accept the text in lxxiv. of the moon, and quotes Gen. i. 14:
12 where we have a statement in irre- “Le calcul avec Lun d’eux seulement
concilable conflict with our text: ‘‘ And (c’est-a-dire avec le soleil ou avec la
the moon brings in all the years exactly lune) ne suffit pas.”
so that their position is not prematurely Comes in... ten days too soon.
advanced or delayed by a single day Lunar year=354 days.
unto eternity ; but they complete the 38. Will not make. abe wrongly
changing year with perfect justice in
omit the negative.
364 days.” But this divergence arises
Will go wrong. Because they do
only from a corruption of the text.
not follow the guidance of the sun.
For “And the moon brings in...
unto eternity ; but the moons” read New moons. This could also be trans-
“ And they (the sun and stars) bring in lated «s beginnings of the months.”
all the years so exactly that their posi- See last clause of last verse.

CHAPTERS VI. 37-VII. 5 59
cities, 13-19. Noah teaches his sons regarding the causes
of the deluge and admonishes them to avoid the eating
of blood and murder, to keep the law regarding fruit
trees and let the land lie fallow every seventh year, as
Enoch had directed, 20-39.
VII. And in the seventh week in the first year thereof, 1317 a.m.
in this jubilee, Noah planted vines on the mountain on
which the ark had rested, named Libr, one of the Ararat
Mountains, and they produced fruit in the fourth year, and 1320 a.m.
he guarded their fruit, and gathered it in this year in the
seventh month. 2. And he made wine therefrom and put it
into a vessel, and kept it until the fifth year, until the first 1321 a.m.
day, on the new moon of the first month. 3. And he
celebrated with joy the day of this feast, and he made a
burnt sacrifice unto the Lord, one young ox and one ram,
and seven sheep, each a year old, and a kid of the goats,
that he might make atonement thereby for himself and his
sons. 4. And he prepared the kid first, and placed some
of its blood on the flesh that was on the altar which he
had made, and all the fat he laid on the altar where he
made the burnt sacrifice, and the ox and the ram and the
sheep, and he laid all their flesh upon the altar. 5. And
he placed all their offerings mingled with oil upon it, and
afterwards he sprinkled wine on the fire which he had
previously made on the altar, and he placed incense on the
altar and caused a sweet savour to ascend acceptable before
VII. 1. Labar. See v. 28. This This is intended to call to mind the
verse is partly reproduced in Syncellus, command in Lev. xix. 23-25 not to
i. 147, Νῶε ἐφύτευσεν ἀμπελῶνα ἐν ὄρει touch the fruit of trees for the first
“Λουβὰρ τῆς ᾿Αρμενίας, and in Cedrenus, three years after they were planted.
i, 21, Epiphanius, Adv. Haer. I. i. 4, See verses 36-37 where the passage
follows our text: ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι τοῖς from Lev. is in substance reproduced.
᾿Αραρὰτ ἀνὰ μέσον ’Apueviwy καὶ Kap- 3. The ritual is mainly according to
δυέων ἐν τῷ Λουβὰρ ὄρει καλουμένῳ, Num, xxix. 2, 5.
ἐκεῖσε πρῶτον κατοίκησις γίνεται μετὰ 5. And afterwards... which he had
τὸν κατακλυσμὸν τῶν ἀνθρώπων κἀκεῖ previously made... and he placed.
φυτεύει ἀμπελῶνα Νῶε. So cd,
Produced fruit in the fourth year. Acceptable. Emended as in vi. 3.

60 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
the Lord his God. 6. And he rejoiced and drank of this
wine, he and his children with joy. 7. And it was evening,
and he went into his tent, and being drunken he lay down
and slept, and was uncovered in his tent as he slept. ὃ.
And Ham saw Noah his father naked, and went forth and
told his two brethren without. 9. And Shem took his
garment and arose, he and Japheth, and they placed the
garment on their shoulders and went backward and covered
the shame of their father, and their faces were backward.
10. And Noah awoke from his sleep and knew all that his
younger son had done unto him, and he cursed his son and
said: “ Cursed be Canaan; an enslaved servant shall he be
unto his brethren.’ 11. And he blessed Shem, and said:
« Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his
servant. 12. God shall enlarge Japheth, and God shall
dwell in the dwelling of Shem, and Canaan shall be his
servant.” 13. And Ham knew that his father had cursed
his younger son, and he was displeased that he had
cursed his son, and he parted from his father, he and
his sons with him, Cush and Mizraim and Put and
Canaan. 14. And he built for himself a city and called its
name after the name of his wife Néélatamatik. 15. And
Japheth saw it, and became envious of his brother, and he
too built for himself a city, and he called its name after the
6, 7. Gen. ix. 21. Shekinah to rest in the dwellings of
8, 9. Gen. ix. 22, 23. Shem.” The Targ.-Jon. on Gen, ix.
8. And went forth. Mass., Sam., and 27, on the other hand, and Justin, Dial.
all versions save the LXX omit. c. Tryph. 139, refer the words to
10. Gen. ix. 24,25. From his sleep. Japheth.
Gen. ix. 24 has ‘‘ from his wine.”
13. Cf. Gen. x.6. In the text these
An enslaved servant. So LXX
names are Ques, Mastarém, Phid and
(παῖς οἰκέτης), and Onk.: Mass. has
Canaan.
“servant of servants.”
11, 12. Gen. ix. 26, 27. 14. Ne éldtama@k . This name is
12. God shall dwell. It will be found in the Syriac fragment as
observed that the text supplies a subject oO , and in Eutychius
to the verb ‘‘shall dwell.” This sense is of Alex. Annales, p. 35, as Nahlat. The
attached to the ambiguous words of first part of the compound may be
Gen. ix. 27 by Onk. also: 23 “Ie from nbn, construct case of noni, and
bui3 mana, “and may He cause His the second from pnp.

CHAPTER VII. 6-21 61
name of his wife Adatanésés. 16. And Shem dwelt with
his father Noah, and he built a city close to his father on
the mountain, and he too called its name after the name of
his wife Sédéqétéleb’b. 17. And behold these three cities
are near Mount Libr ; Sédéqétélébab fronting the mountain
on its east; and Na’éitama’ik on the south; *Adatan’ésés
towards the west. 18. And these are the sons of Shem:
Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad—this (son) was born two
years after the flood—and Lud, and Aram. 19, The sons of
Japheth : Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan, Tubal and
Meshech and Tiras : these are the sons of Noah. 20. And in
the twenty-eighth jubilee Noah began to enjoin upon his “ais
sons’ sons the ordinances and commandments, and all the
judgments that he knew, and he exhorted his sons to
observe righteousness, and to cover the shame of their flesh,
and to bless their Creator, and honour father and mother,
and love their neighbour, and guard their souls from fornication and uncleanness and all iniquity. 21. For owing to
these three things came the flood upon the earth, namely,
15. "Addtaw ésés. Syriac gives was so careless however as to leave the
WORN) persons unchanged in verses (26-39).
The substance of this section is
16. Shem dwelt near Noah. This is referred to in Epiphanius (Ancorat.
to show Shem’s filial love. exii., Dindorf’s ed., i. 215), where it is
17. Sédégdtédlebab: Syr. RAIADs), said that Noah, ofa δίκαιος ὧν καὶ τοὺς
from 325 npገs= «r ighteousness of the ἑαυτοῦ παῖδας εὐλαβεῖς καθιστᾶν πειρώheart” as Rubin has recognised. μενος, ἵνα μὴ τοῖς αὐτοῖς ὑποπέσωσι
κακοῖςὡ ς καὶ οἱ ἐν τῷ κατακλυσμῷ, οὐ
The mountain, te. Litbar. See
μόνον διὰ λόγων τούτοις τὴν εὐλάβειαν
ver. 1.
παρετίθει, ἀλλὰ καὶ δι’ ὅρκου ἀφ᾽ ἑνὸς
18. In Ethiopic these names are
ἑκάστου αὐτῶν τὴν πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν
Elam, Assi, Arphaksed. Gen. x. 22.
εὔνοιαν ἀπήτησε.
This (son), etc. Gen. xi. 10. Text
Cover the shame, ete. Cf. iii. 31.
mended. See my edition in Joc.
19. Gen. x. 2. These names in 21. These three things, that is ‘‘ fornithe Ethiopic are Gdmér, Maes, Madai, cation, uncleanness and all iniquity”
Tjaaja, Tobel, Meska, Toras. which are mentioned in the preceding
20. From this verse to the close of verse (see xx. 5, xxiii, 14). Ber,
the chapter we have a fragment of the rabba 31 assigns idolatry, impurity and
lost book of Noah. From ver. 26 to bloodshed as the three causes of the
the end Noah speaks in the first person. Flood (inl bon say nda m bn nym ppn
Its legalistic character favours the view opi maSy). Cf. Sanh. 74a: “R,
that its present setting and colouring Johanan says in the name ‘of R.
are due to the author of the book, who Simeon Ὁ. Jehozadak . . . If one says

62 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
owing to the fornication wherein the Watchers against the
law of their ordinances went a whoring after the daughters
of men, and took themselves wives of all which they chose:
and they made the beginning of uncleanness. 22. And
they begat sons the Naphidim, and +they were all unlike,
and they devoured one another: and the Giants slew the
Naphil, and the Naphil slew the Eljé, and the Eljé mankind, and one man another. 23. And every one sold
himself to work iniquity and to shed much blood, and the
earth was filled with iniquity. 24. And after this they
sinned against the beasts and birds, and all that moves and
walks on the earth: and much blood was shed on the earth,
and every imagination and desire of men imagined vanity
and evil continually. 25. And the Lord destroyed everything from off the face of the earth; because of the wickedness of their deeds, and because of the blood which they
had shed in the midst of the earth He destroyed everything.
26. “ And we were left, I and you, my sons, and everything
that entered with us into the ark, and behold I see your
works before me that ye do not walk in righteousness; for
to a man, Commit a transgression else ba ast (Eth. Enoch xv. 11)=“ they
thou wilt be slain, he may transgress the strove together”: cf. xxiii. 19.
commandment in order to escape death 23. Sold himself to work iniquity.
save in the case of idolatry, incest and For phrase see 1 Kings xxi. 20.
murder.” Shed much blood. Eth. Enoch ix. 1.
Went a whoring after. For phrase The earth was filled, etc. Gen. vi.
see Lev. xvii. 7 ; Ezek. xvi. 34. 11; Eth. Enoch ix. 9.
Took themselves wives. Gen. vi. 2; 24. They sinned against, ete. Cf.
Eth, Enoch vii. 1. Eth. Enoch vii. 5, by means of which
22. Cf. v. 9. Néaphidim, i.e. the the text is emended.
Nephilim (or53). From Eth. Enoch Moves and walks=reptiles and
Ixxxvi. 4 and Ixxxviii. 2 and the cattle.
Syncellus Greek version of Enoch vii. Ewery imagination. Gen. vi. 5.
1 we learn that there were three classes Cf. v. 2 above.
of giants: καὶ ἔτεκον αὐτοῖς γένη τρία" 25. Destroyed everything, etc. Gen.
πρῶτον γίγαντας μεγάλους (.6., the vii. 4, vi. 7. Of. ver. 27.
oni in Gen. vi. 4). οἱ δὲ γίγαντες 26. Observe how the author of the
ἐτέκνωσαν Ναφηλείμ (55: in Gen. book forgets to adapt this fragment of
vi. 4), καὶ τοῖς Ναφηλεὶμ ἐγεννήθησαν the Book of Noah to its new context.
᾿Ἐλιούδ. From this verse to the end of the
+They were... unliket This chapter Noah speaks in the first person.
seems corrupt. We might emend See ver. 20 (note). In x. 1-15 we
‘tjetmasali into jetmashat‘‘i t=he y have another excerpt from this Apoplundered one another,” or into jet- calypse.

CHAPTER VII. 22-31 63
in the path of destruction ye have begun to walk, and ye
are parting one from another, and are envious one of
another, and (so it comes) that ye are not in harmony, my
sons, each with his brother. 27. For I see, and behold the
demons have begun (their) seductions against you and
against your children, and now I fear on your behalf, that
after my death ye will shed the blood of men upon the earth,
and that ye, too, will be destroyed from the face of the
earth. 28. For whoso sheddeth man’s blood, and whoso
eateth the blood of any flesh, will all be destroyed from the
earth.
29. And there will not be left any man that eateth blood,
Or that sheddeth the blood of man on the earth,
Nor will there be left to him any seed or descendants
living under heaven;
For into Sheol will they go,
And into the place of condemnation will they descend,
And into the darkness of the deep will they all be
removed by a violent death.
30. There shall be no blood seen upon you of all the blood
there shall be all the days in which ye have killed any beasts
or cattle or whatever flies upon the earth, and work ye a
good work to your souls by covering that which has been shed
on the face of the earth. 31. And ye shall not be like him
who eats with blood, but guard yourselves that none may
27. See x. 1 where this subject Covering that which has been shed.
recurs, This prescript of later legislation is here
Destroyed from the face, ete. See carried back to Noah: cf. Lev. xvii.
ver. 25. 13 ; Ezek. xxiv. 7. We must be care28. Gen. ix. 4, 6; Lev. vii. 27. ful to render “covering” and not
29. Into Sheol will they go, And into ‘‘burying.” The Ethiopic word is
the place of condemnation will they de- dafana = καλύπτειν = nga and not qabara
scend, And into the darkness. Cf. xxii. = θάπτειν = Yap, Singer (p. 200)
22. This passage seems to have been
bases one of his arguments for the
used by Eth. Enoch ciii. 7, 8, “their souls
Jewish Christian authorship of the
will be made to descend into Sheol. . .
book on the wrong rendering “ buryAnd into darkness... and a burning fire
ing.” Chullin ii. 9 censures the latter
where there is grievous condemnation.”
as Jewish Christian.
80. Upon you. By an easy emendation we could read among you. 81. Eats with blood. Lev. xix. 26.

64 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
eat blood before you: cover the blood, for thus have I been
commanded to testify to you and your children, together
with all flesh. 32. And suffer not the soul to be eaten
with the flesh, that your blood, which is your life, may not
be required at the hand of any flesh that sheds (it) on the
earth. 33. For the earth will not be clean from the blood
which has been shed upon it; for (only) through the blood
of him that shed it will the earth be purified throughout all
its generations. 34. And now, my children, hearken: work
judgment and righteousness that ye may be planted in
righteousness over the face of the whole earth, and your
glory lifted up before my God, who saved me from the
waters of the flood. 35. And behold, ye will go and build
for yourselves cities, and plant in them all the plants that
are upon the earth, and moreover all fruit-bearing trees.
36. For three years the fruit of everything that is eaten
will not be gathered: and in the fourth year its fruit will
be accounted holy [and they will offer the first-fruits],
acceptable before the Most High God, who created heaven
82. Cf. Gen. ix. 4; Lev. xvii. 10, 36. In this verse we ought, if the
114, text were authentic, to have an inter33. The earth will not be clean, etc. pretation of the law enunciated in Lev.
See vi. 2 (note). xix. 23-24. According to this law of
(Only) through the blood, etc. Num, the Priests’ Code the fruit of a tree
xxxv. 33. was not to be used for the first three
34. Maybe planted. Thismetaphoris years after it was planted. ‘In the
frequent in the O.T.: Jer. xi. 17; Amos fourth year all the fruit thereof shall
ix. 15 etc. According to Eth. Enoch be holy, for giving praise unto the
x. 16, xciii. 5, 10 Israel is “the plant Lord” (mab orbs wap 1.18). It will
of righteousness”; lxxxiv. 6, ‘‘the be observed that our text follows Lev.
plant of uprightness.” xix. 24 very closely: “in the fourth
Saved me from .. the flood. If we year its fruit will be accounted holy”
observe that in ver. 39 Enoch is called (bc. ad ‘*will be gathered”), The
“the seventh in his generation” and question now arises, what was to be
that verses 20-39 are Noah’s words, done with the fruit of the fourth year?
as “a preacher; of righteousness”; (a) If we omit the words in brackets,
if we note further the words saved me our text directs that all the fruit of a=
from . . . the flood, we shall not un- the fourth year is to be accounted holy
——
reasonably conclude that this book was and offered to God. (6) If the
known to the writer of 2 Peter ii. 5 bracketed words are genuine, the text
“saved Noah the eighth person, a directs that, while all the fruit is to ©
preacher of righteousness, bringing in be accounted holy, only the first-fruits
the flood” upon the world of the un- are to be offered to God. In either
godly.” case the words that follow elucidate

CHAPTER VII. 32-39 65
and earth and all things. Let them offer in abundance
the first of the wine and oil (as) first-fruits on the altar of
the Lord, who receives it, and what is left let the servants
of the house of the Lord eat before the altar which receives
(it). 37. And in the fifth year
make ye the release so that ye release it in righteousness and
uprightness, and ye shall be righteous, and all that you plant
will prosper. 38. For thus did Enoch, the father of your
father command Methuselah, his son, and Methuselah his son
Lamech, and Lamech commanded me all the things which his
fathers commanded him, 39. And I also will give you commandment, my sons, as Enoch commanded his son in the first
further the same subject, and ordain be rendered “so that they offer,” but
that of the fruit of the fourth year the the context is against this,
first-fruits are to be offered on the 37. And in the fifth year. At the
altar and the rest of it to be given to close of these words I have marked a
the priests. Next the words “offer lacuna. The text should have pro-
... on the altar” seem to mean ceeded to enunciate the right of eating
“offer as a burnt-offering”’ as in Lev. the fruit of this year as in Lev. xix, 25,
li. 14-16, where the Israelite is bidden whereas it proceeds to speak of the
to burn the first-fruits of corn and oil year of release described in Deut. xv.
on the altar. 1, 9, that is, the seventh year ; or else
of the command in Exod. xxiii. 11;
But if the above interpretation is
Lev. xxv. 2-7, to let the land lie fallow
right, it does not agree with that of
every seventh year. The verb hadaga
later Judaism. According to the latter
is used in the translation of psy in the
it belonged to its owners and was to be
above two senses of letting a field lie
consumed within the walls of Jerusalem.
fallow (Exod. xxiii. 11) and of remitting
See Josephus, Ant. iv. 8.19. In Sifre
a debt (Deut. xv. 2). But the context
on Num. v. 10 it is decided that the
is concerned with the land. Hence we
priests had no share in the fruits of
may render “‘let it (the land) rest so that
the fourth year. Something of the
ye let it rest.” But as this is tautosame nature may be implied in Ps.-Jon.
logous we may conclude that there is
on Lev. xix. 24, where the fruit of the
fourth year is said to be jnavsn wp some corruption. Our te=x ἀφtήσε τε
αὐτὴν ἵνα ἀφῆτε αὐτην. Here I take
M372 lb pwnd " op. Beer (Das Buch ἀφῆτε to be a corruption of ἀνῆτε. We
der Jubilien, Ὁ. 52) writes that the
should then have ἀφήσετε αὐτήν ἵνα
Samaritans, the Caraite Jews and Ibn ἀνῆτε αὐτήν. This is a rendering
Ezra held the view set forth in the
though not an accurate one of myo
text. In any case, the teaching of our
RRB in Exod. xxiii. 11. Hence, intext does not diverge from that of later
Judaism as much as the various regula- stead of ‘‘make ye the release. . . retions on this subject in the different lease it,” we should probably read: “(In
codes of the Pentateuch (see Hastings, the seventh year) ye will let it rest and
Bible Dict. ii. 10-11). lie fallow.”
38. Thus did Enoch . . . command.
Let them offer. The construction The author attributes halachoth to
with Kama is here jussive. It could Enoch. See note on xxi, 10,

66 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
jubilees: whilst still living, the seventh in his generation,
he commanded and testified to his son and to his sons’ sons
until the day of his death.”
Kéindm discovers an inscription relating to the sun and stars,
1-4. His sons, 5-8. Noah’s sons and Noah divide the
earth, 10-11. Shem’s inheritance, 12-21: Hams, 2224: Japheth’s, 25-30. (Cf. Gen. x.)
VIII. In the twenty-ninth jubilee, in the first week, in
1373 A.M.
the beginning thereof Arpachshad took to himself a wife and
her name was Rast’éja, [the daughter of Stisan,] the daughter
1375 A.M.
of Elam, and she bare him a son in the third year in this
week, and he called his name K4éinam. 2. And the son
grew, and his father taught him writing, and he went to
seek for himself a place where he might seize for himself a
city. 3. And he found a writing which former (generations)
had carved on the rock, and he read what was thereon, and
89, Seventh in his generation. Ct. attributed by ourauthortothe Watchers,
Eth. Enoch 1x. 8, xciii. 3; Jude 14. is in Josephus (Ant. i. 2. 3) assigned to
VIII. 1. Rés#’%a4= ns), «the ac- the children of Seth: Σοφίαν re τὴν
ceptable” (cf. Deut. xxxiii. 24). It περὶ τὰ οὐράνια Kal THY τούτων διακόσμησιν ἐπενόησαν. ὑπὲρ δὲ τοῦ μὴ
appears as Oy in the Syriac Fragδιαφυγεῖν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους τὰ ηὑρημένα
ment.
μηδὲ πρὶν εἰς γνῶσιν ἐλθεῖν φθαρῆναι
Kdindm. This name, which is not . στήλας δύο ποιησάμενοι τὴν μὲν
found in the Mass., Sam., Syr., Vulg. ἐκ πλίνθου τὴν ἑτέραν δὲ ἐκ λίθων
of Gen. xi. 18 nor yet in the Targums, ἀμφοτέραις ἐνέγραψαν τὰ εὑρημένα.
appears in the LXX version of this J. Malala, Anon. Chron. p. 6, reproverse and also in Luke iii. 36. In the duces the matter contained in the above
Mass., Sam., etc. Salah is the son of statement and adds: μετὰ δὲ τὸν καταArphaxad. The same facts are stated κλυσμὸν Καϊνᾶν, ὁ υἱὸς ᾿Αρφαξάδ, συνin Gen. x. 24 and 1 Chron. i. 24. At εγράψατο τὴν ἀστρονομίαν, εὑρηκὼς τὴν
the best, therefore, the tradition attested τοῦ Σὴθ καὶ τῶν αὐτοῦ τέκνων ὀνομασίαν,
by our text, the LXX and Luke is not ὡς εἴρηται, τῶν ἀστέρων ἐν πλακὶ λιθίνῃ
an ancient one. The motive for its γεγραμμένην. In Syncellus, i. 150,
insertion in the text is obvious from this event is recounted as follows: τῷ
ii. 23 above. Without this name there Pore ἔτει Καϊνᾶν διοδεύων ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ
would only have been twenty-one heads εὗρε τὴν γὙραφὴν τῶν γιγάντων καὶ
from Adam to Jacob. The same ἔκρυψε παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷς The words of
motive may have led to its insertion in Syncellus are reproduced in Cedrenus,
the LXX. i. 27, but with the following important —
3. He found awriting, etc. The wisdom addition which further illustrates our

CHAPTER VIII. 1-7 67
he transcribed it and sinned owing to it; for it contained
the teaching of the Watchers in accordance with which they
used to observe the omens of the sun and moon and stars in all
the signs ofheaven. 4. And he wrote it down and said nothing
regarding it; for he was afraid to speak to Noah about it lest
he should be angry with him on account of it. 5. And in
the thirtieth jubilee, in the second week, in the first year 1429 a.m.
thereof, he took to himself a wife, and her name was Mélk4,
the daughter of Madai, the son of Japheth, and in the
fourth year he begat a son, and called his name Shelah; for 1432 a.m.
he said: “ Truly I have been sent.” 6. [And in the fourth
year he was born], and Shelah grew up and took to himself
a wife, and her name was Mak, the daughter of Késéd, his
father’s brother, in the one and thirtieth jubilee, in the fifth 1499 a.m.
week, in the first year thereof. 7. And she bare him a son
in the fifth year thereof, and he called his name Eber: and
he took unto himself a wife, and her name was ’Aztrad, the 1503 A.M.
text: καὶ αὐτὸς μὲν ἐν αὐτοῖς ἐξημάρτανε reading aélaw6 instead of a‘élaw& we
καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τὴν αὐτὴν ἀτοπίαν should have: “it led him astray.”
ἐξεπαίδευσεν. οἱ δὲ τὸν Σάλα φασὶ Sinned owing to it. Cedrenus (see
ταύτην εὑρηκέναι. In Joel’s Chrono- above) preserves this clause: ἐν αὐτοῖς
graphy, pp. 3-4, we find additional ἐξημάρτανε. :
details borrowed probably from John Used to observe =jérée’éji. In my
Malala (see above): μετὰ δὲ τὸν text I emended this into jéréséja=
κατακλυσμὸν Καϊνᾶν ὁ vids ᾿Αρφαξὰδ “were founding.”
συνεγράψατο τὴν ἀστρονομίαν εὑρηκὼς In all the signs, ete. Cf. xi. 8.
τὴν τοῦ Σὴθ καὶ τῶν αὐτοῦ τέκνων 5. Mélka from nav= ‘‘ queen” or
ὀνομασίαν καὶ τῶν ἀστέρων ἐν. πλακὶ “ counsel.”
λιθίνῃ γεγλυμμένην. Similarly in Madai. Emended with Syr. ao
the Book of Jashar 10 a Cainan the son
and Lagarde’s Greek MS τ: μέλχα
of Seth, and not the son of Arphaxad,
θυγατηρ μαδαι.
as in our text and the above chronoCalled his name Shelah ; for he said :
graphies, is described as possessing
‘TrulyI havebeen sent.’ Here obviously
great wisdom and a knowledge of future
there was a paronomasia in the original
events, especially of the deluge. This
mandy ἼΩΝ °3 ποῦ joy ΠΝ Np’). For
wisdom he inscribed on tables of stone
Shelah, Eth, has $4l4=LXX Sand.
(jax mm Sy) and placed them among
his treasures. See the quotation from 6. Bracketed words a dittography
Josephus above. Just as the revela- from preceding verse.
tions of the Watchers are transferred Mak. Lagarde’s MS r on Gen. x.
to Seth, so likewise the revelations of 24: μωαχα Ovyarnp Xeegau: Syr.
the Slavonic Enoch are assigned to him from m2yn, afrequent O.T. name.
by the Greek chronographers. These
7. ’Azérdd. Should be’Aztira. Syr.
words will be found in the note on iv.
15. }30y) ; Lagarde’s MS r on Gen. x.'24:
He transcribed it. So MSS. By afoupa from ns, “the treasured one,”

68 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
1564 A.M, daughter of Nébrod, in the thirty-second jubilee, in the
seventh week, in the third year thereof. 8. And in the
1567 Α.Μ. sixth year thereof, she bare him a son, and he called his name
Peleg ; for in the days when he was born the children of
Noah began to divide the earth amongst themselves: for
this reason he called his name Peleg. 9. And they
divided (it) secretly amongst themselves, and told it to
Noah. 10. And it came to pass in the beginning of the
thirty-third jubilee that they divided the earth into three
1569 a.m.
parts, for Shem and Ham and Japheth, according to the
inheritance of each, in the first year in the first week, when
one of us, who had been sent, was with them. 11. And he
called his sons, and they drew nigh to him, they and their
children, and he divided the earth into the lots, which his
8. Divide the earth... for this his descendants (see ix. 14, 15, x. 29reason he called his name’ Peleg. As 34 and notes im doc.). By mutual conin ver. 5 we have here again a parono- sent, moreover, a curse had been inmasia, Yow ΠΝ NIP 135. « «+ payed ΠΝ 1305" voked on any one who should break
avy. Cf. Gen, x. 25. For Peleg, Eth. this covenant as well as destruction on
has Phalék. him and on his seed. Cf. Epiphan.
9,10. This secret and unauthorita- Haer. \xvi. 84 (II. ii. p. 542, Oehler) :
tive division of the earth is followed by οὐκ οἷδεν ὁ ἰδιώτης ὅτι τὴν ἰδίαν γῆν
a formal and authoritative one made ἀπείληφαν διηρπασμένην ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ
by Noah in the presence of an angel, ἐξεδικήθη τὰ μεταξὺ ἀλλήλων γινόμενα
and subscribed to by his sons with an ἐν ὅρῳ ἀληθείας καὶ ὅρκῳ: Νῶε γὰρ
oath binding on their descendants. On . μόνος διαιρῶν τὸν πάντα κόσμον
this subject Beer (Buch der Jubiliéen, τοῖς τρισὶν υἱοῖς αὐτοῦ, τῷ Σὴμ καὶ Χὰμ
p. 83) quotes Pirke R. Eliezer, ch. 24. καὶ ᾿Ιάφεθ, διεῖλε βαλὼν τοὺς κλήρους
This device of the author in some ἐν Ῥινοκορούροις. Hence when Israel
respects anticipates the Social Contract invaded Palestine and drove out the
of Rousseau, but the objects are differ- Canaanites they were simply recovering
ent. The theory in our text makes it their own possessions. Cf. Syncellus,
clear that there must have been current i. 83-84: vewreploas ὁ τοῦ Χὰμ vids
in the second cent. B.C. religious and Χαναὰν ἐπέβη τοῖς ὁρίοις τοῦ Σὴμ καὶ
moral objections to the Hebrew invasion κατῴκησεν ἐκεῖ παραβὰς τὴν ἐντολὴν
of Palestine and the slaughter of the Νῶε σὺν τοῖς ἐξ αὐτοῦ γενομένοις ἔθνεσιν
Canaanites which accompanied it. This ἑπτά, ᾿Αμορραίοις, Χετταίοις, Φερεζαίοις,
scheme of an ancestral compact approved Εὐαίοις, Τεργεσαίοις, ᾿Ιεβουσαίοις καὶ
by God and accepted as obligatory for Χαναναίοις, ods διὰ Μωύσέως καὶ ᾿Ιησοῦ —
succeeding generations is an attempt to ἐξωλόθρευσεν ὁ θεὸς καὶ κατά τινας
obviate such objections, and to show καιροὺς διὰ τῶν κριτῶν ἀπέδωκε τοῖς
that in reality the true transgressors υἱοῖς Ἰσραὴλ τὴν πατρῴαν γῆν...
were not Israel but the Canaanites, and 9. Secretly. See note on iv. 5.
that Israel in seizing Palestine were 10. One of us, who ihad been sent.
but resuming possession of what was This angel is one of the angels of the
their own; for the Canaanites had presence whom God had sent down to
settled in Palestine, although this bind the fallen watchers, v. 6. See
country had fallen by lot to Shem and notes on iv. 15, v. 6.

CHAPTER VIII. 8-12 69
three sons were to take in possession, and they reached forth
their hands, and took the writing out of the bosom of Noah,
their father. 12. And there came forth on the writing as
Shem’s lot the middle of the earth which he should take as
an inheritance for himself and for his sons for the generations of eternity, from the middle of the mountain range
of Rafa, from the mouth of the water from the river
12-21. Shem’s lot. It is impossible ἕως Ῥινοκουρούρων τῆς Αἰγύπτου, ἤτοι
to define exactly the limits of Shem’s τὰ ἀπὸ ἀνατολῆς ἕως μέρους τῆς μεσημportion. The text is at times indefinite βρίας, τήν τε Συρίαν καὶ Μήδειαν καὶ
and no doubt corrupt ; but even if we ποταμὸν διορίζοντα αὐτοῦ τὰ ὅρια τὸν
had the original before us many ob- Εὐφράτην). Cedrenus (i. 23) reproduces
securities would still remain, owing to this passage. The Chronicles of Jerahthe vague and inaccurate geographical meel xxxi. 2 give practically the same
ideas of the time. The boundaries of delimitations : « Shem, the eldest, chose
Shem’s portion are defined in verses his portion in the land of Asya, that
12-16 and the countries embraced with- is, the land of Persia from Bactris to
in them in ver. 21, and ix. 2-6, 13°. Endiana, from the Persian river to
Since there is some hope of under- the Ocean in the west and the whole
standing our author’s ideas as to the Rinés.” These definitions include for
countries allotted to Shem, we shall the most part the countries enumerated
confine our attention in the main to in our text above as well as in Josephus,
this question, and supplement the evi- Ant. i. 6. 4, but they hardly explain the
dence of the text by citations from statement in viii. 12 that Shem’s portion
Epiphanius and Syncellus which are extended to the river Don and the
based upon it. We shall also make Rhipaean mountains. Now a list of
occasional use of the statements of countries filling up this larger area is
Josephus on this head as well as of the given in Epiphanius (Adv. Haer. 11. ii.
Chronicles of Jerahmeel. Ρ. 544 [Haer. lxv. 83], ed. Oehler):
First of all Shem’s portion is said to τῷ δὲ Σὴμ ὑπέπεσεν ὁ κλῆρος πρὸς
include (ver. 21) the countries of Eden, πλάτος, ἡ Παλαιστίνη καὶ Φοινίκη καὶ
and of the Red Sea, of Bashan, Lebanon, Κοίλη, Κομμαγήνη, Κιλικία, ΚατElam, Asshur, Babel, Susa, Media, παδοκία, Γαλατία, Παφλαγονία, Θρᾷκη,
India, the mountains of Sanir and Εὐρώπη, Ῥοδόπη, Aafia, Ἰβηρία,
Amana, and the islands of Kaftur. To Κασπία, Καρδυέα, ἄχρι τῆς Μηδίας
this list ix. 2-6 adds the waters of πρὸς βορρᾶν. ἐντεῦθεν οὗτος ὁ κλῆρος
Dedan, the mountains of Mebri and διορίζει τὸν ᾿Ιάφεθ τὰ πρὸς βορρᾶν. But
Bla and the land of Arara (? Ararat). Thrace, Rhodope and probably Europa
Finally in ix. 18> there are the islands are here wrongly assigned to Shem.
of Kamaturi. Now, if we turn to 12. The middle of the earth. Palestine
Epiphanius, Ancorat. cxii.(Dindorf’s ed. according to Ezek. xxxviii. 12 (cf. also
1. 215), we find that he defines Shem’s v. 5; Eth. Enoch xxvi. 1) was the navel
portion as extending from Persia and (3, ὄμφαλος) of the earth. Cf. viii.
Bactria to India, to Rhinocurura which 19 of our text. The idea reappears in
is between Egypt and Palestine (τῷ μὲν Rabbinic Hebrew. Singer (p. 68) quotes
Σὴμ. .. ὑπέπεσεν ὁ κλῆρος ἀπὸ Περ- Joma 546; Sanhedrin 37a; Pesikta
σίδος καὶ Βάκτρων ἕως ᾿Ινδικῆς ἕως τῆς Rabb. x. in Tanch. on Lev. xix. 23,
χώρας Ῥινοκουρούρων). The same state- ΨΧΏΝΞ DWI Dow Pw 3D brew pwr 13
ment is made in the Chronicon Paschale
(i. 53) and in Syncellus (i. 82), though Raf. This range is no doubt the
in fuller form in the latter (Σὴμ... Rhipaean mountains which ancient
ἔδωκεν ἀπὸ Iepoldos καὶ Βάκτρων ἕως geographers placed in the northern
᾿Ινδικῆς μῆκος, πλάτος δὲ ἀπὸ ᾿Ινδικῆς parts of Europe and Asia or in other

70 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Ting, and his portion goes towards the west through the midst
of this river, and it extends till it reaches the water of the
abysses, out of which this river goes forth and pours its
waters into the sea Mé’at, and this river flows into the great
sea. And all that is towards the north is Japheth’s, and all
that is towards the south belongs to Shem. 13. And it
extends till it reaches Karaésé: this is in the bosom of the
tongue which looks towards the south. 14. And his
portion extends along the great sea, and it extends in a
straight line till it reaches the west of the tongue which
looks towards the south; for this sea is named the tongue
of the Egyptian Sea. 15. And it turns from here towards
the south towards the mouth of the great sea on the shore of
cases appear to have identified with we have another abbreviation of the
the Ural mountains, The Tanais or long name Rhinocurura. It will be
Don is placed by our author in their observed, indeed, that our text makes
neighbourhood. A son of Peleg is so Shem’s portion extend westward as far as
named in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel the mouths of the Gihon (Nile), so that
xxvii. 5. later writers have diverged somewhat
Tind. The Tanais or Don. This from their primal authority. “Puyo.
river is said to spring from “the waters κουροῦρα is used by the LXX in transof the abysses.” lating Diy $m, 1.6., “the torrent of
Méat. The Maeotis or Sea of Azov. Egypt,” a town on the confines of Egypt
13-14. These two verses should de- and Palestine, in Is, xxvii. 12.
scribe the western boundary. This is in the bosom of. These words
13. Kérdsé. Dillmann identifies this cannot be right if either of the above
place with the Chersonese. But if it interpretations of Karasé is sound.
is connected, as it seems to be, with Tongue. The word lesin may be
‘ithe tongue (i.e. gulf) which looks rendered indifferently ‘‘ promontory
towards the south,” which in ver. 14 (of the land) or “bay” or ‘‘gulf” (of
is defined as “the tongue of the the sea).
Egyptian Sea,” this identification cannot Tongue which looks towards the south.
be right. I am inclined to believe that This phrase is repeated and defined in
in Karas we have the latter part of the next verse.
the word Ῥινοκοροῦρα, which lies on 14. Tongue which looks towards the
the western boundary of Shem. For south. This may mean the promontory
if we turn to the quotations from Epi- which runs out into the Red Sea on ©
phanius and Syncellus in the note on which Mt. Sinai is situated.
12-21 we find that the portion of Shem The tongue of the Egyptian Sea.
is said to extend ‘‘from India to This is the Gulf of Aqaba at the north
Rhinocurura in Egypt.” This place of the Red Sea. Our text is the literal
furthermore is situated on the frontier equivalent of Is. xi. 15, sso Es nw, as
of Ham’s portion according to Epiphan- Littmann has observed.
ius and the Chronicles of Jerahmeel. 15-16. These two verses should ἄθThus in Adv. Haer, 11. ii. 84 of the scribe mainly the southern, eastern, and
former, Ham’s African dominions extend northern-eastern boundaries,
ἀπὸ ‘Pivoxoupotpwv ἄχρι Tadelpwy: and 15. ThewordSamén which is rendered
in xxxi. 2 of the latter, “from Rinés as “south” can also be rendered “north”
far as Gadaira.” In this last quotation —a later meaning of the word.

CHAPTER VIII. 13-19 71
(its) waters, and it extends to the west to ‘Afra, and it extends
till it reaches the waters of the river Gihon, and to the south
of the waters of Gihon, to the banks of this river. 16. And
it extends towards the east, till it reaches the Garden of Eden,
to the south thereof, [to the south] and from the east of
the whole land of Eden and of the whole east, it turns to
the east, and proceeds till it reaches the east of the
mountain named Rafa, and it descends to the bank of the
mouth of the river Ting. 17. This portion came forth by
lot for Shem and his sons, that they should possess it for
ever unto his generations for evermore. 18. And Noah
rejoiced that this portion came forth for Shem and for his
sons, and he remembered all that he had spoken with his
mouth in prophecy; for he had said:
“ Blessed be the Lord God of Shem,
And may the Lord dwell in the dwelling of Shem.”
19. And he knew that the Garden of Eden is the
holy of holies, and the dwelling of the Lord, and Mount
West to ‘Afra (cd). ὃ reads “to the [To the south]. Bracketed as dittowest of “Afra.” ‘ Afra seems to be Africa graphy.
in its early limited sense. Ji turns to the Teast}. We should
Gihon. Eth. has Gijén, i.e, the expect ‘‘to the west.” I have omitted
Gihon, one of the four rivers of Paradise “and” before ‘‘it turns. The boundary
(Gen. ii. 13). According to our text line now returns to the river Don whence
(viii. 23) it flows to the south of the it started in ver. 12.
Garden of Eden. This river compassed 18. See vii. 11. God dwells in the
‘the whole land of Cush.” Whether dwellings of Shem: the three most
the Cushites are the Kassi of the holy places belong to Shem.
cuneiform inscriptions or the Ethiop- 19. In iv. 26 above we have seen
ians does not concern us here, though that there are four holy places in the
the identification of the Gihon and Nile earth : from the present verses we learn
may have arisen from a confusion of that three of these are in Shem’s portion.
the two countries. Syncellus, i. 89, The fourth place, therefore, must either
speaks of two distinct countries named have been in Japheth’s or Ham’s porEthiopia: Αἰθιοπία ἡ βλέπουσα κατὰ tion. Either therefore the Mount of
*Ivdods πρὸς εὐρόνοτον, ἄλλη Αἰθιοπία the East may be regarded as Ararat in
πρὸς νότον, ὅθεν ἐκπορεύεται ὁ Νεῖλος Japheth’s portion, or as the great
ποταμός. Our author undoubtedly iden- mountain in the south-east (cf. Eth.
tifies the Nile with the Gihon. So Syn- En. xxiv. 3, xxv. 38), which would
cellus (p. 82) interprets this passage, τὸν probably belong to Ham’s portion. See
Νεῖλον, ὃς καὶ Πειὼν... λέγεται. Ty alsoiv. 26 note. The latter mountain is
is used as a rendering of =x», i.¢., the the chief in a range of mountains of fire
Nile in Sirach xxiv. 27: see also Jer. 11.1 8, (Eth. En. xviii. 9, xxiv. 1), and such
16. South. Better translate «« north,” a range belongs to Ham’s portion: see
See note on ver. 15. ver, 22.

72 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Sinai the centre of the desert, and Mount Zion—the centre
of the navel of the earth: these three were created as
holy places facing each other. 20. And he blessed the God
of gods, who had put the word of the Lord into his mouth,
and the Lord for evermore. 21. And he knew that a
blessed portion and a blessing had come to Shem and his
sons unto the generations for ever—the whole land of Eden
and the whole land of the Red Sea, and the whole land of
the east, and India, and on the Red Sea and the mountains
thereof, and all the land of Bashan, and all the land of
Lebanon and the islands of Κι αἰ τ, and all the mountains of
Sanir and "Amand, and the mountains of Asshur in the north,
and all the land of Elam, Asshur, and Babel, and Stis4n and
MA edai, and all the mountains of Ararat, and all the region
beyond the sea, which is beyond the mountains of Asshur
towards the north, a blessed and spacious land, and all that
Navel of the earth. See note on correct translation of the original (probver. 12. ably “na2 '%), the phrase may denote
21. A blessed portion. Cf. Syncellus, the island of Crete. Kamattiri in ix.
p. 88, (Σὴμ) τὰς ἐξαιρέτους τῶν παρ 13 may be a corruption of Κατ,
αὐτοῦ εὐλογιῶν ἐκληρώσατο ὡς καὶ ἐν Modern exegesis has taken the scripτῇ Γενέσει φέρεται. On the countries tural Caphtor to be Cilicia, Cyprus,
mentioned in this ver. see note on Crete, or Coptos, a city in the upper
12-21. Thebaid (see Hncyc. Bip. on “Caphtor’).
Bashan. In Eth. Basa. Sar and’ Amdnd. Cf. ix. 4. These
Islands of Kaftar. This is Caphtor names may be derived from Cant. iv. 8.
the proper name of a country in Jer: Sanir is the Biblical Senir in Deut. iii.
xlvii. 4; Amos ix. 7. The plural is 9; Ezek. xxvii. 5. In Deut. iii. 9 it is
used of its inhabitants in Gen. x. 14; said to be the Amoritish name for
Deut. ii. 23. In Gen. x. 14 these are Hermon. Saniru occurs in the cuneiform
taken to be the Cappadocians in the inscriptions (see Bertholet on Ezekiel
Syr., Onk., and the Jon. and Jer. Tar- xxvii. 5). “Amand may.belong to the
gums; also in Amos ix. 7 in the LXX, range of the Antilibanus or be Mt.
Syr., Vulg., Targ.-Jon.; also in Jer. Amanus in northern Syria. Josephus
xlvii. 4 in the Syr., Jon. Targ., Vulg.; (Ant. i. 6. 1) and the Chronicles of
also in Deut. ii. 23 in the LXX, Syr., Jerahmeel (xxxi. 3. 5) favour the latter
Onk., Vulg., Jon.-Targ. There are view.
thus some grounds for regarding Kaftfir Elam. The name of Shem’s eldest
as equivalent to Cappadocia in this son. The country is the Assyrian
text, and this view may be confirmed Elamtu, and is ‘‘nearly equivalent to
by the passage in Epiphanius which the Susiana and Elymais of the Greeks ”
includes Cappadocia in the portion of (Encyc. Bid. ii. 1258). Sfisin, which is
Shem ; see quotation in note on viii. mentioned presently, was its capital, or
12-21. On the other hand if we take it may stand for Susiana.
the words “islands of Kaftiir” as a Ma Eddi, i.e. Media. See x. 35.

CHAPTER VIII. 20-25 73
is in it is very good. 22. And for Ham came forth the second
portion, beyond the Gihon towards the south to the right of
the Garden, and it extends towards the south and it extends
to all the mountains of fire, and it extends towards the west
to the sea of Atel and it extends towards the west till it
reaches the sea of Maé’iik—that (sea) into which everything
which is not destroyed descendst. 23. And it goes forth
towards the north to the limits of Gadir, and it goes forth to
the coast of the waters of the sea to the waters of the great
sea till it draws near to the river Gihon, and goes along the
river Gihon till it reaches the right of the Garden of Eden.
24. And this is the land which came forth for Ham as the
portion which he was to occupy for ever for himself and his
sons unto their generations for ever. 25. And for Japheth
22-24. Ham's portion. This portion κλῆρος διορίζει ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ
embraces all Africa from the mouths of Σὴμ τὰ πρὸς ἀνατολήν. According
the Nile westward and southward and to the Chronicles of Jerahmeel xxxi.
certain parts of Asia, which are vaguely 2 “Ham took his portion in the land
defined in viii. 23, ix. 1, imperfectly in of Afriqia which comprises Aram,
Epiphan. Ancorat. cxii.: Χὰμ δὲ τῷ Hamath, and the mountain of Lebanon
δευτέρῳ ἀπὸ τῆς αὐτῆς ἹΡινοκουρούρων . until the Red Sea and the Sea of
ἕως Γαδείρων τὰ πρὸς νότον: and in Philistia, from Rinos as far as Gadaira.”
Syncellus, 82: Χὰμ, δὲ τῷ δευτέρῳ. .. See also for Josephus’ views, Ant, i. 6. 2.
ἔδωκε τὰ πρὸς νότον καὶ Λίβα καὶ 22. Gthon. Eth. has Gijon. See
μέρος τῆς δύσεως ἀπὸ Ῥινοκουρούρων τῆς note on viii. 15.
Αἰγύπτου, Αἰθιοπίαν, καὶ Αἴγυπτον καὶ To the right, 1.6. to the south.
Λιβύην, ᾿Αφρικὴν καὶ Μαυριτανίαν ἕως Mountains of fire. On certain fiery
Ἡρακλείων στηλῶν ἤτοι ἕως τοῦ δυτικοῦ mountains see Eth. Enoch xviii. 6-9,
καὶ Λιβυκοῦ ᾿Ὠκεανοῦ, ποταμὸν διορί- xxiv. 1-3.
foyra τὸν Νεῖλον, ὃς καὶ Tey . .. Ata, The Atlantic.
λέγεται, for both these passages omit MEK. This sea or ocean lies in the
the countries belonging to Ham in extreme west: cf. ver. 26. Is the word
Asia. In Epiphan. Adv. Haer, II. ii. a distortion of ᾽Ωκεανός, the Great Ocean
544 (Haer. lxvi. 84), however, these Stream ?
are given very fully: ὑπέπεσεν ὁ Everything which is not destroyed
κλῆρος ἀπὸ Ῥινοκουρούρων ἄχρι descends (ab). cd=“ everything perishΤαδείρων, Αὔγυπτον ἔχων καὶ Mapee- able descends.” What is required
ανδίνην καὶ ᾿Αμμῶνα, Λιβύην τε probably is: ‘‘if anything descends
καὶ Μαρμαρίδα, ΠΤεντάπολιν, Μακάτην, into it, it perishes.”
Μακρόνην τε καὶ Λεπτημάγνην, Σύρτιν, 23. Gddir, 1,6, Gades, Cadiz.
Μαυριτανίαν, ἄχρι τῶν Ἡρακλεωτικῶν Goes along the river Gihon. I have
στηλῶν λεγομένων καὶ τῆς ἔσω Γαδείρης" added ‘ba’ before Gihon; for the writer
ταῦτα τὰ πρὸς νότον" ἀπὸ δὲ Ῥινοκου- could not say that the Nile flowed
ρούρων τὰ πρὸς ἀνατολήν, τήν τε ᾿[δου- towards the Garden of Eden.
μαίαν καὶ Μαδιανῖτιν, τήν τε ᾿Αλα- 25-298, Japheth’s portion—Northern
βαστρῖτιν, καὶ ᾽Ομηρῖτιν, καὶ ᾿Αξωμῖτιν, Asia, Europe, and five great islands.
καὶ Βούγεαν, καὶ Λίβαν, ἄχρι τῆς This portion, which is further described
τῶν Βάκτρων χώρας. ὁ δὲ αὐτὸς in ix. 7-13, embraces the countries north

74 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
came forth the third portion beyond the river Ting to the
north of the outflow of its waters, and it extends northeasterly to the whole region of Gog and to all the country
east thereof. 26. And it extends northerly to the north,
and it extends to the mountains of Qélt towards the north,
and towards the sea of Maik, and it goes forth to the east
of Gadir as far as the region of the waters of the sea. 27.
And it extends until it approaches the west of Fara and it
returns towards ’Aféraég, and it extends easterly to the
waters of the sea of Meat, 28. And it extends to the
region of the river Tina in a north-easterly direction until it
approaches the boundary of its waters towards the mountain
Rafa, and it turns round towards the north. 29. This is
the land which came forth for Japheth and his sons as the
portion of his inheritance which he should possess for himself
and his sons, for their generations for ever; five great
islands, and a great land in the north. 30. But it is cold,
of Shem and Ham’s portions from Φράγγων ἄνω χώρας. An elaborate
Media to Rhinocurura in Asia and to account of Japhet’s province appears
Gades in Europe. Epiphanius (Ancorat. in Josephus, Ant, i. 6. 1, and in the
exii.) describes it briefly: Ἰάφεθ τῷ Chronicles of Jerahmeel xxxi. 4-5.
τρίτῳ ἀπὸ Μηδίας ἕως Γαδείρων καὶ The latter is dependent in some respects
Ρινοκουρούρων τὰ πρὸς Βορρᾶν. Cf. on the former.
Chronicon Pasch. i. 46. A fuller 25. The boundaries of Japheth’s poraccount from a later standpoint is given tion in Asia.
by Syncellus (p. 83): ᾿Ιάφεθ. .. Gog. The country of Gog is in
(ἔδωκεν) ἀπὸ Μηδείας τὰ πρὸς ἄρκτον northern Asia. Gog is identified with
καὶ δυσμὰς ἕως Tadelpwy καὶ Βρεττανι- the Scythians by Josephus (Ant, i. 6.
κῶν νήσων, ᾿Αρμενίαν καὶ ᾿Ιβηρίαν, 1) and the Chronicles of Jerahmeel
Πόντον, Κόλχους καὶ τὰς κατόπιν χώρας (xxxi. 4).
καὶ νήσους ἕως ᾿Ιταλίας καὶ Γαλλικῆς, 26-28. The boundaries of Japheth’s
Σπανικῆς, τε καὶ Κελτιβηρίας καὶ Λυσι- portion in Europe.
τανῶν. Practically the same descrip- 26. Qét. These are probably the
tion of Japheth’s province is given by Celts.
Epiphanius (Adv. Heer, 11. ii. 544 Mé@ak. See on ver. 22.
[Haer. Ixvi. 847): οὗτος ὁ κλῆρος 27. Fara (cd), ὃ Fera, a Ferég.
(τοῦ Σὴμ) διορίζει τὸν ᾿Ιάφεθ τὰ Fara may be Africa. See ver. 15.
πρὸς Βορρᾶν (ἰ.6., Japheth’s province Aférig. This may be Phrygia. This
in Asia is bounded by Shem’s on country according to Josephus (Ant.
the south): πρὸς δὲ τὴν δύσιν ἀπὸ i. 6. 1) and the Chronicles of Jerahmeel
τῆς Εὐρώπης ἄχρι τῆς σπανίας καὶ XXX. 5 belonged to Japheth.
Βριττανίας, ἐκεῖθέν τε τὰ παρακείμενα 29. Five great islands. See note
ἔθνη, “Enres καὶ Δαύνεις, ᾿Ιάπυγες, on ix. 18. To these five may belong
Κάλαβροι, Λατῖνοι, ᾽Οπικοί, Μάγαρδες, Cyprus, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica. Five
ἕως διακατοχῆς τῆς Σπανίας, καὶ τῆς islands in the Great Sea are mentioned
Γαλλίας, τῆς τε τῶν Σκόττων καὶ in Eth. Enoch Ixxvii. 8.

CHAPTERS VIII. 26-IX. 3 75
and the land of Ham is hot, and the land of Shem is neither
hot nor cold, but it is of blended cold and heat.
Subdivision of the three portions amongst the grandchildren
of Noah. Amongst Hams children, 1: Shem’s 2-6:
Japheth's, 7-13. Oath taken by Noah’s sons, 14-15.
IX. And Ham divided amongst his sons, and the first
portion came forth for Cush towards the east, and to the
west of him for Mizraim, and to the west of him for Put,
and to the west of him [and to the west thereof] on the sea for
Canaan. 2. And Shem also divided amongst his sons, and
the first portion came forth for Elam and his sons, to the east
of the river Tigris till it approaches the east, the whole land of
India, and on the Red Sea on its coast, and the waters of
Dédan, and all the mountains of Mebri and EA, and all
the land of Stisin and all that is on the side of Pharnak to
the Red Sea and the river Ting. 3. And for Asshur came
forth the second portion, all the land of Asshur and Nineveh
30. Land of Ham is hot. Cf. Epi- running northward to Pontus and the
phan, Haer. lxvi. 85: Χαναὰν δὲ Don.
πλεονέκτης ὧν ὁ vids τοῦ Χὰμ ἐπῆλθε The east, the whole land of India
τῇ Παλαιστηνῶν γῇ . . . καταλείψας (cd). αὖ read “to the east of the
τὸν ἴδιον κλῆρον διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν εἶναι whole land of India.” But India was
καυματινόν. in Shem’s portion. See viii. 21.
IX. 1. Cf. Gen. x. 6. Waters of Dédan. Deqan is a son of
Cush. Eth. has Ques, The country Raamah, one of the sons of Cush (Gen.
is no doubt Ethiopia. See also Josephus x. 7) or of Jokshan, son of Keturah
and the Chronicles of Jerahmeel, in Joc. (Gen. xxv. 3). The Dedanites are
Mizraim. Eth. has Mésrém. He generally taken to be a commercial
receives nx or Egypt. people dwelling in Arabia, possibly on
Put. Eth. has Phid. Soalsoin LXX the north-west. See Hncyc. Bibl.
Φούδ, 1.6. wis. The country of Phid 1. 1053.
is Libya, lying west of Egypt. See
Mebri (Ὁ). a Mazbara.
Josephus and Jerahmeel.
> Ela (bcd). a’ Elim.
To the west of him. . . on the sea for
Canaan. Thus Canaan’s portion ex- Pharnak. Can this be Pharnacia on
tended from Libya to the Atlantic on the coast of Pontus? On the countries
the west. Seex. 28-29. The bracketed falling to Shem’s portion in Asia Minor
words are a dittography. and to the north see quotation from
' 2. Elam’s portion—from the Tigris Epiphanius (Adv. Haer.) in note on
to the utmost confines of India, the viii. 12-21.
countries bordering on the Red Sea and 8. Nineveh. Eth. Ninévi.

76 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and Shinar and to the border of India, and it ascends and
skirts the river. 4. And for Arpachshad came forth the
third portion, all the land of the region of the Chaldees to
the east of the Euphrates, bordering on the Red Sea, and
all the waters of the desert close to the tongue of the sea
which looks towards Egypt, all the land of Lebanon and
Sanir and Amand to the border of the Euphrates. 5, And
for Aram there came forth the fourth portion, all the land
of Mesopotamia between the Tigris and the Euphrates to
the north of the Chaldees to the border of the mountains of
Asshur and the land of Arar. 6. And there came forth
for Lud the fifth portion, the mountains of Asshur and all
appertaining to them till it reaches the Great Sea, and till
it reaches the east of Asshur his brother. 7. And Japheth
also divided the land of his inheritance amongst his sons.
8. And the first portion came forth for Gomer to the east
from the north side to the river Tina; and in the north
there came forth for Magog all the inner portions of the
north until it reaches to the sea of Mé’at. 9. And for
Madai came forth as his portion that he should possess from
the west of his two brothers to the islands, and to the coasts
of the islands. 10. And for Javan came forth the fourth
Shinar. Eth. has Sinadar. The west coast of Asia Minor to the east of
Shinar of Scripture, Gen. x. 10, etc. Asshur. Josephus, Ant. i. 6. 4, says
And skirts the river=wawadafa the descendants of Lud were the
falaga, emended from wadafa falag of Lydians.
abd, which is untranslateable. If 8. Magog. Only Gog is spoken of
wadafa were the name of a river we in viii. 25.
might emend falag into falaga and 9. The north-western portions of
translate: ‘to the river Wadafa.” Europe fell to Madai’s lot, but he was
4, Arpachshad’s portion. See further dissatisfied with it (see x. 85) and
ix. 15 for the islands allotted to him. begged a portion of Shem’s lot. Madai’s
In Josephus, Ant. i. 6. 4, the descend- lot would seem to embrace Britain and
ants of Arpachshad are identified with Treland. The former is mentioned in
the Chaldees. Eth. has ’Arphaxed. the Chronicles of Jerahmeel (xxxi. 5),
Tongue of the sea, etc. Idon’t know Epiphanius and Syncellus ; see notes on
what is meant here. viii. 25-29, f
Sanir and ’Améanda. See note on 10. Javan. Eth.has’Ijé’evan. Javan
viii. 21. denotes properly Ionia, the Greek
5. The Syrians. colony in Asia Minor, and is used in
*Ardra, i.e. Ararat. See viii. 21. this limited sense in Is. Ixvi. 19;
6. Lud’s portion extends from the Ezek. xxvii. 13. This name also de

CHAPTER ΙΧ. 4-14 77
portion every island and the islands which are towards the
border of Lud. 11. And for Tubal there came forth the
fifth portion in the midst of the tongue which approaches
towards the border of the portion of Lud to the second
tongue, to the region beyond the second tongue unto the
third tongue. 12. And for Meshech came forth the sixth
portion, all the region beyond the third tongue till it approaches the east of Gadir. 13. And for Tiras there came
forth the seventh portion, four great islands in the midst of
the sea, which reach to the portion of Ham [and the islands
of Kamattiri came out by lot for the sons of Arpachshad as
his inheritance]. 14, And thus the sons of Noah divided
notes the Graeco-Macedonian empire: [The islands of Kamédtirt ... as
Dan. viii. 21, x. 20, xi. 2. In our text his inheritance]. I have bracketed
it seems to embrace all the islands of these words as an interpolation. They
the coast of Asia Minor, while in Jose- are foreign to their present context, for
phus, Ant. i. 6. 1, it includes Ionia it is dealing with the possessions of the
and all the Greeks. ር sons of Japheth, and Arpachshad is a
Every island and the islands. We son of Shem. Furthermore, the phraseshould expect rather «all the coast- ology “came out . . . for the sons of
lands and the island.” Arpachshad” is unusual. This phrase
11. Tubal’s (Eth. Tdbél) portion tc the sons of ” is used only in the case
seems to extend from Thrace to of Noah’s three sons: viii. 17 «efor
Italy, Josephus, Ant. i. 6. 1, iden- Shem and his sons”; viii. 94 ‘‘for
tifies Tubal’s descendants with the Ham .'.: and his -sons”’; Vil 29
Iberes who lived in the Caucasus, “for Japheth and his sons.” But in
and the Chronicles of Jerahmeel, xxxi. connection with Noah’s sixteen grand5, identify them with the Iberi and sons in chap, ix. it is not used. The
Ispamia (1). It is not clear what the grandson is mentioned in each case as
three tongues of land are. Italy seems the person to whom a certain province
to be the third, Greece the second and is allotted. On the other hand, the
possibly Thrace the first. The descend- words may in some form have followed
ants of Tubal in Gen. x. 2 are identified after ix. 4, which defines the possessions
with Tibareni in Pontus. of Arpachshad. From viii. 21 we know
12. As Italy seems to be the third that ‘‘the islands of Kaftfir” were
tongue, Meshech’s portion extends from in Shem’s portion. Now these
the north of Italy to Cadiz. Josephus, “islands of Kamatiri ” may be the
Ant. i. 6. 1, and the Chronicles of ‘islands of Kaftfir”; for Kamatiri
Jerahmeel, xxxi. 4, take the descend- could easily originate from Κα νυ,
ants of Meshech to be identified with 14, Following our text Epiphanius,
the Cappadocians, but modern scholars Ancorat, exiv. (Dind. ed., vol. i, 217),
with the Moschi who lived between the writes τούτων τοίνυν τῶν ἐθνῶν οὕτως
sources of the Phasis and Cyrus. ἐκ τῶν τριῶν υἱῶν τοῦ Νῶε γεγονότων
13. The descendants of Tiras (Eth. καὶ τριχῆ τοῦ κόσμου τοῖς τρισὶν υἱοῖς
Tiras) seem to be the Tyrseni, a branch διαμερισθέντος, ὡς προεῖπον, ὅρκος ἀπῃof the Pelasgians who lived by piracy τήθη παρ᾽ αὐτῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς μηδένα
on the coasts and islands of the Aegean ἐπεμβαίνειν τῷ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ κλήρῳ, τὸν
Sea. Josephus, Ant. i. 6. 1, identifies δὲ ὑπερβαίνοντα τὴν τοῦ ὅρκου διαταγὴν
them with the Thracians. ἐξολοθρεύεσθαι ἐν τῷ ὅρκῳ καὶ πᾶν τὸ
Four great islands. See on viii. 29. σπέρμα αὐτοῦ. See also Adv. Haer.

78 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
unto their sons in the presence of Noah their father, and
he bound them all by an oath, imprecating a curse on
everyone that sought to seize the portion which had not
fallen (to him) by his lot. 15. And they all said, “So be
it; so be it,’ for themselves and their sons for ever throughout their generations till the day of judgment, on which the
Lord God shall judge them with a sword and with fire, for
all the unclean wickedness of their errors, wherewith they
have filled the earth with transgression and uncleanness and
fornication and sin.
Evil spirits lead astray the sons of Noah, 1-2. Noah's prayer,
3-6. Mastémd allowed to retain one-tenth of his subject
spirits, 7-11. Noah taught the use of herbs by the angels
for resisting the demons, 12-14. Noah dies, 15-17.
Building of Babel and the confusion of tongues, 18-277.
Canaan seizes on Palestine, 29-34. Madai receives
Media, 35-36.
X. And in the third week of this jubilee the unclean
demons began to lead astray tthe children oft the sons of
II. ii, 544 (Haer lxvi. 85). In νησαν τοὺς υἱοὺς Νῶε, καὶ εὐξαμένου
Syncellus (i. 83) also, it is said of τοῦ Νῶε ἵνα ἀποστῶσιν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν,
Noah: μέλλων δὲ τελευτᾶν ἐνετείλατο ὁ κύριος ἐκέλευσε τῷ ἀρχαγγέλῳ
τοῖς τρισὶν αὐτοῦ υἱοῖς μηδένα ἐπελθεῖν Μιχαὴλ βαλεῖν αὐτοὺς εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον
τοῖς τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ ὁρίοις καὶ ἀτάκτως ἄχρι ἡμέρας τῆς κρίσεως" ὁ δὲ διάβολος
ἐνεχθῆναι πρὸς ἕτερον, ὡς τούτου γενησο- ἠτήσατο λαβεῖν μοῖραν ἀπ’ αὐτῶν πρὸς
μένου αἰτίου στάσεως αὐτοῖς καὶ πολέμων πειρασμὸν τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ ἐδόθη
τῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους. αὐτῷ τὸ δέκατον αὐτῶν κατὰ πρόσταξιν
15. The day of judgment. See note θείαν, ὥστε πειράζειν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
on iv. 19. πρὸς δοκιμὴν τῆς ἑκάστου πρὸς θεὸν
X. 1. We have here another fragment προαιρέσεως, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ ἐννέα μέρη
of the lost Apocalypse of Noah. The ἐβλήθη εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον. But what is
former fragment we found in vii. 20-39. of still greater interest is the fact that
Of the present fragment a summary in the Hebrew Book of Noah fragments
is preserved in Syncellus, i. 49, though, of verses 1-2, 9-14 have been preserved
of course, as forming a genuine section from the Hebrew original. For this
of Jubilees. This summary gives the work the reader can consult Jellinek’s
contents of verses 1-9. Καὶ yap ἐν Bet ha-Midrasch, iv. 155-156, or my
τῇ Μωῦύσέως λεγομένῃ ἀποκαλύψει text of Jubilees, p. 179.
φέρεται περὶ αὐτῶν, ὅτι μετὰ τὸν κατα- The third week of this jubilee. If
bd,
κλυσμὸν τῷ βῴπβ' ἔτει τοῦ κόσμου this jubilee be the last mentioned, i.e.,
φθόνῳ κινούμενοι μετὰ θάνατον ἐπλά- the thirty-third (viii. 10), then the date

CHAPTERS IX. 15-X. 5
79
Noah, and to make to err and destroy them. 2. And the
sons of Noah came to Noah their father, and they told him
concerning the demons which were leading astray and blinding and slaying his sons’ sons. 9. And he prayed before
the Lord his God, and said:
“God of the spirits of all flesh, who hast shown mercy
unto me,
And hast saved me and my sons from the waters
of the flood,
And hast not caused me to perish as Thou didst the
sons of perdition ;
For Thy grace has been great towards me,
And great has been Thy mercy to my soul;
Let Thy grace be lift up upon my sons,
And let not wicked spirits rule over them
Lest they should destroy them from the earth.
4, But do Thou bless me and my sons, that we may increase
and multiply and replenish the earth. 5. And Thou
knowest how Thy Watchers, the fathers of these spirits,
is 1583-1589, but it may be much covered the true text. The passage in
earlier. question is: nነግinno Boon mn Yon
The unclean demons. These are the mandy dandy mynd) mownd 3 233= “And
spirits which went forth from the the spirits of the Mamzerim began to
Mamzerim or children of the angels stir themselves against the sons of
and the daughters of men. See vii. Noah, to lead astray and cause to err
22; Eth. Enoch xiv.-xvi. and to destroy and to slay.” ‘* Unclean
The unclean demons began... de- demons” in our text is a good equivalent
stroy them (so ab). cd omit ‘‘the for “‘the spirits of the Mamzerim,”
children of.” But Syncellus, i. 49, and though it is not a literal rendering.
the passage from the Hebrew Book of The Hebrew original of our text thereNoah (see my Eth. Text, p. 35, notes 17- fore =“ The unclean demons began to
19) show that instead of “the children of lead astray and to make to err and to
the sons’ we should simply have “the slay and to destroy the sons of Noah”
sons.” Under the word daqiqa (= “the (= Sanh mah mynd mown Yon). On
children of”) there may lie some corrup- the other hand the expression ‘‘ sons’
tion of the verb ’adqaqa, “to beat small sons” recurs in verses 2, 890, and 5b,
=m}, a corruption for man}, “to slay.” so that the text of ap may be right.
Now this verb is the last infinitive in 3. God of the spirits of all flesh.
the passage of the Hebrew Book of Num. xvi. 22, xxvii. 16.
Noah (see below), and as the other Sons of perdition (=]114N7 2). Cf.
three verbs in the Ethiopic text are 2 Thess. ii. 5,
literal equivalents of the preceding My sons (a), b “Thy sons’ sons.”
three infinitives in the same passage we 5. Thy Watchers. Cf. Eth. Enoch
may conclude that we have thus re- Vi.-Xvi.

80 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
acted in my day: and as for these spirits which are living,
imprison them and hold them fast in the place of condemnation, and let them not bring destruction on the sons of
thy servant, my God; for these are malignant, and created
in order to destroy. 6. And let them not rule over the
spirits of the living; for Thou alone canst exercise dominion
over them. And let them not have power over the sons
of the righteous from henceforth and for evermore.” 7, And
the Lord our God bade us to bind all. 8. And the chief of
the spirits, Mastemi, came and said: “ Lord, Creator, let
some of them remain before me, and let them hearken to
my voice, and do all that I shall say unto them; for if
some of them are not left to me, I shall not be able to
The sons (cd). 6 “the sons’ sons.” capacity they are designated as “ angels
a ‘‘the place.” of punishment,” 11, 3, lvi. 1, Isxii.
11, lxiii. 1, so also in our author,
6. Canst exercise dominion over
Thus the evil spirits under Mastéma (1)
them=ta’amr kudnnend l6mii emended
tempt men, lead them astray and blind
from ti’amr kuennanéhémi= “Thou
them x. 2, 8, xlviii. 12, 16, and harden
knowest their power” or “judgment.”
their hearts xlviii. 17. In xv. 31 it is
7. Cf. Eth. Enoch x. 4, 12.
actually stated that God put spirits in
8. See the quotation from Syncellus
authority over men to lead them astray ;
in note on ver. 1. see notes on xv. 31-32. Again (2) they
Mastémé. In the Latin version this accuse men of actual or alleged sins, xvii.
name appears as Mastima, and in the 16, xlviii. 15, 18. Finally (3) they destroy
Midrashic Book of Noah (see my text, those who have sinned, being created
p. 179) as hoevn Jv. Hence the form for this purpose, x. 2, 5. As angels
in which it appears in Syncellus and of destruction they appear, xlviii. 2,
Cedrenus as Μαστιφάμ, ὁ ἄρχων τῶν in slaying the first-born in Egypt. In
δαιμονίων, or Μαστιφάτ is less accurate. xlviii. 2 Mastéma seeks to slay Moses
Outside the Jubilee literature, as for failing to circumcise his son. These
Roénsch has remarked (p. 418), this spirits seek to rule a man in order to
word is not found as a proper noun destroy him, x. 3. But they cannot
except in the Acts of Philip (ed. touch the righteous, x. 6; every breach
Tischend., p. 98): ὁ δὲ Μανσημάτ, τοῦτ᾽ of the law, however, exposes men to
ἔστιν ὁ Σατανᾶς, ὑπεισῆλθεν εἰς τὸν their malignant influence, xlviii. 2.
᾿Ανανίαν καὶ ἐπλήρωσεν αὐτὸν θυμοῦ Israel as such is God’s own portion and
καὶ ὀργῆς. As a common noun it is is not subject to spirits of any kind, xv.
found twice in Hos. ix. 7, 8 in the sense 32, xvi. 18, xix. 28. From this high
of “enmity.” The word appears to be ethical conception our author falls away,
the hiphil of now (= ie, i.e. πο, and no doubt under the influence of his ©
is therefore the equivalent of ὁ Σατανᾶς authorities, in x. 12, 13, where, as in
in point of meaning and derivation. Tobit, magical methods are said to be
As in the Eth. Enoch it is the function effective against evil spirits. See —
of the evil spirits to tempt men, Eth. further note on xlviii. 2.
Enoch lxix. 4, 6; accuse them, Eth. Let some of them remain before me. —
Enoch xl. 7; and destroy them, Eth. See zien from Syncellus in note ©
Enoch xv. 11, 12, xvi, in which on x. 1, |

CHAPTER X. 6-17 81
execute the power of my will on the sons of men; for
these are for corruption and leading astray before my judgment, for great is the wickedness of the sons of men.”
9. And He said: “ Let the tenth part of them remain before
him, and let nine parts descend into the place of condemnation.” 10. And one of us He commanded that we should
teach Noah all their medicines; for He knew that they
would not walk in uprightness, nor strive in righteousness.
11. And we did according to all His words: all the
malignant evil ones we bound in the place of condemnation,
and a tenth part of them we left that they might be subject
before Satan on the earth. 12. And we explained to Noah
all the medicines of their diseases, together with their
seductions, how he might heal them with herbs of the earth.
13. And Noah wrote down all things in a book as we
instructed him concerning every kind of medicine. Thus the
evil spirits were precluded from (hurting) the sons of
Noah. 14. And he gave all that he had written to Shem,
his eldest son; for he loved him exceedingly above all his
sons. 15. And Noah slept with his fathers, and was buried
on Mount Libar in the land of Ararat. 16. Nine hundred
and fifty years he completed in his life, nineteen jubilees and 1659 a.m.
two weeks and five years. 17. And in his life on earth he
excelled the children of men save Enoch because of the
9. Cf. Hebrew Book of Noah: “And _ So it is stated in the Hebrew Book of
the angel did so and enclosed them in Noah, where there is a manifest parothe house of judgment (nwnn nn). nomasia between 5x5; and myip. Cf.
Only one-tenth did he permit to goto Eth. Enoch x.7; Tob. iii, 17, xii.
and fro on the earth before the prince 14, 15.
of the Mastema to rule over the godless 11. See ver. 9, note.
to smite them and to plague them with = Satan. Satan and Mastema are thus
all manner of diseases.” The angel identical.
according to this Hebrew book is 12. This verse is found almost wholly
Raphael, but according to Eth. Enoch in Heb. Book of Noah (see my text of
x. 11-13 is Michael. Again, though Jubilees, p. 179).
according to our text only one-tenth of 13-14. Shem as the eldest son (see
the demons are allowed to act with note on iv. 33) or as the priest receives
impunity to the day of judgment, in all the sacred writings from Noah. Cf.
Eth. Enoch xv.-xvi., all the demons have Syncellus ii, 83. In xlv. 16 Jacob
this privilege. gives all the books into Levi’s hands,
10. Oneofus. This angel is Raphael. as Levi was priest.
6

82 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
righteousness, wherein he was perfect. For Enoch’s office was
ordained for a testimony to the generations of the world, so
that he should recount all the deeds of generation unto generation, till the day of judgment. 18. And in the three and
thirtieth jubilee, in the first year in the second week, Peleg
took to himself a wife, whose name was Lomné the daughter
of Sind ar, and she bare him a son in the fourth year of this
week, and he called his name Reu; for he said: “ Behold
the children of men have become evil through the wicked
purpose of building for themselves a city and a tower in the
land of Shinar.” 19. For they departed from the land of
Ararat eastward to Shinar; for in his days they built the
city and the tower, saying, “Go to, let us ascend thereby
into heaven.” 20. And they began to build, and in the
fourth week they made brick with fire, and the bricks
served them for stone, and the clay with which they
cemented them together was asphalt which comes out of
the sea, and out of the fountains of water in the land of ©
1645-1688 Shinar. 21. And they built it: forty and three years
A.M. were they building it; its breadth was 203 bricks, and the
17. Enoch’s office was ordained for a 19, Cf. Gen, xi, 2; Epiphan. Adv.
testimony, ete. Cf. iv. 24 for a similar Haer. i. 1. 5.
statement. 20. On Babel see Encyc. Bibl. i.
Recount all the deeds, etc. Cf. iv. 410-413,
23, 24. Made brick. (Emended: see my
Till the day of judgment. Cf. iv. Eth. Text, p. 34.)
19; 24, ix. 16, = 22. Made brick with fire; and the bricks —
18. Lémnd. This name is found in served, etc. This passage appears to
the Syriac fragment as (A), and be the source of the Chronicles οὗ
Jerahimeel xxix. 2: ‘‘Come and let
Lagarde’s MS r as δυμνα, and Algazi’s
us make bricks... and let us burn
Chronicle as 7325.
them and each brick will be to us as a
Rev. Eth. has Ragaw=‘ Paya’ = 1
stone and the pitch for mortar.” Cf.
(Gen. xi. 18). It is obvious that our
Joseph. Ant. i. 4. 3.
author thus derived Reu from yy, «« to
21. For the three slight emendations
be evil.” There was a paronomasia in
of the text in this verse see my text, pp.
the original. ‘‘He called his name
36-37. The passage is found in Greek
Ragau (379); for... the children of
in the Catena of Nicephorus, i. 175: ἐπὶ
men had become evil,”’ wy. This deriva- py ἔτη ἔμειναν οἰκοδομοῦντες. τὸ ὕψος
tion appears in the Onomasticon, p. 197, jeudry πήχεις, καὶ δύω παλεσταί (sic), τὸ
27: Ῥαάν (i.e. ἹΡααύ) κακούμενος. πλάτος ἐπὶ FY" πλίνθους, τῆς πλίνθου τὸ
Shinar. Eth. has Sanaar, in ver. ὕψος, τρίτον μιᾶς πλίνθου. τὸ ἔκταμα
25 Sindar, in 26 Sanaér. τοῦ ἑνὸς τοίχου στάδιοι vy καὶ τοῦ ἄλλου

CHAPTER X. 18-25 83
height (of a brick) was the third of one; its height amounted
to 5433 cubits and 2 palms, and (the extent of one wall
was) thirteen stades (and of the other thirty stades). 22.
And the Lord our God said unto us: “ Behold, they are one
people, and (this) they begin to do, and now nothing will be
withholden from them. Go to, let us go down and confound
their language, that they may not understand one another’s
speech, and they may be dispersed into cities and nations,
and one purpose will no longer abide with them till the
day of judgment.” 23. And the Lord descended, and we
descended with Him to see the city and the tower which
the children of men had built. 24. And He confounded
their language, and they no longer understood one another’s
speech, and they ceased then to build the city and the
tower. 25. For this reason the whole land of Shinar is
called Babel, because the Lord did there confound all the
language of the children of men, and from thence they were
dispersed into their cities, each according to his language
XN. Eutychius (translated by Pococke, ausser sich waren und jeder eine
1658, pp. 51, 52) has drawn upon our andere Sprache redete.
text in the following passage: Tres Thirteen stades. In Jerome (Zpist.
ergo annos lateribus conficiendis et (78 in Migne) ad Fabiolam, mansione
coquendis insumpserunt: quorum 18) we have the following reference to
singuli tredecim cubitos longi, decem this passage. Hoc verbum (nen),
lati, ac quinque alti essent ; urbemque
quantum memoria suggerit, nusquam
inter Tyrum et Babelem exstruxerunt
alibi in Scripturis sanctis apud Hebraeos
orgyas longam tercentum et tredecim,
invenisse menovi absque libro apocrypho
latam centum quinquaginta unam:
qui a Graecis Λεπτή (a.l. Μικρογένεσις)
cujus muri alti orgyas quinquies mille
id est, parva Genesis appellatur. ΤῸ] ἴῃ
quingentas triginta tres; lati triginta
aedificatione turris pro stadio ponitur,
tres ; turris autem orgyas decies mille
in quo exercentur pugiles et athletae
alta; quibus exstruendis quadraginta
et cursorum velocitas comprobatur.
annos insumpserunt. Cf. J. Malalas,
This forms Jerome’s note on the name
p. 12; Glycas, p. 240. The clauses
of the place of encampment Rissah
in brackets in the translation are
(π8:) in Num. xxxiii, 21, 22. In later
derived from the Greek. Rénsch (p.
401) quotes the following passage Hebrewδ ᾽ and rp are useda s = stadium
respecting this tower from Weil’s or race-course. See Levy’s Wérterbuch,
Biblische Legenden der Musel- tn loc.
minner, pp. 77-78: Der Thurm 22. Will be withholden from them.
(Nimrod’s) ward bis zu einer Héhe von Lit. “will fail from them.” Gen, xi. 6.
5000 Ellen gebaut . . . Gott liess ihn 25. Cf. Gen. xi. 9.
mit einem solchen Getise umstiirzen, From thence they were dispersed...
dass alle Leute vor Schrecken ganz each according to his language. Accord-

84 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and his nation. 26. And the Lord sent a mighty wind
against the tower and overthrew it upon the earth, and
behold it was between Asshur and Babylon in the land of
Shinar, and they called its name “Overthrow.” 27. In the
fourth week in the first year in the beginning thereof in the
1688 A.M.
four and thirtieth jubilee, were they dispersed from the land
of Shinar. 28. And Ham and his sons went into the land
which he was to occupy, which he acquired as his portion
in the land of the south. 29. And Canaan saw the land
of Lebanon to the river of Egypt that it was very good, and
he went not into the land of his inheritance to the west
(that is to) the sea, and he dwelt in the land of Lebanon,
eastward and westward from the border of Jordan and from
ing to the Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xi. 8 the in Jubilees and the books dependent
number of nations thus created were upon it. Palestine fell by lot to
seventy, under their seventy patron Arpachshad and north-west Africa (see
angels. Cf. Chronicles of Jerahmeel ix. 1) to Canaan; but Canaan wrongxxx. 8; also Epiphan. Adv. Haer, i, 1. fully seized Palestine : see Epiphanius,
5: διεσκέδασε yap αὐτῶν τὰς γλώσσας, Ancorat. xiv. p. 217 (ed. Dindorf) :
καὶ ἀπὸ μιᾶς εἰς ἑβδομήκοντα δύο ἐπεὶ οὖν ἐν τῷ κλήρῳ Σὴμ ἡ Παλαιστίνη
διένειμε κατὰ τὸν τῶν τότε ἀνδρῶν ὑπέπεσε καὶ πάντα τὰ πλησίον αὐτῆς,
ἀριθμὸν εὑρεθέντα. Book of Adam and πλεονέκτης δὲ ὧν ὁ Χαναὰν υἱὸς Χὰμ
Eve (Malan), iii. 22. ἐπῆλθε τῇ Παλαιστινῶν ὕστερον γῇ,
26. A mighty wind. This is a very τουτέστι τῇ ᾿Ιουδαίᾳ, καὶ ἀφαρπάζει
old tradition. It is found in Sibyll. αὐτήν, ἐμακροθύμει δὲ ὁ θεός, διδοὺς
Or. iii. 98-103 ; Joseph. Ant. i. 4. 3; χρόνους μετανοίας, ἵνα μετανοήσειαν ot
Epiphan. Adv. Haer.i. 1.5; Syncellus, ἐκ τοῦ Χὰμ καὶ ἀποδῶσι τοῖς τοῦ Σὴμ
i. 77 ; Cedrenus, i. 22. τὴν ἰδίαν κληρουχίαν, ἐκεῖνοι δὲ οὐ
“ Overthrow ” = dtqat = καταστροφή μετενόουν, ἀλλ᾽ ἤθελον τὸ μέτρον αὐτῶν
= 35H. Observe the play of words not πληρῶσαι. τότε ὁ θεὸς μετὰ πολλὰς
preserved in Eth.): ‘‘Overthrew it ὕστερον γενεὰς δίκαιος ὧν ἐκδικεῖ τὴν
. and they called its name ‘O ver- παράβασιν τοῦ ὅρκους οὕτω yap ἔδει
πληρωθῆναι τὸ ᾿Αμορραίων μέτρον. Cf.
throw’ = pw nv Np). • . ነጋ5n
nen, This disagrees with its name also Haer. Ixvi. 88 (11.18. 544); Syncellus,
‘“‘Babel” in Gen. xi. 9. According to i. 83; Glycas, 242. The words of the
Sanh. 109 α one-third of the tower of last come very near our text: ὁ τοῦ
Χὰμ vids Χαναὰν ἰδὼν τὴν πρὸς τὸν
Babel was burnt, one-third swallowed
Λίβανον γῆν ὅτι... ἐστιν. .. κρείτup in the earth, and one-third standing.
τῶν τῆς ἑαυτοῦ γῆς, τυραννικῶς καθήρ- —
28. Ham’s portion lay in the north
παξεν αὐτήν. Clementine Recognitions —
of Africa. It is described in the next
i. 30: Cujus interim senior frater
verse as lying in the west towards
the sea, cf. ix. 1. The designation (Shem) habitationis sortem eam, quae —
cs land of the south” is a loose one. est in medio terrae, suscepit, in qua
The word rendered “south” rightly est regio Judaeae, junior vero orientis
(should be occidentis) plagam sortitus
means ‘‘ north,” but it is used occasionally in this wrong sense by Ethiopic est, ipse autem occidentis (should be
scribes. See note on viii. 15. orientis) accepit. y
29. This view is, I think, found only Jordan (ad). 6c ‘* Lebanon.”

CHAPTER X. 26-36 85
the border of the sea. 30. And Ham, his father, and Cush
and Mizraim, his brothers, said unto him: “Thou hast settled
in a land which is not thine, and which did not fall to us
by lot: do not do so; for if thou dost do so, thou and thy
sons will fall in the land and (be) accursed through sedition ;
for by sedition ye have settled, and by sedition will thy
children fall, and thou shalt be rooted out for ever. 31.
Dwell not in the dwelling of Shem; for to Shem and to his
sons did it come by their lot. 32. Cursed art thou, and
cursed shalt thou be beyond all the sons of Noah, by the
curse by which we bound ourselves by an oath in the
presence of the holy judge, and in the presence of Noah our
father.” 33. But he did not hearken unto them, and dwelt
in the land of Lebanon from Hamath to the entering of
Egypt, he and his sons until this day. 34. And for this
reason that land is named Canaan. 35. And Japheth and
his sons went towards the sea and dwelt in the land of
their portion, and Madai saw the land of the sea and it did
not please him, and he begged a (portion) from Elam and
Asshur and Arpachshad, his wife’s brother, and he dwelt in
the land of Media, near to his wife’s brother until this day.
36. And he called his dwelling-place, and the dwelling-place
of his sons, Media, after the name of their father Madai.
30. Cf. Syncellus, i. 83-84: μετὰ 34. Cf. Glycas, p. 242: καὶ οὕτω
διακόσια ἔτη τῆς τελευτῆς Νῶε, vewrept- πᾶσα ἡ γῆ τῆς ἐπαγγελίας τοῦ Χαναὰν
σας ὁ τοῦ Χὰμ υἱὸς Χαναὰν ἐπέβη τοῖς προσηγορεύθη.
ὁρίοις τοῦ Σὴμ καὶ κατῴκησεν ἐκεῖ,
35. See note on ix. 9. Diodorus,
_ With the word “sedition” in the text Presbyter of Antioch (οὗ. 898 1), appears
compare vewrepicas in Syncellus. to have known this passage. He is
32. By the curse, etc. Cf. ix. 14, 15. quoted in Catena Nicephori, i. 167 on
The holy judge, 1.6. the angel who Gen. ix. 27: τί δήποτε, καὶ κατοικησάτω
was present at the drawing of lots, ὁ ᾿Ιάφεθ ἐν τοῖς σκηνώμασι τοῦ Σὴμ
viii. 10. εἴρηται; ὁρᾷς, ὅτι πάντα προφητεία ἢν
33. Hamath. Eth. has ’Bmath (i.e.,
διὰ προφάσεώς τινος, ἢ ἄνευ προφάσεως
Ἡμάθ, non); see xiii. 2. Hamath was
φανερουμένη; καὶ γὰρ μετὰ ταῦτα
the northern boundary of Israel (Num. Madat, τουτέστιν ὁ Μῆδος, τοῦ ᾿Ιάφεθ
XXXIV. 8; Judg. iii. 3, etc.). In ὧν υἱός, τὸ κάλλιστον τῶν τοῦ Σὴμ
2 Chron, vii. 8 we have the phrase: οἰκήσεων κατέσχε τὴν. Μηδίαν, μέρος
“From the entering in of Hamath to οὐκ ἐλάχιστον τῆς τῶν Περσῶν γῆς.
the river of Egypt.” Medic, Eth. Médqin.

86 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Rew and Serug, 1 (cf. Gen. xi. 20, 21). Rise of war and
bloodshed and eating of blood and idolatry, 2-7. Nachor
and Terah, 8-14 (cf. Gen. xi. 22-30). Abram’s knowledge of God and wonderful deeds, 15-24.
XI. And in the thirty-fifth jubilee, in the third week,
1681 A.M.
in the first year thereof, Reu took to himself a wife, and her
name was ’Ora, the daughter of Ur, the son of Késéd, and
she bare him a son, and he called his name Séréh, in the
1687 A.M.
seventh year of this week in this jubilee. 2. And the sons
of Noah began to war on each other, to take captive and to slay
each other, and to shed the blood of men on the earth, and
to eat blood, and to build strong cities, and walls, and
towers, and individuals (began) to exalt themselves above the
nation, and to found the beginnings of kingdoms, and to go
to war people against people, and nation against nation, and
city against city, and all (began) to do evil, and to acquire
arms, and to teach their sons war, and they began to capture
cities, and to sell male and female slaves. 3. And Ur, the
son of Késéd, built the city of Ara of the Chaldees, and
called its name after his own name and the name of his father.
XI. 1. Cf. Gen. xi. 21. fodvots καὶ ἐν τορείαις λίθων ἢ ξύλων ἣ
’Ord. Lagarde’s MS r wpa: Syr. ἀργυροτεύκτων ... μόνον δὲ διὰ χρωFrag. lio}. Ps.-Philo, Ant. bibl. Lid. μάτων καὶ εἰκόνων ἣ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου
διάνοια ἑαυτῇ ἐφηύρατο τὴν κακίαν : also
p. 45 gives Melcha.
in Cedrenus, i. 47 : ἐπὶ τούτου (Σηροὺχὶὴ
Séroh. See ver. 6. Beer suggests that
οἱ ἄνθρωποι τὸν κατ᾽ ἀλλήλων αὐξήσαντες
this is from mip, “to sin,” in Talmudic
τῦφον στρατηγούς τε ἑαυτοῖς κατεστήHebrew. This would suit ver. 2, but
σαντο καὶ βασιλεῖς. καὶ τότε πρώτως
ver. 6 implies that our author derived
πολεμικὰ κατασκευάσαντες ὄργανα πολεit from ia “to turn aside.” Epiμεῖν ἀλλήλους ἐνήρξαντο. See also Book
phanius, Adv. Haer. i. 1. 6, writes: τὸν
of Adam and Eve (Malan), iii. 24 : Ps.-
Σεροὺχ τὸν ἑρμηνευόμενον ᾿Ερεθισμόν.
Philo, Ant. bibl. Lib. p. 45.
2-6. The corruption of mankind which
2. Individuals began to exalt themour author ascribes to the period of
selves, etc. So MSS. The emendation
Serug is by later writers assigned to
in my text is not necessary.
the age of Enos, the son of Seth: see
iv. 12 note. Some reflection of our 3. ’Or, the son of Késéd. We have
text appears in Epiphanius, Adv. Haer. here an attempt to explain the phrase
i. 1.6: Φαλὲκ δὲ γεννᾷ τὸν ‘Payod .. . Ur of the Chaldees (ow NN) through
καὶ ἤρξατο eis ἀνθρώπους 7 εἰδωλολατρία reference to Ur and his father Késéd.
τε καὶ ὁ Ἑλληνισμός . . . οὔπω δὲ ἐν *Ard. Corrupt for Ura or Ur.
icin :

CHAPTER XI. I-10 87
4. And they made for themselves molten images, and they
worshipped each the idol, the molten image which they had
made for themselves, and they began to make graven images
and unclean simulacra, and malignant spirits assisted and
seduced (them) into committing transgression and uncleanness,
5. And the prince Mastéma exerted himself to do all this, and
he sent forth other spirits, those which were put under his hand,
to do all manner of wrong and sin, and all manner of transgression, to corrupt and destroy, and to shed blood upon the
earth. 6. For this reason he called the name of Sérob,
Serug, for every one turned to do all manner of sin and
transgression. 7. And he grew up, and dwelt in Ur of the
Chaldees, near to the father of his wife’s mother, and he
worshipped idols, and he took to himself a wife in the thirty- 1744 a.m
sixth jubilee, in the fifth week, in the first year thereof, and
her name was Mélka, the daughter of Kabér, the daughter
of his father’s brother. 8. And she bare him Nahor, in
the first year of this week, and he grew and dwelt in Ur of
the Chaldees, and his father taught him the researches of
the Chaldees to divine and augur, according to the signs of
heaven. 9. And in the thirty-seventh jubilee, in the sixth 1800 4.
week, in the first year thereof, he took to himself a wife,
and her name was ‘Ijdsk4, the daughter of Néstag of the
Chaldees. 10. And she bare him Terah in the seventh
5. Mastéma. See note on x. 8. Chronicles of Jerahmeel in note on
To corrupt, etc. Cf. Eth. Enoch xvi. iv. 12. Our text was known directly
6. Thereseemsto be here a play on the or indirectly by Cedrenus, i. 47: avénnameSerug. ‘‘ He called the name... θέντα δὲ τὸν Ναχὼρ ἐδίδαξεν ὁ πατὴρ
Serug (mw) for every one turned (7p) πάντων ἐπίλυσιν οἰωνῶν, τῶν τε ἐν
to all manner of sin and transgression οὐρανῷ σημείων διακρίσεις καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ
(π΄). See, however, note on ver. 1. γῆς ἁπάντων καὶ πᾶσαν Χαλδαϊκὴν
7. He worshipped idols. See in note μαντείαν. On an earlier reference to
on iv. 12 passage from Chron. of Jerah- this art in our text see viii. 3.
meel denying this. 9. Baska, the daughter of Néstdg.
Mélka, daughter of Kabér. So also
Syr. Fragment 239
in Syr. and Lagarde’s MS 7. In Gen.
Aoi This name Ijaska is
xi. 29 Milcah is the name of Nahor’s
wife, but this Nahor is Terah’s son. found in Gen. xi. 29, ze. Iscah (nጋb"),
8. Cf. Gen, xi. 23. but there she is the daughter of Haran.
His father taught him the researches 10. Cf. Gen. xi. 25.
of the Chaldees, etc. See reference to Terah. Eth. has Tara.

88 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
year of this week. 11. And the prince Mastéma sent
1806 A.M.
ravens and birds to devour the seed which was sown in the
land, in order to destroy the land, and rob the children of
men of their labours. Before they could plough in
the seed, the ravens picked (it) from the surface of the
ground. 12. And for this reason he called his name
Terah, because the ravens and the birds reduced them to
destitution and devoured their seed. 13. And the
years began to be barren, owing to the birds, and they
devoured all the fruit of the trees from the trees: it was
only with great effort that they could save a little of all
the fruit of the earth in their days. 14. And in this
thirty-ninth jubilee, in the second week in the first year,
1870 A.M.
Terah took to himself a wife, and her name was dna, the
11-13. This legend is traced to our mandata perdentes. These last two
text by Jerome. Two other writers passages are in the main derived from
reproduce it, but do not mention the our text.
source. Jerome, in commenting on
11. Sent. This can be rendered also
Num. xxxiii, 27 (Zpist. Ixxviii. ad
‘had sent.”
Fabiolam, mansions 24), writes as
follows: Castra metati sunt in Thare 12. Reduced them to destitution. The
(Num. xxxiii. 27): Hoc eodem vocabulo Ethiopic here = ἐπτώχισαν αὐτούς, but it
(nin) et iisdem litteris scriptum invenio could also be a rendering of ἔθλιψαν or
ἐκάκωσαν. Hence this verb may go back
patrem Abraham, qui in supradicto
to the Chaldee verb ysn=to ravage, deapocrypho Geneseos volumine, abactis
vastate. This verb would constitute a
corvis, qui hominum frumenta vastaplay on the name Terah (nn) and the
bant, abactoris vel depulsoris sortitus
verse would run: ΠῚΠ oy ΠΝ NIP ΠΝῚΞῚ
est nomen. I know of only two other
ὯΔ win pany 3. For attempts to
references to the incident in our text.
explain the derivation of Terah from
The first is in S. Ephraem i. 156 and
the meaning assigned by Jerome see
is quoted by Malan, Book of Adam and
Roénsch, Das Buch der Jubilien,
Eve, p. 248: “Abram when a child,
266-267; Beer, Leben Abraham’s, pp.
having been sent by Terah to drive
95-96.
away ravens sent to destroy the
crops, as a punishment for the 14. Bana, the daughter of Abram.
idolatry of the land, Abram—un- So Syriac Fragment (see my text, p.
able to drive them away—by a 40). Cf. Cedrenus, i. 47: Odppa δὲ
sudden impulse, called upon God to . . . ἐγέννησεν ἐκ γυναιBBκs,ὸ θςυγ αorder them off, who answered: ‘ Here τρὸς ᾿Αβραὰμ πατραδέλφου αὐτοῦ, τὸν
am I,’ and ordered the ravens away ᾿Αβραάμ, ὅντινα ἡ μήτηρ ἐκάλεσεν ἐπ᾽
from Terah’s field.” The second is ὀνόματι τοῦ ἑαυτῆς πατρός. In the
found in Bar-hebraeus, Historia Dyn- later Jewish books the wife of Terah
astiarum, p. 13 (Fabric. Cod. Pseud. is called Amthelai, the daughter of
V.7. i. 422 sq.) : Cum Abraam annorum Karnebo, Baba Bathra gla; Book of
esset quindecim, annuit Deus precibus Jashar (Migne, Dict. des Apocr. ii.
ejus contra picas quae terram Chaldae- 1103). In the Chronicles of Jerahorum vastabant semina terrae ab iis meel (Eng. transl.) xxvii. 7, Amtalai,

CHAPTER XI. 11-19 89
daughter of Abram, the daughter of his father’s sister. 15.
And in the seventh year of this week she bare him a son, 1876 a.m.
and he called his name Abram, by the name of the father of
his mother; for he had died before his daughter had conceived a son. 16. And the child began to understand the
errors of the earth that all went astray after graven images
and after uncleanness, and his father taught him writing,
and he was two weeks of years old, and he separated 1890 a.m.
himself from his father, that he might not worship idols
with him. 17. And he began to pray to the Creator of
all things that He might save him from the errors of the
children of men, and that his portion should not fall into
error after uncleanness and vileness. 18. And the seed
time came for the sowing of seed upon the land, and they
all went forth together to protect their seed against the
ravens, and Abram went forth with those that went, and
the child was a lad of fourteen years. 19. And a cloud of
ravens came to devour the seed, and Abram ran to meet
them before they settled on the ground, and cried to them
before they settled on the ground to devour the seed, and
said, “Descend not: return to the place whence ye came,”
and they proceeded to turn back. 20. And he caused the
the daughter of Karnabo, is said to οὗτος (Αβραὰμ) μόνος, τῶν ἁπανταχοῦ
be the wife. of Nahor, but by taking τὴν ἐπὶ τὰ εἴδωλα πλάνην νοσούντων, τὸν
the context rightly we get Amtalai as ἀληθῆ θεὸν ἐπέγνω καὶ δημιουργὸν τῶν
wife of Terah. Book of Jashar (Migne, ὅλων ἀνεκήρυξε. According to Simon
Dict. des Apocr. ii. 1103) gives Amtela ben Lakish in Ber. rabba 30, 64, 95,
as Terah’s wife, but there is no men- Midr. on Shir ha-Shirim v. 16 (ef.
tion of her father’s name. According Midr. on Esther ii. 5), Book of Jashar
to Eutychius (translated by Pococke, (op. cit. ii. 1106), Abraham knew God
1658) Terah had two wives, Yuna and when only three years old, accordTohwait. See note on xii. 9. ing to R. Chanina in his forty-eighth
15. Abram, by the name, ete. This year. See Beer, Leben Abr. 103-104
statement is referred to by Syncellus, for other references.
i, 183: Tov κατὰ μητέρα πάππον τοῦ 16. For later forms of the saga in
᾿Αβραὰμ ἡ Λεπτὴ Τένεσίς φησιν ὅτι xi. 16-17, xii. 1-14, see Beer, Leben
᾿Αβραὰμ ἐκαλεῖτο, ἡ δὲ Σάρρα ἀδελφὴ Abr. 3, 102.; Book of Jashar (op. cit.
ὁμοπατρία τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ ὑπῆρχε. ii. 1106 sqq.); Chronicles of Jerah16-17. Syncellus writes (i. 184) on meel xxix., XXXL, -xxxiv
the authority of our text: τῷ ιδ΄ ἔτει 18. Lad of fourteen years. See
αὐτοῦ ὁ ᾿Αβραὰμ. ἐπιγνοὺς τὸν τῶν ὅλων quotation from Bar-hebraeus in note
θεὸν προσεκύνει. Cf. Cedrenus, i. 47: on 11-18,

go THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
clouds of ravens to turn back that day seventy times, and
of all the ravens throughout all the land where Abram was
there settled there not so much as one. 21. And all who
were with him throughout all the land saw him cry out, and
all the ravens turn back, and his name became great in all
the land of the Chaldees. 22. And there came to him this
year all those that wished to sow, and he went with them
until the time of sowing ceased: and they sowed their land,
and that year they brought enough grain home and eat and
were satisfied. 23. And in the first year of the fifth week
Abram taught those who made implements for oxen, the
1891 A.M.
artificers in wood, and they made a vessel above the ground,
facing the frame of the plough, in order to put the seed
thereon, and the seed fell down therefrom upon the share of
the plough, and was hidden in the earth, and they no longer
feared the ravens. 24. And after this manner they made
(vessels) above the ground on all the frames of the ploughs,
and they sowed and tilled all the land, according as Abram
commanded them, and they no longer feared the birds.
Abram seeks to turn Terah from idolatry, 1-8. Marries Sara,
9. Haran and Nachor, 9-11. Abram burns the idols:
death of Haran, 12-14 (ct. Gen. xi. 28). Terah and
his family go to Haran, 15. Abram observes the stars
and prays, 16-21. Js bidden to go to Canaan and
blessed, 22-24. Power of speaking Hebrew given to him,
25-27. Leaves Haran for Canaan, 28-31. (Cf. Gen.
x1. 31-xii. 3.)
XII. And it came to pass in the sixth week, in the
1904 A.M.
20. He caused the clouds of ravens narrative in these verses we have in
to turn back. Here we must emend later Jewish writings elaborate accounts
gabera (ab), gaberd (6), gab’a (d), into of the fear inspired in Nimrod by
|
agb’a, or retaining the reading of αὖ Abram’s birth, and the attempts of the
understand jetmajati after sabs$ i, former to destroy Abram in a furnace
XII. 1-14. Instead of the simple of fire when he refused to commit

CHAPTERS XI. 20-XII. 2 οι
seventh year thereof, that Abram said to Terah his father,
saying, “ Father!” And he said, “ Behold, here am I, my son.”
ul
by
2. And he said,
“What help and profit have we from those idols which
Ie
x
thou dost worship,
And before which thou dost bow thyself?
idolatry. The idea that Abram was triginta quinque fuisse anni doceantur.
cast into a fiery furnace arose from a Vera est igitur tila Hebraeorum traditio,
literal interpretation of Gen. xv. 7, “I quam supra diximus, quod egressus
eονπyνοε ςν am the Lord that brought thee out of sit Thara cum filtis suis de igne
Ur (xp) of the Chaldees”” where ἫΝ Chaldaeorum: et quod Abram Babywas taken to mean «fire. Probably lonio vallatus incendio, quia illud
a comparison of Exod. xx. 2 and Is. adorare nolebat, Dei sit auxilio liberxxix. 22 may have contributed to this atus: et ex illo tempore ei dies vitae,
interpretation. The casting of Abram et tempus reputetur aetatis, ex quo
into the furnace of fire is recorded in confessus est Dominum, spernens
Targ.-Jon. on Is. x. 32, in the Ps.-Jon. idola Chaldaeorum. Potest autem fieri
on Gen. xi. 28, xv. 7, and the Jerus. ut, quia scriptura reliquit incertum,
Tare, on Gen... xv. 7; also in Ber. ante paucos annos Thara de Chaldaea
Rabba 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 63; Shem. profectus' venerit in Charran quam
ταῦθα 18, 23, 44; Wajikra rabba 36 ; mortem obieret, vel certe statim post
biotnetge r s E
Debarimrabba9. As to whether it was persecutionem in Charran venerit et ibi
God Himself or an angel who delivered diutius sit moratus. For a full disee©
Abram out of the fire was a question of cussion of the subject and references
ሓቕ. debate among the Rabbis in the first to later Jewish literature see Beer's
PΕΖ. e and second cent. (Ber. rabba 48, Midr. monograph in the Monatsschrift fiir
Pre t
on Shir ha-Shirim i. 12). Exaggerated Gesch. Judenthums, 1855, pp. 59-65.
and grotesque forms of the legend will Beer is of opinion that Persia was the
be found in the Book of Jashar (Dict. des home of the legend and that it did not
Apocr. ii. 1111 sqq.) and the Chronicles make its way into Palestine till the
of Jerahmeel xxxiii.-xxxiv. On the third cent. of the Christian era. This
other hand no trace of the legend occurs is much too late. A late form of the
in Josephus (Ant. i. 7) or in the tradition is found in Ps.-Philo, Ant,
Palestinian Midrashim (the Mechilta, bibl. Lib, pp. 48 sad.
Sifra and Sifre), nor in our text save in
2. This tradition of Abram admonxii, 14, where we have perhaps the source
ishing Terah was known to Suidas
of a kindred legend—the death of Haran
(Fabric. Cod. Pseud. V.T. i. 336-338) :
by fire (see note in ioc.). Jerome men-
᾿Αβραὰμ ὑπάρχων ἐτῶν «8 καὶ θεοtions this last legend (see note on xii.
γνωσίας ἀξιωθεὶς ἐνουθέτει τὸν πατέρα
14) and likewise the former about the
αὐτοῦ λέγων" τί πλανᾷς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
casting of Abram into the fiery furnace
διὰ κέρδος ἐπιζήμιον, τουτέστι,τὰ εἴδωλα;
(Quaest. Hebr on Gen. xii, 4): Erant
οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλος θεός, εἰ μὴ ὁ ἐν τοῖς
autem Abram septuaginta quinque anοὐρανοῖς, ὁ καὶ πάντα τὸν κόσμον δηnorum, quando egressus est ex Charra.
μιουργήσας. Epiphanius (Adv. Haer.
Tndissolubilis nascitur quaestio: si enim
i, 1, p. 88, Oehler) attributes the
Thara pater Abrahae, cum adhucesset in
invention of image-worship to Terah:
regione Chaldaea, septuaginta annorum,
Ναχὼρ δὲ γεννᾷ τὸν Odppa: ἐντεῦθεν
genuit Abram, et postea in Charra
γέγονεν ἀνδριαντοπλασία ἀπὸ πηλουρducentesimo quinto aetatis suae anno
γίας καὶ κεραμικῆς ἐπιστήμης διὰ τῆς
mortuus est: quomodo nunc post
τοῦ Θάρρα τούτου τέχνη“.
mortem Thare, Abram exiens de Charra,
septuaginta quinque annorum fuisse Help and profit . . . from those
memoratur: cum a nativitate Abrae idols. Cf. 1 Sam. xii. 21, “ Vain things
usque ad mortem patris ejus, centum which cannot profit nor deliver.’

92 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
3. For there is no spirit in them,
For they are dumb forms, and a misleading of the heart.
Worship them not:
4, Worship the God of heaven,
Who causes the rain and the dew to descend on the
earth,
And does everything upon the earth,
And has created everything by His word,
And all life is from before His face.
5. Why do ye worship things that have no spirit in them?
For they are the work of (men’s) hands,
And on your shoulders do ye bear them,
And ye have no help from them,
But they are a great cause of shame to those who
make them,
And a misleading of the heart to those who worship
them :
Worship them not.”
6. And his father said unto him, “I also know it, my
son, but what shall I do with a people who have made
me to serve before them? 7. And if I tell them the
truth, they will slay me; for their soul cleaves to them to
worship them and honour them. Keep silent, my son, lest
they slay thee.” 8. And these words he spake to his two
brothers, and they were angry with him and he kept silent.
9. And in the fortieth jubilee, in the second week, in the
1925 a.m.
seventh year thereof, Abram took to himself a wife, and her
name was Sarai, the daughter of his father, and she became
8. There is no spirit, etc. See also 5. Work of (men’s) hands. Cf. Jer.
Ver: ὦ, Xx 5.5 PR. exxxy. 17. x. 8, 9. See xx. 8, xxii. 18 of our text.
4. Causes the rain... to descend. On your shoulders do ye carry them.
See xx.9. Cf. Jer. xiv. 22, "" Are there Amos v, 26; Ha: xlvi. 7.3. OOPS
any among the vanities of the heathen Epist. Jer. 4, 26; Ass. Mos. viii. 4.
that can cause rain?... thou hast made 9. Sarat. Sarai is written Sor in
all these things.” See also Epistle of the Ethiopic till xv. 15, when she
Jeremy 53; Mt. v. 45; Acts xiv. 17. receives the name Sarah (Eth. Sara).

CHAPTER XII. 3-14 93
his wife. 10. And Haran, his brother, took to himself a
wife in the third year of the third week, and she bare him
a son in the seventh year of this week, and he called his name
1932 a.m.
Lot. 11. And Nahor, his brother, took to himself a wife.
12. And in the sixtieth year of the life of Abram, that is,
1936 A.M.
in the fourth week, in the fourth year thereof, Abram arose
by night, and burned the house of the idols, and he burned
all that was in the house, and no man knew it. 13. And
they arose in the night and sought to save their gods from
the midst of the fire. 14. And Haran hasted to save them,
but the fire flamed over him, and he was burnt in the fire,
and he died in Ur of the Chaldees before Terah his father,
The same form of the words is found we have an old legend—possibly devised
in the Ethiopic version of Gen. xvii. by our author, being suggested by the
15 and may go back to the Greek twofold meaning of the Ur (x), i.e.
version. In the LXX the words, how- the name of a country and a fire. Our
ever, are given as Σάρα and Σάρρα. author is fond of explaining events from
The daughter of his father. Our the meanings of words. A different
author here follows Gen. xx. 12, form of the legend appears in Jerome,
where Abraham says that Sarah is the who rejects the legend of Abram’s
daughter of his father but not of his being cast into the fire (Quaest. Hebr.
mother. Syncellus probably follows on Gen. xi. 28): Pro eo, quod legimus,
our text in saying (i. 183): ἡ δὲ Σάρρα in regione Chaldaeorum, in Hebraeo
ὁμοπατρία τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ ὑπῆρχε. In habetur, in Ur Chesdim, id est in igne
the Book of Adam and Eve (translated Chaldaeorum. Tradunt autem Hebraei
by Malan), iv. 2, the two wives of Terah ex hac occasione istius modi fabulam:
are mentioned, Tona, the mother of quod Abraham in ignem missus sit,
Abraham, and Tahdif, the mother of quia ignem adorare noluerit, quem
Sarah (see note on xi. 14). On the Chaldaei colunt, et Dei auxilio liberatus
other hand Josephus (Ant. i. 6. δ; 7 de idolatriae igne profugerit . . . Mor1) describes Sarai as a niece of Abraham tuus est Aran ante conspectum Thare
and a daughter of Haran—an evasion in igne Chaldaeorum: quod
probably unknown to our author. videlicet ignem nolens adorare igne
According to the rabbinic tradition consumptus sit. Syncellus (i. 185)
(Jebam. 98 a, Sanh. 586, Ber. rabba follows our author: ἐνεπύρισεν ᾿Αβραὰμ
18, etc.) marriage with half-sisters τὰ εἴδωλα τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ Kal συγon the father’s side was permitted κατεκαύθη αὐτοῖς ᾿Αρρὰν θέλων σβέσαι
to the descendants of Noah (see τὸ πῦρ ἐν νυκτί. Cedrenus (i. 48)
Singer, Das Buch der Jubiléen, p. 167 seems to have had our text before him:
note). Marriage with a sister or half- ἤδη δὲ ἑξηκοστὸν ἔτος ἄγων ὁ ᾿Αβραάμ,
sister is strictly forbidden in Lev. ὡς οὐκ ἐδόκει τὸν πατέρα πείθειν καὶ
xviii. 9, 11, xx. 17. See note on iv. 15. τοὺς ἄλλους οἰκείους τῆς περὶ τὰ εἴδωλα
10. Haran. Eth. has Aran. ἀποσχέσθαι δεισιδαιμονίας, λανθάνει
11, According to Gen. xi. 29 Nahor νυκτὸς τῶν εἰδώλων ἐμπρήσας τὸν οἶκον.
married Milcah, the daughter of Haran. αὐτῶν δὲ ἐξαναλουμένων οἱ ἀδελφοὶ
12-14. In the note on xii. 1-14 (p. 90 νοήσαντες ἀναπηδῶσι, βουλόμενοι ἐκ
sq.) I have drawn attention to the fact μέσου τοῦ πυρὸς ἐξελέσθαι τὰ εἴδωλα.
that our book knows nothing of the φιλοτιμότερον δὲ ὁ ᾿Αρὰμ τῷ πράγματι
later legend of the casting of Abram into προσφερόμενος ἐν μέσῳ διαφθείρεται
the furnace, In verses 12-14, however, τοῦ πυρός. Cf, Bar-hebraeus, Historia

94 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and they buried him in Ur of the Chaldees. 15. And
Terah went forth from Ur of the Chaldees, he and his sons,
to go into the land of Lebanon and into the land of Canaan,
and he dwelt in the land of Haran, and Abram dwelt with
Terah his father in Haran two weeks of years. 16. And in
the sixth week, in the fifth year thereof, Abram sat up
1951 A.M.
throughout the night on the new moon of the seventh month
to observe the stars from the evening to the morning, in
order to see what would be the character of the year with
regard to the rains, and he was alone as he sat and observed.
17. And a word came into his heart and he said: “ All the
signs of the stars, and the signs of the moon and of the
sun are all in the hand of the Lord. Why do I search
(them) out?
18. If He desires, He causes it to rain, morning and evening;
And if He desires, He withholds it,
And all things are in His hand.”
19. And he prayed that night and said
“My God, God Most High, Thou alone art my God,
And Thee and Thy dominion have I chosen.
And Thou hast created all things,
And all things that are are the work of Thy hands.
Dynastiarum, p. 13 (quoted by stance of our text: ἔνθα ὁ ᾿Αβραὰμ
Fabricius, i. 422): Incenditque 1116 δεκαπέντε ἔτη τῷ πατρὶ συνοικήσας ἐνtemplum idolorum in urbe Chaldae- νοεῖ ποτὲ νυκτὸς EK τῆς τῶν ἄστρων κινήorum, at Haran frater ipsius ad σεως τοῦ ἐπιόντος καιροῦ κατασκέψαextinguendum ignem ingressus com- σθαι τὴν ποιότητα" ἣν γὰρ οὐ μετρίως
bustus est. According to Beer (Leben ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἅπασαν τὴν τοιαύτην
Abr. 110) the same legend is found in ἐξασκηθεὶς ἐπιστήμην. καὶ δὴ μετὰ
Midr. Ὁ. Bechaii, τὴν ἑκάστου τῶν ζητουμένων διάγνωσιν,
15. Haran. Eth. has Karan, 7.e. συνίησι περιττὴν ἅπασαν εἶναι τὴν τοιjm, Haran, a city in the N.W. of αὐτην περιεργίαν: δύνασθαι γὰρ αὖθις
Mesopotamia. Cf. Gen. xi. 31. τὸν θεόν, εἰ βούλοιτο, μετασκευσάσαι πρὸς
16-18. Abram on the first of the τὸ οἰκεῖον βούλημα τὰ προεγνωσμένα.
seventh month seeks to determine the Cf. Book of Jashar (op. cit. ii. 1106).
nature of the weather during the ensu- Some such idea seems to have been
ing six rainy months (see note on xii. present to Philo, De Migr. Abr, xxxii.-
27). In Ber. rabba 44, according to XXX
the Rabbis, God told Abram that he 19, And Thee and Thy Dominion,
was a prophet and not a star-gazer. etc. The MSS put this line at the end
Cedrenus (i. 48-49) reproduces the sub- of ver. 19.
Pease

CHAPTER XII. 15-25 95
20. Deliver me from the hands of evil spirits who have
sway over the thoughts of men’s hearts,
And let them not lead me astray from Thee, my God.
And stablish Thou me and my seed for ever
That we go not astray from henceforth and for evermore.”
21. And he said, “Shall I return unto Ur of the Chaldees
who seek my face that I may return to them, or am I
to remain here in this place? ‘The right path before
Thee prosper it in the hands of Thy servant that he may
fulfil (it) and that I may not walk in the deceitfulness
of my heart,O my God.” 22. And he made an end of
eτο eο.,
speaking and praying, and behold the word of the Lord was
sent to him through me, saying: “Get thee up from thy
country, and from thy kindred and from the house of thy
father unto a land which I shall show thee, and I shall
make thee a great and numerous nation.
23. And I shall bless thee
And I shall make thy name great,
And thou wilt be blessed in the earth,
And in Thee will all families of the earth be ee
And I shall bless them that bless thee,
And curse them that curse thee.
24. And I shall be a God to thee and thy son, and to
thy son’s son, and to all thy seed: fear not, from
henceforth and unto all generations of the earth I
am thy God.” 25. And the Lord God said: “Open his
mouth and his ears, that he may hear and speak with
22-23. Gen. xii. 1-3. Abram’s life. Our text was before
22. From the house of thy father. Syncellus, i. 185. Thus, contrary to
This implies separation from Terah (see his own system of chronology, he
29-31). The phrase is omitted in Acts assigns the date in this connection as
vii. 3, where the quotation is given a the beginning of the 4180 jubilee.
different context. ᾿Αρχὴ τοῦ μά ᾿Ιωβηλαίου Tap Ἑβραίοις.
25-26. From the overthrow of Babel Ἰωβὴλ δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς 7 πεντηκοντα-
(x. 26) the knowledge of the Hebrew ετηρίς, ὡς εἶναι ἀπὸ ᾿Αδὰμ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς
language was lost till the 75th year of ἐπὶ re (so Rénsch: MSS με) ἔτος

96 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
his mouth, with the language which has been revealed” ; for
it had ceased from the mouths of all the children of
men from the day of the overthrow (of Babel). 26. And I
opened his mouth, and his ears and his lips, and I began to
speak with him in Hebrew in the tongue of the creation.
277. And he took the books of his fathers, and these were
written in Hebrew, and he transcribed them, and he began
from henceforth to study them, and I made known to him
that which he could not (understand), and he studied them:
1953 A.M. during the six rainy months. 28. And it came to pass in
the seventh year of the sixth week that he spoke to his
father, and informed him that he would leave Haran to go
into the land of Canaan to see it and return to him. 29.
And Terah his father said unto him; “Go in peace:
᾿Αβραὰμ ἔτη Ba (=2001: so Rénsch: Babel, In the next colophon of the
MSS Pv’). ὁ ἄγγελος ὁ λαλῶν τῷ same work the same statement is
Μωῦσῇ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ὅτι τὸν ᾿Αβραὰμ attributed to Diodorus of Antioch
ἐγὼ ἐδίδαξα τὴν Ἑβραΐδα γλῶσσαν (378-394 a.p.). A similar view is set
κατὰ τὴν am’ ἀρχῆς κτίσεως, λαλεῖν τὰ forth in Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xvi.
πάτρια πάντα, ὡς ἐν Λεπτῇ κεῖται ale and iin Cedrenus, |i . 22: φασὶ dé ὅτι
Γενέσει. The above reckoning agrees μόνος ὁ “BBep ὁ τοῦ Φάλεκ πατὴρ οὐ
exactly with our text if we take into συνέθετο τῇ πράξει τῆς πυργοποιίας"
account the fact that Syncellus wrongly διὸ καὶ τῆς τῶν ἄλλων φωνῆς συγχεtakes a jubilee as 50 years instead of θείσης ἡ τοῦ “EBep οὐκ ἀπώλετο.
49 years. Syncellus thus finds that According to Malan, Book of Adam
on the 1st year of the 41st jubilee, and Eve, p. 245, this view was pro2001 years have elapsed from Adam pounded by Bar-hebraeus (Syr. p. 9).
till the 85th year of Abram. Accord- 25. Language which has been reing to our text Abram was 75 years vealed. Cf. Clementine Recognitions
old in 1951 and therefore 85 in 1961. i. 30: Divinitus humano generi data
Now 40 jubilees+1=1961, but Syn- Hebraeorum lingua (see preceding
cellus, reckoning the jubilee at 50 note).
years, wrongly made the total 2001. Day of the overthrow. See note on
A curtailed form of the above state- x. 26.
ment is reproduced by Cedrenus, i. 48. 27. Thebooks of his fathers, See note
Again the writer of the Clementine on xxi. 10. i
Recognitions, i. 30, knew the substance Six rainy months, This means the
of our text : Quinta decima generatione winter in the East. It is the time for
primo omnium homines idolum statu- study. The expression is Talmudic:
entes adoraverunt, et usque ad illud "bwin nip’ (Taan. 36; Erubin 56a) in
tempus divinitus humano generi data opposition to mpnn mn, the days of the
Hebraeorum lingua tenuit monarchiam. Sun, ὁ. 6. the summer.
A different tradition from that in 29-31. Singer (Das Buch der
our text appears in the Catena Jubiléen, p. 170) is no doubt right in
Nicephori, i. col. 177, on Gen. xi. 8, saying that this passage owes its existwhere Heber is said to have alone ence to the author’s wish to protect
retained the Hebrew language, because Abram against the reproach of leaving
he took no part in the building of his aged father (see Ber. rabba 39).

CHAPTERS XII. 26-XIII. 3 97
May the eternal God make thy path straight,
And the Lord [(be) with thee, and] protect thee from
all evil,
And grant unto thee grace, mercy and favour before
those who see thee,
And may none of the children of men have power over
thee to harm thee;
Go in peace.
30. And if thou seest a land pleasant to thy eyes to dwell
in, then arise and take me to thee and take Lot with thee,
the son of Haran thy brother, as thine own son: the Lord be
with thee. 31. And Nahor thy brother leave with me till
thou returnest in peace, and we go with thee all together.”
Abram journeys from Haran to Shechem in Canaan, thenee to
Hebron and thence to Egypt, 1-14a. Returns to Canaan
where Lot separates from him, and receives the promise
of Canaan and journeys to Hebron, 140-21. Chedorlaomer’s attack on Sodom and Gomorrah: Lot taken captive, 22-24. Law of tithes enacted, 25-29. (Cf. Gen. xii.
4-10, 15-17, 19-20, xiii. 11-18, xiv. 8-14, 21-24.)
XIII. And Abram journeyed from Haran, and he took
Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his brother Haran’s son, to the land
of Canaan, and he came into TAsshurt, and proceeded to
Shechem, and dwelt near a lofty oak. 2. And he saw, and,
behold, the land was very pleasant from the entering of
Hamath to the lofty oak. 3. And the Lord said to him:
Accordingly, Abram is to return and XIII. 1. Cf. Gen. xii. 5-6.
fetch his father. As Terah is still tAsshur.t I have obelised this as
alive at the age of 147 (see xi. 10, 15) corrupt. We should expect “ Canaan.”
it follows that our author accepts 205 a has Sar.
years in Gen. xi. 32 (Mass., LXX) as Shechem. Eth. has Sakimén.
the age of Terah when he died. The 2. Hamath. Eth. has ’Emath. See
Samaritan here has 145, and this is the note on x. 33.
text presupposed by Acts vii. 4. It Lofty oak. So LXX Gen. xii. 6;
is accepted by Budde and Dillmann. Mass. = “‘ oak of Moreh.”

98 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
“To thee and to thy seed will I give this land” 4. And
he built an altar there, and he offered thereon a burnt
sacrifice to the Lord, who had appeared to him. 2. And
he removed from thence unto the mountain . . . Bethel on
the west and Ai on the east, and pitched his tent there.
6. And he saw and behold, the land was very wide and
good, and everything grew thereon—vines and figs and
pomegranates, oaks and ilexes, and terebinths and oil trees,
and cedars and cypresses and date trees, and all trees of the
field, and there was water on the mountains. 7. And he
blessed the Lord who had led him out of Ur of the Chaldees,
and had brought him to this land. 8. And it came to pass
1954 A.M.
in the first year, in the seventh week, on the new moon of the
first month, that he built an altar on this mountain, and
called on the name of the Lord: “ Thou, the eternal God,
art my God.” 9. And he offered on the altar a burnt
sacrifice unto the Lord that He should be with him and not
forsake him all the days of his life. 10. And he removed
from thence and went towards the south, and he came to
Hebron, and Hebron was built at that time, and he dwelt
there two years, and he went (thence) into the land of the
south, to Bealoth, and there was a famine in the land.
11. And Abram went into Egypt in the third year of the
1956 A.M.
week, and he dwelt in Egypt five years before his wife was
torn away from him. 12. Now Tanais in Egypt was at
8-5. Cf. Gen. xii. 7-8. 8. On the new moon of the first
5. Unto the mountain . . . Bethel on month. So cd, which is to be prethe west, etc. After “mountain” there is ferred to the reading of ὦ ὃ as Praetorius
probably a loss of the words: “to the and Littmann have pointed out.
east of Bethel with.” This lacuna is Thou, the eternal God, art (bcd). a,
not marked in the MSS. Zasemt **And said, the eternal God is.” See
after Bétél in ὦ may be a corrup- ver. 16.
tion of westa=év. If so, it should be 9-10. Cf. Gen. xii. 8-10.
placed before Bétél. bod read “unto 10. Hebron. Eth. Kébrén.
the mountain of Bethel,” etc. Bealoth, Latin Bahalot, LXX BaakAi. Eth. ’Aggé, LXX ’Ayyat. w@ (Mass. nibya). A town in the
6. Date trees=bilanés (= βάλανος), south of Judah, Jos. xv. 24, as Littmann
an emendation of @ bibanés. cd read has recognised. MSS corruptly Boa
libanés, which Dillmann takes to Leth.
mean ‘pine trees,” 12. Tanais, ie. Zoan, ἢν» (LXX

CHAPTER XIII. 4-20 99
that time built—seven years after Hebron. 13. And it
came to pass when Pharaoh seized Sarai, the wife of Abram,
that the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great
plagues because of Sarai, Abram’s wife. 14. And Abram
was very glorious by reason of possessions in sheep, and
cattle, and asses, and horses, and camels, and menservants,
and maidservants, and in silver and gold exceedingly.
And Lot also, his brother’s son, was wealthy. 15. And
Pharaoh gave back Sarai, the wife of Abram, and he sent
him out of the land of Egypt, and he journeyed to the place
where he had pitched his tent at the beginning, to the place
of the altar, with Ai on the east, and Bethel on the west,
and he blessed the Lord his God who had brought him
back in peace. 16. And it came to pass in the forty-first 1963 a.m.
jubilee, in the third year of the first week, that he returned
to this place and offered thereon a burnt sacrifice, and called
on the name of the Lord, and said: “Thou, the most high
God, art my God for ever and ever.” 17. And in the fourth 1964 a.m.
year of this week Lot parted from him, and Lot dwelt in
Sodom, and the men of Sodom were sinners exceedingly.
18. And it grieved him in his heart that his brothers son
had parted from him; for he had no children. 19. In that
year when Lot was taken captive, the Lord said unto Abram,
after that Lot had parted from him, in the fourth year of
this week: “Lift up thine eyes from the place where
thou art dwelling, northward and southward, and westward
and eastward. 20. For all the land which thou seest I
Taviv). The statement in this verse 16. Thou, the most high God, eto,
is drawn from Num. xiii. 22. Cf. ver. 8.
13-15%. Cf. Gen. xii. 15-20. Our 17. Lot parted from him. Cf. Gen.
author conceals Abram’s deception of
HIT 11,
Pharaoh relative to Sarai, and omits
18. Jé grieved him = akajo. So
Gen. xii. 18. The Book of Jashar
Cf. Sir. xi. 22 for this transitive
expands all the details of the Biblical
use. ὦ has’ak’ijé,d’aékaji. ὁ gives
account.
hazana, a conjecture right in sense.
15. Journeyed to the place where he
had pitched his tent, etc. Cf. Gen. 19-21. Cf. Gen. xiii. 14-18.
xiii. 3, 4. 19. This week. MSS add “and
Ai on the east, etc. See on ver. 5. said” against Latin and Gen, xiii,

100 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
shall give to thee and to thy seed for ever, and I shall make
thy seed as the sand of the sea: though a man may number
the dust of the earth, yet thy seed shall not be numbered.
21. Arise, walk (through the land) in the length of it and
the breadth of it, and see it all; for to thy seed shall I give
it.” And Abram went to Hebron, and dwelt there. 22.
And in this year came Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and
Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Séllasar, and
Tereal, king of nations, and slew the king of Gomorrah, and
the king of Sodom fled, and many fell through wounds in
the vale of Siddim, by the Salt Sea. 23. And they took
captive Sodom and Adam and Zeboim, and they took captive Lot also, the son of Abram’s brother, and all his possessions, and they went to Dan. 24. And one who had
escaped came and told Abram that his brother’s son had
been taken captive and (Abram) armed his household
servants. 25.
; : Σ for Abram, and for his seed, a tenth of the
20. Sand of the sea. This expres- Térgal, i.e. Tidal of Mass. Syr.
sion is borrowed from Gen. xxii. 17. has Taril and LXX Θαργάλ.
Gen. xiii. 16 has here: ‘dust of the Gomorrah. Eth. Gémér.
earth.” King of Sodom fled. Our author
Not be numbered. Gen. xiii. 16 here corrects the apparent contradiction
omits the negative ; but it is also found in Gen. xiv. 10, 17.
in Onkelos. Vale of Siddim. An easy emenda21. I have added ‘‘through the tion of a corrupt text. See my Eth.
land” from Gen. xiii. 17, since the text (p. 48).
expression “length of it” presupposes 23. Adam, i.e. Admah.
its presence in the text, otherwise we They went. Text which has tc he
have to go back twenty-three words in went ” should be emended.
the Ethiopic for the antecedent of “it.” To Dan. Cf. Gen. xiv. 14.
The Latin is here defective, omitting 24. One who had escaped. Gen.
‘* through the land in its length and.” xiv. 13. This person was named Oni
22-29. Cf. Gen. xiv. according to the Book of Jashar (Migne’s
22. Chedorlaomer. Eth. has Kodols- Dict. des Apoer. ii. 1125).
gomor. τ And (Abram) armed his household
Amraphel. Eth. has Amirphel. servants. Gen. xiv. 14. For “armed”
Cf. Gen. xiv. 1 (LXX) ᾿Αμαρφάλ. (abd), ὁ corruptly reads “made atoneSéllasar. Possibly a corruption of ment for.” Onkelos (77) supports the
Ellasar, since sé and ’é are easily con- rendering which our text gives of p> in
fused in Ethiopic ; but the corruption Gen. xiv. 14. The LXX ἠρίθμησε and
originated in the Greek, since A in Vulg. numeravit which presuppose pv
Gen. xiv. 1 has Σελλασαρ; or in the the text of the Samaritan.
Hebrew, as the Syriac has Dalasar and 25. At the beginning of this verse
the Targum of Ps.-Jon. Telassar. there is obviously a lacuna, for the text
B=τI—ι AS

CHAPTER XIII. 21-29 IoI
first-fruits to the Lord, and the Lord ordained it as an
ordinance for ever that they should give it to the priests
who served before Him, that they should possess it for ever.
26. And to this law there is no limit of days; for He hath
ordained it for the generations for ever that they should
give to the Lord the tenth of everything, of the seed and
of the wine and of the oil and of the cattle and of the sheep.
27. And He gave (it) unto His priests to eat and to drink
with joy before Him. 28. And the king of Sodom came to
him and bowed himself before him, and said: “Our Lord
Abram, give unto us the souls which thou hast rescued, but
let the booty be thine.” 29 . And Abram said unto him:
“JT lift up my hands to the Most High God, that from a
is anacolouthic. c removes the anacol- προσφορὰς ἔδωκεν ᾿Αβραάμ) that Melouthon by changing astarasala = chizedek was uncircumcised to whom
“armed” of abd into ’astastraja= Abram gave tithes, and also by Tertullian,
**made atonement for.” Thus instead Ady. Jud. iii.: Patriarchae incircumcisi
of ‘‘(Abram) armed his household fuerunt, ut Melchisedech qui ipsi
servants .... for Abram” we have Abrahae jam circumciso... panem
“his household servant made atone- et vinum obtulit incircumcisus. To
ment for Abram.” But this change is evade such attacks some Jewish writers
against the best MSS, which are like- declared that Melchizedek was born
wise supported by Gen. xiv. 14 (see circumcised (Ber. rabba 43; for other
note on ver. 24), and it does not dis- references see Singer, p. 122 note);
pense with the necessity of assuming also that Melchizedek was identical with
a lacuna at the close of ver. 24. The Shem (Targum Jon. and Jerus. on Gen.
lacuna, drawn attention to in our text, xiv. 18; Nedar 320; Ber. rabba 44:
would naturally contain an account of Book of Jashar (Dict. des <Apocr. ii.
Abram’s pursuit of the kings and 1125); see Beer, Leben Abrahams, 142 ;
recovery of the captives and spoil. It Singer, Das Buch der Jubiléen, 122
no doubt told also of Melchizedek ; note for further references). These
for ver. 25 presupposes Gen. xiv. 18>- evasions were apparently unknown to
30° by declaring that the tithes belong Philo and Josephus. Im connection
to the priests. In Nedar 320 it is said with the fact that Melchizedek was
that the priestly office passed from called ‘“‘a priest of the most high God”
Melchizedek’s successors to those of (Gen. xiv. 18) we should remember
Abraham because Melchizedek sinned that the Maccabeans called themselves
in blessing Abraham before he blessed by this title (see note on xxxii. 1).
God (Beer, Buch der Jubilien, p. 74). Now since our author (see Introd. § 21)
Since Beer had before him the corrupt is an apologist of the Maccabean dyreading of c, which tries to obviate the nasty, it is not probable that he would
anacolouthic nature of the text, he omit all reference to Melchizedek who
assumed that the text contained no first bore the title they afterwards asreference to Melchizedek. It is true sumed.
that this passage has always been a 26. From the enigmatical words of
stumbling-block to strict Jews. Thus it Gen. xiv. 20 ‘‘he gave him a tenth of
was urged against them by Justin (Dial. all” our author derives the law of
6. Tryph. 19: ἀπερίτμητος ἣν ὁ ἱερεὺς universal tithing. See xxxii. 15.
τοῦ ὑψίστου Μελχισεδέκ, ᾧ καὶ δεκάτας 28-29. Cf. Gen. xiv. 21-24,

102 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
thread to a shoe-latchet I shall not take aught that is thine,
lest thou shouldst say I have made Abram rich; save only
what the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men
who went with me—dAner, Eschol, and Mamre. These will
take their portion.”
Abram receives the promise of a son and of innumerable
descendants, 1-7. Offers a sacrifice and is told of his
seed being in Egypt, 8-17. God’s covenant with Abram,
18-20. Hagar bears Ishmael, 21-24. (Cf. Gen. xv.,
xvi. 1-4, 11.)
XIV. After these things, in the fourth year of this
week, on the new moon of the third month, the word of the
Lord came to Abram in a dream, saying: “ Fear not, Abram ;
I am thy defender, and thy reward will be exceeding great.”
2. And he said: “Lord, Lord, what wilt thou give me,
seeing I go hence childless, and the son of Maséq, the son
of my handmaid,is the Dammasek Eliezer: he will be my
heir, and to me thou hast given no seed.” 3. And He said
unto him: “This (man) will not be thy heir, but one that
will come out of thine own bowels; he will be thine heir.”
4, And He brought him forth abroad, and said unto him:
« Look toward heaven and number the stars, if thou art able
to number them.” 5. And he looked toward heaven, and
beheld the stars. And He said unto him: “So shall thy
seed be.” 6. And he believed in the Lord, and it was
counted to him for righteousness. 7. And He said unto
29. Aner. Eth. has ’Aun4n. Instead of “the son of MAaséq”’ we should
XIV. 1-6. Cf. Gen. xv. 1-6. have “the possessor.” Next, “the son
2. Lord, Lord. Proba=b Δlέσπyοτ α of my handmaid”= 6 οἰκογενής μου.
Κύριε as in LXX of Gen. xv. 2= 31" Hence our text=*naq2 pwnya. Subsemn. quent tradition made much of Eliezer.
The son of Msg, the son of my He was said to be one of the seven.
handmaid. The Greek translator (and righteous men who had not tasted of
also the LXX) wrongly took pyp (= death (Baba bathra 58 a).
““possession”) to be a proper name. 7. Cf. Gen. xv. 7.

CHAPTER XIV. 1-14 103
him: “I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of
the Chaldees, to give thee the land of the Canaanites to
possess it for ever; and I shall be God unto thee and to thy
seed after thee. 8. And he said: “Lord, Lord, whereby
shall I know that I shall inherit (it)?” 9. And He said unto
him: “Take Me an heifer of three years, and a goat of three
years, and a sheep of three years, and a turtle-dove, and a
pigeon.” 10. And he took all these in the middle of the
month; and he dwelt at the oak of Mamre, which is near
Hebron. 11. And he built there an altar, and sacrificed
all these; and he poured their blood upon the altar, and
divided them in the midst, and laid them over against each
other; but the birds divided he not. 12. And birds came
down upon the pieces, and Abram drove them away, and
did not suffer the birds to touch them. 13. And it came
to pass, when the sun had set, that an ecstasy fell upon
Abram, and lo! an horror of great darkness fell upon him,
and it was said unto Abram: “ Know of a surety that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land (that is) not theirs, and
they will bring them into bondage, and afflict them four
hundred years. 14. And the nation also to whom they will
And Is hail be God unto thee (cd). ab of τμηθέντα: cf. LXX τὰ διχοτομήread “to be God unto thee.” ματα. This would imply the reading
8-9. Cf. Gen. xv. 8-9. on. But ταθέντα might possibly be
8. Lord, Lord. See note on ver. 2. a corruption of xrafévra=or15 as in
9. An heifer of three years, etc. The Mass. text. In that case we should
Mass., LXX, Ps.-Jon., Wajikra rabba render ‘‘ carcases.” Observe that LXX
14, Joseph. Ant. i. 10. 3 mention one (Ξ ἐπὶ τὰ σώματα ἐπὶ τὰ διχοτομήματα)
animal of each kind, as here. On the had clearly oma-Sy pገasn-5y before it.
other hand, Gen. rabba and Onkelos on And Abram drove them awa=y K at
this verse prescribe three of each kind. ἀπεσόβησεν (=M ass. ayi) αὐτὰ ᾿Αβράμ
So also Rashi, Nachmanides, Kimchi (Aquila). LXX=kal συνεκάθισεν αὐτοῖς
according to Beer (Zeb. Abr. 20, 121). ᾿Αβράμ.
10. In the middle of the month. 13-16. Cf. Gen. xv. 12-16.
Ps.-Jon. on Exod. xii. 40, and the 13. They will bring them into bondage.
Seder Olam 5, state that this event So LXX and Vulgate. Mass., Sam., and
took place on Nisan 15. Syr. = “ they will be in bondage tothem.”
Dwelt at the oak of Mamre. Cf. Four hundred years. In Gen. xv.
Gen. xiv. 13. 13 the length of the sojourn in
11-12. Cf. Gen. xv. 10-11.
Egypt is given as 400 years, but in
12. The pieces, The MSS have here Exod, xii. 40 as 430. But since neither
‘that which was spread out” = ταθέντα, number agrees with the period calcuwhich I have taken to be a corruption lated from the ages of Kohath, Amram

104 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
be in bondage shall I judge, and after that they will come
forth thence with much substance. 15. And thou wilt go
to thy fathers in peace, and be buried in a good old age.
16. But in the fourth generation they will return hither;
for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.” 17. And
he awoke from his sleep, and he arose, and the sun had set;
and there was a flame, and behold! a furnace was smoking,
and a flame of fire passed between the pieces. 18. And on
that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying:
“To thy seed will I give this land, from the river of Egypt
unto the great river, the river Euphrates, the Kenites, the
Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, the Perizzites, and the Rephaim,
the Phakorites, and the Hivites, and the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.” 19,
in Exod. vi. 18, 20, and Moses at the 210 (years of sojourn in Egypt). Actime of the Exodus, vii, 7; tradition cording to this chronology it follows
early assumed that the above periods that Abram was 70 years old when he
include the sojourn of the patriarchs in witnessed the vision in Gen. xv. 7-21,
Canaan before the migration. Thus But according to Gen. xii. 4 Abram was
the LXX in Exod. xii. 40 insert the already 75 when he left Haran. This
words καὶ ἐν γῇ Xavday after ἐν γῇ difficulty obliged later Jewish exΑἰγύπτῳ, and the same addition is pounders to assume that Abram had
found in the Samaritan Pentateuch. paid an earlier visit in his 70th year
The period of 400 or 430 years was to Canaan, and that Gen. xv. 7-21
reckoned from the date of its announce- belongs to that earlier visit and that its
ment in Gen. xv. 13, according to St. present context is accordingly wrong.
Paul, Gal. iii. 16, 17; Joseph. Ant. This method of exposition is followed
ii. 15.2; Ps.-Jon. in Exod. xii. 40, but in the Book of Jashar where Gen. xv.
our text reckons the 430 years from 7-21 is first recounted (Dict. des Apocr.
Isaac’s birth. On the other hand, Philo ii. 1119) and subsequently Gen. xv. 1-6
(Quis rer. div. her. 54) sets down the (ii. 1125-1126). The double journey to
actual sojourn of Israel in Egypt at 400 Canaan is referred to by R. Nehemiah in
years, and likewise Josephus (Ant. ii. 9. Ber. rabba 39. For other references
1; Bell. Jud. v. 9.4). According to Ps,- tolater Jewish literature on this question
Jon. on Exod. xii. 40, 41 the 430 years see Beer, Zeb. Abr. 118-120.
are explained as follows: 400 years Of this later form of exposition our
elapsed between Isaac’s birth, which book knows nothing.
took place when Abraham was 100 16. Fourth generation. A generayears old (Gen. xxi. 5), and the Exodus ; tion means here 100 years. Isaac was
and 430 between the date of God’s born when Abraham was 100 years
promise to Abraham (Gen. xv. 13) and old (Gen. xxi. 5).
the Exodus ; for this promise was given 17-18. Cf. Gen. xv. 17-21.
30 years before Isaac's birth. Thus 17. The pieces. Emended. See note
430 years=30 (years between promise on ver. 12, where the same corruption
in Gen. xv. 13 and birth of Isaac)+ is found.
60 (years from birth of Isaac to birth 18. The Hivites. Found in Sam. and
of Jacob) + 180 (being age of Jacob on LXX of Gen. xv. 20, but not in Mass.,
his arrival in Egypt, Gen. xlvii. 9)+ Syr., or Vulg,

CHAPTERS XIV. 15-XV. 1 105
And the day passed, and Abram offered the pieces, and the
birds, and their fruit-offerings, and their drink-offerings, and
the fire devoured them. 20. And on that day we made
a covenant with Abram, according as we had covenanted
with Noah in this month; and Abram renewed the festival
and ordinance for himself for ever. 21. And Abram
rejoiced, and made all these things known to Sarai his wife;
and he believed that he would have seed, but she did not
bear. 22. And Sarai advised her husband Abram, and said
unto him; “Go in unto Hagar, my Egyptian maid: it may
be that I shall build up seed unto thee by her.” 23. And
Abram hearkened unto the voice of Sarai his wife, and said
unto her, “ Do (80). And Sarai took Hagar, her maid, the
Egyptian, and gave her to Abram, her husband, to be his
wife. 24. And he went in unto her, and she conceived
and bare him a son, and he called his name Ishmael, in the
fifth year of this week; and this was the eighty-sixth 1965 a.m.
year in the life of Abram.
Abram celebrates the feast of first-fruits, 1, 2: his name
changed and circumcision instituted, 3-14. Sarar’s
name changed and Isaac promised, 15-21. Abraham,
Ishmael, and all his household circwmetised, 22-24. Circumecision an eternal ordination, 25, 26. Israel shares
this honour with the highest angels who were created
circwmeised, 27-29. Israel subject to God alone:
other nations to angels, 30-32. Future faithlessness of
Israel, 33, 34. (Cf. Gen. xvii.)
XV. And in the fifth year of the +fourtht+ week of this 1979 a.m.
19. The pieces. Emended. See note and the same day of the month by our
on ver. 12, where the same corruption author.
is found. 214-24ab, Cf. Gen. xvi. 1-4.
20. On that day, 1.6. the 15th Sivan. 24. And he called his name Ishmael.
We have already seen (see note on vi. Cf. Gen. xvi. 11.
17-18) that the Covenant with Noah was XV. 1. tfourtht (acd). b reads
probably assigned to the same month «« seventh.’ It should be ‘‘ third,” here

106 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
jubilee, in the third month, in the middle of the month,
Abram celebrated the feast of the first-fruits of the grain
and in xvi. 15, as Dillmann recognised. is simply rendered “the feast day” ;
Cf. xvii. 1. in Josephus, Ant. iii, 10. 5, τῇ δὲ
In the third month, in the middle of δευτέρᾳ τῶν ἀζύμων ἡμέρᾳ; in Philo,
the month. From a comparison of xv. De Septenar. 20, where the day for
1 and xliv. 4, 5 (see notes also oni. 1, waving the sheaf is said to be the
vi. 17-18, xiv. 20) it follows that the second day of unleavened bread: ‘Eopry
feast of weeks was celebrated on the δὲ ἔστιν ἡ μετὰ τὴν πρώτην εὐθὺς
fifteenth of the third month (Sivan). ἡμέρα. The Mishna, also (Chas, ii. 4 ;
Since this reckoning deviates from that Menach. x. 1-3), maintains this interof the Pharisees about the beginning pretation against conflicting expositions.
of the Christian era, and as there were Sinee on this view the sheaf-waving
many divergent views in Judaism about, took place on Nisan 16, the feast of
before, and after that period, we must weeks, fifty days later, was usually
here inquire briefly into the origin and celebrated on Sivan 6, without regard
nature of these views. in either case to the day of the week.
To begin with, it is clear that they all (ii) But others took the Sabbath to
arose from the various meanings attached mean the seventh day of unleavened
to the word “Sabbath” in Lev. xxiii. bread, which was also a day of rest. As
15, 16. In these verses it is ordained the Sabbath in this case was Nisan 21,
that the feast of weeks should fall on the morrow after the Sabbath was Nisan
the fiftieth day after the offering of the 22. This is actually the course pursued
Paschal wave-sheaf. Now, this sheaf by the (a) Falashas or Abyssinian Jews.
was waved ‘‘on the morrow after the They reckon the fifty days from Nisan
Sabbath” (Lev. xxiii. 11, 15, nገnbb 22 and thus the feast of weeks falls on
naw). In what sense, then, are we to Sivan 12 as they use alternate months
take the word “Sabbath”? Two ways of thirty and twenty-nine days (see
are possible :—(1) It may be taken to VAbbadie in Univ. Isr. Juillet 1851,
mean merely a feast day. (2) It may p. 482). (») Again this view is attested
be taken in its strict sense as the weekly by the Syriac version of Lev. xxiii. 11,
Sabbath. 15, as existing before 100 A.D. Thus
(1) First the word ‘‘Sabbath” is
it renders the Hebrew phrase መ
taken in the general sense of a feastLia] Δ....-- after the second
day. Now the first day of unleavened
bread (Ley. xxiii. 7) was such a day; (feast) day,” that is Nisan 21. (o) But
but the seventh (Lev. xxiii. 8) was no the usage is as early as the second cent.
less so. Hence two different computa- B.c.; for it appears in our text. At
tions arise from this interpretation of the beginning of this note we found
the word, (i) the first of which inter- that the feast of weeks took place on
prets the first day of unleavened bread the Sivan 15. If we count back fifty
as the Sabbath, and (ii) the second which days (reckoning the second month at
interprets it of the seventh day. twenty-eightidays),w e arrive at Nisan 22
(i) The first interpretation, which when the wave-sheaf was offered. Thus
took the Sabbath to be the first day of un- Jubilees alsointerpreted the phrase “ the
leavened bread (Nisan 15), naturally morrow after theSabbath’’as meaning the
understood the phrase ‘the morrow after day after the seventh day of unleavened
the Sabbath” to designate Nisan 16, with- bread, which was a special day of rest.
out regard to the day of the week. This (2) But on the fact that the simple
was the interpretation of the Pharisees in term “Sabbath” stands elsewhere only
our Lord’s time. This view is first at- as the weekly Sabbath, are based other
tested in the LXX, where the phrase in early uses among the Jews as well as
question is rendered by ry ἐπαύριον τῆς certain modern speculations. Thus the
πρώτης (here ἡ mpwrn=nawn), exactly Baithusians’(Menachoth 65 a) took “the
as in Ps.-Jon. on Lev. xxiii. 15, snap morrow after the Sabbath” to be the
MNDP Na xo; in the Targum of Onkelos day after the weekly Sabbath which
(Na NE» onan) where “the Sabbath” occurred during the feast of unleavened

CHAPTER XV. 1-9 107
harvest. 2. And he offered new offerings on the altar, the
first-fruits of the produce, unto the Lord, an heifer and a
goat and a sheep on the altar as a burnt sacrifice unto
the Lord; their fruit-offerings and their drink-offerings he
offered upon the altar with frankincense. 3. And the Lord
appeared to Abram, and said unto him: “I am God
Almighty ; approve thyself before Me and be thou perfect.
4, And I will make My covenant between Me and thee, and
I will multiply thee exceedingly.” 5. And Abram fell on
his face, and God talked with him, and said:
6. “Behold My ordinance is with thee,
And thou wilt be the father of many nations.
7. Neither will thy name any more be called Abram,
But thy name from henceforth, even for ever, shall be
Abraham.
For the father of many nations have I made thee.
8. And I shall make thee very great,
And I shall make thee into nations,
And kings will come forth from thee.
9. And I shall establish My covenant between Me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, throughout their generations, for an
bread. Frankel (Hinfluss d. pal. Lxeg., Recht,? 1853, p. 420), Fiirst (Heb. u.
1851, pp. 136-137) holds that the 77 chald. Worterbuch, 1863, under word
ἐπαύριον τῆς πρώτης of the LXX is naw), Wellhausen (Jahr. 7. deutsch.
directed against this view. The Karaite Theol. xxii.), Dillmann (on Lev. xxiii.
Jews (Trigland, Diatribe de Secta Karae- 11),von Orelli (Herzog’s Real Encyc.? xi.
orum, 1703; First, Geschichte des 264) accept in one form or another the
Karierthwms, 1865) and likewise the Sadducean interpretation. In addition
Samaritans follow the strict interpreta- to the above literature, see the Articles
tion of the term Sabbath in this con- on Pentecost (Pyingstfest) in Hasting’s
nection. Very many modern scholars Bible Dictionary; Herzog’s Real Encyc.”
- hold strongly to some form of this and Schenkel’s Bibel-Lexicon.
theory, as Hitzig (Ostern u. Pfingsten, 2. An heifer and a goat, etc. Cf.
1837 and Ostern wu. Pfingsten im xiv. 9. These are not the sacrifices
zweiten Dekalog, 1838), who maintained prescribed for this festival in Lev.
that in the Hebrew calendar Nisan 14 xxiii. 18-20.
and 21 were always Sabbaths and that 3-4, Cf. Gen. xvii. 1-2.
“the morrow after the Sabbath” was
3. Approve thyself. Cf. LXX, evapéNisan 22. Knobel (on Lev. xxiii.
στει and Syr. Aum, which are all free
11) agreed with Hitzig, save that he
identified the day of the sheaf-waving renderings of Sanz.
with Nisan 15. Saalschiitz (Das Mos. 5-10. Cf. Gen, xvii. 3-8.

108 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
eternal covenant, so that I may be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee. 10. (And I shall give to thee and
to thy seed after thee) the land where thou hast been a
sojourner, the land of Canaan, that thou mayst possess it for
ever, and I shall be their God.” 11. And the Lord said
unto Abraham: “ And as for thee, do thou keep My covenant,
thou and thy seed after thee; and circumcise ye every male
among you, and circumcise your foreskins, and it will be a
token of an eternal covenant between Me and you. 12.
And the child on the eighth day ye will circumcise, every
male throughout your generations, him that is born in the
house, or whom ye have bought with money from any
stranger, whom ye have acquired who is not of thy seed.
13. He that is born in thy house will surely be cireumcised, and those whom thou hast bought with money will
be circumcised, and My covenant will be in your flesh for
an eternal ordinance. 14. And the uncircumcised male
who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin on the
eighth day, that soul will be cut off from his people, for
10. (And I shall give to thee and to wanting in the Hebrew. See on ver.
thy seed after thee). These words, lost 26.
through homoioteleuton, I have restored As the Sabbath is the first, so cir
from Gen, xvii. 8. cumcision is the second cardinal com11-13. Cf. Gen. xvii. 9-13. mand of Judaism. In opposition to
12. The child (or “ children”) on the the laxity introduced by Greek culture
eighth day ye will circumcise. This the command in Gen. xv. 14 is enunciform of Gen. xvii. 12 is found only in ated afresh and the requirement added
the Eth. vers. of that passage and in our that it should be performed on the
text. It seems to be a deliberate change eighth day of the child’s life. Owing
of “the child of eight days ye shall cir- to Greek influences, even before the
cumcise,” as in Gen. xvii. 12, See on reign of Antiochus IV., many Jews
ver. 14. of noble birth had undergone surgical
14. Cf. Gen, xvii. 14. operations in order to appear like Greeks
On the eighth day. These words, when undressed (1 Mace. i. 15; Aswhich are not found in the Mass,, Syr., sumpt. Mos. viii. 3; Joseph. Ant.
and Vulg., are, however, attested by xii. 5. 1). Subsequently Antiochus
the Sam. and LXX. Also in Origen’s had taken the severest measures to
Commentary in Hp. ad Rom. ii. 13 prohibit circumcision (1 Mace. i. 48,
(Lommatzsch, vi. 123-124): Incir- 60, ii. 46). To withstand the Helleniscumcisus masculus, qui non fuerit ing attitude towards circumcision our
circumcisus in carne praeputii sui die author emphasises what was apparently
octavo, exterminabitur anima illa ; and the current view of his time, 1,6., that
in Ambrose, Fpist. 72, who remarks on circumcision should be performed on
Aquila’s statement that this clause is the eighth day—the current view; for

CHAPTER XV. 10-19 109
he has broken My covenant.” 15. And God said unto
Abraham: “As for Sarai thy wife, her name will no more
be called Sarai, but Sarah will be her name. 16. And I
shall bless her, and give thee a son by her, and I shall bless
him, and he will become a nation, and kings of nations will
proceed from him.” 17. And Abraham fell on his face, and
rejoiced, and said in his heart: “Shall a son be born to him
that is a hundred years old, and shall Sarah, who is ninety
years old, bring forth?” 18. And Abraham said unto God:
“<0 that Ishmael might live before thee!” 19. And God
said: “ Yea, and Sarah also will bear thee a son, and thou
wilt call his name Isaac, and I shall establish My covenant
with him, an everlasting covenant, and for his seed after
the words enjoining it were in both τῇ ὀγδόῃ ἐκ παντὸς περιτέμνεσθαι τοὺς
Jewish and Samaritan copies of the γεννηθέντας ὁμοίως κἂν ἢ ἡμέρα τῶν
Hebrew text of Gen. xvii. 14 (see above). σαββάτων 2). Could not He have the
This strict view was subsequently re- infants circumcised one day before or
laxed. Thus, according to Shabb. xix. 5: one day after the Sabbath, if He knew
**A child could be circumcised on the that it was a sinful act on the Sabbath 2”
8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, or 12th day, neither This custom is also regarded as obliearlier norlater. Howso? Usually it gatory by the Falashas or Abyssinian
is circumcised on the 8th day. Should it Jews. Cf. Abbadie, Univ. Isr. Avr. p.
be born on the evening, it is circumcised 481, 1851 (quotedby Singer, p. 289 note).
on the 9th: should it be born on We might observe here that our book
Friday evening it is circumcised on the knows nothing of the later traditions
10th: should the Sunday be a festival, that the patriarchs such as Adam, Seth,
‘on the llth: should the Sunday and Enoch, Noah, Shem, Terah, Jacob and
Monday be New Year’s days, on the six others were born circumcised (Mid12th. If the child is ill, it is not rash Tillin 10d, Soteh 104, quoted by
circumcised till well.” But the Sama- Hershon, Treasures of Talmud, 238,
ritans have held fast to the severer 240, 241). Ber. rabba 48 affirms this
regulation to the present day. In of Melchizedek. For other references
letters of the Samaritans communicated see Singer, p. 301 note.
by de Sacy to T. Scaliger (Eichhorn’s We might observe here that our
Repertor, xiii. 261) it is said: ‘‘We book knows nothing of the barbarous
circumcise the male on the eighth day mode of circumcision ordered by the
and do not defer circumcision a single Talmudists and Bar Cochba, in order to
day (anx ov YRS xd) . . . but the Jews make it impossible to obliterate the
_ defer it one day or more.” That the signs of it by any such surgical operaseverer form of the halacha prevailed tion as is referred to above. This
among the Jews themselves as late as mode was known as the ny, or “ the
the second cent. A.D. might be inferred laying bare.” This mutilation after
from Justin Martyr (Dial. c. Tryph. the removal of the foreskin is still
27): “Did God wish those to sin who practised. See Hershon, Genesis, p.
are circumcised or do circumcise on the 304.
Sabbaths? for He commands that on 15-22. Cf. Gen. xvii. 15-22.
the eighth day—even though it happen 16. J shall bless him. So also the
to be a Sabbath—those who are born Sam., LXX, Syr. and Vulg. of Gen. xvii.
should always be circumcised (τῇ ἡμέρᾳ 16, whereas the Sam. makes the rest of

110 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
him. 20. And as for Ishmael also have I heard thee, and
behold I shall bless him, and make him great, and multiply
him exceedingly, and he will beget twelve princes, and I
shall make him a great nation. 21. But My covenant shall
I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to thee, in
these days, in the next year.” 22. And He left off speaking with him, and God went up from Abraham. 23. And
Abraham did according as God had said unto him, and he
took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house,
and whom he had bought with his money, every male in his
house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin. 24. And
on the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and all the
men of his house, (and those born in the house), and all
those, whom he had bought with money from the children of
the stranger, were circumcised with him. 29. This law is
for all the generations for ever, and there is no circumcision
of the days, and no omission of one day out of the eight
days; for it is an eternal ordinance, ordained and written
on the heavenly tables. 26. And every one that is born,
the flesh of whose foreskin is not circumcised on the eighth
day, belongs not to the children of the covenant which the
Lord made with Abraham, but to the children of destruction; nor is there, moreover, any sign on him that he is the
Lord’s, but (he is destined) to be destroyed and slain from
the verse, and the Mass. and Onk. make days. I take this clause to be parallel
the entire verse refer to Sarah. in meaning to the preceding. In no
20. Princes. So Mass. (CN'b) and case is the circumcision to be performed
Vulg. LXX, ἔθ=ν ηpr . before the eighth day. The word translated “omission” is the same as that
23-24. Cf. Gen. xvii. 23-27.
translated “ neglecting ” or “‘transgress24. On the selfsame day, 1.6... on the
ing” in vi. 31.
15th of Sivan; see ver. 1. According
26. This verse is simply an enlargeto the Yalkut Chadash 121 a Abraham
ment of ver. 14, which as we saw is
was circumcised on the 13th or 15th
Gen. xvii. 14.
of Nisan, or on the Day of Atonement,
or on the New Moon of January (Beer, On the eighth day. MSS and Latin
Leb. Abr. 63, 152). have “till the eighth day.” But since
(And those born in the house). Re- this verse is simply an emphatic and
stored with Lat. enlarged form of ver. 14, for “till”
25. See note on ver. 14. we should clearly have «« on.’ Besides,
No omission of one day out of the eight “6 till” gives the wrong sense; for the

CHAPTER XV. 20-31 III
the earth, and to be rooted out of the earth, for he has
broken the covenant of the Lord our God. 27. For all the
angels of the presence and all the angels of sanctification
have been so created from the day of their creation, and
before the angels of the presence and the angels of sanctitication He hath sanctified Israel, that they should be with
Him and with His holy angels. 28. And do thou command
the children of Israel and let them observe the sign of this
covenant for their generations as an eternal ordinance, and
they will not be rooted out of the land. 29. For the
command is ordained for a covenant, that they should
observe it for ever among all the children of Israel. 30.
For Ishmael and his sons and his brothers and Esau, the
Lord did not cause to approach Him, and he chose them not
because they are the children of Abraham, because He knew
them, but He chose Israel to be His people. 31. And He
sanctified it, and gathered it from amongst all the children
circumcision is to be performed on the simply an alternative rendering that
eighth day. The error can be explained has ousted the true reading, “sanctificaby the corruption of 3 into 5 or oy into tionis,” and that the context deals only
ay in the Hebrew. with two orders of angels. The two
And to be rooted out of the earth. orders mentioned here in the Ethiopic
ad and Latin omit, possibly through text are the same two who are said to
homoioteleuton. unite with God and Israel in observing
27. There are two classes of angels the Sabbath (ii. 18, 19, 21). The
mentioned here: the angels of the inferior angels of service did not enjoy
presence (see i. 29 note, ii. 2 note, 18, this privilege. Now just as the highest
XXX. 14) and the angels of sanctifica- angels shared with Israel in the privilege
tion (see ii, 2 note, 18 [holy ones,” of the Sabbath, so they shared also
“sancti,” XXX. 147), according to the in the privilege of circumcision. They
Ethiopic text; but three or four accord- were created circumcised, just as, acing to the Latin: angeli vultus, arch- cording to later Judaism, many of the
angeli benedictionis, angeli sanctifica- patriarchs of Israel were born so. (See
tionis, angeli sanctorum ipsius. But note on ver. 14.) Such a belief was
the last does not constitute a distinct not difficult to believers in the loves of
order. It is simply a comprehensive the angels for the daughters of men
term for the two (or three) highest (v. 1 sqq.). In Debarim rabba on i. 2
orders, since it occurs in the following it is said that the angels of service, 7.e.
context: ut esset simul cum ipso et the inferior orders, sought to know the
cum angelis sanctorum ipsius. Here Law, but it was hidden from them (see
ipso means ‘‘God,” and the angelis Weber, Jiid. Theol.” 25).
Sanct. ipsius sums up the orders men- 30. Chose them. The Ethiopic retioned in the earlier part of the sentence. produces the Hebrew idiom 3 na, The
Since in ii, 18 the Ethiopic speaks so Latin gives elegit ex ipsis.
clearly of only two classes, I am inclined Israel. See on xvi. 17.
to believe that ‘“benedictionis” is 31-32, This idea that Israel was

112 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
of men; for there are many nations and many peoples, and
all are His, and over all hath He placed spirits in authority
to lead them astray from Him. \32. But over Israel He did
not appoint any angel or spirit, for He alone is their ruler,
and He will preserve them and require them at the hand
of His angels and His spirits, and at the hand of all His
powers in order that He may preserve them and bless them,
and that they may be His and He may be theirs from
henceforth for ever. 33. And now I announce unto thee
that the children of Israel will not keep true to this
ordinance, and they will not circumcise their sons according
to all this law; for in the flesh of their circumcision they
will omit this circumcision of their sons, and all of them,
God’s portion but that the Gentiles to the demons, who were the spirits
were placed under the dominion of that went forth from the slaughtered
angels, goes back to an old (possibly children of the Watchers and the
the oldest) form οἱ the text of Deut. daughters of men (see v. 1, 7-9, x. 5,
xxxii. 8-9, which, reading 5x instead of 8, 9). But in the present passage it is
said that God gave the hegemony of
Siw, is reproduced in the LXX:
the nations to angels for this purpose.
ὅτε διεμέριζεν ὁὝ ψιστος ἔθνη... The condemnation of the seventy angelic
ἔστησεν ὅρια ἐθνῶν patrons for their evil treatment of Israel
κατὰ ἀριθμὸν ἀγγέλων θεοῦ. is described in Eth. Enoch xe. 22, 23,
καὶ ἐγενήθη μέρις Κυρίου λαὸς αὐτοῦ and also in Isaiah xxiv. 21, 22, though
᾿Ιακώβ. in the latter passage the cause is not
This view next appears in Sir. xvii. assigned. I think we may assume that
the statement in our text is made on
17
the same principle as many in the
ἑκάστῳ ἔθνει κατέστησεν ἡγούμενον,
Scriptures (cf. Is. vi. 9; Matt. xiii, 14 ;
καὶ μερὶς Κυρίου ᾿Ισραήλ ἐστιν :
Mark iv. 12, etc.), in which the ultimate
and in Dan. x. 18, 20, 21, xii. 1, result of an action or a series of actions
where, however, all the nations includ- is declared to have been the immediate
ing even Israel are understood to be object of them.
under the patronage of angels, Israel In later Judaism at all events the
being under Michael. According to seventy angels are described as the
Eth. Enoch lxxxix. Israel was placed rulers of the nations. These angels
for purposes of discipline for a time share in the fortunes, whether favourunder the charge of seventy angels, able or unfavourable, of the nations
who are no doubt the angelic patrons over which they bear sway. They
of the seventy nations of the world. are likewise the sources of corruption
The appointment of these seventy to their subject peoples, introducing
angels to be the heads of the nations is idolatry and impurity. See LHisenrecorded in the Ps.-Jon. of Deut. xxxii. menger, Entdecktes Judenthum, i. 8058. They may be referred to as demons 820.
in 1 Cor. x. 19, or as τὰ στοιχεῖα τοῦ 33. This verse shows that the
κόσμου in Gal, iv. 3, 9; Col. ii. 20. apostasy in Israel in early part of
31. To lead them astray. In x. 3, 8, the second cent. B.c. was very widexix. 28, this is the function assigned spread.
<yp=<oeee} se

CHAPTERS XV. 32-XVI. 3 113
sons of Beliar, will leave their sons uncircumcised as they
were born. 34. And there will be great wrath from the
Lord against the children of Israel, because they have forsaken His covenant and turned aside from His word, and
provoked and blasphemed, inasmuch as they do not observe
the ordinance of this law; for they have treated their
members like the Gentiles, so that they may be removed
and rooted out of the land. And there will no more be
pardon or forgiveness unto them [so that there should be
forgiveness and pardon] for all the sin of this eternal error.
Angels appear to Abraham in Hebron, and Isaac again
promised, 1-4. Destruction of Sodom and Lots deliverance, 5-9. Abraham at Beersheba: birth of and circumcision of Isaac, whose seed was to be the portion of
God, 10-19. Institution of the feast of tabernacles,
20-31. (Cf. Gen. xvii. 1, 10, 12, xix. 24, 29, 33miaax. 1,4, 8, xxi. 1-4.)
XVI. And on the new moon of the fourth month we
appeared unto Abraham, at the oak of Mamre, and we talked
with him, and we announced to him that a son would be
given to him by Sarah his wife. 2. And Sarah laughed, for
she heard that we had spoken these words with Abraham,
and we admonished her, and she became afraid, and denied
that she had laughed on account of the words. 3. And we
told her the name of her son, as his name is ordained and
Sons of Beliar, An O.T. expres- prophet and dropped into that of the
sion: ef. 1 Sam. ii. 12, etc. For a annalist.
full treatment of the Beliar myth, see [So that... pardon]. A corrupt
my edition of the Ascension of Isaiah, dittoeraphy.
ΒΡ. liv sqq. From i. 20 and Test. XVI. 1. Cf. Gen. xviii. 1,10. Our
Il. Patriarch. Dan. 5 it follows author omits all reference to Gen.
that as early as the second cent. xviii. 2-9. Singer (122 note, 293
B.C. Beliar was regarded as a Satanic note) thinks that the eating of the
spirit. angels may have given offence as it
34. Have forsaken His covenant... did to Josephus (Ant. i. 11. 2, οἱ δὲ
inasmuch as they do not observe. Our δόξαν αὐτῷ παρέσχον ἐσθιόντων).
author has forgotten his role as a 2. Cf. Gen. xviii. 10, 12, 15.
8

114 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
written in the heavenly tables (i.¢.) Isaac, 4. And (that)
when we returned to her at a set time, she would have
conceived a son. 5. And in this month the Lord executed
his judgments on Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Zeboim, and
all the region of the Jordan, and He burned them with fire
and brimstone, and destroyed them until this day, even as
[lo] I have declared unto thee all their works, that they are
wicked and sinners exceedingly, and that they defile themselves and commit fornication in their flesh, and work
uncleanness on the earth. 6. And, in like manner, God
will execute judgment on the places where they have done
according to the uncleanness of the Sodomites, like
unto the judgment of Sodom. 7. But Lot we saved; for
God remembered Abraham, and sent him out from the
midst of the overthrow. 8. And he and his daughters
committed sin upon the earth, such as had not been on the
earth since the days of Adam till his time; for the man lay
with his daughters. 9. And, behold, it was commanded
and engraven concerning all his seed, on the heavenly tables,
to remove them and root them out, and to execute
judgment upon them like the judgment of Sodom, and to
leave no seed of the man on earth on the day of condemnation. 10. And in this month Abraham moved from
Hebron, and departed and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur
in the mountains of Gerar. 11. And in the middle of the
fifth month he moved from thence, and dwelt at the Well of
the Oath. 12. And in the middle of the sixth month the
4. Would have conceived. The text 7-8. Cf. Gen. xix. 29, 31 sqq.
is corrupt, but the corruption is as old 10. Mountains. The Eth. could be
as the Greek version, as it seems to rendered “territories” or “confines”
have led to the gloss in verses 15-16. as in Latin. There may, however, as
We should expect “would conceive.” Ronsch (p. 102) suggests, have been a
See verses 12 (where this promise is confusion of ὅρος and ὄρος.
fulfilled), 16. 11. All mention of Abraham’s un5. Cf. Gen. xix. 24. seemly treatment of Abimelech is
Zeboim, in text Sobo im. See Gen. omitted.
xiv. 2, 8. Weil of the Oath, 1.6. Beersheba, Gen.
6. Like unto the judgment of. xxi. 31.
Lat=i snicu t judicavit. 12-14. Cf. Gen. xxi. 1-4.

CHAPTER XVI. 4-18 115
Lord visited Sarah and did unto her as He had spoken, and
she conceived. 13. And she bare a son in the third month, 1980 a.m.
and in the middle of the month, at the time of which the
Lord had spoken to Abraham, on the festival of the first-fruits
of the harvest, Isaac was born. 14. And Abraham circumcised his son on the eighth day: he was the first that was
circumcised according to the covenant which is ordained for
ever. 15. And in the sixth year of the fourth} week we
came to Abraham, to the Well of the Oath, and we appeared
unto him [as we had told Sarah that we should return to her,
and she would have conceived ason. 16. And we returned
in the seventh month, and found Sarah with child before us]
and we blessed him, and we announced to him all the things
which had been decreed concerning him, that he should not
die till he should beget six sons more, and should see (them)
before he died; but (that) in Isaac should his name and
seed be called: 17. And (that) all the seed of his sons
should be Gentiles, and be reckoned with the Gentiles; but
from the sons of Isaac one should become a holy seed, and
should not be reckoned among the Gentiles. 18. For he
should become the portion of the Most High, and all his
seed had fallen into the possession of God, that it should be
13. Birth of Isaac on the 15th of reads «« her.” Similarly after ‘‘anSivan. According to the Rosh ha- nounced to.” The Latin is followed
Shanah 104, Isaac was born on the here.
Passover Feast; according to the Six sons more. Abraham had six
Midrash Tanchuma on Exodus (Beer, sons by Keturah: Gen. xxv. 2. See
Leb. Abr. 168), on the first of Nisan. xx. 1 of our text.
15. tFourtht. This should be In Isaac should his name, ete. Gen.
“third” as in xv. 1. Abram was in xxi, 12, See xvii. 6 of our text.
his eighty-sixth year when Ishmael 17, All the descendants of Abraham
was born (xiv. 24), that is, in the fifth save Jacob and his posterity belong to
year of the first week of the forty- the Gentiles. See xv. 80. In Sanh.
first jubilee. Fifteen years later Isaac 59 ὃ there is a discussion as to whether
was born in the hundredth year of circumcision was obligatory on Ishmael’s
Abraham. and Keturah’s sons in consequence of
15-16. The words bracketed in these Gen. xvii. 9,10. Owing to Gen. xxi.
verses contain a gloss that destroys the 12 it was held that the obligation did
sense of the context. They proceed not extend to the descendants of Esau,
from a corrupt reading in ver. 4 and See above xv. 30.
misunderstanding of text generally. 18. Portion of the Most High. See
16. Blessed him. For “him” Eth. note on xv. 31-32.

116 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
unto the Lord a people for (His) possession above all nations
and that it should become a kingdom and priests and a holy
nation. 19. And we went our way, and we announced to
Sarah all that we had told him, and they both rejoiced with
exceeding great joy. 20. And he built there an altar to
the Lord who had delivered him, and who was making him
rejoice in the land of his sojourning, and he celebrated a
festival of joy in this month seven days, near the altar
which he had built at the Well of the Oath. 21. And he
built booths for himself and for his servants on this festival,
and he was the first to celebrate the feast of tabernacles
on the earth. 22. And during these seven days he brought
A people for (His) possess=i hoeznb a giving practically the same rendering
terit (cf. xxiii. 20),emended from hezba of ond nado in Exod. xix. 6, and in
(a b ©) tersit (bc tirsitas a) = “people of inserting either the copula or a pause
magnificence.” d reads ‘‘ people of in- between the two Hebrew words. This
heritance”’ (hezba rest), ef. Deut. iv. 20 ; is an ancient Jewish way of treating
Latin, populum sanctificatum, This last this phrase. Thus we find it given
= λαὸν ὅσιον, which may be corrupt for in Onkelos as bana [30 (as in Rev.
λαὸν οὐσίας (or περιούσιο=ν Π)Σ oy i. 6); in Ps.-Jon. Nobo mp prado
(Deut. vii. 6),ἃ f requent O.T, phrase; cf. ΟΦ pin (= Kings with crowns
Exod, xix. 5, which was clearly before and ministering priests); in the Jer.
our author, as the closing clause of our Targ. bina) 7959; and the Syr. ververse shows. See also Deut. vii. 6, xiv. sion Lipo Jlanis; exactly
2, xxvi. 18, where the full phrase nes oy
as in our Ethiopic text and in Rev.
is found. In xix. 18 of our text the same
v. 10. Thus we conclude that the
difficulties recur. If tersit is right, we
Ethiopic text represents the Hebrew
might compare Deut. xxvi. 19.
original and that the Latin regnum
A kingdom and priests (cf. xxxiii.
sacerdotale is borrowed by the Latin
20)= βασιλεία καὶ ἱερεῖς, whereas the
translator of Jubilees from the Vulgate.
Latin has regnum sacerdotale = βασιλεία
leparikh=ound nave. The phrase is 20-31. The account of the feast of
tabernacles in our text is peculiar. AS
from Exod. xix. 6, of which the Latin
regards the number of victims it
gives the correct rendering and not the
Ethiopic version. Yet the latter seems presents some points of agreement and
many of disagreement with the account
vo represent the Hebrew original of
given in Num. xxix. 12-40. I cannot
our text, as we shall see presently.
First of all we observe that it is in- offerany explanation of these phenomena.
Verses 20-22 were before Cedrenus
correctly translated in the LXX and
it is reproduced in two forms in the i. 50: μετὰ ταῦτα τῆς κατὰ Μαβρῆ
δρυὸς ἀπαναστὰς ὁ ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐπὶ τὸ
N.T. closely akin to those above. The
φρέαρ κατασκηνοῖ τοῦ ὅρκου. ἑαυτῷ
LXX translates it incorrectly by
δὲ ἰδίᾳ καὶ τοῖς οἰκέταις αὐτοῦ κατὰ
βασίλειον ἱεράτευμα (a hierarchy conσυγγενείας πηξάμενος σκηνάς, τότε
sisting of kings), and this rendering is
πρῶτον ᾿Αβραὰμ τῆς σκηνοπηγίας ἐπὶ
adopted in 1 Pet. ii. 9. In Rev. v. 10
we have βασιλείαν καὶ ἱερεῖς exactly as ἑπτὰ ἡμέρας ἐπιτελεῖ τὴν ἑορτήν. |
in our Ethiopic text, and in 1. 22. Two different sacrifices are here |
βασιλείαν ἱερεῖς. Thus our Ethiopic recorded : a burnt-offering (ony) and a |
text and Rev. i. 6, v. 10 agree in sin-offering (nken). |

CHAPTER XVI. 19-26 117
each day to the altar a burnt-offering to the Lord, two oxen,
two rams, seven sheep, one he-goat, for a sin-offering, that
he might atone thereby for himself and for his seed. 23.
And, as a thank-offering, seven rams, seven kids, seven sheep,
and seven he-goats, and their fruit-offerings and their drinkofferings; and he burnt all the fat thereof on the altar, a
chosen offering unto the Lord for a sweet smelling savour.
24. And morning and evening he burnt fragrant substances,
frankincense and galbanum, and stackte, and nard, and
myrrh, and spice, and costum; all these seven he offered,
crushed, mixed together in equal parts (and) pure. 25.
And he celebrated this feast during seven days, rejoicing
with all his heart and with all his soul, he and all those
who were in his house; and there was no stranger with him,
nor any that was uncircumcised. 26. And he blessed his
Creator who had created him in his generation, for He had
created him according to His good pleasure; for He knew
and perceived that from him would arise the plant of rightTwo oxen or “bullocks.” Accord- first four of these are mentioned in
ing to Num. xxix. 13-33 thirteen bullocks Exod. xxx. 94, mab (=AiBavos=
were sacrificed on the first day, twelve libanus, thus), navn (= χαλβάνητε
on the second, eleven on the third, and galbanum), Msi (=craKr7=stacte),
soon, the number being diminished by nbnw (=dvvE=nardus). All seven are
one each day. enumerated in Sir. xxiv. 15:
Two rams. So in Num. xxix. 13. ὡς κιννάμωμον Kal ἀσπάλαθος ἀρωSeven sheep. In Num. xxix. 13 μάτων δέδωκα ὀσμήν,
fourteen he-lambs. καὶ ὡς σμύρνα ἐκλεκτὴ δέδωκα εὐωOne he-goat. Soin Num. xxix. 16. δίαν,
23. Thank-offering=Ovoia σωτηρίου ὡς χαλβάνη καὶ ὄνυξ καὶ στακτή,
=onsw nal, The victims in this case καὶ ὡς λιβάνου ἀτμὶς ἐν σκηνῇ.
correspond in kind and number with
Here χαλβάνη, ὄνυξ, στακτή, λιβάνου
those offered by Hezekiah in 2 Chron.
ἀτμίς correspond to the first four in
xxix. 21, but in the latter passage they
our text but in a different order, and
constitute a sin-offering for the kingκιννάμωμον, ἀσπάλαθος ἀρωμάτων,
dom.
σμύρνα to the last three. These seven
24. Fragrant substa=n ἡcδύeσμsατ α
fragrant constituents of the incense
=o. Our author is here making use
offering are mentioned in Jer. Joma
of Exod. xxx. 34, and not of Num.
iv. 5; Keritot θ αὖ (Singer, 75 note;
iv. 16; Lev. iv. 7 etc. as the Latin
Nowack, Hebr. Archiiol. ii. 248).
implies, which has incensum compositionis = θυμίαμα τῆς συνθέσεως from 26. Plant of righteousness. See
ev. τ 7 Xvi. 13; Num. iv. 16 xxi, 24; Eth. Enoch x. 16; xciii. 5,
(a'i2on mp). The Ethiopic appears to 10, where the same expression is found.
be right. Cf, also lxxxiyv. 6, xciii. 2 in the same
Frankincense, galbanum, ete. The work.

118 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
eousness for the eternal generations, and from him a holy
seed, so that it should become like Him who had made all
things. 27. And he blessed and rejoiced, and he called
the name of this festival the festival of the Lord, a joy
acceptable to the Most High God. 28. And we blessed him
for ever, and all his seed after him throughout all the generations of the earth, because he celebrated this festival in its
season, according to the testimony of the heavenly tables.
29. For this reason it is ordained on the heavenly tables
concerning Israel, that they shall celebrate the feast of
tabernacles seven days with joy, in the seventh month,
acceptable before the Lord—a statute for ever throughout
their generations every year. 30. And to this there is no
limit of days; for it is ordained for ever regarding Israel
that they should celebrate it and dwell in booths, and set
wreaths upon their heads, and take leafy boughs, and
willows from the brook. 31. And Abraham took branches
of palm trees, and the fruit of goodly trees, and every day
going round the altar with the branches seven times [a day]
in the morning, he praised and gave thanks to his God for
all things in joy.
Expulsion of Hagar and Ishmael, 1-14. Mastémd proposes
that God should require Abraham to sacrifice Isaac in
28. All his seed. Latin omits “all.” as ὁ στέφανος τῆς ζωῆς (Rev. ii. 10:
29. A statute for ever, etc. Lev, cf. 2 Tim. iv. 8) is familiar also in
xxiii. 41. Judaism ; cf. Megilla 15 ὃ.
30. Cf. Lev. xxiii. 40. 31. Branches of palm trees. Text
Set wreaths upon their heads. This lebba dabart and Latin corde palmarum
is unknown to tradition in connection go back as Dillmann recognised to »abyb
with the feast. The custom of wear- sonn. ahnb was wrongly taken as 235
ing chaplets at feasts is referred to in by the Greek translator. We might
Wisdom ii. 7-8 ; Joseph. Ant. xix. 9. 1 observe that the Targums on Lev.
(cf. 3 Mace. iv. 8), but it cannot be xxiii. 40 have here simply ah).
established as a Jewish one. Bride- Every day... seven times. According
grooms, however, were adorned with to Sukka iv. 5 it was only on the —
myrtles and roses, Gittin 7 a, Sota 49 ὃ seventh day that the worshippers went
(Beer, Buch d. Jub. 47). The meta- round the altar seven times (Beer, |
phorical use of “crown” or “ wreath” Buch der Jubilien, 46 ; Singer, 75).

CHAPTERS XVI. 27-XVII. 8 119
order to test his love and obedience: Abraham’s ten
trials, 15-18. (Cf. Gen. xxi. 8-21.)
XVII. And in the first year of the +fifth}+ week Isaac 1982 Ax
was weaned in this jubilee, and Abraham made a great
banquet in the third month, on the day his son Isaac was
weaned, 2. And Ishmael, the son of Hagar, the Egyptian,
was before the face of Abraham, his father, in his place, and
Abraham rejoiced and blessed God because he had seen his
sons and had not died childless. 3. And he remembered
the words which He had spoken to him on the day on which
Lot had parted from him, and he rejoiced because the Lord
had given him seed upon the earth to inherit the earth, and
he blessed with all his mouth the Creator of all things. 4.
And Sarah saw Ishmael playing and dancing, and Abraham
rejoicing with great joy, and she became jealous of Ishmael
and said to Abraham, “ Cast out this bondwoman and her
son; for the son of this bondwoman will not be heir
with my son, Isaac.” 5. And the thing was grievous in
Abraham’s sight, because of his maidservant and because of
his son, that he should drive them from him. 6. And God
said to Abraham “Let it not be grievous in thy sight,
because of the child and because of the bondwoman; in all
that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken to her words and
do (them); for in Isaac shall thy name and seed be called.
7. But as for the son of this bondwoman I will make him
a great nation, because he is of thy seed.” 8. And Abraham
rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle
XVII. 1. Cf. Gen. xxi. 8. for ba-yeshaq=« «w ith Isaac.” These
+Fifth}. This should be “fourth.” words are found in the LXX and
See a similar error in xvi. 15. Vulg. of Gen, xxi, 9 but not in the
2. B ecause he had seen his] sons, etc i Mas T s. i t or S gr a e m a . t , walt, ke ou; t
Cf. 3. xvi Se . e 16. xi ii. 19 ‘foreat’”’ ነ? is supported by the Sxa m.,
Mo plein LXX, Syr., and Vulg. of Gen. xxi. 13,
4-13. Cf. Gen. xxi, 9-21. but omitted by the Mass., Onkelos and
4. And dancing. Since the Latin has Ps,-Jon. The last reads instead: ‘‘a
cum Isac, wa-yezafen may be corrupt nation of robbers.”

120 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
of water, and placed them on the shoulders of Hagar and
the child, and sent her away. 9. And she departed and
wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba, and the water in
the bottle was spent, and the child thirsted, and was not
able to go on, and fell down. 10. And his mother took
him and cast him under an olive tree, and went and sat her
down over against him, at the distance of a bow-shot; for
she said, “ Let me not see the death of my child,” and as
she sat she wept. 11. And an angel of God, oneo f the
holy ones, said unto her, “Why weepest thou, Hagar?
Arise take the child, and hold him in thine hand; for God
hath heard thy voice, and hath seen the child.” 12. And
she opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water, and she
went and filled her bottle with water, and she gave her
child to drink, and she arose and went towards the wilderness of Paran. 13. And the child grew and became an
archer, and God was with him; and his mother took him a
wife from among the daughters of Egypt. 14. And she
bare him a son, and he called his name Nebaioth; for she
said, “ The Lord was nigh to me when I called upon him.”
15. And it came to pass in the seventh week, in the first
2003 A.M.
year thereof, in the first month in this jubilee, on the
twelfth of this month, there were voices in heaven regarding
Abraham, that he was faithful in all that He told him,
and that he loved the Lord, and that in every affliction he
was faithful. 16. And the prince Mastéma came and said
10. An olive tree. Instead of ἐλαίας xvi. 12 and xvii. 15). According to the
LXX has ἐλάτης. Seder Olam, Isaac was thirty-seven.
12. She opened. We should with 16. Here as elsewhere (cf. xlviii. 2,
Gen. xxi. 19 expect ‘‘he.” 17) our author attributes to Mastéma
14. Nebaioth. Eth.=Nabéwét. Cf. the conduct which he deems unworthy
Gen. xxv. 15. of God but which is ascribed to Him
Was nigh. We should expect by Gen. xxii. 1. Cf. also James i. 19.
the original behind “was nigh” to We might compare with our text the
contain some of the consonants in following passage from Sanh. 8956
** Nebaioth.” ‘Satan spake before the Holy One,
15. Isaac is thus twenty-three when blessed be He. ‘Lord of the World,
he was offered up by Abraham (cf. Thou hast given fruit of the body to

CHAPTER XVII. 9-18 121
before God, “ Behold, Abraham loves Isaac his son, and he
delights in him above all things else; bid him offer him as
a burnt-offering on the altar, and Thou wilt see if he will do
this command, and Thou wilt know if he is faithful in everything wherein Thou dost try him. 17. And the Lord knew
that Abraham was faithful in all his afflictions; for He had
tried him through his country and with famine,and had
tried him with the wealth of kings, and had tried him again
through his wife, when she was torn (from him), and with
circumcision ; and had tried him through Ishmael and Hagar,
his maid-servant, when he sent them away. 18. And in
everything wherein He had tried him, he was found faithful,
this old man of 100 years, and yet in xii. 1) and to go to Mt. Moriah to
all the feasts celebrated by him, he has sacrifice Isaac (xx. 2): two in connever offered in sacrifice to Thee a bul- nection with his sons: two in connection
lock or a young dove.’ God answered with his wives: one with the kings:
him: ... ‘If I were to say to him, Sac- one between the sacrifical pieces: one
rifice thy son, he would sacrifice him, in the furnace of the Chaldees: one in
etc.” Cf. also Bk. of Jashar (ii. 1139). circumcision. According to the reckon17. According to xix. 8 Abraham ing of Maimonides (see Fabricius (ibid.
was submitted to ten trials. Seven 399); Ronsch, 383) the trials were: 1.
are mentioned in this verse: 1. The Going forth from his country. 2.
going forth from his country. 2. Famine. 3. Seizure of his wife. 4.
Famine. 3. The wealth of kings. 4. War with the kings. 5. UnfruitfulThe seizure of his wife by the king of ness of Sarah. 6. Circumcision. 7.
Egypt. 5. Circumcision. 6, 7. The Second seizure of his wife. 8, 9. Exdismissal of Ishmael and Hagar. In pulsion of Hagar and Ishmael. 10.
xix. 3, 8 the burial of Sarah is specially Sacrifice of Isaac. It will be remarked
mentioned as the tenth. The eighth and that this last list corresponds best with
ninth though not specifically reckoned our text; but the correspondence of
as such in our text are the unfruitful- the following lists is closer: Beer
ness of Sarah, xiv. 21, and the sacrifice (Leben Abr. 191) writes: Die meisten
of Isaac, xviii. This enumeration agrees spiiteren Aboth-Commentatoren schlosclosely with those of Maimonides, Jona sen sich den Pirke des R. Elieser an,
Girondi and Simon Duran which are blos darin variirend, dass Hinige (Obadia
given below. From Beer's Leben Abr. Bertinoro and Menachem Meiri) anstatt
190-192 I draw the account in Pirke des unterirdischen Aufenthaltes in
R. Eliezer, ch. 26 sq.: 1. Nimrod’s Abraham’s Kindheit den Vorfall mit
attempt on his life. 2, Ten years im- Abimelech besonders ziihlen und Andere
prisonment in Cutha and Khadr. 3. (R. Jona Girondi, Simon Zemach
Departure from his country. 4. Famine. Duran) den Bund zwischen den Stiicken
5. Seizure of his wife. 6, War with the nicht unter die Versuchungen aufnehmen,
kings. 7. Covenant between the pieces. aber an dessen Stelle gegen alle friiheren
8. Circumcision. 9. Rejection of Ishmael. Referate, welche die Zehnzahl mit der
10. Offering of Isaac. The account Opferung Isaak’s schliessen, die Beergiven in Fabricius, Cod. Pseud. V.T. digung Sara’s als zehute Versuchung
i. 398, differs slightly from the above. hinstellten, Thus Jona Girondi and
According to Pirke R. Nathan, ch. Simon Duran agree with our text in
33, two trials were sustained when making the burial of Sarah the tenth
he was bidden to leave his home (Gen. trial of Abraham.

122 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and his soul was not impatient, and he was not slow to act;
for he was faithful and a lover of the Lord.
Sacrifice of Isaac: Mastémd put to shame, 1-13. Abraham
again blessed: returns to Beersheba, 14-19. (Cf. Gen.
xxi 1-19.)
XVIII. And God said to him, “ Abraham, Abraham ”; and
he said, “ Behold, (here) am 1. 2, And He said,“ Take thy
beloved son whom thou lovest, (even) Isaac, and go unto the
high country, and offer him on one of the mountains which
I will point out unto thee.” 3. And he rose early in the
morning and saddled his ass, and took his two young men
with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood of the
burnt-offering, and he went to the place on the third day,
and he saw the place afar off. 4. And he came to a well
of water, and he said to his young men, “ Abide ye here
with the ass, and I and the lad shall go (yonder), and when
we have worshipped we shall come again to you.” 5. And
he took the wood of the burnt-offering and laid it on Isaac
his son, and he took in his hand the fire and the knife, and
they went both of them together to that place. 6. And
Isaac said to his father, “ Father”; and he said, “ Here am 1,
my son.” And he said unto him, “ Behold the fire, and the
knife, and the wood; but where is the sheep for the burntoffering, father?” 7. And he said, “God will provide for ||
himself a sheep for a burnt-offering, my son. And he drew ~ i
near to the place of the mount of God. 8. And he built an —
altar, and he placed the wood on the altar, and bound Isaac his
son, and placed him on the wood which was upon the altar,
and stretched forth his hand to take the knife to slay Isaac i
XVIII. 1-17. Cf. Gen. xxii. 1-19. tain=” (G)en . xxii. 2) LXX τὴν γῆν thy
2. Beloved son. So LXX τὸν ἀγα- ὑψηλήν. Mass.=“ Land of Moriah.”
πητό= νገገገ " instead of Mass., Sam., 7. Of the mounto f God. Gen. xxii.
Syr. ym. 9 reads: «which God had told him —
The high country (ad. bc=“moun-_ of.”

CHAPTER XVIII. 1-15 123
his son. 9. And I stood before him, and before the prince
of the Mastéma, and the Lord said, “ Bid him not to lay his
hand on the lad, nor to do anything to him, for I have shown
that he fears the Lord.” 10. And I called to him from
heaven, and said unto him: “ Abraham, Abraham”; and he
was terrified and said: “ Behold, (here) am 1. 11. And I
said unto him: “Lay not thy hand upon the lad, neither do
thou anything to him; for now I have shown that thou
fearest the Lord, and hast not withheld thy son, thy firstborn son, from me.” 12. And the prince of the Mastéma was
put to shame ; and Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and,
behold,a single ram caught... by his horns, and Abraham went
and took the ram and offered it for a burnt-offering in the stead
of his son. 13. And Abraham called that place “The Lord
hath seen,” so that it is said “(in the mount) the Lord hath
seen”: that is Mount Sion. 14. And the Lord called
Abraham by his name a second time from heaven, as he
caused us to appear to speak to him in the name of the Lord.
15. And He said: “ By Myself have I sworn, saith the Lord,
Because thou hast done this thing,
And hast not withheld thy son, thy beloved son, from Me,
9. Prince of the Mastémad. So ab he came’ =wa-yémas’é, (1) corrupt for
here and in ver. 12 and xlviii. 9, 12, 15. ba édaw= ‘‘ in a thicket.”
ed wrongly give “prince Mastéma” in 13. (In the mount). Added from
these passages and all MSS wrongly in Latin. It is found in Mass. and LXX
xvii. 6, xlviii. 2. See note on x. 8. of Gen. xxii. 14.
Shown. Or “known,” but see note Hath seen. Syr. and Vulg,= ‘‘ will
on 11, see,’ ‘‘seeth.” The verb is passive in
11. 7 have shown=Latin version, the Mass. (nxn) and LXX, and also in
manifestavi (=*ny7). The Eth. could the Latin version of Jubilees—visus est.
14. He caused us to appear (Ὁ). a “he
also be rendered “I have known,”
as Mass. and Sam. of Gen. xxii. 12 caused him (ὁ cme) to appear”; d ‘‘ we
AY), but the Latin, manifestavi, is appeared.” Lat=i funimu s is corrupt.
15. Thy beloved son (a dq) = To ayaunmistakeable and this rendering is supπητοῦ cov= 77. Lat., tuo unigenito=
ported by both Eth. and Latin in ver.
τοῦ μονογενοῦς σου = Ion". Hence
16. TheSyr. has the very same renderHebrew text seems to have had a dittoing: Aol =፣ have shown. Ps.- graphical text just as LX X(A)of Judges
Jon. has :=manifestatum est, ‘I xi. 84: αὕτη μονογενὴς αὐτῷ ἀγαπητή,
have shown ” is suitable to the context, and LXX and Vulg. of Gen. xxii. 2, 12,
God proves Abraham’s faithfulness to 16 postulate similar dittographies of the
Mastéma and to others (ver. 16). same Hebrew word in Hebrew text. On
12. Caught. All the MSS add “and the other hand ὦ c under influence of ver.

124 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
That in blessing I shall bless thee,
And in multiplying I shall multiply thy seed
As the stars of heaven,
And as the sand which is on the seashore.
And thy seed will inherit the cities of its enemies,
16. And in thy seed will all nations of the earth be
blessed;
Because thou hast obeyed My voice,
And I have shown to all that thou art faithful unto Me
in all that I have said unto thee:
Go in peace.”
17, And Abraham went to his young men, and they arose
and went together to Beersheba,and Abraham dwelt by the
Well of the Oath. 18. And he celebrated this festival every
year, seven days with joy, and he called it the festival of
the Lord according to the seven days during which he went
and returned in peace. 19. And accordingly has it been
ordained and written on the heavenly tables regarding
Israel and its seed that they should observe this festival
seven days with the joy of festival.
Return of Abraham to Hebron. Death and burial of Sarah,
1-9. Marriage of Isaac and second marriage of Abraham.
Brith of Esau and Jacob, 10-14. Abraham commends
Jacob to Rebecca and blesses him, 15-31. (Cf. Gen. xxiii.
1-4, 11-16, xxiv. 15, xxv. 1-2, 25-27, xin. LBS)
XIX. And in the first year of the first week in the
forty-second jubilee, Abraham returned and dwelt opposite
2010 a.m.
Hebron, that is Kirjath Arba, two weeks of years. 2. And
11 read “thy first-born son,” and with where Vulg. has Dortas = TUNas = yw of
Latin (quem dilexisti), add ‘whom thou Mass. and Sam.).
hast loved.” This addition may go back 16. Go in peace. 1 Sam. i. 17.
to nጋnN-ገbN (Gen. xxii. 2), or to J
19. With thejoy off estival. Latin has
(corruption (?) of Ton’ Gen. xxii. 16 on
in laetitia gaudentes.
which our text is based).
Citi= eTONset s (so also Sam. vers., XIX. 1. Kirjath Arba. In MSS ~
LXX, Syr. (1), Onk. of Gen. xxii. 17 Qarjatarbag. LXX ἐν πόλει ᾿Αρβόκ.

CHAPTERS XVIII. 16-XIX. 10 125
in the first year of the +third}+ week of this jubilee the days
of the life of Sarah were accomplished, and she died in
Hebron. 3. And Abraham went to mourn over her and
bury her, and we tried him [to see] if his spirit were patient
and he were not indignant in the words of his mouth; and
he was found patient in this, and was not disturbed. 4. For
in patience of spirit he conversed with the children of Heth,
to the intent that they should give him a place in which to
bury his dead. 5. And the Lord gave him grace before all
who saw him, and he besought in gentleness the sons of
Heth, and they gave him the land of the double cave over
against Mamre, that is Hebron, for four hundred pieces of
silver. 6. And they besought him, saying, “ We shall give it
to thee for nothing”; but he would not take it from their
hands for nothing, for he gave the price of the place, the
money in full, and he bowed down before them twice; and
after this he buried his dead in the double cave. 7. And
all the days of the life of Sarah were one hundred and
twenty-seven years, that is, two jubilees and four weeks and
one year: these are the days of the years of the life of
Sarah. 8. This is the tenth trial wherewith Abraham was
tried, and he was found faithful, patient in spirit. 9. And
he said not a single word regarding the rumour in the land
how that God had said that He would give it to him and to his
seed after him, and he begged a place there to bury his dead ;
for he was found faithful, and was recorded on the heavenly
tables as the friend of God. 10. And in the fourth year 2020 a.
2. +Thirdt. Read “second.” Isaac Four hundred. So Latin. Eth.
married (xix. 10) at the age of 40 wrongly gives ‘‘ forty.”
(Gen. xxv. 20) after Sarah’s death. 7. Cf. Gen. xxiii. 1.
Hence he married in the fourth year of Of the years, a and Latin omit.
the second week. 8. Tenth trial. In addition to the
2, 4. Cf. Gen. xxiii, 3, 4. references on xvii. 17 see also the Sayings of the Fathers,” v. 3 (Taylor’s edi5-6. Cf. Gen. xxiii. 11-16.
tion, p. 80), which speaks of the ten
5. Double cave = 79 σπήλαιον τὸ trials of Abraham,
διπλοῦν (LXX) = nን5ጋbn nye ‘the 9, Friend of God. Cf. xxx. 20, 21.
cave of Machpelah.” This expression springs from the O,T.:

126 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
thereof he took a wife for his son Isaac and her name was
Rebecca [the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, the
brother of Abraham] the sister of Laban and daughter of
Bethuel; and Bethuel was the son of Méle&, who was the
wife of Nahor, the brother of Abraham. 11. And Abraham
took to himself a third wife, and her name was Keturah,
from among the daughters of his household servants, for
Hagar had died before Sarah. 12. And she bare him six
sons, Zimram, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and
Ishbak, and Shuah, in the two weeks of years. 13. And in
the sixth week, in the second year thereof, Rebecca bare to
2046 Α.Μ.
Isaac two sons, Jacob and Esau, and Jacob was a smooth
and upright man, and Esau was fierce, a man of the field,
and hairy, and Jacob dwelt in tents. 14. And the youths
grew, and Jacob learned to write; but Esau did not learn,
ef. Is. xli. 8 “Abraham, My friend” ; tioned by Jerome, Quaest. Hebr. in Gen.
2 Chron. xx.7 ; LXXof Dan. iii, 35. It xxv. 1: Cetura Hebraeo sermone copuis found in Philo, De Soprietate, 11: latainterpretatur aut juncta (al. vincta).
μὴ ἐπικαλύψω ἐγὼ ἀπὸ ᾿Αβραὰμ τοῦ Quam ob causam suspicantur Hebraei
φίλου μου; (Gen. xviii. 17); also in mutato nomine eandem esse Agar, quae
James ii. 23; Clem. Rom. x. 1, xvii. Saraa mortua de concubina transierit
2; Targ. Jer. on Gen. xviii. 17. In in uxorem. According to the Book
Book of Wisdom vii. 27 the designation of Jashar (Dict. des Apocr. ii. 1147)
φίλοι Θεοῦ is applied to the faithful Keturah was a Canaanitish woman. See
generally, and likewise in Philo, Beer, Leben Abr. 83, 198 ; Singer, p. 118.
Fragment ii. p. 652: πᾶς σοφὸς θεοῦ Daughters. Emended with Latin.
φίλος. This application of the phrase Text = ‘‘ sons.”
may be due to Plato, Legg. iv. 8, where 12. Cf. Gen. xxv. 2. In the Ethiopic
the wise man is said to be θεῷ φίλος: the names appear as Zenbar, Jaksen,
cf. also Max. Tyr. xx. 6. For Rabbinical Madai, Madan, Ijazbod, Séhija.
references Singer, p. 151 note. 13. Cf. Gen. xxv. 25-27.
10. Cf. Gen. xxiv. 15. Sixth. This date harmonises with
Daughter of Bethuel ; and Bethuel. that in xxv. 1, 4, according to which
Emended with help of Latin. See my Jacob was 63 in 2109 a.m., but distext, p. 66. agrees with that in xlv. 13.
[The daughter... brother of Abra- Sinooth and upright. So bc. Two
ham). Bracketed as a dittography, different renderings of on wx (Gen.
already in the Greek, as it appears in xxv. 27) seem to be conjoined here.
the Latin version. On the other hand, since the description
11. Cf. Gen. xxv. 1. of Esau is borrowed from Gen. xxv. 27
Keturah ... for Hagar had died and xxvii. 11, it is probable that the
before Sarah. Our author here explains description of Jacob is drawn from
why Abraham did not take Hagar both also, and that we should here
back. Later tradition—Gen. rabba 61, read : “Smooth and upright.”
Ps.-Jon. and Targ. Jer. on Gen. xxvii. 14. Jacob learned to write. On the
—got over the difficulty by identifying phrase cf. John vii. 15; Acts xxvi. 24;
Hagar and Keturah. This view is men- Plato, Apol.26D. According to Onkelos

CHAPTER XIX. 11-22 127
for he was a man of the field and a hunter, and he learnt
war, and all his deeds were fierce. 15. And Abraham loved
Jacob, but Isaac loved Esau. 16. And Abraham saw the
deeds of Esau, and he knew that in Jacob should his name
and seed be called; and he called Rebecca and gave commandment regarding Jacob, for he knew that she (too) loved
Jacob much more than Esau. 17. And he said unto her:
“ My daughter, watch over my son Jacob,
For he shall be in my stead on the earth,
And for a blessing in the midst of the children of men,
And for the glory of the whole seed of Shem.
18. For I know that the Lord will choose him to be a people
for possession unto Himself, above all peoples that are upon
the face of the earth. 19, And behold, Isaac myson loves Esau
more than Jacob, but I see that thou truly lovest Jacob.
20. Add still further to thy kindness to him,
And let thine eyes be upon him in love;
For he will be a blessing unto us on the earth from
henceforth unto all generations of the earth.
21. Let thy hands be strong
And let thy heart rejoice in thy son Jacob;
For I have loved him far beyond all my sons.
He will be blessed for ever,
And his seed will fill the whole earth.
22. If a man can number the sand of the earth,
His seed also will be numbered.
on Gen. xxv. 27 Jacob attended a Hebrew before Esau took to evil ways; see
school of theology, xinhix-na. The Ps.- also Baba bathra 166 (Beer, Leb. Abr.
Jon. and Jerus, Targums represent Heber 84).
as the head of this school. Cf. Ber. 18. A people for possession=)adv
rabba 63. See Beer, Leben Abr. p. περιούσιον. See note on xvi. 18 ; also
200; Fabricius, Cod. Pseud. V.T. i. the note in my text p. 68 where I have
435-438 ; Singer, p. 103. shown that the Ethiopic translators of
16. Abraham recognises by his the Bible always mistranslated περιconduct the predestined founder of ovcios. This verse is drawn word for
the nation (ii. 20). The promise given word from Deut. vii. 6.
in xvi. 16, xvii. 6 is here further de- Peoples. Restored from Latin.
fined. According to Ps.-Jon. on Gen. 22. Gen. xiii. 16. Contrast xiii. 20
xxv. 9; Ber. rabba 68, Abraham died of our text.

128 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
23. And all the blessings wherewith the Lord hath blessed
me and my seed shall belong to Jacob and his seed alway.
24. And in his seed shall my name be blessed, and the
name of my fathers, Shem, and Noah, and Enoch, and
Mahalalel, and Enos, and Seth, and Adam. 25. And these
shall serve
To lay the foundations of the heaven,
And to strengthen the earth,
And to renew all the luminaries which are in the firmament.”
26. And he called Jacob before the eyes of Rebecca his
mother, and kissed him, and blessed him, and said:
27. “Jacob, my beloved son, whom my soul loveth, may
God bless thee from above the firmament, and may He
give thee all the blessings wherewith He blessed Adam,
and Enoch, and Noah, and Shem; and all the things οὗ
which He told me, and all the things which He promised ~
to give me, may He cause to cleave to thee and to thy ©
seed for ever, according to the days of heaven above —
the earth. 28. And the spirits of Mastéma shall not rule —
over thee or over thy seed to turn thee from the Lord, who
is thy God from henceforth for ever. 29. And may
the Lord God be a father to thee and thou the first-born
son, and to the people alway. Go in peace, my son.” 30.
And they both went forth together from Abraham. 31.
And Rebecca loved Jacob, with all her heart and with all
her soul, very much more than Esau; but Isaac loved Esau
much more than Jacob. |
24. This list of righteous patriarchs (p'y3 "ነጋ Sanh. 882). See rabbinic
is peculiar for its omissions and its references in Singer, pp. 125-126.
insertions. With regard to Mahalelel 25. See note on i. 29. Cf. 15, δὶ
nothing special is known. On the 16.
other hand, the omission of Methuselah 27. All the blessings wherewith, ete.
is strange. In later times opinions CE sexi 13?
were divided as to the character of 28. See note on xv. 31-32. Evil
Adam. Some held him to be a saint spirits have dominion over the Gentiles
(von Erub. 180), others an atheist but not over Israel.

CHAPTERS XIX. 23-XX. 4 129
Abraham admonishes his sons and his sons’ sons to work
righteousness, observe circumcision, and refrain from
impurity and idolatry, 1-10. Dismisses them with gifts,
11. Dwelling-places of the Ishmaelites and of the sons
of Keturah, 12-13. (Cf. Gen. xxv. 5-6.)
XX. And in the forty-second jubilee, in the first year (2204250)5 2a .m.
of the fseventh+ week, Abraham called Ishmael, and his
twelve sons, and Isaac and his two sons, and the six sons of
Keturah, and their sons. 2. And he commanded them that
they should observe the way of the Lord; that they should
work righteousness, and love each his neighbour, and act on
this manner amongst all men; that they should each so
walk with regard to them as to do judgment and righteousness on the earth. 3. That they should circumcise their
sons, according to the covenant which He had made with
them, and not deviate to the right hand or the left of all
the paths which the Lord had commanded us; and that we
should keep ourselves from all fornication and uncleanness,
[and renounce from amongst us all fornication and uncleanness]. 4. And if any woman or maid commit fornication
amongst you, burn her with fire, and let them not commit
fornication with her after their eyes and their heart; and
let them not take to themselves wives from the daughters
of Canaan; for the seed of Canaan will be rooted out of the
XX. 1. +Seventit+. “Seventh” seems 3. Circumeise their sons. Sanh. 59d
corrupt for “sixth.” The present text contains a discussion as to whether cirmakes the date 2052 or the year after cumcision was obligatory on Ishmael’s
Abraham’s death. If we read “sixth” and Keturah’s sons in conformity with
it would give 2045. See note on xxi. Gen. xvii. 9. Owing to Gen. xxi. 12
1. Thus some time would intervene it was held not to extend to Esau’s
between the dismissal of Ishmael and descendants.
his sons to their distant homes (xx. [And renounce ... uncleanness].
11) and the return of Ishmael and Bracketed as a dittography.
Jacob to celebrate the feast of weeks 4, This halacha does not agree exactly
(xxii. 1). with those in Leviticus and DeuteroHis twelve sons. See Gen. xxv. nomy, etc., but with that implied in
13-15. Gen. xxxviii. 24. According to Deut.
2. Men=sab’é emended froin sab’é, xxii. 23 sqq. ; Ezek. xvi. 40; Lev. xx.
Se war.” 10 the adulteress was to be put to

130 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
land. 5. And he told them of the judgment of the giants,
and the judgment of the Sodomites, how they had been
judged on account of their wickedness, and had died on
account of their fornication, and uncleanness, and mutual
corruption through fornication.
6. “ And guard yourselves from all fornication and uncleanness,
And from all pollution of sin,
Lest ye make our name a curse,
And your whole life a hissing,
And all your sons to be destroyed by the sword,
And ye become accursed like Sodom,
And all your remnant as the sons of Gomorrah.
7. I implore you, my sons, love the God of heaven,
4
And cleave ye to all His commandments. ᾿
ἢ
And walk not after their idols, and after their uncleannesses,
8. And make not for yourselves molten or graven gods;
For they are vanity,
And there is no spirit in them;
For they are work of (men’s) hands,
And all who trust in them, trust in nothing.
Serve them not, nor worship them,
9. But serve ye the Most High God, and worship Him
continually :
death by stoning, whereas death by 5. Fornication, and uncleanness, and
fire was reserved for the priest's . corruption. See note on vii. 21.
daughter who had played the whore, 6. Make our name @ curse, and your
Ley. xxi. 9. On the other hand Gen. whole life a hissing. Based on Is. Ixv.
Xxxvili. 24, where Judah proposes to 15; Jer.xxix.18. Cf. Eth. En.v.6. For
burn Tamar, comes under neither of “a hissing” (so Latin) a gives ‘‘a threatthese regulations. Tamar was still, ening” and bcd “a cause of boasting.”
according to custom, the wife of Er— 8, Ch. xi. δ, ae:
for Shelah was simply to act as Er’s Molten or graven gods. Cf. Deut.
representative—and should thereupon xxvii. 15.
have been stoned according to the Serve them not, nor worship them.
Levitical law. See notes on xli. 25, 26. Exod. xx. 5.

CHAPTER XX. 5-13 131
And hope for His countenance always,
And work uprightness and righteousness before Him,
That He may have pleasure in you and grant you His
mercy,
And send rain upon you morning and evening,
And bless all your works which ye have wrought upon
the earth,
And bless thy bread and thy water,
And bless the fruit of thy womb and the fruit of thy land,
And the herds of thy cattle, and the flocks of thy sheep.
10. And ye will be for a blessing on the earth,
And all nations of the earth will desire you,
And bless your sons in my name,
That they may be blessed as I am.”
11. And he gave to Ishmael and to his sons, and to the
sons of Keturah, gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his
son, and he gave everything to Isaac his son. 12. And
Ishmael and his sons, and the sons of Keturah and their
sons, went together and dwelt from Paran to the entering
in of Babylon in all the land which is towards the East
facing the desert. 13. And these mingled with each other,
and their name was called Arabs, and Ishmaelites.
Abraham s last words to Isaac regarding idolatry, the eating
of blood, the offering of various sacrifices and the use of
salt, 1-11. Also regarding the woods to be used in
9. Have pleasure in. Lat. has what springs from the seed as here.
dirigat, which with Praetorius should be Latin has fructum. Greek was prob.
changed into diligat. καρπόν.
Send rain. Cf. xii. 4, 18. 10. Yewiil be for a blessing. Cf. Gen.
Bless all your works, etc. Cf. Deut. xii. 2; and xxi. 25 of our text.
xxviii. 8.
11. Cf. Gen. xxv. 6.
Bless thy bread and thy water. Exod.
12. Paran, Eth, Pharmon.
xxiii. 25.
Fruit of thy womb and the fruit of 13. Was called Arabs, and Ishmaelthy land, And the herds, etc. Deut. vii. ites. So Eth. The Latin=“ Clave to
13. The Ethiopic word rendered fruit the Arabs and (they are) Ishmaelites
gener=a «l sleeyd, but it also means unto this day.”

132 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
sacrifice and the duty of washing before sacrifice and of
covering blood eto., 12-25.
2057 XXL. And in the sixth year of the + seventh+ week of
2050) A.M.
this jubilee Abraham called Isaac his son, and commanded
him, saying: “I am become old, and know not the day
of my death, and am full of my days. 2. And behold, I am
one hundred and seventy-five years old, and throughout all
the days of my life I have remembered the Lord, and
}
sought with all my heart to do His will, and to walk uprightly in all His ways. 3. My soul has hated idols, (and I
have despised those that served them, and I have given my heart
᾿NPoL r e
XXL. 1. tSeventht. Since Abraham to Levi. The ws κἀμὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ. ἐδίδαξε
was born in 1876 A.M. and lived 175 support the view of our author. I
years, he must have died in 2051 A.M., will now give the portions of Test.
whereas our text makes it 2057. Levi 9 which deal with the same
Hence read “sixth.” We should then matter as our text and insert after
have 2050. them the references to the parallels
Abraham called Isaac his son, and in our text. καὶ ᾿Ισαὰκ ἐκάλει me
commanded him. Cf. Test. Levi 9: συνεχῶς τοῦ ὑπομνῆσαί με νόμον Κυρίου
"Toad ἐκάλει με. . . τοῦ ὑπομνῆσαί με (Jub. χχὶ. 1) . . . καὶ ἐδίδασκέμ ε νόμον
νόμον Kuplov. The rest of this chapter ἱερωσύνης, θυσιῶν, ὁλοκαυτωμάτων,
according to our author deals with ἀπαρχῶν, ἑκουσίων, σωτηρίων (Jub.
Abraham’s directions to Isaac regard- xxi. 7-9). .. καὶ ἔλεγε: Μὴ πρόσεχε,
ing the various kinds of sacrifices, the τέκνον, ἀπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος τῆς πορνείας
woods to be used on the altar, the (xxi. 21-28). . . καὶ πρὸ τοῦ εἰσελθεῖν
ablutions of the priest, the duty of εἰς τὰ ἅγια, λούου" καὶ ἐν τῷ θύειν,
avoiding fornication. Now it is quite νίπτου᾽" καὶ ἀπαρτίζων πάλιν τὴν θυσίαν,
clear that the author of Test. Levi 9 νίπτου (xxi. 16 almost word for word).
had either our text before him or else Δώδεκα δένδρων del ἐχόντων φύλλα
a source common to both. The converse ἄναγε Κυρίῳ, ὡς κἀμὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐδίδαξε
hypothesis that our author had the Test. (xxi. 12-13)... καὶ πᾶσαν θυσίαν
Levi before him is not workable. In ἅλατι ἁλιεῖς (xxi. 11).
any case the text of the Test. Levi is I am become old, and know not the
less original than that of our author. day of my death. These words are
It represents Isaac as transmitting to used by Isaac in Gen. xxvii. 2.
Levi the same -ritual commands that
And am full. For “and” MSS read
our text describes Abraham as giving
“for,” but Latin rightly gives ‘‘ et.”
to Isaac. The only point that can
Full of my days. The pronoun is
be urged in favour of the originality
peculiar to this book and Eth. vers.
of the Test. Levi is that the words in
and Syr. The Sam., LXX, Vulg. read —
Jubilees xxi. 1 ‘‘I am become old and
“full of days” against Mass. and
know not the day of my death” are
Onkelos of Gen. xxv. 8 which omit “οὗ
used by Isaac in Gen. xxvii. 2 and not
days.” Cf. xxii. 7, xxiii. 8 of our text. —
by Abraham. But the two views are
compatible. Our text represents Abra- 2, Of Gens xvi ἡ:
ham as giving directions as to sacrifices, 3. (And 1 have despised ... and
etc., to Isaac; and the Test. Levi spirit). Supplied from Latin: probably |
represents Isaac as handing them on lost in Ethiopicthrough homoioteleuton. _

CHAPTER XXI. 1-8 133
and spirit) that I might observe to do the will of Him who
created me. 4. For He is the living God, and He is holy
and faithful, and He is righteous beyond all, and there is
with Him no accepting of (men’s) persons and no accepting
of gifts; for God is righteous, and executeth judgment on
all those who transgress His commandments and despise His
covenant. 5. And do thou, my son, observe His commandments and His ordinances and His judgments, and walk not
after the abominations and after the graven images and
after the molten images. 6. And eat no blood at all of
animals or cattle, or of any bird which flies in the heaven.
7. And if thou dost slay a victim as an acceptable peaceoffering, slay ye it, and pour out its blood upon the altar,
and all the fat of the offering offer on the altar with fine
flour (and the meat-offering) mingled with oil, with its drinkofferi— nofgfe r them all together on the altar of burntoffering; it is a sweet savour before the Lord. 8. And
thou wilt offer the fat of the sacrifice of thank-offerings
on the fire which is upon the altar, and the fat which is
on the belly, and all the fat on the inwards and the two
kidneys, and all the fat that is upon them, and upon the
loins and liver thou shalt remove, together with the kidneys.
4. No accepting of (men’s) persons as.” Lev. iii. 9-10, which our author has
and... gifts. Cf. Deut. x. 17. before him, supports the Latin: “And
6. Cf. Lev. vii. 26. See vi. 10, 12 he shall offer of the sacrifice of peaceof our text ; also xxi. 17 sqq. offerings an offering made by fire . .
7. Cf. Lev. iii. 7-10. and the fat which covereth the inwards,
Peace - offering = θυσίαι εἰρηνικαίΞΞ: and all the fat that is upon the inwards
‘abe na, 1 Sam. x. 8, xi. 15 etc., but and the two kidneys, and the fat that
the Hebrew phrase is more usually is upon them, which is by the loins. . .
rendered (7) θυσία (τοῦ) σωτηρίου, Lev. with the kidneys shall he take away.”
iii. 3, 6, 9, iv. 26 etc. On the phrase “thank-offerings” see
(And the meat-offering). Latin omits note on ver. 7.
the meat-offering. The phrase is most On the belly, . . . on the inwards=
probably genuine as Littmann urges, ἐπὶ τῆς κοιλίας. . . ἐπὶ τῶν ἐντοσθίων
though I rejected it in my Ethiopic text. (ἐντέρων). The Latin has super ventrum
Mingled with oil. Cf. Lev. ii. 4, . super interanea. This variation is
jova Ὁ" ΠΩ. strange, since the Hebrew has 1p and
8. And thou wilt offer the fat of the the LXX κοιλία in both cases in Lev.
sacrifice of thank-offerings . . . and the iii. 10.
fot. So Latin. For “and... and” in And upon the loins. Lev. iii. 10 has
the above the Ethiopic reads “as . . . ‘‘which is by the loins.”

134 THE BOOK ΟΕ JUBILEES
9. And offer all these for a sweet savour acceptable before
the Lord, with its meat-offering and with its drink-offering,
for a sweet savour, the bread of the offering unto the Lord,
10. And eat its meat on that day and on the second day,
and let not the sun on the second day go down upon it till
it is eaten, and let nothing be left over for the third day;
for it is not acceptable [for it is not approved] and let it no
longer be eaten, and all who eat thereof will bring sin upon
themselves; for thus I have found it written in the books
of my forefathers, and in the words of Enoch, and in the
words of Noah. 11. And on all thy oblations thou shalt
strew salt, and let not the salt of the covenant be lacking in
all thy oblations before the Lord. 12. And as regards the
wood of the sacrifices, beware lest thou bring (other) wood
Thou shalt remove = téblél., Emended ground for the statement made by our
with Latin separa from teblil=rolled author,
up, covered up. 11. On all thy oblations thow shalt
9. Bread of the offering unto the strew salt, Cf. the parallel passage in
Lord. From Lev. iii. 11. Test. Levi 9: καὶ πᾶσαν θυσίαν ἅλατι
ἁλιεῖς,
10. [For it is not approved]. I have
bracketed this clause as a dittography. Salt of the covenant. Cf. Lev. ii. 18.
MSS read “covenant of salt.”
Let it no longer be eaten=jétbalivé,
12. Beware lest thou bring (other)
emended from jétbahal (ab), cd=
“thou shalt not eat.” wood for the altar in addition to these.
By a slight change (see my text, p. 75
Written in the books of my forenote 30) we might read: ‘‘ Be careful
fathers. According to x. 14 Noah gave
to offer on the altar the following woods |
all his secret books to Shem, who
(only).” This passage was written
may have passed them on to Abraham,
possibly to determine the meaning of
as, according to rabbinic tradition,
ow yy in Exod. xxv. 5, 10 ete.
Abraham attended the school of Shem,
Our text or the subject of it is referred
According to xii. 27, however, Abram
to in Test. Levi 9: δώδεκα δένδρων |
is said to have been ἃ “‘home”’ student,
ἀεὶ ἐχόντων φύλλα ἄναγε Κυρίῳ, ὡς
and ‘to have studied the books of his
fathers. Singer (p. 126 note) states κἀμὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐδίδαξε. The number
here is probably corrupt. δώδεκαΞξε
that according to Pirke R. El. viii.,
Jalk. Gen. § 41, Abraham received from = corrupt for T=1 4, The Eth, Enoch —
Shem the knowledge of the calendar ili, speaks of fourteen evergreen trees,
which was imparted to Adam from and may be in that passage dependent ~
heaven, and which had come down to on our text. With the list of fourShem through Enoch and Noah. The teen trees jin our text, cf. that in
present passage in our text as well as the Geoponica xi. 1: δένδρα ἀειθαλῆ,
vii. 38 and Test. XII. Patriarch. Zeb. 3 ἐστι. . . ιδ΄" (1) φοῖνιξ, (2) κίτριον, (3)
trace back certain halachoth to com- στρόβιλος, (4) δάφνη, (5) ἐλαία, (6)
mands or books of Enoch and Noah. κυπάρισσος, (7) κερατέα, (8) πίτυς,
None of the ancient books preserved (9) πρῖνος, (10) πύζος, (11) μυρσίνη,
under these names are of an halachic (12) κέδρος, (18) ivéa καὶ (14) ἄρκευcharacter. There was probably no θος. Of these fourteen, ten, ζ.6. nos.

CHAPTER XXI. 9-19 135
for the altar in addition to these: cypress, défrin, sagad,
pine, fir, cedar, savin, palm, olive, myrrh, laurel, and citron,
juniper, and balsam. 13. And of these kinds of wood lay
upon the altar under the sacrifice, such as have been tested
as to their appearance, and do not lay (thereon) any split or
dark wood, (but) hard and clean, without fault, a sound and
new growth; and do not lay (thereon) old wood, [for its
fragrance is gone] for there is no longer fragrance in it
as before. 14. Besides these kinds of wood there is none
other that thou shalt place (on the altar), for the fragrance
is dispersed, and the smell of its fragrance goes not up to
heaven. 15. Observe this commandment and do it, my son,
that thou mayst be upright in all thy deeds. 16. And at
all times be clean in thy body, and wash thyself with water
before thou approachest to offer on the altar, and wash thy
hands and thy feet before thou drawest near to the altar;
and when thou art done sacrificing, wash again thy hands
and thy feet. 17. And let no blood appear upon you nor
upon your clothes; be on thy guard, my son, against blood,
be on thy guard exceedingly ; cover it with dust. 18. And
do not eat any blood, for it is the soul; eat no blood whatever. 19. And take no gifts for the blood of man, lest it be
6, 3, 8, 12, 1 (2), 5,11, 4, 2 (or 7), 14, Clean=néstih, emended from sina
appear in our text. See my text, p. (6)=“‘ firm,” sén‘a (c). a omits.
75 [For its fragrance is gone]. I have
Défran might be a corruption of πρῖνος bracketed this clause as originating in a
but that daprono (a አጋ 4) is found in dittography, or an interpolation from
the next verse.
Syriac, and is a kind of fir.
14. Goes not up. With Littmann I
Sagad. This has been identified
have inserted the negative.
with the pv, “the almond”; but
16. On the duty of washing before
wrongly, since the trees are all everapproaching the altar, cf. Exod. xxx.
green,
19-21, etc,
Citron. I have taken qédar as
Wash again. Text=“return and
corrupt for κίτριον. It may be a corwash,” the familiar Hebrew idiom as
ruption of xeparéa. On wood for the
Littmann has recognised.
sacrifices see Middoth ii. 5; Tamid
17. Nor upon your clothes. ab omit
296; Sifra on Lev. i. 8 (Beer, Buch ὦ,
Jub. p. 35), ce . 3)
13. Nothing of this nature is found Be on thy guard, my son, against
in the halacha. Tamid ii. 3 allows all blood, . . . cover it with dust. Cf.
kinds of wood but that of the olive Lev. xvii. 13.
and vine. 18. Cf, Lev. xvii. 14; Deut. xii, 28.

136 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
shed with impunity, without judgment; for it is the blood
that is shed that causes the earth to sin, and the earth
cannot be cleansed from the blood of man save by the blood
of him who shed it. 20. And take no present or gift
for the blood of man: blood for blood, that thou mayest be
accepted before the Lord, the Most High God; for He is the
defence of the good: and that thou mayest be preserved from
all evil, and that He may save thee from every kind of
death.
21. I see, my son,
That all the works of the children of men are sin and
wickedness,
And all their deeds are uncleanness and an abomination
and a pollution,
And there is no righteousness with them.
22. Beware, lest thou shouldest walk in their ways
And tread in their paths,
And sin a sin unto death before the Most High God.
Else He will [hide His face from thee,
And] give thee back into the hands of thy transgression,
And root thee out of the land, and thy seed likewise
from under heaven,
And thy name and thy seed will perish from the whole
earth.
23. Turn away from all their deeds and all their uncleanness,
And observe the ordinance of the Most High God,
19. Causes the earth to sin. This 22. Sin unto death=apapriay θαναgoes back to nan"= “ pollutes.” τηφόρ=ο νo y wen, Num. xviii. 22. Cf.
The earth cannot be cleansed, etc. 1 John v.16. See xxxiii. 18 of our text.
Cf. vii. 33 ; Num. xxxv. 33. [Hide His face from thee, And]. 1
20. That thou mayest be accepted. have bracketed this clause (cf. i. 13)
Emended (see my text, p. 76, note 1). as an interpolation, since it spoils the
ὃ (d)=‘‘and it will be accepted”; a parallelism.
**it will not be accepted” ; ὁ “and He Give thee back into the hands of thy —
will accept you.” transgression. Has this vigorous ex21-24. This passage was written pression been suggested by Gen. iv. 7
originally in Hebrew verse and the “Tf thou dost not well, sin is a lurker
parallelism is still well preserved. at the door” #

CHAPTERS ΧΧΙ. 20-XXII. 2 137
And do His will and be upright in all things.
24, And He will bless thee in all thy deeds,
And will raise up from thee the plant of righteousness
through all the earth, throughout all generations of
the earth,
And my name and thy name will not be forgotten
under heaven for ever.
25. Go, my son, in peace.
May the Most High God, my God and thy God, strengthen
thee to do His will,
And may He bless all thy seed and the residue of thy
seed for the generations for ever, with all righteous
blessings,
That thou mayest be a blessing on all the earth.”
26. And he went out from him rejoicing.
Isaac, Ishmael, and Jacob celebrate the feast of first-fruits at
Beersheba with Abraham, 1-5. Prayer of Abraham,
6-9. Abrahams last words to and blessings of Jacob,
10-30.
XXII. And it came to pass in the first week in the
+forty-fourtht jubilee, in the +second+ year, that is, the
year in which Abraham died, that Isaac and Ishmael came
from the Well of the Oath to celebrate the feast of weeks
—that is, the feast of the first-fruits of the harvest—to
Abraham, their father, and Abraham rejoiced because his
two sons had come. 2. For Isaac had many possessions in
Beersheba, and Isaac was wont to go and see his possessions
24, Plant of righteousness. See Dillmann suggests that for ‘‘ fortyxvi. 26. fourth” we should read ‘‘forty-third.”
25. 1 have with some hesitation But this would make the year of
arranged this verse as Hebrew poetry. Abraham's death 2060, whereas (see
ΠΡ δα ἃ ae Ct xx. 10 on xxi. 1) he died in the year 2051.
were cre ewng. hy Hence I propose: “in the sixth week
XXII. 1. All the dates in this verse in the forty-second jubilee, in the seventh
appear to be wrong. The total=2116. year” = 2091,

138 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and to return to his father. 3. And in those days Ishmael
came to see his father, and they both came together, and
Isaac offered a sacrifice for a burnt-offering, and presented it
on the altar of his father which he had made in Hebron.
4, And he offereda thank-offering and made a feast of joy
before Ishmael, his brother: and Rebecca made new cakes
from the new grain, and gave them to Jacob, her son, to
take them to Abraham, his father, from the first-fruits of
the land, that he might eat and bless the Creator of all
things before he died. 5. And Isaac, too, sent by the hand
of Jacob to Abraham a best thank-offering, that he might
eat and drink. 6. And he eat and drank, and blessed the
Most High God,
Who hath created heaven and earth,
Who hath made all the fat things of the earth,
And given them to the children of men
That they might eat and drink and bless their Creator.
7. “And now I give thanks unto Thee, my God, because thou
hast caused me to see this day: behold, I am one hundred
three score and fifteen years, an old man and full of days,
and all my days have been unto me peace. 8. The sword ~
of the adversary has not overcome me in all that Thou hast
given me and my children all the days of my life until this —
day. 9. My God, may Thy mercy and Thy peace be upon
Thy servant, and upon the seed of his sons, that they may
be to Thee a chosen nation and an inheritance from amongst
all the nations of the earth from henceforth unto all the
days of the generations of the earth, unto all the ages.” Ὁ
10. And he called Jacob and said: “My son Jacob, may —
4. Creator of all things. A frequently 6-9. Abraham’s thanksgiving and
recurring idea in our author: cf. xxii. prayer,
27. Cf. Sir. xxiv. 8: ὁ κτίστης ἁπάν- 7. See xxi. 1.
κων ; 2 Mace. i. 24: ὁ θεὸς ὁ πάντων
κτίστης; vii. 23: ὁ τοῦ κόσμου κτίστης J 8. pe fit of a Bedi + Of
(cf. 4 Mace. v. 25). Of. “God of all,” Jet vi. 255 Ps. ix. 7 (LXX),
xxii. 10, 27, xxx. 19, xxxi, 13, 32; 9. An inheritance(=nbms). Cf. verses —
Assumpt. Mos. iv. 2. 10, 15, 29 and Deut. iv. 20.

CHAPTER XXII. 3-14 139
the God of all bless thee and strengthen thee to do righteousness, and His will before Him, and may He choose thee and
thy seed that ye may become a people for His inheritance
according to His will alway. And do thou, my son, Jacob,
draw near and kiss me.” 11. And he drew near and
kissed him, and he said:
“ Blessed be my son Jacob
And all the sons of God Most High, unto all the ages:
May God give unto thee a seed of righteousness;
' And some of thy sons may He sanctify in the midst of
the whole earth ;
May nations serve thee,
And all the nations bow themselves before thy seed.
12. Be strong in the presence of men,
And exercise authority over all the seed of Seth.
Then thy ways and the ways of thy sons will be
justified,
So that they shall become a holy nation.
13. May the Most High God give thee all the blessings
Wherewith He has blessed me
And wherewith He blessed Noah and Adam;
May they rest on the sacred head of thy seed from
generation to generation for ever.
14, And may He cleanse thee from all unrighteousness and
impurity,
10. God of ail, i.e. God of the xxiv. 17, ny-')3 52, where, however,
universe. See verses 4, 27. nv is not to be taken as the name of
11. The sons of the God Most High (or the patriarch but as a contraction of
“his sons unto the God Most High”).
nN = ‘‘ confusion.”
For phraseology cf. Gen. xiv. 19. On
13. Blessings . . . wherewith He
Israel as sons of God, see i. 24 note.
blessed Noah, etc. See xix. 27.
May nations serve Thee, And all the
Rest on the sacred head, From Gen.
nations, etc, From Gen. xxvii. 29—
Isaac's blessing of Jacob. xlix, 26, though with the Syr. it implies
12. Exercise, Eth, has “exercising’ Ly) 13 instead of ia Cf. Num, vi. 9.
but Latin= “exercise,” 14. Unrighteousness and impurity.
All the seed of Seth, i.e. all mankind. Emended with Latin inquinamento et
The phrase is found also in Num, injustitia. MSS = “impure defilement.”

140 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
That thou mayest be forgiven all (thy) transgressions;
(and) thy sins of ignorance.
And may He strengthen thee,
And bless thee.
And mayest thou inherit the whole earth,
15. And may He renew His covenant with thee,
That thou mayest be to Him a nation for His inheritance
for all the ages,
And that He may be to thee and to thy seed a God in
truth and righteousness throughout all the days of
the earth.
16. And do thou, my son Jacob, remember my words,
And observe the commandments of Abraham, thy father :
Separate thyself from the nations,
And eat not with them:
And do not according to their works,
And become not their associate;
For their works are unclean,
And all their ways are a pollution and an abomination
and uncleanness.
17. They offer their sacrifices to the dead
Thou mayest be forgiven. Lat. =‘* He 29). Antiochus IV. tried to force the
may forgive.” The ‘‘thy” and “and” Jews to eat of unclean food, 1 Macc, i.
are supplied from the Latin. 47-48, 62-63 ; 2 Macc. vi. 18-21, vii. 1.
15, Renew His covenant. See ver.30. See Driver’s Commentary on Daniel i. 8Nation for His inheritance. See on 10 note. Cf. Matt. ix. 11; Mk. ii. 16
ver. 9. for the Pharisaic attitude.
16. The exclusiveness of Judaism is Their ways are a pollution. Cf. ver.
here traced to Abraham. The very 19, Observe how frequently this conexistence of Judaism in 200-150 B.c. ception returns in all accounts of the
made such exclusiveness indispensable. persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes and
Separate thyself from the nations. his successors: μιαίνειν in 1 Mace. i.
Cf. Is. lii. 11. 46, 63, iv. 45, vii. 34, xiv. 36 ; μιασμός,
Eat not with them. A Jew could 1 Mace. iv. 43; ἀκάθαρτος, 1 Mace.
not eat with a Gentile ; for the animals i. 48, iv. 48 ; ἀκαθαρσία, 1 Mace. xiii.
might not have been slaughtered ac- 48, xiv. 7; μύσος, 2 Macc. vi. 19, 25;
cording to the prescriptions of the Law μολύνω, 1 Mace. i. 37; 2 Mace. vi. 2,
(Deut, xii. 23, 24) or might have been xiv. 3; μολυσμός, 2 Mace. v. 27; Beamongst those that were forbidden to βηλόω, 1 Mace. i. 43, 45, 48, 63, 11. 12,
the Jew (Lev. xi. 4-7, 10-12, 13-20) 34, iii. 51, etc.; βεβήλωσις, 1 Macc. i. 48.
or the meat and wine might have been 17. Offer their sacrifices to the dead.
offered to idols (cf. 1 Cor. x. 20, 27- Cf. Deut. xxvi. 14; Ps. evi. 28 ; Sir. vii.

CHAPTER XXII. 15-21 I4I
And they worship evil spirits,
And they eat over the graves,
And all their works are vanity and nothingness.
18. They have no heart to understand
And their eyes do not see what their works are,
And how they err in saying to a piece of wood: ‘Thou
art my God,
And to a stone: ‘Thou art my Lord and thou art my
deliverer.’
[And they have no heart.
19. And as for thee, my son Jacob,
May the Most High God help thee
And the God of heaven bless thee
And remove thee from their uncleanness and from all
their error.
20. Be thou ware, my son Jacob, of taking a wife from any
seed of the daughters of Canaan;
For all his seed is to be rooted out of the earth.
21. For, owing to the transgression of Ham, Canaan erred,
And all his seed will be destroyed from off the earth
and all the residue thereof,
89 ; Tob. iv. 17, which allude to such offered sacrifices to the dead partook of
sacrifices as being offered by Israel. such sacrifices. These sacrifices were
They are derided Sir. xxx. 18, 19; Ep. placed over the grave: see references
Jer. 31, 32; Wisdom xiv. 15, xix. 3; given under “offer sacrifices to the
Or. Sibyl. viii. 382-384. The Pirke dead” in earlier part of the verse: also
Aboth iii. 4 speaks of “sacrifices to the Schwally, Das Leben nach dem Tode,
dead” (D,nen "Π21). 21-24.
Worship evil spirits. Some of the 18.) Cf. xit.'5, xx.'8 5 Jer: i. 27.
Jews at the bidding of Antiochus Their works. Read gebrémf instead
Epiphanes consented to worship idols of gabromti in my text. aL:
and offer them sacrifices, 1 Mace. i. 48. [And they have no heart]. Bracketed
For other references to such worship as a dittography of the beginning of
generally see Deut. xxxii. 17; Lev. ver. 18. The parallelism is against it.
xvii. 7; Ps. cvi. 37; Eth. Enoch xix. 20. Cf. Gen. xxviii. 1. For similar
1; Baruch iv. 7; 1 Cor. x. 20: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι commands see xxv. 5, xxvii. 10, xxx
ἃ θύουσιν τὰ ἔθνη, δαιμονίοις... θύου- 7 of our text ; Test. Levi 9.
σιν. See note on i. 11-13 of our text. For ali his seed, etc. This line
Eat over the graves. Just as the recurs in ver. 21» ; for the two Ethiopic
worshipper of Yahweh partook of the verbs are not infrequently renderings
sacrifices offered to Him, so those who of the same word in Greek.

142 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
And none springing from him will be saved on the day
of judgment.
22. And as for all the worshippers of idols and the profane
(Ὁ) There will be no hope for them in the land of the
living;
(e) And there will be no remembrance of them on the
earth;
(c) For they will descend into Sheol,
(d) And into the place of condemnation will they go,
As the children of Sodom were taken away from the earth
So will all those who worship idols be taken away.
23. Fear not, my son Jacob,
And be not dismayed, O son of Abraham :
May the Most High God preserve thee from destruction,
And from all the paths of error may He deliver thee.
24. This house have I built for myself that I might put my
name upon it in the earth: [it is given to thee and to thy
seed for ever], and it will be named the house of Abraham ; —
it is given to thee and to thy seed for ever; for thou wilt
build my house and establish my name before God for ever: —
thy seed and thy name will stand throughout all generations
of the earth.”
25. And he ceased commanding him and blessing -
him. 26. And the two lay together on one bed, and .
Jacob slept in the bosom of Abraham, his father’s father
and he kissed him seven times, and his affection and his
21. Day of judgment. Cf. xxiii. 11, transposed this verse on account of the ~
‘‘day of the great judgment”: xxiv. parallelism.
28, “day of wrath and indignation : They will descend into Sheol...
also xxxvi. 10. will they go. The same passage with
22. The profane. Se ]ὰη = βεβηλω- a transposition of the two verbs has
μένοι (cf. Lev. xxi. 7, 14), emended already occurred in vii. 29 (see note):
from seli’an (a ὁ d)=“ the hated ones.” cf. Eth. En. ciii. 7, 8.
c reads, ‘the perverse.” If we emend 24. [It is given, ete.] A dittography
abd into sala-éjan we should have “the from the second clause following.
adversaries.” 25. Commanding. Gen. xlix. 33.
(e) And there will be no remembrance, This word goes back to ms which is
etc. It will be observed that I have used technically of a man’s last will

CHAPTER XXII. 22-30 143
heart rejoiced over him. 27. And he blessed him with all
his heart and said: “ The Most High God, the God of all,
and Creator of all, who brought me forth from Ur of the
Chaldees, that He might give me this land to inherit it for
ever, and that I might establish a holy seed—blessed be the
Most High for ever.” 28. And he blessed Jacob and said:
“My son, over whom with all my heart and my affection I
rejoice, may Thy grace and Thy mercy be lift up upon him
and upon his seed alway. 29. And do not forsake him, nor
set him at nought from henceforth unto the days of eternity,
and may Thine eyes be opened upon him and upon his seed,
that Thou mayst preserve him, and bless him, and mayest
sanctify him as a nation for Thine inheritance; 30. And
bless him with all Thy blessings from henceforth unto all
the days of eternity, and renew Thy covenant and Thy
grace with him and with his seed according to all Thy good
pleasure unto all the generations of the earth.”
Abraham's death and burial, 1-8 (οἱ Gen. xxv. 7-10).
Decreasing years and increasing corruption of mankind :
Messianic woes: wniversal strife: the faithful rise up an
arms to bring back the faithless : Israel invaded by sinners
and testament: cf. 2 Sam. xvii. 23; ‘that the Most High may be blessed
2 Kings xx. 1; Is. xxxviii. 1; Test. for ever.” The latter is the more
XI. Patriarch., Reuben 1 ; Baba bathra natural translation; but if we adopt
147a, 1516. it, there is no principal verb.
27. This verse looks like an inter- 28. Over whom with all my heart
polation. It professes to give Abraham’s .. . Irejoice (cd). But ab read “reblessing of Jacob, and yet does not joice” in 8rd sing. This reading premention him at all. Jacob’s blessing supposes “heart and affection” as the
begins in ver. 28. This verse follows subject of “rejoice,” just as in ver. 26.
well upon ver. 26. On the other hand In that case if instead of zaba (twice)
some mention of the sacred name is we read baza (twice) we have as follows:
required in ver. 28 if 27 is omitted. ‘Over whom all my heart and my
God of all. See on verses 4, 10. affection rejoice.” In either case we
Creator of all, i.e., of the universe. must reject ba’ella as corrupt.
See on ver. 4. See Neh. ix. 6. Be lift up upon him. Cf. Num. vi.
Brought me forth from Ur of the 20a: IY: θ.
Chaldees. Cf. Gen. xv. 7; Neh. ix. 7. 29. Thine eyes be opened. Cf. 1 Kings
Instead of “brought” 3rd sing. of ad, viii. 29, 52; Neh.i, 6; Dan. ix. 18.
bc read “brought” 2nd sing. 30. Renew Thy covenant. Cf. ver.
Blessed be the Most High for ever, or 15.

144 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
of the Gentiles, 11-25. Renewed study of the law and
renewal of mankind: Messianic kingdom : blessed immortality of the righteous, 26-31.
XXIII. And he placed two fingers of Jacob on his eyes,
and he blessed the God of gods, and he covered his face and
stretched out his feet and slept the sleep of eternity, and
was gathered to his fathers. 2. And notwithstanding all
this Jacob was lying in his bosom, and knew not that
Abraham, his father’s father, was dead. 3. And Jacob
awoke from his sleep, and behold Abraham was cold as ice,
and he said: “Father, father”; but there was none that
spake, and he knew that he was dead. 4. And he arose
from his bosom and ran and told Rebecca, his mother; and
Rebecca went to Isaac in the night, and told him; and they
went together, and Jacob with them, and a lamp was in his
hand, and when they had gone in they found Abraham
lying dead. 5. And Isaac fell on the face of his father,
and wept and kissed him. 6. And the voices were heard
in the house of Abraham, and Ishmael his son arose, and
went to Abraham his father, and wept over Abraham his ©
father, he and all the house of Abraham, and they wept
with a great weeping. 7. And his sons Isaac and Ishmael |
buried him in the double cave, near Sarah his wife, and they ᾿
wept for him forty days, all the men of his house, and Isaac —
and Ishmael, and all their sons, and all the sons of Keturah
in their places; and the days of weeping for Abraham were ;
XXIIL 1. He placed two fingers of in Judges ii. 10. Gen. xxv. 8 has “to
Jacob. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 4. The closing his Raia
of the eyes was generally done by the . From Gen. 1, 1.
eldest son, and according to Shabbath 7. Buried him in the double cave,
1516 it was strictly forbidden till death Gen. xxv. 9.
had ensued (Singer, 107 note).
The days of weeping=133 ‘> (cf.
Stretched out his feet. So Syr. and
Deut. xxxiv. 8; Gen. 1. 4). b=“the
Eth. vers. of Gen. xlix. 33, but Mass.,
lamentation of the weeping = 33 3
LXX, Vulg.=“ gathered up his feet.”
Slept the sleep of eternity. Cf. Jer. (cf. Jer. xxx. 15) which I take to be a
li, 39) 57. corruption of 533 io". ὦ reads “lamenta-—
To his fathers. This phrase is first tion and weeping” and ac “ weeping.”

\
CHAPTER XXIII. 1-12 145
ended. 8. And he lived three jubilees and four weeks of
years, one hundred and seventy-five years, and completed
the days of his life, being old and full of days. 9. For
the days of the forefathers, of their life, were nineteen
jubilees; and after the Flood they began to grow less than
nineteen jubilees, and to decrease in jubilees, and to grow
old quickly, and to be full of their days by reason of manifold tribulation and the wickedness of their ways, with the
exception of Abraham. 10. For Abraham was perfect in
all his deeds with the Lord, and well-pleasing in righteousness all the days of his life; and behold, he did not complete four jubilees in his life, when he had grown old by.
reason of the wickedness, and was full of his days. 11.
And all the generations which will arise from this time
until the day of the great judgment will grow old quickly,
before they complete two jubilees, and their knowledge will
forsake them by reason of their old age [and all their knowledge will vanish away]. 12. And in those days, if a man
live a jubilee and a-half of years, they will say regarding
him: “He has lived long, and the greater part of his days
are pain and sorrow and tribulation, and there is no peace:
8. Cf. Gen. xxv. 8. See xxi. 1 of ness of others. He was himself “ perour text. fect,” according to our author.
9. Men’s years grow less, pari passu, 11, Generations which will arise...
with the growing corruption. until the day of the great judgment.
Days of the forefathers, of their life. Here the judgment seems to precede
Probably we should read “days of the the Messianic kingdom ; but see note
life of the forefathers.” on ver. 30.
To decrease in jubilees, and to grow Their knowledge will forsake them
old quickly, and to be full of their days. by reason of their old age. Lat, = erunt
The Latin has senescere celerius et minui transeuntes ab ipsis spiritus intellectus
dies vitae ipsorum. The Latin seems ipsorum, where spiritus and intellectus
right. For a possible explanation of may be duplicate renderings of the same
the corruption in the Eth. see my text, word. Otherwise it should correspond to
pp. 81-82. the phrase “‘ by reason of their age.” I
10. When he had grown old. Both here withdraw the emendationin my text.
Eth. and Latin give ‘‘ until” instead [And all their knowledge will vanish
of “when.” The error, I take it, arose away], A dittography. Lat. omits.
from the corruption of ws=“ when” 12. The greater part of his days are
into ἕως= ‘‘ until.” pain and sorrow. Ps. xc. 10. Our
By reason of the wickedness. Abraham text gives the same rendering of pam
grew old early because of the wicked- as the LXX, Syr., Chald., and Vulg,
IO

146 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
13. For calamity follows on calamity, and wound on wound,
and tribulation on tribulation, and evil tidings on evil
tidings, and illness on illness, and all evil judgments such
as these, one with another, illness and overthrow, and snow
and frost and ice, and fever, and chills, and torpor, and
famine, and death, and sword, and captivity, and all kinds
of calamities and pains.” 14. And all these will come on
an evil generation, which transgresses on the earth: their
works are uncleanness and fornication, and pollution and
abominations. 15. Then they will say: “The days of the
forefathers were many (even), unto a thousand years,
and were good; but, behold, the days of our life, if a man
has lived many, are three score years and ten, and, if he is
strong, four score years, and those evil, and there is no
peace in the days of this evil generation.” 16, And in
that generation the sons will convict their fathers and their
elders of sin and unrighteousness, and of the words of their
mouth and the great wickednesses which they perpetrate,
13-14. The calamities that befell We have herein an adumbration of the
Judah in the early decades of the actual history and the expectations of ©
second cent. B.O. the Chasids in the second cent. B.C.
13. Such as these. So Latin secundum Bousset (Z. 7. NTiiche Wissensch. 1900,
hoc ipsud=nbwp. p. 199) has already recognised that this —
chapter deals with the Maccabean move- —
One with another. Wanting in the
ment. The conclusiveness of this interLatin.
pretation will grow stronger as we proFever, and chills. So Latin. The
ceed. It is no little confirmation of
Ethiopic words are ἅπαξ λεγόμενα.
our view that we find the same events
14, Uncleanness, etc. See vii. 21 in Judaism depicted in allegorical eeeyd
note, xx. 5, xxii. 16 note. language in Eth. Enoch xe. 6-7: “But —
15. The days of our life... are behold lambs were borne by those white
three score years and ten, etc. Ps. xe. sheep, and they began to open their
10 eyes and to see and to cry to the sheep.
16. This verse points most probably But the sheep did not ery to them and
to the rise of the Chasids. These did not hear what they said to them,
proceed to challenge the creed and but were exceedingly deaf, and their
conduct of their fathers and the elders eyes were exceedingly and forcibly
(the spiritual rulers of Judaism). From blinded.” Here “the white sheep ”
their ranks (see Eth. Enoch xc. 7) arise are the faithful adherents of the theothe Maccabees. The armed resistance cracy ; the “lambs” are the Chasids,
of the latter to the Hellenising party a new and distinct party among th
is represented in ver. 20. Finally after Jews. The Chasids appeal unavailing]
years of strife the Messianic era begins to the nation at large. In the next
to set in and the years of men to grow verse (xc. 8) there is a symbolical de
many, till at last they become athousand, scription of Syria's attack on Judah,

CHAPTER XXIII. 13-20 147
and concerning their forsaking the covenant which the Lord
made between them and Him, that they should observe and
do all His commandments and His ordinances and all His
laws, without departing either to the right hand or the left.
17. For all have done evil, and every mouth speaks iniquity
and all their works are an uncleanness and an abomination,
and all their ways are pollution, uncleanness and destruction.
AB. Behold the earth will be destroyed on account of all
their works, and there will be no seed of the vine, and no
oil; for their works are altogether faithless, and they will
all perish together, beasts and cattle and birds, and all the
fish of the sea, on account of the children of men. 19.
And they will strive one with another, the young with the
old, and the old with the young, the poor with the rich,
and the lowly with the great, and the beggar with the prince,
on account of the law and the covenant; for they have
forgotten commandment, and covenant, and feasts, and
months, and Sabbaths, and jubilees, and all judgments. 20.
And they will stand (with bows and) swords and war to
Forsaking the covenant. 18. Will all perish together, beasts
i 80 and 1 Macc. i. 16 wie. the
. and birds, and all the fish of the
same charge is brought against the sea. Cf. Hos. iv. 3: also Ezek. xxxviii.
Hellenising Jews. 20; Zeph. i. 3; 4 Ezra ν. 7.
Observe and do... without... On account of the children. Lat. =
either to the... or the left. Cf. a malitia filiorum.
Went. v: 31, 32, xxviii. 13, 14. A 19. For other descriptions of the
similar statement is found in 1 Macc. Messianic woes, see Or. Sibyl. iii. 796ji. 21-22: “Heaven forbid that we 807 ; Apoc. Bar. xxvii. 1-13, xlviii.
should forsake the law and the ordi- 31-37, Ixx. 2-10; 4 Ezra v. 1-12, vi.
nances ... fo go aside from our wor- 14-18, 21-24; Matt. xxiv. 6-29 with
ship to the right hand or the left” (παρ- Synoptic parallels ; Sota ix. 15 sq. See
ελθεῖν τὴν λατρίαν ἡμῶν δεξιὰν ἢ ἀρι- Schiirer, Gesch. d. jiid. Volkes,? ii.
στεράν). The phrase is most probably 523 sq.
historical. The poor with the rich, and (Ὁ omits)
17. All have done evil. Cf. 1 Macc. the lowly with the great. Apoc. Bar.
i, 52, 98, ‘‘ And from the people were lxx. 3-4.
gathered unto them many, every one For they have forgotten commandthat had forsaken the law and they did ment, and covenant, etc. From a general
evil things in the land.” - description of the Messianic woes the
Every mouth speaks iniquity. Cf. writer passes on to a definite descrip1 Mace. ii. 6, “And (Mattathias) saw tion of the Maccabean times, and the
the blasphemies . . . in Judah and in Apostate Jews.
Jerusalem.” Judgments, 1.6, determinations, dePollution, etc. See note on xxii. 16, cisions.
18-24. The Messianic woes. 20. This verse describes the warlike

148 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
turn them back into the way; but they will not return
until much blood has been shed on the earth, one by another.
21. And those who have escaped will not return from their
wickedness to the way of righteousness, but they will all
exalt themselves to deceit and wealth, that they may each
take all that is his neighbour’s, and they will name the
great name, but not in truth and not in righteousness, and
they will defile the holy of holies with their uncleanness
and the corruption of their pollution. 22. And a great
punishment will befall the deeds of this generation from the
Lord, and He will give them over to the sword and to judgment and to captivity, and to be plundered and devoured.
23. And He will wake up against them the sinners of the
Gentiles, who have neither mercy nor compassion, and who
will respect the person of none, neither old nor young, nor
efforts of Judas the Maccabee to force but the Hellenising party under the ~
the apostates to return to Judaism. In high priest Alkimus still pursued its —
the year 162, owing to internal divisions, own aims. ‘This party is said in our —
Syria felt it advisable to make terms text . to ‘“‘name the great name” —
with the Jews and allow them ‘‘to and to “defile the holy of holies with —
walk after their own laws as aforetime ” their uncleanness.” Though it embraced |
(1 Macc. vi. 55-62; 2 Macc. xiii. 23- nearly the entire Sanhedrin, it was —
26; Joseph. Ant. xii. 9. 6-7). This opposed by the Maccabees, the Chasids, —
understanding was observed by all the and the great mass of the Jews. :
subsequent kings of Syria. Hence from Great name. Cf. Jos. vii. 9. On
162 onward the struggle was not so the phrase “‘name the .. . name,” cf.
much to preserve Judaism against the LXX of Is. xxvi. 13; Acts xix. 13; 2)
attempts of Syria to crush it out of Tim. ii. 19.
existence, as to determine the question 22-23. These verses describe the
whether the Hellenising faction or the sufferings of the nation during the civil
national party should control the nation. wars and internal troubles that took
Syria henceforth intervened in support place down to Simon’s high priesthood
now of the one now of the other of the (142-135 B.c.).
two Jewish parties. (See Schurer, op. cif. 23. This verse refers in language
1. 214; [Eng. transl.], I. i. 224 sq.) borrowed from past prophecy to the
(With bows and). Supplied from frequent invasions of Palestine by the
the Latin. Syrians or possibly by some unknown
The way. Cf. Is. xxx. 21, “This is nation from the north as in Zeph. i. 7 ;
the way, walk ye in it.” Cf. the use Jer. iii.-vi.; like Gog and Magog i
of ἡ ὁδός in Acts ix. 2) xix. 9, 235 Ezek. xxxviii.-xxxix, |
xxiv. 22. Have neither mercy nor compassion.
21. Those who have escaped will not So Jeremiah (vi. 23) describes the nation
return . . . to the way of righteousness. that was to invade Judah : ‘they are
By the treaty of 162 referred to in the cruel and have no mercy.”
preceding note, the religious liberties Neither old nor young. Cf. Ezek,
of Judaism were secured against Syria; x, Ὁ.

CHAPTER XXIII. 21-27 149
any one, for they are more wicked and strong to do evil
than all the children of men.
And they will use violence against Israel and transgression against Jacob,
And much blood will be shed upon the earth,
And there will be none to gather and none to bury.
24, In those days they will cry aloud,
And call and pray that they may be saved from the
hand of the sinners, the Gentiles;
But none will be saved.
25. And the heads of the children will be white with grey hair,
And a child of three weeks will appear old like a man
of one hundred years,
And their stature will be destroyed by tribulation and
oppression.
26. And in those days the children will begin to study the
laws,
And to seek the commandments,
And to return to the path of righteousness.
27. And the days will begin to grow many and increase
amongst those children of men,
None to gather and none to bury, i.e, Hor’ ἂν γεινόμενοι πολιοκρόταφοι τελέthe fallen. The phrase is from Jer. θωσιν.
viii. 2.
This was to be one of the signs (as
24. Of the sinners, the Gentiles=
in our text) which foreshadowed the
ἁμαρτωλῶν ἐθνῶν. The Ethiopic transcoming of the kingdom according to
lator took these words to be in apposiSibyll. Or. ii. 155:
tion. He ought rather to have taken
the second as dependent on the first. Ἔκ γενετῆς παῖδες πολιοκρόταφοι
Hence «« sinners of the Gentiles.” See γεγαῶτε-.
verse 23 and Gal. ii. 15 where the See also Latin apocalyptic fragment
phrase is reproduced somewhat differ- in the Cambridge Texts and Studies,
ently: ἐξ ἐθνῶν ἁμαρτωλοί. To the τιν, oy) Do 184:
writer the terms “Gentiles” and ‘‘sin- 26. It might seem possible that ver.
ners”’ were practically synonymous, 16 originally followed ver. 26.
25. Heads of the children will be 26-30. The renewed study of the
white, ete. Hesiod, Op. et Dies, 180- Law followed by a change for the better
181, tells how in the iron age children and the gradual approach to Messianic
will be born with hoary temples : blessedness. With this spiritual transΖεὺς δ᾽ ὀλέσει kal τοῦτο γένος μερόπων formation of Israel (cf. 1. 5) there will
ἀνθρώπων take place a corresponding transforma-

150 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Till their days draw nigh to one thousand years, |
And to a greater number of years than (before) was the |
number of the days. |
28. And there will be no old man |
Nor one who is not satisfied with his days, ;
For all will be (as) children and youths.
29. And all their days they will complete and live in peace
and in joy,
And there will be no Satan nor any evil destroyer;
For all their days will be days of blessing and healing.
30. And at that time the Lord will heal His servants,
tion of the heaven and theearth. This verses 23-27. Hence the final judgment
idea appears also in Is. lxv. 17 sqq. can occur only at the close of this
(See 1, 29 note; iv. 26.) This is their kingdom. The kingdom is therefore of
final renewal. temporary duration—a conclusion which
27. Nigh to one thousand years. In presents some difficulty in the face of
the Messianic kingdom men will attain 1. 17, 18, 29, but which agrees best
to the age originally designed for them with all other passages referring to the
by God. Adam did not attain to 1000 final judgment in this book. In that
years because of his sin ; see iv. 30. case the resurrection of the righteous
28. The writer appears to have Is. and the final judgment are disjoined,
Ixv. 20 before him but avoids making any if this verse asserts that the righteous
reference to the presence of the wicked rise to share in the kingdom. The
in the consummated kingdom, as is done eschatology of our author would thus
in Isaiah. Yet apparently they are pre- differ alike from that of Eth. Enoch
supposed in ver, 30, though according to lxxxiii.-xc. (before 161 B.G.), Test. —
ver. 29 there are none such. They are Jud. 25, Sim. 6, Zeb. 10, Benj. 10,
gradually eliminated. Cf. Test. Levi 18. where the final judgment precedes —
Who is not satisfied. I have added the the kingdom and the righteous are
negative from a comparison of Is, 1χν. 20. raised to enjoy it for ever, and from
29. Jn Joy. Cf. Is. lxv. 14. that of Eth. Enoch xci.-civ. (104-95
No Satan. Cf. Assumpt. Mos. x. 1. B.0.) where the final judgment comes
This statement need not mean very in at the close of the kingdom and the ©
much : cf. xl. 9, xlvi. 2, 1. 5. righteous are not raised to share in it, —
Blessing and healing. Cf. i. 29. but in a blessed immortality. 3
30. If this verse refers to the resur- But the teaching of our text agrees
rection, the righteous are raised to share rather with that of Eth. Enoch xci,-civ. ;
in this (temporary?) Messianic king- for the words «« will rise up” have appar: |
dom. If ver. 11 is correctly handed ently no reference to the resurrection, |
down and to be taken literally, it follows and mean merely that when God heals
that the final judgment precedes the His servants (cf. Rev. xxii. 2) they
Messianic kingdom. But the nature of become strong. The clauses in ver. 29,
this kingdom precludes such a view. “all their days will be days of blessing —
It is to be introduced gradually pars and healing” and in i. 29, “for healing
passu with the spiritual transformation . . . for all the elect of Israel” render
of man. Such agradual and progressive this view the most probable. In this
transformation does not admit of the case there is no resurrection to this
insertion of the final judgment at any temporary Messianic kingdom, and thus
single point of its evolution. Nor is the eschatology harmonises perfectly
there a hint of such a judgment in with that of Eth. Enoch xci.-civ.

CHAPTERS XXIII. 28-XXIV. [51
And they will rise up and see great peace,
And drive out their adversaries.
And the righteous will see and be thankful,
And rejoice with joy for ever and ever,
And will see all their judgments and all their curses on
their enemies.
bl. And their bones will rest in the earth,
And their spirits will have much joy,
And they will know that it is the Lord who executes
judgment,
And shows mercy to hundreds and thousands and to all
that love Him.
52. And do thou, Moses, write down these words; for thus
are they written, and they record (them) on the heavenly
tables for a testimony for the generations for ever.
Isaac at the Well of Vision, 1 (cf. Gen. xxv. 11). sau sells
his birthright, 2-7 (cf. Gen. xxv. 29-34). Isaae goes
down to Gerar, 8. Dealings between Isaac and Abimelech, 9-97. Isaac curses the Philistines, 28-32. (Ct.
Ven: xxvi. 1-0, 11, 13-25, 32, 33.)
XXIV. And it came to pass after the death of Abraham,
that the Lord blessed Isaac his son, and he arose from
Hebron and went and dwelt at the Well of the Vision in
the first year of the third week of this jubilee, seven years.
2073 A.M.
2. And in the first year of the fourth week a famine began
2080 A.M.
See great peace, i.e. “enjoy great And to aii (acd). 6 reads ““ of all.”
peace.” The word ‘‘peace” may go XXIV. 1. Well of the Vision. Cf.
back to coy: in that case the sense Gen. xxv. 11. The full name is Beer
would be «enjoy sound health,” Lahai-roi= “the well of the living One
Drive out their adversaries. Such a that seeth me.” Cf. also Gen. xvi. 14,
conception is in keeping with the xxiv. 62.
gradual growth of the kingdom. First year of the third week of this
31. After death there is no resurrec- jubilee. This is the forty-third jubilee.
tion of the body, but a blessed immor- 2. Cf. Gen. xxvi. 1. Observe that
tality awaiting the spirit as in Eth. our author transposes Gen. xxvi. 1
Enoch xci. 10, xcii. 3, ciii. 8, 4 (see before xxv. 29 sqq. in order possibly to
my Eschatology, pp. 203 sqq.). explain Esau’s hunger.

152 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
in the land, besides the first famine, which had been in the
days of Abraham. 3. And Jacob sod lentil pottage, and
Esau came from the field hungry. And he said to Jacob
his brother: “ Give me of this red pottage.” And Jacob said
to him: “Sell to me thy [primogeniture, this] birthright and
I will give thee bread, and also some of this lentil pottage.”
4, And Esau said in his heart: “I shall die; of what profit
to me is this birthright?” And he said to Jacob: “I give
it to thee.’ 5. And Jacob said: “Swear to me, this day,”
and he sware unto him. 6. And Jacob gave his brother
Esau bread and pottage, and he eat till he was satisfied,
and Esau despised his birthright; for this reason was Esau’s
name called Edom, on account of the red pottage which
Jacob gave him for his birthright. 7. And Jacob became
the elder, and Esau was brought down from his dignity. 8.
And the famine was over the land, and Isaac departed to go
down into Egypt in the second year of this week, and went
to the king of the Philistines to Gerar, unto Abimelech.
9, And the Lord appeared unto him and said unto him:
“Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land that I shall
tell thee of, and sojourn in this land, and I shall be with thee
and bless thee. 10. For to thee and to thy seed shall I give
all this land, and I shall establish My oath which I sware
unto Abraham thy father, and I shall multiply thy seed as
the stars of heaven, and shall give unto thy seed all this
land. 11. And in thy seed will all the nations of the
earth be blessed, because thy father obeyed My voice, and
kept My charge and My commandments, and My laws, and
8-6. Cf. Gen. xxv. 29-34. And I will give... pottage. Not
3. Red pottage. Cf. Gen. xxv. 30, in Gen. xxv. 31. i ህ
Text =“‘wheaten pottage. Here za- 6. saw 5 name: literally Esau,
Sernaj = πυροῦ which is corrupt for his name (a0). cd read “Esau.” —
πυρροῦ. Red pottage. Same corruption as in
Se=l ἀπlόδο υ (LXX)= Mass. man. ver. 3. q
ut 8. Famine. xxvi. 1.
Thy (primogeniture, this] birthright. Second year of this week. See note
Here we have two renderings of Ta on date in ver. 1.
πρωτοτόκιά σου. 9-12, Cf. Gen. xxvi. 2-6.

CHAPTER XXIV. 3-20 153
My ordinances, and My covenant; and now obey My voice
and dwell in this land.” 12. And he dwelt in Gerar three 2080-2101
weeks of years. 13. And Abimelech charged concerning PR
him, and concerning all that was his, saying: “Any man
that shall touch him or aught that is his shall surely die.” 14.
And Isaac waxed strong among the Philistines, and he got
many possessions, oxen and sheep and camels and asses and
a great household. 15. And he sowed in the land of the
Philistines and brought in a hundred-fold, and Isaac became
exceedingly great, and the Philistines envied him, 16.
Now all the wells which the servants of Abraham had dug
during the life of Abraham, the Philistines had stopped them
after the death of Abraham, and filled them with earth.
17. And Abimelech said unto Isaac: “Go from us, for thou
art much mightier than we”; and Isaac departed thence in
the first year of the seventh week, and sojourned in the 2101 a.m.
valleys of Gerar. 18. And they digged again the wells of
water which the servants of Abraham, his father, had digged,
and which the Philistines had closed after the death of
Abraham his father, and he called their names as Abraham
his father had named them. 19. And the servants of Isaac
dug a well in the valley, and found living water, and the
shepherds of Gerar strove with the shepherds of Isaac,
saying: “The water is ours”; and Isaac called the name of
the well “ Perversity,” because they had been perverse with
us. 20. And they dug a second well, and they strove for
12. Isaac stayed at the Well of the water” and the Latin merely ‘‘ aqua,”
Vision seven years and in Gerar twenty- but the ze (=this) is merely a transone. lation of the Greek article as is fre13. Cf. Gen. xxvi.11. No reference quently the case. Hence Eth. and Lat.
is made in our text to Isaac’s lie regard- attest the same text.
ing Rebecca.
The well. Eth. has “that well”
14-17. Cf. Gen. xxvi. 13-17.
but the we’etfi is merely a translation
14. Household. So Latin ministerium
of the Greek art. as is frequently the
= may. Our text renders loosely “‘poscase. Latin has merely “ putei,”
session.”
18-20. Cf. Gen. xxvi. 18-22. Perversity. Gen. xxvi. 20 has pyy,
19. The water. Here Eth. has “ this LXX, ἀδικία.

154 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
that also, and he called its name “Enmity.” And he arose
from thence and they digged another well, and for that they
strove not, and he called the name of it “ Room,” and Isaac
said: “ Now the Lord hath made room for us, and we have
increased in the land.” 21. And he went up from thence
to the Well of the Oath, in the first year of the first week in
2108 Α.Μ.
the forty-fourth jubilee. 22. And the Lord appeared to
him that night, on the new moon of the first month, and —
said unto him: “I am the God of Abraham thy father; |
fear not, for I am with thee, and shall bless thee and shall —
surely multiply thy seed as the sand of the earth, for the
sake of Abraham my servant.” 23. And he built an altar
there, which Abraham his father had first built, and he ©
called upon the name of the Lord, and he offered sacrifice to i
the God of Abraham his father. 24. And they digged a ~
well and they found living water. 25. And the servants ~
of Isaac digged another well and did not find water, and
they went and told Isaac that they had not found water,
and Isaac said: “I have sworn this day to the Philistines |
and this thing has been announced to us” 26. And he
called the name of that place the “ Well of the Oath”; for
there he had sworn to Abimelech and Ahuzzath his friend and
Phicol the prefect of his host. 27. And Isaac knew that
day that under constraint he had sworn to them to make ~
peace with them. 28. And Isaac on that day cursed the
20. Enmity=sél’é emended with the LXX thus imply Ns» xb in Gen.
Latin (inimicitias) from sabib= xxvi. 32, but Mass., Sam., Syr. read 19
“narrow.” The corruption is native instead of xb and connect it with the
to the text. It most probably arose preceding verb.
from a scribe’s wishing to make an 26. Cf. Gen. xxvi. 33.
antithesis between the name of this Ahuzzath. Eth. ’Akézat.
well and that of the next ‘‘ Room.” 28-32. The hatred expressed in these
21-26. Cf. Gen. xxvi. 23-25, 32-33. verses is hardly intelligible save in a
24-25. There is mention of only one contemporary of the wars waged by the
well in Gen. xxvi. 25. Maccabeans against the Philistine cities.
25. The implication of our text is This passage is here introduced gratuithat owing to Isaac having made ἃ tously into the narrative (so also Bousset,
covenant with Abimelech his servants Ζ,. 7. NT liche Wissensch, 1890, p. 200).
failed to find water. Of the five chief cities of the Philistines
They had not found. Our text and (Jos. xiii. 3) four were still in existence

CHAPTER XXIV. 21-30 155
Philistines and said: “Cursed be the Philistines unto the
day of wrath and indignation from the midst of all nations;
may God make them a derision and a curse and an object
of wrath and indignation in the hands of the sinners the
Gentiles and in the hands of the Kittim. 29. And whoever escapes the sword of the enemy and the Kittim, may
the righteous nation root out in judgment from under
heaven; for they will be the enemies and foes of my
children throughout their generations upon the earth.
30. And no remnant will be left to them,
Nor one that will be saved on the day of the wrath of
judgment ;
For for destruction and rooting out and expulsion from
the earth is the whole seed of the Philistines (reserved),
And there will no longer be left for these Caphtorim a
name or a seed on the earth.
in Maccabean times, Askelon, Ashdod, tians — particularly the latter: see
Gaza and Ekron. Of these Ekron Herodotus i. 105, ii. 157, 159.
(Ακκαρών) was given by Alex. Balas to Kittim (ons, Κιτιεῖς, Κίτιοι, Χετιείμ,
Jonathan for his services (1 Mace. x. Χεττάν). These were descended from
89; Joseph. Ant. xiii. 4. 4), and Javan according to Gen. x. 4 and,
Askelon submitted to him (1 Mace. therefore, belonged to the Graeco-Latin
x. 60, xi. 60). Ashdod ("Afwros) races. Their country is usually identisuffered severely under Judas the Mac- fied with Cyprus. In Dan. xi. 30 the
cabee (1 Macc. v. 68) and was captured, Kittim are undoubtedly the Romans,
put to the sword, and burnt by Jona- whereas in 1 Mace. i. 1, viii. 5 they
than (147 B.c,); the temple of Dagon are the Macedonians. It is to the
likewise and all that had taken refuge Macedonians that our text refers. Gaza
ini tw ere burnt (1 Macc. x. 84 ; Joseph. was captured by Alexander the Great
Ant. xiii. 4. 4). It was again reduced (Joseph. Ant. xi. 8. 4).
to ashes by John Hyrcanus (1 Macc. 29. The righteous nation. Judah
xvi. 10). As regards Gaza its suburbs under the Maccabees. See note on 28were burnt by Jonathan and the city 32 above.
forced to capitulate (1 Mace. xi. 61-69), Generations. Emended with Latin.
It was afterwards destroyed by; Alex. Text = “days.”
Jannaeus (Joseph. Ant. xiii. 13. 3). These Caphtorim. ‘Thes=e ”El l
Our text reflects correctly the attitude emend. from kuélli= “all” with Latin.
of Judah towards the cities of the Text= ‘‘all Caphtorim.” According to
Philistines in the second cent. B.c. Amos ix. 7; Deut. 11, 23; Jer. xlvii.
28. Sinners, the Gentiles. The Latin 4, the Philistines came originally from
has here “ peccatoris populi.” Cf. xxiii. Caphtor. On the various views as to
24. The Philistines suffered severely its locality see Hncyc. Bib. 1, 698at the hands of the Assyrians and Egyp- 699.

156 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
31. For though he ascend unto heaven,
Thence will he be brought down,
And though he make himself strong on earth,
Thence will he be dragged forth,
And though he hide himself amongst the nations,
Even from thence will he be rooted out;
And though he descend into Sheol,
There also will his condemnation be great,
And there also he will have no peace.
32, And if he go into captivity, |
By the hands of those that seek his life will they slay
him on the way, 1
And neither name nor seed will be left to him on all
the earth;
For into eternal malediction will he depart.”
33. And thus is it written and engraved concerning him |
on the heavenly tables, to do unto him on the day of —
judgment, so that he may be rooted out of the earth. |
Rebecca admonishes Jacob not to marry a Canaanitish woman, ἷ
1-3. Jacob promises to marry a daughter of Laban |
despite the urgent requests of Esau that he should marry
a Canaanitish woman, 4-10. Rebecca blesses Jacob, 11- |
23. (Cf Gen. xxviii. 1-4.)
XXV. And in the second year of this week in this 4
2109 A.M.
jubilee, Rebecca called Jacob her son, and spake unto him, ©
saying: “ My son, do not take thee a wife of the daughters —
of Canaan, as Esau, thy brother, who took him two wives of —
the daughters of Canaan, and they have embittered my soul -
31-32. Based on Amos ix. 2-4. Cf. 1. Second year of this week in this —
Ps. exxxix. 8 sqq. jubilee. See note on ver. 4.
31. Though he make himself strong. Do not take thee a wife, etc. Cf. Gen.—
Lat.=ubi fugiens erit. The corruption xxviii. 1. |
seems to have originated in the Hebrew. Esau... who took him two wives, 4
XXV. 1-3. Observe that our author etc. Cf. Gen. xxvi. 34. os
transposes Gen. xxviii. 1-4 before Gen. Embittered my soul. Cf. Gen. xxvii. —
xxvii., which contains Jacob’s inter- 46, xxvi. 35.
ception of Esau’s blessing.

CHAPTERS XXIV. 31-XXV. 8 157
with all their unclean deeds: for all their deeds are fornication and lust, and there is no righteousness with them, for
(their deeds) are evil. 2. And I, my son, love thee exceedingly, and my heart and my affection bless thee every hour
of the day and watch of the night. 3. And now, my son,
hearken to my voice, and do the will of thy mother, and
do not take thee a wife of the daughters of this land, but
only of the house of my father, and of my father’s kindred.
Thou wilt take thee a wife of the house of my father, and
the Most High God will bless thee, and thy children will be
a righteous generation and a holy seed.” 4. And then
spake Jacob to Rebecca, his mother, and said unto her:
“ Behold, mother, I am nine weeks of years old, and I neither
know nor have I touched any woman, nor have I betrothed
myself to any, nor even think of taking me a wife of the
daughters of Canaan. 5. For I remember, mother, the
words of Abraham, our father, for he commanded me not to
take a wife of the daughters of Canaan, but to take mea
wife from the seed of my father’s house and from my
kindred. 6. I have heard before that daughters have been
born to Laban, thy brother, and I have set my heart on them
to take a wife from amongst them. 7. And for this reason
I have guarded myself in my spirit against sinning or being
corrupted in all my ways throughout all the days of my life ;
for with regard to lust and fornication, Abraham, my father,
gave me many commands. 8, And, despite all that he has
commanded me, these two and twenty years my brother has
3. Cf. Gen. xxviii. 1, 2. the blessing: fourteen years he spent
4, Nine weeks. If the date in ver. hidden in the house of Eber and seven
1 is right, it follows that since Jacob years he served for Rachael: accordingly
was then sixty-three years old, he was he was eighty-four when he married, but
born in 2046. This agrees with MSS Esau was forty.” See also Seder Olam ii.
reading in xix. 13; but the estimate I neither know... any woman.
based on that reading is at variance with Syncellus (i. 197) wrongly attributes
that which follows from xlv. 13, which this statement to Josephus : ᾿Ἰώσηππός
assigns Jacob’s birth to the year 2041. φησιν ὅτι ὁ ᾿Ιακὼβ ἐτῶν ὑπάρχων £Y
With the statement as to Jacob’s age ef. οὐκ ἔγνω ὅλως γυναῖκα, ὡς αὐτὸς ἐξεῖπε
Ber. rabba 68: ‘* Our father Jacob was τῇ μητρὶ Ῥεβέκκᾳ.
sixty-three years old when he received 7. With regard to... fornication

158 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
striven with me, and spoken frequently to me and said: ‘My
brother, take to wife a sister of my two wives’; but I refuse
to do as he has done. 9. I swear before thee, mother, that
all the days of my life I will not take me a wife from the
daughters of the seed of Canaan, and I will not act wickedly
as my brother has done. 10. Fear not mother; be assured —
that I shall do thy will and walk in uprightness, and
not corrupt my ways for ever. 11. And thereupon she
lifted up her face to heaven and extended the fingers of her
hands, and opened her mouth and blessed the Most High
God, who had created the heaven and the earth, and she
gave Him thanks and praise. 12. And she said: “ Blessed ©
be the Lord God, and may His holy name be blessed for —
ever and ever, who has given me Jacob as a pure son and —
a holy seed; for he is Thine, and Thine shall his seed be f
continually and throughout all the generations for evermore. i
13. Bless him, O Lord, and place in my mouth the blessing i
of righteousness, that I may bless him.” 14. And at that
hour, when the spirit of righteousness descended into her —
mouth, she placed both her hands on the head of Jacob, and
said : |
15. “ Blessed art thou, Lord of righteousness and God of the
ages ;
And may He bless thee beyond all the generations of men.
May He give thee, my son, the path of righteousness,
And reveal righteousness to thy seed.
16, And may He make thy sons many during thy life,
And may they arise according to the number of the
months of the year.
Abraham... gave me many com- 14. Spirit of righteousness (or
mands. Of. xx. 4, xxxix. 6. “truth”)=7d πνεῦμα τῆς ἀληθείας.
8. These two and twenty years. Cf. John xiv.17, χν. 96, xvi.13. So
This agrees with the statement of abd. Cf. xxx. 12. ὁ reads ‘‘ Holy
Esau’s age in Gen. xxvi. 34, where he Spirit.” The latter is Jewish also: cf.
is said to have been forty when he Is. lxiii. 10, 11 “His holy Spirit”
married. Esau was now sixty-three. (wap mi). With the idea conveyed by

CHAPTER XXV. 9-21 159
And may their sons become many and great beyond the
stars of heaven,
And their numbers be more than the sand of the sea.
17. And may He give them this goodly land—as He said He
would give it to Abraham and to his seed after him
alway—
And may they hold it as a possession for ever.
18. And may I see (born) unto thee, my son, blessed children
during my life,
And a blessed and holy seed may all thy seed be.
19. And as thou hast refreshed thy mother’s spirit during
+myt life,
The womb of her that bare thee blesses thee,
[My affection] and my breasts bless thee
And my mouth and my tongue praise thee greatly.
20. Increase and spread over the earth,
And may thy seed be perfect in the joy of heaven and
earth for ever ;
And may thy seed rejoice,
And on the great day of peace may it have peace.
21. And may thy name and thy seed endure to all the ages,
And may the Most High God be their God,
And may the God of righteousness dwell with them,
And by them may His sanctuary be built unto all the ages,
both phrases cf. Deut. xxxiv. 9 the 19. Hast refreshed (ab). cd “has
spirit of wisdom” (mpan my); Num. given thee rest.”
xi. 25, 26, 29; Neh. ix. 20; Is. xi. 2. +Myt. Read “thy,” as the sense
17. As He said He would give it to requires it.
Abraham and to his seed... alway. [My affection]. I have bracketed
Of. Luke i. 55, καθὼς ἐλάλησεν. . . τῷ this phrase ; for it comes in awkwardly
᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ τῷ σπέρματι αὐτοῦ εἰς between “ wombs’? « breasts,” «« mouth,”
τὸν αἰῶνα. The words in Luke recall and “tongue.” We should expect
both Mic. vii. 20 and our text. Observe an ‘‘and” to precede it. It may be
that this statement in Luke is added a dittography and have originated as
parenthetically or explanatorily as in a false alternative rendering of nn,
our text. “womb.”
Possession for ever. Cf. the Thucy- 21. His sanctuary. . . unto all the
didean phrase κτῆμα és ἀεί. ages. Cf. i. 29,

160 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
22. Blessed be he that blesseth thee,
And all flesh that curseth thee falsely may it be
cursed.”
23. And she kissed him, and said to him:
“May the Lord of the world love thee
As the heart of thy mother and her affection rejoice in
thee and bless thee.”
And she ceased from blessing.
Isaac sends Esau for venison, 1-4. Rebecca wmstructs Jacob to
obtain the blessing, 5-9. Jacob under the person of
Esau obtains it, 10-24. Hsaw brings in his venison
and by his importunity obtains a blessing, 25-34.
Threatens Jacob, 35. (Cf. Gen. xxvii.)
XXVI. And in the seventh year of this week Isaac
2114 A.M,
called Esau, his elder son, and said unto him: “I am old,
my son, and behold my eyes are dim in seeing, and I know 4
not the day of my death. 2. And now take thy hunting
weapons thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field,
and hunt and catch me (venison), my son, and make me
savoury meat, such as my soul loveth, and bring it to me
that I may eat, and that my soul may bless thee before I
die.” 3. But Rebecca heard Isaac speaking to Esau. 4, And
Esau went forth early to the field to hunt and catch and bring |
home to his father. 5. And Rebecca called Jacob, her son,
and said unto him: “Behold, I heard Isaac, thy father,
speak unto Esau, thy brother, saying: ‘Hunt for me, and
make me savoury meat, and bring (it) to me that I may eat
and bless thee before the Lord before I die. 6. And now,
my son, obey my voice in that which I command thee: Go
22. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 29. rendering of Gen. xxvii. 1 which=“ di
23. Cf. Sir. iv. 10. so that he could not see (πΝ 1). "ἢ
i 2. Hunt and cat= cθήρhευσ ον κα
XXVI. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 1-41. ἐπιλάβου, a loose rendering of t
1. Ave dim in seeing. An imperfect phrase in Gen, xxvii. 3.

CHAPTERS XXV. 22-XXVI. 16 161
to thy flock and fetch me two good kids of the goats, and I
will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he
loves, and thou shalt bring (it) to thy father that he may
eat and bless thee before the Lord before he die, and that
thou mayst be blessed.” 7. And Jacob said to Rebecca his
mother: “Mother, I shall not withhold anything which my
father would eat, and which would please him: only I fear,
my mother, that he will recognise my voice and wish to
touch me. 8. And thou knowest that I am smooth, and
Esau, my brother, is hairy, and I shall appear before his eyes
as an evildoer, and shall do a deed which he had not commanded me, and he will be wroth with me, and I shall bring
upon myself a curse, and not a blessing.” 9. And Rebecca,
his mother, said unto him: “ Upon me be thy curse, my son
only obey my voice.” 10. And Jacob obeyed the voice of
Rebecca, his mother, and went and fetched two good and
fat kids of the goats, and brought them to his mother, and
his mother made them (savoury meat) such as he loved.
11. And Rebecca took the goodly raiment of Esau, her
elder son, which was with her in the house, and she clothed
Jacob, her younger son, (with them), and she put the skins
of the kids upon his hands and on the exposed parts of his
neck, 12. And she gave the meat and the bread which she
had prepared into the hand of her son Jacob. 13. And
Jacob went in to his father and said: “I am thy son: I
have done according as thou badest me: arise and sit and
eat of that which I have caught, father, that thy soul may
bless me.” 14. And Isaac said to his son: “ How hast
thou found so quickly, my son?” 15, And Jacob said:
“ Because (the Lord) thy God caused me to find.” 16. And
7. First half of verse added by our him” against Latin and Gen. xxvii, 17.
author in favour of Jacob. This addition is found also in the
10. (Savoury meat). Added from Eth. version of Gen. xxvii. 17.
Latin. 15. (The Lord). Supplied from Latin.
12. Gave. Here Eth. adds “to Caused me to find (=’arkabani 6c).
Il

162 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Isaac said unto him: “Come near, that I may feel thee, my
son, if thou art my son Esau or not.” 17. And Jacob went
near to Isaac, his father, and he felt him and said: 18.
“The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of
Esau,” and he discerned him not, because it was a dispensation from heaven to remove his power of perception and
=
Isaac discerned not, for his hands were hairy as (his brother) j
Esau’s, so that he blessed him. 19. And he said: “Art
thou my son Esau?” and he said: “I am thy son”:
and he said, “Bring near to me that I may eat of that
which thou hast caught, my son, that my soul may bless
thee.” 20. And he brought near to him, and he did eat,
and he brought him wine and he drank. 21. And Isaac,
L
his father, said unto him: “Come near and kiss me,
my son.” And he came near and kissed him. 22. And
he smelled the smell of his raiment, and he blessed him and ~
said: “Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a
(full) field which the Lord hath blessed.
23. And may the Lord give thee of the dew of heaven
And of the dew of the earth, and plenty of corn and oil:
Let nations serve thee,
And peoples bow down to thee.
a= helped me”; d=‘ caused me to I am he who will receive the ten comsee.” Latin gives direxit. In my mandments (which begin with the
text I emended the phrase into arti ani words “J am”), but Esau is thy first
=direxit, comparing xxi. 2 where the born.
Eth, has this verb as the equivalent of 21. Come near. Latin adds “to me.”
dirigere in the Latin. But the read- So also LXX and Vulg. of Gen. xxvii.
ing of bc may be right as Praetorius 26.
thinks. 22. (Full). Added from the Latin.
18. Because it was a dispensation So Sam., LXX, and Vulg. of Gen, xxvii.
from heaven. This clause is borrowed 27. Mass. omits.
from 1 Kings xii. 15; cf. 2 Chron. 23. Give the. bed add “and
x. 15. multiply thee.” a transposes it before
His power of perception, literally, tt may the Lord give thee.”
«his spirit.” Dew of the earth. The same render-
(His brother). Added from the ing of τῆς πιότητος τῆς γῆς is found in
Latin. the Eth. version of Gen. xxvii. 28.
19. Jam thy son. For an analogous And plenty. MSS add against
evasion, Beer compares Ber. rabba 65: parallelism and Gen. xxvii. 28 before
“T am Esau the first born” (Gen. “plenty” the clause “may He give
xxvii. 24). R. Levi said: Jacob meant: plentifully to thee.”

CHAPTER XXVI. 17-31 163
24. Be lord over thy brethren,
And let thy mother’s sons bow down to thee;
And may all the blessings wherewith the Lord hath
blessed me and blessed Abraham, my father,
Be imparted to thee and to thy seed for ever:
Cursed be he that curseth thee,
And blessed be he that blesseth thee.”
25. And it came to pass as soon as Isaac had made an end
of blessing his son Jacob, and Jacob had gone forth from
Isaac his father the hid himself andt Esau, his brother,
came in from his hunting. 26. And he also made savoury
meat, and brought (it) to his father, and said unto his father :
“Let my father arise, and eat of my venison that thy soul
may bless me.” 27. And Isaac, his father, said unto him:
“Who art thou?” And he said unto him: “I am thy first
born, thy son Esau: I have done as thou hast commanded
me.” 28. And Isaac was very greatly astonished, and said:
“Who is he that hath hunted and caught and brought (it)
to me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have
blessed him: (and) he shall be blessed, and all his seed for
ever.” 29. And it came to pass when Esau heard the
words of his father Isaac that he cried with an exceeding
great and bitter cry, and said unto his father: “ Bless
me, (even) me also, father.” 30. And he said unto him:
“Thy brother came with guile, and hath taken away thy
blessing.” And he said: “Now I know why his name is
named Jacob: behold, he hath supplanted me these two
times: he took away my birth-right, and now he hath taken
away my blessing.” 31. And he said: “Hast thou not
24, The blessings wherewith the Lord 28. Hunted and caught. See note
. » » blessed Abraham, etc. Cf. Gen. on ver. 2.
xxviii. 4. 30. Iknow why (or “how”)=olda ὡς.
25. tHe hid himself and}. This looks This may be a corruption of δικαίως.
like an addition to the text. Read In that case the text would agree with
“that.” Gen. xxvii. 36.

164 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
reserved a blessing for me, father?” and Isaac answered and
said unto Esau:
“Behold, I have made him thy lord,
And all his brethren have I given to him for servants,
And with plenty of corn and wine and oil have I
strengthened him :
And what now shall I do for thee, my son?”
32. And Esau said to Isaac, his father :
“ Hast thou but one blessing, O father?
Bless me, (even) me also, father” :
And Esau lifted up his voice and wept. 33. And Isaac
answered and said unto him:
“Behold, far from the dew of the earth shall be thy
dwelling,
And far from the dew of heaven from above.
34, And by thy sword wilt thou live,
And thou wilt serve thy brother.
And it shall come to pass when thou becomest
great,
And dost shake his yoke from off thy neck,
Thou wilt sin a complete sin unto death,
And thy seed will be rooted out from under heaven.”
35. And Esau kept threatening Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him, and he said in his
33. Dew of the earth. See note on remove his yoke from off thy neck.”
verse 23. Similarly in the Jerusalem and Ps,-Jon.
84. Becomest gre=a abtaik a (so δ). Targums and in Ber. rabba 67. This —
ac=“refusest” (’abaika) which is (1) a passage in our text is attributed to ©
corruption of the former. dg is corrupt Genesis by Syncellus, i. 202: τῷ Ἡσαῦ
but supports 6. The text here agrees ἔφη ἐν ταῖς εὐλογίαις ὁ ᾿Ισαάκ, ἔσται
with the Sam, s1xn(Gen. xxvii. 40) which δὲ ἡνίκα ἂν καθέλῃς καὶ ἐκλύσῃς τὸν
is the niphal or hiphal of nN. Mass. = Jn ζυγὸν αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦτραχήλοσυο υ πλημ- —
as to the meaning of which the versions μελήσῃς εἰς θάνατον. Glycas (p. 2685)
vary. LXX has καθέλῃς = ግ,ገሰn from 117". appears to assign it to Josephus: τότε
34. Thou wilt sin a complete sin unto οὖν ἐπληρώθη ἡ τοῦ ᾿Ισαὰκ προφητεία
death, or “every sin unto death.” This ἡνίκα ἂν καθέλῃς τὸν ζυγὸν τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ
change is contrary to all tradition. In σου ἐκ τοῦ τραχήλου cov, πλημμέλειαν
Onkelos we have: ‘ And it will come to πλημμελήσεις θανάτου. καὶ τὰ μὲν τοῦ
pass when his (Jacob’s) sons transgress ᾿Ιωσήπου τοιαῦτα. |
the words of the law, that thou wilt Sin unto death. Cf. xxi. 22.

CHAPTERS XXVI. 32-XXVII. 6 165
heart: “ May the days of mourning for my father now come,
so that I may slay my brother Jacob.”
Rebecca alarmed at Esau’s threats, prevails on Isaac to send
Jacob to Mesopotamia, 1-12. Isaac comforts Rebecca on
the departure of Jacob, 13-18. Jacobs dream and vow
at Bethel, 19-27. (Cf. Gen. xxviii.)
XXVIL And the words of Esau, her elder son, were
told to Rebecca in a dream, and Rebecca sent and called
Jacob her younger son, and said unto him: 2. “Behold
Esau thy brother will take vengeance on thee so as to
kill thee. 3. Now, therefore, my son, obey my voice,
and arise and flee thou to Laban, my brother, to Haran,
and tarry with him a few days until thy brother’s anger
turns away, and he remove his anger from thee, and forget
all that thou hast done; then I will send and fetch thee
from thence.” 4. And Jacob said: “Iam not afraid; if he
wishes to kill me, I will kill him.” 5. But she said unto
him: “Let me not be bereft of both my sons on one day.”
6. And Jacob said to Rebecca his mother: “Behold, thou
knowest that my father has become old, and does not see
because his eyes are dull, and if I leave him it will be evil
in his eyes, because I leave him and go away from you, and
my father will be angry, and will curse me. I will not go;
35. May the days, etc. Observe the Abraham and Jacob from the reproach
malicious turn given to Esau’s words of leaving their fathers in their old
in Gen. xxvii. 41. age. Singer (p. 170) writes: In der
XXVII. 1-5. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 42-45. Haggada wird naémlich Jakob darob
1. Were told to Rebecca in a dream. getadelt, dass er so lange Zeit von
In the Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxvii. 42 it is seinen Eltern fernblieb und dadurch
said: “And the words of Esau her die Uebung der Kindespflichten verabelder son were told to Rebecca by the sdumte (Megilla 16 p, Sed. Od. rabba 2,
Holy Spirit.” In Ber. rabba on the Tanch. u. Lek. Tob. Wagescheb in
same passage Rebecca is called a Raschi, Gen. xxxvii. 34), wogegen Esau
prophetess, in dieser Hinsicht sehr gepriesen und
6. This verse like xii. 31 owes its als Muster eines guten Kindes dargeexistence, as Singer has pointed out, to stellt wird (Ber. rabba 65, 82 ; Debarim
the author’s desire to protect his heroes rabba 1, Pesikta rab. xxiv.).

166 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
when he sends me, then only will I go.” 7. And Rebecca
said to Jacob: “I will go in and speak to him, and he will
send thee away.” 8. And Rebecca went in and said to
Isaac: “I loathe my life because of the two daughters of
Heth, whom Esau has taken him as wives; and if Jacob
take a wife from among the daughters of the land such as
these, for what purpose do 1 further live; for the daughters
of Canaan are evil.” 9. And Isaac called Jacob and blessed
him, and admonished him and said unto him: 10. “Do
not take thee a wife of any of the daughters of Canaan;
arise and go to Mesopotamia, to the house of Bethuel, thy
mother’s father, and take thee a wife from thence of the
daughters of Laban, thy mother’s brother. 11. And God
Almighty bless thee and increase and multiply thee that
thou mayest become a company of nations, and give thee
the blessings of my father Abraham, to thee and to thy seed
after thee, that thou mayest inherit the land of thy sojournings and all the land which God gave to Abraham: go, my
son, in peace.” 12. And Isaac sent Jacob away, and he
went to Mesopotamia, to Laban the son of Bethuel the
Syrian, the brother of Rebecca, Jacob's mother. 13. And it
came to pass after Jacob had arisen to go to Mesopotamia
that the spirit of Rebecca was grieved after her son, and she
wept. 14. And Isaac said to Rebecca: “My sister, weep
not on account of Jacob, my son; for he goeth in peace,
and in peace will he return. 15. The Most High God will
8. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 46. Song of Solomon iv. 9, 10, 12, v. 1.
9-12. Cf. Gen. xxviii. 1-5. This usage was common in the old
14. My sister. This term as applied Egyptian songs as Maspero and Spiegelby Isaac to his wife is used as an ex- berg have shown (see Budde, Das
pression of tenderness. It is possible Hohenlied, pp. xvi-xvii). “Brother”
that Singer (p. 168 note) is right in was used in these songs also with a
stating that it is designed by our author similar meaning. ἀδελφή in 1 Cor. ix.
to justify the fact of Isaac’s having 5 has quite a different meaning. It
called her his sister at the Court of denotes one who is connected by the
Abimelech. As instances of the former tie of the Christian religion. The above
use we might quote Tobit’s address to usage, is according to Singer (p. 208
his wife (Tobit v. 21): μὴ λόγον ἔχε, note), unknown in Rabbinic _literaἀδελφή : also vii, 15, viii. 4, 73 also ture.

CHAPTER XXVII. 7-24 167
preserve him from all evil, and will be with him; for He
will not forsake him all his days; 16. For I know that
his ways will be prospered in all things wherever he goes,
until he return in peace to us, and we see him in peace.
17. Fear not on his account, my sister, for he is on the
upright path and he is a perfect man: and he is faithful
and}will not perish. Weep not.” 18. And Isaac comforted
Rebecca on account of her son Jacob, and blessed him. 19.
And Jacob went from the Well of the Oath to go to Haran
on the first year of the second week in the forty-fourth
jubilee, and he came to Luzon the mountains, that is,
Bethel, on the new moon of the first month of this week, 2115 a.m.
and he came to the place at even and turned from the way
to the west of the road that night: and he slept there; for
the sun had set. 20. And he took one of the stones of
that place and laid it (at his head) under the tree, and he
was journeying alone, and he slept. 21. And he dreamt
that night, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven, and behold, the angels of the
Lord ascended and descended on it: and behold, the Lord
stood upon it. 22. And He spake to Jacob and said: “I
am the Lord God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of
Isaac; the land whereon thou art sleeping, to thee shall I
give it, and to thy seed after thee. 23. And thy seed will
be as the dust of the earth, and thou wilt increase to the
west and to the east, to the north and the south, and
in thee and in thy seed will all the families of the
nations be blessed. 24. And behold, I shall be with thee,
16. Will be prospered=jésérih (= 19. Luz. Cf. Gen. xxviii. 19.
the Latin dirigentur) emended from 20. (At his head). Added from the
jeséréh. Text=‘‘he will prosper.” Latin.
17. On the upright path. So band Under the tree. This phrase is not
Latin, in via recta. acd diverge in found in Gen. xxviii. 11. It seems to
different directions. be the wooden post or mast (mx) which
And he is faithful. ab and Latin stood at Canaanitish places of worship.
omit “and. See Encyc. Bid. i. 330-382.
19-20. Cf. Gen, xxviii. 10, 11, 19. 21-27. Cf. Gen. xxviii, 12-22,

168 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and shall keep thee whithersoever thou goest, and I shall
bring thee again into this land in peace; for I shall not
leave thee until I do everything that I told thee of.”
25. And Jacob awoke from his sleep, and said, “Truly
this place is the house of the Lord, and I knew it not.”
And he was afraid and said: “Dreadful is this place
which is none other than the house of God, and this
is the gate of heaven.” 26. And Jacob arose early in the
morning, and took the stone which he had put under his
head and set it up as a pillar for a sign, and he poured oil
upon the top of it. And he called the name of that place
Bethel; but the name of the place was Luz at the first. 27.
And Jacob vowed a vow unto the Lord, saying: “If the
Lord will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I
go, and give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, so that
I come again to my father’s house in peace, then shall the
Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set up as a
pillar for a sign in this place, shall be the Lord’s house,
and of all that thou givest me, I shall give the tenth to
thee, my God.”
Jacob marries Leah and Rachel, 1-10. His children by Leah
and Rachel and by their handmaids, 11-24. Jacob
seeks to leave Laban, 25: but stays on at a certain wage,
26-28. Jacob becomes rich, 29-30. (Cf Gen. xxix.
1, 17, 18, 21-35, xxx. 1-13, 17-22, 24, 25, 28, 32,
Di 40, xxx. 1, 2.)
XXVIII. And he went on his journey, and came to the
land of the east, to Laban, the brother of Rebecca, and he
was with him, and served him for Rachel his daughter one
week. 2. And in the first year of the third week he said ~
2122 AM
25. Awoke from... slΞeε ἐeξύπpνωσ ε XXVIII. 1. Cf. Gen. xxix. 1.
ἐξ ὕπνου. MSS corr=u pryte ὕπνον 9-4, Cf. Gen. xxix. 21-25,
= “slept a sleep.”

CHAPTERS XXVII. 25-XXVIII. 8 169
unto him: “Give me my wife, for whom I have served thee
seven years”; and Laban said unto Jacob: “I will give
thee thy wife.” 3. And Laban made a feast, and took Leah
his elder daughter, and gave (her) to Jacob as a wife, and
gave her Zilpah his handmaid for an handmaid; and Jacob
did not know, for he thought that she was Rachel. 4. And
he went in unto her, and behold, she was Leah; and Jacob
Was angry with Laban, and said unto him: “ Why hast thou
dealt thus with me? Did not I serve thee for Rachel and
not for Leah? Why hast thou wronged me? Take thy
daughter, and I will go; for thou hast done evil to me.”
5. For Jacob loved Rachel more than Leah; for Leah’s
eyes were weak, but her form was very handsome; but
Rachel had beautiful eyes and a beautiful and very handsome form. 6. And Laban said to Jacob: “It is not so
done in our country, to give the younger before the elder.”
And it is not right to do this; for thus it is ordained and
written in the heavenly tables, that no one should give his
younger daughter before the elder—but the elder one gives
first and after her the younger—and the man who does so, they
set down guilt against him in heaven, and none is righteous
that does this thing, for this deed is evil before the Lord.
7. And command thou the children of Israel that they do
not this thing; let them neither take nor give the younger
before they have given the elder, for it is very wicked. 8.
And Laban said to Jacob: “ Let the seven days of the feast
of this one pass by, and I shall give thee Rachel, that thou
3. Zilpah. Eth. Zalafa. See note These are the words of the angels
on ver. 9. enunciating the law as Singer (p. 82)
He thought. For ‘‘he” (a) bcd read has recognised. There is no hint
Jacob, according to Beer and Singer of this
5. Cf. Gen. xxix. 17-182. ordinance in tradition.
Leah's eyes were weak. Ps.-Jon. in But the elder (so δ). acd omit
loc. and Ber. rabba 70 attribute this through homoioteleuton, as Littmann
weakness to Leah’s weeping. has pointed out.
6. It is not... before the elder. 8-10. Cf. Gen. xxix. 27-29. Jacob’s
Cf. Gen. xxix. 26. marriage with two sisters was expressly
And it is not right to do this, ete. forbidden by the later law: cf. Lev.

170 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
mayst serve me another seven years, that thou mayst
pasture my sheep as thou didst in the former week.” 9,
And on the day when the seven days of the feast of Leah |
had passed, Laban gave Rachel to Jacob, that he might
serve him another seven years, and he gave to Rachel
Bilhah, the sister of Zilpah, as a handmaid. 10. And he
served yet other seven years for Rachel, for Leah had been
given to him for nothing. 11. And the Lord opened the
xviii, 18. Justin Martyr, Dial. c. ἑξῆς ἔτεκεν τὴν Bdddav. In later
Tryph. 134, declares it to be οὐ θεμιτόν. Jewish tradition they are still repre8. Our author rightly understands sented as sisters, but as daughters of
Gen, xxix. 27-29, and represents Jacob as Laban by a concubine: cf. Ps.-Jon.
receiving Rachel when the seven days on Gen. xxix. 24, 29; Ber. rabba 74.
of Leah’s feast were over. Josephus Singer adds Pirke R. El. 36 on p. 118
(Ant. i. 19. 7) wrongly makes Jacob note.
wait for seven years after his marriage 11-24. Cf. Gen. xxix. 31-xxx. 1-13,
with Leah. 17-22, 24.
9. Bilhah. Eth. Balan. 11-24. The twelve sons of Jacob.
The sister of Zilpah., Bilhah and The twelve appear in our text in the
Zilpah appear as sisters also in Test. same order as in Gen. xxix. 32-34,
XII. Patriarch. Naph. i. Naphtali xxx. 1-24, xxxv. 17-18. The followdeclares: 7 δὲ μήτηρ μου ἐστὶ Bada, ing tables (taken from Rénsch, p. 330)
θυγάτηρ Pegéou, ἀδελφοῦ Δεβόρρας, will serve to make clear the different
τῆς τροφοῦ Ῥεβέκκας... . ὁ δὲ Ῥόθεος ἐκ order of these names. 1. In the ©
τοῦ γένους ἢν ᾿Αβραάμ.... καὶ αἰχ- narrative of Gen. xxix.-xxxv. and |
μαλωτισθεὶξ ἠγοράσθη ὑπὸ Λάβαν" Jubilees. x, In Jubilees according to
καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ Αἰνᾶν τὴν παιδίσκην the date of birth. ur, In Test. XII. ry
αὐτοῦ εἰς γυναῖκα" ἥτις ἔτεκεν θυγατέρα, Patriarchs according to date of birth.
καὶ ἐκάλεσεν αὐτὴν Ζελῴφάν. .. καὶ Iv. In Gen. xlix.
ΠῚ. Test. XII.
I. Gen. xxix.- II. Jubilees
Patriarchs accordἜΣ, EEX: according to the
ing to date of TY. Gen. xix
and Jubilees. date of birth.
birth.
1 Reuben Reuben Reuben Reuben
2 Simeon Simeon Simeon Simeon
3 Levi Levi Levi Levi
4 Judah Dan Judah Judah
5 Dan Judah Dan Zebulon
6 Naphtali Naphtali Issachar Issachar
7 Gad Gad Naphtali Dan
8 Asher Tssachar Gad Gad
9 Issachar Asher Zebulon Asher
10 Zebulon Joseph Asher Naphtali
11 Joseph Zebulon Joseph Joseph
12 Benjamin Benjamin Benjamin Benjamin
It will be observed that the order in on our text, shows the same order (see
II. diverges from all the others as to below). Probably the dates are corrup
Dan, Issachar, and Joseph. The Mid- Rousch proposes to read seventh instead
rash Tadshe, which is partly based of sixth (an easy emendation resting on

CHAPTER XXVIII. 9-11 I71
womb of Leah, and she conceived and bare Jacob a son, and
he called his name Reuben, on the fourteenth day of the 2122 a,x.
confusion of 1 and 1) in Jub. xxviii. 24. Rénsch further supposes that the
‘In that case Joseph would be born in copyist transposed the dates for Judah
_ 2135 a.m. and his place in the Jubilees and Dan, and again a corruption of
list would agree with those of the seventh into sixth; and finally sugother authorities. But this date does gests in the case of Asher and Issachar
not agree with what is required by that we should transpose the years
XXXIV. 10 and xlvi. 1 of our text. For of their births, and read fourth year
these passages when taken together in Asher’s case and fifth in Issachar’s,
imply that Joseph was born in the Thus we should have the following
year 2132. See note on xxviii. 24, list :—
Reuben born 14th of 9th month in 1st year of the 3rd week DI)
Simeon ,, 21st of 10th ΓΞ ord ን 8rd 5 = 2194
Levi SD OL tnt 93 6th oy OPO OUD
Judah ,, 15th of 3rd is 7th 38 CLG” fe Les
Dan » 9th of 6th fe 1st i Ati DTI)
Naphtali ,, 5th of 7th Fe 2nd 4s Ath, V5; ἘΞ 21391
Gad » 12th of 8th Pe 3rd "ἡ Sth ΠΝ =o 2032
Asher » 2nd of 11th AE 4th "κα Athy PTSD
Tssachar ,, 4th of 5th nn 5th 93 ፈth 3 2 = 2154
Zebulon ,, 7th of 7th δ 6th es Ath 4,9 =) 21354
Joseph ,, Ist of 4th 39 7th Fs Car ee 99
Benjamin», 11th of 8th ys 1st Ἢ ΔῈΝ = 2145
This order, corrected as Ronsch pro- died at the age of 125; Judah on
poses above, is found in Syncellus i. 15th of 8rd and died 119 (?) (text in198, though the dates differ from those distinct) ; Naphtali on the 5th of the 3rd
in our text: καὶ δουλεύσας ἔτη ζ΄ ἔλαβε and died aged 133 ; Gad on the 10th of
τὴν Λείαν καὶ ἐγέννησε τὸν Ῥουβὴν τῷ the 7th and died 125 ; Issachar on 4th
π’ ἔτει kal τὸν Συμεὼν τῷ πα΄, τὸν δὲ of 5th month and died 122; Asher on
Λευὶ τῷ TB , τὸν ᾿Ιούδαν τῷ wy, τὸν 2nd of (corrupt text) and died 123;
Δὰν τῷ πε΄, τὸν Ν εφθαλεὶμ τῷ TS, τὸν Joseph on the 1st of the 7th and died
Τὰδ τῷ rE, τὸν ᾿Ασὴρ τῷ πη΄, τὸν 110.” It will be observed that more
Ἰσσάχαρ τῷ πθ΄, τὸν Ζαβουλὼν καὶ than half the above dates of the month
τὴν Δείναν ἐκ Λείας τῷ 3’, τὸν Ἰωσὴφ correspond exactly to those in Jubilees,
ἐκ τῆς Ῥαχὴλ τῷ 5α΄. and nearly all the ages to those in
The following imperfect list (derived Test. XII. Patriarchs (see below). The
undoubtedly from our text) of the Book of Jashar (op. cit. ii. 1244, 1246,
twelve patriarchs with their ages and 1248) agrees with the Testament XII.
the days of the month on which they Patriarch. in giving the same ages for
were born is found in Eppstein’s edition Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Issachar, Gad,
of the Midrash Tadshe viii. lines Joseph, but disagrees in the cases of
2-4: ‘The years of Rebecca were 188, Judah, Dan, Asher, Zebulon and
of Rachel 36, of Lea 46. Reuben was Naphtali, to whom it ascribes respecborn on the 14th of the 9th month and tively the following ages: 129, 124,
died 125 years old. Simeon was born 123, 114, 132.
on the 2180 of the 10th month and In the Test. XII. Patriarchs the dates
died at the age of 120 years. Levi was vary also. The facts have been collected
born on the 1st of the 1st month and by Dodwell and are found in Fabricius,
died at the age of 1357. Dan was born Cod. Pseud. V.T. i. 749-754. See also
on the 6th of the 9th month and Ronsch, 327-329. The chief are :—
[LIST—OVER

172 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
ninth month, in the first year of the third week. 12. But
the womb of Rachel was closed, for the Lord saw that Leah
was hated and Rachel loved. 13. And again Jacob went
in unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob a second
son, and he called his name Simeon, on the twenty-first of
2124 A.M.
the tenth month, and in the third year of this week. 14.
And again Jacob went in unto Leah, and she conceived, and
bare him a third son, and he called his name Levi, in the
new moon of the first month in the sixth year of this week.
2127 A.M.
15. And again Jacob went in unto her, and she conceived,
and bare him a fourth son, and he called his name Judah,
on the fifteenth of the third month, in the first year of the
2129 A.M.
+fourth+ week. 16. And on account of all this Rachel envied
Leah, for she did not bear, and she said to Jacob: “Give me
children”; and Jacob said: “Have I withheld from thee
the fruits of thy womb? Have I forsaken thee?” 17.
And when Rachel saw that Leah had borne four sons to
Jacob, Reuben and Simeon and Levi and Judah, she said
unto him: “Go in unto Bilhah my handmaid, and she will
Reuben was born in the 76th year of Jacob’s life, and died aged 125 in the
same year as Zebulon aged
114.
Simeon - 79th is and died aged 120 in the
same year as Joseph aged
110.
Levi iy 81st and died aged 137.
Judah Ἔ 84th ΑΞ "ἢ 119,
Dan 85th 125.
Issachar, Naphtali, Gad 86th
Issachar died aged 122;
Naphtali, 180; Gad, 125.
Zebulon and Asher 87th ΕἸ Zebulon died aged 114;
Asher, 126.
Dinah i) 88th sg
Joseph + 89th ን and died aged 110.
Benjamin 35 101st "ἡ 2 125.
We must be content with these dates 15. From the context (cf. verses
till a critical edition of this work is 15 and 18) it is obvious that the
issued. For a different set of dates see dates in the text are corrup
Eusebius, Praep. Hv. ix. 21. Judah was born before Rachel gave
11. He called. In Gen. xxix. 32 it Bilhah to Jacob. Yet the text sets
is ‘‘she called.’ Perhaps we should so the birth of Bilhah’s son two years
read here and in verses 13, 14, 15, 18. before that of Judah. See note on
In 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 24 this form is 11-24,
actually found.

CHAPTER XXVIII. 12-24 173
conceive, and bear a son unto me.” 18. (And she gave
(him) Bilhah her handmaid to wife.) And he went in unto
her, and she conceived, and bare him a son, and he called 2127 a.m.
his name Dan, on the ninth of the sixth month, in the +sixth}
year of the third week. 19. And Jacob went in again unto
Bilhah a second time, and she conceived, and bare Jacob
another son, and Rachel called his name Naphtali, on the
fifth of the seventh month, in the second year of the fourth 2180 a.m.
week. 20. And when Leah saw that she had become
sterile and did not bear, she envied (Rachel) and she also
gave her handmaid Zilpah to Jacob to wife, and she conceived, and bare a son, and Leah called his name Gad, on
the twelfth of the eighth month, in the third year of the 2131 a.m.
fourth week. 21. And he went in again unto her, and she
conceived, and bare him a second son, and Leah called his
name Asher, on the second of the eleventh month, in the 2133 Ax.
+fifth+ year of the fourth week. 22. And Jacob went in
unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare a son, and she called
his name Issachar, on the fourth of the fifth month, in the 2132 a.m.
+fourth+ year of the fourth week, and she gave him to a nurse.
23. And Jacob went in again unto her, and she conceived,
and bare two (children), a son and a daughter, and she called
the name of the son Zebulon, and the name of the daughter
Dinah, in the seventh of the seventh month, in the sixth year 2134 a.m.
of the fourth week. 24. And the Lord was gracious to
Rachel, and opened her womb, and she conceived, and bare
a son, and she called his name Joseph, on the new moon of
the fourth month, in the sixth year in this fourth week. 2134 ax,
18. On the date assigned to Dan see Latin reads et dedit. Gen. xxx. 9 has
note on 11-24. “took and gave.”
21-22. On the dates see note on 11-24.
20. Become sterile and did not bear.
24. According to xxxiv. 10 Joseph was
Cf. Gen. xxx. 9=“‘had left bearing.”
sold into Egypt in 2149 at the age of
1 here withdraw the emendation in my seventeen (xlvi. 3). Hence this would
text. require the date in our text to be 2132.
Enwied (Rachel) and she also gave. This change is required also by xlvi.
So MSS but the text is doubtful. My 1. This would require “fourth” inemendation of the text I here withdraw. stead of “sixth,” but see note on 11-24.

174 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
25. And in the days when Joseph was born, Jacob said to
Laban ? “Give me my wives and sons, and let me go to
my father Isaac, and let me make me an house; for I have
completed the years in which I have served thee for thy
two daughters, and I will go to the house of my father.”
26. And Laban said to Jacob: “TTarry with me for thy
wages, and pasture my flock for me again, and take thy
wages.” 27. And they agreed with one another that he
should give him as his wages those of the lambs and kids
which were born black and spotted and white, (these) were
to be his wages. 28. And all the sheep brought forth
spotted and speckled and black, variously marked, and they |
brought forth again lambs like themselves, and all that were |
spotted were Jacob's and those which were not were
Laban’s. 29. And Jacob’s possessions multiplied exceedingly, and he possessed oxen and sheep and asses and camels,
and menservants and maidservants. 30. And Laban and ὃ
his sons envied Jacob, and Laban took back his sheep from :
him, and he observed him with evil intent. ἢ
Jacob departs secretly, 1-4. Laban pursues after him, 5-6.
Covenant of Jacob and Laban, 7-8. Abodes of the
25-26. Cf. Gen. xxx. 25, 28. 28. Cf. Gen. xxx. 39. |,
26. TTarry with me for thy wages.t Speckled and black, variously marked. —
Latin has: Expecta me in mercede. This agrees exactly with LXX of Gen, ©
Both seem wrong. Gen. xxx. 28 has xxx, 89: ποικίλα καὶ σποδοειδῇ bayré
“Appoint (napa) me thy wages. and Vulg. varia et diverso colore
Possibly “expecta” goes back to mp respersa. The Mass. has no equivalent
and “tarry” to cap, but neither of these of the σποδοειδῆ. See my text on this
takes us back to the right text. clause.
Take thy wages. Latin: dabo tibi All that were spotted were Jacob's,
mercedem is better. etc. Cf. Gen. xxx. 32. Jerome
27. Cf. Gen. xxx. 82. (Quaest. Hebr. in loc.) seems to have
Those of. So ὃ. abd=“all the had this passage in mind: Si quid
sheep of.” igitur ex albis et nigris, quae unius
Black and spotted = se on. See coloris sunt, varium natum erit, meum
my text for emendation. erit ; si quid vero unius coloris, tuum. —
White. This is a false rendering of
29. And sheep. So also LXX of
διάλευ=κ αἼΡ ) (same false rendering in
Gen. xxx. 43. Mass,, Sam., Syr.,
Eth. ver. of Gen. xxx. 39), or else it
Vulg. omit. J
presupposes λευκόν which is itself
wrong. We should render “speckled.” 30. Cf. Gen, xxx, 1, 2,

CHAPTERS XXVIII. 25-XXIX. 7 175
Amorites (anciently of the Rephaim) destroyed in the
time of the writer, 9-11. Laban departs, 12. Jacob is
reconciled to Esau, 13. Jacob sends supplies of food to
his parents four times a year to Hebron, 14-17, 19-20.
Esau marries again, 18. (Cf. Gen. Xxx. 3, 4, 10, 18,
19-21, 23, 24, 46, 47, xxxii. 22, xxxiii. 10, 16.)
XXIX. And it came to pass when Rachel had borne
Joseph, that Laban went to shear his sheep; for they. were
distant from him a three days’ journey. 2. And Jacob saw
that Laban was going to shear his sheep, and Jacob called
Leah and Rachel, and spake kindly unto them that they
should come with him to the land of Canaan. 3. For he
told them how he had seen everything in a dream, even all
that He had spoken unto him that he should return to his
father’s house; and they said: “To every place whither
thou goest we will go with thee.” 4. And Jacob blessed the
God of Isaac his father, and the God of Abraham his father’s
father, and he arose and mounted his wives and his children,
and took all his possessions and crossed the river, and came
to the land of Gilead, and Jacob hid his intention from 2135 a.m.
Laban and told him not. 5. And in the seventh year of
the fourth week Jacob turned (his face) toward Gilead
in the first month, on the twenty-first thereof. And Laban
pursued after him and overtook Jacob in the mountain
of Gilead in the third month, on the thirteenth thereof.
6. And the Lord did not suffer him to injure Jacob; for He
appeared to him in a dream by night. And Laban spake to
Jacob. 7. And on the fifteenth of those days Jacob made
XXIX. 1. Laban went to shear his 4. Cf. Gen. xxxi. 20, 21.
sheep. Cf. Gen. xxxi. 19 Hid his intention (lit. “heart’’).
2. Called Leah, etc. Cf. Gen. So LXX of Gen. xxxi. 20 ἔκρυψε and
xxi, 4, Onkelos ‘p>. Mass, Sam., Syr.=
3. Seen everything in a dream Cf. ἔκλεψε.
Gen. xxxi. 10. 5-6. Cf. Gen. xxxi. 29, 24.
Return to his father’s house. Cf. 7. The fifteenth, we. of the ard
Gen. xxxi. 3, 18. month,

176 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
a feast for Laban, and for all who came with him, and Jacob |
sware to Laban that day, and Laban also to Jacob, that
neither should cross the mountain of Gilead to the other
with evil purpose. 8. And he made there a heap for a ι
witness; wherefore the name of that place is called: “The
Heap of Witness,” after this heap. 9. But before they used—
to call the land of Gilead the land of the Rephaim; for it
was the land of the Rephaim, and the Rephaim were born —
(there), giants whose height was ten, nine, eight down to |
10. And their habitation was from the land —
seven cubits.
of the children of Ammon to Mount Hermon, and the seats i
of their kingdom were Karnaim and Ashtaroth, and Edrei,
and Misfir, and Beon. 11. And the Lord destroyed them ὶ
because of the evil of their deeds; for they were very ᾿
ἐκ
A Feast. Cf. Gen. xxxi. 46. succeeded .by the Amorites (ver. 11), i
8. Cf. Gen. xxxi. 47. and of these our text grimly declares —
9. Rephaim. Eth. Rafa 6m. Cf. Gen. that “they have no longer length of i
xiv. 5. life on the earth.” Judas must have
10. It is difficult to understand why nearly annihilated them. δὰ
our author mentions these seats of the Edrei. Eth. ’Adra’a. This is the
Rephaim unless it is that certain biblical Edrei (yi4x, "Edpal, ᾿Εδραίεν), ©
victories of the Maccabees over the the “Adpa of Ptolemy and the ’Adpda —
Amorites who succeeded the Rephaim of Eusebius. It was the chief city |
are connected with them. To these we of Og, king of Bashan, who dwelt at
shall draw attention as we proceed. Ashtaroth and at Edrei, Josh. xii, 4,
Karnaim and Ashtaroth. Eth. xiii, 12, 31. Although this town is
Qarfné’im and Astarés. In Gen. xiv. not mentioned as attacked by Judas in,
5 these two appear as one name his eastern campaign (1 Mace. v.) the ©
‘* Ashtaroth - Karnaim”’ = ‘‘ Ashtaroth fact that it is mentioned here as having —
of the two horns” (1) in the Mass. and been destroyed makes it probable that —
Sam. and some MSS of the LXX. On it did suffer at the hands of Judas. Ἧ
the other hand the Syr. and some MSS Mis= Μtεισώiρ =r a w. Cf. Deut.
of the LXX support our text. Kuenen, iii. 10, where there is a list of the cities ©
Buhl and Siegfried accept this reading. of the plain (wb) belonging to Og which
Ashtaroth Karnaim appears simply as were captured by Joshua. This may
Ashtaroth in Deut. i. 4; Josh. ix. 10, be the same as the valley of Rephaim,
xii. 4, xiii. 12, 31 along with Edrei as Josh. xv. 8, xviii. 16.
a chief city of Og, king of Bashan. Beon=jy2. Eth. Béwon. Cf. Num,
This Og was of the remnant of the xxxii. 8. lt isthe same as the Baal-meon -
Rephaim, Deut. iii. 11. See Zncyc. Bib. (see Encyc. Bib. and Bible Dict. in loc.).
i. 335, 336.
Karnaim. Eth. Qarana’im. Cf. Gen.
xiv. 5; Amosvi.13. Karnaim a strong
city (1 Macc. v. 26) was captured by a πόλις τοῦ ᾿Αμορραίου. This suits our
Judas and its temple of Atargatis text exactly. Beon and its inhabitants
burnt and 25000 people put to the were utterly destroyed by Judas
sword (1 Macc. v. 43, 44; 2 Mace. (1 Macc. v. 4, 5; Joseph, Ant. xii,
xii. 21, 26). The Rephaim were 8.1)

CHAPTER XXIX. 8-16 177
malignant, and the Amorites dwelt in their stead, wicked
and sinful, and there is no people to-day which has wrought
to the full all their sins, and they have no longer length of
life on the earth. 12. And Jacob sent away Laban, and he
departed into Mesopotamia, the land of the East, and Jacob
returned to the land of Gilead. 13. And he passed over the
Jabbok in the ninth month, on the eleventh thereof. And
on that day Esau, his brother, came to him, and he was
reconciled to him, and departed from him unto the land
of Seir, but Jacob dwelt in tents. 14. And in the first
year of the fifth week in this jubilee he crossed the Jordan, 2136 a.m.
and dwelt beyond the Jordan, and he pastured his sheep from
the sea tof the heapt unto Bethshan, and unto Dothan
and unto the forest of Akrabbim. 15. And he sent
to his father Isaac of all his substance, clothing, and food,
and meat, and drink, and milk, and butter, and cheese, and
some dates of the valley, 16. And to his mother Rebecca
also four times a year, between the times of the months,
11. The Amorites dwelt. Latin: citizens to the numberof 13,000 (Joseph.
habitare fecit. Bell, Jud. ii. 18.3). Eth. has Bétasan.
13. Passed over the Jabbok. Ct. Dothan. Eth. Dotha#’im = Δωθάειμ
Gen. xxxii. 22. (Judith iv. 6, vii. 3, ete.)=pnh, Gen.
He passed over the Jabbok ... on xxxvii. 17.
the eleventh thereof. Latin has trans- Unto the ‘*+forestt. Latin has
ivit Jacob et undecim filii ipsius, prob- aggruum which may be corrupt for
ably owing to Gen. xxxii. 22. arborem, seeing that the Eth. has ’oma
He was reconciled. Emended with (a)=“ forest.” bed read simply “unto
Latin propitiatus (est) from takudnant Akrabbim.” We should expect “unto
= ‘they were reconciled.” the ascent of Akrabbim” from Num,
14. ΤΟΥ theheapt. Soad. bcgive xxxiv. 4; Josh. xv. 3.
fahahat a word of unknown meaning. Akrabbim. Eth. ’Aqrabéth. This
Latin has salso. Hence La=t ‘‘, fro m name is found only in the phrase
the Salt Sea.” “ Ascent of Akrabbim.” See preceding
Beths=h Baatgnrd y (1 Mace. v. 52, note. ᾿Αἀκραβαττήνη, a district in
xii. 40)=jvi-ma (ie. the Bethshan in Idumea, where Judas fought against
1 Sam. xxxi.10; 1 Kingsiv.12). This the Edomites, 1 Macc. v. 3; Joseph.
town also is associated with Judas, but Ant. xii. 8. 1.
in a peaceful way: cf. 2 Macc. xii. 29- 15-16. Jacob, in contrast to Esau
31, where it appears under a new name who robs his father (ver. 18), sends
Σκυθῶν πόλις (cf. LXX Judg. i. 27, presents to him and his mother four
where B adds after Βαιθσάν the gloss times a year. The four times may
ἥ ἐστιν Σκυθῶν πόλις). In the Roman correspond, as Rénsch (p. 140) conWar 65 A.D, the heathen inhabitants of jectures, to the four festivals instituted
this city slaughtered their Jewish fellow- by Noah (see vi. 28 sqq.): the 1st
12

178 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
between ploughing and reaping, and between autumn and
the rain (season) and between winter and spring, to the
tower of Abraham. 17. For Isaac had returned from the
Well of the Oath and gone up to the tower of his father
Abraham, and he dwelt there apart from his son Esau.
18. For in the days when Jacob went to Mesopotamia, Esau
took to himself a wife Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael,
and he gathered together all the flocks of his father and his
wives, and went up and dwelt on Mount Seir, and left
Isaac his father at the Well of the Oath alone. 19. And
Isaac went up from the Well of the Oath and dwelt in the
tower of Abraham his father on the mountains of Hebron,
20. And thither Jacob sent all that he did send to his
father and his mother from time to time, all they needed,
and they blessed Jacob with all their heart and with all
their soul.
Dinah ravished, 1-3. Slaughter of the Shechemites, 4-6.
Laws against intermarriage between Israel and the
heathen, 7-17. Levi chosen for the priesthood on account
of his slaughter of the Shechemites, 18-23. Dinah
recovered, 24. Jacobs reproof, 25-26. (Cf. Gen.
XXXL, 18, xxxiv. 2, 4, 7, 13-14, 25-30, xxxv. 5.)
XXX. And in the first year of the sixth week he went
2148 A.M.
up to Salem, to the east of Shechem, in peace, in the fourth
of the 4th month= «« between the times middle of October to the middle of -
of the months’; the 1st of the 7th December.
=“ between ploughing and reaping ; Between winter and spring. Latin
the 1st of the 10th month=“ between has: in medio pluviarum veris. Eth.
autumn and the rain (season”) ; the could be rendered « between the rain
1st of the lst month = “ between and spring.” This is the latter rain
winter and spring.” (ehpo5)s which falls in March and
16. Between autumn and the rain April.
(season). Latin has: in medio 18. Cf. Gen. xxviii. 9, xxxvi. 6, 8.
|
autumni pluviarum. This is the Mahalath. Eth. Ma éléth.
former rain (n7)*), which falls from the XXX. 1. Went up to Salem... in
i

CHAPTERS XXIX, 17-XXX. 4 179
month. 2. And there they carried off Dinah, the daughter
of Jacob, into the house of Shechem, the son of Hamor, the
Hivite, the prince of the land, and he lay with her and
defiled her, and she was a little girl, a child of twelve years,
3. And he besought his father and her brothers that she
might be given to him to wife. And Jacob and his sons
were wroth because of the men of Shechem ; for they had
defiled Dinah, their sister, and they spake to them with evil
intent and dealt deceitfully with them and beguiled them.
4. And Simeon and Levi came unexpectedly to Shechem
and executed judgment on all the men of Shechem, and
peace. This passage is based on Gen. ἔφθασε δὲ ἣ ὀργὴ κυρίου ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς eis
xxxiii, 18 nbv apy Xan. The LXX, τέλος. Again in Judith (a Hebrew work
of the first cent. B.c.) ix. 2: κύριε ὁ
Syr., Eusebius, and Jerome here take
obvi as a proper name. The Sam. reads θεὸς τοῦ πατρός μου Συμεών, ᾧ ἔδωκας
ἐν χειρὶ ῥομφαίαν εἰς ἐκδίκησιν ἀλploy. Our text combines both interλογενῶν, ot ἔλυσαν μήτραν παρθένου εἰς
pretations.
μίασμα καὶ ἐγύμνωσαν μηρὸν εἰς aiTo the east. Gen. xxxiii. 18 has
σχύνην, κιτιλ. Again in Philo, De Migr.
“city.”
Abrahami, 39, Simeon and Levi are
2-3. Of. Gen. xxxiv. 2, 4, 7, 13.
called οἱ φρονήσεως ἀκουσταὶ καὶ γνώρι2-6. The history of Jacob’s connec- μοι for their action in this matter, and
tion with the Shechemites caused much in the next few lines it is implied that
trouble to our author. He could hardly Shechem was not circumcised. See also
approve of their slaughter after they the Book of Jashar for a reproduction of
had consented to circumcision. Accord- the ancient favourable view of Simeon
ingly he omits all reference to the cir- and Levi (Dict. des Apocr. ii. 1166cumcision of the Shechemites, as also 1168). In the late rabbinic tradition,
does Josephus (Ant. i. 21.1). On the however, Simeon and Levi are judged
other hand this is given as the reason more in accordance with the sentence
for Jacob’s anger against Simeon and pronounced upon them in Gen xlix. In
Levi in Test. Levi 6: καὶ ἤκουσεν ὁ Gen. rabba 80, it is true, there is some
πατήρ, καὶ ὠργίσθη, καὶ ἐλυπήθη, ὅτι extenuation of their conduct; but in
κατεδέξαντο τὴν περιτομὴν καὶ μετὰ section 98 of the same work it is said
ταῦτα ἀπέθανον. Notwithstanding the that the fact that most of the poor
severe disapprobation of Simeon and were of the tribe of Simeon is to be
Levi in Gen. xlix. 5-7 for their conduct traced to the curse in Gen. xlix. 7.
in this matter, it was highly extolled Singer (p. 115 note) compares also Sifre
in the two centuries preceding the on Deut. xxxiii. 8.
Christian era. This is done in our text 2. Child of twelve years. This agrees
and in Test. Levi 5 where the angel with the reckoning in Test. Levi 12.
bids Levi: ποίησον ἐκδίκησιν ἐν Συχὲμ There Levi, who was six years older
ὑπὲρ Δίνας, κἀγὼ ἔσομαι μετά σου, ὅτι than Dinah, slew Shechem at the age of
κύριος ἀπέσταλκέ με. καὶ συνετέλεσα τῷ eighteen.
καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Εμμώρ, καθὼς 3. His father (ab). eq “her father.”
γέγραπται ἐν ταῖς πλαξὶ τῶν οὐρανῶν : And beguiled them. And Simeon
and in the Test. Levi 6-7, where Levi . . . to Shechem. Latin has: Et posusays that he saw that “the sentence of erunt in corde suo Symeon et Lenui
God had gone forth for evil against exterminare eos.
Shechem,” and still more strongly: 4, Cf. Gen. xxv. 25-27,

180 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
slew all the men whom they found in it, and left not a
single one remaining in it: they slew all in torments
because they had dishonoured their sister Dinah. 5, And
thus let it not again be done from henceforth that a
daughter of Israel be defiled ; for judgment is ordained in
heaven against them that they should destroy with the
sword all the men of the Shechemites because they had
wrought shame in Israel. 6. And the Lord delivered them
into the hands of the sons of Jacob that they might
exterminate them with the sword and execute judgment
upon them, and that it might not thus again be done in
Israel that a virgin of Israel should be defiled. 7. And if
there is any man who wishes in Israel to give his daughter
or his sister to any man who is of the seed of the Gentiles
he shall surely die, and they shall stone him with stones;
for he hath wrought shame in Israel; and they shall burn
the woman with fire, because she has dishonoured the name
of the house of her father, and she shall be rooted out of
Israel. 8. And let not an adulteress and no uncleanness be
found in Israel throughout all the days of the generations of
the earth; for Israel is holy unto the Lord, and every man
who has defiled (it) shall surely die: they shall stone him
with stones. 9. For thus has it been ordained and written
in the heavenly tables regarding all the seed of Israel: he
Cf.
5. Wrought shame in Israel. our author, however, such a marriage
Gen. xxxiv. 7. was illegal and was no better than
7. This statement does not agree fornication. In Lev. xxi. 9 it is
quite with any in the O.T. The burn- ordained that a priest’s daughter who
ing of the woman with fire, it is true, played the harlot was to be burnt with —
finds a precedent in Gen. xxxviil. 24, fire. Our text teaches that to give a —
where Judah demands that such a daughter to a non-Israelite was to give |
punishment should be executed on her to Moloch (ef. ver. 10). Since our ©
Tamar—a punishment at variance with author holds the former to be equivalent
the later law in Lev. xxi. 9. See in to the latter, it follows that the man |
note on xli. 17 the distortion of the who was guilty of the former offence
biblical tradition had recourse to by should justly be visited with the penalty —
the Rabbis in order to justify the exacted for the latter, and this was, acdemand of Judah. It is true that her cording to Lev. xx. 2, death by stoning; —
crime is that of fornication, whereas hence our text ordains: “and they shall
our text deals merely with the marriage stone him with stones,”
of a Hebrew woman and aGentile. To

CHAPTER XXX. 5-14 181
who defileth (it) shall surely die, and he shall be stoned
with stones. 10. And to this law there is no limit of days,
and no remission, nor any atonement: but the man who has
defiled his daughter shall be rooted out in the midst of all
Israel, because he has given of his seed to Moloch, and
wrought impiously so as to defile it. 11. And do thou,
Moses, command the children of Israel and exhort them not
to give their daughters to the Gentiles, and not to take for
their sons any of the daughters of the Gentiles, for this is
abominable before the Lord. 12. For this reason I have
written for thee in the words of the Law all the deeds of the
Shechemites, which they wrought against Dinah, and how the
sons of Jacob spake, saying: “ We shall not give our daughter
to a man who is uncircumcised ; for that were a reproach
unto us.” 13. And it is a reproach to Israel, to those who
give, and to those who take the daughters of the Gentiles;
for this is unclean and abominable to Israel. 14. And
Israel will not be free from this uncleanness if it has a wife
of the daughters of the Gentiles, or has given any of its
10. Has given of his seed to Moloch. in Megilla 25a. That such an inThis interpretation of Lev. xviii. 21: terpretation was prevalent we see from
“Thou shalt not give any of thy seed Megil. iv. 9: ayn» yan xd ገግ» sa
to make them pass through the fire to Nm sa Nግayw2 inn xd yin bid
Molech,” as being equivalent to giving ims ppnwn= “ Whoever translates ‘Thou
one’s child in marriage to a Gentile, is shalt not give of thy seed to pass
found in Ps.-Jon. on this verse: “And through the fire to Molech’ as ‘Thou
of thy seed thou shalt not give to lie shalt not give of thy seed to cohabit
with a daughter of the Gentiles so as with a Gentile woman,’ bid him be
to draw him over to a strange worship.” silent.” Singer (p. 200 note) says
The Latin which gives alienigenae in- that this Mishna is directed against
stead of Molech is aninterpretation of the the Jewish Christians. However this
text but not the text itself. The same may be, the interpretation was an
idea underlies the statement in Sanh. ancient Jewish one to begin with. It
82a: R. Chija Ὁ. Abija said: ‘‘ Who- may not be older than the Maccabean
ever cohabits with a Gentile woman is age. The circumstances of that time
to be regarded as though he had made were such as to justify the extremest
himself the son-in-law of the idol ; for measures in order to save Judaism from
it is said: And he cohabited with the annihilation. )
daughter of a strange God.” In Sanh. 11. For their sons. So Latin. bcd
ix. 6 it enacts that “the zealous may om., but a=adrol.
slay a man taken in fornication with 12. We shall not give, etc. Cf. Gen.
a Gentile or Roman woman (ΠΝ). ἢ XXXIV. 14.
Nearly the same statement as is 14-15. The sin of one man, the man
quoted above from Ps.-Jon, is found who gives any of his seed to the Gentiles

182 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
daughters to a man who is of any of the Gentiles. 15. For 7
there will be plague upon plague, and curse upon curse, and |
every judgment and plague and curse will come (upon him): |
if he do this thing, or hide his eyes from those who commit |
uncleanness, or those who defile the sanctuary of the Lord, |
or those who profane His holy name, (then) will the whole
nation together be judged for all the uncleanness and .
16.. And’ there πο nal
profanation of this (man).
respect of persons [and no consideration of persons], and no
receiving at his hands of fruits and offerings and burnt-—
offerings and fat, nor the fragrance of sweet savour, so as t0
accept it: and so fare every man or woman in Israel who ©
defiles the sanctuary. 17. For this reason I have com- —
manded thee, saying: “Testify this testimony to Israel: —
see how the Shechemites fared and their sons: how they©
were delivered into the hands of two sons of Jacob, and ἥ
they slew them under tortures, and it was (reckoned) unto
them for righteousness, and it is written down to them for—
righteousness. 18. And the seed of Levi was chosen for
or takes to wife a Gentile woman will
affect the whole community. These them is given: οὕτως ἐδίωξαν ᾿Αβραὰμ,L
verses are based on Lev. xx. 2-4, which τὸν πατέρα ἡμῶν ξένον ὄντα, καὶ κατdeal with the man who gives his seed ἐπάτησαν τὰ ποίμνια ὀγκομένα ὄντα ἐπ᾽
unto Moloch. αὐτόν" καὶ Ἴεβλάε τὸν οἰκογενῆ αὐτοῦ
15. (Upon him). Added from the σφόδρα αἰκίσαντο. καί γε οὕτως ἐποίο
Latin. πάντας τοὺς ξένους, ἐν δυναστείᾳ ἁρπάHide his eyes. This is the phrase in fovres τὰς γυναῖκας αὐτῶν. )
Lev. xx. 4, oy odpm. The Latin, All the uncleanness (αὖ and Latin).
praeterierit et despexerit, seems to be cd ‘‘all this uncleanness.” 7
a dittography. Profanation of this (man). MSS read
Who commit uncleanness . . . defile ‘this profanation.” I have emended
the sanctuary of the Lord . . . profane in accordance with the Latin. 5
His holy name. Cf. Lev. xx. 3, «« Hath 16. [And wo consideration of persons].
given of his seed unto Molech, to defile Bracketed as a dittography. Latin
my sanctuary . . . to profane my holy omits. τ
name.” The fragrance of sweet savour. Latin:
(Then) will the whole nation together, odorabitur odore suavitatis. |
etc. In Lev. xx. 5 only the man’s 18. The ground for Levi's appoint:
family is involved in his guilt. Our ment to the priesthood is quite diffe
author’s enlargement of the area of the in xxxii. 3. Levi is there consecrated
guilt is to justify the action of Simeon to the work of the priesthood as he
and Levi in slaying all the Shechemites. tithe or tenth in Jacob’s family. Ow
Our text (ver. 2) makes the whole author has thus made use of two con
people share in the rape of Dinah. In flicting traditions. Possibly a third is

CHAPTER XXX. 15-23 183
the priesthood, and to be Levites, that they might minister
before the Lord, as we, continually, and that Levi and his
sons may be blessed for ever; for he was zealous to execute
righteousness and judgment and vengeance on all those who
arose against Israel 19. And so they inscribe as a
testimony in his favour on the heavenly tables blessing
and righteousness before the God of all: 20. And we
remember the righteousness which the man fulfilled during
his life, at all periods of the year; until a thousand
generations they will record it, and it will come to him
and to his descendants after him, and he has been recorded
on the heavenly tables as a friend and a righteous man.
21. All this account I have written for thee, and have
commanded thee to say to the children of Israel, that they
should not commit sin nor transgress the ordinances nor
break the covenant which has been ordained for them, (but)
that they should fulfil it and be recorded as friends. 22. But
if they transgress and work uncleanness in every way, they
will be recorded on the heavenly tables as adversaries,
and they will be destroyed out of the book of life, and
they will be recorded in the book of those who will be
destroyed and with those who will be rooted out of the
earth. 23. And on the day when the sons of Jacob slew
Shechem a writing was recorded in their favour in heaven
that they had executed righteousness and uprightness and
to be found in Test. Levi 4, where Levi’s 19. God of all. See note on xxii.
appointment seems to be in answer to 4
his prayer: εἰσήκουσεν οὖν ὁ ὕψιστος 20. Friend, i.e,s of God. See note
τῆς προσευχῆς σου τοῦ διελεῖν σε ἀπὸ τῆς on xix. 9.
ἀδικίας καὶ γενέσθαι αὐτῷ... λει- 22. Transgress. Latin adds testaτουργὸν τοῦ προσώπου αὐτοῦ. Another mentum.
tradition appears in Shem. rabba 19 to Book of life. See note on this exthe effect that Levi received the priest- pression in my edition of Eth. Enoch
hood because it held fast to the rite of xlvii. 3. It may mean here the register
circumcision in Egypt when all the of those who enjoy temporal blessings,
other tribes neglected it (Weber, Jiid. but, in xxxvi. 10, of those who enjoy
Theol.” D. 309). For other reasons cf. eternal,
Baba bathra 123 a and Bamidbar rabba Book of those who will be destroyed
7. See Singer (p. 115 note). and, Latin has libro perditionum,

184 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
vengeance on the sinners, and it was written for a blessing.
24. And they brought Dinah, their sister, out of the house
of Shechem, and they took captive everything that was
in Shechem, their sheep and their oxen and their asses,
and all their wealth, and all their flocks, and brought them
all to Jacob their father. 25. And he reproached them
because they had put the city to the sword; for he feared
those who dwelt in the land, the Canaanites and the
Perizzites. 26. And the dread of the Lord was upon
all the cities which are around about Shechem, and they did
not rise to pursue after the sons of Jacob; for terror had
fallen upon them.
Jacob goes to Bethel to offer sacrifice, 1-3 (cf. Gen. xxxv.
2-4, 7,14). Isaac blesses Levi, 4-17, and Judah, 1822. Jacob recounts to Isaac how God prospered him, 24.
Jacob goes to Bethel with Rebecca and Deborah, 26-30.
Jacob blesses the God of his fathers, 31-32.
XXXL. And on the new moon of the month Jacob
spake to all the people of his house, saying: “ Purify yourselves and change your garments, and let us arise and —
go up to Bethel, where I vowed a vow to Him on the ©
day when I fled from the face of Esau my brother, because
He has been with me and brought me into this land in ~
peace, and put ye away the strange gods that are among |
24. Cf. Gen. xxxiii. 26, 28, xxv. 2, xxvi. 2, etc. I press the above |
And all their wealth. cd trans- correction of the translation because the ©
pose after “flocks” against α ὃ and context requires sy ገገ and not ois)
Latin. bx as in Gen. xxxiv. 30 in the corre25. Reproachedthem. Text=€dddnoe sponding passage. With our text “reπρὸς αὐτούς (so Latin, locutus est ad proached them because they had put
illos)= omy 137, which, however, in
the city to the sword,” cf. Test. Levi
this context the Greek translator should 6: of ἀδελφοὶ ἐπάταξαν τὴν πόλιν ἐν
have rendered by ἐλάλησε κατ᾽ αὐτῶν. στόματι ῥομφαίας. καὶ ἤκουσεν ὁ πατήρ,
The same wrong choice of the two καὶ ὠργίσθη, καὶ ἐλυπήθη. ͵
possible renderings of this phrase is 26. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 5.
found also in the LXX of Jer. vi. 10, XXXI. 1-2, Cf. Gen. xxxv, 2-4.

CHAPTERS XXX, 24-XXXI. 8 185
you.” 3) 2. And they gave up the strange gods and that
which was in their ears and which was fon their necks,+
and the idols which Rachel stole from Laban her brother she
gave wholly to Jacob, And he burnt and brake them
to pieces and destroyed them, and hid them under an oak
which is in the land of Shechem. 3. And he went up
on the new moon of the seventh month to Bethel. And he
built an altar at the place where he had slept, and he
set up a pillar there, and he sent word to his father Isaac
to come to him to his sacrifice, and to his mother Rebecca.
4. And Isaac said: “ Let my son Jacob come, and let me
see him before I die.” 5. And Jacob went to his father
Isaac and to his mother Rebecca, to the house of his father
Abraham, and he took two of his sons with him, Levi
and Judah, and he came to his father Isaac and to his
mother Rebecca. 6. And Rebecca came forth from the
tower to the front of it to kiss Jacob and embrace him;
for her spirit had revived when she heard: “ Behold Jacob
thy son has come”; and she kissed him. 7. And she saw
his two sons, and she recognised them, and said unto him:
“ Are these thy sons, my son?” and she embraced them
and kissed them, and blessed them, saying: “In you shall
the seed of Abraham become illustrious, and ye will prove
a blessing on the earth.” 8. And Jacob went in to Isaac
his father, to the chamber where he lay, and his two sons
were with him, and he took the hand of his father, and
stooping down he kissed him, and Isaac clung to the neck
2. They gave up= matawéwomi. give abth=««a h er father” instead of
Emended from (α) ὃ masawéwomii = *ehfiha,
“they melted.” cd give a bad emenda- 3-4. The same incident is referred to
tion masatéwémti= “‘ they tore away.” in Test. Levi 9, where it says of Isaac:
And which was ton their neckst. οὐκ ἠθέλησε πορευθῆναι μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν els
Here késaiwdihémfi seems corrupt for Βεθήλ.
’édawihodmiit=he“i r hands,” and the 5. This last meeting of Jacob with
whole emended clause ‘‘ which were in Tsaac and Rebecca is unknown to later
their hands” should be inserted after haggada (Beer).
«strange gods,” 6. Spirit had revived. Cf. Gen. xlv.
Her brother. The MSS corruptly 27 for the phrase.

186 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
of Jacob his son, and wept upon his neck. 9. And the
darkness left the eyes of Isaac, and he saw the two sons of
Jacob, Levi and Judah, and he said: “ Are these thy sons,
my son? for they are like thee. 10. And he said unto
him that they were truly his sons: “And thou hast
truly seen that they are truly my sons.” 11. And they
came near to him, and he turned and kissed them and
embraced them both together. 12. And the spirit of
prophecy came down into his mouth, and he took Levi
by his right hand and Judah by his left. 13. And he
turned to Levi first, and began to bless him first, and said
unto him: “May the God of all, the very Lord of all
the ages, bless thee and thy children throughout all the
ages, 14. And may the Lord give to thee and to thy seed
+ereatness and great gloryt, and cause thee and thy
seed, from among all flesh, to approach Him to serve in His
sanctuary as the angels of the presence and as the holy
(Even) as they, will the seed of thy sons be for glory —
ones.
and greatness and holiness, and may He make them great
9. Part of this verse with the subject great greatness of glory.” ὦ is corrupt
matter of ver. 5 and 10 sqq. is attri- but points in the direction of 6. Latin
buted by Syncellus (i.2 02) to J osephus = magno intellegere gloriam ejus. This
᾿Ιωσήππου. τῷ pry ἔτει τοῦ ᾿Ισαὰκ is decidedly better than the Ethiopic.
ἐπανῆλθεν ᾿Ιακὼβ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπὸ Μεσο- By a slight change we can arrive at it
ποταμίας. καὶ ἀναβλέψας ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ from 6. Hence we should probably
ἰδὼν τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Ιακὼβ ηὐλόγησε τὸν render: ‘‘to thy great seed to underΛευὶ ὡς ἀρχιερέα καὶ τὸν ᾿Ιούδαν ὡς stand His glory,” or else by another —
βασιλέα καὶ ἄρχοντα. change ‘‘to thy seed to have great
10. Seen that they are truly my sons. understanding of His glory.”
The Latin has: Vidisti, pater, quoniam Serve in His sanctuary as the angels
filii mei sunt, and is probably right; of the presence and as the holy ones.
for ‘am= a«trnuly ” may be corrupt On these two classes, see notes ii. 2, 18,
for ab = «0 father.” xv. 27. Here “the holy ones” appear
to form a distinct class, whereas in xv. —
12. Spirit of prophecy. See note on
27 they are used as a comprehensive
xxv. 14.
term for the two (or “three” according
18. Turned to Levi first, and began
to the Latin) highest orders. Levi is
to bless him. Similarly in Test. Levi 9
to serve in the sanctuary as the two
it says of Isaac: καὶ εὐλόγησέ pe ὁ
highest orders of angels serve in the
πατὴρ Tov πατρός μου, κατὰ πάντας
highest heaven. One or two such orders
τοὺς λόγους τῶν ὁράσεών μου ὧν εἶδον.
are mentioned in Test. Levi 3 (Armenian
God of all. See note on xxii. 4.
vers. A) as λειτουγοῦντες. ᾿
14. To thy seed tgreatness and great May He make them great. Lat, has
gloryt. Soc. 6 “to thy seed the sanctificabit.

CHAPTER XXXI. 9-16 187
unto all the ages. 15. And they will be princes and judges,
and chiefs of all the seed of the sons of Jacob;
They will speak the word of the Lord in righteousness,
And they will judge all His judgments in righteousness.
And they will declare My ways to Jacob
And My paths to Israel,
The blessing of the Lord will be given in their mouths
To bless all the seed of the beloved.
16. Thy mother has called thy name Levi,
And justly has she called thy name;
Thou wilt be joined to the Lord
And be the companion of all the sons of Jacob;
15. In this verse a double function ἱερωσύνῃ (Arm. as Bousset remarks
is assigned to the descendants of Levi: prob.=% δὲ δευτέρα ἔσται ἱερατεία):
they are to rule the nation (to be ὁ τρίτος ἐπικληθήσεται αὐτῷ ὄνομα
“princes and judges and chiefs’’) and κοινόν, ὅτι βασιλεὺς ἐν (so Arm. :
to be the priests of the nation (“The Greek ex) ᾿Ιούδᾳ ἀναστήσεται, καὶ
blessing of the Lord will be given in ποιήσει ἱερατείαν νέαν. The first refers
their mouths”). This description, com- to Moses, the greatest of Levi’s descendbined with other facts peculiar to the ants; the second denotes Aaron and
Maccabean period, requires us to recog- the Aaronitic priesthood; the third
nise here the early Maccabean princes. the Maccabean ruling priests, and in
The blessing given to Judah (verses 18, particular to Johannes Hyrcanus, for
19) confirms this interpretation. the subsequent words ἡ δὲ παρουσία
Princes and judges, and chiefs. The αὐτοῦ ἀγαπητή, ws προφήτης ὑψίστου
Latin omits “and chiefs.” We might point to his prophetic gifts. The threecompare Test. Levi 8: ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ fold offices of prophet, priest and king
κριταὶ καὶ γραμματεῖς, for the author of were never claimed for any Jewish
that work had either our text or a ruler save this Maccabean prince. See
source common to both before him. In Josephus, Ant. xiii. 10. 7; Bell. Jud.
the same chapter of the Test. Levi there IBA,
15, as Bousset (Z. f. WTliche Wissen- The blessing of the Lord wilt be given
schaft, 1900, pp. 165-167) has already in their mouths. Cf. Sir. 1. 20: δοῦναι
pointed out, an undoubted description εὐλογίαν κυρίῳ ἐκ χειλέων αὐτοῦ, and
of Johannes Hyrcanus: Λευί, eis τρεῖς Test. Reuben 6: πρὸς τὸν Λευὶ ἐγγίἀρχὰς διαιρεθήσεται τὸ σπέρμα σου els σατε ἐν ταπεινώσει καρδίας, ἵνα δέξησθε
σημεῖον δόξης κυρίου ἐπερχομένης (so MS εὐλογίαν ἐκ τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ.
Ῥ. Arm.=rijs παρουσίας τοῦ κυρίου). 16. Joined to the Lord . . . the
These three offices to be adminis- companion, ete. In the first, if not in
tered by Levi’s descendants are to be the second, there is a play on the name
signs of the coming of the Messiah. Levi, as in Gen, xxix. 34 “ will my husWhat these are is described in the band be joined to me (bx wx mb)...
words that follow: ὁ πρῶτος κλῆρος therefore was his name called Levi”
ἔσται μέγας" ὑπὲρ αὐτὸν οὐ γενήσεται (nb): cf. also Num. xviii. 2,4. Instead
ἕτερος (MS R). ὁ δεύτερος ἔσται ἐν of “joined to the Lord” the Latin has

188 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
, Let His table be thine,
And do thou and thy sons eat thereof ;
And may thy table be full unto all generations,
And thy food fail not unto all the ages.
17. And let all who hate thee fall down before thee,
And let all thy adversaries be rooted out and perish;
And blessed be he that blesses thee,
And cursed be every nation that curses thee.
18. And to Judah he said:
May the Lord give thee strength and power
To tread down all that hate thee;
A prince shalt thou be, thou and one of thy sons, over
the sons of Jacob;
May thy name and the name of thy sons go forth and
traverse every land and region.
Then will the Gentiles fear before thy face,
ad decorem Dei, which seems to refer to (xxiii. 26-30), the gates of Paradise to
Levi as derived from an, ‘‘a crown” be opened and the saints to eat of the
or “garland.” tree of life, as in Eth. Enoch xxv, 5, in
Let His table be thine, ete. Cf. Test. an eternal Messianic kingdom on earth,
Levi 8: as in Eth. Enoch xc. 29-38. In Judah
24-25 and Dan 5 the Messiah is to spring
καὶ ἔδεσθε πᾶν ὡραῖον ὁράσει
not from Levi but from Judah, as in Eth.
καὶ τὴν τράπεζαν κυρίου διανεμήσεται
Enoch xe. See Art. “Testaments of the
τὸ σπέρμα σου.
XII Patriarchs ” (in Bible Dict, vol. iv.).
Also Test. Judah 21: καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸν It is very probable that this last view
(Λευὶ) ὑπὲρ ὑμᾶς (Arm. Gk. ce) ἐξε- underlies our text. The words “a —
λέξατο Κύριος ἐγγίζειν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐσθίειν prince . . . thou and one of thy sons”
τράπεζαν αὐτοῦ. admit most naturally of this interpreta18-19, In the note on ver. 15 we saw tion. If this is right, then the Messiah
that according to the Test. Levi 8 the is to spring from Judah. In akingdom ~
three great offices held in turn by the which attains to realisation only gradudescendants of Levi were to be signs of ally (see notes on i. 29, xxiii. 26-30)
the coming Messiah who was to spring and not catastrophically no réle seems
from Levi or from Judah or from Judah to be assigned to him, as is also the case
and Levi combined (?). Thus according in Eth. Enoch xc. On the other hand
to Levi 18, Reuben 6, the Messiah (a this seems to be the earliest instance
Maccabean priest-king ?) was to spring of the presence of a Messiah in a tem |
from Levi and to be the eternal High porary Messianic kingdom (see note on ~
Priest and civil ruler of the nation. Dur- xxiii. 30). i
ing his reign sin was gradually to come 18. May thy name... go forth, etc.,
to an end just as our author supposes tee, that of the Jewish nation,

CHAPTER XXXL. 17-26 189
And all the nations will quake
[And all the peoples will quake].
19. In thee shall be the help of Jacob,
And in thee be found the salvation of Israel.
20. And when thou sittest on the throne of the honour of
thy righteousness,
There will be great peace for all the seed of the sons
of the beloved,
And blessed will he be that blesseth thee;
And all that hate thee and afflict thee and curse thee
Shall be rooted out and destroyed from the earth and
accursed.”
21. And turning he kissed him again and embraced
him, and rejoiced greatly; for he had seen the sons of
Jacob his son in very truth. 22. And he went forth
from between his feet and fell down and worshipped
him. And he blessed them. And (Jacob) rested there with
Isaac his father that night, and they eat and drank with
joy. 23. And he made the two sons of Jacob sleep, the
one on his right hand and the other on his left, and it was
counted to him for righteousness. 24. And Jacob told his
father everything during the night, how the Lord had
shown him great mercy, and how He had prospered (him
in) all his ways, and protected him from all evil. 25. And
Isaac blessed the God of his father Abraham, who had
not withdrawn His mercy and His righteousness from the
sons of His servant Isaac. 26. And in the morning Jacob
told his father Isaac the vow which he had vowed to
[And all the peoples will quake]. The beloved, i.e. Abraham, as in ver.
Bracketed as a dittography. 15;
20. The throne of the honour of thy 22. And he blessed them. This
righteousness, There will be great peace. clause seems out of place here.
Sod. bc read “The throne of honour, 26. Jacob asks his father to go with
Thy righteousness will be great peace,” him to Bethel ; but Isaac is unable to go,

190 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
the Lord, and the vision which he had seen, and that he
had built an altar, and that everything was ready for
the sacrifice to be made before the Lord as he had vowed,
and that he had come to set him on an ass. 27. And
Isaac said unto Jacob his son: “I am not able to go with
thee; for I am old and not able to bear the way: go, my
son, in peace; for I am one hundred and sixty-five
years this day; I am no longer able to journey; set
thy mother (on an ass) and let her go with thee. 28. And
I know, my son, that thou hast come on my account,
and may this day be blessed on which thou hast seen ~
me alive, and I also have seen thee, my son. 29. Mayest
thou prosper and fulfil the vow which thou hast vowed;
and put not off thy vow; for thou wilt be called to —
account as touching the vow; now therefore make haste 0
to perform it, and may He be pleased who has made ©
all things, to whom thou hast vowed the vow.” 30. And ἢ
he said to Rebecca: “Go with Jacob thy son”; and —
Rebecca went with Jacob her son, and Deborah with her, i
and they came to Bethel. 31. And Jacob remembered the
prayer with which his father had blessed him and his i
two sons, Levi and Judah, and he rejoiced and blessed the ©
God of his fathers, Abraham and Isaac. 32. And he said:
“Now I know that I have an eternal hope, and my sons ©
also, before the God of all”; and thus is it ordained con- ~
cerning the two; and they record it as an eternal testimony © |
unto them on the heavenly tables how Isaac blessed them.
Levys dream at Bethel, 1. Levi chosen to the priesthood, as
the tenth son, 2-3. Jacob celebrates the feast of
tabernacles and offers tithes through Levi: also tf 2 |
second tithe, 4-9. Law of tithes ordained, 10-15.
27. am... not able to bear the way, reference to the same event in the Tes ት
etc. See note on verses 3-4 for the Levi 9.

CHAPTERS XXXI. 27-XXXII. 3 191
Jacobs visions in which Jacob reads on the heavenly
tables his own future and that of his descendants, 16-26.
Celebrates the eighth day of feast of tabernacles, 2'7-29.
Death of Deborah, 30. Birth of Benjamin and death of
Rachel, 33-34. (Cf. Gen. xxxv. 8, 10, 11, 13, 16-20.)
XXXII. And he abode that night at Bethel, and Levi
dreamed that they had ordained and made him the priest of
the Most High God, him and his sons for ever; and he
awoke from his sleep and blessed the Lord. 2. And Jacob
rose early in the morning, on the fourteenth of this month,
and he gave a tithe of all that came with him, both of men
and cattle, both of gold and every vessel and garment, yea,
he gave tithes of all. 3. And in those days Rachel became
pregnant with her son Benjamin. And Jacob counted his
sons from him upwards and Levi fell to the portion of the
XXXII. 1. According also to Test. seems to be at the base of Ps. cx. 1-4,
Levi 8, Levi had this dream at Bethel, which constitutes a Messianic hymn
in which seven men appeared unto him addressed to Simeon or Simon the
and bade him: ᾿Αναστὰς ἔνδυσαι τὴν Maccabee. As Bickell has recognised,
στολὴν τῆς ἱερατείας, καὶ τὸν στέφανον this Ps, forms an acrostic on the name
τῆς δικαιοσύνης . . . “Amd τοῦ νῦν γίνου Simeon. On the frequency of this
εἰς ἱερέα κυρίου, σὺ καὶ τὸ σπέρμα σου divine title “ Most High” in the second
ἕως αἰῶνος. Cf. also Test. Levi ὅ. In cent. B.C. see note on xxxvi. 16,
ch. 9 of the same Testament Jacob Him and his sons for ever. This
is said to have had this dream also, phrase in the same connection is found
Priest of the Most High God. This in Test. Levi 8, already quoted above,
was the specific title chosen by the 2. Jacob rose early in the morning,
Maccabean priest-kings. Thus they etc. So also Test. Levi 9: καὶ ἀναστὰς
are called sacerdotes summi Dei in τὸ πρωὶ ἀπεδεκάτωσε πάντα δι᾽ ἐμοῦ τῷ
Assumpt. Mos. vi. 1 (where my emenda- κυρίῳ, though here the offering is said
tion is wrong): Hyrcanus II. is desig- to be through Levi.
nated ἀρχιερεὺς θεοῦ ὑψίστου by Joseph. 3. Jacob counted his sons from him
(Ant. xvi. 6. 2), and the Rosh ha- (i.e., Benjamin) upwards and Levi fell to
Shanah 180 states that it used to be the portion of the Lord, ete. Our text
said: ‘‘In such a year of Johanan in some form was before Cedrenus, i. 60:
priest of the Most High God.” This καὶ πάντα ἀποδεκατώσας ἃ ἐκέκτητο,
title, anciently borne by Melchizedek τελευταῖον ὑποβάλλει κλήρῳ τοὺς παῖδας,
(Gen. xiv. 18), was revived by the new καὶ τὸν Λευὶ τῷ Θεῷ ἀφιεροῖ, ἐτῶν
holders of the high priesthood. Our ὑπάρχοντα ιη΄ καὶ ἀρχιερέα ἀναδείκνυσι,
author has Gen. xiv. 18-20 before him ; δέκατον ὄντα ἀπὸ ἐσχάτου κατὰ τὸν τῆς
for in the next verse he adopts a clause ἀστρολογίας (Adyov). And still more
from Gen, xiv. 20: ‘‘And he gave hima clearly before his predecessor Syncellus, i.
tenth ofall.” We have seen in the note 200: Ἰακὼβ ἀποδεκατώσας τὰ ἑαυτοῦ τὸν
on xxxi, 18-19 that the Messiah was Λευὲ ιη΄ ἐτῶν ὄντα ἀρχιερέα ἀνέδειξεν,
to spring from this family according ι( ὄντα ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐσχάτου κατὰ τὸν τῆς
to Test. Levi 18. The same expectation ἀναστροφῆς λόγον. And again on D,

192 THE BOOK ΟΕ JUBILEES
Lord, and his father clothed him in the garments of the
priesthood and filled his hands. 4. And on the fifteenth of
this month, he brought to the altar fourteen oxen from
amongst the cattle, and twenty-eight rams, and forty-nine
sheep, and seven lambs, and twenty-one kids of the goats as
a burnt-offering on the altar of sacrifice, well pleasing for a
sweet savour before God. 5. This was his offering, in consequence of the vow which he had vowed that he would
give a tenth, with their fruit-offerings and their drink-offerings. 6. And when the fire had consumed it, he burnt
incense on the fire over the fire, and for a thank-offering
two oxen and four rams and four sheep, four he-goats, and
two sheep of a year old, and two kids of the goats; and
thus he did daily for seven days. 7. And he and all
his sons and his men were eating (this) with joy there
during seven days and blessing and thanking the Lord,
who had delivered him out of all his tribulation and had
207: ἱερωσύνη τῷ Λευὶ ἐδόθη, ὅτι begun again with Simeon. Levi thus
δέκατος ὑπάρχων ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐσχάτου τῶν came to be the tenth.
υἱῶν ᾿Ιακὼβ σὺν πᾶσι τοῖς ὑπάρχουσι Filled his hands. The technical —
τοῦ πατρὸς τῷ Θεῷ ἀπεδεκατώθη, expression for appointment to the priestκαθὼς προσηύξατο ᾿Ιακὼβ λέγων, καὶ hood. Cf. Exod. xxviii. 41, xxix. 9.
πάντα ὅσα ἄν μοι δῷς ἀποδεκατώσω
4, This celebration of the feast of
αὐτά. And on p. 211: Λευὶ γ΄ υἱὸς
tabernacles is peculiar as regards the
Λείας, U ἀπὸ ᾿Ιωσὴφ ἀναστρέφοντι καὶ
number of victims. According to the
Y ἀπὸ Ῥουβήν, ἐγεννήθη τῷ πατριάρχῃ
Levitical law on each of the seven days
᾿Ιακὼβ ἐν Μεσοποταμίᾳ τῳ mp’ ἔτει
a kid of the goats was offered as a sinαὐτοῦ, ὡς πρόδηλόν ἐστι. τοῦτον ἀριθoffering, and two rams and fourteen
μήσας ἀπὸ τοῦ Βενιαμὶν ἔτι ὄντος ἐν
lambs as a burnt-offering. Through- —
τῇ γαστρὶ Ραχὴλ ι( ὄντα ἐν ἄρρεσιν,
out the seven days seventy bullocks
ἀφιέρωσε τῷ Θεῷ καὶ ἀρχιερέα ἀνέδειξεν,
were offered, beginning with thirteen
ὡς ᾿Ιώσηππος, κατὰ τὸν τῆς ἀναστροφῆς on the first day, the number being
λόγον, συναποδεκατώσας αὐτῷ “πάντα
diminished daily till on the seventh day
τὰ ὑπάρχοντα καὶ ἀναθέμενος τῷ Θεῷ,
seven were offered. See Num. xxix.
καθὰ προσηύξατο πορευόμενος eis Μεσο12-40; Lev. xxiii. 34-36, 39-44, |
ποταμίαν, ὅτι καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἄν μοι
Seven lambs. MSS=60, but since
δῷς ἀποδεκατώσω αὐτά. Jacobs dedicaLatin has ‘‘septem,” and the heptadic
tion of Levi as his tenth son to the
system prevails, we may assume with
priesthood is found also in P. R. Eliez.
Roénsch (p. 147) that the corruption
ch. 37 (Beer, Buch d. Jub. 36-37), though
arose from a confusion of £ and 7.
the method of reckoning is different.
One. MSS=9. Emended with Latin
Jacob is said to have separated the first
“unum.” Corruption possibly due to
four sons born of his four wives and to
confusion of ἐννέα and ἕνα (Rénsch),
have counted his remaining sons from
Simeon to Benjamin and then to have 5. Cf. Gen. xxviii. 22.

CHAPTER XXXII. 4-15 193
given him his vow. 8. And he tithed all the clean animals,
and made a burnt sacrifice, but the unclean animals he
gave (not) to Levi his son, and he gave him all the souls
of the men. 9. And Levi discharged the priestly office at
Bethel before Jacob his father in preference to his ten
brothers, and he was a priest there, and Jacob gave his vow:
thus he tithed again the tithe to the Lord and sanctified it,
and it became holy unto Him. 10. And for this reason it
is ordained on the heavenly tables as a law for the tithing
again the tithe to eat before the Lord from year to year,
in the place where it is chosen that His name should dwell,
and to this law there is no limit of days for ever. 11.
This ordinance is written that it may be fulfilled from year
to year in eating the second tithe before the Lord in the
place where it has been chosen, and nothing shall remain
over from it from this year to the year following. 12. For in
its year shall the seed be eaten till the days of the gathering of the seed of the year, and the wine till the days of the
wine, and the oil till the days of its season. 13. And all
that is left thereof and becomes old, let it be regarded as
polluted: let it be burnt with fire, for it is unclean. 14.
And thus let them eat it together in the sanctuary, and let
them not suffer it to become old. 15. And all the tithes of
the oxen and sheep shall be holy unto the Lord, and shall
8. The unclean animalsh e gave (not) 11, The second tithe (so a). bed
to Levi. I have supplied the negative. “the tithe again.”
In Test. Levi 9 Levi says that Jacob 15. The tithes of the oxen and sheep.
ἀπεδεκάτωσε πάντα δι᾽ ἐμοῦ τῷ κυρίῳ. These tithes are mentioned in the O.T.
Our text would limit this to the clean only in Lev. xxvii. 32 and 2 Chron.
animals, XXX. 6. They were unknown to NeheGave him all the souls of the men. miah (x. 37-39, xii. 44-47, xiii. 5, 12).
Levi was to exercise his priestly func- Our author took this law of tithing
tions on behalf of these. literally, but rabbinic tradition (Rosh
9. Discharged the priestly office, or ha-Shanah i. 1, quoted by Dillmann on
“was constituted a priest.” Lev. xxvii. 32) sought to weaken the
Tithed again the tithe to the Lord. statement, and made it out to be merely
Cf. Num. xviii. 26. a tithe of the yearly increase, but the
10. Zo eat before the Lord, etc. Our context offers not the slightest justificatext holds closely to the law in Deut. tion for this step (see Bertholet on Ley.
xiv. 22 sq. Cf. Tobit i. 7. im loc.). See our text xiii. 26.
13

194 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
belong to His priests, which they will eat before Him from
year to year; for thus is it ordained and engraven regarding
the tithe on the heavenly tables. 16. And on the following
night, on the twenty-second day of this month, Jacob
resolved to build that place, and to surround the court with
a wall, and to sanctify it and make it holy for ever, for
himself and his children after him. 17. And the Lord ap- Ὁ
peared to him by night and blessed him and said unto him: —
‘Thy name shall not be called Jacob, but Israel shall they
name thy name.” 18. And He said unto him again: “I am
the Lord who created the heaven and the earth, and I shall
increase thee and multiply thee exceedingly, and kings will
δa) non.
come forth from thee, and they will judge everywhere whereever the foot of the sons of men has trodden. 19. And 1
shall give to thy seed all the earth which is under heaven, —
and they will judge all the nations according to their —
desires, and after that they will get possession of the whole
earth and inherit it for ever.” 20. And He finished speak- —
ing with him, and He went up from him, and Jacob looked
till He had ascended into heaven. 21. And he saw ina
vision of the night, and behold an angel descended from
heaven with seven tablets in his hands, and he gave them
to Jacob, and he read them and knew all that was written
therein which would befall him and his sons throughout 811
the ages. 22. And he showed him all that was written on
the tablets, and said unto him: “Do not build this place,
and do not make it an eternal sanctuary, and do not dwell
here ; for this is not the place. Go to the house of Abraham
thy father and dwell with Isaac thy father until the day of
the death of thy father. 23. For in Egypt thou wilt die
17-18. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 10-11. 20. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 13.
19. Our author here forsakes Gen. 21. Tablets. Cf. 4 Ezra xiv. 24.
XXXY. 12 and promises to Israel the Knew. Emended with Latin “ cogpossession of the whole earth. novit.” Text=‘‘read.” But probably
All the earth. Latin has: universas for “read and knew” we should read
benedictiones, and perhaps rightly. ‘read, see Introd. p. xli sq.

CHAPTER XXXII. 16-28 195
in peace, and in this land thou wilt be buried with honour
in the sepulchre of thy fathers, with Abraham and Isaac.
24. Fear not, for as thou hast seen and read it, thus will it
all be; and do thou write down everything as thou hast
seen and read.” 25. And Jacob said: “Lord, how can I
remember all that I have read and seen?” And he said unto
him: “I will bring all things to thy remembrance.” 26.
And he went up from him, and he awoke from his sleep,
and he remembered everything which he had read and seen,
and he wrote down all the words which he had read and
seen. 27. And he celebrated there yet another day, and he
sacrificed thereon according to all that he sacrificed on the
former days, and called its name +“ Addition,’+ for +this
day was added,} and the former days he called “ The Feast.”
28. And thus it was manifested that it should be, and it is
written on the heavenly tables: wherefore it was revealed to
him that he should celebrate it, and add it to the seven days
Our text seems to be the source of additional feast-day with Jacob’s dethe words ascribed by Origen (Fabricius, tention an eighth day in Bethel. In
Cod. Pseud. V.T. i. 761) to the Prayer the Talmud (Chag. 18a) the idea of
of Joseph: Διόπερ ἐν τῇ προσευχῇ τοῦ “keeping back” (in uy) is connected
᾿Ιωσὴφ δύναται οὕτω νοεῖσθαι τὸ λεγό- with work. For it states that on the
μενον ὑπὸ τοῦ ᾿Ιακώβ. ἀνέγνων γὰρ ἐν seventh day of the Passover “there
ταῖς πλαξὶ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ὅσα συμβήσεται must be a keeping back from every
ὑμῖν καὶ τοῖς υἱοῖς ὑμῶν. Cf. xlv. 14. kind of work” (naxbp 592 sy yawn).
25. Will bring all things, etc. Cf. See Levy's Weuhebr. Lexicon, iii. 680.
John xiv. 26, where the Paraclete Scholars are now generally agreed that
ὑπομνήσει ὑμᾶς πάντα. the word moixy means “sacred as27. tAddition}. This eighth day sembly.”
after the seven days of the feast of +This day was added}. Here we
tabernacles was called nsy (2 Chron. must suppose ἐπετέθη as corrupt for
vii. 9), in New Hebrew waxy (Joseph. ἐπεσχέθη. See rendering proposed in
preceding note. The last clause of the
Ant. iii. 10. 6, ’Acdpra): likewise the
next verse may have given rise to the
seventh day of the Passover feast.
corruption or wrong correction.
The translation in our text, ‘‘addition,” points to some corruption in the The Feast. This agrees exactly with
Greek or Hebrew. The Latin “reten- rabbinic usage. The feast of tabertatio” is a possible rendering. Rénsch nacles was called an = ‘‘ the Feast.” Cf.
suggests that ἐπίσχεσις stood in the Sukk. 420, 48a. Josephus (Ant. viii.
Greek version but was corrupted into 4, 1) designates it as ἑορτὴ ἁγιωτάτη
ἐπίθεσις in the copy before the Ethiopic kal μεγίστη and Philo ἑορτῶν μεγίστη.
translator. Hence we might render: 29. A very corrupt verse in the
“Called its name ‘a keeping back’ for Ethiopic and partially corrupt in the
on that day he was kept back.” Thus Latin. The restored translation is given
our author connects the origin of this below.

196 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
of the feast. 29. And its name was called +“ Addition,f +
+because thatt it was recorded amongst the days of the feast
days, +according tof the number of the days of the year.
30. And in the night, on the twenty-third of this month,
Deborah Rebecca’s nurse died, and they buried her beneath
the city under the oak of the river, and he called the name
of this place, “ The river of Deborah,” and the oak, “The oak
of the mourning of Deborah.” 31. And Rebecca went and
returned to her house to his father Isaac, and Jacob sent by
her hand rams and sheep and he-goats that she should
prepare a meal for his father such as he desired. 32. And
he went after his mother till he came to the land of
Kabritan, and he dwelt there. 33. And Rachel bare a son ~
in the night, and called his name “Son of my sorrow”; for |
she suffered in giving him birth: but his father called his
name Benjamin, on the eleventh of the eighth month in the
first of the sixth week of this jubilee. 34. And Rachel died
2143 A.M.
there and she was buried in the land of Ephrath, the same
is Bethlehem, and Jacob built a pillar on the grave of
Rachel, on the road above her grave. |
+Additiont. See note on ver. 27. into 5. Thus the whole verse should
+Because that}. The Ethiopic has run: “And its name was called ‘a
a peculiar phrase here ’esma ’enta which keeping back’ (i.e, nosy), when it was
usually =nam quod, but since an analo- recorded amongst the days of the feastgous yet rare phrase kama enta= quasi days in the number of the days of the
occurs in xliii. 19, xlviii. 13, we may take year.”
it that ’esma ’enta=propter quod as the 30. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 8. Deborah dies —
Latin version has it. But this gives no on the eighth day of the feast of
right sense. The reason of the name tabernacles.
is not given here but in ver. 27. Hence Of this place. So d, Latin and Vulg.
I suggest that propter quod= διότι= Gen. xxxv. 8=“‘of this place.” be=
‘3, which the Greek translator should ‘of this river.” a omits.
have rendered in this context by ὅτε. 32-34. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 16, 18-20.
It was recorded, Text of MSS un- 32. Land of Kabratan. Thisgoes back
grammatical, but bya change of vocalisa- to pox nገ55= “some distance” in Gen. —
tion in one letter we arrive at the above. xxxv. 16, but the translation like that
Amongst the day=s b a ‘lata emended of the LXX (Χαβραθα) took -n2ጋ to be
with Latin “in dies” from basgm a= a proper name.
“for a testimony ” (6d). c has basalim 34. Rachel died. According to Book
= ‘*in peace.” of Jashar (Dict. des Apocr. ii. 1172)
+According tot. Here we expect Rachel was only forty-five years old.
“in.” Accordingly I suggest that we In the land of Ephrath. Gen. xxxv
have here an original corruption of 3 19, “in the way to Ephrath.”

CHAPTERS XXXII. 29-XXXIII. 7 197
Reuben sins with Bilhah, 1-9 (cf. Gen. xxxv. 21,22). Laws
regarding incest, 10-20. Jacobs children, 22. (Cf.
Gen. xxxv. 23-27.)
XXXIII. And Jacob went and dwelt to the south of
Magdaladra’éf, And he went to his father Isaac, he and
Leah his wife, on the new moon of the tenth month. 2.
And Reuben saw Bilhah, Rachel’s maid, the concubine of
his father, bathing in water in a secret place, and he loved
her. 3. And he hid himself at night, and he entered the
house of Bilhah [at night], and he found her sleeping alone
on a bed in her house. 4. And he lay with her, and she
awoke and saw, and behold Reuben was lying with her in
the bed, and she uncovered the border of her covering and
seized him, and cried out, and discovered that it was Reuben.
5. And she was ashamed because of him, and released her
hand from him, and he fled. 6. And she lamented because
of this thing exceedingly, and did not tell it to any one. 7.
And when Jacob returned and sought her, she said unto
XXXII. 1. To the south of Magdala- these passages Reuben’s guilt is denied
dr@éf, This name is a compression of absolutely. These writings state that
mx τισι, “the tower of Eder of on Rachel’s death Jacob settled in the
Ephrath,” Gen. xxxv. 21. See a prob- tent of Bilhah her handmaid, and that
ably corrupt form of this name in xxxiv. Reuben, being indignant on behalf of
15. In Test. Reuben 3, where the same his mother Leah, went into Bilhah’s tent
scene is recounted, we have ἐν T'adép and withdrew his father’s couch from
πλησίον Eppadd. it, or threw Bilhah’s couch into disAnd he went to his father Isaac... order etc., and that on this ground the
2. And Reuben saw Bilhah, etc. It was Scripture held that he lay with Bilhah.
during Jacob’s absence with Isaac that In Shabb. 55 ὁ it is recounted that the
the outrage was done. So Test. Reuben earlier teachers, R. Joshua and KR.
3: ἀπόντος yap ᾿Ιακὼβ τοῦ πατρὸς Eliezer, accepted the narrative in Gen.
ἡμῶν πρὸς ᾿Ισαὰκ τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ, xxxv. 22.
ὄντων ἡμῶν ἐν Tagép, πλησίον ᾿Εφραθὰ 3. And he hid himself. . . house of
οἴκου Βηθλεέμ, Badda . . . ἀκάλυφος Bilhah [at night]. Latin is preferable :
κατέκειτο ἐν τῷ κοιτῶνι. Et introivit nocte occulte ad Ballan.
2. Saw Bilhah . . . bathing, ete. The second “at night” is a dittography.
Cf. Test. Reuben 3: εἰ μὴ yap εἶδον 4, He lay with her, and she awoke.
ἐγὼ Βάλλαν λουομένην ἐν σκεπινῷ Test. Reuben 3 agrees with this: κἀγὼ
τόπῳ, κιτιλ. A very different account εἰσελθών... ἔπραξα τὴν ἀσέβειαν,
of Reuben’s conduct appears in later καί, καταλιπὼν αὐτὴν κοιμωμένην,
works: Gen. rabba 98, 99; Ps.-Jon. ἐξῆλθον.
on Gen. xxxv. 22, Shabb. 556 and the 5. She was ashamed because of him.
Book of Jashar (op. cit. 1172). In Latin: confusus est ab ea,

198 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
him: “I am not clean for thee, for I have been defiled as
regards thee ; for Reuben has defiled me, and has lain with
me in the night, and I was asleep, and did not discover
until he uncovered my skirt and slept with me.” 8. And
Jacob was exceedingly wroth with Reuben because he had
lain with Bilhah, because he had uncovered his father’s
skirt. 9. And Jacob did not approach her again because
Reuben had defiled her. And as for any man who uncovers —
his father’s skirt his deed is wicked exceedingly, for he is
abominable before the Lord. 10. For this reason it ig
written and ordained on the heavenly tables that a man |
should not lie with his father’s wife, and should not uncover |
his father’s skirt, for this is unclean: they shall surely die
together, the man who lies with his father’s wife and the —
woman also, for they have wrought uncleanness on the earth. ~
11. And there shall be nothing unclean before our God in ,
the nation which He has chosen for Himself as a possession. |
12. And again, it is written a second time: “Cursed be he |
who lieth with the wife of his father, for he hath uncovered
his father’s shame”; and all the holy ones of the Lord said
“So be it; so be it.” 13. And do thou, Moses, command —
the children of Israel that they observe this word; for it
(entails) a punishment of death; and it is unclean, and
there is no atonement for ever to atone for the man who
has committed this, but he is to be put to death and slain,
and stoned with stones, and rooted out from the midst of
the people of our God. 14. For to no man who does so in
Israel is it permitted to remain alive a single day on the
earth, for he is abominable and unclean. 15. And let them
not say: to Reuben was granted life and forgiveness after
7. Test. Reu3b reeprensen ts Jacob re- 10. They shall surely die. So Ler
ceiving this information from an angel. xx. 11.
oor my skirt. Cf. Deut. xxii. 12. Cf. Deut. xxii. 30.
9. Did not approach her again. So 13. A punishment of death=xplow
Test. Reuben 3: μηκέτι ἁψάμενος αὐτῆς. θανάτου = nyp-pBwis (Jer zx: 16).

CHAPTER XXXIII. 8-22 199
he had lain with his father’s concubine, and to her also
though she had a husband, and her husband Jacob, his
father, was still alive. 16. For until that time there had
not been revealed the ordinance and judgment and law in
its completeness for all, but in thy days (it has been revealed)
as a law of seasons and of days, and an everlasting law for
the everlasting generations. 17. And for this law there is
no consummation of days, and no atonement for it, but they
must both be rooted out in the midst of the nation: on the
day whereon they committed it they shall slay them. 18.
And do thou, Moses, write (it) down for Israel that they may
observe it, and do according to these words, and not commit
a sin unto death; for the Lord our God is judge, who
respects not persons and accepts not gifts. 19. And tell
them these words of the covenant, that they may hear and
observe, and be on their guard with respect to them, and
not be destroyed and rooted out of the land; for an uncleanness, and an abomination, and a contamination, and a pollution are all they who commit it on the earth before our God.
20. And there is no greater sin than the fornication which
they commit on earth; for Israel is a holy nation unto the
Lord its God, and a nation of inheritance, and a priestly and
royal nation and for (His own) possession; and there shall
no such uncleanness appear in the midst of the holy nation.
21. And in the third year of this sixth week Jacob and all 2145 a.m.
his sons went and dwelt in the house of Abraham, near
Isaac his father and Rebecca his mother. 22. And these
were the names of the sons of Jacob: the first-born Reuben,
16. Our author here anticipates the (His own) possess=i oNna s ἱερατικὸς
Pauline doctrine: “where there is no καὶ βασιλικὸς καὶ περιούσιος (or ovclas).
law there is no transgression” (Rom. Cf. Latin populus sacerdotalis et regalis
iv. 15). et tsanctificationis}. Here, as in xvi.
18. Sin unto death. See note on 18, xix. 18 above, the Latin has misx 22. translated περιούσιος or οὐσίας as ὅσιος.
Who respects not persons, etc. Cf. Royal nation (a). Literally = “nation
v. 16, xl. 8. of a kingdom.” Cf. Latin (populus)
20. See note on xvi. 18. regalis. cd=“of a kingdom.”
A priestly and royal nation and for 22. Cf. Gen. xxx. 23-27.

200 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulon, the sons of Leah;
and the sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin; and the sons
of Bilhah, Dan and Naphtali; and the sons of Zilpah, Gad
and Asher; and Dinah, the daughter of Leah, the only
daughter of Jacob. 23. And they came and bowed themselves to Isaac and Rebecca, and when they saw them they
blessed Jacob and all his sons, and Isaac rejoiced exceedingly, for he saw the sons of Jacob, his younger son, and he
blessed them.
Warfare of the Amorite kings against Jacob and his sons,
1-9. Jacob sends Joseph to visit his brethren, 10.
Joseph sold and carried down into Egypt, 11-12 (ef.
Gen, xxxvii. 14, 17, 18, 25, 32-36). Deaths of Bilhah
and Dinah,15. Jacob mourns for Joseph, 13, 14, 17.
Institution of Day of Atonement on day when news of
Josephs death arrived, 18-19. Wives of Jacobs sons,
20-21.
2148 A.M. XXXIV. And in the sixth year of this week of this
forty-fourth jubilee Jacob sent his sons to pasture their
sheep, and his servants with them, to the pastures of
Shechem. 2. And the seven kings of the Amorites
assembled themselves together against them, to slay them,
hiding themselves under the trees, and to take their cattle
" XXXIV. 1. His servants (bcd). a here recast so as to call to mind some
reads ‘‘ their servants.” of the great victories of the Maccabees
(see below). A fuller account of this
2. Kings of the Amorites assembled
legend is given in Test. Judah 3-7, and
. » - to slay them. This clause is
a still fuller in the Midrash Wajjissau
found also in the Midrash Wajjissau in
which is translated by Gaster in the
this connection.
Chronicles of Jerahmeel, 1899, pp.
Hiding themselves. Latin gives
80-87. I have introduced some cor-
“et sederunt.” This seems right ; for
rections into this translation from a
there is no hint of their hiding in any
comparison of the Hebrew ΜΗ in the
of the other versions of this legend.
Bodleian, though I have not seen the
2-8. In these verses we have a short British Museum MS from which Gaster
outline of an ancient legend which, has drawn occasional phrases. A
already attested in Gen. xlviii. 22, tells version almost identical with that of
of Jacob’s conquest of Shechem (see xlv. Gaster’s has been preserved inthe Jalkut
14 and notes on p. 201), and is probably Shimeoni i. 40 d-410, and has been

CHAPTERS XXXIII. 23-XXXIV. 6 201
as a prey. 3. And Jacob and Levi and Judah and Joseph
were in the house with Isaac their father; for his spirit
was sorrowful, and they could not leave him: and Benjamin
was the youngest, and for this reason remained with his
father. 4. And there came the king[s] of Taphi, and the
king[s] of +’Arésa,} and the king[s] of Sér4gan, and the king[s]
of 5610, and the king[s] of Ga’as, and the king of Béthérén,
and the king of -+Ma’anisdkir,t and all those who dwell in
these mountains (and) who dwell in the woods in the land
of Canaan. 5. And they announced this to Jacob saying:
“Behold, the kings of the Amorites have surrounded thy
sons, and plundered their herds.”
6. And he arose from
his house, he and his three sons and all the servants of
reprinted by Jellinek in his Bet ha- JN) above thy brethren, which I took
Midrasch, iii. 1-5. A German translaout of the hand of the Amorite with
tion of part of this Midrash by Jellinek
my sword and with my bow.” So
will be found in Rénsch, 390-394.
the Rev. Version following the renderFrom a comparison of the Hebrew text
ing of Onkelos and the Syriac. But as
I have observed that this translation
most scholars are now agreed, nv here
has been carelessly edited in one or
refers to Shechem. So anciently also the
more points. Thus on p. 393 line 11
LXX (Σίκιμα) and Ps,-Jon. on Gen. xlviii.
instead of «« Pasasi von Aram” we should
read “Pasusi, Konig von Sartan, und 22 (nav xmp, the city of Shechem).
Laban, Konig von Aram.” A much Thus our verse points to an overthrow
enlarged and elaborated form of the of Shechem by all Israel under Jacob’s
legend is given in the Book of Jashar direction, and the fact that Jacob makes
(see the French translation: Dict. it over to one of his sons to the exclusion
des Apocr. ii. 1173-1184). So far of the rest can only be justified by the
as I have compared this translation further fact that he was the personal
and the text it is trustworthy. A short leader of the war and had captured
but interesting study of this subject Shechem with his sword and with his
has appeared from the pen of Bousset bow (see Holzinger’s Commentary in
in the Ζ. f. NTliche Wissenschaft, loc.). Thus this form of the story
1890, pp. 202-204, but in some cases differs clearly from that in Gen. xxxiv.
he has been misled by the translations, There Jacob has no part whatever in
and in others I have been obliged to the onslaught on Shechem and is subdisagree with his identifications. sequently hostile to its authors (xxxiv.
A full treatment of this legend 30, xlix. 5-7). But the possibly older
belongs rather to the Test. Judah 3-7, account has survived in the present
where the order of events corresponds work as in Gen. xlviii. 22. Before we
closely with that in the Midrash pass on, we might observe that later
Wajjissau, and in many cases pre- rabbinic tradition changed ‘“‘sword and
supposes details which are found in bow” into ‘merits and good deeds”
that Midrash. That some form of this Targ. Jerus. in loc.; Gen. rabba 97
legend is very ancient is attested by (to these Beer (Buch d. Jub. p. 8) adds :
the fact that it is referred to in Gen. Baba bathra 123 a), and in a corrupt
xlviii. 22 where Jacob declares: ‘I text of Onkelos we find ‘prayer and
have given to thee one portion (naw supplication.”

THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
202
his father, and his own servants, and he went against them
with six thousand men, who carried swords. 7. And he
Returning now to the legend in our the proper names in the various
text, I append here a table in which authorities are compared.
Midrash Wajjissau
in Bodleian MS
used by Gaster,
Jubilees. gies ta with the forms Book of Jashar.
ayo in Jellinek’s text
in brackets when
these differ.
1 | Taphd Tagové (1) Jashub of | (1) Jashub of
Tappuach Tappuach
2 | ’Arésa ᾿Ασούρ (MS (4) Pirathaho of | (4) Parathon of
corrupt for ‘Aowp |H azor Hazor (wanting
= sn) on ii. 1173-1174,
but Hazor is mentioned on 1176,
1182)
3 | Séragén ᾽Αρετάν (5) Susi of Sartan | (5) Sartan
[Pasusi of Sartan]
4 | Sél6 Σηλώμ (3) Shilo [Zerori | (3) Thuri (rs)
of Shiloh] of Shiloh
5 |G a’as Tads (MSS OR) | (2) Gaash [Hlon | (2) Ton (p>) of
of Gaash] Gaash
6 | Béthérén Axwp (? for Xw-|(6) Laban of | (6) Laban of
pav. Xwpa in| Cheldon (so Bod- | Bethoron
an Arm. MS) leian Hebrew MS.
British Museum
MS may have
“ Horan’’)[ Laban
of Aram |
7 | Ma’anisakir (cor-| Maxcp [com-|(7) Shakir of|(7) Shakir of
rupt for Shakir-| pressed from} Machnah [Shebir | Machnaim
Maani) Μαχανισακιρ. Cf. |o f Machnaim]
form in Jubilees]
3. Sorrowful. Latin is ‘“‘pusill- one of the cities fortified by Bacchides
animes.” (1 Mace. ix. 50).
4, King[s] of Tapht. In this and Sérdgdn. In the Hebrew authorities
all the other cases in this verse we this word appears as Sartan. I can
should read “king” and not the discover nothing further about it.
plural. The Latin has the singular in Séi6. This is Shiloh. See above
all the instances but one. Taphi is to table.
be identified with Τεφών in 1 Macc. Gé’as. This may be the Gaash (wy)
and this with Tappuah in Jos. xv. 53, in the hill-country of Ephraim, where
xvi. 8. It was fortified by Bacchides Joshua was buried (Jos. xxiv. 30;
against Jonathan (1 Macc. ix. 50). Judg. ii. 9).
Τ᾿ Arésa.t+ This is corrupt for Aser Béthérén. The city Bethhoron was
(cf. Tobit i. 2, ᾿Ασήρ) or rather Asor, closely associated with the victories of
ὦ.6., Hazor (xn). See above table. the Maccabees. Thus Judas defeated
At Hazor, according to 1 Macc. xi. 67 Seron, a Syrian general, in the
sqq.; Joseph. Ant. xiii. 5. 7, Jonathan neighbourhood of Bethhoron and put
won a great victory over the Syrians. 800 of his troops to the sword (1 Mace.
Parathon, who was king of Hazor (see iii, 18-94; Jos. Age: RNS
table above), is of the same name as few years later it was the scene of

CHAPTER XXXIV. 7-9
203
slew them in the pastures of Shechem, and pursued those
who fled, and he slew them with the edge of the sword,
and he slew f’Arésat+ and Taphi and Sarégin and Sél6 and
+ Amanisakirt and GAlga]'as, and he recovered his herds.
8. And he prevailed over them, and imposed tribute on
them that they should pay him tribute, five fruit products
of their land, and he built R6bél and Tamnatares. 9. And
Judas’s great victory over Nicanor Jerahmeel (pp. 83-84) supports the
when 9000 Syrians were slain (1 Macc. view in the Test. Jud.: ‘* All the
vii. 39-47; Joseph. Ant. xii. 10. 5). Amorites came without arms and
It was subsequently fortified by promised to keep peace (and friendship,
Bacchides against Jonathan (1 Macc. and they gave unto Jacob Timn‘a and
ix. 50; Joseph. Anz. xiii. 1. 3). the whole land of Hararyah), Then
THM anisdkir.t This is corrupt for Jacob made peace with them, and the
Shakirmaant or Shakir, king of Maha- sons of Jacob restored them all the
naim. See table above. sheep they had captured from them,
(And). Supplied from Latin. and in returning them gave double,
6. Six thousand (abd). c gives two for one. And Jacob built Timnah
800. (nxn) and Judah built Zabel (=n).
7. According to our text six kings This translation does not represent the
were slain out of the seven. ‘This Bodleian MS, which (fol. 30 a) runs as
agrees with Test. Jud. 4. follows: “Allthe Amorites . . . came
8-9. With this passage cf. Test. Jud. to them without arms and surrendered
7: ἐδεήθησαν τοῦ πατρός μου καὶ themselves to be their hirelings, and
ἐποίησεν εἰρήνην μετ᾽ αὐτῶν, καὶ οὐκ they made peace with them, and they
ἐποιήσαμεν αὐτοῖς οὐθὲν κακόν, ἀλλ᾽ gave a present and they restored to
ἐποιήσαμεν αὐτοὺς ὑποσπόνδους, καὶ them Jacob (sic, here I think the unἀπεδώκαμεν αὐτοῖς πᾶσαν τὴν αἰχμα- grammatical apy’ ond is corrupt rather
λωσίαν. καὶ φκοδόμησα ἐγὼ τὴν Θάμνα for apy’ 325: hence “restored to the
καὶ ὁ πατήρ μου τὴν Ῥαβαήλ (Ο, sons of Jacob” as in the Yalkut and
Ῥοβαήλ P). It will be observed that our text; or for apy’ 32: hence “the
whereas in our text Jacob recovers his sons of Jacob restored” as we presume
herds, in the Test. Jud. the sons of is the text of the British Museum MS
Jacob restore to the Amorites the occasionally used by Gaster) all the
herds which they had taken from them. cattle which they had captured twice
This divergence in the tradition is seen over, and they restored (reading inn
also in the Hebrew versions. Thus instead of the intransitive yin) the
the Yalkut (in Jellinek’s Bet ha- booty and Jacob built (sic) and also
Midrasch) supports our text: “ All the Judah (sic).” The Bodleian MS menAmorites . came without arms tions no towns. The view represented
and besought them to make in the Test. Jud. has thus no indubitable
peace, and they made peace with them support in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel.
and gave them Timna (nen) and all It has such, however, in the Book of
the land of Hararya (ni). And then Jashar (op. cit. ii. 1184): Les fils de
Jacob made peace with them, and they Jacob . . leur rendirent tous les
delivered up to the sons of Jacob all hommes qu ils avaient emmenés prisonthe cattle which they had taken from niers . . . et autre butin.”
them, (returning) two for each one, and 8. Rébé. This is most probably
they gave them tribute, and returned corrupt for Arbael, cf. Jalkut (Sxa1x)
(nnn) to them all the booty; and quoted in preceding note. Thus Arbael
Jacob turned to Timnah and Judah to appears in Test. Jud. 7 as Ῥαβαήλ
Arbael (NZS). On the other hand (O) or Ῥοβαήλ (P), Ῥαμβαήλ (CR);
Gaster’s translation of the Chronicles of bya: apparently in the Brit. Museum

204 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
he returned in peace, and made peace with them, and they
became his servants, until the day that he and his sons
went down into Egypt. 10. And in the seventh year of
this week he sent Joseph to learn about the welfare
2149 A.M.
of his brothers from his house to the land of Shechem,
and he found them in the land of Dothan. 11. And they
dealt treacherously with him, and formed a plot against
him to slay him, but changing their minds, they sold
him to Ishmaelite merchants, and they brought him down
into Egypt, and they sold him to Potiphar, the eunuch
of Pharaoh, the chief of the cooks, priest of the city of
‘Eléw. 12. And the sons of Jacob slaughtered a kid,
and dipped the coat of Joseph in the blood, and sent (it) to
Jacob their father on the tenth of the seventh month.
13. And he mourned all that night, for they had brought it
to him in the evening, and he became feverish with
mourning for his death, and he said: “An evil beast hath
devoured Joseph”; and all the members of his house
[mourned with him that day, and they] were grieving and
mourning with him all that day. 14, And his sons and
MS used by Gaster but not in the became his servants. The Hebrew for
Bodleian (see preceding note). We these words is preserved in the
have here most probably the strong- Chronicles of Jerahmeel ; see note on
hold Arbela mentioned in 1 Mace. ix. verses 8-9,
2, where it is said that Bacchides and 10-11. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 12, 13, 17,
Alcimus “went by the way that lead- 20, 28, 36.
eth to Galgala and encamped against
10. Dothan. Eth. Datha im.
Mesaloth which is in Arbela (Μεσσαλὼθ
11. Eunuch of Pharaoh. Here
τὴν ἐν ᾿Αρβήλοις) and got possession of
‘‘Kunuch” goes back to ο΄. But
it” (cf. Joseph. Ant. xii. 11. 1). Here
this word need not be taken literally
it seems best with Tuch and Wellhausen
but simply as meaning ‘‘a court
to read Μεσα=δ ΠωΥ θὉ = “strongofficial” ; cf. 2 Kings xxv. 19.
holds” (see Enyc. Bib. i. 291). Arbela
Chief of the cooks. Cf. xxxix. 2, 14,
is mentioned in the Book of Jashar
xl. 10. Our text and the LXX of Gen.
(op. cit. ii. 1178) as one of the cities
xxxvii. 36 wrongly take D,nabn-ገe as =
put to the sword by the sons of Jacob
ἀρχιμάγειρος. It should be ‘captain
in this war.
of the body-guard.”
Tamnatérés = Θαμναθάρες = d>n-ninn,
City of ᾿Εἴδ-ει Ἡλυίο υ πόλεως (cf.
Judg. ii. 9. This appears as Timna
(nn) in the Jalkut: see note on verses LXX Gen. xli. 45, 50, xlvi. 20), ze.
8-9. It was one of the cities fortified On (18).
by Bacchides against Jonathan (1 Mace. 12-14, Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 31-35.
ix. 50). 13. [Mourned with him that day,and —
9. Made peace with them, and they they]. Bracketed as a dittography.

CHAPTER XXXIV. 10-20 205
his daughter rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be
comforted for his son. 15. And on that day Bilhah heard
that Joseph had perished, and she died mourning him, and
she was living in +Qafratéf;> and Dinah also, his daughter,
died after Joseph had perished. And there came these three
mournings upon Israel in one month. 16. And they buried
Bilhah over against the tomb of Rachel, and Dinah also,
his daughter, they buried there. 17. And he mourned for
Joseph one year, and did not cease, for he said “ Let me go
down to the grave mourning for my son.” 18. For this
reason it is ordained for the children of Israel that they
should afflict themselves on the tenth of the seventh month—
on the day that the news which made him weep for Joseph
came to Jacob his father—that they should make atonement for themselves thereon with a young goat on the
tenth of the seventh month, once a year, for their sins;
for they had grieved the affection of their father regarding
Joseph his son, 19. And this day has been ordained
that they should grieve thereon for their sins, and for
all their transgressions and for all their errors, so that they
might cleanse themselves on that day once a year. 20. And
after Joseph perished, the sons of Jacob took unto themselves wives. The name of Reuben’s wife is ‘Ada; and
the name of Simeon’s wife is “Adiba’a, a Canaanite; and the
15. Qafratéf (Ὁ and so almost a). ὁ 18. A flict themselves. This phrase (=
reads Qaraftifa. These may be corrup- ταπεινοῦν τὴν ψυχήν, ny my) is a techtions of “‘ Eder of Ephrath,” which was nical designation for fasting: see Lev.
at one time the abode of Jacob. See xvi. 31, xxiii. 27, 32; Ezra viii. 21;
XXxiii, 1 note. Or more probably Dan. x. 12. So used in the Mishna:
- Qafratéf is the same as Kabratan in n'iyn = “ fasting.”
XXX. 32, where see note.
20. For the list of these names in
Dinah. According to Gen. rabba
the Syriac Fragment see my text, p. 188.
Dinah married Simeon ; according
A different list is given in the Book
0 Ps.-Philo, Ant. bib1. Lib. p. 51, she
of Jashar, Dict. des Apocr. ii. 1198.
married Job.
‘Add. So Syriac Fragment. Book
17. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 35.
of Jashar gives Elioram, daughter of
18-19. Cf. Lev. xvi. 29, 34, 15, 16.—
Havi, a Canaanitess.
Haggada knows nothing of this institu-
"Adiba#a, a Canaanite. This is
tion of the Day of Atonement. See notes
referred to in Gen. xlvi. 10 ; Exod, vi.
on v. 17-18 which possibly belong to
15 where Shaul a son of Levi is said to
this context.

206 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
name of Levis wife is Mélka, of the daughters of Aram,
of the seed of the sons of Terah; and the name of Judah’s
wife, Bétast’él, a Canaanite ; and the name of Issachar’s
wife, Hézaqi; and the name of Zebulon’s wife, FNiimant ;
and the name of Dan's wife, Eels ; and the name of
Naphtali’s wife, Rast, of Mesopotamia; and the name of
Gad’s wife, Maka; and the name of Asher’s wife, Tjona ;
and the name of Joseph’s wife, Asenath, the Egyptian; and
the name of Benjamin’s wife, Tjasaka. 21. And Simeon
repented, and took a second wife from Mesopotamia as
his brothers.
be the son of a Canaanitish woman. and Bk, of Jashar called a Canaanitess.
Since such a marriage was an abomina- Here again the rabbinic tradition felt
tion for which death was the penalty, this an offence. Accordingly in some of
οἵ, xxx. 7 sqq., it is to our author's the MSS of Onkelos on Gen. xxxviii. 2
credit that he has not sought to explain 2922 wx is rendered by NIA 523, “a
away the statement in Gen. xlvi. 10. merchant.” Similarly in Ps.-Jon. on
’Adibfa may be corrupt ; for the Syriac the same passage: also in Gen. rabba
Fragment has fs and Book of 85; Pessach. 50a. Simeon ben
Lakish (circ. 200-250 A.D.) gave this
Jashar “Buna.” Later rabbinic tradiinterpretation on the ground of Hosea
tion sought to explain this away. Acxii. 7, where he evidently took »3y33 in
cording to Gen. rabba 80 Shaul the son
the sense of “trader,” ‘‘ merchant.”
of the Canaanitish woman is said to be
the son of Dinah, who was deflowered Hézaga. Syr. Frag. Loa Bk.
by Shechem. The Rabbis say that of Jashar, ‘‘ Arida,”
Simeon married her (so also Book of
+NVimant. Since abd omit this
Jashar, op. cit. ii, 1198). Another
name it may be the invention of an
evasion is found in Ps.-Jon. on Gen. Ethiopic scribe. Furthermore the Syr.
xlvi. 10 where Shaul is said to be “‘Zimri Frag. gives Waly), “Adni.” Bk, of
who did the work of the Canaanites in
Shittim” ; and in Sanh. 820, Shaul is Jashar, “ Marusa.”’
said to have been called ‘‘the son of a ’fgla. Syr. Frag. Bk,
Canaanite” ‘‘because he had comof Jashar, “Aphlalath,
mitted an act like that of Canaan”
Rast’. Syr. Frag. Oi. Bk. of
(see Beer, Buch der Jubiliéen, p. 51 sq.).
Méiké. So also in Test. Levi ll Jashar, «« Merimath.”
and Syriac Fragment. Bk. of Jashar Maka. Syr. Frag. Bk.
“ Adina,” daughter of Jobab, son of
of Jashar, “ Usith,” a daughter οὗ
Joctan, son of Heber.
Emoram, son of Hus, son of Nachor.” —
Terah. Eth. Taran.
The Syr. Frag. makes Ma aka also to ~
BetasVél. Cf. xli. 7. So also in
be of the house of Nachor. 0
Test. Jud. 8, 13, 16 where the name
appears variously as Βησσοῦς, Βησουέ, ‘Jind. Syr. Frag. a. Bk. of —
Βισσουέ. These are all derived from Jashar, first ““Edon” and next ‘ Haywrena, “the daughter of Shua”: see dora.”
Gen. xxxviii. 2 and Syriac Fragment Asenath. Eth ’Asnéth. Cf. Gen. |
Waa des. The Bk. of Jashar ΧΙ, 45.
gives her personal name as “ Habith.” ’Tjasaka. Syr. Frag. . Bk.
She is here and in Test. Jud. 13, 16 of Jashar, “" Mahalia” and “ Harbath,” —

CHAPTERS XXXIV. 21-XXXV. 7 207
Rebecca's admonition to Jacob and his reply, 1-8. Rebecca
asks Isaac to make Esau swear that he will not pure
Jacob, 9-12. Jsaac consents, 13-17. saw takes the
oath and likewise Jacob, 18-26. Death of Rebecca, 27.
XXXV. And in the first year of the first week of the 2157 a.m.
forty-fifth jubilee Rebecca called Jacob, her son, and commanded him regarding his father and regarding his brother,
that he should honour them all the days of his life.
2. And Jacob said: “I will do everything as thou hast commanded me; for this thing will be honour and greatness
to me, and righteousness before the Lord, that I should
honour them. 3. And thou too, mother, knowest from the
time I was born until this day, all my deeds and all that is
in my heart, that I always think good concerning all.
4, And how should I not do this thing which thou hast
commanded me, that I should honour my father and
my brother! 5. Tell me, mother, what perversity hast thou
seen in me and 1 shall turn away from it, and mercy will
be upon me.” 6. And she said unto him: “My son, I
have not seen in thee all my days any perverse but (only)
upright deeds. And yet I shall tell thee the truth, my
son: I shall die this year, and I shall not survive this
year in my life; for I have seen in a dream the day of
my death, that I should not live beyond a hundred and
fifty-five years: and behold I have completed all the
days of my life which I am to live” 7. And Jacob
Jaughed at the words of his mother, because his mother had
said unto him that she should die; and she was sitting
opposite to him in possession of her strength, and she
was not infirm in her strength; for she went in and out
and saw, and her teeth were strong, and no ailment
XXXV. 1. His (fe, MSS add a 5. Mercy. Latin has “ Misericordia
gloss “of Jacob.” Domini.”

208 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
had touched her all the days of her life. 8. And Jacob
said unto her: “ Blessed am I, mother, if my days approach
the days of thy life, and my strength remain with me thus
as thy strength: and thou wilt not die, for thou art jesting
idly with me regarding thy death.” 9. And she went in
to Isaac and said unto him: “One petition I make unto
thee: make Esau swear that he will not injure Jacob,
nor pursue him with enmity; for thou knowest Esau’s
thoughts that they are perverse from his youth, and there is
no goodness in him; for he desires after thy death to
kill him. 10. And thou knowest all that he has done
since the day Jacob his brother went to Haran until
this day ; how he has forsaken us with his whole heart, and
has done evil to us; thy flocks he has taken to himself, and
carried off all thy possessions from before thy face. 11. And
when we implored and besought him for what was our own,
he did as a man who was taking pity on us. 12. And
he is bitter against thee because thou didst bless Jacob
thy perfect and upright son; for there is no evil but
only goodness in him, and since he came from Haran
unto this day he has not robbed us of aught, for he brings
us everything in its season always, and rejoices with all his
heart when we take at his hands, and he blesses us, and
has not parted from us since he came from Haran until
this day, and he remains with us continually at home
honouring us.” 13. And Isaac said unto her: “I, too,
know and see the deeds of Jacob who is with us, how that
with all his heart he honours us; but I loved Esau formerly
more than Jacob, because he was the first-born; but now
I love Jacob more than Esau, for he has done manifold evil 7
9. This passage is referred to ‘Ioadk ἐν τῷ γήρᾳ παραινέσαι τῷ
Josephus by Syncellus, i. 202 at the Ἡσαῦ καὶ τῷ ᾿Ιακὼβ ἀγαπᾶν ἀλλήλους.
beginning of the section, and to Jubilees καὶ παραινέσας αὐτοῖς προεῖπεν ὅτι ἐὰν
at the close, but he attributes it wrongly ἐπαναστῇ τῷ ᾿Ιακὼβ ὁ Ἡσαῦ, εἰς χεῖρας
to Josephus. ἡ Ῥεβέκκα ἤτησε τὸν αὐτοῦ πεσεῖται.

CHAPTER XXXV. 8-20 209
deeds, and there is no righteousness in him, for all his
ways are unrighteousness and violence, [and there is no
righteousness around him]. 14. And now my heart is
troubled because of all his deeds, and neither he nor his
seed is to be saved, for they are those who will be
destroyed from the earth, and who will be rooted out
from under heaven, for he has forsaken the God of Abraham
and gone after his wives and after their uncleanness
and after their error, he and his children. 15. And
thou dost bid me make him swear that he will not slay
Jacob, his brother; even if he swear he will not abide
by his oath, and he will not do good but evil only.
16. But if he desires to slay Jacob, his brother, into Jacob’s
hands will he be given, and he will not escape from his
hands, [for he will descend into his hands.] 17. And fear
thou not on account of Jacob; for the guardian of Jacob
is great and powerful and honoured, and praised more than
the guardian of Esau.” 18. And Rebecca sent and called
Esau, and he came to her, and she said unto him: “I have
a petition, my son, to make unto thee, and do thou promise
to do it, my son.” 19. And he said: “I will do everything that thou sayest unto me, and I will not refuse
thy petition.” 20. And she said unto him: “I ask you
that the day I die, thou wilt take me in and bury me near
Sarah, thy father’s mother, and that thou and Jacob will
love each other, and that neither will desire evil against
the other, but mutual love only, and (so) ye will prosper,
my sons, and be honoured in the midst of the land, and
no enemy will rejoice over you, and ye will be a blessing
13. [And there is no righteousness 17. Guardian of Jacob. We seem
around him.| This is either a corrup- here to have the idea of men’s guardian
tion or, as I take it, a dittography. angels. In that case it is the earliest
16. [For he will descend into his distinct reference to this belief. Cf.
hands.| Here jéwartd=‘‘willdescend” Mt. xviii. 10; Acts xii. 15; Heb. i,
is corrupt for jéwadéq=‘‘will fall.’ 14; Edersheim, Jesus the Messiah, ii.
I have bracketed the clause asa gloss 752.
from xxxvi. 9.
14

210 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
and a mercy in the eyes of all those that love you.”
21. And he said: “I will do all that thou hast told me,
and I shall bury thee on the day thou diest near Sarah, my
father’s mother, as thou hast desired that her bones may be
near thy bones. 22. And Jacob, my brother, also, I shall
love above all flesh; for I have not a brother in all the
earth but him only: and this is no great merit for me if I
love him; for he is my brother, and we were sown together
in thy body, and together came we forth from thy
womb, and if I do not love my brother, whom shall I love?
23. And I, myself, beg thee to exhort Jacob concerning
me and concerning my sons, for I know that he will
assuredly be king over me and my sons, for on the day
my father blessed him he made him the higher and me the
lower. 24. And I swear unto thee that I shall love him,
and not desire evil against him all the days of my life
but good only.” And he sware unto her regarding all this
matter. 25. And she called Jacob before the eyes of Esau,
and gave him commandment according to the words which
she had spoken to Esau. 26. And he said: “I shall do thy
pleasure; believe me that no evil will proceed from me
or from my sons against Esau, and I shall be first in
naught save in love only.” 27. And they eat and drank,
she and her sons that night, and she died, three jubilees
and one week and one year old, on that night, and her two
sons, Esau and Jacob, buried her in the double cave
near Sarah, their father’s mother.
Isaac gives directions to his sons as to his burial : exhorts them —
to love one another and makes them imprecate destruction —
on him who injures his brother, 1-11. Divides Ms
22. From thy womb. Sod probably mercy” which goes back to a misby an emendation. 6bc=“from thy translation of om (Littmann).

CHAPTERS XXXV. 21-XXXVI. 7 211
possessions, giving the larger portion to Jacob, and dies,
12-18. Leah dies: Jacobs sons come to comfort him,
21-24.
XXXVI. And in the sixth year of this week Isaac called 2162 a.m.
his two sons, Esau and Jacob, and they came to him, and he
said unto them: “My sons, I am going the way of my
fathers, to the eternal house where my fathers are. 2.
Wherefore bury me near Abraham my father, in the double
cave in the field of Ephron the Hittite, where Abraham
purchased a sepulchre to bury in; in the sepulchre which I
digged for myself, there bury me. 3. And this I command
you, my sons, that ye practise righteousness and uprightness
on the earth, so that the Lord may bring upon you all that
the Lord said that he would do to Abraham and to his seed.
4. And love one another, my sons, your brothers as a man
who loves his own soul, and let each seek in what he may
benefit his brother, and act together on the earth; and let
them love each other as their own souls. 5. And concerning the question of idols, 1 command and admonish you to
reject them and hate them, and love them ποῦ ; for they are
full of deception for those that worship them and for those
that bow down to them. 6. Remember ye, my sons, the
Lord God of Abraham your father, and how I too worshipped Him and served Him in righteousness and in joy,
that He might multiply you and increase your seed as the
stars of heaven in multitude, and establish you on the earth
as the plant of righteousness which will not be rooted out
unto all the generations for ever. 7. And now I shall make
you swear a great oath—for there is no oath which is greater
XXXVI. 1. According to ver. 18 The eternal house. Eccles, xii. 5,
Isaac was 180 years old when he died. by mn.
Hence he must have been born in 1982 4. Your brothers. Seems a gloss.
and not in 1980 as in xvi. 12-13. 6. How=wakama emended from
Josephus (Ant. i, 22) sets Isaac’s age waemze=“‘and after this.”
down at 185. Plant of righteousness. See notes
on i, 16, xvi. 26, xxi. 24.

212 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
than it by the name glorious and honoured and great and
splendid and wonderful and mighty, which created the
heavens and the earth and all things together—that ye will
fear Him and worship Him. 8. And that each will love
his brother with affection and righteousness, and that neither
will desire evil against his brother from henceforth for ever
all the days of your life, so that ye may prosper in all
your deeds and not be destroyed. 9. And if either of you
devises evil against his brother, know that from henceforth
every one that devises evil against his brother will fall into
his hand, and will be rooted out of the land of the living,
and his seed will be destroyed from under heaven. 10.
But on the day of turbulence and execration and indignation
and anger, with flaming devouring fire as He burnt Sodom, so
likewise will He burn his land and his city and all that is his,
and he will be blotted out of the book of the discipline of
the children of men, and not be recorded in the book of life,
but in that which is appointed to destruction, and he will
depart into eternal execration; so that their condemnation may
be always renewed in hate and in execration and in wrath and
in torment and in indignation and in plagues and in disease —
for ever. 11. I say and testify to you, my sons, according to the judgment which will come upon the man who
wishes to injure his brother.” 12. And he divided all his
possessions between the two on that day, and he gave the
larger portion to him that was the first-born, and the tower —
and all that was about it, and all that Abraham possessed at i
the Well of the Oath. 13. And he said, “This larger i
portion I shall give to the first-born. 14. And Esau said, —
“T have sold to Jacob and given my birthright to Jacob; to ἵ
him let it be given, and I have not a single word to say ©
10. Turbulence and execration and Book of life. See note on xxx. 22,
indignation and anger. It can hardly In contrast with the Book of life we
be accidental that we find in Eth. En. have here also a Book of destruction.
xxxix. 2 “Books of wrath and anger 13. 7 shall give(=’thtb). MSS give
and books of disquiet and turbulence.” ‘I shall make great” (a abi). ;
f

CHAPTER XXXVI. 8-20 213
regarding it, for it is his.” 15. And Isaac said, “ May a
blessing rest upon you, my sons, and upon your seed this
day, for ye have given me rest, and my heart is not pained
concerning the birthright, lest thou shouldest work wickedness on account of it. 16. May the Most High God bless
the man that worketh righteousness, him and his seed for
ever.” 17. And he ended commanding them and blessing
them, and they eat and drank together before him, and he
rejoiced because there was one mind between them, and
they went forth from him and rested that day and slept.
18. And Isaac slept on his bed that day rejoicing; and he
slept the eternal sleep, and died one hundred and eighty
years old. He completed twenty-five weeks and five years;
and his two sons Esau and Jacob buried him. 19. And
Esau went to the land of Edom, to the mountains of Seir,
and dwelt there. 20. And Jacob dwelt in the mountains of Hebron, in the tower of the land of the sojournings
of his father Abraham, and he worshipped the Lord with all
his heart and according to the visible commands according as
16. Most High God. This divine From the above facts it follows that this
title is frequently used by our author: title of God was most used in the second
see vii, 36, xii. 19, xiii. 29, xvi. 18, cent. B.c., though rare in some characDiese. 9. xxi, 30, .22,. 28. ‘29, xxii. teristic writings of that century such
6, 11, 18, 19, 28, 27 (twice), xxv. 3, as Eth. Enoch i.-xxxvi. (twice), Ixxii.-
MBL, σαν 15. xxi. 1, xxx. xc. (once) and 1 Macc. (not at all).
16, xxxix. 6. Cf. Test. Levi 3, 4, 5 After a long period of comparative
(twice), 8, 18. This frequency is disuse it again became prominent in
characteristic of many writings of the writings of the latter half of the first
second cent. B.C. Thus it is found forty- cent. A.D.
eight times in Sirach and thirteen times 18. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 29.
in Daniel. On the other hand it appears Slept the eternal sleep. Cf. Test.
only once in the Prophets, six times in Dan 7 ; Issach.7: ὕπνωσεν ὕπνον αἰώνιον.
the Pentateuch (and of these four times Test. Jos. 20: ἐκοιμήθη ὕπνον αἰώνιον.
in Gen. xiv. in connection with Mel- 20. According to the visible comchizedek), in the Pss. twenty-one times. mands according as He had divided.
From the close of the second cent. B.C. (ad). be almost wholly wanting.
till after the Christian era it is rare. Latin: “secundum praecepta visibilia
Thus in Eth. En. xci.-civ. (before 79 8.0.) secundum divisionem temporum generait is found nine times, four in xxxvii.- tionum ejus.’” The commands here
lxx., three times in Tobit, once in Judith, referred to were made visible to Jacob
not at all in the Pss. of Solomon, twice on the seven tablets which the angel
in Wisdom, twice in the Assumption of showed him in a vision: see xxxii. 21.
Moses, nine times in the N.T. It is fre- All the history of Jacob’s descendants
quent in the Apocalypse of Baruch— was recorded here in their successive
twenty-three times, and also in 4 Ezra, time divisions (so also Ronsch, p. 152).

214 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
He had divided the days of his generations. 21. And Leah
2167 A.M. his wife died in the fourth year of the second week of the
forty-fifth jubilee, and he buried her in the double cave near
Rebecca his mother, to the left of the grave of Sarah, his
father’s mother. 22. And all her sons and his sons came to
mourn over Leah his wife with him, and to comfort him
regarding her, for he was lamenting her. 23. For he loved
her exceedingly after Rachel her sister died; for she was
perfect and upright in all her ways and honoured Jacob,
and all the days that she lived with him he did not hear
from her mouth a harsh word, for she was gentle and peaceable and upright and honourable. 24. And he remembered
all her deeds which she had done during her life, and he
lamented her exceedingly; for he loved her with all his
heart and with all his soul. |
Esau’s sons reproach him for his subordination to Jacob, and
constrain him to war with the assistance of 4000
mercenaries against Jacob, 1-15. Jacob reproves Esau,
16-17. Esaw’s reply, 18-25.
XXXVII. And on the day that Isaac the father of Jacob
2162 A.M.
and Esau died, the sons of Esau heard that Isaac had given
XXX VII.-XXXVIII. These two account in the Jalkut and the
chapters give in some respects the fullest Chronicles of Jerahmeel comes very
and in others an abridged form of an close to—at times reproduces verbally—
ancient legend dealing with the wars that in our text, though most probably
between the sons of Jacob and Esau. with later amplifications. They show
The legend is elsewhere found in the however a deliberate attempt to adapt
Test. Judah 9, in the Jalkut Shimeoni the legend to later times. Thus Adora
i. 132 (reprinted in Jellinek’s Bet ha- or Adoraim (a1) is changed to Arodin
Midrasch, iii. 3-5 and on pp. 180-182 (in the Jalkut) or Merodin (71x, al.
of my Ethiopic text of Jubilees), in yy in the Chron. of Jerah.) where
the Chronicles of Jerahmeel, pp. 80-87, the M of the latter is due to a
and in the Book of Jashar (op. cit. ii. change of x into ». This Arodin is
1236-1238). Our text preserves the Herodion built by Herod the Great. ᾿
oldest form. The same form though Gaster has recognised this fact, and on
very abbreviated is presupposed in the this ground would assign the origin of
Test. Judah 9: yet even this preserves the legend to the beginning of the
some details on the capture of Adora (?) Christian era. He takes this legendary
not found in any of the others. The story to be a piece of contemporary

CHAPTERS XXXVI. 21-XXXVII. 6 215
the portion of the elder to his younger son Jacob and they
were very angry. 2. And they strove with their father,
saying: “Why has thy father given Jacob the portion of the
elder and passed over thee, although thou art the elder and
Jacob the younger?” 3. And he said unto them “ Because
I sold my birthright to Jacob for a small mess of lentils;
and on the day my father sent me to hunt and catch and
bring him something that he should eat and bless me, he came
with guile and brought my father food and drink, and my
father blessed him and put me under his hand. 4. And now
our father has caused us to swear, me and him, that we shall
not mutually devise evil, either against his brother, and that
we shall continue in love and in peace each with his brother
and not make our ways corrupt.” 5. And they said unto
him, “We shall not hearken unto thee to make peace with
him ; for our strength is greater than his strength, and we
are more powerful than he; we shall go against him and
slay him, and destroy him and his sons. And if thou wilt
not go with us, we shall do hurt to thee also. 6. And now
history, «a reflex of the Jewish wars Thus the oldest form of the legend
against Herod” (Chron. of Jerah. p. is found in our text and in the Test.
lxxxiii.). But the legend does not owe Jud. 9; the next oldest in the Jalkut
its origin to the times of Herod, but and Chronicles of Jerahmeel, and the
only this adaptation of it. We should latest in the Book of Jashar.
observe also that there were two places
XXXVII. 1. On the day that Isaac
called Herodion: the first was a fort
... died, The sons of Esau began their
built near Jerusalem by Herod (Joseph.
opposition to Jacob from the day of
Ant. xiv. 18. 9, xv. 9. 6, xvii. 8. 3),
Isaac's death (2162 A.M.), but did not
in which he was subsequently buried.
attack him till Leah died (2167 a.m.).
The second was likewise a fort built in
See ver. 14.
Idumea on the confines of Arabia
2-8, 11-12. The favourable view
(Joseph. Ant. xvi. 2. 1; Bell. Jud. i.
presented here of Esau contrasts
21. 10). Our legend underwent a
strongly with that found in Jalkut
further adaptation—indeed a complete
Shimeoni reprinted in Jellinek’s Bet
recasting—in the Book of Jashar,
ha-Midrasch, iii. 3-5, or in the
which has here borrowed its materials
Chronicles of Jerahmeel, xxxvii. 1.
from the Midrash in Josippon (see
According to our text, it was not Esau
Bousset, Z. f. NTliche Wissensch. 1900,
but Esau’s sons that were primarily
p. 205). The events recorded are
to blame for this fraternal war.
placed after Jacob’s death, and the
story presupposes the struggles of the 5. Him and his sons. Emended
Idumean house of Antipater, by which with Latin from “his sons” (bcd).
through the help of Rome—here called Text of a, though ungrammatical,=
“ Aeneas ’—it rose to royal power. ‘him his sons.”

216 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
hearken unto us: Let us send to Aram and Philistia and
Moab and Ammon, and let us choose for ourselves chosen
men who are ardent for battle, and let us go against him and
do battle with him, and let us exterminate him from the
earth before he grows strong.” 17. And their father said
unto them, “Do not go and do not make war with him lest
ye fall before him.” 8. And they said unto him, “This too,
is exactly thy mode of action from thy youth until this day,
and thou art putting thy neck under his yoke. We shall
not hearken to these words.” 9. And they sent to Aram,
and to ’Adurim to the friend of their father, and they hired
along with them one thousand fighting men,chosen men of war.
10. And there came to them from Moab and from the children
of Ammon, those who were hired, one thousand chosen men,
and from Philistia, one thousand chosen men of war, and from
Edom and from the Horites one thousand chosen fighting
men, and from the Kittim mighty men of war. 11. And
they said unto their father: “Go forth with them and
lead them, else we shall slay thee.” 12. And he was
filled with wrath and indignation on seeing that his
sons were forcing him to go before (them) to lead them
against Jacob his brother. 13. But afterward he remem6-10. To these verses the only 3, 65. The Syrians invaded Judah
equivalent in the Test. Jud. 9 is: frequently by Edom (1 Macc. iv. 29,
ἐπῆλθεν ἡμῖν Ἡσαῦ, ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ 61), and were helped by the latter
πατρός μου, ἐν λαῷ βαρεῖ καὶ ἰσχυρῷ. against Israel. Later John Hyrcanus
For that in the Jalkut see note on wrested Adora and Mareshah out of
verses 14-16. the hands of the Edomites and com6. The names of the nations men- pelled the whole nation to accept
tioned here recur in verses 9-10. circumcision (Joseph. Ant. xiii. 9. 1,
9-10. Against nearly all the nations xv. 7.9; Bell. Jud. i. 2.6). As regards
mentioned here the Maccabees waged the Kittim, see note on xxiv. 28. These
war. With Aram or Syria they were may have been Greek auxiliaries of the
at strife for many decades. The Syrians.
Ammonites were invaded by Judas (1
9. "Agr, He was an Aramaean.
Mace. v. 6-8; Joseph. Ant. xii. 8. 1),
See xxxviii. 3.
and discomfited in several battles. On
the complete subjugation of the Philis- 10. Horites. Eth. Koréwés (6): a
tines by the Maccabees see notes on Koréws. See Hncyc. Bib., in loc.
xxiv. 28-32. As regards the Edomites Kittim. The Eth. might also be
Judas fought against them and smote rendered ‘‘ Hittites” but the context is
them with great slaughter, 1 Macc. v. against this meaning in xxiv. 28.

CHAPTER XXXVII. 7-17 217
bered all the evil which lay hidden in his heart against
Jacob his brother ; and he remembered not the oath which
he had sworn to his father and to his mother that he would
devise no evil all his days against Jacob his brother.
14. And notwithstanding all this, Jacob knew not that
they were coming against him to battle, and he was
mourning for Leah, his wife, until they approached very
near to the tower with four thousand warriors and chosen
men of war. 15. And the men of Hebron sent to him
saying, “Behold thy brother has come against thee, to
fight thee, with four thousand girt with the sword, and
they carry shields and weapons”; for they loved Jacob
more than Esau. So they told him; for Jacob was a more
liberal and merciful man than Esau 16. But Jacob
would not believe until they came very near to the
tower. 17. And he closed the gates of the tower; and
he stood on the battlements and spake to his brother Esau
and said, “Noble is the comfort wherewith thou hast
come to comfort me for my wife who has died. Is this
the oath that thou didst swear to thy father and again
to thy mother before they died? Thou hast broken the
oath, and on the moment that thou didst swear to thy
14-16. These verses are found in with them, nor did they discover it till
the Jalkut Shimeoni (Jellinek’s Bet the whole host had encompassed the
ha-Midrasch, iii. 3): “It was the year tower, in which there were only Jacob
when Leah died and Jacob and his and his sons and their 200 servants.”
sons were mourning and some of their Similarly in Chron. of Jerahmeel, p. 84.
children had come to comfort them. 17-25. Jacobs attempt to bring
Then came (Esau) against them with a about peace and Esau’s reply are not
mighty army of warriors, clad in referred to in the Test. Jud. 9, but are
armour of iron and brass, all armed shortly summarised in the Yalkut:
with shields and bows and swords, “When therefore Jacob saw that Esau
4000 warriors. All these surrounded had emboldened himself to come against
the tower, in which were Jacob and his him in war in order to put those in the
sons together with their servants, tower to the sword, and that he shot
children and all their possessions ; for arrows against them, Jacob stood upon
they had all assembled there in order the wall of the tower, and spake to
to comfort Jacob in his mourning for Esau his brother words of peace, friendLeah. They were sitting there peace- ship and brotherliness (minx) ; but Esau
fully, and none imagined that any would have none of them.” Similarly
force had come upon them to contend in Chron. of Jerah. p. 84.

218 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
father wast thou condemned.” 18. And then Esau answered
and said unto him,“ Neither the children of men nor
the beasts of the earth have any oath of righteousness
which in swearing they have sworn (an oath valid) for
ever; but every day they devise evil one against another,
and how each may slay his adversary and foe. 19. And
thou dost hate me and my children for ever. And there
is no observing the tie of brotherhood with thee. 20.
Hear these words which I declare unto thee,
If the boar can change its skin and make its bristles
as soft as wool,
Or if it can cause horns to sprout forth on its head
like the horns of a stag or of a sheep,
Then shall I observe the tie of brotherhood with thee.
[And if the breasts separated themselves from their
mother ; for thou hast not been a brother to me.]
21. And if the wolves make peace with the lambs so as not
to devour or do them violence,
And if their hearts are towards them for good,
Then there will be peace in my heart towards thee.
22. And if the lion becomes the friend of the ox and makes
peace with him,
19. The tie of brotherhood. See this world. Nor do the words as they
phrase in quotation in preceding note. stand form a distich. If they belong
20. Boar. In Eth. Enoch Ixxxix. to the text at all, they are corrupt. It
12, 42 sq., 49, 66, the boar is used to is not improbable that originally they
denote Esau symbolically. Cf. Ps. followed immediately after ver. 19
lxxx. 13. There is no doubt some such “thou dost hate me and my children
reference here. for ever.” By transposing the two
Make ... soft. Instead of ’adkama clauses and by reading ’ém’ama tafalta
we should expect jadakém. atbié ’ém’émomfi instead of wa’éma
It can cause horns to sprout forth. So tafalta ’atbat ‘gm Emon, we should get
a. 6cd=“horns were to sprout forth.” the following excellent sense in ver.
[And if (αὖ omit) the breasts separated 19 “And thou dost hate me and my
themselves from their mother ; for thou children for ever ; for thou hast not been
hast not been a brother tome.] So abed a brother to me since the twins were
save that for “thou hast not been a separated from their mother. Yea,
brother to me” ὦ reads “TI shall not be there is no observing the tie of brothera brother to thee.” These words do hood with thee.”
not belong to their present context; 22, And makes peace with him. This
for the tristichs before and after deal clause which cd omit is added by a6
with ideas taken only from the animal after «« ploughs with him.” With the

CHAPTERS XXXVII. 18-XXXVIII. 2 219
And if he is bound under one yoke with him and
ploughs with him,
Then shall I make peace with thee.
23. And when the raven becomes white as the raza,
Then know that I have loved thee
And shall make peace with thee.
Thou shalt be rooted out,
And thy sons shall be rooted out,
And there shall be no peace for thee.”
24. And when Jacob saw that he was (so) evilly disposed
towards him with his heart, and with all his soul as to
slay him, and that he had come springing like the wild
boar which comes upon the spear that pierces and kills
it, and recoils not from it; 25. Then he spake to his
own and to his servants that they should attack him and
all his companions.
War between Jacob and Esau. Death of Esaw and overthrow of his forces, 1-10. Edom reduced to servitude
“till this day,” 11-14. Kings of Edom, 15-24. (CL.
Gen. xxxvi. 31-39.)
XXXVIII. And after that Judah spake to Jacob, his
father, and said unto him: “Bend thy bow, father, and
send forth thy arrows and cast down the adversary and
slay the enemy; and mayst thou have the power, for
we shall not slay thy brother, for he is such as thou, and
he is like thee: let us give him (this) honour.” 2. Then
guidance of the parallelism I have XXXVIII. 1. In the Jalkut (cf. the
transposed it as above. Chron. of Jerah. p. 84) Judah says:
23. The raza. The raza is according to “How long wilt thou extend words of
Isenberg, Amharic Dictionary, p. 48, peace and friendship to him, when he
“a large white bird which eats grass- comes against us as an enemy with his
hoppers.” Dillmann both in his mail-clad troops to slay us.”
Lexicon and translation took raza here Let us give him=Nahabo (so read in
to mean «rice, oryza, but there can my text instead of Nehabé). Emended
be no doubt that the above is right. with Lat. «« demus illi” from bahabéna
Littmann has followed my rendering. =“ with us.”

220 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Jacob bent his bow and sent forth the arrow and struck
Esau, his brother, (on his right breast) and slew him.
3. And again he sent forth an arrow and struck Adorn
the Aramaean, on the left breast, and drove him backward
and slew him. 4. And then went forth the sons of
Jacob, they and their servants, dividing themselves into
companies on the four sides of the tower. 5. And Judah
went forth in front, and Naphtali and Gad with him and
fifty servants with him on the south side of the tower,
and they slew all they found before them, and not one
individual of them escaped. 6. And Levi and Dan and
Asher went forth on the east side of the tower, and
fifty (men) with them, and they slew the fighting men
of Moab and Ammon. 7. And Reuben and Issachar and
Zebulon went forth on the north side of the tower, and
2-3. These two verses are found in tower, and 50 servants of the servants
the reverse order in the Jalkut and of Jacob their father with them. And
the Chron, of Jerah. pp. 84-85. The Levi and Dan and Asher went forth on
former runs: “ When Jacob heard this, the east of the tower and 50 servants
he seized his bow and slew Adoram the with them. And Reuben and Issachar
Edomite. And again he seized his bow and Zebulon went forth on the north
and smote Esau on the right breast.” of the tower and 50 servants with them.
In the Test. Jud. 9 it is said shortly of And Simeon and Benjamin and Enoch
Esau: ἔπαισεν ἐν τόξῳ ᾿Ιακὼβ τὸν the son of Reuben went forth on the
‘Has. west of the tower and 50 servants with
2. (On his right breast). Supplied them.” After a long tedious account
from the Latin and the Yalkut. See of the achievements of the various
preceding note. brothers which are not alluded to in
Slew him. A later tradition attri- our text the Jalkut again comes into
buted the death of Esau to Chushim, touch with it: “400 men that were
son of Dan. See Ps.-Jon. on Gen. 1. warriors who had opposed Simeon fell
13; Book of Jashar (op. cit. ii. 1235) ; and the remaining 600 fled, and amongst
Sota 18 a. Beer (Buch der Jubiléen, p. them were the four sons of Esan—Reuel,
6) quotes also Pirke R. Eliezer 39. Jeush, Jolam, Korah . .. And the
8. "Adéran, the Aramaean. This is sons of Jacob pursued after them to
consistent with the statement in xxxvili. the city Arodin, and they left their
9. The Jalkut and the Chron. of father Esau lying dead in Arodin, and
Jerah. on the other hand make him they fled to Mount Seir to the ascent
an Edomite. of ‘Aqrabbim. And the sons of Jacob
4-9. Here the sons of Jacob and their entered and rested there that night and
200 servants (cf. Jalkut translated in they found Esau’s dead body and they
note on xxxvii. 14-16) go forth from buried it out of respect for their father.”
the four sides of the tower to meet the The Test. Jud. 9 says shortly of Esau:
4000 soldiers of Esau. So we find it καὶ πορευόμενος ἐν ᾿Ανονιράμ (0, ᾿Ανονηexactly in the Yalkut: “And then pau, P) ἀπέθανεν. The Armenian
Judah went forth first and Naphtali version of this Testam=e nἐτtάφ η ἐν
and Gad with him to the south of the ᾿Ανανιράμ.

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 3-14 221
fifty men with them, and they slew the fighting men of
the Philistines. 8. And Simeon and Benjamin and Enoch,
Reuben’s son, went forth on the west side of the tower,
and fifty (men) with them, and they slew of Edom and
of the Horites four hundred men, stout warriors; and
six hundred fled, and four of the sons of Esau fled with
them, and left their father lying slain, as he had fallen on
the hill which is in’Adfiram. 9. And the sons of Jacob
pursued after them to the mountains of Seir. And Jacob
buried his brother on the hill which is in ’Adtrim, and he
returned to his house. 10. And the sons of Jacob pressed
hard upon the sons of Esau in the mountains of Seir,
and bowed their necks so that they became servants of the
sons of Jacob. 11. And they sent to their father (to
inquire) whether they should make peace with them or slay
them. 12. And Jacob sent word to his sons that they
should make peace, and they made peace with them, and
placed the yoke of servitude upon them, so that they paid
tribute to Jacob and to his sons always. 13. And they
continued to pay tribute to Jacob until the day that he
went down into Egypt. 14. And the sons of Edom have
_ 8. Horites. Cf. xxxvii. 10. These sons of Esau and all the men who had
are not mentioned in the Yalkut. fled with them came forth and fell down
Four. . . sons of Esau. These are before the sons of Jacob and laid them.
mentioned in the Jalkut translated in selves prostrate and prayed them till
note on 4-9. they made peace with them. And
*Adirdm. This appears as Adurin they made them servants to tribute.”
in the Latin, and as ᾿Ανονιράμ in Test. Similarly in the Chron. of Jerah. p.
Jud. 9 (see note on verses 4-9): in the 87. Test. Jud. 9 gives certain details
Yalkut as ΚΝ which is corrupt for of the siege of Adora, and then proceeds:
one. This is the “Adwpa mentioned τότε αἰτοῦσιν ἡμᾶς τὰ πρὸς εἰρήνην" Kal
by Joseph. Ant. xiii. 15. 4, along with γενόμενοι βουλῆς τοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν, ἐδεMdpica (cf. 1 Mace. xiii. 20). These ξάμεθα αὐτοὺς ὑποφόρους. καὶ ἦσαν
two towns of Edom were captured by δίδοντες ἡμῖν πυροῦ κόρους διακοσίους
Hyrcanus and forced to accept cireum- . . « ἕως ὅτε κατήλθομεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον.
cision (Joseph. Ant. xiii. 9. 1; Bell. 10. Pressed hard upon. Here aman.
Jud, i. 2. 6). dabéw6mti (which is to be retained and
10-13. The Jalkut is as follows: not emended as in my tex=t )nk ms
“In the morning the sons of Jacob in the Jalkut.
armed themselves and pursued after 11-13. The substance of these verses
them and pressed them hard on Mount is found in Test. Jud. 9; see on 10-13
Seir on the ascent of Aqrabbim. The above, |

222 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
not got quit of the yoke of servitude which the twelve
sons of Jacob had imposed on them until this day. 15.
And these are the kings that reigned in Edom before there
reigned any king over the children of Israel [until this
day] in the land of Edom. 16. And Balad, the son of Beor,
reigned in Edom, and the name of his city was Danaba.
17. And Balad died, and Jobab, the son of Zara of Bosér,
reigned in his stead. 18. And Jobab died, and ‘Asim,
of the land of Téman, reigned in his stead. 19. And
‘Asam died, and ’Adath, the son of Barad, who slew Midian
in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead, and the name of
his city was Avith. 20. And Adath died, and Salman, from
᾿Ατηδβδαᾶ, reigned in his stead. 21. And Salman died, and
Saul of Ré’abéth (by the) river, reigned in his stead.
22. And Saul died, and Ba’éltinin, the son of Achbor,
reigned in his stead. 23. And Ba’eltinin, the son of
Achbor, died, and ’Adath reigned in his stead, and the name
of his wife was Maitabith, the daughter of Matarat, the
daughter of Metabedzaab . 24. These are the kings who
reigned in the land of Edom.
Joseph set over Potiphars house, 1-4. His purity and —
imprisonment, 5-13. Imprisonment of Pharaoh’s chief
14. Until this day. Edom was finally 20. Salman ; LXX, Σαλαμά ; Mass,
made tributary to Israel by Hyrcanus. προ.
15-24. Cf. Gen. xxxvi. 31-39. "Amdséga; LXX, Μασέκκα ; Mass.
16. Cf. Gen. xxxvi. 32. Baldy= np
LXX, Βάλακ-ε boa. 21. Ré’abéth ;L XX, Ῥοωβώθ; Mass.
Danaba. Cf. LXX, AevyadBa= naan, nነጋክን.
17, Zara. Cf. LXX, Zdpa, Mass.
22. Ba’élindn; LXX, Βαλαεννών ;
ni. Mass. 33n bya.
Bésér. Cf. LXX, Βοσόρρα ; Mass. 93. Achbor. Eth. ‘Akbar. |
53 "Adath ; LXX, ᾿Αράθ ; Mass. a1. We
18. *Asdm; LXX,'Aodu; Mass. avn. — Maitabith ; LXX, MereBefh; Mass.
19. ’Adat; LXX, ᾿Αδάδ; Mass. DNs". P
TH. Matorot ; LXX, Ματραείθ; Mass.
Barad ; LXX, Βαράδ ;M ass. 173.
TBE,
Avith. Eth, ‘Aw ath i LXX, ΓεθMétabéded’ob ; LXX, Mefo68 ; Mass,
θάιμ ; Mass. nS
ΠῚ= "5,

CHAPTERS XXXVIII. 15-XXXIX. 9 223
butler and chief baker whose dreams Joseph interprets,
14-18. (Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 2, xxxix. 3-8, 12-15, 1723, xl. 1-5, 21-23, xli. 1.)
XXXIX. And Jacob dwelt in the land of his father’s
sojournings in the land of Canaan. 2. These are the
generations of Jacob. And Joseph was seventeen years old
when they took him down into the land of Egypt, and Potiphar, an eunuch of Pharaoh, the chief cook bought him. ὃ.
And he set Joseph over all his house, and the blessing of
the Lord came upon the house of the Egyptian on account
of Joseph, and the Lord prospered him in all that he did.
4. And the Egyptian committed everything into the hands of
Joseph ; for he saw that the Lord was with him, and that
the Lord prospered him in all that he did. 5. And Joseph’s
appearance was comely and very beautiful was his appearance, and his master’s wife lifted up her eyes and saw
Joseph, and she loved him, and besought him to lie with
her. 6. But he did not surrender his soul, and he
remembered the Lord and the words which Jacob, his
father, used to read from amongst the words of Abraham,
that no man should commit fornication with a woman
who has a husband; that for him the punishment of death
has been ordained in the heavens before the Most High
God, and the sin will be recorded against him in the
eternal books continually before the Lord. 7. And Joseph
remembered these words and refused to lie with her.
8. And she besought him for a year, but he refused and
would not listen. 9. But she embraced him and held him
XXXIX. 2. Seventeen years old. Cf. 5. Josephs appearance, etc. There
Gen. xxxvii. 2. seems to be a dittography.
The chief cook. See note on xxxiv. 6. See xx. 4, xxv. 7 where Abraham’s
1 commands on this question are men2-5. Cf. Gen. xxxix. 3-7. tioned. According to Soteh 366 the
4. Into the hands = baδα’ δἢ . image of Jacob appeared at the window
Emended with Latin “in manus ejus” and exhorted Joseph to be faithful
in ver. 13 and Gen. xxxix.6. From (Hershon, Genesis with a Talm. Comqédméhi = ‘‘ before him.” mentary, p. 428).

224 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
fast in the house in order to force him to lie with her, and
closed the doors of the house and held him fast; but he
left his garment in her hands and broke through the
door and fled without from her presence. 10. And the
woman saw that he would not lie with her, and she
calumniated him in the presence of his lord, saying: “Thy
Hebrew servant, whom thou lovest, sought to force me so
that he might lie with me; and it came to pass when
I lifted up my voice that he fled and left his garment
in my hands when 1 held him, and he brake through
the door.’ 11. And the Egyptian saw the garment of
Joseph and the broken door, and heard the words of his
wife, and cast Joseph into prison into the place where
the prisoners were kept whom the king imprisoned
12. And he was there in the prison; and the Lord gave
Joseph favour in the sight of the chief of the prison guards
and compassion before him, for he saw that the Lord was
with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper.
13. And he committed all things into his hands, and
the chief of the prison guards knew of nothing that
was with him, for Joseph did every thing, and the Lord ©
perfected it. 14. And he remained there two years. |
And in those days Pharaoh, king of Egypt, was wroth
against his two eunuchs, against the chief butler and ,
against the chief baker, and he put them in ward in the i}
house of the chief cook, in the prison where Joseph was —
kept. 15. And the chief of the prison guards appointed i
Joseph to serve them; and he served before them. 16. ἢ
And they both dreamed a dream, the chief butler and —
the chief baker, and they told it to Joseph. 17, Ang
9-13. Cf. Gen. xxxix. 12-15, 17-23. Perfected at. Latin “ dirigebat ea,” a
18. Into his hands. Emended as in i.e, ‘‘ made it to prosper.’
ver. 4 from MSS = “before him.” Latin 14-18. Cf Gen. x1. 1-5, 21-28,
in manus ejus. ግ
Knew of nothing that was with him. 14. Two years. Cf. Gen. xli. 1,
Cf. Gen. xxxix. 8. Chief cook, See note on xxxiv. 11.

CHAPTERS XXXIX. 10-XL. 4 225
as he interpreted to them so it befell them, and Pharaoh
restored the chief butler to his office, and the (chief) baker
he slew, as Joseph had interpreted to them. 18. But the
chief butler forgot Joseph in the prison, although he had
informed him what would befall him, and did not remember to inform Pharaoh how Joseph had told him, for he
forgot.
Pharaoh's dreams and their interpretation, 1-4. Elevation
and marriage of Joseph, 5-13. (Cf. Gen. x11. 1-5, 7-9,
14 sqq., 25, 29-30, 34, 36, 38-43, 45-46, 49.)
XL. And in those days Pharaoh dreamed two dreams
in one night concerning a famine which was to be in all
the land, and he awoke from his sleep and called all the
interpreters of dreams that were in Egypt, and magicians,
and told them his two dreams, and they were not able
to declare (them). 2. And then the chief butler remembered
Joseph and spake of him to the king, and he brought him
forth from the prison, and he told his two dreams
before him. 3. And he said before Pharaoh that his
two dreams were one, and he said unto him: “Seven
years will come (in which there will be) plenty over all
the land of Egypt, and after that seven years of famine,
such a famine as has not been in all the land. 4.
And now let Pharaoh appaint overseers in all the land
of Egypt, and let them store up food in every city
throughout the days of the years of plenty, and there will
be food for the seven years of famine, and the land will
XL. 1. Cf. Gen. xli. 1, 5, 7, 8. and Gen, xli. 34; whereas cd read
2. Cf. Gen. xli. 9, 14 sqq. mékjada, “threshing floors” or “‘barns.”
3. Cf. Gen. xli. 25, 29, 30. Perhaps ὈΡἼΡΞ = “‘ overseers ” was cor4. Cf. Gen. xi. 34, 36. rupted into ps. Rénsch thinks there
Overseers. We should here have was a corruption of σιτάρχας into σιταρmakuannéna. Cf. Latin “speculatores,” χίας.
15

226 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
not perish through the famine, for it will be very severe.”
5. And the Lord gave Joseph favour and mercy in the eyes
of Pharaoh, and Pharaoh said unto his servants: “ We
shall not find such a wise and discreet man as this man,
for the spirit of the Lord is with him.” 6. And he
appointed him the second in all his kingdom and gave him
authority over all Egypt, and caused him to ride in the
second chariot of Pharaoh. 7. And he clothed him with
byssus garments, and he put a gold chain upon his
neck, and (a herald) proclaimed before him “ ἘΠ ἘΠ wa
’Abirér, and he placed a ring on his hand and made him ruler
over all his house, and magnified him, and said unto him:
“ Only on the throne shall I be greater than thou.” 8. And
Joseph ruled over all the land of Egypt, and all the
princes of Pharaoh, and all his servants, and all who did
the king’s business loved him, for he walked in uprightness,
for he was without pride and arrogance, and he had no
respect of persons, and did not accept gifts, but he judged in
uprightness all the people of the land. 9. And the land
of Egypt was at peace before Pharaoh because of Joseph, for
the Lord was with him, and gave him favour and mercy for
all his generations before all those who knew him and those
5. Cf. Gen. xli. 38, 39. of God”’ clearly designates Joseph, and,
6-7. Cf. Gen. xli. 40-43. indeed seems to be a technical designa7. (A herald) proclaimed. The Latin tion for a great magician. Thus in
Acts viii. 10 Simon Magus is called 7
has praeconaverunt; but the Sam.,
δύναμις TOU Θεοῦ ἡ μεγάλη (or ἡ καλουLXX, Syr., Vulg., Aquila, Symm. of
μένη μεγάλη). In a late Christian be
Gen. xli. 43 have the singular. Hence
version of a Jewish legend “The History __
I withdraw my change of the Ethiopic
of Asenath” (see Fabricius, Codex Psewd, —
sing. into the plural.
P.T. i. 774-784, ii. 85-102; Batiffol,
Before him. MSS add against Latin Studia Patristica, 1889), Joseph is
‘cand hes aid.”
twice (chaps. iii. and xv.) spoken of as
EI EI wa ’Abirér=bx vary dx dx,
“the mighty one of God,” Ἰωσὴφ ὁ
« God, God, the mighty one of God.” δυνατὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ. The following apt —
The Latin has Elel et Habirel. This parallel may be cited from Pap. Par. —
is a peculiar expansion of the term Bibl. nat. 1275 sqq.; Wessely, i. 76
ገጋ in Gen. xli. 43, With the inter- (quoted by Deissmann, Bible Studies, p.
pretation of that term we have no con- 336 note), ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε τὴν μεγίστην
cern here, but only with its derivation δύναμιν τὴν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ ὑπὸ κυρίου
in our text. The phrase “mighty one Θεοῦ τεταγμένην.

CHAPTER XL. 5-13 227
who heard concerning him, and Pharaoh’s kingdom was
well ordered, and there was no Satan and no evil person
(therein), 10. And the king called Joseph's name Sephiintiphans, and gave Joseph to wife the daughter of Potiphar,
the daughter of the priest of Heliopolis, the chief cook.
11. And on the day that Joseph stood before Pharaoh he
was thirty years old [when he stood before Pharaoh].
12. And in that year Isaac died, And it came to pass
as Joseph had said in the interpretation of his two dreams,
according as he had said it, there were seven years of
plenty over all the land of Egypt, and the land of Egypt
produced abundantly, one measure (producing) eighteen
hundred measures. 13. And Joseph gathered food into
every city until they were full of corn until they could
no longer count and measure it for its multitude.
Judah's sons and Tamar, 1-7. Judah’s incest with Tamar,
8-18. Tamar bears twins, 21-22. Judah forgiven
because he sinned ignorantly and repented when convicted,
and because Tamar s marriage with his sons had not
9. No Satan. Cf. xxiii. 29. Hence Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xli. 45 repre10. Stphantiphans, 1.6. nays niBy. sents Asenath as a daughter of Dinah
Gen. xli. 45. Latin Judaism took this by Shechem, who was reared by the
to mean ‘‘revealer of secrets.” Cf. wife of Potiphar, prince of Tanais.
Onk., my pba jos ΜἼΝ3 ). So also Ps.- Singer (p. 119 note) states that this
view is put forward in the Pirke R.
Jon. and Syr.
Eliezer 36, 38. This was likewise the
Daughter of Potiphar . . . priest of
view of the Jewish legend which formed
Heliopolis. Our author has rightly
the basis of the Greek romance of
identified 75 y}5 in Gen. xxxvii. 36 and
“History of Asenath” (see Hasting’s
yn» ነ in xli. 45 as being one and the
Bible Dict. 1, 162; and Issaverden’s
same name. He takes the two to refer
translation of Uncanonical Writings
to one and the same person: cf. xxxiv.
of the Old Testament, 1901, Venice,
11, xliv. 24. Origen (Cat. Niceph. i.
pp. 94-96). In these later writings,
463) refers to our book for this view:
however, Asenath is no longer repreοἰήσεται δέ τις ἕτερον εἶναι τοῦτον (1.6.
sented as a Jewess by birth except
Φουρτιφάρ) παρὰ τὸν ὠνησάμενον τὸν
in a single passage in the Syriac verἸωσήφ' οὐ μὴν οὕτως ὑπειλήφασιν
Ἑβραῖοι: ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἀποκρύφου λέγουσι sion.
τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι καὶ δεσπότην καὶ πενθε- 11. Cf. Gen. xli. 46. Ihave bracketed
ρὸν γενέσθαι. Later Judaism was the words ‘‘when he stood before
offended with this marriage of Joseph Pharaoh” as a dittography.
to the daughter of a heathen priest, 13. Cf. Gen. xli. 49.

228 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
been consummated, 23-28. (Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 6-18, 2026; 29-30,'xli, 13.)
XLI. And in the forty-fifth jubilee, in the second week,
2165 A.M.
(and) in the second year, Judah took for his first-born
Er, a wife from the daughters of Aram, named Tamar.
2. But he hated, and did not lie with her, because his
mother was of the daughters of Canaan, and he wished
to take him a wife of the kinsfolk of his mother, but Judah,
his father, would not permit him. 3. And this Er, the
first-born of Judah, was wicked, and the Lord slew him.
4. And Judah said unto Onan, his brother: “Go in unto
thy brothers wife and perform the duty of a husbands
brother unto her, and raise up seed unto thy brother.”
5. And Onan knew that the seed would not be his, (but)
his brother’s only, and he went into the house of his
brother’s wife, and spilt the seed on the ground, and he
was wicked in the eyes of the Lord, and He slew him.
6. And Judah said unto Tamar, his daughter-in-law:
“Remain in thy fathers house as a widow till Shelah
my son be grown up, and I shall give thee to him to wife.”
7. And he grew up; but Bédst’él, the wife of Judah,
did not permit her son Shelah to marry. And Bédst’él, the
2168 A.M.
wife of Judah, died in the fifth year of this week. 8. And
XLI. 1. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 6. ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν, κατὰ τὴν ἐντολὴν τῆς
From the daughters of Aram named μητρὸς αὐτοῦ" καί γε οὗτος ἐν πονηρίᾳ
Tamar. Cf. Test. Jud. 10: Θάμαρ ἐκ ἀπέθανεν. ἤθελον δὲ καὶ τὸν Σιλὼμ
Μεσοποταμίας, θυγατέρα ᾿Αράμ. δοῦναι αὐτῇ, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ γυνή μου Βήσσουε
9-8. Cf. Test. Jud. 10: καὶ ἄγγελος οὐκ ἀφῆκεν" ἐπονηρεύετο γὰρ πρὸς τὴν
κυρίου ἀνεῖλεν αὐτὸν τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ Θάμαρ, ὅτι οὐκ ἣν ἐκ θυγατέρων Χαναάν,
νυκτί, καὶ αὐτὸς οὐκ ἔγνω αὐτὴν κατὰ ws αὐτή.
πανουργίαν τῆς μητρὸς αὐτοῦ, οὐ γὰρ 7. Béds#dl , i.e. Bathshua. See χχχῖν.
ἤθελεν ἔχειν τέκνα ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς. 20.
8. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 7. Shelah. Eth. Sélém.
4. Onan. Eth. ’Aunan. 8-12. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 12-18: also _
Perform the duty of a husband’s Test. Jud. 12: Θάμαρ, μετὰ δύο ern
broth=e RrR R 03). Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 8 ; ἀκούσασα, ὅτι ἀνέρχομαι κεῖραι τὰ πρόDeut. xxv. 5. βατα, κοσμηθεῖσα κόσμῳ νυμφικῷ, ἐκάθι5-7. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 9-12: also σεν ἀπέναντι τῇ πόλει πρὸς τὴν πύλην °°‘ |
Test. Jud. 10: ἐπεγάμβρευσα αὐτῇ τὸν μεθυσθεὶς... οὐκ ἐπέγνων αὐτὴν ἀπὸ
Αὐνᾶν. καί γε οὗτος ἐν πονηρίᾳ οὐκ τοῦ οἴνου. . . καὶ ἐκκλίνας πρὸς αὐτὴν
ἔγνω αὐτὴν . . . διέφθειρε δὲ τὸ σπέρμα εἶπον, Ἐϊσέλθω πρός σε. καὶ εἶπέ μοι,
Ἢ
x
Vir
|፡

CHAPTER XLI. 1-15 229
in the sixth year Judah went up to shear his sheep at 2169 a.m.
Timnah. And they told Tamar: “Behold thy father-inlaw goeth up to Timnah to shear his sheep.” 9. And
she put off her widow’s clothes, and put on a veil, and
adorned herself, and sat in the gate adjoining the
way to Timnah. 10. And as Judah was going along he
found her, and thought her to be an harlot, and he said
unto her: “Let me come in unto thee”; and she said
unto him: “Come in,” and he went in. 11. And she
said unto him: “Give me my hire”; and he said unto her:
“JT have nothing in my hand save my ring that is on
my finger, and my necklace, and my staff which is in
my hand.” 12. And she said unto him: “Give them
to me until thou dost send me my hire”; and he said
unto her: “I will send unto thee a kid of the goats”;
and he gave them to her, (and he went in unto her), and
she conceived by him. 13. And Judah went unto his
sheep, and she went to her father’s house. 14. And Judah
sent a kid of the goats by the hand of his shepherd, an
Adullamite, and he found her not; and he asked the
people of the place, saying: “ Where is the harlot who was
here?” And they said unto him: “There is no harlot
here with us.” 15. And he returned and informed him,
and said unto him that he had not found her; “I
Ti μοι dwoes; καὶ ἔδωκα αὐτῇ τὴν necklace, ζώνη and ὁρμίσκος go back, is
ῥάβδον μου καὶ τὴν ζώνην καὶ τὸ διάδημα said to be the cord round the neck,
τῆς βασιλείας, καὶ συνελθὼν (sic) αὐτῇ on which the signet ring was hung.
συνείληφεν. 12. And he went in unto her. Re8. Timnah. Eth. Témnata. stored from Latin “et coiit (MS fuit)
9. Adorned herself. So Test. Jud. cum ea.” Cf. Test. Jud. 12: συνελθὼν
12: κοσμηθεῖσα ; also LXX, Syr. and αὐτῇ συνείληφεν, and Gen. xxxviii. 18.
Onk. on Gen. xxxviil. 14. Mass.= 14-19. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 20-26.
“ covered herself.”
14. Cf. Test. Jud. 12: καί ye οἱ ἐν
11, Ring... necklace... staff.
τῇ πόλει ἔλεγον, μὴ εἶναι ἐν TH πόλει
Corresponding to these Test. Jud. 12
τελισκομένην (=a woman being initihas διάδημα, ζώνη, ῥάβδος, and the LXX
ated into rites of Aphrodite, tise. ΠΡ).
of Gen. xxxviii. 18: δακτύλιον, ὁρμίσκος,
15. And said unto him that he
ῥάβδος. διάδημα supposes ΠΠ3 as in
had not found her. I have here transPs, xlv. 10, or “na as in Esther i, 11,
posed the text of cd (ab) which read
ii, 17, instead of orn, dnp, to which ‘that he had not found her and he said

230 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
asked the people of the place, and they said unto me:
‘There is no harlot here.” And he said: “Let her
keep (them) lest we become a cause of derision.” 16. And
when she had completed three months, it was manifest
that she was with child, and they told Judah, saying:
“Behold Tamar, thy daughter-in-law, is with child by
whoredom.” 17. And Judah went to the house of her
father, and said unto her father and her brothers: “ Bring
her forth, and let them burn her, for she hath wrought
uncleanness in Israel.” 18. And it came to pass when they
brought her forth to burn her that she sent to her father-inlaw the ring and the necklace, and the staff, saying:
“ Discern whose are these, for by him am I with child.”
19. And Judah acknowledged, and said: “Tamar is more
righteous than I am, And therefore let them burn her not.”
20. And for that reason she was not given to Shelah,
and he did not again approach her. 21. And after that
2170 A.M. she bare two sons, Perez and Zerah, in the seventh year
of this second week. 22. And thereupon the seven years
of fruitfulness were accomplished, of which Joseph spake
to Pharaoh. 23. And Judah acknowledged that the
deed which he had done was evil, for he had lain with
his daughter-in-law, and he esteemed it hateful in his
eyes, and he acknowledged that he had transgressed and
gone astray; for he had uncovered the skirt of his son,
unto him.” Perhaps we should read In Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxxviii. 6, 24
with Latin ‘‘dicens: Non inveni eam,” Tamar is called a priest’s daughter.
* And said: I have not found her,” as Beer (Buch d. Jub. p. 52) cites Baba
I have done in my text. Mexia 87 a to the same effect,
Let her keep = ténsa’é, emended 20. Did not again approach her.
with Latin “habeat” from tansé’é, Cf. Test. Jud. 12 :. οὐδὲ ἤγγισα αὐτῇ
“arise.” ἔτι ἕως θανάτου μου.
17. Let them burn her. See note on 21. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 29, 30.
xxx. 7. In Ber. rabba 85 R. Meir of Perez... Zerah. Eth, Pharés...
the second cent. states that Tamar was Zara.
a daughter of the priest-king Shem. 22. Cf. Gen. xli, 53.
Hence her destruction by fire came 23. Had gone astray; for he had
under the law in Lev. xxi. 9, which uncovered, etc. Οἵ, Test. Jud. 14:
prescribes this penalty for the sin of ἐποίησα ἁμαρτίαν μεγάλην, καὶ ἀνfornication in the daughter of a priest. εκάλυψα κάλυμμα ἀκαθαρσίας υἱῶν μου.
ΤτΡ

CHAPTER XLI. 16-28 231
and he began to lament and to supplicate before the
Lord because of his transgression. 24. And we told
him in a dream that it was forgiven him because he
supplicated earnestly, and lamented, and did not again
commit it. 25. And he received forgiveness because he
turned from his sin and from his ignorance, for he transgressed greatly before our God; and every one that acts
thus, every one who lies with his mother-in-law, let
them burn him with fire that he may burn therein, for
there is uncleanness and pollution upon them; with fire
let them burn them. 26. And do thou command the
children of Israel that there be no uncleanness amongst
them, for every one who lies with his daughter-in-law or
with his mother-in-law hath wrought uncleanness; with
fire let them burn the man who has lain with her, and
likewise the woman, and He will turn away wrath and
punishment from Israel. 27. And unto Judah we said
that his two sons had not lain with her, and for this
reason his seed was established for a second generation,
and would not be rooted out. 28. For in singleness of eye
he had gone and sought for punishment, namely, according
to the judgment of Abraham, which he had commanded
his sons, Judah had sought to burn her with fire.
24-254, Cf. Test. Jud. 19: εἰ μὴ ἡ ance and because he turned from his
μετάνοια σαρκός μου, καὶ ἣ ταπείνωσις sin”; for the Eth. preposition emna
ψυχῆς μου, καὶ αἱ εὐχαὶ ᾿Ιακὼβ τοῦ means either “from” or “ because of.”
πατρός μου, ἄτεκνος εἶχον ἀποθανεῖν. Ewery one who lies with his mother-inἀλλ᾽ ὁ θεός... ὁ οἰκτίρμων καὶ ἐλεή- law, let them burn him with fire. So
μων συνέγνω ὅτι ἐν ἀγνοίᾳ ἐποίησα. Lev. xx. 14 enacts.
25. Received forgiveness because he 26. Lies with his daughter-in-law.
turned from his sin and from his ignor- Cf. Lev. xviii. 15, xx. 12. The punishance. Something seems wrong. We ought ment ordained for this offence is death
to have the idea expressed in Test. Jud. in the passages referred to in Leviticus ;
19: συνέγνω ὅτι ἐν ἀγνοίᾳ ἐποίησα. but the form of death is not specified,
Cf. 1 Tim, i. 13: ἠλεήθην, ὅτι ἀγνοῶν On the other hand, death by fire is the
ἐποίησα. 6 transposes ‘‘ because he penalty presupposed for this offence in
turned” after ‘‘ignorance.” If we Gen. xxxviii. 24. Our text (xx. 4)
transpose the clauses “because... enjoins this penalty for adultery or
sin” and ‘‘from his ignorance,” we fornication.
should have an excellent sense: ‘‘re- 28. According to the judgment of
ceived forgiveness because of his ignor- Abraham. See note on xx. 4.

232 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Owing to the famine Jacob sends his sons to Egypt for corn,
1-4. Joseph recognises them and retains Simeon, and
requires them to bring Benjamin when they returned,
5-12. Notwithstanding Jacob’s reluctance his sons take
Berjamin with them on their second journey and are
entertained by Joseph, 13-25. (Cf. Gen. x11. 54, 56,
xlil. 7-9, 13, 17, 20, 24-25, 29-30, 34-38, xliii. 1-2,
4-5, 8-9, 11, 15, 23, 26, 29, 34, xiv. 1-2.)
2171 A.M. XLII. And in the first year of the third week of the
forty-fifth jubilee the famine began to come into the
land, and the rain refused to be given to the earth, for none
whatever fell. 2. And the earth grew barren, but in the
land of Egypt there was food, for Joseph had gathered
the seed of the land in the seven years of plenty and
had preserved it. 3. And the Egyptians came to Joseph
that he might give them food, and he opened the storehouses where was the grain of the first year, and he sold it
to the people of the land for gold. 4. (Now the famine
was very sore in the land of Canaan), and Jacob heard that
there was food in Egypt, and he sent his ten sons that they
should procure food for him in Egypt; but Benjamin he
did not send, and (the ten sons of Jacob) arrived (in Egypt)
among those that went (there). 5. And Joseph recognised
them, but they did not recognise him, and he spake
unto them and questioned them, and he said unto them;
“Are ye not spies, and have ye not come to explore
the approaches of the land?” And he put them in
XLII. 2. Jn . . . Egypt there was (The ten sons of Jacob), (in Egypt).
food. Cf. Gen. xi, 54. Supplied from Latin, “in Aegypto decem 4
3. Cf. Gen. xli. 56. filii Jacob.”
4, (Now... Canaan). Supplied 5-7. Cf. Gen. xlii. 7-9, 17, 24, 25.
from Latin. Cf. Gen. xli. 56. 5. Spake unto them and questioned
And Jacob heard, etc. Cf. Gen. xlii. them. Lat. has ‘‘ appellavit eos dure.”
1, 2, 4. Cf. Gen, xlii. 7.

CHAPTER XLII. 1-15 233
ward. 6. And after that he set them free again, and
detained Simeon alone and sent off his nine brothers.
7. And he filled their sacks with corn, and he put their
gold in their sacks, and they did not know. 8. And he
commanded them to bring their younger brother, for they
had told him their father was living and their younger
brother. 9. And they went up from the land of Egypt
and they came to the land. of Canaan; and they told their
father all that had befallen them, and how the lord? of
the country had spoken roughly to them, and had seized
Simeon till they should bring Benjamin. 10. And Jacob
said: “ Me have ye bereaved of my children! Joseph is not
and Simeon also is not, and ye will take Benjamin away.
On me has your wickedness come.” 11. And he said:
“My son will not go down with you lest perchance he
fall sick; for their mother gave birth to two sons, and
one has perished, and this one also ye will take from
me. If perchance he took a fever on the road, ye would
bring down my old age with sorrow unto death.” 12. For
he saw that their money had been returned to every
man in his sack, and for this reason he feared to send
him. 13. And the famine increased and became sore in the
land of Canaan, and in all lands save in the land of Egypt,
for many of the children of the Egyptians had stored
up their seed for food from the time when they saw Joseph
gathering seed together and putting it in storehouses and
preserving it for the years of famine. 14. And the people
of Egypt fed themselves thereon during the first year of
their famine. 15. But when Israel saw that the famine was
very sore in the land, and that there was no deliverance,
6. And after that . . . Simeon alone. 9. Cf. Gen. xlii. 29, 30, 84,
Latin differs: “Et mittens arcessivit 10-12. Cf. Gen. 36, 38.
illos et accipiens Symeonem ab ipsis 12. Cf. Gen. xlii. 35.
ligavit eum.” 13. Cf. Gen. xliii. 1.
8. Cf. Gen. xlii. 20, 18. 15-16. Cf. Gen. xliii. 2, 4, 5.

234 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
he said unto his sons: “Go again, and procure food for
us that we die not.” 16. And they said: “ We shall not go;
unless our youngest brother go with us, we shall not go.”
17. And Israel saw that if he did not send him with them,
they should all perish by reason of the famine. 18. And
Reuben said: “Give him into my hand, and if I do not
bring him back to thee, slay my two sons instead of his
soul.” And he said unto him: “ He will not go with thee.”
19. And Judah came near and said: “Send him with
me, and if I do not bring him back to thee, let me
bear the blame before thee all the days of my life.” 20.
And he sent him with them in the second year of this week
2172 A.M.
on the first day of the month, and they came to the land of
Egypt with all those who went, and (they had) presents in
their hands, stacte and almonds and terebinth nuts and pure
honey. 21. And they went and stood before Joseph,
and he saw Benjamin his brother, and he knew him, and
said unto them: “Is this your youngest brother?” And
they said unto him: “It is he.” And he said: “The Lord
be gracious to thee, my son!” 22. And he sent him
into his house and he brought forth Simeon unto them
and he made a feast for them, and they presented to him
the gift which they had brought in their hands. 23. And
they eat before him and he gave them all a portion, but
the portion of Benjamin was seven times larger than that of
any of theirs. 24. And they eat and drank and arose
and remained with their asses. 25, And Joseph devised a
plan whereby he might learn their thoughts as to whether —
thoughts of peace prevailed amongst them, and he said ©
to the steward who was over his house: “Fill all their —
sacks with food, and return their money unto them into ἵ
e
ih
18. Cf. Gen. xiii. 87, 38. 22. Cf. Gen. xliii. 23, 26.
19. C£ Gen. xliii. 8, 9. 2 Fr"
20. Cf. Gen. xiii, 11. 23-24. CE Orn 94
21. Cf. Gen. xiii. 15, 29. 25. Cf. Gen. xliv. 1, 2.
RὉ ASS

CHAPTERS XLII. 16-XLIII. 6 235
their vessels, and my cup, the silver cup out of which
I drink, put it in the sack of the youngest, and send them
away.”
Josephs plan to stay his brethren, 1-10. Judas supplication, 11-13. Joseph makes himself known to his
brethren and sends them back for his father, 14-24.
(Cf. Gen. xliv. 3-10, 12-18, 27-28, 30-32, xlv. 1-2,
5-9, 12, 18, 20-21, 23, 25-28.)
XLIIL And he did as Joseph had told him, and filled
all their sacks for them with food and put their money
in their sacks, and put the cup in Benjamin’s sack. 2. And
early in the morning they departed, and it came to pass
that, when they had gone from thence, Joseph said unto the
steward of his house: “ Pursue them, run and seize them,
saying, ‘ For good ye have requited me with evil; you have
stolen from me the silver cup out of which my lord drinks.’
And bring back to me their youngest brother, and fetch
(him) quickly before I go forth to my seat of judgment.”
3. And he ran after them and said unto them according
to these words. 4. And they said unto him: “God forbid
that thy servants should do this thing, and steal from
the house of thy lord any utensil, and the money also which
we found in our sacks the first time, we thy servants
brought back from the land of Canaan. 5. How then
should we steal any utensil? Behold here are we and
our sacks; search, and wherever thou findest the cup in
the sack of any man amongst us, let him be slain, and
we and our asses will serve thy lord.” 6. And he said unto
them: “Not so, the man with whom I find, him only
shall I take as a servant, and ye will return in peace
XLII. 2. Cf. Gen. xliv. 3, 4. 5. Thy lord. Gen, xliv. 9, “ΤΥ
3-6. Cf. Gen. xliv. 6-10. lord.”

236 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
unto your house.” 7. And as he was searching in their
vessels, beginning with the eldest and ending with the
youngest, it was found in Benjamin’s sack. 8. And they
rent their garments, and laded their asses, and returned
to the city and came to the house of Joseph, and they
all bowed themselves on their faces to the ground before
him. 9. And Joseph said unto them: “Ye have done
evil. And they said: “What shall we say and how
shall we defend ourselves? Our lord hath discovered
the transgression of his servants; behold we are the servants
of our lord, and our asses also.” 10. And Joseph said unto
them: “I too fear the Lord; as for you, go ye to your
homes and let your brother be my servant, for ye have done
evil. Know ye not that a man delights in his cup as I
with this cup? And yet ye have stolen it from me.”
11. And Judah said: “O my lord, let thy servant, I pray
thee, speak a word in my lord’s ear; two brothers did
thy servant’s mother bear to our father; one went away
and was lost, and hath not been found, and he alone is left
of his mother, and thy servant our father loves him, and his
life also is bound up with the life of this (lad). 12. And it
will come to pass, when we go to thy servant our father,
and the lad is not with us, that he will die, and we
shall bring down our father with sorrow unto death.
13. Now rather let me, thy servant, abide instead of the
boy as a bondsman unto my lord, and let the lad go with
his brethren, for I became surety for him at the hand
of thy servant our father, and if I do not bring him back,
thy servant will bear the blame to our father for ever.”
7-8. Cf. Gen. xliv. 12-14, line with Gen. xliv. 15; but the change
9-10. Cf. Gen. xliv. 5 (“ye have may be deliberate. ἣ
done evil '), 16, 17. Observe that Gen. 3 :
xliv. 16 specifies “we and he also in σι, τ 8. Ch Gen, aly A
whose hand the cup is found.” UT a
10. Delights in his cup. So MSS, 11. I pray thee. Here the MSS= t
A change of jasta’adém into jastaqastm “on me, a mistranslation of "3 δέομαι
=“divines” would bring our text into in Gen. xliv. 18.

CHAPTER XLIII. 7-24 237
14. And Joseph saw that they were all accordant in goodness one with another, and he could not refrain himself,
and he told them that he was Joseph. 15. And he
conversed with them in the Hebrew tongue and fell on
their neck and wept. But they knew him not and they
began to weep. 16. And he said unto them: “ Weep
not over me, but hasten and bring my father to me; and ye
see that it is my mouth that speaketh, and the eyes of
my brother Benjamin see. 17. For behold this is the
second year of the famine, and there are still five years
without harvest or fruit of trees or ploughing. 18. Come
down quickly ye and your households, so that ye perish not
through the famine, and do not be grieved for your possessions, for the Lord sent me before you to set things in order
that many people might live. 19. And tell my father that
I am still alive, and ye, behold, ye see that the Lord has
made me as a father to Pharaoh, and ruler over his house
and over all the land of Egypt. 20. And tell my father
of all my glory, and all the riches and glory that the Lord
hath given me.” 21. And by the command of the mouth of
Pharaoh he gave them chariots and provisions for the way,
and he gave them all many-coloured raiment and silver.
22. And to their father he sent raiment and silver and
ten asses which carried corn, and he sent them away.
23. And they went up and told their father that Joseph
was alive, and was measuring out corn to all the nations of
the earth, and that he was ruler over all the land of Egypt.
24. And their father did not believe it, for he was beside
himself in his mind; but when he saw the wagons which
14-15, Cf. Gen. xlv. 1, 2. ‘Let me see him before I die and the eyes
15. Conversed with them in the Hebrew of my brother Benjamin while seeing.”
tongue. So Ber. rabba 93. According 17. Cf. Gen. xlv. 6.
to Gen. Joseph caused all the Egyptians 18. Cf. Gen. xlv. 18, 20, 5, 7.
to go out. 19. Cf. Gen. xlv. 8.
16. Cf. Gen. xlv. 5, 9, 12. 20. Cf. Gen. xlv. 18.
Ye see that itis . . . Benjamin see. 21-24. Cf. Gen. xlv. 21, 28, 25, 26,
Emended: see my text p.157. MSS= 27, 28.

238 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Joseph had sent, the life of his spirit revived, and he
said: “It is enough for me if Joseph lives; I will go down
and see him before I die.”
Jacob celebrates the feast of first-fruits, and encouraged by
a vision goes down to Egypt, 1-10. Names of his
descendants, 11-34. (Cf. Gen. xlvi. 1-28.)
XLIV. And Israel took his journey from + Haran + from
his house on the new moon of the third month, and he
went on the way of the Well of the Oath, and he offered a
sacrifice to the God of his father Isaac on the seventh of
this month. 2. And Jacob remembered the dream that
he had seen at Bethel, and he feared to go down into Egypt.
3. And while he was thinking of sending word to Joseph to
come to him, and that he would not go down, he remained
there seven days, if perchance he should see a vision as
to whether he should remain or go down. 4. And he
celebrated the harvest festival of the first-fruits with old
grain, for in all the land of Canaan there was not a handful of seed (in the land), for the famine was over all the
beasts and cattle and birds, and also over man. 5. And
on the sixteenth the Lord appeared unto him, and said
unto him, “Jacob, Jacob”; and he said, “Here am I.”
And He said unto him: “I am the God of thy fathers,
the God of Abraham and Isaac; fear not to go down
into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.
24. It is enough for me. The Ethi- supposed by the statement in ver. 6
opic is here a literal equivalent of the and also by Gen. xxxvii. 14,
LXX, Gen. xlv. 28, μέγα μοί ἐστιν, which
4. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 1, Jacob celebrates
is in its turn a literal rendering of Ὁ 35,
the feast of weeks on the 15th of the i
LXX, Syr., Vulg. (sufficit mihi) and third month. He has a vision on the 2
Onkelos presuppose the %, which how- next day (see next verse).
ever the Mass. and Sam, omit. (In the land). Bracketed as a ditto- Ὁ
XLIV. 1. +Harant. This seems cor- graphy.
rupt for “Hebron.” Hebron is pre- 5-8. Cf. Gen. xlvi, 2-6.

CHAPTER XLIV. 1-12 239
6. I shall go down with thee, and I shall bring thee up
(again), and in this land wilt thou be buried, and Joseph
will put his hands upon thy eyes. Fear not; go down
into Egypt.” 7. And his sons rose up, and his sons’
sons, and they placed their father and their possessions
upon wagons. 8. And Israel rose up from the Well of the
Oath on the sixteenth of this third month, and he went to
the land of Egypt. 9. And Israel sent Judah before him to
his son Joseph to examine the Land of Goshen, for Joseph
had told his brothers that they should come and dwell
there that they might be near him. 10. And this was the
goodliest (land) in the land of Egypt, and near to him,
for all (of them) and also for the cattle. 11. And these
are the names of the sons of Jacob who went into Egypt
with Jacob their father. 12. Reuben, the first-born of
Israel; and these are the names of his sons: Enoch, and
6. Bring thee up. Cf. xxvii. 24, Reuben and 4 sons 5
xxxii, 23. Here wasada has the very Simeon and 6 sons 7
unusual meaning of ἀναβιβάζειν or ἀν- Levi and 3 sons 4
dyew. Cf. Asc. Isaiah ix. 1. Usually Leah's children 1 Judah, 1 son, 2
it means “conduct,” «« lead,” grandsons 4
9. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 28. Issachar and 4 sons 5
To examine = NT). So practically Zebulon and 8 sons 4
Onkelos. Mass. alone has nino, while 29
Sam., LXX, Syr. = ano.
12-33. Our text makes the number Zilpah’s RN =E N! 8
of Jacob's descendants together with ᾽ + dees titer 6
himself seventy. This was the view 5 fe
of the writer of Gen. xlvi. 26 and of 14
Joseph. Aut. ii. 7. 4. On the other hand Joseph and 2 sons 3
in Gen. xlvi. 15, 18, 21, 25 Jacob is Rachels {Paani and 10
expressly not included in the number sons 11
seventy. Cf. Exod.i.5. That chapter Τά
has admittedly undergone revision. Our
text makes up the number seventy by Bilhah’ Dan and 5 sons 6
a method somewhat different from that RAO ἐὸν Naphtaliand5sons 6
in Gen. xlvi. Thus whereas Dan and 19
Naphtali have respectively one and four
sons in Gen., our text assigns them five 99 + 14 + 14+ 19 = 69, Thus the
each. On the other hand Gen. includes number 70 includes Jacob. It is notein its reckoning two grandchildren of worthy that the LXX reads 75 in Gen.
Asher, Er, Onan, two sons of Perez, xlvi. 27: likewise in Exod. i. 5, while
and Dinah against Jubilees. The in Deut. x. 22 most MSS give 70 but
numbers in our text may be represented some give 75. The number 75 in Acts
as follows :— vil. 14 is of course due to the LXX.

240 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Pallu, and Hezron and Carmi—five. 13. Simeon and his
sons; and these are the names of his sons: Jemuel, and
Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, the
son of the Zephathite woman—seven. 14. Levi and his
sons; and these are the names of his sons: Gershon, and
Kohath, and Merari—four. 15. Judah and his sons; and
these are the names of his sons: Shela, and Perez, and
Zerah—four. 16. Issachar and his sons; and these are the
names of his sons: Tola, and Phiia, and Jasib, and Shimron—
five. 17. Zebulon and his sons; and these are the names
of his sons: Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel—four. 18. And
these are the sons of Jacob, and their sons, whom Leah bore
to Jacob in Mesopotamia, six, and their one sister, Dinah:
and all the souls of the sons of Leah, and their sons, who
went with Jacob their father into Egypt, were twenty-nine,
and Jacob their father being with them, they were thirty.
19. And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s handmaid, the wife of
Jacob, whom she bore unto Jacob, Gad and Asher. 20. And
these are the names of their sons who went with him
into Egypt: the sons of Gad: Ziphion, and Haggi, and
Shuni, and Ezbon, (and Eri) and Areli, and Arodi—eight.
21. And the sons of Asher: Imnah, and Ishvah, (and Ishvi),
and Beriah, and Serah, their one sister—six. 22. Alt
12. For Pallu, Hezron and Carmi, in 1 Chron. vii. 1, xis), whereas Mass.
Eth. has Phalltis, ’Rsrém, Karami.
has 735.
13. For, Jemuel, etc., Eth. has
Jasab. So Sam. of Gen. xlvi. 18,
δ ὃ], "Ijamén, ’Awdt (LXX, “Awd),
aw, LXX, "IacovB. Mass., Vulg., —
*{jakim, Sa’ar (LXX, Sdap), Saul.
Onk. has 2)".
Zephathite woman. So ὁ Siphnawat. Shimron. Eth. Samarém. —
acd corrupt. Zephathite, as Ronsch 17. Eth. has Sa’ar, ’Bl6n, ’1jal’él.
p- 499 has recognised, is an adjective 19. Whom she bore unto Jacob. So
formed from Zephath, nas, a Canaanitish cd. ab=“who bore unto Jacob Gad —
city destroyed by Judah and Simeon: and Asher.” 3
Judg.i. 17. Hence reading of ὁ should 20. Eth. has Séphjén, ’Agati, Sin, —
be restored in my text. ’Asibén, ’Ardéli, ’Arédi. 4
14. For Gershon and Kohath Eth. (And Eri). This was originally in the —
has Géds6n and Qa ath. Ethiopic as the number “eight” shows.
21. Eth. has fjomna, Jést’a, Barija,
15. For Perez and Zerah Eth. has
Phiarés and Zara. Sara. ¥
16. Phta. So Sam., LXX, Syr., (And Ishvi). This was originally in
Vulg., Onk. in Gen. xlvi. 13 (and also the Eth. as the number “six” shows. _

CHAPTER XLIV. 13-34 241
the souls were fourteen, and all those of Leah were fortyfour. 23. And the sons of Rachel, the wife of Jacob:
Joseph and Benjamin. 24. And there were born to Joseph
in Egypt before his father came into Egypt, those whom
Asenath, daughter of Potiphar priest of Heliopolis bare
unto him, Manasseh, and Ephraim—three. 25. And
the sons of Benjamin: Bela and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera,
and Naaman, and Ehi, and Rosh, and Muppim, and
Huppim, and Ard—eleven. 26. And all the souls of
Rachel were fourteen. 27. And the sons of Bilhah, the
handmaid of Rachel, the wife of Jacob, whom she bare
to Jacob, were Dan and Naphtali. 28. And these are
the names of their sons who went with them into Egypt.
And the sons of Dan were Hushim, and Sdmdén, and Astfidi,
and ‘ijika, and Salémén—six. 29. And they died the
year in which they entered into Egypt, and there was left
to Dan Hushim alone. 30. And these are the names of
the sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
Shallum, and ἦν. 31. And ‘Ty, who was born after the years
of famine, died in Egypt. 32. And all the souls of Rachel
were twenty-six. 33. And all the souls of Jacob which went
into Egypt were seventy souls. These are his children
and his children’s children, in all seventy; but five died
in Egypt before Joseph, and had no children. 34. And
in the land of Canaan two sons of Judah died, Er and
Onan, and they had no children, and the children of Israel
25. Eth. has Bal, Bakar, Asbil, quotes Baba bathra 1436 to the same
Gi’ada, Né@’émén, "Abdéjé, Ra’é, San- effect.
anim, ’Aphim, Ga’am. In this list the Hushim. Eth. has Kfisim.
sixth, eighth and tenth names are cor- 30. Eth. has ἼΔΕΙ, Gahani, Hsa’ar,
rupted almost beyond the possibility of Sallim. Here our text agrees with
recognition. 1 Chron. vii. 13 rather than with Gen.
28. In Gen. xlvi. 23 only one son of xlvi, 24 in the case of the names Jahziel
Dan is mentioned, though the Mass. and Shallum. Gen. xlvi. 24 has here
reads «« sons of Dan.” Cf. for similar Jahzeel and Shillem.
case Gen, xxxvi. 25. On the other And’Iv. Noint Ge n. xlvi. 24.
hand Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xlvi. 23 states 33. Before Joseph (bc). a gives
that the sons of Dan were beyond “before they married’’; d “who did
numbering. Beer (Buch d. Jub. 37) not marry.”
16

242 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
buried those who perished, and they were reckoned among
the seventy Gentile nations.
Joseph receives Jacob, and gives him Goshen, 1-7. Joseph
acquires all the land and its inhabitants for Pharaoh,
8-12. Jacob dies and is buried in Hebron, 13-15.
His books given to Levi, 16. (Cf Gen. xlvi. 28-30,
xlvii. 11-13, 19, 20, 23, 24, 28, 1. 13.)
2172am. XLV. And Israel went into the country of Egypt,
into the land of Goshen, on the new moon of the fourth
month, in the second year of the third week of the
forty-fifth jubilee. 2. And Joseph went to meet his father
Jacob, to the land of Goshen, and he fell on his father’s
neck and wept. 3. And Israel said unto Joseph: “Now
let me die since I have seen thee, and now may the
Lord God of Israel be blessed, the God of Abraham and
the God of Isaac who hath not withheld His mercy and
His grace from His servant Jacob. 4. It is enough for
me that I have seen thy face whilst +I amt yet alive;
yea, true is the vision which I saw at Bethel. Blessed
be the Lord my God for ever and ever, and blessed.
be His name.” 5. And Joseph and his brothers eat bread
before their father and drank wine, and Jacob rejoiced with
exceeding great joy because he saw Joseph eating with
his brothers and drinking before him, and he blessed the —
Creator of all things who had preserved him, and had ~
preserved for him his twelve sons. 6. And Joseph had —
given to his father and to his brothers as a gift the if
right of dwelling in the land of Goshen and in Rameses | ἡ
XLV. 1-48, Cf. Gen. xlvi. 28-30. but our text is probably corrupt ; for
4, It is enough for me. Here the by changing ana into anta it is brought
Ethiopic=péya μοί ἐστιν. See note on into line with Gen. xlvi. 30.
xliii. 24, 6. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 11. BI
Whilst tI amt yet alive. In Gen. Rameses. Eth. has Raméséna=
xlvi. 30: ‘that thou art yet alive”; opnyn.

CHAPTER XLV. 1-12 243
and all the region round about, which he ruled over before
Pharaoh. And Israel and his sons dwelt in the land of
Goshen, the best part of the land of Egypt; and Israel was
one hundred and thirty years old when he came into Egypt.
7. And Joseph nourished his father and his brethren
and also their possessions with bread as much as sufficed
them for the seven years of the famine. 8. And the land of
Egypt suffered by reason of the famine, and Joseph acquired
all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh in return for food, and he
got possession of the people and their cattle and everything
for Pharaoh. 9. And the years of the famine were
accomplished, and Joseph gave to the people in the
land seed and food that they might sow (the land)
in the eighth year, for the river had overflowed all the
land of Egypt. 10. For in the seven years of the
famine it had not overflowed and had irrigated only a
few places on the banks of the river, but now it overflowed
and the Egyptians sowed the land, and it bore much
corn that year. 11. And this was the first year of the 2178 a.m.
fourth week of the forty-fifth jubilee. 12. And Joseph
took of the corn of the harvest the fifth part for the
king and left four parts for them for food and for seed,
and Joseph made it an ordinance for the land of Egypt
One hundred and thirty years. Cf. Jt bore=farajat, which, since Latin
Gen. xlvii. 9. has collegerunt, may be corrupt for
7. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 12. ’ararfi=“collegerunt”’ or “harvested.”
As much as sufficed them. BY read- 12. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 24.
ing bakama’akAlomfi instead of bakama Of the corn of the harvest =’ém’ékl
yaaklémfi we should get (as in LXX zazar'ft. So the text should be transof Gen. xlvii. 12) κατὰ σῶμα αὐτῶν, lated. Zar’fi is not a verb here, but
“according to their persons.” The zar’e (which here=seges, γεννήματα)
Hebrew is nian '55 = «« according to their
with the suffix, which goes back to
families.” medr=‘‘land” in verse 10, just as
8. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 13, 19, 20. αὐτῆς after τὰ γεννήματα in LXX of
For Pharaoh. Emended with Latin Gen. xlvii. 24 goes back to γῆν in the
‘*Pharaoni” from text of b=‘‘and preceding sentence. But since the
Pharaoh.” Latin has de omnibus quidquid natum
9. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 28. est, it is possible that for em’ekl zazar’t
(The land). Restored from Latin, we should read ’émkuellii zar’i“=‘ o f
Cf. Gen. xlvii. 23. all the harvest.” I hereby withdraw
10. Not. Restored from Latin, the emendation in my text.

244 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
until this day. 13. And Israel lived in the land of Egypt
seventeen years, and all the days which he lived were three
jubilees, one hundred and forty-seven years, and he died
2188 A.M. in the fourth year of the fifth week of the forty-fifth jubilee.
14. And Israel blessed his sons before he died and told
them everything that would befall them in the land of
Egypt; and he made known to them what would come
upon them in the last days, and blessed them and gave
to Joseph two portions in the land. 15. And he slept
with his fathers, and he was buried in the double cave
in the land of Canaan, near Abraham his father in the
grave which he dug for himself in the double cave in
the land of Hebron. 16. And he gave all his books and
the books of his fathers to Levi his son that he might
preserve them and renew them for his children until this
day.
Prosperity of Israel in Egypt, 1-2. Death of Joseph, 3-5.
War between Egypt and Canaan during which the bones
of all the sons of Jacob except Joseph are buried at
Hebron, 6-11. Egypt oppresses Israel, 12-16. (Cf.
Gen. 1. 22, 25-26; Exod. i. 6-14.) |
XLVI. And it came to pass that after Jacob died the
children of Israel multiplied in the land of Egypt, and they
became a great nation, and they were of one accord in
heart, so that brother loved brother and every man ~
helped his brother, and they increased abundantly and
multiplied exceedingly, ten weeks of years, all the days ©
2242 A.M.
13. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 28. 15. Cf. Gen. 1. 13.
This date conflicts with that in 16. Cf. x. 14. According to our ih
xix. 13, i.e. 2046, which according to author these traditions were in the —
the present passage should be 2041. keeping of Levi’s descendants. It is
See also note on xxv. 4. reasonable to infer that our author who
14. Told them everything, etc. Gen. gave them to the world was a descend- _
xlix. 1. See xxxii. 21, note. ant of Levi, and probably a priest.
Blessed them. Cf. Gen. xlix. ;
Two portions. Gen, xlviii. 22, See XLVI. 1. Cf, Exod. i, 7.
notes p. 201. Ten weeks of years. Hence Joseph

CHAPTERS XLV. 13-XLVI. 6 245
of the life of Joseph. 2. And there was no Satan nor
any evil all the days of the life of Joseph which he
lived after his father Jacob, for all the Egyptians honoured
the children of Israel all the days of the life of Joseph.
3. And Joseph died being a hundred and ten years old;
seventeen years he lived in the land of Canaan, and ten
years he was a servant, and three years in prison, and
eighty years he was under the king, ruling all the land
of Egypt. 4. And he died and all his brethren and all
that generation. 5. And he commanded the children of
Israel before he died that they should carry his bones with
them when they went forth from the land of Egypt.
6. And he made them swear regarding his bones, for
died seventy years after the arrival of (see note on xxviii. 11-24), his burial
Jacob in Egypt, i.¢. in 2242. See note in Hebron took place 90 years after the
on xxviii. 24. Joseph had already descent into Egypt in the year of the
been ruling ten years before Jacob’s world 2262. But this date would be
coming (ver. 3). too early for Levi and Benjamin.
2. No Satan, etc. See xxiii. 29. The statement in Benj. 12 that this
3. Joseph died being a hundred and expedition to Hebron was in the 91st
ten years old. Cf. Gen. 1. 22, 26; year (Greek MSS) before the exodus,
Exod. i. 6. is not supported by the Armenian
5-68, Cf. Gen. 1. 25. version. Our text fixes it at 2263.
6-9. This war between the Egyptians Notwithstanding it seems clearly to
and the Canaanites is referred to in have been the view of the author of
the Test. Sim. 8 and Test. Benj. 12 as the Testaments that the bones of all the
being waged when the bodies of these patriarchs save those of Joseph were
patriarchs were buried at Hebron. Thus buried in Hebron on the occasion of
in Sim. 8: ἔθηκαν αὐτὸν ἐν θήκῃ ξύλων a war between Egypt and Canaan.
ἀσήπτων, τοῦ ἀναγαγεῖν τὰ ὀστᾶ αὐτοῦ Thus, in addition to the statements in
ἐν Χεβρών. καὶ ἀνήνεγκαν αὐτὰ ἐν Simeon, Gad and Benjamin, observe
πολέμῳ Αἰγυπτίων κρυφῇ : and Benj. that after mentioning the death of
12: καὶ ἔθηκαν αὐτὸν ἐν παραθήκῃ Levi, Zebulon and Dan, the Testaments
kal... ἀνήγαγον τὰ ὀστᾶ τῶν πατέ- (Lev. 19; Zeb. 10; Dan 7) add that
ρων αὐτῶν ἐν κρυφῇ, ἐν πολέμῳ Χαναάν “afterwards” (ὕστερον) they were
(0. Arm=. ὅ τε ἦσαν ἐν πολέμῳ οἱ Χανα- buried in Hebron. Josephus (Ant.
ναῖοι). If we could trust the date in ii. 8. 2) appears to have held the same
Test. Gad 8 which says that the body view, though he makes no mention of
of Gad was buried in Hebron five years the war. He states: ‘‘ His (Joseph’s)
after his death: ἐκοιμήθη ἐν εἰρήνῃ. brethren also died . .. and their
kal μετὰ πέντε ἔτη ἀνήγαγον αὐτὸν καὶ posterity and sons carried their bodies
ἔθηκαν αὐτὸν εἰς Χεβρών, we could after some time (κομίσαντες μετὰ χρόarrive at the date to which the authors voy) and buried them in Hebron.” St.
of Jubilees and the Testaments assigned Stephen is beholden to this tradition for
this war between Egypt and Canaan. the statement in Acts vii. 15-16.
Since Gad died at the age of 125 (Test. Merenptah (about this date ?) waged
Gad, 1 (MS 0); Midrash Tadshe and war against Palestine. See Articles on
Book of Jashar, op. cit. ii. 1246) and Egypt in Hncyc. Bib. ii. and Bible
was 40 when he went down into Egypt Dictionary, i. 662, 665. But our text,

246 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
he knew that the Egyptians would not again bring forth
and bury him in the land of Canaan, for Makaméarén, king
of Canaan, while dwelling in the land of Assyria, fought
in the valley with the king of Egypt and slew him
there, and pursued after the Egyptians to the gates of
’Ermén. 7. But he was not able to enter, for another, a
new king, had become king of Egypt, and he was stronger
than he, and he returned to the land of Canaan, and
the gates of Egypt were closed, and none went out and
none came into Egypt. 8. And Joseph died in the forty2242 A.M. sixth jubilee, in the sixth week, in the second year, and
they buried him in the land of Egypt, and all his
brethren died after him. 9. And the king of Egypt went
forth to war with the king of Canaan in the forty-seventh
2263 A.M.
jubilee, in the second week in the second year, and the
children of Israel brought forth all the bones of the
children of Jacob save the bones of Joseph, and they buried
them in the field in the double cave in the mountain.
10. And the most (of them) returned to Egypt, but a
few of them remained in the mountains of Hebron, and
which emphasises the weakness of to this in representing Cush and Canaan
Egypt, points rather to the period of as the opposing countries.
the successors of Rameses III. when 6. ’Ermén, i.e. Herodupolis which
Egypt lost her Syrian dependencies, stood close to the Desert on the canal of
In Josephus (Ant. ii. 10) there is an Ramses. I cannot identify Makamar6én.
account of a war between Cush and 8. All his brethren died after him.
Egypt in which the latter prevails This statement holds even if we accept
under the generalship of Moses. An the birth-dates in our text (see p. 171
enlarged form of this legend, having note), and the ages assigned to the twelve
many details in common with that in sons of Jacob by the Test. XII. Patri- — ብ
Josephus, is given in the Chronicles of archs (see p. 172 note).
Jerahmeel, xlv. Here the war is 9. The date 2263 is not late enough
between Cush and Syria and the people to allow of all the sons of Jacob being
of the East. Another form appears in dead if we accept the ages assigned to
the Palaea Historica (Vassiliev, Anec- them by the Test. XII. Patriarchs.
dota Graeco-Byzantina, i. 228), where Thus Benjamin was born in the year
Egypt is at strife with India. A later 2143 and as he lived 125 years (see
and still more elaborate, and still more note on p. 172) the date of his death ie
grotesque, edition is found in the Book would be 2268.
of Jashar (op. cit. ii. 1244-1253). The 10. According to Beer there is no | 3
oldest form of the tradition is that in other mention of this stay of Amram in —
our text where the war is between Canaan. To Josephus (see Ant. ii. 8.
Egypt and Canaan. The account in the 2), however, some such legend may —
Chronicles of Jerahmeel comes nearest have been known.

CHAPTERS XLVI. 7-XLVII. 1 247
Amram thy father remained with them. 11. And the king
of Canaan was victorious over the king of Egypt, and he
closed the gates of Egypt. 12. And he devised an evil
device against the children of Israel of afflicting them;
and he said unto the people of Egypt: 13. “Behold the
people of the children of Israel have increased and multiplied more than we. Come and let us deal wisely with
them before they become too many, and let us afflict them
with slavery before war come upon us and before they
too fight against us; else they will join themselves unto
our enemies and get them up out of our land, for their
hearts and faces are towards the land of Canaan.” 14.
And he set over them taskmasters to afflict them with
slavery; and they built strong cities for Pharaoh, Pithom
and Raamses, and they built all the walls and all the fortifications which had fallen in the cities of Egypt. 15. And
they made them serve with rigour, and the more they dealt
evilly with them, the more they increased and multiplied. 16. And the people of Egypt abominated the
children of Israel.
Birth of Moses, 1-4. Adopted by Pharaoh’s daughter, 5-9.
Slays an Egyptian and flees (into Midian), 10-12. (Cf.
Exod. i. 22, 11. 2-15.)
XLVII. And in the seventh week, in the seventh
23803 A.M.
year, in the forty -seventh jubilee, thy father went forth
from the land of Canaan, and thou wast born in the fourth 2330 A.M.
Amram, t.e. ory, Eth. Abram. usually rendered ‘‘ treasure” or “store
This last form is found in Philo, De cities,” but the LXX renders πόλεις
Cong. Erud. Gratia 24: also in one of éxvpat here and in 2 Chron, viii. 4.
the LXX MSS in Num. xxvi. 59. Pithom and Raamses. Eth. Pit6
13-15. Cf. Exod. i. 10, 11, 14, 12. waRamésé. Latin adds et Oon”’ prob13. Their hearts . . . are towards ably through influence of LXX of Exod.
the land of Canaan. Réonsch (p. 162) ΕΣ ἢ ἢ
compares for the diction Ezek. xxi. 2. And all the fortifications. Latin
14, Strong cities, This is nao “py, omits.

248 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
week, in the sixth year thereof, in the forty-eighth
jubilee; this was the time of tribulation on the children
of Israel. 2. And Pharaoh, king of Egypt, issued a command regarding them that they should cast all their
male children which were born into the river. 3. And
they cast them in for seven months until the day that thou
wast born. And thy mother hid thee for three months,
and they told regarding her. 4. And she made an ark for
thee, and covered it with pitch and asphalt, and placed
it in the flags on the bank of the river, and she placed thee
in it seven days, and thy mother came by night and suckled
thee, and by day Miriam, thy sister, guarded thee from the
birds. 5. And in those days Tharmuth, the daughter of
Pharaoh, came to bathe in the river, and she heard thy
voice crying, and she told her maidens to bring thee
forth, and they brought thee unto her. 6. And she
took thee out of the ark, and she had compassion on
thee. 7. And thy sister said unto her: “Shall I go and
call unto thee one of the Hebrew women to nurse and
suckle this babe for thee?” And she said (unto her):
( Go 37 8. And she went and called thy mother Jochebed,
and she gave her wages, and she nursed thee. 9. And
XLVI. 2-4, Cf. Exod. i. 22, ii. 5. Tharmuth. Syr. This appears
2-4, in Syr. Frag. as «26.952, as Θέρ3. For seven months. Cedrenus (i,
μουθις in Joseph. Ant. ii. 9. 5, 7: 10.
85) takes our text as stating that the
2: similarly in Syncellus i. 227: Θερcasting of the children of the Hebrews
μοῦθις ἡ Kal Papin, This Papla is
went on for ‘‘ten” months, 7.e., until
identified with Isis ; see Tertullian Ad.
Pharaoh’s daughter adopted Moses:
Nat. ii. 8; Apol. 16. For other referὅτι ἐν TH λεπτῇ Γενέσει κεῖται μόνους
ences consult Rénsch, p. 265.
δέκα μῆνας ῥιφῆναι τὰ βρέφη τῶν IopanHer maidens. Eth.=‘‘her Hebrew
λιτῶν ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ ἕως οὗ ἀνελήφθη
maids,” a mistranslation as Dillmann
Μωὺῦσῆς ὑπὸ τῆς βασιλίσσης" διὰ τοῦτο
recognised of ἅβραις. The plural is
δέκα πληγαὶ ἐδόθησαν ἐν δέκα μησὶ
also found in the Syr. of Exod. ii. 5,
τοῖς Αἰγυπτίοις, καὶ τέλος ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ
but our Latin version and the Mass.,
κατεστράφησαν ὃν τρόπον τὰ βρέφη τῶν
Sam., LXX, and Vulg=d6pg¢.
Ἑβραίων ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ ἀπέπνιγον,
7. (Unto her). Restored from the
χιλίων ἀνδρῶν ἀπονιγέντων ἰσχυρῶν
Latin and Exod. 11, 8.
Αὐγυπτίων ἀνθ᾽ ἑνὸς βρέφους ᾿Ισραηλιτικοῦ. 8. Jochebed. Cf. Exod. vi. 20; Num.
5-8. Cf. Exod. ii. 5-9. xxvi. 59.

CHAPTERS XLVII. 2-XLVIII. 1 249
afterwards, when thou wast grown up, they brought
thee unto the daughter of Pharaoh, and thou didst become
her son, and Amram thy father taught thee writing,
and after thou hadst completed three weeks they brought
thee into the royal court. 10. And thou wast three weeks 2351-23724.
of years at court until the time when thou didst go forth
from the royal court and didst see an Egyptian smiting
thy friend who was of the children of Israel, and thou didst
slay him and hide him in the sand. 11. And on the
second day thou didst find two of the children of Israel
striving together, and thou didst say to him who was doing
the wrong: “ Why dost thou smite thy brother?” 12. And
he was angry and indignant, and said: “ Who made thee
a prince and a judge over us? Thinkest thou to kill
me as thou killedst the Egyptian yesterday ?” And thou
didst fear and flee on account of these words.
Moses returns from Midian to Egypt. Mastémd seeks to
slay him on the way, 1-3. The ten plagues, 4-11.
Israel goes forth out of Egypt: the destruction of the
Egyptians on the Red Sea, 12-19. (Cf. Exod. ii. 15,
iv. 19, 24, vii. sqq.)
XLVIII. And in the sixth year of the third week of 2372 a.m.
the forty-ninth jubilee thou didst depart and dwell in
the land of Midian five weeks and one year. And thou
didst return into Egypt in the second week in the
9. Cf. Exod. ii. 10. τὸ τῆς ἡλικίας... ἀνάστημα. AccordDaughter. Eth. and Lat, = «« house.” ing to the Chron. of Jerahmeel, xliv. 12
Here the Greek translator misread -Π as and the Book of Jashar (op. cit. ii.
“11. SY. 1265) Moses was only eighteen when he
Amram. Eth. ‘Ebran. slew the Egyptian.
Taught thee writing. This is not the 10-12. Cf. Exod. ii, 11-14.
view of Acts vii. 22 ; Philo, Vita Mos. XLVIII. 1. Jn the land of Midian.
ii. 83 (Mangey); Clem. Alex. Strom. Restored from Latin “in terram
i, 23, 153. Med(ian),” and Exod. ii. 15.
Three weeks. Josephus (Ant. ii. 9, One year. Corrupt for three “years.”
6) says that when he was only three Return into Egypt. Cf. Exod.
years old God gave him θαυμαστόν... iv. 19.

250 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
second year in the fiftieth jubilee. 2. And thou thyself
2410 A.M.
knowest what He spake unto thee on Mount Sinai, and
what prince Mastéma desired to do with thee when thou
wast returning into Egypt on the way when thou didst
meet him at the lodging-place. 3. Did he not with
all his power seek to slay thee and deliver the Egyptians
out of thy hand when he saw that thou wast sent to
execute judgment and vengeance on the Egyptians ?
4. And I delivered thee out of his hand, and thou didst
perform the signs and wonders which thou wast sent to
perform in Egypt against Pharaoh, and against all his
house, and against his servants and his people. 5. And
the Lord executed a great vengeance on them for Israel’s
sake, and smote them through (the plagues of) blood and
frogs, lice and dog-flies, and malignant boils breaking forth
in blains; and their cattle by death; and by hail-stones,
thereby He destroyed everything that grew for them;
and by locusts which devoured the residue which had been
left by the hail, and by darkness; and (by the death) of the
first-born of men and animals, and on all their idols the
2. We have in this verse another away the true meaning of the incident
instance (cf. also ver. 17) where our in Exod. iv. 24 sqq. This is followed
author has followed the example of the more faithfully by the Ps.-Jon. in Joc.
Chronicler in 1 Chron. xxi. 1, where he and the Chron. of Jerah, xlvii. 1, 2
assigns to Satan the action that in 2 where the angel seeks to slay Moses for
Sam. xxiv. 1 is ascribed to Yahweh. not circumcising his son. It is explained,
The LXX and the Targums replace the however, that it was owing to Jethro
divine name by the phrase «an angel of that the child had not been circumcised.
the Lord.” We have already called 5. We have here an enumeration of
attention to an earlier instance as xvii. the ten plagues of Egypt.
16, where our author has similarly got And (by the death) of the first-born.
rid of the offence in the Biblical text. I have supplied the words in brackets.
On Mastéma see note on x. 8. They are wanting both in the Eth. and
On the way when thou didst meet him Lat. The Lat. has simply “ primitiat the lodging-place. Here the Eth. is vorum”’ and 80 αὖ. cd have prefixed
hopelessly corrupt. ὁ which represents ‘sand. Hence there was a lacuna here
an attempt at emendation= “on the in the Greek version. Only for the confeast of tabernacles.” abd are un- cluding words “and burned them with
intelligible. It is best therefore to fire” we might connect the clause with
follow the Latin: “in via in qua the words that follow and merely supply
praeteristi eum in refectione,” and a preposition: ‘(on) the first-born.” —
Exod. iv. 24, nwa 2a 773. But the genitive “primitivorum” is —
3. Our author here quite explains also against this.

CHAPTER XLVIII. 2-13 251
Lord took vengeance and burned them with fire. 6. And
everything was sent through thy hand, that thou shouldst
declare (these things) before they were done, and thou didst
speak with the king of Egypt before all his servants
and before his people. 7. And everything tock place
according to thy words; ten great and terrible judgments
came on the land of Egypt that thou mightest execute
vengeance on it for Israel. 8. And the Lord did everything for Israel’s sake, and according to His covenant,
which He had ordained with Abraham that He would take
vengeance on them as they had brought them by force into
bondage. 9. And the prince of the Mastéma stood up against
thee, and sought to cast thee into the hands of Pharaoh,
and he helped the Egyptian sorcerers, and they stood up
and wrought before thee. 10. The evils indeed we permitted them to work, but the remedies we did not allow to
be wrought by their hands. 11. And the Lord smote
them with malignant ulcers, and they were not able
to stand, for we destroyed them so that they could not
perform a single sign. 12. And notwithstanding all (these)
signs and wonders the prince of the Mastéma was not put to
shame because he took courage and cried to the Egyptians to
pursue after thee with all the powers of the Egyptians, with
their chariots, and with their horses, and with all the hosts
of the peoples of Egypt. 13. And I stood between the
Egyptians and Israel, and we delivered Israel out of his
6. Declare =tenger, emended from shame until he took courage.” As
tegbar=‘‘shouldest do.’ The context this fails to give a good sense, I omitted
shows that this is the idea required. the negative in my text. Thus we
In xlix. 22 the same corruption is found should have: ‘‘ was put to shame until
in three out of the four MSS. he took courage.” Cf. xviii. 12. I
8. Cf. Gen. xv. 13, 14. now think that the corruption lies in
9. Prince of the Mastémd. So ab the ‘‘until he took coura=g Je”N
here and in verses 12 and 15 and in pinn, where I take JwN-y to be corrupt
xviii. 9, 12. for wwx-sy= «« because.” Instead of
ll. Cf. Exod. ix. 11. hajjala = “took courage,” a reads
12. Cf. Exod. xiv. 8, 9. halaja= “took thought.”
Was not put to shame because he took 13. I have omitted “between thee
courage. The Eth=“. w as not put to and” which ab insert before ‘‘ between

252 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
hand, and out of the hand of his people, and the Lord
brought them through the midst of the sea as if it were
dry land. 14. And all the peoples whom he brought
to pursue after Israel, the Lord our God cast them
into the midst of the sea, into the depths of the abyss
beneath the children of Israel, even as the people of
Egypt had cast their children into the river. He took
vengeance on 1,000,000 of them, and one thousand strong
and energetic men were destroyed on account of one
suckling of the children of thy people which they had
thrown into the river. 15. And on the fourteenth day and
on the fifteenth and on the sixteenth and on the seventeenth and on the eighteenth the prince of the Mastéma was
bound and imprisoned behind the children of Israel that
he might not accuse them. 16. And on the nineteenth
we let them loose that they might help the Egyptians
and pursue the children of Israel. 17. And he hardened
their hearts and made them stubborn, and the device
was devised by the Lord our God that He might smite
the Egyptians and cast them into the sea. 18. And on the
fourteenth we bound him that he might not accuse the
children of Israel on the day when they asked the
the Egyptians.” cd add these words but sab ὅ in ad is corrupt for rabt'g
after “ between the Egyptians.” in b. c gives “the fifteenth.” Cedrenus
(i. 87), who has cited our text but a
14, Another example of the lex talifew sentences before, confirms ὃ: τῇ
onis mentioned in iv. 31 (see note), and
ιδ΄ τούτου τοῦ μηνὸς σκυλεύσαντες Toys
enunciated in Wisd. xi. 16: δι᾿ ὧν τις
Αἰγυπτίους ἐξῆλθον. This would admit
ἁμαρτάνει, διὰ τούτων κολάζεται. See
of the Israelites setting out on the 15th
also Gen. ix. 6 ; Exod. xviii. 11 ; Wisd.
of Nisan as in Joseph. (Ant. ii. 14. 6 ;
xi. 7, xii. 23, xvi. 1, xviii. 4,5; Philo,
15. 2), where it states Israel went forth
Adv. Flacc. 20; Joseph. Contra Ap.
from Egypt on the 15th of Nisan having
ii. 18,
already received gifts from the Egyptians
One thousand ... men. Cf. Wisd. (ii. 14. 6): so also in Shabb. 876. Our
xviii. 5. text then supposes that the Israelites
17. Cf. Exod. xiv. 8 for diction. marched from the 15th to the 18th, and
Here again our author attributes to the that on the 19th Mastema and his
immediate agency of Mastéma the action powers were let loose. Beer points out
which Exod. xiv. 8 assigns to Yahweh. that in the Mechilta on Exod. xiv. 3 it
Cf. xvii. 16, xlviii. 2. is stated that the Egyptians pursued
18. The fourteenth. So we should after Israel from the 19th of the first
read with 0. ad= “the seventeenth,” month.

CHAPTERS XLVIII. 14-XLIX. 5 253
Egyptians for vessels and garments, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and vessels of bronze, in order to despoil
the Egyptians in return for the bondage in which they had
forced them to serve. 19. And we did not lead forth
the children of Israel from Egypt empty handed.
The Passover: regulations regarding its celebration. (Cf.
Exod. xii. 6, 9, 11, 13, 22-23, 30, 46, xv. 22.)
XLIX. Remember the commandment which the Lord
commanded thee concerning the passover, that thou shouldst
celebrate it in its season on the fourteenth of the first
month, that thou shouldst kill it before it is evening,
and that they should eat it by night on the evening
of the fifteenth from the time of the setting of the sun.
2. For on this night—the beginning of the festival and
the beginning of the joy—ye were eating the passover
in Egypt, when all the powers of Mastéma had been let
loose to slay all the first-born in the land of Egypt,
from the first-born of Pharaoh to the first-born of the
captive maid-servant in the mill, and to the cattle.
3. And this is the sign which the Lord gave them:
Into every house on the lintels of which they saw the
blood of a lamb of the first year, into (that) house they
should not enter to slay, but should pass by (it), that all
those should be saved that were in the house because the
sign of the blood was on its lintels. 4. And the powers of
the Lord did everything according as the Lord commanded
them, and they passed by all the children of Israel, and
the plague came not upon them to destroy from amongst
them any soul either of cattle, or man, or dog. 5. And
XLIX. 1. Cf. Exod. xii. 6. Egyptians. Here again (cf. xvii. 16,
2. When all the powers of Masten xviii. 2, 17) our author interprets after
had been let loose to slay, etc. See his manner the statement in Exod. xii.
note on x. 8. According to Ps.-Jon. 29 that “ Yahweh smote all the firston Exod, xii. 29 it was the word born.”
(xno) of Yahweh which slew the 3. Cf. Exod. xii. 13, 22, 23.

254 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
the plague was very grievous in Egypt, and there was
no house in Egypt where there was not one dead, and
weeping and lamentation. 6. And all Israel was eating
the flesh of the paschal lamb, and drinking the wine,
and was lauding and blessing, and giving thanks to
the Lord God of their fathers, and was ready to go
forth from under the yoke of Egypt, and from the evil
bondage. 7. And remember thou this day all the days
of thy life, and observe it from year to year all the days of
thy life, once a year, on its day, according to all the law
thereof, and do not adjourn (it) from day to day, or from
month to month. 8. For it is an eternal ordinance,
and engraven on the heavenly tables regarding all the
children of Israel that they should observe it every year
on its day once a year, throughout all their generations;
and there is no limit of days, for this is ordained for ever.
9. And the man who is free from uncleanness, and does not
come to observe it on occasion of its day, so as to bring
an acceptable offering before the Lord, and to eat and to
drink before the Lord on the day of its festival, that
man who is clean and close at hand will be cut off:
because he offered not the oblation of the Lord in its
appointed season, he will take the guilt upon himself.
10. Let the children of Israel come and observe the
passover on the day of its fixed time, on the fourteenth
day of the first month, between the evenings, from the
third part of the day to the third part of the night,
for two portions of the day are given to the light,
5. Cf. Exod. xii. 30. (its) day” (a). The translation is
6. Drinking the wine. This seems doubtful, and the Latin ‘‘ praeteribit et
to be the earliest reference to the use of erit illud a diebus suis ” is corrupt.
wine at the Passover feast. For later 9. CE Num: ix./13.
references, see Pesach. x. 2; Baba- To bring an acceptable offering.
bathra 97 Ὁ. According to Pesach. ix. 4 it was the
7-8. Compare the directions regard- duty of every man within a radius of 15
ing the feast of weeks, vi. 20, 22. miles, if not ceremonially impure, to
7. Do not adjourn (it) from day to present an offering at this feast.
day (Ὁ) or ‘do not change a day from 10. Cf. Exod. xii, 6.

CHAPTER XLIX. 6-13 255
and a third part to the evening. 11. This is that which
the Lord commanded thee that thou shouldst observe it
between the evenings. 12. And it is not permissible
to slay it during any period of the light, but during the
period bordering on the evening, and let them eat it at the
time of the evening until the third part of the night,
and whatever is left over of all its flesh from the third
part of the night and onwards, let them burn it with
fire. 13. And they shall not cook it with water, nor shall
they eat it raw, but roast on the fire: they shall eat it
with diligence, its head with the inwards thereof and its
feet they shall roast with fire, and not break any bone
thereof; for Τοῦ the children of Israel no bone shall be
12. Slay it... during the period the act of sacrificing to the hour between
(or ““ time’’) bordering on the evening. sunset and complete darkness.
According to our text the Passover Eat it at the time of the evening
victim might be slain ‘‘during the untu the third part of the night. Night
period bordering on the evening.” This was divided into three parts 6 to 10
is the meaning it attaches to the phrase p-m., 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. and 2 to 6 a.m.
‘ between the evenings” (n,anyn ]3)- Hence the time for eating seems to be
It corresponds well with Deut. xvi. 6, from 6 to 10 p.m. The rabbinic rule
which gives directions for the sacrificing fixed midnight as the hour when the
of the passover “at even, at the going eating must be concluded (Berachoth
i, 1; Pesach. x. 9).
down of the sun.” But in ver. 10 of our
text, a wider definition is given—‘“‘ from 13. And they shall not cook...
the third part of the day to the third roast on the fire. Cf. Exod. xii: 9.
part of the night.” The Pharisees and They shall eat it = jébléw6, emended
the Sadducees differed in the interpre- with Lat. ‘‘comedetis illud” from the
tation of the phrase “between the unmeaning bestila.
evenings.” The former said it meant They shall eat it with diligence. Cf.
from the time when the sun inclined Exod. xii. 11. ‘‘ With diligence”=
towards his setting till his final dis- σπουδαίως, which in the LXX is a
rendering of INisna. In ver. 28 this
appearance, i.¢., from 3 to 6 p.m,
but according to the latter it was the Hebrew phrase is rendered more litertime between actual sunset and dark- ally.
ness, i.6., 6 and 7 p.m. (Pesachim v. 1). Its head with the inwards, ete. Cf,
The hours (the 9th to the 11th) assigned Exod. xii. 9.
by Josephus (Bell. Jud. vi. 9. 3) agree Not break any bone thereof. Cf.
with the Pharisaic determination (θύου- Exod. xii. 46.
ow μὲν ἀπὸ ἐνάτης ὥρας μέχρις ἑν- +Of the children of Israel no bone
Sexdrns). If then we combine the shall be crushed+. The Latin differs
statements in verses 10 and 12 of our and is to be followed: ‘‘ Non erit
text we may infer that the slaughter- tribulatio in filiis Istrahel in die hac.”
ing of the victim might take place any If we might suppose two distinct Greek
time during “the third part of the versions of the Hebrew and that the
day before sunset ; and this harmonises original of ‘‘in die hac” was ova oxya
on the whole with the rabbinic tradition. mn, we could explain the Eth. by
TheSamaritans and Karaite Jews support supposing the loss of min ovn and the
the usage of the Sadducees in limiting change of bsy3 into oxy. But the cor-
=i

256 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
crushedt. 14. For this reason the Lord commanded the ©
children of Israel to observe the passover on the day of
its fixed time, and they shall not break a bone thereof;
for it is a festival day, and a day commanded, and there
may be no passing over from day to day, and month to
month, but on the day of its festival let it be observed.
15. And do thou command the children of Israel to
observe the passover throughout their days, every year,
once a year on the day of its fixed time, and it will
come for a memorial well pleasing before the Lord, and
no plague will come upon them to slay or to smite
in that year in which they celebrate the passover in
its season in every respect according to His command.
16. And they shall not eat it outside the sanctuary
of the Lord, but before the sanctuary of the Lord, and
all the people of the congregation of Israel shall celebrate it in its appointed season. 17. And every man who
has come upon its day shall eat it in the sanctuary
of your God before the Lord from twenty years old and
upward; for thus is it written and ordained that they
should eat it in the sanctuary of the Lord. 18. And when
the children of Israel come into the land which they are
to possess, into the land of Canaan, and set up the
tabernacle of the Lord in the midst of the land in one of
ruption seems native to the Ethiopic. In every respect according to His comIf the text referred here to the «« break- mand, Latin seems better: ‘secundum
ing” of a bone, it would most probably universa praecepta ejus.”
have used sabara as in the clause before 16. Before the sanctuary of the Lord.
and in the verse after, where the Latin Cf. ver. 17 and see note on ver. 20.
uses frangere and confringere respec- 17. Your God. Latin has Dei nostri,
tively. In this clause, therefore, ‘ijét- but the phrase recurs in ver. 22.
qataqat ( = “ will not be crushed ”’) is to From twenty years old, etc. Rabbinic
be taken metaphorically = the Latin tradition determines fourteen years and
“non erit tribulatio.” This idea, that upwards as the qualifying age. The
no evil will befall on the day of the right determination in our text may be based
celebration of the Passover, recurs in on such passages as Exod. xxx. 14;
ver. 15 in an intensified degree. Num. i. 32 which prescribe that in
15. Every year, once a year. Cf. numbering the people only the males
verses 7-8. from twenty years old and upwards
No plague will come upon them, ete. should be taken account of. Man was
Cf. Exod. xii. 13. not accountable for the first twenty

CHAPTER XLIX. 14-22 257
their tribes until the sanctuary of the Lord has been
built in the land, let them come and celebrate the passover
in the midst of the tabernacle of the Lord, and let them
slay it before the Lord from year to year. 19. And in
the days when the house has been built in the name of the
Lord in the land of their inheritance, they shall go there
and slay the passover in the evening, at sunset, at the
third part of the day. 20. And they will offer its blood
on the threshold of the altar, and shall place its fat on the
fire which is upon the altar, and they shall eat its flesh
roasted with fire in the court of the house which has been
sanctified in the name of the Lord. 21. And they may not
celebrate the passover in their cities, nor in any place save
before the tabernacle of the Lord, or before His house where
His name hath dwelt; and they will not go astray from the
Lord. 22. And do thou, Moses, command the children
of Israel to observe the ordinances of the passover, as it
was commanded unto thee; declare thou unto them every
year and the day of its days, andf the festival of
unleavened bread, that they should eat unleavened bread
seven days, (and) that they should observe its festival,
and that they bring an oblation every day during those
seven days of joy before the Lord on the altar of your God.
years according to some rabbis, and no δυνήσῃ) and the Vulg. (non poteris) renpunishment was to be enacted for them. der in the same faulty manner oon xb.
20. Hai its flesh... ὧν the court In any place. Eth. prefixes ‘‘ and,”
of the house, etc. This direction can which I have omitted with the Latin.
be justified by an appeal to Deut. xvi. Wil not go astray from the Lord.
7 (cf. 6) “thou shalt eat it in the place Cf. Zeph. i. 6.
which the Lord thy God shall choose.” 22. Every ye=a mrat a (c) laamatat
But the Mishna extended this privilege (d). So Latin “per singulos .
to Jerusalem at large (Sebach. v. 8; annos.” ab=“‘its year every year.”
Makkoth iii. 3). This extension was t+And the day of its days, and+. Here
necessitated by the vast multitudes the Latin ‘“‘in tempore dierum suorum”’
which came up to this feast (cf. Joseph. is most probably right, and we should
Bell. Jud. vi. 9. 3, ii. 14. 8). render ‘‘ during its days and during.
21. May not. Here Eth. and Latin (And) that. “And” supplied from
(Doterunt=) o y δυνήσονται, which is a the Latin.
faulty rendering of 122, xb, where the During those. Latin omits “those.”
phrase denotes moral inability. Thetext Hence it probably represents the Greek
is based on Deut. xvi. 9, wherethe LXX (οὐ article.
17

258 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
23. For ye celebrated this festival with haste when ye
went forth from Egypt till ye entered into the wilderness of
Shur; for on the shore of the sea ye completed it.
Laws regarding the jubilees, 1-5, and the Sabbath, 6-13.
L. And after this law I made known to thee the days of
the Sabbaths in the desert of Sin[ai], which is between Elim
and Sinai. 2. And I told thee of the Sabbaths of the land
on Mount Sinai, and I told thee of the jubilee years in
the sabbaths of years: but the year thereof have I not
told thee till ye enter the land which ye are to possess.
3. And the land also will keep its sabbaths while they
dwell upon it, and they will know the jubilee year.
4, Wherefore I have ordained for thee the year-weeks and
the years and the jubilees: there are forty-nine jubilees
2410 a.m. from the days of Adam until this day, and one week
and two years: and there are yet forty years to come (lit.
2450 a.m. “distant ”) for learning the commandments of the Lord,
until they pass over into the land of Canaan, crossing
the Jordan to the west. 5. And the jubilees will pass
by, until Israel is cleansed from all guilt of fornication, and
uncleanness, and pollution, and sin, and error, and dwells
with confidence in all the land, and there will be no
more a Satan or any evil one, and the land will be clean
from that time for evermore.
6. And behold the commandment regarding the Sabbaths—
I have written (them) down for thee—and all the judgments A
23. With haste. See note on ver. Jubilees. Our author assumes jubilee —
13. Cf. Exod. xii. 11. For Shur (Eth. periods of 49 years each, as R. Jehuda
Sr) see Exod. xv. 22. (Nedarim 61 a), whereas the majority of
L. 1. Sin[at], which is between Elim pier ἣνa e oe at 50, years ᾿
and Sinai. Cf. Exod. xvi. 1. Sin[ai] (Beer, Bue ub. p. 38)
ν᾿ ΟἹ 5. Forecast of the Messianic kingdom. A
corrupt for Sin.
3 Ἢ A gradual transformation: cf. i, 29 ἢ
2. Jubilee years. Cf. Lev. xxv. 8. note ; xxiii. 26-28 note. aah
3. Cf. Lev. xxvi. 34, etc. A Satan or any evil one. See note on
4. Yeuar-weeks, i.e., seven years. xxiii. 29.

CHAPTERS XLIX. 23-L. 8 259
of its laws. 7. Six days wilt thou labour, but on the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord your God. In it ye
shall do no manner of work, ye and your sons, and your
men-servants and your maid-servants, and all your cattle
and the sojourner also who is with you. 8. And the man
that does any work on it shall die: whoever desecrates
that day, whoever lies with (his) wife, or whoever says
he will do something on it, that he will set out on a
journey thereon in regard to any buying or selling: and
whoever draws water thereon which he had not prepared
7. Cf. Exod. xx. 9, 10. 1851, p. 482) and the Karaite Jews
8-12. On the Talmudic laws relating (see Singer, pp. 198-199 note). The
to the Sabbath see Schiirer, History of Karaite Jews inferred the unlawfulness
NV.T. Times, 11. ii. 96-105 ; Edersheim, of cohabitation on the Sabbath from a
Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah,” literal interpretation of Exod. xxxiv. 21.
ii. 777-787 ; and the Bible Dictionaries, As regards the usage of the ancient
in loc. Samaritans there has been some diversity
8. The man that does any work on it of opinion. Karo (Beer, Buch der
shall die. This statement found in Exod. Jubiléen, p. 54) argues that the text in
xxxv. 2 makes death the penalty for Nedar iii. 10 speaks for the existence of
any and every breach of the Sabbath. the strict law having existed among the
Whoever lies with (his) wife. This Samaritans at a date anterior to the
law sprung probably from the fanatical time of the Karaite Jews, but this is
period referred to in Sanh, 46 a, the period disputed by Frankel (Hinjiuss d. pal.
of the Syro-Grecian domination, when Exeg. 252 sq.).
a man was put to death for riding a That he will set out on a journey
horse. That certain regulations of this thereon (bd), ac omit ‘‘ thereon.”
nature existed we must infer from our This command was derived from Exod.
text, as well as from the Talmudic xvi. 29, where the people are bidden
treatise Nidda 38a. Early Chasids sto abide every man in his place . .
refrained from cohabitation with their on the seventh day” and not to go in
wives from the close of the Sabbath to quest of manna. Permission was given
the fourth day of the week, in order to go a distance of 2000 cubits (Erubin
that their wives might not desecrate iv. 3, 1, v. 7), which was called the
the Sabbath 271 to 273 days later by ‘*Sabbath limit”’ (navn nn) or simply
child-bearing. Against this ascetic “limit” (cnn), or Sabbath-day’s journey
attitude towards marriage a reaction set (Σαββάτου odds, Acts i, 12). See
in which resulted in the laws of the Lightfoot, Hxercitations on the Acts, i.
Mishna on this subject. Thus the co- 12; Buxtorf and Levy’s Lexicons on
habitation of husband and wife is en- nn i; Schiirer, History of the New
joined on the Sabbath in Nedar iii. 10, Testament Times, 11. ii. 102-103.
viii. 6, while in Baba kamma 82 ὦ it is Josephus (Ani. xiii. 8. 4) speaks of
stated that one of the ordinances in- this halacha: οὐκ ἔξεστι δ᾽ ὑμῖν οὔτε
stituted by Ezra directed that a man τοῖς σαββάτοις οὔτ᾽ ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ ὁδεύειν.
should “eat garlic” (1.6, cohabit) on In regard to any buying or selling.
the eve of the Sabbath. The severer All the MSS prefix “and. The true
usage is followed by the modern text is uncertain and probably transSamaritans (Hichhorn’s Repertorium, posed. Buying and selling are prohibited
xiii. 257, 282; de Sacy, Wotices et in Neh. x. 31, xiii. 16, 17.
extraits de la Bible, xii. 175: also by Whoever draws water. This was
the Abyssinian Falashas (Univ. Isr. forbidden by the Karaite Jews (Jost,

260 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
for himself on the sixth day, and whoever takes up any
burden to carry it out of his tent or out of his house shall
die. 9. Ye shall do no work whatever on the Sabbath day
save what ye have prepared for yourselves on the sixth day,
so as to eat, and drink, and rest, and keep Sabbath from
all work on that day, and to bless the Lord your God,
who has given you a day of festival, and a holy day: and a
day of the holy kingdom for all Israel is this day among
their days for ever. 10. For great is the honour which
the Lord has given to Israel that they should eat and drink
and be satisfied on this festival day, and rest thereon
from all labour which belongs to the labour of the children
of men, save burning frankincense and bringing oblations
and sacrifices before the Lord for days and for Sabbaths.
11. This work alone shall be done on the Sabbath-days
in the sanctuary of the Lord your God; that they may
atone for Israel with sacrifice continually from day to
day for a memorial well-pleasing before the Lord, and that
He may receive them always from day to day according as
thou hast been commanded. 12. And every man who does
any work thereon, or goes a journey, or tills (his) farm,
whether in his house or any other place, and whoever
lights a fire, or rides on any beast, or travels by ship on
Gesch. d. Judenth. ii. 304, quoted by 9. See note on ii. 29.
Singer, p. 199 note), 10. Cf. ii. 21.
Which he had not prepared on the 11. Cf. Num. xxviii. 9,10; Matt.xii. 5.
siath day. This clause comes in 12. Goes a journey. See note on
awkwardly. A command against ‘‘eat- ver. 8.
ing or drinking anything” may have Tills (his) farm. Ploughing and
originally preceded this clause in our harvesting are forbidden in Exod,
text. Cf. ii. 30, note. xxxiv. 21; Shabb. vii. 2. PPΡ eO
Takes up any burden to carry it, etc. Whether in his house or any other
See note on ii. 29. This is the 39th place. These words seem to be in their oe,
form of work forbidden in the treatise wrong place. They would give good
Shabbath. If a man dropped his false sense if they were read immediately
teeth it would be unlawful to lift and after ‘‘every man who does any work
carry them ; for they would constitute thereon.”
a «¢ burden.” Similarly as much ink Lights a fire. Forbidden in Exod.
as would suffice for writing two letters xxxv. 3; Shabb. vii. 2. The man who
(Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus gathers sticks for this purpose is to be
the Messiah,? ii. 782, 784). stoned. Num. xv. 32, 33.

CHAPTER L. 9-13 261
the sea, and whoever strikes or kills anything, or slaughters
a beast or a bird, or whoever catches an animal or a
bird or a fish, or whoever fasts or makes war on the
Sabbaths: 13, The man who does any of these things
on the Sabbath shall die, so that the children of Israel shall
observe the Sabbaths according to the commandments
regarding the Sabbaths of the land, as it is written in
the tables, which He gave into my hands that I should
write out for thee the laws of the seasons, and the seasons
according to the division of their days.
Herewith is completed the account of the division of the
days.
Rides on any beast. This is forbidden xii, 1; 2 Macc. xv. 1; cf. Joseph.
in Beza v. 2: also in Sanh. 46 a, which Ant, xiii. 12. 4, xviii. 9. 2 for later
states that during the Syro-Grecian occasions). But on the urgent repredomination an offender against this law sentations of Mattathias this prohibiwas arraigned before the judicial court tion of warfare, offensive and defensive,
and sentenced to death by stoning: was abandoned, and defensive measures
οἵ, Jebam. 900. were declared legitimate (1 Macc, ii,
Strikes or kills anything. Killing 41; Joseph. Aut. xii. 6. 2): but offensive
any animal is the 26th forbidden warfare was still forbidden (2 Macc.
Sabbatical offence (Shabb. vii. 2). viii. 26). Jonathan's battle against
Fasis. Israel is to ‘‘ eat and drink” Bacchides (1 Macc. ix. 43 sqq.) can
on the Sabbath (see ver. 9). This law be justified from the new standpoint.
was observed by Judith (Judith viii. 6, a This emended law was in force when
book which in its shorter form probably Pompey besieged Jerusalem (Joseph.
goes back to the early Maccabean times). Ant, xiv. 4, 2), but as it only allowed
The injunction against fasting in our of an active resistance against an active
text is not in harmony with the severe assault, it did not permit of the deascetic law against the marriage-bed on struction of fortified works raised by
the Sabbath. the enemy on the Sabbath, and so exMakes war. This prohibition of all posed the Jews to defeat (op. cit. xiv.
warfare, which is found also in the 4, 2). Once during the final war with
Mishna, Shabb. vi. 2, 4, was observed Rome the Jews broke through this
literally before and during the outbreak Sabbatical law, and successfully attacked
of the Maccabean wars (1 Macc. ii. the Romans (Joseph. Bell. Jud. ii.
31-38; 2 Macc. vi. 11; Joseph, Ant. 19. 2).


INDEX I
PASSAGES FROM THE SCRIPTURES AND OTHER ANCIENT Books
DIRECTLY CONNECTED OR CLOSELY PARALLEL WITH THE TExT!
Exopus JUBILEES Exopus J UBILEES LEVITICUS JUBILEES
15 xliv. 33 xxx. 15 i. 17 iii. 9, 10 xxi. 8
ἢ xlvi, 1 ii, 19 vii. 26 xxi. 6
i, 22 ΧΙ. 2-4 ii. 25 ΧΙ ὦ, ὃ ui, 8-14
li. 2-4 xlvii, 2-4 li, 26 xvi. 29, 34,
ii, 5-9 xlvii, 5-8 xxxi, 18 15, 16 xxxiv. 18, 19
ii. 8 xlvii. 7 xxxiii. 1, 3 xvii. 13 vii. 30
ii. 10 xlvii. 9 XXXIV, 21 xvii. 13 SAILS
ii, 11-14 ΧΙ. 10-12 xxxiv. 27 xvii. 14 xxi. 18
ii, 15 Xvi. 1 XXX 2 xviii. 15 xli. 26
iv. 24 xlviii. 2 XXXY. 3 xix. 23, 24 vii. 36
vi. 20 xlvii. 8 xix. 23-25 vii. 1
VOI X1viii, 11 ΣΝ xxx. 7
NUMBERS JUBILEES
xii. 6 xlix. 1 xx, 2-4 xxx, 14, 15
xii. 9 xlix. 13 vi, 26 xxii. 28 xx, 12 xli. 26
xii, 11 xlix. 13 ix. 138 xlix. 9 xx. 14 xli. 25
xii. 11 xlix. 23 xiii, 22 xiii, 12 XXIII xxii, 22
xii, 13 xlix, 15 Xv, 52, 885 1. 15 xxi. 9 xx. 4
xii, 46 xix. 13 xvi. 22 2 xxi. 9 xli. 17
xiv. 8, 9 xlviii. 12 Xvili. 2, 4 XXX. 16 xxiii. 40 xvi. 30
xiv. 8 xlviii. 17 XV. 26 XXX, 9 xxiii. 34-36,
xiv. 19 1. 29 xxvi. 59 xlvii. 8 39-44 XXX, 4
xvi. 1 ΤΡ xxvii. 16 x3 xxv. 8 2
xix. 5 xvi. 18 xxviii. 9, 10 ney xxvi. 34, etic. 1 3
xix. 6 xvi. 18 ERLE OD vii. 3 xxvi. 40 1, 29
xx xx. 8 xxix. 12-40 XXXL, 4
9,10 1.7 xXxix, 13 xvi, 22 DEUTERONOMY J UBILEES
xxiii, 25 xx. 9 xxix. 16 xvi, 22 i. 4 xxix. 10
xxiii. 33 i. 9 XXXIV, 4 xxix, 14 iv. 20 xxii. 9
xxiv. 12 Ὁ xxxv. 33 vii. 33 iv. 30, 29 1,15
xxiv. 15-18 i. 2-4 xxxv. 33 xxi. 19 v. 31, 32 xxiii. 16
xxv, 8 Ὁ vii. 6 ii, 21
ΧΧΥΙΪ. 21 li. 88 vii. 6 xvi. 18
xxix. 45 1. 17 LEVITICUS JUBILEES vii. 6 xix. 18
Στ ἢ iv. 25 li, 4 EET 7 vii. 13 xx. 9
xxx, 19-2) xxi. 16 li, 13 χα, 11 vii. 16 i. 9
xxx, 34 xvi, 24 iii. 7-10 xxi. 7 ix. 26, 29 1,91
1 J have not given the passages in Genesis which are reproduced in the text. These are
indicated generally in the headings to the chapters and in detail in the notes. .
263

264 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES —
DEUTERONOMY JUBILEES NEHEMIAH JUBILEES DANIEL JUBILEES
x, 16 1. 23 xxii. 29 ix. 18 xxii. 29
LT v. 16 19 x. 18; 20, 21) ‘ay; Sivan
Ly χχὶ. 4 χχὶϊ. 27 xi. 30 xxiii. 16
X22, xliv. 12-33 RY 1. 8 ΣΤ ἢ xv. 31, 32
xiv. 2 xvi. 18 xiii. 16, 17 1. 8
xiv. 22 sq. xxxii. 10 Hosea JUBILEES
xvi. 5 xlix. 21 i) 1.29
xvi. 6. Iz 2 PSALMS JUBILEES | iv. 3 xxiii. 18
xlvi. 7 xlix. 20 iv. 6 xxii. 28
xxii. 23 sqq. xx. 4 li. 10 i. 20 Amos JUBILEES
xxii. 30 Xxxiii. 7 Izxx. 15 XXXVI, 20 ix. 2-4 xxiv.31, 32
lxxxix. 27 ii. 20
xxv. 9 ΧΙ, 4
xxvi. 14 xxii, 17 xe. 10 xxiii. 12 ZEPHANIAH JUBILEES
xxvi. 18 xvi. 18 xe. 10 xxiii. 15 i. 3 xxiii. 18
evi. 28 xxii. 17
xxvii. 15 xx. 8
xxvii. 24 iv. 5 evi. 37 xxii. 17 ZECHARIAH JUBILEES
xxviii. 8 xx. 9 exxxix. 8 sqq. xxiv. 31, 32 viii. 13 i. 16
xxviii. 19 i. 16
xxvili. 13,14 xxiii. 16 ἘΤΗΙΟΡΙΟ ENOCH JUBILEES
ISAIAH JUBILEES
xxix. 28 ii. 27 vi. 1, 2 Vi .1
xli. 8 xix. 9
Xxx, ἢ i. 6 vii. 1 (Synxli. 8 li, 20 cellus’ Gk.) vii. 21, 22
xxx. 6 1, 23
xlvi. 7 xii. 5
xxx. 20 Bie vii. 1, 2 Wl
Xxxi. 6 1. 18 his 1 xxii. 16 vii. 5 v. 2, vii. 24
lviii. 13 li. 29
xxxi. 20 Ls IED vii. 23
Ixvo 15 xx. 6
ORNL ey, 17 x, 4,2) Kink
Ixv. 17 sqq. xxiii. 26-30
xxx. 27 122 x, 11 iv. 22
ΧΙ dey iv. 21
XXX, 6 i, 24
exc 17. LT JEREMIAH JUBILEES | xii. 8-6 (xiii.1-2,
xxxiv. 8 xxiii. 7 xxii. 18 xiv. 4-7, xv.
2 564.) vii. 22
XXXIV. 9 xxv. 14 xxiii. 23
xv. 3-4 vii. 22
xxi 8
XXili.-XXXVi.
JOSHUA JUBILEES XX, 23
(implied by) vii. 211
xxiii. 13 1. 9 xii. 5
liv. 7, 8 ii. 4
xii. 5
lx. 12-21 ii, 9
xii. 4
1 Krycs JUBILEES Ixxii.-]x xxii.
viii. 29, 52 xxii. 29 (implied by) iv. 17
ii. 29
viii. 53 ii. 19 lxxiv. 12 vi. 32
ii. 30
XIN; ID xii. 19 Ixxiv. 13-16
xxvi. 16 XXXL, 13
xxi. 20 vii. 23 (implied by) vi. 36
xxix. 13, 14 1. 15
inxy. ae
xxix, 14 i, 15
2 CHRONICLES JUBILEES (Ixxxii.11) ™i. 23
xxix 18 xx, 6
vi. 38 i, 23 lxxxiii.-xe.
XXX. 41 i. 16
oo xix. 9 | li. 89, 57 (implied by) iv. 19
XXL
xxiv. 19 ᾿ 12 | Ixxxv. 3 iv. 20
XXvVili. 3 Δ 11 | Ixxxix.7,8 vi. 26
ERIKS) DL xvi. 23 EZEKIEL JUBILEES | Ixxxix.-xe.
XXXL. 6 E11 πᾶς, 1 i. 19 | (implied by) xv. 31, 32
1
NE
Wherever there has been a relation of dependence in the preceding
list of passages, the dependence has been on the side of Jubilees.
When such a relation exists in the list that follows, Jubilees is to be
regarded as the original.
1 See note on iv. 17-23 of the Translation.

INDEX I 265
ἙΤΗΙΟΡΙΟ ENOCH JuBILEES MATTHEW JUBILEES 1CoRINTHIANS JUBILEES
iii. xxi. 12, 15 UX: ΤΠ xxii. 16 x. 20 xxii. 17
v. 9 XX. 29 x11, 5 1011
σαῖς, 2 xxxvi. 10 xvii. 10) aa, 17 2CORINTHIANS JUBILEES
Ιχχ. 1-3 iv. 23 xxiii, 34 i. 12 La Wi Ve 19
xci. 4 xxii. 16 vi. 18 1. 24
xci. 16 i, 29
xciii. 2,5, 10 xvi. 26 MARK JUBILEES
xev. 3 xxxii. 18 ii. 16 xxii. 16 GALATIANS JUBILEES
xevi. 1 xxxii. 18 iL 2D x. 8 xii, 15 XXXL, 23
ἜΣ xv. 4 566.
xevili, 11 vii. 28, 29
Ἐν: IY xv. 27
xeix. 7 xi 2 LUKE JUBILEES
ci. 2 xii. 4
Xi, 49 1.12
ἘΠῚ 7. 8. Vil. 29, xxii. 2 THESSALONIANS JUBILEES
22 iii) x. 3
ceili, 11 i. 16 JOHN JUBILEES
civ. 6 xxii. 16 *xiv. 26 xxxii, 25
2 PETER JUBILEES
Xi, 5 vii. 20-39
Wispom 2 JUBILEES
ii. 13 (v. 5, ACTS JUBILEES ail. 8 iv. 30
vii. 15,16 xlvi. 9 IIS 1, 29
xii. 7, etc.) xxi. iv.
*vii. 23 xlvii. 10-12
πὶ 16 iv. 81
vii. 53 20
xviii. 5 xlviii. 14 REVELATION JUBILEES
Ἔ 8 xvi, 18
4 Ezra2 JUBILEES RoMANS JUBILEES εν ii. 2
xiv. 4-6 1. 26 (see note) | *iv, 15 XXXL, 15, 16 tvs AD xvi. 18
1 On the following list of passages from this work, see Introduction, § 19.
2 See Introduction, § 22.
* Passages so asterisked are dealt with in the Introduction, § 23.


INDEX II
NAMES AND SUBJECTS
Abel, iv. 1 Amorites, xiv. 18 ; (destroyed in lifetime
Abimelech, xxiv. 13, 17, 26 of the author 2) xxix. 9-11
Abraham. See Abram war of, against Jacob and his sons,
"Abram, father-in-law of Terah, xi, 14 pp. lvi, lxii; xxxiv. 1-9
Abram, birth of, xi. 15 Amram, father of Moses, xlvi. 10
late legend of his being cast into a Amraphel, xiii. 22
fiery furnace, xii. 1-14 note Anastasius Sinaita, pp. 18, 23
observes the sky, xii. 16-17 Aner, xiii. 29
called Abraham, xv. 7 Angelology of Jubilees, pp. lvi sqq.
his ten trials, xvii. 17 note and of the New Testament, p.
death of, xxiii. 1 lxxxvi
glorification of, in Jubilees, p. liii Angels created on the first day, ii. 2
Abysses, the, ii. 2, 16; v. 29 note
*Ada, wife of Reuben, xxxiv. 20 created on the second day according
Adam, creation of, ii. 14 to later tradition, ii. 2-3 note
brought into Eden forty days after of the presence, i. 27, 29 note; ii.
his creation, iii. 9 1, 9 note, 185 xv. 275 xxxi. 14
names the animals, iii. 1-3 of sanctification, ii. 2,18; xv. 27;
death of, iv. 29 XXX, 14
Life of, pp. xix-xx over natural phenom—e wninads ,
Adam’s Daughters, Book of, pp. xviii- clouds, fire, etc., 11, 2
xix two chief orders of, created circumAdam =Admah, xiii. 23 cised, xv. 27 note
Adam and Eve, Book of, pp. 28, 34, 88, descend in days of Jared to instruct
93 mankind, iv. 15 note
* AdAtanésés, vii. 15, 17 marry the daughters of men, v. 1 note ;
*Adiba’a, wife of Simeon, xxxiv. 20 vii. 21; a myth rejected by later
’Adéran, xxxviii. 3 Jewish and Christian tradition, bp,
*Adfiram, friend of Esau, xxxvii. 9 33-35, 43 notes
*Adtiram—a place, xxxviii. 8, 9 their punishment and that of their
Adurin, D. xxxi children, v. 6-11; vii. 25
’Aférag, viii. 27 guardians of individuals, p. Ixxxvi;
“Afra, viii. 15 xxxv. 17
Africanus, Julius, p. 34 Antiochus Epiphanes, pp. lx, 1xis Lxiti
Ahuzzath, xxiv. 26 Apocalypse of the last things, xxiii. 11Ai, xiii. 5 31
Akrabbim, xxix. 14 Apocalyptic tradition written down by
’Améané, viii. 21; ix. 4 Moses, i. 26 note
Ammonites, xxix, 10; xxxvii, 6, 10; ATS (corrupt for Ur, xi. 7), city of, xi. 3
XXxXViii. 6 Arabs, xx. 13
267

268 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Aram, son of Shem, vii. 18; ix. 5 Book of Life, xxx. 22; xxxvi. 10
land of, xxxvii. 6, 9 those who will be destroyed, xxx.
Ararat, v. 28; viii. 21; ix. 5; x. 15 22
Ard, xliv. 25 Bousset, pp. xii, 146, 201, 215
Areli, xliv. 20 Burial of patriarchs in Canaan, xlvi. 9
’Arésa, corrupt for Hazor, xxxiv. 4, 7
Arioch, xiii. 22
Cain, iv. 1
Ark, building of the, v. 21-22
death of, iv. 31
Arodi, xliv. 20
Calendar, p. Ixvi
Arpachshad, vii. 18 ; viii. 1 Canaan, vii. 10-13 ; ix. 1 ; xxii, 21
Asenath, xxxiv. 20; xl. 10; xliv. 24
seizes Palestine, x. 29-384
Ashbel, xliv. 25 Canaanites, xiv. 18; xxx. 25
Asher, xxviii. 21 Canaanitish wives of Joseph, Judah,
Ashtaroth, xxix. 10
Simeon, xl. 10; xxxiv. 20
Asshur, son of Shem, vii. 18; ix. 3, 6 Caphtorim, xxiv. 30
land of (= Assyria), viii. 21; ix. 8, 5
Carmi, xliv. 12
*Asfidi, xliv. 28
Carpenter, pp. xlvii, lili
Atonement, Day of, p. xlii; v. 17-18;
Catena on Pentateuch quoted, p. xviii
, _x xxiv. 18-19
Cedrenus, pp. xvi, xvii, Ixxix, 11, 28,.
Awan, wife of Cain, iv. 1, 9
35, 37, 41, 66, 67, 80, 86-88, 93,
*Azrial, wife of Methuselah, iv. 27 94, 96, 116, 191, 248, 252
Azra, wife of Seth, iv. 8, 11 Ceriani, pp. Xv, xxix
wife of Eber, viii. 7
Cettin, p. xxxi
Chaldees, land of, ix. 4, 5
Babel, tower of, x. 19-26
Charles, pp. xx, xxi, xxvi, xxviii, xxix
Babel, viii. 21
Chasids, rise of, xxiii. 16
Babylon, xx. 12
Chedorlaomer, xiii. 22
Bacon, pp. xxv, 56-57
Chrysostom quoted, p. 34
Baldensperger, p. XXv
Circumcision, an everlasting ordinance,
Biraka, wife of Jared, iv. 16 p-1; xv. 14 note, 25; xx. 3
Baraki’él, brother of Kenan, iv. 15
observed in the creation of the two
Baraki’il, brother of Methuselah, iv. 28
highest orders of angels, pp. 1, 1x;
Barhebraeus, pp. Ixxxiii, 88, 94
xv. 27
Barth, pp. 19, 25 on the eighth day, xv. 14, 25
Bashan, viii. 21 neglected by Israel, xv. 33-34
Bealoth, xiii. 10 Clementine Recognitions, pp. Ixxx, 84,
Becher, xliv. 25 96
Bédst’él, wife of Judah, xli. 7
Covenant with Noah, vi. 17-18
Beer, pp. xxiii, 3, 55, 65, 68, 89, 91,
with Abram, xiv. 20
101, 118, 121, 127, etc.
Cush, vii. 13 ; ix. 1
Beersheba (see Well of the Oath), xvii.
Creation, the new, i. 29 note; iv. 26
Bui ΣΕΙΝ Ὁ
note ; xxiii. 26-30; 1.5
Bela, xliv. 25 twenty-two works of, ii. 1-16
Beliar, sons of, xv. 33 note Creator of all things, xvii. 3; xxii. 4,
spirit of, i. 20 273 xlv. 5
Benjamin, xxxii. 3, 33
Beon, xxix. 10
Beriah, xliv, 21 Dan, xiii, 23; xxviii. 18 ; xliv. 27, 28
Bétasti’él, wife of Judah, xxxiv. 20 Danél, iv. 20
Béténos, wife of Lamech, iv. 28 Deane, p. xxv
Bethel, xiii. 5; xxvii. 19, 26 Deborah, xxxii. 30
Béthor6én, xxxiv. 4 Dédan, waters of, ix. 2
Bethshan, xxix. 14 Demonology of Jubilees, p. lviii
Bethuel, xix. 10; xxvii. 10, 12 and of the New Testament, pp. Ixxxvi
Bilhah, sister of Zilpah, xxviii. 9 sq.
Reuben sins with, xxxiii. 1-9 Demons, sons of the Watchers, vii. 22
Blood, eating of, forbidden, vii. 28, 29 ; note ; vii. 27
xxi. 6, 18 tempt Noah’s‘sons, x. 1-2 notes; x.
Bohn, p. xxvi 5, 8 note; xii. 20

INDEX II 269
one-tenth of the, left subject to Mas- Ephraim, xliv. 24
téma, x. 9 Ephrath, xxxii. 34
nine-tenths to be bound in place of Ephron, the Hittite, xxxvi. 2
temporal punishment, x. 9 | Epiphanius, pp. xv, xvi, xl, Ixxvii,
to be punished finally with Satan, Ixxviii, 11-16, 18, 32, 33, 47, 59,
x. 8 61, 68, 69, 70, 73-74, 75, 77, 84,
worshipped, xxii. 17 86, 91
Didymus of Alexandria, Db. Ixxvii Eppstein, pp. xvi, xxv, lxxvi, 11, 53,
Dillmann, pp. xx, xxi, xxiii, 118, 193 55
Dinah, daughter of Jacob, xxviii. 23; Er, xli. 1
xx 1.9.5 xxxiv. 155 xliv. 18 Eri, xliv. 20
Dinah, wife of Mahalalel, iv. 15 *Prmdn = Heroonpolis, xlvi. 6
Diodorus of Antioch, pp. Ixxxi, 85, 96 Esau (see Edom), p. lvi; xv. 30; xix.
Dislocations of text, pp. xlii, 45, 218 13; xxix. 15
Dittographies, pp. xli-xlii sells his birthright, xxiv. 2-7
Dothan, xxix. 14; xxxiv. 10 breaks with Jacob, xxxvii. 20-23
Driver, p. 140 slain by Jacob, xxxvili. 2
Drummond, p. xxv Eschol, xiii. 29
Euphrates, ID πεν 18
Earth divided, viii. 8 Eutychius,p p. Ixxxii, 28, 35, 83, 89
Eating with Gentiles forbidden, xxii. 16 Eve created on the 6th day of the
Eber, viii. 7
second week, iii. 5-6
Eden, Garden of. See Garden brought into Eden 80 days after her
land of, viii. 16, 21
creation, iii. 9
Edersheim, p. 260 Exposure of the person condemned, p.
*Edna, wife of Methuselah, iv. 27 lx; iii. 31; vii. 20
wife of Terah, xi. 14 Ezbon, xliv. 20
*Edni, wife of Enoch, iv. 20 Ezra, Fourth, pp. 1, Ixxv, 7, 14
Edom, p. lvi; xxiv. 6; xxxvi. 19;
xxxvili. 8 Fabricius, pp. xviii, xxii, 121, 171, 194
kings of, xxviii, 16-23 Fara (= Africa 1), viii. 27
made tributary to Israel, p. lx; Feast of tabernacles instituted by Abraxxxviii. 10-14 ham, xvi. 20-31
Edrei, xxix. 10 celebrated by Jacob, xxxii. 4-9
ela, wife of Dan, xxxiv. 20 Feast of weeks celebrated in heaven and
Ehi, xliv. 25 first revealed to Noah, vi. 17-18
"fl ἜΙ, x1. 7
note ; xv. 1 note; xxii. 1-5
ES, mountains of, ix. 2 rules as to its observance, vi. 20-22
Elam, son of Shem, Wile ho shay commemorates giving of Law on Sinai,
land of, vil. 21; xiii. 22 vi. 17-18 note
Blew, city of= Heliopolis, xxxiv. 11 its designation ‘‘ Pentecost” unknown
Eliezer, xiv. 2 to the author, vi. 17 note
ἘΠ), vii. 22 Feasts on the new moons, vi. 23-29
Elon, xliv. 17 Filistin, D. xxxi
“Emazara, wife of Noah, iv. 33 Flood, the, v. 23-32
Encyclopaedia Biblica, pp. 167, 176, Floodgates, the, v. 24
204, 245 Fornication, punishment for, xx. 4;
Enoch, son of Cain, iv. 9 SERVI XRG
son of Jared, iv. 16-26 ; xix. 24, 27; Four sacred places, iv. 26
first to learn writing, iv. 17; the Frankel, pp. xxiv, 30, 42, 107, 259
scribe of judgment in the Garden Friend of God, xix. 9; xxx. 20, 21
of Eden, iv. 23-24; x. 17 Fruit trees, law as to, vii. 36
son of Reuben, xxxviii. 8; xliv. 12
Ethiopie Book of, pp. 13, 36, 37, 53, Ga’as (=Gaash), xxxiv. 4, 7
62-64, 102, 134, 146, 150, 212, Gad, xxviii. 20; xliv. 19, 20
Gadir (= Cadiz), viii. 23, 26 ; ix. 12
213
Slavonic Book of, pp. 13-15, 25, 37, Garden of Eden, ii. 7 note; iv. 26;
39, 41 viii. 16, 19, 23
Enos, son of Seth, iv. 11 ; xix. 24 Gaster, pp. 200, 208, 204, 214

270 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Gelasius, Decree of, pp. xvili, lxxviii Hezron, xliv. 12
Genesis, the Little, pp. xv-xvi Hilgenfeld, pp. xxv, Ixxv
Gentiles denounced, pp. lv, ivi Hippolytus, p. Ixxx
Geoponica, the, quoted, p. 134 Hivites, xiv. 18
Gera, xliv. 25 Horites, xxxvii. 10 ; xxxviii. 8
Gerar, mountains of, xvi. 10; xxiv. 12, Huppim, xliv. 25
Hushim, xliv. 28
Gershon, xliv. 14 Hyrcanus, J., pp. lvi, lix, ἔδει lxiv,
Giants, the, vii. 22 Ixxxviii
Gihon, the, viii. 15, 22
Gilead, xxix. 4, 5, 9 Idolatry, rise of, xi. 4
Ginsburg, p. xxiv Abram dissuades Terah against, xii.
Girgashites, the, xiv. 18 1-8
Glycas, pp. xvi, lxxx, 23, 25, 26, 35, , forbidden, xx. 7-9; xxi, 3-5
37, 84, 85, 164 Baka xliv. 28
God dwells with man in the Messianic ‘Tjasaka, wife of Benjamin, xxxiv. 20
times, i. 26 note, 27 Tjaska, xi. 9
the Father of the children of Jacob, "ign, wife of Asher, xxxiv. 20
1. 24, 28 note Immortality of the soul, pp. xii, Ixxxix;
of all, xxii. 10 Ais Kae, 29) xxx, xxiii. 31
13, 32 Imnah, xliv. 21
Gog, land of, viii. 25 Incest, laws regarding, xxxiii. 10-20;
Gomer, vii. 19; ix. 8 xli. 25-26
Gomorrha, xiii. 22; xvi. 53 xx. 6 India, vill. 21 1%, Bis
Goshen, xliv. 9; xlv. 1, 2 Intercalary days, p. lxviii; vi. 23 note
Great Sea, the, ix. 6 Intermarriage with Canaan forbidden,
Guni, xliv. 30 pp. li, xi; xx, 45 xx 0. σὰν
1,5
Hagar, xiv. 22; xvii. 2; xix. 11 with Gentiles = giving to Moloch, xxx.
Haggada, older forms of, in Jubilees, 7-17
pp. 1xiv sq. Isaac, xv. 213 xvi. 13
Haggi, xliv. 20 sacrifice of, xviii. 1-13
Halacha, older forms of, in Jubilees, pp. blesses Levi, xxxi. 4-17
Ixv sq. blesses Judah, xxxi. 18-22
Ham, iv. 33; vii. 8,13; xxii. 21 death of, xxxvi. 18
portion of, viii. 22-24 glorification of, in Jubilees, p. liii
Hamath, x. 33; xiii, 2 Ishbak, xix. 12
Hamor, xxx. 2 Ishmael, xiv. 24; xv. 18, 20, 28, 30;
Haran, brother of Abram, xii, 10, 14 Xl, Ὁ, Δι RI]
land of, xiii, 1; xxvii. 3, 19; xxxv. Ishmaelites, xx. 13
10, 12 Ishvah, xliv. 21
Hastings’ Bible Dictionary, pp. 107, Ishvi, xliv. 21
188 Isidore of Pelusium, p. lxxxi
Hazor (see ’Arésa), Dp. LA ; xxxiv. 4, 7 of Seville, pp. lxxxi, 18
Headlam, p. xxvi Israel, apostasy of, i. 5-9; xv. 83-34;
Heap of Witness, xxix. 8 xxiii. 14, 17-19
Heavenly tables, iii. 10 note captivity of, i. 10
Hebraisms in Ethiopic text, p. xxxiisq. God’s inheritance, xxii. 9, 10, 15
Hebrew, the original language of men Gods portion, xv. 81 note; xvi. 18
and animals, iii. 28 note note
forgotten from overthrow of Babel till to be separate from the Gentiles, p. lv
Abram’s time, xii. 25-26 note glorification of, pp. liv sq.
Hebron, xiii. 10, 21; xix. 1;2 xxxvi. 20 Issachar, xxviii, 22
Heliopolis, x1. 10 Ἶν, xliv. 30
Hellenism, p. 1
Hermon, xxix. 10 Jabbok, xxix. 13, 14
Hesiod quoted, p. 149 Jachin, xliv. 13
Heth, children of, xix. 4, 5 Jacob, birth of, xix. 13
Hézaq, wife of Issachar, xxxiv. 20 twenty-second from Adam, ii. 23 note

INDEX II
271
called Israel, xxxii. 17 textual affinities of, p. xxxiii sqq.
twelve sons of, xxxiii, 22 versions of, pp. xxvi-xxix
sees the future on the heavenly tables, Greek version of, pp. xxvi, xxvii
xxxiil. 21-26 Ethiopic version of, pp. xxvii, xxviii
gives his books to Levi, xlv. 16 Latin version of, pp. xxviii, xxix
dies, xlv. 14 Syriac version of, p. xxx
glorification of, in Jubilees, pp. liii, Ethiopic and Latin, from the Greek,
liv- pp. XXX, Xxxi
Jahleel, xliv. 17 Ethiopic MSS of, p. xx; editions of,
Jahziel, xliv. 30 pp. XX, xxi; translations of, pp.
Jalkut Shimeoni, pp. xliii, 200, 201, xxi, XX
203, 214, 217, 220, 221 poetical element in, pp. xlii sq.
Jamin, xliv. 13 from one author but based on earlier
Jannaeus, A., p. lix books and traditions, pp. xliv sqq.
Japheth, iv. 33; vii. 9, 12, 15; ix. 7 a product of the Midrashic tendency,
portion of, viii. 25-292 pp. xlvii sqq.
Jared, iv. 15 an esoteric tradition according to its
Jashar, Book of, pp. xliv, Ixxvi, 52, author, pp. 1, li
33, 40, 43, 67, 89, 126, 171, 179, written by Moses at the dictation of
196, 197, 201-204, 206, 214 an angel according to its author,
Jastb, xliv. 16 i, 26 note; xxiii. 32
Javan, vii. 19 ; ix. 10 omissions in, of narratives in Genesis,
Jebusites, xiv. 18 pp. xlviii sqq.
Jellinek, pp. xx, xxiii, xliv, 201, 202, alterations in, of such narratives, pp.
214, 215, 217 xlix, liv
Jemuel, xliv. 13 explanations in, pp. liii, liv notes
Jerahmeel, Chronicles of (translated by object of,—the defence of Judaism,
Gaster), pp. Ixxv, lxxvi, 12, 28, pp. li sqq.; and exposition of pre32, 36, 69, 70, 73, 77, 82, 89, Mosaic elements of the law, pp. li
200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 214, 215, sqq.
220, 246 glorifies the patriarchs and Israel,
Jerome, pp. xvi, 15, 34, 52, 83, 88, 91, pp. liii sqq.
93, 126, 174 date of, pp. lviii-lxvi
Jerusalem, i. 28, 29 makes use of Eth. Enoch vi.-xxxvi.,
Jezer, xliv. 30 lxxii.-xe., pp. LXV sq.
Jochebed, xlvii. 8 makes use of Book of Noah, pp. Ixxi
Joel, Greek chronographer, pp. 1xxxii. sq.
37, 67 made use of by Eth. Enoch xci.-civ.,
Jokshan, xix, 12 pp. lxix sqq.
Jordan, the, xxix. 14 made use of by Eth. Enoch i.-v. (1),
Joseph, xxviii. 24 p. Lxxi
carried down into Egypt, xxxiv. 11-21 made use of by Wisdom, pp. lxxiv sq.
dies, xlvi. 3 made use of by 4 Ezra, p. lxxv
Josephus, pp, xxxix, lix, 8, 26, 27, 44, relation of, to Test. XII. Patriarchs,
65, 66, 69, 106, 113, 187, 191, 195, Ρ. xii
211, 245, 246, 249, 255, 257, 259, author of, a Pharisee and a Priest (7),
261 p. xxiii
Jubilee perio=d 4 9 years, pp. xv, lxvii author of, an upholder of the Mac-
=50 years, pp. xv, xviii cabean dynasty, p. lxxili
laws regarding, 1, 1-5 in Jewish literature, pp. lxxiv sqq.
Jubilees, Book of, its various titles— in Christian non-canonical literature,
Jubilees, or the Book of Jubilees, pp. lxxvii-lxxxiii
p. xv; Little Genesis, pp. xv, xvi; influence of, on the New Testament,
Apocalypse of Moses, p. xvii; Tes- pp. Ixxxiii-lxxxvi
tament of Moses, pp. xvii-xviii; Book Judah, tribe of, carried into captivity,
of Adam’s Daughters, pp. xviii-xix; i, 13
Life of Adam, pp. xix, xx restored from the captivity, i. 15-16
written originally in Hebrew, pp. |J udah born, xxviii, 15
XXXi-Xxxiii Judas Maccabaeus, pp. lxiii, [xxxvii

272 THE BOOK OF JUBILEES
Judgment, final, of the fallen angels and pre-eminence of, over Judah, p. lxii;
their sons, v. 10, 11 XXX. 14-17
of mankind (?) and Satan precedes the Levitical elements in Enoch, vii. 37, 38;
Messianic kingdom, xxiii. 11 xxi. 10 notes
at close of Messianic kingdom, pp. Lidzbarski, p. xix
lxxxvii sq. ; xxxiii. 30 note Littmann referred to, pp. xxii, xxvi,
Judith quoted, pp. 179, 205 xxxi; 5, 19, 25, 44, 70, 98, 135,
Justin Martyr quoted, pp. 88, 41, 50, 169, 210
101, 109 Lémna, wife of Peleg, x. 18
Lot, xii. 30; xiii. 13 xvi 7
Kabér, brother of Reu, xi. 7 Liibar, v. 28 ; vii. 1
Kabratin, xxxii. 32 Lud, vii. 18; ix. 6, 10, 11
Kadesh, xvi. 10 Luz, xxvii. 19, 26
Kadmonites, xiv. 18
Kaftir, viii. 21 Ma’anisikir (corrupt for Shakir of
Kainam, viii. 1-4 Mahanaim), xxxiv. 4, 7
Kamatfiri, ix. 13 Maccabean victories, scenes of, alluded
Karisé (=Chersonese or Rhinocorura), to, pp. ἵν], lxii, lxili; xxiii, 21viii. 13 2
Karnaim, xxix. 10 Maccabees, First, referred to, pp. 1xxxviii,
Kenan, iv. 13 147, 148, 204
Kenites, xiv. 18 Second, referred to, p. 42
Kenizzites, xiv. 18 Madai, vii. 19; viii. 5; ix. 9
Késéd, brother of Arpachshad, viii. 6 obtains Media, x. 35-36
grandfather of ’Ora, the wife of Reu, Ma‘édai (= Media), viii. 21
iii), Magdaladra’éf, xxxiii. 1
Keturah, xix. 11; xx. 1, 11, 12 Magog, vii. 19; ix. 8
Kirjath Arba, xix. 1 Mahalalel, iv. 14, 15; xix. 24
Kittim= Macedonians, pp. lxiii; xxiv. Mahalath, xxix. 18
28, 29 Maka, wife of Gad, xxxiv. 20
= Hittite(sἢ , xxxvii. 10 Makamaré6n, xlvi. 6
Kohath, xliv. 14 | Malala, John, pp. 34, 37, 41, 66, 67
Kriiger, p. xxiv | Mamre (a person), xiii, 29
(a place), xiv. 10; xvi. 1
Laban, xix. 10; xxvii. 8, 10; xxviii. 1 Manasseh, xliv. 24
Lacunae, pp. Xxxix sqq.; ii, 225 iii. Marriage with sisters ceases in Maha28 ; vii. 37 ; xiii. 25 lalel’s time, iv. 15 note
Lambros’ Catalogue of Greek MSS on Mastéma, pp. xxx, xlix, lviii, Ixxxvi ;
Mt. Athos, p. xl x, 8 note; HL ὅ; 11; HIRD
Lamech, iv. 27 =Satan, x. 8, 11
Land to lie fallow every seventh year, prince or chief, xvii. 16 ; xlviii. 2
vii. 37 prince of the, xviii, 9, 12; xlviii, 9,
Langen, p. Xxiv 12, 15
Law, the, of everlasting validity, pp. Mak, sea of, viii. 22, 26
xiii, 1, lii sq. Mé’at (= Maedis), viii. 12, 27 ; ix. 8
given through angels, i. 27 note | Mebri, mountains of, ix. 2
transmitted through the patriarchs, Medan, xix. 12
vii. 38 Melchizedek, pp. xlviii, Ixxxviii; xiii.
Leah, xxviii. 3 25 note
Two> Ae
death of, xxxvi. 21 Melk, wife of Levi, xxxiv. 20
Lebanon, viii, 21; ix. 4; xii. 15 wife of Kainiim, viii. 5
Legendary matter in Jubilees, pp. xliv wife of Nahor, xix. 10
sqq. wife of Serug, xi. 7
Levi, birth of, xxviii. 14 Merari, xliv. 14
ordained to the priesthood for the Meshech, vii. 19; ix. 12
destruction of Shechem, xxx. 17-23 Mesopotamia, ix. 5; xxvii. 10, 12, 13;
ordained to the priesthood because xxix. 18
he was the tenth son, xxxii. 2, 3 | Messiah from Judah, p. lxxxvii; Xxx,
note 18 note

INDEX II 273
Messianic kingdom, gradual develop- Noah, iv. 28; xix. 24, 27; xxii, 13
ment of the, pp. Ixiii, Ixxxvii ; ordinances of, vii, 20-39
1. 29 note; v. 12; xxiii. 26-30 ancient Book of, pp. Ixxi sq.
notes Hebrew Book of, pp. xliv; 47, 61,
righteous do not rise to share in the, 62, 78, 79, 81
xxiii, 30, 31 saga oi, earlier than that of Enoch,
woes, xxiii. 9, 11-15, 17-19, 22-25 p. xxii
Methuselah, iv. 27 Noam, wife of Enos, iv. 13
_ Midian, xix. 12
Midrash Bereshith rabba, pp. 12, 25,
Ohad, xliv. 13
99, 41, 49, 61, 89, 94, 96, 109,
Onan, xliv. 4, 5
127, 157, 162, 165, 169, 179, 206,
Onkelos, pp. 32, 33, 60, 106, 116, 126,
230
227
Shem. rabba quoted, pp. 3, 183
Ora, wife of Reu, xi. 1
Wajjisau, pp. xliv, 200, 201, 202,
Origen, pp. lxxx, 108, 194, 227
203
Tadshe quoted, pp. x1, Ixxvi, 11, 18,
24, 171
Pallu, xliv. 12
Mishna, pp. 20, 46, 53, 106, 109, 135, Paran, wilderness of, xvii. 12; xx. 12
141, 181, 193, 255, 257, 259, 260, Paronomasiae, p. xxxiii; iv. 9, 15,
261 285 ὙΠ. ὦ, Ss) αν 19, 26's. x1, 6,
Misty, xxix. 10 12
Mizraim, vii. 18 ; ix. 1 Passover, the laws regulating the observMoab, xxxvii. 6, 10 5 xxxviii. 6 ance of the, p. 49
Moloch, xxx. 10 Peleg, viii. 8; x. 18
Moon, polemic against calculations by Pentateuch, the book of the first Law
the, vi. 36 written by an angel, p. 1; i. 27;
Moses born, xlvii. 1 Vi. 235 xxx, 12, 21
twenty-one years at court of Pharaoh, Pentecost, p. Ixvi; vi. 17 note
xlvii. 10 Perez, xli. 21; xliv. 15
thirty-six years in Midian, xlviii. 1 Perizzites, xiv. 18 ; xxx. 25
Assumption of, pp. xv, xviii Phakorites, xiv. 18
Most High, the, p. Ixvi; xxxvi. 16 note Pharaoh, contemporary of Abram xiii,
Mount of the East, iv. 26 19
MS Coislinianus, p. 11 contemporary of Joseph, xl. 1, 3,
γ in Lagarde’s Genesis, pp. lxxxiii, 5, ete.
33, 40, 42, 67 contemporary of Moses, xlvii. 2
2 in Lagarde’s Genesis, pp. lxxxiii, Pharnak, ix. 2
48, 49
Phicol, xxiv. 26
Mak, wife of Shelah, viii. 6 Philip, Acts of, p. 80
Mfialéléth, wife of Kenan, iv. 14 Philistia, xxxvii. 6, 10
Muppim, xliv. 25 Philistines, pp. lvi, lxiii; xxiv. 14, 15,
ete,
Naaman, xliv. 25 Philo quoted, pp. 8, 11, 28, 44, 106,
Nahor, father of Terah, xi. 8 179
son of Terah, xii. 11 Philo, Pseudo-, <Antiquitatum bibl.
Naphil, vii. 22 Leber, pp. 32, 205
Naphtali, xxviii. 19 ; xliv. 30 Phiia, xliv. 16
Navel of the earth, viii. 19 Pithom, xlvi. 14
Nebaioth, xvii. 14 Plagues, the ten, x1viii, 5-11
Nébréd, viii. 7 Plant, the, of uprightness, i. 165 xvi.
N@élatamtéik , vii. 14, 17 26 note ; xxi. 24; xxxvi. 6
Néstig, xi. 9 Plough, the invention of the, xi. 23-24
Nicephorus, Catena of, pp. xviii, xxviii, Poetical element in Jubilees, pp. xlii
37, 82, 85, 96 sqq.
Catalogue of, p. xvii. Potiphar, chief of the cooks, xxxiv. 11 ;
Nicolaus of Damascus, p. 47 Xxxix. 2
NYiman, wife of Zabulon, xxxiv. 20 Priest of the Most High God, p, lix;
Nineveh, ix. 3 XXXi, 1
18

OF JUBILEES
» 74 THE BOOK
~
Purification, laws of, iii. 10-12 Sarai, xii. 9
Pat, wit. 13.5 a. called Sarah, xv. 15
death of, xix. 2, 7
Qafratéf, xxxiv. 15 Satan, x. 11
Qélt (= Celts) viii. 26 to be punished finally, x. 8
confined at different periods, xxiii. 29;
XL 9; HL 2)
Raamses, x!v. 6; xlvi. 14
Sayce, p. 48
Rachel, xxviii. 1, 9; xxxii. 34
Schatzhohle, die, pp. 28, 29, 34
Rafa (=Rhipaean Mountains), viii. 12,
Schodde, p. xxi
16
Schtirer, pp. xxv, lxxx, lxxxviii, 147,
Ra&ké@’él, brother of Lamech, iv. 33
259
Rast’éja, wife of Arpachshad, viii. 1
Sédégétélébab, vii. 16, 17
Rasiijal, iv. 16
Seder Olam rabba, p. 103
Ras’, wife of Naphtali, xxxiv. 20
Seir, xxix. 13,18 -
Ravens put to flight by Abram, xi. 18Séllasar, xiii. 22
22
5610 (=Shiloh), xxxiv. 4, 7
Rebecca, xix. 10, 13, 16; xxxv. 27
Séphantiphans, x1. 10
Red Sea, the, viii. 21 ; ix. 2, 4 Sérigan (=Sartan), xxxiv. 4, 7
Rephaim, the, xiv. 18; xxix. 9
Serah, xliv. 21
Resurrection, no, of the body, xxiii. Sered, xliv. 17
Séroh, xi. 1, 6
Retaliation, law of literal, iv. 31 note;
Serug, xi. 6
xlviii. 14 note
Seth, iv. 17; xix. 24
Reu, x. 18
saga, pp. Ixxii, 33-36
Reuben, xxviii. 11
later glorification of, in Jewish and
sin of, with Bilhah, Xxxiii, 1-9
Christian writings, pp. 34, 35 notes
R6bél (corrupt for Arbael), xxxiv. 8
Severus of Antioch, pp. xv, Ixxviii
Rénsch, pp xvii, xix, xxiv, xxviii,
Shaul, xliv. 13
xxxi, Ixxvii, 33, 39, 80, 83, 96,
Shechem, city of, xiii. i
121, 170, 171, 177, 192, 195
destroyed by Levi and Simeon, xxx.
Rosh, xliv. 25
4-6
Rubin, p. xxiv
taken from the Amorites by Jacob
Rufinus quoted, Dp. 12
and his sons, xxxiv. 2-8 note
Ryle, p. xxxix
Shechem, son of Hamor, xxx. 2
Shelah, son of Arpachshad, viii. 5, 6
Sabbath, the, to be kept by the highest son of Judah, xli. 6, 7
angels and Israel, p. 1; ii. 17-21 Shem, iv. 33; vii. 9, 11, 12,16; xix.
notes ; ii. 31 note 24, 27
not for the inferior angels, nor for lot of, viii. 12-21
the Gentiles, ii. 2 note ; ii. 31 note Sheol, a place of punishment but not of
first celebrated by Jacob, ii. 23 note; fire, vii. 29; xxii. 22; xxiv. 31
ii. 51 note Shimron, xliv. 16
laws for the observance of the, pp. Shinar, land of, ix. 3; x. 18, 19, 20;
1x, 1x; 11. 25-30; 1. 6-13 ΧΙ͂Ι, 22
various interpretations of the term, Shua, xix. 12
in relation to the feast of weeks, Shuni, xliv. 20
xv. 1 note Shur, xvi. 10
Sack, p. xxv Siddim, xiii. 22
Sacrifices to the dead, xxii. 17 Simeon, xxviii. 13 ; xxx. 4; xxxiv. 20
to demons, i. 11 note ; xxii. 17 note 21; xliv. 13
Sallfim, xliv. 30 Simon Maccabaeus, pp. xiii, lxxxviii
Salomon, xliv, 28 Sina’ar, father-in-law of Peleg, x. 18
Salt Sea, xiii. 22 Sinai, i. 2, 5; viii. 19
Salt to be used in sacrifices, xxi. 11 Singer, pp. xxvi, 7, 63, 93, 96, 101,
Samaritan Chronicle, pp. lxxvi sq., 40, 109, 113, 117, 134, 144, 165, 166,
47, 58 169, 181, 227
Samén, xliv. 28 Sinker, p. xxiv
Sanir (= Biblical Senir), viii. 21 ; ix. 4 Sirach quoted, p. 117

INDEX II
275
Six days of creation, ii. 1-14 Timnah, xli. 8, 9
Séderblom quoted, p. 9 Tina (=Tanais= Don), viii. 12, 16, 25,
Sodom, xiii. 17, 22; xvi.5; xx. 5, 6; 28) 1x. 28
xxii. 22 Tiras, vi. 19; ix. 13
Son of God, the individual Israelite a, Tithes, xiii. 25, 26 ; xxxii. 2, 8, 9, 10-15
i, 24 note; i. 25, 28; xix. 29 double, xxxii. 9-11
Spirit, a holy, i. 21, 28 Tobit quoted, p. 166
of righteousness (or truth), xxv. 14 Tola, xliv. 16
note Tower of Abraham, xxix. 16, 19
Suidas, pp. lxxxii, 91 Treuenfels, p. xxii.
Sun, the, to regulate the year, ii. 9 note ; Tubal, vii. 19; ix, 11
vi. 36-38 notes Twenty-two—a significant number, pp.
Syncellus, pp. xvi, xvii, xix, xxviii, Xxxix-xl ; ii. 23 note
sax’ 11, 14. 18, 21, 25. 20,
28, 29, 80, 31, 32, 34, 35, 41, 59,
Cr, father-in-law of Reu, xi, 1
62, 66, 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 78, 85,
Ur, city of, xi. 3, 7, 8; xii. 14, 15
89, 98, 95,157, 164, 171, 186, 191,
192, 208
War forbidden on the Sabbath, 1. 12
Syriac Fragment, the, pp. 30, 60, 61,
Washings obligatory in connection with
66, 67, 86, 87, 206
sacrifices, xxi. 16
Watchers, the. See Angels
Tables, two, of stone, i. 1
Well of the Oath (see Beersheba), xvi.
Talmud, pp. lix, lxi, Ixxxviii, 8, 12,
11 Ups) xvi. I xxi: Ws xxiv.
23, 27, 28, 32, 42, 61, 89, 96, 101,
Ὁ 26's) Xa’ 19's xxx ΤῊΣ
102, 118, 120, 121, 128, 144, 181,
xliv. 1
191, 195, 197, 206, 220, 223, 252,
Vision, xxiv, 1
256, 258, 259, 260, 261
Wine to be drunk at the Passover, xlix.
Tamar, xli. 1, 6, 8, 16, 19
6, 9
Tamnatarés (=Timnath-heresxx)xi,v . 8
Wisdom, Book of, pp. 126, 252
Tanais (=Zoan), xiii, 12
makes use of Jubilees, pp. lxxiv, sq.
Tapha, xxxiv. 4
Woods to be used in sacrificing, xxi.
Targum, Ps. Jonathan, pp. 2, 22, 26,
12-14
32, 33, 103, 116, 201
Taylor quoted, p. 7, 125
Year, the=364 days, vi. 29-38 notes
Temple, the second, i. 17
Years, civil and ecclesiastical, implied
Terah, xi. 10
(Ὁ) in Jubilees, p. xviii; vi. 29-30
Tergal, xiii. 22
note
Tertullian quoted, p. 101
430, from birth of Isaac to The
Testaments of XII. Patriarchs, pp. xliv,
Exodus, xiv. 18 note
xlv, 8, 9, 24, 132, 184, 170, 171,
179, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187,
188, 191, 192, 197, 198, 201, 202, Zabulon, xxvili. 23
209, 206, 213, 214, 216, 220, 221, Zeboim, xiii. 23; xvi. 5
228, 229, 230, 231, 245, 246 Zephathite, xliv. 13
Tharmuth, xlvii. 5 Zerah, ἘΠ᾿ 21 ; xliv. 15
Third month, i. 1 note Zilpah, sister of Bilhah, xxviii. 3, 9;
Thomson, p. xxv xliv. 19
Thousand years=one day, iv. 30 note Zimram, xix. 12
years of life for the righteous, xxiii. Zion, i. 28, 29 ; viii. 19
27 (iv. 30; xxiii, 15) Ziphion, xliv. 20
Tigris, ix. 2, 5 Zonaras quoted, pp. xvi, Ixxix, 35
THE END


እ "
nite Ne aa
UT
any }
bs
ἊΝ

c
a
a
c
F
Library Bureau Cat. No. 1137

i
L
The book of Jubilees, or The little Gene
BS 1830 .J7 A3 1902
Book of Jubilees.
The book of Jubilees

s
i
e
e e
paper
ie
i
e
r
e
αν
e ον.δ ὶ
ne
Stes
te
eet
Peer”
aeRO
e
y
της
τῷ
OR EaSSe mN A
e ee Pmyies oe) 6
t
e
P
e
σι
i
e
e
e
ἀποτν
>
--
-
-
e
e
σ
ό
νπ᾿
Pare at oon -
τι
πισόσεσισφοτσοσν
δ
-“1---ὔὖ--στ΄.--......
