V

* •*

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

THE HYMNS OF THE SiMAVEDA, in one Vol.,
Royal 8vo., cloth boards, gilt lettered, Rs. 4-0-0.

THE HYMNS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA, in two
Volumes, Royal 8vo., cloth bound, gilt lettered,
f Rs. 6-0-0, each Volume*,^^*

A METRICAL TRANSLATIOlHrr*^
RAMAYAN, , complete in one Volume, Grown
8vo,, cloth bound, gilt lettered, Rs. 6-0-0.

*

THE

HYMNS OF THE RIGYEDA

TRANSLATED WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY

BY

RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M.A.,C.I.E.

FORMER PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE, AND LATE DIRECTOR

SeoixnH Iditixm.

COMPLETE IN TWO VOLUMES.

BENARES:

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY E. J. LAZARUS AND 00.

1897.

All rights reserved

CENTRAL ARCH \FOL0GKMK
LIBRARY, Ntfc

Aoo. No ...»•«•

hate .. ... ...

Hff No.

Hymns, Translation and Commentary : —
Book YII. ... ...

„ VIII.

Valajkhilya
Book IX.

„ X.

Appendix. — Hymns lxi., cvi., clxii.-olxiii.
Index of Hymns ...

General Index of Hymns
Index of Names, Etc.

Corrigenda et Addenda

CLXXXIV.

1

503

259

269

383

611

615

633

637

671

THE HYMtfS OF THE KIGVEDA,

BOOK THE SEVENTH.

HYMN I. Agni.

The men from fire-sticks, with their hands* swift movement
have, in deep thought, engendered glorious Agni,

Far-seen, with pointed flame, Lord of the homestead.

2 The Vasus set that Agni in the dwelling, fair to behold, for

help from every quarter ;

Who, in the home for ever, must be honoured.

3 Shine thou before us, Agni, well-enkindled, with flame, Most

Youthful God, that never fadeth. ^

To thee come all our sacrificial viands.

4 Among all fires these fires have shone most brightly, splendid

with light, begirt by noble heroes,

Where men of lofty birth sit down together.

5 Victorious Agni, grant us wealth with wisdom, wealth with

brave sons, famouS and independent,

Which not a foe who deals in magic conquers. *

6 To whom, the Strong, at morn and eve comes, maid-like, the

ladle dropping oil, with its oblation ;

Wealth-seeking comes to him his own devotion,

7 Burn up all malice with those flames, 0 Agni, wherewith c£f

old thou burntest up Jarfitha,

And drive £way in silence pain and sickness,

8 With him who lightetb up thy splendour, Agni, excellent,

pure, refulgent, Purifier, *

Be present, and with us throxigh these our praises.

9 Agni, the patriarchal men, the mortals who have in many

places spread thy lustre, —

Be gracious to us here for their sake also, .

All the hymns of this Book are ascribed to the Rishi Vasishtha, with whom,
his sons are associated as the seers of parts of two hymns.

1 In deep thought ; ( with their fingers/ according to S&yana, this' meaning
having been attributed without any philological grounds to the word dMhiti*
With from its use in this and similar passages.

6 His oion devotion : the worship which belongs especially to him.- . ;

7 JarUtha ; a B&kshasa or demon with a loud- harsh voice.— S Ay an j*. . * w.

2 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK VII.

10 Let these men, heroes in the fight with foemen, prevail against

all godless arts of magic, —

These who approve the noble song I sing thee.

11 Let ns not sit in want of men, 0 Agni, without descendants,

heroless, about thee :

But, 0 House-Friend, in houses full of ohildren.

12 By sacrifice which the Steeds’ Lord ever visits, there make

our dwelling rich in seed and offspring,

Increasing still with lineal successors.

.13 Guard us, 0 Agni, from the hated demon, guard us from
malice of the churlish sinner :

Allied with^thee may I subdue assailants.

14 May this same fire of mine surpass all others, this fire where
offspring, vigorous and firm-handed,

Wins, on a -thousand paths, what ne’er shall perish.

,15 This is that Agni, saviour from the foeman, who guards the
' ^ kindler of the flame- from sorrow :

Heroes of noble lineage serve and tend him.

J 6 This is that Agni, served in many places, whom the rich lord
who brings oblation kindles,

And round him goes the priest at sacrifices.

.17 Agni, may we with riches in possession bring thee continual
offerings in abundance,

^ Using both means to draw thee to our worship.

18 Agni, bear thou, Eternal, these most welcome oblations to

the Deities’ assembly :

Let them enjoy our very fragrant presents.

19 Give us not up, Agni, to want of heroes, to wretched clothes,

to need, to destitution.

Yield ns not, Holy One, to fiend or hunger; injure us not at
home or in the forest.

20 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agni ; O

God, pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles.

Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye Gods,
protect us evermore with blessings.

21 Thou Agni, swift to hear, art fair of aspect : beam forth, 0

Son of Strength, in full effulgence.

Let me not want, with thee, a son for ever : let not a manly
hero ever fail us.

12 The Steeds' Lord ; Agni, whose swift flames are called horses.

17 Both means : prayer and praise.

21 For fiver : nltye ; perpetual ; who shall live for ever in his posterity.

Tm mvm)A.

BY MM 2.j

22 Condemn us not to indigence, 0 Agni, beside these flaming

fires which Gods have kindled ;

Nor, even after fault, let thy displeasure, thine as a God, O
Son of Strength, o j ertake us.

23 0 Agni, fair of face, the wealthy mortal who to the Im-

mortal offers his oblation

Hath him who wins him treasure by his Godhead, to Whom
the prince, in need, goes supplicating.

24 Knowing our chief felicity, 0 Agni, bring hither ample

riches to our nobles,

Wherewith we may enjoy ourselves, 0 Yicfcor, with un dimini-
shed life and hero children. *

25 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agni ; 0 God,

pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles.

Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye
Gods, protect us evermore with blessings.

HYMN rr. Ajw?is.

Gladly accept, this day, our fuel, Agni : send up thy sacred
smoke and shine sublimely.

Touch the celestial summits with thy columns, and overspread
thee with the rays of Surya.

2 With sacrifice to thqge w© men will honour the majesty of

holy Narasansa —

To these the pure, most wise, the thought-inspirers, Gods who
enjoy both sorts of our oblations.

3 We will extol at sacrifice for ever, as men may do, Agni whom

Manu kindled,

Your very skilful Asura, meet for worship, envoy between
both worlds, the truthful speaker.

4 Bearing the sacred grass, the men who serve him strew it

with reverence, on their knees, by Agni.

Calling him to the spotted grass, oil-sprinkled, adorn him, ye
A lhvaryus, with oblation.

22 Which Gods have kindled ; lighted by the ministering priests.

23 Hath him : possesses., or enjoys the favour of, Agni. ‘ That deity (Agni)
favours the presenter of (sacrificial) wealth. 1 — Wilson.

24 Knowing our chief felicity ; understanding what we want to make u&
happy, that is, riches.

The Apits are the divine or deified beings and objects to which the propi-
tiatory verses are addressed. For other Aprl hymns see I. 13 ; 188 ; XL 3 ; III.
4 ; V. 5 ; IX. 5 ; X. 70 ; 110.

1 Nardmnsa : ‘the Praise of Men’; Agni. Both sorts of our oblations :
offerings of ghrita , gM, or clarified butter, and libations of Soma juice.

TEE E TMNS OF

[BOOK TIL

• 5 With, holy thoughts the pious have thrown open Boors fain for
chariots in the Gods' assembly.

; Like two, f uU mother cows who lick their youngling, like maid-
ens for the gathering, they adorn them,
fc And let the two exalted Heavenly Ladies, Morning and Night,
like a cow good at milking,

Gome, much-invoked, and on our grass be seated, wealthy,
deserving worship, for oar -welfare.

7 t You, Bards and Singers at men's sacrifices, both filled with
wisdom, I incline to worship.

Send up Qur offerings when we call upon yon, and so among
the God# obtain us treasures.

£ Bharatl with all her- Sisters, Ila accordant with the Gods*
with mortals Agni,

Sarasvati with all her kindred Rivers, come to this grass.
Three Goddesses, and seat them.

D^Well pleased with us do thou, 0 God, 0 Tvashtar, give ready
issue to our procreant vigour,

Whence springs the hero, powerful, skilled in action, lover
of Gods, adjuster of the press-stones.

JO Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Forests, and let the
Immolator, Agni, dress it.

He as the truer Priest shall offer worship, for the Gods’ gene-

^ rations well he knoweth.

11 Come thou to us, 0 Agni, duly kindled, together with the
potent Gods and Indra.

5 On this our grass sit Aditi, happy Mother, and let our Hail j
delight the Gods Immortal.

HYMN III, Agni,

Associate with fires, m^ke your God Agni eiavoy at sacrifice,
best skilled in worship,

Established firm among mankind, the Ploly, flame-crowned
and fed with oil, the Purifier.

5 Doom : the deified doors qf the hall of sacrifice where the Gods assemble.
fain for chariots ; welcoming the approach of the cars in. which the priests
come to the ceremony. The latter half of the stanza is obscure : ‘ (the ladles)
placed to the east are plying the fire with gh$ at sacrifices, as the moth ex'
cows lick the calf, or as rivers (water the fields).’ — Wilson.

6 Like a mo : the dual dkend, two cows, instead of dhenuh, would, as Ludr
wig suggests, seem to us to bo preferable.

7 Bards and Singers : the hdtdrd, or 1 two Invokers’ of L 13. 8 ; perhaps
Agni and Vanina, or Varuna and Aditya.

8 Stanzas 8— H are identical with stanzas 8— If of Book III. 4.,

*1 Associate: sctjdsMh, being a shortened form of sajMasah, the nominative
jplural. S&yana explains it as axi accusative singular, qualifying Agni.

MYMN Z,} THE JUG VEDA. &

2 Like a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath

stepped forth from the great enclosure :

Then the wind following blows upon his splendour, and,
straight, tlie path is black wliich thou hast travelled.

3 From thee a Bull but newly born, 0 Agm, tho kindled ever-

lasting flames rise upward;

Aloft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth : Agni, tholi
speedest to the Gods as envoy.

4 Thou whose fresh lustre o’er the earth advanceth when greed-

% with thy jaws thy food thou eatest.

Like a host hurried onward comes thy lasso i fierce, with thy
tongue thou piercest, as ’twere baifley* *

5 The men have decked him both at eve and morning, Most

Youthful Agni, as they tend a courser.

They kindle him, a guest within his dwelling : bright shines
the splendour of the worshipped Hero.

6 0 fair of face, beautiful is thine aspect when, very near at

^ hand, like gold thou gleamest. * >

Like Heaven’s thundering roar thy might approaches* and
like the wondrous Sim thy light thou showest.

7 That we may worship, with your Hail to Agni 1 with sacrificial

cakes and fat oblations,

Guard us, 0 Agni, with those boundless glories as with a
hundred fortresses of iron.

8 Thine are resistless songs for him who offers, and hero-giving

hymns wherewith thou savest ;

With these, 0 Son of Strength, 0 J&tavedas, guard us, pre-
serve these princes and the singers.

9 When forth he eometh, like an axe new-sharpened, pure in

his form, resplendent in his body,

Sprung, sought with eager longing, from his Parents, for the
Gods’ worship, Sage and Purifier :

10 Shine this felicity on us, 0 Agni: may we attain to perfect
understanding.

* All happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

2 From, the great enclosure: 'from the vast enclosing (forest).’ — Wilson.
Others understand it as the enclosure iu which the horse is confined.

4 Thou pier cest as 'twere barley : the comparison is somewhat compressed :
the meaning is, thou penebratest and fellest the trees of the forest with thy
tongue as men cut down barley with a reaping die ok.

9 From his Parents; the two fire-s ticks.

THB HYMNS OF

IBOOK V1L

e

HYMN IV, ’ Agni.

Bring forth your gifts to his refulgent splendour, your hymn
as purest offering to Agni,

To him who goes as messenger -with knowledge between all
sons of men and Gods in heaven,

2 Wise must this Agni he, though young and tender, since he

was born, Most Youthful, of his Mother ;

He who with bright teeth seizeth fast the forests, and eats
Ms food, though plenteous, in a moment.

3 Before his presence must we all assemble, this God's whom

men have seized in his white splendour.

This Agni ho hath brooked that men should seize him hath
shone for man with glow insufferable,

4 Far-seeing hath this Agni been established, deathless mid

mortals, wise among the foolish.

Here, 0 - victorious God, forbear to harm tis : may we for ever
share thy gracious favour.

5 He who hath occupied his God- made dwelling, Agni, in wisdom

hath surpassed Immortals.

A Babe unborn, the plants and trees support him, and the
earth beareth him the All-sustainer.

6 Agni is Lord of Amrit in abundance, Lord of the gift of -wealth

and hero valour, *

* Victorious God, let us not sit about thee like men devoid of
strength, beauty, and worship.

7 The foeman’s treasure may be won with labour : may we be

masters of our own possessions.

Agni, no son is he who springs from others : lengthen not out
the pathways of the foolish.

8 Unwelcome for adoption is the stranger, one t<? be thought of

as another's offspring,

Though grown familiar by continual presence. May cm strong
hero come, freshly triumphant.

3 Must we all msembU : I follow Ludwig in his interpretation of samstidi;
as we ere forsaken, and our protector is far away (at 6, 7, 8), we must crowti
to the God of Fire for defence.

6 In the second line I have borrowed from Pro-f. Max IMIer, Vedic Hymns

I. p. 80. ?

7 Let us remain in undisturbed possession of our own property, and let us
have sons of our own begetting and not the adopted children of others.

8 ^ Men do not look with pleasure and affection on adopted sons ; but we arq
longing to see our absent protector return to us.— Ludwig. Others explain
the last half-verse differently ; * therefore let there come to us (agon) new-born
possessed of food, victorious over foes/— Wilson.

jfftME 5.J ' TEE MG VEDA, 1

9 Guard us from him who would assail us, Agni ; preserve us
0 thou Victor, from dishonour

Here let the place of darkening come upon thee ; may" wealth
be ours, desirable, in thousands.

10 Shine this felicity on us, 0 Agni s may we attain to perfect
understanding.

All happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee. Ye Gods,
presei-ve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN V. ^ Agni.

Being forth your song of praise to mighty Agni, the speedy
messenger of earth and heaven,

Vaifvanara, who, with those who Wake, hath Waxen great in
the lap of all the Gods Immortal.

2 Sought in the heavens, on earth is* Agni stablished, leader of

rivers, Bull of standing waters.

Vaisvanara, when he hath grown in glory, shines on the tribes
of men with light and treasure. ^

3 For fear of thee forth fled the dark-hued races, scattered

abroad, deserting their possessions,

When, glowing, 0 Vaisvanara, for Puru, thou, Agni, didst
light up and lrend their castles.

4 Agni Vaisvanax'a, both Earth and Heaven submit them to

thy threefold jurisSiction.

Kefulgent in thine undecaying lustre thou hast invested bo^i
the worlds with splendour.

5 Agni, the tawny horses, loudly neighing, our resonant hymns

that drop with oil, attend thee;

Lord of the tribes, our Charioteer of riches, Ensign of days,
Vaisvanara of mornings.

■■ — — n. — I : — —*—

9 This stanza is a repetition of VI. 1 o, 12, where See note.

10 Repeated from stanza 10 of the preceding hymn.

The hymn is addressed to Agni as Vaisvanara, the God who is present with,
and benefits, all Aryan men.

1 With those who wake : tended hy the priests. According to S&yana * as-
sociated with the wakened Gods.’

2 Bull of standing waters : the meaning of stlyindm is uncertain. ^ Perhaps,
as Ludwig suggests, plants and bushes are intended which Agni like a bull
levels with the ground.

3 The dark-hued races : according to von Roth, the spirits of darkness. Fo?
P&ru ; or, for man.

4 Threefold jurisdiction ; in heaven, mid-air, and earth.

5 The tawny horses : the hymns that hasten to Agni like eager horse*.

Ludwig translates the harltu £> of the text by ‘^old-yellow,’ qualifying * hymns;’
that is, hymns with libations of yellow Soma juice. . ;

f !THE EYM&8 OF [BOOK ViL

6 In thee, 0 bright a£ Mitra, Yasus seated the might of Asurae,
for they loved thy spirit-

Theft dravest t)asyus from their hofne, 0 Agm, and brought*
est forth broad light tot light the Ary a,

Y Born in the loftiest heaven thou in a moment reachest, like
wind, the place where Gods inhabit.

. Thou, favouring thine offspring, roaredst loudly when giving
life to creatures, Jatavedas.

8 Send its that strength, Vaifvanara, send it, Agni, that

strength, 0 J&tavedas, full of splendour,

Wherewith, all-bounteous God, thou pourest riches, as fame
wide-spreading, on the man who offers.

9 Agni, bestow upon our chiefs and nobles that famous power,

that wealth which feedeth many.

Accordant with the Yasus and the Rudras, Agni, Yaisvanara,
give us sure protection.

HYMN YL Agni.

''Praise of the Asura, high imperial Ruler, the Manly One in
whom the folk shall triumph —

I laud his deeds who is as strong as Indra, and lauding celebrate
the Fort-destroyer.

2 Sage, Sign, Food, Light, — they bring him from the mountain,

the bless&d Sovran of the earth and heaven.

I decorate with songs the mighty actions which Agni, Fort-
r destroyer, did aforetime.

3 The foolish, faithless, rudely-speaking niggards, without belief

or sacrifice or worship, —

Far, far away hath Agni chased those Dasyus, and, in the
east, hath turned the godless westward.

4 Him who brought eastward, manliest with Iks prowess, the

Maids rejoicing in the western darkness,

That Agni I extol, the Lord of riches, unyielding tamer of
assailing foemen.

5 Him who brake down the walls with deadly weapons, and

gave the Mornings to a noble Husband,

6 Thou dravest ,* cf. I. 117. 21.

1 Fort-destroyer j demolish er of the cloud-castles of the demons of drought,
prof the strongholds of the non- Ary an tribes.

2 From the mountain : from the cloud, as lightning.

3 Westward ; into the darkness of night.

4 Who brought eastward : brought back the vanished lights of dawn.

5 To a noble Husband : the Sun, or Agni himself, The tribes of JSahus; or,
according to von Both, neighbouring people.

Hfuif ?.] tHJE 1 UGtfiDi. I

Young Aghi,- who With conquering strength subduing tbtf
tribes of Nahus made them bring their tribute.

6 In whose protection all men rest by nature, desiring to enjoy

his gracious favour —

Agni Vaisv&nara in his Parents' bosom hath found the choic-
est seat in earth atld heaven.

7 Vaisvanara the God, at the sun's setting, bath. taken to?

himself deep-hidden treasures :

Agni hath taken them front earth and heaven, from the sea
under and the sea above us.

HYMN VII. ' Agni.

I send forth even your God, victorious Agni, like a strong
courser, with mine adoration*

Herald of sacrifice be he who knoweth : he hath reached Gods’*
himself, with measured motion*

2 By paths that are thine own come hither, Agni, joyous, delight-

ing in the Gods’ alliance,

Making the heights of earth roar with thy fury, burning with
eager teeth the woods and forests.

3 The grass is strewn ; the sacrifice advances : adored as Priest,

Agni is made propitious,

Invoking both All-b$on-bestowiug Mothers of whom, Most
Youthful ! thou wast born to help us. ^

4 Forthwith the men, the best of these for wisdom, have made

him leader in the solemn worship.

As Lord in homes of men is Agni stablished, the Holy One,
the joyous, sweetly speaking.

5 He hath come, chosen bearer, and is seated in man's home,

Brahman y Agni , the Supporter,

He whom both Heaven and Earth exalt and strengthen,
whom, Giver of all boons, the Hotar worships.

6 These have passed all in glory, who, the manly, have wrought

with skill the hymn of adoration ;

7 Agni becomes the representative of the Sun, and in bis absence gives
light and other blessings to man. The sea above us : the ocean of air.

1 Like a strong courser : glorified with my praises, like a horse that has
been groomed and adorned. Or, perhaps, merely, rapid as a horse.^
measured motion : or, a speedy runner. S&yana explains the word mitadrufy
in this place as f consumer of trees/ but in IV. 6. 5 aa parimitagatih, 1 * 3 with

measured motion/

3 1 Both ...... Mothers ; Heaven and Earth,

It) tiYMkS OP \B'ObX rtu

Who, listening, have advanced the people’s welfare, and set
their thoughts on this my holy statute,

7 We,* the Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 Son of
Strength, the Lord of wealth and treasure.

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN VIII, Agni.

The King whose face is decked with oil is kindled with homage
offered by his faithful servant.

The men, the priests adore him with oblations. Agni hath
shone forth when the dawn is breaking.

2 Yea, he hath been acknowledged as most mighty, the joyous

Priest of men, the youthful Agni.

He, spreading o’er the earth, made light around him, and
grew among the plants with blackened fellies.

3 How dost thou decorate our hymn, 0 Agni ? What power

dost thou exert when thou art lauded ?

^When, Bounteous God, may we be lords of riches, winners of
precious wealth which none may conquer ?

4 Far famed is this the Bharata’s own Agni : he shineth like

the Sun with lofty splendour.

He who hath vanquished Puru in the battle, the heavenly
guest hath glowed in full refulgence.

5 r Full many oblations are in thee collected : with all thine
aspects thou hast waxen gracious.

Thou art already famed as praised and lauded, yet still, 0
nobly born, increase thy body.

6 Be this my song, that winneth countless treasure, engendered

with redoubled force for Agni,

That,, splendid, chasing sickness, slaying demons, it may
delight our friend and bless the singers.

7 We, the Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 Son of

Strength, the Lord of wealth and riches.

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

6 Who set their thoughts on this my holy statute : that is, apparently, who
duly observe the law which requires us to worship Agni. f Who are glorifiers
of this truthful (deity).’ — Wilson.

? With blackened fellies : leaving black tracks behind him: * d&rk-pathed.’ —
Wilson.

4 The Bharata ; Vasishtha, the purokita of the Bharatas. P&ru : the'

U /7 ° n ? ^ ive ,<f au Tribes) who opposed the Bharatas.
o Countless treasure: literally, hundreds, thousands. Our friend ,* the
institutor of the sacrifice.

10 .1

The jRiG YEbA.

IV

HYMN IX* Agni.

Boused from their bosom is the Dawns* beloved, th$ joyous
. Priest, most sapient, Purifier.

He gives a signal both to Gods and mortals, to Gods oblations,
riches to the pious.

2 Most wise is he who, forcing doors of Panis, brought the

bright Sun to us who feedeth many.

The cheerful Priest, men’s Friend and home-companion,
through stiil night’s darkness he is made apparent.

3 Wise, ne’er deceived, uncircvtmscribed, refulgent, our gracious

guest, a Friend with good attendants,

Shines forth with wondrous light before the ^Moraings : the
young plants hath he entered, Child of Waters.

4 Seeking our gatherings, he, your Jfttavedas, hath shone ador-

able through human ages,

Who gleams refulgent with his lovely lustre : the kine have
waked to meet him when enkindled.

5 Go on thy message to the Gods, and fail not, 0 Agni, with

their band who pray and worship.

Bring all the Gods that they may give us riches, SarasvatS,
the Marats, Asvins, Waters.

6 Vasishtha, when enkindling thee, 0 Agni, hath slain Jarfitha,

Give us wealth in plenty.

Sing praise in choral song, 0 Jatavedas. Ye Gods, preserve
us evermore with blessings.

HYMN X. Agni

He hath sent forth, bright, radiant, and refulgent, like the
Hawn’s Lover, his far-spreading lustre,
pure in his^ splendour shines the goLlen Hero : our longing
thoughts hath he aroused and wakened.

2 He, like the Sun, bath shone while Mora is breaking, and
priests who weave the .sacrifice sing praises,

Agni, the God, who knows their generations and visits Gods,
most bounteous, rapid envoy. #

The Dawns’ beJovkl : Agni, as lighted up at day-break. A signal ; of
sacrifice, which men are to offer and Gods are to receive.

6 Jariltha : see VII. t. 7, where the destruction of JarCithais ascribed to
Agni himself. Jarutha, said by S&yana to have been a R&kshasa or demon,
was probably au enemy who was slain in a battle at which Vasishtha was
present as purohita , — Ludwig.

1 Like the Dawn's Zqvw : the Sun. See I. 69. I.

2 And ’priests ; I adopt Sftyana’s interpretation of this half-line.

%4 MM am ns of [book vit

8 Our songs and holy hymns go forth to Agni, seeking the God
and asking him for riches,

Him f f air to see,- of goodly aspect, mighty, men’s messenger
who carries their oblations.

4 Joined with the Vasus,. Agni,* bring thou Indra, bring hither

Mighty Riidra With the fiudras*

Aditi good to all men with Adityas, Brihaspati All-bounteous,
with the Singers.

5 Men eagerly implore at sacrifices Agni, Most Youthful God,

the joyous Herald.

For he is Lord and Ruler over riches, and for Gods’ worship
an unwearied envoy.

HYMISr XI. Agm.

GueAt art thou, Agni, sacrifice’s Herald : not without thee are
deathless Gods made joyful.

/Pome hither with all Deities about thee : here take thy seat,
the first, as Priest, 0 Aghi.

2 Men With oblations evermore entreat thee, the swift, to under*

< take an envoy’s duty.

He on whose sacred "grass with Gods thou sittest, to him,
O Agni, are the days propitious.

3 Three times a day in thee are shown the treasures sent for
+ the mortal who presents oblation.

Bring the Gods hither like a man, 0 Agni : be thou our envoy,
guarding us from curses.

4 Lord of the lofty sacrifice is Agni, Agni is Lord of every gift

presented.

The Yasus were contented with his wisdom, so the Gods made
him their oblation-bearer. r

6 0 Agni, bring the Gods to taste our presents : with Indra
leading, here let them he joyful.

, Convey this sacrifice to Gods in heaven. Ye Gods, preserve
* us evermore with blessings.

4 Singers : or Rikvans, deities who attend and sing the praises of some
God : 1 the adorable (Angirasas).' — Wilson.

3 Three times a day : at the morning, the noon, and the evening libation.
Or the meaning may he, in the three fire -receptacles. Like a man : acting
like a human priest. The Commentators explain manushvdt by ‘ as ,(at the
sacrifice) of Mann/ *

IXYMX 11]

THE RIG VEDA*.

n

HYMN XII. Agni.

Wb with great reverence have approached The Youngest who
hath shone forth well-kindled in his dwelling,

With wondrous light between wid.e earth and heaven, well-
worshipped, looking forth in all directions.

2 Through his great might o’ercoming all misfortunes, praised

in the house is Agni J&ravedas.

May he protect us from disgrace and trouble, both us who
laud him and our noble patrons.

3 0 Agni, thou art Vanina and Mitra ; Vagishthas with their

holy hymns exalt thee.

With thee be most abundant gain of treasure. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings

HYMN XIII, Agni.

Bring song and hymn to Agni, Asuranslayer, enlightener of
all and thought-bestower*

Like an oblation on the grass, to please him, I bring thfs tq
Vaisvanara, by mn-inspirer.

2 Thou with thy flame, 0 Agni, brightly glowing, hast at thy

birth tilled full the earth and heaven.

Thou with thy might, Vaisvanara JAtavedas, settest the Gods
free from the curste that bound them.

3 Agni, when born, thou lookedst on all creatures, like brisk

herdsman moving round his cattle*

The path to prayer, Vaisvanara, thou fQ-qnd^t. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with bles.sings,

HYMN XIV, Agni,

With reverence and with offered gifts serve we the God whose
flame is bright :

Let us bring JAtavedas fuel, and adore Agni when we invoke
the Gods.

2 Agni, may we perform thy rites with fuel, and honour thee,
0 Holy One, with praises \

Honour thee, Priest of sacrifice ! with butter, thee, God of
blessed light ! with our oblation.

1 The Youngest [: Agni, roost) youthful pf the Gods, as being continually

reproduced. .

2 The curse that hound them: the Gods seem to have been subject to the
infirmities of old age until Ipdra, or, as is here said, Agni, freed them. See

JV. id. 2. ** * .' . .ii

u THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Tit*

3 Come, Agni, with the Gods to our invoking, come, pleased, to
offerings sanctified with Vashat.

May* we be his who pays thee, God, due honour. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XV. Agni,

Offer oblations in bis mouth, the bounteous God's whom we
must serve,

His who is nearest kin to us :

2 Who for the Fivefold People's sake hath seated him in every

home,

Wise, Youthful, Master of the house.

3 On all side^ may that Agni guard our household folk and

property ;

May he deliver us from woe.

4 I have begotten this new T hymn for Agni, Falcon of the sky :
Will he not give us of his wealth ?

5 ^Whose glories when he glows in front of sacrifice are fair

to see,

Like wealth of one with hero sons,

6 May he enjoy this hallowed gift, Agni accept our songs, who

bears

Oblations, best of worshippers,

7 Lord of the bouse, whom men must seek, we set thee down,
r 0 Worshipped One 1

Bright, rich in heroes, Agni ! God t

8 Shine forth at night and morn : through thee with fires are

we provided well.

Thou, rich in heroes, art our Friend.

9 The men come near thee for their gain, the singers with their

songs of praise :

Speech, thousandfold, comes near to thee.

10 Bright, Purifier, meet for praise, Immortal with refulgent

glow,

Agni drives B&kshasas away,

11 As such, bring us abundant wealth, young Child of Strength,

for this thou canst :

May Bhaga give us what is choice.

3 Sanctified with Vashat; Vashat (may He hear it to the Gods) is the
exclamation used at the moment of pouring the sacrificial oil or clarified
butter on the fire.

9 Speech : dhhar<i f the imperishable $ here speech. in the shape of praise
and prayer. ..."

THE RIG VET) A.

15

HYMN 16 ]

12 Tliou, Agni, givest hero fame ; Bhaga and Savitar the God,
And Diti give ns what is good.

1 3 Agni, preserve ns from distress ; consume our enemies, 0 God>
Eternal, with thy hottest flames,

14 And, irresistible, be thou a mighty iron fort to us.

With hundred walls for man's defence.

1 5 Do thou preserve us, eve and morn, from sorrow, from the

wicked men,

Infallible ! by day and night.

HYMN XVI. Agni.

With this my reverent hymn I call Agni for you, the Son of
Strength,

Dear, wisest envoy, served with noble sacrifice, immortal
messenger of all.

2 His two red horses, all-supporting, let him yoke : let him,

well-worshipped, urge them fast.

Then hath the sacrifice good prayers and happy end, s&i d
heavenly gift of wealth to men.

3 The flame of him the Bountiful, the Much-invoked, hath

mounted up,

And his red-coloured smoke-clouds reach and touch the sky :
the men are kindling Agni well.

4 Thee, thee Most Glorious One we make our messenger. Bring

the Gods hither to the feast.

Give us, 0 Son of Strength, all food that feedeth man ; give
that for which we pray to thee.

5 Thou, Agni, art the homestead's Lord, our Herald at the

sacrifice.

Lord of all l^pons, thou art the Cleanser and a Sage. Pay
worship, and enjoy the good.

6 Give riches to the sacrificer, 0 Most Wise, for thou art he

who granteth wealth.

Inspire with zeal each priest at this our solemn rite, all who
are skilled in singing praise.

7 0 Agni who art worshipped well, dear let our princes be to thee,
Our" wealthy patrons who are governors of men, who part, as

gifts, their stalls of kine.

12 Eiti : generally regarded as the opposite, of Adifci, which may have been
tlie word used by the poet, changed by later reciters, who considered the
metre irregular, into Diti. See Vedic Hymns f L p. 2 56.

5 Herald ; Solar , or invoking priest. Cleanser : Tatar , or purifier, another
of the officiating priests. Agni performs the duties of all human prieata.

16 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Til

,8 They in whose home, her hand bearing the sacred oil, I3a sits
down well-satisfied —

, Ouard them, Victorious God, from slander and from harm :
giye us a refuge famed afar.

9 Do thou, a Priest with pleasant tongue,, most wise, and very
near to us, %

Agni, bring riches hither to our liberal chiefs, and speed' the
offering of our gifts.

JO They who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of steeds, moved
by desire of great renown —

Do thou with saving help preserve them from distress, Most
Youthfu 1 ! with a hundred forts.

11 The God who gives your wealth demands a full libation poured

to him.

Pour ye it forth, then fill the vessel full again : then doth the
God pay heed to you.

12 Him have the Gods appointed Priest of sacrifice, oblation-
v bearer, passing wise.

Agni gives wealth and valour to the worshipper, to folk who
pffer up their gifts.

HYMH XVII. Agni.

Agni, be kindled well with proper 4uel, and let the grass be
Spattered wide about thee.

2 Let the impatient Portals he thrown open : bring thou the

Gods impatient to come hither.

3 Taste, Agni : serve the Gods with our oblation. Offer good

sacrifices, Jtevedas !

4 Let Jatavedas pay fair sacrifices, worship and gratify the

Gods Immortal. *

5 Wise God, win for us things that are all-goodly, and let the

prayers we pray to-day he fruitful.

6 Thee, eyep thee, the Bon of Strength, 0 Agni, those Gods

haye made the bearer of oblations.

7 To thee the God may we perform our worship ; do thou,

besought, grant ns abundant riches.

8 ltd : the Goddess who is regarded as the sacrificial food or oblation per-
sonified : annaritpd hamrlakshand devt — S&yana.

■2 The impatient Portals ; the doors of the sacrificial chamber which long
to bear their part in the holy ceremony, °

6 Those Oods ; the famous Gods.

EYMN 18.]

TEE RIG VEDA,

V

HYMN XVIII. lad**.

All is with, thee, 0 Indra, all the treasures which erst our
fathers won who sang thy praises.

With thee are milch-kine good to milk, and horses : best win-
ner thou of riches for the pious.

2 For like, a King among his wives thou dwellest : with glories,

as a Sage, surround and help us.

Make us, thy servants, strong for wealth, and honour our
songs with kine and steeds and decoration.

3 Here these our holy hymns with joy and gladness in pious

emulation have approached thee.

Hitherward come thy path that leads to richer: may we find
shelter in thy favour, Indra.

4 Vasishthahath poured forth his prayers, desiring to milk thee

like a cow in goodly pasture.

All these my people call thee Lord of cattle : may Indra come
unto the prayer we offer.

5 What though the foods spread widely, Indra made them

shallow and easy for Sudas to traverse.

He, worthy of our praises, caused the Sirnyu, foe of our hymn,
to curse the rivers 7 fury.

6 Eager for spoil was Turyasa Purod&s, fain to win wealth, like

fishes urged by hunger.

The Bhrigus and the JDruhyus quickly listened : friend rescued
friend mid the two distant peoples.

The hymn glorifies Indra as the protector of Sud&s, the King of the Tritsus,
and praises the liberality of that prince. See Vedic India (Story of the
Jfatious Series), pp. 319—332.

4 Vasishtha : the Rishi of the hymn, and the chief priest who had
accompanied the 'yarlike expedition of Sudas. To milk thee: to obtain
riche3 through thy favour by means of my hymn, as men milk the cow at
sacrifice for the milk which is required for libations.

5 The poet begins to recount the events of Sud^s's victorious expedition.
These are not always intelligible partly on account of the obscure phraseology
employed, and partly on account of our ignorance of details which are vaguely
alluded to. In this stanza Sud&s, king or chief of the Tritsu tribe, has, with
the aid of Indra, crossed a deep river (the Parasha which is now called the
Rdvt), and put the Simyus to flight, some of the fugitives being drowned in
its waters. The Simyus are mentioned together with the Dasyus, in I. 1 90.
3-8, as hostile barb.irians slain by Indra. The second half of the stanza is
difficult, the meaning of two of the words being uncertain.

6 Tarvasa PurodU : Turvasa appears here as one of the enemies of Sud&s,
I follow, with mueii hesitation, Ludwig in taking Purod&a as an appellative of
Turvasa: f Turvasa, who was preceding (at solemn rites).’— Wilson. . The
fihrigus and the JDruhyus: here, apparently, allies of Turvasa. Fishes :
according to others, Matsyas, a people.

2

18 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH' VIL

7 Together came the Pakthas, the Bhal&nas, the Alinas, the

Sivas, the VisMnins.

Yet to the Tritsus came the Arya’s Comrade, through love of
spoil and heroes 5 war, to lead them.

8 Fools, in their, folly fain to waste her waters, they parted in-

exhaustible Parushni.

Lord of the Earth, he with his might repressed them : still lay
the herd and the affrighted herdsman.

9 As to their goal they sped to their destruction : they sought

Parushni ; e’en the swift returned not.

Indra abandoned, to Sudas the manly, the swiftly flying foes,
unmanly babblers.

10 They went like kine unherded from the pasture, each cling-

ing to a friend as chance directed.

They who drive spotted steeds, sent down by Prism, gave
^ ear, the Warriors and the harnessed horses.

11 The King who scattered one-and-twenty people of both

Yaikarna tribes through lust of glory —

As the skilled priest clips grass within the chamber, so hath
the Hero Indra wrought their downfall.

7 The Pakthas , and the rest mentioned in the first line of the stanza
Cppear to have been non- Aryan tribes opposed to the Tritsus. According to
the Scholiast these names are the denominations of various ministers at
religious rites, and following this interpretation Wilson translates the stanza
as follows : ‘Those who dress the oblation, those who pronounce auspicious
words, those who abstain from penance, those who bear horns (in their hands),
those who bestow happiness (on the^world by sacrifice), glorify that Indra
who recovered the cattle^ of the Ary a from the plunderers, who slew the
enemies in battle.’ The Aryu's Comrade ; Indra, the aHy of Tritsu against
the non- Aryan confederacy.

8 The confederates, who were on the right or farther bank of the Parushni,
intending to attack Sudds and the Tritsus, appear to have attempted to make
the river fordable by digging channels and so diverting the water, which, it
se^ms, rushed buck into its natural bed and drowned the men who were cross-
ing the stream. The second line of the stanza is obscure and the translation
is conjectural. Wilson translates: ‘but he by his greatness pervades the
earth, Kavi, the sou of Chayamdna, like a falling victim, sleeps (in death).*
The herd and the herdsman are, of course, the hostile band and its leader.

10 They went: the fugitives who escaped drowning. They who drive spotted
steeds : the Miaruts, sent down by their mother Prism to aid Sudds.

11 People: or. houses, i. e. families. Both Vaikarna tribes : perhaps some
allies of the Druhyus ; but the meaning of vaikurnuyoh is uncertain. See
Zimmer, Altindisekes Lehen , p. 103. Ludwig thinks that the reference is to
a' mythic battle at some place called Vaikarnau between Indra (the King)
and the Maruts (the one -and -twenty people). Clips grass : with one clean cut.

fTYMN 18.] THE RIG VEDA. 19

12 Thou, thunder-armed, o'erwhelmedst in the waters famed

ancient Kavaslia and then the Druhyu.

Others here claiming friendship to their friendship, devoted
unto thee, in thee were joyful.

13 Indra at once with conquering might demolished all their

strong places and their seven castles.

The goods of Ann's son he gave to Tritsu. May we in sacrifice
conquer scornful Puru.

14 The Anavas and Druhyus, seeking booty, have slept, the sixty

hundred, yea, six thousand,

And six-and-sixty heroes. For the pious were all these mighty
exploits done by Indra. p

15 These Tritsus under Indra's careful guidance came speeding

like loosed waters rushing downward.

The foemen, measuring exceeding closely, abandoned to Slides
all their provisions.

16 The hero's side who drank the dressed oblation, Indra's denser,

far o'er earth he scattered.

Indra brought down the fierce destroyer's fury. He gave
them various roads, the path's Controller.

17 E'en with the weak he wrought this matchless exploit: e'en
with a goat he did to death a lion.

He pared the pillar^ angles with a needle. Thus to Sud&s
Indra gave all provisions. 0

12 Kavaslia : perhaps the priest of one of the two Vaikarna tribes which

Zimmer is inclined to identify with the Kuru-Krivis. See Altindisches Lehen,
p, 127. Others here: ‘for they, Indra, Who are devoted to thee and glorify
thee, preferring thy friendship, enjoy it.’— Wilson. The exact meaning is
uncertain. «■*

13 To Tritsu ; to Sudds, the King of the Tritsus.

14 The Anavas : men of the Anu tribe. The sixty hundred: ‘ The enu-
meration is very obBC'r' 1 - *r : 7 \ said shat sahasrd shashtir adhi

shat, literally, sixty'.;' ' i :!■ ■ , sixty, with six more; S&yaua

understands by satdni , thousands, s«hasrdnUyarthah ' — Wilson. * * Sixty-
six thousand six hundred and six.’ .Ludwig suggests that dasd should be read
instead of satfl, which would make the number 6666. See Benfey, Vedica
und Linguistic a, pp. 139 — 162.

15 Measuring exceeding closely : though taking great care of their goods
and reluctantly giving them up.

16 The hero's side : the party of the hostile leader, the non- Aryans who
denied Indra, and themselves devoured the oblations that should have been
presented to him. He gave them various roads: made them fly in all direc-
tions.

17 E'en with a goat: impossible deeds mentioned as illustrations of Indra’s
miraculous power.

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOH VI &

18 To thee have all thine enemies submitted : e'en the fierce

Bheda hast thou made thy subject.

Cast down thy sharpened thunderbolt, 0 Indra, on him who
harms the men who sing, thy praises.

19 Yamuna and the Tritsus aided Indra. There he stripped

Bheda bare of all his treasures.

The Ajas and the Sigrus and the Yakshus brought in to him
as tribute heads of horses.

20 Not to be scorned, but like Dawns past and recent, 0 Indra,

are thy favours and thy riches.

Devaka, Manyamana’s son, thou slewest, and smotest Sambarn
from the lofty mountain.

21 They who, from home, have gladdened thee, thy servants

Barbara, Vasishtba, Satay&tu,

Will not forget thy friendship, liberal Giver. So shall the
days dawn prosperous for the princes.

22 JPriest-like, with praise, I rnoYO around the altar, earning

Paijavana’s reward, 0 Agni,

Two hundred cows from Devav&n’s descendant, two chariots
from Sudas with mares to draw them.
g3 Gift of Paijavana, four horses bear me in foremost place,
trained steeds with pearl to deck them.

Sudd’s brown steeds, firmly-stepping, carry me and my sou
* far progeny and glory.

24 Him whose fame spreads between wide earth and heaven, who,
as dispenser, gives each chief his portion,

Seven flowing Rivers glorify like Indra. He slew Yudhy^
madhi in close encounter.

18 Bheda : an enemy of Sudds, or an unbeliever, says Sd^ina.

19 Yamund: the Jumna. Uui it is nqt easy to see bow the expedition
reached so far. The iVj as 3 Sflgrus, and Yakshus were perhaps subject to Bheda,
but nothing is known regarding them. Heads of horses •' which had been
killed in battle.

20 Like Dawns : renewed every day. Devaka : not mentioned elsewhere.
According to Grassrqann devakatn mdnyamdndm refers to SUmbara, * thinking
himself a God/

21 Pard%ara is said by one authority to have been the son, and by another the
grandson of the lvishi Vasishtha. S itaydtu is said to be Sakti, Yusjshtha’sson.

22 Here begins the ddnastuti or praise qf the prince’s liberality/ Paija-
vana : Sudds, descendant of Pijavana. Devavfin’s descendant : Sudds, Deva-
vdn being either the same as Divoddsa, tfle father of Sudds or one of his
forefathers.

24 Seven flowing Rivers glorify: the seven chief rivers of the Panjdb
glorify him as they glorify Indra. Or, they (men) praise him as the seven
rivers praise Indra. < The seven rivers bear his glory far and wide’ (I. 102-2).
Yudhydmidld: not mentioned elsewhere.

HYMN 19.] THE ktGVMDA. 21

25 Attend on him. 0 ye heroic Maruts as on Sud&s’s father
Divodslsa.

further Paijavana’s desire with favour. Guard faithfully
his lasting firm dominion.

HYMN XIX. Indra,

He like a hull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly excites
and agitates all the people :

Thou givest him who largely pours libations his goods who
pours not, for his own possession.

£ Thou, verily, Indra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly giving
ear to him in battle,

When, aiding Arjuneya, thou subduedst to him both Kuyava
and the Dasa Sushna.

$ 0 Bold One, thou with all thine aids hast boldly holpen Sud&s
whose offerings "Were accepted,

Puru in winning land and slaying foemen, and Trasadasyu
son of PuriikiitSa. ?

4 At the Gods’ banquet, hero-souled ! with Heroes, Lord of Bay

Steeds, thou slowest many foemen.

Thou sentest in swift death to sleep the Dasyu, both Chumuri
and Dhuni, for Dabhiti.

5 These were thy mighty powers that, Thunder-wielder, thou

swiftly crushedst nine-and-ninety castles :

Thou capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught ; thou
slewest Namuchi, thou slowest Vritra.

6 Old are the blessings, Indra, which thou gavest Sudas the

worshipper who brought oblations.

For thee, the Strong, I yoke thy strong Bay Horses : may our
prayers reach thee and win strength) Most Mighty !

7 Give us not up, Lord of Bay Horses, Victor, in this thine own

assembly, to the wicked.

Deliver us with true and faithful succours : dear may we be
to thee among the princes. .

25 Maruts : here, perhaps, the MV'V-vv’ ■■ > -r-'^hy nobles are intended

who stand in the same relation to i i - to Indra.

1 Excites and agitates : as God of battles. Thou : Indra. This abrupt
change from the third person -to the Second is nob unusual iu the Veda.

2 Arjuneya : Kutsa, descendant of Arjuna, See I. 112. 23. Kuyava: See

I. 103. 8.

4 For Chumuri , Dhani, and Dabhiti , see Vol. I. Index.

5 Namuchi : another demon of drought. See I. 53. 7. In thine onslaught ;

according to S&yana, for thy dwelling : 1 2 * 4 5 6 thou hast occupied the hundredth

as a place of abode.’ — Wilson.

6 Sudds ; the King of the Tritsus, celebrated in the preceding hymn,

22 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII

8 May we men, Ma glia van, the friends thou lovest, near thee be

joyful under thy protection.

Fain to fulfil the wish of Atithigva humble the pride of Tur-
vasa and Yadva.

9 Swiftly, in truth, 0 Maghavan, about thee men skilled in

hymning sing their songs and praises.

Elect us also into their assembly who by their calls on thee
despoiled the niggards.

10 Thine are these lauds, 0 manliest of heroes, lauds which

revert to us and give us riches.

Favour these, Indra, when they fight with foemen, as Friend
and Hero and the heroes’ Helper.

1 1 Now, lauded for thine aid, Heroic Indra, sped by our prayer,

wax mighty in thy body.

Apportion to us strength and habitations. Ye Gods, protect us
evermore with blessings.

HYMN XX. Indra.

Strong, Godly-natured, bom for hero exploit, man’s Friend,
he doth whatever deed he willeth.

Saving us e’en from great transgression, Indra, the Youthful,
visiteth man’s home with favour.

2 Waxing in greatness Indra slayeth Yritra : the Hero with his

aid hath helped the singer. *

r He gave Sudas wide room and space, and often hath granted
wealth to him who brought oblations.

3 Soldier unchecked, war-rousing, battling Hero, unconquered

from of old, victorious ever,

Indra the very strong hath scattered armies ; yea, he hath
slain each foe who fought against him.

4 Thou with thy greatness hast filled full, 0 Ifidra, even both

the worlds with might, 0 thou Most Mighty.

Lord of Bays, Indra, brandishing his thunder, is gratified with
Soma at the banquet.

5 A Bull begat the Bull for joy of battle, and a strong Mother

brought forth him the manly.

8 A tiihigm : probably a descendant of SucMs who must have lived long
before the composition of this hymn, as the favour bestowed upon him by
Indra is spoken of as old in stanza 6 . Yddva : or Yadu’s son.

9 Elect us also : that is, let us share the blessings which thou withholdesfc
from the illiberal churls who offer no oblations and gives b to those who call
upon thee and worship thee.

5 /I Bull begat the Bull: * A vigorous (god ) begot a vigorous (son)/ — Muir.
The father of Indra is Kasyapa, according to Sdyana ; hut probably Dyaus is
intended. A strong Mother : Aditi. .

HYMN 21.]

THE RIG VEDA.

23

He who is Chief of men, their armies’ Leader, is a strong Hero,
bold, and fain for booty.

6 The people falter not, nor suffer sorrow, who win themselves

this God’s terrific spirit.

He who with sacrifices worships Indra is lord of wealth, law-
born and law’s protector.

7 Whene’er the elder fain would help the younger, the greater

cometh to the lesser’s present.

Shall the Immortal sit aloof inactive ? 0 Wondrous Indra,
bring us wondrous riches.

8 Thy dear folk, Indra, who present oblations, are, in chief

place, thy friends, 0 Thunder-wielder. *

May we be best content in this thy favour, sheltered by One
who slays not, but preserves us.

9 To thee the mighty hymn hath clamoured loudly, and,

Maghavan, the eloquent hath besought thee.

Desire of wealth hath come upon thy singer : help us then,
Sakra, to our share of riches. r

10 Place us by food which thou hast given, O Indra, us and the
wealthy patrons who command us.

Let thy great power bring good to him who lauds thee. Ye
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

* HYMN XXI. Indra.

Pressed is the juice divine with milk commingled: thereto
hath Indra ever been accustomed.

We wake thee. Lord of Bays, with sacrifices : mark this our
laud in the wild joy of Soma.

2 On to the rite they move, the grass they scatter, these Soma-
drinkers eloquent in synod.

Hither, for men to grasp, are brought the press-stones, far-thun-
dering, famous, strong, that wait on heroes.

6 Law-born : born in accordance with the law.

7 The relations between Gods and men resemble those between elders and
juniors, superiors and inferiors among men. The inferior comes to his superior
with some offering in his hand and is assisted by him in return. So Indra
should accept our oblations, and reward us with wealth.

9 The eloquent : stfimtik ; according to Ludwig, the Greek <rr(0/iiv\o q
(from (TTOjUta } mouth), mouthy, talkative, and, in a good sense, fluent, eloquent.
The Commentators explain the word as c praiser.’

1 We ivahe thee : or, we think of thee, serve thee.

U THE HYMtfS OF [BOOH fit

3 Indra, thou setteat free the many waters that were encompassed,

Hero, by the Dragon.

Down rolled, as if on chariots boi*ne, the river's i through fear*
of thee all things created tremble.

4 Skilled in all manly deeds the God terrific hath with his

weapons mastered these opponents.

Indra in rapturous joy shook down their castles : h© slew
them in his might, the Thunder-wielder.

5 No evil spirits have impelled us, Indra, nor fiends, 0 Mightiest

God, with their devices.

Let our true God subdue the hostile rabble : let not the lewd
approach5our holy worship.

6 Thou in thy strength surpassest Enrth and Heaven: the

regions comprehend not all thy greatness.

With thine own power and might thou slewest Vritra : no foe
hath found the end of thee in battle.

7 r Even the earlier Deities submitted their powers to thy supreme
divine dominion.

Indra wins wealth and deals it out to others ; men in the strife
for booty call on Indra.

8 The humble hath invoked thee for protection, thee, Lord of

great felicity, 0 Indra.

Thou with a hundred aids hast been oifr Helper : one who brings
„ gifts like thee hath his defender.

9 May we, 0 Indra, be thy friends for ever, eagerly, Conqueror,

yielding greater homage.

May, through thy grace, the strength of us who battle quell
in the shock the onset of the foeman.

10 Place us by food which thou hast given, 0 Indra, us and the
wealthy patrons who command us. *

Let thy great power bring good to him who lauds thee. Ye
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XXII. Indra ,

Drink Soma, Lord of Bays, and let it cheer thee : Indra, the
stone, like a well guided courser,

Directed by the presser’s arms hath pressed it.

4 These opponents : according to S&yana, the demons of the air. The text
baa no noun for c these/

5 The lewd : those who 'do not follow Vedie observances, according to
Y&ska. For a full discussion of the meaning of aisnddevdh see Muir, 0 . S.
Texts , IV. 406 — 411.

8 One who * brings gifts like thee: S&yana interprets differently: 'be our
defender against every overpowering (assailant) like to thee/ — Wilson.

THE R1GVEDA.

25

Mi fMN 23.]

2 So let the draught of joy, tby dear companion, by which, 0

Lord of Bays, thou slayest foemen,
t)elight thee, Indra, Lord of princely treasures.

3 Mark closely, Maghavan, the words I utter, this eulogy

incited by Vasishtha ;

Accept the prayers I offer at thy banquet.

4 Hear thou the call of the juice-drinking press-stone : hear thou

the Brahman’s hymn who sings and lauds thee.

Take to thine inmost self these adorations.

8 I know and ne’er forget the hymns and praises of thee, the
Conqueror, and thy strength immortal.

Thy name I ever utter, Self-Refulgent !

6 Among mankind many are thy libations, and many a time the

pious sage invokes thee.

0 Maghavan, be not long distant from us.

7 All these libations are for thee, 0 Hero : to thee I offer these

my prayers that strengthen. *”

Ever, in every place, must men invoke thee.

8 Never do men attain, 0 Wonder-Worker, thy greatness, Mighty

One, who must be lauded,

Nor, Indra, thine heroic power and bounty.

9 Among all Rishis, In^ra, old and recent, who have engender-

ed hymns as sacred singers,

Even with us be thine auspicious friendships. Ye God$
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XXIII. Indra.

Prayers have been offered up through love of glory : Vasishtha,
honour In<jja in the battle.

He who with might extends through all existence hears words
which I, his faithful servant, utter.

2 A cry was raised which reached the Gods, O Indra, a cry to

them to send us strength in combat.

None among men knows his own life's duration : bear us in
safety over these our troubles.

3 The Rays, the booty-seeking car I harness ; my prayers have

reached him who accepts them gladly.

4 Juice-dr inking : that presses out the juice of the plant, and so may be
said to drink it. The Scholiast inserts mama, of me : 4 Hear the invocation o’f
the (grinding) stone (of me) repeatedly drinking (the Soma).'— Wilson.

2 A cry was raised : I follow Pischel’s interpretation of this very difficult
stanza. See Vedische JStudien , I. pp. 34 — 36.

26 THE HYUM OF [BOOK Vlt

Indra, when he had slain resistless foemen, forced with his
might the two world-halves asunder.

4 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters : the singers

sought thy holy rite, 0 Indra.

Come unto us as with his team comes V&yu : thou, through
our solemn hymns bestowest booty.

5 So may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee, Indra, the

Mighty, very bounteous to the singer.

Alone among the Gods thou pitiest mortals ; 0 Hero, make
thee glad at this libation.

6 Thus the Vasishthas glorify with praises Indi'a the Powerful

whose asm wields thunder.

Praised, may he guard our wealth in kine and heroes. Ye
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYNM XXI Y. Indra.

A home is made for thee to dwell in, Indra : 0 Much -invoked,
r go thither with the heroes.

That thou, to prosper us, mayst be our Helper, vouchsafe us
wealth, rejoice with draughts of Soma.

2 Indra, thy wish, twice-strong, is comprehended : pressed is
the Soma, poured are pleasant juices.

This hymn of praise, from loosened tongue, made perfect,
draws Indra to itself with loud invoking.

^ 3 Come, thou Impetuous God, from earth or heaven come to our
holy grass to drink the Soma.

Hither to me let thy Bay Horses bring thee to listen to our
hymns and make thee joyful.

4 Come unto us with all thine aids, accordant, Lord of Bay

Steeds, accepting our devotions,

Fair-helmeted, overcoming with the mightyf and lending us
the strength of hulls, 0 Indra.

5 A.s to the chariot pole a vigorous courser, this laud is brought

to the great strong Upholder.

This hymn solicits wealth of thee : in heaven, as 7 twere above
the sky, set thou our glory.

6 With precious things. 0 Indra, thus content us: may we attain

to thine exalted favour. *

Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Preservo
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

4 Barren cows ; which are fatter than others.

1 A home : in the sacrificial chamber. Heroes : or, men ; the priests.
4 Fair-hclmctecl ; or fair-checked, or handsome* chinned.

mV 23.]

THE RtGVEEA.

27

HYMN XXV. Indra.

Whek with thy mighty help, 0 potent Indra, the armies rush
together in their fury,

When from the strong man’s arm the lightning flieth, let not
thy mind go forth to side with others.

2 0 Indra, where the ground is hard to traverse, smite down

our foes, the mortals who assail us.

Keep far from us the curse of the reviler : bring us accumulat-
ed store of treasures.

3 God of the fair helm, give Sudas a hundred succours, a

thousand blessings, and thy bounty.

Strike down the weapon of our mortal foeman*: bestow upon
us splendid fame and riches.

4 I wait the power of one like thee, 0 Indra, gifts of a Helper

such as thou art, Hero.

Strong, Mighty God, dwell with me now and ever : Lord of
Bay Horses, do not thou desert us. f

5 Here are the Kutsas supplicating Indra for might, the Lord

• of Bays for God-sent conquest.

Make our foes ever easy to he vanquished : may we, victorious,
win the spoil, 0 Hero.

6 With precious things, 0 Indra, thus content us : may we

attain to thine exaltbd favour.

Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXYI. Indra.

Soma unpressed ne’er gladdened liberal Indra, no juices
pressed without a prayer have pleased him.

I generate a laud that shall delight him, new and heroic,
so that he*may hear us.

2 At every laud the Soma gladdens Indra : pressed juices please

him as each psalm is chanted,

What time the priests with one united effort call him to aid,
as sons invoke their father.

3 These deeds he did; let him achieve new exploits, such as the

priests declare at their libations.

The battle has begun, and the singer prays to Indra for aid.

1 The lightning : the swift and flashing arrow. Others : the enemy.

3 Sudds ; according to S&yana, 4 the liberal donor (of oblations).’ — Wilson.
The Kutsas ; apparently the priests of the hostile party.

1 Soma wipressed: cp. VI. 41. 4, Soma when (properly) pressed excels the
impressed («»r ill-pressed) Soma. Xot only must the juice be duly expressed,
but it must be expressed and offered with prayer.

23 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YIL

Indra hath taken and possessed all castles, like as one com-
mon husband doth his spouses.

4 Even thus have they declared him. Famed is Indra as Con-

queror, sole distributer of treasures ;

Whose many succours come in close succession. May dear
delightful benefits attend us;

5 ThuSj to bring help to men, Vasishtha laudeth Indra, tliO

peoples’ Hero, at libation.

Bestow upon us strength and Wealth in thousands* Preserve
us evermore, ye Grodsj with blessings*

» HYMN XXVII. Indra.

Men call on Indra in the armed encounter that he may make
the hymns they sing decisive.

Hero, rejoicing in thy might* in combat gWe US a portion of
the stall of cattle.

<*2 Grant, Indra Maghavan, invoked of many, to these my friends
the strength which thou possessest.

Thou, Maghavan, hast rent strong places open : unclose for
us, Wise God, thy hidden bounty.

3 King of the living world, of men, is Indra, of all in varied

form that earth contain eth.

Thence to the worshipper he givethT riches : may he enrich US
** also when we laud him.

4 Maghavan Indra, when we all invoke him, bountiful ever

sendeth strength to aid us : „

Whose perfect guerdon, never failing, bringeth wealth to the
men, to friends the thing they covet.

5 Quick, Indra, give us TOom and way to jpehes, and let us

bring thy mind to grant us treasures,

That we may win us cars and steeds and cattle. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXVIII. Indra.

Cowe to our prayers, 0 Indra, thou who knowest : let thy
Bay Steeds be yoked and guided hither.

Though mortal men on every side invoke thee, still give thine
ear to us, 0 All-impeller.

3 All castles : all the strongholds of the demons of drought, the cloud-cas-
tles in which the rain is imprisoned.

1 Give us a portion , etc : aid us to capture and carry off the cattle of the
enemy.

HYMN 29,}

THE RIG VEDA.

2 &

2 Thy greatness reacheth to our invocation, the sages’ prayer
•which, Potent God. thou guardest.

What time thy hand, 0 Mighty, holds the thunder, awful in
strength thou hast become resistless.

5 What time thou drewest both world-halves together, like

heroes led by thee who call each other —

For thou wast bom for strength and high dominion — then
e’en the active overthrew the sluggish.

4 Honour us in these present days, 0 Indra, for hostile men are
making expiation.

Our sin that sinless Varum discovered, the Wondrous-Wise
hath long ago forgiven. T

6 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that he may

grant us gifts of ample riches,

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXIX.

This Soma bath been pressed for thee, 0 Indra : come hither,
Lord of Bays, for this thou lovest.

Prink of this fair, this well-effused libation : Maghavan, give
us wealth when we implore thee.

2 Come to us quickly with thy Bay Steeds, Hero, come to our

prayer, accepting our devotion. ^

Enjoy thyself aright at this libation, and listen thou unto the
prayers we offer.

3 What satisfaction do our hymns afford thee ? When, Magha-

yan? Now let us do thee service.

Hymns, only hymns, with love for thee, I weave thpe : then
hear, O Jndra, these nxine invocations.

2 Thy greatness reacheth to opr invocation : thou hast the power to dome
to our call if thou wilt.

3 1 Drewest both world-halves together : settest heaven and earth opposite to
each other, like armies arrayed for battle. E'en the active : the meaning of
the half-line is doubtful, and chit, even, seems to be out of place. Wilson
translates, after S&yana : ‘ whence the presenter of offerings overcomes him
who offers them not/ According to Professor Grassmann, 1 the active’ is Indra,
and ‘ the inactiye ’ is the sluggish demon. Ludwig suggests an alteration of
the text.

4 Are rooking expiation : or, possibly, set themselves in order, that is,
equip and prepare themselves for battle. The Wondrous-Wise ; mdy%; Yaruna,

3 Novo let us do thee service ; nUndm ; c no time like the present/ — Ludwig.

30 THE HYMNS OF « [BOOK VII *

4 They, verily, were also human beings whom thou wast wont

to hear, those earlier sages.

Hence I, 0 Indra Maghavan, invoke thee : thou afrfc our Pro-
vidence, even as a Father. 4

5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that he may-

grant us gifts of ample riches,

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXX. Indra.

With power and strength, 0 Mighty God, approach us : be
the augmenter, Indra, of these riches ;

Strong Thunderer, Lord of men, for po'tent valour, for manly
exploit and for high dominion.

2 Thee, worth invoking, in the din of battle, heroes invoke in,

fray for life and sunlight. * *

Among all people thou art foremost fighter : give up our
* enemies to easy slaughter.

3 When fair bright days shall dawn on us, 0 Indra, and thou

shalt bring thy banner near in battle,

Agni the Asura shall sit as Herald, calling Gods hither for
our great good fortune.

4 Tnine are we, Indra, thine, both tl^ese who praise thee, and

those v\ ho give rich gifts, 0 God and Hero.
c Grant to our princes excellent protection : may they wax old
and still be strong and happy.

5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that he may .

grant us gifts of ample riches,

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. #

HYMN XXXI. ■ '' i ndra .

Sing ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, Lord of Tawny
Steeds,

The*Soraa-drinker, 0 my friends.

2 To him the Bounteous say the laud, and let us glorify, as men

May do, the Giver of true gifts.

3 0 Indra, Lord of boundless might, for us thou winnest strength

and kine,

Thou winnest gold for us, Good Lord.

1 For potent valour : that is, to give us potent valour. 54

2 Foremost fighter : caster of the spear, warrior, according to von Both •

hut the meaning of sinyah is somewhat uncertain. ° P

HYMN 32.]

TEE RIG VEDA .

31

4 Faithful to thee we loudly sing, heroic Indra, songs to thee :
Mark, 0 Good Lord, this act of ours.

5 Give us not up to man’s reproach, to foeman’s hateful calumny :
In thee alone is all my strength.

6 Thou art mine ample coat of mail, my Champion, Vritra-slayer,

thou :

With thee for Friend I brave the foe.

7 Yea, great art thou whose conquering might two independent

Powers confess,

The Heaven, 0 Indra, and the Earth.

8 So let the voice Surround thee, which attends t^he Maruts on

their way,

Peaching thee with the rays of light.

9 Let the ascending drops attain to thee, the Wondrous God, in

heaven : 4

Let all the folk bow down to thee.

10 Bring to the Wise, the Great, who waxeth mighty, yotir offer-

ings, and make ready your devotion :

To many clans he goeth, man’s Controller.

11 For Indra, the sublime, the far-pervading, have singers gener-

ated prayer and praises :

The sages never violatq his statutes.

12 The choirs have stablished Indra King for ever, for victory,

him whose anger is resistless :

And, for the* Bays’ Lord, strengthened those he loveth.

HYMN XXXII. l ndra .

Let none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us.
Ev^n from fan away come thou unto our feast, or listen if al-
ready here.

2 For here, like flies on honey, these who pray to thee sit by the
juice that thfey have poured.

Wealth-craving singers have on Indra set their hope, as men
set foot upon a car.

7 Independent : svadhctvart ; ‘abounding in food.’ — Wilson.

8 The voice : ‘the praises of thine adorers/ — Wilson.

12 Strengthened : 1 barhay& : for abarhayan, as is^ clear from what pre-
cedes/ — Ludwig. S&yana takes barhayd as the imperative ; ‘ urge thy kinsmen,
(worshipper, to glorify) the lord of bay steeds/ — Wilson.

I am indebted to Max Mhller’s translation of this hymn in his Ancient
Sanskrit Literature for many of the renderings which I have adopted.

TEE EYMNS OF [ BOOK VII .

3 Longing for wealth I call on him, the Thunderer with the

strong right hand,

As a son calleth on his sire.

4 These Soma juices, mixed with curd, have been expressed for

Indra here.

Come with thy Bay Steeds, Thunder-wielder, to our home, to
drink them till they make thee glad.

5 May he whose ear is open hear us. He is asked for wealth :

will he despise our prayer ?

Him who bestows at once a hundred thousand gifts none shall
restrain when he would give.

6 The hero rt never checked by men hath gained his strength

through Indra, he

Who presses out and pours his deep libations forth, 0 Vritra-
. slayer, unto thee.

7 When thou dost drive the fighting men together be, thou

Mighty One, the mighty’s shield.

May we divide the wealth of him whom thou hast slain ; bring
us, Unreachable, liis goods.

8 For Indra, Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press the Soma

juice.

Make ready your dressed meats : cause him to favour us. The
Giver blesses him who gives, *

~ 9 Grudge not, ye Soma-pourers ; stir you, pay the rites, for
wealth, to the great Conqueror*

Only the active conquers, dwells in peace, and thrives : not for
the niggard are the Gods.

10 No one hath overturned or stayed the car of him who freely gives,
The man whom Indra and the Marut host defend comes to a

stable full of kine.

11 Indra, that man when fighting shall obtain the spoil, whose

strong defender thou wilt be.

Be thou the gracious helper, Hero 1 of our cars, be thou the
helper of our men.

12 His portion is exceeding great like a victorious soldier’s spoil.
Him who is Indra, Lord of Bays, no foes subdue, He gives

the Soma-pourer strength.

3 With the strong right hand : or, giver of good gifts.

7 The mighty's shield: 1 the shield of the mighty (Vasishthas).’ — M. M. j
‘a protection of the Maghavans,’ i. e. the institutes of the sacrifice,— Ludwig.

8 The Giver blesses him who gives : Indra rewards the liberal worshipper.

10 Gomes to a stable full of kine : carries off rich booty.

HYMN 32.] THE RIG VEDA. 33 ?

IB Make for the Holy Gods a hymn that is not mean, but wefl^
arranged and fair of form.

Even many snares and bonds subdue not him who dwells with
Indra through his sacrifice.

14 ■ Indra, what mortal will attack the man who hath his wealth*

in thee f

The strong will win the spoil on the decisive day through faith
in thee, 0 Maghavan.

15 In battles with the foe urge on our mighty ones who give the*

treasures dear to thee, . ,

And may we with our princes, Lord of Tawny Steeds ! pass
through all peril, led by thee. *

16 Thine, Indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest the mid-~

most wealth,

Thou ever rulest all the highest : in the fray for cattle none
resisteth thee.

17 Thou art renowned as giving wealth to every one in all tl§e

battles that are fought.

Craving protection, all these people of the earth, 0 Much-
invoked, implore thy name.

18 If I, 0 Indra, were the Lord of riches ample as thine own,

I should support the sjnger, God who givest wealth ! and not
abandon him to woe.

19 Each day would I enrich the man who sang my praise, in

whatsoever place he were.

No kinship is there better, Maghavan, than thine : a father
even is no more.

20 With Plenty for his true ally the active man will gain the

spoil. •

Your Indra, Much-invoked, I bend with song, as bends a
wright his wheel of solid wood.

21 A mortal wins no riches by unworthy praise : wealth comes

not to the niggard churl.

Light is the task to give, 0 Maghavan, to one like me on the
decisive day.

22 Like kine unmilked we call aloud, Hero, to thee, and sing

thy praise,

Looker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord;
Indra, of what moveth not.

20 Plenty : or. Spirit, Boldness.
3

U TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK TIL

2§ other like tcrthee, of earth or of the heavens, hath boen

or ever will be bora.

Desiring horses, Indra Magkavan ! and kine, as men of might
we call on tbee.

24 Bring? Indra, the Victorious Ones; bring, elder thou, the

younger host.

, For, Mfighavan, thou art rich in treasures from of old, and
must be called in every fight,

25 Drive thou away our enemies, 0 Maghavan : make riches easy

to be won.

Be thou our good Protector in the strife for spoil ; Cherisher
of our friends be thou.

26 0 Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons.
G-uide us, 0 Much-invoked, in this our way : may we still live

and look upon the light.

27 Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, unhallowed,

tread us to the ground,

With thine assistance, Hero, may we pass through all the
paters that are rushing down.

HYMN XXXIII. Vasishtha.

These who wear hair-knots on the right, the movers of holy
thought, white-robed, have won m$ over.

I warned the men, when from the grass I raised me, Not from
7 * afar can my Vasishthas help you,

2 With Soma they brought Indra from a distance, over Vaisanta,
from the strong* libation.

Indra preferred Vasishthas to the Soma pressed by the son of
Vayata? Pasadyumna.

' ’ ■ ■ # * *

24 Bring f Jndra , the Victorious Ones : these would be the Maruts. f Elder
Indra, bring that (wealth to me) being the junior,’ — Wilson. * Bring all this
to those who are good, 0 Indra, be they old or young.’— M. Muller.

The hymn is a glorification of Vasishtha and his family, the latter part
relating his birth and the earlier verses referring to his connexion with King
Sudas.

1 Ilair-hiots ; Icaparda is the chuqta or single lock of hair left on the head
at tonsure, which, according to the Scholiast, it was characteristic of the
Vccsishthas to wear on the right of the crown of the head. White-robed :
white-coloured, according to Silyana. Me : Vasishtha, who is the speaker of
stanza 1—6. * Von Roth (under the word av) regards Indra as the speaker.
May it not be SudSs ? ’ — Muir, 0, S, Texts, I. 31Q, 320, where stanzas 1—13
are translated. From the grass : the sacred grass laid on the floor of the sacri-
ficial chamber.

2 r r 7 -y r.-- 1 : ;.Vr the name of a river. Pdsadyumna : another king who
was in.:-. > ! i ■ . i at the same time as Sudis.

tbe nm Veda*

&YMtt S3.]

m

8 So, verily, with these he crossed the river, in company with
these he slaughtered Blieda,

So in the fight with the Ten Kings, Vasishthas ! did Indra
help Sud&s through your devotions. -
4 I gladly, men ! with prayer prayed by our fathers have fixed
your axle i ye shall not be injured :

Since, when ye sang aloud the Sakvari verses, Vasishthas ! ye
invigorated Indra.

0 Kike thirsty men they looked to heaven, in battle with the
Ten- Kings, surrounded and imploring.

Then Indra heard Vasishtha as he praised him, and gave the
Tritsus ample room and freedom.

6 Like sticks and staves wherewith they drive the cattle, strips

ped bare, the Bharatas were found defenceless : >

Vasishtha then became their chief and leader : then widely
were the Tritsus* clans extended.

7 Throe fertilize the worlds with genial moisture : three noble

Creatures cast a light before them. *

Three that give warmth to all attend the Morning. All these
have they discovered, these Vasishthas.

8 Like the Sun’s growing glory is their splendour, and like the

sea’s is their unfathomed greatness,

Their course is like ^he wind’s. Your land, Vasishthas, can
never be attained by any other,

9 They with perceptions of the heart in secret resort to tli£t

which spreads a thousand branches.

The Apsaras brought hither the Vasishthas wearing the vesture
spun for them by Yama.

3 The river: YamunA See VII. 18. 19, Ten Kings : of the confederate
tribe* who opposed SqcjAa. See VII. 18.

4 Sakvari verses : hymns of praise ip. the Sakvari metre (14 x 4).

6 Tritsus : the tribe of which Sudds was King. Bharatas : apparently the
siime the Tritsus.

7 Indra is the speaker of the rest of the hymn. e In explanation of this,
S&yana quotes a passage from the Silty dyana Brahma na : (1) Agni produces a
fertilizing fluid on the earth, Vdyu in the air, the Smmn the sky. (2} Tl^e
* three noble creatures’ , are the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas, The Sup is
their light. (3) Agni, V&yu, and the Sun each attend the Dawn.* — Jfluir*,
0.8. Texts , 1. 320. '

9 That which spreads a thousand branches : according to Ludwig’s Trans-
lation, the Sun-God is meant ; according to his later view, the reference is tp
the mystic free sustained by Varuna in the baseless region (I. 24. 7).
The vesture : the body. The stanza is very obscure, and Sily ana's explana-
tion. which overrides grammar, is not satisfactory: ‘ By the wisdom seated in
the heart the Vasishthas traverse the hidden M - 7 :*-»*-! 1 -■-’-■■I world, and

the Aptsara&as sit down, wearing tl^e vesture u ... ■■ » ..VWibpfl t

[BOOK vii:

m tAe hymns of

IG A form of lustre springing from the lightning wast thou, when
Varuna and Mitra saw thee.

Thy one and only birth was then, Vasishtha, when from thy
stock Agastya brought thee hither.

11 Born of their love for Urvas", Vasishtha, thou, priest, art son

of Varuna and Mitra ;

And as a fallen drop, in heavenly fervour, all the Gods laid
thee on a lotus-blossom.

12 He, thinker, knower both of earth and heaven, endowed with

many a gift, bestowing thousands,

Destined to wear the vesture spun by Yama, sprang from the
Apsaras to life," Vasishtha.

13 Born at the sacrifice, urged by adorations, both with a corm

mon flow bedewed the pitcher.

Then from the midst thereof there rose up Mana, and thence
they say was boru the sage Vasishtha.
li He brings the bearer of the laud and Salman ; first shall hd
speak bringing the stone for pressing.

With grateful hearts in reverence approach him : to you, O
pratridas, Vasishtha cometh.

HYMN XXXIV. Visvedevas.

May our divine and brilliant hymn go forth, like a swift
chariot wrought and fashioned well.

2 ' The waters listen as they flow along ; they know the origin of
heaven and earth.

10 Vasishtha appears here as an embodiment of lightning, light, or fire,
and to have been brought down to men by Agastya who was born in the same
Way as Y nsishtha.

1 1 Ur vast: the most celebrated of the Apsarases or nymphs of heaven On
a lotus-blossom ; or, according to others, * in the sacred pitcher,’ or water-jar
used in sacrifice. * In the lake.’— Wilson.

For a full account of this production of Vasishtha, the curious reader is
referred to Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 821. See M. Muller, Chips , IV. 108, 109, and
Hillebrandt, Varum und Mitra , 148, 149.

12 The Apsaras : Urvasl.

3 3 Mdna : said to be another name of Agastya.

14 The bearer of the laud and Srtman : the pressing-stone, which was worked
during the recitation of sacred verses. Pratridas : a name used here to
designate the Tiitsus.

This difficult and obscure hymn has been translated and thoroughly dis*
cussed by Geldner ( Vedische Studien, II. pp. 129—155, criticized by Prof.
Ludwig, Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf clem Gebiete der Rgveda-forschung ,
pp. 168-167).

2 f An allusion, perhaps, to the subsequently received cosmogony, as in ‘
Jlfanu, that water was the first of created things.’ — Wilson.

THE RW VEDA.

HYMN 34.]

87

3 Yea, the broad waters swell their flood for him : of him strong

heroes think amid their foes,

4 Set ye for him the coursers to the pole : like Indra Thunderer

is the Golden-armed.

5 Arotise you, like the days, to sacrifice : speed gladly like a

traveller on the way.

• 6 Go swift to battles, to the sacrifice : set up a flag, a hero for
the folk.

7 Up from his strength hath risen as ^tWere a light : it bearft
the load as earth bears living things.

"8 Agni, no demon I invoke the Gods : by law completing it, I
form a hymm

$ Closely about you lay your heavenly song, and send your
voice to where the Gods abide.

10 Varuna, Mighty, with a thousand eyes* beholds the paths

wherein these rivers run. ^

11 He, King of kings, the glory of the floods, o’er all that liveth

hath resistless sway.

12 May he assist us among all the tribes, and make the envier’s

praise devoid of light.

1 3 May the foes’ threatening arrow pass us by : may he put far

from us our bodies’ sin. *

14 Agni, oblation-eater, through our prayers aid us : to him our

dearest laud is brought.

15 Accordant with the Gods choose for our Friend the Waters’

Child : may he be good to us.

16 With lauds losing the Dragon born of floods : he sits beneath

the streams in middle air.

17 Ne’er may the Dragon of the Deep harm us : ne’er fail this

faithful servant’s sacrifice.

18 To these our heroes may they grant renown ; may pious men

march boldly on to wealth,

1*9 'Leading great hosts, with fierce attacks of these, they burn
their foes as the Sun burns the earth.

3 For him : Indra.

4 The, Golden-armecl : Savitar.

6 A hero : a sort of personification of the sacrifice. t An expiatory sacrifice
for (the good of) mankind.’ — Wilson.

16 The Dragon horn of floods : AMbtidlinya, or the Dragon of the Deep of
the following stanza ; the regent of the sea of pir.

18 They : the Gods,

19 Of these ; Gods, or Maruts, according to the Scholiast,

THE HYMNS OF

38

[BOOK VII.-

20 What time our wives draw near to us, may he, deft-handed

Tvashtar, give us hero sons.

21 May Tvashtar find our hymn acceptable, and may Aramati,

seeking wealth, be ours.

22 May they who lavish gifts bestow those treasures : may

Rodasi and Varunani listen.

May he, with the Varutris, be our refuge, may bountiful
Tvashtar give us store of riches.

23 So may rich Mountains and the liberal Waters, so may all

Herbs that grow on ground, and Heaven,

And Eartli accordant with the Forest-Sovrans, and both the
World-halves round about protect us.

24 To this may both the wide Worlds lend approval, and Varuna

in heaven, whose Friend is Jndra.

May all the Maruts give consent, the Victors, that we may
- hold great wealth in firm possession.

25 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Agni, Waters, Herbs, Trees

accept the praise we offer.

May we find refuge in the Maruts 7 bosom. Protect us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XX Xy. Visvedevas.

Befriend us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra and
Varuna who receive oblations !

Indra and Soma give health, strength and comfort, Indra
and Pushan be our help in battle.

2 Auspicious Friends to us be Bhaga, Sanaa, auspicious be

Purandhi and all Riches ;

The blessing of the true and well-conducted^ and Aryaman in
many forms apparent.

3 Kind unto us be Maker and Sustainer, and the far-reaching

Pair with Godlike natures.

Auspicious unto us be Earth and Heaven, the Mountain, and
the Gods 7 fair invocations.

21 Aramati : the Genius of Devotion and active piety.

22 Vardtrts : protecting Goddesses.

23 Forest-Sovrans : tall timber trees.

1 'Befriend us: sdm no bhavatdm. The indeclinable word sdm } signifying
happy, auspicious, pleasant, sweet, kind, agreeable, etc., etc., is used with or
without the verb ikH, in the first thirteen stanzas. I have varied the expres-
sion here aud there.

2 Sima : Prayer or Wish personified. Or it may he Nar&sansa, Agni.
Purandhi : Plenty, or Spirit, Boldness personified.

3 Far-reaching Pair : Heaven and Earth.

THE RIGVEDA.

nnrx 35 .]

A Favour us Agni with his face of splendour, and Varuna and
Mitra and the Asvins.

Favour us noble actions of the pious, impetuous Vata blow oti
us with favour.

5 Early invoked, may Heaven and Earth be friendly, and Air’s

mid-region good for us to look on.

To us may Herbs and Forest-Trees -be gracious, gracious th6
Lord Victorious of the region.

6 Be the God Indra with the Yasus friendly, and, with Adityas,

Varuna who blesseth.

Kind, with the Rudras, be the Healer Rudra, ^nd, with the
Dames, may Tvashtar kindly listen.

7 Blest unto us be Soma, and devotions, blest be the Sacrifice,

the Stones for pressing;

Blest be the fixing of the sacred Pillars, blest be the tender
Grass, and blest the Altar.

8 May the far-seeing Sun rise up to bless us : be the fo&r

Quarters of the sky auspicious.

Auspicious be the firmly-seated Mountains, auspicious be the
Rivers and the Waters.

9 May Aditi through holy works be gracious, and may the

Maruts, loud in song, be friendly.

May Vishnu give felicity, and Pushan, the Air that cherisheth
our life, and Vayu. *

10 Prosper us Savitar, the God who rescues, and let the radiant

Mornings be propitious.

Auspicious to all creatures be Parjanya, auspicious be the
field’s benign Protector.

11 May all the ^fellowship of Gods befriend us, Sarasvati, with

Holy Thoughts, be gracious.

Friendly be they, the Liberal Ones who seek us, yea, those
who dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters.

1 2 May the great Lords of Truth protect and aid us ; blest to us

be our horses and our cattle.

Kind be the pious skilful-handed Ribhus, kind be the Fathers
at our invocations.

13 May Aja-Ekapad, the God, be gracious, gracious the Dragon

of the Deep, and Ocean.

5 The Lord Victorious : Indra.

10 The field's benign Protector : Agni, or Rudra. See IV. 57. 1.

13 Aja*Ekapdtl : the Sun. See VI. 50, 14, and footnote.

The, 1) raj on of the Deep : Ahibudhuya, regent of the depths of the &maa-'
merit.

THE HYMNS OF

c£Q

[BOOK VII ;

Gracious be lie, the swelling Child of Waters, gracious be
Prism who hath Gods to guard her.

14 So .may the Rudras, Vasus, and A dityas -accept the new hymn
which we now are making.

May all the Holy Ones of earth and heaven, and the Cow's
offspring hear our invocation.

They who of Holy Gods are very holy, Immortal, knowing
Law, whom man must worship, —

May these to-day give us broad paths to travel. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

° .HYMN* XXXVI. Visvedevas.

Let the prayer issue from the seat of Order, for Surya with
his beams hath loosed the cattle.

With lofty ridges earth is far extended, and Agni’s flame hath
lit the spacious surface.

$ 0 Asuras, 0 Varuna and Mitra, this hymn to you, like food,
anew I offer.

One of you is a strong unerring Leader, and Mitra, speaking,
stirreth men to labour.

3 The movements of the gliding wind come hither : like cows,
the springs are filled to overflowing.

Born in the station e’en of lofty heaven the Bull hath loudly
< bellowed in this’ region.

■ 4 May I bring hither with my song. 0 Indra, wise Aryaman
who yokes thy dear Bay Horses,

14 Coiv’s offspring : the Maruts. According to von Both those who are bom
and live in radiant heaven.

15 Broad paths to travel ; perhaps, generally, an easy road to prosperity.

1 The seat of Order : 1 the hall of the sacrifice.’ — Wilson. The cattle : rays
of light.

2 * One of you (Varuna) is the lord and unassailable guide, and he who is
called Mitra, (i, e. the friend) calls men to activity. Here so much at least is
declared (and the, same thing is expressed in nearly the same words in other
places), that the light of day, which awakens life, and brings joy and activity
into the world, is the narrower sphere of Mitra’s power ; though, however,
Varuna is not relegated to the night alone, for he continues bo be the lord
and the first.’ — Von Both, quoted by Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. 70. The meaning
of translated by lord \ in this, extract, is, in the Veda, rather ‘strong/

1 energetic/ and is so given in the St, Petersburg Lexicon, the meaning ‘ lord ’
belonging to later literature. The second half of the second line is repeated,
with a variation, -from III. 59. 1.

3 The springs: the fountains of rain; the clouds. The Bull: Parjanya,
QpA of the rain-cloud. This region: literally, this, udder; the firmament.

HYMN 37.] THE RIG VEDA, <41

Voracious, with thy noble car, 0 Hero, liim who defeats the
Wrath of the malicious*

5 In their own place of sacrifice adorers worship to gain long

life and win his friendship.

He hath poured food on men when they have praised him ;
be this, the dearest reverence, paid to Eudra.

6 Coming together, glorious, loudly roaring — Sarasvati, Mother

of Floods, the seventh —

With copious milk, with fair streams, strongly flowing, full
swelling with the volume of their water ;

7 And may the mighty Maruts, too, rejoicing, aid ^our devotion

and protect our offspring.

Let not swift-moving Akshara neglect us : they have increas-
ed our own appropriate riches.

8 Bring ye the great Aramati before you, and Pushan*as the

Hero of the synod,

Bhaga who looks upon this hymn with favour, and, as offr
strength, the bountiful Purandhi.

9 May this our song of praise reach you, 0 Maruts, and Vd$hmT'~

guardian of the future infant.

May *they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring. Preserve
us evermore, ye Grod& with blessings.

HYMN XXXVII. Visvedeva^

Let your best-bearing car that must be lauded, ne’er injured,
bring you V&jas and Ribhukshans.

Fill you, fair-helm eted I with mighty Soma, thrice-mixed, at
our libations, to delight you.

4 Voracious: epithet of horses ; but the meaning of dhdytt is uncertain.
According to S&yana, it means * holding/ ‘ vigorous according to Ludwig,
*, pouring forth rain ; * according to Grassmann, ‘thirsty,’

5 His friendship ; Rudra’s.

6 The seventh : with the six other celebrated rivers. See I. 32. 12.

7 A leshard : V&k, or Voice ; ‘the imperishable goddess of speech.’ — Wilson.
Of. VII. 15. 9.

8 Aramati : the personification of religious worship, or active piety. See
VII. 34. 21. According to S&yana, ardmatvni here is an epithet of mahi'm,
‘the never-resting Earth.’ For the various meanings assigned by S^yana to
this word in the various places in which it occurs, see Muir, 0. 8. Texts,
IV. 317.

9 Vishnu: cf. X. 184. 1.

1 Vdjas and Rihhuhshans : that is, llibhukshan or Ribhu, Vibhvan, and
V&ja, commonly called the Ribhus from the name of the first of the three.
Fair-helmeted : * handsome-chinned.’ — Wilson ,* ‘ Strong- jawed/ — Ludwig.
Thrice-mixed : with milk, curds, and .meal.

42 THE BYM NS OF [BOOK ttt

2 Ye who behold the light of heaven, Ribhukshans, give our rich

patrons unmolested riches.

Brink, heavenly-natured, at our sacrifices, and give us bount-
ies for the hymns we sing you,

3 For thou, 0 Bounteous One, art used to giving, at parting

treasure whether small or ample.

Filled full are both thine arms with great possessions : thy
goodness keeps thee not from granting riches.

4 Indra, high-famed, as Vaja and Ribhukshan, thougoest work-

ing, singing to the dwelling.

Lord of Bay Steeds, this day may we Vasishthas offer our
prayers to thee and bring oblations.

5 Thou winnest swift advancement for thy servant, through

hymns, Lord of Bay Steeds, which thou hast favoured.

For thee with friendly succour have we battled, and when, 0
Indra, wilt thou grant us riches ?

6 To us thy priests a home, as ’twere, thou givest : when, Indra,

wilt thou recognize our praises ?

May thy strong Steed, through our ancestral worship, bring
food and wealth with heroes to our dwelling.

7 Though Nirriti the Goddess reigneth round him, Autumns

with food in plenty come to Ind*a.

With three close Friends to length of days he eometh, he
whom men let not rest at home in quiet.

8 Promise us gifts, 0 Savitar : may riches come unto us in

Parvata’s full bounty.

May the Celestial Guardian still attend us. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXXVIII. # Savitar.

On high hath Savitar, this God, extended the golden lustre
which he spreads around him.

Now, now must Bhaga be invoked by mortals, Lord of great
riches who distributes treasures.

3 Bounteous One : Maghavan ; Indra.

4 Working : * the fulfiiler ( of willies )/— Wilson. The first line is somewhat
obscure.

7 Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Destruction, who has no power over
Indra. Three close Friends: the Ribhus, who represent the year, the annual
course of Indra as the Sun. S&ynna’a explanation is different: * Indra, the
upholder of the three regions, whom the divine Nirriti acknowledges as ruler,
whom abundant years pass over, whom mortals detain from his own abode,
approaches to ( recruit ) his decaying strength/ — Wilson j who observes : ‘ the
explanation is not veiy clear/

5 Parvakds full bounty : the Genius of mountain and cloud.

ITYMN 39.]

THE MOVED A.

43

2 Rise up, 0 Savitar whose hands are golden, and hear this man

while sacrifice is' offered,

Spreading afar thy broad and wide effulgence, and bringing
mortal men the food that feeds them.

3 Let Savitar the God be hymned with praises, to whom the

Vasas, even, all sing glory.

Sweet be our lauds to him whose due is worship : may he with
all protection guard our princes.

4 Even he whom Aditi the Goddess praises, rejoicing in God

Savitar’s incitement :

Even he whose praise the high imperial Rulers, Parana, Mitra,
Aryaman, sing in concert.

5 They who come emulous to our oblation, dispensing bounty,

from the earth and heaven,

May they and Ahibudhnya hear our calling : guard us Var&tri
with the Ekadhenus.

6 This may the Lord of Life, entreated, grant us, — the wealth

which Savitar the God possesses.

The mighty calls on Bhaga for protection, on Bhaga calls the
weak to give him riches.

7 Bless us the Vajins when we call, while slowly they move,

strong Singers, to the Gods’ assembly.

Crushing the wolf, the serpent, and the demons, may they
completely banish all affliction.

8 Deep-skilled in Law eternal, deathless, Singers, O V&jins, help

us in each fray for booty.

Drink of this meath, be satisfied, be joyful : then go on paths
which Gods are wont to travel.

n HYMN XXXIX. Yisvedevas.

Agni, erect, hath shown enriching favour : the flame goes for-
ward to the Gods' assembly.

Like car-bome men the stones their path have chosen : let the
priest, quickened, celebrate our worship.

3 The Vasus : the Gods in general, according to S&yana.

5 Var&trt: 4 the protectress (the goddess of speech).’ — Wilson. Ekadhenus :
the Waters are probably meant : 4 excellent cattle.’ — Wilson,

7 Vdjins : a class of divinities so named, according to S&ynna ; but, accord-
ing to Mahidhara, horses, i. e. the teams which draw the chariots of the Gods.
The wolf, or the robber. The serpent : or the assassin. The demons : the
It&kshasas. See Sat'iputlia-Brdhinanu, Y. 1, 5. 21 — 24, (S. Books of the East,
XLI. 27) for a dilferent version of stanzas 6 and 7.

1 The stones ; the pressing* stones have begun their course.

44 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK til.

2 Soft to the tread, their sacred grass is scattered : these go like

Kings amid the band around them,

At the folk’s early call on Night and Morning, — Vayu* and
Pdshan with his team, to bless us;

3 Here on their path the noble Gods proceeded : in the wide

firmament the Beauteous decked them.

.Bend your way hither, ye who travel widely : hear this our
envoy who hath gone to meet you.

A For they are holy aids at sacrifices: all Gods approach the
place of congregation.

Bring these, desirous, to our worship, Agni, swift the Nasa-
tyas, Bhaga, and PurandhL

5 Agni, to these men’s hymns, from earth, from heaven, bririg
Mitra, Vanina, Indra, and Agni,

And Aryaman, and Aditi, and Vishnu. Saras vati be joyful,
and the Maruts.

*6 Even as the holy Wish, the gift is offered : may he, unsated,
come when men desire him.

Give never-failing ever-conquering riches : with Gods for our
allies may we be victors.

7 Now have both Worlds been praised by the Vasishthas, and
holy Mitra, Varuna, and Agni.

May they, bright Deities, make our song supremest. Preserve
* us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XL, Viavedevas.

Be gathered all the audience of the synod : let its begin their
praise whose course is rapid.

Whate’er God Savitar this day produces, may we be where
the Wealthy One distributes. *

2 This, dealt from heaven, may both the Worlds vouchsafe us,

and Varuna, Indra, Aryaman, and Mitra.

May Goddess Aditi assign us riches, Vayu and Bhaga make
them ours for ever.

3 Strong be the man and full of power, 0 Maruts, whom ye,

borne on by spotted coursers, favour.

2 These go like Kings .- according to S&yana, ‘ may the two lords of people
(V&yu and Phshan) .... appear now/

3 Our envoy ; Agni.

5 Agni : in his own form as a celestial God, not in that of terrestrial fire.

6 He, unsated : Agni.

1 Their praise: praise of the Gods.

2 Dealt from heaven : or, distributed by Dyu or Dyaus.

THE HI GY EDA.

HYMiV 41.]

45 '

Him, too, Sarasvati and Agni further, and there is none to rob
him of his riches.

4 This Varuna is guide of Law, he, Mitra, and Aryaman, the
Kings, our work have finished.

Divine and foeless Adit i quickly listens. May these deliver
us unharmed from trouble.

5 ' With offerings I propitiate the branches of this swift-moving
God, the bounteous Vishnu,

Henqe Rudra gained his Rudra-strength : 0 Asvins, ye sought
the house that hath celestial viands,

6 Be not thou angry here, 0 glowing Pushan, for xhat Varutri

and the Bounteous gave us.

May the swift-moving Gods protect and bless us, and Vata send
us rain, who wanders round us.

7 Now have both worlds been praised by the Vasishthas, and holy

Mitra, Varuna, and Agni.

May they, bright Deities, make our song supremest. Preserve us^
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLL Bhaga.

Agki at dawn, and Indra wo invoke at dawn, and Varuna and
Mitra, and the Asvins twain :

Bhaga at dawn, Pushan, ^and Brahmanaspati, Soma at dawn,
Rudra we will invoke at dawn.

2 We will invoke strong, early-conquering Bhaga, the Son of

Aditi, the great supporter :

Thinking of whom, the poor, yea, even the mighty, even the
King himself says, Give me Bhaga.

3 Bhaga our guide, Bhaga whose gifts are faithful, favour this

song, and giv$ us wealth, 0 Bhaga.

Bhaga, augment our store of kine and horses, Bhaga, may we
be rich in men and heroes,

4 Our work ; the sacrifice.

5 The branches : * ray ah, branches : all other deities are, as it were, branches
of Vishnu, an ye dev ah, mkha iva bhavanti : as by a text cited by the scholiast,
Vishnu is all divinities, Vishnu h sarvd divata ili sruteh.’ — Wilson. This,
Ludwig remarks, gives no satisfactory interpretation ; but X am unable to'
offer any thing better at preset) t. Grassmann alters vaytth into vaydma : i we
with our offerings approach the banquet of this swift-moving God, the boun-
teous Vish.u ) i. e. come to offer him sacrificial food.’

The hymn is addressed ohiefly to Bhaga the bountiful, whose name, slightly
corrupted, survives in the Slavonic languages as a general name for God ; but*
the Gods mentioned in stanza 1, and Usbas, Dhwu or Morning, are also regard*
ed as the deities of the verses in which their names occur.

2 Give me Bhaga ,* or riches.

46 TBF HYMNS OF [FQQK Ttt

1 So may felicity be ours at present, and when the day approaches,

and at noontide ;

And may we still, 0 bounteous One, at sunset be happy in th$
Deities’ loving-kindness.

f> May Bhaga, yerily be bliss-bestower, and through him, Gods !
may happiness attend us.

As such, 0 Bhaga, all with might invoke thee ; as such be
thou our Champion here, 0 Bhaga.

6 To this our worship may all Dawns incline them, and come to

the pure place like Dadhikravau.

As strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring us hitherward
Bhaga^who discovers treasure.

7 May bless&d Mornings dawn on us for ever, with wealth of

kine, of horses, and of heroes,

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

° HYMN XLII. . Visvedevas.

Let Brahmans and Angirases come forward, and let the roar
of cloudy heaven surround us.

Loud low the Milch-kine swimming in the waters : set be the
stones that grace our holy service.

2 Fair, Agni, is thy long-known psPtli to travel : yoke for the

juice thy bay, thy ruddy horses,

Or red steeds, Hero-bearing, for the chamber. Seated, I call
the Deities’ generations.

3 They glorify your sacrifice with worship, yet the glad Priest

near them is left unequalled.

' Bring the Gods hither,. thou of many aspects: turn hither-
ward Aramati the Holy. ^

6 The pure -place : the chamber of sacrifice. Like JDudhikrdvan : swift ^s
Dadhikrftvau, the famous horse, the type and model of racers. See IV. 39. 3;
40. 1—3.

1 Angirases: ltishis so named, according to SAyana. The Milch-kine : the
clouds in the watery firmament, with allusion also to the milk and water mixed
with the Soma juice. The stones : the press-stones. S&yana's explanation is
different: ‘may the pious couple, (the Yajamdna and his wife) conjointly
appreciate the beauty of the sacrifice.' — Wilson.

2 Thy hay , thy ruddy horses : or the Harits and the Rohits. Red steeds : or

4-rushas. Bero-bearmg : carrying the Hero Agni. For the chamber: the
sacrificial hall ; 'in thy stable.’ — M. Muller. - .

- 3 The human priests cannot equal Agni iu efficiency. Aramati; ; the Genius
of Devotion. See VII. 36. 8.

THE RIG VEDA,

47

HYMN 43.]

4 What time the Guest hath made himself apparent, at ease

reclining in the rich man’s dwelling,

Agni, well-pleased, well-placed within the chamber gives to a
house like this wealth worth the choosing.

5 Accept this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni ; glorify it with Indra

and the Maruts.

Here on our grass let Night and Dawn be seated : bring long-
ing Varuna and Mitra hither.

6 Thus hath Vasishtha praised victorious Agni, yearning for

wealth that giveth all subsistence.

May he bestow on its food, strength, and riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLIIL Visyedevas.

Sing out the pious at your sacrifices to move with adorations
Earth and Heaven —

The Holy Singers, whose unmatched devotions, like a tree’s
branches, part in all directions.

2 Let sacrifice proceed like some fleet courser : with one accord

lift ye on high the ladles.

Strew sacred grass meet for the solemn service : bright flames
that love the Gods ha>e mounted upward.

3 Like babes in arms reposing on their mother, let the Gods sit

upon the grass’s summit.

Let general fire make bright the flame of worship : scorn us
nob, Agni, in the Gods’ assembly.

4 Gladly the Gods have let themselves be honoured, milking

the copious streams of holy Order.

The highest might to-day is yours, the Vasus’: come ye, as
many as ye are, one-minded.

5 So, Agni, send us wealth among the people : may we be

closely knit to thee, 0 Victor,

Unharmed, and rich, and taking joy together. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

4 'The Guest : Agni.

3 Let general five : or, according to S&yana, c Let the full ladle balm the
fire of worship.’ The exact meaning is uncertain as both, subject and object
^re adjectives without substantives.

. 4 Milking the copious streams ; enjoying the libations of law-ordained sacri-
fice. ‘Who are the bes towers of water, the ahedders of showers/ — Wilson.

48*' TTTE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI L

HYMN XL1Y. DadhiWi

I CALL on Dadhikras, the first, to give you aid, the Asvins,
Bhaga, Dawn, and Agni kindled well, a
I ndra, and Vishnu, Pdshan, Brahmanaspafci, Adityas, Heaven
and Earth, the Waters, and the Light

2 When, rising, to the sacrifice we hasten, awaking Dadhikr&s

with adorations,

Seating on sacred grass the Goddess Ila, let us invoke the
sage swift-hearing Asvins.

3 While I am thus arousing Dadkikravan I speak to Agni,

Earth, 'tand Dawn, and Surya,

The red, the brown of Varuna ever mindful : may they ward
off from us all grief and trouble.

4 Foremost is Dadhikravan, vigorous courser ; in forefront of

the cars, his way he knoweth, A

Closely allied with Surya and with Morning, Adityas, and
Angirases, and Yasus.

£> May Dadhikras prepare the way we travel that we may pass
along the path of Order.

May Agni hear us, and the Heavenly Army: hear us all Mighty
Ones whom none deceiveth.

HYMN XlV Savitar.

May the God Savitar, rich in goodly treasures, filling the
region, borne by steeds, come hither.

In his hand holding much that makes men happy, lulling to
slumber and arousing oreatures.

'2 Golden, sublime, and easy in their motion, his arms extend
unto the bounds of heaven. ^

1 Dadhikrds : see. IY. 38. 1.

3 HadhiJcrdvan : a lengthened form of Dadhibr&s. Bee IV. 39. 2, and 40.
The red , the brown ; apparently the horse of Varuna, that is. the Sun, is in-
tended. Ever mindful: ‘ who is mindful of his adorers.’— Wilson. The mean-

ng of the word mahxchatdh, or nidi) what 6k, is uncertain. Von Roth thinks
that a colour, dun or yellow, is meant. Ludwig would explain it as ‘knotting
snares or nooses.’ Grassmann translates it by, ‘des Mondverseheuchers, 1 * * 4 5
‘ who scares away the Moon.*

4 In forefront of the cars : according to S&yana, the chariots of the Gods

are intended. But, as Pisehel observes ( Vedisohe Studien , I. 124), Dadhik-
r£ van, the famous race-horse, was for ‘the gentlemen of the turf’ in King
Trasadasyu’s time what the matchless English horse Eclipse was in recent
days. It seems probable that Dahhikr&van may have been originally only a
most distinguished racer, glorified and deified by the exaggerated praises of
the bards of a people who were passionately fond of chariot- racing.

H YMN 46 ] THE RIG VEDA. 49

Now shall that mightiness of his be lauded : even Sura yields
to him in active vigour.

3 May this God Savitar, the Strong and Mighty, the Lord of

precious wealth, vouchsafe us treasures.

May he, advancing his far-spreading lustre, bestow on us the
food that feedeth mortals.

4 These songs praise Savitar whose tongue is pleasant, praise

him whose arms are full, whose hands are lovely.

High vital strength, and manifold, may he grant us. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLVI. * Budra.

To Budra bring these songs, whose bow is firm and strong, the
self-dependent God with swiftly-flying shafts,

The Wise, the Conqueror whom none may overcome, armed
with sharp-pointed weapons : may he hear our call.

2 He through his lordship thinks on beings of the earth, Oh

heavenly beings through his high imperial sway.

Come willingly to our doors that gladly welcome thee, and heal
all sickness, Budra, in our families.

3 May thy bright arrow which, shot down by thee from heaven,

flieth upon the eartlu pass us uninjured by.

Thou, very gracious God, hast thousand medicines : inflict no
evil on our sons or progeny.

4 Slay us not, nor abandon us, 0 Budra : let not thy noose, when

thou art angry, seise us.

Give us trimmed grass and fame among the living. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

2 S&ra : the Sun as distinguished from, or a different form of, Savitar who
is said by S&yana to be the Sun before his rising.

3 Very gracious God ; svapivdta. ‘ This word is not explained in the
printed text of Sayana, although in the “ Yarietaa Lectionis,” appended to
his preface, Prof. Miiller notes that in one MS., B. 4, svapivdta is rendered
by jitaprana, “he by whom life (or breath) is conquered.” In the Nirukta,
X. 7. it is explained by svdpta-vachana, “ thou whose words are very suitable
or authoritative.” ' — Muir, 0. S, Texts , IV, 314, where an exhaustive note on
the word will be found. Wilson renders svapivdta by * wind-appeaser/ and
Grassmann by ‘ vielbegehrter,’ { much-desired.’

4 Give us trimmed grass : let us share in sacrifice. Fame among the living:
the Sb. Petersburg Lexicon takes jtvasunsi to mean rule over the living.
Others take the word as qualifying barhUhi , trimmed grass, i. e. sacrifice, and
signifying ‘ desired by the living/ ‘ to be praised among men,’ s promising (long)
life.’ See Vedic Hymns , Part I. p. 439.

4

m

THU HYMNS OF

[HOOK FIT

HYMN XLYII. Water*.

May we obtain this day from you, 0 Waters, that wave of
pure refreshment, which the pious
Made erst the special beverage of Indra, bright, stainless, rich
in sweets and dropping fatness.

2 May the Floods’ • Offspring, he whose course is rapid, protect

that wave most rich in sweets, 0 Waters,

That shall make Indra and the Vasus joyful. This may we
gain from you to-day, we pious.

3 All-purifying, joying in their nature, to paths of Gods the

Goddesses move onward.

They never violate the laws of Indra. Present the oil-rich
offering to the Rivers.

4 Whom S&rya with his bright beams hath attracted, and Indra

dug the path for them to travel,

May these Streams give us ample room and freedom. Pre-
> serve us evennore, ye Gods, with blessings.

• HYMN XLVIII. Ribhus.

Ye liberal Heroes, V&jas and Ribhukshans, come and delight
you with our flowing Soma.

May your strength, Vibhus, as ye come to meet us, turn hither-
ward your car that brings men profit.

2 May we as Ribhu with your Ribhus Conquer strength with our
* strength, as Vibhus with the Vibhus.

May Vaja aid us in the fight for booty, and helped by Indra
may we quell the foeman.

3 For they rule many tribes with high dominion, and conquer

all their foes in close encounter.

May Indra, Vibhvan, V&ja, and Ribhukshan destroy by turns
the wicked foeman’s valour. •

4 Now, Deities, give us ample room and freedom : be all of you,

one-minded, our protection.

So let the Vasus grant us strength and vigour. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

1 Wave of 'pure refreshment : ‘sweet essence of the earth ; ’ Urmi is said
Here to imply the Soma juice produced from the earth.’ — Wilson.

3 All-purifying : sutdpavitrdh ; literally, with a hundred, that is, countless,
means of purification. The Goddesses : the divine Waters.

1 Vdjas and MbhuJcshans : ye three, Ribhu, Vibhvan, and V&ja.

2 The meaning is, may we be as powerful as Ribhu, as mighty as the com-
pany of the Vibhus (another name of the Ribhus). S&yana explains ribh'd as
great, and vibhvah as powerful. In the fight for booty : vffjas'Hau ; a play on
the word and name v$ja.

4 The Vasus ; according to S&yana, vdsavah here is an epithet of Ribhdvah,
understood ; ‘ the exacted (Ribhus).’ — Wilson.

MTM2? no,)

tub movEBi.

Bl

HYMN XLIX, Waters

Forth from the middle of the flood the Waters — their chief
the Sea — flow cleansing,, never sleeping.

Indra, the Bull, the Thunderer, dug their channels ; here let
those Waters, Goddesses, protect me.

2 Waters which come from heaven, or those that wander dug

from the earth, or flowing free by nature,

Bright, purifying, speeding to the Ocean, here let those
Waters, Goddesses, protect me.

3 Those amid whom goes Varuna the Sovran, he who discri-

minates men's truth and falsehood —

Distilling meath, the bright, the purifying, liere let those
Waters, Goddesses, protect me.

4 They from whom Varuna the King, and Soma, and all the

Deities drink strength and vigour,

They into whom Vaisv&nara Agni entered, here let those
Waters, Goddesses, protect me, •

HYMN L. Various Deities.

0 Mitra-Varuna, guard and protect me here : let not that
come to me which nests within and swells.

1 drive afar the scorpion hateful to the sight : let not the
winding worm tauch # me and wound my foot.

2 Eruption that appears upon the twofold joints, and that®

which overspreads the ancles and the knees,

May the refulgent Agni banish far awny ; let not the winding
worm touch me and wound my foot,

3 The poison that is formed upon the Salmali, that which is

found in streams, that which the plants produce,

All this may all the Gods banish and drive away ; let not the
winding worm touch me and wound my foot.

1 The flood : the ocean of air, the firmament.

The deities are (1) Mutra and Varuna, (2) Agni, (3) Visve Bev&h, (4) Praise
of the Rivers. Each stanza of the hyrnu is to be repeated a as an antidote to
the poison or disease which it specifies.

- 1 That which nests within and swells ; 'the insidious And spreading (poison V*
— Wilson. S&yana suppliers the substantive visham. The scorpion ; ajaJcd-
vam ; the exact meaning is uncertain.

2 Twofold joints : of the arms and legs. S&y ana’s interpretation is different:
* the poison which is generated in the manifold knots (of trees}..’ — Wilson.

3 The Salmali; the silk-cotton tree. Alt the Gods; or, the Afl-Gods or
Visvedevash

52 TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK V1L

4 The steep declivities, the valleys, and the heights, the chan-
nels full of water, and the waterless —

May those who swell with water, gracious Goddesses, never
afflict us with the Sipada disease, may all the rivers keep
us free from SimidgL

HYMN LI. Adityas.

Through the Adityas’ most auspicious shelter, through their
most recent succour may we conquer.

May they, the Mighty, giving ear, establish this sacrifice, to
make us free and sinless.

2 Let Aditi rejoice and the Adityas, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman,

most righteous.

May they, the Guardians of the world, protect us, and, to
show favour, drink this day our Soma.

3 All Universal Deities, the Maruts, all the Adityas, yea, and

all the Ribhus,

- Indra, and Agni, and the Asvins, lauded. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LII. Adityas.

May we be free from every bond, Adityas ! a castle among Gods
and men, ye Yasus.

Winning, may we win Varuna and Mitra, and, being, may w r e
be, 0 Earth and Heaven. ~

- 2 May Varuna and Mitra grant this blessing, our Guardians,
shelter to our seed and offspring.

Let us not suffer for another’s trespass, nor do the thing that
ye, 0 Vasixs, punish.

3 The ever-prompt Angirases, imploring riches from Savitar the

God, obtained them.

So may our Father who is great and holy, fed all the Gods,
accordant, grant this favour.

HYMN LIII. Heaven and Earth.

As priest with solemn rites and adorations I worship Heaven
and Earth, the High and Holy.

To them, great Parents of the Gods, have sages of ancient
time, singing, assigned precedence.

4 The Sipada disease : 'perhaps the Vaidikform of Slipada, the Cochin

leg.’ — Wilson. Simidd : apparently a female demon, or a disease attributed
to her malevolence.

3 Universal Deities : visve devtfh j the All-Gods. Lauded : the sentence ia
incomplete, the substantives in the nominative case having no verb.

1 Being : really and truly being, rich, powerful, and distinguished.

3 Our Father :V aruna, the father of Vasishtha;or Savitar, or Fraj&pati
may be intended, - * ■

BYMN 55.]

mn moved a.

58

2 With newest hymns set in the seat of Order, those the Two
Parents, born before all others,

Come, Heaven and Earth, with the Celestial People, hither to
us, for strong is your protection.

5 Yea, Heaven and Earth, ye hold in your possession full many
a treasure for the liberal giver.

Grant us that wealth which comes in free abundance. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings*

HYMN LIY. Y&stoshpati.

Acknowledge ■ us, 0 Guardian of the Homestead : bring no
disease, and give us happy entrance.

Whate’cr we ask of thee, be pleased to grant ifc, and prosper
thou our quadrupeds and bipeds*

2 Protector of the Home, be our promoter : increase our wealth.

in kine and steeds, 0 Indu.

May we be ever-youthful in thy friendship : be pleased in us
as in his sons a father.

3 Through thy dear fellowship that bringeth welfare, may we te

victors, Guardian of the Dwelling !

Protect our happiness in rest and labour. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LY. V&stoshpati.

Y JtSTOSHPATl, who kill^st all disease and wearest every form,

Be an auspicious Friend to us.

2 When, 0 bright Son of Sarama, thou showest, tawny-hued f

thy teeth,

They gleam like lances’ points within thy mouth when thou
wouldst bite : go thou to sleep.

3 Sarama’s Son, retrace thy way : bark at the robber and the

thief. r

At Indra’s singei's barkest thou ? Why dost thou seek to ter-
rify us 3 Go to sleep.

3 For the liberal giver : or, for SucUs,

V&stoshpati is the Genius or tutelary God of the house. In this hymn
lie is addressed also as Indu, another name of Soma the Moon-God.

V&stoshpati is the deity of the first stanza, and Indra of the rest.

The metre Is G&yatri in stanza 1, TJparisht&dbiiliati (8x3 -hi 2) in 2-4,
and Anushfcup in 5-8, and the hymn appears to he made up of three corres-
ponding pieces unconnected by their subjects.

2 Son of Saramd : Saram&, the hound of Indra, is mother of the two
S&rameyas, the brindled watcli-dogs of Yama, God of the Dead. This stanza
and the two following appear to be addressed by the spirits of Indra’s worship-
pers to one of the dogs who would prevent their entering the home of the
pious.

m mu HYMNS OF [BOOK VIl

4 Be on thy guard against the boai’, and let the boar beware of

thee.

At Indra's singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou seek to
terrify us ? Go to sleep.

5 Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog and master of the

house.

Let all the kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who are round
about.

6 The man who sits, the man who walks, and whosoever looks

on us,

Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely shut this
house.

<T

7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up fi’om out

the sea, —

By him the Strong and Mighty One we lull and make the
people sleep.

8 The women sleeping in the court, lying without, or stretched

, on beds,

The matrons with their odorous sweets — these, one and all,
we lull to sleep.

HYMN LVL Maruts.

Who are these radiant men in serried rank, Rudra's young
heroes borne by noble steeds ?

2 Yerily no one knoweth whence they' sprang : they, and they
^ only, know each other's birth.

6 They strew each other with their blasts, these Hawks : they

strove together, roaring like the wind.

5 This and the three following stanzas form a lullaby or sleep-song, pro-
bably sung as a charm by a lover on a secret visit to his love.

7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns: the Sun, whose setting brings the
time of rest and sleep ; or perhaps the starry heaven is intended.

8 With their odorous sweets : wearing garlands of fragrant flowers on festive
occasions, according to Sftyana : ‘decorated with holiday perfumes.’ — Wilson.
According to a legend mentioned by Sdyana, Vasishtlia. having fasted for three
days was entering the house of Varuna in hope of food, when the watch-dog
set upon him and was put to sleep hy the repetition of the last four verses,
which are to be recited on similar occasions by thieves and house-breakers.
See Wilson’s note. The hymn has been discussed hy Aufrecht, Jndi&ahz
Studien , IY. 337f, and by Lanman, Sanskrit Reader , p. 370.

3 They strew each other with their blasts : the- meaning of svapflbhiK is
uncertain. ‘They go together by their own pure paths.’ —Wilson ‘They
plucked each other with their beaks (?)’ — M. Muller. ‘They bestrew each
other with light.’ — Grassmaftn. ‘ They scatter dust over each other with
besoms/ — Roth. I follow Professor Ludwig. The meaning appears to be that
-the Hawks or rapid Maruts are so crowded in their onward sweep that those
in front feel the quick breath of those who follow. Similarly (VIII. 20, 21),
the crowded Maruts are likened to cattle who lick each other’s heads or humps.

THE RIG VEDA.

BY MB 56.]

TO

4 A sage was he who knew these mysteries, what in her udder

mighty Prism bore.

5 Ever victorious, through the Maruts, he this band of Heroes,

nursing manly strength,

6 Most bright in splendour, fleetest on their way, close-knit to

glory, strong with varied power.

7 Yea, mighty is your power and firm your strength : so,

potent, with the Maruts, be the band.

8 Bright is your spirit, wrathful are your minds : your bold

troop’s minstrel is like one inspired.

9 Ever avert your blazing shaft from us, and let not your dis-

pleasure reach us here. *

10 Your dear names, conquering Maruts, we invoke, calling aloud

till we are satisfied.

11 Well-armed, impetuous in their haste, they deck themselves,

their forms, with ornaments of gold.

12 Pure, Maruts, pure yourselves, are your oblations : to you, tfle

pure, pure sacrifice I offer.

By Law they came to truth, the Law’s observers, bright by
their birth, and pure, and sanctifying.

13 Your rings, 0 Maruts, rest upon your shoulders, and chains

of gold are twined ^pon your bosoms.

Gleaming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, after your
wont ye whirl about your weapons.

14 Wide in the depth of air spread forth your glories, far, most

adorable, ye bear your titles.

Maruts, accept this thousandfold allotment of household
sacrifice and household treasure.

15 If, Maruts, yd regard the praise recited here at this mighty

singer’s invocation,

Vouchsafe us quickly wealth with noble heroes, wealth which
no man who hatetb us may injure.

4 What in her udder : according to S&yana, what beings (Maruts, etc. )
mighty Prisni bore at her udder or iu the firmament.

8 Your bold troop's minstrel: the leader of the Maruts’ thunder- psalm. Like
one inspired : milniriva, like a Muni or inspired saint ‘ The sounds produced
by the shaking of the trees are like the varied intonations of a reciter of praises,
is S&y ana’s explanation.’ —Wilson. Lanman translates differently: Clear is
your whistling. Your hearts are wrathful as the wild onward-rush of a doughty
troop/

14 Ye bear your titles : you make yourselves known. * You send down
(the waters) that beat down (the dust)/ — Wilson. N&mdni) names, according
to S&yana, means waters, because they band down the dust, pd ns4n namay anti.

fctf THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII

16 The Manits, fleet as coursers, while they deck them like

youths spectators of a festal meeting,

Linger, like beauteous colts, about the dwelling, like frisking
calves, these who pour down the water.

17 So may the Maruts help us and be gracious, bringing free

room to lovely* Earth and Heaven.

Far be your bolt that slayeth men and cattle. Ye Yasus,
turn yourselves to us with blessings.

18 The priest, when seated, loudly calls you, Maruts, praising in

song your universal bounty.

He, Bulls ! who hath so much in liis possession, free from
duplicity, with hymns invokes you.

19 These Maruts bring the swift man to a stand-still, and

strength with mightier strength they break and humble.
These guard the singer from the man who hates him and lay
their sore displeasure on the wicked.

20 These Maruts rouse even the poor and needy : the Yasus love
r him as an active champion.

Drive to a distance, 0 ye Bulls, the darkness : give us full
store of children and descendants.

21 Never, 0 Maruts, may we lose your bounty, nor, car-borne

Lords ! be hindmost when ye deal it.

Give us a share in that delighted treasure, the genuine
wealth that, Bulls ! is your possession.

122 What time the men in fury rush together for running' streams,
for pastures, and for houses,

Then, 0 ye Maruts, ye who spring from Budra, be onr protec-
tors in the strife with foemen.

23 Full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of lauds

which, even of old, they sang you. e

The strong man, with the Maruts, wins in battle, the charger,
with the Maruts, gains the booty.

24 Ours, 0 ye Maruts, be the vigorous Hero, the Lord Divine of

men, the strong Sustainer,

With whom to fair lands we may cross the waters, and dwell
in our own home with you beside us.

25 May Indra, Mitra, Yaruna and Agni, Waters, and Plants, and

Trees accept our praises.

May we find shelter in the Maruts' bosom. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

24 The Lord Divine: literally, the Asura. We may cross the waters : the
Maruts are besought to favour an expedition for the acquisition of new set-
tlements on the farther side of a river,

HYMN 58.]

THE RIQVRDA.

57

HYMN LVII. Maruts,

Yea, through the power of your sweet juice, ye Holy ! the
Marut host is glad at sacrifices.

They cause even spacious heaven and earth to tremble, they
make the spring flow when they come, the Mighty.

2 The Maruts watch the man who sings their praises, promoters

of the thought of him who worships.

Seat you on sacred grass in our assembly, this day, with
friendly minds, to share the banquet.

3 No others gleam so brightly as these Maruts with their own

forms, their golden gauds, their weapons.

With all adornments, decking earth and heaven, they heighten,
for bright show, their common splendour.

4 Far from us be your blazing dart, 0 Maruts, when we,

through human frailty, sin against you.

Let us not he exposed to that, ye Holy 1 May your most lov-
ing favour still attend ns. *

5 May even what we have done delight the Maruts, the blame-

less -Ones, the bright, the purifying.

Further us, 0 ye Holy, with your kindness: advance us
mightily that we may prosper.

6 And may the Maruts, praised by all their titles, Heroes, enjoy

the taste of our oblations.

Give ns of Amrit for the sake of offspring : awake the excel- -
lent fair stores of riches.

7 Hither, ye Maruts, praised, with all your succours, with all

felicity come to our princes,

Who, of themselves, a hundredfold increase us. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LVIII. • Maruts.

Sing to the troop that pours down rain in common, the
Mighty Company of celestial nature.

1 Ye Holy : according to S&yapa, the Maruts are addressed. The Marut
host : n&ma MXrutam : the Marut name, i. e. those who are called Maruts.

This hymn, and all the hymns to the Maruts have been translated and
explained in Max Muller’s Vedic Hymns , I. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol.
XXXII)

6 Give us of Amrit : the secret essence which pervades the world and nour-
ishes and sustains all must naturally also be the element that promotes re-
production. — Ludwig. Yon Both explains the passage differently: ‘ Add us to
(the number of) the people of eternity, i, e. to the blessed/ * v ouchsafe our
children long life/ — Grassmann. ‘ Bestow water upon our progeny/— Wilson,

58

TBS BY MBS OS

[BOOK VII.

They make the world-halves tremble with their greatness :
from depths of earth and sky they reach to heaven.

2 Yea, your birth, Maruts, was with wild commotion, ye who

move swiftly, fierce in wrath, terrific.

Ye all-surpassing in your might and vigour, each looker on the
light fears at your coming.

3 Give ample vital power unto our "princes : let our fair praises

gratify the Maruts.

As the way travelled helpeth people onward, so further us
with your delightful succours.

4 Your favoured singer counts his wealth by hundreds : the

strong steed whom ye favour wins a thousand.

The Sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman. May this
your -gift, ye Shakers, be distinguished.

5 I call, as such, the Sons of bounteous Rudra : will not the

Maruts turn again to us-ward ?

r What secret sin or open stirs their anger, that we implore the
Swift Ones to forgive us.

6 This eulogy of the Bounteous hath been spoken : accept, ye

Maruts, this our hymn of praises.

Ye Bulls, keep those who hate us at a distance. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN BIX. Maruts.

Whomso ye rescue here and there, whoinso ye guide, 0 Deities,
To him give shelter, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, ye Maruts, axid
thou Aryaman.

2 Through your kind favour, Gods, on some auspicious day, the

worshipper subdues his foes.

That man increases home and strengthening ample food who
brings you offerings as ye list.

3 Yasishtha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all.

0 Maruts, of our Soma juice effused to-day drink all of you
with eager haste.

4 Your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye,

Heroes, grant your gifts.

1 From depths of earth and shj : nirriti here is said to be synonymous with
hhUrni, earth, and avamd , the unsupported, with antarijcsha , firmament. But
nirriti, Death, Destruction, as identified with bMmi, may be the Prithivi of
the atmosphere (see Y. 84.), which must originally have been considered to be
the place of departed spirits.

2 Each looker on the light: vhvah svardvik: according to S&yana, every -tree.

4 Injures-not : a litotes for, is of the greatest advantage to.

BYMN 5#.]

THE RIG VEDA.

m

May your most recent favour turn to us again. Come quickly,
ye who fain would drink,

5 Come hitherward to drink the juice, 0 ye whose bounties give

you joy.

These offerings are for you, these, Maruts, I present. Go not
to any place but this,

6 Sit on our snored grass, he graciously inclined to give the

wealth for which we long,

To take delight, ye Maruts, Friends of all, with Svaha, in
sweet Soma juice.

7 Decking the beauty of their forms in secret thq. Swans with

purple backs have flown down hither.

Around me all the Company hath settled, like joyous Heroes
glad in our libation.

8 Maruts, the man whose wrath is hard to master, he who would

slay us ere we think, 0 Vasus,

May he be tangled in the toils of mischief ; smite ye him
down with your most flaming weapon.

9 0 Maruts, ye consuming Gods, enjoy this offering brought for

you,

To help us, ye who slay the foe.

10 Sharers of household sacrifice, come, Maruts, stay not far away.
That ye may help us, Bounteous Ones.

11 Here, Self-strong Maruts, yea, even here, ye Sages with your

sunb right skins !

I dedicate your sacrifice.

12 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity.

As from its stem the cucumber, so may I be released from
death, not feit of immortality.

5 Whose bounties give you joy : or follow each other closely, and are ever
fresh and ready.

6 Svdkd : an exclamation, like Aye ! or Hail 1 used iu making oblations to
the Cods.

7 With purple backs : ntflaprishthih : cf. Horace's ‘ purpurei olores/

8 Mischief ; or one of the malicious spirits called Drubs.

12 Tryambaka ; a name of Rudra. Sweet : according to S&yana, sugdndhim,
sweet-smelling, means here, 4 whose fame is fragrant/ " The verse occurs in the
Yajur- Veda, 6. 30, and is, in some instances, differently interpreted ; Tryam-
baka is termed netrntrayopetam JRudram, the triocular Rudra : sugandhim,
divyagan dhopet am , of celestial fragrance : the tirvuruka is said, to mean the
karkand.hu [fruit of the jujube- tree], which, when ripe, falls of itself from its
stalk/ — Wilson. , ,

80

9BB HYMNS OP

[Won m

HYMN LX. Mitra- Varuna.

Wmn thou, 0 Sun, this day, arising sinless, shalt speak the
truth to Varuna and Mitraj

0 Aditi, may all the Deities love uS, and thou, 0 Aryaman,
while we are singings

2 Looking oil man, 0 Yaruna and Mitra, this Sun ascendeth up

by both the pathways,

Guardian of all things fixt> of all that moveth, beholding
good and evil acts of mortals.

3 He from their home hath yoked the Seven gold Coursers who,

dropping oil and fatness, carry Surya.

Yours, Yaruna and Mitra, he surveyeth the worlds and living
creatures like a herdsman.

4 Your coursers rich in store of sweets have mounted i to the

bright ocean Surya hath ascended,

For whom the Adityas make his pathway ready, Aryaman,
Mitra, Yaruna, accordant.

5 For these, even Aryaman, Yaruna, and Mitra, are the chas-

tisers of all guile and falsehood.

The.se, Aditi’s Sons, infallible and mighty, have waxen in the
home of Law Eternal.

6 These, Mitra, Yaruna, whom none 4 ece iveth, with great power

quicken even the fool to wisdom,

And, wakening, moreover, thoughtful insight, lead it by easy
paths o’er grief and trouble.

7 They ever vigilant, with eyes that close not, caring for heaven

and earth, lead on the thoughtless.

Even in the river’s bed there is a shallow : across this broad
expanse may they conduct us. •

8 When Aditi’ and Yaruna and Mitra, like guardians, give Sudas

their friendly shelter,

Granting him sons and lineal succession, let us not, bold ones !
move the Gods to anger.

The hymn is addressed chiefly to Mitra and Yaruna, but S arya or the Sun
is the deity of the first stanza,

1 Sinless: Sftyana makes dnfigdh-andgasah : c declare the truth... that we
are void of sin.’-— Wilson. But this seems forced, and the implied meaning of
the poet is clear enough if the word is taken in its usual signification.

2 Both the pathways : near the earth and high in the firmament.

6 Mitra, Vanina : and Aryaman, understood : the verbs are in the plural.

8 Bold ones : the warning is addressed to the people of Sud&s, who has been
frequently mentioned in preceding hymns.

HYMN 61.]

THE RIG VEDA.

n

9 May he with offerings purify the altar from any stains of
Yanina's re viler.

Aryaman save us from all those who hate us : give room and
freedom to Sudas, ye Mighty.

10 Hid from our eyes is their resplendent meeting: by their

mysterious might they hold dominion.

Heroes ! we cry trembling in fear before you, even in the great-
ness of your power have mercy.

11 He who wins favour for his prayer by worship, that he may

gain him strength and highest riches,

That good man's mind the Mighty Ones will follojv : they have
brought comfort to his spacious dwelling.

12 This priestly task, Gods ! Yaruna and Mitra ! hath been par-

formed for you at sacrifices.

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, ye
Gods, with blessings.

r

HYMN LXI. Mitra-Varuna.

0 Yaruna and Mitra, Sftrya spreading the beauteous light of
you Twain Gods ariseth.

He who beholdeth all existing creatui'es observeth well the zeal
that is in mortals/ r

2 The holy sage, renowned afai’, direeteth his hymns to you, 0

Yaruna and Mitra, —

He whose devotions, sapient Gods, ye favour so that ye fill, as
'twere, with power his autumns.

3 From the wide earth, 0 Varuna and Mitra, from the great

lofty heaven, ye, Bounteous Givers,

Have in the fields and houses set your warders who visit every
spot and watch unceasing.

4 : I praise the strength of Yaruna and Mitra : that strength, by
mightiness, keeps both worlds asunder.

Pleroless pass the months of the ungodly : he who loves sacri-
fice makes his home enduring.

9 May he ; Agni may be intended. Vanina's reviler: those who speak evil
of princes like Sud&s, Varuna being the king’s prototype. —Ludwig.

10 Their resplendent meeting : that of Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman.

11 Have brought comfort to his spacious dwelling; ‘ bestow a spacious man*
sion for a dwelling upon him.’ — Wilson.

2 Autumns: years of his life.

m TBS BY MBS OF {BOOB Fit

5 Steers, all infallible are these your people in whom no wondrous

thing is seen, no worship.

Guile follows close the men who are untruthful : no secrets
may be hidden from your knowledge.

6 I will exalt your sacrifice with homage ; as priest, I, Mitra-

Varuna, invoke you.

May these new hymns and prayers that I have fashioned
delight you to the profit of .the singer.

7 This priestly task, Gods ! Varuna and Mitra !' hath been per-

formed for you at sacrifices.

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, ye
Gods, tfith blessings.

HYMN LXIL Mitra-Varursai.

SiVrya hath sent aloft his beams of splendour o’er all the
tribes of men in countless places.

Together with the heaven he shines apparent, formed by his>
Makers well with power and wisdom.

2 So hast thou mounted up before us, Surya, through these our

praises, with fleet dappled horses.

Declare us free from all offence to Mitra, and Varuna, and!
Aryaman, and Agni.

3 May holy Agni, Varuna, and M%a send down their riches

upon us in thousands.

May they, the Bright Ones, make our praise-song perfect, and,,
when we laud them, grant us all our wishes.

4 0 undivided Heaven and Earth, preserve us, us, Lofty Ones f

your nobly-born descendants.

Let us not anger Varuna, nor Vayu, nor him, the dearest
Friend of mortals, Mitra. r

5 Stretch forth your arms and let O'Ur lives be lengthened ^

with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle.

Ye Youthful, make us famed among the people : hear, Mitra-
Varuna, these mine invocations.

5 This stanza is difficult, te&yana’s interpretation as given by Wilson is r
* Unperplexed, all-pervading showerers (of benefits), these praises are for you,
in which nothing surprising, no adoration (worthy of you), is beheld; the in-
sincere commendations of men serve as offences ; eulogies of you, although
offered in secret are not unappreciated/ The version of the Seventy Hymns is
somewhat as follows : ‘ All your avenging spirits, 0 ye Mighty, follow unerr-
ingly the sinner’s traces. They have no sign that men may mark, no figure.
Naughtr-is^so secret that ye fail to know it.’ This latter involves a slight
alteration offtlie text. I prefer Ludwig’s interpretation, although it is not
absolutely convihgiiig.

6 To the profit of'tye singer: see Yedische Studien, I. 43.

HYMN 64.]

THE MIG VEDA.

m

6 Now Mitra, Yaruna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room*
for us and for our children.

May we find paths all fair and good to travel. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LX I II. Mitra-Yaruna,

Common to all mankind, auspicious Surya, he who beholdeth all,
is mounting upward ;

The God, the eye of Yaruna and Mitra, who rolled up dark-
- ness like a piece of leather.

2 Siirya’s great ensign, restless as the billow, that urgeth men

to action, is advancing ;

Onward he still would roll the wheel well-rounded, which
Etasa, harnessed to the car-pole, moveth.

3 Refulgent from the bosom of the Mornings, he in whom singers

take delight ascendeth.

This Savitar, God, is my chief joy and pleasure, who breaketh
not the universal statute. m

4 Golden, far-seeing, from the heaven he riseth : far is his goal,

he hasteth on resplendent.

Men, verily, inspirited by Surya speed to their aims and do
the work assigned them.

5 Where the Immortals have prepared his pathway he flieth

through the region lil?e a falcon.

With homage and oblations will we serve you, 0 Mitra-Yaruna,
when the Sun hath risen.

6 Now Mitra, Yaruna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room,

for us and for our children.

May we find paths all fair and good to travel. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXIY. Mitra-Varuna.

Ye Twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, clothed
be your clouds in robes of oil and fatness.

May the imperial Varnna, and Mitra, and high-born Aryaman
accept our presents.

2 Kings, guards of mighty everlasting Order, come hitherward,
ye Princes, Lords of Rivers.

Send us from heaven, 0 Yaruna and Mitra, rain and sweet
food, ye who pour down your bounties,

2 Elam: or, the bright or dappled steed ; one of the horses of the Sun. .

3 Breaketh not : faithfully observes and supports.

1 Chiliad be your clouds : 1 A covering cloud of sacred oil attends you
(V. 62. 4). * Impelled by you, (the clouds) assume the form of rain.’— Wilson.

U THE HYMNS OF [BOOK PlL

3 May the dear God, and Vanina, and Mitra conduct us by the

most effective pathways,

That foes may say unto Sud^s our chieftain, May we, too, joy
in food with Gods to guard us.

4 Him who hath wrought for you this car in spirit, who makes

the song rise upward and sustains it,

Bedew with fatness, Varuna and Mitra : ye Kings, make glad
the pleasant dwelling-places.

5 To you this laud, 0 Varuna and Mitra, is offered like bright

Soma juice to Vayu,

Favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. Preserve
us eveifbiore, ye Gods, with blessings,

HYMN LXV Mitra- Varuna.

With hymns I call you, when the Sun hath risen, Mitra, and
Varuna whose thoughts are holy,

Whose Power Divine, supreme and everlasting, comes with good
heed at each man’s supplication.

2 For they are Asuras of Go Is, the friendly : make, both of you,

our lands exceeding fruitful.

May we obtain you, Varuna and Mitra, wherever Heaven and
Earth and days may bless us.

3 Bonds of the sinner, they bear many nooses : the wicked mortal

hardly may escape them. °

Varuna-Mitra, may your path of Order bear us o’er trouble as
a boat o’er waters.

4 Come, taste our offering, Varuna and Mitra : bedew our pasture

with sweet food and fatness.

Pour down in plenty here upon the people the choicest of your
fair celestial water.

3 The second half of the stanza is obscure. The meaning appears to be
that even our foes, the godless who offer no sacrifices, shall envy the pros-
perity which we enjoy through the liberality of Sudfis, and shall wish to fol-
low our example, to sacrifice to the Gods and to enjoy their protection and
the blessings which they send.

4 This car : this carefully-formed hymn which goes, like a chariot, to the
Gods.

5 To Vdiju : who receives the first draught of Soma juice at the morning

libation.

The hymn appears to be composed of fragments of other hymns with a
few original additions. Cf. VII 63. 5; 66, 7. 12; VI. 68, 8; VII, 62. 5; III
62. 16. See von Bradke, Dyaus Asura, 3 — 5.

1 Power Divine : asuryam : Asurahood. MTiose : refers to Mitra and Varuna.

2 A mras of Gods : the high or ruling Gods of all the deities.

8 Bonds : binders. Many nooses : * Your guiles, ye Holy Ones, to quell op-
pressors, your snares spread out against the foe, Adityas’ (II. 27. 16).

BYUN 66.]

THE RIG VEDA.

65

5 To you this laud, 0 Varuna and Mitra, is offered, like bright
Soma juice to Vayu.

Favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXVI. Mitra-V&runa.

Let our strong hymn of praise go forth, the laud of Mitra-
Varuna,

With homage to that high-born Pair ;

2 The Two exceeding wise, the Sons of Daksha, whom the Gods

ordained

For lordship, excellently great. *

3 Such, Guardians of our homes and us, 0 Mitra- Varuna, fulfil
The thoughts of those who sing your praise.

4 So when the Sun hath risen to-day, may sinless Mitra, Arya-

man,

Bhaga, and Savitar send us forth.

5 May this our home be guarded well : forward, ye Bounteous,

on the way,

Who bear us safely o’er distress.

6 And those Self-reigning, Aditi, whose statute is inviolate,

The Kings who mle a \^st domain.

7 Soon as the Sun h tth risen, to you, to Mitra- Varuna, I sing,
And Aryaman who slays the foe.

8 With wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested

power and might,

And, Brahmans, gain the sacrifice.

9 May we be thine, God Varuna, and with our princes, Mitra,

thine :

Food and Heaven’s light will we obtain.

10 Many are they who strengthen Law, Sun-eyed, with Agni for
their tongue,

2 Sons of Daksha * see VI. 50. 2. For lordship : literally for Asurahood.

4 Sinless: S&yana here, as in VII 60. 1, takes dndgdh &s — andgasah, so
that, according to his interpretation, the translation would be : may Savitar,
Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga send us sinless forth.

6 Aditi is out of place here, as there is no copulative in the text : whose
mother is Aditi, seems to be intended.

8 And, Brahmans , gain the sacrifice : the exact meaning is uncertain : ‘May
it (be effective), sages, for the fulfilment of (the objects of) the sacrifice.’ — -
Wilson,

5

66 TBM HYMNS OF [BOOK VII

They who direct the three great gatherings with their
thoughts, yea, all things with surpassing might.

11 They who have stablished year and month and then the day,

night, sacrifice and holy verse,

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the Kings, have won dominion which
none else may gain.

12 So at the rising of the Sun we think of you with hymns

to-day,

Even as Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman deserve : ye are the chariot-
eers of Law.

13 True to Law, born in Law, the strengtheners of Law, terrible,

haters of the false,

In their felicity which gives the best defence may we men and
our princes dwell.

14 Uprises, on the slope of heaven, that marvel that attracts the

sight,

As swift celestial Etasa bears it away, prepared for every eye
to see.

15 Lord of each single bead, of fixt and moving things, equally

through the whole expanse,

The Seven sister Bays bear Surya on his car, to bring us
wealth and happiness. r

16 A hundred autumns may we see that bright Eye, God-ordain-

ed, arise :

A hundred autumns may we live.

17 Infallible through your wisdom, come hither, resplendent

Varuna,

And Mitra, to the Soma draught.

18 Come as the laws of Heaven ordain, Varuna, Mitra, void of

guile :

Press near and drink the Soma juice.

19 Come, Mitra, Varuna, accept, Heroes, our sacrificial gift :

Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law.

f

1 0 The three great gatherings: or three assemblies. The meaning is not clear.
Ludwig is of opinion that the three castes are intended.

The meaning of stanzas 10 and 51 is that although there be many deities
Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman are supreme.

15 Sister Bays: the Harits. See IV. 6. 9; 13. 3.

18 Cme as the laws of Heaven ordain : * Come with your glories from the
sky.’ — Styana. ‘ Come hither with the hosts of heaven.’ — Grassmann.

HYMN 67.]

THE RIG VEDA.

67

HYMN LXVIL Asvins.

X with a holy heart that brings oblation will sing forth praise
to meet your car, ye Princes, 1

Which, Much-desired I hath wakened as your envoy. I call
you hither as a son his parents.

2 Brightly hath Agni shone by us enkindled: the limits even

of darkness were apparent.

Eastward is seen the Banner of the Morning, the Banner bora
to give Heaven’s Daughter glory.

3 With hymns the deft priest is about you, Asvins, the eloquent

priest attends you now, N&satyas.

Come by the paths that ye are wont to travel, ’on car that
finds the light, laden with treasure.

4 When, suppliant for your help, Lovers of Sweetness ! I seek-

ing wealth call you to our libation,

Hitherward let your vigorous horses bear you : drink ye with
us the well-pressed Soma juices. ^

5 Bring forward, Asvins, Gods, to its fulfilment my never-weari-

ed prayer that asks for riches.

Vouchsafe us all high spirit in the combat, and with your
powers, 0 Lords of Power, assist us.

6 Favour us in these prayers of ours, 0 Asvins, May we have

genial vigour, ne’er to fail us.

So may we, strong in children and descendants, go, wealthy,
to the banquet that awaits you.

7 Lovers of Sweetness, we have brought this treasure to you as

’twere an envoy sent for friendship.

Come unto us with spirits free from anger, in homes of men
enjoying ou& oblation.

& With one, the same, intention, ye swift movers, o’er the Seven
Fivers hath your chariot travelled.

Yoked by the Gods, your strong steeds never weary while
speeding forward at the pole they bear you.

9 Exhaustless be your bounty to our princes who with their
wealth incite the gift of riches,

Who further friendship with their noble natures, combining
wealth in kine with wealth in horses.

1 Much-desired : ( adorable. 1 — Wilson.

$ Incite the gift of riches ; move the Gods to give riches in return.
Friendship : or, a kinsman, meaning, apparently, the priest

68 TME HYMNS OF (BOO# VIZ,

10 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation: come, Asvins,
to the home where food aboundeth.

Youehsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXYIII. Asvins.

Come, radiant Asvins, with your noble horses : accept your
servant’s hymns, ye Wonder-Workers :

Enjoy oblations which we bring to greet you.

2 The gladdening juices stand prepared before you : come quick-

ly and partake of mine oblation.

Pass by tjie calling of our foe and hear us.

3 Your chariot with a hundred aids, 0 Asvins, beareth you swift

as thought across the regions,

Speeding to us, 0 ye whose wealth is SdryA

4 What time this stone of yours, the Gods’ adorer, upraised,

sounds forth for you as Soma-presser,

" Let the priest bring you, Fair Ones, through oblations.

5 The nourishment ye have is, truly, wondrous : ye gave there-

of a quickening store to Atri,

Who, being dear to you, receives your favour.

6 That gift, which all may gain, ye gave Chyav&na, when he

g *ew old, who offered you oblations,

When ye bestowed on him enduring beauty.

7 What time his wicked friends abandoned Bhujyu, 0 Asvins,

in the middle of the ocean,

Your horse delivered him, your faithful servant.

3 Whose wealth is SAn/d : having Stiryd for your possession or treasure.
Sfiryd, the daughter of the Sun. is the consort of the A*vins. See I. 116. 17.

4 The Gods' adorer: devayfth : literally, turning or going to the Gods, in-
asmuch as it is employed in preparing the Soma juice. The priest : here,
perhaps, the pressing-stone.

5 A quickening store : the meaning of mdhishvantam , which does not occu r
elsewhere, is uncertain. According to Sdyana it means a pit or cavern : ye
liberated Atri from the cavern, or, literally, ye separated the cavern from Atri.
For the legmd, see I. 116. 12.

6- Which all may gain : which you Asvins are ready to grant to every
worshipper Who needs it. For the story of Chyavdna seel. J16. 10’ 117
13; 118.6.

7 Bhujyu: see Vol. I., Index. Your horse: this meaning is suggested by
von Roth for the uncertain word ardvd, which generally appears to mean
hostile or illiberal 1 ut may perhaps Stand in this passage for arvd, a common
wur<l signifying h or e. S ‘e I. 117. 14 ‘ With horses brown of hue that flew

with swift wmgs ye 1 rought back Bhujyu from the sea of billows.’ bee also
VII. 69. 7.

EYMN 60.]

THE RIGVEDA .

69

8 Ye lent your aid to Vrika when exhausted, and listened when

invoked to Sayu’s calling.

Ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, Asvins,
strengthened with your strength the barren.

9 With his fair hymns this singer, too, extols you, waking with

glad thoughts at the break of morning.

May the cow nourish him with milk to feed him. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXIX. Asvins.

May your gold chariot, drawn by vigorous horses, come to us,
blocking up the earth aud heaven, *

Bright with its fellies while its way drops fatness, food-laden,
rich in coursers, man’s protector.

2 Let it approach, yoked by the will, three-seate 1, extending fay

and wide o'er fivefold beings,

Whereon ye visit God-adoring races, bending your cours^
whither ye will, 0 Asvins.

3 Benowned, with noble horses, come ye hither : drink, Wond-

rous Pair, the cup that holds sweet juices.

Your car whereon your Spouse is wont to travel marks with
its track the farthest ends of heaven.

4 When night was turning to the grey of morning the Maiden,

Surya’s Daughter, chose your splendour.

When with your power and might ye aid the pious he comes
through heat to life by your assistance.

.5 0 Chariot-borne, this car of yours invested with rays of light
comes harnessed to our dwelling.

Herewith, 0 Asvins, while the dawn is breaking, to this our
sacrifice brisg peace and blessing.

6 Like the wild cattle thirsty for the lightning, Heroes, come
nigh this day to our libations.

Men call on you with hymns in many places, but let not other
worshippers detain you.

8 Vrika; literally wolf, or robber. Some man so named seems to be meant.
Sayu: see I. 118. 8; VI. 13. 5.

9 This singer: the Rishi Vasishtha. The cow: that is brought to supply
the milk required for libations.

2 Fivefold beings: ( sarvaprdninah, 1 all living beings, says S&yana.

3 Your Spouse : Sury.i, daughter of the Sun.

4c Chose your splendour : Beel. 116. 17.

6 Thirsty for the lightning: which immediately precedes, or accompanies,
the rain they long for.

70 TM HYMNS OP [BOOK fit

7 Bhujyu, abandoned in the midst of ocean, ye raised from out

the water with your horses,

Uninjured, winged, flagging not, undaunted, with deeds of
wonder saying him, 0 Asvins,

8 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation : come, Asvins,

to the home where food aboundeth.

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings,

HYMN LXX. Asvins,

Rich in all blessings, Asvins, come ye hither : this place on
earth is*called your own possession,

Like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth, whereon, as
in a lap, ye seat you firmly.

2 This most delightful eulogy awaits you : in the man's house

drink-offering hath been heated,

r Which bringeth you over the seas and rivers, yoking as 'twere
two well-matched shining horses.

3 Whatever dwellings ye possess, 0 Asvins, in fields of men or

in the streams of heaven.

Resting upon the summit of the mountain, or bringing food
to him who gives oblation,

4: Delight yourselves, ye Gods, in plants and waters when Rishis
give them and ye find they suit you.

Enriching us with treasures in abundance ye have looked back
to former generations.

5 Asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, regard the

many prayers which Bishis offer.

Come to the man even as his heart desireth ; may we enjoy
your most delightful favour. *

6 Come to the sacrifice offered you, Nasatyas, with -men, obla-

tions, and prayer duly uttered.

Come to Vasishtha as his heart desireth, for unto you these
holy hymns are chanted.

7 Horses : not in the text, but supplied by S&yana and obviously understood.
See preceding hymn, 7, note.

1 This place: the altar.

2 Drink-offering ; ghanna : the libation of hot milk ; or, the caldron in which
it Is prepared.

4 Ye have looked hack to former generations : S&yana explains yugtfni diffe-
rently : c (favour us) as you have favoured former couples [i e, sacrifices and
their wives].’ — Wilson.

The man ; the institute of the sacrifice.

ItlMN 71]

RIGfEDA.

n

7 This is the thought, this is the song, 0 Asvins ; accept this
hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour.

May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you.
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXI. Asvins.

The Night retireth from the Dawn her Sister ; the Dark one
yield eth to the Red her pathway.

Let us invoke you rich in steeds and cattle : by day and night
keep far from us the arrow.

2 Bearing rich treasure in your car, 0 Asvins, come to the

mortal who presents oblation. ^

Keep at a distance penury and sickness ; Lovers of Sweetness,
day and night preserve us.

3 May your strong horses, seeking bliss, bring hither your

chariot at the earliest flush of morning.

With coursers yoked by Law drive hither, Asvins, your car
whose reins are light, laden with treasure. *

4 The chariot, Princes, that conveys you, moving at daylight,

triple-seated, fraught with riches,

Even with this come unto us, Nasatyas, that laden with all
food it may approach us.

5 Ye freed Chyavana frorg old age and weakness : ye brought

the courser fleet of foot to Pedu.

Ye rescued Atri from distress and darkness, and loosed for
Jahusha the bonds that bound him.

6 This is the thought, this is the song, 0 Asvins : accept this

hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour.

May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you.
Preserve us .evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXII. Asvins.

Come, 0 N&satyas, on your car resplendent, rich in abundant
wealth of kine and horses.

As harnessed steeds, all our laudations follow you whose forms
shine with most delightful beauty.

2 Gome with the Gods associate, come ye hither to us, N&satyas,

with your car accordant.

5 Twixt you and us there is ancestral friendship and common
kin : remember and regard it.

1 The Med : the Sun. The arrow : of disease and death.

3 Seeking bliss : for men.

5 For Chyctv&na, Pedu, Atri, and Jdhusha, see Vol. I. Index. The re-ap-
pearance, heralded by the Asvins or Gods of Twilight, of the departed Sun
appears to be symbolized in all these legends.

n THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII

3 Awakened are the songs that praise the Asvins, the kindred

prayers and the Celestial Mornings.

Jnviting those we long for, Earth and Heaven, the singer
calleth these Nasatyas hither.

4 What time the Dawns break forth in light, 0 Asvins, to you

the poets offer their devotions.

God Savitar hath sent aloft his splendour, and fires sing praises
with the kindled fuel.

5 Come from the west, come from the east, N&satyas, come, As-

vins, from below and from above us.

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve
us everlnore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXIII. Asvins.

Wje have o’erpassed the limit of this darkness while, worship-
ping the Gods, we sang their praises.

The song invoketh both Immortal Asvins, far-reaching, born
*• of old, great Wonder-Workers.

2 And, 0 Nasatyas, man’s dear Priest is seated, who brings to

sacrifice and offers worship.

Be near and taste the pleasant juice, 0 Asvins : with food,
I call you to the sacrifices.

3 We choosing you, have let our worship follow its course : ye

Steers, accept this hymn with favour.

Obeying you as your appointed servant, Vasishtha singing
hath with lauds aroused you.

4 And these Two Priests come nigh unto our people, united,

demon-slayers, mighty-handed.

The juices that exhilarate are mingled. Injure us not, but
come with happy fortune.

5 Come from the west, come from the east, Nasatyas, come, As-

vins, from below and from above us.

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXiV. Asvins.

These morning sacrifices call you. Asvins, at the break of day.
For help have I invoked you rich in power and might : for,
house by house, ye visit all.

5 The Fivefold People : the five Aryan* tribes. See I. 7. 9.

1 The first half-line has occurred before in I. 92. 6, and 183. 6.

2 Man's dear Priest: Agni.

.4 These Two Priests: the Asvins. Hemon-slaye^'S: slayers of RAkshasaa and
evil spirits of the night which disappear at the coining of the heralds of day.

HYMN 75.] THE MGVEDA. 73

2 0 Heroes, ye bestow wonderful nourishment : send it to him

whose songs are sweet.

Accordant, both of you, drive your car down to us, and drink
the savoury Soma juice.

3 Approach ye and be near to us : drink, 0 ye Asvins, of the

meath.

Draw forth the milk, ye Mighty, rich in genuine wealth : in-
jure us not, and come to us.

4 The horses that convey you in their rapid flight down to the

worshipper’s abode,

With these your speedy coursers, Heroes, Asyjns, come, ye
Gods, come w ell-inclined to us.

5 Yea, verily, our princes seek the Asvins in pursuit of food.
These shall give lasting glory to our. liberal lords, and, both

Nasatyas, shelter us.

6 Those who have led the way, like cars, offending none, thos^

who are guar dians of the men —

Also through their own might the heroes have grown strong,
and dwell in safe and happy homes.

HYMN LXXV. Dawn.

Born in the heavens the Dawn hath flushed, and showing her
majesty is come as Law ordaineth.

She hath uncovered fiends and hateful darkness ; best of
Angirases, hath waked the pathways.

2 Rouse us this day to high and happy fortune : to great felicity,

0 Dawn, promote us.

Vouchsafe us manifold and splendid riches, famed among mor-
tals, man-befriending Goddess i

3 See, lovely Morning’s everlasting splendours, bright with their

varied ^colours, have approached us.

Filling tfie region of mid-air, producing the rites of holy wor-
ship, they have mounted.

4 She yokes her chariot far away, and swiftly visits the lands

where the Five Tidbes are settled,

Looking upon the works and ways of mortals, Daughter of
Heaven, the world’s Imperial Lady.

3 Draw forth the milk: milk the sweet rain from the firmament.

6 Who have led the way, like cars ; wealthy nobles or princes, ‘the heroes* of
the second line.

, 1 Best of Angirases : endowed with the noblest characteristics of the holy
Angirases. Waked the pathways : lighted them for men to use.

/

74 THE HYMNS OP [J WOK VIZ

5 She who is rich in spoil, the Spouse of Surya, wondrously

opulent, rules all wealth and treasures.

Consumer of our youth, the seers extol her ; lauded by priests
rich Dawn shines out refulgent.

6 Apparent are the steeds of varied colour, the red steeds car-

rying resplendent Morning.

On her all-lovely car she comes, the Fair One, and brings rich
treasure for her faithful servant.

7 True with the True and Mighty with the Mighty, with Gods

a Goddess, Holy with the Holy,

She brake^strong fences down and gave the cattle : the kine
were lowing as they greeted Morning.

8 0 Dawn, now give us wealth in kine and heroes, and horses,

fraught with manifold enjoyment.

Protect our sacred grass from man’s reproaches. Preserve us
f evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXVI. Da to.

Savitar God of all men hath sent upward his light, designed
for all mankind, immortal.

Through the Gods’ power that Eye was first created. Dawn
hath made all the universe apparent.

2 I see the paths which Gods are wont to travel, innocuous paths

made ready by the Vasus,

Eastward the flag of Dawn hath been uplifted; she hath come
hither o’er the tops of houses.

3 Great is, in truth, the number of the Mornings which were

aforetime at the Sun’s uprising,

Since thou, 0 Dawn, hast been beheld repairing as to thy love,

• as one no more to leave him.

£ They were the Gods’ companions at the banquet, # the ancient
sages true to Law Eternal.

The Fathers found the light that lay in darkness, and with
effectual words begat the Morning.

7 Gave the cattle : restored the rays of light that had beeu imprisoned by
the demons of darkness.

3 .is to thy love : to the Sun, who is sometimes called the lover and some-
times the husband of Ushas or Dawn.

4 The Fathers; the ancestors of the Kishis in the spirit- world are associated
with the Gods as companions, friends,’ and assistants, SeeM. Muller, India,
What can it Teach us f pp. 223, 224.

THE El GY EH A.

HYMN 77.]

75

5 Meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive not, of one

mind, one with another.

They never break the Gods’ eternal statutes, and injure none,
in rivalry with Yasus.

6 Extolling thee, Blest Goddess, the Vasishthas, awake at early

morn, with lauds implore thee.

Leader of kine and Queen of all that strengthens, shine, come
as first to us, 0 high-born Morning.

7 She bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices. The flush-

ing Dawn is sung by the Vasishthas,

Giving us riches famed to distant places. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXVII, Dawn.

She hath shone brightly like a youthful woman, stirring to
motion every living creature.

Agni hath come to feed on mortals’ fuel. She hath made
light and chased away the darkness. ^

2 Turned to this All, far-spreading, she hath risen and shone in

brightness with white robes about her.

She hath beamed forth lovely with golden colours, Mother of
kine, Guide of the days she bringeth.

3 Bearing the Gods’ own Eye, auspicious Lady, leading her

Courser white and fair to look on,

Distinguished by her beams Dawn shines apparent, come
forth to all the world with wondi'ous treasure.

4 Draw nigh with wealth and dawn away the foeman : prepare

for us wide pasture free from danger.

Drive away those who hate us, bring us riches : pour bounty,
opulent Lady, on the singer.

5 Send thy most excellent beams to shine and light us, giving

us lengthened days, 0 Dawn, 0 Goddess,

Granting** us food, thou who hast all things precious, and
bounty rich in chariots, kine, and horses.

6 0 Ushas, nobly-born, Daughter of Heaven, whom the Vasish-

thas with their hymns make mighty,

Bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

6 In the same enclosure : the vast aerial hall in which the Gods assemble.

1 Agni hath come to feed on mortals ’ fuel ; ( Agni is to be kindled for the
good of men.’ — Wilson.

2 Kine : rays of light.

3 The Gods' own Eye , and Dawn’s white Course are the Sun,

76 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIL

HYMN LXXVIIL Dawn.

Wk have beheld her earliest lights approaching : her many'" - ^
glories part, on high, asunder.

On car sublime, refulgent, wending hither, 0 Ushas, bring the
wealth that makes us happy.

. 2 The fire well-kindled sings aloud to greet her, and with their
hymns the priests are chanting welcome.

Ushas approaches in her splendour, driving all evil darkness
far away, the Goddess.

3 Apparent eastward are those lights of Morning, sending out

lustre, Sts they rise, around them.

She hath brought forth Sun, sacrifice, and Agni, and far away
hath fled detested darkness.

4 Rich Daughter of the Sky, we all behold her,, yea, all men

look on Dawn as she is breaking.
r Her car that moves self-harnessed hath she mounted, the car
drawn onward by her well-yoked horses.

5 Inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee, we and

our wealthy nobles have awakened.

Show yourselves fruitful, Dawns, as ye are rising. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXCX. Dawn,

Rousing the lands where men’s Five Tribes are settled, Dawn
hath disclosed the pathways of the people.

She hath sent out her sheen with beauteous oxen. The Sun
with light hath opened earth and heaven.

2 They paint their bright rays on the sky" s far limits : the

Dawns come on like tribes arrayed for battle.

Thy cattle, closely shutting up the darkness, asSawitar spreads
his arms, give forth their lustre.

3 Wealthy, most like to Indra, Dawn bath risen, and brought

forth lauds that shall promote our welfare.

Daughter of Heaveu, a Goddess, she distributes, best of Angi-
rases, treasures to the pious.

1 Five Tribes: of Aryans. Pathways : pathi/fl here has apparently the
same meaning as in VIL 75. 1. But according to the Pada text and S&yana
it is an adjective agreeing with Ushah (Dawn), and signifying beneficial.

2 TheyT the Dawns. Far battle : supplied by Sayuna.

3 Best of Anyirases : see VIL 75. 1,

HYMN 81 J

THE RIQYEDA.

11

4 Bestow on us, 0 Dawn, that ample bounty which thou didst

send to those who sang thy praises ;

Thou whom with bellowings of a bull they quickened : thou
didst unbar the firm-set mountain’s portals.

5 Impelling every God to grant his bounty, sending to us the

charm of pleasant voices,

Youchsafe us thoughts, for profit, as thou breakest. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LX XX. Dawn.

The priests, Vasishthas, are the first awakened to welcome
Ushas with their songs and praises,

Who makes surrounding regions pari asunder, and shows ap-
parent all existing creatures.

2 Giving fresh life when she hath hid the darkness, this Dawn

hath wakened there with new-born lustre.

Youthful and unrestrained she cometh forward : she hath#
turned thoughts to Sun and fire and worship.

3 May blessed Mornings shine on us for ever, with wealth of

kine, of horses, and of heroes,

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HJMN LXXXL Dawn.

Advancing, sending forth her rays, the Daughter of the Sky
is seen.

Uncovering, that we may see, the mighty gloom, the friendly
Lady makes the light.

2 The Sun ascending, the refulgent Star, pours down his beams

together with the Dawn.

0 Dawn, at tAaiue arising, and the Sun’s, may we attain the
share allotted us.

3 Promptly we woke to welcome thee, 0 Ushas, Daughter of

the Sky,

Thee, Bounteous One, w r ho bringest all we long to have, and to
the offerer health and wealth.

4 The second line is translated by Prof. Wilson ; * thou whom (thy worship-
pers) welcomed with clamour (loud as the bellowing) of a bull.’

Eortate : the doors of the mountain or cloud in which the cows or rays 'of
light were imprisoned. Ushas is by implication entreated to open these doora
now for the singer of the hymn.

2 She hath turned thoughts : or, with S&yana, ‘she hath made manifest
sacrifice, Sun, and Agni.’ Of. VTI. 78. 8.

5 Tills stanza is repeated from VII. 41, 7,

78 THE HYMNS OF [ hOOKVTl.

4 Thou, dawning, workest fain to light the great world, yea,

heaven, Goddess ! that it may be seen.

We yearn to be thine own, Dealer of Wealth : may we be to
this Mother like her sons.

5 Bring us that wondrous bounty, Dawn, that shall be famed

most far away.

What, Child of Heaven, thou bast of nourishment for man,
bestow thou on us to enjoy.

6 Give to our princes opulence and immortal fame, and strength

in herds of kine to us.

May she who prompts the wealthy. Lady of sweet strains, may
Ushas Sawn our foes away.

HYMN LXXXir. Indra-Yaruna.

Gbant us your strong protection, Indra-Yaruna, our people,
and our family, for sacrifice,

^ May we subdue in fight our evil-hearted foes, him who attacks
the man stedfast in lengthened rites.

2 0 Indra-Yaruna, mighty and very rich ! One of you is called

Monarch and One Autocrat.

All Gods in the most lofty region of the air have, 0 ye Steers,
combined all power and might in you.

3 Ye with your strength have piercecfthe fountains of the floods:

the Sun have ye brought forward as the Lord in heaven.
Cheered by this magic draught ye, Indra-Yaruna, made the dry
places stream, made songs of praise flow forth.

4 In battles and in frays we ministering priests, kneeling upon

our knees for furtherance of our weal,

Invoke you, only you, the Lords of twofold wealth, you prompt
to hear, we bards, 0 Indra-Yaruna.

5 0 Indra-Yaruna, as ye created all these creatures of the world

by your surpassing might,

In peace and quiet Mitra waits on Yaruna, the Other, awful,
with the Maruts seeks renown.

6 Lady of meet strains : stinritdvati : according to Sftyana, e speaker of
truth.’ ‘Possessing all that is excellent.’ — Ludwig.

2 One of you: Yaruna is called sarnrdj or universal ruler (thoroughly re-
splendent, according to SfLyana), and Indra svarc^j, independent ruler, or,
according to S&yana, self-resplendent.

4 Twofold wealth : celestial and terrestrial.

5 Waits on Varuna: and so acknowledges his supremacy. The Other:-
Indra,

HYMN 83.] THE RIQVEDA. 79

6 That Yaruna’s high worth may shine preeminent, these Twain

have measured each his proper power and might.

The One subdueth the destructive enemy; the Other with a
few furthereth many a man.

7 No trouble, no misfortune, Indra-Yaruna, no woe from any

side assails the mortal man

Whose sacrifice, 0 Gods, ye visit and enjoy : ne’er doth the
crafty guile of mortal injure him.

8 With your divine protection, Heroes, come to us : mine invo-

cation hear, if ye be pleased therewith.

Bestow ye upon us, 0 Indra-Yaruna, your friendship and your
kinship and your favouring grace.

9 In battle after battle, Indra-Yaruna, be ye our Champions, ye

who are the peoples’ strength,

When both opposing bands invoke you for the fight, and men
that they may gain offspring and progeny.

10 May Indra, Yaruna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us glory
and great shelter spreading far. '

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar’s song
of praise, the God who strengthens Law.

HYMN LXXXIIL Indra-Yaruna.

Looking to you and your alliance, 0 ye Men, armed with
broad axes they went forward, fain for spoil.

Ye smote and slew his Dasaand his Aryan enemies, and helped
Sud4s with favour, Indra-Yaruna.

2 Where heroes come together with their banners raised, in the

encounter where is naught for us to love,

Where all things that behold the light are terrified, there did
ye comfort us, 0 Indra-Yaruna.

3 The boundary of earth were seen all dark with dust :

0 Indra-Yaruna, the shout went up to heaven.

The enmities of the people compassed me about. Ye heard
my calling and ye came to me with help.

6 The One: Yaruna.

Indra and Yaruna are praised by the Vasishthas, the family priests of Sudds,
King of the Tritsus, for having given him the victory over the ten confederate
Kings. See VII. 33. 3.

1 0 ye Men: or Heroes; Indra and Yaruna. Armed with "broad axes:
e armed with large sickles/ — Wilson. Ludwig maintains that the former
meaning is perfectly impossible, and argues that prithujodrsavak must mean
* the Prithus and the Parsus/

2 Where is naught for us to love: Prof. Grassmann, whom Prof. Peterson
follows, explains differently : * where all that is dear is at stake/

80 THE HYMNS OF (BOOH VJI.

1 With your resistless weapons, Indra-Varuria, ye conquered

Bheda and ye gave Sud&s your aid.

Ye heard the prayers of these amid the cries of war : effectual
was the service of the Tritsus' priest.

5 0 Indra-Varuna, the wickedness of foes and mine assailants'

hatred sorely trouble me.

Ye Twain are Lords of riches both of earth and heaven : so
grant to us your aid on the decisive day.

6 The men of both the hosts invoked you in the fight, Indra

and Varuna, that they might win the wealth,

What time ye helped Sudas, with all the Tritsu folk, when the
Ten Kings had pressed him down in their attack.

7 Ten Kings who worshipped not, 0 Indra-Varuna, confederate,

in war prevailed not o’er Sud&s.

True was the boast of heroes sitting at the feast : so at their
invocations Gods were on their side.
r 8 0 Indra-Varuna, ye gave Sudas your aid when the Ten Kings
in battle compassed him about,

There where the white- robed Tritsus with their braided hair,
skilled in song worshipped you with homage and with hymn.

9 One of you Twain destroys the Vritras in the fight, the Other

evermore maintains his holy Laws.

We call on you, ye Mighty, with Aur hymns of praise. Youch-
safe us your protection, Indra- Yaruna.

10 May Indra, Yaruna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us glory
and great shelter spreading far.

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar's song
of praise, the God who strengthens Law.

HYMN LXXXIV. Indra-Varuna.

Kings, Indra-Yaruna, I would turn you Either to this our
sacrifice with gifts and homage.

Held in both arms the ladle, dropping fatness, goes of itself
to you whose forms are varied.

2 Dyaus quickens and promotes your high dominion who bind

with bonds not wrought of rope or cordage.

Far from us still be Varuna's displeasure : may Indra give us
spacious room to dwell in.

4 Bheda; see VII. 18. 19.

5 Both of earth and heaven : or, perhaps, belonging to both sides.

8 With their braided hair : see VII. 33. 1.

10 This stanza is repeated from the preceding hymn.

2 Dyam: cf. VI. 62. 9. Not wrought of rope: moral and figurative, no
material.

HYMN 85.]

TEE DIGVEDA.

81

3 Make ye our sacrifice fair amid the assemblies : make ye our

prayers approved among our princes.

May God-sent riches come for our possession : further ye us
with your delightful succours. "

4 0 Indra-Varuna, vouchsafe us riches with store of treasure,

food, and^ every blessing;

For the Aditya, bauiaher of falsehood, the Hero, dealeth
wealth in boundless plenty.

5 May this my song reach Varuna and Tndra, and, strongly

urging, win me sons and offspring.

To the Gods’ banquet may we go with riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. *

HYMN LXXXY. Indra-Yaruna.

For you I deck a harmless hymn, presenting the Soma juice
to Vartma and Indra —

A hymn that shines like heavenly Dawn with fatness. May
they be near us on the march and guard us. ^

3 Here where the arrows fall amid the banners both hosts invoke
the Gods in emulation.

0 Indra- Varuna, smite back those our foernen, yea, smite them
with your shaft to every quarter.

3 Self-lucid ip their seats^e’en heavenly Waters endowed with

Godhead Varuna and Indra.

One of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, the Other
smites and slays resistless foemen.

4 Wise be the priest and skilled in Law Eternal, who with his

sacred gifts and adoration

Brings you to aid us with your might, Adityas : let him have
viands to promote his w elf are.

5 May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, strongly

urging, win me sons and offspring.

To the Gods’ banquet may we go with riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with, blessings.

4 The AcUtya, : Varuna.

% On the march: the Rishi prays for aid in an expected battle.

3 With Godhead : libations of Soma juice, with which water is mingled,
support the Gods in their several stations : somendpydyitd hi devatdh sve sve
st'hdne * vatishthante . — Sftyana. Distinct and sundered: differently treated, re-
warded or punished in accordance with their deserts. ‘The other sustain*
the separate creatures. 1 — Muir. * The one protects the tribes which are scat-
tered abroad. 1 — Qrassmann.

4 Wise be the priest: or, wise must the priest be, skilled, etc. Be: the
institutor of sacrifice. Viands : sacrificial food to be offered to the Gods.

6 .

82 TUB HYMNS OH [BOOK V1L

HYMN LXXXVI. Varuna.

Wise, verily, are creatures through his greatness who stayed
even spacious heaven and earth asunder ;
f Who urged the high and mighty sky to motion, the Star of
old, and spread the earth before him.

2 With mine own heart I commune on the question how Varuna

and I may be united.

Wb#t gift of mine will he accept unangered ? When may I
calmly look and find him gracious ?

3 Fain to know this my sin I question others : I seek the wise,

0 Yaruna, and ask them.

This one same answer even the sages gave me, Surely this
Yaruna is angry with thee.

4 What, Varunn, hath been my chief transgression, that thou

wouldst slay the friend who sings fchy praises ?

Tell n£e, Unconquerable Lord, and quickly sinless will I ap-
proach thee with mine homage.

5 Free us from sins committed by our fathers, from those where-

in we have ourselves offended.

0 King, loose, like a thief who feeds the cattle, as -from the
cord a calf, set free Vasishtha.

6 Not ouv own will betrayed us, but Seduction, thoughtlessness,

Yaruna I wine, dice, or anger.

The old is near to lead astray the younger: even sleep removeth
not all evil-doing.

7 Slavelike may I do service to the Bounteous, serve, free from

sin, the God inclined to anger.

This gentle Lord gives wisdom to the simple : the wiser God
leads on the wise to riches.

8 0 Lord, 0 Yaruna, may this laudation come close to thee and

lie within thy spirit.

May it be well with us in rest and labour. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

1 The Star : the Sun.

5 Like a thief who feeds the cattle : who hap performed penance for his theft,
and, at the completion of the service, offered fodder to the stolen animal: ‘ who
has feasted on stolen cattle.’ — M. Muller. But see Pischel, Vedische Studien.
I. p. 106.

6 Seduction: or, as Sty ana explains, ‘the settled course of fate.’

The old is near : { The stronger perverts the wea1< er.’— Muir. ‘ There is a
senior [God] in the proximity of the junior [man].’ — ’Wilson.

HYMH 87 J

THE RIGVEDA.

HYMN LXXXVII. Varuna.

Vartoa cut a pathway out for Surya, and led the watery floods
of rivers onward.

The Mares, as in a race, speed on in order. He made great
channels for the days to follow.

2 The wind, thy breath, hath sounded through the region like

a wild beast that seeks his food in pastures.

Within these two, exalted Earth and Heaven, 0 Varuna, ar£
all the forms thou lovest.

3 Yanina’s spies, sent forth upon their errand, survey the two

world-halves well formed and fashioned.

Wise are they, holy, skilled in sacrifices, the furtherers of the
praise-songs of the prudent.

4 To me who understand hath Varuna spoken, the names borne

by the Cow are three times seven.

The sapient God, knowing the place’s secret, shall speak as
’twere to teach the race that cometh.

5 On him three heavens rest and are supported, and the three

earths are there in sixfold order.

The wise King Varuna. hath made in heaven that Golden Swing
to cover it with glory.

6 Like • Varuna from heaven he sinks in Sindh u, like a white-

shining spark, a strong wild creature.

Buling in depths and meting out the region, great saving
power hath he, this, world’s Controller.

1 The Marts: the swift rivers. The half-line 5s difficult. 1 * 3 4 5 6 * T »'■■■ *■ : " .
his task) as a horse let loo^e rushes to (a Hock of) mares, he i ■ *r ■ ■

nights from the days.’ — Wilson. 1 Like a troop (of horses) let loose, following
the mares, he has made great channels for the clays.’ — Muir.

3 Varuna 7 s spies : the other Adityas, or perhaps the Fathers.

4 The Cow : according to Sftyana, V&k or Speech in the form of a cow
having twenty-one metres attached to her breast, throat, and head, or holding
the names of twenty-one kinds of sacrifice. Aditi may be intended, or Prism
with the thriee-seven Marufcs.

The sapient God: ‘The wise god, though he knows them, has not revealed ■
the mysteries of (her) place, which he desires to grant to a future generation.’ —
Muir. According to Sfiyana, nd in this line is not negative.

5 For the three heavens and three earths see Vol. I., Index, In sixfohl order :
perhaps referring to the heavens and earths, or else the three earths arbitrarily
doubled. * The three earths with their six seasons.’— Wilson. That Golden .
Swing : the Sun.

6 He: the Sun. Sindhn: or the sea. Ruling in depths: referring to
Varuna whose dominion, following the setting sun, reaches to the depths of
the ocean. Meting out the region : or, who measured out the firmament.
S&yana’s interpretation of this stanza is different ; ‘ (Radiant) as the sun,

Varuna placed the ocean (in its bed), white as a drop (of water), vigorous as
an antelope, object of profound praise, distributor of water, the powerful
transporter beyond sin, the ruler of this existing (world).’ — Wilson,

TWS HYMNS OF

[BOOH vir,

u

!J Before this Varuna may we be sinless — him who shows mercy
even to the sinner—

While we are keeping Acliti’s ordinances. Preserve us ever-
more. ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXXVIJJ, Varon*

Present to Yaruna thine hymn, Vasishtha, bright, most der
* lightful to the Bounteous Giver,

Who bringeth on to us the Bull, the lofty, the Holy, laden
with a thousand treasures.

2 And now, as J am come before his presence, I take the face of

Varuna 'for AgniA

So might he bring — Lord also of the darkness — the light m
heaven that I may see its beauty 1

3 When Yaruna and I embark together and urge our boat into

the midst of ocean,

We, when we ride o*er ridges of the waters, will swing within
that swing and there be happy.

4 Varuna placed Vasishtha in the vessel, and deftly with his

might made him a Rishi.

When days shone bright the Sage made him a singer, while
the heavens broadened and the Dawns were lengthened.

5 What hath become of those our ancient friendships, whei*

without enmity we walked together 1
I, Yaruna, thou glorious Lord, have entered thy lofty home ?
thine house with thousand portals.

6 if he, thy true ally, hath signed against thee, still, Yaruna,

he is the friend thou lovedst.

Let us not, Living One, as sinners, know t^ee : give shelter,
as a Sage, to him who lauds thee,

7 Aditi's ordmancet: according to S&yana, Adifd bore means Uhe Mighty,’
that is, Yaruna.

1 The Bull : the Sun,

2 For Agni'& : that is, it appears to nje to be flaming with anger.

3 1 2 3 4 The kernel of the hynin lies in verses 3 to 6. The singer believes that

he has been forsaken by his helper Yaruna } with anguish he remembers his
communion with the God in former tip;es. In a vision he sees himself trims-:
3a.tei.into Yaruna’s realm, he goes sailing with the God, is called to be Ilishi
or h'oly singer to the God, and is in his palace with him. Nfow, Yaruna has
withdrawn his favour, yet let him have mercy on his singer, and not punish
him F* r , \ " his sin. The hymn perhaps originally closed with verse

■ ■ ’■ "■ note in the Skbenziy IAeder, translated by Prof,

Peterson. $ut see jnilebrandt, Kanina und Mkra, pp. 25, 2§.

HYMN ad.J TEfJ RtGYEEL

7 While we abide in these fixed habitations, and frotn the lap of
Aditi win favour,

May Varuna untie the bond that binds us. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXllX. Varuna.

Let me not yet, iting Varuna, enter into the house of clay :
Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord.

2 When, Thunderer ! I move along tremulous like a wind-blown

skin,

Have merey, spare me, Mighty Lord-.

3 0 Bright and Powerful God, through want of strength I erred

and went astray :

Have mercy, spare me* Mighty Lord.

4 Thirst found thy worshipper though he stood in the midst of

water-floods ;

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord. *

i> 0 Varuna, whatever the offence may he which we as men com-
mit against the heavenly host,

When through our want of thought we violate thy laws,
punish us not, 0 God, for that iniquity,

"HYMN XG. vayu.

To you pure juices, rich in meath, are offered by priests through
longing for the Pair of Heroes.

Drive, Vayu, bring thine harnessed horse3 hither: drink the
pressed Soma till it make thee joyful.

7 Aditi: here said to mean feartk

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir 0. S. Texts, V. 67, Prof. M.
-Muller, A no. Sansh. Lit , 540, the authors of Sieben&ig Zieder, p. 12 r a,ndProf.
Peterson, Hymns from the Jiigveda, p. 287.

1 The house of clay : the grave. Cf. Atharva-veda, Y. 30. 14.

2 Thunderer: adrivah , Caster of the Stone, a common epithet of Indra,
hot nob suitable to Varuna. Tremulous: S&yana adds mityent a, with cold;
a&d Prof. Wilson observes that ‘the Varuna-'pdsa, a kind of dropsy, seems to
be referred to. 1 ’ Of. Atharva-veda, IV. 16. 7-

4 Thirst; avarice. In the midst of water foods: when surrounded by
abundant wealth. According to the Commentator, the allusion is to Vasish-
tha’s sea- voyage or perhaps the perpetual thirst of dropsy may be intended,

The last three stanzas are addressed to Indra and V&yu as a dual Deity.

% The Pair of Heroes : Indra and Y&yu.

-86 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII.

. 2 Whoso to thee, the Mighty, brings oblation, pure Soma unto
thee, pure-drinking Vayu,

That man thou.makest famous among mortals ; to him strong
sons are born in quick succession.

3 The God whom both these worlds brought forth for riches,
whom heavenly Dhishana for our wealth appointeth,

• His team of harnessed horses waits on Vayu, and, foremost, on
the radiant Treasure-bearer.

< 4 The spotless Dawns with fair bright days have, broken; they
found the spacious light when they were shining.

Eagerly they disclosed the stall of cattle : floods streamed for
, them as in the days aforetime.

5 These with their truthful spirit, shining brightly, move on
provided with tUeir natural insight.

Viands attend the car that beareth Heroes, your car, ye Sovran
. Pair, Indra and Vayu.

f 6 May these who give us heavenly light, these rulers, with gifts
of kine and horses, gold and treasures,

These princes, through full life, Indra and Vayu I overcome
in battle with their steeds and heroes.

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 Indra- Vayu,
with our fair laudations, ^

Exerting all our po- n- call you to aid us. Preserve us ever-
more, fe Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XCI. vayu.

Wj&bb not, in sooth, the Gods aforetime blameless, whose
pleasure was increased by adoration 1
For Vayu and fur man in his affliction they ecrused the Morning
to arise with Surya. ■

. 3 The God : apparently, Indra. Dhishand : a Goddess of prosperity and

gain. The radiant Trea&ur e-bear er ; perhaps Soma.

4 They found: the Angirases. ‘They are not named in the text, hut
S&yana refers the whole to them ; by their praise of Vdyu the dawn broke,
the stolen cattle were rescued, and the obstructed rain set at liberty.’ — •
Wilson.

5 These : the institntors of sacrifice.

6 These rulers r, these princes, are the wealthy nobles who defray the expenses
and reward the priests.

Indra is associated with Vftyu in almost every stanza.

1 Tor Vfiyu: I translate the v&yave of the text, but it is evident that
fcj&ve, for Ayu, or the living one, should be read in its stead.

HYMN 92.]

THE 2UGVEDA.

87

2 Guardians infallible, eager as envoys, preserve us safe through

many months and autumns.

Addressed to you, our fair praise, ludra-V&yu, implores your
favour and renewed well-being.

3 Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he seeketh men with rich

food whose treasures are abundant.

They Im ve arranged them of one mind with Vayu : the men
have wrought all noble operations.

4 So far as native power and strength permit you, so far as men

behold whose oyes have vision,

O ye pure-drinkers, drink with us pure Soma : sit on this
sacred grass, Indra and Vayu. *

5 Driving down teams that bear the lovely Heroes, hitherward,

Indra- Vayu, come together.

To you this prime <>f savoury juice is offered : here loose your
horses and be friendly-minded.

6 Your hundred and your thousand teams, 0 Indra and Vayir^

all-munificent, which attend you,

With these most gracious-minded come ye hither, and drink,
0 Heroes, of the meath we offer.

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 Indra- -Vfiyu,

with our fair laudations,

Exerting all our pow*br, .call you to aid us. Preserve ns
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XCII. Vayu.

O VAvu, drinker of the pure, be near us : a thousand teams
are thine, All-bounteous Giver.

To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, whose first
draught, God, thou takest as thy portion.

■ 2 Prompt at the holy rites forth came the presser with Soma-
draughta for Indra and for Vayu,

When ministering priests with strong devotion bring to you
Twain the first taste of the Soma.

3 The teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers, within his
home, 0 Vayu, to direct him,

Therewith send wealth to us with full enjoyment, a hero son
and gifts of kin e and horses.

3 He seeketh : V&yu. The meaning of the stanza is obscure.
5 The lovely Heroes : Indra and V&yu,

1 Drinker of the pure : or bright/ Soma.

83 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK VTL

4 Near to the Gods and making Indra joyful, devout and offer-

ing precious gifts to V&yu,

Allied with princes, smiting down the hostile, may we with
heroes conquer foes in battle.

5 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to

our sacrifice and solemn worship.

Come, Vayn, make thee glad at this libation. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XCIII. Indra-Agni.

Slaters of enemies, Indra and Agni, accept this day our new-
born pp,re laudation.

Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly
strength to him who craves it.

2 For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, growing toge-

ther, waxing in your vigour.

Lords of the pasture filled with ample riches, bestow upon
strength both fresh and lasting.

3 Yea when the strong have entered our assembly, and singers

seeking with their hymns your favour,

They are like steeds who come into the race-course, those
men who call aloud on Indra-Agni.

4 The siuger, seeking with his hyrasis your favour, begs spleu-

did riches of their first possessor.

Further us with Dew bounties, Indra-Agni^ armed with strong
thunder, slayers of the foeman.

£ When two great hosts, arrayed against each other, meet
clothed with brightness, in the fierce encounter
Stand ye beside the godly, smite the godless; and still assist
the men who press the Soma. *

6 To this our Soma^pressing, Indra-Agni, come ye prepared to

show your loving-kindness,

For not at any time have ye despised us. So may I draw
you with all strengthenings hither.

7 So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou Mitra,

Yanina, and Indra.

4 Allied : the priests are the allies and moral supporters of the princes
in war.

5 In hundreds ctnd in thousands : cf. I. 135. 3.

3 The strong : the nobles who institute sacrifices.

4 Their first possessor : each God who is invoked.

5 Great hosts: i hosts’ must be supplied. The feminine dual adjectives
have no substantive in the text.

THE EIQVEDA.

j ntMN 01.3

89

Forgive whatever sin we have committed *, may Aryaman and
Aditi remove it.

8 While we accelerate these our sacrifices, may we win strength
from both of you, 0 Agni :

Ne’er may the Maruts, Indra, Vishnu slight us. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blesssugs.

HYMN XC1V. Indra-Agni.

As rain from out the cloud, for you, Itidra and Agni, from
my soul

This noblest praise hath been produced.

2 Do ye, 0 Indra-Agni, hear the singer’s call: accept his songs.
Ye Rulers, grant his heart’s desire.

3 Give us not up to poverty, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni, nor
To slander and reproach of men.

4 To Indra and to Agni we bring reverence, high and holy hymn,

And, craving help, soft words with prayer. ^

5 For all these holy singers here implore these Twain to succour

them,

And priests that they may win them strength.

6 Eager to laud you, we t with songs invoke you, bearingsacred food,
Fain for success in sacrifice.

7 Indra and Agui, come t# us with favour, ye who conquer men :
Let not the wicked master ns<

8 At no time let the injurious blow of hostile mortal fall on us ;
0 Indra- Agui, shelter us.

9 Whatever wealth we crave of you, in gold, in cattle, or in

steeds,

That, Indra-Aojiii, let us gain *

10 When heroes prompt in worship call Indra an cl Agni, Lord*

of steeds,

Beside the Soma juice effused.

11 Call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the

foemen, those

Who take delight in hymns of praise. .

7 Aryaman and Aditi : Mitra and others being understood, as the verb i»
plural

8 0 Agni : that is, Indra and Agni.

I As rain : the hymn of praise is copious in its flow, and is doubly bene-
ficial,, gratifying the Gods and : ’-’--r*--? the worshipper. From my

soul : mdnmanah : explained h ...... ^ ere and in the correspond-
ing passage of" the Sdmaveda by stotufa, praiser ~~ — ' lv4 .

II Gall hither : I follow Prof. Ludwig in ■ ■* ... u-i:.:. instead of

dvivdsatak which involves a very harsh construction.

90 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII

12 Slay ye the 'wicked man whose thought is evil, of the demon
kind.

Slay him who stays the waters, slay the Serpent with your
deadly dart,

HYMN XCV. Sarasvati.

This stream Sarasvati. with fostering current comes forth, our
sure defence, our fort of iron.

As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty and
might all other waters.

2 Pure in her course from mountains to the ocean, alone of

streams Sarasvati hath listened.

Thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures, she
poured for N&husha her milk and fatness.

3 Friendly to man he grew among the women, a strong young

Steer amid the Holy Ladies.

Pie gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and decks
e their bodies for success in battle.

4 May this Sarasvati be pleased and listen at this our sacrifice,

auspicious Lady,

When we with reverence, on our knees, implore her close-knit
to wealth, most kind to those she loveth,

5 These offerings have ye made with adoration : say this, Saras-

vatt, and accept our praises;

Aud, placing us under thy dear protection, may we approach
thee, as a tree, for shelter.

6 For thee, 0 Blest Sarasvati, Yasishtha hath here unbarred the

doors of sacred Order.

Wax, Bright One, and give strength to him who l&uds thee.
Preserve us ever jore, ye G ods, with blessings.

12 Him who stays the waters : udadhim : according to Sftyana, like an
udadl ih, water-holder or pitcher. The Serpent : dbhogdm , ‘ the coiler,’ explained
differently by S&yana, as ‘one who enjoys good things taken from the
worshippers,’

1 Sarasvati : Sindhu or Indus appears to be intended under this name.
See VI. 61. 2, and Vedic Hymns, I. p. 60.

2 Ndhusha : according to the legend, a King who prayed to Sarasvati who
gave him butter and milk sufficient for the thousand-year sacrifice which he
was about to perform. The Nahushas, the people living on the banks of the
river, are probably intended.

3 He grexo : Sarasvdn, the consort of Sarasvati.

5 These offerings : this half-line is very obscure. Prof. Ludwig thinks that
these words may be supposed to be spoken by Sarasvati to her worshippers,
but lie is not satisfied of the correctness of liis conjeotiu-e, * Presenting to
thee, S , these oblations with reverence (may we receive from thee affluence}.’

’ Wilson.

HYMN 97.]

THE RTOVEHA.

91

HYMN XCVL Sarasvatl.

I sing a lofty song, for she is mightiest, most divine of Streams.
Sarasvatl will I exalt with hymns and lauds, and, 0 Yasishtba,
Heaven and Earth.

2 When in the fulness of their strength the Purus dwell, Beau-

teous One, on thy two grassy banks,

Favour us thou who hast the Maruts for thy friends : stir up
the bounty of our chiefs.

3 So may Sarasvati auspicious send good luck; she, rich in spoil,

is never niggardly in thought,

When praised in Jamadagni’s way and lauded as Yasishtha
lauds. *

4 We call upon Sarasvan, as unmarried men who long for wives,
As liberal men who yearn for sons.

5 Be thou our kind protector, 0 Sarasv&n, with those waves of

thine

Laden with sweets and dropping oil. n

6 May we enjoy Sarasv&u’s breast, all-beautiful, that swells with

streams,

May we gain food and progeny.

HYMN XCYII. Brihaspati

Wbbre Heaven and Ea#th combine in men’s assembly, and
those who love the Gods delight in worship,

Where the libations are effused for Indra, may he come first
to drink and make him stronger.

2 We crave the heavenly grace of Gods to guard us — so may
Brihaspati, 0 friends, exalt us —

That he, the Bounteous God, may find us sinless, who giveth
from a distance like a father.

1 Heaven and Earth : heaven as the home of the Goddess, and earth where
she flows as a river.

2 The Pdrus: an Aryan tribe settled on both hanks of the Sarasvati or
Indus See Vol I., Index. Grassy banks : this, as von Roth has suggested,
seems to be the meaning of dndhasi , but the expression is difficult. See
Hillebrandt, Vedische Mytholoyie , p. 254.

3 Jamadagni : a celebrated ancient Ilishi.

Indra is the deity of stanza 1, Indra and Brnhmanaspati are the deities of
3 and 9, Indra and Brihaspati of 10, and the rest of the hymn is addres&ed to
Brihaspati. Brihaspati and Brahmauaspati are one and the same God, the
Lord of Prayer. See I, 14. 3.

1 Where Heaven and Earth combine : where Gods and men meet at the place
of sacrifice. And make him stronger : Sftyana explains vdyasoha differently:

* (may his) swift (horses, approach).’ — Wilson.

2 Like a father : although he is far away he gives us what we ask like a
father who is near at hand. — Ludwig.

92 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VlL

3 That Brahmanaspati, most High and Gracious, I glorify with

offerings and with homage.

May the great song of praise, divine, reach Indra who is the
King of prayer the Gods’ dreaticfri;

4 May that Brihaspati who brings all blessings, most dearly

loved, be seated by our altar.

Heroes and wealth we crave ; may be bestow them, and bear
us safe beyond the men who vex us.

5 To ns these Deathless Ones, erst born, have granted this laud

of ours which gives the Immortal pleasure.

Let us invoke Brihaspati, the foeless, the clear-voiced God, the'
Holy One of households.

6 Him, this Brihaspati* his red-hued horses, drawing together,

full of strength, bring hither.

Robed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the Lord of
Might whose friendship gives a dwelling.

7 For he is pure, with hundred wings, refulgent, with sword of

gold, impetuous* winning sunlight.

Sublime Brihaspati, easy of access, granteth his friends most
bountiful refreshment.

8 Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the Deity’s Parents, have

made Brihaspati increase in grandeur;

Glorify him, 0 friends, who merits glory : may he give prayer
fair way and easy passage.

0 This, Brahmanaspati, is yoxlr laudation : prayer hath been
made to thunder -wielding Indra.

Favour our songs, wake up our thought and spirit : destroy
the godless aud our foemen’a malice.

10 Ye Twain are Lords of wealth ih earth afrd heaven, thou, 0
Brihaspati, and thou, 0 Indra.

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you.
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings;

3 The Gods' creation : devahriiasya : inspired, or, literally, made, by the
Gods.

5 Our hymiis of praise which are acceptable to the immortal God have
been given to us by the everlasting deities themselves. S&yana’s explanation
is different ; r may the iirst-boni inimorfcals (by his command) bestow upon dtf
the food that is necessary for existence.’ — Wilson.

6 Whose friendship gives a dwelling : I adopt, the interpretation given bjr
Professor Cowell in his note On the passage in Wilson’s translation.

7 With hundred wirigs •: { borne by numerous conveyances.’ — Wilson.

8 In grandeur : or, by their might,

10 Mean ; or, poor.

ffYMN 99.]

THE RIGVEDA.

93

HYMN XCVIIL lj)dra.

Priests, offer to the Lord of all the people the milked-out
stalk of iSoma, radiant-coloured.

No wild-bull knows his drill king-place like Indra who ever
seeks him who hath pressed the Sqnpi.

2 Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant
food which thou hast had aforetime,

0 Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma
set before thee.

8 Thou, newly-born, for strength didst drink the Soma ; the
Mother told thee of thy future greatness.

0 Indra, thou hast filled mid-air’s wide region, and given the
Gods by battle* room and freedom.

4 When thou hast urged the arrogant to combat, proud in their

strength of arm, we will subdue them.

Or, Indra, when thou tightest girt by heroes, we in the glori-
ous fray with thee will conquer,

5 I will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent acts

which Maghavau hath accomplished.

When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma be-
came his own entire possession.

,6 Thine is this world of flocks and herds around thee, which
with the eye of Snrya thou beholdest,

Thou, Indra, art alone the Lord of cattle : may we enjoy the
treasure whioh thou givest.

7 Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in eapth and heaven, thou, 0
Brihaspati, and thou, 0 Indra.

Mean thoqgh he be, give wealth to him who laqds yoq.
Preserve us eVermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

’ HYMN XCIX. Yishm*,

Men eome not nigh thy majesty whq gr-owest beyond all bound
and measure with thy body.

Both thy two regions of the earth, 0 Yishnu, we know ; thou,
God, knowest the highest alsp.

1 Radiant-coloured ; arundm, red, ruddy, here explained by the Com^
jnentator as drochanidnam, shining.

3 Thy future greatness : see IY. 18. 4, where Adifci says: — ‘No peer hath
he among those born already, nor among those who shall be born hereafter.

1 fwo regions of the earth ; that is, the earth and the firmament. f The
two lower regions are within the range of our perception ; the third belongs
Yishnu, whither he stepped with the third of Ins ascending strides.’ — Wallis,
Cosmology of the Rigveda^ p, 11£,

U THE HYMNS OH [HOOK YU.

2 None who is bora or being born, God Vishnu, hath reached

the utmost limit of thy grandeur.

The vast high vault of heaveu hast thou supported, and fixed
earth’s eastern pinnacle - securely.

3 Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kin e, with fertile

pastures, fain to do men service.

Both these worlds, Vishnu, hast thou stayed asunder, and
firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it.

4 Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating

Sfirya, Dawn, and Agni.

0 Heroes? ye have conquered in your battles even the bull-
jawed Dasa’s wiles and magic.

f> Ye have destroyed, then, Indra, and thou, Vishnu, Sambara’s
uine-and-ninefcy fenced castles.

Ye Twain smote down a hundred times a thousand resistless
heroes of the royal Varchin.

6 This is the lofty hymn of praise, exalting the Lords of Mighty

Stride, the strong and lofty.

1 laud you in the solemn synods, Vishnu : pour ye food on us
in our camps, 0 Indra.

7 0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vashat ! Let this mine offer-

ing, Sipivishta, please thee.

May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN C. Vishnu.

Ne’er doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, bringeth bis
gift to the far-striding Vishnu.

He who adoreth him with all his spirit winneth himself so
great a benefactor.

2 Thou, Vishnu, constant in thy courses, gavest good-will to all
' men, and a hymn that lasteth,

That thou mightst move us to abundant comfort of very
splendid wealth with store of horses.

3 The first line appears to be Vishnu’s blessing on heav.en and earth when
he parted and supported them.

4 Bull-jawed : or Vrfehasipra may be the name of the Dftsa.

$ Royal Varchin: see II. 14. 6.

7 Vashat : the exclamation used on making an oblation. Sipivishta : a name
+f Vishnu of uncertain etymology and meaning. 1 Invested with rays of light,’
according to S&yana. See Muir, 0. S. Texts , IV. 87, 88, note,

2 A hymn that lasteth * continually recurring occasion to praise thee.

IIYMN 101.]

THE RIGVEDA. '

95

3 Three times strode forth this God iu all his grandeur over this

earth bright with a hundred splendours.

Foremost be Vishnu, stronger than the strongest : for glorious
is his name who lives for ever.

4 Over this earth with mighty step strode Vishnu, ready to

give it for a home to Mann.

In him the humble people trust for safety : be, nobly born,
hath made them spacious dwellings.

5 To-day I land this name, 0 Sipivishta, I, skilled in rules, the

name of thee the Noble. .

Yea, I the poor and weak praise thee the Mighty -\yho dwellesfc
in the realm beyond this region.

6 What was there to be blamed iu thee, 0 Vishnu, when thou

declaredst, I am Sipivishta 1 ?

Hide not this form from us, nor keep it secret, since thou didst
wear another shape iu battle.

7 0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vashat 1 Let this mine offer-

ing, Sipivishta, please thee.

May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN CI. Parjanya.

Speak forth three words-* the words which light precedeth,
which milk this udder that produceth nectar.

Quickly made manifest, the Bull hath bellowed, engendering
the germ of plants, the Infant.

2 Giver of growth to plants, the God who ruleth over the waters
and all moving creatures,

Vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge, and threefold light
to succour au4 befriend us.

3 This earth: meaning, says the Commentator, earth, firmament, and heaven.
6 This stanza is unintelligible. The Commentator on the corresponding
passage of the Sftmaveda says : ‘ Vishnu formerly abandoning his own form,
and assuming another artificial shape, succoured Vnsislitha in battle.^ Recog-
nizing the god, the Rishi addresses him with the verse ’ Sipivishta is said to
be a word of equivocal meaning, * clothed with rays of light, 1 and * denuded/
See Wilson’s note, and 0. S. Texts , IV. 87, 88, note. The passage looks like
the germ of the later incarnations of the God which occur in the Sjtaputha-

Brdhmana and the Purdnas.

1 Three words: or texts of the three Vedas. Which light precedeth : intro-
duced by the sacred syllable Om. More probably Parjanya is addressed, the
three words being his voice, the thunder (V. fi3. 6), henrfl in heaven, air, and
earth, and preceded by the lightning-flash. See Bergaigne. Quarante Uymnes
du Rig-veda. p. 79. Milk this udder : draw down the sweet rain from the cloud.
The Bull: Parjanya. The Infant: Agni in the form of lightning.

' 2 Threefold light: with reference to the divisions of the dsy and the seasons.

$6 THE HYMNS OF [HOOK VIZ

3 Now he is sterile, now begetteth offspring, even as lie wiileth

doth he change bis figure,

The Father’s genial how bedews the Mother; therewith the
She, therewith the son is nourished.

4 In him all living creatures have their being, and the three

heavens with triply-flowing waters.

Three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed their
sweet streams around him with a murmur.

5 May this my song to Sovran Lord Parjanya come near unto

his heart and give him pleasure.

May we obtain the showers that bring enjoj^ment, and God-
protecCed plants with goodly fruitage.

6 He is the Bull of all, and their impregner : he holds the life

of all things fixed and moving.

May this rite save me till my hundredth autumn. Preserve
tlis eyermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN CII. Parjanya,

Sixg forth and laud Parjanya, jSon of Heaven, who sends the
gift of rain :

May he provide our pasturage.

2 Parjanya is the God who forms in kine, in mares, in plants

of earth,

And womankind, the germ of life. r
$ Offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice :
May he for ever give us food.

HYMN CIII Frogs.

They who lay quiet for a year, the BHLh mans who fulfil their vows,
The Frogs have lifted up their voice, the voice Parjanya hath
inspired-

$ He is sterile ; sends no rain, like a barren cow thaf gives no milk.

The Father'? genial flow : ‘The father is the sky, earth the mother, who rer
reives the rain from the former, which, producipg the ipeans of offering liba-
tions and oblations, returns again to the parent heaven, a« well as supports his
offspring — all living creatures.’ — Wilson.

4 Three reservoirs: according to Sayana, clouds in the east, west, and north,
6 The Bull of all ; the plants, understood.

3 Into his mouth : that is, Agni, who is the mouth by which the othor Gods
consume the offerings that are made to them.

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. 8 Texts, V. 436, and by Pro-
fessor F. Max Muller in his Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 49 4f, who

remarks : * The hymn which is called a panegyric of the frogs, is clearly

a satire on the priests ; and it is curious to observe that the saihe animal
should have been chosen by the Vedic Satirist to represent the priests, which,
the earliest satirist of Greece, was selected as the representative of the
Jffomeric heroes.’ But see Oldenberg, Hie Religion des Veda, p. 70. The
by^nn evidently belongs to a late period of Vedic poetry.

r

HYMN 103.]

THE RIGVEDA .

97

2 What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the pool's bed,

the floods of heaven descended,

The music of the Frogs comes forth in concert like the cows'
lowing with their calves beside them.

3 When at the coming of the Rains the water has poured upon

them as they yearned and thirsted,

One seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of
pleasure as a son his father.

4 Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while they are

revelling in the flow of waters,

When the Frog moistened by the rain springs forward, and
Green and Spotty both combine their voices.

5 When one of these repeats the other's language, as he who

learns the lesson of the teacher,

Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse
with eloquence on the waters.

6 One is Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat the other, one Frog is Green c

and one of them is Spotty.

They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, talking,
modulate the voice diversely.

7 As Brahmans, sitting round the brimful vessel, talk at the

Soma-rite of Atiratra, ^

So, Frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all
the year, the first of Rain-time.

8 These Br&hmans with the Soma juice, performing their year-

long rite, have lifted up their voices ;

And these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, come forth
and show themselves, and none are hidden.

9 They keep the twelvemonth's God-appointed order, and never

do the men neglect the season.

3 With cries of pleasure : akhkhalikrltya : uttering tlie imitative exclama”
tion akhkhala.

5 Your every limb : this abrupt change of person is not unfrequent in the
Veda.

7 Atirdtra : a ceremony accompanied by three nocturnal recitations.

8 Year-long rite : ‘ Sayana makes it refer to Gitvim ayanam , a sacrificial
session, which commences and ends with the atirdtra , and lasts a whole year.’ —
Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation. Sweating with their kettles : * There is a
quibble on the word gharminah, having or bearing the vessel, or performin
the rite so termed ; or, suffering from gharma , heat, or the hot season.’ —
Wilson. And none are hidden : f/iihyd mi Ice chit : some take nd here as‘ like’:
e issue forth like persons who have been hidden.’ — Muir. ‘ Pop out like her-
mits.’ — M. Muller.

9 The men: the priestlike frogs. Thc$e who were heated kettles : the frogs
who had been burnt and scorched by the hot weather.

7

98 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VTL

Soon a 3 the Rain-time in the year returneth, these who were
heated kettles gain their freedom.

10 Cow-bellow and Goat- bleat have granted riches, and Green and
Spotty have vouchsafed us treasure.

The Frogs who give us cows in hundreds lengthen our lives
in this most fertilizing season.

HYMN CIY. Indra-Soma.

, Indra and Soma, bum, destroy the demon foe, send downward,
0 ye Bulls, those who add gloom to gloom.

Annihilate the fools, slay them and bum them up : chase them
away from us, pierce the voracious ones.

2 Indra and Soma, let sin round the wicked boil like as a caldron
set amid the flames of fire.

. Against the foe of prayer, devourer of raw flesh, the vile fiend
fierce of eye, keep ye perpetual hate.

^ 3 Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, yea, cast
them into darkness that hath no support,

, So that not one of them may ever thence return : so may your
wrathful might prevail and conquer them.

4 Indra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on the
wicked fiend from heaven and from the earth.

Yea, forge out of the mountains 'your celestial dart wherewith,
ye burn to death the waxing demon race.

10 Have granted riches : as the earliest proelaimers of the advent of the
Rains which revive and fertilize the earth.

‘ It is possibly an echo of this production that we find in a description of
autumn in the Harivamsa, Y 8803, where the poet compares the noise made
by a frog, after liis rest of sixteen half months, along with his wives, to the

recitation of the Rig-veda by a Brahman surrounded by his pupils On

this verse the late M. Langlois somewhat naively remarks as follows ; Dana
nos mocurs rien n* egalerait 1* impertinence d’ une comparaison dans laquelle
une grenouflle serait assimilde h uu respectable eccldsiastique. Les Xndiens,
h ce qu’ il parait, ne voyaient daus telle espctee de rapprochement aucune
teinte d* impiete.’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts. V. 438. But see Bergaigue, La Religion
Yidique } I. 292.

The ^ hymn consists chiefly of imprecations directed against demons and
evil spirits, R&kshasas and Yfxtudhanas. The deities are various.

1 The demon foe : rdhshah : the R&kshasas, fiends, demons, goblins, going
about at niglit, disturbing sacrifices and devout men, ensnaring and even
devouring human beings, and generally hostile to the human race.

2 The vile fend ; himtdine : explained by the Commentator as one who
goes about saying, Kimiddnim or What now? A quidnunc, a vile and
treacherous spy and. informer. The word is used as the name of a class of
evil spirits.

1

MyfMN 104,] THE RIGVEHA. 99

p Indra and Soma, oast ye downward out of Leaven your deadly
/ darts cf stone burning with fiery flame,

; Eternal, scorching darts ; plunge the voracious ones within the
' depth, and let them sink without a sound.

)6 Indra and Soma, let this hymn control you both, even as the
f girth encompasses two vigorous steeds —

, The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you : do ye, as
Lords of men, animate these my prayers.

7 In your impetuous manner think ye both thereon : destroy

these evil beings, slay the treacherous fiends.

Indra and Soma, let the wicked have no bliss who evermore
assails us with malignity. *

8 Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when I pursue my

way with guileless spirit,

May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra, like water which
the hollowed baud compresses.

9 Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, and with their*'

evil natures harm the righteous,

May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the lap of
Nirriti consign them.

10 The fiend, 0 A.gni, who designs to injure the essence of our

food, kine, steeds, or bodies,

May he, the adversary, fhief, and robber, sink to destruction,
both himself and offspring.

11 May he be swept away, himself and children : may all the

three earths press him down beneath them.

May his fair glory, 0 ye Gods, be blighted, who in the day or
night would fain destroy us.

12 The prudent firsts it easy to distinguish the true and false ;

their words oppose each other.

Of these two that which is the true and honest, Soma protects,
and brings the false to nothing.

13 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who falsely

claims the Warrior’s title.

He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly : both lie en-
tangled in the noose of Indra.

5 Without a sound : so suddenly that they have not time to cry out.

9 To the serpent : or to death by serpents’ bites. Nirriti : Death and
Destruction.

13 The Warrior'' s title: the rank of a Kshafcriya or prince of the military
order.

The first eleven stanzas 4 are considered to be a malediction upon the
JR&kshasas by the JRishi. To account for the change of tone [in 12 — 16],
Sdyana gives an unusual version of the legeud told in the Mahabhdrata of

100

THE HYMNS OF

ISOOJ^Ih

14 As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought iin

thoughts about the Gods, 0 Agni. \

Why art thou angry with ixs, Jatavedas Destruction fall of
those who lie against thee 1

15 So may I die this day if I have harassed any man’s life or f

I be a demon. „

Y ea, may he lose fill his ten sons together who with false^
tongue hath called me Yatudhaua,

16 May Indra slay him. with a mighty weapon, and let the vilest 5 *

of all creatures perish,

The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me a demon
though devoid of demon nature.

17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her

body in her guile and malice,

May she fall downward into endless caverns. May press-stones
with loud ring destroy the demons.

^18 Spread out, ye Maruts, search among the people : seize ye and
grind the Ilab\ ■ - ' \

Who fly abroad, ■ ■■ at night-time, or sully

and pollute our holy worship.

19 Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, 0 Indra: sharpen

it, Maghavan, made keen by Soma.

Forward, behind, and from above ^nd under, smite down the
demous with thy rocky weapon.

20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would

they harm indomitable Indra.

Sakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked : now let him
cast his bolt at fiend is li wizards.

21 Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil oblations

of the Gods’ invokers : *■*

Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the timber, attacks and
smashes them like earthen vessels.

’king Halmashapada being transformed to a Fdkshasa, and devouring the 100
sons of Vasishtha : here it is said that a liukshusa, having devoured the
Maid’s sons, assumed his shape, and said to him, u I am Vasishtha, thou art
the Fakshasa; ” to which Vasishtha replied by repeating this verse [stanza
12J, declaratory of his discriminating between truth anti falsehood.’ — Wilson.

* The verses may, as Professor Max Muller supposes, have arisen out of
Vasish^hn’s contest with Visvamitra [see III. 53. 21, note], and it may have
been the latter personage who brought those charges of heresy, and of murder-
ous and demoniacal character against his rival ’ — Muir, O. S. T<xts } I. 327,328.

15 Ydtudhdna; explained by 8&yana as^ Riikshasa. The Yatudbma pro-
bably was rather the goblin or sorcerer while the ll&kshaaa was the violent
and voracious ogre.

17 Here the malediction on evil spirits in general is resumed and continu-
ed to the end of the hymn. She too : the Mkshast, or she fiend.

HYMN 104.] TIIE EIGVEDA. 101

22 Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, destroy him in

the form of dog or cuckoo.

Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture : as with a stone,
0 Indra, crush the demon.

23 Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us : may Dawn

drive off the couples of Kiraidins,

Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble : from grief
that comes from heaveu mid-air preserve us,

24 Slay the male demon, Indra! slay the female, joying and

triumphing in arts of magic.

Let the fools' gods with bent necks fall and perish^ aiid see no
more the Sun when he arises.

25 Look each one hither, look around : Indra and Soma, watch

ye well.

Cast forth your weapon at the fiends; against the sorcerers
hurl your bolt.

23 Khntdhis : or vile spirits. See note on stanza 2.

24 Fools' (jocls : mtiradevdh : explained by S&yana as = m Iranakrtrfdh, ‘those
who make killing their sport.’ According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon,
mftmdev&h — milladev&h, a species of demons or goblins.

BOOK THE EIGHTH.

HYMN I. Indra.

Globify naught besides, 0 friends; so shall no sorrow trouble
you.

Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your
lauds repeatedly :

2 Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men's Con-
queror, bounteous like a cow ;

Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides
most munificent.

3 Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to obtain

thine aid,

Be this our prayer, addressed, 0 Indra, unto thee, thine exal-^
tation every day.

4 Those skilled in song, 0 Maghavan, among these men o’er-

come with might the foeman’s songs.

Come hither, bring us strength in many a varied form most
near that it may succour us.

5 0 C^ter of the Stone, Lwonlcl not sell thee for a mighty price,
.Not for a thousand, Thunderer ! nor ten thousaud, nor a

hundred, Lord of countless wealth 1

6 0 Indra, thou art more to me than sire or niggard brother is.
Thou and my mother, 0 Good Lord, appear alike, to give me

wealth abundantly.

7 Where art thou % Whither art thou gone % For raauy a

place attracts thy mind.

Haste, Warrior, Fort-destroyer, Lord of battle's din, haste,
holy songs have sounded forth.

8 Sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles for his

faithful friend, .

Verses to bring the Thunderer to destroy the forts and sit on
Kanva’s sacred grass.

2 Bounteous like a coiv : the adjective is not m the text, but must be sup-
plied in order to make the comparison intelligible. See 1 edische btudim, I,
103. To both sides : to the singers and the institutes of sacrifice.

5 A hundred?: meaning 4 infinite, ’ according to the Commentator .

8 For his faithful friend : Ludwig takes Vav&tar to be the name of a Hag
who has been deserted by Indra and consequently defeated in battle.. K&ym*
sacred grass : trimmed and prepared by Medh&tithi and Medhy&tithi, each of
whom, is a son of ICanva,

104 THE IIYMNS OF [BOOK YIII.

9 The Horses which are thine in tens, in hundreds, yea, in
thousands thine,

Even those vigorous Steeds, fleet-footed in the course, with
those come quickly near to ns.

10 This day I call Sabardugha who animates the holy song,

Indra the richly-yielding Milch-cow who provides unfailing

food in ample stream.

11 When Sura wounded Etasa, with Vata’s rolling winged car
Indra bore Kutsa Arjuueya off, and mocked Gandharva the

un conquered One.

12 He without ligature, before making incision in the neck,

Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Maglmvan, who

maketh whole the injured part.

13 May we be never cast aside, and strangers, as it were, to thoe.
We, Thunder-wielding Indra, count ourselves as trees rejected

and unfit to burn.

*14 0 Vritra-slayer, we were thought slow and unready for the fray.
Yet once in thy great bounty may we have delight, 0 Hero,
after praising thee.

15 If he will listen to my laud, then may our Soma-drops that

flow

Rapidly through the strainer gladden Indra, drops due to the
Tugryas’ Strengthener.

16 Come now unto the common laud of thee and of thy faithful

friend.

So may our wealthy nobles’ praise give joy to thee. Fain
would I sing thine eulogy.

17 Press out the Soma with the stones, and in the waters wash it

clean. *

10 Sahardut/M : the general name of cows which supply the milk required
for sacrificial purposes. Bee VI. 4S. 11, note. Here Indra himself is intended,
as is shown in the following line .

11 Silva : Surya, the Sun-God. Wounded: 1 harassed.’- -Wilson. Etasa: a
proUji of Indra. Bee Vol. I, Index. Ydta: the Wind-God. Kutsa: see Vol. I.,
Index Guvclharva : the Sun. The meaning of the stanza is somewhat obscure,

12 Closed up the wound again : healed Etasa who had been wounded by
Sirya.

13 Count ourselves as trees : or, 'count us not as trees,’ the meaning of net ,

'not’ and ‘like ’ being ambiguous. m

15 Hue to the Tugryns’ Strengthener : that belong to Indra the protector of
the chiefs of the race of Tugra, who appear to have been the patrons of the
.Bishia of Ivanva’s family.

16 Faithful friend : see stanza S,

HYMN 1.]

THE JR 10 VEDA.

105

The men investing it with raiment made of milk shall milk it
forth from out the stems.

18 Whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty

heaven,

Wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise : fill full
all creatures, 0 Most Wise.

19 For Indra press the Soma out, most gladdening and most

excellent.

May Sakra make it swell sent forth with every prayer and ask-
ing, as it were, for strength.

20 Let me not, still beseeching thee with earnest song at Soma

rites,

Anger thee like some wild beast. Who would not beseech
him who hath power to grant his prayer 1

21 The draught made swift with rapturous joy, effectual with its

mighty strength,

All-conquering, distilling transport, let him drink : for he in A
ectstasy gives us gifts.

22 Where bliss is not, may he, All-praised, God whom the pious

glorify,

Bestow great wealth upon the mortal ■worshipper who sheds
the juice and praises him.

23 Come, Indra, and rejoice* thyself, 0 God, in manifold affluence.
Thou fillest like a lake thy vast capacious bulk with Soma

and with draughts besides.

24 A thousand and a hundred Steeds are harnessed to thy golden

car.

So may the long-maned Bays, yoked by devotion, bring Indra
to drink the Soma juice.

25 Yoked to thy chariot wrought of gold, may thy two Bays

with peacock tails,

Convey thee hither, Steeds with their white hacks, to quaff
sweet juice that makes us eloquent.

17 From out the stems : see Yedische Stndien, I. 133, 178. S&ynna explains
the second line differently : ‘ (for by so doing) the leaders (of the rain, the
Maruts) clothing (the sky with clouds) as with a vesture of the hide of the
cow, milk forth (the water) for the rivers.’ — Wilson.

21 Let him drink : pibatu : supplied by the Scholiast ; there being no verb
in the text. m

22 Where Miss is not ; that is, in defeat and trouble. But the meaning of
sivdrc is uncertain. * At the sacrifice, ’ is S&yana’s explanation. Yon Roth sug-
gests * in the treasure- cham her/ I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation.

23 With draughts besides ,* with thy fellow-topers (the Maruts).’ — Wilson,

[BOOK VIII.

106 THE HYMNS OK

26 So drink, thou Lover of the Song, as the first drinker, of this

juice.

This the outpouring* of the savoury sap prepared is good and
meet to gladden thee.

27 He who alone by wondrous deed is Mighty, Strong by holy

works,

May he come, fair of cheek; may he not stay afar, but come
and turn not from our call.

28 Snshna’s quick moving castle thou hast crushed to pieces with

thy bolts.

Thou, Indra, from of old, hast followed after light, since we'
have had thee to invoke.

29 My praises when the Sun ■ hath risen, my praises at the time

of noon,

My praises at the coming of the gloom of night, 0 Yasu, have
gone forth to thee.

^30 Praise, yea, praise him. Of princes these are the most liberal
of their gifts,

These, ParamajvEL NinditaSva, Prapathi, most bounteous, 0
Medhyatithi.

31 When to the car, by faith, I yoked the horses longing for the

way —

For skilled is Yaclu’s son in dealing precious wealth, he who
is rich in herds of kine.

32 May he who gave me two brown steeds together with their

cloths of gold,

May he, Asanga’s son Svanadratha, obtain all joy and high
felicities.

26 As the first drinker : e According to the scholiast, pfirv'apdh means Vdyu,
who, having arrived first in the race, drank the Soma before the other gods.
The allusion is to the principal graha libation, called A indravdyava, which
Indra and Vdyu share together/ — Wilson.

28 Castle : of cloud. Followed after light : to find and bring it back.

30 Praise him : Indra. Paramajy&, Ninditftsva, and Prapathi appear to be
the names of the chiefs who are praised for their liberality. S&yana makes
Asanga the speaker: ‘Praise me, for we are the most liberal givers : (praise
me as one) who bears the best arms ( paramajyd ), follows the right path (pra-
patht), and outstrips' a horse iu speed ( ninditdsva )/

31 The horses : presented by the prince. The sentence is incomplete. The
Scholiast supplies at the end of the line taddnim evummdm s tuki, then praise
me thus. Yadu's son ; Asanga, descendant of the ancient eponymous hero
Yadu. See Yol. I., Index. Uich in herds of kine: joasw/t whi^h appeal's to be
in apposition with yddvah, is hardly intelligible here. S&yana explains it as
pasumdn, haviug beasts or cattle, or as a derivative of pas, to see, and mean*
ing one who .sees what is subtile, silkshmasya drashtd. Neither of these ex-
planations has anything but Silyana’s name to recommend it, but I adopt the
former as a makeshift.

HYMN 2.] THE RIG VEDA. 107

33 Playoga’s son Isanga, by ten thousand, 0 Agni, hath surpass-
ed the rest in giving.

For me ten bright-hued oxen have come forward like lotus-
stalks from out a lake upstanding.

31 What time her husbaud’s perfect restoration to his lost
strength and manhood was apparent,

His consort Sasvati with joy addressed him, How art thou
well, my lord, and shalt be happy.

HYMN II. Indra.

Herts is the Soma juice expressed; 0 Vasu, drink till thou art
fuil :

Undaunted God, we give it thee.

2 Washed by the men, pressed out with stones, strained through

the filter made of wool,

Tis like a courser bathed in streams.

3 This juice have we’ made sweet for thee like barley, blendings

it with milk.

Indra, I call thee to our feast.

4 Beloved of all, Indra alone drinks up the flowing Soma juice
Among the Gods and mortal men.

5 The Friend, whom not the brilliant-hued, the badly-mixt or

bitter draught

Repels, the far-extending God ;

€ While other men than we with milk chase him as hunters
chase a deer,

And with their kine inveigle him.

33 Ten bright-hued oxen: meaning ten thousand, according to S&yana.

34 Asanga, the King whose liberality, with that of his son (32), and perhaps
his grandsons (30), has been eulogized in the four preceding stanzas, had, the
legend says, been changed to a woman by the imprecation of the Gods and
afterwards restored to liis manhood in consequence of his repentance and the
intercession of Medh&tithi and Medhy&bithi whom he richly rewarded, In this
stanza Sasvati congratulates him on his restoration. Professors Ludwig and
Grassmanu have translated the stanza more literally.

1 0 Vasu : or, Good Lord. f Giver of dwellings/ according to S&yana.

2 Strained through the filter made of wool : more literally, ‘cleaused by the
tail-wool of the sheep/ the material of which the sieve, strainer, or filter used
for clearing and purifying the Soma juice was made,

3 Like barley : or, like the sacrificial cake made of barley-meal.

4 Alone drinks up : he alone is to receive the entire libation, which other
Gods only share among them.

5 BvilUant-hued: without sufficient mixture with milk to thicken it and
change its colour. The meaning of this and the following stanza is : Indra
prefers our libations, imperfectly prepared as they maybe, to the milk- offerings
with which other men endeavour to attract him.

108 THE HYMNS OF f BOOK Y1TT.

7 For him, for Indra, for the God, be pressed three draughts of

Some juice

In the Juice- drinker’s own abode.

8 Three reservoirs exude their drops, filled are three beakers to

the brim,

All for one offering to the God.

9 Pure art thou, set in many a place, and blended in the midst

with milk

And curd, to cheer the Hero best.

10 Here, Indra, are thy Soma-draughts pressed out by us, the
strong,^ he pure :

They crave admixture of the milk.

110 Iudrn, pour in milk, prepare the cake, and mix the Soma-
draught :

I hear them say that thou art rich.

12 Quaffed juices fight within the breast. The drunken praise

not by their wine,

The naked praise not when it raius.

13 Rich be the praiaer of one rich, munificent and famed like thee :
High rank be his, 0 Lord of Bays.

14 Foe of the man who adds no milk, he heeds not any chanted

hymn

Or holy psalm that may be sung.

15 Give us not, Indra, as a prey unto the scornful or the proud ;
Help, Mighty One, with power and might.

16 This, even this, 0 Indra, we implore : as thy devoted friends,
The Kunvas praise thee with their hymns.

8 Three reservoirs : or troughs used in the preparation of the Soma-libations.
They are called severally, dronalcalam , piltabkrit, and ddhavmiiya .

9 In the midst: *in the middle (of the day ?).’ — Hillebrandfc.

12 This stanza breaks the connexion between stanzas 11 and 13, and is in
itself almost unintelligible. Wilson paraphrases, after S&yaua : c The potations
(of Soma) contend in thy • interior (for thine exhilaration) like the ebriety

caused by wine: thy ■■ ■ ■ ■ ise thee (filled full of Soma) like the

udder (of a cow with ■ . ■- _ . ' explanation of narjndh, naked men,
as worshippers, atotfiwh, 1 who do not desert the verses of the Veda,’ is obvi-
ously impossible, u'dhuh, udder, frequently means the rainy sky, and it may
have this meaning here ; so that the sense of the passage may possibly be, m
Ludwig suggests, that neither great wealth nor abject poverty tends to make
a man devout. The rich man when he drinks his wine at home and the ill-
clod wretch exposed to the drenching rain are equally regardless of the Gods.

13 Fich be the jtraisev of the rich : this appeal’s to be the continuation of
* thou art rich ’ of stanza 11.

14 Indra will not accept worship without oblation.

JSTMN 2,]

TEE JRIGVEDA.

109

17 Naught else, 0 Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer's

eulogy :

On thy laud only have I thought.

18 The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire

not sleep :

They punish sloth unweariedly.

19 Come hither swift with gifts of wealth — be not thou angry

with us — like

A great man with a youthful bride.

20 Let him not, wrathful with us, spend the evening far from

us to-day,

Like some unpleasant son-in-law.

21 For well we know this Hero’s love, most liberal of the boons

he gives,

His plans whom the three worlds display.

22 Pour forth the gift which Kanvas bring, for none more glorious^

do we know

Thau the Strong Lord with countless aids.

23 0 presser, offer Soma first to Indra, Hero, Sakra, him
The Friend of man, that he may drink;

24 Who, in untroubled ways, is best provider, for his worshippers,
Of strength in horses aq,d in kine.

25 Pressers, for him blend Soma juice, each draught most excel-

lent, for him

The Brave, 'the Hero, for his joy.

26 The Vritra-slayer drinks the juice. May he who gives a hun-

dred aids

Approach, nor stay afar from us.

27 May the strong Bay Steeds, yoked by prayer, bring hither

unto us our Friend,

Lover of Song, renowned by songs.

28 Sweet are the Soma juices, come 1 Blent are the Soma juices,

come 1

Bishi-like, mighty, fair of cheek, come hither quickly to the
feast.

19 A great man : the exact meaning of mciMn, great, is not certain. S&yaga
explains* it by ga airadhikah , eminent on account of Ins good qualities. Be
not bashful, like the ardent husband of a new bride.’— Wilson. ‘ Like a rich
man, newly married.’—- G-rassmann.

20 Like some unpleasant son-in-law : who sees that his company is unwolr
come and consequently stays at home.

23 First to Indra : see VIII. 1. 26. Sakra: Indra, the Mighty One.

110 THM HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

29 And lands winch strengthen thee for great bounty and valour,

and exalt

Indra who doeth glorious deeds,

30 And songs to thee who lovest song, and all those hymns

addressed to thee —

These evermore confirm thy might.

31 Thus he, sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds thunder,

gives ns strength,

He who hath never been subdued.

32 Yritra he slays with his right hand, even Indra, great with

mighty- power,

And much-invoked in many a place.

33 He upon whom all men depend, all regions, all achievements, he
Takes pleasure in our wealthy chiefs,

31 All this hath he accomplished, yea, Indra, most gloriously
■> renowned,

Who gives our wealthy princes strength.

35 Who drives his chariot seeking spoil, even from afar, to him

he loves :

For swift is he to bring men wealth.

36 The Sage who, winning spoil with steeds, slays Yritra, Hero

with the men,

His servant’s faithful succourer.

37 0 Priyamedhas, worship with collected mind this Indra whom.
The Soma hath full well inspired.

38 Ye Kanvas, sing the Mighty One, Lord of the Brave, who

loves renown,

All-present, glorified by song.

39 Strong Friend, who, with no trace of feet, c res tores the cattle

to the men

Who rest their wish and hope on him.

40 Shaped as a Bam, Stone-hurler ! once thou earnest hither to

the son

Of Kanva, wise Medhyatithi,

34 All this hath he accomp>U$hed : the slaughter of Yritra and other great
deeds ; or, he made all these creatures.

36 The Sage : Indra. With the men ; accompanied by the Maruts.

37 Priyamedhas : members of the family of one of the B-ishis.

39 With no trace of feet : without tracking the lost cattle (the rays of light)
by their footsteps.

40 Shaped as a Fain; see I. 51. 1. The legend is told in the Shadvinm
Frdhmana, I. 1.

HYMN* 3.]

TEE BIGVEDA.

Ill

41 Vibhindu, thou hast helped this man* giving him thousands

four times ten,

And afterward eight thousand more,

42 And these twain pouring sti earns of milk, creative, daughters

of delight,

For wedlock sake I glorify.

HYMN HI. Ind ra,

Drink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee with our
milky draught.

Be, for our weal, our Friend and sharer of the feast, and let
thy wisdom guard us well.

2 In thy kind grace and favour may we still be strong : expose

us not to foe’s attack.

With manifold assistance guard and succour us, and bring us
to felicity.

3 May these my songs of praise exalt thee, Lord, who hast-,

abundant wealth.

Men skilled m holy hymns, pure, with the hues of fire, have
sung them with their lauds to thee.

4 He, with his might enhanced by Hishis thousandfold, hath

like an ocean spread himself.

His majesty is praised a^true at solemn rites, his power where
holy singers rule.

5 Indra for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds,
Indra, as worshippers in battle-shock, we call, Indra that we

may win the spoil.

6 With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with

power hath Indra lighted up the Sun.

In Indra are i^all creatures closely held; in him meet the
distilliug Soma-drops.

7 Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the

Soma first.

The Bibhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras
sung thee as the first.

41 Vibhindu : the prince, the insti tutor of the sacrifice.

42 The stanza is obscure, the meaning of m4l% } a feminine dual which S&yana

explains by nirmdtryau, makers or creators, i. e. heaven and earth, being un-
certain. S&yana’s paraphrase of the stanza is : 1 1 glorify these two (heaven and
earth), the augmenters of water, the originators (of beings), the benefactors of
the worshipper, on account of their generation (of the wealth so given to me)/
— Wilson. —

3 With the hues of fire : or, radiant as Agni.

7 The Bibhus : as deities connected with the seasons which are regulated by
the Sun whom Indra has caused to shine.

112

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII

8 Indra increased hi§ manly strength at sacrifice, in the wild

rapture of this juice.

And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praises
to his majesty.

9 I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou may at first

regard this prayer,

Wherewith thou holpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and Praskanva
when the prize was staked.

10 Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, that, Indra,

is thy manly strength.

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the worlds
have efiecl aloud.

11 Help us, 0 Indra, when we pray to thee for wealth and hero

might.

First help thou on to strength the man who strives to win,
and aid our laud, .0 Ancient One.

12 Help for us, Indra, as thou holpest Paura once, this man’s

devotions bent on gain.

Help, as thou gavest Eusama and Syavaka and Svarnara and
Iiripa aid.

13 What newest of imploring prayers shall, then, the zealous

mortal sing ?

For have not they who laud his nfight, and Indra-power won
for themselves the light of heaven %

11 When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid the Gods ?
Who counts as Rishi and as sage ?

When ever wilt thou, Indra Maghavan, come nigli to presser’s
or to praiser’s call ?

15 These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of praise

asceud to thee, 9 10

Like ever- conquering chariots that display their strength,
gain wealth, and give unfailing aid.

16 The JBhrigus are like Suns, like Kanvas, and have gained all

that their thoughts were bent upon.

The living men of Priyamedha’s race have sung exalting Indra
with their lauds.

9 Bhvuju ; see Vol. I., Index. Yatis : an ancient race of ascetics connected
with the Bhrigus, and, according to one legend, said to have taken part in the
creation of the world. Praskanva; a Iha hi, son of Rauva, the seer of some
hymns of Book I.

10 The worlds : all men, or all living creatures.

12 Paura : the sun of King Punt. Jlmama, Stfmhi, Svarnara, and Kripa
foCu- hymu beeU pllu “ s es l ieciaU J' favoured by Indra. Of/ stansia 2 of' the

THE RIG VEDA.

113

HTMH 4.]

17 Best slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy Bay Steeds, Indra, from
afar.

Come with the High Ones hither, Maghavan, to us, Mighty, to
drink the Soma juice.

IS For these, the bards and singers, have cried out to thee with
prayer, to gain the sacrifice.

As such, 0 Maghavan, Indra, who lovest song, even as a lover
hear my call.

19 Thou from the lofty plains above, 0 Indra, hurledst Yritra

down.

Thou dravest forth the kine of guileful Mrigaya and Arbuda
from the mountain’s hold. ’

20 Bright were the flaming fires, the Sun gave forth his shine,

and Soma, Indra’s juice, shone clear.

Indra, thou blewest the great Dragon from the air : men must
regard that valorous deed.

21 The fairest courser of them all, who runneth on as ’twere to

heaven.

Which Indra and the Maruts gave, and Pakastli&man Kaura-
yan,

22 To me hath Pakasth&mau given, a ruddy horse, good at the

pole,

Filling his girth and routing wealth ;

23 Compared with whom no other ten strong coursers, harnessed

to the pole,

Bear Tugrya to his dwelling-place.

24 Baiment is body, food is life, and healing ointment giveth.

strength.

As the free-handed giver of the ruddy steed, I have named
Pakasthamaiitfourth.

HYMN IY. Indra.

Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward,
north and south,

Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave Champion 1
urged by men to come.

17 High Ones : the Maruts.

18 To gain the sacrifice : to ensure its proper performance and the blessings
which flow from it.

19 Mrigaya : see IV. 16. 18. Arbuda: see Yol. I., Index.

20 The great Dragon : or Serpent, Ahi.

21 Kauraydn : Kauray&na, the son of Kuruy&na. P&kastMman, whose
liberality is praised in stanzas 21—24, is not mentioned elsewhere.

23 Tugrya: Bhujyu, son of Tugra. See Vol. X., Index.

I Inava: descendant of the eponymous Anu. Turvasa : see Yol, I., Index*

8

a U TUB HYMNS OF [FOOK Vtlt

2 Or, Indra, when with Eama, Eusama, Syavaka, and Kyipa

thou rejoicest thee,

, Still do the Kanvas, bringing praises, with their prayers,

0 Indra, draw thee hither : come.

3 Even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert’s

watery pool,

Come hither quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the
Kanvas drink thy fill,

4 May the drops gladden thee, rich Indra, and obtain bounty

for him who pours the juice.

Soma pressed in the mortar didst thou take and drink, and
hence hast won surpassing might.

5 With mightier strength he conquered strength, with energy

he crushed their wrath.

0 Indra, Strong in youth, all those who sought the fray bent
and bowed down to thee like trees.

~ 6 He who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thou-
sand mighty men of war.

He makes his son preeminent in hero might : he serves with
reverential prayer.

• 7 With thee, the Mighty, for our Friend, we will not fear or feel
fatigue.

May we see Turvasa and Yadu : thy great deed, 0 Hero, must
be glorified.

8 On his left hip the Hero hath reclined himself: the proffered

feast offends him not.

The milk is blended with the honey of the bee : quickly come
hither, haste, and drink.

9 Indra, thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses, cars, and kine.
He evermore hath food accompanied by wealth, and radian

joins the company.

10 Come like a thirsty antelope to the drinking-place: drink .
Soma to thy heart’s desire.

' Earning it down, .0 Maghavan, day after day, thou gainest thy
surpassing might.

. 2 Fusama, Sydvaha, and Kripa have been mentioned in stanza 12 of the
preceding hymn, Fuma was another of Indra’ s favourites.

3 The wild-bull'! or Gaura (Bos Gaums), a kind of buffalo.

7 May we see Turvasa and Yadu : enjoying happiness through thy favour, —
$Ayana.

9 Thy friend; the man whom thou favourest. Joins the company : the
assembly of his equals.

10 Mining it down ; pouring down the transformed Soma in the shape of
rain; See Vedischc Studien, I, 88,

THE lUGVBDA.

HYMN 4.]

115

11 Priest, let the Soma juice flow forth, for Indra longs to drink

thereof.

He even no w hath yoked his vigorous Bay Steeds : the Vritra- *
slayer hath come near. '

12 The man with whom thou fillest thee with Soma deems him-

self a pious worshipper.

This thine appropriate food is here poured out for thee : come,
hasten forward, drink of it.

13 Press out the Soma juice, ye priests, for Indra borne upon his

car.

The pressing-stones speak loud of Indra, while they shed the
juice which, offered, honours him. *

14 To the brown juice may his dear vigorous Bay Steeds bring

Indra, to our holy task.

Hither let thy Oar-steeds who seek the sacrifice bring thee to
our drink-offerings.

15 Pushan, the Lord of ample wealth, for firm alliance we elect. *
May he with wisdom, Sakra ! Looser ! Much-invoked l aid us

to riches and to seed.

16 Sharpen us like a razor in the barber's hands; send riches

thou who settest free.

Easy to find with thee are treasures of the Dawn for mortal
man whom thou dost $peed.

17 Pushan, I long to win thy love, I long to praise thee, Radiant

God.

Excellent Lord, ’tis strange to me, no wish have I to sing the
psalm that Pajra sings.

18 My kine, 0 Radiant God, seek pasture where they will, ray

during wealth, Immortal One. *

Be our protector, Pushan 1 be, most liberal Lord, propitious to
our gatheriug strength.

* 19 Rich was the gift Kurunga gave, a hundred steeds at morning
rites.

Among the gifts of Turvasas we thought of him, the opulent,
the splendid King.

20 What by his morning songs K&nva, the powerful, hath, with
the Priyamedhas, gained —

15 P&shan : may here be a name of Indra. Looser : of the chariot-horse*
when thou comest to sacrifices ; or, according to Sayana, liberator (from sin).

17 Pajra : one of the Pajras, a celebrated priestly family, with whom the
Itanvas appear to have been on hostile terms. 1 »

19 Kurunga; this prince’s name does not occur again*

11(5 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

The herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, have I,
the Eishi, driven away.

21 The very trees were joyful at my coming : kine they obtained
in plenty, steeds in plenty.

hyme y. Asvins.

When, even as she were present hei*e, red Dawn hath shone
from far away,

She spreadeth light on every side.

2 Like Heroes on your will-yoked car far-shining, Wonder-

Workers ! ye

Attend, Q Asvins, on the Dawn.

3 By you, 0 Lords of ample wealth, our songs of praise have

been observed :

As envoy have I brought the prayer.

4 Kanvas must praise the Asvins dear to many, making many

glad,

Most rich, that they may succour us,

5 Most liberal, best at winning strength, inciters, Lords of

splendour who

Visit the worshipper’s abode.

6 So for devout Sudeva dew with fatness his unfailing mead,.
And make it rich for sacrifice. *

7 Hitherward running speedily with horses, as with rapid hawks,
Come, Asvins, to our song of praise :

8 Wherewith the three wide distances, and all the lights that

are in heaven

Ye traverse, and three times of night.

9 0 Finders of the Day, that we may win us food of kine and

wealth, •

Open the paths for us to tread.

10 0 Asvins, bring us wealth in kine, in noble heroes, and in cars:
Bring us the strength that horses give.

11 Ye Lords of splendour, glorified, ye Wonder-Workers borne on

paths

Of gold, drink sweets with Soma juice.

20 Pure and spotless : I follow S&yana’s interpretation of nirmajdm, but its
correctness is at least doubtful. Yon Roth suggests ‘to the watering-place *
as the meaning of the word, and Ludwig ‘ so that none remained behind.*

3 lords of ample wealth.: ‘affluent in sacrifices.’ — Wilson. See V. 74. 1.
As envoy : as the messenger of the patron of the sacrifice.

8 Times of night : ydmas, night-watches of three hours each.

11 Sweets: or meath, madhu ; here, perhaps, the milk, — Ludwig.

THE RIQVEJDA,

117

HYMN 5.]

1.2 To us, ye Lords of ample wealth, and to our wealthy chiefs
extend

Wide sheltei’, ne’er to be assailed.

13 Come quickly downward to the prayer of people whom ye

favour most :

Approach not unto other folk.

14 Ye Asvins whom our minds perceive, drink of this lovely

gladdening draught,

The meath which we present to you.

15 Bring riches hither unto us in huudreds and in thousands,

source „

Of plenteous food, sustaining all.

16 Verily sages call on yon, ye Heroes, in full many a place.
Moved by the priests, 0 Asvins, come.

17 Men who have trimmed the sacred grass, bringing oblations

and prepared, *

0 Asvins, are invoking you.

18 May this our hymn of praise to-day, most powerful to bring

you, be,

0 Asvins, nearest to your hearts.

19 The skin filled full of savoury meatb, laid in the pathway of

your car — #

0 Asvins, drink ye both therefrom.

20 For this, ye Lords of ample wealth, bring blessing for our herd,

our kine,

Our progeny, and plenteous food.

21 Ye too unclose to us like doors the strengthening waters of the

sky,

And rivers, ye»who find the day.

22 When did the son of Tugra serve you, Men? Abandoned in

the sea,

That with winged steeds your car might fly.

23 Ye, 0 Nasatyas, ministered to Kanva with repeated aid,
When cast into the heated pit.

16 By the priests: vdghddbhih: according to S&yana, c with, horses.’

19 The Asvins appear to be invited to halt and drink fche libations prepared
for them by their worshippers, and not, as S&yana explains, to drink from the
skin suspended in their own car. — Ludwig.

22 The son of Tugra : Bhujyu, whose rescue by the Asvins has frequently
been related and referred to. The meaning is, I do not honour you only when
I am in distress, as others whom you have aided have done,

2$ Ministered to Kanva: see I, 112. 5, and 118. 7.

118 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vim

24 Come- near with those most recent aids of yours which merit

eulogy,

When I invoke you, Wealthy Gods.

25 As ye protected Kanva erst, Priyamedha and Upastuta,

Atri, Sinjara, Asvins Twain !

26 And Ansu in decisive fight, Agastya in the fray for kitTe,

And, in his battles, Sobhari.

27 For so much bliss, or even more, 0 Asvins, Wealthy Gods,

than this,

We pray while singing hymns to you.

28 Ascend your car with golden seat, 0 Asvins, and with reins

of gold,

That reaches even to the sky.

29 Golden is its supporting shaft, the axle also is of gold,

And both the wheels are made of gold.

r S0 Thereon, ye Lords of ample wealth, come to us even from afar,
Come ye to this mine eulogy.

31 Prom far away ye come to us, Asvins, enjoying plenteous food
Of Dasas, 0 Immortal Ones.

32 With splendour, riches, and renown, 0 Asvins, hither come

to us,

N&satyas, shining brilliantly.

33 May dappled horses, steeds who fly with pinions, bring you

hitherward

To people skilled in sacrifice.

34 The wheel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied by

song,

That cometh with a store of food.

35 Borne on that chariot wrought of gold, frith coursers very
i fleet of foot,

Come, 0 Nasatyas, swift as thought.

24 Wealthy Gods: the meaning of vrishanvasd is uncertain r 1 rich in showers’
is Sdyana’s explanation, and ‘excellent as* steers’ Prof. Ludwig’s. I follow
von Roth, but his interpretation is conjectural.

* 25 Kanva, PHyamedha , Upastuta and Atri have been mentioned in Book I.
S&ya'ia takes sinj&ram to be an epithet of Atri, ‘repeating praises.’

26 Avsu: a Worshipper so named. — S&yana. Agastya: appeal's in I. 117. 11,
where he is said to have been the family-priest of Khela. The great Rishi
' Agastya is the seer of Hymns 166 — 191 of Book I. See also VII. 33. 10.
Sobhari: a Rishi, the seer of Hymns 19 — 22 of this Book.

3 1 Plenteous food of Ddsas : the meaning appears to be that even far away

* in the east the I>£sas or non-Aryan inhabitants sacrifice to the Asvins. Sftyana
explains the stanza differently : ‘ Immortal Asvins, destroyers of the cities'*!
the Pdsas, ye bring to us food from afar.’ — Wilson,

HYMN 6.] THE RIQYEJDA . 11$

36 0 Wealthy Gods, ye taste and find the brisk and watchful wild

beast good.

Associate wealth with food for us.

37 As such, 0 Asvins, find for me my share of new-presented

gifts,

As Kasu, Chedi’s son, gave me a hundred head of buffaloes,
and ten thousand kine.

38 He who hath given me for mine own ten Kings like gold to

look upon.

At Chaidva’s feet are all the people round about, all those
who think upon the shield.

39 No man, not any, goes upon the path on which the Chedis

walk.

No other prince, no folk is held more liberal of gifts than they.

HYMN VI. Indra.

Inbba, great in his power and might, and like Parjanya rich
in rain,

Is magnified by Vatsa’s lauds.

2 When the priests, strengthening the Son of Holy Law, present

their gifts,

Singers with Order’s hytpn of praise.

3 Since Kanvas with their lauds have made Indra complete the

sacrifice,

Words are their own appropriate arms.

4 Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men, bow

down,

As rivers bow them to the sea.

5 This power of *his shone brightly forth when Indra brought

together, like

A skin, the worlds of heaven and earth.

36 According to S&yaua the watchful wild beast is the the Soma which must
be chased or sought after by the Gods. Ludwig would read svapatho, with a
transitive and causal meaning, instead of svadatko , i e , ye when ye appear
in the morning send to sleep the wild beasts that have been awake all night.
The stanza is obscure.

37 Buffaloes / or camels.

38 This stanza appears to be spoken by Kasu who is called Chaidya or son
bf Chedi. Who think upon the shield : who are practised in wearing armour
of leather, according to S&yaua.

3 Words are their own appropriate arms; 'they declare all weapon*
needless.’—' Wilson. ....

120 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIJL

6 The fiercely-moving Vritra s head he severed with his thunder-

bolt,

His mighty hundred-knotted bolt.

7 Here are — we sing them loudly forth — our thoughts among

the best of songs,

Even lightnings like the blaze of fire.

8 When hidden thoughts, spontaneously advancing, glow, and

with the stream
Of sacrifice the Kanvas shine.

9 Indra, may we obtain that wealth in horses and in herds of

cows,

And prayer that may be noticed first.

10 1 from my Father have received deep knowledge of the Holy

Law :

I was born like unto the Sun.

11 After the lore of ancient time I make, like Kanva, beauteous

songs,

And Indra’ s self gains strength thereby.

12 Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra, or have lauded

thee,

By me exalted wax thou strong.

13 When his wrath thundered, when he rent Vritra to pieces,

limb by limb, #

He sent the waters to the sea.

14 Against the Dasyu Susbna thou, Indra, didst hurl thy during

bolt :

Thou, Dread One, hast a hero's fame.

15 Neither the heavens nor firmaments nor regions of the earth

contain r

Indra, the Thunderer with his might.

16 0 Indra him who lay at length staying* thy copious waters

thou,

In his own footsteps, smotest down.

17 Thoii hiddest deep in darkness him, 0 Indra, who had set his

grasp

On spacious heaven and earth conjoined.

10 From my Father : ‘from Indra, the true protector,’ according to S^yana.

12 Have not praised thee : have not praised thee yet, that is, will praise
thee hereafter. — Ludwig.

16 In his own footsteps : or, in the (waters) at his feet. ‘Into the rushing
stream s. ’—Wilson.

17 Conjoined ; like two howls turned towards each other.

HYMN 6.]

THE RIGVEJDA.

121 ■

18 Indra, whatever Yatis and Bhrigus have offered praise to thee,
Listen, thou Mighty, to my call.

19 Indra, these spotted cows yield thee their butter and the

milky draught,

Aiders, thereby, of sacrifice ;

20 Which, teeming, have received thee as a life-germ, Indra, with

their mouth,

Like Surya who sustaineth all.

21 0 Lord of Might, with hymns of praise the Kanvas have

increased thy power,

The drops poured forth have strengthened thee.

22 Under thy guidance, Indra, mid thy praises, Lordrof Thunder,

shall

The sacrifice be stxoo performed.

23 Indra, disclose much food for us, like a stronghold with store

of kine :

Give progeny and heroic strength,

24 And, Indra, grant us all that wealth of fleet steeds which

shone bright of old
Among the tribes of Nahushas.

25 Hither thou seemest to attract heaven’s fold which shines be-

fore our eyes,

When, Indra, thou art kind to us.

26 Yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, Indra, thou governest

the folk,

Mighty, unlimited in strength.

27 The tribes who bring oblations call to thee, to thee to give

them help,

With drops to thee who spreadest far.

28 There where the mountains downward slope, there by the

meeting of the streams
The Sage was manifest with song,

29 Thence, marking, from his lofty place downward he looks

upon the sea,

And thence with i*apid stir he moves.

18 Yatis; ‘ pious sages.’ — -Wilson, Angirases, according to Sftyana.

20 The stanza is unintelligible to me. Bay ana says that ‘’thee’ means Indra
in the shape of the grass which his fertilizing energy causes to grow, and jby
feeding on which the cows multiply. This energy of Indra’s is all-supporting
like the sun. See Wilson’s note. Ludwig proposes an alteration of the text.
24 Tribes of Nuhushas ; or, perhaps, the neighbouring tribes.

28 The Sage : Indra. * S4y ana’s conclusion of the purport of the verse is,
that men ought to sacrifice in those places where Indra is said to be manifest'
©d.’ — Wilson,

29 The sea ; the reservoir of Soma Juice,

[BOOK VIII,

m tee h ymns o f

30 Then, verily, they see the light refulgent of primeval seed,
Kindled on yonder side of heaven.

31 Indra, the Kanvas all exalt thy wisdom and thy manly

power,

And, Mightiest ! thine heroic strength.

32 Accept this eulogy of mine, Indra, and guard me carefully : .
Strengthen my thought and prosper it.

33 For thee, 0 Mighty, Thunder-armed, we singers through devo-

tion have

Fashioned the hymn that we may live.

31 To Indra have the Kanvas sung, like waters speeding down
a slop#:

The song is fain to go to him.

35 As rivers swell the ocean, so our hymns of praise make Indra
strong,

Eternal, of resistless wrath.

^36 Come with thy lovely Bay Steeds, come to us from regions far
away :

0 Indra, drink this Soma juice.

37 Best slayer of the Vritras, men whose sacred grass is ready

trimmed

Invoke thee for the gain of spoil.

38 The heavens and earth come after thee as the wheel follows

Etasa :

To thee flow Soma-drops effused.

39 Rejoice, 0 Indra, in the light, rejoice in Saryanaveln, be
Glad in the sacrificer's hymn.

40 Grown strong in heaven, the Thunder-armed hath bellowed,

Vritra -slayer, Bull, r :

Chief drinker of the Soma juice.

41 Thou art a Rishi born of old, sole Ruler over all by might :
Thou, Indra, guardest well our wealth.

42 May thy Bay Steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, bring

thee to the feast,

Bring thee to these our Soma-draughts.

43 The Kanvas with their hymns of praise have magnified this

ancient thought

That swells with streams of meath and oil.

* 30 The light : the Sun which is lighted up beyond the range of men’s sight.

38 As the wheel follows Etasa; as the chariot of the Sun follows the horse

that draws it. # _ q /

39 Saryan^vdn said to be a lake and district in Kurukahetra. See i* ot

H, note. * '

TEE RIQVEDA.

ETMiV 7.]

123

44 Mid mightiest Gods let mortal man choose Indra at the

sacrifice,

Indra, whoe’er would win, fbr help.

45 Thy steeds, by Priyamedhas praised, shall bring thee, God

whom all invoke,

Hither to drink the Soma juice. ;

46 A hundred thousand have I gained from Parsu, from

Tirindira,

And presents of the Yadavas.

47 Ten thousand head of kiue, aud steeds three times a hundred

they bestowed
On Pajra for the S&ma-song.

48 Kakuha hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffaloes yoked

in fours.

And matched in fame the Y&davas.

HYMN VII. Marut*. -

0 Maruts, when the sage hath poured the Trishtup forth as
food for you,

Ye shine amid the mountain-clouds.

2 When, Bright Ones, fain to show your might ye have deter-

mined on your course,

The mountain -clouds ha?e bent them down.

3 Loud roaring with the winds the Sons of Prisni have upraised

themselves :

They have poured out the streaming food.

4 The Maruts spread the mist abroad and make the mountains

rock and reel,

When with the winds they go their way ;

5 What time theVivers aud the hills before your oomiug bowed

them down,

So to sustain your mighty force.

46 From Parsu , from J Tirindira : 'from Tirindira the son of Parsu.’ —
Wilson. Both names are Iranian (cf. Tiridates, Persa). See Weber’s iSpiscAes
im Vedischen Ritual , pp. 36 — 38 (Sitzungsberichte der K. P. Akademie der
Wissenschaften, 1891, XXXVIII).

Yddavas : or Yadus, descendants of the hero Yadu.

47 Pajra; see VIII. 4, 17.

48 Kakuha ; or, the lofty one, meaning Tirindira. Buffaloes : or camel*,

1 The Trishtup; according to one of S&yana’s three interpretations, the
Soma offering at the midday libation accompanied by hymns in the Trishtup
metre. . . . ; ’

324 , THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

6 We call on you for aid by night, on you for succour in the day,
On you while sacrifice proceeds.

7 These, verily, wondrous, red of hue, speed on their courses

with a roar

Over the ridges of the sky.

8 With might they drop the loosened rein so that the Sun may

run his course,

And spread themselves with beams of light.

9 Accept, ye Maruts, this my song, accept ye this mine hymn

of praise,

Accept, Ribhukshans, this my call.

10 The dappled Cows have poured three lakes, meath for the

Thunder-wielding God,

From the great cask, the watery cloud.

11 0 Maruts, quickly come to us when, longing for felicity,

We call you hither from the sky.

"1*2 For, Rudras and Ribhukshans, ye, Most Bountiful, are in the
house,

Wise when the gladdening draught is drunk.

13 0 Maruts, send us down from heaven riches distilling raptur-

ous] oy,

With plenteous food, sustaining all.

14 When, Bright Ones, hither from the hills ye have resolved to

take your way,

Ye revel in the drops effused.

15 Man should solicit with his lauds happiness which belongs to

them,

So great a band invincible.

16 They who like fiery sparks with showers of <rain blow through

the heaven and earth,

Milking the spring that never fails.

17 With chariots and tumultuous roar, with tempests and with

hymns of praise
The Sons of Prisni hurry forth.

18 For wealth, we think of that whereby ye aided Yadu, Turvasa,
And Kanva who obtained the spoil.

8 They drop the loosened rein : they speed forward to prepare the way for
the Sun.

9 Ribhukshans ; Mighty Ones, according to S&yana.

10 The dappled Cows : the ^Maruts. Three lakes : three large Soma recep-
tacles, the f)ronakalasa t the Adhavantya , and the PHtabhrit, The meaning is,
the Maruts have poured down abundant water from the rain- cloud.

HTMN 7.] THE El GY EE A. lis

19 May these our viands Bounteous Ones ! that flow in streams

like holy oil,

With K ftnva'a hymns, increase your might.

20 Where, Bounteous Lords for whom the grass is trimmed are

ye rejoicing now ? ' 5

What Brahman is adoring you 1

21 Is it not there where ye of old, supplied with sacred grass,

for lauds

Inspired the strong in sacrifice

22 They brought together both the worlds, the mighty waters,

and the Sun,

And, joint by joint, the thunderbolt.

23 They sundered Vritra limb from limb and split the gloomy

mountain-clouds,

Performing an heroic deed.

24 They reinforced the power and strength of Trifca as he fought,

and helped

Indra in battle with the foe.

25 They deck themselves for glory, bright, celestial, lightning in

their hands,

And helms of gold upon their heads.

26 When eagerly ye from faraway came to the cavern of the Bull,
He bellowed in his fear like Heaven.

27 Borne by your golden-footed steeds, 0 Gods, come hither to

receive

The sacrifice we offer you.

28 When the red leader draws along their spotted deer yoked to

the car.

The Bright Ones come, and shed the rain.

29 Sushoma, Saryan&van, and Arjika full of homes, have they,
These Heroes, sought with downward car.

19 With K&nva’s hymns: hymns of the Bishi Punarvatsa, a descendant of
Kanva.

21 The strong in sacrifice : the Mayhavans, wealthy worshippers.

24 Trita : a Vedic deity, ; v v - \ - - -* " 1 - third form, generally associated
with Indra, Vftyu, and the i‘ V . I., Index. In battle with the

foe : or, to overcome V ritra.

26 The cavern of the Ball: perhaps, the hollow of the rain-cloud; ‘the
opening of the rainy (firmament).’ — Wilson.

28 Leader : or side-horse.

29 Saryavdv&n ; A has occurred before (see I. 84. 14, and VIII 6. 39) as the
name of a lake. Arjika is said by S&yana to be the name of a district, and
he takes sushfana (containing excellent Soma) to be an adjective qualifymgifc.
See Zimmer, Altindisches Lebcn , p. 19.

123 fSt HYMNS OP [BOOK Till

30 When, Manats, will ye come to him, the singer who invokes

you thus,

With favours to your suppliant 1

31 What now ? where have ye still a friend since ye left Indra all

alone ?

Who counteth on your friendship now ?

32 The Kanvas Bing forth Agni’s praise together with our

Manats' who

Wield thunder and wear swords of gold.

33 Hither for new felicity may I attract the Impetuous Ones,

The Herpes with their wondrous strength. •

34 Before them sink the very hills deeming themselves abysses ;

yea,

Even the mountains bend them down.

35 Steeds flying on their tortuous path through mid-air carry

them, and give

The man who lauds them strength and life.

36 Agni was born- the first of all, like Sfirya lovely with his light :
With lustre these have spread abroad. u

HYMN VIII. Asvln*.

With all the succours that are yours, 0 Asvins, hither come
to us :

Wonderful, borne on paths of gold, drink ye the meath with
Soma juice.

2 Come now, ye Asvins, on your car decked with a sun-bright

canopy,

Bountiful, with your golden forms, Sages with depth of
intellect.

3 Come hither from the Nahushas, come, drawn by pure hymns,

from mid-air.

0 Asvins, drink the savoury juice shed in the Kanvas'
sacrifice.

SI Left Indra all alone ? ; This is merely a rhetorical question meaning, ye
never did desert him. The Maruts alone stood by him when he fought with
Yritra.

86 With lustre these have spread abroad : ‘then they (the Maruts) stood
round in their radiance.’ ‘The Scholiast intimates that this verse refers to
the ceremony called Agnimdruta, when Agni is first worshipped, then the
Maruts! — Wilson,

3 Prom the Nahushas r or, according to others, from the neighbouring
people. *

MYMX 8.] • TEE mar ED A. 127

4 Come to us hither from the heavens, come from mid-air, well-

loved by us :

Here Kanva’s son hath pressed for you the pleasant meath of
Soma juice.

5 Come, Asvins, to give ear to ns, to drink the Soma, Asvins,

come.

Hail, Strengthened of the praise-song ! speed onward, ye
Heroes, with your thoughts.

6 As, Heroes, in the olden time the Eishis called you to their

aid,

So now, 0 Asvins, come to us, come near to this mine eulogy*

7 Even from the luminous sphere of heaven come to us, ye who

find the light,

Carers for Yatsa, through our prayers and lauds, 0 ye who
hear our call.

8 Do others more than we adore the Asvins with their hymns

of praise ?

The Hi ski Yatsa, Kanva’s son, hath magnified you with his
songs.

9 The holy singer with his hymns hath called you, Asvins, hither-

ward ;

Best Yritra-slayers, free from stain, as such bring us felicity.

1.0 What time, ye Lords of \mple wealth, the Lady mounted on
your car,

Then, 0 ye Asvins, ye attained all wishes that your hearts
desired.

11 Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand

ornaments :

Yatsa the sage, the sage’s son, hath sung a song of sweets to
you.

12 Cheerers of many, rich in goods, discoverers of opulence,

The Asyins, Riders through the sky, have welcomed this my

song of praise.

13 0 Asvins, grant us all rich gifts wherewith no man may'

interfere.

Make us observe the stated times : give us not over to reproach.

14 Whether, N&satyas, ye be nigh, or whether ye be far away,
Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand

ornaments.

7 Carers for Vatsa : ye who favour and provide for Yatsa, the Rishi of .
Hymn YI. of this Book.

10 The Lady ; Stiryi, Daughter of the Sun* See. 1. 110. 17.

123 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

15 Vatsa the Eishi with his songs, Msatyas, hath exalted you :
Grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a thousand

ornaments.

16 Bestow on him, 0 Asvins, food that strengthens, and that

drops with oil,

On him who praises you for bliss, and, Lords of bounty, prays
for wealth.

1 7 Come to us, ye who slay the foe, Lords of rich treasure, to

this hymn.

0 Heroes, give us high renown and these good things of earth
for help.

1 8 The Priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours that

are yours,

You, Asvins, Lords of solemn rites, with calls entreating you
to come.

19 Come to us, Asvins, ye who bring felicity, auspicious Ones,

To Yatsa who with prayer and hymn, lovers of song, hath

honoured you.

20 Aid us, 0 Heroes, for those hymns for which ye helped

Gosarya erst,

Gave Vasa, Dasavraja aid, and Kanva and MedhUtithi ;

21 And favoured Trasadasyu, ye Heroes, in spoil-deciding fray :
For these, 0 Asvins, graciously assist us in acquiring strength.

22 0 Asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and praises,

honour you :

Best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly yearn
for you.

23 Three places of the Asvins, erst concealed, are made apparent

now.

Both Sages, with the flight of Law come hither unto those
who live.

HYMN IX. Asvins.

To help and favour Yatsa now, 0 Asvins, come ye hitherward.
Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, and keep
malignities away.

20 Qo&arya : said by S&yana to be a name of Sayu. See I. 116, 22. Fusa
and Dasavraja are known only as protfyds of the Asvins.

21 Trasadasyu : see Vol. I., Index.

23 Three places ; according to Sayana, the three wheels of the Asvins’
chariot are intended. The three places can only be heaven, firmament, and
earth, hidden during the darkness of night and made visible by the coming
of the Asvins and Dawn.

1 Vatsa: apparently another name of jSasakarna, called also Kanva or
descendant of Kanva, the Kishi of the hymn*

HYMN 9.] THE MG VEDA . 329

2 All manliness that is in heaven, with the Five Tribes, or in

mid-air,

Bestow, ye Asvins, upon ns.

3 Remember Kanva first of all among the singers, Asvins, who
Have thought upon your wondrous deeds.

4 Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused,
This your sweet Soma juice, ye Lords of ample wealth, through

which ye think upon the foe.

5 Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, Wonder-Wor-

kers, and in growing plants,

Therewith, 0 Asvins, succour me.

6 What force, Nasatyas, ye exert, whatever, Gods, ye tend and

heal,

This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone : ye visit
him who offers gifts.

7 How hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the Alvins*

hymn of praise.

Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, and Soma
very rich in sweets.

8 Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls upon its

way.

May these my praises make you speed hitherward like a cloud
* of heaven.

9 When, 0 Nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither with

our hymus,

Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember EAnva
specially.

10 As erst Kakshivan and the Rishi Vyasva, as erst Dlrghatamas
invoked you^ presence,

Or, in th.e sacrificial chambers, Yainya Prithi, so be ye mind-
ful of us here, 0 Asvins.

3 Thought upon: or touched upon, handled.

4 Thinlc upon the foe : plan thp destruction of the demon of darkness.

5 Whatever ye have done : Professor Wilson paraphrases after S&yana :
* preserve me with that (healing virtue) deposited by you in the waters/ in
the trees, in the herbs/

7 The Atharvan ; the priest who has special charge pf the fire and the Som^.
I follow Ludwig in taking dtharvani as a nominative and not as a locative as
S&yana does : ‘he will sprinkle the sweet-flavoured Soma and the gharnm
* (oblation) on the Atharvan fire.’ — Wilson.

10 Kalcshtv tn ; see I. 18. 1. Vyasva : see I. 112. 15. Dirghatamas: see Voh
L, Index. Vaiaya : son of Vena. ’ Pnthi ; the first anointed king.

9

130 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK YUL

1 1 Come as home-guardians, saving ns from foemen, guarding

our living creatures and our bodies,

Come to the house to give us seed and offspring,

12 Whether with Indra ye be faring, Asvins, or resting in one

dwelling-place with Vayu,

In concord with the Bibhus or Adityas, or standing still in
Vishnu’s striding-places.

13 When I, 0 Asvins, call on you to-day that I may gather

strength,

Or as all-conquering might in war, be that the Asvins 5 noblest
grace.

14 Now conie, ye Asvins, hitherward: here are oblations set

for you ;

These Soma-draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, these offered
you mid Kanva’s sons.

15 Whatever healing balm is yours, Nasatyas, near or far away.
Therewith, great Sages, grant a home to Vatsa and to Vimada.

16 Together with the Goddess, with the Asvins 5 Speech have I

awoke.

Thou, Goddess, hast disclosed the hymn, and holy gift from
mortal men.

17 Awake the Asvins, Goddess Dawn ! Up Mighty Lady of sweet

strains ! "

Bise, straightway, priest of sacrifice S High glory to the
gladdening draught !

18 Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light shinest together

with the Sun,

And to this man-protecting home the chariot of the Asvins comes.

19 When yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows from udders

pour their milk,

And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins 5 worshippers
show first..

20 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall

conquer men,

And power and skill, most sapient Ones !

11 Our living creatures: our dependents and our cattle.

12 Vishnu’s striding-places : from which he made his three great strides
through earth, firmament, and heaven.

13 That: the granting of my request.

15 And to Vimada: as ye did to Vimada. — Sdyana. See Vol. I., Index.

16 The Goddess : Dawn, The Asvins’ Speech: Vftk or Speech who glorifies '
the Asvins ; i. e. the hymn that praises them.

19 Yellow stalks : of Soma plants.

20 Forward for glory : advance and come to give us glory, etc.

nYMJST 11.] TEE MOVED A. 101

21 When, Asvins, worthy of our lauds,” ye seat -you in the father’s
house.

With wisdom or the bliss ye bring.

HYMN X. Asvins.

Whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of
heaven,

Or in a mansion that is built above the sea, come thence, ye
Asvins, hitherward.

2 Or if for Manu ye prepared the sacrifice, remember also Kanva’s

son.

I call Brihaspati, Indra, Vishnu, all the Gods, the Asvins borne
by rapid steeds.

3 Those Asvins I invoke who work marvels, brought hither

to receive,

With whom our friendship is most famed, and kinship passing
that of Gods.

4 On whom the solemn rites depend, whose worshippers rise

without the Sun :

These who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice, and by their

Godhead drink the sweets of Soma juice.

&

b Whether ye, Lords of ample wealth, now linger in the east
or west,

With Druhyu, or with *Anu, Yadu, Turvsa, I call you hither ;
come to me.

6 Lords of great riches, whether through the firmament ye fly
or speed through heaven and earth,

Or with your Godlike natures stand upon your cars, come
thence* 0 Asvins, hitherward.

* HYMN XI. Agrn.

Thou, Agni, God mid mortal men, art guard of sacred rites,
thou art

To be adored at sacrifice.

21 In the father's house: in the sacrificial hall of the father of the family,
the wealthy householder who institutes the sacrifice. This stanza is a conti-
nuation *of 19, alt hough the connexion is interrupted by the intervening stanza.

1 Above the sea: above the ocean of air.

3 To receive : our oblations.

4 Without the sun : Sftyana explains astirti differently, connecting in with
Mri instead of dtra : { of whom there are worshippers in a place where there
is no worship,* — Wilson.

5 Druhyu and the other names stand for the tribes called after these
ancient chieftains. See Vol. I., Index.

The hymn is translated ip Max Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit
Literature.

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK riJL

w

2 0 Mighty Agni, thou must be glorified at our festivals,
Bearing our offerings to the Gods.

3 0 Jatavedas Agni, fight and drive our foes afar from us,
Them and their godless enmities.

4 Thou, Jatavedas, seekest not the worship of a hostile man,
However nigh it be to thee.

5 We sages, mortals as we are, adore the mighty name of thee,
Immortal Jatavedas 7 name.

6 Sages, we call the Sage to help, mortals, we call the God to aid :
We call on Agni with our songs.

7 May Vats& draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwel-

ling-place,

Agni, with song that yearns for thee.

8 Thou art the same in many a place : mid all the people thou

art Lord.

In fray and fight we call on thee.

9 When we are seeking strength we call Agni to help us in

the strife,

The giver of rich gifts in war.

10 Ancient, adorable at sacrifices, Priest from of old, meet for our
praise, thou sittest.

Fill full and satisfy thy body, Agni, and win us happiness by
offering worship.

HYMN XII. India.

Joy, Mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung most from
Soma-draughts, wherewith

Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that wejong.

2 Wherewith thou holpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, and

the God • .

Who stirs the sunlight, and the sea, for that we long.

3 Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and all the

mighty floods

To go the way ordained by Law, for that we long,

2 Bearing our offerings to the Qo<$s: literally, ‘the charioteer of solemn rites/

1 Joy: mddah: the rapturous exhilaration produced in Indra by drinking
the Soma juice. For that we long: the short refrain or burden which
generally concludes each stanza of each triplet of this hymn is sometimes
rather loosely attached and cannot always be clearly brought out in the proper
place in translation.

2 Adhrigu : according to S&yana a Ri^hi so named. See 1. 1 1 2. 20. Dasagva :
one of the priestly family connected with, or identical with, the Angirasea
‘ the accomplisher of the ten (months’ rite).’— Wilson. Ludwig thinks that
Dasagva here may juiean the Sun. The sea : of air.

HYMN 12 .) THE MIGVEDA. 135

4 Accept this laud for aid, made pure like oil, thou Caster of

the Stone,

Whereby even in a moment thou hast waxen great.

5 Be pleased, Song-lover, with this song ; it hows abundant

like the sea.

Indra, with all thy succours thou hast waxen great.

6 The God who from afar hath sent gifts to maintain our

friendship’s bond,

Thou, spreading them like rain from heaven, hast waxen great,

7 The beams that mark him have grown strong, the thunder

rests between his arms, w

When, like the Sun, he hath increased both Heaven and Earth.

8 When, Mighty Lord of Heroes, thou didst eat a thousand

buffaloes,

Then grew and waxed exceeding great thine Indra-power.

9 Indra consumeth with the rays of Sdrya the malicious man:
Like Agni conquering the woods, he hath*grown strong.

10 This newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches

unto thee :

Serving, beloved in many a place, it metes and marks.

11 The pious germ of sacrifice directly purifies the soul.

By Indra’s lauds it waxqs great, it metes and marks.

12 Indra who wins the friend hath spread himself to drink the

Soma-draught :

Like worshipper’s dilating praise P it metes and marks.

13 He whom the sages, living men, have gladdened, offering up

their hymns,

Hath swelled like oil of sacrifice in Agni’s mouth.

8 Didst eat a thousand buffaloes : the buffaloes probably represent the clouds
which the Sun dissipates or consumes. — Ludwig. ‘When thou hast slain
thousands of mighty foes.’ — Wilson.

10 It metes and marks : defines and discriminates Indra’ s good qualities. —
S&yana.

11 The germ of sacrifice is probably the wish that prompts the offering.

Siiyana explains differently : i The devctlfc pi’&iBer of the adorable (Tnclra)

purifies in due succession the offering (of the Soma) ; with siicmd hymns he
magnifies (the might of Indra; he verily proclaims the measure (of his'merits)/

12 Worshipper's dilating praise: I follow S&yana : but the stanza is unin-
telligible to me. ‘Indra, the benefactor of his friend (the worshipper), lma
Surged himself to drink the Soma, in like manner as the pious praise dilates
and proclaims the measure of his merits/ — Wilson. The meaning of vff&i
(praise, according to Sftyana) is uncertain. Yon Roth thinks that the two
press-stones are meant, and others explain it as the sword, knife, or axe used
in sacrifice.

184 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIIL

14 Aditi also hath “brought forth a hymn for Indra, Sovran Lord :
The work of sacrifice for help is glorified.

15 The ministering priests have sung their songs for aid and eulogy;
God, thy Bays turn not from the rite which Law ordains.

16 If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu's or Trita Aptya's side*
Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops ;

17 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air,
Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops.

18 Or, Lord of Heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who sheds the

juice,

Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing drops.

1 9 To magnify the God, the God, Indra, yea, Indra for your help,
And promptly end the sacrifice — this have they gained.

20 With worship, him 'whom men adore, with Soma, him who

drinks it most,

Indra with lauds have they increased — this have they gained.

21 His leadings are with power and might and his instructions

manifold :

He gives the worshipper all wealth : this have they gained.

22 For slaying Vritra have the Gods set Indra in the foremost

place.

Indra the choral bands have sung, "for vigorous strength.

23 We to the Mighty with our might, with lauds to him who

hears our call,

With holy hymns have sung aloud, for vigorous strength.

24 Not earth, nor heaven, nor firmaments cod tain the Thunder-

wielding God :

They shake before his violent rush and vigorous strength.

25 What time the Gods, 0 Indra, set thee foreifiost in the furious

fight,

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on.

26 When Vritra, stayer of the floods, thou slewest, Thunderer

with might, .

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on.

27 When Vishrm, through thine energy, strode wide those three

great steps of his,

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on.

28 When thy two beautiful Bay Steeds grew great and greater

day by day,

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thoo.

1 ^ Trita Aptya : sec VIII, 7. 24, note. Here he appears as the preparer of
celestial Soma for Indra.

HYMN 13.]

THE RIG VEDA.

135

20 When, Indra, all theMarut folk humbly submitted them to thee,
Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.

30 When yonder Sun, that brilliant light, thou settest in the

heaven above,

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.

31 To thee, 0 Indra, with this thought the sagelifts up this eulogy,
Akin and leading as on foot to sacrifice.

32 When in thine own dear dwelling all gathered have lifted up

the voice

Milk-streams at worship’s central spot, for sacrifice,

33 As Priest, 0 Indra, give us wealth in brave men and good

steeds and kine

That we may first remember thee for sacrifice.

HYMN XIII. Indra.

Indra, when Soma juices flow, makes his mind pure and meet
for lauds.

He gains the power that brings success, for great is he.

2 In heaven’s first region, in the seat of Gods, is he who brings

success,

Most glorious, prompt to save, who wins the water-floods.

3 Him, to win strength, have I invoked, even Indra mighty for

the fray.

Be thou most near to us for bliss, a Friend to aid.

4 ludra, Song-lover, here for thee the worshipper’s libation flows
Rejoicing in this sacred grass thou shinest forth.

5 Even now, 0 Indra, give us that which, pressing juice, we

crave of thee.

Bring us weall^i manifold which finds the light of heaven.

6 What time the zealous worshipper hath boldly sung his songs

to thee,

Like branches of a tree up-grows what they desire.

7 Generate songs even as of old, give ear unto the singer’s call :
Thou for the pious hast grown great at each carouse.

31 The second line is difficult. Wilson, following S&yana, paraphrases the
stanza; ‘The wise (worshipper), Indra, offers thee this gratifying sincere
praise along with pious rites at the sacrifice, as (a man places) a kinsman in
(a prominent) position/

32 Milk-streams : the sweetly-flowing hymns.

Wilson remarks : f This is probably an ancient hymn, both by its repetitions
and combination of simplicity and obscurity/

7 Generate songs : by granting the prayers of the singers.

136 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK FIJI

8 Sweet strains that glorify him play like waters speeding down

a slope,

Yea, him who in this song is called the Lord of Heaven ;

9 Yea, who alone is called the Lord, the single Euler of the folk,
By worshippers seeking aid : may he joy in the draught.

10 Praise him, the Glorious, skilled in song, Lord of the two

victorious Bays :

They seek the worshipper's abode who bows in prayer.

11 Put forth thy strength: with dappled Steeds come, thou of

mighty intellect,

With swift Steeds to the sacrifice, for 'tis thy joy.

12 Grant wealth to those who praise thee, Lord of Heroes,

Mightiest Indra : give
Our princes everlasting fame and opulence.

13 1 call thee when the Sun is risen, I call thee at the noon of day :
With thy car-horses, Indra, come well-pleased to us.

14 Speed forward hither, come to us, rejoice thee in the milky

draught :

Spin out the thread of ancient time, as well is known.

15 If, Sakra, Vritra-slayer, thou be far away or near to us,

Or in the sea, thou art the guard of Soma juice.

16 Let songs we sing and Soma-dr8ps expressed by us make

Indra strong :

The tribes who bring oblations find delight in him.

17 Him sages longing for his aid, with offerings brought in eager

haste,

Him, even as branches, all mankind have made to grow.

1 8 At theTrikadrukas the Gods span sacrifice that stirred the mind :
May our songs strengthen him who still hath strengthened us.

19 When, true to duty, at due times the worshipper offers lauds

to thee,

They call him Purifier, Pure, and Wonderful.

14 Spin out the thread of ancient times : e extend the ancient sacrifice.’ —
Wilson,

The due performance of sacrifice is regarded as an unbroken thread reaching
thvongb a succession of Ilishis from ancient to modern times.

1 5 In the sea : in the firmament, or ocean of air.

17 All mankind: hshoritfh. But see M, Muller, Vedic Hymns, I. 310.

18 A t the Tvikadrnkas : according to Sftyana these are the first three days
of the Abhiplava ceremony. According to some modern scholars they are
probably three peculiar Soma-vessels, or an oblation consisting of three offer-
ings of Soma. Span sacrifice; see above note on 14. That stirred the mind;
that urged others to follow the example.

19 Him : a change of person, Indra being meant.

Hymn is .] the rigveda. m

20 That tnind of Rudra, fresh and strong, moves conscious in the

ancient ways,

With reference whereto the wise have ordered this.

21 If thou elect to be my Friend drink of this sacrificial juice,

By help whereof we may subdue all enemies.

22 0 In Ira, Lover of the song, when shall thy praiser be most blest?
When wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds ?

23 And thy two highly-lauded Bays, strong stallions, draw thy

car who art

Untouched by age, most gladdening car for which we pray.

24 With ancient offerings we implore the Young«and Strong

whom many praise.

He from of old hath sat upon dear sacred grass.

25 Wax mighty, thou whom many laud for aids which Rishis

have extolled.

Pour down for us abundant food and guard its well.

26 0 Indra, Caster of the Stone, thou helpest him who praises thee:
From sacrifice I send to thee a mind- yoked hymn.

27 Here, yoking for the Soma -draught these Horses, sharers of

thy feast,

Thy Bay Steeds, Indra, fraught with wealth, consent to come.

28 Attendants on thy gloryf let the Rudras roar assent to thee,
And all the Marut companies come to the feast.

29 These his victorious followers hold in the heavens the place

they love,

Leagued in the heart of sacrifice, as well we know.

30 That we may long behold the light, what time the ordered

rite proceeds,

He duly measures, as he views, the sacrifice.

31 0 Indra, strong is this thy car, and strong are these Bay

Steeds of thine :

0 Satakratu, thou art strong, strong is our call.

20 Have ordered this : song of praise, or holy ceremony. — Ludwig.

26 Mind-yoked : made ready by the poet’s mind, as a chariot — to which the
hymn is frequently compared — is equipped for a journey,

28 The Rudras : the sons of Rudra, the Maruts.

29 The heart , literally navel, that is the central point, of sacrifice , is the
receptacle on which oblations are placed, or the uttaravedi or north altar.

31 Strong : vHshd .* as has been noticed before (see I. 177. 2. 3.) some of
the Vedic poets delight in the repetition of this word and derivatives from the
same root. S&yana explains vrishd : as ‘showerer of benefits/ and Ludwig
translates it by f atierlcraftig/ strong as a bull. The original meaning of the
word is male, masculine, and, hence, strong.

138 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR VIIL

32 Strong is the press-stone, strong thy joy, strong is the flowing

Soma juice:

Strong is the rite thou furtherest, strong is our call,

33 As strong I call on thee the Strong, 0 Thunderer with thy

thousand aids :

For thou hast won the hymn of praise. Strong is our call.

HYMN XI Y. Indra .

If I, 0 Indra, were, like thee, the single Sovran of all wealth,
My worshipper should be rich in kine.

2 I should fee fain, 0 Lord of Power, to strengthen and enrich

the sage,

Were I the Lord of herds of kine.

3 To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, Indra, is a

cow

Yielding in plenty kine and steeds.

4 None is there, Indra, God or man, to hinder thy munificence,
The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give.

5 The sacrifice made Indra strong when he unrolled the earth,

and made

Himself a diadem in heaven.

6 Thine aid we claim, 0 Indra, thine who after thou hast waxen

great

Hast won all treasures for thine own.

7 In Soma's ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and realms of

light,

When he cleft Yala limb from limb.

8 Showing the hidden he drave forth the co\^s for the Angirases,
And Yala he cast headlong down.

9 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven established

and secured,

Firm and immovable from their place.

10 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of water-

floods :

Bright shine the drops that gladden thee.

11 For thou, 0 Indra, art the God whom hymns and praises

magnify :

Thou blessest those who worship thee.

12 Let the two long-maned Bay Steeds bring Indra to drink the

Soma juice,

The Bountiful to our sacrifice.

HYMN 15 .]

THE RIG VEDA .

m

13 With waters’ foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of Namuchi,
Subduing all contending hosts.

14 The Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic arts and

mount to heaven,

Thou, Indra, castest down to earth.

15 As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou scatteredst to every side
Their settlement who poured no gifts.

HYMN XV. Indra.

Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom
many laud :

Invite the powerful Indra with your songs of praise.

2 Whose lofty might — for doubly sti'ong is he — supports the

heavens and earth,

And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power.

3 Such, Praised by many ! thou art King : alone thou smitest

Vritras dead,

To gain, 0 Indra, spoils of war and high renown.

4 We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which conquers

in the fray,

Which, Caster of the Stone ! gives room and shines like gold.

5 Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and for Manu’s

sake : •

Now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth.

6 This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this might

of thine :

Win thou the waters day by day, thralls of the strong.

7 That lofty Indra-power of thine, thy strength and thine

intelligence,

Thy thunderbolt for which we long, the wish makes keen.

8 0 Indra, Heaven and Earth augment thy manly power and

thy renown ;

The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on.

9 Vishnu the lofty ruling Power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise:
In thee the Maruts 4 5 6 7 company have great delight.

13 With waters' foam: with a thunderbolt in the form of foam, according
to a later legend. See Lanman, Sanskrit Reader^ p. 375, who takes NTamuchi
to be a waterspout in a lake, and e with foam * to mean * accompanied by foam.’

4 Wild delight : Soma juice, the cause of thy rapture.

5 For Agv, md for Wh ; that is for man. Ayu was the son of

Ptmiravas and Ur vast ' ~

6 Thralls of the strong : controlled and imprisoned by Vritra.

7 The wish : our wishes expressed in prayer and praise,

146

TEE 11YMN& OF

[BOOK FILL

10 0 Indra, thou wast born the Lord of men, most liberal of thy

gifts :

Excellent deeds for evermore are all thine own.

1 1 Ever, alone, 0 highly-praised, thou sendest Vritras to their

rest :

None else than Indra executes the mighty deed.

12 Though here and there, in varied hymns, Indra, men call on

thee for aid,

Still with our heroes fight and win the light of heaven.

13 Already have all forms of him entered our spacious dwelling-

place ^

For victory stir thou Indra, up, the Lord of Might.

HYMN XVI. Indra.

Peaxsb Indra whom our songs must laud, sole Sovran of
mankind, the Chief
Most liberal who controlleth men.

2 In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the glory-giving

songs,

Like the floods’ longing for the sea.

3 Him I invite with eulogy, best King, effective in the fight,
Strong for the gain of mighty spoil.

4 Whose perfect ecstasies are wide, profound, victorious, and

give

Joy in the field where heroes win.

5 Him, when the spoils of war are staked, men call to be their

advocate :

They who have Indra win the day.

6 Men honour him with stirring songs, and magnify with solemn

rites :

Indra is he who giveth ease.

7 Indra is Priest and Kishi, he is much invoked by many men,
And mighty by his mighty powers.

8 Meet to be lauded and invoked, true Hero with his deeds of

might,

Victorious even when alone.

13 All forms of him: the various qualities of Indra have been celebrated.

Stir thou: the ItishI addresses himself. Lord of Might: sacMpatim : in
later literature, lord or husband of Sack? or his might personified and regarded
as his consort.

. J 1 mean-V ~ r 1 - ^y ana, greater than all. See VI.

45. 7, The Brahman who ». ■ ■■ : that is, Indra regarded as a

priest. Misht ; according t - > t. . n. ■ ; .-holder of all the Aryan race/ .

THE JUG VEDA.

141

HYMN 17.J

9 The men, the people magnify that Indra with their Sama songs,
With hymns and sacred eulogies :

10 Him who advances them to wealth, sends light to lead them

in the war,

And quells their foemen in the fray.

11 May he, the saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear us in a

ship

Safely beyond all enemies.

12 As such, 0 Indra. honour us with gifts of booty, further us.
And lead us to felicity.

HYMN XVII. • Indra.

Come, we have pressed the juice for theej 0 Indra, drink
this Soma here *.

Sit thou on this my sacred grass.

2 0 Indra, let thy long-maned Bays, yoked by prayer, bring

thee hitherward :

Give ear and listen to our prayers.

3 We Soma-bearing Brahmans call thee Soma-drinker with thy

friend,

We, Indra, bringing Soma juice.

4 Come unto us who bring the juice, come unto this our eulogy,
Fair-visored ! drink thou ©f the juice.

5 I pour it down within thee, so through all thy members let it

spread :

Take with thy tongue the pleasant drink.

6 Sweet to thy body let it be, delicious be the savoury juice :
Sweet be the Soma to thine heart.

7 Like women, let this Soma-draught, invested with its robe,

approach, •

0 active Indra, close to thee.

8 Indra, transported with the juice, vast in his bulk, strong in

his neck

And stout arms, smites the Vritras down.

9 0 Indra, go thou forward, thou who rulest over all by might :
Thou Vritra-slayer slay the fiends.

1 0 Long be thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest ample wealth

to him

Who sheds the juice and worships thee.

S With thy friend : ludra’s companion, the thunderbolt. 1 With suitable
praise.’ — Wilson.

7 Like women: dressed in white garments and moving slowly. Its robe:
the milk that colours it.

TEE EYMm OE

142

IBOOK VI IT.

1 1 Here, Indra, is thy Soma-draught, made pure upon the sacred

grass :

Bun hither, come and drink thereof.

12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well ! this juice is shed

for thy delight : a
T hou art invoked, Akhandala !

13 To Kundap&yya, grandson’s son, grandson of Sringavrish ! to

thee,

To him have I addressed my thought.

14 Strong pillar thou, Lord of the home ! armour of Soma-offerers :
The drop of Soma breaketh all the strongholds down, and

Indra is the Rishis’ Friend.

15 Holy Prid&kusanu, winner of the spoil, one eminent o’er many

men,

Lead on the wild horse Indra with his vigorous grasp forward
to drink the Soma juice.

HYMN XVIII. Adityas,

Now let the mortal offer prayer to win the unexampled grace
Of these Adityas and their aid to cherish life.

12 Famed for thy radiance , 1 7 ■ ,T 5 words thus rendered,

aftchigo and sttchipdjana, have i : ■ explained by the Com-

mentator, and their meaning is still uncertain. According to Sayan a, the
former may mean ‘ thou whose cattle are strong/ or ‘ thou whose radiance
is renowned,’ and the latter ‘thou of renowned adoration’ or ‘whose hymns
are. renowned ’ See Wilson’s note. Thou art invoked , Akhandala J : or, ‘Thou,
0 Destroyer, art invoked.’ This appellation of Indra does "not occur again in
the Iligveda. See Muir, 0. 8 . Texts , IV. 190.

13 Kvndaplyya and Sringavrish appear here to be names of men. Accord-
ing to S&yana, kvndaplyya is the name of a particular Soma- ceremony, and
the offspring of Sringavrish is Indra himself. ‘ (Indra), who wast the off-
spring of Sringavrish, of whom the kundapdyya rite was the protector, (the
sages) have fixed (of old) their minds upon this ceremony.’ See Wilson’s
note who observes that ‘ the construction is loose, and the explanation not
very satisfactory.’

14 lord of the home ; apparently the householder who institutes the sacri-
fice is addressed, he ydstoshpate grihapate.— S&yana. The Rishis ’ Friend:
mtinindm sahhd, the friend of the Munis, sages, saintly men or ascetics : of us
Itishis, according to S&yana.

15 Prid&kusdnu: I follow Ludwig in taking this to be the name of the

institutor of the sacrifice. According to Sftyana who explains it as ‘lifting
up the head or back like a serpent,’ or ‘ to be propitiated, as a serpent is, with
gems, charms, medicaments, etc./ it is an epithet of Indra ; and the leader
forward of Inclra in the second line is the worshipper, understood. Grass-
mann banishes the last three stanzas to his Appendix as not originally form-
ing part of the hymn. " "

1 Adityas : see I. 14. 3,

THE RIG VET) A.

143

HYMN 18.1

2 For not an enemy molests the paths which these Adityas tread ;
Infallible guards, they strengthen us in happiness.

3 Now soon may Bhaga, Savitar, Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman
Give us the shelter widely spread which we implore.

4 With Gods come thou whose fostering care none checks, O

Goddess Aditi

Come, dear to many, with the Lords who guard us well,

5 For well these Sons of Adit! know to keep enmities aloof :
Unrivalled, giving ample room, they save from woe.

6 Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, by night,

Aditi, ever strengthening, save us from grief ! *

7 And in the day our hymn is this : May Aditi come nigh to help,
With loving-kindness bring us weal and chase our foes.

8 And may the Asvins, the divine Pair of Physicians, send us

health :

May they remove iniquity and chase our foes.

9 May Agni bless us with his fires, and Surya warm us

pleasantly :

May the pure Wind breathe sweet on us, and chase our foes.

10 Drive ye disease and strife away, drive ye away malignity:
Adityas, keep us ever far from sore distress.

11 Remove from us the arr<»w, keep famine, Adityas ! far away :
Keep enmities afar from us, Lords of all wealth I

12 Now, 0 Adityas, grant to us the shelter that lets man go free,
Yea, even the sinner from his sin, ye Bounteous Gods !

13 Whatever mortal with the power of demons fain would

injure us,

May he, impetuous, suffer harm by his own deeds.

14 May sin o J ertal£e our human foe, the man who speaketh evil

things,

Him who would cause our misery, whose heart is false.

15 Gods, ye are with the simple ones, ye know each mortal in

your hearts :

Ye, Yasus, well discriminate the false and true.

16 Fain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains and of

water-floods :

Keep far from us iniquity, 0 Heaven and Earth.

17 So with auspicious sheltering aid do ye, 0 Yasus, carry us
Beyond all trouble and distress, borne in your ship.

4 With the Lords : sUHbhth ; that is, the Gods.

13 With the power of demons : f from his diabolical nature/— Wilson.

144 TEfE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIIL

1§ Adityas, ye Most Mighty Ones, grant to our children and
their seed

Extended term of life that they may live long days.

19 Sacrifice, 0 Adityas, is your inward monitor : be kind,

For in the bond of kindred we are bound to you.

20 The Maruts’ high protecting aid, the Asvins, and the God

who saves,

Mitra and Varuna for weal we supplicate.

21 Grant us a home with triple guard, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna !
Un threatened, Maruts ! meet for praise, and filled with men.

22 And as we human beings, 0 Adityas, are akin to death,
Graciously lengthen ye our lives that we may live.

HYMN XIX. Agni.

Sing praise to him, the Lord of Light. The Gods have made
the God to be their messenger,

And sent oblation to the Gods.

2 Agni, the Bounteous Giver, bright with varied flames, laud

thou, 0 singer Sobhari —

Him who controls this sacred food with Soma blent, who hath
first claim to sacrifice.

3 Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, Immortal Priest

among the Gods,

Wise finisher of this holy rite : r

4 The Son of Strength, the bless&d, brightly-shining One, Agni

whose light is excellent.

May he by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of Mitra,
Varuna, and the Floods.

5 The mortal who hath ministered to Agni with oblation, fuel,

ritual lore,

And reverence, skilled in sacrifice,

19 Your inward monitor : or near remembrancer, not suffering you to rest
until you have rewarded men for their devotions. Ludwig says that the
hlldh of the text is really hi ilah ; For sacrifice, Adityas, is your nearest
dwelling-place. ^

20 The God who saves : Indra, who is especially the tutelary God of Aryans.

21 With triple guard; or, triply defending or defended. According to
S&yana, protecting from heat, cold, and web ; or three-storeyed.

22 Akin to death ; bom subject to death,

1 The Gods: in the first line are, according to S&yana, the priests, i, e. those

who praise : divyanti stuvanttti devd ritvijo ; but the word may be taken in

its ordinary signification. * ■ m 1 * *

5 Ritual lore : videna here can hardly mean, as S&yana explains it, 1 by
studying the Veda/ It may perhaps mean 4 by knowledge of the proper use
of the sacred formulas/ or as M. Muller says, ‘ by the bundle of grass ’ used
in sacrifice. See Ane. S. Literature , p. 28, note, and p. 205.

HYMN 19.] TEE RIG VEDA, U$

6 Verily swift to run are his fleet-footed steeds, and most re-

splendent fame is his.

No trouble caused by Gods or wrought by mortal man from
any side o’ertaketh him.

7 May we by thine own fires be well supplied with fire, 0 Son

of Strength, 0 Lord of Might :

Thou as our Friend hast worthy men.

8 Agni, who praises like a guest of friendly mind, is as a car

that brings us gear.

Also in thee is found perfect security : thou art the Sovran
Lord of wealth. *

9 That man, moreover, merits praise who brings, auspicious

Agni, sacrificial gifts :

May he win riches by his thoughts.

10 He for whose sacrifice thou standest up erect is prosperous

and rules o'er men.

He wins with coursers and with singers skilled in song : with
heroes he obtains the prize.

1 1 He in whose dwelling Agni is chief ornament, and, all-desired,

loves his laud well,

And zealously tends his offerings —

12 His, or the lauding sage% word, his, Son of Strength ! who is

most prompt with sacred gifts,

Set thou beneath the Gods, Vasu, above mankind, the speech
of the intelligent.

13 He who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very skilful

Agni nigh,

Or him who flashes fast with song,
l4r The mortal wffo with blazing fuel, as his laws command,
adores the Perfect /God,

Blest with his tb oughts in splendour shall exceed all men, as
though he overpassed the floods.

15 Give us the splendour, Agni, which may overcome each
greedy fiend in our abode, *

The wrath of evil-hearted folk.

7 East worthy men : in us thy worshippers.

1 0 With coursers and with singers : is successful in ehariot-races and ii
rewarded by the Gods for his sacrifices.

12 Set thou beneath the Gods and above mankind, is said to mean 'spressd
through all the sky.’ The meaning of this and the preceding stanza is some r
what obscurely expressed.

' 1 4 The Perfect God : dditim , explained by S&yana as okhandaniyam,
indivisible, complete,

10

146 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK FIJI,

16 That, wherewith Mitra, Yariina, and Aryaman, the Asvins,

Bhaga give us light,

That may we, by thy power finding best furtherance, worship,
0 Indra, helped by thee.

17 0 Agni, most devout are they, the sages who have set thee

Sage exceeding wise,

0 God, for men to look upon :

18 Who have arranged thine altar. Blessed God, at morn, brought

thine oblation, pressed the juice.

They by their deeds of strength have won them mighty
wealthy who have set all their hope in thee.

•19 May Agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, Blessed
One, and sacrifice bring bliss :

Yea, may our praises bring us bliss.

20 Show forth the mind that brings success in war with fiends,
wherewith thou conquerest in fight.

Bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, and let us
vanquish with thine aid.

211 praise with song the Friend of man, whom Gods sent down
to be herald and messenger,

Best worshipper, bearer of our gifts.

22 Thou unto sharp-toothed Agni/' Young and Radiant God,

proclaimest with thy song the feast —

Agni, who for our sweet strains moulds heroic strength when
sacred oil is offered him,

23 While, served with sacrificial oil, now upward and now down-

ward Agni moves his sword,

As doth the Asura his robe.

24: The God, the Friend of man, who bears onr gifts to heaven,
the God Witfi his sweet-smelling mouth,

Distributes, skiftedjn sacrifice, his precious things, Invoking
Priest, ImmortalGud.

25 Son of Strength, Agni, X thou wert the mortal, bright as
Mitra ! worshipped with bur gifts !

And I were the Immortal God,

16 That : radiance or splendour.

• 20 Bring down the many firm hopes : there is no substantive in the text,

and hopes, resolves, thoughts or something similar must be supplied.

21 The Friend of man : or mdnurhztam may mean ‘him who was establish-
ed by Manus.’

23 Hi$ sword: the flashing flame. The Asura: the Sun, according to
S&yana. Robe : outward form.

HYMN !&.}

THE RIG VEDA.

147

26 I would not give- thee up, Vasu, to calumny or misery, 0

Bounteous One.

My worshipper should feel no hunger or distress, nor, Agni,
should he live in sin.

27 Like a son cherished in his father’s house, let our oblation

rise unto the Gods.

28 With thine immediate aid may I, excellent Agni, ever gain

my wish,

A mortal with a God to help,

29 0 Agni, by thy wisdom, by thy bounties, by thy leading may

I gather wealth. «,

Excellent Agni, thou called my Providence : delight thou
to be liberal.

30 Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of noble

heroes and great strength,

Whose bond of friendship is thy choice.

31 Thy spark is black and crackling, kindled in due time,

0 Bounteous, it is taken up.

Thou art the dear Friend of the mighty Mornings : thou
sbinest in glimmerings of the night.

32 We Sobharis have come to him, for succour, who is good to help

with thousand powers*

The Sovran, Trasadasyu’s Friend.

33 0 Agni, thou on whom all other fires depend, as branches on

the parent stem,

I make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine own, while

1 exalt thy sovran might.

34 The mortal whom, Adityas, ye, Guileless, lead to the farther bank
Of all the princes, Bounteous Ones ! —

35 Whoe’er he be, Man-ruling Kings ! the Regent of the race of

men —

May we, 0 Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, like him be further-
ers of your law.

36 A gift of fifty female slaves hath Trasadasyu given me, Puru-

kutsa’s son,

Most liberal, kind, lord of the brave.

26 In sin : such as neglect of the Gods in consequence of poverty.

33 The meaning of the second line appears to be : * t praise Agni better
than other men. I overpower their hymns and secure for myself the rewards
which they were intended to obtain/

36 Female slaves : vadhrftn&m : vadhft means usually a bride, a wife, a woman
in general, and here handmaids or female slaves, the wives or daughters of
conquered D&sas, appear to, be meant. According to von Roth, mares or ;
other female draught-animals are intended.

148 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

37 And Syava too for me led forth a strong steed at Suvastu’s
ford :

A herd of three times seventy kine, good lord of gifts, he gave
to me.

HYMN XX. Maruts. '

Let none, Swift Travellers ! check you : come hither, like-
spirited, stay not far away,

Ye benders even of what is firm.

2 Maruts, Ribhukshans, Rudras, come ye with your cars strong-

fellied and exceeding bright.

Come, ye Aor whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, come ye
with love to Sobhari.

3 For well we know the vigorous might c&Jftudi'a’s Sons, the

Maruts, who are passing strong,

Swift Vishnu’s band, who send the rain.

4 Islands are bursting forth and misery is stayed : the ^heaven

and earth are joined in one. :

Decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses out,
when ye, Self-luminous, stirred yourselves.

5 Even things immovable shake and reel, the mountains and the

forest trees at your approach,

And the earth trembles as ye com$\

6 To lend free course, 0 Maruts, to your furious rush, heaven

high and higher still gives way,

Where they, the Heroes mighty with their arms, display their
gleaming ornaments on their forms.

7 After their Godlike nature they, the bull-like Heroes, dazzling

and impetuous, wear

Great splendour as they show erect. *

37 Suvtfstu is in all probability the Soastos of Arrian (Suwad or Swat) near
the K6phen or KAbul river. Kine : there is no substantive in the text. The
stanza, which has no comment in the printed edition, is very obscure and can
be only conjecturally translated. See Ludwig's Translation and Commentary,

I. 427; and IV. 380.

4 S&yana Beems to explain this verse, ‘ The islands fall asunder, the firmest
(trees) experience distress ; they (the winds) distress heaven and earth ; the
waters hurry onward, 0 bright weaponed, self-shining ones, when you agitate
them,’— E. B. C.’s note in Wilson’s Translation. The stanza is difficult.

I have followed, generally, Ludwig’s version. Mauds ; the higher unsub-
mergecl grounds. Misery : caused by the preceding hot and dry weather.
Are joined in one : as the heavy rain obscures the horizon. Fright rings :
worn on the arms or the ankles or carried by the Maruts on their shoulders.
See L 166. 9.

y 7 Bull ’■lihe : .7 ' r ■ yishapsavak is uncertain. Show treat;

ahrutapsavah is , : ■ ■■ ■.

»HYMN 20.]

THE JUG VEDA .

149

8 The pivot of the Sobharis’ chariot within the golden box is

balmed with in ilk.

May they the Well-born, Mighty, kindred of the Cow, aid us
to food and to delight.

9 Bring, ye who sprinkle balmy drops, oblations to your vigorous

Marut company,

To those whose leader is the Bull.

TO Come hither, 0 ye Maruts, on your strong-horsed car, solid in
look, with solid naves.

Lightly like winged falcons, 0 ye Heroes, come, come to enjoy
our offerings.

0>

11 Their decoration is the same; their ornaments of gold are

bright upon their arms ;

Their lances glitter splendidly.

12 They toil not to defend their bodies from attack, strong He-

roes with their mighty arms.

Strong are your bows and strong the weapons in your cars,
and glory sits on every face.

13 Whose name extendeth like a sea, alone, resplendent, so that

all have joy in it,

And life-power like ancestral might.

14 Pay honour to these Maruts and sing praise to them, for of

the wheel-spokes of the car

Of these loud roarers none is last : this is their power, this
moves them to give mighty gifts.

15 Blest by your favouring help was he, 0 Maruts, at the earlier

flushings of the mom,

And even now shall he be blest.

16 The strong man to whose sacrifice, 0 Heroes, ye approach

that ye may taste thereof,

With glories and with war that winneth spoil shall gain great
bliss, ye Shakers of the world.

17 Even as Rudra’s Sons, the brood of the Creator Dyaus, the

As ura, desire,

0 Youthful Ones, so shall it be :

8 Box : the interior of the chariot. With milk: with fei'tilizing rain sent
by the Maruts. The Cow: Prism.

9 Ye who sprinkle balmy drops : priests who offer libations. Whose leader
is the Bull : whom Xndra leads. Or, it may be, whose chariot is drawn by
bulls, as in the following stanza.

10 Solid in look : or with bull-like, or strong look.

14 Hone is last : no part of their chariot wheel is behind the rest in speed.
This moves them to give mighty gifts ; or, this (characteristic belongs to them)
through greatness of their gifts.

15 He: your worshipper.

150 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YIIP

18 And these the bounteous, worthy of the Maruts who more

onward pouring down the rain —

Even for their sake, 0 Youthful Ones, with kindest heart take
us to you to be your own.

19 0 Sobhari, with newest song sing out unto the youthful puri-

fying Bulls,

Even as a plougher to his steers.

20 Who, like a celebrated boxer, overcome the challengers in every

fight :

They who, like shining bulls, are most illustrious — honour
those Maruts with thy song.

21 Allied by common ancestry, ye Maruts, even the Cows, alike

in energy,

Lick, all by turns, each other’s head.

22 Even mortal man, ye Dancers breast-adorned with gold, attains

to brotherhood with you.

Mark ye and notice us, 0 Maruts; evermore your friendship
is secured to us.

23 0 Maruts, rich in noble gifts, bring us a portion of the Maruts >

medicine,

Ye Coursers who are Friends to us.

24 Haters of those who serve you ftot, bliss-bringers, bring us

bliss with those auspicious aids

Wherewith ye are victorious and guard Sindhu well, and suc-
cour Krivi in his need.

25 Maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm soever

Sindhu or Asikni hath,

Or mountains or the seas contain,

26 Ye carry on your bodies, ye who see it all: scfbless ns graciously

therewith.

Cast, Maruts, to the ground our sick man’s malady : replace
the dislocated limb.

18 The bounteous : the liberal institu tors of sacrifice.

19 Purifying bulls : the strong Maruts who send the sweet rain.

21 Allied by common ancestry : as the offspring of Prism. The Cows : the
Maruts, Lick... each other's head; as they crowd together in their course.
According to Sdyana, c the cows severally liok up the quarters of the sky.’

22 Ye Dancers / ye who dance through the air.

24 Krivi : the eponymus of a warrior tribe in the Panjdb, in later times
combined with, or identical with the Panchdlas. Sdyana takes b'ivim here
to mean a well : 1 with which you provided a well (for Gotama)/ — Wilson.

25 Asikni ; the A^oesines of Quintus Curtius, the Yeclio name of the Chandra-
bhdgd, the modern Chendb.

26 Replace the dislocated limb: ' re-establish his enfeebled frame.’— Wilson.

HYMN 21.]

THE RIG VEDA

151

HYMN XXL indra.

We call on th.ee, 0 Matchless One ! We seeking help, posses-
sing nothing firm ourselves,

Call on thee wonderful in fight:

2 On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, the bold,

the mighty, hath gone forth.

We therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen thee, free-
giver, as our Guardian God.

3 Come hither, for the drops are here, 0 Lord of corn-lands,

Lord of horses, Lord of kine :

Drink thou the Soma, Soma’s Lord !

4 For we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee, 0 Indra,

who hast numerous kin.

With all the forms thou hast, come thou of bull-like strength,
come near to drink the Soma juice,

5 Sitting like birds beside thy meath, mingled with milk, that

gladdeneth and exalteth thee,

Indra, to thee we sing aloud.

6 We speak to thee with this our reverential prayer. Why

art thou pondering yet awhile %

Here are our wishes ; thou art liberal, Lord of Bays ; we and
our hymns are present here.

7 For not in recent times alone, 0 Indra, Thunder-armed, have

we obtained thine aid.

Of old we knew thy plenteous wealth.

8 Hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards: these,

Thunderer, now we crave of thee.

G Vasu, for all wealth that cometh of the kine, sharpen our
powers, fair-*risored God.

9 Him who of old hath brought to us this and that blessing,

him I magnify for you,

Even Indra, 0 my friends, for help :

10 Borne by Bay Steeds, the Lord of heroes, ruling men, for it

is he who takes delight.

May Maghavan bestow on us bis worshippers hundreds of
cattle and of steeds,

1 1 Hero, may we, with thee for Friend, withstand the man who

pants against us in his wrath,

In fight with people rich in kine.

1 2 May we be victors in the singer’s battle-song, and meet the

wicked, Much-invoked !

2 This youth of ours; the nob]# wfio instituted the sacrifice,

152 THE HYMN8 OF [BOOK MIL'

With heroes smite the foeman and show forth our strength.
0 Indra, further thou our thoughts.

13 0 Indra, from ail ancient time rivalless ever and compani-

onless art thou :

Thou seekest comradeship in war.

14 Thou flndest not the wealthy man to be thy friend : those

scorn thee who are flown with wine.

What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as
a Father, art invoked.

15 0 Indra, let us not, like fools who waste their lives at home,

with friendship such as thine
Sit idly by* the poured-out juice.

16 Giver of kiue, may we not miss thy gracious gifts : let us not

rob thee of thine own.

Strip even the strong places of the foe, and bring : thy gifts
can never be made vain.

17 Indra or blest Sarasvati alone bostows such wealth, treasure

so great, or thou,

. O Chitra, on the worshipper.

18 Chitra is King, and only kinglings are the rest who dwell

beside Sarasvati.

He, like Parjanya with his rain, Jjiath spread himself with
thousand, yea, with myriad gifts.

HYMN XXII. Asvins,

Hitherward have I called to-day, for succour, that most
wondrous car

Which ye ascended, Asvins, ye whose paths are red, swift to
give ear, for Buryis sake.

2 Car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoiced, soon guided,
first in deeds of might,

Which waits and serves, 0 Sobhari, with benevolence, without
a rival or a foe.

1 3 Thou seehest comradeship in war : befriendest thy worshippers when
they need thine assistance in battle.

14 Gatherest : the clouds. - M. Muller.

17 Chitra : the name of this king does not occur elsewhere in the Rigveda,

18 King : mji. Kinglings : rdjak&K Parjanya: God of the rain-cloud,
regarded as the type of liberal beneficence.

1 Ye whose paths are red: rudravartani : this epithet of the Asvins is
variously explained; ‘having a path which causes weeping in battle/ or
f whose paths are praised/— Sdyana ; ‘ advancing on the path to battle,’—
Wilson; ‘ proceeding on terrible roads.’ — Muir; ‘going on ftudra’e path.’ —
Ludwig; ‘on your light path.’ — Grassmanu ; ‘going on a reddish path.’ —
Pischel. See Vedische Studien, I., pp. 15 nnd 55 — 60. For Eilryd’s sake; who
chose the Asvins as her husbands. See 1. 116, 17.

HYMN 22.] THE BIG VEDA. US

3 These Asvins with our homage, these Two Omnipresent

Deities

Hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who seek the
dwelling of the worshipper*

4 One of jour chariot wheels is moving swiftly round, one

speeds for you its onward course.

Like a milch-cow, 0 Lords of splendour, and with haste let
your benevolence come to us.

5 That chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of

gold,

The famous car that traverseth the heaven and earth, thereon
Nasatyas, Asvins, come.

6 Ye with your plough, when favouring Manu with your help,

ploughed the first harvest in the sky.

As such will we exalt you, Lords of splendour, now, 0 Asvins,
with our prayer and praise.

7 Come to us, Lords of ample wealth, by paths of everlasting Law,
Whereby to high dominion ye with mighty strength raised

Trikshi, Trasadasyu’s son.

8 This Soma pressed with stones is yours, ye Heroes, Lords of

plenteous wealth.

Approach to drink the Sofha, come, drink in the worshipper’s
abode.

9 0 Asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, ye who

are Lords of plenteous wealth,

And bring to us abundant food.

10 The aids wherewith ye helped Paktha and Adhrigu, and

Babhru severed from his friends, —

With those, 0 Asvins, come hither with speed and soon, and
heal whatever is diseased.

11 When we continually invoke the Asvins, the resistless, at this

time of day,

We lovers of the song, with songs,

4 The movements of the two wheels are not very intelligibly described. See
I. 30. 19, and V. 73. 3 Like a milch- cow : a common type of liberaliby.

6 Ploughed the first harvest: first ploughed the ground and sowed and
reaped: that is, taught, by example, men to do so. Cp. 1. 117. 21 ; k Ploughing
and sowing barley, 0 ye Asvins, milking out food for men, ye wonder-workers,
Blasting away the Dasyu with your trumpet, ye have bestowed wide light
upon the Arya.’

7 Trikshi : see 71 46. 8.

10 Paktha, Adhrigu, and Babhru are said to have been kings,

THE HYMNS OF

154

[BOOK V1IL

12 Through these, ye Mighty Ones, come hither to my call which

brings .all blessings, wears all forms, —

Through wmch, All-present Heroes, lavishest of food ye
strengthened Krivi, come through these.

13 I speak to both of these as such, these Asvins whom I rever-

ence at this time of day :

With homage we entreat them both.

14 Ye who are Lords of splendour, ye whose paths are red, at

eve, at morn, at sacrifice,

Give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye Eudras, Lords
of ample wealth.

15 For bliss I call the blissful car, at morn the inseparable Asvins

with their car
I call, like Sobhari our sire,

16 Eapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to the joy, bring-

ing your swiftly-coming help,

Be to us a protection even from far away, Lords of great wealth,
with many aids.

17 Come, Wonder-Workers, to our home, our home, 0 Asvins,

rich in cattle, steeds, and gold,

Chief drinkers of the Soma’s juice !

18 Choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, uninjured

by the Rakshas foe,

At this your coming nigh, ye Lords of ample wealth and all
good things, may we obtain.

HYMN XXIII. Agni.

Worship thou Jita vedas, pray to him who willingly accepts,
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame.

2 Thou, all men’s friend, Visvamanas, exaltest Agni with thy

song,

The Giver, and his flames with which no cars contend.

3 Whose resolute assault, to win vigour and food, deserves our

praise, —

12 Krivi : see VIII. 20. 24.

14 Ye Rudras : ye reclamed or bright Gods.

17 Rich in cattle: proleptic ; which your coming will make rich.

The Rishi is Visvamanas the son of Vyasva.

1 Who willingly accepts : prattvyhm : according to Sftyana, 1 disposed to
encounter enemies.’

2 The second line is difficult, as the adjective vishpardkasah stands without,
a substantive and may be either the accusative plural or the genitive singular ;

1 who is the giver of chariots to the unenvious (worshipper).’ — WiLon.

3 Assault : on the oblations which the fire consumes.

HYMN 23.]

THE MOVED A.

m

Through whose discovering power the priest obtaineth
wealth.

4 Up springs the imperishable flame, the flame of the Reful-

gent One

Most bright, with glowing jaws and glory in his train.

5 Skilled in fair sacrifice, extolled, arise in Godlike loveliness,
Shining with lofty splendour, with effulgent light.

6 Called straight to our oblations, come, 0 Agni, through our

eulogies,

As thou hast been our envoy bearing up our gifts.

7 I call your Agni, from of old Invoking Priest of living men :
Him with this song I laud and magnify for you.

8 Whom, wondrous wise, they animate with solemn rites and

his fair form,

Kind as a friend to men who keep the holy Law.

9 Him, true to Law, who perfecteth the sacrifice, Law-loving

ones !

Ye with your song have gratified in the place of prayer.

10 May all our sacrifices go to him the truest Angiras,

Who is among mankind the most illustrious Priest.

11 Imperishable Agni, thinerare all these high enkindled lights,
Like horses and like stallions showing forth their strength.

12 So give us, Lord of Power and Might, riches combined with

hero strength,

And guard us with our sons and grandsons in our frays.

13 Soon as the eager Lord of men is friendly unto Manu’s race,
Agni averteth from us all the demon host.

14 0 Hero Agni, LOrd of men, on hearing this new laud of mine,
Bum down the Rakshasas, enchanters, with thy flame.

15 No mortal foe can e’er prevail by arts of magic over him
Who serveth Agni well with sacrificial gifts.

1 6 Yyasva the sage, who sought the Bull, hath won thee, finder

of good things :

As such may we enkindle thee for ample wealth.

17 Usana K&vya stablished thee, 0 Agni, as Invoking Priest:
Thee, Jatavedas, Sacrificing Priest for man.

9 Law-loving ones : ‘pious worshippers.’ — Wilson. Have gratified; or

must gratify.

16 Who sought the Bull: the strong Agni. According to S&yana, ‘the
showerer (of rain),’

17 Ifsan&Kdvya: see Vol. I., Index.

156

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK VJ1L

18 All Deities of one accord appointed thee their messenger :
Thou, God, through hearing, hadst first claim to sacrifice.

19 Him may the mortal hero make his own immortal messenger,
Far-spreading, Purifier, him whose path is black.

20 With lifted ladles let us call him splendid with his brilliant

flame,

Men’s ancient Agni, wasting not, adorable.

21 The man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial gifts
Obtains both plenteous nourishment and hero fame.

22 To Jatavedas Agni, chief in sacrifices, first of all
With hofnage goes the ladle rich with sacred gifts.

23 Even as Vyasva did, may we with these most high and liberal

hymns

Pay worship unto Agni of the splendid flame.

24 Now sing, as Sthurayfipa sang, with lauds to him who spread-

eth far,

To Agni of the home, 0 Kishi, Vyasva’ s son.

25 As welcome guest of human kind, as offspring of the forest

kings,

The sages worship ancient Agni for his aid.

26 For men’s oblations brought to Ijim who is the mighty Lord

of all,

Sit, Agni, mid our homage, on the sacred grass.

27 Grant us abundant treasures, grant the opulence which many

crave,

With store of heroes, progeny, and high renown.

28 Agni, Most Youthful of the Gods, send evermore the gift of

wealth •

Unto VarosusMman and to all his folk.

29 A mighty Conqueror art thou, 0 Agni, so disclose to us
Food in our herds of kine and gain of ample wealth.

30 Thou, Agni, art a glorious God : bring hither Mitra, Varuna,
Imperial Sovrans, holy-minded, true to Law.

18 Through hearing : and, by causing the Gorls to hear, m fan's prayers,

24 SthUraydpa .* said by S&yana to be the name of a Rishi.

25 Forest kings : tall trees, or trees in general.

28 Varosushdnian : I follow the St. Petersburg Lexicon in joining varo to
sushthnne and taking the whole as one word and the name of a chief. Ludwig
translates somewhat as follows : f Agni, send quickly to the folk who know
the goodly S&man well, the gift of wealth, for ever, Youngest God ! to all.* '
But in a later volume of his work (III, p. 162) he comes to the conclusion
that SusMman is a proper name, and that varo (which may, he thinks, be an
interjection) must not be combined with it.

HYMN 24.]

157

THE EIG VET) A.

HYMN XXIV. Xndra.

Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom the thunder
arms,

To glorify your bold and most heroic Friend.

2 For thou by slaying Yritra art the Yritra-slayer, famed for

might.

Thou, Hero, in rich gifts surpassest wealthy chiefs.

3 As such, when glorified, bring us riches of very wondrous

fame,

Set in the highest rank, Wealth-giver, Lord of Bays !

4 Yea, Indra, thou disclosest that preeminent dear wealth of

men :

Boldly, 0 Bold One, glorified, bring it to us.

5 The workers of destruction stay neither thy right hand nor

thy left :

Nor hosts that press about thee, Lord of Bays, in fight.

6 0 Thunder-armed, I come with songs to thee as to a stall

with kine :

Fulfil the wish and thought of him who sings thy praise.

7 Chief Vritra-slayer, through the hymn of Yisvamanas think

of all,

All that concerneth us, Excellent, Mighty Guide.

8 May we, 0 Yritra-slayer, 0 Hero, find this thy newest boon,
Longed-for, and excellent, thou who art much invoked !

9 0 Indra, Dancer, Much-invoked ! as thy great power is un-

surpassed,

So be thy bounty to the worshipper unchecked.

10 Most Mighty, most heroic One, for mighty bounty fill thee full.
Though strong, strengthen thyself to win wealth, Maghavan !

110 Thunderer, never have our prayers gone forth to any God
but thee :

So help us, Maghavan, with thine assistance now.

12 For, Dancer, verily I find none else for bounty, saving thee,
For splendid wealth and power, thou Lover of the Song.

13 For Indra pour ye out the drops 3 meath blent with Soma let

him drink :

With bounty and with majesty will he further us.

9 Dancer: of the dance of war. According to S&yana, ‘dancer, or who
cause? to dance, i . e. agitator, exciter, from Indra’s faculty of internal impulse
in all beings. 1 — Wilson.

158 THE HU INS OF [BOOK Vlll

14 I spake to the Bay Coursers’ Lord, to him who gives ability:
Now hear the sou of Asva as he praises thee.

15 Never was axiy Hero bora before thee mightier than thou :
None certainly like thee in goodness and in wealth.

16 0 ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice what glad-

dens most :

So is the Hero praised who ever prospers us.

17 Indra, whom Tawny Coursers bear, praise such as thine,

preeminent,

None by his power or by his goodness hath attained.

18 We, seeking glory, have invoked this Master of all power and

might

Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice.

19 Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends, the Hero who deserves

the laud,

Him who with none to aid overcomes all tribes of men,

20 To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, Celes-

tial God,

Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and than
meath.

21 Whose hero powers are measureless, whose bounty ne’er may

be surpassed, °

Whose liberality, like light, is over all.

22 As Yyasva did, praise Indra, praise the Strong unfluctuating

Guide,

Who gives the foe’s possessions to the worshipper.

23 Now, son of VyaBva, praise thou him who to the tenth time

still is new,

The very Wise, whom living men must glorify.

24 Thou knowest, Indra, Thunder-armed, how to avoid destructive

powers,

As one secure from pitfalls each returning day.

14 Son of Asva: i, e. of Vyasva, the Bishi Vi;vamanas.

20 Who keeps no cattle bach : either literally who aids his worshippers to
win cattle in their raids and gives them all the booty ; or, who sends forth all
the kine or rays of light that he has recovered from the powers ox darkness.
According to S&yana, c who rejects no praise.’

28 Who to the tenth time still is new : continually renews his liberality to
us. This seems to be the meaning of the dasamam ndvam (tentbrnew) of the
text. Sftyana explains differently : ‘ who is the tenth (of the pervading vital
principles), the adorable.’

24 Destructive powers ; the plural of Nirriti, Death or Destruction. I
adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of the second line.

HYMN 25.] THE RIG VEDA. 159

25 O Indra, bring that aid wherewith of old, Most Wondrous !

thou didst slay

His foes for active Kutsa : send it down to us.

26 So now we seek thee fresh in might, Most Wonderful in act !

for gain :

For thou art he who conquers all our foes for us.

27 Who will set free from*ruinous woe, or Arya on the Seven

Streams :

0 valiant Hero, bend the Dasa’s weapon dow T n.

28 As to Varosushaman thou broughtest great riches, for their

gain,

To Vyasva’s sons, Blest Lady, rich in ample wealth l

29 Let Narya’s sacrificial meed reach Vyasva’s Soma-bearing sons :
In hundreds and in thousands be the great reward.

30 If one should ask thee, Where is he who sacrificed ? Whither

lookest thou %

Like Vala he hath passed away and dwelleth now on Gomati.

HYMN XX Y. Mitra-Varuna.

1 WORSHIP you who guard this All, Gods holiest among the
Gods,

Y T ou, faithful to the Law,* whose power is sanctified.

2 So, too, like charioteers are they, Mitra and sapient Varuna,
Sons high-born from of old, whose holy laws stand fast.

3 These Twain, possessors of all wealth, most glorious, for

supremest sway

Aditi, Mighty Mother, true to Law, brought forth.

27 2rya on the Sevetf Streams : from any Aryan enemy in the land of the
Seven Rivers, probably the Indus, the five rivers of the Panjab, and the
Kubhft, ..

23 Varosushdman : see YIII. 23. 28. Blest Lady: Ushas or Dawn is
addressed. .

29 Ndrya's sacrificial meed ; N&rya appears to be the name of the mstitutor
of the sacrifice.

30 Ludwig observes : ' This stanza clearly refers to the greatness of the

reward given by X&rya, and its - : here so many cows (presented

by N&rya) that one might think . : , : : 1 : ■■ a . • • ■ . of the sacrifice, V ala had

given up his cows [which he had stolen from the Gods, and hidden in a cave],
and taken his departure/ Ushas says also, ‘my cows are quite superfluous
here, and I will drive them away to some other place/ The stanza is addressed
to Ushas, and the second line is the answer she is to give to the question
contained in the first. Gomati : some affluent of the Indus, which in later
times lent its name to the Gomati, or Gumti, which flows through Oudh and
falls into the Ganges.

2 Charioteers : furthefers of eternal Law. See VII. 66. 12.

160 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

4 Great Varuna and Mitra, Gods, Asuras and imperial Lords,
True to Eternal Law proclaim the high decree.

5 The offspring of a lofty Power, Daksha’s Two Sons exceeding

strong,

Who, Lords of flowing rain, dwell in the place of food.

6 Ye who have gathered up your gifts, celestial and terrestrial

food,

Let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven.

7 The Twain, who from the lofty sky seem to look down on

herds below,

Holy^ imperial Lords, are set to he revered.

8 They, true to Law, exceeding strong, have sat them down

for sovran rule :

Princes whose laws stand fast, they have obtained their sway.

9 Pathfinders even better than the eye, with unobstructed sight,
Even when they close their lids, observant, they perceive.

10 So may the Goddess Aditi, may the Nasatyas guard us well*-
The Maruts guard us well, endowed w r ith mighty strength.

11 Do ye, 0 Bounteous Gods, protect our dwelling-place by day

and night :

With you for our defenders may '-we go unharmed.

12 May we, unharmed, serve bountiful Vishnu, the God who

slayeth none :

Self-moving Sindhu hear and be the first to mark.

13 This sure protection we elect, desirable and reaching far,

Which Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman afford,

14 And may the Sindhu of the floods, the Maruts, and the Asvin

Pair, *

Boon Indra, and boon Vishnu have one mind with us.

15 Because these warring Heroes stay the enmity of every foe,

As the fierce water-flood repels the furious ones.

1 6 Here this one God, the Lord of men, looks forth exceeding far

and wide :

And we, for your advantage, keep his holy laws.

17 We keep the old accustomed laws, the statutes of supremacy,
The long-known laws of Mitra and of Varuna.

5 Daksha 8 Two Sons : or sons of power or energy, according to S&yana,
Daksha. as a creative power, is frequently associated with Aditi. Place of
food : heaven from which the food-producing rain comes.

12 Sindhu ; the Indus. According to S^yana, Vishnu who causes wealth
to flow to Ins woi shippers.

HYMN 26.] THE RIQYEDA. 161

18 He who hath measured with his ray the boundaries of heaven

and earth,

And with his majesty hath filled the two worlds full,

19 Surya hath spread his light aloft up to the region of the sky,
Like Agni all aflame when gifts are offered him.

20 With him who sits afar the word is lord of food that comes

from kine,

Controller of the gift of unempoisoned food.

21 So unto Surya, Heaven, and Earth at morning and at eve I

speak.

Bringing enjoyments. ever rise thou up for us. m .

22 From Ukshany&yana a bay, from Harayana a white steed,
And from SusMman we obtained a harnessed car.

23 These two shall bring me further gain of troops of tawny-

coloured steeds,

The carriers shall they be of active men of war.

24 And the two sages have I gained who hold the reins and bear

the whip,

And the two great strong coursers, with my newest song.

HYMN XXVI. Asvins.

I call your chariot to receive united praise mid princely
men, *

Strong Gods who pour down wealth, of never vanquished
mights

2 Ye to Varosush&man come, N&satyas, for this glorious rite,
With your protecting aid, Strong Gods, who pour down wealth.

20 Varuna has only to command and men have milk and wholesome food.
SAyana explains differently : * liaise your voice in the spacious hall of sacrifice
to him who is lord over food derived from cattle/ — Wilson.

21 Thou : Surya, that is, according to S&yana, Mitra and Varuna in Sftrya’a
shape.

22 Sushdman : here without Varo, the prefix or interjection or whatever it
may be. See VIII. 23. 28.

23 These two : horses.

2 4t Two sages : vlprd : the meaning is uncertain. According to Sdyana the
word is an epithet of Coursers’ : 1 sagacious. 5 — Wilson. * Ludwig thinks that
the grooms (probably enslaved enemies) are ironically called sages, or as he
translates, Brahmans. Dr. Muir translates the stanza differently : e I have
celebrated at the same time with a new hymn, these two sages and mighty
[princes], strong, swift, and carrying whips.’ Bub this rendering has little to
recommend it. — —

1 Princely men * the Stir is or institutors of the sacrifice.

2 Varosushdman : see VIII. 23. 28. Who pour down wealth : vrishanvasti ;
see IV. 50. 10, note.

11

162

THE HTMNS OF

[BOOK V11Z

3 So with oblations we invoke you, rich in ample wealth, to-day,
When night hath passed, 0 ye who send us plenteous food.

4 0 Asvins, Heroes, let your car, famed, best to travel, come to us,
And, for his glory, mark your zealous servant’s lauds.

5 Asvins, who send us precious gifts, even when offended, think

of him :

For ye, 0 Rudras, lead us safe beyond our foes.

6 For, Wonder-Workers, with fleet steeds ye fly completely

round this All,

Stirring our thoughts, ye Lords of splendour, koney-hued.

7 With all-sustaining opulence, Asvins, come hitherward to us,
Ye rich and noble Heroes, ne’er to be o’erthrown.

8 'To welcome this mine offei'ing, 0 ye Indralike H&satyas, come
As Gods of best accord this day with other Gods.

9 For we, like Vyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, call on you ;
With all your loving kindness, Sages, come to us,

10 0 Rishi, laud the Asvins well. Will they not listen to thy call \
Will they not burn the Pariis who are nearer them ?

110 Heroes, listen to the son of Vyasva, and regard me here,
Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, of one accord.

12 Gods whotn we yearn for, of your gifts, of what ye bring to

us, bestow

By princes' hands on me, ye Mighty, day by day.

1 3 Him whom your sacrifices clothe, even as a woman with her robe,
The Asvins help to glory honouring him well.

1 4 Whoso regards your care of men as succour widest in its reach,
About his dwelling go, ye Asvins, loving us.

15 Come to us ye who pour down wealth, q ome to the home

which men must guard :

Like shafts, ye are made meet for sacrifice by song.

1 6 Most fetching of all calls, the laud, as envoy, Heroes, called

to you :

Be it your own, 0 Asvin Pair.

17 Be ye in yonder sea of heaven, or joying in the home of food.
Listen to me, Immortal Ones.

5 JRudras : bright Gods.

6 Honey -hued : madhuvarnd : ‘of fascinating complexion.’— Wilson.

15 Like shafts : as arrows are sharpened for their work, so the Asvins are
prepared for the sacrifice by the Rishi's hymn. The word vishudrithd, ex-
plained by S&yana as two arrows, is difficult, and other readings and explana-
tions have been suggested.

HYMN 27.] THE R1GVEDA. 163

18 This river with his lucid flow attracts you, more than all the

streams, —

Even Sindhu with his path of gold.

19 0 Asvins, with that glorious fame come hither, through our

brilliant song,

Come ye whose wsyrs are marked with light;

20 Harness the steeds who dr^^^h'e car, 0 Yasu, bring the well-

fed pair.

0 Vavur^nk thou of our meath : come unto] our drink-
-offerings.

121 Wonderful V&yu, Lord of Right, thou who art Tvashtar’s son-
in-law, 9

Thy saving succour we elect.

22 To Tvashtar’s son-in-law we pray for wealth whereof he hath

control :

For glory we seek Yayu, men with juice effused.

23 From heaven, auspicious Yayu, come; drive hither with thy

noble steeds :

Come on thy mighty car with wide-extending seat.

24 We call thee to the homes of men, thee wealthiest in noble

food,

And liberal as a press-stone with a horse’s back.

25 So, glad and joyful in thine heart, do thou, God, Y&yu, first

of all

Vouchsafe us water, strength, and thought.

HYMN XXVII. Vievedevas,

Chief Priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass at sacri-
fice :

With song I seek the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, Gods for help
much to be desired.

18 With his lucid flow: svetayftrari : taken by Sayanaas the name of a river.

21 Tvashtar’s son-in-law : the Commentators giveno satisfactory explanation.
Saranyfi, Tvashtar’s daughter, was the wife of Vivasv&n, who cannot be identi-
fied with V;tyu.' See Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologies I. p. 521,

24 The second line is difficult. The press-stone which produces the Soma
juice which makes the Gods bountiful is regarded as a type of liberality ;
it may be called literally, horse-backed, because it bears its

load of Soma a i‘>rse. ‘Sharp-backed’, * with sharp ridges’, as

suggested by Pischel, gives a better meaning.

1 Chief Priest : according to S&yana, purdhitah here is taken in its primary
sense of 1 placed in front/ that is, set by the priests on the uttaravedt or
northern altar or fire-receptacle. The laud : uhthd ; a kind of religious service
consisting of the recitation of certain eulogistic verses.

m THE HYMNS Of [BOOK VIII

, 2 I sing to cattle and to Earth, to trees, to Dawns* to Night, to
plants.

0 all ye Yasus, ye possessors of all wealth, be ye the further-
ers of our thoughts.

3 Forth go,^ with Agni, to the Gods our sacrifice of ancient use,
To the Adityas, Varuna whose Law stands fast, and the all-

lightening Marut troop . *

4 Lords of all wealth, may they be su-ongtheners of man, de-

stroyers of his enemies.

Lords of all wealth, do ye, with guards which none may harm,
preserve our dwelling free from foes,
h Come to *us with one mind to-day, come to us all with one
accord,

Maruts with holy song, and, Goddess Aditi, Mighty One, to our
house and home.

6 Send us delightful things, ye Maruts, on your steeds : come

,.ye, 0 Mitra, to our gifts.

Let Indra, Varuna, and the Adityas sit, swift Heroes, on our
sacred grass.

7 We who have trimmed the grass for you, and set the banquet

in array,

And pressed the Soma, call you, Varuna, like men, with sacri-
ficial fires aflame. *

8 0 Maruts, Vishnu, Asvins, Pushan, haste away with minds

turned hitherward to me.

Let the Strong Indra, famed as Vritra’s slayer, come first with
. the winners of the spoil.

9 Ye Guileless Gods, bestow on us a refuge strong on every side,
A sure protection, Vasus, unassailable from near at hand or

from afar. *

10 Kinship have I with you, and close alliance, 0 ye Gods, de-

stroyers of our foes.

Call us to our prosperity of former days, and soon to new felicity.

11 For now have I sent forth to you, that I may win a fair reward,
Lords of all wealth, with homage, this my song of praise like

a milch-cow that faileth not.

2 I sing to : or I glorify, in order that 1 may win or propitiate them.

6 Come ye y 0 Mitra, : Varuna and Aryaman being understood.

7 like men : manushvdt : or after the manner of Manus.

11 Like a milch-cow that faileth not : the meaning of dnydm here is some-
what uncertain. S&y an a- explains it by adrishfuptiwdm, unprecedented, and
Grassmann by * a stream that never dries up. 1 I have adopted Ludwig’s
•interpretation.

THE RIGVED A.

HYMN 27.]

12 Excellent Savitar hath mounted up on high for you, ye sure

and careful Guides.

Bipeds and quadrupeds, with several hopes and aims/ and
birds have settled to their tasks.

13 Singing their praise with Godlike thought let us invoke each

God for grace,

Each God to bring you help, each God to strengthen you.

14 Eor of one spirit are the Gods with mortal man, co-sharers all

of gracious gifts.

May they increase our strength hereafter and to-day, provid-
ing ease and ample room. #

15 1 laud you, 0 ye Guileless Gods, here where we meet to render

praise.

None, Varuna and Mitra, harms the mortal man who honours
and obeys your laws. .

16 He makes his house endure, he gathers plenteous food who

pays obedience to your will.

Born in his sons anew he spreads as Law commands, and pros-
pers every way unharmed.

17 E’en without war he gathers wealth, and goes his way on

pleasant paths,

Whom Mitra, Varana, atf& Aryaman protect, sharing the gift,
of one accord.

18 E’en on the plain for him ye make a sloping path, an easy

way where road is none : ■

And far away from him the ineffectual shaft must vanish,
shot at him in vain.

19 If ye appoint the rite to-day, kind Rulers, when the Sun as-

cends,

Lords of all wealth, at sunset or at waking-time, or be it at'
the noon of day,

20 Or, Asuras, when ye have sheltered the worshipper who goes

to sacrifice, at eve,

May we, 0 Yasus, ye possessors of all wealth, come' then into
the midst of you.

21 If ye to-day at sunrise, or at noon, or in the gloom of eve,
Lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, the wise

man who hath sacrificed,

22 Then we, imperial Rulers, claim of you this boon, your wide

protection, as a son.

May we, Adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that which shall
bring us greater bliss.

THE HYMNS OF

[ BOOK VIII

m

HYMN XXVIII. Visyedevas.

The Thirty Gods and Three besides, whose seat hath been the
sacred grass,

From time of old have found and gained.

2 Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, Agnis, with Consorts, sending boons,
To whom our Vashat ! is addressed :

3 These are our guardians in the west, and northward here, and

in the south,

And on the east, with all the tribe.

4 Even as the Gods desire so verily shall it be. None minisheth

this pofter of theirs,

No demon, and no mortal man.

5 The Seven carry seven spears ; seven are the splendours they

possess,

And seven the glories they assume.

HYMN XXIX. Visvedevaa.

One is a youth brown, active, manifold : he decks the golden
one with ornament.

2 Another, luminous, occupies the place of sacrifice, Snge, among

the Gods.

3 One brandishes in his hand an ir<sn knife, firm, in his seat

amid the Deities.

4 Another holds the thunderbolt, wherewith he slays the Vritras,

resting in his band.

1 Thirty Gods and Three : see I. 139. 11.

2 Agnis : Agni in his various forms and under different names. With Con-
sorts: with the G-n&s, Celestial Dames, wives of the G8ds. Vashat ! ' the ex-
clamation made when the oblation is offered.

4 No demon and no mortal man : or no mortal who presents no offerings
to the Gods.

5 The Seven : the Maruts, seven, or seven times nine, or seven times seven
in number. S&yana mentions the legend of their birth, which will be found
in the Rdmdyana, Book I., Cantos 46, 47. The meaning is merely that the
Maruts carry lances, that is, their lightnings, and are splendidly adorned.
See 1. 37. The connexion of this stanza with the preceding is not obvious.

1 One : Soma. ‘ The yellow Soma juice is itself an ornament to the gold on
the finger (Atharvaveda, XVIII. 3. 18, hiranyapftv&h) of the priest.* —Ludwig.
According to others, Soma as the Moon is intended, 'who 1 2 3 4 decorates (himself)
with golden ornaments.* — Wilson.

2 Another, luminous : Agni,

3 One brandishes : Tvashfear, as the Artificer of the Gods.

4 Another holds the thunderbolt ; Indra.

HYMN 31.] THE RIGVEVA . 167

5 Another bears a pointed weapon : bright is lie, and strong,

with healing medicines.

6 Another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and knows the

places where the treasures lie.

7 Another with his mighty stride hath made his three steps

thither where the Gods rejoice.

8 Two with one Dame ride on with wingM steeds, and journey

forth like travellers on their way.

9 Two, highest, in the heavens have set their seat, worshipped

with holy oil, Imperial Kings.

10 Some, singing lauds, conceived the Sama-hymn,* great hymn
whereby they caused the Sun to shine.

HYMN XXX. Visvedevaa.

Not one of yon, ye Gods, is small, none of you is a feeble
child :

All of you, verily, are great.

2 Thus be ye lauded, ye destroyers of the foe, ye Three-and-

Thirty Deities,

The Gods of man, the Holy Ones.

3 As such defend and succour us, with benedictions speak to us :
Lead us not from our fathers’ and from Manu’s path into the

distance far away. *

4 Ye Deities who stay with us, and all ye Gods of all mankind,
Give us your wide protection, give shelter for cattle and for

steed.

HYMN XXXI. Various Deities.

That Brahman pleases Indra well, who worships, sacrifices, pours
Libation, and prepares the meal.

5 Another : Budra. See I. 43. 4.

6 Another : Pusltaa. See I. 42.

7 Another with his mighty, stride : Vishnu. Thither: to his station in the
height of heaven.

8 Two with one Dame : the Asvins with Suryft. See I. 116. 17.

9 Two, highest : Mitra and Varuna.

10 Some, singing lauds : the Angi rases, or, according to S&yana, the Airis.

• 2 Three-and- Thirty Deities: see I. 139. 11. The Gods of man: a r, God
whom Manu worshipped, which interpretation is supported by stanza 3,

4 Who stay with us : or are present at this sacrifice.

1 Brahman ; here any pious worshipper, not one of the regular professional
priests, but the i ns ti tutor of sacrifice who during the ceremony may be re-
carded as their chief. Prepares the meed: pasupurodUMikam pachati : bay ana;
‘cooks the cake which is an essential part of the animal sacrifice, etc.

169 TEE EYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

2 Sakra protects from woe the man who gives him sacrificial

cake

■ And offers Soma Went with milk.

3 His chariot shall be glorious, sped by Gods, and mighty shall

he be,

Subduing all hostilities.

4 Each day that passes, in his house flows his libation, rich in
* milk,

Exhaustless, bringing progeny.

5 0 Gods, with constant draught of milk, husband and wife

with one accord

Press out and wash the Soma juice.

6 They gain sufficient food: they come united to the sacred grass,
And never do they fail in strength.

7 Never do they deny or seek to hide the favour of the Gods :
They win high glory fpr themselves.

8 With sons and daughters by their side they reach their full

extent of life,

Both decked with ornaments of gold.

9 ' Serving the Immortal One with gifts of sacrificial meal and
wealth,

They satisfy the claims of love and^ay due honour to the Gods.
1 6 We claim protection from the Hills, we claim protection of
the Floods,

Of him who stands by Vishnu’s side.

1 1 May Pushan come, and Bhaga, Lord of wealth, All-bounteous,

for our weal :

Broad be the path that leads to bliss : #

12 Aramati, and, free from foes, Visva with spirit of a God,

And the Adityas’ peerless might.

13 Seeing that Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna are guarding us.

The paths of Law are fair to tread.

9 The Immortal One ; amvitdya ; Agni, or the Immortal (host), that is, the
Gods in general. According to Bftyana, { that they may obtain immortality
(in their sons and descendants)/ They satisfy : tiiis pdda is considered by
some, on metrical and other grounds, to be an interpolation. According to-
Pischel ( Veclische Studien, I. p. 178), the half-line refers to the beating and
preparation of the rough stalks of the Soma plant*

10 Of him who stands by Vishmis side ; of Yishnu and his associate Indra.
—Ludwig.

12 Aramati; the Genius of Devotion. Vihva; Dyaus ? — Ludwig. * AH
the worshippers/ according to S&yana.

tfYMN 82,] TUB RIGVBDA, M9

14 1 glorify with song, for wealth, Agni the God, the first

of you.

We honour as a well-loved Friend the God who prospereth
our fields.

15 As in all frays the hero, so gwift moves his car whom Gods

attend.

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

16 Ne’er are ye injured, worshipper, presser of juice, or pious man.
The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities

will conquer those who worship not.

17 None in his action equals him, none holds him 5 ' far or keeps

him off.

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

18 Such strength of heroes shall he his, such mastery of fleet-

foot steeds.

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

HYMN XXXII. i a dm,

Kanvas, tell forth with song the deeds of Indra, the Im-
petuous,

Wrought in the Soma’s Wttd delight.

2 Sbrong God, he slew Anarsani, Sribinda, Pipru, and the fiend
Ahisuva, and loosed the floods.

3 Thou broughtest down the dwelling-place, the height of lofty

Arbuda.

That exploit, Indra, must be famed.

4 Bold, to your famous Soma I call the fair-visored God for aid,
Down like a torrent from the bill.

5 Rejoicing in the Soma-draughts, Hero, burst open, like a fort,
The stall of horses and of kine.

6 If my libation gladdens, if thou takest pleasure in my laud,
Come with thy Godhead from afar.

14 Who prospereth our fields; kshetrasftdkasam ; Sly ana explains kshetra
(the modern Hindi khet, a field), as sacrifice : * the bountiful perfecter of the
sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

1 The Impetuous: rift&Mnah : 1 2 3 4 the drinker of the stale Soma.' — Wilson.

2 The fiend : the Dta, or savage. All the names are names of demons of
drought, of whom Pipru has been mentioned frequently in preceding Books.

3 Arbuda: see I. 51. 6 ; II. 11. 20 ; 14. 4.

4 Like a torrent from the hill : ‘as (a traveller invokes) the water [from a
cloud.’ — Wilson.

170 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII .

7 0 Indra, Lover of the Song, the singers of thy praise are we :
0 Soma-drinker, quicken us.

8 And, taking thy delight with us, bring us still undiminshed

food:

Great is thy wealth, 0 Maghavan.

9 Make thou us rich in herds of kine, in steeds, in gold : let

us exert

Our strength in sacrificial gifts.

10 Let us call him to aid whose hands stretch far, to whom high

laud is due,

Who worketh well to succour us.

11 He, Satafratu, even in fight acts as a Vritra-slayer still :

He gives his worshippers much wealth.

12 May he, this Sakra, strengthen us, Boon God who satisfies

our needs,

Indra, with all his saving helps.

13 To him, the mighty stream of wealth, the Soma-presser’s

rescuing Friend,

To Indra sing your song of praise ;

14 Who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth glory in

his wars,

Lord of vast wealth through po\^er and might.

1 5 There liveth none to check or stay his energies and gracious

deeds :

None who can say, He giveth not.

16 No debt is due by Brahmans now, by active men who press

the juice : *

Well hath each Soma-draught been paid.

17 Sing ye to him who must be praised, say lauds to him who

must be praised,

Bring prayer to him who must be praised.

18 May he, unchecked, strong, meet for praise, bring hundreds,

thousands forth to light,

Indra who aids the worshipper.

19 Go with fhy Godlike nature forth, go where the folk are

calling thee :

Brink, Indra, of the drops we pour.

, 11 atakmtu; Lord of a Hundred Powers.

12 Sakra: the Mighty.

lb* The Brahmans or worshippers have, by offering libations, discharged
their obligations to the Gods, and the Gods have repaid them, or will soon
repay them for their offerings.

18 Hundreds , thousands ; countless treasures for us to enjoy.

HYMN 33.]

THE RIGVEJDA.

171

20 Drink milky draughts which are thine own, this too which

was with Tugrya once,

This is it, Indra, that is thine.

21 Pass him who pours libations out in angry mood or after sin *.
Here drink the juice we offer thee.

22 Over the three great distances, past the Five Peoples go thy way,
0 Indra, noticing our voice.

23 Send forth thy ray like Sfirya : let my songs attract thee

hitherward

Like waters gathering to the vale.

24 How to the Hero fair of cheek, Adhvaryu, pour the Soma forth :
Bring of the juice that he may drink :

25 Who cleft the water-cloud in twain, loosed rivers for their

downward flow,

And set the ripe milk in the kine.

26 He, meet for praise, slew Vritra, slew Ahtsuva, t3 r rnav£bha , s son,
And pierced through Arbuda with frost.

27 To him your matchless Mighty One, unconquerable Conqueror,
Sing forth the prayer which Gods have given :

28 Indra, who in the wild delight of Soma juice considers ' e
All holy Laws among the Gods.

29 Hither let these thy Bayfc who share thy banquet, Steeds with

golden manes,

Convey thee to the feast prepared.

30 Hither, 0 thou whom many laud, the Bays whom Priyamed ha-

praised

Shall bring thee to the Soma-draught.

HYMN XXXIII. Indra.

We compass thee like waters, we whose grass is trimmed and
Soma pressed.

Here where the filter pours its stream, thy worshippers round
thee, 0 Vritra-slayer, sit.

20 Which was with Tugrya: like that which thy favourite Bhujyu (see Vol.
I., Index) formerly offered thee.

22 The three great distances ; the space in front of thee, behind thee, and
at thy side. Noticing our voice : hearing and attending to our invocations.
Come to us who are thy true worshippers, and pass by others who worship
thee in the hope of being avenged upon their enemies or of obtaining pardon
for some sin.

26 f) rnavdbha’ s sou : Aurnavftbha : a demon of drought. See II. 11. 18.
With frost : making the piercing cold of winter his weapon.

1 The filter : or woollen strainer through which the Soma juice is run to
purify it.

[BOOK VIII.

172 THE HYMNS OF

2 Men, Vasa ! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to the fore-

most place :

When comest thou athirst unto the juiee as home, 0 Indra,
like a bellowing bull ?

3 Boldly, Bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the Kanvas’

sake :

0 active Maghavan, with eager prayer we crave the yellow-
hued with store of kine,

4 Medhy&tithi, to Indra sing, drink of the juice to make thee glad.
Close-knit to ins Bay Steeds, bolt-armed, beside the juice is

he : his chariot is of gold. ;

5 He who i§ praised as strong of hand both right and left, most

wise and bold :

Indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, honoured
as breaker-down of forts.

6 The bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands in bearded

confidence ;

Much-lauded, very glorious, overthrowing foes, strong Helper,
like a bull with might.

7 Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside the

lowing juice?

This is the fair-cheeked God who, joying in the draught,
breaks down the castles in his strength.

8 As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way, mad

with heat,

None may compel thee, yet come hither to the draught ; thou
mo vest mighty in thy power.

9 When he, the Mighty, jne’er o’erthrowtt, stedfast, made ready

for the fight,

When Indra Maghavan lists to his praise»’s call, he will not
stand aloof, but come.

10 Yea, verily, thou art a Bull, with a bull’s rush, whom none*
may stay :

2 As home: as familiar to thee as thine own home.

3 The yellow-kued : there is no substantive, hut gold must be intended.

6 hi bearded confidence: a conjectural paraphrase. Smdsrushu (in (his)
beard) is said by S&yana to mean here ‘ in combats,’ that is, perhaps, as Ludwig,
suggests, among ranks of men bristling with spears. But this can hardly be
the meaning of the word which ( is probably an idiomatic expression for the
fierce look of a warrior who challenges the foe.’ — Ludwig. So, in the Edda,
Th6rr, when about to meet a foe, is said to have c raised his beard’s voice.’
See Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, I. 177 (English Translation).

8 Mad with heat : that is, mast, or as phonetically spelt, must.

10 Thou art a Bull : vrishd : or strong and mighty. As has been observed
before (VIII, 13. 31, note), some of the Yedic poets delight in the repetition
of this word and its derivatives.

HYMN 33.} *, TEE RIGVEDA . .17$

Thou, Mighty One, art celebrated as a Bull, famed as a Bull
both near and far.

1 1 Thy reins are very bulls in strength, bulls' strength is in thy
• golden whip.

Thy car, O Maghavan, thy Bays are strong as bulls : thou,
Satakratu, art a Bull.

12 Let the strong presser press for thee. Bring hither, thou

straight-rushing Bull.

The mighty makes the mighty run in flowing streams for thee
whom thy Bay Horses bear.

13 Come, thou most potent Indra, come to drink ^the savoury

Soma juice.

Maghavan, very wise, will quickly come to hear the songs, the
prayer, the hymns of praise.

11 When tWix hast mounted on thy car let thy } r oked Bay Steeds
carry thee

Past other mens' libations, Lord of Hundred Powers, thee,
Vritra-slayer, thee om* Friend.

15 0 thou Most Lofty One, accept our laud as nearest to thine

heart. .

May our libations be most sweet to make thee glad, 0 Soma-
drinker, Heavenly Lor$.

16 Neither in thy decree nor mine, but in another's he delights, —
The man who brought us unto this.

17 Indra himself hath said, The mind of woman brooks not dis-

cipline,

Her intellect hath little weight.

18 His pair of horses, rushing on in their wild transport, draw

his car : *

High-lifted is the stallion's yoke.

19 Cast down thine eyes and look not up. More closely set thy

feet. Let none

See what thy garment veils, for thou, a Brahman, hast become
a dame.

11 Golden whip : the lightning, with which Indra lashes the clouds, his
horses.

12 The mighty makes the mighty run; the priest makes the Soma juice flow.
16 The last four stanzas of the hymn are not very intelligible, nor is their

connexion with the preceding verses obvious. Stanzas 16^ and 18 appear o
he spoken by a woman and 17 by a man. Stanza 19 is said to be addresae
by Indra to Asanga son of Playoga who had been changed to a woman y
imprecation of the Gods, and who was afterwards restored to manhood.

174

THE H YMNS OF

[BOOK YIU.

HYMN XXXIV. Indra.

Come hither, Indra, with thy Bays, come thou to Kanva’s
eulogy.

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day ! have
gone to heaven.

2 May the stone draw thee as it speaks, the Soma-stone with

ringing voice.

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, etc.

3 The stones* rim shakes the Soma here like a wolf worrying a

sheep.

Ye, eto.

4 The Kanvas call thee hitherward for succour and to win the

spoil.

Ye, etc.

5 I set for thee, as for the Strong, the first draught -of the juices

shed.

6 Come with abundant blessings, come ^th perfect care to suc-

cour us.

7 Come, Lord of lofty though who hast infinite wealth and

countless aids.

8 Adorable mid God< the Priest good to mankind shall bring

thee near. f

9 As wings the falcon, so thy Bays rushing in joy shall carry

thee.

10 Come from the enemy to us, to Svaha ! and the Soma-draught.

1 1 Come hither with thine ear inclined to hear, take pleasure in

our lauds.

12 Lord of well-nourished Horses, come with^well-fed Steeds alike

in hue.

13 Come hither from the mountains, come from regions of the

sea of air.

The Rishi is Nipatithi of the family of Kanva, but stanzas 16 — 18 art
ascribed in the Index to the thousand Vasurochishas who are said to have
been a division of the family of Angiras.

1 The exact meaning of the second line, which is the burden of the first
fifteen stanzas, is obscure. Ye probably means Indra’s horses, and God bright
by day / ( divdvaso) Indra himself ; that is, ye, horses, and thou, Indra, have
gone to heaven. The Scholiast offers two different explanations, in one case
boldly altering two words of the text. See Wilson’s Translation, note.

8 The Priest good to manJcind: or, the Invoking Priest, Invoker or Herald
established by Manu, namely Agni.

10 Svdhd; an exclamation used in sacrifice ; Ave ! or Hail !

HYMN 35.] TEE RIG VEDA. lit

14 Disclose to us, 0 Hero, wealth in thousands both of kine and

steeds

15 Bring riches hitherward to us in hundreds, thousands, myriads.
Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day 1 have

gone to heaven.

16 The thousand steeds, the mightiest troop, which we and Indra

have received
From Vasurochis as a gift,

17 The brown that match the wind in speed, and bright bay

coursers fleet of foot,

Like Suns, resplendent are they all. ^

18 Mid the Par&vata’s rich gifts, swift steeds whose wheels run

rapidly,

I seemed to stand amid a wood.

HYMN XXXY. a Asvins.

With Agni and with Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, with the Adityas,
Rudras, Vasus, closely leagued ;

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, O Asvins,
drink the Soma juice.

2 With all the Holy Thoughts, all being, Mighty Ones ! in close

alliance with the Mountains, Heaven, and Earth ;

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
drink the Soma juice.

3 With all the Deities, three times eleven, here, in close alliance

with the Maruts, Bhrigus, Floods;

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, O Asvins,
drink the Soma j nice.

4 Accept the sacrifice, attend to this my call ; come nigh, 0 ye

Twain Gods, to all libations here.

Accordant, of one mind with Sfirya and with Dawn, O Asvins,
bring us strengthening food.

5 Accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. Come nigh,

0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, O Asvins,
bring us strengthening food.

16 Vasurochis : vdsurochishah is probably the ablative singular, and not the
nominative plural, of the name of the inatitutor of the sacrifice. Wilson,
following S&yana, translates : ‘ We, the thousand Vasuroehishas, and Indra
(our leader), when we obtain vigorous herds of horses, —

18 The Pdrdvaia is Vasurochis. The P&r&vatas are probably the 7 rapvr)ral
of Ptolemy, who were settled northwards of Araehosia — Ludwig.

5 A youth : literally two youths. c As youths are delighted (by the voices
of maidens/ — Wilson.

THE HYMNS OF

176

[BOOK YIIl

6 Accept the songs we sing, accept the solemn rite. Come nigh,

0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
bring us strengthening food.

7 Ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees ; like buffaloes ye

seek the Soma we have shed.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, come
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home.

8 Ye fly like swans, like those who travel on their way ; like

buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, come
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home.

9 Ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks ; like buffaloes ye

seek the Soma we have shed.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, come
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home.

10 Coxpe hitherward and drink and satisfy yourselves, bestow

upon us progeny and affluence.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
grant us vigorous strength.

11 Conquer your foes, protect us, praise your worshippers ; bestow

upon us progeny and affluence.^

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
grant us vigorous strength.

12 Slay enemies, animate men whom ye befriend ; bestow upon

us progeny and affluence.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
grant us vigorous strength.

13 With Mitra, Vanina, Dharma, and the Maruts in your com-

pany approach unto your praiser’s call.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, and with
tbe Adityas, Asvins ! come.

14 With Vishnu and the Angirases attending you, and with the

Maruts come unto your praiser’s call.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, and with
the Adityas, Asvins I come.

15 With E-ibhus and with Vajas, 0 ye Mighty Ones, leagued with

the Maruts come ye to your praiser’s call.

Accordant, of one mind with Sdrya and with Dawn, and
with the Adityas, Asvins ! come.

8 Ye come eagerly to the Soma as thirsty hahsas (swans, geese, or flamin-
goes) travellers, and buffaloes hasten to the water.

13 Dharma : Bight, J ustice. Law, Virtue or Duty personified.

HYMN 35.]

THE RIGYEDA .

177

1 6 Give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts ; slay ye

the R&kshasas and drive away disease.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink.

17 Strengthen the Ruling Power, strengthen the men of war;

slay ye the R&kshasas and drive away disease.

Accordant, of one mind with. Surya and with Dawn, the pres-
ser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink.

18 Give strength unto the milch-kine, give the people strength,

slay ye the Rakshasas and drive away disease.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and wit£ Dawn, the
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink.

19 As ye heard Atri’s earliest eulogy, so hear Sy&vasva, Soma-

presser, ye who reel in joy.

Accordant, of one mind with Siirya and with Dawn, drink
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old.

20 Further like running streams Sy&vasva’s eulogies who presses

out the Soma, ye who reel in joy.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old.

21 Seize, as ye grasp the reins, Syavasva’s solemn rites who pres-

ses out the Soma, ye ?yho reel in joy.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old.

22 Drive down your chariot hitherward : drink ye the Soma's

savoury juice.

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your
•aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper.

23 When sacrifice 0 which tells our reverence hath begun, Heroes !

to drink the gushing juice,

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper.

24 Sate you with consecrated drink, with juice effused, ye Deities.
Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your

aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper.

17 The Ruling Power : kshatrdm : hende Kshatriya, a man of the princely
or military order.

18 The people : vims : hence Vaisya, a man of the mercantile class or order.

19 AtrVs : as he was the progenitor of the Rishi of the Hymn. See Yol. I.,
Index.

21 Solemn rites : that is, the oblations presented thereat.

24 Consecrated drink : libations offered with the sacrificial exclamation
Sv&h& ! Ave ! or Hail !

12

THE HYMNS OF
HYMN XXXYI.

[BOOK VIJL
Indra.

ITS

Thou helpest him whose grass is trimmed, who sheds the
juice, 0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.

The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, Indra, Victor
o'er all hosts and space, begirt with Maruts, Lord of Heroes,
winner of the floods.

2 Maghavan, help thy worshipper : let him help thee. 0 Sata-

kratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.

The share which they have fixed for thee, etc.

3 Thou aidest Gods with food, and that with might aids thee.

0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.

4 Creator of the heaven, creator of the earth, 0 Satakratu*

drink Soma to make thee glad.

5 Father of cattle, father of all steeds art thou. 0 Satakratu,

drink Soma to make thee glad.

6 Stone-hurler, glorify the Atris 5 hymn of praise. 0 Satakratu,

drink Soma to make thee glad.

7 Hear thou SyavAsva while he pours to thee, as erst thou

heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites.

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce fight
with heroes, strengthening his prayers.

HYMN XXXVII. Indra.

This prayer, and those who shed the juice, in wars with
Vritra thou kolpest, Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy
succours.

0 Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink of the
Soma juice, thou blameless Thunderer.

2 Thou mighty Conqueror of hostile armaments, 0 Indra, Lord
of Strength, with all thy saving help.

1 Which they have fixed : which all the Gods have assigned. This half- verse
is the refrain of stanzas 1—6. And space, begirt : or, and wide space, girt. The
floods : the waters of heaven, the rain.

2 Let Mm help thee ; according to Sftyana, 1 * protect thyself (by drinking
the Soma).’ 4 The mutual relation between the God and his worshipper is
expressed, and the translation 4 help thyself * is ridiculous.’— Ludwig.

3 Food : sacrificial food. That ; food, especially in the shape of Soma.

7 Trasadasyu ; an especial favourite of Indra and the Asvins, celebrated
for his victories and liberality. See Index.

1 0 Vritra-slayer, etc: this half- verse is repeated as a refrain in the five

following stanzas.

TBE RmVEDA.

BYMN 38.]

. 3 Sole Ruler, thou art Sovran of this world of life, 0 Indra,
Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.

4 Thou only sunder est these two consistent worlds, 0 Indra,

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.

5 Thou art the Lord supreme o’er rest and energy, ’O Indra,

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help .

6 Thou helpest one to power, and one thou "hast not helped, 0

Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving aid.

7 Hear thou Syavasva while he sings to thee, as erst thou

heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites.

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in tlie fierce fight
with heioes, strengthening his powers.

HYMN XXXVIH. IndraAgni.

Ye Twain are Priests of sacrifice, winners in war and holy
works :

Indra and Agni, mark this well.

2 Ye bounteous riders on the car, ye Vritra-slayers unsubdued :
Indra and Agni, mark this well.

2 The men with pressing-stones have pressed this meath of
yours which gives delight :

Indra and Agni, mark this well,

4 Accept our sacrifice for weal, sharers of praise ! the Soma

shed :

Indra and Agni, Heroes, come.

5 Be pleased with these libations which attract you to our

sacred gifts :

Indra and Agni* Heroes, come.

6 Accept this eulogy of mine whose model is the G&yatrt : Indra

and Agni, Heroes, come.

4 Consistent worlds : there is no substantive in the text, and loTcau (worlds)
is supplied by S&yana.

5 Rest and energy : or peace and war. * Prosperity and gains/— Wilson.

6 To power : ksatr&ya : the rule exercised by princes.

7 Repeated froir ■/ • ■ ■ ■■ ' y tw— i with the alteration of two words —

r Mat ah, singing, ’■ pouring (libations), and 'hshatr&ni

(princely) powers instead of brdhmdni, prayers, ‘as if/ observes Dr. Muir,

* the former (brahmdni,) contained a reference to the functions of the priest,
and the latter to those of the prince/ — 0. S . Texts, X. 263.

1 Mark this well : c hear (the praise) of this (thy worshipper).’ — Wikon.

2 Bounteom t to Ad ; according to S&yana, ‘ destroyers (of foes)/

6 Whose model is the Gdyatri: composed in G&yatrt metre.

180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VITL

7 Come with the early-faring Gods, ye who are Lords of genuine

wealth :

Indra-Agni, to the Soma-draught !

8 Hear ye the call of Atris, hear Syav&sva as he sheds the

juice :

Indra-Agni to the Soma-draught !

9 Thus have I called you to our aid as sages called on you of

old :

Indra-Agni to the Soma draught !

10 Indra’s and Agni’s grace I claim, Sarasvati’s associates
To whonf this psalm of praise is sung.

HYMN XXXIX. Agni.

The glorious Agni have I praised, and worshipped with the
sacred food.

May Agni deck the Gods for us. Between both gathering-
places he goes on his embassy, the Sage. May all the others
die away.

2 Agni, burn down the word within their bodies through our

newest speech,

All hatreds of the godless, all the wicked man’s malignities.
Away let the destroyers go. May all the others die away.

3 Agni, I offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy mouth.
Acknowledge them among the Gods, for thou art the most

excellent, the worshipper’s blissful messenger. Let all the
others die away.

4 Agni bestows all vital power even as each man supplicates.

He brings the Yasus strengthening gifts, ^and grants delight,

in rest and stir, for every calling on the Gods. Let all the
others die away.

5 Agni hath made himself renowned by wonderful victorious act.
He is the Priest of all the tribes, chosen with sacrificial meeds.

He urges Deities to receive. Let all the others die away,

7 Early-faring Gods : ‘But Thou wastup at break of day.’— George Herbert.

10 Sarasvati’s associates : according to S&yana, * to whom praise belongs/

1 Deck the Gods for us : ‘ brighten the gods with the oblations at our
sacrifice.’ — Wilson, Both gathering-places : heaven and earth. All the others :■
anyalce same : meaning, according to S&yana, all our enemies.

2 All hatred of ike godless : ardtir ardvndm must be read instead of ardtt
rardvndm , — Ludwig.

5 With sacrificial meeds : dalcshindbhih : his dakshinds or honoraria as Priest
are the oblations which he receives as a God.

the rigv ed a.

181

EYttN 40.]

6 Agni knows all that springs from Gods, he knows the mystery

of men.

Giver of wealth is Agni, he uncloses both the doors to us when
worshipped with our newest gift. Let all the others die
away.

7 Agni inhabiteth with Gods and men who offer sacrifice.

He cherisheth with great delight much wisdom, as all things
that be, God among Gods adorable. May all the others die
away.

8 Agni who liveth in all streams, Lord of the Sevenfold Eace of

men,

Him dweller in three homes we seek, best slayerof the Dasyus
for Mandh&tar, first in sacrifice. Let all the others die away.

9 Agni the Wise inhabiteth three gathering-places, triply formed.
Decked as our envoy let the Sage bring hither and conciliate

the Thrice Eleven Deities. Let all the others die away.

10 Oar Agni, thou art first among the Gods, and first mid living
men.

Thou only rulest over wealth. Eound about thee, as natural
dams, circumfluous the waters run. Let all the others die
away.

HYMN XL. Indra-Agni.

Jndra and Agni, surely ye as Conquerors will give us wealth,
Whereby in fight we may o’er come that which is strong and
firmly fixed, as Agni burns the woods with wind. Let all
the others die away.

2 We set no snares to tangle you ; Indra we worship and adore,
Hero of heroes mightiest.

Once may he cbme unto us with his Steed, come unto us to
win us strength, and to complete the sacrifice.

6 That springs from Gods : the past and the present, while the mystery of
mm is the future. — Ludwig. Doth the doors: of wealth, or, perhaps of
heaven also.

8 Lord of the Sevenfold Dace of men : perhaps meaning, God of all men,
like Vaisv£nara ; or the reference may be to the seven priests : * Who is minis-
tered to by seven priests.’ — Wilson. ' Acting as seven priests.’ — M. Muller.
Mandhdtar : said to be tbe same as MftndMtar, son of Yuvan&sva, and Itishi
of X. 134.

9 Three gathering 'places : heaven, firmament, and earth.

10 Round about thee... the waters run: Cf. ‘Him, pure, resplendent,

Offspring of the Waters, the waters pure have on all sides encompassed*.
(XI. 35. 3).

1 Let all the others die away : this refrain recurs in all stanzas of the hymn
except tbe final.

2 Once: kaddchit : expressive of impatience,— Ludwig.

I 82 i THE HYMM OF [BOOK VM,

3 For, famous Indra-Agtii, ye are dwellers in the midst of frays.
Sages in wisdom, ye are knit to him who seeketh you as

friends. Heroes, bestow on him his wish.

4 NabMka-l'ike, with sacred song Indra’s and Agni’s praise I sing,
Theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven and this

mighty earth which bear rich treasure in their lap.

5 To Indra and to Agni send your prayers, as was Nabh&ka’s

wont, —

Who oped with side way opening the sea with its foundations
seven — Indra all powerful in his might.

6 Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creeping plant,
demolish thou the Dasa's might. May we with Indra’s help

divide the treasure he hath gathered up.

7 What time with this same song these men call Indra-Agni

sundry ways,

May we with our own heroes quell those who provoke us to the
fight, and conquer those who strive with us.

.8 The Two refulgent with their beams rise and come downward
from the sky.

By Indra’s and by Agni^s best, flowing away, the rivers run
which they released from their restraint.

9 0 Indra, many are thine aids, many thy ways of guiding us,
Lord of the Bay Steeds, Hinva’s Son. To a Good Hero come
our prayers, which soon shall have accomplishment.

10 Inspire him with your holy hymns, the Hero bright and

glorious,

Him who with might demolisheth even the broad of Sushna,
and winneth for us the heavenly streams.

11 Inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious Hero

truly brave.

He brake in pieces Sushna’s. brood who still expected not the
stroke, and won for us the heavenly streams. Let all the
others die away.

4 Nabhdka-like ; ISTabh&ka may have been the father of NAbMka the Rishi
of the hymn.

5 Who oped: 4 who overspread (with their lustre)/ — Wilson. The Commen-

tator does not explain the passage.

7 This same song : a hymn like our own, for victory in battle.

8 The Two refulgent loith their beams : apparently the Sun and Moon. Ac-
cording to S&yana, Indra and Agni are intended.

9 Ilinva's Son: Hinva (the driver, impeller, instigator of actions), a father
invented for Indra by the poet. To a Good Hero : to Indra. 4 5 * 7 8 9 The meaning of
the verse, even with the help of the scholiast, is far from, intelligible.* — Wilson,

WYMN 41.]

THE UIQVEDA.

183

12 Thus have we sung anew to Indra-Agni, as sang our sires,
Angirases, and MandhAtar.

Guard us with triple shelter and preserve us ; may we bo
masters of a store of riches.

HYMN XLL Varuna.

To make this Varuna come forth, sing thou a song . unto the
baud of Maruts wiser than thyself, —

This Varuna who gaardeth well the thoughts of men like
herds of kine.

Let all the others die away.

2 Him altogether praise I with the song and hymns our fathers

sang, and with N abb aka’s eulogies, —

Him dwelling at the rivers’ source, surrounded by his Sisters
Seven.

3 The nights he hath encompassed, and sfcablished the morns

with magic art : visible over all is he.

His dear Ones, following his Law, ha,ve prospered the Three
Dawns for him.

4 He, visible o’er all the earth, stablished the quarters of the

sky :

He measured out the eastern place, that is the fold of Varuna :
like a strong herdsman is the God.

5 He who supports the worlds of life, he who well knows the

hidden names mysterious of the morning-beams,

He cherishes much wisdom, Sage, as heaven brings forth each
varied form.

6 In whom all wisdom centres, as the nave is set within the

wheel. *

Haste ye to honour Trita, as kine haste to, gather in the fold,
even as they muster steeds to yoke.

1 To make this Varuna come forth : S&yana explains prdbhUtaye as an ad joe*
tive — prakrishtadhandy a : * to that opulent Varuna.’ — Wilson. Wiser; more
skilled in singing. The thoughts : holy thoughts and devotions. The refrain,
Let all, etc., recurs at the end of every stanza.

2 Ndbkdka's : that is, mine own. Sisters Seven ; the five rivers of the Panjdb,
the Indus, and perhaps the Kublifc. See I 32, note.

3 Bis dear 0 " -*■'.* : V 1 2 3 4 - nights, which give place to the mornings.

Three Dawns : ■ ■ 1 ’ '• V- morning, noon, aud evening.

4 The fold : or, perhaps, the course, meaning the place from which he starts.
6 THta: Varuna, here, apparently, identified with this ancient God who

represents the expanse of heaven. According to S&yana, (Varuna) ‘who abides
in the three worlds,’

184 2 HE HYMNS OP [. tiOOK VI tl.

7 He wraps these regions as a robe ; he contemplates the tribes

of Gods and all the works of mortal men.

Before the home of Varuna all the Gods follow his decree.

8 He is an Ocean far-removed, yet through the heaven to him

asdends the worship which these realms possess.

With his bright foot he overthrew their magic, and went up
to heaven.

9 Ruler, whose bright far-seeing rays, pervading all three earths,

have filled the three superior realms of heaven.

Firm is the seat of Varuna : over the Seven he rules as King.

10 Who, after: his decree, o’erspread the Dark Ones with a robe
of light;

Who measured out the ancient seat, who pillared both the
worlds apart as the Unborn supported heaven. Let all the
others die away.

HYMN XLIL Varuna.

Lord of all wealth, the Asura propped the heavens, and mea-
sured out the broad earth's wide expanses.

He, King supreme, approached all living creatures. All these
are Varuna’s holy 4 operations.

2 So humbly worship Varuna tb© Mighty ; revere the wise
Guard of the World Immortal.

May he vouchsafe us triply-barred protection. 0 Earth and
Heaven, within your lap preserve us.

7 This stanza is very obscure, and my rendering is conjectural. The com-
mentary is defective, and von Roth and Ludwig think that the correctness of
one word in the tex t is doubtful. According to the slight alteration suggest-
ed by the latter scholar, * under the lead > would stand*instead of ‘ before the
home.’

8 The first line of this stanza also is difficult. Wilson, following S&yana,
translates : ‘ He is the hidden ocean ; swift he mounts (the heaven) as (the
sun) the sky ; when he has placed the sacrifice in those (regions of the firma-
ment)/ Ludwig’s interpretation, which I follow, requires tirdh to be read
instead of turdh (swift). Their magic ; the magical arts of the fiends of darkness.

9 Firm: so Hesiod (Theog. V. 127) calls Ouranos = Varuna the €§0£
acr(paXeCj the firm seat of the Gods. See M. Muller, Chips from a German
Workshop, IV. xx (new edition). The Seven : rivers, understood.

10 The Dark Ones : the nights, which Varuna turns into days. But see
Chips, IV. xxii. The Unborn: the primeval, everlasting, uncreated Divine
Being. According to S&yanav the Sun.

1 The Asura : the High God, Varuna. f The wise spirit/ — M. Muller.

2 Of the World Immortal ; amritasya ; according to S&yana, of amrit or
ambrosia.

HYMN 43.]

THE Rj GY EDA.

185

3 Sharpen this song of him who strives his utmost, sharpen,

God Varuna, his strength and insight ;

May we ascend the ship that bears us safely, whereby we may
pass over all misfortune.

4 Asvins, with songs the singer stones have made yoh hasten

hitherward,

N&satyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away.

5 As the sage Atri with his hymns, 0 Asvins, called you eagerly,
Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away.

6 So have I called you to our aid, even as the wise have called

of old, *

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away.

HYMN XLIII. Agni.

These songs of mine go forth as lauds of Agni, the disposing Sage,
Whose worshipper is ne’er overthrown.

2 Wise Agni Jatavedas, I beget a song of praise for thee.

Who willingly receivest it.

3 Thy sharpened flames, 0 Agni, like the gleams of light that

glitter through,

Devour the forests with their teeth.

4 Gold-coloured, bannered*with the smoke, urged by the wind,

aloft to heaven

Eise, lightly borne, the flames of fire.

5 These lightly kindled fiery flames are all around made visible,
Even as the gleamings of the Dawns.

6 As Jatavedas speeds along, the dust is black beneath his^feet,
When Agni spreads upon the earth.

7 Making the plants his nourishment, Agni devours and wearies

not,

Seeking the tender shrubs again.

8 Bending him down with all his tongues, he flickers with his

fiery glow :

Splendid is Agni in the woods.

9 Agni, thine home is in the floods : into the plants thou

forcest way,

And as their Child art born anew.

10 Worshipped with offerings shines thy flame, 0 Agni, from
the sacred oil,

With kisses on the ladle’s mouth.

3 The ship : a metaphorical expression for hymn and sacrifice. Cf. I. 46. 7 ,
140. 12 j IX. 89. 2 ; X. 44. 6 ; 63. 10 ; 101. 2 ; 105. 9.

186 TEE HYMNS OF {BOOK VIII.

1 1 Let us serve Agni with our hymns, Disposer, fed on ox and

cow,

Who bears the Soma on his back.

12 Yea, thee, 0 Agni, do we seek with homage and with fuel,

Priest

Whose wisdom is most excellent.

13 0 worshipped with oblations, pure Agni, we call on thee as

erst

Did Bhrigu, Manus, Angiras.

14 For thou, 0 Agni, by the fire, Sage by the Sage, Good by the

Good,

Friend by the Friend, art lighted up.

15 So wealth in thousands, food with store of heroes give thou to

the sage,

0 Agni, to the worshipper.

16 0 Agni, Brother, made by strength, Lord of red steeds and

brilliant sway,

Take pleasure in this laud of mine.

17 My praises, Agni, go to thee, as the cows seek the stall to

meet

The lowing calf that longs for mjjk.

18 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have pleasant homes
Apart, have turned as to their wish.

19 The sages skilled in holy song and thinkers with their thoughts

have urged

Agni to share the sacred feast.

20 So, Agni, unto thee the Priest, Invoker, strong in forays, pray

Those who spin out the sacrifice. *

21 In many a place, the same in look art thou, a Prince o’er all

the tribes :

In battles we invoke thine aid.

11 Fed on ox and coio : 'the eater of the ox, the eater of the marrow.’ —
Wilson, Who hears the Soma on his bach ; sbmajprishthdya ; £ on whose hack
the libation is poured.’ — Wilson.

14 SAyana refers to the Aitareya Brdhmana , I. 16, ‘which describes how
the fire produced by friction from the two aranis [fire-sticks] is thrown into
the Ahavaniya fire, in the Atithyeshti ceremony. “ In the verse twain hyagm
[For thou, 0 Agni] etc., the one vipra (a sage) means one Agni, the other vipra
the other Agni ; the one san (being, existing) means the one, the other san
(in satd) the other Agni.’ (Haug’s trails.).’ — hTote by E. B. C. in Wilson’s
Translation. Sdn and satd may also mean ' good,’

1 6 Made by strength : produced by violent agitation of the fire-stick.

BTMN 44.] ms RIGVEDA. 187

22 Pray thou to Agni, pray to him who blazes served with sacred

oil :

Let him give ear to this our call.

23 We call on thee as such, as one who hears, as JAtavedas, one,
Agni ! who beats away our foes.

24 I pray to Agni, King of men, the Wonderful, the President
Of holy Laws : may he give ear.

25 Him like a bridegroom, him who stirs all people, like a noble

horse,

Like a fleet steed, we instigate.

26 Slaying things deadly, burning up foes, Raksha^as, on every

side,

Shine, Agni, with thy sharpened flame.

27 Thou whom the people kindle even as Manus did,, best Angiraa !

0 Agni, mark thou this my speech. t

28 0 Agni, made by strength ! be thou born in the heavens or

born in floods,

As such we call on thee with songs,

29 Yea, all the people, all the folk who have good dwellings,,

each apart,

Send food for thee to eat ^hereof.

30 0 Agni, so may we, devout, gazed at by men, throughout our

davs

Pass lightly over all distress.

31 We venerate with cheerful hearts the cheerful Agni, dear to all,
Burning, with purifying flame.

32 So thou, 0 Agni rich in light, beaming like Surya with thy rays
Boldly demolishsst the gloom.

2>3 We pray to thee for this thy gift, Yictor ! the gift that faileth
not,

0 Agni, choicest wealth from thee.

HYMN XLIY. Agni.

Pay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your Guest with
oil :

In him present your offerings.

2 Agni, do thou accept my laud, be magnified by this my song :
Welcome my sweetly-spoken words.

28 In the heavens: as the Sun. In floods: in the waters of the firmament
as- lightning.

30 Gazed at by men : objects of their admiration. ‘ Beholding men.’ — Wilson,
‘Living (among, men), 1 — St.- Petersburg Lexicon.

m TBS BtMNS OP [POOR V1IL

3 Agni, envoy, I place in front ; the oblation-bearer I address :
Here let him seat the Deities.

4 Agni, the lofty flames of thee enkindled have gone up on high,
Thy bright flames, thou Refulgent One.

5 Beloved ! let my ladles full of sacred oil come near to thee :
Agni, accept our offerings.

6 I worship Agni — may he hear ! — the cheerful, the Invoker,

Priest

Of varied splendour, rich in light.

7 Ancient Invoker, meet for praise, belovM Agni, wise and strong,
The visitant of solemn rites.

8 Agni, best Angiras, accept straightway these offerings, and guide
The seasonable sacrifice.

9 Excellent God, with brilliant flames, enkindled bring thou

hitherward,

Knowing the way, the Heavenly Host.

10 Him, Sage and Herald, void of guile, ensign of sacrifices, him
Smoke-bannered, rich in light, vte seek.

110 Agni, be our Guardian thou, God, against those who injure us :
Destroy our foes, thou Son of Strength.

12 Making his body beautiful, Agni^he Sage hath waxen by
The singer and his ancient hymn.

13 1 invocate the Child of Strength, Agni with purifying flame,
At this well-ordered sacrifice.

14 So Agni, rich in many friends, with fiery splendour, seat

thyself

With Gods upon our sacred grass.

15 The mortal man who serves the God Agni within his own

abode,

For him he causes wealth to shine.

16 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the earth

is he :

He quiekenetb the waters* seed.

1 7 Upward, 0 Agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplendent, blaz-

ing high,

Thy lustres, fair effulgences.

14 Rich in many friends : ‘thou who hast Mitra’s splendour.’ — Ludwig.

1 5 For him he causes wealth to shine ; or, 1 To him he shines forth opulence/
' To him he gives riches,’ — Wilson.

16 The waters' seed : as lightning, he impregnates the wate rs of the air.

HYMN 45.]

THE RIGYEDA.

389

18 For, Agni, thou as Lord of Light rulest o'er choicest gifts:

may I,

Thy singer, find defence in thee.

19 0 Agni, they who understand stir thee to action with their

thoughts :

So let our songs enhance thy might.

20 We ever claim the friendship of Agni, the singing messenger,

Of Godlike nature, void of guile. ° ° ?

21 Agni who hears most holy sway, the holy Singer, holy Sage,
Shines holy when we worship him.

22 Yea, let. my meditations, let my songs exalt thee evermore :
Think, Agni, of our friendly bond.

23 If I were thou and thou wert I, 0 Agni, every prayer of

thine

Should have its due fulfilment here.

24 For Excellent and Lord of wealth art thou, 0 Agni, rich in

light :

May we enjoy thy favouring grace.

25 Agni, to thee whose laws stand fast our resonant songs of

praise speed forth
As rivers hasten to the sea.

26 Agni, the Youthful L8rd of men, who stirreth much and

eateth all,

The Sage, I glorify with hymns.

27 To Agni let us haste with lauds, the Guide of sacrificial rites,
Armed with sharp teeth, the Mighty One.

28 And let this man, good Agni, be with thee the singer of thy

praise :

Be gracious, Holy One, to him.

29 For thou art sharer of our feast, wise, ever watchful as a

Sage :

Agni, thou shinest in the sky.

30 0 Agni, Sage, before. our foes, before misfortunes fall on us,
Excellent Lord, prolong our lives.

HYMN XLY. In<ha.

Hitherward ! they who light the flame and straightway trim
the sacred grass,

Whose Friend is Indra ever young.

26 Eateth all: consumes the entire oblation. — S&yana. But the meaning
is probably general.

28 This man : the Rishi or singer himself.

29 In the sky : or, up to heaven.

,»> Tm STMm OF [J300K VITI.

,2 High, is their f uel, great their lati&, wide is their splinter from
the stake,

Whose Friend is Indra ever young.

3 Uuquelled in fight the hero leads his army with the warrior chiefs?
Whoso Friend is Indra ever young.

4: The new-horn Vritra-slayer asked his Mother, as he seized
his shaft,

Who are the fierce ^ Who are renowned h
5 Savasi answered, He who seeks thine enmity will battle like
A stately elephant on a hill.

.6 And hear^ 0 Maghavan ; to him who craves of thee thou
grantest all :

Whate’er thou makest firm is firm.

7 What time the Warrior Indra goes to battle, borne by noble

steeds,

Best -of all charioteers is he.

8 Repel, 0 Thunder-armed, in all directions all attacks on us :
And be our own most glorious God.

9 May Indra set our car in front, in foremost place to win the spoil?
He whom the wicked injure not.

10 Thine enmity may we escape, and, Sakra, for thy bounty, rich
In kine, may we come near to tbefe ;

11 Softly approaching, Thunder-armed 1 wealthy by hundreds,

rich in steeds,

Unrivalled, ready with our gifts.

12 For thine exalted excellence gives to thy worshippers each day
Hundreds and thousands of thy boons.

13 Indra, we know thee breaker-down evei^ of strong forts,

winner of spoil,

As one who conquers wealth for us.

11 Though thou art highest, Sage and Bold ! let the drops cheer
thee when we come
To thee as to a trafficker.

2 Splinter: the first shaving, splinter, or strip of wood, cut from the yil pa
or sacrificial post, and used in the sacrifice.

4 As soon as he was born Indra showed his warlike disposition, and asked
what worthy opponents he should have.

5 Savasi, or, the Strong Dame ; his mother Aditi. A stately elephant : I
follow S&yona who explains upstih as darsantyo gajah , a beautiful elephant,
although in other places the word seems to mean beauty (I. 124 7), and fore-
head (V. 80. 6). The allusion is to the size and strength of Yritra, Indra’s fu-
ture antagonist.

1 4 A s to a trafficker: as to one who knows the value of our worship and
oblations and will give us something in return.

MYMN 45.] Tm RIGVEDA. 191

15 Bring unto us the treasure of the opulent man who, loth to
give,

Hath slighted thee for gain of wealth.

3/6 Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and
look to thee,

As men with fodder to the herd.

17 And thee who art not deaf, whose ears are quick to listen, for

our aid,

We call to us from far away.

18 When thou hast listened, make our call one which thou never

wilt forget, ^

And be our very nearest Friend.

19 When even now, when we have been in trouble, we have

thought of thee,

0 Indra, give us gifts of kine.

20 0 Lord of Strength, we rest on thee, as old men rest upon a

staff :

We long to have thee dwell with us.

21 To Indra sing a song of praise, Hero of mighty valour, him
Whom no one challenges to war.

22 Hero, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink:
Sate thee and finish thy •arouse.

23 Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee when they

seek thine aid :

Love not the enemies of prayer.

24 Here let them with rich milky draught cheer thee to great

munificence :

Drink as the wild-bull drinks the lake.

25 Proclaim in our Assemblies what deeds, new and ancient, far

away

The Vritra-slayer hath achieved.

26 In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadru’sSoma juice:
There he displayed his manly might.

27 True undeniable strength he found in Yadu and in Turvasa,
And conquered through the sacrifice.

23 The enemies of prayer ; according to S&yana those who hate Br&hmans.

24 The wild-bull : the gaura.

26 Kadrtfs Soma juice : Kadru here is apparently the name of a TUshi or
of one of the officiating priests. The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes it to
mean, from & hadrd or Soma-vessel.

27 Undeniable ; ahnavdyydm , according to S&yana, is the name of the enemy
of Turvasa and Yadu : ‘ he overcame Ahnav&yya in battle.’— Wilson.

192 TEM HYMNS OF [HOOK Wit

28 Him have I magnified, our Lord in common, Guardian of jour

folk,

Discloser of great wealth in kine ;

29 Ribhukshan, not to be restrained, who strengthened Tugra’s

son in lauds,

Indra beside the flowing juice ;

30 Who for Trisoka clave the hill that formed a wide receptacle,
So that the cows might issue forth.

31 Whatever thy plan or purpose be, whatever, in transport, thou

wouldst do, ^

Do it not^Indra, but be kind. V\

32 But little hath been heard of done x\\n the earth by one

like thee : *

Let thine heart, Indra, turn to us.

33 Tbiue then shall be this high renown, thine shall these lofty

praises be,

When, Indra, thou art kind to us.

34 Not for one trespass, not for two, 0 Hero, slay us, nor for

three,

Nor yet for many trespasses.

35 I fear one powerful like f ^hee, the crusher-down of enemies,
Mighty, repelling all attac^, n

36 0 wealthy God, ne’er may I live to see my friend or son in

need :

Hitherward let thy heart he turned.

37 What friend, 0 people, unprovoked, hath ever said unto a

friend,

He turns and leaves us in distress ?

38 Hero, insatiate enjoy this Soma juice so near to thee,

Even as a hunter rushing down.

29 j Ribhuhshan: Indra, Lord of the ftibhus. Tug vet’s son: Bhujyu. Ac-
cording to S&yana, tugryavridham means £ augmenter of water/

30 The hill is the massive rain-cloud, and the cows are streams of water,

31 Do it not : * S&yana understands this, “ do it not, for thou hast done it
for us, — only make us happy.” Con Id it be that the worshipper had a feeling
of nemesis 1 or would he monopolize all ? ’ — Note by E. B. C, in Wilson’s
Translation.

32 1 In the following verses (32 — 36) the poet seems to express disappoint-
ment at the inadequate manifestation of Indra’s power, while he at the same
time entreats his grace and forgiveness/ — 0, & Texts , Y. p. 111.

37 This stanza is Indra’s answer to the poet’s complaint. Th^ What
seems to be : no friend without good cause calls his friend a traj/orsaben
then have I done, or left undone, that thou shouldst say that hdkah.
thee ? See Ludwig’s Commentary on the very difficult jaM K

\

THE JLIGTEDA.

in

HYMN 46,]

39 Hither I draw those Bays of thine yoked hy our hymn, with

splendid car,

That thou mayst give unto the priests*

40 Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes who press

around,

And bring the wealth for which we long:

41 0 Jndra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipi-

tous :

Bring us the wealth for which we long ;

42 Great riches which the world of men shall recognize as sent

by thee : *

Bring us the wealth for which we long*

hymn xlvi. indra.

We, Indra, Lord of ample wealth, our Guide, depend on one
like thee,

Thou driver of the Tawny Steeds*

2 For, Hurler of the Bolt, we know thee true, the giver of our

food,

We know thee giver of our wealth.

3 0 thou whose majesty the bards celebrate with their songs,

thou Lord ^

Of hundred powers and hundred aids.

4 Fair guidance hath the mortal man whom Aryaman, the Marut

host,

And Mitra, void of guile, protect.

5 Kine, steeds, and hero strength he gains, and prospers, by the

Adityas sped,

Ever in wealth which all desire*

6 We pray to Indra for his gift, to him the Fearless and the

Strong,

We pray to him the Lord of wealth,

7 For verily combined in him are all the fearless powers of aid.
Him, rich in wealth, let swift Steeds bring to us, his Bays, to

Soma juice for his carouse :

8 Yea, that most excellent carouse, Indra, which slays most ene-

mies,

With Heroes wins the light of heaven, and is invincible in war :

The hymn appears to be composed of two or more originally separate hymns
(see Pischel, Vedisoke Stud ten, I. pp. 7 — 9). There are seventeen varieties of
metre (see Index of Hymns). The hymn is difficult and obscure in parts,
where only conjectural translations can be given.

7 Powers of aid : or, succourers ; the Maruts may be intended,

v 13

194 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIII

9 Which merits fame, all-bountiful 1 and, unsubdued, hath vic-
tory in deeds of might.

So come to our libations, Strongest ! Excellent ! May we ob-
tain a stall of kine.

1 0 Responding to our wish for cows, for steeds, and chariots, as

of old,

Re gracious, Greatest of the Great !

1 1 For, Hero, nowhere can I find the bounds of thy munificence.
Still do thou favour us, 0 Bolt-anned Maghavan : with strength

hast thou rewarded hymns.

12 High, glosifier of his friend, he knows all generations, he

whom many praise.

All races of mankind with ladles lifted up invoke that Mighty
Indra’s aid.

13 Be he our Champion and Protector in great deeds, rich in all

wealth, the Vritra-slayer, Maghavan,

14 In the wild raptures of the juice sing to your Hero with high

laud, to him the Wise,

To Indra, glorious in his name, the Mighty One, even as the
hymn allow eth it.

15 Thou givest wealth to me myself, thou givesfc treasure, Ex-

cellent ! and the strong steed,

0 Much-iuvoked, in deeds of might, yea, even now.

16 Him, Sovran Ruler of all precious things, who even hath

power o’er this fair form of his,

As now it taketh shape, and afterward,

17 We praise, so that the Mighty One may speed to you, Pourer

of bounties, Traveller, prepared to go. #

Thou favourest the Maruts known to all, by song and sacrifice.
With song aim praise I sing to thee.

18 We in the sacrifice perform their will whose voice is lifted

high,

The worship of those Thundering Ones who o’er the ridges of
these mountains fly in troops.

13 This stanza may have been the conclusion of one of the original hymns.

14 its the hymn alloweth it : in due accordance with the metre.

1 C Sttyana explains the latter part of the first line and the following * part
of the second as, ( who overcomes this obstructor (the enemy) as he wages
war.’ I follow Ludwig’s interpretation who refers to III. 53. 8, 4 Maghavan
weareth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic changes in his body ; ’ and
v 1. 47, 18, Indra moves multiform by his illusions.’

18 Their will : the pleasure of the Maruts.

HYMN 46.]

THE MGVEDA.

m

19 0 Indra, Mightiest, bring us that which c rushes men of evil minds,
Wealth suited to our needs, 0 Stirrer of the thought, best

wealth, 0 thou who stirrest thought.

20 0 Winner, noble winner, strong, wondrous, most splendid,

excellent,

Sole Lord of victory, bring all-overpowering wealth, joy-giving,
chief in deeds of might.

21 Now let the godless man approach who hath received reward

so great

As Yasa Asvya, when this light of morning dawned, received
from Prithusravas, from Kanita’s son.

22 Steeds sixty thousand and ten thousand kine, and twenty

hundred camels I obtained ;

Ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in three spots ;
in all, ten thousand kine.

23 Ten browns that make my wealth increase, fleet steeds whose

tails are long and fair,

Turn with swift whirl my chariot wheel ;

24 The gifts which Prithusravas gave, Kanita’s son munificent.

He gave a chariot wrought of gold : the prince was passing

bountiful, and won himself most lofty fame.

25 Come thou to this great rite of ours, Vkyu ! to give us vigor-

ous light.

We have served thee that thou mightest give much to us, yea,
mightest quickly give great wealth.

26 Who with thrice seven times seventy horses comes to' us,

invested with the rays of morn,

Through these our Soma-draughts and those who press, to
give, drinker oi pure bright Soma juice.

27 Who hath inclined this glorious one, bounteous himself, to

give me gifts,

Borne on firm chariot with the prosperous Nahusha, wise, to
a man yet more devout.

20 0 winner : of wealth to be given to thy worshippers. * 0 bountiful,
most bountiful.’ — Wilson.

21 Vasa A svya : the Rishi of the hymn. Seel. 112. 10. Prithusravas:
see I 116. 2i:

22 In all , ten thousand kine : the exact meaning is not very clear. The last
line is rendered differently in Wilson’s Translation ; ‘ a thousand brown

—and ten times ten thousand cows with three red patches.’

26 Who : apparently V&yu, but, according to S&yana, Prithusravas.

27 On firm chariot: literally, on a car made of the wood of the Aradu tree
(Calosanthes Indica). But S&yana makes two proper names of the ’words,

* with Aradva and Aksha.’

THE HYMNS OF

196

[BOOR VIII .

28 Sole Lord in beauty meet for praise, 0 V&yu, dropping fatness

down,

Hurried along by steeds, by camels, and by hounds, spreads
forth thy train ; even this it is,

29 So, as a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand have Igained,
Balls that resemble vigorous steeds.

30 To me come oxen like a herd, yea, unto me the oxen come.

31 And in the grazing herd he made a hundred camels bleat for me,
And twenty hundred mid the white,

32 A hundred has the sage received, Dasa Balbdtha’s and Taruk-

sha’s gffts.

These are thy people, Vayu, who rejoice with Indra for their
guard, rejoice with Gods for guards.

33 And now to Vasa Asvya here this stately woman is led forth,
Adorned with ornaments of gold.

HYMN XL VII. Adityas.

Great help ye give the worshipper, Varupa,Mitra, Mighty Ones !
No sorrow ever reaches him whom ye, Adityas, keep from harm.
Yours are incomparable aids, and good the succour they afford.

2 0 Gods, Adityas, well ye know the way to keep all woes afar.
As the birds spread their sheltering wings, spread your protec-
tion over us.

3 As the birds spread their sheltering wings let your protection

cover us.

We mean all shelter and defence, ye who have all things for
your own.

i To whomsoever they, Most Wise, have given a home and
means of life, *

O’er the whole riches of this man they, the Adityas, have control.

5 As drivers of the car avoid ill roads, let sorrows pass us by.
May we be under Indra’s guard, in the Adityas 5 favouring grace.

6 Yor verily men sink and faint through loss of wealth which

ye have given.

Much hath he gained from you, O Gods, whom ye, Adityas,
have approached.

28 The steeds , camels , and hounds are apparently the fantastic forme of the
clouds that hy before V&yu or the wind.

31 Mid the white,' herds of cows.

32 JDdsa BalbMha: probably an aboriginal aily of Pritkusravas. See
Weber, Episckes im vedischen Ritual , p. 30.

33 This stately woman: probably the wife of the conquered King. — Ludwig.

1 Touts are } etc: the refrain recurs in every verse of the hymn.

1 tntN 41 ] THE RIGtEDA. 197

7 On him shall no fierce anger fall, no sore distress shall visit

him,

To whom, Adityas, ye have lent your shelter that extendeth
far.

8 Resting in you, 0 Gods, we are like men who fight in coats of

mail.

Ye guard us from each great offence, ye guard us from each
lighter fault.

9 May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guard and shelter us,

Mother of wealthy Mitra and of Aryaman and Yaruna.

10 The shelter, Gods, that is secure, auspicious, fre&from malady,
A sui'e protection;, triply strong, even that do ye extend to us.

11 Look down on us, Adityas, as a guide exploring from the

bank.

Lead us to pleasant ways as men lead horses to an easy ford.

12 111 be it for the demons’ friend to find us or come near to us.
But for the milch-cow be it well, and for the man who strives

for fame.

13 Each evil deed made manifest, and that which is concealed,

0 Gods,

The whole thereof remove from us to Trita Aptya far away.

14 Daughter of Heaven, the dream that bodes evil to us or to

our kine,

Remove, 0 Lady of the Light, to Trita Aptya far away.

15 Even if, 0 Child of Heaven, it make a garland or a chain of

gold,

The whole bad dream, whate’er it he, to Trita Aptya we
consign. a

16 To him whose food and work is this, who comes to take his

share therein,

To Trita, and to Dvita. Dawn ! bear thou the evil dream away.

13 To Trita Aptya far away : Trita Aptya is a divinity dwelling in the re-
motest part of the heavens to whom it was customary to wish away, and
consign any threatened calamity or unpleasantness. As S&yana regards Trita
Aptya as the Bishi of the hymn, he is compelled to force a different interpre-
tation on the first half of the second line : 4 (let it not be found) in Trita
Aptya, keep it far from us.’ — Wilson.

14 Daughter of Heaven : TJshas or Dawn.

15 * The sense would then be 4 even though parts of it be pleasant, we put
the whole of the evil dream away.” — Macdonell, Journal of B. A. S., July,
1893, p. 461.

16 To him: to Trita whose business it is to receive these consignments.
ToDvita: a similar being, sometimes associated with Trita. SeeY. 18. 2.

193 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YI1L

17 As we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteenth

. P art > .

So unto Aptya we transfer together all the evil dream,

18 Now have we conquered and obtained, and from our trespas-

ses are free.

Shine thou away the evil dream, 0 Dawn, whereof we are
afraid. Yours are incomparable aids, and good the succour
they afford.

HYMN XLVIII. Soma.

.Wisely have I enjoyed the savoury viand, religious-thoughted,
best to find out treasure,

The food to which all Deities and mortals, calling it mcath,
gather themselves together.

2 Thou shalt he Aditi as thou hast entered within, appeaser of

celestial anger.

Indu, enjoying Indra's friendship, bring us — as a swift steed
the car — forward to riches.

3 We have drunk Soma and become immortal ; we have attained

the light, the Gods discovered.

Now what may foeman’s malice do to harm us 1 2 3 ? What, 0 Im-
mortal, mortal man’s deception?

4 Absorbed into the heart, he sweet, 0 Indu, as a kind father to

his son, 0 Soma,

As a wise Friend to friend : do thou, wide-ruler, 0 Soma,
lengthen out our days for living.

5 These glorious drops that give me freedom have I drunk.

Closely they knit my joints as straps secure a car.

Let them protect my foot from slipping on, the way : yea, let
the drops I drink preserve me from disease.

6 Make me shine bright like fire produced by friction : give us a

clearer sight and make us better.

For in carouse I think of thee, 0 Soma, Shall I, as a rich man,
attain to comfort ?

7 May we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juice thou givest,

like ancestral riches.

0 Soma, King, prolong thou our existence as Surya makes the
shining days grow longer.

1 Meath : madhu : or, sweet.

2 Within : within my heart. Indu : Soma.

3 We have drunk Soma : see Muir, 0. S . Tescts , III. 261, 265.

5 From slipping on the way: ‘may they keep us from a loosely-knit
worship.’ — Wilson,

HYMN 49.] THE RIG YE DA. 199

8 King Soma, favour us and make us prosper : we are thy de-

votees ; of this be mindful.

Spirit and power are fresh in us, 0 Indu : give us not up unto
our foeman’s pleasure.

9 For thou hast settled in each joint, 0 Soma, aim of men’s eyes

and guardian of our bodies.

When we offend against thine holy statutes, as a kind Friend,
God, best of all, be gracious.

10 May I be with the Friend whose heart is tender, who, Lord of

Bays ! when quaffed will never harm me —

This Soma now deposited within me. For this, I pray for longer
life to Indr a. ^

1 1 Our maladies have lost their strength and vanished : they feared,

and passed away into the darkness.

Soma hath risen in us, exceeding mighty, and we are come
where men prolong existence.

12 Fathers, that Indu which our hearts have drunken, Immortal

in himself, hath entered mortals.

So let us serve this Soma with oblation, and rest securely in his
grace and favour.

13 Associate with the Fathers thou, 0 Soma, hast spread thyself

abroad through earth $nd heaven.

So with oblation let us serve thee, Indu, and so let ns become
the lords of riches,

14 Give us your blessing, 0 ye Gods, preservers. Never may sleep

or idle talk control us.

But evermore may we, as friends of Soma, speak to the synod
with brave sons around us.

15 On all sides, Sprna, thou art our life- giver : aim of all eyes,

light-finder, come within us.

Indu, of one accord with thy protections both from behind and
from before preserve us.

HYMN XLIX. Agni.

Agni, come hither with thy fires ; we choose thee as Invoking
Priest.

Let the extended ladle full of oil balm thee, best Priest, to
sit on sacred grass.

9 Aim of men's eyes : or, beholder of men.

12 Immortal in himself: see note on I. 18. 4.

13 Soma: here the Moon -God, who is intimately connected with the Pitris
or Fathers. See Hymns of the Atharva-veda, XV III. 4, 72.

I place at the end of this Book the eleven hymns, called the Y&lakhilya,
which are usually inserted after Hymn XLVIII. These hymns are not

200 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII M

2 For unto thee, 0 Angiras, 0 Son of Strength,- move ladles in

the sacrifice.

' To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we seek, fore-
most in sacrificial rites.

3 Agni, thou art Disposer, Sage, Herald, bright God ! and

worshipful,

* Best offerer, cheerful, to be praised in holy rites, pure Lord !
by singers with their hymns.

4 Most Youthful and Eternal, bring the longing Gods to me,

the guileless, for the feast.

Come, Yasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared : rejoice
thee, gracious, with our songs.

5 Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide, Preserver, righteous, and

a Sage.

The holy singers, 0 refulgent kindled God I arrangers, call on
thee to come.

6 Shine, Most Resplendent ! blaze, send bliss unto the folk, and

to thy worshipper : Great art thou.

So may my princes, with good fires, subduing foes, rest in the
keeping of the Gods.

7 0 Agni, as thou burnest down to earth even high-grown

underwood,

So, bright as Mitra is, burn him who injures us, him who plots
ill against thy friend.

8 Give us not as a prey to mortal enemy, nor to the wicked

friend of fiends.

With conquering guards, auspicious, unassailable, protect us,
0 Most Youthful God.

9 Protect us, Agni, through the first, protect us through the

second hymn,

Protect us through three hymns, 0 Lord of Power and Might,
through four hymns, Yasu, guard thou us.

reckoned in the division of the Rigveda into Maiidalas (Books) and Anuv&kas
(Chapters), and S&yana does not notice them in his Commentary. See Wil-
son's Translation, V. p. 96, note by Cowell. See also Max Miiller’s Vedic
Hymns I. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXII.), pp. xlvi — xlviii.

Eleven must be added to the number of this hymn and of all that follow
in this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Max Muller’s
edition of the text.

2 Whose locks drop oil: e butter-haired.’ — Wilson.

5 The arrangers : of the ritual of sacrifice.

6 Princes : wealthy patrons. According to S&yana, the Rishi’s own sons
and others may be intended.

9 The numbers probably have reference to the four quarters of the sky. —
Ludwig.

H1MN 49.]

the mar ee a.

201

10 Preserve us from eaeh fiend who brings the Gods no gift,

preserve thou us in deeds of strength :

For we possess in thee the nearest Friend of all, for service
of the Gods and weal.

11 0 Holy Agni, give us wealth renowned with men and strength-

ening life.

Bestow on us, 0 Helper, that which many crave, more glorious
still by righteousness \

12 Wherewith we may overcome our rivals in the war, o’erpower-

ing the foe’s designs.

So wax thou by our food, 0 Excellent in strength. Quicken
our thoughts that find out wealth.

13 Agni is even as a bull who whets and brandishes his horns.
Well-sharpened are his jaws which may not be withstood ; the

Child of Strength hath powerful teeth.

14 Not to be stayed, 0 Bull, 0 Agni, are thy teeth when thou

art spreading far and wide.

Make our oblations duly offered up, 0 Priest, and give us
store of precious things.

15 Thou liest in the wood : from both thy Mothers mortals kindle

thee.

Unweariedly thou beare^t up the offerer’s gifts, then shinest
bright among the Gods.

16 And so the seven priests, 0 Agni, worship thee, Free-giver,

Everlasting One.

Thou cleavest through the rock with heat and fervent glow;
Agni, rise up above the men.

1 7 For you let us whose grass is trimmed call Agni, Agni, rest-

less God. »

Let us whose food is offered call to all the tribes Agni the
Invoking Priest of men.

18 Agni, with noble psalm that tells his wish he dwells, thinking

on thee who guardest him.

Speedily bring us strength of many varied sorts to be most
near to succour us.

19 Agni, Praise-singer! Lord of men, God! burner-up of Rakshasas,
Mighty art thou, the ever-present Household-Lord, Home-

friend and Guardian from the sky.

12 Wherewith ; referring to the wealth which Agni is asked to give. .

15 In the wood: in the pieces of wood used for the production of Agni.

16 Seven priests : minor Hotar priests, such as the Mai tr&varuna and others.
The rock : adrim, explained bj T S&yana as megham, the cloud,

17 The restless God : or, * the irresistible.’ — Wilson.

18 He dwells: that is, the pious institutor of sacrifice.

202 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI1T

20 Let no fiend come among* us, 0 thou rich in light, no spell of
those who deal in spells.

To distant pastures drive faint hunger : far away, 0 Agni,
chase the demons 5 friends.

HYMN L. Indra.

Bote boons, — may Indra, hitherward turned, listen to this
prayer of ours,

And mightiest Maghavan with thought inclined to us come
near to drink the Soma juice.

2 For him, strong, independent Euler, Heaven and Earth have

fashioned" forth for power and might.

Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, for thy
soul longs for Soma juice.

3 Fill thyself full, 0 Lord of wealth, 0 Indra, with the juice we

shed.

We know thee, Lord of Bay Steeds ! victor in the fight, van-
quishing e’en the invincible.

4 Changeless in truth, 0 Maghavan Indra, let it be as thou in

wisdom wiliest it.

May we, 0 fair of cheek, win booty with thine aid, 0 Thun-
derer, swiftly seeking it.

5 Indra, with all thy saving helps give us assistance, Lord of

power.

For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, Hero,
finder-out of wealth.

6 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well, 0

God, art thou,

For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee. Bring me
whatever thing I ask.

7 For thou, — come to the worshipper! — wilt find great wealth

to make us rich.

Fill thyself full, 0 Maghavan, for gain of kine, full, Indra,
for the gain of steeds.

8 Thou as thy gift bestowest many hundred herds, yea, many

thousands dost thou give.

With singers’ hymns have we brought the Fort-render near,
singing to Indra for his grace.

20 Spell of those who deal in spells: ydttirydtumtfvutdm : ‘torment of the
evil spirits. — Wilson.

1 Both boons: Indra is asked to hear the prayer and to drink the Soma.

HYMN 50.]

TEE KIGYEDA.

203

9 Whether thesimple or the sage, Indra, have offered praise to thee,
He, Satakratu I by his love hath gladdened thee, ambitious !
ever pressing on !

10 If he the Strong of arm, the breaker-down of forts, the great

Destroyer, hear my call,

We, seeking riches cry to Indra, Lord of wealth, to Satakratu
with our lauds.

11 We count not then as sinners, nor as niggardly or foolish men,
When with the Soma juice which we have shed we make Indra,

the Mighty One, our Friend.

12 Him have we yoked in fight, the powerful Conqueror, debt-

claimer, not to be deceived.

Best charioteer, the Victor marks each fault, he knows the
strong to whom he will come near.

13 Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid.

Help us, 0 Maghavan, let thy succour give us this : drive

away foes and enemies.

14 For thou, 0 liberal Lord of bounty, strengthenest his ample

home who worships thee.

So Indi-a, Maghavan, thou Lover of the Song, we with pressed
Soma call on thee.

15 Indra is Yritra-slayer, g^ard, our best defender from the foe.
May he preserve our last and middlemost, and keep watch

from behind us and before,

16 Defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all sides,

Indra, shield us well.

Keep far away from us the terror sent from heaven : keep
impious weapons far away.

17 Protect us, Ind^a, each to-day, each morrow, and each follow-

ing day.

Our singers, through all days, shalt thou, Lord of the brave,
keep safely both by day and night.

IS A crushing Warrior, passing rich is Maghavan, endowed with
all heroic might.

Thine arms, 0 Satakratu, are exceeding strong, arms which
have grasped the thunderbolt.

9 The simple or the sage : < the unskilled or the skilled.’ — Wilson.

12 Marks each fault : the meaning of hhrimdm is uncertain : according to
Ludwig it is ‘his — v.- L r- that is, the worshipper who presents

him with sacrifice ' : . takes it with vdjinam : ‘the strong racer,’ -~

Wilson. The strong : the rich and powerful worshipper.

15 Our last and middlemost : putram, son, being understood, according to
S&yapa. Tbe expression probably means ‘allpf us.’

16* The terror sent from heaven : 1 supernatural alarm.’ —Wilson.

204

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII . ,

HYMN LI. Indra,

Offer ye up as praise to him that wherein Indra takes delight.
The Soma-bringers magnify Indra's great energy with hymns. .
Good are the gifts that Indra gives.

2 Sole among chiefs, companionless, impetuous, and peerless, he
Hath waxen great o’er many folk, yea, over all things horn,

in might.

3 Lord of swift bounty, he will win e’en with a steed of worth-

less sort.

This, Indra, must be told of thee who wilt perform heroic deeds.

4 Come to u§ hither : let us pay devotions that enhance thy

might,

Fur which, Most Potent ! thou wouldst fain bless the man
here who strives for fame.

5 For thou, 0 Indra, makest yet more bold the spirit of the bold
Who with strong Soma serveth thee, still ready with his

reverent prayers.

6 Worthy of song, he looketh down as a man looketh into wells.
Pleased with the Soma-bringer’s skill he maketh him his mate

and friend.

7 In strength and wisdom all the Gods, Indra, have yielded unto.

thee*

Be thou the Guard of all, 0 thou whom many praise.

8 Praised, Indra, is this might of thine, best for the service of

the Gods,

That thou with power dost slay Yritra, 0 Lord of Strength.

9 He makes the races of mankind like synods of the Beauteous

One. *

Indra knows this his manifest deed, and is renowned.

10 Thy might, 0 Indra, at its birth, thee also, and thy mental
power,

In thy care, Maghavan rich in kine ! they have increased
exceedingly.

1 Good are, etc : the refrain is repeated in each verse.

2 Chiefs : nribhih : men, meaning Gods, according to S&jana. Folk : or,
tribes.

3 He will win e'en with a steed of worthless sort : * He...... wishes to bestow

blessings (upon us) with his unurged courser.’ — Wilson.

6 He looketh down .* kindly on us as a thirsty man looks eagerly into a well,
, 9 synods of the Beauteous One : like assemblies that meet to honour
him ; but the meaning is obscure.

10 They : thy worshippers.

TEE Itm VEDA.

m

HYMN 52.]

11 0 Yritra-slayer, thou and I will both combine for winning

spoil.

Even malignity will consent, 0 Bolt-armed Hero, unto us.

12 Let us extol this Indra as truthful and never as untrue.

Dire is his death who pours no gifts : great light bath he who
offers them. Good are the gifts that Indra gives.

HYMN LIL Indra.

With powers of Mighty Ones hath he, Ancient, Beloved, been
equipped,

Through whom the Father Manu made prayers efficacious
with the Gods. *

2 Him, Maker of the sky, let stones wet with the Soma ne'er

forsake,

Nor hymns and prayer that must be said.

3 Indra who knew full well disclosed the kine to the Angirases.
This his great deed must be extolled.

i Indra, promoter of the song, the sage's Strengthener as of old,
Shall come to bless and succour us at presentation of this
laud.

5 Now after their desire's intent the pious singers with the cry
Of Hail ! have sung loffd hymns to thee, Indra, to gain a stall

of kine.

6 With Indra rest all deeds of might, deeds done and yet to be

performed,

Whom singers know devoid of guile.

7 When the Five Tribes with all their men to Indra have sent

out their voice,

And when the priest hath strewn much grass, this is the Friend's
own dwelling-place.

8 This pi'aise is verily thine own : thou hast performed these

manly deeds,

And sped the wheel upon its way.

11 Malignity : or the malignant man. 1 * * 4 * * * 8 The niggard.’ — Wilson.

12 Dire is his death : or, great is bis destruction.

1 This difficult verse is variously interpreted both by Indian commentators

and by European scholars. I follow partly Aufrecht’s translation as given by

Dr. Muir, and partly Ludwig’s Commentary. See 0. S. Texts, I. pp. 163—164;

Ludwig’s Rigveda , Y. pp. 167—168 ; and Wilson’s Translation, Y. p. 107.

The Ancient , Belovbd appears to be Soma and not Indra.

7 The Friend's : Indra’s. The second line is very obscure. See Bergaigne,

I. vi., and Vedic Hymns, I., p. 226. I adopt- Ludwig’s interpretation.

8 The wheel : the Sun.

206

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK VIII.

9 At the o’erflowing of this Steer, boldly he strode for life, and
took

Soma as cattle take their corn.

10 Receiving this and craving help, we, who with you are Daksha’s

sons,

Would fain exalt the Maruts’ Lord. ^

11 Yea, Hero, with the singers we sing to the duly-coming Band. ^
Allied with thee may we prevail.

12 With us are raining Rudras, clouds accordant in call to battle,

at the death of Yritra,

The stronguassigned to him who sings and praises. May Gods
with Indra at their head protect us.

HYMN LIII. Indra.

May our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy bounty,
Thunderer.

Drive off the enemies of prayer.

2 Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts.

Mighty art thou :

There is not one to equal thee.

3 Thou art the Lord of Soma pressed, Soma impressed is also

thine. T

Thou ai't the Sovran of the folk.

4 Come, go thou forth, dwelling in heaven and listening to the

prayers of men :

Thou fillest both the heavens and earth.

5 Even that hill with rocky heights, with hundreds, thousands,

held wilhin,

Thou for thy worshippers brakest through.

6 We call on thee both night and day to taste the flowing Soma

juice :

Do thou fulfil our hearts’ desire.

0 This Steer: Soma; that is, when abundant libations had been offered,
lie : Indra.

1 0 Daksha's sons : of the same origin with you. ‘ Loi-ds of food/ according
to S&j ana.

11 Duly-coming Band: of Maruts, led by Indra.

12 The strong: perhaps the thunderbolt with which Indra aids the wor-

shippei\

3 Unpressed : in its natural state in the stalks of the plant. Or, as Ludwig
suggests, the Soma which Indra drinks in heaven may be meant. See VII.

26. 1.

5 That hill : the cloud with its countless treasures of rain,

6 Night: just before dawn.

»

HYMN 54.] TEE RIGVEDA . 207

7 Where is that ever-youthful Steer, strong-necked and never

yet bent down?

What Brahman ministers to him?

8 To whose libation doth the Steer, betake him with delight

therein ?

Who takes delight in Indra now 1

9 Whom, Yritra-slayer, have thy gifts and hero powers accom-

panied ?

Who is thy dearest in the laud ?

10 For thee among mankind, among the Purus is this Soma shed.

Hasten thou hither : drink thereof. %

11 This, growing by Sushoma and by Saryan&v&n, dear to thee,
In Arjikiya, cheers thee best.

12 Hasten thou hitherward, and drink this for munificence to-day,
Delightful for thine eager draught.

HYMN LIY. indra.

Though, Indra, thou art called by men from east and west,
from north and south,

Come hither quickly with fleet steeds ;

2 If in the effluence of heaven, rich in its light, thou takest joy,
Or in the sea in Soma juice.

3 With songs 1 call thee, Great and Wide, even as a cow to

profit us,

Indra, to drink the Soma-draught.

4 Hither, 0 Indra, let thy Bays bear up and bring upon thy car
Thy glory, God ! and majesty.

5 Thou, Indra, wohldst be sung and praised as great, strong,

lordly in thy deeds :

Come hither, drink our Soma juice.

6 We who have shed the Soma and prepared the feast are call-

ing thee

To sit on this our sacred grass.

10 Among the P4ms : among men, or among Kings named Pfirus. — S&yana,

11 Susho 1 . ■■■ u, y r - river which cannot now be identified. ArjVrtya :■

-i.-i.i r _ . ■. . Saryandvdn is said to be a lake in the district

iee V ui. 1., Index. For conjectures regarding Sushomd and
- Arjildya see Zimmer, Altindisches Leben , pp. 12, 13. Cf. VIII. 7. 29.

2 The effluence of heaven : or the place in heaven from which the Amrit
flows, In the sea : of air ; the firmament.

3 4s a cotv,: as the most useful of all animals.

208 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIII.

7 As, Indra, thou art evermore the common Lord of all alike,
As such we invocate thee now.

8 The men with stones have milked for thee this nectar of the

Soma juice :

Indra, be pleased with it, and drink.

9 Neglect all pious men with skill in sacred song : come hither-

ward

With speed, and give us high renown.

10 Gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the King who gives me

spotted kine,

Kine decked with golden ornaments.

11 Beside a thousand spotted kine I have received a gift of gold,
Pure, brilliant, and exceeding great.

12 Durgaha’s grandsons, giving me a thousand kine, munificent,
Have won renown among the Gods.

HYMN LY. Indra,

Loux> singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows we priests
invoke

With haste, that he may help, as the bard’s Cherisher, Indra
who findeth wealth for you.

2 Whom with fair helm, in rapture of the juice, the firm resist-

less slayers hinder not :

Giver of glorious wealth to him who sing his praise, honouring
him who toils and pours :

3 Sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden goad,

Indra, the Vritra-slayer, urges eagerly the opening of the

stall of kine : *

9 All pious men: all other worshippers.

10 The King : who instituted the sacrifice. According to S&yana, Indra is
meant ; but this is impossible.

12 JDurgaha's grandsons : S&ynna explains durgdhasya by duhlchcim gdha-
mdnasya me } of me plunged in grief, and ndpdtuh (nepotes) as aralcshitasya,
unprotected : ‘ Unprotected as I am, and plunged* in sorrow (my dependents)
by the favour of the gods opfcain food, and are blessed with abundance in a
thousand cattle,’ See Wilson’s Translation, and Cowell’s note.

1 We priests invoice : the constxupidaais-difficult. ' TYollow Ludwig, and take
hm^ an infinitive, as equivalMf to the first person plural.

3 Curry-comb for horses : the purifier of his worshippers and well-skilled in
horses, according to Sayana. Golden goad: wonderful and golden-bodied,
according to Sayana. The meaning of h^jah i as well as of mrikshdk } is uncer-
tain, but both seem to signify instruments connected with horses*

HYMN’ 55.]

THE RIG VEDA.

209

A Who for the worshipper scatters forth ample wealth, even,
though buried, piled in heaps :

May In dr a, Lord of Bay Steeds, fair-helmed Thunderer, act
at his pleasure, as he lists.

5 Hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, even of

old, from men.

All that we offer unto thee, 0 Indra, now, sacrifice, laud, effect-
ual speech.

6 To Soma, Much-invoked, Bolt-armed 1 for thy carouse, Celestial,

S o m a-d r i n k er ! co m e.

Thou to the man who prays and pours the juice hast been
best giver of delightful wealth.

7 Here, verily, yesterday we let the Thunder-wielder drink his fill.
So in like manner offer him the juice to-day. Now range you

by the Glorious One.

8 Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, follows

the path of his decrees.

So graciously accepting, Indra, this our praise, with wondrous
thought come forth to us.

9 What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra hath

not done ]

Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, the Vritra-
slayer from his birth 1

10 How great his power resistless 1 how invincible the Vritra-

slayer’s matchless might 1

Indra excels all usurers who see the clay, excels all traffickers
ill strength.

11 0 Indra, Vritra-slaver, we, thy very constant worshippers,
Bring prayers ne’er heard befure to thee, 0 Much-invoked, 0

Thunder-armed, to be thy meed.

12 0 thou of mighty acts, the aids that are in thee call forward

many an eager hope.

Past the drink-offerings, Vasti, even of the good, hear my
call, Strongest God, and come.

13 Verily, Indra, we are thine, we worshippers depend on thee.
For there is none but only thou to show us grace, O Maghavan,

thou much invoked.

4 Buried : as gold, precious stones, etc.

8 The wolf : according to S&yana, the robber. The reason of mentioning
either in this place is not obvious.

10 Who see the day : who live. According to S&yana, who look upon the
Sun in their present life, but will be sunk in darkness after death.

14

210 THE HYMNS OF [KOOK Vllt

14 From this onr misery and famine set us free, from this dire

curse deliver us.

Succour ns with thine help and with thy wondrous thought.
Most Mighty, finder of the way.

15 Now let your Soma juice be poured : be not afraid, 0 Kali's sons.
This darkening sorrow goes away ; yea, of itself it vanishes.

HYMN LYI. Adityas .

Now pray we to these Kshatriyas, to the Adityas for their aid,
These who are gracious to assist.

2 May Mitra bear ns o'er distress, and Yanina and Aryaman,
Yea, the ^lityas, as they know.

3 For wonderful and meet for praise is these Adityas' saving help
To him who offers and prepares.

4 The mighty aid of you, the Great, Varum, Mitra, Aryaman,
We claim to be our sure defence.

5 Guard us, Adit}'as, still alive, before the deadly weapon strike:
Are ye nob they who hear our call ?

6 What sheltering defence ye have for him who toils in pouring

gifts,

Graciously bless ye us therewith.

7 Adityas, Gods, from sorrow there^is freedom, for the sinless,

wealth,

0 ye in whom no fault is seen.

8 Let not this fetter bind us fast : may he release us for success ;
For strong is Indra and renowned.

9 0 Gods who fain would lend your aid, destroy not us as ye
• destroy

Your enemies who go astray. r

10 And thee too, 0 Great Aditi, thee also, Goddess, I address,
Thee very gracious to assist.

11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thou Mother of

Strong Sons :

Let no one of our seed be harmed.

12 Fai ; -spread ! wide-ruling! grant that w’e, unharmed by envy,

may expand :

Grant that our progeny may live.

14 From this our misei'y : the hymn was ‘ seen ' and employed in a time of
dearth, and famine. Finder of the way : to prosperity.

15 Kali*s sons : Kali is the Rishi or seer of the hymn.

I Kshatriyas : royal princes.

II Of Strong Sons ; the Adityas.

HYMN 57.] THE RIO VEDA.' '211

13 Those who, the Princes of the folk, in native glory, ne’er

deceived,

Maintain their statutes, void of guile —

14 As such, from mouth of ravening wolves, 0 ye Adityas,

rescue us,

Like a bound thief, 0 Aditi.

15 Adityas, let this arrow, yea, let this malignity depart
From us or e’er it strike us dead.

16 For, Bountiful Adityas, we have evermore enjoyed your help,
Both now and in the days of old.

17 To every one, 0 ye Most Wise, who turneth ev^n from sin to

you,

Ye Gods vouchsafe that he may live.

18 May this uew mercy profit us, which, ye Adityas, frees like one
Bound from his bonds, 0 Aditi.

19 0 ye Adityas, this your might is not to be despised by its :

So be ye graciously inclined.

20 Let not Vivasvan’s weapon nor the shaft, Adityas, wrought

with skill,

Destroy us ere old age be nigh

21 On every side dispel all sin, Adityas, all hostility,

Indigence, and combi ue& attack.

HYMN LVII. Indra%

Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for our bliss,
Strong in thy deeds, checking assault, Lord, Mightiest Indra,
of the brave !

2 Great in thy power and wisdom, Strong, with thought that

comprehenderth all !

Thou hast filled full with majesty.

3 Thou very Mighty One, whose hands by virtue of thy greatness

grasp

The golden bolt that breaks its way.

4 Your Lord of might that ne’er hath bent, that ruleth over all

mankind,

I call, that he, as he is wont, may aid the chariots and the
men.

17 Who turneth even from sin : who comes to you for forgiveness.

20 Vivasvdn’s weapon : the deadly bolt of the Sun, or perhaps, metaphor-
cally, of the sacrificer.

21 Combined attach : c the closely drawn neb.’ — Wilson.

2 Thou hast filled full : the universe.

[BOOK VIII

212 THE HYMNS OF

5 Whom, ever furthering, in frays that win the light, in both

the hosts

Men call to succour and to help.

6 Indra, the Strong, the measureless, worthy of praise, Most

Bountiful,

Sole Ruler even over wealth,

7 Him, for his ample bounty, him, this Indra do I urge to

drink,

Who, as his praise was sung of old, the Dancer, is the Lord
of men.

.8 Thou Mighty One, whose friendship none of mortals ever hath
obtained ;

None will attain unto thy might.

9 Aided by thee, with thee allied, in frays for water and for sun,
Bolt-armed ! may we win ample spoil,

10 So seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief Lover of the

Song,

As, in our battles, Indra, thou to Purum&yya gavest help,

11 0 Thunderer, thou whose friendship and whose on ward

guidance both are sweet,

Thy sacrifice must be prepared.

12 To us, ourselves, give ample room, give for our dwelling ample

room :

Give ample roGm to us to live,

13 We count the .banquet of the Gods a spacious pathway for

the men,

And for the cattle, and the car,

14 Six men, yea, two aud two, made glad with Soma juice, come

near to me

With offerings pleasant to the taste.

15 Two brown-hued steeds, Indrota/s gift, two bays from Tfciksha's

son were mine,

From Afivamedha’s son two red.

7 The Dancer : in the dance of war.

10 Purumdyya : according to Sayana, * me (the Rishi) the possessor of
much wisdom/

13 Sacrifice to the Gods procures freedom and security for us and all who
belong to us.

15 ‘ These princes with their respective fathers are the six of V. 14. The
sons of lii/cnfut and A warned ha had originally commenced the sacrifice, but
Indrota and his father AtUhigva came to see it and added their gifts. The
sons alone are mentioned : the son is the father’s second self, pitri-imtnujor
abheddt' — Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation,

BYMJSr 58.]

THE El 0 VEDA. '

2IS

IS From Atithigva good car-steeds, from Arksha rein-obeying
steeds,

From Asvamedha beauteous ones.

17 Indrota, Atithigva’s son, gave me six horses matched with

mares :

And Pubakratu gave besides.

18 Marked above all, amid the brown, is the red mare Yrishanvati,
Obedient to the rein and whip,

19 0 bound to me by deeds of might, not even the man who loves

to blame

Hath found a single fault in you.

HYMN LYIII, - In dr a.

I SEMI) you forth the song of praise for Indu, hero-gladdener.
With hymn and plenty he invites you to complete the saeritice.

2 Thou wishes t for thy kine a bull, for those who long for his

approach,

For those who turn away from him, lord of thy cows whom
none may kill.

3 The dappled kine who stream with milk prepare his draught

of Soma juice :

Clans in the birth-plac^ of the Gods, in the three luminous
realms of heaven.

4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of

the kine,

The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave.

16 Arksha: the son of Riksha. Asvamedha: the son of Asvamedha.

17 PHtakratu : son <5f Asvamedha.

18 Yrishanvati : according to von Roth, e perhaps, that may be found
among stallions/

19 0 hound to me : this stanza is addressed to the princes who instituted
the sacrifice and gave the rewards which have been mentioned.

1 The song of praise : trishHibham : used in a general sense for any hymn
of praise. Indu : Soma. According to Sflyana, Indra is meant.

2 The stanza is difficult. I adopt Pischei’s explanation of naddm and
ddatindm.

3 Clans: vis * : u- Ji1 ' -» cows are meant. Eggeling translates : At

his birth the *■ ' . ■ ■ ■'/■ . speckled ones mix the Soma (draught), the

clans of the gods in the three spheres of the heavens’ (Sacred Books of the
East, XLI. p. 307). Pischel observes : ‘The connexion of the first three
stauzas is probably this : Soma shall he celebrated by you in your song of
praise in order that he may liberally reward you. What thou wishest for
thyself is a bull for the cows, in order that they may be propagated and
provide Indra with milk to be mixed with his Soma juice, while they serve,
the race of Gods in all the three realms of heaven / — Vedische Studien, I,
p. 197.

214 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V1IE

b Hitter his Bay Steeds have been sent, red Steeds are on the
sacred grass

Where we in concert sing our songs.

6 For Indra Thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk

and meath,

What time he found them in the vault.

7 When I and Indra mount on high up to the Bright One’s place

and home,

We, having drunk of meath, will reach his seat whose Friends
are three times seven.

8 Sing, sing forth your songs of praise, ye Priyamedhas, sing

your songs ;

Yea, let young children sing their lauds : as a strong castle
praise ye him.

9 How loudly let the viol sound, the lute send out its voice with

might,

Shrill be the music of the string. To Indra is the hymn up-
raised.

10 When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, easy to be

milked,

Seize quickly, as it bursts away^ the Soma juice for Indra’a
drink.

11 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk : all Deities have drunk

their fill.

Here Yaruna shall have his home, to whom the floods have
sung aloud as mother-kine unto their calves.

12 Thou, Yanina, to whom belong Seven Rivers, art a glorious

God.

The waters flow into thy throat as ’twere a pipe with ample
mouth.

1 3 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessed, to

the worshipper.

6 In the vault: ' in the cavity of the Soma-vessel/ — von Both; ‘on the horizon.’
— Ludwig; ‘near at hand.’— S&yana.

7 The Bright One's place : the station of the Sun. Whose Friends are
three times seven : Indra who is the friend of the Karuts. I follow Ludwig
in combining the trihsuptd sakhyuh of the text into one compound word.,
S.iyana’s explanation is different : ‘let us be united in the twenty-first sphere
of the (universal) friend/— See note in Wilson’s Translation.

^ ?J l€ y^rgarah: ‘a kind of musical instrument’, says Sfiyana.

Godha , originally the leather guard worn by bowmen on the left arm, and
pihgd (said to mean bowstring) are also, apparently, names of musical instru-
ments.

’ 12 Vanina’s throat, or palate, is said to mean the sea, into which the seven
rivers flow.

HY MB 59.] THE Rl'GVEBA. 215

He, the swift Guide, is that fair form that loosed the horses
near at hand.

14 Indra, the very Mighty, holds his enemies in utter scorn.

He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten by his
voice.

15 He, yet a boy exceeding small, mounted his newly-fashioned

car.

He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild mighty buffalo.

16 Lord of the home, f&ir-helmeted, ascend thy chariot wrought

of gold.

We will attend the Heavenly One, the thousan&footed, red of
hue, matchless, who blesses where he goes.

17 With reverence they come hitherward to him as to a Sovran

Lord,

That they may bring him near for this man’s good success, to
prosper and bestow his gifts.

18 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the men of old,
Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred grass, and

spread their sacrificial food.

HYMN LIX. Inch*.

He who, as Sovran Lord # of men, moves with his chariots un-
restrained,

The Vritra-slayer, vanquisher of fighting hosts, preeminent,
is praised with song.

2 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman ! for his aid, in whose sus-

taining hand of old ;

The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the great Sun
was set in heVven.

3 No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens

No, not by sacrifice, to ludra praised of all, resistless, daring,
bold in might

15 His Mother and his Sire: Earth and Heaven. The buffalo is the dark

rain-cloud which Indra pierces with his lightning, or perhaps the demon Yaia
is intended, w

16 The Heavenly One : the Sun, which is Indra's chariot Thousand -footed:
bright with countless rays of light.

17 This mans: who institutes the sacrifice.

2 Puruhanman: the Bishi of the hymn addresses himself. Sustaining:
or vidharturi may (with Ludwig) be taken as a nominative with vdjruh, the
bolt of thunder as a sustamer (of Order).

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOR V1TL

• 4 The potent Conqueror, invincible in war, * him at whose birth
the Mighty Ones,

The Kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens,
earths sent their loud voices out. ,

5 0 Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were

thine —

No, not a thousand Suns could match thee at thy birth, not
both the worlds, 0 Thunderer.

6 Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with might, yea,

all with strength, 0 Strongest One.

Magliavan/rhelp us to a stable full of kine, 0 Thunderer, with
wondrous aids.

7 Let not a godless mortal gain this food, 0 thou whose life is

long !

But one who yokes the bright-hued steeds, the Etasas, even
Indra yoker of the Bays.

8 Urge ye the Conqueror to give, your Indra greatly to be

praised,

To be invoked in shallow waters and in depths, to be invoked
in deeds of might.

9 O Vasu, 0 thou Hero, raise us up to ample opulence.

Baise us to gain of mighty wealtn, 0 Maghavan, 0 Indra, to
sublime renown.

10 Indra, thou justifiest us, and trarnplest down thy slanderers.
Guard thyself, valiant Hero, in thy vital parts : strike down

the Dasa with thy blows.

11 The man who brings no sacrifice, inhuman, godless, infidel,
Him let his friend the mountain cast to rapid death, the

mountain cast the Dasyu down.

12 0 Mightiest Indra, loving us, gather thou up, as grains of corn
Within thine hand, of these their kine, to give away, yea,

gather twice as loving us.

13 0 my companions, wish for power. How may Ave perfect Sara’s

praise,

The liberal princely patron, never to be harmed ?

4 The Kine : the heavens and the earths.

7 Etasas: the horses of the Sun.

10 Jn thy vital parts : literally, between thy thighs,
thy thighs.’ — Wilson. 6

Par

JI His friend: in which he hopes to find refuge:
trvata (mountain) is a Kishi, the friend of Indra.

to TJ tch : ^ ine i ^ ie P m P er ty of the hostile ahorij
I." bur a s praise t Sara mush be the insti tutor c
to Sily ana he is Iudra, ‘the destroyer.’

* Shelter us between
according to Sfiyana,

igines.

institutor of the sacrifice ; according

HYMN 60.]

THE RIGVEDA.

217

14 By many a sage whose grass is trimmed thou art continually

praised,

That thou, 0 Sara, hast bestowed here one and here another
calf.

15 The noble, Suradeva’s son, hath brought a calf, led by the ear,

to three of ns,

As a chief brings a goat to milk.

HYMN LX. Agni .

0 Agni, with thy mighty wealth guard us from all malignity,
Yea, from all hate of mortal man. m

2 For over thee, 0 Friend from birth, the wrath of man hath

no control :

Nay, Guardian of the earth art thou.

3 As such, with all the Gods, 0 Son of Strength, auspicious in

thy flume,

Give us wealth bringing all things good.

4 Malignities stay not from wealth the mortal man whom, Agni,

thou

Protectest while he offers gifts.

5 Sage Agni, he whom thou dost urge, in worship of the Gods,

to wealth,

With thine assistance winneth kine.

C Riches with many heroes thou hast for the man who offers gifts :
Lead thou ns on to higher bliss.

7 Save ns, 0 JAtavedas, nor abandon us to him who sins,

Unto the evil-hearted man.

8 0 Agni, let no godless man avert thy bounty as a God :

Over all treasures thou art Lord.

9 So, Son of Strength, thou aidest us to what is great and

excellent,

Those, Vasu 1 Friend ! who sing thy praise.

10 Let our songs come anear to him beauteous and bright with
piercing flame,

Our offerings, with our homage, to the Lord of wealth, to
him whom many praise, for help :

14 Here one and here another : tkam-ekam : meaning many.

15 S&radevas son : Sara. S&yana explains saumdevi/ah as cows won in

battle. ‘ May Maghavan, taking them by the ears, lead the cows with their
calves from our three (destructive enemies), , as the owner leads a goat to
drink.’— Wilson.

2 Guardian of the earth : kshrfpdvdn : * Lord of the night.’ — S&yana.

5 Winneth kine : literally, is a goer among cows : ‘ walks (lord) among
crowds of cattle.*— Wilson,

218 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIIF

11 To Agni Jatavedas, to the Son of Strength, that lie may give

us precious gifts,

Immortal, from of old Priest among mortal men, the most
delightful in the house :

12 Agni, made yours by sacrifice, Agni, while holy rites advance;
Agui, the first in songs, first with the warrior steed ; Agni to

win the land for us.

13 May Agni who is Lord of wealth vouchsafe us food for friend-

ship sake.

Agni we ever seek for seed and progeny, the Vasu who
protects flour lives.

14 Solicit with your chants, for help, Agni theGod witlipiercingflame,
For riches famous Agni, Pummilha and ye men ! Agni to

light our dwelling well.

15 Agni we laud that he may keep our foes afar, Agni to give ns

health and strength.

Let him as Guardian be iuvoked in all the tribes, the lighter-
up of glowing brands.

HYMN LXL Agni.

Prepare oblation : let him come ; and let the minister serve again
Who knows the ordering thereof. *

2 Rejoicing in his friendship, let the priest be seated over man,
Beside the shoot of active power.

3 Him, glowing bright beyond all thought, they seek among the

race of man ;

With him for tongue they seize the food.

4 He hath inflamed the twofold plain ; life-giving, he hath

climbed the wood,

And with his tongue hath struck the rock.

12 With the warrior steed : arvati ; the fierce and rapid fire that clears the
jungle for the advance of the Aryan settlers.

14 To light our 'dwelling well : I follow Ludwig’s explanation. Sftyana
hikes sudUdye as a proper name : f a house for (me) Suditi.’ — Wilson.

15 'The lighter -up of glowing brands : vusturrishilnttm : according to S&yana,

( the giver of homes to us Bishis.’

The language of the hymn is intentionally obscure, and much of my
translation (in which I generally follow Ludwig) must be regarded as
conjectural.

1 Let him come : Agui. The minister : or, the Adhvaryu.

2 The shoot : Agni, according to S&yana : the stalks of the Soma-plant,
according to von Both.

3 They seek : that is, the Gods.

4 The twofold plain, ; the expanses of earth and heaven. Climbed the wood:
a forest conflagration is referred to.

BYMN 61.] TEE RIQYEDA.

n 0

5 Wandering liere the radiant Calf finds none to fetter him, and

seeks

The Mother to declare his praise.

6 And now that great and .mighty team, the team of horses that

are his,

And traces of his car, are seen.

7 The seven milk a single cow ; the two set other five to work.
On the stream's loud-resounding bank.

8 Entreated by Vivas van's ten, Indra cast down the water-jar
With threefold hammer from the sky.

9 Three times the newly-kindled flame proceeds around the

sacrifice :

The priests anoint it with the meath.

10 With reverence they drain the fount that circles with its

wheel above,

Exhaustless, with the mouth below.

11 The pressing-stones are set at work : the meath is poured into

the tank,

At the out-shedding of the fount.

12 Ye cows, protect the fount : the two Mighty Ones bless the

sacrifice. m

The handles twain are wrought of gold.

13 Pour on the juice the ornament which reaches both the heaven

and earth :

Supply the liquid to the Bull.

5 The radiant Calf: Agni in the form of lightning. Here: in the aky
above us. The Mother ; the cloud, which will praise him with a thunder-psalm.

7 The seven : officiating priests, or assistants. See II. 1. 2. A single cow:
the text has only ikdm. (imam). Sflyana supplies, cow, which he explains as the
qharma pitcher or caldron used for heating milk, etc., in the Pi avargya ceie-
iaouy. Loud-resounding bank; with. reference to the sacrificial exclamations,
uttered by the officiating priests. The two : the Adhvaryu and the Pmtipras-
th&tar, his Assistant, direct the five others in the performance of the ceremony.

8 Entreated by Viva&vdn’s ten; according to Styana. the ten fingers of the
worshipper. Ten priests are probably meant. Indra ; Agni or Adi by a may be
meant. — Siyana. The water-jar ; the raiuy cloud. Mummery meaning, pro-
bably, the isigiag lightning. S&yana explains it by ra sound, with his ray.

10 The fount; avatthn : the gharnia or mahdvira , the contents of which are
poured into the fire. Its wheel : apparently, the circular run on which it
usually stands and which is now inverted that all the liquid may flow out.
According to Hillebrandt ( Vedische Mythology I. 325) the fount is the Moon,

12 The two Mighty Ones: Heaven and Earth. But as the meaning of
rapsudd is unknown, the sentenoe can be only con]eoturally translated: a he
two kinds of milk) in the sacrifice are plentiful and fmib-gmng. —Wilson.

13 The ornament: the milk which is mingled with the Soma. To the Bull;
to Agni.

[BOOK VIII :

220 HYMNS OF

14 These know their own abiding-place : like calves beside- the

mother cows

They meet together with their kin,

15 Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food .

in heaven,

To ludra, Agni light and prayer*

16 The Pious One milked out rich food, sustenance dealt in por-

tions seven,

Together with the Sun’s seven rays.

IT I took some Soma when the Sun rose up, 0 Mitra, Yaruna.
That is the sick man’s medicine.

18 From where oblations must be laid, which is the Well-belovkTs
home,

He with his tongue hath compassed heaven.

HYMN LXII. Asvins.

House ye for him who keeps the Law, yoke your steeds,
Asvins, to yonr car :

Let your protecting help be near*

2 Come, Asvins, with your car more swift than is the twinkling

of an eye : r

Let your protecting help be near*

3 Asvins, ye overlaid with cold the fiery pit for Atri’s sake :

Let your protecting help be near.

4 Where are ye? whither are ye gone? whither, like falcons,

have ye flown ?

Let your protecting help be near.

5 If ye at any time this day are listening to this my call,

Let your protecting help be near.

6 The Asvins, first to hear our prayer, for closest kinship I

approach :

Let'your protecting help he near.

7 For Afri ye, 0 .Asvins, made a dwelling-place to shield him well.
Let your protecting help be near,

14 These know: the cows know, and come to, the place where they are to
he milked for sacrificial purposes as well as they know their own stable,

15 Devouring : perhaps the flames ; but the stanza is obscure.

1 6 The Pious One : Agni. Dealt in portions seven : one for each priest.

18 This Well-beloved's home: * the place which I, the eager offerer, choose.*
— Wilson. Haryatd, ‘the well-beloved,’ is perhaps the Soma.

1 Who keeps the Law : which enjoins sacrifice. The Rishi means himself.

3 For Atri's sake : see I. 116. 8*

THE RIO VEDA.

HYMN 62..]

221

8 Ye warded off the fervent heat for Atri when he sweetly spake :
Let your protecting help be near.

9 Erst Saptavadhri by his prayer obtained the trenchant edge

of fire:

Let your protecting help be near.

10 Come hither, 0 ye Lords of wealth, and listen to this call of

mine :

Let your protecting help be near.

11 What is this praise told forth of you as Elders in the ancient

way %

Let your protecting help be near. r

12 One common brotherhood is yours, Asvins, your kindred is the

same :

Let your protecting help be near.

13 This is your chariot, Asvins, which speeds through the regions,

earth and heaven :

Let your protecting aid be near.

14 Approach ye hitherward to us with thousands both of steeds

and kine :

Let your protecting help be near.

15 Pass us not by, remember us with thousauds both of kine

and steeds ;

Let your protecting help be near.

16 The purple tinted Dawu bath risen, and true to Law hath made

the light :

Let your protecting help be near.

17 He looked upon the Asvins, as an axe-armed man upon a tree :
Let your protecting help be near.

18 By the black band encompassed round, break it down, bold

one, like a fort.

Let your protecting help be near.

9 Saptavadhri : see V. 78. 6. His release seems to have been effected by
employing fire. But see Myriantheus, Die Aqrins, pp. 88, 90.

11 ‘ Why is this Repeated invocation) addressed to you as if you were
decrepit like old men ? ’ — Wilson.

12 One common brotherhood : as twin children of the consort of Vivasv&n/
the Sun.

17 The meaning is obscure. ‘ Asvins, the ■■ ’ ,,M1 : .■ 1 (sun cleaves

the darkuess) as the woodman with his axe a t .- . ■'» ' 'h [the demon]

looked at the Asvins. Grassmaun.

18 The first line is said by Siiyana to be addressed to Saptavadhri. It

seems to express ■ ■ 1 " ' ■* : before an attack upon a Ddsa enemy.

But see Myriantt- . .V ■ ; r ; ■ 20.x,

[BOOK VIII.

222 THE hymns of

HYMN LXTII. Agni.,

Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify
in speech

Agui your dear familiar Friend, the darling Guest in every
home.

’ 2 Whom, served with sacrificial oil like Mitra, men presenting gifts
Eulogize with their songs of praise ;

3 Much-lauded Jatavedas, him who bears oblations up to heaven

Prepared in service of the Gods.

4 To noblest Agni, Friend of man, best Vritra-slayer, are we come,
Him in whose presence Kiksha’s son, mighty Srutarvan, waxes

great ;

5 To deathless Jatavedas, meet for praise, adored with sacred oil,
"Visible through the gloom of n ; ght;

6 Even Agni whom these priestly men worship with sacrificial

gifts,

With lifted ladles offering them.

7 0 Agni, this our newest hymn hath been addressed from us‘ to

thee,

0 cheerful Guest, well-born, most wise, worker of wonders,
ne’er deceived.

«

8 Agni, may it be dear to thee, most grateful, and exceeding

sweet :

Grow mightier, eulogized therewith.

9 Splendid with splendours may it be, and in the battle with

the foe

Add loftier glory to thy fame.

10 Steed, cow, a lord of heroes, bright like Jndra, who shall fill

the car,

Whose high renown ye celebrate, and people praise each glo-
rious deed.

11 Thou whom Gopavana made glad with song, 0 Agni Angiras,
Hear this my call, thou Holy One.

12 Thou whom the priestly folk implore to aid the gathering of

the spoil,

Such be thou in the fight with foes.

1 I follow Ludwig in his interpretation of this stanza, the construction of
which is difficult.

2 Like Mitra : or as a friend ; or like the Sun. — S&yana.

10 Steed, cow : there is no verb to govern these accusatives. Perhaps, let
it, that is, the hymn, give, may be understood. S&yana explains g dm, cow,
by gantdram, goer. * (Worship) ye men, the bright (Agni) who goes like a
horse and fills our chariots (with spoil).’ — Wilson.

tlYMN 64.] THE RIO VEDA. m

13 1, called to him who reels with joy, Srufcarvan, Biksha's son,

shall stroke

The heads of four presented steeds, like .the long wool of fleecy
rams.

14 Four coursers with a splendid car, Savistha’s horses, fleet of foot,
Shall bring me to the sacred feast, as flying steeds brought

Tugm’s son.

15 The very truth do I declare to thee, Parushnt, mighty flood.
Waters ! no man is there who gives more horses than Savishr

tha gives.

HYMN LXIV. * Agni.

Yoke, Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who best invite the Gods ;
As ancient Herald seat thyself.

2 And, God, as skilfnllest of all, call for us hitherward the Gods :
Give all our wishes sure effect.

3 For thou, Most Youthful, Son of Strength, thou to whom

sacrifice is paid,

Art holy, faithful to the Law.

4 This Agni, Lord of wealth and spoil hundredfold, thousand-

fold, is head

And chief of riches andti Sage.

5 As craftsmen bend the felly, so bend at our general call : come

nigh,

Angiras, to the sacrifice.

6 Now, 0 Virupa, rouse for him, Strong God who shines at early

morn,

Fair praise with voice that ceases not.

7 With missile of this Agni, his who looks afar, will we lay low
The thief in combat for the kine.

8 Let not the Companies of Gods fail us, like Dawns that float

away,

Like cows who leave the niggardly.

14 Tugra's son ; Bhujyu. See Vol. I., Index.

1 5 Parushnt : now the RAvi, the river on whose bank Srutarvan offered

his sacrifice.

1 A ncient Herald : or, chief Invoker,

6 Virilpcv : the Rishi of the hymn who addresses himself. Who shines at
early morn : or, aspiring heavenward.

7 The thief : the hymn is a prayer for aid in an expedition for the recovery
of stolen cattle.

8 Like Da tuns that float away : Hike cows that bathe them in the stream/
according to the explanation given in the St. Petersburg Lexicon. Like cows
who leave ike niggardly ; 1 the kine abandon not a little (calf).’ — Wilson.

224

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK VIIL

9 Let not the sinful tyranny of any fiercely-hating foe
Smite us, as billows smite a ship.

10 0 Agni, God, the. people sing reverent praise to thee for

strength :

With terrors trouble thou the foe.

11 Wilt thou not, Agni, lend us aid in winuing cattle, winning

wealth %

Maker of room, make room for us.

12 lu this great battle cast us not aside as one who bears a load :
Snatch up the wealth and win it all.

13 0 Agni, lee this plague pursue and fright another and not us :
Make our impetuous strength more strong.

14 The reverent or unwearied man whose holy labour he accepts,

, Him Agni favours with success.

15 Abandoning the foeman’s host pass hither to this company :
Assist the men with whom I stand.

16 As we have kuown thy gracious help, as of a Father, long ago,
So now we pray to thee for bliss,

HYMN LXV. Indra.

Not to forsake me, I invoke this Indra girt by Maruts, Lord
Of magic power who rules with might.

2 This Indra with his Marut Friends clave into pieces Vritra’s

head

With hundred -knotted thunderbolt.

3 Indra, with Marut Friends, grown strong, hath rent asunder

Vritra, and

Eel eased the waters of the sea. a

4 This is that Indra who, begirt by Maruts, won the light of

heaven

That he might drink the Soma juice.

5 Mighty, impetuous, begirt by Maruts, him who loudly roars,
Indra we iuvocate with songs.

6 Indra begirt by Maruts we invoke after the ancient plan,

That he may drink the Soma juice.

7 0 liberal Indra, Marut- girt, much-lauded Satakrafcu, drink
The Soma at this sacrifice.

8 To thee, 0 Indra, Marut-girt, these Soma juices, Thunderer!
Are offered from the heart with lauds.

3 Of the sea : of the firmament or ocean of air.

HYMN 66.]

THE HIGVEDA.

225

9 Drink, Indra, with thy Marat Friends, pressed Soma at the
morning rites,

Whetting thy thunderbolt with strength.

10 Arising iu thy might, thy jaws thou shookest, Indra, having

quaffed

The Soma which the mortar pressed.

11 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy

fearful roar,

What time thou smotest Dasyus dead.

12 From Indra have I measured out a song eight-footed with nine

parts,

Delicate, faithful to the Law. *

HYMJST LXYI. Indra.

Scarcely was Satakratu born when of his Mother he inquired,
Who are the mighty ? Who are famed 1

. 2 Then Savasi declared to him Aurnavabha, Ahisuva :

Son, these be they thou must overthrow.

3 The Yrifcra-slayer smote them all as spokes are hammered in-

to naves :

The Dasyu-killer waxed in might.

4 Then Indra at a single draught drank the contents of thirty

pails,

Pails that were filled with Soma juice.

5 Indra in groundless realms of space pierced the Gandharva

through, that he

Might make the Brahmans’ strength increase.

11 Complained to thee : iu terror. When uttering thy fearful roar : the
meaning of Jcrdhshamctnam , rendered thus conjecturally, is uncertain.

12 Eight-footed with nine parts: the hymn consists of triplets, each of

which contains nine Phdas, parts or half-lines, of eight feet or syllables each.
That is, the metre is octosyllabic (8 x 3), and the triplet coutains three stanzas
in that metre, or nine octosyllabic PMas. From Indra : originating in him
as its subject or inspirer. Puithful to the Law: closely connected with
sacrifice.

1 Op. VIII. 45. 4.

2 Savast: or, the Mighty One, Xndra’s Mother. Aurnavdbha : or Urnav&bha’s
son. * See VIII. 32. 26. These: and other fiends, as t6, these, is plural.

4 Pails : or bowls ; literally, lakes. The meaning of the word hdnuM in
this stanza is uncertain. It appears to be an adjective qualifying sardnsi
pails or lakes. See note in Wilson’s Translation.

5 The Gandharva : a heavenly being who dwells in the region of the air
and guards the celestial Soma, that is, the rain. See I. 22. 14, and 163. 2.
According to S&yana, the Gandharva is the rain-cloud itself, which Indra shat-
tered, and so released the f ertiliziog water.

15

223 Ml HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII,

6 Djowh from the. mountains Indra shot hither his well-directed

shaft :

He gained the ready brew of rice.

7 One only is. that shaft of thine, with thousand feathers, hunch

red barbs,

Which, Indra, thou hast made thy friend.

8 Strong as the Ribhus at thy birth, therewith to those who

praise thee, men

And women, bring thou food to eat.

9 By thee these exploits were achieved, the mightiest deeds,

abundantly :

Firm in thy heart thon settest them.

10 All these things Vishnu brought, the Lord of ample stride

whom thou hadsfc sent —

A hundred buffaloes, a brew of rice and milk : and Indra
slew the ravening boar.

11 Most deadly is thy bow, successful, fashioned well ; good is

thine arrow, decked with gold.

Warlike and well equipped thine arms are, which increase
sweetness for him who drinks the sweet.

HYMN LXVIL indra.

Being us a thousand, Indra, as our guerdon for the Soma
juice :

Hundreds of kine, 0 Hero, bring.

2 Bring cattle, bring us ornament, bring ns embellishment and
steeds,

Give us, besides, two rings of gold.

6 The stanza is similarly explained by Sdyana. Indra smote the rain from
the clouds, and obtained food fpr men.

7 One only : Iudra alone is the wielder of the thunderbolt.

10 All these things: the buffaloes or dark clouds, and the rice and milk ojr
fertilizing rain. Slew ; the Verb is supplied by S&) ana. The ravening hoar :
Vritra. Cf. I. 61. 7, where the deed is similarly related. See Prof. A. A, Mac-
donell, Journal F. A. Society , 1895, p. 186.

11 Which increase sweetness /or him who drinks the sweet : this is Ludwig’s
interpretation of two very difficult words which mean according to Wilson’s
Translation, ( destructively overthrowing, destructively piercing ; ’ according
to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, 1 2 * 4 like two bees delighting in sweetness ; * and
according to Grassmann, ‘ sweetness loves thy two lips.’

1 A thousand: cowp, understood.

2 Two rings : the meaning of mand here is somewhat uncertain. See Max

Midler, India, What can it Teach ns ? pp 125. 126 ; Weber, Fpisches im Vedis -

then Ritual, p. 80 ; and Zimmer, Altindisches Lehen , pp. $0, 51.

HXMN aa.] T&3 BXGVEDA. 227

3 Apd, Bold One, bring in ample store rich jewels to adorn th^ ear,
For thou, Good Lord, art far renowned.

4 None other is there for the priest? Hero ! but, thou, to give

him gifts,

To win much spoil and prosper him.

5 Indra can never be brought low, Sakra can never be subdued ;
He heareth and? beholdeth alj.

6 He spieth out the wrath of man, he who can never be deceived :
Ere blame can come he marketh it.

7 He hath his stomach full of might, the Yritra-slayer, Conqueror,
The Soma-drinker, ordering all.

8 In thee all treasures are combined, Soma ! all*blessM things

in thee,

Uninjured, easy to bestow.

9 To thee speeds forth my hope. that craves the gift of corn, and

kine and gold,

Yea, craving horses, speeds to thee.

10 Indra, through hope in thee alone even this sickle do I grasp.
Fill my hand, Maghavan,’ with all that it can hold qf barley
cut or gathered up.

HYMN LXVIII. Soma.

This here is Soma, ne’er restrained, active, all-conquering
bursting forth, *

E-ishi and Sage by sapience.

2 All that is bare he covers o’er, all that is sick he medicines :
The blind man sees, the cripple walks.

3 Thou, Soma, givest wide defence against the hate of alien men,
Hatreds that waste and weaken us.

4 Thou by thine insight and thy skill, Impetuous One, from

heaven and earth
Drivest the sinner’s enmity.

5 When to their task they come with zeal, may they obtain the

Giver’s grace,

And satisfy his wish who thirsts.

8 Soma: here said to mean Indra himself.

10 * It would appear as if the field were a barren one and the poet sought
from Indra a harvest which he had not sown.’ — Wilson.

1 Bursting forth : according to S&yana, causing (fruit) to spring forth.

4 Impetuous One : rijishin : according to S&yana, ‘ possessed of the remains
or dregs of the Soma juice offered in the third advance. 7

5 They: the*priests. The Giver's: bountiful 'Inca’s. His wish,; Indra’*
longing for Soma-libations,

228 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Y1IL

6 So may he find what erst was lost, so may he speed the pious

man,

And lengthen his remaining life.

7 Gracious, displaying tender love, unconquered, gentle in thy

thoughts,

Be sweet, 0 Soma, to our heart.

8 0 Soma, terrify us not; strike us not with alarm, 0 King :
Wound not our heart with dazzling flame.

9 When in my dwelling-place I see the wicked enemies of Gods,
King, chase their hatred far away, thou Bounteous One,

dispel our foes.

HYMK LXIX. Indra.

0 Satakrattj, truly I have made none else my Comforter.
Indra, be gracious unto us.

2 Thou who hast ever aided us kindly of old to win the spoil,

As such, 0 Indra, favour us,

3 What now % As prompter of the poor thou helpest him who

sheds the juice.

Wilt thou not, Indra, strengthen us %

4 0 Indra, help our chariot on, yea, Thunderer, though it lag

behind :

Give this my car the foremost place.

5 Ho there ! why sittest thou at ease $ Make thou my ohariot

to be first :

And bring the fame of victory near.

6 Assist our car that seeks the prize. What can be easier for

thee ?

So make thou us victorious.

7 Indra, be firm : a fort art thou. To thine' appointed place

proceeds

The auspicious hymn in season due.

8 Let not our portion be disgrace. Broad is the oourse, the prize

is set,

The barriers are opened wide.

9 This thing we wish, that thou mayst take thy fourth, thy
sacrificial name.

So art thou held to be our Lord.

« —

9 The wicked enemies : or, the enmities ; that is, when I see that the Gods

are displeased with me.

4 The hymn is a prayer for success in a coming chariot race.

7 To thine appointed place : ‘to thee the repelier (of enemies),’ — Wilson.

9 Thy fourth, thy sacrificial name : the other three, according to S&yana, are
the constellation-name, the secret name, and the revealed name.

■ ybe EiavEDA.

Hymn ?i.]

229

.10 Ekadyii hath exalted you, Immortals : both Goddesses and
Gods hath he delighted.

Bestow upou him bounty meet for praises. May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LXX. Indra.

Indra, God of the mighty arm, gather for us with thy right
hand

Manifold and nutritious spoil.

2 We know thee mighty in thy deeds, of mighty bounty, mighty

wealth,

Mighty in measure, prompt to aid. c

3 Hero, when thou art fain to give, neither may Gods nor

mortal men

Restrain thee like a fearful Balk
4c Come, let us glorify Indra, Lord supreme of wealth, Self-
ruling King :

In bounty may he harm us not.

5 Let prelude sound and following chant : so let him hear the

Sam an sung,

And with his bounty answer us.

6 0 Indra, with thy right hand bring, and with thy left remem-

ber us: *

Let us not lose our share of wealth.

7 Come nigh, 0 Bold One, boldly bring hither the riches of

the churl

Who giveth least of all the folk.

8 Indra, the booty which thou hast with holy singers to receive,
Even that booty win with us.

9 Indra, thy swiftly-coming spoil, the booty which rejoices all,
Sounds quick in concert with our hopes.

HYMN LXXI. Indra.

Haste forward to us from afar, or, Vritr a- slayer, from anear,
To meet the offering of the meath.

10 The Gods in general are the deities of this stanza. Ulcady'd is the seer of
the hymn. He, enriched with prayer : Indra, exalted by our hymn.

5 Let prelude sound : prd stoshadMipagdsishat : let the prastotar and the ud-
gdtar, two of the officiating priests at the chanting of a Sam an, discharge their
functions : the former singing the prelude and -the latter the accompaniment.

8 Win with us : make us thy. allies.

9 Sounds in concert with our hopes : answers to our , expectation, perhaps
as Ludwig thinks, the word * sounds * refers to the herd of cattle which pro-
bably constituted the spoil that is spoken of.

* 3#0 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK Tiff.

% Strong are the Soma-draughts ; come nigh : the juices fill thee
with delight :

Drink boldly even ’as thou art wont,

3 Joy, Indra, in the strengthening food : let it content thy wish

and thought,

And be delightful to thine heart.

4 Come to us thou who hast no foe : we call thee down to hymns

of praise,

In heaven’s sublimes t realm of light.

5 This Soma here expressed with stones and dressed with milk

for thy carouse,

Indra, i-s offered up to thee,

6 Graciously, Iudra, hear my call. Come and obtain the draught,

and sate

Thyself with juices blent with milk.

7 The Soma, Indra, which is shed in chalices and vats for thee,
Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof.

8 The Soma seen within the vats, as in the flood the Moon is seen,
Driuk thou, for thou art Lord thereof.

9 That which the Hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, through

the air to thee,

Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof.

HYMN LXXII. Visvedevas,

We choose unto ourselves that high protection of the Mighty Gods
That it may help and succour us.

2 May they be ever our allies, Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman,
Far-seeing Gods who prosper us.

3 Ye fuTlherers of holy Law, transport us safe* o’er many woes,

As over water-floods in ships.

4 Dear wealth be Aryaman to us, Yaruna dear wealth meet for

praise :

Dear wealth we choose unto ourselves.

5 For Sovrans of dear wealth are ye, A<iityas, not of sinner's

wealth,

Ye sapient Gods who slay the Joe.

6 We in our homes, ye Hounteoijp Ones, and while we journey

on the road,

Invoke you, Gods, to prosper us.

8 Moon ; in allusion to the double meaning of Soma, the p'lau't and its
juice, and the Hoon.

9 The Hawk ; see I, 80. 2, and 93. d.

HYMN 74.]

THE MiaVEDA,

5231

7 Regard its, Indra, Vishiiu, here, ye Asvins and the Marufc host,
Us who are kith and kin to you.

8 Ye Bounteous Ones, from time of old we heire set forth our

brotherhood,

Our kinship in the Mother’s womb.

9 Then come with Indra for your chief, at early day, ye Boun-

teous Gods :

Yea, I address you now for this.

HYMN LXXIII. Agiii.

Agni, your dearest Guest, I laud, him who is loving as a friend,
Who brings us riches like a car. €

2 Whom as a far-foreseeing Sage the Gods have, from the olden

time,

Established among mortal men.

3 Do thou. Most Youthful God, protect the men who offer, heat

their songs.

And of thyself preserve their seed,
i What is the praise wherewith, 0 God, Anglras, Agni, Son ot
Strength,

We, after thine own wish and thought,

5 May serve thee, 0 thou 0hild of Power, and with what sacri-

fice’s plan ?

What prayer shall I now speak to thee f

6 Our God, make all of us to dwell in happy habitations, and
Reward our songs with spoil and wealth.

7 Lord of the house, what plenty fills the songs which thou ins-

pires t now,

Thou whose hymn helps to win the kine?

8 Him Wise and Strong they glorify, the foremost Champion in

the fray,

And mighty in his dwelling-place.

9 Agni, he dwells in rest and. peace who smites and no one smites

again :

With hero sons he prospers well.

HYMN LXXIY. Asvins.

To this mine invocation, 0 ye Asvins, ye Nasatyas, eome,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

8 In the Mother's womb ; as common children of Aditi the General Mother

of all living beings. , „ , , ,

$ And ofthr/wlf preserve their seed ; or, and guard our offspring and ourselves.

9 Me : the faithful worshipper.

m TDK HYMNS OF [BOOK TIJI .

,2 This laud of mine, ye Asvins Twain, and this mine invitation
hear,

. To drink the savoury Soma juice.

3 Here Krishna is invoking you, 0 Asvins, Lords of ample wealth,
To drink the savoury Soma juice.

4 List, Heroes, to the singer's call, the call of Krishna lauding

y ou ?

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

5 Chiefs, to the sage who sings your praise grant an inviolable

home,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

6 Come to the worshipper's abode, Asvins, who here is lauding

you,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

7 Yoke to the firmly -jointed car the ass which draws you, Lords

of wealth,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

8 Come hither, Asvins, on your car of triple form with triple seat,
To drink the savoury Soma juice.

9 0 Asvins, 0 Nasatyas, now accept with favouring grace my

songs, *

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

HYMN LXXV. Asvins.

Ye Twain are wondrous strong, well-skilled in arts that heal,
both bringers of delight, ye both won Dakylm's praise.
Visvaka calls on yon as such to save his life. Break ye not
off our friendship, come and set me free.

2 How shall he praise you now who is distraught in mind? Ye
Twain give wisdom for the gain of what is good.

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not
off our friendship, come and set me free.

5 To drink : so that ye may drink.

7 The ass: cf. I. 34. 9 ; 116. 2 ; and 162. 21.

8 Of triple form with triple seat : see I. 34. 2, 9.

The Kislii is Visvaka son of Krishna.

1 Daksha’s praise : on the occasion mentioned in I. 116. 2 ; or when the
Asvins won Sfiryd for their bride, I. 116. 17. To save his life: according to
h-Ayana, ‘for the sake of his son.’ ■ Come and set me free: ‘flying loose (your
reins and gallop hither).’ — Wilson. ‘ Unyoke your horses.’— Grassmann,

2 Distraught vn mind : referring either to Visvaka himself, or the man for
whom lie invokes the Asvins’ aid. According to S&yana, Viman&li (distraught
in uuudj here 13 the name of a Kishi.

THE PIGVEDA.

238

HYMH 76.]

3 Already have ye Twain, possessors of great wealth, prospered
, Vishn&pu thus for gain of what is good.

Visvaka calls on yon as such to save his life. Break ye not
off our friendship, come and set me free.

4 And that Impetuous Hero, winner of the spoil, though he is

far away, we call to succour us,

Whose gracious favour, like a father’s, is most sweet. Break
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free.

5 About the holy Law toils Savitar the God : the horn of holy

Law hath he spread far and wide.

The holy Law hath quelled even mighty men qf war. Break
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free.

HYMN LXXVI. Asvins,

Splendid, 0 Asvins, is your praise. Come, fountain-like, to
pour the stream.

Of the sweet juice effused — dear is it, Chiefs, in heaven — drink
like two wild-bulls at a pool.

2 Drink the libation rich in sweets, 0 Asvins Twain : sit. Heroes,

on the sacred grass.

Do ye with joyful heart in the abode of man preserve his life
by means of wealth. ^

3 The Pr iyamedhas bidy on come wi th all th e succours that are yours.
Come to his house whose holy grass is trimmed, to dear sacri-
fice at the morning rites.

4 Drink ye the Soma rich in meath, ye Asvins Twain : sit gladly

on the sacred grass.

So, waxen mighty, to out eulogy from heaven come ye as wild-
bulls to the pool.

5 Come to us, 0 ye Asvins, now with steeds of many a varied hue,
Ye Lords of splendour, wondrous, borne on paths of gold,

drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law.

6 For we the priestly singers, fain to hymn your praise, invoke

you for the gain, of strength. •

So, wondrous, fair, and famed for great deeds come to us,
through our hymn, Asvins, when ye hear.

3 YisJindpH: the It i shi’s son or grandson.

4 Thai Impetuous Hero ; Indra. ‘ These two verses/ says Grassmaun, 4 are
taken from another hymn. Verse 6 is addressed to Savitar, and verse 4, as
it appears, to Indra. The refrain, which is altogether unsuitable here, has
been added in order to connect the verses with the preceding hymn.’

2 The libation : gharmdm ; the heated milk or other beverage, pr the vessel
in which it is heated.

3 The Pr iyamedhas : Priyamedha and his family.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII T,

HYMN LXXVII. Indra.

As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our songs we
glorify

This Indra, even your Wondrous God who checks attack, who
joys in the delicious juice.

2 Celestial, bounteous Giver, girt about with might, rich, moun-

tain-like, in precious things,

Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, brought
hundredfold and thousandfold.

3 Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar thy way.
None stay^that act of thine when thou wouldst fain give

wealth to one like me who sings thy praise.

4 A Warrior thou by strength, wisdom, and wondrous deed, in

might excellest all that is.

Hither may this our hymn attract thee to our help, the hymn
which Gotamas have made.

5 For in thy might thou stretchest out beyond the boundaries

of heaven.

The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. After thy
Godhead hast thou waxed.

6 When, Maghavan, thou honourest the worshipper, no one is

there to stay thy wealth. *

Most liberal Giver thou, do thou inspire our song of praise,
that we may win the spoil.

HYMN LXXVIII, Indrfc.

To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts ! that slays the Vritras best*
Whereby the Holy Ones created fur the God the light divine
that ever wakes.

2 Indra who quells the Curse blew Curses far away, and then in

splendour came to us.

Indra, refulgent with thy Marut host ! the Gods strove eagerly
to win thy Live.

3 Sing to your lofty Indra, sing, Maruts, a holy hymn of praise.
Let Satakratu, Vritra-slayer, kill the foe with hundred-knotted

thunderbolt.

1 As cows : the cows who are milked for sacrificial purposes, whose calvei
are shut up during the ceremony.

6 T. 'he earthly region ; the rajas region, middle air, or firmament is frequent*

]y divided into two, one half belonging to the earth and the other to the kky.
See Wallis, Cosmology of the Bigveda , pp. 114, 115.

r } Maruts ; here meaning the sihgers of the hymn of praise. * Priests/ —

Y ilson. The light divine : the Sun, which the Yisvedevas generated or created
for Indra,

MYMN 79.] TMB RIG 71 EDA . 235

4 Aim and fetch boldly forth, 0 thou whose heart is bold : great

glory will be thine thereby.

In rapid torrent let the mother waters spread. Slay Vritra, win
the light of heaven.

5 When thou, unequalled Maghavan, wast bom to smite the

Vritras dead,

Thou spreadest out the spacious earth and didst support and
prop the heavens.

6 Then was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, and song

of joy,

Thou in thy might surpassest all, all that now is and yet
shall be. -

7 Baw kine thou filledst with ripe milk. Thou madest Surya

rise to heaven.

Heat him as milk is heated with pure Sama hymns, great joy
to him who loves the song.

HYMN LXXIX. In&ra.

Mat Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, be near to us.
May the most mighty Vritra-slayer, meet for praise, come to
libations and to hymns.

2 Thou art the best of all ip sending bounteous gifts, true art

thou, lordly in thine act.

We claim alliance with the very Glorious One, yea, with the
Mighty Son of Strength.

3 Prayers unsurpassed are offered up to thee the Lover of the

Song.

Indra, Lord of Bay Steeds, accept these fitting hymns, hynini
which we have thought out for thee.

4 For thou, 0 Maghavan, art truthful, ne’er subdued, and

bringest many a Vritra low.

-As such, 0 Mightiest Lord, Wielder of Thunder, send wealth
hither to the worshipper.

7 Raw kine; cf. I. 62 9; 180. 3; II. 40. 2 ; IV 3. 9; VI. 72. 4 ; 17. 6; 44.
24 ; VIII. 32. 25. Thou madest S&rya rise to heaven : S&yana relates a legend that
when the Pania had carried off the cowa of the Angirases and placed them in a
mountain enveloped in darkness, Indra, at the prayer of the Rtshis, set the
sun in heaven in order that he might see and recover their cattle. Meat him
as milk is heated : this line is difficult. ‘ (Priests) excite (Indra) with your
praises as men heat the Qharma with jSVfman-hymns.’ — Wilson, Gharma
means either the hot milk or other beverage offered in the Pravargya cere-
mony, or the vessel in which it is heated. Great joy to him who loves the song:
'or .perhaps the meaning is, tbeBrihat-S&man (one of the most important S&ma
hymns, the first and seoond verses of V. VI 46), is dear to him who loves

song.

3 flitting hymns ; ydjand : see Wilson’s Translation and note.

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK VIII.

5 0 Indra, thou art far-renowned, impetuous, 0 Lord of Strength.
Alone thou slayest with the . guardian of mankind resistless

never-conquered foes.

6 As such we seek thee now, 0 Asura, thee most wise, craving

thy bounty as our share.

Thy sheltering defence is like a mighty cloak. So may thy
glories reach to us.

HYMN LXXX, Indra.

Down to the stream a maiden came, and found the Soma by
the way.

Bearing i£ to her home she said, For Indra will I press thee
out, for Sakra will I press thee out.

2 Thou roaming yonder, little man, beholding every house in

turn,

Drink thou this Soma pressed with teeth, accompanied with
grain and curds, with cake of meal and song of praise.

3 Fain would we learn- to know thee well, nor yet can we attain

to thee.

Still slowly and in gradual drops, 0 Indu, unto Indra flow.

4 Will he not help and work for us 1 Will he not make us

wealthier h

Shall we not, hostile to our lord/unite ourselves to Indra now ?

, 5 0 Tndra, cause to sprout again three places, these which I
declare, — •

My father’s head, his cultured field, and this the part below
my waist.

6 Make all of these grow crops of hair, yon cultivated field of

ours,

My body, and my father’s head. *

7 Cleansing ApMa, Indra ! thrice, thou gavest sunlike skin to

her,

Drawn, Satakratu ! through the hole of car, of wagon, and of
yoke.

5 7'he guardian of mankind : Indra’ s thunderbolt with which he slays the

demons of drought.

The Ilishi is Apftl& of the family of Atri.

1 A maiden : ApftlA

2 Little man : vtrakah : according to S&yaua, hero. Indra is intended,
perhaps as Sftrya the Suu-God.

3 Inda; Soma.

4 He : Indra. Hostile to our lord : Ap&lft, it is said, was afflicted with a
cutaneous disease and was consequently repudiated by her husband.

7 Sunlike: bright and clear. 1 S&yana says that Indra dragged her through
the wide hole of his chariot, the narrower hole of the cart and the small hole
of the yoke> and she cast off three skins. The first skin became a hedgehog,

HYMN 81 .] TEE RIQYEDA. m

HYMN" LXXXI. Indra..

Invite ye Indra with a song to. drink your draught of Soma
juice,

All-conquering Satakratu, most munificent of all who live.

2 Lauded by many, much-invoked, leader of song, renowned

of old :

His name is Indra, tell it forth.

3 Indra the Dancer be to us the giver of abundant strength :

May he, the mighty, bring it near.

4 Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshipping

Sudaksha’s draught, ^

The Soma juice with barley mixt.

5 Call Indra loudly with your songs of praise to drink the Soma

juice,

For this is what augments his strength.

6 When be hath drunk its gladdening drops the God with

vigour of. a God

Hath far surpassed all things that are.

7 Thou speedest down to succour us this ever-conquering God

of yours,

Him who is drawn to all our songs;

8 The Warrior not to be restrained, the Soma-drinker ne’er

overthrown,

The Chieftain- of resistless might.

9 0 Indra, send us riches, thou Omniscient, worthy of our

praise :

Help us in the decisive fray.

the second an alligator, the third a chameleon. I suppose, with Prof. Aufrecht,
that the hole or space oi the chariot and cart represents the opening between’
the four wheels ; the hole of the yoke seems to me to mean the opening
through which the animal’s head passed, corresponding to Homer’s Xrj,

II. 19. 406.’ — Cowell.

For the legend from the SAty&yana Br&hmana, founded on the hints con-
tained in this hymn and repeated by S&yana' in his Commentary, see also
Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V.

Prof. Aufrecht has published the text and commentary of this hymn in
Indkche Stndien, IY. p. 1 sqq. See M. Muller’s Kig-veda Sambit& 3 YoL IIL,
2nd edition, p. 33 sqq.

3 The Dancer : active in battle, dancer of the war dance. Near ; abhijnti :
or, up to our knees.

4 Sudalcsha’s draught : offered by a Bishi of that name.

7 According to S&yana this stanza is addressed by the Yajamdna or saerh
ficer to the Stotar or praising priest, and he gives an imperative sense to the
indicative, thou speedest down : * Bring hither/ — Wilson.

238 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII,

10 Even thence, 0 Indra, come: tp us with food that gives a

hundred powers,

With food that gives a thousand powers.

11 We sought the wisdom of the wise. Sakra, Kine-giver,

Thunder-armed !

May we with steeds o’ercome in fight.

12 We make thee, Satakratu, find enjoyment in the songs we sing,
Like cattle in the pasture lands.

13 For, Satakratu, Thunder-armed, all that we craved, as men

are wont, •

All that we hoped, have we attained.

14 Those, Son of Strength, are come to thee who cherish wishes

in their hearts :

0 Indra, none excelleth thee.

15 So, Hero, guard us with thy care, with thy most liberal

providence,

Speedy, and terrible to foes.

16 0 Satakratu Indra, now rejoice with that carouse of thine
Which is most splendid of them all ;

17 Even, Indra, that carouse which slays the Yritras heat, most

widely famed,

Best giver of thy power and migh£.

18 For that which is thy gift we know, true Soma-drinker,

Thunder-armed,

Mjghty One, amid all the folk.

19 For Indra, Lover of Carouse, loud be our songs about the

juice :

Let poets sing the song of praise.

20 We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all glories rest,

in whom

The seven communities rejoice.

21 At the Trikadrukas the Gods span sacrifice that stirs the

mind :

Let our songs aid and prosper it.

10 Even thence: from where thou art ; from heaven.

11 Of the wise: Indra. Nine-giver : godare : perhaps, ‘burster open of
the cow-stall ‘ cleaver of mountains/ — Wilson.

12 Like cattle: as the cowherd refreshes his cattle. — S&yana.

IS Thy gift : the wealth which thou givest. Amid all the folk : among all
the worshippers who offer thee Soma.— S&yana. '

20 Seven communities : scvptd sansddah : probably = all the folk, in stanza
1 8 ;• the seven associated priests/ — Wilson,

21 At the Trikadrukas: see VlII. 13. 18, and note.

BXMN §2.] T-E[JS Rl^ VEpA.

2j2. Let tlie drops pass within thee as, the rivers, flaw into the sea,:
O Indra, naught excelleth thee.

23 Thou, wakeful Hero, by thy might hast taken food of Soma
juice,

Which, Iudra, is within thee how.

24 t 0 Indra, Vritra-slayer, let Sotna be ready for thy maw.

The drops be ready for thy forms.

25 Now Smtakaksha sings his song that cattle and the steed may

come,

That Iudra’s very self may come.

26 Here, Indra, thou art ready by our Soma juices shed for thee,

Sakra, at hand that thou mayst give. *

27 Even from far away our songs reach thee, 0 Caster of the

Stone :

May we come very close to thee.

2,8 For so thou art the hero’s Friend, a Hero, too, art thou, and
strong :

So may thine heart he won to us.

29 So hath the offering, wealthiest Lord, been paid by aJI th^

worshippers :

So dwell thou, Indra, even with me.

30 Be not thou like a slothful priest, 0 Lord of spoil and wealth :

rejoice

In the pressed Soma bletft with milk.

31 O Iudra, let not ill designs surround us in the sunbeanis’ light :
This may we gain with thee for Friend.

32 With thee to help us, Iudra, let us answer all our enemies :
For thou art ours and we are thine,

33 Indra, the poets^iud thy friends, faithful to thee, shall loudly sing
Thy praises as they follow thee,

HYMN LXXXII. Iudra,

Surya, thou mountest up to meet the Hero famous for his
wealth,

Who hurls the bolt aud works for man:

2 Him who with might of both his arms brake nine-aud-ninety
castles down,

Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead.

24 Thy forms : thy various bodies or splendours. — -S&yana.

25 Sratdkaksha : the Rishi of the hymn,

30 Priest: brahmti : Brahman or praying priest.

31 In the sunbeams' light ; as Indra stands in the closest relationship to

the Sun. —

2 Nine-and-ninety castles : cloud-castles of the demon Sambara.

240 TEE EYMNB OF [BOOK VI1T.

3 This Indra is our gracious Friend., He sends us in a full

broad stream

. Riches in horses, kine, and corn.

4 Whatever, Vritra-slayer ! thou, Siirya, hast risen upon to-day,
That, Indra, all is in thy power.

5 When, Mighty One, Lord of the brave, thou tliinkest thus, ■

I shall not die, '

That thought of thine is true indeed.

6 Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma libations shed for thee,

Both far away and near at hand.

7 We make tips Indra very strong to strike the mighty Vrifcra dead;
A vigorous Hero shall he be.

8 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o’er the joyous

draught,

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song.

9 By song as ’twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry

was prepared :

Lofty, invincible he grew. .

10 Indra, Song-lover, lauded, make even in the wilds fairways for us,
Whenever, Maghavan, thou wilt.

11 Thou whose commandment and behest of sovran sway none

disregards,

Neither audacious man nor God. #

12 And both these Goddesses, Earth, Heaven, Lord of the beau :

teous helm ! revere
Thy might which no one may resist.

13 Thou in the black cows and the red. and in the cows with spot-

ted skin

This white milk hast deposited. r

14 When in their terror all the Gods shrank from the Dragon’s

furious might,

Fear of the monster fell on them.

15 Then he was my Defender, then, Invincible, whose foe is not,
The Vritra-slayer showed his might.

16 Him your best Vritra-slayer, Mm the famous Champion of

mankind

I urge to great munificence,

8 Was made: was created by-Praj&pati. — S&yana.

12 Lord of the beauteous helm : or, ‘deity of the handsome jaw.’ — Wilson.

13 In the black cows: cf I. 62. 9.

14 The Dragon's furious might : the fierce attack of the demon Ahi. Of
the monster : or, of the wild beast, Ahi.

16 Champion: 1 joiuprd to mvdharn, as suggested in the St. Petersburg Lexicon.

HYMN 82 ]

THE MOVE DA.

241

17 To come, Much-lauded ! Many-named! with this same thought

that longs for milk,

Whene’er the Soma j nice is shed.

18 Much-honoured by libations, may the Yritra-slayer wake for us ;
May Sakra listen to our prayers.

19 0 Hero, with what aid dost thou delight us, with what suc-

cour bring

Riches to those who worship thee ?

20 With whose libation joys the Strong, the Hero with his team

who quells

The foe, to drink the Soma juice? *

21 Rejoicing in thy spirit bring thousandfold opulence to us :
Enrich thy votary with gifts,

22 These juices with their wedded wives flow to enjoyment lov-

ingly :

To waters speeds the restless one.

23 Presented strengthening gifts have sent Iudra away at sacri-

fice,

With might, unto the cleansing bath.

24 These two who share his feast, Ray Steeds with golden manes,

shall bring him to %

The banquet that is laid for him.

25 For thee, 0 Lord of Light, are shed these Soma-drops, and

grass is strewn :

Bring Iudra to his worshippers.

26 May Iudra give thee skill and lights of heaven, wealth to his

votary

And priests whg praise him : laud ye him.

27 0 Satakratu, wondrous strength and all our lauds I bring to

thee :

Be gracious to thy worshippers.

17 To come : that is, that thou, Indra, mayst come. This abrupt change
of person is not uu common in the Yeda.

22 The wedded zoives : of the Soma juices are said to be the two waters
called vasallvavijah and ehadhandh , used in the Soma ceremonies. To enjoy~
merit : to be drunk by Indra. I'o waters speeds the restless one ; or, with Grass-
mann, £ The lover of the waters speeds.’ The exact meaning of nichumpundh
is uncertain, Yaska deriving it from c/mm, to eat, and Mahidhara from chup,
to creep or move slowly. The meaning of the sentence is, according to the
Scholiast, that, at the time of the concluding purificatory ceremony which is
to atone for errors and omissions in the principal sacrifice, the stale Soma is
thrown into the waters. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’* Translation.

23 The cleansing bath : the avabhritha , here, apparently, the bath or vessel
in which the Soma plants were rinsed and purified.

16

242 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII

28 Bring to us all things excellent, 0 Satakratu, food and strength;
For, Indra, thou art kind to us.

29 0 Satakratu, bring to us all blessings, all felicity :

For, Indra, thou art kind to us.

30 Bearing the Soma juice we call, best Vritra-slayer, unto thee ;
For, Indra, thou art kind to us.

31 Come, Lord of rapturous joys, to our libation with thy Bay

Steeds, come

To our libation with thy Steeds.

32 Known as best Vritra-slayer erst, as Indra Satakratu, come
With BayBteeds to the juice we shed.

33 0 Vritra-slayer, thou art he who drinks these drops of Soma :

come

With Bay Steeds to the juice we shed.

34 May Indra give, to aid us, wealth handy that rules the Skilful

Ones :

Yea, may the Strong give potent wealth,

HYMN LXXXIII. Marat*.

The Cow, the famous Mother of the wealthy Maruts, pours
her milk ;

' Both horses of the cars are yoked, —

2 She in whose bosom all the Gods, and Sun and Moon for men

to see,

Maintain their everlasting Laws.

3 This all the pious sing to us, and sacred poets evermore ;

The Maruts to the Soma-draught !

4 Here is the Soma ready pressed : of this the Maruts drink, of

this

Self-luminous the Asvins drink.

34 Handy: ribkum . That rules the Skilful Ores : ribhukshmam. The
Strong; vdjt These words are used as plays upon the names of tile Ribhus,
or as Grassmann says, the verse may have been taken from a hymn addressed
to the Ribhus. ‘ May Indra bring to us the bounteous Ribliu Ribliukshana
to partake of our sacrificial viands ; may lie, the mighty/ bring the mighty
(Vaja) / — Wilson. Cowell remarks : ‘ Ribhukwhava was the eldest and Vtfja
the youngest of the three brothers. The Ribhus have a share in the evening
libation between Prajftpati, and Savitri, see Ait. Bra'hm. iii. 80. This verse
is addressed to the Ribhus in the evening libation on the ninth day of the
Bwddasaha ceremony (ib. v. 21).’

1 The Cow : Prism.

2 In whose bosom: 'in whose presence.’ — Wilson.

The Maruts ; are to be invoked, understood.

HYMN 84.1

THE RIO VEDA.

248

5 Of this, moreover, purified, set in three places, procre&nt,
Drink Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman,

6 And Indra, like the Herald Priest, desirous of the milky juice,
At early morn will quaff thereof.

7 When have the Princes gleamed and shone through waters as

through troops of foes ?

When hasten they whose might is pure?

8 What favour do I claim this day of you great Deities, you

who are

Wondrously splendid in yourselves?

9 I call, to drink the Soma, those Maruts who spread all realms

of earth

And luminous regions of the sky.

10 You, even such, pure in your might, you, 0 ye Maruts, I in-

voke

From heaven to drink this Soma juice.

11 The Maruts, those who have sustained and propped the

heavens and earth apart,

I call to drink this Soma juice,

12 That vigorous baud of Maruts that abide th in the mountains, I
Invoke to drink this Soma juice.

HYMN LXXXIV. Indra.

Song-lovek ! like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma
flows.

0 Indra, they have called to thee as mother-kine unto their
calves.

2 Bright juices hitherward have sped thee, Indra, Lover of the

Song.

Drink, Indra, of this flowing sap : in every house 'tis set for thee.

3 Drink Soma to inspirit thee, juice, Indra, which the Falcon

brought :

For thou art King and Sovran Lord of all the families of men.

4 0 Indra, hear Tirnsohfs call, the call of him who serve th thee.
Satisfy him with wealth of kine and valiant offspring : Great

art thou.

5 Set in three places : first, in a trough ; then in a straining-cloth ; then in
a third trough or vessel called PUtabhrit . Procreant : granting progeny to
the worshipper.

6 The Herald Priest : Agni.

1 Like a charioteer : straight and swift to their object.

8 Which the Falcon brought: see I. 80. 2, and 93. 6.

244 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK P71L

5 For he, 0 Indra, hath produced for thee the newest gladden-

ing song,

A hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, and full
of sacred truth.

6 That Iudra will we laud whom songs and hymns of praise have

magnified.

Striving to win, we celebrate his many deeds of hero might.

7 Come now and let us glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymn.
Let the pure milky draught delight him strengthened by pure

songs of praise.

8 0 Iudra, oome thou pure to us, with pure assistance, pure thy-

self.

Pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for Soma, pure,
be glad.

D 0 Indra, pure, vouchsafe us wealth, and, pure, enrich the
worshipper.

Pure, thou dost strike the Vritras dead, and strivest, pure,
to win the spoil.

HYMN LXXXV. Indra.

Foe him the Mornings made their courses longer, and Nights
with pleasant voices spake to Indra.

For him the Floods stood still, the Seven Mothers, Streams
oasy for the heroes to pass over.

2 The Darter penetrated, though in trouble, thrice -seven close-

pressed ridges of the mountains.

Neither might God nor mortal man accomplish what the Strong
Hero wrought in full-grown vigour.

3 The mightiest force is Indra’s bolt of iron when firmly grasped

in both the arms of Indra,

His head and mouth have powers that pass all others, and all
his people hasten near to listen.

5 Nowest ancient: recent in form and expression, but ancient in

substance. See Muir, 0. S> Texts, III. 238, 239.

7 Pure Tnclra with pure Sttmn hymns : according to S&yana, * Iudra, purified
with pure Sftma-hyinns,’ from the pollution he had incurred by killing the
Br&hman Vritra. See Wilson’s Translation, note.

1 The heroes : perhaps Turvasa and Yadu— Ludwig.

2 The Darter : of the thunderbolt ; Iudra. Thorn jh in trouble : because he

had none to aid him. What the thr ice-seven ■’ 7 " <es of the mountains

are, is uncertain See Wilson’s Translation. . ■ thinks that the

battle of the Sun with the demons of winter may be meant.

3 To listen ; to the commands which issue from his mouth.

245

ItYMN 85.] THE RIG VEDA.

4 I count thee as the Holiest of the Holy, the eastei’-down of

what hath ne’er been shaken.

I count thee as the Banner of the heroes, I count thee as the
Chief of all men living.

5 What time, 0 Indra, in thine arms thou tookest thy wildly

rushing bolt to slay the Dragon,

The mountains roared, the cattle loudly bellowed, the Brah-
mans with their hymns drew nigh to Indra.

6 Let us praise him who made these worlds and creatures, all

things that after him sprang into being.

May we win Mitra with our songs, and Indra, and wait upon
our Lord with adoration. *

7 Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra, all Deities who were

thy friends forsook thee.

So, Indra, be thy friendship with the Maruts : in all these
battles thou shalt be the victor.

8 Thrice-sixty Maruts, waxing strong, were with thee, like piles

of beaming light, worthy of worship.

We come to thee : grant us a happy portion. Let us adore
thy might with this oblation.

9 A sharpened weapon is the host of Maruts. Who, Indra, dares

withstand thy bolt of 'thunder'?

Weaponless are the Asuras, the godless : scatter them with
thy wheel, Impetuous Hero.

10 To him the Strong and Mighty, most auspicious, send up the

beauteous hymn for sake of cattle.

Lay on his body many songs for Indra invoked with song, for
will not he regard them %

11 To him, the Mighty, who accepts laudation, send forth thy

thought as by a boat o’er rivers,

Stir with thy hymn the body of the Famous and Dearest One,
for w T ill not he regard it ?

12 Serve him with gifts of thine v r hich Indra welcomes : praise

with fair praise, invite him with thine homage.

5 Wildly rushing : this is M. Muller’s translation of madaehyiUam. It
might be rendered also ‘sped in thy rapturous joy.’ 4 Itauschbeschleuuigten.’ —

Ludwig. The Dragon : Ahi.

7 With the Maruts : as they alone stood by him in the conflict.

8 Thrice-sixty ; or sixty-three, according to S&yana, nine companies consist-
ing of seven eacln See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. Like piles of
beaming light ; 5 6 7 8 like cows gathered together.’ — Wilson j ‘ like morning stars.’
— Qrassmann. I have followed Ludwig.

0 With thy wheel ; or discus, a sharp-edged quoit used as a weapon o w T ar,

246

TIIF HYMNS OF IBOOK YtlL

Draw near, 0 singer, and refrain from outcry. Make thy voice
heard, for will not he regard it ?

13 The Black Drop sank in Ansumatfs bosom, advancing With

ten thousand round about it.

Indra with might longed for it as it panted : the hero-hearted
laid aside his weapons.

14 I saw the Drop in the far distance moving, on the slope bank

of Ansumatfs river,

Like a black cloud that sank into the water. Heroes, I send
you forth. Go, fight in battle.

15 And then the Drop in Ansumatfs bosom, splendid with light,

assumed its proper body ;

And Indra, with Bdhaspati to aid him, conquered the godless
tribes that came against him.

16 Then, at thy birth, thou wast the foeman, Indra, of those the

seven who ne'er had met a rival.

Tho hidden Pair, the Heaven and Earth, thou foundest, and
to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure.

17 So, Thunder-armed ! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst

boldly smite that power which none might equal ;

With weapons broughtest low the phght of Sushna, and, Indra,
foundest by thy strength the cattle.

18 Then wast thou, Chieftain of all living mortals, the very

mighty slayer of the Vritras.

Then didst thou set the obstructed rivers flowing, and win
the floods that were enthralled by Dasas.

ID Most wise is he, rejoicing in libations, splendid as day, resist-
less in his anger.

He only doth great deeds, the only Hero, sole Vritra-slayer
he, with none beside him.

12 Draw near , 0 singer , and refrain from autery; ( 0 priest, adorn tliyself
grieve not (for poverty).’ — Wilson.

1Z Ike Black Drop : the darkened Moon. Ansumati : a mystical river q£
the air into which tho Moon dips to recover its vanished light. Ten thousand :
probably, demons of darkness ; the numerals are without a substantive. As it
panted while striving against its assailants. Laid aside his weapons ; after
conquering the demons and restoring the darkened Moon.

1 4 Indra addresses the Maruts.

S&yana explains stanzas 13 — >15 differently, in accordance with a legend
which was probably suggested by this passage. He takes drapsdh krishndh,
black drop, to mean ‘the swift moving Krishnah,’ an Asura or demon who
with ten thousand of his kind had occupied the banks of tho river Ausumatt,
which, he says, is the Yamuna or Jumna, and was there defeated by* Indra,
Brihaspati, and the Maruts. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation.

It) I he seven; Krishna, Yritra, Namnchi, Sambara, and others.— SAyana.

THE nm VEDA.

247

HYMN 86 .]

20 Indra is Vritra’s slayer, mail’s sustainer : he must be called ;

with fair praise let us call him.

Mag ha van is our Helper, our Protector, giver of spoil and
wealth to make us famous.

21 This Indra, Vritra-slayer, this Eibhukshan. even at his birth,

was meet for invocation.

Doer of many deeds for man’s advantage, like Soma quaffed,
for friends we must invoke him.

HYMN LXXXVL Indra;

O Indka, Lord of Light, what joys thou broughtest from the
Asuras, *

Prosper therewith, 0 Maghavan, him who lauds that deed,
and those whose grass is trimmed for thee.

2 The unwasting share of steeds and kine which, Indra, thou

hast fast secured,

Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives guerdon,
not unto the churl.

3 The riteless, godless man who sleeps, 0 Indra, his unbroken

sleep, —

May he by following his own devices die. Hide from him
wealth that nourishes.

4 Whether, 0 Sakra, thou*be far, or, Vritra-slayer, near at hand,
Thence by heaven-reaching songs ho who hath pressed tho

juice invites thee with thy long-maned Steeds.

5 Whether thou art in heaven’s bright sphere, or in the basin of

the sea ;

Whether, chief Vritra-slayer, in some place on earth, or in the
firmament, approach.

6 Thou Soma-drinker, Lord of Strength, beside our flowing

Soma juice

Delight us with thy bounty rich in pleasantness, 0 Indra, with
abundant wealth.

7 0 Indra, turn us not away : be the companion of our feast.
For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin : 0 Indra,

turn us not away.

8 Sit down with us, 0 Indra, sit beside the juice to drink the meath.
Show forth great favour to the singer, Maghavan ; Indra, with

us, beside the juice.

21 Ribhulcshan : or, Lord of Ribhus.

1 Joys : riches. — Sfiyana. From the Asuras ; from the powerful R&kshasas.

2 Gives guerdon : liberally rewards the priests.

[ BOOK FT tt

248 THE BYMtfS OF

9 0 Caster of the Stone, nor Gods nor mortals liave attained to
thee.

Thou in thy might surpassest all that hath been made ; the
Gods have not attained to thee.

10 Of one accord they made and formed for kingship Indra, the

Eero who in all encounters overcomcth,

Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, fierce and
exceeding strong, stalwart and full of vigour.

11 Bards joined in song to Indra so that he might drink the

Soma juice,

The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid
with power and with the help he gives.

12 The holy sages form a ring, looking and singing to the Bam.
Inciters, full of vigour, not to be deceived, ai’C with the chant-
ers, nigh to hear.

13 Loudly 1 call that Indra, Maghavan the Mighty, who evermore

possesses power, ever resistless.

Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, Thundor-
armed, make all our pathways pleasant for us.

14 Thou knowest well, 0 Sakra, thou Most Potent, with thy

strength, Indra, to destroy these castles.

Before thee, Thunder-armed ! all beings tremble : the heavens
and earth before thee shake with terror.

15 May thy truth, Indra, Wondrous Hero! be my guard : bear

me o’er much woe, Thunderer ! as over floods.

When, Indra, wilt thou honour us with opulence, all-nourish-
ing and much- to-be-desired, 0 King ?

HYMN LXXXVIL indra.

To Indra sing a Sama hymn, a lofty song tb Lofty Sage,

To him who guards the Law, inspired, and fain for praise.

2 Thou, Indra, art the Conqueror: thou gavest splendour to

tho Sun.

Maker of all things, thou art Mighty and All-God.

3 Hadiaut with light thou wen test to the sky, the luminous

realm of heaven/

The Deities, Indra, strove to win thee for their Friend.

4 Gome unto ns, 0 Indra, dear, still conquering, nnconcealable,
Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of Heaven.

12 The Earn: Trulra. See I. 5L 1, and VIII. 2. 40. Inciters: apparently,
the Gods themselves,

2 All-God: visradcvith : 1 the lord of all the gods/ — Wilson.

4 V aconcealablc : as the Sun-God.

HYMN 88.] THE RIG VEDA. 249

§ 0 truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than both thd
worlds.

Thou strength enesfc him who pours libation, Lord of Heaven.

6 For thou art he, 0 Indra, who stormeth all castles of the foe?
Slayer of Dasyus, man’s Supporter, Lord of Heaven.

7 Now have we, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great wishes

forth to thee,

Coming like floods that follow floods.

8 As rivers swell the ocean, so, Hero, our prayers increase thy might.
Though of th} r self, 0 Thunderer, waxing day by day.

9 With holy song they bind to the broad wide-yobed car the Bay

Steeds of the rapid God,

"Bearers of Indra, yoked by word.

10 0 Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu,

thou most active, bring
A hero conquering in war.

11 For, gracious Satakratu, thou hast ever been a Mother aud a

Sire to us,

So now for bliss we pray to thee.

12 To thee, Strong, Much-invoked, who showest forth thy strength,

0 Satakratu, do I spq$k :

So grant thou us heroic strength.

HYMN LXXXVIII. Indra.

O Thunderer, zealous worshippers gave thee drink this time
yesterday.

So, Indra, listen here to those who bring the laud : come near
unto our dwelling-place.

2 Lord of Bay Steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee : this we crave.

Here the disposers wait on thee.

Thy loftiest glories claim our lauds beside the juice, 0 Indra,
Lover of the Song.

3 Turning, as ’twere, to meet the Sun, enjoy from Indra all good

things.

When he who will be born is born with power we look to trea-
sures as our heritage.

7 doming like floods : in crowds, But the half -line is very obscure. ‘As
men going by water (splash their friends) with handfuls.’ — Wilson.

10 A hero : an heroic son. — —

2 Disposers : the priests who order religious ceremonies.

3 This stanza is difficult and obscure. Mahtdhara’s explanation is : ‘The
gathering (rays) proceeding to the sun distribute all Indra’s treasures (to
living beings, sc. as rain, corn, etc.) ; may we too by our power leave those
treasures as an inheritance to him who has been or will be born.’ See Cotv'cITs;
note in Wilson’s Translation,

S50 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK VI 1L

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties injure none i

good are the gifts which Indra grants.

He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns his
mind to giving boons.

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands.
Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, thou

victor of the vanquisher.

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might, as

to their calf two mother-cows.

Wheu thou attaches! Vritra all the hostile bands shrink and
faint, luc^ra, at thy wrath.

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and noue may

shoot at him,

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’s unvan-
quished Strengthener ;

8 Arrauger of things unaiTauged, e’en Satakratu, source of

might,

Indra, the Friend of all, for succour we invoke, Guardian of
treasure, sending wealth

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra. V4Ic»

I move before thee here present iif person, and all the Deities
follow behind me.

When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with me thou
shalt perform heroic actions.

2 The food of meath in foremost place I give thee, thy Soma

shall be pressed, thy share appointed.

Thou on my right shnlt be my friend and comrade : then
shall we two smite dead full many a foeman.

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a truthful

hymn if he in truth existeth.

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath beheld
him ? Whom then shall we honour ?

§ As to their calf: or the translation may he, as sire and mother to their
child.

7 Tugrya is Bhujyu, the son of Tugra. See Vol. I., Index.

S Arranger of things unarranged : ‘ the eonseerator of others but himself
consecrated by none.’ — Wilson.

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni.

2 Indra answers.

3 Addressed to the priests. One and another : n6ma ; but according to
Sftyana, Nema is the name of the Rishi. ‘Hema says, “verily there is no
Indra..” * — Wilson.

HYMN 89.] THE 2UGVLDA. 251

4 Here am I, look upon me here, 0 singer. All that existeth I

surpass in greatness.

The Holy Law's commandments make me mighty. Bending
with strength I rend the worlds asunder.

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me as I sate

lone upon the dear sky’s summit,

Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My friends have
cried unto me with their children.

6 All these thy deeds must he declared at Soma-feasts, wrought,

Indra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice,

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by ^aany, brought
from far away to Sarabba, the Eishi’s kin.

7 Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept

you back.

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vritra’s vital
part ?

8 On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he

pressed :

The E'alcon went to heaven and brought the Soma to the
Thunderer.

9 Deep in the ocean lies th£ bolt with waters compassed round

about,

And in continuous onward flow the floods their tribute bring
to it.

10 When, uttering words which 'no one comprehended, V&k,
Queen of Gods, the Gladdener, was seated,

The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now
whither hathkher noblest portion vanished'?

4 Indra speaks this and the following stanza.

5 The Law's lovers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According
to Hillobrandt (F. Mytholoyie , I. 854), the Maruts ; sUumantah meaning not
< with their children/ but * with the Infant (Soma)/

6 The priest addresses Indra. Sarabha : a Rislii of that name.— S&yana.
The original hymn appeal's to end with this stanza.

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’ s battle with Yritra.

8 He: the Falcon. The iron fort: the stronghold or cloud in which the
Soma or ambrosial rain was imprisoned. Cf. IY. 27. 2.

9 la the ocean : as produced naturally in the sea of air.

10 This and the following stanza have no apparent connexion with what
precedes. Ydk : or V&ch, vox, voice, or Speech personified. Her unintel-
ligible words are the thunder. Her noblest portion : according to S&yana, the
rain which follows thunder. Or the thunder itself may be intended. See
Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. Was seated : at the sacrifice offered
to her.

m THE HYMNS OF [HOOK VIII,

1.1 The Deities generated V&k the Goddess, and animals of every
figure speak her.

May she, the Glacldener, yielding food and vigour, the Milch-
cow Yak, approach us meetly lauded.

12 Step forth with wider stride, my comrade Vishnu; make room,
By a us, for the leaping of the lightning.

Let us slay Vritra, let us free the rivers : let them flow loosed
at the command of Indra.

HYMN XG. Various.

Yea, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service of the
Gods,

Who quickly hath brought near Mitra and Yaruna to share
his sacrificial gifts.

2 Supreme in sovran powei', far-sighted, Chiefs and Kings, most

swift to hear from far away,

Both, wondrously, set them in motion as with arms, in com-
pany with Surya’s beams.

3 The rapid messenger who runs before you, Mitra-Varur*a, with

iron head, swift to the draught,

4 He whom no man may question, none may summon back, who

stands not still for colloquy, — °

From hostile clash with him keep ye us safe this day; keep
us in safety with your arms.

5 To Aryaman and* Mitra sing a reverent song, 0 pious one,

A pleasant hymn that shall protect to Varuna : sing forth a
laud unto the Kings.

6 The true, Bed Treasure they have sent, one only Son bom of

the Three.

They, the Immortal Ones, never deceived, survey the families
of mortal men.

7 My songs are lifted up, aud acts most splendid are to be per-

formed.

Come hither, ye Nasatyas, with accordant mind, to meet and
to enjoy my gifts.

11 Speak her ; articulately-speaking men aud lower animals all derive their
voices from her.

12 This stanza, which is out of place here, is spoken by Indra when he is
about to attack Vritra. See IV. 18. 11.

■ 3 The rapid messenger : the lightning, as one of the forms of Agni.

6 The true, lied Treasure: the Sun. The Three: heaven, mid-air, and earth.

HYMN 90.]

THE El 0 VEDA.

253

8 Lords of great wealth, when we invoke your bounty which no

demon checks,

Both of you, furthering our eastward-offered praise, come, Chiefs
whom Jamadagni lauds !

9 Come, V&yu, drawn by fair hymns, to our sacrifice that reaches

heaven.

Poured on the middle of the straining-cloth, and cooked, this
bright drink hath been offered thee.

10 He comes by straightest paths, as ministering Priest, to taste

the sacrificial gifts.

Then, Lord of harnessed teams ! drink of the twofold draught,
bright Soma mingled with the milk.

11 Verily, Surya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great.
As thou art great indeed, thy greatness is admired : yea, verily,

thou, God, art great.

12 Yea, Surya, thou art great in fame : thou evermore, O God,

art great.

Thou by thy greatness art the Gods' High Priest, divine, far-
spread unconquerable light.

13 She yonder, bending lowly down, clothed in red hues and rich

in rays, *

Is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, amid the ten
surrounding arms.

14 Past and gone are three mortal generations : the fourth and

last into the Sun hath entered.

He mid the worlds his lofty place hath taken. Into green
plants is gone the Purifying.

15 The Rudras' Mother, Daughter of the Yasus, centre of nectar,

the Adityas' Sister —

To folk who understand will I proclaim it — injure not Adit*,
the Cow, the sinless.

13 She yonder: Ushaa or Dawn. The ten surrounding arms: the ton
regions of the world.

14 Three mortal generations : according to the legend, Praj&pati produced

in succession three kinds of creatures who all died. The fom’th generation
lived and enjoyed the light and warmth of the Sun. See Cowell's note in
Wilson’s Translation, or f : ” : r ‘ ** \ ■ II. 5. 1. 1 — 4. Into green ylcmts :
S&yana explains harltah ■ ■ .■* ■ . e sky, and pdvamdmh (the Puri-
fying) as Yilyu or the 1 . • . ■■ akes pammdnah to be the Soma,

and harltah to be the horses of the Sun. I have followed Ludwig’s inter-
pretation ; but I find the stanza almost unintelligible.

15 Centre of nectar: or, of amrxt, or immortality, or the world of the
immortal Gods. The Cow; the earthly cow, as the type of Aditi or universal
Hature, must not be offended. The stanza is spoken by the priest who has
received the cow as his reward.

254 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V11L

16- Weak-minded men have as a cow adopted me who came hither
from the Gods, a Goddess,

Who, skilled in eloquence, her voice upliftefch, who standetk
near at hand with all devotions.

HYMN XOL Agni.

Lord of the house, Sage, ever young, high power of life, O ■
Agni, God,

Thou givest to thy worshipper.

2 So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, Lord of

spreading light,

Agni, bring hitherward the Gods.

3 For, Ever- Youthful One, with thee, best Furtherer, as our ally,

% We overcome, to win the spoil.

4 As Aurva Bhrigu used, as Apnav.ina used, I call the pure
Agni who clothes him with the sea.

5 I call the Sage who sounds like wind, the Might that like

Par j any a roars,

Agni who clothes him with the sea,

6 As Savitar’s productive Power, as him who sends down bliss, I call
Agni who clothes him with the sqa.

7 Hither, for powerful kinship, I call Agni, him who prospers you,
Most frequent at our solemn rites ;

8 That through this famed One's power, he may stand by us

even as Tvashtar comes
Unto the forms that must be shaped.

9 This Agni is the Lord supreme above all glories mid the Gods :
May he come nigh to us with strength.

10 Here praise ye him the most renowned of all the ministering

Priests,

Agni, the Chief at sacrifice ;

1 1 Piercing, with purifying flame, enkindled in our homes, most

high,

Swiftest to hear from far away.

16 Weak-minded men: ‘Men are too feeble in their intellect to comprehend
me in my true form and my real nature : they can only understand my worth
in the shape of a cow.’ — See Ludwig, R. 7., IV. 245, 246.

The concluding stanza is spoken by Adifci as a cow.

4 Aurva Bhrigu : or, perhaps, Aurva and Bhrigu. The ancient Rishi
Aurva is said to have been the grandson of Bhrigu. Apnavdna: another
ancient Rishi, mentioned in connexion with the Bhrigus and the earliest
worship of Agni, in Book IV. 7. 1.

HYMN 91.]

TIIB RIG VELA.

m

12 Sage, laud the Mighty One who wins the spoil of victory like

a steed,

And, Mitra-like, unites the folk.

13 Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation-bearer's sister

hymns

Have come to thee before the wind.

14 The waters find their place in him, for whom the threefold

sacred grass

Is spread unbound, unlimited.

15 The station of the Bounteous God hath, through his aid which

none impair, °

A pleasant aspect like the Sun.

16 Blazing with splendour, Agni, God, through pious gift&jpf

sacred oil, W

Bring thou the Gods and worship them.

17 The Gods as mothers brought thee forth, the Immortal Sage,

0 Angiras,

The bearer of our gifts to heaven.

18 Wise Agni, Gods established thee, the Seer, noblest messenger,
As bearer of our sacred gifts.

19 No cow have I to call mine own, no axe at hand wherewith

to work,

Yet what is here I bring to thee.

20 0 Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for thee.

Be pleased therewith. Most Youthful God.

21 That which the white-ant eats away, that over which the

emmet crawls —

May all of this be oil to thee.

22 When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend

the song :

I with the priests have kindled him.

12 Sage : the priest is addressed.

13 Before the wind: or, in front of the wind, with which the flame is
fanned.

14 * The waters rest in Agni, who abides as lightning in the firmament/ —
Note in Wilson’s Translation which I have followed closely in this stanza.

15 Or, a comma being substituted for the full stop at the end of the preced-
ing stanza, and pattern (station) taken as in apposition to paddm (place) in 14 ;
* The station of the bounteous : he hath, through his aid which none impair,
A pleasant aspect like the Sun.’

19 AsPrayoga, the Kislii of the hymn, has no cow and no* axe to cut wood,
Agni is aslced in this and the two following stanzas to dispense with the custom-
ary offerings of milk, and to accept such wood as the worshipper can pick up.

22 With his heart : a devout spirit will compensate the want of milk and
properly prepared fuel.

255 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIIL

HYMN XCII. Agni.

That noblest Fnrtherer bath appeared, to whom men bring
their holy works.

Our songs of praise have risen aloft to Agni who w r as born to
give the Arya strength.

2 Agni of Divod&sa turned, as ’twere in majesty, to the Gods.
Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took his station

in the height of heaven.

3 Him before whom the people -shrink when he performs his

glorious Aeeds,

Him who wins thousands at the worship of the Gods, himself,
that Agni, serve with songs.

4 The mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulenco, 0 Vasu,

he who brings thee gifts.

He, Agni, wins himself a hero singing lauds, yea, one who feeds
a thousand men.

5 He with the steed wins spoil even in the fenced fort, and gains

imperishable fame.

In thee, 0 Lord of wealth, coutiuually we lay all precious
offerings to the Gods.

6 To him who dealeth out all wealth, who is the cheerful Priest

of men,

To him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to Agni
go the songs of praise.

7 Votaries, richly-gifted, deck him with their songs, even as the

steed who draws the car.

On both, Strong Lord of men ! on child and grandson pour
the bounties which our nobles give.

S Sing forth to him, the Holy, most muuificcnt, sublime with,
his refulgent glow,

To Agni, ye Upastntas.

9 Worshipped with gifts, enkindled, splendid, Maghavan shall
win himself heroic fame.

And will not his most newly shown benevolence come to us
with abundant strength ?

2 Of Dhodfim : whom Divod&sa especially worshipped and claimed as his
tutelary God. The stanza is obscure, and my translation, founded on von
Itoth’s interpretation of jirdvl vdvrite , which has been accepted by Cowell, must
be regarded as conjectural See Wilson’s Translation and note.

4 A hero : a brave son. . -

7 The second line is obscure. c Graceful lord of men, grant wealth to us

n children and grandchildren.’ — Wilson. !

8 Upastutus; singers so named after the Bishi Upastuta. See I. 36. If).

HYMN 92.]

THE RIGVEDA.

257

10 Priest, presser of the juice ! praise now the dearest Guest of

all our friends,

Agni, the driver of the cars.

11 Who, finder-out of treasures open and concealed, bringeth them

hither, Holy One;

Whose waves, as in a cataract, are hard to pass, when he,
through song, would win him strength.

12 Let not the noble Guest, Agni, be wroth with us: by many a

man his praise is sung,

Good Herald, skilled in sacrifice.

13 0 Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in any way

with lauds to thee.

Even the lowly, skilled in rites, with offered gifts, seeketh thee
for the envoy’s task.

14 Friend of the Maruts, Agni, come with Budras to the Soma-

draught,

To Sobhari’s fair song of praise, and be thou joyful in the light.

10 Priest, presser of the juice: dsdva: stotcih. — S&yana. ‘Singer of hymns.’
— Wilson.

11 Whose loaves: billowy floods of flame rushing on like waters falling down

a precipice. * Whose (flames), as he hastens to wage the battle by means of our
sacred rite, are hard to be passe? " ' ‘ .ves rushing down a decli-
vity.’ — -Wilson. See also Pischel, ” ■ ^ • . I. p. 184. Through son y :

inspirited and strengthened by our hymns.

13 For the envoy's task : to bear lxis oblations to the Gods.

17

VaLAKHILYA.

(Book VIII. Hymns 49—59. M. Mailer.)

HYMN I. Indra.

To you will I sing Xudra’s praise who gives good gifts as well
we know ;

The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers
with wealth thousandfold. *

2 As with a hundred hosts, he rushes boldly on, and for the

offerer slays his foes.

As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts
who feedeth many a one.

3 The drops effused, the gladdening draughts, 0 Indra, Lover of

the Song,

As waters seek the lake where they are wont to rest, fill thee,
for bounty, Thunderer.

4 The matchless draught that strengthens and gives eloquence,

the sweetest of the meath drink thou,

That in thy joy thou mayst scatter thy gifts o’er us, plente-
ously, even as the dust.

5 Come quickly to our laud, urged oil by Soma-pressers like a

horse —

Laud, Godlike Indra, which milck-kme make sweet for thee :
with Kanva’s sons are gifts for thee.

6 With homage have we sought thee as a Hero, strong, pre-

eminent, with unfailing wealth.

0 Thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its stream, so,
Indra, flow our songs to thee.

7 If now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth,
Come thence, high-thoughted ! to our sacrifice with the Swift,

come, Mighty with the Mighty Ones.

See Book VIII., Hymn XLIX., note. Professor Cowell's version of these
eleven hymns wifi be found in Appendix I. of Wilson’s Translation, Vol* V.
I am indebted to him for some improvements on the version which I had
previously prepared.

2 .4s with a hundred hosts : ‘like a weapon with a hundred edges.’ — Cowell.
4 That ...gives eloquence : vivdhshanam : from vaoh ; ‘ swelling,! froth vahsh =»
ulcsh. — von Roth, and Cowell. Pleuteously, even as the dust : the meaning of
the text is obscure The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes dhrUMd—driskud*
the nether millstone ; f just as the mill-stone pours out meal.’ — Cowell.

7 The Swift and the Mighty Ones> are India’s horses.

m

TEE EYMiVS OP

[ V ALA RET L YA .

8 The active, fleet-foot, tawny Coursers that are thine are swift

to victory, like the Wind,

Wherewith thou goest round to visit Maims* seed, wherewith
all heaven is visible.

9 Indra, from thee so great we crave prosperity in wealth of kine,
As, Maghavan, thou favouredst Medbyatifchi, and, in the fight,

Nipatithi.

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva, Trasadasyu, and to Paktha and
Dasavrnja;

As, Indra, to Gosarya and Bijisvau thou vouchsafed*! wealth
in kine an^i gold.

HYMN II. Indra.

Sakra I praise, to win his aid, far-famed, exceeding bountiful,
Who gives, as ’twere in thousauds, precious wealth to him
who sheds the juice and worships him.

2 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, arc this Indra’s

mighty arms in war.

He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with springs,
when juices poured have gladdened him.

3 What time the flowing Soma-drops have gladdened with their

taste the Friend, °

Like water, gracious Lord ! were my libations made, like milch-
kine to the worshipper.

4: To him the peerless, who is calling you to give you aid, forth
flow the drops of pleasant meath.

The Soma-drops which call on thee, 0 gracious Lord, have
brought thee to our hymns of praise.

5 He rushes hurrying* like a steed to Soma that adorns our rite,
Which liymns make sweet to thee, lover of pleasant food. The

call to Paura thou dost love.

6 Praise the strong, grasping Hero, winner of the spoil, ruling

supreme o’er mighty wealth.

Like a full spring, 0 Thunderer, from thy store hast thou
poured on the -worshipper evermore.

° V 77 a Rishi whose name has frequently occurred. Nijpdtitld :

■ * . ■ . , ■ ere and V&laldiilya Hymn III.

10 Trasadusyu: see. Yol. I., Index. Paktha : a favourito of the Asvins.
See VIII. 22. 10, Earivraja ; see VIII. 8, 20, Cromrya : see VIII. S. 30.
Kijisvan: see Vol. I., Index.

5 The call to Paura : the invitation to Paura’s house. According to von
Both pauvd means the filler, the satisfier : i thou approvest the summons to
the satisfying beverage.’ — CowelL See V. 74, 4.

11 YMN 3,] THE RIG VEDA . 261

7 Now whether thou he far away, or in the heavens, or on the

earth,

0 Indra, mighty- though ted, harnessing thy Bays, come Lofty
with the Lofty Ones.

8 The Bays who draw thy chariot, Steeds who injure none, sur-

pass the wind’s impetuous strength —

With whom thou sileneest the enemy of man, with whom thou
goest round the sky.

9 0 gracious Hero, may we learn anew to know thee as thou art :
As in decisive fight thou holj)est Etasa, or Vasa ’gainst

Dasavraja, ^

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva at the sacred feast, to Dirghamtha
thine home-friend,

As to Gosarya thou, Stone-darter, gavest wealth, give me a gold-
bright stall of kine,

HYMN HI. Indra.

As with Manu Samvarani, Indra, thou drankest Soma juice,
AnH, Maghavan, with Nipatithi, Medhyatithi, with Pushtigu
and Srushtigu, —

3 The son of Prishadvana was Praskanva’s host, who lay decre-
pit and forlorn. *

Aided by theo the Rishi Dasyavc-vrika strove to obtain thou-
sands of kino.

3 Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks not hymns

of praise,

Him who observes and knows, inspirer of the sage, him who
seems eager to enjoy.

i He unto when* they sang the seven-headed hymn, three-
parted, in the loftiest place,

He sent his thunder down on all these living things, and so
displayed heroic might.

7 This stanza is almost a repetition of stanza 7 of Hymn I.

9 Etasa: seel. 61. 15. Vasa : mentioned as a favourite of the Asvins in
X. 40. 7* Dasavraja ; said in stanza 10 of Hymn I. to have been helped by

Indra. . ....

10 Dlrgftanltha : Ludwig takes this word to be an adjective qualifying
wi&lhe adhvart, ‘ at the sacrificial feast of long duration.’ A gold-bright stall
of hint: according to Ludwig, a stall graced with bay steeds, would be a
better translation.

1 Sdmvarani: son of the Vedic Eishi Samvarana. See V. 33. 10. At the
end of the stanza, £ so drink with us,’ is to be understood.

2 Forlorn : rejected and cast out by his kindred. Dasyave-vrika ; literally,
the Wo 1 f -to- 1 1 1 e- Da ay u, that is, Destroyer of fiends or barbarians.

4 The seven-headed: sung by seven heavenly singers.

THE HYMNS OH

[VALAEHILYA.

262

5 We invoeate that Tndra who bestoweth precious things on us.
Now do we know his newest favour ; may we gain a stable that

is full of kine.

6 He whom thou aidest, gracious Lord, to give again, obtains

great wealth to nourish him.

We with our Soma ready, Lover of the Song ! call, Indra
Maghavan, on thee.

7 Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra; ne’er dost thou desert the

worshipper :

But now, 0 Maghavan, thy bounty as a God is poured forth
ever mor$ and more.

8 He who hath overtaken Krivi with his might, and silenced

Susbna with death-bolts, —

When he supported yonder heaven and spread it out, then first
the son of earth was born.

9 Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, Dasas here be-

long.

Directly unto thee, the pious Rasama Paviru, is that wealth
brought nigh.

10 In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song distilling
oil and rich in sweets. ^

Riches have spread among us and heroic strength, with us are
flowing Soma-drops.

HYMN IV. Indra.

As, Sakra, thou with Man u called Vivaav&n drankest Soma juice,
As, Indra, thou didst love the hymn by Trita’s side, so dost
thou joy with Ayu now.

2 As thou with M&farisvan, Medhya, Prishadhra, hast cheered

thee, Indra, with pressed juice,

Drunk Soma with liijunas, Syftmarasmi, by Dasonya’s, Dasa-
sipra’s side.

3 ’Tis he who made the lauds his own and boldly drank the

Soma juice,

8 The son of earth ; man.

9 Rasama Paviru : the Rusamas are mentioned in V. 30. 13 — 15. The
name of Paviru does not occur again.

1 Vivasvda: or Vivasvat, was the father of Manu who is generally called
Yaivasvata. Ayu : the Itishi of the hymn, or the saerificer.

2 Mdtarisvan : the Rishi of Hymn YI. of the V&lakhilya, Medhya: the
Itishi of Hymns V. IX. and X. Prishadhra: the Rishi of Hymn VIII. Syti-
marasmi; mentioned, as a favourite of the Asvins, in I. 112. 16. The names
of Rij unas, Dasonya, and Dasasipra do not occur again in the Rigveda.

HYMN 5.]

THE MO VEDA .

263

He to whom Vishnu came striding his three wide steps, as
Mitra’s statutes ordered it. *

4 In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great deed, 0

Satakratu, Mighty One 1

Seeking renown we call thee as the milkers call the cow who
yields abundant milk.

5 He is our Sire who gives to us, Great, Mighty, ruling as he wills.
Unsought, may he the Strong, Rich, Lord of ample wealth,

give us of horses and of kine.

6 He to whom thou, Good Lord, givest that he may give increas-

es wealth that nourishes. ^

Eager for wealth we call 011 Indra, Lord of wealth, on Sata-
kratu with our lauds.

7 Never art thou neglectful : thou guardest both races with thy

care.

The call on Indra, fourth Aditya 1 is thine own. Amrit is
stablished in the heavens.

8 The offerer whom thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, liberal

Maghavan, favourest, —

As at the call of Kanva so, 0 gracious Lord, hear thou our
songs and eulogy.

9 Sung is the song of ancient time : to Indra have ye said the

prayer.

They have sung many a Brihafci of sacrifice, poured forth the
worshipper’s many thoughts.

10 Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, and both
the worlds, yea, and the Sun.

Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the draughts
of Soma havb made Indra glad.

HYMN V. Indra.

As highest of the Maghavans, preeminent among the Bulls,
Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, Lord of wealth, we
seek thee, Indra Maghavan.

2 Thou who subduedst Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva, waxing daily in
thy might,

5 Ruling as he wills ; ‘ lie who acts as the sovereign/ — Cowell.

7 Both races: Gods and men. Fourth Aditya : Varuna, Mitra, and Arya-
man being the other three. Amrit: ‘ ambrosia.’ — Cowell.

8 As thou kearest, must be supplied at the beginning of the stanza.

9 Brihati : verse iu the Brikatt metre.

. 1 Highest : or, nearest. The Bulls : strong heroes.

2 Ayiij Kutsa, Atithigva: see I. 53. 10.

264 T1IE HYMNS OF [ VALAKHIL YA .

As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, thee
Satakratu, Lord of Bays.

3 The pressing-stones shall pour for us the essence of the meath

of all,

Drops that hare been pressed out afar among the folk, and
those that have been pressed near us.

4 Eepel all enmities and keep them far away : let all win

treasure for their own.

Even among Sishtas are the stalks that make thee glad,
where thou with Soma safest thee.

5 Come, Indrfij very near to us with aids of firmly-based resolve ;
Come, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious help, good

Kinsman, with good kinsmen, come !

6 Bless thou with progeny the chief of men, the lord of heroes,

victor in the fray.

Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds and keep
their spirits ever pure and bright.

7 May we be such in battle as are surest to obtain thy grace :
With holy offerings and invocations of the Gods, we mean,

that we may win the spoil.

8 Thine, Lord of Bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the spoil.

Still with thy help I seek the fight.

So, at the raiders 7 head, I, craving steeds and kinc, unite
myself with thee alone.

HYMN VI. Indm.

Indra, the poets with their hymns extol this hero might of
thine :

They strengthened, loud in song, thy power* that droppeth oiL
With hymns the Pauras came to thee.

2 Through piety they came to Indra for his aid, they whoso
libations give thee joy.

As thou with Krisaand Samvarta hast rejoiced, so, Indra, be
thou glad with us.

4 Sishtas: apparently a tribe of no great importance. Stalks: of the
Soma -plant.

8 At the raiders 7 head : at the head of the band who are going forth to seize
the cattle of their enemies. Von Both thinks that matindni should be read in
stead of mathlnvfm, and Grassrnann translates accordingly, { in Aufang rneiner
Bitten/ ‘ at the beginning of my prayers.’

1 Pauras : c the offerers.’ — Cowell. See V&lakhilya, II. 5.

2 Krisct : the Jlishi of Hymn VII. of the Y&lakhilya. Samvarta: not
mentioned elsewhere.

HYMN 7.]

THE MIG VEDA,

265

3 Agreeing in your spirit, all ye Deities, come nigh to us.

Yasus and Ituclras shall come near to give us aid, and Manila
listen to our call.

£ May Pushan, Vishnu, and Sarasvati befriend, and the Seven
Streams, this call of mine :

May Waters, Wind, the Mountains, and the Forest-Loi’d, and
Earth give ear unto my cry.

5 Indra, with thiue own bounteous gift, most liberal of ' the

Mighty Ones,

Be our boon benefactor, Vritia-slayer, be our feast-companion
for our weal. *

6 Leader of heroes, Lord of battle, lead thou us to combat, thou

Most Sapient One.

High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts and enter-
tainment of the Gods.

7 Our hopes rest on the Faithful One : in Indra is the people’s life.
0 Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid : make

plenteous food stream forth for us.

8 Thee would we worship, Indra, with our songs of praise : 0

Satakratu, he thou ours.

Pour down upon Praska*va' bounty vast and hnn, exuberant,
m that shall never fail.

HYMN VI T. Fraskanva’s Gift,

Great, verily, is Indra’s might. I have beheld, and hither
comes

Thy bounty, Dasyave-vrika !

2 A hundred oxen white of hue are shining like the stars in

heaven, r

So tall, they seem to prop the sky.

3 Bamboos a hundred, hundred clogs, a hundred skins of "boasts

well-tanned,

A hundred tufts of Balbaja, four hundred red-hued mares
are mine.

4 The Forest Lord: vanasjuiti : the tall timber tree, frequently meaning the
Sacrificial Post..

5 Benefactor: or Bhaga, the God who distributes wealth.

1 f Great is Indra’s power, and the gifts which I have received from thee, 0
destroyer of the Dasyus, can be compared only to his bounty/ Dasyave-
vrika, here, is the name, not of the Bishi, but of a hero who in alliance with
the Kanvas has been victorious in his attack on the hostile barbarians. Bee
Ludwig. Yol. IH. p. 164.

3 Balbaja : a kind of coarse grass (Eleusine Indica), used in religious cere-
monies, and' for other pui poses when plaited,

THE HYMN'S OF

[' VALAKHILYA .

4 Blest by the Gods, K&riv&yanas S be ye who spread through

life on life:

Like horses have ye stridden forth.

5 Then men extolled the team of seven : not yet full-grown, its

fame is great.

The dark mares rushed along the paths, so that no eye could
follow them.

HYMN" VIII. Praskanva’s Q-iffc.

Tnr bounty, Dasyave-vrika, exhaustless hath displayed itself :
Its fulness is ns broad as heaven.

2 Ten thousand Dasyave-vrika, the son of P&takrata, hath
From his own wealth bestowed on me.

3 A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of fleecy sheep,
A hundred slaves, and wreaths besides.

4 There also was a mare led forth, picked out for Putakrat&’s sake,
JSTot of the horses of the herd.

5 Observant Agni hath appeared, oblation-bearer with his car.
Agni with his resplendent flame hath shone on high as shines

the Sun, hath shone like Surya in the heavens.

HYMN IX. Asvins.

Endoweb, 0 Gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quickly
with your chariot, 0 ye Holy. *

Come with your mighty powers, 0 ye Nasatyas; come hither,
drink ye this the third libation.

2 The truthful Deities, the Three-and-Thirty, saw you approach
before the Ever-Truthful.

4 Ednvdyarms; descendants of Knnva. *

5 The team of seven: 1 siebeugespaunes/— Grassmann ; * seven-yoked

team. ’“Cowell. But the exact meaning here of sdptdsya is uncertain. V on
Roth thinks that it is probably a proper name. Ludwig takes it in the sense
of a bond of friendship or alliance. The dark mares : there is no substantive,
and ‘mares’ is conjecturally supplied. According to Ludwig, the dark hosts
of the Dasyns conquered by Dasyave-vrika are intended, and the whole stanza
would be more correctly translated :

‘Then no more thought they of the great renown of the collective bond.

The dark tribes rushed along the paths so that no eye could reach to them.’
See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol. V, p. 55 2.

2 The son of Pdtdkratd : or, more probably, called Pautakrata after his
father Putakratu. — Ludwig.

3 Slaves: dis^n: conquered barbarians.

4 Picked out; or, adorned. Phtakrald: the wife of Putakratu.

1 Ndmtyas: * truthful ones,’ — Cowell. See Vol I,, Index.

’ 2 The Tavee-and'Thirty : or, Turice-Eleven. See I. 34. 11. The Ever-
Truthful ; the Sun, whose approach is heralded by the Asvius.

the rxgvela.

m

HtMN 11,]

Accepting this our worship and libation, 0 Asvins bright with
fire, drink ye the Soma.

3 Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder, — the Bull of

heaven and earth and air’s mid region ;

Yea, and your thousand promises in battle, — to all of these
come near and drink beside us.

4 Here is your portion laid for you, ye Holy: come to these

songs of ours, 0 ye Nasatyas.

Drink among us the Soma full of sweetness, and with your
powers assist the man who worships.

HYMN X. ** Yisvedevas.

He whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice,
of one accord, bring hither,

Who was appointed as a learned Brahman, — what is the sacri-
ficer’s knowledge of him?

2 Kindled in many a spot, still One is Agni; Surya is One

though high o’er all he shineth.

Illumining this All, still One is Ushas. That which is One
hath into All developed.

3 The chariot bright and radiant, treasure-laden, three-wheeled,

with easy seat, and lightly rolling,

Which She of Wondrous Wealth was born to harness, — this
car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth.

HYMN XL India- Varuna.

In offerings poured to you, 0 Indra-Varuna, these shares of
yours stream forth t o glorify your state.

Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye assist the
worshipper who sheds the juice.

2 The waters anl the plants, O’ Indra-Varuna, had efficacious

vigour, and attained to might :

3 The Bull : the Sun, whom, as his heralds and revealers, they may be said
to have created. Thousand promises : * a characteristic periphrasis for the
Maghavans, or wealthy nobles.’ — Ludwig,

1 The hymn appears to consist of unconnected fragments, and the purport
of this stanza is not obvious.

3 She of Wondrous Weatlh : Ushas or Dawn. Was horn to harness ; or, as
Prof. Cowell translates : ‘ At whose yoking the Dawn was bom.’ The chariot
of the Asvins precedes that of the Dawn.

2 The waters and the plants : used in sacrifice ; the Soma-plants and the
water employed in preparing the juice for libation. The meaning of the
stanza seems t«> be : although you are far away in the most distant firmament,
our libations have had power to attract you. Regard us only : the godless
man is unworthy of your consideration even as an enemy.

268 THE RIG VEDA. [ VALAKHILYA .

Ye who have gone beyond the path of middle air, — no godless
man is worthy to be called your foe.

3 True is your Krisa’s word, Indra and Yaruna : The seven holy
voices pour a wave of meath.

For their sake, Lords of splendour ! aid the pious man who,
unbewildered, keeps you ever in his thoughts*

i Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their stream,
are the Seven Sisters in the seat of sacrifice.

These, dropping oil, are yours, 0 Indra-Varuna : with these
enrich with gifts and help the worshipper.

5 To our great happiness have we ascribed to these Two Bright

Ones truthfulness, great strength, aiud majesty.

0 Lords of splendour, aid us through ’’the Three-times-Seven,
as we pour holy oil, 0 Indra-Varuna.

6 What ye in time of old, Indra and Yaruna, gave Rishis — re-

velation, thought, and power of song,

And places which the w T ise made, weaving sacrifice, — these
through my spirit’s fervid glow have I beheld.

7 0 Indra- Yaruna, grant to the wonshippers cheerfulness vpid

of pride, and wealth to nourish them.

Vouchsafe us food, prosperity, an<J. progeny, and lengthen out
our days that we may see long life.

3 The seven holy voices : the voices of the seven priests or sacred bards.
^ e c IX. 103. 3. A xoave of meath; ‘a stream of honey.’ — Cowell.

4 The Seven Sisters : ‘ sister-streams of the Soma.’—Cowell.

5 The Three-times-Seven : perhaps the Mnruts, thrice-scven being used in-
definitely for a larger number consisting of troops of seven. See I. 133. 6.

6 Revelation: srutum: that which was heard (from ihe beginning) ; sacred
knowledge. ‘Fame.’ — Cowell. Places : perhaps, as Ludwig suggests, homes
in the world to come, which the wise Rishis have prepared for themselves by-
performing sacrifice here below. Through my spirit's fervid glow: tdpasd:
according to Grassmann and Cowell, this tdpas means ‘the holy austerities 1
of the Rishis, and not the sacred fervour of the seer of the hymn. I have
followed Ludwig.

BOOK THE NINTH.

HYMN I, Soma Pavam&na.

In sweetest and most gladdening stream flow pure, 0 Soma,

on thy way,

Pressed out for Indra, for his drink.

2 FientUq ueller, Friend of all men, he hath with the wood at-

tained unto

His place, his iron-fashioned home.

3 Be thou best Vritra-slayer, best gran ter of bliss, most liberal :

Promote our wealthy princes’ gifts.

4 Flow onward with thy juice unto the banquet of the Mighty

Gods :

Flow 7 hither for our strength and fame.

5 0 Inclu, we draw nigh to thee, with this one object day by day :

To thee alone our prayers are said.

6 By means of this eternal fleece may Surya’s Daughter purify

Thy Soma that is foaming forth.

7 Ten sister maids of slender form seize him within the press

and hold

Him firmly on the final day.

8 The virgins send him forth : they blow the skin musician-

like, and fuse

The triple foe-repelling meath,

Nearly all the hymns of this Book are addressedjtp the deified Soma juice,

! or to Soma, or Indu, the Jlloon, who as containing the celestial nectar, the drink
of the Gods, is identified with the Soma-plant and its exhilarating juice. As

jthe Moon-God pours down his ambrosial: r " d * 1_ J,1 ‘ ■ sieve of heaven, he is

addressed and worshipped as Pavamana * I * . ' represented by the

Sonia juice as it undergoes purification by flowing through the wool which
is used as a filter or strainer. See Muir, 0. S, Texts , V. 258 sqq., Hillebrandfc,
Vedische Mythologie , I. 385 sqq., and Max Muller, Chips, IV. 353 — 367. But of.
Oldcnberg, Religion des Veda , 599 — 612.

•1 Flow pare : pdvasva : t purify thyself.’- -Ludwig.

2 With the wood : some wooden vessel or implement, perhaps the sruva or
dipping-spoon. Iron-fashioned home ; receptacle that has been hammered or
formed with a tool of dyas, iron or other metal. It is nob clear what vessel is
intended.

6 S&rya's Daughter : SraddM or Faith. See S itcqmtha-Brdhmana, XII. 7,
3.11.

7 Ten sister maids : the priest’s fingers. The final day : on which the Soma
is effused.

8 Virgins: the unwedded ones: the fingers. Musician-like: or, as men
blow a bagpipe ; but the meaning of bdkurdm and the second half-liue is nob
clear. * They seize it glittering like a water-skin.’— Wilson.

[BOOK IX

270 T1IE HYMNS OF

9 Inviolable milch-kine round about him blend, for Indra’s drink,

The fresh young Soma with their milk.

10 In the wild raptures of this draught, Indra slays all the

Vritras : he,

'The Hero, pours his wealth on us.

HYMN II. Soma Pavamftna.

Soma, flow on, inviting Gods, speed to the purifying cloth :
Pass into Indra, as a Bull.

2 As mighty food speed hitherward, Indu, as a most splendid

Steer :

Sit in thy place as one with strength.

3 The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream of the

creative juice :

The Sage drew waters to himself.

4 The mighty waters, yea, the floods accompany thee Mighty One,
When thou wilt clothe thee with the milk.

5 The lake is brighteued in the floods. Soma, our Friend,

heaven’s prop and stay,

Falls on the purifying cloth.

6 The tawny Bull hath bellowed, fai.v as mighty Mitra to behold :
He shines together with the Sun.

7 Songs, Indu, active in their might are beautified for thee,

wherewith

Thou deckest thee for our delight.

8 To thee who givest ample room we pray, to win the joyous

draught :

Great are the praises due to thee.

9 Indu, as Indra’s Friend, on us pour with a stream of sweet-

ness, like

Parjanya sender of the rain.

10 Winner of kine, Indu, art thou, winner of heroes, steeds, and
strength :

Primeval Soul of sacrifice.

3 The Sage: the Soma. Waters: with which the stalks of the plant are
sprinkled.

5 The lake : the Soma juice.

6 The tawny Bull: * the golden-hued showerer of blessings.* — Wilson. The
strong greenish-yellow Soma juice. Hath bellowed: an exaggerated expression
for the sound made by the juice as it drops, but in keeping with its represent*
ation as a bull.

9 Like Parjanya : enriching and blessing us as the rain-cloud fertilizes the
gi ound.

HYMN 4.]

TEE RIO VEDA .

m

HYMN III. Soma Pavamiln^.

Here present this Immortal God flies* like a bird upon her
wings*

To settle in the vats of wood.

2 This God, made ready with the hymn* runs swiftly through

the winding ways,

Inviolable as he flows.

3 This God while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed for war,

by men

Devout and skilled in holy songs.

4 He, like a warrior going forth with heroes, as he flows along
Is fain to win all precious boons.

5 This God, as he is flowing on, speeds like a car and gives his gifts :
He lets his voice be heard of all.

6 Praised by the sacred bards, this God dives into waters, and

bestows

Rich gifts upon the worshipper.

7 Away he rushes with his stream, across the regions, into

heaven,

And roars as he is flowing on.

8 While flowing, meet for ^sacrifice, he hath gone up to heaven

across.

The regions, irresistible.

9 After the way of ancient time, this God, pressed out for

Deities,

Flows tawny to the straining-cloth.

10 This Lord of many Holy Laws, even at his birth engendering
strength, *

Effused, flows onward in a stream.

HYMN IV. Soma Pavam&na.

0 Soma flowing on thy way, win thou and conquer high re-
nown ;

And make us better than we are.

1 The vats of wood : drdudni : large wooden vessels, tubs or troughs, which
receive the Soma juice.

2 The winding ways : of the wool which forms the strainer. — Ludwig.
‘ Bushes against the enemies,’ — Wilson.

6 Dives into waters : called vasattvaryak, with which the stalks of the Soma-
plant are sprinkled.

9 Pressed out for Deities : the Soma juice being identified with the Amrit
or nectar, the drink of the Gods, contained in the Moon.

1 Better than we are : or, happier than we are#

272 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

2 Win thou the light, win heavenly light, and, Soma, all feli-

cities ;

And make us better than we are.

3 Win skilful strength and mental power. 0 Soma, drive away

our foes ;

And make us better than we are.

4 Ye purifiers, purify Soma for Indra, for his drink :

Make thou us better than we are.

5 Give us our portion in the Sun through thine own mental

power and aids ;

And make us better than we are.

6 Through thine own mental power and aid long may we look

upon the Sun ;

Make thou us better than we are.

7 Well-weaponed Soma, pour to us a stream of riches doubly

great ;

And make us better than we are.

8 As one victorious, unsubdued in battle pour forth wealth to us;
And make us better than we are.

9 By worship, Pavamkna ! men have strengthened thee to prop

the Law :

Make thou us better than we are.

10 0 Indu, bring us wealth in steeds, manifold, quickening all
life ;

And make us better than we are.

HYMN Y. Apris.

Enkindled, Pavamana, Lord, sends forth his light on every side
In friendly show, the bellowing Bull.

2 He, Pavam&na, Self-produced, speeds onward sharpening his

horns :

He glitters through the firmament.

3 Brilliant like wealth, adorable, with splendour PavamS.ua

shines,

Mightily with the streams of meath.

4 Purifiers: prints whose business is to purify the juice. Make thm * 0
Soma

9 To prop the Law : vidkarmani • 'for their own upholding.’— Wilson,
t ch i 1 s ’’ Vl * l ^ yam: ^plained by Sctyami as = sarvugrlmhicm :

In this Apri hymn atributes of Agni are transferred to Soma Pavamana.

7W7 <+1 n 8a))udd [ u ^ properly applicable to Agni. The bellowing

^ U PL 7 J^ ie showerer ot blessings, uttering a loud sound.’— Wilson.

2 Self-produced; Tumtndpdt; properly a name of Agni ; here, the Moon.

&TMN 6.]

THE RIG VEDA.

m

4 The tawny Pavamina, who strews from of old thd grass with

might,

Is worshipped, God amid the Gods.

5 The golden, the Celestial Poors are lifted with their frames

on high,

By Pavamana glorified.

6 With passion Pavamana longs for the great lofty Pair, welt-

formed,

Like beauteous maidens, Night and Dawn.

7 Both Gods who look on men I call, Celestial- Heralds : Jndra’s

Self

Is Pavamina, yea, the Bull.

8 This, Pavamana’s sacrifice, shall the three beauteous Goddes-

ses,

Sarasvati and BMrati and Ila, Mighty One, attend.

9 I summon Tvashtar hither, our protector, champion, earliest-

born,

Indu is Indra, tawny Steer ; Pavamana is Prajapati.

10 0 Pavamana, with the meath in streams* anoint Yanaspati,

The ever-green, the golden-hued, refulgent, with a thousand

boughs. ^

11 Come to the consecrating rite of Pavamana, all ye Gods, —
Yayu, Surya, Brihaspati, Indra, and Agni, in accord.

HYMN YL Soma Pavamana.

Soma, flow on with pleasant stream, a Bull devoted to the Gods,
Our Friend, unto the woollen sieve.

2 Pour hitherward, as Indra’s Self, Indu, that- gladdening

stream of thine,

And send us coursers full of strength.

3 Flow to the filter hitherward, pouring, that ancient gladden-

ing juice,

Streaming forth power and high renown.

4 Hither the sparkling drops have flowed, like waters down a

steep descent :

They have reached Indra purified.

5 The Celestial Doors : the doors of the hall of sacrifice are here identified
with the portals of the east through which light comes into the world. See
II: 3. 5.

7 Celestial Heralds : see I. 13. 8. Indra’s Self : indr ah here is* explained
by S&yana as = dtptah ; ‘radiant,’ — Wilson.

10 Vanaspati: the sacrificial stake.

11 The consecrating rite: svfthdkriiim: oblation accompanied with the
atterance of the sacred formula Sv&M.

18

[BOOK IX.

m TMM HYMNS OF

5 Whom, having passed the filter, ten dames cleanse, as ’twerp

a vigorous steed,

While he disports him in the wood,-—

<5 The steer-strong juice with milk pour forth, for feast and
service of the Gods,

f ^To him who bears away the draught.

7 Effused, the God flows onward with his stream to Indra, to
the God,

So that his milk may strengthen him.

6 Soul of the sacrifice, the juice effused flows quickly on : he

keeps

His ancient wisdom of a Sage.

§ So pouring forth, as Indra’s Friend, strong drink, best Glad-*
dener 1 for the feast,

Thou, even in secret, storest hymns.

HYMN VII, Soma Pavaniftna.

Forth on their way the glorious drops have flowed for main-
tenance of Law,

Knowing this sacrifice’s course.

2 Down in the mighty waters sinks the stream of meath, most

excellent, ’ *

Oblation best of all in worth.

3 About the holy place, the Steer true, guileless, noblest, hath

sent forth

Continuous voices in the wood.

4 When, clothed in manly strength, the Sage flows in celestial

wisdom round,

The Strong would win the light of heaven. '

5 When purified, he sits as King above the hosts, among his folk,
What time the sages bring him nigh.

5 Whom : relative to juice in the following stanza. Ten dames : the fingers.
The wood : the vat or trough .

0 To him who bears away the draught r to Indra. Others take bhardya to>
mean ‘for -strength or prowess in battle/

9 Even in, secret : wisdom lies hidden in the Soma, and cannot be recog-
nized until one drinks the juice. — Ludwig.

2 The mighty waters : the holy waters called vasattvaryah.

3 In the wood : according to Sayana, rare here — adaJce , in the water. The
stanza' is very difficult, and I am unable to offer a satisfactory translation.

4 The Strong ; Indra, * Then the mighty (Indra) in heaven is eager to

repair to the oblation.’ — Wilson. /

5 Above the hosts, among his folic : or, as preferred by Prof. Ludwig in his
Commentary, above the contending tribes or people (visah).

HYMN 8.] THE MOVED A. 275

6 Dear, golden-coloured, in the fleece he sinks, and settles in

the wood :

The Singer shows his zeal in hymns.

7 He goes to Indra, V&yu, to the Asvins, as his custom is,

With gladdening juice which gives them joy.

8 The streams of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra-Varuna, —
Well-knowing through his mighty powers.

9 Gain for us, 0 ye Heaven and Earth, riches of meath to win
us wealth :

Gain for us treasures and renown.

HYMN VIII. •Soma PavamSna,

Obeying Indra’s dear desire these Soma juices have flowed
forth,

Increasing his heroic might.

2 Laid in the bowl, pure-flowing on to Vayu and the Asvins,

may

• These give ns great heroic strength.

3 Soma, as thou art purified, incite to. bounty Indra’s heart,

To sit in place of sacrifice.

4 The ten swift fingers deck thee forth, seven ministers impel

thee on :

The sages have rejoiced in thee.

5 When through the filter thou art poured, we clothe thee with

a robe of milk

To be a gladdening draught for Gods.

6 When purified within the jars, Soma, bright red and golden-

hued,

Hath clothed him with a robe of milk.

.7 Flow on to us and make ns rich. Drive all our enemies away.
0 Indu, flow into thy Friend.

8 Send down the rain from heaven, a stream of opulence from

earth. Give us,

0 Soma, victory in war.

9 May we obtain thee, Indra’s drink, who viewest men and

findest light,

Gain thee, and progeny and food.

8 Well-knowing, through his mighty 'powers : that is, the streams that,
through the power of Soma, know the way they should go. f The worshippers
knowing its (virtues are rewarded) with happiness.’ — Wilson.

7 Flow on to us and make us rich ; or, * Flow to us wealthy worshippera.’
Thy Friend : Indra. Cf. IX. 2. 1.

[Booit m

m- TUB HYMNS OF

HYMN IX. Soma Pavam&tfa.

The Sage of Heaven whose heart is wise, when laid between
both hands and pressed,

Sends us delightful powers of life.

2 On, onward to a glorious home; dear to the people void of

gu-ile,

With excellent enjoyment, how:

3 He, the bright Son, when- born illumed his Parents who had

sprung to life,

Great Son great Strengthened of L&w.

& Urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guileless
rivers which

Have magnified the Single Eye.

5 These helped to might the Youthful One, high over all, invin-

cible,

Even Indu, Indra ! in thy law.

6 The Immortal Courser,, good to draw, looks down upon the

Seven : the fount
Hath satisfied the Goddesses.

,7 Aid us in holy rites, 0 Man : 0 Pavamana, drive away
Bark shades that must be met in fight.

8 Make the paths ready for a hymn newer and newer evermore:
Make the lights shine as erst they shone.

9 Give, Pavamana, high renown, give kino and steeds and hero

sons :

Win for us wisdom, win the light.

HYMN X. Soma Pavam&na.

•

Like cars that thunder on their way, like coursers eager for
renown,

Have Soma-drops flowed forth for wealth.

2f Forth have they rushed from holding hands, like chariots
that are urged to speed,

Like joyful songs of singing-men.

I The Sage of Heaven ; the Soma. Both hands : naptydh; literally, two
granddaughters. According to S&yana, two boards used in pressing the Soma
are intended. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation.

3 His Parents : mdtard : literally, his two mothers ; Heaven and Earth.

i Seven devotions : practised in the preparation of the Soma. S&yana takes •„
sapta with naclydh ; f gladdens the seven guileless rivers.’ — Wilson.* Single
Eye: Soma, the Moon.

6 Courser; the flowing Soma, The Seven ; rivers. The fount; * Pull, as a
wfeli, lie has' satisfied the divine stream's. * — Wilson.

7 0 Man : manly Soma.

-HYMN 11.] THE RIGVEDA, Ml

3' The Somas .deck themselves with milk, as Kings are graced
with eulogies,

And, with seven priests, the sacrifice.

4 Pressed for the gladdening draught, the drops flow forth abund-
antly with song,

The Soma juices in a stream.

,5 Winning Vivasv&n’s glory and producing Morning’s light, the
Suns

Pass through the openings of the cloth.

6 The singing-men of ancient time open the doors of sacred

songs— #

Men, for the mighty .to accept.

7 Combined in close society sit the seven priests, the brother-

hood,

Filling the station of the One.

8 He gives us kiusbip with the Gods, and with the Sunmnites

our eye:

The Sag.e’s offspring hath appeared.

9 The Sun with his dear eye beholds that quarter of the heav-

ens which priests

Have placed within the sacred cell.

HYMN XI. Soma Pavam&na.

Sing forth .to Indu, 0 ye men, to him who now is purified,
Fain to pay worship to the Gods.

:5 TheSuns: so called as being creators of the light': ‘ the sun- bright
juices.’ — Wilson. Vivasvdn: the morning Sun.

6 Men, for the mighty to accept ; 4 ;men, offerers of Soma,'* according to
S&yaua.

7 The seven priests : the adhvarym who bring the water with which the
stalks of the Soma-plants are sprinkled. The One : .Soma. — Sttyana.

8 He ■ ' ■ ■ 7 '. ,T *■ *'* '* Gods: I follow Prof. Pischel’s interpretation

of this \ - . .■ : unites our navel with the navel of the Gods,

our eye wjllu one ouu, uiab is, he brings us into union with the Gods in
heaven.’ — Vedische Studien , I 4 , p. t>9. 4 1 take into my navel the navel of the

sacrifice [the Soma], ’ — Wilson. 4 He [Soma] as kinsman has brought us a
kinsman [Surya].’ — Ludwig. The Sage's offspring : a periphrasis for the Sage
himself, that is, Soma. — Ludwig.

9 This stanza is very obscure. I have adopted Benfey’s explanation \*&io
4 here follows an occasional interpretation of div or dyuloJca, given by the
Scholiast, which identifies it with »the dronalcalasa or large hornet-trough. He
takes it as meaning that the Sun looks towards the place where the -Soma lies

while it is pressed S&yana seems to interpret this verse as meaning that

Indra views the Soma with affection even after it has been drunk by the
priests [fixed in the heart].’ — Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation.

278 THB HYMNS OF [SOON IX.

2 Together with thy pleasant juice the Atharvans have com-

mingled milk,

Divine, devoted to the God.

3 Bring, by thy flowing, weal to kine, weal to the people, weal

to steeds,

Weal, 0 thou King, to growing plants.

4 Sing a praise-song to Soma brown of hue, of independent might,
The Bed, who reaches up to heaven.

5 Purify Soma when effused with stones which hands move

rapidly,

And pour the sweet milk in the meath.

6 With humble homage draw ye nigh ; blend the libation with

the curds:

To Indr a offer Indu up.

7 Soma, foe-queller, chief o’er men, doing the will of Gods,

pour forth

Prosperity upon our kine.

8 Heart-knower, Sovran of the heart, thou art effused, 0 Soma, that
Indra may drink thee and rejoice.

9 0 Soma Pavamana, give us riches and heroic strength, —

Indu ! with Indra for ally.

HYMN XII. Soma Pavamana.

To Indra have the Soma-drops, exceeding rich in sweets, been
poured,

Shed in the seat of sacrifice.

2 As mother kine low to their calves, to Indra have the sages

called,

Called him to drink the Soma juice.

3 In the stream’s wave wise Soma dwells, distilling rapture, in

his seat,

Besting upon a wild-cow’s hide.

4 Far-sighted Soma, Sage and Seer, is worshipped in the central

point

Of heaven, the straining-cloth of wool.

2 The Atharvans : tbe priests, who perform the duties of the Adhvaryus.

8 King : the usual designation of Soma in the Br&hmana.

4 The Keel : kaddehidarunavarndya ; ‘ sometimes red-coloured/ — Sftyana.

8 In the stream's wave : in the water with which the stalks are sprinkled,
Wpon a wild-cow's hide : this, which is Benfey’s explanation of gaurt, seems
to be borne out by g6r adhi tvachi , upon the ox-hide, of IX. 103. II.
S&yana/a interpretation i« different ; 4 to a chant in the middle tone/ — Wilson,
i Of heaven : divah : see IX, 10. 0, and note.

jStYSfM 13.]

TSS MltiVtibA.

5 In close embraces Indu holds Soma when poured within the

jars,

And on the purifying sieve.

6 Indu sends forth a vo'ce on high to regions of the sea of air,

Shaking the vase that drops with me&th,

7 The Tree whose praises never fail yields heavenly milk among

■ our hymns,

Urging men’s generations on.

8 The Wise One, with the Sage’s stream, the Soma urged to

speed, flows on

To the dear places of the sky. #

9 0 Pavamfi.ua, bring us wealth bright with a thousand splen-

dours, yea,

0 Indu, give us ready help.

HYMN XIII, Sonia Pavam&na.

Passed through the fleece in thousand streams the Soma,
purified, flows on

To Indra’s, Vayu’s special place.

2 Sing forth, ye men who long for help, to PavamAna, to the Sage,

Effused to entertain the Oods.

3 The Soma-drops with thousand powers are purified fur victory,

Hymned to become the feast of Oods.

A Yea, as thou flowest bring great store of food that we may
win the spoil :

Indu, bring splendid manly might,

<5 May they in flowing give us wealth in thousands, and heroic .
power, —

These Godlike Soma-drops effused.

5 Indu holds Soma : f the deity eeeuas to be thus opposed to the mere
plant’ — Cowell’s note Ludwig suggests that Indu here m \y be the Moon,
as the time of important liturgical ceremonies depends upon the Moon’s
phases. So also Hillebrandt, Y. I., p. 316.

6 To regions of the sea of air : or samidrdsya h^re may mean, of the sea
or water into which the Soma juice falls. Shaking: or, perhaps, stirring
(with joy). The vase: 1:6mm: the dronakala&a, the large wooden vessel for
holding the juice. According to SA-y&na, who ^interpretation I have followed
in the first line, hdsam here means the cloud.

7 The Tree: Soma. Men's generations : sacrificial seasons, according to

S4yana

1 fndra’s , VdyiCs special place : the vessels especially prepared to hold
libations intended for Indra and V&yu.

3 For victory: v&jas&taye : c for the attainment of food.’ — Wilson, So
S&yana in stanzas 3 and 4 ; but in 6 the word is explained by mngrdmdya,
to battle, in the first clause where lie inserts it after hiyd"flh t urged, an.d by
annaldbhdya, for the attainment- of food, in the second clause.

m ?HE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

6 Like coursers by their drivers urged, they were poured forth,

for victory,

Swift through the woollen straining-cloth.

7 Noisily flow the Soma-drops, like milch-kine lowing to their

calves :

They have ran forth from both the hands.

5 As Gladdener whom Indra loves, 0 Pavam&na, with a roar
Drive all our enemies away.

9 0 Pavamauas, driving off the godless, looking on the light,

Sit in the place of sacrifice.

- HYMN XIY. Soma Pavamftna.

ItoosrNG on the river’s wave the Sage hath widely flowed
around,

Bearing the hymn which many love.

2 When the Five kindred Companies, active in duty, with the

song

Establish him, the Powerful,

3 Theu in his juice whose strength is great, have all the Gods

rejoiced themselves,

When he hath clothed him in the milk.

4 Freeing himself he flows away, leaving his body’s severed limbs.
And meets his own Companion here,

h He by the daughters of the priest, like a fair youth, hath been
adorned,

Making the milk, as ’twere, his robe.

6 O’er the fine fingers, through desire of milk, in winding course

he goes,

And litters voice which he hath found. ^

7 The nimble fingers have approached, adorning him the Lord

of Strength :

They grasp the vigorous Courser’s back.

8 With a roar ; making a loud noise in dropping.

1 On the river's wave : in the vasativart waters, which are used to Rprinkle
the stalks Bearing the hi/ mn ; Prof. GFelcluer explains this as meaning, 1 Bear-
ing away tho much coveted prize,’ Soma being regarded as a courser or race-
horse.^ See Veclische Studien, L, p. 120.

2 Fine kindred Companies : referring, probably, to some sacrifice instituted
in common by representatives of the five Aryan tribes.

4 IBs own Companion : Indra, He meets : this (sanguto hluwati) is S&yana's
explanation of smjighiiate; but it is not easy to see how the word can bear
this signification,

5 Daughters : or granddaughters ; tbe fingers.

6 Which he hath found : 1 which the worshipper recognizes.’ — -Wilson.

ffYMN 16;] TME MOV EDA. 281

S Comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens and on
the earth,

Come, Soma, as our faithful Friend,

HYMN XV. Soma Pavam&na.

Through the fine fingers, with the song, this Hero comes with
rapid cars,

Going to lndra J s special place,

2 In holy thought he ponders much for the great worship of

the Gods,

Where the Immortals have their seat.

3 Like a good horse is he led out, when on the path that shines

with light

The mettled steeds exert their strength.

4 He brandishes his horns on high, and whets them, Bull who

leads the herd,

Doing with might heroic deeds.

5 He moves, a vigorous Steed, adorned with beauteous rays of

shining gold,

Becoming Sovran of the streams.

6 He, over places rough to pass, bringing rich treasures closely

packed, „

Descends into the reservoirs.

7 Men beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be beautified,
Him who brings forth abundant food.

8 Him, even him, the fingers ten and the seven songs make

beautiful,

Well-weaponed, best of gladdeners.

* HYMN XVI. Soma Pavam&na.

The pressers from the Soma-press send forth thy juice for
rapturous joy :

The speckled sap runs like a flood.

1 Indra’s special place: f Indra’s abode.’ — Wilson. In Hymn XIII. 1,

nishkritdm is explained by S&yana as the vessel prepared and set apart.

3 Like a good horse : .the text has ouly Mtdh which may mean either good
or placed. f Placed (in the cart) he is brought.’ — Wilson.

4 Horns : cf. IX. 5. 2.

5 Rays of shining gold : as the Moon.

6 Places rough to pass ; the wool of the strainer. SAyana gives a totally
different explanation of this stanza. See Wilson’s Translation. I have follow-
ed Prof. Ludwig,

8 Seven songs : the songs of the seven priests,

1 From the Soma-press : onybh , ablative dual of onS, signifying apparently
an implement or a vessel, consisting of two pieces, used in the preparation

282 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

2 With strength we follow through the sieve him who brings

might and wins the kine,

Enrobed in water with his juice.

3 Pour on the sieve the Soma, ne’er subdued in waters, waterless,
And make it pure for Indra’s drink.

4 Moved by the purifier’s thought, the Soma flows into the sieve :
By wisdom it hath gained its home.

5 With humble homage, Indra, have the Soma-drops flowed forth

to thee,

Contending for the glorious prize.

6 Purified in <his fleecy garb, attaining every beauty, he
Stands, hero-like, amid the kine.

7 Swelling, as ’twere, to heights of heaven, the stream of the

creative juice

Falls lightly on the cleansing sieve.

8 Thus, Soma, purifying him who knoweth song mid living men,
Thou wandorest through the cloth of wool.

HYMN XVII. Soma Pavam&ua,

Like rivers down a steep descent, slaying the Vritras, full
of zeal, #

The rapid Soma-streams have flowed.

2 The drops of Soma juice effused fall like the rain upon the

earth :

To Indra flow the Soma-streams.

3 With swelling wave the gladdening drink, the Soma, flows

into the sieve,

Loving the Gods and slaying fiends.

4 It hastens to the pitchers, poured upon the sieve it waxes

strong

At sacrifices through the lauds.

5 Soma, thou shinest mounting heaven as ’twere above hght’s

triple realm,

And moving seem’st to speed the Sun.

of the Soma juice. The word is said to be employed to denote, metaphori*
cally, heaven and earth. * They who express t bee, the juice of heaven and
earth.’- Wilson.

3 Waterless : dnaptcwi, which S&yana explains by an&piam , not reached,
or overtaken, by enemies. The meaning is not clear.

4 Its home : in the large wooden vessel called dronahUasa.

5 Contending for the glorious prize ; like race-horses. ‘ Giving thee vigour
for the great conflict.’ — Wilson.

5 Addressed to Soma as the Moon.

ETYMN 19.] THE RIO VEDA '^83

6 To him, the head of sacrifice, singers and bards have sung

their songs,

Offering what he loves to see.

7 The men, the sages with their hymns, eager for help, deck thee

strong steed,

Deck thee for service of the Gods.

8 Flow onward to the stream of meath : rest efficacious in

thy home,

Fair, to be drunk at sacrifice.

HYMN XVIII. 0 Boma Pavamftn*.

Thou, Soma, dweller on the hills, effused, hast flowed into
the sieve :

All-bouuteous art thou in carouse.

2 Thou art a sacred Bard, a Sage ; the meath is offspring of

thy sap :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

3 All Deities of one accord have come that they may drink

of thee :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

4 He who containeth in his hands all treasures much to be

desired :

A 11- bounteous art thou in carouse.

5 Who milketh out this mighty Pair, the Earth and Heaven,

like mother kine :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

6 Who in a moment mightily floweth around these two world-

halves : *

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

7 The Strong One, being purified, hath in the pitchers cried

aloud :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

HYMN XIX. Soma Pavam&na,

0 Soma, being purified bring us the wondrous treasure, meet
For lauds, that is in earth and heaven.

6 The head of sacrifice : the most important element of the ceremony.
According to S&yana, at the head, that is, on the last and most important day
of the effusion of the Soma juice. Offer inf/ what he loves to see : £ entertaining
affection for him the all-beholding,’ — Wilson.

8 Meath : or honey. In thy home : in the dvonakalasa ,

1 Dweller cm the hills : 1 pressed between the stones.’ — Wilson.

,2U THE HYMMS OF [BOOK IX.

2 For ye Twaip, Indra, Soma, are Lords of the light, Lords of

the kine :

Great Rulers, prosper ye our .songs.

3 The tawny Steer, while cleansed among the living, bellowing

-on the grass,

Hath sunk and settled in his home.

A Over the Steer’s productive flow the sacred songs were
resonant,

The mothers of the darling Son.

5 Hath he not, purified, impregned the kine who long to meet

their Lol'd,

The kine who yield the shining milk ?

6 Bring near us those who stand .aloof ; strike fear into our

enemies :

0 Pavam&na, find us wealth.

7 Soma, bring down the foeman’s might, his vigorous strength

and vital power,

Whether he be afar or near.

HYMltf XX. Soma Pavatn&na,

Fort# through the -straining-cloth the Sage flows to the
banquet of the Gods,

Subduing all our enemies.

’2 For he, as Pavam&na, sends thousandfold treasure in the
shape

Of cattle to the singing-men.

3 Thou -graspest -ali things with thy mind, -and purifiest thee

with thoughts :

As such, 0 Soma, find us fame.

4 Pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal lords,
Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

5 As thou art cleansed, 0 Wondrous Steed, 0 Soma, thou hast

entered, like

A pious King, into the songs.

6 He, Soma, like a courser in the floods invincible, made clean
With hands, is resting .in the jars.

4 Hymns are sang over the Soma-stream, and are called mothers of the
precious juice because it is prepared while they are sung.

5 The Jane ; the vasativarl waters which long to mingle with the Soma,

5 Steed : vahne : * bearer (of our offerings).’ — Wilson.

6 like a courser ; 1 the bearer (of oblations)’.— Wilson,

&?MN 22.] HHE RIG VEDA .

$85

7 Disporting, like a liberal chief, thou goest, Soma, to the’ sievg,..
Lending the laud a Hero’s strength.

HYMN XXI. Soma PavamAna.

To Ind'ra flow these running drops, these Somas frolicsome in
mood,

Exhilarating, finding light ;

2 Driving off foes, bestowing room upon the presser, willingly
Bringing their praiser vital force.

3 Lightly disporting them, the drops flow to one eommon reservoir,

And fall into the river’s wave. r

4 These Pavam&nas have obtained all blessings much to be desired,
Like coursers harnessed to a car.

5 With view to us, 0 Soma-drops, bestow his manifold desire
On him who yet hath given us naught.

6 Bring us our wish with this design, as a wright brings his new-

wrought wheel :

Flow pure and shining with the stream.

7 These drops have cried with resonant voice : like swift steeds

they have run the course,

And roused the good map’s hymn to life.

HYMN XXII. Soma Pavamftna'.

These rapid Soma-streams have stirred themselves to motion
like' strong steeds,

Like cars, like armies hurried forth.

2 Swift as wide winds they lightly move, like rain-storms of.

Pai^janya, like*

The flickering flames of burning fire.

3 These Soma juices, blent with curds, purified, skilled in sa-

cred hymns,

Have gained by song their hearts’ desire.

4 Immortal, cleansed, these drops, since first they flowed, have

never wearied, fain

To reach the region and the ir paths.

7 Chief: S&yapa explains makhdh by ddniim , gift.

5 This stanza is obscure, and S&yana’s commentary is imperfect. It seems
thift the Soma-drops are prayed to enrich the institute of the sacrifice who
has not as yet rewarded the priests.

T Run the course : reached the dronhJcuLcisct,

3 By song : vipft : by knowledge, according to S&yana. * The St. Petersh.
Diet, explains vip as' the twigs (cf. vepves) which form the bottom of the
funnel and support the fflteriug-oloth.’— Cowell, in Wilsdn s Translation.

THE HYMNS OF

m

[BOOH IX*

- 5 Advoncing they have travelled o’er the ridges of the earth
and heaven,

And this the highest realm of all.

6 Over the heights have they attained the highest thread that

is spun out,

And this which must be deemed most high.

7 Thou, Soma, holdest wealth in kine which thou hast seized

from niggard churls :

Thou calledst forth the outspun thread.

HYMN XXI EL Soma Pavamfrna,

Swift Soma*drops have been effused in stream of meath, the
gladdening drink,

For sacred lore of every kind.

2 Hither to newer resting-place the ancient Living Ones are

come.

They made the Sun that he might shine.

3 0 Pavamana, bring to us the nnsacrificing foeman’s wealth,
And give us food with progeny.

4 The living Somas being cleansed diffuse exhilarating drink,
Turned to the vat which drips with meath.,

5, Soma flows on intelligent, possessing sap and mighty strength,
Brave Hero who repels the curse.

6 For Indra, Soma ! thou art cleansed, a feast-companion for

the Gods :

Indu, thou fain wilt win us strength.

7 When he had drunken draughts of this, Indra smote down

resistless foes :

Yea, smote them, and shall smite them still!

. HYMN XXIY. SomaPavamAna.

Hitherward have the Somas streamed, the drops while they
are purified :

When blent, in waters they are rinsed.

6 Or, ‘ Streams rushing down have filled the threads, most excellent, spread

out beneath ' ; that is, the threads of J1 - 1 /,) . S ee no ^ e j n Wjd aoi]

According to S&yana ‘the .thread’ h ■ : : . -this which must be

de.erned most high * may be, as Ludwig suggests, the place of sacrifice which
is also to be held holy. Wilson translates the second line:— ‘this rite ia
glorified thereby.’

7 From niggard churls : or from the Papis, Thou calledst out the outspun
thread: thou hast called aloud at the outspread sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

2 JYcwer resting-place: a newly-prepared place of sacrifice. The ancient
Living One? : the Soma-drops.

It YMN 25 -J

TEE RIG VEDA.

m

2 The milk hath run to meet them like floods rushing down a

precipice :

They come to Indra, being cleansed.

3 0 Soma Pavamana, thou art flowing to be Indra’s drink :

The men have seized and lead thee forth.

4 Victorious, to bo hailed with joy, 0 Soma, flow, delighting

men,

To him who ruleth o’er mankind.

5 Thou, Indu, when, effused by stones, tbou runnest to the

filter, ai't

Beady for Indra’s high decree. *

6 Flow on, best Vyitra-slayer • flow meet to be hailed with joyful

1 lauds.

Pure, purifying, wonderful.

7 Pure, purifying is he called the Soma of the meath effused.
Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods.

HYMN XXV. Soma Pavamana.

Grrhjn-hued ! as one who giveth strength flow on for Gods to
drink, a draught
For Vayu and the Marutjiost.

2 0 Pavamana, sent by song, roaring about thy dwelling-place.
Pass into Vayu as Law bids.

3 The Steer shines with the Deities, dear Sage in his appointed

home,

Foe-slayer, most beloved by Gods.

4 Taking each beauteous form, he goes, desirable, while purified,.
Thither where the Immortals sit.

5 To Indra Soma flows, the Bed, engendering song, exceeding

w r ise,

The visitor of living men.

4 To him loho ruleth o'er mankind : to Indra.

5 Ready for Indra' s high decree : Wilson, following S&yana, translates ;
f an ample portion for Indra’s belly.’ See Bergaigne, La Religion V4dique t
III. 210 ff., for the meaning of dMm.au in the Iiigveda.

2 Into Vdyu : into the vessel appropriated to V&yu — Qftyana,

$ The Red .* arvshdh ; here explained by Sftyana as = drocham&nak , shining
or radiant The visitor of living men : dyushdk ; the meaning of this word
is uncertain. The St. Petersburg Lexicon explains it as, conjointly with
men ; with human co-operation. Ludwig in his translation renders it by
‘der den lebenden besucht/ who visits the living man ; but in his Comment-
ary suggests that it may mean, during the whole of life. 2 * 4 Constantly,'-- -

Wilson,

TEE HYMNS OF

[BOOK IX.

6 Flow, beat exhilarator, Sage, flow to the filter in a stream'

To seat thee in the place of song.

HYMN XXVI. Soma Pavamdna.

The sages with the fingers’ art have dressed and decked* that
vigorous Steed
Upon the lap of Aditi.

2 The kine have called aloud to him exhaustless with a thou-

sand streams,

To Indu who supporteth heaven.

3 Him, nourisher of many, Sage, creative Pavamana, they
Have sent, by wisdom, to the sky.

4 Him, dweller with Vivasvan, they with use of both arms have

sent forth,

The Lord of Speech infallible.

5 Him, green, beloved, many-eyed, the Sisters with the pressing-

stones

Send down to ridges of the sieve.

6 0 Pavamana, Indu, priests hurry thee on to Indra, thee
Who aidest song and cheerest him.

HYMN XXYIL Soma PavamAna.

This Sage, exalted by our lauds, flows to the purifying cloth,
Scattering foes as he is cleansed.

2 As giving power and winning light, for Indra and for Y&yu he
Is poured upon the filtering-cloth.

3 The men conduct him, Soma, Steer, Omniscient, and the Head

of Heaven,

: Effused into the vats of wood.

6 Of song : arlcdsya ; archaniyasyendrasya, of the adorable Indra, accord-*
ing to Sftyana. Arka lias two meanings in the Bigveda (1) song or hymn of
praise and (2) light or splendour. See Pischel, Vedische Studien , X. pp. 23 — 26.

X Aditi : the earth.

2 The kine : who supply the milk that is mixed with the Soma juice.

4 F " * ~ : m 1 ■ ’ ere the sacrifices Of both arms : bhuvijah : accord-
ing to " . ■ arms of the body. The St. Petersburg Lexicon

explains the word as meaning a sort of vice or implement for holding wood
wHile‘ it is being cut. lord of speech : making men eloquent.

5 Many-eyed ; ‘ far-beholding.’ — Wilson. The Sisters ; the fingers of the

officiating priest.

3 Omniscient; or,* all- possessing. of wood ; vdneshu : accoixling to

Bcnfey, into the streams of water.

EYMN 29.] .. TEE R1QYEDA. m

4 Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indu Pavam&na lowed,
Still Conqueror, never overcome.

5 This Pavam&na, gladdening draught, drops on the filtering -

cloth, and then

Mounts up with Surya to the sky.

6 To Indra in the firmament this mighty tawny Steer hath flowed,
This Indu, being purified.

HYMN XXVIII. Soma PavamAna.

Urged by the men, this vigorous Steed, Lord of the mind,
Omniscient,

Huns to the woollen straining-cloth. *

2 Within the filter hath he flowed, this Soma for the Gods

effused,

Entering all their essences.

3 He shines in beauty there, this God Immortal in his dwelling-

place,

Foe-slayer, dearest to the Gods.

4 Directed by the Sisters ten, bellowing on his way this Steer
Huns onward to the wooden vats.

5 This Pavamana, swift and strong, Omniscient, gave splendour

to

The Sun and all his forms of light.

6 This Soma, being purified, flows mighty and infallible,

Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods.

HYMN XXIX. Soma Pavam&na.

Forward with mighty force have flowed the currents of this
Steer effused,*

Of him who sets him by the Gods.

2 The singers praise him with their song, and learned priests

adorn the Steed,

Brought forth as light that merits laud.

3 These things thou winnest lightly while purified, Soma, Lord

of wealth :

Fill full the sea that claims our praise.

4 Longing for lane ; wlio supply milk to mix with the Soma juice. Gold ;
worn ou the finger of the priest who presses out the juice. Lowed; made
a noise in dropping.

5 Mounts up : as the Moon.

1 Who sets him ly the Gods ; or, who decorates the Gods. ‘Who seeks to
surpass the gods.’— Wilson.

3 These things «' for which we pray. The sea, ; the Soma-vat or reservoir.
19

290 THE HYMNS OF IBOOK IX.

4 Winning all precious things at once, flow on, 0 Soma, with

thy stream :

Drive to one place our enemies.

5 Preserve us from the godless, from ill-omened voice of one

and all,

That so we may be freed from blame.

6 0 Indu, as thou flowest on bring us the wealth of earth and

heaven,

And splendid vigour, in thy stream.

HYMN XXX. Soma Pavam&na.

Streams of this Potent One have flowed easily to the strain-
ing-cloth :

While he is cleansed he lifts his voice.

2 Indu, by prossevs urged to speed, bellowing out while beautified,
Sends forth a very mighty sound.

3 Pour on us, Soma, with thy stream man-conquering might

which many crave,

Accompanied with hero sons.

4 Hither hath Pavamana flowed, Soma flowed hither in a stream,
To settle in the vats of wood. € ,

5 To waters with the stones they drive thee tawny-h ued, most

rich in sweets,

0 Indu, to be Indra’s drink.

6 For Indra,for the Thunderer press the Soma very rich in sweets.
Lovely, inspiriting, for strength.

HYMN XXXI. Soma.Pavamdna.

The Soma-drops, benevolent, come forth 'as they are purified.
Bestowing wealth which all may see.

2 0 Indu, high o'er heaven and earth be thou, incroaser of our

might :

The Master of all strength be thou.

3 The winds are gracious in their love to thee, the rivers flow

to thee :

Soma, they multiply thy power.

5 Ill-omened voice ; svanflt, explained by Sfiyaria as - mbdftrrindivUyd*. somv-l
or word in the form of blame; the raging fury of tlie dem-..:: or the vodiova
man, according to Grassmann.

2 A very mighty sound : or, a sound which Indra loves.

1 Wealth which all may see : f intellectual wealth/— Wilson.

3 The winds; cl ‘ Vdyu is Soma’s guardian God’ (X. 85. 5).

the riqy eb a.

HYMN 32*]

291

4 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite

in thee :

Be in the gathering-place of strength.

5 For thee, brown-hued ! the kine have poured imperishable oil

and milk

Aloft on the sublimest height.

6 Friendship, 0 Indu, we desire with thee who bearest noble

arms,

With thee, 0 Lord of all that is.

HYMN XXXII. Soma Pavamdna.

The rapture-shedding Soma-drops, effused m* our assembly,
have

Flowed forth to glorify our prince.

2 Then Trita’s Maidens onward urge the Tawny-coloured with

• the stones,

Indu for Indra, for his drink. .

3 Now like a swan he maketh all the company sing each his

hymn :

He, like a steed, is bathed in milk.

4 0 Soma, viewing heaven and earth, thou runnest like a dart-

ing deer : »

Set in the place of sacrifice.

5 The cows have sung with joy to him, even as a woman to her

love :

He came as to a settled race.

6 Bestow illustrious fame on us, both on our liberal lords and me,
Glory, intelligence, and wealth.

4 This stanza has occurred* before. See I. 91. 16. .Be in the gathering place
of strength : be the central point and source of all power.

5 The Jcine ; of the clouds, the waters. Oil and milk : sweet and fertilizing
rain. Or the cows who supply milk for the libation may be intended, in
which case { the sublimest * would be the place of sacrifice.

1 Our prince : the noble who institutes the sacrifice.

2 Trita's Maidens : the fingers of the priest. See IX. 38. 2,

3 Like a swan: as a sentinel hansa (swan, wild-goose, or flamingo) at the
approach of danger sounds a note of alarm which is answered by all the
rest. — Ludwig.

\ q * — - - — taktah with * thou/ Soma, and explains it by

' . ■ ; " &q,n, being mixed with milk, curds, etc. Etee-

\. ' ' ■■ * swift.’

5 Cows : praises, according to Sftyaua. As to a settled race : as a horse is
brought to run a race that has been arranged. f As a hero hastens to the
welcome contest.’ — Wilson.

292 TMB HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

HYMN XXXIII. Soma Pavam&na.

Like waves of waters, skilled in song the juices of the Soma
speed

-Onward, as buffaloes to woods.

2 With, stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowed

with strength in store
Of ki-ne into the wooden vats.

3 To Indra, Vayu, Yaruna, to Vishnu, and the Maruts, flow
The drops of Soma juice effused.

4 Three several words are uttered : kine are lowing, cows who

give theh milk :

The Tawny-hued goes bellowing on.

5 The yoimg and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered

praise :

They decorate the Child of Heaven.

6 From every side, 0 Soma, for our profit, pour thou forth

four seas

Filled full of riches thousandfold.

JHYMN - XXXIY. Soma Pavam£na.

The drop of Soma juice effused flojvs onward with this stream
impelled,

Bending strong places, with its might.

2 Poured forth, to Indra, Yaruna, to V&yu and the Marut host,
To Vishnu, flows the Soma juice.

3 With stones they press the Soma forth, the Strong conducted

by the strong :

They milk the liquor out with skill.

4 J Tis he whom Trita must refine, ’tis he who shall make Indra

glad :

The Tawny One is decked with tints.

4 Three several words ; according to S&yana, trividhd stutih , praise of three
kinds, from the three Vedas. * The priests ntter the three sacred texts.’ — »
Wilson. Probably three triplets chanted during the ceremony. See Bergaigne,
I. 288-

5 Mothers of the holy rite : apparently, the cows who supply milk for
libations. The Child of Heaven ; the Soma, which, according to a text quoted
by S&yana, * was in the third heaven from hence.’

6 Four seas ; imaginary seas, to correspond with the four quarters of heaven.

1 Strong 'places ; the strongholds of enemies, the fiendB who withhold the
rain.

4 Trita ; the preparer of the Celestial Soma.

HYMN 36.]

THE RiaVEHA.

m

5 Him do the Sons of Prism milk, the dwelling-place of sacrifice,
Oblation lovely and most dear.

6 To him in one united stream these songs flow on straight

forward : he,

Loud-voiced, hath made the milch-ldne low.

HYMN XXXV. Soma Pavamdna.

Poue forth on us abundant wealth, 0 Pavamana, with thy
stream,

Wherewith thou mayest And us light.

2 0 Indu, swayer of the sea, shaker of all things, flow thou on,

Bearer of wealth to us with might. «

3 With thee for Hero, Valiant One ! may we subdue our ene-

mies :

Let what is precious flow to us.

4 Indu arouses strength, the Sage who strives for victory,

winning power,

Discovering holy works and means.

5 Mover of speech, we robe him with our songs as he is purified,
Soma, the Guardian of the folk ;

6 On whose way, Lord of Holy Law, most rich, as he is purified,
The people all have set*their hearts.

HYMN XXXVI. Soma Pavam&na.

Foeth from the mortar is the juice sent, like a car-horse, to
the sieve :

The Steed steps forward to the goal.

2 Thus, Soma, watchful, bearing well, cheering the Gods, flow
past the sieye,

Turned to the vat that drops with meath.

5 2? ' * ~ T7 ‘* * t v 1 2 -;-- -f sacrifice : the Soma-plant contains within itself the

chief ■■ ' ■' . . and the preparation of the juice is only the devel-

opment of its nature. — Ludwig.

2 The sea : the reservoir of Soma juice.

4 Discovering holy works and means : { acquainted with sacred rifes apd
arms.’ — Wilson.

6 On whose way : on whose statutes or decrees.

1 To the goal : kftrshman : apparently, a line or furrow drawn across the
end of the race- course. In I. 116. 17, S&yana explains Mrshman as a piece
of wood serving as a goal, but in this place he takes it to mean, 1 the God-
attracting battle-field called a sacrifice/ devdndrtidlcarshanavati yajndkhye sang*
rdme. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation,

2 The vat ; the dronakalasa.

294 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

3 Excellent Pavam&na, make the lights shine brightly out

for ns :

Speed us to mental power and skill.

4 He, beautified by pious men, and coming from their hands

adorned,

Flows through the fleecy straining-cloth.

5 May Soma pour all treasures of the heavens, the earth, the

firmament

Upon the liberal worshipper.

6 Thou mountest to the height of heaven, 0 Soma, seeking

steeds and kine,

And seeking heroes, Lord of Strength !

HYMN XXXVI L Soma PavamAna.

Soma, the Steer, effused for draught, flows to the purifying sieve,
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods.

2 Far-sighted, tawny-coloured, he flows to the sieve, intelligent,
Bellowing, to his place of rest.

3 This vigorous Pavam&;ia runs forth to the 1 uminous realm of

heaven,

Fiend-slayer, through the fleecy sieve.

4 This Pavamfina up above Trita’s high ridge hath made the Sun,
Together with the Sisters, shine.

5 This Vritra-slaying Steer, effused, Soma, room-giver, ne’er

deceived,

Hath gone, as ’twere, to win the spoil.

6 Urged onward by the sage, the God speeds forward to the

casks of wood, _ -

Indu to Indra willingly.

HYMN XXXVIIL Soma Pavam&na.

Tins Steer, this Chariot, rushes through the woollen filter,
as he goes

To war that wins a thousand spoils.

1 For draught : pit dye ; f for the drinking (of the gods)/ — Wilson.

2 Intelligent : or, endowed with strength.

4 Tritit’s high ridge : according to Ssiyana, c the high place (of the sacrifice)
of Trita’ the liishi. Bat the heavenly home of Trita, the celestial preparer of
the Soma for Indra, is intended. The Sisters ; the Dawns.

fi Willingly; mahhdnd : ‘plenteously.’ — Ludwig. * In his might.’— Cowell.

1 To war that wins a thousand spoils : more literally, to thousandfold booty,
or deed of might,

HYMN 39.] THE RIO VEDA. 295

2 The Dames of Trita with the stones onward impel this

Tawny One,

Indu to Indra for his drink.

3 Ten active fingers carefully adorn him here ; they make him

bright

And beauteous for the gladdening draught.

4 He like a falcon settles down amid the families of men,
Speeding like lover to his love.

5 This young exhilarating juice looks downward from its place

in heaven,

This Soma-drop that- pierced the sieve.

6 Poured for the draught, this tawny juice flows forth, intel-

ligent, crying out,*

Unto the well-beloved place.

HYMN XXXIX. Soma Pavain&na.

Flow on, 0 thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy beloved
form,

Saying, I go where dwell the Gods.

2 Preparing what is unprepared, and bringing store of food

to man,

Make thou the rain despond from heaven.

3 With might, bestowing power, the juice enters the purifying

sieve,

Far-seeing, sending forth its light.

' 4 This is it which in rapid course hath with the river’s wave
flowed down

From heaven upon the straining-cloth.

5 Inviting him from far away, and even from near at hand, the

j uice

* For Indra is poured forth as meath.

6 In union they have sung the hymn; with stones they urge the

Tawny One.

Sit in the place of sacrifice.

2 The Dames of Trita; as Trita is the celestial purifier of tlie Soma, the
fingers o! the earthly purifiers are called his dames, or his maidens as in
IX. 32. *2.

5 From its place in heaven ; or divdth, may be the genitive ease, taken with
sfsuh, the Child of Heaven, as in IX. 33. 5.

*6 The well-beloved place : the dronakalasa or vat in which it rests.

2 Preparing what is unprepared : 4 consecrating the uuconsecrated worship-
per or place/ is Sftyana’s explanation.

0 Sit ; 0 Gods. — S&yana.

TEE HYMNS OP

m

[BOOK IX

HYMN XL. Soma PaVam&na.

The Very Active hath assailed, while purified, all enemies. :
They deck the Sage with holy songs.

2 The Red hath mounted to his place ; to Indra goes the mighty

juice :

He settles in his firm abode.

3 0 Indu, Soma, send us now great opulence from every side,
Pour on us treasures thousandfold.

4 0 Soma Pavam&na, bring, Indu, all splendours hitherward :
Find for us food in boundless store.

5 As thou arte- cleansed, bring hero strength and riches to thy

worshipper,

And prosper thou the singer’s hymns.

6 0 Indu, Soma, being cleansed, bring hither riches doubly-

piled,

Wealth, mighty Indu, meet for lauds.

HYMN XLI. Soma Pavam&na.

Active and bright have they come forth, impetuous in speed
hke bulls,

Driving the black skin far away,

2 Quelling the riteless Dasyu, may we think upon the bridge of

bliss,

Leaving the bridge of woe behind.

3 The mighty Pavamaua’s roar is heard as ’twere the rush of rain :
Lightnings are flashing to the sky.

4 Pour out on us abundant food, when thou art pressed, 0 Indu,

wealth

In kine and gold and steeds and spoil.

5 Flow on thy way, Most Active, thou : fill full the mighty heav-

ens and earth,

As Dawn, as Sfirya with his beams.

2 The Bed: Soma. His place: the dronahalasd, or reservoir. His firm
abode: heaven.

r ^ , ,V - ,T - 7 . dvibdrhasam : according to S%ana, 'from both worlds,

i.

1 They : the Soma juices. The black skin : meaning, apparently, both the
black pall or covering of night and the R&kshasas or dark-skinned Dasyus or
hostile aborigines.

3 The cleansing of the terrestrial Soma is identified with the purification
of the celestial nectar accompanied by rain and lightning. See Hillebrand/t.
F. M. 343, 362.

HYMN 48.] THE RIQ7EDA. 297

6 On every side, 0 Sonia, flow round us with thy protecting
stream,

As Kasa flows around the world.

HYMN XLIL Soma Pavam&na.

Engendering the Sun in floods, engendering heaven’s lights,

green-lmecl,

Bobed in the waters and the milk,

2 According to primeval plan this Soma, with his stream, effused
Flows purely on, a God for Gods.

3 For him victorious, waxen great, the juices with a thousand

powers

Are purified for winning spoil.

4 Shedding the ancient fluid he is poured into the cleansing sieve:
He, thundering, hath produced the Gods.

5 Soma, while purifying, sends hither all things to be desired,
He sends the G 9 ds who strengthen Law.

6 Soma, effused, pour on us wealth in kine, in heroes, steeds,

and spoil,

Send us abundant store of food.

.Hl^MN XLIII. Soma Pavamdna.

We will enrobe with sacred song the Lovely One who, as a
Steed,

Is decked with milk for rapturous joy.

2 All songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way,
Indu for Indra, for his drink.

3 Soma flows ou when purified, beloved and adorned with songs,
Songs of the sage Medhy&tithi.

4 0 Soma Pavamfina, find exceeding glorious wealth for us,
Wealth, Indu, fraught with boundless might,

5 Like courser racing to the prize Indu, the lover of the Gods,
Roars, as he passes, in the sieve.

6 Rasd : a mythical stream that flows round the atmosphere and the earth.
See V. 41. 15, and X. 108. 1.

1 In floods : in the waters on high ; in the firmament.

4 Hath produced the Gods: yatra so mo ’ bhisMyate tatra devd myatamprddur -
lhavanti; where Soma is effused, there the gods constantly appear. —S&yana.

1 As a steed : is bathed in water. For rapturous joy : ‘ for the exhilaration
(of the gods),’ — Wilson.

8 Medhydtithi : the Eishi of the hymn.

5 Racing to the prize; vdjasrlt ; 'rushing into battle. — Wilson.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX

6 Flow on thy way to win us strength, to speed the sage who
praises thee :

Soma, bestow heroic power.

HYMN XLIY. Soma Pavam&na.

Ifdu, to us for this, great rite, bearing as ? twere thy wave to
Gods,

Unwearied, thou art flowing forth.

2 Pleased with the hymn, impelled by prayer, Soma is hurried

far away,

The Wise One in the Singer’s stream.

3 Watchful among the Gods, this juice advances to the cleans-

ing sieve ;

Soma, most active, travels on.

4 Flow onward, seeking strength for us, embellishing the sacri-

fice :

The priest with trimmed grass calleth thee.

5 May Soma, ever bringing power to Bhaga and to Vayu, Sage
And Hero, lead us to the Gods.

6 So, to increase our wealth to-day, Inspirer, best of Furtherers,
Win for us strength and high renown.

HYMN XLY. Soma PavamAna.

Flow, thou who viewest men, to give delight, to entertain the
Gods,

Indn, to Indra for his drink.

2 Stream to thine embassy for us : thou hastenest, for Indra, to
The Gods, 0 better than our friends.

* -i

3 We balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rap-

turous joy :

Unbar for us the doors of wealth.

6 Heroic power : 'excellent male offspring.’ — "Wilson.

1 For this great rite : ' to give us abundant wealth.’ — Wilson. Umoearied ;
ai/ffxyah : according to Sftyana, this is the name of the Bishi : ' Aytlsya
(goeth) towards the gods (in sacrifice).’ — Wilson,

2 Thou hastenest : Srtyana gives a different explanation of this part of the
stanza ; < thou (who) art drunk for Indra, (pour) on the gods wealth for (us
their) friends.’ — Wilson. I have adopted Ludwig’s iuterpretation.

3 We halm thee } red of hue: or, 'Yea, we adorn thee, red.’ For the rap-
turous jog: mlddya : f for the purpose of exhilaration.’ — Wilson,

■ '

f HYMN 40.] THE DIGVEDA. 299

4 He through the sieve hath passed, as comes a courser to the

pole, to run : ’

Indu belongs unto the Gods.

5 All friends have lauded him as he sports in the wood, beyond

the fleece :

Singers have chanted Indu’s praise.

6 Flow, Indu, with that stream wherein steeped thou announc-

est to the man

Who worships thee heroic strength.

HYMN XLYI. Soma PavamAna.

Like able coursers they have been sent forth be the feast
of Gods,

Joying in mountains, flowing on.

2 To Yayu flow the Soma-streams, the drops of juice made

beautiful

Like a bride dowered by her sire.

3 Pressed in the mortar, these, the drops of juice, the Somas

rich in food,

Give strength to Indra with their work.

4 Deft-handed men, run hither, seize the brilliant juices blent

with meal,

And cook with milk the gladdening draught.

5 Thus, Soma, Conqueror of wealth ! flow, finding furtherance

for us,

Giver of ample opulence.

6 This Pavamana, meet to be adorned, the fingers ten adorn,
The draught that shall make Indra glad.

4 To the pole ; the meaning of dhuram here is not clear, and the compari-
son is not obvious. ‘ As a horse in going passes the shaft (of the chariot).’ —

.Wilson. ‘As a horse (presses) through the yoke,’ — Grassmann. Ludwig
suggests ‘ hedge ’ or * barrier ’ as the probable meaning of the word in this
place.

5 In the wood, beyond the fleece; when he has passed through the woollen
strainer and fallen into the wooden trough or vat. Singers : ndvflh : shouts
of joy, according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon.

1 They have been sent forth : dsrigran (effusi sunt) is applicable both to the
effused Soma- drops and to horses loosed or started for a race. Joying in
mountains : coming from plants grown on hills.

2 Dowered by her sire ; meaning, perhaps, possessed of property inherited
from her father.

4 Deft-handcd : suhastyah cannot be satisfactorily accounted for. Suhastyd ,
a dual, may have been the original reading. See Ludwig’s Comment-ary, Yol.
V., pp. 347; 348.

306 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK tX.

, HZMN XLVIL Soma PavamAna.

Great as he was, Soma hath gained strength by this high,***
solemnity :

Joyous he riseth like a bull-

2 His task is done : his crushings of the Dasyus are made

manifest :

He sternly reckoneth their debts.

3 ‘Soon as his song of praise is born, the Soma, Indra’s juice,

becomes

A thousand-winning thunderbolt.

* £ Seer and S^istainer, he himself desireth riches for the sage
When he embellisheth his songs.

5 Fain would they both win riches as in races of the steeds. In war
Thou art upon the conquerors’ side.

HYMN XLVIII. Soma PavamAna.

With sacrifice we seek to thee kind Cherisher of manly might
In mansions of the lofty heavens ;

2 Gladdening, crusher of the bold, ruling with very mighty sway,
Destroyer of a hundred forts.

3 Hence, Sapient One ! the Falcon, strong of wing, unwearied,

brought thee down,

Lord over riches, from the sky.

6 That each may see the light, the Bird brought us the guard

of Law, the Friend
Of all, the speeder through the air.

5 And now, sent forth, it hath attained to mighty power and
majesty,

Most active, ready to assist.

1 Riseth : or, roareth. Sabdam Icaroti. — SAyapa. ”*

2 lie sternly reckoneth their debts : 1 resolute he acquits the debts (of the
worshippei').* — Wilson.

3 A thousand-winning thunderbolt : all-powerful to slay the wicked and to
reward worshippers,

4 Sustainer : I follow Ludwig in taking vidhartdri as a nominative singular.
But see Cowell's note in Wilson’s Translation.

5 They both: Soma and the sage or singer. — Ludwig. SAyana interprets
the stanza differently : — 1 2 3 4 Thou desirest to give wealth to those who conquer
in combat as (men offer fodder) to horses in battle.’ — Wilson.

1 Kind Cherisher of manly might : ( auspicious bearing wealth.’ — Wilson.

2 Hundred forts : cf. IV. 26. 3.

3 The Falcon : see IV. 26 and 27.

4 The Friend of all : or, the common possession. The speeder through the
air ; rajasHram ; 4 the showerer of water.’ — Wilson.

HYMN 50,] THE RIGYEHA . SOI

HYMN XLIX. Soma Pavam&na.

Pour down the rain upon us, pour a wave of waters from the
sky,

And plenteous store of wholesome food.

2 Flow onward with that stream of thine, whereby the cows

have come to us,

The kine of strangers to our home.

3 Chief Friend of Gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with

thy stream,

Pour down on us a flood of rain.

4 To give us vigour, with thy stream run through the fleecy

straining- cloth :

For verily the Gods will hear.

5 Onward hath Pavam&na flowed and beaten off the Rakshasas,

Flashing out splendour as of old. *

PIYMN L. Soma Pa-vam&na.

Loud as a river’s roaring wave thy powers have lifted up
themselves :

Urge on thine arrow’s sharpened point.

2 At thine effusion upward rise three voices full of joy, when thou
Flowest upon the fleecy ridge.

3 On to the fleece they urge with stones the tawny well-beloved

One,

Even Pavamana, dropping meath.

4 Flow with thy current to the sieve, 0 Sage most powerful to

cheer,

To seat thee in the place of song.

5 Flow, Most Exhilarating ! flow anointed with the milk for

balm,

* Indu, for Indra, for bis drink.

4 The Gods will hear : the sound that thou makes t in flowing. — S&yana.

5 Flashing out splendour as of old : or, 4 5 Making lights shine as erst they

shone.’

1 Urge on thine arrow's sharpened point : vdndsya ehodayd pavim : apparent-
ly a bold metaphorical expression for 4 make a noise like that of a discharged
arrow.’ 4 Emit thy sound like that of a (rushiug) k arrow.’ — Wilson. Or
vdndsya may mean of (thy) reed, pipe, flute, or other musical instrument, and
S&yana explains pavim by subdam. Benfey accordingly (S&maveda, II. 5, 1,
5. 1.) renders the passage : 4 Erhebe deiner Mote Schall,’ 4 Lift up the music’
;of thy flute.’ According to Hillebrandt, V. M., I. p. 43, the reed or arrow
■means the sharp-pointed stalk of the Soma-plant.

2 Three voices full of joy : or, three several joyful words. See IX. 33, 4.
The fleecy ridge : 4 the summit of the fleece.’ — Wilson.

4 In the place of song : see IX 25. 6. t On Indra’s lap.’ — Wilson.

302

[BOOK IX.

TUB HYMNS OF

HYMN LI. Soma Pavamftaa.

Adhvaryu, on the filter pour the Soma juice expressed with
stones,

And make it pure for Indra’s drink.

2 Pour out for Indra, Thunder-armed, the milk of heaven, the

Soma’s juice,

Most excellent, most rich in sweets.

3 These Gods and all the Marut host, Indu ! enjoy this juice of

thine,

This Pavamana’s flowing meath,

4 For, Soma, thou hast been effused, strengthening for the wild

carouse,

0 Steer, the singer, for our help.

j5 Flow with thy stream, Far-sighted One, effused, into the cleans-
ing sieve :

Flow on to give us strength and fame.

HYMN LII. Soma Pavam&na.

Wealth-winner, dwelling in the sky, bringing us vigour with
the juice,

Flow to the filter when effused. '

2 So, in thiue ancient ways, may he, beloved, with a thousand

streams

Bun o’er the fleecy straining-cloth.

3 Him who is like a caldron shake : 0 Indu, shake thy gift to us
Shake it, armed Warrior ! with thine arms.

4 Indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the vigour of

these men,

Of him who threatens us with war.

5 Indu, Wealth-giver, with thine help pour out for us a hundred,

yea,

A thousand of thy pure bright streams.

4 For the wild carouse : * for speedy exhilaration.’ — Wilson.

2 May he : the juice, regarded as distinct from Soma who is addressed.

3 Him who is Wee a caldron : beat or bruise the Soma that is full of juice
as a caldron is of water. With thine arms : or, with the blows (of the pressing-
stones). The meaning of the second and third ‘shake’ seems to be ‘send
rapidly.’ ‘ (Soma), send (us) him who is like a pot ; Indu, send us now wealth ;
swift-flowing (Soma), send it with blows (of the stones).’— Wilson. Professor
Grassmann says that by * him who is like a caldron’ the wealthy enemy is
intended, whose possessions are to be poured out upon the pious worshippers.

HYMN 55.]

THE RIGYEDA.

803

HYMN LI II. Soma Pavam&na.

0 thou with stones for arms, thy powers, crushing the fiends,
have raised themselves :

Chase thou the foes who compass us.

2 Thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, and

when the prize is staked :

With fearless heart .will I sing praise.

3 No one with evil thought assails this Pavam&na 7 s ho]y laws:

• Crush him who fain would fight with thee.

4 For Indra to the streams they drive the tawny rapture-drop-

ping Steed, >

Indu the bringer of delight.

• HYMN LIY. Soma Pavamdna.

m

After hia ancient splendour, they, the bold, have drawn the
bright*milk from

The' Sage who wins a thousand gifts.

2 In aspect he is like the Sun ; he runneth forward to the lakes,
Seven currents flowing through the sky.

3 He, shining in his splendour, stands high over all things that

exist — ^

Soma, a God as Surya is.

4 Thou, Indu, in thy brilliancy, ponrest on us, as Indra’s Friend,
Wealth from the kine to feast the Gods.

HYMN LY. Soma Pavam&na.

Pour on us with thy juice all kinds of corn, each sort of nourish-
ment,

And, Soma, al? felicities.

2 As thine, 0 Indu, is the praise, and thine what springeth from
the juice,

Seat thee on the dear sacred grass.

1 With stones for arms : adrivah : generally an appellative of Indra, the
slinger or caster of the stone or thunderbolt; here, according to Sftyana,—
gnlvavan soma, 0 Soma, possessor of, that is, expressed by, the stones.

2 When car meets car ; in battle. When the prize is staked : in the chariot-
race ; or the reference may be also to battle.

4 To the streams : the vasattvart waters.

1 They , the hold ; the Soma-pressers. The Sage : or Hishi ; Soma.

2 The lakes : of air. Seven currents : corresponding to the seven earthly
rivers. * He unites with the seven down-descending rivers of heaven/ — •
Wilson.

4 From the kine : consisting of milk, curds, etc.

THE HYMNS OF

m

[BOOK IX.

3 And, finding for us kine and steeds, 0 Soma, with thy juici

flow on

Through days that fly most rapidly.

4 As one who conquers, ne’er subdued, attacks and slays the

enemy,

Thus, Vanquisher of thousands ! flow.

HYMN LVI. . Soma Pavam&na.

Swift to the purifying sieve flows Soma as exalted Law,
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods.

2 When Soma pours the strengthening food a hundred ever-

active stY earns

To Indra’s friendship win their way.

3 Ten Dames have sung to welcome thee, even as a maiden

greets her love :

0 Soma, thou art decked to win.

4 Flow hitherward, 0 Indu, sweet to Indra and to Vishnu : guard
The men, the singers, from distress*

HYMN LVII. Soma Pavam&na.

Thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like showers
of rain from heaven,

To bring a thousand stores of strength.

2 He flows beholding on his way all well-beloved sacred lore,
Green-tinted, brandishing his arms.

3 He, when the people deck him like a docile king of elephants.
Sits as a falcon in the wood.

4 So bring thou hitherward to us, Indu, while thou art purified,
All treasures both of heaven and earth. *

HYMN LVIII. Soma Pavam&na.

Swift runs this giver of delight, even the stream of flowing
juice :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

4 Vanquisher of thousands ; or, thou who winnest thousands, i. e. countless

spoils or treasures.

3 Ten Fames : the fingers, whose sound is heard in the operation of pressing

the Soma juice. A °

3 Like a docile Icing of elephants : von Roth, in the St. Petersburg
Lexicon, suggests ibhe for ibhah , ‘ like a pious king among his retinue ; ’ but
no alteration is necessai’y, ibhah and r&jd being taken together in the sense
of elephant-king or stately and noble elephant. See Vedische Studien , I. p.
'XV. Sits as a falcon in the ivood: in the wood, as referring to the Soma,
meaning the wooden trough or vat. ‘ Sits on the waters like a hawk.’ — "Wilson.

1 Swift: t&rat ; ‘rescuing (his worshippers from sin).’ — Wilson.

HYMN 60.] TEE RIGVEDA . 305

2 The Morning knows all precious things, the Goddess knows her

grace to man :

Swift runs this giver of delight. ~

3 We have accepted thousands from Dhvasra’s and Purushanti’s

hands :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

4 From whom we have accepted thus thousands and three times

ten besides :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

HYMN LIX. Soma Pavam&na.

Flow onward, Soma, winning kine, and steeds', and all that
gives delight :

Bring hither wealth with progeny.

2 Flow onward from the waters, flow, inviolable, from the plants :
Flow onward from the pressing-boards.

3 Soma, as Pavamana, pass over all trouble and distress :

Sit on the sacred grass, a Sage.

4 Thou, Pavamana, foundest light ; thou at thy birth becamest

great :

0 Indu, thou art over all.

*

HYMN LX. Soma Pavamdna.

Sing forth and laud with sacred song most active Pavamana,
laud

Indu who sees with thousand eyes.

2 Thee who hast thousand eyes to see, bearer of thousand bur-
thens, they

Have filtered through the fleecy cloth.

3 Dhvasra and Purmhanti were ‘ two kings who conferred great wealth on
Taranta and Purumilha, two rishis of the family of Vidadasva. See p.
XXX III. of Max-Muller’s Big-veda, Vol, V.’ — Cow ell 5 s note in Wilson’s
Translation.

4 Thus thousands and three times ten : S&yana, taking tdnd (thus, in this
manner) to mean * garments,’ mistaking tririsdtum , thirty, for trisatam ,, three
hundred, and neglecting the cha (and), interprets c three hundred thousand
garments.’ ‘ Thirty robes and thousands.’ — E. B. Cowell. Grassmann places
this hymn in his Appendix as a composition of fragments and out of place
where it stands in the text.

2 The waters : the vasatlvart waters. The pressing-boards ; dhUhdndbhyah :
according to S&yana, grdvdbhyah, the pressing-stones.

X With sacred song ; gdyatrtna : ‘ with a Gdyatri hymn.’-— Wilson.

% Bewer of thousand burthens : or, bringer of thousand bounties,

20

m THE HYMNS OF f BOOK IX,

. 3 He, Pakamana, hath streamed through the fleece : he runs,
into the jars,

Finding his way to Indra’s heart.

4 That Indra may be bounteous, flow, most active Soma, for our
weal :

Bring genial seed with progeny.

‘ HYMN LXI. Soma Pavam&na.

Flow onward, Indu, with this food for him who in thy wild
delight

. Battered the nine-and-ninety down,

2 Smote swiftly forts, and Sambara, then Yadu and that Turyasa,
For pious Divodasa's sake.

3 Finder of horses, pour on us horses and wealth in kino and

gold,

And, Indu, food in boundless store.

4 We seek to win thy friendly love, even Pavamana’s flowing

o’er

The limit of the cleansing sieve.

5 With those same waves which in their stream o’er flow the

purifying sieve,

Soma, be gracious unto us. r

6 0 Soma, being purified, bring us from all sides, — for thou

canst, —

Riches and food with hero sons.

7 Him here, the Child whom streams have borne, the ten swift

fingers beautify :

With the Adityas is he seen.

8 With Indra and with Y&yu he, effused, flows onward with the

beams

Of Surya to the cleansing sieve.

9 Flow rich in sweets and lovely for our Bhaga, V&yu, Pdshan,

flow

For Mitra and for Yaruna.

10 High is thy juice’s birth: though set in heaven, on earth Jt
hath obtained

Strong sheltering power and great renown.

1 The nine-and-ninety : 'ninety-nine (cities of the foe),’ — Wilson.

3 In boundless store ; literally, in thousands.

7 Whom streams have borne: smdhumdtaram : 'whose parents are the
livers,’ — Wilson. fWn as the Moon in the ocean of air. With the Adityas
is fa seen : that U } he is counted as one of the Adityas,

T1IE mo VEDA.

HYMN 61.]

SO?

11 Striving to win, with him we gain all wealth from the ungodly

man,

Yea, all the glories of mankind.

12 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra whom w r e must

adore,

For Vanina and the Marut host,

13 The Gods have come to Indu well-descended, beautified with

milk,

The active crusher of the foe.

14 Even as mother cows their calf, so let our praise-songs strength-

en him, <%

Yea, him who winneth Indra’s heart.

15 Soma, pour blessings on our kihe, pour forth the food that

streams with milk :

Increase the sea that merits laud.

16 From heaven hath Pavamana made, as ’twere, the marvellous

thunder, and

The lofty light of all mankind.

17 The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, of Pavam&na,

King ! *

Flows o’er the woollen straining-cloth.

18 Thy juice, 0 Pavamana, sends its rays abroad like splendid

skill,

Like lustre, all heaven’s light, to see.

19 Flow onward with that juice of thine most excellent, that

brings delight,

Slaying the wicked, dear to Gods.

20 Killing the foeman and his hate, and winning booty every

day,

Gainer art thou of steeds and kine.

21 Red-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its*

lovely breast,

Falcon-like resting in thine home.

13 Well-descended: literally, well-born or well-produced j 4 (who is) com-
pletely generated.’ — Wilson.

15 The sea : samudrdm : according to S&yana, water generally.

1 6 * The purified [Soma] has generated the great light which is common to
all mankind, like the wonderful thundering of the skv.’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts,
TV. 112. The great light common to all men, or vaisvdnardm or the lofty
light of all mankind, is Agni Vaisv&nara,

20 The foeman and his hate; f the hostile Y ritra.’ — Wilson.

SQ8 TEE EYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

22 Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to slaughter

Vritra w T ho

Compassed and stayed the mighty floods.

23 Soma who rainest gifts, may we win riches with our hero

sons :

Strengthen, as thou art cleansed, our hymns.

24 Aided by thee, and through thy grace, may we he slayers

when we war :

Watch, Soma, at our solemn rites,

25 Chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, Soma floweth on»
Going to Inara’s special place.

26 0 Pavam&na, hither bring great riches, and destroy our foes :
O Indu, grant heroic fame.

27 A hundred obstacles have ne’er checked thee when fain to

give thy boons,

When, being cleansed, thou combatest.

28 Indu, flow on, a mighty juice ; glorify us among the folk :
Drive all our enemies away.

29 Indu, in this thy friendship most lofty and glorious may we
Subdue all those who war with us.

T

30 Those awful weapons that thou hast, sharpened at point to

strike men down —

Guard us therewith from every foe.

HYMN LXII. Soma Pavamdna.

These rapid Soma-drops have been poured through the puri-
fying sieve

To bring us all felicities.

2 Dispelling manifold mishap, giving the courser’s progeny,

Yea, and the warrior steed, success.

25 The godless: drdvnah : those who present no sacrificial offerings ; ‘the
withholders (of wealth).’ — Wilson. Special place: that is, the vessel set
apart for his libations.

- 26 Eeroic fame : or, fame with hrave sons.

27 Obstacles : or enemies, according to S&yana, Thou combatest : maltha -
syase: according to S&yana, ‘ when thou wish est to give ns wealth.’ ‘The
meanings “ fight,” “strive,” etc., are foreign to Sltya*; a, being derived from
a, comparison of jua^io/uai, macto, etc.’ — Editor’s note in Wilson’s Trans-
lation.

30 Weapons .’ the Moon being the warrior who overcomes the darkness of

night. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 340. Cf. ‘The moon advances like an

indignant warrior through a fleeing army.’ — S. T. Coleridge.

4

*

the mar ed a.

STUN 62.1

S09

3 Bringing prosperity to kine, they make perpetual lift flow
To us for noble eulogy.

4 Strong, mountain-born, the stalk hath been pressed in the

streams for rapturous joy :

Hawk-like he settles in his home.

5 Fair is the God-loved juice ; the plant is washed in waters,

pressed by men :

The mileh-kine sweeten it with milk.

6 As drivers deck a courser, so have they adorned the meath*s

juice for

Ambrosia, for the festival. ^

7 Thou, Indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which

were poured for help,

Hast settled in the cleansing sieve.

8 So flow thou onward through the fleece, for Indra flow, to be

his drink,

Finding thine home in vats of wood.

9 As giving room and freedom, as most sweet, pour butter forth

and milk,

0 Iudu, for the Angirases.

10 Most active and benevolent, this PavamAna, sent to us
For lofty friendship, meditates.

11 Quellerof curses, mighty, with strong sway, this Pa vara ana

shall

Bring treasures to the worshipper.

12 Pour thou upon us thousandfold possessions, both of kine and

steeds, „

Exceeding glorious, much-desired.

13 Wandering far, with wise designs, the juice here present is

effused,

Made beautiful by living men.

3 114 : here, according to Skyana, meaning 'food.’ ‘ Labe trank/ refreshing
draught. — Grassmann.

4 The stalk : the Soma- plant, which is said to have grown on the mountains.

5 In waters : the vasativarl waters.

6 Far ambrosia; amyitdya ; 'for the sake of immortality,’ — Wilson.

9 For the Angirases : or, from the Angirases. The Jamadagnis were not
members of that family. — Ludwig.

10 Meditates: 'is known (to all).’ — Wilson.

13 Wandering far: urugdydh: according to S&yana, much-lauded, or praised
by many. * * ~

[BOOK IX.

fl? TUB HYMNS OF

14 For Indra flows the gladdening drink, the measurer of the

region, Sage,

With countless wealth and endless help.

15 Born on the mountain, lauded here, Indu for Indra is set down,
As in her sheltering nest a bird.

16 Pressed by the men, as ’twere to war hath Soma Pavam&ua

sped,

To rest with might within the vats.

17 That he may move, they yoke him to the three-backed triple-

seated car

By the Severn Eishis’ holy songs,

J 8 Drive ye that Tawny Courser, 0 ye pressers, on his way to war,
Swift Steed who carries off the spoil.

19 Pouring all glories hither, he, effused and entering the jar,
Stands like a hero mid the kine.

20 Indu, the living men milk out thy juice to make the rapturous

draught :

Gods for the Gods milk out the meath.

21 Pour for the Gods into the sieve our Soma very rich in sweets,
Him whom the Gods most gladly -hear.

22 Into his stream who gladdens best these Soma juices have

been poured,

Lauded with songs for lofty fame.

23 Thou flowest to enjoy the milk, and bringest valour, being

cleansed :

Winning the spoil flow hitherward.

24 And, hymned by Jamadagnis, let all nourishment that kine

supply,

And general praises, flow to us.

25 Soma, as leader of the song flow onward with thy wondrous

aids,

For holy lore of every kind.

14 The measurer of the region; who measured out and made the firmament.

15 Born On the mountain: or, perhaps, as S&y ana takes it, ‘made manifest
by song.’

17 JBy the Seven Rishis' holy songs : or ‘Of Rishis, with seven holy songs ’ ;
the car being the saorifioe, the three backs or ridges being the three daily
libations, the three seats being the three Vedas.

19 Mid the hine: among the enemy’s cattle, for whose possession he is
fighting. So, says S&yana, Soma stands among the sacrifices.

20 The living men : the worshippers, according to S&yana ; but perhaps, as

Ludwig suggests, his stotdrah should be sotdrah, pressers. ’ Gods ; devtfh : th®
priests. ' - ’

ME niov ED A.

&YMN 63.]

m

26 Do thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of £he sea,
Flow onward, thou who niovest all.

27 0 Soma, 0 thou Sage, these worlds stand ready to attest thy

might :

For thy behoof the rivers flow.

28 Like showers of rain that fall from heaven thy streams per-

petually flow

To the bright fleece spread under them.

29 For potent Indra purify Indu effectual and strong,

Enjoyment-giver, Mighty Lord.

30 Soma, true, Pavamana, Sage, is seated in the cleansing sieve.
Giving his praiser hero strength.

HYMN LXITI. Soma Pavamana,

Pour hitherward, 0 Soma, wealth in thousands and heroic
strength,

And keep renown secure for us.

2 Thou makest food and vigour swell for Indra, best of glad-

den ers 1

Within the cups thou seatest thee.

3 For Indra and. for Vishnu poured, Soma hath flowed into

the jar :

May Vayu find it rich in sweets.

4 These Sonias swift and brown of hue, in stream of solemn

sacrifice

Have flowed through twisted obstacles,

5 Performing every noble work, active, augmenting Indra’s

strength, *

Driving away the godless ones.

6 Brown Soma-drops, effused, that seek Indra, to their appro"

priate place

Flow through the region hitherward.

7 Flow onward with that stream of thine wherewith tliou gavesfc

S uya light,

Urging on waters good to men.

8 He, Pavamana, high o’er man yoked the Sun’s courser Etasa
To travel through the realm of air.

26 Waters of the sea; of the sea of air, the firmament.

4 Twisted obstacles ; either the twigs of which the frame of the filter was
made, or the rough surface of the wool of the strainer. ‘Are let loo^e upon
th e R^ksha sas . ' — Wilson.

8 In this and the following stanza Soma is identified with the Son.

812 THE HYMNS OP [POOH /X

9 And those ten Coursers, tawny-hued, he harnessed that the
Sun might come :

Indu, he said, is Indra’s self.

10 Hence, singers, pour the gladdening juice to V&yu and to
Indra, pour

The drops upon the fleecy cloth.

110 Soma Pavamana, And wealth for us not to be assailed,
"Wealth which the foeman may not win,

12 Send riches hither with thy stream in thousands, both of

steeds and kine,

Send spoil 41 war and high renown.

13 Soma the God, expressed with stones, likeSurya, floweth on

his way,

Pouring the juice within the jar.

14 These brilliant drops have poured for us, in stream of solemn

sacrifice,

Worshipful laws and strength in kine.

15 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Somas, blent with

curdled milk,

Efiused for Indra Thunder-armed.

r.

16 Soma, do thou most rich in sweets, a gladdening drink most

dear to Gods,

Flow to the sieve to bring us wealth.

17 For Indra, living men adorn the Tawny Courser in the streams,
Indu, the giver of delight.

18 Pour for us, Soma, wealth in gold, in horses and heroic sons,
Bring hither strength in herds of kine.

19 For Indra pour ye on the fleece him very sweet to taste, who

longs

For battle as it were in war.

20 The singers, seeking help, adorn the Sage who must be decked

with songs :

Loud bellowing the Steer comes on.

21 The singers with their thoughts and hymns have, in the stream

of sacrifice,

Caused Soma, active Steer, to roar.

9 Coursers; or Hants. Cf, IV. 6. 9 and 13. 3.

10 Hence; from this vessel.

14 Worshipful laws : the meaning of dhamdnyftryd is not clear. 1 (Plowing)
towards the dwellings of respectable ( worshippers).’ — Wilson. * Venerable
might.’ — Ludwig.

THE RIG VEDA.

313

EttMN 64,]

22 God, working with mankind, flow on ; to Indra go thy gladden-

ing juice :

To Vayu mount as Law commands.

23 0 Soma Pavamana, thou pourest out wealth that brings re-

nown :

Enter the lake, as one we love.

24 Soma, thou fiowest chasing foes and bringing wisdom and de-

light :

Drive off the folk w r ho love not Gods.

25 The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of Soma

juice,

For holy lore of every kind.

26 The Pavam&nas have been shed, the beautiful swift Soma-

drops,

Driving all enemies afar.

27 From heaven, from out the firmament, hath Pavamana been

effused

Upon the summit of the earth.

28 0 Soma, Indu, very wise, drive, being purified, with thy stream
All foes, all Bakshasas away.

29 Driving the Bakshasas afar, 0 Soma, bellowing, pour for us
Most excellent and splendid strength.

30 Soma, do thou secure for us the treasures of the earth and

heaven,

Indu ! all boons to be desired.

HYMN LXIV". Soma Pavamdna.

Soma, thou art^a splendid Steer, a Steer, 0 God, with steerlike
sway :

Thou as a Steer ordainest laws.

2 Steer-strong thy might is as a steer’s, steer -strong thy wood,

steer-like thy drink :

A Steer indeed, 0 Steer, art thou.

3 Thou, Indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steeds

and kine :

Unbar for us the doors to wealth.

23 The lake : the drondkalam, vat or reservoir.

27 The summit of the earth : the raised altar,

1 Steer ; S&yana, as usual, explains vrisM by varshakah e Sprinkler.’ — Wilson,
3 Neighed together ; collected, through the efficacy of the sound thou
makest in dropping through the filter, and enriched us with, steeds and kine.

B14 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /X

4 0 lit of desire of cows and steeds and heroes potent Soma-drops,
Brilliant and swift, have been effused.

5 They purified in both the hands, made beautiful by holy men,
Flow onward to the fleecy cloth.

6 These Soma juices shall pour forth all treasures for the wor-

shipper

From heaven and earth and firmament.

7 The streams of Pavamaua, thine, Finder of all, have been

effused,

Even as Surya’s rays of light.

8 Making the^light that shines from heaven thou flowest on to

every form :

Soma, thou swellest like a sea.

9 Urged on thou sendest out thy. voice, 0 Pavamaua; thou hast

moved,

Like the God Surya, to the sieve.

10 Indu, Enlightener, Friend, hath been purified by the sages’

hymns :

So starts the charioteer his steed —

11 Thy God-delighting wave which hath flowed to the purifying

sieve,

Alighting in the home of Law.

12 Flow to our sieve, a gladdening -draught that hath most inter-

course with Gods,

Indu, to Indra for his drink.

13 Flow onward with a stream for food, made beautiful by sapient

men :

Indu with sheen approach the milk. *

14 While thou art cleansed, Song-Lover, bring comfort and

vigour to the folk,

Poured, Tawny One ! on milk and curds.

15 Purified for the feast of Go Is, go thou to Indra’s special place,
Besplendent, guided by the strong.

16 Accelerated by the hymn, the rapid drops of Soma juice
Have flowed, urged onward, to the lake.

17 Easily have the living drops, made beautiful, approached

the lake,

Yea, to the place of sacrifice.

8 To every form : to bring us blessings in every shape.

9 To the sieve : vklharmani : *in observance of the law/ according to M.
^Bergaigne. See La Relir/ion Vedique , III. 218, note.

16 The lake : samudram. : according to S&yana, the sea of air, the firmament.
The dronakala§:i, vat or reservoir, is probably intended.

HYMN 64.] THE M1GVEDA,

18 Compass about, our faithful Friend, all our possessions with

thy might :

Guard, hero like, our sheltering home.

19 Loud neighs the Courser Etasa, with singers, harnessed for

the place,

Guided for travel to the lake.

20 What time the Swift One resteth in the golden place of sacrifice,
He leaves the foolish far away.

21 The friends have sung in unison, the prudent wish to sacrifice :
Down sink the unintelligent.

22 For Indra girt by Maruts, flow, thou Indu, veiy rich in sweets,
To sit in place of sacrifice.

23 Controlling priests and sages skilled in holy song adorn thee

well :

The living make thee beautiful.

24 Aryaman, Mitra, Yarn n a drink Pavam finals juice, yea, thine;
0 Sage, the Maruts drink thereof.

25 0 Soma, Indu, thou while thou art purified urgest onward

speech

Thousandfold, with thedore of hymns.

26 Yea, Soma, Indu, while thou art purified do thou bring to us
Speech thousandfold that longs for war.

27 0 Indu, Much-invoked, while thou art purifying, as the Friend
Of these men enter thou the lake.

28 Bright are these Somas blent with milk, with light that flashes

brilliantly

And form that utters loud acclaim.

.29 Led by his drivers, and sent forth, the Strong Steed hath come
nigh for spoil,

Like warriors when they stand arrayed.

30 Specially, Soma, coming as a Sage from heaven to prosper us,
Flow like the Sun for us to see.

19 The Courser Elam : here meaning Soma. Ydhnih (from vah, Lat. veh-o)
is properly a horse of burden, or draught-horse.

21 The friends: the priests ; or perhaps the Maruts. Down sink : naralce,
into hell, says Sftyana.

. 26 That longs for war: makhasytivam : ‘desiring wealth.’ — Wilson. See
IX. 61. 27, note.

28 Form : krip$ : stream, according to SAyana.

80 Specially : ridhah : said by Y&aka to be the Vedic. form of pritliak , and
to be used in the* sense of prospering. See Wilson’s Translation, Editor’s note.
Or ridhd/c may mean, lightly, easily, without effort.

316

[BOOK JX

Tan mymns of

HYMN LX V . Soma Pavam&na.

The glittering maids send Sara forth, the glorious sisters, close -
allied,

Seiid Indu forth, their mighty Lord.

2 Pervade, 0 Pavam&na, all our treasures with repeated light,
God, coming hither from the Gods.

3 Pour on us, Pavamltna, rain, as service and fair praise for

Gods :

Pour all to be our nourishment.

4 Thou art a Steer by lustre : we, 0 Pavamana, faithfully
Call upon tiSee the Splendid One.

5 Do thou, rejoicing, nobly -armed ! pour upon us heroic strength :
0 Indu, come thou hitherward,

6 When thou art cleansed with both the hands and dipped in

waters, v r ith the wood
Thou comest to the gathering-place.

7 Sing forth your songs, as Yyasva sang, to Soma Pavamana, to
The Mighty One with thousand eyes ;

8 Whose coloured sap they drive with stones, the yellow meath-

distilling juice,

Indu for Indra, for his drink.

9 We seek to gain the friendly love of thee that Strong and

Mighty One,

Of thee the winner of all wealth.

10 Flow onward with thy stream, a Steer, inspiriting the Maruts’

Lord,

Winning all riches by thy might.

11 I send thee forth to battle from the press, 0 Pavam&na,

Strong,

Sustain er, looker on the light.

12 Acknowledged by this song of mine, flow, tawny- coloured,

with thy stream :

Incite to battle thine ally.

13 0 Indu, visible to all pour out for us abundant food :

Soma, be thou our prospered

. 1 The glittering maids: the fingers, perhaps with reference to the gold
rings worn by the priests when they press the Soma. Sdra : here said to
mean Soma ; f tlie invigorating." — Wilson. The glorious sisters ; the fingers.

3 As service: as the cause of worship.

6 With the wood : ‘ (taken* up) with the wooden vessel.’ — Wilson, Cf. IX.

1 . 2 .

7 Yyasva: a Biehi frequently mentioned in Book YIII.

12 Thine ally : Indra,

HYMN 65,]

THE RIG VEDA .

317

14 The pitchers, Indn, with thy streams have sung aloud in

vigorous might ;

Enter them, and let Indra drink,

15 0 thou whose potent gladdening juice they milk out with the

stones, flow on,

Destroyer of our enemies.

16 King Pavamana is implored with holy songs, on man’s behalf,
To travel through the firmament.

17 Bring us, 0 Indu, hundredfold increase of kine, and noble

steeds,

The gift of fortune for our help.

18 Pressed for the banquet of the Gods, 0 Soma, bring us might,

and speed,

Like beauty for a brilliant show.

19 Soma, flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to the wooden

vats,

Falcon-like resting in thine home.

20 Soma the Water-winner flows to Indra, Vayu, Varuna,

To Vishnu and the Marut host.

21 Soma, bestowing food upon our progeny, from every side
Pour on us riches thousandfold !

22 The Soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at

hand,

Or there on Saryanavan ? s bank,

23 Those pressed among Arjxkas, pressed among the active, in

men’s homes,

Or pressed among the Races Five —

24 May these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon us, as

they flow,

Bain from the heavens and hero strength.

25 Urged forward o’er the ox-hide flows the Lovely One of

tawny hue,

Lauded by Jamadagni’s song.

26 Like horses urged to speed, the drops, bright, stirring vital

power, when blent

With milk, are beautified in streams.

- 22 Saryandv&n' a tanlc : this lake is said to be on the borders of the Kura-
kshetra country.

23 Arjihas : apparently a non- Aryan people in the Korth-West, See VIII.
53. 11.

25 O’er the ox-hide : the leather sheet that received the droppings of the
Soma.

318 THE HYMNS OF {HOOK IX,

27 So they who toil with juiees send thee forward for the Gods-*

repast :

So with this splendour flow thou on,

28 We choose to-day that, chariot-steed of thine, the Strong’, that

brings us bliss.

The Guardian, the desire of all,

29 The Excellent, the Gladdener, the Sage with heart that un-

derstands,

The Guardian, the desire of all ;

30 Who for ourselves, 0 thou Most Wise, is wealth and fair

intelligence,

The Guardian, the desire of all.

HYMN LXYL Soraa Pavamdna,

For holy lore of every sort, flow onward thou whom all men love*
A Friend to be besought by friends.

2 O’er all thou rulest with these Two which, Soma Pavamana,

stand,

Turned, as thy stations, hitherward.

3 Wise Soma Pavamana, thou encompassest on every side
Thy stations as the seasons come.

4 Flow onward, generating food, for precious boous of every kind,
A Friend for friends, to be our help.

5 Upon the lofty ridge of heaven thy bright rays with their

essences,

Soma, spread purifying power.

6 0 Soma, these Seven Rivers flow, as being thine, to give

command :

The streams of milk run forth to thee. f

7 Flow onward. Soma in a stream, effused to gladden Indra’s heart.
Bringing imperishable fame,

8 Driving thoe in Vivasvan’s course, the Seven Sisters with

their hymns

Made melody round thee the Sage.

23 The guardian : pfaitam : according to Pischel, ‘ den sell well en den/

‘ the swelling one. 1 See his exhaustive excursus on the word in Vedische
Studien , X. pp. 191 — 194.

The Rishis are the hundred VaikMnasas, said to have been a race of saintly
hermits sprung from the nails of Prajftpati.

2 With these T<c,o : probably a double asterism. See Rillebrandt, V, M.
p. 446 ; and Gaidicke, Her Adcuscttiv im Veda, p 199,

8 The stream of Smna is likened to the course of Vivasv&n or the Sun.

The Seven Sisters are probably the Seven Elvers of stanza 6. According to
Sdyana ( the seven kindred (priests)’ are intended,

JfrYMX 66.] THE RIG VEDA. S19

9 The virgins deck thee o’er fresh streams' to drive thee to the
sieve when thou,

A singer, bathest in the wood.

10 The streams of Pavamlna, thine, Sage, Mighty One, have

poured them forth
Like coursers eager for renown.

1 1 They have been poured upon the fleece towards the meath-

distilling vat :

The holy songs have sounded forth.

12 Like milch-ldne coming home, the drops of Soma juice have

reached the lake,

Have reached the place of sacrifice.

13 0 Indu, to our great delight the running waters flow to us,
When thou wilt robe thyself in milk.

14 In this thy friendship, and with thee to help us, fain to

sacrifice,

Indu, we crave thy friendly love.

15 Flow on, 0 Soma, for the great Viewer of men, for gain of kine
Enter thou into Indra’s throat.

16 Best art thon, Soma, of the great, Strongest, of strong ones,

Indu : thou >

As Warrior ever hast prevailed.

17 Mightier even than the strong, more valiant even than the

brave,

More liberal than the bountiful,

18 Soma, as Sura, bring us food, win offspring of our bodies : we
Elect thee for our friendship, we elect thee for companionship.

19 Agui, thou potest life; send down upon us food and vigorous

strength :

Drive thou misfortune far away.

20 Agni is Pavamana, Sage, Chief Priest of all the Paces Five :
To him whose wealth is great we pray.

21 Skilled in thy task, 0 Agni, pour splendour with hero strength

on us, I

Granting me wealth that nourishes.

9 The virgins : the fingers.

3 2 The lake : the dronakalitsd or reservoir.

3 5 For gain of kine : gdvishtaye : according to S&yana, * for the seeker of
the kine of the Angirasea/

18 As Stir a: see IX. 65. 3. ( Who art a hero/ — Wilson, * From the Sun/ —
Ludwig.

19 Misfortune : duchehhtindm : frequently personified as an evil power;
< the Rukshasas.' — Wilson.

820 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

22 Beyond his enemies away to sweet praise Pavam&na flows,
Like Surya visible to all.

23 Adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, rich in

food,

Far-sighted Indu is a Steed.

21 He, Pavamana, hath produced the lofty Law, the brilliant
light,

Destroying darkness black of hue.

25 From tawny Pavamana, the Destroyer, radiant streams have

sprung,

Quick streams from him whose gleams are swift.

26 Best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise,jnid

beauteous ones,

Gold-gleaming with the Marut host,

27 May Pavam&na, best to win the booty, penetrate with rays,
Giving the singer hero strength.

28 Over the fleecy sieve hath flowed the drop effused : to Indra

comes

Indu while he is purified.

29 This Soma, through the pressing-stones, is sporting on the ox-

hide, and

Summoning Indra to the draught.

30 0 Pavamana, bless us, so that we may live, with that bright

milk

Of thine which hath been brought from heaven.

* HYMN LXVIL Soma and Others.

Thou, Soma, hast a running stream, joyoCis, most strong at
sacrifice :

Flow bounteously bestowing wealth.

2 Effused as cheerer of the men, flowing best gladdener, thou art
A Prince to Indra with thy juice.

3 Poured forth by pressing-stones, do thou with loud roar send

us in a stream

Most excellent illustrious might.

23 Is a Steed: ‘ one who continually goes to the Gods/ is S&y ana’s explana-
tion of dti/ah, horse or courser.

25 The Hestroyer : of darkness. Of. IS. 61. 30.

27 Penetrate: the whole world. — S&yana.

29 On the ox-hide : see IS. 65. 25.

2 A Prince : sdrih ; a rich and liberal patron.

THE RIG VEDA.

321

HYMN 67.]

4 India, urged forward, flowetli through the fleecy cloth : the

Tawny One

With his loud roar hath brought us strength.

5 Indu, thou flowest through the fleece, bringing felicities and

fame,

And, Soma, spoil and wealth in kine.

6 Hither, 0 Indu, bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundred-

fold :

Bring wealth, 0 Soma, thousandfold.

7 In purifying, through the sieve the rapid drops of Soma juice
Come nigh to Indra in their course.

8 For Indra flowetli excellent Indu, the noblest Soma juice,
The Living for the Living One.

9 The glittering maids send Sura forth : they with their song

have sung aloud
To Pavamana dropping meath.

1 0 May Pushan, drawn by goats, be our protector, and on all his

paths

Bestow on us our share of maids.

11 This Soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the

braided locks :

He shall give us our share of maids.

12 This Soma juice, 0 glowing God, flows like pure oil, effused

for thee :

He shall give us our share of maids.

13 Flow onward, Soma, in thy stream, begetter of the sages 7

speech :

Wealth-giver anfcrng Gods art thou.

14 The Falcon dips within the jars; he wraps him in his robe

and goes

Loud roaring to the vats of wood.

15 Soma, thy juice bath been effused and poured into the

pitcher : like

A rapid hawk it rushes on.

16 For Indra flow most rich in sweets, 0 Soma, bringing him

delight.

9 The glittering maids send Mra forth: repeated from IX. 65. 1.

10 Our share of maids : desirable and approved wives. — S&yana.

11 For him who wears the braided lochs : hapardine : see I. 114. 1, and VII.
83. 8. Here Pftshan is intended.

12 0 glowinq God : Pushan.

14 The Falcon : the faleon-like Soma.

21

THE HYMNS OF

S22

l BOOH IX,

17 They were sent forth to feast the Gods, like chariots that

display their strength.

18 Brilliant, best givers of delight, these juices have sent Vayu

forth.

19 Bruised by the press-stones and extolled, Soma, thou goest

to the sieve.

Giving the worshipper hero strength.

20 This juice braised by the pressing-stones and lauded passes

through the sieve.

Slayer of demons, through the fleece.

r *

210 Pavamaha, drive away the danger, whether near at hand
Or far remote, that finds me here.

22 This day may Pavam&na cleanse us with his purifying power.
Most active purifying Priest.

23 0 Agni, with the cleansing light diffused through all thy fiery

glow.

Purify thou this prayer of ours.

24 Cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, 0 Agni, that is

bright with flame,

And by libations poured to thee v

25 Savitar, God, by both of these, libation, purifying power, /
Purify me on every side.

26 Cleanse us, God Savitar, with Three, 0 Soma, with sublimest

forms,

Agni, with forms of power and might.

27 May the Gods’ company make me clean, and Vasus make me

pure by song. ^

Purify me, ye General Gods ; 0 J&ta vedas, make me pure.

28 Fill thyself full of juice, flow forth, 0 Soma, thou with all thy

stalks,

The best oblation to the Gods. 1

29 We with our homage have approached the Friend w ho seeks

our wondering praise,

Young, strengthener of the solemn rite.

18 Have sent Vdyu forth : have drawn him down from heaven. ‘Are let
foi*th for Y&yu.’ — Wilson.

26 The Three sublimest forms are said to be Agni, Y&yu, and Surya, or
Fire, Wind, and Sun.

27 The Gods' company : the yajamdnas or sacrifices, or the troop of Gods,
Indra and others.— S&yana. General Gods: vlsvedevdh : or, all ye Gods.

HYMN 68.] THE R1GVEDA, S28

30 Lost is Al&yya J s axe, 0 Soma, God : do thou send it back hither

in thy flow

Even, Soma, God, if ’twere a mole.

31 The man who reads the essence stored by saints, the PHvam&ni

hymns,

Tastes food completely purified, made sweet by Matarisvan’s
touch.

32 Whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the P&vamani

hymns,

Sarasvati draws forth for him water and butter, milk and
meath. ^

HYMN LX VIII. Soma Pavam&na.

The drops of Soma juice like cows who yield their milk have
flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the Shining One,

And, seated on the grass, raising their voice, assumed the milk,
the covering robe wherewith the udders stream.

2 He bellows with a roar around the highest twigs : the Tawny

One is sweetened as he breaks them up.

Then, passing through the sieve into the ample room, the God
throws off the dregs according to his wish.

3 The gladdening drink that measured out the meeting Twins

fills full with milk the Eternal Ever- waxing Pair.

Bringing to light the Two great Begions limitless, moving
above them he gained sheen that never fades.

30 This stanza is well-nigh unintelligible. Alftyya may, as is suggested
in the St. Petersburg Lexicon, be a name of Indra, and the lost axe may be
the thunderbolt which the poet thinks has long lain idle, and which Soma
is prayed to replace in the hands of the Thunderer, even though it were
worthless and miscliievcras like a mole. S&yana’s interpretation is different ; —

* May the battle-axe of the foe destroy the foe alone : flow to us, bright Soma ;
(slay) the villain only, bright Soma.’— Wilson.

31 By saints : by the Rishis to whom they were revealed. Pdvamdnt

hymns : the hymns in this Book dedicated to the purification of the Soma
juice. By Mdtarisvan's touch: ‘ '} . --.v. Y' V' -vf means Vdyu because

it breathes in the atmosphere ■ ■ ■ ' • ’ . - f ■ . .' .■ , 1 od is sweetened and

purified by the purifying wind and the man eats it.’ — Wilson. Mtarisvan
probably represents Agni.

1 The Shining One : devdm : the radiant Indra. The second line is obscure.
According to Sfty&na, usviydh here means i cows’ and not milk : — ‘the lowing
kine sitting on the barhis grass hold in their udders the pure (juice) welling
up.’ — Wilson.

2 The highest twigs : of the Soma-plant, which as being the tenderest and
juiciest are crushed first. — Ludwig. ‘He with a noise reechdes the principal
(praises) : separating the growing herbs, the green-tinted (Soma) sweetens
them.’ — Wilson.

. 3 The meeting Twins ; Soma is called the Creator and Preserver of heaven
a nd earth.

324

TUB HYMNS OF

{BOOK IX.

4 Wandering through the Parents, strengthening the floods,

the Sage makes his place swell with his own native might.

The stalk is mixed with grain : he comes led by the men
together with ijhe sisters, and preserves the Head.

5 With energetic intellect the Sage is bom, deposited as germ

of Law, far from the Twins.

They being young at first showed visibly distinct the Creature
that is half-concealed and half-exposed.

6 The sages knew the form of him. the Gladden er, what time

the Falcon brought the plant from far away.

Him who ^sures success they beautified in streams, the stalk
who yearned therefor, mighty and meet for praise.

7 Together with the Eishis, with their prayers and hymns ten

women deck thee, Soma, friendly when effused.

Led by the men, with invocations of the Gods, through the
fleece, thou hast given us strength to win the spoil.

8 Songs resonant with praise have celebrated him, Soma, Friend,

springing forth, with his fair company.

Even him who, rich in meath, with undulating stream,
Winnner of Wealth, Immortal, sends his voice from heaven.

9 He sends it into all the region forth from heaven. Soma,

while he is filtered, settles in the jars.

With milk and waters is he decked when pressed with stones:
Indu, when purified, shall find sweet rest and room.

10 Even thus poured forth flow on thy -way, 0 Soma, vouchsafing
us most manifold lively vigour.

We will invoke benevolent Earth and Heaven. Give us, ye
Gods, riches with noble heroes.

HYMNLXIX. - Soma Pavam&na.

Laid like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been loosed
like a young calf to the udder of its dam.

4 The Parents : heaven and earth. The floods : the waters of the firma-
ment. Grain : especially barley. Makes his place sivell : enriches bis own
station, the uttaravedi or northward altar. The sisters : the fingers. The
Head : apparently Sfirya. * Siyana’s explanation of sir ah, viz., sirnam
hhutajdtam (the withered world ?), needs explaining more than the original
itself.’ — Wilson.

5 The Sage: the Sun. Far from the Twins : rising in a distant region
beyond heaven and earth. The Creature that is half- concealed and half -
exposed: the meaning appears to be, as Ludwig says, that heaven and earth
while they were yet unseparated, produced the Moon : the Sun came into
being only when they had been separated through Soma’s energetic agency.

7 Ten women : the fingers.

1 Hath been loosed , <Sac. : 4 is let loose to (Indra) the fosterer as a calf to the
udder of its mother.’ 4 S&yana takes Hdhani [to the udder] twice over : he

HYMN 69.] THE MOVED A. 325

As one who cometli first with full stream she is milked : thus
Soma is impelled to this man’s holy rites.

2 The thought is deeply fixed; the savoury juice is shed ; the

tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth ;

And Pavaaiana, like the shout of combatants* the drop rich
in sweet juice, is flowing through the fleece.

3 He flows about the sheep-skin, longing for a bride : he loosens

Aditi’s Daughters for the worshipper.

The sacred drink hath come, gold-tinted, well-restrained : like
a strong Bull he shines, whetting his manly might.

4 The Bull is bellowing; the Cows are coming tfSgh : the God-

desses approach the God’s own resting-place.

Onward hath Soma passed through the sheep’s fair bright
fleece, and hath, as ’twere, endued a garment newly washed.

5 The golden-hued, Immortal, newly bathed, puts on a brightly-

shining vesture that is never harmed.

He made the ridge of heaven to be his radiant robe, the
sprinkling of the bowls from moisture of the sky.

6 Even as the beams of Surya, urging men to speed, that cheer and

send to sleep, together rush they forth,

These swift outpourings in long course of holy rites ; no
form save only Indra shows itself so pure.

7 As down the steep slope of a river to the vale, drawn from

the Steer the swift strong draughts have found a way.

says it is used of Indra because he is the nourisher of everything, * — Wilson.
.4s one uho cometh first: according to S&yana, as a cow coming before her
calf yields her milk, (^p Indra, coming before his worshippers pours various
blessings upon them). First: agre: at the head; at the- beginning of the
religious ceremony.

2 The tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth : probably the
priest’s tongue influenced by the exhilarating Soma juice. * The Foma stream,
emitting pleasant juice is driven into (Indra’ a) mouth/ — Wilson.

3 Longing for a bride : seeking the waters with winch he is to be united.
Aditi’s Daughters : probably, the plants, whose buds Soma as the Moon opens
and fertilizes with his nectareous beams. 1 The daughters of Infinity [Aditi]
are probably the quarters of the sky.’ — Ludwig.

4 The Dull : Soma. According to S&yana, the Cows are the propitiatory
hymns of praise, which are called also Goddesses or divine.

5 Brightly -shining vesture: the milk with which the Soma juice is mixed.
Say ana explains the second half of the stanza differently, taking chamvbh ,
bowls or beakers into which the Soma juice is poured, as meaning metaphori-
cally the two great receptacles of all living beings, or heaven and earth, and
introducing Aditya who is not mentioned in the text *. — ‘ he has created (Aditya)
who stands on thejback of the sky for the destruction (of sin) and purification,
(and has created) Aditya’s brilliance, the cover of the two worlds/ — Wilson.

326 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IK

Well be it with the men and cattle in our home. May powers,
0 Soma, may the people stay with us.

8 Pour out upon us wealth in goods, in gold, in steeds, in cattle

and in corn, and great heroic strength.

Ye, Soma, are my Fathers, lifted up on high as heads of
heaven and makers of the strength of life.

9 These Pa vamanas here, these drops of Soma, to Indra have

sped forth like cars to booty.

Effused, they pass the cleansing fleece, while, gold-hued, they
cast their covering off to pour the rain down.

10 0 Indu, flowrthou on for lofty Indra, flow blameless, very
gracious, foe-destroyer.

Bring splendid treasures to the man who lauds thee. 0
Heaven and Earth, with all the Gods protect us.

HYMN LXX. Soma Pavam&na.

The three times seven Milch-kine in the eastern heaven have
for this Soma poured the genuine milky draught.

Four other beauteous Creatures hath he made for his adorn-
ment, when he waxed in strength through holy rites.

2 Longing for lovely Amrit, by his wisdom he divided, each

apart from other, earth and heaven.

He gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, when
through their glory they found the God’s resting-place.

3 May those his brilliant rays be ever free from death, inviolate,

for both classes of created things, —

Bays wherewith power's of men and Gods are purified. Yea,
even for this have sages welcomed him as King.

4 He, while he is adorned by the ten skilful qnes, that he too in

the Midmost Mothers may create,

7 Vdjrih and krishtdyah, powers and people, are explained by Sayana as
‘ food * and ‘ offspring.’

8 Ye, Soma : ‘ Soma is treated as plural by attraction ; or, as S&yana puts
it, the plurality of the pitris is applied to Soma.’ — Wilson. Probably' Moon
and Stars are intended. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. p. 398.

10 With all the Gods: devaih : ‘ subhagairdhanaih with auspicious riches.’—

S&yana.

1 The three times seven Milch -Une are, according to Sftyana, the twelve
months, the five seasons, the three worlds, and Aditya or the Sun. Probably,
as Ludwig says, the seven celestial rivers, multiplied by three to correspond
with the threefold division of the heavens, are intended. These supply the

genuine •■* r 1 - 1 . * to the four other beauteous creatures, the Vasati-

vari and ' . i waters, which are terrestrial and factitious, made

to adorn or purify Soma.

3 Both classes ; animate and inanimate. Or Gods and men.

4 The ten skilful ones : the fingers. The Midmost Mothers : the clouds

HYMN 70.]

THE RIQVEEA.

327

While he is watching o’er the lovely Amrit’s ways, looks oil
both races as Beholder of mankind.

5 He, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength,

rejoices in his place between the earth and heaven.

The Steer dispels the evil-hearted with his might, aiming at
offerings as an archer at the game.

6 Beholding, as it were, Two Mother Cows, the Steer goes roar-

ing on his way even as the Maruts roar.

Knowing Eternal Law, the earliest light of heaven, he, pas-
sing wise, was chosen out to tell it forth.

7 The fearful Bull is bellowing with violent might, far-sighted,

sharpening his yellow-coloured horns.

Soma assumes his seatiu the well-fashioned place: the cowhide
and the sheepskin are his ornament.

8 Bright, making pure his body free from spot and stain, on

the sheep’s back the Golden-coloured hath flowed down.
Acceptable to Mitra, VAyu, Yarunrt, he is prepared as three-
fold meath by skilful men.

9 Flow on for the Gods’ banquet. Soma, as a Steer, and enter

Indra's heart, the Soma’s reservoir.

Bear us beyond misfortune ere we be oppressed : the man who
knows the land directs the man who asks.

10 Urged like a car-steed, flow to strength, 0 Soma: Indu, flow
onward to the throat of Inllra.

Skilled, bear us past, as in a boat o’er water: as battling
Hero save us from the foemau.

that hang between heaven and earth, in which, perhaps, Soma aids in produc-
ing the rain. But the meaning is uncertain. S&yana explains prame by
lokdn pramdtuni, * to measure out, or create, the worlds.’ Both races : Gods
and men.

6 .ds it were , Two Mother Cows : Heaven and Barth. S&yana explains the
second P&da of the second line differently: — ‘the intelligent (Pavamlna)
chose man to be the offerer of his praise.’ — Wilson.

8 Threefold : according to Sftyana, mixed with the Vasativarf water, curds,
and milk. Probably, poured into three separate vessels, one for each of the
three deities mentioned.

9 The man loho knows the land ; who is acquainted with the roads or ways.
4 S&yana completes the simile : * c as by telling him he protects (helps) him, so
dp thou who knowest the roads of the sacrifice protect us by telling us the
sacrificial paths.” ’ — Wilson. But, of course, the application is intended to
be general.

X0 Bear us past: carry us over all difficulties and dangers. From the foe
man ; niddh : * from the reviling (of the foe)/ — Wilson.

m . TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK 7X

HYMN LXXI. Soma PavamAna.

The guerdon is bestowed : tlie Mighty takes his seat, and, ever-
watehful, guards from fiend and evil sprite.

Gold-hued, he makes the cloud his diadem, the milk his carpet
in both worlds, and prayer his robe of state.

2 Strong, bellowing, he goes, like one who slays the folk; he lets

this hue of Asuras flow off from him,

Throws off his covering, seeks his father’s meeting-place, and
thus makes for himself the bright robe he assumes.

3 Onward he flows, from both the hands, pressed out with

stones : excited by the prayer, the water makes him wild.
He frolics aflcl draws near, completes his work with song, and
bathes in streams to satisfy the worshipper.

4 They pour out meath around the Master of the house, Celestial

Strengthener of the mountain that gives might ;
lu whom, through his great powers, oblation-eating cows in
their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk.

5 They, the ten sisters, on the la.p of Aditi, have sent him for-

ward like a car from both the arms.

He wanders and comes near the Cow’s mysterious place, even
the place which his inventions have produced.

6 Like as a falcon to his home, so speeds the God to his own

golden wisely-fashioned place to rest.

1 The guerdon : the honorarium givej^to the priests, consisting originally
of a cow. The Mighty ; Soma. Ills carpet : upastire: that which is spread,
scattered, or sprinkled. Cp. IX. 69. 5, where upastdranam is translated by
* sprinkling.’

'2 Hue of Asuras: or, celestial brightness; ‘ V s 1 * 3 4 5 d ' ■” ’ -Grassmann.

‘He puts forth that J aura-slaying tint of his’. ' ■ »■ . s ' ■' his father's

meeting-place : goes to meet the yajamdna or sacrificer. According to Sfiyaoa :
‘the food (pitiih ), that is, the Soma, goes to the prepared reservoir.’

3 The water makes him wild: vrishih/ute ndbhasd : nctbhas in the Soma-
hymns is used to signify either the rain-water in which, or the cloud from
which, the Soma flows to the earth. Here it means the water with which
the Soma- plant is sprinkled. See Vedisehe Studien, I. p 135. According to
Ludwig : c he acts like a bull in the sea of cloud.’ To satisfy the worshipper •
I adopt Ludwig’s suggestion and take ydjate as a dative of the participle.
Wilson translates, after S&yana : — ‘he is honoured at the (god) — protected
(sacrifice).’

4 The Master of the house: according to Sftyana, the conqueror of the fort
of tlie enemy. See IX. 78. 3. The mountain that gives might : the cloud.
In the second half of this stanza I adopt Sftyana’s interpretation as a make-
shift, although it seems impossible that mttrdhdn, * head,’ should here mean
‘uplifted.’ Ludwig takes tidhani, ‘udder,’ in the sense of ‘beluilter,’ or re-
ceptacle into which the Soma flows.

5 On the lap of Aditi: on the earth, ‘near to the ground.’ — Wilson
The Cow's mysterious place : or, distant place, is the udder of heaven, the
cloud.

TEE RIG VEDA.

329

HYMN 72.]

With song they urge the darling to the sacred grass : the
Holy One goes like a courser to the Gods.

7 From far away, from heaven, the red-hued noted Sage, Steer

of the triple height, hath song unto the kine.

With thousand guidings he, leading this way and that, shines,
as a singer, splendidly through many a morn.

8 His covering assumes a radiant hue; where’er he comes into

the fight he drives the foe afar.

The Winner of the Floods, with food he seeks the host of
heaven, he comes to praises glorified with milk.

9 Like a hull roaming round the herds he bellows : he hath

assumed the brilliancy of_ Surya.

Down to the earth hath looked, the heavenly Falcon : Soma
with wisdom views all living creatures.

HYMN LXXII. Soma Pavam&na.

They cleanse the Gold-hued : like a red Steed is he yoked, and
Soma in the jar is mingled with the milk.

He sendeth out his voice, and many loving friends of him the
highly-lauded hasten with their songs.

2 The many sages utter words in unison, while into Indr&’s

throat they pour the Soma juice,

When, with the ten that dwell together closely joined, the
men whose hands are skilful cleanse the lovely meatb.

3 He goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over the roaring-

sound which Surya’s Daughter loves.

The Falcon brought it to him for his own delight : now with
the twofold kindred sisters is his home.

4 Washed by the men, stone-pressed, dear on the holy grass,

faithful to seasons, Lord of cattle from of old,

Most liberal, completing sacrifice for men, 0 Indra, pure bright
Soma, Indu, flows for thee.

7 Of the triple height : working in heaven, firmament, and earth. — Ludwig.
See IX. 75. 3.

9 The heavenly Falcon : divy&h suparnah : ‘celestial, flying gracefully/—
Wilson. Soma, says B&yana, is said to go gracefully, < because ifc is carried
off by G&yatrt in the shape of a hawk.’

2 Indra’s : throat ; literally, belly ; the clromkalasd or reservoir. The
ten : the fingers.

3 The cows : the milk and curds. The roaring sound oi the effused Soma
is said to be dear to Surya’s Daughter, U abas or Dawn, because it is chiefly
heaixl in the early morning. The Falcon ; I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of
the strange word vinamgrtsdh as no other meaning seems suitable here.
According to S&yana, the word means praiser, or worshipper. The twofold
kindred sisters ; the fingers of both hands,

830 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /X

5 0 Indra, urged by arms of men and poured in streams, Soma

flows on for thee after his Godlike kind.

Plans thou fulfillest, gatherest thoughts for sacrifice : in the
bowls sits the Gold- b tied like a roosting bird.

6 Sages well-skilled in work, intelligent, drain out the stalk that

roars, the Sage, the Everlasting One.

The milk, the hymns unite them with him in the place of
sacrifice, his seat who is produced anew.

7 Earth's central point, sustainer of the mighty heavens, distil-

led into the streams, into the waters' wave,

As Indra’s thunderbolt, Steer with far-spreading wealth, Soma
is flowing'on to make the heart rejoice.

8 Over the earthly region flow thou on thy way, helping the

praiser and the poorer, thou Most Wise.

Let us not lack rich treasure reaching to our home, aud may
we clothe ourselves in manifold bright wealth.

9 Hither, 0 Indu, unto us a hundred gifts of steeds, a thousand

gifts of cattle and of gold,

Measure thou forth, yea, splendid ample strengthening food :
do thou, 0 Pavam&na, heed this laud of ours.

HYMN LXXJJL Soma Pavamftna.

They from the spouting drop have sounded at the rim : naves
speed together to the place of sacrifice.

That Asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. The
ships of truth have borne the pious man across.

2 The strong Steers, gathering, have duly stirred themselves,

and over the stream's wave the friends sent forth the song.
Engendering .the hymn, with flowing streams of meath, Indra's
dear body have they caused to wax in strength.

3 With sanctifying gear they sit around the song : their ancient

Father guards their holy work from barm.

1 The heart ; of Indra. As Indra 1 s thunderbolt : cp. IX. 77. 1.

1 They: the • from whose rim or edge the Soma-drops fall

noisily. Naves , ■, ■ wheels, again by the same figure, chariots,

and then by metaphor the swiftly-running Soma-drops. That Asura : the
divine Soma. To seize : to be held and used. Three lofty heir/hts : the three
elevated worlds. The ships of truth: or, of the truthful (Soma). According
to Sftyana, the four vessels which hold the Aditya, Agrayana, Ukthya, and
Dhruva libations.

2 The strong Steers : the priests.

8 Their ancient Father : Soma ; or, perhaps, Agni. Vanina : ( Soma the
all-envelopper/ — Wilson. Him : Soma. In sustaining Hoods ; in the Vasatt-
vart waters, — S&yana,

HYMN 74.]

THE RIO VEDA.

831

Varuna hath o’erspread the mighty sea of air. Sages had
power to hold him in sustaining floods.

4 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their voices down
together, in heaven’s vault that pours a thousand streams.

His wildly-restless warders never close an eye : in every place
are found the bonds that bind man fast.

5 O’er Sire and Mother they have roared in unison, bright with

the verse of praise, burning up riteless men,

Blowing away with supernatural might from earth and from
the heavens the swarthy skin which Indra hates.

6 Those which, as guides of song and counsellor^. of speed, were

manifested from their ancient dwelling place, —

Prom these the eyeless and the deaf have turned aside : the
wicked travel not the pathway of the Law.

7 What time the filter with a thousand streams is stretched,

the thoughtful sages purify their song therein.
Bright-coloured are their spies, vigorous, void of guile, 4 excel-
lent, fair to see, beholders of mankind.

8 Guardian of Law, most wise, he may not bo deceived : three

Purifiers hath he set within his heart.

With wisdom he beholds all creatures that exist : he drives into
the pit the hated riteless ones.

9 The thread of sacrifice spun in the cleansing sieve, on Varuna’s

tongue-tip, by supernatural might, —

This, by their striving, have the prudent ones attained : he
who hath not this power shall sink into the pit.

HYMN LXXIV. Soma Pavamdna*

Born like a youngling he hath clamoured in the wood, when
he, the Bed, the Strong, would win the light of heaven.

4 They : the beams that radiate from Soma ,* somarapnaycih : Soma-rays. —
S&yana.

5 Sire and Mother : the general parents, Heaven and Earth. The sivarthy
shin: c the black-skinned ( Rdkshasas ).* — Wilson.

6 Those: rays. X follow S&yana's interpretation. The first line is very
obscure.

7 The filter : the tip of their tongue. Gf. stanza 9, and hymn 75. 2. See ±ser-
gaigne, La Religion Vedique, I. 283. Bright coloured: rudrdtsah : sons of
Iiudra, according to S&yana. But see Vedische Studien, I. pp. 55, 56.

8 Of Law : of law-ordained sacrifice. The three Purifiers whom Soma sets
within his heart and combines in his own being are Agni, V&yu, Surya, the

pxirifying powers of fire, wind, and sun.

9 On Vanina's Vasattvari waters in whioh Soma dwells

(vasati) stand on tl i .*■ . 1 . . " C3 * rv He who hath not this

power ; f he who is incompetent for tli ■ - ■ ‘

1 In the wood : in the wooden vat. According to Sayana, ‘ in the water, 1

332

THE HYMNS OF

l BOOK IX.

He comes with heavenly seed that makes the water swell : him
for wide-spreading shelter we implore with prayer.

2 A far-extended pillar that supports the sky, the Soma-stalk,

filled full, moves itself every way.

He shall bring both these great worlds while the rite proceeds:
the Sage holds these who move together and all food.

3 Wide space hath he who follows Aditi’s right path, and mighty,

well-made food, meath blent with Soma juice ;

He who from hence commands the rain, Steer of the kine,
Leader of floods, who helps us hence, who claims our laud.

4 Butter andfmilk are drawn from animated cloud; thence

Amrit is produced, centre of sacrifice.

Him the Most Bounteous Ones, ever-united, love ; him as our
Friend the Men who make all swell rain down.

5 The Soma-stalk hath roared, following with the wave : he

sw T ells with sap for man the skin which Gods enjoy.

Upon the lap of Aditi he lays the germ, by means wherof we
gain children and progeny.

6 In the third regiou which distils a thousand streams, may the

Exhaustless Ones descend with prooreaut power.

The kindred Four have been sent downward from the heav-
ens : dropping with oil they bring Amrit and sacred gifts.

7 Soma assumes white colour when he strives to gain : the

bounteous Asura knows full many a precious boon.

Down the steep slope, through song, he conies to sacrifice,
and he will burst the water-holding cask of heaven,

2 He shall bring both these great worlds : shall bring Heaven and Earth to

the sacrifice. r

3 He who foliates Aditi’s right path: the regularly moving moon. Sayana
takes dditfh with gdvydtih : * the way to earth is broad.’ — Wilson. Somewhat
similarly Hiilebrandt, V. M., L 360.

4 The Most Bounteous Ones, the Men who make all swell, are, probably, the
Maruts who fertilize the earth, and send Soma down in the rain. S&yana’a
explanation is different : — ‘the assembled liberal givers [the yajamdnas or
sacrificers] delight him : (the Soma juices) the leaders, the protectors shower
down the accumulated (water) ’ — Wilson. For the meaning of p6ravah those
who swell, or cause to swell, ‘protectors’ according to S&y ana, see Vedische
Studien, I. p. 85.

5 For man : for the sacrifices The skin : his own body. — Sfiyana. Upon
the lap of Aditi : of the earth, according to Sayana. The meaning is that
Soma is the source of all Nature’s productive power.

6 In the third region : dwelling in heaven. The Exhaustless Ones : these

are the kindred Four of the following line, .' ”!*■ -to S&yapa, four

rays or digits of Soma. It is most probab ■ .■ -ddesses Sinivilli,

Kuhu or Gungii, Ealut/and Anumati are meant. Cp. II. 32. 6, 7.’ — Ludwig.

7 Strives to gain : seeks to enjoy heaven. — S&yana. The water-holding cask :
the water-laden cloud.

TEE RIG VEDA.

HYMN 75.]

333

8 Yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his goal, hath

stepped the conquering Courser.

Pious-souled men have sent their gifts of cattle unto Kak-
shivan of the hundred winters.

9 Soma, thy juice when thou art blended with the streams,

flows, Pavamana, through the long wool of the sheep.

So, cleansed by sages, 0 best giver of delight, grow sweet for
Indra, Pavamana ! for his drink.

HYMN LXXV. Soma Pavamana.

Graciously-minded he is flowing on his way to win dear
names o’er which the Youthful One grows £reat.

The Mighty and Far-seing One hath mounted now the mighty
Surya’s car which moves to every side.

2 The Speaker, unassailable Master of this hymn, the Tongue of

sacrifice pours forth the pleasant meath.

Within the lustrous region of the heavens the Son makes the
third secret name of Mother and of Sire.

3 Sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars, led by the

men into the golden reservoir.

The milky streams of sacrifice have sung to him : he of the
triple height shines brightly through the morns.

4 Pressed by the stones, with hymns, and graciously inclined,

illuminating both the Parents, Heaven and Earth,

He flows in ordered season onward through the fleece, a cur-
rent of sweet juice still swelling day by day.

5 Plow onward, Soma, flow to bring prosperity : cleansed by the

men, invest thee with the milky draught.

What gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceeding strong,
even with these incite Indra to give us wealth.

8 The conquering Courser : the swiftly-flowing Soma. Kaksldrdn : the
Bishi of the hymn.

1 0’er which: that is the Youthful One, the fresh and strong Soma,
exceeds in greatness even the high titles which he wins by his gracious deeds.

2 Speaker; Master; Tongue of sacrifice: Soma, the giver of eloquence.
The Son ; Soma. Of Mother and of Sire : of his parents. Heaven and Earth.
What the third secret name , that is, probably, a name in addition to those of
Heaven and Earth, and comprising both deities, may be, does not appear.
S&yana’s explanation is different *. — f the son (the sacrifieer) assumes a third
name unknown to his parents ; ’ that is, Wilson adds, * a name not given at
birth.., He [S&yana] cites BaudMyana, who gives Somayajin [Somay&ga sacri-
ffcerj as an instance of a third name/

3 The milky stream^ : ef. I. 144. 2. Of the triple height: dwelling in three
high places, heaven, the firmament or the mountain- top, and the place of sac-
rifice. Cf, IX, 71, 7.

334

[BOOK IX.

THE HYMNS OF

HYMN" LXXVI. Soma Pavamftna.

On flows the potent juice, sustainer of the heavens, the strength
of Gods, whom men must hail with shouts of joy.

The Gold-hued, started like a courser by brave men, impe-
tuously winneth splendour in the streams.

2 He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his bands, fain to win

light, car-borne, in forays for the kine.

Indu, while stimulating Indra’s might, is urged forward and
balmed by sages skilful in their task.

3 Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy

strength e$ter thou Indra’s throat.

Make both Worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the clouds :
mete out exhaustless powers for us, as ’twere through song.

4 Onward he flows, the King of all that sees the light : the

Rishis’ Lord hath raised the song of sacrifice ;

Even he who is adorned with Surya’s arrowy beam, Father of
hymns, whose wisdom is beyond our reach.

5 Like as a bull to herds, thou flowest to the pail, bellowing as

a steer upon the waters’ lap.

So, best of Cheerers, thou for Indra flowest on that we, with
thy protection, may o’ercome in^fight.

HYMN LXXVIL Soma Pavam&na.

More beauteous than the beautiful, as Indra’s bolt, this Soma,
rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat.

Dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice flow unto him
like milch-kine, lowing, with their milk.

2 On flows that Ancieut One whom, hitherward, from heaven,

sped through the region of the air, the Falcon snatched.

He, quivering with alarm and terrified in heart before bow-
armed Krisauu, holdeth fast the sweet.

3 May those first freshest drops of Soma juice effused flow oil

« their way to bring us mighty strength in kine.

Beauteous as serpent s*, worthy to be looked upon, they whom
1 $T each sacred gift and all our prayers have pleased.

3 -4 s ’twere through song ; 1 now with the rite, i. e. at the very time the
rite is being performed.’ — Wilson.

2 The Falcon ; see I. 93. 5. He : Soma, according to S&yana, but more
probably the falcon, KrisSm : the archer who guards the celestial Soma.
Seel. 112. 21.

3 Serpents : the meaning of ahy&k is uncertain here. S&yana explains it

* by pleasing to ’look upon like beautiful well-adorned

(women).’ — Wilson.

HYMN 78.1

THE RIGVEDA .

335

4 May that much-lauded Indu, with a heart inclined to us, well-

knowing, fight against our enemies.

He who hath brought the germ beside the Strong One y s seat
moves onward to the widely-opened stall of kine.

5 The active potent juice of heaven is flowing on, great Varuna

whom the fro ward man can ne’er deceive.

Mitra, the Holy, hath been pressed for troubled times, neigh-
ing like an impatient horse amid the herd.

HYMN LXXVIII. Soma PavamSna.

Raising his voice the King hath flowed upon his way : invest-
ed with the waters he would win the kine. ^

The fleece retains his solid parts as though impure, and bright
and cleansed he seeks the special place of Gods.

2 Thou, Soma, art effused for Indra by the men, balmed in the
• wood as wave, Sage, Viewer of mankind.

Full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go : a thousand
bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls.

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea, sitting within, have

flowed to Soma wise of heart.

They urge the Master of the house upon his way, and to the
Eternal Pavarnana pijay for bliss.

4 Soma flows on for us as winner of the kine, winner of thousands,

cars, water, aud light, and gold ;

He whom the Gods have made a gladdening draught to drink,
the drop most sweet to taste, weal-bringing, red of hue.

4 He who hath brought the germ : here the sacrificer aud not Soma i»
meant. — Ludwig. The Strong One : Agni.

5 In this stanza Soma is compared to, or mystically identified with, Varuna
and Mitra. S&yana leaves Varuna unexplained, but interprets Mitra by
sarveshdm niitrabhiitah , * (Soma) the friend of all.*

1 The fleece: literally, the sheep ; the filter made of wool. Solid parts:
tohird : the fragments of stalk which will not pass through the strainer.
According to S&ynna, ‘with its own covering,’ — ‘the sheep with its fleece.’ —
Wilson. The special place of Gods : the vessels which hold the libations
assigned to various @ods.

2 Balmed in the wood : according to S^yana, ‘art driven into the water.*
Bay steeds : swiftly -running tawny drops,

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea : ‘ nymphs of the firmament.’—
Wilson. The mymphs are identified with their element, and represent the
water with which the Soma juice is mixed. The Master of the house : har~
mydsya saJcshanim : Soma. In IX. 71. 4, S&yana explains these words as
‘ overpowerer, or stormer of the fort of the enemy,’ and in this place as ‘ the
sprinkler of the hall of sacrifice.* Sahshani, from the root sail , means over-
powerer, and from the root sach t connected with, especially as master and
possessor.

336 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX,

5 Soma, as PavamAna thou, our faithful Friend, making for us
these real treasures, flowest on.

Slay thou the enemy both near and far away : grant us secur-
ity and ample pasturage.

HYMN LXXIX. . Soma Pavamdna.

Spontaneous let our drops of Soma juice flow on, pressed, gol-
den-hued, among the Gods of lofty heaven.

Perish among us they who give no gifts of food ! perish the
godless 1 May our prayers obtain success.

2 Forward to us the drops, distilling meath, shall flow, like riches

for whose sake we urge the horses on.

Beyond the<€rafty hindering of all mortal men may we conti-
nually bear precious wealth away.

3 Yea, verily, foe of hate shown to himself is he, yea, verily, des-

troyer too of other hate.

As thirst subdueth in the desert, conquer thou, 0 Soma Pava-
mana, men of evil thoughts.

4 Near kin to thee is he, raised loftiest in the heavens : upon the

earth’s high ridge thy scions have grown forth.

The press-stones chew and crunch thee on the ox’s hide : sages
have milked thee with their hands into the streams.

5 So do they hurry on thy strong anrd beauteous juice, 0 Indu,

as the first ingredient of the draught.

Bring low, thou Pavauiana, .every single foe, and be thy might
shown forth as sweet and gladdening drink.

HYMN LXXX. Soma Pavamftna.

On flows the stream of Soma who beholds mankind : by ever-
lasting Law he calls the Gods from heaven.

He lightens with the roaring of Brihaspati : the lakes have not
contained the pourings of the juice.

1 They who give no gifts of food : I can find no satisfactory explanation of
ishah drdtiyah, so I give S&yana’s interpretation as a makeshift. ‘May they
be destroyed wlio are the withholders of food from us/ — Wilson.

2 Urge the horses on: SAyana explains arvatah, horses, by 4 strong enemy/
‘By whose aid we encounter the powerful (enemy)/ — Wilson.

3 * Soma knows how to defend not only himself, but us also/ — Ludwig.
Destroyer : literally, the wolf.

4 He: ‘the Moon/ — Ludwig. ‘Thy best juice dwells in the navel of

heaven, that which receives (the oblation)/— Wilson. On the ox's hide:
* Although men of the present time pour out the Soma upon the skin of a
bkek antelope and not on a cowhide or oxhide, still it is measured out for
sale on an oxhide/— S&yana.

1 The roaring of Brihaspati : that is, says S Ay ana, the voice or praise of
the worshipper. Agnx may be intended, as Ludwig suggests. The lakes : or
seas (samu' 7 “*" * ' — 1 2 3 4 * 1 the Soma-reservoirs. S&yana takes nd as a
particle of . : _ ' • . ; 1 1 ' libations cover (the earth) like rivers/ — Wilson.

THE RIG VEDA.

337

HYMN 81.1

2 Thou, powerful Soma, thou to whom the cows have lowed, as-

cendest, bright with sheen, thine iron-fashioned home.

Thou, lengthening our princes' life and high renown, flowest for
Indra as his mighty gladdening drink.

3 Best giver of delight, he flows to Indra’ s throat, robing him-

self in might, Auspicious One, for fame.

He spreads himself abroad, to meet all things that be : the
vigorous Tawny Steed flows sporting on his way.

4 The men, the ten swift fingers, milk thee out for Gods, even

thee most rich in meath, with thousand flowing streams.
Soma who winnest thousands, driven by the^mu, expressed
with stones, bring, as thou flowest, all. the Gods.

5 Deft-handed men with stones, the ten swift fingers, drain thee

into waters, thee, the Steer enriched with sweets.

Thou, Soma, gladdening Indra and the Heavenly Host, flowest
as Pavamana like a river's wave.

HYMN LXXXI. Soma Pavamana.

Onward to Indra's throat move, beauteously adorned, the
waves of Soma as lie purifies himself,

When they, brought forward with the lovely curd of kine,
effused, have cheered 6he Hero to bestow his gifts.

2 Hither hath Soma flowed unto the beakers, like a chariot-

horse, a stallion swift upon his way.

Thus, knowing both the generations, he obtains the rights and
dues of Gods from yonder and from hence.

3 While thou art cleansed, 0 Soma, scatter wealth on us ;

Indu, bestow great bounty as a liberal Prince.

Giver of life, with wisdom help to opulence ; strew not our
home possessions far away from us.

4 Hither let Pushan Pavamana come to us, Yaruna, Mitra,

bountiful, of one accord,

The Mamts, Asvins, Yayu, and Brihaspati, Savitar, Tvashtar,
tractable Sarasvati.

2 Iron-fashioned home : see XX. 1. 2.

2 Both the generations : of Gods and men. S&yana takes uhhdyasya jam-
manah with dev&ndm : — f aud knowing both races of gods — those who come
to (the sacrifice) from the other world and those who (come) from this world.*
— Wilson.

3 Help to opulence : according to S&yana, 1 help Yasu (the Rishi of the
hymn) to prosperity.*

4 Tractable: snydmd * easily led (by prayer). According to S4yana = sim~
grahd , beautiful in form.

22

338 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

5 Both. Heaven and Earth, the all-invigorating Pair, Vidhatar,
Aditi, and Aryaman the God,

Bhaga who blesses men, the spacious Firmament, — let all the
Gods in PavamAua take delight,

HYMN LXXXTI. Soma PavamAna.

Even as a King hath Soma, red and tawny Bull, been pressed :
the Wondrous One hath bellowed to the kine.

While purified he passes through the filtering fleece to seat
him hawk-like on the place that drops with oil.

2 To glory goest thou, Sage with disposing skill, like a groomed

steed thm rushest forward to the prize.

0 Soma, be^ thou gracious, driving off distress : thou goest,
clothed in butter, to a robe of state.

3 Parjanya is the Father of the Mighty Bird ; on mountains,

in earth’s centre hath he made his home.

The waters too have flowed, the Sisters, to the kine : he meets
the pressing-stones at the beloved rite,

4 Thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. Listen, O

Child of Pajra, for to thee I speak.

Amid the holy songs go on that we may live : in time of
trouble, Soma, watch thou free from blame.

5 As to the men of old thou earnest, Indu, unharmed, to

strengthen, winning hundreds, thousands,

So now for new felicity flow onward : the waters follow as thy
law ordaineth.

HYMN LXXXIIL Soma PavamAna.

Spread is thy cleansing filter, Brahmanaspati : as Prince,
thou entered its limbs from every side.

5 All-invigorating: visvaminv6: ‘ all -pervading. 5 — S Ay an a. VidMtar : the
Disposer, regarded as a separate deity, as Dhfttar is the Maker, Ordainer, or
Establishes

1 As a King: ‘ magnificent as a king.’ — Wilson. That drops with oil :
SAyana here explains ghyitavantam by udaJcuvcmtam, watery.

2 To a robe of state : nirnijam: f to the cleansing (vessel).’ — Wilson,

3 Parjanya : the God of the rain-cloud and waters of the air in which the
mighty Bird, the Moon, is horn. In earth's centre : at the altar, in the
oblation.

4 Pajrd : according to S&yana, the earth. The St. Petersburg Lexicon

explains the word as meaning the moist fresh Soma-plant of which Soma, the
juice, is the child. Perhaps, as Ludwig suggests, PajrA may be the name of
the sacrifieer’s wife.

1 Brahmauaspati’s filter appears to be the heavenly filter through which
the rain descends to earth. See Bergaigne, La Religion V4dique } I. 79, 201.
The raw : uncooked oblation. Which bear : * bearing (the sacrifice).’ — Wilson.
This: according to S Ay ana, to this filter. Ludwig thinks that Agni or Sfirya
is meant by c tat.’

BYMN 84] THE MGVEDA. 339

The raw, whose mass hath not been heated, gains not this :
they only which are dressed, which bear, attain to it.

2 High in the seat of heaven is spread the Scorcher’s sieve : its

threads are standing separate, glittering with light.

The Swift Ones favour him who purifieth this : with cons-
ciousness they stand upon the height of heaven.

3 The foremost spotted Steer hath made the Mornings shine,

and yearning after strength sustains all things that be.

By his high wisdom have the Mighty Sages wrought : the
Fathers who behold mankind laid down the germ.

4 Gandharva verily protects his dwelling-place^ Wondrous, he

guards the generations of the Gods. •

Lord of the snare, he takes the foeman with the snare : those
who are most devout have gained a share of meath.

h Bich in oblations ! robed in cloud, thou compassest oblation,
sacrifice, the mighty seat of Gods.

King, on thy chariot-sieve thou goest up to war, and with a
thousand weapons winnest lofty fame.

HYMN LXXXIV. Soma Pavam&na.

Flow, cheering Gods, most active, winner of the hood, for
Indra, and for Vayu, and for Varuna.

Bestow on us to-day wide room with happiness, and in thine
ample dwelling laud the Host of Heaven.

2 He who hath come anear to creatures that have life, Immortal
Soma flows onward to all of them.

Effecting, for our aid, both union and release, Indu, like
Siirya, follows closely after Dawn.

2 The Scorcher's sieve: ‘ Tbe filter of the foe-scorching (Soma),’ — Wilson.
The Swift Ones: c his swift-flowing (juices) protect tbe purifier (the worship-
per).’— Wilson.

3 The Mighty Sages : those who possess supernatural wisdom ; the Gods.
The Fathers : ‘The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, which give birth to gods
and men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the
11 F,p. 72. SeeX. 64. 14.

4 Gandhawa : here, the Sun. His : Soma’s.

5 Robed in cloud : ndbhah : meaning, water from the clouds. With a thou-
sand weapons : more literally, having a thousand, that is, countless, sharp
points. f Thousand-rayed.’ — Ludwig.

1 In thine ample dwelling ; 1 on the spacious sacrificial ground.’ — S&yana.

2 The second line is obscure. Wilson translates, after S&yana : — £ Indu,
binding and loosing, accompanies the sacrifice (for its protection) as the sun
the dawn ; ’ that is, binding or connecting the sacrifice with the gods and loos-
ing or separating it from the Asuras or evil spirits. But this explanation is
unsatisfactory. Ludwig suggests that ‘union’ refers to Soma’s binding to-
gether heaven and earth, Gods and men, and for the meaning of * release ’ he
refers to IX, 68. 5,

340 THE HYMNS OF . [BOOK JX

3 He who is poured with milk, he who within the plants hastes

bringing treasure for the happiness of Gods,

He, poured forth in a stream flows with the lightning’s flash,
Soma who gladdens Indra and the Host of Heaven.

4 Winner of thousands, he, this Soma, flows along, raising a

vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn.

Indu with winds drives on the ocean of the air, he sinks
within the jars, he rests in Iudra’s heart.

5 The kine with milk dress him who makes the milk increase,

Soma, amid the songs, who finds the light of heaven.
Winner of wealth, the effectual juice is flowing on, Singer
and Sage by wisdom, dear as heaven itself.

HYMN LXXX V. Soma Pavam&na.

Flow on to Indra, Soma, carefully effused : let sickness stay
afar together with the fiends.

Let not the double-tongued delight them with thy juice : here
be thy flowing drops laden with opulence,

2 0 Pavamana, urge ns forward in the fight : thou art the

vigour of the Gods, the well- loved drink.

Smite thou our enemies who raise r the shout of joy: Indra,
drink Soma juice, and drive away our foes.

3 Unharmed, best Cheerer, thou, 0 Indu, flowest on : thou,

even thou thyself, art Indra’s noblest food.

Full many a wise man lifts to thee the son<£ of praise, and
hails thee with a kiss as Sovran of this world.

4 Wondrous, with hundred streams, hymned in a thousand songs,

Iudu pours out for Indra his delightful meath.

Winning us land and waters, flow thou hitherward : Rainer
of bounties, Soma, make broad way for us.

5 Roaring within the beaker thou art balmed with milk : thou

passest through the fleecy filter all at once.

Carefully cleansed and decked like a prize-winning steed, 0
Soma, thou hast flowed down within Indra’s throat.

6 Flow onward sweet of flavour for the Heavenly Race, for

Indra sweet, whose name is easily invoked :

Flow sweet for Mitra, Yanina, and V&yu, rich in meath, in-
violable for Brihaspati.

7 Ten rapid fingers deck the Courser in the jar: with hymns

the holy singers send their voices forth.

The filtering juices hasten to their eulogy, the drops that
gladden find their way to Indra’s heart.

HYMN 86.] TH'E BlGYELA. 341

8 While thou art purified pour on us hero strength, great, far-

extended shelter, spacious pasturage.

Let no oppression master this our holy work : may we, 0
Indu, gain all opulence through thee.

9 The Steer who sees afar hath risen above the sky : the Sage

hath caused the lights of heaven to give their shine.

The King is passing through the filter with a roar : they drain
the milk of heaven from him who looks on men.

10 High in the vault of heaven, unceasing, honey-tongued, the

Loving Ones drain out the mountain-haunting Steer, —

The drop that hath grown great in waters, in 4Jie lake, meath-
rich, in the stream’s wave and in the cleansing sieve,

11 The Loving Ones besought with many voices the Eagle who

had flown away to heaven.

Hymns kiss the Youngling worthy of laudation, resting on
earth, the Bird of golden colour.

12 High to heaven’s vault hath the Gandharva risen, beholding

all his varied forms and figures.

His ray hath shone abroad with gleaming splendour : pure,
he hath lighted both the worlds, the Parents.

HY&N LXXXVI. Soma Pavamdna,

Thy gladdening draughts, 0 Pavamatia, urged by song flow
swiftly of themselves like sons of fieet-foot mares.

The drops of Soma juice, those eagles of the heavens, most
cheering, rich in rneath, rest in the reservoir.

2 As rapid chariot-steeds, so turned in several ways have thine

exhilarating juices darted forth,

Soma-drops viefa in meath, waves, to the Thunder-armed, to
Indra, like milch-kine who seek their calf with milk.

3 Like a steed urged to battle, finder of the light, speed on-

ward to the cloud-born reservoir of heaven, .

A Steer that o’er the woolly surface seeks the sieve, Soma
while purified for Indra’s nourishment.

9 The Stew who sees afar : wise Soma, the Moon.

10 The Loving Ones ; ventth : the Gods or, specially, the Maruts. Accord-
ing to S&yana, great Rishis, called Venas. The mountain-haunting Steer : Soma,
first seen over the mountain heights. See Hillehrandt, V. M., I. 389,

11 Soma in this stanza is the Eagle , the Youngling or infant, and the Bird
of golden colour.

12 The Gandharva: here Soma, the Moon, See Hillebrandt, V, I. 429.

3 Speed onward : hasten to pour down the rain from the cloud.

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK IX.

4 Fleet as swift steeds, thy drops, divine, thought-swift, have

been, 0 Pavamaua, poured with milk into the vat.

The Kis'his have poured in continuous Soma*drops, ordainers
who adorn thee, Friend whom Bishis love,

5 0 thou who seest all things, Sovran as thou art and passing

strong, thy rays encompass all abodes.

Pervading with thy natural powers thou flowest on, and as
the whole world’s Lord, 0 Soma, thou art King.

6 The beams of Pavam&na, sent from earth and heaven, his

ensigns who is ever stedfast, travel round.

When on ^:he sieve the Golden-hued is cleansed, he rests
within the vats as one who seats him in his place.

7 Served with fair rites he flows, ensign of sacrifice *. Soma

advances to the special place of Gods.

He speeds with thousand currents to the reservoir, and passes
through the filter bellowing as a bull.

S The Sovran dips him in the sea and in the streams, and set
in rivers with the waters’ wave moves on.

High heaven’s Sustaiuer at the central point of earth, raised
on the fleecy surface Pavamana stands.

9 He on whose high decree the hedTvens and earth depend hath
roared and thundered like the summit of the sky.

Soma flows on obtaining Indra’s friendly love, and, as they
purify him, settles in the jars.

10 He, light of sacrifice, distils delicious meath, most wealthy,

Father and begetter of the Gods.

He, gladdening, best of Cheerers, juice that Xndra loves, enrich-
es with mysterious treasure earth and lieaven,

11 The vigorous and far-seeing one, the Lord of heaven, flows,

shouting to the beaker, with his thousand streams.

Coloured like gold he rests in seats where Mitra dwells, the
Steer made beautiful by rivers and by sheep.

,12 In forefront of the rivers Pavam&na speeds, in forefront of
the hymn, foremost among the kine.

4 Friend whom Rishis love : rishishdna : the word does not occur elsewhere,
and its precise meaning is uncertain. * 0 rishi-m joyed.’ — Wilson. ‘ Thou who
playest the part of a Rishi,’ — hudwig.

8 The sea and the streams are the firmament and its waters. Soma,, who
is at the same time the God in heaven and the earthly beverage, is said to
combine with the solar rays in the clouds, and thus to cause the rain to
descend. See Hillebrandt, V. M.. I. 315. Central point of earth; the place
of sacrifice.

11 By rivers and by sheep ; by the purifying waters and the woollen
strainer.

EYMN 86,]

THE MGVEDA.

zm

He shares the mighty booty in the’ van of war : the well-armed
Steer is purified by worshippers,

13 This heedful Pavamana, ]ike a bird sent forth ; bath with his
wave flowed onward to the fleecy sieve,

0 Indra, through thy wisdom, by thy thought, 0 Sage, Soma
flows bright and pure between the earth and heaven.

He, clad in mail that reaches heaven, the Holy One, filling
the firmament, stationed amid the worlds,

Knowing the realm of light, hath come to us in rain : he sum-
mons to himself his own primeval Sire.

15 He who was first of all to penetrate his forf$ bestowed upon

bis race wide shelter and defence.

From that high station which he hath in loftiest heaven he
comes victorious to all encounters here.

16 Iudu hath started forth for Indra’s special place, and slights

not as a Friend the promise of his Friend.

Soma speeds onward like a youth to youthful maids, and gains
the beaker by a course of hundred paths.

17 Your songs, exhilarating, tuneful, uttering praise, are come into

the places where the people meet.

Worshippers have exalted Soma with their hymns, and milch-
kine have come near to meet him with their milk.

18 0 Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, pour on us accumu-

lated, plentiful, nutritious food,

Which, ceaseless, thrice a day shall yield us hero power en-
riched with store of nourishment, and strength, and meath.

19 Far-seeing Soma flows, the Steer, the Lord of hymns, the

Forth erer o£ day, of morning, and of heaven.

Mixt with the streams he c msed the beakers to resound, and
with the singers' aid they entered Indra’s heart.

20 On, with the prudent singers, flows the ancient Sage and guided

by the men hath roared about the vats.

Producing Trita’s name, may he pour forth the meath, that
V&yu and that Indra may become his Friends.

14 His own primeval Sire : or, the ancient Father of this (All). Indra is
meant.

1 5 He : Soma. His form : Indra’s. His race : Indra and the Gods.

16 Slights not as a Friend the promise of his Friend: 1 the friend leaves
not the stomach of his friend.’ — Wilson. S&yana derives samgiram from
samgrt, to swallow, instead of from samgrt , to assent. Hundred paths :
through the interstices of the wool.

18 Thrice a day : at the three appointed sacrifices.

20 Producing Trita's name : literally, begetting, that is, making (jandyan )
the name of Trita ; meaning probably, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, reminding

344 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK iX

21 He, being purified, hath made the Mornings shine : this, even

this is he who gave the rivers room.

He made the Three Times Seven pour out the milky flow :
Soma, the Cheerer, yields whatever the heart finds sweet.

22 Flow onward, Soma, in thine own celestial forms, flow, Indu,

poured within the beaker and the sieve.

Sinking into the throat of Indra with a roar, led by the men
thou raadest Surya mount to heaven.

23 Pressed out with stones thou flowest onward to the sieve, O

Indu, entering the depths of X»dra*s throat.

Far-sighted Soma, now thou lookest on mankind : thou didst
unbar tho^cow-stall for the Angirases.

24 In thee, 0 Soma, while thou pnrifiedst thee, high-though ted

sages, seeking favour, have rejoiced.

Down from the heavens the Falcon brought thee hitherward,
even thee, 0 Indu, thee whom all our hymns adorn.

25 Seven Milch-kine glorify the Tawny-coloured One while with

his wave in wool he purifies himself.

The living men, the mighty, have impelled the Sage into the
waters’ lap, the place of sacrifice.

26 Indu, attaining purity, plunges through the foe, making his

ways all easy for the pious man?

Making the kine his mantle, he, the lovely Sage, runs like a
sporting courser onward through the fleece.

27 The ceaseless watery fountains with their hundred streams

sing, as they hasten near, to him the Golden-hued.

Him, clad in robes of milk, swift fingers beautify on the third
height and in the luminous realm of heaven.

28 These are thy generations of celestial seed : thou art the

Sovran Lord of all the world of life.

This universe, 0 Pavam&na, owns thy sway; thou, Indu, art
the first establisher of Law.

us of Trifca, with whom he is closely connected. * Generating the water of
the threefold (Indra).’ — Wilson.

__ 21 The Three Times Seven : the seven celestial rivers, corresponding to the
rivers of earth, multiplied by three to accord with the threefold division of
the heavens. According to S&yana, cows are meant.

23 Thou didst unbar the cow-stall : didst recover the cattle stolen by the
Panis, that is the rays of light that the fiends of darkness had carried off;
the great deed of Indra being ascribed to Soma bis inspirer.

2 5 Seven Milch-kine : the celestial rivers.

26 Making the kine his mantle; he who is afterwards covered or mingled
with milk.

HY MN 86.] THE R1GVEDA. 345

29 Thou art the sea, O Sage who bringest all to light ; under

thy Law are these five regions of the world.

Thou readiest out beyond the earth, beyond the heavens :
thine are the lights, 0 Pavam&na, thine the Sun.

30 Thou in the filter, Soma Pavamana, art purified to support

the region for the Gods.

The chief, the longing ones have sought to hold thee fast,
and all these living creatnres have been turned to thee,

31 Onward the Singer travels o’er the fleecy sieve : the Tawny

Steer hath bellowed in the wooden vats.

Hymns have been sung aloud in resonant hai^iony, and holy
songs kiss him, the Child who claims our praise.

32 He hath assumed the rays of Sfirya for his robe, spinning, as

he knows how, the triply-twisted thread.

He, guiding to the newest rules of Holy Law, comes as the
Women’s Consort to the special place.

33 On flows the King of rivers and the Lord of heaven : he

follows with a shout the paths of Holy Law.

The Colden-hned is poured forth with his hundred streams,
Wealth-bringer, lifting up his voice while purified.

34 Fain to be cleansed, thcra, Pavam&na, pourest out, like wond-

rous Sura, through the fleece, an ample sea.

Purified with the hands, pressed by the men with stones, thou
speedest on to mighty booty-bringing war.

35 Thou, Pavam&na, sendest food and power in streams : thou

sit test. in the beakers as a hawk on trees,

For Indra poured as cheering juice to make him glad, as near-
est and far-seeing bearer-up of heaven.

36 The Sisters Seven, the Mothers, stand around the Babe, the

noble, new-born Infant, skilled in holy song,

Gandharva of the floods, divine, beholding men, Soma, that he
may reign as King of all the world.

29 Thou art the sea : Sotna and the sea being alike producers of rain.
Lights: stars.

SO The region : mid-air ; the firmament. The chief the longing ones : the
Venas, the Maruts.

32 Spinning... i?-' '• thread: hearing his part in morning, noon-
day and evening ■ i.- <». /' ■ Women's Consort: Lord and husband of the

Waters of heaven. The special place : 1 the consecrated (vessel).’ — Wilson.

34 Like wondrous Stir a : adorable like the Sun.

36 The Sisters Seven : the great rivers which may provide water for Soma-
sacrifices, Gandharva : frequently identified with the Sun, here means Soma,
the Moon.

[BOOK IX,

m THE HYMNS OF

37 As Sovran Lord thereof thou passes t through these worlds, 0

Indu, harnessing thy tawny well-winged Mares.

May they pour forth for thee milk and oil rich in sweets : 0
Soma, let the folk abide in thy decree.

38 0 Soma, thou beholdest men from every side : 0 Pavamana,

Steer, thou wanderest through these.

Pour out upon us wealth in treasure and in gold : may we
have strength to live among the things that be.

39 Winner of gold and goods and cattle flow thou on, set as im-

pregner, Indu, mid the worlds of life.

Bich iu bra^e men art thou, Soma, who winnest all ; these holy
singers wait upon thee with the song.

40 The wave of flowing meath hath wakened up desires : the

Steer enrobed in milk plunges into the streams.

Borne on his chariot-sieve the King hath risen to war, and
with a thousand rays hath won him high renown.

41 Dear to all life, he sends triumphant praises forth, abundant,

bringing offspring, each succeeding day.

From Indra crave for us, Iudu, when thou art quaffed, the bles-
sing that gives children, wealth that harbours steeds,

42 When days begin, the strong juice, lovely, golden-hued, is
recognized by wisdom moi'e aud more each day,

He, stirring both the Paces, goes between the two, the bearer
of the word of men and word of Gods.

43 They halm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, caress
the mighty strength and balm it with the meath.

37 Tawny ...Mares: haritah; Harits. Of. IV. 6.9; 13.3; VII. 66.15;
IX. 63. 9.

38 Through these : there is no substantive. S&yana supplies ajpah, waters.

40 Desires : the meaning of mnanfih: is not certain ; 'voices (of praise).’ —
Wilson. With a thousand rays : sahasrabhrishtih : literally, having a thousand
edges or sharp points. Op. IX, 83. 5

41 The blessing: this seems to be very nearly the meaning of brdhma here.
But the word may as usual be rendered by prayer, or devotion. t Solicit
Indra (to give) us food productive of progeny.’ — Wilson.

42 When days begin : according to S&yana, early in the morning. The
commencement of the year is more probably intended. The second half of
the stanza is obscurely expressed. It appears to mean that Soma acts as a
mediator between heaven and earth, urging men to offer, and the Gods to
receive, worship, bearing up to heaven the hymns and praises of human
worshippers and bringing back to them the assurance that their petitions
will be granted. S&yana's explanation is different : ‘ approaching the two
men (the praiser apd the worshipper or secular and sacred people) he passes
in the midst (of heaven and earth, bestowing), upon the upholder (of the
rite) both human and divine (riches).’— Wilson. I follow Ludwig who takes
dhartdri as nominative singular.

HYMN 87 ]

THE R1QVEDA.

347

They seize the flying Steer at the stream’s breathing-place :
cleansing with gold they grasp the Animal herein.

44 Sing forth to Pavam&na skilled in holy song : the juice is

flowing onward like a mighty stream.

He glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and like a
playful horse the Tawny Steer hath run.

45 Dweller in floods, King, foremost, he displays his might, set

among living things as measurer of days.

Distilling oil he flows, fair, billowy, golden-hued, borne on a
car of light, sharing one home with wealth.

46 Loosed is the heavens 5 support, the uplifted ^cheering juice :

the triply-mingled draught flows round into the worlds.

The holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our praise, when
singers have approached his beauteous robe with song.

47 Thy streams that flow forth rapidly collected run over the

flue fleece of the sheep as thou art cleansed.

When, Indu, thou art balmed with milk within the bowl,
thou sinkest in the jars, 0 Soma, wheu expressed.

48 Winner of power, flow, Soma, worthy of our laud : run on-

ward to the fleece as well-belovbd meath.

Destroy, 0 Indu, all voracious Rakshasas. With brave sons
in the assembly let our speech be bold.

HYMN LXXXYII. Soma Pavamftna.

Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee : cleansed by the
men speed forward to the battle.

Making thee beauteous like an able courser, forth to the
sacred grass with reins they lead thee.

2 Indu, the well-armed God, is flowing onwkrd, who quells the

curse and guards from treacherous-onslaught,

Father, begetter of the Gods, most skilful, the buttress of
the heavens and earth’s supporter,

3 Rishi and Sage, the Champion of the people, deft and sagaci-

ous, Usanfi in wisdom,

43 At the stream' s breathing -place : where the stream seems to stay^ still
for a moment to recover breath. Cleansing with gold: with gold-ringed
Angers. The Animal : Soma.

45 A s measurer of days: Soma being identified with the Moon.

46 Triply -mingled : or, poured into three vessels, the dronahalasa, ddhava-
ntya, and pHtabhrit. Robe : the integuments which cover the juice ; that is
the exterior of the stalk and shoots.

3 Vsand in wisdom : as wise as the celebrated TJsanfi. S&yarm explains
differently, regarding Usanft as the discoverer : 1 Umnas-~\\z verily by his

348 . THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /X

He hath discovered even their- hidden nature, the Cows’ con-
cealed and most mysterious title.
i This thine own Soma rich in meath, 0 Indra, Steer for the
Steer, hath flowed into the filter.

The strong Free-giver, winning hundreds, thousands, hath
reached the holy grass that never fails him.

5 These Somas are for wealth of countless cattle, renown there-

for, and mighty strength immortal.

These have been sent forth, purified by strainers, like steeds
who rush to battle fain for glory.

6 He, while Ke cleanses him, invoked of many, hath flowed to

give the people all enjoyment.

Thou whom the Falcon brought, bring dainty viands, bestir
thyself and send us wealth and booty.

7 This Soma, pressed into the cleansing filter, hath run as

’twere a host let loose, the Courser;

Like a strong bull who whets his horns keen-pointed, like a
brave warrior in the fray for cattle.

8 He issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and found

kine hidden somewhere in a stable.

Soma’s stream clears itself for thee, 0 Indra, like lightning
thundering through the clouds of heaven,

9 Cleansing thyself, and borne along with Indra, Soma, thou goest.

round the herd of cattle.

May thy praise help us, Mighty One, prompt Giver, to the
full ample food which thou bestowest.

HYMN LXXXVIII. Soma Pavam^na.

Fob thee this Soma is effused, 0 Indra: drink of this juice;

for thee the stream is flowing —

Soma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, even Iudu,
for thy special drink to cheer thee.

poetic gift discovered the secret milk of those cows which was hidden and
concealed.’ — Wilson. By title or name of the Cows, water appears to be
intended.

4 Steer for the Steer ; or, Strong for the Strong.

5 Mighty strength immortal : i ample food and ambrosia.’ — Wilson.

8 From out the loftiest mountain: S&yana makes antdrddreh depend upon
Mchit, somewhere : ‘ This Soma stream has come from on high and has
detected the cattle which were in a stall (hidden) somewhere within the
mountain/ — Wilson. Grassmann translates : ‘Er ist entsprungen aus dem
hochsten Pressstein.’ * He hath sprung forth from the most lofty press-stone/

9 The herd of cattle: Soma accompanies Indra in his expedition to recover
the stolen cattle. — S&yana. Or the cattle or cows may be the milk with which
Soma is mixed,

HYMN 89.]

THE RIG VEDA .

349

2 Like a capacious car hath it been harnessed, the Mighty, to

acquire abundant treasures.

Then in the sacrifice they celebrated all triumphs won by
Nahus in the battle.

3 Like V&yu with his team, moving at pleasure, most gracious

when invoked like both N&satyas,

Thou art thyself like the Wealth-Giver, Soma' 3 who grants
all boons, like song-inspiring Pushan.

4 Like Iudra who hath done great deeds, thou, Soma, art slayer

of the Vritras, Fort-destroyer.

Like Pedu’s horse who killed the brood of serpents, thus thou,
0 Soma, slayest every Dasyu. °

5 Like Agni loosed amid the forest, fiercely he winneth splen-

dour in the running waters.

Like one who fights, the roaring of the mighty, thus Soma
Pavamana sends his current.

6 These Somas passing through the fleecy filter, like rain de-

scending from the .clouds of heaven,

Have been effused and poured into the beakers, swiftly like
rivers running lowly seaward.

7 Flow onward like the ^potent band of Maruts, like that

Celestial Host whom none revileth.

Quickly be gracious unto us like waters, like sacrifice victo-
rious, thousand-fashioned.

8 Thine are King Varuna’s eternal statutes, lofty and deep, 0

Soma, is thy glory.

All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, like Arya-
man, 0 Soma.

- HYMN LXXXIX. Soma Pavamana.

This Chariot-horse hath moved along the pathways, and Pava-
mana flowed like rain from heaven.

2 I can make nothing out of the second line of this stanza. The version

which. I give a3 a temporary makeshift is founded on Ludwig’s remarks in
his Commentary on the passage, Vol. V. p. 308, of his Rigveda . Wilson,
following S&yaua, translates : — 2 * 4 * * * 8 After this (i. e. after the harnessing of the
waggon. — Note.) may all the races of men expecting our (attack) go to the
desirable battle.’ * Now let the races of all men, rising up like trees, come
near to him in order to obtain success,’ would, according to Grassmann, be
nearer the meaning.

4 Pedu’s horse: given to him by the Asvins. See I. 116. 6; 117. 9 ; 118.

9 ; 119. 10.

7 Like sacrifice : according to S&yana, yajfiaK, sacrifice, means here, worthy

of sacrifice: — 4 (thou art) of a thousand shapes, adorable like (Indra) the
victor in battle.’ — -Wilson.

8 This stanza is found also in Book I. 91. 3.

350 TBB HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

With ns hath Soma with a thousand currents sunk in the wood,
upon his Mother’s bosom.

2 King, he hath clothed him in the robe of rivers, mounted the

straightest-going ship of Order.

Sped by the Hawk the drop hath waxed in waters : the father
drains it, drains the Father’s offspring.

3 They come to him, red, tawny, Lord of Heaven, the watchful

Guardian of the meath, the Lion.

. First, Hero in the fight, he seeks the cattle, and with his eye
the Steer is our protector.

4 They harness to the broad- w heeled car the mighty Courser

whose hack bears meath, unwearied, awful.

The twins, the sisters brighten him, and strengthen — these
children of one dame — the vigorous Facer.

5 Four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting together

in the same container.

To him they flow, when purified, with homage, and still,
from every side, are first about him.

6 He is the buttress of the heavens, supporter of earth, and in

his hand are all the people.

• Be the team’s Lord a well to thee^the singer : cleansed is the
sweet plant’s stalk for deed of glory.

7 Fighting, uninjured come where Gods are feasted; Soma, as

Vrifra-slayer flow for Indra.

Vouchsafe us ample riches very splendid : may we be masters
of heroic vigour.

HYMN XC. Soma Pavam&na.

Urged on, the Father of the Earth and Heaven hath gone
forth like a car to gather booty,

Going to Indra, sharpening his weapons, and in his harid
containing every treasure.

2 The father drains it : ‘ The scholiast finds it 1 difficult to make sense of
this: pitd (palako loktih) lie supposes to mean the Adhvaryu, who extracts
the juice of the Soma -which is born from the heaven as from a father ; or the
first milker may be the yajamdna and the second the Adhvaryu ; or duhe
may be repeated out of respect.’—- Wilson.

4 Sisters children of one dame: the priest’s fingers,

5 Four: the quarters of the sky. Container: the firmament.

6 The team's Lord: Soma as resembling V&yu. Cp. IX. 88. 3. Sftyana
explains differently : ‘ may (Soma) the fountain (of desires) be possessed "of
horses for thee (his) adorer.’ — Wilson.

1 Father ; janitd : generator, of enrtli by sending rain, and of heaven by
obtaining oblations for the gods.— S&yana,

MYMN 91 J THE R1GVEDA . 351,

2 To him the tones of sacred song have sounded, Steer of the

triple height, the Life-bestower.

Dwelling in wood as Varuna in rivers, lavishing treasure he
distributes blessings.

3 Great Conqueror, warrior-girt, Lord of all heroes, flow on

thy way as he who winneth riches ;

With sharpened arms, with swift bow, never vanquished in
battle, vanquishing in fight the foemen.

4 Giving security, Lord of wide dominion, send us both earth

and heaven with all their fulness.

Striving to win the Dawns, the light, the waters, and cattle,
call to us abundant vigour,

5 0 Soma, gladden Varuna and Mitra ; cheer, Indu Pavamana i

Iudra, Vishnu.

Cheer thou the Gods, the Company of Maruts : Indu, cheer
mighty Iudra to rejoicing.

6 Thus like a wise and potent King flow onward, destroying

with thy vigour all misfortunes.

For our well-spoken hymn give life, 0 Indu. Do ye preserve
us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XCI. Soma Pavam&na.

As for a chariot-race, the skilful Speaker, Chief, Sage, In-
ventor, hath, with song, been started.

The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the Car-horse
to the resting-places.

2 The drop of Soma, pressed by wise Nahushyas, becomes the
banquet of the Heavenly People —

Indu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal,
with the sheop and cows and waters,
v 3 Steer roaring unto Steer, this Pavamana, this juice runs to
the white milk of the milch-cow.

Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful Singer, like
Sura by his fair and open pathways. •

2 Of the triple height: see JX. 71. 7.

4 Call to us : send us with thy shout or roar.

6 The hymn ends with the usual concluding half-line of the hymns ascribed
to the Yasishtha*.

1 The skilful Speaker : Soma who makes us eloquent. The resting-places :
sddandni: the seats, the reservoirs in which he settles.

o v. V* ~ l * 3 r v .* probably a neighbouring people. See VI. 46. 7, and note on
m \ m ■ 1 :: has the same meaning.

3 Stira : SQrya, the Sun. Fair md open : adhvqsmdbhih ; f imperishable/ —
Wilson.

352 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

4 Break down the strong seats even of the demons : cleansing

thee, Indu, robe thyself in vigour.

Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, those who
are near and those who yet are distant.

5 Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new hymn,

thou Giver of all bounties.

Those which are high and hard for foes to conquer may we
gain from thee, Active ! Food-bestower !

6 So purifying thee vouchsafe us waters, heaven’s light, and cows,

offspring and many children.

Give us health, ample land, and lights, 0 Soma, and grant us
long to ldbk upon the sunshine.

HYMN XCII. Soma Pavam&na.

The gold-hued juice, poured. out upon the filter, is started like
a car sent forth to conquer.

He hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed him, and
hath rejoiced the Gods with entertainments.

2 He who beholdeth man hath reached the filter : bearing his

name, the Sage hath sought his dwelling.

The Rishis came to him, seven holy singers, when in the bowls
he settled as Invoker. *

3 Shared by all Gods, most wise, propitious, Soma goes, while

they cleanse him, to his constant station.

Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom : to the Five Tribes
the Sage attains with labour.

4 In thy mysterious place, 0 Pavamana Soma, are all the Gods,

the Thrice-Eleven

Ten on the fleecy height, themselves, self-prompted, and seven
fresh risers, brighten and adorn thee.

5 Now let this be the truth of Pavamana, there where all singers

gather them together,

That he hath given us room and made the daylight, hathholpen
Mann and repelled the Hasyu.

5 Those : portions of thee, according to Sayana

6 In the second half of the stanza, instead of taking uni, wide, ample,

with kshetram, field, land, Sayana joins it, as —urdni, with jydtwshi, lights : —
f make our land prosper, diffuse the luminaries widely (in the firmament).' —
Wilson.

2 The Rishis : according to S&yana, Bharadv&ja, Kasyapa, Gotama, Atri,
Yisv^mitra, Jamadagni, Yasishtha.

3 The Five Tribes : the five Aryan tribes. According to S&yana, ‘ the five
classes of beings/ l e. } four castes and the Nish&das.

4 The Thrice-Eleven : see I, 139. 11, Ten: the fingers.

5 Manu : as the representative of the Aryan race.

HYMN 94.] TEE RIGVEDA. 353

6 As the priest seeks the station rich in cattle, like a true King
who goes to great assemblies,

Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him, and,
like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled.

HYMN XCIII. Soma Pavam&na.

Ten sisters, pouring out the rain together, swift-moving think-
ers of the sage, adorn him.

Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of S&rya and reached
the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.

2 Even as a youngling crying to his mothers, the bounteous

Steer hath flowed along to waters. m

As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens od>to the chosen
meeting-place, the beaker.

3 Yea, swollen is the udder of the milch-cow : thither in streams

goes very sapient Indu.

The kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, the
Head and Chief with milk within the vessels.

4 With all the Gods, 0 Indu Pavarnana, while thou art roaring

send us wealth in horses.

Hither upon her car come willing Plenty, inclined to us, to
give us of her treasures.

5 Now unto us mete riches, while they cleanse thee, all-glorious,

swelling wealth, with store of heroes.

Long be his life who worships thee, 0 Indu. May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN XCIV. Soma Favam&na.

When beauties strive for him as for a charger, then strive
the songs like soldiers for the sunlight.

Acting the Sag'e, he flows enrobed in waters and song as
’twere a stall that kine may prosper.

6 The station rich in cattle : * the hall where the victim is stationed ’ —
Wilson. To great assemblies : or, to war and battle. The wood : the wooden
vat or reservoir.

1 Ten sisters : the fingers which press out the juice of the Soma -plant.
Thinkers : or thoughts, devotions. According to S&yana, fingers. Ch ild of
SUrya : S&yana explains jtfh, offspring, by jdydh wives, i. e the quarters of
the heaven, called Sfirya’s wives because they are made manifest by his rays.

3 The Head and Chief: f the elevated Soma* — Wilson.

4 Se?id us ; more literally, open or disclose to us,

5 The hymn ends with the half- line which is the special conclusion of the
hymns ascribed to Nodhas. See Book I. 58, 60 — 64.

1 The meaning is apparently : when the beautifying "waters hasten emu-
lously to cleanse Soma as though he were a horse, the voices of singing
worshippers vie with each other* like the shouts of men who are fighting for
23

354 THE ffTMN8 OF [BOOK IX .

2 The worlds expand to him, who from aforetime found light to

spread the law of life eternal.

The swelling SQnga, like Jciue within the stable, in deep
devotion call aloud on Ip dm

3 When the Sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a car

visiting all worlds, the Hero,

Becoming fame, mid Gods, unto the mortal, wealth to the
skilled, worth praise mid the Ever-present,

4 For glory horn he hath come forth to glory : he givetli life

and glory to the singers.

They, clothed in glory, have become immortal. He, measured
in bis course, makes frays successful.

5 Stream to us food and vigour, lane and horses : give us broad

lights and fill the Gods with rapture.

All these are easy things for thee to master : thou, Pavamana
Soma, quellest foernen.

HYMN XGY. Soma Pavamdna,

Loud neighs the Tawny Steed when started, settling deep in
the wooden vessel while they cleanse him.

L ( ed by the men he takes the milk for raiment : then shall he,
through his pow r ers, engender praise-songs.

2 As one who rows drives on his boat, he, Gold-hued, sends

forth his voice, loosed on the path of Order.

As God, the secret names of Gods he utters, to be declared on
sacred grass more widely.

3 Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymns

are pressing nigh to Soma.

To him they come with lowly adoration, and, longing, enter
him who longs to meet them. «

4 They drain the stalk, the Steer who dwells ou mountains,

even as a Bull who decks him on the upland.

light and life. Soma flows on in his wisdom, blent with the waters, and
surrounded with hymns into the midst of which he enters as into a stable
full of ldne in order to make them increase and multiply.

3 The stanza is somewhat obscure. Worth praise : or. adorable. The Ever-
present: the Gods who come to help men. Wilson, following S&ya* a, trans-
lates the second line : * then desirous of bestowing upon mortals the wealth
that abides with the gods, he (is) to be glorified in the many places of sacrifice
for the preservation of the riches he has given/

5 All these : all the R4ksbasas, according to S&yana.

1 Deep in the wooden vessel: literally 'in the belly of the wood.’

2 Be utters : reveals to the priest who is to declare them at sacrifice.

HYMN 96.] TEE FIQVEDA. 855

Hymns follow and attend him as he bellows ; Trita be,ars
Varuna aloft in ocean.

5 Sending thy voice out as Director, loosen the Invoker’s thought,
0 Indu, as they cleanse thee.

While thou and Indra rule for our advantage, may we be,
masters of heroic vigour.

HYMiSr XCVI. Soma Pavam&na.

In forefront of the cars forth goes the Hero, the Leader, win-
ning spoil : his host rejoices.

Soma endues his robes of lasting colours, and blesses, for his
friends, their calls on Indra.

2 Men decked with gold adorn his golden tendril, incessantly

with steed-impelling homage.

The Friend of Indra mounts his car : well-knowing, he comes
thereon to meet the prayer we oiler.

3 0 God, for service of the Gods flow onward, for food sublime,

as Indru’s di ink;, 0 Soma.

Making the floods, bedewing earth and heaven, qo.me from the
vast, comfort us while we cleanse thee.

4 Flow for prosperity and constaut vigour, flow ptfior happi-

ness and high perfection. /

This is the wish of alf these friends as^hkled : this i$ my
wish, 0 Soma Pavamana.

5 Father of holy hymns, Soma downward, the Father of the

earth. Father of heaven ;

Father of Agui, Sftrya’s tor, t]xe Father wflo begat Indra

and Vishnu.

6 Brahman of God<™ e Leader of the poets, Rishi of sages,

Bull of s creatures,

Faicoii^f^ the vultures, Axe of forests, over the cleansing
goes Soma singing.

Trita ; the preparer of the celestial Soma. Vanina : here meaning
Soma ; ‘ the defeater of enemies.’ — Wilson. In ocean : in tfle firmament.

5 A s Director : upavakUva: upavaktft here appears to mean Adhvaryu :
yatMdhvaryuh. — Sfiyatia. Loosen the Invoker's thought: aid the Hotar or
invoking priest to give free utterance to his thought or hymn.

1 Of lasting colours : rabhas&ni: ‘hastily made.’ — Wilson. f Brilliant.’— -
Grassmann.

2 Steed-impelling : urging him on, as a whip urges on a horse.

3 From the vast : from the wide firmament. There is no substantive in
the text.

6 Brahman of Gods : thou art Brihaspati, the Lord of Prayer, among the
Gods, or, chief among the priests. Axe : the handle of the axe b,eing

356 THE HYMNS OF [. BOOK /X

7 He, Sonia Pavam&na, like a river, hath stirred the wave of

voice, onr songs and praises

Beholding these inferior powers in cattle, he rests among them
as a Steer well-knowing.

8 As Gladdener, Warrior never harmed in battle, with thousand

genial streams, pour strength and vigour.

As thoughtful Pavam^na, urge 0 Indu, speeding the kine,
the plant’s wave on to Indra.

9 DeaV, grateful to the Gods, on to the beaker moves Soma,

sweet to Indra, to delight him.

With hundred powers, with • thousand currents, Indu, like
a strong cacSborse, goes to the assembly.

10 Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained with the

stone, decking himself in waters,

Warding off curses, King of all existence, he shall find way
for prayer the while they cleanse him.

11 For our sage fathers, Soma Pavamana, of old performed, by

thee, their sacred duties.

Fighting un vanquished, open the enclosures : enrich us with
large gifts of steeds, aud heroes.

12 As thou didst flow for Mann Life-bestowing, Foe-queller,

Comforter, rich oblations,

Even thus flow onward n0 w conferring riches : combine with
Indra, and bring forth thy weapons.

13 Flow onward, Soma, rich in ^veets and holy, enrobed in

waters on the fleecy summit.

Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, a s cheering and most
gladdening drink for Indra.

14 Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, n^hty at the

Gods’ banquet, pour the rain of heaven,

While thou with rivers roarest in the beaker, and blent with
milk prolongest our existence.

15 Purified with our holy hymns, this Soma overtakes maligni-

ties like some strong charger,

naturally made of the strongest wood. — M. Muller. Ludwig thinks that
lightning may he intended. According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon,
svadhitih here means a tree with very hard wood. See V. 32. 10.

7 The* second line is obscure. Wilson translates : * the showerer (of bene-
fits) beholding the hidden (treasure) presides over these irresistible powers,
knowing about the cattle.’

9 Goes to the assembly : ‘ proceeds like a strong horse to battle.’— -Wilson.

11 The enclosures : the obstructions which keep the rain from falling.

13 Full of fatness; ghritdvdnti; according to S Ay ana, ‘water-holding.

HYMtf 96.] THE RlGtEDA. 357

Like fresli milk poured by Aditi, like passage in ample room,
or like a docile car-horse.

1 6 Cleansed by the pressers, armed with noble weapons, stream

to us the fair secret name thou bearest.

Pour booty, like a horse, for love of glory : God, Soma, send
us kine, and send us Vayu.

17 They deck him at his birth, the lovely Infant, the Maruts

with their troop adorn the Car-horse.

By songs a Poet and a Sage by wisdom, Soma goes singing
through the cleansing filter.

18 Light- winner, Bishi-minded, Bishi-maker, hymned in a thou-

sand hymns, Leader of sages,

A Steer who strives to gain his third form, Soma is, like
Viraj, resplendent as a Singer.

19 Hawk seated in the bowls, Bird wide-extended, the Banner

seeking kine and wielding weapons,

Following close the sea, the wave of waters, the great Bull
tells his fourth form and declares it.

20 Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing

to the gain of riches,

A steer to herds, so, flowing to the pitcher, he with a roar
hath passed into the beakers.

21 Flow on with might as Pavam&na, Indu : flow loudly roaring

through the fleecy filter.

Enter the beakers sporting, as they cleanse thee, and let thy
gladdening juice make Indra joyful.

22 His streams have been effused in all their fulness, and he

hath entered, balmed with milk, the goblets.

Singing his p^alm, well-sldlled in song, a Chanter, he comes
as 'twere to his friend's sister roaring.

23 Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana ! Indu, begun g, as

lover to his darling.

As a bird flies and settles in the forest, thus Soma settles,
purified, in goblets.

15 By Aditi; regarded as the Cosmic Cow.

16 Vdyu ; the breath of life, life. — Sfiyana.

18 Bis third form ; the form that he wears in heaven ; ‘ the third region
(heaven).’ — Wilson. Virfij : splendid or most illustrious Indra. — Sfiyana.

19 The banner : di'apsdh : usually meaning, a drop, or a spark. See IV. 13. 2.
His fourth form : the Moon. According to Sfiyana, the region of the Moon
which is said to be above that of the Sun.

22 As ’twere to his friend's sister : Sfiyana explains jdmim, sister, by jdydm,
wife : 4 like (a libertine) to the wife of a friend.’ — Wilson. The meaning is.
probably no more than 4 as lover to his darling ’ in the following stanza.

tte THE &YMN$ J)P [BOOK ll,

24 With full stream and abundant milk, 0 Somh, thy beams
come, like a woman, as they cleanse thee.

He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hath
roared within the goblet of the pious.

HYMN XCVTI. Soma Pavam&na.

Mads pure by this man’s urgent zeal and impulse, the G-od
hath to the Gods his juice imparted.

He goes, effused and singing, to the filter, like priest to mea-
sured seats supplied with cattle.

2 Bobed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty Sage
pronouncing invocations,

Boll onward to the beakers as they cleanse thee, far-seeing at
the feast of Gods, and watchful.

S Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a Prince among
us, nobler than the noble.

Boar out as thou art purified, run forward. Do ye preserve
us evermore with blessings.

4 Let us sing praises to the Gods : sing loudly, send ye the

Soma forth for mighty riches.

Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through tlie Alter, and let our
pious one rest in the pitcher. n

5 Winning the friendship of the Deities, Indu flows in a thou-

sand streams to make them joyful.

Praised by the men after the ancient statute, he hath come
nigh, for our great bliss, to Indra.

6 Plow, Gold-hued, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer : let thy

juice go to Indra to support him.

Come nigh, together with the Gods, for bounty. Do ye pre-
serve us evermore with blessings.

7 The God declares the Deities’ generations, like Usana, pro-

claiming lofty wisdom.

With brilliant kin, far-ruling, sanctifying, the Boar advances,
singing, to the places.

1 Urgent zeal and impulse : hcrmnd, by impulse (from the root hi) is said
by S&yana to mean * by gold,’ that is, by the gold-adorned hand of the priest.
Measured' seats supplied with cattle : ‘the halls prepared (for sacrifice) con-
taining victims/ — Wilson. Singing : the sound of the flowing juice is com-
pared to the priest’s recitation of sacred texts.

7 The Qod : Soma, who has been called the Father of the Gods. Lihc
Usand : the sound of the flowing and dropping Bom a juice is likened to the
song of the famous sage and sacred poet. The Boar: strong, swift Soma.
Singing : making a souud with the descending drops of juice. S&yana explains
diflerently : — * making a noise (as) a wild boar (makes a noise) with its foot.’ —
Wilson, The places : the filters.

HYMN 97.] THE ill GV EDA, . 359

8 The Swans, the Vrishaganas from anear us have bfought their

restless spirit to our dwelling.

Friends come to Pavamana meet for praises, and sound in com
cert their resistless music.

9 He follows the Wide-strider’s rapid movement: cows low, as

’fcwere, to him who sports at pleasure.

He with the sharpened horns biungs forth abundance : the
Silvery shines by night, by day the Golden.

10 Strong Indu, bathed in milk, flows on for Indra, Soma ex-

citing strength, to make him joyful.

He quells malignities and slays the demons, the King of mighty
power who brings us comfort.

11 Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press-stones,

mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy filter —

Indu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens,
for the God’s enjoyment.

12 As he is purified he pours out treasures, a God bedewing Gods

with his own juices.

Indu hath, wearing qualities by seasons, on the raised fleece
engaged the ten swift fingers.

13 The Red Bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing the

heavens and earth to roar and thunder.

WelTis he heard like Indra’s shout iu battle : letting this voice
be known he hastens hither.

14 Swelling with milk, abounding in sweet flavours, urging the .

meath-rich plant thou goest onward.

Raising a shout thou fiowest as they cleanse thee, when thou,

O Soma, ar effused for liidra.

15 So flow thou on inspiriting, for rapture, aiming death-shafts

at him who stays the waters.

Flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager
for the kine, 0 Soma.

8 The Swans - the singers, descendants of the Rishi Vrishagana.

9 The Wide-strider's rapid movement : the swift course of t-lie Bun. Cores
loio as ’tmre : Sayapa explains g-tvah. cows, by anye gantdrah . other goers,
takes net as negative, and derives miniate from md, to measure, instead of
from mA t to bleat or lowj — * other goers cannot overtake him (though he is)
moving easily.’ — Wilson.* He with tke sharpened horns : Soma as the Moon:
the silvery light by night and the golden-coloured juice by day. ^

12 Wearing qualities by seasons: * clothed iu pleasaut radiance according to
the season.’ — Wilson.

15 Him who stays the waters ; Vritra.

360 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

16 Pleased with us, Indu, send us as thou flowest good easy paths

in ample space and comforts.

Dispelling, as ’twere with a clnb, misfortunes, run o’er the
height, run o’er the fleecy summit.

17 Pour on us rain celestial, quickly streaming, refreshing, fraught

with health and ready bounty.

Flow, Indu, send these Winds thy lower kinsmen, setting them
free like locks of hair unbraided.

18 Part, like a knotted tangle, while they cleanse thee, 0 Soma,

righteous and unrighteous conduct.

Neigh like a^tawny courser who is loosened, come like a youth,
0 God, £ houae-possessor.

19 For the Gods’ service, for delight, 0 Indu, run o’er the height,

run o’er the fleecy summit.

With thousand streams, inviolate, sweet-scented, flow on for
gain of strength that conquers heroes.

20 Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyoked, like

coursers started in the contest,

These brilliant drops of Soma juice run forward. Do ye, O
Deities, come nigh to drink them.

21 So for our banquet of the Gods, 0 Indu, pour down the rain

of heaven into the vessels.

May Soma grant us riches sought with longing, mighty, ex-
ceeding strong, with store of heroes.

22 What time the loving spirit’s word had formed him Chief of

all food, by statute of the Highest,

Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the chosen, well-
loved Master in the beaker,

23 The Sage, Celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours as he flows

the Genuine for the Truthful.

The King shall he effectual strength’s upholder : he by the ten
bright reins is mostly guided.

24 He who beholds mankind, made pure with Alters, the King

supreme of Deities and mortals,

From days of old is Treasure-Lord of riches : he, Indu, cheri-
shes fair well-kept Order,

17 Winds : of. £ V&yu is Soma’s guardian God’ (X. 85. 5),

22 Sayana’s explanation of the first line is extremely laboured : —‘When

the praia~ ^ ru ~ r - 7 — - 1 \ notifies hiui as that of a noisy (crowd)

in front 1 '• ■ ■ for the support (he affords).* — Wilson,

23 The Genuine for the Truthful: rithm ritfiya ; the Soma juice for Indra.
The ten bright reins ; or rays, i. e., the fingers. The half -line is difficult.

ETYMJV 97.] TEE RIO VEDA . 361

25 Haste, like a steed, to victory for glory, to Indra’s and to

Vayu’s entertainment.

Give us food ample, thousandfold : be, Soma, the finder-out
of riches when they cleanse thee.

26 Effused by us let God-delighting Somas bring as they flow a

home with noble heroes —

Eich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the worship-
pers of heaven, the best of Cheer ers.

27 So, God, for service of the Gods flow onward, flow, drink of

Gods, for ample food, 0 Soma.

For we go forth to war against the mighty : 2 jiake heaven and
earth well stablished by thy cleansing. *

28 Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, swifter

than thought is, like an awful lion*

By paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send thou us
happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee.

29 Sprung from the Gods, a hundred streams, a thousand, have

been effused : sages prepare and purge them.

Bring us from heaven the means of winning, Indu; thou art
forerunner of abundant riches.

30 The streams of days ware poured as’twere from heaven : the

wise King doth not treat his friend unkindly.

Like a son following his father’s wishes, grant to this family
success and safety,

31 Now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweetness,

when, purified, thou goest through the filter.

The race of kine is thy gift, Pavamana : when born thou
madest Surya rich with brightness.

32 Bright, bellowing along the path of Order, thou shinest as the

form of life eternal.

Thou flowest on as gladdening drink for Indra, sending thy
voice out with the hymns of sages.

33 Pouring out streams at the Gods’ feast with service, thou,

Soma, lookest down, a heavenly Eagle.

Enter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a roar ap-
proach the ray of Surya.

34 Three are the voices that the Courser utters : he speaks the

thought of prayer, the law of Order.

30 The streams of days the libations of Soma juice which we offered every
day. Like a son : the Soma juice is regarded as the son of the yajamdna or
sacrificer who causes it to be prej>ared.

34 The Courser is Soma, and the three voices (vffchah) or words which he
utters are according to S&yaua praises or sacred texts in the form of the three

362 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

To the Cow’s Master come the Cows inquiring : the hymns
with eager longing come to Soma.

35 To Soma come the Cows, the Milch-kine longing, to Soma

sages with their hymns inquiring.

Soma, effused, is purified and blended : our hymns and Trish-
tup songs unite in Soma.

36 Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while thou art puri-

fied flow for our welfare.

Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring : make the voice swell,
and generate abundance.

37 Singer of fifue songs, ever- watchful, Soma hath settled in the

ladles when they cleanse him.

Him the Adhvaryus, paired and eager, follow, leaders of sacri-
fice and skilful-handed.

38 Cleansed near the Sun as 5 twere, he as Creator hath filled full

heaven and earth, and hath disclosed them.

He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield
the precious meed as to a victor.

39 He, being cleansed, the Strength ener and Increaser, Suma the

Bounteous, helped us with his lustre,

Wherewith our sires of old who-' knew the footsteps found
light and stole the cattle from the mountain.

40 In the first vault of heaven loud roared the Ocean, King of

all being, generating creatures.

Steer, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, Soma, the Drop
effused, hath waxen mighty,

41 Soma the Steer, in that as Child of Waters he chose the Gods,

performed that great achievement.

He, Pavamana, granted strength to ludra; he, Iudu, gene*
rated light, in Surya.

42 Make V&yu glad, for furtherance and bounty : cheer Varuna

and Mitra, as they cleanse thee.

Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Mar tits : make Heaven
and Earth rejoice, 0 God, 0 Soma.

43 Flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked, driving away

our enemies and sickness,

Blending thv milk with milk which cows afford us. We are
thy friends, thou art the Friend of Indra.

Vedas. The three tones, low, middle, and high, are probably intended. Or
vdhmh (the courser) may mean the bearer of the oblation, yajamdna , as
S Ay an a explains.

40 In the first mult ; that is in the highest firmament. The Ocean : Soma.

&YMX 97.] fBE UlGVEDA. &63

44 Pour ns a fount of meafch, a spring of treasure; send us a

hero son and happy fortune.

Be sweet to Indra when they cleanse thee, Indu., and pour
down riches on ns from the ocean.

45 Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, hath flowed

in stream as a flood speeding downward.

Cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling: Iudu hath
flowed with milk and with the waters.

46 Strong, wise, for thee who longest for his coming, this Soma

here flows to the bowls, 0 Indra.

He, chariot-borlie, sun-bright, and truly potent, was poured
forth like the longing of the pious.

47 He, purified with ancient vital vigour, pervading all hi3

Daughter’s forms and figures,

Finding his thi'eefold refuge in the waters, goes singing, as a
priest, to the assemblies.

48 How, cl) a riot-borne, flow unto us, God Soma, as thou art

purified flow to the saucers,

Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as Savitar the
God is, truthful-minded.

49 To feast him, flow mid song and hymn, to V&yu, flow purified

to Varuna and Mitra.

Flow to the song-inspiring car-borne Hero, to mighty Indra,
him who wields the thunder.

50 Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send,

purified, milch-ldne, abundant yielders.

God Soma, send us chariot-drawing horses that they may
bring us treasures bright and golden.

51 Send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us, when thou

art cleansed, what earth containeth,

So that thereby we may acquire possessions and Rishihood in
Jamadagni’s manner.

52 Pour forth this wealth with this purification : flow onward to

the yellow lake, 0 Indu.

Here, too, the Ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, shall give
a son to him who cometh quickly.

47 His Daughter's forms and figures : $ oma pervades, and imparts a share
of his nutritious power to, the grass, herbs, and shrubs which are the varied
forms assumed by Earth his daughter.

51 RUhihood in Jamadagni’s manner : 'make our sacred prayer (sweet) as
Jamadagni.’ — Wilson.

52 Yellow ; the meaning of m&nschatvi is uncertain, See VII, 44. 3, note

364 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX.

53 Flow on for ns with this purification to the famed ford of, thee

whose due is glory.

May the Foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, like a tree’s
ripe fruit, sixty thousand treasures.

54 Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake

and Prisana, wrought in battle.

He sent our enemies to sleep and slew them, and turned away
the foolish and unfriendly.

55 Thou comest unto three extended filters, and hastenest

through each one as they cleanse thee.

Thou art tfie giver of the gift, a Bhaga, a Maghavan for
liberal !brds, 0 Indu.

56 This Soma here, the Wise, the All-obtainer, flows on his way

as King of all existence.

Driving the drops at our assemblies, Indu completely traverses
the fleecy filter.

57 The Great Inviolate are kissing Indu, and singing in his place

like eager sages.

The wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, and balm
his form with essence of the waters.

58 Soma, may we, with thee as Pavam&na, pile up together ail

our spoil in battle.

This boon vouchsafe us Yaruna and Mitra, and Aditi and
Sindhu, Earth and Heaven I

HYMN* XCVIIL Soma Parana.

Stream on us riches that are sought by many, best at winning
strength,

Kiches, 0 Indu, thousandfold, glorious, conquering the great.

53 To the famed ford : possibly, as Ludwig suggests, the aid of Soma ia
craved at some ford of a neighbouring river, famous on account of a battle
that has been fought there, and destined to be the scene of an approaching
conflict.

54 The first line is conjecturally translated after Ludwig, who takes
Prisana to be the name of a place. S&yana’s elaborate explanation is dif-
ferent ‘ These two great acts, the raining (of arrows) and the humiliation
(of foes), are the givers of happiness ; they are deadly either in a fight on
horseback or in a hand-to-hand fight.’—Wilson. Here Siiyana explains
mdnschatvi (at the blue or yellow lake ?) by ‘ in battle with horses/ and
prisane (at Prisana ?) by ‘in close, or hand-to-hand encounter/ Two victories
appear to be referred to, and that is about all that can be said.

55 The three extended filters are said to be fire, wind, and sun, in addition
to the one artificial filter of wool.

57 The Great Inviolate : the Gods. Kissing : or sipping.

58 All our spoil in battle : yet to be won in the approa oiling fight wherein
we look to Soma for help and victory.

MTMN 98 .]

THE RIGVEDA.

305

2 Effused, he hath, as on a car, invested him in fleecy mail :
Onward hathlndu flowed' in streams, impelled, surrounded by

the wood.

3 Effused, this Indu hath flowed on, distilling rapture, to the

fleece :

He goes erect, as seeking kine, in stream, with light, to sacrifice.

4 For thou thyself, 0 Indu, God, to every mortal worshipper
Attractest riches thousandfold, made manifest in hundred

forms.

5 Good Yritra-slayer, may we be still nearest to this wealth of

thine

Which many crave, nearest to food and happiness, Besistless
One !

6 Whom, bright with native splendour, crushed between the

pair of pressing-stones —

The wavy Friend whom Indra loves — the twiee-five sisters
dip and bathe,

7 Him with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved

of all,

Who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the Deities.

8 Through longing for this sap of yours ye drink what brings

ability,

Even him who, dear as heaven's own light, gives to our princes
high renown.

9 Indu at holy rites produced you, Heaven and Earth, the

Friends of men,

Hill-haunting God the Goddesses, They bruised him where
the roar was loud.

10 For Vritra-slaying Indra, thou, Soma, art poured that he may

drink,

Poured for the guerdon-giving man, poured for the God who
sitteth there.

11 These ancient Somas, at the break of day, have flowed into

the sieve,

Snorting away at early morn these foolish evil-hearted ones.

2 By the wood : the wooden vat or trough.

3 Seeking Jcine : desirous of the milk which is to he mixed with his juice.

9 This stanza is difficult. Sfiyana explains it differently : — ‘ Divine heaven
and earth the progeny of Mann, the Soma juice is generated at your sacrifices,
radiant, abiding in the grinding stones ; (the priests) bruise him at the loud-
sounding ceremony.* — Wilson. Jlill-liaunting : cf. IX. 85. 10.

10 For the guerdon- giving man: for the good of the institute of the
sacrifice,

11 Snorting away ,* driving away with the bubbling sound they make.

S§6 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

12 Friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this Most Re-
splendent One,

Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him whose**
home is very strength.

HYMN XCIX. Soma Pavam&na.

They for the Bold and Lovely One ply manly vigour like a bow :

Joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the
Lord Divine.

2 And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward into strength-

ening food,

What time the sacrificed thoughts speed on his way the
Qolden-feued.

3 We cleanse this gladdening drink of his, the juice which Indra

chiefly drinks, —

That which kine took into their mouths, of old, and princes
take it now.

4 To him, while purifying, they have raised the ancient psalm

of praise :

And sacred songs which bear the names of Gods have suppli-
cated him.

5 They purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve.

Him they instruct as messenger Co bear the sage’s morning

prayer.

6 Soma, best Cheerer, takes his seat, the while they cleanse him

in the bowls.

He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, the Lord of Song.

12 Who hath the smell of strength : v^jagnndhyam : * fragrant and invigo-
rating.’ — Wilson. ‘ Forming or having a wagon-load of goods or spoil.’ — S. P.
Lexicon. Kim whose home is strength: v&japastyam : ‘food and dwellings.’ —
Wilson. ‘Him who has a house full of goods.’ — S. P. Lexicon.

1 They : the priests. Ply manly vigour like a bow: ‘stretch the bow of
manhood.’ — Wilson. They exert all their manly strength, or as Benfey,
suggests, attack and storm the God with prayer and sacrifice, * beseeching and
besieging ’ as Milton says. The Lord Divine : the Asura (Zend, Ahura), here
meaning Soma.

2 By night : kshapd : ‘ at the end of the night.’ — Wilson. Ludwig tram- ^
slates kshapft by * der fiirst,’ ‘ the prince.*

3 Which kine took into their mouths : in the form of the juices of grass
from which the milky portion of the libation is evolved.

4 Sftyaua’s explanation of the second line of this stanza, is different *. — ‘ and
the fingers exercising their pressure are able (to prepare the oblation) for the ;
gods.’ — Wilson.

6 He as it were impregns the cow ,* meaning, perhaps, as Ludwig suggests,
that the milk becomes efficacious aB a libation only when it is mixed with
Soma juice. \

THE RIGYELA.

HYMN 100.]

36,7

7 He 3s effused and beautified, a God for Gods, by skilful men.
He penetrates the mighty floods collecting all he knows therein.

8 Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to the clean-

ing sieve.

Thou, yielding Indra highest joy, takest thy seat within the
bowls.

HYMH C. Soma Pavatn&na,

The Guileless Ones are singing praise to Indra’s well beloved
Friend,

As, in the morning of its life, the mothers lick the new-born
calf. ^

a

2 0 Indu, while they cleanse thee, bring, 0 Soma, doubly-waxing

wealth :

Thou in the worshipper’s abode causest all treasures to in-
increase.

3 Set free the song which mind hath yoked, even as thunder

frees the rain :

All treasures of the earth and heaven, 0 Soma, thou dost
multiply.

4 Thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some victorious

warrior’s steed,

Hastening onward through the fleece like a swift horse who
wins the prize.

5 Flow on, Sage Soma, with thy stream to give us mental power

and strength,

Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for Varnna.

6 Flow to the filter with thy stream, effused, best winner, thou,

of spoil,

0 Soma, as mos£ rich in sweets for Indra, Vishnu, and the
Gods.

7 The mothers, void of guiles, caress thee, Golden-coloured, in

the sieve,

As cows, 0 Pavam&na, lick the new-born calf, as Law com-
mands.

7 Collecting all he knows therein : the meaning of this half-line is not clear :
— 1 wheu he is recognized amongst these (people) as the giver (of riches).*
— Wilson.

1 The Guileless Ones : the vasattvari waters.

7 As Law commands ; vklharmani : see Bergaigne, La Religion “ V6digue t
III. 218, note 2. ‘At the sacrifice.’ — Wilson. * In the realm of heaven/ —
Graasmanu,

368 THE HYMNS OF ' [HOOK '

8 Thou, Pavamana, mo vest on with wondrous rajs to

nown. - ' , v.

Striving within the votary’s house thou drivest all the glooms
away.

9 Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above

the earth.

Thou, Pavamana, hast assumed thy coat of mail in majesty.

HYMN CL Soma Pavarn&na.

Fob first possession of your juice, for the exhilarating drink,
Drive ye away the dog, my friends, drive ye the long-tongued
dog awa^, #

2 He who with purifying stream, effused, comes flowing hither-

ward,

Indu, is like an able steed.

3 The men with all-pervading song send unassailable Soma forth,
By pressing-stones, to sacrifice.

4 The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is des-

tined, flow,

Effused, the source of Indra’s joy: may your strong juices
reach the Gods.

5 Indu flows on for Indra’s sake : thus have the Deities declared.
The Lord of Speech exerts himself, Euler of all, because of

might.

6 Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams the ocean

flows,

Even Soma, Lord of opulence, the Friend of Indra, day by
day.

7 As Pushan, Fortune, Bhaga,»comes this Soma while they make

him pure.

He, Lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the earth
and heaven.

8 The dear cows lowed in joyful mood together to the gladden-

ing drink.

The drops as they were purified, the Soma juices, made them
paths.

9 0 Pavam&na, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy to be

famed,

Which the Five Tribes have over them, whereby we may win
opulence.

9 The coat of mail: drdp'm; see IX. 86. 14.

1 Drive ye away : prevent dogs or R&kakasas from drinking the Soma juice.

HYMN 102. J THE R1QVEDA. 369

10 For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of our

weal,

Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders of the
light.

11 Effused by means of pressing* stones, upon the ox-hide visible,
They, treasure-finders, have announced food unto us from

every side.

12 These Soma juices, skilled in song, purified, blent with milk

and curd,

When movingand when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely Suns.

13 Let not the power of men restrain the voice c£ the outpour-

ing juice :

As Bhrigu’s sons chased Maklia, so drive ye the greedy hound
away.

14 The Friend hath wrapped him in his robe, as in bis parents'

arms, a son.

He went, as lover to a dame, to take his station suitor-like,

15 That Hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both

worlds apart,

Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, priest-
like, in his place.

16 Soma upon the ox's skin through the sheep's wool flows purified.
Bellowing out, the Tawny Steer goes on to Indra’s special

place.

HYMN GIL Soma Pavam&na.

The Child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan
of sacrifice,

Surpasses all things that are dear, yea, from of old.

2 The place, near the two pressing-stones of Trita, hath he
occupied,

Secret and dear through seven lights of sacrifice.

13 Makha: apparently, a demon whose name does not occur again in the
Bigveda.

1 6 Special place : 1 2 prepared station.’ — Wilson. The vessel containing the
libation appropriated to Indra.

1 The streams : literally 1 the great,’ ‘ waters’ being understood. .

2 I am indebted to Prof. Macdonell (Journal of the B. A, S.. July, 1893,
pp, 457-8) for the translation and explanation of this and the following very-
difficult stanzas. The place : far away iii heaven where Trita presses and
prepares the celestial Soma for Indra. Me: Soma. Bear: to Soma. Seven
lights of sacrifice : probably the seven rays or tongues of the sacrificial fire
with which Soma is closely connected. * Through the seven ordinances of
sacrifices.’ — Macdonell.

24

370 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK /X,

3 Urge to three courses, on the heights of Trita, riches in a

stream ;

He who. is passing wise measures his courses out.

4 Even at his birth the Mothers Seven taught' him, for glory,

like a sage,

So that he, firm and sure, hath set his mind on wealth..,

5 Under* his sway, of one accord, are all the guileless Deities;
Warriors to be envied, they, when they are pleased.

6 The Babe whom they who strengthen Law have generated,

fair to see,

Much longecbfor at the sacrifice, most liberal Sage, —

7 To him, united, of themselves, come the young Parents of the

. rite,

When they adorn him, duly weaving sacrifice.

8 With wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the stall of

heaven,

Speeding at solemn rite the plan of Holy Law.

HYMJST CIIL Soma Pavam&ua.

To Soma who is purified as ordering Priest the song is raised :
Bring meed, as 'twere, to one who intakes thee glad with hymns.

5 Blended with milk and curds he hows on through the long
wool of the sheep.

The Gold-hued, purified, makes him three seats for rest.

3 On through the long wool of the sheep to the meatli-dropping

vat he flows :

The Risbis 5 sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him.

4 Shared by all Gods, Infallible, the Leader of our holy hymns,
Golden- hued Soma, being cleansed, hath reached the bowls.

3 ‘Tli e main justification of my interpretation/ says Prof. Macdonell, ‘is
that I supply no extraneous word with * trfni/ hut explain it by the third
line. The meaning of my translation is : ‘Do thou, Soma, on the heights of
Trita, direct the fertilizing streams which produce wealth into the channels
of Trita, for thou knowest these channels, haying measured them out with
thy streams/ Three courses : or channels, of Trita. He who is passing wise t
Soma. His : Trita’s.

4 The Mothers Seven: the Seven Rivers.

5 Warriors to be envied : the meaning of the line is uncertain.

6 They who strengthen Law : according to S&yana, the vasattvari waters.

7 The young Parents of .the rite: ever-young, fresh and strong Heaven and

Earth.

2 Three seats for rest : three reservoirs in which he may settle. The dro~
nakalasa , the ddhavaniya , and the pMdbhrit.

3 The Mishis' sevenfold guire : ‘ the seven metres of the JZishisS — Wilson.

am 105.] THERWVEDA. S7I

5 After thy Godlike qualities, associate with Indra, go,

As a Priest- purified by priests, Immortal One.

6 Lik^ a ^ ar ^ iors<3 w ^° s ^ ows hia strength, a God effused for

Deities,

The penetrating Pavamana flows along.

HYMN CIY. Soma Pavam&na.

Sit down, 0 friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself :
Deck him for glory, like a child, with holy rites.

2 Unite him blunging household wealth, even as a calf, with

mother kine,

Him who hath double strength, the God-delighting juice.

3 Purify him who gives us power, that he, mdfet Blessed One,

maybe

A banquet for the Troop, Mitra, and Varuna.

4 Yoices have sung aloud to thee as finder-out of wealth for us :
We clothe the hue thou wearest with a robe of milk.

5 Thou, Indu, art the food of Gods, 0 Sovran of all gladdening

drinks :

As Friend for friend, he thou best finder of success.

6 Drive utterly away from us each demon, each voracious fiend,
The godless and the fal^e : keep sorrow far away.

HYMN CY. Soma Pavamftna.

Sing ye aloud, 0 friends, to him who makes him pure for glad-
dening drink :

They shall make sweet the Child with sacrifice and laud.

2 Like as a calf with mother cows, so Indu is urged forth and sent,
Glorified by our hymns, the God-delighting juice.

3 Effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the Troop,
He who hath bfcen effused, most rich in meath, for Gods.

4 Flow to us, Indu, passing strong, effused, with wealth of kine

and steeds :

I will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue.

5 Lord of the tawny, Indu, thou who art the Gods’ most special

food,

As Friend to friend, for splendour be thou good to men.

5 After thy Godlike qualities : according to S&yana, c to the hosts of the gods,'

6 Penetrating : vydnasih; ‘ spreading widely into the vessels.’ — Wilson.

2 Unite him : ‘ Associate him the support of the mansion with the mater-
nal (waters) as the calf (with the mother). 1 — Wilson

3 The Troop ; the banded Maruts.

5 Lord of the tawny ; Jiarlndm ; S&yana tmpplies pattindm, cattle.

372

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK IX.

6 Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each voracious
foe :

0 Indu, overcome and drive the false afar.

HYMN CVI. Soma Pavamdna.

To Indra, to the Mighty Steer, may these gold-coloured juices go,
Drops rapidly produced, that find the light of heaven.

2 Effused, this juice victorious flows for Indra, for his mainte-

nance.

Soma bethinks him of the Conqueror, as he knows.

3 May Indra in his raptures gain from him the grasp that gath-

ers spoil, *>

And, winning waters, wield the steer-strong thunderbolt.

4 Flow vigilant for Indra, thou Soma, yea, Indu, run thou on :
Bring hither splendid strength that finds the light of heaven.

5 Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra's sake the mighty juice,
Path-maker thou, far seeing, with a thousand ways.

6 Best finder of prosperity for us, most rich in sweets for Gods,
Proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths.

7 0 Indu, with thy streams, in might, flow for the banquet of

the Gods :

Rich in meath, Soma, in our beaker take thy place.

8 Thy drops that swim in water have exalted Indra to delight :
The Gods have drunk thee up for immortality.

9 Stream opulence to us, ye drops of Soma, pressed and purified,
Pouring down rain from heaven in floods, and finding light.

10 Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool

of the sheep,

Shouting while purified before the voice of spng.

11 With songs they send the Mighty forth, sporting in wood,

above the fleece :

Our psalms have glorified him of the triple height.

12 Into the jars hath he been loosed, like an impetuous steed

for war,

And lifting up his voice, while filtered, glided on.

13 Gold-hued and lovely in his course, through tangles of the

wool he flows,

And pours heroic fame upon the worshippers.

The hymn is a Bort of rifaccimento of Hymn 104.

2 For his maintenance : bhardya : or, for battle. The Conqueror : Indra
11 Him of the triple height : tripmhthdm: the three heights are probably
the firmament, the mountain, and the altar. ‘Abiding in three receptacles ’
. — Wilson.

HYMN 107.] THE MOVED A. 373

14 Flow thus, a faithful votary : the streams of meath have
been effused.

Thou comest to the filter, singing, from each side.

HYMN CVII. Soma Pavam&na.

Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused. Soma, the best of
sacred gifts,

Who, friend of man, hath run amid the water-streams.

He hath pressed Soma out with stones,

2 Now, being purified, flow hither through the fleece inviolate

and most odorous. »

We gladden thee in waters when thou art effused, blending
thee still with juice and milk.

3 Pressed out for all to see, delighting Gods, Indu, Far-sighted

One, is mental power,

4 Cleansing thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest in a watery

robe :

Giver of wealth, thou sittest in the place of Law, 0 God, a
fountain made of gold.

5 Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath, he hath sat in

the ancient gathering-place.

Washed by the men, the Strong, Far-seeing One streams forth
nutritious food that all desire.

6 0 Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the

sheep’s long wool,

Thou hast become a Singer most like Angtras : thou madesfc
Surya mount to heaven.

7 Bountiful, best of furtherers, Soma floweth on, Rishi and

Singer, keen of sight.

Thou hast become a Sage most welcome to the Gods : thou
madest Surya mount to heaven.

8 Pressed out by pressers, Soma goes over the fleecy backs of

sheep,

Goes, even as with a mare, in tawny-coloured stream, goes
in exhilarating stream.

9 Down to the water Soma, rich in kine, hath flowed with cows,

with cows that have been milked.

1 He ; the priest,

4 In the place of Law : in the place of Law-ordained sacrifice,

5 Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath : extracting the sweet and
precious juice from the stalk and tendrils of the Soma plant.

THE HYMNS OF

374

[BOO# /Jf.

They have approached the mixing-vessels as a sea : the cheerer
streams for the carouse.

10 Effused by stones, 0 Soma, and urged through the long wool

of the sheep,

Thou, entering the saucers as a man the fort, gold-hued hast
settled’ in the wood.

11 He beautifies himself through the sheep’s long fine wool, like

an impetuous steed in war,

Even Soma Pavamana who shall be the joy of sages and of
holy bard?,

12 0 Soma, — for the feast of Gods, river-like he hath swelled

with surge,

With the stalk’s juice, exhilarating, resting not, into the vat
that drops with meath.

1 3 Like a clear son who must be decked, the Lovely One hath

clad him in a shining robe.

Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into the
rivers from their hands.

14 The living drops of Soma juice pour, as they flow, the glad-

dening drink, r

Intelligent drops above the basin of the sea, exhilarating,
finding light.

15 May Pavam&na, King and God, speed with his wave over the

sea the lofty rite :

May he by Mitra’s and by Varuna’s decree flow furthering the
lofty rite.

16 Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose home is

in the sea — *

17 Soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for Indra with his

Marut host :

He hastens o’er the fleece with all his thousand streams : men
make him bright and beautiful.

18 Purified in the bowl and gendering the hymn, wise Soma joys

among the Gods.

Eobed in the flood, the Mighty One hath clad himself with
milk and settled in the vats.

9 They have approached the mixing -vessels like a sea : samvdrandni y from
samvri, to cover, enclose, surround, must, apparently, mean the vessels that
contain the juices and not the juices themselves as Sfiyapa explains; — ‘his
enjoyable juices go (to the pitcher as waters) to the ocean. ’* — Wilson.

12 0 Soma he, is a sort of periphrasis for Soma in the nominative case.

14 Of the sea ; of the firmament, or sea of air.

TEE RIGVEBA.

375

HYMN 108.]

19 0 Soma, Indu, every day thy friendship hath been my delight.
Many fiends follow me ; help me, thou Tawny-hned ; pass on

beyond these barriers.

20 Close to thy bosom am I, Soma, day and night, 0 Tawny4med,

for friendship sake.

Surya himself refulgent with his glow have we o’ertaken in his
course like birds.

21 Deft-handed ! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea.
Thou, Pavam&na, makest riches flow to us, yellow, abundant,

much-desired.

22 Making thee pure and bright in the sheep’s^ Jong wool, thou

hast bellowed, steer-like, in the wood.

Thou flowest, Soma Pavamfina, balmed with milk unto the
special place of Gods.

23 Flow on to win us strength, flow on to lofty lore of every kind.
Thou, Soma, as Exhilarator wast the first to spread the sea

abroad for Gods.

24 Flow to the realm of earth, flow to the realm of heaven, 0

Soma, in thy righteous ways.

Fair art thou whom the sages, 0 Far-seeing One, urge onward
with their songs andjhymns.

25 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Pavamanas in a stream,
Girt by the Maruts, gladdening, Steeds with Inra 5 s strength,

for wisdom and for dainty food.

26 Urged onward by the pressers, clad in watery robes, Indu is

speeding to the vat.

He gendering light, hath made the glad Cows low, the while
he takes them as his garb of state.

* HYMN CVIir. Soma Pavamana.

Fob Indra, flow thou Soma on, as gladdening juice most
sweet, intelligent,

Great, cheering, dwelling most in heaven.

2 Thou, of whom having drunk the Steer acts like a steer :
drinking of this that finds the light,

19 Many fiends : the text has only puritni, many, In the neuter plural.
S&yana supplies rakshdhsi Bftkshasas or fiends. Pass on beyond these barriers ;
‘overcome those who surround me.’ — Wilson.

20 Close to thy bosom, am I : ‘I (delight) in thy presence.’ — Wilson.

21 Amid the sea : antarihshe kalase vd, in the firmament or in the beaker,
»ays S&yana.

25 The Pavamdnas : f thy purified juices/ — Wilson.

2 The Steer acts Wee a *£ecr .♦ vrishabhb vriskdy&te : c the showerer Indra is
invigorated.’ — Wilson. Etasa : one of the horses of the Sun ; or a horse in
general ; — ‘ as a horse comes to the battle/ — S&yana.

376

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK /X

He, Excellently Wise, is come to strengthening food, to spoiI_^-
and wealth like Etasa.

3 For, verily, Pavamaua, thou hast, splendidest, called all the

generations of
The Gods to immortality.

4 By whom Dadhyach Navagva opens fastened doors, by whom

the sages gained their wish,

By whom they won the fame of lovely Amrita in the felicity of
Gods.

5 Effused, he floweth in a stream, best rapture-giver, in the long

wool of the> sheep,

Sporting, as rj twere the waters’ wave.

6 He who from out the rocky cavern took with might the red-

refulgent watery Cows, —

Thou masterest the stable full of kine and steeds : burst it,
brave Lord, like one in mail.

7 Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laud-worthy, speeding

through the region and the flood,

Who swims in water, roars in wood ;

8 Inereaser of the water, Steer with thousand streams, dear to

the race of Deities ; r

Who born in Law hath waxen mighty by the Law, King, God,
and lofty Ordinance.

9 Make splendid glory shine on us, thou Lord of strengthening

food, God, as the Friend of Gods :

Unclose the fount of middle air.

10 Roll onward to the bowls, 0 Mighty One, effused, as Prince

supporter of the tribes. ^

Pour on us rain from heaven, send us the waters’ flow : incite
our thoughts to win the spoil.

11 They have drained him the Steer of heaven, him with a

thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,

Him who brings all thing excellent.

12 The Mighty One was born Immortal, giving life, lightening

dai’kness with his shine.

Well-praised by sages he hath by his wondrous power assumed
the Threefold as his robe.

4 JDadhyach Navagva ; Dadhyach was the son of A thar van the priest who
first obtained fire and offered Soma and prayer to the Hods. Here he is called
a Navagva and consequently one of the Angirases. See both names in Yol.
I., Index. Won the fame of lovely Amrita ; * obtained the sustenance of the
delicious (ambrosial) water/ — Wilson.

12 The Threefold; the morning, noon, and evening libation.

HYMN 109.] THE EIGVEFA. 377

13 Effused is he who brings good things, who brings us bounteous

gifts and sweet refreshing food,

Soma who brings us quiet homes :

14 Pie whom our Indra and the Marut host shall drink, Bhaga

shall drink with Aryaman,

By whom we bring to us Mitra and Yanina and Indra for our
great defence.

15 Soma, for Indra’s drink do thou, led by the men, well-weapon-

ed and most gladdening,

Flow on with greatest store of sweets.

16 Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra’ s heart, as°sivers pass into

the sea,

Acceptable to Mitra, Yayu, Yaruna, the noblest Pillar of the
heavens.

HYMN CIX. Soma PavamAna.

Pleasant to Indra’s, Mitra’s, Pushan’s Bhaga’s taste, speed
onward, Soma, with thy flowing stream.

2 Let Indra drink, 0 Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, and all

Deities for strength.

3 So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the vast, im-

mortal dwelling-place.

4 Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as Father of the Gods,

to every form.

5 Flow on, 0 Soma, radiant for the Gods and Heaven and Earth,

and bless our progeny.

6 Thou, bright Juice, art Sustainer of the sky : flow, mighty, in

accordance w*th true Law.

7 Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream through the

great fleece as in the olden time.

8 Born, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the Light-finder

make all blessings flow.

13 The metre of this stanza is G&yatrl YavamadhyA, that is G&yatr? having
the middle like a barley-corn, thick in the middle and tapering at both ends :
first a P&cla of eight syllables, then one of twelve, and lastly another of eight.

The Bisliis are the Agnavo DhishnyAh, saerifieal Agnis or Fires, said to be
sons of Isvara the Supreme Deity of post-Vedic times.

3 Flow to the vast immortal dwelling ''place : { flow for immortality and
spacious abode. 1 — Wilson.

4 To every form : to all the forms or essences of the Gods into which he
enters. Or to every power, to aid us in every way.

THE HYMNS OF

3 78

[BOOK JX.

9 Indu, while cleansed, keeping the people safe, shall giva-
all possessions for onr own.

10 Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong courser

bathed, to win the prize.

11 The pressers purify this juice of thine, the Soma, for delight,

and lofty fame.

12 They deck the Gold-hued Tnfant, newly-born, even Soma,

Indu, in the sieve for Gods.

13 Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, Sage for good

fortune irvthe waters’ lap.

14 He bears tffe beauteous name of Indra, that wherewith he

overcame all demon foes.

15 All Deities are wont to drink of him, pressed by the men and

blent with milk and curds.

16 He hath flowed forth with thousand 'streams effused, flowed

through the filter and the sheep’s long wool.

17 With endless genial flow the Strong hath run, purified by the

waters, blent with milk.

18 Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go forth, 0

Soma, into Indra’s throat. *

19 The mighty Soma with a thousand streams is poured to Indra

through the cleansing sieve.

20 Indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for Indra, for the

Steer, for his delight.

21 Lightly, for sheen, they cleanse thee for the Gods, gold-colour-

ed, wearing water as thy robe.

22 Indu to Indra streams, yea, downward streams, Strong, flow-

ing to the floods, and mingling there.

HYMN CX. Soma Pavara&na.

O’bepowerxno Vritras, forward run to win great strength :
Thou speedest to subdue like one exacting debts.

2 In thee, effused, 0 Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great su-

premacy in fight:

Thou, Pavam&na, enterest into mighty deeds.

3 0 Pavam&na, thou didst generate the Sun, and spread the mois-

ture out with power,

Hasting to us with plenty vivified with milk.

14 He bears: according to SAyana, the translation of the first half-line
would be : Indra’s fair body he supports, wherewith, etc.

3 With plenty vivified with mills : * with abundant wisdom that procures ■
cattle (for thy worshippers).’ — Wilson.

tre mgveda.

379

rtMR in.]

4 Thou didst produce him, Deathless God ! mid mortal men

for maintenance of Law and lovely Amrita :

Thou evermore hast moved making strength flow to us.

5 AH round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as ’twere

a never-failing well for men to drink,

Borne on thy way in fragments from the presser’s arms,

6 Then, beautifully radiant, certain Heavenly Ones, have sung

to him their kinship as they looked thereon,

And Savitar the God opens as ’twere a stall.

7 Soma, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the

hymn to thee for mighty strength and for renown :

So, Hero, urge us onward to heroic power.

8 They have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky

the old primeval milk of heaven that claims the laud :

They lifted up their voice to Indra at his birth.

9 As long as thou,* 0 P&vamdna, art above this earth and heaven

and all existence in thy might,

Thou standest like a Bull the chief amid the herd.

10 In the sheep's wool hath Soma Pavam&na flowed, while they

cleanse him, like a playful infant,

Indu with hundred powers and hundred currents.

11 Holy and sweet, while purified, this Tndu flows on, a wave of

pleasant taste, to Indra, — -
Strength-winner, Treasure-finder, Life-bes tower.

12 So flow thou on, subduing our assailants, chasing the demons

hard to be encountered,

Well-armed and conquering our foes, 0 Soma.

HYMN CXI. Soma Pavamana.

With this his golden splendour purifying him, he with his
own allies subdues all enemies, as Sura with his own allieB.
Cleansing himself with stream of j nice he shines forth yellow-
hued and red, when with the praisers he encompasses all
forms, with praisers having seven mouths.

5 In fragments ; in pieces of the crushed stalk and shoots of the Soma* plant.

6 Beautifully radiant ; vasunichah ; according to S&yana, a proper name,
Vasuruchas, plural of Vasurueh. Opens as ’twere a stall : ‘drives away the
obstructing (darkness)/ — Wilson.

1 He : Soma. All enemies : the fiends of darkness. As Silva with his own
allies : as Sftrya.or the Sun with his attendant beams of light. All forms:
vl&vrt i^Apti : all the lunar mansions, according to S&yana. According to Hille-
brandt, (assumest) all beauty. With the praisers : riJcvabhih : perhaps the
Angirases are intended. Raving seven mouths : that is, one mouth each, the
mouth being mentioned in reference to their love of Soma juice.

MS HYMNS OF

330

[BOOK IX,

2 That tfe&sitte of the Panis thou discoveredst ; thou withj^^ii.

mother deckest thee in thine abode, with songs of worship
in thine home.

As ’twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy songs
resound in joy. He with the ruddy-hued, threefold hath
won life-power, he, glittering, hath won life-power.

3 He moves intelligent, directed to the East. The very beau-

teous car rivals the beams of light, the beautiful celestial
car.

Hymns, lauding manly valour, came, inciting Tndra to success,
that ye rr^iy be unconquered, both thy bolt and thou, both
be uncoifquered in the war.

HYM2ST CXII. Soma Pavam&na.

W e all have various thoughts and plans, and diverse are the
ways of men.

The Brahman seeks the worshipper, wright seeks the cracked,
and leech the maimed, Flow, Indu, how for Indra’s sake.

2 The smith with ripe and seasoned plants, with feathers of the

birds of air,

With stones, and with enkindled flames, seeks him who hath
a store of gold. Flow, Indu, flaw for Indra’s sake.

3 A bard am I, my dad’s a leech, mammy lays corn upon the

stones.

Striving for wealth, with varied plans, we follow our desires
like kiue. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

2 Treasure of the Panis : the rays of light carried off and concealed by the
demons of darkness. Thy Mothers; apparently the Dawns. According to S&yana
the vasatlvari waters. Threefold ; there is no substantive in the text, and it
is uncertain whab tridhdtubhih refers to. S&yana refers it to the vasativart
waters, and explains it by ‘ the supporters of the three worlds.* Grassmann
thinks that the beverages, consisting of three ingredients, mixed with the
Soma juice are intended. Probably the Dawns, sometimes spoken of as three
(cf. VIII. 41. 3), are meant.

3 The very beauteous car ; of Soma. Beam of light : sunbeams.

The hymn appears to be an old popular song transformed into an address
to Soma by attaching to each stanza a refrain which has no connexion with
the subject of the song. But see Vedische Studies I. p. 107. The hymn is
translated in Muir’s 0. S. Texts, V, 424.

1 The Brahman ; f This verse distinctly proves that the priesthood already
formed a profession.’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts , I. 252.

2 Plants : meaning here reeds which were made into arrows. With stones ,
and with enkindled flames : according to S&yana, with glistening stones, to
form the heads of the arrows Who hatha store of gold : and will be able
to pay well for the arrows which the artisan makes for him.

3 My dad ; talah ; a familiar expression, corresponding to nan#, mammy.

THE RIGVEDA.

881

HYMN 113,]

4 The horse would draw an easy ear, gay hosts attract the laugh
and jest.

The male desires his mate's approach, the frog is eager for the
flood. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.

HYMN CXIII. Soma PavamSna.

Let Vritra-slayiug Indra drink Soma by Saryan&v&n's side,
ncr up vigour in his heart, prepared* to do heroic deels.
Flow, flow for Indra's sake.

2 Lord of the Quarts-, # thou on, boon Soma, from Arj ika l?,nd,

Elf used with ardour au^ w jth faith, and the true hymn of

sacrifice. Flow, Indu, flow w Indra’s sake?

3 Hither hath SArya's Daughter brought the wild Steer whom

Parjanya nursed.

Gandharvas have seized hold of him, and in the Soma laid
the juice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.

4 Splendid by Law ! declaring Law, truth-speaking, truthful in

thy works*

Enouncing faith, King Soma ! thou, 0 Soma, whom thy maker
decks. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.

5 Together flow the meeting streams of him the Great and truly

Strong.

The juices of the juicy meet. Made pure by prayer, 0 Golden-
hued, flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.

6 0 Pavamana, where the priest, as he recites the rhythmio

prayer,

Lords it o'er Soma with the stone, with Soma bringing forth
delight, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

7 0 PavamAna, place me in that deathless, undecay ing world
Wherein the light of heaven is set, and everlasting lustre shines.

Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.

8 Make me immortal in that realm where dwells the King, Vivas-

vfin's Son,

Where is the secret shrine of heaven, where are those waters
young and fresh. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra's sake.

1 Saryandvdn : a lake in the Kurukshetra district.

2 Of the Quarters ; of the four regions of the sky. Avjilca land : accord-
ing to S&yana, the country of the Rijikas. Cf. VIII. 7. 29.

3 The wild Steer whom Parjanya nursed : the mighty Soma-plant whoBe

growth has been fostered by the God of the rainy cloud. Silrya’s Daughter ;
SvaddM or Faith. Cf. IX. I. 6. Gandharvas : guardians of the heavenly
Soma. See Vol. I., Index. *

4 Thy maker ; the Soma-presser, or the institutor of the sacrifice: — *the
upholder (of the rite).' — Wilson.

8 The King : Yama, the ruler of departed spirits, son of Vivasvfin. See
Vol. I., Index.

382

the may eda.

[BOOK IX.

9 Makeme immortal in that realm where they move even as they Iis,t,

In the third sphere of inmost heaven where lucid worlds are
full of light. Flow, Indu, flow for Tndra’s sake.

1 0 Make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and strong desi r^^
The region of the radiant Moon, where food and full delight

are found. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

1 1 Make me immortal in that realm where happiness
, sports, where

Joys and felicities combine, and longings fulfilled.
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake^^^

Soma Pavam&na.

Tab man vfkio walketh-^fhe Laws of Indu Pavam&na bid, —

Men call him rigjrtff children, him, 0 Soma, who hath met thy
thought, Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

2 Kasyapa, Rishi, lifting up thy voice with hymn- composers’ lauds,

Pay reverence to King Soma born the Sovran Ruler of the

plants. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

3 Seven regions have their several Suns j the ministering priests

are seven ;

Seven are the Aditya Deities,— with these, 0 Soma, guard thou
us. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake,

4 Guard its with this oblation whi«h, King Soma, hath been

dressed for thee.

Let not malignity conquer us, let nothing evil do us harm.
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

9 When they move even as they list : i where action is unrestrained.’ — Muir.
* Where the sun wanders at will.’ — Wilson.

10 Of the radiant Moon rthe adjective bradhndsya , of the ruddy or brilliant,
stands without a substantive. ‘Sun’ is supplied by S&yana, ‘Desrotp-
tralenden,’ — Ludwig. See Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie , I., 396.

As regards the joys of the departed, referred to in sfanzas 7 — 12, Professor
von Both observes (Jour u. Amer. Orient. Soc. iii 343, quoted by Dr. Muir,
0. S. Texts , Y. 307) ‘ The place where these glorified ones are to live is heaven.
In order to show that not merely an outer court of the divine dwellings is
set apart for them, the highest heaven, the midst or innermost part of heaven,
is expressly spoken of as their seat. This is their place of rest ; and its
divine splendour is not disfigured by any specification of particular beauties
or enjoyments, such as those with which other religions have been wont to

adorn the mansions of the blest There thr 1 y ■ the language used

to describe their condition is the same with v. ■. »■ ! ■ ■ the most exalted
felicity.’ .

2 Kasyapa : the seer of the hymn addresses himself.

3 Seven regions ; the regions of the sky, the four quarters with intermediate
points. They are sometimes said to be five, six, or seven in number, but
more frequently eight. Aditya Deities: Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga,
Daksha, Ansa, and perhaps Dh&tar, Other enumerations also are given, and
their number is sometimes said to be eight. See M. Miiller, Vedic Hymns, I,
p. 252f (Sacred Books of the East, XXXII).

BOOK THE TENTH.

HYMN I. Agm.

High* hath the Mighty risen before the dawning, and come to
us with light from out the darkness.

Fair-shapen Agni with white-shining splendour hath tilled at
birth all human habitations.

2 Thou, being born, art Child of Earth aud Heaven, parted

among the plants in beauty, Agni 1
The glooms of night thou, Brilliant Babe, subduest, and art
cola o forth, loud roaring, from thy Mothers.

3 Here, beb&g manifested, lofty Vishnu, full wise, protects his

own suprebf^st station.

When they have- offered in his mouth their sweet milk, to
him with one accord, they sing forth praises.

4 Thence bearing food the Mothers come to meet thee, with

food for thee who givest fotdjts increase.

These in their altered form agaim^thou meetest. Thou art
* Invoking Priest in homes of mortals^.

5 Priest of the holy rite, with car that glitters, refulgent Ban-

ner of each act of worship,

Sharing in every God through might aud glory, even Agni
Guest of men I summon hither.

6 So Agni stands on earth's most central station, invested in

well-decorated garments.

Born, red of hue, where men pour out libations, 0 King, as
great High Priest bring the Gods hither.

7 Over the earth and over heaven, 0 Agni, thou. Son, hast ever

spread above thy Parents.

Come, Youthfullest 1 to those who long to meet thee, and
hither bring the Gods, O Mighty Victor.

1 The Mighty : Agni.

2 Among the plants : according to S&yana, in the fire-sticks.

3 Vishnu ; in the form of Agni who is his manifestation on earth. They:
worshippers,

4 The Mothers : the plants which nourish life. In their altered form, : as
dry wood which Agni, as fire, consumes.

5 Sharing in: because Agni as the bearer of men’s oblations supports all
other Gods.

384

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

HYMN II. Agni.

Gladden the yearning Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful ; bring
them, 0 Lord of Seasons, knowing seasons,

With all the Priests Celestial, 0 Agm. Best worshipper art
thou of all Invokers.

2 Thine is the Herald’s, thine the Cleanser’s office, thinker art

thou, wealth-giver, true to Order.

Let us with Svaha offer up oblations, and Agni, worthy God,
pay the Gods worship.

3 To the Gods’ pathway have we travelled, ready to execute

what work we may accomplish.

Let Agui, Lo'I* he knows, complete the worship. He is the
Priest ; let him fix rites and seasons.

4 When we most ignorant neglect the statutes of you, 0 Deities

with whom is knowledge,

Wise Agui shall correct our faults and failings, skilled .to
assign each God his fitting season.
h When, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, mortals bethink
them not of sacrificing,

Then shall the prudent and discerning Agni worship the Gods,
best worship per, in season.

6 Because the Father hath produced thee, Leader of all our

solemn rites, their brilliant Banner :

So win by worship pleasant homes abounding in heroes, and
rich food to nourish all men.

7 Thou whom the Heaven and Earth, thou whom the Waters,

and Tvashtar, maker of fair things, created,

Well knowing, all along the Fathers’ pathway, shine with
resplendent light, enkindled, Agni.

HYMN III. * Agni.

0 King, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for strength, is
manifest in beauty.

He shines, all-knowing, with his lofty splendour : chasing
black Night he comes with white-rayed Morning.

1 Seasons: the proper times of worship. Priests Celestial : Agui heing the
Hotar, the Asvins the Adbvaryus, Tvashtar the Agnidh, and Mitra the
Upavakfcar. Asval&yana, as cited by S&yana,' gives a different enumeration.
See Wilson, note.

% The Herald is the ffotar or invoking priest : the Cleanser iB the Potar or
Purifier, the assistant of the Brahman. Svihd : an exclamation = Ave ! or Hail t
3 The Gods’ pathway : ‘ the path that leads to the gods ’ — Wilson.

6 The father: Praj&pati ; or the iustifcutor of the sacrifice. — S&yana.

7 The Fathers’ pathway : the way that leads to the home of the Manes or

Ancestral Spirits,

1 0 King : Ludwig takes rdjan here as the nominative case. With white-
rayed Morning : I follow Ludwig in taking rusattm as instrumental for
r maty dm.

THE RIG VEDA.

385

HYkN 4.]

2 Having o’ercome the glimmering Black with beauty, and
bringing forth the Dame, the Great Sire’s Daughter,
Holding aloft the radiant light of Surya, as messenger of heav *
en he shines with treasures. . -

3 Attendant on the Blessed J^nre'the Blessed hath come : the

Lover followeth his-iSdster.

Agni, far-sprea<Ji»gf with conspicuous lustre, hath compassed
Night w^A'whi tely-shining garments.

4 His goi^gs-forth kindle as ’twere high voices, the goings of the

^spieious Friend of Agni,

rhe rays, the bright beams of the strong-jawed, mighty,
adorable Steer are visible as he cometh. •

5 Whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, his who

. is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent,

Who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres, sportive
and piercing even to the summit.

6 His powers whose chariot fellies gleam and glitter have loudly

roared while, as with teams, he hasted.

He, the most Godlike, far-extending envoy, shines with flames
ancient, resonant, whitely-shining.

7 So bring us ample wealth ; seat thee <*>& envoy of the two

youthful Matrons, Earth and proven.

Let Agni rapid with liis # rapid norses, impetuous with impe-
tuous Steeds, come hi f - ,jer «

HYMN IV. Agni.

To thee will T praise and bring oblation, as thou hast
merited -^uds when we invoked thee.

A foi’- ACa i n hi the desert art thou, Agni, 0 Ancient King to
man who fain would worship.

s Thou unto whom resort the gathered people, as the kine seek
the warm stall, 0 Most Youthful,

Thou art the messenger of Gods and mortals, and gqest glori-
ous with thy light between them.

3 Making thee grow as ’twere some noble infhnt, thy Mother
nurtures thee with sweet affectiop, '

Over the desert slopes thou pas^est longing, and seekesfc, like
some beast set free, thy fodder.

2 Glimmering Black: dark night, faintly luY.n.l \ y vfciira. The Great Sire’s
Daughter : Ushas or Dawn, daughter of Dynu.- •

3 The lover ; Agni who appears together with Dawn.

4 The first line is almost unintelligible. ‘The blazing flames of that mighty

Agm do not (deter) his adorers.’ — "Wilson. • *

I To man : or, to Pftru.
3 Thy Mother : Earth,
25

386 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X

4 Foolish are we, 0 Vise and free from error ; verily, Agni, thou

dost know thy grandeur.

There lies the form : he moves, and licks, and swallows, and,
as House-Lord, kisses the Youthful Maiden.

5 He rises ever fresh in ancient fuel : smoke-bannered, gray, he

makes the wood his dwelling.

Ho swimmer. Steer, he presses through the waters, and to his
place accordant mortals bear him.

6 Like thieves who risk their lives and haunt th<& forest the

twain with their ten girdles have secured him.

This is a new hymn meant for thee, 0 Agni : yoke as it *vere
thy car with parts that glitter.

7 Homage and prayer are thine, 0 Jatavedas, and this my song

shall evermore *exalt thee.

Agni, protect our children and descendants, and guard with
ever- watchful care our bodies.

HYMN Y. Agni.

He only is the Sea, holder of treasures : born many a time
. he vTew^the hearts within us.

He hides hutK^the secret couple's bosom. The Bird dwells
in the middle^^he fountain.^

2 Inhabiting one dwellmg^dace in common, strong Stallions and*

the Mares have come to i*bet\

The sages guard the seat of Hoi><wier, and keep the highest
names concealed within them.

3 The Holy Pair, of wondrous power, have . they formed

the Infant, they who bred produced him,

The central point of all that moves and moves nbt^he while* *'
they wove the Sage's thread with insight.

4 The form : the Ahavaniya fire. The Youthful Maiden : according to\
S&,yana f either the mixed oblation, or the young earth as compared with her
withered plants.

6 The twain : the two arms, with their grasping fingers which produce fire
by agitation of the fire-stick.

1 He : Agni as the Sun. The secret couple’s bosom : the meaning is uncer-
tain. The fire-sticks in which Agni is latent may be intended. £ He waits
on the cloud in the neighbourhood of the hidden (firmament).’ — Wilson. The
Bird : the Sun. The fountain : the source of light in the east.

2 Strong Stallions : perhaps the fiames of the Sun. Mares : waters of the
firmament. The highest names ; of Agni, such as JAfcavedas and Vaisv&nara.
Concealed within them : in their secret hearts, for worship,

3 The Holy Pair : Heaven and Earth. The Infant : Agni. The while they
wove : viyantah in the text is unintelligible, and I follow Wallis in reading
vayanti in its stead. The Sage's thread: the series of sacrifices to which Agni
is entitled.

THE RIG VEDA.

HYMN 6.]

3S7

4 For tracks of Order and refreshing viands attend from ancient

times the goodly Infant.

Wearing him as a mantle, Earth and Heaven grow strong by
food of pleasant drink and fatness.

5 He, calling loudly to the Seven red Sisters, hath, skilled in

sweet dr/nk, brought them to be looked on.

He. horn of old, in middle air hath halted, and sought and
found the covering robe of Pushan.

6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned ; to

one of these may come the troubled mortal.

He staudeth in the dwelling of the Highest, a Pillar, on sure
ground where paths are parted. *

7 Not Being, Being in the highest heaven, in Aditi's bosom and

in Daksha’s birthplace,

Is Agni, our first-born of Holy Order, the Milch-cow and the
Bull in life's beginning.

HYMN VI. Agni.

This is that Agni, he by whose protection, favour, and help
the singer is successful;

Who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth en-
compassed with far-spi^ading lustre.

5 The Seven red Sisters : the seven tongues or flames of Agni, called Mlt t
kardli, etc.— Sftyana. And found the covering robe of Pushan : and hath
reappeared in the form of Pdshan or the Sun.

- 6 Pathways: long lines of light. The Wise ; the Fathers. The troubled
mortal: the man who is longing for daybreak may approach the pathway of
light. Wallis translates the second line differently : — ‘The support of life m
the home of the highest, at the divergence of the ways, standeth on sure
ground.’ He : apparently Agni as the Sun, to whom the troubled or sinful
man comes for light or forgiveness. Pillar: support and stay of the uni-
verse, like the Skambha of Atharva-veda, X. 7. Where paths are parted:
where' ends the dark road which the Sun travels by night, and the bright
path of his daily course begins.

7 Not Being , Being, non-existent, existent. ( asachcha sachcha, ‘both
unevolved and evolved/ identifying Agni with the first cause and first effect
with a reference to such texts as Asad evam idam agra dsit ‘the non existent
existent (or unevolved) was verily before this (creation).’— Wilson, from
sayana Aditi=6vvafUQ, Daksha^lvipyua. Here Agni is represented as
Prag&pati who as a yet undeveloped embryo is at the same time both male
and xemale.— Ludwig. Or Daksha may be the Sun and Aditi the Earth. ‘ In
fact Agm is identified with all things. These latter hymns to Agni are very
obscure : the notions are mystical; many of the terms are unusual, or are
unusually applied ; and the construction is singularly elliptical and loose
Wilson.

Tina Hymn has been wholly translated, with commeuts, by Wallis See
The Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 48— 50. , '

THE HYMNS OF

388

[BOOK X.

2

3

4

5

Agni, the Holy Oik*^ the everlasting, who shines far beaming
with celestial splencioctr^ • e

He who hath come unto hi^ fi^epds with friendship, like a
fleet steed who never trips or stui^jes.

He who is Lard of all divine oblation, strewed by all living
men at break of morning, ^

Agni to whom our offerings are devoted, in whbnvrests he
whose car, through might, is scatheless. ‘ ^ __

Increasing by his strength, while lauds content him, with
easy flight unto the Gods he travels.

Agni the cheerful Priest, best Sacrificer, balms with his tongue
the Godb with whom he mingles.

With songs and adorations bring ye hither Agni who stirs
himself at dawn like Indra,

Whom sages laud with hymns as Jltavedas of those who wield
the sacrificial ladle.

6 In whom all goodly treasures meet together, even as steeds

and riders for the booty.

Inclining hither bring us help, 0 Agni, even assistance most
desired by Indra.

7 Yea, at thy birth, when thou badst sat in glory, thou, Agni,

wast the aim of invocations. ?

The Gods came near, obedient to thy summons, and thus at-
tained their rank as chief Protectors.

HYMN VII. Agni.

0 Agni, shared by all men living bring us good luck for
sacrifice from earth and heaven.

With us be thine intelligence, Wonder-Worker ! Protect us,
God, with thy far-reaching blessings, o

2 These hymns brought forth for thee, 0 Agni, laud thee for ‘

bounteous gifts, with cattle aiid with horses.

3 The exact meaning of the second line is uncertain : — ( and iiTwliom (the

sacrificer), whose sacrifice is undisturbed by his foes,"Hhrows his choice obla-
tion.’ — Wilson. ' \

5 At dawn : with Grassmann I take usrttni here to be a locative. S&yana
explains it as bhogdndm utsrdvinam, the bestower of enjoyments. X^ording to
T , l *. * 1 — station, the translation of the first line would be : ‘ WrEhrBongs

* 1 * * . dug ye hither the Lord of morning's kine, the quivering Agni.*

6 Riders : sdgitvantah : the word properly means 4 possessed of horses/ and
is applicable to drivers as well as riders. For the booty : to win the spoil, or
to guard it from others.

1 Thine intelligence : the meaning of praJcetaih here is not clear. Wilson

translates it by ‘indications (of favour)’ ; Ludwig by ‘wishes’ ; and Grass

Uiann by ‘light/

HYMN 8.] THE R1GVEHA. 389

Good Lord, when man from thee hath gained enjoyment, by
hymns, 0 nobly-born, hath he obtained it.

3 Agni I deem my Kinsman and my Father, count him my
Brother and my Friend for ever.

I honour as the faoe of lofty Agni in heaven the bright and
holy light of Surya.

d Effectual, Agni, are our prayers for profit. He whom, at home,
thou, Priest for ever, guardest

Is rich in food, di^awn by red steeds, and holy : by day and
night to him shall all be pleasant.

5 Men with their arms have generated Agni, helpful "ks some kind

friend, adorned with splendours,

And stablished as Invoker mid the people the ancient Priest,
the sacrifice’s lover.

6 Worship, thyself, 0 God, the Gods in heaven : what, void of

knowledge, shall the fool avail thee ?

As thou, 0 God, hast worshipped Gods by seasons, so, nobly-
born ! to thine own self pay worship.

7 Agni, be thou our Guardian and Protector ; bestow upon us

life and vital vigour. *

Accept, 0 Mighty One, the gifts we offer, and with unceasing
care protect our bodies.

HYMN yiti. Agni.

Agni advances with his loftylmnner : the Bull is bellowing to
the earth and heaven^

He hath attained^ th^sky’s supremest limits : the Steer hath
waxen in the lpp waters.

2 The Bull, the.youngling with the hump, hath frolicked, the

strong and never-ceasing Calf hath bellowed.

Bringing our offerings to the Gods’ assembly, he moves as
Chief in his own dwelling-places.

3 The second line is remarkable as a direct declaration of the relationship
of Agni and Sfirya. — Ludwig.

7 Be thou our Guardian and Protector ; avitd, says S&yana, is a protector
from obvious dangers and gopd a preserver from perils that are unseen.

1 Advances: through the firmament. His lofty banner ; the lightning.
Waters ; of the firmament,

2 Never-ceasing Yasremft : according to S&yana, f undecaying/ f Glorious/ —
Wilson.

390 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X

3 Him who hath grasped his Parents’ head, they stablished at

sacrifice as a wave of heavenly lustre.

In his swift flight the red Dawns borne by horses refresh their
bodies in the home of Order.

4 For, Vasu, thou precedest every Morning, and still hast been

the Twins’ illuminator.

For sacrifice, seven places thou retainest while for thine own
self thou engenderest Mitra.

5 Thou art the Eye and Guard of mighty Order, and Yaruna

when to sacrifice thou comest.

Thou art the Waters’ Child, 0 Jdtavedas, envoy of him whose
offering thou acceptest.

6 Thou art the Leader of the rite and region, to which with thine

auspicious teams thou tendest.

Thy light-bestowing head to heaven thou liftest, making thy
tongue the oblation-bearer, Agni.

7 Through his wise insight Trita in the cavern, seeking as ever

the Chief Sire’s intention,

Carefully tended in his Parents’ bosom, calling the weapons
kin, goes forth to combat.

8 Well-skilled to use the weapons, of his Father, Aptya, urged

on by Indra, fought the battle.

Then Trita slew the foe seven-rayed, three-headed, and freed
the cattle of the Son of Tvashtar.

3 His Parents' head : the head or forehead of Heaven and Earth, or of the two
fire-sticks. The red Hawns : or the flames, according to S&yana. There is no
substantive in the text. The home of OrcUv .* probably the Sun, if the Dawns
are spoken of ; ancl the place of law-ordained sacrifice according to S&yana’s
explanation.

4 The Twins' illuminator : lighter-up of day and flight, that is, of the end
of night, or very early morning. But see Hillebrandt, Yaruna und Mitra ,
p. 116. Seven places: seven altars for the sacrificial fire. Mitra ; the Sun.

6 Vanma: King and Governor.

6 And region : thou knowest, and canst show the way through, the firmament.

7 In the cavern: in the secret depth of the firmament. Seeking Me

Chief Sire's intention : wishing to carry out the design of Indra or perhaps of
Dyaus or Dyu. His Parents: ‘the parental heaven and earth.’ — Wilson.
Calling the weapons hin : calling the weapons, i. c. the bolts which are pro-
duced from the sky, akin, simply means claiming them as belonging to his
father Dyu as they are in the next Btauza spoken of as paternal (pitryani). —
Macdonell, J. R. A. S. f July, 1893, p. 428. ( ^

8 Of his Father : belonging to the Chief Sire of stanza 7. The foe : the
special enemy of Trita is Trisiras the son of Tvashtar, called Yisvar&pa or
the Multiform. The cattle of the Son of Tvashtar : the cows imprisoned by
him, the showers obstructed by the fiend.

For the legends founded on the last three stanzas of this hymn, see Muir,
0. S , Texts } Y. pp, 229 —233. See also Bergaigne, La Religion Vddigue, IJ.
329, 330.

HYMN 10.] THE RIG VEDA, 391

9 Lord of the brave, Indra oleft him in pieces who sought to
gain much strength and deemed him mighty.

He smote his three heads from his body, seizing the cattle of
the omniform Son of Tvashtar.

HYMN IX. Waters.

Ye, Waters, are beneficent : so help ye us to energy
That we may look on great delight.

2 Give us a portion of the sap, the most auspicious that ye have,
Like mothers in their longing love.

3 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye send us on ;
And, Waters, give us procreant strength. * ^

4 The Waters be to us for drink, Goddesses for our aid and bliss ;
Let them stream to us health and strength.

I beg the Floods to give us balm, these Queens who rule o’er
precious things,

And have supreme control of men.,

6 Within the Waters — Soma thus hath told me — dwell all balms

that heal,

And Agui, he who blesseth all.

7 0 Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm,
So that I long w*J see the Sun.

8 Whatever sm iS found in me, whatever evil I have wrought,
If I have ned or falsely sworn, Waters, remove it far from me.

9 The waters I this day have sought, and to their moisture

Aave we come:

<JAgni,rieh in milk, come thou, and with thy splendour cover me.

HYMN X. '* Yama. Yam!.

Fain would I w*n my friend to kindly friendship. So may the
Sage, come through the air’s wide ocean,

Bemembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a son, the
issue of his father.

1 Great delight * according to the scholiast, meaning perfect knowledge of
Brahma. See Wilson’s note.

3 The meaning of the stanza is obscure. It appears to have been recited
by the priest at the consecration of a new house.

The first three stanzas are to be repeated by Br&bmans at their morning
ablutions. See Colebrooke’s Essays, Essay I. On the Religious Ceremonies of
the Hindus. See also Lanman, Sanskrit Reader , p. 37G.

6 Stanzas 6 — 9 are repeated from Book I. 23. 20 — 23.

Yama and Yami, son aud daughter of Yivasvdn, are the Rishis as well as
the deities of the hymn which is a dialogue between them.

Yama and Yami are, says von Roth, ‘ as their names denote, twin brother
fljjd sister, and are the first human pair, the originators of the race. As the

392

THE HYMNS OF

[BOON X

2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her who is

near in kindred as a stranger.

Sons of the mighty Asura, the Heroes, supporters of the
heavens, see far around them.

3 Yea, this the Immortals seek of thee with longing, progeny of

the sole existing mortal.

Then let thy soul and mine he knit together, and as a loving
husband take thy consort.

4 Shall we do now what we ne’er did aforetime ? we who spake

righteously now talk impurely?

Gandharva in the floods, the Dame of Waters— such is our
bond, stfch our most lofty kinship.

5 Even in the womb God Tvashtar, Yivifier, shaping all forms, . /

Creator, made us consorts.

None violates his holy ordinances : that we are his the heavens
and earth acknowledge.

G Who knows that earliest day whereof thou speak est ? Who
hath beheld it? Who can here declare it?

Hebrew conception closely connected the parents of mankind by making the
woman formed from- a portion of the body “b^the man, so by the Indian
tradition they are placed in the relationship of This thought is laid

by the hymn in question in the mouth of Yam! hereto^ when she is made to
say : * Even in the womb the Creator made us for husbav^ and wife. 5 5 Profes-
sor Muller, on the other hand, says (Lectures on the Sch*^ e 0 f £, an g Ua cr e>
second series, p. 510) : ‘ There is a curious dialogue between Kr (Yami) and
her brother, where she (the night) implores her brother (the dayJXmake her
his wife, and where he declines her offer, ‘because/ as he says, ‘tw
called it a sin that a brother should marry his sister/ ' Again, p. 521, *Ss^ ere
is not a single word in the Yeda pointing to Yuma and Yami as the first coiipu

of mortals, the Indian Adam and Eve If Yamahad been the first createaX

of men, surely the Vedic poets, in speaking of him, co^ld not have passed this
over in silence.’ See, however, the passage from the Atharva-veda, XVIII.

3, 13, to be quoted further on. [Reverence ye with an oblation Yama, the son
of Vxvasvat, the assembler of men, who was the first of men that died, and
the first that departed to this (celestial) world].’ Muir, 0, S, Texts , V. p.

•2S8. Yama as the first man may perhaps be, as Prof. Max Muller holds, ‘a
later phase of religious' thought/

1 Yami speaks The Sage : vedhdh : Yama, whom she wishes to give her a
son. Come: Sftyana explains the masculine participle juganvfln by the femi-
nine gatavatt , that is, I, Yami. who have come. The earth : which, otherwise,
will remain without human inhabitants.

2 Yama replies. A stranger : of a different family, and so a lawful wife. Sons
of the mighty A sura: the spies or sentinels spoken of in stanza 8.

3 Yami speaks.

4 Yama replies. Gandharva: Yivasv&n or the Sun. In the floods : in the
waters of the firmament. The Dame of Waters: Saranyu. ‘ His aqueous wife/

— Muir. Such in our bond : these are our parents. But see Ludwig, Ueber die
neuesten A rbeiicn, u, s, w , p. 107.

5 Yami speaks.

JEttMN io]. ' He RtGVEJbA. 393

Great is the Law of Varuna and Mitra. What, wanton ! wilt
thou say to men to tempt them ?

7 I, Yami, am possessed by love of Tama, that I may rest on the

same couch beside him.

I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car-wheels
let us speed to meet each other.

8 They stand not still, they never ctase their eyelids, those

sentinels of Gods who wander round us.

Not me — go quickly, wanton, with another, and hasten like a
chariot wheel to meet him.

9 May Surya’s eye with days and nights endow -him, and ever

may his light spread out before him.

In heaven and earth the kindred Pair commingle. On Yamt
be the unbroth erly act of Yama.

10 Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers and

sisters will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk.

Not me, 0 fair one, — seek another husband, and make thine
arm a pillow for thy consort.

11 Is he a brother when no lord is left her % Is she a sister when

Destruction comethj

Forced by my love these many words I utter. Come near,
and hold me in thy close embraces.

12 1 will not fold mine arms about thy body : they call it sin

when one comes near his sister.

Not me, — prepare thy pleasures with another : thy brother
seeks not this from thee, 0 fair one.

6 Yama replies. To tempt them : the meaning of vtchyd is uncertain. The
S. P. Lexicon explains it by ' deceitfully.* ‘ Falsely.’ — Grassmann. * What
sayest thou, who punish esfc men with hell ? * — Wilson.

7 Same couch : see Benfey, Vedica und Verwandtes , pp. 39—42, for a, difler-
ent explanation of samdnd y6nau.

8 Yama replies. Sentinels of Gods: recording angels who watch men’s
actions.

9 Yamt speaks. The meaning seems to he : if there be any guilt let me
take it upon myself, and let not Yama’s life be shortened by way of punish-
ment. The hindred Pair : Day and Night.

10 Yama replies. ‘ Make thine arm a pillow.* — Wilson.

11 Yamt speaks. Destruction : Nirriti ; the utter extinction of the human
race. 1 The meaning is, a true brother will not let his sister lack a husband,
and a true sister will not let her brother lack a wife/ — Wilson’s Translation,
Editor’s note.

12 Yama replies.

394 fBE HYMNS 07 [BOOK X

13 Alas I thou art indeed a weakling, Yama ; we find in thee no

trace of heart or spirit.

As round the tree the woodbine clings, another will cling
about thee girt as with a girdle.

14 Embrace another, Yami; let another, even as the woodbine

rings the tree, enfold thee.

Win thou his heart let him win thy fancy, and he shall
form with thee a b]est alliance.

HYMN XL Agni.

The Bull hath yieldad for the Bull the milk of heaven : the
Son of Aditi can never be deceived.

According tcAiis wisdom Varuna knoweth all ; may he, the
Holy, hallow times for sacrifice.

2 Gandharvi spake : may she, the Lady of the flood, amid the

river’s roaring leave my heart untouched.

May Aditi accomplish all that we desire, and may our eldest
Brother tell us this as Chief.

3 Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, splendid,

with heavenly lustre, hath shone out for man,

Since they, as was the wish of yearning Gods, brought forth
that yearning Agni for the assembly as the Priest.

13 Yami speaks.

S&yana’s interpretation of this difficult hymn differs in many places from
that which I have adopted, and Wilson’s Translation should be consulted for
the views of the great Indian Commentator and the Pandits of his time. The
hymn has been transliterated, translated, and annotated by Dr. Muir, 0. S,
Texts, Y. 288 — 291. It has also been translated by the authors of the Sie-
lertzig Lieder, and fully discussed by Dr. J. Ehni in Her Vedische My thus des
Yama. See also Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie , I. p. 495.

+

The subject of the hymn is the origin and institution of sacrifice, first
established by Agni under the authority of Yaruna, who must be regarded as
the deity of the first stanza,

1 The Bull : the mighty Soma. For the Bull: for mighty Yaruna. The
milk of heaven : the divine Soma juice, to be used at sacrifice. The So?i of
Aditi : Yaruna. J ccording to his wisdom : yathd dhiyot : the two words taken
together as an adverbial phrase. According to Sdyana, it is Agni who milks
the streams of prosperity from heaven for the worshipper. I have generally
followed Pischel’s interpretation of the first five stanzas ( Vedische Studien, I,
pp. 188, 189).

2 Gandharvi : said to be tbe daughter of Surabhi (one of the daughters of
Daksha), and the mother of the race of horses. Here she appears to be an
Apsaras or water-nymph, haunting the banks of rivers and practising the
seductive arts of a siren. The meaning seems to be, let no disturbing influ-
ence unsettle my devout thoughts. Oar eldest Brother: Yaruna, regarded as
the founder of society united by common religious observances.

Z The poet regards the coming of the dawn as a proof that the sacrifice is
successful* Since they; the priests

HYMN 12.]

" T&E rigYeda,

395

4 And the fleet Falcon brought for saeidfice from afar this flow-

ing Drop most excellent and keen of sight,

Then when the Aryan tribes chose as Invoking Priest Agni
the Wonder-Worker, and the hymn rose up.

5 Still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass, and,

skilled in sacrifice, offers thee holy gifts.

When thou, having received the sage’s strengthening food
with lauds, after long toil, comest with many more.

6 Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover, to delight : the Lovely

One desires and craves it from his heart.

The priest calls out, the sacrificer shows his skill, the Asura
tries his strength, and with the hymn is stirred.

7 Far-famed is he, the mortal man, 0 Agni, thou Son of Strength,

who hath obtained thy favour.

He, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, makes his
days lovely in his might and splendour.

8 When, Holy Agni, the divine assembly, the sacred synod mid

the Gods, is gathered,

And when thou, Godlike One, dealest forth treasures, vouch-
safe us, too, our portion of the riches.

9 Hear us, O Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid

car, the car of Amrit.

Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither : stay
with us here, nor from the Gods be distant.

HYMH XII. - Agni.

Heaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speakers of
truth, are near enough to hear us,

When the God, urging men to worship, sitteth as Priest, as-
suming all his vital vigour.

4 This fioiving Drop : the Soma, brought from heaven by the Falcon. See
IV. 26 and 27.

5 Thou : Agni. As with grass : c as pasture satisfies (the herds).’ — Wilson.
With many more : bringing many other Gods to the sacrifice.

6 ds a lover ; woos his mistress. Agni is called upon to entreat his parents,
Heaven and Earth, to reproduce him perpetually. The Lovely One: Agni.
Sacrificer : mahhah ; see Vedic Hymns , I. p. 47. The original hymn appears
to end with this difficult stanza.

9 Rapid : dravitmun ; taken by S&yana with amrttasya and explained by
‘distilling the drink of Gods.’ Nor from the Gods be distant : ‘let none of
the gods be absent.’ — Wilson.

1 First : most exalted as well as most ancient. The God : Agni. As Priest ;
as Hotar, invoker, or herald.

§9(5 $HP HYMNS OF [BOON X.

2 As God comprising Gods by Law Eternal, bear, as the Chief

who knoweth, our oblation,

Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise
and worship, Priest for ever.

3 When the cow’s nectar wins the God completely, men here

below are heaven’s and earth’s sustainers.

All the Gods came to this thy heavenly Yajus, which from the
motley Pair milked oil and water.

4 I praise your work that ye may make me prosper : hear, Heaven

and Earth, Twain Worlds that drop with fatness.

While days and nights go to the world of spirits, here let the
Parents wifch sweet meath refresh us.

5 Hath the King seized ns 1 How have we offended against his

holy ordinance ? Who knoweth ?

Por even Mitra mid the Gods is angry : there are both song
aud strength for those who come not.

6 ’Tis hard to understand the Immortal’s nature, where she who

is akin becomes a stranger.

Guard ceaselessly, great Agni, him who ponders Yama’s name,
easy to be comprehended.

7 They in the synod where the Gods rejoice them, where they

are seated in Vivasvan’s dwelling,

Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splendour * the
Two unweariedly maintain their brightness.

2 Better to praise: more skilled than men in praising the Gods.

3 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning seems to be that, by possess-
ing the amrit, ambrosia, or nectar contained in the milk of the sacrificial cow
and in the Soma juice which wins and captivates Agni, men are enabled to
offer acceptable sacrifices to the Gods, and thus to support the heavens and
earth. Heavenly Yajus : divine sacrificial prayer or forrnuK But clivydm by
its position in the verse seems rather to belong to ghritdm , butter or sacri-
ficial oil. The motley Pair : ini : many-coloured heaven and earth.

* When the self-aggregated ambrosia of the divine Agni is generated from
his radiance, then the products from it sustain both heaven and earth, all
the worshippers glorify this thy oblation, the celestial nutritious water which
thy white radiance milks forth.* —Wilson. According to S&yana, the products
from it are the plants and trees which spring from the amrit or rain which
rewards the oblations of men, and the visve devtih of the text are sarve
statdrah, all the worshippers. Some meaning is apparent in this paraphrase,
but it cannot be extracted from the words of the text.
t £ The Ring: Yaruna. For even Mitra: we must have committed some
sin, for even Mitra, the Friend, the gracious God, is wroth with us. Strength :
strengthening sacrificial viands. For those who come not : for the Gods who
will not yet come to receive our worship and oblations.

6 This stanza is apparently a later addition. The latter half of the first line
is taken from X 10. 2, but its application here is not obvious,

7 In Vivasvdn’s dwelling : ‘ on the altar of the sacrifices * — Wilson. Heaven
or the realm of the Sun is intended,

THE RIG VEDA.

397

HYMN 13.]

8 The counsel which the Gods meet to consider, their secret

plan, — of that we have no knowledge.

There let God Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to Yaruria
that we are sinless.

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling ; harness thy rapid

car, the car of Amrit.

Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities' Parents, hither : stay
with us here, nor from the Gods be distant.

HYMN XIII. HavirdMnas.

I yoke with prayer your ancient inspiration : may the laud
rise as on the prince's pathway. ^

All Sons of Immortality shall hear it, all the" possessors of ce-
lestial natures.

2 When speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters, religious-

hearted votaries brought you forward.

Take your place, ye who know your proper station : be near,
be very near unto our Soma.

3 Five paces have I risen from Earth : I follow her who hath

four feet with devout observance.

This by the Sacred Syllable have I measured; I purify in the
central place of Order.

4 He, for Gods' sake, chose death to he his portion. He chose

not, for men's good, a life eternal.

They sacrificed Brihaspati the Bishi. Yama delivered up his
own dear body.

‘ The deities are the two Sakatas , small carts or barrows used at sacrifices
to carry the materials, especially the *So»ia-plant, hence called Havirdhdnas,
oblation-bearers.’ — Wilson.

1 The prince is the noble who institutes* the sacrifice. * Like the path of
the worshipper.’ — Wilson.

3 This stanza is most obscure. . Wilson, following S&yana, translates: ‘I
make f»he five stages of the sacrifice ascend ; I take four steps* by pious
observances ; with the sacred syllable I perfect this (adoration) ; I purify
(the Soma) on the navel of the sacrifice.’ The five stages are, according to
S&yana, the five elements of the sacrifice, grain, Soma, the kine, the Purod&sa
cake, and the clarified butter. The four steps are the metres most commonly used

The words as they stand in the text do not appear to be susceptible of any
satisfactory explanation.

4 He: Yama. See X. 14. 1. For Gods' sake: bis death being the type of
the sacrifices which support and delight the Gods. For men's good ; See X.
90. 8 — 14 for the results of the sacrifice of Purusha, with whom Yama may be
identified. They: the Gods. This PMa is unintelligible as it stands.
Instead of brihaspdtim yajhdm akrinvato rishim, Prof. Ludwig would read
Vaivasvatam yajhatn atanuta rishih f the Pishi performed the Vaivasvata,
or funeral, sacrifice (Ueber die nmesien, u. 8. w. } p. 110). I have mainly
followed Ehni, Der Vedisehe Mythm des Yama , pp. IdQ — 162, but the exact
meaning of the stanza is still doubtful to me.

398 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

5 The Seven flow to the Youth on whom the Maruts wait : the
Sons unto the Father brought the sacrifice.

Both these are his, as his they are the Lords of both : both
toil ; belonging unto both they prosper well.

HYMN XIV. Yama,

Honour the King with thine oblations, Yama, Vivasv&n’a Son,
who gathers men together,

Who travelled to the lofty heights above us, who searches out
* and shows the path to many.

2 Yama first fouud for us a place to dwell in : this pasture never

can be taken from us.

Men born on earth tread their own paths that lead them
whither our ancient Fathers have departed.

3 Matalt prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with Angiras’ sons t>

Brihaspati with Eikvans :

Exaiters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, some joy in praise and
some in our oblation.

4 Come, seat thee on this bed of grass, 0 Yama, in company

with Angirases and Fathers.

Let texts recited by the sages bring thee: 0 King, let this
oblation make thee joyful.

5 Come, Yama, with the Angirases the Holy, rejoice thee here

with children of Virfipa.

To sit on sacred grass at this our worship, I nail VivasvHn, too,
thy Father hither.

5 The Seven : rivers. According to S&yana, metres. The Youth : Indra.
The Sons : the Maruts. The Father * Indra. Both these : havirdhdnas. Of
both: Gods and men. Unto bo0: to Gods and men, or tp Heaven and Earth.

The hymn is a funeral address, partly to Yama the God of the Dead and
partly to the soul of the departed whose body is being consumed on the pile.

1 Yama : the deified Lord of the Dead : originally the first who died and
so showed the souls of his successors the way to the home of the departed.
See X. 12. Lofty heights: of heaven, the abode of the Blest.

3 Mdtali : a divine being, identified by the Commentators with Indra whose
charioteer was MS. tali. Kavyas : a class of Manes, the spirits of a pious
race of ancient time. Angiras’ sons ; the Angirases, the typical first sacri-
ficers. See Yol. I., Index. Bikvans : or singers, a class of spirits or deities
who attend and sing the praises of Brihaspati. See VII. 1 0. 4. Some joy in
praise : the Gods delight in SviUii, the sacrificial exclamation, worship or
praise. . Some in our oblation : the Manes delight in Svadbd, the sweet food
or oblation which is presented to them.

4 Angirases and Fathers : or, perhaps, Angirases our Fathers.

5 Children of V irtijpa : Vairfipas, a sub-division of the Angirases.

HYMN 14,] TBE KIGVEDA. 309

6 Our Fathers are Atigirases, Navagvas, Atharvans, Bhrigus who

deserve the Soma.

May these, the Holy, look on us with favour, may we enjoy
their gracious loving-kindness.

7 Go forth, go forth upon the ancient pathways whereon our

sires of old have gone before us.

There shult thou look on both the Kings enjoying their sacred
food, God Varuna and Yarn a.

8 Meet Yama, meet the Fathers, meet the merit of free or or-

dered acts, in highest heaven.

Leave sin and evil, seek anew thy dwelling, and bright with
glory wear another body. ^

9 Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions : this place for him

the Fathers have provided.

vv Yama bestows on him a place to rest in adorned with days
and beams of light and waters.

10 Run and outspeed the two dogs, Sarama’s offspring, brindled,

four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway.

nigh then to the gracious-minded Fathers where they
rejoice company with Yama.

11 And those two doga thine, Yama, the watchers, four-eyed,

who look on men and gnat a the pathway, —

Entrust this man, 0 King, to their protection, and with pros-
perity and health endow him.

12 Dark-hned, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama’s two en-

voys roam among the people;

May they restore to us a fair existence here and to-day, that
we may see the sunlight.

13 To Yama po-ur the Soma, bring to Yama consecrated gifts :

To Yama sacrifice prepared and heralded by Agni goes.

14 Offer to Yama holy gifts enriched with butter, and draw near :
So may he grant that we may live long days of life among

the Gods.

oNwyagvas, Atharvans, Bhrigus : priestly families of ancient times.

7 This'feud the fallowing stnnza are addressed to the spirit of the dead
man whose funeral rites are being celebrated.

8 Free or ordered acts : voluntary good works and prescribed sacrifices,
whose merit is stored up in heaven to be enjoyed on arrival by the spirits of
the pious who have performed them.

9 According to Sayan a, this stanza is addressed to the Pis&chas and other
evil spirits that haunt the place of cremation.

10 The spirit of the departed is addressed. The two dog& : offspring of

Saram&, the hound of ludra. See Yol. X., Index. '

13 The three following stanzas are addressed to the invests.

400

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

15 Offer to Yama, to the King, oblation very rich in meath :

Bow down before the Bishis of the ancient times, who made

this path in days of old.

16 Into the six Expanses flies the Great One in Trikadrukas.
The GUyatri, the Trishtup, all metres in Yama are contained.

' HYMN XV. Fathers.

May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Fathers
who deserve a share of Soma.

May they who have attained the life of spirits, gentle and
righteous, aid us when we call them.

» Now let uer pay this homage to the Fathers, to those who
passed of old and those who followed,

Those who have rested in the earthly region, and those who
dwell among the Mighty Baces.

I have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have gained
son and progeny from Vishnu.

They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated on sacre^ '
grass, come oftenest hither.

Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help^^^ 1 2 3 ^ 86 °^ >0l ’“
ings have we made for you \ accexrt^^ 311 ^

So come to us with most 3 ysp^^ t ^^ lvour ; an ^ oi ye us health
and strength w ithtTUt^Ttrouble.

May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited to their
favourite oblations

Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen : may they be
gracious unto us and bless us.

16 The meaning appears to be that the Great Unit, Yama as All-God, broad-
ens and fills the universe after plentiful libations of Soma juice in the Three
Kadruka days, or first three days of the Abhiplava festival. See Elmi, Yama,
pp. 154—157. For different explanations, see Bergaigne, I. 178; II. 1*22, 127.

This hymn, with the exception of the last stanza, has been translated, and
annotated by Muir, 0. S. Texts, Y. pp. 291 — 295, by the authors of the
SUbenzig Lieder , and by Prof. Peterson, Hymns from the Figveda.

1 Ascend : rise to higher rank; obtain the ’-r-./ r' , .. y. . < , gratia.

Lowest , highest, midmost ; the Fathers are o' ■■ i- . \ . ,/ ■ , . degrees

of merit acquired on earth.

2 The earthly region ; the firmament nearest to the earth. See VIII. 77. 5.
The Mighty Faces : of the Gods.

3 Son and progeny : napdtcm cha vihrdmanam cha : the meaning appears to
be, as suggested by. Ludwig, that the speaker has discharged his obligation to
the Fathers by begetting a son through the favour of Vishnu. Still vikrchm -
ham is an unintelligible expression in this connexion. See The Hymns of the
Athawa-vcda, XV 111. 1. 45, note.

HYMN 15.]

THE XIGVEJDA .

401

6 Bowing your bended knees and seated southward, accept this

sacrifice of ours with favour.

Punish us not for any sin, 0 Fathers, which we through
human frailty have committed.

7 Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give riches to

the man who brings oblations.

I Grant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present,

give them energy, ye Fathers.

8 Our ancient Fathers who deserve the Soma, who came, most

noble, to our Soma-banquet, —

With these let Yama, yearning with the' yearning, rejoicing
eat our offerings at his pleasure.

^ 9 Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who dwell in
glowing light, the very Kavyas,

Who thirsted mid the Gods, who hasten hither, oblation-
winners, theme of singers* praises.

10 Come, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, dwellers in
light, primeval, God-adorers,

Eaters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, w r ho travel with
the Deities and Indra.

II Fathers whom Agni*s flames have tasted, come ye nigh : ye

kindly leaders, take ye each your proper place.

Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass : grant riches with
a multitude of hero sons.

12 Thou, Agni Jatavedas, when entreated, didst bear the offer-

ings which thou madest fragrant,

And give them £o the Fathers who did eat them with SvadhtL
Eat, thou God, the gifts we bring thee.

13 Thou, Jatavedas, knowest well the number of Fathers who are

here and who are absent,

Of Fathers whom we know and whom we know not : accept
the sacrifice well-prepared with portions.

7 Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings : e Seated in the proximity
of the radiant flames (of the altar).’ — Wilson.

9 Kavyas: see X. 14. 3.

11 Whom Agni' s flames have tasted : whose bodies have been burnt. A class
of Manes called Agmshvflttas, according to S&yana.

12 With Svadhd : with the sacrificial exclamation Svadhft, or, with fhejy
allotted portion.

13 With portions : or, with SvadMs.

26

402

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X *

14 They who, consumed by fire or not cremated, joy in their
offering in the midst of heaven, —

Grant them, 0 Sovran Lord, the world of spirits and their
own body, as thy pleasure wills it.

HYMN XYI. Agni.

Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni ; let not his
body or his skin be scattered.

0 J&tavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send him on
his way unto the Fathers.

2 When thou hast made him ready, J&tavedas, then do thou

give hitri over to the Fathers.

When he attains unto the life that waits him, he shall become
the Deities’ controller.

3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit ; go, as thy

merit is, to earth or heaven.

•Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters ; go, make thine home
in plants with all thy members.

4 Thy portion is the goat : with heat consume him ; let thy

fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him,

With thine auspicious forms, 0 Jltavedas, bear this man to
the region of the pious.

5 Again, 0 Agni, to the Fathers send him who, offered in thee,

goes with our oblations.

Wearing new life let him increase his offspring : let him
rejoin a body, JAtavedas.

< 14 The world of spirits ; dsunUim ; a difficult word whose meaning is some
what uncertain. S&yana joins it with tanvdm, and explains the two words by

* the body that leads to life,’ ‘ that body that is endowed with breath ’

'Wilson. See X. 12. 4. c *

This hymn has been partially transliterated, translated, and annotated bv
Muir, 0. S, Texts, V. pp. 295-297. y

Stanzas 1—6 are to be repeated while the body of the departed is being
partially consumed on the funeral pile. ‘ 2 * * 5 6

2 The life that waits him : dsunitm : see X. 15. 14. Controller : by winning

their favour. b

3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy
See Muir's note, 0, S. Texts, V. 298.

4 Agni is addressed. The goat : that was
on the corpse.

spirit: let like return to like,
slaughtered and laid limb by limb

5 Let him increase his offspring : when he becomes one of the Fathers fee
:Xr S T e I d MH U / f fr «<*. the. parents of God!

nominative is not^exp’ressei M Kfe rei ° iD ****««

THE RIOVEDAi

403

HYMN 16.]

6 What wound soe’er the dark bird bath inflicted, the emmet,

or the serpent, or the jackal,

May Agni who ‘devoureth all things heal it, and Soma who
hath passed into the Brahmans.

7 Shield thee with flesh against the flames of Agni, encompass

thee about with fat and marrow,

So will the Bold One, eager to attack thee with fierce glow
fail to girdle and consume thee,

8 Forbear, 0 Agni, to upset this ladle : the Gods and they who

merit Soma love it.

This ladle, this which serves the Gods to drink from, in this
the Immortal Deities rejoice them. «

9 I send afar flesh-eating Agni, bearing off stains may he depart

to Yama ? s subjects.

But let this other JAtavedas carry oblation to the Gods, for
he is skilful.

10 I choose as God for Father-worship Agni, flesh-eater, who

hath past within your dwelling,

While looking on this other Jatavedas. Let him light’ flames
in the supreme assembly.

11 With offerings meet let Agni bring the Fathers who support

the Law.

Let him announce oblations paid to Fathers and to Deities.

12 Bight gladly would we set thee down, right gladly make thee

burn and glow.

Gladly bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the food of sacrifice. ;

13 Cool, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou hast

scorched and burnt.

Here let the water-lily grow, and tender grass and. leafy herb,,

14 0 full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh moisture,

freshening Herb,

Come hither with the ferwale frog : fill with delight this Agni
here,

7 The corpse is addressed. 'Mesh : the caul and other parts of a slaughtered
animal which covered the corpse to prevent too quick and complete cremation.

9 Stains : of sin n* impurity which may have attached to the departed.
Cp. stanza 6.

10 Light flames: typically offer sacrifice in the assembly of the Gods. .

11 With of wings meet : literally, bearing Kavyas or Kavya- worship, that
is, offerings to' the Jcavis t sages, or Fathers.

12 Thee : Agni ; the fire.

1.9 Water-lily: hiydmbu : some kirr! 'f r.'hnt. Tender grass :

pdkaddrvd: a variety of dlfo'vd grass r I ■ \ ‘ s

14 Fill with delight: meaning, euphemistically, ’extinguish. * After the
fire has consumed the corpse, water is poured upon it to extinguish it. Then

[BOOK X.

404 THE HYMNS OK

HYMN XVII. Various Deities.

Tvashtar prepares the bridal of his Daughter : all the world
hears the tidings and assembles,

But Yama’s Mother, Spouse of great Vivasvan, vanished as
she was carried to her dwelling.

2 From mortal men they hid the Immortal Lady, made one like

her and gave her to Vivasvan,

Saranyu brought to him the Asvin brothers, and then deserted
both twinned pairs of children.

3 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne’er are injured, may PiY

shan beai; thee hence, for he hath knowledge.

May he consign thee to these Fathers’ keeping, and to the
gracious Gods let Agni give thee.

4 May Ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear thee forward

on the distant pathway.

Thither let Savitar the God transport thee, where dwell the
pious who have passed before thee.

5 Pushan knows all these realms : may he conduct us by ways

that are most free from fear and danger.

Giver of blessings, glowing, all-heroic, may he, the wise and
watchful, go before us.

furthermore certain water-plants are put there. In addition to these a frog—
here a female, elsewhere a male — is put upon the place where the fire has
burned. These, representatives of life in the waters, are symbolically
supposed both to prevent and extinguish fire.’ (M. Bloomfield, Contributions
to the Interpretation of Hie Veda , Second Series, Baltimore : 1890).

Dr. Muir’s Original Sahe^rit Texts , V. pp. 297 — 299, should be consulted
with regard to this funeral hymn addressed to Agni, and much additional
information on the subject may obtained from the essays, there referred
to, by von Both and Max Mfiller. \

1 The first two stanzas are difficult, aXd appear to have no connexion with
the rest of the hymn. Tvashtar : a God often regarded, as here, as an agent
in natural phenomena. His Daughter : Saranyu, the stormy cloud ; or, per-
haps, the dawn. Vivasvdn : representing the, bright heavens, or the Sun.
Tama's Mother : Saranyil, who afterwards gave birth to Yama and Yamf .
See X. 10, note. Vanished: or was stolen away. Carried : as a bride, in pro-
cession. *

% They: the Gods. The Immortal Lady : Saranyu, Bought to him : under
another form bore to Vivasv&n. Both twinned pairs : Yamaxnd Yami and the
Asvins/ For the legend which has been formed out of these objure hints, see
Wilson’s Translation, and Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 228.

3 Here the funeral hymn begins, with an address to the spirit the de-
parted. Pdshan : as a Sun- God and the heavenly Herdsman who khtrvs the
path through the heavens and is therefore a good conductor of the spirit of
the departed.

4 Ayu : according to S4yana, V&yu is intended, the letter 1 v ’ being elided.
Or the meaning may be, life of full vitality.

405

HYMN 17.] THE RIGVEDA.

6 Pushan was bom to move on distant pathways, on the road far

from earth and far from heaven.

To both most wonted places of assembly he travels and returns
with perfect knowledge;

7 The pious call Saras vati, they worship Sarasvatl while sacri-

fice proceedeth.

The pious called Sarasvatl aforetime. Sarasvatl send bliss to
him who giveth.

8 Saras vati, who earnest with the Fathers, with them rejoicing

thee in our oblations,

Seated upon this sacred grass be joyful, and giye us strength-
ening food that brings no sickness.

9 Thou, called on as Sarasvatl by Fathers who come right for-

ward to our solemn service,

Give food and wealth to present sacri^ cers ? a portion, worth
a thousand, of refreshment.

10 The Mother Floods shall make ** bright and shining, cleans-

ers of holy oil, with oil sWl cleanse ns :

For, Goddesses, they be^ °ff all defilement : I rise up from
them purified and heightened.

11 Through days o* earliest date the Drop descended on this

place and o*- that which was before it.

I offer urv chroughout the seven oblations, the Drop which
go one same place is moving.

1 2 r -Uie Drop that falls, thy stalk which arms have shaken, which

from the bosom of the press hath fallen,

Or from the Adhvaryu’s purifying filter, I offer thee with heart
and cry of Vashat !

13 That fallen Drop of thine, the stalk which from the ladle fell

away,

This present God Brihaspati shall pour it forth to make us rich.

14 The plants of earth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this

my speech;

And rich in milk the essence of the Waters : make me pure
therewith.

7 Sarasvatl : see I. 3. 10.

11 This stanza is not very intelligible. The Drop is apparently the Soma ;
but S&yana explains it, alternatively, by Aditya or the Sun. See Satapatha*
Brdhmana , VII. 4. 1. 20 (Sacred Books of the East, XLI* 368).
li Rich in milk; full of sap, vigour, vital and vivifying power. 4

m . TEE HYMNS OP [BOOK K.

HYMN XVIII. Various Deities,

nC Go hence, 0 Death, pursue thy special pathway apart from
that which Gods are wont to travel.

To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest ; Touch not our
offspring, injure not our heroes.

2 As ye have come effacing Mrityu’s footstep, to further times

prolonging your existence,

May ye be rich in children and possessions, cleansed, purified,
and meet for sacrificing. ■

3 Divided from the dead are these, the living : now be our

calling o*i the Gods successful.

We have "gone forth for dancing and for laughter, to further
times pronging our existence.

i Here I erect thih^ampart for the living ; let none of these,
none other, reach, £his limit.

May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may
they bury Death beneHh this mountain.

5 As the days follow days in <h^ e succession, as with the sea-
sons duly come the seasons,

As each successor fails not his former, so form the lives of
these, 0 great Ordainer

5 Live your full lives and find old age dehgj^ful, all of you
striving one behind the other.

May Tvashtar, maker of fair things, be gracious lengthen
out the days of your existence.

1 Death : Mrityu, the God of Death ; distinct from Yama the judge and
ruler of the departed. Our offspring ; prajtlm : meaning here, sayB S&yana,
female offspring, duhitridauhitrdtmikdm, in the form of daughters and their
daughters. Our heroes: sons and their sons. — S&yana.

% Addressed to the kinsmen of the deceased. Effacing Mrityu* s footstep :
a wisp or clog was fastened to the foot of the corpse which represented Mrityu
or Death, in order to prevent the premature return of Death to carry off the
living. See A. V V. 19. 12. Cleansed: from sins of a former life. Purified:
from sins of the present life.

3 Dancing and laughter : the enjoyments of ordinary life after the fulfil-
ment of our duties to the dead.

4 This rampart: of stone, or earth, raised by the Adhvaryu as a line of
demarcation between the dead and the living, and limiting, as it were, the
jurisdiction of Death until the natural time for his approach. This mountain:
the mound or bank.

5 So form the lives : let them pass away in due order of seniority, Ordainer :
Dhdtar : the name of a divine being who is the creator, arranger, maiutainer,
and manager of all things.

6 One behind the other ; the oldest reaching the end of their journey first.

HYMN 18.] THE HIGVEDA. 407

T Let these unwidowed dames with noble husbands adorn them-
selves with fragrant balm and unguent.

Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free from sorrow, first let the
dames go up to where he lieth.

8 Rise, come unto the world of life, 0 woman : come, he is life-

less by whose side thou liest.

Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion, who took thy
hand and wooed thee as a lover.

9 From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, that it may be

our power and might and glory.

There art thou, there ; and here with noble heroes may we
o'ercome all hosts that fight against us. ^

10 Betake thee to the lap of Earth the Mother, of Earth far-spread-

ing, very kind and gracious.

Young Dame, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, may she pre-
serve thee from Destruction's bosom.

11 Heave thyself, Earth, nor press thee downward heavily; afford

him easy access, gently tending him.

Cover him, as a mother wraps her skirt about her child, 0 Earth,

12 Now let the heaving earth be free from motion : yea, let a thou-

sand clods remain above him.

Be they to him a home distilling fatness, here let them ever he
his place of refuge.

13 1 stay the earth from thee, while over thee I place this piece

of earth. May I be free from injury.

Here let the Fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, and there
let Yama make thee an abiding-place.

14 Even as an arrow's feathers, they have set me on a fitting day.
The fit word have I caught and held as 'twere a courser with

the rein.

7 First: dgre; to begin with ; i. e. before the ceremonies begin. See M.
Muller, Chips , IV. 35 — 89 (edition of 1895). On the whole stanza, see Dr. F.
Hall, Journal of E. A. S., Yol. III. Part I., p. 185f.

8 ‘ This verse is to be spoken by the husband’s brother, ete , to the wife of
the dead man, and he is to make her leave her husbami’s body. See the
Aswaldyana Grihya Stitraa, IY. 2.’ — Editor’s note, in Wilson’s Translation.

*9 This stanza is applicable only when the deceased was a Kshatriya or maxi
of the princely and military order.

10 Addressed to the body. Guerdon- giver : the liberal rewarder of the
priests. Destruction's bosom : or the lap of Nirriti.

13 / stay the earth : 1 1 keep off the earth above thee with thy lid.’ * This
is addressed to the urn containing the bones and ashes, which is buried after
the corpse has been burnt.*— Wilson. Pillar ; perhaps a beam laid over the
remains.

14 This stanza, which seems to be a later addition, is not noticed in S&yana’s
Commentary, and the meaning of the second line is not very clear. I have

408

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK Xj
HYMN XIX. Waters or Cow*.

Turn, go not farther on your way; visit us, 0 ye Wealthy
Ones.

Agni and Soma, ye who bring riches again, secure us wealth.

3 Make these return to us again, bring them beside us once
again.

May Indra give them back to us, and Agni drive them hither-
ward.

3 Let them return to us again : under this herdsman let them

feed.

Do thou, 0 Agni, keep them here, and let the wealth we
have remain.

4 I call upon their herdsman, him who knoweth well their coming

nigh,

Their parting and their home-return, and watcheth their
approach and rest.

5 Yea, let the herdsman, too, return, who marketh well their

driving-forth ;

Marketh their wandering away, their turning back and com-
ing home.

6. Home-leader, lead them home to us; Indra, restore to us- our
kine ;

We will rejoice in them alive.

followed Prof. Whitney’s rendering (Lanman, p. 886). The verse, says
Lanraan, • seems to express the poet’s satisfaction at having made a good
hymn at the right time and place, and with as good skill as a skilful horse-
man has.’

The hymn has been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Zieder. See
Zimmer’s AUindisches Leben , pp. 400 — 407, Mr. Boznoph Chunder Dutt’s
Civilization in Ancient India , pp. 108, and 278, 279, Lanman's Sanskrit
Header , pp. 382 — 886, and Z^nai'de Bagozin’s Vedic India , pp. 351—353,

The essays of von Both and Max Muller have already been referred to.

The hymn is a prayer for the return of strayed cows, to whom the first
line is addressed.

1 Ye who bring riches again : punarvasd : ‘ ye who clothe (your worship-
pers) again.’ — Wilson. See Hillebrandt, V, M., I. 460.

2 These: cows, or waters. — Sly ana. Make return is th - .. . .\ v .

and SAyana says that the seer of the hymn addresses ' ■ ■. V. , ■; ■ - \
is to Indra.

4 S Ay ana explains this stanza somewhat differently : — 1 1 invoke the
knowledge of the place, of their going, of their coming, of their departure,
of their wandering, of their returning : (I invoke) him who is their keeper/
—Wilson. This is a more strictly literal rendering of the abstract nouns in
the text.

HYMN 20.]

THE RIGVEDA.

400

7 I offer you on every side butter and milk and strengthening food.
May all the Holy Deities pour down on us a flood of wealth.

8 0 thou Home-leader, lead them home, restore them thou who

bringest home.

Four are the quarters of the earth ; from these bring back to
us our kine.

HYMN XX. Agni.

Send unto us a good and happy mind.

2 I worship Agni, Youthf ullest of Gods, resistless, Friend of laws;
Under whose guard and heavenly light the Spotted seek the

Mother’s breast :

3 Whom with their mouth they magnify, bannered with flame

and homed in light.

He glitters with his row of teeth.

4 Kind, Furtherer of men, he comes, when he hath reached the

ends of heaven,

Sage, giving splendour to the clouds.

5 To taste man’s offerings, he, the Strong, hath risen erect at

sacrifice :

Fixing his dwelling he proceeds.

6 Here are oblation, worship, rest : rapidly comes his furtherance.
To sword-armed Agni come the Gods.

7 With service for chief bliss 1 seek the Lord of Sacrifice, Agni*

whom

They call the Living, Son of Cloud.

8 Blest evermore be all the men who come from us, who magnify
Agni with sacrificial gifts.

9 The path he treads is black and white and red, and striped,

and brown, crimson, and glorious.

His sire begat him bright with hues of gold.

10 Thus with his thoughts, 0 Son of Strength, 0 Agni, hath
Yimada, accordant with the Immortals,

Offered thee hymns, soliciting thy favour. Thou hast brought
all, food, strength, a prosperous dwelling.

2 The Spotted: tliere is no noun. The variegated oblations, as Say ana says,
appear to be intended ; and the Mother's breast may be the clouds of the
firmament. The stanza is difficult, and translation must be tentative.

8 Hom.ed in light: the meaning of hripdnUam is uncertain. ‘Pitying
prayer,’ according to Ludwig. ‘ Sustmner of pious works.’ — Wilson.

5 He proceeds : is carried from one fire receptacle or altar to another.

6 Sword-armed : armed With his Bword or knife of pierciug flame.

8 The men who come from us ; sons and grandsons of the worshippers.

9 The path he treads : according to S&yana, his chariot,

10 Vimada j the Rishi of the hymu.

TUB HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

410

HYMN XXI. Agni.

With offerings of our own we choose thee, Agni, as Invoking
Priest,

For sacrifice with trimmed grass, — at your glad carouse —
piercing and brightly shining. Thou art waxing great.

2 The wealthy ones adorn thee, they who bring us horses as

their gift:

The sprinkling ladle, Agni,— -at your glad carouse— and glow-
ing offering taste thee. Thou art waxing great.

3 The holy statutes rest by thee, as 'twere with ladles that over-

flow. „

Black and white-gleaming colours, — at your glad carouse— all
glories thou assumest. Thou art waxing great.

4 0 Agni, what thou deemest wealth, Victorious and Immortal

One !

Bring thou to give us vigour, — at your glad carouse — splendid
at sacrifices. Thou art waxing great.

5 Skilled in all lore is Agni, he whom erst Atharvau brought to

life.

He was Vivas vein’s envoy, at your glad carouse — the well-loved
friend of Yama. Tbou art waxing great.

6 At sacrifices they adore thee, Agni, wheu the rite proceeds.

All fair and lovely treasures — at your glad carouse — thou

givest him who offers. Thou art waxing great.

7 Men, Agni, have established thee as welcome Priest at holy

rites,

Thee whose face shines with butter, — at your glad carouse —
bright, with eyes most observant. Thou art waxing great

8 Wide and aloft thou spreadest thee, 0 Agni, with thy brilliant

flame.

A Bull art thou when bellowing, — at your glad carouse — thou
dost impregn the Sisters. Thou art waxing great.

1 At your glad carouse : apparently a Soma-drinking refrain, addressed to
the Visvedevas or All- Gods. Thou art waxing great: a similar refrain or
burden addressed to Agni. See Wilson’s Translation, note. Grassmann omits
both refrains, which he considers to be later interpolations.

2 Taste thee : feel the power of the fire.

3 The first line is difficult : — f The establishes (of the rite) worship thee
with their ladles (filled with the oblation), like (earth — ) sprinkling (showers).’
—Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation. Those who worship Agni accord-
ing to his Law are regarded as his owu statutes incarnate.

5 Atharvan : the priest who is said to have been the first to obtain fire
and offer Soma and prayers. Vivasvdn; the Soma-priest, or the sacrifices

$ Tat Sisters; the plants, which Agni, descending in rain, makes fruitful.

BltMN 22,1 VSS RIGtEDA. 4X1

HYMN XXII. Indra.

Where is famed Indra heard of? With what folk is he reuowix-
ed to-day as Mitra is, —

Who in the home of Eishis and in secret is extolled with song ?

2 Even here is Indra famed, and among us this day the glorious

Thunderer is praised,

He who like Mitra mid the folk hath won complete and full
renown.

3 He who is Sovran Lord of great and perfect strength, exerter

of heroic might,

Who hears the fearless thunder as a father hears his darling
son.

4 Harnessing to thy car, as God, two blustering Steeds of the

Wind-God, 0 Thunderer,

That speed along the shining path, thou making ways art
glorified.

5 Even to these dark Steeds of Wind thou of thyself hast come

to ride,

Of which no d liver may be found, none, be he God or mortal
man.

6 When ye approach, men ask you, thee and Usan& : Why come

ye to our dwelling-place f l

Why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of earth
and heaven ?

7 0 Indra, thou shalt speak us fair : our holy prayer is offered

up.

We pray to thee for help as thou didst strike the monster
Sushna deach

8 Around us is the Dasyu, riteless, void of sense, inhuman,

keeping alien laws.

Baffle, thou Slayer of the foe, the weapon which this Gasa
wields.

& .Hero with Heroes, thou art ours : yea, strong are they whom
- thou dost help.

In many a place are thy full gifts, and men, like vassals, sing
thy praise.

1 In secret : in the forest, according to S&yana.

4 Making ways : as a God of light, making paths through the pathless
darkness.

6 U$and ; Usan& or TJsanas EAvya, who has been frequently mentioned as
a favoured friend and companion of Indra.

9 With Heroes : the attendant Maruts.

412 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X .

10 Urge thou these heroes on to slay the enemy, brave Thunder-

er ! in the fight with swords,

Even when hid among the tribes of Sages numerous as stars.

11 Swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rend

and bum, 0 Hero Thunder-armed :

As thou with thy Companions didst destroy the whole of
Sushna’s brood.

12 Let not thine excellent assistance come to us, 0 Hero Indra,

profitless.

May we, may we enjoy the bliss of these thy favours, Thun-
derer !

13 May those soft impulses of thine, 0 Indra, be fruitful and

innocent to us.

May we know these whose treasures are like those of milch-
kine, Thunderer !

14 That Earth, through power of knowing things that may be

known, handless and footless yet might thrive,

Thou slewest, turning to the right, Sushna for every living
man.

15 Drink, drink the Soma, Hero Indra; be not withheld as thou

art good, 0 Treasure-giver.

Preserve the singers and our liberal princes, and make us
wealthy with abundant riches.

HYMN XXIII. Indra.

Indra, whose right hand wields the bolt, we worship, dxdver
of Bay Steeds seeking sundered courses.

Shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, casting his
weapons forth and dealing bounties.

2 The treasure which his Bay Steeds found at sacrifice, — this
wealth made opulent Indra slayer of the foe.

10 The enemy : or Vritra. Hid among the tribes of Sages: dwelling among
the wise Gods and invisible to men. Numerous as stars : the meaning of
nakshatrasavasdm is uncertain,

_ 11 Whose hand is prompt to rend and burn : I follow Ludwig’s interpreta-
tion, but the meaning which he gives to dkshdne is doubtful.

13 Soft impulses of thine : ‘ our (praises) reaching thee.’ — Wilson.

14 For every living man : visv&yave : according to Siyana, for the sake of
Visv&yu, a king, the son of Urvasi, the Apsaras or nymph of heaven who be-
came the wife of Purhravas. Turning to the right : circumambulating Sushna
with the right hand towards him for good luck ; performing the Gaelic deasil.

1 Seeking sundered courses : vlvratdndm : unruly, and pulling away from
each other, or wandering. According to S&yapa, having many functions.

2 At sacrifice : S&yana explains vane by ‘at sacrifice, or, in the forest.'
The exact meaning of the word here is not certain. Of the foe ; or, of Yritra.

SYMN 24.]

TEE RIG VEDA.

418

Bibhu, Bibhukshan, Vaja, — he is Lord of Might. The D&sa’s
very name I utterly destroy.

3 When, with the Princes, Maghavan, famed of old, comes nigh

the thunderbolt of gold, and the Controller’s car
Which his two Tawny Coursers draw, then Indra is the
Sovran Lord of power whose glory spreads afar.

4 With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds : Indra

throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard.

When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant place, and
stirs the worshipper as wind disturbs the wood.

5 We laud and praise his several deeds of valour \yho, fatherlike,

with power hath made us stronger ;

Who with his voice slew many thousand wicked ones who
spake in varied manners with contemptuous cries.

6 Indra, the Vimadas have formed for thee a laud, copious,

unparalleled, for thee Most Bountiful.

We know the good we gain from him the Mighty One when we
attract him as a herdsman calls the kine.

7 Ne’er may this bond of friendship be dissevered, the Bishi

Vimada’s and thine, 0 Indra.

We know thou carest for us as a brother : with us, 0 God, be
thine auspicious friendship.

HYMN XXIV. Indra. Asvins.

0 Indra, drink this Soma, pressed out in the mortar, full of
sweets.

Send down to us great riches, — at your glad carouse — in thou-
sands, 0 Most Wealthy. Thou art waxing great.

2 To thee with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds we come.
Lord of all strength and power, grant — at your glad carouse —

the best choice-worthy treasure. Thou art waxing great.

3 Thou who art Lord of precious boons, inciter even of the churl,
Guardian of singers, Indra, — at your glad carouse — save us

from woe and hatred. Thou art waxing great.

RibhUj Ribhuhshan, Vdja : Indra, combining the three Ilibhus in his own
person.

8 With the Princes : with the Maruts.

4 Drops of moisture ; perhaps the rain which he pours upon the lightning
which may be regarded as his beard. — Ludwig. The pleasant place: the
chamber of sacrifice. The worshipper : or, according to S&yana, his own body.
The text has no word to express the object here.

The double burden or refrain of Hymn XXI. is employed in the first
three stanzas.

3 Of singers: worshippers; ' eulogists.’— Wilson.

414

THE HYMNS OH [BOOK X*

4 Strong, Lords of Magic power, ye Twain churned the united

worlds apart,

When ye, implored by Virnada, N&satyas, forced apart the pair.

5 When the united pair were rent asunder all the Gods com-

plained.

The Gods to the N&satyas cried, Bring these together once
again.

6 Sweet be my going forth, and rich in sweets be my approach

to home.

So, through your Deity, both Gods, enrich us with all plea-
santness.

HYMN XXY. Soma .

Send us a good and happy mind, send energy and mental power.
Then — at your glad carouse — let men joy in thy love, Sweet
J uice ! as kine in pasture. Thou art waxing great.

In all thy forms, 0 Soma, rest thy powers that influence the
heart.

So also these my longings— at your glad carouse —spread
themselves seeking riches. Thou art waxing great.

3 Even if, 0 Soma, I neglect thy laws through my simplicity,
Be gracious— at your glad carouse — as sire to son. Preserve

us even from slaughter. Thou art waxing great.

4 Our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to the

wells.

Soma, that we may live, grant — at your glad carouse— full
powers of mind, like beakers. Thou art waxing great.

5 0 Soma, through thy might who art skilful and strong, these

longing men,

These sages, have thrown open — at your glad carouse— the
stall of kine and horses. Thou art waxing great.

6 Our herds thou guardest, Soma, and the moving world spread

far and wide.

Thou fittest them for living, — at your glad carouse — looking
upon all beings. Thou art waxing great.

4 Churned. ; or perhaps, produced % churning or violent agitation,

feayana explains differently ‘you have churned forth (the fire).’ — Wilson.

1 The first half line of this stanza has occurred before as the first line of
a., au. l he double burden or refrain is again employed, with little or no

connexion with the rest of the stanza.

4 Like leakers : filled fulh like chalices of Soma juice.

5 The longing mm: the priests. Have thraion open, etc.: have bv their

sacrifices, opened the way to wealth. ' y

THE RIO VEDA .

HYMN 26,]

415

7 On all sides, Soma, be to us a Guardian ne’er to be deceived.
King, drive away our foemen — at your glad carouse let not

the wicked rule us. Thou art waxing great.

8 Be watchful, Soma, passing wise, to give us store of vital

strength.

More skilled than man to guide us, — at your glad carouse —
save us from harm and sorrow. Thou art waxing great.

9 Chief slayer of our foemen, thou, Indu, art Indra’s gracious

Friend,

When warriors invoke him — at your glad carouse — in fight,
to win them offspring. Thou art waxing great.

10 Victorious is this gladdening drink : to Indra dear it grows in

strength.

This — at your glad carouse — enhanced the mighty hymn of the
great sage Kakshiv&n. Thou art waxing great.

1 1 This to the sage who offers gifts brings power that comes from

wealth in kine.

This, better than the seven, hath — at your glad carouse — far-
thered the blind, the cripple. Thou art waxing great.

HYMN XXVI. Pushan,

Forward upon their way proceed the ready teams, the lovely
songs.

Further them glorious Pftsh&n with yoked chariot, and the
Mighty Twain !

2 With sacred hymns let this man here, this singer, win the

God to whom

Belong this maj esty and might. He hath observed our eulogies.

3 Pushan the Strong hath knowledge of sweet praises even as

Indu hath.

He dews our com with moisture, he bedews the pasture of
our kine.

4 We will bethink ourselves of thee, 0 Pushan, O thou God,

as One.

10 KaksMvdn : a famous Risbi, the seer of some hymns of Book I. See
Index, Vol. I.

11 j B etter than the seven ; more effectually than the seven priests. S&yana
explains differently : — 4 it gives wealth to the seven (priests).-— Wilson. The
blind : the Ilishi Dirghatamas, according to S&yana. The cripple ; Par&vrij.
See both names in VoL I., Index.

1 Ready teams : ordered series of our words. The Mighty Twain ; the Asvins.
According to S&yana, dasrct — darsaniyah , of goodly aspect, applied to POahan ;
or, the two performers of the rite, the Yajamdna and his wife.

416 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

Who brings fulfilment of our hymns, and stirs the singer and
the sage.

5 Joint-sharer of each sacrifice, the driver of the chariot steeds ;

The Eishi who is good to man, the singer’s Friend and faith-
ful Guard.

6 One who is Lord of Sucha, Lord of Sucha caring for herself :

Weaving the raiment of the sheep and making raiment beau-
tiful.

7 The mighty Lord of spoil and wealth, Strong Friend of all

prosperity ;

He with light movement shakes his beard, lovely and ne’er to
be deceived.

8 0 Pushan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy

chariot-pole.

Friend of all suppliants art thou, born in old time, and firm
and sure.

. 9 May the majestic Pushan speed our chariot with his power
aud might

May he increase our store of wealth and listen to this call of
ours.

HYMN XXVII. Indra.

This, singer, is my firm determination, to aid the worshipper
who pours the Soma.

I slay the man who brings no milk-oblation, unrighteous,
powerful, the truth’s perverter.

2 Then will I, when I lead my friends to battle against the
radiant persons of the godless,

Prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullocik, and pour for
thee the fifteenfold strong juices.

6 Sucha and SucM : names of a man and woman.-— Ludwig. According to
S&yana and Wilson, * the pure (he-goat) and the pure (she-goat)/ Weaving
the raiment : * making woollen cloths such as the woollen filter, etc/ — Wilson.
And making raiment beautiful : or, he hath made vesture pure and bright;
that is, says Sctyana, he hath purified all around with his heat and light.

7 Friend : the augmented Shakes his beard : when he drinks the Soma
juice.

8 Those goats: Pfishan’s chariot is said to be drawn by a team of goats.
Of. I. 38. 4.

1 Indra addresses the Eishi. Powerful : dbhiim : perhaps, possessed of the
means that would enable him to offer sacrifices.

2 The Eishi replies. Fifteenfold strong juices : according to S&yana, the
juices of the Soma-plant whose leaves grow during the light half of the'month
and die away during the dark half.

HYMN 27.]

THE MOVED A.

417

3 I know not him who sayeth and declareth that he hath slain

the godless in the battle.

Soon as they see the furious combat raging, men speak forth
praises of my vigorous horses,

4 While yet my deeds of might were unrecorded, all passed for

Maghavans though I existed.

The potent one who dwelt in peace I conquered, grasped by
the foot and slew him on the mountain.

5 None hinder me in mine heroic exploits, no, not the moun-

tains when I will and purpose.

Even the deaf will tremble at my roaring, and every day will
dust be agitated. *

6 To see the Indraless oblation-drinkers, mean offerers, o’ertaken

by destruction 1

Then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who have
blamed my joyous Friend and scorned him.

7 Thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour : an earlier saw,

a later one shall see thee.

Two canopies, as ? twere, are round about him who reacheth to
the limit of this region.

8 The freed kine eat the barley of the pious. I saw them as

they wandered with the herdsman.

The calling of the pious rang around them. What portion
will these kine afford their owner %

9 When we who eat the grass of men are gathered I am with

barley-eaters in the corn-land.

There shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock, and he who
hath been yoked seek one to loose him.

3 Indra speaks, rebuking the Rishi and ascribing all victories to himself.

4 The potent one : the powerful fiend Sambara, for instance.

5 Dust : of battle, stirred up by India.

6 To see : dtirsan : according to S&yana, I, Indra, see. Oblation-drinkers ;
who themselves consume the offerings that should be presented to Indra.
Mean offerers , bdhukshddah : literally, arm-cutters. According to von Roth,
parsimonious worshippers who offer the forelegs, or inferior parts of the
sacrificial animal. ( Who cut (the worshippers) to pieces with their hands/ —
Wilson. Joyous Friend: Vishnu. — Ludwig. Or the meaning may be, your
joyous friend ; Indra himself, the friend of his worshippers.

7 The Rishi speaks. An earlier saw : the meaning of the half-line is not
clear. Perhaps, foes have already felt thy power, and others yet shall feel it.

* The ancient Indra verily destroys (his foe), the other does not destroy
Indra/ — Wilson. Two canopies : heaven and earth. Him : Indra,

8 Indra speaks, fearing, apparently, that the worshipper will have no milk
to offer him.

9 * There is no comment on obscure verse, and Wilson leaves a blank
in his MS/ — Editor of Wilson^ Translation, Yol. VI. Ludwig says that-*

27

418 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

10 There wilt thou hold as true my spoken purpose, to bring

together quadrupeds and bipeds.

I will divide, without a fight, his riches who warreth here,
against the Bull, with women.

11 When a man’s daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, knowing,

will be wroth with her for blindness ?

Which of the two will loose on him his anger — the man^who
leads her home or he who w r oos her?

12 How many a maid is pleasing to the suitor who fain would

marry for her splendid riches ?

If the girl be both good and fair of feature, she fiuds, herself,
a friend among the people.

1.3 His feet have grasped : he eats the man who meets him.
Around his head he sets the head for shelter.

Sitting anear and right above he smites us, and follows earth
that lies spread out beneath him.

14 High, leafless, shadowless, and swift is Heaven: the Mother
stands, the Youngling, loosed, is feeding.

Loud hath she lowed, licking Another’s offspring, In what
world hath the Cow laid down her udder?

Indr a declares that he has brought men and cattle together and made the
latter subject to the former, to be yoked and to remain yoked when and as
long as their masters please. According to this interpretation, tbe first half
of the stanza might be rendered : * Grass-eating beasts with men have I con-
nected, and those who eat grain in the wide spread corn-land.’

10 Against the Bull : against me, the mighty Indra. With women : with
weak allies.

11 ‘Hitherto,’ says Prof. Ludwig, ( it is possible to establish a connexion
and interdependence of the separate strophes ; with strophe 11 the difficulty
begins,’ On him ; on the father. Who woos her : seefcs her in marriage for
his friend or employer.

12 Herself: svaydm chit : by her own worth, independently of her dowry.

13 His feet have grasped: Indra, as the Sun, has seized and drawn up tbe
water of the rivers with the rays which are his feet. Eats the man who meets
him : perhaps, merely, scorches the man who exposes himself to his burning
rays. According to Sayana, ‘ feeds upon, i , e, takes into his orb, the water
that approaches him.’ Another explanation is, that the pious after death go
to the Sun and become sunbeams.— Ludwig. He sets the head for shelter : he
takes the height of heaven as a covering. Anear and right above : in his meri-
dian height. Follows earth : descends to the horizon and sets beyond it.

14 Leafless, shadowless: heaven being compared to a tree that overshadows
the earth. According to S&yana, drvd here is the ever-moving Sun. The
Mother : Ushas or Dawn. According to S&yana, mdta here means * the builder
(of the world).* The Youngling : or Calf ; Agni who feeds on the oblations.
She : Heaven, or the atmospheric Prithivi, roaring as the rain comes down.
Another s offspring : Indra as Aditya or the Sun, the offspring of Aditi, In
what world , etc. : that is, wbo knows where the rain comes from ? The Cow :
the Sky, The second half-stanza has occurred before. See III. 55, 13,

HYMN 27.]

THE RICr VEDA .

419

15 Seven heroes from the nether part ascended, and from the

upper part came eight together.

Nine from behind came armed with winnowing-baskets ; ten
from the front pressed o'er the rock's high ridges.

16 One of the ten, the tawny, shared in common, they send to

execute their final purpose.

The Mother carries on her breast the Infant of noble form
and soothes it while it knows not.

IT The Heroes dressed with fire the fatted wether: the dice were
thrown by way of sport and gaming.

Two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters, hallowing and
with means of purifying. *

18 Crying aloud they ran in all directions : One half of them will

cook, and not the other.

To me hath Savitar, this God, declared it : He will perform,
whose food is wood and butter.

19 1 saw a troop advancing from the distance, moved, not by

wheels but their own Godlike nature.

The Friendly One seeks human generations, destroying, still
new, bands of evil beings.

20 These my two Bulls, even Pramara’s, are harnessed : drive

them not far ; here let them often linger.

The waters even shall aid him to his object, and the all-cleans-
ing Sun who is above us.

15 Seven heroes ; according to S&yana, Visv&mitra and other Rishis, sons of

Praj&pati, Eight ; the V&lakhilyas, a numerous race of divine pygmies. Nine:
the Bhrigus. Ten : Angirases. Or, alternatively, seven Maruts, on Indra's
right, eight on his left, nine behind him, and ten in front. These explanations,
by S&yana cannot b£ accepted ; but it is hard to say what is meant. Ludwig
thinks that the various classes of letters of the alphabet are intended. His/h-
genious explanation will be found in the Preface to his fourth yolume of the
Rigveda, pp. xxxm. — XXXV. # ^

16 The tawny: hapildm : according to S&yana, the famous Rishi X a pua.

‘The Sun ?* — Grassmann. The Mother: Night? — Grassmann. Thednfant *
the young Sun, if the Mother is Niglit. /

17 The fatted wether • perhaps, the swollen rain-cloud. The dic& ^he stars.
Two : the Sun and Moon. These are Ludwig’s suggestions.

18 They : according to Sftyana, the Angirases. Perhaps contentious
priests with whom Agni the veritable priest is contrasted .^-Lud' wig. He :

19 A troop : the stars. The Friendly One : Indra as Sun. Evil beings:
simtf ; R&kshasas and spirits of darkness that vanish ^ the coming of the

20 Bulls : steeds according to Say ana. Pramarcfe' : belonging to me, the
Destroyer or Death. But the whole stanza y/ obscure. All-cleansing: so
S&yana explains marled } which von Roth interp^s by obscuration. Ludwig
thinks that the Moon, { the obscurer of th^un’ mea ^»

TEE HYMNS OE

420

[BOOK X.

21 This is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the

lofty misty realm of S&rya.

Beyond this realm there is another glory : so through old age
they pass and feel no sorrow.

22 Bound fast to every tree the cow is lowing, and thence the man-

consuming birds are hying,

Then all this world, though pressing juice for Indra and
strengthening the Rishi, is affrighted.

23 In the Gods’ mansion 'stood the first-created, and from their

separation came the later.

Three warm the Earth while holding stores of water, and Two
of these cCnvey the murmuring moisture.

21 This is thy life : and do thou mark and know it. As such, hide
not thyself in time of battle.

He manifests the light and hides the vapour : his foot is never
free from robes that veil it.

HYMN XXVIII. Indra. Vasukra.

Now all my other friends are here assembled: my Sire -in-law
alone hath not come hither.

So might he eat the grain and drink the Soma, and, satisfied,
return unto his dwelling.

21 This is the thunderbolt : the meaning, probably is, * this dahshind or
hfcporarium given to the priests is a veritable thunderbolt.’ — Ludwig. But, as
Wiison observes, the stanza may be ‘ intended to express the usual theory of
rain \ the moisture of the earth being drawn up into the solar region as vapour,
and thence descending as rain by the action of the thunderbolt and the wind.’

22 According to S&yana, tree here means ‘ bow,’ cow means ‘ bowstring,’
and mcw-tionsuming birds * deadly arrows.’ The general meaning is that
sacrifices to Indra and liberal gifts to priests will not free men from the fear
of death.

23 The first-created : the A clouds. The later: the Waters of the rain.
Time ; Par j any a, Vftyu. and Aditya or the Sun. Molding stores of water:
andptfX : * Sowing in succession.’ — Wilson. ‘Following the water.’ — Ludwig.

‘ Rich ih water.’ — Q-rassmann. Two : Vftyu and Aditya.

24 Aojbrding to S&yana, Indra is addressed. The following is Wilson’s
translation 0 f S^y ana’s paraphrase of the stanza ‘ That thy (divine nature
identified Hfch the sun) is the cause of life : and know such (solar form) of
his (to be worthy of adoration) at the sacrifice ; conceal nothing : that motion
of him the all-nieangjjng ( sun ) makes manifest the universe ; it absorbs the
moisture ; it is i^ver discontinued.’ The robes that veil the foot, or rays, of

are t} 10 Waters into which they are supposed to vanish.

The hymn is enigmatical and difficult in the highest degree, and neither
S&yana nor later scho^rs have succeeded in making it intelligible throughout.

The Rishi is Vasukra s* n 0 f Indra, and the hymn is mainly a dialogue
between the Father and the q 0 n. Vasukra’s wife is the seer as well as the
speaker of sfcanza 1.

* T hi ^ ta ? za k ^P°^ eu ky Va^ukra’s wife in ignorance, says the legend,
that her I atker-in-law Indra is present in disguise.

TEE RIG VEDA.

EYME 28.]

421

2 Load belloweth the Bull whose horns are sharpened : upon

the height above earth’s breadth he stand eth.

That man I guard and save in all his troubles who fills my
flanks when he hath shed the Soma.

3 Hen with the stone press out for thee, O Indra, strong, glad-

dening Soma, and thereof thou drink est.

Bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest when,
Maghavan, with food thou art invited.

4 Resolve for me, 0 singer, this my riddle : The rivers send their

swelling water backward :

The fox steals up to the approaching lion : the jackal drives
the wild-boar from the brushwood. "

5 How shall I solve this riddle, I, the simple, declare the

thought of thee the Wise and Mighty ?

Tell us, well knowing, as befits the season : Whitherward is
thy prosperous car advancing?

6 Thus do they magnify me, me the mighty : higher than even.

high heaven is my car-pole.

I all at once demolish many thousands : my Sire begot me with
no foe to match me.

7 Yea, and the Gods have known me also, Indra, as mighty, fierce

and strong in every exploit.

Exulting with the bolt I slaughtered Yritra, and for the offerer
oped with might the cow-stall.

8 The Deities approached, they carried axes; splitting the wood

they came with their attendants.

They laid good timber in the fire-receivers, and burnt the grass
up where they found it growing.

9 The hare hatlh swallowed up the opposing razor : I sundered

with a clod the distant mountain.

The great will I make subject to the little : the calf shall wax
in strength and eat the bullock.

2 Indra speaks. The Bull : the mighty Indra.

3 Vasukra speaks.

4 Indra must be the speaker, although S&yana gives the stanza to Vasukra.
Indra declares his power to alter the course of nature. See Wilson’s Trans-
lation, note by the Editor.

5 Vasukra speaks.

6 Indra speaks. My Sire : or, the general Father Praj&pati. —

7 Vasukra speaks, and tells what he has done with Indra’s help

8 This obscure stanza is probably an account of the Gods’ fir? 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 sacrifice. See

Pischel, Vedische Studien , I, pp. 178 — 180. According to SA/ a ? a > re * ei [8 to
the cleaving of the clouds, and the filling of the rivers. J-mdwig sees in it a
reference to the beginning of agriculture. Their • the Maruts.

9 Cf. with stanza 4.

422 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X

10 There hath the strong-winged eagle left his talon, as a snared

lion leaves the trap that caught him.

Even the wild steer in his thirst is captured : the leather strap
still holds his foot entangled.

11 So may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on the

viands of the Brahman.

They all devour .the bulls set free to wander, while they them-
selves destroy their bodies’ vigour.

12 They were well occupied with holy duties who sped in person

with their lauds to Soma.

Speaking like man, mete to us wealth and booty : in heaven
thou hastr>the name and fame of Hero.

HYMN XXIX. Indra.

As sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing, ye, swift Fair,
have been roused by clear laudation,

Whose Herald-Priest through many days is Indra, earth’s Guar-
dian, Friend of men, the best of Heroes.

2 May we, when this Hawn and the next dance hither, be thy

best servants, most heroic Hero !

Let the victorious car with triple splendour bring hitherward
the hundred chiefs with Kutsa.

3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, Indra?

Speed through our doors to songs, for thou art mighty.

Why comest thou to me, what gift attracts thee 1 Faia would
I bring thee food most meet to offer.

4 Indra, what fame hath one like thee mid heroes ? With what

plan wilt thou act ? Why hast thou sought us ?

As a true Friend, Wide-Strider ! to sustain us, since food
absorbs the thought of each among us. *

s 10 The application of this stanza is not apparent. S&yana’s explanation of
^hie and the following verse is entirely different from that of most recent
scholars.

I ^he meaning of the stanza is obscure, and the text of the first half-line
is unintelligible. I follow the reading which S&yana gives in his Com-
mentary, vdyo instead vd y6. ‘ As (the bird) who deposits its young (in its
^.est) in the tree (is) eagerly looking around.’ — Wilson. Swift Pair : Asvins.

\ Dance hither : or, come dancing. Cp. Milton’s ‘ Now the bright morning-
^^’sday’s harbinger, Comes dancing from the east.’ Triple splendour;

with reference to Agni, Vityu, and Shrya.— Ludwig. Hundred chiefs :
the may b e intended, ‘ hundred ’ being used indefinitely. Kutsa ;

Indra s iav^m£ e companion.

4 Indra is that the protection of his worshippers is his special

* ° r +’ as identified with the Sun ; ‘ widely renowned,’ accord-

ing to Sayana. i'boh^the hymn appears to have been I * * 4 seen * or revealed in a
time of dearth or famihv* Ludwig,

MYMN 30.]

THE MOVED A.

423

5 Speed happily those, as Surya euds his journey, who meet his

wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses ;

Men who present, 0 Indra strong by nature, with food the many
songs that tell thy praises.

6 Thine are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, heaven for

thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom.

Here for thy choice are Somas mixed with butter : may the
sweet raeath be pleasant for thy drinking.

7 They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full of sweet

juice, for faithful is his bounty.

O’er earth’s expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, the
Friend of man, and by heroic exploits.

8 Indra hath conquered in his wars, the Mighty : men strive in

multitudes to win his friendship.

Ascend thy chariot as it were in battle, which thou shalfc
drive to us with gracious favoui\

HYMN- XXX. Waters.

As ’twere with swift exertion of the spirit, let the priest speed
to the celestial Waters,

The glorious food of Yaruna and Mitra. To him who spreadeth
far this laud I offer.

2 Adhvaryus, be ye ready with oblations, and come with long-

ing to the longing Waters,

Down on which looks the purple-tinted Eagle. Pour ye that
flowing wave this day, deftdiauded.

3 Go to the x'eservoir, 0 ye Adhvaryus : worship the Waters 1

Child with your oblations.

A consecrated wave he now will give you, so press for him the
Soma rich'* in sweetness.

5 Meet Ms wish : satisfy his, Indra’s, longing for Soma-libations.

6 Thine are two measures : Thy majesty or greatness is vast and lofty as
heaven, and thy wisdom is wide as earth ; or, ‘ with confusion of the measure
and the thing measured,’ thou hast measured out the heaven by thy greatness
and the earth by thy wisdom. Bee Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , p. 18.

The subject is the ceremony of fetching the sacred waters required for the
preparation of the Soma juice.

1 To Mm who spreadeth far : Indra, according to S&yana.

2 The purple-tinted Eagle : Soma, the Moon,

3 To the reservoir ; to fetch the holy Waters. The Waters' Child • usually
Agm, as the lightning that springs from the clouds or waters of the firma-
ment, but here the Deity who produces the rain, the Moon. See Hillebrandfc,
V. M., I. 374.

424 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X

4 He who shines bright in floods, unfed with fuel, whom sages

worship at their sacrifices :

Give waters rich in sweets, Child of the Waters, even those
which gave heroic might to Indra :

5 Those in which Soma joys and is delighted, as a young man

with fair and pleasant damsels.

Go thou unto those Waters, 0 Adhvaryu, and purify with herbs
what thou infusest.

6 So maidens bow before the youthful gallant who comes with

love to them who yearn to meet him.

In heart accordant and in wish one-minded are the Adhvaryus
and the heavenly Waters.

7 He who made room for you when fast imprisoned, who freed

you from the mighty imprecation, —

Even to that Indra send the meath-rich current, the wave that
gratifies the Gods, 0 Waters.

8 Send forth to him the meath-rich wave, 0 Eivers, which is

your offspring and a well of sweetness,

Oil-balmed, to be implored at sacrifices. Ye wealthy Waters,
hear mine invocation.

9 Send forth the rapture-giving wave, 0 Eivers, which Indra

drinks, which sets the Twain in motion;

The well that springeth from the clouds, desirous, that
wandereth triple-formed, distilling transport.

10 These winding Streams which with their double current, like

cattle-raiders, seek the lower pastures, —

Waters which dwell together, thrive together, Queens, Mothers
of the world, these, Eishi, honour.

11 Send forth our sacrifice with holy worship,, send forth the

hymn and prayer for gain of riches.

For need of sacrifice disclose the udder. Give gracious hear-
ing to our call, 0 Waters.

4 In floods : of the aerial ocean. Cp. II. 35. 4.

5 With kerbs : probably Darbha or Kusa grass.

6 The Waters bow to Soma as maidens to their lovers.

9 The Twain : uWU: probably, Heaven and Earth. S^yana explains dif-
ferently : — e which sends us both (kinds of fruit) *; that is, * the fruit, whether
reward or punishment, of the present life, and of a former life/ — "Wilson, and
Editor’s note. Desirous : eager to mix with the Soma, according to S&yana j
but the meaning of aitsinam is uncertain. Ludwig and Hillebrandt translate
it by'des Usanas,’ belonging to Usanas or UsanA Triple-formed: Soma
with two admixtures. — Grassmann.

10 Double current : meaning, probably, the two kinds of waters called
respectively Ekadhan& and Vasativari.

11 Disclose the udder : let your streams flow.

THE MOVED A.

425

HYMN 31.]

12 For, wealthy Waters, ye control all treasures : ye bring

auspicious intellect and Amrit.

Ye are the Queens of independent riches. Sarasvati give full
life to the singer !

13 When I behold the Waters coming hither, carrying with them

milk and meath and butter,

Bearing the well-pressed Soma juice to Indra, they harmonize
in spirit with Adhvaryus.

14 JEticb, they are come with wealth for living beings. 0 friends,

Adhvaryus, seat them in their places.

Seat them on holy grass, ye Soma-bringers, in harmony with
the Offspring of the Waters. <*

15 Now to this grass are come the longing Waters : the Pious

Ones are seated at our worship;

Adhvaryus, press the Soma juice for Indra : so will the service
of the Gods be easy.

HYMN XXXI. Visvedevas.

May benediction of the Gods approach us, holy, to aid us with
all rapid succours.

Therewith may we be happily befriended, and pass triumphant
over all our troubles.

2 A man should think on wealth and strive to win it by adora-

tion on the path of Order,

Counsel himself with his own mental insight, and grasp still
nobler vigour with his spirit.

3 The hymn is formed, poured are the allotted portions : as to

a ford friends come unto the Wondrous.

We have obtained the power of ease .and comfort, we have
become acquainted with Immortals,

4 Pleased be the Eternal Lord who loves the household with this

man whom God Savitar created.

May Bhaga Aryaman grace him with cattle ; may he appear
to him, and be, delightful.

5 Like the Dawns’ dwelling-place be this assembly, where in

their might men rich in food have gathered,

12 Sarasvati: as chief and wisest of the Water- Goddesses.

1 Benediction : or, the laudation; that is, Ludwig suggests, 1 May the power
of praising the Gods, and at the same time the Gods themselves come to us/

3 The Wondrous .* meaning, perhaps. Soma.

4 The Eternal Lord : Agni. According to Sdyana, Prajdpati. This man ;
the institutor of the sacrifice. Savitar has given him life and now let Agni
bless him. Bhaga Aryaman ; Aryaman as Bhaga who distributes wealth.

426 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

Striving to share the praises of this singer. To us com©
strengthening and effectual riches !

6 This Ball’s most gracious far-extended favour existed first of , ; 4

all in full abundance.

By his support they are maintained in common who in the
Asura’s mansion dwell together.

7 What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, from

which they fashioned forth the Earth and Heaven %

These Twain stand fast and wax not old for ever : these have
sung praise to many a day and morning.

8 Hot only here is this : more is beyond us. He is the Bull,

the Heaven's and Earth’s supporter.

With power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the Bay
Coursers bear him on as Surya.

9 He passes o’er the broad earth like a Stega : he penetrates the

world as Wind the mist-cloud.

He, balmed with oil, near Varnna and Mitra, like Agni in the
wood, hath shot forth splendour.

10 When suddenly calved the cow that erst was barren, she,

self-protected, ended all her troubles.

Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cast
up the Sami, that which men were seeking.

11 To Hrishad’s son they gave the name of Kanva, and he the

brown-hued courser won the treasure.

For him dark-coloured streamed the shining udder : none
made it swell for him. Thus Order willed it.

6 This Bull : Agui as the Sun. The Asura is Dyaus.

8 Not only here : the first half-line is obscure. * Hot such (is their power);
there is another greater than they.’ — Wilson. ( There is no other thing
besides like unto him.’ — Wallis. A filter : pavltram; cvhich purifies the rays
of light which stream through it.

9 A Stega : said to be a certain biting or stinging insect. According to
S&yana, ‘the aggregation of rays, the Sun. 1 Ludwig conjectures that ‘ plough-
share ’ may be the meaning.

10 This stanza is very obscure. f The cow which was barren is the Sami
tree, which brings forth the Asioattha , and from the wood of these two trees
are made the arant } the two pieces of wood which are rubbed together to
produce the sacred fire — the upper and harder piece is the Sami (the Acacia
Suma), and the lower and soft is the Asioattha (the Ficus religiosa).’ — Wilson.

1 The verses [7 — 10] deal with the formation of the three main components
of the universe, heaven, earth, and the sun. Of the first two the poet has
little to tell us. and passes on at once to the third. The sun is identified
with the bull, Agui of the sacrifice, and the earth with the lower rubbing-
stick anointed with^ ghee, which is licked up [ ‘ devours" instead of ‘cast
up’ ] as soon as fire is struck.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , pp 47, 48. \

11 This stanza appears to have no connexion with the hymn, and is inex-
plicable as it stands here. See I. 117. 8, where the son of Hrishad is men- 1

tionea as a favourite of the Asvins,

HYMN 32.] THE MG VET) A. 427

HYMN XXXII. I»dra.

Forth speed the Pair to bring the meditating God, benevolent
with boons sent in return for boons.

May Iudra graciously accept both gifts from as, when he hath
knowledge of the flowing Soma juice.

2 Thou wauderest far, 0 Indra, through the spheres of light and

realms of earth, the region, thou whom many praise !

Let those who often bring thee to their solemn rites conquer
the noisy babblers who present no gifts.

3 More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, when the

son duly careth for his parents’ line. ^

The wife attracts the husband : with a shout of joy the man’s
auspicious marriage is performed aright.

4 This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, where,

like milch-cows, the kine order the marriage train ;

Where the Herd’s Mother counts as first and best of all, and
round her are the seven-toned people of the choir.

5 The Pious One hath reached your place before the rest : One

only moves victorious with the Budras’ band.

To these your helpers pour out meath, Immortal Oods, with
whom your song of praise hath power to win their gifts.

6 He who maintains the Laws of Gods informed me that thou

wast lying hidden in the waters.

Indra, who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. By him
instructed am I come, 0 Agni.

7 The stranger asks the way of him who knows it: taught by

the skilful guide he travels onward.

1 The meditating God : Indra. My version of the first line follows the
explanation given by Ludwig in his Commentary. S&yaua’s interpretation
is different: — c Indra sends hi~ —.-r!: rvr." hr.rses to the service of the
(worshipper) expectant {of his -W . Both gifts: oblation and

praise.

Z Gareth for his parents' line : by marrying and becoming a father ; or as
S&yana explains, by having his birth proclaimed according to custom in
sacrifices instituted by him. «

4 Order the marriage train : the meaning of this half-line is uncertain.
According to S&yana, the herd is the company of sacrifioers and priests, its
mother is Sfcuti or Praise, the seven-toned , or sevenfold, are the metres, or the
seasons, or the Hotar priests. The Herd's Mother is more probably Prism, the
mother of the Maruts. The whole stanza is translated by Wilson : — 1 * * 4 5 Shine,
Indra, upon this elegant chamber of sacrifice, when our praises desire (thy
approach) as milch-kine (desire) their stalls ; since the praise of me the wor-
shipper precedes (the adoration) of the company, and this person accompanied
by the seven officiating priests is the offerer of praise.’

5 The Pious One : Agni, the special worshipper of Cods. One only : Indra.
fi He : perhaps Soma. Thou : Agni. Cp. I. 23. 20,

42 $

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

This is, in truth, the blessing of instruction : he finds the paffe^ 1 2 *
that leads directly forward.

8 Even now he breathed : these days hath he remembered. Cor^*

cealed, he sucked the bosom of his Mother.

Yet in his youth old age hath come upon him : he hath grown
gracious, good, and free from anger.

9 0 Kalasa, all these blessings will we bring them, 0 Kurusra-

vana, who give rich presents.

May he, 0 wealthy princes, and this Soma which I am bearing
in my heart, reward you.

< HYMN XXXIII. Various Deities.

The urgiugs of the people have impelled me, and by the near-
est way I bring you Pushan.

The Universal Gods have brought me safely. The cry was
heard, Behold, Duhsasu cometh !

2 The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like rival

wives.

Indigence, nakedness, exhaustion press me sore : my mind is
fluttering like a bird’s.

3 As rats eat weavers’ threads, cares are consuming me, thy

singer, Satakratu, me.

Have mercy on us once, 0 Indra, Bounteous Lord : be thou a
Father unto us.

4 I the priests’ Hisbi chose as prince most liberal Kurusravana,
The son of Trasadasyu’s son,

8 Even now he breathed : began to show signs of life. The connexion bet-
ween stanzas 1—4 and 5—8 is not apparent. Sucked th$ bosom of Us Mother :
enjoyed oblations, in the shape of Soma juice, etc., produced by the earth.

9 The meaning of Aate, literally 'pitcher' or * beaker/ here is uncertain.
(Indra), the possessor of the pitchers.’— Wilson. Ludwig suggests kaldsoh
as . *he right reading : — * We will perform these holy ceremonies in their
minutest details/ Kurusravana : according to S&yana, ' hearer of the praise
of priests ; but probably the name of a prince, as in the following hymn.

1 Huhsdsu: literally, ‘the malevolent/ Perhaps, as Ludwig suggests a
hostile prince whose victory over Kurusravana has caused the distress men-
tioned m the following stanza.

2 The first line is taken from I. 105. 8.

in tr ^ hlS firSt 6 from ** 1 05 * 5 - Weavers' threads : threads steeped

miwr^'- Ludwig 2 10 S4ya9a " ° nce: <after haviag 80 often S ivea us U P to
, 4 Priests' •' higher in rank than the other priests. Chose : i. e. • I

m. ter ia order t0 s ° out t0 battle with

i

HYMN 34.]

THE RIG VEDA.

429

5 Whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me straight on-

ward : I will laud
The giver of a thousand meeds,

6 The sire of Upamasravas, even him whose words were passing

sweet,

As a fair field is to its lord.

7 Mark, Upamasravas, his son, mark, grandson of Mitratithi :

I am thy father’s eulogist.

8 If I controlled Immortal Gods, yea, even were I Lord of men,
My liberal prince were living still.

9 N one lives, even had he hundred lives, beyond the statute of

the Gods :

So am I parted from my friend.

HYMN XXXIV. Bice, Etc.

Sprung from tall trees on windy heights, these rollers trans-
port me as they turn upon the table.

Bearer to me the die that never slumbers than the deep
draught of Mujavan’s own Soma.

2 She never vexed me nor was angry with me, but to my friends

and me was ever gracious.

For the die’s sake, whose single point is final, mine own devot-
ed wife I alienated.

3 My wife holds me aloof, her mother hates me ; the wretched

man finds none to give him comfort.

As of a costly horse grown old and feeble, I find not any profit
of the gamester.

4 Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath covet-

ed, that rapid* courser :

6 This and the three following stanzas are said to be consolatory verses
addressed by the Rishi Kavasha to Upamasravas on the death of his father
Mitr&tithi.

8 Were I Lord of men : as one of the Gods. My liberal prince : Mitr&tifcbi.

9 Beyond the statute of the Gods : beyond the time fixed for the duration
of his life.

This hymn has been placed by Grassmann in bis Appendix as a composite
production consisting of incoherent fragments. See Lanman, Sanskrit Reader ,
pp. 386, 389.

1 Sprung from tall trees : the nuts of the Vibbtdaka, or, later, Vibhitaka,
tree (Terminalia Bellerica) were used as dice in early times. Rollers :
swiftly rolling dice. MUjavdn: said to be a mountain on which the finest
Soma plants grew.

2 Whose single point is final: the speaker has apparently lost all by throw-
ing aces.

430 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X .

Of him apeak father, mother, brothers saying, We know him .
not : bind him and take him with yon.

5 When I resolve to play with these no longer, my friends

depart from me and leave me lonely.

When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have rattled, like
a fond girl I seek the place of meeting.

6 The gamester seeks the gambling-house, and wonders, his

body all afire, Shall I be lucky ?

Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his gains
against his adversary,

7 Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, deceiv-

ing andr tormenting, causing grievous woe.

They give frail gifts and then destroy the man who wins,
thickly anointed with the player’s fairest good.

8 Merrily sports their troop, the three-and-fifty, like Savitar

the Ood whose ways are faithful.

They bend not even to the mighty’s anger : the King himself
pays homage and reveres them.

9 Downward they roll, and then spring quickly xipward, and,

handless, force the man with hands to serve them.

Cast on the board, like lumps of magic charcoal, though cold
themselves they burn the heart to ashes.

10 The gambler’s wife is left forlorn and wretched : the mother

mourns the son who wanders homeless.

In constant fear, in debt, and seeking riches, he goes by
night unto the home of others.

1 1 Sad is the gambler when he sees a matron, another’s wife, and

his well-ordered dwelling.

He yokes the brown steeds in the early morning, and when
the fire is cold sinks down an outcast.

4 Bind him : he has staked his personal freedom, and lost ; and his people
renounce him.

7 Driving-hooks : used by mahouts or elephant-drivers. The last half-line of
the stanza is difficult : —‘they appear to the gambler covered with honey,' — Muir.

8 Three-and-fifty: or, 1-1 ■ five in number. It would appear

from S&yana’s Oommentai . ■’ V ■ was the usual number of dice em-

ployed ; and yet this seems hardly probable. Ludwig suggests ‘ three times
five ’ as the^ meaning here of tripaneMsdh, and Prof. Weber would read
tripanchamh instead of tripanohdsah (Ueber den Rdjasdya, p, 72). Like Savitar ;
< [disposing men’s destinies] like the* god S.’ — Muir.

10 Riches : wealth gained by robbery, according to Sdyana,

11 Yokes the brown steeds ; begins throwing the nut-dice.* When the fire is
cold : * by the time when the fire goes out he has sunk into a degraded
wretch.’ — Muir.

THE MOVED A.

HYMN 3 5,]

431

12 To the great captain of your mighty army, who hath become

the host’s imperial leader,

To him I show my ten extended fingers : I speak the truth.
No wealth am I withholding.

13 Play not with dice: no, cultivate thy corn-land. Enjoy the

gain, and deem that wealth sufficient.

There are thy .cattle, there thy wife, 0 gambler. So this good
Savitar himself hath told me.

14 Make me your friend : show us some little mercy. Assail us

not with your terufic fierceness.

Appeased be your malignity and anger, and let the brown
dice snare some other captive. *

HYMN XXXV. Visvedevas.

These fires associate with Indra are awake, blunging their
light when first the Dawn begins to shine.

May Heaven and Earth, great Pair, observe our holy work.
We claim for us this day the favour of the Gods.

2 Yea, for ourselves we claim the grace of Heaven and Earth,

of Saryan&vgUi, of the Hills and Mother Streams.

For innocence we pray to Surya and to Dawn. So may the
flowing Soma bring us bliss to-day.

3 May the great Twain, the Mothers, Heaven and Earth, this

day preserve us free from sin for peace and happiness.

May Morning sending forth her light drive sin afar. We pray
to kiudled Agni for felicity.

4 May this first Dawn bring us the host of gracious Gods :

rich, may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth.

The wrath of the malignant may we keep afar. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

5 Dawns, who come forward with the bright beams of the Sun,

and at your earliest flushing bring to us the light,

12 The great captain: the highest- numbered of all the dice. Ten fingers:
to show that I have nothing left.

14 This stanza is a farewell address to the Dice. Some other : our enemy. —
Sflyana.

The hymn or lay has been transliterated, translated in prose, and freely
reproduced in rhymed octosyllabic verse, by Dr. J. Muir, <9. S . Texts , V,
425 — 429. It has also been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder.

1 With Indra : as a God of the morning light.

2 Of Saryandvdn, of the Hills : according to S&yana, 1 of the mountains of
Sary&n&van/ a lake in the district of Kurukshetra. I follow Ludwig in
taking both parvatdn and saryan&vatah as genitives.

5 Your : according to the text 1 their/ the verb in the first line being in
the third person.

432 TEE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X.J

Shine ye on us to-day auspicious, for renown. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

6 Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, and let

our fires mount upward with a lofty blaze.

The Asvin Pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. We
pray to kindled Agni for felicity,

7 Send us to-day a portion choice and excellent, 0 Savitar, for

thou art he who dealeth wealth.

I cry to Dhishan4, Mother of opulence,. We pray to kindled
Agni for felicity.

8 Further me this declaring of Eternal Law, the Law of Gods,

as we mortals acknowledge it !

The Sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

9 This day we pray with innocence in strewing grass, adjusting

pressing-stones, and perfecting the hymn.

Thou in the A-dityas' keeping moves t restlessly. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

10 To our great holy grass I bid the Gods at morn to banquet,

and will seat them as the seven priests, —

Varuna, Indra, Mitra, Bhaga for our gain. We pray to kindl-
ed Agni for felicity.

11 Come hither, 0 Adityas, for onr perfect weal : accordant help

our sacrifice that we may thrive.

Pushan, Brihaspati, Bhaga, both Asvins, and enkindled Agni
we implore for happiness.

12 Adityas, Gods, vouchsafe that this our hom$ may be praise-

worthy, prosperous, our heroes' sure defence,

For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

13 This day may all the Maruts, all be near us with aid : may

all our fires be well enkindled.

May all Gods come to us with gracious favour. May spoil and
wealth be ours, and all possessions.

7 Dhishand : a Goddess who presides over prosperity : according to Hille-

braudt, the Earth. b

8 Further me : 1 May that glorification of the gods which men repeat in
connexion with the rite preserve me.’ — Wilson.

9 Movest restlessly: perform est thy duties, according to S&vana. Aeni ra-

pidly burning the fuel appears to be intended. * ‘ S

THE RIG VEDA .

433

HYMN 36.]

14 He whom ye aid, 0 Deities, in battle, whom ye protect and
rescue from affliction,

Who fears no danger at your milk-libation, — such may we be
to feast the Gods, ye Mighty.

HYMN XXXYI. _ Visvedeva#.

There are the Dawn and Night, the grand and beauteous
Pair, Earth, Heaven, and Yaruna, Mitra, and Aryaman.
Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, and the Floods, Adityas,
Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Sky.

2 May Dyaus and Prithivi, wise, true to Holy Law, keep us in

safety from distress and injury.

Let not malignant Nirriti rule over us. We crave to-day this
gracious favour of the Gods.

3 Mother of Mitra and of opulent Yaruna, may Aditi preserve

us safe from all distress.

May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe7
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

4 May ringing press-stones keep the Rakshasas afar,

and Nirriti, and each voracious bend.

May the Adityas and the Maruts shelter us. We
gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

5 Full flow libations ; on our grass let Indra sit; Erihaspati the

singer land with Sama hymns !

Wise be our hearts’ imaginings that we may live. We crave
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

6 Ye Asvins, make our sacrifice ascend to heaven, and animate

the rite that it may send us bliss,

Offered with holy oil, with forward-speeding rein. We crave
the gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

7 Hither I call the band of Maruts, swift to hear, great, purify-

ing, bringing bliss, to be our Frieuds.

May we increase our wealth to glorify our name. We crave
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

8 We bring the Stay of Life, who makes the waters dwell, swift-

hearing, Friend of Gods, who waits on sacrifice.

14 Who fears no danger * who feels assured that hip-worship of the Gods
will protect him.

1 The Waters : of the firmament.

2 Dyaus and Prithivi ; Heaven and^arfck. Nirriti: Death or Destruction.

8 Who makes the waters swell : jtfwm, pirum : ‘protector of the watei'S.’ —

S&yapa. ‘Drinker of the — Ludwig. Soma is meant. See IX, 76. 4.

28

YY e <

ill dream,
crave this

434 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK X;

May we control that Power, Soma whose rays are bright. We
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

9 Alive ourselves, with living sons, devoid of guilt, may we win
this with winners by fair means to win.

Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every side. We crave
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

10 Fear us, 0 ye who claim the worship of mankind, and give*"" 8 '

us, 0 ye Gods, the gift for which we pray,

Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with wealth. We
crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods.

11 We crave the gracious favour of the Gods to-day, great favour

of great r Gods, sublime and free from foes.

That we may gain rich treasure sprung from hero sons. We
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

12 In great enkindled Agni’s keeping, and, for bliss, free from all

sin before Mitra and Varuna,

May we share Savitar’s best animating help. We crave this
gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

13 All ye, the Gods whom Savitar the Father of truth, and Va-

runa and Mitra govern,

Give us prosperity with hero children, and opulence in kine
and various treasure.

14 Savitar, Savitar from east and westward, Savitar, Savitar

from north and southward,

Savitar ^nd us perfect health and comfort, Savitar let our
days of life be lengthened i

HYMN XXXVII. S&rya.

Do homage unto Varuna’s and Mitra’s Eye : offer this solemn
worship to the Mighty God,

Who seeth far away, the Ensign, born of (Sods. Sing praises
unto Surya, to the Son of Dyaus.

2 May this my truthful speech guard me on every side, wher-

ever heaven and earth and days are spread abroad.

All else that is in motion finds a place of rest: the waters
ever flow and ever mounts the Sun.

3 No godless man from time remotest draws thee down when

thou art driving forth with winged dappled Steeds.

One lustre waits hpon thee moving to the east, and, Surya, thou
arisest with a different light. *

1 Varuna s and Mitra' s Eye: Surya or the Sun. ‘The eye of Mitra
varuna and Agm. — I. 115.1.

3 Dappled Steeds : ‘with Etasag/ — Ludwig. One lustre: by night. Cf. I. ^
115. 5, and Aitareya'Brdhniana } III. 4. 44. ‘One ancient radiance folio w&

HYMN 37.] THE RIG VEDA. 435

4 0 Surya, with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom, and

with thy ray impellest every moving thing,

Keep far from us all feeble, worthless sacrifice, and drive away
disease and every evil dream.

5 Sent'forth thou guardest well the Universe’s law, and in thy

wonted way arisest free from wrath.

When Surya, we address our prayers to thee to-day, may the
Gods favour this our purpose and desire.

6 This invocation, these our words may Heaven and Earth, and

Indra and the Waters and the Maruts hear.

Ne’er may we suffer want in presence of the Sun, and, living
happy lives, may we attain old age. *

7 Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with store

of children, free from sickness and from sin, ..
Long-living, may we look, 0 Surya, upon thee uprising day by
day, thou great as Mitra is !

8 Sftrya, may we live long and look upon thee still, thee, 0 Far-

seeing One, bringing the glorious light,

The radiant God, the spring of joy to every eye, as thou art
mounting up o’er the high shining flood.

9 Thou by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth, and by

thy beams again returns unto its rest,

0 Surya with the golden hair, ascend for us day after day,
still bringing purer innocence.

10 Bless us with shine, bless us w- : ch perfect daylight, bless us

with cold, with fervent he*^ lustre.

Bestow on us, 0 Surya, varied riches, to bless us in our home
and when we travel.

1 1 Gods, to our livkig creatures of both kinds vouchsafe protection,

both to bipeds "and to quadrupeds,

That they may drink and eat invigorating food. So grant us
health aud strength and perfect innocence.

12 If by some grievous sin we have provoked the Gods, O Deities,

with the tongue or thoughtlessness of heart.

That guilt, 0 Yasus, lay upon the Evil One, on him who ever
leads us into deep distress.

(thee) whilst thou risest with another.’— -Wilson. See Wallis, Cosmology of
the R^gveda, p, 117.

5 In thy wonted way : svadhd dnu : { after the swadhd offerings.* — Wilson.

8 Flood : or floor of heaven.

12 The Evil One : drdvd : here probably a kind of Diabolus or Devil,—
Ludwig.

[BOOK X

436 T8E KYMNS OF

HYMN XXXYIIL Indra.

0 Indra, in this battle great and glorious, in this loud din of
war help us to victory,

■Where in the strife for kine among bold ring-decked men
arrows fly all around and heroes are subdued.

2 At home disclose to us opulence rich in food, streaming with

milk, 0 Indra, meet to be renowned.

Sakra, may we be thine, the friendly Conqueror's ; even as we
desire, 0 Vasu, so do thou.

3 The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be D&sa or

be A.rya, who would war with us, —

Easy to conquer he for thee, with us, these foes : with thee may
we subdue them in the clash of fight.

4 Him who must be invoked by many and by few, who standeth

nigh with comfort in the war of men,

Indra, famed Hero, winner in the deadly strife, let us bring
hitherward to-day to favour us.

5 For, Indra, I have heard thee called Self-cap turer, One, Steer !

- who never yields, who urges even the churl.

Beleas& s thyself from Kutsa and come hither. How shall one
like th§o.fdt still bound that he may not move 1 * * * ?

. HYMN XXXIX. Asvins.

As 5 1 were the name ot . father, easy to invoke, we all assembled
here invoke this Car bf yours,

Asvitis, your swiftly -rolling circumambient Car which he who
worships must invoke at evv^nd dawn,

2 Awake all pleasant strains and let x tbe hymns flow forth : raise
up abundant fulness : this is our dfe^ire.^

Asvins, bestow on us a glorious heritage, apd give our princes
treasure fair as Soma is. ' ■ *

1 King-decked : adorned with armlets, or quoits as weapons.

5 Self-capturer : it is difficult to assign a reasonable and appropriate mean*
ing to svavrijam . S&yana explains it by svayam eva chhettdrani , * one who cuts
himself ;’ 'self mutilator.’ — Wilson. According to the St. Petersburg Lexi-
con, the meaning is ‘ one who appropriates or takes to himself ; ’ according to
Ludwig * the self- rescuer,’ and according to Geldner f one who suffers himself
to be captured.’ The poet calls on Indra to tear himself away from his favour-
ite Kutsa in order to aid his worshippers in the coming fight. ‘A legend 'is
here somewhat obscurely related, that Kutsa and Lusa having summoned In-
dra at the same time to their respective sacrifices, he went first to Kutsa who

then detained him, having fastened him with a hundred leather thongs.

This verse is addressed to Indra by Lusa> exhorting him to free himself.’ —

Wilson.

The Rishi is Ghoshs, daughter of Kakshiv&n.

HYMN 39.] TBS RlGfMM. 437

3 Ye are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, and helpers

of the slow although he linger last.

Men call you too, N&satyas, healers of the blind, the thin and
feeble, and the man with broken bones.

4 Ye made Chyav&na, weak and worn with length of days,

young again, like a car, that he had power to move.

Ye lifted up the son of Tugra from the floods. At our liba-
tions must all these your acts be praised.

5 We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic]

yea, ye were Physicians bringing health.

You, you who must be lauded, will we bring for aid, so that
this foe of ours, 0 Asvins, may believe. *

6 Listen to me, 0 Asvins ; I have cried to you. Give me your

aid as sire and mother aid their son.

Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. Save me,
before it be too late, from this my curse.

7 Ye, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the comely

maid of Purumitra as a bride.

Ye came unto the calling of the weakling’s dame, and granted
noble offspring to the happy wife.

8 Ye gave again the vigour of his youthful life to the sage Kali

when old age was coming nigh.

Ye rescued Yandana and raised him from the pit, and in a
moment gave Yispala power to move.

9 Ye, Asvins Twain, endowed with manly strength, brought

forth Rebha when hidden in the cave and well-nigh dead,
Freed Saptavadhri, and for Atri caused the pit heated with
fire to be a ^pleasant resting-place.

10 On Pedu ye bestowed, Asvins, a courser whitefmighty with
nine-and-ninety varied gifts of streii^thf
A horse to be renowned, who bore JdAfriend at speed, joy-giv-
ing, Bhaga-like to be invoked^ men.

X .. ■- - —

3 Of her who groweth old at 7p*t& : referring to Ghosh& herself. See I. 17. 7,

Healers of the blind: see I., Il2. 9. *

4 Ohyavdna: seel. 1*6.' 10, and 117. 13. Son of Tugra: Bhujyu. See
Yol. I., Index.

6 My curse : leprosy, which prevented her marriage.

7 Vimada : see I. 117. 20. The weakling's dame : see I. 117. 24,

8 For Kali, Vandana, and Vispald in this stanza, and Rebha, Atri, and
Pedu in 9 and 10, see Yol. I v Index. For Saptavadhri (stanza 9) see Y, 78. 6.

438 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

11 From no side, ye Two Kings whom none may check or stay,

doth grief, distress, or danger come upon the man
Whom, Asvins swift to hear, borne on your glowing path, ye
with your Consort make the foremost in the race.

12 Come on that Chariot which the Bib h us wrought for you,

the Chariot, Asvins, that is speedier than thought,

At harnessing whereof Heaven’s Daughter springs to birth,
and from Vivasv&n come auspicious Night and Day.

13 Come, Conquerors of the sundered mountain, to our home,

Asvins who made the cow stream milk for Sayu’s sake,

, Ye who delivered even from the wolf’s deep throat and set
again at -liberty the swallowed quail.

14 We have prepared this laud for you, 0 Asvins, and, like the

Bhrigus, as a car have framed it,

Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brought
it as a son, our stay for ever.

HYMN XL. Asvins.

Your radiant Chariot — whither goes it on its way ? — who decks
it for you, Heroes, for its happy course,

Starting at daybreak, visiting each morning every house, borne
hitherward through prayer unto the sacrifice ?

2 Where are ye, Asvins, in the evening, where at morn ? Where

is your halting-place, where rest ye for the night ?

Who brings you homeward, as the widow bedward draws her
husband’s brother, as the bride attracts the groom 1

3 Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald’s voice, and, meet

for worship, go each morning to the house.

Whom do ye ever bring to ruin ? Unto whose libations come
ye, Heroes, like two Sons of Kings? r

11 Whom none may - check or stay : adite—adinau. — S&yana. Your Consort ;
Sftryd. The foremost in the race : that is, generally, preeminent.

32 Heaven’ s Laughter : UshaB nr Dawn. Vivasvdn: the morning Sun.

13 Conquerors of the sundered mountain: probably with reference to the
deliverance of Jahusha. — Ludwig. See I. 116. 20. The swallowed quail : see
I H2. 8. The quail is probably Dawn delivered from the jaws of the wolf
Night by the twin Light-Gods. .

14 Our stay for ever : who will perpetuate our family; 1 the eternal per-
former of rites.* — Wilson.

2 As the widow: in certain circumstances a widow was bound to marry her
deceased husband’s brother. See Harm (MdnavadharmasdstraJ, IX. 69. 70.
The law o i the Jews was the same. See Deuteronomy, xxv. 5.

3 As with a herald’s voice : Mjpayd is thus explained by S&yana. The house :
of the sacrificer.

HYMN 40.] THU KIGVBJDA.

439

4 Even as hunters follow two wild elephants, we with oblations

call you down at morn and eve.

To folk who pay you offerings at appointed times. Chiefs, Lords
of splendour, ye bring food to strengthen them.

5 To you, 0 Asvins, came the daughter of a King, Gbosha, and

said, 0 Heroes, this I beg of you :

Be near me in the day, be near me in the night : help me to
gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds.

6 0 Asvins, ye are wise : as Kutsa comes to men, bring your car

nigh the folk of him who sings your praise.

The bee, 0 Asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the
maid carries it purified in her hand. »

7 To Bhujyu and to Vasa ye came near with help, 0 Asvins, to

Sin Java and to Usana. ,

Your worshipper secures your friemdidxi^^ Through

your protection I desire felicity.

8 Krisa and Sayu ye protect, ye Asvins Twain : ye Two assist

the widow and the worshipper;

And ye throw open, Asvins, unto those who win the cattle-stall
that thunders with its sevenfold mouth.

9 The Woman hath brought forth, the Infant hath appeared,

the plants of wondrous beauty straightway have sprung up.
To him the rivers run as down a deep descent, and he this
day becomes their master and their lord.

10 They mourn the living, cry aloud, at sacrifice : the men have
set their thoughts upon .a distant cast.

A lovely thing for fathers who have gathered here, — a joy to
husbands, — are the wives their arms shall clasp.

5 The second half* of the second line is difficult : 4 be able (to grant favour)
to the son of my brother, who has horses and a chariot.’ — Wilson.

6 As Kutm comes to men: home on Indra’s chariot. Bears your honey :
sips honey when the Asvins have ushered in the day. As the maid : Dr.
Muir and Prof. 0-raasmann explain this half-line differently, 1 as a maid, or a
woman, resorts to her rendezvous (with her lover)/

7 Vasa: Bee I. 112. 10. Sinjdra : see VIII. 5. 25. Usand: see Vol. I., Index.

8 Krisa: a Bishi favoured by Indra ; or, as S&y ana explains the word here,
the feeble man in general. Sayu: has been mentioned frequently, a fie
cattle-stall : the rain-cloud whose waters are the cows.

9 The Woman: perhaps the water of the cloud. The Infant : the lightning.
To him : the sacrificer may perhaps be intended.

10 They mown the living : perhaps, show their sorrow for the widower at
the funeral of his wife. See Lanman (Sanskrit Reader, p. 387) fiom whom
I have borrowed. Set their thoughts upon a distant cast; of _tbe noose or
Bnaring-net : apparently a periphrasis for, have taken thought for the distant
future and children to live after them.

440 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

1 1 Of this we have no knowledge. Tell it forth to us, how the

youth rests within the chambers of the bride.

Fain would we reach the dwelling of the vigorous Steer who
loves the kine, 0 Asvins : this is our desire.

12 Your favouring grace hath come, ye Lords of ample wealth:

Asvins, our longings are stored up within your hearts.

Ye, Lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard : may
we as welcome friends reach Aryaman’s abode,

13 Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give hero sons

and riches to the eloquent.

Hake a fomh Lords of splendour, where men well may drink :
remove the spiteful tree-stump standing in the path.

14 0 Asvins, Wonder-Workers, Lords of lustre, where and with

what folh 0,u yo delight yourselves to-day?

Who hath detained therewith him ? Whither are they gone ?
Unto what sage’s or wbaUworShlpp

HYMN XLI. Asvins.

That general Car of yours, invoked by many a man, that
comes to our libations, three- wheeled, meet for lauds,

That circumambient Car, worthy of sacrifice, we call with our
pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn,

2 Ye, ONasatyas, mount that early-harnessed Car, that travels

early, laden with its freight of balm,

Wherewith ye, Heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even the poor
man’s worship where the priest attends. 1 *

3 If to the deft Adhvaryu with the meath in hand, or to the

Kindler firm in strength, the household friend,

Or to the sage’s poured libations ye approach, come thence 0
Asvins, now to drink the offered meath. J

apppar " to speak of herself ia the plural number, She plainly
expresses her wishes for marriage.

12 Aryaman’s abode : Aryaman is here used in the original sense r»f
^marriag^fo^Tnot^ier. 00 ^^ 8 '' 1 ^ 01 '’ eSpeoiall y the friend wht > a woman

Prof Grassmaun places stanzas 10—14 in his Appendix
and m his opinion forming no part of the original hymn.

as being obscure

1 Three-wheeled : see I. 34, 9.

3 The Kindly; the Agutdh, the priest who kindles the sacrificial fire.

HYMN it ] THE RIG VEDA . 441

HYMN XLII. Indra.

Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud to him
with meet adornment.

Quell with your voice the wicked's voice, O sages. Singer,
make Indra rest beside the Soma.

2 Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking : 0 Singer,

wake up Indra as a lover.

Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel
filled brimful with treasure,

3 Why, Maghavan, do they call thee Bounteous Giver? Quicken

me : thou, I hear, art he who quickens.

Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us luck that
finds great wealth, 0 Indra.

4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people,

Indra, in the fray invoke thee.

Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade : with him
who pours no juice he seeks not friendship.

5 Whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong Somas as

much quickly-coming treasure.

For him he overthrows in early morning his swift well-weapon-
ed foes, and slays the tyrant.

6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath

joined to ours his wishes, —

Before him even afar the foe must tremble : low before him
must bow all human glories.

7 With thy fierce bolt, 0 God invoked of many, drive to a

distance from afar the foeman.

0 Indra, give us wealth in com and cattle, and make thy
singer's prayer gain strength and riches.

8 Indra, the swallower of strong libations rich in the boons J

they bring, the potent Somas,

He, Maghavan, will not restrict his bounty : he brings much
wealth unto the Soma-presser.

9 Yea, by superior play be wins advantage, when he, a gambler,

piles his gains in season.

Celestial-natured, he o'erwhelms with riches the devotee who
keeps not back his treasure.

3 The wicked's voice: ‘the praises of your adversaries.’ — Wilson.

4 The Hero : Indra.

5 As much quickly-coming treasure : representing the wealth which the offer-
ing of the libations is expected to produce.

6 Unto whom we offer praises : or, in whom we have placed our hope.

9 When he, a gamble ; cp. X. 43. 5,

m THE HYMNS OF ' [BOOK X.

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want

with store of grain and cattle.

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions
by our own exertion.

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and

from below, from sinners !

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

HYMN XLiri. Indra.

In perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the
light of.lieaven have sung forth Indra’s praise.

As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they
compass Maghavan about that he may help.

2 Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have set my

hopes on thee, 0 Much-invoked I
Sit, Wonderful I as King upon the sacred grass, and let thy
drinking-place be by the Soma juice.

3 From indigence and hunger Indra turns away : Maghavan

hath dominion over precious wealth.

These the Seven Kivei's flowing on their downward path in-
crease the vital vigour of the potent Steer.

i As on the fair-leafed tree rest birds, to Indra flow the gladden-
ing Soma juices that the bowls contain.

Their face that glows with splendour through their mighty
power hath found the shine of heaven for man, the Aryas’
light

5 As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so Maghavan,

sweeping all together, gained the Sun.

This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none,
Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time.

6 Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men : the Steer

took notice of the people’s songs of praise.

The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by means of
potent Somas vanquisketh his foes.

10 With princes ; with men eminent for their wealth : rdjabhir-dhan&nd-
mtsvaraih. — S&yana.

3 Turns away : S&yana makes vishuvrU toansitive ; — * May Indra be the
remover of thirst and hunger.’ — Wilson.

5 Gained the Sum conquers him by taking away his moisture, that is, the
water that he has absorbed.— S&yaua,

JSYMN 44.]

tee may ed a.

443

7 When Soma streams together unto Indra flow like waters to

the river, rivulets to the lake,

In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the rain swells
the corn by moisture sent from heaven.

8 He rushes through the region like a furious Bull, he who hath

made these floods the dames of worthy lords.

This Maghavan hath found light for the mau who brings ob-
lation, sheds the juice, and promptly pours his gifts.

9 Let the keen axe come forth together with the light : here be,

as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice.

Let the Bed God shine bright with his refulgent ray, and let
the Lord of heroes glow like heaven’s clear sheen.

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with

store of grain and cattle.

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions
by our own exertion.

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and

from below, from sinners.

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom,

HYMN XL IV. Indra.

May Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by Holy Law
is strong and active,

The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great steer-
like power that hath no limit.

2 Firm-seated is thy car, thy Steeds are docile ; thy hand, O

King, holds, i%firmlj grasped, the thunder.

On thy fair path, 0 Lord of men, come quickly : we will in-
crease thy powers when thou hast drunken.

3 Let strong and mighty Steeds who hear this Mighty Indra, the

Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder,

Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the Steer of conquer-
ing might, of real vigour.

8 The dames of xuorthy lords : that is, subjected them to the Aryans,
whereas they had been the thralls of D&sas. See I. 32. IX.

9 The keen axe : Agni, who is frequently likened to an axe. See I. 127. 3,
and VT. 3. 4. The Red God: arushah: according to S&yana, * the radiant
Indra'; but Agni is probably intended, or perhaps ‘ the red bolt’ as M. Muller
prefers.

10 The two concluding stanzas are identical in Hymns 52, 53, 54.

Hi THE HYMNS OP [TOOK X.

4 So like a Ball thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trough,

the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat.

Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself : be for our
profit as the Master of the wise.

5 May precious treasures come to us, — so will I pray. Come to

the votary’s gift offered with beauteous laud.

Thou art the Lord, as such sit on this holy grass : thy vessels
are inviolate as Law commands.

6 Far went our earliest invocations of the Gods, and won us

glories that can never be surpassed.

They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice, sink down in
desolation, trembling with alarm.

7 So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses, difficult

to harness, have been yoked.

Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by whom full
many a work that brings reward is done.

8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook.

Dyaus thundered forth and made the air’s mid-region quake.
He stays apart the two confronting bowls ; he sings lauds in
the potent Soma’s joy when he hath drunk.

9 I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine, wherewith thou,

Maghavan, shalt break the strikers vuth the hoof.

At this libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake the
juice, partake the worship, Maghavan.

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want
with store of grain and cattle.

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions
by our own exertion.

3 1 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and
from below, from sinners. *

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as Friend to
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

4 The Lord: pdtim; the Soma. Collect them in thyself: ‘take us into
thyself.’ — Wilson. Of the wise: kenipftnam is thus explained by the Commen-
tators, but the meaning seems doubtful. Ludwig thinks that ‘ the master
of the oars / that is, the steersman, is intended.

6 In desolation : irrnft ~ eprjfiOL — Ludwig. Trembling in alarm : or, doers
of ill deeds, according to Y&ska’s interpretation of Mpayah,

7 Whose horses , difficult to harness , have been yoked: whose ill- managed
attempts to perform acceptable sacrifice have failed. In advance : before
death, according to S&yana.

8 He : Indra. As they shook: op. II. 12. 2. Two confronting bowls : heaven
and earth.

9 Goad : the hymn of praise which urges Indra to action. The strikers with
the hoof : a class of Y&tudh&nas or demons. See X. 87. 13,

HYMN 45.]

445

TEE RIGVEDA.

HYMN XLV. Agni.

Fikst Agni sprang to life from out of Heaven : the second
time from us came J&tavedas.

Thirdly the Manly-souled was in the waters. The pious lauds
aud kindles him the Eternal.

2 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know

thy forms in many a plhce divided.

We know what name supreme thou hast in secret : we know
the source from which thou hast proceeded.

3 The Manly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, man’s Viewer

lit thee iu the breast of heaven.

There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Steers
increased thee in the waters’ bosom.

4 Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders : he licked

the ground, about the plants he flickered.

At once, when born, he looked around enkindled, and lightened
heaven and earth within with splendour.

5 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts

and guardian of the Soma,

Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront
of the Dawns he shines enkindled.

6 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, be sprang to life

and filled the earth and heavens.

Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when the Five
Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni.

7 So among mortals was Immortal Agni stablished as holy

wise aud willing envoy.

He waves th^ red smoke that he lifts above him, striving to
reach the heavens with radiant lustre.

1 From out of Eemen : or, from Dyaus or Heaven his father; in the shape
of the Sun. From us ; produced by men in the shape of sacrificial and do-
mestic fire. In the waters : of the firmament, in the shape of lightning, the
third form of Agni,

2 In secret : unknown to those who know not the Veda. — S&yana.

3 The Manly-souled : or, the Friend of men; Vai’una, according to S&yana,
and Praj&pati, according to Mahidhara. Perhaps Dyaus (cp. stanza 8) may
be intended. — Ludwig. Gvassmann thinks that Indra, the kindler of the
lightning, is meant. The Steers : or, the Mighty Ones; the Maruts.

6 The Urm rock : ‘the solid cloud.’ — Wilson. Some extraordinary conflagra-
tion of jungle may perhaps be referred to. The Five Tribes : pdlhcha jdnkh :
literally, the five men, meaning, according to S&yana, men in general, and,
according to Mahidhara, the institutor of the sacrifice and the four chief
priests.

44$ TBS HYMNS OF f BOOK X

8 Like gold to look on, far he shone refulgent, beaming imper-

ishable life for glory,

Agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific Father
Dyaus begat him.

9 Whoso this day, 0 God whose flames are lovely, prepares a

cake, 0 Agni, mixt with butter,

Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss bestowed
by Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful.

10 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every song of

praise sung forth enrich him.

Dear let him be to Surya, dear to Agni, preeminent with son
and children’s children.

11 While, Agni, day by daymen pay thee worship they win

themselves all treasures worth the wishing.

Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclos-
ed the stable filled with cattle.

12 Agni, the Friend of men, the Soma’s keeper, Vaisv&nara,

hath been lauded by the Kishis.

We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven : ye Deities,
give ns w r eaith with hero children.

HYMN XLYI. Agni.

Stablished for thee, to lend thee vital forces, Giver of wealth,
Guard of his servant’s body.

The Great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, Abider with
men, is seated in the lap of waters.

2 Worshipping, seeking him with adoration like some lost crea-

ture followed by its footprints,

Wise Bhrigus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and
found him lurking where the floods are gathered.

3 On the Cow’s forehead, with laborious searching, Trita, the

offspring of Vibhuvas, found him.

Born in our houses, Youthful, joy-best ower, he now becomes
the central point of brightness.

12 Soma's keeper: as identified with the Moon, the great receptacle of the
celestial Soma, the nectar or ambrosia of the Gods. See Hillebrandt, V. M. } I.
330 — 336.

1 For thee: the Pis hi addresses himself. Who knows the clouds: from
which he (Agni) conies in the form of Lightning. Of waters : of the firma-
ment.

2 Wise Bhrigus ; frequently mentioned as specially connected with the
worship of Agni. Cl 1 1 4. 2. Pursued him : see I. 65. 1.

3 On the Cow’s forehead : ‘on the head of the cloud.* Trita: Agni in his
third form as lightning. The abstract personified form of the celestial Agni

HYMN 46.3 THE XI Q VEDA, 44T

4 Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe

Priest among mankind, oblation-bearer,

Leader of rites and Purifier, envoy of men, as sacrifice that
still advances.

5 The foolish brought the ne’er-bewildered forward, great, Victor,

Song-iu spire r, Fort-destroyer.

Leading the Youth gold-bearded, like a courser gleaming with
'wealth, they turned their hymn to profit.

6 Holding his station firmly in the houses, Trita sat down within

his home surrounded.

Thence, as Law bids, departs the Tribes’ Companion, having
collected men with no compulsion. *

7 His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses

move, whose smoke is shining,

White, waxing in their strength, for ever stirring, and sitting
in the wood ; like winds are Somas.

8 The tongue of Agni bears away the praise-song, and, through

his care for Earth, her operations.

Him, bright and radiant, living men have stablished as their
blithe Priest, the Chief of Sacrifieers.

9 That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, the

Waters, Tvashtar, and, with might, the Bbrigus,

Him Matarisvan and the Gods have fashioned holy for man
aud first to be entreated.

is here represented as endeavouring to find the lurking fire in the sky. —
Macdonell. Offspring of Viblitivus : or, connected with Vibhiivasu, the very-
wealthy, Soma.

4 As sacrifice that still advances : * als das sich vorwarts bewegende opfer.’
— Ludwig According to Sstyana, 'the object of sacrifice, him who goes forward
[from one fire receptacle to another].’

5 The foolish : humhn priests, weak and foolish in comparison with the wise
Agni. Gleaming with wealth: the meaning of dhanarcham is uncertain. The
St. Petersburg Lexicon offers dhanarjam t 1 striving to win the prize,’ as pro-
bably the right reading,

6 On stanzas 3 and 6 see Macdonell (J. R. A. S., July, 1893, pp. 450 — 452),
who translates the second half of 6 as follows : From hence the house-friend
of settlers collecting (them) goeB among men by distribution, not by (means
of) bonds ; i e, } carried from place, nob freshly produced by cord and drill.

7 That make the houses move : this seems to be what the words damfim
aritrd should mean, though how flames can be thus qualified is not clear.
4 The rescuers from the humiliated (spirits of ill).’ — Wilson. ‘ Protectors of
the houses.* — Mahidhara. Like winds are Somas : as winds fan flame, so
Soma* libations increase the might of Agni. According to S&yana, the flames
are 4 like the fast-flowing j uices of the Soma .* — Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s
explanation, but the meaning of the passage is doubtful.

8 Her operations : holy works performed by men.

9 Mdtarisvan : a divine or semi-divine being who brought Agni from
heaven. See I. 31. $, and 60. 1,

448 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X

10 Agni, whom Gods have made oblation-bearer, and much-desir-
ing men regard as holy,

Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then
shall glorious men in troops adore thee.

HYMN XLYII. Indra Vaikuntha.

Thy right hand have we grasped in ours, 0 Indra, longing
for treasure, Treasure-Lord of treasures !

Because we know thee, Hero, Lord of cattle : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

2 Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, sprung
from four seas, the prop and stay of treasures,

Fraught with great bounties, meet for praise and glory :
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.

Z Wealth, with good Brahmans, Indra! God-attended, high,
wide, and deep, and based on broad foundations,

Strong, with famed Rishis, conquering our foernen : vouch-
safe us mighty and resplendent riches.

4 Victorious, winning strength, with hero sages, confirmed in

power, most useful, wealth-attracting,

True, Indra ! crushing forts and slaying Dasyus : vouchsafe
us mighty and resplendent riches.

5 Wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses, strength hundred-

fold and thousandfold, 0 Indra,

With manly sages, happy troops, light-winning : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

6 To Saptagu the sage, the holy-minded, to him, Brihaspati, the

song approaches,

Angiras’ Son who must be met with homage : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches. „

7 My lauds, like envoys, craving loviug-kiudness, go forth to

Indra with their strong entreaty,

Moving his heart and uttered by my spirit: vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

Vaikuntha is said to mean son of VikuntM, an Asurl or female demon who
was allowed by Indra to become his second mother.

2 Wealth : Slyana gives another interpretation : — * (We know thee to be)
well armed/ etc. — WiV*. V;.- . > /*, ■. seas.* regarded as the store-
houses of jewels. * il- ■ *. *■.( i the four oceans/ — [applied to

Indra] Wilson.

6 Brihaspati : according to the Scholiast meaning Saptagu, * the lord of
much (praise).’ — Wilson. According to others, the God Brihaspati called
Saptagu as being drawn by seven oxen : * der fabrt mit sieben Kindern * —
Grassmann. Angiras ’ San : meaning apparently Brihaspati as especially loved
and honoured by Angiras and his descendants. See VI. 73, 1. i

THE RIGVEDA .

HYMN 48.]

449

8 Grant us the boon for which I pray, 0 Indra, a spacious home
unmatched among the people.

To this may Heaven and Earth accord approval ; vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

HYMN XLV III. Indra Yaikuntha.

I was the first possessor of all precious gear : the wealth of
every man I win and gather up.

On me as on a Father living creatures call : I deal enjoyment
to the man who offers gifts.

2 I, Indra, am Atharvan’s stay and firm support : I brought forth

kine to Trita from the Dragon’s grasp.

I stripped the Dasyus of their manly might, ’'and gave the
cattle-stalls to Mat****? van and Dadhyach.

3 pv,. *«o uatn Tvashtar forged the iron thunderbolt : in me the

Gods have centred intellectual power.

My sheen is like the Sun’s insufferably bright : men honour
me as Lord for past and future deeds.

4 I won myself these herds of cattle, steeds and kine, and gold

in ample store, with my destructive bolt.

I give full many a thousand to the worshipper, what time the
Somas and the lauds have made me glad.

5 Indra am I ; none ever wins my wealth from me : never at

any time am I a thrall to death.

Pressing the Soma, ask riches from me alone : ye, Pfirus, in
my friendship shall not suffer harm.

6 These, breathing loud in fury, two and two, who caused Indra

to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray,

The challengers, I struck with deadly weapon down: firm
stand what words the God speaks to his worshippers.

8 Unmatched : asamam : * not held in common.’ — WilBon.

In^ra Yaikuntha is the Riski of this hymn, which is a self -laudatory reply
to Saptagu in Hymn XLVII.

2 Atharvan is the name of the priest who first obtained fire and offered
Soma and prayers to the Gods. See I. 80. 16, and 83, 5. The Dragon is ap-
parently Ahi or Yritra. * I generated the waters above the cloud for the sake
of Trita.* — Wilson. Mdtarisvan and Dadhyach: or, according to Sdyana,
* M&tarisvan’s son Dadhyach.’

5 Ye, Films : ‘ O men.’ — Wilson.

6 These ; who these were is uncertain. Two and two : probably the war-
rior who fights on the chariot and the charioteer.— Ludwig. The literal trans-
lation of the last half -line of the stanza appears to be : — 4 the non- worshipper
speaking firm words to worshippers ; dnamasyuh, he who has no other to re-
verence, being Indra, whose promise of victory to his worshippers is never
broken.’ — Ludwig.

29

m TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK X

7 This One by stronger might I conquered singly; yea, also two :

shall three prevail against me?
like many sheaves upon the floor I thrash them. Plow can
my foes, the Indraless, revile me ?

8 Against the Gungus I made Atithigva strong, and kept him

mid the folk like Yritra- conquering strength,

When I won glory in the great • foe-slaying fight, in battle
where Karan ja fell, and Parnaya.

9 With food for mine enjoyment Sipya Kami came: he joined

me as a friend of old in search of kine.

As I bestowed^ on him an arrow for the fight I made him
worthy, -.of the sdtig^pdhymn of praise.

10 One of the two hath SoinaTseei^ the Plerdsman with

the hone <shows forth the other. ^

He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were sharpene^^
fettered in the demon’s ample region.

11 I, as a God, ne’er violate the statutes -of Gods, of Yasus, Ru-

' driyas, Adityas.

These Gods have formed me for auspicious vigour, unconquer-
ed ian<d invincible for ever.

HYMN XLIX. Indra Vaikuntha.

I have enriched the singer with surpassing wealth ; I have al-
lowed the holy hymn to strengthen me.

I, furtherer of him who offers sacrifice, have conquered in each
fight the men who worship not.

7 This One : or, this one thing, that is, * the primordial substance or unit
out of which the universe was developed.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the Iiitjveda,
p. 58.

8 Against the Gungus : or, to aid the Gungus, as Sayan a explains. Who
these people were is uncertain. Atithigva : Divodftsa, son of Atithigu, accord-
ing to Sclyana. See Yol. I., Index. Karanja ..and Parnaya: apparently
tree-demons : see I. 58. 8.

9 Sdpya : a family name of Indra ’s friend Kami, who in YI. 20. 6 is called
-Sayya’s son.

10 One of the two: the Moon. The Herdsman: Indra. With the hone :
of Dadhyacli. See I. 84. 13. The other : Yritra. He: Yritra. The Bull :
Indra. The demon's ample region : mid-air, which was then dominated by the
Drub or malignant spirit of drought. I follow Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation
of this obscure stanza which is evidently an interpolation motived by the
mention of Dadhyach in stanza 2. Por a somewhat different interpretation,
see Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 337.

11 Budriyas: the Maruts, sons of Rudra,

Indra Yaikuntha is the Rislii also.

HYMN 49.] THE RIG VEDA. 451

2 The People of the heavens, the waters, and the earth haye

stablished me among the Gods with Indra’s name. .

I took unto myself the two swift vigorous Bays that speed on
divers paths, and the fierce bolt for strength,

3 With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi’s sake ; I guarded

Kutsa well with these my saving helps. w

As Sushna’s slayer I brandished the dart of death ; I gave not
up the Aryan name to Dasyu foes.

4 Smadibha, Tugra, and the Yetasus I gave as prey to Kntsa,

father-like, to succour him.

I was a worthy King to rule the worshipper, when I gave Tuji
dear inviolable gifts.

5 I gave hp Mrigaya to Smtarvan as his prey because he ever

followed me and kept my laws.

For Ayn’s sake I caused Vesa to bend and bow, and into Sa-
vya’s hand delivered Padgribhi.

6 I, I crushed Navavftstva of the lofty car, the D&sa, as the

Yritra-slayer kills the fiends ;

When straightway on the region’s farthest edge I brought the
God who makes the lights to broaden and increase.

7 I travel round about borne onward in my might by the fleet-

footed dappled Horses of the Sun.

When man’s libation calls me to the robe of state I soon repel
the powerful Dasyu with my blows.

3 Atka : mentioned again in Hymn 99 of .this Book. Kmi; the father of
Indra’s friend IJsarai.

4 Smadibha * or, as an adjective joined with Tugra, f with all his followers/
See VI, 20, 5, where Vetasu and Tugra are mentioned as having been con-
quered W indra, and VI. 26. 4, where their names occur again together with
that of Tuji.

5 Mrigaya: a demon of the air. See IY. 16. 18, and^VIII. 3. 3,9. Srutarvan :
a prince whose liberality is lauded in VIII. 63. Ayu : sometimes spoken
of as a King favoured by Indra and at other times as conquered by him. See
Index. The name of Vesa does not occur again. Savya : the B,ishi of Hymns

51 57 of Book I. Padgribhi: some demon or savage enemy who is not

mentioned again.

.6 Navavdstm: see I. 36. 18, and YI. 20. 11. Of the lofty car: or Bri-
hadratha. as a name of Havav&stva. The lights : the stars, or perhaps light
in general. In the former case the God would be Dyaus or Varuna, and in
the latter case Silrya or the Sun.— Ludwig.

7 The robe of state : apparently the milk which is the royal mantle where-
with Soma is invested.

452 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK X

8 Stronger am I than Nahua^I who slew the seven : I glorified

•with might Yadn and Tur'vasfv^:

- ■■ I brought another low, with strengtFT bent his strength ; I
let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power.

9 Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth, I took the

Seven Rivers as mine own domain.

I, gifted with great wisdom, spread the floods abroad : by war
I found for man the way to high success.

10 I set within these cows the white milk which no God, not even

Tvashtar’s self, had there deposited, —

Much-longed-for,’ in the breasts, the udders of the kine, the
savoury sweets of meath, the milk and Soma juice.

11 Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, sped Gods

and men with mighty operation.

' The pious glorify all these thine exploits, Lord of Bay Cours-
ers, Strong, and Self-resplendent.

HYMN L. Indra Vaiknntha.

I laud your Mighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is
shared by all men, who created all ;

Indra, whose conquering strength is powerful in war, whose
fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth revere.

2 He with his friend is active, lauded, good to man, Indra who

must he glorified by one like me.

Hero, Lord of the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with
Vritra, or for waters, or for spoil.

3 Who are the men whom thou wilt further, Indra, who strive

to win thy bliss allied with riches ?

Who urged thee forward to exert thy powder divine, to valour,
in the war for waters on their fields 1

8 Stronger am I than Nahus : ndhusho ndhushtarah ; literally, mere Nahus
than Nahus ; I out-Nahus Nahus, a King who contended with Indra j ‘ I am
nearer than the neighbour/ according to Roth whom Grassmann follows.
* I am the especial bond of bonds.' — Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation.
I who slew the seven : the seven, perhaps, are the chief of the demons des-
troyed by Indra. Ludwig takes saptaM to mean f seven times’ : — ‘ I am
seven times stronger than Nahus.’ Another: whom, is uncertain. "Wane in
power: until they became worthy antagonists. *1 have demolished ninety
and-nine powerful (foes).’ — Wilson.

10 Milk and Soma juice : sweet ambrosial rain; the kine being the teeming
clouds.

11 In this stanza Indra as Rishi addresses himself as the deity of the hymn.

2 His friend : his constant companion, the thunderbolt.

3 Allied with riches: the happiness which Indra sends being given in
return for costly sacrificial offerings.

HYMN 51.] THE RIGVELA, 453

4 Tbou, Indra, through the holy prayer art mighty, worthy of

sacrifice at all libations.

In every fight thou Gastest heroes on the ground : thou art the
noblest song, 0 Lord of all the folk.

5 Help now, as Highest, those who toil at sacrifice : well do the

people know thy great protecting might.

Thou shalt be Everlasting, Giver of success : yea, on all these
libations thou bestowest strength.

6 All these libations thou makest effectual, of which thou art

thyself supporter, Son of Power.

Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, sacrifice, holy
text, prayer, and exalted speech. •

7 They who with flowing Soma pray to thee, O'Sage, to pour on

them thy gifts of opulence and wealth,

May they come forward, tiirough their spirit, on the path of
bliss, in the wild joy of Soma juice effused.

HYMN LI. Agni. Gods.

Large was that covering, and firm of texture, folded wherein
thou enteredst the waters.

One Deity alone, 0 Jatavedas Agni, saw all thy forms in sun-
dry places.

2 What God hath seen me 2 Who of all their number clearly be-

held my forms in many places 2
Where lie, then, all the sacred logs of Agni that lead him God-
ward, Yaruna and Mitra 2

3 In many places, Agni Jatavedas, we sought thee hidden in the

plants and waters.

Then Yama marked thee, God of wondrous splendour! effulgent
from thy tenfold secret dwelling.

4 Song : mdntrah : subject of thy worshippers* songs of praise.

6 Vessel : p&tram : ‘protection.' — Wilson.

The legend says that Agni, fearing to share the fate of his three elder
brothers who had perished in the service of the Gods, fled away and hid
himself in the waters. The Gods discovered him and persuaded him to
return to his sacred duties.

Stanzas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 are spoken by the Gods, and 2, 4, 6, 8 by Agni.

1 He must have been very well wrapped up, the Gods ironically say, or the
water would have extinguished him. — Ludwig. Forms : literally, 4 bodies/

2 Sacred logs : pieces of Sami and Asvattba wood, from which alone the
sacrificial fire is produced. Others explain sartildhah by e flames/

3 Thy tenfold secret dwelling : according to S&yana, ‘ the three worlds, —
heaven, mid-air, earth ; three divinities, Agni, V&yu, Aditya ; the waters,
the shrubs, the trees, and the bodies of living beings/ — Wilson. The mean-
ing appears to be, as Ludwig conjectures, that Yama knew that Agni would
appear again from the fire-sticks worked by the fingers of both hands.

454 TEE EYMNS OF [BOOK X

4 I fled id feat from sacrificial worship, Vanina* lest the Gods

should thus engage me.

Thus were rriy fork's laid down in m-any places. This, as my
goal, I Agni saw before me.

5 Come ; man is plods and would fain do worship ; he waits pre-

pared : in gloom thou, Agni, dwellest.

Make pathways leading God-ward clear and easy, and bear ob-
lations with a kindly spirit.

6 This goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he who drives a

car the way to travel.

So, Vanina, I fled afar through terror, as flies the wild-bull
from an archer’s bowstring.

*i yife give thee lifeoun wasting, J&tavedas, so that, employed,
thou never shalt be injured. __

So, nobly born ! shalt thou with kincQy-upi^t bear to the Gods
their share of men's oblations.

8 Grant me the first oblations and the latter, entire, my force-

ful share Of holy presents,

The soul of plants, the fatness of the waters, and let there be
long life, ye Gods, to Agni.

9 Thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, thy forceful

shares of holy presents.

Let all this sacrifice be thine* 0 Agni, and let the world’s four
regions bow before thee.

HYMN LII. Gods.

. Instruct me, all ye Gods, how I, elected your Priest, must
seat me here, and how address you.

Instruct me how to deal to each his portion, and by what path
to bring you man’s oblation.

2 I sit as Priest most skilled in sacrificing : the Maruts and all
Deities impel me.

Asvins* each day yours is the Adbvaryus’ duty ; Brahman and
wood are here : ? tis yours to offer.

8 The first oblations and the latter : or the Pray&jas and the Anuy&jaa, the
former being texts and oblations forming part of the introductory ceremony
at a Soma sacrifice, and the latter the secondary or final offerings. Forceful
share : the potent concentrated portion. The fatness : ghritdm : ght, clarified
butter,

1 Agni, having been elected Oblation-bearer, asks the Gods to instruct
him in hia duties.

HYMN 53.] THE RIG VEDA. 455

3 Who is this Priest ? Is he the Priest of Ystma ? On whom is

thrust this God-appointed honour?

He springs to life each month, each day that passes; so Gods
have made him their oblation-bearer.

4 The Gods have made me' bearer of oblations, who slipped away

and passed through many troubles.

Wise Agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether five-wayed,
threefold, or seven-threaded.

5 So will I win you strength and life for ever, 0 Gods, that I

may give you room and freedom.

To Indies arms would I consign the thunder; in all these
* battles shall he then be victor. *

6 The Deities, three thousand and three hundred and thirty-

nine, have served and honoured Agni,

Strewn sacred grass, anointed him with butter, and seated
him as Priest, the Gods 1 2 Invoker.

HYMN LIII. Agni Sauchika. Gods.

Hb hath arrived, he whom we sought with longing, who skil-
led in sacrifice well knows its courses.

Let him discharge his sacrificial duties : let him sit down as
Friend who was before us.

2 Best Priest, he hath been won by being seated, for he hath
looked on the well-ordered viands.

Come, let us worship Gods who must be worshipped, and
pouring oil, laud those who should be lauded.

3 The first line is spoken by some God who doubts Agni’s competence. Is
he the Priest of Tama ? : can he convey offerings to the Blest in the realms of
the God of the departed ? In the second half of the first line I follow Lud-
wig, but the meaning is uncertain. The second line is the answer of another
God. Each month , each day : the Pitriyajfia, or sacrifice to the Fathers, is
offered monthly, and the Agnihotva , or oblation to Agni and the Gods, daily.
These comprehend all other periodical rites.

4 The first line is spoken by Agni. Slipped away : see the preceding hymn.
The second line is what the Gods said. Five- waged ; consisting of five courses
or parts, see X. 124. 1. Threefold: consisting of the three daily Soma-libations,
see X. 124. 1 . Seven-threaded: performed by seven priests. See X. 124. 1 .

Stanza 5 is spoken by Agni. Stanza 6 is the poet’s conclusion.

For an explanation of the number of the Gods (33 + 303 + 3003) see The
Hymns of the Atharva-veda , X. 7. 1 3, note.

On Hymns 51 — 53 see Macdonell, J. B. A. S., January, 1894, pp. 11 — 22.

1 The Gods speak. Courses : or portions.

2 By being seated : 1 by his seat (at the altar),’ — Wilson.

456 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK X .

3 Now hath he made the feast of Gods effective : now have we

found the secret tongue of worship.

Now hath he come, sweet, robed in vital vigour, and made our
calling on the Gods effective.

4 This prelude of my speech I now will utter, whereby we Gods

may quell our Asura foemen.

Eaters of strengthening food who merit worship, 0 ye Five
Tribes, be pleased with mine oblation.

5 May the Five Tribes be pleased with mine oblation, and the

Cow’s Sons and all who merit worship.

From earthly trouble may the earth protect us, and air’s mid
realm frpm woe that comes from heaven.

6 Spinning the thread, follow the region’s splendid light : guard

thou the pathways well which wisdom hath prepared.
Weave ye the knotless labour of the bards who sing : be Manu
thou, and bring the Heavenly People forth.

7 Lovers ef Soma, bind the chariot traces fast : set ye the reins

in order and embellish them.

Bring hitherward the car with seats where eight may sit,
whereon the Gods have brought the treasure that we love.

8 Here flows Asmanvat! : hold fast each other, keep yourselves

up, and pass, my friends, the river.

There let us leave the Powers that brought no profit, and
cross the flood to Powers that are auspicious.

9 Tvashtar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic art, bring-

ing most blessed bowls that hold the drink of Gods.

His axe, wrought of good metal, he is sharpening now, where-
with the radiant Brahmanaspati will out.

3 Tongue of worship : Agni, by whose fiery tongues the Gods drink libations.

4 Agni speaks. Asura foemen: the Asuras in the later hymns of the Veda
are evil spirits in perpetual hostility with the Gods, not to be confounded with
the great celestial Asuras, the chiefs of the Gods, nor with the R&kshasas, de-
mons or ogres, who disturb the sacrifices of men.

5 The Five Tribes: according to some, says Y&ska, ‘ the Gandharvas, gods,
Fathers, Asuras, and K&kshasas.’ See Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 177. But the five
Aryan tribes may be intended. The Cow’s Sons: the Maruts, children of
Prisni. Yon Roth explains gdjdtdh as ‘born in the starry heaven/ See YXI.
35. 14.

6 The Gods apeak. The region’s splendid light : the Sun. Weave ye : flames
of Agni. Assist the singer in his holy task and let there he no difficulties
in his way.

7 This stanza appears to begin a new hymn, made up of fragments. Accord-
ing to S&yana it is spoken by the Gods to one another.

8 A smanvati : or, the stony stream. See The Hymns of the Atharva-veda,
XII. 2. 26.

9 Will cut : perhaps, will cut and destroy demons ; but the meaning is
uncertain.

HYMN 54.] THE RIGVEDA. 45?

10 Now, 0 ye Sapient Ones, make ye the axes sharp wherewith

ye fashion bowls to hold the Amrita.

Knowing the secret places make ye ready that whereby the
Gods have gotten immortality.

11 Ye with a secret tongue and dark intention laid the maiden

deep within, the calf within the mouth.

They evermore are near us with their gracious help : successful
is the song that strives for victory.

HYMN LIY. Indra.

I sing thy fame that, Maghavan, through thy greatness the
heaveus and earth invoked thee in their terror,

Thou, aiding Gods, didst quell the power of Dasas, what time
thou holpest many a race, 0 Indra,

2 When thou wast roaming, waxen strong in body, telling thy

might, Indra, among the people,

All that men called thy battles was illusion : no foe hast thou
to-day, nor erst hast found one.

3 Who are the Bishis, then, who comprehended before our time

the bounds of all thy greatness 1
For from thy body thou hast generated at the same time the
Mother and the Father.

4 Thou, Mighty Steer, hast four supremest natures, Asura

natures that may ne’er be injured.

All these, 0 Maghavan, thou surely knowest, wherewith thou
hast performed thy great achievements.

5 Thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession, treasures made

manifest and treasures hidden.

10 0 ye Sapient Ones : ye Ribhus. That ; perhaps Amrita or celestial Soma
juice. Cf. I. 20. 6; 110. 3.

11 The first line is obscure. '(The Maruts) placed a female in the envelop-
ing hide (of a dead cow), and a calf in the mouth (of a dead cow)/ — Wilson.
According to this interpretation the miracle ascribed to them would somewhat
resemble that mentioned in X. 1 10. 8. See Bergaigne, La Religion Vidique,
II. 27. The first half of the second line is hard to construe. Wilson para-
phrases the line : — 'daily the generous (fraternity of the Ribhus) offers suita-
ble praises (to the gods), granting victory over our foes.’ Prof, Geldner takes
kdra , against the Pada text, as a locative, and renders the last half-line to
the following effect : — 3 4 'May he (the sacrificer), when he wishes to win, gain
the victory in the race.*

3 The question is rhetorical. The great Rishis of the olden time could not
comprehend thy greatness, much less can we comprehend it.

The Mother and the Father : Earth and Heaven, parents of all. See M,
Muller, India , What can it Teach us ?, p. 161*

4 A sura : divine, with a vague sense of supreme grandeur.

m TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

Defer not thou, 0 Maghavan, my longing : thou art Director,
Indra, thou art Giver.

6 To him who set the light in things of splendour, and with all
sweetness blent essential sweetness,

To Indra hath this welcome hymn that strengthens been
uttered by the votary Brihaduktha.

HYMN LV. Indra.

Far is that secret name by which, in terror, the worlds invoked
thee and thou gavest vigour.

The earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and, Ma-
ghavan, ^nadest bright thy Brother's Children.

2 Great is that secret name and far-extending, whereby thou

madest all that is and shall' be.

The Five Tribes whom he loveth well have entered the light
he loveth that was made aforetime.

3 He filled the heavens and earth and all between them, Gods

five times sevenfold in their proper seasons.

With four-and-thirty lights he looks around him, lights of one
colour though their ways are divers.

At As first among the lights, 0 Dawn, thou shonest, whereby thou
broughtest forth the Stay of Increase,

Great art thou, matchless is thine Asura nature, who, high
above, art kin to those beneath thee.

5 The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who
runs his circling course with many round him.

6 Who set the light : the first essential light.

1 Far is that secret name : thou art not present with us now. In terror •
terrified by Vritra. Thy Brother's Children: according to S&yana, Indra’s
brother is Par j any a, the God of the rain-cloud, and his children are the gath-
ered waters. Varuna and his stars- - 1_t 1 .- ' -uded. — Ludwig.

3 Gods Jive times sevenfold : ‘It ■ ■ ■ . ■ that the original Gods

were the constellations, 5 — Ludwig. According to Sftyana, the five orders of
beings and the classes of seven ; that is, Gods, men, Fathers and Mkshasae,
and the seven troops of Maruts, the seven rays of the Sun, the seven senses,
etc. The four-and-thirty lights : are probably the sun, moon, and five planets,
and the twenty-seven lunar asterisms or mansions of the moon, According
to S&yana, the four-and-thirty are eight Vasus, eleven Itudras, twelve Adifcyas,
Praj&patr, Yashatkftra, and Vir&j.

4 The Stay of increase: that which is the e r 1 jr 1 1 • '* T sub-
sistence; according to Sityana, the Sun. A: ' ■ : art

allied and connected with men as provider of their food. The second line is
difficult, a~d 11 . "lterpreted by others.

5 S&yar - ■ '■ - ' ■ -tanza differently, making Indra, identified with.

Time, the ■ . ■ . I . Ludwig’s interpretation (Commentary, II. p. 203)

which seems to be nearer to the sense of the words, and is simpler and more
rational. With many round him : stars of the asterisms through which he passes.

HYMN 56.] THE R10VEDA. 45S

Behold the Gods’ high wisdom in its greatness : he who died
yesterday to-day is living.

6 Strong is the Red Bird in his strength, great Hero, who from

of old hath had no nest to dwell in.

That which he knows is truth and never idle : he wins and
gives the wealth desired of many.

7 Through these the Thunderer gained strong manly vigour,

through whom he waxed in power to smite down Vritra, —

Who through the might of Indra’s operation came forth as
Gods in course of Law and Order.

8 All-strong, performing works with his companion All-marking,

rapid Victor, Curse-averter,

The Hero, waxing, after draughts of Soma, blew far from heav-
en the Dasyus with his weapon.

HYMN LVI. Visvedevas,

Herb is one light for thee, another yonder : enter the third and
be therewith united.

Uniting with a body be thou welcome, dear to the Gods in their
sublimest birth-place.

2 Bearing thy body, Vftjin, may thy body afford us blessing and

thyself protection. .

Unswerving, stablish as it were in heaven thine own light as
the mighty Gods’ supporter.

3 Strong Steed art thou : go to the yearning Maidens with vigour,

happily go to heaven and praises :

6 The Red Bird ; the Sun, with whom Indra is identified,

7 Through these ; probably the stars are intended. * (Accompanied) by
these Maruts/ — Wilson.

8 His companion : the thunderbolt.

* The mystical union of the Fathers with the rays of light is the funda-
mental id «. a underlying the abstruse allusions’ of this funeral hymn. ‘The
poet bids the deceased man unite himself with the beams of the heavenly
light ; he takes occasion to celebrate the power and greatness of the Fathers,
to whom the spirit of the departed is journeying ; and ends with a statement
of the success of the journey for which he has prayed.’ See Wallis, Cos-
mology of the Rigveda , pp. 72, 73.

1 One light : the earthly fire of the funeral pile. Another : in the firma-
ment, The third : the light in the highest region above the firmament. A
tody : a new body after cremation. Their sublimest birth-place : the Sun.

2 Vdjm: apparently the name of the deceased, the son of Brihaduktha
the Bishi of the hymn. The word means originally ‘ strong, strong steed’
as in stanza 3.

3 The yearning Maidens ; perhaps the Dawns ; but the meaning of swentih
fs uncertain. To heaven and praises ; 1 to the (land of) praise, and to the
sky.’ — Wallis.

460

the hymns of [book x t

Ply happily to the Gods with easy passage, according to the
first and faithful statutes.

4 Part of their grandeur have the Fathers also gained : the

Gods have seated mental power in them as Gods.

They have embraced within themselves all energies, which,
issuing forth, again into their bodies pass.

5 They strode through all the region with victorious might, es*

tablishing the old immeasurable laws.

They compassed in their bodies all existing things, and stream-
ed forth offspring in many successive forms.

6 In two ways have the sons established in his place the Asura

who finds the light ; by the third act,

As fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, their off-
spring, as a thread continuously spun out.

7 As in a ship through billows, so through regions of air, with

blessings, through all toils and troubles
Hath Brihaduktha brought his seed with glory, and placed it
here and in the realms beyond us.

HYMN LVII. . Visvedevas,

Let us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser’s sacrifice :
Let no malignity dwell with us.

2 May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun out to
reach the Gods,

That perfecteth the sacrifice.

4 Of their grandeur : of the greatness of the Gods.

5 Establishing the old immeasurable laws : or, in accordance with the more
generally received interpretation of dhftmdni here, ‘ measuring ancient
stations never measured out.*

wm F ’ in heaven and on earth. The sons : explained by Sftyana
as the Angirases, sons of Aditya. The Fathers in general appear to be in-
tended. _ The Asura : Agni. The third act * or third sacred duty, that of
continuing their family ; religious study and sacrifice being the first and
second. — S&yana.

7 Placed it here and in the realm beyond us : established his offspring in
heavenly regions as well as here upon earth.

Mr Wallis, from, whose translation I have borrowed, remarks : — t The in-
terpretation of one or two expressions is uncertain j the general sense is
clear, i he rays of light are here the bodies of the fathers, -which emanate
Irom the sun, assume the forms of all things on the earth and of the later
sacrincers, the descendants of the fathers, and again return to their birth-
place m the sky from which they had extended themselves.’— of

For Prof. Max Muller's translation of Hymns 57—60, with the legend found-
U., a im, 4™5 Ple eluoidatiTe matter > see Journal R. A. S„ Vol. IX. Part

HYMN 58.]

THE H1GVEDA.

461

3 We call the spirit hither with the Soma of our parted sires,
Yea, with the Fathers’ holy hymns.

4 Thy spirit come to thee again for wisdom, energy, and life,
That thou mayst long behold the sun !

5 0 Fathers, may, the Heavenly Folk give us our spirit once again,
That we may he with those who live.

6 0 Soma, with the spirit still within us, blest with progeny,

May we be busied in thy law.

HYMN LYIII. Manas or Spirit.

Tiiy spirit, that went far away to Yama, to Vivas van’s Son,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

2 Thy spirit, that went far away, that passed away to earth and

heaven,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

3 Thy spirit, that went far away, away to the four-cornered earth,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

4 Thy spirit, that went far away to the four quarters of the world,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

5 Thy spirit, that went far away, away unto the billowy sea,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live atiA so-
journ here.

6 Thy spirit, that went far away to beams of light that flash and

flow,

We cause to pome to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

7 Thy spirit, that went far away, went to the waters and the

plants,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

8 Thy spirit, that went far away, that visited the Sun and Dawn,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

3 The spirit : of the deceased whose obsequies are performed. Of our sires :
ndrdsahs4na : explained as meaning, suited to man; that is to deified men,
the Fathers or Spirits of the Blest.

The hymn is an address to recall the fleeting spirit of a man at the point of
death.

7 Waters .plants; ct X. 16. 3.

402 TEE EYMNS OF [BOOK X.

9 Tby spirit, that went far away, away to lofty mountain heights,
We cause to come to thee agaiu that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

10 Thy spirit, that went far away into this All that lives and

moves,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

1 1 Thy spirit, that went far away to distant realms beyond our ken,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

12 Thy spirit, that went far away to all that is and is to be,

We cause .Co come to thee again that thou mayst live and
sojourn here.

LIX. Nirriti and Others.

His life hath been renewed and carried forward as two men,
car-borne, by the skilful driver.

One falls, then seeks the goal with quickened vigour. Let
JSTirriti depart to distant places.

2 Here is the psalm for wealth, and food, in plenty : let us do

many deeds to bring us glory.

All these our doings shall delight the singer. Let Nirriti
depart to distant places.

3 May we o'er come our foes with acts of valour, as heaven is

over earth, hills over lowlands.

All these our deeds the singer hath considered. Let Nirriti
depart to distant places.

4 Give us not up as prey to death, 0 Soma : still let us look

upon the Sun arising.

Let our old age with passing days be kfndly. Let Nirriti
depart to distant places.

5 0 Asumti, keep the soul within us, and make the days we

have to live yet longer.

Grant that we still may look upon the sunlight : strengthen
thy body with the oil we bring thee.

1 Eis life : the life of Subandhu one of the Bishis of the hymn. Accord-
ing to S&yaiia the first line is a prayer : — 1 1 May the life of Subandhu be
augmented so as to be more lasting and newer/ — Wilson. Subandhu is not
mentioned in the text. Two men : the warrior and the charioteer. One falls :
S&yana explains differently ; — ‘ he who falls (from life) increases (his) desire
to live.* — Wilson. Nirriti : the Goddess of death and destruction.

5 AsimUi: apparently the personification of a deity presiding over funerals.
It may be a name for Yama, or it may mean c guide to life,’ or f way to life,*
See Muir, 0 8, Texts , V, 297, and Bergaigne, La Religion VMhjiie, I, 96. ^

HYMN 60.] THE R1GVEDA. MZ

6 Give us our sight again, 0 Asuniti, give us again our breath
and our enjoyment.

Long may we look upon the Sun uprising : 0 Anumati,
favour thou and bless us.

^ 7 May Earth restore to us our vital spirit, may Heaven the
Goddess and mid-air restore it.

May Soma give us once again our body, and Pushan show
the Path of peace and comfort.

8 May both Worlds bless Subandhu, young Mothers of ever-

lasting Law.

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.

9 Health-giving medicines descend sent down from heavon in

, twos and threes, ,

Or wandering singly on the earth. May Heaven and . Earth
uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away : nor sin nor
sorrow trouble thee. ,

- — LQ Drive forward thou the wagon-ox, 0 Indra, which Drought
wagon hither.

May Heav'en^jidJEar-th uproot and sweep iniquity and shame
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.

HYMN LX. Asam&ti and Others.

Bringing our homage we have come to one magnificent in
look.

Glorified of the mighty Gods ;

2 To Asamati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, a radiant car,
The conqueror of Bhajeratha ;

6 Anumati : a personification, of the favour with which the Gods regard
the sacrifices and. prayers of the pious. * Gracious (goddess).’ — Wilson,

8 Iniquity and shame : rdpas , according to Williams’s Dictionary meatis,
defect, fault, sin ; hurt, injury. In his Commentary on I. 69. 4, S&yapa
paraphrases rdpdnsi, the plural of the word, by bddhakdni rdlcshasdcUni, dis-
turbing Rftksbasas, ate.

9 In twos and threes : according to Sdyana, iu the persons of the two
Asvins and of the three Goddesses I1&, Sarasvatt, and Bli&ratl

10 E&tnardni must mean the wife of TJsinara, chief of the. Usinaras who
are mentioned in later times as living in Madhyadesa or the Midland country.
The meaning of the line is not obvious.

Stanzas 8, 9, 10, which Prof, Grassmann places in his Appendix, are of a
different character from that of the preceding part of the hymn, and seem
to be a separate song or fragment of a song,

2 Asamdti : according to S&yana, the name of a King. But the word is
more probably an adjective, as in star ' I dtham f car, and signi-
fying unequalled. Bhajeratha; it is !:.■■■ : s this is the name of a

prince or of a country.

464 THE HYMN’S OF {BOOK X

3 Who, when the spear hath armed his hand, or even weaponless

overthrows

Men strong as buffaloes in fight ;

4 Him in whose service flourishes Ikshv&ku, rich and dazzling-

bright

As the Five Tribes that are in heaven.

5 Iudra, support the princely power of Eathaproshthas matched

by none,

Even as the Sun for all to see.

6 Thou for Agastya’s sister’s sons yokest thy pair of ruddy

steeds.

Thou trocfiest niggards under foot, all those, 0 King, who
brought no gifts.

7 This is the mother, this the sire, this one hath come to be

thy life.

What brings thee forth is even this. How come, Subandhu,
get thee forth.

8 As with the leather thong they bind the chariot yoke to hold

it fast,

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not for
death, held it for thy security.

9 Even as this earth, the mighty earth, holds fast the monarchs

of the wood,

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not for death,
held it for thy security.

3 Who : Asam&ti, according to S&yaua.

4 Ikshvdfoi : a prince or a people ; the name does not occur again in the

Rigveda. The Five Tribes : the deities regarded as f ■■ r .T r vt - - i-

ing to the five tribes on earth, in the same man 1 :

land of the Aryans have their counterparts in heaven. Bee Muir, 0 > S. Texts,
I. p. 177. S&yana explains differently : — ‘(so that) the five orders of men
(are as happy) as if they were in heaven.’ — Wilson.

5 j Eathaproshthas : the family of the prince, Asam&ti or another’, whose praises
the poet celebrates.

6 Agastya's sister's sons: Bandhu and, his brothers, the Rishis of the hymn.
Stanzas 1 — 6 have no apparent connexion with the six stanzas that follow.

7 This: Agni, according to S&yana. The speaker probably means him-
self. — Ludwig. Subandhu seems to have been in a trance and apparently
dead. * It is supposed that the brothers of Subandhu have a:l\r<v»>ed their
supplications to Agni, to restore him to life, and that he has come accord-
ingly, being, as it were, his parent and begetter. Another interpretation
explains the terms literally as, Subandhu, your father, mother, and son,
have come to mourn your decease.’ — Wilson.

8 So have I held: ‘so has Agni placed,’ according to S&yana,

HYMN 61.]

THE RIGVEDA .

465

10 Subaudhu’s spirit I have brought from Yama, from Vivas-

v&n’s Son,

Brought it for life and not for death, yea, brought it for
security.

11 The wind blows downward from on high, downward the Sun-

God sends his heat,

Downward the milch-cow pours her milk : so downward go thy
pain and grief.

12 Felicitous is this mine hand, yet more felicitous is this.

This hand contains all healing balms, and this makes whole
with gentle touch.

HYMN LXI. " Yisvedevas.

The welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with
might this prayer to win the Asvins,

When the most liberal God, for Paktha, rescued his parents,
and assailed the seven Ho tars.

2 Chyav&na, purposing deceptive presents, with all ingredients,
made the altar ready.

Most sweet-voiced Tftrvayana poured oblations like floods of
widely fertilizing water.

11 Thy pain and grief; ‘ fcliy sin.’ — Sayana.

12 More felicitous is this ; my other hand, probably the right. With gentle
touch : with light friction, laying-on of hands, or hypnotizing passes.

This Hymn, as Ludwig observes, belongs to the most difficult, one might
almost say most hopeless, portions of the Rigveda. It is made up of several
parts which are in no intelligible connexion with one another.

1 According to the view taken by Pischel who has most carefully studied
and elaborately discuSsed the first three stanzas ( Vedische Studien , I. pp. 7 1 —
77), they contain in brief the ancient story of Turvayftna, the young King
of the Fakthas, and OhyavSna. Chyav£na, a favourite of the Asvins who
had restored him to youth (I. 116. 10, and 117. 13), intended to sacrifice to
them, hoping with their aid to conquer Tftrvay&na and his parents. But
Indra stays the sacrifice, drives the priests away, and enables Turvay&na who
had poured rich libations to him to gain the victory over his opponent.

The welcome speaker : Tiirvay&ua, whose words were welcome to the Gods.
To win the A wins : raUdram: not * addressed to Rudra,’ but to the Asvins
who are called ratidrait in stanza 1 5, and, elsewhere, rudrtt and rudrdva-rtant.
The most liberal God: Indra. Paktha: King of the Pakthas (see VII. 18. 7),
that is, apparently, Tfirvay&na, who lias been mentioned in I. 53. 10, and VI,
18. 13 , as especially aided by Indra. Seven Hotars ; the usual number of
Hotar priests employed at important sacrifices.

2 Deceptive presents : his intended sacrifice was displeasing to Indra, whom,
possibly, Chyav&na falsely pretended that he was about to worship. With
all ingredients; required for the preparation of the Soma juice. Poured
oblations : to Indra.

30

468

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

3 To Lis oblations, swift as thought, ye burned, and welcomed

eagerly the prayers he offered.

With arrows in his hand the Very Mighty forced from him all
obedience of a servant.

4 I call on you the Sons of Dyaus, the Asvins, that a dark cow

to my red kine he added.

Enjoy my sacrifice, come to my 'viands, contented, not deceiv-
ing expectation.

10 Uttering praise to suit the rite Navagvas came speedily to

win the damsel’s friendship.

They who approached the twice-strong stable’s keeper, meed-
less, worild milk the rocks that naught had shaken.

11 Swift was new friendship with the’maid : they quickly accept-

ed it as genuine seed and bounty.

Milk which the cow Sabardugha had yielded was the bright
heritage which to thee they offered.

12 When afterwards they woke and missed the cattle, the speaker

thus in joyful mood addressed them :

Matchless are singers through the Vasu’s nature; he bringeth
them all food and all possessions.

13 His followers then who dwelt in sundry places came and desired

to slay the son of Nrishad.

Besistless foe, he found the hidden treasure of Sushria multi-
plied in numerous offspring.

3 To his oblations : to the offerings of Chyavftna. Ye: Asvins. The Very
Mighty: Indra, who threatened Chyav&na, and made him his obedient
servant.

4 The ljtishi now prays to the Asvins on his own account, and asks for a
dark- coloured cow ns a reward. S&yana, whom Professors Ludwig and

Grassmami follow, explains tins second half of the first line more poetically :

* When the dark night retires before the purple oxen (of the chariot of the
dawn).* — Wilson. * When the black sits among the red cows ; that is, while
it is still dark, but the grey of morning is beginning to appear.’— Ludwig

5 I pass over stanzas 5— 9 S which contain an ancient legend, probably 0 the

germ of the later story of Brahmft or Pmj/tpati and his daughter, concerning
two deities or powers of nature, male and female. See Appendix. °

10 Navagvas : ‘ the A ngirusas.'—' Wilson. The damsel's * Sftyana says that
Prism may be meant. Perhaps Snraraft is intended. The twice-strong stable's
keeper: the P«ni or Panis who kept the stolen cows or vanished rays of light
concealed. Meedless : as the Panis refused to give up the cows. Would milk
the rocks: would force from the rocky prison the meed or honorarium which
they deserved in the shape of the cows.

H SabavdvpM: 1 neotar-yielding;' the general name of cows milked at
sacrifices. T I hic-h to then they ojjercd : which the Angiraees offered to Indra

12 The V(tsu is Indra.

13 « on of Nvhhctd: Xarshada, usually a patronymic of Know, but
6ai d to be m this place the name of a certain demou. Resistless foe / Indra.

THE RIQVEDA,

HYMN 61.]

467

14 Thou, called Effulgence, in whose threefold dwelling, as in the

light of heaven, the Gods are sitting,

Thou who art called Agui or Ja fa vedas, Priest, hear us, guile-
less Priest of holy worship.

15 And, Indra, bring, that I may laud and serve them, those

Two resplendent glorious N&satyas,

Blithe, bounteous, man-like, to the sacrifice!', honoured among
our men with offered viands.

16 This King is praised and honoured as Ordainer; himself the

biddge, the Sage speeds o’er the waters.

He hath stirred up Kakshivan, stirred up Agui, as the steed’s
swift wheel drives the felly onward. *

17 Vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the cow who

ne’er hath calved, Sabardhu,

When I encompass Varuna and Mitra with lauds, and Arya
man in safest shelter.

18 Their kin, the Prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman, turning

his thought to thee thus speaks in kindness :

This is our highest bond : I am his offspring. How many
others came ere I succeeded ?

19 Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in : these are my

Gods ; I in full strength am present.

Twice-born am I, the first-born Son of Order : the Cow milked
this when first she bad her being.

3 4 Here begins another part of the hynm. Agni Is addressed. Effulgence ;
identified with the Sun. Threefold dwelling : earth, firmament, and heaven.

15 Man-like : as men reward one who institutes a sacrifice for their benefit.

36 This King : Sftrya, the Sun-God. ‘This royal Soma.’ — Wilson. Him-
self the bridge; the "long beams of light form the bridge by which Sfirya
passes over the waters of the firmament or sea of air. KaksMvdn : the cele-
brated Rishi, See Vol. I., Index.

17 Vaitarana : c (Agni), the conveyer (of all). 1 — Wilson. Agni is so called,
probably, as sacrificer for a prince Vitarana. Doubly kinsman: closely allied
to heaven and earth. Sabardhu: the Cow whose milk is used in sacrifice ;
also called Sabardughd, as in stanza 11. According to Ludwig, the New Year
which lias not yet distributed its treasures is meant.

18 Their kin : akin to Mitra, Vanina, and Aryaman. The Prince: sdri :
Sfirya, the Sun- God. Thy nearest kinsman ; Sftrya. I adopt Ludwig’s inter-
pretation of ndbhdnHlishthah, which appears unintelligible as the name of the
son of Maim who was deprived of his inheritance by his father according to
the Yajur-veda , and by his brothers according to the Aitareya-Erdhmaria.
But see Weber, Episches im V Eitual } pp. 4 Of. This : Dyaus. How many
others ; many Savitars (suns that introduce the new year) have been before
me. — Ludwig,

19 These are my Gods: i these are my resplendent (rays).’— Wilson, Pro-
bably the priests a, re intended. — Ludwig. The Cow: Aditi, Milked this;
milked forth this universe.’ — Wilson. Agni ia the speaker u£ this stauza.

[BOOK X,

468 THE HYMN'S OF

20 So mid these tribes he rests, the friendly envoy, borne on two

paths, refulgent, Lord of fuel.

When, like a line, the Babe springs up erectly, his Mother
' straight hath borne him strong to bless us.

21 Then went the milch-kin e forth to please the damsel, and for

the good of eveiy man that liveth.

Hear us, 0 wealthy Lord; begin our worship. Thou hast
grown mighty through Asvaghna’s virtues.

22 And take thou notice of us also, Indra, for ample riches, King

whose arm wields thunder !

Protect our wealthy nobles, guard our princes unmenaced near
thee, Load of Tawny Coursers.

23 When he goes forth, ye Pair of Kings, for booty, speeding to

war and praise to please the singer, —

I was the dearest sage of those about him, — let him lead these
away and bring them safely.

24 Now for this noble man’s support and comfort, singing with

easy voice we thus implore thee :

Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser : and may I he his
priest to win him glory.

25 If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win your friend-

ship made the laud accepted,

That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for every one to
whom the songs are suited.

26 Glorified thus, with holy hymns and homage : — Of noble race,

with Waters, God-attended —

May he enrich us for our prayers and praises : now can the cow
be milked ; the path is open.

20 He : Agni. Two paths : from earth to heaven and from heaven to earth,

21 The reference in the first 1-*-* to the imprisoned cows and

Saram& (see stanza 10); but all allusions in tkja hyum are

more or less conjectural. Ludwig thinks that the reference may be to the act-
ual milking of the sacrificial cows at the ceremony which this hymn accompa-
nied. Wilson translates : — * The words of a desirable praise. of,a certain tran-
quil person (hf&bMnedishtba), attain the prototype (Indra)' Asvaghna: pro-
bably the patronymic of Vitarana. — Ludwig. See note on Vaifcarana in stanza
17.

23 He : Asvaghna Vitarana. Ye Pair of Kings : Mitra and Varuna.

26 Glorified thus : that is, May Vamna glorified with song beginning, * Of
noble race, etc.,’ enrich us. Now can the cow be milked: it is now time for
the morning Aguihobram. — Ludwig.

Prof. Grassmaun has banished this almost unintelligible hymn to his Appen-
dix.

THE MOVED A.

469

HYMN 62.]

27 Be to us, then, ye Gods who merit worship, be ye of one accord
our strong protection,

Who went on various ways and brought us vigour, ye who are
undeceivable explorers.

HYMN LXJI. Visveclevas, Etc*

Ye who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, have won
you Indra's friendship and eternal life,

Even to you be happiness, Angirases. Welcome the son of
Manu, ye who are most wise.

2 The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, have in the

year's course cleft Yala by Eternal Law : n

A lengthened life be yours, 0 ye Angirases. Welcome the
son of Manu, ye who are most wise.

3 Ye raised the Sun to heaven by everlasting Law, and spread

broad earth, the Mother, out on every side.

Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Angirases. Welcome the
son of Manu, ye who are most wise.

4 This kinsman in your dwelling-place speaks pleasant words :

give ear to this, ye Bishis, children of the Gods.

High Brahman dignity be yours, Angirases. Welcome the
son of Manu, ye who are most wise.

5 Distinguished by their varied form, these Bishis have been

deeply moved.

These are the sons of Angiras ; from Agni have they sprung
to life.

6 Distinguished by their varied form, they sprang from Agni,

from the sky.

Navagva and JDasagva, noblest Angiras, he giveth bounty
with the Gods.

7 With Indra for associate the priests have cleared the stable

full of steeds and kioe,

Giving to me a thousand with their eight-marked ears, they
gained renown among the Gods,

1 The ton of Manu: Nftbhftnedishtha M&nava. See X. 61* 18 note.

2 The Fathers : the Angirases. Vala : the demon who stole the cows of
the Gods.

3 By everlasting Law: ‘ by means of your sacrifice/ — Wilson.

4 This kinsman : or, this N&bh&, that is, N&bh&uedishtha.

5 Distinguished by their varied form ; or, Virfipas. See III. 53. 7-

6 From the sky: or, from Dyaus Noblest Angiras : Agni himself, accord-
ing to S&yana. He is also called Navagva and Dasagva as these priestly names
or titles belong to or are closely connected with the Angirases.

7 With their eight ‘marked ows : ! , \ nded on their ears ; or per-

haps, with slit cm iv .. L':. /itamf *f 7 . ■' • ■ : , .. VI, 141.2.

470 THE HYMNS' OF [WdE'Xr

8 May this man’** so as be multiplied ; like springing corn may

Manu grow,

Who gives at once in bounteous gift a thousand kiue, a
hundred steeds.

9 No one attains to him, as though a man would grasp the

heights of heaven.

SAvarnya’s sacrificial meed hath broadened like an ample flood.

10 Yadu and Turva, too, have given two Dasas, well-disposed, to

serve,

Together with great store of kine,

11 Blest be the hamlet’s chief, most liberal Manu, and may his

bounty fival that of Surya,

May the Gods let Savarni’s life be lengthened, with whom,
unwearied, we have lived and prospered.

HYMN LX III. Visvedevas,

May they who would assume kinship from far away, Vivasvan’s
generations, dearly loved of men,

Eveu the Gods who sit upon the sacred grass of Nahusha’s
son Yayati, bless and comfort us.

2 Bor worthy of obeisance, Gods, are all your names, worthy of

adoration and of sacrifice.

Ye who were born from waters, and from Aditi, and from the
earth, do ye here listen to my call.

3 I will rejoice in these Adityas for my weal, for whom the Mo-

ther pours forth water rich in balm,

And Dyaus the Infinite, firm as a rock, sweet milk, — Gods act-
ive, strong through lauds, whose might the Bull upholds.

8 Manu : here apparently the name of Savarni the prince whose munificence
is the subject of stanzas 8 — 11. A thousand kine, a hundred steeds ; * kine ’ is
conjecfcurally supplied. ‘A thousand and a hundred horses.’-— Wilson. 1 2 3 4 A
thousand times a hundred horses.’— Ludwig.

9 Sdvarnya here means S&varni.

10 Turva: equivalent to Turvasa ; a prince of the clan called after the
eponymus Turva. Ddsas : enslaved natives.

1 ' ‘ ■ ■■■■’ ."onship with us, and the duties of protection and aid which

v* ' : ■ / ■’ Cf. I. 109. 7, note. Fivasvdu’s generations : S&yaua sup-

plies a verb, and explains differently : — '(support) the generations of (Manu
the soil of) Vivasvat.’— Wilson. Yaydli: see I. 31. 17, and 108. 8, note.

2 From waters : the aerial waters, or intermediate region of air. Aditi : von
Roth understands Aditi here to mean ‘Infinity,’ the boundlessness of
heaven as opposed to the limitation of earth. See Muir, 0. S , Texts, V. 89.
S&yana’s explanation is similar.

3 The Mother : Earth. Dyaus : Heaven. The Bull : the Sun, S&yana

explains vridhabharfln as ‘ bringers of rain.’

HYMH 63.]

THE RIG VEDA.

471

4 Looking on men, ne’er slumbering, they by their deserts at-

tained as Gods to lofty immortality.

Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents’ powers, they
robe them, for our welfare, in the height of heaven.

5 Great Kings who bless us, who have come to sacrifice, who,

ne’er assailed, have set their mansion in the sky, — ^

These I invite with adoration and with hymns, mighty Adityas,
Aditi, for happiness.

6 Who offereth to you the laud that ye accept, 0 ye All-Gods of

Manu, many as ye are ?

Who, Mighty Ones, will prepare for you the sacrifice to bear
us over trouble to felicity \ n

7 Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled fire, offered

the first oblation with his heart and soul,

Vouchsafe us, ye Adityas, shelter free from fear, and make us
good and easy paths to happiness.

8 Wise Deities, who have dominion o’er the world, ye thinkers

over all that moves not and that moves,

Save us from uncommitted and committed sin, preserve us
from all sin to-day for happiness.

9 In battles we invoke Indra still swift to hear, and all the holy

Host of Heaven who banish grief,

Agni, Mitra, and Varuna that we may gain, Dyaus, Bhaga,
Marnts, Prithivi for happiness :

10 Mightily-saving Earth, incomparable Heaven, the good guide

Aditi who gives secure defence.

The well-oared heavenly Ship that lets no waters in, free from
defect, will we ascend for happiness.

11 Bless us, all Holy Ones, that we may have your help, guard

aud protect us from malignant injury.

With fruitful invocation may we call on you, Gods, who give
ear to us for grace, for happiness.

12 Keep all disease afar aud sordid sacrifice, keep off the wicked

man’s malicious enmity.

Keep far away from us all hatred, 0 ye Gods, and give us
ample shelter for our happiness.

13 Untouched by any evil, every mortal thrives, and, following .

the Law, spreads in his progeny,

Whom ye with your good guidance, 0 Adityas, lead safely
through all his pain aud grief to happiness.

4 With serpents' powers : ( of unsurpassable wisdom.’ — Wilson,

10 The heavenly Skip ; according to Sly ana, a metaphorical expression for
sacrifice.

TEE HYMNS OF

472

[BOOK'X.

14 That which ye guard and grace in battle, 0 ye Gods, ye Ma-

ruts, where the prize is wealth, where heroes win,

That conquering Car, 0 Indra, that sets forth at dawn, that
never breaks, may we ascend for happiness,

15 Vouchsafe us blessing in our paths and desert tracts, blessing

in waters and in battle for the light ;

Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth, and
blessing, 0 ye Maruts, for the gain of wealth.

16 The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who conies to what

is good by distant pathway, —

May she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with us
under the Gods' protection.

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you,

0 Aditi and all Adilyas.

Men are made rich by those who are Immortal : the Heavenly
Folk have been extolled by Gaya,

HYMN LXIV. Vievedevas.

What God, of those who hear, is he whose well-praised name we
may record in this our sacrifice ; and how ?

Who will be gracious? who of many give us bliss ? Who out
of all the Host will come to lend us aid?

2 The will and thoughts withiu my breast exert their power :

they yearn with love, and ily to all the regions round.

None other Comforter is found save only these : my longings
and my hopes are fixt upon the Gods.

3 To Narasaim and to Pushan I sing forth, to unconcealable

Agni kindled by the Gods;

To Sun and Moon, two Moons, to Yama in the heavens, to Trit.a,
Vata, Dawn, Night, and the Asvins Twain,*

4 How is the Sage extolled whom the loud singers praise ?

What voice, what hymn is used to laud Bribaspati?

May Aja-Ekapad with Rikvans swift to hear, and Ahi of the
Deep listen i nto our call.

14 For happiness : svastrfye, for happiness or welfare, recurs at the end of
all the stanzas from 3 to 14 inclusive.

16 Svasti : Pathyd Svasti, According to the Index; the Goddess of prosperity
and happiness.

17 The son of Plati: Gaya, the Itishi of the hymn.

3 XJn concea table A gni pr, to the unconcealable (Savitar) and Agni. Two
Moons : New Moon and Full Moon.

4 Aja-Ekapdd: see VI. 50. 14. Rikvavs' singers; minor deities who
attend and sing the praises of some superior God. Ahi of the JJeep : the great
Diagon of the depths of the aerial ocean ; Ahibudhnya. See Vol. L, Index.

HYMN 64.] THE MG VEDA. 473

5 Aditi, to the birth of Daksha and the vow thou summonest the

Kings Mitra and Vanina.

With course unchecked, with many chariots Albanian comes
with the seven priests to tribes of varied sort.

6 May all those vigorous Coursers listen to our cry, hearers of

invocation, speeding on their way ;

Winners of thousands where the priestly meed is won, who
gather of themselves great wealth in every race.

7 Bring ye Purandhi, bring V&yu who yokes his steeds, for

friendship bring ye Pusban with your songs of praise :

They with one mind, one thought attend the sacrifice, urged
by the favouring aid of Savitar the God.

8 The thrice-seven wandering Rivers, yea, the mighty floods,

the forest trees, the mountains, Agui to our aid,

Krisanu, Tisbya, archers to our gathering-place, and Rudra
strong amici the Rudras, we invoke.

9 Let the great Streams come hither with their mighty help,

Sindh u, Sarasvati, and Sarayn with waves.

Ye Goddess Floods, ye Mothers, animating all, promise us
water rich in fatness and in balm.

10 And let Brihaddiva, the Mother, hear our call, and Tvashtar,

Father, with the Goddesses and Dames.

Ribhukshan, Vaja, Bhaga, and liathaspati, and the sweet
speech of him who labours guard us well !

11 Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the blest

favour of the Maruts, Rudra’s Sons.

May we be famed among the folk for wealth in kine, and ever
come to you, ye Gods, with sacred food.

5 Daksha : meaning here the Sun, according to S&yana. Ludwig thinks
that the sacrificer, regarded as Daksha or PrajApati, and said to be born again
through completion of his vow, is intended. In the second line also Aryaman
is considered by Skyana to be the Sun : — ‘ Aryaman, whose course is not
hurried, the giver of delight to many, having seven ministering (rays) piuceeds
in his multiform births/ — "Wilson.

6 Qours&'s : the horses which bring the Gods to men’s sacrifices.

7 Purandhi: Plenty personified as a deity. Or pHrandhim may be an ad-
jective * the spirited, or liberal, Pushan/

8 Thrice-seven : the seven rivers of the land of the Aryans having their coun-
terparts in heaven and in the firmament. Ami an; the archer who guards
the heavenly 8oma. Tishya: an asterism regarded as being in the form of
an arrow, and so here identified with Kris&uU.

10 Brihaddivd : a Goddess associated with IM, Sarasvati, and others.
Dames: the consorts of the Gods. jRatkaspati: the God who presides over
chariots of war. Speech: or prayer. Who labours: at the saoiifice.

in

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK jt.

12 The thought which ye, 0 Maruts, Indra, and ye Gods have

given to me, and ye Mitra and Yaruna, —

Cause this to grow and swell like a milch-cow with milk. Will
ye not bear away my songs upon your car?

13 0 Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again to mind

this our relationship ?

When next we meet together at the central point, even there
shall Aditi confirm our brotherhood.

14 The Mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty Goddesses,

worthy of sacrifice, come with the race of Gods.

These Two^with their support uphold both Gods and men, and
with the Fathers pour the copious genial stream.

1 5 This invocation wins all good that we desire : Brihaspati, highly-

praised Aramati, are here,

Even where the stone that presses meath rings loudly out,
and where the sages make their voices heard with hymns.

16 Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers 5 duties, desiring

riches, yearning after treasure,

Gaya, the priestly singer, with his praises and hymns content-
ed the Celestial People,

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you,

0 Aditi and all Adityas.

Men are made rich by those who are Immortal ; the Pleavenly
Folk have been extolled by Gaya.

HYMN LXV. Visvedevas.

May Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna consent, Aryaman, V&yu, Push-
A an, and Sarasvati,

Adityas, Maruts, Vishnu, Soma, lofty Sky, Ttudra, and Aditi,
and Brahmanaspati.

2 Indra and Agni, Hero-lords when Vritra fell, dwelling together,
speeding emulousiy on,

And Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, have
with their power filled full the mighty firmament.

S Skilled in the Law I lift the hymn of praise to these, Law-
strengtheners, unassailed, and great in majesty.

13 At the central point : the place of sacrifice.

14 With the Fathers : ‘ The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, which give

birth to gods and men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ See Wallis
Cosmology of the Rigveda , p, 72. '

15 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion.

17 The concluding stanza of Hymn 63 is repeated here,

H/OJA r ~TT57j ~~ “ TITK'KTG-YP DA . 47 5

These in their wondrous bounty send the water}’ sea : may
they as kindly Friends send gifts to make us great.

4 They with their might have stayed Heaven, Earth, and Prithi-

vi, the Lord of Light, the firmament, the lustrous spheres.
Even as fleet-foot steeds who make their masters glad, the
princely Gods are praised, most bountiful to man.

5 Bring gifts to Mitra and to Varuna who, Lords of all, in spirit

never fail the worshipper,

Whose statute shines on high through everlasting Law, whose
places of sure refuge are the heavens and earth.

6 The cow who yielding milk goes her appointed way hither to

us as leader of our holy rites,

Speaking aloud to Varuna and the worshipper, shall with
oblation serve Vivasv&n and the Gods.

7 The Gods whose tongue is Agni dwell in heaven, and sit, aid-

ers of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law.

They propped up heaven and then brought waters with their
might, got sacrifice and in a body made it fair.

8 Born in the oldest time, the Parents dwelling round are shar-

ers of one mansion in the home of Law.

Bound by their common vow Dyaus, Prithivi stream forth the
moisture rich in oil to Varuna the Steer.

9 Parjanya, Vata, mighty, senders of the rain, Indra and Vayu,

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman :

Wo call on Aditi, A iityas, and the Gods, those who are on
the earth, in waters, and in heaven.

10 Tvashtar and Vayu, those who count as Kibhus, both celestial

Hotar- priests, and Dawn for happiness,

Winners of wealth, we call, and wise Brihaspati, destroyer of
our foes, and Soma Indra’s Friend.

11 They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, the

forest trees, the earth, the waters, and the hills.

3 The watery sea : the clouds and rain-

4 Prithivi: meaning here the region of mid-air.

5 Places of sure refuge : S&yana explains n&dkasi differently : — 3 4 5 6 7 8 upon whom
the two solicitous worlds remain dependent/

6 The cow : who is milked at sacrifice. According to S&yana, thunder may
be meant, and by * milk * strength may be inteaded,

7 In a body : that is, personified, Cf. X, 6G. 9, note.

8 The Parents : Heaven and Earth.

10 Celestial Hotar-priests : see 1. 13. 8.

476

THE HYMJSS VJf

IBOOK X.

These very bounteous Gods made the Sun mount to heaven,
and spread the righteous laws of Aryas o'er the land.

12 0 Asvins, ye delivered Bhujyu from distress, ye animated

Syava, Vadhrimati’s son.

To* Vimada ye brought his consort Kamadyfi, and gave his
lost Vishnftpu back to Visvaka.

13 Thunder, the lightning's daughter, Aja-Ekap&d, heaven's bear-

er, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea :

Hear all the .Gods my words, Sarasvati give ear together with
Purandhi and with Holy Thoughts.

14 With Holy Thoughts and with Purandhi may all Gods, know-

ing the Law immortal, Manu's Holy Ones,

Boon-givers, favourers, finders of light, and Heaven, with gra-
cious love accept my songs, my prayer, my hymn.

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high

above all other beings.

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN LXVI. Visvedevas.

I call the Gods of lofty glory for our w T eal, the makers of the
light, well-skilled in sacrifice ;

Those who have waxen mightily, Masters of all w r ealth, Im-
mortal, strengthening Law, the Gods whom Indra leads.

2 For the strong band of Maruts will we frame a hymn: the chiefs

shall bring forth sacrifice for Indra's troop,

Who, sent by Indra and advised by Varuna, have gotten for
themselves a share of Sfirya's light.

3 May Indra with the Vasus keep our dwelling safe, and Aditi

with Adityas lend us sure defence.

May the God Kudra with the Eudras favour us, and Tvashtar
with the Dames further us to success.

4 Aditi, Heaven and Earth, the great eternal Law, Indra, Vishnu,

the Maruts^and the lofty Sky.

We call upon Adityas, on the Gods, for help, on Vasus, Eudras,
Savitar of wondrous deeds.

12 These deeds of the Asvins are told in I, 16 and 17.

13 Aja-Ekapdd : see VI. 50. 14. Holy Thoughts : Devotions personified.

14 Manu's Holy Ones ; deities whom Manu worshipped.

15 Vasishtha: that is, a descendant of the great Kishi Vasishtha,

4 The names in the first line are in the nominative case and without a verb :
‘are invoked/ may be understood.

HYMN 66,]

THE R1GVEDA .

477

5 With Holy Thoughts Sarasvan, firm-lawed Vanina, great V&yu,

Pushan, Vishnu, and the Asvins Twain,

Lords of all wealth, Immortal, furtherers of prayer, grant us
a triply-guarding refuge from distress.

6 Strong be the sacrifice, strong be the Holy Ones, strong the

preparers of oblation, strong the Gods.

Mighty be Heaven and Earth, true to eternal Law, strong be
Parjanya, strong be they who laud the Strong.

7 To win us strength I glorify the Mighty Twain, Agni and

Soma, Mighty Ones whom many laud.

May these vouchsafe " us shelter with a triple guard, these
whom the strong have served in worship of the Gods.

8 Potent, with firm-fixt laws, arranging sacrifice, visiting solemn

rites in splendour of the day,

Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from falsehood,
poured the waters out when Vritra died.

9 The Holy Ones engendered, for their several laws, the heavens

and earth, the waters, aud the plants and trees.

They filled the firmament with heavenly light for help : the
Gods embodied Wish and made it beautiful.

10 May they who bear up heaven, the Eibhus deft of band, and

Vata and Parjanya of the thundering Bull,

The waters and the plants, promote the songs we sing : come
Bhaga, Rati, and the Vajius to my call.

11 Sindhu, the sea, the region, and the firmament, the thunder,

and the ocean, Aja-Ekapad,

The Dragon of the Deep, shall listen to my words, and all
the Deities and Princes shall give ear.

12 May we be yours, we men, to entertain the Gods : further

our sacrifice and give it full success.

Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, givers of good gifts, quicken the holy
hymns which we are singing now.

6 Strong: vrishan repeated in the way loved by some of the Vedic poets ;
e showerer of benefits/ according to S&yana. The Gods : meaning, says S&yana,
the priests.

9 Laws : courses of action. Embodied Wish : gave a body to the wishes and
hopes of worshippers, and personified them in the same manner as sacrifice is
said to have been embodied and beautified in X. 65. 7.

10 Vdta and Parjanya of the thundering Bull : meaning the wind and storm
that attend the thunderous rain-cloud. JRdti: divine Favour or Bounty.
Ydjlns ; a class of divinities according to Sayana, See VII. 38. 7.

11 Aja-Ehapdd : see VI. 50, 14. Dragon of the Deep: Ahibudhnya. See
VI. 49, 14.

473 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X,

13 I follow with 3nccess upon the path of Law the two celestial

Hotars, Priests of oldest time.

We pray to him who dwelleth near, Guard of the Field, to all
Immortal Gods who never are remiss.

14 Vasishtha's sons have raised their voices, like their sire, EishL

like praying to the Gods for happiness.

Like friendly-minded kinsmen, come at our desire, 0 Gods, and
shake down treasures on us from above.

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasislitha, lauded, Gods set on high

above all other beings.

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods,
preserve? us evermore with blessings.

HYMN LXVII. Biihaspati.

This holy hymn, sublime and seven-headed, sprung from eter-
nal Law, our sire discovered.

Ayasya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth hymn
as he sang his laud to Indra.

2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyaus the

Asura, those heroes,

Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice's
holy statute.

3 Girt by his friends who cried with swan-like voices, bursting

the stony barriers of the prison,

Brihaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and uttered praise
and song ’when he had found them.

4 Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave the kine

that stood in bonds of falsehood.

Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness*, drave forth the
bright cows : three lie made apparent.

and Aditya, according to S&yana. Guard of
the Field : probably Indra. J

15 Repeated from the preceding hymn.

.1,1m T 4 u rf -'. hav “ g Seven dlvlal01ls - Accompanied by seven bands of
the Maruts, or having seven metres, according to Sftyara. Our sire : Anciras
Fourth : or, extending to all four sides, mighty. ga ‘

°?T sof the AngiraseB, representing metaphorically
the rays of light which had been stolen by the fiends of darkness. See I. 02. i.

i Apart from one, away from two : the meaning is uncertain. Perhane af
a distance from the earth, down from heaven and the firmament Falsehood ■
wickedness of the treacherous ranis. Three: heaven, firmament, and

HYMN 67 . 3 THE RIGYEDA. 479

5 When he had cleft the lairs' and western castle, he cut off three

from him who held the waters.

Brihaspati discovered, while he thtmdered like Dyans, the
dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning.

6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through,

the guardian of the cattle.

Seeking the milk-draught with sweat-shining comrades ho stole
the Pani’s kine and left him weeping.

7 He with bright faithful Friends, winners of booty, hath rent

the milker of the cows asunder.

Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty, sweating with
heat, hath gained a rich possession. v

8 They, longing for the kiue, with faithful spirit incited with

their hymns the Lord of cattle,

Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked,
averting shame from one another.

9 In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who

roareth like a lion,

May we, in every fight where heroes conquer, rejoice in strong
Brihaspati the Victor.

10 When he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven

and its most lofty mansions,

Men praised Brihaspati the Mighty, bringing the light within
their mouths from sundry places.

11 Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour : aid in your wont-

ed manner even the humble.

Let all our foes be turned and driven backward. Hear this,
0 Heaven and Earth, ye All-producers.

12 Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the head of

Arbuda the watery monster,

Slain Alii, and set free the Seven Fivers. 0 Heaven and Earth,
with all the Gods, protect us.

5 Western castle : this is obscure. Ludwig suggests that dpdchlm may mean
* hostile’ or ‘detested.’ Three: heaven, brmnment, and earth. Him who held
the waters: the demon Vala, who kept the rain, as well as the cows or rays of
light, imprisoned. The cow : the cattle ; the beams of light.

6 Comrades : his faithful friends the Maruts. Wild hoars : the strong fierce
Maruts ; according to Sayana, ‘bearers of excellent water.’

8 The Lord of cattle : Brihaspati, so called because he had released them,

10 The light : that is, the hymns of praise which will bring them the light
of help. The stanza is difficult.

12 The watery monster : the fiend who dominated the ocean of air. Ahi:
or, the Dragon, Vritra or his brother.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

HYMN LX VIII. Brihaspati.

Like birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, like the
loud voices of tiie thundering rain-cloud,

Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to
Brihaspati our hymns have sounded.

2 The Son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bhuga, brought in

Arvaman among us.

As Friend of men he decks the wife and husband : as for the
race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers.

3 Brihaspati, having won them from the mountains, strewed

down, like barley out of winnowing-baskets,

The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, desired of
all, of blameless form, well-coloured.

4 As the Sun dews with meath the seat of Order, and casts a

flaming meteor down from heaven,

Bo from the rock Brihaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the
earth's skin as it were with water.

5 Forth from mid-air with light he drave the darkness, as the

gale blows a lily from the river.

Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Yala, Brihaspati ga-
thered to himself the cattle.

6 Brihaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the

weapon of reviling Vala,

Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth have compassed ; he
threw the prisons of the red cow t s open.

7 That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave

Brihaspati discovered,

And drave, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like a
bird's young after the eggs' disclosure.

2 The Son of Angiras : Brihaspati, especially worshipped and cherished by
Angiras. Arycman : the institution of: marriage, represented by Aryauum ;
one meaning of the name being groomsman or matchmaker.

3 Out of winnow mg ~ba$het$ : sthivibhyah ; the exact meaning of the word
is somewhat uncertain, but it is evidently a measure, basket, or instrument
connected with corn. Sthivimdntah, * armed with stkivis % ' occurs in X. 27. 15,
and is said by S&yana to mean ‘occupants of stations.’ Wilson renders
stldvlbhyuh in this place by c from the granaries.’ The cows bestowed by
Brihaspati are countless as grains of barley on the threshing-floor or winnow-
ing-plaoe.

4 Cleft the earth's shin : or surface, with the hoofs of many cattle,

5 A lily : stipdla : according to S&yana the same as Saivala, the Vallisneria
Octandra, a common aquatic plant.

6 Weapon: 1 adopt B&yaua’s explanation of jdsum t although in X. 33,2
the same word means ‘exhaustion,’

HTATisr fio.]

TJlE RIG VEDA.

481

8 He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who

eyes a fish in scanty water.

Brihaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, brought it
forth like a bowl from out the timber.

9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning : with

l.ucid rays he forced apart the darkness.

As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of Vala as he
gloried in his cattle.

10 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the

cows Brihaspati had taken.

He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, whereby the
Sun and Moon ascend alternate. , ^

11 Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers have deco-

rated heaven with constellations.

They set the light in day, in night the darkness. Brihaspati
cleft the rock and found the cattle.

12 This homage have we offered to the Cloud-God who thunders

out to many in succession.

May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kina and
horses, men, and heroes.

Hymn lxix. Agm.

Auspicious is the, Aspect of Vadbryasva’s fire ; good is its
guidance, pleasant are its visitings.

When first the people of Sumitra kindle it, with butter pour-
ed thersbn it crackles and shines bright.

2 Butter, fs that which makes Vadhryasva’s fire grow strong ;
tlx* butter is its food, the butter makes it fat.

It spreads abroad when butter hath beeu offered it, and balra-
ed with streams of butter shines forth like the Sun.

8 Sweetness : the sweet milk ; that is, the cows who produced it.

Like a bowl ; which already exists potentially in the wood from which it ia
produced by cutting.

9 Wilson, following SAyana, paraphrases the second line ; — ‘ he seized (the
cattle from the rock) of Vala surrounded by the kine as (one extracts) mar-
row from a bone.’

11 The Fathers : 4 The connection of the fathers with the light, of which
they are both the embodiments and the guardians, is alone sufficient to ex-
plain their action in placing the stars in the sky/ — Wallis, Cosmology of the
Rigveda t p. 68. Or, as Ludwig remarks, the Fathers themselves may be the
starB.

12 To many : 'cows ’ is, apparently, understood. S&yana supplies richas
* who recites in order many (sacred stanzas).’ — Wilson.

1 Vadhryasva has been mentioned, in VI. 61. 1, as a worshipper of Saras-
vatt : here he appears as a special worshipper of Agni.

31

4j2 THEHysrm-vr —

3 Still newest is this face of thine, 0 Agni, which Manu and Su-
mitra have enkindled.

So richly shine, accept our songs with favour, so give us strength^
ening food, so send us glory.

i Accept this offering, Agni, whom aforetime Vadhryasva hath
entreated and enkindled.

Guard well our homes and people, guard our bodies, protect
thy gift to us which thou hast granted.
h Be splendid, guard us, Kinsman of Vadhryasva : let not the
enmity of men o’ercome thee.

Like the bold hero Chyavana, I Sumitra tell forth the title of
Vadhry^vat’s Kinsman.

6 All treasures hast thou won, of plains and mountains, and

quelled the D^sas’ and the Aryas’ hatred.

Like the bold hero Chyavana, 0 Agni, mayst thou subdue the
men who long for battle.

7 Deft Agni hath a lengthened thread, tall oxen, a thousand

heifers, numberless devices.

Becked by the men, splendid among the splendid, shine
brightly forth amid devout Sumitras.

8 Thine is the teeming cow, 0 Jatave&as, who pours at once her

ceaseless flow, Sabardhuk.

Thou art lit up by men enriched with guerdon, 0 Agni, by
the pious-souled Sumitras.

9 Even Immortal Gods, 0 JStatvedas, Vadhryasva’s Kinsman,

have declared thy grandeur.

When human tribes drew near with supplication thonconquer-
edst with men whom thou hadst strengthened.

10 Like as a father bears his son, 0 Agni, Vadhryasva bare thee

in his lap and served thee.

Thou, Youngest God, having enjoyed his fuel, didst vanquish
those of old though they were mighty.

11 Vadhryasva’s Agni evermore hath vanquished hia foes with

heroes who had pressed the Soma.

Lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, subduing,
as our help, e’en mighty foemen.

3 Sumitra : son of Vadhryasva andKishi of the hymn.

5 Chyavana ; a son of Bhrigu. Or the word may mean ‘ conquering,’ as
S4y*na interprets it. Vadhryasva' s Kinsman : as having been especially
worshipped and cherished by that Rishi. See stanza 10.

7 A lengthened thread : continual sacrifices, from ancient to present times.
Devices : ways of attaining his object. Or satdnitha may mean, ‘ having a
hundred or many musical modes or Baqred songs ; * or 1 praiBed by many: ’
\th* Uader of hundreds (of bum! offerings)/ — Wilson.

THE FIGVEDA.

HYMN 70,]

483

12 This Agni of Vadhryasva, Vritra-slayer, lit from of old, must
be invoked with homage.

As such assail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether the foes be
strangers or be kinsmen.

HYMN LXX. jtpris.

Enjoy, 0 Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled ladle wlxexe
we pour libation.

Bise up for worship of the Gods, wise Agni, on the earth's
height, while days are blight with beauty.

2 May he who goes before the Gods come hither with steeds

whose shapes are varied, Nar^sansa.

May he, most Godlike, speed our offered viancfs with homage
God- ward on the path of Order.

3 Men with oblations laud most constant Agni, and pray him to

perform an envoy's duty.

With lightly-rolling car and best draught-horses, bring the
Gods hither and sit down as Hotar.

4 May the delight of Gods spread out transversely : may it be
with us long in length and fragrant.

0 Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou the wil-
ling Gods whose Chief is Indra.

5 Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven,/-^ spring apart

to suit the wide earth's measure.

Yearning, ye Doors, with those sublitp' m greatness, seize
eagerly the heavenly Car that comet**

6 Here in this shrine may Dawn ai i^/Night, the Daughters of

Heaven, the skilful Goddessesr^ e seated.

In your wide lap, auspicious, ;r*dnng Ladies, may the Gods seat
them with a willing spir^

7 Up stands the stone, hh^Lurns the fire enkindled : Aditi's lap

contains the Fri^W Natures.

Ye Two Chief who serve at this our worship, may ye,

more skillp^ w * u * ov 113 possessions.

Other A^Tbyrnns may be compared ; I. 13, 142, and 188 ; IX. 3 ; III. 4 ;
y 5 . jarl 2 , and IX. 5. The usual deities and deified objects, with the ex-
cep**** 1 of Tanunap&t, are invoked.

^3 As Hotar : *as ministrant priest.' — Wilson.

4 The delight of Gods ; the sacred grass.

5 The heavenly Car : which brings the Gods.

7 The stone : with which the Soma juice is expressed. Aditi’s lap: the
surface of the earth. The Friendly Natures: the Gods. According to
S&yana, ‘ the acceptable sacrificial vessels.' Two Chief Priests : purtihitau ;
perhaps Agni and Aditya. More skilled ; than human priests.

THE HYMNS OF

m

[HOOK X

8 On our wide grass, Three Goddesses be seated : for you have

we prepared aud made it pleasant.

May 1$, she whose foot drops oil, the Goddess, taste, man-like,
sacrifice and well-set presents.

9 Since thou, God Tvashfcar, hast made beauty perfect, since

thou hast been the Angirasea’ Companion,

Willing, most wealthy, Giver of possessions, grant us the Gods*
assembly, thou who knowest.

10 Well knowing, binding with thy cord, bring hither, Lord of

the Wood, the Deities’ assembly.

The God prepare and season our oblations : may Heaven and
Earth b C gracious to my calling.

11 Agni, bring hither Varuna to help us, Indra from heaven,

from air’s mid-realm the Maruts.

On sacred grass all Holy Ones be seated, and let the Immortal
Gods rejoice in Svaha.

HYMN LXXI. JMnam.

When men, Brihaspati, giving names to objects, sent out Y&k’a
first and earliest utterances,

All that was excellent and spotless, treasured within them, was
disclosed through their affection.

2 Where, like n«. n cleansing corn-flour in a cribble, the wise in
spirit have crt^ted language,

Friends see and reccqr n i ZQ the marks of friendship : their speech
retains the blessed -fign imprinted.

8 Three Goddesses: IU, Sarasvati,^ Bbdratt. Taste: the verb is plural,
meaning, may Ila and the others taste. Mandike: as at the sacrifice of Manu,
according to Sftyana.

9 Grant us the \ God s’ assembly: the Com tator< expla ; n g tU , Boma .

Fh 06 ’ TT TJr 9 trh °!/“ r ’ u ‘ water.’ Here Wilson, follow-
ing Sayan a, translates : — offer the food of the g^ g them)/

)rd • it fa nnt rdfifti' wlmf in . . ,

be bound, or ranged
explains as annum

10 Binding with thy cord : it is not dear wliat is

in order. According to S&yaua, the pdthas, which
devdnAm, food of the Gods, is to be fastened with a rope. Z E”!

vdnaspati: the yhpa or Sacrificial Post. *

11 Svdhd: that is, in the sacrificial offerings presented with the

SyAU, Ave, or Hail. clamation

JMnam or Knowledge, the subject of this very difficult hymn, is said by
Sayapa to mean ParamabrahmajMmira, knowledge of the higher truths of
Religion, which teaches man his own nature and how he may be reunited to
the Supreme Spirit.

,, Voic , e ° t r Speech, the Sacred Word. Hrre specially the voice of

the hymn regarded as the means of communication between men and Goda
Sea VtdK India (Story of the Nations Series), pp. 269 271.

71.] THE MGV&EA. * 48$

3 With sacrifice the trace of V&k they followed, and found her

harbouring within the Rishis.

They brought her, dealt her forth in many places : seven
singers make her tones resound in concert*

4 One man hath ne’er seen Vak, and yet he seeth ; one man

hath hearing but hath never heard her.

But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well-
dressed woman to her husband.

5 One man they call a laggard, dull in friendship : they never

urge him on to deeds of valour.

He wanders on in profitless illusion : the Voice he heard yields
neither fruit nor blossom.

r\

6 No part in Vak hath he who hath abandoned his own dear

friend who knows the truth of friendship.

Even if he hears her still in vain he listens : naught knows
he of the path of righteous action.

7 Unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends endowed

alike with eyes and hearing.

Some look like tanks that reach the mouth or shoulder, others
like pools of water fit to bathe in.

8 When friendly Brahmans sacrifice together with mental im-

pulse which the heart hath fashioned,

They leave one far behind through their attainments, and some
who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere.

9 Those men who step not back and move not forward, nor

Brahmans nor preparers of libations,

Having attained to Vak in sinful fashion spin out their thread
in ignorance like spinsters.

10 All friends are joyful in the friend who cometh in triumph,

having conquered in assembly.

He is their blame-averter, food-provider : prepared is he and
fit for deed of vigour.

3 Harbouring within the $ishis : they discovered, in the course of sacrifice,
that the inspired Rishis alone understood Speech as required for religious
purposes. In many places : among the Hotar-priests. Seven singers : { the
seven noisy (birds) meet together.’ — Wilson : referring, says S&yana, to the
seven metres, the G&yatrJ, etc.

8 Some who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere : ‘ others walk about
boasting to be brahmans.* — Muir.

9 Step not bach and move not forward : take no active part in religious
ceremonies. ‘ Those who do not walk (with the Brahmans) in this lower
world, nor (with the gods) in the upper world,’ is Wilson’s paraphrase of the
text which I have rendered literally. Like spinsters : ‘ (like) female weavers.
Buch is the sense which Prof. Aufrecht thinks may, with probability, be
assigned to $irU t a word which occurs only here.’ — Muir.

THE HYMNS OF

485

[BOOK X 9

1 1 One plies his constant task reciting verses : one sings the holy
psalm in Sakvari measures.

One more, the Brahman, tells the lore of being, and one lays
down the rules of sacrificing.

HYMN LXXIL The Gods.

Let us with tuneful skill proclaim these generations of the Gods,

That one may see them when these hymns are chanted in a
future age.

2 These Brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelting, like

a smith.

Existence, in an earlier age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang.

3 Existence, m the earliest age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang.

Thereafter were the regions horn. This sprang from the Pro-
ductive Power.

4 Earth sprang from the Productive Power ; the regions from

the earth were born.

Daksha was bom of Aditi, and Aditi was Daksha’s Child.

5 For Aditi, 0 Daksha, she who is thy Daughter, was brought

forth.

After her were the blessed Gods bom sharers of immortal life.

6 When ye, 0 Gods, in yonder deep close-clasping one another

stood,

11 Reciting verses : repeating rickets or verses of the Rigveda. This is the
duty of the Hotar. The holy psalm : the G4yatra or S&man. The Udg&tar
or Chanter, one of the four chief priests is intended. The lore of being : the
knowledge of all that exists. Lags down the rules : ' prescribes the order/
— Muir. ' Measures the materials/ — Wilson. This is the duty of the Adh-
varyu, another of the chief priests. The hymn has been transliterated
and translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. pp. 254—256. It has also been
metrically rendered by the authors of the Siebenzig Zieder des Rigvcda, who
have endeavoured, V;." J : t. 1 ; — ir of the stanzas, to bring them into
closer connexion, ,\ ■* * the subject of the whole hymn ia

' the eulogy of the understanding of the Veda as essential to divine knowledge/

2 These : all beings. Like a smith : as a blacksmith blows up his fire and
melts metal.

3 The regions : 'the quarters (of the, horizon)/ — Wilson. This : meaning
earth. Productive Power : the meaning of uUdnapadah is uncertain. Wallis
renders it by 'the begetter (the sky)’; Wilson by * the upward-growing (tree)/

4 And Aditi was Eaksha's Child: ' Yaska remarks......... How can this be

possible ? They may have had the same origin ; or, according to the nature of
the gods, they may have been bora from each other, — have derived their Bubs-
tance from one another/ — 0. S, Texts, IV. 13. Aditi is Infinity or the Infinite,
and Daksha is Force or Power personified. See Vedic Hymns, I. p. 245.

5 'The two verses 5 and 7 are interesting as containing an independent story
of the origin of the world : the gods are said to have kicked up in dancing
the atoms which formed the earth/ — Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , p, 43.

THE III GV EDA.

487

HYMN 73.]

Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening cloud of dust
arose.

7 When, O ye Gods, like Yatis, ye caused all existing things to

grow,

Then ye brought Surya forward who was lying hidden in
the sea.

8 Eight are the Sons of Aditi who from her body sprang to life.
With seven she went to meet the Gods: she cast Martin da

far away.

9 So with her Seven Sons Aditi went forth to meet the earlier

age.

She brought Martin da thitherward to spring £o life and die
again.

HYMN LX XIII. Indra.

Thou wast born mighty for victorious valour, exulting, strong-
est, full of pride and courage.

There, even there, the Maruts strengthened Indra when his
most rapid Mother stirred the Hero.

2 There with fiend’s ways e’en Prisani was seated : with much

laudation they exalted Indra.

As if encompassed by the Mighty-footed, from darkness, near
at hand, forth came the Children.

3 High are thy feet when on thy way thou goest ; the strength

thou foundest here hath lent thee vigour.

Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou holdest. 0 Indra, mayst
thou turn the Asvins hither.

7 YatU .• devotees.

8 Eight are the Sorfa : according to the A Commentator, Mitra, Varuna, DMtar,
Aryaman, Ansa, Bhaga, Yivasv&n, and Aditya (the Bun). Mdrtdnda : Sdrya,
the Sun. His exposure probably refers to his sweeping through the sky. —
Ludwig. But see Bergaigne, La Religion VMigue, III. 107.

1 Mother: Aditi. Stirred the Eero : gave him free motion as soon as he was
born, or incited him to action by telling him of his future opponent. See VIII.
45. 5, and 66. 2.

2 This stanza is unintelligible to me- Prisani : meaning perhaps Prisni, a«

Ludwig conjectures. The Mighty-footed : Indra. The Children : the new-born

Maruts. Wilson translates, after S&yana : — * The martial troop of (Indra) the
xnjurer encamped around by the swift-moving (Maruts) ;

they animated him with /:■ ■ i .- , ; ■ a ■ l 2 * * * * * 8 < Rattle) penned up within a great

stall, the embryonic (waters) issued from the ( Vritra) who had arrived iu the

form of darkness.’

8 High are thy feet : as travelling through the heavens. Hyenas ; sdtuvriMn :
jackals/ — Wilson.

488 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

4 Speeding at once to sacrifice thou comest ; for friendship

thou art bringing both H&safcyas.

Thou hadst a thousand treasures in possession. The Asvins,
0 thou Hero, gave thee riches.

5 Glad, for the race that rests on holy Order, with friends who

hasten to their goal, hath Indra
With these his mngic powers assailed the Dasyu : he cast
away the gloomy mists, the darkness,

6 Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as Indra strik-

ing down the car of Ushas.

With thy beloved lofty Friends thou earnest, and with the
assurance of thine heart thou slewest.

7 War-loving Namuchi thou smotest, robbing the D&sa of his

magic for the Rishi.

For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, paths lead-
ing as it were directly God-ward.

8 These names of thine thou hast fulfilled completely : as Lord,

thou holdcst in thine arm, 0 Indra.

In thee, through thy great might, the Gods are joyful : the
roots of trees hast thou directed upward.

9 May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit

that lies in depth of waters^

Thou from the udder which o’er earth is fastened hast poured
the milk into the kine and herbage.

10 When others call him offspring of the Courser, my meaning is
that Mighty Power produced him.

He came from Manyu and remained in housea : whence he
hath sprung is known to Indra only.

6 Two of Wee name : or, of similar nature; gloomy mists and darkness. The
car of Ushas : see XV. 30. 8 — 11. The assurance of thy heart: thy trusted
thunderbolt.

8 Thou hast fulfilled : hast acted in full accordance with the names thou
bearest, such as Vyitra-slayer, Sakra, etc. Thou boldest; the thunderbolt.
The roots of trees: the clouds are. often compared to trees. The rain is their
fruit, and when they pour it down their roots aro supposed to be turned up-
ward.

9 Quoit : chah'dm : meaning the thunderbolt. The udder : the firmament.

10 The Courser : meaning Heaven. Manyu ; wrath, passion or ardour,
personified, My meaning is: the speaker declares that he is raised above the
common mythological explanations. He considers the God to have sprung
from a transcendental Power. — Ludwig.

Grassmann banishes this hymn to his Appendix as being generally obscure
and in parts absolutely unintelligible. I have, for the most partj followed,
Ludwig’s interpretation.

HYMN 74.] THE JR1GVEDA. m

1 1 Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, Rishis, im-
ploring, have come nigh to Indra :

Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision ; deliver us as men
whom snares entangle.

HYMN LXXIV. Indra,

I am prepared to laud with song or worship the Noble Ones
who are in earth and heaven,

Or Coursers who have triumphed in the contest, or those who,
famed, have won the prize with glory.

2 Their call, the call of Gods, went up to heaven : they kissed

the ground with glory-seeking spirit, *

There where the Gods look on for happy fortune, and like
the kindly heavens bestow their bounties.

3 This is the song of those Immortal Beings who long for trea-

sures in their full perfection.

May these, completing prayers and sacrifices, bestow upon us
wealth where naught is wanting.

4 Those living men extolled thy deed, 0 Indra, those who would

fain burst through the stall of cattle,

Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose Sons
are many and her streams past number.

5 Saohivan, win to your assistance Indra who never bends, who

overcomes his foemen,

Ribhukshan, Maghavan, the hymn's upholder, who, rich in
food, bears man’s kind friend, the thunder.

6 Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, Indra hath

earned his name of Vritra-slayer.

He hath appeared, the mighty Lord of Conquest. What we
would have him do let him accomplish.

The subject of the hymn is a coming horse-race, and the Kishi invokes in
favour of the Yajam&na, the Vasus, racers who have won the prize in former
times, and the men who owned them. Indra also is appealed to for help.
See Vedische Studien , I. p. 129.

2 The call of Gods ; the Gods are imagined as present and interested in the
race. They kissed the ground : the horses lightly touched the earth as they
ran.

4 Those living men : the Angirases. Her v)ho hare hit once : Heaven, accord-
ing to S&yana ; Earth, according to Grassmann. Prisni, the mother of the
Maruts, must be meant. — Ludwig. See VI. 48. 22.

5 Sachtvan ; apparently a man’s name. * Colcbrator of holy rites.’ — Wilson.

6 He who won of old : the Yajam&na. He hath appeared ; the poet ima-
gines Indra himself to be present.

400 THE HYMNS OH [ BOOK X.

HYMN LXXV. The Rivers.

The singer, 0 ye Waters, in Vivas vlin’s place, shall tell your
grandeur forth that is beyond compare.

The Rivera have come forward triply, seven and seven. Sindhu
in might surpasses all the streams that flow.

2 Yaruna cut the channels for thy forward course, 0 Sindhu,
when thou rannest on to win the race.

Thou speedesfc o’er precipitous ridges of the earth, when thou
art Lord and Leader of these moving floods.

Z His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth : he puts forth
endless vigour with a flash of light.

Like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the cloud, so Siu-
dhu rushes on bellowing like a bull.

4 Like mothers to their calves, like milch-kine with their milk,

so, Sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers run.

Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army’s wings what time
thou comest in the van of these swift streams.

5 Favour ye this my laud, 0 Ganga, Yamunil, 0 Sutudri, Paru-

shni, and Sarasvati :

With Asikni, Yitasta, 0 Marudvridh&, 0 A.rjikty& with Su-
shoma hear my call.

6 First with TrishUmA thou art eager to flow forth, with Rasa,

and Susartu, and with Svetysi here,

With Kubhd ; and with these, Sindhu ! and Mehatnu, thou
seekest in thy course Krumu and Gomati.

1 0 ye Waters : apparently the Rivers are addressed as representing all the
divine Waters. Vivasvdn's place; where the singers stand when they sing
hymns.. Triply, seven and, seven .* twenty- one rivers ; twp other sets of seven
each being added to the seven chief rivers of the Panj&b, S&yana explains
differently; — ( they flowed by sevens through the three (worlds),*’ — -Wilson.
* Each set of seven [streams] has followed a threefold course,’ — Muir, ‘ By
seven and seven in three courses.’ — M. Muller.

5 The poet addresses first the most distant rivers, Gangd : the Ganges ia
mentioned, indirectly, in only one other verse of the Eigueda, and even there,
the word is said by some to be the name of a woman. See VI. 45. 31.
Yamund; the Jumna. Situdri : the Sutlej or Satlaj. Pavushni : the Rdvt :
Sarasvati ; see VI. 61. 2. Asikni; the ancient Acesines ; the Vedic name of

the ChandrabMgd. ^ , v. Vitastd: probably the Jlielum, the

Hydaspes of the > '! ■ ■ . ’ meaning, increased by the Maruts :

not identified. ArjiHyd and Sushomd are said by Yaska to be the Vipjts and
the Siudhu ; .but this is not possible, and it is uncertain what riverB are
meant.

S * K rum \ an(i Gomati have been mentioned in previous Books.

1 he other streams whose names oocur in this stanza are probably unimportant
affluents °f the Indus. All that is known regarding the rivers mentioned in
ttmms 5 and 6 may be found in Zimmer’s Altindisches Leben , pp. 4ff,

THE RIQVEDA .

HYMN 76.]

491

7 Flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, she moves

along her ample volumes through the realms,

Most active of the active, Sindhu unrestrained, like to a dap-
pled mare, beautiful, fair to see.

8 Rich in good steeds is Sindhu, rioh in cars and robes, rich in

gold, nobly-fashioned, rich^in ample wealth.

Blest Silamavati and young TJru&vati invest themselves with
raiment rich in store of sweets.

9 Sindhu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by steeds,

and with that car shall she win booty in this fight.

So have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, of
independent glory, roaring as it runs. •

HYMN LXXVT Press-stones.

I grasp at you when power and strength begin to dawn:

bedew ye, Indra and the Maruts, Heaven and Earth,

That Day and Night, in every hall of sacrifice, may wait on us
and bless us when they first spriug forth.

2 Press the libation out, m >st excellent of all : the Pressing-

stone is grasped like a hand-guided steed.

So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and the fleet
comber's might that speeds to ample wealth.

3 Juice that this Stone pours out removes defect of ours, as in

old time it brought prosperity to man.

7 In her mightiness : in the preceding stanzas Sindhu appears to be a Kiver-
God, but in this and following verses the epithets are feminine.

8 Silamdvati and ffrnivatt appear to be names of rivers. According to
S&yana, the words are epithets of Sindhu and mean respectively ‘ abounding
in Stlamd plants/ sahl to be used for cordage, and ‘rich in wool.' The
meaning of the second half of the second line is uncertain : — f wears [as only
one river is supposed to be the subject] honey-growing (flowers)/ — Wilson.

9 In this fight : the hymn may, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, be a prayer
for aid in a battle that is to be fought on the banks of the Sindhu or Indus.
The hymn has been transliterated and translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0. S. Texts ,
V. 343 — 345, and a version of stanzas 1 — 8 is given by Prof. Zimmer, AUindit-
ohes Leben, p. 4. A complete translation, with full explanatory notes, is given
in Max Muller’s India , What can it Teach u3 ?, pp. 164 — 168.

X 1 grasp at you: ‘I propitiate you.’ — Wilson. Power and strength: the
morning beams which bring new vigour. Bay and Night : or, ‘ both day-halves/

3 To man : or, to Manu. Tvashtar 1 s milk-blent juice ; the Soma juice brewed
by Tvashtar for the year, which represents the life- sustaining power of Nature.
— Ludwig. Bright v>ith the hue of steeds : tawny-coloured. S&yana interprets
differently : — ‘when the son of Twashtri, hidden by the (stolen) cows, and
assuming the form of a horse, (was to be slain)/— Wilson. Trisiras the son of
Tvashtar was regarded as an enemy of the Gods. Indra slew him and took
possession of the Soma,

m

mi HYMNS OP

[BOON

At sacrifices they established holy rites on Tvashtar’s milk-
blent juice bright with the hue of steeds*

4 Drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us: keep

JSfirriti afar and banish penury.

Pour riches forth for us with troops of hero sons, and bear ye
up, 0 Stones, the song that visits Gods.

5 To you who are more mighty than the heavens themselves,

who, finishing your task with more than Vibhvan’s speed,
More rapidly than Vayu seize the Soma juice, better than
Agni give us food, to you I sing.

6 Stirred be the glorious Stones: let it press out the juice, the

Stone with heavenly song that reaches up to heaven,

There where the men draw forth the meath for which they
long, sending their voice around in ’rivalry of speed.

7 The Stones press out the Soma, swift as car-borne men, and,

eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap thereof.

To fill the beaker, they exhaust the udder’s store, as the tnen
purify oblations with their lips.

8 Ye, present men, have been most skilful in your work, even

ye, 0 Stones who pressed Soma for Indra’s drink.

May all ye have of fair go to the Heavenly Race, and all your
treasure to the earthly worshipper.

HYMN LXXYII. Maruts.

As with their voice from cloud they sprinkle treasure so are the
wise man’s liberal sacrifices.

I praise their Company that merits worship as the good Maruta’
priest to pay them honour.

4 Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Destruction.

5 Vibhvan ' one of the three Riblius, Vdyu: or, the wind*

6 The men : meaning the press-stones. Cf. stanza 8.

7 The udder's store: the juice contained in the milky Soma-plant.
their lips : with the praises that they utter.

With

S Worshipper : SAyana explains tunvaU by yajam.dni.ya, to the YaiamAna
or sacrifioer. llie more literal translation would be ‘to the presser,’ the man
who presses out or effuses the Soma juice.

{« r ! s ob : 5cure ' According to SAyana. vijdntis7iah (the wise man's)

I*" 8 e “ erftte . a »d not from jfid, to know ‘they are the

K 6 ’ 1 ®™ 8 j- 0 / t[ !® world) like sacrifices abounding in libations.’ — Wilson. The

y d Maruta print : either the band of the Maruts themselves regarded as a

MiipuT’ pr!e , st s P eciall y skilled in propitiating them? Prof M

Muller translates differently. See Vedic Sywnt, I. p, 412.

HYMN 77. ] THE RIG VEDA . 493

2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through

many nights, — this uoble band of Maruts.

Like stags the Sons of Dyaus have striven onward, the Sons
of Aditi grown strong like pillars.

3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own

mass, as from the cloud spreads Surya;

Like mighty Heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly gallants
who destroy the wicked.

4 When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the earth is

loosened, as it were, and shaken.

This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches: come all united,
fraught, as ’twere, with viands.

5 Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, luminous with

your beams, with splendour as at dawn ;

Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked men, like hover-
ing birds urged forward, scattering rain around.

6 When ye come forth, 0 Maruts, from the distance, from the

great treasury of rich possesions,

Knowing, 0 Vasns, boons that should be granted, even from
afar drive back the men who hate us.

7 He who, engaged in the rite’s final duty, brings, as a man,

oblation to the Maruts,

Wins him life’s wealthy fulness, blest with heroes : he shall
be present, too, where Gods drink Soma.

8 For these are helps ^adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune

by their name Adityas.

Speeding on cars let them proteot our praises, delighting ia
our sacrifice •and worship.

2 This nolle band of Maruts : Prof. Ludwig suggests tliat surnttrutam
means here a festival held in honour of the Maruts at the end of the periodi-
cal rains, and that, after many nights, the Maruts adorn themselves for this ,
Pillars : I follow Ludwig ; but the meaning of akrfth is uncertain. Geldner
takes it to mean ‘ horses,’ a parallelism to stags, or antelopes. S&yaua makes
like, negative, and explains akrflh by dhramanasildh ; — ‘the swift-going
sons of Aditi do not increase in glory,’ — Wilson.

4 This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : * this manifold sacrifice comes
towards you.’ — Wilson.

7 In the rite's final duty : Sftyana explains udrichi yajM by yajfie samdpta-
stutike sampdrne sati , when the sacrifice has its praise perfected, when the
sacrifice is complete. As a man: according to Ludwig, ‘no longer a man/
that is, not in his human character but having become divine by worship.
Where the Gods drink Soma ; he, a God himself, shall be admitted to the
Gods’ society.

494

mn HYMNS OP

l BOOK X

HYMN LXXVIII. Maruts.

Yb by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, skilful,
inviting Gods with sacrifices ;

Fair to behold, like Kings, with bright adornment, like spot-
less gallants, leaders of the people :

2 Like fire with flashing flame, breast-bound with chains of gold,

like tempest-blasts, self-moving, swift to lend your aid;

Ab best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, like Somas, good
to guard the man who follows Law.

3 Shakers of all, like gales of wind they travel, like tongues of

burning fires in their effulgence.

Mighty ap they as Warriors clad in armour, and, like the
Fathers' prayers, Most Bounteous Givers.

4 Like spokes of car-wheels in one nave united, ever victorious

like heavenly Heroes,

Shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors, they raise
their voice and chant their psalm as singers.

5 They who are fleet to travel like the noblest steeds, long to

obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers,

Like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods, like
omniform Angirases with Sama-hymns.

6 Born from the stream, like press-stones are the Princes, for

ever like the stones that crush in pieces ;

Sons of a beauteous Dame, like playful children, like a great
host upon the march with splendour.

7 Like rays of Dawn, the visitors of sacrifice, they shine with

ornaments as eager to be bright.

Like rivers hasting on, glittering with their spears, from far
away they measure out the distances. 0

8 Gods, send us happiness and make us wealthy, letting us sing-

ers prosper, 0 ye Maruts,

Bethink you of our praise and of our friendship : ye from of old
have riches to vouchsafe us.

HYMN LXXIX. Agni.

I have beheld the might of this Great Being, Immortal in the
midst of tribes of mortals.

His jaws now open and now shut together : much they devour,
insatiately chewing.

4 Shedding their precious halm ; pouring out the fertilizing rain aB liberally
a* young wooers give presents.

6 Born from the stream : from the sea of air, or from jSindhu, the Indus.

7 They measure out the distances: ‘have traversed leagues/—- Wilson.
* They measure many miles/— M. Muller,

SYMN 80.]

TSE MOVED A,

495

2 His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden : unsated with

his tongue he eats the fuel.

With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses, for him
they quickly bring his food together.

3 Seeking, as 'twere, his Mother's secret bosom, he, like a child,

creeps on through wide-spread bushes.

One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing
deep within the earth's recesses.

4 This holy Law I tell you, Earth and Heaven : the Infant at

his birth devours his Parents.

Ho knowledge of the God have I, a mortal. Yea, Agni know-
eth best, for he hath wisdom.

-e

5 This man who quickly gives him food, who offers his gifts of

oil and butter and supports him, —

Him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on : thou showest
him thy face from all sides, Agni.

6 Agni, hast thou committed sin or treason among the Gods ? In

ignorance 1 ask thee.

Playing, not playing, hegold-hued and toothless, hath cut his
food up as the knife a victim.

7 He, born in wood hath yoked his horses rushing in all direc-

tions, held with reins that glitter.

The well-born Mend hath carved his food with Yasus : in all
his limbs he hath increased and prospered.

HYMN LXXX. Agni.

Agni bestows the fleet prize-winning courser ; Agni, the hero
famed and firm in duty.

Agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven, and fills the
fruitful dancte who teems with heroes.

2 Sis eyes ; according to S&yana, the eyes of Agni are the distant Sun and
Moon, and his head is hidden in mens’ stomachs, in the shape of the heat
which enables them to digest their food. Sis food : the sticks for fuel, which
are bound up into fagots.

3 This stanza is very obscure, Agni, born from the wood of the fire-sticks,
seems, as he creeps through the brushwood that he is burning, to seek
entrance again into his mother’s side. He then finds an old dry tree or log,
which had been deeply rooted in the earth, and feeds od it as on food that
has been specially prepared for him.

4 Sis Parents : the two fire-sticks from which he has been produced.

6 Hast thou committed sin ? : Art thou as voracious and destructive in
heaven as thou art on earth ? Playing, not playing ; playing about the fuel,
and yet earnestly intent on devouring his food. * Sporting (here), not sporting
(there).’ — Wilson. A victim : g&m : ox or cow.

7 The well-born Friend : Agni, In all his limbs : p arvabhih : { with logs of
wood,’— -Wilson.

496 TEE EYMES OF [BOOK X.

2 Blest be the wood that feeds the active Agni : within the two

great worlds hath Agni entered,

Agni impels a single man to battle, and with him rends in
pieces many a foeman.

3 Agni rejoiced the ear of him who praised him, and from the

waters burnt away Jarutha.

Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavern, and made Nrimedha rich
with troops of children.

4 Agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero, and sent the

sage who wins a thousand cattle.

Agni hath made oblations rise to heaven : to every place are
Agni’s laws extended.

5 With songs of praise the Rishis call on Agni * on Agni, heroes

worsted in the foray.

Birds flying in the region call on Agni : around a thousand •
cattle Agni wanders.

6 Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who have sprung

from Nab us 1 * * * * * line adore him.

Stablished in holy oil is Agni’s pasture, on the Gandharva
path of Law and Order.

7 The Ribhus fabricated prayer for Agni, and wo with mighty

hymns have called on Agni.

Agni, Most Youthful God, protect the singer : win us by wor-
ship, Agni, great possessions.

HYMN LXXXI. Visvakarman.

He who sate down as Ho tar-priest, the Rishi, our Father,
offering up all things existing, —

He, seeking through his wish a great possession, came among
men on earth as archetypal.

3 Jardtha: see YXL 1. 7, and 9. 6. Atri : his deliverance is ascribed to
the Asvins in X. 112. 7, 116. 8, 117, 3, and 118. 7.

5 Around a thousand cattle; in the fires lighted to keep off wild beasts
and demons of darkness.

6 Gandharva path ; sublime; that which the Gandharvas in heaven use
to travel.

7 The Ribhus : or Rishis skilful as the Ribhus.

Yisvakarman, the Omnific, is represented in this hymn as the universal
Father and Generator, the Creator of all things and Architect of the worlds.

1 f “■* ' " “ ’"“VT'arded as being contained in the offerings presented

by y .!v.- . : hU wish ; through his desire to create. Archety-

pal'. the niean:*v*‘ 1 * ■ 7 is uncertain. In Wilson's Translation

‘inventor’ is a “ ■' ■■ -/that is, ‘ first investing Agni with the

worlds,’ according to S&yaua’s explanation. ‘First appearing.’ — Ludwig,

‘ The first worshipper. ’—Wallis.

MYMN 81.] TEE MG VEDA, 497

2 What was the place whereon he took his station 1 What was

it that supported him? How was it?

Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, with
mighty power disclosed the heavens,

3 He who hath eyes on all sides round about him, a mouth on

all sides, arms and feet on all sides,

He, the Sole God, producing earth and heaven, weldeth them,
with his arms as wings, together.

4 What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which

they fashioned out the earth and heaven ?

Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit whereon he stood
when he established all things.

5 Thine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid-

most here, 0 Visvakarman,

Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, 0 Blessed, and come thy-
self, exalted, to our worship.

6 Bring thou thyself, exalted with oblation* 0 Visvakarman,

Earth and Heaven to worship. ^ "

Let other men around us live in fpHy : here let us have a rich
and liberal patron. ^ - ^

7 Let us invoke to-day, t^alcl our labour, the Lord of Speech,

the thought-swiftWisvakarman.

May he hear kjudfy all our invocations who gives all bliss for
aid, who^ works are righteous.

3 I Veldeih them : cp. IV. 2. 17, and X. 72. 2. With his arms as wings :
faqpxftg the flame in which the matter is smelted. Ludwig thinks that

. whirlwinds, produeed^by the action of hands, feet, and wings, are intended.

4 The first half-line occurs also in X. .31. 7. They : the makers of the
world directed by Paramesvara. — S&yana.

5 Or the first half-line maybe rendered: — ‘Thy sacrificial forms, the
highest, lowest.’ Come thyself, exalted, to our worship: ‘ exhilarated, thyself
offer up thyself.’ — Muir. * Do thou sacrifice to thyself delighting thyself.*—.
Wallis. ‘ According to MaMdhara the meaning is that man is incompetent
to worship the creator, that is, in his forms, and it must be done by
himself.’ — Wilson. I have adopted Prof. Ludwig’s explanation of the last clause.

6 Bring to worship : or, sacrifice to Heaven and Barth.

7 Our labour: the arduous work of sacrificing. f In our conflict.’ — Muir.
The hymn has been translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0. S. Texts , IV. pp. 6, 7, by
Mr. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , pp. 81—83, and, partly, by Prof. F.
Max Muller in his Eibbert Lectures, p. 293f,

See also Mme. Z6naide Bagozin, Vedic India, pp. 263, 416.

32

m

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

HYMN* LXXXIL Visyakarman.

The Father of the eye, the Wise in spirit, created both these
worlds submerged in fatness.

Then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened, the heavens
and the earth were far extended.

2 Mighty in mind and power is Yisvakarman, Maker, Disposer*

and most lofty Presence.

Their offerings joy in rich juice where they value One, only
One, beyond the Seven Rishis,

3 Father who made us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth all races

and all things existing,

Even he nlone, the Deities’ name-giver, — him other beings
seek for information.

4 To him in sacrifice they offered treasures, — Rishis of old, in

numerous troops, as singers,

Who, in the distant, near, and lower region, made ready all
these things that have existence.

5 That which is earlier' than this earth and heaven, before the

Asuras and Gods had being, —

What was the germ primeval which the waters received where
all the Gods were seen together ?

6 The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein the

Gods were gathered all together.

It rested set upon the Unborn’s navel, that One wherein abide
all things existing.

7 Ye will not find him who produced these creatures : another

thing hath risen up among you.

Enwrapt in misty cloud, with lips that stammer, hymn-
chanters wander and are discontented.

1 The Father of the eye : Visyakarman, who made the light which enables
the eye to see. Submerged in fatness : S&yana explains ghritdm here by
4 water — f engendered the water, (and then) these two (heaven and earth)
floating (on the waters).' — Wilson.

2 Most lofty Presence: literally, the highest apparition ; the highest image
or object of spiritual contemplation. Their offerings ,* the offerings, or per-
haps the wishes, of the Fathers, semi-personified. The Seven Rishis ; the
constellation Ursa Major, the seven stars of which are the great Rishis Mariehi,
Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Yasishtha. The meaning is that
the spirits of the blest enjoy the fulfilment of all their desires beyond the
starry heavens where the One Being, the great Creator, dwells.

3 For information : to learn who is the Supreme God ; or what their seve-
ral functions are.

4 Distant, near , and lower region : meaning, apparently, the heavenly, the
earthly, and the intermediate atmosphere.

6 The Unborn , Aja, seems here to be identified with Visvakarman. See
Vedic India , pp. 423, 424.

7 Another thing : meaning, according to the Commentator, ‘Yisvakarman

HYMN 83.]

THE R1GVBDA. m

HYMN LXXXIII. Manyu.

He who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt, breeds
a for himself forthwith all conquering energy.

Arya aud Dasa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the
Conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped.

2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the God was Manyu, Manyu was

Hotar, Varuna, J&tavedas.

The tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accordant with
thy fervour, Manyu, guard us.

3 Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty ; chase, with

thy fervour for ally, our foemen. #

Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou to us all
kinds of wealth and treasure.

4 For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, queller of

the foe, and self-existent,

Shared by all men, victorious, subduer : vouchsafe to us
superior strength in battles.

5 I have departed, still without a portion, wise God ! according

to thy will, the Mighty.

I, feeble man, was wroth with thee, 0 Manyu : I am myself ;
come thou to give me vigour.

6 Come hither, I am all thine own ; advancing turn thou to

me, Yictorious, All-supporter !

is a different entity from you who are sentient beings, who have individual
consciousness, and so forth.’ — See Editor’s note in Wilson’s translation.
S&yana ‘gives the general sense of the last clause [of the stanza] as ir You
are merely anxious for enjoyment in this world and iu the next, therefore
you know nothing of Viaoukavman /’ taking ukthasdsah as implying singing
hymns with a view t*o gaining felicity in a future itate. Mahldhara has a
similar explanation : “ you who are engaged in the enjoyments of this world
or the next, being subject to false knowledge or ignorance, have no knowledge
of the Truth.” ’ — Wilson.

With regard to this and the preceding hymn Mr. Wallis observes that
they make no attempt to explain in what way the process of sacrifice could
be regarded as an act of creation. We are told little more than that Visva-
karman was a primeval sacrificer and also a creator ; we have no hint how to
combine the two ideas ,w - i ; ■;« unity. See Cosmology of the Rigveda,

pp. 83, 84, and Muir, 0. S I 7 8, where the hymn is translated and

some of its difficulties are discussed. Prof. Ludwig's Commentary is especi-
ally full and valuable, and should be consulted by all students of the Veda.

1 Manyu : Anger, Passion, personified.

3 With thy fervour : tdpasd : tdpas means f heat,’ 1 burning/ and, secondly,
penance, rigorous abstraction.

5 Without a portion: without a share in thy favours. I am myself: I am
just what I am ; a weak mortal, for whose infirmity allowance Bhould be made,
( Being (incorporated with) my body, approach me.’ — Wilson.

m TEE ETMNS OF [BOOK X, .

Come to me, Manyu, Wielder of the Thunder : bethink thee of
thy friend, and slay the Dasyus.

7 Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station : so shall we
slay a multitude of foemen.

The best of meath I offer to support thee : may we be first to
drink thereof in quiet.

HYMN LXXXIV. Manyu.

Borne on with thee, 0 Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brave
men, impetuous, bursting forward,

March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointed
arrows, sharpening their weapons.

2 Flashing like fire, be thou, 0 conquering Manyu, invoked, 0

Victor, as our army’s leader.

Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions : show forth
thy vigour, scatter those who hate us.

3 0 Manyu, overcome thou our assailant : on ! breaking, slay-

ing, crushing down the foemen.

They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour : Mighty,
Sole born ! thou makest them thy subjects.

4 Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu : sharpen the

spirit of each clan for battle.

With thee to aid, 0 thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift the
glorious shout for conquest.

5 Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, 0 Manyu, be thou

bere our Sovran Ruler.

To thy dear name, 0 Victor, we sing praises ; we know the
spring from which thou art come hither.

6 Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highest

conquering might is thine. Subduer !

Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu, 0 Much-invoked, in
shock of mighty battle.

7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth of both

sides gathered aud collected ;

And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed with
terror, slink away defeated.

1 Like flames of fire inform; agnirilpdh: Homer’s Si flag Trvpbg aWojuivoco .

3 Sole lorn : c O thou who art without companion- — Wilson,

5 The spring ; the source.

7 For spoil: the preservation of their own property and the seizure of
^®ir enemies’ goods being regarded as a double conquest. Or dhdnam
ubhdyam may mean wealth of both kinds, horses and cows.

This hymn and the preceding are to be repeated, Saya.ia says, at sacrifices to
ensure the destruction of enemies.

HYMN 85.]

501

tub mar eb a.

HYMN LXXXV. SArya’s Bridal.

Truth is the base that bears the earth ; by Surya are the heav-
ens sustained.

By Law the Adit y as stand secure, and Soma holds his place in
heaven.

2 By Soma are the Adityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth.
Thus Soma in the midst of all these constellations hath his. place.

3 One thinks, when they have brayed the plant, that he hath

drunk the Soma’s juice ;

Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma no one ever tastes.

4 Soma, secured by sheltering rules, guarded by hymns inBrihati,
Tbou standest listening to the stones : none tastes of thee who

dwells on earth.

5 When they begin to drink thee, then, 0 God, thou swellest out

again.

Yayu is Soma’s guardian God. The Moon is that which shapes
the years.

6 Raibhi was her dear bridal friend, and N&rAsansi led her home.
Lovely was Sury&’s robe : she came to that which G&thfl had

adorned.

7 Thought was the pillow of her couch, sight was the unguent

for her eyes :

Her treasury was earth and heaven when Suryfl went unto
her Lord.

The main subject of this composite hymn, which is one of the latest m the
Rigveda, is the ceremony of marriage in general and more especially the wed-
ding of Sfiry&, the Daughter of the Sun, another form of Dawn, who is re-
garded as the typical bride.

1 Truth : or reality ; sdtyarn , used interchangeably with rltam, the Law
and Order of the universe.

2 By Soma ; by the power of the deified Soma whose influence pervades,
quickens, and supports all existence. In the second line Soma is the Moon,
but perhaps there is an allusion to the other sense also of the word. These
constellations; the naJcshati'as or lunar mansions. ‘In the centre of these
stars.’ — Muir,

3 Knoio as Soma : know -to be the Moon, regarded as the food of Gods only.

4 By hymns in Brihatt : that is by hymns in that metre. But the meaning
of Mrhaiaik is uncertain. According to S&yana, the B&rhatas are the seven
guardians of the Soma, Sv&na, Bhr&ja, Angh& ri, and others.

5 They : the Gods. Thee ; the ambrosia contained in thee, which the
Gods drink during the waning of the Moou. 0 Qod ; Soma, the Moon.

6 Soma is the deity of the preceding five stanzas. Siirya’s Bridal is the
subject of 6—17. Raibht, N&rdsansU aud Qdthd are ritual verse, eulogistic
hymn, and non-Vedic song personified.

7 Treasury : kdsali : meaning, probably, trousseau or bridal outfit. Accord-
ing to some the box or body of the chariot is intended.

502

TEE EYMNS OF

[BOOK X

8 Hymns were the cross-bars of the pole, Kurira-metre decked

the car :

The bridesmen were the Asvin Pair : Agni was leader of the
train.

9 Soma was he who wooed the maid : the groomsmen were both

Asvins, when

The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing Suryjl on her Lord.

10 Her spirit was the bridal car; the covering thereof was

heaven :

Bright were both Steers that drew it, when SurjA approached
her husband’s home.

11 Thy Steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse and

Sama-hymn ;

All ear were thy two chariot wheels : thy path was tremulous
in the sky.

12 Clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels ; wind was the axle

fastened there.

Sdrya, proceeding to her Lord, mounted a spirit-fashioned car.

13 The bridal pomp of Surya, which Savitar started, moved

along.

In Magha days are oxen slain, in Arjunls they wed the bride.

14 When on your three- wheeled chariot, 0 .Asvins, ye came as

wooers unto Surya’s bridal,

Then all the Gods agreed to your proposal : Pfishan as Son
elected you as Fathers.

15 0 ye Two Lords of lustre, then when ye to SuryA’s wooing came.
Where was one chariot-wheel of yours? Where stood ye for

the Sire's command ?

$ Decked her car : formed its canopy. But the meaning of opasdh here is
uncertain. ‘ JKurtra metre was the thong of the whip/ — Wilson. The
Iridesmen: in I. 119. 7 and elsewhere the Asvins are said to be the husbands
of SffryA Here they are represented as the friends who had asked her in
marriage for Soma.

11 All ear : the text has srdtram, an ear, which S&yana says, means arotre ,
two ears. ‘ The two wheels were thy ears/ — Wilson.

13 In MagM days : or in stricter accordance with the text, * In Agh& days/
when the Moon is in the lunar mansion MagM. See Jacobi, Festgruss an, JR,
•von Moth , p. 09, and Weber, Vedische JBeitrage, p. 32f. Slain : only on
especially festive occasions, weddings for instance. ‘Are whipped along/ —
Wilson. In Arjunis : two asterisms or lunar mansions, more commonly called
Phalgunis. They wed the hHde : she is esc >rted to her husband's home.

14 As wooers: on behalf of Soma. Ptlshan : here meaning Savitar. Son
and Fathers ; intended to express close relationship and Savitar’s obligation
to the Asvins who had arranged the marriage.

15 For the Sire’s command : to receive Savitar’a invitation to take part in
the bridal procession. According to Say ana, ( to offer your gift/

HYMN 85,] THE RIGVED A.

16 The Brahmans, by their seasons, know, 0 Surya, those two

wheels of thine :

One, kept concealed, those only who are skilled in highest
truths have learned.

17 To Sury& and the Deities, to Mitra and to Yarnna,

Who know aright the thing that is, this adoration have I paid.

18 By their own power these Twain in close succession move ;

They go as yd cVMr*': round the sacrifice.

One of the b .. i «■ h all existing things; the other

ordereth seasons and is born again.

19 He, born afresh, is new and new for ever: ensigu of days he

goes before the Mornings.

Coming, he orders for the Gods their portion. The Moon pro-
longs the days of oar existence.

20 Mount this, all-shaped, gold-hued, with strong wheels, fash-

ioned of Kins uka and Sal mail, light-rolling,

Bound for the world of life immortal, Surya ; make for thy lord
a happy bridal journey.

21 Bise up from hence : this midden hath a husband. I laud

Visvavasu with hymns and homage.

Seek in her father’s home another fair one, and find the
portion from of old assigned thee.

23 Kise up from hence, Visvavusu : with revei*ence we worship thee.
Seek thou another willing maid, and with her hushaud leave
the bride,

23 Straight in direction be the paths, and thornless, whereon
our fellows travel to the wooing.

Let Aryamau and Bhaga lead us : perfect, G Gods, the union
of the wife^and husband.

16 The two wheels are probably heaven nnd earth, and the third, one kept
concealed, is the mysterious invisible world beyond them.

18 In this stanza .and the following one, which are but loosely connected
with the rest of the hymn, Surya represents the Sun, and Soma is the Moon.

20 Stanzas 20 — 33 contain a collection of formulas repeated when the bride
mounts her chariot, while she is travelling to her husband’s house, when she
arrives there, and on the following morning. This : chariot. Kinsuha ; the
wood of the Butea frondosa, Salmali : the silk-cotton tree ; Salmalia mala-
barica. Stir yd : the girl is addressed by the name of Sury&, the typical
bride.

21 Visvdvasa : one of the Gandharvas, the protector of virgins. He is told
to leave the bride who no longer needs his care, and to transfer his guardian-
ship to some marriageable maiden who has not yet found a husband. Fair
one: vy&Jct&m: 4 decorated with ornaments.’ — Wilson

£3 To the wooing : to the father, to whom the in tenders are to apply for
his daughter’s hand on behalf of their friend, according to S£yana,

504 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

24 Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, wherewith Most

Blessed Snvitar hath bound thee.

In Law's seat, to the world of virtuous action, I give thee up
uuinjured with thy consort.

25 Hence, and not thence, I send thee free. I make thee softly

fettered there,

That, Bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her fortune and
her sons.

26 Let Pushan take thy hand and hence conduct thee ; may the

two Asvins on their car transport thee.

Go to the house to be the household’s mistress and speak as
lady to thy gathered people.

27 Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here : be vigi-

lant to rule thy household in this home.

Closely unite thy body with this man, thy lord. So shall ye,
full of years, address your company.

28 Her hue is blue and red : the fiend who clingeth close is

driven off.

Well thrive the kinsmen of this bride : the husband is bound
fast in bonds.

29 Give thou the woollen robe away : deal treasure to the Brah-

man priests.

This female fiend hath got her feet, and as a wife attends
her lord.

30 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this wicked fiend,
What time the husband wraps about his limbs the garment

of his wife.

r*

24 The noose of Varuna : the girdle with which the bride is girded after
she has been bathed, combed, and dressed for the marriage ceremony. See
Prof. Max Muller's Eigveda-Sanhitd, Vol. VI., Preface, p 14. Or, as Lanman
suggests, the noose may mean the tie by which a girl is bound to her father
till marriage. Law's seat ; the place of sacrifice, the altar.

Stanzas 24 — 2d and 32, 33 are spoken just before the bride's departure
from her father’s house.

25 Hence and not thence: from thy father's house and not from thy
husbands.

27 Be vigilant to rule thy household: this is S&yana's explanation. * Be
watchful over the domestic fire.’ — Wilson. The verse is addressed to the
bride, and to the newly- wedded pair on arrival at the bridegroom’s house.

23 Her hue: the colour of Krityd, Magic personified, a female deity or
fiend.

29 The woolltn to he ; ( the garment soiled by the body.’— Wilson. Attends
her lord: the magic, or evil spell, returns to its originator.— Ludwig.

HYMN 85 .] THE EIGVEDA. m

31 Consumptions, from her people, which follow the bride's re-

splendent train, —

These let the Holy Gods again bear to the place from which
they came.

32 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wed-

ded pair.

By pleasant ways let them escape the danger, and let foes
depart.

33 Signs of good fortune mark the bride : come all of you and
% look at her.

Wish her prosperity, and then return unto your homes again.

34 Pungent is this, and bitter this, filled, as it wera, with arrow-

barbs, Empoisoned and not fit for use.

The Brahman who knows Sfirya well deserves the garment of
the bride.

35 The fringe, the cloth that decks her head, and then the triply

parted robe, —

Behold the hues which Sfirya wears : these doth the Brahman
purify.

36 I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou mayst

reach old age with me thy husband.

Gods, Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi' have given thee to
be my household's mistress.

37 0 Pushan, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the

sharer of my pleasures ;

Her who shall twine her loving arms about me, and welcome all
my love and mine embraces.

38 For thee, with bridal train, they, first, escorted SftryH to her

home. *

Give to the husband in return,. Agni, the wife with progeny.

31 From her people: * a most remarkable and direct assumption of “here-
dity ** as a lurking danger, * — Mme. Z^uaSde Jiagozin, Vedic India, p. 371.

33 Perhaps spoken, on the way, to the spectators of the procession.

34 This: the bride's garment. Mryd : meaning here the song of Sfiry&'ft
Bridal.

35 The meaning of rfsdsanam, visasanam . and adhivikartanam is uncertain.
Prof. Wilson renders these words by * border-cloth,’ ‘ head-cloth,* and ‘ divided
skirt.’ Prof, Weber and the St. Petersburg Lexicon explain the passage as refer-
ring to the preparation of the carcass of the animal that has been slaughtered
for the festivity. According to this view the first line might he rendered : —
‘The butchering, the cutting up, the severing of limb and joint* ; and for
‘hues* ‘forms’ might be substituted.

36 The bridegroom addresses the bride,

• .38 Thee : Agni. They ? the Gaudharvas, according to S&yana,

m THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X.

39 Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and with

ample life.

Long-lived be he who is her lord ; a hundred autumns let him
live.

40 Soma obtained her -first of all; next the Gandharva -was her

lord.

Agni was thy third husband : now one born of woman is thy
fourth.

41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave :
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this my

spouse.

** 42 Be ye not parted ; dwell ye here ; reach the full time of human
life.

With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing in your
own abode.

43 So may Prajapati bring children forth to us ; may Aryaman

adorn us till old age come nigh.

Not inauspicious enter thou thy husband’s house : bring bless-
ing to our bipeds and our quadrupeds.

44 Not evil-eyed, no slayer of thy husband, bring weal to cattle,

radiant, gentle-hearted ;

Loving the Gods; delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing to
our quadrupeds and bipeds.

45 0 Bounteous Indra, make this bride blest in her sons and for-

tunate.

Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband the eleventh
man.

46 Over thy husband’s father and thy husband’s mother bear full

sway. *

Over the sister of thy lord, over his brothers rule supreme.

47 So maythe Universal Gods, so may the Waters join our hearts.
May Matarisvan, Dhatar, and Deshtri together bind us close.

40 As the typical bride Suryfi, was first married to Soma, so the young maid
originally belongs to him, then to the Gandharva, as the guardian of virginity,
then to Agni as the sacred fire round which she walks in the marriage cere-
mony, and fourthly to her human husbaud — Grassmann.

42 The formulae contained in stanzas 42 — 47 are repeated when the bride-
groom has returned with his bride to his home, and offers sacrifice with fire.
The wedded pair are addressed first, and then the bride is exhorted and*
blessed. Stanza 47 is spoken by the bridegroom for his wife and himself.

47 JDethtrt: Instructress, a female deity, not mentioned elsewhere in the
Kigveda. According to S&yana, ddtrt phaldiidm sarasvati is meant ; 1 the
bountiful (Saraswati).* — Wilson.

For a full account of the marriage ceremonies of the Hindfis, derived from

E7MN 86.]

THE RIGVEDA.

507

HYMN LXXXVI. ' Indra.

Men have abstained from pouring juice : they count not Indra
as a God

Where at the votary's store my friend Vrishakapi hath drunk
his fill. Supreme is Indra over all.

2 Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishakapi hath wrought;
Yet nowhere else thou findest place wherein to drink the Soma

juice. Supreme is Indra over all.

3 What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast Vrishakapi,
With whom thou art so angry now 1 What is the votary's food-
ful store? Supreme is Indra over all.

4 Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him and bite

him in the ear,

O Indra, that Vrishakapi whom thou protectest as a friend.
Supreme is Indra over all.

5 Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly wrought,

that were my joy.

In pieces will I rend his head ; the sinner's portion shall be
woe. Supreme is Indra over all.

6 No Dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater wealth of

love's delights.

None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her lord's em-
brace. Supreme is Indra over all.

the ritnal of Br&limans who use the S&ma-veda, see Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous
Essays, No. III., and Weber and Haas, Indiscke Studien, V. pp, 177 ff. See
also Hymns of the Atharva-veda, Book XIV., and Dr. J. Ehni’s paper, Zeits-
chrift der JDeutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft, XXXIII. pp. 166 ff. I
have relied mainly on Ludwig’s Commentary. Prof. Grassmann has banished
the hymn to his Appendix.

1 S&yana ascribes this stanza to Indra ; others make Indr&nl the speaker.
Vrish&kapi is said to have monopolized the offerings that should have been
presented to Indra. Vrhhdkapi — literally ‘ the strong ape*’ or c the male ape’
— appears to be a sort of intermediate being between a demigod and a demon ;
but it is not easy to determine his nature. S&yana calls him the son of Indra.

He is also Baid to be the setting Bun, and the sun who draws up vapour and
irrigates with mist. According to M. Bergaigue, La Religion Vedique , II, 270,
he was a mythical sacrifices

2 IndiAni blames Indra for his apathy.

3 Indra 'speaks. What is the votary’ s f oodf ul store 7 ; why should his appro-
priation of the worshipper’s offerings make thee so angry ?

4 Indr&nt is the speaker of this stanza and of the two, or three, that follow.

5 Kapi: the ape; an abbreviation of Vrish&kapi. Hath marred the beau-
teous things : according to Sftya’ a, hath spoiled the oblations prepared for me
by my worshippers. But it Beems more probable that Vrishakapi has assault-
ed IndiAd and inflicted injuries on her person.

6 Iudrdnl speaks with pride of her voluptuous charms which incited VrishA-
kapi to his amorous assault.

508

THE HYMNS OH

{BOOK X.

7 Mother whose love is quickly won, I say what verily will be.
My breast, 0 Mother, and my head and both my hips seem
quivering. Supreme is, Indra over all.
g Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad hair-plaits
add ample hips,

Why, 0 thou Hero's wife, art thou angry with our Vrish&kapi ?
Supreme is Indra over all.

9 This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of hero's love.
Yet Heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts' Friend and Indra's
Queen. Supreme is Indra over all.

10 From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice.
Mother of Heroes, Indra's Queen, the rite's ordainer is extolled.

Supreme is Indra over all.

11 So have I heard Indrdni called most fortunate among these Dames,
For never shall her Consort die in future time through length

of days. Supreme is Indra over all.

12 Never, Indr&ni, have I joyed without my friend Vrish&knpi,
Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth to

the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all.

13 Wealthy Yrishakapayi, blest with sons and consorts of thy sons,
Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that etfecteth much.

Supreme is Indra overall.

14 Fifteeu in number, then, for me a score of bullocks they prepare,
And I devour the fat thereof: they fill my belly full with food.

Supreme is Indra over all.

15 Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing amid the herds,
Sweet to thine heart, 0 Indra, is the brew which she who

tends thee pours. Supreme is Indra over aJI,

7 This stanza is ascribed by S&yana to Yrish&kapi. It is hardly intelligible;
bat, as Ludwig says, it seems to be spoken by Indi&nl, expressing her indigna-
tion at Vrish&kfipi’s audacity which makes all her body quiver with rage.

8 Indra speaks.

9 Indr&ni speaks this and the following stanza. Bereft of h&'o's love; who
has no brave husband to protect her.

10 The matron goes to feast : Indr&ni means that VrisMkapi assaulted her
when she was on her way to a festival, which women were accustomed to at-
tend ; and that her rank as Indra’s consort did not preserve her from insult.

11 Indra speaks this and the following stanza.

J3 Spoken by Vrislntkapi to his wife Yrish&kap&yf who is said to represent
the dawn, or, by others, the gloaming which follows the setting sun Yrisb&kapf.

14 Indra speaks. Fifteen: sacrifices; probably YrislAkapi and his wife,
and their sons and daughters-in«law. Sftyana explains differently : — * The
worshippers dress for me fifteen (and) twenty bulls.’ — Wilson.

15 Indr&nt speaks, endeavouring to attract him to her own libation instead
of the offerings of Vrlsh&kapi.

I pass over stanzas 16 and 17, which I cannot translate into decent English.

THE RIGYEDA.

HYMN 86.]

m

18 0 Indra this Vrishakapi bath found a slain wild animal,
Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load

of wood* Supreme is Indra over all

19 Distinguishing the Dasa and the Arya, viewing all, I go.

I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary’s Soma juice.
Supreme is Indra over all.

20 The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues ill

length they spread !

Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, Vrishakapi.
Supreme is Indra over all.

21 Turn thee again Vrishakapi ; we twain will bring thee happiness.
Thou goest homeward on thy way along thispsth wnich leads

to sleep. Supreme is Indra over all.

22 When, Indra and Vrishakapi, ye travelled upward to your home,
Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the beast

that troubles mau ? Supreme is Indra over all,

23 Daughter of Maim, Parsu bai’e a score of children at a birth.
Her portion verily was "bliss although her burthen caused her

grief.

18 Indr&d speaks, bub her speech is difficult to understand. Wild a ni-
nxal : von Roth conjectures ‘wild ass* as the meaning of parasvantam
here. Dresser: or slaughter-bench. ‘A fire-place (to cook it).’ — Wilson.
Indrdni seems to speak depreciatingly of a sacrifice offered by V risMkapi as
consisting of an unsuitable victim, prepared with instruments and means
which chance has thrown in his way. Ludwig thinks that Yrish&kapi may
represent the Moon whose spots are fancifully considered to be the objects
mentioned by Indr&iii.

19 I look : with favour. The simple votary is the worshipper who offers his
libation in a sincere spirit of devotion. The stanza and the two following
are spoken by Indr*.

20 Vrish&kapi appears to meditate flight into distant deserts to escape
from the wrathful Indr&ni. Indra dissuades him, and promises to reconcile
Indrdni to him.

22 The two concluding stanzas seem to be spoken by Indr&ni. Stanza 22 is
obscure, and stanza 23 has no discoverable connexion with the rest of the hymn.

23 Daughter of Manu : that is, of the progenitor of men. Nothing more

is known of Parsu, which means a rib. Much of this hymn appears to be
inexplicable. M, Bergaigne thinks that Vrishakapi, Indra’s friend, represents
Soma, and IndiAni the wife of Indra represents Prayer. ‘This bizarre myth
would symbolize the frequently expressed idea that Indra loves neither the
sacred beverage without prayer nor prayer without the sacred beverage. He
wishes therefore his union with Prayer to be accompanied by the union of
Prayer with Soma, and he neglects sacrifice, as long as this union of the two
essential elements of worship remains unaccomplished.’ — See ha Religion
VUique, II. 270,271. 4 .

Prof. Geldner gives a different interpretation of the hymn, which he has
translated and exhaustively discussed in Vedische Studien, II. pp. 22 — 42.
See also Oldenberg, Religion dee Veda , 172 — 174,

510

THE HYMNS OF

[ BOOK X

HYMN LXXXVIL Agni.

I BALM with, oil the mighty Bakshas-slayer ; to the most
famous Friend I come for shelter.

Enkindled, sharpened by our rites, may Agni protect us in
the day and night from evil.

2 0 Jatavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flame

attack the demons.

Seize with thy tongue the foolish gods’ adorers : rend, put
within thy mouth the raw-flesh eaters.

3 Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who hast

both, enkindled and destroying.

Boam also in the air, 0 King, around us, and with thy jaws
assail the wicked spirits.

4 Bending thy shafts through sacrifices, Agni, whetting their

points with song as if with whetstoues,

Pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudh&nas, and break their
arms uplifted to attack thee.

5 Pierce through the Y&tudhana’s skin, 0 Agni ; let the destroy-

ing dart with fire consume him.

Bend his joints, Jatavedas, let the eater of flesh, flesh-seeking,
track his mangled body.

6 Where now thou seest, Agni Jatavedas, one of these demons

standing still or roaming,

Or flying oh those paths in air's mid-region, sharpen the shaft
and as an archer pierce him.

7 Tear from the evil spirit, Jatavedas, what he hath seized and

with his spears hath captured.

Blazing before him strike him down, 0 Agni ; let spotted
carrion-eating kites devour him,

8 Here tell this forth, 0 Agni : whesoever is, he himself, or acteth

as, a demon,

Him grasp, 0 thou Most Youthful, with thy fuel : to the Man-
seer's eye give him as booty.

9 With keen glance guard the sacrifice, 0 Agni : thou Sage,

conduct it onward to the Vasus.

Let not the fiends, 0 Man-beholder, harm thee burning against
the Bakshaeas to slay them.

■2 The demons ; Y&tudh&nas, explained by S4yana as^R&kshasas. See VII.
104. 15. Foolish gods' adorers: mttradev&n: according to S&yana, a special
class of evil spirits called Mftradevas because they make destruction their sport,
5 The eater of flesh : the wolf or other carnivorous animal.

8 The Man-seer here is either Agni himself or Sftrya the Sun.

9 To the Vasus , to the Gods to whom the oblations are made. S&yana ex-

HYMN $7.] THE RWVEHA. 511

10 Look on the fiend mid men, as Man-beholder: rend thou his

three extremities in pieces.

Demolish with thy flame his ribs, 0 Agni; the Y&tudhana f s
root destroy thou triply.

1 1 Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who with his

falsehood injures Holy Order.

Loud roaring with thy flame, 0 JAtavedas, crush him and
cast him down before the singer.

12 Lend thou the worshipper that eye, 0 Agni, wherewith thou

lookest on the hoof-armed demon.

With light celestial in Atharvan’s manner burn up the fool
who ruins truth with falsehood. A

1 3 Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, what heated

word the worshippers have spoken,

Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit, — pierce to the
heart therewith the Y&tudh&nas.

14 With fervent heat exterminate the demons; destroy the fiends

with burning flame, 0 Agni.

Destroy with fire the foolish gods 7 adorers ; blaze and destroy
the insatiable monsters.

15 May Gods destroy this day the evil-doer: may each hot curse

of his return and blast him.

Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva’s net enclose
the Yatudh&na.

16 The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, with flesh

of horses and of human bodies,

Who steals the milch-cow T s milk away, O Agni, — tear off the
heads of such with fiery fury.

17 The cow gives milk each year, 0 Man-regarder : let not the

Yktudhana ever taste it.

If one would glut him with the biestings, Agui, pierce with
thy flame his vitals as he meets thee.

plains vasubhyah here by vasUndmartkdya : — 4 to (the acquisition of) riches.*— r
Wilson.

10 His three extremities; his three heads, according to S&yana. ‘ Kopf
und Schultern,* head and shoulders. — G-rassmann, Root : meaning his feet.
Triply : used vaguely, to correspond with the three upper extremities.

* Cut off the triple font of the Yatudhana* — Wilson.

12 Hoof -armed: striking with the hoof. According to S&yana, ‘having
nails like hoofs.* In Atharvan y s manner : like Atharvan, the ancient prieBt
who is said to have been the first who obtained fire.

13 The pair ; the married pair ; perhaps the sacrificer and his wife. The
Rishi prays that every hasty word that may have been uttered by pious people
in their anger may be used as a weapon to wound the Y&tudh&na.

15 F/swa's net : the noose of the all-pervading Agni.

512 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

18 Let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle; may Aditi cast

off the evil-doers.

May the God Savitar give them up to ruin, and be their share
of plants and herbs denied them.

19 Agni, from days of old thou slayest demons: never shall

Rakshasas iu fight o’ercome thee.

Burn up the foolish ones, the flesh-devourers : let none of them
escape thine heavenly arrow.

20 Guard us, 0 Agni, from above and under, protect us from

behind us and before us ;

And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, glowing
with fervent heat, consume the sinner.

21 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, 0 King,

protect us as a Sage with wisdom.

Guard to old age thy friend, 0 Friend, Eternal : 0 Agni, as
Immortal, guard us mortals.

22 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sage,
Of hero lineage, day by day, destroyer of our treacherous foes.

23 Burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood of

Rakshasas,

0 Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with lances armed with points
of flame,

2 4 Burn thou the paired Kimidins, burn, Agni, the Y&tudhana pairs.

1 sharpen thee, Infallible, with hymns. 0 Sage, be vigilant.

25 Shoot forth, 0 Agni, with thy flame : demolish them on every side.
Break thou the Yatudhana’s strength, the vigour of the Rak-

tillclS&l

HYMN LXXXVIir. Agni.

Dear, ageless sacrificial drink is offered in light-discovering,
heaven-pervading Agni.

The Gods spread forth through his Celestial Nature, that he
might bear the world up and sustain it.

2 The world was swallowed and concealed in darkness : Agni
was born, and light became apparent.

The Deities, the broad earth, and the heavens, and plants,
and waters gloried in his friendship.

18 The poison of the cattle: if they drink milk, let it poison them.
According to Sftyana, let them drink the poison of the cattle (which is kept
in the house), meaning perhaps some poisonous ointment used for external
application only.

24 Kimtdim : treacherous and malevolent spirits. See VII. 104. 2, note,

1 Sacrificial drinh : 1 swelling oblation/ according to Prof. Pischel.

HYMN 88.]

THE RIG VEDA.

513

3 Inspired by Gods who claim oar adoration, I now will laud

Eternal Lofty Agni,

Him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre, this heaven,
and both the worlds, and air’s mid-region.

4 Earliest Priest whom all the Gods accepted, and chose him,

and anointed him with butter,

He swifty made all things that fly, stand, travel, all that hath
motion, Agni Jatavedas.

5 Because thou, Agni, Jatavedas, stoodest at the world’s head

with thy refulgent splendour,

We sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises : thou
filledst heaven and earth, God meet for worship.

6 Head of the world is Agni in the night-time ; then, as the

Sun, at morn springs up and rises.

Then to his task goes the prompt Priest foreknowing the
woudrous power of Gods who must be honoured.

7 Lovely is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath shone forth,

seated in the heavens, refulgent.

With resonant hymns all Gods who guard our bodies have
offered up oblation in this Agni,

8 First the Gods brought the hymnal into being; then they

engendered Agni, then oblation.

He was their sacrifice that guards our bodies ; him the heav-
ens know, the earth, the waters know him.

0 He, Agni, whom the Gods have generated, in whom they
offered up all worlds and creatures,

He with his bright glow heated earth and heaven, urging him-
self right onward in his grandeur.

] 0 Then by the 2aud the Gods engendered Agni in heaven, who
fills both worlds through strength and vigour.

They made him to appear in threefold essence : he ripens
plants of every form and nature.

5 We sent thee forth : the Rishi glorifies the power of the priests who
made Agni their messenger to the Gods.

6 Agni, who is the Moon by night, at dawn becomes Sfirya or the Sun- God
who when he sets again becomes Agni.

9 All worlds and creatures; proleptically : meaning that the oblation
offered by the gods was destined to produce the universe, — Ludwig, Accord-
ing to 8 Ay ana : — * in whom all beings have offered oblations ; * but it is clear
that the oblations of the Gods are intended.

10 Through strength and vigour: saktbhih : *by his functions:' — Wilson.
In threefold essence : or in three conditions, or places, as the Sun, lightning,
and terrestrial fire.

33

514 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 20

11 What time the Gods, whose due is worship, set him as Surya,

Sou of Acliti, iu heaven,

When the Pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, all creatures
that existed looked upon them.

12 For all the world of life the Gods made Agni Vaisvanara to

be the days’ bright Banner,—

Him who hath spread abroad the radiant Mornings, and, com-
ing with his light, unveils the darkness.

13 The wise and holy Deities engendered Agni Vaisvanara whom

age ne’er touches,

The Ancient Star that wanders on for ever, lofty and strong,
Lord of.<the Living Being.

14 We call upon the Sage with holy verses, Agni Vaisvanara the

ever-beaming,

Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatness : he
is a God below, a God above us.

15 1 have heard mention of two several pathways, ways of the

Fathers and of Gods and mortals.

On these two paths each moving creature travels, each thing
between the Father and the Mother.

16 These two united paths bear him who journeys born from the

head and pondered with the spirit.

He stands directed to all things existing, hasting, unresting
in his fiery splendour.

17 Which of us twain knows where they speak together, upper

and lower of the two rite-leaders ?

Our frieuds have helped to gather our assembly. They came
to sacrifice; who will announce it"?

18 How many are the Fires and Suns in number ? What is the

number of the Dawns and Waters ?

Not jestingly I speak to you, 0 Fathers. Sages, I ask you
this for information.

11 The Pair : the Sun and Moon. Accrding to S&yana, Usbas and Shrya.

13 Lord of the Living Being: the meaning of yaJcshdsya is uncertain.
Sftyana explains it by ptijyasya devasya, of the adorable God. ‘ The observer
of what is firm.’ — Ludwig. 4 The lord of meteors,’ — Grassmann. ‘Surveil-
lant du Yaksba,' — Bergaigne.

1 4 Beloio : on earth.

15 Two several pathways : the way to the other world and the way back to
the earth. The Father and the Mother : heaven and earth.

16 Him who journeys : Agni. From the head: of the world. From Aditya,
the head or chief of all existence, according to S&yana,

17 Us twain: Agni and the Ilishi, Upper and lower : according to SSyana,
the upper fire is V&yu and the lower is terrestrial Agni. Who will announce
it ? ; Agni alone will make the sacrifice known to the Gods,

HYMN 89.] THE RIG VEDA. 515

19 As great as is the fair-winged Morning’s presence to him who
dwells beside us, Matavisvan !

Is what the Br&hman does when he approaches to sacrifice
and sits below the Hotar.

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra.

I will extol the most heroic Indra who with his might forced
earth and sky asunder ;

Who hath filled all with width as man’s Upholder, surpassing
floods and rivers in his greatness.

2 Sdrya is he : throughout the wide expanses shall Indra turn

him, swift as car-wheels, hither, #

Like a stream resting not but ever active : he hath destroyed,
with light, the black-lmed darkness.

3 To him I sing a holy prayer, incessant, new, matchless, common

to the earth and heaven,

Who marks, as they were backs, all living creatures ; ne’er
doth he fail a friend, the noble Indra.

4 I will send forth my songs in flow unceasing, like water from

the ocean's depth, to Indra

Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth
and heaven as with an axle.

5 Rousing with draughts, the Shaker, rushing onward, im-

petuous, very strong, armed as with arrows
Is Soma ; forest trees and all the bushes deceive not Indra
with their offered likeness.

19 Morning' $ presence : the light of Dawn which spreads over heaven and
earth. Him who tyvells beside us : the Yajam&na, or institute of the
sacrifice. — Ludwig. Below the Hotar : below the regular Hotar-priesfc.
S&yana explains this stanza differently : — ‘ As long, M^tarisvan, as the swiftly-
moving (nights) cover the face of the dawn, (so long) the Brahman , the
inferior sitting down (to perform the work) of the Hotri, approaching the
sacrifice supports (the ceremony).’ — Wilson.

1 With width: with his own extended magnitude. ‘With radiance/ —
Wilson.

2 Sltrya is he : Indra is identified with the Sun whose course he directs.
According to S&yana, stlryah here = suvtr yah, heroic.

3 Incessant : or unerring, that is, in strict accordance with the rules of
the ritual. As they were bade* ; as if they were horses or oxen, the length
and Bhape of whose backs must be carefully considered in forming a judgment
of their worth.

5 Prof. Wilson observes : — r This verse is obscure, partly because the words
are unusual, partly because there is a confusion between Indra and SomaJ
Deceive not Indra: he will not accept any substitutes : he will have nothing
but the genuine Soma -plant and its juice.

[BOOK X

51,6 THE HYMNS OF

6 Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, the earth,

the heavens, the firmament, the mountains, —

When heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm
and breaks the strong in pieces.

7 As an axe fells the tree so he slew Vritra, brake down the

strongholds and dug out the rivers.

He cleft the mountain like a new-made pitcher. Indra brought
forth the kine with his Companions.

8 Wise art thou, Punisher of guilt, 0 Indra. The sword lops

limbs, thou smitest clown the sinner,

The men who injure, as it were a comrade, the lofty Law of Va-
runa and Mitra.

9 Men who lead evil lives, who break agreements, and injure

Vamna, Aryaman, and Mitra, —

Against these foes, 0 Mighty Indra, sharpen, as furious death,
thy Bull of fiery colour.

10 Indra is Sovran Lord of Earth and Heaven, Indra is Lord of

waters and of mountains.

Indra is Lord of prosperers and sages : Indra must be invoked
in rest and effort.

11 Vaster than days and nights, Giver of increase, vaster than

firmament and flood of ocean,

Vaster than bounds of earth and wind’s extension, vaster
than rivers and our lands is Indra.

12 Forward, as herald of refulgent Morning, let thine insatiate

arrow fly, 0 Indra,

And pierce, as ’twere a stone launched forth from Leaven, with
hottest blaze the men who love deception.^

13 Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed, the tall trees

followed and the plants and herbage.

Yearning with love both Worlds approached, the Waters wait-
ed on Indra when he first had being.

7 His Companions : the Maruts, who assisted him in performing his exploit.

8 Punisher of guilt: here Indra is said to discharge the duties which in
more ancient hymns' are ascribed to Agni and to Mitra and Varuna.

9 Thy Bull: thy thunderbolt. ‘The heavy strong red weapon.’ — M.
Muller.

10 Invest and effort: ‘ for the acquirement and preservation of wealth.

Wilson.

13 The moons : or, the months. Waited on Indra: as the representative
of the Sun, the originator of all life.— Ludwig.

TEE RIGVEDA.

517

HYMN 90.]

14 Where was the vengeful dart when thou, 0 Indra, clavest the

demon ever bent on outrage ?

When fiends lay there upon the ground extended like cattle in
the place of immolation?

15 Those who are set in enmity against us, the Oganas, 0 Indra,

waxen mighty, —

Let blinding- darkness follow those our foemen, while these
shall have bright shining nights to light them.

16 May plentiful libations of the people, and singing Bishis’ holy

prayers rejoice thee.

Hearing with love this common invocation, come unto us, pass
by all those who praise thee.

17 O Indra, thus may we be made partakers of thy new favours

that shall bring us profit.

Singing with love, may we the Visv&mitras win daylight even
now through thee, 0 Indra.

18 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Stroug who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN XC. Purusha,

A thousand heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a thousand
feet.

On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.

2 This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that is to be ;
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still by food.

14 Fiends; mitrahrUvah : the exact meaning of the word is uncertain.
Prof. Ludwig takes it as a genitive case : * What time they lay there on the
earth extended like ^>xen in a demon’s place of slaughter.’

15 Oganas; probably the name of some hostile clan. According to S£yana*
enemies assembled in numbers. These : us and our friends here.

16 All those who praise thee; all other worshippers.

18 This is the concluding stanza of several hymns of the Visv&mitras.
See IIL 30, 22 ; 31. 22 ; 32. 17 ; 34. II ; 35. II ,* 36. II.

1 Purusha, embodied spirit, or Man personified and regarded as the soul

and original source of the universe, the personal and life-rrivmg in

all animated beings, is said to have a thousand, that is, i-i . .! ic'v.' V *• ids,
eyes, and feet, as being one with all created life. A space ten fingers wide ;
the region of the heart of man, wherein the soul was supposed to reside.
Although as the Universal Soul he pervades the universe, as the Individual
Soul he is enclosed in a space of narrow dimensions. See Hymns of the
Atharm-veda, XIX. 6. I, note.

2 The second line is explained in various ways. The meaning of the words
seems to be : he? is lord of immortality or the immortal world of the Gods,
which grows greater by food, that is, by the sacrificial offerings of men.

518

THE HYMNS OF

[EOOK X.

3 So mighty is his greatness ; yea, greater than this is Purusba.

All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths eternal life

in heaven.

4 With three-fourths Purusha w entrap : one-fourth of him again

was here.

Thence he strode out to every side over what eats not and what
eats.

5 From him Yiraj was born ; again Purusba from Viraj was born.

As soon as he was born he spread eastward and westward o’er

the earth.

6 When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusba as their

offering,

Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn ; summer was
the wood.

7 They balmed as victim on the grass Purusba bom in earliesttime.

With him the Deities and all S&dhyas and Bisbis sacrificed.

According to Sftyana : he is the lord or distributer of immortality because
be becomes the visible world in order that living beings may obtain the fruits
of their actions and gain mohsha or final liberation from their bonds, * he is
also the lord of immortality ; for he mounts beyond (his own condition)
for the food (of living beings).’ —Wilson. Colebrooke translates the line
* he is that which grows by nourishment, and he is the distributer of immor-
tality.’ Dr. Muir renders it by c He is also the lord of immortality, since
by food he expands.’ According to the paraphrase in the Bhdgavata-Purdna,
the meaning of the last clause is: ‘since he hath transcended mortal
nutriment.’ Prof. Ludwig’s version is : 4 auch fiber die unsterblichkeit
gebietend, [da er ,] was durch speise [1st,] weit iiberragt,’ ruling also over
immortality, [since he] far transcends what [exists] through food ; but in his
Commentary a somewhat different explanation is given. 4 Ruling over im-
mortality, he was all that grows by food.’— Peterson.

3 Eternal life : umritam: immortality, or the immortal Gods.

4 Over what eats not and what eats : over animate and inanimate creation.
According to Sdyana and Mahtdharn, over both classes of created things*
those capable of enjoyment, that is, who can taste the reward and punish-
ment of good’ and evil actions, such as Gods, men, and lower animals, and
those who are incapable thereof, such as mountains and rivers — chetanam } or
conscious, aahetanam, or unconscious, creation.

& him/ °r> from that, the 4 one-fourth ’ mentioned in stanzas 3 and
4. Virdf or, in the nominative form, Virdt, is said to have come, in the form
of the mundane egg, from Adi-Purusha, the primeval Purusha, or presiding
Male or Spirit, 4 who then entered into this egg, which he animates as its
vital soul or divine principle.’ Or Virdj may 4 be the female counterpart of
Purusha as Aditi of Daksha in X. 72. 4, 5.’ See Dr. Muir’s exImuKsivc
oil this passage, 0 , Texts , V. }ip, 369, 370 ; and Wallis, Cosmology of the

Migveda, p. 87. Eastward and westward: or, before and behind.

. c ^ sacrifice : mdnasam yajnam , a mental or imaginary sacrifice, accord-
ing to Styana. Summer: grishmd does not occur in any other R. Y. hymn.
Spring : vasantd occurs in only one other R. V. hymn.

7 On the grass : on the sacred^ grass used in sacrifices. Sddhyas : a class
of celestial beings, probably ancient divine sacrifices, -

HYMi V 90.]

THE MG VEDA.

519

■8 From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gather-
ed up.

He formed the creatures of the air, and animals both wild and
tame,

9 From that great general sacrifice Bichas and Sama-hymns
were born :

Therefrom were spells and charms produced ; the Yajus had
its birth from it.

10 From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of

teeth :

From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were
born.

1 1 When they divided Purusha how many portions*lid they make 1
What do they call his mouth, his arms ? What do they cafl his

thighs and feet 1

12 The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the B&janya

made.

His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sudra was
produced.

13 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the

Sun had birth ;

Indra and Agui from his mouth were born, ' and Vayu from
his breath.

1 4 Forth from Ins navel came mid-air ; the sky w r as fashioned

from his head ;

Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. Thus they
formed the worlds.

8 The dripping fat : e the mixture of curds and butter.*- -Wilson. He:
or, it ; the sacrificed victim Purusha, or the sacred clarified butter. The crea-
tures of the air: 1 those animals over whom VAyu presides,’ — Wilson.

9 Spells and charms : probably those of the later collection of the Ailiarva-
veda. The Yajus: the Yajur-veda.

, 12 Rijanya: the second or Kshatriya easte, the regal and military class-
Vaisya : the husbandman ; he whose business is agriculture and trade. Sildra :
the labourer. TUe Br&hmau is called the mouth of Purusha, as having the
special privilege, as a priest, of addressiug the Gods in prayer. The arms of
Purusha became the K&janya, the prince and soldier who wields the sword
and spear. His thighs, the strongat parts of his body, became the agricul-
turist and tradesman, the chief support of society ; and his feet, the emblems
of vigour and activity, became the B idra or labouring man on whose toil and
industry all ultimately rests. This is the only passage in the Rigveda which,
enumerates the four castes.

14 Cf. the creation myth of the world-giant Ymir or Hymir in old Northern
poetry. The hills are his bones, the vault of the sky his skull, the sea his
blood, and th0 clouds his brains . — ^Corpus Poeticum Borea\e> Yol. II. p. 468.

520 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

15 Sev6n fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers of fuel were

prepared,

When the Gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their victim,
Purusha.

16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim : these were the earliest

holy ordinances.

The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there where
the S<tdhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.

HYMN XCL Agni.

Brisk, at the place of I1&, hymned by men who wake, our
own familiar Friend is kindled in the house ;

Hotar of all oblation, worthy of our choice, Lord, beaming,
trusty fri6nd to one who loveth him.

2 He, excellent in glory, guest in every house, finds like a swift-

winged bird a home in every tree.

Benevolent to men, he scorns no living man : Friend to the
tribes of men he dwells with every tribe.

3 Most sage with insight, passing skilful with thy powei*s art

thou, 0 Agni, wise with wisdom, knowing all.

As Vasu, thou alone art Lord of all good things, of all the
treasures that the heavens and earth produce.
i Foreknowing well, 0 Agni, thou in Ila’s place hast occupied
thy regular station balmed with oil.

Marked are thy comings like the comings of the Dawns, the
rays of him who shineth spotless as the Sun.

15 P ending -slicks : guards, or pieces of wood laid round the sacrificial fire
to enclose it. ana explains paridhdyah as the seven metres, or as six shallow

trenches dug round the fire, and an imaginary one round the Sun. Mahidhara
says that the seven oceans may be intended.

This pantheistic hymn, which is generally called the Pwrusbasfikta, is of
comparatively recent origin, and appears to be an attempt to harmonize the
two ideas of sacrifice and creation. For further information regarding it, see
Muir, 0 S. Texts , I. pp. 6— <11, and V. 368—377, Prof. Max Muller, Ancient
Sanskrit Literature , pp. 570f, and Dr. Scherman, Philosophische Hymnen aus
der Big- r, ■■ 7 • 7 ‘‘f ■ % 11 — 23. The hymn has also been trans-
lated b; » ■' - ‘ • Essays , pp, 187, 168,* by Wallis, Cos*

mologi/ of the JRigveda , pp. 87, 88; and by Peterson, Hymns from the Rigveda,
pp. 289, 290; also by Burnouf, Bhdgavata Purdna, Preface to Yol. L, and by
Weber, Indische Studien , IX. p. 5. Grasstnann’s Translation in his Appendix
to Yol. II., and Ludwig's Translation and Commentary should be consulted.
See also Hymns of the Atharva-veda, XIX. 6, which is a reproduction of
this hymn with transpositions and variations.

1 The place of lid : the shrine where clarified butter is poured upon the
fire. Our own familiar Friend : Agni, the Friend of the house.

2 Swift-winged bird: or, bird of prey. ‘ Hunter,’ according to Ludwig,

3 Vasu * the word meaning alsoyood and treasure, .■

HTMN 91.] THE RIGVEHA. 521

5 Thy glories are, as lightnings from the rainy cloud, marked,

many-hued, like heralds of the Dawns’ approach,

When, loosed to wander over plants and forest trees, thou
crammest by thyself thy food into thy mouth.

6 Him, duly coming as their germ, have plants received : this

Agni have maternal Waters brought to life.

So in like manner do the forest trees and plants hear him
within them and produce him evermore.

7 When, sped and urged by wind, thou spreadest thee abroad,

swift piercing through thy food according to thy will,

Thy never-ceasing blazes, longing to consume, like men on
chariots, Agni, strive on every side. ^

8 Agni, the Hotar-priest who fills the assembly full, Waker of

knowledge, chief Controller of the thought, —

Him, yea, none other than thyself, doth man elect at sacri-
ficial offerings great and small alike.

9 Here, Agni, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee

as their Priest in sacred gatherings,

When men with strewn dipt grass and sacrificial gifts offer
thee entertainment, piously inclined.

10 Thine is the Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed; Leader

art thou, and Kindler for the pious man.

Thou art Director, thou the ministering Priest : thou art the
Brahman, Lord and Master in our home.

11 When mortal man presents to thee Immortal God, Agni, his

fuel or his sacrificial gift,

Then thou art his Adhvaryu, Hotar, messsenger, callest the
Gods and orderest the sacrifice.

12 From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him, these

holy words, these Hichas, songs and eulogies,

Eager for wealth, to Jatavedas fain for wealth : when they
have waxen strong they please their Strength ener.

(5 Agni is produced in the form of lightning by the waters of the firma-
ment, or the clouds, and descends with the rain into plants and trees, from
the wood of which he is brought forth by attrition.

8 Great and small : with Soma or without it.

9 The arrangers : priests who order and conduct the sacrificial ceremonies.

10 Agni discharges the duties of the seven chief priests, officiating as
Hotar, Potar, Neshfcar, Agnidh, Pras&star, Adhvaryu, and Brahman. See II.
I. 2, where this stanza originally occurs.

11 OaUest the Gods: ‘sayest the formula.’ — Ludwig.

1 2 Richas : verses of praise.

THE HYMNS OF

m

[BOOK X

13 This newest eulogy will I speak forth to him, the Ancient One

who loves it. May he hear our voice.

May it come near his heart and make it stir with love, as a
fond well-dressed matron clings about her lord.

14 He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and barren cows, and rams,

when duly set apart, are offered up, —

. To Agni, Soma-sprinlded, drinker of sweet juice, Disposer, with
my heart I bring a fair hymn forth.

15 Into thy mouth is poured the offering, Agni, as Soma into

cup, oil into ladle.

Vouchsafe us wealth, strength-winning, blest . with heroes,
wealth lofty, praised by men, and full of splendour.

HYMN XOIL Visvedevas.

I pbaise your Charioteer of sacrifice, the Lord of men, Priest
of the tribes, refulgent, Guest of night.

Blazing amid dry plants, snatching amid the green, the Strong,
the Holy Herald hath attained to heaven.

2 Him, Agni, Gods and men have made their chief support, who

drinks the fatness and completes the sacrifice.

With kisses they caress the Grandson of the Red, like the
swift ray of light, the Household Priest of Dawn.

3 Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard’s ways: his branches

evermore are sent forth to consume.

When his terrific flames have reached the Immortals’ world,
then men remember and extol the Heavenly Folk.

4 For then the net of Law, Dyaus, and the wide expanse, Earth,

Worship, aud Devotion meet for highest praise,

Varuna, Indra, Mifcra were of one accord,* and Savitar and
Bhaga, Lords of holy might.

5 Onward, with ever-roaming Rudra, speed the floods : over Ara-

mati the Mighty have they run.

With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, loud
bellowing, bedews all things that are within.

2 Completes the sacrifice: or, fills the assembly full. Grandson of the Red :
son of the brilliant YAyu.’— Wilson. Sprung from, his own red glow, one fire
bemg kindled fioni another.

3 Men remember : because then their prayers are granted.

5 Armmti; the earth.-sS&yana. Armaiti, of the Avesta, also means Earth
—Wilson aS WG aS ^ evofc * on 0r Piety* Parijman: "the circumambient (Iudra).’

6 The Asura : Dyaus himself.

THE RIO VEDA.

523

HYMN 91]

6 Straightway the Rudras, Maruts visiting all men, Falcons of

Dyaus, hotn e-dwellers with the Asura, —

Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and the swift-
moving Indra with swift-moving Gods.

7 With Indra have they found enjoyment, they who toil, in the

light’s beauty, in the very Strong One’s strength ;

The singers who in men’s assemblies forged for him, according
to his due, his friend the thunderbolt.

8 Even the Sun’s Bay Coursers hath he held in check ; each one

fears Indra as the mightiest of all.

Unhindered, from the air’s vault thunders day by day the loud
triumphant breathing of the fearful Bull. 9

9 With humble adoration show this day your song of praise to

mighty Rudra, Ruler of the brave :

With whom, the Eager Ones, going their ordered course, he
comes from heaven Self-bright, auspicious, strong to guard,

10 For these have spread abroad the fame of human kind, the

Bull Brihaspati and Soma’s brotherhood.

Atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure : through skill the
Bhrigus were esteemed of all as Gods.

1 1 For these, the Earth and Heaven with their abundant Beed,

four-bodied ISTarasansa, Yama, Aditi,

God Tvashtar Wealth-bestower, the Ribhukshanas, Rodasi
Maruts, Yishnu, claim and merit praise.

12 And may he too give ear, the Sage, from far away, the Dragon

of the Deep, to this our yearning call.

Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and
with your thought, 0 Earth and Sky, observe this well.

13 Dear to all Gods, may Pushan guard the ways we go, the

Waters’ Child and Yayu help us to success.

Sing lauds for your great bliss to Wind, the breath of all : ye
Asvins prompt to hear, hear this upou your way.

7 Worshippers are rewarded in heaven for the hymns and prayers with
which they have strengthened aud armed Indra for his great deeds.

9 With whom : the Maruts.

10 Soma's brotherhood ; ail Gods who are entitled to drink Soma juice.
Made men sure : gave them assurance of obtaining what they asked.

11 Four-bodied Nardsansa ; Agni provided with four fires, or complete in
all his parts. Ribhukshanas ; Ribhus. Rodasi : consort of the Maruts.

12 The Dragon of the Deep : Ahibudhnya, regent of the sea of air.

13 The Waters' Child : Agni, born as lightning from the clouds.

TEE HYMNS OF

{BOOK X

524

14 With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as Lord

over these fearless tribes, the Self-resplendent One.

We praise Night’s youthful Lord benevolent to men, the foeless
One, the free, with all celestial Dames.

15 By reason of his birth here Angiras first sang : the pressing-

stones upraised beheld the sacrifice —

The stones through which the Sage became exceeding vast, and
the sharp axe obtains in fight the beauteous place.

HYMN XCIII. Yisvedevaa.

Mighty are ye, and far-extended, Heaven and Earth : both
Worlds are evermore to us like two young Dames.

Guard us thereby from stronger foe ; guard us hereby to give
us strength.

2 In each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth the Gods,
He who, most widely known and famed for happiness, invite th

them.

3 Ye who are Eulers overall, great is your sovran power as Gods.
Ye all possess all majesty : all must be served in sacrifice.

4 These are the joyous Kings of Immortality, Parijman, Mitra,

Aryaman, and Yaruna.

What else is Rudra, praised of men 1 the Maruts, Bhaga,
Push ana?

5 Come also to our dwelling, Lords of ample wealth, common

partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon,

When the great Dragon of the Deep hath settled down upon
their floors.

6 And let the Asvins, Lords of splendour, set us free, — both

Gods, and, with their Laws, Mitra and Vanina.

Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds Ifo ample opulence.

14 The Self- resplendent One: Agni, Night's youthful Lord: the Moon.
Celestial Dames : the lunar aster isms.

15 The Sage: Indra, according to S&yana, Sharp axe: the thunderbolt.
The meaning of this stanza is obscure.

1 Thereby hereby : literally ‘ by those ’ ‘by these.’ S&yana supplies

pdlanaik, protections, in both cases. The former may refer to the Maghavans,
and the latter to the people in general. ' ?

4 Immortality : or, the immortal world. Parijman : Roamer round ; V&yu.
What else : that is, Rudra is also one of these Kings. Ptishana ; a lengthened
form of the usual Pushan.

5 Watei's: libations of Soma juice. S&yana explains ndktam by r&trau
* by night.’ It is, as Prof, Ludwig has pointed out, a shortened form of
nahshtam % c come ye.’ Upon their floors : * in their company in the firma-
mental (clouds)/ — Wilson. The meaning is obscure.

6 He : the sacrificer whom these Gods protect.

HYMN 93.]

THE RIG VEDA.

525

7 Yea, let the Asvins Twain be gracious unto us, even Rudras,

and all Gods, Rhaga, Rathaspati ;

Parijman, Ribhu, Vaja, 0 Lords of all wealth Ribhukshanas.

8 Prompt is Ribhukshan, prompt the worshipper’s strong drink :

may thy fleet Bay Steeds, thine who speedest on, approach.
Not man’s but God’s is sacrifice whose psalm is unassailable.

9 0 God Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us a place among

wealthy princes.

With his Car-steeds at once hath our Indra guided the reins
and the car of these men.

10 To these men present here, 0 Heaven and Earth, to us grant

lofty fame extending over all mankind. »

Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with wealth for
victory.

11 This speaker, Indra — for thou art our Friend — wherever he

may be, guard thou, Victor 1 for help, ever for help :

Thy wisdom, Vasu ! prosper him.

12 So have they strengthened this mine hymn which seems to

take its bright path to the Sun, and reconciles the men :
Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced.

13 Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and

bright with gold,

Lightly, with piercing ends, as ’twere two ranks of heroes
ranged for fight.

14 This to Duhsima Prithavana have I sung, to Vena, Rama, to

the nobles, and the King.

They yoked five hundred, and their love of us was famed
upon their way.

15 Besides, they showed us seven-and-seventy horses here.

Tanva at once displayed his gift, Parthya at once displayed

hi?} gift, and straightway M ayava showed his.

7 Rathaspati : the guardian of war-chariots. Cf. X. 64. 10. Ribhukshanas:
Ribhus.

’ 8 Ribhukshan: 1 the mighty (Indra)/ — Wilson.

9 With his Gar -steeds : with us priests, who draw the chariot of sacrifice.

12 So have they strengthened: ‘May (the priests) strengthen/ — Wilson.
The yoke : as the yoke keeps a pair of horses together so the hymn addressed
to the Gods reconciles worshippers and fills them with like feelings of
devotion.

13 Piei'oing ends : of the axle, which pass through the naves.

14 Duhsima Prithavdna , Vena, and Rdma were Maghavans or wealthy
institutors of sacrifices. To the King : dsure : to the Asura, lord or chief.
Rive hundred : horses or chariots.

15 Horses: there is no substantive in the text. Sayana supplies gavdm t

526

{BOOK X.

THE HYMNS OB

HYMN XCIV. Press -stones.

Let these speak loudly forth ; let us speak out aloud ; to the
loud speaking Pressing-stones address the speech ;

When, rich with Soma juice, Stones of the mountain, ye,
united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise.

2 They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men : they

cry aloud to us with their green-tinted mouths,

While, pious Stones, they ply their task with piety, and, even
before the Hotar, taste the offered food.

3 Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meath :

they make a humming sound over the meat prepared.

As they 'devour the branch of the Red-coloured Tree, these,
the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered bellowings.

4 They cry aloud, with strong exhilarating drink, calling on

Indra now, for they have found the meath.

Bold, with the sisters they have danced, embraced by them,
making the earth reecho with their ringing sound.

5 The Eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven ; in the

sky’s vault the dark impetuous ones have danced.

Then downward to the nether stone’s fixt place they sink,
and, splendid as the Sun, effuse their copious stream.

6 Like strong ones drawing, they have put forth all their

strength ; the Bulls, harnessed together, bear the chariot-poles.
When they have bellowed, panting, swallowing their food,
the sound of their loud snorting is like that of steeds.

7 To these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth, to these

who have ten yoke-straps and ten binding thongs,

To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, ging ye praise, to
these who bear ten car-poles, ten when they are yoked.

cows. These horseB, or cows, were presented to the priests. Tdnva, Pdrthya ,
and ftfdyava are patronymics which do not occur again in the Rigveda.

Ludwig thinks that a quarrel had arisen between the Magh&Vans or nobles
(stanza 14) and the Visas or people (stanza 9), and that the priests, who had
reconciled the two parties, were presented with the chariots which had been
prepared for battle. See stanza 13, in which, according to this explanation,
7id should be rendered by 1 and not’ instead of 4 as ‘fcwere.’ The hymn, which
is difficult and in parts almost unintelligible, is placed by Grassmann in his

Appendix.

Hotar : ‘ (Agni) the invoker (of the gods)/— Wilson. Or the human Hotar-
priest may be intended.

3 Bed-coloured Tree / the Soma-plant. Well-pastured ,* the meaning of
siibkarvd is obscure. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 18.

4 The sisters : the fingers.

5 The Eagles: the rapidly moving celestial press-stones.

7 Ten workers: the fingers of both hands.

HYMN 95.]

THE RIG VEDA.

527

8 These Stones with ten conductors, rrcpid in their course, with

lovely revolution travel round and round.

They have been first to drink the flowing Soma juice, first to
enjoy the milky fluid of the stalk.

9 These Soma-eaters kiss Indra’s Bay-coloured Steeds : draining

the stalk they sit upon the ox’s hide.

Indra, when he hath drunk Soma-meath drawn by them, waxes
in strength, is famed, is mighty as a Bull.

1 0 Strong is your stalk ; ye, verily, never shall be harmed : ye

have refreshment, ye are ever satisfied.

Fair are ye, as it were, through splendour of his wealth, his
in whose sacrifice, 0 Stones, ye find delight.

11 Bored deep, but not pierced through with holes, are ye, 0

Stones, not looseued, never weary, and exempt from death,
Eternal, undiseased, moving in sundry ways, un thirsting, full
of fatness, void of all desire.

12 Your fathers, verily, stand firm from age to age : they, loving

rest, are not dissevered from their seat.

Untouched by time, ne’er lacking green plants and green
trees, they with their voice have caused the heavens and
earth to hear.

13 This, this the Stones proclaim, what time they are disjoined,

and when with ringing sounds they move and drink the balm.
Like tillers of the ground when they are sowing seed, they
mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minish it.

14 They have raised high their voice for juice, for sacrifice, strik-

ing the Mother Earth as though they danced thereon.

So loose thou too his thought who hath efifnsed the sap, and
let the Stones which we are honouring be disjoined.

HYMN XCV. Urvuat. Pur&ravas.

Ho there, my consort ! Stay, thou fierce-souled lady, and let
us reason for a while together.

Such thoughts as these of ours, while yet unspoken in days
gone by have never brought us comfort.

9 The ox's hide : spread underneath to catch and hold the droppings.

12 Your fathers : the mountains from which you came.

14 Striking the Mother Earth: ‘Earth * is not in the text ‘they made a
noise like (children) at play, strikiug their mother/ — Wilson, I have followed
Prof. Ludwig’s explanation.

The hymn is a dialogue between Pururavas and Urvas!, and they are
severally the Bishis of the stanzas which they speak. The dialogue, which
is sometimes almost unintelligible, contains the germs of a legend which is
related in the Sutapatha-Drdhmana , reappears in the Mahdbhdrata and

528 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

2 What am I now to do with this thy saying % I have gone

from thee like the first of Mornings.

Purdravas, return thou to thy dwelling : I, like the wind, am
difficult to capture.

3 Like a shaft sent for glory from the quiver, or swift steed

winning cattle, winning hundreds,

The lightning seemed to flash, as cowards planned it. The
minstrels bleated like a lamb in trouble.

- 4 Giving her husband’s father life and riches, from the near

dwelling, when her lover craved her,

She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accept-
ing day and night her lord’s embraces.

- 5 Thrice iif the day didst thou embrace thy consort, though

coldly she received thy fond caresses.

To thy desires, Purdravas, I yielded ; so wast thou king, 0
hero, of my body.

6 The maids Sujm'ni, Sreni, Sumne-api, Charanyu, Granthint,
and Hradechakshus, —

These like red kine have hastened forth, the bright ones, and
like milch-cows have lowed in emulation.

Pur Anas, and forma the plot of the well-known drama, Viler amorva si, or The
Hero * md the Nymph. According to this legend, Urvasi, an Apsaras or
Nymph of heaven, has been banished to earth where she consents to live
with King Purdravas on condition that he takes care of her two pet rams,
and that she never sees him unclothed. She lives with Purdravas for four
years, when the Gandharvas or heavenly minstrels resolve to bring her back.
They steal one of the rams by night. Purdravas springs from his bed ; the
Gandharvas send on him a flash of magic lightning, and Ur vast sees her
husband naked. One of the conditions of the continuance of their union is
broken, and the nymph instantly vanishes. Purdravas meets her afterwards
and in vain implores her to return. At last she relents^ and in due time a
son is born to them. These are the main outlines of a somewhat variously
told story.

1 Purdravas speaks, when he has met Urvasi again after her sudden
departure.

2 Urvasi replies.

3 Purdravas speaks, reminding her of the circumstances in which she
vanished. * Yea/ he says, ‘thou wentest from me with the speed of an arrow
or a racer. The cowardly Gandharvas deluded us. They bleated like a lamb
to make us think that one of thy pets was in pain or danger, and then, by a
flash of factitious lightning, made me visible to thee in my nakedness/

4 Life and riches : meaning, perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, the
future grandson. The near dwelling : her father-in-law's bouse, where she
spent much of her time. Her lover ; her husband Purdravas,

This stanza and the next are spoken by Urvsi.

6 This stanza is ascribed by S&yana to Purdravas, who mentions the names
of the Apsarases who were the companions of Urvasi after her flight. They
are compared to red kine, meaning, perhaps, bright flashes of lightning fol-
lowed by the lowing or bellowing of the thunder.

HYMN 95.]

THE R1GYEDA .

§29

7 While he was born the Dames sate down together, the Bivers

with free kindness gave him nurture;

And then, Pururavas, the Gods increased thee for mighty
battle, to destroy the Dasyus.

8 When I, a mortal, wooed to mine embraces these heavenly

nymphs who laid aside their raiment,

Like a scared snake they fled from me in terror, like chariot
horses when the car has touched them.

9 When, loving these Immortal Ones, the mortal hath converse

with the nymphs as they allow him.

Like swans they show the beauty of their bodies, like horses
in their play they bite and nibble. *

10 She who flashed brilliant as the falling lightning brought me

delicious presents from the waters.

Now from the flood be born a strung young hero ! May Urvasi
prolong her life for ever !

1 1 Thy birth hath made me drink from earthly miloh-kine : this

power, Pururavas, hast thou vouchsafed me.

I knew, and, warned thee, on that day. Thou wouldst not
hear me. What sayest thou, when naught avails thee ?

12 When will the son be horn and seek his father? Mourner-like,

will he weep when first he knows him?

Who shall divide the accordant wife and husband, while fire
is shining with thy consort’s parents ?

7 Urvasi speaks, reminding PurCiravas of the favour shown him at his birth,
by the celestial Dames who were present, the Rivers who nursed him, and
the Gods who gave him strength. Another explanation is that in the first
half of the stanza IV vast speaks, by anticipation, of the son whom she will
bear to Pururavas.

8 PurCiravas complains of the shyness of the nymphs mentioned in stanza 6,
with whose society he had sought to console himself. A mortal ; meaning that
if he had been a God then? behaviour would have been different. Raiment :
dtham : explained by Sayana as svaktyum rUpam, their own proper form.

9 Urvasi replies. Tim Apsarases, she says, as a rule only coquet with mor-
tal men. As they allow him : krdtubhirnd; see Geldner, F. JS., I. 2 76. Like
swans : Sayana explains na here differently ; — Hhey (becoming) ducks do not
show their bodies.’ — Wilson.

10 Pururavas speaks. Urvasi, he says, did not treat him so coldly, from
the waters; of the firmament. From the flood: from Urvasi who comes from
the watery regions above. S&yana explains apdfy differently : — ‘a son able in
act and friendly to man has been bom.’ — -Wilson.

11 Urvasi speaks. According to Sayana, whom Wilson, Grassmann, and
Geldner follow, the translation of the first half-line would be : — ‘Thou hast
been bom to give the earth protection.’ Warned thee on that day : tokj thee,
when I agreed to live with thee what would happen if the conditions of the
agreement were not strictly observed.

12 Pururavas speaks. Knows him; ‘on recognizing (me).’ — Wflaon, Or,

34

m tbm hymns of [book x.

13 X will console him when his tears are falling: he shall not

weep and cry for care that blesses.

That which is thine, between ns, will I send thee. Go home
again, thou fool ; thou hast not won me.

14 Thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever, to seek, without

return, the farthest distance.

Then let his bed be in Destruction’s bosom, and there let
fierce rapacious wolves devour him.

15 Nay, do not die, Pururavas, nor vanish : let not the evil-omened

wolves devour thee.

With women there can be no lasting friendship : hearts of
hyenas-are the hearts of women.

16. When amid men in altered shape I sojourned, and through
four autumns spent the nights among them,

I tasted once a day a drop of butter ; and even now with that
am I contented.

17 1, her best love, call Urvasi to meet me, her who fills air and
measures out the region.

Let the gift, brought by piety approach thee. Turn thou to
me again : my heart is troubled.

IS Thus speak these Gods to thee, 0 son of Ha : As death hath
verily got thee for his subject,

, Thy sons shall serve the Gods with their oblation, and thou,
moreover, shalt rejoice in S varga.

when he knows my story, knows how his father has been deserted. While fire
in shining : so long as the father-in-law and mother-in-law who sanctioned the
onion live and maintain their household fire.

13 Urvasi answers. That which is tld%e r between u&: our child, our com-
mon treasure.

14 Pururavas threatens to destroy himself.

15 Urvasi speaks this and the next stanza'.

Id A dropofbuttei': one of the conditions on which the continuance of
their union depended was that she should eat nothing but a small quantity
of ghritd or clarified butter daily. See stanza 11,

17 Pururavas speaks. Her best love: vamhthah here is evidently, as the
Scholiast says, an epithet and not a name, meaning £ most excellent,’ e moat
precious/ Fills air : representing the morning mist, or the first flush of
light, that spreads over the heavens before the rising of the sun.
b 18 There is an hiatus between this stanza and 17, an entire break of con-
tinuity. The fragment is ascribed to Urvasi, who consoles Purfir&vae by
telling him of the promise of the deities that after his death his sons shall
offer sacrifice to the Gods, and he himself shall be blest in heaven. Son of
Jld: Purfiravas, called Aila or son of Ila who was the daughter of Manu.

Some of the stanzas should be transposed, and their order should be, l, 2,
3, 4, 5. 15, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 15, 10.—Ludwig.

Of this very difficult hymn there is a complete translation, with a very ,
full and generally convincing commentary (to both, of which I am indebted

0

fffYMiV 95.] RMVMDA . 53 1

HYMN XCVI. Indra.

In the great synod will I laud thy two Bay Steeds : I prize
the sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior-God,

His who pours lovely oil as ’twere with yellpw drops. Let
my songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints,

2 Ye who in concert sing unto the gold-hued place, like Bay

Steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat,

For Indra laud ye strength allied with Tawny Steeds, laud
him whom cows content as ’twere with yello\^drops.

3 His is that thunderbolt, of iron, golden-hued, gold-coloured,

very dear, and yellow in his arms ; •

Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage. In
Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.

4 As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden thunder-
’ bolt spread out as in a race.

That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A thousand
flames had he who bore the tawny-hued.

5 Thou, thou, when praised by men who sacrificed of old/ hadst

pleasure in their lands, 0 Indra golden-haired.

All that befits thy song of praise thou welcomest,/the perfect
pleasant gift, 0 Golden-hued from birth.

6 These two dear Bays bring hither Indra on bfs car, Thunder-

armed, joyous, meet for laud, to drink hid fill.

Many libations flow for him who loveth .them : to Indra have
the gold-hued Soma juices run. y

for much assistance), by Prof. Qeldner, Vedischc Siudun, I. pp. ^ 243 — 295.
The myth lias been discussed by von Both, Illustration# of the JVirukta, and
Indische Studies I, 196 ; by Prof. Max Miiller, Oxford Essays {Chips, IV.
109f.) ; by Prof, Adalbert Kuhn, Me Mrabhunft des Emers, pp. 85 ff ; and
by Professors Holtzmann and Oldenberg in more recent days. Professor
Max Miiller considers the story to be 4 one of the myths of the Vedas which
-expresses the correlation of the dawn and the sun/ According to Dr. Gold-
sfcticker, Ur vast is the morning mist which vanishes away as.soon as Purfiravas
the Sun displays himself. See Chambers's Encyclopedia, 1st edition , under

Purueav&s.

Throughout the hymn the poet rings the changes on words said to be
derivatives of the root hri, to take, as haryatd, delightsome, foary&n, loving,
hdri, bay or tawny, h&rit, green, yellow, or gold-coloured Cp. HI. 44.
These words are conjectumlly explained by the Commentator, and are
susceptible of various renderings.

1 Oil ; or fatness, fertilizing rain. , '

2 Cows : milked for sacrificial purposes. *

3 Tawny rage : perhaps with reference to the effect of anger on the. face.—
 Ludwig.

 4 The tawny hued ; the thunderbolt wielded by Indra.

532

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

7 The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish : the

yellow drops have urged the swift Bays to the Strong.

He who speeds on with Bay Steeds even as he lists hath satis-
fied his longing for the golden drops.

8 At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in might, the

Iron One with yellow beard and yellovr hair.

He, Lord of Tawny Coursers, Lord of fleet-foot Alares, will
bear his Bay Steeds safely over all distress.

9 His yello^coloured jaws, like ladles, move apart, what time,.

for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted stir,

When, "/bile the bowl stands there, he grooms his Tawny
Steeds, when he hath drank strong drink, the sweet juice
that he loves.

10 Yea, to the Dear One’s seat in homes of heaven and earth the

Bay Steeds’ Lord hath whinnied like a horse for food.

Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, and the
Beloved One hath gained high power of life.

11 Thou, comprehending with thy might the earth and heaven,

acceptest the dear hymn for ever new and new.

0 Asura, disclose thou and make visible the Cow’s beloved
home to the bright golden Sun.

.12 0 Indra, let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee, delightful,
gclden-visored, on thy car,

That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, thou
mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered meath.

13 Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest; and thine
especially is this libation.

Gladden thee, Indra, with the meath-rieh Soma : pour it down
ever, Mighty One ! within thee.

y Strong : to Indra ; that they may be harnessed and come to
sacrifice.

the

8 The Iron One: 'iron-hearted Indra.’— Wilson.

. 9 For strength: for strengthening food. The yeUon-tinted : his yellow jaw..
10 Me Fear One must be the Soma, found both in heaven -and earth, the
me ?' According to SSyana, Indra himself is meant. The
Helovid One: Indra, whose vital vigour is increased by Soma-draughts.

un jl ' ? e CoW rnay be the Sun whose home is the
unmrse which Indra will&Ilow Siirya to illumine,

12 Sacrifice ; according to Siyana, the sacrificial Soma juice which is pres-
»ed ana prepared by the fingers of the priest. P

MYMN 97.] THE RIG VEDA. 533

HYMN XCVII. Praise of Herbs.

Herbs that sprang up in time of old, three ages earlier than
the Gods, —

Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the hundred
powers and seven*

2 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are

your growths.

Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from
disease.

3 Be glad and joyful in the Plants, both blossoming and bearing

fruit,

Plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in
the race*

4 Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the

Goddesses :

Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self,
O man.

5 The Holy Fig tree is your home, your mansion is the Parna tree :
Winners of cattle shall ye be if ye regain for me this man.

fi He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd
of men, —

Physician is that sage’s name, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease.

7 Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishment, in strength-

ening power, —

All these have I provided here, that this man may be whole again.

8 The healing virtues of the Plante stream forth like cattle

from the stall, —

Plants that sh&ll win me store of wealth, and Bave thy vital
breath, 0 man.

9 Believer is your mother’s name, and hence Bestorers are ye

called.

Bivers are ye with wings that fly : keep far whatever brings
disease.

10 Over all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold.
The Plants have driven from the frame whatever malady was
there.

1 Three ages earlier than the Gods: ‘for the godB before the three ages,’ —
Wilson. See Satapatha Erdkmanat VII, 2. 4. 26 (& 1 B. E, } XLI. p. ’33$).

4 Steed , ear, and garment : as my fee for curing you.

5 Holy Fig-tree : the Asvattha, or Ficus Beligiosa. Parna tree : the Pal&sa,
Butea Frondosa. Sacrificial vessels are made of the wood of these trees
which are therefore said to be the home of plants used in religious ceremonies.

534 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X,

11 When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold these herbs

within my hand,

The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life.

12 He through whose frame, 0 Plants, ye creep member by '

member, joint by joint, —

From him ye drive away disease like some strong arbiter of strife.

13 Fly, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jav and kingfisher.
Fly with the wind’s impetuous speed, vanish together with

the storm.

11 Help every one the other, lend assistance each of you to each,
All of you be accordant, givef urtherance to this speech of mine.

15 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, and the

blossomless,

Urged onward by Brihaspati, release us from our pain and grief ;

16 Release me from the curse’s plague and woe that comes from

Varuna;

Free me from Yama’s fetter, fromsinand offenceagainst the Gods.

17 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew earth-

ward, thus they spake :

No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth we pervade.

IS Of all the many Plants whose King is Soma, Plants of hundred
forms,

Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompt to the wish, sweet
to the heart.

19 0 all ye various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o’erspread

the earth,

Urged onward by Brihaspati, combine your virtue in this Plant.

20 Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man for

whom I dig :

And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours.

21 All Plants that hear this speech, and those that have depart-

ed far away,

Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon this
Herb.

12 Like some strong arbiter of strife : * like a mighty ( prince ) stationed in
the midst of his host.’ — Wilson.

13 With the blue jay and kingfisher .* with the speed of the swiftest birds.
Together with the storm : according to S&yana, ( perish along with the iguana. 9

15 Urged onward : Brihaspati, says S&yana, is the deity who presides over
mantras or spells and charts.

19 This Plant : the medicinal herb which I, the physician, am about to
make use of.

MYMN 98,]

THE MOVE DA.

585

22 With Soma as their Sovran Lord the Plants hold colloquy

and say :

0 King, we save from death the man whose cure a Brkhman
undertakes.

23 Most excellent of all art thou, 0 Plant : thy vassals are the trees.
Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to in-
jure us.

HYMN XCVIII. The Gods.

Comes, be thou Mitra, Varuna, or Pushan, come, 0 Brihaspati,
to mine oblation ;

With Maruts, Vasus, or Adityas, make thou Parjatiya pour
for Santana his rain-drops.

2 The God, intelligent, the speedy envoy whom thou hast sent

hath come to me, Devapi :

Address thyself to me and turn thee hither : within thy lips
will I put brilliant language.

3 Within my mouth, Brihaspati, deposit speech lucid, vigorous,

and free from weakness,

Thereby to win for Sautanu the rain-fall. The meath-ricfo
drop from heaven hath passed within it.

4 Let the svveet drops descend on us, 0 Indra : give -us enough

to lade a thousand wagons.

Sit to thy Hotar task ; pay worship duly, and serve the Gods,
Devapi, with oblation.

5 Knowing the Gods’ good-will, Devapi, Bishi, the son of Kish-

tishena, sate as Hotar.

He hath brought down from heaven’s most lofty summit the
ocean of the rain, celestial waters.

' This Stikta is remarkable as representing one of two brothers, both of the
Kshatriya caste, becoming the Purohita , or family priest, and Hotri or sacrific-
ing priest, of the other who is the ll&jd.’ — Wilson.

1 Dev&pi addresses Brihaspati, who is identifiable with Mitra, Yarana,
Pushan and others, in his special character of Purohita, or family Priest, of
the Gods, and as the prototype of all human ^ Purohita, s. With Maruts:
whether thou be attended by Maruts, Vasus, or, Adityas. For Santana : the
brother of Dev&pi.

2 Brihaspati replies. Brilliant language : a ‘brilliant hymn/ — Muir.

3 Dev&pi speaks, praying Brihaspati, as Lord of Speech (cp. X. 71. 1.)? to
inspire him with eloquence that he may address the Gods effectually. The
meuths-rich drop: the sweet eloquence for which he has prayed.

. 4 The sweet drops : of rmn. , This stanza is spoken by Santana.

5 Knowing: how to win.

536

THE HYMNS OH

[BOOK X.

6 Gathered together in that highest ocean, the waters stood, by

deities obstructed.

They hurried down set free by Arshtishena, in gaping clefts,
urged onward by Devapi.

7 When as chief priest for Santanu, Devapi, chosen for Hotar 7 a

duty, prayed beseeching,

Graciously pleased Brihaspati vouchsafed him a voice that
reached the Gods and won the waters.
n 8 0 Agni whom Dev&pi Arshtishena, the mortal man, hath
kindled in his glory,

Joying in him with all the Gods together, urge on the sender
of the f&in, Parjanya.

$ All ancient Rbshis with their songs approached thee, even
thee, 0 Much-invoked, at sacrifices.

We have provided wagon-loads in thousands : come to the
solemn rite, Lord of Red Horses,

10 The wagon-loads, the nine-and-ninety thousand, these have

been offered up to thee, 0 Agni.

Hero, with these increase thy many bodies, and, stimulated,
send us rain from heaven.

11 Give thou these ninety' thousand loads, O Agni, to Indra, to

the Bull, to be his portion.

Knowing the paths which Deities duly travel, set mid the
Gods in heaven Aul&na also.

1 2 0 A uni, drive afar our foes, our troubles ; chase malady away

and wicked demons.

From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, 'send down on us
a mighty flood of waters. '

f> Arshtishena : patronymic, son of Rishtehefla ; Dev&pi.

7 Chief priest : or family or household priest ; Purohita.

9 Wagon-loads : an extraordinary quantity of fuel for the sacrifice, as the
occasion was one of the greatest importance.

1 3 A uldna : Santanu, as a descendant of tTla, appears to be meant. Accord-
ing to some scholars, anldnam means oblation or sacrificial offering. ‘ The
fact of Devapi being reputed as the author of this hymn, and as the purohita
and hotri of his brother seems to Lave led the legendary writers to invent
the story of his becoming a Brahman, which (as mentioned by Professor
Weber, Indiscke Studies, i. p. 203) is recorded in the 6alya-parvan of the
Mahftbharatu, verses 2281 ff 3 where he is said to have attained this distinction
at a certain place of pilgrimage called Prithudaka ; where Sindhudvipa and,
Visvamitra also were received into the higher caste/ — Muir, 0. S, Texts , I.
270 £f. For the legend on which the hymn is said to be based, quoted by
S&yana from the Nirukta , see Wilson’s Translation.

HYMN $9.]

537

THE HIGVEDA .

HYMN XCIX. Indra.

What Splendid One, Loud-voiced, Far-striding, dost thou, well
knowing, urge us to exalt with praises'?

What give we him 1 When his might dawned, he fashioned
the Yritra-slaying holt, and sent us waters.

2 He goes to end his work with lightning flashes : wide is the

seat his Asura glory gives him.

With his Companions, not without his Brother, he quells this
Saptntha's magic devices.

3 On most auspicious path he goes to battle ; he toiled to win

heaven’s light, full fain to gain it;

He seized the hundred-gated castle’s treasure })y craft, un-
checked, and slew the lustful demons.

A Fighting for kitie, the prize of war, and roaming among the
herd he brings the young streams hither,

Where, footless, joined, without a car to bear them, with jara
for steeds, they pour their flood like butter.

5 Bold, unsolicited for wealth, with liudras he came, the Blame-

less, having left his dwelling,

Came, seized the food of Vamra and his consort, and left the
couple weeping and unsheltered.

6 Lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who roared aloud,

six-eyed and triple-headed.

Trita, made stronger by the might he lent him, struck down
the boar with shaft whose point was iron.

7 He raised himself on high and shot his arrow against the guileful

and oppressive foeraan.

Strong, glomus, manliest, for ns he shattered the forts of
Nah us when he slew the Dasyus.

1 The question in the first line is a rhetorical figure, the meaning beirrk,
How splendid is he (Indra) whom thou (the Yujam&ua ? ) urgest ,,ua to exalt I
What give we him £ what can we give him in return for what he has done
for us ?

2 His Companions : the Maruts. His Brother : Vishnu. Who Saptatha was
is uncertain. The word means Septimus, the seventh, and probably some
R&kshasa or demon is intended.

3 The lustful demons : the exact meaning of sisnadevdn is uncertain. See
VII. 21. 5 and note.

5 I can make nothing intelligible of the second line. * I think of the two
(parents) of Vamra, who are free from fever. Having obtained (the enemy’s)
food, he called aloud whilst stealing it/ — Wilson. Vamra is mentioned in X.
51. 9; 112.15.

6 Lord of the dwelling : or, with Ludwig, The Lord and Giver. Thu

demon: or B&sa Visvarfipa, son of Tvashtar. See X. 8. 8. The boar : Yritiv
CL I. ,61. 7. " ,

533 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

8 He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath found for

us the way to dwell in safety.

When the Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed with his
iron claws he slays the Dasyus.

9 He with his potent Friends gave up the mighty, gave Sushna

up to Kutsa for affliction.

He led the lauded Kavi, he delivered Atka as prey to him and
to his heroes.

10 He, with his Gods who love mankind, the Wondrous, giving

like Vanina who works with magic,

Was known, yet young, as guardian of the seasons; and he
quelled Araru, four-footed demon.

11 Through lauds of him hath Ausija Biji^van burst, with the

Mighty’s aid, the stall of Pipru.

When the saint pressed the juice and shone as singer, he seized
the forts and with his craft subdued them.

12 So, swiftly Asura, for exaltation, hath the great Yamraka come

nigh to Indra.

He will, when supplicated, bring him blessing : he hath brought
all, food, strength, a happy dwelling.

HYMN G. Visvedevas.

Be, like thyself, 0 Indra, strong for our delight : here lauded,
aid us, Magbavan, drinker of the juice.

Savitar with the Gods protect us : hear ye Twain. We ask for
freedom and complete felicity.

S The Hawk : the fierce and swift Indra.

9 Kavi: according to Say ana, Usan$ Kftvya or son o? Kavi is intended.

Atka : see X. 49, 3. *

10 His Gods: the Maruts. Araru: I follow S4yana. * Cf. Satajpatha- Brdh-
mana, I. 2 4. 17 (S. B. E. XII. 57) According to Prof. Ludwig’s conjectural
explanation the translation would be: — ‘he measured out the year in four
divisions.*

11 Ausija; son of Usij. But as this patronymic does not properly belong
to Rijisvan, the word here may perhaps mean, c vehement,’ ‘eagerly desirous.’
Fipru ; one of the demons of drought.

12 Asura: 0 divine and mighty Indra. For exaltation: of Indra.
Yamraka : a lengthened form of Vamra, the Rishi of the hymn. The last
clause of the stanza is borrowed from X. 20. 10*.

This hymn, which is obscure and in some places unintelligible, is placed by
Prof. Grassmann in his Appendix. Dr, Muir has translated stanzas 1 — 7 iu
0. S. Texts, IV, pp, 408, 409 (2nd edition).

„ 1 Ye Twain: Indra and Savitar. Freedom: aditim. Prof. M. Muller
translates differently : * We implore Aditi for health and wealth.’

TEE R1GVEDA .

EYMN 100.]

53 $

2 Bring swift, for offering, the share that suits the time r to the

pure-drinker Y&yu, roaring as he goes,

To him who hath approached the draught of shining milk.
We ask for freedom and complete felicity.

3 May Savitar the God send us full life, to each who sacrifices,

lives aright and pours the juice;

That we with simple hearts may wait upon the Gods. We ask
for freedom and complete felicity.

4 May Indra evermore he gracious unto us, and may King Soma

meditate our happiness,

Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity. .

5 Indra hath given the body with its song and strength : Brihas-

pati, thou art the lengthener of life.

The sacrifice is Manu, Providence, our Sire. We ask for
freedom and complete felicity.

6 Indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed : the singer in

the house is Agni, prudent Sage.

He is the sacrifice in synod, fair, most near. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity.

7 Not often have we sinned against you secretly, nor, Yasus,

have we openly provoked the Gods.

Not one of us, ye Gods, hath worn an alien shape. We ask
for freedom and complete felicity.

8 May Savitar remove from us our malady, and may the Moun-

tains keep it far away from where
The press-stone as it sheds the meath rings loudly forth. We
ask for freedom and complete felicity.

9 Ye Yasus, c let the stone, the presser, stand erect: avert all

enmities and keep them far remote.

Our guard to be adored is Savitar this God. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity.

10 Eat strength and fatness in the pasture, kine, who arebalmed
at the reservoir and at the seat of Law.

So let your body be our body’s medicine. We ask for freedom
and complete felicity.

2 Pure-drinker : drinker of pure Soma juice.

5 The sacrifice is Manu ; we owe our existence and’ preservation to sacrifice,
which is to us another Manu, the father of Aryan men.

* 6 The sacrifice in synod : f worthy of sacrifice at the altar.’ — Wilson.

7 An alien shape : as sorcerers are accustomed to do.

10 Palmed at the reservoir : anointed before being milked. S Ay an a ex-
plains k6se by goshthe f ‘in the cowstall.’ Let your body: may the milk, the
produce of your bodies, offered in libation, keep our bodies in health. Or

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X.

11 The singer fills the spirit : all mens’ love hath he. Indra takes

kindty care of those who pour the juice.

For his libation is the heavenly udder full. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity.

12 Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, triumphant; thy hosts save

from decay and are resistless.

The pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to possess
the best of all the cattle.

HYMN CL Visvedevas.

Wake with one mind, my friends, and kindle Agni, ye who
are many and who dwell together.

Agni and L x adhikdts and Dawn the Goddess, you, Gods with
Indra, I call down to help us.

2 Make pleasant hymns, spin out your songs and praises : build

ye a ship equipped with oars lor transport.

Prepare the implements, make all things ready, and let the
sacrifice, my friends, go forward.

3 Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces : formed is the

furrow, sow the seed within it.

Through song may we find hearing fraught with plenty ; near
to the ripened grain approach the sickle.

4 Wise, through desire of bliss from Gods, the skilful bind

the traces fast,

- And lay the yokes on either ^ide.

5 Arrange the buckets in their place : securely fasten on the

straps.

We will pour forth the well that hath a copious stream, fair-
flowing well that never fails. g.

* may the body of the cow offered in sacrifice be the expiation for the body of
the aaerificer, enabling him to attain swarga. Or may the milk be the cor-
Fective of the Soma/ — Wilson.

11 The heavenly udder • the clouds of the firmament.

12 Save from decay: this is Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation of the obscure
word jaranipi'Sth, which means, according to S&yana, replenishing the wealth
of thy worshippers. The last line is explained differently by S&yana. — ‘ (there-
fore) Iluvasyu hastens iu front of the victim cow, (leading it) with a straight
cord/ — Wilson. According to the same authority the meaning of the refrain
of stanzas 1 — 11 is : — ‘We long for the universal Aditi/

1 Dadhikrds : probably a personification of the Morning Sun. See III.
20. 1 ; IV. 38. 2 ; 40. 5 note.

2 Ship : sacrifice, represented under this figure.

3 In this and the following stanzas sacrifice is figuratively spoken of as

ploughing, sowing and reaping. See Satapatha-Erdlmana , VII. 2. 2. 4. (S,
B. E. XLI. 320). *

$ The flowing Soma is an inexhaustible well.

HYMN 101.]

TEE BIGVEDA.

541

6 I pour the water from the well with pails prepared and goodly

straps,

Unfailing, full, with plenteous stream.

7 Refresh the horses, win the prize before you: equip a chariot

fraught with happy fortune.

Pour forth the well with stone wheel, wooden buckets, the
drink of heroes, with the trough for armour.

8 Prepare the cow-stall, for there drink your heroes : stitch ye

the coats of armour, wide and many.

Make iron forts, secure from all assailants : let not your pit-
cher leak : stay it securely.

9 Hither, for help, I turn the holy heavenly mhad of you the

Holy Gods, that longs for sacrifice.

May it pour milk for us, even as a stately cow who, having
sought the pasture, yields a thousand streams.

10 Pour golden juice within the wooden vessel : with stone-made

axes fashion ye and form it.

Embrace and compass it with tenfold girdle, and to both
chariot-poles attach the car-horse.

11 Between both poles the car-horse goes pressed closely, as in.

his dwelling moves the doubly-wedded.

Lay in the wood the Sovran of the Forest, and sink the well
although ye do not dig it.

12 Indra is he, 0 men, who gives us happiness : sport, urge the

giver of delight to win us strength.

Bring quickly down, 0 priests, hither to give us aid, to drink

the Soma, Indra Son of Nishtigri.

©

7 The sacrifice is a chariot ; and the ritual is a race. The well: the stream
of Soma juice. Stone wheel : witli allusion to the press-stones.

8 The cow-stall : figuratively, for the place where the Soma is preBsed,
Coats of armour: the filters for straining the juice. Iron forts: the
safeguards obtained by sacrificing.

9 Milk: abundant blessing. »

10 Stone-made : with allusion to the'press-stones. Tenfold girdle : the fingers
of both hands. Both chariot-poles: the arms. The car-korse: the upper
press-stone ; or the pestle.

11 The doubly-wedded : the man who has two wives. The comparison is
not dear. The Sovran of the Forest i the Soma plant. Sink the well : * store
up the juice/ —Wilson.

12 X follow S&yana in his interpretation of the first line. Yon Both.
Ludwig, and Grassmann explain it differently. Nishtigri : meaning according
to $&yana, ‘she who swallows up her rival wife Nishti, i . e. Biti,’ is said to be
Aditi, the mother of Indra,

M2 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOM X,

HYMN CII. Indr*.

For thee may Indra boldly speed the- car that works on either
side.

Favour us, Much-invoked ! in this most glorious fight against
the raiders of our wealth.

2 Loose in the wind the woman’s robe was streaming what time

she won a ear-load worth a thousand.

The charioteer in fight was Mudgalam : she, Indra’s dart, heap-
ed up the prize of battle.

3 0 Indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughter

us :

The weapon ^oth of D&sa and of Arya foe keep far away, 0
Maghavan.

4 The bull in joy had drunk a lake of water. His shattering

horn encountered an opponent.

Swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he stretched his
forefeet, fain to win and triumph.

5 They came anear the bull ; they made him thunder, made him

pour rain down ere the fight was ended.

And Mudgala thereby won in the contest well-pastured kine
in hundreds and in thousands.

6 In hope of victory that bull was harnessed : Kesi the driver

urged him on with shouting.

As he ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels press-
ed close on Mudgalani.

The deified subject of the hymn is said to he, alternatively, Drughana (Mace,
Club or Hammer. See stanza 9). The Rishi is Mudgala, ?

According to the legend quoted by S&yana, all Mudgala’s cattle had been
stolen except an old ox -which lie harnessed to his wagon and went in pursuit
of the robbers. He threw his club or mace before him, which showed him the
way to the thieves, and thus recovered his property.

1 For thee : 0 Mudgala. That works on either' side ; mithdkHtam : accord-

ing to $&ya,nz= asahdyum, * that has no companion. ’ The meaning is uncer-
tain. ,

2 MudgaUnt ; Mudgala’s wife. Indra' s dart : sped swiftly on her way by
Indra.

3 This stanza seems to be an interpolation.

4 The lull : apparently one of the buffaloes which drew the chariot of Mud-
galftnfs chief opponent, Had drunk : ju&t before the fight began. Encoun-
tered an opponent : meaning, perhaps, that feeling uneasy he hung his head
and struck the ground with his horns. * He cleft the mountain peak, he went
against the enemy.’— Wilson.

Q In hope of victory : kakdrdave : the meaning is uncertain ; according to
, S&yana, ‘ for the destruction of the enemy.’ Ludwig thinks that the farther
end of the chariot-pole is intended.

HYMH 102.]

THE RIGVEDA.

54$

7 Deftly for him he stretched the car-pole forward, guided the

bull thereto aud firmly yoked him.

Indra vouchsafed the lord of cows his favour : with mighty
steps the buffalo ran onward.

8 Touched by the goad the shaggy beast went nobly, bound to

the pole by the yoke’s thong of leather.

Performing deeds of might for many people, he, looking on the
cows, gained strength and vigour.

9 Here look upon this mace, this bull’s companion, now lying

midway on the field of battle.

Therewith hath Mndgala in ordered contest won for cattle for
himself, a hundred thousaud. *>

10 Far is the evil : who hath fiere beheld it? Hither they bring

the bull whom' they are yoking.

To this they give not either food or water. Beaching beyond
the pole it gives directions,

11 Like one forsaken, she hath found a husband, and teemed as

if her breast were full and flowing.

With swiftly-racing chariot may we conquer, and rich anil
blessed be our gains in battle.

12 Thou, Indra, art the mark whereon the eyes of all life rest,

when thou,

A Bull who drivest with thy bull, wilt win the race together
with thy weakling friend.

7 Mudgala’s better fortune is now related. For him : for his own buffalo.
He : Mudgala, Oar-pole : I follow Ludwig’s conjecture - but it is uncertain
wk&fc part of the chariot bh&pradhi was ; * the periphery of the wheel/ accord-
ing to the St. Petersburg Lexicon ; * the frame of the waggon.’ — Wilson.
S&yana’s explanation is not very clear, but he seems to think that the linchpin
is intended. None of these three explanations seems suitable here. The lord
of com : the bull buffalo.

9 Mace : drughanam : according to Sftyana, the club which Mudgala had
carried with him on his expedition, and which, together with the ox thatflrew
his car had enabled him to recover his cattle. Lying midway : after the vic-
tory, the King had thrown, down his mace- upon the field of battle. — Ludwig.

10 I find this stanza unintelligible. Perhaps the second line contains the
germ of that part of the legend which mentions the club thrown in front of
the chariot to poiut out the way that the robbers had taken.

11 Like one forsaken : parivriktdv : . ■■ •‘■ 1 r Mudgal&ni was a pari -

vriktd [a wife lightly esteemed in ■ t ■ :**.!> the favourite wife] who

made amends for her sterility by driving her husband’s chariot to battle and
briuging him back victorious, with the booty which she had helped him to
gain instead of the children that she had not borne him.’ — Ludwig.

12 With thy bull ; thy fierce and strong thunderbolt. With thy weakling

friend : with the mortal man whom thou protectest, and who is weak and
effeminate in comparison with thee. ^ _

The hymn is fragmentary, and it seems impossible to interpret it fully and

[j BOOK X
Indra,

544 ' THE HYMNS OF

HYMN CIII.

Swift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens his horns,
terrific, stirring up the people,

With eyes that close not, bellowing, Sole Hero, Indra subdued
at once a hundred armies.

2 With him loud-roaring. ever watchful, Victor, bold, hard to

overthrow, Rouser of battle,

Indra the Strong, whose band bears arrows, conquer, ye
warriors, now, now vanquish in the combat.

3 He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, Indra who

with his band brings hosts together.

Foe-conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, with mighty
bow, shooting with well-laid arrows.

4 Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demons,

driving off our foemen.

Be thou protector of our cars, destroyer, victor in battle,
breaker-up of armies.

5 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, mighty

and fierce, victorious, ail-subduing,

The Son of Conquest, passing men and heroes, kine-winuer,
mount thy conquering car, 0 Indra.

, 6 Cleaver of stalls, kin e- winner, armed with thunder', who quells
an army and with might destroys it, —

Follow him, brothers 1 quit yourselves like heroes, and like
this Indra show your zeal and courage.

7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra, the

pitiless Hero, wild with anger,

Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless, — may he protect our
armies in our battles.

8 Tpdra guide these : Brihaspati precede them, the guerdon,

and the sacrifice, and Soma ;

And let the banded Marti ts march in forefront of heavenly
hosts that conquer and demolish.

Batiafactorily. I have followed in some stanzas the interpretations of the
authors of Vedische Sbudien , I. pp. X 24 and 138 . But see the later translation
and exhaustive discussion by Prof. Geldner in Part II. pp. 1—22, and Prof.
Ludwig’s remarks thereon in Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der
Rgveda-forschung, .

The hymn is a prayer for aid and victory in battle.

8 Guide these : be the leader of our troops. The guerdon : ddhshind ; the
reward of the priests who perform the sacrifice offered before battle.

HYMN 104.]

THE MOVED A.

545

9 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King Varuna, and
Maruts, and Adityas,

Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer high-minded Gods
who cause the worlds to tremble,

10 Bristle thou up, 0 Maghavan, our weapons : excite the spirits

of my warring heroes.

Urge on the strong steeds’ might, O Vritra-slayer, and let the
din of conquering cars go upward.

11 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered : victorious be

the arrows of our army.

May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods, protect
us in the shout of onset.

12 Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize thou their bodies

and depart, 0 Apva,

Attack them, set their hearts on fire and burn them : so let
our foes abide in utter darkness.

13 Advance, 0 heroes, win the day. May Indra be your sure

defence.

Exceeding mighty be your arms, that none may wound or in-
jure you.

HYMN CIV. Indra.

Soma hath flowed for t.hoe, Invoked of many ! Speed to our
sacrifice with both thy Coursers. v

To thee have streamed the songs of mighty singers, imploring.
Indra, drink of our libation.

2 Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, and fill

thee full, 0 Lord of Tawny Horses.

0 Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stones have
mixed for thee enhance thy raptui'e.

3 To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to thee, the

Bull, 0 thou whom Bay Steeds carry.

Here take delight, 0 Indra, in our voices while thou ait
hymned with power and all our spirit.

4 0 Mighty Indra, through thine aid, thy prowess, obtaining

life, zealous, and skilled in Order,

11 When our flags arc gathered : i apparently comparable with the signis
collatis of the Romans.’ — Ludwig.

12 Apvd : according to S&yana, a female deity who presides over sin ;

according to Mahldhara, sickness, or fear. Apparently Apv& was a sort of
colic, or dysentery, likely to attack soldiers in the field. And depart : or, pass
us by ; do not attack us.

3 True : which produces the results expected in the shape of favour.

35

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

Men in the house who share the sacred banquet stand singing
praise that brings them store of children.

5 Through thy directions, Lord of Tawny Coursers, thine who

art firm, splendid, and blest, the people
Obtain most liberal aid for their salvation, and praise thee',
ludra, through thine excellencies..

6 Lord of the Bays, come with thy two Bay Horses, eome to

our prayers, to drink the juice of Soma.

To thee comes sacrifice which thou accepteat : thou, skilled
in holy rites, art he who giveth.

7 Him of a thousand powers, subduing Icemen, Maghavan prais-

ed with hymns and pleased with Soma, —

Even him our songs approach, resistless India : the adorations
of the singer laud him.

8 The way to bliss for Gods and man thou foundest, Indra,

seven lovely floods, divine, untroubled,

Wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, and
nine-andminety flowing streams of water.

$ Thou from the curse didst free the mighty Waters, and as
their only God didst watch and guard them.

G ludra, cherish evermore thy body with those which thou
hast won in quelling Yrltra.

1 0 Heroic power and noble praise is India : yea, the song wor-

ships him invoked of nvtny.

Vritra he quelled, and g ive men room and freedom : Bakra,
victorious, hath conquered armies.

11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious India, best Hero in this

fight where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in biftties, who slays
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN CY. Indra.

When, Yasu, wilt thou love the laud l Now let the channel
bring the stream.

The juice is ready to ferment.

8 Didst move the ocean: didst bring the sea of rain from heaven.

9 These: waters.

11 This is the concluding verse of several hymns of the Visv&ruitras in

Book III.

1 Yasu: Indra. Let the channel bring the stream; to the Soma juice
which has stood long enough for fermentation —Ludwig. The phraseology
is very obscure, and Sayana gives a totally different explanation.— ‘When
will he, (like) a dam. obstruct and Jet loose the long- protracted libation for
the sake of wind-driven (rain). ? ’—Wilson.

HYMN 105.]

THE RIGYEDA.

547

2 He whose two Bay Steeds harnessed well, swerving, pursue

the Bird’s tail-plumes,

With flowing manes, like heaven and earth, he is the Lord
with power to give.

3 Bereft of skill is Indra, if, like some out-wearied man he' fears
,The sinner, when the Mighty hath prepared himself for victory.

4 Indra with these drives round, until he meets with one to wor-

ship him :

Indra is Master of the pair who snort and swerve upon their way.

5 Borne onward by the long-maned Steeds who stretch them-

selves as ’twere for food,

The God who wears the helm defends them with, his jaws.

6 The Mighty sang with Lofty Ones ; the Hero fashioned with

his strength,

Like skilful Matarisvan with his power and might,

7 The bolt, which pierced at once the vitals of the Dasyu easy

to be slain,

With jaw uninjured like the wondrous firmament.

S Grind off our sins: with song will we conquer the men who
sing no hymns :

Not easily art thou pleased with prayerless sacrifice.

9 When threefold flame burns high for thee, to rest on poles of
sacrifice,

Thou with the living joyest in the self-bright Ship.

2 The Bird : the allusion seems to be to a race between the horses of Indra
and those of S&rya or the Sim who is the Bird of the heavens. — Ludwig. Like
heaven and earth : the meaning of rajV is unknown. S&yana explains the word
by 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 heaven and eartji,’ or ‘ sun and moon ; ’ but these are mere guesses. Prof,
Ludwig thinks that two animals of some kind ( e raj i tier©,’ ‘ raji-beasta’) are
meant. In VI. 26. 6, Raji is said by S&yana to be the name of a maiden.

3 The sinners ; Vritra, the chief of sinners, according to Sdyana. Or p&paje
may be a verb, and the stanza may be rendered : — ‘ Without them Indra holds
him still, like a. man weary and alarmed, When he hath made himself ready
for noble deed.’— See Pischel, Vedische Studien , I, p. 398.

4 Js Master : literally 4 hero.’ The meaning apparently is that when Indra
meets with a worshipper he stops his horses and attend^ she sacrifice.

5 Who wears the, helm : siprintvdn ; 4 possessing mighfcy jaws/— Wilson. With
his jaws : with his roar, the thunder.

6 Lofty Ones ; the Maruts.

7 The stanza is obscure. I follow Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation of Kiri-
masd hirtmdn, which mean, according to S&yana, 4 gold-bearded ’ and 4 lord of
bay horses.’

8 Grind off: remove them by whetting. 4 Comminute/-- Wilson,

9 Threefold flame : of the three sacred fires. The living: the sacrlfic er.
The self -bright Ship: the sacrifice ; 4 the vessel of thy ’glory.’ — Wilspn, '

548

THE HYMNS OF [BOOR X

10 Thy glory was the speckled cup, thy glory was the flawless scoop
Wherewith thou po.urest into thy receptacle.

11 As hundreds, 0 Immortal God, have sung to thee, so hath

Sumitra, yea, Durmitra praised thee here,

What time thou holpest Kutsa’s son, when Dasyus fell, yea,
holpest Kutsa’s darling when the Dasyus died.

HYMN CYI. Asvins,

This very thing ye Twain hold as your object : ye weave your
songs as skilful men weave garments.

That ye may come united have I waked you : ye spread out
food like days of lovely weather.

2 Like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, and seek like

eager guests your bidder's banquet.

Ye are like glorious envoys mid the people : like bulls, ap-
proach the place where ye are watered.

3 Like the two pinions of a bird, connected, like two choice ani-

mals, ye have sought our worship.

Bright as the fire the votary hath kindled, ye sacrifice in
many a spot as reamers.

4 Ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong in

your splendour and like kings for conquest ;

Like rays for our enjoyment, Lords to feed us, ye, like quick
hearers, have obeyed our calling.

9 Like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in depths,
like feet for one who fords a shallow.

Like ears ye will attend to him w T bo orders : ye Two enjoy
our wondrous work as sharers.

Like toiling bees ye bring to us your honey, as bees into tho
hide that opens downward.

10 Cup : upasechctnl : a ladle or cup used for sprinkling. Thy receptacle;
drinking-vessel, or perhaps Agni, that is, the fire, may be intended.

11 Simitra and Durmitra are alternative names of the Rishi of the hymn.

Kutsa's son : Durmitra himself, according to S&yana. * J

The metres in some places are somewhat irregular, the meanings of feomo
words are uncertain, and the hymn generally is obscure. Prof. Grassmann
has placed the hymn in his Appendix.

4 like rays for our enjoyment ; ' like brooms to sweep with,’ accordinz to
Prof. Ludwig. , 4 * 6

I do not attempt the hopeless task of translating stanzas 5 6 1 8 in
which nearly every word is a difficult riddle. See Appendix ’ ’

10 _ The hide that opens downward : the honey-comb is compared to a water-
skin inverted. I cannot translate intelligibly the second line ‘like two

labourers yon are dripping with perspiration, like a tired cow eating swebt
herbage, you attend (the sacrifice).’— Wilson, . h '

HYMN 107.] THE R1QYEHA . 549

11 May we increase the laud and gain us vigour : come to our
song, ye whom one chariot carries.

Filled be our kine with ripened meath like “glory : Bhutansa
hath fulfilled the Alvins’ longing.

HYMN CVIL DakshM.

These men’s great bounty hath been manifested, and the
whole world of life set free from darkness.

Great light hath come, vouchsafed us by the Fathers : ap-
parent is the spacious path of Guerdon.

2 High up in heaven abide the Guerdon-givers : they who give
steeds dwell with the Sun for ever.

They who give gold are blest with life eternal : they who give
robes prolong their lives, 0 Soma.

‘3 Not from the niggards — for they give not freely — comes Meed
at sacrifice, Gods’ satisfaction :

Yea, many men with hands stretched out with Guerdon
present their gifts because they dread dishonour.

4 These who observe mankind regard oblation as streamy VSyu

and light-finding Arka.

They satisfy and give their gifts in synod, and pour in streams
the seven-mothered Guerdon.

5 He who brings Guerdon comes as first invited ; chief of the

hamlet comes the Guerdon-bearer.

Him I account the ruler of the people who was the first to
introduce the Guerdon.

6 They call him Bishi, Brahman, Sama-chanter, reciter of the

laud, leaded of worship.

The brightly-shining God’s three forms he knoweth who first
bestowed the sacrificial Guerdon.

The hymn eulogizes Dakshinft, the largess, guerdon, or honorarium present-
ed by the insti tutors of the sacrifices to the priests who perform the cere-
monies. The yajamdnas who give this guerdon liberally are alternatively
the deified subjects of the hymn.

1 These men : the wealthy insti tutors of the sacrifice, Fathers ; who are
the embodiments and guardians of the light.

4 These who observe mavkind : the Maghavans or wealthy nobles, who do
not consider the cost of sacrifice, but regard it as an occasion that enables
them to show their liberality, and to gain the favour of Vfiyu, the Wind-God
who brings countless showers of rain, and Arka or the Sun who brings the
light. Seven-mothered : originating in, and accompanying, seven forms of sacri-
fice; or, regulated by the seven priests.

6 Three forms : Agni as the Sun, lightning, and fire.

550 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

7 Guerdon bestows the horse, bestows the bullock, Guerdon

bestows, moreover, gold that glisters.

' Guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit. He who is
wise takes Guerdon for his armour.

8 The liberal die not, never are they ruined : the liberal suffer

neither harm nor trouble.

The light of heaven, the universe about us, — all this doth
sacrificial Guerdon give them.

9 First have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, and got

themselves a bride in fair apparel. *

The liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, and con-
quered fhose who, unprovoked, assailed them.

10 They deck the fleet steed for the bounteous giver: the maid

adorns herself and waits to meet him.

His home is like a lake with lotus-blossoms, like the Gods'
palaces adorned and splendid.

11 Steeds good at draug ht convey the liberal giver, and lightly

rolling moves the car of Guerdon.

Assist, ye Gods, the liberal man in battles : the liberal giver
conquers foes in combat.

HYMN CVIII. Saraml Panis.

What wish of Sarama hatfy brought her hither ? The path
leads far away to distant places.

What charge hast thou for us ? Where turns thy journey ? How
hast thou made thy way o’er Rasa’s waters.

2 I come appointed messenger of Indra, seeking your ample
stores of wealth, 0 Panis. 0

This hath preserved me from the fear of crossing : thus have
I made my way o’er Ras&’s waters.

9 Draught of liquor: antakpiyam siirdydh : ‘ deep potations of wine/ — Wilson.

10 The maid adorns herself ; ‘he obtains a brilliant damsel for his portion.
— Stuir.

11 Car of Guerdon: cf I. 123. 1.

The hymn is a colloquy between Saram&, the messenger of the Gods or of
Indra (see I. 62. 8, note ; 1% 8 ; III. 81. 6; V, 15. 8), and the Panis or envious
demons who have carried off the cows or rays of light which Indra wishes to
recover. Saram& and the Panis are alternately subject and Riahi.

1 The Papis address Saramd who has found her way to the rooky strong-
hold in which the stolen cows are imprisoned. The Panis speak the uneven
stanzas, with the exception of stanza 11, and Saramft the even. Rasti is in
*f is P lace a mythical stream that flows round the atmosphere and the earth.
See V. 41, 15. In I. 112. 12, and V. 53. 9, Rasft appears to be a river of tha,
Pan jab, probably an affluent of the Indus. See Zimmer, Altindisckes Lehen,
pp, 15, 1 6,

MYMN 108 .]

THE RmtEDA .

551

3 What is that Indra like, what is his aspect whose envoy, Sarama,

from afar thou eomest ?

Let him approach, and we will show him friendship : he shall
be made the herdsman of our cattle.

4 I know him safe from harm; but he can punish who sent me

hither from afar as envoy.

Him rivers flowing with deep waters hide not. Low will ye lie,
0 Panis, slain by Indra.

5 These are the kine which, Sarama, thou seekest, flying, 0 Blest

One, to the ends of heaven.

Who will loose these for thee without a battle ? Yen, and sharp-
pointed are our warlike weapons. ^

6 Even if your wicked bodies, 0 ye Panis, were arrow-proof, your

words are weak for wounding;

And were the path to you as yet umnastered, BrihaspaU in
neither case will spare you.

7 Paved with the rock is this our treasure-chamber ; filled full

of precious things, of kine, and horses.

These Panis who are watchful keepers guard it. In vain hast
thou approached this lonely station.

<8 Rishis will come inspirited with Soma, Angirases unwearied,
and Navagvas.

This stall of cattle will they part among them : then will the
Panis wish these words unspoken.

9 Even thus, Q Sarama, hast thou come hither, forced by celest-
ial might to make the journey.

Turn thee not back, for thou shalt be our sister : 0 Blest One,
we will gr?e thee of the cattle.

TO Brotherhood, sisterhood, I know not either: the dread Angi-
rases and Indra know them.

They seemed to long for kine when I departed. Hence, into
distance, be ye gone, O Pands.

II Hence, far away, ye Paais! Let the cattle lowing come forth
as holy Law commandeth,

Kiue which Brihaspati, and Soma, Rishis, sages, and pressing-
stones have found when hidden.

f> Weak for wounding : 1 not in the piaee of -armies.’ — Wilson. Erifuispati :
as Indra’s companion and ally in battle.

8 Navagvas : members of a mythological family, forming a division of the
Angirases or closely connected with them. Wish the*e words unspoken ; more
literally, reject them from their mouthB ; retract their threats.

10 Snow them: are allied by such ties of kinship.

11 It is uncertain to whom this stanza is to be ascribed, Sftyana assigns it
to SatamA Prof, Ludwig thinks that Brihaspati may he the speaker. Press-
ing * stones ; which prepare the Soma juice that inspirits Indra.

552 Tills HYMNS OF [BOOK X

7^ HYMN CIX. Visvedevas,

These first, the boundless Sea, and Matarisvan, fierce-glowing
Fire, the Strong, the Bliss-bestower,

And heavenly Floods, first-born by holy Order, exclaimed
against the outrage on a Brahman.

2 King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made restitution of

the Brahman's consort.

Mitra and Varuna were the inviters : Agni as Hotar took her
hand and led her.

3 The man, her pledge, must by her hand be taken when they

have cried, She is a Bikhman's consort.

She stayed not for a herald to conduct her : thus is the king-
dom of a ruler guarded.

4 Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Rishis 'who sate

them down to ’their austere devotion :

Hire is a Brahman's wife led home by others : in the suprem-
est heaven she plants confusion.

5 The Brabmaohftri goes engaged in duty: he is a member of

the Gods' own body.

Through him Brihaspati obtained his consort, as the Gods
gained the ladle brought by Soma.

6 So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the woman back

again.

The Kings who kept their promises restored the Brahman's
wedded wife.

7 Having restored the Brahmau's wife, and freed them, with Gods'

aid, from sin,

They shared the fulness of the earth, and won themselves
extended sway.

The hymn has been translated by the authors of Siehenzig Lieder den Big-
veda. See also Mme. Z6naide Ragozin, Vedic Lidia, p. 25$.

1 Outrage on a Brahman : e Brahm&’a sin/ according to S&yana.

5 BrahmaeMrt : a religious student. For his glorification, see Tlgmm of
the A tharva-veda, XL 5. The ladle: juhvchn: Prof Ludwig takes it to be a
proper name : — e Juhfi, 0 Gods, conducted borne by Soma/

^ The wife of a Brahman appears to have been taken to his home by a Ksha-
! triya, and then restored. A legend quoted by S&vana says that Jubfi or V&k,
j the wife of Brihaspati who is identified with Brahm&, had been deserted by
j her husb md. The Gods then consulted «« means of expiating

J his sin , and restored her to him. See .V “ ■ v'

\ The hymn is an almost unintelligible fragment and of comparatively late
j origin.

HYMN 110.]

THE RIG VE HA . 553

HYMN CX. Apria.

Thou in the house of man this day enkindled worshippest
» Gods as God; 0 Jatavedas.

Observant, bright as Mitra, bring them hither : thou art a
sapient and foreknowing envoy.

2 Tanunap&t, fair-tongued, with sweet meath balming the paths

and ways of Order, make them pleasant.

Convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy thoughts
our hymns of praise and worship.

3 Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, O Agni, come ac-

cordant with the Vasus.

Thou art, 0 Youthful Lord, the Gods’ Invoker, so, best of
Sacrifices, bring. them quickly.

4 By rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a robe to

clothe this earth when dawns are breaking.

Widely it spreads around and far-extended, fair for the Gods
and bringing peace and freedom.

5 Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like .wives who

deck their beauty for their husbands.

Lofty, celestial, all-impelling Portals, admit the Gods and
give them easy entrance.

6 Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, each close

to each, be seated at their station, —

Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them, assuming all
their fair and radiafit beauty.

7 Come the two first celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, arranging

sacrifice for man to worship,

As singers who inspire us in assemblies, showing the eastward
light with their direction.

8 Let Bharati come quickly to our worship, and I] a showing like

a human being.

So let Sarasvati and both her fellows, deft Goddesses, on this
fair grass be seated.

9 Hotarmore skilled in sacrifice, bring hither with speed to-day

God Tvashtar, thou who knowest,

Even him who formed these two, the Earth and Heaven, the
Parents, with their forms, and evfery creature.

See preceding hymns addressed to the same deities and deified objects ;
I. 13 ; 142, 188 ; II. 3 ; III. 4 ; V. 5 ; VII. 2 ; and IX. 5;

1 Jdtavcdas and Tanllnapdt are names of Agni. The Doors of the sacrificial
chamber represent the portals of the eastern heaven, Vanusputi is the
sacrificial post to which the victim is tied.

554 THE HYMNS OF IBOOK X.

10 Send to our offerings which, thyself thou balmest the Com-

panies of Gods in ordered season.

Agni, Vanaspati the Immolator sweeten our offered gift with
meath and butter.

11 Agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacrifice, and

was the Gods’ preceder.

May the Gods eat our offering consecrated according to this
true Priest’s voice and guidance,

HYMN CXI, Indra.

Bring for^vyour sacred song ye prudent singers, even as are
the thoughts of human beings.

Let us draw Indra with true deeds anear us: he loves our
songs, the Hero, and is potent.

2 The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship : to the

kine came the Bull, the Heifer’s Offspring.

With mighty bellowing hath he arisen, and hath pervaded
even the spacious regions.

3 Indra knows, verily, how to hear our singing, for he, victori-

ous, made a path for Surya.

He made the Cow, and he became the Sovran of Heaven,
primeval, matchless, and unshaken.

4 Praised by Angirases, Indra demolished with might the works

of the great watery monster.

Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his truth
supported earth’s foundation,

5 The counterpart of heaven and earth is Indira : he knoweth

all libations, slayeth Sushna,

The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended, and, best of
pillars, stayed it with a pillar.

6 The Yritra-slayer with his bolt felled Vyifcra : the magic of

the godless, waxen mighty,

Here hast thou, Bold Assailant, boldly conquered. * Yea, then
thine arms, 0 Maghvan, were potent.

2 The hine: who are milked for sacrificial purposes. The Bull : Indra. The
Heifer s Offering: cp. IV. 18. 10 : ‘ The Heifer hath brought forth the strong,
the mighty, the unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra ’ The Heifer is Aditi.

3 He made the Ooie: the words in Mm .... .,g6h, the cow, 1 the female of
the bull.’ — Muir; 1 Des Stieres Weib/ — Grassmann,— are difficult. Prof.
Ludwig suggests that the earth may be intended.

4 Watery monster : Arbuda, a demon of the clouds. See X. 67, 12.

HYMN 112.] THE MG VEDA. ' 555

7 When the Dawns come attendant upon Sarya their rays dis-

cover wealth of divers colours.

The Star of heaven is seen as ’twere approaching : none
knoweth aught of it as it departeth.

8 Far have they gone, the first of all these waters, the waters

that flowed forth when Indra sent them.

Where is their spring, and where is their foundation 1 Where
now, ye Waters, is your inmost centre ?

9 Thou didst free rivers swallowed by the Dragon ; and rapidly

they set themselves in motion,

Those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom.
Excited now to speed they run unresting. ■ ^

10 Yearning together they have sped to Sindhu : the Fort-des-
troyer, praised, of old, hath loved them.

Indra, may thy terrestrial treasures reach us, and our full
songs of joy approach thy dwelling.

HYMN CXII Indra.

Dkink of the juice, 0 Indra, at thy pleasure, for thy first
draught is early morn’s libation.

Rejoice, that thou mayst slay our foes, 0 Hero, and we with
iauds will tell thy mighty exploits.

2 Thou hast a car more swift than thought, 0 Indra ; thereon

come hither, come to drink the Soma.

Let thy Bay Steeds, thy Stallions, hasten hither, with whom
thou eomest nigh and art delighted.

3 Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splend-

our of the Sun adorn it.

0 Indra, turn thee hitherward invited by us thy friends ; be
seated and be joyful.

4 0 thou whose grandeur in thy festive transports not even these

two great worlds have comprehended.

Come, Indra, with thy dear Bay Horses harnessed, come to our
dwelling and the food thou lovest.

5 Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma whereof

thou, Indra, ever drinking,

Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, which prompts
the mighty flow of thine abundance.

7 The Star of heaven : the Sun. .Departeth: on its nightly journey from
west to east.

9 The Dragon : Ahi ; Vritra or his brother- fiend.

10 The Fort-destroyer : Indra,

m tee hymns of [book x

6. Found from of old is this thy cup, 0 Indra : 0 Satakratu,
drink therefrom the Soma.

Filled is the beaker with the meath that gladdens, the beaker
which all Deities delight in.

7 From many a side with proffered entertainment the folk are

calling thee, 0 Mighty Indra.

These our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meath :
drink thereof and find them pleasant.

8 I will declare thy deeds of old, 0 Indra, the mighty acts which

thou hast first accomplished.

In genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that the
Brahman^easily found the cattle.

9 Lord of the hosts, amid our bands be seated : they call thee

greatest Sage among the sages.

Nothing is done, even far away, without thee : great, wondrous,
Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee.

10 Aim of our eyes be thou, for we implore thee, 0 Maghavan,
Friend of friends and Lord of treasures.

Fight, Warrior strong in truth, fight thou the battle : give us
our share of undivided riches.

HYMN CXIII. Indra.

The Heavens and the Earth accordant with all Gods encour-
aged graciously that vigorous might of his.

When he came showing forth his majesty and power, he drank
of Soma juice and waxed exceeding strong.

2 This majesty of his Vishnu extols and lauds, making the stalk

that gives the meath flow forth with might.

When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him had smit-
ten Vritra he deserved the choice of Gods. r

3 When, bearing warlike weapons, fain to win thee praise, thou

mettest Vritra, yea, the Dragon, for the fight,

Then all the Maruts who were gathered with thee there ex-
tolled, 0 Mighty One, thy powerful majesty.

4 Soon as he sprang to life he forced asunder hosts : forward the

Hero looked to manly deed and war.

He cleft the rock, he let concurrent streams flow forth, and
with his skilful art stablished the heavens’ wide vault.

5 Indra hath evermore possessed surpassing power : he forced,

far from each other, heaven and earth apart.

He hurled impetuous down his iron thunderbolt, a joy to Varu-
na’s and Mitra’s worshipper.

S The Brahman : according to S&yana, Brahma who is identified with Bji-
kappati^tlie owner of the cows which the Pams had stolen.

HYMN 114.] THE HI GV ED A, 557

6 Then to the mighty powers of Indra, to his wrath, his the fierce

Stormer, loud of voice, they came with speed ;

What time the Potent One rent Vritra with his strength, who
held the waters back, whom darkness compassed round.

7 Even in the first of those heroic acts which they who strove

together came with might to execute,

Beep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won by victory
the right of being first invoked.

8 Then all the Gods extolled, with eloquence inspired by draughts

of Soma juice, thy deeds of manly might.

As Agni eats the dry food with his teeth, he ate Vritra, the
Dragon, maimed by Indra’s deadly dart.

9 Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, made

with singers, with the skilful and the eloquent.

Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Chumuri, lists to Dabhiti
for his faithful spirit’s sake.

10 Give riches manifold with noble horses, to be remembered
w r hile my songs address thee.

May we by easy paths pass all our troubles : find us this day
a ford wide and extensive.

HYMN CXIV. Visvedeva*.

Two perfect springs of heat pervade the Threefold, and come
for their delight is M&tarisvan.

Craving the milk of heaven the Gods are present : well do
they know the praise-song and the S&man.

2 The priests heard far away, as they are ordered, serve tho
three Nirritis, for well they know them.

Sages have traced the cause that first produced them, dwelling
in distant and mysterious chambers.

6 They came : it is uncertain whether the Gods, or the Maruts, or thr waters
are the understood subject.

7 Deep darkness fell upon the slain : ‘ Vritra being slain, the thick darkness
was destroyed.’ — Wilson.

8 He ate: Indra utterly destroyed him. a more matter-

of-fact way : people devoured Vritra, that is, ■ ! ; :■ . . by the waters

which were no longer obstructed by him.

9 Dhuni and Chumuri were demons and enemies of Indra’s friend Dabhiti,

See Vol. I., Index.

1 Springs of heat : gharmti : Agni and Svtrya. The Threefold : the universe,
sky. firmament, and earth. Mdtari&van : V&yu, according to S&yana. * Thus
we have here the well-known triad, Agni, V&yu, Sflrya.’— Ludwig.

2 Three Nirritis : according toS&yana, heaven, mid-air, and earth, or the
deities that control them. Prof. Ludwig thinks that the Dawns are meant,
which by their regular appearance bring men nearer to death. The plural
appears in one other place, VIII. 24, 24,

558 THE HYMNS OF f BOOK X.

3 The Yon tli ful One, well-shaped, with four locks braided, bright-

ened with oil, pats on the ordinances.

Two Birds of mighty power are seated near her, there where
the Deities receive their portion.

4 One of these Birds hath passed into the sea of air : thence he

looks round and views this universal world.

With simple heart I have beheld him from anear : his Mother
kisses him and he returns her kiss.

5 Him with fair wings though only One in nature, wise singers

shape, with songs, in many figures.

While they at sacrifices fix the metres, they measure out
twelve chalices of Soma.

6 While they arrange the four and six-and-thirty, and duly

order, up to twelve, the mensures,

Having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful snges send the Car
forward with the Rich and SfLman.

7 The Chariot's majesties are fourteen others : seven sages lead

it onward with their voices.

Who will declare to us the ford Apnana, the path whereby
they drink first draughts of Soma?

8 The fifteen lauds are in a thousand places: that is as vast as

heaven and earth in measure.

A thousand spots contain the mighty thousand. Yak spread-
eth forth as far as Prayer extend eth.

3 The Youthful One : the altar, represented as a woman. With four locks
braided: quadrangular, according to S&yana. Puts on the ordinances: is
dressed or arranged in the manner prescribed for sacrifice. Two Birds ;
probably Agni and Soma, According to S&yana, the husband and bis wife,
or the Yajamdua and the Brahman.

4 One: Agni as the Sun, IHs mother: perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig says.
Dawn.

t> Thiidy-six graft as y chalices, or saucers for Soma juice or other libations,
are to be used at the Agnishtoma, and four in addition at the Atyagniahtoma
sacrifice. The measures : the proper metres for particular rites or parts of
the service. The Car : the sacrifice. Rich : the holy verse that is recited.
Slman : the psalm that is sung or chanted.

7 Majesties : the abstract used for the concrete, the mighty ones, probably
the priests. The ford Apndm; the passage leading to the place of sacrifice.
They : the Gods.

8 That: meaning the fifteen lauds regarded as a whole. The mighty
thousand: the meaning is uncertain ; ‘the thousand great (functions) are in
a thousand places.’ — Wilson. This means, according to SHyana, that every

function of the body has i Ar "i Dr. Muir translates*. —

e There are a thousand times ' ■ ■■ • \ thousand times a thous-

and are their glorious manifestations.’ Vftk : or Speech, See X. 71 and 125.

HYMK 115.] THE RIQVEJDA

553

9 What sage hath learned the metres’ application-?
gained Yak, the spirit’s aim and object?

Which ministering priest is called eighth Hero? Who then
hath tracked the two Bay Steeds of Indra?

10 Yoked to his chariot-pole there stood the Coursers; they only
travel round earth’s farthest limits.

These, when their driver in his home is settled, receive the-
allotted meed of their exertion.

HYMN CXY. AgnL

Verily wondrous is the tender Youngling’s growth who never
draweth nigh to drink his Mothers’ milk.

As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, ; he, ^faring on his.
great errand, suddenly grew strong.

2 Then Agni was- his name, most active to bestow 7 gathering up

the trees with his consuming tooth ;

Skilled in fair sacrifice,, armed with destroying tongue, im-
petuous as a bull that snorteth in the- mead.

3 Praise him, your God who, bird-like, rests upon a tree, scatter-

ing drops of juice and pouring forth his flood,

Speaking &loud with flame as with his lips a priest, and broad-
ening his paths like one of high command.

4 Thou Everlasting, whom, far-striding fain to burn, the winds,,

uninterrupted, never overcome,

They have approached, as warriors eager for the fight, heroic
Trita, guiding him to gain his wish.

5 This Agni is the best of Kanvas, Kauvas’ Friend, Conqueror

of the foe whether afar or near.

May Agni guard the singers, guard the princes well : may
Agni grant To us our princes* gracious help.

6 Do thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself the lord of

data vedas, mightiest of all,

9 Eighth Hero : Agni is meant, as presiding over the seven ritvijas or
ministering priests.

1 His Mothers are the two fire-sticks, the lower of which, in which the spark
is produced, being she who hath no udder .

4 Trita : according to S&yana, him who is stationed in the three fire-
receptacles, that is, Agni.

5 Kanvas; a well-known family with which Upastuia was connected.
According to S&yana, worshippers in general are meant :• — ‘the most earnest
of eulogists, the friend of those who praise him.’ — Wilson,

6 Supitrya (‘ who hast fair ancestors.’ — Wilson) seems to be an epithet of
the ILishi as addressed by himself. S&yana applies it to Agni. The con-
struction of the stanza is difficult, and the translation of the first half, which
follows Prof, Ludwig, is somewhat conjectural. Thirsty land: Agni by his
intercession causes rain to fall.

560

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

iio surely gives a boon even in thirsty land, most powerful,
prepared to aid us in the wilds.

7 Thus noble Agni with princes and mortal men is lauded, ex-

cellent for conquering strength with chiefs,

Men who are well-disposed as friends and true to Law, even
as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind.

8 0 Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upastuta’s most

potent voice reveres thee.

Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, and lengthen
out the days of our existence.

9 Thus, Agni, have the sons of Vrishtihavya, the Rishis, the

U pastirtas invoked thee.

Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. With
Vashat ! have they come, with hands uplifted, with their
uplifted hands and cries of Glory !

HYMN OXVI. Indra.

Brink Soma juice for mighty power and vigour, drink, Strong-
est One, that thou mayst smite down Vritra.

Brink thou, iu voiced, for strength, and riches : drink thou thy
fill of meath and pour it down, 0 Indra.

2 Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what thou

choosest of the flowing Soma.

Giver of weal, be joyful in thy spirit, and turn thee hither-
ward to bless and prosper.

3 Let heavenly Soma gladden thee, 0 Indra, let that effused

among mankind delight thee.

Rejoice in that whereby thougavest freedom, and that whereby
thou conquerest thy foemen. 0

4 Let Indra come, impetuous, doubly mighty, to the poured

juice, the Bull, with two Bay Coursers.

With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, glut ever-
more thy bolt, 0 Foe-destroyer.

5 Dash down, outflaming their sharp flaming weapons, the strong-

holds of the men urged on by demons.

I give thee, Mighty One, great streugth and conquest : go,
meet thy foes and rend them in the battle.

Prof. Grass maim observes? : ‘Das Lied enthalt. namentlich in Vers 3— 6,
manches Dunkle, sodass hier die Auslegung zweifelhaft bleibb.’

1 Pour it down: ‘shower down (blessings). 5 — Wilson.

S fairest freedom : by slaying Vritra t or, riches, according to Sayan a.

4 Foe-destroyer : arusuhd : according to the St Petersburg Lexicon, ‘ striker
the red clouds’ ( arusa « aru.did ? ). I adopt Sfty ana’s explanation.

HYMN 117.]

TI1E RIG VEDA .

m

6 Extend afar the votary's fame and glory, as the firm archer 7 s

strength drives off the foeman.

Ranged on our side, grown strong in might that conquers,
never defeated, still increase thy body.

7 To thee have we presented this oblation : accept it, Sovran

Ruler, free from anger.

Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened : eat, Indra,
drink of that which stirs to meet thee.

8 Eat, Indra, these oblations which approach thee : be pleased

with food made ready and with Soma.

With entertainment we receive thee friendly : effectual be
the sacrificed wishes. ^

9 I send sweet speech to Indra and to ^gni : with hymns I

speed it like a boat through waters.

Even thus, the Gods seem moving round about 'me, the foun-
tains and bestow T ers of our riches.

HYMN CXVII. Liberality.

The Gods have not ordained hunger to be our death : 'even to
the well-fed man comes death in varied shape.

The riches of the liberal never waste away, while he who will
not give finds none to comfort him.

2 The man with food in store who, when the needy, comes in

miserable case begging for bread to eat,

Hardens his heart against him — even when of old he did him
service — finds not one to comfort him.

3 Bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him

in want of food and feeble.

Success attends him in the shout of battle. He makes a friend
of him in future troubles.

4 No friend is he who to his friend and comrade who comes im-

ploring food, will offer nothing.

Let him depart — no home is that to rest in — , and rather seek
a stranger to support him.

5 Let the rich satisfy the poor implorer, and bend his eye upon

a longer pathway.

6 As the firm archer's strength:- the construction is obscure: — ‘(stretch
out), thy strength like strong bows against’ our enemies.’ — Wilson.

The bymn eulogizes Liberality or Bounty in the shape of gifts of wealth
and food. *

3 To be our death: men must not attempt to justify their refusal of food
to the hungry by saying that the Gods send hunger- as a punishment for sin.

5 Bend his eye upon a longer pathway : carefully consider the future and,
not the present only. He himself may need the same assistance hereafter.

36

£02 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK X

Riches come now to one, now to another, and like the wheels
of cars are ever rolling,

6 Th* foolish man wins food with fruitless labour; that food—
I speak the truth' — shall be his ruin. _

He feeds no trusty friend, no man to love him. Ail guilt is
lie who eats with no partaker.

—-7 The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us, and

, with its feet cuts through the path it follows.

Better the speaking than the silent Brahman : the liberal friend
outvalues him who gives not.

g with one foot hath far outrun the biped, and the two-footed

catches the three-footed. , . , ,

Four-footed creatures come when bipeds call them, and stand
and look where five are met together.

9 The hands are both alike : their labour differs. The yield of
sister nillch-kirie is unequal.

Twins even differ in their strength and vigour : two, even kins-
men, differ in their bounty.

HYMN CXVIII. -Agin.

Agsti, refulgent among men thou slayest the devouring fiend,

Bright Ruler in thine own abode,
v xhou springest up when worshipped well : the drops of butter
are thy joy

When ladles are brought near to thee.

;? Honoured with gifts he shines afar, Agni adorable with song:

The dripping ladle balms his face.

6 Shall be his ruin ; with reference to stanza T.

7 Active exertion la necessary for success. The speaking Brahman : the
priest wbo duly discharges the task of refutation for which he is engaged.

‘ A Brahman expounding (the Veda)/- Wilson.

3 The victory is not always theirs who appear to be more richly endowed
than others. Be with ove foot: tkapdd . the Sun appears to be meant,
elsewhere called Aja-Ekap&d. See VI. 50. 14. The biped is man. The three -
foot'd' is the old man who walks with a Btaff and is overtaken by one who
*cb>es not require such assistance Four-footed creatures : dogs. Five : several
men together ; the dogs being at first uncertain whether their masters are
among them or not. PahHYk, sets of fire, is apparently used with reference
to the one, two, three, and four in the preceding compound words, Others
explain pahhtfh by ‘steps’ or ‘traces/

l have adopted the explanation given by the author* of the Siebmzig
J.irder

9 Ah men should be liberal ; hut we must not expect all to be equally
generous

Tne hymn haa been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. 3. Testis, V. pp, 431 — 433.

HYMN 119.] THE. MG VEDA. 563

4 Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, is balmed

with oil,

Refulgent in his wealth of light.

5 Praised by our hymns thou kindlest thee, Oblation-bearer, for

the Gods :

As such do mortals call on thee.

6 To that Immortal Agni pay worship with oil, ye mortal men, —
Lord of the house, whom none deceive.

7 0 Agni, burn the R&ksliasas with thine unconquerable flame :
Shine guardian of Eternal Law.

8 So, Agni, with thy glowing face burn fierce against the female

fiends,

Shining among Umkshayas.

9 Urukshayas have kindled thee, , Oblation-bearer, thee, with

hymns,

Best Worshipper among mankind.

HYMN CXIX. Indra.

This, even this was my resolve, to win a cow, to win a steed :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice 1

2 Like violent gusts of wind the draughts that I have drunk

have lifted me :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

3 The draughts I drank have borne me up, as fleet-foot horses

draw a car :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

4 The hymn hath reached me, like a cow who lows to meet her*

darling calf :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice? .

5 As a wright bends a chariot-seat so round my heart I bend the

hymn :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

6 Not as a mote within the eye count the Five Tribes of man

with me :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

B Urukshayas : members of the Rishfs family.

The Rishi is Indra himself in the form of Lava. He describes his eensa*
tiona after drinking Soma juice. But see Bergaigne, I. 151, who considers it
to be the utterance of an exhilarated mortal.

1 To win a cow: to strengthen and inspirit himself for battle, and so to
witk kine and horses for his worshippers.

6 8&yana explains differently The five castes have not eluded the glance
of my eye/ — Wilson.

THE HYMNS OF

m

[BOOK X

7 The heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to one

half of me :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

8 I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and all this

spacious earth :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

9 Aha ! this spacious earth will I deposit either here or there :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

10 In one short moment will I smite the earth in fury here or

there :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

11 One of my £anks is in the sky; I let the other trail below :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

12 I, greatest of the Mighty Ones, am lifted to the firmament :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice 1

13 1 seek the worshipper’s abode ; oblation-bearer to the Gods :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

2

HYMN GXX.

Indra.

In all the worlds That was the Best and Highest whence sprang
the Mighty Gods, of splendid valour.

As soon as bora he overcomes his foemen, he in whom all who
lend him aid are joyful.

Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, he as a foe
strikes fear into the D£sa,

Eager to win the breathing and the breathless. All sang thy
praise at banquet and oblation. °

3 All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these
twice or thrice, are thine assistants. a 1

11 Cp. III. 32. 11.

M l 3 T h “ B * an . za is di ® ouIt - The word gnU is unintelligible, and grihcm,
as Prof. Ludwig suggests should, perhaps, be read instead. Oblation-bearer-
Indra, in his excitement, fancies that he is Agni. Prof. Grassmann, who with
Dr. Muir, considers grih6 to mean servant or minister, places the stanza in
his Appendix as a fragment from a hymn to A gni.

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. p. 91 , by the

<SX° Sa^toSs?^' aadb?: ^^ffymns/romtheJiUda

meaa ‘°S> adding to Sfiyana, Brahma the original cause of the

universe*

Zfiager to wjt Prof. Ludwig makes sasni an infinitive. Sdsnih may he
the correct reading. See Grassmann, Worterbuch mm Kigveda. The breath-
and the breathless ; the animate and the inanimate world

f adoration/ — Wilson. These: Soma juices.
Twice jr thnce: with reference, perhaps, to the three daily libations. 3 What

nruN 120 .]

tee rig Veda.

565

Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness : win
quickly with our meath that meath in battle.

4 Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, at every ban-

quet are the sages joyful.

With mightier power, Bold God, extend thy firmness : let not
malignant Yatudhanas harm thee.

5 Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold

great wealth the prize of combat.

I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and' sharpen
with my prayer thy vital vigour.

6 Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, paost energetic,

Aptya of the Aptyas :

He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many
. who were deemed his equals.

7 Thou in that house which thy protection gitardeth bestowest

wealth, the higher and the lower.

Thou stablishest the two much- wandering Mothers, and bring-
est many deeds to their completion.

8 Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats these holy

prayers, this strength to Indva.

He rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and all the
doors of light hath he thrown open.

9 Thus hath Brihaddiva, the great Atharvan, spoken to Indra

as himself in person.

The spotless Sisters, they who are his Mothers, with power
exalt him and impel him onward.

is sweeter than the*sweet ; thine own celestial Soma. Sftyana explains the
stanza differently ; — ‘To thee all (worshippers) offer adoration, whether those
propitiators he two or three. Combine that which is sweeter than the sweet
with sweetness, unite that honey with honey,’ — Wilson. The ‘two or three/
according to S&yana, are the saerificer and his wife and child, and the second
half of the stanza contains a reference to the propagation of children,

6 Aptya ; the name of a class of deities, of which Trita Aptya is the chief .
‘ Most accessible of the accessible.’ — Wilson. The first line is without a verb :
I praise him, may be understood. Ednas : a class of demons.

7 The higher and the lower: heavenly and earthly. Mothers: Heaven ancl Earth.

8 Foremost of light-winners ; according to S&yana, * chief of Rishis, and
enjoyer of heaven, or servant of Aditya, the Sun, Indra/ Fold of cattle ;
the region of light.

9 The great Atharvan: ‘the great priest/ — Grassm&nn. As himself: he
identifies himself with the God whom he worships. The spotless Sisters, they
toho are his Mothers ; according to S&yana, the sister riverB which abide in the
mother earth. Yon Roth adopts the reading of Atharva-veda V. 2. 9, mdta-
rlsvari, instead of the mdtaribhvarih of the' text. Heaven and Earth appear
to be intended.

566 THE HYMNS OF

HYMN CXXI.

I# the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, bom Only
created beings.

He fixed and holdetb up this earth and heaven,
shall we adore with our oblation ?

2 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose command-

ments all the Gods acknowledge :

The Lord of death, whose shade is life immortal. What God,
shall we adore with our oblation ?

3 Who by hi3 grandeur hath become Sole Ruler of all the

moving world that breathes and slumbers ;

He who is Lord of men and Lord of cattle. What God shall
we adore with our oblation ?

4 His, through his might, are these snow-covered mountains,

and men call sea and Basil his possession :

His arms are these, his are these heavenly regions. What God
shall we adore with our oblation ?

5 By him the heavens are strong and earth is stedfast, by him

light’s realm and sky- vault are supported :

By him the regions in mid-air were measured. What God
shall we adore with our oblatiou 1

6 To him, supported by his help, two armies embattled look

while trembling in their spirit,

When over them the risen Sun is shining. What God shall we
adore with our oblation ?

7 What time the mighty waters came, containing the universal

germ, producing Agni,

Thence sprang the Gods’ one spirit into being. What God
shall we adore with our oblation ?

I Ka, kab, (quis) meaning Who ? that is, the Unknown God, has been applied
[ a name to PrajApati, and to other Gods, from a forced interpretation of the
 IQ terrogative pronoun which occurs in the refrain of each verse of the hymn.

1 Hiranyagarbha : literally ( the gold-germ ; ' * source of golden-light ; *
the Sun-god 1 as the great power of the universe, from which all other powers
and existences, divine aud earthly, are derived, a conception which is the
nearest approach tfl? the later mystical conception of Brahma, the creator of
the world.* — Wallis. WMt God; kdsnm dfotiya ; cui deo? According to others :

Worship we Ka the God with our oblation.* According to Ludwig, the mean-
ing is * What other God than Praj&pafci shall we worship ? *

^ Breathes and slumbers : that is of Gods and men. Of men and , cattle :
literally, of quadruped and biped.’

* Sea : air. Jtasl : the mythical river of the firmament. Gf. X, 108. 1.

. * Thence; from the coming of the waters. One spirit ; 6!cah t one, in the
text gwe3 two superfluous syllables, and is auspicious.

[BOOK X
Ka.

Lord of all
What God

'&TXX 122.] TBE RIGVEDA. Ml

8 He in his might surveyed the floods containing productive

force and generating Worship.

He is the God of gods, and none beside him. What God shall
we adore with our oblation ?

9 Ne’er may he harm us who is earth’s Begetter, nor he whose

laws are sure, the heavens’ Creator,

He who brought forth the great and lucid waters. What God
shall we adore with our oblation %

10 Prajkpati ! thou only comprehendest all these created things,
and none beside thee.

Grant us our hearts’ desire when we invoke thee : may we
have store of riches in possession.

HYMN CXXIL Agni.

I praise the God of wondrous might like Indra, the lovely
pleasant Guest whom all must welcome.

May Agni, Priest and Master of the household, give hero
strength and all-sustaining riches.

2 0 Agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou passing

wise who knowest every ordinance.

Enwrapped in holy oil further the course of prayer : the Gods
bestow according to thy holy law.

3 Immortal, wandering round the seven stations, give, a liberal

Giver, to the pious worshipper,

Wealth, Agni, with brave sons and ready for his use : welcome
the man who comes with fuel unto thee.

4 The seven who bring oblations worship th^e, the Strong, the

first, the Great Chief Priest, Ensign of sacrifice.

The oil-andin ted Bull, Agni who hears, who sends as God full
hero strength to him who freely gives.

8 Gen&'&ting Worship: 1 giving birth to sacrifice.*— Wilson.

10 Prajdpati : Lord of life, creatures or creation. Savitar ihe Sun God
is bo called in IV. 58. 2, and Soma Pavam&oa in IX. 5. 9. Prajdpati Whs after-
wards the name of a separate God. the bestower of progeny and ca»tle, and
sometimes invoked as the Creator.

The hvmn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0 8. Texts , IV,, pp. 16, 17 }
by Prof. Max Muller, A. S, Lit,, p. 569, and Vedio ffynfas. Port I. (Sacred
\ Books of the East, XXXII) p. 1.; by Mr. Wallis, Cosmology of the Itiyved*,,
\ p 50f; by Prof. Peterson, aymnnfrom. the Rigreda ; and by Dr. L. Rcherm-.n,
S Philosophische Hymnm Aus der Rig-und Atkarva-veda~8ankitd, p. 2-k

^ 1 Like Indra; vdsvmna: like the Vas«, or chief Vasu. ‘ Like the sun.’— *

J Wilson. Riches: or viands.

 3 Seven stations: regions of the universe, according to S&yana,

I 4 The seven ; the priests.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X

5 First messenger art then, meet for election : drink thou thy
fill invited to the Amrit.

The Maiucs in the votary’s house adorned thee; with lauds
the Bhrigus gave thee light and glory.

f> Milking the teeming Cow for all-sustaining food, 0 Wise One,
for the worship-loving worshipper,

Thou, Agoi, dropping oil, thrice lighting works of Law, show-
est thy wisdom circling home and sacrifice.

7 They who at flushing of this dawn appointed thee their mes-

senger, these men have paid thee reverence.

Cods strengthened thee fnr work that must be glorified, Agni,
while they made butter pure for sacrifice.

a

8 Arrangers in our synods, Agni, while they sang, Yasishtha’s

sons have called thee down, the Potent One.

Maintain the growth of wealth wirh men who sacrifice. Ye
Gods, preserve us with your blessings evermore.

HYMN CXXIII. Vena.

See, Vena, born in light, hath driven hither, on chariot of the
air, the Calves of Pri ni.

♦Singers with hymns caress him as an infant there where the
waters and the suuhght mingle.

2 Yen a draws up his wave from out the ocean : mist-born, the
fair one’s back is made apparent.

Brightly he shone aloft on Order’s summit : the hosts san<*
glory to their common birthplace.

Full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling together
stood the Darling’s Mothers.

Ascending to the lofty height of Order, the bawds of singers
sip the sweets of Amrit.

I (rods: here meaning priests. * Verify there are two kinds of gods; for
nit teed, the gods are the gods, and the Br&himuns who have studied and teach
ijyiy Jure are the human gods’ (Sttapatia-BrdJmana, II. 2. 2. t> ; S. B. JE.

1 1 . rSoDy , i

')*« !( ;ving Sun’ of I. 83. 5, Kdnta or ‘ the beloved,’ is said by the
(•'Wiolias!'. m this place. to be mu.dhyatth6.no devah ‘the God of the middle
J emou. He is, apparently, the Sun as he rises in the miat and dew of the
morning.

1 Pmni , the Speckled Cow, is the variegated cloud, and her Calves are the
masses of mist which the Sun dispels.

2 Ocean : the sea of air. On Order's summit: ‘on the summit of nature’s
course —Wallis. Order , here and in the following stanza, is Kosmos, the
orders W-rer-htH universe. ^ Common birthplace: the sky.

T ' '[ ’ . ■ ‘ *■' child which they have produced in common. Tht

jJarhng $ Mothers ; the Dawns, or the Waters, or the songs.

HYMyr 123.]

THE RIGVEDA,

4- Knowing his form, the sages yearned to* meet him : they have
. come nigh to hear the wild Bull's bellow.

Performing sacrifice they reached the river : for the Gandbarva
found the immortal waters.

5 The Apsaras, the Lady, sweetly smiling, supports her Lover

in subliinest heaven.

In his Friend's dwelling as a Friend he wanders: he, Vena,
rests him on his golden pinion.

6 They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strong-

winged bird that mounteth sky-ward ;

On thee with wings . of gold,. Varana's envoy, the Bird that
hasteneth to the home of Yama.

7 Erect, to heaven hath the Gandbarva mounted, pointing at

us his many-coloured weapons;

Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light,
produceth forms that please us.

8 When as a spark he cometh near the ocean, still looking with

a vulture’s eye to heaven,

His lustre, joying in its own bright splendour, maketh dear
glories in the lowest region.

4 The wild Bull's bellow; the sound made by the dropping Soma juice.
The Gandharva : Vena, the rising Sun.

5 The Apsaras : the celestial nymph who symbolizes the waters of heave n.
Her Lover ; Vena, the Gandharva, Silrya. ‘ Our hymn illustrntes the two-,
senses in which the sun is brought, into connection with the waters ; first, as
penetrating with his beams the watery masses of the sky, and secondly iu the-
assimilation of his light to the waters, as soma or ambrosia, whence the depths
of light become the aerial ocean. This association is stereotyped in the union
of the Gandharvas and the Apsarases.’ — Wallis. His Friend's dwelling : the
mansion of his father Heaven.

6 Varuna's envoy ; the setting sun. Cf. VII. 87. 6. Yama: Cf. X. 14. 7.

7 Clad in sweet raiment : surabM f sweet, may, as Mr. Wallis conjectures, be
a play on the word gandhd , occurring in the name Gandharva. Stanzas 1
and 8 merely recapitulate, as Ludwig observes, the deeds of SOrya, first as
the light of living men and then as the illuminator of the regions below the
earth.

The hymn is one of the obscurest in the whole Rigveda. Mahldhara inter-
prets Vena by chandra , the Moon. Wilson says : ‘The general purport of tbe
tSiiHa makes it [Vena] equivalent to the thunder-cloud ' Von Roth, whom
Grassmann follows, identifies Vena Gandharva with the Rainbow. According
to Ludwig Vena is the Moon and the Gandharva is the Sun. Mr. Wallis has
translated and explained the hymn in his Cpsmology of the Rigveda , pp. 34 ff.
For a different interpretation see Hillebrandt, V, Id I. 43i)ff. and Ludwig’s
criticisms thereon ( Ueber die neuestew Arbeiten, u: s, p. 109f). See also Ber-
gftigne, II. 38 — 40. , '■ . . . . ....

THE HYMNS OF

570

HYMN CXX1V.

[BOOH X
Agni, Etc, 4

Come to this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni, threefold, with seven J
threads and five divisions. “ ;]■'

Be our oblation-bearer and preceder; thou hast lain long
enough in during darkness.

2 I come a God foreseeing from the godless to immortality by

secret pathways,

While I, ungracious one, desert the gracious, leave mine own
friends and seek the kin of strangers.

3 I, looking to the guest of other lineage, have founded many a

rule of Law and Order.

I bid far^vell to the Great God, the Father, and, for neglect,
obtain my share of worship.

4 I tarried many a year within this altar : I leave tbe Father,

for my choice is Indra,

Away pass Agni, Varuna, and Soma. Rule ever changes : this
1 come to favour.

5 These Asuras have lost their powers of magic. But thou, 0

Varuna, if thou dost love me,

0 King, discerning truth and right from falsehood, come and
be Lord and Ruler of my kingdom.

6 Here is the light of heaven, here all is lovely; here there is

radiance, here is air’s wide region.

Let us two slaughter Vritra, Forth, 0 Soma 1 Thou art obla~
tiou : we therewith will serve thee.

1 Indra speaks. Threefold: performed with three daily libationB ; or com*,

prising the p&Jcayajfla, the kaviryajna, and the somagajha } the simple domes-
tic oblation, the oblation of clarified butter, etc,, and* the offering of Soma
juice. With seven threads; conducted by the seven chief priests. With five
divisions : with five oblations, or regulated by the Yajam&na and four of the
chief priests, according to Sftyana. The .. .. . ! ■ . 1 . /. errant

2 A<ni speaks. He has Mb Varuna, . : ■ >,::•< :‘i Deity, whose

power was waning, aud associated himstui wun incira who nas superseded
that God. From the godless : from Varuni who in the decline of his supre-
macy has neglected Agni and sacrifice. Sdyana interprets the first line dif-
ferently : — ‘From being no divinity I issue a divinity from the cave at the
solicicafcion (of the gods), and being manifest I attain immortality/— Wilson.
Seek the kin of strangers : come to be born and domesticated in. a new place,
with Indra.

3 Of other lineage : of the other branch ; terrestrial fire. Father ; VarunA

4 Within this altar : or, close to this Varuna. This; the supremacy of
Indra.

5 Indra speaks. These Asuras: Agni, Varuna, and Soma. Corns and be
Lord : Indra offers Varuna spiritual and moral sovereignty as compensation
for ids loss of general supremacy.

6 Let us two ; the exhortation is addressed by Indra to Soma, Vritra:
regarded aa in league with Varuna, the fiendish enemy in the ahape of Varuna.

0 ' •

HYMN 125.] TEE RIG VEDA. 571

7 The Sage hath fixed his form by wisdom in the heavens : Va-

runa with no violence let the wafcex*s flow.

Like women-folk, the floods that bring prosperity have caught
his hue and colour as they gleamed and shone.

8 These wait upon his loftiest power and vigour : he dwells in

these who triumph in their Godhead ;

And they, like people who elect their ruler, have in abhor-
rence turned away from Yritra.

9 They call him Swan, the abhorrent floods’ Companion, moving

in friendship with celestial Waters.

The poets in their thought have looked on Indra swiftly ap-
proaching when Anushfcup calls him. ^

HYMN CXXY. ^ V&k.

I travel with the Rudras and the Yasus, with the Adityas
and All-Gods I wander.

I hold aloft both Yaruna and Mitra, Indra and Agni, and the
Pair of Asvins.

2 I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and Tvashtar I sup-

port, Pus ban, and Bhaga.

I load with wealth the zealous sacrifioer who pours the juice
and oflers his oblation.

3 \l am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most thoughtful,

first of those who merit worship.

Thus Gods have stablished me in many places with many
homes to enter aud abide in.

4 Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them, — each

man who sees, breathes, hears the word outspoken.

They know it* not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one
and all, the truth as I declare it A

7 The Sage : perhaps Soma, in answer to Indra’s appeal ; Mitra, according

to S&yana. ^

8 His loftiest power : the supreme might of Indra.

9 This stanza appears to have been added on account of the occurrence of
the word bibhatsUndm (abhorrenfcium) which seems to connect it with^ the
preceding stanza where MbhaUtivaK (abhorrentea) occurs. Swan : hansa :
Sfirya the Sun- God is sometimes so called. Cf. IV. 40. 5. Swiftly approach-
ing when Anushtup calls him : e or the ceaselessly moving Indra, who ia worthy
to be praised with an Anushtubh.' — -Wilson. Or, ‘dancing the Anushtup,
according to Prof. Max Muller's interpretation.

M. Bergaigne ha^ translated and explained this hymn. See La Reltgwn
V4dique, III. pp. 145—149. See also Book IV. 42, for hints of the rivalry
between Varuna and Indra.

V&k is Speech personified, the Word, the first creation and renreeentntive
of Spirit, and the means of communication between men aud Qoda, Here
she is said to be the daughter of the Rishl Ambhriuo,

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

5 I, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods and

men alike shall welcome,

I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a
Eishi, and a Brahman.

6 I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay

the hater of devotion.

I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have penetrated
Earth and Heaven.

7 (On the world’s summit I bring forth the Father : my home is

in the waters, in the ocean.

Thence I extend o’er all existing creatures, and touch even
yonder heaven with tny forehead.

8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the while

I hold together all existence.

Beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens I have become
so mighty in my grandeur.^

HYMN CXXYI. * Visvedevas,

No peril, no severe distress, ye Gods, affects the mortal man

Whom Aryaman and Mitra lead, and Varuna, of one accord,
beyond his foes.

2 This very thing do we desire, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman,

• Whereby ye guard the mortal man from sore distress, and lead
him safe beyond his foes.

3‘ These are, each one, our present helps, Varuna, Mitra, Arya-
man,

Best leaders, best' deliverers to lead us on and bear us safe
beyond our foes.

7 The Father : Heaven or Sky, produced from V&k identified with Para-
the supreme and universal Soul.

The hymn lias been translated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays , I. 32 ;
by the authors of the Siehenzig Lieder; by Prof. Peterson, Hymns from the
lligvcda (Bombay Sanskrit Series); and by Prof, Whitney, Notes to Cole-
biooke’s Essay on the Vedas, p. 113.

Mr. Wallis observes: ‘Vac, ‘Speech’ is celebrated alone in two whole
hymns, X. 71. and X. 125., of which the former shows that the primary
application of the name was to the voice of the hymn, the means of com-
munication between heaven and earth at the sacrifice. The other hymn
illustrates the constant assimilation of the varied phenomena of nature to
the sacrifice ; all that has a voice in nature, the thunder of the storm, the
reawaking of life at dawn, with songs of rejoicing over the new birth of the
world, are embodied in this V&c in the same way as it is’said of Brihaspati,
that he embraces all things that are. It is thus another expression for that
idea of the unity of the world, which we have seen crowning the mystical
speculations of all the more abstract hymns of the collection.’ — Cosmology of
the Rigveda , p. 85. See also Weber, V&c und Aoyog, Indische Studien , IX.
473— 480 ; and Max Muller, The Veddnta Philosophy, 144-147.

HYMN 127.]

THE RIGYEDA .

573

4 Ye compass round and guard each man, Vanina, Mitra, Arya-

man :

In your dear keeping may we be, ye who are excellent as
guides beyond our foes.

5 Idityas are beyond all foes, — Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman :
Strong Rudra with the Marut host, Indra, Agni let us call for

. weal beyond our foes.

6 These lead us safely over all, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman,

These who are Kings of living men, over all troubles far away

beyond our foes.

7 May they^give bliss to aid us well, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman :
May the Adityas, when we pray, grant us wide shelter and

defence beyond our foes.

8 As in this place, 0 Holy Ones, ye Vasus freed even the-Gauri

when her feet were fettered,

So free us now from trouble and affliction : and let our life be
lengthened still, 0 Agni.

HYMN CXXVII. Night.

With all her eyes the Goddess Night looks forth approaching
many a spot :

She hath put all her glories on.

2 Immortal, she hath filled the waste, the Goddess hath filled

height and depth :

She conquers darkness with her light.

3 The Goddess as she comes hath set the Dawn her Sister in her

place :

And then the clarkness vanishes.

4 So favour us this night, 0 thou whose pathways we have visited
As birds their nest upon the tree.

5 The villagers have sought their homes, and all that walks

and all that flies,

Even the falcons fain for prey.

6 Keep off the she-wolf and the wolf ; 0 frrmya, keep the thief

away :

Easy be thou for us to pass.

8 Gaurt: the wild-cow, the female of the Gaura or Bos Gaurus. The
Vasus are said to have* delivered her from Visv&vasu the Gandharva,

2 The waste: the expanded (firmament).’ — Wilson.

<5 ftfmyd: * undulating 8 9 ; pfight. ' • • ••

574

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X,

7 Clearly hath she come nigh to me who decks the dark with
richest hues ;

0 Morning, cancel it like debts.

S These have I brought to thee like kine. 0 Jtfigbt, thou Child
of Heaven, accept
This laud as fur a conqueror.

■ HYMN CXXVIII. Visvedevas.

Let me win glory, Agni, in our battles : enkindling thee, may
we support our bodies.

May the four regions bend and bow before me : with thee for
guardiam may we win in combat.

^ May all the Gods be on my side in battle, the Maruts led by
ludra, Vishnu, Agni.

Mine be the middle air's extended region, and may the wind
blow favouring these my wishes.

3 May the Gods grant me riches ; may the blessing and invoca-
tion of the Gods assist me.

foremost in fight be the divine Invokers : may we, un wounded
have brave heroes round us.

4 For me let them present all mine oblations, and let my mind's
intention be accomplished.

May I be guiltless of the least transgression : and, all ye Gods
do ye combine to bless us. '

5 Ye sk divine Expanses, grant us freedom : here, all ve Gods
acquit yourselves like heroes. J 7

Let us not lose our children or our bodies ; let us not benefit
the foe, King Soma !

6

8

“SibiSpn? « .. our

Let these thy foes turn back and seek their houses
then- thought who \yatch at home be ruined.

and let

Tktzt ; verses.

SriS VS

$Sp;

HYMN 129.J

THE R1GVEDA .

5 75

7 Lord of the world, Creator of creators : the saviour God who

overcomes the foe man.

May Gods, Brihaspati, both Asvins shelter from ill this sacri-
fice and sacrificer.

8 Foodful, and much-invoked, at this our calling may the great

Bull vouchsafe us wide protection.

Lord of Bay Coursers, Indra, bless our children : harm us not,
give us not as prey to others.

9 Let those who are our foemen stay afar from us : with Indra

and with Agni we will drive them off.

Vasus, Adityas, Rudras have exalted me, made me far-reach-
ing, mighty, thinker, sovran lord. ^

HYMN CXXIX. Creation.

Tfien was not non-existent nor existent : there was no realm
of air, no sky beyond it.

What covered in, and where? and what gave shelter ? Was
water there, unfathomed depth of water ?

2 Death was not then, nor was there aught immortal : no sign

was there, the day's and night's divider.

That One Thing, breathless, breathed by its own nature : apart
from it was nothing whatsoever.

3 Darkness there was : at first concealed in darkness this All

was in discriminated chaos.

All that existed then was void and formless : by the great
power of Warmth was bom that Unit.

i Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the primal
seed and gprm of Spirit.

Sages who searched with their heart's thought discovered the
existent's kinship in the non-existent.

7 After Creator of creators S&vana supplies tam devam staumi , ‘that God I
praise.’ Indra or Suvitar is intended,

8 The great Ball : Indra.

1 Then: in the beginning. Non-existent : dsat : that does not yet actually
exiBt, but which has in itself the latent potentiality of existence. * There was
a certain unapparent condition/ says an Indian Commentator, 4 which, from
the absence or distinctness, was not an ‘ entity/ while from its being the
instrument of the world’s production, it was not a * non-entity.’ ’

2 That One 'Thing .* the single primordial substance, the unit out of which
the universe was developed. Cp. I. 164. 6 and 46.

3 Warmth : Prof. Wilson, following S3.yana, translates tdpasah by 1 austeri-
ty.’ meaning the contemplation of the things that were to be created. M.
Burnouf, in La Science des Religions, pp. 207ff, has shown how warmth wag
regarded by the Ary as as the principle explaining movement, life, and thought.

4 Desire : KArna, Eros, or Love. Sages : anpient Riflbis.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

5 Transversely was their severing line extended: what was

above it then, and what below it ?

There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free action here
and energy up yonder.

6 Who verily knows and who can here declare it, whence it was

born and whence comes this creation ?

The Gods are later than this world’s production. Who knows
then whence it first came into being 1

7 He, the first origin of this creation, whether he formed it all or

did not form it,

Whose eye controls this world in highest heaven, he verily
knows it,, or perhaps he knows not.

HYMN CXXX. Creation.

The sacrifice drawn out with threads on every side, stretched
by a hundred sacred ministers and one, —

This do these Fathers weave who hitherward are come : they
sit beside the warp and cry, Weave forth, weave back.

2 The Man extends it and the Man unbinds it : even to this

vault of heaven hath he outspun it.

These pegs are fastened to the seat of worship : they made
the Sama-hymns their weaving-shuttles.

3 What were the rule, the order and the model 1 What were

the wooden fender and the butter ?

What were the hymn, the chant, the recitation, when to the
God all Deities paid worship ?

5 Line : a line drawn by the ancient Rishis to make a division between the
upper world and the lower, and to bring duality out of unity. Begetters :
the Fathers may be meant. Free action : the happiness of the Fathers.
The stanza is obscure, and its connexion with stanza 4 is not obvious. An in-
tervening stanza may, perhaps, have been lost.

The hymn has been translated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, I. pp.
33, 34 ; by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 356, 357 ; by the authors of the Siebeyi-
zig Lieder , and by Mr. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , pp. 59 ff. * The latest
of the many Commentators on this hytfm are Professor Whitney in the
Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xi. p. cix, and Dr. Scherman,
PhilosophiscbeHymnen aus der Rig-undAtharva-vedaSnmhitSi, 1887.’— -Wallis.
See Prof. Max Muller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature , pp. 559—563.

As the subject of the hymn is creation typified and originated by the mys-
terious : 1 > ‘-vr 1 ■■ ' 3p. X. 90), >■ Praj&pati the Creator is said by S£yana

to be th •' y . ] \ b is Yajna (Sacrifice) Praj&pati’a son.

1 The sacnfice: savydtmako yajhah ; the sacrifice which constitutes creation.

— S&yana. A hundred cpnd one : meaniug an indefinitely large number. Fathers:
S&yana explains pitdrah here bypd 1 'i h dh '' 0 *'".*. H H~',

2 The Man : the first Man or V.i.!:: : hi-./:. a. A iV..; ,i. Ppaj&p&ti, accord-
ing to S&yana. - - "

3 Wooden fender : the enclosing sticks placed round the sacrificial fire,

HYMN 131.] THE RIGVEDA. 577

4 Closely was G&yatrl conjoined with Agni, and closely Savitar

combined with Ushnih.

Brilliaut with Ukthas, Soma joined Anushtup : Brihaspati's
voice by Brihati was aided.

5 Viraj adhered to Varuna and Mitra : here Trishtup day by day

was Indra’s portion*

Jagati entered all the Gods together : so by this knowledge men
were raised to Rishis.

6 So by this knowledge men were raised to Rishis, when ancient

sacrifice sprang up, our Fathers.

With the mind's eye I think that l behold them who first per-
formed this sacrificial worship.

7 They who were versed in ritnal and metre, in hymns and rules,

were the Seven Godlike Rishis.

Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up the
reins like chariot-drivers.

HYMN CXXXL hklra.

Drxvb all our enemies away, 0 Indra, the western, mighty
Conqueror, and the eastern.

Hero, drive off our northern foes and southern, that we in thy
wide shelter may be joyful.

:2 What then 7 As men whose fields are full of barley reap the
ripe corn removing it in order,

So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who went not
to prepare the grass for worship.

,3 Men come not with one horse at sacred seasons ; thus they
obtain no honour in assemblies.

/ Sages desiring herds of kine and horses strengthen the mighty
Indra for his friendship.

± Brilliant with Ukthas: ‘gladdening (us) through hymns (ukthas).' —
Muir. Brihaspati's voice >• because his duty was to speak as Priest. Accord-
ing to the A itareya- Brdhmana, III. 13, Praj&patl ‘allotted to the deities
their (different) parts in the sacrifice and metres.'

5 Day by day : was Indra’s portion of the mid-day (oblation).' — Wilson,
fi I behold them. ; or, according to Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation ; — * These
with the eyes of mind, I think, beheld them,*

7 ‘The seven Rishis here are not the 4ngirases, but BharadvAja, l£asyapa,
GTotama, Atri, Vasishfcha, Visv&mitra, and Jamadagni. The knowledge of
the ritual is derived from the divine priests ; the sages or Rishis have followed
them in sacrificing, and modern priests are only imitators of those wbp
preceded them.’ — Ludwig.

The hymn has heeu translated by Dr. Muir, 0 S. Texts, III. pp. 278, 279,
and by Prof. Whitney, Notes to Oolebrooke’s Essay on the Vedas , p. 114.

3 With one horse : it seems to have been considered undignified and dm*
reputable for a wealthy man to come to the sacrifice in a one-horse car ; but
the precise meaning of the first line is somewhat uncertain*

37

57S TEE HYMXE OF [BOOK X.

' 4 Ye, Asvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts of grate-
ful Soma juice,

Aud aided Indra in his work with Namuchi of Asura birth.

5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee with their

wondrous powers and wisdom.

When thou, with might, hadst drunk the draught that glad-
dens, Sarasvafei, 0 Maghavan, refreshed thee.

6 Indra is strong to : save,, rich in assistance : may he, possessing

all, be kind and gracious. #

May he disperse our foes- and give 1 us safety,, and may we he
the lords of hero vigour.

% May we enjoy his favour, his the- Holy : may we enjoy his
blessed loving-kindness.

May this rich Indra, as our good Protector, drive off and keep
afar all those who hate us.

HYMN CXXXIL Mitra. Varuna.

May Dya/us the Lord of lauded wealth, and Earth stand by
the man who offers sacrifice,

And may the Asvins, both the Gods, strengthen, the worship-
per with bliss.

% As such we honour you, Mitra and Varuna, with hasty zeal,

■ most blest, you who sustain the folk.

So- may we, through your frienship* forthe worshipper, subdue
the fiends.

3- And when we seek to win your love and friendship, we who-
have precious wealth in our possession,

Or when the worshipper augments hm riches* let not his trea-
sures be shut up*

4 That other, Asura! too was born of Heaven : thou art, 0 1 Va-
nina, the King of all men.

The chariot’s Lord was well content, forbearing, to anger Iteath
by sin so great.

4 ffillebrandt, V. M, I. 146, and Eggeling, Sacred Booh of the East, XL I.
135, interpret differently. The myth referred to in the following stanza haa
not been preserved. See VYeber, Ueber dbn MjasHya, pp> 95', 101.

4 That other: Mitra. The chariot’ $ Lord: literally, £ ' head* of the chariot.*
The meaning is uncertain. I find the rest of the hymn unintelligible. Prof.
I iudwig conjectures that two brothers. Nrimedhas and Sumedhas, had con-
tended for sovereignty, and that the adherents of one had wished to put the
other brother to death, but had not carried out their purpose. Safcapfitat

absolve and. purifies the. former,, and the; brothers are reconciled.

HYMN 133.] THE RIG VEDA. m

5 This sin hath Sakaputa here committed. Heroes who fled to

their dear friend he slayeth,

When the Steed bringefch down your grace and favour in
bodies dear and worshipful.

6 Your Mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water even as

earth is purified from heaven.

Show love and kindness here below ; wash her in rays of
heavenly light.

7 Ye Twain have seated you as Lords of Wealth, as one who

mounts a car to him who sits upon the pole, upon the wood.
These our disheartened tribes Nrimedhas saved from woe,
Sumedhas saved from woe. »

HYMN CXXXIIL Indr*

Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in the fore-
most place.

Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war,
be thou our great encourager. Let the weak bowstrings
break upon the bows of feeble enemies.

2 Thou didst destroy the Dragon : thou sentest the rivers down

to earth.

Foeless, 0 Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendest well each
choicest thing. Therefore we draw us close to thee. Let
the weak bowstrings, etc.

3 Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy’s designs.

Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, 0 Indra, who would smite us

dead : thy liberal bounty gives us wealth.

4 The robber people round about, Indra, who watch and aim at

us, —

Trample them down beneath thy foot ; a conquering scatterer
art thou. 1

5 Whoso assails us, Indra, be the man a stranger or akin,

Bring down, thyself, his strength although it be as vast as are

the heavens.

6 Close to thy friendship do we cling, 0 Indra, and depend on

thee.

5 Lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of holy Law.

5 The Steed: the Sun. — Ludwig. Your grace: Mitra’s and Varuna’s.

6 Your Mother Aditi : perhaps the mother of the two brothers is intended. —

Ludwig.

2 Let the weak bomtringi , etc ; the refrain is repeated in all the stanza*
except the last.

580 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

7 Do thou bestow upon us her, 0 Indra, who yields according to
the singer’s longing,

That the great Cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring a
thousand streams, give milk to feed us.

HYMN* CXXXIY. Indra.

As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, 0 Indra, both the earth
and heaven,

So as the Mighty One, great King of all the mighty world of
men, the Goddess Mother brought thee forth, the Blessed
Mother gave thee life.

2 Relax that mortal’s stubborn strength whose heart is bent on

wickedness.

Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and aims
at us. The Goddess Mother brought thee forth, etc.

3 Shake down, 0 Slayer of the foe, those great all-splendid energies.
With all thy /powers, 0 Sakra, ail thine helps, 0 Indra, shake

them down ;

4 As thou, 0 Safcakratu, thou, 0 Indra. shakest all things down
As wealth for him who sheds the juice, with thine assistance

thousandfold.

5 Around, on every side like drops of sweat let lightning-flashes

fall.

' Ret all malevolence pass away from us like threads of Dfirva
grass.

6 Thou bearest in thine hand a lance like a long hook, great

Counsellor !

As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the branch, 0
Maghavan.

7 Never, 0 Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate: we

walk as holy texts command.

Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, beneath
your arms.

' 7 The great Cow : probably the Earth.

1 The Goddess Mother ; Aditi, The refrain is repeated in all the stanza*
except the last.

3 Energies: influences in the shape of rain and sunlight
i Satakratu : or, Lord of Hundred powers.

5 I>Arvd grass: Panicum Daotylon ; a species of bent grass whose filaments
itrefcch horizoutally away from the stem.

6 The branch : that is loaded with fruit for us. ’

EYMN 135.] TEE RIG VEDA. 581

HYMN CXXXV. Yama.

In the Tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama drinketh
with the Gods,

The Father, Master of the house, tendeth with love our an-
cient Sires.

2 I looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old,
On him who treads that evil path, and then I yearned for

this again.

3 Thou mountest, though thou dost not see, 0 Child, the new

and wheel-less car

Which thou hast fashioned mentally, one-poled but turning
every way. w

i The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the
Sages, Child l

This hath theSaman followed close, hence, laid together on a ship.

6 Who was the father of the child 1 Who made the chariot roll
away ?

Who will this day declare to us how the funereal gift was made f

6 When the funereal gift was placed, straightway the. point of

flame appeared.

A depth extended in the front : a passage out was made behind

7 Here is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the

Home of Gods :

Here minstrels blow the flute for him : here he is glorified
with songs.

1 The Tree : where the spirits of the pious dead rest after their labours.
The Father : Yama.

2 The spirit of the dead child speaks. I yearned for this : to return to
the world of life.

3 Yama speaks. Fashioned mentally : figuratively prepared by being burnt
on the funeral pile.

5 Ship ; meaning, apparently, the funeral pile. The funereal gift : the
meaning of anudiyi is uncertain, ‘ Restitution.’— Wilson. ‘Surrender* or
‘delivery/ according to Prof. Zimmer. Stanzas 5 — 7 are spoken by the poet.

6 A depth: the meaning is obscure. Passage out: probably for the removal
of the ashes.

The subject of the hymn appears to he the funeral ceremony of a boy
(itximdra, said by some to be the name of a man). According to the legend
cited by S&yana a youth named Nachiketas was sent by bis father to the
kingdom of Yama who treated him kindly and allowed ,him to return to this
world. ‘ The hymn is made throughout applicable to Aditya as well as to
Yama, with, if possible, a still greater degree of obscurity. It seems to have
been the basis of the discussion in the Taittiriya Br&hmana (III. 11. 8) and
in the Katha Upanishad, respecting what becomes of the soul after death, in
dialogues between Nachiketas and Yama/ — Wilson,

THE HYMNS OF

[BOOK X

582

HYMN CXXXVI. Kesins.

He with the long loose locks supports Agni, and moisture,
heaven, and earth :

He is all sky to look upon : he with long hair is called this
light.

2 The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments soiled of

yellow hue.

They, following the wind's swift course go where the Gods
have gone before.

3 Transported with our Munihood we have pressed on into the

winds :

You therefore, mortal men, behold our natural bodies and
; no more.

4 The Muni, made associate in the holy work of every God,
Looking upon all varied forms flies through the region of the air.

b The Steed of Vila, V&yu’s friend, the Muni, by the Gods
impelled,

In both the oceans hath his home, in eastern and in western sea.

6 Treading the path of sylvan beasts, Gandharvas, and Ap*

sarases,

He with long locks, who knows the wish, is a sweet most
delightful friend.

7 V&yu hath churned for him : for him he poundeth things

most hard to bend,

When he with long loose locks hath drunk, with Rudra, water
from the cup.

The Kesins, hesinal t, wearers of long loose hair, are Agpi, V&yu, and SCrya.
Each stanza has for its Rishi one of the seven sons of V&tarasaua. See Index
of Hymns.

X He with the long loose loblcs : probably the ascetic, the Muni or Yogi.
According to S&yana, the radiant Sun. Moisture : vishdm, usually meaning
‘poison * is so explained in this place.

2 Munis : ascetics inspired or in a state of ecstasy. Girdled with the wind :
exposed without girdles to the wind. According to S&yana, sons of V&ta-
rasana, or Wind* Girdled.

5 In both the oceans : everywhere in the firmament from its eastern to its
western extremity.

‘The hymn shows the conception that by a life of sanctity the Muni can,
attain to the f -V > ' £ i 1 ufcies of the air, the V&yus, the Rudras, the
Apsarasas, ai. I G is ; and, furnished Uke them with wonderful

powers, can travel along with them oq their course The beautiful-haired,

the long-haired, that is to say, the Muni, who during the time of his austeri-
ties does not shave his hair, upholds fire, moisture, heaven, and earth, and
resembles the world of light, ideas which the later literature so largely con-
tains.*— Von Roth, quoted by Dr. Muir, 0, S. Texts, IY. 319, the hymn being
transliterated and translated on page 318.

HYMN 138.]

THE RTGVEDA.' m

HYMN CXXXVIL Visvedevas.

Ye Gods, raise up once more the man whom ye have humbled
and brought low.

0 Gods, restore to life again the man who hath committed sin.

2 Two several winds are blowing here, from Sindh u, from a

distant land.

May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow disease away.

3 Hither, G Wind, blow healing balm, blow all disease away,

thou Wind;

For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods.

4 I am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee rest and keep

thee safe.

1 bring thee blessed strength, I drive thy weakening malady away.
$ Here let the Gods deliver him, the Maruts 5 baud deliver him:

AH things that be deliver him that he be freed from his disease.

& The Waters have their healing power, the Waters drive disease
away.

The Waters have a balm for all : let them make medicine for thue.

• 2 The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our t en-
fold -branching hands,

With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle
touch.

HYMN CXXXVIXI. Imlra.

Allied with thee in friendship, Indra, these thy priests, re-
membering Holy Law, rent Vritra limb from limb,

When they bestowed the Dawns and let the waters flow, and
when thou didst chastise dragons at Kutsa's call.

3 Thou sentest/orth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou
dravest forth the kine, thou drankest pleasant meath.

Thou gavest increase through this Tree's surpassing might.
The Sun shone by the hymn that sprang from Holy Law,

Each stanza is ascribed to one of the seven great Rishis. See Index of
Hymns. The hymn is a charm to restore a sick man to health. Of. Hymns of
the Atharva-veda, IV. 13.

1 Who hath committed sin: sickness and death being regarded as the conse-
quence of sin.

2 Sindhu: or, ocean.

4 The Wind speaks. Weakening malady * yakshma may be sickness in gene-
ral, or the name of a large class of diseases, probably of a consumptive nature.

7 The stanza is important as showing that the Indians employed touches
or laying-on of hands to relieve suffering or to restore health. Op. X. 60. 12.

1 Thy priests: the Angirases. But see Vedic Hymns , I. p. 44. Didst
chastise : this clause is very difficult. I adopt Prof. Grassmann’s interpretation.

2 This Tree's surpassing might : the power of the juice of the Soma plant.

- 584 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

3 In the mid-way of heaven the San unyoked his oar; the Arya
foimd a mutch to meet his Dasa foe.

Associate with Rijisvan Indra overthrew the solid forts of
Pipru, conjuring As lira.

1 He boldly cast down forts which none had e’er assailed ; un-

wearied he destroyed the godless treasure-stores.

Like Sun and Moon he took the stronghold’s wealth away, and,
praised in song, demolished foes with flashing dart.

5 Armed with resistless weopons, with vast power to cleave, the

Vritra-slayer whets his darts and deals forth wounds.
Bright Tishas was afraid of Indra’s slaughtering bolt : she went
upon her way and left her chariot there.

6 These are*thy famous exploits, only thine, when thou alone

hast left the other reft of sacrifice.

Thou in the heavens bast set the ordering of the Moons : the
Father bears the felly portioned out by thee.

HYMN CXXXIX. Samar.

Savitar, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright with the
sunbeams, his eternal lustre;

He in whose euergy wise Pusban marches, surveying all exist-
ence like a herdsman.

2 Beholding men he sits amid the heavens, filling the two world-

halves and air’s wide region.

He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between the
eastern and the western limit.

3 He, root of wealth, the gatherer-up of treasures, looks with

his might on every form and figure.

Savitar, like a God whose Law is constant, stands in the battle
for the spoil like Indra. 1

1 Waters from sacrifice came to the Gandhafva Visv&vasu, 0

Soma, when they saw him.

Indra, approaching quickly, marked their going, and looked
around upon the Sun’s enclosures.

3 Unyoked his car ; thealWim w. perhaps, to an eclipse, or a detention
of the Sun to enable the Aryan** to complete the overthrow of their enemies.
Fijisvan : a pious worshipper befriended by Indra. Pipru ; a demon of
drought. Sre Vol. I., Index.

5 Bright Ushas was afraid: see II. 15. 6, IV. 30. 8 — 11, and X 73. 6.

S The other: thy foe, the demon or R&kshnsa. The Father: Dyaus or
Iieaven. The felly portioned out by thee: the course of the Moon through
the aaterisms, which thou hast arianged.

2 Pastures: there is no substantive in the text. S&yana supplies i quarters
of space Ludwig ( ladles and Grassmann ‘pastures/

4 Waters : used in the preparation of the Soma juice. The Gandharva :

regarded as the custodian of the celestial Soma. The Sun** enclosures; ‘ the
rim* of the sun/— Wilson. - .

HYMN 140,]

THE MG VEDA.

585

5 This song Yisvavasu shall sing us, meter of air’s mid-realm,

celestial Gandharva,

That we may know aright both truth and falsehood : may he
inspire our thoughts and help our praises.

6 In the floods’ track he found the booty-seeker: the rocky

cow-pen’s doors he threw wide open.

These, the Gandharva told him, flowed with Amrit. Indra
knew well the puissance of the dragons.

HYMN CXL. - Agni.

Agni, life-power and fame are thine : thy fires blaze mightily,
thou rich in wealth of beams 1

Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the wdfcshipper, with
strength, the food that merits land.

2 With brilliant, purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest

up thyself in light.

Thou, visiting both thy Mothers, aidest them as Son: thou
joinest close the earth and heaven.

3 0 J&tavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our

fair hymns and songs.

In thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food,
born nobly and of wondrous help.

4 Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth

to ns, Immortal God.

Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon : thou leadest
us to conquering power.

5 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who bath great riches

under his control,

Thou givest^blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest
him wealth that conquers all.

6 The men have set before them for their welfare Agni, strong,

visible to all, the Holy.

Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men's
generations magnify with praise-songs.

5 Visvdvaxu : the celestial Gandharva, here the Sun-God. He : Visv&vaau.
The booty-seeker : Indra who sought to win the waters. Of the dragon * 0 the
serpent-demons who obstructed the floods of heaven. The last three stanzas
are very difficult and obscure. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I, pp, 436, 487, and
Ludwig, Ueber die neuesten A. u. s. w* t p. 101.

2 Thy Mothers ; Heaven and Earth. Joinest close : or, fill est full.

5 To him : to the inetitutor of the sacrifice.

See the exposition of the hymn in Satapatha Brdhmana, VII. 3. 1, 29 — 34
(Scored Books of the East, XLI. 349— 351).

m

IBOOK X.

THE HYMNS OF

HYMN CXLI. Visvedevas.

Turn hither, Agmi, speak to us : come to us with a gracious
mind.

Enrich ns, Master of the house : thou art the Giver of our
wealth.

;2 Let Aryaman vouchsafe us wealth, and Bhaga, and Brihaspati,
Let the Gods ^ive their gifts, and let Sunrit&, Goddess, grant
us wealth.

3 We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs and

hymns,

Adityas, Yishnu, Surya, and the Brahman Priest Brihaspati.

4 Indra, Yayfl, Brihaspati, Gods swift to listen, we invoke,

That in the synod all the folk may be benevolent to us.

5 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brihaspati,
Y&ta, Yishnu, Sarasvati and the Strong Courser Savitar.

$ Do thou, 0 Agni, with thy fires strengthen our prayer and
sacrifice :

Urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our serviee of the
Gods.

HYMN CXLIL Agni.

With thee, 0 Agni, was this singer of the laud : he hath no
other kinship, 0 thou Son of Strength.

Thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard. Keep the
destructive lightning far away from us.

2 Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, Agni ; as

Comrade thou winuest all living things.

Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious : they of them*
selves advance like one who guards the herd.

3 And thou, 0 Agni, thou of Godlike nature, sparest the stones,

while eating up the brushwood.

Then are thy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. Let us not
stir to wrath thy mighty arrow.

4 O’er Mils, through vales devouring as thou goesfc, thou partest

like an army fain for booty.

As when a barber shaves a beard, thou shavest earth when
the wind blows on thy flame and fans it.

f> Apparent are his lines as he approaches : the course is single,
but the cars are many,

2 SUnritd : Pleasantness ; Gladness, personified. Cf. I. 40. 3.

3 Sparest the stones : see Pischel, Vedische Studien, I. p. 180. Cp. III. 29. 6.

HYMN 143. J

THE R I G FED A.

5S7

When, Agni, thou, making thine arms resplendent, advancest
o’er the land spread out beneath thee.

6 Now let thy strength, thy burhlng flames fly upward, thine

energies, 0 Agni, as thou toilest.

Gape widely, bend thee, waging in thy vigour : let all the
Yasus sit this day beside thee.

7 This is the waters’ reservoir, the great abode of gathered streams.
Take thou another path than this, and as thou listest walk

thereon.

& On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durva grass
spring up.

Let there be lakes with lotus blooms. These are the mansions
of the flood.

HYMN CXLIII. Asvins.

Yfl made that Atri, worn with eld, free as a horse to win the goal.
When ye restored to youth and strength Kakshivan like a car
renewed,

2 Ye freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him newly-born

to earth.

Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which Gods unsoiled by
dust had bound.

3 Heroes who showed most wondrous power to Atri, strive to

win fair songs ;

For then, 0 Heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise shall
cease no more.

4 This claims your notice, Bounteous Gods ! — oblation, Asvins !

and our love,

That ye, 0 Heroes, in the fight may bring us safe to ample room,
i Ye Twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region’s end,
Nasatyas, with your winged steeds came nigh, and gave him
strength to win.

6 Come with your joys, most liberal Gods, Lords of all treasures,
bringing weal.

Like fresh full waters to a well, so, Heroes, come and be with us.

6 Stanzas 7 and 8 seem to belong to some other hymn, being a prayer to Agni
that he may spare the speaker’s house where, he says, there is nothing to invite
the devouring God. See Hymns of the A tharva-veda, VL 106.

1 Atri : seel. 112. 7. Kalcshivdn : the Scholiast says that this Rishi was
originally dull of understanding and that the Asvins endowed him with know-
ledge Prof. Ludwig takes kahsMvantam to be an adjective agreeing with
rdtham : * Again ye made him youthful like a chariot that is braced with bands.’

5 Bhujyu : see Yol. L, Index.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOH &

HYMN CXLIV. Indra.

. This deathless Iadu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality,
Belongs to thee, the Orderer.-

2 Here, by us, for the worshipper, is the wise bolt that works

with skill.

It brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man brings the
effectual strong drink.

3 Impetuous Ahisuva, a bull among these cows of his,

Looked down upon the restless Hawk.

4 That the strong-pinioned Bird hath brought, Child of the

Falcon, from afar,

What oio vm upon a hundred wheels along the female Dragon’s
path.

5 Which, fair, unrobbed, the Falcon brought thee in his foot,

the red-hued dwelling of the juice ;

Through this came vital power which lengthens out our days,
and kinship through its help awoke.

6 So Indra is by Indu’s power : e’en among Gods will it repel

great treachery.

Wisdojn, Most Sapient One, brings force that lengthens life.
May wisdom bring the juice to us.

HYMN CXLY. SapatntUdhanara.

From out the earth I dig this plant, an herb of most effectual
power,

Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husband
for oneself.

1 Tndu: Soma. The Orderer ; disposer and arranger of the universe.

2 Bolt; the Yashatkdra, or sacrificial exclamation, is to r the priests what
the thunderbolt is to Indra.

3 I find this and the following stanza unintelligible, Ahisuva in other
places is the name of a demon ; hut the meaning here is uncertain. Cows ;
there is no substantive to dsil svdsu } 1 these his own/ in the feminine gender.

4 Wh<tt moves upon a hundred wheels: saidchakram : 'the bea tower of
many boons/ — Wilson.

5 Dwelling of the juice: the Soma-plant, which the Falcon brought from
heaven. See IY. 26 and 27.

6 It : or he ; Indu or the Soma juice.

Prof. Grassmann places this hymu in his Appendix as being in his opinion
made up of fragments. He considers Ahisuva (stanza 8} to be ‘the archer
Kris&nu, of IY. 27. 3 and other places, who guards the celestial Soma, and in-
stead of cows * he understands ' wives/

The hymn is a spell to rid a jealous wife of a more favoured rival. The
Kiahi is Indr&ni, the Consort of Indra.

1 THU plant; said to be the Pata, probably identical with P4th4 (Clypea
nernanaiiolia), a climbing plant possessing various medicinal properties.

HYMN 146.]

THE RIG VEDA.

589

2 Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious

plant,

Blow thou the rival wife away, and make my husband only mine.

3 Stronger am I, 0 Stronger One, yea, mightier than the mightier;
And she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames.

4 Her very name I utter not : she takes no pleasure in this man.
Far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away.

5 I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also art victorious :

As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellow-wife,

6 I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a

stronger spell.

As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirtt speed to me,
hasten like water on its way.

HYMN CXLVI. Aranytol.

Goddess of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight,
How is it that thou seekest not the village? Art thou.not afraid?

2 What time the grasshopper replies and swells the shrill cicala's

voice,

Seeming to sound with tinklingbells, the Lady of the Woodexults,

3 And, yonder, cattle seem to graze, what seems a dwelling-place

appears :

Or else at eve the Lady of the Forest seems to free the wains,

4 -Here one is calling to his cow, another there hath felled a tree :
At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath

screamed. *

5 The Goddess never slays, unless some murderous enemy ap-

proach. ,

Maneatsof savoury fruit and then takes, even as be wills, his rest.

6 Thy spirit ; the husband's.

The deity, Arany&nt, is the tutelary Goddess of the forest and wilderness,

2 Grasshopper cicala ; the chichchiha is said to be a little creature that

cries cMcht : and the vriskdravd is said to be a sort of cricket. Others take
them to be birds of some unascertained kind,

3 Cattle seem to graze : deer feeding in the glades. What seems a dwelling-
place : a natural bower of branches and creepers,

4 Bounds are heard as of a cowman calling his cattle, or of a woodman at
work. * We must imagine the thousund strange sounds and delusions which
seem to encompass the solitary listener of an evening in the darkening forest,' —
Mme. Z&naide Ragozin, Ve die India (Story of the Nations), p. 272.

5 Murderous enemy : the text has only a ny6h< * another,' by which, accord- f
iug to S Ay an a, a tiger or robber is meant. Prof. Ludwig suggests that the
reading should be kanyuh, ‘ one who is destined to be killed-* The hymn has
been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts t V. p. 423 ; and by the authors >f
the Sitbenzig JUedtr des Riyvcda.

m the Emm of [book x

• 6 l $Tow have I praised the Forest Queen, sweet-scented, redolent

of balm,

The Mother of all sylvan things, who tills not but hath atom
of food,

HYMN CXLVII. Indra.

I trust in thy first wrathful deed, 0 Jndra, when thou slewest
Vritra and didst work to protit man ;

What time the two world-halves fell short of thee in might,
and the earth trembled at thy force, 0 Thunder* armed,

2 Thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer Vritra,

0 Blameless One, with heart that longed for fame.

Heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey, thee in all
sacrifiees r worthy of renown.

3 God Much-invoked, take pleasure in these princes here, who,

thine exalte rs, Maghavan, have come to wealth.

In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the Strong for
sons and progeny and riches undisturbed.

4 That man shall find delight in well-protected wealth whose

care provides for V—. the — x joyous draught.
Bringing oblations, M ■ by thee, he swift-

ly wins the spoil with heroes in the fight.

5 Now for our band, 0 Maghavan, when lauded, make ample

room with might, and grant us riches.

Magician thou, our Varuna and Mitra, deal food to us, 0
Wondrous, as Dispenser.

HYMN CXLVIII. India. .

When we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, and

when, Most Valorous ! we have won the booty.

Bring us prosperity, as each desires it ; under thine own pro-
tection may we conquer.

2 Sublime from birth, mayst thou 0 Indra, Hero, with Sfirya
overcome the Dilsa races.

As by a fountain's side, we bring the Soma that lay concealed,
close-hidden in the waters.

. 3 Answer the votary's hymns, for these thou knowest, craving
the Bishis' prayer, thyself a Singer.

May we be they who take delight in Somas : these with sweet
food for thee, 0 Chariot-rider.

3 Princes : the Sfiris, the wealthy institutes of the sacrifice. The Strong :
thee, the mighty Indra.

S n«se with tweet food:. 'these (praises are offered) with sacrificial viands.
— Wilson.

EYMJSf 149.] TEE 1 IIGYMDA. m

4 These holy prayers, 0 Indra, have I sung thee : grant to the 4

men the strength of men, thou Hero.

Be of one mind with those in whom thou joyest ; keep thou-
the singers safe and their companions.

5 Listen to Prithis call, heroic Indra, and be thou landed by

the hymns of Venya,

Him who hath sung thee to thine oil-rich dwelling, whose roh
ling, songs have sped thee like a torrent..

HYMN CXLIX. Savitar.;

Savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it,, and made heaven
stedfast where no prop supported.

Savitar milked,, as J twere a restless courser, air/ sea hound fast
to what no foot had trodden..

2 Well knoweth Savitar,. O Child of Waters, where ocean, firmly

fixt,. overflowed its limit.

Thence sprang the world, from that uprose the region : thence
heaven spread out and the wide earth expanded.

3 Then, with a full crowd of Immortal Beings, this other realm

came later,, high and holy.

First, verily, Savi far’s strong-pinioned Eagle was horn ; and
he obeys his law for ever.

4 As warriors to their steeds, kine to their village, as fond milk-

giving: cows approach their youngling,

As man to wife, let Savitar come downward to us, heaven’s
bearer, Lord of every blessing.

5 Like the Angirasa Hiranyastupa, I call thee, Savitar, to this

achievement :

So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch for thee
as for the stalk of Soma.

4 Companions ; or, dependents.

$ PritM’s call : the invocation of Prithu, the Rishi of the hymn, according
to S&yana. Prof. Ludwig suggests that Prithu’s wife is intended. Venya ;
Prithi, son of Vena.

1 To what no foot had trodden : at&rte : 1 * 3 * 5 to the indestructible (ether)/ —

Wilson.

3 Eagle : identified by S&yana with T&rkshya, brother of Garuda, who brought

the Soma from the Moon at Savitar’s command.

5 Angirasa : a descendant of the AngiraseB. Achievement: vftje: food,
according to S&yana, i. e„ oblation. Lauding : drchan : or, I, Arehan, honour-
ing thee to win thy favour.

m

THB HYMNS OF

[BOOK X,

HYMN CL. Agni.

Thoxt, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kindled for the
Gods.

With the Adityas, Kudras, Yasus, come to us : to show us fa-
vour come to us.

2 Come hither and accept with joy this sacrifice and hymn of ours,
0 kindled God, we mortals are invoking thee, calling on thee

to show us grace.

3 I laud thee Jatavedas, thee Lord of all blessings, with my song,
Agni, bring hitherward the Gods whose Laws we love, whose

Laws we love, to show us grace.

4 Agni the God was made the great High-Priest of Gods, Eishis

have kindled Agni, men of mortal mould.

Agni I invouate for winuiug ample wealth, kindly disposed for
winning wealth. *

Afcri and Bharadvaja and Gavisbthira, Kanva and Trasadasyti,
in our fight he helped.

On Agni calls Vasisbtha, even the household priest, the house-
hold priest to win his grace.

* HYMN CLI. Faith,

By Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith is oblation offered up.
We celebrate with praises Faith upon the height of happiness.

2 Bless thou the man who gives, 0 Faith ; Faith, bless the man

who fain would give.

Bless thou the liberal worshippers : bless thou the word that
l have said.

3 Even as the Deities maintained Faith in the mighty Asuras,
So make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal wor-
shippers.

4 Guarded by V&yu, Gods and men who sacrifice draw near to

Faith.

Man winneth Faith by yearnings of the heart, and opulence
by Faith.

1 Though kindled : although thou art already burning fresh fire is added to
thee. To shoto m favour : mrdik&ya ; this play upon the Riahi’s name Mrilika
js repeated in each stanza.

The Riahi is Sraddhfc (Faith) of the family of K&rqa (Love),

1 Upon the height of happiness : * (who is seated) on Bhaga's head,,-**
Wilson,

3 Axuras: the primeval Aryan Gods, Dyaus, Varuna, and some others, who
were venerated by Indra and other Indo- Aryan deities of a later creation,

4 (guarded by Ydyu ; the meaning is noc clear.

HYMN 154.] v

THE RIQVE DA.

593

5 Faith in the early morning. Faith at noonday will we invocate,
Faith at the setting of the Sun. 0 Faith, endow us with belief.

HYMN CLII.

A mighty Governor art thou, Wondrous, Destroyer of the foe,
Whose friend is never done to death, and never, never overcome.

2 Lord of the elan, who brings us bliss, Strong, Warrior, Slayer

of the fiend,

May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who gives uspeace.

3 Drive Rakshasas and foes away, break thou in pieces Vritra’s jaws:
0 Vritra-slaying Indra, quell the foeman’s wrath who threat-
ens ns.

4 0 Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who^challenge us :
Send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do us injury.

5 Baffle the foeman’s plan, ward off his weapon who would con-

quer us.

Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his murdering
dart afar.

HYMN CLIII. Indra -

Swaying about, the Active Ones came nigh to Indra at his birth,
And shared his great heroic might.

2 Based upon strength and victory and power, 0 Indra is thy birth :
Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed.

3 Thou art the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread the firma-

ment ;

Thou hast with might upheld the heavens.

4 Thou, Indra, bearest in thine arms the lightning that accords

with thee,

Whetting th;f thunderbolt with might.

5 Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in thy might :
Thou hast pervaded every place.

HYMN CLIY. New Life.

For some is Soma purified, some sit by sacrificial oil :

To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to those let
him depart.

1 The Active Ones : the Water-Goddesses may be meant. The Consorts of
the Gods, according to S&yana.

2 Thou , Mighty One : or, 4 0 Bull, thou art a Bull indeed/ ‘Thou, 0 hero,
art indeed a hero’.-— Max Muller,

i Lightning : or, praise-song, hymn. S&yana explains arharn hereby $tu«
tyam‘ thy laudable or adorable thunderbolt..

The ftishi of this funeral hymn is Yam!, sister of Yama,

X To' those let him depart: let the spirit -of the dead go to the realm of the

38

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

2 Invincible through Fervour, those whom Fervour hath ad-

vanced to heaven,

Who showed great Fervour in their lives, — even to those let
him depart. *

3 The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away,

Or who give guerdon thousandfold, — even to those let him

depart

4 Yea, the first followers of Law, Law’s pureand holy strength eners,

The Fathers, Yama ! Fervour-moved, — even to those let him

depart.

5 Shilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who protect

the Sum,

The Bishis, Yamal Fervour-moved, — even to those let him
depart.

HYMN CLY. Various.

Aiuyi, one-eyed limping hag, fly, ever-screeching, to the hill.

We frighten thee away with these, the heroes of Sirimbitha,

2 Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of each germ

unborn.

Go, sharp-horned Brahmanaspati and drive Arayi far away.

3 Yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the river’s

edge,—

Seize it, thou thing with hideous jaws, and go thou far away
thereon.

4 When, foul with secret stain and spot, ye hastened onward to

the breast,

All Indra’s enemies were slain and passed away like froth
and foam.

blessed, to the Fathers who receive offerings of Soma juice and clarified but-
ter. Meath; according to S&yana, honey, which is offered to the spirits of their
ancestors by students of the Atharva-veda, Soma juice and gkritdm or clarified
butter (sacrifioial oil) being offered, respectively, by students of the Sfimaveda-
and Yajurveda,

2 Favour; tdpas : literally, warmth, heat; religious fervour, asceticism,
austerity, self-denial and abstracted meditation.

4 Favour-moved : or, Penance-rich ; filled full of religious austerity.

5 Who protect the Sun : see Muir 0. S. T., V. 319.

The hymn has been translated by Dr, JVMuir, 0. S. Texts , V. p. 310, and
by Prof. Zimmer, Altindisckes Lebtn, p. 416.

The subject or object of the hymn is the averting or removal of misfortune.

1 Ardyt : 1 the stingy; ' one of a class of malevolent she-fiends. Ever- screech-
ing : according to S&yana’s explanation of saddnve ; according to others ‘ alli-
ed with D&nus, D&navas, or demons.’ Sirimbitha : the Riski of the hymn.

2 Shai'p-horned: armed with piercing rays of light.

4 The meaning of this stanza is eot clear. Mandtiradh&mWih and budbu-
dayfimvah are difficult words that do not occur again.

BYMN 157.] TEE MOVED A. 595

5 These men have led about the cow, have duly carried Agni
round,

And raised their glory to the Gods. Who will attack them
with success ?

HYMN CLVL Agni.

Let songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race.
And we will win each prize through him.

2 Agni, the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves with help

from thee, —

That send us for the gain of wealth.

3 0 Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine:

Oil thou the socket, turn the wheel. *

A 0 Agni, thou hast made the Sun, Eternal Star, to mount the
sky,

Bestowing light on living men.

5 Thou, Agni, art the people’s light, best, dearest, seated in
thy shrine :

Watch for the singer, give him life.

HYMN CLVIL Visvedevas.

We will, with Indra and. all Gods to aid us, bring these exist-
ing worlds into subjection.

2 Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra form to-

gether with Adityas,

3 With the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra be

Protector of our bodies.

4 As when the* Gods came, after they had slaughtered the

Asuras, keeping safe their Godlike nature,

5 Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked

about them on their vigorous Godhead.

5 These men: the text has only tW, ‘these.* According to Sftyana, the
Visvedevas are meant, who have brought back the stolen cattle. But the
reference is probably to the sacrifice which the priests are performing.

2 The dart : * that army/ — Wilson.

3 Turn the wheel : I adopt the reading of the S&maveda, parim } instead of

panim. According to the text, the rendering would be: ‘Balm heaven and
drive the Pani hence.

The first three verses of this hymn were recited at the Asvamedha or Horse-
Sacrifice.

5 S&yana explains the second half of the stanza differently : — ‘then (men)
beheld around them the swift descending rain/ — Wilson,

m TEE ETMNS OF [BOOK X

HYMN CLVIIL ’ Surya,

May S dry a guard us out of heaven, andVata from the firmament,
And Agni from terrestrial spots.

2 Thou Savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations, be thou

pleased :

From falling lightning keep us safe.

3 May Savitar the God, and may Parvata also give us sight r
May the Creator give us sight.

4 Give sight unto our eye, give thou our bodies sight that they

may see :

May we survey, discern this world.

5 Thus, Sftrya, may we look on thee, on thee most lovely to behold*
See clearly w;ith the eyes of men.

HYMN GLIX. SachiPaulomi.

Yon Sun hath mounted up, and this my happy fate hath
mounted high.

I knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband for mine o\n.

2 I am the banner and the head, a mighty arbitress am I :

I am victorious, and my Lord shall be submissive to my will.

3 My Sons are slayers of the foe, my Daughter is a ruling Queen :
I am victorious : o’er my Lord my song of triumph is supreme.

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and

most high, —

This have I offered, 0 ye Gods, and rid me of each rival wife.

5 Destroyer of the rival wife, Sole Spouse, victorious, conqueror,
The others’ glory have I seized as ’twere the wealth of weaker

Dames.

6 I have subdued as conqueror these rivals, these my fellow-wives,
That I may hold imperial sway over this Hero and the folk.

HYMN CLX. Indra.

Taste this strong draught enriched with offered viands ; with
all thy chariot here unyoke thy Coursers,

Let not those other sacrificers stay thee, Indra : these juices
shed for thee are ready.

I Out of heaven : * from (foes dwelling in) heaven.’ — Wilson.

3 The Creator : Dh&tar.

, §achl Paulomt, called also IndrAnl, the Consort of Indra, is also the Rishi
of the hymn. * Literally, this is a song of exultation by Sachi over her rival
wives ; but sacH means also an " act,” “ exploit,” and this* hymn is metaphoric
cally the praise of Indra' s glorious acts.’ — Wilson.

STMN 161.] TEE RIGVEDA. 59 7

2 Thine is the j nice effused, thine are the juices yet to be pressed :

our resonant songs invite thee.

0 Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who
knowest all and drink the Soma.

3 Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him with yearn-

ing heart and spirit, —

Never doth Indra give away his cattle : for him he makes the
lovely Soma famous.

4 He looks with loving favour on the mortal who, like a rich

man, pours for him the Soma.

Maghavan in his bended arm supports him : he slays, unasked,
the men who hate devotion.

5 We call on thee to come to us, desirous of goo<Ts and spoil, of

cattle, and of horses.

For thy new love and favour are we present : let us invoke
thee, Indra, as our welfare.

HYMN CLXI. Indra.

Foe life I set thee free by this oblation from the unknown
decline and from Consumption ;

Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from
her, 0 Indra, thou and Agni.

2 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought very

near to death already,

Out of Destruction’s lap again I bring him, save him for life
to last a hundred autumns.

3 With hundred-eyed oblation, hundred-autumned, bringing a

hundred lives, have I restored him,

That Indra* for a hundred years may lead him safe to the
farther shore of all misfortune.

4 Live, waxing in thy strength, a hundred autumns, live through

a hundred springs, a hundred winters.

Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brihaspati, Savi-
tar yield him for a hundred !

4 Dr. Qaedicke (Accusativ im Veda, p. 127) translates P&das 1 — 3 of the
stanza differently : der wird von ihm erspaht, der, obvohl reich, ihm keinen
Soma preset, den holt der machtige heraus aus dem Winkel (Versteck).

According to the Index the subject of the hymn is the cure of the disease
called R&jayakshma (Consumption or Atrophy).

1 Unknown decline : some insidious disease, differing from R&jayakshma.
Perhaps, as Prof. Zimmer suggests, hypertrophy and atrophy are the two
diseases intended. See Altmdisches Leben , p, 377. The grasping demon ;
gr&hi : from grab, to seize ; a female spirit who seizes men and kills them.

4 For a hundred ; years, understood.

598 TEE RYMNS OF [BOOK X

1 5 So have I found and rescued thee : thou hast returned with

youth renewed.

Whole in thy members ! I have found thy sight and all thy
life for thee.

HYMN CLXIV. Dream-charm.

* Avatjnt, thou Master of the mind ! Depart, and vanish far away.
Look on Destruction far from hence. The live man’s mind is
manifold.

2 A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they obtain.
Bliss with Yaivasvata they see. The live man’s mind seeks

many a place.

3 If by address, by blame, by imprecation we have committed

sin, awafoe or sleeping,

All hateful acts of ours, all evil doings may Agni bear away to
distant places.

1 When, Indra, Brahmanaspati, our deeds are wrongful and

unjust,

May provident Angirasa prevent our foes from troubling us.
5 We have prevailed this day and won : we are made free from
sin* and guilt.

Ill thoughts, that visit us awake or sleeping, seize the man
we hate, yea, seize the man who hateth us.

HYMN CLXV. Visvedevas.

Gods, whatsoe’er the Dove came hither seeking, sent to us as
the envoy of Destruction,

For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. Well be
it with our quadrupeds and bipeds.

2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harmless

bird, ye Gods, within our dwelling. *

May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may the
Missile borne on wings avoid us.

For Hymns CLXIL, CLXIIL, and CLXXXIV. see Appendix.

( X Master of the mind : the spirit of evil dreams is addressed. Destruc-
tion; the Goddess Nirriti. Manifold: ‘attentive to various objects, and
soon diverted from any regard to evil dreams/ — Wilson.

2 Vaivasvata : Yama, the son of Yivasv&n, who presides over evil dreams.—
S&yapa.

4 Angirasa: according to S&yana, Varuna, the wise God who is especially

connected with his worshippers the Angtrasea, may he intended. Of. Rymns
of the Atharva-veda, VI. 45. 3.

1 A dove, regarded as an ill-omened bird and the messenger of Death, has
flown into the house. Similarly, in North-Lincolnshire, ‘ If a pigeon is seen
sitting on a tree, or comes into the house, or from being wild suddenly be*
comes tame, it is a sign of death .' — Notes and Queries, viii. p. 382.

2 Missile home on wings : the ill-omened bird.

HYMN 166.]

THE RIGVEDA .

559

3 Let not the Arrow that hath wings distract us : beside the

fire-place, on the hearth it settles.

May it bring welfare to our men and cattle : here let the
Dove, ye Gods, forbear to harm us.

4 The screeching of the owl is ineffective; and when beside the

fire the Dove hath settled,

To him who sent it hither as an envoy, to him be reverence
paid, to Death, to Yam a,

5 Drive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses: rejoicing,

bring ye hither food and cattle,

Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Let the swift
bird fiy forth and leave us vigour.

HYMN CLXVI. fS apatnan&sanam .

Make me a bull among my peers, make me my rivals’ con-
queror :

Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord of kine.

2 I am my rivals’ slayer, like Indra un wounded and unhurt,
And all these enemies of mine are vanquished and beneath

my feet.

3 Here, verily, I bind you fast, as the two bow-ends with the string.
Press down these men, 0 Lord of Speech, that they may

humbly speak to me.

4 Hither I came as conqueror with mighty all-effecting power,
And 1 have mastered all your thought, your synod, and your

holy work.

5 May I be highest, having gained your strength in war, your

skill in peace : my feet have trodden on your heads.

Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the
water croak, as frogs from out the water croak.

HYMN CLXVII. Indra.

This pleasant meath, O Indra, is effused for thee : thou art
the ruling Lord of beaker and of j uice.

Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons : thou, having
glowed with Fervour, wonnest heavenly light.

5 With holy verses -* S&yana takes rick& with ttHyamdndh, understood : —
i(Praised) by our hymn (0 Gods).

The subject is the Destruction of Rivals.

The Rishis are Visv&mitra and J amadagni. Stanzas 1 — 3 are spoken by the
Rrshis, and 4 by Indra.

, I Having glowed with Fervour : * performing arduous penance.’ — Wilson.

3 Anumati : Divine Favour personified.

4 The prize : the wealth won for you.

mo THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X.

1 Let us call Sakra to libations here effused, winder of light who

joyeth in the potent juice.

Mark well this sacrifice of ours and come to ns : we pray to
Maghavan the Vanquisher of hosts.

3 By royal Soma’s and by Varuna’s decree, under Brihaspati’s

and Anumati’s guard,

This day by thine authority, 0 Maghavan, Maker, Disposer
thou ! have I enjoyed the jars.

4 I, too, urged on, have had my portion, in the bowl, and as first

Prince I drew forth this my hymn of praise,

When with the prize I came unto the flowing juice, 0 Visva-
mitra, Jamadagni, to your home.

HYMN CLXVIII. Vdy«u

0 the Wind’s chariot, 0 its power and glory ! Crashing it goes
and hath a voice of thunder.

It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and as it moves
the dust of earth is scattered.

2 Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come to him as

dames to an assembly.

Borne on his car with these for his attendants, the God speeds
forth, the universe’s Monarch.

3 Travelling on the paths of air’s mid-region, no single day doth

he take rest or slumber.

Holy and earliest-born, Friend of the waters, where did he
spring and from what region came he]

4 Germ of the world, the Deities’ vital spirit, this God moves ever

as his will inclines him.

His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let us adore
this Wind with our oblation.

HYMN CLXIX. Cows.

Mat the wind blow upon our Cows with healing: may they
eat herbage full of vigorous juices.

May they drink waters rich in life and fatness : to food that
moves on feet be gracious, Rudra.

2 Like-coloured, various-hued, or single-coloured, whose nancies
through sacrifice are known to Agni,

2 They: the Waters. Prof. Max Muller interprets differently. See hi*
translation, Vedic Hymns, I. 449.

1 Food that moves on feet : the wandering milch-cows. But see Bergaigne*

HYMN 171.]

THE RIG VEDA .

601

Whom the Augirases produced by Fervour,— vouchsafe to
these, Parjanya, great protection.

3 Those who have offered to the Gods their bodies, whose varied

forms are all well known to Soma, —

Those grant us in our cattle-pen, 0 Indra, with their full streams
of milk and plenteous offspring.

4 Prajapati, bestowing these upon me, one-minded with all Gods

and with the Fathers,

Hath to our cow-pen brought auspicious cattle : so may we own
the offspring they will bear us.

HYMN CLXX. r Surya.

May the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled meath,
giving the sacrifice’s lord uninjured life ;

He who, wind-urged, in person guards our offspring well, hath
nourished them with food and shines o’er many a land.

2 Radiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning strength,

Truth based upon the statute that supports the heavens,
He rose, a light, that kills Yritras and enemies, best slayer
of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes.

3 This light, the best of lights, supreme, all-conquering, winner

of riches, is exalted with high laud.

All-lighting, l'adiant, mighty as the Sun to see, he spreadeth
wide unfailing victory and strength.

4 Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast attained

heaven’s lustrous realm.

By thee wdre brought together all existing things, possessor
of all Godhead, All-effecting God.

HYMN CLXXI. Indra.

Fern Ita’s sake who pressed the juice, thou, Indra, didst protect
his car,

Arid hear the Soma-giver’s call.

2 Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving
combatant,

And sought the Soma-pourer’s home.

4 Prajdpati hath brought: 1 may Praj&pati bring/ according to S&yana

2 Shin: here meaning ‘body.’ Combatant: tnahhdsya: according to the
legend cited by S&yana, Sacrifice personified, whose head, as he attempted to
escape in human form from the Gods, was cut off by Indra. See Wilson.

m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK x.

Z Venya, that mortal man, hast thou, for Astrabudkna the
devout,

0 Indra, many a time set free.

4 Bring,, Indra, to the east again that Sun who now is in the
west,

Even against the will of Gods.

HYMN CLXXII. Dawn.

With all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with full
udders follow on thy path.

2 Come with kind thoughts, most liberal, rousing the warrior's

hymn of praise, with bounteous ones* „

3 As nourishes we tie the thread, and, liberal with our bounty,

offer sacrifice.

4 Dawn drives away her Sister’s gloom, and, through her ex-

cellence, makes her retrace her path. *. ,

HYMN CLXXIII. Ehe King.

Be with us; I have chosen thee : stand stedfast and im-
movable. ' .

Let all the people wish for thee : let not thy kingship fall away.

2 Be even here ; fall not away ; he like a mpuntain unremoved.
Stand stedfast here like Indra’s self, and hold the kingship in

thy grasp.

3 This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by strong obla-

tion's power.

May Soma speak a benison, and Brahmanaspati, on him.

4 Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also are these

hills.

Stedfast is all this living world, and stedfast is this King of men.

£ Stedfast, may Varuna the King, stedfast, the God Brihaspati,
Stedfast, may Indra, stedfast, too, may Agni keep thy sted
fast reign. . • / ■ 1

3 Venya, : said to he Prifchu, the son of Vena. See X 14$. & AstrabudAha :
the name of a man not mentioned elsewhere, the eon of Astrabudhna. - Set
free: Cp. I. 24. 15.

2 Most liberal: Surya appears to be meant. Housing the warrior's hymn

of praise: jdraydnmahhiih ; the meaning is uncertain: — * Winging the
sacrifice to completion/ according to S&yana. '*

3 As noariskers : because sacrifice brings the food that nourishes life; Thff
thread: of sacrifice.

4 Her Sister's gloom : the darkness of Xight,

The subject is the benediction of a newly-elected king.

HYMN 176J

THE RIGVEDA.

603

6 On constant Soma let us think with constant sacrificial gift.
And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee
. alone.

HYMN CLXXIY. The King.

With offering for success in fight whence Indra was victorious.
With this, 0 Brahmanaspati, let us attain to royal sway.

2 Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities,
Withstand the man who menaces, withstand the man who

angers us.

3 Soma and Savitar the God have made thee a victorious King :
All elements have aided thee, to make thee general conqueror.

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus gre$ glorious and

most high, —

This have I offered, Gods ! and hence now, verily, am rivalless.

5 S layer of rivals, rivalless, victorious, with royal sway,

*■ : Over these beings may I rule, may I be Sovran of the folk.

. * HYMN CLXXV, PresR-stones.

Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you according to the
'V .Law: ■

Be harnessed to the shafts, and press.

2 Stones, drive calamity away, drive ye away malevolence :
Make ye the Cows our medicine.

* 3 Of one accord the upper Stones, giving the Bull his bull-like
strength,

Look down with pride on those below.

4 May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you as Law commands
for him

Who sacrifices, pouring juice.

HYMN CLXXYI. Agni,

With hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Kibbiis*
mighty deeds

* Who, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as ’twere a mo-
/ ' ' ther cow.

1 With offering for success ; f By the abhivaria oblation/ — Wilson.

4 Cp. X. 159. 4.

The shafts : or chariot-poles; here meaning the guiding arms of the
Soma-press.

- 2 The^Gows : or, the rays of morning, at whose approach robbers and de-
mons fly.

3 The Bull: Soma.

604 THE HYMNS OF * [BOOK X.

2 Bring forth the God with song divine, bring Jltavedas hither-

ward,

To bear our gifts at once to heaven.

3 He here, a God-devoted Priest, led forward comes to sacrifice/
Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himself,

the way.

1 This Agni rescues from distress, as 5 twere from the Immortal Race,
A God yet mightier than strength, a God who hath been made

for life.

HYMN CLXXVIL Mfiyfibheda.

This sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the Bird
adorned owith all au Asura’s magic might.

Sages observe him in the ocean’s inmost depth ; the wise dis-
posers seek the station of his rays.

2 The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit ; erst the Gan-

dharva in the womb pronounced it :

And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant,
heavenly-bright invention.

3 I saw the Herdsman, him who neyer resteth, approaching and

departing on his pathways.

He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, within the
worlds continually travels.

HYMN CLXXVIII. # Tfirkshya.

This very mighty one whom Gods commission, the Conqueror
of cars, ever triumphant,

Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even T&rkshya
for our weal will we call hither.

3 Like a ear i perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, like a chariot which, as
the driver is concealed from sight by the canopy, seems to find its way with-
out a guide.

4 As ’ twere from the Immortal Race : 1 as (well as) from peril caused by the
immortals.’ — Wilson. Stanzas 2 — 4 are recited at the Agni-pranayana, the
ceremony of carrying the sacrificial fire to the altar used for animal and
Soma sacrifices. See Haug’s Aitareya JBrdhmanam, II. 60, 61.

The subject is Mdy&bheda, f the discernment of Mdyd i or illusion (the
cause of material creation).’ — Wilson.

1 The Bird : the Sun. In the ocean 1 s inmost depth : in the solar orb,
according to S&yana. Wise disposers : ‘ ordainers (of solar worship).’ — Wilson.

2 Speech : or song ; the morning song of the Sun-Bird. The Gandharva :
the breath of life, according to S&yana. The ray of the Sun iB probably meant.

3 This stanza has occurred before. Seel. 164. 31. The Herdsman : the Sun.
Resteth : or, stumbleth ; literally, sinks or fallB down.

1 Tdrkshya ; a personification of the Sun, usually described as a divine
horse. Cp. I. 89. 6.

HYMN 180,] THE RIG VEDA. 605

2 As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we ascend

him as a ship for safety.

Like the two wide worlds, broad., deep, far-extended, may we
be safe both when he comes and leaves you.

3 He who with might the Five Lands hath pervaded, like Surya

with his lustre, and the waters, —

His strength wins hundreds, thousands : none avert it, as the
young maid repelleth not her lover.

HYMN CLXNIX. Indra.

Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra’s seasonable share.
If it be ready, offer it ; unready, ye have been remiss.

2 Oblation is prepared : come to us, Indra ; the Sun hath travel-

led over half his journey.

■* Friends with their stores are sitting round thee waiting like
lords of clans for the tribe’s wandering chieftain.

3 Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy ; well-dressed, I

fancy, is this recent present.

Drink, Indra, of the curd of noon’s libation with favour,
Thunderer, thou whose deeds are mighty.

HYMN CLXXX. Indra.

O much-invoked, thou hast subdued thy foemen : thy might is
loftiest ; here display thy bounty.
v In thy right hand, 0 Indra, bring us treasures : thou art the
Lord of rivers filled with riches.

2 Like a dre«4 wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast

approached us from the farthest distance.

Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, 0 Indra, crush thou
the foe and scatter those who hate us.

3 Thou, mighty Indra, sprangest into being as strength for

lovely lordship o’er the people.

Thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the
Gods thou gavest room and freedom;

Her lover; I adopt, with a modification, Professor Pischel’s interpretation
of the difficult words yuvattm nd sdrydm. See Vedische Stvdien , I. p. 106.

3 The milk is twice cooked ; first matured in the cow’s udder and then
heated on the fire. Curd ; the hymn was employed in the Dadhigharma
ceremony when Soma juice was offered mixt with curd or sour inspissated
milk. Cf. VIII. 2, 9, and IX. 11. 6. See Hillebrandt, F M., I. 221.

106 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X.

HYMN CLXXXI. Visvedevas,

Vasishtha mastered the Rathantara, took it from radiant
Dh&tar, Savitar, and Vishnu,

Oblation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by the names of
Saprathas and Prathas.

2 These sages found what lay remote and hidden, the sacrifice's

loftiest secret essence.

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Agni, Bharad-
vaja brought the Brihat.

3 They found with mental eyes the earliest Yajus, a pathway to

the Gods^ that had descended.

From radiant Dh&tar, Savitar, and. Vishnu, from Sfirya did
these sages bring the Gharma.

HYMN CLXXXII. Brihaspatl

Brihaspati lead us safely over troubles, and turn his evil
thought against the sinner ;

Repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacri-
ficer peace and comfort !

2 May Narasansa aid us at Prayaja : blest be our Anuyaja at

invokings.

May he repel the curse, and chase ill-feeling, and give the
sacrificer peace and comfort.

3 May he whose head is flaming burn the demons,' haters of

prayer, so that the arrow slay them.

May he repel the curse and chase ill-feeling, and^give the sacri-
ficer peace and comfort

1 Rathantara: one of the most important S&ma-hymns, consisting of verses
22 and 23 of Rigveda VII. 32=S&maveda II. i. i. 13. The meaning here is
uncertain, and the whole stanza is obscure. Sapratfyas and Prathas : mean-
ing, apparently, ‘ far-extending ’ and * extending/ the former referring to
the Rnthantara and the latter to the Brihat, which is also one of the mo8t
important Sfimans (Rigveda VI. 46, 3, 2=S4maveda II. ii. 1. 12).

3 Yajus : sacrificial prayers and formulas of the Yajurveda. Gharma :
warm libation of milk or other beverage,

* The Sfikta refers evidently to technical ritual to which no key is given by
the commentary.’— Wilson. See Mme. Z6na‘ide Ragozin’s Vedic India , p. 398.

2 Nardmnsa : Agni. Praydja : part of the introductory ceremony at a
Soma sacrifice. Anuydja ; a secondary or final sacrifice.

3 He whose head is flaming: tapurmilrdhan ; Brihaspati or Agni as
lightning.

M YMN 187.] THE RtGVEHA, 60 7

HYMN CLXXXIII. The Sacrifice* Etc.
I saw thee meditating in thy spirit what sprang from Fervour
and hath thence developed.

Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread in thine off-
spring, thou who cravest children.

2 I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying that in due

time thy body might be fruitful.

Come as a youthful woman, rise to meet me : spread in thine
offspring, thou who cravest children.

3 In plants and herbs, in all existent beings I have deposited the

germ of increase.

All progeny on earth have I engendered, and spns in women
who will be hereafter.

HYMN CLXXXY. Adit*

Great, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of Three Gods r
Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman.

2 (Ter these, neither at home nor yet abroad on pathways that

are strange,

The evil-minded foe hath power :

3 Nor over him, the man on whom the Sons of A diti bestow
Eternal light that he may live.

HYMN CLXXXYI. V*yu.

Filling our hearts with health and joy, may Yata breathe his
balm on us :

May he prolong our days of life.

2 Thou art our Father, V&ta, yea, thou art a Brother and a friend;
So give ns strength that we may live.

3 The store of Amrit laid away yonder, 0 Y&ta, in thine home, — -
Give us thereof that we may live.

HYMN CLXXXYII. Agni

To Agni send I forth my song, to him the Bull of all the folk ;
So may he bear us past our foes.

The deities arc the Qacrifieer, liis Wife, and the Hotar-priest.

1 According to S&yana, the wife is the speaker of the first stanza, the
Yajam&ua or sacrificer of the second, and the Hotar-priest of the third,
Lndwig considers Agni to be the speaker of the whole hymn. What sprang
from Fervour : the results of ardent devotion or tdpas.

3 The Hotar-priest regards himself as^ the procreator of all living beings
through the efficacy of the sacrifices which he performs ; matMhyena ydgena
mrvasyotpatteraham aarvajcmaheturbhavdmi. — S&yana.

1 Bull ; chief and lord, as the indispensable household fire.

60S TEE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X.

2 Who from the distance far away shines brilliantly across the

wastes :

So may he hear us past our foes.

3 The Bull with brightly-gleaming flame who utterly consumes

the fiends :

So may he bear us past our foes.

4 Who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with

his view :

So may he bear us past our foes.

5 Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region of the air :
So may he bear us past our foes.

HYMN CLXXXVIII. Agni.

Now send ye Jltavedas forth, send hitherward the vigorous
Steed

To seat him on our sacred grass.

2 I raise the lofty eulogy of JAtavedas, raining boons,

With sages for his hero band.

3 With flames of J atavedas which carry oblation to the Gods,
May he promote our sacrifice.

HYMN CLXXXIX. Surya.

This spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the Mother in
the east,

Advancing to his Father heaven.

2 Expiring when he draws his breath, she moves along the lucid

spheres :

The Bull shines out through all the sky.

3 Song is bestowed upon the Bird : it rules supreme through’

thirty realms

Throughout the days at break of morn.

2 A cross the wastes : as the fire that burns the jungle and prepares the
ground for cultivation,

5 In farthest region of the air : or beyond the firmament, as the Sun.

The deity is alternatively S&rpar&jftl, the Serpent-Queen, Kadrti, who is
also the Rishi of the hymn.

1 This spotted Bull : the Sun. The Mother : Dawn.

3 The Bird: the Sun, His morning song, representing prayer, is supreme
through all the divisions of the world, the number thirty being used indefi-
nitely. Cf. I. 123. 8.

1 From Fervour ; from the tapas, devotional ardour or asceticism of Brahm&,
according to S&yana. But the meaning here may be ( from warmth See X.
129. 3 and note. Thence : from that fervour, or warmth.

HYMN 191J

THE RIGYEDA.

609

HYMN CXC. Creation.

From Fervour kindled to its height Eternal Law and Truth
were born :

Thence was the Night produced, aud thence the billowy flood
of sea arose.

2 From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was afterwards

produced,

Ordaiuer of the days and nights, Lord over all who close the
eye.

3 Dbatar, the great Creator, then formed in due order Sun and

Moon.

Me formed in order Heaven and Earth, the regions of the air,
and light.

HYMN CXCI. Agni.

Thou, mighty Agni, gatfrerest up all that is precious for thy
friend.

Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libation’s place.

2 Assemble, speak together : let your minds be all of one accord,
As ancient Gods unanimous sit down to their appointed share.

3 The place is commum, common the assembly, common the
1 mind, so be their thought united.

A common purpose do I lay before you, and worship with
your general oblation.

4 One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds of one

accord.

United be the thoughts of all that all may happily agree.

✓'

The deity or subject of stanzas 2-4 is Samj Miiam. Agreement or Unani-
mity in assembly.*

3 Common the assembly ; this sdmiti appears to have been a general assem-
bly of the people on some important occasion, such as the election of a King.
Ct Hymn » of the Atharva-veda } YI. 64.

APPENDIX.

Page 466, Hymn 1X1.

I subjoin a Latin version of stansas 5 — 8, and borrow Wilson’s
translation of stanza 9.

5 Membrum suum virile, quad protentum fuerafc, mas ille re-

traxit. Rursus illud qu^'d in juvenem filiam sublatum fuerafc,
non aggressurus, ad & retrabit.

6 Quum jam in medio cpfcgressu, semiperfecto opere, amorem in

puellam pater impteverat, ambo discedentes seminis paulum
in terrae superfic>£ in sacrorum sede effusum emiserunt.

7 Quum pater suam filiam adiverat, cum ek congressus suum

semen supra cerram effudit. Turn Dii benigni precem
(brahma) progenuerunt, et Vastoshpatim, legum saorarum
custodem, fcrmaverunt.

8 Ille tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit ; tunc discedens

pusillanimis hue profectus est. Quasi dextro pede claudus
processit, “ inutiles fuerunt illi mei complexus,” ita locutus.

9 ‘ The fire, burning the people, does not approach quickly (by

day) : the naked (Hdkshasas approach) not Agniby night;
the giver of fuel, and the giver of food, he, the upholder
( of the rite), is born, overcoming enemies by his might.’

The whole passage is difficult and obscure, and stanza 9 is unintelligible.
With regard to the myth of Prajapati and. his daughter. Prof. Max Mulleb
says : — ‘When Kum&rila is hard pressed by his opponents about the immoral-
ities of his gods, he answers with all the freedom of a comparative my-
thologist : li It is fabled that Praj£pati, the Lord of Creation, did violence to
Ms daughter. But what does it mean ? Praj&pati, the Lord of Creation, is
a name of the sun, and he is called so, because he protects all creatures.
His daughter Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he was in love
with her, this only means that, at sunrise, the sun runs after the dawn, the
dawn being at the same time called the daughter of the sun, because she
rises when he approaches *Y — History of Anc. Sans, Literature , pp. 529, 530.
See Muir, 0 . S. Texts , IY. pp. 46, 47, where stanzas 4 — 7 are translated.

7 Vastoshpatim : V&stoshpati, the guardian of the house ; 6 the lord of the
hearth (of sacrifice)/ — Wilson. The word may be in apposition with br&hma,
prayer.

9 The fire; according to Sdyana, Bftkshasas who consume like fire.

APPENDIX.

612

Page 548, Hymn CVT.

I borrow Wilson's translation of the omitted Stanzas.

5 ‘ You are like two pleasantly moving well-fed (hills) like Mitra

and Varuna, the two bestowers of felicity, veracious, pos-
sessors of infinite wealth, happy, like two horses plump with
fodder, abiding in the firmament, like two rams (are you) to
be nourished with sacrificial food, to be cherished (with
oblations).

6 1 You are like two mad elephants bending their forequarters

and smiting the foe, like the two sous of Nitosa destroying
(foes), and cherishing (friends) ; you are bright as two water-
born (jewels), do you, who are victorious, (render) my decay-
ing mortal body free from decay. f ,

7 ^Fierce (Aswins), like two powerful (heroes), you enable this

moving, perishable mortal (frame) to cross over to the ob-
jects (of its destination) as over winter ; extremely strong,
like the Ribhus, your chariot attained its destination swift
as the wind, it pervaded (everywhere), it dispensed riches.

8 With your bellies full of the Soma , like two saucepans, preserv-

ers of wealth, destroyers of enemies, (you are) armed with
hatchets, moving like two flying (birds) with* forms like the
moon, attaining success through the mind, like two laudable
beings, (you are) approaching (the sacrifice)/

Page 598, Hymn CLXII.

May Agni, yielding to our prayer, the Rakshas-siayer, drive
away

The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring womb.

2 Agui, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of thy flesh,

The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe and

womb.

3 That which destroys the* sinking germ, the settled, moving

embryo,

That which will kill the babe at birth, — even this will we drive
far away.

4 That which divides thy legs that it may lie between the mar-

ried pair,

That penetrates and licks thy side, — even this will we extern
* minate, - v '/.

The subject is the Prevention of Abortion. The Riahi ia RakshokA (Slay er : -
of R&kahaaaa), bou of Brahma. ■- ’ . V

Stanzas 1, 2 are directed against diseases, and 8 — 6 against evil-epirtta which
attack women who are about to become mothers. .

APPENDIX,

613

5 What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, or of lord ,
And would destroy thy progeny, — even this will we exterminate.

6 That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and

lies down by thee,

And will destroy thy progeny, — even this will we exterminate.
Page 598, Hymn CLXIII.

Prom both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both thine ears
and from thy chin,

Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive thy malady
away.

2 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones

and from the spine, *

From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy malady away-

3 From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, from the

heart,

* From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy malady away.

4 From thighs, from knee-caps, and from heels, and from the

forepart of the feet,

From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive thy malady
away.

5 From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, and from

thy nails,

From all thyself from top to toe, I drive thy malady away,

6 From every member, every hair, disease that comes in everyjoint,
From* all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.

Page 607, Hymn CLXXXIV.

May Vishna form and mould the womb, may Tvashtar duly
shape the forms,

Praj&pati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay the germ for thee.

2 0 Sinivalt, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvati :

May the Twain Gods bestow the germ, the Asvins crowned
with lotuses.

3 That which the Asvins Twain rub forth with the attrition-
, r sticks of gold, —

That germ of thine we iuvocate, that in the tenth month thou
may st bear.

The deity or subject is the cure of Yakshma or phthisis or consumption,

2 Sinivfilt : a lunar Goddess, who aids the birth of children. Cp. II, 32, 6.
Verses 1 and 2 are incorporated in Atharva-veda, V. 25, which is a charm
to accompany the GarbhMnAna ceremony to ensure or facilitate and bless
conception.

ityintt*

INDEX OF HYMNS.
boos: VII.

Rishz. Dely . Metre .

1 Vasishtha Mai- AgnL Vir&j. 19-25 Trishtup.

tr&varuni. *

2 The same Apris. Trishtup.

3 Agni. The same,

4 .. The sane* '

5 Vaisv&iara AgnL , .........

-6 : The sane.

7 Agni

S Thf same.

9

10

11

12

13 Vaisv&nara Agni.

14 Agni* 1 BrihatL 2, 3 Trishtup.

15 Tfce same, G&yatri.

16 Brihati and Satobrihatl

alternately.

17 Dvipad& Trishtup.

18 Indra. Munificence of Trishtup.

Sud&e (22-25),

19 Indra. The same.

20 .. The same.

21

22 VlrOj. 9 Trishtup.

23 ... . ... Trishtup.

24 ........ The same.

25 ...

26

27

28

29 .**..*..*

30 Vasishtha. Imlra. Trishtup.

31 The same. The. same. (Savatrl 10-12 Vir&j.

g Hymn .

616 INDFX OF HYMNS,

£ iMi.

£

Deity.

Metre.

32 Vasisbtha.Sakti Indra,

V&sishfcha.

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately. 3 Dvipad&

Vir&j.

33 Vasishtba. His
sons (10-14).

Vasishtha’s sons.
Yasishtha (10-14)

Trishtup.

34 Vasishlha.

Visvedevas. Ahi. AU-
budhnya.

DvipadA 22-25 Trishtup.

35 The same.

Visvedevas.

Trishtup.

36

The same.

The same.

37

38 °

Savitar. Savitar or

Bhaga. V&jins (7-8).

39

Visvedevas,

40

The same.

t

41

Various (1). Bhaga, Ushas.

Ti\shtup. 1 J agati.

42

Visvedevas.

Triihtup.

43

The same.

The same.

44

Various (1). Dadhikr&s.

Trishtup. 1 Jaguti.

45

Savitar.

Trishtup.

46

Rudra.

Jagati. i Trishtup.

47

Waters,

Trishtup.

48

Ribhus. Ribhus or
Visvedevas.

The same.

49

Waters.

50

Mitra and Varuna. Agni. Jagatt 4 Atijagati or
Visvedevas. Praise of Rivers. Sak\^ri.

51

Adityas.

Trishtup.

52

The same.

The same.

53

Heaven and Earth.

54

V&stoshpati.

1 GSyatri, 2-\ Uparishtftd-
brihatl. 5-8 A»u B htup.

*55

Vfistoshpati. Indra,

56

Maruts.

1-11 Dvipad& VW 12-25
Trishtup^

57

The same.

Trishtup. \

58

The same.

59

Maruts, Rudra (12).

1, 3, 5 Brihati. 2, 4, 6 SatX s
brihati. 7, 8 Trishtup. 9-11
G&yatrt 12 Anush tup.

60

Surya. Mitra and Vanina.

Trishtup.

61

Mitra and Varuna,

The same.

62

S&rya. Mitra and Varuna.

63

The same.

INDEX OF HYMNS.

617

$

fs JRishi .

Deity.

Metre.

64 Vasishtha.

Mitra and Varuna.

Trishtup.

65 The same.

The same.

The same.

66

67

68

69

70

Mitra and Varuna.

Adityas. SOrya.

Asvins.

The same.

G&yatri. 10-15 Brihati and
Satobrihatl alternately.

16 Pura-ushnih.

Trishtup.

VirAj. 8, 9 Trishtup.
Trishtup.

The same.

71

72

73

74

Brihati and Satobrihatl
alternately.

Trishtup.

The same.

75

76

77

Ushas or Dawn.

The same.

78

79

80

81

Brihati and Satobrihatl
’alternately.

Jagath

82

Indra and Varuna.

83 ..

The same.

The same*

84

Trishtup.

The same.

85

86

Varuna,

The same.

87

88

89

90

91

V/iyu. Indra and V&yu,
The same.

GAyatrl. 5 Jagati

Trishpip.

The same.

9 *2

93

Indra and Agni.

The same.

Saras vati. Saras vkn.

94

95

GAyatrl. 12 Anush tup.
Trishtup.

96

97

98

The same, 1 Brih&tt. 2 Satobrihatl. 3

Prast&rapankti 4-6G&ytri
Indra. Brihaspati. Indra Trishtup.
andBiahmanaspati. Indr*
and Biihaapati,

Indra. Indra and Brihaspati The same.

€18,

INDEX OF HYMNS.

£ Hishi.

tel

59 Vasishtha.

100 The same.

101

*02 ......

103

101

Metre .

Vishnu. Indra and Vishnu. Trishtup.

The same.

Vishnu.

Parjanya.

The same.

Progs.

Indra and Soma. Indra.
Soma Agni. The Gods.
Press-stones. Maruts.
Vasishlha’s Prayer. Earth
and Firmament.

1,3 Gdyatri. 2 Pddanichrit.
Trishtup. 1 Anushtup.
Trishtup. 1-6, 18, 21, 23
Jagatt 7 Jagati or Trish-
tup. 25 Anushtup,

* BOOK VIII.

1 Pragdtha Klava Indra. Asanga’s Manih-

(1, 2), Medbdti- cence. Asanga.
thi and Medh-
ydtithi (3-29),

Asanga (30-33),

Saavatt (34).

2 Medhdtithi and Indra. Vibhindhu’s

Priyamedha. Munificence.

Medhdtithi

(41-42).

3 Medhydtifchi. Indra. Pdkasthdman’s

Munificence.

Brihati. 2, 4 Satobrihati,
33, 34 Trishtup.

Gdyatri. 28 Anushtup.

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately. 21 Anushtup,
22,23 Gdyatri. 24 Brihati.

4 Dev&tithi,

5 Brahmdtithi.

6 Vatsa.

7 Punarvatsa.

8 Sadhvansa.

9 Sasakarna.

10 Pragdtha.

11 Vatsa.

12 Parvata.

13 Ndrada,

Indra. Indra or Pfishan. Brihati and Satobrihati al-
Kurunga’s Munificence. temately. 21 Pura-ushnih.

Asving. Kasu’s Munificence. Gdyatri. 37, 38 Brihati. 35
Anushtup. Gdyatri.

Indra, Tirindira’s Gdyatri.

Munificence.

Maruts. The same.

As v ins.
The same.

Agni.

Indra.

The same.

Anushtup.

1, 4, 6* 14, 15, Brihati. 2,
3, 20, 21, Gdyatri. 5 Ka-
kup. 7, 9, 13, 16. 19. Anu-
shtup. 10 Trishtup, 11
Virdj. 12 Jagati. *

1, 5 Brihati. 2 Madhyejyo^ie.
3 Anushtup. 4 Astdra-
pankti. 6 Satobrihati.

Gdyatri. 1 Pratishthd. 2 Var-
dhamdnd. 10 Trishtup.

Ushnih.

The same.

Hymn*

INDEX OF HYMNS.

m

JRishi. Deity . Metre .

luktin and Indra, G&yatri.

Asvasuktin.

15 The same. The same. Ushnih.

16 Irimbithi. G<iyatri.

17 The same. G&yatri. 14 Brihati.

15 Satobrihati.

18 Adityas.Asvins.Agni. Ushnih.

Sftrya, V&ta or Wind.

19 Sobhari. Agni. Adityas. Trasa- 1-26, 28-33 Kakup and Sato-

dasyu’s Munificence. brihati alternately. 27

Dvipadd viiAj. 34 Ushnih.
35 Satobrihati. 36 Kakup.
37 Pankti.

20 The same. Maruts. Kakup and Satobrihati

alternately.

21 Indra. Chitra’s Munificence. The same.

22 Asvins. 1-7 Brihati and Satobrihati

alternately. 8 Anushtup.
9, 10, 13-18 Kakup and
Satobrihati alternately. 11
Kakup. 12 Madhyejyotis,

23 Visvamanas. Agni. Ushnih.

24 The same. Indra. A Prince's Ushnih. 30 Anushtup.

Munificence.

25 Mitra and Varuna. Ushnih. 23 UshniggarbhA

Visvedevas.

26 Asvins. Y^yu. Ushnih. 16, 19, 21, 25 G4ya»

tri. 20 Anushtup.

27 Manu Yaivas- Visvedevas. Brihati and Satobrihati

vata. * ’alternately.

28 The same. The same. Gftyatri. 4 Pura-ushnih.

29 M&nu, or Kas- Dvipad& Vir&j.

yapa.

30 Manu. 1 G4yatrh 2 Pura-ushnih.

3 Brihati. 4 Anushtup.

31 The same. The Yajam&na and his G&yatri. 9, 14 Anushtup. 10

Wile. Their Benediction. Padanichfit. 15-18 Pankti.

32 Medb&tithi Indra. G4yatri.

33 Medhy&tithi. The same. Brihati. 16-18 G&yatri. 19

Anushtup.

34 Nip&tithh • Anushtup. 16-18 G&yatrl.

The 1000 Vasn-
rochishas.

35 Sy&vasva. Asvins. UparhhtAjjyotis. 22-24

’ Pankti. 23 MabAbrihati.

620

INDEX OP HYMNS*

I Rishi. Deity- Metre.

I s

36 Sy 4 v&sva. Indra, Sakvari. 7 Mah&pankti.

37 The same. Mahdpankti. 1 Atijagati.

38 Indra and Agni. G&yatri.

39 N&bbAka. Agni. Mah&pankti.

40 The same. Indra and Agni. Mah&pankti. 2 SakvarJ.

12 Trishtup.

41 Varuna. MaMpankti.

42 Archan&nas, or Varuna, Asvins. 1-3 Trishtup. 4*6 Anushtup.

N&bh&ka.

43 Viriipa. ? Agni. G&yatrl

44 The same. The same The same.

46 Trisoka. Agni and Indra. Indra.

46 Vasa Asvya, ■ Indra. Munificence of 1 P4dam$hrit. 2-4, 6 , 10,

Prithusravas. V&yu. 23, 29, 33, G£yatrl 5
Kakup. 7,11,19,26,27
Brihati, 8 Anushtup. 9,
26, 28 Satobribatl. 12 Vi-
parity. 13 Chaturvinsa-
tik4 DvipadA 14 Pipili-
kamadhya Brihati. 16 Ka-
kup NyankusirA 16 Vir&j.
17 Jagatl. 18 Uparisht&d-
brihati. 20 VishamapadA
21. 22, 24, 32 PankU 30
Dvipad& Vir&j. 31 Ushpih.

4? Trita Aptya. Adityas. Adityas and Mah&pankti,

Ushas.

48 Prag&tha. Soma. Trishtup. 5 Jagatf.

49* Bharga. Agni. Bfihati and Satobrihatl

alternately.

60 The same* Indra. The same.

51 Prag&tha, The same. Pankti. 7, 9 Brihati. ^

52 The same. Indra. The Gods. G&yatri. 1, 4, 5, 7 Anushtup.

12 Trishtup.

53 Indra. Gftyatrl.

54 The same. The same.

55 Kali. Brihati and Satobrihatl

alternately. 15 Anushtup.

56 MatsyaorM&nya. Adityas. Glyatri.

57 Priyamedha. Indra. Munificence of G&yatrt. 1, 4, 7,10 Anushtup.

two Princes.

* Eleven must be added to the numbers of this and of all that follow in
this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Prof. Max Muller's
editions of the text. See note p. 267.

INDEX OF HYMNS.

621

tel

RUM,

Metre .

58 The same. Indra, Visyedevas. Varuna. Anushtup, 2 Ushnih. 4-6

G&yatrl. 11, 16 Pankii.
17, 18 Brihati.

59 Puruhanman. Indra.

60 Suditi and Puru- Agni.
milha.oreither
of them.

Brihati and Satobrihati »
alternately. 7-12 *Brihat i .
13 Ushnih. 14 Anush tup.
15 Pura-ushpih,

G&yatit 10-15 Brihati and
Satobrihati alternately.

61 Haryata,

The same.

G&yahi

62 Gopavana, or

Asvins.

The same.

Saptavadhri,

63 Gopavana.

Agni-Srutarvan’s

Munificence.

G&yatri. 1, 4, 7, 10, 13-15
Anushtup.

64 Virfipa.

Agni.

G&yatri

65 Kuruauti.

Indra.

The* same.

66 The same.

The same.

G&yatrt. 10 Brihati. 11
Satobrihatl,

67

GAyatri. 1 0 Brihati.

68 Kritnu.

Soma.

G&yatri. 9 Anushtup

69 Ekadyft.

Indra. The Gods.

G&yatri 10 Trishtup,

70 Kueldin,

Indra.

G&yatrl.

71 The same.

The same.

The same.

72

Visvedevaa,

73 Ueanft K&vya.

AgnL

74 Krishna.

Asvjns.

75 Visvaka,

The same.

Jagati.

76 Byumnika or
Priyafnedha

Brihati and Satobrihatl
alternately.

or Krishna.

77 Nodhas.

Indra.

The same.

78 Nrimedha and
Purumedha.

The same.

1, 3, 7 Biihati. 2, i Satobri.
hath 5, 6 Anushtup,

79 The same.

PragAtha.

80 Apftfft.

Anushtup. 1, 2 Pankti,

81 Srutakaksha, or

GAyatit, 1 Anushtup.

Sukakaha.

82 Sukaksha.

Indra Indra and Ribhus.

Gftyatrt.

83 Vindu, or P&ta- Maruts,
daksha.

The same.

84 Tirascht

Indra.

Anushtup.

85 Dyut&na, or
Xirasebi.

Indra, Maruts. Indra
and Bcibasp&tb

TriBhtup. 4 Virlj,

Hymn .

622

INDEX OF HYMNS.

Ri&hi Deity. Metre.

86 Bebha. , Indra. Brihati. 10, 13 Atijagatl. 11,

12 Uparishtcldbrihati . 14
Trishtup. 15 JagatL

87 Nrimedha. The same. Ushnih. 7, 10, 11 Kakup. 9,

12 Pura-ushnih.

88 The same Prag&tha.

89 Nema. Indra Indra. Vak. Trishtup. 6 Jagat!. 7-9

(45). Anushtup.

90 Jamadagni. Mitra and Varuna. Adi- 1, 5, 7, 9, 31, 13 Brihati. 2, 4,

i v i'.. VjVni.Surya. 6, 8, 10,12 Satobrihati. 3

' yv. i..s f J i a m*

91 Prayoga, or Agni. G&yatri.

Agni B&rhas-
patya, or Agni
Grihapati* or
Yavishtha.

92 Sobkari.

Agni. Agni and Maruts.

1 Praskanva.

vAlakhilya hymns.*

Indra.

Brihati and Satobrihatt

2 Pushtigu.

The same.

alternately.

The same.

3 Srushtigu.

4 Ayu.

5 Medhya,

6 M&tarisvan.

Indra. Visvedevas.

7 Krisa

Praskanva’s Munificence.

G&yatrL 3-5 Anushtup.

8 Prishadra.

The same. Agni and Sfirya. G&yatri. 6 Pankti.

9 Medhya.

Asvins.

Trishtup.

10 The same.

Visvedevas.The Priests

The same.

11 Suparpa,

Indra and Varuna.

Jagati.

BOOK IX,

1 Madhuchchhan- Soma Pavam&na.

G&yatri.

das.

2 Medh&tithi.

The same.

The aame.

3 Sunabsepa.

4 Hiranyastupa.

5 Asita.orDevala. Apris.

Gftyatri. 8-11 Anushtup.

6 The same.

Soma Pavam&na. *

Gayatrl.

7-24

The same.

The same, i

* These eleven hymns are numbered 49 — 69 in Prof. Max Muller's
editions of the text,

mmx OF KYMWt

62 $

I RisJii. Deity.

3 s *

Kq

25 Drilhachyuta, Soma Pavam&na.

26 Idhmav&ha

27 Nrimedha.

28 Priyamedha

29 Nrimedha.

30 Vindu. .

31 Gotama.

32 Sy&v&sva,

33 Triia Aptya ,

34 The same. .

35 Prabhuvasu, ,

36Thesame,

37 Bahdgapa.

38 The same.

39 Brihanmath

40 The same.

41 Medhy&tithi. *

42 The same*.

43

44 Ay&sya.

45 The same,

46

47 Kavi.

48 The same.

49

50 Uehathya,

51 The same.

52

53-60 Avats&ra. .........

61 Amahtyu.

62 Jamadagni, .........

3* Nidhruvi.

64 Kasyapa.

65 Bhrigu or

Jamadagni.

66 The Vaithfusasas. Soma Favam&na. Agni. Gfcyatri. 18 Anush tup.

67 Bharady&ja. Pavam&na Soma. Pavamftna G&yatrl. 16-18 Dvipad& G&-

Easyapa. Gota- POshan. Agni. Savitar. All- yatri. 27, 31, 32 Anush-
ma. Atri. Visv&- Gods. Praise of Students. tup. 30 Pura-ushnih,
mitra. Jama- *

dagni. Yasish-
tha. Pavitra.

Metre .

G£yaM

624

INDEX OF HYMNS.

$

1

k

Rishi.

t Deity .

68

Vatsaprl.

Soma Pavarnlna.

69 Hiranyasfchpa. The same,

70 Renu,

71 Rishabha.

72 Harim&nta ,.

73 Pavitra.

74 Kakshlv&n

75 Kavi.

76 The same

77

' r*.

78

79

80 Vasu. *

81 The same.

82

83 Pavitra.

,84 Fraj&pati.

85 Vena.

86 The Akrisbfca

Mashas. The
Sikata Ki viva-
ria. The Prisni
Ajas. Atri.

Gritsam&da.

87 tTsanA

88 The same,

89

90 Vasishtha.

91 Kasyapa.

92 The same,

93 Kodhas.

94 Kanva.

95 Praskanva.

96 Pratardana

97 Vasishtha. In>

drapramati.

Manyu. Upa-
rasnyu. Vy4-
ghrapftd. Sakti
JCarnasrut.

Mrilika. Vaau-
* kra. Par&sara.

ICutaa.

Metre.

Jagatt 10 Trishtup.
Jagat!. 9, 10 Trishtup,
Jagatt 10 Trishtup,
jagatt 9 Trishtup.
Jagat i.

The same.

Jagatt. 8 Trishtup,
Jagati .

The same.

Jagati. 5 Trishtup,

The same, *

Jagati.

The same.

Jagatt II, 12 Trishtup.
Jagati.

Trishtup.
The same,

INDEX or HYMNS.

$25

ft

ft

fcq

Rishi, Deity .

Metre .

98

Ambarfsha and Soma Pavam&na.

Anush tup, 11 Brihatl.

Rijisvan.

*

98

TheRebhasunus. The same.

Anushtup. 1 Brihati.

100

The same.

Anushtup.

101

Andhfgu. Yay&*

ti. STakusha,

Anush tup. % 5 Qfiyatri.

Mauu. Praj&pati.

102

Trita Aptya

Ushnih.

103

Dvita Aptya

The same.

104

Parvata and

N&rada, or the

Sikhandinls.

(Apsaras).

105

Parvata and

Nrfrada.

103

Agni. Chakshus

Manu.

107

Seven Rishis

Pr&g&tha. 3, 16 Dvipadfi Vi-
rfij. 8, 10 Brihatl.

108

Gaurivlti, Sak-

1-12 Kakup and Satobrihati

ti. Oru. Ilijifi-

alternately. 13 G-fiyatrl

van. tfrdhva-

Yavamadhyfi,. 14, 16 Sato-

sadman. Kii-
tayasa. Rinau-
chaya.

brihati. 10 Kakup.

109

Agnis of Saeri- ..... ...

See.

Bvipadfi Yirftj.

110

Tryaruna and ......

1-3 Anushtup Piptlikamadh-

Trasadasyu.

yA 4-9* Ordhvabrihati.

10-^2 Virfij.

til

Anfi.ua ta. ...

Atyashti.

112

Sisu.

Pankti.

113

Kasyapa.

The same.

114

The same.

BOOK X.

1 Trita Aptya. Agni. TrishtUp.

2 The s*me. The same. The same

3

4

5 ..

6

7

8 Trisiras, Agni, Indra.

i 40

626'

INDEX OF HYMNS.

S Hiahi.

Deity.

Metre.

&

9 TrisiraSjOr Sin*

Waters.

GAvatrt. 5 Vardham&nA, 7

dhudvipa.

Pratirththft. 8, 9 Anushtup.

10 Yama. Yamt.

Yama. Yamt.

Trishtup.

11 Havirdk&na

Agni.

Jagati. 7-9 Trishtup.

Angi.

12 The same.

The same.

Trishtup,

13 VivasvAn,

The Two Carts.

Trishtup. 5 Jagati.

14 Yama.

Yama. The Deities men-

Trishtup. 13, 14. 1G Anush-
tup. 15 Brihati.

tioned. The Fathers. The

a

Hounds, sons of SarainA.

15 Sankha,

The Fathers,

Trishtup. 11 Jagati.

16 Damana.

Agni.

Trishtup. 11-14 Anushtup.

17 Devaaravaa. Saranyh. Pushan. Sarasvati.Trislmip 14 Amish tup. 13

Waters. Soma. Auushtup or PurastAd-

brihati.

18 Sankusuka.

Mrityu, Dh&tar. Tvashtar.

Trishtup. 1 1 PrastArapankti.

The Pitrimedha.Praj4pati,

13 Jagati. 14. Anushtup.

19 Mathita,Bhrigu, Waters, or Cows. Agni

Anuslitup. 6 QAyatri,

or Chyavana.

and Soma.

20 VimadaorVa-

Agni.

G&yatri. 1 EkapadA VirAj.

sukrit.

2 Anushtup. 9 Vir&j. 10
Trishtup.

21 The same.

The same.

AstArapankti.

22

Indra,

Purast&dbrihati. 5, 7, 9 Anu-

shtup. i5 Trishtup.

23

The same.

Jagati. 1, 7 Trishtup. 5

AbhiaAriuL

24

Ii 4ra. Asvins,

Ast&ra pan kti. 4-6 Anushtup.

25

Soma.

Awtdrapankti.

26

POslian,

Anushtup. 1, 4 Ushtiih,

27 Vasukra.

Indra.

Trishtup.

28 Yasukra’s Wife. Indra. Vasukra.

The same.

Indra. Vasukra.

29 Vasukra.

Indra.

30 Kayasha.

Waters, or Child of Waters

31 The same.

Visvedevas.

32

Indra,

1-5 Jagati. 6-9 Trishtup.

33

Visvedevas. Indra. Kuru-

1 Trishtup, 2 Brihati. 3 Sato-

34 Kavasha, or
Aksha.

sravana, Upamasravas.

brihati. 4-9 GAyatr .

Dice. Agriculture.

Trishtup. 7 Jagati. [

35 Lnaa.

36 The same.

Visvedevas.

The same.

Jagafch 13, 14 Trishtup^

The same.

37 AbhitapA.

Surya.

Jagati, 10 Trishtup,

INDEX OF HYMNS,

m

R

I 5

RisJu. Deity.

Metre.

as

Indra Mushka* Indra.
vAn.

Jagati.

S9

Ghoshs. Asvins.

Jagatt. 14 Trishtup. -

40

The same. The same.

Jagati.

41

Sukastya.

The same.

42

Krishna. Indra.

Trishtup.

43

The same. The same.

Jagatt. 10, 11 Trishtup.

44

Jagati. 1-3, 10, 11 Trishtup,

45

Vatsaprt, Agni.

Trishtup.

46

The same. The same.

The sam£

47

Saptagu, Indra Vaikuntha,

48

Indra Vaihun- The same,
fclia.

Jagati. 7, 10, 11 Trishtup.

49

The same.

Jagati. 2, 11 Trishtup,

50

1, 2, 6 , 1 Jngatt. 3, 4 Abhi-
s&rint. 5 Trishtup.

51

Agni Sauchfka. Agni. Gods.

Trishtup.

52

The same. Gods.

The same.

‘ 53

Agni Saucblka. Agni. Gods,

Gods.

Trishtup. 6, 7, 9-11 Jagatt.

54

Brikaduktha. Indra.

Trishtup.

55

The same. The same.

The same.

56

Visvedevas.

Trishtup. 4, 6 Jagatt.

57

Bandhu, Sruta- The same,
bandhu, Vi-

prabandliu.

G&yatrl.

58

The same. The Spirit.

Anushtup.

59

Kirriti. Soma. Asuniti. The Triahtup. 8 Pankti. 9 Ma*

Deities mentioned, Heav- h&pankti.lOPanktyuttarA
en and Earth. Indra.

60

The Gaupkya- Asamati. Indra. Subandhu’s Anushtup. 1*5 GAyafcrt. 8*
n as and their Recall to Life. The Hands. 9 Pankti.

Mother.

61

N &bb&nedishtka. Visvedevas.

Trishtup.

62

The same. Visvedevas, or Angirases.

Visvedevas. Savarni’s
Liberality.

1-4 Jagati. 5, 8, 9 Anush-
fcup. 6 Brihati, 7 Sato-
brihati. 10 G&yatri. 11
Trishtup.

63

Gaya. Visvedevas. PathyA Svasti. Jagati. 16, 17 Trishtup. 15

Trishtup or Jagati,

64

The same. Visvedevas.

Jagati. 12, 16, 17 Trishtup,

65

Vasukarna. The same.

Jagati. 15 Trishtup,

66

The same.

The same.

67

Ay&sya. Brihaspati.

Trishtup.

INDJBi OF HTKN8-

m

s

s

JIUKii

Deity,

Metre.

fci

68

AyAsya.

Brihaspati.

Trishtup.

69

Sumitra,

Agni.

Trishtup, 1,2 Jagati,

70

The same,

Aprls.

Trishtup.

71

Brihaspati.

Jfttnam.

Trishtup. 9 Jagati,

72

Brihaspati, or

Goda.

Anubhtup.

Aditi.

73

Gautivifch

Indra.

Trishtup.

74

The same.

The same.

The same.

75

Sindhukahifc.

The Rivers.

Jagati.

76

Jaratkarnaf

The Press-stones,

The same.

77

SyOmarasmi.

Mamt3.

Trishtup. 5 Jagati.

73

The same,

The same.

1, 3, 4, 8 Trishtup. 2, 5-7
Jagati,

79

Agni, or Sapti.

Agni.

Trishtup.

89

Agni.

The same.

The same,

81

Yisvakarmau.

Visvakarman.

82

The same,

The same.

83

Manyu.

Manyu.

Trishtup. 1 Jagati.

84

The same.

The same.

1*3 Trishtup. 4*7 Jagatt.

85

SuryA,

Soma. SuryA’s Bridal. Gods.

Anush tup. 1 4, 39-21 23.

Soina and Arka. The Moon.

24, 26, 36, 37, 44 Trish-

Benedictions. SuryA,

tup. 18, 37, 43 Jagati,
34 Urobrihati.

86

Indra. IndrAut. Indra, IndrA?! YriehAk&pi.

, Pankti.

YrishAkapi.

87

PAyu.

Agni RakshohA,

Trishtup. 22, 25 Anushtup.

88

M&rdbanvAn.

Surya and YaisvAnara.

Trishtup.

89

Repu.

Indra and Soma,

The same.

90

KArAyan*.

Purusha.

Anushtup. 16 Trishtup,

91

Aruna.

AgnL

Jagati, 15 Trishtup,

92

SAryAta.

Yisvedevaa.

Jagati,

93

TAnva.

The same.

PirastArapankti. 2,3,13 Anu-

shtup. 9 Pankti. 11 Nyan-
kusArinl. 15 PurastAdbri-

hath

94

Arbuda,

The Press -stones.

Jagati. 5, 7, 14 Trishtup.

95

Pururavas,

Urvari,

UrvaeL Pururavas,

Trishtup.

96

Barn* or
Sarvaharh

Indra’s Horses.

Jagati. 12, 13 Trishtup.

97

Bhishaj.

Medicinal Her-bs,

Anushtup,

98

DevApi.

Gods.

Trishtup,

$9

Yamra,

Indra,

The same,

INDEX OF HYMN'S,

629

S Rishi , ’ Deity,

100 Duvasyu. Visvedevas,

101 Budha. Yisvedevas, or Priests.

302 Mudgala. Indra, or the Mace.

103 Apratiratha, Indra. Brihaspati. ApvA

Maruts.

104 Ashtaka. Indra,

105 Durmitra or The same.

Sumitra.

106 BhfttAnsa. Aisvins.

107 Divya, or Dak- Guerdon.

shirA.

108 SararaA. Panis, SaramA. Panis,

109 Juhft. Yisvedevas.

110 Jamadagni or Apiis.

RAma.

111 Ash trad anshtra. Indra.

112 Nabhahprabhe- The same.

dana.

113 Sataprabhedana.

114 Sadhri or Ghar- Yisvedevas,

ma.

115 TTpastuta, Agni.

116 Agniyuta or Indra.

AgniyOpa.

117 Bhikshu. Liberality.

318 TJrukshoya, Agni RakshohA.

139 Lava. Indra as Lava,

120 Brihaddiva.. Indra.

321 Hiranyagarbha. Ka.

122 ChitramahA. Agni.

12.3 Vena. Vena.

124 Agni. Agni, Va- Agni, Indra.

runa, and Soma.

125 VAk. Vak.

126 Kulmalabarhi- Yisvedeyas,

sha, or Anho-
much.

127 Kusika or Ratri. Night,

328 Vihavya. Yisvedevas.

X29 PrajApati Para- Creation.

raeshthin.

130 YajJia,"

Metre,

Jagatt 32 Trishtup*
Trishtup. 4, 6 GAyatrt
5 Brihati 9, 32 Jagatt.
Trishtup, 1, 3, 12 Brihatt.
Trishtup. 13 Anushtup.

Trishtup.

URhnih. 2, 7 Pipilikamadh*
yA. II Trishtup.
Trishtup,

Trishtup* 4 Jagatt.
Trishtup.

Trishtup. 6, 7 Anushtup,
Trishtup.

The same.

Jagatt. 10 Trishtup.
Trishtup. 4 Jagatt.

Jagatt. 8 Trishtup,
SakvarL
Trishtup.

Trishtup, 1, 2 Jagatt,
GAyatrt.

The same.

Trishtup,

The same.

Jagatt. 1, 5 Trishtup.
Tmhtup.

Trishtup. 7 Jagatt,

Trishtup. 2 Jagatt.
UparishkAdbrihatt.

8 Trishtup*

GAyatrt

Trishtup, 9 Jagatt,
Trishtup.

The same.

Trishtup, I Jagatt.

e30'

INDEX OF HYMNS.

*>

S! Mshi.

<*i

131 Sukirti.

132 Sakapfita.

133 Sudds.

134 Mandhdfcar.

Godhd.

Deity.

Metre .

Indra. Asvins.

Heaven and Earth, Asvins.
Mitra and Varuya.

Indra.

The same.

Trishtup. 4 Anushtup,

1 Nyankusdrini. 2, 6 Pras-
tdra pankti. 3-5 Virddru-
pa. 7 Mahdsatob rihati .
1-3 Sakvari. 4-6 Mahapank-
ti. 7 Trishtup.
Mahdpankti. 7 Pankti.

135 Kumdra. Yama.

136 Seven Munis : The Kesins,

Juti. Yataj«ti.
Viprajuti.Yri-
shdnaka.Etasa.

Risyasringa.

137 The Seven

Rishis.

138 Anga.

139 Visvdvasu;

140 Agni Pdvaka.

Yisvedevas.

Indra.

Sdrya. Yisvdvasu,
Agni.

141 Agni Tdpasa. Yisvedevas.

142 Jaritar. Drona. Agni.

Sarisrikva.

Stambamitra.

Anushtup.
The same.

Anushtup.

Jagati.

Trishtup.

1 Visbtdra pankti. 2-4 Sa-
tobriiiati. 5 Uparishtdj-
jyotis. 6 Trishtup.
Anushtup.

Trishtup. 1, 2 Jagatl. 7, 8
Anushtup.

143 Atri. Asvins.

144 Suparya, tfrdh- Indra.

vakrisana.

145 Indrdnt. Removal of Rival.

146 Devamuni. Aranyani.

147 Suvedas. Indra.

148 Prithu Vainya. The same.

149 Arehan. Savitar.

150 Mrilika. Agni.

151 Sraddha. Sraddhd (Faith).

152 Sdsa. Indra.

153 Indra’s Mothers. The same.

154 Yarn! New Life. ,

155 Sirimbitha. Averting of Misfortune.
Brahmanaspati. Yisve-
devas.

Agni.

Anushtup.

1, 3, 4 Gdyatri. 2 B rihati.
5 Satobrihati. 6 Vishttra-
pankti.

Anushtup, 6 Pankti.

Anushtup.

Jagati. 5 Trishtup.

Trishtup.

The same.

1-3 Brihati. 4 Uparishtdj-
jyotis or Jagati. 5 Upa-
rishtdjjyotis,

Anushtup.

The same.

Gdyatri.

Anushtup.

The same.

156 Ketu.

Gdyatri,

INDEX OF HYMNS,

631

1

jRishi.

Deity,

Metre.

157

Bhuvana, or
S&dhana.

Visvedevas.

Dvipudfl Trishtup.

158

Chakshus.

Surya.

Gayatri..

159

Sach! Paulomi.

Sachi Paulomi.

Auushtup.

160

Parana.

Indra.

Trishtup.

161

Yakshmandsana. Removal of Phthisis.

Trishtup. 5 Anushtup.

162

Rakshoh&.

Against Miscarriage.

Anush tup.

163

Vivrihd.

Removal of Phthisis.

The same.

164

Prachetas.

Dissipation of Bad Dreams.

1, 2, 4 Auushtup. 3 Trish-
tup. 5 Pankti.

165

Kapota.

Visvedevas.

TriahuQ).

166

Rishabha.

Removal of Rivals.

Anushtup, 5 Mahipankti.

167

Visv&mitra and Indra.

Jamadagni.

J agat i.

168

Anila.

VJyu.

Trishtup,

169

Sahara.

Cows.

The same.

170

Vibhntj.

Surya.

Jagati. 4 AaUrapankti.

171

Ita.

Indra.

G&yatrt.

172

Samvarta.

Us has.

Dvipadd Viraj.

173

Dhruva.

The King.

Anushtup,

174

Abhivarta.

The same.

The same.

175

CTrdhvagravan.

Tile Press-stones.

Gayatri.

176

Sunu.

Ribhua. Agni.

Auushtup. 2 Gityatri.

177

t Patanga,

Mtiyabheda.

1 Jagati. 2, 3 Trishtup,

178

Arisbtanemi.

T&rkehya.

Trishtup.

179

Sibi. Pratarda- Indra.
na. Vasuuiauas.

1 Anushtup. 2, 3 Trishtup,

180

Jay a.

The same.

Trishtup.

181

Prat-ha. Sapra-
tha. Gharwa.

Visvedevas.

The same.

182

Tap arm a rd ban. Brihaspati.

183

Praj4vtin.

The Sacriticer. His Wife.
The Hotar.

184

Tvashtar or
Vishnu.

Benediction of the Embryo.

Auushtup.

185

Satyadhriti.

Aditi.

Giyatri.

186

UJa.

Vayu.

The same.

187

Vatsa.

Agni.

188

Syena.

Agni J&tavedas.

189

S&rpar&jfti.

Siirpariijhi, or Surya.

190

Aghamarahana.

Cieation.

Anuslitup.

191

Samvanana.

Agni, Unanimity.

Auushtup. 3 Trishtup.

GENERAL INDEX ’OF HYMNS.
ACCORDING TO DEITIES AND SUBJECTS *
DEITIES OF DAWN. COSMIC DEITIES.

Ribhus. — I. 20. 110. 111. III. 60. lY
* 33-37. VII. 48.

Ilshat, Dawn, Morning. — I. 48. 49. 92.
113. 123. 124. TIL 61. IV. 51. 52. V,
79. 80, VI 64. 65. VII. 75-81. X. 17*2.
The Asvins, — I. 34.46. 47. 112. 116-
120. 157, 158. 280-184. 11.39. Ill, 58.
IV. 43-45. V. 73-77. VI. 62. 63. VII.
67-74. VIII. 5. 8-10. 22. 26. 35. 6*2.
74. 76. Vftlakhilva Hymns, at the
end of VIII. 9. X. 39-41. 106. 143.
Dadkikr&van, Dadhikrfts. — IV, 38-40,
VII. 44.

Agni as a God of Morning. — IV. 13.14.

VARUNA AND SUN-GODS.
Varuna, — I. 24. 25. II. 28. V. 85. VII.

86. 89. VIII. 41. 42.

Mitra.-III. 59. VII. 41.

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman. — I. 41.
Mitra and Varuna. — I. 136. 137. 151-
153. V. 62-72. VI. 67. VI L 60-66.
VIII. 25. X. 132. 185.

Adityas. — II. 27. VII. 51. 52. VIII.
18. 47. 56,

Sfirya.—I. 50. 115. X. 37. 158,
Savitar.— I. 35. II. 38. IV. 53. 54. V. 81.

82. VI. 71. VII. 38. 45. X. 139. 149.
Pftshan. — I. 42. 138. VI. 53-56. 58.
X 26.

Vishnu.— I. 154456. VII. 99. 100.
Visvakarman.— X. 81. 82.

Wua.— X. 123.

Vibhrftj.~X. 170.

T&rkshya.-- - X. 178,

Sfl.rjparS.jfi.il or SOrya — X. 189.

Heaven and Earth. — T. 159. 160, 185
IV. 56. VI. 70. VII. 58.

Prithivi. — V, 84, *

Saras vati. — VI, 61. VII. 95-96.
Waters.— VII. 47. 49. X. 9. Waters,
or Cows. — X. 19-<

Son of Waters, Ap&mnap&t. — II. 35,
Soma. — I. 91. VIII. 48. 68. X. 25.

COLLECTIVE AND MISCELLA-
NEOUS DEITIES.
Visvedevas, All-Gods.— I. 14. 89, 90,
106. 107. 122. 139. 186. II. 29. 31.
III. 54-57. IV. 55. V. 41-51. VI.
49-52. VII. 34. 36. 37. 39. 40. 42.
43. VIII. 27-30. 72. X. 31. 35. 36,
63-66. 92. 93, 100.

Asvins, Savifcar, Agni, Heaven and
Earth, Vishnu.— I. 22.

V&yu, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Visve-
devas, Fdshan, Waters, Agni. — I. 23.
Heaven and Earth, Indra, Tvashtar,
R&k&, Siulv&li — II. 32.

Indra, V&yu r Mitra, Varuna, Asvins,
Visvedevas, Sarasvatt, Dyatis, Pri-
thivi.-II, 41.

Indra, Varuna, Brihaspati, Push an,
Savitar, Soma. Mitra, Varuna, — III.
62.

Mitra, Varuna, Adityas, Asvins, Vflyu ?
Sfirya, Pavum&na, the Cow. — VIII.

90!

* I follow the classification and arrangement adopted by Professor Lud-
wig in his Translation. The names of many of the deities are repeated in
other Sections in accordance with the subjects of the hymns addressed to
them. For instance, the great deeds of Indra are related in hymns placed ia
thfe Cosmogonies! and Mythical Section.

m

GENERAL INDEX OF HYMNS.

AON I (JATAVEDAS AND
VAISVANARA).

I, 1. 12. 26. 27 / 31 . 36. 44. 45. 58-60.
65-79. 94-99. 127. 128. 140. 141.
143-150. 189. II. 1. 2. 4-10. III. 1-
3. 5-7. 9-11. 13-28. IV. 1-12. 15.
V. 1-4. 6-11. 13-28. VI. 1-16. 48.
VII, 1. 3. 4-17. VIII. 11. 19. 23.
39, 43. 44. 49. 60. 61. 63. 64. 73.
91. 92. X. 1-8. 11, 12. 20. 21. 45.
46. 79. 80. 87. 88. 91. 115. 118, 122.
140. 142. 150. 156. 176. 187. 188.

INDRA (SATA&RATU, SAKRA,
MANYU.)

X. 4-11. 16. 30. 54-57. 61-63. 80-84.

100-104. 121. 129-133. 135. 169.

. 373-178. II. 11-22. 30. III. 30-32.
34-52. IV, 16. 17. 19. 25. 29. 31.
32. 46. V. 29-39. VI. 17-26. 28-47.
VII. 19-32. VIII, 1-4. 6, 12-17. 21.
24. 32-34. 36. 37. 45. 46. 50-55. 57.
59.65-67. 69,71.77-79. 81. 82.84-

88. V&lakhilya, 1-6. X. 22-24. 29.
32, 42-44. 47. 50. 54. 55. 73. 74.

89. 96. 104. 105. 112.113.116. 120.
131. 133. 134. 138. 144. 147. 148.
152. 153. 160. 171-179. 180. Mauyu.
X, 83. 84.

GODS OF STORM, WIND,
AND RAIN.

Maruts.— I, 37-39. 64. 85-88. 166-168.
171.11 34. V. 52-60. 87. VI. 66. VII.
56-59. VIII. 7. 20. 83. X. 77. 78.
Rudra,— I, 43. 114. II. 33. VII. 46.
V&yu. — L 2. 134. IV. 47. 48. VII.

90-92. X. 168. 186.

Parjanya.— V. S3. VII, 101, 102.

LORD OF PRAYER.
Brahmanaspati or Brill aspati. — I. 18.
40. 190. IL 23-26. IV. 50. VI. 73.
VII. 97. 98. X. 182.

Xndra and Bralimanaspati, — IV. 49.

DUAL DEITIES.

Indra-Varuna.— I. 17. IV. 41 . VI. gg,
VII. 82. 84. 85. V&lakhilya, 11 .

Indra-Pushan.—VI. 57.

Indra-Vishnu, — VI. 69.

Inclra-Agni — I. 21. 108. 109, III. 12.
V, 86 . VI. 59. 60. VII. 93. 94. VIII
88 . 40.

Agni-Maruts.— I. 19.

Indra- Soma. — V 1 . 72 . VII. 104.

Agni-Soma. — I. 93,

Soma-Rudra,— VI. 74.

Soma-Pushan. — II. 40.

LITURGICAL HYMNS. PRAYERS.

CHARMS.

Visvedevas — X. 114. Sacred Metres*
— X. 130. Praise of the Angira-
ses. — X. 62. The Sacrificer and his
Wife.— VIII. 31. The Sacrificer,
Wife, and Hotar.— X. 183. Faith. —
X. 151. Visvedevas. — X. 157. State
of the Dead. — X. 154. DakshinjL
(Priests’ Guerdon). — X. 107. llitvi-
3 as (Priests).— Valakhilya, 10. X.
101. Apris.— I. 13. 142. 188. II. 3.
III. 4. V. 5. VII. 2. IX. 5. X. 70.
110. Production of Sacrificial Fire*
—HI. 29. Sacrificial Stake.— III.
8 . Pestle and Mortar. — I. 28. Press-
stones. — X. 76. 94. 175. HavirdhA
nas. — X. 13. Ritus (Seasons). — II,
36. 37. Soma PavamAna.— IX. 1-4.
6-114. Praise of the Horse.— I.

, 162. 163. Waters, or Son of Waters.
— X. 30. Saranyfi, Pfishan, Saras-
vati, Waters, Soma. — X. 17. SuryAs
Bridal. — X. 85, V&stoshpatx (Guar-
dian of the House). — VII. 54, 55.
Kshetrapati ( Lord of the Field )
andSitft (Furrow)! — IV. 57. Praise
of Food.— I. 187. Aranyfttu (God-
dess of the Forest). — X. 146. Night.
— X. 127. Averting Misfortune. —
X. 155. Benediction of the Embryo,

GENERAL INDEX OF HYMNS.

635

* •— X. 187. Against Miscarriage. —

X. 162. Asvins. — V. 78. Maruts. —
I. 172. Soma Pavam&na. — IX. 114.
Visvedevas, — X. 137. Cows. — X.
169. Water, Grass, Sfirya.— I. 191.
Indra.— VIII. 80. Mifcra, Varuna,
Agm, Visvedevas, Praise of Rivers.
— VII. 50. .Visvedevas.— X. 126.
Charm against Phthisis. — X. 161.
163. (Jharm against Evil Dreams. —
X. 164. Indra. — I, 29. The Bird
of Good Omen.— II. 42. 43. The
Bird of 111 Omen. — X. 165. Charm
against a rival Wife. — X. 145. JSaclii
Paulomi. — X. 159. Visvedevas. —
X. 128. 141. Removal of a Rival. —
X. 166. Benediction of the King. —
X. 173. 174. Unanimity. — X. 191.
Yama, the Fathers, the Dogs. — X.
14. The Fathers.— X. 15. Agni. —
X. 16. Mrityu, Dh&tar, Tvashtar,
the Pitrimedha, Praj&pati. — X. 18.
Visvedevas. — X. 56. Pavamana
Soma.— IX. 1-4. 6-114.

HYMNS RELATING TO COSMO-
GONY, MYTHS, HISTORY, AND
CIVILIZATION.

Creation of the World. — X. 129. 190.
Creation by Sacrifice of Purusha. —
X. 90. ; Ka. — X. 121. The Gods.—
X. 52. 72." Visvedevas. — L 105. 164.
181. M4y&bheda. — X. 177. Agni,
Sury a, Waters, the Cow, Ghrita. —
IV. 58. Rivalry of Indra and
Vanina.- IV. 42. X. 124. Indra’s
Birth. — IV. 18. Indra. Praise of
the Falcon. — IV. 26. Praise of the
Falcon. — IV. 27. Indra and Soma.
— IV. 28. Indra and Ushas. — IV.

30. Indra.— I. 32. 33. 51. 53. X. 27.
48. 49. 67. 68. 99. 102. 111. 119. 167.
Indra. Vasukra. — X. 28. Indra.
Maruts. Agastya. — X. 165, 170
Maruts. — V. 61. Indra. V£k. — VIII.
89. Agni. The Gods.— X. 51. Agni
Sauchtka. The Gods. — X. 53. Indra.
Surya. Atri. — V. 40, Vrish&kapi.
Indnini. Indra. — X. 86. Urvasi.
Puriiravas. — X. 95. Saraml Panis.
— X 108. Visvedevas. — X. 57. Re-
call of the Spirit. — X. 58. Nirriti.
Soma. Asuniti. Earth. Heaven an d
Earth. — X. 59> Asam&ti. Indra*
Subandhu’s Recall to Life. The
Hands.— X. 60. Vak Ambhrinf.— X.
125. Jh&nam — X. 71. Yama.— X,
135. Praise of the Rivers. — X. 75,
Vasishtha and the Rivers. — III. 33.
Indra and Parvata, Indra, Y'Xk Sa-
sarpad. Praise of the Chariot. —
III. 53. Indra, Ch&yam&na’s Muni-
ficence. — V. 27. Indra. Sud&s’s
Munificence. — VII. 18. Vasishtlia’s
Sons. Vasishtha. — VII. 33. Indra
and Varuna. 5 — VII. 83. Dadhikr&van.
— IV. 38. Agni. — V, 12. Savanaya’s
Munificence.— I. 125. Bk&vayavya
and Romasd. — I. 126. Lop&mudr&
and Agastya. — 1. 179. Asvins. — VIII.
75. Agni.— X. 69. The Gods.— X.
98. Visvedevas. Kurusravana’s Mu-
nificence. — X. 33. Praskanva’s Muni-
ficence. — V&lakhilya. 7. 8. Kesins.
— X. 136. Visvedevas.— X. 109.
The Frogs.— VII, 103. Weapons of
War, — VI. 75. Indra.— X. 38. 103.
Soma Pavamana. — IX. 112. Medi-
cinal Herbs. — X. 97. The Dice. —
X, 34, Liberality.— X 117.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Abhiflaya, a certain So-
ma ceremony, 136, 400
notes.

Abhivarta, a hymn or of-
fering for success, 603
note.

Abortion, charm against,
612, 613.

Acesines, Latin name of
the Asiknt, the river
Chen&b, 150, 490 note .

Adam and Eve, the In-
dian, 392 note.

Adhavantya, one of the
three large Soma re-
ceptacles, 108,124, 347,
370 notes.

Adhrigu, a Rishi or a
prince, 132, 153.

Adhvaryn(s) priest,
priests who perform
the practical work of
sacrifice, 3, 97, 171,
219, 277, 278, 302, 350,
355, 362, 384, 405,406,
414, 423-425, 440, 454,
486, 521.

Adi-Purusha, the Prime-
val Presiding Male or
Embodied Spirit, 518,
576 notes .

Aditi, Infinity, Infinite

486, 487, 493,512,514,
523, 538,510, 541,554,
579, 607.

Aditi = Agni, 145.

= the Earth, 288.

~ the Cosmic Cow,

357.

Aditya, son of Aditi, es-
pecially Variina and
the Sun, 4, 81, 219,253,
263, 326,330, 405, 418,
453, 460, 478, 483,487,
514, 565, 581.

Adityas, Gods, seven or
eight in number, 12,
35, 39, 40, 48, 52, 60,
64,81,83,130,142-144,
147, 164,165,168,1 75,
176, 193, 196,197,210,
211, 230, 253, 306, 332,
432, 433, 450, 458, 470-
472, 474-477, 487, 501,
535,545, 571,573, 575,
586, 592, 595.

the eight names of,

487.

Adoption of children, 6.

Agastya, a great Yedic
Rishi, 36, 118, 464.

Agh& days, wheu the
moon is in the constel-
lation MagbA, 502.

182, 185-189, 199-202,
217-220, 222-224, 231,
250, 254-257, 266, 267.
272, 273, 309, 319, 322,
323,331,349,35 5, 383-
391, 394,395,397, 401-
404,408-410, 419,422,
425-427, 432, 434, 415-
448, 453-456, 460, 464,
467-469, 471*475,477,
478, 481-484, 492, 494-
496,502,505, 506,510-
514,519-522,536, 539,
540, 549, 552-554, 557,
559, 560-564, 566-568,
570,571,573,574, 577,
582, 585-587, 592, 595-
598,600, 602-604,606-
609, 611, 612.

Agni, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, 8 ; Lord of
Light, 144, 189 ; iden-
tified with the Sun,
9, 187, 386, 426, 467,
513, 514; the Moon at
night, 513 ; identified
■with Yaruna, 390; with
Yaruna andMibra, 13 ;
created by the Gods,
513,514; Son of Dyaus,
445, 446 ; son of Dawn,
558 ; of Earth, 385 ;

Nature, the Mother of Agni, God of Fire and
the Gods, 4, 12, 15, 22, Light, 1-16, 20, 30,
35, 37-40, 43-48, 51,

39, 43-45,52, 60, 65,
79, 80, 83-85, 89, 134,
143, 160, 164, 190, 197,
198, 2X0, 253, 254, 288,
315, 328, 332, 338, 357,
364, 387, 394, 397,418,
433, 467, 470-476, 483,

52, 56, 58, 61, 65, 72,
75, 76, 84, 88, 89, 94,
96, 99, 100, 125, 126,
131-133, 143-147, 154-
156, 161, 163, 164, 166,
168, 169, 174, 175,179-

of Heaven and Earth,
9, 383, 390, 395, 447,
585 ; of Heaven and
Earth, Waters, Tvash-
tar, Brigus, 447 ; com-
prising other Gods,
396 ; produced by at-
trition, 1, 201, 386,
389, 495, 559 ; man’s

638

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC*

father & brother, 389; Agni, a religious cere- Ajas, a non-Aryan tribe,

head and height of mony, 558. 20. \

heaven, 188; born from Agniriiv&ttas, a class of Akhaudala, Destroyer, a
the mouth of Purusha, Manes, 401 note, name of Indra, 142.

519; spiritual husband Agrayana, a certain Soma Aksha, said to be a man’s
of maidens, 506 ; con- libation, 330 note. name, 195 note.

seerator of marriage, Agriculture, 519 ; thebe- Aksharfi, Speech, Vdk,
506 ; giver of children ginning of, 421 note ; 14,41.

495 ; invoked in battle, ploughing, 150, 353, AUyya, perhaps a name
132, 222, 224, 482, 496 ; 543, 563 ; sowing, 527 ; of Indra, 323.

jungle-clearing fire, reaping, 152, 577 jsickle, All-God, Indra, 248 ;'

218, 586, 608 ; slayer 227; threshing, 450; Yama 400 note,

of fiends, 510-612 ; winnowing, 419, 480; All-Gods, 51, 52, 410, 571.

punisher of sin, 3 ; barley, grain, 480, 577. See Visvedevas.
ripener of plants, 513; Ahavaniya, one of the Ainrit, Amrita, nectar
his installation as three sacrificial fire3, ambrosia, rain, milk,

Priest of Gods, 454,* 186, 386 notes, 6, 57, 207, 253, 263,

455 ; his flight from Ahi, the Dragon or Ser- 271, 326, 327, 332, 376,
his duties, 446, 453, pent-demon who with- 379, 395, 425, 457, 568,

454; Priest, Messen- holds the rain, 113, 585,607.

ger, oblation-bearer, 239, 240, 245, 449, 472, Anava, Anavas, descen-
146, 447, 483 ; his 479, 555. dants of the epony-

divine functions, 146, Ahibudhnya, the Dragon mous chief Anu.

512; his three births, of the Deep, regent of Ancestral spirits, 74. Sec

445 ; three forms, 513, of the sea of air, 37, fathers.

549 ; three homes, 467; 39, 43, 472, 4/7, 523. Anghdri, one of the guar-

three powers, 445 ; Ahtsuva, a demon of the diansof Soma, 501 note.
three stations,. 445. air, 169, 171, 225, 588. Angiras, a semi-divine
Agnidh, kindler, priest Ahnavfiyya, said to be a patriarchal Rishi ; also
who kindles, the sa- man’s name, 191 note. a name of Agni, 135,

crificial fire, 384, 440, Ahura, Zend form of 174, 186-188, 200, 222,

521. Asura, High God, 366 223, 231, 255, 373, 398,

Agnihotra, daily oblation note. » 448, 469, 478, 480, 498,

to Agni and Gods, 455 Aila, Pururavas son of 524.
note . Ill 530 note. Angirases, descendants

Agnim&ruta, a ceremony Aindravdyava, a libation of Angiras, 46, 48, 52,

in which Agni is wor- to Indra and Vdyu, 73,76, 86, 121, 138,

shipped first and then 106 note, 167, 176, 183, 205, 235

the Maruts, 126 note. Aifcareya-Brdhmana, 186, 309, 344, 376, 379, 398,

Agni-pranayana, ceremo- 242, 434, 467, 577, 604. 399, 419, 460, 466, 469

ny of carrying fire to Aja,, the Unborn, the 478, 484, 489, 494, 551,

the altar, 604 note. Birthless, 498, 554, 583, 591, 598, 601.

Agnis, Agni in various Aja-Ekapdd, the Unborn Angirasa, a descendant
forms, 166, 337. One-footed, the Sun, of, or belonging to, the

Igmshtoma, Praise of 39, 472, 476, 477, 562. Angirases, 591, 598.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

639

Animals, tame and wild, orifice, 658. Arjtkas, name of a people,

horse, bull, cow, passhn; Apnavftna, an ancient 317.
go'a^t, 19, 321,402, 416 ; Rishi, 254. Arjlkiya, « Arjika, 207,

ass, 232, 266 ; dog, 53, Apr!, Aprfs, a class of 490.

54, 101, 265, 368 ; lion propitiatory hymns, 3, Arjuna ? aman’sname,2L

19, 361, 421, 422, 479 ; 272, 483, 553. Arjuneya, Kufcsa descent

elephant, 172, 190,304; Apsaras, a celestial dant of Arjtma, 21,
buffalo, 119, 123, 176, nymph, 394, 528, 569. 104.

292 ; Gaura, 114, 191, the, the chief, Ur- Arjunls, two lunar man-

573 ; antelope, 114 ; vast, 35, 36, 412. sions, 502.

deer, 107, 291 ; ape, Apsarases, 335, 528, 529, Arka, the Sun, 549.

507 ; wild-boar, 226, 5S2. Arksha, patronymic, son

421, 479; wolf, 174, names of six, 528. of Rtksha, 213.

209, 211,261,530,573; Aptya, Apfcyas, dwelling Armaiti, in the Avesta —
jackal, 421 ; hyena, in water, a class of earth, 522 note.

487; fox, 421 ; serpent, deities, 134, 197, 198, Armour

99, 471 ; emmet, 403 ; 390, 565.

vulture, 101, 355, 569 ; Apva, colic personified,
owl, 100, 101; swan, 545.

176, 291 ; dove, 598, Arachosia, 175 note.

599 ; cuckoo, 101 ; Aracju, a kind of tree,
b tarl i'ng, 176; king-fish- 195.

er, 534 ; blue jay, 534. Arad va, said to be a man’s

31, 119, 197,
343, 365, 368, 376, 494,
541.

Arrian, 148.

A rrow, the stroke of dis-
ease or death, 71, 143.

the thunderbolt,

226.

Ansa, one of the Adityas, name, 195 note. Arshtishena, son of Kish-

382, 487 notes. Aramati, the Goddess of tishena, 536.

Ahsu, a protege of the Devotion, 38, 41, 46, Artificer of Gods ; sree
Asvins, 118. 68, 474, 522. Tvashtar,

Ansumatl, a mystical =» Earth, 522. Arushah, the Red, Agm

river of air, 246, 468. Aranis, fire-sticks, 186, or the thunderbolt,
Anu, the eponymns of 426 notes. 443 note.

an Aryan tribe, 19, Arany&ni, Goddess of the Arushas,' Agni r s horses,
113, 181. Wood, 589, 590. 46 note.

Auumati, Divine Favour Araru, name of a fiend, Arya, Aryan, Aryas, 8,
personified, 599, 600; 538. 18,72, 79,91,144,153,

a Lunar Goddess, 332. Ar&yi, a witch or she- 159, 256, 262, 352, 395,
Annshtup, a Vedic and fiend, 594.
classical metre, 53, 571, Arbuda, name of a de-
$77. mon, 113, 169,171,479,

436, 442, 451, 464, 473,
475,482, 499, 509, 539,-
584 ,_5 92. ^

«40

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

349, 377, 332, 425, 433, Asvailyana, a ' famous 507, 519, 520, 562, 535,

440, 467, 473, 474, 430, writer on ritual, 384, 583, 587, 394, 598, 509,

487, 503, 505, 506, 516, 407 notes. 613.

523, 524, 572,573,586, Asvamedha, Horse-s&cri- Atir&tra, a certain Soma

606. fine, 595 note. ceremony, 97.

Asam&ti, said to be the Asvamedha, a man’s Atithigu, said to be a
name of a king, 463, name, 212, 213. man’s name, 450 note.

464 notes. Asvamedha, son of Asva- Atithigva, a name of Di-

Asanga, the name of a medha* 213. vod&sa, 22, 212, 213,

chieftain, 106,107,173. Asvattha, a sacred tree, 203,450.

Asikni, the river CheiAb, 426, 453, 533. Atithyeshti, a certain re-

Asvins, the Horsemen, ligious ceremony, 186

Twin heralds of Dawn, note.

11, 39, 45, 48, 52, 67- Atka, a man’s name, 451,
73, 136-119, 126-131, 538.

143, 144, 146, 152-154, Atmospheres, three, 498.
160-164, 367, 175-177, Atri, an ancient Rishi,
185, 220,221,231-233, 68, 7l, 118, 177-379,

242, 261, 266, 267, 275, 220, 221, 352, 437, 496,
337, 349, 384, 404, 413, 498, 577, 587, 592.

415, 422, 426, 482, 436- Atris, 167, 178, 180.

440, 454, 463, 465, 466, Atyagnishtoma, a religi-
472, 476, 477, 496, 502, ous ceremony, the se-
504, 523-525, 548, 549, cond part of the Jyo-
573, 575, 578, 587, 613. tishtoma, 558 note.

— their Consort, 69, Aufrecht, Prof. Thu, 54,
438 ; their character, 205, 237, 485.

437 ; their miracles, Aul&na, son of Ula, 536.
220, 221, 437-439 ; Aurnav&bha, son of £fr-

physicianB, 129, 143, pav&bha, a demon of

232, 437 ; first teachers drought, 17 1, 225.

of agriculture, 153 ; Aurva, an ancient Rishi,
their chariot, 67-69, 254.

71, 118, 352, 153, 220, Ausija, KakshMn son of
232, 267, 436, 438, 440, Usij, 538.

662. Autocrat, Vanina, 78.

Asvya, a family name, Autumn, 518.

150, 490.

Asmanvatl, Stony, the
name of a stream, 456.
Ass, the steed of the As-
♦ vine, 232.

Asses, presented to
priests, 266.

Asterism(s), 318, 458,
473, 524 notes .
A&trabudhna, a man’s
name, 602 note .
Astrabudhna, son of As-
trabudhna, 602.

Asunlti, Spirit-worJd ;
deity of funerals, 402, -
462, 463.

Asura, High Cod, 3, 8, 30,
36, 146, 149, 184, 236,
330, 366, 392,39 5, 426,
457, 460, 478, 522, 523,
532,537, 538,578, 604.

— — - lord, king, 525 note .
Asuras, 5, 8, 498, 570,
592.

Asura, a demon, 216, 456,
578,584.

4Q? 6^> 160, 245, 195, 196, Autumns, 42, 61. $

' A vahhr itha. a bath fo

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

641

Ay&sya, a Kishi's name, Name, 463, Bradke, P. von, 64.

278 note, 478. BhaMnas, a non- Aryan Brahma, 391, 564 notes.

Ayu, a Proper Name ; tribe, 18. BrahmS, 466, 552, 556,

man; living being, 86, Bharadv&ja, agreatRishi, 566 notes.

339,262, 263, 404, 451. 352, 577, 592, 606. BrahmaeMrt, a religious

Bharata, Warrior; a name, student, 552,

Babb, the, Agni, 468. See 10. Brahman, 9, 25, 125, 3 40,

Infant. Bharatas, 10, 35. " 167, 173, 207, 239,355,

Babhru, a king or a Rishi, Bh&ratl, a Goddess of 380, 3:i4, 422, 454,469,
153. * Speech, 4, 273, 463, 486, 492, 505, 515, 521,

Balbaja, a kind of coarse 484, 553. 549, 552, 556, 558, 562,

grass, 265, Bheda, a non-Aryan king, 572, 586,

Balbfttha, a non- Aryan 20, 80. Brahmans, 46, 65, 170,

chief, 196. Bhr&ja, a guard of Soma, 225, 245, 448, 485,

Bandhu, a Rishi, 464. 501 note. 501,503.

Barber, 115, 586. Bhrigu, an ancient Rishi, Bi&hman, 98, 244, 267,

B&rhatas, guards of Soma, 112, 186, 254, 482. 519, 535, 536.

501 note. Bhrigus, 17, 112, 121, 175, Br&hmans, 96, 97, 191,

Barhis, altar or seat of 254, 369, 399, 419, 438, 391, 403, 485.

sacred grass, 323 note. 446, 447, 523, 568. Brahma naspati, Lord of
Barley, 5, 107, 227, 237, Bhujyu, a proUgt of the Prayer, 45, 48, 91, 92,
417, 577. Asvins, 68, 70, 113, 163, 338, 456, 474,

Battle, 436, 465. 117, 171, 192, 223, 250 486, 594, 598, 602,603.

Beard, 171, 536; of Indra, 437, 439, 476, 587. Bridal, of Sdryfc, 501,502.

412, 413, 532. Bhut^nsa, a Rishi, 549. ceremonies, 503-506.

Bee, 439, 548. Bird, Soma, 341, 357 ; — Bride, benediction on a,

®enfey, Prof., 19, 277, the, the Sun, 386, 459, 506.

278, 288, 301, 366, 393. 547, 557, 569, 604, 608; Bridge, 296.

Bergaigne, Prof. A., 95, the Moon, 338. Brihaddiva, a Rishi, 565*

98, 205, 287, 292, 314, Birds, Agni and Soma, 358, BrihaddivA, a * Goddess

331, 338, 367, 890, 400, See Animals. connected with I]& and

457,462, 487, 507, 509, Black Drop, the darken- Saraavati, 473.

514, 563, 571, 600. ed Moon, 246. Brihadratha, name of a

Bhaga, an Aditya, God of Black skin, aborigines, 296. chief, 45 1 ,

Good Fortune, 14, 15, Bloomfield, Prof. M„ 404. Brihaduktha, a Rishi,

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

■ ■ 642

552,575,577,586,597, Varuna, 62 ; strong he- Children, prayer lor;

, 600, 602, 606. roes, 263. see Prayer.

Brihaspati = the Cloud- Burial of ashes of the the gift of Agni, 2,

God, 481. dead, 407. 496 : of the Aavins,

Brihat, great, important Burnouf, Prof. E, 520, 67 ; of the Maruta, 56;

‘ S&man, 606. 575. of Tvaahtar, 38.

Brihat- S&man, 235. Chitra, a liberal prfnc

Brihatt, a Yedic metre, Calf, Agni, 219,389, 418. 152.

263, 501, 577. Camels, 119, 123, 195, Chumuri, a fiend or mv*

Buffalo « Cloud, 215, 196. age, 21, 557.

Buffaloes, 119, 123, 176, Car = hymn or sacrifice, Cliyavana, a son of Bh^i-
292, 64, 310, 558, gu, 482.

— = Clouds, 135, 226. Carpenter, 223, 380, 525, Chyav&na, a prot&gi of
Bull, strong, mighty one, 563. the Asvins, 68, 71, 437,

hero, Agni, 5, 7, 15 5, Cask = cloud, 332, 465, 406.

219, 385-387, 389, 410, Castes, the four, 519. Circumambulation. 412,
567, 607, 608. Castles, 19, 21, 23, 28, 94, Clay, house of = grave, 85,

* Indra, 22, 51, 122, 106, 249. Cleanser, Potar, one of

149, 172, 173, 207, 348, Cattle = rays of light, 40, the priests, 15,384,521,
372, 375,378,418,421, 74, 76, 86, 110, 246, Clouds « trees, 488.

436, 441, 443, 450, 523, 361, 478, 656. Colebrooke, 891, 507,518,

536, 543, 545, 554, 560, Cattle-raiders, 264. 520, 572, 576, 577.

575, 593. Cattle-stealing, 223. Coleridge, 308.

— Parjanya, 40, 95, 96. Centre of earth, the altar, Consorts of the Gods,

. — Bain-cloud, 125,477. 342. 116, 593.

— Brihaspati, 523. Chaidya, son of Chedi, 119, Constellations, 501.

Soma, 206, 270, 272- Chambers's Encyclopus- Consumption, 505, 597,

274, 281, 284, 288, 289, dia, 531. 613.

294, 302, 312, 313, 316, CbandrabMgst, the river Corpus, Poeticum Bore-
325, 327, 329, 330, 332, Clien&b, 490 note, ale, 519,

337-339, 341, 343,346- Chanter, Udgdtar, one of Courser, the Sun, Hea-
348, 350, 353-355, 357, the priests, 486 note. ven, 75, 488, 586.

369, 362, 369, 376, 394, Charanyu, name of an Soma, 276, 340, 350,

603. Apsaras, 528, 361.

the Sun, 58, 84, 267, Chariot » sacrifice, 558. Coursers of the Gods, 473.

470, 608. Chariot-race, 228, 303, Cow, the Cosmic, 357 *

351, 360. ty,M.Qf A diti j ar- 1£b t —

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

m

offended, 253 ; type 362 ; Maruts, 125, 243. D&nastuti, eulogy of a
of? munificence, 207 ; Creation myth, Scandi- prince’s liberality, 20 ;
the priest’s guerdon, navian, 619 ; creation see Liberality to priests.

328 ; = cloud, 446. connected with sacri- Dancer (in war), Indra,

Cows, subject of hymns, fice, 613, 576. 157, 212, 237*

408, 600 ; — Heaven & Creator, the, Soma, 362; Dancers, the Maruts, 150.'
Earth, 327; Waters of Visvakarman, 497,498; Dancing, 406, 422, 486,
heaven, 348 ; rays of Dyaus, 149; Praj£pati, 487, 526, 527.

light, 376, 480, 550, 566,567, 576 ; Tvash- D£nus, a class of fiends,

551, 603 ; the Maruts, tar, 392 ; Dh&tar, 596, 565, 594.

124, 150 ; streams of 609. Derbha grass, 424 note.

rain, 192 ; hymns, 325 ; of Creators, Indra Dark One, the, Night, 7L

raw, ripe milk set in, or Savitar, 575. Dark ibices, 7.

171, 235 ; black andJCuckoo, 101. D&sa, hostile native, sa-

white, white milk set Cucumber, 59. vage, demon, 21, 79, 94,

in, 240. 169, 169, 182, 196, 216,

Cowell, Prof, E. B., 92, DabhIti, &protfy6 of In- 221,411,413,436, 461,
97, 148, 186, 192, 200, dra, 21, 557* 488, 499, 537, 564,

208, 212, 237, 241, Dadhigharma, an offering 584,590.

242, 245, 246, 249,251, of warm inspissated D&sas, 118, 147, 246,

253, 256, 259, 260,263, milk, 605 note. 262, 457,470, 432.

264, 266-268, 276, 279, Dadhikrfts, a famous ra- Dasagva, one of an anci-

285, 293, 294, 300, 305. cer or war-horse ; a ent priestlj family,

Creation, 37 5, 376, 591, personification of the* 132, 469.

609. ' Sun, 48, 540. Dasasipra, aProperName,

origin unknown, 57 6.

various accounts of,

ascribed to Indra, 111,
138,178, 235, 245,262,
263, 458 ; to Visva-
fcarman, 497, 498 ;

Agni, 513 ; Varuna,
183, 184 ; Hiranya-
garbba, 566 ; Brahma-
naspati, 486 ; the Un-
born, the Sun, 184 ;
the Asvins, 414 ; Tvash-
tar, 553, 392 ; Gods
raising the cosmic dust
by dancing, 486, 487 ;
Gods in general, 475.
477 ; the sacrifice of
Purusha, 519 ; Indra-
Varuna, 78 ; Vishnu,
94 ; SCuya, 601 ; Soma,

. Dadhikr&van = Dadhi*
kr&s, 46, 48,

Dadhyach, a son of
Atharvan, 376, 449,
450.

Daksha, Creative Power,
Strength, 65, 160, 206,
232, 382, 387, 394,
473, 486.

Daksbin&, priests’ guer-
don, 180, 544, 549.

Dame, wife of a God, 507*

Prism, 494.

the, Dawn, 385.

Dames of Trita ; see
Trita’s dames.

ten, the fingers of

the priest, 304.

Dames, Celestial, lunar
asterisms, 524,

262.

DaBavraja, a Proper Name,

: 128, 260, 261.

, Dasonya, a man’s name,
262.

Dasyave-vr/ka, Wolf-to-
the-Dssyu, name of a
man, 261, 265, 266.

Da?yu(s), savage foe(s),
demon (s), 8, 21, 120,
139, 153, 181,216, 225,
249, 261, 265,266, 296,
300, 352,411,448, 451,
459, 488, 499, 500, 529,
537, 538,547,548, 601.

Dasyu-slayer, the, Indra,
225.

Dawn, 11, 35, 45, 48, 71,
73-78, 81, 94, 101, 115,
116, 130,159,175-177,

644

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.

197,198,221,253,267, Destructive powers, 158. Disposer, the, 186, 498,
296, 329, 339, 385, 422, Deuteronomy, 438. 600.

481,438, 458,472,475, Devaka, a fiend or savage. Disposers, priests, 249.
494,501,515, 522, 540, 20 . Diti, the antithesis of

558, 573, 602, 608. Devdpi, a Kshatriya who Aditi, 15, 541.

Pawn and Night, 433, aotedasHotar, 535,536. Divod&sa, a liberal prince,
483. Devav&n, father or an- 20 , 21, 256, 306, 450.

Pawns, 11, 20, 46, 72, 76, cestor of Sudds, 20.

84, 86, 164, 185, 223, Devil, 435.

294, ,351, 380, 390, Devotion, 168 ; Genius
425,431,445,459,514, * of, 38, 46, 168, 474,

520, 521, 555,557.

- — husband of * the,

Dog, 101,368, 562; house-
dog, 54 ; boar-hound,
54 ; hound of Indra,
53 ; figurative, 100.
522 ; blessings of, 168, Pogs, of Yama, 53 , 399 .
169,205. given to priests, 265.

Agai or the Sun, 8 . Devout Bpirit awakes hum- Doors, divine, of sacrifi*
Pay and Night, 393, 491. ble offering acceptable, cial enclosure, 4,16,
Deasil, the Gaelic, 412. 25 5. 273, 483, 557.

Death, 42, 58, 99, 158, Dharma, duty personi- Dove, 598, 599.

*.406* 419, 462, 492, fied, 176. Dragon, the, great cloud-

578, 599. Dhdtar, Maker, Creator, serpent, 24, if 3, 240,

^—*^6 punishment of 338, 382, 406, 487,
ain, £ 3. 506, 606, 609, 613.

return to earthly Dhishand, a Goddess of

life aftet, v 581. prosperity, 86 , 432.

Deer, 107, 294. Dhishnydh (AgimyahJ,,

spotted, ol the Ma- sacrificial Fires, 377.

ruts, 125. Dhuni, a di^n, 21 , 557. Dragons, serpent-demons,

Demons, forms assumed Dhruva, a fecial 583, 585.

by, 100, 101. libation, 330 iiak. Dream, evil, 197, 198 ,

—imprecation on, 98- Dhvasra, the name of a 445, 598.

^ , king, 305, Dronakalasa,a large Soma

Demon-slayer^ the As- Diabolus, 435 note. reservoir, 108,124,277

vins, 72. \ Dice, 429-431; the stars? 278, 282, 285,293,’ 29 e!

419 ' 318, 314,319,329; 347,

of the, 381, 382, 418, Digvijaya, conquest of 370 notes.

' neighbouring count- Drop, the Moon, 246';

245, 449, 479, 555,557,
579.

— female, 588.

of the Deep, regent
pi air-sea, 37, 39, 472,
477, 523, 524.

-King of the, 381 ;\nes, 574 note. Soma, 405.

see Yama. Doctor, one of the Druh(s), spirit(s) of mis-

Deshtrt, Instructress, a prists, 355 , 521. chief, 59 , 450.

Dlseasdjthe Spirit of, 534. Druhyu (s) eponymus and
Diseases/ colic, 545 ; con- men Of a Vedic tribe
sumption, 583, 597, 17-19, 131.

^ ; ph- Duhsdsu, the name of a
thisis, 618 5 Simidd, prince, 428.

52 ; Sipada, 52. Duhsuna, name of an in*

Dispenser, Indra, 590. atitufcor of sacrifice, 525.

Goddess, 506.

Desire, 57 5 ; see K&ma.
Destroyer, the, Indra,
114; Death, 419 notes .
Destruction, 42, 58, 99,
158 , 393 , 407 , ;462, 492,
830, 597, 598.

INDEX. OF NAMES, ETC,

645

Durgaha, a chief, 208. Eggeling,Br. J., 213,578. Falcons, the Maruts, 523,
Burmitra, a Rishi, 548. Ehni, Dr. J., 394, 397, Falsehood, punishers of,
BOrva grass, 580, 587 . 400, 507. 60, 66, 81, 99.

Butt, R. Ch., 408, Eight sons of Aditi, 487. False-swearing, prayer

Buty, Right, Law, Virtue, Eight-footed metre, 225. for removal of sin of,
personified, 176. Ekadhan&h, waters in 391,

Bvita, Second, perhaps Soma ceremonies, 241, Famine, 143, 210, 442.

a form of Agni, 197. 326, 424 notes . Father, the, Heaven, 96,

Bw&das&ha, a twelve- Ekadhenus, sacrificial 514, 572, 584 ; Indra*

day sacrifice, 242 note. waters, 43. 343 ; Visvakaraan, 496 ;

Dyaus, Heaven, the an- Ekadyu, the name of a Yama, 581; Manu,205.

cient Aryan God — the Rishi, 229. Father, Agni, 456 ; In-

Greek Zeus, 44, 80,149, Elephant, 172, 190, 304, dra, 250 ; Fraj&pati,

168,174,175,385,390, 612. 384 f Soma or Agni,

426, 433, 444, 445, 451, Eros, K&ma, Desire, 575 330 ; Tvaslitar, 473;

466, 467, 469-471, 475, note. Ydyu, 607 ; the Yaja-

478, 479, 493, 522, 523, Etasa, the horse of the m&na, 384.

578, 584,592. Sun; a man’s name, Father and Mother, Heav-

Byu « Byaus, 44, 390 63, 66, 104, 122, 26.1, en and Earth, 331, 333,

notes . 311, 315, 375, 376. 457.

Etasas, 216, 434. Fathers, Manes, Spirits of

Eagle, 101, 422. Evil-eyed, 506. the Departed, 39, 74,

the Moon, 423; Existence, sprung from 83, 199, 339, 384,

Soma, 341 361; Savi- non-existence, 486. 387, 398-405, 407, 458-

tar’s =-T&rkshy a, 591. Expanses, the six, 400, 461, 469, 474,481,494,

Eagles, Celestial press- 574. 498, 514, 549, 576,' 577*

stones, 526 ; Soma- Eye, of the dead goes to 581, 594, 601.

drops, 341. the Sun, 402 ; of Va- —Moon and stars?

Ear-ornaments, 227. runa and Mitra, the 326 ; stars ? 481.

Earth, 38, 48, 164, 265, Sun, 63, 434 ; of the —three classes of,
363, 383,385,387,407, Gods, 75; of Order, dwelling in heaven,

426,433, 447,468,470, Agni, 390. firmament, lower fir-

471, 495, 522,578, 580, Eye, the, the Sun; the mament, 408 ; created

son of, man, 262. single, the Moon, 276. light, 74 ; produce the

— — sprung from Puru- fruitfulness of heaven

sha’s feet, 519. Faith, 269, 381, 592, and earth, 474 ; their

Earth and Heaven, 38, 593. home, 581.

47, 52, 56, 72, 83, 184, Falcon (s), 63, 149, 174, Fencing or enclosing

215,2.40, 250, 324,364, 220, 295, 304, 307, sticks round the sacri-

385, 426, 446, 497, 513. 309, 317, 328, 493,573. ficial fire, 520, 576.

Earths, 216. Falcon, Agni, 14 ; Soma, Fervour, religious au-

Eclipse, of Sun, 584, 321, 329, 355, sterity, penance, 594,

Edda, 172 note. bringerof the Soma, 599, 601, 606, 608.

Egg, the Mundane, 518 243, 251, 300, 324, Field, Lord or Protector

frote.

334, 344, 348, 395, 588. of the, 39, 478.

646

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

Fiends, prayer for des- Forest-Trees, 39, Grange, fche river Ganges,

truction of, 98401 ; Forests, Lord of, Yanas- 490.
forms assumed by, 100. pafei, the sacrificial Ganges, 159, 490.

See R&kshasas, Y&fcu- stake, 4. GarbMdh&ua, a ceremony

dhdnas. Fort-deafcroyer, Agni, 8, to facilitate and bless

Fig-tree, tbe Holy, see 447 ; Iudra, 103, 172, conception, 613 raote.

Asvattha. 190,202,203,263,555; Garuda, the name of a

Filter, for Soma juice, Soma, 300, 349. mythical bird, 591 note.

107,171,269,275,278, Forts, cloud castles of G£th&, non-Yedic song,
280, 285, 287, 289, fiends, 584 ; of abori- .501.
302,331,335,338,340, gines, 256 ; of iron, Gaura, Bos Gavaeus, 114,
342, 348, 362, 426. 251, 540. 191, 573.

. Fire, 322, 552. „ Fortune, 368. Gauri, 278, 572.

Fire-sticks, 5, 186,390, Four, the, Lunar Goddes- Gavisbthira, altishi, 592.
426. aes, 332. Gaya, a man’s name, 472,

Firmament, personified, Beauteous creatures, 474.

338 ; two divisions of 326 ; quarters of the Gdyatra, a hymn, 305,
the, 234 note. sky, 292 ; seas, 292, 486.

Fishi 481. 448. G&yatri, a Vedic metre,

Five races, tribes, 10, 14, Fox, 421. 53, 179, 305, 400, 577.

72, 73, 76, 129, 171, Friend, the, Mitra, 396 Geldner, Prof. K., 36,
205, 280, 317, 319, 352, note, 280, 436, 457, 509, 529,

368, 445, 456, 458, 563; Friendship, 485 ; Rishi's 531, 544.
tribes of heaven, 464 ; with Varuna, 84. Gharma, a warm libation,
rivers, floods, 159, Frog, an emblem of cool- 70,97, 219, 233, 235,
183 ; courses or divi- ness, 403. 606.

sions of sacrifice, 570 ; Frogs, 96-98, 599. Ghoshs, a woman's name,

companies, 280 ; ele- Fruit, 580, 588. 436, 439.

ments of sacrifice, 397 Funeral hymus, 398-407, Ghrita(m), clarified but-
note ; lands or settle- 459-461, 581, 593, 594. ter,* 3, 594, .

ments, 605 ; regions Funerals, deity of, 462 Gn&s, Consorts’ of Gods,
of the world, 345. note. 166.

Fivefold beings, 69 ; Funereal gift, 581. Goal, 293.

people, 72. Goat(s), 19, 321 ; at fu-

Flesh-eater, Agni, 403. Gaidicke, Prof., 3 18, 597, nerals, 402; team of

Floods, rivers, 168, 175, Gambler, 429-431, 441, Pushan, 321, 416.

405, 433, 473, 552 ; 442. God, One Supreme, 498,

waters of the air, 187, Gambling-house, 430. of Gods, 567 ; the

Floods’ (waters’ of air) Gamester, 430. Unknown, 566.

oflhpring, Agni, 50. Gandharva, 104,225,339, Goddess, 43, 74-76, 78,
Force, personified, 486. 341, 345,392, 496, 506, 91, 130, 143, 252, 253*

Forest-Lord, 265 jForest* 569, 573, 584, 585, 604. 305, 463, 540, 573, 580*,

Sovran, 38 ; Sovran of Gandharvas, 381, 456, 586, 588. .

the Forest, Soma, 541 ; 496, 505, 528, 582. Goddesses, 38, 43, 50, 51,

Forest-’Queen, 589, 590, Gandharvi, 394. 229, 240, 273, 276, 325,

INDEX OF NAMES, BTC.

647

1

365,391,405,473,474 f of Savifcar, 43; paths Guest of men, Agni, 5,

553,593. of the Asvins, 116,126; 10, 11, 47, 187, 222,

Goddesses, Three, 4, 484. reins of the Asvins, 257, 383, 520.

Gods, passim ; hymn to, 153 ; Hero, Agni, 11 ; Gumti, a river, 159 note .

486 ; all invoked, 470- ornaments of the Ma- Gungfi, a lunar Goddess,

478 ; primeval Aryan, ruts, 57 ; sword of Bri- 332.

592; number, 167,455; haspati, 92; thunder- Gungus, a non- Aryan
origin, 52, 92, 395, 397, bolt, 211, 531. people, 450.

470, 486 ; immortal, Goldstucker, Prof. Th.,

4, 7, 12, 63, 92, 472, 531. Haas, Prof., 507.

476-478, 482, 486, 522; Gomafci, the name of a Hair, braided, 34, 80, 321.

born immortal, 486 ; river, 159, 490. Hall, Dr. F., 407.

made immortal by Good Works, 399. Hammgr = lightning, 21 9.

Agni, 13 ; by Soma, Gopavana, a Risbi, 222. Hands, joined in rnarri-

372,376,457; by their Gosarya, a protigi of the age, 407, 505.

merits, 471 ; produced Asvins, 128, 260, 261. healing by touch of,

after the world, 576 ; Gotama, an ancient Rishi, 465, 583.
earlier, 24 ; General, 352, 579. Hansa, the Sun, 571 note.

322; of heaven, waters, Gr&hi, Grasper, a deadly Haray&na, a chief, 161.
earth, 39, 475 ; omni- female fiend, 597 note. Hants, horses of Agni,
potent, 166 ; reward Granthinl, the name of 46 ; of the Sun, 66,
the pious, 165 ; punish an Apsaras, 528. 253,312; of Soma, 346.

sin, 516 ; punish the Grass, Sacred, 3, 16, 18, Harivahsa, 98.
undevout, 32, 109, 169, 34,39, 44, 47, 57, 74, Havirdh&nas, Soma carta.

464; Priests of the, 117,125,137,139,142, 397, 398 notes.

384; Queen of the, 251. 191, 205, 215, 233, 247, Haviryajfta, oblation of

Gods = priests, 3, 310,568. 273,303,305,348, 400, clarified butter, 570

Gold, 5, 30, 65, 166, 168, 483, 553. note.

170, 172,196, 197, 208, Grassmann, Prof., 20, 29, Haug, Prof. M., 186,604.
226,296,312,330,346, 41, 45, 48, 49, 54, 57, Hawk, 176,230,345,350,

380, 449, 525, 531, 549, 66,79,81,107,142,152, 588. See Falcon.

550, 553; chariot 226,232, 233,241,242, Indra, 538 ; Soma,

Wrought of or decked 245, 253, 264, 266, 268, 357.

with, 69, 118, 195 ; on 290,299,302,305,309, Hawks, the Maruts, 54.
priest’s finger, 166,289, 328, 348, 349, 355, 380, Healer, Rudra, 39, 49 ;

316, 347, 355, 35S; 388,393,410,419,420, V&stoshpati, 53.

gold-bearded, Agni, 424, 429, 439, 440, 445, Heaven, a Goddess, 463.

447 ; gold coursers of 448,452,463, 489,511, Dyaus, 5, 38, 66,

the Sun, 60; gold 514,520,529,538,541, 67,73, 78,96,125,197,

helms of Maruts, 125 ; 560, 564, 565, 569, 583. 433, 438, 445, 470, 471

gold swords of Maruts, Great One, the, Yama, 476, 483, 514, 569,
126. 400. 572, 578.

Golden, Savifcar, 63; arms Grimm, Jacob, 172. home of the Blest,

of Savifcar, 37, 48 ; hair Guerdon, priests* fee, 247, 381, 382, 399, 402, 404,

of Savifcar, 435 ; hands 323, 544, 549. 498.

INDEX OP -NAMES, ETC.

646

Heaven and Earth, 9, Hiranyagarbha, Gold- Hunter, 192,

31, 38, 39, 48, 52, 53, germ, Sun-God, 566, Hunting, deer, 107 ; ele-
62 , 64, 91, 92,133)139, Hiranyastilpa, a Bishi, phants, 439; boar, 507;
143, 161, 175, 21 9,246, 591, wild bull, 454.

275, 326,331-333, 338, Holtzmann, Prof., 531, Husband and wife, hap- I
S62, 385, 370, 377, 334, Holy Ladies, the Pavers, i pin ess of the pious, 168.
886, 390, 395,424,431, 90. Husbandman, 519 ; see

433, 435, 447, 449,452, Homer, 500. Vaisya,

463, 474, 477, 479,484, Homestead, Guardian of Hydaspes, Greek name
491, 524, 525, 556, 565, the, 53. of the Jhelum, 490.

585, 609. Hoof-armed demons, 511. Hyena, 487 .

» »■ — — separated by the Horace, 59. Hymir, Scandinavian

Asvins, 414; by Indra Horse Sacrifice, 595. World-giant, 519.

179, 515, 656, 5?3 ; by Horses = flames of Agni, Hymn = car, 64 ; gene-
Savitar, 591 ; by Va- 2 hymns, 7 ; of the rated or. begotten by

runa, 82, 184; by Vish- Asvins, 69, 70,73, 118; the bard, 10, 13, 25 /

ptu, 94. of Brihaspati, 92; of new, 13, 27, 40, 6^

He^ven*sI)aughter,Usha8, Hawn, 74, 76 ; of the 133, 150, 155, 222, 24, i,

Dawn, 67, 73, 75,76, Sun, 216,312, 451,523. 261, 296, 352, 386;

197, 4.38, Hotar, 9, 201, 355, 384, made, formed, fashioh-

Heaven*s Child, Soma, 395, 465, 483, 485,486, ed, 33, 37, 40, 120, 122;

292, ?95; Night, 574, 499, 515, 520, 526,535, wrought with skill, 9 ;

Heifer, the, Aditi, 554. 552, 607. thought out, 129,235,

Hell, 315 note. Ho tars, the Celestial, 4, 244.

Herald, Hotar, Invoker, 475, 478, 483, 553,574. Hymns = milk-Btre*mB,
Agni, 15, 30, 174, 384, Hound, 507. 135.

395, 521, 522, et passim. Hounds = clouds, 196. Hypnotism, 583 hote.
Heralds, two celestial, 273. Household Lord, Agni,

Herbert, George, 180. 201 Priest, Agni, 522. iKSHviKN, the name of

Herbs, 38, 39, 533-535, Hradechakshus, the name a prince, 464.

Herd, the, the Maruts, of an Apsaras, 528, 111, a Goddess of Prayer,

427. Humble offering, 255. 4, 1 6, 48, 273, 309 463,

Herdsman, the, Indra, Hundred autumns, na- 484, 520, 553.

450; the Sun, 604. tural duration of hu- IJ&’s place, where butteris
Hesiod, 184. man life, 66, 96, 406, poured on the fire, 520.

Hillebrandt, Prof. A., 36, 506, 597 ; springs, dit- Immolator, the, Agni, 4,

84, 91, 108, 163, 219, to, 597 ; winters, ditto, 554.

251, 269, 279, 296, 301, 333, 597. Immortality, after death,

308, 818,326,332,341, Hundred Chiefs, the 59, 168, 253 ; in one’s
842,379, 382,390,894, Maruts? ? 422. children, 168 ; prayer

408, 42fi, 424, 460, 526, Hundred Powers, Lord for, 59 ; the gift of
509, 578, 585, 605, of, 170, 173 ; see Safca- Soma, 372 ; Lord of, ,

Hills, 163, 431. kratu, Purusha, 517 ; Kings

Bhrva, Benefactor,* title Hunger, deprecated, 2, of, 524 ; the world of
of Indra, 182. 202. the Gods, 253', 517 ^ 1

Incantation, against an
ill-omened bird, 598 ;
against miscarriage,
612,613; against phthi-
sis, 613; against poison,
51 ; against a rival
wife, 588,

Indigence, 3, 438.

Indigenous races, see D&-
sas, Dasyns, Dark races.

Indra, 4, 8, 12, 17-35,
37-40, 44, 47, 48, 50-
54, 56, 76, 78, 80, 81,
85-89, 91-94, 98-101,
.108-115, 119-123, 125,
126, 130, 132-142,146,
151, 152, 157-160, 164,
167-175, 178-180, 189-
196, 198, 199, 202-209,
211-216,219, 220, 224,
231, 234-252, 259,265,
269, 270, 273-275, 278,

. 279,281,282, 286, 287,
292,296,297-299, 301-
308, 310-316, 318-321,
323,325, 327, 329,330,
333-335, 837, 339, 340,
342-346, 348, 350, 351,
355-363, 3H5 369, 371,
372,374, 375, 377-382,
asa^o, 391 , 398,408,
411-413, 416,417, 420,
423, 425, 427, 431-436,
441444, 448-453, 457,
458,460, 463, 464-467,
469,471, 474, 476,478,
479,483, 484,487,489;
491,499, 500, 501, 504,
507-509, 515*517, 522,
527,531,532,535,537-
547, 550, 554-557, 560,
561, 563-565, 570, 571,
573-580, 583-586, 588,
590,591, 593-597,5^9,
601, 603, 605.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. S49

Indra, his parents, Heaven Indra- Agni, 88, 89, 178-

aud Earth, 202, 215 ;
his father, 22 ; his mo-
ther, 22, 190, 225,487,
580 ; born from Puru-
sha’s mouth, 519 ; his
wife, 507-509 ; his
greatness, 120, 134,

234,249, 417, 423,449,
515, 516, 554, 590 ; his
battles with demons,
120,134,138, 171,516,
517 ; Lord of Heaven,
.248, 554 ; Chief of
Cods, 134, 204 ; Ma-
ker of all things, 452,
458 ; identified with
Sun, 133, 240,419,422.
426, 451, 515, 516 ;
supersedes Varuna,
570 ; punisher of sin,
516 ; Warrior God,
21, 22, 34, 103, 141,
190, 202,203, 216,237,
250, 265,417,441,531,
544 ; tutelary God of
Aryans, 18, 144, 190;
his attributes and
deeds, 120, 449-452;
his love of Soma, 122,
202 ; his rapture after
drinking, 132, 138,

139, 171, 563, 564 ;
aided by the Maruts,
126, 245 ; priest, 140 ;
his chariot, 172, 413,
423 ; his horses, see
Horses ; his existence
doubted, 250.

— and Agni, 38, 88, 89;

and Pdshan, 88 ;

and Soma, 38, 98,

99, 101, 284 ; and

Yarupa, 38 ; — and
V&yu* 106#

180 ; Indra-Soma, 98 : ;
Indra-Varupa, 78-81,
267, 268 ; Indra- Y^yu,
85-89.

Indr&ni, Indra’s Consort,
507-509, 588, 596.

Indrota, aprince, 212, 213.

Indu, drop, = Soma, 198,
199, 213, 236. and
Book IX. passim

Indus, the river, 90,159,
160, 183,491,494,550.

Infant, 0 the, Agni as

lightning, 95, 439;

Agni, 386, 387, 468,
495 ; the young Sun,
419.

Infinity, 470, 486.

Inspiration, 92, 231, 397.

Inspirer(s;, 3, 13, 261,
298, 349, 354, 447.

Instructress, the,DeBhtri,
506.

Invoker, 355, 395.

Invokers, Hotara, the two
Celestial, 4, 574.

Iron, or other metal, 5,
15, 90, 244, 251, 269,
337,449, 510,531, 532,
537, 540.

tsvara, Lord, Supreme
Deity of po&fc-Vedic
time, 377 note.

Ita, a Rishi, 601. ,

Jackal, 421.

Jacobi, Dr. H., 502.

Jagati, a Yedic metre,
577.

Jahusha, a protegb of the
Asvins, 71.

Jamadagni, a famous
ancient Rishi, 91, 253,
317,352,577, 599, 600.

6 JO

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Jamadagnis, 309,310,363. Karaadyu, the wife of Kiiie, rays of light, 74,
^ Jarfttha, name of a fiend Yimada, 476. 75, 208, 348, 376, 516,

or savage, 1, 11, 496. Kanita, the name of a 583 ; heavens & earths,

JAtavedas, the Omnis- chief, 195. 216; waters, 449; milk,

cient, Agni, 5, 8, 11, Kanva, an ancient Rishi, 284, 344, 359, 365 ;

13, 16, 100, 132, 154- 103,110,112,137, 118, rain-clouds, 291, 452 ;

156, 185, 187, 217, 218, 120, 124, 127, 128, 130, sacrificial waters, 371.

222, 322, 386, 388, $90, 131, 174, 259, 261,263, King, benediction of a,

401-403, 445, 453, 454, 266, 426, 466, 592. 602,603 ; Indra,3l,

467,482,499,510,513, Kanvas, 108-110, 112, 140,229,243,248,442,

521, 553, 559, 585, 592, 114-116, 119-122, 126, 443, 464, 468, 580;

604, 608. 169, 172, 174, 265, 559. Agni, 10, 187, 383-

Jhelum, the river, 490 note. K&nva, a descendant of 385, 445, 51 0, 5 1 2 ;

Jhlnam, knowledge, 484. Kanva, 103, 115, 125, Soma, 198, 199, 228,

Juhfi, a sacrificial ladle ; 128,129. Book IX. passim ; *

possibly aProperKame, K&nv&yanas, 'descendants the Sun, 467 ; — Va-
552 note. of Kanva, 266. runa, 37, 51,82,83,184,

Jumna, the modern name Kapardin, wearing braid- 396, 54 5, 602 ; Ya-

: of the river Yamun£, ed hair, 321 note . ma, 381, 398-400 ;

20, 246, 490. Kapi, an ape, 507 note. of Kings, Varuna, 37.

Kapila, a famous Rishi, Kings, the, Varuna, A.rya-
Ka, Who?, the God Pra- 419. man,Mitra,45, 66; — -

j&pati, 566 note. Kar&li, name of a flame the Ten, 36, 79, 80;

K4bul, the river, 148 of Agni, 387 note. Varuna, and Mitra, 63-

note. Karaoja, a demon, 450. 65, 167, 252, 468, 473 ;

Kadru, apparently a Ri- Kasu, a prince, 119. Varuna, Mitra,

shi, 191; Queen of Ser- Kasyapa, a famous Rishi, Aryaman, 147, 573 ;

pents, 608 note. 22, 352, 382, 577. the Asvius, 438,

Kadru kadays,days of the KatM Upanishad, 581. Kihsuka, a tree, 503.

Abhiplava festival, 400. Kauray&na, patronymic K6ph$n, Greek name of
Kakshiv4n, an ancient of a prince, 113. the Kabul river, 148,

sage, 129, 333, 415, Kavasha, the name of a Kratu, one of the Seven
436, 467, 587. priest, 19, 429. Rishis, 498.

Kakuha, the name of a Kavi, the father of XJsa- Kripa, a prince, 112,114. *"
prince, 123. n&, 18, 451, 538. * Krisa,aRishi,264,268,439.

Kalasa, of uncertain Kavis, 403 note. Kris&nu, a guardian of

meaning, 428. Kavyas, a class of Manes, the Celestial Soma, 334,

Kali, a Jiishi, 210, 437, 398, 401, 403. ■ 473, 588.

K411, name of a flame of Kesins, long-haired, Agni Krishna, a Rishi, 232 ; a
Agni, 387 note. V&yu, Silrya, 582. demon, 246.

Kalm&shap4da, name of Khela, a king, 118 note. KrityAMagic personified,
a King, 1 00 note , Kimidins, mischievous 505 note.

K&ma, Love, Desire, 575 fiends, 98, 101, 512. Krivi, the eponymus of
note; said to be a Ri- Kindler,Agn{dli, lighter of a warlike tribe, 150,
shi’s name, 592. sacrificial fire, 440,521. 154,262.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

651

Krumu, the name of a 73 ; Lady of the world Life, duration of human,

river, 490. — 73 ; Lady of sweet sec Hundred Autumns;

Kshatram, the Ruling strains— 78, 130; Lady appointed by Gods, 429.

Power, the military of the Wood, Aran y a- Light, 48.

and princely order, nt, 589. Lightning, 252 ; Vasishtha

177 note. Lakes, Soma receptacles, an embodiment of, 36.

Kshatriya, 99, 1 77, 407, 124. Lion, 19, 361, 421, 422,

519, 552. Lances, 149, 166, 479 ; trap for, 422 ;

Kshatriyas, raised to Langlois, Prof., 98. Soma, 350.

Brdhmau rank, 536 Language, 484. Lord of Heaven, Indra,

note, Lanman, Prof. C. R., 248, 219 ; of Light,

A&ityas, 210. 54, 55, 139, 391, 408, Indra, 241, 247, 248.

KubM, a river, 159, 183, 428, 429, 439, 504. Lotus, 33, 107, 5 50, 587,

490, Law, Moral and Cosmic, 613.

Kuhn, Prof. A., 531. 43, 45, 55, 60, 65, 66, Ludwig, Prof. A., Her

Kuhfi, a lunar Goddess, 71, 73, 74, 79-81, 112, Rigveda, 5 Vols., and

332. 119,120,128,132.134, Ueber die neuesten

Kurnara, said to be a 15 5, 156, 159, 160, 165, Arbeiten im Gebiete

Proper Name, 581 note. 168, 220, 221, 230, 233, der Rgveda-forschung,

Kum&rila, a celebrated 248, 274 276, 293, 297, passim .

philosopher, 611 rifyte. 300, 304, 313, 320, 324, Lusa, a favourite of Indra,
Kundap&yya, a Proper 3^7,344,345,370,377, 436 note.

Name, 142. 379, 381, 396, 403, 432, Lying, prayer for rernov-

Kuray^na, a Proper Name, 433, 445,447, 459, 469, al of sin of, 391.

• 113 note . 474-478, 494, 496, 522,

Kurira, a kind of metre, 551, 560,563, 579, 583, Macdoneld, Prof, A. A,,
502. 609. 197^226,369, 370,392,

Kuru-krivis, the name df sacrifice, 155, 225, 447, 455.

a tribe, 19 note. 251, 314, 331, 345, 373, Madhyadesa, Midland

Kurukshetra, a district 504,539,568,570,594, country, 463 note.

in N.-W. India, 122, 603. Magh&, a lunar mansion,

207, 317, 381 notes. Leader, Neahtar, one of 502.

Kurungt, a prince, 115. the priests, 521. Maghavan, Lord of Boun-

Kurusravaaa, a prince. Leather, 63. ty, a title of Indra,

Kufcsa, a favourite of Leech, physician, 380 ; passim.

Indra, 21, 104,159,263, see Physician, Maghavans, nobles, ins-

42 , 436, 439, 451, Liberal Ones, Gods, 39. titutors of aacnfice,2L

538, 548, 583. Liberality, 561; to priests, 32, 125, 267, 524, 526,

Kutsas, 27. 20, 106, 107, 111, 113, 549.

Kuyava, a demon of 116, 119,123, 147, 148, Magic, personified, 504
drought, 21. 159, 161, 175, 195,196, note ; of Gods, 183,224,

208, 212, 213, 223,265, 436,590, 604; of fiends,

Ladies, the Holy, Rivers, 266, 305, 429, 470,525; 1, 2, 93, 94, 101, 139,

90. heavenly and earthly 184, 202, 554, 584 ; of

Lady of the Light, Dawn, rewards of, 549, 550. men, 155,

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

m

Mah&bhUrata, 99, 527, Mann, Man, father of 450, 456-458, 471-474**
536. mankind, 3, 12, 131, 476, 479, 484, 487, 491-

MaMvlra, a sacrificial cal- 139, 153, 155, 167, 174, 494, 500, 508, 516, 523,

dron, 219 note. 205, 261, 262, 352, 356, 524, 535, 537, 538, 544,

Mahtdhara, a celebrated 471, 476, 482, 484, 509, 545, 547, 556, 557, 568,

Commentator on the 530, 539, 573, 574, 583, 595.

V&jasaneyi‘SahhiU,43, Laws of, 36, 438. as healers, 150 ; ;

241, 249, 445, 447,497, the father of M- their number, 245 note.

499, 518,520, 545,509. bh4nedishfcha,456,467, M&tali, the charioteer of
Maiden, the, Sfiryfi, 69 ; 469, 470. Indra, 398 note.

earth or the oblation, Manus — Manu, 146, 164, M&tall, said to be Indra,
386. . 186, 187, 260. 398.

Maidens, the Dawjs, 459. ManyamftU% ■ a Proper M&tarisvan, Vdyu, or Ag-
Maids, the Dawns, 8.; Name, 20. ni, or the bringer of

fingers of the priest, Manyu, tfp$&Qtr> person!- Agni from heaven, 323,
316. fied, 488-fOO. 447, 449, 506, 515, 547,

Maker, 38. , Mares, swift risers, 83 ; 552, 557 ; the name of

Makha, apparently a da- waters of the firma- a Bishi, 262.

mon, 369. ment, 386. Match-makers, 418, 502,

Male, the presiding, 518 Mariclii, one of the Seven 503 notes,
note ; the first, 576 Bishis, 498. MatrOfts, Heaven and

nolti Marriage and, marriage Earth, 385.

Man, the first, 576 ;per- ceremonies 501-506. Matsyas, fishes ; said to

sonified, the Soul of presiding deities of, be the name of a tribe,

the universe, 517 note ; 505, 506. 17.

son of Heaven and M&rt&nda, a name of the M&y&, Illusion, the cause
Earth, 62 ; akin to Sun, 48?. of material creation,

Gods, 71, 131, 144, Marudvridlift, name or 604 note.

164, 180, 206,231,247, epithet of a river, 490. M&y&bheda, Discernment
264, 470, 474, 548, Maruts, Storm-Gods, 11, of Mayi or Illusion,

607. 18, 21, 31, 32, 34, 37- 604.

M&na, said to be a name 4l, 44, 47, 52, 54-59, M&yava, the name of a
of Agastya, 36. 78, 89, 91, 100, 110, liberal noble, 525, 526

Man4,two chains orrings?, 133, 123-126, 134, 135, Medh&fcithi, a Bishi, 103,
226 note. 137, 139, 144, 148-150, 107, 128.

Manas, Spirit, 461. 160, 163, 164, 166, 175, Medhya, a Bishi, 262.

M&naya, eon of Mann, 176,178,183, 193, 194, Medhyatithi,aRmlu,l03,

i69noli. 206,214,224,225,231, 106, 107, 110, 172, 260,

Mandhfttar, M&ndh&tar, 234,242,243,245,246, 261, 297,

namesof a Rishi, 181, 265, 268, 287, 292, 802, Medicine, Soma, 220 ; q£

1*3- 307, 315-317,320,132, the Maruts, 150, 583;

' Manes, 398, 401; see Pa- 337, 341, 345, 349, 351, of Budra, 49, 167 * of

w*s. 857, 362, 371, 374, 375, the Waters, 391, 583 ;

Mansions of the Moon, 377, 398, 411, 419, 421, of Wind, 583.

«8 note. : 427, 432, 433, 435, 445, Mehatnu, a river, 490.

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.

m

Merit, rewarded in hea- Monotheism, 498. and cloud, Geniua

ven, 399. Moon, Moon-God, 166, of, 42.

Metal, see Gold, Iron. 199, 219, 230, 246,269, Mountains, 38, 39, 175,
Metres, 558, 559 ; allot- 271,272, 279, 281, 282, 265, 433, 539.

ted to various Gods, 289,306,308,324,325, Mrigaya, a fiend or hos-
577. 332,336,338, 341, 345, tile savage, 113, 451.

Milch-cow, Indra, 104; 347, 357,359,382,419, Mrilika, the name of a

the type of beneficence, 423,450,458, 501, 503, Rishi, 592.

153 ; Agni, 387. 519,525, 569, 584, 591. Mrityu, Death, 406.

Milch kine, clouds, 46 ; the food of Gods, Mudgala, a Rishi, 542,

rivers, 326, 344. 501 note; sprung from 543.

Milk, rain, 149, 291,452; Purusha’s mind, 51 9. Mudgalfini, Mudgala’s
sap, vigour, 105 ; of Moon and stars, 326. wife, Jj>42, 543.
heaven, Soma juice, Moons, two, New and Muir, Dr. J., 22, 34, 36,
394, 557 ; white in Full, 472. 40, 41, 49, 81-83, 85,

coloured cows, 452. = months, 516. 94-98, 100, 142, 152,

Milton, 366, 422. Morning, personified, 35, 161, 179, 192, 198,205,

Mitva, 8, 13, 36, 38-40, 45, 48, 67, 73-76, 86, 244, 269, 307, 380,

43-45. 47, 52, 60-66, 305, 384, 394, 431, 382, 390, 392, 394,

78-80, 88, 89, 139,143, 515, 580 ; see Dawn. 400,402, 430, 439,462,

144, 146, 147,156,159- and Night, 4. 464, ff 470, 485,486, 490,

162, 164-168, 176, 188, Mornings, 31, 39, 46, 491,497, 499,501,518,

193,196, 197,200,210, 63, 72, 74, 77, 147, 520, 535,536,538,550,

220,222,230,243,245, 244, 339, 344, 401, 558, 562, 564,567,576,

252,255,257,263,270, 432, 502. 577,582, 589, 594, 611.

306,315,335,337,340, Mother, Aditi, 4, 93, Mfijav&n, a mountain fam-
342, 349, 351,362-364, 159, 231 ; Dawn, 78, ed forSomaplanbs,429.

367,371,374,377,382, 418, 608 ; Earth, 96, Muller, Prof. F. Max, 6,

384,390,393,396,397, 407, 469, 514, 527 ; 15, 31, 32, 3,4, 36,

411,423,426, 432-435, of Floods, Sarasvati, 46, 49, 54, 57, 74, 82,

^53, 467,468, 471, 473- 41 ; of kine (rays of 85, 90, 96, 97, 100,

475, 487,503, 516, 522- light), Dawn, 75. 131,136,144, 152, 181,

524, 535, 552,553, 556, Mothers, Rivers, 244, 184,200, 226, 226,237,

571-573,578, 590,607, 345, 370, 405, 431, 245, 259, 269,305,355,

612. 473; the Waters, 235, 382, 392, 404, 407,408,

Mitra-Varuna, 51, 60-65, 425 ; Heaven & Earth, 443, 457, 460, 490-492,

159, 252, 275. 431, 46.3, 474, 565 ; 494, 497,504, 516,520,

Mitr&tithi, the name of Plants, 383, 583 ; of 531,538, 567, 571, 572,

a prince, 429. , Law (Heaven & Earth), 576, 593, 600.

Moksha, final liberation, 463; of Agni (Dawns), Mundane Egg, the, 518
salvation, 518 note . 380. note.

Mole, 323. midmost, clouds ? Muni, Munis, inspired

Monarch, Indra, 78. 326. saint(s), 55, 142, 582.

Monogamy, indications Mountain, 38 ;= cloud, Muradevas, impious,men
506. 8, 77,123,125,328,362. or demons, 101, 510.

654

INDEX OF NAMES, BTC,

Music, 214, [2G9, 581 ; 252, 266,267,349,414, Nodhas, a Rishi, 353 note. *

of the Maruts, 55. 437,440,447,448,587. Noose (for catching sin-

Myriantheus, Prof., 221. Nature, 253 note. ners), of Agm, 511*; of

Navagva, member of a Rudra, 49; of Vamna r
N£ bha = Nftbh&nedish- mythical priestly 504 ; of Vis va, 511’

tha, 469. 376, 469, Nooses of In dra- Vanina,.

Nabh&ka, a Rishi, 182. NavavSstva,.the name of 80 ; of Mitra and Va-
N&bh&ka, the son of Na- a chief, 451. r nrra, 64.

bh&ka, 182, 183. Nectar, 253, 269, 271. North altar, 13*7, 163

NAbhtadishtha, son of Nema, said to be a $i- notes .

Manu, 467, 468. shi, 250 note . Notes and Queries, 598.

Nachiketas, a Proper Neshtar, one of the priests, Nrimedha, a pvotdgt o f

Name, 581 note. 521 note. Agni, 496.

N alius, a Propex^Name, New Year, 467 note. Nrimedhas, a man’s-
8,9,349,452,496,537. Night, 164, 384, 385, name, 578, 579.

; Nahuaba, a Pr oper Name, 419, 438, 472, 573, 57 4, Nrishad, a Proper Name,
195, 470. 602,609. 426, 466.

NAhusha, said to be the — and dawn or morn-
name of a king, 90. k ing, 44, 47, 273, 553. Ocean, 39, 51, 70, 84 r

Natiushas, a people, 90, — - and day, 438. 111,122,184, 249, 569,

121, 126, 351. Lord of, the Moon, 583, 591.

Nahiishyas, apeople,351. 524. of air, 251, 355, 391,

Nakshatras, lunar man- Nights, 244. 477, 536, 568, 572, 604.

axons, 501 note . Nine, the Bhrigus? 419. Vanina, 184 ;Soma,

Names, four, of a deity, Ninety, indefinite for 362.

228. many, 536. Oceans, seven, 520 note .

Nami, a friend of Indra, Ninety-nine, ditto, Oganas, men of some-
450. rivers, 546; castles, hostile ti’ibe, 517.

Namucbi, a demon of 21, 94, 239, 306 ; - Old age, 406, 462.

drought, 21, 139, 246, fiends, 452 ; loads Oldenberg, Prof, H, f 96 r

488, 57 8. of fuel, 536. 269, 509, 53L

Nar&sausa, a tide of Nip&tithi, a Rishi, 174, Om,^ 95.

Agni, 3, 4, 72, 483, 260, 261. Omen, bird of ill, 598,

523, 606. Nirriti, Goddess of des- 599.

NftriLsansi, eulogistic song, traction, 42, 58, 99, Omnific, Yisvakarman,

501. 158, 393, 407, 433, 496 note.

Nftrsbada, said to be the 462, 492, 598. Omniscient, Soma, 288,

name of a fiend, 466 Nirritis, destructive 289.
note. powers, 557. Onb, 498 ; One All, 267;

Mrya, a liberal prince, Nirukta, 49. One Supreme, 498.

159. Nishti, said to be Diti, One-horse car, 577 ; One*

N&satyas, a name of the 541 note. footed, the Sun ; see

Asvins, 44, 67, 70-73, Nishtigri, Indra’s mother, Aja-ekapad,

117,118,127-130,153, 541. Out, implement for pres-

160-162,185,231,232, Nitosa,aman’s name, 612, sing Soma, 281 note.

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC,

655

r * \

Ordainer, the, Dh&tar, P&kayajiia, simple domes- Parna, the Pal&sa trfeji.
406 ; the Sun, 4G7. tie oblation, 570 note . Butea Frondoaa, 533. 1
^Order, Cosmic and Mo- Paktha, a king, 153, 260, Parnaya,atree-demon,450j
ral, 48, 63, 64, 384, 465, ^ Pami, Rib, daughter of \

386, 390, 395, 459, Paktbas, 18, 465. Manu, 509. 1

467, 478, 480, 488, Paldsa, a tree, Butea name of a chief, 123,

496, 552. See Law. Frondosa, 533 note. Parsus, 79.

sacrifice, 40, 47, 90, Panch&las, a tribe in the P&rthya, a liberal chief,

119, 350, 354, 360, Panjab, 150 note . 525, 526.

363, 387, 390, 397, Paid, a demon of dark- Parushrd, the river R&vt,
425, 511, 545, 553, ness, 466, 479, 595. 17, 18, 223, 490.

570. See Law, Panis, 11, 162, 235, 286, Parvata, the Genius of

Kosraos, the Uni- 344, 380, 466, 478, Mountain and Cloud,

verse, 568. 550, 551, 556. 42, 596.

Orderer, disposer of the
Universe, ludra, 588,

Ornaments, of the Ma-
ruts, 148-150, 494 ; of
women, 196 ; of men,
208, 226 ; of cows,
208.

Ouranos-Varuna, .184
note.

Owl, 100, 101; owlet, 101.

Ox-hide, 278, 317, 320,
336, 369.

P adgribhi, a demon or
savage, 451.

Paijavana, patronymic of
King Sudds, 20, 21.
Pair, the, Earth and Hea-
ven, 38, 283, 386, 896;
Day and Right, 393 ;
Night and Dawn, 273,
433 ; Sun and Moon,
514.

Pajrd, a woman’s name ?
338.

Pajra, a Proper Name,
115, 323.

PajraB, a priestly family,
115.

Pdkasthdman, a liberal
prince, 113.

Pan jab, 20, 150, 159, P&sadyumna, a king, 34.

490, 550 notes . P&td, Pdthd, a medicinal

Pantheism, 517-520. plant, 588 note .

ParamabrahmajMnam, Paulomi, Indrani, 596.
knowledge of the hi- Paura, son of King Puru,
gher truths of religion, 112, 260.

484 note Pauras, 264.

Paramajyd, a liberal chief, Pautakratu, son of Pfita-
* 06. kratit or Pdtakratu,

Paramdtmd, the supreme 266 note .

soul or self, 572 note. Pavam&na, 269, 273 ;

Paramesvara, the sup- Agni, 253 note ; Soma,
reme God, 497 note. 272, and Book IX. pas -
Par&sara, a Rishi, 20. sim ; Pushan, 337.
P&rdvata (s), name of a Pavam&nas, Soma juices
distant tribe, 175. . or drops, 285.

Par&vrij, the cripple, Pdvam&ni, verse dedicat-
415 note. ed to the purification

Parents, the, Heaven of Soma, 323.
and Earth, 52, 53, 62, Paviru, chief of the Hu-
92, 324, 341, 396, samas, 262.

475, 553. Pearl, pearls, 20, 481.

Parijman, the Roamer Pedu, a protige of the
round, Indra as the Asvms, 71, 649, 437,
Sun, 522; V&yu, Wind, Penury, prayer against,
524, 525. 71, 492.

Parjanya, God of the Peterson, Prof. P., 79,
Rain-cloud, 39, 95, 96, 84, 85, 400, 518, 520,

119, 152, 254, 270, 285, 564, 567, 572.

338, 381, 458,475,477, Phalgunts, a double lu-
535, 536, 601, nar mansion, 502 note.

m

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Phthisis* 613 note. Potar, Cleanser, one of homes, 231, 431; for

physician, 380, 533 ; his the priests, 15, 384, long life, 59, 65,

fee, 533. 421. 75,96,144, 189, 198,

Physicians, Waters, 143, Poverty, deprecated, 2, 199, 211, 288, 272,

j 437. 89, 192 352, 406, 435, 462,

Piety, the blessings of, Praise of Men, Nar&sansa, 607 ; for safety, 37,
165, 522 ;see Devotion, a title of Agni, 3. 79,89, 110, 117, 154*

Pijavana, father or an- Praj&pati, Lord of Crea- 160, 164, 165, 196,

{7 eesfcorofKingSudfis^O. tion or Creatures, 52, 197, 200, 210, 341,

Pillar of the Universe, 240, 242, 253, 273, 361, 471 ; for goodness,

Agni, 387. 318, 387, 419, 421, 198, 27 J, 272 ; for in-

Pillars, sacrificial, 39. 425, 445, 458, 466, nocence, 143, 431, 435,

Pipru, a demon qf dro- 473, 506, 566, 567, 471, 574 ; for mercy,

ught, 538, 584. 576,611, 613. 85,192; for purification,

Pis&chas, demons, 399 Pramara, Destroyer, 322, 391; for forgiva-
note. Death, 419. ness of sins, 37, 58,

Pischel, Prof. R., 25, 48, Prapathi, a liberal chief, 82, 84, 85, 89, 199, ;
82, 152, 163, 168, 193, 106. for freedom from sin,

213, 257, 277, 288, Prasfcstar, one of the 431, 435, 471, 598 ;

318, 394, 421, 465, chief priests, 521 note. for immortal life in

512, 547, 586, 605. Praskanva, a Rishi, 112, heaven, 381, 382, 399;
Pitarae, Pitris, 199 ; see 261, 265, 266. for wisdom, 1, 5, 34,

Fathers. Prastotar, one of the 198, 291, 367, 378,

Pitriyajha, sacrifice to priests, 229 note. 414, 434 ; for fame,

the Fathers, 455 note. Prathas, extending, the 27, 80, 156, 276, 284,

Planets, 458 note. name of an oblation, 291, 302, 308, 311,

Plants, 56; descended 606. \ / 312, 432, 434, 462,

! from heaven, 534 ; me- PratiprasthUtar, the de* 525 ; for wives, 321;

^dicinal, 533-535 ; po- signation of one of the for children, 1, 2, 6,

isonous, 51 ; king of, assistant priests, 219 57, 67, 87, 91, 92, 121,

Soma, 382, 534, 535. note. 156, 176, 268, 306,

Plati, a Rishi, 472, 474. Pratridas, a name of the 346, 852, 361, 391,

Playoga, the father of Tritsus, 36. 446, 567 ; for aid in

KingAsanga, 107, 173. Pravargya, an introduc- battle, 24, 27, 30, 56,
Pleasantness, personified, tory Soma ceremony, 79*81, 93, 111, 140,

686. 219 note. 146, 151, 190, 201,

Plenty, personified, 33, Prayfija,f ore-offering, 606. 212,224, 264, 364,436,

38, 353, 473. Prayer, personified, 38, 544, 590 ; for victory

Plough, 153, 563. 558 ; Lord of, 91, 92 ; in a race, 228, 525 ;

Poison, charm against, 51. made, inspired, by Gods, for clothes, 363 ; for

Poisonous reptiles, charm 92 ; for health, ivealth rain, 63, 64, 73, 96,

against, 5. and happiness, 3, 53, 124, 160, 275, 295,

Polygamy, 17, 28, 428, 73, 75, 143, 340, 361, 301, 316, 317, 356,

442, 541, 588, 589 ; 391, 431, 432, 471, 360, 872, 376, 535,

troubles of, 4 28. 538, 539 ; for happy 536 ; for spacious pas*

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.

657

turage, 341, 352 ; for 58, 433, 471, 475. Purohita, a family or
eloquence, 5 35; against Prithu, a Rishi, 591,602. tribal priest, 10, 11,
penury and sickness, Pritlius, 79. 163, 535.

71, 143, 210, 432,471; Pritliusravas, a liberal —of Gods, Brihaspati,
for freedom from evil prince, 195, 196. 585.

dreams, 445 ; for re- Priyamedha, a famous Puru, a King, 112.
moval of the sin of Rishi, 112, 118, 171, PCiru, the eponymus of
lying and false swear- 233. a Yedic tribe, 7, 10,

ing, 391 ; for the de* Priyamedhas, 110, 115, 19, 21, 385.

struction of fiends, 90, 123, 128, 215,233,489. Purus, 10, 91, 449.

98-101, 352. Productive Power, 486. Puruhanman, a ^Rishi,

Prayoga, a poor Rishi, Professions, crafts, trades, 215.

2 55 note. indications of, agricul- Purufeutsa, a prince, 21,

Press-stones, 43, 46,491, ture, 150, 153, 157, 147.

492, 526, 527, 603. 519, 563 ; barber, 115, Purum&yya, a Rishi, 212,

Prid&kus&nu, a Proper 586; bard, 380; boat- Purumilha, a Rishi, 218,

Name, 142. builder, 230, 327 ; 305.

Priesthood, a profession, carpenter, wright, 285, Purumitra, a Rishi, 437.

380 note. 380 ; currier, 63, 265; Pururavas, an ancient

Priest’s daughters, fingers, rope-making, 80; phy- King, 139, 412, 527-
280. sician, 380, 523; smelt- 531.

Priests, modern, imita- er, 486, 497 ; smith, Pdrus, men of a Yedic

tors of divine, 577. 380, 486 ; trafficker, tribe, 207.

of the Gods, 483; merchant, 190, 20,9 ; Purusha, Embodied Spirit,

see Hotars, Celestial usurer, 209 ; weaver, Man, 397, 517-520,

called Gods, 3, 144, 416. 576.

310, 568. Protecting Goddesses, Purushanti, a liberal

liberality to, see 38 ; see Varfttris. prince, 305.

Liberality to Priests, Protectress, the, 43 ; see Pftshan, a Sun-God,, 39,
Prishadhra, a Rishi, 262. Yarfitri. 41, 44, 45, 48, J15,

7 Prishadvftna, a Proper Providence, 30, 147, 539. 164, 167, 168, 265,

Name, 261. Ptolemy, 175. 306, 321, 337, 349,

Prisana, the name of a Pulaha, one of the Seven 368, 377, 387, 404,

place ? 364. Riahis, 498 note . 405, 415, 416, 428,

Prisani=Prisni, 487. Puiastya, ditto, 498 note . 432, 463, 472-474,

Prism, mother of the Punarvatsa, a Rishi, 125. 502, 504, 523, 535,

Maruts, 18, 40, 55,83, Pur4nas, 95, 528. 571, 534.

123,124,149,150,242, Purandhi, Plenty or Bold- P ushana = P6 shan, 524.
293,427, 456, 466, 487, ness personified, 38, Pushtigu, a Proper Name,

489, 568. 41, 44, 473, 476, 505. 261.

Prithav&na, the name of Purifying, the, 253. Putabhrit, a Soma reser-
a noble, 525- Purod&s, a Proper Name? voir, 108, 124, 243,

j PritJfi, the first anoint* 17. 347, 370.

ed King, 129, 591. Purod&sa, sacrificialcake, Putakratl, a Proper Name,
PritMv!, Karth, Mid-air, 397 note, 266*.

isi

658

INDEX OE NAMES, ETC.

Pfitakratu, a Proper 201,247, 296, 801, 313, Ribhus, three deities of
2Tame, 213, 266. 331,34*7,868,375,419, mid-air, 39, 41, 60, 52,

433,456, 458, 463, 510, 111, 130, 176,192,226,

Quail = Dawn, 438. 512, 563, 593. 242,247,413, 438, 457,

Quarters of the sky, 39. R&kshasi, a female fiend, 475, 477, 492,496,523,
Queen, the, V4k, 571 ; 100. 603, 612.

of Gods, V&k, 251. Earn, the Warrior Indra, Rich, richas, sacred
Queens, the Waters, 391, 110, 248. verse(s) for recitation,

424, 425. R&ma, the name of a 586, 519, 521, 558.

Questionings regarding noble, 525. Eiches personified, 38 ;

Mature, Gods, and Blm&yana, 166. like chariot- wheels,

Man, 497, 514, 555, Basft, a semi-mythical 562.

600. r* river, 29 7, 490, 550, 566. Eijikas,name of a people,

Quintus Curtius, 150. Eathantara, an import- 381 42 ote.

Quoit, 245, 436, 488. ant S&man, 606. Eijisyan, a proUgb of

Bathaproshthas, men of Indra, 260, 538, 584.
Eaoe, 291, 300, 480, 489. a regal family, 464. Eijitnas, a man’s name,

Eace-course, 88. Bathaspati, God of war- 262.

Eacers, 46, 282 note . chariots, 473, 525. Riksha, a prince, 212,

Ragozin, Mme. Z., 408, R&ti, Divine Favour or 213, 222, 223.
497,505,552,589,606 ; Bounty, 477. Bikvans, divine singers,

see Vedic India. R&vi, a river in the Pan- 12, 398, 472.

Rarbhi, ritual verse, 501. j&b, 17, 223, 490 notes, Rishi, 84, 112, 572;
Rain, 89 ; produced by Razor, 115, 421, Indra, 122, 140.

the .Moon, 423, 424 Rebha, a proUgi of the Rishis, 70, 74, 111, 120,
notes ; Lords of, 160 ; -Asvins, 437. 127,218,235,268, 323,

prayer for, 63, 64, 160, Red, the, the Sun, 76; 352, 469,385,518, 594;

275. Red Bird, the Sun, 459 ; old and recent, 25 ; an-

Riuna, the, 97, 98, 148. Red Treasure, the, the cient, 400, 577 ; raised

Rftjanya, a Kshatriya, Sun, 252. to their rank by know-

519. Regal Class, the, 519 ; ledge, 577 ; childlike

Eajas, the firmament, see Kshatriyas. questions of, 514 ;

264. Resuscitation of Suban- childlike address to a

Rftjtfyakshma, Consump- dhu, 461-465. God, 33, 138, 146, 147,

tion, 597. Revelation, 268. 189 ; the Seven, 498,

Raji, a word of unknown Ribhu, the eldest of the 552, 57 7, 583.

meaning, 547, Ribhus, 41, 242, 413, Rishtishena, a prince,

MU, a lunar Goddess, 525. 535, 536.

362. Ribhukshan — Ribhu ; a Rivers, 4, 39, 490, 529 ;

Rakshas, the demon race, title of Indra ; 41, 42, the Seven, 20, 41, 67,

154. 50, 192, 247, 413, 473, 214; twenty-one, 490 ;

Mkehaaa, a nocturnal 489, 52 5. Lords of, 63.

fiend, 1, 11, 100. Ribhukshans, Ribhuk- Robber, 53, 99; see Thief,
B5ksha8as, 14, 43, 72, shanas= Ribhus, 4 1,42, Rodari, the Consort of
98*100, 155, 177 187, 50, *124, 148, 523, 525. the Maruts, 38, 523,

INDEX OP NAMES, ETO.

659

Bohitas, the horses of 43, 57, 213, 405, 567, 109, 115,134, 136,168,

Agni, 4 6 note. 578,585. 170, 190, 227, 236,238,

Both, Prof, von, 8, 34, Sacred Grass, see Grass, 239, 241,247,248,262,
40, 48, 54, 57, 68, 84, Sacred. 441, 442,546, 580,600.

91, 105, 116, 118, 147, Sacred syllable, 397. Sakti, a son of Vasishtha,
184,214,218,256,259, Sacrifice, 219, 540, 54 1; * 20.

260, 264, 266,304,382, personified, 576, 601 Sakvarl, a Vedic metre,

391,392,404, 408, 452, notes; as an act of crea- 35, 486.

456, 470,509,531, 541, tion, 499,513,520,576; Salmali, the silk-cotton
565, 569, 582. morning and evening, tree, 51, 503.

Budra, the Tempest- 14, 15; morning, noon, Salt, not mentioned.

God, 12, 39, 41, 45, and evening, 165, 345, Sdrna, Sdman, song, chant

49, 54, 56, 58, 137, 149, 376; priest of, Agni, edj^ymn, 36, 123, 141,

167, 331, 450, 473, 474, 13,16 ; herald of, Agni, 156, 167, 229, 235, 244,

522-525, 572, 573, 582, passim ; a web, woven, 248, 433, 486, 494, 502,

600. 11, 268, 370, 575; 519,557,558,576, 581,’

Budras, sons of B-udra, a thread, spun, 136, 606.

the Maruts, 8, 12, 35, 186, 238, 345, 456,482, S&ma-chanter, one of the

39, 40, 124, 337, 148, 602 ; a ship, 444, 540, priests, 486, 549.

206, 253, 265, 427, 458, 547 ; a chariot, 525, S&maveda, 594, 595, 60

473, 476, 477, 525, 537, 540; ploughing, sow- notes.

571,575,582,592; the ing, reaping, 540 ; with Sambara, a demon or

Asvins, 154, 162. the heart, 255 ; head , savage, 20, 94, 239,

Budriyas= Budras, 450. of, Soma, 283; the 246, 306.

Buma, a favourite of Gods’ first, 421 ; three* Sami, a tree, Acacia Su-

Indra, 114. fold, 455, 570; seven- ma, 426, 453.

Kusama, a prince, 112, threaded, 455, 570 ; Samjfiftnam, Agreement,
114, 262. with five divisions, 570; 609.

Busamas, a people, 262. unpleasing without Samvarana, a Biski, 261.

prayer, 547 ; sordid, Skmvarani, son of Samva-
Sabardhtt, name of the prayer Against, 471. rana, 261.
cow milked at sacrifice, Sacrifices the, 607; see Samvarta, a man’s name,
467. Yajam&na. 264.

Sa'bardhuk, ditto, 482. the first, Atharvan, Sanaa, Prayer, Wish, per-

Sabardugha, ditto, 104, 523 ; wife of, asBociat- sonified, 38.

466, 467. ed in worship, 168, Santanu, a prince, 535,

Saeht, power, Indra’s 415, 607.' 536.

Consort, 140, 596. Sad by as, a class of Gods, Saprathas, Far-extend-

S&chlgo, of uncertain 518, 520. ing, the name of an

meaning, 142 note. Sakapftba, a Proper Name, oblation, 606,
iS&chipfijana, ditto, 142 578, 579. Sapatnib&dhanam, spell

note . Sakatas, carts for Soma to remove a rival wife,

Sachivan, a man’s name, plants, 397 note . 588. *

489. Sakra, the mighty, aname Saptagu, a name of Bri-

S acred Books of the Fast, of Indra, 22, 100, 105, haspati, 448,

660

INDEX 0 F NAMES, ETC.

Saptavadhri, a protigt of Sauchtka, a title of Agni, Serpents, 99, 471.

the Asvins, 221, 437. 466. Seven, the, the Maruts,

§ara; the name of a man, S&varni, a liberal prince, 166.

‘ 216,' 217. 470. Seven, Adityas, 382 j

Sarabha, the name of a Savarnya=S&varni, 470. castles, 19 ; eommu-

Rishi, 251, Savasi, the Mighty Dame, nities, 288; fiends*

Saram&, Indra’s messen* Aditi, 190, 225. 246 ; flames of Agni*

ger, 53, 399, 466, 468, Sayishtha, a liberal prince, 370, 387 ; glories, 166;
550, 551. 223. Guards of Soma, 501 ;

S&rameyas, Yama’s watch Savitar, the Sun as Im- heavenly singers, 261
dogs, sons of SaramS, peller, Vivifier, 15, 37, heroes-, 419 ; horses of

58 note. 39,42-44, 48, 49, 52, theStm, 60, 66; hotars

Saranyfi, the mothdr of 63, 65, 74, 76, 79, 80, 427; 465; lights of

Tama, 163, 404. 143, 165, 233,254,322, sacrifice, 370* ; metres*

Sarasv&n, the Consort of 337,368, 379, 397,404, 370, 427, 478, 520

Sarasvati, 90, 477. 419, 425,430-432,434, notes; mothers (rivers),

Sarasvati, River and God- 467, 472, 473, 476, 244, 345, 370 ; obla-

dess, 4, 11, 39, 41, 44, 502, 505, 512,522,525, tions, 405 oceans,

45, 90,91, 152, 180, 538, 539;. 567,575,584, 520 note; priests, 181*

265, 273, 323,337,405, 586, 591, 597, 603,606. 201, 219, 238,268,2:75,.

425,463,473,474,476, Savitri-Savitar, UZnote. 277, 281, 310, 352,

484,490, 553,575,586, S&yana,Ach&rya, the great 370, 382, 415*, 432*

613. Commentator, passim, * 455,471, 473, 559-, 567,

Sarayu, a river, 473. Sayu, a 'protege of the 570 ; regions; 382,567;
S&rpar3jii!, Kadril, Ser* Asvins, 69, 438, 439; ridges of mountains,

pent-Queen, 608, Scherman, Dr. 520, 567, 244 ; Rishis 498, 552 $

Saryan&vfai, a lake and 576. see Rishis, Seven ; ri-

district, 122, 125,207, Scorpion?, 51. vers, 20, 41, 6-7, 159,

.317, 381, 431. Sea, 9,35, 51, 117,119, 120, 183, 184, 214, 265„

Sasakarna, a Rishi, 128. 149, 239, 307, 345, 303, 318, 344, 345,

Sa3vaU, * the wife of 386, 476, 477,552,566, 352, 370; 442* 452*

Asanga, 107. 582; of air, 9, T31, 132, 479 ; 546 ; rivers of

Satakratu, Lord of a 334, 136, 162; 207, air, 303 ; singers, 485 ;

Hundred Powers, Indra, 224, 247, 254, 279; sisters, 183, 268, 318,

137, 170, 173,178,203, 307, 811, 881, 374, 845, 387 ; eons of Adi-

224, 225, 228, 234, 236- 375, 487, 494, 609 ; a ti, 487; spears of the

238,241,242,249,250, Soma reservoir, 121, Maruts, 166; splen-

263,264,428,556,580. 289, 293 ; water into dours, 166; stations,

Satapatha-Bv&hmana, 43, which the Soma juice 567 ; Sun’s rays, 220,

95, 253, 269, 405,527, falls, 279 ; cloud and 458; threads of sacri-

533, 538, 540, 568,585. rain, 475. flee, 570; tones, 427 ;

Satayfctu = §akti, V asish- Seas, four, 292, 448. troops of Maruts, 458,
tha’s son, 20. Serpent, the, 90, 113; 478.

* S&ty&yana Br&hmana,35, assassin, 43 ; Serpent* Sevenfold Race of men,
237. Queen, 608. 181,

INDEX ON NAMES, ETC.

661

• Seven-headed, hymn, 261; to Brahman rank, 536 154, 257.

sacrifice, 478. note . Sobharis, 147, 149.

Seventy Hymns, the, 62; Singers, Bikvans, 12. Sole born, M&nyu, 500.

see S'iebenzig Lieder. Siniv&li, a lunar Goddess, Sole God, 497.
ShadvinsaBr£hmana,110. 332, 613. Soma, the God, 38, 45,

Ship, 143, 224, 23*0,330, Slnjta, a prottgt of the 53, 98-101, 166, 269,
359, 605 ; hymn, 185; Asvins, 118, 439. 325, 391, 414, 415,474,

sacrifice, 185,350, 444, Sipada,akind of disease, 5,2. 477, 501, 515, 534,535,
471, 540, 547, s= funeral Sipivishta, a title of Vishnu, 539, 570, 57 1, 574,577,

pile, 581. 94,95. 586, 600-603; the plant,

■Sickle, 227, 540. SIrimbitha, a Bishi, 594. habitat of, 283, 309,

Sickness, 71 ; see Disease. Sishtas, an unimportant 3 30, 354, preparation
Siebenzig Lieder des Rig- tribe, 264. of, 107, 270, 309; rap-

veda (Geldner , and SisnfcR&kshasas, etc., tur$ produced by, 169,
Kaegi), 7, 62, 84, 85, 419 note. 194, 198 ; powers of,

394, 400, 408, 431, Sisnadevdh, lewd savages, 193, 198, 199 ; ; elo-
486, 552, 562, 572, 24, 537 notes. quence produced by,

576, 589. Sisters, fingers, 288,289, 259, 288, 293, 315, 321,

Sigrus, a non- Aryan tribe 316,324,328, 329,350, 325,333, 351 356,368;

20. 351, 353, 365, 526 ; Pavam&na (in course

Stlam&vati, name ©r epi- rivers, 345; plants, 410; of purification), 269-

thet of a river, 491. Heaven and Earth, 565; 382, 567 ; deified, 198,

Simid&, a kind of disease, Hawns, 294 ; flames of 199, 227, 269, 271,273,

62. Agni, 387. 374, 376, 501 ; celes-

Simyus, a savage tribe, Si vas, a non- Ary an tribe, tial, 134, 206, 207,292,
17. 18. 296, 369, 381, 560;

Sin, the bonds of, 82,85, Six Expanses, 400, 574. Guard of,Kris£nu,473;

210, 211 ; prayer for Skamblia, Pillar of the guards of, 501 ; Father

removal or forgiveness Universe, 387 note t of Godsj 342, 347, 355,

of, 82, 89, 210, 211, Sky, personified, 76,77, 377; Father of Heaven

4&1 ; of others, prayer 4S3, 474, 476 ; sprung and Earth, 350, 356 ;

for freedom from, 52, from Purusha's head, identified with the Sun,

82 ; punisher of, 64,82, 5 19. 311 ; with the Moon,

S62, 493, 516 ; punish- Slaves, 147, 266. 306, 501 ; omniscient,

meat of, 583; sinless, Sleep- song, 54. 288, 289 ; producer of

60, 62, 65, 82, 210; Smadibha, a Proper Hame, the Gods, 297; maker

sinner, 576. 451. of the firmament, 310;

Sindhu, the Indus, river, Smelting of metals, 486, giver of rain, 295, 301;
sea, 83, 90, 132, 150, 497. slayer of sinners, 289,

1 60, 163, 364, 473, 477, Smith, 380, 486, 497. 300 ; healer of the Bick

490, 494, 555, 583, Snowy Mountains, 566. and giver of sight, 227.

chief of rivers, 490; Soastos, Arrian's name Somayajfla, an offering
feminine, 491. of Suv&stu, 148. of Soma juice, 570 note,

Sindhudvlpa, the name Sobhari, a Vedie Bishi, Son of Strength, see
of a Kshatriya, raised 118, 144, 148, 150, 152 Strength, Son of,

662

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

Sorcerer(s), sorcery, 100, Stallions, flames of the SumneApi, the name of
101. Sun, 886. an Apsaras, 528.

Soul, Individual, 517 note ; Star, the Sun, 7 7, 82, 555, Sun, Sun-God, 8, 9, 85, 39,
Universal, 517, 57%notes. 595 ; the ancient, Agni 60, 68, 74, 77, 78, 82,

Soul of the Universe, as the Sun, 514. Ill, 113, 124, 133, 146,

Man, Embodied Spirit, Starlings, 176. 221, 234, 239,244, 270,

517 note. Steed, the, the Sun, 579. 286, 289, 297,311, 322,

Speech, 130, 251, 484, Steeds’ Lord, Agni, 2. 339, 378, 386, 387, 390,

485, 458, 571, 604; Steer, Steers, see Bull, 392,405,418-420,431,

Lord of, Brihaspati, Bulls. 434, 451, 458,465, 467,

535 note; Soma, 288, Stega, a word of uncertain 473, 487, 501, 502,514,

368; Visvakarman, 497. meaning, 426. 519, 520,525, 547, 554,

Spies of Varuna, 83 ; of Stotar, a praising priest, 562, 565, 566, 569, 571,

the Gods, 392, 89£ 237. 584, 585, 601, 604, 608;

« Spinsters, 485. Streams, 50, 431, 472 ; sprung from Purusbas

Spirit, Boldness, personi- see Rivers. eye, 519; the daughter

fled, 38. Strength, Son of, Agni, pf, SfiryA 501 ; protec-

— — the Supreme, 484 2, 3, 5, 10, 14, 15, 188, tors of, 594.

note sprung from 200, 201, 217, 218, 223, Sun and Moon, 182, 242,
Desire or Love, 575; 231,395, 409, 445, 585, 419, 472, 481, 495,503,

the Embodied, Purusha, 586; Indra, 235, 238, 514, 523, 524, 584,609;

517 ; the presiding, Stuti, Praise, 427 note. the eyes of Agai, 495

518 ; human, goes to Subandhu, a Rishi, 462- note.

the wind at death, 402 ; 465. Sunrita, Pleasantness, 5 8 6,

recall of the departed, Sucha, Such&, Proper Supitrya, epithet of a
461, 462. Names, 416. Rishi, 559.

Spirits, the world of, 402. Sudaksha, a Rishi, 237. Supporter, Indra, 249;
Spring, 518, 597. Sud&s, King of the Trit- Supreme Deity, original-

SraddlA, Faith, 528. sus, 17-22, 27, 34, 35, ly Varuna, 570;— God,

Srenf, the name of an 53, 60, 61, 64, 79, 80. 377 note Soul, 572.

Apsaras, 528. Sudeva, a Proper Name, Sflra, the Sun, 49, 104,

Sribinda, a demon of 116. 316, 319, 321,345,351,

drought, 169. Sudlti, said to be a Pro- 379.

Siingavrish, a Proper per Name, 218. Surabhi, the daughter of

Name, 142. Sddra, a man of the Daksha, 394.

, §rutakaksha, a Vedic fourth class, 519. Sftradeva, a prince, 21 7.

Rishi, 239. Sujflrpi, the name of an Surgery, 104.

Smtarvan, a prince, 222, Apsaras, 528. Surfs, princes, institu tors

223,451, Sum&rutam, the band of of sacrifice, 161, 590.

'! St. Petersburg Lexicon, Maruts, 493. Surya, the Sun, 3, 40,

40, 49, 101, 156, 187, Sumedhas, aProperName, 48,50, 60-63, 66, 69,
191, 223,226, 240, 259, 578, 579. 74, 83, 86, 93, 94, 104,

285, 287, 288, 299, 323, Sumitra, a Rishi, 482, 548. 121, 126,1 43, 152, 161,
338, 356, 366, 393,436, Sumitras, 482. 171, 175-177, 187, 198

447, 505, 543, 560. Summer, 518. §235, 236, 239, 240, 25

INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.

m

» 253, 266, 267, 269,273, Sv£na, the name of a Ten, the, the fingers, 329;

289, 296,303,306,311, guard of Soma, 501 arms = regions, 253 ;

312, 314, 320, 322,325, note. confederate kings* 35,

329, 331, 333, 334,339, Svanadratha, a prince, 106. 79, 80; dames, women,

344, 345, 351, 353,355, Svarga, heaven, 530. the fingers, 274, 304,

361, 362, 373, 375,381, Svarnara, a prince, 112. 324, 326; fingers’ space,

389, 393, 420, 422,423, Svasti, Prosperity, 472. the region of the heart,

426, 431, 434, 435,446, Svety£, a river, 490. 617; horses of the Sun,

451, 467, 470,476, 487, Swan, 176, 291 ; the Sun, 312 ; priests, 219 ;

493, 501, 510,514, 515, 571. regions, 253 ; Bisters,

547, 554, 555, 557,569, Swans, bards, 359 ; the the fingers, 269 ; 289;

571, 582, 586, 590,596, Maruts, 59. Angiraees, 419.

601, 605, 606, 608 ; Swarthy skin, the abori- Tenfold dwelling of Agni,
High Priest of Gods, gines, 331. 453,

253. Swat, 148 note. Thief, thieves, 53, 82, 99,

Surya’s Daughter, Faith, Swing, boat, 84; golden, 223, 386, 505.

381. the Sun, 83. Thirty-four lights, 458.

Stiry&, Sunlight, Daughter Sword, or knife, of Agni, Thirty -three Gods, 166,
of Surya, 68, 69, 127, flame, 409. 167, 175, 181, 265,352.

152,167, 232,438,501- Sy&va, a protege of the Thirty-six chalices for
505: the typical bride, Asvins, 476. Soma libations, 558.

501-505. Sy&vaka, a favourite of Thousand, branches, of

Sflry^s Bridal, 501-503. Indra, 112, 114. the Sun-God or the

Susartu, a river, 490. Sy&v&sva, a Proper Hame, World- Tree, 35; eyes
Sushtaan, the name of 177-180. of Varuna, 37.

a prince, 156, 161. Syumarasmi, a favourite Thdrr, 172 note.

Sushpa, a demon of • of the Asvins, 262. Thread of sacriflce, 136,
drought, 21, 106, 120, . 286, 345, 482, 485,482,

182, 246, 262, 411, 412, TAXTTiEivA BrAhman a, 485, 576, 602.

451, 466, 538, 554; 581. Three, the, heaven, air,

Susfioma, % district f am- Tanfiua p&t, Son of Him- earth, 252; Vftyu,
ed for Soma, 125. self, Agni, 272, 483, 553. Par j any a, Aditya, 420;

Sushom&, a river, 207, T&nva, a liberal noble, attendants on Dawn,

490. 525, 526. 35 ; backs or ridges,

Sustainer, 38, 56. Tapas, Austerity, Fervour, 31 0 ; beakers, 1 08, 136;

Sutlej, 493 note. Penance, 499, 594, 607. daily libations, 12, 376,

Sutudri, the Sutlej, 490. Tapurmurdhan, Flame- 570 ; Dawns, 183, dis-
Suvdstu, the name of a headed, Brihaspati or tances,116,l71; earths,

district, 148. Agai, 606. 83, 99, 184; fertilizing

Suwad, 148. Taranta, a liberal prince, deities, 35; filters, 364;

SvadM, oblation to 305. fire receptacles, 12, 559 ;

Manes, 398, 401. T&rkshya, a personification friends of Indra, 42;
Sv&h&, Ave ! Hail! 59, of the Sun, 591, 604. gatherings, 66; gather-

174, 177,273, 384, 398, Taruksha, a non-Aryan ing-places, 181 ; gene-

484. chief, 196. rations, 253; Goddes-

INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

664

g es , 4 ; Gods, 607 ; Time, 458 note. _ Tritsu, Sudfts, king of
heights, 330 ; holy Times (watches) of night, Tritsus.
words, 292, 301 ; lumi- 116. Tritsus, a tribe, 17-21, 36,

nous realms of heaven, Tiraschi, a Rishi, 243. 36, 79, 80.

213 282 * noble crea- Tirindira, a liberal prince, Troop, the, the Maruts,
tees, 85 *; places of the 123. 37l ;— a, stars, 419.

Asvias, 128 ; places of Tishya, an asterism, 473. Truth, the Law of the
' -Soma, 243 ; Purifiers, Trafficker, 190, 209. Universe, 501, 601,

331 ; reservoirs, 96, 108, Trap, for lions, 422; for 609; Lords of, the

370 ; sacrificial fires, wild bulls, 422, Gods, 39.

547; seats, 310; spheres Trasadasyu, Terror of Tryambaka, a name of
of light, 282 ; steps of Dasyus, the name of a Rudra, 59.

Vi$%u, 93, 95, 130, prince, 21, 128, H7,l5B, Tugra, a prince, 104, 113, *•

134, 107, 263 ; subfc- 178, 179, 260, 428, 592. 117, 192, 223, 250, 437,

est forms, 3,22 ; times Tree, the Boma plant, 451.

(watches) of night/ 583 ; the home of the Tugrya, Bhujyu son of
116 ; tones, 362 ; Ve- Blest, 581. Tugra, 113, 171, 250.

das, 310 note; voices, Trees, 38,56; clouds, 488; Tugryas, 104.

,361 ; wheels of SfiryAs Trikadrukas, three Soma Tuji, a prince aided by
car, 503; Worlds, 109, vessels, or first three Indra, 451.

478. days of the Abhiplava Turva = Turvasa.

Threefold, the, the Uni- ceremony, 136, 238, Turvasa, the eponymus
verse, 557; the three 400. ofa Yedic tribe, 17, 22,

daily sacrifices, 376 ■ Trikshi, a prince, 153. 113, 114, 124, 130, 131 ;

light, 95 ; grass (in Triocular, Rudra 59 note, 191, 306, 452.

three layers), 25 5 ; Triple, height, 329, 333, Turvasas, 115.
wealth, 33. 351, 372 ; splendour, Tfirvay&aa, a King aided

Three-footed, old man 422. by Indra, 465.

with staff, 562. TrishtArad, a river, 490. Tvasbtar, the Divine Ar-
Thrice, in connexion Trishtup, one of the chief tificeV, 4, 38, 39, 163,
with the Asvins, 176. Yedic metres, 123, 362, 166, 254, 273, 337, 384,

Thrice^Eieven, Gods, 400, 577. 390-392, 404, 406, 447,

352; see Thirty-three Trisiras, Three-headed, 449, 452, 456, 473, 475,
Gods. son of Tvashtar, 390, 476,484, 491, 492, 523,

Thrice-seven, Maruts, 83, 491 notes. 537, 553, 571, 613; giver

214, 268; metres, .83; Trisoka,a of Indra, of children, 38.
rivers, 326, 844, 473,490; 192. Twain, the, Heaven and

sorts of sacrifice, 83. Trita, a Yedic deity, 125, Earth, 424*

Thunderbolt, of iron, 244, 134, 183, 197, 262,292, Twins, the, Heaven and

449, 531; of gold, 211, 294, 295, 343, 355,369, Earth, 323, 324 ; day

413, 531 ; — sacrifice, 370, 890, 446, 447,449, and night, 390.

211 ; « priest’s fee, 472, 537, 559, 565. 1

420 ; = the sacrificial Trifca’s maidens, dames, Uddeh, the Soma plant,
exclamation, 588; the priest’s fingers, 492 ; the heavenly, So-

Indra's friend, 452. 291, 295, ma, 373; clouds, 540.

INDEX OF, NAMES, ETC,

m

TOg&tar, the Chanter of Ushas, Dawn, 45, 74-77, 41, 42, 50, 242, 413,

Sdmans, 129, 480. 159, 197, 258, 267, 329, 473, 525.

Ukshany£yana, a Proper 385, 438, 488, 514, 584, V&jas, Vaja and his bro-
Name, 161. 611; see Dawn; her there, the Ribhus, 41, #

Uktha, a hymn of praise, chariot shattered by 50, 17.6.

168, 577. Indra, 488, 584. V&jins, a class of divine

TJkthya, the name of a Ushnih, a Vedic metre, beings, 43, 477.

Soma libation, 3 30 note. hi 7, V&k, Speech, the Word

Ula, a Proper Name, 536 Usij, mother of Kaksht- personified, 41, 83, 130,
note . v&n, 538 note . 250-252, 484, 485, 552,

Upborn, Birthless, the, Usinara, Usinaras, names 558, 559, 571.
the Sun, 184; Visva- of a chief and his peo- Vala, the imprisoning
karman, 498. pie, 463 note . cloud, a demon of

Unit, the, whence the uni- Usinar6ni, wife of Usinara, drought, 138, 159,469,
verse was evolved, 575. 463. 479, 481.

Universal Gods, 52, see Usurers, 209. Valakhilya, the title of

Visvedevas. eleven hymns of Book

Upamasravas, a prince, VadhrimatI, a woman VIII, 199, 259-268.

429. aided by the Asvins, Vdlakliilyas, a race of

UparishtSdbrihafci, a Ve- 476. pygmies, 419 note.

die metre, 53 note. Vadhryasva, a famous Vamr a, a Rishi, 537,538.
Upastuta, a Rishi, 118, Rishi, 481-483. Vamraka— Vamra* 538.

560. Vaikarna, the name of a Vanaspati, the Sacrificial

Upastutas, singers, wor- tribe, 18, 19. Post, 265, 273, 553,554.

shippers, 256. Vaikh&nasas, a race of Vandana, a protegd of the

Upavaktar (upavaktd), hermits, 318. Asvins, 437.

Director, one of the Vaikuntha, a title of V archin, a non- Ary an,
priests, 355, '384 notes, Indra, 448-450, 452. prioce regarded as a
tTrmyfi, a name of Night, Vainya, son of Vena, 129. fiend, 94.

573. Vairftpas, a priestly fami- VarosusMman, a Proper

frrnavfibha, a demon of ly, 393 note . Name, 156,159, 161.

drought, 171, 225 notes. Vaisanta, probably the Varuna, the Encompasser,
tjrnftvatf, Fleecy, name name of a river, 34, God of the Starry

or epithet of a river, Vaisv&nara, Deay to All Heaven, 4, 13, 29, 35-

V 491, Men, Agui, 7-9, 13, 51, 40, 43-45, 47, 48, 51,

Ursa Major, 498. 181, 307, 386, 446,514. 52, 54, 56, 58 ? 60-66,

Urukshayas, members of Vaisya, a man of the 78-85, 88, 139, 143,

a Rishi’s family, 563. agricultural and mer- 144, 146, 147, 156,

Urvasi, a celebrated Ap- cantlle class, 177, 519. 159-162, 164-168, 175,

saras, 36, 139, 412, 527- Vaitarana, a title of Agni, 176, 183-185, 196, 197,

531. 467. 210, 214, 220, 230, 243

Usand KAvya, a Rishi, Yaivaavata, Yaraa, son 252, 263, 292, 306, 3Q7,

son of Kavi and friend of Vivasv4n, 261, 397, 315, 317, 327, 331,335,

of Indra, 1 55, 347, 358, 598. 337,339, 340, 349, 351,

411, 424, 439, 451, 538. V$ja, one of the Ribhus, 355, 362-364, 367, 371,

i

INDEX OE NAMES, ETC,

374, 377, 382, 393, 394, X00, 352, 475, 478, 498, 195, 196, 203, 273,2 75, *

423, 426, 432434, 445, 568, 577, 592, 606; the 279, 287, 288, 290,292,

451,453,454, 458,467, embodiment of light- 298, 299, 306, 311-313,

468, 471, 473-477, 484, ning, 36 ; the birth of, 317, 322, 323,327,331,

487, 490, 499, 500, 503,. 36. 337,339, 340, 343,349,

504,516,522,524,534, Vasishthas, 10, 13, 26, 350, 357, 360-363,377,

535, 538,545, 552,556, 34, 35, 42, 44, 45, 75, 404, 420, 422, 453,473-

569-573, 577, 590, 592, 77, 79, 86, 357, 478. 475, 477, 492, 501,514,

598,600,602,607,612; Vdstoabpati, the Genius 519, 522, 523, 539,557,
the Supreme Deity, of Home, 53, 611 note, 582, 586, 592, 600,607;

570; discoverer of sin, Yasu, Good Lord, 106, sprung from Purusha’s

29 ; discriminator of 107, 145,147, 151, 163, navel, 519 ; Tvashtar’s

truth and falsehood, 172,200,209,217, 218, son-in-law, 163.

51 ; forgiver of sfh, 29, 256, 257, 390, 436, 466, V&yus, 582 note.

83, 84; type of royalty, 520, 525, 546. Yeda, 144 note ; the bunch

61 ; Tuler of the depths Vasus, a class of Gods, of grass used as sacrifice,

of the sea, 83 ; identi- 1, 8, 12, 35, 39, 40, 43, 144 note .

ficd with Soma, 355 ; 47, 48, 50, 52, 56, 59, Vedas, three, 95 note.

brother of man, 394; 74, 75, 143, 164, 185, Vedic Hymns (Part I),

founder of society, 394 175, 180, 253, 265, 322, 90, 136, 205, 395, 486,

note ; superseded by 435, 450, 458, 476, 477, 492, 567, 583; see Miil-

Indra, 570. 493, 51f 535, 539, 553, ler, Prof. Max.

Varundnt, Consort of 571, 573,575, 581, 592. Vedic India (Mme. Z.

Varuna, 38. Yaaukra, a son of Indra, Ragozin), 17, 408, 484,

Yarn na-pdsa, dropsy, 85 420,421. 497, 498, 522, 589,606.

note. Vasurochis, a Proper Vedische Studien (Geld-

Yardtri, Protectress, a Kame, 175. ner and Pischel), 36,

Goddess, 43, 45. Vasurochisas, 174, 175. 48,62, 82, 103, 105,

Yarfitris, 38. Vasurueh, Vasuruohas, 114, 152, 168. 193,21,3,

Vasativar! waters, used said to he Proper 257, 277, 280, 288,

in preparing Soma, 241, Karnes, 379 note. ' 304, 318, 328, 332,380,

274, 280, 284, 303, 309, Y4ta, the Wind-God, 39, 421, 465, 489, 531, 544,

326, 327, 331, 370, 380, 45, 104, 472, 475, 477, 547, 586, 605.

424 notes. 582, 586, 596, 607. Vena, the loving Sun,

Vashat, a sacrificial ex- Ydtarasana, Wind-girdled, 568,569 ; a ProperName,
clamation, 14, 94, 166, the name of a hermit, 129, 525, 591, 602.

405, 460. 582 note. Venas, the Gods, or the

Vashatkdra, theexclama- Vatsa, a Vedic Rishi,119, Maruts, 341, 345. *

tion deified, 458, 488 127-130,132, Venya, son of Vena, 591,

notes. Vdv&tar, said to he a 602.

Vasishtha, a famous Ri- King, 103 note. Vesa, a demon or savage, .

shi, seer of Book VII., Vayata, a prince, 34. 451.

1, 10, II, 17, 20,25, 28, Yfiyu, the Wind-God, 26, Vetasu, Vetasus, Proper
34, 36, 47, 52,54,58,69, 35, 39, 44, 62, 64, 85- Karnes, 451.

70, 82, 84,87,90,91,95, 88, 106, 1 25, 130, 163, Vibhidaka, Vibhttaka, a „

♦; ,

* CORRIGENDA.

VOL. I. ( Additional ).

Page 239 line 7 read honours (t. e. song honours) for honour
i* 370 # 9 from below read Here, Indra, girt by Maruts, drink thou
Soma, for Here, Indra, drink thou Soma with the Maruts,
* 684 » 17 from below of middle column read Hotar, chief priest for

Hotar, thief priest

VOL. II.

s

Page

3 line

2 from below read 2 for 1

<

\

f

n

48

M

2 read HYMN for HYMN

 ;

V

72

V

8 from below read a comma after you for the broken stop

i'

if

76

w

5 from below read pathya iorpathy’d

i '

»

89

n

6 read blessings for blesssngs

{'

*

97

a

7 from below read performing for performin

n

105

if

18 read ecstasy for ectstasy

!

H

114

i»

2 of verse 9 read radiant for radian

'

»

121

a

3 of verse 22 read soon for suoo

if

131

a

3 of verse 5 read Turvasa for Turvsa

II .

185

w

1 of verse 4 insert a full stop after flows

ft

245

n

last of notes read- of for o

A

256

A

2 from below read in for n

§.\;, ;

302

a

16 from below read us. for us

$i' "• . •

w

303

W

2 of note 1 read a comma for the broken stop after here

t-

■* i».

327

a

2 from below insert a hyphen after foe

N

328

a

3 of note 1 read sprinkled for sprinkled

a

333

a

3 of notes insert a comma after is

fa f » t '

a

369

a

last of notes read sacrifice for sacrifices

a

375

a

2 of verse 25 read Indra’s for I lira’s

ii

ii

377

a

4 of notes read sacrificial for sacrifical

1,

»

402

a

1 of notes insert a hyphen after some

* ,

403

a

9 of notes read aquatic for acquatic

»

406

a

4 of verse 5 insert a full stop after Ordainer

h

a

467

a

3 of verse 17 insert a hyphen after Arya

%

468

»

1 of note 23 read Asvaghna for Asvaghna

469

a

last of notes read The Hymns for Hymns

a

484

a

1 insert a comma after Goddesses

672

CORRIGENDA#

Page 490 line 7 from below read Vip&s for Vip8&

« 608 » 5 read and for add

w 520 » 0 read The Hymns for Hymns

» r . • 9 from below read Purdna for Purdna

.» 538 * 1 of verse 12 insert a comma after swiftly

V , 545 i» 8 insert a comma after conquer
tr 548 i» last but one of text prefix tlie numeral 3$

n 549 » 1 of verse 4 read V&yu /or y&yu

ft 550 # 4 of verse 1 read waters ? for waters.

s 552 « 4 of verse 1 The Hymns for Hymns

* 557 if 1 of notes read the for tkr

if 583 if 2 of notes read The Hymns for Hymns

* ' 587 if 3 of" notes make the same correction

if 597 * 2 of notes read obwohl for obvohl

* 598 n % of note read The Hymns for Hymns

; i 602 ft 2 of verse 5 insert a hyphen after sted

* . 609 f> last of notes read The Hymns for Hymns

Central Archaeological Library,

NEW DELHI.
ft-**- Qva /& jy 2 -

CallNo^ 2-1// '

-T heT
^E\7 0RPB r !
book c °-
