Evelyn Underhill: Mysticism (1911)
==================================
Evelyn Underhill’s Mysticism: A Study in the Nature and Development of Man’s Spiritual Consciousness (1910/1911). The classic English study of mysticism; source: Internet Archive.

M YSTICISM


by

EVELYN UNDERHILL


UNIVERSITY PAPERBACKS


METHOEN : LONDON



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


T his book falls naturally into two parts; each of which
is really complete in itself, though they are in a sense
complementary to one another. Whilst the second and
longest part contains a somewhat detailed study of the nature
and development of man's spiritual or mystical consciousness, the
first is intended rather to provide an introduction to the general
subject of mysticism. Exhibiting it by turns from the point of
view of metaphysics, psychology, and symbolism, it is an attempt
to gather between the covers of one volume information at
present scattered amongst many monographs and text-books
written in divers tongues, and to give the student in a compact
form at least the elementary facts in regard to each of those
subjects which are most closely connected with the study of the
mystics.

Those mystics, properly speaking, can only be studied in their
works: works which are for the most part left unread by those
who now talk much about mysticism. Certainly the general reader
has this excuse, that the masterpieces of mystical literature, full
of strange beauties though they be, offer considerable difficulties
to those who come to them unprepared. In the first seven chapters
of this book I have tried to remove a few of these difficulties; to
provide the necessary preparation; and to exhibit the relation in
which mysticism stands to other forms of life. If, then, the readers
of this section are enabled by it to come to the encounter of
mystical literature with a greater power of sympathetic com-
prehension than they previously possessed, it will have served
the purpose for which it has been composed.

It is probable that almost every such reader, according to
the angle from which he approaches the subject, will here find a
good deal which seems to him superfluous. But different types
of mind will find this unnecessary elaboration in different places.
The psychologist, approaching from the scientific standpoint,
eager for morbid phenomena, has little use for disquisitions
on symbolism, religious or other. The symbolist, approaching
from the artistic standpoint, seldom admires the proceedings of
psychology. I believe, however, that none who wish to obtain,
an idea of mysticism in its wholeness, as a form of life, can afford



PREFACE


xiii


to neglect any of the aspects on which these pages venture to
touch. The metaphysician and the psychologist are unwise if they
do not consider the light thrown upon the ideas of the mystics
by their attitude towards orthodox theology. The theologian is
still more unwise if he refuse to hear the evidence of psychology.
For the benefit of those whose interest in mysticism is chiefly
literary, and who may care to be provided with a clue to the
symbolic and allegorical element in the writings of the contem-
platives, a short section on those symbols of which they most
often make use has been added. Finally, the persistence amongst
us of the false opinion which confuses mysticism with occult
philosophy and psychic phenomena, has made it necessary to
deal with the vital distinction which exists between it and every
form of magic.

Specialists in any of these great departments of knowledge will
probably be disgusted by the elementary and superficial manner
in which their specific sciences are here treated. But this book
does not venture to address itself to specialists. From those who
are already fully conversant with the matters touched upon, it asks
the indulgence which really kindhearted adults are always ready
'co extend towards the efforts of youth. Philosophers are earnestly
advised to pass over the first two chapters, and theologians to
practise the same charity in respect of the section dealing with
their science.

The giving of merely historical information is no part of the
present plan: except in so far as chronology has a bearing upon
the most fascinating of all histories, the history of the spirit of
man. Many books upon mysticism have been based on the
historical method: amongst them two such very different works
as Vaughan's supercilious and unworthy “Hours with the
^lystics” and Dr. Inge's scholarly Bampton lectures. It is a
\nethod which seems to be open to some objection : since mysticism
avowedly deals with the individual not as he stands in relation
to the civilization of his time, but as he stands in relation to
truths that are timeless. All mystics, said Saint-Martin, speak
the same language and come from the same country. As against
that fact, the place which they happen to occupy in the kingdom
of this world matters little. Nevertheless, those who are unfamiliar
with the history of mysticism properly so called, and to whom
the names of the great contemplatives convey no accurate sug-
gestion of period or nationality, may be glad to have a short
statement of their order in time and distribution in space. Also,
same knowledge of the genealogy of mysticism is desirable if
we are to distinguish the original contributions of each individual
from the mass of speculation and statement which he inherits



xiv MYSTICISM

from the past. Those entirely unacquainted with these matters
may find it helpful to glance at the Appendix before proceeding i
to the body of the work; since few things are more disagreeable
than the constant encounter of persons to whom we have not been
introduced.

The second part of the book, for which the first seven chapters
aie intended to provide a preparation, is avowedly psychological.
It is an attempt to set out and justify a definite theory of the
nature of man’s mystical consciousness: the necessary stages of
organic growth through which the typical mystic passes, the
state of equilibrium towards which he tends. Each of these
stages — and also the characteristically mystical and still largely
mysterious experiences of visions and voices, contemplation and
ecstasy — though viewed from the standpoint of psychology, is
illustrated from the lives of the mystics; and where possible
in their own words. In planning these chapters I have been
considerably helped by M. Delacroix’s brilliant "Etudes sur le
Mysticisme,’’ though unable to accept his conclusions: and here
gladly take the opportunity of acknowledging my debt to him
and also to Baron von Hiigel’s classic "Mystical Element of
Religion.” This book, which only came into my hands when
my own was planned and partly written, has since been a con-
stant source of stimulus and encouragement.

Finally, it is perhaps well to say something as to the exact
sense in which the term "Mysticism” is here understood. One
of the most abused words in the English language, it has been
used in different and often mutually exclusive senses by religion,
poetry, and philosophy: has been claimed as an excuse for every
kind of occultism, for dilute transcendentalism, vapid sym-
bolism, religious or aesthetic sentimentality, and bad metaphysics.
On the other hand, it has been freely employed as a term of con-
tempt by those who have criticized these things. It is much tc
be hoped that it may be restored sooner or later to its old meaning,
as the science or art of the spiritual life.

Meanwhile, those who use the term "Mysticism” are bound
in self-defence to explain what they mean by it. Broadly speaking,
I understand it to be the expression of the innate tendency of
the human spirit towards complete harmony with the transcen-
dental order; whatever be the theological formula under which
that order is understood. This tendency, in great mystics, gradu-
ally captures the whole field of consciousness; it dominates their
life and, in the experience called "mystic union," attains its end
Whether that end be called the God of Christianity, the World-
soul of Pantheism, the Absolute of Philosophy, the desire to
attain it and the movement towards it — so long a- c this is a genuine



PREFACE


xv


life process and not an intellectual speculation — is the proper
subject of mysticism. I believe this movement to represent the true
line of development of the highest form of human consciousness.

It is a pleasant duty to offer my heartiest thanks to the many
kind friends and fellow students, of ail shades of opinion, who
have given me their help and encouragement. Amongst those to
whom my heaviest debt of gratitude is due are Mr. W. Scott
Palmer, for much valuable, generous, and painstaking assistance,
particularly in respect of the chapter upon Vitalism: and Miss
Margaret Robinson, who in addition to many other kind offices,
has made all the translations from Meister Eckhart and Mechthild
of Magdeburg here given.

Sections of the MS. have been kindly read by the Rev. Dr.
Inge, by Miss May Sinclair, and by Miss Eleanor Gregory; from
all of whom I have received much helpful and expert advice.
To Mr. Arthur Symons my thanks and those of my readers are
specially due; since it is owing to his generous permission that
I am able to make full use of his beautiful translations of the
poems of St. John of the Cross. Others who have given me much
help in various directions, and to whom most grateful acknow-
ledgments are here offered, are Miss Constance Jones, Miss Ethel
Barker, Mr. J. A. Herbert of the British Museum — who first
brought to my notice the newly discovered “Mirror of Simple
Souls’’ — the Rev. Dr. Arbuthnot Nairn, Mr. A. E. Waite, and
Mr. H. Stuart Moore, F.S.A. The substance of two chapters —
those upon "The Characteristics of Mysticism” and "Mysticism
and Magic”— has already appeared in the pages of The Quest
and The Fortnightly Review. These sections are here reprinted by
kind permission of their respective editors.

E. U.

Feast of St. John oj the Cross

igio


CONTENTS


PART ONE

THE MYSTIC FACT

fAGK

PREFACE VII

CHAPTER I

THE POINT OF DEPARTURE 3

CHAPTER II

MYSTICISM AND VITALISM 26

CHAPTER III

MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 44

CHAPTER IV

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 70

CHAPTER V

MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 95

CHAPTER VI

MYSTICISM AND SYM130L1SM I25

CHAPTER VII

MYSTICISM AND MAGIC 149


PART TWO

THE MYSTIC WAY

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY ... 167

CHAPTER II

THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF

xvii


176



xviii MYSTICISM

CHAPTER III

PAG1

THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF ........ I98

CHAPTER IV

THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 232

CHAPTER V

VOICES AND VISIONS 266

CHAPTER VI

introversion: part i: recollection and quiet .... 298

CHAPTER VII

introversion: part ii: contemplation 328

CHAPTER VIII

ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 338

CHAPTER IX

THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 380

CHAPTER X

THE UNITIVE LIFE 4I3

CONCLUSION . 444

APPENDIX

A HISTORICAL SKFTCH OF EUROPEAN MYSTICISM FROM THE
BEGINNING OF THE CHRISTIAN ERA TO THE DEATH OF

BLAK * 453

BIBLIOGRAPHY 475


INDEX


509



PART ONE


THE MYSTIC FACT



"What the world, which truly knows nothing, calls ‘mysticism’ is the
science of ultimaies, ... the science of self-evident Reality, which cannot
be ‘reasoned about,’ because it is the object of pure reason or perception.
The Babe sucking its mother’s breast, and the Lover returning, after
twenty years’ separation, to his home and food in the same bosom, are
the types and princes of Mystics.”

Coventry Patmore,

"The Rod, the Root, and the Flower"



MYSTICISM


CHAPTER I

THE POINT OF DEPARTURE


The mystic type — its persistence — Man’s quest of Truth — The Mystics claim
£o have attained it — The foundations of experience — The Self — its sensations —
ts concepts — The sense-world — -its unreal character — Philosophy — its classic
.henries of Reality — Naturalism — its failures — Idealism — its limitations — Philo-
sophic Scepticism — the logical end of Intellectualism — Failure of philosophy and
Science to discover Reality — Emotional and spiritual experience — its validity —
Religion — Suffering — Beauty — Their mystical aspects — Mysticism as the science
pf the Real — Its statements — its practice — It claims direct communion with the
Absolute

T he most highly developed branches of the human family
have in common one peculiar characteristic. They tend
to produce — sporadically it is true, and often in the teeth
Iff adverse external circumstances - a curious and definite type of
personality; a type which refuses to be satisfied with that which
other men call experience, and is inclined, in the words of its
enemies, to “deny the world in order that it may find reality.” We
meet these persons in the east and the west; in the ancient, medi-
aeval, and modem worlds. Their one passion appears to be the
prosecution of a certain spiritual and intangible quest: the finding
of a “way out” or a “way back” to some desirable state in which
alone they can satisfy their craving for absolute truth. This quest,
tor them, has constituted the whole meaning of life. They have
made for it without effort sacrifices which have appeared enormous
<D other men: and it is an indirect testimony to its objective actu-
ality, that whatever the place or period in which they have arisen,
:heir aims, doctrines and methods have been substantially the
same. Their experience, therefore, forms a body of evidence,
mriously self-consistent and often mutually explanatory, which
nust be taken into account before we can add up the sum of the
snergies and potentialities of the human spirit, or reasonably
speculate on its relations to the unknown world which lies outside
:he boundaries of sense.

All men, at one time or another, have fallen in love with the
veiled Isis whom they call Truth. With most, this has been a
passing passion : they have early seen its hopelessness and turned
Sf more practical things. But others remain all their lives the
levout lovers of reality: though the manner of their love, the



MYSTICISM


4

vision which they make to themselves of the beloved object
varies enormously. Some see Truth as Dante saw Beatrice: a;
adorable yet intangible figure, found in this world yet revealin
the next. To others she seems rather an evil but an irresistibl
enchantress: enticing, demanding payment and betraying ho
lover at the last. Some have seen her in a test tube, and some in ,
poet’s dream: some before the altar, others in the slime. Th
extreme pragmatists have even sought her in the kitchen; dc
daring that she may best be recognized by her utility. Las
stage of all, the philosophic sceptic has comforted an unsuccessfv
courtship by assuring himself that his mistress is not really there
Under whatsoever symbols they have objectified their quesl
none of these seekers have ever been able to assure the worl
that they have found, seen face to face, the Reality behind th
veil. But if we may trust the reports of the mystics— and the
are reports given with a strange accent of certainty and good fait:
—they have succeeded where all these others have failed, i
establishing immediate communication between the spirit of mar
entangled as they declare amongst material things, and that ‘‘onl
Reality, that immaterial and final Being, which some philosopher
call the Absolute, and most theologians call God. This, the
sa y — and here many who are not mystics agree with them — i
the hidden Truth which is the object of man’s craving; the on!
satisfying goal of his quest. Hence, they should claim from us thi
same attention that we give to other explorers of countries i:
which we are not competent to adventure ourselves; for th
mystics are the pioneers of the spiritual world, and we have n
right to deny validity to their discoveries, merely because we lac]
the opportunity or the courage necessary to those who woul<
prosecute such explorations for themselves.

It is the object of this book to attempt a description, and alsi
though this is needless for those who read that description i:
good faith a justification of these experiences and the conclu
sions which have been drawn from them. So remote, however
are these matters from our ordinary habits of thought, tha
their investigation entails, in those who would attempt to under
stand them, a definite preparation: a purging of the intellect. A
with those ■who came of old to the Mysteries, purification is hen
the gate of knowledge. We must come to this encounter witl
minds cleared of prejudice and convention, must deliberateh
break with our inveterate habit of taking the “visible world” fo
granted ; our lazy assumption that somehow science is "real’
and metaphysics is not. We must pull down our own card houses—
descend, as the mystics say, “into our nothingness”— and examiin
for ourselves the foundations of all possible human experience



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE


5

[before we are in a position to criticize the buildings of the vision-
aries, the poets, and the saints. We must not begin to talk of the
unreal world of these dreamers until we have discovered — if we
can — a real world with which it may be compared.

Such a criticism of reality is of course the business of philosophy
I need hardly say that this book is not written by a philosopher,
nor is it addressed to students of that imperial science. Neverthe-
less, amateurs though we be, we cannot reach our starting-point
without trespassing to some extent on philosophic ground. That
i ground covers the whole area of first principles: and it is to first
principles that we must go, if we would understand the true
significance of the mystic type.

Let us then begin at the beginning: and remind ourselves of
a few of the trite and primary facts which all practical persons
agree to ignore. That beginning, for human thought, is of course
the I, the Ego, the self-conscious subject which is writing this
fbook, or the other self-conscious subject which is reading it; and
; which declares, in the teeth of all arguments, I AM. 1 Here is a
1 point as to which we all feel quite sure. No metaphysician has

i yet shaken the ordinary individual's belief in his own existence.
The uncertainties only begin for most of us when we ask what
else is.

( To this I, this conscious self "imprisoned in the body like an
oyster in his shell/' 2 come, as we know, a constant stream of
messages and experiences. Chief amongst these are the stimulation
of the tactile nerves whose result we call touch, the vibrations
taken up by the optic nerve which we call light, and those taken
up by the ear and perceived as sound.

What do these experiences mean? The first answer of the
unsophisticated Self is, that they indicate the nature of the
external world: it is to the "evidence of her senses" that she turns,
%vhen she is asked what the world is like. From the messages
received through those senses, which pour in on her whether she
will or no, battering upon her gateways at every instant and from
every side, she constructs that "sense-world" which is the "real
and solid world" of normal men. As the impressions come in — or
rather those interpretations of the original impressions which
her nervous system supplies — she pounces on them, much as
players in the spelling game pounce on the separate letters dealt

Even this I AM, which has seemed safe ground to most metaphysicians, is of
course combated by certain schools of philosophy. “The word Sum,” said Eckhart
long ago, “can be spoken by no creature but by God only: for it becomes the
creature to testify of itself Non Sum.” In a less mystical strain Lotze, and after
him Bradley and other modem writers, have devoted much destructive criticism
the concept of the Ego as the starting-point of philosophy: looking upon it
as a large, and logically unwarrantable, assumption.

• Plato, “Phaedrus,” § 250.



MYSTICISM


6

out to them. She sorts, accepts, rejects, combines: and then
triumphantly produces from them a “concept” which is, she.
says, the external world. With an enviable and amazing simplicity
she attributes her own sensations to the unknown universe. The
stars, she says, are bright ; the grass is green. For her, as for the
philosopher Hume, “reality consists in impressions and ideas.”

It is immediately apparent, however, that this sense-world,
this seemingly real external universe — though it may be useful
and valid in other respects — cannot be the external world, but
only the Self s projected picture of it. 1 It is a work of art, not
a scientific fact; and, whilst it may well possess the profound
significance proper to great works of art, is dangerous if treated
as a subject of analysis. Very slight investigation shows that it
is a picture whose relation to reality is at best symbolic and ap-
proximate, and which would have no meaning for selves whose
senses, or channels of communication, happened to be arranged
upon a different plan. The evidence of the senses, then, cannot
be accepted as evidence of the nature of ultimate reality: useful
servants, they are dangerous guides. Nor can their testimony
disconcert those seekers whose reports they appear to contradict.

The conscious self sits, so to speak, at the receiving end of 0
telegraph wire. On any other theory than that of mysticism, it is
her one channel of communication with the hypothetical “external
world.” The receiving instrument registers certain messages.
She does not know, and — so long as she remains dependent on
that instrument — never can know, the object, the reality at the
other end of the wire, by which those messages are sent ; neither
can the messages truly disclose the nature of that object. But she
is justified on the whole in accepting them as evidence that some-
thing exists beyond herself and her receiving instrument. It is
obvious that the structural peculiarities of the telegraphic instru-
ment will have exerted a modifying effect upon the message 7 *
That which is conveyed as dash and dot, colour and shape, may
have been received in a very different form. Therefore this message,
though it may in a partial sense be relevant to the supposed
reality at the other end, can never be adequate to it. There will be
fine vibrations which it fails to take up, others which it confuses
together. Hence a portion of the message is always lost; or, in

1 Thus Lckharl, “Every time that the powers of the soul come into contact
with created things, they receive the ct cate images and likenesses from the created
thing and absorb them. In this way arises the soul's knowledge of created things.
Created things cannot come nearer to the soul than this, and the soul can only
approach created things by the voluntary reception of images. And it is through
the presence of the image that the soul approaches the cieated world: for the
image js a 1 king, which the soul creates with her own powers. Does the soul wa**t
to know the nature of a stone — a horse — a man? She forms an image.” — Meister
Eckh.irt, Pred. i. (“Mystische Schriiten,” p. 15).



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE 7

other language, there are aspects of the world which we can
Uiever know.

The sphere of our possible intellectual knowledge is thus
strictly conditioned by the limits of our own personality. On
this basis, not the ends of the earth, but the external termini of
our own sensory nerves, are the termini of our explorations : and
to “know oneself'' is really to know one's universe. We are locked
up with our receiving instruments: we cannot get up and walk
away in the hope of seeing whither the lines lead. Eckhart’s words
are still final for us: “the soul can only approach created things
by the voluntary reception of images." Did some mischievous
Demiurge choose to tickle our sensory apparatus in a new way,
we should receive by this act a new universe.

William James once suggested as a useful exercise for young
idealists, a consideration of the changes which would be worked
in our ordinary world if the various branches of our receiving
instruments exchanged duties; if, for instance, we heard all
colours and saw all sounds. Such a remark throws a sudden light
on the strange and apparently insane statement of the visionary
Saint-Martin, “I heard flowers that sounded, and saw notes that
£hone"; and on the reports of other mystics concerning a rare
moment of consciousness in which the senses are fused into a single
and ineffable act of perception, and colour and sound are known
as aspects of one thing . 1

Since music is but an interpretation of certain vibrations under-
taken by the ear, and colour an interpretation of other vibrations
performed by the eye, this is less mad than it sounds and may
yet be brought within the radius of physical science. Did such
an alteration of our senses take place the world would still send
us the same messages — that strange unknown world from which,
on this hypothesis, we are hermetically sealed — but we should
interpret them differently. Beauty would still be ours, though
speaking another tongue. The bird's song would then strike our
retina as a pageant of colour: we should see the magical tones of
the wind, hear as a great fugue the repeated and harmonized
greens of the forest, the cadences of stormy skies. Did we realize
how slight an adjustment of our organs is needed to initiate us
into such a world, we should perhaps be less contemptuous of
those mystics who tell us that they apprehended the Absolute
as “heavenly music" or “Uncreated Light ': less fanatical in our
determination to make the solid “world of common sense" the only
standard of realito This “world of common sense" is a conceptual

Thus Edward Ca penter says of his own experience of the mystical con-
sciousness, “The perception seems to be one in which all the senses unite into
one sense" (quoted in Bucke's “Cosmic Consciousness," p. 198).



MYSTICISM


8

world. It may represent an external universe: it certainly does
represent the activity of the human mind. Within that mind it is*
built up: and there most of us are content “at ease for aye to
dwell/' like the soul in the Palace of Art.

A direct encounter with absolute truth, then, appears to be
impossible for normal non-mystical consciousness. We cannot
know the reality, or even prove the existence, of the simplest
object: though this is a limitation which few people realize
acutely and most would deny. But there persists in the race a
type of personality which does realize this limitation : and cannot
be content with the sham realities that furnish the universe of
normal men. It is necessary, as it seems, to the comfort of persons
of this type to form for themselves some image of the Something
or Nothing which is at the end of their telegraph lines: some
“conception of being," some “theory of knowledge." They are
tormented by the Unknowable, ache for first principles, demand
some background to the shadow show of things. In so far as man
possesses this temperament, he hungers for reality, and must
satisfy that hunger as best he can: staving off starvation, though
he many not be filled.

It is doubtful whether any two selves have offered themselves*
exactly the same image of the truth outside their gates : for a living
metaphysic, like a living religion, is at bottom a strictly personal
affair — a matter, as William James reminded us, of vision rather
than of argument . 1 Nevertheless such a living metaphysic may —
and if sound generally does — escape the stigma of subjectivism
by outwardly attaching itself to a traditional School; as personal
religion may and should outwardly attach itself to a traditional
church. Let us then consider shortly the results arrived at by these
traditional schools — the great classic theories concerning the
nature of reality. In them we see crystallized the best that the
human intellect, left to itself, has been able to achieve.

i. The most obvious and generally accepted explanation of
the world is of course that of Naturalism , or naive Realism : the
point of view of the plain man. Naturalism states simply that
we see the real world, though we may not see it very well. What
seems to normal healthy people to be there, is approximately
there. It congratulates itself on resting in the concrete ; it accepts
material things as real. In other words, our corrected and correlated
sense impressions, raised to their highest point of efficiency, form
for it the only valid material of knowledge: knowledge itself
being the classified results of exact observation.

Such an attitude as this may be a counsel of prudence, in view
of our ignorance of all that lies beyond : but it can never satisfy
* “A Pluralistic Universe," p. io.



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE


9

our hunger for reality. It says in effect, 'The room in which we
find ourselves is fairly comfortable. Draw the curtains, for the
night is dark : and let us devote ourselves to describing the furni-
ture/' Unfortunately, however, even the furniture refuses to
accommodate itself to the naturalistic view of things. Once we
begin to examine it attentively, we find that it abounds in hints
of wonder and mystery : declares aloud that even chairs and tables
are not what they seem.

We have seen that the most elementary criticism, applied to
any ordinary object of perception, tends to invalidate the simple
and comfortable creed of "common sense"; that not merely faith,
but gross credulity, is needed by the mind which would accept
the apparent as the real. I say, for instance, that I "see" a house.
I can only mean by this that the part of my receiving instrument
which undertakes the duty called vision is affected in a certain way,
and arouses in my mind the idea “house." The idea "house" is
now treated by me as a real house, and my further observations
will be an unfolding, enriching, and defining of this image. But
what the external reality is which evoked the image that I call
"house," I do not know and never can know. It is as mysterious,

’ as far beyond my apprehension, as the constitution of the angelic
choirs. Consciousness shrinks in terror from contact with the
mighty verb "to be/T may of course call in one sense to "corrobo-
rate," as we trustfully say, the evidence of the other ; may approach
the house, and touch it. Then the nerves of my hand will be affected
by a sensation which I translate as hardness and solidity; the eye
by a peculiar and wholly incomprehensible sensation called
redness; and from these purely personal changes my mind con-
structs and externalizes an idea which it calls red bricks. Science
herself, however, if she be asked to verify the reality of these
perceptions, at once declares that though the material world be
i real, the ideas of solidity and colour are but hallucination. They
belong to the human animal, not to the physical universe: pertain
to accident not substance, as scholastic philosophy would say.

"The red brick," says Science, "is a mere convention. In reality
that bit, like all other bits of the universe, consists, so far as I
know at present, of innumerable atoms whirling and dancing one
about the other. It is no more solid than a snowstorm. Were you to
eat of Alice-in- Wonderland's mushroom and shrink to the dimen-
sions of the infra-world, each atom with its electrons might seem
to you a solar system and the red brick itself a universe. Moreover,
these atoms themselves elude me as I try to grasp them. They
are only manifestations of something else. Could I track matter
to its lair, I might conceivably discover that it has no extension,
and become an idealist in spite of myself. As for redness, as you



10


MYSTICISM


call it, that is a question of the relation between your optic nerve
and the light waves which it is unable to absorb. This evening,
when the sun slopes, your brick will probably be purple; a very
little deviation from normal vision on your part would make it
green. Even the sense that the object of perception is outside
yourself may be fancy ; since you as easily attribute this external
quality to images seen in dreams, and to waking hallucinations,
as you do to those objects which, as you absurdly say, are ' really
there * ”

Further, there is no trustworthy standard by which we can
separate the “rear’ from the “unreal” aspects of phenomena.
Such standards as exist are conventional : and correspond to con-
venience, not to truth. It is no argument to say that most men
see the world in much the same way, and that this “way” is the
true standard of reality: though for practical purposes we have
agreed that sanity consists in sharing the hallucinations of our
neighbours. Those who are honest with themselves know that
this “sharing” is at best incomplete. By the voluntary adoption of
a new conception of the universe, the fitting of a new alphabet
to the old Morse code — a proceeding which we call the acquire-
ment of knowledge — we can and do change to a marked extent
our way of seeing things : building up new worlds from old sense
impressions, and transmuting objects more easily and thoroughly
than any magician. “Eyes and ears,” said Heracleitus, “are
bad witnesses to those who have barbarian souls”: and even
those whose souls are civilized tend to see and hear all things
through a temperament. In one and the same sky the poet may
discover the habitation of angels, whilst the sailor sees only a
promise of dirty weather ahead. Hence, artist and surgeon,
Christian and rationalist, pessimist and optimist, do actually and
truly live in different and mutually exclusive worlds, not only of
thought but also of perception. Only the happy circumstance that
our ordinary speech is conventional, not realistic, permits us to
conceal from one another the unique and lonely world in which
each lives. Now and then an artist is born, terribly articulate,
foolishly truthful, who insists on “Speaking as he saw.” Then
other men, lapped warmly in their artificial universe, agree that
he is mad: or, at the very best, an “extraordinarily imaginative
fellow.”

Moreover, even this unique world of the individual is not
permanent. Each of us, as we grow and change, works incessantly
and involuntarily at the re-making of our sensual universe. We
behold at any specific moment not “that which is,” but “that which
we are”; and personality undergoes many readjustments in the
course of its passage from birth through maturitv to death. The



II


THE POINT OF DEPARTURE

mind which seeks the Real, then, in this shifting and subjective
"natural” world is of necessity thrown back on itself: on images
and concepts which owe more to the "seer” than to the "seen.”
But Reality must be real for all, once they have found it : must
exist "in itself” upon a plane of being unconditioned by the per-
ceiving mind. Only thus can it satisfy that mind's most vital
instinct, most sacred passion — its "instinct for the Absolute,” its
passion for truth.

You are not asked, as a result of these antique and elementary
propositions, to wipe clean the slate of normal human experience,
and cast in your lot with intellectual nihilism. You are only asked
to acknowledge that it is but a slate, and that the white scratches
upon it which the ordinary man calls facts, and the Scientific
Realist calls knowledge, are at best relative and conventionalized
symbols of that aspect of the unknowable reality at which they
hint. This being so, whilst we must all draw a picture of some kind
on our slate and act in relation therewith, we cannot deny the
validity — though we may deny the usefulness — of the pictures
which others produce, however abnormal and impossible they
may seem; since these are sketching an aspect of reality which
has not come within our sensual field, and so does not and cannot
form part of our world. Yet as the theologian claims that the
doctrine of the Trinity veils and reveals not Three but One, so the
varied aspects under which the universe appears to the perceiving
consciousness hint at a final reality, or in Kantian language, a
Transcendental Object, which shall be, not any one, yet all of its
manifestations; transcending yet including the innumerable
fragmentary worlds of individual conception. We begin, then,
to ask what can be the nature of this One; and whence comes the
persistent instinct which — receiving no encouragement from sense
experience — apprehends and desires this unknown unity, this
all-inclusive Absolute, as the only possible satisfaction of its thirst
for truth.

2. The second great conception of Being — Idealism — has
arrived by a process of elimination at a tentative answer to this
question. It whisks us far from the material universe, with its
interesting array of "things,” its machinery, its law, into the pure,
if thin, air of a metaphysical world. Whilst the naturalist's world
is constructed from an observation of the evidence offered by the
senses, the Idealist's world is constructed from an observation of
the processes of thought. There are but two things, he says in
effect, about which we are sure : the existence of a thinking subject,
a conscious Self, and of an object, an Idea, with which that subject
^leals. We know, that is to say, both Mind and Thought. What
we call the universe is really a collection of such thoughts; and



12


MYSTICISM


these, we agree, have been more or less distorted by the subject,
the individual thinker, in the process of assimilation. Obviously,
we do not think all that there is to be thought, conceive all
that there is to be conceived ; neither do we necessarily combine
in right order and proportion those ideas which we are capable
of grasping. Reality, says Objective Idealism, is the complete,
undistorted Object, the big thought, of which we pick up these
fragmentary hints: the world of phenomena which we treat as
real being merely its shadow show or "manifestation in space and
time.” ^

According to the form of Objective Idealism here chosen from
amongst many as typical — for almost every Idealist has his own
scheme of metaphysical salvation 1 — we live in a universe which
is, in popular language, the Idea, or Dream of its Creator. We, as
Tweedledum explained to Alice in the most philosophic of all
fairy tales, are "just part of the dream.” All life, all phenomena,
are the endless modifications and expressions of the one trans-
cendent Object, the mighty and dynamic Thought of one Absolute
Thinker, in which we are bathed. This Object, or certain aspects
of it — and the place of each individual consciousness within the
Cosmic Thought, or, as we say, our position in life, largely deter-
mines which these aspects shall be — is interpreted by the senses
and conceived by the mind, under limitations which we are accus-
tomed to call matter, space and time. But we have no reason to
suppose that matter, space, and time are necessarily parts of
reality; of the ultimate Idea. Probability points rather to their
being the pencil and paper with which we sketch it. As our vision,
our idea of things, tends to approximate more and more to that of
the Eternal Idea, so we get nearer and nearer to reality: for the
idealist's reality is simply the Idea, or Thought of God. This, he
says, is the supreme unity at which all the illusory appearances
that make up the widely differing worlds of "common sense,” of
science, of metaphysics, and of art dimly hint. This is the sense
in which it can truly be said that only the supernatural possesses
reality; for that world of appearance which we call natural is
certainly largely made up of preconception and illusion, of the
hints offered by the eternal real world of Idea outside our gates,
and the quaint concepts which we at our receiving instrumejit
manufacture from them.

There is this to be said for the argument of Idealism : that in
the last resort, the destinies of mankind are invariably guided,
not by the concrete "facts” of the sense world, but by concepts

1 There are four main groups of such schemes, (i) Subjective; (2) Objective^
(3) Transcendental (Kantian); (4) Absolute (Hegelian). To this last belongs by
descent the Immanental Idealism of Croce and Gentile.



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE


A 3

which arc acknowledged by every one to exist only on the mental
n)lane. In the great moments of existence, when he rises to spiritual
freedom, these are the things which every man feels to be real. It
is by these and for these that he is found willing to live, work,
'suffer, and die. Love, patriotism, religion, altruism, fame, all
belong to the transcendental world. Hence, they partake more of
the nature of reality than any “fact" could do; and man, dimly
recognizing this, has ever bowed to them as to immortal centres
ot energy. Religions as a rule are steeped in idealism: Christianity
in particular is a trumpet call to an idealistic conception of life.
Buddhism is little less. Over and over again, their Scriptures
tell us that only materialists will be damned.

In Ideal -sm we have perhaps the most sublime theory of Being
which has ever been constructed by the human intellect: a theory
so sublime, in fact, that it can hardly have been produced by the
exercise of “pure reason" alone, but must be looked upon as a
manifestation of that natural mysticism, that instinct for the
Absolute, which is latent in man. But, when we ask the idealist
how we are to attain communion with the reality which he describes
to us as “certainly there," his system suddenly breaks down; and
discloses itself as a diagram of the heavens, not a ladder to the
stars. This failure of Idealism to find in practice the reality of
which it thinks so much is due, in the opinion of the mystics, to a
cause which finds epigrammatic expression in the celebrated phrase
by which St. Jerome marked the distinction between religion and
philosophy. “Plato located the soul of man in the head; Christ
located it in the heart." That is to say, Idealism, though just in
its premises, and often daring and honest in their application, is
stultified by the exclusive intellcctualism of its own methods : by
its fatal trust in the squirrel-work of the industrious brain instead
of the piercing vision of the desirous heart. It interests man, but
does not involve him in its processes : does not catch him up to
the new and more real life which it describes. Hence the thing
that matters, the living thing, has somehow escaped it; and its
observations bear the same relation to reality as the art of the
anatomist does to the mystery of birth.

3. But there is yet another Theory of Being to be considered :
♦hat which may be loosely defined as Philosophic Scepticism. This
is the attitude of those who refuse to accept either the realistic
or the idealistic answer to the eternal question: and, confronted
in their turn with the riddle of reality, reply that there is no riddle
to solve. We of course assume for the ordinary purposes of life
that for every sequence a : b : present in our consciousness there
exists a mental or material A : B : in the external universe; and
that the first is a strictly relevant, though probably wholly inade-



MYSTICISM


14

quate, expression of the second. The bundle of visual and auditory
sensations, for instance, whose sum total I am accustomed to call*
Mrs. Smith, corresponds with something that exists in the actna*
as well as in my phenomenal world. Behind my Mrs. Smith,
behind the very dilferent Mrs. Smith which the X rays would
exhibit, there is, contends the Objective Idealist, a transcendental,
or in the Platonic sense an ideal Mrs. Smith, at whose qualities I
cannot even guess; but whose existence is quite independent of
my apprehension of it. But though we do and must act on this
hypothesis, it remains only a hypothesis; and it is one which
philosophic scepticism will not let pass.

The external world, say the sceptical schools, is — so far as I
know it — a concept present in my mind. If my mind ceased to
exist, so far as I know the concept which I call the world would
cease to exist too. The one thing which for me indubitably is, is
the self’s experience, its whole consciousness. Outside this circle
of consciousness I have no authority to indulge in guesses as to
what may or may not Be. Hence, forme, the Absolute is a meaning-
less diagram, a superfluous complication of thought : since the mind ,
wholly cut off from contact with external reality, lias no reason
to suppose that such a reality exists except in its own ideas. Every
effort made by philosophy to go forth in search of it is merely the
metaphysical squirrel running round the conceptual cage. In the
completion and perfect unfolding of the set of ideas with which
our consciousness is furnished, lies the only reality which we can
ever hope to know. Far better to stay here and make ourselves at
home: only this, for us, truly is.

This purely subjective conception of Being has found repre-
sentatives in every school of thought : even including by a curious
paradox, that of mystical philosophy — its one effective antagonist.
Thus Delacroix, after an exhaustive and even sympathetic analysis
of St. Teresa’s progress towards union with the Absolute, ends,,
upon the assumption that the God with whom she was united was
the content of her own subconscious mind . 1 Such a mysticism is
that of a kitten running after its own tail: a different path indeed
from that which the great seekers for reality have pursued. The
reductio ad absurdum of this doctrine is found in the so-called
“philosophy” of New Thought, which begs its disciples to "try
quietly to realize that the Infinite is really You ." 2 By its utter
denial not merely of a knowable, but of a logically conceivable
lranseendent, it drives us in the end to the conclusion of extreme
pragmatism; that Truth, for us, is not an immutable reality, but
nieiely that idea which happens to work out as true and useful

1 Delacroix, “litudes sur lc Mysticisme/' p. 62.

* E. Towne, “Just how to Wake the Solar Plexus/ p. 25.



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE 15

fin any given experience. There is no reality behind appearance;
^Jiereiore all faiths, all figments with which we people that nothing-
ness are equally true, provided they be comfortable and good to
live by.

Logically carried out, this conception of Being would permit
each man to regard other men as non-existent except within his
own consciousness: the only place where a strict scepticism will
allow that anything exists. Even the mind which conceives
consciousness exists for us only in our own conception of it; we
no more know what we are than we know what we shall be. Man
is left a conscious Something in the midst, so far as he knows,
of Nothing: with no resources save the exploring of his own
consciousness.

Philosophic scepticism is particularly interesting to our present
inquiry, because it shows us the position in which “pure reason,"
if left to itself, is bound to end. It is utterly logical; and though
we may feel it to be absurd, we can never prove it to be so. Those
who are temperamentally inclined to credulity may become
naturalists, and persuade themselves to believe in the reality of
the sense world. Those with a certain instinct for the Absolute
may adopt the more reasonable faith of idealism. P»ut the true
intellect ualist, who concedes nothing to instinct or emotion, is
obliged in the end to adopt some form of sceptical philosophy.
The horrors of nihilism, in fact, can only be escaped by the exercise
of faith, by a trust in man’s innate but strictly irrational instinct
for that Real “above all reason, beyond all thought" towards-
which at its best moments his spirit tends. If the metaphysician
he true to his own postulates, he must acknowledge in the end that
we are all forced to live, to think, and at last to die, in an unknown
and unknowable world : fed arbitrarily and diligently, yet how
we know not, by ideas and suggestions whose truth we cannot
itest but whose pressure we cannot resist. It is not by sight but
by faith — faith in a supposed external order which we can nevet
prove to exist, and in the approximate truthfulness and constancy
of the vague messages which we receive from it — that ordinary
men must live and move. We must put our trust in “laws of
nature" w T hich have been devised by the human mind as a con-
venient epitome of its own observations of phenomena, must, for
the purposes of daily life, accept these phenomena at their face
value: an act of faith beside which the grossest superstitions of
the Neapolitan peasant are hardly noticeable.

The intellectual quest of Reality, then, leads us down one of
three blind alleys: (1) To an acceptance of the symbolic world

appearance as the real; (2) to the elaboration of a theory — also
of necessity symbolic — which, beautiful in itself, cannot help us


1



MYSTICISM


16

to attain the Absolute which it describes; (3) to a hopeless but
strictly logical scepticism.

In answer to the “Why? Why?" of the bewildered and etern^
child in us, philosophy, though always ready to postulate the
unknown if she can, is bound to reply only, “Nescio! Nescio!” In
spite of all her busy map-making, she cannot reach the goal which
she points out to us ; cannot explain the curious conditions under
which we imagine that we know; cannot even divide with a sure
hand the subject and object of thought. Science, whose business
is with phenomena and our knowledge of them, though she too
is an idealist at heart, has been accustomed to explain that all
our ideas and instincts, the pictured world that we take so seriously,
the oddly limited and illusory nature of our experience, appear to
minister to one great end: the preservation of life, and consequent
fulfilment of that highly mystical hypothesis, the Cosmic Idea.
Each perception, she assures us, serves a useful purpose in this
evolutionary scheme: a scheme, by the way, which has been
invented — we know not why — by the human mind, and imposed
upon an obedient universe.

By vision, hearing, smell, and touch, says Science, w r e find our
way about, are warned of danger, obtain our food. The male
perceives beauty in the female in order that the species may be
propagated. It is true that this primitive instinct has given birth
to higher and purer emotions ; but these too fulfil a social purpose
and are not so useless as they seem. Man must eat to live, therefore
many foods give us agreeable sensations. If he over-eats, he dies;
therefore indigestion is an unpleasant pain. Certain facts of which
too keen a perception would act detrimentally to the life-force
are, for most men, impossible of realization: i.e ., the uncertainty
of life, the decay of the body, the vanity of all things under the
sun. When we are in good health, we all feel very real, solid, and
permanent; and this is of all our illusions the most ridiculous^
and also the most obviously useful from the point of view of
the efficiency and preservation of the race.

But when we look closer, we see that this brisk generalization
does not cover all the ground — not even that little tract of ground
of which our senses make us free ; indeed, that it is more remarkable
for its omissions than for its inclusions. Rec^jac has well said
that “from the moment in which man is no longer content to devise
things useful for his existence under the exclusive action of
the will-to-live, the principle of (physical) evolution has been
violated." 1 Nothing can be more certain than that man is not so
content. He has been called by utilitarian philosophers a tool-
making animal — the highest praise they knew how to bestow*.

1 “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique/* p. 15.



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE 17

More surely he is a vision-making animal; 1 a creature of perverse
f and unpractical ideals, dominated by dreams no less than by
appetites — dreams which can only be justified upon the theory
that he moves towards some other goal than that of physical
perfection or intellectual supremacy, is controlled by some higher
and more vital reality than that of the determinists. We are driven
to the conclusion that if the theory of evolution is to include or
explain the facts of artistic and spiritual experience — and it
cannot be accepted by any serious thinker if these great tracts
of consciousness remain outside its range — it must be rebuilt on
a mental rather than a physical basis.

Even the most ordinary human life includes in its range funda-
mental experiences — violent and unforgettable sensations — forced
on us as it were against our will, for which science finds it hard to
account. These experiences and sensations, and the hours of
exalted emotion which they bring with them — often recognized
by us as the greatest, most significant hours of our lives — fulfil
no office in relation to her pet “functions of nutrition and repro-
duction. ” It is true that they are far-reaching in their effects on
character; but they do little or nothing to assist that character
in its struggle for physical life. To the unprejudiced eye many of
them seem hopelessly out of place in a universe constructed on
strictly physico-chemical lines — look almost as though nature,
left to herself, tended to contradict her own beautifully logical
laws. Their presence, more, the large place which they fill in the
human world of appearance, is a puzzling circumstance for deter-
ministic philosophers; who can only escape from the dilemma here
presented to them by calling these things illusions, and dignifying
their own more manageable illusions with the title of facts.

Amongst the more intractable of these groups of perceptions and
experiences are those which we connect with religion, with pain,
and with beauty. All three, for those selves which are capable of
receiving their messages, possess a mysterious authority far in
excess of those feelings, arguments, or appearances which they
may happen to contradict. All three, were the universe of the
naturalists true, would be absurd; all three have ever been
treated with the reverence due to vital matters by the best minds
of the race.

A. I need not point out the hopelessly irrational character of
all great religions; which rest, one and all, on a primary assump-
tion that can never be intellectually demonstrated, much less

Or, as Aristotle, and after him St. Thomas Aquinas, suggest, a contemplative
animal, since “this act alone in man is proper to him, and is in no way shared by
*any other being in this world” (“Sumraa Contra Gentiles,” 1. iii. cap. xxxvii.,
Kickaby's translation).



18 MYSTICISM

proved — the assumption that the supra-sensible is somehow
important and real, and is intimately connected with the life of
man. This fact has been incessantly dwelt upon by their critics, and
has provoked many a misplaced exercise of ingenuity on the part
of their intelligent friends. Yet religion — emphasizing and pushing
to extremes that general dependence on faith which we saw to
be an inevitable condition of our lives — is one of the most universal
and ineradicable functions of man, and this although it constantly
acts detrimentally to the interests of his merely physical existence,
opposes “the exclusive action of the will-to-live," except in so far
as that will aspires to eternal life. Strictly utilitarian, almost
logical in the savage, religion becomes more and more transcen-
dental with the upward progress of the race. It begins as black
magic; it ends as Pure Love. Why did the Cosmic Idea elaborate
this religious instinct, if the construction put upon its intentions
by the determinists be true?

B. Consider again the whole group of phenomena which are
known as “the problem of suffering": the mental anguish and
physical pain which appear to be the inevitable result of the
steady operation of "natural law" and its voluntary assistants, the
cruelty, greed, and injustice of man. Here, it is true, the naturalist
seems at first sight to make a little headway, and can point to
some amongst the cruder forms of suffering which are clearly
useful to the race: punishing us for past follies, spurring to new
efforts, warning against future infringements of "law." But he
forgets the many others which refuse to be resumed under this
simple formula : forgets to explain how it is that the Cosmic Idea
involves the long torments of the incurable, the tortures of the
innocent, the deep anguish of the bereaved, the existence of so
many gratuitously agonizing forms of death. He forgets, too, the
strange fact that man's capacity for suffering tends to increase
in depth and subtlety with the increase of culture and civilization ;
ignores the still more mysterious, perhaps most significant circum-
stance that the highest types have accepted it eagerly and willingly*
have found in Pain the grave but kindly teacher of immortal
secrets, the conferrer of liberty, even the initiator into amazing
joys.

Those who "explain" suffering as the result of nature's immense
fecundity — a by-product of that overcrowding and stress through
which the fittest tend to survive — forget that even were this
demonstration valid and complete it would leave the real problem
untouched. The question is not, whence come those conditions
which provoke in the self the experiences called sorrow, anxiety*
pain: but, why do these conditions hurt the self? The pain is^
mental; a little chloroform, and though the conditions continue



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE 19

unabated the suffering is gone. Why does full consciousness always
include the mysterious capacity for misery as well as for happi-
ness — a capacity which seems at first sight to invalidate any
conception of the Absolute as Beautiful and Good? Why does
evolution, as we ascend the ladder of life, foster instead of dimin-
ishing the capacity for useless mental anguish, for long, dull
torment, bitter grief? Why, when so much lies outside our limited
powers of perception, when so many of our own most vital func-
tions are unperceived by consciousness, does suffering of some sort
form an integral part of the experience of man? For utilitarian
purposes acute discomfort would be quite enough; the Cosmic
Idea, as the determinists explain it, did not really need an
apparatus which felt all the throes of cancer, the horrors of
neurasthenia, the pangs of birth. Still less did it need the tor-
ments of impotent sympathy for other people's irremediable pain,
the dreadful power of feeling the world's woe. We are hopelessly
over-sensitized for the part science calls us tp play.

Pain, however we may look at it, indicates a profound dis-
harmony between the sense-world and the huifcan self. If it is to be
vanquished, either the disharmony must be resolved by a deliberate
and careful adjustment of the self to the world of sense, or, that
self must turn from the sense-world to some other with which it
is in tune . 1 * 3 Pessimist and optimist here join hands. But whilst
the pessimist, resting in appearance, only sees "nature red in tooth
and claw" offering him little hope of escape, the optimist thinks
that pain and anguish — which may in their lower forms be life's
harsh guides on the path of physical evolution — in their higher
and apparently "useless" developments are her leaders and
teachers in the upper school of Supra-sensible Reality. He believes
that they press the self towards another world, still "natural" for
him, though "super-natural" for his antagonist, in which it will be
more at home. Watching life, he sees in Pain the complement of
Love: and is inclined to call these the wings on which man's
spirit can best take flight towards the Absolute. Hence he can say
with A Kempis, "Gloriari in tribulatione non est grave amanti," *
and needs not to speak of morbid folly when he sees the Christian
saints run eagerly and merrily to the Cross. 3

He calls suffering the "gymnastic of eternity," the "terrible

1 All the healing arts, from Aesculapius and Galen to Metchnikoff and Mrs. Eddy,
have virtually accepted and worked upon these two principles.

* “De Imitatione Christi," 1. ii. cap. vi.

3 “Such as these, I say, as if enamoured by My honour and famished for the
food of souls, run to the table of the Most holy Cross, willing to suffer pain. . . .
To these, My most dear sons, trouble is a pleasure, and pleasure and every con-
solation that the world would ofler them are a toil" (St. Catherine of Siena,
Dialogo, cap. xxviii.). Here and throughout I have used Thorold’s translation.



20


MYSTICISM


initiative caress of God”; recognizing in it a quality for which
the disagreeable rearrangement of nerve molecules cannot account.
Sometimes, in the excess of his optimism, he puts to the test of
practice this theory with all its implications. Refusing to be de-
luded by the pleasures of the sense world, he accepts instead of
avoiding pain, and becomes an ascetic; a puzzling type for the
convinced naturalist, who, falling back upon contempt — that
favourite resource of the frustrated reason — can only regard him
as diseased.

Pain, then, which plunges like a sword through creation,
leaving on the one side cringing and degraded animals and on the
other side heroes and saints, is one of those facts of universal
experience which are peculiarly intractable from the point of
view of a merely materialistic philosophy.

C. From this same point of view the existence of music and
poetry, the qualities of beauty and of rhythm, the evoked sensa-
tions of awe, reverence, and rapture, are almost as difficult to
account for. The question why an apparent corrugation of the
Earth's surface, called for convenience' sake an Alp, coated with
congealed water, and perceived by us as a snowy peak, should
produce in certain natures acute sensations of ecstasy and
adoration, why the skylark’s song should catch us up to heaven,
and wonder and mystery speak to us alike in “the little speedwell's
darling blue'' and in the cadence of the wind, is a problem that
seems to be merely absurd, until it is seen to be insoluble. Here
Madam How and Lady Why alike are silent. With all our busy
seeking, we have not found the sorting house where loveliness is
extracted from the flux of things. We know not why “great”
poetry should move us to unspeakable emotion, or a stream of
notes, arranged in a peculiar sequence, catch us up to heightened
levels of vitality: nor can we guess how a passionate admiration
for that which we call “best" in art or letters can possibly con-
tribute to the physical evolution of the race. In spite of many
lengthy disquisitions on aesthetics, Beauty's secret is still her own.
A shadowy companion, half seen, half guessed at, she keeps step
with the upward march of life: and we receive her message and
respond to it, not because we understand it but because we must.

Here it is that we approach that attitude of the self, that point
of view, which is loosely and generally called mystical. Here,
instead of those broad blind alleys which philosophy showed us,
a certain type of mind has always discerned three strait and narrow
ways going out towards the Absolute. In religion, in pain, and in
beauty — and not only in these, but in many other apparently
useless peculiarities of the empirical world and of the perceiving
consciousness — these persons insist that they recognize at least



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE


21


the fringe of the real. Down these three paths, as well as by many
iMiother secret way, they claim that news comes to the self con-
cerning levels of reality which in their wholeness are inaccessible
to the senses : worlds wondrous and immortal, whose existence is
not conditioned by the “given” world which those senses report.
“Beauty,” said Hegel, who, though he was no mystic, had a touch
of that mystical intuition which no philosopher can afford to be
without, “is merely the Spiritual making itself known sensuously." 1
“In the good, the beautiful, the true,” says Rudolph Eucken, “we
see Reality revealing its personal character. They are parts of a
^coherent and substantial spiritual world.” 2 Here, some of the
veils of that substantial world are stripped off: Reality peeps
through and is recognized, dimly or acutely, by the imprisoned
self.

R^c^jac only develops this idea when he says, 3 “If the mind
penetrates deeply into the facts of aesthetics, it will find more
and more, that these facts are based upon an ideal identity between
the mind itself and things. At a certain point the harmony becomes
so complete, and the finality so close that it gives us actual
emotion. The Beautiful then becomes the sublime ; brief appar-
ition, by which the soul is caught up into the true mystic state, and
touches the Absolute. It is scarcely possible to persist in this
aesthetic perception without feeling lifted up by it above things
and above ourselves, in an ontological vision which closely
resembles the Absolute of the Mystics/* It was of this underlying
reality — this truth of things — that St. Augustine cried in a moment
of lucid vision, “Oh, Beauty so old and so new, too late have I
loved thee!”4 It is in this sense also that “beauty is truth, truth
beauty”: and as regards the knowledge of ultimate things which
is possible to ordinary men, it may well be that

“That is all

► Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know/'

“Of Beauty,” says Plato in an immortal passage, “I repeat again
that we saw her there shining in company with the celestial forms ;
and coming to earth we find her here too, shining in clearness
through the clearest aperture of sense. For sight is the most
piercing of our bodily senses : though not by that is wisdom seen ;
her loveliness would have been transporting if there had been a
visible image of her, and the other ideas, if they had visible counter-
parts, would be equally lovely. But this is the privilege of Beauty,
that being the loveliest she is also the most palpable to sight. Now

1 “Philosophy of Religion," vol. ii. p. 8 .

^ * “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 148.

§ “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 74.

« Aug. Conf., bk. x. cap. xxvii.



22 MYSTICISM

he who is not newly initiated, or who has been corrupted, does
not easily rise out of this world to the sight of true beauty in th|i
other. . . . But he whose initiation is recent, and who has been the*
spectator of many glories in the other world, is amazed when he
sees anyone having a godlike face or form, which is the expression
of Divine Beauty; and at first a shudder runs through him, and
again the old awe steals over him. . .

Most men in the course of their lives have known such Platonic
hours of initiation, when the sense of beauty has risen from a
pleasant feeling to a passion, and an element of strangeness and
terror has been mingled with their joy. In those hours the world
has seemed charged with a new vitality; with a splendour which'
does not belong to it but is poured through it, as light through a
coloured window, grace through a sacrament, from that Perfect
Beauty which ‘‘shines in company with the celestial forms”
beyond the pale of appearance. In such moods of heightened
consciousness each blade of grass seems fierce with meaning, and
becomes a well of wondrous light: a "little emerald set in the
City of God." The seeing self is indeed an initiate thrust suddenly
into the sanctuary of the mysteries: and feels the “old awe and
amazement” with which man encounters the Reed. In such
experiences, a new factor of the eternal calculus appears to be
thrust in on us, a factor which no honest seeker for truth can
afford to neglect; since, if it be dangerous to say that any two
systems of knowledge are mutually exclusive, it is still more
dangerous to give uncritical priority to any one system. We are
bound, then, to examine this path to reality as closely and seriously
as we should investigate the most neatly finished safety-ladder of
solid ash which offered a salita aUe stelle.

Why, after all, take as our standard a material world whose
existence is affirmed by nothing more trustworthy than the sense-
impressions of "normal men”; those imperfect and easily cheated-
channels of communication? The mystics, those adventurers of
whom we spoke upon the first page of this book, have always
declared, implicitly or explicitly, their distrust in these channels
of communication. They have never been deceived by phenomena,
nor by the careful logic of the industrious intellect. One after
another, with extraordinary unanimity, they have rejected that
appeal to the unreal world of appearance which is the standard of

1 "Phaedrus,” § 250 ( Jowett’s translation) . The reference in the phrase “he whose
initiation is recent* * is to the rite of admission into the Orphic Mysteries. It is
believed by some authorities that the neophyte may have been cast into an
hypnotic sleep by his “initiator,” and whilst in this condition a vision of the
“glories of the other world’* suggested to him. The main phenomena of “con-
version” would thus be artificially produced: but the point of attack being th# j
mind rather than the heart, the results, as would appear from the context, weie !
usually transient.



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE


*3

sensible men : affirming that there is another way, another secret,
l|)y which the conscious self may reach the actuality which it
*seeks. More complete in their grasp of experience than the votaries
of intellect or of sense, they accept as central for life those spiritual
messages which are mediated by religion, by beauty, and by pain.
More reasonable than the rationalists, they find in that very
hunger for reality which is the mother of all metaphysics, an
implicit proof that such reality exists ; that there is something else,
some final satisfaction, beyond the ceaseless stream of sensation
which besieges consciousness. “In that thou hast sought me, thou
hast already found me,” says the voice of Absolute Truth in their
ears. This is the first doctrine of mysticism. Its next is that only in
so far as the self is real can it hope to know Reality: like to like:
Cor ad cor loquitur. Upon the propositions implicit in these two
laws the whole claim and practice of the mystic life depends.

“Finite as we are/' they say — and here they speak not for them-
selves, but for the race — “lost though we seem to be in the woods
or in the wide air's wilderness, in this world of time and of chance,
we have still, like the strayed animals or like the migrating birds,
our homing instinct. . . . We seek. That is a fact. We seek a city
^till out of sight. In the contrast with this goat, we live. But if this
be so, then already we possess something of Being even in our
finite seeking. For the readiness to seek is already something of
an attainment, even if a poor one.” 1

Further, in this seeking we are not wholly dependent on that
homing instinct. For some, who have climbed to the hill-tops,
that city is not really out of sight. The mystics see it and report
to us concerning it. Science and metaphysics may do their best
and their worst : but these pathfinders of the spirit never falter
in their statements concerning that independent spiritual world
which is the only goal of “pilgrim man.” They say that messages
!tcome to him from that spiritual world, that complete reality which
we call Absolute: that we are not, after all, hermetically sealed
from it. To all who will receive it, news comes of a world of Abso-
lute Life, Absolute Beauty, Absolute Truth, beyond the bourne
of time and place: news that most of us translate — and inevitably
distort in the process — into the language of religion, of beauty, of
love, or of pain.

Of all those forms of life and thought with which humanity has
fed its craving for truth, mysticism alone postulates, and in the
persons of its great initiates proves, not only the existence of the
Absolute, but also this link: this possibility first of knowing,
finally of attaining it. It denies that possible knowledge is to be
limited (a) to sense impressions, (6) to any process of intellection,

1 Royce, “The World and the Individual/' vol. i. p. 181.



MYSTICISM


24

(c) to the unfolding of the content of normal consciousness. Such
diagrams of experience, it says, are hopelessly incomplete. Thg,
mystics find the basis of their method not in logic but in life : iir
the existence of a discoverable “real,” a spark of true being, within
the seeking subject, which can, in that ineffable experience which
they call the “act of union,” fuse itself with and thus apprehend
the reality of the sought Object. In theological language, their
theory of knowledge is that the spirit of man, itself essentially
divine, is capable of immediate communion with God, the One
Reality . 1

In mysticism that love of truth which we saw as the beginning
of all philosophy leaves the merely intellectual sphere, and takes
on the assured aspect of a personal passion. Where the philosopher
guesses and argues, the mystic lives and looks ; and speaks, conse-
quently, the disconcerting language of first-hand experience, not
the neat dialectic of the schools. Hence whilst the Absolute of the
metaphysicians remains a diagram — impersonal and unattainable
— the Absolute of the mystics is lovable, attainable, alive.

“Oh, taste and see !” they cry, in accents of astounding certainty
and joy. “Ours is an experimental science. We can but communi-
cate our system, never its result. We come to you not as thinkers),
but as doers. Leave your deep and absurd trust in the senses, with
their language of dot and dash, which may possibly report fact
but can never communicate personality. If philosophy has taught
you anything, she has surely taught you the length of her tether,
and the impossibility of attaining to the doubtless admirable
grazing land which lies beyond it. One after another, idealists
have arisen who, straining frantically at the rope, have announced
to the world their approaching liberty; only to be flung back at
last into the little circle of sensation. But here we are, a small
family, it is true, yet one that refuses to die out, assuring you that
we have slipped the knot and are free of those grazing grounds.
This is evidence which you are bound to bring into account before
you can add up the sum total of possible knowledge; for you will
find it impossible to prove that the world as seen by the mystics,
'unimaginable, formless, dark with excess of bright/ is less real
than that which is expounded by the youngest and most promising
demonstrator of a physico-chemical universe. We will be quite
candid with you. Examine us as much as you like: our machinery,
our veracity, our results. We cannot promise that you shall see
what we have seen, for here each man must adventure for himself;

1 The idea of Divine Union as man's true end is of course of great antiquity.
Its first definite appearance in the religious consciousness of Europe seems to
coincide with the establishment of the Orphic Mysteries in Greece and Southern
Italy in the sixth century b.c. See Rohde: “Psyche," cap. 10, and Adam, “The
Religious Teachers of Greece," p. 92.



THE POINT OF DEPARTURE 25

but we defy you to stigmatize our experiences as impossible or
invalid. Is your world of experience so well and logically founded
that you dare make of it a standard? Philosophy tells you that it
is founded on nothing better than the reports of your sensory
apparatus and the traditional concepts of the race. Certainly it is
imperfect, probably it is illusion; in any event, it never touches the
foundation of things. Whereas 'what the world, which truly
knows nothing, calls "mysticism” is the science of ultimate s, . . .
the science of self-evident Reality, which cannot be "reasoned
about,” because it is the object of pure reason or perception.”' 1

* Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," “Aurea Dicta,”
cxxviii.



CHAPTER II


MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


Another philosophic scheme — Vitalism — Driesch, Bergson, Eucken — -The vital
principle as the essence of reality — Freedom — Spontaneity — Nietzsche — The
inclusive character of vitalistic philosophy: physical, psychological, spiritual —
Vitalism and the mystics — its origin in Heraclcitus — its other connections —
The World of Becoming — Reality as dynamic — Life as incessant change —
Bergson’s theory of the intellect — of perception — Its relation to mysticism —
Reality known by communion — Intuition — its partial nature — Eucken’s teac hing
— a spiritual vitalism — Reality as an “independent spiritual world" — Man's
possible attainment of it — he is “the meeting-point of various stages of reality" —
Rebirth — Penial of the sense world — Mystics the heroic examples of “inde-
pendent spiritual life" — Vitalism criticized — its central idea only half a truth —
The mystic consciousness of reality two-fold — Being and Becoming — Tran-
scendence and Immanence — both true — St. Augustine on the Nature of God —
Man’s instinct for the Absolute — Mysticism justifies it — reconciles it with a
dynamic universe — Boehme — Revelation by strife — Mystic union — its two lorms
— its agent, the absolute element in man — Total mystic experience only expres-
sible in terms of personality — How is this experience attained ?

W e glanced, at the beginning of this inquiry, at the universes
which result from the various forms of credulity practised
by the materialist, the idealist, and the sceptic. We saw
the mystic denying by word and act the validity of the foundations
on which those universes are built : substituting his living experi-
ence for their conceptual schemes. But there is another way of
seeing reality or, more correctly, one aspect of reality. This
scheme of things possesses the merit of accepting and harmonizing
many different forms of experience; even those supreme experi-
ences and intuitions peculiar to the mystics. The first distinct
contribution of the twentieth century to man’s quest of the Real,
it entered the philosophic arena from several different directions ;
penetrating and modifying current conceptions not only of philo-
sophy but of religion, science, art and practical life. It was applied
by Driesch 1 and other biologists in the sphere of organic life.
Bergson, 2 starting from psychology, developed its intellectual and
metaphysical implications; whilst Rudolph Eucken3 constructed
from, or beside it, a philosophy of the Spirit, of man’s relations
to the Real.

1 “The Science and Philosophy of Organism," Gifford Lectures, 1907-8.

’ “Les Donnies Imm&liates de la Conscience" (1889), “Matifcre et M6moire”
(1896), “ L’E volution Cr6a trice" (1907).

J “Der Kampf um einen geistigen Lcbensinhalt" (1896), “Der Sinn und Wert
des Le bens’' (1908), &c. See Bibliography.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


2 7

In all these we find the same principle; the principle of a free
spontaneous and creative life as the essence of Reality. Not law
but aliveness, incalculable and indomitable, is their subject-matter:
not human logic, but actual living experience is their criterion of
truth. Vitalists, whether the sphere of their explorations be biology,
psychology or ethics, see the whole Cosmos, the physical and
spiritual worlds, as instinct with initiative and spontaneity: as
above all things free. For them, nature, though conditioned by the
matter with which she works, is stronger than her chains. Push-
ing out from within, ever seeking expression, she buds and breaks
forth into original creation . 1 The iron “laws” of the determinists
are merely her observed habits, not her fetters: and man, seeing
nature in the terms of “cause and effect," has been the dupe of
his own limitations and prejudioes.

Bergson, Nietzsche, Eucken, differing in their opinion as to
life's meaning, are alike in this vision : in the stress which they lay
on the supreme importance and value of life — a great Cosmic life
transcending and including our own. This is materialism inside
out : for here what we call the universe is presented as an expression
of life, not life as an expression or by-product of the universe.
The strange passionate philosophy of Nietzsche is really built
upon an intense belief in this supernal nature and value of Life,
Action and Strength: and spoilt by the one-sided individualism
which prevented him from holding a just balance between the
great and significant life of the Ego and the greater and more
significant life of the All.

Obviously, the merit of vitalistic philosophy lies in its ability
to satisfy so many different thinkers, starting from such diverse
points in our common experience. On the phenomenal side it can
accept and transfigure the statements of physical science. In its
metaphysical aspect it leaves place for those ontological specula-
tions which seem to take their rise in psychology. It is friendly to
those who demand an important place for moral and spiritual
activity in the universe. Finally — though here we must be content
with deduction rather than declaration — it leaves in the hands of
the mystics that power of attaining to Absolute Reality which
they have always claimed: shows them as the true possessors of
freedom, the torch-bearers of the race.

Did it acknowledge its ancestors with that reverence which is
their due, Vitalism would identify itself with the mystic philo-

1 The researches of Driesch (op. cit.) and of de Vries (“The Mutation Theory,"
19 io) have done much to establish the truth of this contention upon the scientific
plane. Note particularly Driesch’s account of the spontaneous responsive changes
in the embryo sea-urchin, and de Vries' extraordinary description of the escaped
stock of evening primrose, varying now this way, now that, “as if swayed by a
restless internal tide."



2 8


MYSTICISM


sopher Heracleitus; who, in the fifth century B.C., introduced its
central :dea to the European world 1 : for his “Logos” or Energizing
Fire is but another symbol for that free and living Spirit of Becom-
ing, that indwelling creative power, which Vitalism acknowledges
as 1 lie very soul or immanent reality of things. It is in essence both
a Hellenic and a Christian system of thought. In its view of the
proper function of the intellect it has some unexpected affinities
with Aristotle, and after him with St. Thomas Aquinas; regarding
it as a departmental affair, not the organ of ultimate knowledge.
Its theory of knowledge is close to that of the mystics: or would
be, if those gazers on reality had interested themselves in any
psychological theory of their own experiences.

A philosophy which can harmonize such diverse elements as
these, and make its influence felt in so many fields of thought, may
be useful in our present attempt towards an understanding of
mysticism: for it illustrates certain aspects of perceived reality
which other systems ignore. It has the further recommenda-
tion of involving not a mere diagram of metaphysical possibilities,
but a genuine theory of knowledge. Its scope includes psychol-
ogy as well as philosophy: the consideration, not only of the
nature of Reality but also of the self's power of knowing it — the
machinery of contact between the mind and the flux of things.
Tims it has an inclusive quality lacking in the tidy ring-
fenced systems of other schools of thought. It has no edges, and
if it be true to itself should have no negations. It iis a vision,
not a map.

The primary difference between Vitalism and the classic
philosophic schools is this. Its focal point is not Being but
Becoming. 2 Translated into Platonic language, not the change-
less One, the Absolute, transcending all succession, but rather
His energizing Thought — the Son, the Creative Logos — is the
supreme reality which it proposes as accessible to human
consciousness.

“All things,” said Heracleitus, “are in a state of flux.” “Every-
thing happens through strife.” “Reality is a condition of unrest. ”3
Such is also the opinion of Bergson and Alexander; who, agreeing
in this with the conclusions of physical science, look upon the
Real as dynamic rather than static, as becoming rather than being

1 The debt to Heracleitus is acknowledged by Schiller. See “Studies in
Humanism," pp. 39, 40.

* See, for the substance of this and the following pages, the works of Henri
Bergson already mentioned. I am here also much indebted to the personal help
of my friend “William Scott Palmer," whose interpretations have done much
towards familiarizing English readers with Bergson's philosophy; and to Prof.
Willdon Carr's paper on “Bergson's Theory of Knowledge/ read before the
Aristotelian Society, December, 1908.

J Heracleitus, Fragments, 46, 84.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM 29

perfect* and invite us to see in Time — the precession or flux of
things — the very stuff of reality —

“From the fixed lull of Heaven she saw
Time like a pulse shake fierce
Through all the worlds’ ' — 1

said Rossetti of the Blessed Damozel. So Bergson, while ignoring
if he does not deny the existence of the “fixed lull," the still
Eternity, the point of rest, finds everywhere the pulse of Time,
the vast unending storm of life and love. Reality, says Bergson, is
pure creative Life; a definition which excludes those ideas of
perfection and finality involved in the idealist's concept of Pure
Being as the Absolute and Unchanging One.* This life, as he sees
it, is fed from within rather than upheld from without. It evolves
by means of its own inherent and spontaneous creative power.
The biologist's Nature “so careful of the type"; the theologian's
Creator transcending His universe, and “holding all things in the
hollow of His hand": these are gone, and in their place we have a
universe teeming with free individuals, each self-creative, each
evolving eternally, yet towards no term.

Here, then, the deep instinct of the human mind that there
must be a unity, an orderly plan in the universe, that the strung-
along beads of experience do really form a rosary, though it be
one which we cannot repeat, is deliberately thwarted. Creation,
Activity, Movement; this, says Vitalism, rather than any merely
apparent law and order, any wholeness, is the essential quality
of the Real — is the Real : and life is an eternal Becoming, a ceaseless
changefulness. At its highest it may be conceived as “the universe
flowering into deity ,"3 As the Hermetic philosophers found in
the principle of analogy, “ Quod inferius sicut quod superius ,"4 the
Key of Creation, so we are invited to see in that uninterrupted
change which is the condition of our normal consciousness, a true
image, a microcosm of the living universe as a part of which that
consciousness has been evolved.

If we accept this theory, we must then impute to life in its
fullness — the huge, many levelled, many coloured life, the in-
numerable worlds which escape the rhythm of our senses: not
merely that patch of physical life which those senses perceive — a
divinity, a greatness of destiny far beyond that with which it is
credited by those who hold to a physico-chemical theory of the

* First edition, canto x.

* E.g. St. Augustine's “That alone is truly real which abides unchanged"
(Conf., bk. vii. cap. io), and among modern thinkers F. von Hligel: “An absolute
Abidingness, pure Simultaneity, Eternity, in God . . . standout, in man's deepest
consciousness, with even painful contrast, against all mere Succession, all sheer
hux and change." (“Eternal Life," p. 365.)

J S. Alexander, “Space, Time and Deity," vol. ii, p. 410,

4 See below, Pt. I. Cap. VII.



MYSTICISM


30

universe. We must perceive in it, as some mystics have done,
"the beating of the Heart of God"; and agree with Heracleitus> ;
that "there is but one wisdom, to understand the knowledge by
which all things are steered through the All." 1 Union with reality
— apprehension of it — will upon this hypothesis be union with
life at its most intense point : in its most dynamic aspect. It will
be a deliberate harmony set up with the Logos which that same
philosopher described as "man’s most constant companion." Er%o,
says the mystic, union with a Personal and Conscious spiritual
existence, immanent in the world — one form, one half of the
union which I have always sought, since this is clearly life in its
highest manifestation. Beauty, Goodness, Splendour, Love, all
those shining words which exhilarate the soul, are but the names
of aspects or qualities picked out by human intuition as charac-
teristic of this intense and eternal Life in which is the life of men.

How, then, may we know this Life, this creative and original
soul of things, in which we are bathed; in which, as in a river,
swept along? Not, says Bergson bluntly, by any intellectual
means. The mind which thinks it knows Reality because it has
made a diagram of Reality, is merely the dupe of its own categories.
The intellect is a specialized aspect of the self, a form of conscious-
ness: but specialized for very different purposes than those of
metaphysical speculation. Life has evolved it in the interests of
life; has made it capable of dealing with "solids," with concrete
things. With these it is at home. Outside of them it becomes
dazed, uncertain of itself ; for it is no longer doing its natural work,
which is to help life, not to know it. In the interests of experience,
and in order to grasp perceptions, the intellect breaks up experi-
ence, which is in reality a continuous stream, an incessant pro-
cess of change and response with no separate parts, into purely
conventional "moments," "periods," or psychic "states." It picks
out from the flow of reality those bits which are significant for
human life; which "interest" it, catch its attention. From these
it makes up a mechanical world in which it dwells, and which
seems quite real until it is subjected to criticism. It does, says
Bergson, the work of a cinematograph : takes snapshots of some-
thing which is always moving, and by means of these successive
static representations — none of which are real, because Life, the
object photographed, never was at rest — it recreates a picture of
life, of motion. This rather jerky representation of divine harmony,
from which innumerable moments are left out, is useful for practical
purposes: but it is not reality, because it is not alive.*

* Heracleitus, op. cit.

* On the complete and undivided nature of our experience in its “wholeness,*
and the sad work our analytic brains make of it when they come to pull it to
pieces, Bradley has some valuable contributory remarks in his “Oxford Lectures
on Poetry/' p. 15.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


3i

This ''real world.” then, is the result of your selective activity,
ind the nature of your selection is largely outside your control,
your cinematograph machine goes at a certain pace, takes its
snapshots at certain intervals. Anything which goes too quickly
Eor these intervals, it either fails to catch, or merges with preceding
and succeeding movements to form a picture with which it can
deal. Thus we treat, for instance, the storm of vibrations which
vve convert into “sound” and “light.” Slacken or accelerate its
clock-time, change its rhythmic activity, and at once you take a
different series of snapshots, and have as a result a different
picture of the world. Thanks to the time at which the normal
human machine is set, it registers for us what we call, in our simple
way, “the natural world.” A slight accession of humility or
common sense might teach us that a better title would be “owr
natural world.”

Let human consciousness change or transcend its rhythm, and
any other aspect of any other world may be ours as a result.
Hence the mystics' claim that in their ecstasies they change the
conditions of consciousness, and apprehend a deeper reality which
is unrelated to human speech, cannot be dismissed as unreasonable.
Do not then confuse that surface-consciousness which man has
trained to be an organ of utility and nothing more — and which
therefore can only deal adequately with the “given" world of
sense — with that mysterious something in you, that ground of
personality, inarticulate but inextinguishable, by which you are
aware that a greater truth exists. This truth, whose neighbourhood
you feel, and for which you long, is Life. You are in it all the
while, “like a fish in the sea, like a bird in the air," as St. Mechthild
of Hackborn said many centuries ago. 1

Give yourself, then, to this divine and infinite life, this mysterious
Cosmic activity in which you are immersed, of which you are
J}orn. Trust it. Let it surge in on you. Cast off, as the mystics are
always begging you to do, the fetters of the senses, the “remora
of desire"; and making your interests identical with those of the
All, rise to freedom, to that spontaneous, creative life which,
inherent in every individual self, is our share of the life of the
Universe. You are yourself vital — a free centre of energy — did
you but know it. You can move to higher levels, to greater reality,
truer self-fulfilment, if you will. Though you be, as Plato said,
like an oyster in your shell, you can open that shell to the living
waters without, draw from the “Immortal Vitality." Thus only
— by contact with the real — shall you know reality. Cor ad cor
loquitur .

1 The Indian mystics declare substantially the same truth when
they say that the illusion of finitude is only to be escaped by

* “ Liber Speciaiis Gratiae," 1. ii. cap. xxvi.



MYSTICISM


32

relapsing into the substantial and universal life, abolishing
individuality. So too, by a deliberate self-abandonment to that^
which Plato calls the '"saving madness'* of ecstasy, did the initiates
of Dionysus "draw near to God." So their Christian cousins assert
that "self-surrender" is the only way: that they must die to live,
must lose to find: that knowing implies being: that the method and
secret which they have always practised consists merely in a meek
and loving union — the synthesis of passion and self-sacrifice —
with that divine and unseparated life, that larger consciousness
in which the soul is grounded, and which they hold to be an aspect
of the life of God. In their hours of contemplation, they deliberately
empty themselves of the false images of the intellect, neglect the
cinematograph of sense. Then only are they capable of tran-
scending the merely intellectual levels of consciousness, and
perceiving that Reality which "hath no image."

"Pilgrimage to the place of the wise," said Jalalu 'ddin, "is
to find escape from the flame of separation." It is the mystics'
secret in a nutshell. "When I stand empty in God’s will and empty
of God's will and of all His works and of God Himself," cries
Eckhart with his usual violence of language, " then am I above all
creatures and am neither God nor creature, but I am what I wai
and evermore shall be." 1 He attains, that is to say, by this escape
from a narrow selfhood, not to identity with God — that were
only conceivable upon a basis of pantheism — but to an identity
with his own substantial life, and through it with the life of a real
and living universe; in symbolic language, with "the thought of
the Divine Mind" whereby union with that Mind in the essence
or ground of the soul becomes possible. The first great message of
Vitalistic philosophy is then seen to be — Cease to identify your
intellect and your self : a primary lesson which none who purpose
the study of mysticism may neglect. Become at least aware of, if
you cannot "know," the larger, truer self: that root and depth
of spirit, as St. Frangois de Sales calls it, from which intellect and
feeling grow as fingers from the palm of the hand — that free
creative self which constitutes your true life, as distinguished
from the scrap of consciousness which is its servant.

How then, asks the small consciously-seeking personality of
the normal man, am I to become aware of this, my larger self,
and of the free, eternal, spiritual life which it lives?

Here philosophy, emerging from the water-tight compartment!
in which metaphysics have lived too long retired, calls in psy-
chology; and tells us that in intuition, in a bold reliance on con-j
tact between the totality of the self and the external world-
perhaps too in those strange states of lucidity which accompahyj
* Meister Eckhart, Pred. lxxxvii.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM 33

great emotion and defy analysis— lies the normal man's best
chance of attaining, as it were, a swift and sidelong knowledge
of this real. Smothered in daily life by the fretful activities of our
surface-mind, reality emerges in our great moments; and, seeing
ourselves in its radiance, we know, for good or evil, what we are.
“We are not pure intellects . . . around our conceptional and
logical thought there remains a vague, nebulous Somewhat, the
substance at whose expense the luminous nucleus we call the
intellect is formed/' 1 * In this aura, this diffused sensitiveness, we
are asked to find man’s medium of communication with the
Universal Life.

Such fragmenta^, dim and unvcrifiable perceptions of the Real,
however, such “excursions into the Absolute,” cannot be looked
upon as a satisfaction of man's hunger for Truth. He does not want
to peep, but to live. Hence he cannot be satisfied with anything
less than a total and permanent adjustment of his being to the
greater life of reality. This alone can resolve the disharmonies
between the self and the world, and give meaning and value to
human life. 3 The possibility of this adjustment — of union between
man’s life and that “independent spiritual life” which is the
stuff of reality — is the theme alike of mysticism and of Eucken's
spiritual vitalism or Activistic Philosophy.3 Reality, says Eucken,
is an independent spiritual world, unconditioned by the apparent
world of sense. To know it and to live in it is man’s true destiny.
His point of contact with it is personality: the inward fount of
his being: his heart, not his head. Man is real, and in the deepest
sense alive, in virtue of this free personal life-principle within him ;
but he is bound and blinded by the ties set up between his surface-
intelligence and the sense-world. The struggle for reality must be
a struggle on man’s part to transcend the sense-world, escape
its bondage. He must renounce it, and be “re-born” to a higher
level of consciousness; shifting his centre of interest from the
Viatural to the spiritual plane. According to the thoroughness with
which he does this, will be the amount of real life he enjoys. The
initial break with the “world,” the refusal to spend one's life
communing with one's own cinematograph picture, is essential

1 Willdon Carr, op. cit.

» “It seems as if man could never escape from himself, and yet, when shut in to
the monotony of his own sphere, he is overwhelmed with a sense of emptiness.
The only remedy here is radically to alter the conception of man himself, to dis-
tinguish within him the narrower and the larger life, the life that is straitened and
finite and can never transcend itself, and an infinite life through which he enjoys
communion with the immensity and the truth of the universe. Can man rise to
this spiritual level ? On the possibility of his doing so rests all our hope of supply-
ing any meaning or value to life" (“Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 8 1 ).

3 The essentials of Eucken's teaching will be found conveniently summarized
in “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens."



MYSTICISM


34

if the freedom of the infinite is to be attained. We are amphibious
creatures: our life moves upon two levels at once — the natural
and the spiritual. The key to the puzzle of man lies in the fact
that he is "the meeting point of various stages of Reality/ 11 All
his difficulties and triumphs are grounded in this. The whole
question for him is, which world shall be central for him — the real,
vital, all-embracing life we call spirit, or the lower life of sense?
Shall “Existence,” the superficial obvious thing, or “Substance,”
the underlying verity, be his home ? Shall he remain the slave of
the senses with their habits and customs, or rise to a plane of
consciousness, of heroic endeavour, in which — participating in
the life of spirit — he knows reality because he is real ?

The mystics, one and all, have answered this question in the
same sense, and proved in their own experience that the premises
of “Activism” are true. This application of the vitalistic idea to
the transcendental world, does in fact fit the observed facts of
mysticism far more closely even than it fits the observed facts
of man's ordinary mental life.

(i) The primary break with the sense-world. (2) The “new”
birth and development of the spiritual consciousness on high
levels — in Eucken's eyes an essential factor in the attainment of
reality. (3) That ever closer and deeper dependence on and appro-
priation of the fullness of the Divine Life ; a conscious participa-
tion, and active union with the infinite and eternal. These three
imperatives, as we shall see later, form an exact description of the
psychological process through which the mystics pass. If then this
transcendence is the highest destiny of the race, mysticism
becomes the crown of man's ascent towards Reality; the orderly
completion of the universal plan.

The mystics show us this independent spiritiaul life, this
fruition of the Absolute, enjoyed with a fullness to which others
cannot attain. They are the heroic examples of the life of spirit;
as the great artists, the great discoverers, are the heroic examples
of the life of beauty and the life of truth. Directly participating,
like all artists, in the Divine Life, they are usually persons of
great vitality: but this vitality expresses itself in unusual forms,
hard of understanding for ordinary men. When we see a picture or
a poem, hear a musical composition, we accept it as an expression
of life, an earnest of the power which brought it forth. But the
deep contemplations of the great mystic, his visionary reconstruc-
tions of reality, and the fragments of them which he is able to
report, do not seem to us — as they are — the equivalents, or more
often the superiors of the artistic and scientific achievements of
other great men.

• “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 12 1.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


35

Mysticism, then, offers us the history, as old as civilization,
of a race of adventurers who have carried to its term the process
of a deliberate and active return to the divine fount of things.
They have surrendered themselves to the life-movement of the
universe, hence have lived with an intenser life than other men
can ever know; have transcended the "sense-world” in order to
live on high levels the spiritual life. Therefore they witness to
all that our latent spiritual consciousness, which shows itself in
the “hunger for the Absolute,” can be made to mean to us if we
develop it; and have in this respect a unique importance for the
race. It is the mystics, too, who have perfected that method of
intuition, that knowledge by union, the existence of which
philosophy has been driven to acknowledge. But where the meta-
physician obtains at best a sidelong glance at that Being "un-
changing yet elusive,” whom he has so often defined but never
discovered, the artist a brief and dazzling vision of the Beauty
which is Truth, they gaze with confidence into the very eyes of the
Beloved.

The mystics, again, are, by their very constitution, acutely
conscious of the free and active "World of Becoming,” the Divine
Immanence and its travail. It is in them and they are in it : or,
as they put it in their blunt theological way, "the Spirit of God is
within you.” But they are not satisfied with this statement and
this knowledge; and here it is that they part company with
vitalism. It is, they think, but half a truth. To know Reality in
this way, to know it in its dynamic aspect, enter into "the great life
of the All” : this is indeed, in the last resort, to know it supremely
from the point of view of man — to liberate from selfhood the
human consciousness — but it is not to know it from the point of
view of God. There are planes of being beyond this; countries
dark to the intellect, deeps into which only the very greatest
contemplatives have looked. These, coming forth, have declared
with Ruysbroeck that "God according to the Persons is Eternal
Work, but according to the Essence and Its perpetual stillness
He is Eternal Rest.” 1

The full spiritual consciousness of the true mystic is developed
not in one, but in two apparently opposite but really complemen-
tary directions: —

*\ . . io vidi

Ambo le corte del del manifeste.'

On the one hand he is intensely aware of, and knows himself to be
at one with that active World of Becoming, that immanent Life,
ffrom which his own life takes its rise. Hence, though he has broken
1 *‘De Septem Gradibus Amoris/' cap. xiv. * Par. xxx. 95.



MYSTICISM


36

for ever with the bondage of the senses, he perceives in every mani-
festation of life a sacramental meaning; a loveliness, a wonder,
a heightened significance, which is hidden from other men. He
may, with St. Francis, call the Sun and the Moon, Water and Fire,
his brothers and his sisters: or receive, with Blake, the message
of the trees. Because of his cultivation of disinterested love,
because his outlook is not conditioned by “the exclusive action of
the will-to-live,” he has attained the power of communion with
the living reality of the universe; and in this respect can truly say
that he finds “God in all and all in God.” Thus, the skilled spiritual
vision of Lady Julian, transcending the limitations of human
perception, entering into harmony with a larger world whose
rhythms cannot be received by common men, saw the all-enfolding
Divine Life, the mesh of reality. “For as the body is clad in the
cloth,” she said, “and the flesh in the skin and the bones in the
flesh and the heart in the whole, so are we, soul and body, clad in
the Goodness of God and enclosed. Yea, and more homely: for all
these may waste and wear away, but the Goodness of God is ever
whole .” 1 Many mystical poets and pantheistic mystics never
pass beyond this degree of lucidity.

On the other hand, the full mystic consciousness also attains to
what is, I think, its really characteristic quality. It develops the
power of apprehending the Absolute, Pure Being, the utterly
Transcendent: or, as its possessor would say, can experience
“passive union with God.” This all-round expansion of conscious-
ness, with its dual power of knowing by communion the temporal
and eternal, immanent and transcendent aspects of reality — the
life of the All, vivid, flowing and changing, and the changeless,
conditionless life of the One— is the peculiar mark, the ultimo
sigillo of the great mystic, and must never be forgotten in studying
his life and work.

As the ordinary man is the meeting-place between two stages
of reality — the sense-world and the world of spiritual life — so the
mystic, standing head and shoulders above ordinary men, is
again the meeting-place between two orders. Or, if you like it
better, he is able to perceive and react to reality under two modes.
On the one hand he knows, and rests in, the eternal world of Pure
Being, the “Sea Pacific” of the Godhead, indubitably present to
him in his ecstasies, attained by him in the union of love. On the
other, he knows — and works in — that “stormy sea,” the vital
World of Becoming which is the expression of Its will. “Illuminated
men,” says Ruysbroeck, “are caught up, above the reason, into
naked vision. There the Divine Unity dwells and calls them. Hence
their bare vision, cleansed and free, penetrates the activity
1 “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. vi.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


37

of all created things, and pursues it to search it out even to
its height/' 1

^ Though philosophy has striven since thought began — and
striven in vain — to resolve the paradox of Being and Becoming,
of Eternity and Time, she has failed strangely enough to perceive
that a certain type of personality has substituted experience for
her guesses at truth; and achieved its solution, not by the dubious
processes of thought, but by direct perception. To the great mystic
the “problem of the Absolute" presents itself in terms of life, not
in terms of dialectic. He solves it in terms of life: by a change or
growth of consciousness which — thanks to his peculiar genius —
enables him to apprehend that two-fold Vision of Reality which
eludes the perceptive powers of other men. It is extraordinary
that this fact of experience — a central fact for the understanding
of the contemplative type — has received so little attention from
writers upon mysticism. As we proceed, with our inquiry, its
importance, its far-reaching implications in the domains of
psychology, of theology, of action, will become more and more
evident. It provides the reason why the mystics could never accept
the diagram of the Vitalists or Evolutionists as a complete state-
ment of the nature of Reality. “Whatever be the limits of your
^knowledge, we know" — they would say — "that the world has
another aspect than this: the aspect which is present to the Mind
of God." "Tranquillity according to His essence, activity ac-
cording to His nature: perfect stillness, perfect fecundity," 2 says
Ruysbrocck again, this is the two-fold character of the Absolute.
That which to us is action, to Him, they declare, is rest ; “His very
peace and stillness coming from the brimming fullness of His
infinite life. "3 That which to us is Many, to that Transcendent
KnowerisOne. Our World of Becoming rests on the bosom of that
Pure Being which has ever been the final Object of man's quest:
the “river in which we cannot bathe twice" is the stormy flood of
^life flowing toward that divine sea. "Plow glorious," says the Voice
of the Eternal to St. Catherine of Siena, “is that soul which has
indeed been able to pass from the stormy ocean to Me, the Sea
Pacific, and in that Sea, which is Myself, to fill the pitcher of her
heart.

The evolution of the mystic consciousness, then, brings its
possessors to this transcendent point of view: their secret is this
unity in diversity, this stillness in strife. Here they are in harmony
with Heracleitus rather than with his modern interpreters. That

1 Ruysbroeck, “Samuel," cap. viii.

^ * Ibid., “Dc Vera Contemplatione," cap. xii.

Jr 3 Von Hugel, “The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. ii. p. 132.

• St. Catherine of Siena, Dialogo, cap. lxxxix.



MYSTICISM


38

most mystical of philosophers discerned a hidden unity beneath
the battle, transcending all created opposites; and taught his^
disciples that “Having hearkened not unto me but unto the Logos,
it is wise to confess that all things are one” 1 This is the secret at
which the idealists' arid concept of Pure Being has tried, so
timidly, to hint: and which the Vitalists' more intimate, more
actual concept of Becoming has tried, so unnecessarily, to destroy.
We shall see the glorious raiment in which the Christian mystics
deck it when we come to consider their theological map of the
quest.

If it be objected — and this objection has been made by advo-
cates of each school of thought — that the existence of the idealists'
and mystics* “Absolute" is utterly inconsistent with the deeply
alive, striving life which the Vitalists identify with reality, I
reply that both concepts at bottom are but symbols of realities
which the human mind can never reach: and that the idea of
stillness, unity and peace is and has ever been humanity's best
translation of its intuition of the achieved Perfection of God.

“ ‘In the midst of silence a hidden word was spoken to me.' Where
is this Silence, and where is the place in which this word is spoken?

It is in the purest that the soul can produce, in her noblest part (
in the Ground, even the Being of the Soul." 2 3 So Eckhart: and here^
he does but subscribe to a universal tradition. The mystics have
always insisted that “Be still, be still, and know” is the condition
of man's purest and most direct apprehensions of reality: that
he experiences in quiet the truest and deepest activity: and
Christianity when she formulated her philosophy made haste to
adopt and express this paradox.

“Quid es ergo , Deus meus said St. Augustine, and gave an
answer in which the vision of the mystic, the genius of the philo-
sopher, combined to hint something at least of the paradox of l
intimacy and majesty in that all-embracing, all-transcending One.J
“Summe, optime, potentissime, omnipotentissime, misericordis-^
sime et justissime, secretissime et presentissime, pulcherrime et
fortissimo; stabilis et incomprehensibilis; immutabilis, mutans j
omnia. Numquam novus, nunquam vetus. . . . Semper agens,
semper quietus: colligens et non egens: portans et implens et
protegens; creans et nutriens et perficiens: quaerens cum nihil j
desit tibi. . . . Quid dicimus, Deus meus, vita mea, dulcedo mea
sancta? Aut quid dicit aliquis, cum de te dicit ?"3

1 Heracleitus, op. cit .

• Meister Eckhart, Pred. i.

3 Aug. Conf., bk. i. cap. iv. “What art Thou, then, my God? . . . Highest,
best, most potent [i.e., dynamic], most omnipotent [ i.e ., transcendent], moe t
merciful and most just, most deeply hid and yet most near. Fairest, yet strongest:
steadfast, yet unseizable; unchangeable yet changing all things; never new, yet



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


39

It has been said that “Whatever we may do, our hunger for the
f A bsolute will never cease/' This hunger — that innate craving for,
and intuition of, a final Unity, an unchanging good — will go on,
however heartily we may feed on those fashionable systems which
offer us a dynamic or empirical universe. If, now, we admit in all
living creatures — as Vitalists must do — an instinct of self-preserva-
tion, a free directive force which may be trusted and which makes
for life: is it just to deny such an instinct to the human soul?
The “entelechy” of the Vitalists, the “hidden steersman/' drives
the phenomenal world on and up. What about that other sure
instinct embedded in the race, breaking out again and again,
which drives the spirit on and up; spurs it eternally towards an
end which it feels to be definite yet cannot define ? Shall we dis-
trust this instinct for the Absolute, as living and ineradicable as
any other of our powers, merely because philosophy finds it
difficult to accommodate and to describe ?

“We must," says Plato in the “Timaeus,” “make a distinction
of the two great forms of being, and ask, ‘What is that which Is
and has no Becoming, and what is that which is always becoming
and never Is?' ” l Without necessarily subscribing to the Platonic
^answer to this question, we may surely acknowledge that the
question itself is sound and worth asking; that it expresses a
perennial demand of human nature; and that the analogy of man's
other instincts and cravings assures us that these his fundamental
demands always indicate the existence of a supply.* The great
defect of Vitalism, considered as a system, is that it only answers
half the question; the half which Absolute Idealism disdained
to answer at all.

We have seen that the mystical experience, the fullest all-round
experience in regard to the transcendental world which humanity
has attained, declares that there are two aspects, two planes of
^discoverable Reality. We have seen also that hints of these two
planes — often clear statements concerning them — abound in
mystical literature of the personal first-hand type. 3 Pure Being,

never old. . . . Ever busy, yet ever at rest; gathering yet needing not: bearing,
filling, guarding; creating, nourishing and perfecting; seeking though Thou h.iat
no wants. . . . What can I say, my God, my life, my holy joy? or what can any
say who speaks of Thee?" Compare the strikingly similar Sufi definition of the
Nature of God, as given in Palmer’s “Oriental Mysticism," pp. 22, 23. “First
and last, End and Limit of all things, incomparable and unchangeable, always
near yet always far," &c. This probably owes something to Platonic influence.

1 "Timaeus," § 27.

* “A natural craving," said Aquinas, “cannot be in vain." Philosophy is
creeping back to this “mediaeval" point of view. Compare “Summa Contra
Gentiles," l.ii. cap. lxxix.

Jk 3 Compare Dante’s vision in Par. xxx., where he sees Reality first as the
Streaming River of Light, the flux of things; and then, when his sight has been
purged, as achieved Perfection, the Sempiternal Rose.



MYSTICISM


40

says Boutroux in the course of his exposition of Boehme, 1 has two
characteristic manifestations. It shows itself to us as Power,,
by means of strife, of the struggle and opposition of its own
qualities. But it shows itself to us as Reality, in harmonizing and
reconciling within itself these discordant opposites.

Its manifestation as Power, then, is for us in the dynamic World
of Becoming, amidst the thud and surge of that life which is
compounded of paradox, of good and evil, joy and sorrow, life
and death. Here, Boehme declares that the Absolute God is
voluntarily self-revealing. But each revelation has as its condition
the appearance of its opposite: light can only be recognized at the
price of knowing darkness, life needs death, love needs wrath.
Hence if Pure Being — the Good, Beautiful and True — is to reveal
itself, it must do so by evoking and opposing its contrary: as in
the Hegelian dialectic no idea is complete without its negative.
Such a revelation by strife, however, is rightly felt by man to be
incomplete. Absolute Reality, the Player whose sublime music
is expressed at the cost of this everlasting friction between
bow and lyre, is present, it is true, in His music. But He is
best known in that “light behind," that unity where all these
opposites are lifted up into harmony, into a higher synthesis;
and the melody is perceived, not as a difficult progress of sound,
but as a whole.

We have, then, (a) The achieved Reality which the Greeks, and
every one after them, meant by that seemingly chill abstraction
which they called Pure Being: that Absolute One, unconditioned
and undiscoverable, in Whom all is resumed. In the undifferenti-
ated Godhead of Eckhart, the Transcendent Father of orthodox
Christian theology, we see the mind's attempt to conceive that
“wholly other" Reality, unchanging yet changer of all. It is the
great contribution of the mystics to humanity's knowledge of the
real that they find in this Absolute, in defiance of the meta-
physicians, a personal object of love, the goal of their quest, a
“Living One who lives first and lives perfectly, and Who, touching
me, the inferior, derivative life, can cause me to live by Him and
for His sake" 2 .

(6) But, contradicting the nihilism of Eastern contemplatives,
they see also a reality in the dynamic side of things : in the seething
pot of appearance. They are aware of an eternal Becoming, a
striving, free, evolving life ; not merely as a shadow-show, but as
an implicit of their Cosmos felt also in the travail of their own
souls — God's manifestation or showing, in which He is immanent,
in which His Spirit truly works and strives. It is in this plane of

* E. Boutroux, “Le Philosophe Allemand, Jacob Boehme,” p. 18.

• F. von Hugel: “ Eternal Life, * p. 385.



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM 41

reality that all individual life is immersed : this is the stream which
set out from the Heart of God and “turns again home."

The mystic knows his task to be the attainment of Being,
Eternal Life, union with the One, the “return to the Father’s
heart" : for the parable of the Prodigal Son is to him the history of
the universe. This union is to be attained, first by co-operation in
that Life which bears him up, in which lie is immersed. He must
become conscious of this "great life of the All," merge himself in
it, if he would find his way back whence he came. Vae soli. Hence
there are really tw T o distinct acts of “divine union," two distinct
kinds of illumination involved in the Mystic Way: the dual
character of the spiritual consciousness brings a dual responsibility
in its train. First, there is the union with Life, with the World of
Becoming: and parallel with it, the illumination by which the
mystic “gazes upon a more veritable world." Secondly, there is
the union with Being, with the One: and that final, ineffable
illumination of pure love which is called the “knowledge of God."
It is through the development of the third factor, the free, creative
“spirit," the scrap of Absolute Life which is the ground of his
soul, that the mystic can (a) conceive and (b) accomplish these
transcendent acts. Only Being can know Being: we “behold that
which we are, and are that which we behold.” But there is a spark
in man’s soul, say the mystics, which is real — which in fact is —
and by its cultivation we may know reality. “Thus," says Von
I Jugel “a real succession, real efforts, and the continuous sense of
limitation and inadequacy are the very means in and through
which man apprehends increasingly (if only he thus loves and
wills) the contrasting yet sustaining Simultaneity, Spontaneity,
Infinity, and pure action of the Eternal Life of God." 1

Over and over again — as Being and Becoming, as Eternity
and Time, as Transcendence and Immanence, Reality and Appear-
ance, the One and the Many — these two dominant ideas, demands,
imperious instincts of man’s self will reappear; the warp and woof
of his completed universe. On the one hand is his intuition of a
remote, unchanging Somewhat calling him: on the other there is
his longing for and as clear intuition of an intimate, adorable
Somewhat, companioning him. Man’s true Real, his only adequate
God, must be great enough to embrace this sublime paradox,
to take up these apparent negations into a higher synthesis.
Neither the utter transcendence of extreme Absolutism, nor the
utter immanence of the Vitalists will do. Both these, taken alone,
are declared by the mystics to be incomplete. They conceive that
Absolute Being who is the goal of their quest as manifesting
Himself in a World of Becoming: working in it. at one with it

* Op. cit., p. 387.



MYSTICISM


42

yet though semper agens, also semper quietus. The Divine spirit
which they know to be immanent in the heart and in the universe
comes forth from and returns to the Transcendent One; and this
division of persons in unity of substance completes the “Eternal
Circle, from Goodness, through Goodness, to Goodness."

Absolute Being and Becoming, the All and the One, are found
to he alike inadequate to their definition of this discovered Real;
the "triple star of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty." Speaking always
from experience — the most complete experience achieved by man
— they assure us of an Absolute which overpasses and includes the
Absolute of philosophy, far transcends that Cosmic life which it
fills and sustains, and is best defined in terms of Transcendent
Personality; which because of its unspeakable richness and of the
poverty of human speech, they have sometimes been driven to
define only by negations. At once static and dynamic, above life
and in it, “all love yet all law," eternal in essence though working
in time, this vision resolves the contraries which tease those who
study it from without, and swallows up whilst it kindles to life all
the partial interpretations of metaphysics and of science.

Here then stands the mystic. By the help of two types of philo-
sophy, eked out by the resources of symbolic expression and
suggestion, he has contrived to tell us something of his vision and
his claim. Confronted by that vision — that sublime intuition
of eternity— we may surely ask, indeed are bound to ask, “What
is the machinery by which this self, akin to the imprisoned and
sense-fed self of our daily experience, has contrived to slip its
fetters and rise to those levels of spiritual perception on which
alone such vision can be possible to man? How has it brought
within the field of consciousness those deep intuitions which
fringe upon Absolute Life; how developed powers by which it is
enabled to arrive at this amazing, this superhuman concept of
the nature of Reality?" Psychology will do something, perhaps, to
help us to an answer to this question ; and it is her evidence which
we must examine next. But for the fullest and most satisfying
answer we must go to the mystics; and they reply to our ques-
tions, when we ask them, in the direct and uncompromising
terms of action, not in the refined and elusive periods of specula-
tive thought.

“Come with us," they say to the bewildered and entangled self,
craving for finality and peace, “and we will show you a way out
that shall not only be an issue from your prison, but also a pathway
to your Home. True, you are immersed, fold upon fold, in theWorld
of Becoming; worse, you are besieged on all sides by the persistent
illusions of sense. But you too are a child of the Absolute. You
bear within you the earnest of your inheritance. At the apex of



MYSTICISM AND VITALISM


43

your spirit there is a little door, so high up that only by hard
climbing can you reach it. There the Object of your craving
stands and knocks; thence came those persistent messages —faint
echoes from the Truth eternally hammering at your gates — which
disturbed the comfortable life of sense. Come up then by this
pathway, to those higher levels of reality to which, in virtue of
the eternal spark in you, you belong. Leave your ignoble ease,
your clever prattle, your absurd attempts to solve the apparent
contradictions of a Whole too great for your useful little mind to
grasp. Trust your deep instincts; use your latent powers. Appro-
priate that divine, creative life which is the very substance of your
being. Remake yourself in its interest, if you would know its
beauty and its truth. You can only behold that which you are.
Only the Real can know Reality.”

Note to the Twelfth Edition

The changed philosophic outlook since this chapter was first
written, eighteen years ago, has now given to it a somewhat
old-fashioned air. The ideas of Bergson and Eucken no longer
occupy the intellectual foreground. Were I now writing it
for the first time, my examples would be chosen from other
philosophers, and especially from those who are bringing back
into modem thought the critical realism of the scholastics. But
the position which is here defended — that a limited dualism, a
"Two-step philosophy,” is the only type of mctaphysic adequate
to the facts of mystical experience — remains in my own mind
as true as before. Now that mysticism enjoys the patronage of
many pious monists and philosophic naturalists, this view seems
more than ever in need of strong and definite statement.



CHAPTER III


MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY

Man's craving to know more and love more — His mental machinery — Emotion,
Intellect, Will — Their demand of absolute objects — Conation and Cognition —
Action and Thought — Importance of emotion — Love and Will — Concentration-
Contemplation -The mvstic sense — its liberation — Passivity — The Mystic State
— Supraliminal and subliminal personality — The “ground of the soul" — The
“unconscious mind" — extravagances of this doctrine — The unconscious not
the equivalent of the transcendental self — Mystical theory of man's spiritual
sense — The New Birth— The Spiritual Self — Synteresis — The Spark of the Soul —
the organ of transcendental consciousness — Transcendental Feeling — its expres-
sion — The Spark of the Soul sleeps in normal men — The mystic’s business is to
wake it — Function of contemplation — it alters the field of consciousness — Dual
personality — The hidden self of the Mystic — its emergence — Entranccment —
Mystical ill-health — Psycho-physical phenomena — Mysticism and hysteria —
Mysticism and longevity — The mystics' psychic peculiarities — their wholeness
of life — Genius and mysticism compared — Philo on inspiration — The function
of passivity — Automatic states — Summary and conclusion

W E come now to consider the mental apparatus which is
at the disposal of the self : to ask what it can tell us of
the method by which she may escape from the prison of
the sense-world, transcend its rhythm, and attain knowledge of—
or conscious contact with— a supra-sensible Reality. We have seen
the normal self shut within that prison, and making, by the
help of science and of philosophy, a survey of the premises and
furniture: testing the thickness of the walls and speculating on
the possibility of trustworthy news from without penetrating
to her cell. Shut with her in that cell, two forces, the desire to know
more and the desire to love more, are ceaselessly at work. Where
the first of these cravings predominates, we call the result a
philosophical or a scientific temperament ; where it is overpowered
by the ardour of unsatisfied love, the self’s reaction upon things
becomes poetic, artistic, and characteristically — though not
always explicitly— religious.

We have seen further that a certain number of persons declare
that they have escaped from the prison. Have they done so, it
can only be in order to satisfy these two hungry desires, for these,
and these only, make that a prison which might otherwise be a
comfortable hotel; and since, in varying degrees, these desires are
in all of us, active or latent, it is clearly worth while to discover, :
if we can, the weak point in the walls, and method of achieving '
this one possible way of escape.

44



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 45

Before we try to define in psychological language the way in
which the mystic slips the fetters of sense, sets out upon his
journey towards home, it seems well to examine the machinery
which is at the disposal of the normal, conscious self: the creature,
or part of a creature, which we recognize as “ourselves.” The older
psychologists were accustomed to say that the messages from
the outer world awaken in that self three main forms of activity,
(i) They arouse movements of attraction or repulsion, of desire
or distaste; which vary in intensity from the semi-conscious
havings of the hungry infant to the passions of the lover, artist,
or fanatic. (2) They stimulate a sort of digestive process, in which
she combines and cogitates upon the material presented to her;
finally absorbing a certain number of the resulting concepts and
making them part of herself or of her world. (3) The movements
of desire, or the action of reason, or both in varying combinations,
awaken in her a determination by which percept and concept
issue in action; bodily, mental, or spiritual. Hence, the main
aspects of the self were classified as Emotion, Intellect, and Will:
and the individual temperament was regarded as emotional,
intellectual, or volitional, according to whether feeling, thought,
ipr will assumed the reins.

Modern psychologists have moved away from this diagram-
matic conception, and incline more and more to dwell upon the
unity of the psyche — that hypothetical self which none have ever
seen — and on some aspect of its energetic desire, its libido, or
“hormic drive” as the ruling factor of its life. These conceptions are
useful to the student of mysticism, though they cannot be accepted
uncritically or regarded as complete.

Now the unsatisfied psyche in her emotional aspect wants, as
we have said, to love more; her curious intellect wants to know
more. The awakened human creature suspects that both appetites
are being kept on a low diet ; that there really is more to love, and
more to know, somewhere in the mysterious world without, and
further that its powers of affection and understanding are worthy
of some greater and more durable objective than that provided
by the illusions of sense. Urged therefore by the cravings of feeling
or of thought, consciousness is always trying to run out to the
encounter of the Absolute, and always being forced to return.
The neat philosophical system, the diagrams of science, the “sun-
set-touch,” are tried in turn. Art and life, the accidents of our
humanity, may foster an emotional outlook; till the moment m
which the neglected intellect arises and pronounces such an
outlook to have no validity. Metaphysics and science seem to
:ffer to the intellect an open window towards truth; till the heart
looks out and declares this landscape to be a chill desert in which



MYSTICISM


46

she can find no nourishment. These diverse aspects of things must
be either fused or transcended if the whole self is to be satisfied
for the reality which she seeks has got to meet both claims and'
pay in full.

When Dionysius the Areopagite divided those angels who
stand nearest God into the Seraphs who are aflame with perfect
love, and the Cherubs who are filled with perfect knowledge, he
only gave expression to the two most intense aspirations of the
human soul, and described under an image the two-fold condition ,
of that Beatific Vision which is her goal. 1

There is a sense in which it may be said, that the desire of
knowledge is a part of the desire of perfect love: since one aspect^
of that all inclusive passion is clearly a longing to know, in the
deepest, fullest, closest sense, the thing adored. Love's charac-
teristic activity — for Love, all wings, is inherently active, and
"cannot be lazy," as the mystics say — is a quest, an outgoing
towards an object desired, which only when possessed will be
fully known, and only when fully known can be perfectly adored. 3
Intimate communion, no less than worship, is of its essence.
Joyous fruition is its proper end. This is true of all Love's quests,
whether the Beloved be human or divine — the bride, the Grail,,
the Mystic Rose, the Plenitude of God. But there is no sense in;
which it can be said that the desire of love is merely a part of the ^
desire of perfect knowledge : for that strictly intellectual ambition
includes no adoration, no self-spending, no reciprocity of feeling
between Knower and Known. Mere knowledge, taken alone, is
a matter of receiving, not of acting: of eyes, not wings: a dead
alive business at the best. There is thus a sharp distinction to be
drawn between these two great expressions of life: the energetic
love, the passive knowledge. One is related to the eager, outgoing
activity, the dynamic impulse to do somewhat, physical, mental, i
or spiritual, which is inherent in all living things and which
psychologists call conation; the other to the indwelling conscious-^
ness, the passive knowing somewhat, which they call cognition. '

Now "conation" is almost wholly the business of will, but of
will stimulated by emotion : for wilful action of every kind, how-
ever intellectual it may seem, is always the result of interest, and

* The wise Cherubs, according to the beautiful imagery of Dionysius, are “all

eyes," but the loving Seraphs are “all wings." Whilst the Seraphs, the figure of
intensest Love, “ move perpetually towards things divine/' ardour and energy
being their characteristics, the characteristic of the Cherubs is receptiveness,
their power of absorbing the rays of the Supernal Light. (Dionysius the Areopagite, (
“De Caelesti lerarchia," vi. 2, and vii. 1.) ^

* So RScejac says of the mystics, “They desire to know, only that they may ,
love ; and their desire for union with the principle of things in God, Who is theJi
sum of them all, is founded on a feeling whit-h is neither curiosity nor sch^
interest" (“Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 50).



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 47

■interest involves feeling. We act because we feel we want to; feel
Iwe must. Whether the inspiring force be a mere preference or an
overwhelming urge, our impulse to “do” is a synthesis of determina-
tion and desire. All man’s achievements are the result of conation,
never of mere thought. “The intellect by itself moves nothing,”
said Aristotle, and modern psychology has but affirmed this law.
Hence his quest of Reality is never caused, though it may be
greatly assisted, by the intellectual aspect of his consciousness; for
, the reasoning powers as such have little initiative. Their province
! is analytic, not exploratory. They stay at home, dissecting and
; arranging matter that comes to hand; and do not adventure
beyond their own region in search of food. Thought does not
ipenetrate far into an object in which the self feels no interest — i.e. t
| towards which she does not experience a “conative” movement of
I attraction, of desire — for interest is the only method known to
| us of arousing the will, and securing the fixity of attention ncces-
Jsary to any intellectual process. None think for long about any-
thing for which they do not care ; that is to say, which does not
touch some aspect of their emotional life. They may hate it, love it,
fear it, want it; but they must have some feeling about it. Feeling
ip the tentacle we stretch out to the world of things.

1/ Here the lesson of psychology is the same as that which Dante
'brought back from his pilgrimage; the supreme importance and
| harmonious movement of il desiro and il wile. Si come rota
ich’cgmlmente b mossa , J these move together to fulfil the Cosmic
\ Plan. In all human life, in so far as it is not merely a condition of
I passive “awareness,” the law which he found implicit in the
’’ universe is the law of the individual mind. Not logic, not
"common sense,” but I’amor che move il sole e le altre sfclle is the
motive force of the spirit of man: in the inventors, the philo-
sophers, and the artists, no less than in the heroes and in the saints.

The vindication of the im]x)rtance of feeling in our life, and in
[particular its primacy over reason in all that has to do with man’s
contact with the transcendental world, has been one of the great
achievements of modern psychology. In the sphere of religion it
is now acknowledged that “God known of the heart” gives a better
account of the character of our spiritual experience than “God
guessed at by the brain”; that the loving intuition is more fruitful
and more trustworthy than the dialectic proof. One by one the
commonplaces of mysticism are thus rediscovered by official
science, and given their proper place in the psychology of the
spiritual life. Thus Leuba, hardly a friendly witness, is found to
agree with the Fourth Evangelist that “Life, more life, a larger,
:her, more satisfying life, is in the last analysis the end of

* Par. xxxiii. 143.



MYSTICISM


48

religion/' 1 and we have seen that life, as we know it, has the
character of a purposive striving, more directly dependent on will^
and feeling then on thought. Of this drive, this urge, thought
indeed is but the servant; a skilled and often arrogant servant,
with a constant tendency to usurpation. Some form of feeling —
interest, desire, fear, appetite — must supply the motive power.
Without this, the will would be dormant, and the intellect lapse
into a calculating machine.

Further, “the heart has its reasons which the mind knows not 1
of” It is a matter of experience that in our moments of deep emo-
tion, transitory though they be, we plunge deeper into the reality
of things than we can hope to do in hours of the most brilliant!
argument. At the touch of passion doors fly open which logic has
battered on in vain: for passion rouses to activity not merely the
mind, but the whole vitality of man. It is the lover, the poet, the
mourner, the convert, who shares for a moment the mystic's
privilege of lifting that Veil of Isis which science handles so help-
lessly, leaving only her dirty fingermarks behind. The heart,
eager and restless, goes out into the unknown, and brings home,
literally and actually, “fresh food for thought.” Hence those who
“feel to think” are likely to possess a richer, more real, if les,s
orderly, experience than those who “think to feel.”

This psychological law, easily proved in regard to earthly*
matters, holds good also upon the supersensual plane. It was
expressed once for all by the author of “The Cloud of Unknowing”
when he said of God, “By love He may be gotten and holden, but
by thought of understanding, never.” 2 That exalted feeling, that
“secret blind love pressing,” not the neat deductions of logic, the
apologists “proofs” of the existence of the Absolute, unseals the
eyes to things unseen before. “Therefore,” says the same mystic,
“what time that thou purposest thee to this work, and feelest by
grace that thou art called of God, lift then up thine heart unto God
w r ith a meek stirring of love; and mean God that made thee anf^ii
bought thee, and that graciously hath called thee to thy degree,
and receive none other thought of God. And yet not all these but
if thou list ; for it sufficeth thee enough, a naked intent direct unto
God without any other cause than Himself .”3 Here we see emotion ai
its proper work ; the movement of desire passing over at once into
the act of concentration, the gathering up of all the powers of the
self into a state of determined attention, which is the business
of the Will. “This driving and drawing,” says Ruysbroeck, “we
feel in the heart and in the unity of all our bodily powers, and
especially in the desirous powers.”4 This act of perfect concentra?

1 The Monist , July, 1901, p. 572. * “The Cloud of Unknowing,’* cap. vi.^

i Op. cit ., cap. vii. 4 “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1. ii. cap. v.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY


49

t ion, the passionate focussing of the self upon one point, when it
is applied "with a naked intent" to real and transcendental things,
constitutes in the technical language of mysticism the state of
recollection : 1 a condition which is peculiarly characteristic of the
mystical consciousness, and is the necessary prelude of pure
contemplation, that state in which the mystic enters into com-
munion with Reality.

We have then arrived so far in our description of the mechanism
of the mystic. Possessed like other men of powers of feeling,
thought, and will, it is essential that his love and his determination,
even more than his thought, should be set upon Transcendent
Reality. He must feel a strong emotional attraction toward the
supersensual Object of his quest: that love which scholastic
philosophy defined as the force or power which causes every
creature to follow out the trend of its own nature. Of this must be
born the will to attain communion with that Absolute Object.
This will, this burning and active desire, must crystallize into and
express itself by that definite and conscious concentration of the
whole self upon the Object, which precedes the contemplative
state. We see already how far astray are those who look upon the
i mystical temperament as passive in type.

Our next concern, then, would seem to be with this condition of
contemplation: what it does and whither it leads. What is (a) its
psychological explanation and (b) its empirical value? Now, in
dealing with this, and other rare mental conditions, we are of
course trying to describe from without that which can only
adequately be described from within ; which is as much as to say
that only mystics can really write about mysticism. Fortunately,
many mystics have so written; and we, from their experiences
and from the explorations of psychology upon another plane, are
able to make certain elementary deductions. It appears generally
from these that the act of contemplation is for the mystic a
psychic gateway; a method of going from one level of consciousness
to another. In technical language it is the condition under which
he shifts his "field of perception" and obtains his characteristic
outlook on the universe. That there is such a characteristic
outlook, peculiar to no creed or race, is proved by the history of
mysticism; which demonstrates plainly enough that in some men
another sort of consciousness, another "sense," may be liberated
beyond the normal powers we have discussed. This "sense" has
attachments at each point to emotion, to intellect, and to will.
It can express itself under each of the aspects which these terms
connote. Yet it differs from and transcends the emotional, intel-
lectual, and volitional life of ordinary men. It was recognized by
* See below, Pt. II. Cap. VI.



MYSTICISM


50

Plato as that consciousness which could apprenend the real world
of the Ideas. Its development is the final object of that education ,
which his “Republic" describes. It is called by Plotinus “Another
intellect, different from that which reasons and is denominated
rational." 1 Its business, he says, is the perception of the super-
sensual — or, in Neoplatonic language, the intelligible world. It is
the sense which, in the words of the “Theologia Germanica," has
“the power of seeing into eternity," 3 the “mysterious eye of the
soul" by which St. Augustine saw “the light that never changes. "3
It is, says A1 Ghazzali, a Persian mystic of the eleventh century,
“like an immediate perception, as if one touched its object with
one's hand . "4 In the words of his great Christian successor, 1
St. Bernard, “it may be defined as the soul’s true unerring intui-
tion, the unhesitating apprehension of truth" which “simple
vision of truth," says St. Thomas Aquinas, “ends in a movement
of desire." 6

It is infused with burning love, for it seems to its possessors
to be primarily a movement of the heart : with intellectual subtlety,
for its ardour is wholly spent upon the most sublime object of
thought : with unflinching will, for its adventures are undertaken
in the teeth of the natural doubts, prejudices, languors, and self-
indulgence of man. These adventures, looked upon by those who
stay at home as a form of the Higher Laziness, are in reality the
last and most arduous labours which the human spirit is called
to perform. They are the only known methods by which we can
come into conscious possession of all our powers; and, rising
from the lower to the higher levels of consciousness, become
aware of that larger life in which we are immersed, attain
communion with the transcendent Personality in Whom that
life is resumed.

Mary has chosen the better, not the idler part; for her gaze is
directed towards those First Principles without which the activity
of Martha would have no meaning at all. In vain does sardonic
common sense, confronted with the contemplative type, reiterate
the sneer of Mucius, “Encore sont-ils heureux que la pauvre
Marthe leur fassc la cuisine." It remains a paradox of the mystics
that the passivity at which they appear to aim is really a state
of the most intense activity : more, that where it is wholly absent
no great creative action can take place. In it, the superficial self
compels itself to be still, in order that it may liberate another

1 Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.

• “Theologia Germanica,” cap. vii. (trans. Winkworth).

3 Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

4 A. Schmblders, “Essai sur les £coles Philosophique chez les Arabes,” p. 68.

< “De Consideratione,” bk. ii. cap. ii. 1

u “Summa Theologica,” ii. ii. q. clxxx, art. 3. eds. 1 and 3.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 51

more deep-seated power which is, in the ecstasy of the contempla-
tive genius, raised to the highest pitch of efficiency.

'This restful travail/' said Walter Hilton, “is full far from
fleshly idleness and from blind security. It is full of ghostly work,
but it is called rest, for grace looseth the heavy yoke of fleshly
love from the soul and maketh it mighty and free through the
gift of the holy ghostly love for to work gladly, softly, and
delectably. . . . Therefore is it called an holy idleness and a rest
most busy ; and so is it in stillness from the great crying and the
beastly noise of fleshly desires/' 1

If those who have cultivated this latent power be correct in
their statements, the self was mistaken in supposing herself to be
entirely shut off from the true external universe. She has, it seems,
certain tentacles which, once she learns to uncurl them, will
stretch sensitive fingers far beyond that limiting envelope in which
her normal consciousness is contained, and give her news of a
higher reality than that which can be deduced from the reports
of the senses. The fully developed and completely conscious
human soul can open as an anemone does, and know the ocean in
which she is bathed. This act, this condition of consciousness, in
which barriers are obliterated, the Absolute flows in on us, and
we, rushing out to its embrace, "find and feel the Infinite above all
reason and above all knowledge,”* is the true "mystical state.”
The value of contemplation is that it tends to produce this state,
release this transcendental sense ; and so turns the "lower servi-
tude" in which the natural man lives under the sway of his earthly
environment to the "higher servitude" of fully conscious depend-
ence on that Reality "in Whom we live and move and have our
being."

What then, we ask, is the nature of this special sense — this trans-
cendental consciousness — and how does contemplation liberate it?

Any attempt to answer this question brings upon the scene
another aspect of man's psychic life: an aspect of paramount
importance to the student of the mystic type. We have reviewed
the chief ways in which our surface consciousness reacts upon
experience: a surface consciousness which has been trained
through long ages to deal with the universe of sense. We know,
however, that the personality of man is a far deeper and more
mysterious thing than the sum of his conscious feeling, thought,
and will: that this superficial self — this Ego of which each of us
is aware — hardly counts in comparison with the deeps of being
which it hides. "There is a root or depth in thee," says Law,
"from whence all these faculties come forth as lines from a centre.


1 Walter Hilton, “The Scale of Perfection,’* bk. ii. cap. xl.
• Ruysbroeck, “De Septem Gradibus Amoris,” cap. xiv.



MYSTICISM


54

of his spiritual self; to bring it out of the hiddenness, and unify
himself about it as a centre, thus "putting on divine humanity.".

The divine nucleus, the point of contact between man's life and
the divine life in which it is immersed and sustained, has been
given many names in course of the development of mystical
doctrine. All clearly mean the same thing, though emphasizing
different aspects of its life. Sometimes it is called the Synteresis, 1
the keeper or preserver of his being : sometimes the Spark of the
Soul, the Funklein of the German mystics: sometimes its Apex,
the point at which it touches the heavens. Then, with a sudden
flight to the other end of the symbolic scale, and in order to
emphasize its participation in pure Being, rather than its difference
from mere nature, it is called the Ground of the Soul, the founda-
tion or basal stuff indwelt by God, whence springs all spiritual
life. Clearly all these guesses and suggestions aim at one goal and
are all to be understood in a symbolic sense ; for, as Malaval ob-
served in answer to his disciples’ anxious inquiries on this subject,
"since the soul of man is a spiritual thing and thus cannot have
divisions or parts, consequently it cannot have height or depth,
summit or surface. But because we judge spiritual things by the
help of material things, since we know these better and they are
more familiar to us, we call the highest of all forms of conception
the summit, and the easier way of comprehending things the
surface, of the understanding.

Here at any rate, whatever name we may choose to give it, is
the organ of man's spiritual consciousness; the place where he
meets the Absolute, the germ of his real life. Here is the seat of
that deep "Transcendental Feeling," the "beginning and end of
metaphysics" which is, says Professor Stewart, "at once the
solemn sense of Timeless Being — of That which was and is and
ever shall be’ overshadowing us — and the conviction that Life
is good." "I hold," says the same writer, "that it is in Transcen-
dental Feeling, manifested normally as Faith in the Value of Life,
and ecstatically as sense of Timeless Being, and not in Thought
proceeding by way of speculative construction, that Consciousness
comes nearest to the object of metaphysics, Ultimate Reality. "3

position to acceptor restate the account of it given by the mystics. Thus Bremond
(“Pri&re et Poesie" and ‘‘Introduction & la Philosophic de la Pri£re") insists on
the capital distinction between the surface-mind, capable of rational knowledge,
and the deeper mind, organ of mystical knowledge, and operative in varying
degrees in religious, poetic, and aesthetic apprehensions.

1 An interesting discussion of the term “Synteresis" will be found in Dr. Inge's
“Christian Mysticism," Appendix C, pp. 359, 360.

• “La Pratique de la Vraye Theologie Mystique," vol. 1. p. 204.

s J. A. Stewart, “The Myths of Plato," pp. 41, 43. Perhaps I may point out
that this Transcendental Feeling — the ultimate material alike of prayer and of
poetry — has, like the mystic consciousness, a dual perception of Reality: static
being and dynamic life. See above, p. 42.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY


55

The existence of such a “ sense/' such an integral part or
(unction of the complete human being, has been affirmed and
dwelt upon not only by the mystics, but by seers and teachers of
all times and creeds: by Egypt, Greece, and India, the poets, the
fakirs, the philosophers, and the saints. A belief in its actuality is
the pivot of the Christian position; indeed of every religion worthy
of the name. It is the justification of mysticism, asceticism, the
whole machinery of the self-renouncing life. That there is an
extreme point at which man's nature touches the Absolute: that
his ground, or substance, his true being, is penetrated by the
Divine Life which constitutes the underlying reality of things;
this is the basis on which the whole mystic claim of possible
union with God must rest. Here, they say, is our link with reality;
and in this place alone can be celebrated the “marriage from which
the Lord comes ." 1

To use another of their diagrams, it is thanks to the existence
within him of this immortal spark from the central fire, that man
is implicitly a “child of the infinite." The mystic way must there-
fore be a life, a discipline, which will so alter the constituents of
his mental lile as to include this spark within the conscious field;
bring it out of the hiddenness, from those deep levels where it
sustains and guides his normal existence, and make it the dominant
element round which his personality is arranged.

It is clear that under ordinary conditions, and save for sudden
gusts of “Transcendental Feeling" induced by some saving mad-
ness such as Religion, Art, or Love, the superficial self knows
nothing of the attitude of this silent watcher — this “Dweller in the
innermost" — towards the incoming messages of the external world :
nor of the activities which they awake in it. Concentrated on the
sense-world, and the messages she receives from it, she knows
nothing of the relations which exist between this subject and the
unattainable Object of all thought. But by a deliberate inatten-
tion to the messages of the senses, such as that which is induct'd
by contemplation, the mystic can bring the ground of the soul,
the seat of “Transcendental Feeling/' within the area of conscious-
ness : making it amenable to the activity of the will. Thus becoming
unaware of his usual and largely fictitious “external world,"
another and more substantial set of perceptions, which never have
their chance under normal conditions, rise to the surface. Some-
times these unite with the normal reasoning faculties. More often,
they supersede them. Some such exchange, such “losing to find,"

> appears to be necessary, if man's transcendental powers are to
have their full chance.

“The two eyes of the soul of man," says the “Theologia
1 Tauler, Sermon on St. Augustine (“The Inner Way,” p. 162).



MYSTICISM


56

Germanica,” here developing a profound Platonic image, “cannot
both perform their work at once : but if the soul shall see with the
right eye into eternity, then the left eye must close itself and
refrain from working, and be as though it were dead. For if the
left eye be fulfilling its office toward outward things; that is,
holding converse with time and the creatures; then must the
right eye be hindered in its working; that is, in its contemplation.
Therefore, whosoever will have the one must let the other go ; for
‘no man can serve two masters/ ” x

There is within us an immense capacity for perception, for the
receiving of messages from outside ; and a very little consciousness
which deals with them. It is as if one telegraph operator were
placed in charge of a multitude of lines: all may be in action,
but he can only attend to one at a time. In popular language, there
is not enough consciousness to go round. Even upon the sensual
plane, no one can be aware of more than a few things at once. These
fill the centre of our field of consciousness : as the object on which
we happen to have focussed our vision dominates our field of sight.
The other matters within that field retreat to the margin. We
know, dimly, that they are there ; but we pay them no attention
and should hardly miss them if they ceased to exist.

Transcendental matters are, for most of us, always beyond
the margin ; because most of us have given up our whole conscious-
ness to the occupation of the senses, and permitted them to
construct there a universe in which we are contented to remain.
Only in certain states — recollection, contemplation, ecstasy and
their allied conditions — does the self contrive to turn out the usual
tenants, shut the “gateways of the flesh/ 1 and let those submerged
powers which are capable of picking up messages from another
plane of being have their turn. Then it is the sense-world which
retreats beyond the margin, and another landscape that rushes
in. At last, then, we begin to see something of what contemplation
does for its initiates. It is one of the many names applied to that
chain of processes which have for their object this alteration of
the mental equilibrium: the putting to sleep of that “Normal
Sell” which usually wakes, and the awakening of that “Transcen-
dental Self” which usually sleeps. To man, “meeting-point of
various stages of reality,” is given — though he seldom considers
it — this unique power of choosing his universe.

The phenomenon known as double or disintegrated personality
may perhaps give us a hint as to the mechanical nature of the
change which contemplation effects. In this psychic malady thei
total character of the patient is split up ; a certain group of quali-

1 “Theologia Germanica," cap. vii. Compare ‘‘De Imitatione Christi," 1. iii.
cap. 38.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 57

ties are, as it were, abstracted from the surface-consciousness
and so closely associated as to form in themselves a complete
"character” or "personality” — necessarily poles asunder from the
"character” which the self usually shows to the world, since it
consists exclusively of those elements which are omitted from it.
Thus in the classical case of Miss Beauchamp, the investigator,
Dr. Morton Prince, called the three chief "personalities,” from
their ruling characteristics, "the Saint,” "the Woman,” and "the
Devil.” 1 The totality of character which composed the “real
Miss Beauchamp” had split up into these contrasting types; each
of which was excessive, because withdrawn from the control of
the rest. When, voluntarily or involuntarily, the personality
which had possession of the field of consciousness was lulled to
sleep, one of the others emerged. Hypnotism was one of the means
which most easily effected this change.

Now in persons of mystical genius, the qualities which the
stress of normal life tends to keep below the threshold of con-
sciousness are of enormous strength. In these natural explorers
of Eternity the "transcendental faculty,” the "eye of the soul,”
is not merely present in embryo, but is highly developed; and
is combined with great emotional and volitional power. The
result of the segregation of such qualities below the threshold of
consciousness is to remove from them the friction of those counter-
balancing traits in the surface mind with which they might collide.
They are “in the hiddenness,” as Jacob Boehme would say. There
they develop unchecked, until a point is reached at which their
strength is such that they break their bounds and emerge into
the conscious field: either temporarily dominating the subject
as in ecstasy, or permanently transmuting the old self, as in the
"unitive life.” The attainment of this point may be accelerated
by processes which have always been known and valued by the
mystics ; and which tend to produce a state of consciousness classed
by psychologists with dreams, reverie, and the results of hypnosis.
In all these the normal surface-consciousness is deliberately or
involuntarily lulled, the images and ideas connected with normal
life are excluded, and images or faculties from "beyond the
threshold” are able to take their place. <

Of course these images or faculties may or may not be more
valuable than those already present in the surface-consciousness.
In the ordinary subject, often enough, they are but the odds and
ends for which the superficial mind has found no use. In the
mystic, they are of a very different order: and this fact justifies
the means which he instinctively employs to secure their emer-
gence Indian mysticism founds its external system almost wholly
1 Morton Prince, “The Dissociation of a Personality," p. if.



MYSTICISM


58

on (a) Asceticism, the domination of the senses, and ( b ) the de-
liberate practice of self-hypnotization ; cither by fixing the eyes on a
near object, or by the rhythmic repetition of the mantra or sacred
word. By these complementary forms of discipline, the pull of the
phenomenal world is diminished and the mind is placed at the
disposal of the subconscious powers. Dancing, music, and other
exaggerations of natural rhythm have been pressed into the same
service by the Greek initiates of Dionysus, by the Gnostics, by
innumerable other mystic cults. That these proceedings do effect
a remarkable change in the human consciousness is proved by
experience : though how and why they do it is as yet little under-
stood. Such artificial and deliberate production of ecstasy is
against the whole instinct of the Christian contemplatives ; but
here and there amongst them also we find instances in which
ecstatic trance or lucidity, the liberation of the * ‘transcendental
sense/' was inadvertently produced by purely physical means.
Thus Jacob Boehme, the “Teutonic theosopher,” having one day
as he sat in his room “gazed fixedly upon a burnished pewter dish
which reflected the sunshine with great brilliance,” fell into an
inward ecstasy, and it seemed to him as if he could look into the
principles and deepest foundations of things. 1 The contemplation
of running water had the same effect on St. Ignatius Loyola.
Sitting on the bank of a river one day, and facing the stream,
which was running deep, “the eyes of his mind were opened, not
so as to see any kind of vision, but so as to understand and com-
prehend spiritual things . . . and this with such clearness that for
him all these things were made new/' 2 This method of attaining
to mental lucidity by a narrowing and simplification of the
conscious field, finds an apt parallel in the practice of Immanuel
Kant, who “found that he could better engage in philosophical
thought while gazing steadily at a neighbouring church steeple.”3
It need hardly be said that rationalistic writers, ignoring the
parallels offered by the artistic and philosophic temperaments,
have seized eagerly upon the evidence afforded by such instances
of apparent mono-ideism and self-hypnotization in the lives of
the mystics, and by the physical disturbances which accompany
the ecstatic trance, and sought by its application to attribute all
the abnormal perceptions of contemplative genius to hysteria or
other disease. They have not hesitated to call St. Paul an epileptic.
St. Teresa the “patron saint of hysterics”; and have found room
for most of their spiritual kindred in various departments of the
pathological museum. They have been helped in this grateful task
by the acknowledged fact that the great contemplatives, though

1 Martensen, “Jacob Boehme," p. 7. * Testament, cap. iii.

' St.irbuck. “The Psychology of Religion/’ p. 388.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY


59

almost always persons of robust intelligence and marked practical
or intellectual ability — Plotinus, St. Bernard, the two Ss. Cathe-
rine, St. Teresa, St. John of the Cross, and the Sufi poets Jami
and Jalalu 'ddin are cases in point — have often suffered from
bad physical health. More, their mystical activities have generally
reacted upon their bodies in a definite and special way; producing
in several cases a particular kind of illness and of physical disa-
bility, accompanied by pains and functional disturbances for
which no organic cause could be discovered, unless that cause
were the immense strain which exalted spirit puts upon a body
which is adapted to a very different form of life.

It is certain that the abnormal and highly sensitized type of
mind which we call mystical does frequently, but not always, pro-
duce or accompany strange and inexplicable modifications of the
physical organism with which it is linked. The supernatural is
not here in question, except in so far as we are inclined to give
that name to natural phenomena which we do not understand.
Such instances of psycho-physical parallelism as the stigmatiza-
tions of the saints — and indeed of other suggestible subjects
hardly to be ranked as saints — will occur *to anyone . 1 I here offer
to the reader another less discussed and more extraordinary
example of the modifying influence of the spirit on the supposed
‘ ‘Jaws ' 1 of bodily life.

We know, as a historical fact, unusually well attested by con-
temporary evidence and quite outside the sphere of hagiographic
romance, that both St. Catherine of Siena and her namesake
St. Catherine of Genoa — active women as well as ecstatics, the
first a philanthropist, reformer, and politician, the second an
original theologian and for many years the highly efficient matron
of a large hospital — lived, in the first case for years, in the second
for constantly repeated periods of many weeks, without other
food than the consecrated Host which they received at Holy
Communion. They did this, not by way of difficult obedience to
a pious vow, but because they could not live in any other way.
Whilst fasting, they were well and active, capable of dealing with
the innumerable responsibilities which filled their lives. But the
attempt to eat even a few mouthfuls — and this attempt was
constantly repeated, for, like all true saints, they detested eccen-
tricity* — at once made them ill and had to be abandoned as
useless. 3

1 See, for instances, Cutten, “The Psychological Phenomena of Christianity/’
cap. viii.

* “Singularity," says Gertrude More, “is a vice which Thou extremely hatest"
(“The Spiritual Exercises of the most vertuous and religious Dame Gertrude
More," p. 40). All the best and sanest of the mystics are of the same opinion.

3 See E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena," pp. 12 and 4#; and E. von Hiigcl,
“The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. f>. 135.



6o


MYSTICISM


In spite of the researches of Murisier, 1 Janet,* Ribot,3 and
other psychologists, and their persevering attempts to find a
pathological explanation which will fit all mystic facts, this and
other marked physical peculiarities which accompany the mystical
temperament belong as yet to the unsolved problems of humanity.
They need to be removed both from the sphere of marvel and
from that of disease — into which enthusiastic friends and foes
force them by turn — to the sphere of pure psychology ; and there
studied dispassionately with the attention which we so willingly
bestow on the less interesting eccentricities of degeneracy and vice.
Their existence no more discredits the sanity of mysticism or the
validity of its results than the unstable nervous condition usually
noticed in artists — who share to some extent the mystic's appre-
hension of the Real — discredits art. “In such cases as Kant and
Beethoven/' says Von Hiigel justly, “a classifier of humanity
according to its psycho -physical phenomena alone would put these
great discoverers and creators, without hesitation, amongst
hopeless and useless hypochondriacs.

In the case of the mystics the disease of hysteria, with its
astounding variety of mental symptoms, its strange power of
disintegrating, rearranging and enhancing the elements of con-
sciousness, its tendencies to automatism and ecstasy, has been
most often invoked to provide an explanation of the observed
phenomena. This is as if one sought the source of the genius of
Taglioni in the symptoms of St. Vitus’s dance. Both the art and
the disease have to do with bodily movements. So too both mysti-
cism and hysteria have to do with the domination of consciousness
by one fixed and intense idea or intuition, which rules the life and
is able to produce amazing physical and psychical results. In the
hysteric patient this idea is often trivial or morbid5 but lias be-
come — thanks to the self’s unstable mental condition — an obses-
sion. In the mystic the dominant idea is a great one: so great in
fact, that when it is received in its completeness by the human
consciousness, almost of necessity it ousts all else. It is nothing
less than the idea or perception of the transcendent reality and
presence of God. Hence the mono-ideism of the mystic is rational,
whilst that of the hysteric patient is invariably irrational.

On the whole then, whilst psycho-physical relations remain so
little understood, it would seem more prudent, and certainly more
scientific, to withhold our judgment on the meaning of the psycho-

* “Les Maladies des Sentiments Religieux.*

* “L/Iitat Mentale des Hysteriqucs,” and “Une Extatique” ( Bulletin cU
I’lnstitui Piychologiquc, 1901),

s “La Psychologie des Sentiments,” 1896.

4 Op. cit., vol. ii. p. 42.

5 For examples consult Pierre Janet, op. cit



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 61

physical phenomena which accompany the mystic life ; instead
Of basing destructive criticism on facts which are avowedly
mysterious and at least capable of more than one interpretation.
To deduce the nature of a compound from the character of its
by-products is notoriously unsafe.

Our bodies are animal things, made for animal activities.
When a spirit of unusual ardour insists on using its nerve-cells
for other activities, they kick against the pricks; and inflict, as
the mystics themselves acknowledge, the penalty of “mystical
ill-health.” “Believe me, children/' says Tauler, “one who would
know much about these high matters would often have to keep his
bed, for his bodily frame could not support it.” 1 “I cause thee
extreme pain of body," says the voice of Love to Mechthild of
Magdeburg. “If I gave myself to thee as often as thou wouldst
have me, I should deprive myself of the sweet shelter I have of thee
in this world, for a thousand bodies could not protect a loving soul
from her desire. Therefore the higher the love the greater the
pain." 2

On the other hand the exalted personality of the mystic — his
self-discipline, his heroic acceptance of labour and suffering, and
his inflexible will — raises to a higher term £hat normal power of
mind over body which all possess. Also the contemplative state —
like the hypnotic state in a healthy person — seems to enhance life
)y throwing open deeper levels of personality. The self then drinks
at a fountain which is fed by the Universal Life. True ecstasy is
notoriously life-enhancing. In it a bracing contact with Reality
seems to take place, and as a result the subject is himself more
real. Often, says St. Teresa, even the sick come forth from ecstasy
healthy and with new strength; for something great is then given
to the soul . 3 Contact has been set up with levels of being which
he daily routine of existence leaves untouched. Hence the extra-
nrdinary powers of endurance, and independence of external
:onditions, which the great ecstatics so often display.

If we see in the mystics, as some have done, the sporadic begin-
ning of a power, a higher consciousness, towards which the race
dowly tends; then it seems likely enough that where it appears
lerves and organs should suffer under a stress to which they have
iot yet become adapted, and that a spirit more highly organized
han its bodily home should be able to impose strange conditions
>n the flesh. When man first stood upright, a body long accus-
omed to go on all fours, legs which had adjusted themselves to
)earing but half his weight, must have rebelled against this

- Sermon for First Sunday after Easter (Winkworth, p. 302).

* “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. ii. cap. xxv.

J Vida, cap. xx. § 29.



MYSTICISM


62

unnatural proceeding; inflicting upon its author much pain and
discomfort if not absolute illness. It is at least permissible to look
upon the strange * 'psycho-physical” state common amongst the
mystics as just such a rebellion on the part of a normal nervous
and vascular system against the exigencies of a way of life to
which it has not yet adjusted itself. 1

In spite of such rebellion, and of the tortures to which it has
subjected them, the mystics, oddly enough, are a long-lived race:
an awkward fact for critics of the physiological school. To take ,
only a few instances from amongst marked ecstatics, St. Hilde-
garde lived to be eighty-one, Mechlhild of Magdeburg to eighty-
seven, Ruysbroeck to eighty-eight, Suso to seventy, St. Teresa to
sixty-9even, St. Catherine of Genoa and St. Peter of Alcantara to
sixty-three. It seems as though that enhanced life which is the
reward of mystical surrender enabled them to triumph over their
bodily disabilities: and to live and do the work demanded of them
under conditions which would have incapacitated ordinary men.

Such triumphs, which take heroic rank in the history of the
human mind, have been accomplished as a rule in the same way.
Like all intuitive persons, all possessors of genius, all potential
artists — with whom in fact they are closely related — the mystics
have, in psychological language, “thresholds of exceptional'
mobility.” That is to say, a slight effort, a slight departure from
normal conditions, will permit their latent or “subliminal” powers
to emerge and occupy the mental field. A “mobile threshold” may
make a man a genius, a lunatic, or a saint. All depends upon
the character of the emerging powers. In the great mystic, these
powers, these tracts of personality lying below the level of normal
consciousness, are of unusual richness; and cannot be accounted
for in terms of pathology. “If it be true,” says Delacroix, “that
the great mystics have not wholly escaped those nervous blemishes
which mark nearly all exceptional organizations, there is in them
a vital and creative power, a constructive logic, an extended scale
of realization — in a word, a genius — which is, in truth, their
essential quality. . . . The great mystics, creators and inventors
who have found a new form of life and have justified it . . . join,
upon the highest summits of the human spirit, the great simplifiers
of the world.” 2

The truth, then, so far as we know it at present, seems to be

1 Boyce Gibson (“God with Us/* cap. iii.) has drawn a striking parallel
between the ferment and “interior uproar" of adolescence and the profound dis-
turbances which mark man's entry into a conscious spiritual life. His remark|
are even more applicable to the drastic rearrangement of personality which takes
place in the case of the mystic, whose spiritual life is more intense th a n that of
other men.

* Delacroix, “fitudes sur le Mysticisme," p. iii.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 63

that those powers which are in contact with the Transcendental
Order, and which constitute at the lowest estimate half the self,
are dormant in ordinary men ; whose time and interest are wholly
occupied in responding to the stimuli of the world of sense. With
those latent powers sleeps the landscape which they alone can
apprehend. In mystics none of the self is always dormant. They
have roused the Dweller in the Innermost from its slumbers, and
round it have unified their life. Heart, Reason, Will are there in
hill action, drawing their incentive not from the shadow-show of
sense, but from the deeps of true Being; where a lamp is lit, and a
consciousness awake, of which the sleepy crowd remains oblivious.
He who says the mystic is but half a man, states the exact oppo-
site of the truth. Only the mystic can be called a whole man, since
in others half the powers of the self always sleep. This wholeness
of experience is much insisted on by the mystics. Thus the Divine
Voice says to St. Catherine of Siena, ‘1 have also shown thee the
Bridge and the three general steps, placed there for the three
powers of the soul; and I have told thee how no one can attain
to the life of grace unless he has mounted all three steps,
that is, gathered together all the three powers of the soul in
My Name." 1

* In those abnormal types of personality to which we give the
name of genius, we seem to detect a hint of the relations which
may exist between these deep levels of being and the crust of
consciousness. In the poet, the musician, the great mathematician
or inventor, powers lying below the threshold, and hardly con-
trollable by their owner's conscious will, clearly take a major part
in the business of perception and conception. In all creative acts,
the larger share of the work is done subconsciously : its emergence
is in a sense automatic. This is equally true of mystics, artists,
philosophers, discoverers, and rulers of men. The great religion,
invention, work of art, always owes its inception to some sudden
uprush of intuitions or ideas for which the superficial self cannot
account ; its execution to powers so far beyond the control of that
self, that they seem, as their owner sometimes says, to "come from
beyond.” This is "inspiration"; the opening of the sluices, so
that those waters of truth in which all life is bathed may rise to
the level of consciousness.

The great teacher, poet, artist, inventor, nev^r aims deliberately
at his effects. He obtains them he knows not how: perhaps from a
contact of which he is unconscious with that creative plane of
l^eing which the Sufis call the Constructive Spirit, and the Kaba-
Ms Yesod, and which both postulate as lying next behind the
world of sense. "Sometimes," said the great Alexandrian Jew Philo,

1 Dialogo, cap. lxxxvi.



MYSTICISM


64

"when I have come to my work empty, I have suddenly become
full ; ideas being in an invisible manner showered upon me, and
implanted in me from on high ; so that through the influence of
divine inspiration, I have become greatly excited, and have known
neither the place in which I was, nor those who were present, nor
myself, nor what I was saying, nor what I was writing ; for then
I have been conscious of a richness of interpretation, an enjoyment
of light, a most penetrating insight, a most manifest energy in all
that was to be done; having such an effect on my mind as thej
clearest ocular demonstration would have on the eyes ." 1 This is a
true creative ecstasy, strictly parallel to the state in which the!
mystic performs his mighty works.

To let oneself go, be quiet, receptive, appears to be the condition
under which such contact with the Cosmic Life may be obtained.
“I have noticed that when one paints one should think of nothing:
everything then comes better/' says the young Raphael to Leon-
ardo da Vinci . 3 The superficial self must here acknowledge its own
insufficiency, must become the humble servant of a more profound
and vital consciousness. The mystics are of the same opinion.
"Let the will quietly and wisely understand," says St. Teresa,
"that it is not by dint of labour on our part that we can converse
to any good purpose with God ."3 "The best and noblest way in
which thou mayst come into this Life," says Eckhart, "is by
keeping silence and letting God work and speak. Where all the
powers are withdrawn from their work and images, there is this
word spoken . . . the more thou canst draw in all thy powers and
forget the creature the nearer art thou to this, and the more
receptive. "4

Thus Boehme says to the neophyte/ "When both thy intellect
and will are quiet and passive to the expressions of the eternal
Word and Spirit, and when thy soul is winged up above that which
is temporal, the outward senses and the imagination being locked
up by holy abstraction, then the eternal Hearing, Seeing, and
Speaking will be revealed in thee. Blessed art thou therefore if
thou canst stand still from self thinking and self willing, and
canst stop the wheel of thy imagination and senses." Then, the
conscious mind being passive, the more divine mind below the’
threshold — organ of our free creative life — can emerge and;
present its reports. In the words of an older mystic, "The soul
leaving all things and forgetting herself, is immersed in the ocear

1 Quoted by James (“Varieties of Religious Experience/' p. 481) from Clissold'i
"The Prophetic Spirit in Genius and Madness,” p. 67.

* M6rejkowsky, “Le Roman de Leonard de Vinci,” p. 638.

3 Vida, cap. xv. 9.

4 Meister Eckhart, Pred. i. (“Mystische Schriften,” p. 18).

s “Three Dialogues of the Supersensual Life,” p. 14.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 65

of Divine Splendour, and illuminated by the Sublime Abyss of
the Unfathomable Wisdom.” 1

The “passivity” of contemplation, then, is a necessary prelimin-
ary of spiritual energy: an essential clearing of the ground. It
withdraws the tide of consciousness from the shores of sense,
stops the “wheel of the imagination.” “The Soul,” says Eckhart
again, “is created in a place between Time and Eternity: with
its highest powers it touches Eternity, with its lower Time.” 2
These, the worlds of Being and Becoming, are the two “stages of
reality” which meet in the spirit of man. By cutting us off from
the temporal plane, the lower kind of reality, Contemplation gives
the eternal plane, and the powers which can communicate with
that plane, their chance. In the born mystic these powers are
great, and lie very near the normal threshold of consciousness.
He has a genius for transcendental— or as he would say, divine —
discovery in much the same way as his cousins, the born musician
and poet, have a genius for musical or poetic discovery. In all
three cases, the emergence of these higher powers is mysterious,
and not least so to those who experience it. Psychology on the
one hand, theology on the other, may offer us diagrams and
theories of this proceeding: of the strange oscillations of the
developing consciousness, the fitful visitations of a lucidity and
creative power over which the self has little or no control, the
raptures and griefs of a vision by turns granted and withdrawn.
But the secret of genius still eludes us, as the secret of life eludes the
biologist.

The utmost we can say of such persons is, that reality pre-
sents itself to them under abnormal conditions and in abnormal
terms, and that subject to these conditions and in these terms
they are bound to deal with it. Thanks to their peculiar mental
make up, one aspect of the universe is for them focussed so sharply
that in comparison with it all other images are blurred, vague, and
unreal. Hence the sacrifice which men of genius — mystics, artists,
inventors — make of their whole lives to this one Object, this one
vision of truth, is not self-denial, but rather self-fulfilment. They
gather themselves up from the unreal, in order to concentrate on
the real. The whole personality then absorbs or enters into com-
munion with certain rhythms or harmonies existent in the universe,
which the receiving apparatus of other selves cannot take up.
“Here is the finger of God, a flash of the Will that can!” exclaims
Abt Vogler, as the sounds grow under his hand. “The numbers

1 Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Divinis Nominibus," vii. 3.

* Pred. xxiii. Eckhart obtained this image from St. Thomas Aquinas, “Summa
Contra Gentiles/' 1. iii. cap. lxi. “The intellectual soul is created on the confines
of eternity and time."



66 MYSTICISM

cameY* says the poet. He knows not how; certainly not by deliber-
ate intellection.

So it is with the mystic. Madame Guyon states in her autobi-
ography, that when she was composing her works she would ex-
perience a sudden and irresistible inclination to take up her pen ;
though feeling wholly incapable of literary composition, and not
even knowing the subject on which she would be impelled to
write. If she resisted this impulse it was at the cost of the most
intense discomfort. She would then begin to write with extra-
ordinary swiftness; words, elaborate arguments, and appropriate
quotations coming to her without reflection, and so quickly that
one of her longest books was written in one and a half days. “In
writing I saw that I was writing of things which I had never seen :
and during the time of this manifestation, I was given light to
perceive that I had in me treasures of knowledge and under-
standing which I did not know that I possessed/* 1

Similar statements are made of St. Teresa, who declared that
in writing her books she was powerless to set down anything but
that which her Master put into her mind. 2 So Blake said of “Milton”
and “Jerusalem/* “I have written the poems from immediate
dictation, twelve or sometimes twenty or thirty lines at a time,
without premeditation and even against my will. The time it has
taken in writing was thus rendered non-existent, and an immense
poem exists which seems to be the labour of a long life, all pro-
duced without labour or study .**3

These are, of course, extreme forms of that strange power of
automatic composition, in which words and characters arrive and
arrange themselves in defiance of their authors* will, of which
most poets and novelists possess a trace. Such composition is
probably related to the automatic writing of “mediums'* and
other sensitives; in which the often disorderly and incoherent
subliminal mind seizes upon this channel of expression. The
subliminal mind of the great mystic, however, is not disorderly.
It is abnormally sensitive, richly endowed and keenly observant —
a treasure house, not a lumber room — and becomes, in the course
of its education, a highly disciplined and skilled instrument of
knowledge. When, therefore, its contents emerge, and are presented
to the normal consciousness in the form of lucidity, “auditions,"
visions, automatic writing, or any other translations of the super-


* Vie, t. ii. pp. 120, 2 23, 229. It might reasonably be objected that Madame
Guyon docs not rank high among the mystics and her later history includes some
unfortunate incidents. This is true. Nevertheless she exhibits such a profusion 1
of mystical phenomena and is so candid in her self-disclosures, that she provides
much valuable material for the student.

* G. Cunninghame Graham, “Santa Teresa,” vol. i. p. 202.

3 “Letters of William Blake, ’ 2s, 180^5.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY


67

sensible into the terms of sensible perception, they cannot be
♦discredited because the worthless unconscious region of feebler
natures sometimes manifests itself in the same way. Idiots are
often voluble : but many orators are sane.

Now, to sum up: what are the chief characteristics which we
have found to concern us in this sketch-map of the mental life
of man?

(1) We have divided that life, arbitrarily enough, along the
fluctuating line which psychologists call the “threshold of his
consciousness'' into the surface life and the unconscious deeps.

(2) In the surface life, though we recognized its essential whole-
ness, we distinguished three outstanding and ever-present aspects:
the Trinity in Unity of feeling, thought, and will. Amongst these,
we were obliged to give the primacy to feeling, as the power which
set the machinery of thought and will to work.

(3) We have seen that the expression of this life takes the
two complementary forms of conation , or outgoing action, and
cognition , or indwelling knowledge; and that the first, which is
dynamic in type, is largely the work of the will stimulated by
the emotions; whilst the second, which is passive in type, is the
business of the intellect. They answer to the two main aspects
which man discerns in the universal life : Being and Becoming.

(4) Neither conation nor cognition — action nor thought — as
performed by this surface mind, concerned as it is with natural
existence and dominated by spatial conceptions, is able to set up
any relations with the Absolute or transcendental world. Such
action and thought deal wholly with material supplied directly
or indirectly by the world of sense. The testimony of the mystics,
however, and of all persons possessing an “instinct for the Abso-
lute,” points to the existence of a further faculty — indeed, a
deeper self — in man; a self which the circumstances of diurnal
life usually keep “below the threshold'' of his consciousness, and
which thus becomes one of the factors of his “subliminal life.”
This hidden self is the primary agent of mysticism, and lives a
“substantial” life in touch with the real or transcendental world. 1

(5) Certain processes, of which contemplation has been taken as
a type, can so alter the state of consciousness as to permit the
emergence of this deeper self; which, according as it enters more
or less into the conscious life, makes man more or less a mystic.

1 This insistence on the twofold character of human personality is implicit
ui the mystics. ‘‘It is," says Bremond, “the fundamental dogma of mystical
psychology — the distinction between the two selves: Animus, the surface self;
Anima, the deep self; Animus , rational knowledge; and Anima, mystical or
{>oetic knowledge . . . the I, who feeds on notions and words, and enchants him-
self by doing so; the Me, who is united to realities" (Bremond "Pri£re et Poesic,"
cap. xii )



68


MYSTICISM


The mystic life, therefore, involves the emergence from deep
levels of man’s transcendental self; its capture of the field of
consciousness; and the 4 ‘conversion'’ or rearrangement of his
feeling, thought, and will— his character— about this new centre
of life.

We state, then, as the conclusion of this chapter, that the object
of the mystic's adventure, seen from within, is the apprehension of,
or direct communion with, that transcendental Reality which we
tried in the last section to define from without. Here, as in the
fulfilment of the highest earthly love, knowledge and communion
are the same thing; we must be “oned with bliss” if we are to be
aware of it. That aspect of our being by which we may attain this
communion — that “marrow of the Soul,” as Ruysbroeck calls it —
usually lies below the threshold of our consciousness; but in certain
natures of abnormal richness and vitality, and under certain
favourable conditions, it may be liberated by various devices,
such as contemplation. Once it has emerged, however, it takes up,
to help it in the work, aspects of the conscious self. The surface
must co-operate with the deeps, and at last merge with those
deeps to produce that unification of consciousness upon high levels
which alone can put a term to man's unrest. The heart that longs
for the All, the mind that conceives it, the will that concentrates
the whole self upon it, must all be called into play. The self must
be surrendered: but it must not be annihilated, as some Quietists
have supposed. It only dies that it may live again. Supreme
success, — the permanent assurance of the mystic that “we are
more verily in heaven than in earth,” — says the Lady Julian, in
a passage which anticipates the classification of modern psychology,
“cometli of the natural Love of our soul, and of the clear light of
our Reason, and of the steadfast Mind.” 1

But what is the order of precedence which these three activities
are to assume in the work which is one ? All, as we have seen, must
do their part ; for we are concerned with the response of man in his
wholeness to the overwhelming attraction of God. But which shall
predominate? The ultimate nature of the self’s experience of
reality will depend on the answer she gives to this question. What,
here, are the relative values of Mind and Heart? Which will bring
her closest to the Thought of God; the real life in which she is
bathed? Which, fostered and made dominant, is most likely to
put her in harmony with the Absolute ? The Love of God, which is
ever in the heart and often on the lips of the Saints, is the passionate
desire for this harmony; the “malady of thought” is its intellectual ,
equivalent. Though we may seem to escape God, we cannot escape
some form of this craving; except at the price of utter stagnation.

1 Julian of Norwich, “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lv.



MYSTICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY 69

We go back, therefore, to the statement with which this chapter
opened: that of the two governing desires which share the prison
of the self. We see them now as representing the cravings of the
intellect and the emotions for the only end of all quests. The
disciplined will— the "conative power’’— with all the dormant
faculties which it can wake and utilize, can come to the assistance
of one of them. Which? The question is a crucial one; for the
destiny of the self depends on the partner which the will selects.



CHAPTER IV


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM


Mysticism and Magic — Distinction between them — The Way of Love and the
Way of Knowledge — Characteristics of Mysticism — Difficulty of fixing them —
The Mystic has attained contact with the Absolute — He is a spiritual genius —
All men have latent mystical feeling — Such feeling is the source of the arts —
Mystic and Artist — Their likenesses and differences — Difficulties of mystical
expression — Mysticism and music — Richard Rolle — Symbolic expression —
Vision — An accident not an implicit or mysticism — A method of communication
— Suggestive power of symbols — Four characteristics of true mysticism — It is
(i) practical, (2) transcendental, (3) the mystic is a lover, (4) his object is union
with the Absolute — Mysticism defined— First characteristic illustrated — St. John
of the Cross — Theologia Germanica — Second characteristic illustrated — Tauler —
Plotinus— Third characteristic illustrated— Mystic love— Rolle — A Kempis—
Gertrude More — Fourth characteristic illustrated — Mechthild of Magdeburg —
The Mystic Way — Unity of the mystical experience — A fifth characteristic:
disinterestedness — Self-surrender — Pure love — Summary

T he spiritual history of man reveals two distinct and-
fundamental attitudes towards the unseen; and two
methods whereby he has sought to get in touch with it.
For our present purpose I will call these methods the “way of
magic” and the “way of mysticism.” Having said this, we must
at once add that although in their extreme forms these methods
are sharply contrasted, their frontiers are far from being clearly
defined: that, starting from the same point, they often confuse
the inquirer by using the same language, instruments, and methods.
Hence, much which is really magic is loosely and popularly described
as mysticism. They represent as a matter of fact the opposite poles
of the same thing : the transcendental consciousness of humanity.
Between them lie the great religions, which might be described
under this metaphor as representing the ordinarily habitable
regions of that consciousness. Thus, at one end of the scale, pure
mysticism “shades off” into religion — from some points of view
seems to grow out of it. No deeply religious man is without a
touch of mysticism; and no mystic can be other than religious,
in the psychological if not in the theological sense of the word.
At the other end of the scale, as we shall see later, religion, no less
surely, shades off into magic.

The fundamental difference between the two is this: magic
wants to get, mysticism wants to give — immortal and antago-
nistic attitudes, which turn up under one disguise or another in



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 71

( very age of thought. Both magic and mysticism in their full
development bring the whole mental machinery, conscious and
unconscious, to bear on their undertaking: both claim that they
give their initiates powers unknown to ordinary men. But the
centre round which that machinery is grouped, the reasons of
that undertaking, and the ends to which those powers are applied
dilfer enormousty. In mysticism the will is united with the emotions
in an impassioned desire to transcend the sense-world, in order
that the sell may be joined by love to the one eternal and ultimate
‘Object of love; whose existence is intuitively perceived by that
wliich we used to call the soul, but now find it easier to refer to as
the “cosmic” or “transcendental” sense. This is the poetic and
religious temperament acting upon the plane of reality. In magic,
the will unites with the intellect in an impassioned desire for
supersensible knowledge. This is the intellectual, aggressive, and
scientific temperament trying to extend its field of consciousness,
until it includes the supersensual world: obviously the antithesis
of mysticism, though often adopting its title and style.

It will be our business later to consider in more detail the
characteristics and significance of magic. Now it is enough to say
that we may class broadly as magical all forms of self-seeking
I transcendentalism. It matters little whether the apparatus which
■ they use be the incantations of the old magicians, the congrega-
tional prayer for rain of orthodox Churchmen, or the consciously
self-hypnotizing devices of “New Thought”: whether the end
proposed be the evocation of an angel, the power of transcending
’? circumstance, or the healing of disease. The object is always the
same: the deliberate exaltation of the will, till it transcends its
; usual limitations and obtains for the self or group of selves some-
j thing which it or they did not previously possess. It is an indi-
vidualistic and acquisitive science : in all its forms an activity of
| die intellect, seeking Reality for its own purposes, or for those of
I humanity at large.

Mysticism, whose great name is too often given to these super-
sensual activities, has nothing in common with this. It is non-
individualistic. It implies, indeed, the abolition of individuality;
of that hard separateness, that “I, Me, Mine” which makes of
man a finite isolated thing. It is essentially a movement of the
heart, seeking to transcend the limitations of the individual
standpoint and to surrender itself to ultimate Reality; for no
personal gain, to satisfy no transcendental curiosity, to obtain no
other-worldly joys, but purely from an instinct of love. By the
word heart , of course we here mean not merely “the seat of the
affections,” “the organ of tender emotion,” and the like: but
rather the inmost sancluarv of personal being, the deep root of



MYSTICISM


72

its love and will, the very source of its energy and life. The mystic
is “in love with the Absolute'' not in any idle or sentimental
manner, but in that vital sense which presses at all costs and
through all dangers towards union with the object beloved.
Hence, whilst the practice of magic — like the practice of science
— does not necessarily entail passionate emotion, though of course
it does and must entail interest of some kind, mysticism, like art,
cannot exist without it. We must feel, and feel acutely, before we
want to act on this hard and heroic scale.

We see, then, that these two activities correspond to the two *
eternal passions of the self, the desire of love and the desire of
knowledge: severally representing the hunger of heart and intellect
for ultimate truth. The third attitude towards the supersensual
world, that of transcendental philosophy, hardly comes within
the scope of the present inquiry; since it is purely academic,
whilst both magic and mysticism are practical and empirical.
Such philosophy is often wrongly called mysticism, because it
tries to make maps of the countries which the mystic explores.
Its performances are useful, as diagrams are useful, so long as
they do not ape finality ; remembering that the only final thing is
personal experience — the personal and costly exploration of the
exalted and truth-loving soul.

What then do we really mean by mysticism ? A word which is
impartially applied to the performances of mediums and the
ecstasies of the saints, to “menticulture" and sorcery, dreamy
poetry and mediaeval art, to prayer and palmistry, the doctrinal
excesses of Gnosticism, and the tepid speculations of the Cam-
bridge Platonists — even, according to William James, to the
higher branches of intoxication 1 — soon ceases to have any useful
meaning. Its employment merely confuses the inexperienced
student, who ends with a vague idea that every kind of super-
sensual theory and practice is somehow “mystical." Hence the;
need of fixing, if possible, its true characteristics : and restating
the fact that Mysticism, in its pure form, is the science of ultimates,
the science of union with the Absolute, and nothing else, and
that the mystic is the person who attains to this union, not the*
person who talks about it. Not to know about, but to Be, is the mark
of the real initiate.

The difficulty lies in determining the point at which super-
sensual experience ceases to be merely a practical and interesting
extension of sensual experience — an enlarging, so to speak, of the
boundaries of existence — and passes over into that boundless life
where Subject and Object, desirous and desired, are one . No

* See “Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 387, “The Drunken Consciousness
is a bit of the Mystic Consciousness."



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 73

sharp line, but rather an infinite series of gradations separate the
» two states. Hence we must look carefully at all the pilgrims on
the road; discover, if we can, the motive of their travels, the maps
which they use, the luggage which they take, the end which they
attain.

Now we have said that the end which the mystic sets before
him is conscious union with a living Absolute. That Divine Dark,
that Abyss of the Godhead, of which he sometimes speaks as the
goal of his quest, is just this Absolute, the Uncreated Light in
which the Universe is bathed, and which— transcending, as it
does, all human powers of expression — he can only describe to us
as dark. But there is — must be — contact "in an intelligible where"
between every individual self and this Supreme Self, this Ultimate.
In the mystic this union is conscious, personal, and complete.
“He enjoys," says St. John of the Cross, "a certain contact of the
soul with the Divinity; and it is God Himself who is then felt
and tasted ." 1 More or less according to his measure, he has
touched— or better, been touched by— the substantial Being of
Deity, not merely its manifestation in life. This it is which dis-
tinguishes him from the best and most brilliant of other men, and
makes liis science, in Patmore's words, "the science of self-evident
Reality." Gazing with him into that unsearchable ground whence
the World of Becoming comes forth “eternally generated in an
eternal Now," we may see only the icy darkness of perpetual
negations: but he, beyond the coincidence of opposites, looks upon
the face of Perfect Love.

As genius in any of the arts is— humanly speaking— the final
term of a power of which each individual possesses the rudiments,
so mysticism may be looked upon as the final term, the active
expression, of a power latent in the whole race: the power, that
is to say, of so perceiving transcendent reality. Few people pass
through life without knowing what it is to be at least touched by
this mystical feeling. He who falls in love with a woman and
perceives — as the lover really does perceive — that the categorical
term "girl" veils a wondrous and unspeakable reality: he who,
falling in love with nature, sees the landscape "touched with light
divine," — a charming phrase to those who have not seen it, but a
scientific statement to the rest— he who falls in love with the Holy,
or as we say “undergoes conversion": all these have truly known
for an instant something of the secret of the world.*

f< . . . Ever and anon a trumpet sounds
From the hid battlements of Eternity,

Those shaken mists a space unsettle, then

Round the half-glimpsdd turrets slowly wash again.**

1 Llama de Amor Viva, II. 26. • Compare above, pp. 24, 26, 57.



MYSTICISM


74

At such moments 'Transcendental Feeling, welling up from
another Tart of the Soul’ whispers to Understanding and Sense
that they are leaving out something. What? Nothing less than
the secret plan of the Universe. And what is that secret plan?
The other Tart of the Soul' indeed comprehends it in silence as it
is, but can explain it to the Understanding only in the symbolical
language of the interpreter, Imagination — in Vision ." 1

Here, in this spark or "part of the soul" where the spirit, as
religion says, "rests in God who made it," is the fountain alike of
the creative imagination and the mystic life. Now and again some-
thing stings it into consciousness, and man is caught up to the
spiritual level, catches a glimpse of the "secret plan." Then hints
of a marvellous truth, a unity whose note is ineffable peace, shine
in created things; awakening in the self a sentiment of love,
adoration, and awe. Its life is enhanced, the barrier of personality
is broken, man escapes the sense- world, ascends to the apex of his
spirit, and enters for a brief period into the more extended life of
the All.

This intuition of the Real lying at the root of the visible world
and sustaining its life, is present in a modified form in the arts :
perhaps it were better to say, must be present if these arts are to
justify themselves as heightened forms of experience. It is this
which gives to them that peculiar vitality, that strange power
of communicating a poignant emotion, half torment and half joy,
which baffle their more rational interpreters. We know that the
picture which is "like a photograph," the building which is at
once handsome and commodious, the novel which is a perfect
transcript of life, fail to satisfy us. It is difficult to say why this
should be so, unless it were because these things have neglected
their true business; which was not to reproduce the illusions of
ordinary men but to catch and translate for us something of that
"secret plan," that reality which the artistic consciousness is able,
in a measure, to perceive. "Painting as well as music and poetry
exists and exults in immortal thoughts," says Blake . 5 That "life-
enhancing power" which has been recognized as the supreme
quality of good painting,} has its origin in this contact of the
artistic mind with the archetypal — or, if you like, the transcen-
dental — world: the underlying verity of things.

A critic, in whom poetic genius has brought about the unusual
alliance of intuition with scholarship, testifies to this same truth
when he says of the ideals which governed early Chinese painting,
"In this theory every work of art is thought of as an incarnation

* J. A. Stewart, “The Myths of Plato,” p. 40.

* “Descriptive Catalogue."

I See T. Rolleston, “Parallel Paths."



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 75

of the genius of rhythm, manifesting the living spirit of things
.with a clearer beauty and intenser power than the gross impedi-
ments of complex matter allow to be transmitted to our senses in
the visible world around us. A picture is conceived as a sort of
apparition from a more real world of esseut al life” 1

That "more real world of essential life” is the world in which
the "free soul” of the great mystic dwells; hovering like the
six-winged seraph before the face of the Absolute . 2 The artist too
may cross its boundaries in his brief moments of creation ; but he
cannot stay. He comes back to us, bearing its tidings, with Dante's
cry upon his lips —

. . Non eran da ci6 le proprie penne
se non che la mia monte fu percossa
da un fulgore, in che sua vogiia venne.”»

The mystic may say — is indeed bound to say — with St. Bernard,
"My secret to myself.” Try how he will, his stammering and awe-
struck reports can hardly be understood but by those who are
already in the way. But the artist cannot act thus. On him ha.s
been laid the duty of expressing something of that which he
perceives. He is bound to tell his love. In his worship of Perfect
Beauty faith must be balanced by works. By means of veils and
symbols he must interpret bis free vision, his glimpse of the
burning bush, to other men. He is the mediator between his
brethren and the divine, for art is the link between appearance
and reality. 4

But we do not call every one who has these partial and artistic
intuitions of reality a mystic, any more than we call every one a
musician who has learnt to play the piano. The true mystic is the
person in whom such powers transcend the merely artistic and
visionary stage, and are exalted to the point of genius : in whom
the transcendental consciousness can dominate the normal
consciousness, and who has definitely surrendered himself to the
embrace of Reality. As artists stand in a peculiar relation to the
phenomenal world, receiving rhythms and discovering truths and
beauties which are hidden from other men, so this true mystic
stands in a peculiar relation to the transcendental world; there
experiencing actual, but to us unimaginable tension and delight.
His consciousness is transfigured in a particular way, he lives a:

1 Laurence Binyon, “Painting in the Far East/ 1 p. 9.

• “The Mirror of Simple Souls, " Pt. Ill, cap. I.

s Par. xxxiii. 139. “Not for this were my wings fitted : save only that my mirvi.
was smitten by a lightning flash, wherein came to it its desire."

4 In this connexion Godfernaux [lievue Philosophique, February, 1902) has
a highly significant remark to the effect that romanticism represents the invasion
of secular literature by mystic or religious emotion. It is, he says, the secularisation
of (he inner life . Compare also Bremond, “Priire et Poesie/*



MYSTICISM


76

different levels of experience from other people : and this of course
means that he sees a different world, since the world as we know '
it is the product of certain scraps or aspects of reality acting upon
a normal and untransfigured consciousness. Hence his mysticism
is no isolated vision, no fugitive glimpse of reality, but a complete
system of life carrying its own guarantees and obligations. As
other men are immersed in and react to natural or intellectual
life, so the mystic is immersed in and reacts to spiritual life. He
moves towards that utter identification with its interests which
he calls “Union with God.” He has been called a lonely soul. He
might more properly be described as a lonely body: for his soul,
peculiarly responsive, sends out and receives communications
upon every side.

The earthly artist, because perception brings with it the impera-
tive longing for expression, tries to give us in colour, sound or
words a hint of his ecstasy, his glimpse of truth. Only those who
have tried, know how small a fraction of his vision he can, under
the most favourable circumstance, contrive to represent. The
mystic, too, tries very hard to tell an unwilling world his secret.
But in his case, the difficulties are enormously increased. First,
there is the huge disparity between his unspeakable experience
and the language which will most nearly suggest it. Next, there
is the great gulf fixed between his mind and the mind of the world.
His audience must be bewitched as well as addressed, caught up
to something of his state, before they can be made to understand.

Were he a musician, it is probable that the mystic could give
his message to other musicians in the terms of that art, far more
accurately than language will allow him to do: for we must
remember that there is no excuse but that of convenience for the
pre-eminence amongst modes of expression which we accord to
words. These correspond so well to the physical plane and its
adventures, that we forget that they have but the faintest of
relations with transcendental things. Even the artist, before he
can make use of them, is bound to re-arrange them in accordance
with the laws of rhythm : obeying unconsciously the rule by which
all arts “tend to approach the condition of music.”

So too the mystic. Mysticism, the most romantic of adventures,
from one point of view the art of arts, their source and also their
end, finds naturally enough its closest correspondences in the
most purely artistic and most deeply significant of all forms of
expression. The mystery of music is seldom realized by those who
so easily accept its gifts. Yet of all the arts music alone shares
with great mystical literature the power of waking in us a response
to the life-movement of the universe: brings us — we know not
how — news of its exultant passions and its incomparable peace-



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 77

Beethoven heard the very voice of Reality, and little of it escaped
when he translated it for our ears. 1

The mediaeval mind, more naturally mystical than ours, and
therefore more sharply aware of the part which rhythmic harmony
plays in the worlds of nature and of grace, gave to music a cosmic
importance, discerning its operation in many phenomena which
we now attribute to that dismal figment, Law. ‘There are three
kinds of music,” says Hugh of St. Victor, “the music of the worlds,
the music of humanity, the music of instruments. Of the music of
\he worlds, one is of the elements, another of the planets, another
of Time. Of that which is of the elements, one is of number, another
of weights, another of measure. Of that which is of the planets, (Hie
is of place, another of motion, another of nature. Of that which is of
Time, one is of the days and the vicissitudes of light and darkness;
another of the months and the waxing and waning of the moon ;
another of the years and the changes of spring, summer, autumn
arid winter. Of the music of humanity, one is of the body, another
of the soul, another in the connexion that is between them.” 2
Thus the life of the visible and invisible universe consists in a
supernal fugue.

One contemplative at least, Richard Rolle of Hampole, “the
father of English mysticism,” was acutely aware of this music
of the soul, discerning in it a correspondence with the measured
harmonies of the spiritual universe. In those enraptured descrip-
tions of his inward experience which are among the jewels of
mystical literature, nothing is more remarkable than his constant
and deliberate employment of musical imagery. This alone, it
seems, could catch and translate for him the character of his
experience of Reality. The condition of joyous and awakened
love to which the mystic passes when his purification is at an end
is to him, above all else, the state of Song. He does not “see” the
spiritual world: he “hears” it. For him, as for St. Francis of
Assisi, it is a “heavenly melody, intolerably sweet. ”3
“Song I call,” he says, “when in a plenteous soul the sweetness
of eternal love with burning is taken, and thought into song is
turned, and the mind into full sweet sound is changed.” 1 * He who

1 I take from Hebert's monograph “Le Divin" two examples of the analogy
between mystical and musical emotion. First that of Gay, who had “the soul, the
heart, and the head full of music, of another beauty than that which is formulated
by sounds.” Next, that of Ruysbroeck, who, in a passage that might have been
written by Keats, speaks of Contemplation and Love as “two heavenly pipes”
whi< h, blown upon by the Holy Spirit, play ‘‘ditties of no tone” ( op . ctt., p. 29).
a Hugh of St. Victor, “Didascalicon de Studio Legendi.”
i “Fioretti." Delie Istimati. (Arnold's translation.)

♦ Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love” (Early English Text Society), bk. i.
cap. xv. In this and subsequent quotations from Rolle's Incendium Amoris I have
usually adopted Misyii's fifteenth-century translation; slightly modernizing the
spelling, and, where necessary, correcting from the Latin his errors and obscurities.

D



MYSTICISM


78

experiences this joyous exaltation “says not his prayers like other
righteous men” but “is taken into marvellous mirth: and, goodly
sound being descended into him, as it were with notes his prayers
he sings.” 1 So Gertrude More — “O lett me sitt alone, silent to all
the world and it to me, that I may learn the song of Love.” 2

Rolle's own experience of mystic joy seems actually to have
come to him in this form : the perceptions of his exalted conscious-
ness presenting themselves to his understanding under musical
conditions, as other mystics have received them in the form of
pictures or words. I give in his own words the classic descriptiorf
of his passage from the first state of “burning love” to the second
state of “songful love” — from Color to Conor — when “into song
of joy meditation is turned.” “In the night, before supper, as I
my psalms sung, as it were the sound of readers or rather singers
about me I beheld. Whilst, also praying, to heaven with all desire
I took heed, suddenly, in what manner I wot not, in me the sound
of song I felt; and likeliest heavenly melody I took, with me
dwelling in mind. Forsooth my thought continually to mirth of
song was changed, and my meditation to praise turned; and my
prayers and psalm-saying, in sound I showed. ”3

The song, however, is a mystic melody having little in common
with its clumsy image, earthly music. Bodily song “lets it”; an<J
“noise of janglers makes it turn again to thought,” “for sweet
ghostly song accords not with outward song, the which in churches
and elsewhere is used. It discords much: for all that is man's voice
is formed with bodily ears to be heard; but among angels' tunes
it has an acceptable melody, and with marvel it is commended of
them that have known it.” To others it is incommunicable.
“Worldly lovers soothly words or ditties of our song may know,
for the words they read : but the tone and sweetness of that song
they may not learn. ”4

Such symbolism as this — a living symbolism of experience and
action, as well as of statement — seems almost essential to mystical
expression. The mind must employ some device of the kind if its
transcendental perceptions — wholly unrelated as they are to the
phenomena with which intellect is able to deal — are ever to be
grasped by the surface consciousness. Sometimes the symbol and
the perception which it represents become fused in that con-
sciousness; and the mystic's experience then presents itself to

1 Op. tit., bk. i. cap. xxiii. Compare bk. ii. caps. v. and vi.

* “Spiritual Exercises/' p, 30.

s Op. cit., bk. i. cap. xv.

♦ Op. tit., bk. ii. caps. iii. and xii. Shelley is of the same opinion: —

“The world can hear not the sweet notes that move
The Sphere whose light is melody to lovers."

(“The Triumph of I Me.")



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 79

him as “visions” or “voices” which we must look upon as the
garment he has himself provided to veil that Reality upon which
no man may look and live. The nature of this garment will be
largely conditioned by his temperament — as in Rolle's evident
bias towards music, St. Catherine of Genoa's leaning towards the
abstract conceptions of fire and light — and also by his theo-
logical education and environment. Cases in point are the highly
dogmatic visions and auditions of St. Gertrude, Suso, St. Catherine
nf Siena, the Blessed Angela of Foligno; above all of St. Teresa,
whose marvellous self-analyses provide the classic account of
these attempts of the mind to translate transcendental intuitions
into concepts with which it can deal.

The greatest mystics, however — Ruysbroeck, St. John of the
Cross, and St. Teresa herself in her later stages — distinguish
clearly between the ineffable Reality which they perceive and the
image under which they describe it. Again and again they tell us
with Dionysius and Eckhart, that the Object of their contem-
plation “hath no image”: or with St. John of the Cross that “the
soul can never attain to the height of the divine union, so far as it
is possible in this life, through the medium of any forms or
figures.” 1 Therefore the attempt which has sometimes been made
to identify mysticism with such forms and figures — with visions,
voices, “supernatural favours” and other abnormal phenomena —
is clearly wrong.

“The highest and most divine things which it is given us to see
and to know,” says Dionysius the Areopagite plainly, “arc but the
symbolic language of things subordinate to Him who Himself
transcendeth them all: through which things His incompre-
hensible Presence is shown, walking on those heights of His Holy
Places which are perceived by the mind. 2

The mystic, as a rule, cannot wholly do without symbol and
image, inadequate to his vision though they must always be : for
his experience must be expressed if it is to be communicated, and
its actuality is inexpressible except in some side-long way, some
hint or parallel which will stimulate the dormant intuition of the
reader, and convey, as all poetic language does, something beyond
its surface sense. Hence the large part which is played in all
mystical writings by symbolism and imagery; and also by that
rhythmic and exalted language which induces in sensitive persons
something of the languid ecstasy of dream. The close connection
between rhythm and heightened states of consciousness is as yet
little understood. Its further investigation will probably throw
much light on ontological as well as psychological problems.

1 "Subida del Monte Carmelo,” 1. ii. cap. xv*.

» “De Mystica Theologia," i. 3.



8o


MYSTICISM


Mystical, no less than musical and poetic perception, tends natur-
ally — we know not why — to present itself in rhythmical periods:
a feature which is also strongly marked in writings obtained in
the automatic state. So constant is this law in some subjects that
Baron von Hiigel adopted the presence or absence of rhythm
as a test whereby to distinguish the genuine utterances of St.
Catherine of Genoa from those wrongly attributed to her by
successive editors of her legend. 1

All kinds of symbolic language come naturally to the articulate
mystic, who is often a literary artist as well : so naturally, that he
sometimes forgets to explain that his utterance is but symbolic —
a desperate attempt to translate the truth of that world into the
beauty of this. It is here that mysticism joins hands with music
and poetry: had this fact always been recognized by its critics,
they would have been saved from many regrettable and some
ludicrous misconceptions. Symbol — the clothing which the
spiritual borrows from the material plane — is a form of artistic
expression. That is to say, it is not literal but suggestive : though
the artist who uses it may sometimes lose sight of this distinction.
Hence the persons who imagine that the “Spiritual Marriage" of
St. Catherine or St. Teresa veils a perverted sexuality, that the
vision of the Sacred Heart involved an incredible anatomical
experience, or that the divine inebriation of the Sufis is the
apotheosis of drunkenness, do but advertise their ignorance of
the mechanism of the arts: like the lady who thought that Blak
must be mad because he said that he had touched the sky with
his finger.

Further, the study of the mystics, the keeping company how-
ever humbly with their minds, brings with it as music or poetry
does — but in a far greater degree — a strange exhilaration, as if
we were brought near to some mighty source of Being, were at
last on the verge of the secret which all seek. The symbols dis-
played, the actual words employed, when we analyse them, arc
not enough to account for such effect. It is rather that these
messages from the waking transcendental self of another, stir
our own deeper selves in their sleep. It were hardly an ext ravagance
to say, that those writings which are the outcome of true anti
first-hand mystical experience may be known by this power of
imparting to the reader the sense of exalted and extended life.
“All mystics," says Saint-Martin, “speak the same language, for
they come from the same country." The deep undying life within
us came from that country too: and it recognizes the accents of
home, though it cannot always understand what they would say.

Now, returning to our original undertaking, that of defining
1 Von Hiigel, “The Mystical Element of Religion/' vol. i. p. 189.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 81

if we can the characteristics of true mysticism, I think that we
have already reached a point at which William James's cele-
brated "four marks" of the mystic state, Ineffability, Noetic
Quality, Transiency, and Passivity, 1 will fail to satisfy us. In
their place I propose to set out, illustrate and, I hope, justify four
other rules or notes which may be applied as tests to any given
case which claims to take rank amongst the mystics.

1. True mysticism is active and practical, not passive and
^ theoretical. It is an organic life-process, a something which the

whole self does; not something as to which its intellect holds an
opinion.

2. Its aims are wholly transcendental and spiritual. It is in no
way concerned with adding to, exploring, re-arranging, or im-
proving anything in the visible universe. The mystic brushes
aside that universe, even in its supernormal manifestations.
Though he does not, as his enemies declare, neglect his duty to
the many, his heart is always set upon the changeless One.

3. This One is for the mystic, not merely the Reality of all that
is, but also a living and personal Object of Love; never an object
of exploration. It draws his whole being homeward, but always
under the guidance of the heart.

4. Living union with this One — which is the term of his adven-
ture — is a definite state or form of enhanced life. It is obtained
neither from an intellectual realization of its delights, nor from the
most acute emotional longings. Though these must be present,
they are not enough. It is arrived at by an arduous psychological
and spiritual process — the so-called Mystic Way — entailing the
complete remaking of character and the liberation of a new, or
rather latent, form of consciousness; which imposes on the self
the condition which is sometimes inaccurately called "ecstasy,"
but is better named the Unitive State.

. Mysticism, then, is not an opinion: it is not a philosophy. It
has nothing in common with the pursuit of occult knowledge. On
the one hand it is not merely the power of contemplating Eternity :
on the other, it is not to be identified with any kind of religious
queerness. It is the name of that organic process which involves
the perfect consummation of the Love of God: the achievement
here and now of the immortal heritage of man. Or, if you like it
better — for this means exactly the same thing — it is the art of
establishing his conscious relation with the Absolute. r

The movement of the mystic consciousness towards this con-
summation, is not merely the sudden admission to an overwhelm-
ing vision of Truth : though such dazzling glimpses may from time
to time be vouchsafed to the soul. It is rather an ordered movement
1 “Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 380.



MYSTICISM


82

towards ever higher levels of reality, ever closer identification
with the Infinite. 'The mystic experience/' says Recejac, "ends'
with the words, T live, yet not I, but God in me.' This feeling of
identification, which is the term of mystical activity, has a very
important significance. In its early stages the mystic consciousness
feels the Absolute in opposition to the Self ... as mystic activity
goes on, it tends to abolish this opposition. . . . When it has
reached its term the consciousness finds itself possessed by the
sense of a Being at one and the same time greater than the Self
and identical with it : great enough to be God, intimate enough to
be me." 1

This is that mystic union which is the only possible fulfilment
of mystic love : since

“All that is not One must ever
Suffer with the wound of Absence,

And whoever in Love’s city
Enters, finds but room for One
And but in One-ness, Union.”*

The history of mysticism is the history of the demonstration
of this law upon the plane of reality.

Now, how do these statements square with the practice of the i
great mystics; and with the various forms of activity which have
been classified at one time or another as n^stical?

( 1 ) Mysticism is practical , not theoretical.

This statement, taken alone, is not, of course, enough to identify
mysticism; since it is equally true of magic, which also proposes
to itself something to be done rather than something to be
believed. It at once comes into collision, however, with the
opinions of those who believe mysticism to be “the reaction of
the born Platonist upon religion."

The difference between such devout philosophers and the true
mystic, is the difference which George Tyrrell held to distinguish
revelation from theology. 3 Mysticism, like revelation, is final and
personal. It is not merely a beautiful and suggestive diagram but
experience in its most intense form. That experience, in the words
of Plotinus, is the soul's solitary adventure: “the flight of the
Alone to the Alone/'* It provides the material, the substance,
upon which mystical philosophy cogitates; as theologians cogitate
upon the revelation which forms the basis of faith. Hence those
whom we are to accept as mystics must have received, and acted
upon, intuitions of a Truth which is for them absolute. If we are

* “Les Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique,” p. 45.

* J&mi. Quoted in “Jalalu 'd Din” (Wisdom of the East Series), p. 25.

3 “Through Scylla and Chary bdis,” p. 264.

4 Ennead vi. 9.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 83

to acknowledge that they '‘knew the doctrine” they must have
‘'Jived the life”; submitted to the interior travail of the Mystic
Way, not merely have reasoned about the mystical experiences of
others. We could not well dispense with our Christian Platonists
and mystical philosophers. They are our stepping-stones to higher
things; interpret to our dull minds, entangled in the sense-world,
the ardent vision of those who speak to us from the dimension of
Reality. But they are no more mystics than the milestones on
the Dover Road are travellers to Calais. Sometimes their words —
‘ the wistful words of those who know but cannot be — produce
mystics; as the sudden sight of a signpost pointing to the sea will
rouse the spirit of adventure in a boy. Also there are many instances
of true mystics, such as Eckhart, who have philosophized upon
their own experiences, greatly to the advantage of the world;
and others — Plotinus is the most characteristic example — of
Platonic philosophers who have passed far beyond the limits of
rheir own philosophy, and abandoned the making of diagrams for
an experience, however imperfect, of the reality at which these
diagrams hint. It were more accurate to reverse the epigram above
slated, and say, that Platonism is the reaction of the intellectualist
upon mystical truth.

Over and over again the great mystics tell us, not how they
speculated, but how they acted. To them, the transition from the
life of sense to the life of spirit is a formidable undertaking, which
demands effort and constancy. The paradoxical “quiet” of the
contemplative is but the outward stillness essential to inward
work. Their favourite symbols are those of action: battle, search,
and pilgrimage.

“In an obscure night
Fevered with love’s anxiety
(O hapless, happy plight!)

1 went, none seeing me.

Forth from my house, where all things quiet be/' 1

said St. John of the Cross, in his poem of the mystic quest.

“It became evident to me,” says A1 Ghazzali of his own search
for mystic truth, “that the Sufis are men of intuition and not men
of words. I recognized that I had learnt all that can be learnt of
Suiiism by study, and that the rest could not be learnt by study
or by speech.” 3 “Let no one suppo.se,” says the “Theologia
Germanica,” “that we may attain to this true light and perfect
knowledge ... by hearsay, or by reading and study, nor yet by
high skill and great learning.”3 “It is not enough,” says Gerlac

1 “En una Noche Escura,” Stanza I. I quote from Arthur Symons's beautiful
translation, which will be found in vol. ii. of his Collected Poems.

* Schmolders, “Les ficoles Philosophiques chei les Arabes,” p. 55.

J Cap. xix.



MYSTICISM


84

Petersen, “to know by estimation merely: but we must know by
experience/' 1 So Mechthild of Magdeburg says of her revelations,
“The writing of this book was seen, heard, and experienced in
every limb. ... I see it with the eyes of my soul, and hear it with
the ears of my eternal spirit/'*

Those who suppose mystical experience to be merely a pleasing
consciousness of the Divine in the world, a sense of the “otherness"
of things, a basking in the beams of the Uncreated Light, are
only playing with Reality. True mystical achievement is the most
complete and most difficult expression of life which is as yet
possible to man. It is at once an act of love, an act of surrender,
and an act of supreme perception; a trinity of experiences which
meets and satisfies the three activities of the self. Religion might
give us the first and metaphysics the third of these processes.
Only Mysticism can offer the middle term of the series ; the essen-
tial link which binds the three in one. “Secrets," says St. Catherine
of Siena, “are revealed to a friend who has become one thing with
his friend and not to a servant / # 3

(2) Mysticism is an entirely Spiritual A ctivity.

This rule provides us with a further limitation, which of course
excludes all the practisers of magic and of magical religion : even
in their most exalted and least materialistic forms. As we shall
see when we come to consider these persons, their object — not
necessarily an illegitimate one — is to improve and elucidate the
visible by help of the invisible : to use the supernormal powers of
the self for the increase of power, virtue, happiness or knowledge.
The mystic never turns back on himself in this way, or tries to
combine the advantages of two worlds. At the term of his develop-
ment he knows God by communion, and this direct intuition of
the Absolute kills all lesser cravings. He possesses God, and needs
nothing more. Though he will spend himself unceasingly for
other men, become “an agent of the Eternal Goodness," he is
destitute of supersensual ambitions and craves no occult knowledge
or power. Having his eyes set on eternity, his consciousness
steeped in it, he can well afford to tolerate the entanglements of
time. “His spirit," says Tauler, “is as it were sunk and lost in the
Abyss of the Deity, and loses the consciousness of all creature-
distinctions. All things are gathered together in one with the
divine sweetness, and the man's being is so penetrated with the
divine substance that he loses himself therein, as a drop of water is
lost in a cask of strong wine. And thus the man's spirit is so sunk
in God in divine union, that he loses all sense of distinction . . .

1 “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium,” cap. xi.

* “Das Fhessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. iv. cap. 13.

S Dialogo,*cap. lx.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 85

and there remains a secret, still union, without cloud or colour ." 1
'"I wish not," said St. Catherine of Genoa, "for anything that
comes forth from Thee, but only for Thee, oh sweetest Love!"*
"Whatever share of this world," says Rabi'a, "Thou dost bestow
on me, bestow it on Thine enemies, and whatever share of the
next world thou dost give me, give it to Thy friends. Thou art
enough for me!"3 "The Soul," says Plotinus in one of his most
profound passages, "having now arrived at the desired end, and
participating of Deity, will know that the Supplier of true life is
then present. She will likewise then require nothing farther; for,
on the contrary it will be requisite to lay aside other things, to
stop in this alone, amputating everything else with which she is
surrounded. "4

( 3 ) The business and method of Mysticism is Love.

Here is one of the distinctive notes of true mysticism ; marking
it off from every other kind of transcendental theory and practice,
and providing the answer to the question with which our last
chapter closed. It is the eager, outgoing activity whose driving
power is generous love, not the absorbent, indrawing activity
which strives only for new knowledge, that is fruitful in the
spiritual as well as in the physical world.

Having said this, however, we must add — as we did when
speaking of the "heart" — that the word Love as applied to the
mystics is to be understood in its deepest, fullest sense; as the
ultimate expression of the self's most vital tendencies, not as
the superficial affection or emotion often dignified by this name.
Mystic Love is a total dedication of the will; the deep-seated desire
and tendency of the soul towards its Source. It is a condition of
humble access, a life-movement of the self: more direct in its
methods, more valid in its results — even in the hands of the least
lettered of its adepts — than the most piercing intellectual vision
^ of the greatest philosophic mind. Again and again the mystics insist
upon this. "For silence is not God, nor speaking is not God; fasting
is not God nor eating is not God ; onliness is not God nor company
is not God ; nor yet any of all the other two such quantities, He is
hid between them, and may not be found by any work of thy
soul, but all only by love of thine heart. He may not be known by
reason, He may not be gotten by thought, nor concluded by under-
standing; but he may be loved and chosen witli the true lovely
will of thine heart. . . . Such a blind shot with the sharp dart of
longing love may never fail of the prick, the which is God."5

1 Tauler, Sermon for Septuagesima Sunday (Winkworth's translation, p. 253).

* Vita e Dottrina, cap. vi.

3 M. Smith, “Rabi'a the Mystic," p. 30. 4 Ennead vi. 9.

5 “An Epistle of Discretion." This beautiful old English tract, probably by the
author of “The Cloud of Unknowing," is printed by E. Gardner, “The Cell of Sell
Knowledge," p. 108.



86


MYSTICISM


“ 'Come down quickly/ ” says the Incomprehensible Godhead
to the soul that has struggled like Zacchaeus to the topmost
branc hes of the theological tree, “ ‘for I would dwell with you
to-day/ And this hasty descent to which he is summoned by God
is simply a descent by love and desire in to that abyss of the God-
head which the intellect cannot understand. But where intelli-
gence must rest without, love and desire can enter in/’ 1

Volumes of extracts might be compiled from the works of the
mystics illustrative of this rule, which is indeed their central
principle. “Some there are,” says Plotinus, “that for all their effort
have not attained the Vision; the soul in them has come to no
sense of the splendour there. It has not taken warmth; it has not
felt burning within itself the flame of love for what is there to
know.”* “Love,” says Rolle, “truly suffers not a loving soul to bide
in itself, but ravishes it out to the Lover, that the soul is more there
where it loves, than where the body is that lives and feels it.” “Oh
singular joy of love everlasting,” he says again, “that ravishes all
his to heavens abpve all worlds, them binding with bands of
virtue! Oh dear charity, in eartli that has thee not is nought
wrought, whatever it hath ! He truly in thee that is busy, to joy above
earthly is soon lifted ! Thou makest men contemplative, heaven-
gate thou openest, mouths of accusers thou dost shut, God thou,
makest to be seen and multitude of sins thou liidest. We praise
thee, we preach thee, by thee the world we quickly overcome, by
whom we joy and the heavenly ladder we ascend.”3

Love to the mystic, then, is (a) the active, conative, expression
of his will and desire for the Absolute; (b) his innate tendency to
that Absolute, his spiritual weight. He is only thoroughly natural,
thoroughly alive, when he is obeying its voice. For him it is the
source of joy, the secret of the universe, the vivifying principle
of things. In the words of R&ejac, “Mysticism claims to be able
to know the Unknowable without any help from dialectics; and
believes that, by the way of love and will, it reaches a point to
which thought alone is unable to attain.” Again, “It is the heart
and never the reason which leads us to the Absolute. ”4 Hence in
St. Catherine of Siena's exquisite allegory it is the feet of the soul's
affection which brings it first to the Bridge, “for the feet carry the
body as affection carries the soul/'5
The jewels of mystical literature glow with this intimate and
impassioned love of the Absolute ; which transcends the dogmatic
language in which it is clothed and becomes applicable to mystics
of every race and creed. There is little difference in this between

1 Ruysbroeck, “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiaruro/’ 1 . i. cap.xxvi.

1 Enaead, vi. 9. i ’‘The Mending of Life/’ cap xi.

4 “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique/’ p. 7.

4 Dialogo, cap. xxvi.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 87

the extremes of Eastern and Western thought : between A Kempis
the Christian and Jalalu ’d Din the Moslem saint.

“How great a thing is Love, great above all other goods: for
alone it makes all that is heavy light, and bears evenly all that
is uneven. . . .

“Love would be aloft, nor will it be kept back by any lower
thing. Love would be free, and estranged from all worldly affection,
that its inward sight be not hindered: that it may not be en-
tangled by any temporal comfort, nor succumb to any tribulation.

“Nought is sweeter than love, nought stronger, nought higher,
nought wider: there is no more joyous, fuller, better thing in
heaven or earth. For love is born of God, and cannot rest save in
God, above all created things.

“The lover flies, runs, and, rejoices: he is free, and cannot be
restrained. He gives all for all, and has all in all; for he rests in
One Supreme above all, from whom all good flows and proceeds.

“He looks not at the gift, but above all goods turns himself
to the giver.

“. . . He who loves knows the cry of this voice. For this burning
affection of the soul is a loud cry in the ears of God when it saitli
‘My God, My Love, Thou art all mine, and I am all Thine/

So much for the Christian. Now for the Persian mystic.

“While the thought of the Beloved fills our hearts
All our work is to do Him service and spend life for Him.
Wherever He kindles His destructive torch.

Myriads of lovers’ souls are burnt therewith.

The lovers who dwell within the sanctuary

Are moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved’s face,

O heart, hasten thither ! for God will shine upon you,

And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a terror.

He will infuse into your soul a new soul,

So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine.

Take up your abode in Ihs Soul!

Take up your abode in heaven, oh bright full moon!

Like the heavenly Scribe, He will open your heart's book,

That he may reveal mysteries unto you.”*

Well might Hilton say that “Perfect love maketh God and the
soul to be as if they both together were but one tiling/^ and
Tauler that “the well of life is love, and he who dwelleth not in
love is dead.”*

These, nevertheless, are objective and didactic utterances;
though their substance may be — probably is — personal, their form
is not. But if we want to see what it really means to be “in love

1 “De Imitatione Christi,” 1. ii. cap. v.

* Jalalu 'd Din (Wisdom of the East Series), p. 79.

3 Treatise to a Devout Man, cap. viu.

4 Sermon for Thursday in Easter Week (Winkworth’s translation, p. 294).



MYSTICISM


88

with the Absolute," — how intensely actual to the mystic is the
Object of his passion, how far removed from the spheres of pious'
duty or philosophic speculation, how concrete, positive and
dominant such a passion may be — we must study the literature of
autobiography, not that of poetry or exhortation. I choose for this
purpose, rather than the well-known self-analyses of St. Augustine,
St. Teresa or Suso, which are accessible to every one, the more
private confessions of that remarkable mystic Dame Gertrude
More, contained in her "Spiritual Exercises."

This nun, great-great-granddaughter of Sir Thomas More, and
favourite pupil of the celebrated Benedictine contemplative, the
Ven. Augustine Baker, exhibits the romantic and personal side of
mysticism more perfectly than even St. Teresa, whose works were
composed for her daughters* edification. She was an eager student
of St. Augustine, "my deere deere Saint," as she calls him more
than once. He had evidently influenced her language; but her
passion is her own.

Remember that Gertrude More’s confessions represent the
most secret conversations of her soul with God. They were not
meant for publication; but, written for the most part on blank
leaves in her breviary, were discovered and published after her
death. "She called them/* says the title-page with touching
simplicity, “Amor ordinem nescit: an Ideot’s Devotions. Her only
spiritual father and directour, Father Baker, styled them Confes -
siones Amantis, A Lover's Confessions. Amans Deum anima sub Deo
despicit universa. A soul that loveth God despiseth all things that
be inferiour unto God." 1

The spirit of her little book is summed up in two epigrams:
epigrams of which her contemporary, Crashaw, might have been
proud. "To give all for love is a most sweet bargain."* "O let me
love, or not live! "3 Love indeed was her life: and she writes of it
with a rapture which recalls at one moment the exuberant poetry,
of Jacopene da Todi, at another the love songs of the Elizabethan
poets.

"Never was there or can there be imagined such a Love, as is
between an humble soul and thee. Who can express what passeth
between such a soul and thee ? Verily neither man nor Angell is
able to do it sufficiently. ... In thy prayse I am only happy, in
which, my Joy, I will exult with all that love thee. For what can
be a comfort while I live separated from thee, but only to remem-
ber that my God, who is more myne than I am my owne, is abso-
lutely and infinitely happy ? . . . Out of this true love between a

1 They were printed in 1658, ‘'At Paris by Lewis de la Fosse in the Carme
Street at the Signe of the Looking Glass," and have lately been republished.

1 quote from the ordinal edition.

* P. 13&


i P. 181.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 89

soul and thee, there ariseth such a knowledge in the soul that it
loatheth all that is an impediment to her further proceeding in
the Love of thee. O Love, Love, even by naming thee, my soul
loseth itself in thee. . . . Nothing can Satiate a reasonable soul,
but only thou: and having of thee, who art indeed all, nothing
could be said to be wanting to her. . . . Blessed are the cleane of
hart for they shall see God . 0 sight to be wished, desired, and longed
for; because once to have seen thee is to have learnt all things.
Nothing can bring us to this sight but love. But what love must
it be ? not a sensible love only, a childish love, a love which seeketh
itself more than the beloved. No, no, but it must be an ardent
love, a pure love, a couradgious love, a love of charity, an humble
love, and a constant love, not worn out with labours, not daunted
with any difficulties. . . . For that soul that hath set her whole love
and desire on thee, can never find any true satisfaction, but only
in thee . ” l

Who will not see that we have here no literary exercise, but the
fruits of an experience of peculiar intensity? It answers exactly
to one of the best modern definitions of mysticism as “in essence,
the concentration of all the forces of the soul upon a supernatural
Object, conceived and loved as a living Person /' 2 “Love and desire/'
says the same critic, “are the fundamental necessities; and where
they are absent man, even though he be a visionary, cannot be
called a mystic."3 Such a definition, of course, is not complete.
It is valuable however, because it emphasizes the fact that all true
mysticism is rooted in personality; and is therefore fundamentally
a science of the heart.

Attraction, desire, and union as the fulfilment of desire; this is
the way Life works, in the highest as in the lowest things. The
mystic's outlook, indeed, is the lover’s outlook. It has the same
element of wildness, the same quality of selfless and quixotic
devotion, the same combination of rapture and humility. This
parallel is more than a pretty fancy: for mystic and 1 over, upon
different planes, are alike responding to the call of the Spirit of
Life. The language of human passion is tepid and insignificant
beside the language in which the mystics try to tell the splendours
of their love. They force upon the unprejudiced reader the con-
viction that they are dealing with an ardour far more burning
for an Object far more real.

“This monk can give lessons to lovers!" exclaimed Arthur
Symons in astonishment of St. John of the Cross.4 It would be
strange if he could not; since their finite passions are but the feeble
images of his infinite one, their beloved the imperfect symbol of

Op. cit., pp. 9, 16, 25, 35, 138, 175. * Berger, “William Blake," p. 72.

Ibid., p. 74. < Lov temporary Review, April,



MYSTICISM


90

his First and only Fair. “I saw Him and sought Him: I had
Him and I wanted Him,” says Julian of Norwich, in a phrase
which seems to sum up all the ecstasy and longing of man's
soul. Only this mystic passion can lead us from our prison.
Its brother, the desire of knowledge, may enlarge and improve
the premises to an extent as yet undreamed of : but it can never
unlock the doors.

( 4 ) Mysticism entails a definite Psychological Experience .

That is to say, it shows itself not merely as an attitude of mind
and heart, but as a form of organic life. It is not only a theory of
the intellect or a hunger, however passionate, of the heart. It
involves the organizing of the whole self, conscious and uncon-
scious, under the spur of such a hunger: a remaking of the whole
character on high levels in the interests of the transcendental life.
The mystics are emphatic in their statement that spiritual desires
are useless unless they initiate this costly movement of the whole
self towards the Real.

Thus in the visions of Mechthild of Magdeburg, “The soul spake
thus to her Desire, Tare forth and see where my Love is. Say to
him that I desire to love/ So Desire sped forth, for she is quick of
her nature, and came to the Empyrean and cried, 'Great Lord,
open and let me in!' Then said the Householder of that place:
‘What means this fiery eagerness?' Desire replied, 'Lord I would
have thee know that my lady can no longer bear to live. If Thou
wouldst flow forth to her, then might she swim : but the fish cannot
long exist that is left stranded on the shore/ ‘Go back/ said the
Lord, ‘I will not let thee in unless thou bring to me that hungry
soul, for it is in this alone that I take delight/ ”*

We have said* that the full mystic consciousness is extended
in two distinct directions. So too there are two distinct sides to the
full mystical experience. (A) The vision or consciousness of Abso-
lute Perfection. (B) The inward transmutation to which that
Vision compels the mystic, in order that he may be to some extent
worthy of that which he has beheld : may take his place within the
order of Reality. He has seen the Perfect ; he wants to be perfect too.
The “third term/' the necessary bridge between the Absolute and
the Self, can only, he feels, be moral and spiritual transcendence —
in a word, Sanctity — for “the only means of attaining the Absolute
lies in adapting ourselves to It .”3 The moral virtues are for him,
then, the obligatory “ornaments of the Spiritual Marriage” as
Ruysbroeck called them : though far more than their presence is
needed to bring that marriage about. Unless this impulse for moral
perfection be bom in him, this travail of the inner life begun, he

1 “Das Fliessende Licht der Dotthelt,” pt. iii. cap. 1.

* Supra, p. 35. 5 KScejac, op. cit., p. 35.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 91

is no mystic: though he may well be a visionary, a prophet, a
"mystical” poet.

Moreover, this process of transmutation, this rebuilding of the
self on higher levels, will involve the establishment within the
field of consciousness, the making "central for life,” of those sub-
conscious spiritual perceptions which are the primary material of
mystical experience. The end and object of this "inward alchemy”
will be the raising of the whole self to the condition in which
conscious and permanent union with the Absolute takes place;
and man, ascending to the summit of his manhood, enters into that
greater life for winch he was made. In its journey towards this
union, the subject commonly passes through certain well-marked
phases, which constitute what is known as the "Mystic Way.”
This statement rules out from the true mystic kingdom all merely
sentimental and affective piety and visionary poetry, no less than
mystical philosophy. It brings us back to our first proposition —
the concrete and practical nature of the mystical act.

More than the apprehension of God, then, more than the
passion for the Absolute, is needed to make a mystic. These must
be combined with an appropriate psychological make-up, with a
nature capable of extraordinary concentration, an exalted moral
emotion, a nervous organization of the artistic type. All these are
necessary to the successful development of the mystic life process.
In the experience of those mystics who have left us the records of
their own lives, the successive stages of this life process are always
traceable. In the second part of this book, they will be found worked
out at some length. Rohe, Suso, St. Teresa, and many others have
left us valuable self-analyses for comparison: and from them we
see how arduous, how definite, and how far removed from mere
emotional or intellectual activity, is that educational discipline
by which "the eye which looks upon Eternity” is able to come
to its own. "One of the marks of the true mystic,” says Leuba —
by no means a favourable witness — "is the tenacious and heroic
energy with which he pursues a definite moral ideal.” 1 “He is,”
says Pacheu, "the pilgrim of an inward Odyssey.” 2 Though we
may be amazed and delighted by his adventures and discoveries
on the way, to him the voyage and the end are all. “The road on
which we enter is a royal road which leads to heaven,” says St.
Teresa. "Is it strange that the conquest of such a treasure should
cost us rather dear ? ”3

It is one of the many indirect testimonies to the objective
reality of mysticism that the stages of this road, the psychology

* Revue Philosophique, July, 1902.

* “Psychologic des Mystiques Chrdtiens,*’ p
s “Camino de Perfeccion, cap. xxiii.



MYSTICISM


92

of the spiritual ascent, as described to us by different schools of
contemplatives, always present practically the same sequence of
states. The “school for saints" has never found it necessary to
b-ring its curriculum up to date. The psychologist finds little
difficulty, for instance, in reconciling the “Degrees of Orison"
described by St. Teresa 1 * * * * — Recollection, Quiet, Union, Ecstasy,
Rapt, the “Pain of God," and the Spiritual Marriage of the soul
— with the four forms of contemplation enumerated by Hugh of
St. Victor, or the Sufi's “Seven Stages" of the soul's ascent to
God, which begin in adoration and end in spiritual marriage.*
Though each wayfarer may choose different landmarks, it is clear
from their comparison that the road is one.

(5) As a corollary to these four rules, it is perhaps well to
reiterate the statement already made, that True Mysticism is
never self-seeking. It is not, as many think, the pursuit of super-
natural joys; the satisfaction of a high ambition. The mystic
does not enter on his quest because he desires the happiness of the
Beatific Vision, the ecstasy of union with the Absolute, or any
other personal reward. That noblest of all passions, the passion
for perfection for Love’s sake, far outweighs the desire for trans-
cendental satisfaction. “O Love," said St. Catherine of Genoa,
“I do not wish to follow thee for sake of these delights, but solely
from the motive of true love."3 Those who do otherwise are only,
in the plain words of St. John of the Cross, “spiritual gluttons"
or, in the milder metaphor here adopted, magicians of the more
high-minded sort. The true mystic claims no promises and makes
no demands. He goes because he must, as Galahad went towards
the Grail: knowing that for those who can live it, this alone is life.
He never rests in that search for God which he holds to be the
fulfilment of his highest duty ; yet he seeks without any certainty
of success. He holds with St. Bernard that “He alone is God who
can never be sought in vain: not even when He cannot be found. "5
With Mcchthild of Magdeburg, he hears the Absolute saying in his
soul, “0 soul, before the world was I longed for thee: and 1 still
long for thee, and thou for Me. Therefore, when our two desires
unite, Love shall be fulfilled." 6

Like his type, the “devout lover” of romance, then, the mystic
serves without hope of reward. By one of the many paradoxes
of the spiritual life, he obtains satisfaction because he does not
seek it; completes his personality because he gives it up. “Attain-

1 In “El Castillo Interior."

* See Palmer, “Oriental Mysticism," pt. v. ch. v.

J Vita, p. 8.

« “Subida del Monte Carmelo," 1. ii. cap. vii.

J “De Consideratione," 1. v. cap. xi.

* “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. vii. cap. i b.



THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 93

ment,” says Dionysius the Areopagite in words which are writ
forge on the annals of Christian ecstasy, “comes only by means of
this sincere, spontaneous, and entire surrender of yourself and
all things.” 1 Only with the annihilation of selfhood comes the fulfil-
ment of love. Were the mystic asked the cause of his often extra-
ordinary behaviour, his austere and steadfast quest, it is unlikely
that his reply would contain any reference to sublime illumination
or unspeakable delights. It is more probable that he would answer
in some such words as those of Jacob Boehme, “I am not come
to this meaning, or to this work and knowledge through my own
reason or through my own will and purpose; neither have I sought
this knowledge, nor so much as to know anything concerning it.
I sought only for the heart of God, therein to hide myself.” 2

"Whether we live or whether we die,” said St. Paul, "we are
the Lord's.” The mystic is a realist, to whom these words convey
not a dogma but an invitation : an invitation to the soul to attain
that fullness of life for which she was made, to "lose herself in
That which can be neither seen nor touched ; giving herselt entirely
to this sovereign Object without belonging either to herself or to
others; united to the Unknown by the most noble part of herself
and because of her renouncement of knowledge; finally drawing
from this absolute ignorance a knowledge which the understanding
‘'knows not how to attain . "3 Mysticism, then, is seen as the "one
way out” for the awakened spirit of man; healing that human
incompleteness which is the origin of our divine unrest. "I am
sure,” says Eckhart, "that if a soul knew the very least of all that
Being means, it would never turn away from it. ”4 The mystics
have never turned away : to do so would have seemed to them a
self-destructive act. Here, in this world of illusion, they say, we
have no continuing city. This statement, to you a proposition, is
to us the central fact of life. "Therefore, it is necessary to hasten
our departure from hence, and detcich ourselves in so far as we
may from the body to which we are fettered, in order that with
the whole of our selves, we may fold ourselves about Divinity,
and have no part void of contact with Him . ”5
To sum up. Mysticism is seen to be a highly specialized form of
that search for reality, for heightened and completed life, which
we have found to be a constant characteristic of human con-
sciousness. It is largely prosecuted by that "spiritual spark,”
that transcendental faculty which, though the life of our life,
remains below the threshold in ordinary men. Emerging from its

1 “De Mystica Theologia,” i. r.

‘ . * “Aurora,” English translation, 1764, p. 237.

3 Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Mystica Theologia,” i. 3,

4 “Mystische Schriften,” p. 137.

5 Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.



MYSTICISM


94

hiddenness in the mystic, it gradually becomes the dominant
factor in his life; subduing to its service, and enhancing by its
saving contact with reality, those vital powers of love and will
which we attribute to the heart, rather than those of mere reason
and perception, which we attribute to the head. Under the spur of
this love and will, the whole personality rises in the acts of con-
templation and ecstasy to a level of consciousness at which it
becomes aware of a new field of perception. By this awareness,
by this "loving sight/' it is stimulated to a new life in accordance
with the Reality which it has beheld. So strange and exalted is‘
this life, that it never fails to provoke either the anger or the
admiration of other men. "If the great Christian mystics/' says
Leuba, "could by some miracle be all brought together in the
same place, each in his habitual environment, there to live accord-
ing to his manner, the world would soon perceive that they con-
stitute one of the most amazing and profound variations of which
the human race has yet been witness ." 1

A discussion of mysticism, regarded as a form of human
life, will therefore include two branches. First the life pro-
cess of the mystic: the remaking of his personality; the method
by which his peculiar consciousness of the Absolute is attained,
and faculties which have been evolved to meet the requirements of
the phenomenal, are enabled to do work on the transcendental,
plane. This is the "Mystic Way” in which the self passes through
the states or stages of development which were codified by the
Keoplatonists, and after them by the mediaeval mystics, as
Purgation, Illumination, and Ecstasy. Secondly, the content of
the mystical field of perception; the revelation under which the
contemplative becomes aware of the Absolute. This will include
a consideration of the so-called doctrines of mysticism: the
attempts of the articulate mystic to sketch for us the world into
which lie has looked, in language which is only adequate to the
world in which the rest of us dwell. Here the difficult question of
symbolism, and of symbolic theology, comes in: a point upon
which many promising expositions of the mystics have been
wrecked. It will be our business to strip off as far as may be the
symbolic wrapping, and attempt a synthesis of these doctrines;
to resolve the apparent contradictions of objective and subjective
revelations, of the ways of negation and affirmation, emanation
and immanence, surrender and deification, the Divine Dark and
the Inward Light; and finally to exhibit, if we can, the essential
unity of that experience in which the human soul enters consciously
into the Presence of God.


* op. at.



CHAPTER V


MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY


Theology as used by the Mystics — Their conception of God — Emanation and
Immanence — Emanation discussed — Dante — the Kabalists — Aquinas — Its psy-
chological aspect — Immanence discussed — the basis of introversion — The
“ground" of soul and universe — Emanation and Immanence compared — both
accepted by the Mystics — Objections to this answered — Emanation and the Mystic
Way — Its reconciliation with Immanence — Both describe experience — are
expressions of temperament — Mystical theology must include both — Theology
is the Mystic's map — Sometimes but not always adequate — Christianity the best
of t»uch Maps — It combines the metaphysical and personal aspects of the Divine —
reconciles Emanation and Immanence — provides a congenial atmosphere for the
Mrs tic — explains his adventures — All Western mystics implicitly Christian—
lilakc — The dogma of the Trinity — Division of Persons essential to the descrip-
tion of God — The indwelling and transcendent aspects of the Divine — St. Teresa
—her vision of the Trinity — Father, Word, Holy Spirit — Threefold division of
Reality — Neoplatonic trinities — Lady Julian on the Trinity — Its psychological
justification — -Goodness, Truth, and Beauty — Trinitarian doctrine and the
M vs tics — Light, Life, Love — The Incarnation — its mystic aspect— The Repairer
-‘“The Drama of Faith — The Eternal Birth of the Son — The new Birth in Man —
Regeneration — Conclusion

I n the last chapter we tried to establish a distinction between
the mystic who tastes supreme experience and the mystical
philosopher who cogitates upon the data so obtained. We
have now, however, to take account of the fact that often the true
mystic is also a mystical philosopher; though there are plenty of
mystical philosophers who are not and could never be mystics.

Because it is characteristic of the human self to reflect upon
its experience, to use its percepts as material for the construction of
a concept, most mystics have made or accepted a theory of their
own adventures. Thus we have a mystical philosophy or theology—
the comment of the intellect on the proceedings of spiritual
intuition — running side by side with true or empirical mysticism :
classifying its data, criticizing it, explaining it, and translating
its vision of the supersensible into symbols which are amenable
to dialectic.

Such a philosophy is most usually founded upon the formal
reed which the individual mystic accepts. It is characteristic of
him that in so far as his transcendental activities are healthy he
is generally an acceptor and not a rejector of such creeds. The
view which regards the mystic as a spiritual anarchist receives
little support from history; which shows us, again and again,

M



MYSTICISM


96

the great mystics as faithful sons of the great religions. Almqst
any religious system which fosters unearthly love is potentially a
nursery for mystics: and Christianity, Islam, Brahmanism, and
Buddhism each receives its most sublime interpretation at their
hands. Thus St. Teresa interprets her ecstatic apprehension of the
Godhead in strictly Catholic terms, and St John of the Cross
contrives to harmonize his intense transcendentalism with incar-
national and sacramental Christianity. Thus Boehme believed to
the last that his explorations of eternity were consistent with the
teaching of the Lutheran Church. The Sufis were good Moham-
medans, Philo and the Kabalists were orthodox Jews. Plotinus
even adapted — though with what difficulty ! — the relies of pagan-
ism to his doctrine of the Real.

Attempts, however, to limit mystical truth — the direct appre-
hension of the Divine Substance — by the formulae of any one
religion, are as futile as the attempt to identify a precious metal
with the die which converts it into current coin. The dies which
the mystics have used are many. Their peculiarities and excres-
cences are always interesting and sometimes highly significant.
Some give a far sharper, more coherent, impression than others.
But the gold from which this diverse coinage is struck is always
the same precious metal : always the same Beatific Vision of
Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which is one. Hence its substance
must always be distinguished from the accidents under which we
perceive it : for this substance has an absolute, and not a denomi-
national, importance.

Nevertheless, if we are to understand the language of the
mystics, it is evident that we must know a little of accident a:
well as of substance : that is to say, of the principal philosophic
or religions which they have used in describing their adventure
to the world. This being so, before we venture to apply ourselve
to the exploration of theology proper, it will be well to consider th<
two extreme forms under which both mystics and theologians havi
been accustomed to conceive Divine Reality: that is to say, th<
so-called “emanation-theory” and “immanence-theory” of th<
transcendental world.

Emanation and Immanence are formidable words ; which thong!
perpetually tossed to and fro by amateurs of religious philosophy
have probably, as they stand, little actuality for practical moderi
men. They are, however, root-ideas for the maker of mystica
diagrams: and his best systems are but attempts towards their
reconciliation. Since the aim of every mystic is union with God
it is obvious that the vital question in his philosophy must be th<’|
place which this God, the Absolute of his quest, occupies in the
scheme. Briefly, He has been conceived — or, it were better to say|



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 97

presented — by the great mystics under two apparently contra-
dictory modes

(1) The opinion which is represented in its most extreme form
by the theory of Emanations , declares His utter transcendence.
This view appears early in the history of Greek philosophy. It is
developed by Dionysius, by the Kabalists, by Dante : and is implied
in the language of Rulman Merswin, St. John of the Cross and
many other Christian ecstatics.

The solar system is an almost perfect symbol of this concept
of Reality; which finds at once its most rigid and most beautiful
expression in Dante's “Paradiso." 1 The Absolute Godhead is
conceived as removed by a vast distance from the material world
of sense ; the last or lowest of that system of dependent worlds or
states which, generated by or emanating from the Unity or Central
Sun, become less in spirituality and splendour, greater in multi-
plicity, the further they recede from their source. That Source —
the Great Countenance of the Godhead — can never, say the Kaba-
lists, be discerned by man. It is the Absolute of the Neoplatonists,
the Unplumbed Abyss of later mysticism : the Cloud of Unknowing
wraps it from our sight. Only by its “emanations" or manifested
attributes can we attain knowledge of it. By the outflow of these
( same manifested attributes and powers the created universe exists,
depending in the last resort on the laiens Deltas: Who is therefore
conceived as external to the world which He illuminates and
vivifies.

St. Thomas Aquinas virtually accepts the doctrine of Emana-
tions when he writes: 3 “As all the perfections of Creatures descend
in order from God, who is the height of perfection, man should
begin from the lower creatures and ascend by degrees, and so
advance to the knowledge of God. . . . And because in that roof
and crown of all things, God, we find the most perfect unity, and
^ everything is stronger and more excellent the more thoroughly it
' is one; it follows that diversity and variety increase in things, the
further they are removed from Him who is the first principle of
all." Suso, whose mystical system, like that of most Dominicans,
is entirely consistent with Thomist philosophy, is really glossing
Aquinas when he writes: “The supreme and superessential Spirit
has ennobled man by illuminating him with a ray from the Eternal
Godhead. . . . Hence from out the great ring which represents the


* “La gloria di colui che tutto move

per l’universo penetra, e resplende

in una parte pih e meno altrove" (Par. i. 1—3).

The theological ground-plan of the Cantica is epitomized in this introductory
verse.

* “Summa Contra Gentiles/* 1. iv. cap. i. (Rickaby’s translation).



MYSTICISM


98

Eternal Godhead there flow forth . . . little rings, which may be
taken to signify the high nobility of natural creatures/' 1

Obviously, if this theory of the Absolute be accepted the path
of the soul’s ascent to union with the divine must be literally a
transcendence: a journey “upward and outward,” through a long
series of intermediate states or worlds till, having traversed the
“Thirty-two paths of the Tree of Life,” she at last arrives, in
Kabalistic language, at the Crown: fruitive knowledge of God,
the Abyss or Divine Dark of the Dionysian school, the Neoplatonic
One. Such a series of worlds is symbolized by the Ten Heavens of
Dante, the hierarchies of Dionysius, the Tree of Life or Sephiroth
of the Kabalah : and receives its countersign in the inward experi-
ence, in the long journey of the self through Purgation and Illu-
mination to Union. “We ascend,” says St. Augustine, “thy ways
that be in our heart, and sing a song of degrees; we glow inwardly
with thy fire, with thy good fire, and we go, because we go upwards
to the peace of Jerusalem.” 3

This theory postulates, under normal and non-mystical con-
ditions, the complete separation of the human and the divine ; the
temporal and the eternal worlds. “Never forget,” says St. John of
the Cross, “that God is inaccessible. Ask not therefore how far
your powers may comprehend Him, your feeling penetrate Him.
Fear thus to content yourself with too little, and deprive your
soul of the agility which it needs in order to mount up to Him. ”3
The language of pilgrimage, of exile, comes naturally to the mystic
who apprehends reality under these terms. To him the mystical
adventure is essentially a “going forth” from his normal self and
from his normal universe. Like the Psalmist “in his heart he hath
disposed to ascend by steps in this vale of tears” from the less to
the more divine. He, and with him the Cosmos— for to mystical
philosophy the soul of the individual subject is the microcosm of
the soul of the world — has got to retrace the long road to the Per-
fection from which it originally came forth; as the fish in Rulman
Merswin’s Vision of Nine Rocks must struggle upwards from pool
to pool until they reach their Origin.

Such a way of conceiving Reality accords with the type of mind
which William James called the “sick soul.“4 It is the mood of
the penitent ; of the utter humility which, appalled by the sharp
contrast between itself and the Perfect which it contemplates,
can only cry “out of the depths.” It comes naturally to thetem-
perament which leans to pessimism, which sees a “great gulf
fixed” between itself and its desire, and is above all things sensitive

* Leben, cap. lvi. a Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. xi.

3 Avisos y Scntencias Espirituales, N. 51. I

♦ “Varieties of Religious Experience/* Lecture vi. |



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY


99

to the elements of evil and imperfection in its own character and
dn the normal experience of man. Permitting these elements to
dominate its field of consciousness, wholly ignoring the divine
aspect of the World of Becoming, such a temperament constructs
from its perceptions and prejudices the concept of a material world
and a normal self which are very far from God.

( 2 ) Immanence . At the opposite pole from this way of sketching
Reality is the extreme theory of Immanence, which plays so large
a part in modern theology. To the holders of this theory, who
• commonly belong to James's "healthy minded" or optimistic
class, the quest of the Absolute is no long journey, but a realization
of something which is implicit in the self and in the universe: an
opening of the eyes of the soul upon the Reality in which it is
bathed. For them earth is literally "crammed with heaven."
"Thou wert I, but dark was my heart, I knew not the secret
transcendent," says Tewekkul Beg, a Moslem mystic of the
seventeenth century.* This is always the cry of the temperament
which leans to a theology of immanence, once its eyes are opened
on the light. "God," says Plotinus, "is not external to anyone, but
is present with all things, though they are ignorant that He is so." 2
In other and older words, "The Spirit of God is within you." The
| Absolute Whom all seek does not hold Himself aloof from an im-
■ 'perfect material universe, but dwells within the flux of things:
stands as it were at the very threshold of consciousness and knocks,
awaiting the self’s slow discovery of her treasures. "He is not far
1 from any one of us, for in Him we live and move and have our
| being," is the pure doctrine of Immanence: a doctrine whose
teachers are drawn from amongst the souls which react more
easily to the touch of the Divine than to the sense of alienation
and of sin, and are naturally inclined to love rather than to awe.
f Unless safeguarded by limiting dogmas, the theory of Immanence,

| taken alone, is notoriously apt to degenerate into pantheism ; and
into those extravagant perversions of the doctrine of "deification"
in which the mystic holds his transfigured self to be identical with
the Indwelling God. It is the philosophical basis of that practice of
I introversion, the turning inward of the soul’s faculties in con-
jj templation, which has been the "method "of the great practical
| mystics of all creeds. That God, since He is in all — in a sense, is
;i all — may most easily be found within ourselves, is the doctrine
I of these adventurers; 3 who, denying or ignoring the existence of
| those intervening "worlds" or "planes" between the material

I 1 Quoted by W. L. Lilly, “Many Mansions/' p. 140. * Ennead vi. 9.

Jv * Thus Aquinas says, “Since God is the universal cause of all Being, in whateve
region Being can be found, there must be the Divine Presence" (“Summa Contra
Gentiles/' 1. iii. cap. lxviii.). And we have seen that the whole claim of the mystics
ultimately depends on man’s possession of pure being in “the spark of the soul/’

?



100


MYSTICISM


world and the Absolute, which are postulated by the theory of
Emanations, claim with Ruysbroeck that “by a simple introspec-
tion in fruitive love” they “meet God without intermediary.” 1
They hear the Father of Lights “saying eternally, without inter-
mediary or interruption, in the most secret part of the spirit, the
one, unique, and abysmal Word.” 2

This discovery of a “divine” essence or substance, dwelling, as
Ruysbroeck says, at the apex of man's soul is that fundamental
experience — found in some form or degree in all genuine mystical
religion — which provides the basis of the New Testament doctrine
of the indwelling spirit. It is, variously interpreted, the “spark of
the soul” of Eckhart, the “ground” of Tauler, the Inward Light of
the Quakers, the “Divine Principle” of some modem transcen-
dentalists; the fount and source of all true life. At this point logical
exposition fails mystic and theologian alike. A tangle of metaphors
takes its place. We are face to face with the “wonder of wonders”
— that most real, yet most mysterious, of all the experiences of
religion, the union of human and divine, in a nameless something
which is “great enough to be God, small enough to be me.” In
the struggle to describe this experience, the “spark of the
soul,” the point of juncture, is at one moment presented to us
as the divine to which the self attains: at another, as that
transcendental aspect of the self which is in contact with God. r
On either hypothesis, it is here that the mystic encounters
Absolute Being. Here is his guarantee of God's immediate
presence in the human heart; and, if in the human heart, then in
that universe of which man’s soul resumes in miniature the
essential characteristics.

According to the doctrine of Immanence, creation, the universe,
could we see it as it is, would be perceived as the self-development,
the self-revelation of this indwelling Deity. The world is not
projected from the Absolute, but immersed in God. “I under-
stood,” says St. Teresa, “how our Lord was in all things, and how"
He was in the soul: and the illustration of a sponge filled with
water was suggested to me. ”3 The world-process, then, is the slow
coming to fruition of that Divine Spark which is latent alike in
the Cosmos and in man. “If,” says Boehme, “thou conceivest a
small minute circle, as small as a grain of mustard seed, yet the
Heart of God is wholly and perfectly therein : and if thou art born
in God, then there is in thyself (in the circle of thy life) the whole

» “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiaruin,” 1. ii. cap. lxvii.

* Op. cit., 1. iii. cap. i.

s Relaccion ix. 10 . But this image of a sponge, which also suggested itself ttf
St. Augustine, proved an occasion of stumbling to his more metaphysical mind:
tending to confuse his idea of the nature of God with the category of space
Vide Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. v.



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY ioi

Heart of God undivided/' 1 The idea of Immanence has seldom
>been more beautifully expressed.

It is worth noticing that both the theological doctrines of
reality which have been acceptable to the mystics implicitly
declare, as science does, that the universe is not static but dynamic ;
a World of Becoming. According to the doctrine of Immanence
this universe is free, self-creative. The divine action floods it : no
part is more removed from the Godhead than any other part.
"God/' says Eckhart, “is nearer to me than I am to myself; He is
just as near to wood and stone, but they do not know it."*

These two apparently contradictory explanations of the
Invisible have both been held, and that in their extreme form,
by the mystics: who have found in both adequate, and indeed
necessary, diagrams by which to suggest something of their rich
experience of Reality.3 Some of the least lettered and most
inspired amongst them — for instance, St. Catherine of Siena,
Julian of Norwich — and some of the most learned, as Dionysius
the Areopagite and Meister Eckhart, have actually used in their
rhapsodies language appropriate to both the theories of Emana-
tion and of Immanence. It would seem, then, that both these
theories convey a certain truth; and that it is the business of a
sound mystical philosophy to reconcile them. It is too often for-
gotten by quarrelsome partisans of a concrete turn of mind that
at best all these transcendental theories are only symbols, methods,
diagrams; feebly attempting the representation of an expeiience
which in its fullness is always the same, and of which the dominant
characteristic is ineffability. Hence they insist with tiresome
monotony that Dionysius must be wrong if Tauler be right: that
it is absurd to call yourself the Friend of God if unknowableness
be that God's first attribute: that Plato's Perfect Beauty and
St. Catherine of Siena's Accepter of Sacrifices cannot be the same:
that the “courteous and dear-worthy Lord" who said to Lady
•Julian, “My darling, I am glad that thou art come to Me, in all
thy woe I have ever been with thee/'4 rules out the formless and
impersonal One of Plotinus, the “triple circle" of Suso and Dante.
Finally, that if God be truly immanent in the material world,
it is either sin or folly to refuse that world in order that we may
find Him; and if introversion be right, a plan of the universe which
postulates intervening planes between Absolute Being and the
phenomenal world must be wrong.

Now as regards the mystics, of whom we hold both these

1 “The Threefold Life of Man," cap. vi. § 71.

^ » Eckhart, Pred, lxix. So too we read in the Oxyrhyncus Papyri, “.Raise the
stone and there thou shalt find Me. Cleave the wood and there am I."
i Compare above, cap. ii.

« “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. xl.



102


MYSTICISM


doctrines, these ways of seeing truth — for what else is a doctrine
but that ? — it is well to remind ourselves that their teaching about
the relation of the Absolute to the finite, of God to the phenomenal
world, must be founded in the first instance on what they know
by experience of the relation between that Absolute and the
individual self. This experience is the valid part of mysticism, the
thing which gives to it its unique importance amongst systems of
thought, the only source of its knowledge. Everything else is
really guessing aided by analogy. When therefore the mystic,
applying to the universe what he knows to be true in respect of his
own soul, describes Divine Perfection as very far removed from
the material world, yet linked with it by a graduated series of
"emanations’ * — states or qualities which have each of them
something of the godlike, though they be not God — he is trying
to describe the necessary life-process which he has himself passed
through in the course of his purgation and spiritual ascent from
the state of the "natural man” to that other state of harmony
with the spiritual universe, sometimes called "deification,” in
which he is able to contemplate, and unite with, the divine. We
have in the "Divina Commedia" a classic example of such a two-
fold vision of the inner and the outer worlds : for Dante’s journey
up and out to the Empyrean Heaven is really an inward alchemy,
an ordering and transmuting of his nature, a purging of his spiritual'
sight till — transcending all derived beatitude — it can look for an
instant on the Being of God.

The mystic assumes— because he tends to assume an orderly
basis for things — that there is a relation, an analogy, between this
microcosm of man's self and the macrocosm of the world-self.
Hence his experience, the geography of the individual quest,
appears to him good evidence of the geography of the Invisible.
Since he must transcend his natural life in order to attain con-
sciousness of God, he conceives of God as essentially transcendent
to the natural world. His description of that geography, however
— of his path in a land where there is no time and space, no inner
and no outer, up or down — will be conditioned by his tempera-
ment, by his powers of observation, by the metaphor which comes
most readily to his hand, above all by his theological education.
The so-called journey itself is a psychological and spiritual experi-
ence: the purging and preparation of the self, its movement to
higher levels of consciousness, its unification with that more
spiritual but normally unconscious self which is in touch with
the transcendental order, and its gradual or abrupt entrance into
union with the Real. Sometimes it seems to the self that this
performance is a retreat inwards to that "ground of the soul”
where, as St. Teresa says, "His Majesty awaits us”: sometimes



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 103

a going forth from the Conditioned to the Unconditioned, the
^supernatural flight” of Plotinus and Dionysius the Areopagite.
Both are but images under which the self conceives the process
of attaining conscious union with that God who is “at once
immanent and transcendent in relation to the Soul which shares
His life.” 1

He has got to find God. Sometimes his temperament causes him
to lay most stress on the length of the search; sometimes the
abrupt rapture which brings it to a close makes him forget that
^preliminary pilgrimage in which the soul is “not outward bound,
but rather on a journey to its centre.” The habitations of the
Interior Castle through which St. Teresa leads us to that hidden
chamber which is the sanctuary of the indwelling God : the hier-
archies of Dionysius, ascending from the selfless service of the
angels, past the seraphs 1 burning love, to the God enthroned above
time and space : the mystical paths of the Kabalistic Tree of Life,
which lead from the material world of Malkuth through the uni-
verses of action and thought, by Mercy, Justice and Beauty, to
the Supernal Crown; 1 all these are different ways of describing
this same pilgrimage.

As every one is born a disciple of either Plato or Aristotle, so
every human soul leans to one of these two ways of apprehending
reality. The artist, the poet, every one who looks with awe and
rapture on created things, acknowledges in this act the Immanent
God. The ascetic, and that intellectual ascetic the metaphysician,
turning from the created, denying the senses in order to find
afar off the uncreated, unconditioned Source, is really — though
; olten he knows it not — obeying that psychological law which
produced the doctrine of Emanations.

A good map then, a good mystical philosophy, will leave room
for both these ways of interpreting our experience. It will mark
I the routes by which many different temperaments claim to have
j round their way to the same end. It will acknowiedge both the
aspects under which the patria splendida Truth has appeared to
i its lovers : the aspects which have called forth the theories of
emanation and immanence and are enshrined in the Greek and
Latin names of God. Deus, whose root means day, shining, the
Transcendent Light ; and Theos, whose true meaning is supreme
: desire or prayer — the Inward Love— do not contradict, but com-
: plete each other. They form, when taken together, an almost
perfect definition of that Godhead which is the object of the
mystic's desire: the Divine Love which, immanent in the soul,

1 spurs on that soul to union with the transcendent and Absolute

1 J>oyce Gibson, “God with Us,” p. 24.

• See A. K. Waite, “The Doctrine and Literature of the Kabaiah/' pp. 36 53.



io 4 MYSTICISM

Light— at once the source, the goal, the life of created
things.

The true mystic — the person with a genius for God — hardly
needs a map himself. He steers a compass course across the “vast
and stormy sea of the divine/' It is characteristic of his intel-
lectual humility, however, that he is commonly willing to use the
map of the community in which he finds himself, when it comes
to showing other people the route which he has pursued. Sometimes
these maps have been adequate. More, they have elucidated the
obscure wanderings of the explorer; helped him; given him land-
marks; worked out right. Time after time he puts his finger on
some spot — some great hill of vision, some city of the soul — and
says with conviction, “Here have I been." At other times the
maps have embarrassed him, have refused to fit in with his descrip-
tion. Then he has tried, as Boehme did and after him Blake, to
make new ones. Such maps are often wild in drawing, because
good draughtsmanship does not necessarily go with a talent for
exploration. Departing from the usual convention, they are hard —
sometimes impossible —to understand. As a result, the orthodox
have been forced to regard their makers as madmen or heretics :
when they were really only practical men struggling to disclose
great matters by imperfect means.

Without prejudice to individual beliefs, and without offering an
opinion as to the exclusive truth of any one religious system or
revelation — for here we are concerned neither with controversy
nor with apologetics — we are bound to allow as a historical fact
that mysticism, so far, has found its best map in Christianity.
Christian philosophy, especially that Neoplatonic theology which,
taking up and harmonizing all that was best in the spiritual
intuitions of Greece, India, and Egypt, was developed by the
great doctors of the early and mediaeval Church, supports and
elucidates the revelations of the individual mystic as no other
system of thought has been able to do.

We owe to the great fathers of the first five centuries — to
Clement of Alexandria and Irenseus, Gregory of Nyssa and
Augustine; above all to Dionysius the Areopagite, the great
Christian contemporary of Proclus — the preservation of that
mighty system of scaffolding which enabled the Catholic mystics ,
to build up the towers and bulwarks of the City of God. The
peculiar virtue of this Christian philosophy, that which marks its
superiority to the more coldly self-consistent systems of Greece,
is the fact that it re-states the truths of metaphysics in terms of
personality : thus offering a third term, a “living mediator' 'betwe^j
the Unknowable God, the unconditioned Absolute, and the con-
ditioned self. This was the priceless gift which the Wise Men



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 105

received in return for their gold, frankincense, and myrrh. This

* solves the puzzle which all explorers of the supersensible have
sooner or later to face: come si convenne V imago al cerchio , x the
reconciliation of Infinite and intimate, both known and felt, but
neither understood. Such a third term, such a stepping-stone,
was essential if mysticism were ever to attain that active union,
that fullness of life which is its object, and develop from a blind
and egoistic rapture into fruitful and self-forgetting love.

Where non-Christian mystics, as a rule, have made a forced
choice between the two great dogmatic expressions of their
experience, (a) the long pilgrimage towards a transcendent and
unconditioned Absolute, ( b ) the discovery of that Absolute in the
"ground" or spiritual principle of the self; it has been possible
to Christianity, by means of her central doctrine of the Trinity,
to find room for both of them and to exhibit them as that which
they are in fact — the complementary parts of a whole. Even
Dionysius, the godfather of the emanation doctrine, combines
with his scheme of descending hierarchies the dogma of an in-
dwelling God : and no writer is more constantly quoted by Meister
Eckhart, who is generally considered to have preached immanence
in its most extreme and pantheistic form.

Further, the Christian atmosphere is the one in which the

* individual mystic has most often been able to develop his genius
in a sane and fruitful way; and an overwhelming majority of the
great European contemplatives have been Christians of a strong,
impassioned and personal type. This alone would justify us in
regarding it as embodying, at any rate in the West, the substance
of the true tradition: providing the "path of least resistance"
through which that tradition flows. The very heretics of Chris-
tianity have often owed their attraction almost wholly to the
mystical element in their teachings. The Gnostics, the Fraticelli,
the Brethren of the Free Spirit, the Quietists, the Quakers, are

* instances of this. In others, it was to an excessive reliance on
reason when dealing with the suprarational, and a corresponding
absence of trust in mystical intuition that heresy was due. Anus
and Pelagius are heretics of this type.

The greatest mystics, however, have not been heretics but
Catholic saints. In Christianity the "natural mysticism" which,
like "natural religion," is latent in humanity, and at a certain
point of development breaks out in every race, came to itself; and
attributing for the first time true and distinct personality to its
Object, brought into focus the confused and unconditioned God
which Neoplatonism had constructed from the abstract concepts
of philosophy blended with the intuitions of Indian cestatics, and

* Par. xxxiii. 137.



MYSTICISM


106

made the basis of its meditations on the Real. It is a truism that
the chief claim of Christian philosophy on our respect does not
lie in its exclusiveness but in its Catholicity: in the fact that it
finds truth in a hundred different systems, accepts and elucidates
Greek, Jewish, and Indian thought, fuses them in a coherent
theology, and says to speculative thinkers of every time and
place, “Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I
unto you/'

The voice of that Truth which spoke once for all on Calvary,
and there declared the ground plan of the universe, was heard more
or less perfectly by all the great seers, the intuitive leaders of men,
the possessors of genius for the Real. There are few of the Christian
names of God which were not known to the teachers of antiquity.
To the Egyptians He was the Saviour, to the Platonists the Good,
Beautiful and True, to the Stoics the Father and Companion.
The very words of the Fourth Gospel are anticipated by Cleanthes.
Heracleitus knew the Energizing Fire of which St. Bonaventura
and Mechthild of Magdeburg speak. Countless mystics, from St.
Augustine to St. John of the Cross, echo again and again the
language of Plotinus. It is true that the differentia which mark
off Christianity from all other religions are strange and poignant :
but these very differentia make of it the most perfect of settings
for the mystic life. Its note of close intimacy, of direct and personal
contact with a spiritual reality given here and now — its astonishing
combination of splendour and simplicity, of the sacramental and
transcendent — all these things minister to the needs of the
mystical type.

Hence the Christian system, or some colourable imitation of it,
has been found essential by almost all the great mystics of the
West. They adopt its nomenclature, explain their adventures by
the help of its creed, identify their Absolute with the Christian
God. Amongst European mystics the most usually quoted excep-
tion to this rule is Blake ; yet it is curious to notice that the more
inspired his utterance, the more passionately and dogmatically
Christian even this hater of the Churches becomes: —

“We behold

Where Death eternal is put oft eternally. O Lamb
Assume the dark satanic body in the Virgin's womb!

O Lamb divine ! it cannot thee annoy ! O pitying One,

Thy pity is from the ioundation of the world, and thy Redemption
Begins already in Eternity." 1

This is the doctrine of the Incarnation in a nutshell: here
St. Thomas himself would find little to correct. Of the two follow- -
ing extracts from “Jerusalem," the first is but a poet's gloss on

* “Vala," viii 237.



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 107

the Catholic’s cry, “0 felix culpa!” the second is an almost perfect
1 epitome of Christian theology and ethics: —

" If I were pure, never could I taste the sweets
Of the forgiveness of sins. If I were holy, I never could behold the tears
Of Love . . . O Mercy! O divine Humanity!

O Forgiveness, O Pity and Compassion! If I were pure I should never
Have known Thee/'

“Woulclst thou love one who never died
For thee, or ever die for one who had not died for thee ?

And if God dieth not for man, and giveth not Himself
Eternally for Man, Man could not exist, for Man is Love
As God is Love. Every kindness to another is a little death
In the Divine Image, nor can Man exist but by brotherhood.

Whether the dogmas of Christianity be or be not accepted on the
scientific and historical plane, then, those dogmas are necessary
to an adequate description of mystical experience — at least, of
the fully developed dynamic mysticism of the West. We must
therefore be prepared in reading the works of the contemplatives
for much strictly denominational language ; and shall be wise if
we preface the encounter by some consideration of this language,
and of its real meaning for those who use and believe it.

No one needs, I suppose, to be told that the two chief features
of Christian schematic theology are the dogmas of the Trinity and
the Incarnation. They correlate and explain each other: forming
together, for the Christian, the “final key” to the riddle of the
world. The history of practical and institutional Christianity is
the history of the attempt to exhibit their meaning in space and
time. The history of mystical philosophy is the history — still
incomplete — of the demonstration of their meaning in eternity.

Some form of Trinitarian dogma is found to be essential, as a
method of describing observed facts, the moment that mysticism
begins either (a) to analyse its own psychological conditions, or
(&) to philosophize upon its intuitive experience of God. It must,
that is to say, divide the aspects under which it knows the God-
head, if it is to deal with them in a fruitful or comprehensible way.
The Unconditioned One, which is, for Neoplatonic and Catholic
mystic alike, the final object of their quest, cannot of itself satisfy
the deepest instincts of humanity: for man is aware that diversity
in unity is a necessary condition if perfection of character is to be
expressed. Though the idea of unity alone may serve to define the
End — and though the mystics return to it again and again as a
relief from that “heresy of multiplicity” by which they are op-
pressed — it cannot by itself be adequate to the description of
the All.

* “Jerusalem,” lxi. 44 and xcv, 23.



MYSTICISM


io 8

The first question, then, must be — How many of such aspects
are necessary to a satisfactory presentment of the mystic's posi-*
tion? How many faces of Reality does he see? We observe that
his experience involves at least a twofold apprehension, (a) That
Holy Spirit within, that Divine Life by which his own life is
transfused and upheld, and of which he becomes increasingly
conscious as his education proceeds. (b) That Transcendent Spirit
without, the "Absolute," towards union with which the indwelling
and increasingly dominant spirit of love presses the developing
soul. In his ecstasy, it seems to the mystic that these two experi-
ences of God become one. But in the attempt to philosophize on his
experiences he is bound to separate them. Over and over again
the mystics and their critics acknowledge, explicitly or implicitly,
the necessity of this discrimination for human thought.

Thus even the rigid monotheism of Israel and Islam cannot, in
the hands of the Kabalists and the Sufis, get away from an
essential dualism in the mystical experience. According to the
Zohar "God is considered as immanent in all that has been created
or emanated, and yet is transcendent to all." 1 So too the Sufis.
God, they say, is to be contemplated (a) outwardly in the imperfect
beauties of the earth; (b) inwardly, by meditation. Further, since
He is One, and in all things, "to conceive one's self as separate
from God is an error: yet only when one sees oneself as separate
from God, can one reach out to God." 1

Thus Delacroix, speaking purely as a psychologist, and denying
to the mystical revelation — which he attributes exclusively to the
normal content of the subliminal mind — any transcendental
value, writes with entire approval of St. Teresa, that she "set up
externally to herself the definite God of the Bible, at the same time
as she set up within her soul the confused God of the Pseudo-
Areopagite: the One of Neoplatonism. The first is her guarantee
of the orthodoxy of the second, and prevents her from losing her-
self in an indistinction which is non-Christian. The confused God ~
within is highly dangerous. ... St. Teresa knew how to avoid this
peril, and, served by her rich subconscious life, by the exaltation
of her mental images, by her faculty of self-division on the one
hand, on the other by her rare powers of unification , she realized
simultaneously a double state in which the two Gods \i.e., the
two ways of apprehending God, transcendence and immanence]
were guarantees of each other, mutually consolidating and
enriching one another: such is the intellectual vision of the Trinity
in the Seventh Habitation. "3

1 A. E. Waite, “The Doctrine and Literature of the Kabalah,” p. 35. V

* Palmer, “Oriental Mysticism," pt. i, cap. i.

J Delacroix, “£tudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 75. The reference in the last sentence
is to St. Teresa s “Castillo Interior."



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 109

It is probable that St. Teresa, confronted by this astonishing
analysis, would have objected that her Trinity, unlike that of her
eulogist, consisted of three and not two Persons. His language
concerning confused interior and orthodox exterior Gods would
certainly have appeared to her delicate and honest mind both
clumsy and untrue: nor could she have allowed that the Uncon-
ditioned One of the Neoplatonists was an adequate description of
, the strictly personal Divine Majesty, Whom she found enthroned
\ in the inmost sanctuary of the Castle of the Soul. What St. Teresa
really did was to actualize in her own experience, apprehend in
the “ground of her sour' by means of her extraordinarily developed
transcendental perceptions, the three distinct and personal Aspects
of the Godhead which are acknowledged by the Christian religion.

First, the Father, pure transcendent Being, creative Source
and Origin of all that Is : the Unconditioned and Unknowable One
of the Neoplatonists: Who is “neither This nor That" and must be
| conceived, pace M. Delacroix, as utterly transcendent to the
s subject rather than “set up within the soul.”
j Secondly, in the Person of Christ, St. Teresa isolated and dis-
tinguished the Logos or Creative Word ; the expression, or outbirth,
of the Father's thought. Here is the point at which the Divine
Substance first becomes apprehensible by the spirit of man ; that
mediating principle “raised up between heaven and earth” which
is at once the Mirror of Pure Being and the Light of a finite world.
The Second Person of the Christian Trinity is for the believer not
I only the brightness or express image of Deity, but also the personal,
[inexhaustible, and responsive Fount of all life and Object of all
love: Who, because of His taking up (in the Incarnation) of
humanity into the Godhead, has become the Bridge between finite
and infinite, between the individual and the Absolute Life,
and hence in mystic language the “true Bridegroom” of every
human soul.

1,1 Thirdly, she recognized within herself the germ of that Absolute
Life, the indwelling Spirit which is the source of man's transcen-
dental consciousness and his link with the Being of God. That is to
say, the Holy Spirit of Divine Love, the Real Desirous seeking for
the Real Desired, without Whose presence any knowledge of or
communion with God on man's part would be inconceivable.

In the supreme Vision of the Trinity which was vouchsafed to
St. Teresa in the Seventh Habitation of the soul, these three
aspects became fused in One. In the deepest recesses of her spirit,
in that abyss where selfhood ceases to have meaning, and the
^dividual soul touches the life of the All, distinction vanished
and she “saw God in a point.” Such an experience, such an intui-
tion of simple and undifferentiated Godhead — the Unity — beyond



112


MYSTICISM


saw the Trinity of the Divine Nature shining in the phenomenal
as well as in the spiritual world. "He showed me," she says, ‘‘a
little thing, the quantity of an hazel nut, in the palm of my hand;
and it was as round as a ball. I looked thereupon with the eye of
my understanding, and thought, What may this be? And it was
answered generally thus : It is all that is made . ... In this Little
Thing I saw three properties. The first is that God made it, the
second is that God loveth it, the third is that God keepeth it. But
what is to me verily the Maker, the Keeper, and the Lover, I
cannot tell." 1 *

Julian, a simple and deeply human Englishwoman of middle
age dwelling alone in her churchyard cell, might well be called the
poet of the Trinity. She treats this austere and subtle dogma —
of which the mediaeval mystics write with a passion little under-
stood by those who look upon it as "orthodoxy reduced to matlie-^
matics" — with an intimacy and vigour which carry with them a
conviction of her own direct and personal apprehension of the
theological truth she struggles to describe. "I beheld," she says of
a vision which is close to that of St. Teresa in the "Seventh Habita-
tion of the Soul," and more lucidly if less splendidly expressed,
"the working of all the blessed Trinity: in which beholding, I saw
and understood these three properties: the property of the Father-
hood, the property of the Motherhood, and the property of the
Lordhood, in one God. In our Father Almighty we have our keep-
ing and our bliss as anent our natural Substance, 1 which is to us
by our making, without beginning. And in the Second Person in
wit and wisdom we have our keeping as anent our Sense-soul:
our restoring and our saving; for He is our Mother, Brother, and
Saviour. And in our good Lord, the Holy Ghost, we have our
rewarding and our meed-giving for our living and our travail, and
endless overpassing of all that we desire, in His marvellous courtesy j
of His high plenteous grace. For all our life is in three: in the first*
we have our Being, in the second we have our Increasing, and
in the third we have our Fulfilling; the first is Nature, the second
is Mercy, and the third is Grace. 3 . . . The high Might of the Trinity
is our Father, and the deep Wisdom of the Trinity is our Mother,
and the great Love of the Trinity is our Lord: and all this we have
in Nature and in our Substantial Making."4

Again, in a passage of exquisite tenderness, "As verily as God

1 Op. cit., cap. v.

* Substance is here, of course, to be understood in the scholastic sense, as the
reality which underlies merely phenomenal existence. 9

3 I.e., the Second Person of the Christian Trinity is the redemptive, “fount pf
mercy/' the medium by which Grace, the free gift of transcendental life, reao'rvV-
and vivifies human nature: “permeates it," in Eucken's words, “with the Infinite
and Eternal” (“Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,” p. 181).

4 “Revelations of Divine Love/’ cap. lviii.



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY


ii3

£s our Father, so verily God is our Mother; and that shewed He in
^all [her revelations] and especially in these sweet words where He
saith: I it am. That is to say, 1 it am, the Might and the Goodness
of the Fatherhood: I it am, the Wisdom of the Motherhood; I it am,
the Light and the Grace that is all blessed Love. I it am, the Trinity, I
it am, the Unity : I am the sovereign Goodness of all manner of
things. 1 am that maketh thee to love • 1 am that maketh thee to long:
I it am, the etidless fulfilling of all true desires
So Christopher Hervey —

“The whole world round is not enough to fill
The heart's three corners, but it craveth still.

Only the Trinity that made it can
Suffice the vast triangled heart of Man.”*

Any attempt towards a definition of God which does not account
for and acknowledge these three aspects is found in experience to
be incomplete. They provide objectives for the heart, the intellect,
and the will : for they offer to the Self material for its highest love,
its deepest thought, its act of supreme volition. Under the familiar
Platonic terms of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, they represent
the divine source and end of Ethics, Science, and Art, the three
supreme activities of man. Thus the ideals of artist, student, and
1 philanthropist, who all seek under different modes the same
reality, are gathered up in the mystic's One; as the pilgrimage of
the three kings ended in the finding of one Star.

“What is God?” says St. Bernard. “Length, breadth, height,
and depth. 'What/ you say, 'you do after all profess to believe
in the fourfold Godhead which was an abomination to you?’ Not
in the least. . . . God is designated One to suit our comprehension,
not to describe his character. His character is capable of division, He
Himself is not. The words are different, the paths are many, but one
thing is signified; the paths lead to one Person. ”3
5 All possible ways of conceiving this One Person in His living
richness are found in the end to range themselves under three
heads. He is “above all and through all and in you all , ”4 said
St. Paul, anticipating the Councils in a flash of mystic intuition,
and giving to the infant Church the shortest and most perfect
definition of its Triune God. Being, which is above all, manifests
itself as Becoming; as the dynamic omnipresent Word of Life. The
Divine Love immanent in the heart and in the world comes forth
from, and returns to, the Absolute One. “Thou, my God, who art
1 Op. cit., cap. lix.

» “The School of the Heart,” Epigram x. This book, which is a free transla-
tion of the “Scola Cordis” of Benedict Haeften (lC 35), is often, but wrongly,
attributed to Francis Quarles.

s “De Consideratione,” bk. v. cap. viii,

« Ephesians iv. 6,



MYSTICISM


114

Love/' says Nicolas of Cusa, “art Love that loveth, and Lovi
that is loveable, and Love that is the bond between these twain.” 1
Thus is completed "the Eternal Circle from Goodness, through
Goodness, to Goodness." It is true that to these fundamental
aspects of the perceived Godhead — that Being, Becoming, and
Desire whereto tlie worlds keep time — the mystics have given many
and various names; for they have something of the freedom of
true intimates in treating of the Reality which they love. In
particular, those symbols of the Absolute which are drawn from
the great and formless forces of the universe, rather than from
the orthodox but necessarily anthropomorphic imagery of human
relationship, have always appealed to them. Their intense appre-
hension of Spirit seems to find freer and more adequate expres-
sion in such terms, than in those in which the notion of space is
involved, or which suggest a concrete picture to the mind. Though
they know as well as the philosophers that “there must always
be something symbolic in our way of expressing the spiritual life,"
since “that unfathomable infinite whose spiritual character is
first recognized in our human experience, can never reveal itself
fully and freely under the limitations of our earthly existence”;*
yet they ever seek, like the artists they are, some new and vital
image which is not yet part of the debased currency of formal
religion, and conserves its original power of stinging the imagina-
tion to more vivid life.

Thus “the Kingdom of Heaven,” says Law, “stands in this
threefold life, where three are one, because it is a manifestation
of the Deity, which is Three and One; the Father bos His distinct
manifestation in the Fire, which is always generating the Light;
the Son has His distinct manifestation in the Light, which is
always generated from the Fire; the Holy Ghost has His mani-
festation in the Spirit, that always proceeds from both, and is
always united with them. It is this eternal unbeginning Trinity
in Unity of Fire, Light, and Spirit, that constitutes Eternal Nature,
the Kingdom of Heaven, the heavenly Jerusalem, the Divine Life,
the Beatific Visibility, the majestic Glory and Presence of God.
Through this Kingdom of Heaven, or Eternal Nature, is the
invisible God, the incomprehensible Trinity, eternally breaking
forth and manifesting itself in a boundless height and depth of
blissful wonders, opening and displaying itself to all its creatures
as in an infinite variation and endless multiplicity of its powers,
beauties, joys, and glories.”3

1 **De Visione Dei,” cap. xvii.

• Eucken, ‘*Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p.131. <

s “An Appeal to All who Doubt” (“Liberal and Mystical Writings of William
Law,” p. 54). Law’s symbols are here borrowed from the system of his master,
Jacob Boehme. (See the “De Signatura Rerum” of Boehme, cap. xiv.)



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 1x5

Perhaps an easier, better, more beautiful example of these
abstract symbols of the Trinity than Law’s Fire, Light, and Spirit
is that of light, Life, and Love: a tlireefoid picture of the Real
which is constantly dwelt upon and elaborated by the Christian
mystics. Transcendent Light, intangible but unescapeabkj, ever
emanating Its splendour through the Universe: indwelling, un-
resting, and energizing Life: desirous and directive Love- -these
are cardinal aspects of Reality to which they return again and
again in their efforts to find words which will express something of
the inexpressible truth.

(a) Light, ineffable and uncreated, the perfect symbol of pure
undifferentiated Being: above the intellect, as St. Augustine
reminds us, but known to him who loves . 1 This Uncreated Light
is the “deep yet dazzling darkness” of the Dionysian school,
“dark from its surpassing brightness ... as the shining of the sun
on his course is as darkness to weak eyes.** It is St. Hiidegarde’s
lux vivens , Dante’s somma lace, wherein he saw multiplicity in
unity, the ingathered leaves of all the -universes: the Eternal
Father, or Fount of Things. “For well we know," says Ruysbroeek,
“that the bosom of the Father is our ground and origin, wherein
< ur life and being is begun. "4

(b) Liie, the Son, hidden Steersman of the Universe; the Logos,
Fire, or cosmic Soul of Things. This out-birth or Concept of the
Father’s Mind, which He possesses within 'Himself, as Battista
Vernazza was told in her ecstasy , 5 is that Word of Creation which,
since It is alive and infinite, no formula can contain: the Word
eternally “spoken" or generated by the Transcendent Light. “This
is why," says Ruysbroeek again, “all that lives in the Father un-
manifested in the Unity, is also in the Son actively poured forth
in manifestation ." 6 This life, then, is the flawless expression or
character of the Father, Sapientia Patris. It is at once the personal
and adorable comrade of the mystic’s adventure and the inmost
principle, the sustaining power, of a dynamic universe; for that
which intellect defines as the Logos or Creative Spirit, contem-
plative love knows as Wonderful, Counsellor, and Prince of Peace.

Since Christ, for the Christian philosopher, is Divine Life Itself
— the drama of Christianity expressing this fact and its implica-
tions “in a point" — it follows that His active spirit is to be dis-
cerned, not symbolically, but in the most veritable sense, in the
ecstatic and abounding life of the world. In the rapturous vitality

1 Aug. Canf., bk. vii. cap. x.

* Tauler, 3rd Instruction (‘The Inner Way/’ p. 324).

3 Pdr. xxxiii. 67, 85.

« “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarnm,” 1 . iii. cap. iii.

5 Von Hugel, “The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. p. 357.

* Ruysbroeek, op.jcit, r loc. ci 4 .



ii6 MYSTICISM

of the birds, in their splendid glancing flight: in the swelling cj|
buds and the sacrificial beauty of the flowers: in the great an*
solemn rhythms of the sea — there is somewhat of Bethlehem in
all these things, somewhat too of Calvary in their self-giving pains.
It was this re-discovery of Nature’s Christliness which Blake
desired so passionately when he sang —

“I will not cease from mental fight,

Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,

Till we have built Jerusalem

In England's green and pleasant land.*’ ^

Here then it is, on this pinnacle of faith, at the utmost boundaries
of human speech, that mystical theology suddenly shows herself —
not as the puzzle-headed constructor of impossible creeds, but
as accepting and transmuting to a more radiant life those two
profound but apparently contradictory metaphysical definitions
of Reality which we have already discussed . 1 Eternal Becoming,
God immanent and dynamic, striving with and in His world: the
unresting “flux of things" of Heracleitus, the crying aloud of that
Word "which is through all things everlastingly" — the evolutionary
world-process beloved of modern philosophers — is here placed
once for all in true relation with pure transcendent and unmoved
Being; the Absolute One of Xenophanes and the Platonists. This,
Absolute is discerned by mystic intuition as the "End of Unity"
in whom all diversities must cease ; 2 the Ocean to which that
ceaseless and painful Becoming, that unresting river of life, in
which we are immersed, tends to return: the Son going to the
Father.

(c) Love, the principle of attraction, which seems to partake at
once of the transcendental and the created worlds. If we consider
the Father as Supreme Subject — "origin," as Aquinas says, "of
the entire procession of Deity "3 — and the Son or generated
Logos as the Object of His thought, in whom, says Ruysbroeck,|
"He contemplates Himself and all things in an eternal Now";^
then this personal Spirit of Love, il desiro e il velle , represents the
relation between the two, and constitutes the very character of
God. "The heavenly Father," says Ruysbroeck, "as a living
Ground, with all that lives in Him, is actively turned towards His
Son as to His own Eternal Wisdom. And that same Wisdom, with
all that lives in it, is actively turned back towards the Father, that
is towards that very ground from which it comes forth. And of
this meeting is born the third Person, between the Father and the'

• Supra, Cap. IT.

• Tauler, op. cit., loc. cit .

s “Summa Contra Gentiles/' 1. iv. cap. xxvi.

• “De Ornatu Spiritaiium Nuptiarum," 1. ii. cap. iv.



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY


117

^on, that is, the Holy Spirit, their mutual Love." 1 Proceeding,
^according to Christian doctrine, from Light and Life, the Father
and Son — implicit, that is, in both the Absolute Source and
dynamic flux of things — this divine spirit of desire is found
enshrined in our very selfhood ; and is the agent by which that
selfhood is merged in the Absolute Self. "My love is my weight,"
said St. Augustine. 2 * * 5 It is the spiritual equivalent of that gravita-
tion which draws all things to their place. Thus Bernard Holland
says in his Introduction to Boehme's "Dialogues," "In a deep
<sense, the desire of the Spark of Life in the Soul to return to its
' Original Source is part of the longing desire of the universal Life
for its own heart or centre. Of this longing, the universal attraction,
striving against resistance, towards a universal centre, proved to
govern the phenomenal or physical world, is but the outer sheath
and visible working." Again, "Desire is everything in Nature;
does everything. Heaven is Nature filled with divine Life attracted
by Desire. "3

"The best masters say," says Eckhart, "that the love where-
with we love is the Holy Spirit . 4 Some deny it. But this is always
true : all those motives by which we are moved to love, in these is
nothing else than the Holy Spirit." 5

"God wills," says Ruysbroeck, gathering these scattered
f symbols to unity again, "that we should come forth from ourselves
in this Eternal Light ; that we should reunite ourselves in a super-
natural manner with that image which is our true Life, and that
we should possess it with Him actively and fruitively in eternal
blessedness . . . this going forth of the contemplative is also in
Love: for by fruitive love he overpasses his created being and
finds and tastes the riches and delights which are God Himself, and
which He causes to pour forth without ceasing in the most secret
chamber of the soul, at that place where it is most like unto the
nobility of God." 6

f Here only, in the innermost sanctuary of being, the soul's "last
habitation," as St. Teresa said, is the truth which these symbols
express truly known: for "as to how the Trinity is one and the
Trinity in the Unity of the nature is one, whilst nevertheless the
Trinity comes forth from the Unity, this cannot be expressed in

1 Op. cit., 1. ii. cap. xxxvii. » Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. ix.

3 Introduction to “Three Dialogues of the Supersensual Life," p. xxx.

4 The doctrine is found in St. Augustine, and is frequently reproduced by the
mediaeval mystics. Eckhart is perhaps here quoting St. Thomas Aquinas, a
usual source of his more orthodox utterances. Compare “Summa Contra Gentiles,"

1. iv. cap. xxiii: “Since the Holy Ghost proceeds as the love wherewith God loves
^Iimself, and since God loves with the same love Himself and other beings for the
sake of His own goodness, it is clear that the love wherewith God loves us belongs
to the Holy Ghost. In like manner also the love wherewith we love God."

5 Pred. xii. 4 “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," 1. iii. cap. iii.



MYSTICISM


118

words,” says Suso, "owing to the simplicity of that deep abys^
Hither it is, into this intelligible where that the spirit, spiritualizir.
itself, soars up; now flying in the measureless heights, now swim-
ming in the soundless deeps, of the sublime marvels of the
Godl lead l” 1

Mystical philosophy, then, has availed itself gladly of the
doctrine of the Trinity in expressing its vision of the nature of
that Absolute which is found, by those who attain the deep Abyss
of the Godhead, to be essentially One. But it is by the complemen-
tary Christian dogma of the Incarnation that it has best been able
to describe and explain the nature of the inward and personal
mystic experience. The Incarnation, which is for traditional
Christianity synonymous with the historical birth and earthly
life of Christ, is for mystics of a certain type, not only this
but also a perpetual Cosmic and personal process. It is an ever-
lasting bringing forth, in the universe and also in the individual
ascending soul, of the divine and perfect Life, the pure character
of God, of which the one historical life dramatized the essential
constituents. Hence the soul, like the physical embryo, resumes in
its upward progress the spiritual life-history of the race. "The one
secret, the greatest of all," says Patmore, is "the doctrine of the
Incarnation, regarded not as an historical event which occurred
two thousand years ago, but as an event which is renewed in thtjj
body of every one who is in the way to the fulfilment of his
original destiny.”*

We have seen that for mystical theology the Second Person
of the Trinity is the Wisdom of the Father, the Word of Life.
The fullness of this Word could therefore only be communicated
to the human consciousness by a Life. In the Incarnation this
Logos, this divine character of Reality, penetrated the illusions of
the sensual world — in other words, the illusions of all the selves
whose ideas compose that world — and "saved” it by this infusion
of truth. A divine, suffering, self-sacrificing Personality was theij
shown as the sacred heart of a living, striving universe : and for
once the Absolute was exhibited in the terms of finite human
existence. Some such event as this breaking through of the divine
and archetypal life into the temporal world is perceived by the
mystical philosopher to be a necessity, if man was ever to see in
terms of life that greatness of life to which he belongs : learn to
transcend the world of sense, and rebuild his life upon the levels
of reality. "For Thou art,” says Nicolas of Cusa, "the Word of God
humanified, and Thou art man deified”3 Thus it is that the

» Suso, Leben, cap. lvi. **

• “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower." “Homo," xix.

3 "De Viaione Dei," cap. xxiu.



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY 119

Catholic priest in the Christmas Mass gives thanks, not for the
setting in hand of any commercial process of redemption, but for
a revelation of reality, “Quia per incamati Verbi mysterium,
nova mentis nostrae oculis lux tuae claritatis infulsit: ut dum
visibiliter Deum cognoscimus, per liunc in invisibilium amorem
rapiamur." The essence of mystical Christianity seems to be
summed up in these lovely words. 1 * * 4

“The Son of God, the Eternal Word in the Father, who is the
glance, or brightness, and the power of the light eternity/' says
fBoehme, “must become man and be born in you, if you will know
God: otherwise you are in the dark stable and go about groping."*
“The Word," says Ruysbroeck finely, “is no other than See. And
this is the coming forth and the birth of the Son of the Eternal
Light, in Whom all blessedness is seen and known. "3 Once at any
rate, they say in effect, the measure of that which it was possible
for the Spirit of Life to do and for living creatures to be, was filled
to the brim. By this event, ail were assured that the ladder of
Creation was made whole; in this hypostatic union, the breach
between appearance and reality, between God and man, was
healed. The Bridge so made — to use St. Catherine of Siena's
allegory again — is eternal, since it was “laid before the foundation
of the world" in the “Eternal Now." Thus the voice of the Father
l says to her in that vision, “I also wish thee to look at the Bridge
of My only-begotten Son, and see the greatness thereof, for it
reaches from Heaven to earth; that is, that the earth of your
humanity is joined to the greatness of the Deity thereby. I say,
then, that this Bridge reaches from Heaven to earth, and consti-
tutes the union which I have made with man. ... So the height of
the Divinity, humbled to the earth, and joined with your humanity,
made the Bridge and reformed the road. Why was this done?
In order that man might come to his true happiness with the
angels. And observe that it is not enough, in order that you should
have life, that My son should have made you this Bridge, unless
you walk thereon."4 “Our high Father God Almighty, which is
Being," says Lady Julian, “He knew and loved us from afore any
time. Of which knowing, in His marvellous deep charity, and the
foreseeing counsel of all the blessed Trinity, He willed that the
Second Person should become our Mother."5

It is of course this assertion of the quickening communication

1 ‘‘Because by the mystery of the Incarnate Word the new light of Thy bright-
ness hath shone upon the eyes of our mind : that we, knowing God seen of the
eyes, by Him may be snatched up into the love of that which eye hath not seen' 1
rjMissale Homan um. Praefatio Solemnis de Nativitate).

1 “The Threefold Life of Man/' cap. iii. § 31.

i Ruysbroeck, op. cit., 1 . iii. cap. i.

4 Dialogo, cap. xxii. 5 “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lix.



120


MYSTICISM


of grace to nature, of God to man— an influx of ultimate reality ^
possible of assimilation by all — which constitutes the strength ol
the Christian religion. Instead of the stony diet of the philosophers,
it offers to the self hungry for the Absolute that Pants Angelorttm,
the vivifying principle of the world. That is to say, it gives concrete
and experimental knowledge of a supreme Personality — absorp-
tion into His mystical body — instead of the artificial conviction
produced by concentration on an idea. It knits up the universe ;
shows the phenomenal pierced in all directions by the real, the
natural as the vehicle of the supernatural. It provides a solid basist
for mysticism, a basis which is at once metaphysical and psycho-
logical: and shows that state towards which the world’s deepest
minds have always instinctively aspired, as a part of the cosmic
return through Christ to God.

“Quivi e la sapienza e la possanza

ch’ aprl le s trade intra il cielo e la terra
onde fu gici si lunga disianza.”*

This is what the Christian mystics mean to express when they
declare over and over again that the return to the Divine Substance,
the Absolute, which is the end of the soul’s ascent, can only be
made through the humanity of Christ. The Son, the Word, is the
character of the Father: that in which the Ineffable Godhead^
knows Himself, as we only know ourselves in our own characters.
He is thus a double link: the means of God’s self-consciousness,
the means of man's consciousness of God. How then, asks mystic
theology, could such a link complete its attachments without some
such process as that which the Incarnation dramatized in time and
space? The Principle of Life is also the Principle of Restitution;
by which the imperfect and broken life of sense is mended and
transformed into the perfect life of spirit. Hence the title of
Repairer applied by Boehme to the Second Person of the Trinity.

In the last resort, the doctrine of the Incarnation is the onlj |
safeguard of the mystics against the pantheism to which they
always tend. The Unconditioned Absolute, so soon as it alone
becomes the object of their contemplation, is apt to be conceived
merely as Divine Essence; the idea of Personality evaporates.
The union of the soul with God is then thought of in terms of
absorption. The distinction between Creator and creature is
obliterated and loving communion is at an end. This is probably
the reason why many of the greatest contemplatives — Suso and
St. Teresa are cases in point — have found that deliberate medita- j
tion upon the humanity of Christ, difficult and uncongenial

1 Par. xxiii. 37. "Here is the Wisdom and the Power which opened the ways
betwixt heaven and earth, for which there erst had been so long a yearning."



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY


121


this concrete devotion sometimes is to the mystical temperament,
was a necessity if they were to retain a healthy and well-balanced
inner life.

Further, these mystics see in the historic life of Christ an epi-
tome — or if you will, an exhibition — of the essentials of all spiritual
life. There they see dramatized not only the cosmic process of the
Divine Wisdom, but also the inward experience of every soul on
her way to union with that Absolute “to which the whole Creation
moves. ” This is why the expressions which they use to describe
the evolution of the mystical consciousness from the birth of the
divine in the spark of the soul to its final unification with the
Absolute Life are so constantly chosen from the Drama of Faith.
In this drama they see described under veils the necessary adven-
tures of the spirit. Its obscure and humble birth, its education in
poverty, its temptation, mortification and solitude, its “illuminated
life” of service and contemplation, the desolation of that “dark
night of the soul” in which it seems abandoned by the Divine:
the painful death of the self, its resurrection to the glorified
existence of the Unitive Way, its final reabsorplion in its Source
— all these, they say, were lived once in a supreme degree in the
flesh. Moreover, the degree of closeness with which the individual
experience adheres to this Pattern is always taken by them as a
standard of the healthiness, ardour, and success of its transcen-
dental activities.

“Apparve in questa forma
Per dare a noi la norma.**

sang Jacopone da Todi. “And he who vainly thinketh otherwise,”
says the “Theologia Germanica” with uncompromising vigour,
“is deceived. And he who saith otherwise, lieth.” 1

Those to whom such a parallel seems artificial should remember
that according to the doctrine of mysticism that drama of the
self-limitation and self-sacrifice of the Absolute Life, which was
once played out in the phenomenal world — forced, as it were,
upon the consciousness of dim-eyed men — is eternally going for-
ward upon the plane of reality. To them the Cross of Calvary is
implicit in the Rose of the World. The law of this Infinite Life,
which was in the Incarnation expressing Its own nature in human
terms, must then also be the law of the finite life; in so far as that
life aspires to transcend individual limitations, rise to freedom,
and attain union with Infinity. It is this governing idea which
justifies the apparently fanciful allegorizations of Christian
history which swarm in the works of the mystics.

To exhibit these allegorizations in detail would be tedious. All

* “TlaeoJogia Germanica," cap. xviii.



122


MYSTICISM


tlia t is necessary is that the principle underlying them should be
understood. I give, then, but one example : that which is referred
by mystical writers to the Nativity, and concerns the eternal
Birth or Generation of the Son or Divine Word.

This Birth is in its first, or cosmic sense, the welling forth of the
Spirit of Life from the Divine Abyss of the unconditioned Godhead.
“From our proper Ground, that is to say from the Father and all
that which lives in Him, there shines/' says Ruysbroeck, “an
eternal Ray, the which is the Birth of the Son." 1 It is of this per-
petual generation of the Word that Meister Eckhart speaks, when
he says in his Christmas sermon, “We are celebrating the feast of
the Eternal Birth which God the Father has borne and never
ceases to bear in all Eternity : whilst this birth also comes to pass
in Time and in human nature. Saint Augustine says this Birth
is ever taking place." At this point, with that strong practical
instinct which is characteristic of the mystics, Eckhart turns
abruptly from speculation to immediate experience, and con-
tinues, “But if it takes not place in me, what avails it? Every-
thing lies in this, that it should take place in me." 3 Here in a few
words the two-fold character of this Mystic Birth is exhibited.
The interest is suddenly deflected from its cosmic to its personal
aspect; and the individual is reminded that in him, no less than
in the Archetypal Universe, real life must be born if real life is to
be lived. “When the soul brings forth the Son," says Eckhart in
another place, “it is happier than Mary. "3

Since the soul, according to mystic principles, can only perceive
Reality in proportion as she is real, know God by becoming God-
like, it is clear that this birth is the initial necessity. The true and
definitely directed mystical life does and must open with that
most actual, though indescribable phenomenon, the coming forth
into consciousness of man's deeper, spiritual self, which ascetical
and mystical writers of all ages have agreed to call Regeneration
or Re-birth. Nothing that is within him is able of its own power to
achieve this. It must be evoked by an energy, a quickening Spirit,
which comes from beyond the soul, and “secretly initiates what
He openly crowns."*

1 “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1 . iii. cap. v. The extreme antiquity
of this idea is illustrated by the Catholic practice, dating from Patristic times, of
celebrating three Masses on Christmas Day. Of these the first, at midnight, com-
memorates the Eternal Generation of the Son; the second, at dawn, Ilis incar-
nation upon earth; the third His birth in the heart of man. Compare the Roman
Missal: also Kellner, “Heortology” (English translation, London, 1908), p. 156.

* Eckhart, Pred. i., “Mystische Schriften,” p. 13. Compare Tauler, Sermon
on the Nativity of Our Lady (‘‘The Inner Way,” p. 167).

3 This idea of re-birth is probably of Oriental origin. It can be traced back to
Egypt, being found in the Hermetic writings of the third century, b.c. See Petrie,
“Personal Religion in Egypt before Christianity,” p. 167.

♦ F. von Hugel. “The Life of Prayer,” p. 24.



MYSTICISM AND THEOLOGY


123

We nave already considered 1 the New Birth in its purely
psychological aspect, as the emergence of the transcendental
sense. Here its more profound and mystical side is exhibited.
By a process which may indifferently be described as the birth
of something new or the coming forth of something which has
slept — since both these phrases are but metaphors for another
and more secret operation — the eye is opened on Eternity; the
self, abruptly made aware of Reality, comes forth from the cave
of illusion like a child from the womb and begins to live upon the
supersensual plane. Then she feels in her inmost part a new
presence, a new consciousness — it were hardly an exaggeration
to say a new Person— weak, demanding nurture, clearly destined
to pass through many phases of development before its maturity
is reached ; yet of so strange a nature, that in comparison with its
environment she may well regard it as Divine.

'This change, this upsetting, is called re-birth. To be born
simply means to enter into a world in which the senses dominate,
in which wisdom and love languish in the bonds of individuality.
To be re-born means to return to a world where the spirit of wisdom
and love governs and animal-man obeys.”* So Eckartshausen.
It means, says Jane Lead, "the bringing forth of a new-created
Godlike similitude in the soul. ”3 He is brought forth, says Eck-
artshausen again, in the stable previously inhabited by the ox
of passion and the ass of prejudice. 4 His mother, says Boehme,
is the Virgin Sophia, the Divine Wisdom, or Mirror of the Being
of God. With the emergence of this new factor into the conscious
field — this spiritual birth — the mystic life begins : as the Christian
epoch began with the emergence of Divine Spirit in the flesh.
Paradise, says Boehme, is still in the world, but man is not in
Paradise unless he be born again. In that case, he stands therein
in the New Birth/ and tastes here and now that Eternal Life for
which he has been made.

Here then are some characteristics of the map which the
Christian mystics are most inclined to use. There are, of course,
other great landmarks upon it : and these we shall meet as we follow
in detail the voyages of the questing soul. One warning, however,
must be given to amateur geographers before we go on. Like all
other maps, this one at its best can but represent by harsh outline
and conventional colour the living earth which those travellers
trod and the mysterious seas on which they sailed. It is a deliber-
ately schematic representation of Reality, a flat and sometimes
arid symbol of great landscapes, rushing rivers, awful peaks:


1 Supra, p. 53. a “The Cloud upon the Sanctuary/' p. 77.

' “The Enochian Walks with God," p. 3. ♦ Op. cit., p. 81.

5 “De Signature Rerum/' via. 47.



MYSTICISM


124

dangerous unless these its limitations be always kept in mind.
The boy who defined Canada as “very pink” was not much further
off the track than those who would limit the Adorable Trinity
to the definitions of the “Athanasian” Creed; however useful
that chart may be, and is, within the boundaries imposed by
its form.

Further, all such maps, and we who treat of them, can but set
down in cold blood and with a dreadful pretence of precision,
matters which the true explorers of Eternity were only able to
apprehend in the ardours of such a passion, in the transports of
such a union as we, poor finite slaves of our frittered emotions,
could hardly look upon and live. "If you would truly know how
these things come to pass,” says St. Bonaventura, in a passage
which all students of theology should ever keep in mind, “ask it
of grace, not of doctrine ; of desire, not of intellect ; of the ardours
of prayer, not of the teachings of the schools; of the Bridegroom,
not of the Master; of God, not of man; of the darkness, not of the
day; not of illumination, but of that Fire which enfiames all and
wraps us in God with great sweetness and most ardent love. The
which Fire most truly is God, and the hearth thereof is in
Jerusalem .” 1

I “De Itiuerario Mentis in Deo, M cap. vii.



CHAPTER VI

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM


^ Mystical Symbols — Their use and necessity — Their immense variety — Three
groups of Symbols — (i) Divine Transcendence and the idea of pilgrimage—
[2) Mutual Desire and symbols of love — (3) Divine Immanence, and s)mbols of
.ransmutation — (1) Symbols of Pilgrimage — Bunyan — The Sufi Pilgrim — The
Seven Valleys of 'Attar — Dante — (2} Mutual Desire — “The Hymn of Jesus" — “The
(lound of Heaven" — The “Following Love" — Symbols of Love — the “Spiritual
Marriage" — St. Bernard — St. Teresa — Richard of St. Victor's Four Degrees of
\rdent Love — (3) Symbols of Transmutation — the Spiritual Alchemists — the
Philosopher's Stone — the material of Alchemy — Jacob Boehme — “Salt, Sulphur,
md Mercury" — the Mystical transmutation — the Magnum Opus — “Hunting the
Greene Lyon"— The Red Dragon.

I N our study of theology we saw the Christian mystic adopting,
as chart and pilot book of his voyages and adventures, the
scheme of faith, and diagram of the spiritual world, which
is accepted by ordinary Christian men. We saw that he found in
*t a depth and richness of content which the conventional believer
n that theology, the “good churchman," seldom suspects: and
that which is true of the Christian mystic is also true in its measure,
md as regards their respective theologies, of the Pagan, the
Mahommedan and the Buddhist.

But since the spiritual adventures of the mystic are not those
if ordinary men, it will follow that this map, though always true
for him, is not complete. He can press forward to countries which
mmystical piety must mark as unexplored, Pushing out from
larbour to “the vast and stormy sea of the divine," he can take
foundings, and mark dangers the existence of which such piety
lever needs to prove. Hence it is not strange that certain maps,
artistic representations or symbolic schemes, should have come
into being which describe or suggest the special experiences of the
mystical consciousness, and the doctrines to which these experi-
ences have given birth. Many of these maps have an uncouth,
even an impious appearance in the eyes of those unacquainted with •
the facts which they attempt to translate: as the charts of the
ieep-sea sailor seem ugly and unintelligible things to those who
lave never been out of sight of land. Others — and these the most
leasing, most easily understood — have already been made
; amiliar, perhaps tiresomely familiar, to us by the poets; who,
ntuitively recognizing their suggestive qualities, their links with



126


MYSTICISM


truth, have borrowed and adapted them to their own busing
of translating Reality into terms of rhythm and speech. Ulft-r
matcly, however, they owe their origin to the mystics, or to that
mystical sense which is innate in all true poets: and in the knt
resort it is the mystic's kingdom, and the mystic's experience,
which they affect to describe.

These special mystical diagrams, these symbolic and artistic
descriptions of man's inward history — his secret adventures with
God — are almost endless in their variety : since in each we have a
picture of the country of the soul seen through a different temper^
ment. To describe all would be to analyse the whole field ot
mystical literature, and indeed much other literature as well; to
epitomize in fact all that has been dreamed and written concern-
ing the so-called “inner life" — a dreary and a lengthy task. But
the majority of them, I think, express a comparatively small
number of essential doctrines or fundamental ways of seeing
things; and as regards their imagery, they fall into three great
classes, representative of the three principal ways in which man's
spiritual consciousness reacts to the touch of Reality, the three
primary if paradoxical facts of which that consciousness must be
aware. Hence a consideration of mystic symbols drawn from each
of these groups may give us a key with which to unlock some at
least of the verbal riddles of the individual adventurer. ^

Thanks to the spatial imagery inseparable from human thinking
and human expression, no direct description of spiritual experience
is or can be possible to man. It must always be symbolic, allusive,
oblique: always suggest, but never tell, the truth: and in this
respect there is not much to choose between the fluid and artistic
language of vision and the arid technicalities of philosophy. In
another respect, however, there is a great deal to choose between
them: and here the visionary, not the philosopher, receives the
palm. The greater the suggestive quality of the symbol used, the
more answering emotion it evokes in those to whom it is addressed
the more truth it will convey. A good symbolism, therefore, wil
be more than mere diagram or mere allegory: it will use to the
utmost the resources of beauty and of passion, will bring with ii
hints of mystery and wonder, bewitch with dreamy periods th<
mind to which it is addressed. Its appeal will not be to the cleve:
brain, but to the desirous heart, the intuitive sense, of man.

The three great classes of symbols which I propose to consider
appeal to three deep cravings of the self, three great expression!
of man's restlessness, which only mystic truth can fully satisfy
The first is the craving which makes him a pilgrim and wanderer
It is the longing to go out from his normal world in search of '<
lost home, a "better country”; an Eldorado, a Sarras, a Heavenlj



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 127

^^on. The next is that craving of heart for heart, of the soul for
its perfect mate, which makes him a lover. The third is the craving
for inward purity and perfection, which makes him an ascetic,
arid in the last resort a saint.

These three cravings, I think, answer to three ways in which
mystics of different temperaments attack the problem of the
Absolute: three different formulae under which their transcendence
of the sense-world can be described. In describing this transcen-
dence, and the special adventures involved in it, they are describ-
ing a change from the state of ordinary men, in touch with the
sense-world, responding to its rhythms, to the state of spiritual
consciousness in which, as they say, they are “in union" with
Divine Reality, with God. Whatever be the theological creed of
*he mystic, he never varies in declaring this close, definite, and
actual intimacy to be the end of his quest. “Mark me like the tulip
with Thine own streaks," says the Sufi. 1 “I would fain be to the
Eternal Goodness what his own hand is to a man," says the
German contemplative. 3 “My me is God, nor do I know my self-
hood save in Him," says the Italian saint.3

But, since this Absolute God is for him substance, ground or
underlying Reality of all that is: present yet absent, near yet far:
lie is already as truly immanent in the human soul as in the
fylni verse. The seeker for the Real may therefore objectify his
bluest in two apparently contradictory, yet really mutually
explanatory ways. First he may see it as an outgoing journey from
the world of illusion to the real or transcendental world : a leaving
of the visible for the invisible. Secondly, it may appear to him
as an inward alteration, remaking or regeneration, by which his
personality or character is so changed as to be able to enter into
communion with that Fontal Being which he loves and desires;
6 united with and dominated by the indwelling God who is the
fount of his spiritual life. In the first case, the objective idea “God"
;>the pivot of his symbolism: the Blazing Star, or Magnet of the
Universe which he has seen far off, and seeing, has worshipped and
desired. In the second case, the emphasis falls on the subjective
idea “Sanctity," with its accompanying consciousness of a dis-
harmony to be abolished. The Mystic Way will then be described,
not as a journey, but as an alteration ol personality, the trans-
muting of “earthly" into “heavenly" man. Plainly these two
aspects are obverse and reverse of one whole. They represent that
mighty pair of opposites, Infinite and Finite, God and Self, which
fit is the business of mysticism to carry up into a higher synthesis.

> Jami, “Joseph and Zulaikha. The Poet's Prayer."

* “Theologia Germanica,” cap. x.

9 St. Catherine of Genoa, "Vita e Dottrina," cap. xiv.



128 MYSTICISM

Whether the process be considered as outward search or inw^
change, its object and its end are the same. Man enters into thafl
Order of Reality for which he was made, and which is indeed tlw
inciting cause of his pilgrimage and his purification : for howeve
great the demand on the soul's own effort may be, the initiative
always lies with the living Divine World itself. Man's small
desire is evoked, met, and fulfilled by the Divine Desire, his “separ
ated will" or life becomes one with the great Life of the All.

From what has been said in the last chapter, it will be clear tha
the symbolism of outward search and of inward change will
adopted respectively by the two groups of selves whose experieno
of "union with the Divine" leans (i) to the Transcendent
external, (2) to the Immanent or internal way of apprehendinj
Reality. A third or intermediate group of images will be necessar
to express the experience of those to whom mystic feeling — -tin
satisfaction of love — is the supreme factor in the mystic life
According, then, to whether man's instinct prompts him to de
scribe the Absolute Reality which he knows and craves for as
Place, a Person, or a State — all three of course but partial am
inadequate translations of the one Indescribable Truth — so wi]
he tend to adopt a symbolism of one or other of these three types

A. Those who conceive the Perfect as a beatific vision exterio
to them and very far off, who find in the doctrine of Emanation
something which answers to their inward experience, will feel th
process of their entrance into reality to be a quest, an arduou
journey from the material to the spiritual world. They move awa
from, rather than transmute to another form, the life of sens(
The ecstasies of such mystics will answer to the root-meaning c
that much perverted word, as a "standing out" from themselves
a flight to happier countries far away. For them, the soul is out
ward bound towards its home.

B. Those for whom mysticism is above all things an intimate an
personal relation, the satisfaction of a deep desire — who can sr.
with Gertrude More, "never was there or can there be imagine
such a love, as is between an humble soul and Thee" — will fa
back upon imagery drawn largely from the language of earthl
passion. Since the Christian religion insists upon the persons
aspect of the Godhead, and provides in Christ an object of sue
intimacy, devotion and desire, an enormous number of Christia
mystics inevitably describe their experiences under symbolism c
this kind.

C. Those who are conscious rather of the Divine as a Transcer
dent Life immanent in the world and the self, and of a strap j
spiritual seed within them by whose development man, movin
to higher levels of character and consciousness, attains his enc



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 129

rill see the mystic life as involving inward change rather than
outgoing search. Regeneration is their watchword, and they will
choose symbols of growth or transmutation : saying with St.
Catherine of Genoa, “my Being is God, not by simple participa-
tion, but by a true transformation of my Being/' 1

These three groups of mystics, then, stand for three kinds of
temperament; and we may fairly take as their characteristic
forms of symbolic expression the Mystic Quest, the Marriage of
the Soul, and the “Great Work" of the Spiritual Alchemists.

I

The pilgrima*^ idea, the outgoing quest, appears in mystical
literature under two different aspects. One is the search for the
“Hidden Treasure which desires to be found." Such is the“quest
of the Grail" when regarded in its mystic aspect as an allegory
of the adventures of the soul. The other is the long, hard journey
towards a known and definitegoal or state. Such are Dante’s “Divine
Comedy"and Bunyan’s “Pilgrim’s Progress"; each in their manner
faithful descriptions of the Mystic Way. The goal of the quest — the
Empyrean of Dante, the Beatific Vision or fulfilment of love — is
often called Jerusalem by the Christian mystics: naturally enough,
since that city was for the mediaeval mind the supreme end of
pilgrimage. By Jerusalem they mean not only the celestial country
Heaven, but also the spiritual life, which is “itself a heaven." 2
“Right as a true pilgrim going to Jerusalem," says Hilton, “leaveth
behind him house and land, wife and child, and maketh himself
poor and bare from all that he hath, that he may go lightly with-
out letting: right so, if thou wilt be a ghostly pilgrim, thou shalt
make thyself naked from all that thou hast . . . then shalt thou set
in thy heart wholly and fully that thou wouldst be at Jerusalem,
md at none other place but there." “Jerusalem," he says in this
same chapter, “is as much as to say a sight of peace; and be-
tokeneth contemplation in perfect love of God. "3

Under this image of a pilgrimage — an image as concrete and
practical, as remote from the romantic and picturesque, for the
mediaeval writers who used it, as a symbolism of hotel and railway
train would be to us — the mystics contrived to summarize and
suggest much of the life history of the ascending soul; the develop-
ing spiritual consciousness. The necessary freedom and detach-
ment of the traveller, his departure from his normal life and
interests, the difficulties, enemies, and hardships encountered on

* “Vita e Dottrina," p. 36.

* This image seems first to have been elaborated by St. Augustine, from whom
it was borrowed by Hugh of St. Victor, and most of the mediaeval mystics.

3 “The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxi.



MYSTICISM


130

the road — the length of the journey, the variety of thlpj
country, the dark night which overtakes him, the glimpses of
destination far away — all these are seen more and more as we
advance in knowledge to constitute a transparent allegory of
the incidents of man's progress from the unreal to the real.
Bunyan was but the last of a long series of minds which grasped
this fact.

The Traveller, says the Sufi 'Aziz bin Mahommed Nafasi, in
whose book, “The Remotest Aim," the pilgrimage-symbolism is
developed in great detail, is the Perceptive or Intuitive Sense oi\
Man. The goal to which he journeys is Knowledge of God. This
mysterious traveller towards the only country of the soul may
be known of other men by his detachment, charity, humility, and
patience. These primary virtues, however — belonging to ethical
rather than to spiritual life — are not enough to bring his quest to
a successful termination. They make him, say the Sufis, “perfect
in knowledge of his goal but deficient in the power of reaching it.”
Though he has fraternal love for his fellow-pilgrims, detachment
from wayside allurements, untiring perseverance on the road, he
is still encumbered and weakened by unnecessary luggage. The
second stage of his journey, therefore, is initiated like that of
Christian by a casting off of his burden : a total sell-renouncement,
the attainment of a Franciscan poverty of spirit whereby hel
becomes “Perfectly Free.”

Having got rid of all impediments to the spiritual quest, he
must now acquire or develop in their stead the characteristic
mystical qualities, or Three Aids of the Pilgrim; which are called
in this system Attraction, Devotion, and Elevation. Attraction is
consciousness of the mutual desire existing between man's spirit
and the Divine Spirit: of the link of love which knits up reality
and draws all things to their home in God. This is the universal
law on which all mysticism is based. It is St. Augustine's “Thou
hast made us for Thyself and our hearts can find no rest except in*
Thee.” This “natural magnetism,” then, once he is aware of it,
will draw the pilgrim irresistibly along the road from the Many to
the One. His second aid, Devotion, says the “Remotest Aim" in a
phrase of great depth and beauty, is “the prosecution of the
journey to God and in God.” 1 It embraces, in fact, the whole
contemplative life. It is the next degree of spiritual consciousness
after the blind yielding to the attraction of the Real, and the
setting in order of man's relation to his source.

The Traveller's journey to God is complete when he attains

* So too Ruysbroeck says that “the just man goes towards God by inward love
in perpetual activity and in God in virtue of his fruitive affection in eternal rest’*
(“De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiaruin,” l.ii. cap. lxv).



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM


131

Jjnowledge of Him — “Illumination,” in the language of European
“mystics. The point at which this is reached is called the Tavern,
or resting-place upon the road, where he is fed with the Divine
Mysteries. There are also “Wine Shops” upon the way, where the
weary pilgrim is cheered and refreshed by a draught of the wine
of Divine Love. 1 * Only when the journey to God is completed
begins the “Journey in God” — that which the Christian mystics
call the Unitive Way — and this, since it is the essence of Eternal
Life, can have no end. Elevation, the pilgrim's third aid, is the
exalted or ecstatic form of consciousness peculiar to the contempla-
tive, and which allows the traveller a glimpse of the spiritual city
towards which he goes. 3

The Sufi poet 'Attar, in his mystical poem, “The Colloquy oi
the Birds,” has described the stages of this same spiritual pilgrim-
age with greater psychological insight, as the journey through
“Seven Valleys.” The lapwing, having been asked by other birds
what is the length of the road which leads to the hidden Palace
of the King, replies that there are Seven Valleys through which
every traveller must pass: but since none who attain the End
ever come back to describe their adventures, no one knows the
length of the way.

(1) The first valley, says the lapwing, is the Valley of the Quest.
It is long and toilsome : and there the traveller must strip him-
self of all earthly things, becoming poor, bare, and desolate: and
so stay till the Supernal Light casts a ray on his desolation. It is
in fact, Dante's Purgatorio, the Christian Way of Purgation: the
period of self-stripping and purification which no mystic system
omits.

(2) When the ray of Supernal Light has touched the pilgrim
he enters the limitless Valley of Love : begins, that is to say, the
mystic life. It is Dante's “Earthly Paradise,” or, in the traditional
system of the mystics, the onset of Illumination.

(3) Hence he passes to the Valley of Knowledge or Enlighten-
'ment — the contemplative state — where each finds in communion
with Truth the place that belongs to him. No Dante student will
fail to see here a striking parallel with those planetary heavens
where each soul partakes of the Divine, “not supremely in the
absolute sense,” as St. Bonaventura has it, but “supremely in
respect of himself” The mystery of Being is now revealed to the
traveller. He sees Nature's secret, and God in all things. It is the
height of illumination.

1 I need not remind the reader of the fact that this symbolism, perverted to the
k Vi.irposes of his sceptical philosophy, runs through the whole of the Rubaiyat of

Omar Khayyam.

* See Palmer's “Oriental Mysticism," pt. i. caps, i., ii.,iii., and v.



MYSTICISM


132

(4) The next stage is the Valley of Detachment, of utter
absorption in Divine Love — the Stellar Heaven of the Saints—
where Duty is seen to be all in all. This leads to —

(5) The Valley of the Unity, where the naked Godhead is the
one object of contemplation. This is the stage of ecstasy, or the
Beatific Vision : Dante's condition in the last canto of the "Para-
diso." It is transient, however, and leads to —

(6) The Valley of Amazement; where the Vision, far transcend-
ing the pilgrim's receptive power, appears to be taken from hiir
and he is plunged in darkness and bewilderment. This is the
state which Dionysius the Areopagite, and after him man)
mediaeval mystics, called the Divine Dark, and described as the
truest and closest of all our apprehensions of the Godhead. It
is the Cloud of Unknowing, "dark from excessive bright." The
final stage is —

(7) The Valley of Annihilation of Self: the supreme degree oi
union, or theopathetic state, in which the self is utterly merged
"like a fish in the sea" in the ocean of Divine Love. 1

Through all these metaphors of pilgrimage to a goal — of a road
followed, distance overpassed, fatigue endured — there runs the
definite idea that the travelling self in undertaking the journey
is fulfilling a destiny, a law of the transcendental life; obeying
an imperative need. The chosen Knights are destined or called
to the quest of the Grail. "All men are called to their origin," says
Rulman Merswin, and the fishes which he sees in his Vision of
Nine Rocks are impelled to struggle, as it were "against nature,"
uphill from pool to pool towards their source.*

All mystical thinkers agree in declaring that there is a mutual
attraction between the Spark of the Soul, the free divine germ
in man, and the Fount from which it came forth. "We long for
the Absolute," says Royce, "only in so far as in us the Absolute
also longs, and seeks, through our very temporal striving, the
peace that is nowhere in Time, but only, and yet Absolutely, in
Eternity ."3 So, many centuries before the birth of American
philosophy, Hilton put the same truth of experience in lovelier
words. "He it is that dcsireth in thee, and He it is that is desired.
He is all and He doth all if thou might see Him ."4

The homeward journey of man's spirit, then, maybe thought of
as due to the push of a divine life within, answering to the pull of


* An abridged translation of 'Attar's allegory of the Valleys will be found in
The Conference of the Birds," by R. P. Masani (1924). See also W. S. Lilly's
“Many Mansions," p. 130.

* Jundt, “Rulman Merswin," p. 27.

1 itoyce, “The World and the Individual," vol. ii. p. 386.

4 The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxiv.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 133

$ divine life without . 1 It is only possible because there is already
in that spirit a certain kinship with the Divine, a capacity for
Eternal Life; and the mystics, in undertaking it, are humanity's
pioneers on the only road to rest. Hence that attraction which the
Moslem mystic discerned as the traveller's necessary aid, is a
fundamental doctrine of all mysticism: and as a consequence, the
symbolism of mutual desire is here inextricably mingled with that
of pilgrimage. The spiritual pilgrim goes because he is called;
because he wants to go, must go, if he is to find rest and peace.
‘"God needs man," says Eckhart. It is Love calling to love: and
r the journey, though in one sense a hard pilgrimage, up and out,
by the terraced mount and the ten heavens to God, in another is
the inevitable rush of the roving comet, caught at last, to the
Central Sun. "My weight is my love," said St. Augustine.* Like
gravitation, it inevitably compels, for good or evil, every spirit
to its own place. According to another range of symbols, that love
flings open a door, in order that the larger Life may rush in,
and it and the soul be "one thing."

Here, then, we run through the whole gamut of symbolic
expression; through Transcendence, Desire, and Immanence.
All are seen to point to one consummation, diversely and always
allusively expressed : the need of union between man's separated
.spirit and the Real, his remaking in the interests of transcendent
life, his establishment in that Kingdom which is both "near
and far."

"In the book of Hidden Things it is written," says Eckhart,
" T stand at the door and knock and wait' . . . thou needst not
seek Him here or there : He is no farther off than the door of the
heart. There He stands and waits and waits until He finds thee
ready to open and let Him in. Thou needst not call Him from a
distance; to wait until thou openest is harder for Him than for
thee. He needs thee a thousand times more than thou canst need
.Him. Thy opening and His entering are but one moment ."3 "God,"
he says in another place, "can as little do without us, as we without
Him. "4 Our attainment of the Absolute is not a one-sided ambi-
tion, but the fulfilment of a mutual desire. "For our natural
Will," says Lady Julian, "is to have God, and the Good will of


1 Compare R6c6jac (“Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 252).
“According to mysticism, morality leads the soul to the frontiers of the Absolute
and even gives it an impulsion to enter, but this is not enough. This movement
of pure Freedom cannot succeed unless there is an equivalent movement within
the Absolute itself."

* Aug. Conf., bk. xiii, cap. 9. “All those who love," says Ruysbroeck, “feel
'^his attraction : more or less according to the degree of their love." (“De Calculo
sive de Perfectione filiorum Dei.")
s Meister Eckhart, Pred. iii.


♦ Ibid., Pred. xiii.



*34 MYSTICISM

God is to have us; and we may never cease from longing till w«
have Him in fullness of joy.”*

So, in the beautiful poem or ritual called the “Hymn of Jesus,"
-contained in the apocryphal “Acts of John” and dating from
primitive Christian times, the Logos, or Eternal Christ, is thus
represented as matching with His own transcendent, self-giving
desire every need of the soul.*

The Soul says: —

“ 'I would be saved.' ”

Christ replies: —

*' 'And I would save/ Amen/*

The Dialogue continues: —

” 'I would be loosed/

‘And I would loose/ Amen.

‘I would be pierced/

'And I would pierce/ Amen.

'I would be bom/

'And I would bear/ Amen.

'1 would eat/

'And I would be eaten/ Amen.

'I would hear/

And I would be heard/ Amen/*


* # *1 am a Lamp to thee who beholdest Me,

I am a Mirror to thee who perceives! Me,

I am a Door to thee, who knockest at Me,

I am a Way to thee a wayfarer/ "

The same fundamental idea of the mutual quest of the Soul
and the Absolute is expressed in the terms of another symbolism
by the great Mahommedan mystic: —

“No lover ever seeks union with his beloved,

But his beloved is also seeking union with him.

But the lover’s love makes his body lean
While the beloved’s love makes her fair and lusty.

When in this heart the lightning spark of love arises,

Be sure this love is reciprocated in that heart.

When the love of God arises in thy heart.

Without doubt God also feels love for thee/'J

The mystic vision, then, is of a spiritual universe held within

* “Revelations of Divine Love/’ cap. vi.

» The Greek and English text will be found in the “Apocrypha Anecdota’’ of
Dr. M. R. James, series 2 (Cambridge, 1897), pp. 1-25. 1 follow his translation.
It will be seen that I have adopted the hypothesis of Mr. G. R. S. Mead as to the
dramatic nature of this poem. See his “Echoes from the Gnosis/' 1896.

3 Jalalu d' Din Rflml (Wisdom of the East Series), p. 77.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 135

'fee bonds of love : 1 and of the free and restless human soul, having
within it the spark of divine desire, the ‘Tendency to the Absolute,"
roily finding satisfaction and true life when united with this Life of
God. Then, in Patmore’s lovely image, “the babe is at its mother's
breast," "the lover has returned to the beloved ." 1
Whatever their outward sense, all true mystic symbols express
pects of this “secret of theworld," this primal verity. Butwhereas
such great visionary schemes as those of 'Attar and of Dante show
it in its cosmic form, in many symbolic descriptions — particu-
Jrrly those which we meet in the writings of the ecstatic saints —
|/Elie personal subjective note, the consciousness of an individual
relation between that one self and the Supernal Self, overpowers
all general applications. Then philosophy and formal allegory
[must step aside: the sacramental language of exalted emotion,
of profoundly felt experience, takes its place. The phases of mutual
love, of wooing and combat, awe and delight — the fevers of desire,
the ecstasy of surrender — are drawn upon and made to contribute
something to the description of the great and secret drama of
the soul.

To such symbolic transcripts of intimate experience belongs
one amazing episode of the spiritual life-history which, because
it has been given immortal expression by the greatest mystical
tpoet of modern times, is familiar to thousands of readers who
Know little or nothing of the more normal adventures incidental
to man's attainment of the Absolute. In “The Hound of Heaven”
Francis Thompson described with an almost terrible power, not
the self's quest of adored Reality, but Reality's quest of the
unwilling self. He shows to us the remorseless, untiring seeking
and following of the soul by the Divine Life to which it will not
urrender: the inexorable onward sweep of “this tremendous
Lover," hunting the separated spirit, “strange piteous futile
thing" that flees Him “down the nights and down the days." This
idea of the love-chase, of the spirit rushing in terror from the over-
powering presence of God, but followed, sought, conquered in the
md, is common to all the mediaeval mystics: it is the obverse of
their general doctrine of the necessary fusion of human and divine
life, “escape from the flame of separation."

“I chased thee, for in this was my pleasure," says the voice of
Love to Mechthild of Magdeburg; “I captured thee, for this was
my desire; I bound thee, and I rejoice in thy bonds; I have

7 So Dante —

“Nel suo profondo vidi che s'interna
legato con amore in un volume
cio che per l'universo si squadema."

(Par. xxxiii. 83.)

« “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," “Aurea Dicta," ccxxviih



MYSTICISM


136

wounded thee, that thou mayst be united to me. If I gave th^
blows, it was that I might be possessed of thee.’’ 1 * * 4

So in the beautiful Middle English poem of “Quia amore
langueo," —

“I am true love that fals was nevere.

Mi sistyr, mannis soule, I loved hir thus ;

Bicause we wolde in no wise discevere
I lefte my Kyngdom glorious.

I purveyde for hir a paleis precious ;

She fleyth, I folowe, 1 sought hir so.

I suffride this peyne piteous
Quia amore langueo.”*

Meister Eckhart lias the same idea of the inexorable Following
Love, impossible to escape, expressed under less personal images.
“Earth," he says, “cannot escape the sky; let it flee up or down,
the sky flows into it, and makes it fruitful whether it will or no.
So God does to man. He who will escape Him only runs to His
bosom; for all corners are open to Him. "3

We find in all the mystics this strong sense of a mysterious
spiritual life — a Reality — over against man, seeking him and
compelling him to Its will. It is not for him, they think, to sav
that he will or will not aspire to the transcendental world . 4 Hence
sometimes this inversion of man's long quest of God. The seF f
resists the pull of spiritual gravitation, flees from the touch of'
Eternity; and the Eternal seeks it, tracks it ruthlessly down.
The Following Love, the mystics say, is a fact of experience, not a
poetic idea. “Those strong feet that follow, follow after," once
set upon the chase, are bound to win. Man, once conscious of
Reality, cannot evade it. For a time his separated spirit, his
disordered loves, may wilfully frustrate the scheme of things: but
he must be conquered in the end. Then the mystic process unfolds,
itself: Love triumphs: the “purpose of the w T orlds" fulfils itself
in the individual life.


II

It was natural and inevitable that the imagery of human love
and marriage should have seemed to the mystic the best of all
images of his own “fulfilment of life"; his soul's surrender, first
to the call, finally to the embrace of Perfect Love. It lay ready to

1 “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,” pt. i. cap. iii.

* “Quia amore langueo,” an anonymous fifteenth-century poem. Printed from

the Lambeth MS. by the E.E.T.S., 1S66-67. 5 Pred. lxxxviii.

4 So we are told of St. Francis of Assisi, that in his youth he “tried to flee
God’s hand.” Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. ii.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM


137

his hand : it was understood of all men : and moreover, it certainty
does offer, upon lower levels, a strangely exact parallel to the
sequence of states in which man's spiritual consciousness unfolds
itself, and which form the consummation of the mystic life.

It has been said that the constant use of such imagery by
Christian mystics of the mediaeval period is traceable to the
popularity of the Song of Songs, regarded as an allegory of the
spiritual life. I think that the truth lies rather in the opposite
statement: namely, that the mystic loved the Song of Songs
because he there saw reflected, as in a mirror, the most secret
experiences of his soul. The sense of a desire that was insatiable, of
a personal fellowship so real, inward, and intense that it could
only be compared with the closest link of human love, of an inter-
course that was no mere spiritual self-indulgence, but was rooted
in the primal duties and necessities of life — more, those deepest,
most intimate secrets of communion, those self-giving ecstasies
which all mystics know, but of which we, who are not mystics,
may not speak — all these he found symbolized and suggested,
their unendurable glories veiled in a merciful mist, in the poetry
which man has invented to honour that august passion in which
the merely human draws nearest to the divine.

The great saints who adopted and elaborated this symbolism,
applying it to their pure and ardent passion for the Absolute, were
destitute of the prurient imagination which their modern com-
mentators too often possess. They were essentially pure of heart ;
and when they “saw God" they were so far from confusing that
unearthly vision with the products of morbid sexuality, that the
dangerous nature of the imagery which they employed did not
occur to them. They knew by experience the unique nature of
spiritual love: and no one can know anything about it in any
other way.

Thus for St. Bernard, throughout his deeply mystical sermons
on the Song of Songs, the Divine Word is the Bridegroom, the
human soul is the Bride: but how different is the effect produced
by his use of these symbols from that with which he has been
charged by hostile critics! In the place of that “sensuous imagery"
which is so often and so earnestly deplored by those who have
hardly a nodding acquaintance with the writings of the saints, we
find images which indeed have once been sensuous; but which are
here anointed and ordained to a holy office, carried up, transmuted,
and endowed with a radiant purity, an intense and spiritual life.

44 * Let Him kiss me with the kisses of His mouth * Who is it speaks
these words? It is the Bride. Who is the Bride? It is the Soul
thirsting for God. . . . She who asks this is held by the bond of
love to him from whom she asks it. Of all the sentiments of nature.



MYSTICISM


138

this of love is the most excellent, especially when it is rendered
back to Him who is the principle and fountain of it — that is, God.
Nor are there found any expressions equally sweet to signify the
mutual affection between the Word of God and the soul, as those
of Bridegroom and of Bride; inasmuch as between individuals
who stand in such relation to each other all things are in common,
and they possess nothing separate or divided. They have one inheri-
tance, one dwelling-place, one table, and they are in fact one flesh.
If, then, mutual love is especially befitting to a bride and bride-
groom, it is not unfitting that the name of Bride is given to a soul
which loves.” 1

To women mystics of the Catholic Church, familiar with the
antique and poetic metaphor which called every cloistered nun
the Bride of Christ, that crisis in their spiritual history in which
they definitely vowed themselves to the service of Transcendent
Reality seemed, naturally enough, the veritable betrothal of the
soul. Often, in a dynamic vision, they saw as in a picture the
binding vows exchanged between their spirits and their God.*
That further progress on the mystic way which brought with it a
sharp and permanent consciousness of union with the Divine Will,
the constant sustaining presence of a Divine Companion, became,
by an extension of the original simile, Spiritual Marriage. The
elements of duty, constancy, irrevocableness, and loving obedi-
ence involved in the mediaeval conception of the marriage tie,
made it an apt image of a spiritual state in which humility,
intimacy, and love were the dominant characteristics. There is
really no need to seek a pathological explanation of these simple
facts. 3 Moreover with few exceptions, the descriptions of spiritual
marriage which the great mystics have left are singularly free
from physical imagery "So mysterious is the secret,” says St.
Teresa, "and so sublime the favour that God thus bestows instan-
taneously on the soul, that it feels a supreme delight, only to be
described by saying that our Lord vouchsafes for the moment to
reveal to it His own heavenly glory in a far more subtle way than
by any vision or spiritual delight. As far as can be understood,
the soul, I mean the spirit of this soul, is made one with God, who is

1 St. Bernard, “Cantica Canticorum," Sermon vii. For a further and excellent
discussion of St. Bernard's mystical language, see Dom Cuthbert Butler, “Western
Mysticism," 2nd ed., pp. 160 scq. a Vide infra, Pt. II. cap. v.

J Professor Pratt, by no means an enthusiastic witness, most justly observes
“There are several excellent reasons why the mystics almost inevitably make
use of the language of human love in describing the joy of the love of God. The
first and simplest is this: that they have no other language to use . . . the mystic
must make use of expressions drawn from earthly love to describe his experience,
or give up the attempt of describing it at ail. It is the only way he has of even
suggesting to the non -mystical what he has felt" (“The Religious Consciousness,"
p. 418).



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM


139

Himself a spirit, and Who has been pleased to show certain persons
how far His love for us extends in order that we may praise His
greatness. He has thus deigned to unite Himself to His creature:
He has bound Himself to her as firmly as two human beings are
joined in wedlock and will never separate Himself from her/ 11

The great Richard of St. Victor, in one of his most splendid
mystical treatises, 1 * 3 has given us perhaps the most daring and
detailed application of the symbolism of marriage to the adven-
tures of the spirit of man. He divides the “steep stairway of love,"
by which the contemplative ascends to union with the Absolute,
into four stages. These he calls the betrothal, the marriage, the
wedlock, and the fruitfulness of the soul.3 In the betrothal, he says,
the soul “thirsts for the Beloved 0 ; that is to say, it longs to experi-
ence the delights of Reality. “The Spirit comes to the Soul, and
seems sweeter than honey/' It is conversion, the awakening to
mystical truth ; the kindling of the passion for the Absolute. “Then
the Soul with pertinacity demands more 0 : and because of her
burning desire she attains to pure contemplation, and so passes
to the second degree of love. In this she is “led in bridal 0 by the
Beloved. Ascending “above herself 0 in contemplation, she “sees
the Sun of Righteousness/' She is now confirmed in the mystic
life; the irrevocable marriage vows are made between her spirit
and her God. At this point she can “see the Beloved," but “cannot
yet come in to Him," says Richard. This degree, as we shall see
later, answers more or less to that which other mystics call the
Illuminative Way: but any attempt to press these poetic symbols
into a cast-iron series, and establish exact parallels, is foredoomed
to failure, and will merely succeed in robbing them of their frag-
rance and suggestive power. In Richard's “third stage," however,
that of union, or wedlock, it is clear that the soul enters upon the
“Unitive Way." She has passed the stages of ecstatic and signifi-
cant events, and is initiated into the Life. She is “deified," “passes
utterly into God, and is glorified in Him" : is transfigured, he says,
by immediate contact with the Divine Substance, into an utterly
different quality of being. “Thus," says St. John of the Cross,
“the soul, when it shall have driven away from itself all that is
contrary to the divine will, becomes transformed in God by love.°4

“The Soul," says Richard again, “is utterly concentrated on the
One." She is “caught up to the divine light." The expression of

1 “El Castillo Interior,'" Moradas Setimas, cap. ii.

* “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis" (Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol.
exevi. col. 1207).

3 “In primo gradu fit desponsatio, in secundo nuptiae, in fcertio copula, in
quarto puerperium. . . . De quarto dicitur, Concepimus, et quasi parfcurivimus et
pepenmas spiritum” {Isa. xviii. 26). {Op. cit., 1216, D.)

« “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” lii. cap. v.



MYSTICISM


140

the personal passion, the intimate relation, here rises to its height.
But this is not enough. Where most mystical diagrams leave off.
Richard of St. Victor's “steep stairway of Love" goes on: with the
result that this is almost the only symbolic system bequeathed to
us by the great contemplatives in which all the implications
contained in the idea of the spiritual marriage have been worked
out to their term. He saw clearly that the union of the soul with
its Source could not be a barren ecstasy. That was to mistake a
means for an end; and to frustrate the whole intention of life,
which is, on all levels, fruitful and creative. Therefore he says
that in the fourth degree, the Bride who has been so greatly
honoured, caught up to such unspeakable delight, sinks her own
will and “is humiliated below herself." She accepts the pains and
duties in the place of the raptures of love; and becomes a source,
a “parent" of fresh spiritual life. The Sponsa Dei develops into
the Mater Divince gratice. That imperative need of life, to push on,
to create, to spread, is here seen operating in the spiritual sphere.
This forms that rare and final stage in the evolution of the great
mystics, in which they return to the world which they forsook;
and there live, as it were, as centres of transcendental energy, the
creators of spiritual families, the partners and fellow-labourers
with the Divine Life . 1


Ill

We come now to the symbols which have been adopted by those
mystics in whom temperamental consciousness of their own
imperfection, and of the unutterable perfection of the Absolute
Life for which they longed, has overpowered all other aspects
of man's quest of reality. The “seek, and ye shall find" of the
pilgrim, the “by Love shall He be gotten andholden" of the bride,
can never seem an adequate description of experience to minds
of this type. They are intent on the inexorable truth which must
be accepted in some form by both these classes: the crucial fact
that “we behold that which we are," or, in other words, that
“only the Real can know Reality." Hence the state of the inward
man, the “unrealness'' of him when judged by any transcendental
standard, is their centre of interest. His remaking or regeneration
appears to them as the primal necessity, if he is ever to obtain
rights of citizenship in the “country of the soul."

We have seen that this idea of the New Birth, the remaking or
transmutation of the self, clothed in many different symbols,
runs through the whole of mysticism and much of theology. It
is the mystic's subjective reading of those necessary psychological

* Vide infra , pt. ii. caps. i. and x.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 141

md moral changes which he observes within himself as his
piritual consciousness grows. His hard work of renunciation, of
letachment from the things which that consciousness points out
,s illusory or impure, his purifications and trials, all form part of
t. If that which is whole or perfect is to come, then that which is
n part must be done away: ‘Tor in what measure we put off the
reature, in the same measure are we able to put on the Creator:
either more nor less.” 1

Of all the symbolic systems in which this truth has been en-
ihrined none is so complete, so picturesque, and now so little
nderstood as that of the “Hermetic Philosophers” or Spiritual
Alchemists. This fact would itself be sufficient to justify us in
xamining some of the chief features of their symbolism. There
s a further excuse for this apparently eccentric proceeding, how-
ver, in the fact that the language of alchemy was largely — though
lot always accurately and consistently — used by the great mystic
acob Boehme, and after him by his English disciple, William
^iw. Without, then, some knowledge of the terms which they
mployed, but seldom explained, the writings of this important
ichool can hardly be understood.

The alchemic symbols, especially as applied to the mystic life,
re full of an often deliberate obscurity; which makes their exact
iterpretation a controversial matter at the best. Moreover, the
mthors of the various Hermetic writings do not always use them
n the same sense, and whilst many of these writings are un-
loubtedly mystical, others clearly deal with the physical quest of
?old: nor have we any sure standard by which to divide class from
dass. The elements from which the spiritual alchemists built up
heir allegories of the mystic life are, however, easily grasped: and
hese elements, with the significance generally attributed to them,
ire as much as those who are not specialists can hope to unravel
rom this very tangled skein. First, there are the metals; of course
he obvious materials of physical alchemy. These are usually
called by the names of their presiding planets: thus in Hermetic
anguage Luna means silver, Sol gold, etc. Then there is the
/essel, or Athanor, in which the transmutation of base metal to
jold took place: an object whose exact nature is veiled in much
nystery. The Fire, and various solvents and waters, peculiar to
he different alchemistic recipes, complete the apparatus neces-
sary to the “Great Work.”

The process of this work, sometimes described in chemical
md sometimes in astrological terms, is more often than not dis
juised in a strange heraldic and zoological symbolism dealing
vith Lions, Dragons, Eagles, Vultures, Ravens and Doves: which,

* “Theologia German ica,” cap. i.



MYSTICISM


142

delightful in its picturesqueness, is unequalled in its power of 1
confusing the anxious and unwary inquirer. It is also the subjcc^
of innumerable and deliberate allegories, which were supposed to
convey its secrets to the elect, whilst most certainly concealing
them from the crowd. Hence it is that the author of “A Short
Enquiry concerning the Hermetic Art” speaks for all investigators
of this subject when he describes the “Hermetic science” as a
“great Labyrinth, in which are abundance of enquirers rambling
to this day, many of them undiscerned by one another.” Like
him, I too “have taken several Turns in it myself, wherein one
shall meet with very few; for 'tis so large, and almost every one
taking a different Path, that they seldom meet. But finding it a
very melancholy place, I resolved to get out of it, and rather
content myself to walk in the little garden before the entrance,
where many things, though not all, were orderly to be seen.
Choosing rather to stay* there, and contemplate on the Metaphor
set up, than venture again into the wilderness .” 1

Coming, then, to the “contemplation of the Metaphor set up/
— by far the most judicious course for modern students of the
Hermetic art — we observe first that the prime object of alchem\
was held to be the production of the Philosopher's Stone; that
perfect and incorrupt substance or “noble Tincture,” never found
upon our imperfect earth in its natural state, which could purge
all baser metals of their dross, and turn them to pure gold. The
quest of the Stone, in fact, was but one aspect of man’s everlasting
quest of perfection, his hunger for the Absolute; and hence ai
appropriate symbol of the mystic life. But this quest was noi
conducted in some far off transcendental kingdom. It was prose
cuted in the Here and Now within the physical world.

Gold, the Crowned King, or Sol, as it is called in the planetar)
symbolism of the alchemists, was their standard of perfection
the “Perfect Metal.” Towards it, as the Christian towards sanctity
their wills were set. It had for them a value not sordid but ideal
Nature, they thought, is always trying to make gold, this incor
ruptible and perfect thing; and the other metals are merely the
results of the frustration of her original design. Nor is this aiming
at perfection and achieving of imperfection limited to thephysica
world. Quod superius , sicut quod inferius. Upon the spiritual plant
also they held that the Divine Idea is always aiming at “Spiritua
Gold” — divine humanity, the New Man, citizen of the transcen
dental world — and “natural man” as we ordinarily know him is £
lower metal, silver at best. He is a departure from the “plan,” wh(
yet bears within himself, if we could find it, the spark or seed 0
absolute perfection: the “tincture” which makes gold. “Th<
* “A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art," p. 29.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 143

smattering I have of the Philosopher’s Stone,” says Sir Thomas
Browne, “(which is something more than the perfect exaltation
of gold) hath taught me a great deal of divinity, and instructed
my belief how that immortal spirit and incorruptible substance
of my soul may lie obscure, and sleep awhile within this house of
flesh.” 1 This “incorruptible substance” is man’s goldness, his
perfect principle: for “the highest mineral virtue resides in Man,”
says Albertus Magnus, “and God may be found everywhere. ”*
Hence the prosecution of a spiritual chemistry is a proper part of
the true Hermetic science.

The art of the alchemist, whether spiritual or physical, consists
in completing the work of perfection, bringing forth and making
dominant, as it were, the “latent goldness” which “lies obscure”
in metal or man. The ideal adept of alchemy was therefore an
“auxiliary of the Eternal Goodness.” By his search for the “Noble
Tincture” which should restore an imperfect world, he became a
partner in the business of creation, assisting the Cosmic Plan.
Thus the proper art of the Spiritual Alchemist, with whom alone
we are here concerned, was the production of the spiritual and
only valid tincture or Philosopher’s Stone; the mystic seed of
transcendental life which should invade, tinge, and wholly trans-
mute the imperfect self into spiritual gold. That this was no fancy
of seventeenth-century allegorists, but an idea familiar to many of
the oldest writers upon alchemy — whose quest was truly a spiritual
search into the deepest secrets of the soul — is proved by the words
which bring to an end the first part of the antique “Golden T reatise
upon the Making of the Stone,” sometimes attributed to Hermes
Trismegistus. “This, 0 Son,” says that remarkable tract, “is the
Concealed Stone of Many Colours, which is born and brought
forth in one colour; know this and conceal it ... it leads from
darkness into light, from this desert wilderness to a secure habita-
tion, and from poverty and straits to a free and ample fortune . ”3

Man, then, was for the alchemists “the true laboratory of the
Hermetic art”; which concealed in an entanglement of vague and
contradictory symbols the life-process of his ascension to that
perfect state in which he was able to meet God. This state must
not be confused with a merely moral purity, but is to be under-
stood as involving utter transmutation into a “new form.” It

1 “Religio Medici," pt. i.

1 “A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery," p. 143. This rare and
curious study of spiritual alchemy was the anonymous work of the late Mrs.
Atwood. She attempted to suppress it soon after publication under the impression
— common amongst mystics of a certain type — that she had revealed matters
which might not be spoken of; as Coventry Patmore for the same reason destroyed
his masterpiece, “Sponsa Dei."

3 Quoted in “A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery," p. 107. The
whole of the “Golden Treatise" will be found set out in this work.



MYSTICISM


144

naturally followed from this that the indwelling Christ, the “Corner
Stone,” the Sun of Righteousness, became, for many of the Chris-
tian alchemists, identified with the Lapis Philosophorum and with
Sol: and was regarded both as the image and as the earnest of
this “great work.” His spirit was the “noble tincture” which “can
bring that which is lowest in the death to its highest ornament or
glory ;” J transmuting the natural to the supernatural, operating the
“New Birth.” “This,” says Boehme, “is the noble precious Stone
(Lapis Philosophorum), the Philosopher’s Stone, which the Magi
(or wise men) find which tinctureth nature , and generateth a new
son in the old. He who findeth that, esteemeth more highly of it
than of this (outward) world. For the Son is many thousand times
greater than the Father.” Again, “If you take the spirit of the
tincture, then indeed you go on a way in which many have found
Sol; but they have followed on the way to the heart of Sol, where
the spirit of the heavenly tincture hath laid hold on them, and
brought them into the liberty, into the Majesty, where they have
Known the Noble Stone, Lapis Philosophorum, the Philosopher’s
Stone, and have stood amazed at man’s blindness, and seen his
labouring in vain. Would you fain find the Noble Stone? Behold
we will show it you plain enough, if you be a Magus, and worthy,
else you shall remain blind still: therefore fall to work thus: for
it hath no more but three numbers . First tell from one till you come
to the Cross, which is ten (X) . . . and there lieth the Stone without
any great painstaking, for it is pure and not defiled with any
earthly nature.”

“In this stone there lieth hidden, whatsoever God and the
Eternity, also heaven, the stars and elements contain and are able
to do. There never was from eternity anything better or more
precious than this, and it is offered by God and bestowed upon
man; every one may have it ... it is in a simple form, and hath
the power of the whole Deity in it.” a

Boehme is here using alchemic symbols, according to his
custom, in a loose and artistic manner; for the true Hermetic
Philosopher's Stone is not something which can be found but
something which must be made. The alchemists, whether their
search be for a physical or a spiritual “tincture,” say always that
this tincture is the product of the furnace and Athanor: and further
that it is composed of “three numbers” or elements, which they
call Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury. These, when found, and forced
into the proper combination, form the “Azoth” or “Philosopher’s
Egg” — the stuff or First Matter of the Great Work. Sulphur, Salt,^

1 Jacob Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man," cap. iv. § 23.

* Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man,” cap. vi. § 98; cap. x. §§ 3, 4; and
cap.xiii.fi.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 145

and Mercury, however, must not be understood in too literal a
sense. "You need not look for our metallic seed among the
elements," says Basil the Monk, "it need not be sought so far back.
If you can only rectify the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt (understand
those of the sages ) until the metallic spirit and body are inseparably
joined together by means of the metallic soul, you thereby firmly
rivet the chain of love and prepare the palace for the Coronation ." 1

Of these three ingredients, the important one is the spiritual
principle, the unseizable Mercury; which is far from being the
metal which we ordinarily know by that name. The Mercury
which the alchemists sought — often in strange places — is a hidden
and powerful substance. They call it "Mercury of the Wise"; and
he who can discover it, they say, is on the way towards success.
The reader in search of mystical wisdom already begins to be
bewildered; but if he persevere in this labyrinth of symbolism, he
presently discovers — as Basil the Monk indeed hints — that the
Sulphur and the Salt, or "metallic soul and body" of the spiritual
chemistry, represent something analogous to the body and mind
of man — Sulphur his earthly nature, seasoned with intellectual
Salt. The Mercury is Spirit in its most mystic sense, the Synteresis
or holy Dweller in the Innermost, the immanent spark or Divine
Principle of his life. Only the "wise," the mystically awakened,
can know this Mercury, the agent of man’s transmutation: and
until it has been discovered, brought out of the hiddenness, nothing
can be done. "This Mercury or Snowy Splendour, is a Celestial
Body drawn from the beams of the Sun and the Moon. It is the
only Agent in the world for this art."* It is the divine-human
"spark of the soul," the bridge between Gold and Silver, God
and man.

The Three Principles being enclosed in the vessel, or Athanor,
which is man himself, and subjected to a gentle fire — the Incen-
dium Amoris — the process of the Great Work, the mystic trans-
mutation of natural into spiritual man, can begin. This work, like
the ingredients which compose it, has "three numbers": and the
first matter, in the course of its transmutation, assumes three
successive colours: the Black, the White, and the Red. These three
colours are clearly analogous to the three traditional stages of the
Mystic Way: Purgation, Illumination, Union.

The alchemists call the first stage, or Blackness, Putrefaction.
In it the three principles which compose the "whole man" of body,
soul and spirit, are "sublimated" till they appear as a black
powder full of curruption, and the imperfect body is "dissolved and
purified by subtle Mercury"; as man is purified by the darkness,

1 “The Golden Tripod of the Monk Basilius Valentinus” (“The Hermetic Museum,"
eol. i. p. 319). • “A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art," p. 17.



MYSTICISM


144

naturally followed from this that the indwelling Christ, the "Corner
Stone,” the Sun of Righteousness, became, for many of the Christ
tian alchemists, identified with the Lapis Philosophorum and with
Sol: and was regarded both as the image and as the earnest 0
this “great work.” His spirit was the “noble tincture” which “can
bring that which is lowest in the death to its highest ornament 0:
glory;” 1 transmuting the natural to the supernatural, operating th<
“New Birth.” "This,” says Boehme, "is the noble precious Storn
(Lapis Philosophorum ), the Philosopher’s Stone, which the Mag
(or wise men) find which tinctureth nature , and generateth a nev
son in the old. He who findeth that, esteemeth more highly of i
than of this (outward) world. For the Son is many thousand time:
greater than the Father.” Again, “If you lake the spirit of th(
tincture, then indeed you go on a way in which many have foum
Sol; but they have followed on the way to the heart of Sol, when
the spirit of the heavenly tincture hath laid hold on them, am
brought them into the liberty, into the Majesty, where they hav<
Known the Noble Stone, Lapis Philosophorum, the Philosopher’:
Stone, and have stood amazed at man’s blindness, and seen hi*
labouring in vain. Would you fain find the Noble Stone? Behold
we will show it you plain enough, if you be a Magus, and worthy
else you shall remain blind still: therefore fall to work thus: for
it hath no more but three numbers. First tell from one till you come
to the Cross, which is ten (X) . . . and there lieth the Stone without'
any great painstaking, for it is pure and not defiled with any
earthly nature.”

“In this stone there lieth hidden, whatsoever God and the
Eternity, also heaven, the stars and elements contain and are able
to do. There never was from eternity anything better or more
precious than this, and it is offered by God and bestowed upon
man; every one may have it ... it is in a simple form, and hath
the power of the whole Deity in it.”* 1

Boehme is here using alchemic symbols, according to his
custom, in a loose and artistic manner; for the true Hermetic
Philosopher's Stone is not something which can be found but
something which must be made. The alchemists, whether their
search be for a physical or a spiritual “tincture,” say always that
this tincture is the product of the furnace and Athanor : and further
that it is composed of "three numbers” or elements, which they
call Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury. These, when found, and forced
into the proper combination, form the “Azoth” or “Philosopher’s
Egg”— the stuff or First Matter of the Great Work. Sulphur, Salt,

1 Jacob Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man,” cap. iv. § 23.

* Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man,” cap. vi. § 98; cap. x. §§ 3, 4; and
cap. xiii. §1.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 145

and Mercury, however, must not be understood in too literal a
sense. "You need not look for our metallic seed among the
elements," says Basil the Monk, "it need not be sought so far back.
If you can only rectify the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt (understand
those of the sages) until the metallic spirit and body are inseparably
joined together by means of the metallic soul, you thereby firmly
rivet the chain of love and prepare the palace for the Coronation." 1

Of these three ingredients, the important one is the spiritual
principle, the unseizable Mercury; which is far from being the
metal which we ordinarily know by that name. The Mercury
which the alchemists sought — often in strange places — is a hidden
and powerful substance. They call it "Mercury of the Wise"; and
he who can discover it, they say, is on the way towards success.
The reader in search of mystical wisdom already begins to be
bewildered; but if he persevere in this labyrinth of symbolism, he
presently discovers — as Basil the Monk indeed hints — that the
Sulphur and the Salt, or "metallic soul and body" of the spiritual
chemistry, represent something analogous to the body and mind
of man — Sulphur his earthly nature, seasoned with intellectual
Salt. The Mercury is Spirit in its most mystic sense, the Synteresis
or holy Dweller in the Innermost, the immanent spark or Divine
Principle of his life. Only the "wise," the mystically awakened,
can know this Mercury, the agent of man's transmutation: and
until it has been discovered, brought out of the hiddenness, nothing
can be done. "This Mercury or Snowy Splendour, is a Celestial
Body drawn from the beams of the Sun and the Moon. It is the
only Agent in the world for this art."* It is the divine-human
"spark of the soul," the bridge between Gold and Silver, God
and man.

The Three Principles being enclosed in the vessel, or Athanor,
which is man himself, and subjected to a gentle fire — the Incen-
dium Atnoris — the process of the Great Work, the mystic trans-
mutation of natural into spiritual man, can begin. This work, like
the ingredients which compose it, has "three numbers" : and the
first matter, in the course of its transmutation, assumes three
successive colours: the Black, the White, and the Red. These three
colours are clearly analogous to the three traditional stages of the
Mystic Way: Purgation, Illumination, Union.

The alchemists call the first stage, or Blackness, Putrefaction.
In it the three principles which compose the "whole man" of body,
soul and spirit, are "sublimated" till they appear as a black
powder full of curruption, and the imperfect body is "dissolved and
purified by subtle Mercury"; as man is purified by the darkness,

1 “The Golden Tripod of the Monk Basilius Valentinus" (“The HermeticMuseum/'
vol. i. p. 319). • “A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art," p. 17.



144 MYSTICISM

naturally followed from this that the indwelling Christ, the “Corner
Stone/' the Sun of Righteousness, became, for many of the Chris
tian alchemists, identified with the Lapis Philosophorum and with
Sol: and was regarded both as the image and as the earnest of
this “great work." His spirit was the “noble tincture" which “car
bring that which is lowest in the death to its highest ornament 01
glory ; " 1 transmuting the natural to the supernatural, operating the
“New Birth." “This," says Boehme, “is the noble precious Stone
(Lapis Philosophorum ), the Philosopher’s Stone, which the Mag
(or wise men) find which tinciureth nature , and generateth a ne^
son in the old. He who findeth that, esteemeth more highly of il
than of this (outward) world. For the Son is many thousand time*
greater than the Father." Again, “If you take the spirit of tin
tincture, then indeed you go on a way in which many have fount*
Sol ; but they have followed on the way to the heart of Sol, when
the spirit of the heavenly tincture hath laid hold on them , ant
brought them into the liberty, into the Majesty, where they have
Known the Noble Stone, Lapis Philosophorum , the Philosopher'}
Stone, and have stood amazed at man’s blindness, and seen hr
labouring in vain. Would you fain find the Noble Stone? Behold
we will show it you plain enough, if you be a Magus, and worthy
else you shall remain blind still: therefore fall to work thus: foi
it hath no more but three numbers. First tell from one till you com(
to the Cross, which is ten (X) . . . and there lieth the Stone withoul
any great painstaking, for it is pure and not defiled with an)
earthly nature."

“In this stone there lieth hidden, whatsoever God and the
Eternity, also heaven, the stars and elements contain and are able
to do. There never was from eternity anything better or more
precious than this, and it is offered by God and bestowed upoT
man; every one may have it ... it is in a simple form, and liatl
the power of the whole Deity in it." J

Boehme is here using alchemic symbols, according to his
custom, in a loose and artistic manner; for the true Hermetic
Philosopher’s Stone is not something which can be found bul
something which must be made. The alchemists, whether then
search be for a physical or a spiritual “tincture," say always thal
this tincture is the product of the furnace and Athanor : and f urthei
that it is composed of “three numbers" or elements, which the)
call Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury. These, when found, and forcec
into the proper combination, form the “Azoth" or “Philosopher’s
Egg" — the stuff or First Matter of the Great Work. Sulphur, Salt

1 Jacob Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man," cap. iv. § 23.

* Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man," cap. vi. § 98; cap. x. §§ 3, 4; aik
cap. xiii, §1.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 145

and Mercury, however, must not be understood in too literal a
sense. “You need not look for our metallic seed among the
elements/' says Basil the Monk, “it need not be sought so far back.
If you can only rectify the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt (understand
those of the sages ) until the metallic spirit and body are inseparably
joined together by means of the metallic soul, you thereby firmly
rivet the chain of love and prepare the palace for the Coronation/' 1

Of these three ingredients, the important one is the spiritual
principle, the unseizable Mercury; which is far from being the
metal which we ordinarily know by that name. The Mercury
which the alchemists sought— often in strange places — is a hidden
and powerful substance. They call it “Mercury of the Wise"; and
he who can discover it, they say, is on the way towards success.
The reader in search of mystical wisdom already begins to be
bewildered; but if he persevere in this labyrinth of symbolism, he
presently discovers — as Basil the Monk indeed hints— that the
Sulphur and the Salt, or “metallic soul and body" of the spiritual
chemistry, represent something analogous to the body and mind
of man — Sulphur his earthly nature, seasoned with intellectual
Salt. The Mercury is Spirit in its most mystic sense, the Synteresis
or holy Dweller in the Innermost, the immanent spark or Divine
Principle of his life. Only the “wise," the mystically awakened,
can know this Mercury, the agent of man’s transmutation: and
until it has been discovered, brought out of the hiddenness, nothing
can be done. “This Mercury or Snowy Splendour, is a Celestial
Body drawn from the beams of the Sun and the Moon. It is the
only Agent in the world for this art." 2 It is the divine-human
“spark of the soul," the bridge between Gold and Silver, God
and man.

The Three Principles being enclosed in the vessel, or Athanor,
which is man himself, and subjected to a gentle fire — the Incen-
dium Amoris — the process of the Great Work, the mystic trans-
mutation of natural into spiritual man, can begin. This work, like
the ingredients which compose it, has “three numbers" : and the
first matter, in the course of its transmutation, assumes three
successive colours: the Black, the White, and the Red. These three
colours are clearly analogous to the three traditional stages of the
Mystic Way: Purgation, Illumination, Union.

The alchemists call the first stage, or Blackness, Putrefaction.
In it the three principles which compose the “whole man" of body,
soul and spirit, are “sublimated" till they appear as a black
powder full of curruption, and the imperfect body is “dissolved and
purified by subtle Mercury"; as man is purified by the darkness,

1 “TheGoldenTripodof the Monk Basilius Valentinus" (“The Henne tic Museum,”
vol. i. p. 319). • “A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art," p. 17.



MYSTICISM


146

misery, and despair which follows the emergence of his spiritual
consciousness. As psychic uproar and disorder seems part of the
process of mental growth, so “Solve et coagula ” — break down that
you may build up — is the watchword of the spiritual alchemist.
The "black beast,” the passional element, of the lower nature
must emerge and be dealt with before anything further can be
done. "There is a black beast in our forest,” says the highly
allegorical "Book of Lambspring,” "his name is Putrefaction,
his blackness is called the Plead of the Raven; when it is cut off,
Whiteness appears .” 1 This Whiteness, the state of Luna, or Silver,
the "chaste and immaculate Queen,” is the equivalent of the Illu-
minative Way: the highest point which the mystic can attain
short of union with the Absolute. This White Stone is pure, and
precious; but in it the Great Work of man's spiritual evolution
has not yet reached its term. That term is the attainment of the
Red , the colour of Perfection or alchemic gold ; a process sometimes
called the "Marriage of Luna and Sol” — the fusion of the human
and divine spirit. Under this image is concealed the final secret oi
the mystic life: that ineffable union of finite and infinite — that
loving reception of the inflowing vitality of God — from which
comes forth the Magnum Opus : deified or spiritual man.

"This,” says the author oi “A Suggestive Enquiry,'* “is the
union supcrsentient, the nuptials sublime, Mentis et Universi. . . .
Lo! behold I will open to thee a mystery, cries the Adept, the
bridegroom ciowneth the bride of the north [1 i.e ., she who comes
out of the cold and darkness of the lower nature]. In the darkness
of the north, out of the crucifixion of the cerebral life, when the
sensual dominant is occultated in the Divine Fiat, and subdued,
there arises a Light wonderfully about the summit, which wisely
returned and multiplied according to the Divine Blessing, is made
substantial in life .” 1

I have said, that side by side with the metallic and planetary
language of the alchemists, runs a strange heraldic symbolism
in which they take refuge when they tear — generally without
reason — that they are telling their secrets too plainly to an
unregenerate world. Many of these heraldic emblems are used in
an utterly irresponsible manner; and whilst doubtless conveying
a meaning to the individual alchemist and the disciples for whom
he wrote, are, and must ever be, unintelligible to other men. But
others are of a more general application ; and appear so frequently
in seventeenth-century literature, whether mystical or non-
mystical, that some discussion of them may well be of use.

Perhaps the quaintest and most celebrated of all these allegories

1 “The Hermetic Museum/* vol. i. p. 272.

■ “A Suggestive Enquiry/’ p. 34*.



MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 147

hs that which describes the quest of the Philosopher's Stone as the
hunting of the Green Lion." 1 The Green Lion, though few would
divine it, is the First Matter of the Great Work: hence, in spiritual
alchemy, natural man in his wholeness — Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury in their crude state. He is called green because, seen from
the transcendent standpoint, he is still unripe, his latent powers
undeveloped; and a Lion, because of his strength, fierceness, and
virility. Here the common opinion that a pious effeminacy, a
diluted and amiable spirituality, is the proper raw material of the
mystic life, is emphatically contradicted. It is not by the educa-
tion of the lamb, but by the hunting and taming of the wild
intractable lion, instinct with vitality, full of ardour and courage,
exhibiting heroic qualities on the sensual plane, that the Great
Work is achieved. The lives of the saints enforce the same law.

"Our ]yon wanting maturitie
Is called greene for his unripeness trust me:

And yet full quickly he can run,

And soon can overtake the Sun.”*

The Green Lion, then, in his strength and wholeness is the only
creature potentially able to attain Perfection. It needs the adop-
tion and purification of all the wealth and resources of man's
nature, not merely the encouragement of his transcendental
tastes, if he is to "overtake the Sun" and achieve the Great Work.
The Kingdom of Heaven is taken by violence, not by amiable
aspiration. "The Green Lion," says one alchemist, "is the priest
by whom Sol and Luna are wed." In other words, the raw stuff
of indomitable human nature is the means by which man is to
attain union with the Absolute. The duty of the alchemist, the
transmuting process, is therefore described as the hunting of
the Green Lion through the forest of the sensual world. He, like
the Hound of Heaven, is on a love chase down the nights and
down the days.

When the lion is caught, when Destiny overtakes it, its head
must be cut off as the preliminary to the necessary taming process.
This is called by the alchemists "the head of the Raven," the Crow,
or the Vulture, "for its blackness." It represents the fierce and
corrupt life of the passions: and its removal is that "death of the
lower nature" which is the object of all asceticism — i.e., Purgation.
The lion, the whole man, Humanity in its strength, is as it were
"slain to the world," and then resuscitated; but in a very different
shape. By its passage through this mystic death or the "putre-

1 See *‘A Short Enquiry/* p, 17, and “A Suggestive Enquiry/’ pp. 297 et $eq. t
where the rhymed Alchemic tract called “Hunting the Greene Lyon” is printed
In full. » Op. cit.



MYSTICISM


148

faction of the Three Principles” the "colour of unripeness” is
taken away. Its taming completed, it receives wings, wherewith
it may fly up to Sol, the Perfect or Divine; and is transmuted, say
the alchemists, into the Red Dragon. This is to us a hopelessly
grotesque image: but to the Hermetic philosophers, whose sense
of wonder was uncorrupt, it was the deeply mystical emblem of a
new, strange, and transcendental life, powerful alike in earth and
in heaven. As the angel to the man, so was the dragon to the world
of beasts: a creature of splendour and terror, a super-brute,
veritably existent if seldom seen. We realize something of the
significance of this symbol for the alchemic writers, if we remember
how sacred a meaning it has for the Chinese : to whom the dragon
is the traditional emblem of free spiritual life, as the tiger repre-
sents the life of the material plane in its intensest form. Since it
is from China that alchemy is supposed to have reached the
European world, it may yet be found that the Red Dragon
is one of the most antique and significant symbols of the
Hermetic Art.

For the Spiritual Chemistry, then, the Red Dragon represents
Deified Man; whose emergence must always seem like the birth
of some monstrous and amazing creature when seen from the
standpoint of the merely natural world. With his coming forth,
the business of the alchemist, in so far as he be a mystic, is done.
Man has transcended his lower nature, has received wings where-
with to live on higher levels of reality. The Tincture, the latent
goldness, has been found and made dominant, the Magnum Opus
achieved. That the true and inward business of that Work, when
stripped of its many emblematic veils, was indeed the reordering
of spiritual rather than material elements, is an opinion which
rests on a more solid foundation than personal interpretations of
old allegories and alchemic tracts. The Norwich physician —
himself deeply read in the Hermetic science — has declared to us
his own certainty concerning it in few but lovely words. In them
is contained the true mystery of man’s eternal and interior quest
of the Stone : its reconciliation with that other, outgoing quest of
"the Hidden Treasure that desires to be found.”

“Do but extract from the corpulency of bodies, or resolve things
beyond their First Matter, and you discover the habitation of
Angels: which, if I call it the ubiquitary and omnipresent Essence
of God, I hope I shall not offend Divinity.” 1

1 Sir Thomas Browne, “Religio Medici/* pt. i.



CHAPTER VII

MYSTICISM AND MAGIC


Persistence of occultism — It accompanies mystical activity — is often confused
th it— Its claim stated and criticized— Its limits — It does not attain the Absolute
It influences all religion and some science — It is based on psychological laws —
s aim is to enlarge man's universe — Its method is enhancement of the will —
Ddern magic— “New" Thought— The doctrines of Magic— Eliphas L6vi—
tiroes Trismegistus — Three occult dogmas — (i) The Astral Light — antiquity
this idea — The Cosmic memory — The “universal agent" — (2) The Power of
e Will — Occult education — a re-making of character— Magic ceremonies
cuts of will-enhancement — addressed to the subconscious mind — Value of
mbols— they are (a) instruments of self-suggestion (b) autoscopes— (3) The
)C trine of Analogy — Its breadth of application— in mysticism— in art — Ab-
imal power of the trained will over the body— in religion— in evoking
inscendental consciousness— Mental healing purely magical— The theory of
igic — its defects — its influence on character — Magic and religion — Occult
>ments in Christianity— Ceremonial religion contains magical elements—' This
inevitable

[ T is unnecessary to examine in detail the mistakes— in
ecclesiastical language, the heresies— into which men have been
led by a feeble, a deformed, or an arrogant mystical sense,
lie number of these mistakes is countless; their wildness almost
conceivable to those who have not been forced to study them.
10 often the loud voices and strange declarations of their apostles
ive drowned the quieter accents of the orthodox.

It seems as though the moment of puberty were far more
itical in the spiritual than it is in the physical life: the ordinary
mgers of adolescence being intensified when they appear upon the
gher levels of consciousness. In the condition of psychic insta-
lity which is characteristic of his movement to new states, man
unusually at the mercy of the suggestions and impressions which
; receives. Hence in every period of true mystical activity we
id an outbreak of occultism, illuminism, or other perverted
>irituality and— even more dangerous and confusing for the
udent— a borderland region where the mystical and psychical
eet. In the youth of the Christian Church, side by side with
:nuine mysticism descending from the Johannine writings or
•ought in by the Christian Neoplatonists, we have the arrogant
id disorderly transcendentalism of the Gnostics: their attempted
sion of the ideals of mysticism and magic. During the Middle
ges and the Renaissance there are the spurious mysticism of the



MYSTICISM


150

Brethren of the Free Spirit, the occult propaganda of Paracelsus,
the Rosicrucians, the Christian Kabalists; and the innumerable
pantheistic, Manichean, mystery-making, and Quietist heresies S
which made war upon Catholic tradition. In the modern world,
Theosophy in its various forms is probably the most widespread
and respectable representative of the occult tradition.

The root idea from which these varied beliefs and practices
develop is always the same; and, since right doctrine is often most
easily defined by contrast with its opposite, its study is likely to
help us to fix more precisely the true characters of mysticism.
Leaving therefore the specifically mystical error of Quietism until
we come to the detailed discussion of the contemplative states,
we will consider here some of those other supernormal activities
of the self which we have already agreed to classify as magic
and learn through them more of those hidden and half -compre-
hended forces which she has at her command.

The word "magic' * is out of fashion, though its spirit was never
more widely diffused than at the present time. Thanks to the
gradual debasement of the verbal currency, it suggests to the
ordinary reader the production of optical illusions and other
parlour tricks. It has dragged with it in its fall the terrific verb
"to conjure," which, forgetting that it once undertook to compel
the spirits of men and angels, is now content to produce rabbit sj
from top-hats. These facts would have little importance, were it .
not that modern occultists — annoyed, one supposes, by this abuse '
of their ancient title — constantly arrogate to their tenets and
practices the name of "Mystical Science." Vaughan, in his rather
supercilious survey of the mystics, classed all forms of white
magic, alchemy, and occult philosophy as "theurgic mysticism," 1
and, on the other side of the shield, the occultists display an in-
creasing eagerness to claim the mystics as masters in their school. 2
Even the "three-fold way" of mysticism has been adopted by them’
and relabelled "Probation, Enlightenment, Initiation."3

In our search for the characteristics of mysticism we have
already marked the boundary which separates it from magic:
and tried to define the true nature and intention of occult phil-
osophy.4 We saw that it represented the instinctive human "desire
to know more" applied to suprasensible things. For good or ill
this desire, and the occult sciences and magic arts which express it,
have haunted humanity from the earliest times. No student of man


1 R. A. Vaughan, “Hours with the Mystics/’ vol. i. bk. i. ch. v.

* In a list published by Papus from the archives of the Martinists, we find such .
diverse names as Averroes, St. Thomas Aquinas, Vincent of Beauvais, andf
Swedenborg, given as followers of the occult tradition 1

s See R. Steiner, “The Way of Initiation/' p. in. 4 Supra , pp. 70 seq.



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC 151

can neglect their investigation, however distasteful to his intelli-
gence their superficial absurdities may be. The starting-point of
all magic, and of all magical religion — the best and purest of
occult activities — is, as in mysticism, man’s inextinguishable
conviction that there are other planes of being than those
which his senses report to him; and its proceedings represent
the intellectual and individualistic results of this conviction
— his craving for the hidden knowledge. It is, in the eyes
of those who really practise it, a moyen de parvenir : not the
performance of illicit tricks, but a serious attempt to solve the
riddle of the world. Its result, according to a modern writer upon
occult philosophy, “comprises an actual, positive, and realizable
knowledge concerning the worlds which we denominate invisible,
^because they transcend the imperfect and rudimentary faculties
of a partially developed humanity, and concerning the latent
potentialities which constitute — by the fact of their latency — the
interior man. In more strictly philosophical language, the Hermetic
science is a method of transcending the phenomenal world and
attaining to the reality which is behind phenomena/’ 1

Though fragments of this enormous claim seem able to justify
themselves in experience, the whole of it cannot be admitted.The
last phrase in particular is identical with the promise which we
have seen to be characteristic of mysticism. It presents magic as
a pathway to reality; a promise which it cannot fulfil, for the
mere transcending of phenomena does not entail the attainment
of the Absolute. Magic even at its best extends rather than escapes
the boundaries of the phenomenal world. It stands, where genuine,
for that form of transcendentalism which does abnormal things,
but does not lead anywhere: and we are likely to fall victims to
some kind of magic the moment that the declaration “I want to
know” ousts the declaration “I want to be” from the chief place
in our consciousness. The true “science of ultimates” must be a
science of pure Being, for reasons which the reader is now in a
position to discover for himself. But magic is merely a system
whereby the self tries to assuage its transcendental curiosity by
extending the activities of the will beyond their usual limits;
sometimes, according to its own account, obtaining by this means
an experimental knowledge of planes of existence usually — but
inaccurately — regarded as “supernatural.”

Even thismodified claim needs justification. For most personswho
do not specialize in the eccentric sciences the occultist can only be
said to exist in either the commercial or the academic sense. The
.fortune-teller represents one class; the annotator of improper
grimoires the other. In neither department is the thing supposed
1 A. E. Waite, “The Occult Sciences,” p. i.



MYSTICISM


152

to be taken seriously: it is merely the means of obtaining money,
or of assuaging a rather morbid curiosity. ^

Such a view is far from accurate. In magic, whether regarded
as a superstition or a science, we have at any rate the survival of a
great and ancient tradition, the true meaning of whose title should
hardly have been lost in a Christian country ; for it claims to be
the science of those Magi whose quest of the symbolic Blazing
Star brought them once, at least, to the cradle of the Incarnate
God. Its laws, and the ceremonial rites which express those laws,
have come down from immemorial antiquity. They appear to
enshrine a certain definite knowledge, and a large number of less
definite theories, concerning the sensual and supersensual worlds,
and concerning powers which man, according to occult thinkers,
may develop if he will. Orthodox persons should be careful how
they condemn the laws of magic : for they unwittingly conform to
many of them whenever they go to church. All ceremonial religion
contains some elements of magic. The art of medicine will never
wholly cast it off : many centuries ago it gave birth to that which
we now call modern science. It seems to possess inextinguishable
life. This is not surprising when we perceive how firmly occultism
is rooted in psychology: how perfectly it is adapted to certain
perennial characteristics of the human mind — its curiosity, its
arrogance, its love of mystery. r

Magic, in its uncorrupted form, claims to be a practical, intel-
lectual, highly individualistic science ; working towards the declared
end of enlarging the sphere on which the human will can work,
and obtaining experimental knowledge of planes of being usually
regarded as transcendental. It is the last descendant of a long
line of teaching — the whole teaching, in fact, of the mysteries of
Egypt and Greece — which offered to initiate man into a certain
secret knowledge and understanding of things. “In every man,''
says a modern occultist, “there are latent faculties by means of
which he can acquire for himself knowledge of the higher worlds . . .
as long as the human race has existed there have always been
schools in which those who possessed these higher faculties gave
instruction to those who were in search of them. Such are called
the occult schools, and the instruction which is imparted therein
is called esoteric science or the occult teaching/' 1

These occult schools, as they exist in the present day, state
their doctrine in terms which seem distressingly prosaic to the
romantic inquirer; borrowing from physics and psychology theories
of vibration, attraction, mental suggestion and subconscious
activity which can be reapplied for their own purposes. According
to its modern teachers, magic is simply an extension of the theory
* Steiner, “The Way of Initiation," p. 66.



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC 153

and practice of volition beyond the usual limits. The will, says
the occultist, is king, not only of the House of Life, but of the
universe outside the gates of sense. It is the key to “man limitless" ;
the true “ring of Gyges,” which can control the forces of nature,
known and unknown. This aspect of occult philosophy informs
much of the cheap American transcendentalism which is so
lightly miscalled mystical by its teachers and converts; Menu-
culture, “New 1 ' or “Higher Thought," and the scriptures of the
so-called “New Consciousness." The ingenious authors of “Volo,"
“The Will to be Well/' and “Just How to Wake the Solar Plexus,"
the seers who assure their eager disciples that by “Concentration"
they may acquire not only health, but also that wealth which is
“health of circumstance," are no mystics. They are magicians ; and
, teach, though they know it not, little else but the cardinal doctrines
of Hermetic science, omitting only their picturesque ceremonial
accompaniments . 1

These cardinal doctrines, in fact, have varied little since their
first appearance early in the world's history: though, like the
doctrines of theology, they have needed re-statement from time
to time. In discussing them I shall quote chiefly from the works of
Eliphas L 6 vi ; the pseudonym under which Alphonse Louis
Constant, the most readable occult philosopher of the nineteenth
. century, offered his conclusions to the world.

The tradition of magic, like most other ways of escape which
man has offered to his own soul, appears to have originated in the
East. It was formulated, developed, and preserved by the religion
of Egypt. It made an early appearance in that of Greece. It has
its legendary grand master in Hermes Trismegistus, who gave to it
its official name of Hermetic Science, and whose status in occultism
is much the same as that occupied by Moses in the tradition
( of the Jews. Fragmentary writings attributed to this personage,
and said to be derived from the Hermetic books, are the primitive
scriptures of occultism: and the probably spurious Tabic of
Emerald, which is said to have been discovered in his tomb, ranks
as the magician's Table of Stone . 3 In Gnosticism, in the allegories
of the Kabalah, in theosophy, in secret associations which still
exist in England, France, and Germany — and even in certain
practices embedded in the ceremonial of the Christian Church —

1 See E. Towne, “Joy Philosophy* 1 (1903) and “Just How to Wake the Solar
Plexus** (1904); R. D. Stocker, “New Thought Manual’* (1906) and “Soul
Culture" (1905); Floyd Wilson, “Man Limitless" (1905). The literature of these
sects is enormous. For a critical and entertaining account, see C. W. Ferguson,
“The Confusion of Tongues." (1929).

,, 1 It must here be pointed out that the genuine “Hermetica" — a body of ancient

philosophic and religious pieces collected under this general title — are entirely
unconnected with occultism. Cf. “Hermetica," ed. with English translation by
W. Scott. 3 vols. 1924-8.



MYSTICISM


154

the main conceptions which constitute the "secret wisdom" of
magical tradition have wandered down the centuries. The baser
off-shoots of that tradition are but too well known, and need not
be particularized . 1

Like the world which it professes to interpret, magic has a body
and a soul: an outward vesture of words and ceremonies and an
inner doctrine. The outward vesture, which is all that the uniniti-
ated are permitted to perceive, consists of a series of confusing and
often ridiculous symbolic veils: of strange words and numbers,
grotesque laws and ritual acts, personifications and mystifications.
The outward vestures of our religious, political, and social systems
— which would probably appear equally irrational to a wholly
ignorant yet critical observer — offer an instructive parallel to
this aspect of occult philosophy. Stripped of these archaic formulae,
symbols, and mystery-mongerings, however, magic as described by
its apologists, is found to rest upon three fundamental axioms
which can hardty be dismissed as ridiculous by those who listen
respectfully to tlie ever-shifting hypotheses of psychology and
physics.

(1) The first axiom declares the existence of an imponderable
"medium” or "universal agent,” which is described as beyond the
plane of our normal sensual perceptions yet interpenetrating and
binding up the material world. This agent, which is not luminous
and has nothing to do with the stars, is known to the occultists
by the unfortunate name of "Astral Light”: a term originally
borrowed from the Martinists by Eliphas Levi. To live in
conscious communication with the "Astral Light” is to live upon
the "Astral Plane,” or in the Astral World: to have achieved,
that is to say, a new level of consciousness. The education of the
occultist is directed towards this end.

This doctrine of the Astral Plane, like most of our other dia-
grams of the transcendent, possesses a respectable ancestry, and
many prosperous relations in the world of philosophic thought.
Traces of it may even be detected under veils in the speculations
of orthodox physics. It is really identical with the "Archetypal
World" or Yesod of the Kabalah — the "Perfect Land” of old
Egyptian religion — in which the true or spirit forms of all created
things are held to exist. It may be connected with the "real world”
described by such visionaries as Boehme and Blake, many of whose


1 A. E. Waite, a life-long student of these byeways of thought, gives, as the main
channels by which “an arcane knowledge is believed to have been communicated
to the West," Magic, Alchemy, Astrology, the occult associations which cul-
minated in Freemasonry, and, finally, “an obscure sheaf of hieroglyphs known as
Tarot cards." He places in another class “the bewitchments and other mummeries
of Ceremonial Magic." ("The Holy Kabbalah," pp. 518-19.)



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC


155

experiences are far more occult than mystical m character. 1 A
persistent tradition as to the existence of such a plane of being
or of consciousness is found all over the world: in Indian, Greek,
Egyptian, Celtic, and Jewish thought. “Above this visible nature
there exists another, unseen and eternal, which, when all things
created perish, does not perish/' says the Bhagavad Gita. Accord-
ing to the Kabalists it is “the seat of life and vitality, and the
nourishment of all the world/' 2 Vitalism might accept it as one
of those aspects of the universe which can be perceived by a more
extended rhythm than that of normal consciousness. Various
aspects of the Astral have been identified with the “Burning Body
of the Holy Ghost” of Christian Gnosticism and with the Odic
force of the old-fashioned spiritualists.

Further, the Astral Plane is regarded as constituting the “Cosmic
Memory/' where the images of all beings and events are preserved,
as they are preserved in the memory of man.

“The high that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard.

The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky’ 1 —

all are living in the Astral World. There too the concepts of future
creation are present in their completeness in the Eternal Now,
before being brought to birth in the material sphere. On this
theory prophecy, and also clairvoyance — one of the great objects
of occult education — consist in opening the eyes of the mind upon
this timeless Astral World: and spiritualists, evoking the phan-
toms of the dead, merely call them up from the recesses of universal
instead of individual remembrance. The reader who feels his
brain to be whirling amidst this medley of solemn statement and
unproven fairy tale must remember that the dogmatic part of
the occult tradition can only represent the attempt of an extended
or otherwise abnormal consciousness to find an explanation of its
own experiences.

Further, our whole selves — not merely our sentient selves —
are regarded as being bathed in the Astral Light, as in the ether
of physics. Hence in occult language it is a “universal agent”
connecting soul with soul, and becomes the possible vehicle of
hypnotism, telepathy, clairvoyance, and all those supernormal
phenomena which are the subject-matter of “psychical research.”
This hypothesis also accounts for the confusing fact of an initial
similarity of experience in many of the proceedings of mystic
and occultist. Both must pass through the plane of consciousness
which the concept of the “Astral” represents, because this plane

1 For a discussion of the Gnostic and Theosophic elements in Blake's work,
gee D. Surat “Blake and Modem Thought" (1929).

* A. E. Waite, “Doctrine and Literature of the Kabbalah," p. 48,



MYSTICISM


156

of perception is the one which lies "next beyond" our normal life.
The transcendental faculties may become aware of this world;
only, in the case of the mystic, to pass through it as quickly as they
can. But the occultist, the medium, the psychic, rest in the
"Astral" and develop their perceptions of this aspect of the world.
It is the medium in which they work.

From earliest times, occult philosophy has insisted on the
existence of this medium: as a scientific fact, outside the range of
our normal senses, but susceptible of verification by the trained
powers of the "initiate." The possessor of such trained powers,
not the wizard or the fortune-teller, is regarded as the true
magician: and it is the declared object of occult education, or
initiation, to actualize this supersensual plane of experience, to
give the student the power of entering into conscious communion ,
with it, and teach him to impose upon its forces the directive
force of his own will, as easily as he imposes that will upon the
"material" things of sense. 1

( 2 ) This brings us to the second axiom of magic, which also
has a curiously modern air: for it postulates simply the limitless
power of the disciplined human will. This dogma has been “taken
over" without acknowledgment from occult philosophy to become
the trump card of menticulture, "Christian Science," and "New
Thought." The preachers of "Joy Philosophy" and other dilute ,
forms of mental discipline, the Liberal Catholic "priest" producing
"a vast bubble of etheric astromental matter, a thought-edifice,
ethereal, diaphanous, a bubble which just includes the congrega-
tion — these are the true hierophants of magic in the modern
world.3

The first lesson of the would-be magus is self-mastery. "By
means of persevering and gradual athletics," says Eliphas Levi,
"the powers of the body can be developed to an amazing extent.
It is the same with the powers of the soul. Would you govern 1
yourself and others? Learn how to will. How may one learn how
to will ? This is the first secret of magical initiation ; and it was to
make the foundations of this secret thoroughly understood that
the antique keepers of the mysteries surrounded the approach to
the sanctuary with so many terrors and illusions. They did not
believe in a will until it had given its proofs ; and they were right.

1 I offer no opinion as to the truth or falsity of these “occult'' claims. For a
more detailed discussion the reader is referred to Steiner's curious little book,
“The Way of Initiation.''

* C. W. Leadbeater, ‘The Science of the Sacraments,” p. 38.

3 Compare the following : “Imagine that all the world and the starry hosts are
waiting, alert and with shining eyes, to do your bidding. Imagine that you are
to touch the button now, and instantly they will spring to do the rest. The
instant you say, ‘J can and I will ,' the entire powers of the universe are to be
*et in motion” (E. Towne, “Joy Philosophy,” p. 52).



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC 157

Strength cannot prove itself except by conquest. Idleness and
negligence are the enemies of the will ; and this is the reason why
all religions have multiplied their practices and made their cults
difficult and minute. The more trouble one gives oneself for an

idea, the more power one acquires in regard to that idea Hence

the power of religions resides entirely in the inflexible will of those
who practise them." 1

This last sentence alone is enough to define the distinction
between mysticism and magic, and clear the minds of those who
tend to confuse the mystical and magical elements of religion. In
accordance with it, real "magical initiation" is in essence a form
of mental discipline, strengthening and focussing the will. This
discipline, like that of the religious life, consists partly in physical
, austerities and a deliberate divorce from the world, partly in the
cultivation of will-power: but largely in a yielding of the mind to
the influence of suggestions which have been selected and accumu-
lated in the course of ages because of their power over that
imagination which Eliphas L6vi calls "The eye of the soul." There
is nothing supernatural about it. Like the more arduous, more
disinterested self-training of the mystic, it is character-building
with an object, conducted upon an heroic scale. In magic the "will
to know" is the centre round which the personality is rearranged.
As in mysticism, unconscious factors are dragged from the
hiddenness to form part of that personality. The uprushes of
thought, the abrupt intuitions which reach us from the subliminal
region, are developed, ordered, and controlled by rhythms and
symbols which have become traditional because the experience
of centuries has proved, though it cannot explain, their efficacy:
and powers of apprehension which normally lie below the
threshold may thus be liberated and enabled to report their
discoveries.

"The fundamental principle," says A. E. Waite, speaking of
occult evocations, "was in the exercise of a certain occult force
resident in the magus, and strenuously exerted for the establish-
ment of such a correspondence between two planes of nature as
would effect his desired end. This exertion was termed the evoca-
tion, conjuration, or calling of the spirit, but that which in reality
was raised was the energy of the inner man ; tremendously developed
and exalted by combined will and aspiration, this energy ger-
minated by sheer force a new intellectual faculty of sensible
psychological perception. To assist and stimulate this energy into
the most powerful possible operation, artificial means were almost
invariably used. . . . The synthesis of these methods and processes


* “Rituel de la Haute Magie,” pp. 35, 36.



MYSTICISM


158

was called Ceremonial Magic, which in effect was a tremendous
forcing-house of the latent faculties of man's spiritual nature .” 1

This is the psychological explanation of those apparently
absurd rituals of preparation, doctrines of signs and numbers,
pentacles, charms, angelical names, the “power of the word”
which made up ceremonial magic. The power of such artifices is
known amongst the Indian mystics; who, recognizing in the
Mantra , or occult and rhythmic formula, consciously held and
repeated, an invaluable help to the attainment of the true ecstatic
state, are not ashamed to borrow from the magicians. So, too,
the modern American schools of mental healing and New Thought
recommend concentration upon a carefully selected word as the
starting-point of efficacious meditation. This fact of the psychical
effect of certain verbal combinations, when allowed to dominate
the field of consciousness, may have some bearing upon that need
of a formal liturgy which is felt by nearly every great religion: for
religion, on its ceremonial side, has certain affinities with magic.
It, too, seeks by sensible means to stimulate supra-sensible ener-
gies. The true magic “word” or spell is untranslatable; because
its power resides only partially in that outward sense which is
apprehended by the reason, but chiefly in the rhythm, which is
addressed to the subliminal mind. Symbols, religious and other,
and symbolic acts which appear meaningless when judged by the
intellect alone, perform a similar office. They express the deep-
seated instinct of the human mind that it must have a focus on
which to concentrate its volitional powers, if those powers are to
be brought to their highest state of efficiency. The nature of the
focus matters little: its office matters much.

“. . . All these figures, and acts analogous to them,” says Levi,
“all these dispositions of numbers and of characters [i.e. sacred
words, charms, pentacles, etc.] are, as we have said, but instru-
ments for the education of the will, of which they fix and determine
the habits. They serve also to concentrate in action all the powers
of the human soul, and to strengthen the creative power of the
imagination. ... A practice, even though it be superstitious and
foolish, may be efficacious because it is a realization of the will.
.... We laugh at the poor woman who denies herself a ha'porth of
milk in the morning, that she may take a little candle to burn
upon the magic triangle in some chapel. But those who laugh are
ignorant, and the poor woman does not pay too dearly for the
courage and resignation which she thus obtains . 2

* "The Occult Sciences," p. 14. But references in Mr. Waite's most recent work
to "the puerilities and imbecility of ceremonial magic" suggest that he has
modified his views. Cf. "The Holy Kabbalah" (1929), p. 521.

2 "Rituel de la Haute Magic," p. 71 .



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC 159

Magic symbols, therefore, from penny candles to Solomon's seal,
fall in modem technical language into two classes. The first
contains instruments of self-suggestion, exaltation, and will
direction. To this belong all spells, charms, rituals, perfumes: from
the magician's vervain wreath to the “Youth! Health! Strength!"
which the student of New Thought repeats when she is brushing
her hair in the morning. The second class contains autoscopes :
i.e., material objects which focus and express the subconscious
perceptions of the operator. The dowser’s divining rod, fortune-
teller's cards, and crystal-gazer's ball, are characteristic examples.
Both kinds are rendered necessary rather by the disabilities of
the human than by the peculiarities of the superhuman plane:
and the great adept may attain heights at which he dispenses
with these “outward and visible signs." “Ceremonies being, as
we have said, artificial methods of creating certain habits of the
will, they cease to be necessary when these habits have become
fixed." 1 These facts, now commonplaces of psychology, have
long been known and used by students of magic. Those who judge
the philosophy by the apparent absurdity of its symbols and cere-
monies should remember that the embraces, gestures, grimaces,
and other ritual acts by which we all concentrate, liberate, or
express love, wrath, or enthusiasm, will ill endure the cold reveal-
ing light of a strictly rational inquiry.

(3) The dogmas of the “Astral Light" or universal agent and the
“power of the will" are completed by a third: the doctrine of
Analogy, of an implicit correspondence between appearance and
reality, the microcosm of man and the macrocosm of the universe,
the seen and the unseen worlds. In this, occultism finds the basis
of its transcendental speculations. Quod superius sicut quod inferius
— the first words of that Emerald Table which was once attributed
to Hermes Trismegistus himself — is an axiom which must be
agreeable to all Platonists. It plays a great part in the theory of
mysticism; which, whilst maintaining an awed sense of the total
“otherness" and incomprehensibility of the Divine, has always
assumed that the path of the individual soul towards loving union
with the Absolute is somehow analogous with the path on which
the universe moves to its consummation in God.

The notion of analogy ultimately determines the religious con-
cepts of every race, and resembles the verities of faith in the
breadth of its application. It embraces alike the appearances of
the visible world — which thus become the mirrors of the invisible
— the symbols of religion, the tiresome arguments of Butler's
u Analogy,” the allegories of the Kabalah and the spiritual
alchemists, and that childish “doctrine of signatures" on which
* “Rituel de la Haute Magic,” p. 139.



MYSTICISM


160

much of mediaeval science was built. “Analogy,” says L6vi,* “is
the last word of science and the first word of faith . . . the sole
possible mediator between the visible and the invisible, between
the finite and the infinite." Here Magic clearly defines her own
limitations; stepping incautiously from the useful to the universal,
and laying down a doctrine which no mystic could accept — which,
carried to its logical conclusion, would turn the adventure of the
infinite into a guessing game.

The argument by analogy is carried by the occultists to lengths
which cannot be described here. Armed with this torch, they ex-
plore the darkest, most terrible mysteries of life: and do not hesi-
tate to cast the grotesque shadows of these mysteries upon the
unseen world. The principle of correspondence is no doubt sound
so long as it works within reasonable limits. It was admitted into
the system of the Kabalah, though that profound and astute
philosophy was far from giving to it the importance which it as-
sumes in Hermetic “science.” It has been eagerly accepted by many
of the mystics. Boehme and Swedenborg availed themselves of its
method in presenting their intuitions to the world. It is implicitly
acknowledged by thinkers of many other schools: its influence
permeates the best periods of literature. Sir Thomas Browne
spoke for more than himself when he said, in a well-known passage
of the "Religio Medici”: "The severe schools shall never laugh me
out of the philosophy of Hermes \i.e. t Trismegistus] that this
visible world is but a picture of the invisible, wherein, as in a
portrait, things are not truly but in equivocal shapes, and as they
counterfeit some real substance in that invisible framework.”
Such a sense of analogy, whatever the "severe schools” may say,
is indeed the foundation of every perfect work of art. “Intuitive
perception of the hidden analogies of things,” says Hazlitt in
“English Novelists,” “or, as it may be called, his instinct of the
imagination , is perhaps what stamps the character of genius on
the productions of art more than any other circumstance.”

The central doctrine of magic may now be summed up thus: —

(i) That a supersensible and real “cosmic medium” exists,
which interpenetrates, influences, and supports the tangible and
apparent world, and is amenable to the categories both of philo-
sophy and of physics.

(z) That there is an established analogy and equilibrium
between the real and unseen world, and the illusory manifestations
which we call the world of sense.

(3) That this analogy may be discerned, and this equilibrium
controlled, by the disciplined will of man, which thus becomes
master of itself and of fate.

1 "Dogme de la Haute Magie," p. 361 et seq.



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC


161


We must now examine in more detail the third of these proposi-
tions — that which ascribes abnormal powers to the educated and
disciplined will — for this assumption lies at the root of all magical
practices, old and new."Magical operations, "says Eliphas L4vi,"are
the exercise of a power which is natural, but superior to the ordin-
ary powers of nature. They are the result of a science, and of habits,
which exalt the human will above its usual limits/' 1 This power
of the will is now recognized as playing an important part both in
the healing of the body and the healing of the soul; for our most
advanced theories on these subjects are little more than the old
wine of magic in new bottles. The ancient occultists owed much of
their power, and also of their evil reputation, to the fact that they
were psychologists before their time. Effective methods of sugges-
tion, recipes for the alteration and exaltation of personality and
enhancement of will-power, the artificial production of hypnotic
states, photisms, automatisms, and ecstasy, with the opening up of
the subliminal field which accompanies these phenomena — con-
cealed from the profane by a mass of confusing allegories and
verbiage — form the backbone of all genuine occult rituals. Their
authors were aware that ceremonial magic has no objective
importance, but depends solely on its effect upon the operator's
mind. That this effect might be enhanced, it was given an atmo-
sphere of sanctity and mystery ; its rules were strict, its higher rites
difficult of attainment. These rules and rites constituted at once
a test of the student's earnestness and a veil guarding the sanctuary
from the profane. The long and difficult preparations, majestic
phrases, and strange ceremonies of an evocation had power, not
over the spirit of the dead, but over the consciousness of the
living ; who was thus caught up from the world of sense to a new
plane of perception.Thus, according to its apologists, the education
of the genuine occult student tends to awaken in him a new view
and a new attitude. It adjusts the machinery of his cinematograph
to the registering of new intervals in the stream of things, which
passed it by before; and thus introduces new elements into that
picture by which ordinary men are content to know and judge th^
— or rather their — universe.

So much for the principles which govern occult education. Magic
therapeutics, or as it is now called, "mental healing," is but the
application of these principles upon another plane. It results, first,
from a view of humanity which sees a difference only of degree
between diseases of body and of soul, and can state seriously and
in good faith that "moral maladies are more contagious than
physical, and there are some triumphs of infatuation and fashion
which are comparable to leprosy or cholera."* Secondly, it is
1 “Rituel de la Haute Magie," p. 32. * “Dogme de la Haute Magie,' p. 129.



MYSTICISM


162

worked by that enhancement of will power, that ability to alter
and control weaker forms of life, which is claimed as the reward
of the occult discipline. "All the power of the occult healer lies
in his conscious will and all his art consists in producing faith
in the patient." 1

This simple truth was in the possession of occult thinkers at
a time when Church and State saw no third course between the
burning or beatification of its practitioners. Now, under the
polite names of mental hygiene, suggestion, and psycho-thera-
peutics, it is steadily advancing to the front rank of medical
shibboleths. Yet it is still the same "magic art" which has been
employed for centuries, with varying ritual accompaniments, by
the adepts of occult science. The methods of Brother Hilarian
Tissot, who is described as curing lunacy and crime by "the un-
conscious use of the magnetism of Paracelsus," who attributed
his cases "either to disorder of the will or to the perverse influence
of external wills," and would "regard all crimes as acts of madness
and treat the wicked as diseased," 2 anticipated in many respects
those of the most modern psychologists.

The doctrine of magic which has here been described shows us
the "Secret Wisdom" at its best and sanest. But even on these
levels, it is dogged by the defects which so decisively separate
the occultist from the mystic. The chief of these is the peculiar
temper of mind, the cold intellectual arrogance, the intensely
individual point of view which occult studies seem to induce by
their conscious quest of exclusive power and knowledge, their
implicit neglect of love. At bottom, every student of occultism
is striving towards a point at which he may be able to "touch the
button" and rely on the transcendental world "springing to do
the rest." In this hard-earned acquirement of power over the
Many, he tends to forget the One. In Levi's words, "Too deep a
study of the mysteries of nature may estrange from God the
careless investigator, in whom mental fatigue paralyses the
ardours of the heart. "3 When he wrote this sentence Levi stood,
as the greater occultists have often done, at the frontiers of
mysticism. The best of the Hermetic philosophers, indeed, are
hardly ever without such mystical hankerings, such flashes of
illumination; as if the transcendental powers of man, once roused
from sleep, cannot wholly ignore the true end for which they
were made.

In Levi's case, as is well known, the discord between the occult
and mystical ideals was resolved by his return to the Catholic
Church. Characteristically, he "read into" Catholicism much

* “Rituel,” p. 312. 1 “Dogma/* p. 134.

i “Histoire de la Magie,” p. 514.



MYSTICISM AND MAGIC


163

that the orthodox would hardly allow; so that it became for him,
as it were, a romantic gloss on the occult tradition. He held that
the Christian Church, nursing mother of the mystics, was also the
heir of the magi ; and that popular piety and popular magic veiled
the same ineffable truths. He had more justification than at first
appears probable for this apparently wild and certainly heretical
statement. Religion, as we have seen, can never entirely divorce
herself from magic: for her rituals and sacraments must have,
if they are to be successful in their appeal to the mind, a certain
magical character. All persons who are naturally drawn towards
the ceremonial aspect of religion are acknowledging the strange
power of subtle rhythms, symbolic words and movements, over
the human will. An "impressive service" conforms exactly to
the description which I have already quoted of a magical rite : it
is "a tremendous forcing-house of the latent faculties of man's
spiritual nature." Sacraments, too, however simple their begin-
nings, always tend, as they evolve, to assume upon the phenomenal
plane a magical aspect — a fact which does not invalidate their
claim to be the vehicles of supernatural grace. Those who have
observed with understanding, for instance, the Roman rite of
baptism, with its spells and exorcisms, its truly Hermetic employ-
ment of salt, anointing chrism and ceremonial lights, must have
seen in it a ceremony far nearer to the operations of white magic
than to the simple lustrations practised by St. John the Baptist.

There arc obvious objections to the full working out ol this
subject in a book which is addressed to readers of all shades of
belief; but any student who is interested in this branch of religious
psychology may easily discover for himself the occult elements in
the liturgies of the Christian — or indeed of any other — Church.
There are invocative arrangements of the Names of God which
appear alike in grimoire and in Missal. Sacred numbers, ritual
actions, perfumes, purifications, words of power, are all used, and
rightly used by institutional religion in her work of opening up
the human mind to the messages of the suprasensible world. In
certain minor observances, and charm-like prayers, we seem to
stand on the very borderland between magician and priest.

It is surely inevitable that this should be so. The business of
the Church is to appeal to the whole man, as she finds him living
in the world of sense. She would hardly be adequate to this task
did she neglect the powerful weapons which the occultist has
developed for his own ends. She, who takes the simplest and most
common gifts of nature and transmutes them into heavenly food,
takes also every discovery which the self has made concerning
its own potentialities, and turns them to her own high purposes.
Founding her external system on sacraments and symbols, on



MYSTICISM


164

rhythmic invocations and ceremonial acts of praise, insisting on
the power of the pure and self-denying will and the "magic chain”
of congregational worship, she does but join hands with those Magi
whose gold, frankincense, and myrrh were the first gifts that she
received.

But she pays for this ; sharing some of the limitations of the system
which her Catholic nature has compelled her to absorb. It is true,
of course, that she purges it of all its baser elements — its arrogance,
its curiosity — true also that she is bound to adopt it, because
it is the highest common measure which she can apply to the
spirituality of that world to which she is sent. But she cannot —
and her great teachers have always known that she cannot — extract
finality from a method which does not really seek after ultimate
things. This method may and does teach men goodness, gives them
happiness and health. It can even induce in them a certain exalta-
tion in which they become aware, at any rate for a moment, of the
existence of the supernatural world — a stupendous accomplish-
ment. But it will not of itself make them citizens of that world:
give to them the freedom of Reality.

"The work of the Church in the world," says Patmore, "is not
to teach the mysteries of life, so much as to persuade the soul to
that arduous degree of purity at which God Himself becomes her
teacher. The work of the Church ends when the knowledge of
God begins .” 1


* “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," “Knowledge and Science," xxii.



PART TWO
THE MYSTIC WAY



"As the Pilgrim passes while the Country permanent remains
So Men pass on; but the States remain permanent for ever."

Blake, “Jerusalem.”



CHAPTER I


INTRODUCTORY


Our object is to describe the normal development of mystic consciousness — Its
difficulty — Mystics differ enormously from one another — No one mystic completely
typical — A “composite portrait" necessary — Its characteristics — The developing
mystic consciousness oscillates between pain and pleasure states — Its growth is a
continuous transcendence — Five great stages : i. Awakening or Conversion; 2. Self-
knowledge or Purgation; 3. Illumination; 4. Surrender, or the Dark Night;
*5. Union — Distinction between Union and Ecstasy — Unitive Life the goal of the
Mystic Way — Annihilation of Self the end of Oriental Mysticism — Christian Mys-
ticism denies this interpretation of Union — Finds in it the enhancement not the
suppression of life — The Divine Dark — The true Unitive Life active — A state of
Divine Fecundity — The “great actives" — Their dual character of action and
fruition — St. Catherine of Siena — The proper end of the Mystic Way is Deification

W e are now to turn from general principles and study
those principles in action : to describe the psychological
process, or "Mystic Way,” by which that peculiar type
«of personality which is able to set up direct relations with the
Absolute is usually developed. The difficulty of this description
will lie in the fact that all mystics differ one from another; as all
the individual objects of our perception, "living” and "not
living,” do. The creative impulse in the world, so far as we arc
aware of it, appears upon ultimate analysis to be free and original,
not bound and mechanical: to express itself, in defiance of the
determinists, with a certain artistic spontaneity. Man, when he
.picks out some point of likeness as a basis on which to arrange its
productions in groups, is not discovering its methods; but merely
making for his own convenience an arbitrary choice of one or two
—not necessarily characteristic — qualities, which happen to
appear in a certain number of different persons or things. Hence
the most scientific classification is a rough-and-ready business at
the best . 1

When we come to apply such classification to so delicate and
elusive a series of psychological states as those which accompany
the "contemplative life,” all the usual difficulties are increased.
No one mystic can be discovered in whom all the observed charac-
teristics of the transcendental consciousness are resumed, and

* 1 Science seems more and more inclined to acquiesce in this judgment. See
especially A. N. Whitehead: “Man and the Modem World" and “Religion in the
Making."


167



MYSTICISM


168

who can on that account be treated as typical. Mental states which
are distinct and mutually exclusive in one case, exist simultane-
ously in another. In some, stages which have been regarded as
essential are entirely omitted: in others, their order appears to be
reversed. We seem at first to be confronted by a group of selves
which arrive at the same end without obeying any general law.

Take, however, a number of such definitely mystical selves and
make of them, so to speak, a "composite portrait": as anthropolo-
gists do when they wish to discover the character of a race. From
this portrait we may expect a type to emerge, in which all the
outstanding characteristics contributed by the individual examples
are present together, and minor variations are suppressed. Such
a portrait will of course be conventional: but it will be useful as a
standard, which can be constantly compared with, and corrected
by, isolated specimens.

The first thing we notice about this composite portrait is that
the typical mystic seems to move towards his goal through a
series of strongly marked oscillations between "states of pleasure"
and "states of pain." The existence and succession of these
states — sometimes broken and confused, sometimes crisply defined
— can be traced, to a greater or less degree, in almost every case of
which we possess anything like a detailed record. Gyrans gyrando
vadit spiritus. The soul, as it treads the ascending spiral of its road'
towards reality, experiences alternately the sunshine and the shade.
These experiences are “constants" of the transcendental life. "The
Spiritual States of the Soul are all Eternal," said Blake, with
the true mystical genius for psychology. 1

The complete series of these states — and it must not be for-
gotten that few individuals present them all in perfection, whilst
in many instances several are blurred or appear to be completely
suppressed — will be, I think, most conveniently arranged under,
five heads. This method of grouping means, of course, the abandon-
ment of the time-honoured threefold division of the Mystic Way,
and the apparent neglect of St. Teresa's equally celebrated Seven
Degrees of Contemplation; but I think that we shall gain more
than we lose by adopting it. The groups, however, must be looked
upon throughout as diagrammatic, and only as answering loosely
and generally to experiences which seldom present themselves in
so rigid and unmixed a form. These experiences, largely conditioned
as they are by surroundings and by temperament, exhibit all
the variety and spontaneity which are characteristic of life in its
highest manifestations: and, like biological specimens, they lose
something of their essential reality in being prepared for scientific (
investigation. Taken all together, they constitute phases in a
1 “Jerusalem/' pt. iii.



INTRODUCTORY


169

single process of growth ; involving the movement of conscious-
ness from lower to higher levels of reality, the steady remaking of
character in accordance with the “independent spiritual world/'
But as the study of physical life is made easier for us by an artificial
division into infancy, adolescence, maturity, and old age, so
a discreet indulgence of the human passion for map-making
will increase our chances of understanding the nature of the
Mystic Way.

Here, then, is the classification under which we shall study the
phases of the mystical life.

(1) The awakening of the Self to consciousness of Divine
Reality. This experience, usually abrupt and well-marked, is
accompanied by intense feelings of joy and exaltation.

(2) The Self, aware for the first time of Divine Beauty, realizes
by contrast its own finiteness and imperfection, the manifold
illusions in which it is immersed, the immense distance which
separates it from the One. Its attempts to eliminate by discipline
and mortification all that stands in the way of its progress towards
union with God constitute Purgation : a state of pain and effort.

(3) When by Purgation the Self has become detached from the
“things of sense," and acquired those virtues which are the
“ornaments of the spiritual marriage," its joyful consciousness of
the Transcendent Order returns in an enhanced form. Like the
prisoners in Plato's “Cave of Illusion," it has awakened to know-
ledge of Reality, has struggled up the harsh and difficult path
to the mouth of the cave. Now it looks upon the sun. This is
Illumination : a state which includes in itself many of the stages
of contemplation, “degrees of orison," visions and adventures of
the soul described by St. Teresa and other mystical writers. These
form, as it were, a way within the Way: a moyen de parvenir, a
training devised by experts which will strengthen and assist the
mounting soul. They stand, so to speak, for education; whilst the
Way proper represents organic growth. Illumination is the “con-
templative state" par excellence . It forms, with the two preceding
states, the “first mystic life." Many mystics never go beyond it;
and, on the other hand, many seers and artists not usually classed
amongst them, have shared, to some extent, the experiences of
the illuminated state. Illumination brings a certain apprehension
of the Absolute, a sense of the Divine Presence: but not true union
with it. It is a state of happiness.

(4) In the development of the great and strenuous seekers after
God, this is followed — or sometimes intermittently accompanied —
by the most terrible of all the experiences of the Mystic Way:
the final and complete purification of the Self, which is called
by some contemplatives the “mystic pain" or “mystic death,"



MYSTICISM


170

by others the Purification of the Spirit or Dark Night of the Soul .
The consciousness which had, in Illumination, sunned itself in
the sense of the Divine Presence, now suffers under an equally
intense sense of the Divine Absence: learning to dissociate the
personal satisfaction of mystical vision from the reality of mystical
life. As in Purgation the senses were cleansed and humbled, and
the energies and interests of the Self were concentrated upon
transcendental things: so now the purifying process is extended
to the very centre of I-hood, the will. The human instinct for
personal happiness must be killed. This is the “spiritual crucifixion"
so often described by the mystics : the great desolation in which the
soul seems abandoned by the Divine. The Self now surrenders
itself, its individuality, and its will, completely. It desires nothing,
asks nothing, is utterly passive, and is thus prepared for

(5) Union: the true goal of the mystic quest. In this state the
Absolute Life is not merely perceived and enjoyed by the Self, as
in Illumination: but is one with it. This is the end towards which
all the previous oscillations of consciousness have tended. It is
a state of equilibrium, of purely spiritual life; characterized by
peaceful joy, by enhanced powers, by intense certitude. To cail
this state, as some authorities do, by the name of Ecstasy, is
inaccurate and confusing: since the term Ecstasy has long been
used both by psychologists and ascetic writers to define that short
and rapturous trance — a state with well-marked physical and
psychical accompaniments — in which the contemplative, losing
all consciousness of the phenomenal world, is caught up to a brief
and immediate enjoyment of the Divine Vision. Ecstasies of this
kind are often experienced by the mystic in Illumination, or even
on his first conversion. They cannot therefore be regarded as
exclusively characteristic of the Unitive Way. In some of the
greatest mystics — St. Teresa is an example — the ecstatic trance
seems to diminish rather than increase in frequency after the
state of union has been attained: whilst others achieve the
heights by a path which leaves on one side all abnormal phenomena.

Union must be looked upon as the true goal of mystical growth ;
that permanent establishment of life upon transcendent levels of
reality, of which ecstasies give a foretaste to the soul. Intense
forms of it, described by individual mystics, under symbols such
as those of Mystical Marriage, Deification, or Divine Fecundity,
all prove on examination to be aspects of this same experience
“seen through a temperament."

It is right, however, to state here that Oriental Mysticism
insists upon a further stage beyond that of union, which stage it
regards as the real goal of the spiritual life. This is the total
annihilation or reabsorption of the individual soul in the Infinite.



INTRODUCTORY


171

Such an annihilation is said by the Sufis to constitute the “Eighth
Stage of Progress,” in which alone they truly attain to God. Thus
* stated, it appears to differ little from the Buddhist's Nirvana, and
is the logical corollary of that pantheism to which the Oriental
mystic always tends. Thus Jalalu d’Din:

”0, let me not exist! for Non-Existence
Proclaims in organ tones, To Him we shall return/” 1

It is at least doubtful, however, whether the interpretation
which has been put by European students upon such passages as
this be correct. The language in which A1 Ghazzali attempts to
describe the Eighth Stage is certainly more applicable to the
Unitive Life as understood by Christian contemplatives, than to
’the Buddhistic annihilation of personality. “The end of Sufi-ism,”
he says, “is total absorption in Goa. This is at least the relative
end to that part of their doctrine which I am free to reveal and
describe. But in reality it is but the beginning of the Sufi life, for
those intuitions and other things which precede it are, so to speak,
but the porch by which they enter. ... In this state some have
imagined themselves to be amalgamated with God, others to be
identical with Him, others again to be associated with Him : but
all this is sin” 2

' The doctrine of annihilation as the end of the soul's ascent,
whatever the truth may be as to the Moslem attitude concerning
it., is decisively rejected by all European mystics, though a belief
in it is constantly imputed to them by their enemies: for their aim
is not the suppression of life, but its intensification, a change in its
form. This change, they say in a paradox which is generally
misunderstood, consists in the perfecting of personality by the
utter surrender of self. It is true that the more Orientally-minded
, amongst them, such as Dionysius the Areopagite, do use language
of a negative kind which seems almost to involve a belief in the
annihilation rather than the transformation of the self in God:
but this is because they are trying to describe a condition of super-
sensible vitality from the point of view of the normal consciousness,
to which it can only seem a Nothing, a Dark, a Self-loss. Further,
it will be found that this language is often an attempt to describe
the conditions of transitory perception, not those of permanent
existence: the characteristics, that is to say, of the Ecstatic
Trance, in which for a short time the whole self is lifted to trans-
cendent levels, and the Absolute is apprehended by a total
suspension of the surface consciousness. Hence the Divine Dark,
the Nothing, is not a state of non-being to which the mystic aspires

1 Quoted by R. A. Nicholson, “The Mystics of Islam/' p. 168.

* Schmdlders, “Les Ecoles Philosophiques chez ies Arabes," p. 61.



MYSTICISM


172

to attain: it is rather a paradoxical description of his experience
of that Undifferentiated Godhead, that Supernal Light whence
he may, in his ecstasies, bring down fire from heaven to light 1
the world.

In the mystics of the West, the highest forms of Divine Union
impel the self to some sort of active, rather than of passive life :
and this is now recognized by the best authorities as the true
distinction between Christian and non-Christian mysticism.
'The Christian mystics,” says Delacroix, "move from the Infinite
to the Definite; they aspire to infinitize life and to define Infinity;
they go from the conscious to the subconscious, and from the
subconscious to the conscious. The obstacle in their path is not
consciousness in general, but stf//-consciousness, the consciousness
of the Ego. The Ego is the limitation, that which opposes itself to.
the Infinite: the states of consciousness free from self, lost in a
vaster consciousness, may become modes of the Infinite, and
states of the Divine Consciousness .” 1 So Starbuck: "The individual
learns to transfer himself from a centre of self-activity into an
organ of revelation of universal being, and to live a life of affec-
tion for and one-ness with, the larger life outside.”*

Hence, the ideal of the great contemplatives, the end of their
long education, is to become "modes of the Infinite.” Filled with
an abounding sense of the Divine Life, of ultimate and adorable
reality, sustaining and urging them on, they wish to communicate
the revelation, the more abundant life, which they have received.
Not spiritual marriage, but divine fecundity is to be their final
state. In a sense St. Teresa in the Seventh Habitation, Suso when
his great renunciation is made, have achieved the quest; yet there
is nothing passive in the condition to which they have come. Not
Galahad, but the Grail-bearer is now their type : and in their life,
words or works they are impelled to exhibit that "Hidden Treasure
which desires to be found.”

"You may think, my daughters,” says St. Teresa, "that the
soul in this state [of union] should be so absorbed that she can
occupy herself with nothing. You deceive yourselves. She turns
with greater ease and ardour than before to all that which belongs
to the service of God, and when these occupations leave her free
again, she remains in the enjoyment of that companionship. ”3
No temperament is less slothful than the mystical one; and
the "quiet” to which the mystics must school themselves in the
early stages of contemplation is often the hardest of their tasks.
The abandonment of bodily and intellectual activity is only

* “Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 235.

* “The Psychology of Religion/' p. 147.

3 “El Castillo Interior," Moradas Setimas, cap. i.



INTRODUCTORY


173

undertaken in order that they may, in the words of Plotinus,
"energize enthusiastically'" upon another plane. Work they must:
•but this work may take many forms — forms which are sometimes
so wholly spiritual that they are not perceptible to practical minds.
Much of the misunderstanding and consequent contempt of the
contemplative life comes from the narrow and superficial defini-
tion of "work" which is set up by a muscular and wage-earning
community.

All records of mysticism in the West, then, are also the records
of supreme human activity. Not only of "wrestlers in the spirit"
but also of great organizers, such as St. Teresa and St. John of the
Cross; of missionaries preaching life to the spiritually dead, such
as St. Francis of Assisi, St. Ignatius Loyola, Eckhart, Suso,
Tauler, Fox; of philanthropists, such as St. Catherine of Genoa or
St. Vincent de Paul; poets and prophets, such as Mechthild of
Magdeburg, Jacopone da Todi and Blake; finally, of some im-
mensely virile souls whose participaion in the Absolute Life has
seemed to force on them a national destiny. Of this St. Bernard,
St. Catherine of Siena, and Saint Joan of Arc are the supreme
examples. "The soul enamoured of My Truth," said God's voice
to St. Catherine of Siena, "never ceases to serve the whole world
in general." 1

* Utterly remade in the interests of Reality, exhibiting that dual
condition of fruition and activity which Ruysbroeck described
as the crowning stage of human evolution, the "Supreme summit
of the Inner Life," 2 all these lived, as it were, with both hands;
towards the finite and towards the Infinite, towards God and man.
It is true that in nearly every case such "great actives" have first
left the world, as a necessary condition of establishing communion
with that Absolute Life which reinforced their own: for a mind
distracted by the many cannot apprehend the One. Hence some-
thing equivalent to the solitude of the wilderness is an essential part
of mystical education. But, having established that communion,
re-ordered their inner lives upon transcendent levels — being
united with their Source not merely in temporary ecstasies, but
in virtue of a permanent condition of the soul, they were impelled
to abandon their solitude; and resumed, in some way, their
contact with the world in order to become the medium whereby
that Life flowed out to other men. To go up alone into the moun-
tain and come back as an ambassador to the world, has ever been
the method of humanity's best friends. This systole-and-diastole
motion of retreat as the preliminary to a return remains the true
ideal of Christian Mysticism in its highest development. Those in

1

* Dialogo, cap. vii.

t “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1. ii. cap. lxxiii.



MYSTICISM


174

whom it is not found, however great in other respects they may be,
must be considered as having stopped short of the final stage.

Thus St. Catherine of Siena spent three years in hermit -like*
seclusion in the little room which we still see in her house in the
Via Benincasa, entirely cut off from the ordinary life of her
family. "Within her own house,” says her legend, "she found
the desert; and a solitude in the midst of people .” 1 There Catherine
endured many mortifications, was visited by ecstasies and visions:
passed, in fact, through the states of Purgation and Illumination,
which existed in her case side by side. This life of solitude was
brought to an abrupt end by the experience which is symbolized
in the vision of the Mystic Marriage, and the Voice which then
said to her, "Now will I wed thy soul, which shall ever be con-
joined and united to Me!” Catherine, who had during her long
retreat enjoyed illumination to a high degree, now entered upon the
Unitivc State, in which the whole of her public life was passed.
Its effect was immediately noticeable. She abandoned her solitude
joined in the family life, went out into the city to serve the poor
and sick, attracted and taught disciples, converted sinners, and
began that career of varied and boundless activity which has made
her name one of the greatest in the history of the fourteenth
century. Nor docs this mean that she ceased to live the sort of
life which is characteristic of mystical consciousness: to experience
direct contact with the Transcendental World, to gaze into "the
Abyss of Love Divine.” On the contrary her practical genius
for affairs, her immense power of ruling men, drew its strength
from the long series of visions and ecstasies which accompanied
and supported her labours in the world. She "descended into the
valley of lilies to make herself more fruitful,” says her legend . 2
The conscious vehicle of some "power not herself,” she spoke and
acted with an authority which might have seemed stiange enough
in an uneducated daughter of the people, were it not justified b^
the fact that all who came into contact with her submitted to
its influence.

Our business, then, is to trace from its beginning a gradual and
complete change in the equilibrium of the self. It is a change
whereby that self turns from the unreal world of sense in which
it is normally immersed, first to apprehend, then to unite itself
Fr ;ith Absolute Reality: finally, possessed by and wholly surren-
dered to this Transcendent Life, becomes a medium whereby the
spiritual world is seen in a unique degree operating directly in the
world of sense. In other words, we are to see the human mind
advance from the mere perception of phenomena, through the

1 E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena, ” p. 15.

* S. Catherinae Senensis Vitae (Acta SS. Aprilis t. iii.), ii. ii. § 4.



INTRODUCTORY


175

intuition— with occasional contact— of the Absolute under its
aspect of Divine Transcendence, to the entire realization of, and
union with, Absolute Life under its aspect of Divine Immanence.

The completed mystical life, then, is more than intuitional: it
is theopathetic. In the old, frank language of the mystics, it is the
deified life.



CHAPTER II


THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


The awakening of transcendental consciousness — Psychologically it is a form
of conversion — Generally abrupt — Sometimes gradual — George Fox — An ineffable
revelation — A vision of the Divine immanent in the world — General characteris-
tics of mystic conversion — Instances— St. Francis of Assisi— The typical mystic
— St. Catherine of Genoa — Madame Guyon — Her character — Her early life and
conversion — Rulman Merswin — Suso — Ecstatic conversion — Pascal — Brother
Lawrence — The perception of Divine Reality in Nature — The “transfigured
world" — Instances — Walt Whitman — Richard Jefferies — Richard Rolle —
Heavenly Song — Conversion may take two forms: (i) Expansive and Trans-
cendent; (2) Personal and Immanent — Their characteristics discussed and com-
pared — Personal love the essential factor — The stimulus which sets the process
of transcendence to work

F irst in the sequence of the mystic states, we must consider
that decisive event, the awakening of the transcendental
consciousness.

This awakening, from the psychological point of view, appears
to be an intense form of the phenomenon of "conversion”; and
closely akin to those deep and permanent conversions of the adult
type which some religious psychologists call "sanctification .” 1 It
is a disturbance of the equilibrium of the self, which results in the
shifting of the field of consciousness from lower to higher levels,
with a consequent removal of the centre of interest from the
subject to an object now brought into view : the necessary begin-
ning of any process of transcendence. It must not, however, be
confused or identified with religious conversion as ordinarily
understood: the sudden and emotional acceptance of theological
beliefs which the self had previously either rejected or treated
as conventions dwelling upon the margin of consciousness and
having no meaning for her actual life. The mechanical process
may be much the same; but the material involved, the results
attained, belong to a higher order of reality.

"Conversion,” says Starbuck, in words which are really far more
descriptive of mystical awakening than of the revivalistic pheno-
mena encouraged by American Protestantism, “is primarily an
unselfing. The first birth of the individual is into his own little
world. He is controlled by the deep-seated instincts of self-preserva-
tion and self-enlargement — instincts which are, doubtless, a direct

* See Starbuck, “The Psychology of Religion,” cap. xxix,

176



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


177

inheritance from his brute ancestry. The universe is organized
around his own personality as a centre." Conversion, then, is
1 "the larger world-consciousness now pressing in on the individual
consciousness. Often it breaks in suddenly and becomes a great
new revelation. This is the first aspect of conversion : the person
emerges from a smaller limited world of existence into a larger
world of being. His life becomes swallowed up in a larger whole." 1 *

All conversion entails the abrupt or gradual emergence of intui-
tions from below the threshold, the consequent remaking of the
field of consciousness, an alteration in the self’s attitude to the
world. "It is,” says Pratt, "a change of taste — the most momentous
one that ever occurs in human experience." 3 But in the mystic
this process is raised to the nth degree of intensity, for in him it
means the first emergence of that passion for the Absolute which
is to constitute his distinctive character: an emergence crucial in
its effect on every department of his life. Those to whom it happens,
often enough, are already "religious”: sometimes deeply and
earnestly so. Rulman Merswin, St. Catherine of Genoa, George
Fox, Lucie-Christine — all these had been bred up in piety, and
accepted in its entirety the Christian tradition. They were none
the less conscious of an utter change in their world when this
opening of the soul's eye took place.

• Sometimes the emergence of the mystical consciousness is
gradual, unmarked by any definite crisis. The self slides gently,
almost imperceptibly, from the old universe to the new. The
records of mysticism, however, suggest that this is exceptional:
that travail is the normal accompaniment of birth. In another
type, of which George Fox is a typical example, there is no con-
version in the ordinary sense ; but a gradual and increasing lucidity,
of which the beginning has hardly been noticed by the self, inter-
. mittently accompanies the pain, misery of mind, and inward
struggles characteristic of the entrance upon the Way of Purga-
tion. Conversion and purification then go hand in hand, finally
shading off into the serenity of the Illuminated State. Fox's
"Journal” for the year 1647 contains a vivid account of these
"showings” or growing transcendental perceptions of a mind not
yet at one with itself, and struggling towards clearness of sight.
"Though my exercises and troubles,” he says, "were very great,
yet were they not so continual but I had some intermissions, and
was sometimes brought into such a heavenly joy that I thought I
had been in Abraham's bosom. . . . Thus in the deepest miseries,
and in the greatest sorrows and temptations that many times

1 Op. cit. t cap. xii.

* J . B. Pratt, “The Religious Consciousness, "cap. xiii. The whole chapter deserves

carefuJ study.



MYSTICISM


178

beset me, the Lord in His mercy did keep me. I found that there
were two thirsts in me; the one after the creatures to get help and
strength there; and the other after the Lord, the Creator. ... It
was so with me, that there seemed to be two pleadings in me. . . .
One day when I had been walking solitarily abroad and was come
home, I was wrapped up in the love of God, so that I could not
but admire the greatness of his love. While I was in that condition
it was opened unto me by the eternal Light and Power, and I saw
clearly therein. . . . But 0 ! then did I see my troubles, trials, and
temptations more clearly than ever I had done." 1

The great oscillations of the typical mystic between joy and pain
are here replaced by a number of little ones. The "two thirsts"
of the superficial and spiritual consciousness assert themselves
by turns. Each step towards the vision of the Real brings with it f
a reaction. The nascent transcendental powers are easily fatigued,
and the pendulum of self takes a shorter swing. "I was swept up
to Thee by Thy Beauty, and torn away from Thee by my own
weight," says St. Augustine, crystallizing the secret of this
experience in an unforgettable phrase. 2

Commonly, however, if we may judge from those first-hand
accounts which we possess, mystic conversion is a single and abrupt
experience, sharply marked off from the long, dim struggles
which precede and succeed it. It usually involves a sudden and 1
acute realization of a splendour and adorable reality in the world
— or sometimes of its obverse, the divine sorrow at the heart of
things — never before perceived. In so far as I am acquainted
with the resources of language, there are no words in which this
realization can be described. It is of so actual a nature that in
comparison the normal world of past perception seems but twilit
at the best. Consciousness has suddenly changed its rhythm and a
new aspect of the universe rushes in. The teasing mists are swept
away, and reveal, if only for an instant, the sharp outline of the
Everlasting Hills. "He who knows this will know what I say, and
will be convinced that the soul has then another life. "3

In most cases, the onset of this new consciousness seems to
the self so sudden, so clearly imposed from without rather than
developed from within, as to have a supernatural character. The
typical case is, of course, that of St. Paul: the sudden light, the
voice, the ecstasy, the complete alteration of life. We shall see,
however, when we come to study the evidence of those mystics
who have left a detailed record of their preconverted state, that

1 Journal of George Fox, cap. i.

* Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xvii. We can surely trace the influence of such an >
experience in St. Paul's classic description of the “endopsychic conflict" : Rom. vii.
14-25. 3 Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


179

the apparently abrupt conversion is really, as a rule, the sequel
and the result of a long period of restlessness, uncertainty, and
^mental stress. The deeper mind stirs uneasily in its prison, and its
emergence is but the last of many efforts to escape. The tempera-
ment of the subject, his surroundings, the vague but persistent
apprehensions of a supersensual reality which he could not find
yet could not forget ; all these have prepared him for it. 1

When, however, the subconscious intuitions, long ago quickened,
are at last brought to birth and the eyes are opened on new light
— and it is significant that an actual sense of blinding radiance
is a constant accompaniment of this state of consciousness — the
storm and stress, the vague cravings and oscillations of the past
life are forgotten. In this abrupt recognition of reality “all things
ftre made new”: from this point the life of the mystic begins.
Conversion of this sort has, says De Sanctis, three marked charac-
teristics: a sense of liberation and victory: a conviction of the
nearness of God: a sentiment of love towards God. a We might
describe it as a sudden, intense, and joyous perception of God
immanent in the universe ; of the divine beauty and unutterable
power and splendour of that larger life in which the individual is
immersed, and of a new life to be lived by the self in correspondence
with this now dominant fact of existence. “Suddenly,” says the
French contemplative Lucie-Christine of the beginning of her
mystical life, “I saw before my inward eyes these words — God
only . . . they were at the same time a Light, an Attraction and a
Power. A Light which showed me how I could belong completely
to God alone in this world, and I saw that hitherto I had not well
understood this ; an Attraction by which my heart was subdued
and delighted ; a Power which inspired me with a generous resolu-
tion and somehow placed in my hands the means of carrying
it out. ”3

I will here set down for comparison a few instances of such
mystical conversion; quoting, where this is available, the actual
description left by the subject of his own experience, or in default
of it, the earliest authentic account. In these cases, when grouped
together, we shall see certain constant characteristics, from which
it may be possible to deduce the psychological law to which they
owe their peculiar form.

* “It is certain,” says De Sanctis, “that when we attempt to probe deeper in
Dur study of sudden converts, we discover that the coup de joudre, which in the
main is observable in only a small minority of conversions, is in fact the least
significant, though the most aesthetic, moment of the conversion.” (“Religious
Conversion,” Eng. trans., p. 65. Compare St. Augustine's Confessions, with their
lescription of the years of uncertainty and struggle which prepared him for the
tudden and final “Tolle, lege I" that initiated him into the long-sought life of
Reality. * Op, cit. t p. 171. s “Journal Spirituel de Lucie-Christine,” p. 11.



i8o


MYSTICISM


First in point of time, and perhaps also in importance, amongst
those I have chosen, is the case of that great poet and contempla-
tive, that impassioned lover of the Absolute, St. Francis of Assisi.
The fact that St. Francis wrote little and lived much, that his
actions were of unequalled simplicity and directness, long blinded
his admirers to the fact that he is a typical mystic: the only one,
perhaps, who forced the most trivial and sordid circumstances of
sensual life to become perfect expressions of Reality.

Now the opening of St. Francis's eyes, which took place in
a.d. 1206 when he was twenty-four years old, had been preceded
by a long, hard struggle between the life of the world and the
persistent call of the spirit. His mind, in modem language, had
not unified itself. He was a high-spirited boy, full of vitality: a
natural artist, with all the fastidiousness which the artistic
temperament involves. War and pleasure both attracted him,
and upon them, says his legend, he “miserably squandered and
wasted his time." 1 Nevertheless, he was vaguely dissatisfied. In
the midst of festivities, he would have sudden fits of abstraction:
abortive attempts of the growing transcendental consciousness,
still imprisoned below the threshold but aware of and in touch
with the Real, to force itself to the surface and seize the reins.
“Even in ignorance," says Thomas of Celano again, “he was being
led to perfect knowledge." He loved beauty, for he was by nature
a poet and a musician, and shrank instinctively from contact with
ugliness and disease. But something within ran counter to this
temperamental bias, and sometimes conquered it. He would then
associate with beggars, tend the leprous, perform impulsive acts
of charity and self-humiliation. 2

When this divided state, described by the legend as “the
attempt to flee God's hand," had lasted for some years, it happened
one day that he was walking in the country outside the gates of,
Assisi, and passed the little church of S. Damiano, “the which"
(I again quote from Thomas of Celano's “Second Life") “was
almost ruinous and forsaken of all men. And, being led by the
Spirit, he went in to pray; and he fell down before the Crucifix
in devout supplication, and having been smitten by unwonted
visitations , found himself another man than he who had gone in.”

Here, then, is the first stage of conversion. The struggle between
two discrepant ideals of life has attained its term. A sudden and
apparently “irrational" impulse to some decisive act reaches the
surface-consciousness from the seething deeps. The impulse is
followed; and the swift emergence of the transcendental sense

» Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. i. *

* Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap. v. Compare P. Sabatier, “Vie de
S. Francois d 'Assise," cap. ii., where the authorities are fully set out.



fHE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


results. This "unwonted visitation" effects an abrupt and involun-
tary alteration in the subject's consciousness: whereby he literally
f 4'finds himself another man." He is as one who has slept and now
awakes. The crystallization of this new, at first fluid apprehension
of Reality in the form of vision and audition: the pointing of the
moral, the direct application of truth to the awakened self,
follow. "And whilst he was thus moved, straightway — a thing
unheard of for long ages ! — the painted image of Christ Crucified
spoke to him from out its pictured lips. And, calling him by his
name, "Francis," it said, "go, repair My house, the which as thou
seest is falling into decay." And Francis trembled, being utterly
amazed, and almost as it were carried away by these words.
And he prepared to obey, for he was wholly set on the fulfilling
1 *f this commandment. But forasmuch as he felt that the change he
had undergone was ineffable , it becomes us to be silent concerning
it. . . ." From this time he "gave untiring toil to the repair of that
Church. For though the words which were said to him concerned
that divine Church which Christ bought with His own Blood, he
would not hasten to such heights, but little by little from things
of the flesh would pass to those of the Spirit." 1

In a moment of time, Francis's whole universe has suffered
complete rearrangement. There are no hesitations, no uncertain-
ties. The change, which he cannot describe, he knows to be central
for life. Not for a moment does he think of disobeying the impera-
tive voice which speaks to him from a higher plane of reality and
demands the sacrifice of his career.

Compare now with the experience of St. Francis that of another
great saint and mystic, who combined, as he did, the active with
the contemplative life. Catherine of Genoa, who seems to have
possessed from childhood a religious nature, was prepared for the

f naking of her consciousness by years of loneliness and depres-
n, the result of an unhappy marriage. She, like St. Francis —
t in sorrow rather than in joy — had oscillated between the world,
which did not soothe her, and religion, which helped her no more.
At last, she had sunk into a state of dull wretchedness, a hatred
alike of herself and of life.

Her emancipation was equally abrupt. In the year 1474, she
being twenty-six years old, "The day after the feast of St. Benedict
(at the instance of her sister that was a nun), Catherine went to
make her confession to the confessor of that nunnery; but she was
not disposed to do it. Then said her sister, ‘At least go and recom-
mend yourself to him, because he is a most worthy religious’; and
in fact he was a very holy man. And suddenly, as she knelt before
iiim, she received in her heart the wound of the unmeasured Love

1 Thomas of Celano, Legenda Sccunda, cap. vi.



MYSTICISM


182

of God, with so clear a vision of her own misery and her faults, and
of the goodness of God, that she almost fell upon the ground. And
by these sensations of infinite love, and of the offences that had,
been done against this most sweet God, she was so greatly drawn
by purifying affection away from the poor things of this world
that she was almost beside herself, and for this she cried inwardly
with ardent love, ‘No more world! no more sin!' And at this point,
if she had possessed a thousand worlds, she would have thrown
all of them away. . . . And she returned home, kindled and deeply
wounded with so great a love of God, the which had been shown her
inwardly, with the sight of her own wretchedness, that she seemed
beside herself. And she shut herself in a chamber, the most secluded
she could find, with burning sighs. And in this moment she was
inwardly taught the whole practice of orison: but her tongue could
say naught but this — ‘0 Love, can it be that thou has called me
with so great a love, and made me to know in one instant that
which worlds cannot express?' ” This intuition of the Absolute
was followed by an interior vision of Christ bearing the Cross,
which further increased her love and self-abasement. “And she
cried again, ‘O Love, no more sins! no more sins!' And her hatred
of herself was more than she could endure.” 1

Of this experience Von Hugel says, “If the tests of reality in
such things are their persistence and large and rich spiritual
applicability and fruitfulness, then something profoundly real
and important took place in the soul of that sad and weary woman
of six-and-twenty, within that convent-chapel, at that Annuncia-
tion-tide.” 2 It is certain that for St. Catherine, as for St. Francis,
an utterly new life did, literally, begin at this point. The centre
of interest was shifted and the field of consciousness remade. She
“knew in an instant that which words cannot express.” Some
veil about her heart was torn away; so abruptly, that it left a,
wound behind. For the first time she saw and knew the Love in
which life is bathed; and all the energy and passion of a strong
nature responded to its call.

The conversion of Madame Guyon to the mystic lixe, as told
by herself in the eighth chapter of Part I. of her Autobiography —
“How a holy Religious caused her to find God within her heart,
with Admirable Results,” is its characteristic title — is curiously
like a dilute version of this experience of St. Catherine's. It, too,
followed upon a period of mental distress; also the result of an
uncongenial marriage. But since Madame Guyon's unbalanced,
diffuse, and sentimental character entirely lacks the richness
and dignity, the repressed ardours and exquisite delicacy of

* “Vita e Dottrina di Santa Caterina da Genova/' cap. ii.

• Von Hiigel, “The Mystical Element of Religion/' vol. ii. p. 29.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


183

St. Catherine's mind, so, too, her account of her own interior
processes is marred by a terrible and unctuous interest in the
peculiar graces vouchsafed to her. 1

Madame Guyon's value to the student of mysticism partly
consists in this feeble quality of her surface-intelligence, which
hence had little or no modifying or contributory effect upon her
spiritual life and makes her an ideal “laboratory specimen" for
the religious psychologist. True to her great principle of passivity
or “quiet," it lets the uncriticized interior impulses have their way;
thus we are able to observe their workings uncomplicated by the
presence of a vigorous intellect or a disciplined will. The wind
that bloweth where it listeth whistles through her soul : and the
response which she makes is that of a weathercock rather than a
windmill. She moves to every current ; she often mistakes a draught
for the divine breath; she feels her gyrations to be of enormous
importance. But in the description of her awakening to the deeper
life, even her effusive style acquires a certain dignity. 1

Madame Guyon had from her childhood exhibited an almost
tiresome taste for pious observances. At twelve years old she
studied St. Francois de Sales and St. Jeanne Fran$oise de Chantal;
begged her confessor to teach her the art of mental prayer; and
when he omitted to do so, tried to teach herself, but without result 3
She wished at this time to become a nun of the Visitation, as St.
Catherine at the same age wanted to be an Augustinian canoness;
but as the longings of little girls of twelve for the cloister are
seldom taken seriously, we are not surprised to find the refusal of
her parents' consent chronicled in the chapter which is headed
“ Diver ses croix cliez M. son pfoe” Growing up into an unusually
beautiful young woman, she went into society, and for a short
time enjoyed life in an almost worldly way. Her marriage with
Jacques Guyon, however — a marriage of which she signed the
articles without even being told the bridegroom's name — put an
end to her gaiety. “The whole town was pleased by this marriage;
and in all this rejoicing only I was sad . . . hardly was I married,
when the remembrance of my old desire to be a nun overcame me."«

Her early married life was excessively unhappy. She was soon

1 It is clear from the heading of cap. x. (pt. i.) of her Autobiography that
Madame Gu yon's editors were conscious, if she was not, of some of the close
:oincidonces between her experiences and those of St. Catherine of Genoa. The
Darallel between their early years is so exact and descends to such minute details
that I am inclined to think that the knowledge of this resemblance, and the
gratification with which she would naturally regard it, has governed or modified
aer memories of this past. Hence a curious and hitherto unnoticed case of
‘unconscious spiritual plagiarism/'

► a For a thoroughly hostile account see Leuba: “The Psychology of Religious
Mysticism," cap. iv.

1 Vie, pt. i. cap. iv. 4 Op . cit,, pt. i. cap. vi.



MYSTICISM


184

driven to look for comfort in the practices of religion. "Made to
love much, and finding nothing to love around her, she gave her
love to God," says Guerrier tersely. 1 But she was not satisfied^
like most of her fellow-contemplatives, she was already vaguely
conscious of something that she missed, some vital power unused,
and identified this something with the “orison of quiet," the
“practice of the presence of God" which mystically minded
friends had described to her. She tried to attain to it deliberately,
and naturally failed. “I could not give myself by multiplicity that
which Thou Thyself givest, and which is only experienced in
simplicity." 2

When these interior struggles had lasted for nearly two years,
and Madame Guyon was nineteen, the long desired, almost
despaired of, apprehension came — as it did to St. Catherine- 1
suddenly, magically almost; and under curiously parallel con-
ditions. It was the result of a few words spoken by a Franciscan
friar whom a "secret force" acting in her interest had brought
into the neighbourhood, and whom she had been advised to con-
sult. He was a recluse, who disliked hearing the confessions of
women, and appears to have been far from pleased by her visit;
an annoyance which he afterwards attributed to her fashionable
appearance, "which filled him with apprehension." "He hardly,
came forward, and was a long time without speaking to me. I,
however, did not fail to speak to him and to tell him in a few
words my difficulties on the subject of orison. He at once replied,
'Madame, you are seeking without that which you have within.
Accustom yourself to seek God in your own heart, and you will
find him/ Having said this, he left me. The next morning he was
greatly astonished when I again visited him and told him the
effect which these words had had upon my soul: for, indeed, they
were as an arrow, which pierced my heart through and through#.

I felt in this moment a profound wound , which was full of delight
and of love — a wound so sweet that I desired that it might never
heal. These words had put into my heart that which I sought for
so many years, or. rather, they caused me to find that which was
there. 0, my Lord, you were within my heart, and you asked of
me only that I should return within, in order that I might feel your
presence. 0, Infinite Goodness, you were so near, and I, running
here and there to seek you, found you not!" She, too, like St.
Catherine, learned in this instant the long-sought practice of orison,
or contemplation. “From the moment of which I have spoken, my
orison was emptied of all form, species, and images; nothing of my
orison passed through the mind; but it was an orison of joyous
possession in the Will, where the taste for God was so great, pure,'

1 “Madame Guyon, “ p. 36. 2 Vie, pt. i. cap. viii.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


185

and simple that it attracted and absorbed the two other powers
of the soul in a profound recollection without action or speech/* 1 *

Take now the case of a less eminent mystic, who has also left
behind him a vivid personal description of his entrance upon the
Mystic Way. Rulman Merswin was a wealthy, pious, and respected
merchant of Strassburg. In the year 1347, when he was about
thirty-six years old, he retired from business in order that he
might wholly devote himself to religious matters. It was the time
of that spiritual revival within the Catholic Church in Germany
which, largely influenced by the great Rhenish mystics Suso and
Tauler, is identified with the “Friends of God”; and Merswin
himself was one of Tauler’s disciples. 3
* One evening, in the autumn which followed his retirement,
~ 'about the time of Martinmas,” he was strolling in his garden
alone. Meditating as he walked, a picture of the Crucifix suddenly
presented itself to his mind. In such an imaginary vision as this
there is nothing, of course, that we can call abnormal. The thoughts
of a devout Catholic, influenced bv Tauler and his school, must
often have taken such a direction during his solitary strolls. This
time, however, the mental image of the Cross seems to have
released subconscious forces which had long been gathering way.
^Merswin was abruptly filled with a violent hatred of the world
and of his own free-will. “Lifting his eyes to heaven he solemnly
swore that he would utterly surrender his own will, person, and
goods to the service of God.”3

This act of complete surrender, releasing as it were the earth*
bound self, was at once followed by the onset of pure mystical
perception. “The reply from on high came quickly. A brilliant
light shone about him: he heard in his ears a divine voice of

1 Op, cit,, toe. cit.

‘ * One of the best English accounts of this movement and the great personalities

concerned in it is in Rufus Jones, “Studies in Mystical Religion/* cap. xiii.

3 A. Jundt, “Rulman Merswin," p. 19. M. Jundt has condensed his account,
which I here translate, from Merswin 's autobiographical story of his conversion,
published in Beitrdge zu den theologischen Wissenschaften, v. (Jena, 1854). Our
whole knowledge of Merswin *s existence depends on the group of documents which
includes this confession, the “Book of Two Men/' the “Vision of Nine Rocks,**
and his other reputed works. The authenticity of these documents has been
much questioned, and they have doubtless suffered severely from the editorial
energy of his followers. Some critics even regard them as pious fictions, useless
as evidence of the incidents of Merswin's life. With this view, upheld by Karl
Reider (“Der Gottesfreund von Oberland/* 1905), I cannot agree. A possible solu-
tion of the many difficulties is that of M. Jundt, who believes that we have
in Merswin and the mysterious “Friend of God of the Oberland/' who pervades
his spiritual career, a remarkable case of dissociated personality. Merswin's
peculiar psychic make-up, as described in his autobiography, supports this view:
the adoption of which I shall assume in future references to his life. It is incredible
that the vivid account of his conversion which I quote should be merely
“tendency-literature," without basis in fact. Compare Jundt' s monograph, and
also Rufus Jones, op, cit . pp. 245-253, where the whole problem is discussed.



i86


MYSTICISM


adorable sweetness; he felt as if he were lifted from the ground
and carried several times completely round his garden/' 1 Optical
disturbance, auditions, and the sense of levitation, are of course
frequent physical accompaniments of these shiftings of the level
of consciousness. There are few cases in which one or other is not
present; and in some we find all. Coming to himself after this
experience, Merswin's heart was filled by a new consciousness of
the Divine; and by a transport of intense love towards God which
made him undertake with great energy the acts of mortification
which he believed necessary to the purification of his soul. From
this time onwards, his mystical consciousness steadily developed.
That it was a consciousness wholly different in kind from the
sincere piety which had previously caused him to retire from busi-
ness in order to devote himself to religious truth, is proved by*
the name of Conversion which he applies to the vision of the
garden; and by the fact that he dates from this point the beginning
of his real life.

The conversion of Merswin's greater contemporary, Suso, seems
to have been less abrupt. Of its first stage he speaks vaguely at
the beginning of his autobiography, wherein he says that “he
began to be converted when in the eighteenth year of his age/' 2
He was at this time, as St. Francis had been, restless, dissatisfied;
vaguely conscious of something essential to his peace, as yet*
unfound. His temperament, at once deeply human and ardently
spiritual, passionately appreciative of sensuous beauty yet
unable to rest in it, had not “unified itself'': nor did it do so


completely until after a period of purgation which is probably
unequalled for its austerity in the history of the mysticism of the
West. “He was kept of God in this, that when he turned to those
things that most enticed him he found neither happiness nor peace
therein. He was restless, and it seemed to him that something ,
which was as yet unknown could alone give peace to his heart. *

And he suffered greatly of this restlessness God at last delivered

him by a complete conversion. His brothers in religion were
astonished by so quick a change : for the event took them unawares.
Some said of it one thing, and some another: but none could know
the reason of his conversion. It was God Who, by a hidden light ,
had caused this return to Himself .“3


This secret conversion was completed by a more violent uprush
of the now awakened and active transcendental powers. Suso,
whom one can imagine as a great and highly nervous artist if his


* Jundt, op. cit loc . cit .

* “Leben und Schriften” (Die pen brock), cap. i. Suso's autobiography is .

Written in the third person. He refers to himself throughout under the title of
“Servitor of the Eternal Wisdom." 3 Op. cit., loc. cit.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF 187

genius had not taken the channel of sanctity instead, was subject
all his life to visions of peculiar richness and beauty. Often these
visions seem to have floated up, as it were, from the subliminal
region without disturbing the course of his conscious life; and to
be little more than pictorial images of his ardour towards and
intuition of, divine realities. The great ecstatic vision — or rather
apprehension — with which the series opens, however, is of a very
different kind; and represents the characteristic experience of
Ecstasy in its fullest form. It is described with a detail and
intensity which make it a particularly valuable document of the
mystical life. It is doubtful whether Suso ever saw more than this:
the course of his long education rather consisted in an adjustment
of his nature to the Reality which he then perceived.

“In the first days of his conversion it happened upon the Feast
of St. Agnes, when the Convent had breakfasted at midday, that
the Servitor went into the choir. He was alone, and he placed
himself in the last stall on the prior’s side. And he was in much
suffering, for a heavy trouble weighed upon his heart. And being
there alone, and devoid of all consolations — no one by his side,
no one near him — of a sudden his soul was rapt in his body, or
out of his body. Then did he see and hear that which no tongue
can express.

“That which the Servitor saw had no form neither any manner
of being; yet he had of it a joy such as he might have known in
the seeing, of the shapes and substances of all joyful tilings. His
heart was hungry, yet satisfied, his soul was full of contentment
and joy: his prayers and hopes were all fulfilled. And the Friar
could do naught but contemplate this Shining Brightness; and
he altogether forgot himself and all other things. Was it day or
night? He knew not. It was, as it were, a manifestation of the
sweetness of Eternal Life in the sensations of silence and of rest.
Then he said, Tf that which I see and feel be not the Kingdom of
Heaven, I know not what it can be: for it is very sure that the
endurance of all possible pains were but a poor price to pay for
the eternal possession of so great a joy/ ”

The physical accompaniments of ecstasy were also present.
“This ecstasy lasted from half an hour to an hour, and whether
his soul were in the body or out of the body he could not tell.
But when he came to his senses it seemed to him that he returned
from another world. And so greatly did his body suffer in this
short rapture that it seemed to him that none, even in dying,
could suffer so greatly in so short a time. The Servitor came to
himself moaning, and he fell down upon the ground like a man
who swoons. And he cried inwardly, heaving great sighs from the
depth of his soul and saying, 'Oh, my God, where was I and where



i88


MYSTICISM


ami?’ And again, 'Oh, my heart's joy, never shall my soul forget
this hour!' He walked, but it was but his body that walked, as a
machine might do. None knew from his demeanour thatwhich^
was taking place within. But his soul and his spirit were full of
marvels; heavenly lightnings passed and repassed in the deeps of
his being, and it seemed to him that he walked on air. And all
the powers of his soul were full of these heavenly delights. He was
like a vase from which one has taken a precious ointment, but in
which the perfume long remains."

Finally, the last phrases of the chapter seem to suggest tne true
position of this exalted pleasure-state as a first link in the long
chain of mystical development. "This foretaste of the happiness
of heaven," he says, "the which the Servitor enjoyed for many
days, excited in him a most lively desire for God." 1 '

Mystical activity, then, like all other activities of the self, opens
with that sharp stimulation of the will, which can only be obtained
through the emotional life.

Suso was a scholar, and an embryo ecclesiastic. During the
period which elapsed between his conversion and his description
of it, he was a disciple of Meister Eckhart, a student of Dionysius
and St. Thomas Aquinas. His writings show familiarity with the
categories of mystical theology; and naturally enough this cir-
cumstance, and also the fact that they were written for purposes
of edification, may have dictated to some extent the language
in which his conversion-ecstasy is described. As against this, I
will give two first-hand descriptions of mystical conversion in
which it is obvious that theological learning plays little or no part.
Both written in France within a few years of one another, they
represent the impact of Reality on two minds of very different
calibre. One is the secret document in which a great genius set
down, in words intended only for his own eyes, the record of a
two hours’ ecstasy. The other is the plain, unvarnished statement %|
of an uneducated man of the peasant class. The first is, of course,
the celebrated Memorial, or Amulet, of Pascal; the second is the
Relation of Brother Lawrence.

The Memorial of Pascal is a scrap of parchment on which,
round a rough drawing of the Flaming Cross, there are written a
few strange phrases, abrupt and broken words; all we know
about one of the strangest ecstatic revelations chronicled in the
history of the mystic type. After Pascal's death a servant found
a copy of this little document, now lost, sewn up in his doublet.
He seems always to have worn it upon his person: a perpetual
memorial of the supernal experience, the initiation into Reality,
which it describes. Though Bremand has shown that the opening

1 Leben, cap. iii.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF 189

of Pascal's spiritual eyes had begun, on his own declaration,
eleven months earlier, "d'une manure douce et obligeante," 1 the
, conversion thus prepared was only made actual by this abrupt
illumination; ending, a long period of spiritual stress, in which
indifference to his ordinary interests was counterbalanced by an
utter inability to feel the attractive force of that Divine Reality
which his great mind discerned as the only adequate object of
desire.

The Memorial opens thus: —

"L*an de grace 1654

lundi, 23 novembre, jour de Saint Clement, pape
et martyr, et autres au martyrologe,
veille de Saint Chrysogone, martyr ct autres,

V depuis environ dix heures et demie du soir jusques

environ minuit et demie.

Feu/'

''From half-past ten till half-past twelve, Fire!" That is all, so
far as description is concerned; but enough, apparently, to remind
the initiate of all that passed. The rest tells us only the passion of
joy and conviction which this nameless revelation — this long,
blazing vision of Reality — brought in its train. It is but a series
of amazed exclamations, crude, breathless words, placed there
'helter-skelter, the artist in him utterly in abeyance; the names
of the overpowering emotions which swept him, one after the other,
as the Fire of Love disclosed its secrets, evoked an answering flame
of humility and rapture in his soul.

“Dieu d’ Abraham, Dieu d’ Isaac, Dieu de Jacob,

Non des philosophes et des savants.

Certitude. Certitude. Sentiment. Joie. Paix/*

"Not the God of philosophers and of scholars!" cries in amaze-
ment this great scholar and philosopher abruptly turned from
knowledge to love.

"Oubli du monde et de tout hormis Dieu," he says again,
seeing his universe suddenly swept clean of all but this Transcen-
dent Fact. Then, "Le monde ne t'a point connu, maisje t'ai connu.
Joie! joie joie! pleurs de joie!" Compare with the classic style,
the sharp and lucid definition of the “Pens^es," the irony and
glitter of the "Provinciates, " these little broken phrases — this
child-like stammering speech — in which a supreme master of
language has tried to tell his wonder and his delight. I know few
things in the history of mysticism at once more convincing, more
poignant than this hidden talisman; upon which the brilliant

1 Bremond, “Histoire Litt6rarie du Sentiment Religieux en France/* vol. iv.
PP* 359 seq.



MYSTICISM


190

scholar and stylist, the merciless disputant, has jotted down in
hard, crude words, which yet seem charged with passion — the
inarticulate language of love — a memorial of the certitude, the v
peace, the joy, above all, the reiterated, all-surpassing joy, which
accompanied his ecstatic apprehension of God.

"Mon Dieu, me quitterez vous?" he says again; the fire ap-
parently beginning to die down, the ecstasy drawing to an end.
"Que je n'en sois pas separe eternellement !" "Are you going to
leave me? Oh, let me not be separated from you for ever!" — the
one unendurable thought which would, said Aquinas, rob the
Beatific Vision of its glory, were we not sure that it can never fade. 1
But the rhapsody is over, the vision of the Fire has gone; and the
rest of the Memorial clearly contains Pascal's meditations upon his
experience, rather than a transcript of the experience itself. It
ends with the watchword of all mysticism, Surrender — "Renuncia-
tion, totaleet douce" in Pascal's words — the only way, he thinks,
in which he can avoid continued separation from Reality. 2

Pascal's vision of Light, Life, and Love was highly ecstatic;
an indescribable, incommunicable experience, which can only be
suggested by his broken words of certitude and joy. By his simple
contemporary. Brother Lawrence, that Transcendent Reality
Who "is not the God of philosophers and scholars," was perceived
in a moment of abrupt intuition, peculiarly direct, unecstatic and
untheological in type, but absolutely enduring in its results.
Lawrence was an uneducated young man of the peasant class;
who first served as a soldier, and afterwards as a footman in a
great French family, where he annoyed his masters by breaking
everything. When he was between fifty and sixty years of age,
he entered the Carmelite Order as a lay brother; and the letters,
"spiritual maxims," and conversations belonging to this period of
his life were published after his death in 1691. "He told me," says
the anonymous reporter of the conversations, supposed to be
M. Beaufort, who was about 1660 Grand Vicar to the Cardinal
de Noailles, "that God had done him a singular favour in his
conversion at the age of eighteen. That in the winter, seeing a tree
stripped of its leaves, and considering that within a little time the
leaves would be renewed, and after that the flowers and fruit
appear, he received a high view of the Providence and Power of
God, which has never since been effaced from his soul. That this

* “Summa contra Gentiles," 1 . iii. cap. lxii.

* The complete text of the Memorial is printed, among other places, in
Faug&re’s edition of the “Pens 6 es, Fragments et Lettres de Blaise Pascal,"
2nd ed., Paris, 1897. Tome i. p. 269; and is reproduced in facsimile by Bremond,
loc. oit. Bremond holds that the Memorial is the record of two distinct experiences :
a “mystical experience in the proper meaning of the word," and an “affective
meditation arising from it." This view does not seem incompatible with my
original description, which I therefore retain. (Note to 12th ed.)



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF


191

view had set him perfectly loose from the world and kindled in
him such a love for God that he could not tell whether it had
• increased in above forty years that he had lived since." 1

Such use of visible nature as the stuff of ontological perceptions,
the medium whereby the self reaches out to the Absolute, is not
rare in the history of mysticism. The mysterious vitality of trees,
the silent magic of the forest, the strange and steady cycle of its
life, possess in a peculiar degree this power of unleashing the
human soul: are curiously friendly to its cravings, minister to its
inarticulate needs. Unsullied by the corroding touch of conscious-
ness, that life can make a contact with the "great life of the All";
and through its mighty rhythms man can receive a message
^concerning the true and timeless World of "all that is, and was,
and evermore shall be." Plant life of all kinds, indeed, from the
"flower in the crannied wall" to the "Woods of Westermain" can
easily become, for selves of a certain type, a "mode of the Infinite."
So obvious does this appear when we study the history of the
mystics, that Steiner has drawn from it the hardly warrantable
inference that "plants are just those natural phenomena whose
qualities in the higher world are similar to their qualities in the
physical world." 2

Though the conclusion be not convincing, the fact remains.
*The flowery garment of the world is for some mystics a medium
of ineffable perception, a source of exalted joy, the veritable
clothing of God. I need hardly add that such a state of things
has always been found incredible by common sense. "The tree
which moves some to tears of joy," says Blake, who possessed in
an eminent degree this form of sacramental perception, "is in the
Eyes of others only a green thing that stands in the Way."3

Such a perception of the Divine in Nature, of the true and holy
meaning of that rich, unresting life in which we are immersed,
is really a more usual feature of Illumination than of Conversion.
All the most marked examples of it must be referred to that
state; and will be discussed when we come to its consideration.
Sometimes, however, as in the case of Brother Lawrence, the
first awakening of the self to consciousness of Reality does take
this form. The Uncreated Light manifests Itself in and through
created things. This characteristically immanental discovery of
the Absolute occurs chiefly in two classes : in unlettered men who
have lived close to Nature, and to whom her symbols are more
familiar than those of the Churches or the schools, and in tempera-
ments of the mixed or mystical type, who are nearer to the poet
than to the true contemplative, for whom as a rule the Absolute

« Brother Lawrence, “The Practice of the Presence of God,** p. 9.

• “The Way of Initiation," p. 134. J “Letters of William Blake/* p. 6^



MYSTICISM


192

"hath no image/' "It was like entering into another world, a new
state of existence," says a witness quoted by Starbuck, speaking
of his own conversion. "Natural objects were glorified. My spiritual*
vision was so clarified that I saw beauty in every material object
in the universe. The woods were vocal with heavenly music."
"Oh, how I was changed! Everything became new. My horses and
hogs and everybody became changed!" exclaims with naive
astonishment another in the same collection. 1 "When I went in
the morning into the fields to work," says a third, "the glory of
God appeared in all His visible creation. I well remember we
reaped oats, and how every straw and head of the oats seemed,
as it were, arrayed in a kind of rainbow glory, or to glow, if I may
so express it, in the glory of God. "*

Amongst modern men, Walt Whitman possessed in a supreme
degree the permanent sense of this glory, the "light rare, untenable,
lighting the very light. "3 But evidences of its existence, and the
sporadic power of apprehending it, are scattered up and down the
literature of the world. Its discovery constitutes the awakening
of the mystical consciousness in respect of the World of Becoming:
a sharp and sudden break with the old and obvious way of seeing
things. The human cinematograph has somehow changed its
rhythm, and begins to register new and more real aspects of the
external world. With this, the self's first escape from the limitations*
of its conventional universe, it receives an immense assurance of
a great and veritable life surrounding, sustaining, explaining its
own. Thus Richard Jefferies says, of the same age as that at
which Suso and Brother Lawrence awoke to sudden consciousness
of Reality, "I was not more than eighteen when an inner and
esoteric meaning began to come to me from all the visible universe."
“I now became lost, and absorbed into the being or existence of
the universe . . . and losing thus my separateness of being, camei
to seem like a part of the whole." "I feel on the margin of a life*
unknown, very near, almost touching it — on the verge of powers
which, if I could grasp, would give men an immense breadth of
existence."4

What was this "life unknown" but the Life known to the great
mystics, which Richard Jefferies apprehended in these moments
of insight, yet somehow contrived to miss?

Such participation in the deep realities of the World of Becom-
ing, the boundless existence of a divine whole — which a modern

1 “The Psychology of Religion,** p. 120.

* James, “Varieties of Religious Experience,** p. 253. This phenomenon receives
brilliant literary expression in John Masefield's poem “The Everlasting Mercy**
(1911).

S Whitman, “The Prayer of Columbus.**

* “The Story of My Heart,** pp. 8, 9, 45, 181.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF 193

psychologist has labelled and described as "Cosmic Consciousness" 1
— whilst it is not the final object of the mystic's journey, is a
^constant feature of it. It may represent one-half of his character-
istic consciousness: an entrance into communion with the second
of the Triune Powers of God, the Word which "is through all
things everlastingly." Jefferies stood, as so many mystically minded
men have done, upon the verge of such a transcendental life.
The "heavenly door," as Rolle calls it, was ajar but not pushed
wide. He peeped through it to the greater world beyond; but,
unable to escape from the bonds of his selfhood, he did not pass
through to live upon the independent spiritual plane.

Rolle, Jefferies's fellow countryman, and his predecessor by
close upon six hundred years in the ecstatic love and under-
standing of natural things, shall be our last example of the mystical
awakening. He, like his spiritual brother St. Francis, and other
typical cases, had passed through a preliminary period of struggle
and oscillation between worldly life and a vague but growing
spirituality: between the superficial and the deeper self. "My
youth was fond, my childhood vain, my young age unclean," 3 but
"when I should flourish unhappily, and youth of wakeful age was
now come, the grace of my Maker was near, the which lust of tem-
poral shape restrained, and unto ghostly supplications turned my
desires, and the soul, from low things lifted, to heaven hasbome."3

The real "life-changing," however, was sharply and charac-
teristically marked off from this preparatory state. Rolle associ-
ates it with the state which he calls "Heat" : the form in which his
ardour of soul was translated to the surface consciousness. "Heat
soothly I call when the mind truly is kindled in Love Everlasting,
and the heart on the same manner to burn not hopingly but verily
is felt. The heart truly turned into fire, gives feeling of burning
love."4 This burning heat is not merely a mental experience. In
it we seem to have an unusual but not unique form of psycho-
physical parallelism: a bodily expression of the psychic travail
and distress accompanying the "New Birth. "5 "More have I
marvelled than I show, forsooth," he says in his prologue, "when
I first felt my heart wax warm, and truly, not imaginingly, but as
it were with a sensible fire , burned. I was forsooth marvelled, as
this burning burst up in my soul, and of an unwonted solace ; for

* Bucke, “Cosmic Consciousness, a Study in the Evolution of the Human

Mind.” Philadelphia, 1905. * “Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. xii.

3 Ibid., bk. i. cap. xv. 4 Ibid., cap. xiv.

* Hilton and the author of “The Cloud of Unknowing" both refer to “sensible
heat’* as a well-known but dubious concomitant of spiritual experience. Compare
the confession of a modem convert, “I was siezed and possessed by an interior
flame, for which nothing had prepared me; waves 0 f fire succeeding one another
for more than two hours." ("Madeleine Semer, Convertie et Mystique," 1874-
1921, p. 71.)



MYSTICISM


194

in my ignorance of such healing abundance, oft have I groped my
breast, seeing whether this burning were of any bodily cause
outwardly. But when I knew that only it was kindled of ghostly'
cause inwardly, and this burning was naught of fleshly love or
desire, in this I conceived it was the gift of my Maker/' 1 Further
on, he gives another and more detailed account. "From the begin-
ning, forsooth, of my life-changing and of my mind, to the opening
of the heavenly door which Thy Face showed, that the heart
might behold heavenly things and see by what way its Love it
might seek and busily desire, three years are run except three
months or four. The door, forsooth, biding open, a year near-by I
passed unto the time in which the heat of Love Everlasting was
verily felt in heart. I sat forsooth in a chapel and whilst with
sweetness of prayer and meditation greatly I was delighted,
suddenly in me I felt a merry heat and unknown. But at first I
wondered, doubting of whom it should be; but a long time I am
assured that not of the Creature but of my Maker it was, for more
hot and gladder I found it ” 2

To this we must add a passage which I cannot but think one
of the most beautiful expressions of spiritual joy to be found in
mystical literature. Based though it certainly is upon a passage
in St. Augustine — for the nightingale is not a Yorkshire bird —
its sketch of the ideal nr^stic life, to the cultivation of which
he then set himself, reveals in a few lines the most charming
aspect of Rolle’s spirituality, its poetic fervour, its capacity for
ardent love.

"In the beginning truly of my conversion and singular purpose,
I though I would be like the little bird that for love of her lover
longs, but in her longing she is gladdened when he comes that she
loves. And joying she sings, and singing she longs, but in sweetness
and heat. It is said the nightingale to song and melody all night is
given, that she may please him to whom she is joined. How muckle
more with greatest sweetness to Christ my Jesu should I sing, that
is spouse of my soul by all this present life, that is night in regard
of clearness to come. "3

Glancing back at the few cases here brought together, we can
see in them, I think, certain similarities and diversities which are
often of great psychological interest and importance: and have
their influence upon the subsequent development of the mystic
life. We see in particular at this point — before purification, or the
remaking of character, begins — the reaction of the natural self,
its heart and its mind, upon that uprush of new truth which
operates "mystical conversion." This reaction is highly significant,

* “Fire of Love,” bk. i. Prologue. * Ibid., bk. i. cap. xv.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF 195

and gives us a clue not only to the future development of the
mystic, but to the general nature of man's spiritual consciousness.

We have said 1 that this consciousness in its full development
seems to be extended not in one but in two directions. These
directions, these two fundamental ways of apprehending Reality,
may be called the eternal and temporal, transcendent and
immanent, absolute and dynamic aspects of Truth. They comprise
the twofold knowledge of a God Who is both Being and Becoming,
near and far: pairs of opposites which the developed mystical
experience will carry up into a higher synthesis. But the first
awakening of the mystic sense, the first breaking in of the supra-
sensible upon the soul, commonly involves the emergence of one
only of these complementary forms of perception. One side always
wakes first: the incoming message always choosing the path of
least resistance. Hence mystical conversion tends to belong to
one of two distinctive types: tends also, as regards its expression,
to follow that temperamental inclination to objectivize Reality
as a Place, a Person, or a State which we found to govern the
symbolic systems of the mystics . 2

There is first, then, the apprehension of a splendour without :
an expansive, formless, ineffable vision, a snatching up of the self,
as it were, from knowledge of this world to some vague yet verit-
able knowledge of the next. The veil parts, and the Godhead is
perceived as transcendent to, yet immanent in, the created universe.
Not the personal touch of love transfiguring the soul, but the im-
personal glory of a transfigured world, is the dominant note of
this experience: and the reaction of the self takes the form of
awe and rapture rather than of intimate affection. Of such a kind
was the conversion of Suso, and in a less degree of w Brother
Lawrence. Of this kind also were the Light which Rulman
Merswin saw, and the mystical perception of the Being of the
universe reported by Richard Jefferies and countless others.

This experience, if it is to be complete, if it is to involve the
definite emergence of the self from “the prison of I-hood," its
setting out upon the Mystic Way, requires an act of concentration
on the self's part as the complement of its initial act of expansion.
It must pass beyond the stage of metaphysical rapture or fluid
splendour, and crystallize into a willed response to the Reality
perceived ; a definite and personal relation must be set up between
the self and the Absolute Life. To be a spectator of Reality is not
enough. The awakened subject is not merely to perceive transcen-
dent life, but to participate therein ; and for this, a drastic and
costly life-changing is required. In Jefferies's case this crystalliza-
tion, this heroic effort towards participation did not take place, and
* Supra, p. 35. * Ibid., p. 128.



MYSTICISM


196

he never therefore laid hold of "the glory that has been revealed."
In Suso's it did, "exciting in him a most lively desire for God."

In most cases this crystallization, the personal and imperative,
concept which the mind constructs from the general and ineffable
intuition of Reality, assumes a theological character. Often it
presents itself to the consciousness in the form of visions or voices :
objective, as the Crucifix which spoke to St. Francis, or mental,
as the visions of the Cross experienced by Rulman Merswin and
St. Catherine of Genoa. Nearly always, this concept, this intimate
realization of the divine, has reference to the love and sorrow at
the heart of things, the discord between Perfect Love and an
imperfect world ; whereas the complementary vision of Transcen-
dence strikes a note of rapturous joy. "The beatings of the Heart
of God sounded like so many invitations which thus spake : Come
and do penance, come and be reconciled, come and be consoled,
come and be blessed; come. My love, and receive all that the
Beloved can give to His beloved. . . . Come, My bride, and enjoy
My Godhead ." 1

It is to this personal touch, to the individual appeal of an
immediate Presence, not to the great light and the Beatific Vision,
that the awakened self makes its most ardent, most heroic response.
Not because he was rapt from himself, but because the figure on
the Cross called him by name, saying, "Repair My Church" did
St. Francis, with that simplicity, that disregard of worldly values
which constituted his strength, accept the message in a literal
sense and set himself instantly to the work demanded; bringing
stones, and, in defiance alike of comfort and convention, building
up with his own hands the crumbling walls.

In many conversions to the mystic life, the revelation of an
external splendour, the shining vision of the transcendent spiritual
world, is wholly absent. The self awakes to that which is within,
rather than to that which is without : to the immanent not the
transcendent God, to the personal not the cosmic relation. Where
those who look out receive the revelation of Divine Beauty, those
who look in receive rather the wound of Divine Love: another
aspect of the "triple star." Emotional mystics such as Richard
Rolle and Madame Guyon give us this experience in an extreme
form. We find in St. Catherine of Genoa a nobler example of the
same type of response. That inward revelation in its anguish and
abruptness, its rending apart of the hard tissues of I-hood and vivid
disclosures of the poverty of the finite self, seemed, says the legend
of St. Catherine "the wound of Unmeasured Love," an image in
which we seem to hear the very accents of the saint. "A wound full
of delight," says the effusive Madame Guyon, "I wished that it
* St. Mechthild of Hackbom, “Liber Specialis Gratiae," 1. ii. cap. i.



THE AWAKENING OF THE SELF 197

might never heal." Rolle calls this piercing rapture a great heat:
the heat which is to light the Fire of Love. “As it were if the finger
were put in fire, it should be clad with feeling of burning : so the
soul with love (as aforesaid) set afire, truly feels most very heat." 1

Love, passionate and all-dominant, here takes the place of that
joyous awe which we noticed as the characteristic reaction upon
reality in conversions of the Transcendent type. In the deep and
strong temperaments of the great mystics this love passes quickly
— sometimes instantly — from the emotional to the volitional stage.
Their response to the voice of the Absolute is not merely an effusion
of sentiment, but an act of will : an act often of so deep and com-
prehensive a kind as to involve the complete change of the outward
no less than of the inward life. “Divine love," says Dionysius,
“draws those whom it seizes beyond themselves: and this so
greatly that they belong no longer to themselves but wholly to
the Object loved."*

Merswin's oath of self -surrender : St. Catherine of Genoa's
passionate and decisive “No more world! no more sins!": St.
Francis's naive and instant devotion to church-restoration in its
most literal sense : these things are earnests of the reality of the
change. They represent — symbolize as well as they can upon the
sensual plane — the spontaneous response of the living organism
to a fresh external stimulus : its first effort of adjustment to the
new conditions which that stimulus represents. They complete the
process of conversion; which is not one-sided, not merely an
infusion into the surface-consciousness of new truth, but rather
the beginning of a life-process, a breaking down of the old and
building up of the new. A never to be ended give-and-take is
set up between the individual and the Absolute. The Spirit of Life
has been born: and the first word it learns to say is Abba, Father.
It aspires to its origin, to Life in its most intense manifestation :
hence all its instincts urge it to that activity which it feels to be
inseparable from life. It knows itself a member of that mighty
family in which the stars are numbered : the family of the sons
of God, who, free and creative, sharing the rapture of a living,
striving Cosmos, “shout for joy."

So, even in its very beginning, we see how active, how pro-
foundly organic, how deeply and widely alive is the true contem-
plative life ; how truly on the transcendent as on the phenomenal
plane, the law of living things is action and reaction, force and
energy. The awakening of the self is to a new and more active
plane of being, new and more personal relations with Reality;
hence to a new and more real work which it must do.

1 “The Fire of Love,” bk. i. cap. i.

* Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Divinis Nominibus/' iv. 13.



CHAPTER III


THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF


Purification the necessary corollary of conversion — The Self's adjustment to
Reality — Cleansing of the powers of perception — Acquirement of “ goodness" —
Self-knowledge — Contrition — St. Catherine of Genoa on Purgatory — Love the
agent of purification — Purgation accompanies the whole mystic life; but the
Purgative Way is the completion of conversion — Self-simplification — Cleansing
and stripping — Detachment— Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience: the funda-'
mental mystic virtues — Spiritual Poverty: the essence of liberty — Jacopone da
Todi on Poverty — St. Francis of Assisi — The “Sacrum Commercium” — Eckhart
on Detachment — An attitude not an act — Its various forms — St. Teresa —
Antoinette Bourignan — St. Douceline — Perverted detachment — Mortification —
The positive aspect of Purgation — The remaking of character — Death of the
lower nature — Once the new life is established, mortification ends — “The Mirror
of Simple Souls" — St. Catherine of Genoa — The psychological aspect of mortifi-
cation — Active suffering — The heroic side of purification — Tauler — The conquest
of fastidiousness — St. Francis of Assisi — Margery Kempe — St. Catherine of
Genoa — Madame Guyon — Purgation essential to all mysticism — Its last stages —
The Game of Love — -The fluctuating transcendental consciousness — Rulman
Merswin— The passage from Purgation to Illumination— The three factors of,
the Purgative Way — Conclusion

H ere, then, stands the newly awakened self : aware, for the
first time, of reality, responding to that reality by deep
movements of love and of awe. She sees herself, however,
not merely to be thrust into a new world, but set at the beginning
of a new road. Activity is now to be her watchword, pilgrimage
the business of her life. “That a quest there is, and an end, is the
single secret spoken." Under one symbol or another, the need of i
that long slow process of transcendence, of character building,
whereby she is to attain freedom, become capable of living upon
high levels of reality, is present in her consciousness. Those in
whom this growth is not set going are no mystics, in the exact
sense in which that word is here used; however great their
temporary illumination may have been.

What must be the first step of the self upon this road to perfect
union with the Absolute ? Clearly, a getting rid of all those
elements of normal experience which are not in harmony with
reality: of illusion, evil, imperfection of every kind. By false
desires and false thoughts man has built up for himself a false
universe: as a mollusc, by the deliberate and persistent absorp-
tion of lime and rejection of all else, can build up for itself a hard ”
shell which shuts it from the external world, and only represents in



THE PURIFICATION OF TIIE SELF


199

a distorted and unrecognisable form the ocean from which it was
obtained. This hard and wholly unnutritious shell, this one-sided
^-ecretion of the surface-consciousness, makes as it were a little
cave of illusion for each separate soul. A literal and deliberate
getting out of the cave must be for every mystic, as it was for
Plato's prisoners, the first step in the individual hunt for reality.

In the plain language of old-fashioned theology “man's sin is
stamped upon man's universe." We see a sham world because we
live a sham life. We do not know ourselves ; hence do not know the
true character of our senses and instincts; hence attribute wrong
values to their suggestions and declarations concerning our
relation to the external world. That world, which we have distorted
£>y identifying it with our own self-regarding arrangements of
its elements, has got to reassume for us the character of Reality,
of God. In the purified sight of the great mystics it did reassume
this character: their shells were opened wide, they knew the tides
of the Eternal Sea. This lucid apprehension of the True is what
we mean when we speak of the Illumination which results from a
faithful acceptance of the trials of the Purgative Way.

That which we call the "natural" self as it exists in the "natural"
world — the “old Adam" of St. Paul — is wholly incapable of super-
sensual adventure. All its activities are grouped about a centre of
consciousness whose correspondences are with the material world.
In the moment of its awakening, it is abruptly made aware of this
disability. It knows itself finite. It now aspires to the infinite. It
is encased in the hard crust of individuality : it aspires to union
with a larger self. It is fettered: it longs for freedom. Its every sense
is attuned to illusion: it craves for harmony with the Absolute
Truth. "God is the only Reality," says Patmore, "and we are real
only as far as we are in His order and He is in us." 1 Whatever form,
then, the mystical adventure may take it, must begin with a
change in the attitude of the subject; a change which will intro-
duce it into the order of Reality, and enable it to set up permanent
relations with an Object which is not normally part of its universe.
Therefore, though the end of mysticism is not adequately defined
as goodness, it entails the acquirement of goodness. The virtues
are the "ornaments of the spiritual marriage" because that
marriage is union with the Good no less than with the Beautiful
and the True.

Primarily, then, the self must be purged of all that stands
between it and goodness: putting on the character of reality
instead of the character of illusion or “sin." It longs ardently
to do this from the first moment in which it sees itself in
rthe all-revealing radiance of the Uncreated Light. “When love
* “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower/’ “Magna Moralia,” xxii.



200


MYSTICISM


openeth the inner eyes of the soul for to see this truth," says Hilton,
“with other circumstances that come withall, then beginneth the
soul for sooth to be vastly meek. For then by the sight of God it
feeleth and seeth itself as it is, and then doth the soul forsake the
beholding and leaning to itself." 1

So, with Dante, the first terrace of the Mount of Purgatory
is devoted to the cleansing of pride and the production of humility :
the inevitable — one might almost say mechanical — result of a
vision, however fleeting, of Reality, and an undistorted sight of
the earthbound self. All its life that self has been measuring its
candlelight by other candles. Now for the first time it is out in
the open air and sees the sun. "This is the way," said the voice
of God to St. Catherine of Siena in ecstasy. "If thou wilt arrive
at a perfect knowledge and enjoyment of Me, the Eternal Truth,
thou shouldst never go outside the knowledge of thyself ; and by
humbling thyself in the valley of humility thou wilt know Me and
thyself, from which knowledge thou wilt draw all that is necessary.

. . . In self knowledge, then, thou wilt humble thyself *, seeing
that, in thyself, thou dost not even exist."*

The first thing that the self observes, when it turns back upon
itself in that awful moment of lucidity — enters, as St. Catherine
says, into "the cell of self-knowledge,” — is the horrible contrasty
between its clouded contours and the pure sharp radiance of the
Real; between its muddled faulty life, its perverse self-centred
drifting, and the clear onward sweep of that Becoming in which it
is immersed. It is then that the outlook of rapture and awe
receives the countersign of repentance. The harbinger of that new
self which must be born appears under the aspect of a desire: a
passionate longing to escape from the suddenly perceived hateful-
ness of selfhood, and to conform to Reality, the Perfect which it l
has seen under its aspect of Goodness, of Beauty, or of Love — to*
be worthy of it, in fact to be real. “This showing," says Gerlac
Petersen of that experience, "is so vehement and so strong that
the whole of the interior man, not only of his heart but of his body,
is marvellously moved and shaken, and faints within itself, unable
to endure it. And by this means, his interior aspect is made clear
without any cloud, and conformable in its own measure to Him
whom he seeks."3

The lives of the mystics abound in instances of the "vehemence
of this showing" : of the deep-seated sense of necessity which urges
the newly awakened self to a life of discomfort and conflict, often
to intense poverty and pain, as the only way of replacing false
experience by true. Here the transcendental consciousness, exalted

* “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap. xxxvii.

• Dialogo, cap. iv. s “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium,” cap. xL



201


THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF

by a clear intuition of its goal, and not merely "counting” but
perceiving the world to be obviously well lost for such a prize, takes
the reins. It forces on the unwilling surface mind a sharp vision
of its own disabilities, its ugly and imperfect life ; and the thirst
for Perfection which is closely bound up with the mystic tempera-
ment makes instant response. "No more sins!" was the first cry of
St. Catherine of Genoa in that crucial hour in which she saw by
the light of love her own self-centred and distorted past. She
entered forthwith upon the Purgative Way, in which for four years
she suffered under a profound sense of imperfection, endured
fasting, solitude and mortification ; and imposed upon herself the
most repulsive duties in her efforts towards that self-conquest
which should make her "conformable in her own measure" to the
dictates of that Pure Love which was the aspect of reality that
she had seen. It is the inner conviction that this conformity —
this transcendence of the unreal — is possible and indeed normal,
which upholds the mystic during the terrible years of Purgation :
so that "not only without heaviness, but with a joy unmeasured
he casts back all thing that may him let.” 1

To the true lover of the Absolute, Purgation no less than
Illumination is a privilege, a dreadful joy. It is an earnest of in-
creasing life. "Let me suffer or die!" said St. Teresa: a strange
alternative in the ears of common sense, but a forced option in
the spiritual sphere. However harsh its form, however painful the
activities to which it spurs him, the mystic recognizes in this break-
up of his old universe an essential part of the Great Work: and the
act in which he turns to it is an act of loving desire, no less than
an act of will. "Burning of love into a soul truly taken all vices
purgeth: ... for whilst the true lover with strong and fervent
desire into God is borne, all things him displease that from the sight
of God withdraw. "» His eyes once opened, he is eager for that
costly ordering of his disordered loves which alone can establish
his correspondences with Transcendental Life. "Teach me, my only
joy," cries Suso, "the way in which I may bear upon my body the
marks of Thy Love." "Come, my soul, depart from outward
things and gather thyself together into a true interior silence, that
thou mayst set out with all thy courage and bury and lose thy-
self in the desert of a deep contrition. "3

It is in this torment of contrition, this acute consciousness of
unworthiness, that we have the first swing- back of the oscillating
self from the initial state of mystic pleasure to the complementary
state of pain. It is, so to speak, on its transcendental side, the reflex

1 Richard Rolle, “The Mending of Life/* cap. i.

• Ibid., “The Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. xxiii.

I “Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," cap. v.



202


MYSTICISM


action which follows the first touch of God. Thus, we react that
Rulman Merswin, “swept away by the transports of Divine Love,”
did not surrender himself to the passive enjoyment of this first
taste of Absolute Being, but was impelled by it to diligent and
instant self-criticism. He was “seized with a hatred of his body,
and inflicted on himself such hard mortifications that he fell ill .” 1
It is useless for lovers of healthy-mindedness to resent this
and similar examples of self-examination and penance: to label
them morbid or mediaeval. The fact remains that only such bitter
knowledge of wrongness of relation, seen by the light of ardent
love, can spur the will of man to the hard task of readjustment.

“I saw full surely,” says Julian of Norwich, “that it behoveth
needs to be that we should be in longing and in penance, until
the time that we be led so deep into God that we verily and truly
know our own soul .” 2

Dante's whole journey up the Mount of Purgation is the
dramatic presentation of this one truth. So, too, the celebrated
description of Purgatory attributed to St. Catherine of Genoas is
obviously founded upon its author's inward experience of this
Purgative Way. In it, she applies to the souls of the dead her
personal consciousness of the necessity of purification ; its place in
the organic process of spiritual growth. It is, as she acknowledges
at the beginning, the projection of her own psychological adven-
tures upon the background of the spiritual world: its substance
being simply the repetition after death of that eager and heroic
acceptance of suffering, those drastic acts of purification, which
she has herself been compelled to undertake under the whip of the
same psychic necessity — that of removing the rust of illusion,
cleansing the mirror in order that it may receive the divine light.
“It is,” she says, “as with a covered object, the object cannot
respond to the rays of the sun, not because the sun ceases to shine
— for it shines without intermission — but because the covering
intervenes. Let the covering be destroyed, and again the object
will be exposed to the sun, and will answer to the rays which beat
against it in proportion as the work of destruction advances.
Thus the souls are covered by a rust — that is, by sin — which is
gradually consumed away by the fire of purgatory. The more it is
consumed, the more they respond to God their true Sun. Their
happiness increases as the rust falls off and lays them open to
the divine ray . . . the instinctive tendency to seek happiness in

* Jundt, “Rulman Merswin, ' p. 19.

* “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. lvi.

s I offer no opinion upon this question of authorship. Those interested may
consult Von Htigel, “The Mystical Element of Religion,” vol. i.. Appendix.
Whoever may be responsible for its present form, the Treatise is clearly founded
upon first-hand mystic experience: which is all that our present purpose require.-.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF


203


God develops itself, and goes on increasing through the fire of love,
which draws it to its end with such impetuosity and vehemence
► that any obstacle seems intolerable; and the more clear its vision,
the more extreme its pain." 1

“Mostratene la via di gire al monte !" cry the souls of the
newly-dead in Dante's vision, 2 pushed by that 4 ‘instinctive
tendency" towards the purifying flames. Such a tendency, such a
passionate desire, the aspiring self must have. No cool, well-
balanced knowledge of the need of new adjustments will avail to
set it on the Purgative Way. This is a heroic act, and demands
heroic passions in the soul.

‘Tn order to overcome our desires," says St. John of the Cross,
who is the classic authority upon this portion of the mystic quest,
“and to renounce all those things, our love and inclination for
which are wont so to inflame the will that it delights therein, we
require a more ardent fire and a nobler love — that of the Bride-
groom. Finding her delight and strength in Him, the soul gains
the vigour and confidence which enable her easily to abandon all
other affections. It was necessary, in her struggle with the attrac-
tive force of her sensual desires, not only to have this love for the
Bridegroom, but also to be filled with a burning fervour, full of
anguish ... if our spiritual nature were not on fire with other and
nobler passions we should never cast off the yoke of the senses,
nor be able to enter on their night, neither should we have the
courage to remain in the darkness of all things, and in denial of
every desire. "3

“We must be filled with a burning fervour full of anguish." Only
this deep and ardent passion for a perceived Object of Love can
persuade the mystic to those unnatural acts of abnegation by which
he kills his lesser love of the world of sense, frees himself from the
“remora of desire," unifies all his energies about the new and higher
centre of his life. His business, I have said, is transcendence: a
mounting up, an attainment of a higher order of reality. Once his
eyes have been opened on Eternity, his instinct for the Absolute
roused from its sleep, he sees union with that Reality as his duty
no less than his joy: sees too, that this union can only be consum-
mated on a plane where illusion and selfhood have no place.

The inward voice says to him perpetually, at the least seasonable
moments, “Dimitte omnia transitoria, quaere aetema."4 Hence
the purgation of the senses, and of the character which they have
helped to build is always placed first in order in the Mystic Way ;
though sporadic flashes of illumination and ecstasy may, and often

1 “Trattato di Purgatorio,” caps. ii. and iii. » Purg. ii., 60 .

I “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” 1. i. cap. xiv.

4 “De Imitatione Christi," 1. iii. cap. i.



MYSTICISM


204

do, precede and accompany it. Since spiritual no less than physical
existence, as we know it, is an endless Becoming, it too has no end.
In a sense the whole of the mystical experience in this life consists
in a series of purifications, whereby the Finite slowly approaches
the nature of its Infinite Source: climbing up the cleansing
mountain pool by pool, like the industrious fish in Rulman
Merswin's vision, until it reaches its Origin. The greatest of the
contemplative saints, far from leaving purgation behind them in
their progress, were increasingly aware of their own inadequateness,
the nearer they approached to the unitive state : for the true lover
of the Absolute, like every other lover, is alternately abased and
exalted by his unworthiness and his good fortune. There are
moments of high rapture when he knows only that the banner over
him is Love: but there are others in which he remains bitterly
conscious that in spite of his uttermost surrender there is within
him an ineradicable residuum of selfhood, which “stains the white
radiance of eternity/'

In this sense, then, purification is a perpetual process. That
which mystical writers mean, however, when they speak of the
Way of Purgation, is rather the slow and painful completion of
Conversion. It is the drastic turning of the self from the unreal to
the real life: a setting of her house in order, an orientation of the
mind to Truth. Its business is the getting rid, first of self-love;
and secondly of all those foolish interests in which the surface-
consciousness is steeped.

“The essence of purgation/' says Richard of St. Victor, “is
self-simplification/' Nothing can happen until this has proceeded
a certain distance : till the involved interests and tangled motives
of the self are simplified, and the false complications of temporal
life are recognized and cast away.

“No one," says another authority in this matter, “can be
enlightened unless he be first cleansed or purified and stripped/' 1
Purgation, which is the remaking of character in conformity with
perceived reality, consists in these two essential acts : the cleansing
of that which is to remain, the stripping of that which is to be
done away. It may best be studied, therefore, in two parts: and I
think that it will be in the reader's interest if we reverse the order
which the “Theologia Germanica” adopts, and first consider
Negative Purification, or self-stripping, and next Positive Purifica-
tion, or character-adjustment. These, then, are the branches into
which this subject will here be split. (1) The Negative aspect, the
stripping or purging away of those superfluous, unreal, and harm-
ful things which dissipate the precious energies of the self. This
is the business of Poverty, or Detachment. (2) The Positive aspect:

1 “Theologia Germanica,” cap. xiv.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 205

a raising to their highest term, their purest state, of all that
remains — the permanent elements of character. This is brought
>about by Mortification , the gymnastic of the soul: a deliberate
recourse to painful experiences and difficult tasks.

1. Detachment

Apart from the plain necessity of casting out imperfection and
sin, what is the type of “good character' * which will best serve
the self in its journey towards union with the Absolute?

The mystics of all ages and all faiths agree in their answer. Those
three virtues which the instinct of the Catholic Church fixed upon
as the necessities of the cloistered life — the great Evangelical
counsel of voluntary Poverty with its departments, Chastity, the
poverty of the senses, and Obedience, the poverty of the will —
are also, when raised to their highest term and transmuted by
the Fire of Love, the essential virtues of the mystical quest.

By Poverty the mystic means an utter self -stripping, the casting
off of immaterial as well as material wealth, a complete detach-
ment from all finite things. By Chastity he means an extreme and
limpid purity of soul, cleansed from personal desire and virgin
to all but God: by Obedience , that abnegation of selfhood, that
mortification of the will, which results in a complete self-abandon-
ment, a “holy indifference” to the accidents of life. These three
aspects of perfection are really one : linked together as irrevocably
as the three aspects of the self. Their common characteristic is
this : they tend to make the subject regard itself, not as an isolated
and interesting individual, possessing desires and rights, but as
a scrap of the Cosmos, an ordinary bit of the Universal Life, only
important as a part of the All, an expression of the Will Divine.
Detachment and purity go hand in hand, for purity is but detach-
ment of the heart ; and where these are present they bring with
them that humble spirit of obedience which expresses detachment
of will. We may therefore treat them as three manifestations of
one thing: which thing is Inward Poverty. “Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,” is the motto of all
pilgrims on this road.

“God is pure Good in Himself,” says Eckhart, “therefore will
He dwell nowhere but in a pure soul. There He can pour Himself
out: into that He can wholly flow. What is Purity? It is that a
man should have turned himself away from all creatures and
have set his heart so entirely on the Pure Good that no creature is
to him a comfort, that he has no desire for aught creaturely, save
so far as he may apprehend therein the Pure Good, which is God.
And as little as the bright eye can endure aught foreign in it, so



206


MYSTICISM


little can the pure soul bear anything in it, any stain on it, thai
comes between it and God. To it all creatures are pure to enjoy
for it enjoyeth all creatures in God, and God in all creatures/' 1

'To it all creatures are pure to enjoy!" This is hardly th(
popular concept of the mystic; which credits him, in the teetl
of such examples as St. Francis, St. Mechthild of Magdeburg
Rolle, Suso, and countless others, with a hearty dread of natura
things. Too many examples of an exaggerated asceticism — sue!
as the unfortunate story told of the holy Cure d'Ars, who refusec
to smell a rose for fear of sin — have supported in this respect th<
vulgar belief ; for it is generally forgotten that though most mystic:
have practised asceticism as a means to an end, all ascetics an
not mystics. Whatever may be the case with other deniers of th<
senses, it is true that the soul of the great mystic, dwelling on hi gl
levels of reality, his eyes set on the Transcendental World, i
capable of combining with the perfection of detachment tha
intense and innocent joy in natural things, as veils and vessels o
the divine, which results from seeing "all creatures in God and Go<
in all creatures." "Whoso knows and loves the nobleness of M]
Freedom," said the voice of God to Mechthild of Magdeburg
"cannot bear to love Me alone, he must love also Me in th<
creatures." 3 That all-embracing love is characteristic of the illu
mination which results from a faithful endurance of the Purgativ
Way; for the corollary of "blessed are the pure in heart" is no
merely a poetic statement. The annals of mysticism prove it t<
be a psychological law.

How then is this contradiction to be resolved : that the mysti
who has declared the fundamental necessity of "leaving al
creatures" yet finds them pure to enjoy? The answer to the riddl
lies in the ancient paradox of Poverty: that we only enjoy tru
liberty in respect of such things as we neither possess nor desire
"That thou mayest have pleasure in everything, seek pleasure ii
nothing.That thou mayest know everything, seek to know nothing
That thou mayest possess all things, seek to possess nothing. . .
In detachment the spirit finds quiet and repose, for covetinj
notiiing, nothing wearies it by elation, and nothing oppresses it b;
dejection, because it stands in the centre of its own humility. Fo
as soon as it covets anything, it is immediately fatigued thereby/'

It is not love but lust — the possessive case, the very food o
selfhood — which poisons the relation between the self and th
external world and "immediately fatigues" the soul. Divide th
world into "mine" and "not mine," and unreal standards ar

* Meister Eckhart, quoted by Wackernagel, “Altdeutsches Lesebuch,” p. 891

• “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. vi., cap. 4.

3 St. John of the Cross, “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” bk. i. cap. xiii.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF £07

set up, claims and cravings begin to fret the mind. We are the
slaves of our own property. We drag with us not a treasure, but
*a chain. “Behold,” says the “Theologia Germanica,” “on this sort
must we cast all things from us and strip ourselves of them : we
must refrain from claiming anything for our own. When we do
this, we shall have the best, fullest, clearest, and noblest knowledge
that a man can have, and also the noblest and purest love and
desire .” 1 “Some there are,” says Plotinus, “that for all their effort
have not attained the Vision. . . . They have received the authentic
Light, all their soul has gleamed as they have drawn near; but
they come with a load on their shoulders which holds them back
from the place of Vision. They have not ascended in the pure
integrity of their being, but are burdened wdtli that which keeps
them apart. They are not yet made one within .” 2 Accept Poverty,
however, demolish ownership, the verb “to have” in every mood
and tense, and this downward drag is at an end. At once the
Cosmos belongs to you, and you to it. You escape the heresy of
separateness, are “made one,” and merged in “the greater life of
the All.” Then, a free spirit in a free world, the self moves upon its
true orbit; undistracted by the largely self-imposed needs and
demands of ordinary earthly existence.

This was the truth which St. Francis of Assisi grasped, and
applied with the energy of a reformer and the delicate originality of
a poet to every circumstance of the inner and the outer life. This
noble liberty it is which is extolled by his spiritual descendant,
Jacopone da Todi, in one of his most magnificent odes: —

"Poverty, alto sapere,

a nulla cosa sojacere,
en desprezo possedere
tutte le cose create. . . .

Dio non alberga en core stretto,

tant’e grande quant’ hai affetto,
povertate ha si gran petto
che ci alberga deitate. . . •

Povertate 6 nulla avere
e nulla cosa poi volere;

2 d omne cosa possedere
en spirito de libertate.”3


“Theologia Germanica," cap. v. * Ennead vi. 9.

* “Oh Poverty, high wisdom! to be subject to nothing, and by despising all
to possess all created things. . . .

God will not lodge in a narrow heart; and it is as great as thy love. Poverty
has so ample a bosom that Deity Itself may lodge therein. . . .

Poverty is naught to have, and nothing to desire: but all things to possess in
the spirit of liberty ." — Jacopone da Todi. Lauda lix.



MYSTICISM


208

"My little sisters the birds,” said St. Francis, greatest adept 0]
that high wisdom, "Brother Sun, Sister Water, Mother Earth/':
Not my servants, but my kindred and fellow-citizens; who maj
safely be loved so long as they are not desired. So, in almosl
identical terms, the dying Hindu ascetic : —

"Oh Mother Earth, Father Sky,

Brother Wind, Friend Light, Sweetheart Water,

Here take my last salutation with folded hands !

For to-day I am melting away into the Supreme
Because my heart became pure,

And all delusion vanished,

Through the power of your good company/*

It is the business of Lady Poverty to confer on her lovers this
fieedom of the Universe, to eradicate delusion, cut out the spread-
ing growth of claimfulness, purify the heart, and initiate them intc
the "great life of the All.” Well might St. Francis desire marriage
with that enchantress, who gives back ten-fold all that she takes
away. “Holy poverty,” he said, “is a treasure so high excelling
and so divine that we be not worthy to lay it up in our vile vessels
since this is that celestial virtue whereby all earthly things anc
fleeting are trodden underfoot, and whereby all hindrances an
lifted from the soul, so that freely she may join herself to Goc
Eternal."*

Poverty, then, prepares man's spirit for that union with God tc
which it aspires. She strips off the clothing which he so often mis-
takes for himself, transvaluates all his values, and shows him things
as they are. "There are,” says Eckhart, "four ascending degrees oi
such spiritual poverty. 1 The soul's contempt of all things that
are not God. 2. Contempt of herself and her own works. 3. Uttei
self-abandonment. 4. Self -loss in the incomprehensible Being oi
God. ”3 So, in the "Sacrum Commercium,” when the friars, climbing
"the steeps of the hill,” found Lady Poverty at the summit "en-
throned only in her nakedness,” she "preventing them with the
blessings of sweetness,” said, “Why hasten ye so from the vale oi
tears to the mount of light ? If, peradventure, it is me that ye seek
lo, I am but as you behold, a little poor one, stricken with storms
and far from any consolation.” Whereto the brothers answer
" Only admit us to thy peace ; and we shall be saved .”4

The same truth: the saving peace of utter detachment from
everything but Divine Reality — a detachment which makes those

1 "Fioretti,” cap. xvi., and "Speculum/* cap. cxx.

* Ibid., cap. xiii. (Arnold’s translation).

J Pfeiffer. Tractato x. (Eng. translation., p. 348).

4 "Sacrum Commercium Beati Francisci cum Domina Paupertate,** caps. iv.
and v. (Rawnsley's translation).



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 209

who have it the citizens of the world, and enabled the friars to
say to Lady Poverty as they showed her from the hill of Assisi
*the whole countryside at her feet, “Hoc est claustrum nostrum,
Domina,'' 1 — is taught by Meister Eckhart in a more homely
parable.

''There was a learned man who, eight years long, desired that
God would show him a man who would teach him the truth. And
once when he felt a very great longing, a voice from God came to
him and said, ‘Go to the church, and there shalt thou find a man
who shalt show thee the way to blessedness/ And he went thence,
and found a poor man whose feet were torn and covered with
dust and dirt : and all his clothes were hardly worth three farthings.
And he greeted him, saying: —

“ ‘God give you good day !'

“He answered: 'I have never had a bad day/

“ 'God give you good luck/

“ T have never had ill luck/

“ 'May you be happy! but why do you answer me thus?'

“ ‘I have never been unhappy/

“ ‘Pray explain this to me, for I cannot understand it/

“The poor man answered, ‘Willingly. You wished me good day.
I never had a bad day ; for if I am hungry I praise God ; if it freezes,
hails, snows, rains, if the weather is fair or foul, still I praise God ;
am I wretched and despised, I praise God, and so I have never had
an evil day. You wished that God would send me luck. But I never
had ill luck, for I know how to live with God, and I know that what
He does is best ; and what God gives me or ordains for me, be it good
or ill, I take it cheerfully from God as the best that can be, and
so I have never had ill luck. You wished that God would make me
happy. I was never unhappy ; for my only desire is to live in God's
will, and I have so entirely yielded my will to God's, that what
God wills, I will/

“ ‘But if God should will to cast you into hell,' said the learned
man, ‘what would you do then?'

“ ‘Cast me into hell? His goodness forbids! But if He did cast
me into hell, I should have two arms to embrace Him. One arm is
true humility, that I should lay beneath Him, and be thereby
united to His holy humanity. And with the right arm of love,
which is united with His holy divinity, I should so embrace Him
that He would have to go to hell with me. And I would rather be
in hell and have God, then in heaven and not have God/

“Then the Master understood that true abandonment with utter
humility is the nearest way to God.

“The Master asked further: ‘Whence are you come?'

Op. cit ., cap. xxii.



210


MYSTICISM


“ 'From God/

“ ‘Where did you find God? 1
“ 'When I forsook all creatures/

“ ‘Where have you left God?'

“ ‘In pure hearts, and in men of good will/

“The Master asked: ‘What sort of man are you?'

“ ‘I am a king/

“ ‘Where is your kingdom? 1

“ ‘My soul is my kingdom, for I can so rule my senses inward anc
outward, that all the desires and power of my soul are in sub
jection, and this kingdom is greater than a kingdom on earth/

“ ‘What brought you to this perfection ?'

“ ‘My silence, my high thoughts, and my union with God. Foj
I could not rest in anything that was less than God. Now I have
found God; and in God have eternal rest and peace/ ” 2

Poverty, then, consists in a breaking down of man's inveterate
habit of trying to rest in, or take seriously, things which are “less
than God" : i.e., which do not possess the character of reality. Such
a habit is the most fertile of all causes of “world-weariness" dis-
illusion and unrest : faults, or rather spiritual diseases, which the
mystics never exhibit, but which few who are without all mystic
feeling can hope to escape. Hence the sharpened perceptions of
the contemplatives have always seen poverty as a counsel of
prudence, a higher form of common sense. It was not with St.
Francis, or any other great mystic, a first principle, an end in
itself. It was rather a logical deduction from the first principle of
their science — the paramount importance to the soul of an undis-
tracted vision of reality.

Here East and West are in agreement: “Their science," says
A1 Ghazzali of the Sufis, who practised, like the early Franciscans,
a complete renunciation of worldly goods, “has for its object the
uprooting from the soul of all violent passions, the extirpation
from it of vicious desires and evil qualities ; so that the heart may
become detached from all that is not God, and give itself for its
only occupation meditation upon the Divine Being. "3

All those who have felt themselves urged towards the attain-
ment of this transcendental vision, have found that possessions
interrupt the view; that claims, desires, attachments become
centres of conflicting interest in the mind. They assume a false
air of importance, force themselves upon the attention, and com-


* So Ruysbroeck, “Freewill is the king of the soul . . . he should dwell in the
chief city of that kingdom: that is to say, the desirous power of the soul* ** (“De
Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1 . i. cap. xxiv.).

» Meister Eckhart. Quoted in Martensen's monograph, p. 107.

3 Schmdlders, “Essai sur les Jicoles Philosophiques chez les Arabes,” p. 54.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF


211


plicate life. Hence, in the interest of self-simplification, they must
be cleared away: a removal which involves for the real enthusiast
ittle more sacrifice than the weekly visit of the dustman. "Having
entirely surrendered my own free-will," says A1 Ghazzali of his
personal experience, "my heart no longer felt any distress in
renouncing fame, wealth, or the society of my children." 1

Others have reconciled self-surrender with a more moderate
abandonment of outward things; for possessions take different
rank for almost every human soul. The true rule of poverty con-
sists in giving up those things which enchain the spirit, divide
its interests, and deflect it on its road to God — whether these
things be riches, habits, religious observances, friends, interests,
distastes, or desires — not in mere outward destitution for its own
sake. It is attitude, not act, that matters; self-denudation would
be unnecessary were it not for our inveterate tendency to attribute
false value to things the moment they become our own. "What
is poverty of spirit but meekness of mind, by which a man knows
his own infirmity?" says Rolle, "seeing that to perfect stable-
ness he may not come but by the grace of God, all thing that him
might let from that grace he forsakes, and only in joy of his Maker
he sets his desire. And as of one root spring many branches, so
of wilful poverty on this wise taken proceed virtues and marvels
untrowed. Not as some, that change their clothes and not their
souls ; riches soothly it seems these forsake, and vices innumerable
they cease not to gather. ... If thori truly all thing for God forsake,
see more what thou despiseth than what thou forsaketh ” 2 3 4
The Poverty of the mystics, then, is a mental rather than a
material state. Detachment of the will from all desire of posses-
sions is the inner reality, of which Franciscan poverty is a sacra-
ment to the world. It is the poor in spirit, not the poor in substance,
who are to be spiritually blessed. "Let all things be forsaken of
me," says Gerlac Petersen, "so that being poor I may be able in
great inward spaciousness, and without any hurt, to suffer want
of all those things which the mind of man can desire; out of or
excepting God Himself. "3

"The soul," says St. John of the Cross, "is not empty, so long
as the desire for sensible things remains. But the absence of this
desire for things produces emptiness and liberty of soul; even
when there is an abundance of possessions. "4
Every person in whom the mystical instinct awakes soon
discovers in himself certain tastes or qualities which interrupt the

1 Schmftlders, “Essai sur les ficoles Philosophiques chez les Arabes," op. cit. t

p. 58. * Richard Rolle, “The Mending of Life," cap. iii,

3 “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium,” cap. i.

4 “Subicla del Monte Carmelo," 1. i. cap. iii.



212


MYSTICISM


development of that instinct. Often these tastes and qualities are
legitimate enough upon their own plane ; but they are a drain upon
the energy of the self, preventing her from attaining that intense^
life for which she was made and which demands her undivided
zest. They distract her attention, fill the field of perception,
stimulate her instinctive life : making of the surface-consciousness
so active a thing that it can hardly be put to sleep. "Where can
he have that pure and naked vision of unchangeable Truth
whereby he see into all things," says Petersen again, "who is so
busied in other things, not perhaps evil, which operate . . . upon
his thoughts and imagination and confuse and enchain his mind . . .
that his sight of that unique One in Whom all things are is over-
clouded?" 1

The nature of these distracting factors which "confuse and
enchain the mind" will vary with almost every individual. It is
impossible to predict what those things will be which a self must
give up, in order that the transcendental consciousness may grow.
"It makes little difference whether a bird be held by a slender
thread or by a rope; the bird is bound, and cannot fly until
the cord that holds it is broken. It is true that a slender thread
is more easily broken ; still notwithstanding, if it is not broken the
bird cannot fly. This is the state of a soul with particular attach-
ments: it never can attain to the liberty of the divine union,
whatever virtues it may possess. Desires and attachments affect
the soul as the remora is said to affect a ship ; that is but a little
fish, yet when it clings to the vessel it effectually hinders its
progress." 3

Thus each adventurer must discover and extirpate all those
interests which nourish selfhood, however innocent or even useful
these interests may seem in the eyes of the world. The only rule
is the ruthless abandonment of everything which is in the way.
"When any man God perfectly desires to love, all things as well
inward as outward that to God's love are contrary and from His
love do let, he studies to do away."3 This may mean the prompt and
utter self -stripping of St. Francis of Assisi, who cast off his actual
clothing in his relentless determination to have nothing of his own :4
the reluctant bit-by-bit renunciations which at last set his
follower Angela of Foligno free, or the drastic proceedings of
Antoinette Bourignan, who found that a penny was enough to
keep her from God.

"Being one night in a most profound Penitence," says the
biographer of this extraordinary woman, "she said from the bottom

* Gerlac Petersen, op. cit., cap. xi.

* St. John of the Cross, op. cit., 1. i. cap. xi.

s Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. xix.

4 Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. vi.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF


213

0 { her Heart, '0 my Lord! what must I do to please Thee? For I
have nobody to teach me. Speak to my soul and it will hear Thee. ’ ”
IjVt that instant she heard, as if another had spoken within her,
"Forsake all earthly things. Separate thyself from the love of the
creatures. Deny thyself.” From this time, the more she entered
into herself the more she was inclined to abandon all. But she had
not the courage necessary for the complete renunciation towards
which her transcendental consciousness was pressing her. She
struggled to adjust herself to the inner and the outer life, but with-
out success. For such a character as hers, compromise was impos-
sible. “She asked always earnestly, When shall I be perfectly
thine, 0 my God? and she thought He still answered her, When
thou shalt no longer possess anything , and shalt die to thyself . And
where shall I do that, Lord? He answered, In the Desert .” At
last the discord between her deeper and her superficial self became
intolerable. Reinforced by the miseries of an unsympathetic home,
still more by a threat of approaching marriage, the impulse to
renunciation got its way. She disguised herself in a hermit's dress
—she was only eighteen, and had no one to help or advise her —
and “went out of her chamber about Four in the Morning, taking
nothing but one Penny to buy Bread for that Day; and it being
said to her in the going out, Where is thy Faith? In a Penny? she
threw it away. . . . Thus she went away wholly delivered from the
heavy burthen of the Cares and Good Things of this World.” 1

An admirable example of the mystic's attitude towards the
soul-destroying division of interests, the natural but hopeless
human struggle to make the best of both worlds, which sucks at
its transcendental vitality, occurs in St. Teresa’s purgative
period. In her case this war between the real and the superficial
self extended over many years; running side by side with the
state of Illumination, and a fully developed contemplative life.
At last it was brought to an end by a “Second Conversion” which
unified her scattered interests and set her firmly and for ever on
the Unitive Way. The virile strength of Teresa’s character, which
afterwards contributed to the greatness of her achievement,
opposed the invading transcendental consciousness; disputed
every inch of territory ; resisted every demand made upon it by
the growing spiritual self. Bit by bit it was conquered, the sphere
of her deeper life enlarged ; until the moment came in which she
surrendered, once for all, to her true destiny. 2

1 “An Apology for Mrs. Antoinette Bourignan,” pp. 269-70.

* St. Teresa's mystic states are particularly difficult to classify. From one point
of view these struggles might be regarded as the preliminaries of conversion. She
was, however, proficient in contemplation when they occurred, and I therefore
think that my arrangement is the right one.



MYSTICISM


214

During the years of inward stress, of penance and growing
knowledge of the Infinite, which she spent in the Convent of the
Incarnation, and which accompanied this slow remaking of
character, Teresa's only self-indulgence — as it seems, a sufficiently
innocent one — was talking to the friends who came down from
Avila to the convent-parlour, and spoke to her through the grille ,
Her confessors, unaccustomed to the education of mystical genius,
saw nothing incompatible between this practice and the pursuit of
a high contemplative life. But as her transcendental consciousness,
her states of orison grew stronger, Teresa felt more and more the
distracting influence of these glimpses of the outer world. They
were a drain upon the energy which ought to be wholly given to
that new, deep, more real life which she felt stirring within her,
and which could only hope to achieve its mighty destiny by
complete concentration upon the business in hand. No genius
can afford to dissipate his energies : the mystic genius least of all.
Teresa knew that so long as she retained these personal satisfac-
tions, her life had more than one focus; she was not whole-hearted
in her surrender to the Absolute. But though her inward voices,
her deepest instincts, urged her to give them up, for years she felt
herself incapable of such a sacrifice. It was round the question
of their retention or surrender that the decisive battle of her life
was fought.

“The devil/ 1 says her great Augustinian eulogist, Fray Luis de
Leon, in his vivid account of these long interior struggles, “put
before her those persons most sympathetic by nature; and God
came, and in the midst of the conversation discovered Himself
aggrieved and sorrowful. The devil delighted in the conversation
and pastime, but when she turned her back on them and betook
herself to prayer, God redoubled the delight and favours, as if to
show her how false was the lure which charmed her at the grating,
and that His sweetness was the veritable sweetness. ... So
that these two inclinations warred with each other in the breast
of this blessed woman, and the authors who inspired them each
did his utmost to inflame her most, and the oratory blotted out
what the grating wrote, and at times the grating vanquished and
diminished the good fruit produced by prayer, causing agony and
grief which disquieted and perplexed her soul : for though she was
resolved to belong entirely to God, she knew not how to shake her-
self free from the world : and at times she persuaded herself that
she could enjoy both, which ended mostly, as she says, in complete
enjoyment of neither. For the amusements of the locutorio were
embittered and turned into wormwood by the memory of the
secret and sweet intimacy with God ; and in the same way when
she retired to be with God, and commenced to speak with Him,



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 215

the affections and thoughts which she carried with her from the
grating took possession of her.” 1

Compare with these violent oscillations between the superficial
and mystical consciousness — characteristic of Teresa's strong
volitional nature, which only came to rest after psychic con-
vulsions which left no corner of its being unexplored — the sym-
bolic act of renunciation under which Antoinette Bourignan's ‘'in-
terior self” vanquished the surface intelligence and asserted its
supremacy. Teresa must give up her passionate delight in human
friendship. Antoinette, never much tempted in that direction, must
give up her last penny. What society was to Teresa's generous,
energetic nature, prudence was to the temperamentally shrewd
and narrow Antoinette : a distraction, a check on the development
of the all-demanding transcendental genius, an unconquered
relic of the "lower life.”

Many a mystic, however, has found the perfection of detach-
ment to be consistent with afar less drastic renunciation of external
things than that which these women felt to be essential to their
peace. The test, as we have seen, does not lie in the nature of the
things which are retained, but in the reaction which they stimulate
in the self. "Absolute poverty is thine,” says Tauler, "when thou
canst not remember whether anybody has ever owed thee or been
ridebted to thee for anything; just as all things will be forgotten
by thee in the last journey of death." 3 Poverty, in this sense, may
be consistent with the habitual and automatic use of luxuries
which the abstracted self never even perceives. Thus we are told
that St. Bernard was reproached by his enemies with the incon-
sistency of preaching evangelical poverty whilst making his
journeys from place to place on a magnificently caparisoned mule,
which had been lent to him by the Cluniac monks. He expressed
great contrition : but said that he had never noticed what it was
that he rode upon, 3

Sometimes, the very activity which one self has rejected as an
rnpediment becomes for another the channel of spiritual percep-
tion. I have mentioned the Cure d'Ars, who, among other inhibi-
tions, refused to allow himself to smell a rose. Yet St. Francis
preached to the flowers,4 and ordered a plot to be set aside for
their cultivation when the convent garden was made, "in order
that all who saw them might remember the Eternal Sweetness. ”5

x Quoted by G. Cunninghame Graham, “Santa Teresa/* vol. i. p. 139* For
St. Teresa's own account, see Vida, caps, vii-ix.

* Sermon on St. Paul (“The Inner Way/' p. 113).

3 Cotter Morison. “Life and Times of St. Bernard/’ p. 68 .

♦ Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. xxix.

3 Ibid., Legenda Secunda, cap. exxiv.



216 MYSTICISM

So, too, we are told of his spiritual daughter, St. Douceline, that
“out of doors one day with her sisters, she heard a bird's note
'What a lovely song!' she said: and the song drew her straight
way to God. Did they bring her a flower, its beauty had a like
effect ” 1 “To look on trees, water, and flowers," says St. Teresa of
her own beginnings of contemplation, “helped her to recollect
the Presence of God."* Here we are reminded of Plato. “The true
order of going is to use the beauties of Earth as steps along which
one mounts upwards for the sake of that other Beauty." This, too,
is the true order of Holy Poverty : the selfless use, not the selfish
abuse of lovely and natural things.

To say that some have fallen short of this difficult ideal and
taken refuge in mere abnegation is but to say that asceticism is
a human, not a superhuman art, and is subject to “the frailty of
the creature." But on the whole, these excesses are mainly found
amongst saintly types who have not exhibited true mystic intui-
tion. This intuition, entailing as it does communion with intensest
Life, gives to its possessors a sweet sanity, a delicate balance,
which guards them, as a rule, from such conceptions of chastity
as that of the youthful saint who shut himself in a cupboard for
fear he should see his mother pass by : from the obedience which
identifies the voice of the director with the voice of God; from
detachment such as that exhibited by the Blessed Angela of
Foligno, who, though a true mystic, viewed with almost murderous
satisfaction the deaths of relatives who were “impediments/^
The detachment of the mystic is just a restoration to the liberty
in which the soul was made: it is a state of joyous humility in
which he cries, “Nought I am, nought I have, nought I lack."
To have arrived at this is to have escaped from the tyranny of
selfhood : to be initiated into the purer air of that universe which
knows but one rule of action — that which was laid down once for
all by St. Augustine when he said, in the most memorable and
misquoted of epigrams : “Love, and do what you like."

2. Mortification

By mortification, I have said, is to be understood the positive
aspect of purification: the remaking in relation to reality of the
permanent elements of character. These elements, so far, have

* Anne Macdonell, “St. Douceline, “ p. 30. * Vida, cap. ix.,p. 6.

3 “In that time and by God’s will there died my mother, who was a great
hindrance unto me in following the way of God: soon after my husband died
likewise, and also ail my children. And because I had commenced to follow the
aforesaid Way, and had prayed God that He would rid me of them, I had great
consolation of their deaths. (Ste Angfcle de Foligno; “Le Livre de l'Exp6rience
des Vrais Fiddles.” Ed. M. J. Ferr6, p. 10.)



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 217

subserved the interests of the old self, worked for it in the world
of sense. Now they must be adjusted to the needs of the new self
' and to the transcendent world in which it moves. Their focal point
is the old self; the “natural man” and his self-regarding instincts
and desires. The object of mortification is to kill that old self,
break up his egoistic attachments and cravings, in order that the
higher centre, the “new man,” may live and breathe. As St.
Teresa discovered when she tried to reconcile the claims of worldly
friendships and contemplation, one or other must go: a house
divided against itself cannot stand. “Who hinders thee more,” says
Thomas k Kempis, “than the unmortified affections of thy own
heart? ... if we were perfectly dead unto ourselves, and not
entangled within our own breasts, then should we be able to
taste Divine things, and to have some experience of heavenly
contemplation .” 1

In psychological language, the process of mortification is the
process of setting up “new paths of neural discharge.” That is
to say, the mystic life has got to express itself in action : and for
this new paths must be cut and new habits formed — all, in
spite of the new self’s enthusiasm, “against the grain” — resulting
in a complete sublimation of personality. The energy which wells
up incessantly in every living being must abandon the old road of
least resistance and discharge itself in a new and more difficult
way. In the terms of the hormic psychology, the conative drive of
the psyche must be concentrated on new objectives; and the old
paths, left to themselves, must fade and die. When they are dead,
and the new life has triumphed, Mortification is at an end. The
mystics always know when this moment comes. Often an inner
voice then warns them to lay their active penances aside.

Since the greater and stronger the mystic, the stronger and more
stubborn his character tends to be, this change of life and turning
of energy from the old and easy channels to the new is often a
stormy matter. It is a period of actual battle between the inhar-
monious elements of the self, its lower and higher springs of action :
of toil, fatigue, bitter suffering, and many disappointments.
Nevertheless, in spite of its etymological associations, the object
of mortification is not death but life : the production of health and
strength, the health and strength of the human consciousness
viewed sub specie aeternitatis. “In the truest death of all created
things, the sweetest and most natural life is hidden.”*

“This dying,” says Tauler again, “has many degrees, and so
has this life. A man might die a thousand deaths in one day. and
find at once a joyful life corresponding to each of them. This is as

* "De Imitatione Christi," 1. i. caps. in. and ix,

" Tauler, Sermon on St. Paul (“The Inner Way,” p. 114).



218 MYSTICISM

it must be : God cannot deny or refuse this to death. The stronger
the death the more powerful and thorough is the corresponding
life ; the more intimate the death, the more inward is the life. Each
life brings strength, and strengthens to a harder death. When a
man dies to a scornful word, bearing it in God's name, or to some
inclination inward or outward, acting or not acting against his
own will, be it in love or grief, in word or act, in going or staying;
or if he denies his desires of taste or sight, or makes no excuses
when wrongfully accused ; or anything else, whatever it may be,
to which he has not yet died, it is harder at first to one who is
unaccustomed to it and unmortified than to him who is mortified.
... A great life makes reply to him who dies in earnest even in the
least things, a life which strengthens him immediately to die a
greater death; a death so long and strong, that it seems to him
hereafter more joyful, good and pleasant to die than to live, for
he finds life in death and light shining in darkness." 1 * 3

No more than detachment, then, is mortification an end in
itself. It is a process, an education directed towards the production
of a definite kind of efficiency, the adjustment of human nature
to the demands of its new life. Severe, and to the outsider appar-
ently unmeaning — like their physical parallels the exercises of
the gymnasium — its disciplines, faithfully accepted, do release the
self from the pull of the lower nature, establish it on new levels of
freedom and power. "Mortification," says the Benedictine con-
templative Augustine Baker, "tends to subject the body to the
spirit and the spirit to God. And this it does by crossing the in-
clinations of sense, which are quite contrary to those of the Divine
Spirit ... by such crossing and afflicting of the body, self-love and
self-will (the poison of our spirits) are abated, and in time in a
sort destroyed; and instead of them there enter into the soul
the Divine love and Divine will, and take possession thereof."*
This transformation accomplished, mortification may end, and
often does, with startling abruptness After a martyrdom which
lasted sixteen years, says Suso — speaking as usual in the third
person — of his own experience, "On a certain Whitsun Day a
heavenly messenger appeared to him, and ordered him in God's
name to continue it no more. He at once ceased, and threw all
the instruments of his sufferings [irons, nails, hair-shirt, etc.] into
a river. "3 From this time onward, austerities of this sort had no
part in Suso's life.

The Franco-Flemish mystic who wrote, and the English con-

1 Tauler, Second Sermon for Easter Day. (This is not included in either of the
English collections.)

* Augustine Baker, "Holy Wisdom/' Treatise ii. Sect. i„ cap. 3,

3 Suso, Leben, cap. xvii.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF


219

templative who translated, “The Mirror of Simple Souls/' have
between them described and explained in bold and accurate
language the conditions under which the soul is enabled to aban-
don that “hard service of the virtues" which has absorbed it
during the Purgative Way. The statement of the “French Book"
is direct and uncompromising: well calculated to startle timid
piety. “Virtues, I take leave of you for evermore!" exclaims the
Soul. “Now shall mine heart be more free and more in peace than
it hath been before. I wot well your service is too travaillous. . . .
Some time I laid mine heart in you without any dissevering: ye
wot well this : I was in all things to you obedient. 0 I was then your
servant, but now I am delivered out of your thraldom."

To this astounding utterance the English translator has added
a singularly illuminating gloss. “I am stirred here," he says, “to
say more to the matter, as thus : First : when a soul giveth her to
perfection, she laboureth busily day and night to get virtues, by
counsel of reason, and striveth with vices at every thought, at
every word and deed that she perceiveth cometh of them, and
busily searcheth vices, them to destroy. Thus the virtues be mis-
tresses, and every virtue maketh her to war with its contrary, the
which be vices. Many sharp pains and bitterness of conscience
feeleth the soul in this war. . . . But so long one may bite on the
bitter bark of the nut, that at last he shall come to the sweet
kernel. Right so, ghostly to understand, it fareth by these souls
that be come to peace. They have so long striven with vices and
wrought by virtues, that they be come to the nut kernel, that is,
to the love of God, which is sweetness. And when the soul hath
deeply tasted this love, so that this love of God worketh and hath
his usages in her soul, then the soul is wondrous light and glad-
some. . . . Then is she mistress and lady over the virtues, for she
hath them all within herself. . . . And then this soul taketh leave
of virtues, as of the thraldom and painful travail of them that
she had before, and now she is lady and sovereign, and they be
subjects." 1

Jacopone da Todi speaks to the same effect: —

"La guerra 6 terminata

de le virtu battaglia,
de la mente travaglia
cosa nulla contende.” 3

Thus, St. Catherine of Genoa, after a penitential period of four
years, during which she was haunted by a constant sense of sin,
and occupied by incessant mortifications, found that “all thought

* "The Mirror of Simple Souls," edited by Clare Kirchberger, p. 12.

* "The war is at an end : in the battle of virtues, in travail of mind, there is nc
more striving" (Lauda xci.).



220


MYSTICISM


of such mortifications was in an instant taken from her mind : in
such a manner that, had she even wished to continue such morti-
fications, she would have been unable to do so . . . the sight of her
sins was now taken from her mind, so that henceforth she did not
catch a glimpse of them : it was as though they had all been cast
into the depths of the sea.” 1 In other words, the new and higher
centre of consciousness, finally established, asserted itself and
annihilated the old. “La guerra £ terminata,” all the energy of a
strong nature flows freely in the new channels; and mortification
ceases, mechanically, to be possible to the now unified, sublimated,
or “regenerated” self.

Mortification takes its name from the reiterated statement of
all ascetic writers that the senses, or “body of desire,” with the
cravings which are excited by different aspects of the phenomena]
world, must be mortified or killed ; which is, of course, a description
of psychological necessities from their special point of view. All
those self-regarding instincts — so ingrained that they have
become automatic — which impel the self to choose the more
comfortable part, are seen by the awakened intuition of the
embryo mystic as gross infringements of the law of love. “This
is the travail that a man behoveth, to draw out his heart and his
mind from the fleshly love and the liking of all earthly creatures,
from vain thoughts and from fleshly imaginations, and out from
the love and the vicious feeling of himself, that his soul should
find no rest in no fleshly thought, nor earthly affection.” 3 The rule
of Poverty must be applied to the temper of normal consciousness
as well as to the tastes and possessions of the self. Under this
tonic influence, real life will thrive ; unreal life will wither and die.

This mortifying process is necessary, not because the legitimate
exercise of the senses is opposed to Divine Reality, but because
those senses have usurped a place beyond their station ; become the
focus of energy, steadily drained the vitality of the self. “The
dogs have taken the children's meat.” The senses have grown
stronger than their masters, monopolized the field of perception
dominated an organism which was made for greater activities, and
built up those barriers of individuality which must be done away if
true personality is to be achieved, and with it some share in the
boundless life of the One. It is thanks to this wrong distribution oi
energy, this sedulous feeding of the cuckoo in the nest, that “ir
order to approach the Absolute, mystics must withdraw from
everything, even themselves. ”3 “The soul is plunged in uttei

* "Vita e Dottrina/’ cap. v.

* Walter Hilton, “The Scale of Perfection/’ bk. i. cap. 8, xlii.

s R6c6jac, “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique/* p. 78. This, however
is to be understood of the initial training of the mystic; not of his final state.



221


THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF

ignorance, when she supposes that she can attain to the high estate
of union with God before she casts away the desire of all things,
Natural and supernatural, which she may possess/' says St. John
of the Cross, 1 * “because the distance between them and that which
takes place in the state of pure transformation in God is infinite." 1
Again, "until the desires be lulled to sleep by the mortification of
sensuality, and sensuality itself be mortified in them, so that it
shall war against the spirit no more, the soul cannot go forth in
perfect liberty to union with the Beloved." 3

The death of selfhood in its narrow individualistic sense is,
then, the primary object of mortification. All the twisted elements
of character which foster the existence of this unreal yet complex
creature are to be pruned away. Then, as with the trees of the
forest, so with the spirit of man, strong new branches will spring
into being, grow towards air and light. "I live, yet not I" is to be
the declaration of the mystic who has endured this "bodily death."
The self-that-is-to-be will live upon a plane where her own pre-
judices and preferences are so uninteresting as to be imperceptible.
She must be weaned from these nursery toys: and weaning is a
disagreeable process. The mystic, however, undertakes it as a rule
without reluctance : pushed by his vivid consciousness of imper-
fection, his intuition of a more perfect state, necessary to the fulfil-
ment of his love. Often his entrance upon the torments of the
Purgative Way, his taking up of the spiritual or material instru-
ments of mortification, resembles in ardour and abruptness that
"heroic plunge into Purgatory" of the newly dead when it perceives
itself in the light of Love Divine, which is described in the
“Treatise" of St. Catherine of Genoa as its nearest equivalent.
"As she, plunged in the divine furnace of purifying love, was
united to the Object of her love, and satisfied with all he wrought
in her, so she understood it to be with the souls in Purgatory. "3

This "divine furnace of purifying love" demands from the
ardent soul a complete self -surrender, and voluntary turning from
all impurity, a humility of the most far-reaching kind: and this
means the deliberate embrace of active suffering, a self-discipline
in dreadful tasks. As gold in the refiner's fire, so "burning of love
into a soul truly taken all vices purgeth." Detachment may be a
counsel of prudence, a practical result of seeing the true values of
things; but the pain of mortification is seized as a splendid oppor-
tunity, a love token, timidly offered by the awakened spirit to that
all-demanding Lover from Whom St. Catherine of Siena heard
the terrible words "I, Fire, the Acceptor of sacrifices, ravishing

1 “Subida del Monte Carmelo," 1. i. cap. v.

* Op. cit., bk. i. cap. xv.

) S. Caterina di Genova, “Trattato di Purgatorio,” cap. i.



222 MYSTICISM

away from them their darkness, give the light/' 1 "Suffering is the
ancient law of love," says the Eternal Wisdom to Suso, "there
is no quest without pain, there is no lover who is not also a martyr.
Hence it is inevitable that he who would love so high a thing as
Wisdom should sometimes suffer hindrances and griefs." 2

The mystics have a profound conviction that Creation, Becom-
ing, Transcendence, is a painful process at the best. Those who
are Christians point to the Passion of Christ as a proof that the
cosmic journey to perfection, the path of the Eternal Wisdom,
follows of necessity the Way of the Cross. That law of the inner
life, which sounds so fantastic and yet is so bitterly true — "No
progress without pain" — asserts itself. It declares that birth
pangs must be endured in the spiritual as well as in the material
world: that adequate training must always hurt the athlete.
Hence the mystics' quest of the Absolute drives them to an eager
and heroic union with the reality of suffering, as well as with the
reality of joy. 3

This divine necessity of pain, this necessary sharing in the travail
of a World of Becoming, is beautifully described by Tauler in one
of those "internal conversations" between the contemplative soul
and its God, which abound in the works of the mystics and are
familiar to all readers of "The Imitation of Christ." "A man once
thought," says Tauler, "that God drew some men even by pleasant
paths, while other were drawn by the path of pain. Our Lord
answered him thus, 'What think ye can be pleasanter or nobler
than to be made most like unto Me? that is by suffering. Mark,
to whom was ever offered such a troubled life as to Me ? And in
whom can I better work in accordance with My true nobility than
in those who are most like Me ? They are the men who suffer. . .
Learn that My divine nature never worked so nobly in human
nature as by suffering; and because suffering is so efficacious, it
is sent out of great love. I understand the weakness of human
nature at all times, and out of love and righteousness I lay no
heavier load on man than he can bear. The crown must be firmly

* Dialogo, cap. lxxxv. a Leben, cap. iv.

3 “This truth, of which she was the living example/' says Huysmans of St.
Lydwine, “has been and will be true for every period. Since the death of Lydwine,
there is not a saint who has not confirmed it. Hear them formulate their desires.
Always to suffer, and to die! cries St. Teresa; always to suffer, yet not to die,
corrects St. Magdalena dei Pazzi; yet more, oh Lord, yet more! exclaims St.
Francis Xavier, dying in anguish on the coast of China; I wish to be broken with
suffering in order that I may prove my love to God, declares a seventeenth century
Carmelite, the Ven. Mary of the Trinity. The desire for suffering is itself an agony,
adds a great servant of God of our own day, Mother Mary Du Bourg; and she
confided to her daughters in religion that ‘if they sold pain in the market she
would hurry to buy it there.' " (J. K. Huysmans, “Sainte Lydwine de Schiedam/'
3rd edition, p. 225). Examples can be multiplied indefinitely from the lives and
works of the mystics of all periods.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 223

pressed down that is to bud and blossom in the Eternal Presence
of My Heavenly Father. He who desires to be wholly immersed
in the fathomless sea of My Godhead must also be deeply immersed
in the deep sea of bitter sorrow. I am exalted far above all things,
and work supernatural and wonderful works in Myself: the deeper
and more supematurally a man crushes himself beneath all things,
the more supematurally will he be drawn far above all things/ ”*

Pain, therefore, the mystics always welcome and often court:
bometimes in the crudely physical form which Suso describes so
vividly and horribly in the sixteenth chapter of his Life, more
frequently in those refinements of torture which a sensitive spirit
can extract from loneliness, injustice, misunderstanding — above
all, from deliberate contact with the repulsive accidents of life.
It would seem from a collation of the evidence that the typical
mystical temperament is by nature highly fastidious. Its passionate
apprehension of spiritual beauty, its intuitive perception of
divine harmony, is counterbalanced by an instinctive loathing of
ugliness, a shrinking from the disharmonies of squalor and disease.
Often its ideal of refinement is far beyond the contemporary
standards of decency: a circumstance which is alone enough to
provide ample opportunity of wretchedness. This extreme sensi-
tiveness, which forms part of the normal psycho-physical make-up
of the mystic, as it often does of the equally highly-strung artistic
type, is one of the first things to be seized upon by the awakened
self as a disciplinary instrument. Then humility's axiom, “Naught
is too low for love” is forced to bear the less lovely gloss, "Naught
must be too disgusting.”

Two reasons at once appear for this. One is the contempt for
phenomena, nasty as well as nice — the longing to be free from
all the fetters of sense — which often goes with the passion for
invisible things. Those mystics to whom the attractions of earth
are only illusion, are inconsistent if they attribute a greater
reality to the revolting and squalid incidents of life. St. Francis
did but carry his own principles to their logical conclusion, when
he insisted that the vermin were as much his brothers as the birds.
Real detachment means the death of preferences of all kinds: even
of those which seem to other men the very proofs of virtue and
fine taste.

The second reason is nobler. It is bound up with that principle
of self-surrender which is the mainspring of the mystic life. To
the contemplative mind, which is keenly conscious of unity in
multiplicity — of God in the world — all disinterested service is
service of the Absolute which he loves: and the harder it is, the
more opposed to his self-regarding and aesthetic instincts, the
1 Tauler, Sermon on St. Paul (“The Inner Way," p. 114).



MYSTICISM


224

more nearly it approaches his ideal. The point to which he aspires
— though he does not always know it — is that in which all dis-
harmony, all appearance of vileness, is resolved in the concrete
reality which he calls the Love of God. Then, he feels dimly, every-
thing will be seen under the aspect of a cosmic and charitable
beauty; exhibiting through the woof of corruption the web of
eternal life.

It is told of St. Francis of Assisi, in whom the love of lovely
things was always paramount, how he forced himself to visit the
lepers whose sight and smell disgusted him : how he served them
and even kissed them. 1 'Then as he departed, in very truth that
which had aforetime been bitter unto him, to wit, the sight and
touch of lepers, now changed into sweetness. For, as he confessed,
the sight of lepers had been so grievous unto him that he had been
minded to avoid not only seeing them, but even going nigh their
dwelling. And if at any time he chanced to pass their abodes, or
to see them, albeit he were moved by compassion to do them an
alms through another person, yet alway would he turn aside his
face, stopping his nostrils with his hand. But through the grace
of God he became so intimate a friend of the lepers that, even as
he recorded in his will, he did sojourn with them and did humbly
serve them.”

Also, after his great renunciation of all property, he, once a
prosperous young man who had been "dainty in his father’s
home,” accustomed himself to take a bowl and beg scraps of food
from door to door: and here too, as in the case of the lepers, that
which at first seemed revolting became to him sweet. "And when
he would have eaten that medley of various meats,” says the
legend, "at first he shrank back, for that he had never been used
willingly even to see, much less to eat, such scraps. At length,
conquering himself, he began to eat ; and it seemed to him that
in eating no rich syrup had he ever tasted aught so delight-
some.”*

The object, then, of this self-discipline is, like the object of all
purgation, freedom: freedom from the fetters of the senses, the
"remora of desire,” from the results of environment and worldly
education, from pride and prejudice, preferences and distaste:
from selfhood in every form. Its effect is a sharp reaction to the
joy of self-conquest. The very act that had once caused in the
enchained self a movement of loathing becomes not merely in-
different, but an occasion of happiness. So Margery Kempe "had
great mourning and sorrowing if she might not kiss a leper when
she met them in the way for the love of our Lord, which was all

1 Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. vii.; 3 Soc. cap. iv.

* 3 Soc. cap. vii.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 225

contrary to her disposition in the years of her youth and prosperity,
f for then she abhorred them most." 1

I spare the sensitive reader a detailed account of the loatnsome
ordeals by which St. Catherine of Genoa and Madame Guyon
strove to cure themselves of squeamishness and acquire this
liberty of spirit. 3 They, like St. Francis, St. Elizabeth of Hungary,
and countless other seekers for the Real, sought out and served
with humility and love the sick and the unclean; deliberately
associated themselves with life in its meanest forms; compelled
themselves to contact with the most revolting substances; and
mortified the senses by the traditional ascetic expedient of
deliberately opposing all — even their most natural and harmless
— inclinations. "In the first four years after she received the sweet
wound from her Lord," says the Life of St. Catherine of Genoa, she
"made great penances: so that all her senses were mortified. And
first, so soon as she perceived that her nature desired anything,
at once she deprived it thereof, and did so that it should receive
all those things that it abhorred. She wore harsh hair, ate no meat
nor any other thing that she liked ; ate no fruit, neither fresh nor
dried . . . and she lived greatly submitted to all persons, and
always sought to do all those things which were contrary to her
own will; in such a way that she was always inclined to do more
promptly the will of others than her own." . . . "And while she
worked such and so many mortifications of all her senses it was
several times asked of her 'Why do you do this ?’ And she answered
’I do not know, but I feel myself drawn inwardly to do this . . .
and I think it is God's will.’ "3

St. Ignatius Loyola, in the world a highly bred Spanish gentle-
man of refined personal habits, found in those habits an excellent
opportunity of mortification. "As he was somewhat nice about
the arrangement of his hair, as was the fashion of those days and
became him not ill, he allowed it to grow naturally, and neither
combed it nor trimmed it nor wore any head covering by day or
night. For the same reason he did not pare his finger or toe nails;
for on these points he had been fastidious to an extreme. "4

Madame Guyon, a delicate girl of the leisured class, accustomed
to the ordinary comforts of her station, characteristically chose
the most crude and immoderate forms of mortification in her efforts
towards the acquirement of "indifference." But the peculiar
psychic constitution which afterwards showed itself in the forms

* “A Short Treatise of Contemplation taken out of the boke of Margery Kempe
ancresse of Lynne." London, 1521. Reprinted and ed. by F Gardner in “The
Cell of Self-Knowledge," 1910, p. 49.

* The curious are referred to the original authorities. For St. Catherine
chapter viii. of the "Vita e Dottrina": for Madame Guyon, Vie, pt. i. ch. x.

3 "Vita e Dottrina," cap. v. 4 Testament, cap. ii. (Rix's translation).



226 MYSTICISM

of automatism and clairvoyance, seems to have produced a partial
anaesthesia. * ‘Although I had a very delicate body, the instruments,
of penitence tore my flesh without, as it seemed to me, causing
pain. I wore girdles of hair and of sharp iron, I often held worm-
wood in my mouth/' "If I walked, I put stones in my shoes.
These things, my God, Thou didst first inspire me to do, in order
that I might be deprived even of the most innocent satisfactions/'*
In the earlier stages of their education, a constant agere contra ,
even in apparently indifferent things, seems essential to the
mystics ; till the point is reached at which the changes and chances
of mortal life are accepted with a true indifference and do not
trouble the life of the soul. This established ascendancy of the
"interior man/' the transcendental consciousness, over "sensitive
nature" — the self in its reactions to the ups and downs and
manifold illusions of daily life — is the very object of Purgation.
It is, then, almost impossible that any mystic, whatever his
religion, character or race, should escape its battles: for none at
the beginning of their growth are in a position to dispense with
its good offices. Neoplatonists and Mahommedans, no less than
the Christian ascetics, are acquainted with the Purgative Way.
All realize the first law of Spiritual Alchemy, that you must tame
the Green Lion before you give him wings. Thus in 'Attar’s
allegory of the Valleys, the valley of self-stripping and renuncia-
tion comes first. 2 So too A1 Ghazzali, the Persian contemplative,
says of the period immediately following his acceptance of the
principles of Sufi ism and consequent renunciation of property, "I
went to Syria, where I remained more than two years; without
any other object than that of living in seclusion and solitude,
conquering my desires, struggling with my passions, striving to
purify my soul, to perfect my character, and to prepare my heart
to meditate upon God." At the end of this period of pure purgation
circumstances forced him to return to the world; much to his
regret, since he "had not yet attained to the perfect ecstatic
state, unless it were in one or two isolated moments."3

Such gleams of ecstatic vision, distributed through the later
stages of purification, seem to be normal features of mystical
development. Increasing control of the lower centres, of the
surface intelligence and its scattered desires, permits the emer-
gence of the transcendental perceptions. We have seen that Fox
in his early stages displayed just such an alternation between
the light and shade of the mystic way. 4 So too did that least
ascetic of visionaries, Jacob Boehme. "Finding within mysdf a

* Vie, pt. i. cap. x. * Supra , p. 131.

J Schm61ders, “Essai sur les ficoles Philosophiques chez les Arabes,” p. 59.

4 Supra, p. 177.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 227

powerful contrarium, namely the desires that belong to the flesh
and blood/ 1 he says, “I began to fight a hard battle against my
'corrupted nature, and with the aid of God I made up my mind to
overcome the inherited evil will, to break it, and to enter wholly
into the Love of God. . . . This, however, was not possible for me
to accomplish, but I stood firmly by my earnest resolution, and
fought a hard battle with myself. Now while I was wrestling and
battling, being aided by God, a wonderful light arose within my
soul. It was a light entirely foreign to my unruly nature, but in
it I recognized the true nature of God and man, and the relation
existing between them, a thing which heretofore I had never
understood, and for which I would never have sought/' 1
In these words Bochme bridges the gap between Purgation
and Illumination : showing these two states or ways as co-existing
and complementary one to another, the light and dark sides of a
developing mystic consciousness. As a fact, they do often exist
side by side in the individual experience: 2 and any treatment
which exhibits them as sharply and completely separated may be
convenient for purposes of study, but becomes at best diagram-
matic if considered as a representation of the mystic life. The
mystical consciousness, as we have seen, belongs — from the
psychological point of view — to that mobile or "unstable" type
in which the artistic temperament also finds a place. It sways
easily between the extremes of pleasure and pain in its gropings
after transcendental reality. It often attains for a moment to
heights in which it is not able to rest : is often flung from some
rapturous vision of the Perfect to the deeps of contrition and
despair.

The mystics have a vivid metaphor by which to describe that
alternation between the onset and the absence of the joyous
transcendental consciousness which forms as it were the charac-
teristic intermediate stage between the bitter struggles of pure
Purgation, and the peace and radiance of the Illuminative Life.
They call it Ludus Amoris , the "Game of Love" which God plays
with the desirous soul. It is the "game of chess," says St. Teresa,
"in which game Humility is the Queen without whom none can
checkmate the Divine King."3 "Here," says Martensen, "God
plays a blest game with the soul . "4 The "Game of Love" is a
reflection in consciousness of that state of struggle, oscillation and
unrest which precedes the first unification of the self. It ceases
when this has taken place and the new level of reality has been

* Hartmann, “Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme,” p. 50.

* Compare the case of St. Teresa already cited, supra , p. 213.

S “Camino de Perfeccion,” cap. xvii.

* Martensen, “Meister Eckhart,” p. 75.



MYSTICISM


228

attained. Thus St. Catherine of Siena, that inspired psychologist,
was told in ecstasy, “With the souls who have arrived at perfection,
I play no more the Game of Love, which consists in leaving and
returning again to the soul; though thou must understand that
it is not, properly speaking, I, the immovable God, Who thus elude
them, but rather the sentiment that My charity gives them of
Me.” 1 In other terms, it is the imperfectly developed spiritual
perception which becomes tired and fails, throwing the self back
into the darkness and aridity whence it has emerged. So we are
told of Rulman Merswin 2 3 that after the period of harsh physical
mortification which succeeded his conversion came a year of
“delirious joy alternating with the most bitter physical and
moral sufferings.” It is, he says, “the Game of Love which the
Lord plays with His poor sinful creature/ 1 Memories of all his old
sins still drove him to exaggerated penances : morbid temptations
“made me so ill that I feared I should lose my reason/' These
psychic storms reacted upon the physical organism. He had a
paralytic seizure, lost the use of his lower limbs, and believed
himself to be at the point of death. When he was at his worst,
however, and all hope seemed at an end, an inward voice told him
to rise from his bed. He obeyed, and found himself cured. Ecstasies
were frequent during the whole of this period. In these moments
of exaltation he felt his mind to be irradiated by a new light, so
that he knew, intuitively, the direction which his life was bound
to take, and recognized the inevitable and salutary nature of
his trials. “God showed Himself by turns harsh and gentle: to
each access of misery succeeded the rapture of supernatural grace/ 1
In this intermittent style, tom by these constant fluctuations
between depression and delight, did Merswin, in whom the psychic
instability of the artistic and mystic types is present in excess,
pass through the purgative and illuminated states. 3 They appear
to have coexisted in his consciousness, first one and then the other
emerging and taking control. Hence he did not attain the peaceful
condition which is characteristic of full illumination, and normally
closes the “First Mystic Life 11 ; but passed direct from these violent
alternations of mystical pleasure and mystical pain to the state
which he calls “the school of suffering love. 11 This, as we shall see
when we come to its consideration, is strictly analogous to that


1 Dialogo, cap. lxxviii.

* Jundt, “Rulman Merswin," pp. io and 20.

3 We recognize here the chief symptoms of the “cyclic type” of mentality, with
its well-marked alternations of depression and exaltation. This psychological type
is found frequently, but not invariably, among the mystics; and its peculiarities
must be taken into account when studying their experiences. For a technical
description, see W. McDougall: “An Introduction to Abnormal Psychology,"
caps, xxii and xxviii.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 229

which other mystics have called the '‘Dark Night of the Soul/' and
opens the “Second Mystic Life" or Unitive Way.

Such prolonged coexistence of alternating pain and pleasure
states in the developing soul, such delay in the attainment of
equilibrium, is not infrequent, and must be taken into account in
all analyses of the mystic type. Though it is convenient for
purposes of study to practise a certain dissection, and treat as
separate states which are, in the living subject, closely intertwined,
we should constantly remind ourselves that such a proceeding is
artificial. The struggle of the self to disentangle itself from illusion
and attain the Absolute is a life-struggle. Hence, it will and must
exhibit the freedom and originality of life : will, as a process, obey
artistic rather than scientific laws. It will sway now to the light
and now to the shade of experience : its oscillations will sometimes
be great, sometimes small. Mood and environment, inspiration
and information, will all play their part.

There are in this struggle three factors.

(1) The unchanging light of Eternal Reality: that Pure Being
“which ever shines and nought shall ever dim."

(2) The web of illusion, here thick, there thin ; which hems in,
confuses, and allures the sentient self.

(3) That self, always changing, moving, struggling — always,
in fact, becoming — alive in every fibre, related at once to the unreal
and to the real; and, with its growth in true being, ever more
conscious of the contrast between them.

In the ever-shifting relations between these three factors, the
consequent energy engendered, the work done, we may find a
cause of the innumerable forms of stress and travail which are
called in their objective form the Purgative Way. One only of the
three is constant : the Absolute to which the soul aspires. Though
all else may fluctuate, that goal is changeless. That Beauty so
old and so new, “with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning," which is the One of Plotinus, the All of Eckhart and
St. John of the Cross, the Eternal Wisdom of Suso, the Un-
plumbed Abyss of Ruysbroeck, the Pure Love of St. Catherine of
Genoa, awaits yesterday, to-day, and for ever the opening of Its
creature's eyes.

In the moment of conversion those eyes were opened for an
instant: obtained, as it were, a dazzling and unforgettable glimpse
of the Uncreated Light. They must learn to stay open: to look
steadfastly into the eyes of Love : so that, in the beautiful imagery
of the mystics, the “faithful servant" may become the “secret
friend." 1 Then it is, says Boehme, that “the divine glimpse and

1 See Ruysbroeck, *'De Calculo," cap. vii. The metaphor is an ancient one and
occurs in mrny patristic and mediaeval writers.



MYSTICISM


230

beam of joy ariseth in the soul, being a new eye, in which the dark,
fiery soul conceiveth the Ens and Essence of the divine light. ”1
So hard an art is not at once acquired in its perfection. It is in
accordance with all that we know of the conditions of development
that a partial achievement should come first; bewildering moments
of lucidity, splendid glimpses, whose brevity is due to the weak-
ness of the newly opened and unpractised “eye which looks upon
Eternity/ 1 the yet undisciplined strength of the “eye which looks
upon Time/' Such is that play of light and dark, of exaltation
and contrition, which often bridges the gap between the Purgative
and the Illuminative states. Each by turn takes the field and ousts
the other; for 'These two eyes of the soul of man cannot both
perform their work at once.” 2

To use another and more domestic metaphor, that Divine Child
which was, in the hour of the mystic conversion, born in the spark
of the soul, must learn like other children to walk. Though it is
true that the spiritual self must never lose its sense of utter
dependence on the Invisible; yet within that supporting atmo-
sphere, and fed by its gifts, it must “find its feet/ 1 Each effort to
stand brings first a glorious sense of growth, and then a fall: each
fall means another struggle to obtain the difficult balance which
comes when infancy is past. There are many eager trials, many
hopes, many disappointments. At last, as it seems suddenly,
the moment comes : tottering is over, the muscles have learnt their
lesson, they adjust themselves automatically, and the new self
suddenly finds itself — it knows not how — standing upright and
secure. That is the moment which marks the boundary between
the purgative and the illuminative states.

The process of this passage of the “new” or spiritual man from
his awakening to the illuminated life, has been set out by Jacob
Boehme in language which is at once poetic and precise. “When
Christ the Corner-Stone [ i.e ., the divine principle latent in man]
stirreth himself in the extinguished Image of Man in his hearty
Conversion and Repentance,” he says, “then Virgin Sophia
appeareth in the stirring of the Spirit of Christ in the extinguished
Image, in her Virgin's attire before the Soul; at which the Soul
is so amazed and astonished in its Uncleanness that all its Sins
immediately awake in it, and it trembleth before her; for then the
judgment passeth upon the Sins of the Soul, so that it even
goeth back in its unworthiness, being ashamed in the Presence of
its fair Love, and entereth into itself, feeling and acknowledgin,
itself utterly unworthy to receive such a Jewel. This is understoo*
by those who are of our tribe and have tasted of this heavenl;

« ‘The Epistles of Jacob Boehme/' p. 19.

» “Theologia Germanica/’ cap. vii.



THE PURIFICATION OF THE SELF 231

Gift, and by none else. But the noble Sophia draweth near in
^he Essence of the Soul, and kisseth it in friendly Manner, and
tinctureth its dark Fire with her Rays of Love, and shineth through
il with her bright and powerful Influence. Penetrated with the strong
Sense and Feeling of which, the Soul skippeth in its Body for great
Joy, and in the strength of this Virgin Love exulteth, and praiseth
the great God for his blest Gift of Grace. I will set down here a
short description how it is when the Bride thus embraceth the
Bridegroom, for the consideration of the Reader, who perhaps
hath not yet been in this wedding chamber. It may be he will be
desirous to follow us, and to enter into the Inner Choir, where
the Soul ioineth hands and danceth with Sophia, or the Divine
Wisdom.” 1

1 Jacob Boehme, “The Way to Christ/' pt. i. p. 23 (vol. iv. of the complete
English translation of Boehme 's works).



CHAPTER IV

THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF


Illumination, the characteristic mystical consciousness — Many artists attain
to it — Part of the normal process of transcendence — Its nature — Plotinus—
The “mystic dance" — Distinctive character of Illumination — “Nature mysticism''
— Illumination and the mysteries — Mystic and artist — The chalice of the Spirit
of Life — Various forms and grades of illumination — It always seems final to the
mystic — Must be expressed artistically — Often received in visionary form—
Three marks of this state — (i) The sense of Divine Presence, (2) the lucid vision
of the world, (3) automatic activity — Twofold character of the illuminated con-
sciousness — Sense of the Presence of God — The source of mystic joy — St. Teresa
— The orison of union — St. Bernard — Hugh of St. Victor — Distinction between
orison of union and unitive life — The “sense of the Presence" and active life —
Brother Lawrence — Passivity — Madame Guyon — St. Catherine of Genoa and
illumination — Nature of illumination — An access of new light — Jacopone da
Todi — Law — St. Augustine — The Vision of Reality — Dante — Angela of Foligno
— Transcendent and Personal illumination — Suso — The illuminated vision of
the world — its nature — Jacob Boehme — Fox — Blake — The mystics and animal
life — St. Francis of Assisi — St. Rose of Lima — Platonism and illumination—!
Plotinus — The Kabalah — Law — Illumination a half-way house — It cannot give
final satisfaction to the spiritual consciousness

I N illumination we come to that state of consciousness which
is popularly supposed to be peculiar to the mystic: a form
of mental life, a kind of perception, radically different from
that of ‘‘normal’’ men. His preceding adventures and experiences
cannot be allowed this quality. His awakening to consciousness
of the Absolute — though often marked by a splendour and
intensity which seem to distinguish it from other psychic upheavals
of that kind — does but reproduce upon higher levels those charac-
teristic processes of conversion and falling in love which give
depth and actuality to the religious and passional life. The purifica-
tion to which he then sets himself — though this possesses as a rule
certain features peculiar to mystical development — is again
closely related to the disciplines and mortifications of ascetic, but
not necessarily mystical, piety. It is the most exalted form with
which we are acquainted of that catharsis — that pruning and
training of the human plant — which is the essence of all education,
and a necessary stage in every kind of transcendence. Here, the
mystic does but adopt in a more drastic form the principles which
all who would live with an intense life, all seekers after freedom,
all true lovers must accept: though he may justly claim with
Ophelia that these wear their rue with a difference . 1

1 For the relation between catharsis and poetic and mystical knowledge, see
Bremond. “Pri&re et Poesie," caps, xvi and xvii.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 233

But in the great swing back into sunshine which is the reward
of that painful descent into the "cell of self-knowledge," he parts
;ompany with these other pilgrims. Those who still go with him
1 little way — certain prophets, poets, artists, dreamers — do so
m virtue of that mystical genius, that instinct for transcendental
reality, of which all seers and creators have some trace. The initiates
:>f beauty or of wisdom, as the great mystic is the initiate of love,
they share in some degree the experiences of the way of illumina-
tion. But the mystic has now a veritable foothold in that trans-
:endental world into which they penetrate now and again : enjoys
a certain fellowship — not yet union — with the "great life of the
All," and thence draws strength and peace. Really and actually,
as one whose noviciate is finished, he has "entered the Inner
Choir, where the Soul joineth hands and danceth with Sophia, the
Divine Wisdom": and, keeping time with the great rhythms of
the spiritual universe, feels that he has found his place.

This change of consciousness, however abrupt and amazing it
may seem to the self which experiences it, seems to the psychologist
1 normal phase in that organic process of development which was
initiated by the awakening of the transcendental sense. Respond-
ing to the intimations received in that awakening, ordering itself
in their interest, concentrating its scattered energies on this one
thing, the self emerges from long and varied acts of purification
to find that it is able to apprehend another order of reality. It
has achieved consciousness of a world that was always there, and
wherein its substantial being — that Ground which is of God — has
always stood. Such a consciousness is "Transcendental Feeling"
in excelsis : a deep, intuitional knowledge of the "secret
plan."

"We are like a choir who stand round the conductor," says
Plotinus, "but do not always sing in tune, because their attention is
diverted by looking at external things. So we always move round
the One — if we did not, we should dissolve and cease to exist — but
we do not always look towards the One." Hence, instead of that
Eree and conscious co-operation in the great life of the All which
done can make personal life worth living, we move like slaves or
marionettes, and, oblivious of the whole to which our little steps
:ontribute, fail to observe the measure "whereto the worlds keep
time." Our minds being distracted from the Corypheusin the midst,
the "energetic Word" who sets the rhythm, we do not behold Him.
We are absorbed in the illusions of sense; the "eye which looks on
Eternity" is idle. "But when we do behold Him," says Plotinus
again, "we attain the end of our existence and our rest. Then we
no longer sing out of tune, but form a truly divine chorus about Him ;
n the which chorus dance the soul beholds the Fountain of life.



MYSTICISM


234

the Fountain of intellect, the Principle of Being, the cause of good,
the root of soul ." 1 Such a beholding, such a lifting of consciousness
from a self-centred to a God-centred world, is of the essence of
illumination.

It will be observed that in these passages the claim of the
mystic is not yet to supreme communion ; the “Spiritual Marriage 1 '
of the Christian mystic, or that “flight of the Alone to the Alone"
which is the Plotinian image for the utmost bliss of the emancipated
soul. He has now got through preliminaries ; detached himself from
his chief entanglements ; re-orientated his instinctive life. The result
is a new and solid certitude about God, and his own soul's relation
to God: an “enlightenment" in which he is adjusted to new
standards of conduct and thought. In the traditional language of
asceticism he is “proficient" but not yet perfect. He achieves a
real vision and knowledge, a conscious harmony with the divine
World of Becoming: not yet self -loss in the Principle of Life, but
rather a willing and harmonious revolution about Him, that “in
dancing he may know what is done." This character distinguishes
almost every first-hand description of illumination: and it is this
which marks it off from mystic union in all its forms. All pleasur-
able and exalted states of mystic consciousness in which the sense of
I-hood persists, in which there is a loving and joyous relation
between the Absolute as object and the self as subject, fall under
the head of Illumination : which is really an enormous development
of the intuitional life at high levels. All veritable and first-hand
apprehensions of the Divine obtained by the use of symbols, as
in the religious life ; all the degrees of prayer lying between medita-
tion and the prayer of union ; many phases of poetic inspiration
and “glimpses of truth," are activities of the illuminated mind.

To “see God in nature," to attain a radiant consciousness of
the “otherness" of natural things, is the simplest and commonest
form of illumination. Most people, under the spell of emotion or
of beauty, have known flashes of rudimentary vision of this kind.
Where such a consciousness is recurrent, as it is in many poets , 2
there results that partial yet often overpowering apprehension of
the Infinite Life immanent in all living things, which some modern
writers have dignified by the name of “nature-mysticism."

1 Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9. Compare with this image of the rhythmic dance of
things about a divine Corypheus m the midst, those passages in the Apocryphal
“Hymn of Jesus*' where the logos or Christ, standing within the circle of dis-
ciples, says, “I am the Word who did play and dance all things." “Now answer
to My dancing," “Understand by dancing what I do." Again, “Who danceth
not knoweth not what is being done." “I would pipe, dance ye all!" and pre-
sently the rubric declares, “All whose Nature is to dance, doth dance 1 " (See
Dr. M. R. James, “Apocrypha Anecdota," series 2; and G. R. S. Mead, “Echoes
from the Gnosis: the Dance of Jesus." Compare supra, p. 134.)

» For instance, Keats, Shelley, Wordsworth, Tennyson, Browning, Whitman.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF


235


Where it is raised to its highest denomination, till the veil is obliter-
ated by the light behind, and “faith has vanished into sight/'
"as sometimes happened to Blake, we reach the point at which the
mystic swallows up the poet.

“Dear Sir," says that great genius in one of his most character-
istic letters, written immediately after an onset of the illuminated
vision which he had lost for many years, “excuse my enthusiasm,
or rather madness, for I am really drunk with intellectual vision
whenever I take a pencil or graver into my hand." 1 Many a great
painter, philosopher, or poet, perhaps every inspired musician,
has known this indescribable inebriation of Reality in those
moments of transcendence in which his masterpieces were con-
ceived. This is the “saving madness" of which Plato speaks in the
“Phaedrus" ; the ecstasy of the “God-intoxicated man," the lover,
the prophet, and the poet “drunk with life." When the Christian
mystic, eager for his birthright, says “Sanguis Christi, inebria
me !" he is asking for just such a gift of supernal vitality, a draught
of that Wine of Absolute Life which runs in the arteries of the
world. Those to whom that cup is given attain to an intenser
degree of vitality, hence to a more acute degree of perception, a
more vivid consciousness, than that which is enjoyed by other
men. For though, as Ruysbroeck warns us, this “is not God," yet
it is for many selves “the Light in which we see Him." 2

Blake conceived that it was his vocation to bring this mystical
illumination, this heightened vision of reality, within the range
of ordinary men: to “cleanse the doors of perception" of the race.
They thought him a madman for his pains.

. . I rest not upon my great task
To open the Eternal Worlds, to open the immortal Eyes
Of Man inwards into the Worlds of Thought: into Eternity
Ever expanding in the Bosom of God, the Human Imagination.

O Saviour, pour upon me thy Spirit of meekness and love,
Annihilate the Selfhood in me: be thou all my life.”*

The Mysteries of the antique world appear to have been attempts
—often by way of a merely magical initiation — to “open the im-
mortal eyes of man inwards": exalt his powers of perception until
they could receive the messages of a higher degree of reality. In
spite of much eager theorizing, it is impossible to tell how far they
succeeded in this task. To those who had a natural genius for the
Infinite, symbols and rituals which were doubtless charged with
ecstatic suggestions, and often dramatized the actual course of

1 “Letters of William Blake," p. 171.

» Ruysbroeck, “De vera Contemplatione," cap. xi.

• “Jerusalem," cap. i.



236 MYSTICISM

the Mystic Way, may well have brought some enhancement of
consciousness: 1 though hardly that complete rearrangement of
character which is an essential of the mystic’s entrance on the*
true Illuminated State. Hence Plato only claims that “he whose
initiation is recent” can see Immortal Beauty under mortal veils.

"O blessed he in all wise,

Who hath drunk the Living Fountain,

Whose life no folly staineth
And whose soul is near to God:

Whose sins are lifted pall-wise
As he worships on the Mountain/**

Thus sang the initiates of Dionysus; that mystery-cult in which
the Greeks seem to have expressed all they knew of the possible
movement of consciousness through rites of purification to the
ecstasy of the Illuminated Life. The mere crude rapture of illu-
mination has seldom been more vividly expressed. With its half-
Oriental fervours, its self-regarding glory in personal purification
achieved, and the spiritual superiority conferred by adeptship,
may be compared the deeper and lovelier experience of the
Catholic poet and saint, who represents the spirit of Western
mysticism at its best. His sins, too, had been “lifted pall-wise” as
a cloud melts in the sunshine of Divine Love : but here the centre
of interest is not the little self which has been exalted, but the
greater Self which deigns thus to exalt.

“0 bum that bums to heal!

O more than pleasant wound!

And O soft hand, O touch most delicate,

That dost new life reveal,

That dost in grace abound
And, slaying, dost from death to life translate.** s


Here the joy is as passionate, the consciousness of an exalted
life as intense: but it is dominated by the distinctive Christian
concepts of humility, surrender, and intimate love.

We have seen that all real artists, as well as all pure mystics, are
sharers to some degree in the Illuminated Life. They have drunk,
with Blake, from that cup of intellectual vision which is the chalice
of the Spirit of Life: know something of its divine inebriation
whenever Beauty inspires them to create. Some have only sipped


* Compare E. Rhode, “Psyche," and J. E. Harrison, “Prolegomena to the
Study of Greek Religion," caps, ix., x., and xi.; a work which puts the most
favourable construction possible on the meaning of Orphic initiation.

* The “Bacchae" of Euripides (translated by Gilbert Murray), p. 83.

* St. John of the Cross, “Llama de Amor Viva" (translated by Arthur Symons) .



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 237

it. Some, like John of Parma, have drunk deep; accepting in that
act the mystic heritage with all its obligations. But to all who
‘‘have seen Beauty face to face, the Grail has been administered ;
and through that sacramental communion they are made partici-
pants in the mystery of the world.

In one of the most beautiful passages of the “Fioretti" it is
told how Brother Jacques of la Massa, “unto whom God opened
the door of His secrets/’ saw in a vision this Chalice of the Spirit
of Life delivered by Christ into the hands of St. Francis, that he
might give his brothers to drink thereof.

“Then came St. Francis to give the chalice of life to his brothers.
And he gave it first to Brother John of Parma: who, taking it,
drank it all in haste, devoutly; and straightway he became all
shining like the sun. And after him St. Francis gave it to all the
other brothers in order: and there were but few among them that
took it with due reverence and devotion and drank it all. Those
that took it devoutly and drank it all, became straightway
shining like the sun ; but those that spilled it all and took it not
devoutly, became black, and dark, and misshapen and horrible
jto see; but those that drank part and spilled part, became partly
shining and partly dark, and more so or less according to the
measure of their drinking or spilling thereof. But the aforesaid
Brother John was resplendent above all the rest ; the which had
more completely drunk the chalice of life, whereby he had the more
deeply gazed into the abyss of the infinite light divine .” 1

No image, perhaps, could suggest so accurately as this divine
picture the conditions of perfect illumination : the drinking deeply,
devoutly, and in haste — that is, without prudent and self -regarding
hesitation — of the heavenly Wine of Life ; that wine of which Rolle
says that it “fulfils the soul with a great gladness through a sweet
contemplation/' 2 John of Parma, the hero of those Spiritual Fran-
ciscans in whose interest this exquisite allegory was composed,
stands for all the mystics, who, “having completely drunk," have
attained the power of gazing into the abyss of the infinite light
divine. I11 those imperfect brothers who dared not drink the cup
of sacrifice to the dregs, but took part and spilled part, so that
they became partly shining and partly dark, “according to the
measure of their drinking or spilling thereof," we may see an
image of the artist, musician, prophet, poet, dreamer, more or
less illuminated according to the measure of courage and self-
abandonment in which he has drunk the cup of ecstasy : but always
in comparison with the radiance of the pure contemplative, “partly
shining and partly dark." “Hinder me not," says the soul to the

* “Fioretti,” cap. xlviii. (Arnold's translation).

* Horstman, “Richard Rolle of Hampole," vol. ii. p. 79.



MYSTICISM


238

senses in Mechthild of Magdeburg's vision, “I would drink for a
space of the unmingled wine." 1 In the artist, the senses have some-
what hindered the perfect inebriation of the soul. ^

We have seen that a vast tract of experience — all the experience
which results from contact between a purged and heightened
consciousness and the World of Becoming in which it is immersed;
and much, too, of that which results from contact set up between
such a consciousness and the Absolute Itself — is included in that
stage of growth which the mystics call the Illuminative Way. This
is the largest and most densely populated province of the mystic
kingdom. Such different visionaries as Suso and Blake, Boehme and
Angela of Foligno, Mechthild of Magdeburg, Fox, Rolle, St. Teresa,
and countless others have left us the record of their sojourn
therein. Amongst those who cannot be called pure mystics we
can detect in the works of Plato and Heracleitus, Wordsworth,
Tennyson, and Walt Whitman indications that they too were
acquainted, beyond most poets and seers, with the phenomena of
the illuminated life. In studying it then, we shall be confronted by
a mass of apparently irreconcilable material: the results of the
relation set up between every degree of lucidity, every kind of
character, and the suprasensible world.

To say that God is Infinite is to say that He may be apprehended
and described in an infinity of ways. That Circle whose centre is
everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere, may be ap-
proached from every angle with a certainty of being found.
Mystical history, particularly that which deals with the Illumina-
tive Way, is a demonstration of this fact. Here, in the establish-
ment of the "first mystic life," of conscious correspondence with
Reality, the self which has oscillated between two forms of con-
sciousness, has alternately opposed and embraced its growing
intuitions of the Absolute, comes for a time to rest. To a large
extent, the discordant elements of character have been purged
away. Temporally at least the mind has "unified itself" upon high
levels, and attained, as it believes, a genuine consciousness of the
divine and veritable world. The depth and richness of its own
nature will determine how intense that consciousness shall be.

Whatever its scope, however, this new apprehension of realit)
generally appears to the illuminated Self as final and complete
As the true lover is always convinced that he has found in his
bride the one Rose of the World, so the mystic, in the first glow ol
his initiation, is sure that his quest is now fulfilled. Ignorant as
yet of that consummation of love which overpasses the proceed-
ings of the inward eye and ear, he exclaims with entire assurance
"Beati oculi qui exterioribus clausi, interioribus autem sunl

* “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. i. cap. 43.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF


*39

j intenti,” 1 and, absorbed in this new blissful act of vision, forgets
pthat it belongs to those who are still in via . He has yet to pass
through that “night of the senses” in which he learns to dis-
tinguish the substance of Reality from the accidents under
which it is perceived; to discover that the heavenly food here
given cannot satisfy his “hunger for the Absolute” 2 His true goal
lies far beyond this joyful basking in the sunbeams of the Un-
created Light. Only the greatest souls learn this lesson, and tread
the whole of that “King's Highway” which leads man back to
his Source. “For the many that come to Bethlehem, there be few
that will go on to Calvary.” The rest stay here, in this Earthly
Paradise, these flowery fields; where the liberated self wanders
at will, describing to us as well as it can now this corner, now that,
of the Country of the Soul.

It is in these descriptions of the joy of illumination — in the out-
pourings of love and rapture belonging to this state — that we
find the most lyrical passages of mystical literature. Here poet,
mystic, and musician are on common ground : for it is only by the
oblique methods of the artist, by the use of esthetic suggestion and
•musical rhythm, that the wonder of that vision can be expressed.
When essential goodness, truth, and beauty— Light, Life, and
Love — are apprehended by the heart, whether the heart be that
of poet, painter, lover, or saint, that apprehension can only be
communicated in a living, that is to say, an artistic form. The
natural mind is conscious only of succession : the special differentia
of the mystic is the power of apprehending simultaneity. In the
peculiarities of the illuminated consciousness we recognize the
effort of the mind to bridge the gap between Simultaneity and
Succession: the characters of Creator and Creation. Here the
successive is called upon to carry the values of the Eternal.

Here, then, genius and sanctity kiss one another; and each, in
that sublime encounter, looks for an instant through the other's
eyes. Hence it is natural and inevitable that the mystic should
here call into play all the resources of artistic expression : the lovely
imagery of Julian and Mechthild of Magdeburg, Suso's poetic
visions, St. Augustine's fire and light, the heavenly harmonies of
St. Francis and Richard Rolle. Symbols, too, play a major part, not
only in the description, but also in the machinery of illumination:
the intuitions of many mystics presenting themselves directly
to the surface-mind in a symbolic form. We must therefore be
prepared for a great variety and lluidity of expression, a constant
and not always conscious recourse to symbol and image, in those

1 “De Imitatione Chris ti," 1. iii. cap. i.

* For the decisive character of this k ‘night of the senses." see St. John of the
Cross, "Noche escura del Alma," 1. i.



MYSTICISM


240

who try to communicate the secret of this state of consciousness
We must examine, and even classify so far as possible, a wid<
variety of experience — some which is recognized by friends anc
foes alike as purely "mystical/ 1 some in which the operation 0
poetic imagination is clearly discernible, some which involve:
"psychic phenomena 11 and other abnormal activities of the mine
— refusing to be frightened away from investigation by the strange
and apparently irreconcilable character of our material.

There are three main types of experience which appear agair
and again in the history of mysticism ; nearly always in connec
tion with illumination, rather than any other phase of mystica
development. I think that they may fairly be regarded as its mair
characteristics, though the discussion of them cannot cover a 1
the ground. In few forms of spiritual life is the spontaneity of tht
individual so clearly seen as here: and in few is the ever-deadly
process of classification attended with so many risks.

1. A joyous apprehension of the Absolute: that which many
ascetic writers call "the practice of the Presence of God." This,
however, is not to be confused with that unique consciousness
of union with the divine which is peculiar to a later stage oi
mystical development. The self, though purified, still realizes itself
as a separate entity over against God. It is not immersed in its
Origin, but contemplates it. This is the "betrothal" rather than
the "marriage" of the soul.

2. This clarity of vision may also be enjoyed in regard to the
phenomenal world. The actual physical perceptions seem to be
strangely heightened, so that the self perceives an added signifi-
cance and reality in all natural things: is often convinced that it
knows at last "the secret of the world." In Blake's words "the
doors of perception are cleansed" so that "everything appears to
man as it is, infinite." 1

In these two forms of perception we see the growing conscious-
ness of the mystic stretching in two directions, until it includes
in its span both the World of Being and the World of Becoming; 2
that dual apprehension of reality as transcendent yet immanent
which we found to be one of the distinguishing marks of the
mystic type.

3. Along with this two-fold extension of consciousness, the
energy of the intuitional or transcendental self may be enormously
increased. The psychic upheavals of the Purgative Way have
tended to make it central for life: to eliminate from the character
all those elements which checked its activity. Now it seizes upon

1 “The Marriage of Heaven and Hell/* xxii.

• Vide supra, pp. 42-50.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 241

the ordinary channels of expression; and may show itself in such
■4)rms as (a) auditions, (b) dialogues between the surface conscious-
ness and another intelligence which purports to be divine, (c)
visions, and sometimes ( d ) in automatic writings. In many selves
this automatic activity of those growing but still largely sub-
conscious powers which constitute the “New Man," increases
steadily during the whole of the mystic life.

Illumination, then, tends to appear mainly under one or all
of these three forms. Often all are present; though, as a rule, one
is dominant. The balance of characteristics will be conditioned in
each case by the seifs psychic make-up ; its temperamental leaning
towards “pure contemplation/ 1 “lucid vision/ 1 or automatic
expression; emanation or immanence, the metaphysical, artistic,
or intimate aspects of truth. The possible combinations between
these various factors are as innumerable as the possible creations
of Life itself.

In the wonderful rhapsodies of St. Augustine, in St. Bernard's
converse with the Word, in Angela of Foligno’s apprehensions of
Deity, in Richard Rolle's “state of song/ 1 when “sweetest heavenly
"melody he took, with him dwelling in mind/' or in Brother Law-
rence's “practice of the Presenceof God, 11 we may see varied expres-
sions of the first type of illuminated consciousness. Jacob Boehm e
is rightly looked upon as a classic example of the second; which
is also found in one of its most attractive forms in St. Francis of
Assisi. Suso and St. Teresa, perhaps, may stand for the third,
since in them the visionary and auditory phenomena were pecu-
liarly well marked. A further study of each characteristic in order,
will help us to disentangle the many threads which go to the
psychical make-up of these great and complex mystic types. The
rest of this chapter will, then, be given to the analysis of the two
chief forms of illuminated consciousness: the self's perception of
Reality in the eternal and temporal worlds. The important subject
of voices and visions demands a division to itself.

1. The Consciousness of the Absolute, or “Sense of the
Presence of God 11

This consciousness, in its various forms and degrees, is perhaps
the most constant characteristic of Illumination; and makes it,
for the mystic soul, a pleasure-state of the intensest kind. I do
not mean by this that the subject passes months or years in a
continuous ecstasy of communion with the Divine. Intermittent
periods of spiritual fatigue or “aridity 11 — renewals of the tempera-
mental conflicts experienced in purgation — the oncoming gloom
of the Dark Night — all these may be, and often are, experienced



MYSTICISM


242

at intervals during the Illuminated Life; as flashes of insight,
indistinguishable from illumination, constantly break the mono£
tony of the Purgative Way. But a deep certitude of the Personal
Life omnipresent in the universe has been achieved; and
this can never be forgotten, even though it be withdrawn. The
“spirit stretching towards God” declares that it has touched Him;
and its normal condition henceforth is joyous consciousness of
His Presence with “many privy touchings of sweet spiritual sights
and feeling, measured to us as our simpleness may bear it.” 1
Where he prefers less definite or more pantheistic language, the
mystic's perceptions may take the form of “harmony with the
Infinite” — the same divine music transposed to a lower key.

This “sense of God” is not a metaphor. Innumerable declara-
tions prove it to be a consciousness as sharp as that which other
men have, or think they have, of colour, heat, or light. It is a
well-known though usually transitory experience in the religious
life: like the homing instinct of birds, a fact which can neither
be denied nor explained. “How that presence is felt, it may better
be known by experience than by any writing,” says Hilton, “for
it is the life and the love, the might and the light, the joy and the
rest of a chosen soul. And therefore he that hath soothfastly once
felt it he may not forbear it without pain ; he may not undesire it,
it is so good in itself and so comfortable. ... He cometh privily
sometimes when thou art least aware of Him, but thou shalt
well know Him or He go ; for wonderfully He stirreth and mightily
He tumeth thy heart into beholding of His goodness, and doth
thine heart melt delectably as wax against the fire into softness
of His love.” 2

Modern psychologists have struggled hard to discredit this
“sense of the presence”; sometimes attributing it to the psychic
mechanism of projection, sometimes to “wish-fulfilments” of a
more unpleasant origin. 3 The mystics, however, who discriminate
so much delicately than their critics between true and false trans-
cendental experience, never feel any doubt about its validity.
Even when their experience seems inconsistent with their theology,
they refuse to be disturbed.

Thus St. Teresa writes of her own experience, with her usual
simplicity and directness, “In the beginning it happened to me
that I was ignorant of one thing — I did not know that God was
in all things: and when He seemed to me to be so near, I thought
it impossible. Not to believe that He was present was not in my

* Julian of Norwich, “Revelations," cap. xliii.

* “The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xli.

I See Delacroix, “Etudes sur le Mysticisme,” Appendix I. “Sentiment de
Presence." For a balanced view, Marichal, "Studies in the Psychology of the
Mystics,” p.55. See also Poulain, "Les Gr&ces d'Oraison," cap. v.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 243

power; for it seemed to me, as it were, evident that I felt there His
very presence. Some unlearned men used to say to me, that He
was present only by His grace. I could not believe that , because,
as I am saying, He seemed to me to be present Himself: so I was
distressed. A most learned man, of the Order of the glorious
Patriarch St. Dominic, delivered me from this doubt ; for he told
■ne that He was present, and how He communed with us: this was
1 great comfort to me ." 1

Again, “An interior peace, and the little strength which either
pleasures or displeasures have to remove this presence (during
die time it lasts) of the Three Persons, and that without power to
loubt of it, continue in such a manner that I clearly seem to
experience what St. John says, That He will dwell in the soul , and
:his not only by grace, but that He will also make her perceive
diis presence /' 2 St. Teresa's strong “immanental" bent comes out
well in this passage.

Such a sense of the divine presence may go side by side with the
laily life and normal mental activities of its possessor; who is not
lecessarily an ecstatic or an abstracted visionary, remote from
he work of the world. It is true that the transcendental con-
ciousness has now become, once for all, his centre of interest ; its
>erceptions and admonitions dominate and light up his daily
ife. The object of education, in the Platonic sense, has been
Lchieved: his soul has “wheeled round from the perishing world"
o “the contemplation of the real world and the brightest part
hereof ."3 But where vocation and circumstances require it, the
luties of a busy outward life continue to be fulfilled with steadi-
less and success: and this without detriment to the soul’s con-
emplation of the Real.

In many temperaments of the unstable or artistic type, however,
his intuitional consciousness of the Absolute becomes ungovern-
ble: it constantly breaks through, obtaining forcible possession
•f the mental field and expressing itself in the “psychic" pheno-
mena of ecstasy and rapture. In others, less mobile, it wells up
nto an impassioned apprehension, a “flame of love" in which the
elf seems to “meet God in the ground of the soul." This is “pure
ontemplation" : that state of deep orison in which the subject
eems to be “seeing, feeling and thinking all at once." By this
pontaneous exercise of all his powers under the dominion of love,
he mystic attains that “Vision of the Heart" which, “more
iterior, perhaps, than the vision ^ of dream or ecstasy, "4 stretches

1 Vida, cap. xviii. § 20.

1 “Letters of St. Teresa” (1581), Dalton’s translation. No. VII.

5 “Republic,” vii. 518.

# R6c6jac, “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique,” p. 151.



MYSTICISM


244

to the full those very faculties which it seems to be holding ir
suspense; as a top "sleeps” when it is spinning fast. Ego dormic
et cor meum vigilat. This act of contemplation, this glad surrendei
to an overwhelming consciousness of the Presence of God, leaves
no sharp image on the mind : only a knowledge that we have beer
lifted up, to a veritable gazing upon That which eye bath nol
seen.

St. Bernard gives in one of his sermons a simple, ingenuous and
obviously personal account of such "privy touchings,” such con-
vincing but elusive contacts of the soul with the Absolute. "Now
bear with my foolishness for a little,” he says, "for I wish to tel]
you, as I have promised, how such events have taken place in me.
It is, indeed, a matter of no importance. But I put myself forward
only that I may be of service to you ; and if you derive any benefit
I am consoled for my egotism. If not, I shall but have displayed
my foolishness. I confess, then, though I say it in my foolishness,
that the Word has visited me, and even very often. But, though
He has frequently entered into my soul, I have never at any time
been sensible of the precise moment of His coming. I have felt
that He was present, I remember that He has been with me ; I
have sometimes been able even to have a presentiment that He
would come: but never to feel His coming nor His departure.
For whence He came to enter my soul, or whither He went on
quitting it, by what means He has made entrance or departure,
I confess that I know not even to this day; according to that
which is said, Nescis unde veniat aut quo vadat. Nor is this strange,
because it is to Him that the psalmist has said in another place,
Vestigia tua non cognoscentur.

"It is not by the eyes that He enters, for He is without form or
colour that they can discern ; nor by the ears, for His coming is
without sound; nor by the nostrils, for it is not with the air but
with the mind that He is blended. ... By what avenue then has
He entered? Or perhaps the fact may be that He has not entered
at all, nor indeed come at all from outside: for not one of these
things belongs to outside. Yet it has not come from within me,
for it is good, and I know that in me dwelleth no good thing. I
have ascended higher than myself, and lo! I have found the Word
above me still. My curiosity has led me to descend below myself
also, and yet I have found Him still at a lower depth. If I have
looked without myself, I have found that He is beyond that which
is outside of me; and if within, He was at an inner depth still. And
thus have I learned the truth of the words I have read. In ipso
mint vivimus et movemur et surnus.” 1

Such a lifting up, such a condition of consciousness as that

« St. Bernard, “Cantica Canticorum," Sermon lxxiv.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 245

which St. Bernard is here trying to describe, seems to snatch the
spirit for a moment into a state which it is hard to distinguish
from that of true “union. ” This is what the contemplatives call
passive or infused contemplation, or sometimes the “orison of
union”: a brief foretaste of the Unitive State, often enjoyed for
short periods in the Illuminative Way, which reinforces their
conviction that they have now truly attained the Absolute. It
is but a foretaste, however, of that attainment : the precocious
effort of a soul still in that stage of “Enlightening” which the
“Theologia Germanica” declares to be “belonging to such as are
growing .** 1

This distinction between the temporary experience of union
and the achievement of the Unitive Life is well brought out in a
fragment of dialogue between Soul and Self in Hugh of St. Victor’s
mystical tract, “De Arrha Animae.*'

The Soul says , “Tell me, what can be this thing of delight that
merely by its memory touches and moves me with such sweetness
and violence that I am drawn out of myself and carried away, I
know not how? I am suddenly renewed: I am changed: I am
plunged into an ineffable peace. My mind is full of gladness, all
my past wretchedness and pain is forgot. My soul exults: my
ntellect is illuminated : my heart is afire : my desires have become
dndly and gentle: I know not where I am, because my Love has
embraced me. Also, because my Love has embraced me I seem to
lave become possessed of something, and I know not what it is;
mt I try to keep it, that I may never lose it. My soul strives in
gladness that she may not be separated from That which she
iesires to hold fast for ever: as if she had found in it the goal of all
ler desires. She exults in a sovereign and ineffable manner, seeking
lought, desiring nought, but to rest in this. Is this , then, my
3 eloved? Tell me that I may know Him, and that if He come
igain I may entreat Him to leave me not, but to stay with me for
:ver.”

Man says , “It is indeed thy Beloved who visits thee; but He
:omes in an invisible shape, He comes disguised, He comes in-
omprehensibly. He comes to touch thee, not to be seen of thee:
o arouse thee, not to be comprehended of thee. He comes not
o give Himself wholly, but to be tasted by thee: not to fulfil thy
lesire, but to lead upwards thy affection. He gives a foretaste of
lis delights, brings not the plenitude of a perfect satisfaction:
nd the earnest of thy betrothal consists chiefly in this, that He
/ho shall afterwards give Himself to be seen and possessed by
hee perpetually, now permits Himself to be sometimes tasted,
hat thou mayest learn how sweet He is. This shall console thee

1 “Theologia German ica," cap. xiv.



246 MYSTICISM

for His absence: and the savour of this gift shall keep thee from
all despair." 1

The real distinction between the Illuminative and the Unitiv?
Life is that in Illumination the individuality of the subject—
however profound his spiritual consciousness, however close his
apparent communion with the Infinite — remains separate and
intact. His heightened apprehension* of reality lights up rather
than obliterates the rest of his life: and may even increase hi;
power of dealing adequately with the accidents of normal exis
tence. Thus Brother Lawrence found that his acute sense ot
reality, his apprehension of the Presence of God, and the resulting
detachment and consciousness of liberty in regard to mundane
things, upheld and assisted him in the most unlikely tasks; as, for
instance, when he was sent into Burgundy to buy wine for his
convent, "which was a very unwelcome task to him, because he
had no turn for business, and because he was lame, and could not
go about the boat but by rolling himself over the casks. That,
however, he gave himself no uneasiness about it, nor about the
purchase of the wine. That he said to God, It was His business he
was about : and that he afterwards found it very well performed.

So likewise in his business in the kitchen, to which he hac?
naturally a great aversion." 2

The mind, concentrated upon a higher object of interest, is
undistracted by its own anxieties, likes, or dislikes; and hence
performs the more efficiently the work that is given it to do.
Where it does not do so, then the normal make-up or imperfect
discipline of the subject, rather than its mystical proclivities,
must be blamed. St. Catherine of Genoa found in this divine
companionship the power which made her hospital a success.
St. Teresa was an administrator of genius and an admirable
housewife, and declared that she found her God very easily
amongst the pots and pans .3 Appearances notwithstanding, Mary
would probably have been a better cook than Martha, had
circumstances required of her this form of activity.

In persons of feeble or diffuse intelligence, however, and above
all in victims of a self-regarding spirituality, this deep absorption
in the sense of Divine Reality may easily degenerate into mono-
ideism. Then the "shady side" of Illumination, a selfish preoccupa-
tion with transcendental joys, the "spiritual gluttony" condemned
by St. John of the Cross, comes out. "I made many mistakes/'
says Madame Guyon pathetically, "through allowing myself to

r ' Hugh of St. Victor, “De Arrha Animae” (Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol.^
clxxvi.) .

* “The Practice of the Presence of God," Second Conversation.

i St. Teresa, "Las Fundaciones," cap. v. p. 8.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF


247

j be too much taken up by my interior joys. ... I used to sit in a
Lorner and work, but I could hardly do anything, because the
'strength of this attraction made me let the work fall 'out of my
hands. I spent hours in this way without being able to open my
eyes or to know what was happening to me: so simply, so peace-
fully, so gently that sometimes I said to myself, ‘Can heaven itself
be more peaceful than I?' "*

Here we see Madame Guyon basking like a pious tabby cat in
the beams of the Uncreated Light, and already leaning to the
extravagances of Quietism, with its dangerous “double character
of passivity and beatitude/' The heroic aspect of the mystic
vocation is in abeyance. Those mystical impressions which her
peculiar psychic make-up permitted her to receive, have been
treated as a source of personal and placid satisfactions; not as a
well-spring, whence new vitality might be drawn for great and self-
giving activities.

It has been claimed by the early biographers of St. Catherine of
Genoa, that she passed in the crisis of her conversion directly
through the Purgative to the Unitive Life; and never exhibited
( the characteristics of the Illuminative Way. This has been
effectually disproved by Baron von Hiigel, 2 though he too is
inclined in her case to reject the usual sequence of the mystic
states. Yet the description of Catherine's condition after her
four great penitential years were ended, as given in cap. vi. of
the “Vita e Dottrina," is an almost perfect picture of healthy
illumination of the inward or “immanental" type; and makes an
effective foil to the passage which I have quoted from Madame
Guyon’s life.

No doubt there were hours in which St. Catherine's experience,
as it were, ran ahead; and she felt herself not merely lit up by the
Indwelling Light, but temporally merged in it. These moments are
responsible for such passages as the beautiful fragment in cap. v. ;
which does, when taken alone, seem to describe the true unitive
state. “Sometimes," she said, “I do not see or feel myself to have
either soul, body, heart, will or taste, or any other thing except
Pure Love."3 Her normal condition of consciousness, however,
was clearly not yet that which Julian of Norwich calls being
“oned with bliss"; but rather an intense and continuous com-
munion with an objective Reality which was clearly realized as
distinct from herself. “After the aforesaid four years," says the
next chapter of the “Vita," “there was given unto her a purified
mind, free, and filled with God: insomuch that no other thing

* Vie, pt. i. cap. xvii.

• “Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. p. 105.

3 “Vita e Dottrina,'' loc. cit.



MYSTICISM


248

could enter into it. Thus, when she heard sermons or Mass, sc
much was she absorbed in her interior feelings, that she neithel
heard nor saw that which was said or done without. But within
in the sweet divine light, she saw and heard other things, bein^
wholly absorbed by that interior light : and it was not in her powei
to act otherwise/ 1 St. Catherine, then, is still a spectator of tht
Absolute, does not feel herself to be one withit. “Anditisamarvel-
lous thing that with so great an interior recollection, the Lord
never permitted her to go beyond control. But when she was
needed, she always came to herself : so that she was able to repl}
to that which was asked of her: and the Lord so guided her, that
none could complain of her. And she had her mind so filled by
Love Divine, that conversation became hard to her: and by this
continuous taste and sense of God, several times she was sc
greatly transported, that she was forced to hide herself, that she
might not be seen.” It is clear, however, that Catherine herseli
was aware of the transitory and imperfect nature of this intense!}
joyous state. Her growing transcendental self, unsatisfied with
the sunshine of the Illuminative Way, the enjoyment of the
riches of God, already aspired to union with the Divine. With her
as with all truly heroic souls, it was love for love, not love foi
joy. “She cried to God because He gave her so many consolations
‘ Non voglio quello che esce da te, ma sol voglio te, 0 dolce Amove!* ” ]

tl Non voglio quello che esce da te .” When the growing soul has
reached this level of desire, the Illuminative Way is nearly at an
end. It has seen the goal, “that Country which is no mere vision,
but a home,” 2 3 and is set upon the forward march. So Rabia, the
Moslem saint: “0 my God, my concern and my desire in this
world, is that I should remember thee above all the things of this
world, and in the next that out of all who are in that world, I
should meet with thee alone.”3 So Gertrude More: “No knowledge
which we can here have of thee can satisfy my soul seeking and
longing without ceasing after thee. . . . Alas, my Lord God, what
is all thou canst give to a loving soul which sigheth and panteth
after thee alone, and esteemeth all things as dung that shemay gain
thee ? What is all I say, whilst thou givest not thyself, who art
that one thing which is only necessary and which alone can satisfy

1 “I desire not that which comes forth from Thee; but only I desire Thee, C
sweetest Lovel" (“Vita e Dottrina," cap. vi.).

a Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xx. Compare St. Teresa: “Rapture is a great help tr
recognize our true home and to see that we are pilgrims here ; it is a great thing
to see what is going on there, and to know where we have to live; for if a person
has to go and settle in another country, it is a great help to him in undergoing
the fatigues of his journey that he has discovered it to be a country where he
may live in the most perfect peace" (Vida, cap. xxxviii., § 8).

3 M. Smith, “Rabia the Mystic," p. 30.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 249

L our souls? Was it any comfort to St. Mary Magdalen, when she
bought thee, to find two angels which presented themselves
instead of thee? verily I cannot think it was any joy unto her. For
that soul that hath set her whole love and desire on thee can never
find any true satisfaction but only in thee.” 1

What is the nature of this mysterious mystic illumination?
Apart from the certitude it imparts, what is the form which it
most usually assumes in the consciousness of the self ? The illumina-
tives seem to assure us that its apparently symbolic name is
really descriptive ; that they do experience a kind of radiance, a
flooding of the personality with new light. A new sun rises above
the horizon, and transfigures their twilit world. Over and over
again they return to light-imagery in this connection. Frequently,
as in their first conversion, they report an actual and overpowering
consciousness of radiant light, ineffable in its splendour, as an
accompaniment of their inward adjustment,

"Sopr’ onne lengua amore,
bontd senza figura,
lume fuor di mesura
resplende nel mio core,”*

sang Jacopone da Todi. “Light rare, untellable!” said Whitman.
“The flowing light of the Godhead,” said Mechthild of Magdeburg,
trying to describe what it was that made the difference between
her universe and that of normal men. “ Lux vivens dicity said
St. Hildegarde of her revelations, which she described as appear-
ing in a special light, more brilliant than the brightness round the
sun. 3 It is an “infused brightness/' says St. Teresa, “a light which
knows no night; but rather, as it is always light, nothing ever
disturbs it .”4

“De subito parve giomo a giomo
essere aggiuntol”

exclaims Dante, initiated into the atmosphere of heaven; “Lumed
lassu” is his constant declaration:

"Cid ch* io dico 6 un semplice lume,”

his last word, in the effort to describe the soul's apprehension of
the Being of God .5

It really seems as though the mystics' attainment of new levels
of consciousness did bring with it the power of perceiving a
splendour always there, but beyond the narrow range of our
poor sight; to which it is only a “luminous darkness” at the best.

1 “Spiritual Exercises,” pp. 26 and 174.

* “Love above all language, goodness unimagined, light without measure
shines in my heart” (Jacopone da Todi. Lauda xci.).

3 Pitra, “Analecta S. Hildegardis opera,” p. 332.

« St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxviii. §§ 7, 8. J Par. i. 61. xxx. 100, xxxiii. 90.



MYSTICISM


* 5 °

"In Eternal Nature, or the kingdom of Heaven," said Law,
"materiality stands in life and light." 1 The cumulative testimony
on this point is such as would be held to prove, in any other depart-
ment of knowledge, that there is indeed an actual light, "lighting
the very light" and awaiting the recognition of men. 2

Consider the accent of realism with which St. Augustine speaks
of his own experience of Platonic contemplation; a passage in
which we seem to see a bom psychologist desperately struggling
by means of negations to describe an intensely positive state. "1
entered into the secret closet of my soul, led by Thee; and this I
could do because Thou wast my helper. I entered, and beheld with
the mysterious eye of my soul the Light that never changes, above
the eye of my soul, above my intelligence. It was not the common
light which all flesh can see, nor was it greater yet of the same kind,
as if the light of day were to grow brighter and brighter and
flood all space. It was not like this, but different: altogether
different from all such things. Nor was it above my intelligence
in the same way as oil is above water, or heaven above earth; but
it was higher because it made me, and I was lower because made
by it. He who knoweth the truth knoweth that Light : and who
knoweth it, knoweth eternity. Love knoweth it. "3

Here, as in the cases of St. Teresa, St. Catherine of Genoa, and
Jacopone da Todi, we have a characteristically "immanentar
description of the illuminated state. The self, by the process
which mystics call "introversion," the deliberate turning inwards
of its attention, its conative powers, discerns Reality within the
heart : "the rippling tide of love which flows secretly from God
into the soul, and draws it mightily back into its source. "4 But
the opposite or transcendental tendency is not less frequent.
The cosmic vision of Infinity, exterior to the subject — the expan-
sive, outgoing movement towards a Divine Light,

"Che visible face
lo Creatore a quella creatura,
che solo in lui vedere ha la sua pace, "5


* “An Appeal to All who Doubt." I give the whole passage below, p. 263.

* It is, of course, arguable that the whole of this light-imagery is ultimately
derived from the Prologue of the Fourth Gospel : as the imagery of the Spiritual
Marriage is supposed to be derived irom the Song of Songs. Some hardy com-
mentators have even found in it evidence of the descent of Christian Mysticism
from sun-worship. (See H. F. Dunbar, “Symbolism in Mediaeval Thought".) But it
must be remembered that mystics are essentially realists, always seeking for
language adequate to their vision of truth: hence their adoption of this imagery
is most simply explained by the fact that it represents something which they
know and are struggling to describe.

s Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

i Mcchthild of Magdeburg, op. cil., pt. vii. 45.

5 Par. xxx. 100, “Which makes visible the Creator to that creature who only
in beholding Him finds its peace.”


THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 251

wholly other than anything the earth-born creature can conceive —
the strange, formless absorption in the Divine Dark to which the
*soul is destined to ascend— all these modes of perception are equally
characteristic of the Illuminative Way. As in conversion, so here.
Reality may be apprehended in either transcendent or immanent,
positive or negative terms. It is both near and far; "closer to us
than our most inward part, and higher than our highest"; 1 and
for some selves that which is far is easiest to find. To a certain type
of mind, the veritable practice of the Presence of God is not the
intimate and adorable companionship of the personal Comrade
or the Inward Light, but the awestruck contemplation of the
Absolute, the "naked Godhead," source and origin of all that Is.
It is an ascent to the supernal plane of perception, where "the
simple, absolute and unchangeable mysteries of heavenly Truth
lie hidden in the dazzling obscurity of the secret Silence, out-
shining all brilliance with the intensity of their darkness, and
surcharging our blinded intellects with the utterly impalpable
and invisible fairness of glories which exceed all beauty." 2

With such an experience of eternity, such a vision of the triune
all-including Absolute which "binds the Universe with love,"
Dante ends his "Divine Comedy": and the mystic joy with which
its memory fills him is his guarantee that he has really seen the
Inviolate Rose, the flaming heart of things.

'*0 abbondante grazia, ond’ io presunsi
ficcar lo viso per la luce eterna,
tanto che la veduta vi consunsi !

Nel suo profondo vidi che s’ interna,
legato con amore in un volume,
ci6 che per Tuniverso si squaderna;

Sustanzia ed accidenti, e lor costume,
quasi conflati insieme per tal modo,
che cio ch’ io dico d un semplice lume.

La forma universal di questo nodo

credo cli io vidi, perch 6 piu di largo,
dicendo questo, mi sento ch' io godo.

O, quanto 6 corto il dire, e come fioco

al mio concetto ! e questo, a quel ch’ io vidi,

& tanto che non basta a dicer poco.

0 luce eterna, che sola in te sidi,
sola t’ intendi, e, da te intelletta
ed intendente te, ami ed arridi!” 3

* Aug. Conf., bk. iii. cap. 6.

* Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Mystica Theologia,” i. i. (Rolt's translation.)

3 Par. xxxiii. 82, 121: —

“O grace abounding l wherein I presumed to fix my gaze on the eternal light,
so long that I consumed my sight thereon!

In its depths I saw ingathered the scattered leaves of the universe, bound into
one book by love. [Note continued over.



MYSTICISM


252

In Dante, the transcendent and impersonal aspect of illumina-
tion is seen in its most exalted form. It seems at first sight almost
impossible to find room within the same system for this expansive
vision of the Undifferentiated Light and such intimate and persona]
apprehensions of Deity as Lady Julian’s conversations with her
“courteous and dearworthy Lord,” or St. Catherine's companion-
ship with Love Divine. Yet all these are really reports of the same
psychological state : describe the attainment by selves of different
types, of the same stage in the soul's progressive apprehension of
reality.

In a wonderful passage, unique in the literature of mysticism,
Angela of Foligno has reported the lucid vision in which she
perceived this truth: the twofold revelation of an Absolute at
once humble and omnipotent, personal and transcendent — the
unimaginable synthesis of “unspeakable power" and “deep
humility.”

“The eyes of my soul were opened, and I beheld the plenitude
of God, wherein I did comprehend the whole world, both here and
beyond the sea, and the abyss and ocean and all things. In all
these things I beheld naught save the divine power, in a manner
assuredly indescribable ; so that through excess of marvelling the
soul cried with a loud voice, saying This whole world is full of
God!' 1 Wherefore I now comprehended how small a thing is the
whole world, that is to say both here and beyond the seas, the
abyss, the ocean, and all things ; and that the Power of God exceeds
and fills all. Then He said unto me: T have shown thee something
of My Power,' and I understood, that after this I should better
understand the rest. He then said 'Behold now My humility.’
Then was I given an insight into the deep humility of God towards
man. And comprehending that unspeakable power and beholding
that deep humility, my soul marvelled greatly, and did esteem
itself to be nothing at all.”*

It must never be forgotten that all apparently one-sided
descriptions of illumination — more, all experiences of it— are
governed by temperament. “That Light whose smile kindles the
Universe” is ever the same; but the self through whom it passes,

Substance and accidents, and their relations: as if fused together in such a
manner that what I tell of is a simple light.

And I believe that I saw the universal form of this complexity; because, as 1
say this, I feel that I rejoice more deeply. . . .

Oh, but how scant the speech and how faint to my concept! and that to what I
saw is such, that it suffices not to call it ‘little/

0 Light Eternal, Who only in Thyself abidest, only Thyself dost comprehend,
and, of Thyself comprehended and Thyself comprehending, dost love and smile !"

1 The Latin is more vivid: “Est iste mundus pregnans de Deo."

> Ste. Ang&le de Foligno, “Le Livre de TExp^rience des Vrais Fiddles," p. 124
(English translation, p. 172).



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 253

and by whom we must receive its report, has already submitted to
die moulding influences of environment and heredity, Church and
^tate. The very language of which that self avails itself in its
struggle for expression, links it with half a hundred philosophies
and creeds. The response which it makes to Divine Love will be
the same in type as the response which its nature would make to
earthly love : but raised to the nth degree. We, receiving the revela-
tion, receive with it all those elements which the subject has con-
tributed in spite of itself. Hence the soul’s apprehension of Divine
Reality may take almost any form, from the metaphysical
ecstasies which we find in Dionysius, and to a less degree in St.
Augustine, to the simple, almost “common-sense” statements of
Brother Lawrence, the emotional ardours of St. Gertrude, or the
lovely intimacies of Julian or Mechthild.

Sometimes — so rich and varied does the nature of the great
mystic tend to be — the exalted and impersonal language of the
Dionysian theology goes, with no sense of incongruity, side by
side with homely parallels drawn from the most sweet and com-
mon incidents of daily life. Suso, in whom illumination and
purgation existed side by side for sixteen years, alternately obtain-
ng possession of the mental field, and whose oscillations between
:he harshest mortification and the most ecstatic pleasure-states
.vere exceptionally violent and swift, is a characteristic instance
)f such an attitude of mind. His illumination was largely of the
ntimate and immanental type ; but, as we might expect in a pupil
>f Eckhart, it was not without touches of mystical transcendence,
vhich break out with sudden splendour side by side with those
ender and charming passages in which the Servitor of the Eternal
.Visdom tries to tell his love.

Thus, he describes in one of the earlier chapters of his life how
‘whilst he was thinking, according to his custom, of the most
ovable Wisdom, he questioned himself, and interrogated his
ieart, which sought persistently for love, saying, ‘0 my heart,
/hence comes this love and grace, whence comes this gentleness
nd beauty, this joy and sweetness of the heart ? Does not all this
dowforthfrom the Godhead, as from its origin ? Come ! let my heart,
my senses and my soul immerse themselves in the deep Abyss
whence come these adorable things. What shall keep me back?
To-day I will embrace you, even as my burning heart desires to

emanation of all good ; all that is beautiful, all that is lovable and
desirable was there spiritually present, and this in a manner which
cannot be expressed. Whence came the habit that every time he
tieard God’s praises sung or said, he recollected himself in the
depths of his heart and soul, and thought on that Beloved Object,



MYSTICISM


254

whence comes all love. It is impossible to tell how often, witl
eyes filled with tears and open heart, he has embraced his swee
Friend, and pressed Him to a heart overflowing with love. He wa:
like a baby which a mother holds upright on her knees, support
ing it with her hands beneath its arms. The baby, by the move
mcnts of its little head, and all its little body, tries to get close
and closer to its dear mother, and shows by its little laughing
gestures the gladness in its heart. Thus did the heart of tlx
Servitor ever seek the sweet neighbourhood of the Divint
Wisdom, and thus he was as it were altogether filled witl
delight." 1


2. The Illuminated Vision of the World

Closely connected with the sense of the "Presence of God/
or power of perceiving the Absolute, is the complementary marl
of the illuminated consciousness; the vision of "a new heaven anc
a new earth," or an added significance and reality in the phenom-
enal world. Such words as those of Julian, "God is all thing that
is good as to my sight, and the goodness that all thing hath, it is
He," 1 seem to supply the link between the two. Here again we
must distinguish carefully between vaguely poetic language—
"the light that never was," "every common bush afire with God"—
and descriptions which can be referred to a concrete and definite
psychological experience. This experience, at its best, balances
and completes the experience of the Presence of God at its best.
That is to say, its "note" is sacramental, not ascetic. It entails
the expansion rather than the concentration of consciousness;
the discovery of the Perfect One self -revealed in the Many,
not the forsaking of the Many in order to find the One. Its
characteristic expression is —

“The World is charged with the grandeur of God;

It will flame out, like shining from shook foil,”

not "turn thy thoughts into thy own soul, where He is hid." It
takes, as a rule, the form of an enhanced mental lucidity — an
abnormal sharpening of the senses — whereby an ineffable radiance,
a beauty and a reality never before suspected, are perceived by
a sort of clairvoyance shining in the meanest things.

"From the moment in which the soul has received the impression
of Deity in infused orison," says Malaval, "she sees Him every-
where, by one of love's secrets which is only known of those who
have experienced it. The simple vision of pure love, which is

* Suso, Leben, cap. iv.

• “Revelations," cap. viii.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF


255

marvellously penetrating, does not stop at the outer husk of
creation: it penetrates to the divinity which is hidden within.'* 1 * 3 4 5

Thus Browning makes David declare —

“I but open my eyes, — and perfection, no more and no less.

In the kind I imagined full-fronts me, and God is seen God
In the star, in the stone, in the flesh, in the soul and the clod.”*

Blake's ‘To see a world in a grain of sand," Tennyson's "Flower
in the crannied wall," Vaughan’s "Each bush and oak doth know
I am," and the like, are exact though over-quoted reports of
"things seen" in this state of consciousness, this "simple vision of
pure love" : the value of which is summed up in Eckhart’s profound
saying, "The meanest thing that one knows in God — for instance,
if one could understand a flower as it has its Being in God — this
would be a higher thing than the whole world !"3 Mystical poets
of the type of Wordsworth and Walt Whitman seem to possess
in a certain degree this form of illumination. It is this which
Bucke, the American psychologist, analysed under the name of
"Cosmic Consciousness. "4 It is seen at its full development in
the mystical experiences of Boehme, Fox, and Blake.

We will take first the experience of Jacob Boehme, a mystic
who owed little or nothing to the influence of tradition, and who
furnishes one of the best recorded all-round examples of mystical
illumination; exhibiting, along with an acute consciousness of
divine companionship, all those phenomena of visual lucidity,
automatism, and enhanced intellectual powers which properly
belong to it, but are seldom developed simultaneously in the same
individual.

In Boehme’s life, as described in the Introduction to the English
translation of his collected works ,5 there were three distinct onsets
of illumination; all of the pantheistic and external type. In the
first, which seems to have happened whilst he was very young, we
are told that "he was surrounded by a divine Light for seven days,
and stood in the highest contemplation and Kingdom of Joy."
This we may perhaps identify with mystical awakening, of
the kind experienced by Suso. About the year 1600 occurred the
second illumination, initiated by a trance-like state of conscious-
ness, the result of gazing at a polished disc. To this I have already
referred. 6 This experience brought with it that peculiar and lucid

1 Malaval, “De l'Oraison Ordinaire” ("La Pratique de la Vraye ThSologie

Mystique,” vol. i. p. 342). * “Saul,” xvii.

3 Meister Eckhart ("Mystische Schriften,” p. 137).

4 Vide supra, Pt. II. Cap. II., the cases of Richard Jefferies, Brother Lawrence,
and others.

5 The Works of Jacob Boehme, 4 vols., 1764, vol. i. pp. xii., etc,

4 Supra, p. 58.



MYSTICISM


256

vision of the inner reality of the phenomenal world in which, as
he says, “he looked into the deepest foundations of things." “Ha
believed that it was only a fancy, and in order to banish it from
his mind he went out upon the green. But here he remarked that
he gazed into the very heart of things, the very herbs and grass,
and that actual Nature harmonized with what he had inwardly
seen." 1 Of this same experience and the clairvoyance which
accompanied it, another biographer says, “Going abroad in the
fields to a green before Neys Gate, at Gorlitz, he there sat down,
and, viewing the herbs and grass of the field in his inward light,
he saw into their essences, use and properties, which were dis-
covered to him by their lineaments, figures and signatures. . . .
In the unfolding of these mysteries before his understanding, he
had a great measure of joy, yet returned home and took care of
his family and lived in great peace and silence, scarce intimating
to any these wonderful things that had befallen him." 2

So far as we can tell from his own scattered statements, from
this time onwards Boehme must have enjoyed a frequent and
growing consciousness of the transcendental world: though there
is evidence that he, like all other mystics, knew seasons of darkness,
“many a shrewd Repulse," and times of struggle with that “powei
ful contrarium" the lower consciousness. In 1610 — perhaps as
the result of such intermittent struggles — the vivid illumination
of ten years before was repeated in an enhanced form : and it was
in consequence of this, and in order that there might be some
record of the mysteries upon which he had gazed, that he wrote
his first and most difficult book, the “Aurora," or “Morning
Redness." The passage in which the “inspired shoemaker" has
tried to tell us what his vision of Reality was like, to communicate
something of the grave and enthusiastic travail of his being, the
unspeakable knowledge of things which he attained, is one of those
which arouse in all who have even the rudiments of mystical
perception the sorrow and excitement of exiles who suddenly
hear the accents of home. Like absolute music, it addresses itself
to the whole being, not merely to the intellect. Those who will
listen and be receptive will find themselves repaid by a strange
sense of extended life, an exhilarating consciousness of truth.
Here, if ever, is a man who is struggling to “speak as he saw":
and it is plain that he saw much — as much, perhaps, as Dante,
though he lacked the poetic genius which was needed to give his
vision an intelligible form. The very strangeness of the phrasing,
the unexpected harmonies and dissonances which worry polite

1 Martensen, “Jacob Boehme,*' p. 7.

1 “Life of Jacob Boehme,” pp. xiii. and xiv. in vol. i. of his Collected Works,
English translation.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 257

and well-regulated minds, are earnests of the Spirit of Life crying
l^ut for expression from within. Boehme, like Blake, seems "drunk
with intellectual vision” — “a God-intoxicated man.”

“In this my earnest and Christian Seeking and Desire,” he says,
"(wherein I suffered many a shrewd Repulse, but at last resolved
rather to put myself in Hazard, than give over and leave off) the
Gate was opened to me, that in one Quarter of an Hour I saw and
knew more than if I had been many years together at an University,
at which I exceedingly admired, and thereupon turned my Praise
to God for it. For I saw and knew the Being of all Beings, the
Byss and the Abyss, and the Eternal Generation of the Holy
Trinity , the Descent and Original of the World, and of all creatures
through the Divine Wisdom : knew and saw in myself all the three
Worlds, namely, The Divine , angelical and paradisical; and the
iark World , the Original of the Nature to the Fire; and then,
thirdly, the external and visible World , being a Procreation or
external Birth from both the internal and spiritual Worlds. And
I saw and knew the whole working Essence in the Evil and the
Good, and the Original and Existence of each of them; and like-
wise how the fruitful bearing Womb of Eternity brought forth

Yet however I must begin to labour in these great mysteries, as
a Child that goes to School. I saw it as in a great Deep in the In-
ternal. For I had a thorough view of the Universe, as in a Chaos,
wherein all things are couched and wrapped up, but it was impos-
sible for me to explain the same. Yet it opened itself to me, from
Time to Time, as in a Young Plant ; though the same was with me
for the space of twelve years, and as it was as it were breeding,
and I found a powerful Instigation within me, before I could
bring it forth into external Form of Writing : and whatever I could
apprehend with the external Principle of my mind, that I wrote
down.” 1

Close to this lucid vision of the reality of things — this sudden
glimpse of the phenomenal in the light of the intelligible world —
is George Fox's experience at the age of twenty-four, as recorded
in his Journal. 2 Here, as in Boehme's case, it is clear that a previous
and regrettable acquaintance with the “doctrine of signatures”
has to some extent determined the language and symbols under
which he describes his intuitive vision of actuality as it exists
in the Divine Mind.

“Now was I come up in spirit through the flaming sword into
the Paradise of God. All things were new: and all the creation
gave another smell unto me than before, beyond what words can
utter. . . . The creation was opened to me ; and it was showed me
how all things had their names given them, according to their
* Op. cit ., p. xv. • Vol. i. cap. ii.



MYSTICISM


258

nature and virtue. And I was at a stand in my mind whether I
should practise physic for the good of mankind, seeing the nature,
and virtue of the creatures were so opened to me by the Lord.*. . ,
Great things did the Lord lead me unto, and wonderful depths
were opened unto me beyond what can by words be declared ;
but as people come into subjection to the Spirit of God, and grow
up in the image and power of the Almighty, they may receive the
word of wisdom that opens all things, and come to know the hidden
unity in the Eternal Being

“To know the hidden unity in the Eternal Being” — know it,
with an invulnerable certainty, in the all-embracing act of con-
sciousness with which we are aware of the personality of those we
truly love — is to live at its fullest the Illuminated Life, enjoying
"all creatures in God and God in all creatures.” Lucidity of this
sort seemes to be an enormously enhanced form of the poetic
consciousness of “otherness” in natural things — the sense of a
unity in separateness, a mighty and actual Life beyond that which
eye can see, a glorious reality shining through the phenomenal veil
— frequent in those temperaments which are at one with life
The self then becomes conscious of the living reality of that World^
of Becoming, the vast arena of the Divine creativity, in which
the little individual life is immersed. Alike in howling gale and
singing cricket it hears the crying aloud of that “Word which is
through all things everlastingly.” It participates, actively and
open-eyed, in the mighty journey of the Son towards the Father's
heart: and seeing with purged sight all things and creatures
as they are in that transcendent order, detects in them too that
striving of Creation to return to its centre which is the secret of
the Universe.

A harmony is thus set up between the mystic and Life in all its 1
forms. Undistracted by appearance, he sees, feels, and knows it in'
one piercing act of loving comprehension. “And the bodily sight
stinted,” says Julian, “but the spiritual sight dwelled in mine
understanding, and I abode with reverent dread joying in that I
saw.” 1 The heart outstrips the clumsy senses, and sees — perhaps
for an instant, perhaps for long periods of bliss — an undistorted
and more veritable world. All things are perceived in the light of
charity, and hence under the aspect of beauty : for beauty is simply
Reality seen with the eyes of love. As in the case of another and
more beatific Vision, essere in caritate & qui necesse* For such a
reverent and joyous sight the meanest accidents of life are radiant.
The London streets are paths of loveliness ; the very omnibuses ,
look like coloured archangels, their laps filled full of little trustful]
souls.


1 “Revelations/' cap. viil.


• Par. iii. 77.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF


*59

Often when we blame our artists for painting ugly things, they
are but striving to show us a beauty to which we are blind. They
Tiave gone on ahead of us, and attained that state of ‘fourfold
vision 1 ' to which Blake laid claim; in which the visionary sees the
whole visible universe transfigured, because he has “put off the
rotten rags of sense and memory," and “put on Imagination un-
corrupt ." 1 In this state of lucidity symbol and reality, Nature and
Imagination, are seen to be One : and in it are produced all the
more sublime works of art, since these owe their greatness to the
impact of Reality upon the artistic mind. “I know," says Blake
again, "that this world is a world of imagination and vision. I see
everything I paint in this world, but everybody does not see alike.
To the eye of a miser a guinea is far more beautiful than the sun,
and a bag worn with the use of money has more beautiful pro-
portions than a vine filled with grapes. The tree which moves some
to tears of joy is in the eyes of others only a green thing which
stands in the way. Some see Nature all ridicule and deformity, and
by these I shall not regulate my proportions; and some scarce
see Nature at all. But to the eyes of the man of imagination,
Nature is Imagination itself. As a man is, so he sees. As the eye
is formed, such are its powers. You certainly mistake, when you
say that the visions of fancy are not to be found in this world.
To me this world is all one continued vision of fancy or imagina-
tion, and I feel flattered when I am told so ." 1

If the Mystic Way be considered as an organic process of tran-
scendence, this illuminated apprehension of things, this cleansing
of the doors of perception, is surely what we might expect to
occur as man moves towards higher centres of consciousness. It
marks the self’s growth towards free and conscious participation in
the Absolute Life; its progressive appropriation of that life by means
of the contact which exists in the deeps of man’s being — the ground
or spark of the soul — between the subject and the transcendental
world. The surface intelligence, purified from the domina-
tion of the senses, is invaded more and more by the transcendent
personality; the “New Man" who is by nature a denizen of the
independent spiritual world, and whose destiny, in mystical
language, is a "return to his Origin." Hence an inflow of new
vitality, a deeper and wider apprehension of the mysterious world
in which man finds himself, an exaltation of his intuitive powers.

In such moments of clear sight and enhanced perception a£
that which Blake and Boehme describe, the mystic and the artist
do really see sub specie aeternitatis the Four-fold River of Life —
that World of Becoming in which, as Erigena says, "Every visible
and invisible creature is a theophany or appearance of God" —

* “Letters of William Blake/’ p. in. • Op. cit., p. 62.



260 MYSTICISM

as all perhaps might see it, if prejudice, selfhood, or other illusion
did not distort our sight. From this loving vision there comes ver^
often that beautiful sympathy with, that abnormal power over
all living natural things, which crops up again and again in tlu
lives of the mystical saints ; to amaze the sluggish minds of commor
men, barred by “the torrent of Use and Wont" 1 * from all free and
deep communion alike with their natural and supernatural origin

Yet it is surely not very amazing that St. Francis of Assisi
feeling and knowing — not merely “believing" — that every living
creature was veritably and actually a “theophany or appearance
of God," should have been acutely conscious that he shared witli
these brothers and sisters of his the great and lovely life of the
All. Nor, this being so, can we justly regard him as eccentric
because he acted in accordance with his convictions, preached tc
his little sisters the birds, 3 * availed himself of the kindly offices ol
the falcon, 3 enjoyed the friendship of the pheasant, 4 soothed the
captured turtledoves, his “simple-minded sisters, innocent and
chaste,"5 or persuaded his Brother Wolf to a better life. 6

The true mystic, so often taunted with “a denial of the world,"
does but deny the narrow and artificial world of self: and finds
in exchange the secrets of that mighty universe which he shares
with Nature and with God. Strange contacts, unknown to those
who only lead the life of sense, are set up between his being and
the being of all other things. In that remaking of his consciousness
which follows upon the “mystical awakening," the deep and primal
life which he shares with all creation has been roused from its sleep.
Hence the barrier between human and non-human life, which
makes man a stranger on earth as well as in heaven, is done away.
Life now whispers to his life: all things are his intimates, and
respond to his fraternal sympathy.

Thus it seems quite a simple and natural thing to the Little
Poor Man of Assisi, whose friend the pheasant preferred his cell
to “the haunts more natural to its state," that he should be
ambassador from the terrified folk of Gubbio to his formidable
brother the Wolf. The result of the interview, reduced to ordinary
language, could be paralleled in the experience of many persons
who have possessed this strange and incommunicable power over
animal life.

“O wondrous thing! whenas St. Francis had made the sign o i
the Cross, right so the terrible wolf shut his jaws and stayed his
running: and when he was bid, came gently as a lamb and laid

1 Aug. Conf., bk. i. cap. xvi. * “Fioretti,” cap. xiv.

s Ibid., “Delle Istimate,’* 2 , and Thomas of Celano, Vita Secunda, cap, cxxvii.

4 Thomas of Celano, op. cit., cap. cxxix.

5 “tiorctti/ 1 cap. xxii. 4 Ibid., cap. xxi.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 261

him down at the feet of St. Francis And St. Francis stretching

forth his hand to take pledge of his troth, the wolf lifted up his
right paw before him and laid it gently on the hand of St. Francis,
giving thereby such sign of good faith as he was able. Then quoth
St. Francis, 'Brother Wolf, I bid thee in the name of Jesu Christ
come now with me, nothing doubting, and let us go stablish this
peace in God's name.' And the wolf obedient set forth with him,
in fashion as a gentle lamb ; whereat the townsfolk made mighty
marvel, beholding. . . . And thereafter this same wolf lived two
years in Agobio ; and went like a tame beast in and out the houses
from door to door, without doing hurt to any, or any doing hurt
to him, and was courteously nourished by the people; and as he
passed thus wise through the country and the houses, never did
any dog bark behind him. At length after a two years space,
brother wolf died of old age : whereat the townsfolk sorely grieved,
sith marking him pass so gently through the city, they minded
them the better of the virtue and the sanctity of St. Francis." 1

In another mystic, less familiar than St. Francis to English
readers — Rose of Lima, the Peruvian saint — this deep sympathy
with natural things assumed a particularly lovely form. To St.
Rose the whole world was a holy fairyland, in which it seemed
to her that every living thing turned its face towards Eternity and
joined in her adoration of God. It is said in her biography that
"when at sunrise, she passed through the garden to go to her
retreat, she called upon nature to praise with her the Author of
all things. Then the trees were seen to bow as she passed by, and
clasp their leaves together, making a harmonious sound. The
flowers swayed upon their stalks, and opened their blossoms
that they might scent the air; thus according to their manner
praising God. At the same time the birds began to sing, and came
and perched upon the hands and shoulders of Rose. The insects
greeted her with a joyous murmur, and all which had life and move-
ment joined in the concert of praise she addressed to the Lord." 3

Again — and here we catch an echo of the pure Franciscan spirit,
the gaiety of the Troubadours of God — during her last Lent, "each
evening at sunset a little bird with an enchanting voice came and
perched upon a tree beside her window, and waited till she gave the
sign to him to sing. Rose, as soon as she saw her little feathered
chorister, made herself ready to sing the praises of God, and
challenged the bird to this musical duel in a song which she had

1 'Fioretti,” cap. xxi (Arnold's translation). Perhaps I may be allowed to
remind the incredulous reader that the discovery of a large wolf's skull in Gubbio,
close to the spot in which Brother Wolf is said to have lived in a cave for two
years after his taming by the Saint, has done something to vindicate the truth
of this beautiful story.

• De Bussierre, “Le P6rou et Ste. Rose de Lime,” p. 256.



262 MYSTICISM

composed for this purpose. 'Begin, dear little bird/ she said, 'begin
thy lovely songl Let thy little throat, so full of sweet melodies,
pour them forth: that together we may praise the Lord. Thou dost
praise thy Creator, I my sweet Saviour: thus we together bless the
Deity. Open thy little beak, begin and I will follow thee: and our
voices shall blend in a song of holy joy.'

“At once the little bird began to sing, running through his
scale to the highest note. Then he ceased, that the saint might
sing in her turn . . . thus did they celebrate the greatness of God,
turn by turn, for a whole hour: and with such perfect order, that
when the bird sang Rose said nothing, and when she sang in her
turn the bird was silent, and listened to her with a marvellous
attention. At last, towards the sixth hour, the saint dismissed him,
saying, 'Go, my little chorister, go, fly far away. But blessed be
my God who never leaves me !'

The mystic whose illumination takes such forms as these, who
feels with this intensity and closeness the bond of love which
“binds in one book the scattered leaves of all the universe," dwells
in a world unknown to other men. He pierces the veil of imperfec-
tion, and beholds Creation with the Creator's eye. The “Pattern is
shown him in the Mount." “The whole consciousness," says
R^cdjac, “is flooded with light to unknown depths, under the
gaze of love, from which nothing escapes. In this stage, intensity
of vision and sureness of judgment are equal : and the things which
the seer brings back with him when he returns to common life are
not merely partial impressions, or the separate knowledge of
'science' or 'poetry.' They are rather truths which embrace the
world, life and conduct: in a word, the whole consciousness

It is curious to note in those diagrams of experience which we
have inherited from the more clear-sighted philosophers and seers,
indications that they have enjoyed prolonged or transitory periods
of this higher consciousness; described by Rec^jac as the marriage
of imaginative vision with moral transcendence. I think it at least a
reasonable supposition that Plato's doctrine of Ideas owed some-
thing to an intuition of this kind ; for a philosophy, though it may
claim to be the child of pure reason, is usually found to owe its dis-
tinctive character to the philosopher's psychological experience.
The Platonic statements as to the veritable existence of the Idea of
a house, a table, or a bed, and other such concrete and practical
applications of the doctrine of the ideal, which have annoyed
many metaphysicians, become explicable on such a psychological
basis. That illuminated vision in which “all things are made new"
can afford to embrace the homeliest as well as the sublimest things ;

* De Bussierre, "Le P6rou et Ste. Rose de Lime," p. 415.

• “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 113.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 263

and, as a matter of experience, it does do this, seeing all objects,
as Monet saw the hayrick, as “modes of light." Blake said that his
cottage at Felpham was a shadow of the angels' houses, 1 and I
have already referred to the converted Methodist who saw his
horses and hogs on the ideal plane. 2

Again, when Plotinus, who is known to have experienced
ecstatic states, speaks with the assurance of an explorer of an
“intelligible world," and asks us, “What other fire could be a
better image of the fire which is there, than the fire which is here ?
Or what other earth than this, of the earth which is there ? "3 we
seem to detect behind the language of Neoplatonic philosophy
a hint of the same type of first-hand experience. The minds to
whom we owe the Hebrew Kabalah found room for it too in their
diagram of the soul's ascent towards Reality. The first “Sephira"
above Malkuth, the World of Matter, or lowest plane upon that
Tree of Life which is formed by the ten emanations of the Godhead,
is, they say, “Yesod," the “archetypal universe." In this are con-
tained the realities, patterns, or Ideas, whose shadows constitute
the world of appearance in which we dwell. The path of the ascend-
ing soul upon the Tree of Life leads him first from Malkuth to
Yesod : i.e ., human consciousness in the course of its transcendence
passes from the normal illusions of men to a deeper perception of
its environment — a perception which is symbolized by the “arche-
typal plane" or world of Platonic Ideas. “Everything in temporal
nature," says William Law, “is descended out of that which is
eternal, and stands as a palpable visible outbirth of it, so when
we know how to separate the grossness, death, and darkness of
time from it, we find what it is in its eternal state. ... In Eternal
Nature, or the Kingdom of Heaven, materiality stands in life
and light; it is the light's glorious Body, or that garment where-
with light is clothed, and therefore has all the properties of light
in it, and only differs from light as it is its brightness and beauty,
as the holder and displayer of all its colours, powers, and virtues."*
When Law wrote this, he may have believed that he was inter-
preting to English readers the unique message of his master,
Jacob Boehme. As a matter of fact he was reiterating truths
which a long line of practical mystics had been crying for centuries
into the deaf ears of mankind. He was saying in the eighteenth
century what Gregory of Nyssa had said in the fourth and Erigena
in the ninth; telling the secret of that “Inviolate Rose"
which can never be profaned because it can only be seen with the
eyes of love.

1 Letters, p. 75. * Vid-e supra , p . 192. 3 Ennead ii. 9. 4.

« “An Api>eal to All who Doubt” (Liberal and Mystical Writings of William
Law, p. 52).



MYSTICISM


264

That serene and illuminated consciousness of the relation of
things inward and outward — of the Hidden Treasure and its
Casket, the energizing Absolute and its expression in Time and
Space — which we have been studying in this chapter, is at its
best a state of fine equilibrium; a sane adjustment of the inner
and outer life. By that synthesis of love and will which is the
secret of the heart, the mystic achieves a level of perception in
which the whole world is seen and known in God, and God is seen
and known in the whole world. It is a state of exalted emotion :
being produced by love, of necessity it produces love in its turn.
The sharp division between its inlooking and outlooking forms
which I have adopted for convenience of description, is seldom
present to the minds which achieve it. They, “cleansed, fed, and
sanctified," are initiated into a spiritual universe where such
clumsy distinctions have little meaning. All is alike part of the
“new life" of peaceful charity: and that progressive abolition of
selfhood which is of the essence of mystical development, is alone
enough to prevent them from drawing a line between the inward
personal companionship and outward impersonal apprehension of
the Real. True Illumination, like all real and vital experience, con-
sists rather in the breathing of a certain atmosphere, the living at
certain levels of consciousness, than in the acquirement of specific
information. It is, as it were, a resting-place upon “the steep stair-
way of love"; where the self turns and sees all about it a trans-
figured universe, radiant with that same Light Divine which
nests in its own heart and leads it on.

“When man's desires are fixed immovably on his Maker as fai
as for deadliness and corruption of the flesh he is let," says Rolle
of the purified soul which has attained the illuminated state,
“then it is no marvel that his strength manly using, first as it were
heaven being opened, with his understanding he beholds high
heavenly citizens ; and afterwards sweetest heat, as it were burning
fire, he feels. Then with marvellous sweetness he is taught, and so
forth in songful noise he is joyed. This, therefore, is perfect charity,
which no man knows but he that hath it took. And he that it has
taken, it never leaves : sweetly he lives and sickerly he shall die." 1

Sweetly, it is true, the illuminated mystic may live; but not,
as some think, placidly. Enlightenment is a symptom of growth :
and growth is a living process, which knows no rest. The spirit,
indeed, is invaded by a heavenly peace ; but it is the peace, not of
idleness, but of ordered activity. “A rest most busy," in Hilton's
words : a progressive appropriation of the Divine. The urgent push
of an indwelling spirit, aspiring to its home in the heart of Reality,
is felt more and more, as the invasion of the normal consciousness

* Rolle, “The Fire of Love,” bk. i. cap. xix.



THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SELF 265

by the transcendental personality— the growth of the New Man —
proceeds towards its term.

Therefore the great seekers for reality are not as a rule long
delayed by the exalted joys of Illumination. Intensely aware now
of the Absolute Whom they adore, they are aware too that though
known He is unachieved. Even whilst they enjoy the rapture of
the Divine Presence — of life in a divine, ideal world — something,
they feel, makes default. Sol voglio Te, 0 dolce Amore. Hence for
them that which they now enjoy, and which passes the understand-
ing of other men, is not a static condition ; often it coexists with
that travail of the heart which Tauler has called “stormy love.”
The greater the mystic, the sooner he realizes that the Heavenly
Manna which has been administered to him is not yet That with
which the angels are full fed. Nothing less will do : and for him the
progress of illumination is a progressive consciousness that he is
destined not for the sunny shores of the spiritual universe, but
for “the vast and stormy sea of the divine.” '

"Here,” says Ruysbroeck of the soul which has been lit by the
Uncreated Light, "there begins an eternal hunger, which shall
never more be satisfied. It is the inward craving and hankering of
the affective power and created spirit after an Uncreated Good.
And as the spirit longs for fruition, and is invited and urged thereto
by God, she must always desire to attain it. Behold! here begin
an eternal craving and continual yearning in eternal insatiableness !
These men are poor indeed: for they are hungry and greedy, and
their hunger is insatiable! Whatsoever they eat and drink they
shall never be satisfied, for this hunger is eternal. . . . Here are
great dishes of food and drink, of which none know but those
who taste them; but full satisfaction in fruition is the one dish
that lacks them, and this is why their hunger is ever renewed.
Nevertheless in this contact rivers of honey full of all delight flow
forth; for the spirit tastes these riches under every mode that it
can conceive or apprehend. But all this is according to the manner
of the creatures, and is below God : and hence there remains an
eternal hunger and impatience. If God gave to such a man all
the gifts which all the saints possess, and all that He is able to
give, but without giving Himself, the craving desire of the spirit
would remain hungry and unsatisfied.” 1

• “De Ornatu Spiiitalium Nuptiarum," 1. ii. cap. liii.



CHAPTER V

VOICES AND VISIONS


This is a controversial subject — Rationalism and Orthodoxy — Both extreme
in their conclusions — Literal interpretation fatal to vision — Every kind of auto-
matism is found in the mystic life — Cannot be neglected by its investigators—
Visions may often be merely subjective — but sometimes embody transcendental
perceptions — Some test necessary — Real mystic vision enhances life — Most
visionary activity mixed in type — Is always symbolic in character — A form of
artistic expression — Automatisms characteristic of all creative genius — Mystic
visions and voices are helps to transcendence — related to life — Delacroix—
Audition — the simplest form of automatism — Three kinds of auditions — the
Intellectual Word — Distinct Interior words — St. Teresa — False auditions— St.
John of the Cross — Character of the true audition — St. Teresa — Exterior words
— Musical audition — Suso — Divine dialogues — Vision — its general character —
Most mystics distrust it — Hilton — St. John of the Cross — Three classes of vision:
intellectual, imaginary, and corporeal — Intellectual vision — its character
— Angela of Foligno — St. Teresa — imaginary vision— it exists in all poets—
Its two forms — Symbolic visions — Suso — Dante — St. Mechthild of Hackborn —
Visions of Divine Personality — St. Teresa's vision of Christ — its transcendental
nature— Active imaginary visions — their character — The mystic marriage of St.
Catherine — Trans verberation of St. Teresa — Automatic writing in the mystics
— St. Catherine of Siena — Blake — St. Teresa — Madame Guyon — Jacob Boehme
—Conclusion

W E now come to that eternal battle-ground, the detailed
discussion of those abnormal psychic phenomena which
appear so persistently in the history of the mystics.
That is to say, visions, auditions, automatic script, and those
dramatic dialogues between the Self and some other factor—
the Soul, Love, Reason, of the Voice of God — which seem some-
times to arise from an exalted and uncontrolled imaginative power,
sometimes to attain the proportions of auditory hallucination.

Here, moderate persons are like to be hewn in pieces between
the two "great powers” who have long disputed this territory.
On the one hand we have the strangely named rationalists, who
feel that they have settled the matter once for all by calling
attention to the obvious parallels which exist between the bodily
symptoms of acute spiritual stress and the bodily symptoms of
certain forms of disease. These considerations, reinforced by those
comfortable words “auto-suggestion,” "psychosensorial hallucina-
tion” and "association neurosis” — which do but reintroduce
mystery in another and less attractive form — enable them to pity
rather than blame the peculiarities of the great contemplatives.
French psychology, in particular, revels in this sort of thing: and

*6fi



VOICES AND VISIONS


267

would, if it had its way, fill the wards of the Salpetriere with
patients from the Roman Calendar. The modem interpreter, says
Rufus Jones, finds in the stigmata of St. Francis of Assisi a point
of weakness rather than a point of strength: not “the marks of a
saint/' but “the marks of emotional and physical abnormality ." 1
This is a very moderate statement of the “rational” position, by a
writer who is in actual sympathy with certain aspects of mysticism.
Yet it may well be doubted whether that flame of living love which
could, for one dazzling instant, weld body and soul in one, was
really a point of weakness in a saint : whether Blake was quite as
mad as some of his interpreters, or the powers of St. Paul and
St. Teresa are fully explained on a basis of epilepsy or hysteria:
whether, finally, it is as scientific as it looks, to lump together all
visions and voices — from Wandering Willy to the Apocalypse of
St. John — as examples of unhealthy cerebral activity.

As against all this, the intransigeant votaries of the super-
natural seem determined to play into the hands of their foes.
They pin themselves, for no apparent reason, to the objective
reality and absolute value of visions, voices, and other experiences
which would be classed, in any other department of life, as the
harmless results of a vivid imagination: and claim as examples
of miraculous interference with “natural law” psychic phenomena
which may well be the normal if rare methods by which a certain
type of intuitive genius actualizes its perceptions of the spiritual
world.*

Materialistic piety of this kind, which would have us believe
that St. Anthony of Padua really held the Infant Christ in his
arms, and that the Holy Ghost truly told the Blessed Angela of
Foligno that He loved her better than any other woman in the
Vale of Spoleto, and she knew Him more intimately than the
Apostles themselves,^ is the best friend the “rationalists" possess.
It turns dreams into miracles and drags down the symbolic visions
of genius to the level of pious hallucination. Even the profound and
beautiful significance of St. Margaret Mary Alacoque's vision of the
Sacred Heart — a pictured expression of one of the deepest intui-
tions of the human soul, caught up to the contemplation of God's
love — has been impaired by the grossly material interpretation
which it has been forced to bear. So, too, the beautiful reveries
of Suso, the divine visitations experienced by Francis, Catherine,

1 “Studies in Mystical Religion,** p. 165. Those who wish to study the
“rationalist” argument in an extreme form are directed to Prof. Janet, “L’Auto-
matisme psychologique” and “L’Etat mentale des hysteriques,” and Prof.
Leuba, “Introduction to the Psychology of Religious Mysticism.**

1 On the difference in this respect between the “normal** and the “average,**
see Granger, “The Soul of a Christian,** p. 12.

J See St. Ang&e do Foligno, op. cit., p. 130 (English translation, p. 245I.



MYSTICISM


268

Teresa and countless other saints, have been degraded in the course
of their supposed elevation to the sphere called “supernatural”—
a process as fatal to their truth and beauty as the stuffing of birds . 1

All this, too, is done in defiance of the great mystics themselves,
who are unanimous in warning their disciples against the danger
of attributing too much importance to “visions” and “voices,”
or accepting them at their face value as messages from God.
Nevertheless, these visions and voices are such frequent accom-
paniments of the mystic life, that they cannot be ignored. The
messengers of the invisible world knock persistently at the doors
of the senses: and not only at those which we refer to hearing and
to sight. In other words, supersensual intuitions — the contact
between man’s finite being and the Infinite Being in which it is
immersed — can express themselves by means of almost any kind
of sensory automatism. Strange sweet perfumes and tastes,
physical sensations of touch, inward fires, are reported over and
over again in connection with such spiritual adventures . 2 Those
symbols under which the mystic tends to approach the Absolute
easily become objectivized, and present themselves to the con-
sciousness as parts of experience, rather than as modes of inter-
pretation. The knowledge which is obtained in such an approach
is wholly transcendental. It consists in an undifferentiated act
of the whole consciousness, in which under the spur of love life
draws near to Life. Thought, feeling, vision, touch — all are hope-
lessly inadequate to it: yet all, perhaps, may hint at that intense
perception of which they are the scattered parts. “And we shall
endlessly be all had in God,” says Julian of this supreme experi-
ence, “Him verily seeing and fully feeling, Him spiritually hearing
and Him delectably smelling and sweetly swallowing. ”3

All those so-called “hallucinations of the senses” which appear
in the history of mysticism must, then, be considered soberly,
frankly, and without prejudice in the course of our inquiry into
the psychology of man’s quest of the Real. The question for their
critics must really be this: do these automatisms, which appear
so persistently as a part of the contemplative life, represent merely

Poulain, “Les Graces d'Oraison,*' cap. xx. Farges, ‘‘Mystical Phenomena/*
and Ribet's elaborate work, “La Mystique Divine/* well represent the “super-
naturalist** position. As against the “rationalistic** theory of stigmatization
already described, one feels that this last-named writer hardly advances his own
cause when he insists on attributing equal validity (a) to the Stigmata as marks
of the Divine, ( b ) to the imprint of a toad, bat, spider “ou de tout autre objet
exprimant rabjection’* on the bodies of those who have had commerce with the
devil (tome iii. p. 482).

* Vide infra, quotations from Hilton and St. John of the Cross. Also Rolle,
“The Fire of Love,** Prologue. E Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena/* p. 15. Von
Hiigel, “The Mystical Element of Religion,** vol. i. pp. 178-181.

3 “Revelations of Divine Love,’* cap. xliii. I have restored the bold language
of the original, which is somewhat toned down in modern versions.



VOICES AND VISIONS


269

the dreams and fancies, the old digested percepts of the visionary,
objectivized and presented to his surface-mind in a concrete form ;
or, are they ever representations — symbolic, if you like — of some
fact, force, or personality, some “triumphing spiritual power/'
external to himself? Is the vision only a pictured thought, an
activity of the dream imagination: or, is it the violent effort of
the self to translate something impressed upon its deeper being,
some message received from without,* which projects this sharp
image and places it before the consciousness?

The answer seems to be that the voice or vision may be either
of these two things: and that pathology and religion have both
been over-hasty in their eagerness to snatch at these phenomena
for their own purposes. Many — perhaps most — voices do but
give the answer which the subject has already suggested to
itself; 2 many — -perhaps most — visions are the picturings of dreams
and desires, i Some are morbid hallucinations : some even symptoms
of insanity. All probably borrow their shape, as apart from
their content, from suggestions already present in the mind of
the seer . 4

But there are some, experienced by minds of great power and
richness, which are crucial for those who have them. These bring
wisdom to the simple and ignorant, sudden calm to those who were
tormented by doubts. They flood the personality with new light :
accompany conversion, or the passage from one spiritual state to
another: arrive at moments of indecision, bringing with them
authoritative commands or counsels, opposed to the inclination of
the self: confer a convinced knowledge of some department of the
spiritual life before unknown. Such visions, it is clear, belong to
another and higher plane of experience from the radiant appear-
ances of our Lady, the piteous exhibitions of the sufferings of
Christ, which swarm in the lives of the saints, and contain no
feature which is not traceable to the subject's religious enthusiasms
or previous knowledge.5 These, in the apt phrase of Godfernaux,

1 Here as elsewhere the reader will kindly recollect that all spatial language is
merely symbolic when used in connection with spiritual states.

• For instance, when Margaret Ebner, the celebrated “Friend of God/* heard
1 voice telling her that Tauier, who was the object of great veneration in the
circle to which she belonged, was the man whom God loved best, and that He
dwelt in him like melodious music (see Rufus Jones, op. cit. f p. 257).

3 “There are persons to be met with,” says St. Teresa, “and I have known them
myself, who have so feeble a brain and imagination that they think they see
whatever they are thinking about, and this is a very dangerous condition." (“El
Castillo Interior," Moradas Cuartas, cap. iii.)

« The dream-theory of vision is well and moderately stated by Pratt: “The
Religious Consciousness," cap. xviii, pp. 402 seq. But his statement ( loc . cit.)
.hat “the visions of the mystics are determined in content by their belief, and
ire due to the dream imagination working upon the mass of theological material
■vhich fills the mind" is far too absolute.

5 The book of Angela of Foligno, already cited, contains a rich series of examples



MYSTICISM


270

are but "images floating on the moving deeps of feeling," 1 not
symbolic messages from another plane of consciousness. Some test,
then, must be applied, some basis of classification discovered, if
we are to distinguish the visions and voices which seem to be symp-
toms of real transcendental activity from those which are only
due to imagination raised to the wth power, to intense reverie, or
to psychic illness. That test, I think, must be the same as that which
we shall find useful for ecstatic states; namely, their life-enhancing
quality.

Those visions and voices which are the media by which the
"seeing self" truly approaches the Absolute; which are the
formulae under which ontological perceptions are expressed; are
found by that self to be sources of helpful energy, charity, and,
courage. They infuse something new in the way of strength,
knowledge, direction; and leave it — physically, mentally, or
spiritually — -better than they found it. Those which do not owe
their inception to the contact of the soul with external reality —
in theological language, do not "come from God" — do not have
this effect. At best, they are but the results of the self's turning over
of her treasures: at worst, they are the dreams — sometimes the
diseased dreams — of an active, rich, but imperfectly controlled
subliminal consciousness.

Since it is implicit in the make-up of the mystical temperament,
that the subliminal consciousness should be active and rich — and
since the unstable nervous organization which goes with it renders
it liable to illness and exhaustion — it is not surprising to find that
the visionary experience even of the greatest mystics is mixed in
type. Once automatism has established itself in a person, it may
as easily become the expression of folly as of wisdom. In the
moments when inspiration has ebbed, old forgotten superstitions
may take its place. When Julian of Norwich in her illness saw the
"horrible showing" of the Fiend, red with black freckles, which
clutched at her throat with its paws: 3 when St. Teresa was visited
by Satan, who left a smell of brimstone behind, or when she saw
him sitting on the top of her breviary and dislodged him by the
use of holy water :3 it is surely reasonable to allow that we are in
the presence of visions which tend towards the psychopathic type,
and which are expressive of little else but an exhaustion and tempo-
rary loss of balance on the subject's part, which allowed her intense
consciousness of the reality of evil to assume a concrete form. 4

* “Surla psychologie du Mysticisme” (Revue Philosophique, February, 1902).

* “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lxvi.

J Vida, cap. xxxi. §§ 5 and 10.

4 Thus too in the case of St, Catherine of Siena, the intense spiritual strain of
that three years' retreat which I have already described (supra, Pt. II, Cap. I.)
showed itself towards the end of the period by a change in the character of her



VOICES AND VISIONS 271

Because we allow this, however, it does not follow that all the
visionary experience of such a subject is morbid: any more than
“(Edipus Tyrannus” invalidates “Prometheus Unbound/' or
occasional attacks of dyspepsia invalidate the whole process of
nutrition. The perceptive power and creative genius of mystics,
as of other great artists, sometimes goes astray. That visions
or voices should sometimes be the means by which the soul
consciously assimilates the nourishment it needs, is conceivable : it
is surely also conceivable that by the same means it may present
to the surface-intelligence things which are productive of unhealthy
rather than of healthy reactions.

If we would cease, once for all, to regard visions and voices as
objective, and be content to see in them forms of symbolic expres-
sion, ways in which the subconscious activity of the spiritual self
reaches the surface-mind, many of the disharmonies noticeable in
visionary experience, which have teased the devout, and delighted
the agnostic, would fade away. Visionary experience is — or at
least may be —the outward sign of a real experience. It is a picture
which the mind constructs, it is true, from raw materials already
at its disposal : as the artist constructs his picture with canvas and
paint. But, as the artist's paint and canvas picture is the fruit,
not merely of contact between brush and canvas, but also of a
more vital contact between his creative genius and visible beauty
or truth ; so too we may see in vision, where the subject is a mystic,
the fruit of a more mysterious contact between the visionary and
a transcendental beauty or truth. Such a vision, that is to say, is
the “accident" which represents and enshrines a “substance"
unseen: the paint and canvas picture which tries to show the
surface consciousness that ineffable sight, that ecstatic percep-
tion of good or evil — for neither extreme has the monopoly — to
which the deeper, more real soul has attained. The transcendental
powers take for this purpose such material as they can find amongst
the hoarded beliefs and memories of the self. 1 Hence Plotinus sees
the Celestial Venus, Suso the Eternal Wisdom, St. Teresa the

visions. These, which had previously been wholly concerned with intuitions of the
good and beautiful, now took on an evil aspect and greatly distressed her (Vita
(Acta SS.), i. xi. i; see E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena," p. 20). We are
obliged to agree with Pratt that such visions as these are “pathological phenomena,
quite on a level with other hallucinations. “(“The Religious Consciousness," p. 405.)

1 An excellent example of such appropriation of material is related without
comment by Huysmans (“Sainte Lydwine de Schiedam," p. 258): “Lydwine
found again in heaven those forms of adoration, those ceremonial practices of the
divine office, which she had known here below during her years of health. The
Church Militant had been, in fact, initiated by the inspiration of its apostles, its
popes, and its saints into the liturgic joys of Paradise." In this same vision, which
occurred on Christmas Eve, when the hour of the Nativity was rung from the
belfries of heaven, the Divine Child appeared on His Mother’s knee: just as the
creche is exhibited in Catholic churches the moment that Christmas has dawned.



MYSTICISM


272

Humanity of Christ, Blake the strange personages of hi *j prophetic
books: others more obviously symbolic objects. St. Ignatius
Loyola, for instance, in a moment of lucidity, "saw the most
Holy Trinity as it were under the likeness of a triple plectrum or
of three spinet keys” and on another occasion "the Blessed Virgin
without distinction of members.” 1

Visions and voices, then, may stand in the same relation to the
mystic as pictures, poems, and musical compositions stand to the
great painter, poet, musician. They are the artistic expressions
and creative results (a) of thought, (6) of intuition, ( c ) of direct
perception. All would be ready to acknowledge how conventional
and imperfect of necessity are those transcripts of perceived
Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which we owe to artistic genius:
how unequal is their relation to reality. But this is not to say that
they are valueless or absurd. So too with the mystic, whose pro-
ceedings in this respect are closer to those of the artist than is
generally acknowledged. In both types there is a constant and
involuntary work of translation going on, by which Reality is
interpreted in the terms of appearance. In both, a peculiar mental
make-up conduces to this result.

In artistic subjects, the state of reverie tends easily to a visionary
character: thought becomes pictorial, auditory or rhythmic as
the case may be. Concrete images, balanced harmonies, elusive
yet recognizable, surge up mysteriously without the intervention
of the will, and place themselves before the mind. Thus the painter
really sees his unpainted picture, the novelist hears the conversa-
tion of his characters, the poet receives his cadences ready-made,
the musician listens to a veritable music which "pipes to the
spirit ditties of no tone.” In the mystic, the same type of activity
constantly appears. Profound meditation takes a pictorial or
dramatic form. Apt symbols which suggest themselves to his
imagination become objectivized. The message that he longs for
is heard within his mind. Hence, those "interior voices” and
"imaginary visions” which are sometimes — as in Suso — indis-
tinguishable from the ordinary accompaniments of intense artistic
activity.

Where, however, artistic "automatisms” spend themselves
upon the artist's work, mystical "automatisms” in their highest
forms have to do with that transformation of personality which
is the essence of the mystic life. They are media by which the self
receives spiritual stimulus; is reproved, consoled, encouraged and
guided on its upward way. Moreover, they are frequently co-
ordinated. The voice and the vision go together: corroborate one
another, and "work out right” in relation to the life of the self.

> Testament, cap. iii.



VOICES AND VISIONS 273

Thus St. Catherine of Siena's “mystic marriage" was preceded
by a voice, which ever said in answer to her prayers, “I will
espouse thee to Myself in faith"; and the vision in which that
union was consummated was again initiated by a voice saying, “I
will this day celebrate solemnly with thee the feast of the betrothal
of thy soul, and even as I promised 1 will espouse thee to Myself in
faith." 1 “Such automatisms as these," says Delacroix, “are by 110
means scattered and incoherent. They are systematic and progres-
sive: they are governed by an interior aim; they have, above all,
a teleological character. They indicate the continuous intervention
of a being at once wiser and more powerful than the ordinary
character and reason; they are the realization, in visual and auditory
images, of a secret and permanent personality of a superior type
to the conscious personality. They are its voice, the exterior pro-
jection of its life. They translate to the conscious personality the
suggestions of the subconscious: and they permit the continuous
penetration of the conscious personality by these deeper activities.
They establish a communication between these two planes of
existence, and, by their imperative nature, they tend to make the
inferior subordinate to the superior."*

Audition

The simplest and as a rule the first way in which automatism
shows itself, is in “voices" or auditions. The mystic becomes
aware of Something which speaks to him either clearly or implicitly,
giving him abrupt and unexpected orders and encouragements.
The reality of his contact with the Divine Life is thus brought
home to him by a device with which the accidents of human
intercourse have made him familiar. His subliminal mind, open
as it now is to transcendental impressions, “at one with the
Absolute," irradiated by the Uncreated Light, but still dissociated
from the surface intelligence which it is slowly educating, seems
to that surface self like another being. Hence its messages are
often heard, literally, as Voices: either (1) the “immediate" or
inarticulate voice, which the auditive mystic knows so well, but
finds it so difficult to define; (2) the distinct interior voice, per-
fectly articulate, but recognized as speaking only within the mind ;
(3) by a hallucination which we have all experienced in dream or
reverie, the exterior voice, which appears to be speaking externally
to the subject and to be heard by the outward ear. This, the
traditional classification of auditions, also answers exactly to
die three main types of vision — (1) intellectual, (2) imaginary,
(3) corporeal.

1 E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena/' p. 25.

• Delacroix, “Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 1 14.



MYSTICISM


274

Of these three kinds of voices the mystics are unanimous in
their opinion that the first and least “marvellous" is by far the
best: belonging indeed to an entirely different plane of conscious-
ness from the uttered interior or exterior “word," which few of
the great contemplatives are willing to accept without scrutiny
as a “message from God." The articulate word is inevitably subject
to some degree of illusion, even at the best; since so far as it
possesses transcendental content it represents the translation of
the simultaneous into successive speech.

“Let Thy good Spirit enter my heart and there be heard with-
out utterance, and without the sound of words speak all truth,"
says a prayer attributed to St. Ambrose, 1 exactly describing the
function of these unmediated or “intellectual words." Dynamic
messages of this kind, imperative intuitions which elude the con-
taining formula of speech, are invariably attributed by the self
to the direct action of the Divine. They are indeed their own
guarantee, bringing with them an infusion of new knowledge or
new life. Their character is less that of messages than of actual
“invasions" from beyond the threshold; transcending succession
and conveying “all at once" fresh truth or certitude. “Intellectual
words," in fact, are a form of inspiration. Eternal truth bursts in
upon the temporally-conditioned human mind. Thus St. Hilde-
garde tells us that each of her great revelations was received “in
an instant" and St. Bridget of Sweden that the whole substance
of her 5th Book was given “in a flash." 2

“Distinct interior words," on the other hand, lack this character
of simultaneity. Nor are they invariably authoritative for those
who hear them. St. Teresa, whose brilliant self-criticisms are our
best source of information on mystical auditions, considers that,
though they often “come from God," they are not due to direct
contact with the Divine ; and agrees with all the great mystics on
the need of subjecting them to criticism. She hesitated long before
obeying the Voice which told her to leave the Convent of the
Incarnation and make the first foundation of her Reform. Genuine
locutions may however be distinguished from those “words’
which result merely from voluntary activity of the imagination
as much by the sense of certitude, peace and interior joy which
they produce, as by the fact that they force themselves upon the
attention in spite of its resistance, and bring with them knowledge
which was not previously within the field of consciousness. That
is to say. they are really automatic presentations of the result of
mystic intuition, not mere rearrangements of the constituents


1 Missale Romanum. Praeparatio ad Missam; Die Dominica.

• Given in Poulain: "Les Gr&ces d’Oraison/* p. 318.



VOICES AND VISIONS 275

of thought. 1 Hence they bring to the surface-self new conviction
or material : have a positive value for life.

Those purely self-created locutions, or rearrangements of
thought “which the mind self-recollected forms and fashions
within itself' — often difficult to distinguish from true automatic
audition — are called by Philip of the Trinity, St. John of the
Cross and other mystical theologians “successive words." They feel
it to be of the highest importance that the contemplative should
learn to distinguish such hallucinations from real transcendental
perceptions presented in auditive form.

“I am really terrified," says St. John of the Cross, with his
customary blunt common sense, “by what passes among us in
these days. Anyone who has barely begun to meditate, if he
becomes conscious of words of this kind during his self-recollection,
pronounces them forthwith to be the work of God; 2 and, convinced
that they are so, goes about proclaiming ‘God has told me this/ or
T have had that answer from God/ But all is illusion and fancy;
such an one has only been speaking to himself. Besides, the
desire for these words, and the attention they give to them, end
by persuading men that all the observations which they address
to themselves are the responses of God." 2 These are the words of
one who was at once the sanest of saints and the most penetrat-
ing of psychologists : words which our modem unruly amateurs
of the “subconscious" might well take to heart.

True auditions are usually heard when the mind is in a state
of deep absorption without conscious thought: that is to say, at
the most favourable of all moments for contact with the trans-
cendental world. They translate into articulate language some
aspect of that ineffable apprehension of Reality which the con-
templative enjoys: crystallize those clairvoyant intuitions,
those prophetic hints which surge in on him so soon as he lays
himself open to the inliuence of the supra-sensible. Sometimes,
however, mystical intuition takes the form of a sudden and un-
governable uprush of knowledge from the deeps of personality.
Then, auditions may break in upon the normal activities of the
self with startling abruptness. It is in such cases that their objec-
tive and uncontrollable character is most sharply felt. However
they may appear, they are, says St. Teresa, “very distinctly
formed; but by the bodily ear they are not heard. They are,
however, much more clearly understood than if they were heard
by the ear. It is impossible not to understand them, whatever
resistance we may offer. . . . The words formed by the understand-
ing effect nothing, but when our Lord speaks, it is at once word

1 “El Castillo Interior/' Moradas Sextas, cap. iii.

» “Subida del Monte Carmelo/’ 1. ii. cap. xxvii.



MYSTICISM


276

and work . . . . The human locution [i.e., the work of imagination
is as something we cannot well make out, as if we were half asleep
but the divine locution is a voice so clear, that not a syllable of its
utterance is lost. It may occur, too, when the understanding and
the soul are so troubled and distracted that they cannot form ont
sentence correctly: and yet grand sentences, perfectly arranged
such as the soul in its most recollected state never could have
formed, are uttered : and at the first word, as I have said, change
it utterly/' 1

St. Teresa's mystic life was governed by voices: her active
career as a foundress was much guided by them. They advised
her in small things as in great. Often they interfered with hei
plans, ran counter to her personal judgment, forbade a foundation
on which she was set, or commanded one which appeared impru-
dent or impossible. They concerned themselves with journeys,
with the purchase of houses; they warned her of coming events. 3
As her mystical life matured, Teresa seems to have learned tc
discriminate those locutions on which action should property
be based. She seldom resisted them, though it constantly happened
that the action on which they insisted seemed the height of folly
and though they frequently involved her in hardships and diffi-
culties, she never had cause to regret this reliance upon decrees
which she regarded as coming direct from God, and which certainty
did emanate from a life greater than her own. So too St. Hildegarde
when she prefaced her prophecies and denunciations by "Thu*
saith the Living Light'' was not making use of a poetic metaphor
She lived under the direction of a Power which was precise and
articulate in its communications, and at her peril disobeyed it?
commands.

So far from mere vague intuitions are the "distinct interioi
words" which the mystic hears within his mind, that Suso is able
to state that the hundred meditations on the Passion thus revealed
to him were spoken in German and not in Latin. 3 St. Teresa's owr
auditions were all of this interior kind — some "distinct" and some
"substantial" or inarticulate — as her corresponding visions were
nearly all of the "intellectual" or "imaginary" sort : that is to say
she was not subject to sensible hallucination. Often, however, the
boundary is overpassed, and the locution seems to be heard b>
the mystic's outward ear; as in the case of those voices whicl
guided the destinies of St. Joan of Arc, or the Figure upon the
Cross which spoke to St. Francis of Assisi. We then have the

* Vida, cap. xxv. §§ 2, 5, 6. See also for a detailed discussion of all forms ol
auditions St. John of the Cross, op, cit., 1. ii. caps, xxviii. to xxxi.

* “El Libro de las Fundaciones" is full of instances.

s Suso, “Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit,” Prologue.



VOICES AND VISIONS 277

fiird form — “exterior words” — which the mystics for the most part
rgard with suspicion and dislike.

Sometimes audition assumes a musical rather than a verbal
haracter: a form of perception which probably corresponds to
be temperamental bias of the self, the ordered sweetness of
)ivine Harmony striking responsive chords in the music-loving
oul. The lives of St. Francis of Assisi, St. Catherine of Siena, and
vichard Rolle provide obvious instances of this: 1 but Suso, in
diom automatism assumed its richest and most varied forms,
L as also given in his autobiography some characteristic examples.

“One day . . . whilst the Servitor was still at rest, he heard
dthin himself a gracious melody by which his heart was greatly
noved. And at the moment of the rising of the morning star, a
cep sweet voice sang within him these words, Stella Maria mavis ,
odie processit ad ortiini . That is to say, Mary Star of the Sea is
lsen to-day. And this song which he heard was so spiritual and

0 sweet, that his soul was transported by it and he too began to
111 g joyously. . . . And one day — it was in carnival time — the
•ervitor had continued his prayers until the moment when the
mgle of the watch announced the dawn. Therefore he said to
imself, Rest for an instant, before you salute the shining Morning
tar. And, whilst that his senses were at rest, behold! angelic
pirits began to sing the fair Respond: ‘ llluminare , illuminare ,
r erusalemY And this song was echoed with a marvellous sweetness

1 the deeps of his soul. And when the angels had sung for some
ime his soul overflowed with joy: and his feeble body being
mable to support such happiness, burning tears escaped from
lis eyes.” 3

Closely connected on the one hand with the phenomena of
utomatic words, on the other with those of prophecy and inspira-
ion, is the prevalence in mystical literature of revelations which
ake the form of dialogue: intimate colloquies between Divine
Reality and the Soul. The Revelations of Julian of Norwich and
>t. Catherine of Siena, and many of those of the Blessed Angela of
'oligno and of the modern mystic Lucie-Christine appear to have
>een received by them in this way. We seem as we read them to
>e present at veritable outpourings of the Divine Mind, crystallized
ito verbal form on their way through the human consciousness.
Ve feel on the one hand a “one-ness with the Absolute” on the
►art of the mystic which has made her really, for the time being,
he “voice of God”: whilst on the other we recognize in her the
►ersistence of the individual — exalted, but not yet wholly absorbed

1 “Fioretti,” “Delle Istimate,” 2.; E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,” p. 15;
tolle, “The Fire of Love,” bk. i. cap. xvi., and other places.

* Leben, cap. vi.



278 MYSTICISM

in the Divine — whose questions, here and there, break in upon
the revelation which is mediated by the deeper mind.

Duologues of this sort are reported with every appearance of
realism and good faith by Suso, Tauler, Mechthild of Magdeburg,
Angela of Foligno, St. Teresa, and countless other mystics. The
third book of the “Imitation of Christ" contains some conspicu-
ously beautiful examples, which may or may not be due to literary
artifice. The self, wholly absorbed by the intimate sense of divine
companionship, receives its messages in the form of “distinct
interior words"; as of an alien voice, speaking within the mind
with such an accent of validity and spontaneity as to leave no
room for doubt as to its character. Often, as in Julian's Revelations,
the discourses of the “Divine Voice," its replies to the eager
questions of the self, are illustrated by imaginary visions. Since,
these dialogues are, on the whole, more commonly experienced
in the illuminative than the unitive way, that self — retaining a
clear consciousness of its own separateness, and recognizing the
Voice as personal and distinct from its own soul — naturally enters
into a communion which has an almost conversational character,
replies to questions or asks others in its turn : and in this dramatic
style the content of its intuitions is gradually expressed. We have,
then an extreme form of that dissociation which we all experience
in a slight degree when we “argue with ourselves." But in this
case one of the speakers is become the instrument of a power other
than itself, and communicates to the mind new wisdom and
new life.

The peculiar rhythmical language of genuine mystic dialogue
of this kind — for often enough, as in Suso's “Book oi the Eternal
Wisdom," it is deliberately adopted as a literary device — is an
indication of its automatic character. 1 Expression, once it is
divorced from the critical action of the surface intelligence, always
tends to assume a dithyrambic form. Measure and colour, exalta-
tion of language, here take a more important place than the
analytic intellect will generally permit. This feature is easily
observable in prophecy, and in automatic writing. It forms an
interesting link with poetry ; which — in so far as it is genuine and
spontaneous — is largely the result of subliminal activity. Life,
which eludes language, can yet — we know not why — be communi-
cated by rhythm : and the mystic fact is above all else the com-
munication of a greater Life. Hence we must not take it amiss if
the voice of the Absolute, as translated to us by those mystics who
are alone capable of hearing it, often seems to adopt the “grand
manner."


* Compare p. 80.



VOICES AND VISIONS


279


Vision

We pass from the effort of man's deeper mind to speak truth
o his surface-intelligence, to the effort of the same mysterious
)ower to show truth: in psychological language, from auditory to
/isual automatism. "Vision," that vaguest of words, has been used
)y the friends and enemies of the mystics to describe or obscure a
vide range of experience : from formless intuition, through crude
>ptical hallucination, to the voluntary visualizations common to
he artistic mind. In it we must include that personal and secret
/ision which is the lover's glimpse of Perfect Love, and the great
Dictures seen by clairvoyant prophets acting in their capacity as
iyes of the race. Of these, the two main classes of vision, says
Denis the Carthusian, the first kind are to be concealed, the second
leclared. The first are more truly mystic, the second prophetic:
xit excluding prophetic vision from our inquiry, a sufficient
/aricty of experience remains in the purely mystical class. St.
Teresa's fluid and formless apprehension of the Trinity, her
:oncrete visions of Christ, Mechthild of Magdeburg's poetic dreams,
■mso's sharply pictured allegories, even Blake's soul of a flea, all
:ome under this head.

Since no one can know what it is really like to have a vision but
he visionaries themselves, it will be interesting to see what they
lave to say on this subject : and notice the respects in which these
ielf-criticisms agree with the conclusions of psychology. We
“orget, whilst arguing on these matters, that it is as impossible for
hose who have never heard a voice or seen a vision to discuss these
jxperiences with intelligence, as it is for stay-at-homes to discuss
.he passions of the battle-field on the material supplied by war
;orrespondents. No second-hand account can truly report the
sxperience of the person whose perceptions or illusions present
hemselves in this form. "We cannot," says Recejac, "remind
mrselves too often that the mystic act consists in relations
between the Absolute and Freedom which are incommunicable.
We shall never know, for instance, what was the state of conscious-
less of some citizen of the antique world when he gave himself
vithout reserve to the inspiring suggestions of the Sacred Fire, or
;ome other image which evoked the infinite ." 1 Neither shall we
iver know, unless it be our good fortune to attain to it, the secret
)f that consciousness which is able to apprehend the Transcendent
n visionary terms.

The first thing we notice when we come to this inquiry is that
.he mystics are all but unanimous in their refusal to attribute

* “Les Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique,” p. 149.



280 MYSTICISM

importance to any kind of visionary experience. 1 The natural
timidity and stern self-criticism with which they approach audi-
tions is here greatly increased: and this, if taken to heart, might
well give pause to their more extreme enemies and defenders
“If it be so/’ says Hilton of automatisms in general, “that thou
see any manner of light or brightness with thy bodily eye or in
imagining, other than every man may see ; or if thou hear any mem
sounding with thy ear, or in thy mouth any sweet sudden savour
other than of kind [nature], or any heat in thy breast as it were
fire, or any manner delight in any part of thy body, or if a spirit
bodily appeareth to thee as it were an angel, for to comfort thee
and kiss thee, or any such feeling, which thou wost well that it
cometh not of thyself, nor of no bodily creature, be then wary in that
time or soon after, and wisely behold the stirrings of thy heart,
If thou be stirred because of that liking that thou feelcst for to
draw out thine heart . . . from the inward desire of virtues and of
ghostly knowing and feeling of God, for to set the sight of thy
heart and thine affection, thy delight and thy rest, principally
therein, weening that bodily feeling should be a part of heavenly
joy and of angels' bliss . . . this feeling is suspect and of the enemy.
And therefore, though it be never so liking and wonderful, refuse
it, and assent not thereto." 2 Nearly every master of the contem-
plative life has spoken to the same effect: none, perhaps, more
strongly than that stem and virile lover of the invisible, St. John
of the Cross, who was relentless in hunting down even the most
“spiritual" illusions, eager to purge mind as well as morals of all
taint of the unreal.

“It often happens," he says “that spiritual men are affected
supernaturally by sensible representations and objects. They
sometimes see the forms and figures of those of another life, saint.*-
or angels, good and evil, or certain extraordinary lights and bright-
ness. They hear strange words, sometimes seeing those who uttei
them and sometimes not. They have a sensible perception at
times of most sweet odours, without knowing whence they proceed,
.... Still, though all these experiences may happen to the bodily
senses in the way of God, we must never delight in them nor
encourage them; yea, rather we must fly from them, without
seeking to know whether their origin be good or evil. For, inasmuch
as they are exterior and physical, the less is the likelihood oi
their being from God. That which properly and generally comes

1 Here the exception which proves the rule is Blake. But Blake's visions
differed in some important respects from those of his fellow-mystics. They seem
to have been “corporeal," not “imaginary" in type, and were regarded by him
as actual perceptions of that “real and eternal world" in which he held that it
was man's privilege to dwell.

* “The Scale of Perfection," bk. i. cap. xi.



VOICES AND VISIONS 281

from God is a purely spiritual communication ; wherein there is
greater security and profit for the soul than through the senses,
wherein there is usually much danger and delusion, because the
bodily sense decides upon, and judges, spiritual things, thinking
them to be what itself feels them to be, when in reality they are
as different as body and soul, sensuality and reason.” 1

Again, “in the high state of the union of love, God docs not
communicate Himself to the soul under the disguise of imaginary
visions, similitudes or figures, neither is there place for such, but
mouth to mouth. . . . The soul, therefore, that will ascend to this
perfect union with God, must be careful not to lean upon imaginary
visions, forms, figures, and particular intelligible objects, for these
things can never serve as proportionate or proximate means
towards so great an end ; yea, rather they are an obstacle in the
way, and therefore to be guarded against and rejected.” 1

So, too, St. Teresa. “In such matters as these there is always
cause to fear illusion ; until we are assured that they truly proceed
from the Spirit of God. Therefore at the beginning it is always
best to resist them. If it is indeed God who is acting, the soul
will but progress still more quickly, for the trial will favour her
advancement. 3

Vision, then, is recognized by the true contemplative as at best
an imperfect, oblique, and untrustworthy method of apprehension :
it is ungovernable, capricious, liable to deception, and the greater
its accompanying hallucination the more suspicious it becomes.
All, however, distinguish different classes of visionary experience;
and differentiate sharply between the value of the vision which is
“felt” rather than seen, and the true optical hallucination which is
perceived, exterior to the subject, by the physical sight.

We may trace in visions, as in voices — for these, from the psycho-
logist's point of view, are strictly parallel phenomena — a progres-
sive extemalization on the self's part of those concepts or intui-
tions which form the bases of all automatic states. Three main
groups have been distinguished by the mystics, and illustrated
again and again from their experiences. These are (1) Intellectual,
(2) Imaginary, and (3) Corporeal vision: answering to (1) Sub-
stantial or inarticulate, (2) Interior and distinct, (3) Exterior words.
With the first two we must now concern ourselves. As to corporeal
vision, it has few peculiarities of interest to the student of pure
mysticism. Like the “exterior word” it is little else than a more or
less uncontrolled extemalization of inward memories, thoughts, or

» “Subida del Monte Carmelo,*’ 1. ii. cap. xi. The whole chapter should be
read in this connection.

* “Subida del Monte Carmelo/* 1. ii. cap. xvi.

s “El Castillo Interior/* Moradas Sextas, cap. iii.



282


MYSTICISM


intuitions — even of some pious picture which has become im-
printed on the mind — which may, in some subjects, attain the
dimensions of true sensorial hallucination.

(i) Intellectual Vision. — The "intellectual vision," like the
"substantial word” as described to us by the mystics, is of so
elusive, spiritual, and formless a kind that it is hard to distinguish
it from that act of pure contemplation in which it often takes its
rise. These moods and apprehensions of the soul are so closely
linked together — the names applied to them are so often little more
than the struggles of different individuals to describe by analogy
an experience which is one — that we risk a loss of accuracy the
moment that classification begins. The intellectual vision, so far
as we can understand it, seems to be a something not sought but
put before the mind, and seen or perceived by the whole self by *
means of a sense which is neither sight nor feeling, but partakes
of the character of both. It is intimate but indescribable : definite,
yet impossible to define. There is a passage in the Revelations of
Angela of Foligno which vividly describes the sequence of illu-
minated states leading up to and including the intuitions which
constitute the substance of this "formless vision” and its comple-
ment the "formless word" : and this does far more towards making 1
us realize its nature than the most painstaking psychological analysis
could ever do. "At times God comes into the soul without being
called; and He instills into her fire, love, and sometimes sweetness;
and the soul believes this comes from God, and delights therein. But
she does not yet know, or see, that He dwells in her; she perceives
His grace, in which she delights. And again God comes to the
soul, and speaks to her words full of sweetness, in which she has
much joy, and she feels Him. This feeling of God gives her the
greatest delight ; but even here a certain doubt remains ; for the
soul has not the certitude that God is in her. . . . And beyond this
the soul receives the gift of seeing God. God says to her, ‘Behold 1
Me!' and the soul sees Him dwelling within her. She sees Him
more clearly than one man sees another. For the eyes of the soul
behold a plenitude of which I cannot speak: a plenitude which is not
bodily but spiritual , of which I can say nothing. And the soul
rejoices in that sight with an ineffable joy ; and this is the manifest
and certain sign that God indeed dwells in her. And the soul can
behold nothing else, because this fulfils her in an unspeakable
manner. This beholding, whereby the soul can behold no other
thing, is so profound that it grieves me that I can say nothing
of it It is not a thing which can be touched or imagined, for it is
ineffable .” 1

* St. Angfcle de Foligno, “Livre de l'ExpSrience des Vrais Fidfcles,” pp. 170 seq.
(English translation, p. 24).



VOICES AND VISIONS


283

Intellectual vision, then, seems to be closely connected with that
'‘consciousness of the Presence of God” which we discussed in the
last chapter: though the contemplatives themselves declare that
it differs from it . 1 It is distinguished apparently from that more or
less diffused consciousness of Divine Immanence by the fact that,
although unseen of the eyes, it can be exactly located in space.
The mystic’s general awareness of the divine is here focussed upon
one point — a point to which some theological or symbolic character
is at once attached. The result is a sense of presence so concrete,
defined, and sharply personal that, as St. Teresa says, it carries
more conviction than bodily sight. This invisible presence is
generally identified by Christian mystics rather with the Humanity
of Christ than with the unconditioned Absolute. “In the prayer
, of union and of quiet,” says St. Teresa, “certain inflowings of
the Godhead are present ; but in the vision , the Sacred Humanity
also, together with them, is pleased to be our companion and to
do us good .” 2 “A person who is in no way expecting such a favour,”
she says again, “nor has ever imagined herself worthy of
receiving it, is conscious that Jesus Christ stands by her side;
although she sees Him neither with the eyes of the body nor of
r the soul. This is called an intellectual vision; I cannot tell why.
This vision, unlike an imaginary one, does not pass away quickly
but lasts for several days and even sometimes for more than a
year. . . . Although I believe some of the former favours are more
sublime, yet this brings with it a special knowledge of God ; a most
tender love for Him results from being constantly in His company,
while the desire of devoting one’s whole being to His service is
more fervent than any hitherto described. The conscience is
greatly purified by the knowledge of His perpetual and near
presence, for although we know that God sees all we do, yet
nature inclines us to grow careless and forgetful of it. This is
impossible here, since our Lord makes the soul conscious that He
is close at hand, ”3

In such a state — to which the term “vision” is barely applicable
— it will be observed that consciousness is at its highest, and
hallucination at its lowest point. Nothing is seen, even with the
eyes of the mind: as, in the parallel case of the “substantial word,”
nothing is said. It is pure apprehension : in the one case of Person-
ality, in the other of knowledge. “The immediate vision of the
naked Godhead,” says Suso of this, “is without doubt the pure
truth: a vision is to be esteemed the more noble the more

1 “It is not like that presence of God which is frequently felt . . . this is a great
grace . . . but it is not vision" (St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxvii. § 6).

* Op. cit ., loc. cit .

s St. Teresa. “El Castillo Interior," Moradas Sextas, cap. viii.



284 MYSTICISM

intellectual it is, the more it is stripped of all image and ap-
proaches the state of pure contemplation/' 1
We owe to St. Teresa our finest first-hand account of this strange
condition of “awareness." It came upon her abruptly, after a
period of psychic distress, and seemed to her to be an answer to her
unwilling prayers that she might be “led" by some other way
than that of “interior words"; which were, in the opinion of her
director, “so suspicious." “I could not force myself," she says, “to
desire the change, nor believe that I was under the influence of
Satan. Though I was doing all I could to believe the one and to
desire the other, it was not in my power to do so." She resolved
this divided state by making an act of total surrender to the will
of God : and it seems to have been as the result of this release of
stress, this willing receptivity, that the new form of automatism
suddenly developed itself, reinforcing and justifying her auditions,
and bringing peace and assurance to the distracted surface-self.

"At the end of two years spent in prayer by myself and others
for this end, namely, that our Lord would either lead me by another
way, or show the truth of this — for now the locutions of our Lord
were extremely frequent — this happened to me. I was in prayer
one day — it was the feast of the glorious St. Peter — when I saw
Christ close by me, or, to speak more correctly, felt Him; for I
saw nothing with the eyes of the body, nothing with the eyes of
the soul. He seemed to me to be close beside me; and I saw, too,
as I believe, that it was He who was speaking to me. As I was
utterly ignorant that such a vision was possible, I was extremely
afraid at first, and did nothing but w T eep; however, when He spoke
to me but one word to reassure me, I recovered myself, and was,
as usual, calm and comforted, without any fear whatever. Jesus
Christ seemed to be by my side continually. As the vision
was not imaginary, I saw no form, but I had a most distinct feeling
that He was always on my right hand, a witness of all I did; and
never at any time, if I was but slightly recollected, or not too much
distracted, could I be ignorant of His near presence. I went at
once to my confessor in great distress, to tell him of it. He asked
in what form I saw our Lord. I told him I saw no form. He then
said: ‘How did you know that it was Christ?' I replied that I did
not know how I knew it ; but I could not help knowing that He
was close beside me . . . there are no words whereby to explain —
— at least, none for us women, who know so little; learned men
can explain it better.

“For if I say that I see Him neither with the eyes of the body
nor those of the soul — because it was not an imaginary vision —
how is it that I can understand and maintain that He stands

1 Leben, cap. liv.



VOICES AND VISIONS 285

beside me, and be more certain of it than if I saw Him} If it be sup-
posed that it is as if a person were blind, or in the dark, and there-
fore unable to see another who is close to him, the comparison is
not exact. There is a certain likelihood about it, however, but not
much, because the other senses tell him who is blind of that
presence: he hears the other speak or move, or he touches him;
but in these visions there is nothing like this. The darkness is not
felt; only He renders Himself present to the soul by a certain
knowledge of Himself which is more clear than the sun. I do not
mean that we now see either a sun or any other brightness, only
that there is a light not seen, which illumines the understanding,
so that the soul may have the fruition of so great a good. This
vision brings with it great blessings." 1

(2) In Imaginary Vision , as in "interior words," there is again
no sensorial hallucination. The self sees sharply and clearly, it is
true: but is perfectly aware that it does so in virtue of its most
precious organ — "that inward eye which is the bliss of solitude/' 1
Imaginary Vision is the spontaneous and automatic activity of a
power which all artists, all imaginative people, possess. So far as
the machinery employed in it is concerned, there is little real
difference except in degree between Wordsworth's imaginary
vision of the "dancing daf fodils" and Suso’s of the dancing angels,
who "though they leapt very high in the dance, did so without any
lack of gracefulness ."3 Both are admirable examples of "passive
imaginary vision": though in the first the visionary is aware
that the picture seen is supplied by memory, whilst in the second
it arises spontaneously like a dream from the subliminal region,
and contains elements which may be attributed to love, belief,
and direct intuition of truth.

Such passive imaginary vision — by which I mean spontaneous
mental pictures at which the self looks, but in the action of which
it does not participate — takes in the mystics two main forms:
{a) symbolic, ( b ) personal*.

(a) In the symbolic form there is no mental deception : the self
is aware that it is being shown truth "under an image." Many of
the visions of the great prophetic mystics — e.g ., St. Hildegarde —
have so elaborate a symbolic character, that much intellectual
activity is involved in their interpretation. This interpretation is

1 St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxvii. §§ 2-5.

* “For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood.

They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude:

And then my heart with pleasure fills.

And dances with the daffodils.*'

Wordsworth, “The Daffodils.’*


s Leben, cap. vii.



286


MYSTICISM


sometimes “given” with the vision. Rulman Merswin's “Vision
of Nine Rocks" is thus described to us as being seen by him in a
sharp picture, the allegorical meaning of which was simultaneously
presented to his mind. In Suso's life these symbolic visions abound :
he seems to have lived always on the verge of such a world of
imagination, and to have imbibed truth most easily in this form.
Thus: “It happened one morning that the Servitor saw in a
vision that he was surrounded by a troop of heavenly spirits. He
therefore asked one of the most radiant amongst these Princes
of the Sky to show him how God dwelt in his soul. The angel said
to him, 'Do but fix your eyes joyously upon yourself, and watch
how God plays the game of love within your loving soul/ And he
looked quickly, and saw that his body in the region of his heart
was pure and transparent like crystal: and he saw the Divine
Wisdom peacefully enthroned in the midst of his heart, and she
was fair to look upon. And by her side was the soul of the Servitor,
full of heavenly desires; resting lovingly upon the bosom of God,
Who had embraced it, and pressed it to His Heart. And it remained
altogether absorbed and inebriated with love in the arms of God
its well-beloved .” 1

In such a vision as this, we see the mystic's passion for the
Absolute, his intuition of Its presence in his soul, combining with
material supplied by a poetic imagination, and expressing itself
in an allegorical form. It is really a visualized poem, inspired by
a direct contact with truth. Of the same kind are many of those
reconstructions of Eternity in which mystics and seers of the
transcendent and outgoing type actualized their profound appre-
hensions of reality. In such experiences, as Beatrice told Dante
when he saw the great vision of the River of Light, the thing seen
is the shadowy presentation of a transcendent Reality which the
self is not yet strong enough to see.

"E vidi lume in forma di riviera

fulvido di fulgore, intra due rive
dipinte di mirabil primavera.

Di tal fiumana uscian faville vive,

e d’ ogni parte si mettean nei fiori,
quasi rubin che oro circonscrive.

Poi, come inebriate dagli odori,

riprofondavan s£ nel miro gurge,
e, s'una entrava, un’ altra n’ uscia fuori.”

• . . . .

"il sol degli occhi miei
anco soggiunse : II fiume, e li topazii

ch’ entrano ed escono, e il rider dell’ erbe
son di lor vero ombriferi prefazii.


1 Suso, Leben, cap. vi.


287


VOICES AND VISIONS

Non che da s£ sien queste cose acerbe:
ma e difetto dalla parte tua,
che non hai viste ancor tanto superbe.” 1

In the last two lines of this wonderful passage, the whole
philosophy of vision is expressed. It is an accommodation of the
supra-sensible to our human disabilities, a symbolic reconstruction
of reality on levels accessible to sense. This symbolic reconstruc-
tion is seen as a profoundly significant, vivid, and dramatic dream:
and since this dream conveys transcendental truth, and initiates
the visionary into the atmosphere of the Eternal, it may well
claim precedence over that prosaic and perpetual vision which
we call the “real world. ” In it — as in the less significant dreams
of our common experience — vision and audition are often com-
bined. Many of the visions of St. Mechthild of Hackborn are of
this complex type. Thus — “She saw in the Heart of God, as it were
a virgin exceeding fair, holding a ring in her hand on which was a
diamond: with which, incessantty, she touched the Heart of God.
Moreover, the soul asked why that virgin thus touched the Heart
of God. And the virgin answered, T am Divine Love, and this
stone signifieth the sin of Adam. ... As soon as Adam sinned, I
introduced myself and intercepted the whole of his sin, and by
thus ceaselessly touching the Heart of God and moving Him to
pity, I suffered Him not to rest until the moment when I took the
Son of God from His Father’s Heart and laid him in the Virgin
Mother’s womb.’ . . . Another time, she saw how Love, under the
likeness of a fair Virgin, went round about the consistory singing
Alone I have made the circuit of heaven, and I have walked on the
waves of the sea. In these words she understood how Love had
subjected to herself the Omnipotent Majesty of God, had inebri-
ated His Unsearchable Wisdom, had drawn forth all His most
sweet goodness; and, by wholly conquering His divine justice
and changing it into gentleness and mercy, had moved the Lord of
all Majesty .” 3

Imaginary vision of this kind is probably far more common
than is generally supposed : and can exist without any disturbance
of that balance of faculties which is usually recognized as “sane.”

1 Par. xxx. 61-81 : “And I saw light in the form of a river blazing with radiance,
streaming between banks painted with a marvellous spring. Out of that river
issued living sparks and settled on the flowers on every side, like rubies set in gold.
Then, as it were inebriated by the perfume, they plunged again into the won-
drous flood, and as one entered another issued forth. . . . Then added the Sun
of my eyes: The river, the topazes that enter and come forth, the smiling flowers,
are shadowy foretastes of their reality. Not that these things are themselves
imperfect; but on thy side is the defect, in that thy vision cannot rise so high/*
This passage probably owes something to Mechthild of Magdeburg’s concept of
Deity as a Flowing Light.

* Mechthild of Hackborn, “Liber Specialis Gratiae,” 1 . ii. caps. xvii. and xxxv.



288


MYSTICISM


“If,” says Pratt, “there be any truth in Freud's insistence upon
the symbolic nature of normal dreams, it is the less surprising
that the dream imagination of the Christian mystic should work
up visions of a symbolic sort. . . . Our modern tendency to consider
visions quite extraordinary and pathological is probably mis-
taken .” 1 It is certain that the meditations of those persons who
are “good visualizers” often take a pictorial form; and indeed
St. Ignatius Loyola, the great teacher of meditation, advised
a deliberate effort so to visualize the subject dwelt upon. The
picture may appear involuntarily, at the summit of a train of
thought, which it sometimes illustrates and sometimes contra-
dicts. It may show itself faintly against a background of mist ;
or start into existence sharply focussed, well-lighted, and alive.

It always brings with it a greater impression of reality than can
be obtained by the operations of the discursive mind.

(b) The symbolic and artistic character of the visions we have
been discussing is obvious. There is, however, another form of
imaginary vision which must be touched on with a gentler hand.

In this, the imagery seized upon by the subliminal powers, or
placed before the mind by that Somewhat Other of which the
mystic is always conscious over against himself, is at once so vivid, Jf
so closely related to the concrete beliefs and spiritual passions of
the self, and so perfectly expresses its apprehensions of God, that
it is not always recognized as symbolic in kind. A simple example
of this is the vision of Christ at the moment of consecration at
Mass, experienced by so many Catholic ecstatics . 2 Another is St.
Margaret Mary Alacoque's vision of the Sacred Heart. St. Teresa
is one of the few mystics who have detected the true character of
automatisms of this sort: which bring with them — like their purer
forms, the intellectual visions of God — a vivid apprehension of
Personality, the conviction of a living presence, rather than the
knowledge of new facts. “Now and then,” she says of her own
imaginary visions of Christ, “it seemed to me that what I saw was
an image: but most frequently it was not so. I thought it was Christ
Himself, judging by the brightness in which He was pleased to |
show Himself. Sometimes the vision was so indistinct, that I

1 Pratt, “The Religious Consciousness/' p. 404.

* For instance, the Blessed Angela of Foligno, who gives in her “Revelations"
a complete series of such experiences; ranging from an apprehension of Divine
Beauty “shining from within and surpassing the splendour of the sun" (op. cit.,
p. 64, English translation, p. 222) to a concrete vision of two eyes shining in the
Host (loc. cit., English translation, p. 230). “I saw Him most plainly with the eyes
of the mind," she says, “first living, suffering, bleeding, crucified; and then
dead upon the Cross" (p. 326, English translation, p. 223). “Another time I
beheld the Child Christ in the consecrated Host. He appeared beautiful and full
of majesty. He seemed as a child of twelve years of age (p. 67, English trans-
lation, p. 229).



VOICES AND VISIONS 289

thought it was an image: but still, not like a picture, however
well painted, and I have seen a good many pictures. It would
be absurd to suppose that the one bears any resemblance whatever
to the other, for they differ as a living person differs from his
portrait, which, however well drawn, cannot be life-like, for it is
plain that it is a dead thing/' 1

“The vision," she says in another place, “passes as quickly as
a flash of lightning, yet this most glorious picture makes an
impression on the imagination that I believe can never be effaced
until the soul at last sees Christ to enjoy Him for ever. Although
I call it a 'picture,' you must not imagine that it looks like a
painting; Christ appears as a living Person, Who sometimes speaks
and reveals deep mysteries." 2

It seems, then, that this swift and dazzling vision of Divine
Personality may represent a true contact of the soul with the
Absolute Life — a contact immediately referred to the image under
which the self is accustomed to think of its God. Obviously in the
case of Christian contemplatives this image will most usually be
the historical Person of Christ, as He is represented in sacred
literature and art.i The life-enhancing quality of such an abrupt
if apprehension, however, the profound sense of reality which it
brings, permit of its being classed not amongst vivid dreams, but
amongst those genuine mystic states in which “the immanent
God, formless, but capable of assuming all forms, expresses
Himself in vision as lie had expressed Himself in words."*
Certainty and joy are the feeling-stales accompanying this ex-
perience; which is as it were a love-letter received by the ardent
soul, bringing with it the very fragrance of personality, along with
the sign-manual of the beloved.

This concrete vision of Christ has the true mystic quality of
ineffability, appearing to the self under a form of inexpressible
beauty, illuminated with that unearthly light which is so per-
sistently reported as a feature of transcendent experience. The
artist's exalted consciousness of Beauty as a form of Truth is
\ here seen operating on the transcendental plane. Thus when
St. Teresa saw only the Hands of God, she was thrown into an

1 Vida, cap. xxviii. § n.

* “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sextas, cap. ix.

3 “On one of the feasts of St. Paul, while I was at Mass, there stood before me
the most sacred Humanity as painters represent Him after the resurrection” (St.
Teresa, Vida, cap. xxviii. § 4). So too the form assumed by many of the visions of
Angela of Foligno is obviously due to her familiarity with the frescoed churches
of Assisi and the Vale of Spoleto. “When I bent my knees upon entering in at the
door of the church,” she says, “I immediately beheld a picture of St. Francis
lying in Christ's bosom. Then said Christ unto me, ‘Thus closely will I hold thee
and so much closer, that bodily eyes can neither perceive nor comprehend it'.”
(op. cit., p. 53. English translation, p. 165).

4 Delacroix, “fitudes sur le Mysticisme,” p. 116.



MYSTICISM


&Q0

ecstasy of adoration by their shining loveliness . 1 "If I were to
spend many years in devising how to picture to myself anything
so beautiful/’ she says of the imaginary vision of Christ, "I should
never be able, nor even know how, to do it; for it is beyond the
scope of any possible imagination here below: the whiteness and
brilliancy alone are inconceivable. It is not a brightness which
dazzles, but a delicate whiteness, an infused brightness, giving
excessive delight to the eyes, which are never wearied thereby
nor by the visible brightness which enables us to see a beauty
so divine. It is a light so different from any light here below, that
the very brightness of the sun we see, in comparison with the
brightness and light before our eyes, seems to be something so
obscure that no one would ever wish to open his eyes again. . . .
In short, it is such that no man, however gifted he may be, can
ever in the whole course of his life arrive at any imagination of
what it is. God puts it before us so instantaneously, that we could
not open our eyes in time to see it, if it were necessary for us to
open them at all. But whether our eyes be open or shut, it makes
no difference whatever: for when our Lord wills, we must see it,
whether we will or not ." 2

There is another and highly important class of visual automa-
tisms: those which I have chosen to call Active Imaginary Visions.
Whereas vision of the passive kind is the expression of thought,
perception, or desire on the part of the deeper self: active vision
is the expression of a change in that self, and generally accom-
panies some psychological crisis. In this vision, which always has
a dramatic character, the self seems to itself to act, not merely to
look on. Such visions may possess many of the characters of
dreams; they may be purely symbolic; they may be theologically
"realistic/’ They may entail a journey through Hell, Purgatory,
and Heaven, an excursion into fairyland, a wrestling with the
Angel in the Way. Whatever their outward form, they are always
connected with inward results. They are the automatic expressions
of intense subliminal activity: not merely the media by which
the self's awareness of the Absolute is strengthened and enriched,
but the outward and visible signs of its movement towards new
levels of consciousness. Hence we are not surprised to find that a
dynamic vision of this sort often initiates the Unitive Life. Such
are the imaginary visions reported by St. Francis of Assisi and
St. Catherine of Siena at the moment of their stigmatization: the

1 Vida, cap. xxviii. § 2.

* St. Teresa, op. cit ., cap. xxviii. §§ 7, 8. Angela of Foligno says of a similar
vision of Christ, “His beauty and adornment were so great . . . and so great was
my joy at the sight, that I think I shall never lose it. And so great was my
certitude that I cannot doubt it in any point" (St. Angfcle de Foligno, op. cit., p. 66,
English translation, p. 229).



VOICES AND VISIONS 291

transverberation of St. Teresa; the heavenly visitor who announced
to Suso his passage from the ‘‘lower school” to the “upper school”
of the Holy Spirit. 1 But perhaps the most picturesque and con-
vincing example of all such dramas of the soul, is that which 's
known in art as the “Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine of Siena.”

We have seen that Catherine, who was subject from childhood
to imaginary visions and interior words, had long been conscious
of a voice reiterating the promise of this sacred bretrothal ; and
that on the last day of the Carnival, a.d. 1366, it said to her, “I
will this day celebrate solemnly with thee the feast of the betrothal
of thy soul, and even as I promised I will espouse thee to Myself
in faith.” “Then,” says her legend, “whilst the Lord was yet
speaking, there appeared the most glorious Virgin His Mother,
» the most blessed John, Evangelist, the glorious Apostle Paul,
and the most holy Dominic, father of her order; and with these the
prophet David, who had the psaltery set to music in his hands;
and while he played with most sweet melody the Virgin Mother of
God took the right hand of Catherine with her most sacred hand,
and, holding out her lingers towards the Son, besought Him to
deign to espouse her to Himself in faith. To which graciously
, consenting the Only Begotten of God drew out a ring of gold, which
had in its circle four peails enclosing a most beauteous diamond;
and placing this ring upon the ring finger of Catherine's right hand
He said, ‘Lo, I espouse thee to Myself, thy Creator and Saviour in
the faith, which until thou dost celebrate thy eternal nuptials
with Me in Heaven thou wilt preserve ever without stain. Hence-
forth, my daughter, do manfully and without hesitation those
things which by the ordering of My providence will be put into
thy hands; for being now armed with the fortitude of the faith,
thou wilt happily overcome all thy adversaries.' Then the vision
disappeared, but that ring ever remained on her finger, not indeed
to the sight of others, but only to the sight of the virgin herself;
for she often, albeit with bashfulness, confessed to me that she
always saw that ring on her finger, nor was there any time when
she did not see it.” a

1 Leben, cap. xxi.

* E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena," p. 25. Vita, i. xii. 1, 2 (Acta S.S., loc,
cit.). In the ring which she always saw upon her finger, we seem to have an instance
of true corporeal vision; which finds a curiously exact parallel in the life of St.
Teresa. “On one occasion when 1 was holding in my hand the cross of my rosary,
He took it from me into His own hand. He returned it, but it was then four large
stones incomparably more precious than diamonds. He said to me that lor the
future that cross would so appear to me always: and so it did. I never saw the

I wood of which it was made, but only the precious stones. They were seen, however,
by no one else" (Vida, cap. xxix. § 8). This class of experience, says Augustine
Baker, particularly gifts of roses, rings, and jewels, is “much to be suspected,"
except in “souls of a long-continued sanctity" (“Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii. § iv.
cap. iii.).



MYSTICISM


292

It is not difficult to discern the materials from which this vision
has been composed. As far as its outward circumstances go, it is
borrowed intact from the legendary history of St. Catherine of
Alexandria, with which her namesake must have been familiar
from babyhood . 1 Caterina Benincasa showed a characteristic
artistic suggestibility and quickness in transforming the stuff of
this old story into the mediui of a profound personal experience :
as her contemporaries amongst the Sienese painters took subject,
method, and composition from the traditional Byzantine source,
yet forced them to become expressions of their overpowering
individuality. The important matter for us, however, is not the
way in which the second Catherine adapted a traditional story to
herself, actualized it in her experience: but the fact that it was for
her the sacramental form under which she became acutely and
permanently conscious of union with God. Long prepared by that
growing disposition of her deeper self which caused her to hear
the reiterated promise of her Beloved, the vision when it came
was significant, not for its outward circumstances, but for its
permanent effect upon her life. In it she passed to a fresh level of
consciousness; entering upon that state of spiritual wedlock, of
close and loving identification with the interests of Christ,
which Richard of St. Victor calls the “Third Stage of Ardent
Love.”

Of the same active sort is St. Teresa's great and celebrated
vision, or rather experience, of the Transverberation ; in which
imagery and feeling go side by side in their effort towards expres-
sing the anguish of insatiable love. “I saw,” she says, “an angel
close by me, on my left side, in bodily form. This I am not accus-
tomed to see unless very rarely. Though I have visions of angels
frequently, yet I see them only by an intellectual vision, such as
I have spoken of before. It was our Lord's will that in this vision
I should see the angel in this wise. He was not large, but small of
stature, and most beautiful — his face burning, as if he were one
of the highest angels, who seem to be all of lire: they must be those
whom we call Cherubim. ... I saw in his hand a long spear of gold,
and at the iron's point there seemed to be a little fire. He appeared
to me to be thrusting it at times into my heart, and to pierce my
very entrails; when he drew it out, he seemed to draw them out
also and to leave me all on fire with a great love of God. The pain
was so great that it made me moan ; and yet so surpassing was the
sweetness of this excessive pain that I could not wish to be rid
of it. The soul is satisfied now with nothing less than God. The pain
is not bodily, but spiritual; though the body has its share in it,
even a large one. It is a caressing of love so sweet which now takes
1 Vide “Legenda Aurea," Nov. xxv.



VOICES AND VISIONS


293

place between the soul and God, that I pray God of His goodness to
make him experience it who may think that I am lying." 1

Finally it should be added that dynamic vision may assume a
purely intellectual form ; as in the case of the Blessed Angela of
Foligno. "During last Lent I found myself, "she says, "altogether
in God, without knowing how, and in a way more exalted than
was customary for me. I seemed to be in the midst of the Trinity
in a more exalted way than I had ever been before, for greater than
usual were the blessings I received, and I enjoyed these blessings
without interruption. And thus to be absorbed in God filled me with
joy and with delight. And feeling myself to be in this beatitude
and this great and unspeakable delight, which were above all I had
experienced before, such ineffable divine operations took place
in my soul, as neither saint nor angel could describe or explain.
And I see and understand that these divine operations, that
unfathomable abyss, no angel or other creature howsoever great
or wise, could comprehend; and all I say now of it seemeth to
me so ill said that it is blasphemy." 2

Automatic Script

The rarest of the automatic activities reported to us in connec-
tion with mysticism is that of “automatic writing." This form of
subliminal action has already been spoken of in an earlier chapter^
where two of the most marked examples — Blake and Madame
Guy on — are discussed. As with voice and vision, so this power of
automatic composition may and does exist in various degrees of
intensity: ranging from that "inspiration," that irresistible impulse
to write, of which all artists are aware, to the extreme form in which
the hand of the conscious self seems to have become the agent of
another personality. We are not here in the presence of phenomena
which require a "supernatural" explanation. From the point of
view of the psychologist, the inspirational writing of the mystics
differs in degree rather than in kind from such poetic creation
as that described by de Musset: "it is not work, it is listening; it
is as if some unknown person were speaking in your ear."4 Such
subliminal activity is probably present to some extent in all the
literary work of the great mystics, whose creative power, like
that of most poets, is largely dissociated from the control of the
will and the surface intelligence.

St. Catherine of Siena, we are told, dictated her great Dialogue
to her secretaries whilst in the state of ecstasy : which may mean

1 Vida, cap. xxix. §§ 16, 17.

* St. Angdle de Foligno, op. cit., p. 232 (English translation, p. 186).

1 P. 66 . 4 Quoted by Prescott: “The Poetic Mind,” p. 102.



MYSTICISM


294

no more than the absorbed state of recollection in which the
creative faculty works most freely, or may have been a condition
of consciousness resembling the * ‘trance 1 1 of mediums, in which
the deeper mind governs the tongue. Had she been more accus-
tomed to the use of the pen — she did not learn writing until after
the beginning of her apostolic life — that deeper mind would
almost certainly have expressed itself by means of automatic
script. As it is, in the rhythm and exaltation of its periods, the
Dialogue bears upon it all the marks of true automatic composition
of the highest type. The very discursiveness of its style, its loose
employment of metaphor, the strangely mingled intimacy and
remoteness of its tone, link it with prophetic literature; and are
entirely characteristic of subliminal energy of a rich type, disso-
ciated from the criticism and control of the normal consciousness. 1

So too the writings of Rulman Merswin, if we accept the in-
genious and interesting theory of his psychic state elaborated by
M. Jundt, 2 3 4 5 were almost wholly of this kind. So Blake insisted
that he was "under the direction of Messengers from Heaven,
Daily and Nightly, "3 and stated on his deathbed that the credit
for all his works belonged not to himself, but to his "celestial
friends, "4 i.e., to the inspiration of a personality which had access
to levels of truth and beauty unknown to his surface mind.

St. Teresa was of much the same opinion in respect of her great
mystical works: which were, she said, like the speech of a parrot
repeating, though he cannot understand, the things which his
master has taught him. There is little doubt that her powers of
composition — as we might expect in one so apt at voice and
vision — were largely of the uncontrolled, inspired, or "automatic”
kind. She wrote most usually after the reception of Holy Com-
munion — that is to say, when her mystic consciousness was in its
most active state — and always swiftly, without hesitations or
amendments. Ideas and images welled up from her rich and
active subliminal region too quickly, indeed, for her eager, hurry-
ing pen : so that she sometimes exclaimed, "Oh, that I could write
with many hands, so that none were forgotten !”5 In Teresa’s
unitive state, a slight suggestion was enough to change the con-
dition of her consciousness, place her under the complete domin-
ation of her deeper mind. Often, she said, when composing the
"Interior Castle,” her work reacted upon herself. She would
suddenly be caught up into the very degree of contemplation


1 On this point I must respectfully differ from Mr. E. Gardner. See his “St.

Catherine of Siena/* p. 354. 9 Supra , p. 185.

3 Quoted by M. Wilson, “Life of William Blake,’* p. 135.

4 Berger, “William Blake,** p. 54.

5 G. Cunninghame Graham, “Santa Teresa/' vol. i. p. 202.



VOICES AND VISIONS 293

which sne was trying to describe, and continued to write in this
absorbed or entranced condition, clearly perceiving that her pen
was guided by a power not her own, and expressed ideas unknown
to her surface mind, which filled her with astonishment.

In the evidence given during the process for St. Teresa's
beatification, Maria de San Francisco of Medina, one of her early
nuns, stated that on entering the saint's cell whilst she was
writing this same "Interior Castle" she found her so absorbed in
contemplation as to be unaware of the external world. "If we
made a noise close to her," said another, Maria del Nacimiento,
“she neither ceased to write nor complained of being disturbed."
Both these nuns, and also Ana de la Encarnacion, prioress of
Granada, affirmed that she wrote with immense speed, never
stopping to erase or to correct: being anxious, as she said, to
“write what the Lord had given her, before she forgot it." They
and many others declared that when she was thus writing she
seemed like another being: and that her face, excessively beautiful
in expression, shone with an unearthly splendour which afterwards
faded away. 1

As for Madame Guyon, whose temperament had in it almost as
much of the medium as of the mystic, and whose passion for
quietism and mental passivity left her almost wholly at the
mercy of subconscious impulses, she exhibits by turns the phe-
nomena of clairvoyance, prophecy, telephathy, and automatic
writing, in bewildering profusion.

"I was myself surprised," she says, "at the letters which Thou
didst cause me to write, and in which I had no part save the actual
movement of my hand : and it was at this time that I received that
gift of writing according to the interior mind, and not according to
my own mind, which I had never known before. Also my manner
of writing was altogether changed, and every one was astonished
because I wrote with such great facility."*

Again, "... Thou didst make me write with so great a detach-
ment that I was obliged to leave off and begin again as Thou didst
choose. Thou didst try me in every way: suddenly Thou wouldst
cause me to write, then at once to cease, and then to begin again.
When I wrote during the day, I would be suddenly interrupted, and
often left words half written, and afterwards Thou wouldst give me
whatever was pleasing to Thee. Nothing of that which I wrote
was in my mind: my mind, in fact, was so wholly at liberty that
it seemed a blank, I was so detached from that which I wrote that

it seemed foreign to me All the faults in my writings come from

this: that being unaccustomed to the operations of God, I was

* G. Cunningharae Graham, "Santa Teresa," vol. i, pp. 203-4.

• Vie, pt. ii. cap. ii.



296 MYSTICISM

often unfaithful to them, thinking that I did well to continue
writing when I had time, without being moved thereto, because
I had been told to finish the work. So that it is easy to distinguish
the parts which are fine and sustained, and those which have neither
savour nor grace. I have left them as they are ; so that the difference
between the Spirit of God and the human or natural spirit may
be seen. ... I continued always to write, and with an inconceivable
swiftness, for the hand could hardly keep up with the dictating
spirit: and during this long work, I never changed my method,
nor did I make use of any book. The scribe could not, however
great his diligence, copy in five days that which I wrote in a
single night. ... I will add to all that I have been saying on my
writings, that a considerable part of the book on ‘Judges' was
lost. Being asked to complete it, I rewrote the lost portions. Long
afterwards, when I was moving house, these were found in a place
where no one could have imagined that they would be; and the
old and new versions were exactly alike — a circumstance which
greatly astonished those persons of learning and merit who under-
took its verification." 1

A far greater and stronger mystic than Madame Guyon, Jacob
Boehme, was also in his literary composition the more or less ,
helpless tool of some power other than his normal surface-mind.
It is clear from his own words that his first book, the "Aurora,"
produced after the great illumination which he received in the
year 1610, was no deliberate composition, but an example of
inspired or automatic script. This strange work, full of sayings
of a deep yet dazzling darkness, was condemned by the local
tribunal; and Boehme was forbidden to write more. For seven
years he obeyed. Then "a new motion from on high" seized him,
and under the pressure of this subliminal impulse — which, charac-
teristically, he feels as coming from without not from within — he
began to write again. 1

This second outburst of composition, too, was almost purely auto-
matic in type. The transcendental consciousness was in command,
and Boehme’s surface-intellect could exert but little control. "Art,"
he says of it himself, “has not wrote here, neither was there any
time to consider how to set it punctually down, according to the
Understanding of the Letters, but all was ordered according to
the Direction of the Spirit, which often went in haste, so that in
many words Letters may be wanting, and in some Places a Capital
Letter for a Word ; so that the Penman's Hand, by reason he was
not accustomed to it, did often shake. And though I could have

1 Vie, pt. ii. cap. sud. Those who wish to compare this vivid subjective account
of automatic writing with modem attested instances may consult Myers, “Human
Personality/* and Oliver Lodge, “The Survival of Man/*



VOICES AND VISIONS 297

wrote in a more accurate, fair and plain Manner, yet the Reason
was this, that the burning Fire often forced forward with Speed,
and the Hand and Pen must hasten directly after it; for it comes
and goes as a sudden shower.” 1

No description could give more vividly than this the spon-
taneous and uncontrollable character of these automatic states;
the welling-up of new knowledge, the rapid formation of sentences :
so quick, that the hand of the subject can hardly keep pace with
that “burning Fire,” the travail of his inner mind. As in vision,
so here, the contents of that inner mind, its hoarded memories,
will influence the form of the message. Hence, in Boehme’s
works, the prevalence of that obscure Kabalistic and Alchemical
imagery which baffles even his most eager readers, and which is
the result of an earlier acquaintance with the works of Paracelsus,
Weigel, and Sebastian Franck. 2 Such language, however, no more
discredits the “power behind the pen,” than the form under which
St. Catherine of Siena apprehended the mystic marriage discredits
her attainment of the unitive life. In the fruit of such automatic
travail, such a “wrestling with the Angel in the way,” the mystic
offers to our common humanity the chalice of the Spirit of Life.
We may recognize the origins of the ornament upon the chalice :
but we cannot justly charge him with counterfeiting the Wine.

We have been dealing throughout this section with means
rather than with ends: means snatched at by the struggling self
which has not yet wholly shaken itself free from “image,” in its
efforts to seize somehow — actualize, enjoy, and adore— that
Absolute which is the sum of its desires. No one will ever approach
an understanding of this phase of the mystical consciousness, who
brings to it either a contempt for the minds which could thus
simply and sometimes childishly objectivize the Divine, or a
superstitious reverence for the image, apart from the formless
Reality at which it hints. Between these two extremes lies our
hope of grasping the true place of automatisms on the Mystic
Way: of seeing in them instances of the adaptation of those
means by which we obtain consciousness of the phenomenal
world, to an apprehension of that other world whose attainment is
humanity’s sublimest end.



CHAPTER VI

INTROVERSION. Part I : RECOLLECTION AND QUIET


Introversion is the characteristic mystic art — Its development accompanies
organic growth — It is susceptible of education — The value of tradition — Tbt
training of will and attention — Contemplation the only real way of perceiving
anything — Its method described — An experiment — Introversion — Ecstasy — the
two aspects of contemplative consciousness — The ground of the soul — Philo
sophic contemplation — The Degrees of Orison — their nature — The end of cotij
temptation- — Ililton — Naked orison — All “stages" or degrees of orison arbitral j
and diagrammatic — But some division essential to description — Three stages—
Recollection, Quiet, Contemplation — Orison grows with the growing self-— dis
ciplines the mind, will and heart — St. Teresa’s degrees of orison — It is a progress
in love — a retreat from circumference to centre — Its end is union — Recollectioi
— a difficult process — Bue lime — Meditation — its characteristics — it develops intc
Recollection — A spiritual gymnastic — Si. Teresa — Quiet — its characteristics—
largely inexpressible — Suspension of thought — Its development from Iiccollec
tion — It is a state of humility — Its nature described — Two aspects of Quiet
positive and negative — Kckhart — The Epistle of Private Counsel — St. Teresa— i
Quiet and Quietism — The “danger-zone" of introversion — Ruysbroeck or
Quietism — its evils— It is a perversion of truth — Molinos — Von Hugo! — Tht
distinguishing mark of true Quiet — Madame Guyon — Quiet is a transitiona
state

I N our study of the First Mystic Life, its purification and
illumination, we have been analysing and considering a
process of organic development ; an evolution of personality
We may treat this either as a movement of consciousness
towards higher levels, or as a remaking of consciousness
consequent on the emergence and growth of a factor which is
dormant in ordinary man, but destined to be supreme in the full-
grown mystic type. We have seen the awakening of this factor—
this spark of the soul— with its innate capacity for apprehending
the Absolute. We have seen it attack and conquer the old sense-
fed and self-centred life of the normal self, and introduce it intc
a new universe, lit up by the Uncreated Light. These were the
events which, taken together, constituted the “First Mystic Life”
a complete round upon the spiral road which leads from mar
to God.

What we have been looking at, then, is a life-process, the
establishment of a certain harmony between the created self and
that Reality whose invitation it has heard : and we have discussed
this life-process rather as if it contained no elements which were
not referable to natural and spontaneous growth, to the invol-



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 299

untary adjustments of the organism to that extended or trans-
cendental universe of which it gradually becomes aware. But
side by side with this organic growth there always goes a specific
kind of activity which is characteristic of the mystic : an educa-
tion which he is called to undertake, that his consciousness of the
Infinite maybe stabilized, enriched and defined. Already once or
twice we have been in the presence of this activity, have been
obliged to take its influence into account: as, were we studying
rther artistic types, we could not leave on one side the medium
in which they work.

Contemplation is the mystic’s medium. It is an extreme form of
that withdrawal of attention from the external world and total
ledication of the mind which also, in various degrees and ways,
sonditions the creative activity of musician, painter and poet:
releasing the faculty by which he can apprehend the Good and
Beautiful, enter into communion with the Real. As “voice” or

vision” is often the way in which the mystical consciousness
presents its discoveries to the surface-mind, so contemplation is
:he way in which it makes those discoveries, perceives the supra-
iensible over against itself. The growth of the mystic’s effective
genius, therefore, is connected with his growth in this art : and that
growth is largely conditioned by education.

The painter, however great his natural powers, can hardly
lispense with some technical training; the musician is wise if he
icquaint himself at least with the elements of counterpoint. So
:oo the mystic. It is true that he sometimes seems to spring
ibruptly to the heights, to be caught into ecstasy without previous
preparation: as a poet may startle the world by a sudden master-
piece. But unless they be backed by discipline, these sudden and
solated flashes of inspiration will not long avail for the production
)f great works. “Ordina quest’ amore, 0 tu che m’ami” is the
mperative demand made by Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, by
:very aspect of Reality, upon the human soul. Lover and
philosopher, saint, artist, and scientist, must alike obey or fail.

Transcendental genius, then, obeys the laws which govern all
)ther forms of genius, in being susceptible of culture : and, indeed,
:annot develop its full powers without an educative process of
;ome kind. This strange art of contemplation, which the mystic
ends to practise during tire whole of his career — which develops
tep by step with his vision and his love — demands of the self
vhich undertakes it the same hard dull work, the same slow
raining of the will, which lies behind all supreme achievement,
ind is the price of all true liberty. It is the want of such training —
uch “supersensual drill” — which is responsible for the mass of
r ague, ineffectual, and sometimes harmful mysticism which has



CHAPTER VI


INTROVERSION. Part I : RECOLLECTION AND QUIET

Introversion is the characteristic mystic art — Its development accompanies
organic growth — It is susceptible of education — The value of tradition — The
training of will and attention — Contemplation the only real way of perceiving
anything — Its method described — An experiment — Introversion — Ecstasy — the
two aspects of contemplative consciousness — The ground of the soul — Philo-
sophic contemplation — The Degrees of Orison — their nature — The end of coti|
teinplation — Hilton — Naked orison — All “stages" or degrees of orison arbitrary
and diagrammatic — Hut some division essential to description — Three stages —
Recollection, Quiet, Contemplation — Orison grows with the growing self-— dis-
ciplines the mind, will and heart — St. Teresa’s degrees of orison — It is a progress
in love — a retreat from circumference to centre — Its end is union — Recollection
— a difficult process — Bochmc — Meditation — its characteristics — it develops into
Recollection — A spiritual gymnastic — St. Teresa — Quiet — its characteristics —
largely inexpressible — Suspension of thought — Its development from Recollec-
tion — It is a state of humility — Its nature described — Two aspects of Quiet:
positive and negative — Eckhart — The Epistle of Private Counsel — St. Teresa— ^
Quiet and Quietism — The “danger-zone" of introversion — Kuysbroeck on
Quietism — its evils — It is a perversion of truth — Molinos — Von Ilugol — The
distinguishing mark of true Quiet — Madame Guyon — Quiet is a transitional
state

I n our study of the First Mystic Life, its purification and
illumination, we have been analysing and considering a
process of organic development ; an evolution of personality.
We may treat this either as a movement of consciousness
towards higher levels, or as a remaking of consciousness
consequent on the emergence and growth of a factor which is
dormant in ordinary man, but destined to be supreme in the full ^
grown mystic type. We have seen the awakening of this factor —
this spark of the soul — with its innate capacity for apprehending
the Absolute. We have seen it attack and conquer the old sense-
fed and self-centred life of the normal self, and introduce it into
a new universe, lit up by the Uncreated Light. These were the
events which, taken together, constituted the “First Mystic Life”;
a complete round upon the spiral road which leads from man
to God.

What we have been looking at, then, is a life-process, the
establishment of a certain harmony between the created self and
that Reality whose invitation it has heard : and we have discussed
this life-process rather as if it contained no elements which were

not referable to natural and spontaneous growth, to the invol-

098



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 299

untary adjustments of the organism to that extended or trans-
cendental universe of which it gradually becomes aware. But
side by side with this organic growth there always goes a specific
kind of activity which is characteristic of the mystic: an educa-
tion which he is called to undertake, that his consciousness of the
Infinite maybe stabilized, enriched and defined. Already once or
twice we have been in the presence of this activity, have been
obliged to take its influence into account: as, were we studying
other artistic types, we could not leave on one side the medium
in which they work.

Contemplation is the mystic’s medium. It is an extreme form of
that withdrawal of attention from the external world and total
dedication of the mind which also, in various degrees and ways,
conditions the creative activity of musician, painter and poet:
releasing the faculty by which he can apprehend the Good and
Beautiful, enter into communion with the Real. As ^voice” or
"vision” is often the way in which the mystical consciousness
presents its discoveries to the surface-mind, so contemplation is
the way in which it makes those discoveries, perceives the supra-
sensible over against itself. The growth of the mystic's effective
;enius, therefore, is connected with his growth in this art : and that
growth is largely conditioned by education.

The painter, however great his natural powers, can hardly
dispense with some technical training; the musician is wise if he
acquaint himself at least with the elements of counterpoint. So
too the mystic. It is true that he sometimes seems to spring
abruptly to the heights, to be caught into ecstasy without previous
preparation: as a poet may startle the world by a sudden master-
piece. But unless they be backed by discipline, these sudden and
isolated flashes of inspiration will not long avail for the production
of great works. "Ordina quest’ amore, 0 tu che m’ami” is the
‘imperative demand made by Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, by
every aspect of Reality, upon the human soul. Lover and
philosopher, saint, artist, and scientist, must alike obey or fail.

Transcendental genius, then, obeys the laws which govern all
other forms of genius, in being susceptible of culture : and, indeed,
cannot develop its full powers without an educative process of
some kind. This strange art of contemplation, which the mystic
tends to practise during the whole of his career — which develops
step by step with his vision and his love — demands of the self
which undertakes it the same hard dull work, the same slow
training of the will, which lies behind all supreme achievement,
and is the price of all true liberty. It is the want of such training —
such “supersensual drill” — which is responsible for the mass of
vague, ineffectual, and sometimes harmful mysticism which has



MYSTICISM


ioo

always existed: the dilute cosmic emotion and limp spirituality
which hang, as it were, on the skirts of the true seekers of the
Absolute, and bring discredit upon their science.

In this, as in all the other and lesser arts which have been,
developed by the race, education consists largely in a humble
willingness to submit to the discipline, and profit by the lessons,
of the past. Tradition runs side by side with experience; the past
collaborates with the present. Each new and eager soul rushing
out towards the only end of Love passes on its way the landmarks
left by others upon the pathway to Reality. If it be wise it observes
them: and finds in them rather helps towards attainment than
hindrances to that freedom which is of the essence of the mystic
act. This act, it is true, is in the last resort a solitary experience,
“the flight of the Alone to the Alone” ; even though no achievement
of the soul truly takes place in vacuo , or leaves the universe of souls
unchanged. At the same time, here as elsewhere, man cannot safely
divorce his personal history from that of the race. The best and
truest experience does not come to the eccentric and individual
pilgrim whose intuitions are his only law : but rather to him who
is willing to profit by the culture of the spiritual society in which
he finds himself, and submit personal intuition to the guidanc^
afforded by the general history of the mystic type. Those who
refuse this guidance expose themselves to all the dangers which
crowd about the individualist : from heresy at one end of the scale
to madness at the other. Vae Soli ! Nowhere more clearly than in
the history of mysticism do we observe the essential solidarity of
mankind, the penalty paid by those who will not acknowledge it.

The education which tradition has ever prescribed for the
mystic, consists in the gradual development of an extraordinary
faculty of concentration, a power of spiritual attention. It is not
enough that he should naturally be “aware of the Absolute,” unless
he be able to contemplate it : just as the mere possession of eye/
sight or hearing, however acute, needs to be supplemented by
trained powers of perception and reception, if we are really to
appreciate — see or hear to any purpose — the masterpieces of Music
or of Art. More, Nature herself reveals little of her secret to those
who only look and listen with the outward ear and eye. The con-
dition of all valid seeing and hearing, upon every plane of con-
sciousness, lies not in the sharpening of the senses, but in a peculiar
attitude of the whole personality: in a self-forgetting attentive-
ness, a profound concentration, a self-merging, which operates a
real communion between the seer and the seen — in a word, in
Contemplation.

Contemplation, then, in the most general sense is a power
which we may — and often must — apply to the perception, not



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 301

only of Divine Reality, but of anything. It is a mental attitude
under which all things give up to us the secret of their life. All
artists are of necessity in some measure contemplative. In so far
as they surrender themselves without selfish preoccupation, they
see Creation from the point of view of God. 1 “Innocence of eye”
is little else than this : and only by its means can they see truly
those things which they desire to show the world. I invite those
to whom these statements seem a compound of cheap psychology
and cheaper metaphysics to clear their minds of prejudice and
submit this matter to an experimental test. If they will be patient
and honest — and unless they belong to that minority which is
temperamentally incapable of the simplest contemplative act —
they will emerge from the experiment possessed of a little new
^knowledge as to the nature of the relation between the human
mind and the outer world.

All that is asked is that we shall look for a little time, in a special
and undivided manner, at some simple, concrete, and external
thing. This object of our contemplation may be almost anything
we please: a picture, a statue, a tree, a distant hillside, a growing
plant, running water, little living things. We need not, with Kant,
igo to the starry heavens. “A little thing the quantity of an hazel
nut” will do for us, as it did for Lady Julian long ago.* Remember,
it is a practical experiment on which we are set ; not an opportunity
of pretty and pantheistic meditation.

Look, then, at this thing which you have chosen. Wilfully yet
tranquilly refuse the messages which countless other aspects of
the world are sending; and so concentrate your whole attention
on this one act of loving sight that all other objects are excluded
from the conscious field. Do not think, but as it were pour out your
personality towards it: let your soul be in your eyes. Almost at
once, this new method of perception will reveal unsuspected
•qualities in the external world. First, you will perceive about you
a strange and deepening quietness ; a slowing down of our feverish
mental time. Next, you will become aware of a heightened signifi-
cance, an intensified existence in the thing at which you look. As
you, with all your consciousness, lean out towards it, an answering
current will meet yours. It seems as though the barrier between
its life and your own, between subject and object, had melted away.

1 “The contemplative and the artist,'* says Mari tain, “are in a position to
sympathize. . . . The contemplative, having for object the causa altissima from
which all else depends, knows the place and value of art, and understands the
artist. The artist as such, cannot judge the contemplative, but he can divine his
greatness. If he indeed loves Beauty, and if some moral vice does not chain
his heart to dulness, going over to the side of the contemplative he will recognize
Love and Beauty" (J. Maritain, “Art et Scholastique," p. 139b

* “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. v.



MYSTICISM


302

You are merged with it, in an act of true communion: and you
know the secret of its being deeply and unforgettably, yet in a
way which you can never hope to express.

Seen thus, a thistle has celestial qualities: a speckled hen a
touch of the sublime. Our greater comrades, the trees, the clouds,
the rivers, initiate us into mighty secrets, flame out at us “like
shining from shook foil." The “eye which looks upon Eternity"
has been given its opportunity. We have been immersed for a
moment in the “life of the All": a deep and peaceful love unites
us with the substance of all things, a “Mystic Marriage" has taken
place between the mind and some aspect of the external world.
Cor ad cor loquitur : Life has spoken to life, but not to the surface-
intelligence. That surface-intelligence knows only that the message
was true and beautiful: no more. *

The price of this experience has been a stilling of that surface-
mind, a calling in of all our scattered interests : an entire giving of
ourselves to this one activity, without self-consciousness, without
reflective thought. To reflect is always to distort: our minds are
not good mirrors. The contemplative, on whatever level his
faculty may operate, is contented to absorb and be absorbed : and
by this humble access he attains to a plane of knowledge which*
no intellectual process can come near.

I do not suggest that this simple experiment is in any sense to
be equated with the transcendental contemplation of the mystic.
Yet it exercises on a small scale, and in regard to visible Nature,
the same natural faculties which are taken up and used — it is true
upon other levels, and in subjection to the transcendental sense
— in his apprehension of the Invisible Real. Though it is one thing
to see truthfully for an instant the flower in the crannied wall,
another to be lifted up to the apprehension of “eternal Truth,
true Love and loved Eternity," yet both according to their measure
are functions of the inward eye, operating in the “suspension of f
the mind."

This humble receptiveness, this still and steady gazing, in which
emotion, will, and thought are lost and fused, is the secret of the
great contemplative on fire with love of that which he has been
allowed to see. But whilst the contemplation of Nature entails
an outgoing towards somewhat indubitably external to us, and has
as its material the world of sensible experience : the contemplation
of Spirit, as it seems to those who practise it, requires a deliberate
refusal of the messages of the senses, an ingoing or “introversion"
of our faculties, a “journey towards the centre." The Kingdom
of God, they say, is within you: seek it, then, in the most secret ,
habitations of the soul. The mystic must learn so to concentrate
all his faculties, his very self, upon the invisible and intangible.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 303

that all visible things are forgot : to bring it so sharply into focus
that everything else is blurred. He must call in his scattered
faculties by a deliberate exercise of the will, empty his mind of
its swarm of images, its riot of thought. In mystical language he
must “sink into his nothingness”: into that blank abiding place
where busy, clever Reason cannot come. The whole of this pro-
cess, this gathering up and turning “inwards” of the powers of the
self, this gazing into the ground of the soul, is that which is called
Introversion.

Introversion is an art which can be acquired, as gradually and
as certainly, by the born mystic, as the art of piano-playing can
be acquired by the born musician. In both cases it is the genius
of the artist which makes his use of the instrument effective : but
"it is also his education in the use of the instrument which enables
that genius to express itself in an adequate way. Such mystical
education, of course, presumes a something that can be educated:
the “New Birth,” the awakening of the deeper self, must have
taken place before it can begin. It is a psychological process,
and obeys psychological laws. There is in it no element of the
unexpected or the abnormal. In technical language, we are here
'concerned with “ordinary” not “extraordinary” contemplation.

In its early stages the practice of introversion is voluntary,
difficult, and deliberate; as are the early stages of learning to read
or write. But as reading or writing finally becomes automatic, so
as the mystic's training in introversion proceeds, habits are formed :
and those contemplative powers which he is educating establish
themselves amongst his normal faculties. Sometimes they wholly
dominate these faculties, escape the control of the will, and
appear spontaneously, seizing upon the conscious field. Such
violent and involuntary invasions of the transcendental powers,
when they utterly swamp the surface-consciousness and the
subject is therefore cut off from his ordinary "external world,”
constitute the typical experience of rapture or ecstasy. It is under
the expansive formulae of such abrupt ecstatic perception, “not
by gradual steps, but by sudden ecstatic flights soaring aloft to
the glorious things on high," 1 that the mystical consciousness of
Divine Transcendence is most clearly expressed. Those wide,
exalted apprehensions of the Godhead which we owe to the mystics
have usually been obtained, not by industrious meditation, but
by “a transcending of all creatures, a perfect going forth from one-
self: by standing in an ecstasy of mind.” 2 Hence the experiences
peculiar to these ecstatic states have a great value for the student
of mysticism. It will be our duty to consider them in detail in a

* St. Bernard, “De Consideratione,” bk. v. cap. iii.

• “De Imitatione Chrisli," I. iii. cap. xxxi.



MYSTICISM


304

later section of this book. The normal and deliberate practice of
introversion, on the contrary, is bound up with the sense of Divine
Immanence. Its emphasis is on the indwelling God Who may be
found "by a journey towards the centre": on the conviction
indeed that "angels and archangels are with us, but He is more
truly our own who is not only with us but in us.” 1

Contemplation — taking that term in its widest sense, as em-
bracing all the degrees and kinds of mystical prayer — establishes
communion between the soul and the Absolute by way of these
complementary modes of apprehending that which is One. A. The
usually uncontrollable, definitely outgoing, ecstatic experience;
the attainment of Pure Being, or "flight to God." B. The more
controllable ingoing experience ; the breaking down of the barrier
between the surface-self and those deeper levels of personality
where God is met and known "in our nothingness, "and a mysterious
fusion of divine and human life takes place. The one, says the
Christian mystic, is the "going forth to the Father"; the other is
the "marriage with the Son." Both are operated by the Spirit
whose dwelling is in the "spark of the soul." Yet it is probable,
in spite of the spatial language which the mystics always use
concerning them, that these two experiences, in their most
sublime forms, are but opposite aspects of one whole: the com-
plementary terms of a higher synthesis beyond our span. In that
consummation of love which Ruysbroeck has called "the peace
of the summits" they meet : then distinctions between inward and
outward, near and far, cease to have any meaning, in "the dim
silence where lovers lose themselves." "To mount to God," says
the writer of "De Adhaerando Deo," "is to enter into one's self.
For he who inwardly entereth and intimately penetrateth into
himself, gets above and beyond himself and truly mounts up
to God.”*

Says Tauler of this ineffable meeting-place, which is to the 1
intellect an emptiness, and to the heart a fulfilment of all desire,
"All there is so still and mysterious and so desolate: for there is
nothing there but God only, and nothing strange. . . . This Wilder-
ness is the Quiet Desert of the Godhead, into which He leads all
who are to receive this inspiration of God, now or in Eternity."3
From this "quiet desert," this still plane of being, so near to her
though she is far from it, the normal self is separated by all the
"unquiet desert" of sensual existence. Yet it stretches through and
in her, the stuff of Reality, the very Ground of her being, since it
is, in Julian's words, "the Substance of all that is": linking that

1 St. Bernard, op. cit., bk. v. cap. v. So Lady Julian, ‘*We are ali in Him en-
closed and He is enclosed in us” (“Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. lvii.).

* Op. cit. t cap. vii. 3 Third Instruction (“The Inner Way,” p. 323).



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 305

being at once with the universe and with God. "God is near us,
but we are far from Him, God is within, we are without, God is
at home, we are in the far country/' said Meister Eckhart, strug-
gling to express the nature of this "intelligible where ." 1 Clearly,
if the self is ever to become aware of it, definite work must be
undertaken, definite powers of perception must be trained: and
the consciousness which has been evolved to meet the exigencies
of the World of Becoming must be initiated into that World of
Being from which it came forth.

Plato long ago defined the necessity of such a perception, and
the nature of that art of contemplation by which the soul can
feed upon the Real, when he said in one of his most purely mystical
passages, "When the soul returns into itself and reflects, it passes
mto . . . the region of that which is pure and everlasting, immortal
and unchangeable: and, feeling itself kindred thereto, it dwells
there under its own control, and has rest from its wanderings ." 2
In the "contemplation" of Plato and of the Platonic Schools
generally, however, the emphasis lies at least as much on intellect
as on intuition : with him the head and not the heart is the meeting-
place between man and the Real. "Anciently," says Augustine
'Baker, "there was a certain kind of false contemplation, which
we may call philosophical, practised by some learned heathens
of old, and imitated by some in these days, which hath for its last
and best end only the perfection of knowledge, and a delightful
complacency in it. . . .To this rank of philosophical contempla-
tions may be referred those scholastic wits which spend much
time in the study and subtle examination of the mysteries of
faith, and have not for their end the increasing of divine love in
their hearts. "3

We cannot long read the works of the mystics without coming
across descriptions — often first-hand descriptions of great psycho-
logical interest — of the processes through which the self must
pass, the discipline which it must undertake, in the course of
acquiring the art of contemplation. Most of these descriptions
differ in detail; in the divisions adopted, the emotions experienced,
the number of "degrees" through which the subject passes, from
the first painful attempt to gather up its faculties to the supreme
point at which it feels itself to be "lost in God." In each there is
that quality of uniqueness which is inherent in every expression
of life: in each the temperamental bias and analytical powers of
the writer have exerted a further modifying influence. All, how-
ever, describe a connected experience, the progressive concentra-


* Ecknart, Pred. lxix.

s “Holy Wisdom,


* Phaedo, 79 c.
’ Treatise iii. § iv. cap. r



MYSTICISM


306

of transcendental reality. As the Mystic Way involves transcen
dence of character, the sublimation of the instinctive life anc
movement of the whole man to higher levels of vitality, his attain
ment of freedom; so the ascent of the ladder of contemplatior
involves such a transcendence, or movement to high levels o
liberty, of his perceptive powers.

The steps of the ladder, the substance of the progressive exer-
cises undertaken by the developing self, its education in the arl
of contemplation, are usually know by the Christian mystics a<
the “degrees of prayer” or “orison.” But the common implica-
tions of the word “prayer,” with its suggestions of formal devotion
detailed petition — a definite something asked for, and a definite
duty done, by means of extern poi ary or traditional allocutions—
do not really suggest the nature of those supersensual activitie!
which the mystics mean to express in their use of this term.

Mystical prayer, or “orison” — the term which I propose for the
sake of clearness to use here — has nothing in common witf
petition. It is not articulate; it has no forms. "It is,” says "The
Mirror of St. Edmund,” “naught else but yearning of soul.” 1 —
the expression of man's metaphysical thirst. In it, says Grou, “the
soul is united to God in its ground, the created intelligence to th*
Intelligence Increate, without the intervention of imagination 01
reason, or of anything but a very simple attention of the mine
and an equally simple application of the will.” 3 On the psychological
side its development involves a steady discipline of the mystic’*
rich subliminal mind, slowly preparing the channels in which tilt
deeper consciousness is to flow. This discipline reduces to some
sort of order, makes effective for life, those involuntary states ol
passivity, rapture and intuition which are the characteristic way*
in which an uncontrolled, uncultivated genius for the Absolute
breaks out. To the subject himself, however, his orison seems rathei
a free and mutual act of love ; a supernatural intercourse between
the soul and the divine, or some aspect of the divine, sometimes
full of light and joy, sometimes dark and bare .3 In some of its
degrees it is a placid, trustful waiting upon messages from without.
In others, it is an inarticulate communion, a wordless rapture, a
silent gazing upon God. The mystics have exhausted all the
resources of all tongues in their efforts to tell us of the rewards

* Cap. xvii. 1 ].N. Grou, “L'Ecole de J6sus,** vc/1. ii., p. 8.

3 ‘T discover all truths in the interior of my soul,” says Antoinette Bourignan,
“especially when I am recollected in my solitude in a forgetfulness of all Things.
Then my spirit communicates with Another Spirit, and they entertain one another
as two friends who converse about serious matters. And this conversation is so
sweet that I have sometimes passed a whole day and a night in it without
interruption or standing in need of meat or drink** (MacEwen, “Antoinette
Bourignan, Quietist/* p. 109).



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 307

which await those who will undertake this most sublime and
difficult of arts.

As we come to know our friends better by having intercourse
with them, so by this deliberate intercourse the self enters more
and more deeply into the Heart of Reality. Climbing like ]>ante
step by step up the ladder of contemplation, it comes at last to
the Empyrean, “ivi e perfetta, matura ed intera ciascuna d^aiiza .” 1
The true end of orison, like the true end of that mystical life
within which it flowers, is the supreme meeting between Lover and
Beloved, between God and the soul. Its method is the method of
the mystic life, transcendence: a gradual elimination of sensible
image, and bit by bit approximation of the contemplative self to
reality, gradually producing within it those conditions in which
•Union can take place. This entails a concentration, a turning
inwards, of all those faculties which the normal self has been
accustomed to turn outwards, and fritter upon the manifold
illusions of daily life. It means, during the hours of introversion,
a retreat from and refusal of the Many, in order that the mind
may be able to apprehend the One. “Behold / 1 says Boelime, “if
thou desirest to see God's Light in thy Soul, and be divinely
illuminated and conducted, this is the short way that thou art to
take ; not to let the Eye of thy Spirit enter into Matter or fill itself
with any Thing whatever, either in Heaven or Earth, but to let
it enter by a naked faith into the Light of the Majesty /' 2
“What this opening of the ghostly eye is/' says Hilton, “the
greatest clerk on earth could not imagine by his wit, nor show fully
by his tongue. For it may not be got by study nor through man s
travail only, but principally by grace of the Holy Ghost and
with travail of man. I dread mickle to speak aught of it, for me
thinketh I cannot; it passeth mine assay, and my lips are unclean.
Nevertheless, for I expect love asketh and love biddeth, therefore
shall say a little more of it as I hope love teacheth. This opening
of the ghostly eye is that lighty murkness and rich nought that
I spake of before, and it may be called: Purity of spirit and ghostly
rest, inward stillness and peace of conscience, highness of thought
and onlyness of soul , a lively feeling of grace and privity of heart ,
the waking sleep of the spouse and tasting of heavenly savour, burning
in love and shining in light, entry of contemplation and reforming
in feeling . . . they are divers in showing of words, nevertheless
they are all one in sense of soothfastness ."3
“Human industry/' says Hilton here, must be joined to “grace/*
If the spiritual eye is to be opened, definite work must be done.
So long as the “eye which looks upon Time" fills itself with things

k

« Par. xxii. 64. * “Dialogues of the Supersensual life," p. 66.

j Hilton. “The Seale of Perfection.” bk. ii„ cap. xl.



MYSTICISM


308

and usurps the conscious field, that spiritual eye which 1 looks
upon Eternity” can hardly act at all: and this eye must not only
be opened, it must be trained, so that it may endure to gaze
steadfastly at the Uncreated Light. This training and purging of
the transcendental sight is described under many images; “diverse
in showing of words, one in sense and soothfastness/’ Its essence
is a progressive cleaning of the mirror, a progressive self-emptying
of all that is not real; the attainment of that unified state of
consciousness which will permit a pure, imageless apprehension
of the final Reality which “hath no image” to be received by
the self. “Naked orison,” “emptiness,” “nothingness,” “entire
surrender,” “peaceful love in life naughted,” say the mystics
again and again. Where apprehension of the divine comes by way
of vision or audition, this is but a concession to human weakness;
a sign, they think, that “sensitive nature” is not yet wholly
transcended. It is a translation of the true tongue of angels into
a dialect that the normal mind can understand. A steady abolition
of sense imagery, a cutting off of all possible sources of illusion, all
possible encouragements of selfhood and pride — the most fertile
of all sources of deception — this is the condition of pure sight ; and
the “degrees of orison,” the “steep stairs of love” which they
climb so painfully, are based upon this necessity.

The terms used by individual mystics, the divisions which
they adopt in describing the self’s progress in contemplation, are
bewildering in their variety. Here, more than elsewhere, the mania
for classification has obsessed them. We find, too, when we come
to compare one with another, that the language which they
employ is not always so exact as it seems : nor are traditional terms
always used in the same sense. Sometimes by the word “contempla-
tion” they intend to describe the whole process of introversion:
sometimes they reserve it for the “orison of union,” sometimes
identify it with ecstasy It has been pointed out by Delacroix that'
even St. Teresa’s classification of her own states is far from lucid,
and varies in each of her principal works . 1 Thus in the “Life” she
appears to treat Recollection and Quiet as synonymous, whilst
in “The Way of Perfection” these conditions are sharply differ-
entiated. In “The Interior Castle” she adopts an entirely different
system; the prayer of quiet being there called “tasting of God .” 2
Finally, Augustine Baker, in treating of the “Prayer of Interior
Silence and Quiet,” insists that by the term “Quiet” St. Teresa
did not mean this at all, but a form of “supernatural con-
templation. ”3

* “lstudes sur le Mysticisme,” p. 18.

» Vida, cap. xiv.; “Camino de Perfection,” cap. xxxi.; “El Castillo Interior,"
Moradas Cuartas, cap. ii. 5 “Holy Wisdom,” Treatise iii. § ii. cap. vii.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET .309

Thus we are gradually forced to the conclusion that the so-called
'degrees of orison” so neatly tabulated by ascetic writers are
argely artificial and symbolic: that the process which they profess
.0 describe is really, like life itself, one and continuous — not a
itairway but a slope — and the parts into which they break it up
ire diagrammatic. Nearly every mystic makes these breaks in a
iifferent place, though continuing to use the language of his pre-
lecessors. In his efforts towards self-analysis he divides and sub-
livides, combines and differentiates his individual moods. Hence
.he confusion of mind which falls upon those who try to harmonize
liilerent systems of contemplation: to identify St. Teresa’s “Four
Agrees” 1 with Hugh of St. Victor’s other four, 2 and with Richard
)f St. Victor’s “four steps of ardent love”:3 or to accommodate
lpon this diagram Hilton’s simple and poetic “three steps of
:<mtemplation”4 — Knowing, Loving, and Knowing-and-Loving —
vhere the adventurer rather than the map-maker speaks. Such
me shades, says Augustine Baker in this connection, are “nicely
list inguished” by the author "rather out of a particular experience
)f the effects passing in his own soul 1 which perhaps are not the
;ame in all” than for any more general reason. 5

Some diagram, however, some set scheme, the writer on intro-
version must have, if he is to describe with lucidity the normal
levelopment of the contemplative consciousness: and so long
is the methodological nature of this diagram is kept in mind,
here can be little objection to the use of it. I propose then to
ixamine under three divisions that continuous and orderly
growth, that gradual process of change, by which the mystical
:onsciousness matures, and develops its apprehension of (!od.
N e will give to these three divisions names familiar to all readers of
iscetic literature: Recollection, Quiet, and Contemplation. Each
>f these three parts of the introversive experience may be discerned
n embryo in that little experiment at which the reader has been
nvited to assist: the act of concentration, the silence, the new per-
ception which results. Each has a characteristic beginning which
inks it with its predecessor, and a characteristic end which shades
)ff into the next state. Thus Recollection commonly begins in
Meditation and develops into the “Orison of Inward Silence or
simplicity,” which again melts into the true “Quiet.” “Quiet” as
t becomes deeper passes into Ordinary Contemplation: and this

* Meditation, Quiet, a nameless “intermediate’* degree, and the Orison of
Jnion (Vida, cap. xi.).

» Meditation, Soliloquy, Consideration, Rapture (Hugh of St. Victor, “De
Contemplatione”).

3 “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis." Vide supra, p. 139.

4 “The Scale of Perfection," bk. i. caps, iv. to viii.

f “Holy Wisdom,** loc. cit ., § ii. cap. i.



3 io MYSTICISM

grows through Contemplation proper to that Orison of Passive
Union which is the highest of the non-ecstatic introversive states.
Merely to state the fact thus is to remind ourselves how smoothly
continuous is this life-process of the soul.

It is the object of contemplative prayer, as it is the object of all
education, to discipline and develop certain growing faculties.
Here, the faculties are those of the “transcendental self/' the
“new man' 1 — all those powers which we associate with the
“spiritual consciousness.” The “Sons of God,” however, like the
sons of men, begin as babies; and their first lessons must not be
too hard. Therefore the educative process conforms to and takes
advantage of every step of the natural process of growth: as we,
in the education of our children, make the natural order in which
their faculties develop the basis of our scheme of cultivation . 1
Recollection, Quiet, and Contemplation, then, answer to the
order in which the mystic's powers unfold. Roughly speaking, we
shall find that the form of spiritual attention which is called
“Meditative” or “Recollective” goes side by side with the Purifica-
tion of the Self; that “Quiet” tends to be characteristic of Illumina-
tion ; that Contemplation proper — at any rate in its higher forms —
is most fully experienced by those who have attained, or nearly
attained, the Unitive Way. At the same time, just as the self in
its “first mystic life,” before it has passed through the dark night
of the spirit, often seems to run through the whole gamut of
spiritual states, and attain that immediate experience of the
Absolute which it seeks — though as a fact it has not reached those
higher levels of consciousness on which true and permanent union
takes place — so too in its orison. At any point in its growth it may
experience for brief periods that imageless and overpowering sense
of identity with the Absolute Life — that loving and exalted
absorption in God — which is called “passive union,” and anticipates
the consciousness which is characteristic of the unitive life. Over
and over again in its “prayerful process” it recapitulates in little
the whole great process of its life. It runs up for an instant to
levels where it is not yet strong enough to dwell: “seeks God in its
ground” and finds that which it seeks. Therefore we must not
be too strict in our identification of the grades of education with
the stages of growth.

This education, rightly understood, is one coherent process:
it consists in a steady and voluntary surrender of the awakened
consciousness, its feeling, thought, and will, to the play of those
transcendental influences, that inflowing vitality, which it con-
ceives of as divine. In the preparative process of Recollection,
the unruly mind is brought into subjection. In “Quiet” the eager
will is silenced, the “wheel of imagination" is stilled. In Contem-



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 311

plation, the heart at last comes to its own — Cor ad cor loquitur .
In their simplest forms, these three states involve the deliberate
concentration upon, the meek resting in, the joyous communing
with, the ineffable Object of man’s quest. They require a pro-
gressive concentration of the mystic’s powers, a gradual handing
over of the reins from the surface intelligence to the deeper mind;
that essential self which alone is capable of God. In Recollection
the surface-mind still holds, so to speak, the leading strings: but
in “Quiet” it surrenders them wholly, allowing consciousness to
sink into that “blissful silence in which God works and speaks.”
This act of surrender, this deliberate negation of thought, is an
essential preliminary of the contemplative state. “Lovers put out
^the candles and draw the curtains when they wish to see the god
and the goddess ; and in the higher communion the night of thought
is the light of perception.” 1

The education of the self in the successive degrees of orison lias
been compared by St. Teresa, in a celebrated passage in her Life,
to four ways of watering the garden of the soul so that it may
bring forth its flowers and fruits. 2 3 The first and most primitive of
these ways is meditation. This, she says, is like drawing water by
hand from a deep well : the slowest and most laborious of all means
of irrigation. Next to this is the orison of quiet, which is a little
better and easier : for here soul seems to receive some help, i.e., with
the stilling of the senses the subliminal faculties are brought into
play. The well has now been fitted with a windlass — that little
Moorish water-wheel possessed by every Castilian farm. Hence
we get more water for the energy we expend: more sense of reality
in exchange for our abstraction from the unreal. Also “the water
is higher, and accordingly the labour is much less than it was when
the water had to be drawn out of the depths of the well. I mean
, that the water is nearer to it, for grace now reveals itself more
distinctly to the soul.” In the third stage, or orison of union, we
leave all voluntary activities of the mind : the gardener no longer
depends on his own exertions, contact between subject and object
is established, there is no more stress and strain. It is as if a little
river now ran through our garden and watered it. We have but
to direct the stream. In the fourth and highest stage, God Himself
waters our garden with rain from heaven “drop by drop.” The
attitude of the self is now that of perfect receptivity, “passive
contemplation,” loving trust. Individual activity is sunk in the
“great life of the All.”3

The measure of the mystic’s real progress is and must always

1 Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower/’ “Aurea Dicta/*

xiii. * Vida, cap. xi. §§ io and n.

3 The detailed analysis of these four degrees fills caps, xii.-xviii. of the Vide.



MYSTICISM


3^2

be his progress in love ; for his apprehension is an apprehension of
the heart. His education, his watering of the garden of the soul,
is a cultivation of this one flower— this Rosa Mystica which has
its root in God. His advance in contemplation, then, will be
accompanied step by step by those exalted feeling- states which
Richard of St. Victor called the Degrees of Ardent Love. Without
their presence, all the drill in the world will not bring him to the
true contemplative state; though it may easily produce abnormal
powers of perception of the kind familiar to students of the occult.

Thus our theory of mystic education is in close accord with our
theory of mystic life. In both, there is a progressive surrender
of selfhood under the steady advance of conquering love; a
stilling of that “I, Me, and Mine,” which is linked by all the
senses, and by all its own desires, to the busy world of visible
things. This progressive surrender usually appears in the practice
of orison as a progressive inward ietreat from circumference to
centre; to that ground of the soul, that substantial somewhat in
man, deep buried for most of us beneath the great rubbish- heap
of our surface-interests, where human life and divine life meet.
To clear away the rubbish-heap so that he may get down to this
treasure-house is from one point of view the initial task of the
contemplative. This clearing away is the first part of “introver-
sion”: that journey inwards to his own centre where, stripped of
all his cleverness and merit, reduced to his “nothingness,” he can
“meet God without intermediary.” This ground of the soul, this
strange inward sanctuary to which the normal man so seldom
penetrates, is, says Eckhart, “immediately receptive of the Divine
Being,” and “no one can move it but God alone .” 1 There the
finite self encounters the Infinite; and, by a close and loving
communion with and feeding on the attributes of the Divine
Substance, is remade in the interests of the Absolute Life. This /
encounter, the consummation of mystical culture, is what we mean
by contemplation in its highest form. Here we are on the verge of
that great self-merging act which is of the essence of pure love:
which Reality has sought of us, and we have unknowingly desired
of It. Here contemplation and union are one. “Thus do we grow,”
says Ruysbroeck, “and, carried above ourselves, above reason,
into the very heart of love, there do we feed according to the
spirit; and taking flight for the Godhead by naked love, we go
to the encounter of the Bridegroom, to the encounter of His Spirit,
which is His love; and thus we are brought forth by God, out of

1 Pred. i. This doctrine of man’s latent absoluteness, expressed under a
multitude of different symbols, is the central dogma of mysticism, and the
guarantee of the validity of the contemplative process. In its extreme form, it
can hardly be defended from the charge of pantheism ; but the Christian mystics
are usually careful to steer clear of this danger.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 313

our selfhood, into the immersion of love, in which we possess
blessedness and are one with God .” 1

Recollection

The beginning of the process of introversion, the first deliberate
act in which the self turns towards the inward path, will not merely
be the yielding to an instinct, the indulgence of a natural taste
for reverie; it will be a voluntary and purposeful undertaking. Like
conversion, it entails a break with the obvious, which must, of
necessity, involve and affect the whole normal consciousness. It
will be evoked by the mystic’s love, and directed by his reason ;

| but can only be accomplished by the strenuous exercise of his will.
These preparatory labours of the contemplative life — these first
steps upon the ladder — are, says St. Teresa, very hard, and require
greater courage than all the rest . 3 All the scattered interests of the
self have here to be collected; there must be a deliberate and
unnatural act of attention, a deliberate expelling of all discordant
images from the consciousness — a hard and ungrateful task. Since
the transcendental faculties are still young and weak, the senses
not wholly mortified, it needs a stern determination, a “wilful
choice,” if we are to succeed in concentrating our attention upon
the whispered messages from within, undistracted by the loud
voices which besiege us from without.

4 ‘How,” says the Disciple to the Master in one of Boehm e's
"Dialogues,” "am I to seek in the Centre this Fountain of Light
which may enlighten me throughout and bring my properties into
perfect harmony? I am in Nature, as I said before, and which
way shall I pass through Nature and the light thereof, so that I
may come into the supernatural and supersensual ground whence
this true Light, which is the Light of Minds, doth arise; and this
without the destruction of my nature, or quenching the Light of it,
which is my reason ?

" Master . Cease but from thine own activity, steadfastly fixing

thine Eye upon one Point For this end, gather in all thy

thoughts, and by faith press into the Centre, laying hold upon the
Word of God, which is infallible and which hath called thee. Be
thou obedient to this call, and be silent before the Lord, sitting
alone with Him in thy inmost and most hidden cell, thy mind
being centrally united in itself, and attending His Will in the
patience of hope. So shall thy Light break forth as the morning,
and after the redness thereof is passed, the Sun himself, which
thou waitest for, shall arise unto thee, and under his most healing
wings thou shalt greatly rejoice: ascending and descending in

* Kuysbroeck, “De Calculo” (condensed). * Vida, cap. xi. § 17.



314 MYSTICISM

his bright and health-giving beams. Behold, this is the feme Super-
sensual Ground of Life/' 1

In this short paragraph Boehme has caught and described the
psychological state in which all introversion must begin: the
primary simplification of consciousness, steadfastly fixing the soul's
eye upon one point, and the turning inwards of the whole conative
powers for a purpose rather believed in than known, “by faith
pressing into the centre.'"

The unfortunate word Recollection , which the hasty reader is
apt to connect with remembrance, is the traditional term by
which mystical writers define just such a voluntary concentration,
such a first collecting or gathering in of the attention of the self
to its “most hidden cell." That self is as yet unacquainted with ,
the strange plane of silence which so soon becomes familiar to
those who attempt even the lowest activities of the contemplative
life; where the self is released from succession, the noises of the
world are never heard, and the great adventures of the spirit take
place. It stands here between the two planes of its being ; the Eye
of Time is still awake. It knows that it wants to enter the inner
world, that “interior palace where the King of Kings is guest'': 2
but it must find some device to help it over the threshold — rather,
in the language of psychology, to shift that threshold and permit
its subliminal intuition of the Absolute to emerge.

This device is as a rule the practice of meditation, in which the
state of Recollection usually begins : that is to say, the deliberate
consideration of and dwelling upon some one aspect of Reality —
an aspect most usually chosen from amongst the religious beliefs
of the self. Thus Hindu mystics will brood upon a sacred word,
whilst Christian contemplatives set before their minds one of the
names or attributes of God, a fragment of Scripture, an incident
of the life of Christ; and allow — indeed encourage — this considera-
tion, and the ideas and feelings which flow from it, to occupy the
whole mental field. This powerful suggestion, kept before the
consciousness by an act of will, overpowers the stream of small
suggestions which the outer world pours incessantly upon the
mind. The self, concentrated upon this image or idea, dwelling
on it more than thinking about it — as one may gaze upon a picture
that one loves — falls gradually and insensibly into the condition of
reverie; and, protected by this holy day-dream from the more
distracting dream of life, sinks into itself, and becomes in the
language of asceticism“recollected'' or gathered together. Although
it is deliberately ignoring the whole of its usual “external
universe," its faculties are wide awake: all have had their part in

1 “Dialogues of the Supersensual Life," p. 56.

* St. Teresa, “Camino de Perfeccion," cap. xxx.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 315

the wilful production of this state of consciousness: and this it is
which marks off meditation and recollection from the higher or
“infused” degrees of orison.

Such meditation as this, says Richard of St. Victor, is the activity
proper to one who has attained the first degree of ardent love. By
it, ‘‘God enters into the mind,” and “the mind also enters into
itself”; and thus receives in its inmost cell the “first visit of the
Beloved/' It is a kind of half-way house between the perception of
Appearance and the perception of Reality. To one in whom this
state is established consciousness seems like a blank field, save for
the “one point" in its centre, the subject of the meditation.
Towards this focus the introversive self seems to press inwards
from every side; still faintly conscious of the buzz of the external
’ world outside its ramparts, but refusing to respond to its appeals.
Presently the subject of meditation begins to take on a new
significance; to glow with life and light. The contemplative
suddenly feels that he knows it ; in the complete, vital, but in-
describable way in which one knows a friend. More, through it
hints are coming to him of mightier, nameless things. It ceases to
be a picture, and becomes a window through which the mystic
peers out into the spiritual universe, and apprehends to some
extent — though how, he knows not — the veritable presence
of God.

In these meditative and recollective states, the self still feels
very clearly the edge of its own personality: its separateness from
the Somewhat Other, the divine reality set over against the soul.
It is aware of that reality: the subject of its meditation becomes
a symbol through which it receives a distinct message from the
transcendental world. But it is still operating in a natural way —
as mystical writers would say, “by means of the faculties." There
is yet no conscious fusion with a greater Life; no resting in the
divine atmosphere, as in the “Quiet" ; no involuntary and ecstatic
lifting up of the soul to direct apprehension of truth, as in con-
templation. Recollection is a definite psychic condition, which
has logical psychic results. Originally induced by meditation, or
absorbed brooding upon certain aspects of the Real, it develops
in the Self, by way of the strenuous control exercised by the
will over the understanding, a power of cutting its connection
with the external world, and retreating to the inner world of
the spirit.

“True recollection," says St. Teresa, “has characteristics by
which it can be easily recognized. It produces a certain effect
which I do not know how to explain, but which is well understood
by those who have experienced it. . . . It is true that recollection
has several degrees, and that in the beginning these great effects



3 i6 MYSTICISM

are not felt, because it is not yet profound enough. But support
the pain which you first feel in recollecting yourself, despise the
rebellion of nature, overcome the resistance of the body, which
loves a liberty which is its ruin, learn self-conquest, persevere thus
for a time, and you will perceive very clearly the advantages which
you gain from it. As soon as you apply yourself to orison, you will
at once feel your senses gather themselves together: they seem like
bees which return to the hive and there shut themselves up to
work at the making of honey: and this will take place without
effort or care on your part. God thus rewards the violence which
your soul has been doing to itself; and gives to it such a domina-
tion over the senses that a sign is enough when it desires to recol-
lect itself, for them to obey and so gather themselves together.
At the first call of the will, they come back more and more quickly.
At last, after countless exercises of this kind, God disposes them to
a state of utter rest and of perfect contemplation." 1

This description makes it clear that "recollection" is a form of
spiritual gymnastics; less valuable for itself than for the training
which it gives, the powers which it develops. In it, says St. Teresa
again, the soul enters with its God into that Paradise which is
within itself, and shuts the door behind it upon all the things of
the world. "You should know, my daughters," she continues,
"that this is no supernatural act, but depends upon our will, and
that therefore we can do it with that ordinary assistance of God
which we need for all our acts and even for our good thoughts.
For here we are not concerned with the silence of the faculties,
but with a simple retreat of these powers into the ground of the
soul. There are various ways of arriving at it, and these ways are
described in different books. There it is said that we must abstract
the mind from exterior things, in order that we may inwardly
approach God: that even in our work we ought to retire within
ourselves, though it be only for a moment : that this remembrance
of a God who companions us within, is a great help to us; finally,
that we ought little by little to habituate ourselves to gentle and
silent converse with Him, so that He may make us feel His
presence in the soul." 3


Quiet

More important for us, because more characteristically mystical,
is the next great stage of orison: that curious and extremely
definite mental state which mystics call the Prayer of Quiet or
Simplicity, cr sometimes the Interior Silence This represents

1 “Caraino de Peri'eccion,” cap. xxx.

• Op. cit., cap. xxxi.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 317

the result lor consciousness of a further degree of that inward
retreat which Recollection began.

Out of the deep, slow brooding and pondering on some mystery,
some incomprehensible link between himself and the Real, or the
deliberate practice of loving attention to God, the contemplative
— perhaps by way of a series of moods and acts which his analytic
powers may cause him ‘‘nicely to distinguish” — glides, almost
insensibly, on to a plane of perception for which human speech
has few equivalents. It is a plane which is apparently characterized
by an immense increase in the receptivity of the self, and by an
almost complete suspension of the reflective powers. The strange
silence which is the outstanding quality of this state — almost the
only note in regard to it which the surface-intelligence can secure
- — is not describable. Here, as Samuel Rutherford said of another
of life's secrets, “Come and see will tell you much: come nearer will
say more.” Here the self passes beyond the stage at which its
perceptions are capable of being dealt with by thought. It can no
longer ‘‘take notes” : can only surrender itself to the stream of an
inflowing life, and to the direction of a larger will. Discursive
thought would only interfere with this process: as it interferes
with the vital processes of the body if it once gets them under its
control. That thought, then, already disciplined by Recollection,
gathered up, and forced to work in the interests of the transcen-
dental mind, is now to be entirely inhibited.

As Recollection becomes deeper, the self slides into a certain
dim yet vivid consciousness of the Infinite. The door tight shut
on the sensual world, it becomes aware that it is immersed in a
more real world which it cannot define. It rests quietly in this
awareness: quite silent, utterly at peace. In the place of the
struggles for complete concentration which mark the beginning
pf Recollection, there is now ‘‘a living, somehow self-acting
recollection — with God. His peace, power, and presence, right in
the midst of this rose of spiritual fragrance/' 1 With this surrender
to something bigger, as with the surrender of conversion, comes
an immense relief of strain. This is “Quiet” in its most perfect
form : this sinking, as it were, of the little child of the Infinite into
its Father's arms. The giving up of I-hood, the process of self-
stripping, which we have seen to be the essence of the purification
of the self, finds its parallel in this phase of the contemplative
experience. Here, in this complete cessation of man's proud effort
to do somewhat of himself, Humility, who rules the Fourth
Degree of Love, begins to be known in her paradoxical beauty and
power. Consciousness loses to find, and dies that it may live. No
longer, in Rolle's pungent phrase, is it a “Raunsaker of the myghte
* F. von Htigel. “Letters to a Niece,” p. 140.



MYSTICISM


3x8

of Godd and of His Majeste.” 1 Thus the act by which it passes into
the Quiet is a sacrament of the whole mystic quest: of the turning
from doing to being, the abolition of separateness in the interests
of the Absolute Life.

The state of " Quiet,” we have said, entails suspension of the
surface-consciousness: yet consciousness of the subject’s person-
ality remains. It follows, generally, on a period of deliberate and
loving recollection, of a slow and steady withdrawal of the atten-
tion from the channels of sense. To one who is entering this state,
the external world seems to get further and further away: till at
last nothing but the paramount fact of his own existence remains.
So startling, very often, is the deprivation of all his accustomed
mental furniture, of the noise and flashing of the transmitting
instruments of sense, that the negative aspect of his condition
dominates consciousness; and he can but describe it as a nothing-
ness, a pure passivity, an emptiness, a “naked” orison. He is there,
as it were poised, resting, waiting, he does not know for what:
only he is conscious that all, even in this utter emptiness, is well.
Presently, however, he becomes aware that Something fills this
emptiness; something omnipresent, intangible, like sunny air.
Ceasing to attend to the messages from without, he begins to
notice That which has always been within. His whole being is
thrown open to its influence: it permeates his consciousness.

There are, then, two aspects of the Orison of Quiet: the aspect
of deprivation, of emptiness which begins it, and the aspect of
acquisition, of something found, in which it is complete. In its
description, all mystics will be found to lean to one side or the
other, to the affirmative or negative element which it contains.
The austere mysticism of Eckhart and his followers, their tempera-
mental sympathy with the Neoplatonic language of Dionysius
the Areopagite, caused them to describe it — and also very oftei^
the higher state of contemplation to which it leads — as above all
things an emptiness, a divine dark, an ecstatic deprivation. They
will not profane its deep satisfactions by the inadequate terms
proper to earthly peace and joy : and, true to their school, fall back
on the paradoxically suggestive powers of negation. To St. Teresa,
and mystics of her type, on the other hand, even a little and
inadequate image of its joy seems better than none. To them it is
a sweet calm, a gentle silence, in which the lover apprehends the
presence of the Beloved: a God-given state, over which the self
has little control.

In Eckhart's writings enthusiastic descriptions of the Quiet, of
inward silence and passivity as the fruit of a deliberate recollec-
tion, abound. In his view, the psychical state of Quiet is pre-
* Prose Treatises of Richard Roile (E.E.T.S. 20), p. 42.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 319

eminently that in which the soul of man begins to be united with
its “ground,” Pure Being. It marks the transition from “natural”
to “ supernatural” prayer. The emptyingof thefieldof consciousness,
its cleansing of all images — even of those symbols of Reality
which are the objects of meditation — is the necessary condition
under which alone this encounter can take place.

“The soul,” he says, “with all its powers, has divided and
scattered itself in outward things, each according to its functions:
the power of sight in the eye, the power of hearing in the ear, the
power of taste in the tongue, and thus they are the less able to
work inwardly, for every power which is divided is imperfect.
So the soul, if she would work inwardly, must call home all her
powers and collect them from all divided things to one inward
work. ... If a man will work an inward work, he must pour all
liis powers into himself as into a corner of the soul, and must hide
himself from all images and forms, and then he can work. Then
he must come into a forgetting and a not-knowing. He must be in
a stillness and silence, where the Word may be heard. One cannot
draw near to this Word better than by stillness and silence: then
jjt is heard and understood in utter ignorance. When one knows
nothing, it is opened and revealed. Then we shall become aware of
the Divine Ignorance, and our ignorance will be ennobled and
adorned with supernatural knowledge. And when we simply keep
>ursclves receptive, we are more perfect than when at work.” 1

The psychic state of Quiet has a further value for the mystic,
as being the intellectual complement and expression of the moral
state of humility and receptivity: the very condition, says
Eckhart, of the New Birth. “It may be asked whether this Birth
is best accomplished in Man when he does the work and forms and
thinks himself into God , or when he keeps himself in Silence, stillness
tad peace, so that God may speak and work in him; . . . the best
and noblest way in which thou mayst come into this work and
life is by keeping silence, and letting God work and speak. When
ill the powers are withdrawn from their work and images, there is
this word spoken .” 3

Eckhart’s view of the primary importance of “Quiet” as
essentially the introverted state is shared by all those mediaeval
mystics who lay stress on the psychological rather than the
objective aspect of the spiritual life. They regard it as the necessary
pieliminary of all contemplation; and describe it as a normal
phase of the inner experience, possible of attainment by all those
who have sufficiently disciplined themselves in patience, recol-
lection, and humilitj .

In an old English mystical tract by the author of “The Cloud
Meister Eckhart, Pred. ii. • Ibid., Pred. i.



MYSTICISM


320

of Unknowing” there is a curious and detailed instruction on the
disposition of mind proper to this orison of silence. It clearly owes
much to the teaching of the Areopagite, and something surely—
if we may judge by its vivid and exact instructions — to personal
experience. "When thou comest by thyself,” says the master to
the disciple for whom this "pystle” was composed, “think not
before what thou shalt do after : but forsake as well good thoughts
as evil thoughts, and pray not with thy mouth, but lift thee right
well. . . . And look that nothing live in thy working mind but a
naked intent stretching unto God, not clothed in any special
thought of God in thyself, how He is in Himself or in any of His
works, but only that He is as He is. Let Him be so, I pray thee,
and make Him on none otherwise speech, nor search in Him bj;
subtilty of wit : but believe by thy ground. This naked intent freely
fastened and grounded by very belief, shall be nought else to thy
thought and thy feeling but a naked thought and a blind feeling
of thine own being. . . . That darkness be thy mirror and thy mind
whole. Think no further of thyself than I bid thee do of thy God,
so that thou be oned with Him in spirit as in thought, without
departing and scattering, for He is thy being and in Him thou arj
that thou art : not only by cause and by being, but also He is in thee
both thy cause and thy being. And therefore think on God as in
this work as thou dost on thyself, and on thyself as thou dost on
God, that He is as He is, and thou art as thou art, and that thy
thought be not scattered nor departed but privied in Him that
is All.” 1

"Let Him be so, I pray thee!” It is an admonition against
spiritual worry, an entreaty to the individual, already at work
twisting experience to meet his own conceptions, to let things
be as they are, to receive and be content. Leave off doing, that
you may be. Leave oil analysis, that you may know. "That mee$
darkness be thy mirror” — humble receptivity is the watchword'
of this state. "In this,” says Eckhart finely, "the soul is of equal
capacity with God, As God is boundless in giving, so the soul is
boundless in receiving. And as God is almighty in His work, so
the soul is an abyss of receptivity : and so she is formed anew with
God and in God. . . . The disciples of St. Dionysius asked him why
Timotheus surpassed them all in perfection. Then said Dionysius,
Timotheus is receptive of God.' And thus thine ignorance is not a
defect but thy highest perfection, and thine inactivity thy highest
work. And so in this work thou must bring all thy works to nought,
and all thy powers into silence, if thou wilt in truth experience
this birth within thyself.”* j

* “An Epistle of Private Counsel’* (B.M. Harl. 674). Printed, with slight
textual variations, in “The Cloud of Unknowing, and other Treatises,” edited byi
Dom Justin McCann. * Eckhart, Pred. ii.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 321

It is interesting to contrast these descriptions of the Quiet with
St. Teresa's subjective account of the same psychological state.
Where the English mystic's teaching is full of an implied appeal
to the will, the Spanish saint is all for the involuntary, or, as she
would call it, the “supernatural" actions of the soul. “This true
orison of quiet," she says, “has in it an element of the supernatural.
We cannot, in spite of all our efforts, procure it for ourselves. It
is a sort of peace in which the soul establishes herself, or rather in
which God establishes the soul, as He did the righteous Simeon.
All her powers are at rest. She understands, but otherwise than bv
the senses, that she is already near her God, and that if she draws
a little nearer, she will become by union one with Him. She docs
*iot see this with the eyes of the body, nor with the eyes of the soul.
... It is like the repose of a traveller who, within sight of the goal,
stops to take breath, and then continues with new strength upon
his way. One feels a great bodily comfort, a great satisfaction of
soul: such is the happiness of the soul in seeing herself close to the
spring, that even without drinking of the waters she finds herself
refreshed. It seems to her that she wants nothing more: the
faculties which are at rest would like always to remain still, for
the least of their movements is able to trouble or prevent her love.
Those who are in this orison wish their bodies to remain motionless,
for it seems to them that at the least movement they will lose this
sweet peace . . . they are in the palace close to their King, and
they see that He begins to give them His kingdom. It seems to
them that they are no longer in the world, and they wish neither
to hear nor to see it, but only God. . . . There is this difference
between the orison of quiet and that in which the whole soul is
united to God; that in this last the soul has not to absorb the
Divine Food. God deposits it with her, she knows not how. The
lorison of quiet, on the other hand, demands, it seems to me, a
slight effort ; but it is accompanied by so much sweetness that
one hardly feels it." 1

“A slight effort," says St. Teresa. “A naked intent stretching,"
says the “Pystle of Private Counsel." These words mark the
frontier between the true and healthy mystic state of “Quiet" and
its morbid perversion in “Quietism": the difference between the
tense stillness of the athlete and the limp passivity of the sluggard,
who is really lazy, though he looks resigned. True “Quiet" is a
means, not an end: is actively embraced, not passively endured.
It is a phase in the self's growth in contemplation ; a bridge which
leads from its old and unco-ordinated life of activity to its new.
unified life of deep action — the real “mystic life" of man. This

“Camino de Perfeccion,” cap. xxxiii. The whole chapter, which is a marvel
of subtle analysis- should be read in this connection.



MYSTICISM


322

state is desired by the mystic, not in order that consciousness may
remain a blank, but in order that the "Word which is Alive" may
be written thereon. Too often, however, this fact has been ignored ;
and the Interior Silence has been put by wayward transcenden-
talists to other and less admirable use.

"Quiet” is the danger-zone of introversion. Of all forms of
mystical activity, perhaps this has been the most abused, the least
understood. Its theory, seized upon, divorced from its context,
and developed to excess, produced the foolish and dangerous
exaggerations of Quietism: and these, in their turn, caused a
wholesale condemnation of the principle of passivity, and made
many superficial persons regard "naked orison" as an essentially
heretical act . 1 The accusation of Quietism has been hurled a
mystics whose only fault was a looseness of language whic h laid
them open to misapprehension. Others, however, have certainly
contrived, by a perversion and isolation of the teachings of great
contemplatives on this point, to justify the deliberate production
of a half-hypnotic state of passivity. With this meaningless state
of "absorption in nothing at all" they were content; claiming that
in it they were in touch with the divine life, and therefore
exempt from the usual duties and limitations of human existence
"Quietism,” usually, and rather unfairly, regarded as the special
folly of Madame Guyon and her disciples, already existed in a fai
more dangerous form in the Middle Ages: and was described
and denounced by Ruysbroeck, one of the greatest masters oi
true introversion whom the Christian world has known.

"Such quietude,” he says, "is nought else but idleness, into which
a man has fallen, and in which he forgets himself and God and
all things in all that has to do with activity. This repose is wholly
contrary to the supernatural repose one possesses in God; foi
that is a loving self -mergence and simple gazing at the Incom
prchensible Brightness; actively sought with inward desire, anc
found in fruitive inclination. . . . When a man possesses this rest
in false idleness, and all loving adherence seems a hindrance tc
him, he clings to himself in his quietude and lives contrary to the
first way in which man is united with God ; and this is the beginning
of all ghostly error ." 2

There can be no doubt that for selves of a certain psychica
constitution, such a "false idleness" is only too easy of attainment
They can by wilful self-suggestion deliberately produce this empti-
ness, this inward silence, and luxuriate in its peaceful effects. T(
do this from self -regarding motives, or to do it to excess — to lei

* Note, for instance, the cautious language of “Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii
fm. cap. vii.

• Ruysbroeck, “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," 1. ii. caps. lxvi. (condensed!



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 323

“peaceful enjoyment” swamp “active love” — is a mystical vice:
and this perversion of the spiritual faculties, like perversion of the
natural faculties, brings degeneration in its train. It leads to the
absurdities of “holy indifference,” and ends in the complete
stultification of the mental and moral life. The true mystic never
tries deliberately to enter the orison of quiet : with St. Teresa, he
regards it as a supernatural gift, beyond his control, though fed
by his will and love. That is to say, where it exists in a healthy
form, it appears spontaneously, as a phase in normal development ;
not as a self-induced condition, a psychic trick.

The balance to be struck in this stage of introversion can only
be expressed, it seems, in paradox. The true condition of quiet,
jjiccording to the great mystics, is at once active and passive: it is
pure surrender, but a surrender which is not limp self-abandon-
ment, but rather the free and constantly renewed self-giving and
self-emptying of a burning love. The departmental intellect is
silenced, but the totality of character is flung open to the influence
of the Real. Personality is not lost: only its hard edge is gone. A
“rest most busy,” says Hilton. Like the soaring of an eagle, says
Augustine Baker, when “the flight is continued for a good space
with a great swiftness, but withal with great stillness, quietness
and ease, without any waving of the wings at all, or the least force
used in any member, being in as much ease and stillness as if she
were reposing in her nest.” 1

“According to the unanimous teaching of the most experienced
and explicit of the specifically Theistic and Christian mystics,”
says Von Hiigel, “the appearance, the soul's own impression, of
a cessation of life and energy of the soul in periods of special union
with God, or of great advance in spirituality, is an appearance
Dnly. Indeed this, at such times strong, impression of rest springs
most certainly from an unusually large amount of actualized
energy, an energy which is now penetrating, and finding expression
by ever pore and fibre of the soul. The whole moral and spiritual
:reature expands and rests, yes; but this very rest is produced
by Action, 'unperceived because so fleet, so near, so all-fulfilling/ ” a

The great teachers of Quietism, having arrived at and experi-
enced the psychological state of “quiet”: having known the
meffable peace and certainty, the bliss which follows on its act
:>f complete surrender, its utter and speechless resting in the
Absolute Life, believed themselves to have discovered in this half-
vay house the goal of the mystic quest. Therefore, whilst much
)f their teaching remains true, as a real description of a real and
7dl id state experienced by almost all contemplatives in the course

* “Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii. § iii. cap. vii.

* Von Hfkgel, ‘The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. ii. p. 13a.



MYSTICISM


324

of their development, the inference which they drew from it, that
in this mere blank abiding in the deeps the soul had reached the
end of her course, was untrue and bad for life.

Thus Molinos gives in the “Spiritual Guide” many unexceptional
maxims upon Interior Silence : “By not speaking nor desiring, and
not thinking,” he says justly enough of the contemplative spirit,
“she arrives at the true and perfect mystical silence wherein God
speaks with the soul, communicates Himself to it, and in the abyss
of its own depth teaches it the most perfect and exalted wisdom.
He calls and guides it to this inward solitude and mystical silence,
when He says that He will speak to it alone in the most secret and
hidden part of the heart.” Here Molinos speaks the language of all
mystics, yet the total result of his teaching was to suggest to tli#
ordinary mind that there was a peculiar virtue in doing nothing
at all, and that all deliberate spiritual activities were bad. 1

Much of the teaching of modern “mystical” cults is thus crudely
quietistic. It insists on the necessity of “going into the silence, ”
and even, with a strange temerity, gives preparatory lessons in
subconscious meditation: a proceeding which might well provoke
the laughter of the saints. The faithful, being gathered together
are taught by simple exercises in recollection the way to attain
the “Quiet.” By this mental trick the modern transcendentalist
naturally attains to a state of vacant placidity, in which he rests :
and “remaining in a distracted idleness and misspending the time
in expectation of extraordinary visits,” believes — with a faith
which many of the orthodox might envy — that he is here “united
with his Principle.” But, though the psychological state which
contemplatives call the prayer of quiet is a common condition of
mystical attainment, it is not by itself mystical at all. It is a state
of preparation: a way of opening the door. That which comes in^
when the door is opened will be that which we truly and passion
ately desire. The will makes plain the way: the heart — the whole
man — conditions the guest. The true contemplative, coming to
this plane of utter stillness, does not desire “extraordinary favours
and visitations,” but the privilege of breathing for a little while the
atmosphere of Love. He is about that which St. Bernard called
“the business of all businesses”: goes, in perfect simplicity, to the
encounter of Perfection, not to the development of himself.

So, even at this apparently “passive” stage of his progress, the
mystic's operations are found on analysis to have a dynamic
and purposive character: his very repose is the result of stress.
He is a pilgrim that still seeks his country. Urged by his innate
tendency to transcendence, he is on his way to higher levels, more ,

* He goes so far as to say in one of his “condemned" propositions, “Oportet
hominem suas potentias annihilare,” and“ velle operari active est Deum offendere."



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 325

sublime fulfilments, greater self-giving acts. Though he may have
forsaken all superficial activity, deep, urgent action still remains.
‘The possession of God,” says Ruysbroeck, ‘‘demands and
supposes active love. He who thinks or feels otherwise is deceived.
All our life as it is in God is immersed in blessedness: all our life
as it is in ourselves is immersed in active love. And though we
live wholly in ourselves and wholly in God, it is but one life; but
it is twofold and opposite according to our feeling — rich and poor,
hungry and fulfilled, active and quiet.” 1 The essential difference
between this true “active” Quiet and Quietism of all kinds has
been admirably expressed by Baron von Hugel. “Quietism, the
doctrine of the One Act ; passivity in a literal sense, as the absence
or imperfection of the power or use of initiative on the soul's
part, in any and every state ; these doctrines were finally con-
demned, and most rightly and necessarily condemned; the Prayer
of Quiet and the various states and degrees of an ever-increasing
predominance of Action over Activity— an action which is all the
more the soul's very own, because the more occasioned, directed,
and informed by God's action and stimulation — these and the
other chief lines of the ancient experience and practice remain
as true, correct, and necessary as ever.” 3

The “ever-increasing predominance of Action over Activity” —
the deep and vital movement of the whole self, too utterly absorbed
for self-consciousness, set over against its fussy surface-energies —
here is the true ideal of orison. This must inform all the soul's
aspiration towards union with the absolute Life and Love which
waits at the door. It is an ideal which includes Quiet, as surely as
it excludes Quietism.

As for that doctrine of the One Act here mentioned, which was
preached by the more extreme quietists; it, like all else in this
movement, was the perversion of a great mystical truth. It taught
that the turning of the soul towards Reality, the merging of the
will in God, which is the very heart of the mystic life, was One Act ,
never to be repeated. This done, the self had nothing more to do
but to rest in the Divine Life, be its unresisting instrument. Pure
passivity and indifference were its ideal. All activity was forbidden
it. all choice was a negation of its surrender, all striving was
unnecessary and wrong. It needed only to rest for evermore and
“let God work and speak in the silence.” This doctrine is so
utterly at variance with all that we know of the laws of life and
growth, that it hardly seems to stand in need of condemnation.
Such a state of indifference — which the quietists strove in vain to
identify with that state of Pure Love which “seeketh not its own”

* “De Calculo," cap. ix.

* “The Mystical Element of Religion/' vol. ii. p. 143.



326 MYSTICISM

in spiritual things — cannot coexist with any of those “degrees of
ardent charity” through which man's spirit must pass on its
journey to the One: and this alone is enough to prove its non-
mystical character.

It is only fair to Madame Guyon to say that she cannot justly
be charged with preaching this exaggeration of passivity, though
a loose and iluid style has allowed many unfortunate inferences
to be drawn from her works. “Some persons,” she says, “when
they hear of the prayer of quiet, falsely imagine that the soul
remains stupid, dead, and inactive. But unquestionably it acteth
therein, more nobly and more extensively than it had ever done
before, for God Himself is the Mover and the soul now acteth by
the agency of Ifis Spirit. . . . Instead, then, of promoting idleness,
we promote the highest activity, by inculcating a total dependence
on the Spirit of God as our moving principle, for in Him we live
and move and have our being. . . . Our activity should therefore
consist in endeavouring to acquire and maintain such a state as
may be most susceptible of divine impressions, most flexile to
all the operations of the Eternal Word. Whilst a tablet is unsteady,
the painter is unable to delineate a true copy : so every act of our
own selfish and proper spirit is productive of false and erroneous
lineaments, it interrupts the work and defeats the design of this
Adorable Artist.” 1

The true mystics, in whom the Orison of Quiet develops to
this state of receptivity, seldom use in describing it the language
of “holy indifference." Their love and enthusiasm will not let
them do that. It is true, of course, that they are indifferent to all
else save the supreme claims of love: but then, it is of love that
they speak. Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat. “This," says St. Teresa,
“is a sleep of the powers of the soul, which are not wholly lost,
nor yet understanding how they are at work. ... To me it seems
to be nothing else than a death, as it were, to all the things of this
world, and a fruition of God. I know of no other words whereby to
describe it or explain it ; neither does the soul then know what to
do — for it knows not whether to speak or be silent, whether it
should laugh or weep. It is a glorious folly, a heavenly madness,
wherein true wisdom is acquired ; and to the soul a kind of fruition
most full of delight. . . . The faculties of the soul now retain only
the power of occupying themselves wholly with God; not one of
them ventures to stir, neither can we move one of them without
making great efforts to distract ourselves — and, indeed, I do not
think we can do it at all at this time." 1

1 “Moyen Court,*' cap. xxi. Madame Guyon’s vague and shifting language,
however, sometimes lays her open to other and more strictly “quietistic" inter-
pretations. * Vida, cap. xvi. {§ i and 4.



INTROVERSION: RECOLLECTION AND QUIET 327

Here, then, we see the Orison of Silence melting into true
contemplation: its stillness is ruffled by its joy. The Quiet reveals
itself as an essentially transitional state, introducing the self into
a new sphere of activity.

The second degree of ardent love, says Richard of St. Victor,
binds, so that the soul which is possessed by it is unable to think of
anything else : it is not only “insuperable,” but also "inseparable.” 1
He compares it to the soul's bridal; the irrevocable act, by which
permanent union is initiated. The feeling-state which is the equiva-
lent of the Quiet is just such a passive and joyous yielding-up of
the virgin soul to its Bridegroom; a silent marriage- vow. It is
ready for all that may happen to it, all that may be asked of it —
to give itself and lose itself, to wait upon the pleasure of its Love.
From this inward surrender the self emerges to the new life, the
new knowledge which is mediated to it under the innumerable
forms of Contemplation.


* “De Quatuor Gratlibus Violentae Charitatis" (Migne, Patrologia Latina,
vol. exevi. col. 1215 b).



CHAPTER VII


INTROVERSION. Part II: CONTEMPLATION


Contemplation, a state of attainment — Its principal forms — Difference between
contemplation and ecstasy — Contemplation defined — Its psychology — Delacroix
— It is a brief act — St. Augustine — It is “ineffable” and “noetic” — contempla-
tion includes a large group of states — Its two marks; totality and self-mergence
— Dionysius the Areopagitc — It is a unitive act — Ruysbroeck — Hilton — -What
do mystics tell us of the contemplative act? — Two things: loving communion
and divine ignorance — Both represent temperamental reactions — The mystic
usually describes his own feeling state — Richard Rolle — Two forms of contem-
plation: transcendental and immanental — Contemplation of Transcendence —
The Via Negativa — The Divine Dark — The Desert of God — Taulcr — Maeterlinck
— Vision of Transcendence — Dante — Angela of Foligno — Contemplation of
Immanence — An experience of Personality — Divine Love — These two forms
really one — Both necessary — Ruysbroeck combines them — The process of Con-
templation — -Dionysius — The Cloud of Unknowing — Boehme — Divine Ignorance
— Angela of Foligno — Loving contemplation — St. John of the Cross — Rolle—
The orison of union — Necessary to a description of the contemplative act —
Deep orison — St. Teresa

W E must now consider under the general name of Con-
templation those developed states of introversion in
which the mystic attains somewhat: the results and
rewards of the discipline of Recollection and Quiet. If this
course of spiritual athletics has done its work, he has now brought
to the surface, trained and made efficient for life, a form of con-
sciousness — a medium of communication with reality— which
remains undeveloped in ordinary men. Thanks to this faculty,
he is now capable of the characteristic mystic experience: tem-
porary union with “that spiritual fount closed to all reactions
from the world of sense, where, without witnesses of any kind,
God and our Freedom meet.” 1

The degrees of Recollection trained the self in spiritual
attention : and at the same time lifted it to a new level of percep-
tion where, by means of the symbol which formed the gathering-
point of its powers, it received a new inflow of life. In the
degrees of Quiet it passed on to a state characterized by a tense
stillness, in which it rested in that Reality at which, as yet, it
dared not look. Now, in Contemplation, it is to transcend alike
the stages of symbol and of silence ; and “energize enthusiastically”
on those high levels which are dark to the intellect but radiant

' R6c6jac, “Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique,” p. 176,

328



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 329

to the heart. We must expect this contemplative activity to show
itself in many different ways and take many different names,
since its character will be largely governed by individual tem-
perament. It appears under the forms which ascetic writers call
“ordinary" and “extraordinary," “infused" or “passive" Con-
templation; and as that “orison of union" which we have already
discussed. 1 Sometimes, too, it shows itself under those abnormal
psycho-physical conditions in which the intense concentration of
the self upon its transcendental perceptions results in the narrow-
ing of the field of consciousness to a point at which all knowledge
of the external world is lost, all the messages of the senses are
utterly ignored. The subject then appears to be in a state of
trance, characterized by physical rigidity and more or less complete
anaesthesia. These are the conditions of Rapture or Ecstasy:
conditions of which the physical resemblances to certain symp-
toms of hysteria have so greatly reassured the enemies of
mysticism.

Rapture and Ecstasy differ from Contemplation proper in
being wholly involuntary states. Rapture, says St. Teresa,
who frequently experienced it, is absolutely irresistible; we
cannot hinder it. Whereas the orison of union, which is one
of the forms in which pure Contemplation appears at its highest
point of development, is still controlled to a large extent by
the will of the subject, and “may be hindered, although that
resistance be painful and violent." 2 There is thus a sharp dis-
tinction — a distinction both physical and psychical — between
the contemplative and the ecstatic states: and we shall do well
to avail ourselves of it in examining their character.

First, then, as to Contemplation proper: what is it? It is a
supreme manifestation of that indivisible “power of knowing"
which lies at the root of all our artistic and spiritual satisfactions.
In it, man’s “made Trinity" of thought, love, and will, becomes
a Unity: and feeling and perception are fused, as they are in all
our apprehensions of beauty, our best contacts with life. It is an
act, not of the Reason, but of the whole personality working
under the stimulus of mystic love. Hence, its results feed every
aspect of that personality: minister to its instinct for the Good,
the Beautiful, and the True. Psychologically it is an induced
state, in which the field of consciousness is greatly contracted:
the whole of the self, its conative powers, being sharply focussed,
concentrated upon one thing. We pour ourselves out or, as it
sometimes seems to us, in towards this over-powering interest:
seem to ourselves to reach it and be merged with it. Whatevei

* Supra , p. 245.

• St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xx. § i and 3.



MYSTICISM


330

the thing may be, in this act it is given to us and we know it, as
we cannot know it by the ordinary devices of thought.

The turning of our attention from that crisp and definite world
of multiplicity, that cinematograph-show, with which intelligence
is accustomed and able to deal, has loosed new powers of percep-
tion which we never knew that we possessed. Instead of sharply
perceiving the fragment, we apprehend, yet how we know not,
the solemn presence of the whole. Deeper levels of personality are
opened up, and go gladly to the encounter of the universe. That
universe, or some Reality hid between it and ourselves, responds
to “the true lovely will of our heart. ” Our ingoing concentration is
balanced by a great outgoing sense of expansion, of new worlds
made ours, as we receive the inflow of its life. So complete is the
self’s absorption that it is for the time unconscious of any acts of
mind or will; in technical language, its “faculties are suspended.”
This is the “ligature” frequently mentioned by teachers of con-
templative prayer, and often regarded as an essential character
of mystical states.

Delacroix has described with great subtlety the psychological
character of pure contemplation.

“When contemplation appears,” he says: “(«) It produces a
general condition of indifference, liberty, and peace, an elevation
above the world, a sense of beatitude. The Subject ceases to
perceive himself in the multiplicity and division of his general
consciousness. He is raised above himself. A deeper and a purer
soul substitutes itself for the normal self, (b) In this state, in
which consciousness of I-hood and consciousness of the world
disappear, the mystic is conscious of being in immediate relation
with God Himself; of participating in Divinity. Contemplation
installs a method of being and of knowing. Moreover, these two
things tend at bottom to become one. The mystic has more and
more the impression of being that which he knows, and of knowing
that which he is.” 1 Temporally rising, in fact, to levels of freedom,
he know r s himself real, and therefore knows Reality.

Now, the object of the mystic's contemplation is always
some aspect of the Infinite Life: of “God, the one Reality.”
Hence, that enhancement of vitality which artists or other unself-
conscious observers may receive from their communion with
scattered manifestations of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, is in
him infinitely increased. His uniformly rapturous language
is alone enough to prove this. In the contemplative act, his
whole personality, directed by love and will, transcends the sense-
world, casts off its fetters, and rises to freedom: becoming
operative on those high levels where, says Tauler, “reason cannot
1 “fitudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 370.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 331

come/' There it apprehends the supra-sensible by immediate
contact, and knows itself to be in the presence of the “Supplier
*of true Life." Such Contemplation — such positive attainment of
the Absolute — is the whole act of which the visions of poets, the
intuition of philosophers, give us hints.

It is a brief act. The greatest of the contemplatives have been
unable to sustain the brilliance of this awful vision for more than
a little while. “A flash/' “an instant," “the space of an Ave
Maria," they say. “My mind," says St. Augustine, in his account
of his first purely contemplative glimpse of the One Reality,
“withdrew its thoughts from experience, extracting itself from
the contradictory throng of sensuous images, that it might find
out what that light was wherein it was bathed. . . . And thus,
with the flash of one hurried glance, it attained to the vision of
That Which Is. And then at last I saw Thy invisible things under-
stood by means of the things that are made, but I could not sus-
tain my gaze: my weakness was dashed back, and I was relegated
to my ordinary experience, bearing with me only a loving
memory, and as it were the fragrance of those desirable meats
on the which as yet I was not able to feed." 1

This fragrance, as St. Augustine calls it, remains for ever
with those who have thus been initiated, if only for a moment,
into the atmosphere of the Real: and this — the immortal and
indescribable memory of their communion with That Which Is — -
gives to their work the perfume of the “Inviolate Rose," and is
the secret of its magic power. But they can never tell us in exact
and human language what it was that they attained in their
ecstatic flights towards the thought of God: their momentary
mergence in the Absolute Life.

“That Which Is," says St. Augustine; "The One," “the Sup-
plier of true Life," says Plotinus; "the energetic Word," says
St. Bernard; “Eternal Light," says Dante; “the Abyss," says
Ruysbroeck; “Pure Love," says St. Catherine of Genoa — poor
symbols of Perfection at the best. But, through and by these
oblique utterances, they give us the assurance that the Object oi
their discovery is one with the object of our quest.

William James considered “ineffability" and “noetic quality"
to be the constant characteristics of the contemplative experience. 1
Those who have seen are quite convinced: those who have not
seen, can never be told. There is no certitude to equal the mystic's
certitude: no impotence more complete than that which falls
on those who try to communicate it. “Of these most excellent
and divine workings in the soul, when God doth manifest Him-

1 Aug. Conf ., bk. vii. cap. xvii.

* “Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 380.



MYSTICISM


332

self/* says Angela of Foligno, “we can in no wise speak, or even
stammer /' 1 Nevertheless, the greater part of mystical literature
is concerned with the attempts of the mystics to share their i
discoveries. Under a variety of images, by a deliberate exploita-
tion of the musical and suggestive qualities of words — often, too,
by the help of desperate paradoxes, those unfailing stimulants
of man’s intuitive power — they try to tell others somewhat of
that veritable country which “eye hath not seen." Their success
— partial though it be — can only be accounted for upon the
supposition that somewhere within us lurks a faculty, a spark,
a “fine point of spirit” which has known this country from its
birth; which dwells in it, partakes of Pure Being, and can under
certain conditions be stung to consciousness. Then “transcen-
dental feeling,” waking from its sleep, acknowledges that these
explorers of the Infinite have really gazed upon the secret plan.

Contemplation is not, like meditation, one simple state,
governed by one set of psychic conditions. It is a general name for
a large group of states, partly governed — like all other forms of
mystical activity — by the temperament of the subject, and
accompanied by feeling-states which vary from the extreme of
quietude or “peace in life naughted” to the rapturous and active
love in which “thought into song is turned.” Some kinds of
Contemplation are inextricably entwined with the phenomena
of “intellectual vision” and “inward voices.” In others we find
what seems to be a development of the “Quiet”: a state which
the subject describes as a blank absorption, a darkness, or “con-
templation in caligine.” 2 * 4 Sometimes the contemplative tells us
that he passes through this darkness to the light : 3 sometimes it
seems to him that he stays for ever in the “beneficent dark.”-*
In some cases the soul says that even in the depths of her absorp-
tion, she “knows her own bliss”: in others she only becomes
aware of it when contemplation is over and the surface-intelligence
reassumes the reins.

In this welter of personal experiences, it becomes necessary
to adopt some basis of classification, some rule by which to
distinguish true Contemplation from other introversive states.
Such a basis is not easy to find. I think, however, that there
are two marks of the real condition: (A) The Totality and
Givenness of the Object. (B) Self-Mergence of the subject. These
we may safely use in our attempt to determine its character.


1 St. Angfcle de Foligno, “Le Livre de 1 ' Experience des Vrais Fidfcles," p. 238
(English translation, p. 189).

» Compare Baker, “Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii. § iv. cap. iv.

s See Hilton, “The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxv.

4 Vide infra, p. 347.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 333

(A) Whatever terms he may employ to describe it, and how-
ever faint or confused his perceptions may be, the mystic's

* experience in Contemplation is the experience of the All, and this
experience seems to him to be given rather than attained. It is
indeed the Absolute which is revealed to him : not, as in medita-
tion or vision, some partial symbol or aspect thereof.

(B) This revealed Reality is apprehended by way of participa-
tion, not by way of observation. The passive receptivity of the
Quiet is here developed into an active, outgoing self-donation,
which is the self’s response to the Divine initiative. By a free act,
independent of man's effort, God is self- disclosed to the soul;
and that soul rushes out willingly to lose itself in Him. Thus a
“give and take" — a divine osmosis — is set up between the finite
and the Infinite life. That dreadful consciousness of a narrow and
Jimiting I-hood which dogs our search for freedom and full life,
is done away. For a moment, at least, the independent spiritual
life is achieved. The contemplative is merged in it “like a bird
in the air, like a fish in the sea" : loses to find and dies to live.

“We must," says Dionysius the Areopagite, “be transported
wholly out of ourselves and given unto God." 1 This is the
“passive union" of Contemplation: a temporary condition in
which the subject receives a double conviction of ineffable happi-
ness and ultimate reality. He may try to translate this conviction
into “something said" or “something seen": but in the end he
will be found to confess that he can tell nothing, save by impli-
cation. The essential fact is that he was there : as the essential
fact for the returning exile is neither landscape nor language, but
the homely spirit of place.

“To see and to have seen that Vision," says Plotinus in one
of his finest passages, “is reason no longer. It is more than reason,
before reason, and after reason, as also is the vision which is
seen. . . . And perhaps we should not here speak of sight : for that
which is seen is not discerned by the seer — if indeed it is possible
here to distinguish seer and seen as separate things. . . .Therefore
this vision is hard to tell of : for how can a man describe as other
than himself that which, when he discerned it, seemed not other,
but one with himself indeed?" 2

Ruysbroeck, who continued in the mediaeval world the best
traditions of Neoplatonic mysticism, also describes a condition
of supreme insight, a vision of Truth, which is closely related to
the Plotinian ecstasy. “Contemplation," he says, “places us in a
purity and a radiance which is far above our understanding . . .
and none can attain to it by knowledge, by subtlety, or by any
exercise whatsoever: but he whom God chooses to unite to

1 “De Divinis Nominibus/’ vii. i. * Ennead vi. 9, 10.

M



334 MYSTICISM

Himself, and to illuminate by Himself, he and no other can
contemplate God. . . . But few men attain to this divine contem-
plation, because of our incapacity and of the hiddenness of that
light in which one sees. And this is why none by his own knowledge,
or by subtle consideration, will ever really understand these
things. For all words and all that one can learn or understand in
a creaturely way, are foreign to the truth that I mean and far
below it. But he who is united to God, and illumined by this
truth — he can understand Truth by Truth . 1

This final, satisfying knowledge of reality — this understanding
of Truth by Truth — is, at bottom, that which all men desire.
The saint's thirst for God, the philosopher's passion for the
Absolute; these are nothing else than the crying need of the spirit,
variously expressed by the intellect and by the heart. The
guesses of science, the diagrams of metaphysics, the intuitions
of artists; all are pressing towards this. ‘‘Adam sinned when he
fell from Contemplation. Since then, there has been division
in man/' 2

Man's soul, says Hilton, "Feeleth well that there is somewhat
above itself that it knoweth not nor hath not yet, but it would
have it, and burninglyy earn eth for it. And that is nought else but
the sight of Jerusalem without-forth, the which is like to a city
that the prophet Ezechicl saw in his visions.

“He saith that he saw a city set upon an hill sloping to the
south, that to his sight when it was measured was no more of
length and of breadth than a rood, that was six cubits and a
palm of length ; but as soon as he was brought into the city and
looked about him, then thought him that it was wonder mickle,
for he saw many halls and chambers both open and privy, he saw
gates and porches, outward and inward, and mickle more building
than I say now, on length and on breadth many hundred cubits.
Then was this wonder to him, how this city within was so long
and so large, that was so little to his sight when he was without.
This city betokeneth the perfect love of God, set in the hill of
contemplation; the which unto the sight of a soul that is without
the feeling of it and travaileth in desire toward, seemeth somewhat,
but it seemeth but a little thing, no more than a rood, that is
six cubits and a palm in length. By six cubits is understood the
perfection of man's work, by the palm a little touching of contem-
plation. He seeth well that there is such a thing, that passeth
the desert of all working of man a little, as the palm passeth
over the six cubits, but he seeth not within what that is. Neverthe-


1 Ruysbroeck, “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," 1 . iii. cap. i.

• J. Maritain, “Art et Scholastique," p. 141.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 335

less, if he may come within the city of contemplation, then seeth
he mickle more than he saw first. 1,1

As in the case of vision, so here, all that we who “without
the feeling travail in desire” can really know concerning Con-
templation — its value for life, the knowledge it confers — must
come from those who have “come within the city”: have, in
the metaphor of Plotinus, “taken flight towards the Thought
of God.” What, in effect, can they tell us about the knowledge
of reality which they attained in that brief communion with
the Absolute?

They tell us chiefly, when we come to collate their evidence,
two apparently contradictory things. They speak, almost in
the same breath, of an exceeding joy, a Beatific Vision, an intense
communion, and a “loving sight”: and of an exceeding emptiness,
a barren desert, an unfathomable Abyss, a nescience, a Divine
Dark. Again and again these pairs of opposites occur in all
first-hand descriptions of pure contemplation: Remoteness and
Intimacy, Darkness and Light. Bearing in mind that these four
metaphors all describe the same process seen “through a tem-
perament,” and represent the reaction of that temperament
upon Absolute Reality, we may perhaps by their comparison
obtain some faint idea of the totality of that indescribable
experience at which they hint.

Note first that the emotional accompaniments of his percep-
tions will always and necessarily be the stuff from which the
mystic draws suggestive language, by which to hint at his
experience of supernal things. His descriptions will always
lean to the impressionistic rather than to the scientific side.
The “deep yet dazzling darkness,” the “unfathomable abyss,”
the Cloud of Unknowing, the “embrace of the Beloved,” all
represent, not the Transcendent but his relation with the Trans-
cendent; not an object observed, but an overwhelming impression
felt, by the totality of his being during his communion with a
Reality which is One.

It is not fair, however, to regard Contemplation on this
account as pre-eminently a “feeling state”; and hence attribute
to it, as many modern writers do, a merely subjective validity.
It is of course accompanied, as all humanity's supreme and
vital acts are accompanied, by feeling of an exalted kind: and
since such emotions are the least abnormal part of it, they are
the part which the subject finds easiest to describe. These elusive
combinations of Fear, Amazement, Desire, and Joy are more or
less familiar to him. The accidents of sensual life have developed
them. His language contains words which are capable of

• t4 The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxv.



336 MYSTICISM

suggesting them to other men. But his total experience transcends
mere feeling, just as it transcends mere intellect. It is a complete
act of perception, inexpressible by these departmental words:
and its agent is the whole man , the indivisible personality whose
powers and nature are only partially hinted at in such words as
Love, Thought, or Will.

The plane of consciousness, however — the objective some-
what — of which this personality becomes aware in contemplation,
is not familiar to it; neither is it related to its systems of thought.
Man, accustomed to dwell amongst spatial images adapted to
the needs of daily life, has no language that will fit it. So, a
person hearing for the first time some masterpiece of classical
music, would have no language in which to describe it objectively;
but could only tell us how it made him feel. This is one reason
why feeling-states seem to preponderate in all descriptions of
the mystic act. Earthly emotions provide a parallel which enables
the subject to tell us by implication something of that which
he felt: but he cannot describe to us — for want of standards of
comparison — that Wholly Other which induced him thus to feel.
His best efforts to fit words to this elusive but objective experience
generally result in the evaporation alike of its fragrance and of
its truth. As St. Augustine said of Time, he knows what it is
until he is asked to define it.

How symbolic and temperamental is all verbal description of
mystical activity, may be seen by the aspect which contemplation
took in the music-loving soul of Richard Rolle; who always
found his closest parallels with Reality, not in the concepts of
intimate union, or of self-loss in the Divine Abyss, but in the idea
of the soul's participation in a supernal harmony — that sweet
minstrelsy of God in which “thought into song is turned." “To
me," he says, “it seems that contemplation is joyful song of
God’s love taken in mind, with sweetness of angels’ praise.
This is jubilation, that is the end of perfect prayer and high
devotion in this life. This is that mirth in mind, had ghostily
by the lover everlastingly, with great voice outbreaking. . . .
Contemplative sweetness not without full great labour is gotten,
and with joy untold it is possessed. Forsooth, it is not man's
merit but God's gift; and yet from the beginning to this day
never might man be ravished in contemplation of Love Ever-
lasting, but if he before parfitely all the world’s vanity had
forsaken." 1

We must, then, be prepared to accept, sift, and use many
different descriptions of evoked emotion in the course of our
inquiry into the nature. of the contemplative's perceptions of the

* Richard Rolle, 'The Mending of Life," cap. xii.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 337

Absolute. We find on analysis that these evoked emotions
separate themselves easily into two groups. Further, these two
'"groups answer to the two directions in which the mystic con-
sciousness of Reality is extended, and to the pairs of descriptions
of the Godhead which we have found to be characteristic of
mystical literature: i.e. t the personal and spatial, immanental
and transcendental, indwelling Life and Unconditioned Source;
[a) the strange, dark, unfathomable Abyss of Pure Being always
dwelt upon by mystics of the metaphysical type, and ( b ) the
divine and loved Companion of the soul, whose presence is so
sharply felt by those selves which lean to the concept of Divine
Personality.

A. The Contemplation of Transcendence . — -The first group of
feeling-states, allied to those which emphasize the theological
idea of Divine Transcendence, is born of the mystic’s sense of
his own littleness, unworthiness, and incurable ignorance in
comparison with the ineffable greatness of the Absolute Godhead
which he has perceived, and in which he desires to lose himself;
of the total and incommunicable difference in kind between the
Divine and everything else. Awe and self-abasement, and the
paradoxical passion for self-loss in the All, here govern his
emotional state. All affirmative statements seem to him blas-
phemous, so far are they from an ineffable truth which is “more
than reason, before reason, and after reason.” To this group of
feelings, which usually go with an instinctive taste for Neo-
platonism, an iconoclastic distrust of personal imagery, we owe
all negative descriptions of supreme Reality. For this type of self,
God is the Unconditioned, the Wholly Other for whom we have
no words, and whom all our poor symbols insult. To see Him is
to enter the Darkness, the “Cloud of Unknowing,” and “know
only that we know nought.” Nothing else can satisfy this extreme
spiritual humility; which easily degenerates into that subtle
form of pride which refuses to acquiesce in the limitations of
its own creaturely state.

“There is none other God but He that none may know, which
may not be known,” says this contemplative soul. “No, soothly,
no! Without fail, No, says she. He only is my God that none
can one word of say, nor all they of Paradise one only point
attain nor understand, for all the knowing that they have of
Him.” 1

When they try to be geographically exact, to define and
describe their apprehension of, and contact with, the Uncon-
ditioned One who is the only Country of the Soul, contemplatives
of this type become, like their great master the Areopagite,

1 “The Mirror of Simple Souls/' Div. iii. cap. xiii.



338 MYSTICISM

impersonal and remote. They seem to have been caught up to
some measureless height, where the air is too rarefied for the
lungs of common men. When we ask them the nature of the life'
on these summits, they are compelled as a rule to adopt the
Dionysian concept of Divine Darkness, or the parallel idea of the
fathomless Abyss, the Desert of the Godhead, the Eckhartian
"still wilderness where no one is at home."

Oddly enough, it is in their language concerning this place
or plane of reality, in which union with the Super-essential God-
head takes place— this "lightsome darkness and rich nought" —
that they come nearer to distinct affirmation, and consequently
offer more surprises to sentimental and anthropomorphic piety,
than in any other department of their work. Unquestionably this
language, with its constant reference to a "still desert," a "vast
sea," an "unplumbed abyss" in which the "emptiness," the "no-
thing," the "Dark" on which the self entered in the Orison of Quiet
is infinitely increased, yet positive satisfaction is at last at-
tained, does correspond with a definite psychological experience. It
is not merely the convention of a school. These descriptions, inco-
herent as they are, have a strange note of certainty, a stranger
note of passion, an odd realism of their own: which mean, where-
ever we meet them, that experience not tradition is their source.
Driven of necessity to a negation of all that their surface-minds .
have ever known — with language, strained to the uttermost,
failing them at every turn — these contemplatives are still able
to communicate to us a definite somewhat; news as to a given
and actual Reality, an unchanging Absolute, and a beatific
union with it, most veritably attained. They agree in their
accounts of it, in a way which makes it obvious that all these
reporters have sojourned in the same land, and experienced the
same spiritual state. Moreover, our inmost minds bear witness
for them. We meet them half-way. We know instinctively and
irrefutably that they tell true; and they rouse in us a passionate
nostalgia, a bitter sense of exile and of loss.

One and all, these explorers of the Infinite fly to language
expressive of great and boundless spaces. In their withdrawal
from the busy, fretful sense-world they have sunk down to the
"ground" of the soul and of the apparent universe: Being, the
Substance of all that Is. Multiplicity is resolved into Unity : a
unity with which the perceiving self is merged. Thus the mystic,
for the time of this "union with the Divine," does find himself,
in Tauler's words, to be "simply in God."

"The great wastes to be found in this divine ground," says *
that great master, "have neither image nor form nor condition,
for they are neither here nor there. They are like unto a fathom-



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 339

less Abyss, bottomless and floating in itself. Even as water ebbs
and flows, up and down, now sinking into a hollow, so that it
looks as if there were no water there, and then again in a little
while rushing forth as if it would engulf everything, so does it
come to pass in this Abyss. This, truly, is much more God's
Dwelling-place than heaven or man. A man who verily desires
to enter will surely find God here, and himself simply in God;
for God never separates Himself from this ground. God will be
present with him, and he will find and enjoy Eternity here. There
is no past nor present here, and no created light can reach unto
or shine into this divine Ground; for here only is the dwelling-
place of God and His sanctuary.

“Now this Divine Abyss can be fathomed by no creatures; it
can be filled by none, and it satisfies none; God only can fill it
in His Infinity. For this abyss belongs only to the Divine Abyss,
of which it is written: Abyssus abyssum invocal . He who is truly
conscious of this ground, which shone into the powers of his
soul, and lighted and inclined its lowest and highest powers to
turn to their pure Source and true Origin, must diligently examine
himself, and remain alone, listening to the voice which cries in
the wilderness of this ground. This ground is so desert and bare,
that no thought has ever entered there. None of all the thoughts
*of man which, with the help of reason, have been devoted to
meditation on the Holy Trinity (and some men have occupied
themselves much with these thoughts) have ever entered this
ground. For it is so close and yet so far off, and so far beyond all
things, that it has neither time nor place. It is a simple and
unchanging condition. A man who really and truly enters, feels
as though he had been here throughout eternity, and as though
he were one therewith," 1

Many other mystics have written to the same effect: have
described with splendour the ineffable joys and terrors of the
Abyss of Being "where man existed in God from all Eternity,"
the soul's adventures when, “stripped of its very life," it “sails
the wild billows of the sea divine." But their words merely amaze
the outsider and give him little information. The contemplative
self who has attained this strange country can only tell an
astonished and incredulous world that here his greatest depriva-
tion is also his greatest joy; that here the extremes of possession
and surrender are the same, that ignorance and knowledge, light
and dark, are One. Love has led him into that timeless, spaceless
world of Being which is the peaceful ground, not only of the
‘ individual striving spirit , but also of the striving universe; and
he can but cry with Philip, “ 7 / is enough ."

* Tauler, Sermon on St. John the Baptist (“The Inner Way,” pp. 97-99).



MYSTICISM


340

“Here,” says Maeterlinck, “we stand suddenly at the confines
of human thought, and far beyond the Polar circle of the mind.
It is intensely cold here; it is intensely dark; and yet you will*
find nothing but flames and light. But to those who come without
having trained their souls to these new perceptions, this light
and these flames are as dark and as cold as if they were painted.
Here we are concerned with the most exact of sciences: with the
exploration of the harshest and most uninhabitable headlands
of the divine 'Know thyself' : and the midnight sun reigns over
that rolling sea where the psychology of man mingles with the
psychology of God." 1

On one hand “flames and light" — the flame of living and
creative love which fills the universe — on the other the “quiet
desert of Godhead," transcending all succession and dark to the
single sight of earth-born men. Under these two metaphors, one
affirmative, one negative, resumed in his most daring paradox,
nearly the whole of man's contemplative experience of the
Absolute can be and is expressed. We have considered his negative
description of Utmost Transcendence: that confession of “divine
ignorance" which is a higher form of knowledge. But this is
balanced, in a few elect spirits, by a positive contemplation of
truth; an ecstatic apprehension of the “secret plan "

Certain rare mystics seem able to describe to us a Beatific -
Vision experienced here and now: a knowledge by contact of
the flaming heart of Reality , which includes in one great whole
the planes of Being and Becoming, the Simultaneous and the
Successive, the Eternal Father, and His manifestation in the
"energetic Word." We saw something of this power, which is
characteristic of mystical genius of a high order, in studying
the characteristics of Illumination. Its finest literary expression
is found in that passage of the “Paradiso" where Dante tells
us how he pierced, for an instant, the secret of the Empyrean.
Already he had enjoyed a symbolic vision of two-fold Reality,
as the moving River of Light and the still white Rose. 2 Now
these two aspects vanished, and he saw the One.

. . la mia vista, venendo sincera,
e piii e piii entrava per lo raggio
dell’ alta luce, che da sd £ vera.

Da quinci innanzi il mio veder fu maggio
che il parlar nostro ch 1 a tal vista cede,
e cede la memoria a tan to oltraggio.


* Maeterlinck, Introduction to Ruysbroeck's “L'Omement des Noces 1
Spirituelles,” p. v. Theologians will recognize here a poetic account of the soul’s
contact with that aspect of Divine Reality emphasized in the work of Rudoli
Otto and of Karl Barth. * Par. xxx. 61-128. Compare p. 286.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 341

Qual & colui che somniando vede,

chd dopo il sogno la passione impressa
rimane, e 1' altro alia mente non riede;

cotal son io, chd quasi tutta cessa
mia visione, ed ancor mi distilla
nel cor lo dolce che nacque da essa.

• ... 4

lo credo, per 1’ acume ch' io soffersi
del vivo raggio, ch' io sarei smarrito,
se gli occhi miei da lui fossero aversi.

E mi ricorda ch' io fui piu arditc
per questo a sostener tan to ch’ io giunsi
1' aspetto mio col valor infinito.

• • •

Cosl la mente mia, tutta sospesa,

mirava fissa, immobile ed attenta,
e sempre del mirar faceasi accesa.

A quella luce cotal si diventa,

che volgersi da lei per altro aspetto
£ impossibil che mai si consenta.

Perd che il Ben, ch’ 6 del volere obbietto,
tutto s’accoglie in lei, e fuor di quella
6 difettivo ci6 che 11 6 peifetto." 1

Intermediate between the Dantesque apprehension of Eternal
Reality and the contemplative communion with Divine Per-
sonality, is the type of mystic whose perceptions of the supra-
sensible are neither wholly personal nor wholly cosmic and
transcendental in type. To him , God is pre-eminently the Perfect
— Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, Light, Life, and Love — dis-
covered in a moment of lucidity at the very door of the seeking
self. Here the symbols under which He is perceived are still the
abstractions of philosophy; but in the hands of the mystic these
terms cease to be abstract, are stung to life. Such contemplatives
preserve the imageless and ineffable character of the Absolute,
put are moved by its contemplation to a joyous and personal love.

Thus, in a striking passage of her revelations, Angela of Foligno

« Par. xxxiii. 52-63, 76-81, 97-105. “My vision, becoming purified, entered
deeper and deeper into the ray of that Supernal Light which in itself is true.
Thenceforth my vision was greater than our language, which fails such a sight;
and memory too fails before such excess. As he who sees in a dream, and after the
dream is gone the impression or emotion remains, but the rest returns not to the
mind, such am I; for nearly the whole of my vision fades, and yet there still
wells within my heart the sweetness born therefrom. ... I think that by the
keenness of the living ray which I endured I had been lost, had I once turned my
syes aside. And I remember that for this I was the bolder so long to sustain my
gaze, as to unite it with the Power Infinite. . . . Thus did my mind, wholly in
suspense, gaze fixedly, immovable and intent, ever enkindled by its gazing. In
the presence of that Light one becomes such, that never could one consent to
turn from it to any other sight. Because the Good, which is the object of the
will, is therein wholly gathered; and outside of this, that is defective which
therein is perfect."



342 MYSTICISM

suddenly exclaims, "I saw God!" "And I, the writing brothei,”
says her secretary, "asked her what she saw, how she saw, and
if she saw any bodily thing. She replied thus: 'I beheld a fullness
and a clearness, and felt them within me so abundantly that I
cannot describe it, or give any likeness thereof. I cannot say I
saw anything corporeal. It was as though it were in heaven: a
beauty so great that I can say nought concerning it, save that it
was supreme Beauty and sovereign Good.' " Again, "I beheld the
ineffable fullness of God : but I can relate nothing of it, save that
I have seen in it the Sovereign Good." 1

B. The Contemplation of Immanence . — The second group of
contemplatives is governed by that "Love which casteth out
fear": by a predominating sense of the nearness, intimacy, and
sweetness, rather than the strangeness and unattainable trans-
cendence, of that same Infinite Life at whose being the first
group could only hint by amazing images which seem to be
borrowed from the poetry of metaphysics. These are, says Hilton,
in a lovely image, "Feelingly fed with the savour of His invisible
blessed Face." 2 All the feelings which flow from joy, confidence,
and affection, rather than those which are grouped about rapture
and awe — though awe is always present in some measure, as it is
always present in all perfect love — here contribute towards a
description of the Truth.

These contemplatives tell us of their attainment of That
which Is, as the closest and most joyous of all communions; a
coming of the Bridegroom; a rapturous immersion in the Un-
created Light. "Nothing more profitable, nothing merrier than
grace of contemplation!" cries Rolle, "that lifts us from this low
and offers to God. What is grace of contemplation but beginning
of joy? what is parfiteness of joy but grace confirmed? " 3 In
such "bright contemplation" as this, says "The Mirror of Simple
Souls," "the soul is full gladsome and jolly." Utter peace and
wild delight, every pleasure-state known to man's normal con-
sciousness, are inadequate to the description of her joy. She has
participated for an instant in the Divine Life; knows all, and
knows nought. She has learnt the world's secret, not by knowing,
but by being: the only way of really knowing anything.

Where the dominant emotion is that of intimate affection,
and where the training or disposition of the mystic inclines him
to emphasize the personal and Incamational rather than the
abstract and Trinitarian side of Christianity, the contemplative
of this type will always tend to describe his secret to us as above

1 St. Angfcle de Foligno, “Le Livre de l'Exp^rience des Vrais Fiddles,*' pp. 78
and 1 16 (English translation, here very imperfect, pp. 169, 174).

* “The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xli.

J “The Mending of Life," cap. xii.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 343

*11 things an experience of adorable Friendship. Reality is for
him a Person, not a State. In the ‘'orison of union' 1 it seems to
him that an actual communion, a merging of his self with this
other and strictly personal Self takes place. “God," he says, then
“meets the soul in her Ground": i.e., in that secret depth of
personality where she participates in the Absolute Life. Clearly,
the “degree of contemplation," the psychological state, is here
the same as that in which the mystic of the impersonal type
attained the “Abyss." But from the point of view of the subject,
this joyful and personal encounter of Lover and Beloved will be
a very different experience from the soul's immersion in that
“desert of Deity," as described by Eckhart and his school. “In
this oning," says Hilton, “is the marriage made betwixt God
and the soul, that shall never be broken." 1

St. Teresa is the classic example of this intimate and affective
type of contemplation: but St. Gertrude, Suso, Julian, Mechthild
of Magdeburg, and countless others, provide instances of its
operation. We owe to it all the most beautiful and touching
expressions of mystic love. Julian's "I saw Him and sought Him:
and I had Him, I wanted Him" expresses in epigram its com-
bination of rapturous attainment and insatiable desire: its appre-
hension of a Presence at once friendly and divine. So too does her
description of the Tenth Revelation of Love, when “with this
sweet enjoying He showed unto mine understanding in part
the blessed Godhead , stirring then the poor soul to understand,
as it may be said; that is, to think on the endless Love that
was without beginning, and is, and shall be ever. And with
this our good Lord said full blissfully, Lo, how that I loved thee ,
as if He had said, My darling , behold and see thy Lord , thy God
that is thy Maker , and thine endless joy.’ * 2

“The eyes of her soul were opened," says the scribe to whom
Angela of Foligno dictated her revelations. “And she saw Love
advancing gently towards her; and she saw the beginning, but
not the end, for it was continuous. And there was no colour to
which she could compare this Love; but directly it reached her
she beheld it with the eyes of the soul, more clearly than she
might do with the eyes of the body, take as towards her the
semblance of a sickle. Not that there was any actual and
measurable likeness, but this love took on the semblance of a
sickle, because it first withdrew itself, not giving itself so fully
as it had allowed itself to be understood and she had understood
it; the which caused her to yearn for it the more. "3

* “The Scale of Perfection," bk. i. cap. viii.

• “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. xxiv.

I St. Ang&le, op, cit„ p. 156 (English translation, p. 178).



MYSTICISM


344

It is to Mechthild of Magdeburg, whose contemplation was
emphatically of the intimate type, that we owe the most perfect
definition of this communion of the mystic with his Friend.
“Orison,” she says, “draws the great God down into the small
heart: it drives the hungry soul out to the full God. It brings
together the two lovers, God and the soul, into a joyful room
where they speak much of love .” 1

We have already seen that the doctrine of the Trinity makes
it possible for Christian mystics, and, still more, for Christian
mysticism as a whole, to reconcile this way of apprehending
Reality with the “negative” and impersonal perception of the
ineffable One; the Absolute which “hath no image.” Though
they seem in their extreme forms to be so sharply opposed as to
justify Eckhart’s celebrated distinction between the unknowable
totality of the Godhead and the knowable personality of God,
the “image” and the “circle” yet represent diverse apprehensions
of one whole. All the mystics feel — and the German school in
particular have expressed — Dante's conviction that these two
aspects of reality, these two planes of being, however widely
they seem to differ, are One. 1 Both are ways of describing man’s
partial contacts with that Absolute Truth, “present yet absent,
near, yet far,” that Triune Fact, di tre colori e d * una continenza,
which is God. Both are necessary if we are to form any idea of that
complete Reality, imperfect as any such idea must be: as, when
two men go together to some undiscovered country, one will
bring home news of its great spaces, its beauty of landscape,
another of its geological formation, or the flora and fauna that
express its life, and both must be taken into account before any
just estimate of the real country can be made.

Since it is of the essence of the Christian religion to combine
personal and metaphysical truth, a transcendent and an incarnate
God, ^ it is not surprising that we should find in Christianity a
philosophic and theological basis for this paradox of the contem-
plative experience. Most often, though not always, the Christian
mystic identifies the personal and intimate Lover of the soul, of
whose elusive presence he is so sharply aware, with the person of
Christ; the unknowable and transcendent Godhead with that
eterna luce, the Undifferentiated One in Whom the Trinity of
Persons is resumed. Temperamentally, most practical contem-
platives lean to either one or other of these apprehensions of
Reality: to a personal and immanental meeting in the “ground
of the soul,” or to the austere joys of the “naughted soul” abased
before an impersonal Transcendence which no language but

1 “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,” pt. v. cap. 13.

• Far. xxxiii. 137. 3 Compare supra , Pt. I. Cap. V.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 345

that of negation can define. In some, however, both types of
perception seem to exist together : and they speak alternately of
light and darkness, of the rapturous encounter with Love and
of supreme self-loss in the naked Abyss, the desert of the Essence
of God. Ruysbroeck is the perfect example of this type of contem-
plative; and his works contain numerous and valuable passages
descriptive of that synthetic experience which resumes the personal
and transcendental aspects of the mystic fact.

"When we have become seeing," he says — that is to say,
when we have attained to spiritual lucidity — "we are able to
contemplate in joy the eternal coming of the Bridegroom; and
this is the second point on which I would speak. What, then,
is this eternal coming of our Bridegroom? It is a perpetual
new birth and a perpetual new illumination: for the ground
whence the Light shines and which is Itself the Light, is life-
giving and fruitful: and hence the manifestation of the Eternal
Light is renewed without interruption in the hiddenness of the
spirit. Behold! here all human works and active virtues must
cease ; for here God works alone at the apex of the soul. Here
there is nought else but an eternal seeing and staring at that
Light, by the Light and in the Light. And the coming of the
Bridegroom is so swift, that He comes perpetually, and He
dwells within us with His abysmal riches, and He returns to us
anew in His Person without interruption; with such new radiance,
that He seems never to have come to us before. For His coming
consists, outside all Time, in an Eternal Noz&, always welcomed
with new longing and new joy. Behold! the delights and the
joys which this Bridegroom brings in His coming are fathomless
and limitless, for they are Himself: and this is why the eyes by
which the spirit contemplates the Bridegroom, are opened so
widely that they can never close again. . . . Now this active
meeting, and this loving embrace, are in their essence fruitive
and unconditioned ; for the infinite Undifferentiation of the God-
head is so dark and so naked of all image, that it conceals within
itself all the divine qualities and works, all the attributes of the
Persons, in the all-enfolding richness of the Essential Unity, and
brings about a divine fruition in the Abyss of the Ineffable.
And here there is a death in fruition, and a melting and dying
into the nudity of Pure Being; where all the Names of God, and
all conditions, and all the living images which are reflected in the
mirror of divine truth, are absorbed into the Ineffable Simplicity,
the Absence of image and of knowledge. For in this limitless
Abyss of Simplicity, all things are embraced in the bliss of
fruition; but the Abyss itself remains uncomprehended, except
by the Essential Unity. The Persons and all that which lives



MYSTICISM


346

in God, must give place to this. For there is nought else here
but an eternal rest in the fruitive embrace of an outpouring love:
and this is the wayless Being that all interior souls have chosen
above all other things. This is the dim silence where all lovers
lose themselves." 1

Here Ruysbroeck, beginning with a symbol of the l>ivine
Personality as Bridegroom of the Soul, which would have been
congenial to the mind of St. Catherine of Siena, ends upon the
summits of Christian metaphysics; with a description of the
loving immersion of the self in that Unconditioned One who
transcends the Persons of theology and beggars human speech.
We seem to see him desperately clutching at words and similes
which may, he hopes, give some hint of the soul’s fruition of
Reality: its immeasurable difference in kind from the dreams
and diagrams of anthropomorphic religion. His strange state-
ments in respect of this Divine Abyss are on a par with those
which I have already quoted from the works of other contem-
platives, who, refusing to be led away by the emotional aspect
of their experience, have striven to tell us — as they thought —
not merely what they felt but what they beheld. Ruysbroeck's
mystical genius, however, the depth and wholeness of his intuition
of Reality, does not allow him to be satisfied with a merely
spatial or metaphysical description of the Godhead. The “active
meeting" and the “loving embrace" are, he sees, an integral part
of the true contemplative act. In “the dim silence where lovers
lose themselves," a Person meets a person: and this it is, not the
philosophic Absolute, which “all interior souls have chosen above
all other thing."

We must now look more closely at the method by which the
contemplative attains to his unique communion with the Absolute
Life : the kind of activity which seems to him to characterize his
mergence with Reality. As we might expect, that activity, like
its result, is of two kinds; personal and affirmative, impersonal
and negative. It is obvious that where Divine Perfection is con-
ceived as the soul's companion, the Bridegroom, the Beloved,
the method of approach will be very different from that which
ends in the self’s immersion in the paradoxical splendour of the
Abyss, the “still wilderness where no one is at home." It is all
the difference between the preparations for a wedding and for an
expedition to the Arctic Seas. Hence we find, at one end of the
scale, that extreme form of personal and intimate communion —
the going forth of lover to beloved — which the mystics call
“the orison of union": and at the other end, the “dark con-
templation," by which alone selves of the transcendent and

1 Ruysbroeck, *De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," bk. iii. caps. ii. and iv.



INTROVERSION CONTEMPLATION 347

impersonal type claim that they draw near to the Uncon-
ditioned One.

Of the dim and ineffable contemplation of Unnameable Trans-
cendence, the imageless absorption in the Absolute, Dionysius
the Areopagite of course provides the classic example. It was he
who gave to it the name of Divine Darkness: and all later mystics
of this type borrow their language from him. His directions
upon the subject are singularly explicit: his descriptions, like
those of St. Augustine, glow with an exultant sense of a Reality
attained, and which others may attain if they will but follow
where he leads.

“As for thee, dear Timothy/' he says, “I counsel that in the
earnest exercise of mystical contemplation thou leave the senses
and the operations of the intellect and all things that the senses
or the intellect can perceive, and all things in this world of
nothingness or that world of being; and that, thine understanding
being laid to rest, thou ascend (so far as thou mayest) towards
union with Him whom neither being nor understanding can con-
tain. For by the unceasing and absolute renunciation of thyself
and all things, thou shalt in pureness cast all things aside, and
be released from all, and so shalt be led upwards to the Ray of
that Divine Darkness which exceedeth all existence ." 1 Again, “The
Divine Dark is nought else but that inaccessible light wherein
the Lord is said to dwell. Although it is invisible because of its
dazzling splendours and unsearchable because of the abundance
of its supernatural brightness, nevertheless, whosoever deserves
to see and know God rests therein; and, by the very fact that he
neither sees nor knows, is truly in that which surpasses all truth
and all knowledge/'*

It has become a commonplace with writers on mysticism to
say, that all subsequent contemplatives took from Dionysius
this idea of “Divine Darkness," and entrance therein as the
soul's highest privilege: took it, so to speak, ready-made and on
faith, and incorporated it in their tradition. To argue thus is to
forget that mystics are above all things practical people. They
do not write for the purpose of handing on a philosophical scheme,
but in order to describe something which they have themselves

1 Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Mystica Thcologia," i. i.

• Ibid., Letter to Dorothy the Deacon. This passage seems to be the source
of Vaughan's celebrated verse in “The Night" —

“There is in God, some say,

A deep but dazzling darkness, as men here
Say it is late and dusky because they
See not all clear.

O for that Night! where I in Him
Might live invisible and dim."



348 MYSTICISM

experienced; something which they feel to be of transcendent
importance for humanity. If, therefore, they persist — and they
do persist— in using this simile of “darkness' 1 to describe their
experience in contemplation, it can only be because it fits the
facts. No Hegelian needs to be told that we shall need the addition
of its opposite before we can hope to approach the truth: and it is
exactly the opposite of this “dim ignorance" which is offered us
by mystics of the “joyous" or “intimate" type, who find their
supreme satisfaction in the positive experience of “union." the
“mystical marriage of the soul."

What, then, do those who use this image of the “dark" really
mean by it? They mean this: that God in His absolute Reality
is unknowable — is dark — toman's intellect: which is, as Bergson
has reminded us, adapted to other purposes than those of divine
intuition. When, under the spur of mystic love, the whole per-
sonality of man comes into contact with that Reality, it enters
a plane of experience to which none of the categories of the
intellect apply. Reason finds itself, in a most actual sense, “in
the dark" — immersed in the Cloud of Unknowing. This dimness
and lostness of the mind, then, is a necessary part of the mystic's
ascent to the Absolute. That Absolute — the Mysterium tremendum
et fascinans 1 — will not be “known of the heart" until we acknow-
ledge that It is “unknown of the intellect" ; and obey the Dionysian
injunction to leave “the operations of the understanding" on one
side. The movement of the contemplative must be a movement
of the whole man: he is to “precipitate himself, free and un-
fettered," into the bosom of Reality. Only when he has thus
transcended sight and knowledge, can he be sure that he has
also transcended the world with which these faculties are com-
petent to deal; and is in that Wholly Other which surpasses all
image and all idea.

“This is Love: to fly heavenward,

To rend, every instant, a hundred veils.

The first moment, to renounce life;

The last step, to fare without feet.

To regard this world as invisible,

Not to see what appears to oneself." *

This acknowledgment of our intellectual ignorance, this
humble surrender, is the entrance into the “Cloud of Unknowing" :
the first step towards mystical knowledge of the Absolute.
“For Truth and Humility are full true sisters," says Hilton,

1 R. Otto, “The Idea of the Holy," caps. iii. and iv. The whole of this work
should be studied in its bearing on the contemplation of supra-rational Reality.

* Jalalu *d Din, “Selected Poems from the Divan," p. 137.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 349

“fastened together in love and charity, and there is no distance
of counsel betwixt them two.” 1

4 “Thou askest me and sayest,” says the author of “The Cloud
of Unknowing,” “How shall I think on Himself and what is He?
and to this I cannot answer thee but thus : I wot not.

“For thou hast brought me with thy question, into that same
darkness and into that same cloud of unknowing that I would
thou wert in thyself. For of all other creatures and their works, yea,
and of the works of God's self may a man through grace have
fulhead of knowledge, and well he can think of them ; but of God
Himself can no man think. And therefore I will leave all that
thing that I can think, and choose to my love that thing that I
cannot think. For why; He may well be loved, but not thought.
By love may He be gotten and holden, but by thought never. . . .
Smite upon that thick cloud of unknowing with a sharp dart of
longing love; and go not thence for thing that befalleth.” 2

So long, therefore, as the object of the mystic's contemplation
is amenable to thought, is something which he can “know,” he
may be quite sure that it is not the Absolute; but only a partial
image or symbol of the Absolute. To find that final Reality, he
must enter into the “cloud of unknowing” — must pass beyond
the plane on which the intellect can work.

“When I say darkness,” says the same great mystic, “I mean
thereby a lack of knowing. . . . And for this reason it is not called
a cloud of the air, but a cloud of unknowing, that is between
thee and thy God. ”3

The business of the contemplative, then, is to enter this cloud:
the “good dark,” as Hilton calls it. The deliberate inhibition of
discursive thought and rejection of images, which takes place in
the “orison of quiet,” is one of the ways in which this entrance is
k effected: personal surrender, or “self-naughting,” is another. He
1 who, by dint of detachment and introversion, enters the “nothing-
ness” or “ground of the soul,” enters also into the “Dark”: a
statement which seems simple enough until we try to realize
what it means.

“0 where/' says the bewildered disciple in one of Boehme's
dialogues, “is this naked Ground of the Soul void of all Self?
And how shall I come at the hidden centre, where God dwelleth
and not man? Tell me plainly, loving Sir, where it is; and how
it is to be found of me, and entered into ?

“ Master . There where the soul hath slain its own Will and
willeth no more any Thing as from itself. . . .

>

* “The Scale of Perfection/’ bk. ii. cap. xiii.

» “The Cloud of Unknowing," cap. vi.

3 Ibid., cap. iv.



MYSTICISM


350

“ Disciple . But how shall I comprehend it ?

“ Master . If thou goest about to comprehend it, then it will
fly away from thee; but if thou dost surrender thyself wholly up*
to it, then it will abide with thee, and become the Life of thy
Life, and be natural to thee .** 1

The author of “The Cloud of Unknowing” is particularly
explicit as to the sense of dimness and confusion which over-
whelms the self when it first enters this Dark; a proceeding
which is analogous to that annihilation of thought in the interests
of passive receptivity which we have studied in the “Quiet.”

“At the first time when thou dost it/* he says of the neophyte's
first vague steps in contemplation, “thou findest but a darkness, ’
and as it were a cloud of unknowing thou knowest not what, saving
that thou feelest in thy will a naked intent unto God. This dark-
ness and this cloud is, howsoever thou dost, betwixt thee and thy
God, and letteth thee, that thou mayest neither see Him clearly
by light of understanding in thy reason, nor feel Him in sweetness
of love in thine affection. And therefore shape thee to bide in
this darkness as long as thou mayest, evermore crying after Him
that thou lovest. For if ever thou shalt feel Him or see Him as
it may be here, it behoveth always to be in this cloud and this
darkness .** 2

From the same century, but from a very different country .
and temperament, comes another testimony as to the supreme
value of this dark contemplation of the Divine: this absorption,
beyond the span of thought or emotion, in the “substance of
all that Is.** It is one of the most vivid and detailed accounts
of this strange form of consciousness which we possess; and
deserves to be compared carefully with the statements of “The
Cloud of Unknowing/' and of St. John of the Cross. We owe it
to that remarkable personality, the Blessed Angela of Foligno,
who was converted from a life of worldliness to become not only
a Franciscan, but also a Platonic mystic. In it we seem to tiear
the voice of Plotinus speaking from the Vale of Spoleto.

“Whilst I was questioning her/’ says her secretary, “Christs
faithful one was suddenly rapt in spirit and seemed not to under-
stand my words. And then was given her a wondrous grace.
After a short time . . . she began to tell me what follows. ‘My
soul has just been rapt to a state in which I tasted unspeakable
joy. I knew all I longed to know, possessed all I longed to possess.

I saw all Good/ She said further: ‘In this state the soul cannot
believe that this Good will ever depart from her, or that she will
depart from it, or that she will again be separated from it. But 1

* Boehme, “Three Dialogues of the Supersensual Life/* p. 71.

• “The Cloud of Unknowing/' cap. iii.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 351

she delights herself in that Sovereign Good. My soul sees nothing
whatever that can be told of the lips or the heart, she sees nothing,
and she sees All . . . No good that can be described or conceived
is now the object of my hope; for I have put all my hope in a
secret Good, most hid and secret, which I apprehend in great
darkness.' And as I, the brother, could not receive or understand
this dark, Christ’s faithful one wishing to explain said: Tf I
see it in the dark, it is because it surpasses all good. All, all the
rest is but darkness. All which the soul or heart can reach is
inferior to this Good. That which I have told hitherto, namely, all
the soul grasps when she sees all creatures filled with God, when
she sees the divine power, and when she sees the divine will, is
inferior to this most secret Good; because this Good which I see
in the darkness is the All, and all other things are but parts/
And she added, Though inexpressible, these other things bring
delight; but this vision of God in darkness brings no smile to
the lips, no devotion or fervour of love to the soul. ... All the
countless and unspeakable favours God has done to me, all the
words He has said to me, all you have written are, I know, so
far below the Good I see in that great darkness that I do not
put in them my hope 1 . . . Christ’s faithful one told me that her
mind had been uplifted but three times to this most high and
ineffable mode of beholding God in great darkness, and in a
vision so marvellous and complete. Certainly she had seen the
Sovereign Good countless times and always darkly ; yet never in
such a high manner and through such great dark.” 1

These words, and indeed the whole idea which lies at the
bottom of “dark contemplation,” will perhaps be better under-
stood in the light of Baron von Hiigel’s deeply significant saying:
“Souls loving God in His Infinite Individuality will necessarily
love Him beyond their intellectual comprehension of Him;
the element of devoted trust, of free self-donation to One fully
known only through and in such an act , will thus remain to man
for ever.” 1 Hence, the contemplative act, which is an act of loving
and self-forgetting concentration upon the Divine — the out-
pouring of man's little and finite personality towards the Absolute
Personality of God — will, in so far as it transcends thought, mean
darkness for the intellect ; but it may mean radiance for the heart.
Psychologically, it will mean the necessary depletion of the surface-
consciousness, the stilling of the mechanism of thought, in the
interests of another centre of consciousness. Since this new centre
makes enormous demands on the self’s stock of vitality its estab-
lishment must involve, for the time that it is active, the with-

1 St. Angfcle, loc. cit., pp. 210-12 (English translation, p. 181).

* “The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. ii. p. 257.



MYSTICISM


352

drawal of energy from other centres. Thus the “night of
thought" becomes the strictly logical corollary of the ‘Tight of
perception."

No one has expressed this double character of the Divine
Dark — its “nothingness" for the dissecting knife of reason, its
supreme fruitfulness for expansive, active love — with so delicate
an insight as St. John of the Cross. In his work the Christian
touch of personal rapture vivifies the exact and sometimes arid
descriptions of the Neoplatonic mystics. A great poet as well as a
great mystic, in his poem on the “Obscure Night," he brings
to bear on the actual and ineffable experience of the introverted
soul all the highest powers of artistic expression, all the resources
of musical rhythm, the suggestive qualities of metaphor.

“Upon an obscure night
Fevered with Love’s anxiety
(O hapless, happy plight !)

I went, none seeing me,

Forth from my house, where all things quiet be.

By night, secure from sight
And by a secret stair, disguisedly,

(O hapless, happy plight!)

By night, and privily

Forth from my house, where all things quiet be.

Blest night of wandering

In secret, when by none might I be spied.

Nor I see anything;

Without a light to guide

Save that which in my heart burnt in my side.

That light did lead me on.

More surely than the shining of noontide
Where well I knew that One
Did for my coming bide;

Where He abode might none but He abide.

O night that didst lead thus,

O night more lovely than the dawn of light;

O night that broughtest us.

Lover to lover’s sight,

Lover to loved, in marriage of delight !

Upon my flowery breast

Wholly for Him and save Himself for none.

There did I give sweet rest
To my beloved one:

The fanning of the cedars breathed thereon.” *


* “En una Noche Escura.” This translation, by Mr. Arthur Symons, will be
found in vol. ii. of his Collected Poems.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 353

Observe in these verses the perfect fusion of personal and
jnetaphysical imagery; each contributing by its suggestive
qualities to a total effect which conveys to us, we hardly know
how, the obscure yet flaming rapture of the mystic, the affirmation
of his burning love and the accompanying negation of his mental
darkness and quiet — that “ hapless, happy plight/ 1 All is here:
the secrecy of the contemplative's true life, unseen of other men,
his deliberate and active abandonment of the comfortable house
of the senses, the dim, unknown plane of being into which his
ardent spirit must plunge — a “night more lovely than the dawn
of light” — the Inward Light, the fire of mystic love, which guides
his footsteps “more surely than the shining of noon-tide”: the
self-giving ecstasy of the consummation “wholly for Him, and
save Himself for none,” in which lover attains communion with
Beloved “in marriage of delight.”

In his book, “The Dark Night of the Soul,” St. John has
commented upon the opening lines of this poem; and the passages
in which he does this are amongst the finest and most subtle
descriptions of the psychology of contemplation whicli we possess.

“The soul,” he says, “calls the dim contemplation, by which
it ascends to the union of love, a secret stair; and that because
of two properties of this contemplation which I shall explain
separately. First, this dark contemplation is called secret,
because it is, as I have said before, the mystical theology which
theologians call secret wisdom, and which according to St. Thomas
is infused into the soul more especially by love. This happens in
a secret hidden way, in which the natural operations of the
understanding and the other powers have no share. . . . The soul
can neither discern nor give it a name, neither desires so to do;
and besides, it can discover no way nor apt comparison by which
to make known a knowledge so high, a spiritual impression so
delicate and infused . So that even if the soul felt the most lively
desire to explain itself, and heaped up explanations, the secret
would remain a secret still. Because this interior wisdom is so
simply, general, and spiritual, that it enters not into the under-
standing under the guise of any form or image perceptible to
sense. Therefore the senses and the imagination — which have not
served as intermediaries, and have perceived no sensible form or
colour — cannot account for it, nor form any conception of it,
so as to speak about it; though the soul be distinctly aware that
it feels and tastes this strange wisdom. The soul is like a man who
secs an object for the first time, the like of which he has never
seen before; he perceives it and likes it, yet he cannot say what
it is, nor give it a name, do what he will, though it be «^en an
object cognisable by the senses. How much less, then can that



MYSTICISM


354

be described, which does not enter in by the senses. . . . Inex-
pressible in its nature, as we have said, it m rightly called secret^
And for yet another reason it is so called; for this mystical
wisdom has the property of hiding the soul within itself. For
beside its ordinary operation, it sometimes happens that this
wisdom absorbs the soul and plunges it in a secret abyss wherein
it sees itself distinctly as far away, and separated from, all created
things; it looks upon itself as one that is placed in a profound and
vast solitude whither no creature can come, and which seems an
immense wilderness without limits. And this solitude is the more
delicious, sweet, and lovely, the more it is deep, vast, and empty.
There the soul is the more hidden, the more it is raised up above
all created things.

“This abyss of wisdom now lifts up and enlarges the soul,
giving it to drink at the very sources of the science of love.
Thereby it perceives how lowly is the condition of all creatures
in respect to the supreme knowledge and sense of the Divine.
It also understands how low, defective, and, in a certain sense,
improper, are all the words and phrases by which in this life we
discuss divine things; that they escape the best eflorts of human
art and science, and that only the mystical theology can know
and taste what these things are in their reality .” 1

In this important passage we have a reconciliation of the
four chief images under which contemplation has been described:
the darkness and the light, the wilderness and the union of love.
That is to say, the self’s paradoxical sense of an ignorance which
is supreme knowledge, and of a solitude which is intimate com-
panionship. On the last of these antitheses, the “wilderness that
is more delicious, sweet, and lovely, the more it is wide, vast, and
empty,” I cannot resist quoting, as a gloss upon the dignified
language of the Spanish mystic, the quaint and simple words of
Richard Rolle.

“In the wilderness . . . speaks the loved to the heart of the
lover; as it were a bashful lover, that his sweetheart before men
entreats not, nor friendly-wise but commonly and as a stranger
he kisses. A devout soul safely from worldly business in mind
and body departed . . . anon comes heavenly joy, and it mar-
vellously making merry melody, to her springs; whose token
she takes, that now forward worldly sound gladly she suffers not.

1 St. John of the Cross, “Noche Escura del Alma,” 1. ii. cap. xvii. It is perhaps
advisable to warn the reader that in this work St. John applies the image of
“darkness” to three absolutely different things: i.e., to a purgation of mind
which he calls the “night of sense”; to dim contemplation, or the Dionysian'
“Divine Dark”; and to the true “dark night of the soul,” which he calls the
“night of the spirit.” The result has been a good deal of confusion, in modern
writers on mysticism, upon the subject of the “Dark Night.”



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 355

This is ghostly music, that is unknown to all that with worldly
business lawful or unlawful are occupied. No man there is that
\his has known, but he that has studied to God only to take heed/' 1

Doubtless the "dark transcendence" reported and dwelt upon
by all mystics of the Dionysian type, is nearest the truth of all
our apprehensions of God: 2 though it can be true only in the
paradoxical sense that it uses the suggestive qualities of negation
— the Dark whose very existence involves that of Light — to hint
at the infinite Affirmation of All that Is. But the nearer this
language is to the Absolute, the further it is from ourselves.
Unless care be taken in the use of it, the elimination of falsehood
may easily involve for us the elimination of everything else. Man
, is not yet pure spirit, has not attained the Eternal. He is in via ,
and will never arrive if impatient amateurs of Reality insist on
cutting the ground from under his feet. Like Dante, he needs a
ladder to the stars, a ladder which goes the whole way from the
human to the divine. Therefore the philosophic exactitude of
these descriptions of the dark must be balanced, as they are in
St. John of the Cross, by the personal, human, and symbolic
affirmations of Love, if we would avoid a distorted notion of the
Reality which the contemplative attains in his supreme "flights
towards God." Consciousness has got to be helped across the gap
, which separates it from its Home.

The "wilderness," the dread Abyss, must be made homely
by the voice of "the lover that His sweetheart before men entreats
not." Approximate as we know such an image of our communion
with the Absolute to be, it represents a real aspect of the con-
templative experience which eludes the rule and compass of
metaphysical thought. Blake, with true mystic insight, summed
up the situation as between the two extreme forms of contem-
| plation when he wrote : — 3

“God appears, and God is Light
To those poor souls who dwell in night:

But doth a human form display
To those who dwell in realms of day.”

In the "orison of union" and the "Spiritual Marriage," those
contemplatives whose temperament inclines them to "dwell in
realms of day" receive just such a revelation of the "human
form" — a revelation which the Christian dogma of the Incarnation
brings to a point. They apprehend the personal and passionate
aspect of the Infinite Life; and the love, at once intimate and
expensive, all-demanding and all- renouncing, which plays like

1 “The Fire of Love," bk. ii. cap. vii.

• Compare Baker, “Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii. § iv. cap. iv.

1 “Auguries of Innocence."



MYSTICISM


356

lightning between it and the desirous soul. “Thou saidst to me,
my only Love, that Thou didst will to make me Thyself; and that
Thou wast all mine, with all that Thou hadst and with all Para- !
dise, and that I was all Thine. That I should leave all, or rather
the nothing; and that (then) Thou wouldst give me the all. And
that Thou hadst given me this name — at which words I heard
within me 'dedi te in lucem gentium' — not without good reason.
And it seemed then, as though I had an inclination for nothing
except the purest Union, without any means, in accordance with
that detailed sight which Thou hadst given me. So then I said
to Thee: These other things, give them to whom Thou wilt;
give me but this most pure Union with Thee, free from every
means .” 1

“Our work is the love of God," cries Ruysbroeck. “Our satis-
faction lies in submission to the Divine Embrace.” This utter
and abrupt submission to the Divine Embrace is the essence of
that form of contemplation which is called the Orison of Union.
“Surrender” is its secret: a personal surrender, not only of finite
to Infinite, but of bride to Bridegroom, heart to Heart. This
surrender, in contemplatives of an appropriate temperament, is
of so complete and ecstatic a type that it involves a more or less
complete suspension of normal consciousness, an entrancement ;
and often crosses the boundary which separates contemplation
from true ecstasy, producing in its subject physical as well as
psychical effects. In this state, says St. Teresa, “There is no sense
of anything: only fruition, without understanding what that may
be the fruition of which is granted. It is understood that the
fruition is of a certain good, containing in itself all good together
at once; but this good is not comprehended. The senses are all
occupied in this fruition in such a way, that not one of them is at
liberty so as to be able to attend to anything else, whether out-
ward or inward. . . . But this state of complete absorption,
together with the utter rest of the imagination — for I believe
that the imagination is then wholly at rest — lasts only for a
short time; though the faculties do not so completely recover
themselves as not to be for some hours afterwards as if in dis-
order. . . . He who has had experience of this will understand it
in some measure, for it cannot be more clearly described, because
what then takes place is so obscure. All I am able to say is, that
the soul is represented as being close to God ; and that there abides
a conviction thereof so certain and strong that it cannot possibly
help believing so. All the faculties fail now, and are suspended
in such a way that, as I said before, their operations cannot be

1 Colloquies of Battista Vemazza: quoted by Von Hiigel, “The Mystical
Element of Religion,** vol. i. p. 350.



INTROVERSION : CONTEMPLATION 357

traced. . . . The will must be fully occupied in loving, but it
understands not how it loves; the understanding, if it under-
stands, does not understand how it understands. It does not
understand, as it seems to me, because, as I said just now, this
is a matter which cannot be understood." 1 Clearly, the psycho-
logical situation here is the same as that in which mystics of the
impersonal type feel themselves to be involved in the Cloud of
Unknowing, or Divine Dark.

"Do not imagine," says St. Teresa in another place, "that this
orison, like that which went before [i.e., the quiet] is a sort of
drowsiness : (I call it drowsiness, because the soul seems to slumber,
being neither thoroughly asleep, nor thoroughly awake). In the
prayer of union the soul is asleep; fast asleep as regards herself
and earthly things. In fact, during the short time that this state
lasts she is deprived of all feeling, and though she wishes it, she
can think of nothing. Thus she needs no effort in order to suspend
her thoughts; if the soul can love — she knows not how or when
she loves, nor what she desires . . . she is, as it were, entirely
dead to the world, the better to live in God." 2

It may be asked, in what way does such contemplation as
this differ from unconsciousness. The difference, according to
St. Teresa, consists in the definite somewhat which takes place
during this inhibition of the surface-consciousness: a "somewhat"
of which that surface-consciousness becomes aware when it
awakes. True contemplation, as the mystics are constantly
assuring us, must always be judged by its fruits. If it be genuine,
work has been done during the period of apparent passivity.
The deeper self has escaped, has risen to freedom, and returns
other than it was before. We must remember that Teresa is
speaking from experience, and that her temperamental peculiarities
will modify the form which this experience takes. “The soul,"
she says, "neither sees, hears, nor understands anything while
this state lasts; but this is usually a very short time, and seems
to the soul even shorter than it really is. God visits the soul in
a way that prevents it doubting when it comes to itself that it
has been in God and God in it; and so firmly is it convinced of
this truth that, though years may pass before this state recurs,
the soul can never forget it nor doubt its reality. . . . But you will
say, how can the soul see and comprehend that she is in God and
God in her, if during this union she is not able either to see or
understand ? I reply, that she does not see it at the time, but that
afterwards she perceives it clearly: not by a vision, but by a
certitude which remains in the heart which God alone can give." 3

* Vida, cap. xviii. §§ 2, 17, 19.

• “El Castillo Interior," Moradas Quintas, cap. i. I Op. cit., loc. cit .



CHAPTER VIII


ECSTASY AND RAPTURE


Ecstasy is the last term of Contemplation — Mystics regard it as a very favour-
able state — Its physical aspect — The trance — an abnormal bodily state — Healthy
and unhealthy trances — their characteristics — St. Catherine of Genoa — Psy-
chological aspect of ecstasy— Complete mono-ideism — A temporary unification
of consciousness — Often helped by symbols — St. Catherine of Siena — Description
of healthy ecstasy — It entails a new perception of Reality — Mystical aspect of
Ecstasy — a state of “Pure Apprehension" — the completion of the Orison of
Union — Sometimes hard to distinguish from it — The real distinction is in entrance-
ment — St. Teresa on union and ecstasy — Results of ecstasy confirm those of
contemplation — no sharp line possible between the two — Many cases cannot
be classified — Rolle on two forms of Rapture — The mystic in ecstasy claims that
lie attains the Absolute — The nature of his consciousness — a concentration of
his whole being on one act — A perception of Eternity — Suso — the Ncoplatomsts
— Plotinus — Self-mergence — Jacopone da Todi — Ecstatic vision — Rapture — its
distinction from Ecstasy — it indicates psycho-physical disharmony — St. Teresa
on Rapture — Levitation — Rapture always entails bodily immobility — generally
mental disorder — Its final result good for life — Ecstatic states contribute to the
organic development of the self

S ince the object of all contemplation is the production of
that state of intimate communion in which the mystics
declare that the self is “in God and God is in her,” it might
be supposed that the orison of union represented the end of mystical
activity, in so far as it is concerned with the attainment of a
transitory but exalted consciousness of "oneness with the
Absolute.” Nearly all the great contemplatives, however, describe
as a distinct, and regard as a more advanced phase of the spiritual
consciousness, the group of definitely ecstatic states in which the
concentration of interest on the Transcendent is so complete, the
gathering up and pouring out of life on this one point so intense,
that the subject is more or less entranced, and becomes, for the
time of the ecstasy, unconscious of the external world. In ordinary
contemplation he refused to attend to that external world: it was
there, a blurred image, at the fringe of his conscious field, but he
deliberately left it on one side. In ecstasy he cannot attend to it.
None of its messages reach him: not even those most insistent of
all messages which are translated into the terms of bodily pain.

All mystics agree in regarding such ecstasy as an exceptionally
favourable state; the one in which man’s spirit is caught up to
the most immediate union with the divine. The word has become
a synonym for joyous exaltation, for the inebriation of the Infinite.

S}»



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 359

The induced ecstasies of the Dionysian mysteries, the metaphysical
raptures of the Neoplatonists, the voluntary or involuntary trance
of Indian mystics and Christian saints — all these, however widely
they may differ in transcendental value, agree in claiming such
value, in declaring that this change in the quality of consciousness
brought with it a valid and ineiiable apprehension of the Real.
Clearly, this apprehension will vary in quality and content with
the place of the subject in the spiritual scale. The ecstasy is merely
the psycho- physical condition which accompanies it. “It is hardly
a paradox to say,” says Myers, "that the evidence for ecstasy is
stronger than the evidence for any other religious belief. Of all
the subjective experiences of religion, ecstasy is that which has
been most urgently, perhaps to the psychologist most convincingly
asserted; and it is not confined to any one religion. . . . From the
medicine man of the lowest savages up to St. John, St. Peter, and
St. Paul, with Buddha and Mahomet on the way, we find records
which, though morally and intellectually much differing, are in
psychological essence the same." 1

There are three distinct aspects under which the ecstatic state
may be studied: (a) the physical, ( b ) the psychological, (c) the
mystical. Many of the deplorable misunderstandings and still
more deplorable mutual recriminations which surround its
discussion come from the refusal of experts in one of these three
branches to consider the results arrived at by the other two.

A. Physically considered, ecstasy is a trance; more or less deep,
more or less prolonged. The subject may slide into it gradually
from a period of absorption in, or contemplation of, some idea
which has filled the field of consciousness: or, it may come on
suddenly, the appearance of the idea — or even some word or
symbol suggesting the idea — abruptly throwing the subject into
an entranced condition. This is the state which some mystical
writers call Rapture. The distinction, however, is a conventional
one: and the works of the mystics describe many intermediate
forms.

During the trance, breathing and circulation are depressed.
The body is more or less cold and rigid, remaining in the exact
position which it occupied at the oncoming of the ecstasy, however
difficult and unnatural this pose may be. Sometimes enhancement
is so deep that there is complete anaesthesia, as in the case which
I quote from the life of St. Catherine of Siena. 2 Credible witnesses
report that Bernadette, the visionary of Lourdes, held the flaming
end of a candle in her hand for fifteen minutes during one of her
ecstasies. She felt no pain, neither did the flesh show any marks

* “Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death,” vol. ii. p. 260.

* Vide infra, p. 365.



MYSTICISM


360

of burning. Similar instances of ecstatic anaesthesia abound
in the lives of the saints, and are also characteristic of certain
pathological states . 1

The trance includes, according to the testimony of the ecstatics,
two distinct phases — (a) the short period of lucidity and (&) a
longer period of complete unconsciousness, which may pass into a
death like catalepsy, lasting for hours; or, as once with St. Teresa,
for days. 'The difference between union and trance/' says Teresa,
“is this: that the latter lasts longer and is more visible outwardly,
because the breathing gradually diminishes, so that it becomes
impossible to speak or to open the eyes. And though this very
thing occurs when the soul is in union, there is more violence in a
trance ; for the natural warmth vanishes, I know not how, when the
rapture is deep, and in all these kinds of orison there is more or
less of this. When it is deep, as I was saying, the hands become cold
and sometimes stiff and straight as pieces of wood ; as to the body,
if the rapture comes on when it is standing or kneeling it remains
so; and the soul is so full of the joy of that which Our Lord is
setting before it, that it seems to forget to animate the body and
abandons it. If the rapture lasts, the nerves are made to feel it ." 2

Such ecstasy as this, so far as its physical symptoms go, is not
of course the peculiar privilege of the mystics. It is an abnormal
bodily state, caused by a psychic state: and this causal psychic
state may be healthy or unhealthy, the result of genius or disease.
It is common in the little understood type of personality called
“sensitive" or mediumistic: it is a well-known symptom of certain
mental and nervous illnesses. A feeble mind concentrated on one
idea — like a hypnotic subject gazing at one spot — easily becomes
entranced; however trivial the idea which gained possession of his
consciousness. Apart from its content, then, ecstasy carries no
guarantee of spiritual value. It merely indicates the presence of
certain abnormal psycho-physical conditions : an alteration of the
normal equilibrium, a shifting of the threshold of consciousness,
which leaves the body, and the whole usual “external world"
outside instead of inside the conscious field, and even affects those
physical functions — such as breathing — which are almost entirely
automatic. Thus ecstasy, physically considered, may occur in any
person in whom (1) the threshold of consciousness is exceptionally
mobile and (2) there is a tendency to dwell upon one governing idea
or intuition. Its worth depends entirely on the objective value
of that idea or intuition.

In the hysterical patient, thanks to an unhealthy condition
of the centres of consciousness, any trivial or irrational idea, any

* An interesting modem case is reported in the Lancet , 18 March, 1911.

• Relaccion, viii. 8.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 361

one of the odds and ends stored up in the subliminal region, may
thus become fixed, dominate the mind, and produce entrancement.
Such ecstasy is an illness : the emphasis is on the pathological state
which makes it possible. In the mystic, the idea which fills his
life is so great a one — the idea of God — that, in proportion as it is
vivid, real, and intimate, it inevitably tends to monopolize the
field of consciousness. Here the emphasis is on the overpowering
strength of spirit, not on the feeble and unhealthy state of body
or mind. 1 This true ecstasy, says Godferneaux, is not a malady,
but “the extreme form of a state which must be classed amongst
the ordinary accidents of conscious life.”*

The mystics themselves are fully aware of the importance of
this distinction. Ecstasies, no less than visions and voices, must,
they declare, be subjected to unsparing criticism before they are
recognized as divine: whilst some are undoubtedly “of God,”
others are no less clearly “of the devil.” “The great doctors of the
mystic life,” says Malaval, “teach that there are two sorts of
rapture, which must be carefully distinguished. The first are pro-
duced in persons but little advanced m the Way, and still full of
selfhood; either by the force of a heated imagination which
vividly apprehends a sensible object, or by the artifice of the Devil.
These are the raptures which St. Teresa calls, in various parts of
her works. Raptures of Feminine Weakness. The other sort of
Rapture is, on the contrary, the effect of pure intellectual vision
in those who have a great and generous love for God. To generous
souls who have utterly renounced themselves, God never fails in
these raptures to communicate high things.”3

All the mystics agree with Malaval in finding the test of a true
ecstasy, not in its outward sign, but in its inward grace, its after-
value: and here psychology would do well to follow their example.
The ecstatic states, which are supreme instances of the close
connection between body and soul, have bodily as well as mental
results: and those results are as different and as characteristic as
those observed in healthy and in morbid organic processes. If the
concentration has been upon the highest centre of consciousness,
the organ of spiritual perception — if a door has really been opened
by which the self has escaped for an instant to the vision of That
Which Is — the ecstasy will be good for life. The entrancement of

1 St. Thomas proves ecstasies to be inevitable on just this psychological ground.
“The higher our mind is raised to the contemplation of spiritual things,” he says,
“the more it is abstracted from sensible things. But the final term to which con-
templation can possibly arrive is the divine substance. Therefore the mind that
sees the divine substance must be totally divorced from the bodily senses, cither
by death or by some rapture” (“Summa contra Gentiles,” 1 . iii. cap. xlvii.,
Rickaby's translation).

* “Surla Psychologic du Mysticisme” (Revue Philosophique, February, 1902).

3 Malaval, “La Pratique de la Vraye Theologie Mystique,” vol. i. p. 89.



3& MYSTICISM

disease, on the contrary, is always bad for life. Its concentration
being upon the lower instead of the higher levels of mentality, it
depresses rather than enhances the vitality, the fervour, or the *
intelligence of its subject: and leaves behind it an enfeebled will,
and often moral and intellectual chaos. 1 “Ecstasies that do not
produce considerable profit either to the persons themselves or
others, deserve to be suspected/* says Augustine Baker, “and
when any marks of their approaching are perceived, the persons
ought to divert their minds some other way/* 3 It is the difference
between a healthy appetite for nourishing food and a morbid
craving for garbage. The same organs of digestion are used in
satisfying both : yet he would be a hardy physiologist who under-
took to discredit all nutrition by a reference to its degenerate forms.

Sometimes both kinds of ecstasy, the healthy and the psycho-
pathic, are seen in the same person. Thus in the cases of St.
Catherine of Genoa and St. Catherine of Siena it would seem that
as their health became feebler and the nervous instability always
found in persons of genius increased, their ecstasies became more
frequent ; but these were not healthy ecstasies, such as those which
they experienced in the earlier stages of their careers, and which
brought with them an access of vitality. They were the results of
increasing weakness of body, not of the overpowering strength
of the spirit : and there is evidence that Catherine of Genoa, that
acute self-critic, was conscious of this. “Those who attended on
her did not know how to distinguish one state from the other.
And hence on coming to, she would sometimes say, 'Why did you
let me remain in this quietude, from which I have almost died?* ”3
Her earlier ecstasies, on the contrary, had in a high degree the
positive character of exaltation and life-enhancement consequent
upon extreme concentration on the Absolute; as well as the merely
negative character of annihilation of the surface-consciousness.
She came from them with renewed health and strength, as from a
resting in heavenly places and a feeding on heavenly food: and
side by side with this ecstatic life, fulfilled the innumerable duties
of her active vocation as hospital matron and spiritual mother
of a large group of disciples. “Many times/' says her legend, “she
would hide herself in some secret place and there stay: and being
sought she was found upon the ground, her face hidden in her
hands, altogether beyond herself, in such a state of joy as is beyond
thought or speech : and being called — yea, even in a loud voice —
she heard not. And at other times she would go up and down. . . .

* Pierre Janet (“The Major Symptoms of Hysteria/' p. 316) says that a lowering
of the mental level is an invariable symptom or “stigma" of hysteria.

* “Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii. § iv. cap. iii.

1 Von rlilgel, “The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. p. 206.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 363

as if beyond herself, drawn by the impulse of love, she did this.
And certain other times she remained for the space of six hours
*as if dead: but hearing herself called, suddenly she got up, and
answering she would at once go about all that needed to be done,
even the humblest things. 1 And in thus leaving the All, she went
without any grief, because she fled all selfhood (la proprield) as if
it were the devil. And when she came forth from her hiding-place,
her face was rosy as it might be a cherub’s; and it seemed as if
she might have said, ‘Who shall separate me from the love of
God?’ ” 2 "Very often,” says St. Teresa, describing the results of
such rapturous communion with Pure Love as that from which
St. Catherine came joyous and rosy-faced, "he who v'as before
sickly and full of pain comes forth healthy and even with new
strength: for it is something great that is given to the soul in
rapture. ”3

B. Psychologically considered, all ecstasy is a form— the most
perfect form— of the state which is technically called “complete
mono-ideism,” That withdrawal of consciousness from circum-
ference to centre, that deliberate attention to one thing, which we
discussed in Recollection, is here pushed— voluntarily or involun-
tarily — to its logical conclusion. It is ( 1 ) always paid for by
psycho-physical disturbances; ( 2 ) rewarded in healthy cases by an
enormous lucidity, a supreme intuition in regard to the one
thing on which the self’s interest has been set.

Such ecstasy, then, is an exalted form of contemplation, and
might be expected in appropriate subjects to develop naturally
from that state. "A simple difference of degree,” says Maury,
"separates ecstasy from the action of forcibly fixing an idea in
the mind. Contemplation implies exercise of will, and the power
of interrupting the extreme tension of the mind. In ecstasy, which
is contemplation carried to its highest pitch, the will, although
in the strictest sense able to provoke the state, is nevertheless

unable to suspend it. ”4 . ...

In "complete mono-ideism” then, the attention to one thing,
and the inattention to all else, is so entire that the subject is
entranced. Consciousness has been withdrawn from those centres
which receive and respond to the messages of the external world:
he neither sees, feels, nor hears. The Ego dormio et cor meum
vigilat of the contemplative ceases to be a metaphor, and becomes
a realistic description. It must be remembered that the whole trend


» This power of detecting and hearing the call of duty thongh she w^deaf to
everything else, is evidently related to the peculiarity noticed byR ibot who! says
tha/an ecstatic hears no sounds, save, in some cases, the voice ia

> ? °n wluch w ulways able to penetrate

Tvidi cap. xx. § 49 . < A. Maury, “Le Sommeil et les Kdves," p. *35-



MYSTICISM


364

of mystical education has been toward the production of this
fixity of attention. Recollection and Quiet lead up to it. Con-
templation cannot take place without it. All the mystics assure 1
us that a unification of consciousness, in which all outward things
are forgot, is the necessary prelude of union with the Divine; for
consciousness of the Many and consciousness of the One are
mutually exclusive states. Ecstasy, for the psychologist, is such
a unification in its extreme form. The absorption of the self in the
one idea, the one desire, is so profound — and in the case of the
great mystics so impassioned — that everything else is blotted out.
The tide of life is withdrawn, not only from those higher centres
which are the seats of perception and of thought, but also from
those lower centres which govern the physical life. The whole
vitality of the subject is so concentrated on the transcendental
world — or, in a morbid ecstatic, on the idea which dominates his
mind — that body and brain alike are depleted of their energy
in the interests of this supreme act.

Since mystics have, as a rule, the extreme susceptibility to
suggestions and impressions which is characteristic of artistic
and creative types, it is not surprising that their ecstasies are
often evoked, abruptly, by the exhibition of, or concentration
upon, some loved and special symbol of the divine. Such symbols
form the rallying-points about which are gathered a whole group
of ideas and intuitions. Their presence — sometimes the sudden
thought of them — will be enough, in psychological language, to
provoke a discharge of energy along some particular path : that is
to say, to stir to life all those ideas and intuitions which belong to
the self's consciousness of the Absolute, to concentrate vitality
on them, and introduce the self into that world of perception of
which they are, as it were, the material keys. Hence the profound
significance of symbols for some mystics: their paradoxical
clinging to outward forms, whilst declaring that the spiritual and
intangible alone is real.

For the Christian mystics, the sacraments and mysteries of
faith have always provided such a point d’appui; and these often
play a large part in the production of their ecstasies. For St.
Catherine of Siena, and also very often for her namesake of Genoa,
the reception of Holy Communion was the prelude to ecstasy.
Julian of Norwich 1 and St. Francis of Assisi- became entranced
whilst gazing on the crucifix. We are told of Denis the Carthusian
that towards the end of his life, hearing the Veni Creator or certain
verses of the psalms, he was at once rapt in God and lifted up from
the earth. 3

* “Revelations of Divine Love," cap. iii. * Vide supra , p. i8x.

3 D. A. Mo u gel, “Denys le Chartreux,” p. 32.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 365

Of St. Catherine of Siena, her biographer says that "she used
to communicate with such fervour that immediately afterwards
She would pass into the state of ecstasy, in which for hours she
would be totally unconscious. On one occasion, finding her in this
condition, they (the Dominican friars) forcibly threw her out of
the church at midday, and left her in the heat of the sun watched
over by some of her companions till she came to her senses."
Another, “catching sight of her in the church when she was in
ecstasy, came down and pricked her in many places with a needle.
Catherine was not aroused in the least from her trance, but after-
wards, when she came back to her senses, she felt the pain in her
body and perceived that she had thus been wounded ." 1

It is interesting to compare with this objective description, the
subjective account of ecstatic union which St. Catherine gives
in her “Divine Dialogue." Here, the deeper self of the mystic is
giving in a dramatic form its own account of its inward experiences :
hence we see the inward side of that outward state of entrance-
men t, which was all that onlookers were able to perceive. As
usual in the Dialogue, the intuitive perceptions of the deeper self
are attributed by St. Catherine to the Divine Voice speaking in
her soul.

“Oftentimes, through the perfect union which the soul has made
with Me, she is raised from the earth almost as if the heavy body
' became light. But this does not mean that the heaviness of the
body is taken away, but that the union of the soul with Me is more
perfect than the union of the body with the soul; wherefore the
strength of the spirit, united with Me, raises the weight of the body
from the earth, leaving it as if immoveable and all pulled to pieces
in the affection of the soul. Thou rememberest to have heard it
said of some creatures, that were it not for My Goodness, in seeking
strength for them, they would not be able to live; and I would
. tell thee that, in the fact that the souls of some do not leave their
bodies, is to be seen a greater miracle than in the fact that some
have arisen from the dead, so great is the union which they have
with Me. I, therefore, sometimes for a space withdraw from the
union, making the soul return to the vessel of her body . . . from
which she was separated by the affection of love. From the body
she did not depart, because that cannot be except in death; the
bodily powers alone departed, becoming united to Me through
affection of love. The memory is full of nothing but Me, the intel-
lect, elevated, gazes upon the object of My Truth; the affection,
which follows the intellect, loves and becomes united with that
f which the intellect sees. These powers being united and gathered
together and immersed and inflamed in Me, the body loses its
1 E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena/' p. 50.



MYSTICISM


366

feeling, so that the seeing eye sees not, and the hearing ear
hears not, and the tongue does not speak ; except as the abundance
of the heart will sometimes permit it, for the alleviation of th4
heart and the praise and glory of My Name. The hand does not
touch and the feet walk not, because the members are bound with
the sentiment of Love." 1

A healthy ecstasy so deep as this seems to be the exclusive
prerogative of the mystics: perhaps because so great a passion,
so profound a concentration, can be produced by nothing smaller
than their flaming love of God. But as the technique of contempla-
tion is employed more or less consciously by all types of creative
genius — by inventors and philosophers, by poets, prophets, and
musicians, by all the followers of the "Triple Star," no less than
by the mystic saints — so too this apotheosis of contemplation, '
the ecstatic state, sometimes appears in a less violent form, acting
healthily and normally, in artistic and creative personalities at
a complete stage of development. It may accompany the prophetic
intuitions of the seer, the lucidity of the great metaphysician, the
artist's supreme perception of beauty or truth. As the saint is
"caught up to God," so these are "caught up" to their vision : their
partial apprehensions of the Absolute Life. Those joyous, expan-
sive outgoing sensations, characteristic of the ecstatic conscious-
ness, are theirs also. Their greatest creations are translations to
us, not of something they have thought, but of something they
have known, in a moment of ecstatic union with the "great life
of the AH."

We begin, then, to think that the "pure mono-ideism," which
the psychologist identifies with ecstasy, though doubtless a part,
is far from being the whole content of this state, True, the ecstatic
is absorbed in his one idea, his one love: he is in it and with it:
it fills his universe. But this unified state of consciousness does
not merely pore upon something already possessed. When it only
does this, it is diseased. Its true business is pure perception. It is
outgoing, expansive: its goal is something beyond itself. The
rearrangement of the psychic self which occurs in ecstasy is not
merely concerned with the normal elements of consciousness. It
is rather a temporary unification of consciousness round that
centre of transcendental perception which mystics call the "apex"
or the "spark of the soul." Those deeper layers of personality
which normal life keeps below the threshold are active in it: and
these are fused with the surface personality by the governing
passion, the transcendent love which lies at the basis of all sane
ecstatic states. The result is not merely a mind concentrated on
one idea, nor a heart fixed on one desire, nor even a mind and a
1 Dialogo, cap. lxxix.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 367

heart united in the interests of a beloved thought: but a whole
joeing welded into one, all its faculties, neglecting their normal
universe, grouped about a new centre, serving a new life, and
piercing like a single flame the barriers of the sensual world.
Ecstasy is the psycho-physical state which may accompany this
brief synthetic act.

C. Therefore, whilst on its physical side ecstasy is an entrance-
ment, on its mental side a complete unification of consciousness,
on its mystical side it is an exalted act of perception. It represents
the greatest possible extension of the spiritual consciousness in
the direction of Pure Being: the “blind intent stretching” here
receives its reward in a profound experience of Eternal Life. In
this experience the departmental activities of thought and feeling,
the consciousness of I-hood, of space and time — all that belongs
to the World of Becoming and our own place therein— are sus-
pended. The vitality which we are accustomed to split amongst
these various things, is gathered up to form a state of “pure
apprehension”: a vivid intuition of — or if you like conjunction
with — the Transcendent. For the time of his ecstasy the mystic
is, for all practical purposes, as truly living in the supersensual
world as the normal human animal is living in the sensual world.
He is experiencing the highest and most joyous of those tempo-
„ rary and unstable states — those “passive unions” — in which his
consciousness escapes the limitations of the senses, rises to
freedom, and is united for an instant with the “great life of
the All.”

Ecstasy, then, from the contemplative’s point of view, is the
development and completion of the orison of union, and he is not
always at pains to distinguish the two degrees; a fact which adds
greatly to the difficulties of students. 1 In both states— though he
may, for want of better language, describe his experience in terms
of sight — the Transcendent is perceived by contact, not by vision:
as, enfolded in darkness with one whom we love, we obtain a know-
ledge far more complete than that conferred by the sharpest sight,
the most perfect mental analysis. In Ecstasy, the apprehension
is perhaps more definitely “beatific” than in the orison of union.
Such memory of his feeling-state as the ecstatic brings back with
him is more often concerned with an exultant certainty — a con-
viction that he has known for once the Reality which hath no
image, and solved the paradox of life — than with meek self-loss in
that Cloud of Unknowing where the contemplative in union is
content to meet his Beloved. The true note of ecstasy, however,
< its only valid distinction from infused contemplation, lies in

* In the case of Dante, for instance, we do not know whether his absorption in
the Eternal Light did or did not entail the condition of trance.



MYSTICISM


368

entrancement ; in “being ravished out of fleshly feeling/* as St. Paul
caught up to the Third Heaven, 1 not in “the lifting of mind untq
God.” This, of course, is an outward distinction only, and a rough
one at that, since entrancement has many degrees: but it will be
found the only practical basis of classification.

Probably none but those who have experienced these states
know the actual difference between them. Even St. Teresa’s
psychological insight fails her here, and she is obliged to fall back
on the difference between voluntary and involuntary absorption
in the divine: a difference, not in spiritual values, but merely
in the psycho-physical constitution of those who have perceived
these values. “I wish I could explain with the help of God,” she
says, “wherein union differs from rapture, or from transport, or
from flight of the spirit, as they call it, or from trance, which are
all one. I mean that all these are only different names for that one
and the same thing , which is also called ecstasy. It is more excellent
than union, the fruits of it are much greater, and its other opera-
tions more manifold, for union is uniform in the beginning, the
middle, and the end, and is so also interiorly ; but as raptures have
ends of a much higher kind, they produce effects both within and
without [ i.e ., both physical and psychical]. ... A rapture is
absolutely irresistible; whilst union, inasmuch as we are then on
our own ground, may be hindered, though that resistance be
painful and violent.” 2

From the point of view of mystical psychology, our interest in
ecstasy will centre in two points. (1) What has the mystic to tell
us of the Object of his ecstatic perception ? (2) What is the nature
of the peculiar consciousness which he enjoys in his trance? That
is to say, what news does he bring us as to the Being of God and
the powers of man?

It may be said generally that on both these points he bears out,
amplifies, and expresses under formulae of greater splendour, with
an accent of greater conviction, the general testimony of the
contemplatives. In fact, we must never forget that an ecstatic is
really nothing else than a contemplative of a special kind, with a
special psycho-physical make-up. Moreover, we have seen that
it is not always easy to determine the exact point at which entrance ■
ment takes place, and deep* contemplation assumes the ecstatic
form. The classification, like all classifications of mental states,
is an arbitrary one. Whilst the extreme cases present no difficulty,
there are others less complete, which form a graduated series
between the deeps of the “Quiet” and the heights of “Rapture.”
We shall never know, for instance, whether the ecstasies of >
Plotinus and of Pascal involved true bodily entrancement, or

* 2 Cor. xii. 1-6. * Vida, cap. xx. §§ i and 3.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 369

only a deep absorption of the “unitive” kind. So, too, the language
qi many Christian mystics when speaking of their “raptures” is
so vague and metaphorical that it leaves us in great doubt as
to whether they mean by Rapture the abrupt suspension of
normal consciousness, or merely a sudden and agreeable elevation
of soul.

“Ravishing,” says Rolle, “as it is showed, in two ways is to be
understood. One manner, forsooth, in which a man is ravished out
of fleshly feeling; so that for the time of his ravishing plainly he
feels nought in flesh, nor what is done of his flesh, and yet he is not
dead but quick, for yet the soul to the body gives life. And on this
manner saints sometime are ravished, to their profit and other
men’s learning; as Paul ravished to the third heaven. And on this
manner sinners also in vision sometime are ravished, that they
may see joys of saints and pains of damned for their correction. 1
And many other as we read of. Another manner of ravishing there
is, that is lifting of mind into God by contemplation. And this
manner of ravishing is in all that are perfect lovers of God, and in
none of them but that love God. And as well this is called a ravish-
ing as the other; for with a violence it is done, and as it were
against nature.” 1

It is, however, very confusing to the anxious inquirer when —
•is too often — “lifting of mind by contemplation” is “as well
called a ravishing as the other,” and ecstasy is used as a synonym
for gladness of heart. Here, so far as is possible, these words will
be confined to their strict meaning, and not applied generally to
the description of all the outgoing and expansive states of the
transcendental consciousness.

What does the mystic claim that he attains in this abnormal
condition — this irresistible trance? The price that he pays is
heavy, involving much psycho-physical wear and tear. He declares
"that his rapture or ecstasy includes a moment — often a very short,
and always an indescribable moment — in which he enjoys a
supreme knowledge of or participation in Divine Reality. He tells
us under various metaphors that he then attains Pure Being, his
Source, his Origin, his Beloved: “is engulphed in the very thing
for which he longs, which is God .”3 “Oh, wonder of wonders,”
cries Eckhart, “when I think of the union the soul has with God!
He makes the enraptured soul to flee out of herself, for she is no
more satisfied with anything that can be named. The spring of

* Compare Dante, Letter to Can Grande, sect. 28, where he adduces this
fact of “the ravishing of sinners for their correction, ” in support of his claim
that the “Divine Comedy" is the fruit of experience, and that he had indeed
“navigated the great Sea of Being” of which he writes.

• Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love," bk. ii. cap. vii.

f Dante, loc. tit .



MYSTICISM


370

Divine Love flows out of the soul and draws her out of hersel
into the unnamed Being, into her first source, which is Go#
alone .” 1

This momentary attainment of the Source, the Origin, is th<
theme of all descriptions of mystic ecstasy. In Rulman Merswin':
“Book of the Nine Rocks,” that brief and overwhelming raptur<
is the end of the pilgrim's long trials and ascents. “The vision o
the Infinite lasted only for a moment : when he came to himsel
he felt inundated with life and joy. He asked, ‘Where have
been?' and he was answered, Tn the upper school of the H 0 I 3
Spirit. There you were surrounded by the dazzling pages of th<
Book of Divine Wisdom . 2 Your soul plunged theiein with delight
and the Divine Master of the school has filled her with an exuberan
love by which even your physical nature has been transfigured/ "
Another Friend of God, Ellina von Crevelsheim, who was of S(
abnormal a psychic constitution that her absorption in the Divin<
Love caused her to remain dumb for seven years, was “touchec
by the Hand of God” at the end of that period, and fell into i
five-days' ecstasy, in which “pure truth" was revealed to her, anc
she was lifted up to an immediate experience of the Absolute
There she “saw the interior of the Father's heart/' and wa:
“bound with chains of love, enveloped in light, and filled witl
peace and joy.”4

In this transcendent act of union, the mystic sometimes say:
that he is “conscious of nothing/' But it is clear that this expressiox
is figurative, for otherwise he would not have known that ther<
had been an act of union: were his individuality abolished, i
could not have been aware of its attainment of God. What h<
appears to mean is that consciousness so changes its form as t<
be no longer recognizable or describable in human speech. Ii
the paradoxical language of Richard of St. Victor, “In a wondrou:
fashion remembering we do not remember, seeing we do not see
understanding we not understand, penetrating we do not pene
trate.”5 In this indescribable but most actual state, the whol<
self, exalted and at white heat, is unified and poured out in one
vivid act of impassioned perception, which leaves no room foi
reflection or self-observation. That aloof “somewhat” in us whicl
watches all our actions, splits our consciousness, has been sub
merged. The mystic is attending exclusively to Eternity, not tc

* Eckhart, “On the Steps of the Sour* (Pfeiffer, p. 153).

• Compare Par. xxxiii. 85 (vide supra , p. 135).

S Jundt, “Rulman Merswin/* p. 27. Note that this was a “good ecstasy/
involving healthful effects for life. j

4 Jundt, “Les Amis de Dieu/* p. 39. Given aiso by Rufus Jones, “Studies h
Mystical Religion/* p. 271.

s “Benjamin Major/'



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 371

his own perception of Eternity. That he can only consider when
tjhe ecstasy itself is at an end.

“All things I then forgot,

My cheek on Him Who for my coming came,

All ceased, and I was not,

Leaving my cares and shame
Among the lilies, and forgetting them.”*

This is that perfect unity of consciousness, that utter concentra-
tion on an experience of love, which excludes all conceptual and
analytic acts. Hence, when the mystic says that his faculties were
suspended, that he “knew all and knew nought,” he really means
that he was so concentrated on the Absolute that he ceased to
consider his separate existence : so merged in it that he could not
perceive it as an object of thought, as the bird cannot see the air
which supports it, nor the fish the ocean in which it swims. He
really “knows all” but “thinks” nought: “perceives all,” but
“conceives nought.”

The ecstatic consciousness is not self-conscious: it is intuitive,
not discursive. Under the sway of a great passion, possessed by a
'reat Idea, it has become “a single state of enormous intensity.” 1 2 3
In this state, it transcends our ordinary processes of knowledge,
xnd plunges deep into the Heart of Reality. A fusion which is
[he anticipation of the unitive life takes place: and the ecstatic
eturns from this brief foretaste of freedom saying, “I know, as
raving known, the meaning of Existence; the sane centre of the
ini verse — at once the wonder and the assurance of the soul. ”3
This utter transformation of the soul in God,” says St. Teresa,
lescribing the same experience in the official language of theology,
‘continues only for an instant : yet while it continues no faculty
)f the soul is aware of it, or knows what is passing there. Nor can
t be understood while we are living on the earth; at least God will
lot have us understand it, because we must be incapable of
mderstanding it. I know it by experience .”4 The utterances of
.hose who know by experience are here of more worth than all the
statements of psychology, which are concerned of necessity with
.he “outward signs” of this “inward and spiritual grace.” To these
ve must go if we would obtain some hint of that which ecstasy
nay mean to the ecstatic.

“When the soul, forgetting itself, dwells in that radiant dark-
less,” says Suso, “it loses all its faculties and all its qualities, as
5t. Bernard has said. And this, more or less completely, according

1 St. John of the Cross, “En una Noche Escura."

* Ribot, “Psychologic de l'Attention," cap. iii.

3 B. P. Blood. See William James, “A Pluralistic Mystic/' in the Hibbert
Journal , July, 1910. « Vida, cap. xx. § 24.



MYSTICISM


372

to whether the soul — whether in the body or out of the body —
is more or less united to God. This forgetfulness of self is, in 51
measure, a transformation in God; who then becomes, in a certain
manner, all things for the soul, as Scripture saith. In this rapture
the soul disappears, but not yet entirely. It acquires, it is true,
certain qualities of divinity, but does not naturally become divine.
... To speak in the common language, the soul is rapt, by the
divine power of resplendent Being, above its natural faculties, into
the nakedness of the Nothing.” 1

Here Suso is trying to describe his rapturous attainment of God
in the negative terms of Dionysian theology. It is probable that
much of the language of that theology originated, not in the
abstract philosophizings, but in the actual ecstatic experience,
of the Neoplatonists, who — Christian and Pagan alike — believed*
in, and sometimes deliberately induced, this condition as the
supreme method of attaining the One. The whole Christian doctrine
of ecstasy, on its metaphysical side, really descends from that great
practical transcendentalist Plotinus : who is known to have been
an ecstatic, and has left in his Sixth Ennead a description of the
mystical trance obviously based upon his own experiences. “Then,”
he says, “the soul neither sees, nor distinguishes by seeing, nor
imagines that there are two things ; but becomes as it were another
thing, ceases to be itself and belong to itself. It belongs to God
and is one with Him, like two concentric circles: concurring they’
are One; but when they separate, they are two. . . . Since in this
conjunction with Deity there were not two things, but the per-
ceiver was one with the thing perceived, if a man could preserve
the memory of what he was when he mingled with the Divine,
he would have within himself an image of God. . . . For then
nothing stirred within him, neither anger, nor desire, nor even
reason, nor a certain intellectual perception, nor, in short, was he
himself moved, if we may assert this; but, being in an ecstasy,,
tranquil and alone with God, he enjoyed an unbreakable calm.” 2
Ecstasy, says Plotinus in another part of the same treatise, is
“another mode of seeing, a simplification and abandonment of
oneself, a desire of contact, rest, and a striving after union.” All
the phases of the contemplative experience seem to be summed up
in this phrase.

It has been said by some critics that the ecstasy of Plotinus
was different in kind from the ecstasy of the Christian saints : that
it was a philosophic rhapsody, something like Plato’s “saving
madness,” which is also regarded on somewhat insufficient evidence
as being an affair of the head and entirely unconnected with >
the heart. At first sight the arid metaphysical language in which
« Leben, cap. vl. * Ennead vi. 9.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 373

Plotinus tries to tell his love, offers some ground for this view.
Nevertheless the ecstasy itself is a practical matter; and has its
root, not in reason, but in a deep-seated passion for the Absolute
which is far nearer to the mystic’s love of God than to any intellec-
tual curiosity, however sublime. The few passages in which it
is mentioned tell us what his mystical genius drove him to do:
and not what his philosophical mind encouraged him to think or
say. At once when we come to these passages we notice a rise of
temperature, an alteration of values. Plotinus the ecstatic is sure,
whatever Plotinus the metaphysician may think, that the union
with God is a union of hearts: that “by love He may be gotten
and holden, but by thought never.” He, no less than the mediaeval
contemplatives, is convinced — to quote his own words — that the
Vision is only for the desirous; for him who has that “loving
passion” which “causes the lover to rest in the object of his love.” 1
The simile of marriage, of conjunction as the soul’s highest bliss,
which we are sometimes told that we owe in part to the un-
fortunate popularity of the Song of Songs, in part to the sexual
aberrations of celibate saints, is found in the work of this hard-
headed Pagan philosopher: who was as celebrated for his practical
kindness and robust common sense as for his transcendent
intuitions of the One.

The greatest of the Pagan ecstatics then, when speaking from
experience, anticipates the Christian contemplatives. His words,
too, when compared with theirs, show how delicate are the shades
which distinguish ecstasy such as this from the highest forms of
orison. “Tranquil and alone with God” — mingled for an instant
of time “like two concentric circles” with the Divine Life,” “per-
ceiver and perceived made one” — this is as near as the subtle
intellect of Alexandria can come to the reality of that experience
in which the impassioned mono-ideism of great spiritual genius
conquers the rebellious senses, and becomes, if only for a moment,
operative on the highest levels accessible to the human soul. Self-
mergence, then — that state of transcendence in which, the barriers
of selfhood abolished, we “receive the communication of Life and
of Beatitude, in which all tilings are consummated and all things
are renewed” 2 — is the secret of ecstasy, as it was the secret of
contemplation. On their spiritual side the two states cannot, save
for convenience of description, be divided. Where contemplation
becomes expansive, out-going, self-giving, and receives a definite
fruition of the Absolute in return, its content is already ecstatic.
Whether its outward form shall be so depends on the body of the
mystic, not on his soul.

1 Op. cit., loc. cit.

• Ruysbroeck, “De Calculo,” cap. xii.



374


MYSTICISM


"Se 1' atto della mente
d tutto consopito,
en Dio stando rapito,
ch’ en s6 non se retrova.

En mezo de sto mare
essendo si abissato,
gi4 non ce trova lato
onde ne possa uscire.

De s 6 non pu6 pensare
n6 dir como i formato,
pero che, trasformato,
altro si ha vestire.

Tutto lo suo sentire
en ben si va notando,
belleza contcmplando
la qual non ha coiore.” 1

Thus sang Jacopone da Todi of the ecstatic soul: and here the
descriptive powers of one who was both a poet and a mystic bring
life and light to the dry theories of psychology.

He continues — and here, in perhaps the finest of all poetic
descriptions of ecstasy, he seems to echo at one point Plotinus, at
another Richard of St. Victor : at once to veil and reveal the utmost
secrets of the mystic life : —

"Aperte son le porte
facta ha conjunzione,
et e in possessione
de tutto quel de Dio.

Sente que non sentio,
que non cognove vede,
possede que non crede,
gusta senza sapere.

Per6 ch' ha s6 perduto
tutto senza misura,
possede quel’ altura
de sumina smesuranza.

Perch6 non ha tenuto
en s£ altra mistura,
quel ben senza figura
recere en abondanza."*


* "The activity of the mind is lulled to rest: rapt in God, it can no longer
find itself. . . . Being so deeply engulphed in that ocean, now it can find no place
to issue therefrom. Of itself it cannot think, nor can it say what it is like: because
transformed, it hath another vesture. All its perceptions have gone forth to gaze
upon the Good, and contemplate that Beauty which has no likeness” (Lauda xci.).

* "The doors are flung wide: conjoined to God, it possesses all that is in Him.
(t feels that which it felt not: sec** that which it knew not, possesses that which it



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 375

This ineffable "awareness/' cn dio siando rapito , this union with
the Imageless Good, is not the only — though it is the purest —
form taken by ecstatic apprehension. Many of the visions and voices
described in a previous chapter were experienced in the entranced
or ecstatic state; generally when the first violence of the rapture
was passed. St. Francis and St. Catherine of Siena both received
the stigmata in ecstasy: almost all the entranccments of Suso,
and many of those of St. Teresa and Angela of Foligno, entailed
symbolic vision, rather than pure perception of the Absolute.
More and more, then, we are forced to the opinion that ecstasy,
in so far as it is not a synonym for joyous and expansive contem-
plation, is really the name of the outward condition rather than
of any one kind of inward experience.

Rapture

In all the cases which we have been considering — and they are
characteristic of a large group — the onset of ecstasy has been seen
as a gradual, though always involuntary process. Generally it has
been the culminating point of a period of contemplation. The self,
absorbed in the orison of quiet or of union, or some analogous
concentration on its transcendental interests, has passed over the
limit of these states ; and slid into a still ecstatic trance, with its
outward characteristics of rigid limbs, cold, and depressed
respiration.

The ecstasy, however, instead of developing naturally from a
state of intense absorption in the Divine Vision, may seize the
subject abruptly and irresistibly, when in his normal state of con-
sciousness. This is strictly what ascetic writers mean by Rapture.
We have seen that the essence of the mystic life consists in the
remaking of personality: its entrance into a conscious relation
with the Absolute. This process is accompanied in the mystic by
the development of an art expressive of his peculiar genius: the
art of contemplation. His practice of this art, like the practice of
poetry, music, or any other form of creation, may follow normal
lines, at first amenable to the control of his will, and always depen-
dent on his own deliberate attention to the supreme Object of his
quest; that is to say, on his orison. His mystic states, however
they may end, will owe their beginning to some voluntary act upon
his part: a deliberate response to the invitation of God, a turning
from the visible to the invisible world. Sometimes, however, his

believed not, tastes, though it savours not. Because it is wholly lost to itself, it
possesses that height of Unmeasured Perfection. Because it has not retained in
itself the mixture of any other thing, it has received in abundance that Image-
less Good'* ( op . cit.).



MYSTICISM


376

genius for the transcendent becomes too strong for the other ele-
ments of character, and manifests itself in psychic disturbances —
abrupt and ungovernable invasions from the subliminal region
— which make its exercise parallel to the “fine frenzy" of the
prophet, the composer, or the poet. Such is Rapture : a violent
and uncontrollable expression of genius for the Absolute, which
temporarily disorganizes and may permanently injure the nervous
system of the self. Often, but not necessarily, Rapture — like its
poetic equivalent — yields results of great splendour and value for
life. But it is an accident, not an implicit of mystical experience:
an indication of disharmony between the subject's psycho-
physical make-up and his transcendental powers.

Rapture, then, may accompany the whole development of sel ;es
of an appropriate type. Wc have seen that it is a common incident
in mystical conversion. The violent uprush of subliminal intuitions
by which such conversion is marked disorganizes the normal
consciousness, overpowers the will and the senses, and entails a
more or less complete entraneement. This was certainly the case
with Suso and Rulman Mcrswin, and perhaps with Pascal: whose
“Certitude, Peace, Joy" sums up the exalted intuition of Perfec-
tion and Reality — the conviction of a final and unforgettable
knowledge — which is characteristic of all ecstatic perception.

In her Spiritual Relations, St. Teresa speaks in some detail of
the different phases or forms of expression of these violent ecstatic
states: trance, which in her system means that which we have called
ecstasy, and transport, or "flight of the spirit," which is the equiva-
lent of rapture. “The difference between trance and transport,"
she says, “is this. In a trance the soul gradually dies to outward
things, losing the senses and living unto God. But a transport
comes on by one sole act of His Majesty, wrought in the innermost
part of the soul with such swiftness that it is as if the higher part
thereof were carried away, and the soul were leaving the body." 1

Rapture, says St. Teresa in another place, “comes in general
as a shock, quick and sharp, before you can collect your thoughts,
or help yourself in any way ; and you see and feel it as a cloud, or a
strong eagle rising upwards and carrying you away on its wings.
I repeat it : you feel and see yourself carried away, you know not
whither." 1 This carrying-away sensation may even assume the
concrete form which is known as levitation: when the upward
and outward sensations so dominate the conscious field that the
subject is convinced that she is raised bodily from the ground. “It
seemed to me, when I tried to make some resistance, as if a great
force beneath my feet lifted me up. I know of nothing with which
to compare it; but it was much more violent than the other

1 Kelaccion viii. 8 and 10. » Vida, cap. xx. § 3,



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 377

spiritual visitations, and I was therefore as one ground to pieces.
. . . And further, I confess that it threw me into a great fear, very
great indeed at first; for when I saw my body thus lifted up from
the earth, how could I help it ? Though the spirit draws it upwards
after itself, and that with great sweetness if unresisted, the senses
are not lost ; at least I was so much myself as to be able to see that
I was being lifted up”'

So Rulman Merswin said that in the rapture which accompanied
his conversion, he was carried round the garden with his feet off
the ground: 2 and St. Catherine of Siena, in a passage which I
have already quoted, speaks of the strength of the spirit, which
raises the body from the earth. 3

The subjective nature of this feeling of levitation is practically
acknowledged by St. Teresa when she says, “When the rapture
was over, my body seemed frequently to be buoyant, as if all
weight had departed from it; so much so, that now and then I
scarcely knew that my feet touched the ground. But during the
rapture the body is very often as it were dead, perfectly powerless.
It continues in the position it was in when the rapture came upon
it — if sitting, sitting/' Obviously here the outward conditions of
physical immobility coexisted with the subjective sensation of
being “lifted up/^

The self’s consciousness when in the condition of rapture may
vary from the complete possession of her faculties claimed by
St. Teresa to a complete enhancement. However abrupt the
on-coming of the transport, it does not follow that the mystic
instantly loses his surface-consciousness. “There remains the
power of seeing and hearing; but it is as if the things heard and
seen were at a great distance far away ." 5 They have retreated,
that is to say, to the fringe of the conscious field, but may still
remain just within it. Though the senses may not be entirely en-
tranced, however, it seems that the power of movement is always
lost. As in ecstasy, breathing and circulation are much diminished.

“By the command of the Bridegroom when He intends ravish-
ing the soul/’ says St. Teresa, “the doors of the mansions and
even those of the keep and of the whole castle are closed ; for He
takes away the power of speech, and although occasionally the
other faculties are retained rather longer, no word can be uttered.
Sometimes the person is at once deprived of all the senses, the

1 St. Teresa, op . cit., loc. cit., §§ 7 and 9.

* Supra , p. 186.

3 Dialogo, cap. lxxix.

4 Vida, cap. xx. § 23. At the same time, in the present state of our knowledge,
and in view of numerous attested cases of levitation, it is impossible to dogmatise
on this subject. The supernaturalist view is given in its extreme form by Farges,
“Mystical Phenomena,” pp. 536 seq.

s St Teresa, *oc. cit.



37« MYSTICISM

hands and body becoming as cold as if the soul had fled ; occasion-
ally no breathing can be detected. This condition lasts but a short
while; I mean in the same degree, for when this profound suspen-
sion diminishes the body seems to come to itself and gain strength
to return again to this death which gives more vigorous life to
the soul.” 1

This spiritual storm, then, in St. Teresa's opinion, enhances
the vitality of those who experience it: makes them “more living
than before.” It initiates them into “heavenly secrets," and if it
does not do this it is no “true rapture," but a “physical weakness
such as women are prone to owing to their delicacy of constitution."
Its sharpness and violence, however, leave considerable mental
disorder behind: “This supreme state of ecstasy never lasts long,
but although it ceases, it leaves the will so inebriated, and the
mind so transported out of itself that for a day, or sometimes for
several days, such a person is incapable of attending to anything
but what excites the will to the love of God; although wide
awake enough to this, she seems asleep as regards all earthly
matters." 2

But when equilibrium is re-established, the true effects of this
violent and beatific intuition of the Absolute begin to invade the
normal life. The self which has thus been caught up to awareness
of new levels of Reality, is stimulated to fresh activity by the
strength of its impressions. It now desires an eternal union with
that which it has known ; with which for a brief moment it seemed
to be merged. The peculiar talent of the mystic-- that power of
apprehending Reality which his contemplations have ordered
and developed, and his ecstasies express — here reacts upon his
life-process, his slow journey from the Many to the One. His
nostalgia has been increased by a glimpse of the homeland. His
intuitive apprehension of the Absolute, which assumes in ecstasy
its most positive form, spurs him on towards that permanent
union with the Divine which is his goal. “Such great graces,”
says St. Teresa, “leave the soul avid of total possession of that
Divine Bridegroom who has conferred them. "3

Hence the ecstatic states do not merely lift the self to an
abnormal degree of knowledge: they enrich her life, contribute
to the remaking of her consciousness, develop and uphold the
“strong and stormy love which drives her home.” They give her
the clearest vision she can have of that transcendent standard to
which she must conform : entail her sharpest consciousness of the
inflow of that Life on which her little striving life depends. Little
wonder, then, that — though the violence of the onset may often

1 St. Teresa, “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sextas, cap .iv.

9 Op. cit., loc cit. 3 St. Teresa, op. ciL, cap. vi.



ECSTASY AND RAPTURE 379

try his body to the lull— the mystic comes forth from a "good
ecstasy” as Pascal from the experience of the Fire, humbled
yet exultant, marvellously strengthened; and ready, not for any
passive enjoyments, but rather for the struggles and hardships of
the Way, the deliberate pain and sacrifice of love.

In the third Degree of Ardent Love, says Richard of St. Victor,
love paralyses action. Union (copula) is the symbol of this state:
ecstasy is its expression. The desirous soul, he says finely, no
longer thirsts for God but into God. The pull of its desire draws it
into the Infinite Sea. The mind is borne away into the abyss of
Divine Light; and, wholly forgetful of exterior things, knows not
even itself, but passes utterly into its God. In this state, all earthly
desire is absorbed in the heavenly glory. “Whilst the mind is
separated from itself, and whilst it is borne away into the secret
place of the divine mystery and is surrounded on all sides by the
fire of divine love, it is inwardly penetrated and inflamed by this
fire, and utterly puts off itself and puts on a divine love: and being
conformed to that Beauty which it has beheld, it passes utterly
into that other glory.”'

Thus does the state of ecstasy contribute to the business of
deification ; of the remaking of the soul’s susbtance in conformity
with the Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which is God, "Being
conformed to that Beauty which it has beheld, it passes utterly
into that other glory” ; into the flaming heart of Reality, the deep
but dazzling darkness of its home.


! “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis" (paraphrase).



CHAPTER IX


THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL

We return to a study of the mystical life-process — The swing-back from
illumination — The Dark Night — (i) Its psychological character — A period of
psychic fatigue — Reaction from the strain of mystical lucidity — The sorting-
house of the spiritual life — Its on-set is gradual — Madame Guyon — A state of
mental chaos — The transition to new levels of consciousness — Mystical adoles-
cence — Psycho-spiritual parallelism — Augustine Baker — (2) Its mystical
character — Takes many forms — Emotional, Intellectual, Volitional — A comple-
tion of Purgation — The final purification of selfhood — The passage from Luna
to Sol — Always painful — Its principal forms — (a) The loss of the Presence of
God — St. John of the Cross — Madame Guyon — Extinction of the transcendental
consciousness — (b) The acute sense of imperfection — St. John of the Cross —
{c) Loss of mystic feeling — Spiritual ennui — Ruysbrocck — ( d ) Intellectual
impotence — Loss of will-power— -St. Teresa — (e) The pain of God, or dark
ecstasy — St. Teresa — All these are aspects of one state — The purification of the
whole personality — An episode in character building — Essential to the attain-
ment of Reality — William Law — Surrender — St. Catherine of Siena — Adaptation
to environment — St. John of the Cross — A process beyond the self's control —
Self-naughting — Spiritual Poverty — Tauler — The Dark an incident of the move-
ment to union — Its gradual disappearance — Madame Guyon — An “example
from life" — Suso — Reasons for this choice — His entrance on the night — The
Vision of the Upper School — The Vision of Knighthood — His education in manli-
ness — The ideal of spiritual chivalry — The final trial — Its human characteristics
— Suso and the baby — The last crisis — The act of surrender — The passing of
the Dark Night

W E have wandered during the last few chapters from our
study of the mystical life-process in man, the organic
growth of his transcendental consciousness, in order to
examine the by-products of that process, its characteristic forms
of self-expression: the development of its normal art of contempla-
tion, and the visions and voices, ecstasies and raptures which are
frequent — though not essential — accompaniments of its activity.

But the mystic, like other persons of genius, is man first and
artist afterwards. We shall make a grave though common mis-
take if we forget this and allow ourselves to be deflected from our
study of his growth in personality by the wonder and interest of
his art. Being, not Doirig, is the first aim of the mystic; and hence
should be the first interest of the student of mysticism. We have
considered for convenience* sake all the chief forms of mystical
activity at the half-way house of the transcendental life : but these
activities are not, of course, peculiar to any one stage of that life.
Ecstasy, for instance, is as common a feature of mystical con-

3 So



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 381

version as of the last crisis, or “mystic marriage*' of the soul: 1
yhilst visions and voices — in selves of a visionary or auditive type —
accompany and illustrate every phase of the inward development.
They lighten and explain the trials of Purgation as often as they
express the joys of Illumination, and frequently mark the crisis
of transition from one mystic state to the next.

One exception, however, must be made to this rule. The most
intense period of that great swing-back into darkness which
usually divides the “first mystic life," or Illuminative Way, from
the “second mystic life/* or Unitive Way, is generally a period of
utter blankness and stagnation, so far as mystical activity is
concerned. The “Dark Night of the Soul/* once fully established,
is seldom lit by visions or made homely by voices. It is of the
‘essence of its miseries that the once-possessed power of orison or
contemplation now seems wholly lost. The self is tossed back from
its hard-won point of vantage. Impotence, blankness, solitude,
are the epithets by which those immersed in this dark fire of
purification describe their pains. It is this episode in the life-
history of the mystic type to which we have now come.

We have already noticed 2 the chief psychological characteris-
tics of all normal mystical development. We have seen that its
essence consists in the effort to establish a new equilibrium, to
get, as it were, a firm foothold upon transcendent levels of reality;
and that in its path towards this consummation the self experi-
ences a series of oscillations between “states of pleasure” and
“states of pain.’* Put in another way, it is an orderly movement
of the whole consciousness towards higher centres, in which each
intense and progressive affirmation fatigues the immature trans-
cendental powers, and is paid for by a negation; a swing-back of
the whole consciousness, a stagnation of intellect, a reaction of
the emotions, or an inhibition of the will.

* Thus the exalted consciousness of Divine Perfection which
the self acquired in its “mystical awakening” was balanced by
a depressed and bitter consciousness of its own inherent imper-
ction, and the clash of these two perceptions spurred it^ to that
borious effort of accommodation which constitutes the “Purga-
ve Way.” The renewed and ecstatic awareness of the Absolute
hich resulted, and which was the governing characteristic of
lumination, brought its own proper negation: the awareness,
Lat is to say, of the self’s continued separation from and incom-
itibility with that Absolute which it has perceived. During the
me in which the illuminated consciousness is fully established,
le self, as a rule, is perfectly content : believing that in its vision

* Vide supra, pp. 187 $eq., the cases of Suso and Pascal.

• Pt. ii. cap. i.



382 MYSTICISM

of Eternity, its intense and loving consciousness of God, it has
reached the goal of its quest. Sooner or later, however, psychic
fatigue sets in; the state of illumination begins to break up, the
complementary negative consciousness appears, and shows itself
as an overwhelming sense of darkness and deprivation. This sense
is so deep and strong that it inhibits all consciousness of the
Transcendent ; and plunges the self into the state of negation and
misery which is called the Dark Night.

We may look at the Dark Night, as at most other incidents of
the Mystic Way, from two points of view : (i) We may see it, with
the psychologist, as a moment in the history of mental develop-
ment, governed by the more or less mechanical laws which so
conveniently explain to him the psychic life of man: or (2) with
the mystic himself, we may see it in its spiritual aspect as con*
tributing to the remaking of character, the growth of the “New
Man”; his “transmutation in God.”

(1) Psychologically considered, the Dark Night is an example
of the operation of the law of reaction from stress. It is a period
of fatigue and lassitude following a period of sustained mystical
activity. “It is one of the best established laws of the nervous
system,” says Starbuck, “that it has periods of exhaustion if
exercised continuously in one direction, and can only recuperate
by having a period of rest.” 1 However spiritual he may be, the
mystic — so long as he is in the body — cannot help using thC^
machinery of his nervous and cerebral sj^stem in the course of his
adventures. His development, on its psychic side, consists in the
taking over of this machinery, the capture of its centres of con-
sciousness, in the interests of his growing transcendental life. In
so far, then, as this is so, that transcendental life will be partly
conditioned by psychic necessities, and amenable to the laws of
reaction and of fatigue. Each great step forward will entail lassitude
and exhaustion for that mental machinery which he has pressed
into service and probably overworked. When the higher centres
have been submitted to the continuous strain of a developed
illuminated life, with its accompanying periods of intense fervour,
lucidity, deep contemplation — perhaps of visionary and auditive
phenomena — the swing-back into the negative state occurs almost
of necessity.

This is the psychological explanation of those strange and
painful episodes in the lives of great saints — indeed, of many
spiritual persons hardly to be classed as saints — when, perhaps
after a long life passed in faithful correspondence with the trans-
cendental order, glowing consciousness of the “presence of God/’
the whole inner experience is suddenly swept away, and only a

* “Psychology of Religion,” p. 24.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 383

blind reliance on past convictions saves them from unbelief. 1
The great contemplatives, those destined to attain the full stature
of the mystic, emerge from this period of destitution, however
long and drastic it may be, as from a new purification. It is for
them the gateway to a higher state. But persons of a less heroic
spirituality, if they enter the Night at all, may succumb to its
dangers and pains. This "great negation" is the sorting-house of
the spiritual life. Here we part from the "nature mystics," the
mystic poets, and all who shared in and were contented with the
illuminated vision of reality. Those who go on are the great and
strong spirits, who do not seek to know , but are driven to be .

We are to expect, then, as a part of the conditions under which
human consciousness appears to work, that for every affirmation
of the mystic life there will be a negation waiting for the unstable
self. Progress in contemplation, for instance, is marked by just
such an alternation of light and shade: at first between "consola-
tion" and "aridity"; then between "dark contemplation" and
sharp intuitions of Reality. So too in selves of extreme nervous
instability, each joyous ecstasy entails a painful or negative
ecstasy. The states of darkness and illumination coexist over a
long period, alternating sharply and rapidly. Many seers and
artists pay in this way, by agonizing periods of impotence and
Repression, for each violent outburst of creative energy.

Rapid oscillations between a joyous and a painful consciousness
seem to occur most often at the beginning of a new period of the
Mystic Way: between Purgation and Illumination, and again
between Illumination and the Dark Night : for these mental states
are, as a rule, gradually not abruptly established. Mystics call such
oscillations the "Game of Love" in which God plays, as it were,
"hide and seek" with the questing soul. I have already quoted a
characteristic instance from the life of Rulman Merswin/ who
passed the whole intervening period between his conversion and
entrance on the Dark Night, or "school of suffering love" in such
a state of disequilibrium. Thus too Madame Guyon, who has
described with much elaboration of detail her symptoms and
sufferings during the oncoming and duration of the Night — or, as
she calls its intensest period the Mystic Death — traces its begin-
ning in short recurrent states of privation, or dullness of feeling,
such as ascetic writers call "aridity": in which the self loses all
interest in and affection for those divine realities which had

* An example of this occurred in the later life of Ste. Jeanne Fran$oise de
Dhantal. See “The Nuns of Port Royal,” by M. E. Lowndes, p. 284. Much
Valuable material bearing on the trials of the Dark Night as they appear in the
experience of ordinary contemplatives will be found in the letters of directSMi
of De Caussade. See his “L* Abandon & la Providence Divine/' vol. ii.

* Vide supra , p. 228.



MYSTICISM


384

previously filled its life. This privation followed upon, or was the
reaction from, an “illuminated" period of extreme joy and security,
in which, as she says, “the presence of God never left me for an
instant. But how dear I paid for this time of happiness! F01
this possession, which seemed to me entire and perfect — and the
more perfect the more it was secret, and foreign to the senses,
steadfast and exempt from change — was but the preparation for
a total deprivation, lasting many years, without any support or
hope of its return.’’ 1 As Madame Guyon never attempted to
control her states, but made a point of conforming to her own
description of the “resigned soul” as “God’s weathercock/’ we
have in her an unequalled opportunity of study.

“I endured/’ she says, “long periods of privation, towards the
end almost continual : but still I had from time to time inflowings
of Thy Divinity so deep and intimate, so vivid and so penetrating, ^ ]
that it was easy for me to judge that Thou wast but hidden from
me and not lost. For although during the times of privation it
seemed to me that I had utterly lost Thee, a certain deep support
remained, though the soul knew it not: and she only became
aware of that support by her subsequent total deprivation thereof.
Every time that Thou didst return with more goodness and
strength. Thou didst return also with greater splendour; so that
in a few hours Thou didst rebuild all the ruins of my unfaithful-
ness and didst make good to me with profusion all my loss.’’* »

Here we have, from the psychological point of view, a perfect
example of the oscillations of consciousness on the threshold of a
new state. The old equilibrium, the old grouping round a centre
characterized by pleasure-affirmation, has been lost; the new
grouping round a centre characterized by pain-negation is not yet
established. Madame Guyon is standing, or rather swinging, be-
tween two worlds, the helpless prey of her own shifting and un-
controllable psychic and spiritual states. But slowly the pendulunl
approaches its limit: the states of privation, “become almost
continual," the reactions to illumination, become less. At last they
cease entirely, the new state is established, and the Dark Night
has really set in.

The theory here advanced that the “Dark Night" is, on its
psychic side, partly a condition of fatigue, partly a state of
transition, is borne out by the mental and moral disorder which
seems, in many subjects, to be its dominant character. When
they are in it everything seems to “go wrong" with them. They *1
are tormented by evil thoughts and abrupt temptations, loselj
grasp not only of their spiritual but also of their worldly affair&Ij
Thus Lucie-Christine says: “Often during my great temptations to W

* Vie, pt, i. cap. xx. » Op . cit., cap. xxi.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 385

sadness I am plunged in such spiritual darkness that I think
n*iyself utterly lost in falsehood and illusion; deceiving both myself
“and others. This temptation is the most terrible of all .” 1 The health
of those passing through this phase often suffers, they become
"odd” and their friends forsake them; their intellectual life is
at a low ebb. In their own words '‘trials of every kind,” “exterior
and interior crosses,” abound.

Now “trials,” taken en bloc , mean a disharmony between the
self and the world with which it has to deal. Nothing is a trial when
we are able to cope with it efficiently. Things try us when we are
not adequate to them: when they are abnormally hard or we
abnormally weak. This aspect of the rmitter becomes prominent
.when we look further into the history of Madame Guyon’s experi-
ences. Thanks to the unctuous and detailed manner in which
► she has analysed her spiritual griefs, this part of her autobiography
is a psychological document of unique importance for the study
of the “Dark Night” as it appears in a devout but somewhat
self-occupied soul.

As her consciousness of God was gradually extinguished, a
mental and moral chaos seems to have invaded Madame Guj'on,
and accompanied the more spiritual miseries of her state. “So soon
as I perceived the happiness of any state, or its beauty, or the
necessity of a virtue, it seemed to me that I fell incessantly into
the contrary vice: as if this perception, which though very rapid
was always accompanied by love, were only given to me that I
might experience its opposite. I was given an intense percep-
tion of the purity of God; and so far as my feelings went, I myself
became more and more impure: for in reality this state is very
purifying, but I was far from understanding this. . . . My imagina-
tion was in a state of appalling confusion, and gave me no rest.
I could not speak of Thee, oh my God, for I became utterly stupid ;
nor could I even grasp what was said when I heard Thee spoken
of. ... I found myself hard towards God, insensible to His mercies;
I could not perceive any good thing that I had done in my whole
life. The good appeared to me evil; and — that which is terrible —
it seemed to me that this state must last for ever .” 2

This world as well as the next seemed leagued against her.
Loss of health and friendship, domestic vexations, increased and
kept pace with her interior griefs. Self-control and power of
attention were diminished. She seemed stupefied and impotent,
imable to follow or understand even the services of the Church,
^incapable of all prayer and all good works; perpetually attracted
►y those worldly things which she had renounced, yet quickly
wearied by them. The neat edifice of her first mystic life was in

* “Journal Spirituel,” p. 233. * Vie., cap. xxiii.



0 MYSTICISM

ruins, tbe state of consciousness which accompanied it was disin-
tegrated, but nothing arose to take its place. t,

“It is an amazing thing,” says Madame Guyon naively, “for*
a soul that believed herself to be advanced in the way of perfec-
tion, when she sees herself thus go to pieces all at once .*' 1

So, too, Suso, when he had entered the “upper school” of the
spiritual life, was tormented not only by temptations and desola-
tions, but by outward trials and disabilities of every kind: calum-
nies, misunderstandings, difficulties, pains. “It seemed at this
time as if God had given permission both to men and demons to
torment the Servitor,” he says . 2 This sense of a generally inimical
atmosphere, and of the dimness and helplessness of the Ego
oppressed by circumstances, is like the vague distress and nervous
sensibility of adolescence, and comes in part from the same cause . 1
the intervening period of chaos between the break-up of an old
state of equilibrium and the establishment of the new. The self,
in its necessary movement towards higher levels of reality, loses
and leaves behind certain elements of its world, long loved but
now outgrown: as children must make the hard transition from
nursery to school. Destruction and construction here go together:
the exhaustion and ruin of the illuminated consciousness is the
signal for the onward movement of the self towards other centres:
the feeling of deprivation and inadequacy which comes from the
loss of that consciousness is an indirect stimulus to new growth'
The self is being pushed into a new world where it does not feel at
home; has not yet reached the point at which it enters into
conscious possession of its second or adult life.

“Thou hast been a child at the breast, a spoiled child,” said the
Eternal Wisdom to Suso. “Now I will withdraw all this.” In the
resulting darkness and confusion, when the old and known
supports are thus withdrawn, the self can do little but surrender
itself to the inevitable process of things : to the operation of tha>\
unresting Spirit of Life which is pressing it on towards a new ana
higher state, in which it shall not only see Reality but be real. i

Psychologically, then, the “Dark Night of the Soul” is due to
the double fact of the exhaustion of an old state, and the growth
towards a new state of consciousness. It is a “growing pain” in
the organic process of the self's attainment of the Absolute. The
great mystics, creative geniuses in the realm of character, have
known instinctively how to turn these psychic disturbances to
spiritual profit. Parallel with the mental oscillations, upheavals j
and readjustments, through which an unstable psycho-physicaL
type moves to new centres of consciousness, run the spiritual
oscillations of a striving and ascending spiritual type. Gyranr

1 “Les Torrents/' pt. i. cap. vii. § 2. • Leben, cap. xxii.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 387

gyrando vudit spifitus . The machinery of consciousness, over-
stretched, breaks up, and seems to toss the self back to an old and
lower level, where it loses its apprehensions of the transcendental
world; as the child, when first it is forced to stand alone, feels
weaker than it did in its mother's arms.

“For first He not only withdraws all comfortable observable
infusions of light and grace, but also deprives her of a power to
exercise any perceptible operations of her superior spirit, and of
all comfortable reflections upon His love, plunging her into the
depth of her inferior powers," says Augustine Baker, the skilled
director of souls, here anticipating the modern psychologist.
"Here consequently," he continues, "her former calmness of pas-
sions is quite lost, neither can she introvert herself; sinful motions
ind suggestions do violently assault her, and she finds as great
difficulty (if not greater) to surmount them as at the beginning of
a spiritual course. ... If she would elevate her spirit, she sees
nothing but clouds and darkness. She seeks God, and cannot find
the least marks or footsteps of His Presence; something there is
that hinders her from executing the sinful suggestions within her,
but what that is she knows not, for to her thinking she has no spirit
at all, and, indeed, she is nowin a region of all other most distant
from spirit and spiritual operations — I mean, such as are
perceptible.” 1

r Such an interval of chaos and misery may last for months, or
iven for years, before the consciousness again unifies itself and a
lew centre is formed. Moreover, the negative side of this new
:entre, this new consciousness of the Absolute, often discloses
itself first. The self realizes, that is to say, the inadequacy of its
ild state, long before it grasps the possibility of a new and higher
state. This realization will take two forms; (a) Objective: the
listance or absence of the Absolute which the self seeks; (b)
^ubjective: the self's weakness and imperfection. Both appre-
hensions constitute a direct incentive to action. They present, as
t were, a Divine Negation which the self must probe, combat,
“esolve. The Dark Night, therefore, largely the product of natural
causes, is the producer in its turn of mystical energy; and hence
if supernatural effects.

\ 2 ) So much for psychology. We have next to consider the mysti-
or transcendental aspects of the Dark Night: see what it has
neant for those mystics who have endured it and for those
spiritual specialists who have studied it in the interests of
ither men.

As in other phases of the Mystic Way, so here, we must beware
if any generalization which reduces the "Dark Night" to a uni-

1 “Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii. § iv. cap. v.



MYSTICISM


388

form experience; a neatly defined state which appears under the
same conditions, and attended by the same symptoms, in all th^
selves who have passed through its pains. It is a name for the %
painful and negative state which normally intervenes between
the Illuminative and the Unitive Life — no more. Different types
of contemplatives have interpreted it to themselves and to us in
different ways; each type of illumination being in fact balanced
by its own appropriate type of “dark.”

In some temperaments it is the emotional aspect —the anguish
of the lover who has suddenly lost the Beloved — which predomin-
ates: in others, the intellectual darkness and confusion overwhelms
everything else. Some have felt it, with St. John of the Cross, as
a “passive purification,’ 1 a state of helpless misery, in which the
self does nothing, but lets Life have its way with her. Others, with
Suso and the virile mysticism of the German school, have experi- 1
enced it rather as a period of strenuous activity and moral con-’
flict directed to that “total self-abandonment” which is the essen-
tial preparation of the unitive life. Those elements of character
which were unaffected by the first purification of the self— left
as it were in a corner when the consciousness moved to the level
of the illuminated life — are here roused from their sleep, purged
of illusion, and forced to join the growing stream.

The Dark Night, then, is really a deeply human process, in which
the self which thought itself so spiritual, so firmly established upon ]
the supersensual plane, is forced to turn back, to leave the Light,
and pick up those qualities which it had left behind. Only thus,
by the transmutation of the whole man , not by a careful and
departmental cultivation of that which we like to call his
"spiritual” side, can Divine Humanity be formed: and the forma-
tion of Divine Humanity — the remaking of man “according to the
pattern showed him in the mount”— is the mystic’s only certain
ladder to the Real. “My humanity,” said the Eternal Wisdom to
Suso, “is the road which all must tread who would come to that'
which thou seekest.” 1 This “hard saying” might almost be used
as a test by which to distinguish the genuine mystic life from its
many and specious imitations. The self in its first purgation has
cleansed the mirror of perception; hence, in its illuminated life,
has seen Reality. In so doing it has transcended the normal
perceptive powers of “natural” man, immersed in the illusions of
sense. Now, it has got to be reality : a very different thing. For this
a new and more drastic purgation is needed — not of the organs of
perception, but of the very shrine of self: that “heart” which is
the seat of personality, the source of its love and will. In the(
stress and anguish of the Night, when it turns back from the vision

x “Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," cap. ii.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 389

of the Infinite to feel again the limitations of the finite, the self
loses the power to Do; and learns to surrender its will to the
operation of a larger Life, that it may Be. “At the end of such a
long and cruel transition," says Lucie-Christine, “how much more
supple the soul feels itself to be in the Hand of God, how much
more detached from all that is not God! She sees clearly in herself
the fruits of humility and patience, and feels her love ascending
more purely and directly to God in proportion as she has realized
the Nothingness of herself and all things/' 1

We must remember in the midst of our analysis, that the mystic
life is a life of love: that the Object of the mystic's final quest and
of his constant intuition is an object of adoration and supreme
desire. “With Thee, a prison would be a rose garden, oh Thou
ravisher of hearts: with Thee, Hell would be Paradise, oh Thou
cheerer of souls,'' said Jalalu 'd Din. 2 Hence for the mystic who
has once known the Beatific Vision there can be no greater grief
than the withdrawal of this Object from his field of consciousness;
the loss of this companionship, the extinction of this Light. There-
fore, whatever form the “Dark Night" assumes, it must entail
bitter suffering: far worse than that endured in the Purgative
Way. Then the self was forcibly detached from the imperfect.
Now the Perfect is withdrawn, leaving behind an overwhelming
yet impotent conviction of something supremely wrong, some final
Treasure lost. We will now look at a few of the characteristic
forms under which this conviction is translated to the surface-
consciousness.

A. To those temperaments in which consciousness of the
Absolute took the form of a sense of divine companionship, and
for whom the objective idea “God" had become the central fact
of life, it seems as though that God, having shown Himself, has
now deliberately withdrawn His Presence, never perhaps to
manifest Himself again. “He acts," says Eckhart, “as if there
were a wall erected between Him and us."* The “eye which
looked upon Eternity" has closed, the old dear sense of intimacy
and mutual love has given place to a terrible blank.

“That which this anguished soul feels most deeply," says
St. John of the Cross, “is the conviction that God has abandoned
it, of which it has no doubt ; that He has cast it away into dark-
ness as an abominable thing . . . the shadow of death and the
pains and torments of hell are most acutely felt, and this comes from
the sense of being abandoned by God, being chastised and cast

1 “Journal Spirituel,” p. 368.

* From the “Mesne vi." Quoted in the Appendix to “The Flowers or Rose
Garden of Sadi.”

3 Meister Eckhart, Pred. lvii. So too St. Gertrude in one of her symbolic visions
saw a thick hedge erected between herself and Christ.



MYSTICISM


390

out by His wrath and heavy displeasure. All this and even more
the soul feels now, for a terrible apprehension has come upon it
that thus it will be with it for ever. It has also the same sense of
abandonment with respect to all creatures, and that it is an object
of contempt to all, especially to its friends ." 1

So, too, Madame Guyon felt this loss of her intuitive apprehen-
sion of God as one of the most terrible characteristics of the
"night." "After Thou hadst wounded me so deeply as I have
described, Thou didst begin, oh my God, to withdraw Thyself
from me: and the pain of Thy absence was the more bitter to me,
because Thy presence had been so sweet to me, Thy love so strong
in me. . . . Thy way, oh my God, before Thou didst make me
enter into the state of death, was the way of the dying life: some-
times to hide Thyself and leave me to myself in a hundred weak-
nesses, sometimes to show Thyself with more sweetness and love.
The nearer the soul drew to the state of death, the more her
desolations were long and weary, her weaknesses increased, and
also her joys became shorter, but purer and more intimate, until
the time in which she fell into total privation ." 2

When this total privation or "mystic death" is fully established,
it involves not only the personal “Absence of God," but the
apparent withdrawal or loss of that impersonal support, that
transcendent Ground or Spark of the soul, on which the self has
long felt its w r hole real life to be based. Hence, its very means of
contact with the spiritual world vanishes ; and as regards all that
matters, it does indeed seem to be “dead." “When we have reached
this total deprivation," says De Caussade, “what shall we do?
Abide in simplicity and peace, as Job on his ash heap, repeating,
'Blessed are the poor in spirit ; those who have nothing have all,
since they have God.’ ‘Quit all, strip yourself of all,' says the great
Gerson, ‘and you will have all in God/ ‘God felt, God tasted and
enjoyed/ says Fenelon, ‘is indeed God, but God with those gifts
which flatter the soul. God in darkness, in privation, in forsaken-
ness, in insensibility, is so much God, that He is so to speak God
bare and alone. . . / Shall we fear this death, which is to produce
in us the true divine life of grace ?" 3

B. In those selves for whom the subjective idea “Sanctity" —
the need of conformity between the individual character and the
Transcendent — has been central, the pain of the Night is less a
deprivation than a new and dreadful kind of lucidity. The vision
of the Good brings to the self an abrupt sense of her own hopeless
and helpless imperfection: a black “conviction of sin," far more
bitter than that endured in the Way of Purgation, which swamps

1 “Noche Escura del Alma," 1 . ii. cap. vi. * Vie, pt. i. cap. xxiii.

s Dc Caussade. “L* Abandon k la Providence Divine." vol. ii., p. 269.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 391

everything else. “That which makes her pain so terrible is that she
is, as it were, overwhelmed by the purity of God, and this purity
makes her see the least atoms of her imperfections as if they were
enormous sins, because of the infinite distance there is between the
purity of God and the creature." 1

“This," says St. John of the Cross again, “is one of the most
bitter sufferings of this purgation. The soul is conscious of a pro-
found emptiness in itself, a cruel destitution of the three kinds of
goods, natural, temporal, and spiritual, which are ordained for
its comfort. It sees itself in the midst of the opposite evils, miser-
able imperfections, dryness and emptiness of the understanding,
and abandonment of the spirit in darkness/' 2

C. Often combined with the sense of sin and the “absence of
God" is another negation, not the least distressing part of the
sufferings of the self suddenly plunged into the Night. This is a
complete emotional lassitude: the disappearance of all the old
ardours, now replaced by a callousness, a boredom, which the
self detests but cannot overcome. It is the dismal condition of
spiritual ennui which ascetic writers know so well under the name
of “aridity," and which psychologists look upon as the result of
emotional fatigue.3 It seems incredible that the eager love of a
Divine Companion, so long the focus of the self's whole being,
should have vanished: that not only the transcendent vision
should be withdrawn, but her very desire for, and interest in, that
vision should grow cold. Yet the mystics are unanimous in declar-
ing that this is a necessary stage in the growth of the spiritual
consciousness.

"When the sun begins to decline in the heavens," says Ruys-
broeck, “it enters the sign Virgo; which is so called because this
period of the year is sterile as a virgin." This is the autumn season
in the cycle of the soul, when the summer heat grows less. “It
perfects and fulfils the yearly travail of the Sun. In the same
manner, when Christ, that glorious sun, has risen to His zenith in
the heart of man, as I have taught in the Third degree, and
afterwards begins to decline, to hide the radiance of His divine
sunbeams, and to forsake the man; then the heat and impatience
of love grow less. Now that occultation of Christ, and the with-
drawal of His light and heat, are the first work and the new coming
of this degree. Now Christ says inwardly to this man, Go ye out in
the manner which I now shoxv you : and the man goes out and finds
himself to be poor, miserable, and abandoned. Here all the storm,
the fury, the impatience of his love, grow cool: glowing summer

* Madame Guyon, “Les Torrents," pt. i. cap. vii.

• “Noche Escura del Alma," loc. cit.

Instructive examples in De Caussade, op. cit., vol. ii., pp. i-8a.



MYSTICISM


392

turns to autumn, all its riches are transformed into a great poverty.
And the man begins to complain because of his wretchedness:
for where now are the ardours of love, the intimacy, the gratitude,
the joyful praise; and the interior consolation, the secret joy, the
sensible sweetness? How have all these things failed him? And
the burning violence of Ins love, and all the gifts which he felt
before. How has all this died in him? And he feels like some
ignorant man who has lost all his learning and his works . . . and
of this misery there is born the fear of being lost, and as it were a
sort of half-doubt : and this is the lowest point at which a man
can hold his ground without falling into despair/' 1
D. This stagnation of the emotions has its counterpart in the
stagnation of the will and intelligence, which has been experienced
by some contemplatives as a part of their negative state. As regards
the will, there is a sort of moral dereliction : the self cannot control
its inclinations and thoughts. In the general psychic turmoil, all
the unpurified part of man’s inheritance, the lower impulses and
unworthy ideas which have long been imprisoned below the
threshold, force their way into the field of consciousness. “Every
vice was re-awakened within me,” says Angela of Foligno, “I
would have chosen rather to be roasted than to endure such pains.” 2
Where visual and auditory automatism is established, these
irruptions from the subliminal region often take the form of evil
visions, or of voices making coarse or sinful suggestions to the
self. Thus St. Catherine of Siena, in the interval between her period
of joyous illumination and her “spiritual marriage,” was tormented
by visions of fiends, who filled her cell and “with obscene words and
gestures invited her to lust.” She fled from her cell to the church to
escape them, but they pursued her there: and she obtained no
relief from this obsession until she ceased to oppose it. She cried,
“I have chosen suffering for my consolation, and will gladly bear
these and all other torments in the name of the Saviour, for as
long as it shall please His Majesty.” With this act of surrender,
the evil vision fled: Catherine swung back to a state of affirmation,
and was comforted by a vision of the Cross. 3
An analogous psychological state was experienced by St. Teresa;
though she fails to recognize it as an episode in her normal develop-
ment, and attributes it, with other spiritual adventures for which
she can find no other explanation, to the action of the Devil.
“The soul,” she says, “laid in fetters, loses all control over itself,
and all power of thinking of anything but the absurdities he puts
before it, which, being more or less unsubstantial, inconsistent, and


1 Ruysbroeck, “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1. ii. cap. xxviii.
1 St. Ang&le de Foligno, op. cit., p. 197 (English translation, p. 15).

I E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,” p. 20.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 393

disconnected, serve only to stifle the soul, so that it has no power
over itself; and accordingly— so it seems to me— the devils make
a football of it, and the soul is unable to escape out of their hands.
It is impossible to describe the sufferings of the soul in this state.
It goes about in quest of relief, and God suffers it to find none.
The light of reason, in the freedom of its will, remains, but it is
not clear; it seems to me as if its eyes were covered with a veil.
.... Temptations seem to press it down, and make it dull, so that
its knowledge of God becomes to it as that of something which it
hears of far away/' This dullness and dimness extends to ordinary
mental activity, which shares in the lassitude and disorder of the
inner life. "If it seeks relief from the fire by spiritual reading, it
cannot find any, just as if it could not read at all. On one occasion
. it occurred to me to read the life of a saint, that I might forget
myself and be refreshed with the recital of what he had suffered.
Four or five times, I read as many lines; and though they were
written in Spanish, I understood them less at the end than I did
when I began: so I gave it up. It so happened to me on more
occasions than one.” 1 If we are reminded of anything here, it is
of the phenomenon of “dark contemplation.” That dimness of
mind which we there studied, is here extended to the normal
activities of the surface intelligence. The Cloud of Unknowing,
rolling up, seems to envelop the whole self. Contemplation, the
"way within the way,” has epitomized the greater process of the
mystic life. In both, the path to Light lies through a meek sur-
render to the confusion and ignorance of the "Dark.” The stress
and exasperation felt in this dark, this state of vague helplessness,
by selves of an active and self-reliant type, is exhibited by Teresa
in one of her half-humorous self-revealing flashes. "The Devil,”
she says of it, “then sends so offensive a spirit of bad temper that
I think I could cat people up!” 2

All these types of “darkness,” with their accompanying and
overwhelming sensations of impotence and distress, are common
in the lives ot the mystics. Suso and Rulman Merswin experienced
them: Tauler constantly refers to them: Angela of Foligno speaks
of a "privation worse than hell.” It is clear that even the joyous
spirit of Mechthild of Magdeburg knew the sufferings of the loss
and absence of God. "Lord,” she says in one place, "since Thou
hast taken from me all that I had of Thee, yet of Thy grace leave
me the gift which every dog has by nature: that of being true to
Thee in my distress, when I am deprived of all consolation. This I
desire more fervently than Thy heavenly Kingdom !”i In such a
saying as this, the whole “value for life” of the Dark Night is

* Vida, cap. xxx. §§ 12 and 14. * Op. cit. t Joe. cit.

I “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. ii. cap. 25.



394 MYSTICISM

revealed to us: as an education in selfless constancy, a “school of
suffering love / 1

E. There is, however, another way in which the self's sense of a
continued imperfection in its relation with the Absolute — of work
yet remaining to be done — expresses itself. In persons of a very
highly strung and mobile type, who tend to rapid oscillations
between pain and pleasure states, rather than to the long, slow
movements of an ascending consciousness, attainment of the
Unitive Life is sometimes preceded by the abrupt invasion of a
wild and unendurable desire to “see God,” apprehend the Trans-
cendent in Its fullness: which can only, they think, be satisfied
by death. As they begin to outgrow their illuminated consciousness,
these selves begin also to realize how partial and symbolic that
consciousness — even at its best — has been: and their move-
ment to union with God is foreshadowed by a passionate and
uncontrollable longing for ultimate Reality. This passion is so
intense, that it causes acute anguish in those who feel it. It brings
with it all the helpless and desolate feelings of the Dark Night;
and sometimes rises to the heights of a negative rapture, an
ecstasy of deprivation. St. Teresa is perhaps the best instance of
this rare method of apprehending the self's essential separation
from its home; which is also the subject of a celebrated chapter
in the “Traite de l'Amour de Dieu” of St. Francois de Sales . 1
Thanks to her exceptionally mobile temperament, her tendency to
rush up and down the scale of feeling, Teresa’s states of joyous
rapture were often paid for by such a “great desolation 1 ’ — a dark
ecstasy or “pain of God.” “As long as this pain lasts,” she says,
“we cannot even remember our own existence; for in an instant
all the faculties of the soul are so fettered as to be incapable' of
any action save that of increasing our torture. Do not think I am
exaggerating; on the contrary, that which I say is less than the
truth, for lack of words in which it may be expressed. This is a trance
of the senses and the faculties, save as regards all which helps to
make the agony more intense. The understanding realizes acutely
what cause there is for grief in separation from God: and our Lord
increases this sorrow by a vivid manifestation of Himself. The
pain thus grows to such a degree that in spite of herself the sufferer
gives vent to loud cries, which she cannot stifle, however patient
and accustomed to pain she may be, because this is not a pain
which is felt in the body, but in the depths of the soul. The person
I speak of learned from this how much more acutely the spirit is
capable of suffering than the body . 3

The intense and painful concentration upon the Divine Absence
which takes place in this “dark rapture” often induces all the

* L. vi. cap. xiii. » “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sextas, cap. xi.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 395

psycho-physical marks of ecstasy. "Although this state lasts but
a short time, the limbs seem to be disjointed by it. The pulse is as
leeble as if one were at the point of death; which is indeed the
case, for whilst the natural heat of the body fails, that which is
supernatural so bums the frame that with a few more degrees
God would satisfy the soul’s desire for death. . . . You will say,
perhaps, that there is imperfection in this desire to see God : and
ask why this soul does not conform herself to His will, since she
has so completely surrendered herself to it. Hitherto she could do
this, and consecrated her life to it; but now she cannot, for her
reason is reduced to such a state that she is no longer mistress of
herself and can think of nothing but her affliction. Far from her
Sovereign Good, why should she desire to live? She feels an
extraordinary loneliness, finds no companionship in any earthly
creature; nor could she I believe among those who dwell in heaven,
since they are not her Beloved. Meanwhile all company is torture
to her. She is like a person suspended in mid-air, who can neither
touch the earth, nor mount to heaven. She burns with a consuming
thirst, and cannot reach the water. And this is a thirst which
cannot be borne, but one which nothing will quench: nor would she
have it quenched with any other water than that of which our
Lord spoke to the Samaritan woman; and this water is denied
her.” 1

All these forms of the Dark Night — the "Absence of God,” the
sense of sin, the dark ecstasy, the loss of the self’s old passion,
peace, and joy, and its apparent relapse to lower spiritual and
mental levels — are considered by the mystics themselves to con-
stitute aspects or parts of one and the same process: the final
purification of the will or stronghold of personality, that it may
be merged without any reserve "in God where it was first.” The
function of this episode of the Mystic Way is to cure the soul of
the innate tendency to seek and rest in spiritual joys; to confuse
Reality with the joy given by the contemplation of Reality. It
is the completion of that ordering of disordered loves, that trans-
valuation of values, which the Way of Purgation began. The
ascending self must leave these childish satisfactions ; make its love
absolutely disinterested, strong, and courageous, abolish all
taint of spiritual gluttony. A total abandonment of the individual-
istic standpoint, of that trivial and egotistic quest of personal
satisfaction which thwarts the great movement of the Flowing
Light, is the supreme condition of man’s participation in Reality.
This is true not only of the complete participation which is possible
to the great mystic, but of those unselfish labours in which the
initiates of science or of art become to the Eternal Goodness
* St. Teresa, op. cit. t loc. cit. Compare the Vida, cap. xx. §§ n to 14.



MYSTICISM


396

"what his own hand is to a man/* “Think not/' says Tauler,
“that God will be always caressing His children, or shine upon their
head, or kindle their hearts as He does at the first. He does so *
only to lure us to Himself, as the falconer lures the falcon with *
its gay hood. . . . We must stir up and rouse ourselves and be
content to leave off learning, and no more enjoy feeling and warmth,
and must now serve the Lord with strenuous industry and at our
own cost." 1

This manly view of the Dark Night, as a growth in responsibility
— an episode of character-building — in which, as “The Mirror of
Simple Souls” has it, “the soul leaves that pride and play wherein
it was full gladsome and jolly,” is characteristic of the German
mystics. We find it again in Suso, to whom the angel of his tribula-
tion gave no sentimental consolations ; but only the stern command,

“ Viriliter agite” — “Be a man!” “Then first,” says Tauler again, 4
“do we attain to the fullness of God’s love as His children, when f
it is no longer happiness or misery, prosperity or adversity, that
draws us to Him or keeps us back from Him. What we should then
experience none can utter; but it would be something far better
than when we were burning with the first flame of love, and had
great emotion, but less true submission.” 3

In Illumination, the soul, basking in the Uncreated Light,
identified the Divine Nature with the divine light and sweetness
which it then enjoyed. Its consciousness of the transcendent was
chiefly felt as an increase of personal vision and personal joy*
Thus, in that apparently selfless state, the “I, the Me, the Mine,”
though spiritualized, still remained intact. The mortification of the
senses was more than repaid by the rich and happy life which this
mortification conferred upon the soul. But before real and perma-
nent union with the Absolute can take place: before the whole
self can learn to live on those high levels where — its being utterly
surrendered to the Infinite Will — it can be wholly transmuted in
God, merged in the great life of the All, this dependence on*
personal joys must be done away. The spark of the soul, the fast-
growing germ of divine humanity, must so invade every corner
of character that the self can only say with St. Catherine of Genoa,
“My me is God: nor do I know my selfhood except in God.”3

The various torments and desolations of the Dark Night con-
stitute this last and drastic purgation of the spirit; the doing
away of separateness, the annihilation of selfhood, even though
all that self now claims for its own be the Love of God. Such a claim
— which is really a claim to entire felicity, since the soul which
possesses it needs nothing more — is felt by these great spirits to

* Sermon for the 4th Sunday in Lent (Wink worth's translation, p. 280).

» Op. cit., loc. cit. i “Vita e Dottrina,” cap. xiv.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 397

sully the radiance of their self-giving love. “All that I would here
say of these inward delights and enjoyments/* says William Law,
“is only this; they are not holiness, they are not piety, they are
not perfection; but they are God's gracious allurements and calls
to seek after holiness and spiritual perfection . . . and ought rather
to convince us that we are as yet but babes , than that we are really
men of God. . . . This alone is the true Kingdom of God opened
in the soul when, stripped of all selfishness, it has only one love and
one will in it; when it has no motion or desire but what branches
from the Love of God, and resigns itself wholly to the Will of
God. ... To sum up all in a word: Nothing hath separated us
from God but our own will, or rather our own will is our separation
from God. All the disorder and corruption and malady of our
nature lies in a certain fixedness of our own will, imagination, and
desire, wherein we live to ourselves, are our own centre and
circumference, act wholly from ourselves, according to our own
will, imagination, and desires. There is not the smallest degree of
evil in us but what arises from this selfishness, because we are thus
all in all to ourselves. ... To be humble, mortified, devout, patient
in a certain degree, and to be persecuted for our virtues, is no
hurt to this selfishness; nay, spiritual- self must have all these
virtues to subsist upon, and his life consists in seeing, knowing,
and feeling the bulk, strength, and reality of them. But still, in all
this show and glitter of virtue, there is an unpurified bottom on
which they stand, there is a selfishness which can no more enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven than the grossness of flesh and blood
can enter into it. What we are to feel and undergo in these last
purifications, when the deepest root of all selfishness, as well
spiritual as natural, is to be plucked up and torn from us, or how
we shall be able to stand in that trial, are both of them equally
impossible to be known by us beforehand." 1

The self, then, has got to learn to cease to be its “own centre
and circumference": to make that final surrender which is the
price of final peace. In the Dark Night the starved and tortured
spirit learns through an anguish which is “itself an orison" to
accept lovelessness for the sake of Love, Nothingness for the sake
of the All; dies without any sure promise of life, loses when it
hardly hopes to find. It sees with amazement the most sure
foundations of its transcendental life crumble beneath it, dwells
in a darkness which seems to hold no promise of a dawn. This is
what the German mystics call the “upper school of true resigna-
tion" or of “suffering love" ; the last test of heroic detachment, of
manliness, of spiritual courage. Though such an experience is

1 “Christian Regeneration" (The Liberal and Mystical Writings of William
Law, pp. 158-60).



MYSTICISM


r39®

"passive” in the sense that the self can neither enter nor leave it
at will, it is a direct invitation to active endurance, a condition of
stress in which work is done. Thus, when St. Catherine of Siena
was tormented by hideous visions of sin, she was being led by her
deeper self to the heroic acceptance of this subtle form of torture,
almost unendurable to her chaste and delicate mind. When these
trials had brought her to the point at which she ceased to resist
them, but exclaimed, "I have chosen suffering for my consolation,”
their business was done. They ceased. More significant still, when
she asked, "Where wast Thou, Lord, when I was tormented by
this foulness?” the Divine Voice answered, "I was in thy heart ." 1

"In order to raise the soul from imperfection," said the Voice
of God to St. Catherine in her Dialogue, "I withdraw Myself from
her sentiment, depriving her of former consolations . . . which I
do in order to humiliate her, and cause her to seek Me in truth,
and to prove her in the light of faith, so that she come to prudence.
Then, if she love Me without thought of self, and with lively faith
and with hatred of her own sensuality, she rejoices in the time of
trouble, deeming herself unworthy of peace and quietness of mind.
Now comes the second of the three things of which I told thee,
that is to say: how the soul arrives at perfection, and what she
does when she is perfect. That is what she does. Though she per-
ceives that I have withdrawn Myself, she does not, on that account,
look back; but perseveres with humility in her exercises, remaining
barred in the house of self-knowledge, and, continuing to dwell
therein, awaits with lively faith the coming of the Holy Spirit, that
is of Me, who am the Fire of Love. . . . This is what the soul does
in order to rise from imperfection and arrive at perfection, and
it is to this end, namely, that she may arrive at perfection, that I
withdraw from her, not by grace, but by sentiment. Once more
do I leave her so that she may see and know her defects, so that
feeling herself deprived of consolation and afflicted by pain, she
may recognize her own weakness, and learn how incapable she
is of stability or perseverance, thus cutting down to the very
root of spiritual self-love: for this should be the end and purpose
of all her self-knowledge, to rise above herself, mounting the throne
of conscience, and not permitting the sentiment of imperfect love
to turn again in its death-struggle, but with correction and reproof
digging up the root of self-love with the knife of self-hatred and
the love of virtue ." 2

"Digging up the root of self-love with the knife of self-hatred"
— here we see the mystical reason of that bitter self-contempt and
sense of helplessness which overwhelms the soul in the Dark Night.
Such a sense of helplessness is really, the mystics say, a mark of

* Vide supra , p. 392. * Dialogo, cap. Ixiii.



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 399

progress: of deeper initiation into that sphere of reality to which
it is not yet acclimatized, and which brings with it a growing
consciousness of the appalling disparity between that Reality,
that Perfection, and the imperfect soul.

The self is in the dark because it is blinded by a Light greater
than it can bear — that “Divine Wisdom which is not only night
and darkness to the soul, but pain and torment too.” “The more
clear the light, the more does it blind the eyes of the owl, and the
more we try to look at the sun the feebler grows our sight and
the more our weak eyes are darkened. So the divine light of con-
templation, when it beats on the soul not yet perfectly purified,
fills it with spiritual darkness, not only because of its brilliance,
but because it paralyses the natural perception of the soul. The
pain suffered by the soul is like that endured by weak or diseased
eyes when suddenly struck by a strong light. Such suliering is
intense when the yet unpurified soul finds itself invaded by this
cleansing light. For in this pure light, which attacks its impurities
to expel them, the soul perceives itself to be so unclean and
miserable that it seems as if God had set Himself against it. . . .
Wonderful and piteous sight! so great are the weakness and
imperfection of the soul that the hand of God, so soft and so gentle,
is felt to be so heavy and oppressive, though merely touching it,
and that, too, most mercifully; for He touches the soul, not to
chastise it, but to load it with Ilis graces.” 1

The Dark Night then, whichever way we look at it, is a state
of disharmony; of imperfect adaptation to environment. The self,
unaccustomed to that direct contact of the Absolute which is
destined to become the Source of its vitality and its joy, feels the
“soft and gentle touch” of the Following Love as unbearable in
its weight. The “ self -naugh ting” or “purification of the will,”
which here takes place, is the struggle to resolve that disharmony;
to purge away the somewhat which still sets itself up in the soul as
separate from the Divine, and makes the clear light of reality a
torment instead of a joy. So deeply has the soul now entered into
the great stream of spiritual life, so dominant has her transcen-
dental faculty become, that this process is accomplished in her
whether she will or no: and in this sense it is, as ascetic writers
sometimes call it, a “passive purgation.” So long as the subject
still feels himself to be somewhat, he has not yet annihilated self-
hood and come to that ground where his being can be united with
the Being of God.

Only when he learns to cease thinking of himself at all, in how-
ever depreciatory a sense; when he abolishes even such selfhood
as lies in a desire for the sensible presence of God, will that
1 St. John of the Cross, “Noclie Escura del Alma," 1. ii. cap. v.



MYSTICISM


400

harmony be attained. This is the “naughting of the soul," the utter
surrender to the great movement of the Absolute Life, which is
insisted upon at such length by all writers upon mysticism. Here,
as in purgation, the condition of access to higher levels of vitality
is a death: a deprivation, a detachment, a clearing of the ground.
Poverty leaps to the Cross: and finds there an utter desolation,
without promise of spiritual reward. The satisfactions of the
spirit must now go the same way as the satisfactions of the senses.
Even the power of voluntary sacrifice and self-discipline is taken
away. A dreadful ennui , a dull helplessness, takes its place. The
mystic motto, I am nothing , I have nothing, I desire nothing, must
now express not only the detachment of the senses, but the whole
being's surrender to the All.

The moral condition towards which the interior travail is
directed is that of an utter humility. ‘‘ Everything depends," says
Tauler, on "a fathomless sinking in a fathomless nothingness."
He continues, "If a man were to say, ‘Lord, who art Thou, that I
must follow Thee through such deep, gloomy, miserable paths?’
the Lord would reply, ‘I am God and Man, and far more God.’
If a man could answer then, really and consciously from the bottom
of his heart. ‘Then I am nothing and less than nothing’ ; all would
be accomplished, for the Godhead has really no place to work in,
but ground where all has been annihilated . 1 As the schoolmen say,
when a new form is to come into existence, the old must of neces- 1
sity be destroyed. . . . And so I say: ‘If a man is to be thus clothed
upon with this Being, all the forms must of necessity be done
away that were ever received by him in all his powers — of percep-
tion, knowledge, will, work, of subjection, sensibility and self-
seeking.’ When St. Paul saw nothing, he saw God. So also when
Elias wrapped his face in his mantle, God came. All strong rocks
are broken here, all on which the spirit can rest must be done
away. Then, when all forms have ceased to exist, in the twinkling
of an eye the man is transformed. Therefore thou must make an
entrance. Thereupon speaks the Heavenly Father to him: ‘Thou '
shalt call Me Father, and shalt never cease to enter in; entering
ever further in, ever nearer, so as to sink the deeper in an unknown
and unnamed abyss; and, above all ways, images and forms,
and above all powers, to lose thyself, deny thyself, and even
unform thyself.’ In this lost condition nothing is to be seen but
a ground which rests upon itself, everywhere one Being, one Life.
It is thus, man may say, that he becomes unknowing, unloving,
and senseless."*

It is clear that so drastic a process of unselfing is not likely

* I.e., the pure essence of the soul, purged of selfhood and illusion.

• Sermon on St. Matthew (“The Inner \Vay,” pp. 204, 205).



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 401

to take place without stress. It is the negative aspect of “deifica-
tion”: in which the self, deprived of “perception, knowledge, will,
work, self-seeking”— the I, the Me, the Mine— loses itself, denies
itself, unforms itself, drawing ‘‘ever nearer” to the One, till
' nothing is to be seen but a ground which rests upon itself”— the
ground of the soul, in which it has union with God.

“Everywhere one Being, one Life”— this is the goal of mystical
ictivity; the final state of equilibrium towards which the self is
noving, or rather struggling, in the dimness and anguish of the
Dark Night. “The soul,” says Madame Guyon in a passage of
musual beauty, ‘‘after many a redoubled death, expires at last
n the arms of Love ; but she is unable to perceive these arms. . . .
Then, reduced to Nought, there is found in her ashes a seed of
mmortahty, which is preserved in these ashes and will germinate
n its season. But she knows not this; and does not expect ever to
>ee herself living again.” Moreover, ‘‘the soul which is reduced
:o the Nothing, ought to dwell therein; without wishing, since she
s now but dust, to issue from this state, nor, as before, desiring
:o live again. She must remain as something which no longer exists :
uid this, in order that the Torrent may drown itself and lose itself
n the Sea, never to find itself in its selfhood again : that it may
become one and the same thing with the Sea.” 1

So Hilton says of the “naughted soul,” “the less it thinketh that
t loveth or seeth God, the nearer it nigheth for to perceive the
pft of the blessed love. For then is love master, and worketh in
:he soul, and maketh it for to forget itself, and for to see and
Dehold only how love doth. And then is the soul more suffering
:han doing, and that is clean love.” 2

The “mystic death” or Dark Night is therefore an aspect or
ncident of the transition from multiplicity to Unity; of that
nergence and union of the soul with the Absolute which is the
vhole object of the mystical evolution of man. It is the last painful
Dreak with the life of illusion, the tearing away of the self from that
World of Becoming in which all its natural affections and desires
ire rooted, to which its intellect and senses correspond ; and the
hrusting of it into that World of Being where at first, weak and
>linded, it can but find a wilderness, a “dark.” No transmutation
vithout fire, say the alchemists: No cross, no crown, says the
Christian. All the great experts of the spiritual life agree — what-
iver their creeds, their symbols, their explanations — in describing
his stress, tribulation, and loneliness, as an essential part of the
vay from the Many to the One ; bringing the self to the threshold
>f that completed life which is to be lived in intimate union with

* “Les Torrents," pt. i. cap. viii.

• “The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxxv.



MYSTICISM


402

Reality. It is the Entombment which precedes the Resurrection,
say the Christian mystics; ever ready to describe their life-process
in the language of their faith. Here as elsewhere — but nowhere else
in so drastic a sense — the self must “lose to find and die to live."

The Dark Night, as we have seen, tends to establish itself
gradually; the powers and intuitions of the self being withdrawn
one after another, the intervals of lucidity becoming rarer, until
the “mystic death” or state of total deprivation is reached. So,
too, when the night begins to break down before the advance of
the new or Unitive Life, the process is generally slow, though it
may be marked — as for instance in Rulman Merswin's case — by
visions and ecstasies. 1 One after another, the miseries and dis-
harmonies of the Dark Night give way : affirmation takes the place
of negation : the Cloud of Unknowing is pierced by rays of light.

The act of complete surrender then, which is the term of
the Dark Night, has given the self its footing in Eternity: its
abandonment of the old centres of consciousness has permitted
movement towards the new. In each such forward movement,
the Transcendental Self, that spark of the soul which is united
to the Absolute Life, has invaded more and more the seat of
personality ; stage by stage the remaking of the self in conformity
with the Eternal World has gone on. In the misery and apparent
stagnation of the Dark Night — that dimness of the spiritual
consciousness, that dullness of its will and love — work has been 1
done; and the last great phase of the inward transmutation
accomplished. The self w'liich comes forth from the night is no
separated self, conscious of the illumination of the Uncreated
Light, but the New Man, the transmuted humanity, whose life
is one with the Absolute Life of God. “As soon as the two houses
of the soul [the sensual and the spiritual].” says St. John of the
Cross, “are tranquil and confirmed, and merged in one by this
peace, and their servants the powers, appetites and passions are
sunk in deep tranquillity, neither troubled by things above nor
things below, the Divine Wisdom immediately unites itself to the
soul in a new bond of loving possession, and that is fulfilled which
is written in the Book of Wisdom: 'While all things were im
mersed in quiet silence, and the night was in the midway of her
course, Thy omnipotent Word sallied out of heaven from the
royal seats’ (Wisdom xviii. 14). The same truth is set before us in
the Canticle, where the Bride, after passing by those who took
her veil away and wounded her, saith, ‘When I had a little passed
by them I found Him whom my soul loveth' (Cant. iii. 4).”*


* Jundt, “Rulman Merswin," p. 22.

• “Noche Escura del Alma," L ii. cap. xxiv.



THE DAfeK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 403

So far, we have considered the Dark Night of the Soul from a
somewhat academic point of view. We have tried to dissect and
| describe it: have seen it through the medium of literature rather
than life. Such a method has obvious disadvantages when dealing
with any organic process: and when it is applied to the spiritual
life of man, these disadvantages are increased. Moreover, our
chief example, ‘'from the life,” Madame Guyon, valuable as her
passion for self-analysis makes her to the student of mystic states,
cannot be looked upon as a satisfactory witness. Her morbid
sentimentalism, her absurd “spiritual self-importance” have to
be taken into account and constantly remembered in estimating
the value of her psychological descriptions. If we want to get a
true idea of the Dark Night, as an episode in the history of a living
soul, we must see it in its context, as part of that soul’s total
experience. We must study the reactions of a self which is passing
through this stage of development upon its normal environment,
the content of its diurnal existence; not only on its intuition of
the Divine.

As a pendant to this chapter, then, we will look at this “state of
pain” as it expressed itself in the life of a mystic whose ardent,
impressionable, and poetic nature reacted to every aspect of the
contemplative experience, every mood and fluctuation of the soul.
I choose this particular case — the case of Suso — (i) because it
►contains many interesting and unconventional elements; showing
us the Dark Night not as a series of specific moods and events,
but as a phase of growth largely conditioned by individual tempera-
ment: (2) because, being told at first hand, in the pages of his
singularly ingenuous autobiography, the record is comparatively
free from the reverent and corrupting emendations of the hagio-
grapher.

From the 22nd chapter onwards, Suso’s “Life” is one of the
most valuable documents we possess for the study of this period
of the Mystic Way. We see in it — more clearly perhaps than its
author can have done — the remaking of his consciousness, his
temperamental reactions to the ceaseless travail of his deeper
self: so different in type from those of St. Teresa and Madame
Guyon. There is a note of virile activity about these trials and
purifications, an insistence upon the heroic aspect of the spiritual
life, far more attractive than Madame Guyon’s elaborate discourses
on resignation and holy passivity, or even St. Teresa’s “dark
ecstasies” of insatiable desire.

The chapter in which Suso’s entrance into this “Second Mystic
Life” of deprivation is described is called “How the Servitor was
led into the School of True Resignation.” Characteristically, this
inward experience expressed itself in a series of dramatic visions;



MYSTICISM


404

visions of that “dynamic*' kind which we have noticed as a
frequent accompaniment of the crisis in which the mystic self
moves to a new level of consciousness. 1 It followed the long period
of constant mortification and intermittent illumination which
lasted, as he tells us, from his eighteenth to his fortieth year:
and constituted the first cycle of his spiritual life. At the end of
that time, “God showed him that all this severity and these
penances were but a good beginning, that by these he had
triumphed over the unruly sensual man : but that now he must
exert himself in another manner if he desired to advance in the
Way.”* In two of these visions — these vivid interior dramas — we
seem to see Suso’s developed mystical consciousness running ahead
of its experience, reading the hidden book of its own future,
probing its own spiritual necessities ; and presenting the results to
the backward and unwilling surface-mind. This growing mystic
consciousness is already aware of fetters which the normal Suso
does not feel. Its eyes open upon the soul’s true country, it sees
the path which it must tread to perfect freedom; the difference
between the quality of that freedom, and the spirituality which Suso
thinks that he has attained. The first of these visions is that of
the Upper School; the second is that in which he is called to put
upon him the armour of a knight.

“One night after matins, the Servitor being seated in his chair,
and plunged in deep thought, he was rapt from his senses. And
it seemed to him that he saw in a vision a magnificent young man
descend from Heaven before him, and say, 'Thou hast been long
enough in the Lower School, and hast there sufficiently applied
thyself. Come, then, with me; and I will introduce thee into the
highest school that exists in this world.3 There, thou shalt apply
thyself to the study of that science which will procure thee the
veritable peace of God ; and which will bring thy holy beginning
to a happy end.* Then the Servitor rose, full of joy; and it seemed
to him that the young man took him by the hand and led him into
a spiritual country, wherein there was a fair house inhabited by <|
spiritual men : for here lived those who applied themselves to the
study of this science. As soon as he entered it, these received him
kindly, and amiably saluted him. And at once they went to the
supreme Master, and told him that a man was come, who desired
to be his disciple and to learn his science. And he said, 'Let him

* Vide supra, p. 290. * Leben, cap. xx.

3 These expressions, the Upper and Lower School of the Holy Spirit, as applied
to the first and second mystic life, were common to the whole group of “Friends
of God/' and appear frequently in their works. Vide supra, p. 441, Rulman
Merswin's “Vision of Nine Rocks," where the man who has “gazed upon lus
Origin" is said to have been in the Upper School of the Holy Spirit; i.e., to have
been united to God.



THE D^RK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 405

come before me, that I may see whether he please me/ And when
the supreme Master saw the Servitor, he smiled on him very
kindly, and said, 'Know that this guest is able to become a good
disciple of our high science, if he will bear with patience the hard
probation: for it is necessary that he be tried inwardly/

"The Servitor did not then understand these enigmatic words.
He turned toward the young man who had brought him and
asked, 'Well, my dear comrade, what then is this Upper School
and this science of which you have spoken to me?' The young
man replied thus: 'In this Upper School they teach the science of
Perfect Self-abandonment ; that is to say, that a man is here taught
to renounce himself so utterly that, in all those circumstances
in which God is manifested, either by Himself or in His creatures,
the man applies himself only to remaining calm and unmoved,
renouncing so far as is possible all human frailty/ And shortly
after this discourse, the Servitor came to himself . . . and, talking
to himself, he said, 'Examine thyself inwardly and thou wilt see
that thou hast still much self-will : thou wilt observe, that with all
thy mortifications which thou hast inflicted on thyself, thou canst
not yet endure external vexations. Thou art like a hare hiding in
a bush, who is frightened by the whispering of the leaves. Thou
also art frightened every day by the griefs that come to thee:
thou dost turn pale at the sight of those who speak against thee :
when thou doest fear to succumb, thou takest flight ; when thou
oughtest to present thyself with simplicity, thou dost hide thyself.
When they praise thee, thou art happy : when they blame thee,
thou art sad. Truly is it very needful for thee that thou shouldst
go to an Upper School/’ 1

Some weeks later, when he had been rejoicing in the new
bodily comfort which resulted from his relinquishment of all
outward mortifications, Suso received a still more pointed lesson
on his need of moral courage. He was sitting on his bed and
meditating on the words of Job " Militia est .” "The life of man
upon the earth is like unto that of a knight”: 2 "and during this
meditation, he was once more rapt from his senses, and it seemed
to him that he saw coming towards him a fair youth of manly
bearing, who held in his hands the spurs and the other apparel
which knights are accustomed to wear. And he drew near to the
Servitor, and clothed him in a coat of mail, and said to him, ‘Oh,
knight ! hitherto thou hast been but a squire, but now it is God’s
will that thou be raised to knighthood/ And the Servitor gazed
at his spurs, and said with much amazement in his heart, ‘Alas,
my God! what has befallen me? what have I become? must I
indeed be a knight? I had far rather remain in peace/ Then he

* Leben, cap. xxi. * Job vii. i (Vulgate).



406 MYSTICISM

said to the young man, 'Since it is God's will that I should be a
knight I had rather have won my spurs in battle; for this would
have been more glorious. 1 The young man turned away and began
to laugh: and said to him, ‘Have no fear! thou shalt have battles
enough. He who would play a valiant part in the spiritual chivalry
of God must endure more numerous and more dreadful combats
than any which were encountered by the proud heroes of ancient
days, of whom the world tells and sings the knightly deeds. It is
not that God desires to free thee from thy burdens; He would
only change them and make them far heavier than they have
ever been/ Then the Servitor said, 'Oh, Lord, show me my pains
in advance, in order that I may know them/ The Lord replied,
‘No, it is better that thou know nothing, lest thou shouldst
hesitate. But amongst the innumerable pains which thou wilt
have to support, I will tell thee three. The first is this. Hitherto
it is thou who hast scourged thyself, with thine own hands : thou
didst cease when it seemed good to thee, and thou hadst compas-
sion on thyself. Now, I would take thee from thyself, and cast
thee without defence into the hands of strangers who shall scourge
thee. Thou shalt see the ruin of thy reputation. Thou shalt be an
object of contempt to blinded men; and thou shalt suffer more
from this than from the wounds made by the points of thy cross. 1
When thou didst give thyself up to thy penances thou wert exalted
and admired. Now thou shalt be abased and annihilated. The
second pain is this: Although thou didst inflict on thyself many
cruel tortures, still by God's grace there remained to thee a
tender and loving disposition. It shall befall thee, that there
where thou hadst thought to find a special and a faithful love,
thou shalt find nought but unfaithfulness, great sufferings, and
great griefs. Thy trials shall be so many that those men who have
any love for thee shall suffer with thee by compassion. The third
pain is this: hitherto thou hast been but a child at the breast, a
spoiled child. Thou hast been immersed in the divine sweetness
like a fish in the sea. Now I will withdraw all this. It is my will that
thou shouldst be deprived of it, and that thou suffer from this
privation; that thou shouldst be abandoned of God and of man,
that thou shouldst be publicly persecuted by the friends of thine
enemies. I will tell it thee in a word : all thou shalt undertake, that
might bring thee joy and consolation, shall come to nothing, and
all that might make thee suffer and be vexatious to thee shall
succeed/

Observe here, under a highly poetic and visionary method of
presentation, the characteristic pains of the Dark Night as

1 During the years of purgation Suso had constantly worn a sharp cross, the
points of which pierced his flesh. * Leben, cap. xxii.



THE D//rK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 407

described by St. John of the Cross, Madame Guyon,De Caussade,
^ and almost every expert who has written upon this state of con-
v sciousness. Desolation and loneliness, abandonment by God and
by man, a tendency of everything to "go wrong," a profusion of
unsought trials and griefs — all are here. Suso, naturally highly
strung, sensitive and poetic, suffered acutely in this mental chaos
and multiplication of woes. He was tormented by a deep depression,
so that "it seemed as though a mountain weighed on his heart":
by doubts against faith: by temptations to despair. 1 These miseries
lasted for about ten years. They were diversified and intensified
by external trials, such as illnesses and false accusations; and
relieved, as the years of purgation had been, by occasional visions
and revelations.

Suso’s natural tendency was to an enclosed life: to secret
asceticism, reverie, outbursts of fervent devotion, long hours of
rapt communion with the Eternal Wisdom whom he loved.
At once artist and recluse, utterly unpractical, he had all the
dreamer's dread of the world of men. His deeper self now ran
counter to all these preferences. Like the angel which said to him
in the hour of his utmost prostration and misery, “Viriliter
agile /” 2 it pressed him inexorably towards the more manly part;
pushing him to action, sending him out from his peaceful if un-
comfortable cell to the rough-and-tumble of the world. Poor Suso
** was little fitted by nature for that rough-and-tumble: and a
large part of his autobiography is concerned with the description
of all that he endured therein. The Dark Night for him was
emphatically an "active night"; and the more active he was
forced to be, the darker and more painful it became. Chapter
after chapter is filled with the troubles of the unhappy Servitor;
who, once he began to meddle with practical life, soon disclosed
his native simplicity and lost the reputation for wisdom and piety
which he had gained during his years of seclusion.

There was not in Suso that high-hearted gaiety, that child-like
courage, which made the early Franciscans delight to call them-
selves God’s fools. The bewildered lover of the Eternal Wisdom
suffered acutely from his loss of dignity; from the unfriendli-
ness and contempt of other men. He gives a long and dismal
catalogue of the enemies that he made, the slanders which he
endured, in the slow acquirement of that disinterested and knightly
valour which had been revealed to him as the essential virtue
of the squire who would "ride with the Eternal Wisdom in
the lists. "3

Suso was a born romantic. This dream of a spiritual chivalry

1 Leben, cap. xxiii. * Ibid., cap. xxv.

K t “Buchlein yon der ewigen Weisheit/' cap. ii.



MYSTICISM


408

haunts him: again and again he uses the language of the tourna-
ment in his description of the mystic life. Yet perhaps few ideals
seem less appropriate to this timid, highly-strung, unpractical
Dominican friar: this ecstatic “minnesinger of the Holy Ghost/'
half-poet, half -metaphysician, racked by ill-health, exalted by
mystical ardours, instinctively fearing the harsh contact of his
fellow-men.

There is no grim endurance about Suso: he feels every hard
knock, and all the instincts of his nature are in favour of telling
his griefs. A more human transcendentalist has never lived.
Thanks to the candour and completeness with which he takes his
readers into his confidence, we know him far more intimately
than we do any of the other great contemplatives. There is
one chapter in his life in which he describes with the utmost
ingenuousness how he met a magnificent knight whilst crossing ‘
the Lake of Constance ; and was deeply impressed by his enthusi-
astic descriptions of the glories and dangers of the lists. The
conversation between the tough man at arms and the hyper-
sensitive mystic is full of revealing touches. Suso is exalted and
amazed by the stories of hard combats, the courage of the knights,
and the ring for which they contend: but most astounded by the
fortitude which pays no attention to its wounds.

“And may not one weep, and show that one is hurt, when one
is hit very hard?" he says.

The knight replies, “No, even though one’s heart fails, as
happens to many, one must never show that one is distressed.
One must appear gay and happy; otherwise one is dishonoured,
and loses at the same time one’s reputation and the Ring.’’

"These words made the Servitor thoughtful; and he was greatly
moved, and inwardly sighing he said, 'Oh Lord, if the knights
of this world must suffer so much to obtain so small a prize, how
just it is that we should suffer far more if we are to obtain an
eternal recompense! Oh, my sweet Lord, if only I were worthy of
being Thy spiritual knight !”

Arrived at his destination, however, Suso was visited by fresh
trials: and soon forgetting his valiant declarations, he began as
usual to complain of his griefs. The result was a visionary ecstasy,
in which he heard the voice of that deeper self to which he
always attributed a divine validity, inquiring with ill-concealed
irony, “Well, what has become of that noble chivalry? Who is this
knight of straw, this rag-made man ? It is not by making rash
promises and drawing back when suffering comes, that men win
the Ring of Eternity which you desire/'

“Alas! Lord,” said Suso plaintively, “the tournaments in which
one must suffer for Thee last such a very long time!”



THE DARK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 409

The voice replied, “But the reward, the honour, and the Ring
' which I give to My knights endure for ever.” 1

As his mystic consciousness grew, the instinct pressing him
towards action and endurance grew with it. The inner voice and
its visionary expression urged him on remorselessly. It mocked
his weakness, encouraged him to more active suffering, more
complete self-renunciation: more contact with the unfriendly
world. Viriliter agite! He must be a complete personality; a whole
man. Instead of the quiet cell, the secret mortifications, his self-
hood was to be stripped from him, and the reality of his renuncia-
tion tested, under the unsympathetic and often inimical gaze of
other men. The case of Suso is one that may well give pause to
those who regard the mystic life as a progress in passivity, with-
drawal from the actual world: and the “Dark Night” as one of its
1 most morbid manifestations.

It is interesting to observe how completely human and appar-
ently “unmystical” was the culminating trial by which Suso was
“perfected in the school of true resignation.” “None can come to
the sublime heights of the divinity,” said the Eternal Wisdom
to him in one of his visions, “or taste its ineffable sweetness, if
first they have not experienced the bitterness and lowliness of
My humanity. The higher they climb without passing by My
( humanity, the lower afterward shall be their fall. My humanity
is the road wdiich all must tread who would come to that which
thou seekest : My sufferings are the door by which all must come
in.” a It was by the path of humanity; by some of the darkest and
most bitter trials of human experience, the hardest tests of its
patience and love, that Suso “came in” to that sustained peace
of heart and union with the divine will which marked his last
state. The whole tendency of these trials in the “path of humanity”
seems, as we look at them, to be directed towards the awakening
of those elements of character left dormant by the rather special-
ized disciplines and purifications of his cloistered life. We seem
to see the “new man” invading all the resistant or inactive comers
of personality: the Servitor of Wisdom being pressed against his
will to a deeply and widely human life in the interests of Eternal

1 Leben, cap. xlvii. So Ruysbroeck, “The gold Ring of our Covenant is greater
than Heaven or Earth” (“De Contemplatione”). Compare Vaughan the Silurist
{“The World”).

“I saw Eternity the other night,

Like a great Ring of pure and endless light.

All calm as it was bright;

One whispered thus:

•This Ring the Bridegroom did for none provide
But for Hls Bride.* **

• "Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit,” cap. ii.



MYSTICISM


410

Love. The absence of God whom he loved, the enmity of man
whom he feared, were the chief forces brought to play upon him:
and we watch his slow growth, under their tonic influence, in
courage, humility, and fraternal love.

Few chapters in the history of the mystics are more touching
than that passage in Suso's Life, 1 “Where we speak of an extra-
ordinary Trial which the Servitor had to bear.” It tells how a
malicious woman accused him of being the father of her child, and
succeeded for the time in entirely destroying his reputation. “And
the scandal was all the greater,” says the Servitor with his cus-
tomary simplicity, “because the rumour of that brother's sanctity
had spread so far." Poor Suso was utterly crushed by this calumny
“wounded to the depths of his heart." “Lord, Lord!" he cried,
“every day of my life I have worshipped Thy holy Name in many
places, and have helped to cause it to be loved and honoured
by many men: and now Thou wouldst drag my name through
the mud!" When the scandal was at its height, a woman of the
neighbourhood came to him in secret ; and offered to destroy the
child which was the cause of this gossip, in order that the tale might
be more quickly forgotten and his reputation restored. She said
further, that unless the baby were somehow disposed of, he would
certainly be forced by public opinion to accept it, and provide
for its upbringing. Suso, writhing as he was under the contempt
of the whole neighbourhood, the apparent ruin of his cam r —
knowing, too, that this slander of one of their leaders must
gravely injure the reputation of the Friends of God— was able to
meet the temptation with a noble expression of trust. “I have
confidence in the God of Heaven, Who is rich, and Who has
given me until now all that which was needful unto me. He
will help me to keep, if need be, another beside myself." And
then he said to his temptress, “Go, fetch the little child that I
may see it."

“And when he had the baby, he put it on his knees and looked
at it : and the baby began to smile at him. And sighing deeply,
he said, ‘Could I kill a pretty baby that smiled at me? No, no, I
had rather suffer every trial that could come upon me !" And turn-
ing his face to the unfortunate little creature, he said to it, ‘Oh
my poor, poor little one ! Thou art but an unhappy orphan, for
thy unnatural father hath denied thee, thy wicked mother would
cast thee off, as one casts off a little dog that has ceased to please !
The providence of God hath given thee to me, in order that I may
be thy father. I will accept thee, then, from Him and from none
else. Ah, dear child of my heart, thou liest on my knees ; thou dost
gaze at me, thou canst not yet speak! As for me, I contemplate

1 Cap. xl.



THE dArK NIGHT OF THE SOUL 411

thee with a broken heart; with weeping eyes, and lips that
kiss, I bedew thy little face with my burning tears! . . Thou
shalt be my son, and the child of the good God; and as long as
heaven gives me a mouthful, I *hall share it with thee, for the
greater glory of God ; and will paaently support all the trials that
may come to me, my darling son!' " How different is this from
the early Suso; interested in little but his own safe spirituality,
and with more than a touch of the religious aesthete !

The story goes on: "And when the hard-h< arted woman who
had wished to kill the little one saw these tears, when she heard
these tender words, she was greatly moved: and her heart was
filled with pity, and she too began to weep and cry aloud. The
Servitor was obliged to calm her, for fear that, attracted by the
noise, some one should come and see what was going on. And when
she had finished weeping the Brother gave her back the baby,
and blessed it, and said to it, 'Now may God in His goodness bless
thee, and may the saints protect thee against all evil that may
be!' And he enjoired the woman to care for it well at his
expense."

Small wonder that after this heroic act of charity Suso’s reputa-
tion went from bad to worse; that even his dearest friends
forsook him, and he narrowly escaped expulsion from the religious
life. His torments and miseries, his fears for the future, continued
to grow until they at last came to their term in a sort of mental
crisis. "His feeble nature broken by the pains which he had to
endure, he went forth raving like one who has lost his senses; and
hid himself in a place far from men, where none could see or hear
him . . . and whilst he suffered thus, several times something
which came from God said within his soul, 'Where then is your
resignation ? Where is that equal humour in joy and in tribulation
which you have so lightly taught other men to love? In what
nuumer is it, then, that one should rest in God and have confi-
dence only in Him?' He replied weeping, 'You ask where is my
resignation? But tell me first, where is the infinite pity of God for
His friends? ... Oh Fathomless Abyss! come to my help, for
without Thee I am lost. Thou knowest that Thou art my only
consolation, that all my trust is only in Thee. Oh hear me, for the
love of God, all you whose hearts are wounded! Behold! let none
be scandalized by my insane behaviour. So long as it was only a
question of preaching resignation, that was easy: but now that
my heart is pierced, now that I am wounded to the marrow . . .
how can I be resigned?' And after thus suffering half a day, his
brain was exhausted, and at last he became calmer, and sitting
down he came to himself : and turning to God, and abandoning
himself to His Will, he said, Tf it cannot be otherwise, fiat



412 MYSTICISM

voluntas tua * ”* The act of submission was at once followed by an
ecstasy and vision, in which the approaching end of his troubles ,
was announced to him. “And in the event, God came to the help
of the Servitor, and little by little that terrible tempest died away.”

Thus with Suso, as with St. Catherine of Siena and other mystics
whom we have considered, the travail of the Dark Night is all
directed towards the essential mystic act of utter self -surrender ;
that fiat voluntas tua which marks the death of selfhood in the
interests of a new and deeper life. He has learned the lesson of
“the school of true resignation”: has moved to a new stage of
reality: a complete self-naughting, an utter acquiescence in the
large and hidden purposes of the Divine Will.

"Anzi 6 formale ad esto beato esse
tenersi dentro alia divina voglia
per ch* una fansi nostre voglie stesse,”*

says Piccarda, announcing the primary law of Paradise. Suso
has passed through the fire to the state in which he too can say,
“La sua voluntate e nostra pace.” The old grouping of his conscious-
ness round “spiritual self” has come to its head and at last broken
down In the midst of a psychic storm parallel to the upheavals of
conversion, “mercenary love” is for ever disestablished, the new
state of Pure Love is abruptly established in its place. Human
pain is the price: the infinite joy peculiar to “free souls” is the
reward. We may study the pain, but the nature of the joy is
beyond us: as, in the Absolute Type of all mystic achievement,
we see the cross clearly but can hardly guess at the true nature
of the resurrection life.

Hence Suso's description of his establishment in the Unitive
Way seems meagre, an anti-climax, after all that went before.
“And later,” he says simply, “when God judged that it was time,
He rewarded the poor martyr for all his suffering. And he enjoyed
peace of heart, and received in tranquillity and quietness many
precious graces. And he praised the Lord from the very depths of,
his soul, and thanked Him for those same sufferings: which, for
all the world, he would not now have been spared. And God
caused him to understand that by this complete abasement he
had gained more, and was made the more worthy to be raised
up to God, than by all the pains which he had suffered from his
youth up to that time. ”3

1 Op. cit., loo. cit. . .

1 Par. iii. 79. “Nay, it is essential to this blessed being, to hold ourselves within
the Will Divine; that therewith our own wills be themselves made one.*'

i hoc. cit.



CHAPTER X

THE UNITIVE LIFE


What is tlie Unitive Life? — Only the Mystics know— It is a state of trans-
cendent vitality — Its importance lor the race — The Mystics describe it under two
forms: metaphysical and personal— Deification and Spiritual Marriage — Self-
surrender — Freedom — Heroic activity — The psychological explanation — Dela-
croix and Euckcn — Unification of personality on high levels — The Mystic's
explanation — Immersion in God — Transmutation — The doctrine of Deification —
m philosophy — in religion — Its justification — It is not identification with God—
it is the achievement of reality— Fire symbolism— Boehme— Richard of St.
Victor — St. Catherine — Kuysbroeck — The Beatific Vision — Suso — Self-loss —
The union of love— Jalalu ’d Din— The Divine companionship — The Epistle of
Prayer — Spiritual Marriage — Divine Fecundity — Enhanced vitality — St. Teresa
— The “great actives" — Madame Guyon — The Mystics as parents of new spiritual
life — The dual character of the Unitive Life — Being and Becoming — Fruition
and work — Kuysbroeck the supreme demonstrator of this law — Its exhibition
m the lives of the Mystics — The Unitive Life satisfies the three aspects of the Self
— Knowledge, Will, Love— Mystic joy — an implicit of the deified life — Dante —
Rolle — the Song of Love — St. Francis — St. Teresa — St. Catherine of Genoa —
Conclusion

W hat is the Unitive Life? We have referred to it often
enough in the course of this inquiry. At last we are face
to face with the necessity of defining its nature if we can.
Since the normal man knows little about his own true personality,
and nothing at all about that of Deity, the orthodox description
of it as "the life in which man’s will is united with God,” does but
echo the question in an ampler form; and conveys no real meaning
to the student’s mind.

That we should know, by instinct, its character from within —
as we know, if we cannot express, the character of our own
normal human lives — is of course impossible. We deal here with
the final triumph of the spirit, the flower of mysticism, -humanity’s
top note: the consummation towards which the contemplative
life, with its long slow growth and costly training, has moved
from the first. We look at a small but ever-growing group of
heroic figures, living at transcendent levels of reality which we,
immersed in the poor life of illusion, cannot attain : breathing an
atmosphere whose true quality we cannot even conceive. Here,
then, as at so many other points in our study of the spiritual
consciousness, we must rely for the greater part of our knowledge
upon the direct testimony of the mystics; who alone can tell the

character of that "more abundant life” which they enjoy.

413



MYSTICISM


414

Yet we are not wholly dependent on this source of information.
It is the peculiarity of the Unitive Life that it is often lived, in its
highest and most perfect forms, in the world; and exhibits its
works before the eyes of men. As the law of our bodies is “earth
to earth” so, strangely enough, is the law of our souls. The spirit
of man having at last come to full consciousness of reality, com-
pletes the circle of Being; and returns to fertilize those levels of
existence from which it sprang. Hence, the enemies of mysticism,
who have easily drawn a congenial moral from the “morbid and
solitary” lives of contemplatives in the earlier and educative
stages of the Mystic Way, are here confronted very often by the
disagreeable spectacle of the mystic as a pioneer of humanity, a
sharply intuitive and painfully practical person: an artist, a
discoverer, a religious or social reformer, a national hero, a “great
active” amongst the saints. By the superhuman nature of that
which these persons accomplish, we can gauge something of the
super-normal vitality of which they partake. The things done,
the victories gained over circumstances by St. Bernard or St.
Joan of Arc, by St. Catherine of Siena, St. Ignatius Loyola,
St. Teresa, George Fox, are hardly to be explained unless these
great spirits had indeed a closer, more intimate, more bracing
contact than their fellows with that Life “which is the light
of men.”

We have, then, these two lines of investigation open to us: first,
the comparison and elucidation of that which the mystics tell us
concerning their transcendent experience, secondly, the testimony
which is borne by their lives to the existence within them of
supernal springs of action, contact set up with deep levels of vital
power. In the third place, we have such critical machinery as
psychology has placed at our disposal; but this, in dealing with
these giants of the spirit, must be used with peculiar caution and
humility.

The Unitive Life, though so often lived in the world, is never
of it. It belongs to another plane of being, moves securely upon
levels unrelated to our speech; and hence eludes the measuring
powers of humanity. We, from the valley, can only catch a glimpse
of the true life of these elect spirits, transfigured upon the moun-
tain. They are far away, breathing another air: we cannot reach
them. Yet it is impossible to over-estimate their importance for
the race. They are our ambassadors to the Absolute. They vindi-
cate humanity’s claim to the possible and permanent attainment
of Reality; bear witness to the practical qualities of the transcen-
dental life. In Eucken's words, they testify to “the advent of a
triumphing Spiritual Power, as distinguished from a spirituality
which merely lays the foundations of life or struggles to maintain



^TIIE UNITIVE LIFE 415

them": 1 to the actually life-enhancing power of the Love of God,
once the human soul is freely opened to receive it.

Coming first to the evidence of the mystics themselves, we find
that in their attempts towards describing the Unitive Life they
have recourse to two main forms of symbolic expression; both
very dangerous, and liable to be misunderstood, both offering
ample opportunity for harsh criticism to hostile investigators of
the mystic type. We find also, as we might expect from our
previous encounters with the symbols used by contemplatives
and ecstatics, that these two forms of expression belong respec-
tively to mystics of the transcendent-metaphysical and of the
intimate-personal type: and that their formulae, if taken alone,
appear to contradict one another.

(1) The metaphysical mystic, for whom the Absolute is im-
personal and transcendent, describes his final attainment of that
Absolute as deification , or the utter transmutation of the self in
God. (2) The mystic for whom intimate and personal communion
has been the mode under which he best apprehended Reality,
speaks of the consummation of this communion, its perfect and
permanent form, as the Spiritual Marriage of his soul with God.
Obviously, both these terms are but the self’s guesses concerning
the intrinsic character of a state which it has felt in its wholeness
rather than analysed: and bear the same relation to the ineffable
realities of that state, as our clever theories concerning the nature
and meaning of life bear to the vital processes of men. It is worth
while to examine them; but we shall not understand them till we
have also examined the life which they profess to explain

The language of "deification" and of "spiritual marriage," then,
is temperamental language: and is related to subjective experi-
ence rather than to objective fact. It describes on the one hand
the mystic's astonished recognition of a profound change effected
in his own personality 2 — the transmutation of his salt, sulphur,
and mercury into Spiritual Gold— on the other, the rapturous
consummation of his love. Hence by a comparison of these sym-
bolic reconstructions, by the discovery and isolation of the
common factor latent in each, we may perhaps learn something
of the fundamental fact which each is trying to portray.

Again, the mystics describe certain symptoms either as the

1 “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 140.

* Compare Dante's sense of a transmuted personality when he first breatned
the air of Paradise : —

“S' io era sol di me quel che creasti

novellamente, Amor che il ciel governi,

tu il sai, che col tuo lume mi levasti" (Par. i. 73).

“H I were only that of me which thou didst new create, oh Love who rulest
heaven, thou knowest who with thy light didst lift me up."



MYSTICISM


416

necessary preliminaries or as the marks and fruits of the Unitive
State : and these too may help us to fix its character.

The chief, in fact the one essential, preliminary is that pure
surrender of selfhood, or “self-naught ing,” which the trials of the
Dark Night tended to produce. “This,” says Julian of Norwich,
“is the cause why that no soul is rested till it is naughted of all
things that are made. When it is willingly made naught for love
to have Him that is all, then is it able to receive spiritual rest.” 1
Only the thoroughly detached, “naughted soul” is “free,” says
“The Mirror of Simple Souls,” and the Unitive State is essentially
a state of free and filial participation in Eternal Life. The capital
marks of the state itself are (1) a complete absorption in the
interests of the Infinite, under whatever mode It is apprehended
by the self; (2) a consciousness of sharing Its strength, acting by
Its authority, which results in a complete sense of freedom, an
invulnerable serenity, and usually urges the self to some form of
heroic effort or creative activity; (3) the establishment of the self
as a “power for life,” a centre of energy, an actual parent of
spiritual vitality in other men. By assembling these symptoms
and examining them, and the lives of those who exhibit them,
in the light of psychology, we can surely get some news — however
fragmentary — concerning the transcendent condition of being
which involves these characteristic states and acts. Beyond this
even Dante himself could not go:

‘Trasumanar significar per verba
non si poria."*

We will then consider the Unitive Life (1) As it appears from
the standpoint of the psychologist. (2) As it is described to us by
those mystics who use (a) the language of Deification, (b) that of
Spiritual Marriage. (3) Finally, we will turn to those who have
lived it; and try, if we can, to realize it as an organic whole.

(1) From the point of view of the pure psychologist, what do
the varied phenomena of the Unitive Life, taken together, seem
to represent ? He would probably say that they indicate the final
and successful establishment of that higher form of consciousness
which has been struggling for supremacy during the whole of the
Mystic Way. The deepest, richest levels of human personality
have now attained to light and freedom. The self is remade,
transformed, has at last unified itself; and with the cessation of
stress, power has been liberated for new purposes.

‘The beginning of the mystic life,” says Delacroix, “introduced
into the personal life of the subject a group of states which are
distinguished by certain characteristics, and which ‘form, so to

1 "Revelations of Divine Love/' cap. v. ■ Par. 1. 70.



^THE UNITIVE LIFE 417

speak, a special psychological system. At its term, it has, as it
were, suppressed the ordinary self, and by the development of this
system has established a new personality, with a new method of
feeling and of action. Its growth results in the transformation of
personality: it abolishes the primitive consciousness of selfhood,
and substitutes for it a wider consciousness ; the total disappear-
ance of selfhood in the divine, the substitution of a Divine Self
for the primitive self.” 1 We give a philosophic content to
this conception if we say further that man, in this Unitive
State, by this substitution of the divine for the “primitive”
self, has at last risen to true freedom; “entered on the
fruition of reality.” 2 Hence he has opened up new paths for the
inflow of that Triumphing Power which is the very substance
of the Real; has remade his consciousness, and in virtue of this
total regeneration is “transplanted into that Universal Life, which
is yet not alien but our own.”3 From contact set up with this
Universal Life, this “Energetic Word of God, which nothing can
contain” — from those deep levels of Being to which his shifting,
growing personality is fully adapted at last — he draws that amaz-
ing strength, that immovable peace, that power of dealing with
circumstance, which is one of the most marked characteristics of
the Unitive Life. “That secret and permanent personality of a
, superior type”** which gave to the surface-self constant and ever
^ more insistent intimations of its existence at every stage of the
mystic's growth — his real, eternal self — has now consciously
realized its destiny: and begins at last fully to be. In the travail
of the Dark Night it has conquered and invaded the last re-
calcitrant elements of character. It is no more limited to acts of
profound perception, overpowering intuitions of the Absolute : no
more dependent for its emergence on the psychic states of con-
templation and ecstasy. Anima and Animus are united. The mystic
has at last resolved the Stevensonian paradox; and is not truly
two, but truly one .

(2) The mystic, I think, would acquiesce in these descriptions,
so far as they go : but he would probably translate them into his
own words and gloss them with an explanation which is beyond
the power and province of psychology. He would say that his
long-sought correspondence with Transcendental Reality, his union
with God, has now been finally established: that his self, though
intact, is wholly penetrated — as a sponge by the sea — by the
Ocean of Life and Love to which he has attained. “I live, yet not
I but God in me.” He is conscious that he is now at length cleansed

1 Delacroix, “Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 197.

» Eucken, “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,” p. 12. s Ibid., p. 96.

# Delacroix, op. ctt., p. 114 ( vide supra, p. 273).



MYSTICISM


418

of the last stains of separation, and has become, in a mysterious
manner, “that which he beholds. "

In the words of the Sufi poet, the mystic's journey is now prose-
cuted not only to God but in God. He has entered the Eternal
Order; attained here and now the state to which the Magnet of
the Universe draws every living thing. Moving through periods of
alternate joy and anguish, as his spiritual self woke, stretched,
and was tested in the complementary fires of love and pain, he
was inwardly conscious that he moved towards a definite objective.
In so far as he was a great mystic, he was also conscious that this
objective was no mere act of knowing, however intense, exultant,
and sublime; but a condition of being, fulfilment of that love
which impelled him, steadily and inexorably, to his own place.
In the image of the alchemists, the Fire of Love has done its work :
the mystic Mercury of the Wise — that little hidden treasure, that
scrap of Reality within him — has utterly transmuted the salt and
sulphur of his mind and his sense. Even the white stone of illu-
mination, once so dearly cherished, he has resigned to the crucible.
Now, the great work is accomplished, the last imperfection is
gone, and he finds within himself the “Noble Tincture" — the
gold of spiritual humanity.

(A) We have said that the mystic of the impersonal type -the
seeker of a Transcendent Absolute — tends to describe the con-
summation of his quest in the language of deification. The Unitive
Life necessarily means for him, as for all who attain it, something
which infinitely transcends the sum total of its symptoms: some-
thing which normal men cannot hope to understand. In it he
declares that he “partakes directly of the Divine Nature," enjoys
the fruition of reality. Since we “only behold that which we are,"
the doctrine of deification results naturally and logically from
this claim.

“Some may ask," says the author of the “Theologia Germanica"
“what is it to be a partaker of the Divine Nature, or a Godlike,
[vergotiet, literally deified] man? Answer: he who is imbued with
or illuminated by the Eternal or Divine Light and inflamed or
consumed with Eternal or Divine Love, he is a deified man and a
partaker of the Divine Nature ." 1

Such a word as “deification" is not, of course, a scientific term.
It is a metaphor, an artistic expression which tries to hint at a
transcendent fact utterly beyond the powers of human understand-
ing, and therefore without equivalent in human speech: that fact
of which Dante perceived the “shadowy preface" when he saw'
the saints as petals of the Sempiternal Rose.* Since we know not

* ‘Theologia Germanica," cap. xli.

* Par. xxx. 1 15-130 and xxxi. 1-12.



ta UNITIVE LIFE 419

the Being of God, the mere statement that a soul is transformed
in Him may convey to us an ecstatic suggestion, but will never
give exact information: except of course to those rare selves who
have experienced these supernal states. Such selves, however — or
a large proportion of them — accept this statement as approx-
imately true. Whilst the more clear-sighted are careful to qualify it
in a sense which excludes pantheistic interpretations, and rebuts
the accusation that extreme mystics preach the annihilation of
the self and regard themselves as co-equal with the Deity, they
leave us in no doubt that it answers to a definite and normal
experience of many souls who attain high levels of spiritual
vitality. Its terms are chiefly used by those mystics by whom
Reality is apprehended as a state or place rather than a Person: 1 * 3
and who have adopted, in describing the earlier stages of their
journey to God, such symbols as those of rebirth or transmutation.

The blunt and positive language of these contemplatives con-
cerning deification has aroused more enmity amongst the un-
mystical than any other of their doctrines or practices. It is of
rourse easy, by confining oneself to its surface sense, to call such
language blasphemous: and the temptation to do so has seldom
been resisted. Yet, rightly understood, this doctrine lies at the
heart, not only of all mysticism, but also of much philosophy and
most religion. It pushes their first principles to a logical end.
^Christian mysticism, says Delacroix with justice, springs from
“that spontaneous and half-savage longing for deification which
all religion contains.”* Eastern Christianity has always accepted
it and expressed it in her rites. “The Body of God deifies me and
feeds me,” says Simeon Metaphrastes, “it deifies my spirit and
it feeds my soul in an incomprehensible manner. ”3

The Christian mystics justify this dogma of the deifying of man,
by exhibiting it as the necessary corollary of the Incarnation —
the humanizing of God. They can quote the authority of the Fathers
in support of this argument. “He became man that we might be
made God,” says St. Athanasius.4 “I heard,” says St. Augustine,
speaking of his pre-converted period, “Thy voice from on high
crying unto me, T am the Food of the fullgrown: grow, and then
thou shalt feed on Me. Nor shalt thou change Me into thy sub-
stance as thou changest the food of thy flesh, but thou shalt be
changed into Mine.' ”5 Eckhart therefore did no more than expand
the patristic view when he wrote, “Our Lord says to every living


1 Compare, p. 128.

» Op. tit., ix. But it is difficult to soe why we need stigmatize as “half-savage”
man's primordial instinct for his destiny.

3 Divine Liturgy of the Orthodox Eastern Church. Prayers before Communion.

♦ Athanasius, t>e Incam. Verbi, i. 108.

* Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.



420 MYSTICISM

soul, ‘I became man for you. If you do not become God for me,
you do me wrong/

If we are to allow that the mystics have ever attained the object
of their quest, I think we must also allow that such attainment
involves the transmutation of the self to that state which they
call, for want of exact language, “deified." The necessity of such
transmutation is an implicit of their first position: the law that
“we behold that which we are, and are that which we behold/'
Eckhart, in whom the language of deification assumes its most
extreme form, justifies it upon this necessity. “If," he says, “I am
to know God directly, I must become completely He and He I : so
that this He and this I become and are one I." 2

God, said St. Augustine, is the Country of the soul: its Home,
says Ruysbroeck. The mystic in the unitive state is living in and of
his native land; no exploring alien, but a returned exile, now wholly
identified with it, part of it, yet retaining his personality intact.
As none know the spirit of England but the English; and they
know it by intuitive participation, by mergence, not by thought;
so none but the "deified" know the secret life of God. This, too, is
a knowledge conferred only by participation: by living a life,
breathing an atmosphere, "union with that same Light by which
they see, and which they see." 3 It is one of those rights of citizen-
ship which cannot be artificially conferred. Thus it becomes
important to ask the mystics what they have to tell us of their
life lived upon the bosom of Reality : and to receive their reports
without prejudice, however hard the sayings they contain.

The first thing which emerges from these reports, and from the
choice of symbols which we find in them, is that the great mystics
are anxious above all things to establish and force on us the truth
that by deification they intend no arrogant claim to identification
with God, but as it were a transfusion of their selves by His Self:
an entrance upon a new order of life, so high and so harmonious
with Reality that it can only be called divine. Over and over again
they assure us that personality is not lost, but made more real. 1
“Wien," says St. Augustine, “I shall cleave to Thee with all my
being, then shall I in nothing have pain and labour; and my life
shall he a real life , being wholly full of Thee."* “My life shall be
a real life" because it is "full of Thee." The achievement of reality,
and deification, are then one and the same thing: necessarily so,
since we know that only the divine is the real. 5

Mechthild of Magdeburg, and after her Dante, saw Deity as a

1 Pred. lvii. » Pred. xcix. (“Mystische Schriften,** p. 122). 1

S Ruysbroeck, “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1 . iii. cap. iii.

« Aug. Conf., bk. x. cap. xxviii.

5 Cf. Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,*' “Magna

Moralia,** xxii.



;the unitive life 421

flame or river of fire that filled the Universe; and the "deified”
souls of the saints as ardent sparks therein, ablaze with that fire,
one thing with it, yet distinct . 1 Ruysbroeck, too, saw "Every soul
like a live coal, burned up by God on the heart of His Infinite
Love .” 2 Such fire imagery has seemed to many of the mystics a
peculiarly exact and suggestive symbol of the transcendent state
which they are struggling to describe. No longer confused by the
dim Cloud of Unknowing, they have pierced to its heart, and there
found their goal: that uncreated and energizing Fire which guided
the children of Israel through the night. By a deliberate appeal
to the parallel of such great impersonal forces — to Fire and Heat,
Light, Water, Air — mystic writers seem able to bring out a per-
ceived aspect of the Godhead, and of the transfigured soul’s
participation therein, which no merely personal language, taken
alone, can touch. Thus Boehme, trying to describe the union be-
tween the Word and the soul, says, “I give you an earthly simili-
tude of this. Behold a bright flaming piece of iron, which of itself
is dark and black, and the fire so penetrateth and shineth through
the iron, that it giveth light. Now, the iron doth not cease to be; it
is iron still: and the source (or property) of the fire retaineth its
own propriety: it doth not take the iron into it, but it penetrateth
(and shineth) through the iron; and it is iron then as well as
before, free in itself: and so also is the source or property of the
fire. In such a manner is the soul set in the Deity; the Deity pene-
trateth through the soul, and dwelleth in the soul, yet the soul doth
not comprehend the Deity, but the Deity comprehendeth the
soul, but doth not alter it (from being a soul) but only giveth it
the divine source (or property) of the Majesty.” 3

Almost exactly the same image of deification was used, five
hundred years before Boehme’s day, by Richard of St. Victor; a
mystic whom he is hardly likely to have read. "When the soul is
plunged in the fire of divine love,” he says, "like iron, it first
loses its blackness, and then growing to white heat, it becomes like
unto the fire itself. And lastly, it grows liquid, and losing its nature
is transmuted into an utterly different quality of being.” "As the
difference between iron that is cold and iron that is hot,” he says
again, "so is the difference between soul and soul: between the
tepid soul and the soul made incandescent by divine love. ”4
Other contemplatives say that the deified soul is transfigured by
the inundations of the Uncreated Light: that it is like a brand
blazing in the furnace, transformed to the likeness of the fire.
"These souls,” says the Divine voice to St. Catherine of Siena,

1 Par. xxx. 64. * “De Septem Gradibus Amoris,” cap. xiv.

I “The Threefold Life of Man/' cap. vi. 88.

4 “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis” (Migne, Patrologia Latina exevi.)



MYSTICISM


422


I


“thrown into the furnace of My charity, no part of their will
remaining outside but the whole of them being inflamed in Me,
are like a brand, wholly consumed in the furance, so that no one
can take hold of it to extinguish it, because it has become fire.
In the same way no one can seize these souls, or draw them
outside of Me, because they are made one thing with Me through
grace, and I never withdraw Myself from them by sentiment, as
in the case of those whom I am leading on to perfection .” 1

For the most subtle and delicate descriptions of the Unitive or
Deified State, understood as self-loss in the “Ocean Pacific” of
God, we must go to the great genius of Ruysbroeck. He alone,
whilst avoiding all its pitfalls, has conveyed the suggestion of its
ineffable joys in a measure which seems, as we read, to be beyond
all that we had supposed possible to human utterance. Awe and
rapture, theological profundity, keen psychological insight, are
here tempered by a touching simplicity. We listen to the report
of one who has indeed heard “the invitation of love” which “draws
interior souls towards the One” and says “Come home.” A humble
receptivity, a meek self -naugh ting is with Ruysbroeck, as with
all great mystics, the gate of the City of God. “Because they have
abandoned themselves to God in doing, in leaving undone, and
in suffering,” he says of the deified souls, “they have steadfast
peace and inward joy, consolation and savour, of which the
world cannot partake; neither any dissembler, nor the man who
seeks and means himself more than the glory of God. Moreover,
those same inward and enlightened men have before them in their
inward seeing, whenever they will, the Love of God as something
drawing or urging them into the Unity; for they see and feel that
the Father with the Son through the Holy Ghost, embrace Each
Other and all the chosen, and draw themselves back with eternal
love into the unity of I heir Nature. Thus the Unity is ever
drawing to itself and inviting to itself everything that has been
bom of It, either by nature or by grace. And therefore, too, such
enlightened men are, with a free spirit, lifted up above reason
into a bare and imageless vision, wherein lives the eternal in-
drawing summons of the Divine Unity; and, with an imageless
and bare understanding, they pass through all works, and all
exercises, and all things, until they reach the summit of their
spirits. There, their bare understanding is drenched through by
the Eternal Brightness, even as the air is drenched through by
the sunshine. And the bare, uplifted will is transformed and
drenched through by abysmal love, even as iron is by fire. And
the bare, uplifted memory feels itself enwrapped and established
in an abysmal Absence of Image. And thereby the created image

1 Dialogo, cap. lxxviii.



'THE UNITIVE LIFE 433

is united above reason in a threefold way with its Eternal Image,
which is the origin of its being and its life. . . . Yet the creature
does not become God, for the union takes place in God through
grace and our homeward-turning love: and therefore the creature
in its inward contemplation feels a distinction and an otherness
between itself and God. And though the union is without means,
yet the manifold works which God works in heaven and on earth
are nevertheless hidden from the spirit. For though God gives
Himself as He is, with clear discernment, He gives Himself in the
essence of the soul, where the powers of the soul are simplified
above reason, and where, in simplicity, they suffer the trans-
formation of God. There all is full and overflowing, for the spirit
feels itself to be one truth and one richness and one unity with
God. Yet even here there is an essential tending forward, and
therein is an essential distinction between the being of the soul
and the Being of God; and this is the highest and finest distinction
which we are able to feel.” 1 *

“When love has carried us above and beyond all things,” he
says in another place, “above the light, into the Divine Dark,
there we are wrought and transformed by the Eternal Word Who
is the image of the Father; and as the air is penetrated by the sun,
thus we receive in idleness of spirit the Incomprehensible Light,
enfolding us and penetrating us. And this Light is nothing else
but an infinite gazing and seeing. We behold that which we are,
and we are that which be behold; because our thought, life and
being are uplifted in simplicity and made one with the Truth
which is God.” 3

Here the personal aspect of the Absolute seems to be reduced to
a minimum: yet all that we value in personality — love, action,
will — remains unimpaired. We seem caught up to a plane of
vision beyond the categories of the human mind : to the contempla-
tion of a Something Other — our home, our hope, and our passion,
the completion of our personality, and the Substance of all that
Is. Such an endless contemplation, such a dwelling within the
substance of Goodness, Truth and, Beauty, is the essence of that
Beatific Vision, that participation of Eternity, “of all things
most delightful and desired, of all things most loved by them
who have it/M which theology presents to us as the objective of
the soul.

Those mystics of the metaphysical type who tend to use these
impersonal symbols of Place and Thing often see in the Unitive
Life a foretaste of the Beatific Vision: an entrance here and now

1 Ruysbroeck, “Samuel/’ cap. xi. (English translation: “The Book of Truth. 0 )

* Ibid., “De Calculo," cap. ix.

* St. Thomas Aquinas, “Summa Contra Gentiles," bk. iii. cap. boi.



MYSTICISM


424

into that absolute life within the Divine Being, which shall be
lived by all perfect spirits when they have cast off the limitations
of the flesh and re-entered the eternal order for which they were
made. For them, in fact, the '‘deified man," in virtue of his genius
for transcendental reality, has run ahead of human history: and
attained a form of consciousness which other men will only know
when earthly life is past.

In the “Book of Truth” Suso has a beautiful and poetic com-
parison between the life of the blessed spirits dwelling within the
Ocean of Divine Love, and that approximate life which is lived
on earth by the mystic who has renounced all selfhood and merged
his will in that of the Eternal Truth. Here we find one of the best
of many answers to the ancient but apparently immortal accusa-
tion that the mystics teach the total annihilation of personality
as the end and object of their quest. “Lord, tell me,” says the
Servitor, “what remains to a blessed soul which has wholly re-
nounced itself.” Truth says, “When the good and faithful servant
enters into the joy of his Lord, he is inebriated by the riches of
the house of God; for he feels, in an ineffable degree, that which
is felt by an inebriated man. He forgets himself, he is no longer
conscious of his selfhood; he disappears and loses himself in God,
and becomes one spirit with Him, as a drop of water which is
drowned in a great quantity of wine. For even as such a drop
disappears, taking the colour and the taste of wine, so it is with
those who are in full possession of blessedness. All human desires
are taken from them in an indescribable manner, they are rapt
from themselves, and are immersed in the Divine Will. If it were
otherwise, if there remained in the man some human thing that
was not absorbed, those words of Scripture which say that God
must be all in all would be false. His being remains , but in another
form , in another glory , and in another power. And all this is the
result of entire and complete renunciation. . . . Herein thou shalt
find an answer to thy question; for the true renunciation and
veritable abandonment of a man to the Divine Will in the temporal
world is an imitation and reduction of that self-abandonment of
the blessed, of which Scripture speaks: and this imitation ap-
proaches its model more or less, according as men are more or less
united with God and become more or less one with God. Remark
well that which is said of the blessed: they are stripped of their
personal initiative, and changed into another form, another glory
another power. What then is this other form, if it be not the
Divine Nature and the Divine Being whereinto they pour them-
selves, and which pours Itself into them, and becomes one thing
with them? And what is that other glory, if it be not to be
illuminated and made shining in the Inaccessible Light ? What is



THE UNITIVE LIFE 425

that other power, if it be not that by means of his union with the
Divine Personality, there is given to man a divine strength and
a divine power, that he may accomplish all which pertains to his
blessedness and omit all. which is contrary thereto ? And thus it
is that, as has been said, a man comes forth from his selfhood.” 1

All the mystics agree that the stripping off of the I, the Me, the
Mine, utter renouncement, or “self-naughting” — self-abandon-
ment to the direction of a larger Will — is an imperative condition
of the attainment of the unitivelife. The temporary denudation of
the mind, whereby the contemplative made space for the vision
of God, must now be applied to the whole life'. Here, they say,
there is a final swallowing up of that wilful I-hood, that surface
individuality which we ordinarily recognize as ourselves. It goes
for ever, and something new is established in its room. The self
is made part of the mystical Body of God; and, humbly taking
its place in the corporate life of Reality, would “fain be to the
Eternal Goodness what his own hand is to a man.” 2 That strange
“hunger and thirst of God for the soul,” “at once avid and
generous,” of which they speak in their profoundest passages, here
makes its final demand and receives its satisfaction. “All that He
has, all that He is, He gives: all that we have, all that we are,
He takes .”3 The self, they declare, is devoured, immersed in the
^Abyss; “sinks into God, Who is the deep of deeps.” In their
efforts towards describing to us this, the supreme mystic act,
and the new life to which it gives birth, they are often driven to
the use of images which must seem to us grotesque, were it not
for the flame which bums behind: as when Ruysbroeck cries, “To
eat and be eaten ! this is Union ! . . . Since His desire is without
measure, to be devoured of Him does not greatly amaze me.” 4
(B) At this point we begin to see that the language of deification,
taken alone, will not suliice to describe the soul's final experience
of Reality. The personal and emotional aspect of man's relation
with his Source is also needed if that which he means by “union
with God” is to be even partially expressed. Hence, even the most
“transcendental” mystic is constantly compelled to fall back on
the language of love in the endeavour to express the content of
his metaphysical raptures : and forced in the end to acknowledge
that the perfect union of Lover and Beloved cannot be suggested
in the precise and arid terms of religious philosophy. Such arid
language eludes the most dangerous aspects of “divine union,”
the pantheistic on one hand, the “amoristic” on the other; but
it also fails to express the most splendid side of that amazing

« Snso, “Bucklein von der Wahrheit,” cap. iv.

* “Theologia Germanica,” cap. x.

s Ruysbroeck, “Speculum Aiternas Salutis,” cap. vii.

4 “Regnum Deum Amantium," cap. xxii.



MYSTICISM


426

experience. It needs some other, more personal and intimate vision
to complete it : and this we shall find in the reports of those mystics
of the “intimate” type to whom the Unitive Life has meant not
self-loss in an Essence, but self-fulfilment in the union of heart
and will.

The extreme form of this kind of apprehension of course finds
expression in the well-known and heartily abused symbolism of
the Spiritual Marriage between God and the Soul: a symbolism
which goes back to the Orphic Mysteries, and thence descended
via the Ncoplatonists into the stream of Christian tradition. But
there are other and less concrete embodiments of it, wholly free
from the dangers which are supposed to lurk in “erotic” imagery
of this kind. Thus Jalalu ’d Din, by the use of metaphors which are
hardly human yet charged with passionate feeling, tells, no less
successfully than the writer of the Song of Songs, the secret of
“his union in which “heart speaks to heart.”

With Thy Sweet Soul, this soul of mine
Hath mixed as Water doth with Wine.

Who can the Wine and Water part.

Or me and Thee when we combine?

Thou art become my greater self;

Small bounds no more can me confine.

Thou hast my being taken on,

And shall not I now take on Thine?

Me Thou for ever hast affirmed,

That I may ever know Thee mine.

Thy Love has pierced me through aud through.

Its thrill with Bone and Nerve entwine.

I rest a Flute laid on Thy lips ;

A lute, I on Thy breast recline.

Breathe deep in me that I may sigh;

Yet strike my strings, and tears shall shine .” 1

What the mystic here desires to tell us is, that his new life is
not only a free and conscious participation in the life of Eternity
— a fully-established existence on real and transcendental levels—*
but also the conscious sharing of an inflowing personal life greater*
than his own; a tightening of the bonds of that companionship
which has been growing in intimacy and splendour during the
course of the Mystic Way. This companionship, at once the most
actual and most elusive fact of human experience, is utterly
beyond the resources of speech. So too are those mysteries of the
communion of love, whereby the soul's humble, active and ever-
renewed self-donation becomes the occasion of her glory: and
“by her love she is made the equal of Love” — the beggar maid 1
sharing Cophetua’s throne.

Thus the anonymous author of the “Mirror” writes, in one of

1 Jalalu *d Din, “The Festival of Spring” (Hastie's translation, p. 10).



TiiE UN 1 T 1 VE LIFE 427

his most daring passages, “ 'I am God/ says Love, ‘for Love is
iod, and God is Love. And this soul is God by condition of love:
>ut I am God by Nature Divine. And this [state] is hers by
Righteousness of love, so that this precious beloved of me, is
learned, and led of Me without her [working]. . . . This [soul] is
the eagle that flies high, so right high and yet more high than
doth any other bird; for she is feathered with fine love/ " J

The simplest expression of the Unitive Life, the simplest inter-
pretation which we can put on its declarations, is that it is the
complete and conscious fulfilment here and now of this Perfect
Love. In it certain elect spirits, still in the flesh, “fly high and yet
more high/' till “taught and led out of themselves." they become,
in the exaggerated language of the “Mirror," “God by condition
of love/' Home-grown English mysticism tried as a rule to express
*fhe inexpressible in homelier, more temperate terms than this.
"I would that thou knew," says the unknown author of the
“Epistle of Prayer," “what manner of working it is that knitteth
man's soul to God, and that maketh it one with Him in love and
accordance of will after the word of St. Paul, saying thus: l Qui
adhaeret Deo, unus spiritus est cum illo ' ; that is to say: ‘Whoso
draweth near to God as it is by such a reverent affection touched
before, he is one spirit with God/ That is, though all that God and
he be two and sere in kind, nevertheless yet in grace they are so
^nit together that they are but one in spirit ; and all this is one for
onehead of love and accordance of will ; and in this onehead is the
marriage made between God and the soul the which shall never
be broken, though all that the heat and the fervour of this work
cease for a time, but by a deadly sin. In the ghostly feeling of this
onehead may a loving soul both say and sing (if it list) this holy
word that is written in the Book of Songs in the Bible, ‘ Dilcctus
mens mihi et ego illi’ that is, My loved unto me, and I unto Him;
understanding that God shall be knitted with the ghostly glue of
"race on His party, and the lovely consent in gladness of spirit
on thy party." 3

I think no one can deny that the comparison of the bond
beltveen the soul and the Absolute to “ghostly glue," though
crude, is wholly innocent. Its appearance in this passage as an
alternative to the symbol of wedlock may well check the un-
critical enthusiasm of those who hurry to condemn at sight all
“sexual" imagery. That it has seemed to the mystics appropriate
and exact is proved by its reappearance in the next century in the
«vork of a greater contemplative. “Thou givest me," says Petersen,

* “The Mirror of Simple Souls," Div. iv. cap. i.

» “The Epistle of Prayer." Printed from Pepwell's edition in “The Cell of Self-
knowledge," edited by Edmund Gardner, p. 88.



MYSTICISM


428

“Thy whole Self to be mine whole and undivided, if at least I
shall be Thine whole and undivided. And when I shall be thus aM
Thine, even as from everlasting Thou hast loved Thyself, so from
everlasting Thou hast loved me : for this means nothing more than
that Thou enjoyest Thyself in me, and that I by Thy grace enjoy
Thee in myself and myself in Thee. And when in Thee I shall love
myself, nothing else but Thee do I love, because Thou art in me
and I in Thee, glued together as one and the selfsame thing , which
henceforth and forever cannot be divided.

From this kind of language to that of the Spiritual Marriage,
as understood by the pure minds of the mystics, is but a step. 2
They mean by it no rapturous satisfactions, no dubious spiritual-
izing of earthly ecstasies, but a life-long bond “that shall never
be lost or broken," a close personal union of will and of heart
between the free self and that “Fairest in Beauty" Whom it ha^
known in the act of contemplation.

The Mystic Way has been a progress, a growth, in love: a
deliberate fostering of the inward tendency of the soul towards its
source, an eradication of its disorderly tendencies to “temporal
goods/' But the only proper end of love is union: “a perfect
uniting and coupling together of the lover and the loved into one." 3
It is “a unifying principle," the philosophers say:i life's mightiest
agent upon every plane. Moreover, just as earthly marriage ij
understood by the moral sense less as a satisfaction of personal
desire, than as a part of the great processof life — the fusion of
two selves for new purposes — so such spiritual marriage brings
with it duties and obligations. With the attainment of a new order,
the new infusion of vitality, comes a new responsibility, the call
to effort and endurance on a new and mighty scale. It is not an
act but a state. Fresh life is imparted, by which our lives are made
complete: new creative powers are conferred. The self, lifted to
the divine order, is to be an agent of the divine fecundity: an
energizing centre, a parent of transcendental life. “The last per-,
fection," says Aquinas, “to supervene upon a thing, is its becoming
the cause of other things. While then a creature tends by many
ways to the likeness of God, the last way left open to it is to seek
the divine likeness by being the cause of other things, according
to what the Apostle says, Dei enim sumus adjutores”s

* Genac Petersen, “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloqium,” cap. xv.

* Compare Pt. i. Cap. vi. It seems needless to repeat here the examples there
given.

3 Hilton, “The Treatise written to a Devout Man/' cap. viii.

4 Cf. Ormond, “Foundations of Knowledge/’ p. 442. “When we love anj
being, we desire either the unification of its life with our own, or our own unification
with its life. Love in its innermost motive is a unifying principle.”

5 “Summa Contra Gentiles,” bk. ii. cap. xxi.



THE UNITIVE LIFE


429

We find as a matter of fact, when we come to study the
history of the mystics, that the permanent Unitive State, or
spiritual marriage, does mean for those who attain to it, above
all else such an access of creative vitality. It means man's small
derivative ufe invaded and enhanced by the Absolute Life: the
appearance in human history of personalities and careers which
seem superhuman when judged by the surface mind. Such activity,
such a bringing forth of "the fruits of the Spirit," may take many
forms: but where it is absent, where we meet with personal
satisfactions, personal visions or raptures — however sublime and
spiritualized — presented as marks of the Unitive Way, ends or
objects of the quest of Reality, we may be sure that we have
wandered from the "strait and narrow road" which leads, not
to eternal rest, but to Eternal Life. "The fourth degree of love is
spiritually fruitful," 1 said Richard of St. Victor. Wherever we find
a sterile love, a "holy passivity," we are in the presence of quietistic
heresy; not of the Unitive Life. "I hold it for a certain truth," says
St. Teresa, "that in giving these graces our Lord intends, as I
have often told you, to strengthen our weakness so that we may

imitate Him by suffering much Whence did St. Paul draw

strength to support his immense labours ? We see clearly in him
the effects of visions and contemplations which come indeed from
,our Lord, and not from our own imagination or the devil’s fraud.
Do you suppose St. Paul hid himself in order to enjoy in peace
these spiritual consolations, and did nothing else? You know that
on the contrary he never took a day’s rest so far as we can learn,
and worked at night in order to earn his bread. . . . Oh my sisters!
how forgetful of her own ease, how careless of honours, should she
be whose soul God thus chooses for Ills special dwelling place ! bor
if her mind is fixed on Him, as it ought to be, she must need?
forget herself; all her thoughts are bent on how to please Him
better, and when and how she may show Him her love. This is
the end and aim of prayer, my daughters; this is the object of
that spiritual marriage whose children are always good works.
Works arc the best proof that the favours which we receive have
come from God." 2 "To give our Lord a perfect hospitality she
says in the same chapter, "Mary and Martha must combine.'

When we look at the lives of the great theopathetic mystics,
the true initiates of Eternity — inarticulate as these mystics often
are — we find ourselves in the presence of an amazing, a superabun-
dant vitality: of a "triumphing force" over which circumstance
has no power. The incessant production of good works seems indeed

1 “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis” (Migne, Patrologia Latina exevi.
col. 1216 D).

* “El Castillo Interior,** Moradas Sdtimas, cap. iv.



430 MYSTICISM

to be the object of that Spirit, by Whose presence their interior
castle is now filled. ?

We see St. Paul, abruptly enslaved by the First and Only Fair, i
not hiding himself to enjoy the vision of Reality, but going out
single-handed to organize the Catholic Church. We ask how it was
possible for an obscure Roman citizen, without money, influence,
or good health, to lay these colossal foundations: and he answers
"Not I, but Christ in me."

We see St. Joan of Arc, a child of the peasant class, leaving the
sheepfold to lead the armies of France. We ask how tins incredible
thing can be: and are told "Her Voices bade her." A message, an
overpowering impulse, came from the supra-sensible : vitality
flowed in on her, she knew not how or why. She was united with
the Infinite Life, and became Its agent, the medium of Its strength,
"what his own hand is to a man."

We see St. Francis, "God's troubadour," marked with Ilis
wounds, inflamed with His joy — obverse and reverse of the earnest-
money of eternity — or St. Ignatius Loyola, our Lady's knight, a
figure at once militant and romantic, go out to change the spiritual
history of Europe. Where did they find —born and bred to the
most ordinary of careers, in the least spiritual of atmospheres —
that superabundant energy, that genius for success which triumphed
best in the most hopeless situations? Francis found it before the ,
crucifix in St. Damiano, and renewed it in the ineffable experience
of La Verna; when "by mental possession and rapture he was
transfigured of God." Ignatius found it in the long contempla-
tions and hard discipline of the cave of Manresa, after the act of
surrender in which he dedicated his knighthood to the service of
tiie Mother of God.

We see St. Teresa, another bom romantic, pass to the Unitive
State after long and bitter struggles between her lower and higher
personality. A chronic invalid over fifty years of age, weakened
by long ill-health and the mortifications of the Purgative Way, g
she deliberately breaks with her old career in obedience to the
inward Voice, leaves her convent, and starts anew lifq: coursing
through Spain, and reforming a great religious order in the teeth
of the ecclesiastical world. Yet more amazing. St. Catherine of
Siena, an illiterate daughter of the people, after a three years'
retreat consummates the mystic marriage, and emerges from the
cell of self-knowledge to dominate the politics of Italy. How came
it that these apparently unsuitable men and women, checked on
every side by inimical environment, ill-health, custom, or poverty , 1 *
achieved these stupendous destinies? The explanation can only
lie in the fact that all these persons were great mystics, living
upon high levels the theopathetic life. In each a character of the



,THE UNITIVE LIFE


431

heroic type, of great vitality, deep enthusiasms, unconquerable
will, was raised to the spiritual plane, remade on higher levels of
consciousness. Each by surrender of selfhood, by acquiescence in
the large destinies of life, had so furthered that self's natural
genius for the Infinite that their human limitations were over-
passed. Hence they rose to freedom and attained to the one
ambition of the "naughted soul/' “I would fain be to the Eternal
Goodness what his own hand is to a man."

Even Madame Guyon's natural tendency to passive states
breaks down with her entrance on the Unitive Way. Though she
cannot be classed amongst the greatest of its initiates, she too
felt its fertilizing power, was stung from her "holy indifference"
to become, as it were, involuntarily true to type.

"The soul," she says of the self entering upon Union — and we
cannot doubt that as usual she is describing her own carefully
docketed "states" — "feels a secret vigour taking more and more
strongly possession of all her being : and little by little she receives
a new life, never again to be lost, at least so far as one can be
assured of anything in this life. . . . This new life is not like that
which she had before. It is a life in God. It is a perfect life. She no
longer lives or works of herself : but God lives, acts and works in
her, and this grows little by little till she becomes perfect with God's
perfection, is rich with His riches, and loves with His love." . . .'

This new, intense, and veritable life has other and even more
vital characteristics than those which lead to "the performance
of acts” or "the incessant production of good works." It is, in an
actual sense, as Richard of St. Victor reminded us, fertile, creative,
as well as merely active. In the fourth degree of love, the soul
brings forth its children. It is the agent of a fresh outbirtli of
spiritual vitality into the world; the helpmate of the Transcendent
Order, the mother of a spiritual progeny. The great unitive
mystics are each of them the founders of spiritual families, centres
wherefrom radiates new transcendental life. The "flowing light
of the Godhead" is focussed in them, as in a lens, only that it may
pass through them to spread out on every side. So, too, the great
creative seers and artists are the parents, not merely of their own
immediate works, but also of whole schools of art; whole groups
of persons who acquire or inherit their vision of beauty or truth.
Thus within the area of influence of a Paul, a Francis, an Ignatius,
a Teresa, an atmosphere of reality is created; and new and vital
spiritual personalities gradually appear, meet for the work which
these great founders set in hand. The real witness to St. Paul's
ecstatic life in God, is the train of Christian churches by which
his joumeyings are marked. Wherever Francis passed, he left

■ “Les Torrents/' pt. i. cap. ix.



MYSTICISM


432

Franciscans, “fragrant with a wondrous aspect/* where none had
been before . 1 The Friends of God spring up, individual mystics, ^
here and there through the Rhineland and Bavaria. Each becomes
the centre of an ever widening circle of transcendent life, the parent
of a spiritual family. They are come like their Master, that men
may have life more abundantly: from them new mystic energy is
actually bom into the world. Again, Ignatius leaves Manresa a
solitary: maimed, ignorant, and poor. He comes to Rome with
his company already formed, and ablaze with his spirit; veritably
his children, begotten of him, part and parcel of his life.

Teresa finds the order of Mount Carmel hopelessly corrupt :
its friars and nuns blind to reality, indifferent to the obligations
of the cloistered life. She is moved by the Spirit to leave her
convent and begin, in abject poverty, the foundation of new
houses, where the most austere and exalted life of contemplation
shall be led. She enters upon this task to the accompaniment of an
almost universal mockery. Mysteriously, as she proceeds, novices
of the spiritual life appear and cluster around her. They come into
existence, one knows not how, in the least favourable of atmo-
spheres: but one and all are salted with the Teresian salt. They
receive the infection of her abundant vitality: embrace eagerly
and joyously the heroic life of the Reform. In the end, every city
in Spain has within it Teresa’s spiritual children: a whole order
of contemplativcs, as truly born of her as if they were* indeed hei
sons and daughters in the flesh. Well might the Spiritual Alchemist?
say that the true “Lapis Pliilosophorum** is a tinging stone: whicl
imparts its goldncss to the base metals brought within its sphere
of influence.

This reproductive power is one of the greatest marks of the
theopathetic life: the true “mystic marriage* * of the individua
soul with its Source. Those rare personalities in whom it is found
are the media through which that Triumphing Spiritual Life whicl]
is the essence of reality forces an entrance into the temporal order
and begets children; heirs of the superabundant vitality of the
transcendental universe.

But the Unitive Life is more than the sum total of its symptoms :
more than the heroic and apostolic life of the “great active” : more
than the divine motherhood of new “sons and daughters of the
Absolute.” These are only its outward signs, its expression in
time and space. I have first laid stress upon that expression,
because it is the side which all critics and some friends of the
mystics persistently ignore. The contemplative’s power of living
this intense and creative life within the temporal order, however?
is tightly bound up with that other life in which he attains to

1 Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap. xii.



THE UNITIVE LIFE


433

complete communion with the Absolute Order, and submits to the
^inflow of its supernal vitality. In discussing the relation of the
^mystical experience to philosophy, 1 we saw that the complete
mystic consciousness, and therefore, of course, the complete
mystic world, had a twofold character which could hardly be
reconciled with the requirements of monism. It embraced a
Reality which seems from the human standpoint at once static
and dynamic, transcendent and immanent, eternal and temporal:
accepted both the absolute World of Pure Being and the unresting
World of Becoming as integral parts of its vision of Truth, demand-
ing on its side a dual response. All through the Mystic Way we
caught glimpses of the growth and exercise of this "dual intuition
of the Real. Now, the mature mystic, having come to his full
^tature, passed through the purifications of sense and of spirit
'and entered on his heritage, must and does take up as a part of that
heritage not merely {a) a fruition of the Divine Goodness, Truth,
and Beauty, his place within the Sempiternal Rose, nor ( b ) the
creative activity of an agent of the Eternal Wisdom, still immersed
in the River of Life: but both together — the twofold destiny of
the spiritual man, called to “incarnate the Eternal in time.” To
use the old scholastic language, he is at once patient and agent:
patient as regards God, agent as regards the world.

^ In a deep sense it may be said of him that he now participates
according to his measure in that divine-human life which mediates
between man and the Eternal, and constitutes the “salvation of
the world.” Therefore, though his outward heroic life of action,
his divine fecundity, may seem to us the best evidence of his
state, it is the inner knowledge of his mystical sonship whereby
“we feel eternal life in us above all other thing,” 2 which is for him
the guarantee of absolute life. He has many ways of describing
this central fact; this peculiar consciousness of his own transcen-
dence, which coexists with, and depends on, a complete humility.
Sometimes he says that whereas in the best moments of his natural
life he was but the “faithful servant” of the eternal order, and
in the illuminated way became its “secret friend,” he is now
advanced to the final, most mysterious state of “hidden child.”
“How great,” says Ruysbroeck, “is the difference between the
secret friend and the hidden child! For the friend makes only
loving, living, but measured ascents towards God. But the child
presses on to lose his own life upon the summits, in that simplicity
which knoweth not itself. . . . When we transcend ourselves and
■ become in our ascent towards God so simple that the bare supreme
Love can lay hold of us, then we cease, and we and all our selfhood

« Supra, Pt. I. Cap. II.

• Ruysbroeck, “De Calculo,” cap. ix.



MYSTICISM


434

die in God. And in this death we become the hidden children of
God, and find a new life within us.” 1 ,

Though the outer career of the great mystic, then, be one of
superhuman industry, a long fight with evil and adversity, his"
real and inner life dwells securely upon the heights; in the perfect
fruition which he can only suggest to us by the paradoxical
symbols of ignorance and emptiness. He dominates existence
because he thus transcends it: is a son of God, a member of the
eternal order, shares its substantial life. 'Tranquillity according
to His essence, activity according to His Nature: absolute repose,
absolute fecundity”: this, says Ruysbroeck again, is the twofold
property of Godhead: and the secret child of the Absolute partici-
pates in this dual character of Reality — “for this dignity has man
been made .” 2

Those two aspects of truth which he has so clumsily classified
as static and dynamic, as Being and Becoming, now find their
final reconciliation within his own nature: for that nature has
become conscious in all its parts, has unified itself about its highest
elements. That strange, tormenting vision of a perfect peace, a
joyous self-loss, annihilation in some mighty Life that overpassed
his own, which haunts man throughout the whole course of his
historjf, and finds a more or less distorted expression in all his
creeds, a justification in all his ecstasies, is now traced to its source :
and found to be the inevitable expression of an instinct by which*
he recognized, though he could not attain, the noblest part of his
inheritance. This recognition of his has of necessity been imperfect
and oblique. It has taken in many temperaments an exaggerated
form, and has been further disguised by the symbolic language '
used to describe it. The tendency of Indian mysticism to regard
the Unitive Life wholly in its passive aspect, as a total self-anni-
hilation, a disappearance into the substance of the Godhead,
results, I believe, from such a distortion of truth. The Oriental
mystic “presses on to lose his life upon the heights”; but he doe-
not come back and bring to his fellow-men the life-giving news
that he has transcended mortality in the interests of the race.
The temperamental bias of Western mystics towards activity
has saved them as a rule from such one-sided achievement as this :
and hence it is in them that the Unitive Life, with its “dual
character of activity and rest,” has assumed its richest and
noblest forms.

Of these Western mystics none has expressed more lucidly or
splendidly than Ruysbroeck the double nature of man's reactioiy
to Reality. It is the heart of his vision of truth. In all his books he]
returns to it again and again: speaking, as none familiar with his I
* Op . cit., cap. viii. and ix. (condensed). * Vide supra, p. 35.



THE UNITIVE LIFE 435

writings can doubt, the ardent, joyous, vital language of first-
hand experience, not the platitudes of philosophy. He might say
vith Dante, his forerunner into the Empyrean:—

"La forma universal di questo nodo

credo ch’ io vidi, perchd piu di largo
dicendo questo, mi sento ch’ io godo." 1

It is then from Ruysbroeck that I shall make my quotations:
and if they be found somewhat long and difficult of comprehension,
their unique importance for the study of man's spiritual abilities
must be my excuse.

First, his vision of God: —

“The Divine Persons," he says, “Who form one sole God, are
n the fecundity of their nature ever active : and in the simplicity
tf their essence they form the Godhead and eternal blessedness,
.'hus God according to the Persons is Eternal Work : but according
o the essence and Its perpetual stillness, He is Eternal Rest. Now
ave and fruition live between this activity and this rest. Love
^ould ever be active : for its nature is eternal working with God.
Tuition is ever at rest, for it consists above all will and all desire,
n the embrace of the well-beloved by the well-beloved in a simple
nd imageless love; wherein the Father, together with the Son,
nfolds His beloved ones in the fruitive unity of His Spirit, above
he fecundity of nature. And that same Father says to each soul
n His infinite loving kindness, ‘Thou art Mine and I am thine: I
m thine and thou art Mine, for I have chosen thee from all
ternity.'

Next the vision of the self's destiny: “Our activity consists in
Dving God and our fruition in enduring God and being pene-
rated by His love. There is a distinction between love and fruition,
s there is between God and His Grace. When we unite ourselves
0 God by love, then we are spirit : but when we are caught up
f \ d transformed by His Spirit, then we are led into fruition. And
tie spirit of God Himself breathes us out from Himself that we
ray love, and may do good works; and again He draws us into
limself, that we may rest in fruition. And this is Eternal Life;
ven as our mortal life subsists in the indrawing and outgoing of
ur breath. "3

“Understand," he says again, “God comes to us incessantly,
oth with means and without means ; and He demands of us both
ction and fruition, in such a way that the action never hinders
be fruition, nor the fruition the action, but they strengthen one

Par. xxxiii. 91. “I believe that I beheld the universal iorm of this knot:
ecause in saying this I feel my joy increased."

“De Septem Gradibus Amoris.” cap. xiv.


3 Ibid ., loc. cU.



MYSTICISM


436

another. And this is why the interior man [i.e., the contemplative]
lives his life according to these two ways ; that is to say, in rest and ip
work. And in each of them he is wholly and undividedly; for he
dwells wholly in God in virtue of his restful fruition and wholly in
himself in virtue of his active love. And God, in His communica-
tions, perpetually calls and urges him to renew both this rest and
this work. And because the soul is just, it desires to pay at every
instant that which God demands of it; and this is why each time
it is irradiated of Him, the soul turns inward in a manner that is
both active and fruitive, and thus it is renewed in all virtues and
ever more profoundly immersed in fruitive rest. ... It is active in
all loving work, for it sees its rest. It is a pilgrim, for it sees its
country. For love's sake it strives for victory, for it sees its crown.
Consolation, peace, joy, beauty and riches, all that can give
delight, all this is shown to the mind illuminated in God, in spiritual
similitudes and without measure. And through this vision and
touch of God, love continues active. For such a just man has built
up in his own soul, in rest and in work, a veritable life which shall
endure for ever; but which shall be transformed after this present
life to a state still more sublime. Thus this man is just, and he
goes towards God by inward love, in eternal work, and he goes in
God by his fruitive inclination in eternal rest. And he dwells in
God; and yet he goes out towards all creatures, in a spirit of love
towards all things, in virtue and in works of righteousness. And
this is the supreme summit of the inner life” 1
Compare this description with the careers of the thcopathetic
mystics; in whom, indeed, “action has not injured fruition, nor
fruition action," who have by some secret adjustment contrived
to “possess their lives in rest and in work" without detriment to
inward joy or outward industry. Bear in mind as you read these
words — Ruysbroeck’s supreme effort to tell the true relation
between man's created spirit and his God — the great public
ministry of St. Catherine of Siena, which ranged from the tending
of the plague-stricken to the reforming of the Papacy; and was
accompanied by the inward fruitive consciousness of the com-
panionship of Christ. Remember the humbler but not less beautiful
and significant achievement of her Genoese namesake: the strenu-
ous lives of St. Francis of Assisi, St. Ignatius, St. Teresa, outwardly
cumbered with much serving, observant of an infinitude of tire-
some details, composing rules, setting up foundations, neglecting
no aspect of their business which could conduce to its practical
success, yet “altogether dwelling in God in restful fruition." Are ,
not all these supreme examples of the state in which the self, ai: J
last fully conscious, knowing Reality because she is wholly real,

1 Ruysbroeck, “De Omatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,‘' 1. ii. cap. lxv.



THE UNITIVE LIFE 437

pays her debt ? Unable to rest entirely either in work or in fruition,
e seizes on this twofold expression of the superabundant life
y which she is possessed: and, on the double wings of eagerness
*and effort, takes flight towards her Home.

In dwelling, as we have done, on the ways in which the great
mystic makes actual to himself the circumstances of the Unitive
State, we must not forget that this state is, in essence, a fulfilment
of love; the attainment of a “heart's desire." By this attainment,
this lifting of the self to free union with the Real— as by the earthly
marriage which dimly prefigures it— a new life is entered upon,
new powers, new responsibilities are conferred. But this is not all.
The three prime activities of the normal self, feeling, intellect, and
will, though they seem to be fused, are really carried up to a
higher term. They are unified, it is true, but still present in their
integrity; and each demands and receives full satisfaction in the
attainment of this final “honour for which man has been made."
The intellect is immersed in that mighty vision of truth, known
now not as a vision but as a home; where St. Paul saw things
which might not be uttered, St. Teresa found the “perpetual
companionship of the Blessed Trinity," and Dante, caught to its
heart for one brief moment, his mind smitten by the blinding
flash of the Uncreated Light, knew that he had resolved Reality's
iast paradox: the unity of “ cerchio " and “imago" — the infinite
and personal aspects of God. 1 The enhanced will, made over to
the interests of the Transcendent, receives new worlds to conquer,
new strength to match its exalted destiny. But the heart too here
enters on a new order, begins to live upon high levels of joy. “This
soul, says Love, swims in the sea of joy : that is, in the sea of delight,
the stream of divine influences." 2

“ Amans volat , currit et laetatur: liber est et non tenetur,”* said
a Kempis: classic words, which put before us once and for ever the
inward joyousness and liberty of the saints. They “fly, run, and
^rejoice" — those great, laborious souls, often spent with amazing
mortifications, vowed to hard and never-ending tasks. They are
“free, and nothing can hold them," though they seem to the
world fenced in by absurd renunciations and restrictions, deprived
of that cheap licence which it knows as liberty.

That fruition of joy of which Ruysbrocck speaks in majestic
phrases, as constituting the interior life of mystic souls immersed
in the Absolute — the translation of the Beatific Vision into
the terms of a supernal feeling-state — is often realized in the
secret experience of those same mystics, as the perennial possession
of a childlike gaiety, an inextinguishable gladness of heart. The

* Par. xxxiii. 137. * “The Mirror of Simple Souls,** f. x6l.

* “De Imitatione Christi,” 1 . iii. cap. v.



MYSTICISM


43*

transfigured souls move to the measures of a “love dance" which
persists in mirth without comparison, through every outward
hardship and tribulation. They enjoy the high spirits peculiar to
high spirituality: and shock the world by a delicate playfulness,
instead of exhibiting the morose resignation which it feels to be
proper to the “spiritual life." Thus St. Catherine of Siena, though
constantly suffering, “was always jocund and of a happy spirit."
When prostrate with illness she overflowed with gaiety and glad-
ness, and “was full of laughter in the Lord, exultant and rejoicing." 1

Moreover, the most clear-sighted amongst the mystics declare
such joy to be an implicit of Reality. Thus Dante, initiated into
Paradise, sees the whole Universe laugh with delight as it glorifies
God: 3 and the awful countenance of Perfect Love adorned with
smiles.3 Thus the souls of the great theologians dance to music
and laughter in the Heaven of the Sun;4 the loving seraphs, in”
their ecstatic joy, whirl about the Being of God.5 “0 luce eterna
che . . . ami ed arridi ," exclaims the pilgrim, as the Divine Essence
is at last revealed to him, 6 and he perceives love and joy as the
final attributes of the Triune God. Thus Beatrice with “ suoi
occhi ridenti " — so different from the world’s idea of a suitable
demeanour for the soul's supreme instructress — laughs as she
mounts with him the ladder to the stars. So, if the deified soul
has indeed run ahead of humanity and “according to his fruitioq
dwells in heaven," he too, like Francis, will run, rejoice and make
merry: join the eager dance of the Universe about the One. “If,"
says Patmore, “we may credit certain hints contained in the lives
of the saints, love raises the spirit above the sphere of reverence
and worship into one of laughter and dalliance : a sphere in which
the soul says : —

u 'Shall I, a gnat which dances in Thy ray.

Dare to be reverent?'

Richard Rolle has expressed this exultant “spirit of dalliance",
with peculiar insight and delicacy. “Among the delights which «
he tastes in so sweet love burning," he says of the true lover who
“in the bond of the lovers’ will stably is confirmed," “a heavenly
privity inshed he feels, that no man can know but he that has
received it, and in himself bears the electuary that anoints and
makes happy all joyful lovers in Jesu; so that they cease not to
hie in heavenly seats to sit, endlessly their Maker to enjoy. Hereto
truly they yearn in heavenly sights abiding; and inwardly set

1 Contestatio Fr. Thomae Caffarina, Processus, col. 1258 (E. Gardner, “St./,
Catherine of Siena,” p. 48). * Par. xxvii. 4. 3 Ibid., xx. 13.

4 Ibid., x. 76. 1 1 8. 5 Ibid., xxviii. 100. 6 Ibid., xxxiii. 124-26.

1 Coventry Patmore, •‘The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,” “Aurea Dicta,”



,THE UNITIVE LIFE 439

afire, all their inward parts are glad with pleasant shining in light.
(And themselves they feel gladdened with merriest love, and in
joyful song wonderfully melted. . . . But this grace generally and
to all is not given, but to the holy soul imbued with the holiest
is taught; in whom the excellence of love shines, and songs of
lovely loving, Christ inspiring, commonly burst up, and being made
as it were a pipe of love, in sight of God more goodly than can be
said, joying sounds. The which (soul) the mystery of love knowing,
with great cry to its Love ascends, in wit sharpest, and in know-
ledge and in feeling subtle ; not spread in things of this world but
into God all gathered and set, that in cleanness of conscience
and shining of soul to Him it may serve Whom it has purposed to
love, and itself to Him to give. Surely the clearer the love of the
lover is, the nearer to him and the more present God is. And
thereby more clearly in God he joys, and of the sweet Goodness
the more he feels, that to lovers is wont Itself to inshed, and to
mirth without comparison the hearts of the meek to turn.” 1

The state of burning love, said Rolle, than which he could
conceive no closer reaction to Reality, was the state of Sweetness
and Song: the welling up of glad music in the simple soul, man's
natural expression of a joy which overpasses the descriptive powers
of our untuneful speech. In the gay rhythms of that primordial
^rt he may say something of the secret which the more decorous
periods of religion and philosophy will never let him tell: some-
thing, too, which in its very childishness, its freedom from the
taint of solemnity and self-importance, expresses the quality of
that inward life, that perpetual youth, which the “secret child”
ol the Transcendent Order enjoys. “As it were a pipe of love” in
the sight of God he “joying sounds.” The music of the spheres is
all about him: he is a part of the great melody of the Divine.
“Sweetest forsooth,” says Rolle again, “is the rest which the
spirit takes whilst sweet goodly sound comes down, in which it is
rdelighted : and in most sweet song and playful the mind is ravished,
to sing likings of love everlasting.” 2

When we come to look at the lives of the mystics, we find it
literally true that such “songs of lovely loving commonly burst
up” whenever we can catch them unawares ; see behind the formid-
able and heroic activities of reformer, teacher, or leader of men,
the vie intime which is lived at the hearth of Love. “What are the
servants of the Lord but His minstrels?” said St. Francis, 3 who
saw nothing inconsistent between the Celestial Melodies and the
Stigmata of Christ. Moreover the songs of such troubadours, as

* Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love," bk. ii. cap. vii.

* Op. cit., bk. i. cap. xi.

3 “Speculum Perfection is," cap. c. (Steele's translation).



MYSTICISM


440

the hermit of Hampole learned in his wilderness, are not only
sweet but playful. Dwelling always in a light of which we hardly
dare to think, save in the extreme terms of reverence and awe,
they are not afraid with any amazement : they are at home.

The whole life of St. Francis of Assisi, that spirit transfigured in
God, who “loved above all other birds a certain little bird which
is called the lark ,” 1 was one long march to music through the
world. To sing seemed to him a primary spiritual function: he
taught his friars in their preaching to urge all men to this . 2 It
appeared to him appropriate and just to use the romantic language
of the troubadours in praise of the perfect Love which had
marked him as Its own. “Drunken with the love and compassion
of Christ, blessed Francis on a time did things such as these. For
the most sweet melody of spirit boiling up within him, frequently
broke out in French speech, and the veins of murmuring which he
heard secretly with his ears broke forth into French-like rejoicing.
And sometimes he picked up a brand 1 from the earth, and laying
it on his left arm, he drew in his right hand another stick like a
bow over it, as if on a viol or other instrument, and, making fitting
gestures, sang with it in French unto the Lord Jesus Christ. ”3

Many a time has the romantic quality of the Unitive Life — its
gaiety, freedom, assurance, and joy — broken out in “French-like
rejoicings” ; which have a terribly frivolous sound for worldly ears,
and seem the more preposterous as coming from people whose
outward circumstances are of the most uncomfortable kind.
St. John of the Cross wrote love songs to his Love. St. Rose of
Lima sang duets with the birds. St. Teresa, in the austere and
poverty-stricken seclusion of her first foundation, did not disdain
to make rustic hymns and carols for her daughters' use in the
dialect of Old Castile. Like St. Francis, she had a horror of solem-
nity. It was only fit for hypocrites, thought these rejuvenators of
the Church. The hard life of prayer and penance on Mount Carmel
was undertaken in a joyous spirit to the sound of many songs. Its,
great Reformer was quick to snub the too-spiritual sister whd
“thought it better to contemplate than to sing”: and was herself
heard, as she swept the convent corridor, to sing a little ditty
about the most exalted of her own mystical experiences: that
ineffable transverberation, in which the fiery arrow of the seraph
pierced her heart .4

But the most lovely and real, most human and near to us, of
all these descriptions of the celestial exhilaration which mystic
surrender brings in its train, is the artless, unintentional self-

1 “Speculum/' cap. cxiii. • Ibid., cap. c.

3 Ibid., cap. xciii., also Thomas of Celano, Vita Secunda, cap. xc.

4 Cf. G. Cunninghame Graham, “Santa Teresa/' vol. i. pp. 180, 300, 304.



.THE UNITIVE LIFE


441

revelation of St. Catherine of Genoa, whose inner and outer lives in
ftheir balanced wholeness provide us with one of our best standards
by which to judge the right proportions of the Mystic Way,
Here the whole essence of the Unitive Life is summed up and pre-
sented to us by one who lived it upon heroic levels: and who was,
in fruition and activity, in rest and in work, not only a great active
and a great ecstatic, but one of the deepest gazers into the secrets
of Eternal Love that the history of Christian mysticism contains.
Yet perhaps there is no passage in the works of these same mystics
which comes to so unexpected, so startling a conclusion as this;
in which St. Catherine, with a fearless simplicity, shows to her
fellow-men the nature of the path chat she has trodden and the
place that she has reached.

“When," she says, in one of her reported dialogues — and though
the tone be impersonal it is clearly personal experience which
speaks — “the loving kindness of God calls a soul from the world,
He linds it full of vices and sins; and first He gives it an instinct
for virtue, and then urges it to perfection, and then by infused
grace leads it to true self-naughting, and at last to true transforma-
tion. And this noteworthy order serves God to lead the soul along
the Way: but when the soul is naughted and transformed, then
of herself she neither works nor speaks nor wills, nor feels nor hears
aor understands, neither has she of herself the feeling of outward
or inward, where she may move. And in all things it is God Who
rules and guides her, without the mediation of any creature. And
the state of this soul is then a feeling of such utter peace and
tranquillity that it seems to her that her heart, and her bodily
being, and all both within and without is immersed in an ocean of
utmost peace; from when she shall never come forth for anything
that can befall her in this life. And she stays immovable, imper-
turbable, impassible. So much so, that it seems to her in her human
ind her spiritual nature, both within and without, she can feel
ao other thing than sweetest peace. And she is so full of peace that
though she press her flesh, her nerves, her bones, no other thing
:omes forth from them than peace. Then says she all day for joy
>uch rhymes as these, making them according to her manner: —

“ ‘Vuoi tu che tu mostr’io
Presto che cosa & Dio?

Pace non trova chi da lui si partib.* ”*

* “Dost thou wish that I should show
All God’s Being thou mayst know ?

Peace is not found of those who do not with Him go."

(Vita e Dottrina, cap. xviii.)

Here, in spite of the many revisions to which the Vita has been subjected, I
cannot but see an authentic report of St. Catherine’s inner mind; highly charac-
:eristic of the personality which “came joyous and rosy-faced" from its ecstatic



MYSTICISM


442

“Then says she all day for joy such rhymes as these” — nursery
rhymes, one might almost call them : so infantile, so naive is thei?
rhythm. Who would have suspected this to be the secret manner
of communion between the exalted soul of Catherine and her Love?*
How many of those who actually saw that great and able woman
labouring in the administration of her hospital — who heard that
profound and instinctive Christian Platonist instructing her
disciples, and declaring the law of universal and heroic love — how
many of these divined that “questa santa benedetta” who seemed
to them already something more than earthly, a matter of solemn
congratulation and reverential approach, went about her work
with a heart engaged in no lofty speculations on Eternity; no
outpourings of mystic passion for the Absolute; but “saying all
day for joy,” in a spirit of childlike happiness, gay and foolish
little songs about her Love?

Standing at the highest point of the mystic ladder which can
be reached by human spirits in this world of time and space,
looking back upon the course of that slow interior alchemy, that
“noteworthy order” of organic transformation, by which her
selfhood had been purged of imperfection, raised to higher levels,
compelled at last to surrender itself to the all-embracing, all-
demanding life of the Real; this is St. Catherine's deliberate
judgment on the relative and absolute aspects of the mystic life.
The “noteworthy order” which we have patiently followed, the
psychic growth and rearrangement of character, the visions and
ecstasies, the joyous illumination and bitter pain — these but
“served to lead the soul along the way.” In the mighty transvalua-
tion of values which takes place when that way has at last been
trod, these “abnormal events” sink to insignificance. For us, look-
ing out wistfully along the pathway to reality, they stand out, it
is true, as supreme landmarks, by which we may trace the home-
ward course of pilgrim man. Their importance cannot be overrated
for those who would study the way to that world from this. Bul^
the mystic, safe in that silence where lovers lose themselves,
“his cheek on Him Who for his coming came,” remembers them
no more. In the midst of his active work, his incessant spiritual
creation, joy and peace enfold him. He needs no stretched and
sharpened intuition now: for he dwells in that “most perfect form
of contemplation” which “consists in simple and perceived con-
tact of the substance of the soul with that of the divine .” 1

encounters with Love. The very unexpectedness of its conclusion, so unlike the
expressions supposed to be proper to the saints, is a guarantee of its authenticity
On the text of the “Vita” see Von Hiigel, “The Mystical Element of Religion/
▼ol. i., Appendix.

* Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower/’ “Magna Moralia/'



THE UNITIVE LIFE


443

The wheel of life has made its circle. Here, at the last point of
■ifs revolution, the extremes of sublimity and simplicity are seen
to meet. It has swept the soul of the mystic through periods of
Alternate stress and glory; tending ever to greater transcendence,
greater freedom, closer contact with "the Supplier of true life.”
He emerges from that long and wondrous journey to find himself,
in rest and in work, a little child upon the bosom of the Father.
In that most dear relation all feeling, will, and thought attain their
end. Here all the teasing complications of our separated selfhood
are transcended. Hence the eager striving, the sharp vision, are
not wanted any more. In that mysterious death of selfhood on
the summits which is the medium of Eternal Life, heights meet
the deeps : supreme achievement and complete humility are one.

In a last brief vision, a glimpse as overpowering to our common
fninds as Dante’s final intuition of reality to his exalted and
courageous soul, we see the triumphing spirit, sent out before us,
the best that earth can offer, stoop and strip herself of the insignia
of wisdom and power. Achieving the highest, she takes the lowest
place. Initiated into the atmosphere of Eternity, united with the
Absolute, possessed at last of the fullness of Its life, the soul, self-
naughted becomes as a little child: for of such is the kingdom of
heaven.



CONCLUSION


W E have traced, as well as our limitations allow us, the
Mystic Way from its beginning to its end. We have seen
the ever-changing, ever-growing human spirit emerge
from the cave of illusion, enter into consciousness of the trans-
cendental world : the “pilgrim set towards J erusalem” pass through
its gates and attain his home in the bosom of Reality. For him, as'
we have learned from his words and actions, this journey and this
End are all: their overwhelming importance and significance
swallow up, of necessity, every other aspect of life. Now 7 , at the
end of our inquiry, we are face to face with the question— What
do these things mean for us; for ordinary unmystical men? What
are their links with that concrete world of appearance in which
we are held fast : with that mysterious, ever-changing life which we
are forced to lead? What do these great and strange adventures
of the spirit tell us as to the goal of that lesser adventure of life'
on which we are set : as to our significance, our chances of freedom,
our relation with the Absolute? Do they merely represent the
eccentric performances of a rare psychic type? Are the matchless
declarations of the contemplatives only the fruits of unbridled
imaginative genius, as unrelated to reality as music to the fluctua-
tions of the Stock Exchange? Or are they the supreme manifesta-
tion of a power which is inherent in our life: reports of observations
made upon an actual plane of being, which transcends and domin-
ates our normal world of sense? The question is vital: for unlcsV
the history of the mystics can touch and light up some part ol this
normal experience, take its place in the general history of man,
contribute something towards our understanding of his nature
and destiny, its interest for us can never be more than remote,
academic, and unreal.

Far from being academic or unreal, that history, I think, is
vital for the deeper understanding of the history of humanity.
It shows us, upon high levels, the psychological process to which
every self which desires to rise to the perception of Reality mua*
submit: the formula under which man’s spiritual consciousness,
be it strong or weak, must necessarily unfold. In the great mystics
we see the highest and widest development of that consciousness



CONCLUSION


445

to which the human race has yet attained. We see its growth
ixhibited to us on a grand scale, perceptible of all men: the stages
*of its slow transcendence of the sense- world marked by episodes
of splendour and of terror which are hard for common men to
accept or understand as a part of the organic process of life.
But the germ of that same transcendent life, the spring of the
amazing energy which enables the great mystic to rise to
freedom and dominate his world, is latent in all of us; an
integral part of our humanity. Where the mystic has a genius
for the Absolute, we have each a little buried talent, some
greater, some less; and the growth of this talent, this spark of
the soul, once we permit its emergence, will conform in little,
and according to its measure, to those laws of organic growth,
r those inexorable conditions of transcendence which we found to
govern the Mystic Way.

Every person, then, who awakens to consciousness of a Reality
which transcends the normal world of sense— however small, weak,
imperfect that consciousness may be — is put upon a road which
follows at low levels the path which the mystic treads at high
levels. The success with which he follows this way to freedom and
full life will depend on the intensity of his love and will ; his capacity
for self-discipline, his steadfastness and courage. It will depend
*on the generosity and completeness of his outgoing passion for
absolute beauty, absolute goodness, or absolute truth. But if
he move at all, he will move through a series of states which
are, in their own small way, analogous to those experienced
by the greatest contemplative on his journey towards that
union with God which is the term of the spirit's ascent towards
its home.

As the embryo of physical man, be he saint or savage, passes
through the same stages of initial growth, so too with spiritual
man. When the “new birth" takes place in him, the new life-process
1 of his deeper self begins, the normal individual, no less than the
mystic, will know that spiral ascent towards higher levels, those
oscillations of consciousness between light and darkness, those
odd mental disturbances, abrupt invasions from the subliminal
region, and disconcerting glimpses of truth, which accompany the
growth of the transcendental powers; though he may well inter-
pret them in other than the mystic sense. He too will be impelled
to drastic self-discipline, to a deliberate purging of his eyes that
he may see : and , receiving a new vision of the world, will be spurred
by it to a total self-dedication, an active surrender of his whole
being, to that aspect of the Infinite which he has perceived. He
too will endure in little the psychic upheavals of the spiritual
adolescence : will be forced to those sacrifices which every form of



MYSTICISM


446

genius demands. He will know according to his measure the
dreadful moments of lucid self-knowledge, the counter-balancing*
ecstasy of an intuition of the Real. More and more, as we study
and collate all the available evidence, this fact — this law — is *
borne in on us : that the general movement of human consciousness,
when it obeys its innate tendency to transcendence, is always the
same. There is only one road from Appearance to Reality. “Men
pass on, but the States are permanent for ever.”

I do not care whether the consciousness be that of artist or
musician, striving to catch and fix some aspect of the heavenly
light or music, and denying all other aspects of the world in order
to devote themselves to this: or of the humble servant of Science,
purging his intellect that he may look upon her secrets with
innocence of eye: whether the higher reality be perceived in the,
terms of religion, beauty, suffering; of human love, of goodness, *
or of truth. However widely these forms of transcendence may
seem to differ, the mystic experience is the key to them all. All
in their different ways are exhibitions here and now of the Eternal ;
extensions of man's consciousness which involve calls to heroic
endeavour, incentives to the remaking of character about new
and higher centres of life. Through each, man may rise to freedom
and take his place in the great movement of the universe: may
“understand by dancing that which is done.” Each brings the*
self who receives its revelation in good faith, does not check it ■
by self-regarding limitations, to a humble acceptance of the
universal law of knowledge: the law that “we behold that which
we are,” and hence that “only the Real can know Reality.”
Awakening, Discipline, Enlightenment, Self-surrender, and Union,
are the essential phases of life's response to this fundamental fact :
the conditions of our attainment of Being, the necessary formulae
under which alone our consciousness of any of these fringes of
Eternity — any of these aspects of the Transcendent— can unfold,
develop, attain to freedom and full life. ,

We are, then, one and all the kindred of the mystics; and it is
by dwelling upon this kinship, by interpreting — so far as we may —
their great declarations in the light of our little experience, that
we shall learn to understand them best. Strange and far away
though they seem, they are not cut off from us by some impassable
abyss. They belong to us. They are our brethren; the giants, the
heroes of our race. As the achievement of genius belongs not to
itself only, but also to the society that brought it forth ; as theology
declares that the merits of the saints avail for all; so, because of
the solidarity of the human family, the supernal accomplishment
of the mystics is ours also. Their attainment is the earnest-money
of our eternal life.



CONCLUSION


447

To be a mystic is simply to participate here and now in that
real and eternal life; in the fullest, deepest sense which is possible
to man. It is to share, as a free and conscious agent — not a servant,
but a son — in the joyous travail of the Universe : its mighty onward
sweep through pain and glorv towards its home in God. This
»ift of “son ship,” this power of free co-operation in the world-
process, is man's greatest honour. The ordered sequence of states,
the organic development, whereby his consciousness is detached
from illusion and rises to the mystic freedom which conditions,
instead of being conditioned by, its normal world, is the way he
must tread if that sonship is to be realized. Only by this deliberate
fostering of his deeper self, this transmutation of the elements of
tiis character, can he reach those levels of consciousness upon
which he hears, and responds to, the measure “whereto the worlds
keep time” on their great pilgrimage towards the Father’s heart.
The mystic act of union, that joyous loss of the transfigured
self in God, which is the crown of man’s conscious ascent towards
the Absolute, is the contribution of the individual to this, the
destiny of the Cosmos.

The mystic knows that destiny. It is laid bare to his lucid
vision, as our puzzling world of form and colour is to normal sight.
He is the “hidden child” of the eternal order, an initiate of the
secret plan. Hence, whilst “all creation groaneth and travaileth,”
dowly moving under the spur of blind desire towards that con-
summation in which alone it can have rest, he runs eagerly along
the pathway to reality. He is the pioneer of Life on its age-long
voyage to the One: and shows us, in his attainment, the meaning
and value of that life.

This meaning, this secret plan of Creation, flames out, had we
iyes to see, from every department of existence. Its exultant
declarations come to us in all great music; its magic is the life
:>f all romance. Its law — the law of love — is the substance of the
beautiful, the energizing cause of the heroic. It lights the altar of
svery creed. All man’s dreams and diagrams concerning a trans-
indent Perfection near him yet intangible, a transcendent vitality
to which he can attain — whether he call these objects of desire
Grod, grace, being, spirit, beauty, “pure idea” — are but transla-
tions of his deeper self’s intuition of its destiny; clumsy fragmen-
tary hints at the all-inclusive, living Absolute which that deeper
self knows to be real. This supernal Thing, the adorable Substance
)f all that Is — the synthesis of Wisdom, Power, and Love —
and man’s apprehension of it, his slow remaking in its interests, his
anion with it at last; this is the theme of mysticism. That two-
bid extension of consciousness which allows him communion
vith its transcendent and immanent aspects is, in all its gradual



MYSTICISM


448

processes, the Mystic Way. It is also the crown of human
evolution; the fulfilment of life, the liberation of personality’
from the world of appearance, its entrance into the free creative
life of the Real.

Further, Christians may well remark that the psychology of
Christ, as presented to us in the Gospels, is of a piece with that
of the mystics. In its pain and splendour, its dual character of
action and fruition, it reflects their experience upon the supernal
plane of more abundant life. Thanks to this fact, for them the
Ladder of Contemplation — that ladder which mediaeval thought
counted as an instrument of the Passion, discerning it as essential
to the true salvation of man — stretches without a break from earth
to the Empyrean. It leans against the Cross ; it leads to the Secret
Rose. By it the ministers of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty go up,
and down between the transcendent and the apparent world.
Seen, then, from whatever standpoint we may choose to adopt —
whether of psychology, philosophy, or religion — the adventure of
the great mystics intimately concerns us. It is a master-key to
man's puzzle : by its help he may explain much in his mental make-
up, in his religious constructions, in his experience of life. In all
these departments he perceives himself to be climbing slowly and
clumsily upward toward some attainment yet unseen. The mystics,
expert mountaineers, go before him: and show him, if he cares to*
learn, the way to freedom, to reality, to peace. He cannot rise in
tliis, his earthly existence, to the awful and solitary peak, veiled
in the Cloud of Unknowing, where they meet that “death of the
summit," which is declared by them to be the gate of Perfect Life:
but if he choose to profit by their explorations, he may find
his level, his place within the Eternal Order. He may achieve
freedom, live the "independent spiritual life."

Consider once more the Mystic Way as we have traced it from
its beginning. To what does it tend if not to this ?

It began by the awakening within the self of a new and em-'
bryonic consciousness : a consciousness of divine reality, as
opposed to the illusory sense-world in which she was immersed.
Humbled, awed by the august possibilities then revealed to her,
that self retreated into the "cell of self-knowledge" and there
laboured to adjust herself to the Eternal Order which she had
perceived, stripped herself of all that opposed it, disciplined her
energies, purified the organs of sense. Remade in accordance with
her intuitions of reality, the "eternal hearing and seeing were
revealed in her." She opened her eyes upon a world still natural, %
but no longer illusory; since it was perceived to be illuminated by
the Uncreated Light. She knew then the beauty, the majesty, the
divinity of the living World of Becoming which holds in its meshes



CONCLUSION


every living thing. She had transcended the narrow rhythm by
tyhich common men perceive but one of its many aspects, escaped
Xhe machine-made universe presented by the cinematograph of
^sense, and participated in the “great life of the All." Reality came
forth to her, since her eyes were cleansed to see It, not from some
strange far-off and spiritual country, but gently, from the very
heart of things. Thus lifted to a new level, she began again her
ceaseless work of growth: and because by the cleansing of the
senses she had learned to see the reality which is shadowed by
the sense-world, she now, by the cleansing of her will, sought to
draw nearer to that Eternal Will, that Being, which life, the World
of Becoming, manifests and serves. Thus, by the surrender of her
selfhood in its wholeness, the perfecting of her love, she slid from
Becoming to Being, and found her true life hidden in God.

* Yet the course of this transcendence, this amazing inward
journey, was closely linked, first and last, with the processes of
human life. It sprang from that life, as man springs from the sod.
We were even able to describe it under those symbolic formulae
which we are accustomed to call the “laws” of the natural world.
By an extension of these formulae, their logical application, we
discovered a path which led us without a break from the sensible
to the supra-scnsible ; from apparent to absolute life. There is
Clothing unnatural about the Absolute of the mystics: He sets the
"rhythm of His own universe, and conforms to the harmonies
which He has made. We, deliberately seeking for that which we
suppose to be spiritual, too often overlook that which alone is
Real. The true mysteries of life accomplish themselves so softly,
with so easy and assured a grace, so frank an acceptance of our
breeding, striving, dying, and unresting world, that the unimagina-
tive natural man — all agog for the marvellous — is hardly startled
by their daily and radiant revelation of infinite wisdom and love.
Yet this revelation presses incessantly upon us. Only the hard
jerust of surface-consciousness conceals it from our normal sight.
In some least expected moment, the common activities of life in
progress, that Reality in Whom the mystics dwell slips through
our closed doors, and suddenly we see It at our side.

~ It was said of the disciples at Emmaus, “Mensam igitur ponunt,
panes cibosque offerunt, et Deum, quern in Scripturae sacrae
expositione non cognoverant, in panis fractione cognoscunt.”
So too for us the Transcendent Life for which we crave is revealed,
and our living within it, not on some remote and arid plane of
being, in the cunning explanations of philosophy; but in the normal
4.cts of our diurnal experience, suddenly made significant for us.
Not in the backwaters of existence, not amongst subtle arguments
and occult doctrines, but in all those places where the direct



MYSTICISM


45o

and simple life of earth goes on. It is found in the soul of man
so long as that soul is alive and growing: it is not found in any
sterile place.

This fact of experience is our link with the mystics, our guarantee
of the truthfulness of their statements, the supreme importance of
their adventure, their closer contact with Reality. The mystics
on their part are our guarantee of the end towards which the
Immanent Love, the hidden steersman which dwells in our midst,
is moving: our “lovely forerunners" on the path towards the Real.
They come back to us from an encounter with life's most august
secret, as Mary came running from the tomb; filled with amazing
tidings which they can hardly tell. We, longing for some assurance,
and seeing their radiant faces, urge them to pass on their revela-
tion if they can. It is the old demand of the dim-sighted and
incredulous: —


"Die nobis Maria
Quid vidisti in via?"


But they cannot say: can only report fragments of the symbolic
vision : —


"Angelicos testes, sudarium, et vestes" —


not the inner content, the final divine certainty. We must ourselves
follow in their footsteps if we would have that.

Like the story of the Cross, so too the story of man's spirit ends
in a garden: in a place of birth and fruitfulness, of beautiful and
natural things. Divine Fecundity is its secret: existence, not for
its own sake, but for the sake of a more abundant life. It ends with
the coming forth of divine humanity, never again to leave us:
living in us, and with us, a pilgrim, a worker, a guest at our
table, a sharer at all hazards in life. The mystics witness to this
story: waking very early they have run on before us, urged
by the greatness of their love. We, incapable as yet of this
sublime encounter, looking in their magic mirror, listening to
their stammered tidings, may see far off the consummation of
the race.

According to the measure of their strength and of their passion,
these, the true lovers of the Absolute, have conformed here and
now to the utmost tests of divine sonship, the final demands of life.
They have not shrunk from the sufferings of the cross. They havt$
faced the darkness of the tomb. Beauty and agony alike have called
them: alike have awakened a heroic response. For them the winter
is over: the time of the singing of birds is come. From the deeps



CONCLUSION


45i

of the dewy garden, Life -new, unquenchable, and ever lov«ly —
comes to meet them with the dawn.

fit boc intellegcrc, quts bominum babit bomtnt?

(Stuts angelus angclo?

(Huts angelus bomtnt?
a te petatut,

311 te quaeratur,
ao te pulsetur,

Stc, sic acctptetur, stc tnvenletur, sic aperletut.


APPENDIX


A HISTORICAL SKETCH OF EUROPEAN MYSTICISM FROM
THE BEGINNING OF THE CHRISTIAN ERA TO THE
DEATH OF BLAKE

I f we try to represent the course of Mysticism in Europe during the
Christian period by the common device of a chronological curve,
showing by its rises and falls as it passes across the centuries the
absence or preponderance in any given epoch of mystics and mystical
thought, we shall find that the great periods of mystical activity tend
to correspond with the great periods of artistic, material, and intellectual
civilization. As a rule, they come immediately after, and seem to
complete such periods: those outbursts of vitality in which man makes
fresh conquests over his universe apparently producing, as their last
stage, a type of heroic character which extends these victories to the
spiritual sphere. When science, politics, literature, and the arts— the
domination of nature and the ordering of life — have risen to their height
and produced their greatest works, the mystic comes to the front;
snatches the torch, and carries it on. It is almost as if he were
humanity's finest flower; the product at which each great creative
period of the race had aimed.

Thus the thirteenth century expressed to perfection the mediaeval
ideal in religion, art, philosophy, and public life. It built the Gothic
cathedrals, put the finishing touch to the system of chivalry, and
nourished the scholastic philosophers. It has many saints, but not
very many mystics; though they increase in number as the century
draws on. The fourteenth century is filled by great contemplatives;
who lifted this wave of activity to spiritual levels, and brought the
intellectual vigour, the romance and passion of the mediaeval tempera-
ment, to bear upon the deepest mysteries of the transcendental life.
Again, the sixteenth century, that period of abounding vitality which
left no corner of existence unexplored, which produced the Renaissance
and the Humanists and remade the mediaeval world, had hardly
reached its full development before the great procession of the post-
Renaissance mystics, with St. Teresa at their head, began. If life,
then — the great and restless life of the race — be described under the
trite metaphor of a billowy sea, each great wave as it rises from the
deep bears the mystic type upon its crest.

Our curve will therefore follow close behind that other curve which
represents the intellectual life of humanity. Its course will be studded
and defined for us by the names of the great mystics; the possessors
of spiritual genius, the pathfinders to the country of the soul. These
starry names are significant not only in themselves but also as links in
the chain of man's growing spiritual history. They are not isolated

453



MYSTICISM


454

phenomena, but are related to one another. Each receives something
from his predecessors: each by his personal adventures enriches it, *
and hands it on to the future. As we go on, we notice more and more
this cumulative power of the past. Each mystic, original though he
be, yet owes much to the inherited acquirement of his spiritual ancestors.
These ancestors form his tradition, are the classic examples on which
his education is based; and from them he takes the language which
they have sought out and constructed as a means of telling their
adventures to the world. It is by their help too, very often, that he
elucidates for himself the meaning of the dim perceptions of his amazed
soul. From his own experiences he adds to this store; and hands on an
enriched tradition of the transcendental life to the next spiritual genius
evolved by the race. Hence the names of the great mystics are con-
nected by a thread; and it becomes possible to treat them as subjects
of history rather than of biography.

I have said that this thread forms a curve, following the fluctuations
of the intellectual life of the race. At its highest points, the names of
the mystics are clustered most thickly, at its descents they become fewer
and fewer, at the lowest points they die away. Between the first
century a.d. and the nineteenth, this curve exhibits three great waves
of mystical activity besides many minor fluctuations. They corre-
spond with the close of the Classical, the Mediaeval, and the Renaissance
periods in history : reaching their highest points in the third, fourteenth,
and seventeenth centuries. In one respect, however, the mystic curve
diverges from the historical one. It rises to its highest point in the
fourteenth century, and does not again approach the level it there
attains; for the mediaeval period was more favourable to the develop-
ment of mysticism than any subsequent epoch has been. The four-
teenth century is as much the classic moment for the spiritual history
of our race as the thirteenth is for the history of Gothic, or the fifteenth
for that of Italian art.

The names upon our curve, especially during the first ten centuries
of the Christian era, are often separated by long periods of time.
This, of course, does not necessarily mean that these centuries pro-
duced few mystics: merely that few documents relating to them have
survived. We have now no means of knowing, for instance, the amount
of true mysticism which may have existed amongst the initiates
of the Greek or Egyptian Mysteries; how many advanced but
inarticulate contemplatives there were amongst the Alexandrian Neo-
platonists, amongst the pre-Christian communities of contemplatives
described by PhUo, the deeply mystical Alexandrian Jew (20 b.c.-
a.d. 40), or the innumerable Gnostic sects which replaced in the early
Christian world the Orphic and Dionysiac mystery-cults of Greece and
Italy. Much real mystical inspiration there must have been, for we
know that from these centres of life came many of the doctrines best
loved by later mystics: that the Neoplatonists gave them the concepts
of Pure Being and the One, that the New Birth and the Spiritual
Marriage were foreshadowed in the Mysteries, that Philo anticipated
the theology of the Fourth Gospel.



APPENDIX


455

As we stand at the beginning of the Christian period we see three
great sources whence its mystical tradition might have been derived.
These sources are Greek, Oriental, and Christian— i.e , primitive
Apostolic — doctrine or thought. As a matter of fact all contributed
their share: but where Christianity gave the new vital impulse to
transcendence, Greek and Oriental thought provided the principal
forms in which it was expressed. The Christian religion, by its very
nature, had a profoundly mystical side. Putting the personality of its
Founder outside the limits of the present discussion, St. Paul and the
author of the Fourth Gospel are obvious instances of mystics of the
first rank amongst its earliest missionaries. Much of the inner history of
primitive Christianity still remains unknown to us; but in what has
been already made out we find numerous, if scattered, indications that
the mystic life was indigenous in the Church and the natural mystic
had little need to look for inspiration outside the limits of his creed.
Not only the epistles of St. Paul and the Johannine writings, but also
the earliest liturgic fragments which we possess, and such primitive
religious poetry as the “Odes of Solomon” and the “Hymn of Jesus,”
show how congenial was mystical expression to the mind of the Church;
how easily that Church could absorb and transmute the mystic elements
of Kssene, Orphic, and Neoplatonic thought.

Towards the end of the second century this tendency received
brilliant literary expression at the hands of Clement of Alexandria
( c . 160-220) - who first adapted the language of the pagan Mysteries to
the Christian theory of the spiritual life -and his great pupil Origen
(c. 183-253). Nevertheless, the first person after St. Paul of whom it
can now be decisively stated that he was a practical mystic of the first
rank, and in whose writings the central mystic doctrine of union with
God is found, is a pagan. That person is Plotinus, the great Neoplatonic
philosopher of Alexandria (a.d. 205-c. 270). His mysticism owes nothing
to the Christian religion, which is never mentioned in his works. Intel-
lectually it is based on the Platonic philosophy, and also shows the
influence of the Mysteries, and perhaps certain of the Oriental cults and
philosophies which ran riot in Alexandria in the third century. Osten-
sibly a metaphysician, however, Plotinus possessed transcendental
genius of a high order, and was consumed by a burning passion for the
Absolute: and the importance of his work lies in the degree in which
his intellectual constructions are made the vehicle of mystical ex-
perience. His disciple Porphyry has left it on record that on four
occasions he saw his master rapt to ecstatic union with “the One.”

The Neoplatonism of which Plotinus was the greatest exponent
became the medium in which much of the mysticism — both Christian
and pagan — of the first six centuries was expressed. But since
mysticism is a way of life — an experience of Reality, not a philosophic
account of Reality — Neoplatonism, and the mysticism which used its
language, must not be identified with one another. Porphyry (233-304),
the favourite pupil of Plotinus, seems to have inherited something of his
master's mysticism, but Neoplatonism as a whole was a confused, semi-
religious philosophy, containing many inconsistent elements. Appear-



MYSTICISM


458

line of the “Dark Ages 1 *: and here the curve of mysticism runs parallel
with the curves of intellectual and artistic activity.

The great current of mediaeval mysticism first shows itself in the
eleventh century, and chiefly in connection with the Benedictine Order;
for the work of such monastic reformers as St. Romuald (c. 950-1027),
St Peter Damian (1007-1072), and St Bruno (1032-1101), the founder
of the Grande Chartreuse, was really the effort of contemplative souls
to establish an environment in which the mystical life could be lived.
Thus too we must regard at least a large proportion of the hermits and
solitaries who became so marked a feature in the religion of the West.
At this period mysticism was not sharply distinguished from the
rest of the religious complex, but was rather the realistic experience
of the truths on which religion rests. It spread mainly through personal
instruction and discipleship. Its literary monuments were few, among
the most important and widely influential being the 1 ‘Meditations' * of
St. Anselm (1033-1109), which, disentangled by recent scholarship
from the spurious material passing under his name, are now seen to
have been a chief channel of transmission for the Augustinian mysticism
which dominated the early Middle Ages. The general religious revival
of the twelfth century had its marked mystical aspect, and produced
four personalities of great historical importance: the Benedictines
St Bernard of Clairvaux (1091-1153), St HiMegarde ol Bingen (109S-
1179), and Joachim of ilora (1132-1202); and the Scotch or Irish
Augustinian Richard of St. Victor ( ob . c. 1173), whom Dante held to be
“in contemplation more than man." Richard's master and contempor-
ary, the scholastic philosopher Hngh (1097-1141) of the same Abbey of
St. Victor at Paris, is also generally reckoned amongst the mystics of
this period, but with less reason; since contemplation occupies a small
place in his theological writings. In spite of the deep respect shown
towards him by Aquinas and other theologians, Hugh’s influence on
later mystical literature was slight. The spirit of Richard and of St.
Bernard, on the contrary, was destined to dominate it for the next two
hundred years. With them the literature of mediaeval mysticism,
properly so called, begins.

This literature falls into two classes: the personal and the didactic.
Sometimes, as in a celebrated sermon of St. Bernard, the two are com-
bined; the teacher appealing to his own experience in illustration of
his theme. In the works of the Victorines the attitude is didactic:
one might almost say scientific. In them mysticism — that is to say, the
degrees of contemplation, the training and exercise of the spiritual
sense — takes its place as a recognized department of theology. It is,
in Richard's favourite symbolism, “Benjamin," the beloved child of
Rachel, emblem of the Contemplative Life: and in his two chief works,
“Benjamin Major" and “Benjamin Minor," it is classified and described
in all its branches. Though mysticism was for Richard the “science of
the heart" and he had little respect for secular learning, yet his solid
intellectuality did much to save the mediaeval school from the perils
of religious emotionalism. In his hands the antique mystical tradition,
which flowed through Plotinus and the Areopagite, was codified and



APPENDIX


459

transmitted to the mediaeval world. Like his master, Hugh, he had the
mediaeval passion for elaborate allegory, neat arrangement, rigid
classification, and significant numbers in things. As Dante parcelled
out Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell with mathematical precision, and
proved that Beatrice was herself a Nine, so these writers divide and
subdivide the stages of contemplation, the states of the soul, the
degrees of Divine Love: and perform terrible tours de force in the course
of compelling the ever- variable expressions of man's spiritual vitality
to fall into orderly and parallel series, conformable to the mystic num-
bers of Seven, Four, and Three.

'Fhe influence of Richard of St. Victor, great as it was, is exceeded
by that of St. Bernard; the dominant spiritual personality of the
twelfth century. Bernard's career of ceaseless and varied activity
sufficiently disproves the “idleness" of the contemplative type. He
continued and informed with his own spirit the Benedictine tradition,
and his writings quickly took their place, with those of Richard of
St. Victor, among the living forces which conditioned the development
of later mysticism. Both these mystics exerted a capital influence on
the formation of our national school of mysticism in the fourteenth
century. Translations and paraphrases of the “Benjamin Major,"
“Benjamin Minor," and other works of Richard of St. Victor, and of
various tracts and epistles of St. Bernard, are constantly met with in
the MS. collections of mystical and theological literature written in
England in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. An early paraphrase
of the “Benjamin Minor," sometimes attributed to Richard Kolle, was
probably made by the anonymous author of “The Cloud of Unknowing,"
who was also responsible for the first appearance of the Areopagite in
English dress.

Jf mediaeval mysticism in the West develops mainly under the sane
and enduring influence of the Victorines and St. Bernard, in Germany
and Italy it appeared in a more startling form; seeking, in the prophetic
activities of St. Hildegarde of Bingen and the Abbot Joachim of Flora,
to influence the course of secular history. In St. Hildegarde and her
fellow-Benedictine St. Elizabeth of Schonau (1138-1165) we have the
first of that long line of women mystics — visionaries, prophetesses, and
political reformers — combining spiritual transcendence with great
practical ability, of whom St. Catherine of Siena is probably the greatest
example. Exalted by the strength of their spiritual intuitions, they
emerged from an obscure life to impose their wills, and their reading of
events, upon the world. From the point of view of Eternity, in
whose light they lived, they attacked the sins of their generation.
St. Hildegarde, a woman of powerful character, apparently possessed
of abnormal psychic gifts, was driven by that Living Light which was
her inspiration to denounce the corruptions of Church and State. In
the inspired letters which she sent like firebrands over Europe, we see
German idealism and German practicality struggling together; the
unflinching description of abuses, the vast poetic vision by which they
are condemned. These qualities are seen again in the South German
mystics of the next century: the four Benedictine women of genius, who



MYSTICISM


460

had their home in the convent of Helfde. These are the Nun Gertrude
(Abbess 1251-1291) and her sister St. Mechthild of Hackborn ( ob . 1310),
with her sublime symbolic visions: then, the poet of the group, the
exquisite Mechthild of Magdeburg (1212-1299), who, first a beguine at
Magdeburg, where she wrote the greater part of “The Flowing Light
of the Godhead/ 1 came to Helfde in 1268 ; last the celebrated St. Gertrude
the Great (1256-1311). In these contemplatives the political spirit is
less marked than in St. Hildegarde: but religious and ethical activity
takes its place. St. Gertrude the Great is a characteristic Catholic
visionary of the feminine type: absorbed in her subjective experiences,
her often beautiful and significant dreams, her loving conversations with
Christ and the Blessed Virgin. Close to her in temperament is St.
Mechthild of Hackborn; but her attitude as a whole is more impersonal,
more truly mystic. The great symbolic visions in which her most
spiritual perceptions are expressed are artistic creations rather than
psycho-sensorial hallucinations, and dwell little upon the humanity of
Christ, with which St. Gertrude is constantly occupied. The terms in
which Mechthild of Magdeburg — an educated and well-born woman,
half poet, half seer — describes her union with God are intensely
individual, and apparently owe more to the romantic poets of her time
than to earlier religious writers. The works of this Mechthild, early
translated into Latin, were read by Dante. Their inlluence is traceable
in the “Paradiso”; and by some scholars she is believed to be the
Matilda of his Eartlily Paradise, though others give this position to
her sister-mystic, St. Mechthild of Hackborn.

Modem scholarship tends more and more to see in the strange
personality of the Abbot Joachim of Flora, whom Dante placed among
the great contemplatives in the Heaven of the Sun, the chief influence
in the development of Italian mysticism. The true import of his
prophecies, which proclaimed in effect the substitution of mystical for
institutional Christianity, was only appreciated after his death. But
their prestige grew during the course of the thirteenth century;
especially after the appearance of the mendicant friars, who seemed to
fulfil his prediction that the new era of the Holy Spirit would be brought
in about the year 1260 by two new Orders who would live in poverty
the spiritual life. From this time, Joachism found its chief vehicle of
expression through Franciscan mysticism of the more revolutionary
sort. Though there is no evidence that St. Francis of Assisi (1182-1226)
knew the prophecies of the “Eternal Gospel/’ he can hardly have grown
up without some knowledge of them, and also of the Cathari and other
semi-mystical heresies — many of them stressing the idea of evangelical
poverty — which were spreading through Italy from the north. But the
mystical genius which may have received food from these sources was
itself strikingly original; the spontaneous expression of a rare person-
ality, a great spiritual realist who admitted no rival to the absolute
claims of the mystical life of poverty and joy. St. Francis was untouched
by monastic discipline, or the writings of Dionysius or St. Bernard.
His only literary influence was the New Testament. With him, mysticism
comes into the open air, seeks to transform the stuff of daily life,



APPENDIX


461

speaks the vernacular, turns the songs of the troubadours to the pur-
poses of Divine love; yet remains completely loyal to the Catholic
Church. None who came after him succeeded in recapturing his secret,
which was the secret of spiritual genius of the rarest type: but he left
his mark upon the history, art, and literature of Western Europe, and
the influence of his spirit still lives.

In a general sense it is true to say that Italian mysticism descends
from St. Francis, and in its first period seems almost to be the preroga-
tive of his disciples; especially those of the “Spirituar' party who
strove to maintain his ideals in their purity. It is here that we find
Franciscan ardour and singlemindedness in alliance with apocalyptic
notions deriving from Joachist ideas. In Provence, a widespread
mystical movement coloured by Joachism was led by Hugues de
Digne and his sister St. Douceline («. 1214) ; in whom we find a spirit
which, like that of Francis, could find the Divine through flowers and
birds and simple natural things. In Italy, nourished by the influence
of such deeply mystical friars as John of Parma ( ob . 1288) and John of
La Verna, this Franciscan spirituality entered into conflict with the
ecclesiastical politics of the day; taking up that duty of denouncing
the corruptions of the Church, which has so often attracted the mystics.
Here the typical figure is that of Jacopone da Todi (1228-1306), the
converted lawyer turned mystical poet. On one hand deeply influenced
by St. Augustine and Dionysius the Areopagite, on the other the
devoted exponent of the Founder's ideals, his “spiritual songs" lift
Franciscan mysticism to the heights of ecstatic rapture and literary
expression; whilst his savage castigations of the Papacy give him
a place among the great mediaeval satirists. Jacopone’s poems have
been shown by Von Hiigel to have had a formative influence on
St. Catherine of Genoa; and have probably affected many other
mystics, not only in Italy but elsewhere, for they quickly attained
considerable circulation.

In his contemporary the Blessed Angela of Foligno (1248-1309),
who was converted from a sinful life to become a tertiary hermit
of the Franciscan Order, we have a mystic of the first rank whose
visions and revelations place her in the same class as St. Catherine of
Genoa and St. Teresa. Known to her followers as the Mistress of
Theologians, and numbering among her disciples the brilliant and
tempestuous “spiritual" friar Ubertino da Casale, the lofty meta-
physical element in Angela’s mysticism suggests the high level of
spiritual culture achieved in Franciscan circles of her time. By the
sixteenth century her works, translated into the vernacular, had taken
their place amongst the classics of mysticism. In the seventeenth they
were largely used by St. Francois de Sales, Madame Guyon, and other
Catholic conteinplatives. Seventeen years older than Dante, whose
great genius properly closes this line of spiritual descent, she is a link
between the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in Italian mysticism.

We now approach the Golden Age of Mysticism: and at the opening
of that epoch, dominating it by their peculiar combination of intellectual
and spiritual power stand the figures of the “Seraphic and Angelic



MYSTICISM


462

Doctors/' St. Bonaventura, the Franciscan (1221-1274), and St. Thomas
Aquinas, the Dominican (1226-1274). As with St. Augustine, the intef-
lectual greatness of St. Thomas has obscured his mystical side; whilst
St. Bonaventura, the apostle of a wise moderation, may easily appear
to the hurried reader the least mystical of the Franciscan mystics. Yet
both were contemplatives, and because of this were able to interpret
to the mediaeval world the great spiritual tradition of the past. Hence
their immense influence on the mystical schools of the fourteenth
century. It is sometimes stated that these schools derive mainly from
St. Bonaventura, and represent an opposition to scholastic theology;
but as a matter of fact their greatest personalities — in particular Dante
and the German Dominicans — are soaked in the spirit of Aquinas, and
quote his authority at every turn.

In Europe the mystic curve is now approaching its highest point.
In the East that point has already been passed. Soli, or Mahommedan
mysticism, appearing in the eighth century in the beautiful figure of
Eabi‘a, the “Moslem St. Teresa" (717-801), and continued by the
martyr A1 Hallaj (ob. 022), attains literary expression in the eleventh in
the “Confessions" of A1 Ghazzali (1058-1111) , and has its classic period in
the thirteenth in the works of the mystic poets 'Attar (c. 1140-1234),
SSdi (1184-1263), and the saintly Jalalu ’d Din (1207-1273). Its tradition
is continued in the fourteenth century by the rather erotic mysticism
of Hafiz (c. 1300-1388) and his successors, and in the fifteenth by the
poet J&rnf (1414-1492).

Whilst Hafiz already strikes a note of decadence for the mysticism
of Islam, the year 1300 is for Western Europe a vital year in the history
of the spiritual life. Mystics of the first rank are appearing, or about to
appear. The Majorcan scholar-mystic Ramon Lull (ob. 1315) is drawing
to the end of his long life. In Italy Dante (1265-1321) is forcing human
language to express one of the most sublime visions of the Absolute
which has ever been crystallized into speech. He inherits and fuses into
one that loving and artistic reading of reality which was the heart of
Franciscan mysticism, and that other ordered vision of the transcen-
dental world which the Dominicans through Aquinas poured into the
stream of European thought. For the one the spiritual world was all
love: for the other all law. For Dante it was both. In the "Paradiso"
his stupendous genius apprehends and shows to us a Beatific Vision
in which the symbolic systems of all great mystics, and many whom
the world does not call mystics — of Dionysius, Richard, St. Bernard,
Mechthild, Aquinas, and countless others — are included and explained.

The moment in which the “Commedia" was being written coincides
with the awakening of mystical activity in Germany and Flanders.
Between the years 1280 and 1309 was produced, probably in the Liege
district and under Franciscan influence, the curious anonymous work
which is now only known to us in Latin and English translations —
4 ‘The Mirror of Simple Souls.” This long treatise, clearly influenced by
Dionysius, the Victorines, and the twelfth-century tract known as the
"Letter to the Brethren of Mons Dei," is a piece of mystical literature of
an advanced kind, often fringing the borders of orthodoxy and looking



APPENDIX


463

forward to the speculative Flemish mysticism of the fourteenth century.
Its writer was probably contemporary with the founder of this school;
the great Dominican scholar Meister Eekhart (1260-1327) , who resembled
Dante in his combination of mystical insight with intense intellectual
power, and laid the foundations at once of German philosophy and
German mysticism. These two giants stand side by side at the opening
of the century; perfect representatives of the Teutonic and Latin
instinct for transcendental reality.

Eekhart, though only a few years younger than St. Gertrude the
Great, seems to belong to a different world. His commanding personality,
his genius for the supra-sensible nourished by the works of Dionysius
and Erigcna, moulded and inspired all whom it came near. The German
and Flemish mystics of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, differing
much in temperament from their master and from each other, have
yet something in common: something which is shared by no other
school. This something is derived from Eekhart; for all have passed
under his hand, being either his immediate disciples, or the friends or
pupils of his disciples. Eckhart’s doctrine is chiefly known to us by
reports of his vernacular sermons delivered at Strassburg; then the
religious centre of Germany. In these we see him as a teaching mystic
full of pastoral zeal, but demanding a high level both of intellect and
spirituality in those he addressed. Towards the end of his life he fell
into disgrace. A number of propositions extracted from his writings,
and representing his more extreme views, were condemned by the
Church as savouring of pantheism and other heresies: and certainly
the violence and daring of his language laid him open to misconstruc-
tion. In his efforts to speak of the unspeakable he was constantly
betrayed into expressions which were bound to seem paradoxical and
exaggerated to other men. Eckhart's influence, however, was little
hurt by ecclesiastical condemnation. His pupils, though they remained
loyal Catholics, contrived also to be loyal disciples. To the end of their
lives their teaching was coloured — often inspired — by the doctrines of
the great, if heretical, scholar whose memory they venerated as that of
a saint.

The contrast in type between Eekhart and his two most famous
disciples is an interesting one. All three were Dominican friars; all were
devout followers of St. Augustine, the Areopagite, St. Bernard, and
Aquinas; all had been trained in the schools of Cologne, where Albert the
Great and St. Thomas had taught, and where their powerful influence
sciil lived. The mysticism of Eekhart, so far as he allows us to see it in
his sermons and fragmentary writings, is objective — one might almost
say dogmatic. He describes with an air of almost terrible certainty
and intimacy, not that which he has felt, but the place or plane of
being he has known — "the desert of the Godhead were no one is at
home/' He is a great scholar, a natural metaphysician passionately
concerned with the quest of Absolute Truth.

Of his two pupils, John Tauler (c. 1300-1361), friar-preacher of
Strassburg, was a born missionary: a man who combined with great
theological learning and mystical genius of a liigh order an overwhelm-



MYSTICISM


464

ing zeal for souls. He laboured incessantly to awaken men to a sense of
their transcendental heritage. Without the hard intellectualism occa- i
sionally noticeable in Eckhart, or the tendency to introspection and
the excessive artistic sensibility of Suso, Tauler is the most virile of the
German mystics. The breadth of his humanity is only equalled by the
depth of his spirituality. His sermons — his only authentic works — are
trumpet-calls to heroic action upon spiritual levels. They influenced
many later mystics, especially St. Teresa and St. John of the Cross.
Tauler is not a subjective writer: only by implication can we assure
ourselves that he speaks from personal experience. He has sometimes,
though unfairly, been described as a precursor of the Reformation.
Such a claim could only be made by those who look upon all pure
Christianity as a form of Protestant heresy. He attacked, like St.
Hildegarde, St. Catherine of Siena, and many others, the ecclesiastical *
corruption of his period: but his writings, if read in unexpurgated
editions, prove him to have been a fervent and orthodox Catholic.

Tauler was one of the leading spirits in the great informal society
of the Friends of God, which sprang into being in Strassburg, spread
through the Rhenish province and beyond to Switzerland and Bavaria,
and worked in this moment of religious decadence for the spiritual
regeneration of the people. In a spirit of fierce enthusiasm and whole-
hearted devotion, the Friends of God set themselves to the mystic life,
as the only life worthy of the name. A great outburst of transcendental
activity took place : many visions and ecstasies were reported : amazing
conversions occurred. The movement had many features in common
with that of the Quakers; except that it took place within, instead
of without, the official Church, and was partly directed against the
doctrines of the Brethren of the Free Spirit and other heretical sects.
With it was connected the third of the trio of great German Dominican
mystics, the Blessed Henry Suso (c. 1295-1365), a natural recluse and
ascetic, and a visionary of the most exuberant Catholic type. To Suso,
subjective, romantic, deeply interested in his own soul and his personal
relation with God, mysticism was not so much a doctrine to be imparted
to other men as an intimate personal adventure. Though a trained ^
philosopher and theologian, and a devoted follower of Eckhart, his auto-
biography- — a human document far more detailed and ingenuous than
St. Teresa's more celebrated "Life” — is mainly the record of his griefs
and joys, his pains, visions, ecstasies, and miseries. Even his mystical
treatises are in dialogue form, as if he could hardly get away from the
personal and dramatic aspect of the spiritual life.

Around these three — Eckhart, Tauler, Suso — are gathered other and
more shadowy personalities: members of this mystical society of the
Friends of God, bound to the heroic attempt to bring life — the terribly
corrupt and disordered religious life of the fourteenth century — back
into relation with spiritual reality, to initiate their neighbours into the
atmosphere of God. From one of these nameless members comes the
literary jewel of the movement: the beautiful little treatise called the
“Theologia Germanica,” or “Book of the Perfect Life," probably written
in Frankfort about the year 1350 by a priest of the Teutonic Order.



APPENDIX


465

One of the most successful of many attempts to make mystic principles
available for common men, this book was greatly loved by Luther, who
published an incomplete edition in 1518. Other Friends of God are now
only known to us as the authors of letters, descriptions of conversions,
visions, and spiritual adventures — literature which the movement
produced in enormous quantities. No part of the history of mysticism
has been more changed by recent research than that of the Rhenish
school: and the work is still but partly done. At present we can only
record the principal names which we find connected with the mystical
propaganda of the Friends of God. These are first the nuns Margaret
Ebner (1291-1351) and her sister Christina, important personages in
the movement upon whose historicity no doubts have been cast.
Margaret appears to have been a psychic as well as a mystic: and to
have possessed, like Madame Guyon, telepathic and clairvoyant powers.
Next the rather shadowy pair of laymen, Henry of Nordlingen and
Nicolas of Basle. Lastly the puzzling figure of Rulman Merswin
(c. 1310-1382), author of the series of apocalyptic visions called “The
Book of the Nine Rocks”; whose story of his conversion and mystic
life, whether it be regarded as fact or “tendency literature,” is a psycho-
logical document of the first rank.

In immediate dependence 011 the German school, and like it drawing
its intellectual vigour from the genius of Eckhart, is the mysticism of
Flanders: best known to us in the work of its most sublime representa-
tive, the Blessed John Ruysbroeck (1293-1381), one of the greatest
mystics whom the world has yet known. In Ruysbroeck's works the
metaphysical and personal aspects of mystical truth are fused and attain
their highest expression. Intellectually indebted to St. Augustine,
Richard of St. Victor, and Eckhart, his value lies in the fact that the
Eckhartian philosophy was merely the medium by which he expressed
the results of profound experience. In his early years a priest in Brussels,
in old age a recluse in the forest of Soignes, Ruysbroeck's influence on
his own generation was great. Through his disciple Gerard Groot
(1340-1384), founder of the Brotherhood of the Common Life, it formed
the inspiration of the religious movement of the New Devotion; which
carried over into the next century the spirit of the great mediaeval
mystics. The mystical writings of Henry de Mande (c. 1360-1415), the
“Ruysbroeck of the North,” the beautiful and deeply Plat oniq~“ Fiery
Soliloquy with God” of Gerlac Petersen (1378-1411), and above all the
“Imitation of Christ” of his friend Thomas k Kempis (1380-1471), in
which some of Gerard Groot's meditations may be enshrined, are the
chief channels through which this mystical current passed. In the next
century the Franciscan Henry de Herp or Harphius ( ob . 1477) and
two greater personalities — the learned and holy Platonist, Cardinal
Nicolas of Cusa (1401-1464), and his friend the theologian and con-
templative Denis the Carthusian (1402-1471), one of the great religious
figures of the fifteenth century — drew their inspiration from Ruysbroeck.
Denis translated the whole of his works into Latin; and calls him
“another Dionysius” but “clear where the Areopagite is obscure.”
It was mainly through the voluminous writings of Denis, widely read



MYSTICISM


466

during succeeding centuries, that the doctrine of the mediaeval mystics
was carried over to the Renaissance world. Ruysbroeck’s works, with
those of Suso, appear in English MSS. early in the fifteenth century,
taking their place by the side of St. Bernard, St. Bonaventura, and the
great English mystic Richard Rolle. The influence of his genius has
also been detected in the mystical literature of Spain.

English mysticism seems to have its roots in the religious revival
which arose during Stephen's reign. It was then, and throughout its
course, closely linked with the solitary life. Its earliest literary monu-
ment, the “Ancren Riwle," was written early in the twelfth century
for the use of three anchoresses. So too the "Meditations" of St. Aldred
(Abbot of Rievaulx 1146-1166), and the Rule he wrote for his anchoress
sister, presuppose the desire for the mystical life. But the first English
mystic we can name with certainty is Margery Kempe (probably writing
c. 1290), the anchoress of Lynn. Even so, we know nothing of this
woman's life; and only a fragment of her "Contemplations" has
survived. It is with the next name, Richard Rolle of Hampole (c. 1300-
1349), that the short but brilliant procession of English mystics begins.
Rolle, educated at Oxford and perhaps at Paris, and widely read in
theology, became a hermit in order to live in perfection that mystic
life of "Heat, Sweetness, and Song," to which he felt himself to be
called. Richard of St. Victor, St. Bernard, and St. Bonaventura are the
authors who have influenced him most; but he remains, in spite of this,
one of the most individual of all writers on mysticism. A volu-
minous author, his chief works are still in MS., and he seems to have
combined the careers of writer and wandering preacher with that of
recluse. He laid claim to direct inspiration, was outspoken in his
criticisms of religious and secular life, and in the next generation the
Lollards were found to appeal to his authority. Rolle already shows the
practical temper characteristic of the English school. His interest was
not philosophy, but spiritual life; and especially his own experience of
it. There is a touch of Franciscan poetry in his descriptions of his
communion with Divine Love, and the "heavenly song" in which it
was expressed; of Franciscan ardour in his zeal for souls. His works
greatly influenced succeeding English mystics.

He was followed in the second half of the fourteenth century by the
unknown author of “The Cloud of Unknowing’ 7 and its companion
treatises, and by the gracious spirit of Walter Hilton ( ob . 1396). With
"The Cloud of Unknowing," the spirit of Dionysius first appears in
English literature. It is the work of an advanced contemplative, deeply
influenced by the Areopagite and the Victorines, who was also an acute
psychologist. From the hand that wrote it came the first English transla-
tion of the "Theologia Mystica," "Dionise Hid Divinite" : a work which,
says an old writer, "ran across England at deere rates," so ready was the
religious consciousness of the time for the reception of mystical truth.

Hilton, though also influenced by Dionysius and Richard of St.
Victor, addresses a wider audience. He is pre-eminently a spiritual
director, the practical teacher of interior ways, not a metaphysician ; and
his great work "The Scale of Perfection" quickly took rank among the



APPENDIX


467

classics of the spiritual life. The moment of his death coincides with
th* completion of the most beautiful of all English mystical works, the
"Revelations of Love" of the anchoress Julian 0! Norwich (1343 — died
after 1413), “theodidacta, profunda, ecstatica," whose unique person-
ality closes and crowns the history of English mediaeval mysticism.
In her the best gifts of Rolle and Hilton are transmuted by a "genius for
the infinite" of a peculiarly beautiful and individual type. She was a
seer, a lover, and a poet. Though considerable theological knowledge
underlies her teaching, it is in essence the result of a direct and personal
vision of singular intensity.

j Already before the completion of Julian’s revelations two other
women of genius, the royal prophetess and founder St. Bridget of
Sweden (1303-1373) and St. Catherine of Siena (1347-1380), had lived
»and died. St. Bridget, or Birgitta, a mystic and visionary of the Hilde-
gardian type, believed herself called to end the exile of the Papacy
and bring peace to the Church. Four months after her death, St.
Catherine — then aged 26 — took up her unfinished work. The true suc-
cessor of Dante as a revealer of Reality, and next to St. Francis
the greatest of Italian mystics, Catherine exhibits the Unitive Life in
its richest, most perfect form. She was a great active and a great
ecstatic: at once politician, teacher, and contemplative, holding a
steady balance between the inner and the outer life. Well named “the
mother of thousands of souls," with little education she yet contrived,
in a short career dogged by persistent ill-health, to change the course of
hi story, rejuvenate religion, and compose, in her “Divine Dialogue," one
of the jewels of Italian religious literature.

With the first half of the fifteenth century it is plain that the mystic
curve droops downwards. At its opening we find the influential figure
of the Chancellor Gerson (1363-1429) at once a mystic in his own right,
and a keen and impartial critic of extravagant mystical teachings and
phenomena. But the great period is over : the new life of the Renaissance,
already striving in other spheres of activity, has hardly touched the
spiritual plane. A transient revival of Franciscan spirituality is
associated with the work of three reforming mystics; the energetic
French visionary St. Colette of Corbie (1381-1447,) her Italian disciple
St. Bernardino of Siena (1380-1444), and the ecstatic Clarisse,
St. Catherine of Bologna (1413-1463). Contemporary with this group
are the careers of two strongly contrasted woman-mystics: St. Joan
of Arc (1412-1431), and the suffering Flemish visionary St. Lydwine
of Schiedam (1380-1432).

With the second half of the century the scene shifts to Italy, where
a spiritual genius of the first rank appeared in St. Catherine of Genoa
(1447-1510). She, like her namesake of Siena, was at once an eager
lover and an indomitable doer. More, she was a constructive mystic, a
profound thinker as well as an ecstatic: an original teacher, a busy
and practical philanthropist. Her influence lived on, and is seen in the
next generation in the fine, well-balanced nature of another contem-
plative: the Venerable Battista Vernazza (1497-1587), her goddaughter
and the child of one of her most loyal friends. Catherine of Genoa



MYSTICISM


466

during succeeding centuries, that the doctrine of the mediaeval mystics
was carried over to the Renaissance world. Ruysbroeck's works, with
those of Suso, appear in English MSS. early in the fifteenth century,
taking their place by the side of St. Bernard, St. Bonaventura, and the
great English mystic Richard Rolle. The influence of his genius has
also been detected in the mystical literature of Spain.

English mysticism seems to have its roots in the religious revival
which arose during Stephen's reign. It was then, and throughout its
course, closely linked with the solitary life. Its earliest literary monu-
ment, the “Ancren Riwle," was written early in the twelfth century
for the use of three anchoresses. So too the “ Meditations" of St. Aldred
(Abbot of Rievaulx 1146-1166), and the Rule he wrote for his anchoress
sister, presuppose the desire for the mystical life. But the first English
mystic we can name with certainty is Margery Kempe (probably writing
c . 1290), the anchoress of Lynn. Even so, we know nothing of this
woman's life; and only a fragment of her “Contemplations" has
survived. It is with the next name, Richard Rolle of Hampole [c. 1300-
1349), that the short but brilliant procession of English mystics begins.
Rolle, educated at Oxford and perhaps at Paris, and widely read in
theology, became a hermit in order to live in perfection that mystic
life of “Heat, Sweetness, and Song," to which he felt himself to be
called. Richard of St. Victor, St. Bernard, and St. Bonaventura are the
authors who have influenced him most; but he remains, in spite of this,
one of the most individual of all writers on mysticism. A volu-
minous author, his chief works are still in MS., and he seems to have
combined the careers of writer and wandering preacher with that of
recluse. He laid claim to direct inspiration, was outspoken in his
criticisms of religious and secular life, and in the next generation the
Lollards were found to appeal to his authority. Rolle already shows the
practical temper characteristic of the English school. His interest was
not philosophy, but spiritual life ; and especially his own experience of
it. There is a touch of Franciscan poetry in his descriptions of his
communion with Divine Love, and the “heavenly song" in which it
was expressed; of Franciscan ardour in his zeal for souls. His works
greatly influenced succeeding English mystics.

He was followed in the second half of the fourteenth century by the
unknown author of “The Cloud oi Unknowing” and its companion
treatises, and by the gracious spirit of Walter Hilton ( ob . 1396). With
“The Cloud of Unknowing," the spirit of Dionysius first appears in
English literature. It is the work of an advanced contemplative, deeply
influenced by the Areopagite and the Victorines, who was also an acute
psychologist. From the hand that wrote it came the first English transla-
tion of the “Theologia Mystica," “Dionise Hid Divinite" : a work which,
says an old writer, “ran across England at deere rates," so ready was the
religious consciousness of the time for the reception of mystical truth.

Hilton, though also influenced by Dionysius and Richard of St.
Victor, addresses a wider audience. He is pre-eminently a spiritual
director, the practical teacher of interior ways, not a metaphysician; and
his great work “The Scale of Perfection" quickly took rank among the



APPENDIX


467

classics of the spiritual life. The moment of his death coincides with
the- completion of the most beautiful of all English mystical works, the
“Revelations of Love” of the anchoress Julian of Norwich (1343 — died
after 1413), “theodidacta, profunda, ecstatica," whose unique person-
ality closes and crowns the history of English mediaeval mysticism.

1 n her the best gifts of Rolle and Hilton are transmuted by a “genius for
the infinite” of a peculiarly beautiful and individual type. She was a
seer, a lover, and a poet. Though considerable theological knowledge
underlies her teaching, it is in essence the result of a direct and personal
vision of singular intensity.

j Already before the completion of Julian's revelations two other
women of genius, the royal prophetess and founder St. Bridget of
Sweden {1303-1373) and St. Catherine of Siena (1347-1380), had lived
•and died. St Bridget, or Birgitta, a mystic and visionary of the Hilde-
gardian type, believed herself called to end the exile of the Papacy
and bring peace to the Church. Four months after her death, St.
Catherine — then aged 26 — took up her unfinished work. The true suc-
cessor of Dante as a revealer of Reality, and next to St. Francis
the greatest of Italian mystics, Catherine exhibits the Unitive Life in
its richest, most perfect form. She was a great active and a great
ecstatic: at once politician, teacher, and contemplative, holding a
steady balance between the inner and the outer life. Well named “the
mother of thousands of souls," with little education she yet contrived,
in a short career dogged by persistent ill-health, to change the course of
history, rejuvenate religion, and compose, in her “Divine Dialogue,” one
of the jewels of Italian religious literature.

With the first half of the fifteenth century it is plain that the mystic
curve droops downwards. At its opening we find the influential figure
of the Chancellor Gerson (1363-1429) at once a mystic in his own right,
and a keen and impartial critic of extravagant mystical teachings and
phenomena. But the great period is over : the new life of the Renaissance,
already striving in other spheres of activity, has hardly touched the
spiritual plane. A transient revival of Franciscan spirituality is
associated with the work of three reforming mystics; the energetic
French visionary St. Colette of Corbie (I 38 i-I 447 >) ** er Italian disciple
St. Bernardino of Siena (1380-1444) » and the ecstatic Clarisse,
St. Catherine of Bologna (1413-1463). Contemporary with this group
are the careers of two strongly contrasted woman-mystics: St. Joan
of Arc (1412-1431), and the suffering Flemish visionary St. Lydwine

of Schiedam (1380-1432). # _ T i 1 ,

With the second half of the century the scene shifts to Italy, where
a spiritual genius of the first rank appeared in St. Catherine of Genoa
(1447-1510). She, like her namesake of Siena, was at once an eager
lover and an indomitable doer. More, she was a constructive mystic, a
profound thinker as well as an ecstatic: an original teacher, a busy
and practical philanthropist. Her influence lived on, and is seen m the
next generation in the fine, well-balanced nature of another contem-
plative: the Venerable Battista Vernazza (1497-1587), her goddaughter
and the child of one of her most loyal friends. Catherine of Genoa



4 68 MYSTICISM

stands alone in her day as an example of the sane and vigorous mystic
life. Her contemporaries were for the most part visionaries of the more
ordinary female type; such as Osanna Andreasi of Mantua (1449-
1505), Columba Rieti (c. 1430-1501), and her disciple Lucia of Narni.
They seem to represent the slow extinction of the spirit which burned
so bright in St. Catherine of Siena.

That spirit reappears in the sixteenth century in Flanders in the
works of the Benedictine Abbot Blosius (1506-1565); and, far more
conspicuously, in Spain, a country hardly touched by the outburst of
mystical life which elsewhere closed the mediaeval period. Spanish
mysticism first appears in close connection with the religious orders:
in the Franciscans Francisco de Osuna ( ob . c. 1540), whose manual of
contemplative prayer influenced the development of St. Teresa, and
St. Peter of Alcantara (1499-1562), her friend and adviser; in thei
Dominican Luis de Granada (1504-1588) and the Augustinian Luis de
Leon (1528-1591). It attains definite and characteristic expression in
the life and personality of St. Ignatius Loyola (1491-1556), the great
founder of the Society of Jesus. The concrete nature of St. Ignatius'
work, and especially its later developments, has blinded historians to
the fact that he was a true mystic ; own brother to such great actives
as St. Teresa and George Fox, actuated by the same vision of reality,
passing through the same stages of psychological growth. His spiritual
sons greatly influenced the inner life of the great Carmelite, St. Teresa
(1515-1582).

Like St. Catherine of Siena, these mystics — and to them we must'
add St. Teresa’s greatest disciple, the poet and contemplative St. John
Of the Cross (1542-1591) — seem to have arisen in direct response to
the need created by the corrupt or disordered religious life of their
time. They were the “saints of the Counter-Reformation”; and, in a
period of ecclesiastical chaos, flung the weight of their genius and their
sanctity into the orthodox Catholic scale. Whilst St. Ignatius organized
a body of spiritual soldiery, who should attack heresy and defend the
Church, St. Teresa, working against heavy odds, infused new vitality
into a great religious order and restored it to its duty of direct com-
munion with the transcendental world. In this she was helped by*
St. John of the Cross; who, a psychologist and philosopher as well as a
great mystic, performed the necessary function of bringing the personal
experience of the Spanish school back again into touch with the main
stream of mystic tradition. All three, practical organizers and profound
contemplatives, exhibit in its splendour the dual character of the
mystic life. They left behind them in their literary works an abiding
influence which has guided the footsteps and explained the discoveries
of succeeding generations of adventurers in the transcendental world.
The true spiritual children of these mystics are to be found, not in their
own country, where the religious life which they had lifted to trans-
cendent levels degenerated when their overmastering influence was
withdrawn, but amongst the innumerable contemplative souls of
succeeding generations who have fallen under the spell of the “Spiritual
Exercises,” the “Interior Castle,” or the “Dark Night of the Soul.”



APPENDIX 469

The Divine fire lit by the great Carmelites of Spain is next seen in
Italy, in the lives of the Dominican nun St. Catherine dei Ricci (1522-
1590) and the Florentine Carmelite St. Maria Maddelena dei Pazzi
(1566-1607), the author of voluminous literary works. It appears in the
New World in the beautiful figure of St. Rose of Lima (1586-1617), the
Peruvian nun; and at the same moment, under a very different aspect,
in Protestant Germany, in the person of one of the giants of mysticism,
the “inspired shoemaker” Jacob Boehme (1575-1624).

Boehme, one of the most astonishing cases in history of a natural
genius for the transcendent, has left his mark upon German philosophy
as well as upon the history of mysticism. William Law, Blake, and
Saint-Martin are amongst those who have sat at his feet. The great
sweep of Boehme's vision includes both Man and the Universe: the
nature of God and of the Soul. In him we find again that old doctrine
of Rebirth which the earlier German mystics had loved. Were it not
for the difficult symbolism in which his vision is expressed, his influence
would be far greater than it is. He remains one of those cloud-wrapped
immortals who must be rediscovered and reinterpreted by the adven-
turers of every age.

The seventeenth century rivals the fourteenth in the richness and
variety of its mystical life. Two main currents are to be detected in it:
dividing between them the two main aspects of man's communion with
the Absolute. One, symbolic, constructive, activistic, bound up with the
ideas of regeneration, and often using the language of the alchemists,
sets out from the Teutonic genius of Boehme. It achieves its successes
outside the Catholic Church, and chiefly in Germany and England, where
by 1650 his works were widely known. In its decadent forms it runs to
the occult: to alchemy, Rosicrucianism, apocalyptic prophecy, and
other aberrations of the spiritual sense. The other current arises within
the Catholic Church, and in close touch with the great tradition of
Christian mysticism. It achieves fullest expansion in France, and tends
to emphasize the personal and intimate side of contemplation : encourag-
ing passive receptivity and producing in its exaggerated forms the
aberrations of the Quietists.

In the seventeenth century England was peculiarly rich, if not in
great mystics, at any rate in mystically minded men, seekers after
Reality. Mysticism, it seems, was in the air; broke out under many
disguises and affected many forms of life. It produced in George Fox
(1624-1690), the founder of the Quakers, a “great active”of the first
rank, entirely unaffected by tradition; and in the Quaker movement
itself an outbreak of genuine mysticism which is only comparable to
the fourteenth-century movement of the Friends of God.

We meet in Fox that overwhelming sense of direct relationship with
God, that consciousness of the transcendent, characteristic of the mystic ;
and Quaker spirituality, in spite of its marked aversion to institutional
religion, has much in common not only with those Continental Quietists
wiio are its most obvious spiritual affinities, but also with the doctrine
of the Catholic contemplatives. Mysticism crops up frequently in the
writings of the school ; and finds expression in the first generation in



470 MYSTICISM

the works of Isaac Penington (1616-1679) and in the second in the
J ournal of the heroic American Friend John Woolman (1720-1772) .

At the opposite end of the theological scale, the seventeenth century
gives us a group of English mystics of the Catholic type, closely related
to the contemporary French school. Of these, one of the most individual
is the young Benedictine nun Gertrude More (1606-1633), who carries
on that tradition of the communion of love which flows from St.
Augustine through St. Bernard and Thomas k Kempis, and is the very
heart of Catholic mysticism. In the writings of her director, and the
preserver of her works, the Venerable Augustine Baker (1575-1641) —
one of the most lucid and orderly of guides to the contemplative life —
we see what were still the formative influences in the environment
where her mystical powers were trained. Richard of St. Victor, Hilton,
and “The Cloud of Unknowing”; Angela of Foligno; Tauler, Suso,
Ruysbroeck ; St. Teresa and St. John of the Cross; these are the authori-
ties to whom Augustine Baker most constantly appeals, and through
these, as we know, the family tree of the mystics goes back to the Neo-
plat onists and the first founders of the Church.

Outside that Church, the twins Thomas Vaughan the spiritual
alchemist and Henry Vaughan, Silurist, the mystical poet (1622-1695)
show the reaction of two very different temperaments upon the trans-
cendental life. Again, the group of “Cambridge Platonists,” Henry
More (1614-1687), John Smith (1618-1652), Benjamin Whichcote
(1609-1683), Peter Sterry (c. 1614-1672), and John Norris (1657-1711)
developed and preached a philosophy deeply tinged with mysticism;
and Thomas Traherne (c. 1637-1674) gave poetic expression to the
Platonic vision of life. In Bishop Hall (1574-1656) the same spirit takes
a devotional form. Finally, the Rosicrucians, symbolists, and other
spiritually minded occultists — above all the extraordinary sect of
Philadelphians, ruled by Dr. Pordage (1608-1698) and the prophetess
Jane Lead (1623-1704) — exhibit mysticism in its least balanced aspect
mingled with mediumistic phenomena, wild symbolic visions, and
apocalyptic prophecies. The influence of these Philadelphians, who were
themselves strongly affected by Boehme’s works, lingered for a century,
appearing again in Saint-Martin the “Unknown Philosopher.”

The Catholic mysticism of this period is best seen in France, where
the intellectual and social expansion of the Grande Siecle had also its
spiritual side. Over against the brilliant worldly life of seventeenth-
century Paris and the slackness and even corruption of much organized
religion, there sprang up something like a cult of the inner life. This
mystical renaissance seems to have originated in the work of an English
Capuchin friar, William Fitch, in religion Benedict Canfield (1520-1611),
who settled in Paris in old age and there became a centre of spiritual
influence. Among his pupils were Madame Acarie (1566-1618) and
Pierre de Blrulle (1575-1629), and through them his teaching on con-
templation affected all the great religious personalities of the period.
The house of Madame Acarie — a woman equally remarkable for
spiritual genius and practical ability — became the gathering-point of a
growing mystical enthusiasm, which also expressed itself in a vigorous



APPENDIX


471

movement of reform within the Church. B^rulle was one of the founders
of the Oratory. Madame Acarie, known as the “conscience of Paris,
visited the relaxed convents and persuaded them to a more strict and
holy life. Largely by her instrumentality, the first houses of reformed
Carmelites were established in France in 1604, nuns being brought to
direct them from St. Teresa's Spanish convents; and French mysticism
owes much to this direct contact with the Teresian school. Madame
Acarie and her three daughters all became Carmelite nuns; and it was
from the Dijon Carmelites that St. Jeanne Frangoise de Chantal (1572-
1641) received her training in contemplation. Her spiritual father, and
co-founder of the Order of the Visitation, St. Francois de Sales (1567-
1622), had also been in youth a member of Madame Acarie's circle. He
shows at its best the peculiar talent of the French school for the detailed
and individual direction of souls. Outside this cultured and aristocratic
group two great and pure mystics arise from humbler social levels. First
the intrepid Ursuline nun Marie del’Incamation (1599-1672), the pioneer
of education in the New World, in whom we find again St. Teresa’s
twin gifts for high contemplation and practical initiative. Secondly
the Carmelite friar Brother Lawrence (1611 -1691), who shows the
passive tendency of French mysticism in its most sane, well-balanced
form. He was a humble empiricist, laying claim to no special gifts: a
striking contrast to his contemporary, the brilliant and unhappy genius
Pascal (1623-1662), who fought his way through many psychic storms
to the vision of the Absolute.

The genuine French and Flemish mysticism of this period, greatly
preoccupied with the doctrines of self-naughting and passivity, con-
stantly approached the frontiers of Quietism. The three great Capuchin
teachers of contemplation, the Flemings Constantine Barbanpon (1581-
1632) and John Evangelist of Barluke (1588-1635), and the English
Benedict Canfield, were not entirely beyond suspicion in this regard;
as their careful language,and thescrutiny to which they were subjected
by contemporary authority, clearly shows. The line between the true
and false doctrine was a fine one, as we see in the historic controversy
between Bossuct and Fenelon; and the perilous absurdities of the
Quietist writers often tempted the orthodox to draw it in the wrong
place.

The earliest In date and most exaggerated in type of these true
Quictists is the Franco-Flemish Antoinette Bourignan (1616-1680): a
strong-willed and wrong-headed woman who, having renounced the
world with Franciscan thoroughness, founded a sect, endured consider-
able persecutions, and made a great stir in the religious life of her time.
An even greater uproar resulted from the doctrinal excesses of the
devout Spanish priest Miguel de Molinos (1640-1697) ; whose extreme
teachings were condemned by the Church, and for a time brought the
whole principle of passive contemplation into disrepute. Quietism, at
bottom, was the unbalanced expression of that need which produced
the contemporary Quaker movement in England: a need for personal
contact with spiritual realities, evoked by the formal and unsatisfying
quality of the official religion of the time. Unfortunately the great



MYSTICISM


472

Quietists were not great mystics. Hence their propaganda, in which
the principle of passivity — divorced from, and opposed to, all spiritual
action — was pressed to its logical conclusion, resulted in a doctrine
fatal not only to all organized religion but to the healthy development
of the inner life.

Madame Guyon (1648-1717), the contemporary of Molinos, is usually
quoted as a typical Quietist. She is an example of the unfortunate
results of an alliance of mystical tendencies with a feeble surface
intelligence. Had she possessed the robust common sense so often found
in the great contemplatives, her temperamental inclination to passivity
would have been checked, and she would hardly have made use of the
exaggerated expressions which brought about the official condemna-
tion of her works. In spite of the brilliant championship of Fenelon,
and the fact that much of her writing merely reproduces orthodox
teaching on contemplative prayer in an inferior form, she was involved
in the general condemnation of “passive orison'' which the aberrations of
the extreme Quietists had called forth.

The end of the seventeenth century saw a great outburst of popular
Quietism; some within and some without the official Church. Well
within the frontiers of orthodoxy, and exhibiting the doctrine of
passivity in its noblest form, was the Jesuit J. P. de Caussade (still living
1739). Among those who over-stepped the boundary — though all the
Quietists appealed to the general tradition of mysticism in support of
their one-sided doctrine — were Mala val, whose “Theologie Mystique"
contains some beautiful French translations from St. Teresa, and
Peter Poiret (1646-1719), once a Protestant pastor, then the devoted
disciple of Antoinette Bourignan. Later generations owe much to the
enthusiasm and industry of Poiret, whose belief in spiritual quiescence
was combined with great literary activity. He rescued and edited all
Madame Guyon's writings; and has left us, in his “Bibliotheca Mysti-
corum," the memorial of many lost works on mysticism. From this unique
bibliography we can see how "orthodox" was the food which nourished
even the most extreme of the Quietists : how thoroughly they believed
themselves to represent not a new doctrine, but the true tradition of
Christian mysticism.

With the close of the seventeenth century, the Quietist movement
faded away. The beginning of the eighteenth sees the triumph of that
other stream of spiritual vitality which arose outside the Catholic
Church and flowed from the great personality of Jacob Boehme. If
the idea of surrender be the mainspring of Quietism, the complementary
idea of rebirth is the mainspring of this school. In Germany, Boehme's
works had been collected and published by an obscure mystic, John
Gichtel (1638-1710) ; whose life and letters constantly betray hisinfluence.
In England, where that influence had been a living force from the
middle of the seventeenth century, when Boehme's, writings flrst became
known, the Anglo-German Dionysius Andreas Freher was writing
between 1699 and 1720. In the early years of the eighteenth century,
Freher was followed by William Law (1686-1761), the Nonjuror: a
brilliant stylist, m 1 one of the most prof oundof English religious writers.



APPENDIX


473

Law, who was converted by the reading of Boehme’s works from the
narrow Christianity to which he gave classic expression in the “Serious
Call” to a wide and philosophic mysticism, gave, in a series of writings
which burn with mystic passion, a new interpretation and an abiding
place in English literature to the "inspired shoemaker’s” mighty vision
of Man and the Universe.

The latter part of a century which clearly represents the steep down-
ward trend of the mystic curve gives us three strange personalities;
all of whom have passed through Boehme’s school, and have placed
themselves in opposition to the ecclesiasticism of their day. In Germany,
Eckartshausen (1752-1803), in “The Cloud upon the Sanctuary” and
other works, continued upon individual lines that tradition of esoteric
and mystical Christianity, and of rebirth as the price of man's entrance
into Reality, which found its best and sanest interpreter in William
Law. In France the troubled spirit of the transccndentulist Saint-Martin
(1743-1803), the “Unknown Philosopher,” was deeply affected in his
passage from a merely occult to a mystical philosophy by the reading
of Boehme and Eckartshausen ; and also by the works of the English
“Philadelphians,” Dr. Pordage and Jane Lead, who had long sunk to
oblivion in their native land, in England, William Blake, poet, painter,
visionary, and prophet (1757-1827). shines like a solitary star in the
uncongenial atmosphere of the Georgian age.

The career of Blake provides us with a rare instance of mystical
genius, forcing not only rhythm and words, but also colour and form, to
express its vision of truth. So individual in Ins case was this vision, so
strange the elements from which his symbolic reconstructions were built
up, that he failed in the attempt to convey it to other men. Neither in
his prophetic books nor in his beautiful mystical paintings does he
contrive to transmit more than great and stimulating suggestions of
"things seen” in some higher and more valid state of consciousness.
Whilst his visionary symbolism derives to a large extent from Sweden-
borg, whose works were the great influence of his youth, Blake has
learned much from Boehme, and probably from his English interpreters.
Almost alone amongst English Protestant mystics, he has also received
and assimilated the Catholic tradition of the personal and inward
communion of love. In his great vision of “Jerusalem,” St. Teresa and
Madame Guyon are amongst the “gentle souls” whom he secs guarding
that Four-fold Gate which opens towards Beulah — the gate of the con-
templative life — and guiding the great “Wine-press of Love whence
mankind, at the hands of its mystics, has received, in every age, the
Wine of Life.


INDEX


Absolute, The, 40, 103, no, 1 16, 229,
344* 447

and mysticism, 24, 35, 37, 42, 67, 72,
82, 92, 97, 102, 103, 120, 127, 330,
387 5*7.

and vitalism, 29

apprehension of, 36, 84, 171, 241 seq.,

378, 389

search for, 45, 418
union with, 51, 91, 174, 198, 245, 310,
40 1 , 44 6

man and, 55, 220, 220, 238, 289
love of, 72, 86, 239, 334, 348
immanent, 98 seq., 174, 190 seq.
and Christianity, 117 seq.
its desire of man, 132
awakening to, 160, 232
and contemplation, 231 seq., 332, 355
fruition of, 340, 373
and ecstasy, 374

Abyss, The, 73, 84, 97, 122, 229, 257,
335 scq. t 345 seq., 425
Acarie, Madame, 470
Adolescence, 386
Aeldred, St., 466
Albertus Magnus, 143
Alchemists, Spiritual, 102, 140 $64., 226,
401. 418, 432
Alexander, S., 29

A 1 Ghazzali, 50, 83, 171, 210, 226, 462
A 1 Hallaj, 462
Allegory, 129 seq., 285
Ambrose, St., 274
Anaesthesia, 226, 320, 359
Analogy, 159

Angela of Foligno, 216, 267, 269,
277 seq., 293, 332, 375, 392, 393,
461, 470

her visions, 252, 282 seq., 341, 343
on contemplation, 350
Anthony of Padua, St., 267
Aquinas, see Thomas
Archetypal World, 154, 262 seq.
Areopagite, see Dionysius
Aridity, 24 t, 383, 391
Aristotle, 47, 103
Anus, 105
d'Ars, Cure, 206
Art, Function of, 74 seq .

Artists—

and mystics, 76, 237

and illumination, 169, 239. 250


Artists [continued ) —
and vision, 271, 285
and contemplation, 300
Asceticism, 205, 215, 224 seq., 230
Astral Light, 154 seq .

Athanasius, St., 419
'Attar, 131, 132, 226, 462
Atwood, Mrs., 143

Auditions, 66, 78, 181, 185, 241, 266
seq., 273 seq., 332

Augustine, St., 21, 29, 50, 88, 98, 100,
104, 115, 129, 133, 178, 216, 239,
248, 250, 253, 336, 419 seq., 456, 470
on God, 38
on Trinity, in
on Love, 117
vision, 331

Automatic composition, 80, 241, 278,
293 seq.

examples, 66, 293 seq.

Automatism, 63, 161, 240, 255, 266
seq., 281
Autoscopes, T59

Aziz bin Mahommed Nafasi, 130
Azoth, 172

Baker, Ven. Augustine, 218, 291, 308,
362, 47°

on contemplation, 305
on quiet, 323
on Dark Night, 387
Barban^on, C., 471
Barluke, John Evangelist of, 471
Basil the Monk, 145
Beatific Vision, 96, 132, 190, 196, 335,
340. 389, 423, 437
Beauty, 20 seq., 238
Plato on, 22, 210
Divine, 196, 289, 342
Becoming, World of, 28, 35 seq., 73, 99.
101, 192, 222, 234, 238, 258, 367,

4 °L 433 * 449
Being —

Eckhart on, 5, 93

and Becoming, 28, 37 seq., 67, 113,
ri 6, 240, 340, 433

Pure, 39 seq., 73, 97 * 100 seq., 249,

257 , 3 ° 4 . 331 . 339 . 367 . 433
Science of, 151, 453
union with, 319* 343* 345
Berger, 89
Bergson, 27, 29, 30



MYSTICISM


5 ™

Bernadette of Lourdes, 359
Bernard, St., 50, 75, 173, 215, 241, 324,
33L 4 J 4» 458 seq ., 470
on God, 92, 1 13
on Spiritual Marriage, 137
on ecstasy, 303
Bernardino of Siena, St., 467
B6rulle, Pierre de, 470
Betrothal, Spiritual, 137 seq., 245, 273
Bhagavad Gita, 155
Bin yon, L., 75
Birds and Mystics, 260
Blake, William, 80, 104, 106, 107, 116,
154, 166, 168, 173, 191, 236, 238,

240, 255, 257, 259, 267, 279, 293

seq., 355, 4 & 9 . 473
automatic writing, 66
on art, 74

on Incarnation, 106
his illumination, 235 seq.
on Nature, 259
his visions, 280
Blood, B. P., 371
Blosius,468

Boehme, Jacob, 57, 93, 96, 104, 120, 123,
141, 144 seq., 154, 160, 229, 238,

241, 259, 263, 367, 349, 469, 472
his ecstasy, 58

on recollection, 64, 313
on immanence, 100
on Incarnation, 119
on New Birth, 123
his purgation, 226
illumination, 255 seq.
automatic composition, 296
on deification, 421
Bonaventura, St., 106, 124, 131, 462
Bossuet, 471

Bourignan, Antoinette, 215, 306, 471
her renunciation, 212
Boutroux, E., 40
Boyce Gibson, 62, 103
Bremond, H., 54, 67, 189, 232
Brethren of Free Spirit, 105, 150
Bridget of Sweden, St., 274, 467
Browne, SirT., 143, 148, 160
Bruno, St., 458
Bucke, R. M„ 193, 255
Bunyan, J., 130
Butler, Dom C., 138

Canfield, Benedict, 470
Catalepsy, 360

Catherine of Alexandria, St., 292
Catherine of Bologna, St., 467
Catherine of Genoa, St., 79, 80, 85, 127,
129, 1 73i 177. 182, 229. 252, 331,

396 , 436* 461, 467
her fasts, 59
on love, 92

her conversion, 181, 196
purgation, 201, 219 seq., 225


Catherine of Getoa, St. (< continued ) —
on Purgatory, 202, 221
her illumination, 247
ecstasies, 362, 364
on mystic way, 441 seq.

Catherine dei Ricci, St., 469
Catherine of Siena, St., 19, 63, 84, 86,
101, 173, 221, 228, 268, 297, 359,
362, 375, 377, 398 seq., 412. 414,
421, 436, 438, 459, 464, 467
on union, 37, 365
her fasts, 59

mystic marriage of, 80, 273, 291

on Incarnation, 119

mystic life, 174

on self-knowledge, 200

her visions, 270, 392

Dialogue, 293

ecstasies, 365 seq.

Catholicism, 469

and magic, 163 *

Caussade, J. P. de, 383, 390, 391, 472
Chantal, St., see Jeanne Fran^oise de
Chantal
Character —

remaking, 204, 216 seq., 306, 381,
396, 416
in quiet, 323
purgation, 388
of unilives, 429 seq.

Cliastity, 205

Christ, 109, 1 18, 128, 138, 233, 344,
391 , 412

life of, and mystics. 120, 222, 448
humanity of, 120, 283
Eternal, 134
indwelling, 144
visions of, 279, 2 S3
Christian mysticism, see Mysticism
Christian science, 156
Christianity —

and Mysticism, 104 seq., 222, 236,
344 . 4 * 1 8

and philosophy, 105 seq.
and magic, 153, 163
and deification, 419
Church and magic, 163 seq.
Clairvoyance, 155, 256
Clean thes, 106

Clement of Alexandria, 104, 435
Cloud of Unknowing, The, 48, 335, 337,
348 seq., 459, 4^6
Cognition, 46 seq., 67
Colette, St., 467
Columba Rieti, 468
Common Life, Brotherhood of, 463
Conation, 46 seq., 67, 314
Consciousness —

mystical, twofold, 35 seq., go, 195,
215, 227, 240, 337, 345, 433
transcendental, 51 seq., 55, 67, 70,
212 seq., 241 seq., 385, 444



INDEX


Consciousness {continued ) —
alteration of, 56, 176, 295, 389
field of, 56, 58, 67 sec/., 91, 176, 329
threshold of, 56 sec/., 67, 74, 314
oscillations of, in mystics, 167 seq.,
177, 227 seq., 233, 253, 381, 383,
445

Mystic, its awakening, 176 seq.
Cosmic, 192 seq., 255
growth, 264, 402
unification of, 308, 363, 366
in introversion, 309 seq., 314, 329,
33 6

ecstatic, 370

Constant, A. L., see L 6 vi Eliphas
Contemplation, 50, 56, 67 seq., 184,
241, 243, 282, 294, 298 seq., 304,
328 seq., 358 seq., 375
its nature, 50, 300
passive* 64
forms of, 92, 329, 335
infused, 245

an experiment in, 301 seq.
degrees of, 31 1
its function, 330
dark, 332, 346 seq., 353, 383
marks of, 332
descriptions of, 335
method of, 346 seq.
and ecstasy, 363, 367, 373
Contemplative —
life, 197
state, 131
experience, 331
Conternplatives, 172, 432
Conversion, 177 seq., 229 seq., 269, 376,
412

two types of, 195
Counter-refoi motion, 468

Cutten, G. B., 52, 59

D'vncr, Mystic, 231, 233
Dante, 35* 39, 75. 101, 105, 115, 120,
129, 135. 256, 307, 331, 344. 355.
3^7. 412, 4 T 5 se l-> 4i 8 seq.,

435. -137. 443. 46°. 4&*
on emanation, 97
and mystic way, 131
Purgatorio, 200, 202
on Divine Light, 249
his vision of God, 251, 340
and symbolic vision, 286
on mystic joy, 437

Dark Night of Soul, 121, 169, 229, 241,
380 seq., 416

4 mystic aspect of, 387 seq.

? Suso and, 403 seq.

Deification, 99, 102, 139, 170, 175, 379,
401, 415 seq.

Deified man, 146 seq.

Delacroix, 14, 242, 289, 308, 416, 419
on mystics, 62, 172


5™

Delacroix ( continued ) —
on St. Teresa, 108
on automatism, 273
on contemplation, 330
Denis the Carthusian, 364, 465
Dc Sanctis, 179

Detachment, 130, 205 seq., 396 seq.
Devotion, 130

Dialogue, mystical, 241, 277 seq.
Dionysius the Areopagite, 46, 65, 79,
97, ioi, 104, 132, 171, 188, 253.
3i 8 . 320, 337, 456, 460, 465
on surrender, 93
on ignorance, 93
on Divine Love, 197
on Divine Dark, 251, 347
on contemplation, 333
Disintegrated Personality, see Per-
sonality

Dissociation, Mental, 278
Divine Absence, see God, Absence of
Divine Dark, 73, 97, 132, 171, 251, 318,
335 seq., 347, 353 seq.
its meaning, 348

Divine Fecundity, 166, 170 seq., 428
examples of, 429
Divine Humanity, 388 seq.

Divine Ignorance, see Ignorance
Divine Principle, 100
Divine Union, see Union
Doucelinc, St., 216, 461
Driescli, Hans, 27

Erne*, Margaret, 269, 465
Eckartshausen, C. von, 123, 473
Fckhart, 6, 10, 64, 83, 133, 136, 173,
18S, 229, 255, 305, 312, 318 seq.,
344. 389. 463
on Being, 5, 93
on silence, 38, 64
on immanence, 101
on Holy Spirit, 1 17
on Eternal Birth, 122
on purity, 206
on poverty, 208 seq.
on detachment. 209
on union, 370
on deification, 419

Ecstasy, 32, 56 seq., 60, 81, 94, 128, 132,
161, 228', 243, 299. 3 ° 3 » 3 5$ seq., 380

creative, 64, 378
and union, 170
examples, 187 seq., 362 seq
and purgation, 226 seq.
its psychology, 363 seq.
and mysticism, 367 seq.
and contemplation, 373
dark, 394
Ecstatics, 368
Elizabeth of Sch6nau, 459
Emanation, 97 seq.

and immanence, 102 seq.



512


MYSTICISM


Emotion, 45 saq.
conative, 46
and symbolism, 126
and mysticism, 135
and contemplation, 335
Entelechy, 39
Epistle of Discretion, 85
of Private Counsel, 320
of Prayer, 427

Erigena, John Scotus, m, 259, 263,

457

Eucken, Rudolph, 27, 34, 112, 114, 414,
4i7

on Reality, 21, 33
Euripides, 236
Evocation, 157, 161

Faith and life, 15
Fasting, 59

Father, The, 41, 108 seq., 115, 304, 340
Feeling —

thought and will, 67, 311, 329
and mysticism, 71, 335 seq., 367, 437
F6nelon, 471

Field of Consciousness, see Conscious-
ness

Fire, Mystic, 114, 124, 141, 189, 221,
23c 257. 4 21
of Love, see Love
Flowers, Mystics and, 215, 255
Fox, George, 173, 177 seq., 226, 238,
255, 414, 469
his illumination, 257
Francis of Assisi, St., 77, 173, 19b. 206,
210, 212, 215, 237, 239, 241, 267
seq., 276 seq., 364,430,431, 436 seq.,
460, 467

his character and conversion, 180 seq.

on poverty, 208

purgation, 224

and animals, 260 seq.

stigmata, 267, 290, 375

his joy, 439 seq .

Francis de Sales, St., 10, 52, 183, 394,
47i

Francis Xavier, St., 222
Franck, Sebastian, 297
Fraticelli, 105

Freedom, 27, 30 seq., 129, 199, 207, 279,
33°. 357. 367, 37L 4°4. 4 l6 seq.
Freyer, D. A., 472

Friends of God, 185, 370, 410, 432,
464

Fruition, 173, 345. 356, 373, 417 seq.,
433 seq.

Funklein, 54

Game of Love, see Love
Gardiner, Edmund, 59, 268, 294
Genius, 63 seq., 73
and mysticism, 65, 232, 366
spiritual, 103, 235, 375, 430


Gerson, 467 ^

Gertrude, St., 343, 389, 460, 463

Gertrude, Nun, 460

Gichtel, John, 472

Gnosticism, 58, 105, 149, 153 seq.

God, 07, 105, 107, 238, 330, 341, 419.
447

union with, see Union
love of, see Love

as Being, 37 seq., 127, 249, 337,

369

mystics and, 38, 111 seq., 189
knowledge of, 57, 83, 130 seq., 195,
369 seq.

transcendent, 96 seq., 102, 195, 251
seq., 336, 344 seq.
immanent, 99 seq., 103, 128, 263,
34 2 seq.

names of, 103, 106, 163
needs man, 132, 425 #

absence of, 170, 376, 388 seq., 393
seq., 410

absorption in, 170

presence of, 184, 239 seq., 282, 314,
382 seq.

glory of, 192, 249
craving for, 248, 265
in quiet, 319
sons of, 433

Godfernaux, 75, 269, 361
Godhead, Unconditioned, 40, 101,

109 seq., 120, 132, 171, 344, 346,
433 seq.

vision ot, 109, 340
aspects of, 109 seq., 336
emanations of, 263
desert of, 304, 337 seq.
and God, 344
Ruysbroeck on, 345
see also Abyss and Absolute
Grail, quest of, 129
Granger, F., 267
Gravitation, spiritual, 132
Gregory of Nyssa, 104, 263
Gregory the Great, 457
Grout, Gerard, 465
Grou, J. N., 306
('.round of Soul, see Soul
Guyon, Madame, 196, 246, 293, 322,
390 seq., 401 seq., 407
automatic writing, 60, 295
youth and conversion, 182 seq.
and St. Catherine of Genoa, 183
purgation, 225 seq.
on contemplation, 326
dark night, 383 seq .
on union, 431

Hafiz, 462
Hall, Bishop, 470
Harphius, 465
Hazlitt, 160



INDEX


513


H^rt, 71
Heiat, mystic, 193
H6bert, M. # 71
Hegel on Beuty, 21
Helfde, 460
Henry de Mande, 465
Henry of Nordlingen, 465
Heracleitus, 10, 38, 106, 116, 238
and vitalism, 28 seq .

Hermes Trismegistus, 143. 153, 159
Hermetic act, see Alchemy
books, 153
science, 152 seq.

Hervey, Christopher, 113
Higher Thought, see New Thought
Hildcgarde, St., 62, 115, 249, 274, 276,
458

Hilton, Walter, 51, 87, 132, 200, 220,
264, 323, 332, 342 seq., 348 seq.,
401 4^8, 466
on pilgrimage, 129
on presence of God. 242
on automatisms, 280
on contemplation, 307 seq., 334
Holland, B., 117
Holy Spirit, 109, 116 seq.

‘‘Hound of Heaven," 135
Hugh of St. Victor, 129, 309
on music, 77

on contemplation, 92, 245
Humility, 200, 209, 221, 252 seq., 317,
337. 348, 400
Huysmans, 222, 271
Hymn of Jesus, 134, 234, 455
Hypnotic states, 57 seq.

Hysteria and mystics, 58 seq.

Idealism, 1 1 seq.

Ignatius Loyola, St., 173, 414, 430, 431,
436, 468
his lucidity, 58
mortifications, 225
visions, 272

Ignorance, Divine. 319. 337, 340, 348
Illumination, State of, 130 seq., 139,
169, 19 1 seq., 206, 227, 279 seq.,
310. 340. 38l seq., 388, 396
and alchemy, 145
its nature, 199, 246 seq .
characteristics, 234 seq.
transcendental, 250 seq.

Illuminative Way, see Illumination
Immanence, 35, 40, 97 seq., 103 seq.,
240, 251

psychology and, 99
consciousness of, 178, 191 seq., 196,
P 234, 257, 283, 342 seq.

see also Absolute and God
Incarnation, The, 106 seq., 118 seq., 355
and deification, 419
Independent spiritual life, 33, 55
spiritual world, 23, 169


Indifference, 205, 323 seq.. 412
Inge, W. R., 54
Initiation, 156 seq.

Inspiration, 63, 234, 293, 299
Intellect, 45 seq.

Bergson’s theory of, 30
darkness of, 385 seq.
satisfaction of, 437
Introversion, 99, 250, 298 seq.
Intuition, 33, 64, 130, 259, 274 seq, 306,

363

Irenaeus, 104

Jacopone da Todi, 1 21, 219, 249, 461
on poverty, 207
on ecstasy, 374
Jacques of la Massa, 237
Jalalu 'd Din, 32, 87, 134, 17 1, 348, 389,
426

James, William, 7 seq., 98
on mysticism, 81, 331
J£mf, 82, 127, 462
Janet, Pierre, 60 seq., 267
Jeanne Fran^oise de Chantal, St., 183,
3*3

Jefferies, Richard, 192, 195
Jerome, St., 13
Jerusalem, 124, 129, 334
Joan of Arc, St., 173, 276, 414, 430, 467
John, St., Gospel of, 250
John of Parma, 237
John of the Cross, St., 73, 79, 89, 92, 96,
98. 139 . 173. 203, 221, 229, 350,
354, 388, 402, 407, 440, 468
poems quoted, 83, 236, 352, 371
on detachment, 206, 21 1
on attachments, 212
on automatisms, 275 seq. , 280
on dark contemplation, 353
on Dark Night, 389 seq., 399
Jones, Rufus, 185 seq., 267
joy. Mystic, 189, 239, 253, 342, 354,
437 seq.

Julian of Norwich, 36, 68, 90, 101, 133,
202, 239, 242, 247, 252 seq. , 258,
268, 301, 304 seq., 364, 467
on Trinity, 111 seq.
on Incarnation, 119
visions, 270
Jundt, A., 185, 402

Kabalah, the, 153, 154, 159
Kabalists, 63, 97 seq., 103, 108, 263 seq
Kant, 58, 301
Kempe, Margery, 224, 466
Knowledge, 44 seq.
desire of, 45 seq., 72, 90, 151
by union, 68, 84
renouncement of, 93
transcendental, 268, 301, 329 seq., 334
law of, 342, 446
and ecstasy, 369 seq., 376



MYSTICISM


Law, William, 141, 250, 263, 397, 469,
472

on Trinity, 114

Lawrence, Brother, 188, 195, 241, 246,
253, 47i

character and conversion, 190
Lead, Jane, 123, 470, 473
Leadbeater, C. W., 156
Leuba, 47, 183, 267
on mystics, 91 seq. t 94
L6vi, Eliphas, 153 seq., 161 seq.
Levitation, 186, 376 seq .

Liberty, see Freedom
Libido, 45
Ligature, 330

Light, Inward, 100, 103, 353

uncreated, 73, 114, 239, 3 08 , 34 2
mystic, 249 seq., 289, 421
Light, life, and love, 1 1 5 seq . , 1 90,2 39, 34 1
Liturgies, 163 set].

Logos, 28, 38, 109 seq., 1 1 5 seq., 118
seq., 134, 233
Love —

Spirit of, see Holy Spirit
and pain, 19, 221 seq.
desire of, 44 seq., 71
active, 46 seq.

mystic, 49, 70 seq., 77, 81, 85 seq.,
92 seq., 197, 208, 264, 281, 3 11 .
355. 37i. 389. 4- 6 «?•
of God, 68 seq., 81 seq., 181, 191, 223
divine, 103, 196, 343
as Holy Spirit, 116 seq.
symbols of, 128, 136
mutual, 130 seq.
following, 135

Four Degrees of, 139, 309, 312, 315
seq., 327. 379
Fire of, 189, 197, 418
pure, 201, 229, 247, 312, 325, 331, 412
game of, 227, 286, 383
vision of, 279
in orison, 306, 313, 330
language of, 425
and fruition, 435 seq.

Lucia of Nami, 468
Lucidity, Mystic, 58 seq., 177, 238,
255 seq., 360, 363, 390
Lucie-Christine, 179, 384, 389
Luis de Granada, 468
Luis de Leon, 214, 468
Lull, Ramon, 462

Lydwine of Scbvjdam, St., 222, 467
visions, 271

Macarius of Eg> pt, St., 457
Maeterlinck, M., 340
Magic, 70, 82, 84, 149 seq.
and religion, 15 1
and psychology, 157 seq.
therapeutics, 161
and Christianity, 162 seq.


Magnum Opus, see Alchemy
Magus, 144
Malaval, 254, 361, 472
Mantra, 158

Margaret Mary, St., 267
Maria Maddelena dei Pazzi, St.,

469

Marie de lTncamation, Ven., 471
Maritain, J., 301, 334
Marriage of Soul, see Spiritual Mar
Martinists, 154
Maury, A., 363
McDougall, W., 228
Mead, G. R. S., 134
Mechthild of Hackborn, St., 31, 1
460

visions, 287

Mechthild of Magdeburg, 62, 90, 1
206 seq., 238 seq., 249 seq., 278 s
393, 420, 460 n

on mystic pain, 61
on love, 92
on orison, 344

Meditation, 49, 158, 311, 313 seq.,

seq.

Mediums, 66, 293 seq., 360
Mental Healing, 158, 161
Menticulture, 153, 156
Merswin, Rulman, 97, 177. *95 seq
202, 376 seq., 383, 393, 4°2, 4^5
his Vision of Nine Rocks, 98, 132, 20
conversion, 185
psychology, 186, 294
penances, 228

Metapsychic phenomena, 155 seq.
Microcosm, 98, 102, 159
Mirror of St. Edmund, The, 306
Mirror of Simple Souls, The, 75, 2i<
337. 34*. 426, 437, 462
Missal, 1 19, 163, 274
Molinos, 324, 471
Monet, 263

Monoideism, 58 seq., 246, 363 seq., 37;
More, Gertrude, 59, 78, 88 seq., I2f
248, 470

Mortification, 169, 186, 200 seq., 216 seq.,

233, 396

Music and Mysticism, 76 seq., 277, 336
Musset, A. de., 293
Myers, F., 359
Mysteries, The, 235, 455
Orphic, 24, 426, 454
Dionysiac, 58, 236, 359, 454
Mystic —

marriage, see Spiritual
philosophy, see Philosophy
vision, 35 seq., 134
type. 49. 91. 2«3 seq., 229
sense, 50 seq.
feeling, 73
literature, 80, 239
experience, 91, 252, 33$



INDEX


Mjrtic (i continued ) — *

<^iest, 91 seq., 103, 12 g seq.
education, 92, 298 seq., 310
life process, 92
theology, 104 seq.
death, 169, 383 seq., 401
life, first, 169, 228, 238, 298, 310,
3 s 1 1

life, second, 229, 381, 403 seq .
language, 335
development, 381 seq.
heritage, 432

Mystic Way, 81 seq., 91, 94, 127, 167
seq., 306, 381, 416, 426 seq., 432,
440 seq.

and life of Christ, 121
and alchemy, 145
stages of, 168 seq.
end of, 442

Mystic, The, see also Mystics
his mechanism, 49 seq.
defined, 75 seq.
his states, 168
great, mark of, 173
as genius, 386

and visions and voices, 266 seq., 279
and artistic expression, 272 seq.
and orison, 324, 328 seq.
and ecstasy, 370 seq.
and Dark Night, 387 seq.
mature, 432 seq.
r Mysticism —

its doctrines, 23

Indian, 31, 57, 158, 170, 314, 434

and vitalism, 34

its nature, 70 seq., 81 seq.

and music, see Music

and symbols, 79 , 125 seq .

defined, 82

love and, 85 seq.

its branches, 94

and theology, 95 seq.

its valid part, 102

Christian, 104, 172 seq., 234, 304, 314,

323. 344. 364. 4°i. 419

theurgic, 150
and magic, 162 seq.

European, 171, 434
and goodness, 199
oassive, 322

German, 396 seq., 459, 462
its meaning, 444
curve of, 453 seq.
tradition of, 454, 469
Mediaeval, 458
Italian, 460 seq.

I Franciscan, 460 seq .

* Dominican, 462
Mahommedan, see Sufis
Flemish, 465
English, 466
Spanish, 468


515

Mystics, The, 23 seq., 34 seq., 49 seq.,
94. 104. 344
their claim, 4, 22 seq.
and artists, 35, 75, 223, 236, 259, 271
practical, 59, 101, 246 seq., 347, 414
psycho-physical peculiarities, 58 seq.,
363

their wholeness of life, 63
automatic powers, 65
heroic types, 91 seq., 428
and theology, 95 seq., 108 seq .
and occultists, 156
as actives, 172 seq., 429 seq.
their love of nature, 206, 260
and Unitive life, 414 seq.
two types of, 415
as lovers, 428
Unitive, 429 seq.
and humanity, 446
Christian, see Mysticism

Names of God, see God
Nativity, The, and Mysticism, 119, 122
Naturalism, 8
Nature —

and Christ, 115

mystic vision of, 178, 191 seq., 234,
240, 254

mystics and, 206, 258 seq.
contemplation of, 301 seq.

Negation, 318, 337 seq., 344, 353 seq.,
372. 387

Negative states, 381 seq.

Neoplatonists, 96 seq., 104 seq., 109,
226. 318, 333, 337, 339, 372, 426,
454 seq., 470
their Trinity, m

New Birth, 34, 53, 122 seq., 140, 193,
303. 3i9, 4i9, 445. 454. 469
New Man, 142, 217, 222, 259, 310, 402
New Thought, 71, 153, 156 seq.
Nicholson, R. A., 171
Nicolas of Basle, 465
Nicolas of Cusa, 114, 118, 465
Nirvana, 171
Norris, John, 470

Obedience, 205, 215
Occult, see Magic
Odes of Solomon, 455
Odic force, 153

One, The, 41, 81, 96, 97, 102, 107,
108, 1 13, 139, 212, 229, 307, 331,
337. 343 seq., 347. 372, 454. 455
Dante's vision of. 340
One Act, the, 325 seq.

Origen, 455

Orison, 184, 243, 254, 306 seq., 344, 375,
380 seq.

of quiet, see Quiet

union, see Union

Degrees of, 169, 306 seq., 31 1



5±S MYSTICISM


Bin, 198 seq., 419, 387
conviction of, 390 seq.

Smith, John, 470
Solitude, 173, 344
Bon, The, 115, 120
Eternal Birth of, 123
Marriage with, 304
Sonship Divine, 446
Song, Mystic, 78, 194, 241, 439 S$q.
Song of Songs, 137, 250, 373, 426
Sophia, 123, 230, 233
Soul, 85, 93, 99, 137
apex of, 54, 366

ground of, 54 seq., 99 seq., 233, 274,
304, 312, 319, 339, 343 seq., 349 ,
390 , 401

spark of, 54 seq., 74, 100, 108, 145,
259 , * 74 , 3 ° 4 . 366, 390, 396 ,
402, 445

Space and Time, 12
Spark of Soul, see Soul
Spiritual Marriage, 80, 92, 129, 136 s^.,
172, 302, 327. 355 seq, 372 seq., 415
seq., 426 seq.
ornaments of, 90
of St. Catherine, 174, 291, 297
Starbuck, 58, 172, 382
on conversion, 176, 192
Steiner, R., 150, 152, 156, 191
Sterry, Peter, 470
Stewart, J. A., 54, 74
Stigmatisation, 59, 267, 375
Subliminal Mind, 52 seq., 62, 91, 102,
108, 273, 3^6, 3”, 375, 392
in mystics, 57, 66, 185
and visions, 290
Substance and Existence, 34
Sufis, 63, 80, 83, 92, 96, 108, 127, 130,
171, 210, 226, 418, 462
“Suggestive Enquiry, A", 143, 147
Surrender, 68, 92, 135, 170 seq., 185,
190, 209, 223, 236, 244, 284, 308
ssq., 317* 3*3 seq., 339, 347 s *l-
355. 392 seq., 398 seq., 415.
445

Suso, 91, 101, 172 seq., 185, 195 seq.,
201, 206, 218, 222 seq., 229, 238
seq., 255, 267, 271 seq., 276 seq.,
283, 291, 343, 371, 388, 393. 396,
464

on theology, 97. 118
his conversion, 186
temperament, 186, 408 seq.
visions, 187, 283 seq., 386
illumination, 253
his Dark Night, 386, 403 seq.
and the Knight, 408
and the baby, 410
on union, 424
Swedenborg, 160, 473
9ymbolism, 78 seq., 97, 125 seq., 159,
271. 336


Symbols, 101, 138, 234, 239, 257, 268,
283, 328 '

of the Absolute, 113, 127 seq., 331
three classes of, 126
of quest, 129 ssq.
of love, 136 seq.
of pilgrimage, 130 seq,
of marriage, 136, 425
of transmutation, 140 seq., 418
magic, 159
philosophic, 341
and ecstasy, 364 seq.
of Unitive Life, 415 seq., 427 seq.
of deification, 421
Symons, Arthur, 83, 89, 236, 352
Synteresis, 54, 145

Tauler, 55, 61, 87, 100 seq., 115, 173,
185, 265, 269, 278, 330, 393. 396,

463 seq.

on self loss, 85, 400
on poverty, 215
on mortification, 217
on pain, 222
on desert of God, 304
on Abyss, 338
Telepathy, 155, 295
Tennyson, 238, 255

Teresa, St., 58, 64, 79, 88, 91, 92, 96,
loo, 102, 1 1 7, 168, 169, 172 seq.,
201, 215 seq., 222, 227, 238, 241
seq., 246 seq., 267 seq., 260, 271,
278 seq., 283 seq., 313, 318, 326,
343 . 3bi. 375 . 392 seq., 414, 430.
432, 436. 440, 453 . 4 6 4. 4 &M 7 1 . 473
on ecstasy, 61, 360, 368, 371
on Trinity, 108 seq.

Spiritual Marriage, 138
her character, 213 seq.
purgation, 213 seq.
visions, 270, 281, 284 seq., 288 seq.
on auditions, 274 seq.
her transverberation, 292
automatic writing, 294 seq.
on orison, 308, 31 1 seq., 356 seq.
on recollection, 315
on quiet, 321, 326
on rapture, 329, 363, 376 seq.
on levitation, 376, seq.
on pain of God, 394
TSwekkul B6g, 99

Theologia Geimanica, 50, 55, 83, 121,
127, 141,230, 245, 425,464
on detachment, 207
on deification, 418
Theology, uq seq.

Theopathetic State, 132, 175
life, 431, 436
mystics, 429

Thomas i Kempis, 19, 217, 278, 437,
465. 470
on love, 87



INDEX


'^homas Aquinas, St., 17, 39, 50, 65,
1 16, 150, 188, 361, 428, 462
on emanation, 97
on immanence, 99
on Trinity, hi
on Holy Spirit, 117
on Beatific Vision, 190, 423
Thompson, Francis, 135
Towne, E., 156
Tradition, 300, 454, 470
Traherne, Thomas, 470
Trance, Ecstatic, 170 seq., 255, 294,
359 seq., 367, 375 seq.
Transcendence, 34, 91, 97 seq. , 103,
108, 232, 259, 307. 324» 335»

444

symbols of, 126 seq.
process of, 168, 198
vision of, 195

and immanence, 250, 259, 337
contemplation of, 337, 344 seq.
dark, 355
and ecstasy, 365

Transcendental Consciousness, see Con-
sciousness

feeling, 55 seq., 73, 232, 330
sense, 56 seq., 70 seq.
powers, 63
life, 213
world, 258 seq

Transmutation, see Self and Symbols
Tree of Life, 98, 103, 263
Trinity, Christian, 107 seq., 133, 257,
272, 344, 422. 435
Hindu, no
Neoplatonic, ill
Truth, Quest of, 334

Unification, 54, 108, 238, 416, 434
of consciousness, 68, 364, 370
Union, Mystic, 24, 32, 35 seq., 68, 72
seq., 79 seq. , 84 seq., 89, 100, 127,
133 seq., 146, 170 seq., 281 seq.,
292, 310 seq., 325, 338, seq. 355 seq.,
367. 372, 378, 396, 401, 417 seq.,
422 seq., 446
hypostatic, 119
condition of, 203, 307
orison of, 245, 283, 308 seq., 329, 343,

346. 355

St. Teresa on, 283, 357
passive, 333, 367
ecstatic, 370

Unitive Life, 57, 81, 290, 388, 402,

413 seq .


519

Unitive Life (continued ) —
and illumination, 245 seq .
examples of, 429
dual character of, 433
its gaiety, 439 seq.

Unitive Way, 121, 131, 139, 170, 229,
310, 381, 413 seq.

Unity, 107, 109, 132, 258, 422

Vaughan, H. (Silurist), 255, 347, 409,
470

Vaughan, R. A., 150
Vaughan, Thomas, 470
Vernazza, Ven. Battista, 115, 356, 467
Vision, 74, 240, 307, 333
illuminated, 234 seq., 254 seq .
fourfold, 259

Visions, 66, 79, 196, 266 seq., 279 seq.,

375. 381

examples, 109, 181, 182, 187, 286
seq., 404 seq.

of Godhead, 109, 251 seq., 283 seq.,
340 , 370

dynamic, 138, 290 seq.
evil, 270, 392
and voices, 281
symbolic, 285
Vitalism, 26 seq., 155
Voices, see Auditions
Von Crevelsheim, Ellina, 370
Von Hfigel, Baron F., 29, 40, 41, 60,
80, 122, 202, 247, 268, 317, 323,
351

on St. Catherine of Genoa, 59, 182,
362

on quietism, 325

Waite, A. E., 108
on Magic, 151, 154 seq., 157
Weigel, V., 297
Whichcote, B., 470
Whitman, Walt, 192, 238, 248, 255
Will, 45 seq., 153 seq., 161 seq., 392
and magic, 71, 153 seq.
purgation of, 170, 395 seq.
and conversion, 188, 197
surrender of, 208

in contemplation, 299, 303, 310, 313
seq., 3 2 4» 3 2 9, 375
Woolman, John, 470
Word, The, 109, 113, 115. 118, 193» 2 33.
241, 244, 258, 326, 331, 340, 417,
4 2 3

Words, see Auditions
Wordsworth, W„ 238, 255, 285



