Raja Yoga — Conquering the Internal Nature (Swami Vivekananda, 1899)
====================================================================
Swami Vivekananda — Raja Yoga: Conquering the Internal Nature (1899), public domain. The lectures on raja yoga with Patanjali's Yoga aphorisms, commentary, and appendix. Scan via Internet Archive.

Digitized by



rAja yoga

p]


Digitized by Google


REPRESENTATIVE OF THE HINDU RELHMO** AT THE WORLD’* PARLIAMENT
OF RELIGIONS, HELD IN CHICAGO. IBB*


Digitizecfby Google


Digitized by Google


L»ANTA PHILOSOPHY


L/icrrxES


?iV THR


> W A M f VI V if KAN A N I) A


RAJA YOGA

AND OTHER SUBJECTS
.uso

NJAVTS YOO\ M’H ORISVS. v - : ;TH ':OM-
MKKTAKiKS. A\ r P Gl.«':>>AkV of
SANSKRIT PERMS



/h ±;>//7 ».\r


NEW YORK

THE RAKER A: TAYLOR CvMi’A^V
33 -- *7 K\ST SF.VP.STIlSf. Hi S rKki^T
Union S^uaN\-k*ih


Digitized by Google



• COPYRIGHT, 1897,

BY

WEED-PARSONS PRINTING COMPANY.


BY

THE BAKER A TAYLOR COMPANY.


Digitized by


Each soul is potentially divine.

The goal is to manifest this divinity within, by con¬
trolling NATURE. EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL.

DO THIS EITHER BY WORK, OR WORSHIP, OR PSYCHIC CON¬
TROL, OR PHILOSOPHY, BY ONE, OR MORE, OR ALL OF THESE —
AND BE FREE.

This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas,
or rituals, or books, or temples, or forms, are but

SECONDARY DETAILS.

[v«]


Digitized by L^OOQle



Digitized by Google



PREFACE


Since the dawn of history, various extraordinary
phenomena have been recorded as happening amongst
human beings. Witnesses are not wanting in modern
times to attest to the fact of such events, even in socie¬
ties living under the full blaze of modern science. The
vast mass of such evidence is unreliable, as coming from
ignorant, superstitious, or fraudulent persons. In many
instances the so-called miracles are imitations. But
what do they imitate ? It is not the sign of a candid
and scientific mind to throw overboard anything without
proper investigation. Surface scientists, unable to ex¬
plain the various extraordinary mental phenomena,
strive to ignore their very existence. They are, there¬
fore, more culpable than those who think that their
prayers are answered by a being, or beings, above the
clouds, or than those who believe that their petitions
will make such beings change the course of the uni¬
verse. The latter have the excuse of ignorance, or at
least of a false system of education in their childhood,
which has taught them to depend upon such beings for

M


Digitized by Google



X


PREFACE.


help, and this dependence has now become a part of
their degenerate nature. The former have no such
excuse.

For thousands of years such phenomena have been
investigated, studied, and generalised,the whole ground
of the religious faculties of man has been analysed, and
the practical result is the science of Rdja Yoga . Rdja
Yoga does not, after the unpardonable manner of some
modern scientists, deny the existence of facts which are
very difficult to explain; on the other hand, it gently, yet
in no uncertain terms, tells the superstitious that mira¬
cles and answers to prayers, and powers of faith, though
true as facts, are not rendered comprehensible through
the superstitious explanation of attributing them to
the agency of a being, or beings, above the clouds. It
declares to mankind that each being is only a conduit
for the infinite ocean of knowledge and power that lies
behind. It teaches that desires and wants are in man,
that the power of supply is also in man; and that wher¬
ever and whenever a desire, a want, a prayer, has been
fulfilled, it was out of this infinite magazine that the
supply came, and not from any supernatural being. The
idea of supernatural beings may rouse to a certain extent
the power of action in man, but it also brings spiritual
decay. It brings dependence; it brings fear; it brings
superstition. It degenerates into a horrible belief in the


Digitized by Google



PREFACE.


XI


natural weakness of man. There is no supernatural,
says the Yogi\ but there are in nature gross manifesta¬
tions and subtle manifestations. The subtle are the
causes, the gross the effects. The gross can be easily
perceived by the senses; not so the subtle. The practice
of Rdja Yoga will lead to the acquisition of the more
subtle perceptions.

All the orthodox systems of Indian philosophy have
one goal in view, the liberation of the soul through per¬
fection. The method is by Yoga . The word Yoga
covers an immense ground, but both the S&nkhya and
the Ved&ntist Schools point to Yoga in some form or
other.

The subject of the first lectures in the present book
is that form of Yoga known as Rdja Yoga . The
aphorisms of Patanjali are the highest authority and
text book on Rdja Yoga . The other philosophers,
though occasionally differing from Patanjali in some
philosophical aspect, have, as a rule, acceded to his
method of practice a decided consent. The first
part of this book is comprised of several lectures to
classes delivered by the present writer in New York.
The second part is a rather free translation of the
aphorisms (Sdtras) of Patanjali, with a running com¬
mentary. Effort has been made to avoid technicalities
as far as possible, and to keep to the free and easy style


Digitized by Google



PREFACE


xii

of conversation. In the first part some simple and
specific directions are given for the student who wants
to practise, but all such are especially and earnestly
reminded that, with few exceptions, Yoga can only be
safely learned by direct contact with a teacher. If these
conversations succeed in awakening a desire for further
information on the subject, the teacher will not be
wanting.

The system of Patanjali is based upon the system of
the Sdnkhyas , the points of difference being very few.

The two most important differences are, first that Pat¬
anjali admits a Personal God in the form of a first
teacher, while the only God the Sdnkhyas admit is a
nearly perfected being, temporarily in charge of a cycle.
Second, the Yogis hold the mind to be equally all-per¬
vading with the soul, or Purufa , and the Sdnkhyas do
not

The Author.


V


Digitized by Google



CONTENTS


rAja yoga.

Preface ..ix


Chap.

I. Introductory..

II. Thk first steps. 17

III. Prana. 39

IV. The Psychic PrAna .... 47

V. Thk control of Psychic PrAna . . 55

VI. PratyAhAra and DhAranA ... 6a

VII. DhyAna and SamdAhi .... 7®

VIII. RAja Yoga in brief .... 86


PATANJALI’S YOGA APHORISMS.

Introduction. 97

1 . Concentration: its Spiritual uses . 104

II. „ its Practice . . 147

[ilU]


Digitized by L^OOQle


XIV


CONTENTS.


Chap. —

ILL The chapter op Powers. ... 189
IV. Independence ..... *07
Appendix ...... t*4


IMMORTALITY.sji


BHAKTI-YOGA.

Definition op Bhakti.351

The Philosophy of ISyara .... 358

Spiritual Realisation, the Aim op Bhakti*

Yoga.365

The Need op a Guru ..368

Qualifications op the Aspirant and the

Teacher.371

Incarnate Teachers and Incarnation . . 378

The Mantra: Om: Word and Wisdom \ . 383

Worship of Substitutes and Images . . 386

The Chosen Ideal.399

The Method and the Means . . . .393


Digitized by t^ooole


CONTENTS.


XV


PARA-BHAKTI OR SUPREME DEVOTION.

FAG&

The Preparatory Renunciation . . .301

The Bhakta’s Renunciation Results from

Love.305

The Naturalness op Bhakti-Yoga and Its

Central Secret.310

The Forms of Love-manifestation . . 31a

Universal Love and How It leads to Self¬
surrender .315

The Higher Knowledge and the Higher Love
are one to the True Lover .... 320

The Triangle of Love .32a

The God of Love is His own Proof . . 327

Human Representations of the Divine Ideal


of Love •••••••• 329

Conclusion ........ 337

GLOSSARY.341


Digitized by Google


Digitized by



Digitized by


RAJA YOGA

OR

Conquering the Internal Nature


CHAPTER L

INTRODUCTORY.

All our knowledge is based upon experience. What
we call inferential knowledge, in which we go from the
less general to the more general, or from the general to
the particular, has experience as its basis. In what are
called the exact sciences, people easily find the truth,
because it appeals to the particular experiences of every
human being. The scientist does not tell you to believe
in anything, but he has certain results which come from
his own experiences, and reasoning on these experiences,
when he asks us to believe in his conclusions, he appeals
to some universal experience of humanity. In every
exact science there is a universal basis which is common
to all humanity, so that we can at once see the truth or
the fallacy of the conclusions drawn therefrom. Now,
the question is, has religion any such basis or not ? I
shall have to answer the question both in the affirmative
and in the negative. Religion, as it is generally taught

M


Digitized by v. ‘ >Qle



2


rAja yoga.


all over the world, is said to be based upon faith and
belief, and, in most cases, consists only of different sets
of theories, and that is the reason why we find all these
various religions quarrelling with each other. These
theories, again, are based upon belief. One man says
there is a great Being sitting above the clouds and
governing the whole universe, and he asks me to believe
that, solely on the authority of his assertion. In the
same way I may have my own ideas, which I am asking
others to believe, and if they ask a reason, I cannot
supply them with any. This is why religion and meta¬
physical philosophy have a bad name nowadays. Every
educated man seems to say : 1 'Oh,these religions are only
bundles of theories without any standard to judge them
by, each man preaching his own pet ideas." At the
same time I must tell you that there is a basis of uni¬
versal belief in religion, governing all these different
theories, and all the varying ideas of different sects of
men in different countries. Going to the basis of them
we find that they also are based upon universal
experiences.

In the first place I will ask you to analyse all the
various religions of the world. You will find that these
are divided into two classes, those with a book, and those
without a book. Those with a book are the strongest,
and have the largest number of followers. Those with¬
out books have mostly died out, and the few new ones
have very small followings. Yet, in all of them we
find one consensus of opinion, that the truths they teach
are the results of the experiences of particular persons.


Digitized by


Google



I


INTRODUCTORY, 3

The Christian asks you to believe in his religion, to
believe in Christ, and to believe in Him as the incarna¬
tion of God, to believe in a God, in a soul, and in a
better state of that soul* If I ask him for reasons he
says, “No, it is my belief / 1 But if you go to the
fountain head of Christianity you will find that it is
based upon experience, Christ said He saw God; the
disciples said they felt God; and so forth. Similarly, in
Buddhism, it is Buddha's experience — He experienced
certain truths, saw them, came in contact with them,
and preached them to the world. So with the Hindus —
in their book the writers, who are called or

sages, declare they have experienced certain truths, and
these they preach. Thus it is dear that all the religions
of the world have been built upon that one universal and
adamantine foundation of all our knowledge — direct
experience. The teachers all saw God; they all saw
their own souls, they saw their eternity, they saw their
future, and what they saw they preached. Only there
is this difference, that in most of these religions, espe¬
cially in modern times, a peculiar claim is put before
us, and that claim is that these experiences are impos¬
sible at the present day; they were only possible with
a few men, who were the first founders of the religions
that subsequently bore their names. At the present
time these experiences have become obsolete, and
therefore we have now to take religion on belief.
This I entirely deny. If there has been one case of
experience in this world in any particular branch of
knowledge it absolutely follows that this experience


4


rAja yoga.


has been possible millions of times Defore, and will be
repeated eternally. Uniformity is the rigorous law of
nature; what once happened can happen always.

The teachers of the science of Yoga, therefore, declare
that religion is not only based upon the experience of
ancient times, but that no man can be religious until he
has the same perceptions himself. Yoga is the science
which teaches us how to get these perceptions. It is
useless to talk about religion until one has felt it. Why
is there so much disturbance, so much fighting and
quarrelling in the name of God ? There has been more
bloodshed in the name of God than for any other cause,
and the reason is that people never went to the fountain
head; they were content only to give a mental assent to
the customs of their forefathers, and wanted others to
do the same. What right has a man to say he has a
soul if he does not feel it, or that there is a God if he
does not see Him ? If there is a God we must see Him,
if there is a soul we must perceive it; otherwise it is
better not to believe. It is better to be an outspoken
atheist than a hypocrite. The modern idea, on the one
hand, with the ** learned/' is that religion and meta¬
physics, and all search after a Supreme Being, is futile;
on the other hand, with the semi-educated, the idea
seems to be that these things really have no basis, that
their only value consists in the fact that they are strong
motive powers for doing good to the world. If men
believe in a God, they may become good, and moral, and
so make good citizens. We cannot blame them for
holding such ideas, seeing that all the teaching these


Digitized by Google



INTRODUCTORY.


5


men get is simply to believe in an eternal rigmarole of
words, without any substance behind them. They are
asked to live upon words; can they do it? If they
could, I should not have the least regard for human
nature. Man wants truth, wants to experience truth for
himself, to grasp it, to realise it, to feel it within his
heart of hearts; then alone, declare the Vedas , will all
doubts vanish, all darkness be scattered, and all crooked¬
ness be made straight. M Ye children of immortality,
even those who live in the highest sphere, the way is
found; there is a way out of all this darkness, and that
is by perceiving Him Who is beyond all darkness, and
there is no other way.”

The science of RAja Yoga proposes to put before
humanity a practical and scientifically worked-out
method of reaching this truth. In the first place, every
science must have its own method of investigation. If
you want to become an astronomer, and sit down and
cry “Astronomy, astronomy!” it will never come to
you. The same with chemistry. A certain method
must be followed. You must go to the laboratory, take
the different substances, mix them up, compound them,
experiment with them, and out of that will come a
knowledge of chemistry. If you want to be an astro¬
nomer you must go to the observatory, take a telescope,
study the stars and planets, and then you will become an
astronomer. Each science must have its own methods.
I could preach you thousands of sermons, but they would
not make you religious, until you first practised the
method. These are the truths of the sages of all


Digitized by Google



6


rAja yoga.

countries, of all ages, men pure and unselfish, who had
no motive but to do good to the world. They all declare
that they have found some truth higher than that the
senses can bring to us, and they challenge verification.
They say to you, take up the method and practise
honestly, and then, if you do not find this higher truth,
you will h^ve the right to say there is no truth in the
claim, but before you have done that, you are not
rational in denying the truth of these assertions. So we
must work faithfully, using the prescribed methods, and
light will come.

In acquiring knowledge we make use of generalisation,
and generalisation is based upon observation. We first
observe facts, and then we generalise, and then we draw
our conclusions or principles. The knowledge of the
mind, of the internal nature of man, of thought, can
never be had until we have the power of first observing
the facts that are going on within. It is very easy to
observe facts in the external world, and many thousand
instruments have been invented to observe every point
of nature, but in the internal world we find no instru¬
ment to help us. Yet we know we must observe in order
to have a real science. Without a proper analysis, any
science will be hopeless, mere theorising, and that is
why all the psychologists have been quarrelling among
themselves since the beginning of time, except those
few who found out the means of observation.

The science of RAja Yoga , in the first place, proposes
to give men such a means of observing the internal
states, and the instrument is the mind itself. The power


Digitized by Google



INTRODUCTORY.


7


of attention of mind, when properly guided, and directed
towards the internal world, will analyse the mind, and
illumine facts for us. The powers of the mind are like
rays of light being dissipated; when they are concen¬
trated they illumine everything. This is the only source
of knowledge that we have. Everyone is using it, both
in the external and the internal world, but, for the
psychologist, this minute observation which the scien¬
tific man can throw upon the external world, will have
to be thrown on the internal world, and this requires a
great deal of practice. From our childhood upwards
we have been taught only to pay attention to things
external, never to pay attention to things internal, and
most of us have nearly lost the faculty of observing the
internal mechanism. To turn the mind, as it were,
inside, stop it from going outside, and then to concen¬
trate all its powers, and throw them upon the mind itself,
in order that it may know its own nature, analyse itself,
is very hard work. Yet that is the only way to anything
which will be a scientific approach to the subject.

What is the use of such knowledge? In the first
place, knowledge itself is the highest reward of knowl¬
edge, and, in the second place, there is also utility in it.
It will take away all our misery. When, by analysing
his own mind, man comes face to face, as it were, with
something which is never destroyed, something which
is, by its own nature, eternally pure and perfect, he will
no more be miserable, no more unhappy. All misery
comes from fear, from unsatisfied desire. Man will find
that he never dies, and then he will have no more fear


Digitized by


le


BLifJL YOGA*


*

of 'teach, When he knows chac he is acmes* » wdl
iuve an mure vsm iesres. snf huct rnsse causes brag
absent, there: sill he no more misery—there wdt Ike
perfect hiisa. even while hi this body.

There: is mly me method by which: tn ntun eftnc
knowledge. than which: is vtaHeii cuinnssnciuiL The
chemist in his -aboran^iy amomrmsg all the emerges of
his mind inm one farm, sni throws them our upon the
roseeriats he is analv^ng^ ami so imfs our their secret.
The astronomer concentrates all the energies of hes
mind and projects them throug h his telescope upon dhe
akies; and the «ars, the set, ami the imooot give up
their aeereta to him. The more I cut cqace a tr a cr my
thoughts on the matter cm. which I am talking to tqik^
the more light I can. throw upon it You are ustmzng
tn me, and the more van c oncentr ate tout thoughts tike
more dearly voa will grasp what I have to say

How has ad this knowledge in the world hem famed
fw by tiie conoentratioa at the powers of the atari ?
Sfeeurc is ready to give up her secrets if we only know
tuvw to krwek, to give her the necessary Mow, and the
strength and force of the blow come through concentra¬
tion. There is no Sant to the power of the human
mind. The more concentrated it ts> the more power
is brought to bear on one po in t, and that is the secret
It t* easier to concentrate the mind on external things,,
the mind naturally goes o at w ar d s ; but, io the case of
re&gten* or psychology, or metaphysics* the subject and
abject are one. The object is internal, the mind itself
is the object, and it is necessary to stndy the mind itself.


Digitized by boogie



INTRODUCTORY*.


9


mind studying mind. We know that there is the power
of the mind called reflective. I am talking to you; at
the same time I am standing aside, as it were, a second
person, and knowing and hearing what I am talking.
You work and think at the same time, another portion
of your mind stands by and sees what you are thinking.
The powers of the mind should be concentrated and
turned back upon itself, and as the darkest places reveal
their secrets before the penetrating rays of the sun, so
will this concentrated mind penetrate its own innermost
secrets. Thus will we come to the basis of belief, the
real genuine religion. We will perceive for ourselves
whether we have souls, whether life is of five minutes,
or of eternity, whether there is a God in the universe
or none. It will all be revealed to us. This is what
Rd/a Yoga proposes to teach. The goat of all Sts teach¬
ing is how to concentrate the mind, then how to discover
the facts in our own minds, then how to generalise
those facts, and form our own conclusions from them.
It therefore never asks the question what our religion
is, whether we are Deists, or Atheists, whether Chris¬
tians, Jews, or Buddhists, We are human beings; that
is sufficient. Every human being has the right and the
power to seek for religion; every human being has the
right to ask the reason why, and to have his question
answered by himself; if he only takes the trouble.

So far, then, we see that in the study of this Rd/a
Yoga no faith or belief is necessary. Believe nothing
until you find it out for yourself; that is what it teaches
us. Truth requires no prop to make it stand* Do you


Digitized*-fly-



le


io rAja yoga.

mean to say that the facts of our awakened state require
any dreams or imaginings to prove them? Certainly
not. This study of RAja Yoga takes a long time and
constant practice. A part of this practice is physical,
but the main part of it is mental. As we go along we
shall find how intimately the mind is connected with
the body. If we believe that the mind is simply a finer
part of the body, and that mind acts upon the body, in
the same way the body must act upon the mind. If the
body is sick, the mind becomes sick also. If the body
is healthy, the mind remains healthy and strong.
When one is angry, the mind becomes disturbed;
at the same time, when the mind is disturbed, the
body also becomes disturbed. With the majority
of mankind the mind is entirely under the control of
the body; the mind is very little developed. The vast
mass of humanity, if you will kindly excuse me, is very
little removed from the animals. Not only that, but,
in many instances, the power of control is very little
higher than that of the lower animals. We have very
little command of our minds. Therefore to bring that
command about, to get that control over body and
mind, we must take certain physical helps, and when
the body is sufficiently controlled, we can attempt the
manipulation of the mind. By manipulation of the
mind, we shall be able to bring it under our control,
make it work as we like, and compel it to concentrate
its powers as we desire.

According to the RAja Yogt> all this external world is
but the gross form of the internal, or subtle. The finer


Digitized by Google



INTRODUCTORY,


II


is always the cause, and the grosser the effect. So the
external world is the effect, and the internal the cause.
In the same way external forces are simply the grosser
parts, of which the internal forces are the finer.
One who has discovered and learned how to manipulate
the internal forces will get the whole of nature under
his control. The Yogi proposes to himself no less a
task than to master the whole universe, to control the
whole of nature. He wants to arrive at the point
where what we call “ nature's laws " will have no influ¬
ence over him, where he will be able to get beyond
them all. He will be master of the whole of nature,
internal and external. The progress and civilisa¬
tion of the human race is simply controlling this
nature.

Various races differ in their processes. Just as in
the same society some individuals want to control
external nature, and others want to control internal
nature, so, among races, some want to control the
external nature, and some the internal. Some say
that by controlling internal nature we control every¬
thing; some that by controlling external nature we
control everything. Carried to the extreme both are
right, because there is neither internal nor external.
It is a fictitious limitation that never existed. Both
are destined to meet at the same point, the external¬
ists and the internalists, when both reach the extreme
of their knowledge. Just as the physician, when he
pushes his knowledge to its limits, finds it melting
away into metaphysics, so the metaphysician will find


Digitized by


C >gle



12


rAja yoga.


that what he calls mind and matter are but apparent
distinctions, which will have to vanish for ever.

The end and aim of all science is to find a unit, that
One out of which all this manifold is being manufac¬
tured, that One existing as many. Rdja Yoga pro¬
poses to start from the internal world, to study internal
nature, and, through that, control the whole — both
internal and external. It is a very old attempt. India
has been its special stronghold but it was also attempted
by other nations. In Western countries it is thought
to be mysticism. People who wanted to practise it
were either burned or killed as witches and sorcerers,
and in India, for various reasons, it fell into the hands
of persons who destroyed 90 per cent, of the knowl¬
edge, and of that portion which remained tried to make
a great secret. In modern times many so-called
teachers have arisen worse than those of India, because
the latter knew something, while these modern expo¬
nents do not.

Anything that is secret and mysterious in these sys¬
tems of Yoga should be at once rejected. The best
guide in life is strength. In religion, as in everything
else, discard everything that weakens you, have noth¬
ing to do with it. All mystery-mongering weakens the
human brain. Through it this science of Yoga has
been well nigh destroyed, but it is really one of the
grandest of sciences. From the time that it was dis¬
covered, more than 4000 years ago, it was perfectly
delineated and formulated and preached in India, and
it is a striking fact, that the more modern the com*


Digitized by


Google



INTRODUCTORY.


13

mentator, the greater the mistakes he makes. The
more ancient the writer on it the more rational he is.
Most of the modem writers talk of all sorts of mystery.
Thus it fell into the hands of a few persons who made
it a secret, instead of letting the full blaze of daylight
and reason fall upon it, and they did so that they
might have the powers to themselves.

In the first place there is no mystery in what I
preach. What little I know I will tell you. So far as
I can reason it out I will do so, but what I do not
know I will simply tell you that it is what the books
say. It is wrong to blindly believe. You must exer¬
cise your own reason and judgment; you must prac¬
tise, and see whether these things happen or not. Just
as you would take up any other science of a material
nature, exactly in the same manner you should take up
this science for study. There is neither mystery nor
danger in it. So far as it is true it ought to be
preached in the public streets, in the broad daylight.
Any attempt to mystify these things is productive of
great danger.

Before proceeding further, I will state to you a little
of the Sdnkhya Philosophy, upon which the whole of
Rd/a Yoga is based. According to this philosophy
perception comes through instruments, e. g . 9 the eyes;
the eyes carry it to the organs, the organs to the mind,
the mind to the determinative faculty, from this the
Puruia (the soul) receives it, and gives the order back,
as it were, and so on through all these stages. In this
way sensations are received. With the exception of the


Digitized by Google



14


rAja yoga.


Puruia all of these are material, but the mind is of
much finer material than the external instruments.
That material of which the mind is composed becomes
grosser, and becomes what is called the Tanmdtras
It becomes still grosser and forms the external mate¬
rial. That is the psychology of the Sdnkhya . So that,
between the intellect and the grosser matter outside
there is only a difference in degree. The Puruia is
the only thing which is immaterial. Mind is an instru¬
ment in the hands of the soul, as it were, through
which the soul catches external objects. This mind is
constantly changing and vacillating, and it can either
attach itself to several organs, or to one, or to none.
For instance, if I hear the clock with great attention I
will not, perhaps, see anything, although my eyes may
be open, showing that the mind was not attached to
the seeing organ, although it was to the hearing organ.
And the mind, in the same way, can be attached to all
the organs simultaneously. This mind has the reflexive
power of looking back into its own depths. This
reflexive power is what the Yogi wants to attain; by
concentrating the powers of the mind, and turning
them inward, he seeks to know what is happening
inside. There is in this no question of mere belief; it
is the analysis of certain philosophers. Modern physi¬
ologists tell you that the eyes are not the organs of
vision, but that the organs are in the nerve centre in
the brain, and so with all the senses; and they also tell
you that these centres are formed of the same material
as the brain itself. So the Sdnkhyas will also tell you,


Digitized by Google



INTRODUCTORY. 1$

but one is a statement on the physical side, and the
other on the psychological side; yet both are the same.
Beyond this we have to demonstrate.

The Yogi proposes to himself to attain to that fine
state of perception in which he can perceive all these
things. There must be mental perception of all the
different states. We shall perceive how the sensation is
travelling, and how the mind is receiving it, how it is
going to the determinative faculty, and how this gives
it to the Purufa. As each science requires certain
preparations, as each science has its own method, until
we follow that method we can never understand that
science; so in RAja Yoga.

Certain regulations as to food are necessary; we
must use that food which brings us the purest mind.
If you go into a menagerie you will find this demon¬
strated at once. You see the elephants, huge ani¬
mals, but calm and gentle; and if you go toward the
cages of the lions and tigers you will find them restless,
showing how much difference has been produced by
food. All the forces that are working in this body
have been produced out of food; we see that every
day. If you begin to fast, first your body will get
weak, the physical forces will suffer; then, after a few
days, the mental forces will suffer also. First, memory
will fail. Then comes a point, when you are not able
to think, much less to pursue any course of reasoning.
We have, therefore, to take care what sort of food we
eat at the beginning, and when we have got strength
enough, when our practice is well advanced, we need


Digitized by t^ooQle



i6


rAja yoga.


not be so careful in this respect. While the plant is
growing it must be hedged round, lest it be injured;
but when it becomes a tree the hedges are taken away;
it is strong enough to withstand all assaults.

A Yogi must avoid the two extremes of luxury and
austerity. He must not fast, or torture his flesh; he
who does so, says the Gitd, cannot be a Yogi; he who
fasts; he who keeps awake; he who sleeps much; he
who works too much; he who does no work; none of
these can be Yogis.


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER II.


THE FIRST STEPS.

RAja Yoga is divided into eight steps. The first is
Yama — non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, con¬
tinence, and non-receiving of any gifts. Next is
Niyama — cleanliness, contentment, mortification,
study, and self-surrender to God. Then comes Asana y
or posture; Prdndydma , or controlling the vital forces of
the body; Pratydhdra , or making the mind introspec¬
tive; Dhdrand y or concentration; Dhydnd y or medita¬
tion; and Samddhi y or super-consciousness. The Yama
and Niyama , as we see, are moral trainings; without
these as the basis no practice of Yoga will succeed. As
these practices become established the Yogi will begin
to realise the fruits of his practice; without these it
will never bear fruit. A Yogi must not think of injur¬
ing anyone, through thought, word or deed, and this
applies not only to man, but to all animals. Mercy
shall not be for men alone, but shall go beyond, and
embrace the whole world.

The next step is Asana , posture; a series of exer¬
cises, physical and mental, is to be gone through every
day, until certain higher states are reached. There¬
fore it is quite necessary that we should find a posture
in which we can remain long. That posture which is
easiest for each one is the posture to use. For one
a [17]


Digitized by Google



i8


rAja yoga.


man it may be very easy to think in a certain posture,
but this may be very difficult for another. We will find
later on that in the study of these psychological mat¬
ters there will be a good deal of action going on in the
body. Nerve currents will have to be displaced and
given a new channel. New sorts of vibrations will
begin, the whole constitution will be remodelled, as it
were. But the main part of the action will lie along
the spinal column, so that the one thing necessary for
the posture is to hold the spinal column free, sitting
erect, holding the three parts — the chest, neck, and
head — in a straight line. Let the whole weight of
the body be supported by the ribs, and then you have
an easy natural posture, with the spine straight. You
will naturally see that you cannot think very high
thoughts with the chest in. This portion of the Yoga
is a little similar to the Hatha Yoga , which deals entirely
with the physical body; the aim of the latter is to make
the physical body very strong. We have notning to
do with that here, because its practices are very diffi¬
cult, and cannot be learned in a day, and, after all, do
not lead to any spiritual growth. Many of these prac¬
tices you will find in Delsarte, and other teachers, such
as placing the body in different postures, but the
object in these is physical, not psychological. There
is not one muscle in the body over which a man can¬
not establish a perfect control; the heart can be made
to stop or go on at his bidding, and, in the same way,
each part of the organism can be made to work at his
bidding.


Digitized by Google



THE FIRST STEPS.


19


The result of this part of Yoga is to make men live
long; health is the chief idea, the one goal of the
Hatha Yogi. He is determined not to fall sick, and he
never does. He lives long; a hundred years is noth¬
ing to him; he is quite young and fresh when he is 150,
without one hair turned grey. But that is all. A Ban¬
yan tree lives sometimes 5000 years, but it is a Banyan
tree and nothing more. So, if a man lives long, he is
only a healthy animal. One or two ordinary lessons
of the Hatha Yogis are very useful. For instance, some
of you will find it a good thing for headaches to drink
cold water through the nose as soon as you get up;
the whole day your brain will be nice and cool, and
you will never catch cold. It is very easy to do; put
your nose into the water, and make a pump action in
the throat.

After one has learned to have a firm erect seat, he
has to perform, according to certain schools, a prac¬
tice called the purifying of the nerves. This part has
been rejected by some as not belonging to RAja Yoga ,
but as so great an authority as the commentator,
Sankardchdrya^ advises it, I think it fit that it should
be mentioned, and I will quote his own directions from
his commentary to the Svetdivatara Upanifad . “ The

mind whose dross has been cleared away by Prdnd -
ydma, becomes fixed in Brahman; therefore Prdndydma
is pointed out. First the nerves are to be purified,
then comes the power to practise Prdndydma. Stop¬
ping the right nostril with the thumb, with the left
nostril fill in air, according to one's capacity; then,


Digitized by


Google



20


rAja yoga.


without any interval, throw the air out through the
right nostril, closing the left one. Again inhaling
through the right nostril eject through the left, accord¬
ing to capacity; practising this three or five times at
four intervals of the day, before dawn, during midday,
in the evening, and at midnight, in fifteen days or a
month purity of the nerves is attained; then begins
Prdndy&ma."

Practice is absolutely necessary. You may sit down
and listen to me by the hour every day, but, if you do
not practise, you will not get one step further. It all
depends on practice. We never understand these
things until we experience them. We will have to see
and feel them for ourselves. Simply listening to
explanations and theories will not do. There are
several obstructions to practice. The first obstruction
is an unhealthy body; if the body is not in a fit state,
the practice will be obstructed. Therefore we have to
keep the body in good health; we have to take care of
what we eat and drink, and what we do; always use a
mental effort, what is usually called " Christian
Science,'* to keep the body strong. That is all; noth¬
ing further of the body. We must not forget that
health is only a means to an end. If health were the
end we would be like animals; animals rarely become
unhealthy.

The second obstruction is doubt; we always feel
doubtful about things we do not see. Man cannot live
upon words, however he may try. So, doubt comes to
us as to whether there is any truth in these things or


Digitized by


Google



THE FIRST STEPS.


21


not; even the best of us will doubt sometimes. With
practice, within a few days, a little glimpse will come,
enough to give you encouragement and hope. As one
commentator on Yoga philosophy says: “When one
proof is realised, however little it may be, that will
give us faith in the whole teachings of Yoga/* For
instance, after the first few months of training and
teaching, you will begin to find you can read another's
thoughts; they will come to you in picture form. Per¬
haps you will hear something happening at a long dis¬
tance, when you concentrate your mind and try to do
so. These glimpses will come, just a little bit at first,
but enough to give you faith, and strength, and hope.
For instance, if you concentrate your thoughts on the
tip of your nose, in a few days you will begin to smell
most beautiful fragrance, and that will be enough to
show you that there are certain mental perceptions
that can be made obvious without the contact of physi¬
cal objects. But we must always remember that these
are only the means; the aim, and end, and goal, of all
this training is liberation of the soul. Absolute con¬
trol of nature, and nothing short of it, must be the
goal. We must be the masters, and not nature;
neither body nor mind must be our master, and
neither must we forget that the body is mine, and not
I the body’s,

A god and a demon went to learn about the Self
from a great sage. They studied with him for a long
time, and at last the sage told them, 4t Thou thyself
art the being thou art seeking. “ Both of them thought


ftljA TOGA.


tanr aer bodies were the Self. 4 ' We but got every
” they said, and both of them returned to their
people and said, “ We have learned everything that is
to be learned; eat, drink, and be merry; we are the
Seif; there is nothing beyond ns,” The nature of the
demon was ignorant, clouded, so be never inquired any
further, but was perfectly satisfied with the idea that
he was OocL that by the Self was meant the body.
Bit the god had a purer nature. He at first committe d
the Tirisnakr of thinking. I, this body, am
ml kero rt strong and in health, and weE-dressed, and
grot n aZ sorts og bodily enjoyments.” But, in a few
x&to, ht found out that this could not be the meaning
nr the sage, their master; there must be something
higher Sc he came back and said, ‘"Sir, did yon
^sai± hk that this body is the Self ? If so. I see al
homes at; the Seif cannot die.” The sage said,
Tmf n out: thon art That.” Then the god thought:
that the vital forces which work the body were w hat
the sage meant. But. after a rime, he found that if he
gg. these vital forces remained strong, bet, if he
starved, they became weak. The god then went back
nr toil sage and said. ” Sir, do you mean that the vital
inrs are the Sec f ” The sage said, ” Find out for
ymnaeif: thrm an That.” The god r einra od once
mot. and thought that it was the mind; perhaps that
is the 5eH But m a few days he reflected that thoughts
an sc v ari ous; now good, now bad; the mind is too
dnugeafe tr he the Self. He went back to the sage
and said, Su. I do not think that the mind is the


Digitized by Google



THE nSLST STEPS.


2 3

Self; did you mean that ? " * No,'’ replied die sage,

“tboe art That; hud out for yourself/* The god
vent T&rk and, at last, found that he was the Self,
beyond a/ thought; One, without birth or death,
whom the sword cannot pierce, or the fire bora, whom
the air cannot dry, or the water melt, the beginning-
less a nd btrthless, the immovable, the intangible, the
omniscient, the omnipotent Being, and that it was
neither the body nor the mind, but beyond them all.
So he was satisfied, but the poor demon did not get
the tnzth, owing to his fondness for the body.

This world has a good many of these demoniac
natures, bat there are some gods too. If one propose
to teach any science to increase the power of sense
enjoyment, be finds multitudes ready for it. If one
undertake to show mankind the supreme goal, they
care nothing for that. Very few have the power to grasp
the highest, fewer still the patience to attain to it, but
a few also know that if the body be kept for a thousand
years the result will be the same in the end. When
the forces that hold it together go away the body must
fall. No man was ever born who could stop his body
one moment from changing. Body is the name of a
series of changes. “As in a river the masses of water
are changing before yon every moment, and new masses
are coming, yet taking similar form, so is it with this
body/* Yet the body must be kept strong and healthy;
it is the best instrument we have.

This human body is the greatest body in the universe,
and a human being the greatest being. Man is higher


24


rAja yoga.


than all animals, than all angels; none is greater than
man. Even the Devos will have to come down again
and attain to salvation through a human body. Man
alone attains to perfection, not even the devas. Accord¬
ing to the Jews and Mohammedans God created man
after creating the angels and everything else, and after
creating man He asked the angels to come and salute
him, and all did except Iblis; so God cursed him and
he became Satan. Behind this allegory is the great
truth, that this human birth is the greatest birth we
can have. The lower creation, the animal, is dull, and
manufactured mostly out of Tamos. Animals cannot
have any high thoughts; nor can the angels, or Devas,
attain to direct freedom without human birth. In
human society, in the same way, too much wealth, or
too much poverty, is a great impediment to the higher
development of the soul. It is from the middle classes
that the great ones of the world come. Here the
forces are very equally adjusted and balanced.

Returning to our subject, we come next to Pr&n&y&ma ,
controlling the breathing. What has that to do with
concentrating the powers of the mind ? Breath is like
the fly-wheel of this machine. In a big engine you find
the fly-wheel first moving, and that motion is conveyed
to finer and finer machinery, until the most delicate and
finest mechanism in the machine is in motion in accord¬
ance. This breath is that fly-wheel, supplying and
regulating the motive power to everything in this body.

There was once a minister to a great king. He fell
into disgrace, and the king as a punishment, ordered


Digitized by


Google



THE FIRST STEPS.


25

him to be shut up in the top of a very high tower.
This was done, and the minister was left there to
perish. He had a faithful wife, however, and at night
she came to the tower and called to her husband at the
top to know what she could do to help him. He told
her to return to the tower the following night and bring
with her a long rope, a stout twine, a pack thread, a
silken thread, a beetle, and a little honey. Wondering
much, the good wife obeyed her husband, and brought
him the desired articles. The husband directed her to
attach the silken thread firmly to the beetle, then to
smear his horns with a drop of honey, and to set him
free on the wall of the tower, with his head pointing
upwards. She obeyed all these instructions, and the
beetle started on his long journey. Smelling the honey
before him he slowly crept onwards and onwards, in
the hope of reaching it, until at last he reached the
top of the tower, when the minister grasped the beetle,
and got possession of the silken thread. He told his
wife to tie the other end to the pack thread, and after
he had drawn up the pack thread, he repeated the pro¬
cess with the stout twine, and lastly with the rope.
Then the rest was easy. The minister descended from
the tower by means of the rope, and made his escape.
In this body of ours the breath motion is the "silken
thread," and laying hold of that, and learning to control
it we grasp the pack thread of the nerve currents, and
from these the stout twine of our thoughts, and lastly the
rope of Frdna r controlling which we reach freedom*
We do not know anything about our own bodies;


2 6


rAja yoga.


we cannot know. At best we can take a dead body,
and cut it in pieces, and there are some who can take
a live animal and cut it in pieces in order to see what
is inside the body. Still, that has nothing to do with
our own bodies. We know very little about them; why
do we not? Because our attention is not discrimina¬
ting enough to catch the very fine movements that are
going on within. We can know of them only as the
mind, as it were, enters the body, and becomes more
subtle. To get that subtle perception we have to begin
with the grosser perceptions, so we have to get hold of
that which is setting the whole engine in motion, and
that is the Prdna , the most obvious manifestation of
which is the breath. Then, along with the breath, we
will slowly enter the body, and that will enable us to
find out about the subtle forces, how the nerve currents
are moving all over the body, and as soon as we per¬
ceive that, and learn to feel them, we shall begin to get
control over them, and over the body. The mind is
also set in motion by these different nerve currents, so,
at last, we shall reach the state when we have perfect
control over the body and mind, making both our serv¬
ants. Knowledge is power, and we have to get this
power, so we must begin at the beginning, the Prdttd -
ydmd restraining the Prdna . This Prdndydma is a long
subject, and will take several lessons to illustrate it
thoroughly. We will take it part by part.

We shall gradually see what are the reasons for each
exercise and what forces in the body are set in motion.
All these things will come to us, but it requires con*


Digitized by Google



THE FIRST STEPS.


2 )


stant practice, and the proof will come by practice.
No amount of reasoning which I can give you will be
proof to you, until you have demostrated it for your
selves. As soon as you begin to feel these currents in
motion all over you, doubts will vanish, but it requires
hard practice every day. You must practise at least
twice every day, and the best times are towards the
morning and the evening. When night passes into
day, and day into night, it has to pass through a state
of relative calmness. The early morning and the early
evening are the two points of calmness. Your body
will have a like tendency to become calm at those times.
We will take advantage of that natural condition, and
begin then to practise. Make it a rule not to eat until
you have practised; if you do this the sheer force of
hunger will break your laziness. In India they teach
children never to eat until they have practised, and
worshipped, and it becomes natural to them after a
time; a boy will not feel hungry until he has bathed
and practised.

Those of you who can afford it will do better to have
a room for this practice alone; do not sleep in that
room, it must be kept holy; you must not enter the
room until you have bathed, and are perfectly clean in
body and mind. Place flowers in that room always;
they are the best surroundings for a Yogi; also pictures
that are pleasing. Burn incense morning and evening.
Have no quarrelling, or anger, or unholy thought in
that room. Only allow those persons to enter who are
of the same thought as you. Then by and by there will


Digitized by


Google



28


rAja yoga.


be an atmosphere of holiness in the room, and when
you are miserable, sorrowful, doubtful, or your mind
is disturbed, the very fact of entering that room will
make you calmer. This was the idea of the temple
and the church, and in some temples and churches you
will find it even now, but in the majority of them the
very idea has been lost. The idea is that by keeping
holy vibrations there the place becomes and remains
illumined. Those who cannot afford to have a room
set apart can practise anywhere they like. Sit in a
straight posture, and the first thing to do is to send a
current of holy thought to all creation; mentally
repeat: 41 Let all beings be happy; let all beings be
peaceful; let all beings be blissful. 0 So do to the
East, South, North and West. The more you do that
the better you will feel yourself. You will find at last
that the easiest way to make yourselves healthy is to
see that others are healthy, and the easiest way to
make yourselves happy is to see that others are happy.
After doing that, those who believe in God should
pray — not for money, not for health, nor for heaven;
pray for knowledge and light; every other prayer is
selfish. Then the next thing to do is to think of your
own body, and see that it is strong and healthy; it is
the best instrument you have. Think of it as being as
strong as adamant, and that with the help of this body
you will cross this ocean of life. Freedom is never to
be reached by the weak; throw away all weakness; tell
your body that it is strong; tell your mind that it is
strong, and have unbounded faith and hope in yourself.


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER III.


PRANA


PrAnAyAma is not, as many think, something about
the breath; breath, indeed, has very little to do with
it, if anything. Breathing is only one of the many
exercises through which we get to the real Prdndydma.
Prdndydma means the control of Prdna. According
to the philosophers of India, the whole universe is com¬
posed of two materials, one of which they call Akd§a ,
It is the omnipresent, all penetrating existence. Every¬
thing that has form, everything that is the result of
compounds, is evolved out of this Akdia . It is the
Akdia that becomes the air, that becomes the liquids,
that becomes the solids; it is the Akdia that becomes
the sun, the earth, the moon, the stars, the comets; it
is the Akdia that becomes the body, the animal body,
the plants, every form that we see, everything that can
be sensed, everything that exists. It itself cannot be
perceived; it is so subtle that it is beyond all ordinary
perception; it can only be seen when it has become
gross, has taken form. At the beginning of creation
there is only this Akdia; at the end of the cycle the
solids, the liquids, and the gases all melt into the Akdia
again, and the next creation similarly proceeds out of
this Akdia ,


W



le


Mgitizea by


30 rAja yoga.

By what power is this Akdia manufactured into this
universe? By the power of Prdna. Just as Akdfa is
the infinite omnipresent material of this universe, so is
this Prdna the infinite, omnipresent manifesting power
of this universe. At the beginning and at the end of
a cycle everything becomes Akdfa, and all the forces
that are in the universe resolve back into the Prdna;
in the next cycle, out of this Prdna is evolved every¬
thing that we call energy, everything that we call force.
It is the Prdna that is manifesting as motion; it is the
Prdim that is manifesting as gravitation, as magnetism.
It is the Prdna that is manifesting as the actions of the
body, as the nerve currents, as thought force. From
thought, down to the lowest physical force, everything
is but the manifestation of Prdna. The sum-total of
all force in the universe, mental or physical, when
resolved back to its original state, is called Prdna .
“When there was neither aught nor naught, when
darkness was covering darkness, what existed then?
That Akdia existed without motion.'* The physical
motion of the Prdna was stopped, but it existed all the
same. All the energies that are now displayed in the
universe we know, by modern science, are unchange¬
able. The sum-total of the energies in the universe
remains the same throughout, only, at the end of a
cycle, these energies quiet down, become potential,
and, at the beginning of the next cycle, they start up,
strike upon the AkdSa , and out of the Akdia evolve
these various forms, and, as the Akdia changes, this
Prdfia changes also into all these manifestations of


Digitized by Google



prAna. 31

energy. The knowledge and control of this Prdtta is
really what is meant by Prdndydma .

This opens to us the door to almost unlimited power.
Suppose, for instance, one understood the Prdrta per¬
fectly, and could control it, what power on earth could
there be that would not be his? He would be able to
move the sun and stars out of their places, to control
everything in the universe, from the atoms to the big¬
gest suns, because he would control the Prdna . This
is the end and aim of Prdndydma. When the Yogi
becomes perfect there will be nothing in nature not
under his control. If he orders the gods to come,
they will come at his bidding; if he asks the departed
to come, they will come at his bidding. All the forces
of nature will obey him as his slaves, and when the
ignorant see these powers of the Yogi they call them
miracles. One peculiarity of the Hindft mind is that
it always inquires for the last possible generalisation,
leaving the details to be worked out afterwards. The
question is raised in the Vedas , 11 What is that, knowing
which we shall know everything?*’ Thus, all books,
and all philosophies that have been written, have been
only to prove That by knowing which everything is
known. If a man wants to know this universe bit by
bit he must know every individual grain of sand, and
that means infinite time for him; he cannot know all
of them. Then how can knowledge be? How is it
possible for a man to be all-knowing through particu¬
lars? The Yogis say that behind this particular mani¬
festation there is a generalisation. Behind all particular


Digitized by Google



32


rAja yoga.


ideas stands a generalised, an abstract principle; grasp
it, and you have grasped everything. Just as this
whole universe has been generalised, in the Vedas , into
that One Absolute Existence. He who has grasped
that Existence has grasped the whole universe. So all
forces have been generalised into this Prdna , and he
who has grasped the Prdtta has grasped all the forces
of the universe, mental or physical. He who has con¬
trolled the Prdna has controlled his own mind, and all
the minds that exist. He who has controlled the
Prdrni has controlled his body, and all the bodies that
exist, because the Prdna is the generalised manifesta¬
tion of force.

How to control the Prdna is the one idea of Prdpd-
ydma . All these trainings and exercises are for that
one end, and each man must begin where he stands,
must learn how to control the things that are nearest
to him. This body is the nearest thing to us, nearer
than anything in the universe, and this mind is the
nearest of all. The Prdna which is working this mind
and body is the nearest to us of all the Prdna in the
universe. This little wave of the Prdna which repre¬
sents our own energies, mental and physical, is the
nearest wave to us of all that infinite ocean of Prdfta ,
and if we can succeed in controlling that little wave,
then alone we can hope to control the whole of Prdrta.
Perfection is to be gained by the Yogi who has done
this, and no power is any more his master. He has
become almost almighty, almost all-knowing. We
see sects in every country who have attempted this


Digitized by Google



prAna.


33


control of Prdna. In this country there are Mind-
healers, Faith-healers, Spiritualists, Christian Scien¬
tists, Hypnotists, etc., and if we analyse these different
groups we shall find that the background of each is this
control of the Prdna , whether they know it or not. If
you boil all their theories down the residuum will be
the same. It is the one and same force they are man¬
ipulating, only unknowingly. They have stumbled on
the discovery of a force, and do not know its nature,
but they are unconsciously using the same powers which
the Yogi uses, and which come from Prdna .

This Prdna is the vital force in every being, and the
finest and highest action of Prdna is thought. This
thought, again, as we see, is not all. There is also a
sort of thought which we call instinct, or unconscious
thought, the lowest plane of action. If a mosquito
stings us, without thinking, our hand will strike it,
automatically, instinctively. This is one expression of
thought. All reflex actions of the body belong to this
plane of thought. There is then a still higher plane of
thought, the conscious. I reason, I judge, I think, I
see the pros and cons of certain things; yet that is not
all. We know that reason is limited. There is only a
certain extent to which reason can go; beyond that it
cannot reach. The circle within which it runs is very,
very limited indeed. Yet, at the same time, we find
facts rush into this circle. Like the coming of comets
certain things are coming into this circle, and it is cer¬
tain they come from outside the limit, although
our reason cannot go beyond. The causes of the phe*
ft


Digitized by


Google



34 rAja yoga.

nomena protruding themselves in this small limit are
outside of this limit. The reason and the intellect
cannot reach them, but, says the Ycgi t that is not all.
The mind can exist on a still higher plane, the super*
conscious. When the mind has attained to that state,
which is called Samddhi ,— perfect concentration, super¬
consciousness— it goes beyond the limits of reason,
and comes face to face with facts which no instinct or
reason can ever know. All these manipulations of the
subtle forces of the body, the different manifestations
of Prdna , if trained, give a push to the mind, and the
mind goes up higher, and becomes super-conscious,
and from that plane it acts.

In this universe there is one continuous mass on
every plane of existence. Physically this universe is
one; there is no difference between the sun and you.
The scientist will tell you it is only a fiction to say the
contrary. There is no real difference between the
table and me; the table is one point in the mass of
matter, and I another point. Each form represents,
as it were, one whirlpool in the infinite ocean of mat¬
ter, and these are not constant. Just as in a rushing
stream there may be millions of whirlpools, and the
water in each of these whirlpools is fresh every
moment, turning round and round for a few seconds,
and then passing out at the other end, and fresh par*
tides of water coming in, so this whole universe is one
constantly changing mass of matter, in which we are
little whirlpools. A mass of matter enters them, goes
round and round, and turns, for a few years, into the


Digitized by Google



PRaNA.


35 .

body of a man, becomes changed, and gets whirled out
in the form of, maybe, an animal, from that it rushes
round to get, after a few years, into another whirlpool,
called a lump of mineral. It is a constant change.
Not one body is constant. There is no such thing as
my body, or your body, except in words. It is one
huge mass of matter. One point is called moon,
another sun, another a man, another the earth, another
a plant, another a mineral. Not one is constant, but
everything is changing, matter eternally concreting
and disintregating. So it is with the mind. Matter is
represented by the ether; when the action of Prdna is
most subtle, this very ether, in the finer state of vibra¬
tion, will represent the mind, and there it will be still
one unbroken mass. If you can get to simply that
subtle vibration you will see and feel that the whole
universe is composed of these subtle vibrations. Some¬
times certain drugs have the power to take us, as it
were, through our senses, and bring us to that condi¬
tion. Many of you may remember the celebrated experi¬
ment of Sir Humphrey Davy, when the laughing gas
overpowered him, and, during the lecture, he remained
motionless, stupefied, and, after that, he said that the
whole universe was made up of ideas; for the time
being, as it were, the gross vibrations had ceased, and
only the subtle vibrations, which he called the mind,
were present to him. He could only see the subtle
vibrations round him; everything had become thought;
the whole universe was an ocean of thought, he and
everyone else had become little thought whirlpools.


Digitized by Google



3*


rAja yoga.


Thus, even in the universe of thought we find this
unity, and at last, when we get to the Self, we know
that that Self can only be One. Beyond motion there
is but One. Even in manifest motion there is only a
unity. These facts can no more be denied, as modern
science has demonstrated them. Modem physics also
has demonstrated that the sum-total of the energies in
the universe is the same throughout. It has also been
proved that this sum-total of energy exists in two
forms. It becomes potential, toned down, and calmed,
and next it comes out manifested as all these various
forces; again it goes back to the quiet state, and again
it manifests. Thus it goes on evolving and involving
through eternity. The control of this Prdna y as before
stated, is what is called Prdn&ydma .

This Prdndydma has very little to do with breathing,
except as exercise. The most obvious manifestation
of this Prdna in the human body is the motion of the
lungs. If that stops, the body will stop; all the other
manifestations of force in the body will immediately
stop, if this is stopped. There are persons who can
train themselves in such a manner that the body will
live on, even when this motion has stopped. There
are some persons who can bury themselves for months
and yet live, without breathing. But, for all ordinary
persons, this is the principal gross motion in the body.
To reach the more subtle we must take the help of the
grosser, and so, slowly travel towards the most subtle,
until we gain our point. The most obvious of all
motions in the body is the motion of the lungs, the fly*


Digitized by Google



prAna.


37


wheel which is setting the other forces in motion.
Prdpdydma really means controlling this motion of the
lungs, and this motion is associated with the breath.
Not that breath is producing it; on the contrary it is
producing breath. This motion draws in the air by
pump action. The Prdrm is moving the lungs, and
that motion of the lungs, draws in the air. So Prdnd-
ydma is not breathing, but controlling that muscular
power which moves the lungs, and that muscular power
which is going out through the nerves to the muscles,
from them to the lungs, making them move in a certain
manner, is the Prims , which we have to control in the
practice of Prdndydma , When this Prdrta has become
controlled, then we shall immediately find that all the
other actions of the Prdna in the body will slowly come
under control. I myself have seen men who have con¬
trolled almost every muscle of the body; and why not ?
If I have control over certain muscles, why not over
every muscle and nerve of the body ? What impossi¬
bility is there t At present the control is lost, and the
motion has become automatic. We cannot move the
ears at will, but we know that animals can. We have
not that power because we do not exercise it. This is
what is called atavism.

Again, we know that motion which has become latent
can be brought back to manifestation. By hard work
and practice certain motions of the body which are
most dormant can be brought back under perfect con¬
trol. Reasoning in that way we find there is no
impossibility, but, on the other hand, every probability


38


rAja yoga.


that each part of the body can be brought under pen
feet control. This the Yogi does through Prdndydma,
Perhaps some of you have read in these books that in
Prd$dydma % when drawing in the breath, you must fill
your whole body with Prdtia. In the English transla¬
tions Prdpa is given as breath, and you are inclined to
ask how that is to be done. The fault is with the
translator. Every part of the body can be filled with
Prdna m this vital force, and when you are able to do
that, you can control the whole body. All the sick¬
ness and misery felt in the body will be perfectly con¬
trolled, and, not only so, you will be able to control
another's body. Everything is infectious in this world,
good or bad. If your body be in a certain state of
tension, it will have a tendency to produce the same
tension in others. If you are strong and healthy, those
that live near you will also have the tendency to be¬
come strong and healthy, but, if you are sick and weak,
those around you will have the tendency to become
the same. This vibration will be, as it were, conveyed
to another body. In the case of one man trying to
heal another, the first idea is simply transferring his
own health to the other. This is the primitive sort of
healing. Consciously, or unconsciously health can be
transmitted. The very strong man, living with the
weak man, will make him a little stronger, whether he
knows it or not. When consciously done it becomes
quicker and better in its action. Next come those
cases in which a man may not be very healthy himself,
yet we know that he can bring health to another. The


Digitized by


Google



frAna,


39


first man, in such a case, has a little more control over
the Prdna y and can rouse, for the time being, his Prdna,
as it were, to a certain state of vibration, and transmit
it to another person.

There have been cases where this process has been
carried on at a distance, but in reality there is no dis¬
tance, in the sense of a break. Where is the distance
that has a break ? Is there any break between you and
the sun ? It is a continuous mass of matter, the sun
the one part, and you the other. Is there a break
between one part of a river and another ? Then why
cannot any force travel ? There is no reason against
it. These cases are perfectly true, and this Prdna can
be transmitted to a very great distance; but to one
genuine case, there are hundreds of frauds. It is not
so easy as it is thought to be. In the most ordinary
cases of this healing you will find that these healers
are simply taking advantage of the naturally healthy
state of the human body. There is no disease in this
world which kills the majority of persons attacked.
Even in cholera epidemics, if for a few days sixty per
cent, die, after that the rate comes down to thirty and
twenty per cent, and the rest recover. An allopath
comes and treats cholera patients, and gives them his
medicines; the homoeopath comes and gives his medi¬
cine, and cures perhaps more, simply because the
homoeopath did not disturb the patients, but allowed
nature to deal with them; and the faith-healer will
cure more still, because he will bring the strength of


rAja yoga.


4P

his mind to bear, and rouses, through faith, the dor*
mant Pr&na of the patient.

But there is a mistake constantly made by faith-
healers; they think that it is faith itself that directly
heals a man. It alone will not cover all the ground.
There are diseases where the worst symptoms are that
the patient never thinks that he has that disease. That
tremendous faith of the patient is itself one symptom
of the disease, and usually indicates that he will die
quickly. In such cases the principle that faith cures
does not apply. If it were faith that cured in all these
cases, these patients also would be cured. It i$ by
this Pr&na that real curing comes. The pure man,
who has controlled this Pr&na , has the power of bring¬
ing it into a certain state of vibration, which can be
conveyed to others, arousing in them a similar vibra¬
tion. You see that in every-day actions. I am talk¬
ing to you. What am I trying to do ? I am, so to
say, bringing my mind to a certain state of vibration,
and the more I succeed in bringing it to that state, the
more you will be affected by what I say. All of you
know that the day I am more enthusiastic the more you
enjoy the lecture, and when I am less enthusiastic you
feel lack of interest.

The gigantic will powers of the world, the world-
movers, can bring their Pr&na into a high state of
vibration, and it is so great and powerful that it catches
others in a moment, and thousands are drawn towards
them, and half the world thinks as they do. Great
prophets of the world had the most wonderful control


Digitized by Google



prAna.


4i


of this Prdna , which gave them tremendous will power;
they had brought their Prdna to the highest state of
motion, and this is what gave them power to sway the
world. All manifestations of power arise from this
control. Men may not know the secret, but this is
the one explanation. Sometimes in your own body the
supply of Prdna gravitates more or less to one part;
the balance is disturbed, and when the balance of
Prdna is disturbed, what we call disease is produced.
To take away the superfluous Prdna , or to supply the
Prdna that is wanting, will be curing the disease. That
again is Prdndydma , to learn when there is more or less
Prdjia in one part of the body than there should be.
The feelings will become so subtle that the mind will
feel that there is less Prdna in the toe or the finger
than there should be, and possess the power to supply
it. These are among the various functions of Prdnd¬
ydma. They have to be learned slowly and gradually,
and, as you see, the whole scope of Rdja Yoga is really
to teach the control and direction in different planes of
the Prdna . When a man has concentrated his energies
he masters the Prdna that is in his body. When a man
is meditating, he is also concentrating the Prdria .

In an ocean there are huge waves, like mountains,
then smaller waves, and still smaller, down to little
bubbles, but the background of all these is the infinite
ocean. The bubble is connected with the infinite
ocean at one end, and the huge wave at the other end.
So, one may be a gigantic man, and another a little
bubble, but each is connected with that infinite ocean


Digitized by Google



42


rAja yoga.


of energy, and this is the common birthright of every
animal that exists. Wherever there is life, the store¬
house of infinite energy is behind it. Starting from
some fungus, some very minute, microscopic bubble,
and all the time drawing from that infinite storehouse
of energy, the form is changed slowly and slowly, until,
in course of time it becomes a plant, then an animal,
then man, ultimately God. This is attained through
millions of aeons, but what is time ? An increase of
speed, an increase of struggle, is able to bridge the
distance of time. That which naturally takes a long
time to accomplish can be shortened by the intensity
of the action, says the Yog(. A man may go on slowly
drawing in this energy from the infinite mass that exists
in the universe, and perhaps he will require a hundred
thousand years to become a Deva, and then, perhaps,
five hundred thousand years to become still higher,
and perhaps five millions of years to become perfect.
Given rapid growth the time will be lessened. Why is
it not possible, with sufficient effort, to reach this very
perfection in six months or six years ? There is no
limit. Reason shows that. If an engine, with a cer¬
tain amount of coal, runs at two miles an hour, add
more coal, and it will run in quicker time. Similarly
why shall not the soul, by intensifying its action, attain
to that goal in this very life ? All beings will at last
attain to that perfection we know. But who cares to
wait all these millions of aeons ? Why not reach it
immediately, in this body even, in this human form ?


Digitized by t^ooQle



prAna. 43

Why shall I not get that infinite knowledge, infinite
power now ?

That is the ideal of the Yogt j the whole science of
Yaga is directed to that one end, to teach men how to
shorten the time by adding power, how to intensify the
power of assimilation, and thereby shorten the time
for reaching perfection, instead of slowly advancing
from point to point, and waiting until the whole human
race has come out, and become perfect. All the great
prophets, saints, and seers, of the world, what arc
they ? In that one span of life they lived the whole
life of humanity, bridged the whole length of time that
it will take ordinary humanity to come to the state of
perfection* In this life they perfect themselves; they
have no thought for anything else, breathe for nothing
else, never live a moment for any other idea, and thus
the way Is shortened for them. This is what is meant
by concentration, intensifying the action or assimila¬
tion, and thus shortening the time; and Rdja Yaga is
the science which teaches us how to gain the power of
concentration.

What has this Prdndydma to do with spiritualism ?
That is also a manifestation of Prdndydma * If it be
true that the departed spirits exist, only that we can¬
not see them, it is quite probable that there may be
hundreds and millions living here that we can neither
see, feel, nor touch. We may be continually passing
and repassing through their bodies, and it is also pro¬
bable that they do not see or feel us* It is a circle
within a circle, universe within universe* Those only


44


rAja yoga.


that are on the same plane see each other. We have
five senses, and we represent Prdtia in a certain state
of vibration. All beings in the same state of vibration
will see each other, but if there are beings who repre¬
sent Prdna in a higher state of vibration they will not
be seen. We may increase the intensity of light until
we cannot see the light at all, but there may be beings
with eyes so powerful that they can see such light.
Again, if the vibrations are very low, we do not see
light, but there are animals that see it, as cats and
owls. Our range of vision is only one plane of the
vibrations of this Prdna . Take this atmosphere, for
instance; it is piled up layer on layer, but the layers
nearer to the earth are denser than those above and
as you go higher the atmosphere becomes finer and
finer. Or take the case of the ocean; as you go deeper
and deeper the density of the . water increases, and
those animals that live at the bottom of the sea can
never come up, or they will be broken into pieces.

Think of this whole universe as an ocean of ether,
in vibration under the action of Prdna , and that it con¬
sists of layer after layer of varying degrees of vibra¬
tion ; in the more external the vibrations are less, and
nearer to the centre the vibrations become quicker and
quicker, and each range of vibration makes one plane.
Think of the whole thing as one circle, the centre of
which is perfection; the further you get from the centre
the slower the vibrations. Matter is the outermost
crust, next comes mind, and spirit is the centre. Then
suppose these ranges of vision are cut into planes, so


Digitized by Google



prAna.


45


many millions of miles one set of vibration, and then
so many millions of miles still higher, and so on. It is
perfectly certain, then, that those who live on the plane
of a certain state of vibration will have the power
of recognising each other, but will not recognise
those above or below them. Yet, just as by the
telescope and the microscope we can increase the
scope of our vision, and make higher or lower
vibrations cognisable to us, similarly, every man can
bring himself to the state of vibration belonging to the
next plane, thus enabling himself to see what is going
on there. Suppose this room were full of beings whom
we do not see. They represent certain vibrations in
the Prdna , and we represent other vibrations. Sup¬
pose they represent the quicker, and we the slower.
Prdna is the material of which they are composed, also
of which we are composed; all are parts of the same
ocean of Prdna , only the rate of vibration differs. If
I can bring myself to the quicker vibration this plane
will immediately change for me; I shall not see you
any more; you vanish, and they appear. Some of you,
perhaps, know this to be true. All this bringing of the
mind into a higher state of vibration is included in one
word in Yoga — Samddhi . All these states of higher
vibration, superconscious vibrations of the mind, are
grouped in that one word, Samddhi, and the lower
states of Samddhi give us visions of these beings. The
highest grade of Samddhi is when we see the real
thing, when we see the material out of which the
whole of these grades of beings are composed, and that


Digitized by


Google



46 rAja yoga.

lump of clay being known, we know all the clay in the
universe.

Thus we see that this Prdndydma includes all that is
true of spiritualism even. Similarly, you will find that
wherever any sect or body of people is trying to search
out anything occult and mystical, or hidden, it is really
this Yoga, this attempt to control the Prdna . You
will find that wherever there is any extraordinary dis*
play of power it is the manifestation of this Prd#a.
Even the physical sciences can be included also in
Prdndydma . What moves the steam engine ? Prdna ,
acting through the steam. What are all these phe¬
nomena of electricity and so forth but Prdna f What is
physical science ? Prdndydma , by externa! means.
Prdna , manifesting itself as mental power, can only be
controlled by mental means. That part of the Prdnd¬
ydma which attempts to control the physical manifesta¬
tions of the Prdna by physical means is called physical
science, and that part which tries to control the mani¬
festations of the Prdna as mental force, by mental
means, is called Rdja Yoga .


Digitized by Google


CHAPTER IV,


THE PSYCHIC PRANA,


According to the Vogts there are two nerve currents
in the spinal column, called Pingald and 10, and there
is a hollow canal called Su$umn4 running through the
spinal cord. At the lower end of the hollow canal is
what the Yogis call the “Lotus of the Kundalini .''
They describe it as triangular in form, in which, in the
symbolical language of the Yogis, there is a power
called the Kundalini coiled up. When that Kundalini
awakes it tries to force a passage through this hollow
canal, and, as it rises step by step, as it were, layer
after layer of the mind becomes open, all these differ¬
ent visions and wonderful powers come to the Yogi*
When it reaches the brain the Yogi is perfectly detached
from the body and mind; the soul finds itself free.
We know that the spinal cord is composed in a peculiar
manner. If we take the figure eight horizontally { go )
there are two parts, and these two parts are connected
in the middle. Suppose you add eight after eight,
piled one on top of the other, that will represent the
spinal cord. The left is the Idd , and the right the
Pingald , and that hollow canal which runs through
the centre of the spinal cord is the Sutumnd. Where the
spinal cord ends in some of the lumbar vertebrae, a fine


[47]


4«


rAja yoga.


fibre comes down, and the canal is even in that fibre,
only much finer. The canal is closed at the lower end,
which is situated near what is called the sacral plexus,
which, according to modern physiology, is triangular
in form. The different plexuses that have their cen¬
tres in the spinal cord can very well stand for the
different 44 lotuses M of the Yogi.

The Yogt conceives of several centres, beginning
with the Mdlddhdra , the basic, and ending with the
Saha&rdra , the thousand-petalled lotus in the brain.
So, if we take these different plexuses as representing
these circles, the idea of the Yogi can be understood
very easily in the language of modern physiology. We
know there are two sorts of actions in these nerve cur¬
rents, one afferent, the other efferent, one sensory and
the other motor; one centripetal, and the other cen¬
trifugal. One carries the sensations to the brain, and
the other from the brain to the outer body. These
vibrations are all connected with the brain in the long
run. Several other facts we have to remember, in
order to clear the way for the explanation which is to
come. This spinal cord, at the brain, ends in a sort
of bulb, in the medulla, which is not attached to the
bone, but floats in a fluid in the brain, so that if there
be a blow on the head the force of that blow will be
dissipated in the fluid, and will not hurt the bulb.
This will be an important fact as we go on. Secondly,
we have also to know that, of all the centres, we have
particularly to remember three, the Mdlddhdra (the
basic), the Saha&rdra (the thousand-petalled lotus of


Digitized by


Google



49


THE PSYCHIC PRANA.

die brain) and the Sp&dJuitMma (next above the JfMU*
Mm). Next we will take one fact from physics. We
all hear of electricity, and various other forces con¬
nected with it. What electricity is no one knows, but,
so far as it is known, it is a sort of motion.

There are various other motions in the universe;
what is the difference between them and electricity ?
Suppose this table moves, that the molecules which
compose this table are moving in different directions;
if they are all made to move in the same direction it
will be electricity. Electric motion is when the mole¬
cules all move in the same direction. If all the air
molecules in a room are made to move in the same
direction it will make a gigantic battery of electricity
of the room. Another point from physiology we must
remember, that the centre which regulates the respira¬
tory system, the breathing system, has a sort of con¬
trolling action over the system of nerve currents, and
the controlling centre of the respiratory system is
opposite the thorax, in the spinal column. This centre
regulates the respiratory organs, and also exercises
some control over the secondary centres.

Now we shall see why breathing is practised. In the
first place, from rhythmical breathing will come a
tendency of all the molecules in the body to have the
same direction. When mind changes into will, the
currents change into a motion similar to electricity,
because the nerves have been proved to show polarity
under action of electric currents. This shows that
when the will evolves into the nerve currents it is
4


Digitized by Google



$0 rAja yoga.

changed into something like electricity. When all the
motions of the body have become perfectly rhythmical
the body has, as it were, become a gigantic battery of
will. This tremendous will is exactly what the Yogt
wants. This is, therefore, a physiological explanation
of the breathing exercise. It tends to bring a rhyth¬
mic action in the body, and helps us, through the
respiratory centre, to control the other centres. The
aim of Prdndydma here is to rouse the coiled-up power
in the Mdlddhdra , called the Kunfalint.

Everything that we see, or imagine, or dream, we
have to perceive in space. This is the ordinary space,
called the Mahdkd&a , or great space. When a Yogi
reads the thoughts of other men, or perceives super-
sensuous objects, he sees them in another sort of space
called the Chittdkd&a , the mental space. When percep¬
tion has become objectless, and the soul shines in its
own nature, it is called the Chiddkdia y or knowledge
space. When the Kundalint is aroused, and enters the
canal of the Suiumnd all the perceptions are in the
mental space. When it has reached that end of the
canal which opens out into the brain, the objectless
perception is in the knowledge space. Taking the
analogy of electricity, we find that man can send a
current only along a wire, but nature requires no wires
to send her tremendous currents. This proves that
the wire is not really necessary, but that only our in¬
ability to dispense with it compels us to use it.

Similarly, all the sensations and motions of the body
are being sent into the brain, and sent out of it, through


Digitized by Google



THE PSYCHIC PRANA. $t

these wires of nerve fibres. The columns of sensory
and motor fibres in the spinal cord are the I(f& and
Pingald of the Yogis, They are the main channels
through which the afferent and efferent currents are
travelling. But why should not the mind send the
news without any wire, or react without any wires ?
We see that this is being done in nature. The Yogi
says if you can do that you have got rid of the bond¬
age of matter. How to do it ? If you can make the
current pass through the SuiumnA , the canal in the
middle of the spinal column, you have solved the prob¬
lem. The mind has made this net-work of the nervous
system, and has to break it, so that no wires will be
required to work through. Then alone will all knowl¬
edge come to us — no more bondage of body; that is
why it is so important that you should get control of
that Su&umnA . If you can send the mental current
through that hollow canal without any nerve fibres to
act as wires, the Yogi says you have solved the prob¬
lem, and he also says it can be done.

This Su/umnd is, in ordinary persons, closed up at
the lower extremity; no action comes through it. The
Yogi proposes a practice by which it can be opened,
and the nerve currents made to travel through. When
a sensation is carried to a centre, the centre reacts.
This reaction, in the case of automatic centres, is fol¬
lowed by motion; in the case of conscious centres it is
followed first by perception, and secondly by motion.
All perception is the reaction to action from outside.
How, then, do perceptions in dreams arise ? There is


Digitized by ooQle



RAJA YOGA.


5*

then no action from outside. The sensory motions,
therefore* are coiled up somewhere, just as the motor
motions are known to be in different centres. For
instance, I see a city; the perception of that city was
from the reaction to the sensations brought from out¬
side objects comprising that city. That is to say, a
certain motion in the brain molecules has been set up
by the motion in the incarrying nerves, which again
were set in motion by external objects in the city.
Now, even after a long time I can remember the city.
This memory is exactly the same phenomenon, only it
is in a milder form. But whence is the action that set
up even the milder form of similar vibrations in the
brain. Not certainly from the primary sensations.
Therefore it must be that the sensations are coiled up
somewhere, and they, by their acting, bring out the
mild reaction which we call dream perception. Now
the centre where all these residual sensations are, as it
were, stored up, is called the Mdiddhdra , the root recep¬
tacle, and the coiled up energy of action is KundalM\
the " coiled up." It is very probable that the residual
motor energy is also stored up in the same centre as,
after deep study or meditation on external objects, the
part of the body where the MM&dMra centre is situ¬
ated (probably the sacral plexus) gets heated. Now,
if this coiled-up energy be roused and made active, and
then consciously made to travel up the Suiumtid canal,
as it acts upon centre after centre, a tremendous reac¬
tion will set in. When a minute portion of the energy
of action travels along a nerve fibre and causes reaction



Digitized by


Google


THE PSYCHIC PRANA. 53

from centres, the perception is either dream or imagi-
nation. But when the vast mass of this energy stored
up by the power of long internal meditation travels
along the Suiumnd , and strikes the centres, the reac¬
tion is tremendous, immensely superior to the reaction
of dream or imagination, immensely more intense than
the reaction of sense perception. It is super-sensuous
perception, and the mind in that state is called super¬
conscious. And when it reaches the metropolis of all
sensations, the brain, the whole brain, as it were,
reacts, and every perceiving molecule in the body, as
it were, reacts, and the result is the full blaze of illu¬
mination, the perception of the Self. As this KutufalitA
force travels from centre to centre, layer after layer of
the mind, as it were, will be opened up, and this uni¬
verse will be perceived by the Yogi in its fine, or coarse,
form. Then alone the causes of this universe, both as
sensation and reaction, will be known as they are, and
hence will come all knowledge. The causes being
known, the knowledge of the effects is sure to follow.

Thus the rousing of the Kungalird is the one and
only way to attaining Divine Wisdom, and super-con¬
scious perception, the realisation of the spirit. It may
come in various ways, through love for God, through
the mercy of perfected sages, or through the power of
the analytic will of the philosopher. Wherever there
is any manifestation of what is ordinarily called super¬
natural power or wisdom, there must have been a little
current of Kundalini which found its way into the
SuiumnA . Only, in the vast majority of such cases of


Digitized by Google



54


rAja yoga.


super-naturalism, they had ignorantly stumbled on to
some practice which set free a minute portion of the
coiled-up Kundalint . All worship, consciously or
unconsciously, leads to this end. The man who thinks
that he is receiving responses to his prayers does not
know that the fulfilment came only from his own
nature, that he has succeeded by the mental attitude
of prayer in waking up a bit of this infinite power
which is coiled up within himself. Whom, thus, men
ignorantly worship under various names, through fear
and tribulation, the Yogi declares to the world to be the
real power coiled up in every being, the mother of eter¬
nal happiness, if we know how to approach her. And
Rdja Yaga is the science of religion, the rationale of
all worship, all prayers, forms, ceremonies, and
miracles.


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER V.

THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA.

We have now to deal with the exercises in Prdfd*
ydtna . We have seen that the first step will be, accord¬
ing to the Yogis, to control the motion of the lungs.
What we want to do is to feel the finer motions that are
going on in the body. Our minds have become
externalised, and have lost sight of the fine motions
inside. If we can begin to feel them, we can begin to
control them. These nerve currents are going on all
over the body, bringing life and vitality to every muscle,
but we do not feel them. The Yogi says we can learn to
do so. How? By taking up and controlling all these
motions of the Prdna beginning with the motion of the
lungs, and when we have done that for a sufficient
length of time we shall also be able to control the finer
motions.

We now come to the exercises in Prdndydma . Sit
upright; the body must be kept straight. The spinal
cord, although it is inside the vertebral column, is not
attached to it. If you sit crookedly you disturb this
spinal cord, so let it be free. Any time that you sit
crookedly and try to meditate you are doing yourself
am injury. The three parts of the body must be always
held straight, the chest, the neck, and the head, in one

[ 55 ]


Digitized by Google



rAja yoga.


5<5

line. You will find that by a little practice this will
come to you just as breathing. The second thing is
to get control of the nerves. We have seen that the
nerve centre that controls the respiratory organs, has
a sort of controlling effect on the other nerves, and
rhythmical breathing is therefore necessary. The
breathing that we generally use should not be called
breathing at all. It is very irregular. Then there are
some natural differences of breathing between men
and women.

The first lesson is just to breathe in a measured way,
in and out. That will harmonise the system. When
you have practised this for some time you will do well
to join the repetition of some word to it, as " Om," or
any other sacred word, and let the word flow in and
out with the breath, rhythmically, harmoniously, and
you will find the whole body is becoming rhythmical.
Then you will learn what rest is. Sleep is not rest,
comparatively. Once this rest has come the most
tired nerves will be calmed down, and you will find
that you have never before really rested. In India we
use certain symbolical words instead of counting one,
two, three, four. That is why I advise you to join the
mental repetition of the “ Om 9 99 or other sacred word
to the Pr&ndy&ma .

The first effect of this practice will be that the face
will change; harsh lines will disappear; with this calm
thought calmness will come over the face. Next,
beautiful voice will come. I never saw a Yogi with a
croaking voice. These signs will come after a few


Digitized by Google



THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA. 57

months’ practice. After practising this first breathing
for a few days, you take up a higher one. Slowly fill
the lungs with breath through the Id&> the left nostril,
and at the same time concentrate the mind on the
nerve current. You are, as it were, sending the nerve
current down the spinal column, and striking violently
on that last plexus, the basic lotus, which is triangular
in form, the seat of the Kundalint. Then hold the
current there for some time. Imagine that you are
slowly drawing that nerve current with the breath
through the other side, then slowly throw it out through
the right nostril. This you will find a little difficult to
practise. The easiest way is to stop the right nostril
with the thumb, and then slowly draw in the breath
through the left; then close both nostrils with thumb
and forefinger, and imagine that you are sending that
current down, and striking the base of the SuSumnd;
then take the thumb off, and let the breath out through
the right nostril. Next inhale slowly through that
nostril, keeping the other closed by the forefinger, then
close both, as before. The way the Hindfts practise
this would be very difficult for this country, because
they do it from their childhood, and their lungs are
prepared for it. Here it is well to begin with four
seconds, and slowly increase. Draw in four seconds,
hold in sixteen seconds, then throw out in eight
seconds. This makes one Pr&ndy&tna . At the same time
think of the triangle, concentrate the mind on that
centre. The imagination can help you a great deal.
The next breathing is slowly drawing the breath in, and


Digitized by


Google



58


rAja yoga.


then immediately throwing it out slowly, and then stop-
ping the breath out, using the same numbers. The
only difference is that in the first case the breath was
held in, and in the second, held out. The last is the
easier one. The breathing in which you hold the
breath in the lungs must not be practised too much.
Do it only four times in the morning, and four times
in the evening. Then you can slowly increase the time
and number. You will find that you have the power
to do so, and that you take pleasure in it. So, very
carefully and cautiously increase as you feel that you
have the power, to six instead of four. It may injure
you if you practise it irregularly.

Of the three processes, the purification of the nerves,
the retaining the breath inside and the keeping the
breath outside, the first and the last are neither diffi¬
cult nor dangerous. The more you practise the first
one the calmer you will be. Just think of “<9w, M and
you can practise even while you are sitting at your
work. You will be all the better for it. One day, if
you practise hard the Kundalint will be aroused. For
those who practise Once or twice a day, just a little
calmness of the body and mind will come, and beauti¬
ful voice; only for those who can go on further with it
will this Kundalini be aroused, and the whole of this
nature will begin to change, and the book of knowledge
will be open. No more will you need to go to books
for knowledge; your own mind will have become your
book, containing infinite knowledge. I have already
spoken of the Itfd and Pingald currents, flowing through


Digitized by Google



THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA- $9

either side of the spinal column, also of the Sufumnd,
the passage through the centre of the spinal cord.
These three are present in every animal; whatever has
a spinal column has these three lines of action, but the
Vogts claim that in ordinary mankind the Suiumnd is
closed, that action there is not evident, while in the
other two it is evident, carrying power to different
parts of the body.

The Vogt alone has the Suiumnd open. When this
Suiumnd current opens, and thought begins to rise
through it, we get beyond the senses, our minds
become supersensuous, superconscious, we get beyond
even the intellect, and where reasoning cannot reach.
To open that Suiumnd is the prime object of the Yogi .
According to him, along this Suiumnd are ranged these
centres of distribution, or, in more figurative language,
these lotuses, as they are called. The lowest one is at
the lowest end of the spinal cord, and is called Mdld-
d/tdra, the next one is called Svddhisthdna, the next
Manipdra , the next Andhata % the next Viiuddha, the
next Ajna y and the last, which is in the brain, is the
Sahairdra , or M the thousand petalled, 1 * Of these we
have to take cognition just now of only two centres,
the lowest, the Mdlddkdra y and the highest, the Sahai¬
rdra, The lowest one is where all energy becomes
stored up, and that energy has to be taken up from
there and brought to the last one, the brain. The
Yogis claim that of all the energies that the human
body comprises the highest is what they call “Ojas. ”
Now this Ojas is stored up in the brain, and the more


Digit?™


Go


rAja yoga.


the Ojas is in a man’s head, the more powerful he is,
the more intellectual, the more spiritually strong will
that man be. This is the action of Ojas . One man
may speak beautiful language and beautiful thoughts,
but they do not impress people; another man speaks
neither beautiful language nor beautiful thoughts, yet
his words charm. That is the power of Ojas coming
out* Every movement coming from him will be
powerful*

Now in all mankind there is more or less of this Ojas
stored up. And all the forces that are working in the
body, in their highest form, become Ojas. You must
remember that It is only a question of transformation*
The same force which is working outside, as electricity
or magnetism, will become changed into inner force;
the same forces that are working as muscular energy
will be changed into Ojas . The Yogis say that that
part of the human energy which is expressed as sex
energy, in sexual functions, sexual thought, and so on,
when checked and controlled, easily becomes changed
into Ojas, and as this lowest centre is the one which
guides all these functions, therefore the Yogi pays par¬
ticular attention to that centre* He tries to take up
all this sexual energy and convert it into Ojas. It is
only the chaste man or woman who can make the Ojas
rise and become stored in the brain, and that is why
chastity has always been considered the highest virtue,
because man feels that if he is unchaste, spirituality
goes away, he loses mental vigour, and strong moral
stamina. That is why in all of the religious orders in



Digitized by CjOOQle


THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA. 6l

the world that have produced spiritual giants you will
always find this intense chastity insisted upon. That
is why the monks came into existence, giving up mar¬
riage. There must be perfect chastity, in thought,
word and deed. Without it the practice of Rdja Yoga
is dangerous, and may lead to insanity. If people
practise Rdja Yoga and at the same time lead an impure
life, how can they expect to become Yogis t


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER VI.

pratyAhAra and dhAranA.

The next step is called Praty&hdra. What is this?
You know how perceptions come. First of all there are
the external instruments, then the internal organs,
acting in the body through the brain centres, and there
is the mind. When these come together, and attach
themselves to some external thing, then we perceive
that thing. At the same time it is a very difficult thing
to concentrate the mind and attach it to one organ
only; the mind is a slave.

We hear 44 be good” and 44 be good” and 44 be good”
taught all over the world. There is hardly a child,
born in any country in the world, who has not been told
44 do not steal,” 44 do not tell a lie,” but nobody tells
the child how he can help it. Talking will never do it.
Why should he not become a thief? We do not teach
him how not to steal; we simply tell him 44 do not
steal.” Only when we teach him to control his mind
do we really help him. All actions, internal and
external, occur when the mind joins itself to certain
centres, which centres are called the organs. Willingly
or unwillingly it is drawn to join itself to the centres,
and that is why people do foolish deeds and feel misery,
which, if the mind were under control, they would not

[6a]


Digitized by Google



■


pratyAhAra and dh AranA- 63

do. What would he the result of controlling the mind?
It then would not join itself to the centres of percep¬
tion, and, naturally, feeling and willing would be under
control. It is clear so far. Is it possible? It is per¬
fectly possible. You see it in modern times; the faith-
healers teach people to deny misery and pain and evil.
Their philosophy is rather roundabout, but it is a part
of Yoga into which they have somehow stumbled. In
those cases where they succeed in making a person
throw off suffering by denying it they have really
taught a part of Pratydhdra , as they have made the
mind of the person taught strong enough to refuse to
take up the record of the senses. The hypnotists in
a similar manner, by their suggestion, excite in the
patient a sort of morbid Pratydhdra for the time being.
The so-called hypnotic suggestion can only act upon a
diseased body and a clouded mind. And until the
operator, by means of fixed gaze or otherwise, has suc¬
ceeded in putting the mind of the subject in a sort of
passive, morbid condition, his suggestions never work.

Now the control of the centres which is established
in a hypnotic patient or the patient of faith-healing,
for a time, is utterly reprehensible, because it leads to
ultimate ruin. It is not really controlling the brain
centres by the power of one's own will, but is, as it
were, stunning the patient's mind for a time by sudden
blows which another's will delivers to it. It is not
checking by means of reins and muscular strength the
mad career of a fiery team, but rather by asking
another to deliver heavy blows on the heads of the


6i rAja yoga.

horses, to stun them for a time into gentleness. At
each one of these processes the man operated upon
loses a part of his mental energies, and, at last, the
mind, instead of gaining the power of perfect control,
becomes a shapeless, powerless mass, and the only goal
of the patient is the lunatic asylum.

Every attempt at control which is not voluntary, not
with the controller’s own mind, is not only disastrous,
but it defeats the end. The goal of each soul is free¬
dom, mastery, freedom from the slavery of matter and
thought, mastery of external and internal nature.
Instead of leading towards that, every will current
from another, in whatever form it comes to me, either
as direct control of my organs, or as forcing me to
control them while under a morbid condition, only
rivets one link more to the already existing heavy chain
of bondage of past thoughts, past superstition. There¬
fore, beware how you allow yourselves to be acted upon
by others. Beware how you unknowingly bring
another to ruin. True, some succeed in doing good
to many for a time, by giving a new trend to their
propensities, but at the same time, they bring ruin to
millions by the unconscious hypnotic suggestions they
throw around, rousing in men and women that morbid,
passive, hypnotic condition which makes them almost
soulless at last. Whosoever, therefore, asks anyone
to believe blindly, or drags mankind behind him through
controlling it by his superior will is an injurer to
humanity, though he may not have intended it.

Therefore use your own minds, control body and


Digitized by Google



pratyAhAra and dhAranA. 6 $

mind yourselves, remember that until you are a diseased
person, no extraneous will can work upon you, and
avoid everyone, however great and good he may be,
who asks you to blindly believe. All over the world
there have been dancing, and jumping, and howling
sects, who spread like infections when they begin to
sing and dance and preach; they also come under this
heading. They exercise a singular control for the
time being over sensitive persons, alas, often, in the
long run, to degenerate whole races. Aye, it is healthier
for the individual or the race to remain wicked than
to be made apparently good by such morbid extraneous
control. One’s heart sinks to think of the amount of
injury done to humanity by such irresponsible, yet well-
meaning religious fanatics. They little know that the
minds which attain to sudden spiritual upheaval under
their suggestions, with music and prayers, are simply
making themselves passive, morbid, and powerless, and
opening themselves to any other suggestion, be it ever
so evil. Little do these ignorant, deluded persons
dream that whilst they are congratulating themselves
upon their miraculous power to transform human
hearts, which power they think was poured upon them
by some Being above the clouds, they are sowing the
seeds of future decay, of crime, of lunacy, and of
death. Therefore, beware of everything that takes
away your freedom. Know that it is dangerous,
and avoid it by all the means in your power. He who
has nucceeded in attaching or detaching his mind to or
from the centres at will has succeeded in PratyAhAra,
5


Digitized by Google



66


rAja yoga.


which means “ gathering towards/* checking the out¬
going powers of the mind, freeing it from the thraldom
of the senses. When we can do this we shall really
possess a character; then alone we shall have made a
long step towards freedom; before that we are mere
machines.

How hard it is to control the mind. Well has it
been compared to the maddened monkey. There was
a monkey, restless by his own nature, as all monkeys
are. As if that were not enough someone made him
drink freely of wine, so that he became still more rest¬
less. Then a scorpion stung him. When a man is
stung by a scorpion he jumps about for a whole day,
so the poor monkey found his condition worse than
ever. To complete his misery a demon entered into
him. What language can describe the uncontrollable
restlessness of that monkey? The human mind is like
that monkey; incessantly active by its own nature,
then it becomes drunk with the wine of desire, thus
increasing its turbulence. After desire takes possession
comes the sting of the scorpion of jealousy of others
whose desires meet with fulfilment, and last of all the
demon of pride takes possession of the mind, making
it think itself of all importance. How hard to control
such a mind.

The first lesson, then, is to sit for some time and let
the mind run on. The mind is bubbling up all the
t}me. It is like that monkey jumping about. Let the
monkey jump as much as he can; you simply wait and
watch. Knowledge is power says the proverb, and


Digitized by


Google



pratvAhara and dharanA.


6 ;


that is true. Until you know what the mind is doing
you cannot control it. Give it the full length of the
reins; many most hideous thoughts may come into it;
you will be astonished that it was possible for you to
think such thoughts. But you will find that each day
the mind's vagaries are becoming less and less violent,
that each day it is becoming calmer. In the first few
months you will find that the mind will have a thousand
thoughts, later you will find that it is toned down to
perhaps seven hundred, and after a few more months it
will have fewer and fewer, until at last it will be under
perfect control, but we must patiently practise every
day* As soon as the steam is turned on the engine
must run, and as soon as things are before us we must
perceive; so a man, to prove that he is not a machine,
must demonstrate that he is under the control of noth¬
ing. This controlling of the mind, and not allowing it
to join itself to the centres, is PratydMra . How is this
practised ? It is a long work, not to be done in a day*
Only after a patient, continuous struggle for years can
we succeed.

The next lesson depends on this. After you have
practised the PratydMra for a time, take the next step,
the VMrand , holding the mind to certain points.
What is meant by holding the mind to certain points?
Forcing the mind to feel certain parts of the body to
the exclusion of others. For instance, try to feel only
the hand, to the exclusion of other parts of the body.
When the Chitia y or mind-stuff, is confined and limited
to a certain place, this is called DMrand . This Dhdrapd


le


rAja yoga.


68

is of various sorts, and along with it, it is better to
have a little play of the imagination. For instance,
the mind should be made to think of one point in the
heart. That is very difficult; an easier way is to imagine
a lotus there. That lotus is full of light, effulgent
light. Put the mind there. Or think of the lotus in
the brain as full of light, or of the different centres in
the Su&utnnd mentioned before.

The Yogi must always practise. He should try to
live alone; the companionship of different sorts of
people distracts his mind; he should not speak much,
because to speak distracts the mind; nor work much,
because too much work distracts the mind; the mind
cannot be controlled after a whole day's hard work.
One with such a determination becomes a Yogi . Such
is the power of good that even the least done will bring
a great amount of benefit. It will not hurt anyone, but
will benefit everyone. First of all it will tone down
nervous excitement, bring calmness, enable us to see
things more clearly. The temperament will be better,
and the health will be better. Sound health will be
one of the first signs, and a beautiful voice. Defects
in the voice will be changed. This will be among the
first of the many effects that will come. Those who
practise hard will get many other signs. Sometimes
there will be sounds, as a peal of bells heard at a dis¬
tance, commingling, and falling on the ear as one con¬
tinuous sound. Sometimes things will be seen, little
specks of light floating and becoming bigger and big¬
ger, and when these things come, know that you are


Digitized by Google



pratyAhAra and dhAranA. 69

progressing very fast. Those who want to be Yogis y
and practise very hard, must take a little care of their
diet at first. Those who want to make very rapid pro¬
gress, if they can live on milk alone for some months,
and cereals, will find it an advantage. But for those
who want only a little practice for every day business
sort of life, let them not eat too much, but otherwise
they may eat whatever they please.

For those who want to make faster progress, and to
practise hard, a strict diet is absolutely necessary.
As the organisation becomes finer and finer, at first
you will find that the least thing throws you out of bal¬
ance. One bit of food more or less will disturb the
whole system, until you get perfect control, and then
you will be able to eat whatever you like. You will
find that when you are beginning to concentrate, the
dropping of a pin will seem like a thunderbolt going
through your brain. The organs get finer, and the
perceptions get finer. These are the stages through
which we have to pass, and all those who persevere
will succeed. Give up all argumentation and other
distractions. Is there anything in this dry intellectual
jargon ? It only throws the mind off its balance and
disturbs it. These things have to be realised. Will
talking do that ? So give up all vain talk. Read only
those books which have been written by persons who
have had realisation

Be like the pearl oyster. There is a pretty Indian
fable to the effect that if it rains when the star Svdtt is
in the ascendant, and a drop of rain falls into an


Digitized by Google



70


rAja yoga.


oyster, that drop will become a pearl. The oysters
know this, so they come to the surface when that star
shines, and wait to catch the precious rain-drop.
When one falls into the shell, quickly the oyster closes
it and dives down to the bottom of the sea, there to
patiently develop the drop into the pearl. We should
be like that. First hear, then understand, and then,
leaving all distractions, shut our minds to outside influ¬
ences, and devote ourselves to developing the truth
within us. There is the danger of frittering away our
energies by taking up an idea only for its novelty, and
then giving it up for another that is newer. Take one
thing up and do it, and see the end of it, and before
you have seen the end, do not give it up. He who can
become mad upon an idea, he alone will see light.
Those that only take a nibble here and there will never
attain anything. They may titillate their nerves for a
moment, but there it will end. They will be slaves in
the hands of nature, and will never get beyond the
senses.

Those who really want to be Vogts must give up,
once for all, this nibbling at things. Take up one idea.
Make that one idea your life; dream of it; think of it;
live on that idea. Let the brain, the body, muscles,
nerves, every part of your body be full of that idea,
and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way
to success, and this is the way great spiritual giants are
produced. Others are mere talking machines. If we
really want to be blessed, and make others blessed, we
must go deeper, and, for the first step, do not disturb


PRATYAHARA AND DHArANA, Jl

the mind, and do not associate with persons whose
ideas are disturbing. All of you know that certain
persons, certain places, certain foods, repel you.
Avoid them; and those who want to go to the highest,
must avoid all company, good or bad. Practise hard;
whether you live or die it does not matter. You have
to plunge in and work, without thinking of the result.
If you are brave enough, in six months you will be a
perfect Yvgt* But, for others, those who take up just
a bit of it, a little of everything, they get no higher.
It is of no use to simply take a course of lessons.
Those who are full of Tamos, ignorant and dull, those
whose minds never get fixed on any idea, who only
crave for something to entertain them — religion and
philosophy are simply entertainments to them. They
come to religion as to an entertainment, and get that
little bit of entertainment. These are the unpersever-
mg. They hear a talk, think it very nice, and then go
home and forget all about it. To succeed, you must
have tremendous perseverance, tremendous will.
** I will drink the ocean , 1 ’ says the persevering soul,
" At my will mountains will crumble up. M Have that
sort of energy, that sort of will, work hard, and you
will reach the goal.


Digitize$T^


le


CHAPTER VII.


DHYANA AND SAMADHI.

We have finished a cursory review of the different
steps in Rdja Yoga , except the finer ones, the training
in concentration, which is the aim, the goal, to which
Rdja Yoga will lead us. We see, as human beings,
that all our knowledge which is called rational is
referred to consciousness. I am conscious of this
table, I am conscious of your presence, and so forth,
and that makes me know that you are here, and that
the table is here, and things I see, feel and hear, are
here. At the same time, there is a very great part of
my existence of which I am not conscious — all the
different organs inside the body, the different parts of
the brain, the brain itself; nobody is conscious of
these things.

When I eat food I do it consciously, when I assimi¬
late it I do it unconsciously, when the food is manu¬
factured into blood it is done unconsciously; when out
of the blood all the different parts of my body are
made, it is done unconsciously; and yet it is I who am
doing this; there cannot be twenty people in this one
body. How do I know that I do it, and nobody else ?
It may be urged that my business is only in eating the
food, and assimilating the food, and that manufactur-

[ 72 ]


Digitized by Google



DHYANA AND SAMADHL


73


ing the body out of the food is done for me by some¬
body else. That cannot be, because it can be demon¬
strated that almost every action of which we are
unconscious now can be again brought up to the plane
of consciousness. The heart is beating apparently
without our control; we none of us here can control
the heart; it goes on its own way. But by practice
men can bring even the heart under control, until it
will just beat at will, slowly, or quickly, or almost
stop. Nearly every part of the body can be brought
under control. What does this show ? That these
things which are beneath consciousness are also worked
by us, only we are doing it unconsciously. We have,
then, two planes in which the human mind is working.
First is the conscious plane; that is to say that sort of
work which is always accompanied with the feeling of
egoism. Next comes the unconscious plane, the work
beneath, that which is unaccompanied by the feeling
of egoism. That part of mind-work which is unaccom¬
panied with feeling of egoism is unconscious work, and
that part which is accompanied with the feeling of
egoism is conscious work. In the lower animals this
unconscious work is called instinct. In higher ani¬
mals, and in the highest of all animals, man, the second
part, that which is accompanied with the feeling of
egoism, prevails, and is called conscious work.

But it does not end here. There is a still higher
plane upon which the mind can work. It can go be¬
yond consciousness. Just as unconscious work is
beneath consciousness, so there is another work which


74


rAja yoga.


is above consciousness, and which, also, is not accom¬
panied with the feeling of egoism. The feeling of
egoism is only on the middle plane. When the mind is
above or below that line there is no feeling of “ I, M
and yet the mind works. When the mind goes beyond
this line of self-consciousness it is called Samddhi , or
super-consciousness. It is above consciousness. How,
for instance, do we know that a man in Samddhi has
not gone below his consciousness, has not degenerated,
instead of going higher ? In both cases the works are
unaccompanied with egoism ? The answer is, by the
effects, by the results of the work, we know that which
is below, and that which is above. When a man goes
into deep sleep he enters a plane beneath conscious¬
ness. He works the body all the time, he breathes, he
moves the body, perhaps, in his sleep, without any
accompanying feeling of ego; he is unconscious, and
when he returns from his sleep he is the same man
who went into it. The sum-total of the knowledge
which he had before he went into the sleep remains
the same; it has not increased at all. No enlighten¬
ment has come. But if a man goes into Samddhi , if he
goes into it a fool, he comes out a sage.

What makes the difference ? From one state a man
comes out the very same man that went in, and out of
another state the man becomes enlightened, a sage, a
prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life
changed, illumined. These are the two effects. Now
the effects being different, the causes must be different.
As this illumination, with which a man comes back from


Digitized by Google



dhyAna and samAdhl


7 5


Samddhi 7 is much higher than, can be got from uncon¬
sciousness, or much higher than can be got by reason¬
ing in a conscious state* it must therefore be super¬
consciousness, and SamddM is called the super-con¬
scious state.

This, in short, is the idea of Samddhi, What is its
application ? The application is here. The field of
reason, or of the conscious workings of the mind, is
narrow and limited. There is a little circle within
which human reason will have to move. It cannot go
beyond it. Every attempt to go beyond is impossible,
yet it is beyond this circle of reason that lies all that
humanity holds most dear. All these questions,
whether there is an immortal soul, whether there is a
God, whether there is any supreme intelligence guiding
this universe, are beyond the field of reason. Reason
can never answer these questions. What does reason
say ? It says, 11 I am agnostic; I do not know either
yea or nay. 1 ' Yet these questions are so important to
us. Without a proper answer to them, human life will
be impossible. All our ethical theories, all our moral
attitudes, all that is good and great in human nature,
has been moulded upon answers that have come from
beyond that circle. It is very important, therefore,
that we should have answers to these questions; with¬
out such answers human life will be impossible. If life
is only a little five minutes’ thing, if the universe is
only a “fortuitous combination of atoms/’ then why
should I do good to another ? Why should there be
mercy! justice! or fellow feeling ? The best thing for


Digitize! 8 ^


76


rAja yoga.


this world would be to make hay while the sun shines,
each man for himself. If there is no hope, why should
I love my brother, and not cut his throat ? If there is
nothing beyond, if there is no freedom, but only rigor¬
ous dead laws, I should only try to make myself happy
here. You will find people saying, now-a-days, that
they have utilitarian grounds as the basis of all moral¬
ity. What is this basis ? Procuring the greatest
amount of happiness to the greatest number. Why
should I do this ? Why should I not produce the great¬
est unhappiness to the greatest number, if that serves
my purpose ? How will utilitarians answer this ques<-
tion ? How do you know what is right, or what is
Wrong ? I am impelled by my desire for happiness and
I fulfil it, and it is in my nature; I know nothing
beyond. I have these desires, and must fulfil them;
why should you complain ? Whence come all these
truths about human life, about morality, about the
immortal soul, about God, about love and sympathy,
about being good, and, above all, about being unselfish ?

All ethics, all human action, and all human thought,
hang upon this one idea of unselfishness; the whole
idea of human life can be put in that one word,
unselfishness. Why should we be unselfish ? Where
is the necessity, the force, the power, of my being
unselfish ? Why should I be ? You call yourself a
rational man, a utilitarian, but, if you do not show me
a reason, I say you are irrational. Show me the
reason why I should not be selfish, why I should not
be like a brute, acting without reason ? It may be


Digitized by


Google



dhyAna and samAdhi.


77


good as poetry, but poetry is not reason. Show me a
reason. Why shall I be unselfish, and why be good ?
Because Mr. and Mrs. So-and-so say so does not weigh
with me. Where is the utility of my being unselfish ?
My utility is to be selfish, if utility means the greatest
amount of happiness. I may get the greatest amount
of happiness by cheating and robbing others. What is
the answer ? The utilitarian can never give it. The
answer is that this world is only one drop in an
infinite ocean, one link in an infinite chain. Where
did those that preached unselfishness, and taught it to
the human race, get this idea ? We know it is not
instinctive; the animals, which have instinct, do not
know it. Neither is it reason; reason does not know
anything about these ideas. Whence did they come ?

We find, in studying history, one fact held in com¬
mon by all the great teachers of religion the world
ever had; they all claim to have got these truths
from beyond, only many of them did not know what
they were getting. For instance, one would say that
an angel came down in the form of a human being,
with wings, and said to him, “ Hear, oh man, this is
the message.** Another says that a JDeva , a bright
being, appeared to him. Another says he dreamed that
his ancestor came and told him all these things. He
did not know anything beyond that. But this thing is
common, that all claim either that they saw angels, or
heard the voice of God, or saw some wonderful vision.
All claim that this knowledge has come to them from
beyond, not through their reasoning power. What


Digitized by


Google



rAja yoga.


78

does the science of Yoga teach ? It teaches that they
were right in claiming that all this knowledge came to
them from beyond reasoning, but that it came from
within themselves.

The Yogi teaches that the mind itself has a higher
state of existence, beyond reason, a super-conscious
state, and when the mind gets to that higher state,
then this knowledge, beyond reasoning, comes to a
man, metaphysical knowledge, beyond all physical
knowledge. Metaphysical and transcendental knowl¬
edge comes to that man, and this state of going be¬
yond reason, transcending ordinary human nature,
sometimes may come by chance to a man who does not
understand its science; he, as it were, stumbles into
it. When he stumbles into it, he generally interprets
it as from outside. So this explains why an inspira¬
tion, or this transcendental knowledge, may be the
same in different countries, but in one country it will
seem to come through an angel, and in another through
a Deva, and in another through God. What does it
mean ? It means that the mind brought the knowledge
by its own nature, and that the finding of the knowl¬
edge was interpreted according to the beliefs and edu¬
cation of the person through whom it came. The real
fact is that these various men, as it were, stumbled into
this super-conscious state.

The Yogi says there is a great danger in stumbling
into this state. In a good many cases there is the
danger of the brain being destroyed, and, as a rule,
you will find that all those men, however great they


Digitized by Google



DHYANA AND SAMADHL


79


were, who have stumbled into this super-conscious
state, without understanding it, grope in the dark, and
generally have, along with their knowledge, some
quaint superstition. They open themselves to hallu¬
cinations. Mohammed claimed that the Angel Gabriel
came to him in a cave one day and took him on the
heavenly horse, Harak, and he visited the heavens.
But, with all that, Mohammed spoke some wonderful
truths. If you read the Qur’an, you find the most
wonderful truths mixed with these superstitions. How
will you explain it ? That man was Inspired, no doubt,
but that inspiration was, as it were, stumbled upon.
He was not a trained Yogi > and did not know the rea¬
son of what he was doing. Think of the good Moham¬
med did to the world, and think of the great evil that
has been done through his fanaticism [ Think of the
millions massacred through his teachings, mothers
bereft of their children, children made orphans, whole
countries destroyed, millions upon millions of people
killed!

So we see in studying the lives of all these great
teachers that there was this danger. Yet we find, at
the same time, that they were all inspired. Somehow
or other they got into the super-conscious state, only
whenever a prophet got into that state by simple force
of emotion, just by heightening his emotional nature,
he brought away from that state some truths, but also
some fanaticism, some superstition which injured the
world as much as the greatness of the teaching did
good. To get any reason out of this mass of incon-


8o


rAja yoga.


gruity we call human life we have to transcend our
reason, but we must do it scientifically, slowly, by
regular practice, and we must cast off all superstition.
We must take it up just as any other science, reason
we must have to lay our foundation, we must follow
reason as far as it leads, and when reason fails reason
itself will show us the way to the highest plane. So
whenever we hear a man say “lam inspired, “and then
talk the most irrational nonsense, simply reject it.
Why ? Because these three states of the mind — in¬
stinct, reason, and super-consciousness, or the uncon¬
scious, conscious, and super-conscious states — belong
to one and the same mind. There are not three
minds in one man, but one develops into the other.
Instinct develops into reason, and reason into the
transcendental consciousness; therefore one never con¬
tradicts the other. So, whenever you meet with wild
statements which contradict human reason and com¬
mon sense, reject them without any fear, because the
real inspiration will never contradict, but will fulfil.
Just as you find the great prophets saying, “ I come
not to destroy but to fulfil, M so this inspiration always
comes to fulfil reason, and is in direct harmony with
reason, and whenever it contradicts reason you must
know that it is not inspiration.

All the different steps in Yoga are intended to bring
us scientifically to the super-conscious state, or Sam -
ddhi . Furthermore, this is a most vital point to under¬
stand that inspiration is as much in every man’s nature
as it was in the ancient prophets. These prophets


Digitized by Google



DHYANA AMD SAMADHI.


81

were not unique; they were just the same as you or I,
They were great Yogis, They had gained this super¬
consciousness, and you and I can get the same* They
were not peculiar people* The very fact that one man
ever reached that state will prove that it is possible for
every man to do so. Not only is it possible, but every
man must, eventually, get to that state, and that is
religion. Experience is the only teacher we have. We
may talk and reason all our lives, without ever under¬
standing a word of truth, until we experience it our¬
selves. You cannot hope to make a man a surgeon by
simply giving him a few books* You cannot satisfy
my curiosity to see a country by showing me a map; I
must have actual experience. Maps can only create a
little curiosity in us to get more perfect knowledge.
Beyond that, they have no value whatever* All cling¬
ing to books only degenerates the human mind. Was
there ever a more horrible blasphemy than to say that
all the knowledge of God is confined in this or that
book ? How dare men call God infinite, and yet try to
compress Him into the covers of a little book ! Mil¬
lions of people have been killed because they did not
believe what the books say, because they would not
see all the knowledge of God within the covers of a
book. Of course this killing and murdering has gone
by, but the world is still tremendously bound up in a
belief in books.

In order to reach the super-conscious state in a scien¬
tific manner we have to pass through these various steps
that I have been teaching you in Rd/a Yoga . After
6


82


rAja yoga.


Pratydhdra and Dhdrand y which I taught you in the last
lecture* we come to Dhydtia , meditation. When the
mind has been trained to remain fixed on a certain
internal or external location, there comes to it the
power of, as it were, flowing in an unbroken current
towards that point. This state is called Dhydna .
When this power of Dhydna has been so much intensi¬
fied as to be able to reject the external part of percep¬
tion, and remain meditating only on the internal part,
the meaning, that state is called Samddhi. The three —
Dhdrandy Dhydna and Samddhi —together are called
Samyama. That is, if the mind can first concentrate
upon an object, and then is able to continue in that
concentration for a length of time, and then, by con¬
tinued concentration, to dwell only on the internal part
of the perception of which the object was the effect,
everything comes under the control of such a mind.

This meditati% r e state is the highest state of existence.
So long as there is desire no real happiness can come.
It is only the contemplative, witness-like study of
objects that brings to us real enjoyment and happiness.
The animal has its happiness in the senses, the man in
his intellect, and the God in spiritual contemplation.
It is only to the soul that has attained to this contem¬
plative state that the world has really become beautiful.
To him who desires nothing, and does not mix himself
up with them, the manifold changes of nature are one
panorama of beauty and sublimity.

These ideas have to be understood in Dhydna , or
meditation. We hear a sound. First there is the



Digitized by


dhyAna and samAdhi.


83


external vibration, second, the nerve motion that car¬
ries it to the mind, third, the reaction from the mind,
along with which flashes the knowledge of the object
which was the external cause of these different changes
from the ethereal vibrations to the mental reaction.
These three are called in Yoga , Sabdha (sound) Artha
(meaning), and Jndna (knowledge). In the language
of physiology they are called the ethereal vibration,
the motion in the nerve and brain, and the mental
reaction. Now these, though distinct processes, have
become mixed up in such a fashion as to become quite
indistinct. In fact, we cannot now perceive any of these
causes; we only perceive the effect of these three,
which effect we call the external object. Every act
of perception includes these three, and there is no
reason why we should not be able to distinguish be¬
tween them.

When, by the previous preparations, the mind
becomes strong and controlled, and the power of finer
perception has been attained, then the mind should be
employed in meditation. This meditation must begin
with gross objects and slowly rise to finer, then to finer
and finer, until it has become objectless. The mind
should first be employed in perceiving the external
causes of sensations, then the internal motions, and
then the reaction of the mind. When it has succeeded
in perceiving the external causes of sensations by them¬
selves it will acquire the power of perceiving all fine
material existences, all fine bodies and forms. When
it can succeed in perceiving the motions inside, by


Digitized by


Google



84 rAja yoga.

themselves, it will gain the control of all mental waves,
in itself or in others, even before they have translated
themselves into physical forces; and when he will be
able to perceive the mental reaction by itself the Yogt
will acquire the knowledge of everything, as every
sensible object, and every thought, is the result of this
reaction. Then will he have seen, as it were, the very
foundations of his mind, and it will be under his per¬
fect control. Different powers will come to the Yogt,
and if he yields to the temptations of any one of these
the road to his further progress will be barred. Such
is the evil of running after enjoyments. But, if he is
strong enough to reject even these miraculous powers,
he will attain to the goal of Yoga , the complete sup¬
pression of the waves in the ocean of the mind; then
the glory of the soul, untrammelled by the distractions
of the mind, or the motions of his body, will shine in
its full effulgence. And the Yogt will find himself as
he is and as he always was, the essence of knowledge,
the immortal, the all-pervading.

Samddhi is the property of every human being — nay,
every animal. From the lowest animal to the highest
angelic being, some time or other each one will have
to come to that state, and then, and then alone, will
religion begin for him. And all this time, what are we
doing? We are only struggling towards that stage;
there is now no difference between us and those who
have no religion, because we have had no experience.
What is concentration good for, save to bring us to this


Digitized by Google



dhyAna and samAdhi.


8S


experience? Each one of the steps to attain this
Samddhi has been reasoned out, properly adjusted,
scientifically organised, and, when faithfully practised,
will surely lead us to the desired end. Then will all
sorrows, cease, all miseries vanish; the seeds of actions
will be burned, and the soul will be free for ever.


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER Vm.
rAja yoga in brief.

This is a summary of RAja Yoga freely translated
from the Kurma Purdna.

The fire of Yoga burns the cage of sin that is around
a man. Knowledge becomes purified, and Nirudna is
directly obtained. From Yoga comes knowledge;
knowledge again helps the Yogi. He who is a com¬
pound of both Yoga and knowledge, with him the Lord
is pleased. Those that practice Mahdyoga, either once
a day, or twice a day, or thrice, or always, know them
to be gods. Yoga is divided into two parts. One is called
the AbhAva, and the other Mahdyoga. Where one’s
self is meditated upon as zero, and bereft of quality,
that is called AbhAva ; the Yogi ', by each one, realises
his Self. That in which one sees the Self as full of
bliss and bereft of all impurities, and one with God, is
called Mahdyoga. The other Yogas that we read and
hear of, do not deserve one particle of this great Brah•
tnayoga, in which the Yogi finds himself and the whole
universe as God himself. This is the highest of all
Yogas.

These are the steps in RAja Yoga . Yama, Niyama ,,
Asana, PrAnAyAma, Pratydhdra , DhdranA, Dhydna, and
SamAdhi , of which, non-injuring anybody, truthfulness,

[ 86 ]


Digitized by Google



rAja yoga in brief.


87


non-covetousness, chastity, not receiving anything
from another, are called Yama; it purifies the mind,
the Chitta . By thought, word, and deed, always, and
in every living being, not producing pain is what is
called Ahimsa , non-injuring. There is no virtue higher
than this non-injuring. There is no happiness higher
than what a man obtains by this attitude of non-offen-
siveness to all creation. By truth we attain to work.
Through truth everything is attained; in truth every¬
thing is established. Relating facts as they are; this
is truth. Not taking others* goods by stealth or by
force, is called Asteyam , non-covetousness. Chastity
in thought, word, and deed, always, and in all condi¬
tions, is what is called Brahmacharya . Not receiving
any present from anybody, even when one is suffering
terribly, is what is called Aparigraha . When a man
receives a gift from another man, the theory is that his
heart becomes impure, he becomes low, he loses his
independence, he becomes bound and attached. The
following are helps to success in Yoga. Niyama , regular
habits and observances; Tapas , austerity; Svddhydya ,
study; Santoia , contentment; Saucham , purity; fiwara
pranidh&na, worshipping God. Fasting, or in other
ways controlling the body, is called the physical Tapas .

Repeating the Vedas , and other Mantrams , by which
the Sattva material in the body is purified, is called
study, Svddhydya . There are three sorts of repetitions
of these Mantrams . One is called the verbal, another
semi-verbal, and the third mental. The verbal or
audible is the lowest, and the inaudible is the highest


Digitized by Google



88


rAja yoga.


of all. The repetition which is so loud that anybody
can hear it is the verbal; the next one is where only
the organs begin to vibrate, but no sound is heard;
another man sitting near cannot hear what is being
said. That in which there is no sound, only mental
repetition of the Mantram , at the same time thinking
of its meaning, is called the 44 mental muttering,” and
is the highest. The sages have said that there are two
sorts of purification, external and internal. The puri¬
fication for the body is by water, earth, or other mate*
rials; the external purification, as by bathing, etc.
Purification of the mind by truth, and by all the other
virtues, is what is called internal purification. Both
are necessary. It is not sufficient that a man should
be internally pure and externally dirty. When both
are not attainable the internal purity is the better, but
no one will be a Yogi until he has both.

Worship is by praise, by memory, having devotion
to God. We have spoken about Yama and Niyatna;
next comes Prdndydma . Prdna means the vital forces
in one's own body, Yama means controlling them.
There are three sorts of Prdndydma , the very simple,
the middle, and the very high. The whole of Prdnd~
ydtna is divided into two parts; one is called filling,
and the other is called emptying. When you begin
with twelve seconds it is the lowest Prdndydma ; when
you begin with twenty-four seconds it is the middle
Prdndydma ; that Prdndydma is the best which begins
with thirty-six seconds. That Prdndydma in which
there is first perspiration, then vibration of the body,


Digitized by Google



raja yoga in brief.


S9


and then rising from the seat and joining of the man's
soul with great bliss is the very highest Frdndydma .
There is a Afantram called the Gdyafri. It is a very
holy verse of the Vedas. ** We meditate on the glory
of that Being who has produced this universe; may
He enlighten our minds." Then Om is joined to it*at
the beginning and end. In one Frdndydma repeat
three Gdyatris. In all books they speak of Frdndydma
being divided into Rtchaka (rejecting or exhaling),
Fdraka (inhaling), and Kumbhaka (restraining, station¬
ary). The Indriyas , the organs of the senses, are
acting outwards and coming in contact with external
objects. Bringing them under the control of the will
is what is called Fratydhdra j gathering towards one¬
self is the literal translation.

Fixing the mind on the lotus of the heart, or on the
centre of the head, is what is called Dhdrand. When
remaining in one place, making one place as the base,
when the waves of the mind rise up, without being
touched by other waves — when all other waves have
stopped — and one wave only rises in the mind, that is
called Dhydna , meditation. When no basis is neces¬
sary, when the whole of the mind has become one
wave, ** one-formedness," it is called Samddhi Bereft
of all help from places and centres, only the meaning
of the thing is present. If the mind can be fixed on
one centre for twelve seconds it will be a Dhdra$d f
twelve such Dhdrands will be a Dhydna , and twelve
such Dhydnas will be a Samddhi. The next is Asana
(posture)* The only thing to understand is to bold


9 °


rAja yoga.


the body straight, leaving the body free, with the
chest, shoulders, and head straight. Where there is
fire, or in water, or on ground which is strewn with dry
leaves, or where there are wild animals, where four
streets meet, or where there is too much noise, or too
much fear, or too many ant hills, where there are many
wicked persons, Yoga must not be practiced in such
places. This applies more particularly to India.
When the body feels very lazy do not practise, or
when the mind is very miserable and sorrowful, or
when the body is ill. Go to a place which is well hid¬
den, and where people do not come to disturb you.
As soon as you do not want people to know what you
are doing all the curiosity in the world will be awakened,
but, if you go into the street and want people to know
what you are doing, they will not care. Do not choose
dirty places. Rather choose beautiful scenery, or a
room in your own house which is beautiful. When
you practise, first salute all the ancient Yogis, and your
own Gurd , and God, and then begin.

Dhydna is spoken of, and a few examples are given
of what to meditate upon. Sit straight, and look at
the tip of your nose. Later on we will come to know
how that concentrates the mind, how by controlling
the two optic nerves one advances a long way towards
the control of the arc of reaction, and so to the con¬
trol of the will. These are a few specimens of medita¬
tion. Imagine a lotus upon the top of the head,
several inches up, and virtue as its centre, the stalk as
knowledge. The eight petals of the lotus are the


Digitized by Google



rAja yoga in brief. 91

eight powers of the Yogi. Inside, the stamens and
pistils are renunciation. If the Yogi refuses the exter¬
nal powers he will come to salvation. So the eight
petals of the lotus are the eight powers, but the inter¬
nal stamens and pistils are the extreme renunciation,
the renunciation of all these. Inside of that lotus
think of the Golden One, the Almighty, the Intangible,
He whose name is Om y the Inexpressible, surrounded
with effulgent light. Meditate on that. Another
meditation is given. Think of a space in your heart,
and in the midst of that space think that a flame is
burning. Think of that flame as your own soul, and
inside that flame is another space, effulgent, and that
is the Soul of your soul, God. Meditate upon that in
the heart. Chastity, non-injuring, pardoning everyone,
even the greatest enemy, truth, faith in the Lord, these
are all different Vrittis. Be not afraid if you are not
perfect in all of these; work, and the others will come.
He who has given up all attachment, all fear, and all
anger, he whose whole soul has gone unto the Lord, he
who has taken refuge in the Lord, whose heart has
become purified, with whatsoever desire he comes to
the Lord He will grant that to him. Therefore wor¬
ship Him through knowledge, or worship Him through
love, or worship Him through renunciation.

M He is my beloved worshipper, he is my beloved
Bhakta , who is not jealous of any being, who is the
friend of all, who is merciful to all, who has nothing of
his own, whose egotism is lost; he who is always satis¬
fied; he who works always in Yoga , whose self has


Digitized by Google



9 *


rAja yoga.


become controlled, whose will is firm, whose mind and
whose intelligence are given up unto me, know that he
is my beloved Bhakta. From whom comes no disturb¬
ance, who never becomes the cause of disturbance to
others, he who has given up excessive joy, grief, and
fear, and anxiety. Such a one is my beloved. He
who does not depend on anything, pure, active, giving
up all, who does not care whether good comes or evil,
never becomes miserable; he who is the same in praise
or in blame, with a silent, thoughtful mind, blessed
with what little comes in his way, homeless, he who
has no home, the whole world is his home, steady in
his ideas, such a one becomes a Yogi. 9 *

There was a great god-sage called N&rada . Just as
there are sages among mankind, great Yogis, so there are
great Yogis among the gods. N&rada was a good Yogi,
and very great. He travelled everywhere, and one
day he was passing through a forest, and he saw a man
who had been meditating until the white ants had built
a huge mound round his body, he had been sitting in
that position so long. He said to N&rada, " Where are
you going ?" N&rada replied, " I am going to
heaven." " Then ask God when He will be merciful
to me; when I will attain freedom." Further on
N&rada saw another man. He was jumping about,
singing, dancing, and said, " Oh, N&rada, where are
you going ? " His voice and his gestures were wild.
N&rada said, " I am going to heaven." " Then, ask
when I will be free." So N&rada went on. In the
course of time he came again by the same road, and


Digitized by Google



rAja yoga in brief.


93


there was the man who had been meditating till the
ant-hills had grown round him. He said, “ Oh,
NArada^ did yon ask the Lord about me ? ** 44 Oh,

yes.” " What did He say ? ” " The Lord told me

that yon would attain freedom in four more births.'*
Then the man began to weep and wail, and said, “ I
have meditated until an ant-hill has been raised
around me, and I have four more births yet ! M
NArada went to the other man. ” Did you ask my
question ?” “ Oh, yes. Do you see this tamarind

tree ? I have to tell you that as many leaves as there
are on that tree, so many times you will be born, and
then you will attain freedom.” Then the man began
to dance for joy, and said, “ I will have freedom
after such a short time.” A voice came, M My child,
you will have freedom this minute.” That was the
reward for his perseverance. He was ready to work
through all those births, nothing discouraged him.
But the first man felt that even four more births must
be too long. Only perseverance like that of the man
who was willing to wait aeons will bring about the
highest result.


Digitized by Google



Digitized by



PATANJALI’S

YOGA APHORISMS


Digitized by Google



Digitized by



FATANJALFS

YOGA APHORISMS


INTRODUCTION.

Before going into the Yoga Aphorisms I will try to
discuss one great question, upon which the whole
theory of religion rests, for the Yogis . It seems the
consensus of opinion of the great minds of the world,
and it has been nearly demonstrated by researches
into physical nature, that we are the outcome and
manifestation of an absolute condition, back of our
present relative condition, and are going forward, to
return again to that absolute. This being granted,
the question is, which is better, the absolute or this
state? There are not wanting people who think that
this manifested state is the highest state of man.
Thinkers of great calibre are of the opinion that we are
manifested specimens of undifferentiated being, and
this differentiated state is higher than the absolute.
Because in the absolute there cannot be any quality
they imagine that it must be insensate, dull, and lifeless,
that only this life can be enjoyed, and therefore we
must cling to it. First of all we want to inquire into
other solutions of life. There was an old solution that
7 [ 97 ]


rAja yoga.


98

man after death remained the same, that all his good
sides, minus his evil sides, remained for ever. Log¬
ically stated this means that man's goal is the world;
this world carried a stage higher, and with elimination
of its evils is the state they call heaven. This theory,
on the face of it, is absurd and puerile, because it can¬
not be. There cannot be good without evil, or evil
without good. To live in a world where it is all good
and no evil is what Sanskrit logicians call a “ dream in
the air . 99 Another theory in modern times has been
presented by several schools, that man’s destiny is to
go on always improving, always struggling towards, and
never reaching, the goal. This statement, though,
apparently, very nice, is also absurd, because there is
no such thing as motion in a straight line. Every
motion is in a circle. If you could take up a stone, and
project it into space, and then live long enough, that
stone would come back exactly to your hand. A
straight line, infinitely projected, must end in a circle.
Therefore, this idea that the destiny of man is progres¬
sion ever forward and forward, and never stopping, is
absurd. Although extraneous to the subject, I may
remark that this idea explains the ethical theory that
you must not hate, and must love, because, just as in
the case of electricity, or any other force, the modern
theory is that the power leaves the dynamo and com¬
pletes the circle back to the dynamo. So with all forces
in nature; they must come back to the source. There¬
fore do not hate anybody, because that force, that
hatred, which comes out from you, must, in the long


Digitized by Google



INTRODUCTION.


99


run, come back to you. If you love, that love will
come back to you, completing the circuit. It is as cer¬
tain as can be, that every bit of hatred that goes out
of the heart of man comes back to him in full force;
nothing can stop it, and every impulse of love comes
back to him. On other and practical grounds we see
that the theory of eternal progression is untenable, for
destruction is the goal of everything earthly. All our
struggles and hopes and fears and joys, what will they
lead to? We will all end in death. Nothing is so cer¬
tain as this. Where, then, is this motion in a straight
line? This infinite progression? It is only going out
to a distance, and again coming back to the centre from
which it started. See how, from nebulae, the sun,
moon, and stars, are produced; then they dissolve,
and go back to nebulae. The same is being done every¬
where. The plant takes material from the earth, dis¬
solves, and gives it back. Every form in this world is
taken out of surrounding atoms and goes back to
these atoms.

It cannot be that the same law acts differently in
different places. Law is uniform. Nothing is more
certain than that. If this is the law of nature, so it is
with thought; it will dissolve and come back to its
origin; whether we will it or not we shall have to return
to the origin, which is called God or Absolute. We
all came from God, and we are all bound to go to God,
call that God by any name you like; call Him God, or
Absolute or Nature, or by any hundred names you like,
the fact remains the same. “ From whom all this uni-


Digitized by


Google



ioo rAja yoga.

verse comes out, in whom all that is born lives, and to
whom all returns.’* This is one fact that is certain.
Nature works on the same plan; what is being worked
out in one sphere is being worked out in millions of
spheres. What you see with the planets, the same
will it be with this earth, with men and with the stars.
The huge wave is a mighty compound of small waves,
it may be of millions; the life of the whole world is a
compound of millions of little lives, and the death of
the whole world is the compound of the deaths of these
millions of little beings.

Now the question arises, is going back to God the
higher state, or is it not? The philosophers of the
Yoga school emphatically answer that it is. They say
that man’s present state is a degeneration; there is no
one religion on the face of the earth which says that
man is an improvement. The idea is that his beginning
is perfect and pure, that he degenerates until he cannot
degenerate further, and that there must come a time
when he shoots upward again to complete the circle;
the circle must be there. However low he goes, he
must ultimately take the upward bend again, and go
back to the original source, which is God. Man comes
from God in the beginning, in the middle he becomes
man, and in the end he goes back to God. This is the
method of putting it in the Dualistic form. In the
Monistic form you say that man is God, and goes back
to Him again. If our present state is the higher one,
then why is there so much horror and misery, and why
is there an end to it? If this is the higher state, why


Digitized by Google



INTRODUCTION,


IOI


does it end? Thu which corrupts and degenerates
cannot be the highest state. Why should it be so dia¬
bolical, so unsatisfying? It is only excusable, inas¬
much as, through it, we are taking a higher groove;
we have to pass through it in order to become regene¬
rate again. Put a seed into the ground and it disin¬
tegrates, dissolves after a time, and out of that
dissolution comes the splendid tree. Every seed must
degenerate to become the stately tree. So it follows
that the sooner we get out of this state we call “man"
the better for us. Is it by committing suicide that we
get out of this state? Not at all. That will be making
it all the worse. Torturing ourselves, or condemning
the world, is not the way to get out. We have to pass
through the 41 Slough of Despond/' and the sooner we
are through the better. But it must always be remerr
bered that this is not the highest state.

The really difficult part to understand is that this
state, the Absolute, which has been called the highest,
is not, as some fear, that of the zoophite, or of the
stone. That would he a dangerous thing to think.
According to these thinkers there are only two states
of existence, one of the stone, and the other of thought.
What right have they to limit existence to these two?
Is there not something infinitely superior to thought?
The vibrations of light, when they are very low, we do
not see; when they become a little more intense they
become light to us; when they become still more
intense we do not see them; it is dark to us. Is the
darkness in the end the same as in the beginning?


102


rAja yoga.


Certainly not; it is the difference of the two poles. Is
the thoughtlessness of the stone the same as the
thoughtlessness of God? Certainly not. God does
not think; He does notreason; why should He? Is
anything unknown to Him, that He should reason?
The stone cannot reason; God does not. Such is the
difference. These philosophers think it is awful if we
go beyond thought; they find nothing beyond thought.

There are much higher states of existence beyond
reasoning. It is really beyond the intellect that the first
state of religious life is to be found. When you step
beyond thought and intellect and all reasoning, then
you have made the first step towards God; and that is
the beginning of life. This that is commonly called
life is but an embryo state.

The next question will be, what proof is there that
this state beyond thought and reasoning is the highest
state? In the first place, all the great men of the
world, much greater than those that only talk, men
who moved the world, men who never thought of any
selfish ends whatever, have declared that this is
but a little stage on the way, that the Infinite is
beyond. In the second place, they not only say so,
but lay it open to everyone, they leave their methods,
and all can follow in their steps. In the third place,
there is no other way left. There is no other explana¬
tion. Taking for granted that there is no higher
state, why are we going through this circle all the
time; what reason can explain the world? The sensi¬
ble will be the limit to our knowledge if we cannot go


Digitized by


Google



INTRODUCTION.


103


farther, if we mast not ask for anything more- This
is what is called agnosticism. But what reason is there
to believe in the testimony of the senses? I would call
that man a true agnostic who would stand still in the
street and die. If reason is all in all it leaves us no
place to stand on this side of nihilism. If a man is
agnostic of everything but money, fame and name, he
is only a fraud. Kant has proved beyond all doubt
that we cannot penetrate beyond the tremendous dead
wall called reason. But that is the very first idea upon
which all Indian thought takes its stand, and dares to
seek, and succeeds in finding something higher than
reason, where alone the explanation of the present
state is to be found. This is the value of the study of
something that will take us beyond the world. " Thou
art our Father, and wilt take us to the other shore of
this ocean of ignorancethat is the science of religion;
nothing else can be.


THE YOGA APHORISMS


CHAPTER I.

1. Vow concentration is explained.

2. Yoga is restraining the mind-stuff (Chitta) from

taking various forms (Vrittis).

A good deal of explanation is necessary here. We
have to understand what Chitta is, and what are these
Vrittis . I have this eye. Eyes do not see. Take
away the brain centre which is in the head, the eyes
will still be there, the retinae complete, and also the
picture, and yet the eyes will not see. So the eyes are
only a secondary instrument, not the organ of vision.
The organ of vision is in the nerve centre of the brain.
The two eyes will not be sufficient alone. Sometimes
a man is asleep with his eyes open. The light is there
and the picture is there, but a third thing is necessary;
mind must be joined to the organ. The eye is the
external instrument, we need also the brain centre and
the agency of the mind. Carriages roll down a street
and you do not hear them. Why? Because your mind
has not attached itself to the organ of hearing. First,
there is the instrument, then there is the organ, and
third, the mind attachment to these two. The mind

[104]


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


105


takes the impression farther in, and presents it to the
determinative faculty — Buddhi — which reacts. Along
with this reaction flashes the idea of egoism. Then
this mixture of action and reaction is presented to the
Puruia, the real Soul, who perceives an object in this
mixture. The organs ( Indriyas ), together with the
mind (Manas), the determinative faculty (Buddhi),
and egoism (Ahamkdra), form the group called the
Antahkarana (the internal instrument). They are but
various processes in the mind-stuff, called Chitta. The
waves of thought in the Chitta are called Vfitti ("the
whirlpool" is the literal translation). What is thought?
Thought is a force, as is gravitation or repulsion. It
is absorbed from the infinite storehouse of force in
nature; the instrument called Chitta takes hold of that
force, and, when it passes out at the other end it is
called thought. This force is supplied to us through
food, and out of that food the body obtains the power
of motion, etc. Others, the finer forces, it throws out
in what we call thought. Naturally we see that the
mind is not intelligent; yet it appears to be intelligent.
Why? Because the intelligent soul is behind it. You
are the only sentient being; mind is only the instru¬
ment through which you catch the external world.
Take this book; as a book it does not exist outside,
what exists outside is unknown and unknowable. It is
the suggestion that gives a blow to the mind, and the
mind gives out the reaction. If a stone is thrown into
the water the water is thrown against it in the form of
waves. The real universe is the occasion of the reac-


Digitized by Google



io6 rAja yoga.

tion of the mind. A book form, or an elephant form,
or a man form, is not outside; all that we know is our
mental reaction from the outer suggestion. Matter is
the “permanent possibility of sensation,” said John
Stuart Mill. It is only the suggestion that is outside.
Take an oyster for example. You know how pearls
are made. A grain of sand or something gets inside
and begins to irritate it, and the oyster throws a sort
of enamelling around the sand, and this makes the
pearl. This whole universe is our own enamel, so to
say, and the real universe is the grain of sand. The
ordinary man will never understand it, because, when
he tries to, he throws out an enamel, and sees only his
own enamel. Now we understand what is meant by
these Vfittis. The real man is behind the mind, and
the mind is the instrument in his hands, and it is his
intelligence that is percolating through it. It is only
when you stand behind it that it becomes intelligent.
When man gives it up it falls to pieces, and is nothing.
So you understand what is meant by Chitta . It is the
mind-stuff, and Vrittis are the waves and ripples rising
in it when external causes impinge on it. These Vrittis
are our whole universe.

The bottom of the lake we cannot see, because its
surface is covered with ripples. It is only possible
when the ripples have subsided, and the water is calm,
for us to catch a glimpse of the bottom. If the water
is muddy, the bottom will not be seen; if the water is
agitated all the time, the bottom will not be seen. If
the water is clear, and there are no waves, we shall


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


107


see the bottom. That bottom of the lake is our own
true Self; the lake is the Chitta, and the waves the
Vrittis. Again, this mind is in three states; one is
darkness* which is called Tatnas , just as in brutes and
idiots; it only acts to injure others. No other idea
comes into that state of mind. Then there is the
active state of mind, Rajas , whose chief motives are
power and enjoyment. 14 I will be powerful and rule
others.” Then, at last, when the waves cease, and
the water of the lake becomes dear, there is the
state called Sattva, serenity, calmness. It is not inac¬
tive, but rather intensely active. It is the greatest
manifestation of power to be calm. It is easy to be
active. Let the reins go, and the horses will drag
you down. Any one can do that, but he who can stop
the plunging horses is the strong man. Which requires
the greater strength, letting go, or restraining? The
calm man is not the man who is dull. You must not
mistake Sattva for dulness, or laziness. The calm
man is the one who has restraint of these waves. Ac¬
tivity is the manifestation of the lower strength* calm¬
ness of the superior strength.

This Chitta is always trying to get back to its natural
pure state, but the organs draw it out. To restrain
it, and to check this outward tendency, and to start it
on the return journey to that essence of intelligence
is the first step in Y#ga f because only in this way can
the Chitta get into its proper course.

Although this Chitta is in every animal, from the
lowest to the highest, it is only in the human form that


rAja yoga.


108

we find intellect, and until the mind-stuff can take the
form of intellect it is not possible for it to return
through all these steps, and liberate the soul. Imme¬
diate salvation is impossible for the cow and the dog,
although they have mind, because their Chitta cannot
as yet take that form which we call intellect.

Chitta manifests itself in all these different forms —
scattering, darkening, weakening, and concentrating.
These are the four states in which the mind-stuff mani¬
fests itself. First a scattered form, is activity. Its
tendency is to manifest in the form of pleasure or of
pain. Then the dull form is darkness, the only ten¬
dency of which is to injure others. The commentator
says the first form is natural to the Devas , the angels,
and the second is the demoniacal form. Vikshipta is
when it struggles to centre itself. The Ekdgra y the
concentrated form of the Chitta , is what brings us to
Sam&dhi.

3. At that time (the time of concentration) the oeer
(the Purupa) rests in his own (unmodified)
state.

As soon as the waves have stopped, and the lake has
become quiet, we see the ground below the lake. So
with the mind; when it is calm, we see what our own
nature is; we do not mix ourselves but remain our
own selves.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


109

4 At other timei (other than that of concentra¬
tion) the seer ii identified with the modifica¬
tion*.

For instance, I am in a state of sorrow; some one
blames me; this is a modification, Vritti, and I identify
myself with it, and the result is misery.

5* There are five classes of modification!, painful and
not painful

6. (These are) right knowledge, indiscrimination,

verbal delusion, sleep, and memory.

7. Direct perception, inference, and competent evi¬

dence, are proofs,

When two of our perceptions do not contradict each
other we call it proof. I hear something, and, if it
contradicts something already perceived, I begin to
fight it out, and do not believe it. There are also
three kinds of proof. Direct perception, Pratyaksham .,
whatever we see and feel, is proof, if there has been
nothing to delude the senses. I see the world; that
is sufficient proof that it exists. Secondly, Anumdna ,
inference; you see a sign, and from the sign you come
to the thing signified. Thirdly, Aptavdkyam , the
direct perception of the Yogt t of those who have seen
the truth. We are all of us struggling towards knowl¬
edge, but you and I have to struggle hard, and come
to knowledge through a long tedious process of
reasoning, but the Yogi, the pure one, has gone beyond
all this. Before his mind, the past, the present, and


no


rAja yoga


the future, are alike one book for him to read; he does
not require to go through all this tedious process, and
his words are proofs, because he sees knowledge in
himself; he is the Omniscient One. These, for
instance, are the authors of the Sacred Scriptures;
therefore the Scriptures are proof, and, if any such
persons are living now, their words will be proof.
Other philosophers go into long discussions about this
Apta, and they say, what is the proof that this is truth?
The proof is because they see it; because whatever I
see is proof, and whatever you see is proof, if it does not
contradict any past knowledge. There is knowledge
beyond the senses, and whenever it does not contradict
reason and past human experience, that knowledge is
proof. Any madman may come into this room and say
he sees angels around him; that would not be proof. In
the first place it must be true knowledge, and, secondly,
it must not contradict knowledge of the past, and,
thirdly, it must depend upon the character of the man. I
hear it said that the character of the man is not of so
much importance as what he may say; we must first hear
what he says. This may be true in other things; a
man may be wicked, and yet make an astronomical
discovery, but in religion it is different, because no
impure man will ever have the power to reach the
truths of religion. Therefore, we have first of all to
see that the man who declares himself to be an Apta
is a perfectly unselfish and holy person; secondly that
he has reached beyond the senses, and thirdly that
what he says does not contradict the past knowledge


Digitized by Google



TOGA JLFHOJU$3ftSs


m

off hnMM*hj . Any new discovery of truth dees wet
uwuafa the pest troth, bet its n»tO it. And,
fourthly, that tr oth most have a possibility of Ttnio*-
tioo. If o mu soys ” I hove seen o rtskte." and tells
me that I have mo right to see it, I believe him not.
Every one most have the power to see it for himself.
No one who sells his knowledge is an All these

conditions most be fulfilled; yon mast first see that the
man is pore, and that he has no selfish motive; that he
has no thirst for gain or fame. Secondly, he moat
show that he is super-conscious. Thirdly, he most
give ns something that we cannot get from our senses,
and which is for the benefit of the world. And w«
most see that it does not contradict other truths; if it
contradict other scientific truths reject it at once.
Fourthly, the man should never be singular; he should
only represent what all men can attain. The three
sorts of proof, are, then, direct sense perception,
inference, and the words of an Apta. I cannot trans¬
late this word into English. It is not the word inspired,
because that comes from outside, while this comes from
himself. The literal meaning is "attained."

8. Indiscrimination is fhlsa knowledge not sitab*
lished in real nature.

The next class of Vrittis that arise is mistaking the
one thing for another, as a piece of mother-of-pearl is
taken for a piece of silver.


Digitized by Google



112


rAja yoga.


9. Verbal delusion follows from words having no

(corresponding) reality.

There is another class of Vrittis called Vikalpa.
A word is uttered, and we do not wait to consider its
meaning; we jump to a conclusion immediately. It is
the sign of weakness of the CAitta. Now you can
understand the theory of restraint. The weaker the
man the less he has of restraint. Consider yourselves
always in that way. When you are going to be angry
or miserable, reason it out, how it is that some news
that has come to you is throwing your mind into
Vrittis.

10. Bleep is a Vritti which embraces the feeling of

voidneis.

The next class of Vrittis is called sleep and dream.
When we awake we know that we have been sleeping;
we can only have memory of perception. That which
we do not perceive we never can have any memory of.
Every reaction is a wave in the lake. Now, if, during
sleep, the mind had no waves, it would have no percep¬
tions, positive or negative, and, therefore, we would
not remember them. The very reason of our remem¬
bering sleep is that during sleep there was a certain
class of waves in the mind. Memory is another class
of Vrittis , which is called Smriti.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS*


US

1L Memory it when the (Vrittis of) perceived sub-
jeetsdo not dip away (and through impressions
oome back to consciousness).

Memory can be caused by the previous three. For
instance, you hear a word. That word is like a stone
thrown into the lake of the Chitta ; it causes a ripple,
and that ripple rouses a series of ripples; this is
memory. So in sleep. When the peculiar kind of
ripple called sleep throws the Chitta into a ripple of
memory it is called a dream. Dream is another form
of the ripple which in the waking state is called
memory.

12. Their control is by practioe and non-attaoh-
ment.

The mind, to have this non-attachment, must be
clear, good and rational. Why should we practise ?
Because each action is like the pulsations quivering
over the surface of the lake. The vibration dies out,
and what is left ? The Samskdras , the impressions.
When a large number of these impressions is left on
the mind they coalesce, and become a habit. It is
said “ habit is second nature ; 99 it is first nature also,
and the whole nature of man; everything that we are
is the result of habit. That gives us consolation, be¬
cause, if it is only habit, we can make and unmake it
at any time. This Samskdra is left by these vibrations
passing out of our mind, each one of them leaving its
result Our character is the sum-total of these marks,
and according as some particular wave prevails one


Digitized by Google



rAja yoga.


H 4

takes that tone. If good prevail one becomes good 9
if wickedness one becomes wicked, if joyfulness one
becomes happy. The only remedy for bad habits is
counter habits; all the bad habits that have left their
impressions are to be controlled by good habits. Go
on doing good, thinking holy thoughts continuously;
that is the only way to suppress base impressions.
Never say any man is hopeless, because he only rep¬
resents a character, a bundle of habits, and these
can be checked by new and better ones. Character is
repeated habits, and repeated habits alone can reform
character.

13. Continuous struggle to keep them (the Vrittis)

perfectly restrained is practice.

What is this practice ? The attempt to restrain the
mind in the Chitta form, to prevent its going out into
waves.

14. Its ground becomes firm by long, constant efforts

with great love (for the end to be attained).

Restraint does not come in one day, but by long
continued practice.

15. That effect which comes to those who have given

up their thirst after objects either seen or
heard, and which wills to control the objects*
is non-attachment.

Two motives of our actions are (i) What we see our¬
selves; (2) The experience of others. These two


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


H 5


rorces are throwing the mind, the lake, into various
waves. Renunciation is the power of battling against
these, and holding the mind in check. Renunciation
of these two motives is what we want. I am passing
through a street, and a man comes and takes my watch.
That is my own experience. I see it myself, and it
immediately throws my Chitta into a wave, taking the
form of anger. Allow not that to come. If you can¬
not prevent that, you are nothing; if you can, you
have Vairdgyam . Similarly, the experience of the
worldly-minded teaches us that sense enjoyments are
the highest ideal. These are tremendous temptations.
To deny them, and not allow the mind to come into a
wave form with regard to them, is renunciation; to
control the twofold motive powers arising from my
own experience, and from the experience of others,
and thus prevent the Chitta from being governed by
them, is Vairdgyam . These should be controlled by
me, and not I by them. This sort of mental strength
is called renunciation. This Vairdgyam is the only
way to freedom.

16. That extreme non-attachment, giving up even
the qualities, shows (the real nature of) the
Purusa,

It is the highest manifestation of power when it
takes away even our attraction towards the qualities.
We have first to understand what the Puruia , the Self,
is, and what are the qualities. According to Yoga
philosophy the whole of nature consists of three quali*


n6 rAja yoga.

ties; one is called Tamos , another Rajas , and the third
Sattva. These three qualities manifest themselves in
the physical world as attraction, repulsion, and con-:
trol. Everything that is in nature, all these manifes¬
tations, are combinations and recombinations of these
three forces. This nature has been divided into vari¬
ous categories by the Sdnkhyas ; the Self of man is be¬
yond all these, beyond nature, is effulgent by Its very
nature. It is pure and perfect. Whatever of intelli¬
gence we see in nature is but the reflection from this
Self upon nature. Nature itself is insentient. You
must remember that the word nature also includes the
mind; mind is in nature; thought is in nature; from
thought, down to the grossest form of matter, every¬
thing is in nature, the manifestation of nature. This
nature has covered the Self of man, and when nature
takes away the covering the Self becomes unveiled,
and appears in Its own glory. This non-attachment,
as it is described in Aphorism 15 (as being control of
nature) is the greatest help towards manifesting the
Self. The next aphorism defines Samddhi , perfect
concentration, which is the goal of the Yogi\

17. The eoneentration called right knowledge is
that which is followed by reasoning, discrim¬
ination, bliss, unqualified ego.

This Samddhi is divided into two varieties. One is
called the Samprajndta , and the other the Asamprajndta .
The Samprajndta is of four varieties. In this Samddhi
xome all the powers of controlling nature. The first


Digitized by Google



■


YOGA APHORISMS. 117

variety is called the Savitarka, when the mind medi¬
tates upon an object again and again, by isolating it
from other objects. There are two sorts of objects
for meditation, the categories of nature, and the
Purufa* Again, the categories are of two varieties;
the twenty-four categories are insentient, and the one
sentient is the Purufa . When the mind thinks of the
elements of nature by thinking of their beginning and
their end, this is one sort of Savitarka. The words
require explanation. This part of Yoga is based
entirely on Sdnkhya Philosophy, about which I have
already told you. As you will remember, egoism and
will, and mind, have a common basis, and that com¬
mon basis is called the Chitta , the mind-stuff, out of
which they are all manufactured. This mind-stuff
takes in the forces of nature, and projects them as
thought. There must be something, again, where both
force and matter are one. This is called Avyaktam f
the unmanifested state of nature, before creation, and
to which, after the end of a cycle, the whole of nature
returns, to again come out after another period. Be¬
yond that is the Purufa , the essence of intelligence.
There is no liberation in getting powers. It is a
worldly search after enjoyments, and there is no enjoy¬
ment in this life; all search for enjoyment is vain; this
is the old, old lesson which man finds it so hard to
learn. When he does learn it, he gets out of the uni¬
verse and becomes free. The possession of what are
called occult powers is only intensifying the world,
and in the end, intensifying suffering. Though, as a


118


rAja yoga.


scientist, Patanjali is bound to point out the possi¬
bilities of this science, he never misses an opportunity
to warn us against these powers. Knowledge is power,
and as soon as we begin to know a thing we get power
over it; so also, when the mind begins to meditate on
the different elements it gains power over them. That
sort of meditation where the external gross elements
are the objects is called Savitarka . Tarka means ques¬
tion, Savitarka with-question. Questioning the ele¬
ments, as it were, that they may give up their truths
and their powers to the man who meditates upon
them. Again, in the very same meditation, when one
struggles to take the elements out of time and space,
and think of them as they are, it is called Nirvitarka ,
without-question. When the meditation goes a step
higher, and takes the Tanmdtras as its object, and
thinks of them as in time and space, it is called Savi -
chdra , with-discrimination, and when the same medita¬
tion gets beyond time and space, and thinks of the
fine elements as they are, it is called Nirvichdra , with-
out-discrimination. The next step is when the ele¬
ments are given up, either as gross or as fine, and the
object of meditation is the interior organ, the thinking
organ, and when the thinking organ is thought of as
bereft of the qualities of activity, and of dulness, it is
then called Sdnandatn y the blissful Samddhi. In that
Samddhi , when we are thinking of the mind as the
object of meditation, before we have reached the state
which takes us beyond the mind even, when it has
become very ripe and concentrated, when all ideas of


Digitized by Google


YOGA APHORISMS. 119

the gross materials, or fine materials, have been given
up, and the only object is the mind as it is, when the
Sattpa state only of the Eg0 remains, but differentiated
from all other objects, this is called Asmitd Sam&dhi*
and the man who has attained to this has attained to
what is called in the Vedas * 4 bereft of body.*" He can
think of himself as without his gross body; but he will
have to think of himself as with a fine body. Those
that in this state get merged in nature without attain¬
ing the goal are called PrakriHlayw , but those who do
not even stop at any enjoyments, reach the goal, which
is freedom.

18. There it another Sam&dhi which it attained by
the constant practice of cessation of all mental
activity, in which the Chitta retains only the
nnmanifested impressions.

This is the perfect super-conscious Asamprajndta
Samddhi y the state which gives us freedom. The first
state does not give us freedom, does not liberate the
soul. A man may attain to all powers, and yet fall
again. There is no safeguard until the soul goes be¬
yond nature, and beyond conscious concentration. It
is very difficult to attain, albhough its method seems
very easy. Its method is to hold the mind as the
object, and whenever thought comes, to strike it
down, allowing no thought to come into the mind, thus
making it an entire vacuum. When we can really do
this, in that moment we shall attain liberation. When
persons without training and preparation try to make


DigraBi !! 1



le


120


rAja yoga.


their minds vacant they are likely to succeed only in
covering themselves with Tamas % material of ignor-
ance, which makes the mind dull and stupid, and leads
them to think that they are making a vacuum of the
mind. To be able to really do that is a manifestation
of the greatest strength, of the highest control. When
this state, Asamprajndta , super-consciousness, is
reached, the Satnddhi becomes seedless. What is
meant by that ? In that sort of concentration when
there is consciousness, where the mind has succeeded
only in quelling the waves in the Chitta and holding
them down, they are still there in the form of tenden¬
cies, and these tendencies (or seeds) will become waves
again, when the time comes. But when you have
destroyed all these tendencies, almost destroyed the
mind, then it has become seedless, there are no more
seeds in the mind out of which to manufacture again
and again this plant of life, this ceaseless round of
birth and death. You may ask, what state would that
be, in which we should have no knowledge ? What we
call knowledge is a lower state than the one beyond
knowledge. You must always bear in mind that the
extremes look very much the same. The low vibra¬
tion of light is darkness, and the very high vibration
of light is darkness also, but one is real darkness, and
the other is really intense light; yet their appearance
is the same. So, ignorance is the lowest state, knowl¬
edge is the middle state, and beyond knowledge is a
still higher state. Knowledge itself is a manufactured
something, a combination; it is not reality. What


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS*


121


will be the result of constant practice of this higher
concentration ? All old tendencies of restlessness, and
dulness, will be destroyed, as well as the tendencies of
goodness too. It is just the same as with the metals
that are used with gold to take off the dirt and alloy.
When the ore is smelted down, the dross is burnt along
with the alloy. So this constant controlling power will
stop the previous bad tendencies, and, eventually, the
good ones also. Those good and evil tendencies will
suppress each other, and there will remain the Soul, in
all its glorious splendour, untrammelled by either good
or bad, and that Soul is omnipresent, omnipotent, and
omniscient. By giving up all powers it has become
omnipotent, by giving up all life it is beyond mortal¬
ity; it has become life itself. Then the Soul will know
It neither had birth nor death, neither want of heaven
nor of earth. It will know that It neither came nor
went; it was nature which was moving, and that move¬
ment was reflected upon the Soul. The form of the
light is moving, it is reflected and cast by the camera
upon the wall, and the wall foolishly thinks it is mov¬
ing. So with all of us; it is the Chitta constantly mov¬
ing, manipulating itself into various forms, and we
think that we are these various forms. All these delu¬
sions will vanish. When that free Soul will com¬
mand — not pray or beg, but command — then what¬
ever It desires will be immediately fulfilled; whatever
It wants It will be able to do. According to the
S&nkhya Philosophy there is no God. It says that


Digitized by Google



122


RAJA YOGA.


there cannot be any God of this universe, because if
there were He must be a Soul, and a Soul must be one
of two things, either bound or free. How can the soul
that is bound by nature, or controlled by nature,
create ? It is itself a slave. On the other hand, what
business has the soul that is free to create and manipu¬
late all these things ? It has no desires, so cannot
have any need to create. Secondly, it says the theory
of God is an unnecessary one; nature explains all.
What is the use of any God ? But Kapila teaches that
there are many souls, who, though nearly attaining
perfection, fall short because they cannot perfectly
renounce all powers. Their minds for a time merge
in nature, to re-emerge as its masters. Such gods
there are. We shall all become such gods, and, accord¬
ing to the Sdnkhyas , the God spoken of in the Vedas
really means one of these free souls. Beyond them
there is not an eternally free and blessed Creator of
the universe. On the other hand the Yogis say, " Not
so, there is a God; there is one Soul separate from all
other souls, and He is the eternal Master of all crea¬
tion, the Ever Free, the Teacher of all teachers."
The Yogis admit that those the Sdnkhyas call the
“ merged in nature M also exist. They are Yogis who
have fallen short of perfection, and though, for a
time debarred from attaining the goal, remain as rulers
of parts of the universe.


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


*23


10. (This Sam&dhi, when not followed by extreme
non-attachment) becomes the cause of the re*
manifestation of the gods and of those that
become merged in nature.

The gods in the Indian systems represent certain
high offices which are being filled successively by
various souls. But none of them is perfect.

20. To others (this Samadhi) comes through faith,

energy, memory, concentration, and discrimin¬
ation of the real

These are they who do not want the position of
gods, or even that of rulers of cycles. They attain to
liberation.

21. Success is speedy for the extremely energetic.

22. They again differ according as the means are

mild, medium or supreme.

23. Or by devotion to I svara.

24 I svara (the Supreme Enter) is a special Purusa,
untouched by misery, the results of actions, or
desires.

We must again remember that this Patanjali Yoga
Philosophy is based upon that of the Sdnkkyas, only
that in the latter there is no place for God, while with
the Vogts God has a place. The Yogis t however, avoid
many ideas about God, such as creating. God as the
Creator of the Universe is not meant by the Ifvara of
the Yogis 1 although, according to the Vedas , Hvara is


124


rAja yoga.


the Creator of the universe. Seeing that the universe
is harmonious, it must be the manifestation of one
will. The Yogis and Sdnkhyas both avoid the question
of creation. The Yogis want to establish a God, but
carefully avoid this question, they do not raise it at
all. Yet you will find that they arrive at God in a
peculiar fashion of their own. They say:

25. In Him becomes infinite that all-knowingness

which in others is (only) a germ.

The mind must always travel between two extremes.
You can think of limited space, but the very idea of
that gives you also unlimited space. Close your eyes
and think of a little space, and at the same time that
you perceive the little circle, you have a circle round it
of unlimited dimensions. It is the same with time.
Try to think of a second, you will have, with the same
act of perception, to think of time which is unlimited.
So with knowledge. Knowledge is only a germ in
man, but you will have to think of infinite knowledge
around it, so that the very nature of your constitution
shows us that there is unlimited knowledge, and the
Yogis call that unlimited knowledge God.

26. He is the Teacher of even the anoient teachers*

being not limited by time.

It is true that all knowledge is within ourselves, but
this has to be called forth by another knowledge.
Although the capacity to know is inside us, it must be


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS,


I2S

called out, and that calling out of knowledge can only
be got, a Yogi maintains, through another knowledge.
Dead, insentient matter, never calls out knowledge, it
is the action of knowledge that brings our knowledge.
Knowing beings must be with us to call forth what is
in us, so these teachers were always necessary. The
world was never without them, and no knowledge can
come without them, God is the Teacher of all teach¬
ers, because these teachers, however great they may
have been — gods or angels — were all bound and lim¬
ited by time, and God is not limited by time. These
are the two peculiar deductions of the Yogis, The first
is that in thinking of the limited, the mind must think
of the unlimited, and that if one part of that perception
is true the other must be, for the reason that their
value as perceptions of the mind is equal. The very
fact that man has a little knowledge, shows that God
has unlimited knowledge. If I am to take one, why
not the other ? Reason forces me to take both or
reject both. If I believe that there is a man with a
little knowledge, I must also admit that there is some¬
one behind him with unlimited knowledge. The
second deduction is that no knowledge can come with¬
out a teacher. It is true as the modem philosophers
say, that there is something in man which evolves out
of him; all knowledge is in man, but certain environ¬
ments are necessary to call it out. We cannot find any
knowledge without teachers, if there are men teachers,
god teachers, or angel teachers, they are all limited;
who was the teacher before them ? We are forced to


.k„Cm£


le


126


rAja yoga.


admit, as a last conclusion, One Teacher, Who is not
limited by time, and that One Teacher of infinite
knowledge, without beginning or end, is called God.

27. His manifesting word is Om.

Every idea that you have in the mind has a counter¬
part in a word; the word and the thought are insepar¬
able. The external part of the thought is what we
call word, and the internal part is what we call thought.
No man can, by analysis, separate thought from word.
The idea that language was created by men — certain
men sitting together and deciding upon words, has
been proved to be wrong. So long as things have
existed there have been words and language. What is
the connection between an idea and a word ? Although
we see that there must always be a word with a thought,
it is not necessary that the same thought requires the
same word. The thought may be the same in twenty
different countries, yet the language is different. We
must have a word to express each thought, but these
words need not necessarily have the same sound.
Sounds will vary in different nations. Our commenta¬
tor says “ Although the relation between thought and
word is perfectly natural, yet it does not mean a rigid
connection between one sound and one idea. M These
sounds vary, yet the relation between the sounds and
the thoughts is a natural one. The connection between
thoughts and sounds is good only if there be a real
connection between the thing signified and the sym*
bol, and until then that symbol will never come into


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


127


general use. Symbol is the manifestor of the thing
signified, and if the thing signified has already exist¬
ence, and if, by experience, we know that the symbol
has expressed that thing many times, then we are sure
that there is the real relation between them. Even if
the things are not present, there will be thousands who
will know them by their symbols. There must be a
natural connection between the symbol and the thing
signified; then, when that symbol is pronounced, it
recalls the thing signified. The commentator says the
manifesting word of God is Om . Why does he empha¬
size this ? There are hundreds of words for God.
One thought is connected with a thousand words; the
idea, God, is connected with hundreds of words, and
each one stands as a symbol for God. Very good. But
there must be a generalisation among all these words,
some substratum, some common ground of all these
symbols, and that symbol which is the common sym¬
bol will be the best, and will really be the symbol of
all. In making a sound we use the larynx, and the
palate as a sounding board. Is there any material
sound of which all other sounds must be manifesta¬
tions, one which is the most natural sound ? Om
(Aum) is such a sound, the basis of all sounds. The
first letter, A, is the root sound, the key, pronounced
without touching any part of the tongue or palate;
M represents the last sound in the series, being pro¬
duced by the closed lips, and the U rolls from the
very root to the end of the sounding board of the
mouth. Thus, Om represents the whole phenomena


Digitized by Google



128


rAja yoga.


of sound producing. As such, it must be the natural
symbol, the matrix of all the various sounds. It
denotes the whole range and possibility of all the
words that can be made. Apart from these specula¬
tions we see that around this word Om are centred all
the different religious ideas in India; all the various
religious ideas of the Vedas have gathered themselves
round this word Om . What has that to do with
America and England, or any other country ? Simply
that the word has been retained at every stage of
religious growth in India, and it has been manipulated
to mean all the various ideas about God. Monists,
Dualists, Mono-Dualists, Separatists, and even Athe¬
ists, took up this Om . Om has become the one symbol
for the religious aspiration of the vast majority of
human beings. Take, for instance, the English word
God. It covers only a limited function, and, if you go
beyond it, you have to add adjectives, to make it Per¬
sonal, or Impersonal, or Absolute God. So with the
words for God in every other language; their significa¬
tion is very small. This word Om y however, has around
it all the various significances. As such it should be
accepted by everyone.

28. The repetition of this (Om) and meditating on
its meaning (is the way).

Why should there be repetition ? We have not for¬
gotten that theory of Samskdras y that the sum-total of
impressions lives in the mind. Impressions live in the


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


129


mind, the sum-total of impressions, and they become
more and more latent, but remain there, and as soon
as they get the right stimulus they come out. Molec¬
ular vibration will never cease. When this universe
is destroyed all the massive vibrations disappear, the
sun, moon, stars, and earth, will melt down, but the
vibrations must remain in the atoms. Each atom wilt
perform the same function as the big worlds do. So
the vibrations of this Chitta will subside, but will go on
like molecular vibrations, and when they get the
impulse will come out again. We can now understand
what is meant by repetition. It is the greatest stimu¬
lus that can be given to the spiritual Samskdras .
M One moment of company with the Holy makes a ship
to cross this ocean of life.” Such is the power of
association. So this repetition of Om y and thinking of
its meaning, is keeping good company in your own
mind. Study, and then meditate and meditate, when
you have studied. Thus light will come to you, the
Self will become manifest.

But one must think of this Om, and of its meaning
too. Avoid evil company, because the scars of old
wounds are in you, and this evil company is just the
heat that is necessary to call them out In the same
way we are told that good company will call out the
good impressions that are in us, but which have be¬
come latent. There is nothing holier in this world
than to keep good company, because the good impres¬
sions will have this same tendency to come to the
surface.

9


*30


rAja yoga.


29. From that ii gained (the knowledge of) intro*

spection, and the destruction of obstaolea

The first manifestation of this repetition and think¬
ing of Om will be that the introspective power will be
manifested more and more, and all the mental and
physical obstacles will begin to vanish. What are the
obstacles to the Yogi f

30. Disease, mental laziness, doubt, calmness, cessa¬

tion, false perception, non-attaining concentra¬
tion, and falling away from the state when
obtained, are the obstructing distractions.

Disease. This body is the boat which will carry us
to the other shore of the ocean of life. It must be
taken care of. Unhealthy persons cannot be Vogts.
Mental laziness makes us lose all lively interest in the
subject, without which there will neither be the will
nor the energy to practise. Doubts will arise in the
mind about the truth of the science, however strong
one’s intellectual conviction may be, until certain
peculiar psychic experiences come, a9 hearing, or see¬
ing, at a distance, etc. These glimpses strengthen the
mind and make the student persevere. Falling away
when attained. Some days or weeks when you are
practising the mind will be calm and easily concen¬
trated, and you will find yourself progressing fast. All
of a sudden the progress will stop one day, and you
will find yourself, as it were, stranded. Persevere.
All progress proceeds by such rise and fall.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


131


31. Grief; mental distress, tremor of the body,

irregular breathing, accompany non-retention
of concentration.

Concentration will bring perfect repose to mind and
body every time it is practised. When the practice
has been misdirected, or not enough controlled, these
disturbances come. Repetition of Om and self-sur¬
render to the Lord will strengthen the mind, and bring
fresh energy. The nervous shakings will come to
almost everyone. Do not mind them at all, but keep
on practising. Practice will cure them, and make the
seat firm.

32. To remedy this the practice of one subject

(should be made).

Making the mind take the form of one object for
some time will destroy these obstacles. This is gen¬
eral advice. In the following aphorisms it will be
expanded and particularised. As one practice cannot
suit everyone, various methods will be advanced, and
everyone by actual experience will find out that which
helps him most.

33. Friendship! mercy, gladness, indifference, being

thought of in regard to subjects* happy, un¬
happy* good and evil respectively* pacify the
Chitta.

We must have these four sorts of ideas. We must
have friendship for all; we must be merciful towards


132


rAja yoga.


those that are in misery; when people are happy we
ought to be happy, and to the wicked we must be
indifferent. So with all subjects that come before us.
If the subject is a good one, we shall feel friendly
towards it; if the subject of thought is one that is
miserable we must be merciful towards the subject. If
it is good we must be glad, if it is evil we must be in¬
different. These attitudes of the mind towards the
different subjects that come before it will make the
mind peaceful. Most of our difficulties in our daily
lives come from being unable to hold our minds in this
way. For instance, if a man does evil to us, instantly
we want to react evil, and every reaction of evil shows
that we are not able to hold the Chitta down; it comes
out in waves towards the object, and we lose our
power. Every reaction in the form of hatred or evil is
so much loss to the mind, and every evil thought or
deed of hatred, or any thought of reaction, if it is con¬
trolled, will be laid in our favour. It is not that we
lose by thus restraining ourselves; we are gaining
infinitely more than we suspect. Each time we sup¬
press hatred, or a feeling of anger, it is so much good
energy stored up in our favour; that piece of energy
will be converted into the higher powers.

34. By throwing out and restraining the Breath.

The word used is Prdna. Prdna is not exactly
breath. It is the name for the energy that is in the
universe. Whatever you see in the universe, whatever
moves or works, or has life, is a manifestation of this


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS-


133


Prdna. The sum-total of the energy displayed in the
universe is called Prdna. This Prdna y before a cycle
begins, remains in an almost motionless state, and
when the cycle begins this Prdna begins to manifest
itself. It is this Prdna that is manifested as motion,
as the nervous motion in human beings or animals,
and the same Prdna is manifesting as thought, and so
on. The whole universe is a combination of Prdna and
Akd£a\ so is the human body. Out of Akd§a you get
the different materials that you feel, and see, and out of
Prdna all the various forces. Now this throwing out
and restraining the Prdna is what is called Prdndydma ,
Patanjali , the father of the Yoga Philosophy, does not
gi ve very many particular directions about Prdndydma f
but later on other Yogis found out various things about
this Prdndydma , and made of it a great science. With
Pantanjali it is one of the many ways, but he does not
lay much stress on it. He means that you simply
throw the air out, and drawn it in, and hold k for
some time, that is all, and by that, the mind will be
come a little calmer. But, later on, you will find that
out of this is evolved a particular science called Prdnd¬
ydma. We will hear a little of what these later Yogis
have to say. Some of this I have told you before, but
a little repetition will serve to fix it in your minds.
First, you must remember that this Prdna is not
the breath. But that which causes the motion of the
breath, that which is the vitality of the breath is
the Prdna. Again, the word Prdna is used of all the
senses; they are all called Prdnas, the mind is called


134


rAja yoga.


Prdna ; and so we see that Prdna is the name of a cer¬
tain force. And yet we cannot call it force, because
force is only the manifestation of it. It is that which
manifests itself as force and everything else in the way
of motion. The Chitta, the mind-stuff, is the engine
which draws in the Prdna from the surroundings, and
manufactures out of this Prdna these various vital
forces. First of all the forces that keep the body in
preservation, and lastly thought, will, and all other
powers. By this process of breathing we can control
all the various motions in the body, and the various
nerve currents that are running through the body.
First we begin to recognise them, and then we slowly
get control over them. Now these later Yogis con¬
sider that there are three main currents of this Prdna
in the human body. One they call I<fd y another Pin -
gald y and the third Suiumnd. Pingald , according to
them, is on the right side of the spinal column, and
the I$d is on the left side, and in the middle of this
spinal column is the Sulumnd, a vacant channel. Itfd
and Pingald , according to them, are the currents work¬
ing in every man, and through these currents, we are
performing all the functions of life. SulumnA is pres¬
ent in all, as a possibility; but it works only in the
Yogi. You must remember that the Yogi changes his
body; as you go on practising your body changes; it
is not the same body that you had before the practice.
That is very rational, and can be explained, because
every new thought that we have must make, as it
were, a new channel through the brain, and that


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


135

explains the tremendous conservatism of human
nature. Human nature likes to run through the ruts
that are already there, because it is easy. If we think,
just for example's sake, that the mind is like a needle,
and the brain substance a soft lump before it, then
each thought that we have makes a street, as it were,
in the brain, and this street would close up t but that
the grey matter comes and makes a lining to keep it
separate. If there were no grey matter there would be
no memory, because memory means going over these
old streets, retracing a thought as it were. Now per¬
haps you have remarked that when I talk on subjects
in which I take a few ideas that are familiar to every¬
one, and combine, and recombine them, it is easy to
follow, because these channels are present in every¬
one's brain, and it is only necessary to recur to them.
But whenever a new subject comes new channels have
to be made, so it is not understood so readily. And
that is why the brain (it is the brain, and not the
people themselves) refuses unconsciously to be acted
upon by new ideas. It resists. The Prdna is trying
to make new channels, and the brain will not allow it.
This is the secret of conservatism. The less channels
there have been in the brain, and the less the needle
of the Prdna has made these passages, the more con¬
servative will be the brain, the more it will struggle
against new thoughts. The more thoughtful the man,
the more complicated will be the streets in his brain,
and the more easily he will take to new ideas, and
understand them. So with every fresh idea; we make


Digitized Dy


rAja yoga.


13«

a new impression in the brain, cut new channels
through the brain-stuff, and that is why we find that
in the practice of Yoga (it being an entirely new set of
thoughts and motives) there is so much physical resist¬
ance at first. That is why we find that the part of re¬
ligion which deals with the world side of nature can be
so widely accepted, while the other part, the Philos¬
ophy, or the Psychology, which deals with the inner
nature of man, is so frequently neglected. We must
remember the definition of this world of ours; it is
only the Infinite Existence projected into the plane of
consciousness. A little of the Infinite is projected
into consciousness, and that we call our world. So
there is an Infinite beyond, and religion has to deal
with both, with the little lump we call our world, and
with the Infinite beyond. Any religion which deals
alone with either one of these two will be defective.
It must deal with both. That part of religion which
deals with this part of the Infinite which has come into
this plane of consciousness, got itself caught, as it
were, in the plane of consciousness, in the cage of
time, space, and causation, is quite familiar to us, be¬
cause we are in that already, and ideas about this
world have been with us almost from time immemorial.
The part of religion which deals with the Infinite be¬
yond comes entirely new to us, and getting ideas
about it produces new channels in the brain, disturbing
the whole system, and that is why you find in the
practice of Yoga ordinary people are at first turned out
of their grooves. In order to lessen these disturb-


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS,


137


ances as much as possible all these methods are devised
by Patanjali , that we may practise any one of them
best suited to us.

35. Those forms of concentration that bring extra¬

ordinary sense perceptions cause perseverance
of the mind.

This naturally comes with DMrdna , concentration;
the Yogis say, if the mind becomes concentrated on the
tip of the nose one begins to smell, after a few days,
wonderful perfumes. If it becomes concentrated at
the root of the tongue one begins to hear sounds; if
on the tip of the tongue one begins to taste wonderful
flavours; if on the middle of the tongue, one feels as if
he were coming in contact with something. If one
concentrates his mind on the palate he begins to see
peculiar things. If. a man whose mind is disturbed
wants to take up some of these practices of Yoga , yet
doubts the truth of them, he wOJ have his doubts set
at rest when, after a little practice, these things come
to him, and he will persevere,

36. Or (by the meditation on) the Effulgent One

which Is beyond all sorrow.

This is another sort of concentration. Think of the
lotus of the heart, with petals downwards, and running
through it the Suiumnd\ take in the breath, and while
throwing the breath out imagine that the lotus is turned
with the petals upwards, and inside that lotus is an
effulgent light. Meditate on that.


138


rAja yoga.


37. Or (by meditation on) the heart that has given

up all attachment to sense objeets.

Take some holy person, some great person whom
you revere, some saint whom you know to be perfectly
non-attached, and think of his heart. That heart has
become non-attached, and meditate on that heart; it
will calm the mind. If you cannot do that, there is
the next way:

38. Or by meditating on the knowledge that comes
in deep.

Sometimes a man dreams that he has seen angels
coming to him and talking to him, that he is in an
ecstatic condition, that he has heard music floating
through the air. He is in a blissful condition in that
dream, and when he awakes it makes a deep impression
on him. Think of that dream as real, and meditate
upon it. If you cannot do that, meditate on any holy
thing that pleases you.

39. Or by the meditation on anything that appeals

to one as good.

This does not mean any wicked subject, but anything
good that you like, any place that you like best, any
scenery that you like best, any idea that you like best,
anything that will concentrate the mind.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS. 139

40. The Yogi’s mind thus meditating, beoomes un¬

obstructed from the atomic to the Infinite.

The mind, by this practice, easily contemplates the
most minute thing, as well as the biggest thing. Thus
the mind waves become fainter.

41. The Yogi whose Yrittis have thus become power¬

less (controlled) obtains in the receiver, re¬
ceiving, and received (the sel£ the mind and
external objects), ooncentratedness and same¬
ness, like the crystal (before different coloured
objects.)

What results from this constant meditation? We
must remember how in a previous aphorism Patanjatt
went into the various states of meditation, and how the
first will be the gross, and the second the fine objects,
and from them the advance is to still finer objects of
meditation, and how, in all these meditations, which
are only of the first degree, not very high ones, we get
as a result that we can meditate as easily on the fine
as on the grosser objects. Here the Yogt sees the
three things, the receiver, the received, and the receiv¬
ing, corresponding to the Soul, the object, and the
mind. There are three objects of meditation given us.
First the gross things, as bodies, or material objects,
second fine things, as the mind, the Chitta , and third
the Puruia qualified, not the Puruia itself, but the
egosim. By practice, the Yogt gets established in all
these meditations. Whenever he meditates he can
keep out all other thought; he becomes identified with


Digitized by Google



140


rAja yoga.


that on which he meditates; when he meditates he is
like a piece of crystal; before flowers the crystal
becomes almost identified with the flowers. If the
flower is red, the crystal looks red, or if the flower is
blue, the crystal looks blue,

42, Sound, meaning, and resulting knowledge, being

mixed up, is (called Samddhi) with reasoning,

Sound here means vibration; meaning, the nerve cur¬
rents which conduct it; and knowledge, reaction. All
the various meditations we have had so far, Patanjali
calls Savitarka (meditations with reasoning). Later
on he will give us higher and higher Dhydnas . In
these that are called “with reasoning, if w T e keep the
dually of subject and object, which results from the
mixture of word, meaning, and knowledge. There
is first the external vibration, the word; this, carried
inward by the sense currents, is the meaning. After
that there comes a reactionary wave in the Chitta % which
is knowledge, but the mixture of these three make up
what we call knowledge. In all the meditations up to
this we get this mixture as object of meditation. The
next Santddhi is higher.

43. The Samadhi called without reasoning (comes)

when the memory is purified, or devoid of
qualities, expressing only the meaning (of the
meditated object).

It is by practice of meditation of these three that we
come to the state where these three do not mix. We
can get rid of them. We will first try to understand


YOGA APHORISMS. 14I

what these three are. Here is the Chitta; you will
always remember the simile of the lake, the mind*
stuff, and the vibration, the word, the sound, like a
pulsation coming over it. You have that calm lake
in you, and I pronounce a word, M cow,” As soon as
it enters through your ears there is a wave produced
in your Chitta along with it. So that wave repre¬
sents the idea of the cow, the form or the meaning
as we call it. That apparent cow that you know is
really that wave in the mind-stuff, and that comes as
a reaction to the internal and external sound vibra¬
tions, and with the sound, the wave dies away; that
wave can never exist without a word. You may ask
how it is when we only think of the cow, and do not
hear a sound. You make that sound yourself. You
are saying “cow" faintly in your mind, and with that
comes a wave. There cannot be any wave without
this impulse of sound, and when it is not from outside
it is from inside, and when the sound dies, the wave
dies. What remains? The result of the reaction, and
that is knowledge. These three are so closely com¬
bined in our mind that we cannot separate them. When
the sound comes, the senses vibrate, and the wave
rises in reaction; they follow so closely upon one
another that there is no discerning one from the other;
when this meditation has been practised for a long
time, memory, the receptacle of all impressions,
becomes purified, and we are able clearly to distinguish
them from one another. This is called “NirvitarkQ"
concentration without reasoning.


142


rAja yoga.


44. By this process (the concentrations) with die*
crimination and without discrimination, whose
objects are finer, are (also) explained.

A process similar to the preceding is applied again,
only, the objects to be taken up in the former medita¬
tions are gross; in this they are fine.

46. The finer objects end with the Pradhfina.

The gross objects are only the elements, and every¬
thing manufactured out of them. The fine objects
begin with the Tanmatras or fine particles. The organs,
the mind , 41 egoism, the mind-stuff (the cause of all
manifestation) the equilibrium state of Sattva 9 Rajas
and Tamos materials — called Pradhdna (chief ) y Prakriti
(nature), or Avyakta (unmanifest), are all included
within the category of fine objects. The Purula (the
Soul) alone is excepted from this definition.

46. These concentrations are with seed.

These do not destroy the seeds of past actions, thus
cannot give liberation, but what they bring to the
Yogi is stated in the following aphorisms.

47. The concentration "without reasoning” being

purified, the Chitta becomes firmly fixed.

48. The knowledge in that is called "filled with

Truth.”

The next aphorism will explain this.

*The mind, or common sensory, the aggregate of all senses.


Digitized by


Google


YOGA APHORISMS* I43

49. The knowledge that is gained from testimony
and inference is about common objects. That
from the Samadhi just mentioned is of a much
higher order, being able to penetrate where
inference and testimony cannot go.

The idea is that we have to get our knowledge of
ordinary objects by direct perception, and by inference
therefrom, and from testimony of people who are com¬
petent* By 11 people who are competent, 1 ’ the Yogis
always mean the Risht r, or the Seers of the thoughts
recorded in the Scriptures — the Vedas. According to
them, the only proof of the Scriptures is that they
were the testimony of competent persons, yet they say
the Scriptures cannot take us to realisation* We can
read alt the Vtdas r and yet will not realise anything,
but when we practise their teachings, then we attain
to that state which realises what the Scriptures say,
which penetrates where reason cannot go, and where
neither perception nor inference can go, and where
the testimony of others cannot avail. This is what is
meant by this aphorism, that realisation is real religion,
and all the rest is only preparation — hearing lectures,
or reading books, or reasoning, is merely preparing the
ground; it is not religion. Intellectual assent, and
intellectual dissent are not religion. The central idea
of the Yogis is that just as we come in direct contact
with objects of the senses, so religion even can be
directly perceived in a far more intense sense* The
truths of religion, as God and Soul, cannot be perceived


TfpTBSr


144 rAja yoga.

by the external senses. I cannot see God with my
eyes, nor can I touch Him with my hands, and we also
know that neither can we reason beyond the senses.
Reason leaves us at a point quite indecisive; we may
reason all our lives, as the world has been doing for
thousands of years, and the result is that we find we
are incompetent to prove or disprove the facts of
religion. What we perceive directly we take as the
basis, and upon that basis we reason. So it is obvious
that reasoning has to run within these bounds of per
ception. It can never go beyond; the whole scope of
realisation, therefore, is beyond sense perception. The
Yogis say that man can go beyond his direct sense per¬
ception, and beyond his reason also. Man has in him
the faculty, the power, of transcending his intellect
even, and that power is in every being, every creature.
By the practice of Yoga that power is aroused, and
then man transcends the ordinary limits of reason, and
directly perceives things which are beyond all reason.

50. The resulting impression from this Bamftdhi ob¬
structs all other impressions.

We have seen in the foregoing aphorism that the only
way of attaining to that super-consciousness is by con¬
centration, and we have also seen that what hinder the
mind from concentration are the past Samskdras y
impressions. All of you have observed that when you
are trying to concentrate your mind, your thoughts
wander. When you are trying to think of God, that is
the very time which all these Samskdras take to appear.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS,


145


At other times they are not so active, but when you
want them not to be they are sure to be there, trying
their best to crowd inside your mind* Why should
that be sor Why should they be much more potent at
the time of concentration? It is because you are
repressing them and they react with all their force*
At other times they do not react. How countless these
old past impressions must be, al! lodged somewhere in
the Chitta y ready, waiting like tigers to jump up* These
have to be suppressed that the one idea which we like
may arise, to the exclusion of the others. Instead,
they are all struggling to come up at the same time.
These are the various powers of the Samskdras in
hindering concentration of the mind, so this Samddhi
which has just been given is the best to be practised,
on account of its power of suppressing the Samskdras t
The Samskdra which will be raised by this sort of con¬
centration will be so powerful that it will hinder the
action of the others, and hold them in check,

51 By the restraint of even this (impression, which
obstructs all other impressions), all being re¬
strained, comes the “ seedless Tt Samddhi*

You remember that our goal is to perceive the Soul
itself* We cannot perceive the Soul because it has got
mingled up with nature, with the mind, with the body*
The most ignorant man thinks his body is the Soul*
The more learned man thinks his mind is the Soul,
but both of these are mistaken. What makes the
Soul get mingled up with all this, these different waves
10


rAja yoga.


146

in the Chitta rise and cover the Soul, and we only see
a little reflection of the Soul through these waves, so,
if the wave is one of anger, we see the Soul as angry;
“ I am angry," we say. If the wave is a wave of love
we see ourselves reflected in that wave, and say we are
loving. If that wave is one of weakness, and the Soul
is reflected in it, we think we are weak. These various
ideas come from these impressions, these Samskdras
covering the Soul. The real nature of the Soul is not
perceived as long as there is one single wave in the
lake of the Chitta y this real nature will never be per¬
ceived until all the waves have subsided; so, first,
Patanjali teaches us the meaning of these waves;
secondly, the best way to repress them; and thirdly,
how to make one wave so strong as to suppress all
other waves, fire eating fire as it were. When only one
remains it will be easy to suppress that also, and when
that is gone, this Samddhi of concentration is called
seedless; it leaves nothing, and the Soul is manifested
just as It is, in Its own glory. Then alone we know
that the Soul is not a compound, It is the only eternal
simple in the universe, and, as such, It cannot be born,
It cannot die, It is immortal, indestructible, the Ever
living Essence of intelligence.


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER IL


CONCENTRATION — ITS PRACTICE.

L Mortification, study, and surrendering fruits of
work to God are called Kriya Yoga-

Those Samddkfs with which we ended our last chapter
are very difficult to attain; so we must take them up
slowly- The first step, the preliminary step, is called
Kriya Yoga . Literally this means work, working
towards Yoga. The organs are the horses, the mind
is the reins, the intellect is the charioteer, the soul is
the rider, and this body is the chariot- The master of
the household, the King, the Self of man, is sitting in
this chariot. If the horses are very strong, and do
not obey the reins, if the charioteer, the intellect, does
not know how to control the horses, then this chariot
will come to grief. But if the organs, the horses, are
well controlled, and if the reins, the mind, are well held
in the hands of the charioteer, the intellect, the chariot
reaches the goal. What is meant, therefore, by this
mortification? Holding the reins firmly while guiding
this body and mind; not letting the body do anything
it likes, but keeping them both in proper control.
Study. What h meant by study in this case? Not
study of novels, or fiction, or story books, but study
of those books which teach the liberation of the soul,

[*47]


Digitized by


148


rAja yoga.


Then again this study does not mean controversial
studies at all. The Yogi is supposed to have finished
,his period of controversy. He has had enough of that,
and has become satisfied. He only studies to intensify
his convictions. V&da and Siddhdnta. These are the
two sorts of Scriptural knowledge, Vdda (the argu¬
mentative) and Siddhdnta (the decisive). When a man
is entirely ignorant he takes up the first part of this,
the argumentative fighting, and reasoning,/^and con.j
and when he has finished that he takes up the Siddhdnta ,
the decisive, arriving at a conclusion. Simply arriving
at this conclusion will not do. It must be intensified.
Books are infinite in number, and time is short; there¬
fore this is the secret of knowledge, to take that which
is essential. Take that out, and then try to live up to
it. There is an old simile in India that if you place a
cup of milk before a Rdja Hamsa (swan) with plenty of
water in it, he will take all the milk and leave the water.
In that way we should take what is of value in knowl¬
edge, and leave the dross. All these intellectual gym¬
nastics are necessary at first. We must not go blindly
into anything. The Yogi has passed the argumenta¬
tive stage, and has come to a conclusion, which is like
the rocks, immovable. The only thing he now seeks
to do is to intensify that conclusion. Do not argue,
he says; if one forces arguments upon you, be silent.
Do not answer any argument, but go away free, because
arguments only disturb the mind. The only thing is
to train the intellect, so what is the use of disturbing
it any more. The intellect is but a weak instrument,


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


149


and can give us only knowledge limited by the senses;
the Yogi wants to go beyond the senses; therefore
intellect is of no use to him. He is certain of this, and
therefore is silent, and does not argue. Every argu¬
ment throws his mind out of balance, creates a disturb¬
ance in the Chitta , and this disturbance is a drawback.
These argumentations and searchings of the reason
are only on the way. There are much higher things
behind them. The whole of life is not for schoolboy
fights and debating societies. “ By surrendering the
fruits of work to God ” is to take to ourselves neither
credit not blame, but to give both up to the Lord, and
be at peace.

2. (They are for) the practice of Samftdhi and

minimizing the pain-bearing obstructions.

Most of us make our minds like spoiled children,
allowing them to do whatever they want. Therefore
it is necessary that there should be constant practice
of the previous mortifications, in order to gain control
of the mind, and bring it into subjection. The obstruc¬
tions to Yoga arise from lack of this control, and cause
us pain. They can only be removed by denying the
mind, and holding it in check, through these various
means.

3. The pain-bearing obstructions are—ignorance,

egoism, attachment, aversion, and clinging to life.

These are the five pains, the fivefold tie that binds
us down. Of course ignorance is the mother of all the


Digitized by


Google



rAja yoga.


150

rest. She is the only cause of all our misery. What
else can make us miserable? The nature of the Soul is
eternal bliss. What can make it sorrowful except
ignorance, hallucination, delusion; all this pain of the
soul is simply delusion.

4. Ignorance is the productive field of all these that

follow, whether they are dormant, attenuated,
overpowered, or expanded.

Impressions are the cause of these, and these impres¬
sions exist in different degrees. There are the dormant.
You often hear the expression 14 innocent as a baby,"
yet in the baby may be the state of a demon or of a
god, which will come out by and by. In the Ycgf,
these impressions, the SamskAras left by past actions,
are attenuated; that is, in a very fine state, and he can
control them, and not allow them to become manifest.
Overpowered means that sometimes one set of impres¬
sions is held down for awhile by those that are stronger,
but they will come out when that repressing cause is
removed. The last state is the expanded, when the
Samsk&ras , having helpful surroundings, have attained
to great activity, either as good or evil.

5. Ignorance is taking that which is non-eternal,

impure, painful, and non-Sell; for the eternal,
pure, happy, Atman (Self).

All these various sorts of impressions have one source,
ignorance. We have first to learn what ignorance is.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


151

All of us think that “ I am the body/’ and not the
Self, the pure, the effulgent, the ever blissful, and that
is ignorance. We think of man, and see man as body.
This is the great delusion.

6. Egoism is the identification of the seer with the

instrument of seeing.

The seer is really the Self, the pure one, the ever
holy, the infinite, the immortal. That is the Self of
man. And what are the instruments? The Chitta , or
mind-stuff, the Buddhi y determinative faculty, the
Manas , or mind, and the Indriydni , or sense organs.
These are the instruments for him to see the external
world, and the identification of the Self with the instru¬
ments is what is called the ignorance of egoism. We
say “lam the mind, I am thought; I am angry, or I
am happy.” How can we be angry, and how can we
hate? We should identify ourselves with the Self; that
cannot change. If it is unchangeable, how can it be
one moment happy, and one moment unhappy? It is
formless, infinite, omnipresent. What can change it?
Beyond all law. What can affect it ? Nothing in the
universe can produce an effect on it, yet, through
ignorance, we identify ourselves with the mind-stuff,
and think we feel pleasure or pain.

7. Attachment is that which dwells on pleasure.

We find pleasure in certain things, and the mind, like
a current, flows towards them, and that, following the


Digitized by Google



152


rAja yoga.


pleasure centre, as it were, is attachment. We are
never attached to anyone in whom we do not find
pleasure. We find pleasure in very queer things some¬
times, but the definition is just the same; wherever we
find pleasure, there we are attached.

8. Aversion is that which dwells on pain.

That which gives us pain we immediately seek to get
away from.

9. Flowing through its own nature, and established

even in the learned, is the dinging to life.

This clinging to life you see manifested in every
animal, and upon it many attempts have been made to
build the theory of a future life, because men like their
lives so much that they desire a future life also. Of
course it goes without saying that this argument is
without much value, but the most curious part of it is
that, in Western Countries, the idea that this clinging
to life indicates a possibility of a future life applies
only to men, but does not include animals. In India
this clinging to life has been one of the arguments to
prove past experience and existence. For instance, if
it be true that all our knowledge has come from
experience, then it is sure that that which we never
experienced we cannot imagine, or understand. As
soon as chickens are hatched they begin to pick up
food. Many times it has been seen where ducks have
been hatched by hens, that, as soon as they come out


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


153


of the eggs, they flew to water, and the mother thought
they would be drowned. If experience be the only
source of knowledge, where did these chickens learn
to pick up food, or the ducklings that the water was
their natural element? If you say it is instinct, it
means nothing — it is simply giving a word, but is no
explanation. What is this instinct? We have many
instincts in ourselves. For instance, most of you
ladies play the piano, and remember, when you first
learned, how carefully you had to put your fingers on
the black and the white keys, one after the other, but
now, after long years of practice, you can talk with
your friends, and your hand goes on just the same.
It has become instinct. So with every work we do;
by practice it becomes instinct, it becomes auto¬
matic, but so far as we know, all the cases which
we now regard as automatic, are degenerated rea¬
son. In the language of the Yogi> instinct is involved
reason. Discrimination becomes involved, and gets
to be automatic Samskdras. Therefore it is perfectly
logical to think that all we call instinct in this
world is simply involved reason. As reason cannot
come without experience, all instinct is, therefore, the
result of past experience. Chickens fear the hawk,
and ducklings love the water, and these are both the
result of past experience. Then the question is
whether that experience belongs to a particular soul,
or to the body simply, whether this experience which
comes to the duck is the duck's forefather's experience,
or the duck’s own experience. Modem scientific men


Digitized by Google



154


rAja yoga.


hold that it belongs to the body, but the Yogis hold
that it is the experience of the mind, transmitted
through the body. This is called the theory of rein¬
carnation. We have seen that all our knowledge,
whether we call it perception or reason, or instinct,
must come through that one channel called experience,
and all that we now call instinct is the result of past
experience, degenerated into instinct, and that instinct
regenerates into reason again. So on throughout the
universe, and upon this has been built one of the chief
arguments for reincarnation, in India. The recurring
experiences of various fears, in course of time, produce
this clinging to life. That is why the child is instinc¬
tively afraid, because the past experience of pain is
there. Even in the most learned men, who know that
this body will go, and who say “never mind; we have
hundreds of bodies; the soul cannot die"— even in
them, with all their intellectual convictions, we still
find this clinging on to life. What is this clinging to
life? We have seen that it has become instinctive.
In the psychological language of the Yogis it has
become Samskdras. The Samskdras f fine and hidden,
are sleeping in the Chitta . All these past experiences
of death, all that which we call instinct, is experience
become sub-conscious. It lives in the Chitta , and is
not inactive, but is working underneath. These Chitta
Vrittis y these mind-waves, which are gross, we can
appreciate and feel; they can be more easily controlled,
but what about these finer instincts? How can they
be controlled? When I am angry my whole mind has


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS. 1 5 5

become a huge wave of anger. I feel it, see it, handle
it, can easily manipulate it, can fight with it, but I
shall not succeed perfectly in the fight until I can get
down below. A man says something very harsh to me,
and I begin to feel that I am getting heated, and he
goes on till I am perfectly angry, and forget myself,
identify myself with anger. When he first began to
abuse me I still thought “I am going to be angry/*
Anger was one thing and I was another, but when I
became angry, I was anger. These feelings have to
be controlled in the germ, the root, in their fine forms,
before even we have become conscious that they are
acting on us. With the vast majority of mankind the
fine states of these passions are not even known, the
state when they are slowly coming from beneath con¬
sciousness. When a bubble is rising from the bottom
of the lake we do not see it, or even when it is nearly
come to the surface; it is only when it bursts and
makes a ripple that we know it is there. We shall only
be successful in grappling with the waves when we
can get hold of them in their fine causes, and until you
can get hold of them, and subdue them before they
become gross, there is no hope of conquering any pas¬
sion perfectly. To control our passions we have to
control them at their very roots; then alone shall we
be able to burn out their very seeds. As fried seeds
thrown into the ground will never come up, so these
passions will never arise.


Digitized by Google



156 rAja yoga.

10. They, to-be-r€{jeoted-by-oppoiite-niodification%

are fine.

How are these fine Samskdras to be controlled ? We
have to begin with the big waves, and come down and
down. For instance, when a big wave of anger has
come into the mind, how are we to control that ?
Just by raising a big opposing wave. Think of love.
Sometimes a mother is very angry with her husband,
and while in that state the baby comes in, and she
kisses the baby; the old wave dies out, and a new
wave arises, love for the child. That suppresses the
other one. Love is opposite to anger. So we find
that by raising the opposite waves we can conquer
those which we want to reject. Then, if we can raise
in our fine nature these fine opposing waves, they will
check the fine workings of anger beneath the conscious
surface. We have seen now that all these instinctive
actions first began as conscious actions, and became
finer and finer. So, if good waves in the conscious
Chitta be constantly raised, they will go down, become
subtle, and oppose the Samskdra forms of evil thoughts.

11. By meditation, their modifications are to be

rejected.

Meditation is one of the great means of controlling
the rising of these big waves. By meditation you can
make the mind subdue these waves, and, if you go on
practising meditation for days, and months, and years,
until it has become a habit, until it will come in spite


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS, I 57

of yourself, anger and hatred will be controlled and
checked.

12. The receptacle of works has its root in these
pain-bearing obstructions, and their experience
in this visible life, or in the unseen life.

By the receptacle of works is meant the sum-total of
these Samskdras . Whatever work we do, the mind is
thrown into a wave* and, after the work is finished, we
think the wave is gone. No, It has only become
fine, but it is still there. When we try to remember
the thing, it comes up again and becomes a wave. So
it was there; if it had not been there, there would not
have been memory. So, every action, every thought,
good or bad, just goes down and becomes fine, and is
there stored up. They are called pain-bearing obstruc¬
tions, both happy and unhappy thoughts, because
according to the Yogis , both, in the long run, bring
pain. All happiness which comes from the senses will,
eventually, bring pain. All enjoyment will make us
thirst for more, and that brings pain as its result.
There is no limit to man’s desires; he goes on desir¬
ing, and when he comes to a point where desire can¬
not be fulfilled, the result is pain. Therefore the
Yogis regard the sum-total of the impressions, good or
evil, as pain-bearing obstructions; they obstruct the way
to freedom of the Soul. It is the same with the
Samskdras t the fine roots of all our works; they are the
causes which will again bring effects, either in this life,
or in the lives to come. In exceptional cases, when


tMgifTze!


i 5 8


rAja yoga.


these Samskdras are very strong, they bear fruit
quickly; exceptional acts of wickedness, or of good¬
ness, bring their fruits in this life. The Yogis even
hold that men who are able to acquire a tremendous
power of good Samskdras do not have to die, but, even
in this life, can change their bodies into god-bodies.
There are several cases mentioned by the Yogis in their
books. These men change the very material of their
bodies; they re-arrange the molecules in such fashion
that they have no more sickness, and what we call
death does not come to them. Why should not this be ?
The physiological meaning of food is assimilation of
energy from the sun. This energy has reached the
plant, the plant is eaten by an animal, and the animal
by us. The science of it is that we take so much
energy from the sun, and make it part of ourselves.
That being the case, why should there be only one way
of assimilating energy ? The plant’s way is not the
same as ours; the earth’s process of assimilating
energy differs from our own. But all assimilate energy
in some form or other. The Yogis say that they are
able to assimilate energy by the power of the mind
alone, that they can draw in as much as they desire
without recourse to the ordinary methods. As a spider
makes his net out of his own substance, and becomes
bound in his net, and cannot go anywhere except along
the lines of that net, so we have projected out of our
own substance this net-work called the nerves, and we
cannot work except through the channels of those
nerves. The Yogi says we need not be bound by that


Digitized by Google


YOGA APHORISMS. 1 59

Similarly, we can send electricity to any part of the
world, but we have to send it by means of wires.
Nature can send a vast mass of electricity without any
wires at alL Why cannot we do the same ? We can
send mental electricity. What we call mind is very
much the same as electricity. It is clear that this
nerve fluid has some amount of electricity, because it
is polarised, and it answers all electrical directions.
We can only send our electricity through these nerve
channels. Why not send the mental electricity without
this aid ? The Yogi says it is perfectly possible and
practicable, and that when you can do that you will
work all over the universe. You will be able to work
with any body anywhere, without the help of any nerv¬
ous system. When the soul is acting through these
channels we say a man is living and when those chan¬
nels die the man is said to be dead. But when a man
is able to act either with or without these channels,
birth and death will have no meaning for him. All
the bodies in the universe are made up of Tanmdtras y
and it is only in the arrangement of them that there
comes a difference. If you are the arranger you can
arrange that body In one way or another. Who makes
up this body but you ? Who eats the food ? If an¬
other ate the food for you you would not live long.
Who makes the blood out of it ? You, certainly. Who
assimilates the blood, and sends it through the veins?
You. Who creates the nerves, and makes all the
muscles ? You are the manufacturer, out of your own
substance. You are the manufacturer of the body, and


i6o rAja yoga.

you live in it. Only we have lost the knowledge of
how to make it. We have become automatic, de¬
generate. We have forgotten the process of manufac¬
ture. So, what we do automatically has again to be
regulated. We are the creators and we have to regu¬
late that creation, and as soon as we can do that we
shall be able to manufacture just as we like, and then
we shall have neither birth nor death, disease, or
anything.

13. The root being there, the fruition comes (in the
form of) ipeoies, life, and experience of plea¬
sure and pain.

The roots, the causes, the Samskdras being there,
they again manifest, and form the effects. The cause
dying down becomes the effect, and the effect becomes
more subtle, and becomes the cause of the next effect.
The tree bears a seed, and becomes the cause of the
next tree, and so on. All our works now, are the
effects of past Samskdras . Again, these Samskdras be¬
come the cause of future actions, and thus we go on.
So this aphorism says that the cause being there, the
fruit must come, in the form of species; one will be
a man, another an angel, another an animal, another a
demon. Then there are different effects in life; one
man lives fifty years, another a hundred, and another
dies in two years, and never attains maturity; all these
differences in life are regulated by these past actions.
One man is born, as it were, for pleasure; if he buries
himself in a forest pleasure will follow him there.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


161

Another man, wherever he goes, pain follows him*
everything becomes painful. It is all the result of
their own past. According to the philosophy of the
Yogis all virtuous actions bring pleasure, and all vicious
actions bring pain. Any man who does wicked deeds
is sure to reap the fruit of them in the form of pain.

14. They bear fruit as pleasure or pain, caused by

virtue or vice.

15. To the discriminating, all is, as it were, painful

on account of everything bringing pain, either
in the consequence, or in apprehension, or in
attitude caused by impressions, also on account
of the counter action of qualities.

The Yogis say that the man who has discriminating
powers, the man of good sense, sees through all these
various things, which are called pleasure and pain, and
knows that they are always equally distributed, and
that one follows the other, and melts into the other;
he sees that men are following an ignis fatuus all their
lives, and never succeed in fulfilling their desires.
There was never a love in this world which did not
know decay. The great king YudiSjhira once said
that the most wonderful thing in life is that every
moment we see people dying around us, and yet we
think we shall never die. Surrounded by fools on every
side, we think we are the only exceptions, the only
learned men. Surrounded by all sorts of experiences
of fickleness, we think our love is the only lasting love.
How can that be ? Even love is selfish, and the Yogi
u


Digitized by Google



162


rAja yoga.


says that, in the end, we shall find that even the love
of husbands and wives, and children and friends, slowly
decays. Decadence seizes everything in this life. It
is only when everything, even love, fails, that, with a
flash, man finds out how vain, how dream-like is this
world. Then he catches a glimpse of Vairdgyam
(renunciation), catches a glimpse of the beyond. It is
only by giving up this world that the other comes;
never through holding on to this one. Never yet was
there a great soul who had not to reject sense pleas¬
ures and enjoyments to become such. The cause of
misery is the clash between the different forces of
nature, one dragging one way, and another dragging
another, rendering permanent happiness impossible.

16. The misery which is not yet oome is to he
avoided.

Some Karma we have worked out already, some we
are working out now in the present, and some is waiting
to bear fruit in the future. That which we have
worked out already is past and gone.

That which we are experiencing now we will have to
work out, and it is only that which is waiting to bear
fruit in the future that we can conquer and control, so
all our forces should be directed towards the control of
that Karma which has not yet borne fruit. That is
meant in the previous aphorism, when Patanjali says
that these various Samskdras are to be controlled by
counteracting waves.


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS- 163

17. The cause of that which is to be avoided is the

junction of the seer and the seen.

Who is the seer ? The Self of Man, the Puruia.
What is the seen ? The whole of nature, beginning
with the mind, down to gross matter* All this pleas¬
ure and pain arises from the junction between this
P*jru£a and the mind* The Purufa, you must remem¬
ber, according to this philosophy, is pure; it is when
it is joined to nature, and by reflection, that it appears
to feeS either pleasure or pain.

18. The experienced is composed of elements and

organs, is of the nature of iHnmination, action
and inertia, and is for the purpose of exper¬
ience and release (of the experience!-)*

The experienced, that is nature, is composed of
elements and organs — the elements gross and fine
which compose the whole of nature, and the organs of
the senses, mind, etc*, and is of the nature of illumina¬
tion, action, and inertia. These are what in Sanskrit
are called Sattva (illumination). Rajas (action), and
Tamos (inertia); each is for the purpose of experience
and release. What is the purpose of the whole of
nature ? That the Puruia may gain experience. The
Puruia has, as it were, forgotten its mighty, godly
nature* There is a story that the king of the gods,
Jndra f once became a pig, wallowing in mire; he had
£ she pig, and a lot of baby pigs, and was very happy.
Then some other angels saw his plight, and came to



■


rAja yoga.


164

him, and told him, “ You are the king of the gods,
you have all the gods command. Why are you here ? ”
But Indra said, 14 Let me be; I am all right here; I do
not care for the heavens, while I have this sow and
these little pigs.* 4 The poor gods were at their wits'
end what to do. After a time they decided to slowly
come and slay one of the little pigs, and then another,
until they had slain all the pigs, and the sow too.
When all were dead Indra began to weep and mourn.
Then the gods ripped his pig body open and he came
out of it, and began to laugh when he realised what a
hideous dream he had had; he, the king of the gods,
to have become a pig, and to think that that pig-life
was the only life! Not only so, but to have wanted
the whole universe to come into the pig life! The
Puruia , when it identifies itself with nature, forgets
that it is pure and infinite. The Puruia does not live;
it is life itself. It does not exist; it is existence itself.
The Soul does not know; it is knowledge itself. It is
an entire mistake to say the Soul lives, or knows, oi
loves. Love and existence are not the qualities of the
Puruia , but its essence. When they get reflected upon
something you may call them the qualities of that
something. But they are not the qualities of the
Puruia, , but the essence of this great Atman , this
Infinite Being, without birth or death, Who is estab¬
lished in His own glory, but appears as if become
degenerate until if you approach to tell Him, “ You
are not a pig," he begins to squeal and bite. Thus
With us all in this Mdyd , this dream world, where it is


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


165


all misery, weeping, and crying, where a few golden
balls are rolled, and the world scrambles after them.
You were never bound by laws, Nature never had a
bond for you. That is what the Yogi tells you; have
patience to learn it. And the Yogi shows how, by
junction with this nature, and identifying itself with
the mind and the world, the Puruia thinks itself miser¬
able. Then the Yogi goes on to show you that the
way out is through experience. You have to get all
this experience, but finish it quickly. We have placed
ourselves in this net, and will have to get out. We
have got ourselves caught in the trap, and we will
have to work out our freedom. So get this experience
of husbands and wives, and friends, and little loves,
and you will get through them safely if you never for¬
get what you really are. Never forget this is only a
momentary state, and that we have to pass through it.
Experience is the one great teacher — experiences of
pleasure and pain — but know they are only experi¬
ences, and will all lead, step by step, to that state
when all these things will become small, and the
Puruia will be so great that this whole universe will
be as a drop in the ocean, and will fall off by its own
nothingness. We have to go through these experi¬
ences, but let us never forget the ideal.

19. The states of the qualities are the defined, the
undefined, the indicated only, and the signless.

The system of Yoga is built entirely on the philoso¬
phy of the Sdnkhyas , as I told you in some of the


Digitized by Google



1 66


rAja yoga.


previous lectures, and here again I will remind you of
the cosmology of the Sdnkhya philosophy. According to
the Sdnkhyasy nature is both the material and the effi¬
cient cause of this universe. In this nature there are
three sorts of materials, the Sattva f the Rajas % and the
Tamos. The Tamos material is all that is dark, all
that is ignorant and heavy; and the Rajas is activity.
The Sattva is calmness, light. When nature is in the
state before creation, it is called by them Avyaktatn 9
undefined, or indiscrete; that is, in which there is no
distinction of form or name, a state in which these
three materials are held in perfect balance. Then the
balance is disturbed, these different materials begin to
mingle in various fashions, and the result is this uni¬
verse. In every man, also, these three materials exist.
When the Sattva material prevails knowledge comes.
When the Ra/as material prevails activity comes, and
when the Tamas material prevails darkness comes,
and lassitude, idleness, ignorance. According to the
Sdnkhya theory, the highest manifestation of this
nature, consisting of these three materials, is what
they call Mahaty or intelligence, universal intelligence,
and each human mind is a part of that cosmic intelli¬
gence. Then out of Mahat comes the mind. In the
Sdnkhya Psychology there is a sharp distinction be¬
tween ManaSy the mind function, and the function of
the Buddhi intellect. The mind function is simply to
collect and carry impressions and present them to the
Buddhiy the individual Mahaty and the Buddhi deter¬
mines upon it. So, out of Mahat comes mind, and out


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


167

of mind comes fine material, and this fine material
combines and becomes the gross material outside — the
external universe. The claim of the Sdnkhya philoso¬
phy is that beginning with the intellect, and coming
down to a block of stone, all has come out of the same
thing, only as finer or grosser states of existence.
The Buddhi is the finest state of existence of the mate¬
rials, and then comes Ahamkdra y egoism, and next to
the mind comes fine material, which they call Tan -
mdtras , which cannot be seen, but which are inferred.
These Tanmdtras combine and become grosser, and
finally produce this universe. The finer is the cause,
and the grosser is the effect. It begins with the
Buddhi , which is the finest material, and goes on
becoming grosser and grosser, until it becomes this
universe. According to the Sdnkhya philosophy, be¬
yond the whole of nature is the Puruia , which is not
material at all. Puruia is not at all similar to any¬
thing else, either Buddhi , or mind, or the Tanmdtras ,
or the gross material; it is not akin to any one of
these, it is entirely separate, entirely different in its
nature, and from this they argue that the Puruia must
be immortal, because it is not the result of combina¬
tion. That which is not the result of combination
cannot die, these Puruias or Souls are infinite in num¬
ber. Now we shall understand the Aphorism, that the
states of the qualities are defined, undefined, and sign¬
less. By the defined is meant the gross elements,
which we can sense. By the undefined is meant the
very fine materials, the Tanmdtras ? which cannot be


Digitized by Google



168 rAja yoga.

sensed by ordinary men. If you practice Yoga, how¬
ever, says PatanjcUiy after a while your perceptions will
become so fine that you will actually see the Tanmdtras .
For instance, you have heard how every man has a cer¬
tain light about him; every living being is emanating
a certain light, and this, he says, can be seen by the
Yogi . We do not all see it, but we are all throwing
out these Tanmdtras, just as a flower is continuously
emanating these Tanmdtras, which enable us to smell
it. Every day of our lives we are throwing out a mass
of good or evil, and everywhere we go the atmosphere
is full of these materials, and that is how there came
to the human mind, even unconsciously, the idea of
building temples and churches. Why should man
build churches in which to worship God ? Why not
worship Him anywhere ? Even if he did not know the
reason, man found that that place where people wor¬
shipped God became full of good Tanmdtras. Every
day people go there, and the more they go the holier
they get, and the holier that place becomes. If any
man who has not much Sattva in him goes there the
place will influence him, and arouse his Sattva quality.
Here, therefore, is the significance of all temples and
holy places, but you must remember that their holi¬
ness depends on holy people congregating there. The
difficulty with mankind is that they forget the original
meaning, and put the cart before the horse. It was
men who made these places holy, and then the effect
became the cause and made men holy. If the wicked
only were to go there it would become as bad as any


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


169

other place. It is not the building, but the people,
that make a church, and that is what we always forget.
That is why sages and holy persons, who have so much
of this Sattva quality, are emanating so much of it
around them, and exerting a tremendous influence day
and night on their surroundings. A man may become
so pure that his purity will become tangible, as it
were. The body has become pure, and in an intensely
physical sense, no figurative idea, no poetical language,
it emanates that purity wherever it goes. Whosoever
comes in contact with that man becomes pure. Next
“ the indicated only ” means the Buddhi y the intellect.
“ The indicated only” is the first manifestation of
nature; from it all other manifestations proceed. The
last is “the signless.” Here there seems to be a
great fight between modern science and all religions.
Every religion has this idea that this universe comes
out of intelligence. Only some religions were more
philosophical, and used scientific language. The very
theory of God, taking it in its psychological signifi¬
cance, and apart from all ideas of personal God, is that
intelligence is first in the order of creation, and that
out of intelligence comes what we call gross matter.
Modern philosophers say that intelligence is the last to
come. They say that unintelligent things slowly evolve
into animals, and from animals slowly evolve into
men. They claim that instead of everything coming
out of intelligence, intelligence is itself the last to
come. Both the religious and the scientific statement,
though seeming directly opposed to each other, are


Digitized by Google



170 rAja yoga,

true. Take an infinite series, A—B—A—B—A—B, etc.
The question is which is first, A or B. If you take the
series as A—B, you will say that A is first, but if you
take it as B—A you will say that B is first. It depends
upon the way we are looking at it. Intelligence
evolves, and becomes the gross matter, and this again
involves as intelligence, and again evolves as matter
once more. The Sdttkhyas y and all religionists, put
intelligence first, and the series becomes intelligence
then matter, intelligence then matter. The scientific
man puts his finger on matter, and says matter then
intelligence, matter then intelligence. But they are
both indicating the same chain. Indian philosophy,
however, goes beyond both intelligence and matter,
and finds a Puruia y or Self, which is beyond all intelli¬
gence, and of which intelligence is but the borrowed
light.

80. The seer is intelligence only, and though pure,
sees through the colouring of the intellect.

This is again Sdnkhya philosophy. We have seen
from this philosophy that from the lowest form up to
intelligence all is nature, but beyond nature are
Puruias (souls), and these have no qualities. Then
how does the soul appear to be happy or unhappy ?
By reflection. Just as if a piece of pure crystal be put
on a table and a red flower be put near it, the crystal
appears to be red, so all these appearances of happiness
or unhappiness are but reflections; the soul itself has
no sort of colouring. The soul is separate from


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


171


nature; nature is one thing, soul anotner, eternally
separate. The S&nkhyas say that intelligence is a
compound, that it grows and wanes, that it changes,
just as the body changes, and that its nature is nearly
the same as that of the body. As a finger-nail is to
the body, so is body to intelligence. The nail is a
part of the body, but it can be pared off hundreds of
times, and the body will still last. Similarly, the
intelligence lasts aeons, while this body can be pared
off, thrown off. Yet intelligence cannot be immortal,
because it changes — growing and waning. Anything
that changes cannot be immortal. Certainly intelli¬
gence is manufactured, and that very fact shows us that
there must be something beyond that, because it can¬
not be free. Everything connected with matter is in
nature, and therefore bound for ever. Who is free ?
That free one must certainly be beyond cause and
effect. If you say that the idea of freedom is a delu¬
sion, I will say that the idea of bondage is also a delu¬
sion. Two facts come into our consciousness, and
stand or fall by each other. One is that we are bound.
If we want to go through a wall, and our head bumps
against that wall, we are limited by that wall. At the
same time we find will, and think we can direct our will
everywhere. At every step these contradictory ideas
are coming to us. We have to believe that we are
free, yet at every moment we find we are not free. If
one idea is a delusion, the other is also a delusion, and
if one is true,, the other also is true, because both stand
upon the same basis—consciousness. The Yogi says


Digitized by Google



172


rAja yoga.


both are true; that we are bound so far as intelligence
goes, that we are free as far as the soul is concerned.
It is the real nature of man, the Soul, the Puruia y
which is beyond all law of causation. Its freedom is
percolating through layers and layers of matter, in
various forms of intelligence, and mind, and all these
things. It is its light which is shining through all.
Intelligence has no light of its own. Each organ has a
particular centre in the brain; it is not that all the
organs have one centre; each organ is separate. Why
do all these perceptions harmonize, and where do they
get their unity ? If it were in the brain there would
be one centre only for the eyes, the nose, the ears,
while we know for certain that there are different cen¬
tres for each. But a man can see and hear at the
same time, so a unity must be back of intelligence.
Intelligence is eternally connected with the brain, but
behind even intelligence stands the Puruia y the unit,
where all these different sensations and perceptions
join and become one. Soul itself is the centre where
all the different organs converge and become unified,
and that Soul is free, and it is its freedom that tells
you every moment that you are free. But you mis¬
take, and mingle that freedom every moment with
intelligence and mind. You try to attribute that free¬
dom to the intelligence, and immediately find that
intelligence is not free; you attribute that freedom to
the body, and immediately nature tells you that you
are again mistaken. That is why there is this mingled
sense of freedom and bondage at the sane time. The


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS,


m


Yogi analyses both what is free and what is bound, and
his ignorance vanishes. He finds that the Furuia is
free, is the essence of that knowledge which, coming
through the Fudd/tt\ becomes intelligence, and, as
such, is bound.

21. The nature of the experienced ii for him.

Nature has no light of its own. As long as the
Furuia is present in it, it appears light, but the light
is borrowed; just as the moon's light is reflected. All
the manifestations of nature are caused by this nature
itself, according to the Yogis; but nature has no pur*
pose in view, except to free the Furusa.

22. Though destroyed for him whose goal has been

gained, yet is not destroyed, being common to
others.

The whole idea of this nature is to make the Soul
know that it is entirely separate from nature, and
when the Soul knows this, nature has no more attrac¬
tions for it. But the whole of nature vanishes only for
that man who has become free. There will always
remain an infinite number of others, for whom nature
will go on working.

23. Junction is the cause of the realisation of the

nature of both the powers, the experienoed
and its Lord.

According to this aphorism, when this Soul comes
into conjunction with nature, both the power of the


*74


.RAJA YOGA.


Soul and the power of nature become manifest in this
conjunction, and all these manifestations are thrown
out. Ignorance is the cause of this conjunction. We
see every day that the cause of our pain or pleasure
is always our joining ourselves with the body. If I
were perfectly certain that I am not this body, I should
take no notice of heat and cold, or anything of the
kind. This body is a combination. It is only a fiction
to say that I have one body, you another, and the sun
another. The whole universe is one ocean of matter,
and you are the name of a little particle, and I of
another, and the sun of another. We know that this
matter is continuously changing, what is forming the
sun one day, the next day may form the matter of our
bodies.

24 Ignorance is its cause.

Through ignorance we have joined ourselves with a
particular body, and thus opened ourselves to misery.
This idea of body is a simple superstition. It is super¬
stition that makes us happy or unhappy. It is super¬
stition caused by ignorance that makes us feel heat
and cold, pain and pleasure. It is our business to rise
above this superstition, and the Yogi shows us how we
can do this. It has been demonstrated that, under
certain mental conditions, a man may be burned, yet,
while that condition lasts, he will feel no pain. The
difficulty is that this sudden upheaval of the mind
comes like a whirlwind one minute, and goes away the
next. If, however, we attain it scientifically, through


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS. I75

Yoga, we shall permanently attain to that separation
of Self from the body.

25. There being absence of that (ignorance) there
1 b absence of junction, which is the thing-to-
be-avoided; that is the independence of the seer.

According to this Yoga philosophy it is through
ignorance that the Soul has been joined with nature
and the idea is to get rid of nature's control over us.
That is the goal of all religions. Each Soul is potenti¬
ally divine. The goal is to manifest this Divinity
within, by controlling nature, external and internal.
Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control,
or philosophy, by one, or more, or all of these—and
be free. This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or
dogmas, or rituals, or books, or temples, or forms, are
but secondary details. The Yogi tries to reach this
goal through psychic control. Until we can free our¬
selves from nature we are slaves; as she dictates so we
must go. The Yogi claims that he who controls mind
controls matter also. The internal nature is much
higher than the external, and much more difficult to
grapple with, much more difficult to control; therefore
he who has conquered the internal nature controls the
whole universe; it becomes his servant. Rdja Yoga
propounds the methods of gaining this control. Higher
forces than we know in physical nature will have to be
subdued. This body is just the external crust of the
mmd. They are not two different things; they are
just as the oyster and its shell. They are but two


ogle


176


rAja yoga.


aspects of one thing; the internal substance of the
oyster is taking up matter from outside, and manu¬
facturing the shell. In the same way these internal
fine forces which are called mind take up gross matter
from outside, and from that manufacture this external
shell, or body. If then, we have control of the internal,
it is very easy to have control of the external. Then
again, these forces are not different. It is not that
some forces are physical, and some mental; the physical
forces are but the gross manifestations of the fine
forces, just as the physical world is but the gross mani¬
festation of the fine world.

26. The means of destruction of ignorance is un¬
broken practice of discrimination.

This is the real goal of practice — discrimination
between the real and the unreal, knowing that the
Puruia is not nature, that it is neither matter nor mind,
and that because it is not nature, it cannot possibly
change. It is only nature which changes, combining,
and recombining, dissolving continually. When through
constant practice we begin to discriminate, ignorance
will vanish, and the Puruia will begin to shine in its
real nature, omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent.

27. His knowledge is of the sevenfold highest

ground.

When this knowledge comes, it will come, as it were,
fn seven grades, one after the other, and when one of


Digitized by


Google



VOGA APHORISMS.


1 77


these has begun we may know that we are getting
knowledge. The first to appear will be that we have
known what is to be known. The mind will cease to
be dissatisfied. While we are aware of thirsting after
knowledge we begin to seek here and there, wherever
we think we can get some truth, and, failing to find it
we become dissatisfied and seek in a fresh direction.
All search is vain, until we begin to perceive that
knowledge is within ourselves, that no one can help us,
that we must help ourselves. When we begin to prac¬
tise the power of discrimination, the first sign that we
are getting near truth will be that that dissatisfied state
will vanish. We shall feel quite sure that we have
found the truth, and that it cannot be anything else
but the truth. Then we may know that the sun is
rising, that the morning is breaking for us, and, taking
courage, we must persevere until the goal is reached.
The second grade will be that all pains will be gone.
It will be impossible for anything in the universe, phy¬
sical, mental, or spiritual, to give us pain. The third
will be that we shall get full knowledge, that omnisci¬
ence will be ours. Next will come what is called free¬
dom of the Chitta. We shall realise that all these
difficulties and struggles have fallen off from us. All
these vacillations of the mind, when the mind cannot
be controlled, have fallen down, just as a stone rolls
from the mountain top into the valley and never comes
up again. The next will be that this Chitta itself will
realise that it melts away into its causes whenever we
so desire. Lastly we shall find that we are established

X2


Digitized by


Google



178


rAja yoga.


in our Self, that we have been alone throughout the
universe, neither body nor mind was ever connected
with us, much less joined to us. They were working
their own way, and we, through ignorance, joined
ourselves to them. But we have been alone, omnipo¬
tent, omnipresent, ever blessed; our own Self was so
pure and perfect that we required none else. We
required none else to make us happy, for we are hap¬
piness itself. We shall find that this knowledge does
not depend on anything else; throughout the universe
there can be nothing that will not become effulgent
before our knowledge. This will be the last state, and
the Yogi will become peaceful and calm, never to feel
any more pain, never to be again deluded, never to
touch misery. He knows he is ever blessed, ever per¬
fect, almighty.

28. By the practice of the different parts of Toga
the impurities being destroyed knowledge be¬
comes effulgent, up to discrimination.

Now comes the practical knowledge. What we have
just been speaking about is much higher. It is away
above our heads, but it is the ideal. It is first neces¬
sary to obtain physical and mental control. Then the
realisation will become steady in that ideal. The
ideal being known, what remains is to practise the
method of reaching it.


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


179

29. Tama, Niyama, Asana, Praa&yAma, Praty&hira,
Dh&rana, Dhyana, SamAdbi, are the limbi of
Yoga.

30. Non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, contin¬

ence, and non-receiving, are called Y&ma.

A man who wants to be a perfect Yogi must give up
the sex idea. The Soul has no sex; why should it
degrade itself with sex ideas? Later on we shall under¬
stand better why these ideas must be given up. Re¬
ceiving is just as bad as stealing; receiving gifts from
others. Whoever receives gifts, his mind is acted on
by the mind of the giver, so that the man who receives
gifts becomes degenerated. Receiving gifts destroys
the independence of the mind, and makes us mere
slaves. Therefore, receive nothing.

31. These, unbroken by time, place, purpose, and

caste, are (universal) great vows.

These practices, non-killing, non-stealing, chastity,
and non-receiving, are to be practised by every man,
woman and child, by every soul, irrespective of nation,
country or position.

32. Internal and external purification, contentment,

mortification, study, and worship of flod, are

the Niyamas,

External purification is keeping the body pure; a
dirty man will never be a Yogi. There must be internal
purification also. That is obtained by the first-named


180 RAJA YOGA.

virtues. Of course internal purity is of greater value
than external, but both are necessary, and external
purity, without internal, is of no good.

38. To obstruct thoughts which are iirinrimri to
Toga contrary thoughts will be brought.

That is the way to practise all these virtues that
have been stated, by holding thoughts of an opposite
character in the mind. When the idea of stealing
comes, non-stealing should be thought of. When the
idea of receiving gifts comes, replace it by a contrary
thought.

34. The obstructions to Toga are killing, eto., whether
committed, caused, or approved; either through
avarice, or anger, or ignorance; whether slight,
middling, or great, and result in innumerable
ignorances and miseries. This is (the method
of) thinking the contrary.

If I tell a lie, or cause another to tell a lie, or approve
of another doing so, it is equally sinful. If it is a very
mild lie, still it is a lie. Every vicious thought will
rebound, every thought of hatred which you may have
thought, in a cave even, is stored up, and will one day
come back to you with tremendous power in the form
of some misery here. If you project all sorts of hatred
and jealousy, they will rebound on you with compound
interest. No power can avert them; when once you have
put them in motion you will have to bear them. Remem¬
bering this, will prevent you from doing wicked things.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS. l8l

85. Hon-killing being established, in his presence

all enmities cease (in others).

If a man gets the ideal of non-injuring others, before
him even animals which are by their nature ferocious
will become peaceful. The tiger and the lamb will
play together before that Yogi and will not hurt each
other. When you have come to that state, then alone
you will understand that you have become firmly
established in non-injuring.

86. By the establishment of truthfulness the Yogi

gets the power of attaining for himself and

others the fruits of work without the works.

When this power of truth will be established with
you, then even in dream you will never tell an untruth,
in thought, word or deed; whatever you say will be
truth. You may say to a man 44 Be blessed,** and that
man will be blessed. If a man is diseased, and you say
to him, 44 Be thou cured,** he will be cured immediately.

87. By the establidiment of non-stealing all wealth

comes to the Yogi.

The more you fly from nature the more she follows
you, and if you do not care for her at all she becomes
your slave.

88. By the establishment of continence energy is

gained.

The chaste brain has tremendous energy, gigantic
will power, without that there can be no mental


Digitized by Google



182


rAja yoga.


strength. All men of gigantic brains are very conti¬
nent. It gives wonderful control over mankind.
Leaders of men have been very continent, and this is
what gave them power. Therefore the Yogt must be
continent.

39. When he is fixed in non-reeeiving he gets the

memory of past life.

When the Yogt does not receive presents from others
he does not become beholden to others, but becomes
independent and free, and his mind becomes pure,
because with every gift he receives all the evils of the
giver, and they come and lay coating after coating on
his mind, until it is hidden under all sorts of coverings
of evil. If he does not receive the mind becomes pure,
and the first thing it gets is memory of past life. Then
alone the Yogt becomes perfectly fixed in his ideal,
because he sees that he has been coming and going so
many times, and he becomes determined that this time
he will be free, that he will no more come and go, and
be the slave of Nature.

40. Internal and external cleanliness being estab¬

lished, arises disgust for one’s own body, and
non-intercourse with other bodies.

When there is real purification of the body, external
and internal, there arises neglect of the body, and all this
idea of keeping it nice will vanish. What others call
the most beautiful face to the Yogt will appear to be


Digitized by


Google



I


YOGA APHORISMS. 183

an animal's face, if there is not intelligence behind it.
What the world will call a very common face he will
call heavenly, if that spirit shines behind it. This
thirst after body is the great bane of human life. So*
when this purity is established, the first sign will be that
you do not care to think you are a body. It is only
when purity comes that we get rid of the body idea.

41. There also arises purification of the Sattva*
cheerfulness of the mind, concentration, con¬
quest of the organs, and fitness for the re&lisa*
tion of the Self

By this practice the Sattva material will prevail, and
the mind will become concentrated and cheerful.
The first sign that you are becoming religious is that
you are becoming cheerful. When a man is gloomy
that may be dyspepsia, but it is not religion. A
pleasurable feeling is the nature of the Sattva . Every¬
thing is pleasurable to the Sdttvika man* and when this
comes, know that you are progressing in Yoga, All
pain is caused by Tamas y so you must get rid of that;
moroseness is one of the results of Tamas. The strong*
the well-knit* the young, the healthy, the daring alone
are fit to be Yogis, To the Yogi everything is bliss,
every human face that he sees brings cheerfulness to
him. That is the sign of a virtuous man. Misery is
casued by sin, and by no other cause. What business
have you with clouded faces; it is terrible. If you
have a clouded face do not go out that day, shut your¬
self up in your room. What right have you to carry


184


rAja yoga.


this disease out into the world? When your mind has
become controlled you will have control over the whole
body; instead of being a slave to this machine, the
machine will be your slave. Instead of this machine
being able to drag the soul down it will be its greatest
helpmate.

42. From oontentment comes superlative happiness.

43. The result of mortification is bringing powers

to the organs and the body, by destroying the
impurity.

The results of mortification are seen immediately
sometimes by heightened powers of vision, and so on,
hearing things at a distance, etc.

44. By repetition of the mantram comes the realisa¬

tion of the intended deity.

The higher the beings that you want to get the harder
is the practice.

45. By sacrificing all to Iswara comes Samftdhi.

By resignation to the Lord, SamAdhi becomes perfect.

48. Posture is that which is firm and pleasant

Now comes Asana , posture. Until you can get a firm
seat you cannot practise the breathing and other exer¬
cises. The seat being firm means that you do not feel
the body at all; then alone it has become firm. But,
in the ordinary way, you will find that as soon as you


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


I8 5

art fm a tew minutes all sorts of disturbances come into
the body; but when you have got beyond the idea of
a concrete body you will lose all sense of the body.
You will feel neither pleasure nor pain. And when
you take your body up again it will feel so rested; it is
the only perfect rest that you can give to the body.
When you have succeeded in conquering the body and
keeping it firm, your practice will remain firm, but
while you are disturbed by the body your nerves become
disturbed, and you cannot concentrate the mind. We
can make the seat firm by thinking of the infinite. We
cannot think of the Absolute Infinite, but we can think
of the infinite sky.

47. By alight effort and meditating on the unlimited

(posture becomes firm and pleasant)*

Light and darkness, pleasure and pain, will not then
disturb you.

48. Seat being conquered, the dualities do not ob*

struct.

The dualties are good and bad, heat and cold, and
all the pairs of opposites,

49. Controlling the motion of the exhalation and the

inhalation follows after this.

When the posture has been conquered, then this
motion is to be broken and controlled, and thus we come
to Prdndydma; the controlling of the vital forces of


rAja yoga.


i 86

the body. Prdna is not breath, though it is usually
so translated. It is the sum-total of the cosmic energy*
It is the energy that is in each body, and its most
apparent manifestation is the motion of the lungs.
This motion is caused by Pr&na drawing in the breath,
and is what we seek to control in Prdndydma * We
begin by controlling the breath, as the easiest way of
getting control of the Prdna .

50. Its modifications are either external or internal,

or motionless, regulated by place, time, and
number, either long or short*

The three sorts of motion of this Prdndydma are,
one by which we draw the breath in, another by which
we throw it out, and the third action is when the breath
is held in the lungs, or stopped from entering the lungs*
These, again, are varied by place and time* By place
is meant that the Prdna is held to some particular part
of the body. By time is meant how long the Prdna
should be confined to a certain place, and so we are
told how many seconds to keep one motion, and how
many seconds to keep another* The result of this
Prdndydma is Udgkdta, awakening the Kupdalint

51. The fourth is restraining the Prdna by directing

it either to the external or internal objects.

This is the fourth sort of Prdndydma . Prdtta can be
directed either inside or outside.


Digitized by


le



I


YOGA APHORISMS* 1 8/

52* From that, the covering to the light of the
Chitta U attenuated

The Chitta has, by its own nature, all knowledge*
It is made of Sattva particles, but is covered by Rajas
and Tamos particles, and by Prdndydma this coverng
is removed*

53* The mind becomes fit for DhArani,

After this covering has been removed we are able
to concentrate the mind,

54. The drawing in of the organs is by their giving
up their own objects and taking the form of the
nund-stuJC

These organs are separate states of the mind-stuff*
I see a book; the form is not in the book, it is in the
mind. Something is outside which calls that form up.
The real form is in the Chitta * These organs are
identifying themselves with, and taking the forms of
whatever comes to them. If you can restrain the
mind-stuff from taking these forms the mind will remain
calm* This is called Prafydhdra, Thence arises
supreme control of the organs.

When the Yogi has succeeded in preventing the
organs from taking the forms of external objects, and
in making them remain one with the mind-stuff, then
comes perfect control of the organs, and when the
organs are perfectly under control, every muscle and
nerve will be under control, because the organs are


Digitized


188


rAja yoga.


the centres of all the sensations, and of all actions.
These organs are divided into organs of work and
organs of sensation. When the organs are controlled,
the Yogi can control all feeling and doing; the whole
of the body will be under his control. Then alone
one begins to feel joy in being born; then one can
truthfully say, “ Blessed am I that I was born.” When
that control of the organs is obtained, we feel how
wonderful this body really is.


Digitized by Google



CHAPTER III.

THE CHAPTER OF POWERS.

We have now come to the chapter which is called
the Chapter of Powers.

1. Dhftranfi, is holding the mind on to some particular

object

Dhdrand (concentration) is when the mind holds on
to some object, either in the body, or outside the body,
and keeps itself in that state.

2. An unbroken flow of knowledge in that object is

Dhyftna.

The mind tries to think of one object, to hold itself
to one particular spot, as the top of the head, the
heart, etc., and if the mind succeeds in receiving the
sensations only through that part of the body, and
through no other part, that would be Dhdrand , and
when the mind succeeds in keeping itself in that state
for some time it is called Dhydna (meditation).

3. When that, giving up all forms, reflects only the

meaning, it is Sam&dhi.

That is, when in meditation all forms are given up.
Suppose I were meditating on a book, and that I have

[189]


Digitized by Google



igo


rAja yoga.


gradually succeeded in concentrating the mind on it,
and perceiving only the internal sensations, the mean¬
ing, unexpressed in any form, that state of Dhydna is
called Samddhi .

4 (These) three (when practised) in regard to one
object is Samyama.

When a man can direct his mind to any particular
object and fix it there, and then keep it there for a
long time, separating the object from the internal part,
this is Samyama; or Dhdrand , Dhydna , and Samddhi,
one following the other, and making one. The form
of the thing has vanished, and only its meaning
remains in the mind.

5. By the conquest of that comes light of knowledge.

When one has succeeded in making this Samyama , all
powers come under his control. This is the great
instrument of the Yogi . The objects of knowledge are
infinite, and they are divided into the gross, grosser,
grossest, and the fine, finer, finest, and so on. This
Samyama should be first applied to gross things, and
when you begin to get knowledge of the gross, slowly,
by stages, it should be brought to finer things.

6. That diould be employed in stages.

This is a note of warning not to attempt to go too
fast.


Digitized by Google


YOGA APHORISMS. igi

7, These three are nearer than those that precede,

Before these we had the Pr&n&yama, the Asana , the
Yama and Ntyama; these are external parts of these
three — Dhdrand , Dkydna t and Samddhi. Yet these
latter even are external to the seedless Samddhi.
When a man has attained to them he may attain to
omniscience and omnipotence, but that would not be
salvation. These three would not make the mind
Nirvikalpa , changeless, but would leave the seeds for
getting bodies again, only when the seeds are, as the
F^says, " fried, M do they lose the possibility of pro¬
ducing further plants. These powers cannot fry the
seed,

8, But even they are external to the seedless

(BamidM),

Compared with that seedless Samddhi, therefore,
even these are external. We have not yet reached the
real Samddhi the highest, but to a lower stage, in
which this universe still exists as we see it, and in
which are all these powers,

9, By the suppression of the disturbed modifications

of the mind, and by the rise of modifications
of control, the mind is said to attain the con¬
trolling modifications —following the control¬
ling powers of the mind.

That is to say, in this first state of Samddhi , the
modifications of the mind have been controlled, but


IQ2


rAja YOGA.


not perfectly, because if they were, there would be no
modifications. If there is a modification which impels
the mind to rush out through the senses, and the Ycgt
tries to control it, that very control itself will be a
modification. One wave will be checked by another
wave, so it will not be real Samddhi y when all the waves
have subsided, as control itself will be a wave. Yet
this lower Sam&dhi is very much nearer to the higher
Samddhi than when the mind comes bubbling out.

10. Its flow becomes steady by habit

The flow of this continuous control of the mind be¬
comes steady when practised day after day and the
mind obtains the faculty of constant concentration.

11. Taking in all sorts of objects, and concentrating

upon one object, these two powers being de¬
stroyed and manifested respectively, the Chitta
gets the modification called Sam&dhi.

The mind is taking up various objects, running into
all sorts of things and then there is a higher state of
the mind, when it takes up one object and excludes
all others. Samddhi is the result of that.

12. The one-pointedness of the Chitta is when it grasps

in one, the past and present

How are we to know that the mind has become con¬
centrated ? Because time will vanish. The more
time vanishes the more concentrated we are. In com-


Digitized by


Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


! 93


mon life we see that when we are interested in a book
we do not note the time at all, and when we leave the
book we are often surprised to find how many hours
have passed. All time will have the tendency to come
and stand in the one present. So the definition is
given, when the past and present come and stand in
one, the more concentrated the mind.

13, By this it explained the threefold transformations

of form, time and state, in fine or gross matter,
and in the organa

By this the threefold changes in the mind-stuff as
to form, time, and state, are explained. The mind-stuff
is changing into Vrittis y this is change as to form.
To be able to hold the changes to the present time is
change as to time. To be able to make the mind-stuff
go to the past forms giving up the present even, is
change as to state. The concentrations taught in the
preceding aphorisms were to give the Vogt a voluntary
control over the transformations of his mind-stuff
which alone will enable him to make the Samyama be¬
fore named.

14. That which if acted upon by transformations,

either past, present or yet to be manifested, is
the qualified.

That is to say, the qualified is the substance which is
being acted upon by time and by the Sam$kdras y and
getting changed and being manifested all the time*

n


!gle



194 rAja yoga.

16. The tuoceiiion of change* if the cause of manifold
evolution

16, By making Samy ama on the three forts of changti

oomei the knowledge of past and future.

We must not lose sight of the first definition of Sam¬
yama. When the mind has attained to that state when
it identifies itself with the internal impression of the
object, leaving the external, and when, by long practice,
that is retained by the mind, and the mind can get into
that state in a moment, that is Samy ama. If a man in
that state wants to know the past and future he has to
make a Samyama on the changes in the Samskdras .
Some are working now at present, some have worked
out, and some are waiting to work; so by making a
Samyama on these he knows the past and future,

17. By making Samyama on word, meaning, and

knowledge, which are ordinarily confused,
comes the knowledge of all animal sounds.

The word represents the external cause, the meaning
represents the internal vibration that travels to the
brain through the channels of the Indriyas , conveying
the external impression to the mind, and knowledge
represents the reaction of the mind, with which comes
perception. These three confused, make our sense
objects. Suppose I hear a word; there is first the
external vibration, next the internal sensation carried
to the mind by the organ of hearing, then the mind
reacts, and I know the word. The word I know is a


uigmzecfloy


YOGA APHORISMS.


195


mixture of the three, vibration, sensation, and reac¬
tion. Ordinarily these three are inseparable; but by
practice the Yogi can separate them. When a man
has attained to this, if he makes a Samyama on any
sound, he understands the meaning which that sound
was intended to express, whether it was made by man
or by any other animal.

18. By perceiving the impressions, knowledge of past

life.

Each experience that we have comes in the form of
a wave in the CMUa % and this subsides and becomes
finer and finer, but is never lost. It remains there in
minute form, and if we can bring this wave up again,
it becomes memory. So, if the Yogi can make a
Samyama on these past impressions in the mind, he
will begin to remember all his past lives,

19. By making Samyama on the signs in another’s

body knowledge of that mind cornea

Suppose each man has particular signs on his body,
which differentiate him from others; when the Yogi
makes a Samyama on these signs peculiar to a certain
man he knows the nature of the mind of that person.

20. But not its contents, that not being the object of

the Samyama,

He would not know the contents of the mind by
making a Samyama on the body. There would be
required a twofold Samyama , first on the signs in the


rAja yoga.


196


body, and then on the mind itself. The Yogt would
then know everything that is in that mind* past, pres¬
ent, and future,

21. By making: Samyama on the form of the body the
power of perceiving forma being obstructed, the
power of manifestation in the eye being sepa¬
rated, the Yogi s body becomes unseen.

A Yogt standing in the midst of this room can appa¬
rently vanish. He does not really vanish, but he will
not be seen by anyone. The form and the body are,
as it were, separated. You must remember that this
can only be done when the Yogt has attained to that
power of concentration when form and the thing
formed have been separated. Then he makes a Sam¬
yama on that, and the power to perceive forms is
obstructed, because the power of perceiving forms
comes from the junction of form and the thing formed.
By this the disappearance or concealment of words
which are being spoken is also explained.

22* Karma is of two kinds, soon to be fructified, and
late to be fructified. By making Samyama on
that, or by the signs called Aristba, portents,
the Yogis know the exact time of separation
from their bodies.

When the Yogt makes a Samyama on his own Karma y
upon those impressions in his mind which are now
working, and those which are just waiting to work, he


YOGA APHORISMS,


197


knows exactly by those that are waiting when bis body
will fall. He knows when he will die, at what hour,
even at what minute. The Hindis think very much of
that knowledge or consciousness of the nearness of
death, because it is taught in the Gftd that the thoughts
at the moment of departure are great powers in deter¬
mining the next life,

23, By making Samyama on friendship, etc,, various

strength comes,

24, By making Samyama on the strength of the ele¬

phant^ etc., that strength comes to the Yogi

When a Yogi has attained to this Samyama and wants
strength, he makes a Samyama on the strength of the
elephant, and gets it. Infinite energy is at the disposal
of everyone, if he only knows how to get it* The Yogi
has discovered the science of getting it,

25, By making Samyama on that effulgent light cornea

the knowledge of the fine, the obstructed, and

the remote.

When the Yogi makes Samyama on that effulgent
light in the heart he sees things which are very
remote, things, for instance, that are happening in a
distant place, and which are obstructed by mountain
barriers and also things which are very fine,

26, By making Samyama on the son the knowledge of

the world.

27, On the moon the knowledge of the cluster of stars.


rAja yoga.


I 9 S


28. Or the pole star the motions of the stars.

29. On the navel circle the knowledge of the constita*

tion of the body*

30. On the well of the throat cessation of hunger.

When a man is very hungry, if he can make Sam-
yama on the pit of the throat hunger ceases.

31. On the nerve called Kurina fixity of the body.

When he is practising the body is not disturbed.

32. On the light from the top of the head sight of the

Siddhas*

The SiddAas are beings who are a little above ghosts.
When the Yogt concentrates his mind on the top of his
head he will see these Siddhas, The word Siddfta does
not refer to those men who have become free — a
sense in which it is often used.

33. Or by the power of BratibhA all knowledge.

All these can come without any Samyama to the man
who has the power of Pratibhd (enlightenment from
purity). This is when a man has risen to a high state
of Pratibhd; then he has that great light. All things
are apparent to him. Everything comes to him natur¬
ally* without making Samyatna or anything.

34. In the heart, knowledge of minds*

36. Enjoyment comes by the non-discrimination of
the very distant soul and Sattva. Its actions


D ig Ic


YOGA APHORISMS.


199


are for another: Samyama on this gives knowl¬
edge of the Purusa.

This power of non-attachment acquired through
purity gives the Yogi the enlightenment called Pratibkd,

36, From that arises the knowledge of hearing, touch¬

ing, seeing, tasting, and smelling, belonging to
Pratibha,

37, These are obstacles to Sam&dhi; but they are

powers in the worldly state.

If the Yogi knows all these enjoyments of the world
it comes by the junction of the Puruta and the mind.
If he wants to make Samyama on this, that they are
two different things, nature and soul, he gets knowl¬
edge of the Purtda , From that arises discrimination.
When he has got that discrimination he gets the
Pratibkd , the light of supreme genius. These powers,
however, are obstructions to the attainment of the
highest goal, the knowledge of the pure Self, and free¬
dom; these are, as it were, to be met in the way, and,
if the Yogi rejects them, he attains the highest. If he
is tempted to acquire these, his farther progress is
barred.

38, When the cause of bondage has become loosened,

the Yogi, by his knowledge of manifestation
through the organs, enters another's body.

The Yogi can enter a dead body, and make it get up
and move, even while he himself is working in another


200


rAja yoga.


body. Or he can enter a living body, and hold that
man*s mind and organs in check, and for the time
being act through the body of that man. That is done
by the Yogi coming to this discrimination of Purvia
and nature. If he wants to enter another’s body he
makes a Samyama on that body and enters it, because,
not only is his Soul omnipresent, but his mind also,
according to the Ycg(. It is one bit of the universal
mind. Now, however, it can only work through the
nerve currents in this body, but when the Yogi has
loosened himself from these nerve currents, he will be
able to work through other things.

39. By conquering the current called Ud&na the Yogi

does not sink in water, or in swamps, and he

can walk on thoma

Ud&na is the name of the nerve current that governs
the lungs, and all the upper parts of the body, and
when he is master of it he becomes light in weight.
He cannot sink in water; he can walk on thorns and
sword blades, and stand in fire, and so on.

40. By the conquest of the current Sarn&na he is sur¬

rounded by blaze.

Whenever he likes light flashes from his body.

41. By making Samyama on the relation between the

ear and the Akftsa comes divine hearing.

There is the Akdia y the ether, and the instrument,
the ear. By making Samyama on them the Yogt gets


Digitized by


Google


YOGA APHORISMS.


201


divine hearing; he hears everything. Anything spoken
or sounded miles away he can hear*

42. By making Samyama on the relation between the

AkfUa and the body the Yogi becoming light as
cotton wool goes through the skies.

This AkdSa is the material of this body ; it is only
Akdia in a certain form that has become the body. If
the Yogi makes a Samyama on this Akdia material of
his body, it acquires the lightness of Akdia y and can
go anywhere through the air.

43. By making Samyama on the real modifications of

the mind, which are outside, called great dis*
embodiedness, comes disappearance of the cover¬
ing to light.

The mind in its foolishness thinks that it is working
in this body. Why should I be bound by one system
of nerves, and put the Ego only in one body, if the
mind is omnipresent ? There is no reason why I
should. The Yogi wants to feel the Ego wherever he
likes. When he has succeeded in that all covering to
light goes away, and all darkness and ignorance van¬
ish. Everything appears to him to be full of knowledge.

44. By making Samyama on the elements* beginning

with the gross, and ending with the superfine,
comes mastery of the elements.

The Yogi makes Samyama on the elements, first on
the gross, and then on the finer states. This Samyama
is taken up more by a sect of the Buddhists. They


202


rAja YOGA.


take a lump of clay, and make Samyama on that, and
gradually they begin to see the fine materials of which
it is composed, and when they have known all the fine
materials in it, they get power over that element. So
with all the elements, the Yogt can conquer them all.

4& From that comes minuteness, etc., glorification of
the body, and indestructibleness of the bodily
qualities.

This means that the Yogt has attained the eight
powers. He can make himself as light as a particle,
he can make himself huge, as heavy as the earth,
or as light as the air; he will rule everything he
wants, he will conquer everything he wants, a lion will
sit at his feet like a lamb, and all his desires be ful¬
filled at will.

46. The glorification of the body are beauty, com¬

plexion, strength, adamantine hardness.

The body becomes indestructible; fire cannot injure
it. Nothing can injure it. Nothing can destroy it
until the Yogt wishes. 11 Breaking the rod of time he
lives in this universe with his body. M In the Vedas it is
written that for that man there is no more disease,
death or pain.

47. By making Samyama on the objectivity, knowl*

edge and egoism of the organs, by gradation
comes the conquest of the organs.

In perception of external objects the organs leave
their place in the mind and go towards the object; that


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS,


203


is followed by knowledge and egoism. When the
Yogi makes Samyama on these by gradation he con¬
quers the organs. Take up anything that you see or
feel, a book, for instance, and first concentrate the
mind on the thing itself. Then on the knowledge that
is in the form of a book, and then the Ego that sees
the book. By that practice all the organs will be
conquered.

48. From that comes glorified mind, power of the
organs independently of the body, and conquest
of nature,

just as by the conquest of the elements comes
glorified body, so from the conquest of the mind will
come glorified mind,

id. By making Samyama on the Sattva, to him who
has discriminated between the intellect and the
Future come omnipresence and omniscience,

When we have conquered nature, and realised the dif¬
ference between the Purufa and nature, that the Puruia
is indestructible, pure and perfect, when the Yogi has
realised this, then comes omnipotence and omniscience,

50. By giving up even these comes the destruction of
the very seed of evil; he attains Kaivalya.

He attains aloneness, independence. Then that
man is free. When he gives up even the ideas of
omnipotence and omniscience, there will be entire


204


rAja yoga.


rejection of enjoyment, of the temptations from celes¬
tial beings. When the Yogi has seen all these wonder¬
ful powers, and rejected them, he reaches the goal.
What are all these powers ? Simply manifestations.
They are no better than dreams. Even omnipotence
is a dream. It depends on the mind. So long as
there is a mind it can be understood, but the goal is
beyond even the mind.

51. There should be entire rejection of enjoyment of

the temptations from celestial beings, for fear
of evil again.

There are other dangers too; gods and other beings
come to tempt the Yogi . They do not want anyone
to be perfectly free. They are jealous, just as we are,
and worse than we sometimes. They are very much
afraid of losing their places. Those Yogis who do not
reach perfection die and become gods; leaving the
direct road they go into one of the side streets, and
get these powers. Then again they have to be born;
but he who is strong enough to withstand these temp¬
tations, and go straight to the goal, becomes free.

52. By making Samyama on a particle of time and

its multiples comes discrimination.

How are we to avoid all these things, these Devas y
and heavens, and powers ? By discrimination, by
knowing good from evil. Therefore a Samyama is
given by which the power of discrimination can be


Digitized by Google



I


YOGA aphorisms. 205

strengthened. This is by making a Sampama on a
particle of time.

53. Those which cannot he differentiated by species,
sign and place, even they will be discriminated
by the above Samyama.

The misery that we suffer comes from ignorance,
from non-discrimination between the real and the
unreal. We are all taking that which is bad for that
which is good, and that which is a dream for that
which is real. Soul is the only reality, and we have
forgotten it. Body is an unreal dream, and we think
we are all bodies. So this non-discrimination is the
cause of misery, and it is caused by ignorance. When
discrimination comes it brings strength, and then alone
can we avoid all these various ideas of body, and
heavens, and gods and Devos. This ignorance arises
through differentiating by species, sign or place. For
instance, take a cow. The cow is differentiated from
the dog, as species. Even with the cows alone how
do we make the distinction between one cow and
another ? By signs. If two objects are exactly similar
they can be distinguished if they are in different
places. When objects are so mixed up that even these
differentiae will not help us, the power of discrimina¬
tion acquired by ttie above-mentioned practice will
give us the ability to distinguish them. The highest
philosophy of the Yogi is based upon this fact, that
the Puruia is pure and perfect, and is the only simple
that exists in this universe. The body and mind are


206


rAja yoga.


compounds, and yet we are ever identifying ourselves
with them. That is the great mistake that the distinc¬
tion has been lost. When this power of discrimina¬
tion has been attained, man sees that everything in
this world, mental and physical, is a compound, and,
as such, cannot be the Puruja .

54. The saving knowledge is that knowledge of dis¬

crimination which covers all objects, all means.

Isolation, that is the goal; when that is attained,
the soul will find that it was alone all the time, and it
required no one to make it happy. As long as we
require someone else to make us happy we are slaves.
When the Purufa finds that It is free, and does not
require anything to complete Itself, that this nature is
quite unnecessary, then freedom is attained. Then
comes this Katvalya.

55. By the similarity of purity between the Sattvaand

the Purusa comes Kaivalya.

When the soul realises that it depends on nothing in
the universe, from gods to the lowest atom, that is
called Kaivalya (isolation) and perfection. It is
attained when this mixture of purity and impurity
called mind has been made as pure as the Puruia
Itself; then the Sattva , the mind, reflects only the un¬
qualified essence of purity, which is the Puruia .


Digitized by Google


CHAPTER IV.

INDEPENDENCE.

1. The Biddhis (powers) axe attained by birth, chemi¬
cal means, power of words, mortification or con¬
centration.

Sometimes a man is born with the Siddkis , powers,
of course from the exercise of powers he had in his
previous birth. In this birth he is born, as it were, to
enjoy the fruits of them. It is said of Kapila , the
great father of the Sdnkhya Philosophy, that he was a
born Siddha y which means, literally, a man who has
attained to success. The Yogfs claim that these
powers can be gained by chemical means. All of you
know that chemistry originally began as alchemy;
men went in search of the philosopher's stone, and
elixirs of life, and so forth. In India there was a sect
called the Rdsdyanas* Their idea was that ideality,
knowledge, spirituality and religion, were all very
right, but that the body was the only instrument by
which to attain to all these. If the body broke now
and then it would take so much more time to attain to
the goal. For instance, a man wants to practise Yoga,
or wants to become spiritual. Before he has advanced
very far he dies. Then he takes another body and
begins again, then dies, and so on, and in this way

[*07]


rAja yoga.


ao8

much time will be lost in dying and being born again.
If the body could be made strong and perfect, so that
it would get rid of birth and death, we should have so
much more time to become spiritual. So these Rds&*
yanas say, first make the body very strong, and they
claim that this body can be made immortal. Their
idea is that if the mind is manufacturing the body,
and if it be true that each mind is only one particular
outlet to that infinite energy, and that there is no limit
to each particular outlet getting any amount of power
from outside, why is it impossible that we should keep
our bodies all the time ? We shall have to manufac¬
ture all the bodies that we shall ever have. As soon
as this body dies we shall have to manufacture another.
If we can do that why cannot we do it just here and
now, without getting out ? The theory is perfectly
correct. If it is possible that we live after death, and
make other bodies, why is it impossible that we should
have the power of making bodies here, without entirely
dissolving this body, simply changing it continually ?
They also thought that in mercury and in sulphur was
hidden the most wonderful powef, and that by certain
preparations of these a man could keep the body as
long as he liked. Others believed that certain drugs
could bring powers, such as flying through the air, etc.
Many of the most wonderful medicines of the present
day we owe to the R&sAyanas , notably the use of metals
in medicine. Certain sects of Yogts claim that many
of their principal teachers are still living in their old
bodies. PatanjcUi\ the great authority on Yoga, does


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


209


not deny this. The power of words There are cer¬
tain sacred words called Mantrams y which have power t
when repeated under proper conditions, to produce
these extraordinary powers We are living in the
midst of such a mass of miracles, day and night, that
we do not think anything of them. There is no limit
to man’s power, the power of words and the power of
mind. Mortification. You find that in every religion
mortifications and asceticisms have been practised.
In these religious conceptions the Hindfts always go to
the extremes. You will find men standing with their
hands up all their lives, until their hands wither and
die. Men sleep standing, day and night, until their
feet swell, and, if they live, the legs become so stiff in
this position that they can no more bend them, but have
tc stand all their lives. I once saw a man who had raised
his hands in this way, and I asked him how it felt
when he did it first. He said it was awful torture. It
was such torture that he had to go to a river and put
himself in water, and that allayed the pain for a little.
After a month he did not suffer much. Through such
practices powers (Siddhis) can be attained. Concentra¬
tion. The concentration is Samddhi ’, and that is Yoga
proper; that is the principal theme of this science, and
it is the highest means. The preceding ones are only
secondary, and we cannot attain to the highest through
them. Samddhi is the means through which we can
gain anything and everything, mental, moral or
spiritual.

14


Digitized by Google



210 rAja yoga.

2. The change into another species is by the filling in

of nature.

PatanjaU has advanced the proposition that these
powers come by birth, sometimes by chemical means,
or they may be got by mortification and he has
admitted that this body can be kept for any length of
time. Now he goes on to state what is the cause of
the change of the body into another species, which he
says is by the filling in of nature. In the next aphor¬
ism he will explain this.

3. Good deeds, etc,, are not the direct causes in the

transformations of nature, but they act as
breakers of obstacles to the evolutions of nature,
as a farmer breaks the obstacles to the course of
water, which then runs down by its own nature.

When a farmer is irrigating his field the water is
already in the canals, only there are gates which keep
the water in. The farmer opens these gates, and the
water flows in by itself, by the law of gravitation.
So, all human progress and power are already in every¬
thing; this perfection is every man's nature, only it is
barred in and prevented from taking its proper course,
if anyone can take the bar off in rushes nature.
Then the man attains the powers which are his already.
Those we called wicked become saints, as soon as the
bar is broken and nature rushes in. It is nature that
is driving us towards perfection, and eventually she
will bring everyone there. All these practices and


YOGA APHORISMS.


211


struggles to become religious are only negative work,
to take off the bars, and open the doors to that perfec¬
tion which is our birthright, our nature. To-day the
evolution theory of the ancient Yogis will be better
understood in the light of modern research. And yet
the theory of the Yogis is a better explanation. The
two causes of evolution advanced by the moderns, viz .,
sexual selection and survival of the fittest, are inade¬
quate. Suppose human knowledge to have advanced
so much as to eliminate competition, both from the
function of acquiring physical sustenance and of
acquiring a mate. Then, according to the moderns,
human progress will stop and the race will die. And
the result of this theory is to furnish every oppressor
with an argument to calm the qualms of conscience,
and men are not lacking, who, posing as philosophers,
want to kill out all wicked and incompetent persons
(they are, of course, the only judges of competency),
and thus preserve the human race ! But the great
ancient evolutionist, Patanjali , declares that the true
secret of evolution is the manifestation of the perfec¬
tion which is already in every being; that this perfec¬
tion has been barred, and the infinite tide behind is
struggling to express itself. These struggles and
competitions are but the results of our ignorance, be¬
cause we do not know the proper way to unlock the
gate and let the water in. This infinite tide behind
must express itself, and it is the cause of all manifes¬
tation, not competition for life, 01 sex gratification,
which are only momentary, unnecessary, extraneous


Digitized by Google



212


rAja yoga.


effects, caused by ignorance* Even when all competi¬
tion has ceased this perfect nature behind will make us
go forward until every one has become perfect.
Therefore there is no reason to believe that competi¬
tion is necessary to progress. In the animal the man
was suppressed, but, as soon as the door was opened,
out rushed man. So, in man there is the potential
god, kept in by the locks and bars of ignorance. When
knowledge breaks these bars the god becomes manifest.

4. From egoism alone proceed the created minds,

The theory of Karma is that we suffer for our good
or bad deeds, and the whole scope of philosophy is to
approach the glory of man. All the Scriptures sing
the glory of man, of the soul, and then, with the same
breath, they preach this Karma , A good deed brings
such a result, and a bad deed such a result, but, if the
soul can be acted upon by a good or a bad deed it
amounts to nothing. Bad deeds put a bar to the mani¬
festation of our nature, of the Purufa , and good deeds
take the obstacles off, and its glory becomes manifest.
But the Puruia itself is never changed. Whatever you
do never destroys your own glory, your own nature,
because the soul cannot be acted upon by anything,
only a veil is spread before it, hiding its perfection,

5. Though the activities of the different created

minds are various, the one original mind is the
controller of them all

These different minds, which will act in these differ¬
ent bodies, are called made-minds, and the bodies


■


YOGA APHORISMS, 213

ade-bodies; that is, manufactured bodies and minds.
Matter and mind are like two inexhaustible store¬
houses, When you have become a Yogi you have
learned the secret of their control. It was yours all
the time, but you had forgotten it. When you become
a Yogi you recollect it. Then you can do anything
with it* manipulate it in every way you like. The
material out of which that manufactured mind is cre¬
ated is the very same material which is used as the
macrocosm. It is not that mind is one thing and mat¬
ter another, but they are different existences of the
same thing. Asmiirf, egoism, is the material, the fine
state of existence out of which these made-minds and
made-bodies of the Yogi will be manufactured. There¬
fore, when the Yogi has found the secret of these
energies of nature he can manufacture any number of
bodies, or minds, but they will all be manufactured
out of the substance known as egoism,

G, Among the various Chittas that which is attained
by Sam&dhi is desireless.

Among all the various minds that we see in various
men, only that mind which has attained to Samddhi\
perfect concentration, is the highest. A man who has
attained certain powers through medicines, or through
words, or through mortifications, still has desires, but
that man who has attained to Samddhi through con¬
centration is alone free from all desires*


214


rAja yoga.


7* Works are neither black nor white for the Yogis;
for others they are threefold, black, white, and
mixed,

When the Yogi has attained to that state of perfec¬
tion, the actions of that man, and the Karma produced
by those actions, will not bind him, because he did not
desire them. He just works on; he works to do good,
and he does good, but does not care for the result, and
it will not come to him. But for ordinary men, who
have not attained to that highest state, works are of
three kinds, black (evil actions), white (good actions),
and mixed.

8. From these threefold works are manifested in each
state only those desires (which are) fitting to
that state alone. (The others are held in abey¬
ance for the time being.)

Suppose I have made the three kinds of Karma ,
good, bad and mixed, and suppose I die and become a
god in heaven; the desires in a god body are not the
same as the desires in a human body. The god body
neither eats nor drinks; what becomes of my past
unworked Karmas , which produce as their effect the
desire to eat and drink ? Where would these Karmas
go when I became a god ? The answer is that desires
can only manifest themselves in proper environments.
Only those desires will come out for which the environ¬
ment is fitted; the rest will remain stored up. In this
life we have many godly desires, many human desires.


YOGA APHORISMS.


215


many animal desires. If I take a god body, only the
good desires will come up, because for them the
environments are suitable. And if I take an animal
body, only the animal desires will come up, and the
good desires will wait. What does that show ? That
by means of environment we can check these desires.
Only that Karma which is suited to and fitted for the
environments will come out. This proves that the
power of environment is the great check to control
even Karma itself.

9. There is eonseoutiveness in desire, even though
separated by species, space and time, there be¬
ing identification of memory and impressions.

Experiences becoming fine become impressions;
impressions revivified become memory. The word
memory here includes unconscious co-ordination of
past experience, reduced to impressions, with present
conscious action. In each body the group of impres¬
sions acquired in a similar body only will become the
cause of action in that body. The experiences of dis¬
similar bodies will be held in abeyance. Each body
will act as if it were a descendant of a series of bodies
of that species only; thus, consecutiveness of desires
will not be broken.

10. Thirst for happiness being eternal desires are
without beginning.

All experience is preceded by desire for becoming
happy. There was no beginning of experience, as


Digitized by Google



2l6


eAja yoga.


each fresh experience is built upon the tendency gene¬
rated by past experience; therefore desire is without
beginning,

11, Being held together by cause, effect, support, and
objects, in the absence of these is its absence.

These desires are held together by cause and effect;
if a desire has been raised it does not die without pro*
ducing its effect. Then again, the mind-stuff is the
great storehouse, the support of all past desires,
reduced to SamsMra form; until they have worked
themselves out they will not die. Moreover, so long
as the senses receive the external objects fresh desires
will arise. If it be possible to get rid of these, then
alone desires will vanish.

IS. The past and future exist in their own nature,
qualities having different ways.

13, They are manifested or fine, being of the nature of

the Gunas,

The Gunas are the three substances, Sattva f J?ajas f
and Tamas y whose gross state is the sensible universe.
Past and future arise from the different modes of mani¬
festation of these Gunas .

14, The unity in things is from the unity in changes.

Though there are three substances their changes
being co-ordinated all objects have their unity.

15, The object being the same, perception and desire

vary according to the various mind*


^Tgmzecffiy


YOGA APHORISMS,


217


18, Thing* are known or unknown to the mind, being
dependent on the colouring which they give to
the mind.

17, The states of the mind are always known because
the lord of the mind is unchangeable.

The whole gist of this theory is that the universe is
both mental and material. And both the mental and
material worlds are in a continuous state of flux.
What is this book ? It is a combination of molecules
in constant change. One lot is going out, and another
coming in; it is a whirlpool, bat what makes the
unity ? What makes it the same book ? The changes
are rhythmical; in harmonious order they are sending
impressions to my mind, and these pieced together
make a continuous picture, although the parts are
continuously changing. Mind itself is continuously
changing. The mind and body are like two layers in
the same substance, moving at different rates of speed,
Relatively, one being slower and the other quicker, we
can distinguish between the two motions. For
instance, a train is moving, and another carriage is
moving slowly alongside it. It is possible to find the
motion of both these, to a certain extent. But still
something else is necessary. Motion can only be per¬
ceived when there is something else which is not mov¬
ing. But when two or three things are relatively
moving, we first perceive the motion of the faster one,
and then that of the slower ones. How is the mind to
perceive ? It is also in a flux. Therefore another


218 rAja yoga.

thing is necessary which moves more slowly, then you
must get to something in which the motion is still
slower, and so on, and you will find no end. There¬
fore logic compels you to stop somewhere. You must
complete the series by knowing something which never
changes. Behind this never ending chain of motion is
the Purufa , the changeless, the colourless, the pure.
All these impressions are merely reflected upon it, as
rays of light from a camera are reflected upon a white
sheet, painting hundreds of pictures on it, without in
any way tarnishing the sheet.

18. Hind is not self-luminous, being an object

Tremendous power is manifested everywhere in
nature, but yet something tells us that it is not self-
luminous, not essentially intelligent. The Puruia
alone is self-luminous, and gives its light to every¬
thing. It is its power that is percolating through all
matter and force.

19. From its being unable to cognise two things at

the same time.

If the mind were self-luminous it would be able to
cognise everything at the same time, which it cannot.
If you pay deep attention to one thing you lose
another. If the mind were self-luminous there would
be no limit to the impressions it could receive. The
Puruja can cognise all in one moment; therefore the
Purufa is self-luminous, and the mind is not.


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


219


80. Another cognising mind being assumed there will

be no end to such assumptions and confusion of
memory.

Let us suppose there is another mind which cognises
the first, there will have to be something which cog¬
nises that, and so there will be no end to it. It will
result in confusion of memory, there will be no store¬
house of memory.

81. The essence of knowledge (the Purufa) being un¬

changeable, when the mind takes its form, it
becomes conscious.

Patanjali says this to make it more clear that knowl¬
edge is not a quality of the Puruia. When the mind
comes near the Puruia it is reflected, as it were, upon
the mind, and the mind, for the time being, becomes
knowing and seems as if it were itself the Puruia .

88. Coloured by the seer and the seen the mind is able
to understand everything.

On the one side the external world, the seen, is
being reflected, and on the other, the seer is being
reflected; thus comes the power of all knowledge to
the mind.

23. The mind through its innumerable desires acts for
another (the Puruia), being combinations.

The mind is a compound of various things, and
therefore it cannot work for itself. Everything that


Digitized by Google



220


rAja YOGA*


is a combination in this world has some object for that
combination, some third thing for which this combina¬
tion is going on. So this combination of the mind is
for the Purufa,

24. For the discriminating the perception of the mind

tk

at Atman ceases.

Through discrimination the Yogi knows that the
Purufa is not mind,

25. Then bent on discriminating the mind attains the

previous state of Eaivaiya (isolation).

Thus the practice of Yoga leads to discriminating
power, to clearness of vision. The veil drops from the
eyes, and we see things as they are. We find that this
nature is a compound, and is showing the panorama
for the Purufa 7 who is the witness; that this nature is
not the Lord, that the whole of these combinations of
nature are simply for the sake of showing these phe¬
nomena to the Purufa^ the enthroned king within.
When discrimination comes by long practice fear
ceases, and the mind attains isolation-

26. The thoughts that arise as obstruction* to that are

from impressions.

All the various ideas that arise making us believe
that we require something external to make us happy
are obstructions to that perfection. The Purufa is


YOGA APHORISMS.


221


happiness and blessedness by its own nature* But that
knowledge is covered over by past impressions. These
impressions have to work themselves out-

27, Their destruction is in the same manner as of

ignorance, etc., as said before.

28, Even when arriving at the right discriminating

knowledge of the essences, he who gives np the
fruits, unto him comes as the result of perfect
discrimination, the Sam&dhi called the cloud of
virtue.

When the Yogi has attained to this discrimination, all
these powers will come that were mentioned in the last
chapter, but the true Yogi rejects them all. Unto him
comes a peculiar knowledge, a particular light called
the Dharma Megka, the cloud of virtue. All the great
prophets of the world whom history has recorded had
this. They had found the whole foundation of knowl¬
edge within themselves. Truth to them had become
real. Peace and calmness, and perfect purity became
their own nature, after they had given up all these
vanities of powers.

29, From that comes cessation of pains and works.

When that cloud of virtue has come, then no more is
there fear of falling, nothing can drag the Yogi down.
No more will there be evils for him. No more pains.


222


rAja. YOGA,


SO. Then knowledge, bereft of covering and imparities
becoming infinite, the knowable becomes small.

Knowledge itself is there; its covering is gone. One
of the Buddhistic scriptures sums up what is meant by
the Buddha (which is the name of a state). It defines
it as infinite knowledge, infinite as the sky. Jesus
attained to that and became the Christ. All of you
will attain to that state, and knowledge becoming
infinite, the knowable becomes small. This whole
universe, with all its knowable, becomes as nothing
before the Puruia. The ordinary man thinks himself
very small, because to him the knowable seems to be
so infinite.

31. Then are finished the successive transformations

of the qualities* they having attained the end.

Then all these various transformations of the quali¬
ties, which change from species to species, cease for
ever.

32. The changes that exist in relation to moments* and

which are perceived at the other end (at the
end of a series) are succession.

Patanjali here defines the word succession, the
changes that exist in relation to moments. While I
am thinking, many moments pass, and with each
moment there is a change of idea, but we only perceive
these changes at the end of a series. So, perception
of time is always in the memory. This is called sue-


Digitized by Google



YOGA APHORISMS.


223


cession, but for the mind that has realised omnipres¬
ence all these have finished. Everything has become
present for it; the present alone exists, the past and
future are lost* This stands controlled, and all knowl¬
edge is there in one second* Everything is known
like a flash*

33. The resolution in the inverse order of the qualities,
bereft of any motive of action for the Furusa, is
Kaivaiya, or it is the establishment of the
power of knowledge in its own nature.

Nature’s task is done, this unselfish task which our
sweet nurse Nature had imposed upon herself. As it
were, she gently took the self-forgetting soul by the
hand, and showed him all the experiences in the uni*
verse, all manifestations, bringing him higher and
higher through various bodies, till his glory came
back, and he remembered his own nature. Then the
kind mother went back the same way she came, for
others who also have lost their way in the trackless
desert of life* And thus is she working, without
beginning and without end. And thus through pleas¬
ure and pain, through good and evil, the infinite river
of souls is flowing into the ocean of perfection, of self-
realisation.

Glory unto those who have realised their own
nature; may their blessings be on us all.


APPENDIX.

References to Yooa.

Svettivatara U pan if had.

Chapter II.

2 - 6 - 14 . Where the fire is churned, where the air is
controlled, where the flow of Soma becomes plentiful

there a (perfect) mind is created.Placing

the body in which the chest, the throat, and the head
are held erect, in a straight posture, making the organs
enter the mind, the sage crosses all the fearful cur¬
rents by means of the raft of Brahman.

The man of well regulated endeavours controls the
Prdna f and when it has become quieted breathes out
through the nostrils. The persevering sage holds his
mind as a charioteer holds the restive horses.

In lonely places, as mountain caves, etc., where the
floor is even, free of pebbles or sand, where there are
no disturbing noises from men or waterfalls, in places
helpful to the mind and pleasing to the eyes, Yoga is
to be practised (mind is to be joined).

Like snowfall, smoke, sun, wind, fire, firefly, light¬
ning, crystal, moon, these forms, coming before,
gradually manifest the Brahman in Yoga.

When the perceptions of Yoga y arising from earth,
water, light, fire, ether, have taken place, then Yoga

[«4j


Digitized by Google



APPENDIX.


225


has begun. Unto him does not come disease, nor old
age, nor death, who has got a body made up of the fire
of Yoga,

The first signs of entering Yoga are lightness, health,
the skin becomes smooth, the complexion clear, the
voice beautiful, and there is an agreeable odour in the
body.

14, As gold or silver, first covered with earth, etc.,
and then burned and washed, shines full of light, so
the embodied man seeing the truth of the Atman as
one, attains the goal and becomes sorrowless,

Y^jnavalkya, quoted by Sankara.

*' After practising the postures as desired, according
to rules, then, O Gdrgi^ the man who has conquered
the posture will practise Prdndydma .

11 On the seat of earth, spreading the Ku£a grass,
and over it a skin, worshipping Garmpati with fruits
and sweetmeats, seated on that seat, placing the oppo¬
site hands on the knees, holding the throat and head
in the same line, the lips closed and firm, facing the
east or the north, the eyes fixed on the tip of the nose,
avoiding too much food or fasting, the Nddis should be
purified according to the above-mentioned rule, with¬
out which the practice will be fruitless, thinking of the
(seed-word) Hum , at the junction of Pingaid and Idd
(the right and the left nostrils), the Idd should be
filled with external air in twelve Mdtrds (seconds),
then the Yogi meditates fire in the same place and the
word * Rang / and while meditating thus, slowly rejects
*5


226


rAja yoga.


the air through the Pingald (right nostril). Again fill*
ing in through the Pingald the air should be slowly
rejected through the Idd y in the same way. This
should be practised for three or four years, or three
or four months, according to the directions of a Guru ,,
in secret (alone in a room) in the early morning, at
midday, in the evening, and at midnight (until) the
nerves become purified, and these are the signs; light¬
ness of body, clear complexion, good appetite, hearing
of the Ndda . Then should be practised Prdndydma ,
composed of Rechaka (exhalation), Kumbhaka (reten¬
tion), and Pdraka (inhalation). Joining the Prdna
with the Apdna is Prdndydma .

“ In sixteen Mdtrds filling the body from the head to
the feet in thirty-two Mdtrds to be thrown out, with
sixty-four the Kumbhaka should be made.

" There is another sort of Prdndydma in which, with
sixteen Mdtrds y the body is to be filled, then the Kum¬
bhaka is made with sixty-four, and with thirty-two it
should be rejected.

11 By Prdndydma impurities of the body are thrown
out; by Dhdrand the impurities of the mind; by Praty-
dhdra impurities of attachment, and by Samddhi is taken
off everything that hides the lordship of the Soul."

Sinkhya.

Book III ’

29 . By the achievement of meditation, there are to
the pure one (the Purula) all powers like nature.

30 . Meditation is the removal of attachment.


Digitized by


Google


APPENDIX


227


31. It is perfected by the suppression of the modifi¬
cations.

32 By meditation, posture and performance of one's
duties, it is perfected.

33. Restraint of the Prdna is by means of expulsion
and retention.

34. Posture is that which is steady and easy.

36. Also by non-attachment and practice.

75. By practising the discrimination of the princi¬
ples of nature front the Puruia y and by giving them
up as M not It, not It/' discrimination is perfected.


Book IK


3. Repetition, instruction is to be repeated.

5. As the hawk becomes unhappy if the food is
taken away from him, and happy if he gives it up him¬
self (so he who gives up everything voluntarily is
happy).

6. As the snake is happy in giving up his old skin.

8. That which is not a means of liberation is not to
be thought of; it becomes a cause of bondage, as in
the case of Bharuta .

9. From the association of many things there is
obstruction to meditation, through passion, etc., like
the shell bracelets on the virgin's hand.

10. It is the same, even in the case of two.

11. The hopeless are happy, like the girl Pinguid .

13. Although devotion is to be given to many insti¬
tutes and teachers, the essence is to be taken from them
all, as the bee takes the essence from many flowers.


228


rAja yoga.


14. One whose mind has become concentrated like
the arrowmaker’s, his meditation is not disturbed.

15. Through transgression of the original rules there
is non-attainment of the goal, as in other worldly things.

19. By continence, reverence, and devotion to Guru ,
success comes after a long time (as in the case of Indra.)

20. There is no law as to time (as in the case of
Vdmadeva ).

24. Or through association with one who has attained
perfection.

27. Not by enjoyments is desire appeased.

Book V.

128. The Siddhis attained by Yoga are not to be
denied.

Book VI.

24. Any posture which is easy and steady is an
Asana ; there is no other rule.

Vyisa SCttra.

Chapter IV. y Section 1.

7. Worship is possible in a sitting posture.

8. Because of meditation.

9. Because the meditating (person) is compared to
the immovable earth.

10. Also because the Smritis say so.

11. There is no law of place; wherever the mind is
concentrated, there worship should be performed.

These several extracts give an idea of what other sys•
terns of Indian Philosophy have to say upon Yoga.


Digitized by


Google



IMMORTALITY


[ml


Digitized by



Digitized by



IMMORTALITY


What question has been asked a greater number of
times; what idea has sent men more to search the uni¬
verse for an answer, what question is nearer and dearer
to the human heart, what question is more inseparably
connected with our existence, than this one, the
immortality of the human soul ? It has been the
theme of poets, and of sages, of priests and of
prophets; kings on the throne have discussed it, beg¬
gars in the street have dreamt of it. The best of
human kind have approached it, and the worst of
human kind have always hoped for it. The interest in
the theme has not died yet, nor will it die, so long as
human nature exists. Various answers have been pre¬
sented to the world by various minds. Thousands,
again, in every period of history have given up the
discussion, and yet the question remains fresh as ever.
Many times in the turmoils and struggles of our lives
we seem to forget the question; all of a sudden, some
one dies; one, perhaps, whom we loved, one near and
dear to our hearts is snatched away from us. The
struggle, the din and turmoil of the world around us,
cease for a moment, become silent, and the soul asks
the old question, “ What after this ? ” What becomes

t«3l]


Digitized by Google



232


IMMORTALITY.


of the soul ? All human knowledge proceeds out of
experience; we cannot know anything except by expe¬
rience. All our reasoning is based upon generalised
experience, all our knowledge is but a sort of harmon¬
ised experience. Looking around us, what do we find?
A continuous change. The plant comes out of the
seed, and the seed becomes the plant again; the plant
grows into the tree, completes the circle, and comes
back to the seed. The animal comes, lives a certain
time, dies, and completes the circle. So does man.
The mountains slowly but surely crumble away, the
rivers slowly but surely dry up, rains come out of the
sea, and go back to the sea. Everywhere it is circles
being completed, birth, growth, development, and
decay following each other with mathematical preci¬
sion. This is our every day experience. Inside of it
all, behind all this vast mass of what we call life, of
millions of forms and shapes, millions upon millions of
varieties, beginning from the lowest atom to the
highest spiritualised man, we find existing a certain
unity. Every day we find that the wall that was
thought to be dividing one substance and another is
being broken down, and all matter is coming to be
recognised by modern science as one substance, mani¬
festing in different ways and in various forms the one
life that runs like a continuous chain throughout, of
which all these various forms represent the links, link
after link, extending almost infinitely, but of the same
one chain. This is what is called evolution. It is an
old, old idea, as old as human society, only it is getting


Digitized by Google



IMMORTALITY*


233


fresher and fresher as human knowledge is going on.
There is one thing more, which the ancients perceived,
and that is involution; but in modern times, this is not
yet so clearly perceived. The seed is becoming the
plant; a grain of sand never becomes a plant. It is
the father that becomes the child, A lump of clay
never becomes the child. Out of what this evolution
comes is the question. What was the seed ? It was
the same as the tree. All the possibilities of a future
tree are in that seed; all the possibilities of a future
man are in the little baby; all the possibilities of any
future life are in the germ. What is this ? The ancient
philosophers of India called it involution. We find
then, that every evolution presupposes an involution.
Nothing can be evolved which is not already in. Here
again modern science comes to our help. You know
by mathematical reasoning that the sum-total of the
energy that is displayed in the universe is the same
throughout. You cannot take away one atom of mat*
ter or one foot-pound of force. You cannot add to
the universe one atom of matter or one foot-pound of
force. As such, evolution did not come out of zero,
then, where it comes from ? It came in involution
before. The child is the man involved, and the man
is the child evolved; the seed is the tree involved, and
the tree is the seed evolved. All the possibilities of
all life are in the germ. The question becomes a little
clearer. Add to it the first idea of continuation of
life. From the lowest protoplasm to the most perfect
human being, there is really one life. Just as in one


234


IMMORTALITY.


life we have so many various phases of expression, the
baby, the child, the young man, the old man — extend
that farther, and trace the baby a few steps back, then
back, and back, until you come to the protoplasm.
Thus, from that protoplasm up to the most perfect man
we get one continuous life, one chain. This is evolu¬
tion, but we have seen that each evolution presupposes
an involution. The whole of this life which slowly
manifests itself, evolves itself from the protoplasm to
the perfected human being, the incarnation of God on
earth, the whole of this series is but one life, and the
whole of this manifestation must have been involved in
that very protoplasm. This whole life, this very god
on earth was involved there, and only slowly comes
out, manifests itself slowly, slowly, slowly. The high¬
est expression must have been there in the germ state,
in minute form; therefore this one force, this whole
chain, is the involution of what ? Of that cosmic life
which is everywhere. This one mass of intelligence
which is from the protoplasm up to the most perfected
man, slowly and slowly uncoils itself. What was it ?
It was a part of the cosmic universal intelligence in¬
volved in that little protoplasm itself, and it was all
there. Not that it grows. Take off all ideas of
growth from your mind. With the idea of growth is
associated something coming from outside, something
extraneous, and that will break the mathematical
demonstration that the cosmic energy is the same
throughout. It can never grow. It was there, only,
it manifests itself. What is destruction ? Here is a


Digitized by Google



■


IMMORTALITY. 235

glass. I throw it on the ground, and it breaks to
pieces. What becomes of it ? It becomes fine. What
is destruction ? The gross becoming fine. The ele¬
ments, the particles, the components, the materials,
the causes are combined, and become this effect called
the glass. They go back to their causes, and this is
what is meant by destruction — going back to the
cause. What is the effect ? The cause manifested.
There is no essential difference between the effect and
the cause. Take this glass, again. Here was the ma¬
terial, and that material plus the will of the manufac¬
turer, these two made the glass, and these two were its
causes, and are present in it. In what form ? Adhe¬
sion. If the force were not here each particle would
fall off. What has become of the effect then ? It is
the same as the cause, only taking a different form, a
different composition. When the cause is changed and
limited and condensed for a time or space, then the
very cause is called effect. We must remember this.
Applying it to our idea of life the whole of the manifes¬
tation of this one series, from the protoplasm up to
the most perfect man, must be the very same thing as
cosmic life. First it got involved and became finer,
and out of that fine something which was the cause, it
has gone on evolving, is manifesting itself, becoming
grosser. But the question of immortality is not set¬
tled here still. What have we got ? We get this, that
everything in this universe is indestructible. There is
nothing new; there will be nothing new. The same
series of manifestations are presenting themsefves


236


IMMORTALITY.


alternately, like a wheel, coming up and down. All
motion in this universe is in the form of waves, suc¬
cessively rising and falling. Systems after systems
are coming out of the finer forms, evolving them¬
selves, taking the grosser forms, again melting down,
as it were, and going back to the fine forms. Again
they rise out of that, rising for a certain period and
slowly going back to the cause. So with all life.
Each manifestation of life is coming up, and then
going back again. What goes down ? The form.
The form breaks to pieces, but the same form comes
up. In one sense the body even is immortal. In one
sense bodies and forms even are eternal. How ? Sup¬
pose we take a number of dice, and throw them.
Suppose the dice fall in this ratio — 6-5»3-4. We take
the dice up and throw them again, and again, and
again; there must come a time when the same number
will fall again; the same combination must come.
Again let them fall, and the same combination comes,
but after a long while. Now each particle, each atom,
that is in this universe I take for such a die, and these
are being thrown out, and combined, again and again.
This is one combination; all these forms before you.
Here is the form of a glass, a table, a pitcher of water,
all these things. This is one combination; the next
moment it will all break. But there must come a
time when exactly the same combination comes again,
when you will be here, and this form will be here, this
subject will be talked, and this pitcher will be here.
An infinite number of times this has been, and an


Digitized by Google



IMMORTALITY.


237


infinite number of times will be repeated. Thus far
with the physical forms. What do we find ? That
even the combination of physical forms is eternally
repeated.

A most interesting question that comes along with
this particle repetition , is the explanation of all such
questions as this. Some of you, perhaps, have seen a
man who can read the past life of another man, and
foretell the life of the future. How is it possible for
anyone to see what the future will be, until there is a
regulated future ? Effects of the past will recur in the
future, and we see that is so. But that does not affect
the soul. Think of one of these big Ferris wheels in
Chicago. These wheels are going on, and the little
rooms in the wheel are regularly coming one after the
other, one set of persons gets into these, and after they
have gone round the circle they get out, and a fresh
batch of people get in. Each one of these batches is
like one of these manifestations, from the lowest ani¬
mal to the highest man. This is the circular chain of
the Ferris wheel of nature; gigantic, infinite, and each
one of the bodies or forms is one of these little houses
or boxes, and fresh batches of souls are riding in them,
and going up higher and higher until they become per¬
fect, and come out of the wheel. But the wheel goes
on, ready for others. And so long as the body is in
the wheel, it can be absolutely and mathematically
foretold where U will go, but not of the soui. There¬
fore it is possible to read the past and the future of
nature absolutely and mathematically. We come to


238 IMMORTALITY.

this that there is recurrence of the same material phe-
nomena at certain periods, that the same combinations
have been going on through eternity. But that is not
immortality of the soul. No force can die, no matter
can be annihilated. What becomes of it ? It goes on
changing, forward and backward, until it comes back
to the source from which it came. There is no motion
in a straight line. Everything is in a circle, because a
straight line, infinitely produced, becomes a circle. If
that is the case, there cannot be eternal degeneration
for any soul. It cannot be. Everything must com¬
plete the circle, and come back to its source. What
are you and I and all these souls ? As we have seen
in our discussion of evolution and involution, you and
I must be part of the cosmic consciousness, cosmic
life, cosmic mind, which get involved, and we must
complete the circle and go back to this cosmic intelli¬
gence which is God. That very cosmic intelligence is
what the people call Lord, or God, or Christ, or Bud¬
dha, or Brahma, whom the materialists perceive as a
force, whom the agnostics perceive as that infinite,
inexpressible beyond. This is that infinite cosmic
life, cosmic intelligence, cosmic power, and we are all
parts of that. This is the second idea, yet this is not
sufficient; there will be still more doubts. It is very
good to say that there is no destruction for any force.
But all the forces that we see are combinations, and all
the forms that we see are combinations. This form is
a composition of several component parts, and so every
force that we see is similarly composite. If you take


Digitized by Google


IMMORTALITY. 239

the scientific idea of force, and call it the sum-total,
the resultant of several forces, what becomes of your
individuality ? Everything that is compound must
sooner or later get back to its component parts.
Whatever in this universe is the result of the combina¬
tion of matter or force, whatever is the result of com¬
bination, must sooner or later get back to its compo¬
nents, Whatever is the result of certain causes must
die, be destroyed. It gets dispersed, broken up,
resolved back into its components. Soul is not a
force; neither is it thought. It is the manufacturer of
thought, but not thought; it is the manufacturer of
the body, but not the body. Why so ? We see that
the body cannot be the soul. Why ? Because it is
not intelligent, A dead man is not intelligent, or a
piece of flesh in a butcher's shop. What do we mean
by intelligence ? That reactive power. We want to
go a little more deeply into it. Here is a pitcher; I
see it. What happens ? Rays of light from the
pitcher enter my eyes; they make a picture in my
retinee, and that impression comes to the brain. Yet
there is no vision. What the physiologists call the
sensory nerves carry this impression inward. But up
to this there is no reaction. The nerve centre in the
brain must carry the impression to the mind, and the
mind reacts, and as soon as this comes, the pitcher
flashes before it. To make it more clear, and give it
rather a commonplace example; suppose you are lis¬
tening to me intently, and a mosquito is sitting on the
tip of your nose, and giving you that pleasant sensa-


240


IMMORTALITY.


tion which mosquitoes can give; but you are so intent
on hearing me that you do not feel the mosquito at alh
What has happened ? The mosquito has bitten a cer¬
tain part of your skin, and certain nerves are there.
They have carried a certain sensation into the brain,
and the impression is there, but the mind, being other¬
wise occupied, does not react, so you are not aware of
the presence of the mosquito. When a new impression
comes in, if the mind does not react, we will not be
conscious of it, but when comes the reaction, along with
that will come the consciousness, and we feel, we see,
or we hear, and so forth. With this reaction comes
illumination, as the Sdnkhya philosophers call it. We
see that the body cannot illuminate, because we see
that in one case I did not feel, my attention was not
there, I did not feel the sensation at alL Cases have
been known where, under certain conditions, a man
who had never learned a particular language, was
found able to speak that language. Subsequent in¬
quiries proved that the man had, when a child, lived
among people who spoke that language, and the
impressions were left on his brain* These impressions
remained stored up there, until through some cause
the mind reacted, and illumination came, and then the
man was able to speak the language. This shows that
the mind alone is not sufficient, that the mind itself is
an instrument in the hands of some one* In the case
of that boy the mind was full of that language, yet he
did not know it, but later there came a time when he
did* It shows that there is someone besides the mind,


IMMORTALITY.


241


and when the boy was a baby that someone did not use
the power, but when he grew up, took advantage of
it, and used it. First, here is the body, second the
mind, or instrument of thought, and third behind this
mind is the Self of man. The Sanskrit word is Atman .
As modern philosophers have identified thought with
molecular changes in the brain they do not know how
to explain such a case, and they generally deny it.
The mind is intimately connected with the brain, and
dies every time the body changes. Self is the illumi¬
nator, and the mind is the instrument in its hands, and
through that instrument it gets hold of the external
instrument, and thus comes perception. The external
instrument gets hold of the impression, and carries it
to the organs, for you must remember always that the
eyes and ears are only receivers, it is the Internal
organs, the brain centres which act. In Sanskrit these
centres are called Indryias , and they carry sensations
to the mind, and the mind presents them further back
to other states of the mind, which in Sanskrit is called
Chitta y and there they are organised into will, and all
these things, which place it before the King of Kings
inside, the Ruler on His throne, the Self of man. He
then sees and gives His orders. Then the mind imme¬
diately acts on the organs, and the organs on the
external body. The real Percelver, the real Ruler, the
Governor, the Creator, the Manipulator of all this is
the Self of man. We have seen then that this Self of
man is not the body, and it is not thought. Neither
body nor thought. It cannot be a compound. Why


24 2


IMMORTALITY.


not ? Because everything that is a compound we must
either see or imagine. That which we cannot imagine
or perceive, that which we cannot bind together, that
is not force or matter, cause or effect, or causation,
cannot be a compound. The power of compound is so
far as our mental universe, our thought universe, takes
us. Beyond this it does not hold good. It is as far
as law will take it, and if it is anything beyond law, it
cannot be a compound at all. I think that is easy
enough to you, yet I will be more explicit. You see
what makes a compound. This glass is a compound,
in which the causes have combined and become the
effect. So these compound things can be only within
the circle of the law of causation, so far as the rules of
cause and effect go, so far can we have compounds and
combinations. Beyond that it is impossible to talk of
combinations, because no law holds good therein.
Beyond this they do not hold good, and law holds good
only in that universe which we see, feel, hear, imagine,
dream, and beyond that we cannot place any law, the
idea of law does not hold good beyond that. We have
seen, too, that that is our universe which we sense, or
imagine, and we sense what is in our direct percep¬
tion, and we imagine what is in our mind, therefore
what is beyond the body, is beyond the senses, and
what is beyond the mind is beyond the imagination,
and therefore is beyond our universe. Therefore be¬
yond the law of causation, is the free ruler, the Self.
Therefore the Self rules everything that is within the
law. This Self of man goes beyond the law, and


Digitized by Google



IMMORTALITY.


243


therefore must be free, cannot be any composition, or
the result of any composition, or the effect of any
cause. It will never die, because death is going back
to the component parts, and that which was never a
compound can never die. It will be sheer nonsense to
say it dies. It does not end here.

We are now treading on finer and finer ground.
Some of you perhaps will be frightened; we are tread¬
ing on very delicate ground. We have seen that this
Self, being beyond the little universe of matter and
force and thought, is a simple, and as a simple it can¬
not die, neither can it live. That which does not die,
cannot live also. So, what is death ? The obverse,
and life the reverse of the same coin. Life is another
name for death, and death for life. One particular
mode of manifestation is what we call life; another
particular mode of manifestation of the same thing is
what we call death. When the wave rises on the top
it is life; falls into the hollow and is death. If any¬
thing is beyond death, we naturally see it must also be
beyond life. I must remind you of the first conclu¬
sion, that this soul of man is one part of the cosmic
energy that exists, one part of God. We now come to
find that it is beyond life and death. You were never
born, and you will never die. What is this birth and
death that we see ? This belongs to the body, because
soul is omnipresent. How is that ? We are so many
people sitting here, and you say the soul is omnipres¬
ent, What is there to limit anything that is beyond
law, beyond causation ? This glass is limited; it is


*44


IMMORTALITY,


not omnipresent* because the surrounding matter forces
it down to that form* does not allow it to expand. It
is conditioned by everything around it; therefore it is
limited. But that which is beyond law* where there is
nobody to act upon it* how can that be limited ? It
must be omnipresent. You are everywhere in the
universe. How is it then that I am born and I am
going to die, and all that ? That is the talk of ignor¬
ance, hallucinations of the brain. You were neither
born, nor will die. You have had neither birth* nor
will have rebirth, nor life, nor incarnation, nor any¬
thing. What do you mean by coming and going ! AO
shallow nonsense. You are everywhere. Then what is
this coming and going ? It is a hallucination produced
by the change of this fine body, what you call the mind.
That is going on. Just a little speck of cloud passing
before the sky. As it moves on and on, it may create
the delusion that the sky moves. Sometimes you see
a cloud moving before the moon* and you think the
moon is moving. But it is the cloud. When you are
in a train you see that the land is flying, or when you
are in a boat, you think the water moves. In reality
you are neither going nor coming, nor born, or going
to be born, you are infinite, ever-present* beyond all
causation, ever free, never born, and never die. Such
a question is out of place; such a question is arrant
nonsense to ask. Because there was no birth; how
could there be any mortality ? You are the omnipres¬
ent beings of the universe.

One step more we will have to go to get a logical


IMMORTALITY.


245


conclusion. There is no half way house. You are
metaphysicians, and there is no crying quarter. If
then we are beyond all law, we must be omniscient,
ever blessed, all knowledge must be in us, and all
power and all blessedness. Certainly. You are the
omniscient, omnipresent being of the universe. But
of such beings can there be many ? Can there be a
hundred thousand millions of omnipresent beings ?
Certainly there cannot be. Then what becomes of all
of us ? You are only one; there is only one such Self,
and that one Self is you. Standing behind this little
nature is what we call the soul. There is one only
Being, one only existence, the ever blessed, the omni¬
present, the omniscient, the birthless, the deathless.
“ Through His control the sky expands, through His
control the air breathes, through His control the sun
shines, all lives are." And He is the background of
nature, He is the Reality that is in nature. He is the
background of your soul. Not only so, but you are
He. You are one with Him. Whenever there are
two, there is fear, there is danger, there is conflict,
there is strife. When it is all One, whom to hate,
with whom to struggle, when it is all He, with whom to
fight ? This explains the nature of life. This explains
the nature of being. This is perfection, and this is God.
As long as you see the many, you are under delusion.
“ In this world of many, he who sees that One in this ever
changing world, he who sees Him who never changes as
the Soul of his own soul, his existence, his own Self, he
is free, he is blessed, he has reached the goal/ 9 There-


Digitized by


Google



246


IMMORTALITY.


fore known that thou art He; thou art the God of this
universe, tat tvam asi , and all these various ideas that
“I am a man,”or a woman, or sick or healthy, or strong,
or weak, or I hate, or I love, or have a little power, or
more power, are but hallucinations. Away with them !
What makes you weak ? What makes you fear ? You
are the one being in the universe. What frightens
you ? Stand then and be free. Know that every
thought and word that weakens in this world is the
only evil that exists. Whatever makes men weak,
makes men fear, is the only evil that should be
shunned. What can frighten you ? If the suns come
down, the moons crumble into dust, systems after sys¬
tems are hurled into annihilation, what is that to you ?
Stand as a rock; you are indestructible. You are the
Self, the God of the universe. “ I am Existence
Absolute,— Bliss Absolute,— Knowledge Absolute, I
am He.” Say that, and as the lion breaks the little
cage of bullrushes and comes out, so break this chain
and be free for ever. What frightens you, what holds
you down ? It is only ignorance and delusion; noth¬
ing else can bind you. You are the pure One, the
ever blessed.

Silly fools tell you, you are sinners, and sit down in
a corner and weep. Foolishness, wickedness, down¬
right rascality to say you are sinners ! You are all
God. See you not God and call it man ? Therefore
if you dare, stand on that,— mould your whole life on
that. If a man cuts your throat do not say no, for
you are cutting your own throat. When you help a


Digitized by Google



IMMORTALITY.


247


poor man, do not feel the least pride. That is wor¬
ship for you, and not the cause of pride. Is not the
whole universe you ? Where is there anyone that is
not you ? You are the soul of this universe. You are
the sun, moon, and stars, it is you that is shining in
the land. The whole universe is you. Whom are you
going to hate, or to fight ? Know then that thou art
He, and model your whole life according to that, and
he who knows this and models his life according to it,
will no more grovel in darkness.


Digitized by Google


BHAKT1-YOGA


BT

SWAM! VIVEKANANDA
[*49]


Digitized by



Digitized by



BHAKTI-YOGA


“ He is the Soul of the Universe; He is immortal; His is the
Rulership; He is the All-Knowing, the All-Pervading, the
Protector of the Universe, the Eternal Ruler. None else is
there efficient to govern the World eternally. He who at
the beginning of creation projected Brahmd (*. e., the uni¬
versal consciousness), and Who delivered the Vedas unto
him — seeking liberation I go for refuge unto that Effulgent
One Whose light turns the understanding towards the
Atman." — S'wetds vatara-Upantshad, VI. 17—18.


Definition of BhaktL

Bhakti-yoga is a genuine, real search after the
Lord, a search beginning, continuing and ending
in Love. One single moment of the madness of ex¬
treme love to God brings us eternal freedom.
“ Bhakti" says Narada in his explanation of the
BhakH-AphoristnSy “is intense love to God.”— “ When
a man gets it he loves all, hates none; he becomes
satisfied forever.”— “ This love cannot be reduced to
any earthly benefit,” because as long as worldly desires
last that kind of love does not come. “ Bhakti is
greater than Karma, greater than Yoga, because these
are intended for an object in view, while Bhakti is its
own fruition, its own means and its own end.”

[251]


Digitized by


Google



252


BHAKTI-YOGA.


Bhakti has been the one constant theme of our sages.
Apart from the special writers on Bhakti , such as S 4 n-
dilya or Nirada, the great commentators on the Vydsa -
SAtras , evidently advocates of Knowledge (yndna) y
have also something very suggestive to say about
Love. Even when the commentator is anxious to
explain many, if not all, of the texts so as to make
them import a sort of dry knowledge, the sAtras y in the
chapter on worship especially, do not lend themselves
to be easily manipulated in that fashion.

There is not really so much difference between Knowl¬
edge ( yn&na ) and Love ( Bhakti ) as people sometimes
imagine. We shall see as we go on that in the end they
converge and meet at the same point. So also it is
with R&ja-yoga y which, when pursued as a means to
attain liberation, and not (as unfortunately it fre¬
quently becomes in the hands of charlatans and mys¬
tery-mongers) as an instrument to hoodwink the
unwary, leads us also to the same goal.

The one great advantage of Bhakti is that it is the
easiest, and the most natural way to reach the great
divine end in view; its great disadvantage is that in its
lower forms it oftentimes degenerates into hideous
fanaticism. The fanatical crew in Hinduism, or
Mahomedanism, or Christianity, have always been
almost exclusively recruited from these worshippers
on the lower planes of Bhakti . That singleness of
attachment ( Nishthd ) to a loved object, without which
no genuine love can grow, is very often also the cause
of the denunciation of everything else. All the weak


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI—YOGA,


*53


and undeveloped minds in any religion or country have
only one way of loving their own ideal, t\ by hating
every other ideal. Herein is the explanation of why
the same man who is so lovingly attached to his own
ideal of God, so devoted to his own ideal of religion,
becomes a howling fanatic as soon as he sees or hears
any thing of any other ideal. This kind of love is
somewhat like the canine instinct of guarding the mas¬
ter's property from intrusion; only even the dog's in¬
stinct is better than the reason of man, for the dog
never mistakes its master for an enemy in whatever
dress he may come before it. Again the fanatic loses
all power of judgment. Personal considerations are in
his case of such absorbing interest that to him it is no
question at all what a man says — whether it is right
or wrong; but the one thing he is always particularly
careful to know is, who says it The same man who
is kind, good, honest, and loving, to people of his own
opinion will not hesitate to do the vilest deeds, when
they are directed against persons beyond the pale of
his own religious brotherhood.

But this danger exists only in that stage of BkakH
which is called the preparatory (gauni). When BkakH
has become ripe and has passed into that form which
is called the supreme (para) no more is there any fear of
these hideous manifestations of fanaticism; that soul
which is overpowered by this higher form of BkakH is
too near the God of Love to become an instrument for
the diffusion of hatred.

It is not given to all of us to be harmonious in the


254


BHAKTI-YOGA,


building up of our characters in this life: yet we know
that that character is of the noblest type in which all
these three — knowledge and love and yoga — are har¬
moniously fused. Three things are necessary for a
bird to fly — the two wings and the tail as a rudder for
steering. Jndna (knowledge) is the one wing, Bhakti
(love) is the other, and Yoga is the tail that keeps up
the balance. For those who cannot pursue all these
three forms of worship together in harmony, and take
up, therefore, Bhakti alone as their way, it is necessary
always to remember that forms and ceremonials,
though absolutely necessary for the progressive soul*
have no other value than taking us on to that state in
which we feel the most intense love to God.

There is a little difference in opinion between the
teachers of Knowledge and those of Love, though
both admit the power of Bhakti . The yndnins hold
Bhakti to be an instrument of liberation, the Bkaktas
look upon it both as the instrument and the thing to be
attained. To my mind this is a distinction without
much difference. In fact, Bhakti , when used as an
instrument, really means a lower form of worship, and
the higher form becomes inseparable from the lower
form of realisation at a later stage. Each seems to lay
a great stress upon his own peculiar method of wor¬
ship, forgetting that with perfect love true knowledge
is bound to come even unsought, and that from perfect
knowledge true love is inseparable.

Bearing this in mind let us try to understand what
the great Vedantic commentators have to say on the


BHAKTI-YGGA,


255

subject. In explaining the S&tra Avrittirasakridupadei&l
Bhagavan Sankara says:—“Thus people say,— ‘He
is devoted to the king,—He is devoted to the Guru;
they say this of him who follows his Guru , and does so,
having that following as the one end in view." Simi¬
larly they say — 4 The loving wife meditates on her
loving husband; * here also a kind of eager and con¬
tinuous remembrance is meant / 1 This is devotion
according to Sankara,

“Meditation again is a constant remembrance (of
the thing meditated upon) flowing like an unbroken
stream of oil poured out from one vessel to another.
When this kind of remembering has been attained (in
relation to God) all bondages break. Thus it is spoken
of in the scriptures regarding constant remembering
as a means to liberation. This remembering again is
of the same form as seeing, because it is of the same
meaning, as in the passage, 4 When He who is far and
near is seen the bonds of the heart are broken, all
doubts vanish, and all effects of work disappear.'
(He who is near can be seen, but he who is far can
only be remembered. Nevertheless the scripture says
that we have to see Him who is near as well as Him
who is far, thereby indicating to us that the above
kind of remembering is as good as string.) 11 This
remembrance when exalted assumes the same form as

seeing ..Worship is constant remembering as may

be seen from the essential texts of scriptures. Know¬
ing, which is the same as repeated worship, has been
described as constant remembering, _Thus the


BH AKTI -YOGA.


256


memory, which has attained to the height of what is as
good as direct perception, is spoken of in the Sruti as
a means of liberation. ' This Atman is not to be
reached through various sciences, nor by intellect, nor
by much study of the Vedas. Whomsoever this Atman
desires by him is the Atman attained, unto him this
Atman discovers himself/ Here after saying that
mere hearing, thinking, and meditating are not the
means of attaining this Atman f it is said, 1 Whom this
Atman desires by him the Atman is attained/ The
extremely beloved is desired; by whomsoever this
Atman is extremely beloved, he becomes the most
beloved of the Atman. So that this beloved may
attain the Atman f the Lord himself helps. For it has
been said by the Lord; ' Those who are constantly

attached to me and worship me with love — I give that
direction to their will by which they come to me/
Therefore it is said that, to whomsoever this remem¬
bering, which is of the same form as direct perception,
is very dear, because it is dear to the Object of such
memory-perception, he is desired by the Supreme
Atman } by him the Supreme Atman is attained. This
constant remembrance is denoted by the word BhakU'*

So says Bhagavdn Rdmdnuja in his commentary on
the Sdtra Athato Brahma Jijn&sa.

In commenting on the Sdtra of Patanjali ffoara
Pranidkdnddvd — i. e., 'By the worship of the 8u^
preme Lord, 1 —Bhoja says, ‘‘ Pranidhdna is that
sort of Bkakti in which, without seeking results, such
as sense-enjoyments, etc., all works are dedicated to


BHAKTI-YOGA.


257


that Teacher of teachers/’ Also Bhagav&n Vyasa,
when commenting on the same, defines Pranidhdna as
“the form of Bhakti by which the mercy of the
Supreme Lord comes to the yogin and blesses him by
granting him his desires/* According to Sindilya,
“Bhakti is intense Love to God.” The best defini¬
tion is, however, that given by the king of Bhaktas ,
Prahlada: “ That deathless love which the ignorant
have for the fleeting objects of the senses — as I keep
meditating on Thee — may not that (sort of intense)
love (for Thee) slip away from my heart.” Love! For
whom ? For the Supreme Lord livara. Love for any
other being, however great, can not be Bahkti; for, as
R&manuja says in his Srt Bhdshya quoting an ancient
Aehdrya , /. e. t a great teacher. “ From Brahmi to a
clump of grass all things that live in the world are
slaves of birth and death caused by Karma; therefore
they cannot be helpful as objects of meditation, because
they are all in ignorance and subject to change.” In
commenting on the word anurakti used by Sindilya,
the commentator SvapneSvara says that it means anti,
after, and rakti , attachment; /. e. y the attachment
which comes after the knowledge of the nature and
glory of God; else a blind attachment to any one,
e. g. y to wife or children would be Bhakti . We plainly
see, therefore, that Bhakti is a series or succession of
mental efforts at religious realisation beginning with
ordinary worship and ending in supremely intense love
for the fivara .

*7


Digitized by Google



258 BHAKTI-YOGA.

The Philosophy of fsvar*.

Who is f&varat —“From Whom is the birth, con*
tinuation and dissolution of the universe / 9 — He
is f&vara —“the Eternal, the Pure, the Ever Free,
the Almighty, the All-Knowing, the All-Merciful, the
Teacher of all teachers ; 99 and above all — “He,
the Lord is, of His own nature, inexpressible Love."

These certainly are the definitions of a personal
God. Are there then two Gods ? The “ Not this,
Not this / 9 the Satchit-dnanda , the Existence-Knowl¬
edge-Bliss, of the philosopher, and this God of Love
of the Bhakta t No, it is the same Satchit-dnanda who
is also the God of Love, the impersonal and personal
in one. It has always to be understood that the per¬
sonal God worshipped by the Bhakta is not separate
or different from the Brahman . All is Brahman , the
One without a second: only the Brahman , as unity or
absolute, is too much of an abstraction to be loved and
worshipped; so the Bhakta chooses the relative aspect
of Brahman, , that is, l&vara , the Supreme Ruler. To
use a simile: Brahman is as the clay or substance out
of which an infinite variety of articles are fashioned.
As clay, they are all one; but form or manifestation
differentiates them. Before ever one of them was
made, they all existed potentially in the clay; and, of
course, they are identical substantially; but when
formed, and so long as the form remains, they are
separate and different; the clay-mouse can never be¬
come a clay-elephant, because, as manifestations, form


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA,


259


alone makes them what they are, though as unformed
clay they are all one. fivara is the highest manifes¬
tation of the absolute reality, or, in other words, the
highest possible reading of the Absolute by the human
mind. Creation is eternal, and so also is livara ,

In the fourth pdda of the fourth chapter of his Sdtras ,
after stating the almost infinite power and knowledge
which will come to the liberated soul after the attain¬
ment of Moksha , Vyasa makes the remark, in an aphor¬
ism, that none, however, will get the power of creating,
ruling, and dissolving the universe, because that be¬
longs to God alone. In explaining the Sdtr@ it is easy
for the dualistic commentators to shew how it is ever
impossible for a subordinate soul, jfiva t to have the
infinite power and total independence of God. The
thorough dualistic commentator Madkv&ck&rya deals
with this passage in his usual summary method by
quoting a verse from the Vdr&ha-Pur&na.

In explaining this aphorism the commentator, Rdm-
dnuja , says: — This doubt being raised, whether among
the powers of the liberated souls is included that unique
power of the Supreme One, that is, of creation, etc.,
of the universe and even the Lordship of all, or
whether, without that, the glory of the liberated con¬
sists only in the direct perception of the Supreme One,
we get as an argument the following: It is reasonable
that the liberated get the Lordship of the universe,
because the scriptures say, 1 He attains extreme same¬
ness with the Pure One/ because, as the scriptures
say, he attains to extreme sameness with the Supreme



26 o


BHAKTI-YOGA.


One and all his desires are realized. Now extreme
sameness and realization of all desires cannot be
attained without the unique power of the Supreme
Lord, namely that of governing the universe. There¬
fore, to attain the realization of all desires and the ex¬
treme sameness with the Supreme, we must all admit
that the liberated get the power of ruling the whole
universe. To this we reply that the liberated get all
the powers except that of ruling the universe. Ruling
the universe is guiding the form and the life and the
desires of all the sentient and the non-sentient beings,
excepting the liberated ones from whom all that veils
His true nature has been removed, and who enjoy the
glory of the unobstructed perception of the Brahman.
This is proved from the scriptural text, * From whom
all these things are born, by whom all that are born
live, unto whom they, departing, return; ask about It,
That is Brahman .' If this quality of ruling the uni¬
verse be a quality common even to the liberated, then
this text would not apply as a definition of Brahman ,
defining Him through His rulership of the universe.
The uncommon alone has to be specially defined;
therefore,— ‘My beloved boy, alone, in the beginning,
there existed the One without a second. That saw
and felt I will give birth to the many. That projected
heat.’—‘ Brahman , indeed, alone existed in the begin¬
ning. That One evolved. That projected a blessed
form, the Kshatra. All these gods are Kshatras:
Varuna , Soma , Rudra, Parjanya , Yama, Mrityu ,
lidna .’— 'Atman, indeed, existed alone in the begin-


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


26l


ning; nothing else vibrated; He, seeing, projected the
world; He projected the world after.’— ‘Alone Ndrd -
yana existed; neither Brahmd nor lidna, nor the
Dydvd-Pritkvt , nor the stars, nor water, nor fire, nor
Soma nor the Sun. He did not take pleasure alone.
He after His meditation had one daughter, the ten
organs, etc./—in texts like these and others as,—
‘ Who living in the earth is separate from the earth,
who living in the Atman , etc.,* the Srutis speak of the
Supreme One as the subject of the work of ruling the

universe.Nor in these descriptions of the ruling of

the universe is there any position of the liberated soul
by which such a soul may have the ruling of the
universe ascribed to it. In explaining the next Sdtrd ,
Ram&nuja says, “ If you say it is not so, because there
are direct texts in the Vedas in evidence to the con¬
trary, these texts refer to the glory of the liberated in
the spheres of the subordinate deities.** This also is
an easy solution of the difficulty. Although the system
of Ram&nuja admits the unity of the total, within that
totality of existence there are, according to him, eter¬
nal differences. Therefore, for all practical purposes,
this system also being dualistic, it was easy for Rama¬
nuja to keep up the distinction between the personal
soul and the personal God very clearly.

We will now try to understand what the great repre¬
sentative of the Adwaita School has got to say on the
point. We shall see how the Adwaita system main¬
tains all the hopes and aspirations of the dualist intact,
and at the same time propounds its own solution of the


Digitized by


Google


262


BHAKTI-YOGA.


problem, in consonance with the high destiny of divine
humanity. Those, who aspire to retain their individual
mind even after liberation, and to remain distinct will
have ample opportunity of realising their aspiration
and enjoy the blessing of the qualified Brahman.
These are they who have been spoken of in the Bhdga -
vata Purdna thus: — ”0 king, such are the glorious
qualities of the Lord that the sages whose only pleas¬
ure is in the Self, and from whom all bondages have
fallen off, even they love the Omni-Present with the
love that is for love’s sake.” These are they who are
spoken of by the Sdnkkyas as getting merged in nature
in this cycle so that, after attaining perfection, they
may come out in the next as lords of world-systems.
But none of these ever becomes equal to God (// vara ).
Those who attain to that state where there is neither
creation, nor created, nor creator, where there is
neither knower, nor knowable, nor knowledge, where
there is neither /, nor thou , nor he y where there is
neither subject, nor object, nor relation, “there, who
is seen by whom ? ”—such persons have gone beyond
everything, beyond ” where words cannot go nor
mind,” gone to that which the Srutts declare as ” Not
this, Not this;” but for those who cannot, or will not
reach this state, there will inevitably remain the tri¬
une vision of the one undifferentiated Brahman as
nature, soul, and the interpenetrating sustainer of
both — Iivara . So, when Prahldda forgot himself, he
found neither the universe nor its cause; all was to
him one Infinite, undifferentiated by name and form;


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


263


but as soon as he remembered that he was Prahldda
there was the universe before him and with it the Lord
of the universe — “ the repository of an infinite num¬
ber of blessed qualities.” So it was with the blessed
Gopts. So long as they had lost sense of their own
personal identity and individuality, they were all
KrishnaSy and when they began again to think of him
as the One to be worshipped, then they were Gcpts
again, and immediately “ Unto them appeared Krishna
with smile on his lotus face, clad in yellow robes and
having garlands on, the embodied conqueror (in
beauty) of the god of love.” (Bhdgavata Pur And).

Now to go back to our Achdrya Sankara : ” Those,”
he says, “ who by worshipping the qualified Brahman
attain conjunction with the Supreme Ruler preserving
their own mind — is their glory limited or unlimited ?
This doubt arising, we get as an argument:—Their
glory should be unlimited, because of the scriptural
texts ‘ They attain their own kingdom*—‘To him all
the gods offer worship*—‘Their desires are fulfilled in
all the worlds.’ As an answer to this, Vydsd writes
‘ Without the power of ruling the universe.’ Barring
the power of creation, etc., of the universe, the other
powers such as animdy etc., are acquired by the liber¬
ated. As to ruling the universe, that belongs to the
eternally perfect Iivara. Why ? Because He is the
subject of all the scriptural texts as regards creation,
etc., and the liberated souls are not mentioned in any
connection with creation, etc. The Supreme Lord,
indeed, is alone engaged in ruling the universe. The


Digitized by


Google



264


BHAKTI- YOGA.


texts as to creation, etc., all point to Him. Also there
is given the adjective " ever perfect.** Also the scrip¬
tures say that the powers animd , etc., of others are
from the search after, and the worship of, God.
Therefore they have no place in the ruling of the uni¬
verse. Again on account of their possessing their own
minds it is possible that their wills may differ, and that,
whilst one desires creation, another may desire destruc¬
tion. The only way of avoiding this conflict is to make
all wills subordinate to some one will. Therefore the
conclusion is that the wills of the liberated are depend¬
ent on the will of the Supreme Ruler."

Bhakti, then, can be directed towards Brahman , only
in his personal aspect.— " The way is more difficult for
those, whose mind is attached to the Absolute!"
Bhakti has to float on smoothly with the current of our
nature. True it is that we cannot have any idea of the
Brahman which is not anthropomorphic, but is it not
equally true of everything we know ? The greatest
psychologist the world has ever known, Bhagav&n
Kapila, demonstrated ages ago that human conscious¬
ness is one of the elements in the make-up of all the
objects of our perception and conception, internal as
well as external. Beginning with our own bodies and
going up to Itvara we may see that every object of our
perception is this consciousness plus a something else,
whatever that may be; and this unavoidable mixture is
what we ordinarily think of as reality. Indeed it is,
and ever will be, all of the reality that is possible for
the human mind to know. Therefore to say that


Digitized by


Gooq



BHAKTI-YOGA.


265


Hvara is unreal, because He is anthropomorphic, is
sheer nonsense- It sounds very much like the occi¬
dental squabble on idealism and realism, which fearful-
looking quarrel has for its foundation a mere play on
the word real . The idea of llvara covers all the
ground ever denoted and connoted by the word real,
and fivara is as much real as anything else in the uni¬
verse; and after alt the word real means nothing more
than what has now been pointed out. Such is our philo¬
sophical conception of llvara.

Spiritual Realisation, the Aim of Bhakti-Yoga.

To the Bhakta these dry details are necessary only
to strengthen his will; beyond that they are of no use
to him. For he is treading on a path which is fitted
very soon to lead him beyond the hazy and turbulent
regions of reason, to lead him to the realm of realisa¬
tion, He, soon, through the mercy of the Lord,
reaches a plane where pedantic and powerless reason is
left far behind, and the mere intellectual groping
through the dark gives place to the daylight of direct
perception. He no more reasons and believes, he
almost perceives. He no more argues, he senses.
And is not this seeing God, and feeling God, and
enjoying God, higher than everything else ? Nay,
Bkaktas have not been wanting who have maintained
that it is higher than even Moksha— liberation. And
is it not also the highest utility ? There are people —
and a good many of them, too — in the world who are


266


BHAKTI-YOGA.


convinced that only that is of use and utility which
brings to man creature-comforts. Even Religion,
God, Eternity, Soul, none of these is of any use to
them, as they do not bring them money or physical
comfort. To such all those things, which do not
gratify the senses and appease the appetites, are of no
utility. In every mind, utility, however, is condi¬
tioned by its own peculiar wants. To men, therefore,
who never rise higher than eating, drinking, begetting
progeny, and dying, the only gain is in sense enjoy¬
ments; and they must wait and go through many more
births and re-incarnations to learn to feel even the
faintest necessity for anything higher. But those to
whom the eternal interests of the soul are of much
higher value than the fleeting interests of this mundane
life, to whom the gratification of the senses is but like
the thoughtless play of the baby, to them God and the
love of God form the highest and the only utility of
human existence. Thank God there are some such still
living in this world of too much worldliness.

Bhakti-Yoga y as we have said, is divided into the
gaunt or the preparatory, and the pard or the supreme
forms. We shall find, as we go on, how, in the pre¬
paratory stage, we unavoidably stand in need of many
concrete helps to enable us to get on; and, indeed, the
mythological and symbological parts of all religions are
natural growths which early environ the aspiring soul
and help it God ward. It is also a significant fact that
spiritual giants have been produced only in those sys¬
tems of religion where there is an exuberant growth of


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


267


rich mythology and ritualism. The dry fanatical
forms of religion which attempt to eradicate all that is
poetical, all that is beautiful and sublime, all that
gives a firm grasp to the infant mind tottering in its
Godward way — the forms which attempt to break
down the very ridge poles of the spiritual roof, and in
their ignorant and superstitious conceptions of truth
try to drive away all that is life-giving, all that fur¬
nishes the formative material to the spiritual plant
growing in the human soul — such forms of religion
too soon find that all of what is left to them is but an
empty shell, a contentless frame of words and sophis¬
try, with perhaps a little flavour of a kind of social
scavengering or the so-called spirit of reform. The
vast mass of those whose religion is like this are con¬
scious or unconscious materialists — the end and aim
of their lives here and hereafter being enjoyment,
which, indeed, is to them the alpha and the omega of
human life. Work like street-cleaning and scavenger¬
ing intended for the material comfort of man is,
according to them, the “be-all** and “end-air* of
human existence; and the sooner the followers of this
curious mixture of ignorance and fanaticism come out
in their true colors, and join, as they well deserve to
do, the ranks of atheists and materialists, the better
will it be for the world. One ounce of the practice of
righteousness and of spiritual self-realisation out¬
weighs tons and tons of frothy talk and nonsensical
sentiments. Show us one, but one, gigantic spiritual
genius growing out of all this dry dust of ignorance


Digitized by


Google



268


BHAKTI-YOGA.


and fanaticism; and if you cannot, close your mouths,
open the windows of your hearts to the clear light of
truth, and sit like children at the feet of those who
know what they are talking about — the sages of
India. Let us then listen attentively to what they say.

The Heed of a Guru.

Every soul is destined to be perfect, and every being,
in the end, will attain the state of perfection. What¬
ever we are now, is the result of our acts and thoughts
in the past; and whatever we shall be in the future,
will be the result of what we think and do now. But
this, our shaping of our own destinies, does not pre¬
clude our receiving help from outside; nay, in the vast
majority of cases such help is absolutely necessary.
When it comes, the higher powers and possibilities of
the soul are quickened, spiritual life is awakened,
growth is animated, and man becomes holy and perfect
in the end.

This quickening impulse cannot be derived from
books. The soul can only receive impulses from
another soul, and from nothing else. We may study
books all our lives, we may become very intellectual;
but, in the end, we find that we have not developed at
all spiritually. It is not true that a high order of intel¬
lectual development always goes hand in hand with a
proportionate development of the spiritual side in man.
In studying books we are sometimes deluded into
thinking that thereby we are being spiritually helped;


Digitized by


Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


269


but, if we analyse the effect of the study of books on
ourselves, we shall find that, at the utmost, it is only
our intellect that derived profit from such studies, but
not .our inner spirit. This insufficiency of books to
quicken spiritual growth is the reason why, although
almost every one of us can speak most wonderfully on
spiritual matters, when it comes to action and the
living of a truly spiritual life, we find ourselves so
awfully deficient. To quicken the spirit, the impulse
must come from another soul.

The person from whose soul such impulse comes is
called the Guru — the teacher; and the person to
whose soul the impulse is conveyed is called the
&ishya —the student. To convey such an impulse, to
any soul, in the first place, the soul from which it pro¬
ceeds must possess the power of transmitting it, as it
were to another; and, in the second place, the soul to
which it is transmitted must be fit to receive it. The
seed must be a living seed, and the field must be
ready ploughed; and when both these conditions are
fulfilled a wonderful growth of genuine religion takes
place. “ The true preacher of religion has to be of
wonderful capabilities, and clever shall his hearer
be M —and when both of these are really wonderful
and extraordinary, then will a splendid spiritual
awakening result, and not otherwise. Such alone are
the real teachers, and such alone are also the real stu¬
dents, the real aspirants. All others are only playing
with spirituality. They have just a little curiosity
awakened, just a little intellectual aspiration kindled


Digitized by


oogle



270


BHAKTI-YOGA.


in them, but are merely standing on the outward fringe
of the horizon of religion. There is, no doubt, some
value even in that, as it may, in course of time, result,
in the awakening of a real thirst for religion; and it is
a mysterious law of nature that, as soon as the field is
ready, the seed must and does come, as soon as the
soul earnestly desires to have religion, the transmitter
of the religious force must and does appear to help that
soul. When the power that attracts the light of relig¬
ion in the receiving soul is full and strong, the power
which answers to that attraction and sends in light
does come as a matter of course.

There are, however, certain great dangers in the
way. There is, for instance, the danger to the receiv¬
ing soul of its mistaking momentary emotions for real
religious yearning. We may study that in ourselves.
Many a time in our lives, somebody dies whom we
loved; we receive a blow; we feel that the world is
slipping between our fingers, that we want something
surer and higher, and that we must become religious.
In a few days that wave of feeling has passed away,
and we are left stranded just where we were before.
We are all of us often mistaking such impulses for real
thirst after religion; but as long as these momentary
emotions a^e thus mistaken, that continuous, real,
craving of the soul for religion will not come, and we
can not find the true transmitter of spirituality into our
nature. So, whenever we are tempted to complain of
our search after the truth, that we desire so much,
proving vain, instead of so complaining, our first duty


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


271


ought to be to look into our own souls, and find
whether the craving in the heart is reaL Then in the
vast majority of cases it would be discovered that we
were not fit for receiving the truth, that there was no
real thirst for spirituality*

There are still greater dangers in regard to the
transmitter f the Guru. There are many who, though
immersed in ignorance, yet, in the pride of their
hearts, fancy they know everything, and not only do
not stop there, but offer to take others on their shoul¬
ders; and thus the blind leading the blind, both fall
into the ditch.—*' Fools dwelling in darkness, wise in
their own conceit, and puffed up with vain knowledge,
go round and round staggering to and fro, like blind
men led by the blind/*— {Mund. Up., 1 . 2 . 8). The
world is full of these. Every one wants to be a
teacher, every beggar wants to make a gift of a million
dollars! Just as these beggars are ridiculous, scare
these teachers.

Qualifications of the Aspirant and the Teacher.

How are we to know a teacher then ? The sun re¬
quires no torch to make him visible, we need not light
a candle in order to see him. When the sun rises, we
instinctively become aware of the fact, and when a
teacher of men comes to help us, the sou) will instinc¬
tively know that truth has already begun to shine upon
it. Truth stands on its own evidence, it does not re¬
quire any other testimony to prove it true, it is self-
effulgent. It penetrates into the innermost corners of


272


BHAKTI-YOGA.


our nature, and in its presence the whole universe
stands up and says, " This is truth.” The teachers
whose wisdom and truth shine like the light of the sun
are the very greatest the world has known, and they
are worshipped as gods by the major portion of man¬
kind. But we may get help from comparatively lesser
ones also; only we ourselves do not possess intuition
enough to judge well of the man from whom we
receive teaching and guidance; so there ought to be
certain tests, certain conditions, for the teacher to
satisfy, as there are also for the taught.

The conditions necessary for the taught are purity,
a real thirst after knowledge, and perseverance. No
impure soul can be really religious. Purity in thought,
speech, and act, is absolutely necessary for one to be
religious. As to the thirst after knowledge, it is an
old law that we all get whatever we want. None of
us can get anything other than what we fix our hearts
upon. To pant for religion truly is a very difficult
thing, not at all so easy as we generally imagine.
Hearing religious talks, reading religious books, is no
proof yet of a real want felt in the heart; there must
be a continuous struggle, a constant fight, an unre¬
mitting grappling with our lower nature, till the higher
want is actually felt and the victory is achieved. It is
not a question of one or two days, of years, or of lives;
the struggle may have to go on for hundreds of life
times. The success sometimes may come immediately,
but we must be ready to wait patiently even for what
may look like an infinite length of time. The student


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA. 273

who sets out with such a spirit of perseverance will
surely find success and realisation at last.

In regard to the teacher, we must see that he knows
the spirit of the scriptures. The whole world reads
Bibles, Vedas, and Q’urans; but they are all only
words, syntax, etymology, philology, the dry bones of
religion. The teacher who deals too much in words,
and allows the mind to be carried away by the force of
words, loses the spirit. It is the knowledge of the
spirit of the scriptures alone that constitutes the true
religious teacher. The network of the words of the
scriptures is like a huge forest in which the human
mind often loses itself and finds no way out. “ The
network of words is a big forest; it is the cause of
curious wanderings.** The various methods of joining
words, the various methods of speaking in beautiful
language, the various methods of explaining the diction
of the scriptures, are only for the disputations and
enjoyment of the learned; they do not conduce to the
development of spiritual conception. Those who
employ such methods to impart religion to others are
only desirous to show off their learning, so that the
world may praise them as great scholars. You will
find that no one of the great teachers of the world ever
went into these various explanations of the texts; there
is with them no attempt at “text torturing,** no eternal
playing upon the meaning of words and their roots.
Yet they nobly taught, while others who have nothing
to teach, have taken up a word sometimes, and written
a three volume book on its origin, on the man who
x8


Digitized by Google



274


BHAKTI-YOGA.


used it first, and on what that man was accustomed to
eat, and how long he slept and so on.

Bhagavdn Rdmakrishna used to tell a story of some
men who went into a mango orchard and busied them¬
selves in counting the leaves, the twigs, and the
branches, examining their color, comparing their size,
and noting down everything most carefully, and then
got up a learned discussion on each of these topics
which were undoubtedly highly interesting to them.
But one of them, more sensible than the others, did not
care for all these things, and instead thereof, began
to eat the mango fruit. And was he not wise? So
leave this counting of leaves and twigs and this note¬
taking to others. This kind of work has its proper
place, but not here in the spiritual domain. You can
never once see a strong spiritual man among these
"leaf-counters.” Religion, the highest aim, the
highest glory of man, does not require so much labour
as leaf-counting. If you want to be a Bhakta it is not
at all necessary for you to know where Krishna was
born, in MathurA or in Vraja , what he was doing,
or just the exact date on which he pronounced the
teachings of the Gttd. You only require to feel the
craving for the beautiful lessons of duty and love in
the Gttd . All the other particulars about it and its
author are for the enjoyment of the learned. Let them
have what they desire. Say ii S*dntih S % Antih " to their
learned controversies, and let us eat the mangoes.

The second condition necessary in the teacher is—
sinlessness. The question is often asked, "Why should


Digitized by


Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


275


we look into the character and personality of a teacher?
We have only to judge of what he says, and take that
up.” This is not right. If a man wants to teach me
something of dynamics or chemistry, or any other
physical science, he may be any thing he likes, because
what the physical sciences require, is merely an intel¬
lectual equipment; but in the spiritual sciences it is
impossible from first to last that there can be any
spiritual light in the soul that is impure. What religion
can an impure man teach? The situ qua non of acquir¬
ing spiritual truth for one’s self, or for imparting it to
others, is the purity of heart and soul. A vision of
God, or a glimpse of the beyond, never comes until
the soul is pure. Hence with the teacher of religion
we must see first what he is y and then what he says.
He must be perfectly pure, and then alone comes the
value of his words, because he is only then the true
“transmitter.” What can he transmit, if he has not
spiritual power in himself ? There must be the worthy
vibration of spirituality in the mind of the teacher so
that it may be sympathetically conveyed to the mind
of the taught. The function of the teacher is indeed
an affair of the transference of something, and not one
of a mere stimulation of the existing intellectual or
other faculties in the taught. Something real and
appreciable as an influence comes from the teacher
and goes to the taught. Therefore the teacher must
be pure.

The third condition is in regard to the motive. The
teacher must not teach with any ulterior selfish motive,


Digitized by Google



2/6


BHAKTI-YOGA.


for money, name, or fame; his work must be simply
out of love, out of pure love for mankind at large. The
only medium through which spiritual force can be
transmitted is love. Any selfish motive, such as the
desire for gain or for name, will immediately destroy
this conveying medium. God is love, and only he who
has known God as love can be a teacher of godliness
and God to man.

When you see that in your teacher these conditions
are all fulfilled, you are safe; if they are not, it is
unsafe to allow yourself to be taught by him, for there
is the great danger that, if he cannot convey goodness
into your heart, he may convey wickedness* This
danger must by all means ’be guarded against ,# He
who is learned, sinless and unpolluted by lust is the
greatest knower of the Brahman"

From what has been said, it naturally follows that
we cannot be taught to love, appreciate, and assimilate
religion everywhere and by everybody. The “sermon
in stones, books in running brooks, and good in every¬
thing" is all very true as a poetical figure: but no man
can impart to another a single grain of truth unless he
has the undeveloped germs of it in himself. To whom
do the stones and brooks preach sermons? To the
human soul the lotus of whose inner holy shrine is
already quick with life. And the light which causes
the beautiful opening out of this lotus comes always
from the good and wise teacher. When the heart has
thus been opened, it becomes fit to receive teaching
from the stones, or the brooks, or the stars, or the sun,



Digitizes^


BHAKTI-YOGA.


277


or the moon, or from anything which has its existence
in our divine universe; but the unopened heart will see
in them nothing but mere stones or mere brooks.
A blind man may go to a museum, but he will not profit
by it in any way; his eyes must be opened first, and
then alone he will be able to learn what the things in
the museum can teach.

This eye-opener of the aspirant after religion is the
teacher. With the teacher, therefore, our relation¬
ship is the same as that between an ancestor and his
descendant. Without faith, humility, submission, and
veneration in our hearts to our religious teacher, there
can not be any growth of religion- in us; and it is a
significant fact that, where this kind of relation between
the teacher and the taught prevails, there alone gigantic
spiritual men are growing, while in those countries
which have neglected to keep up this kind of relation, the
religious teacher has become a mere lecturer, the teacher
expecting his five dollars, and the person taught expect¬
ing his brain to be filled with the teacher's words, and
each going his own way after this much is done. Under
such circumstances spirituality becomes almost an
unknown quantity. There is none to transmit it, and
none to have it transmitted to. Religion with such
people becomes business, they think they can obtain it
with their dollars. Would to God that religion could
be obtained so easily! But unfortunately it cannot.

Religion, which is the highest knowledge and the
highest wisdom, cannot be bought, nor can it be
acquired from books. You may thrust your head into


Digitized by Google



278


BHAKTI-YOGA.


all the corners of the world, you may explore the Hima¬
layas, the Alps, and the Caucasus, you may sound the
bottom of the sea, and pry into every nook of Thibet
and the desert of Gobi, you will not find it any where,
until your heart is ready for receiving it, and your
teacher has come. And when that divinely appointed
teacher comes, serve him with childlike confidence and
simplicity, freely open your heart to his influence, and
see in him God manifested. Those who come to seek
truth with such a spirit of love and veneration, to them
the Lord of Truth reveals the most wonderful things
regarding Truth, Goodness, and Beauty.

Incarnate Teachers and Incarnation.

Wherever His name is spoken, that very place is holy.
How much more so is the man who speaks His name,
and with what veneration ought we to approach that
man out of whom comes to us spiritual truth? Such
great teachers of spiritual truth are indeed very few in
number in this world, but the world is never altogether
without them. The moment it is absolutely bereft of
these, it becomes a hideous hell and hastens on to its
destruction. They are always the fairest flowers of
human life,— the ocean of mercy without any motive.

* ‘Know the Guru to be Me,” says §rt Krishna in the
Gttd.

Higher and nobler than all ordinary ones are another
set of teachers, Avatdras of I&vara in the world.
They can transmit spirituality with a touch, even with


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA. 279

a mere wish. The lowest and the most degraded
characters become in one second saints at their com¬
mand. They are the Teachers of all teachers, the
highest manifestations of God through man. We can¬
not see God except through them. We cannot help
worshipping them; and indeed they are the only ones
whom we are bound to worship.

No man can really see God except through these
human manifestations. If we try to see God otherwise,
we make for ourselves a hideous caricature of Him,
and believe the caricature to be no worse than the
original. There is a story of an ignorant man who was
asked to make an image of the God 6iva, and who,
after days of hard struggle, manufactured only the
image of a monkey! So, whenever we try to think of
God as He is in His absolute perfection, we invariably
meet with the most miserable failure; because as long
as we are men we cannot conceive Him as anything
higher than man. The time will come when we shall
transcend our human nature, and know Him as He is;
but as long as we are men we must worship Him in
man and as man. Talk as you may, try as you may,
you cannot think of God except as a man. You may
deliver great intellectual discourses on God and all
things under the sun, become very great rationalists
and prove to your satisfaction that all these accounts
of the Avatdras of God as man are nonsense. But let
us come for a moment to practical common sense. What
is there behind this kind of remarkable intellect? Zero,
nothing, simply so much froth. When next you hear


Digitized by Google



280


BHAKTI-YOGA.


a man delivering a great intellectual lecture against
this worship of the Avaidras of God, get hold of him
and ask him what his idea of God is, what he knows by
* ‘omnipotence , 99 “omnipresence,”and all similar terms,
beyond the spelling of the words. He really means
nothing by them; he cannot formulate as their meaning
any idea unaffected by his own human nature; he is no
better off in this matter than the man in the street who
has not read a single book. That man in the street,
however, is quiet and does not disturb the peace of the
world; while this big talker creates disturbance and
misery among mankind. Religion is after all realisa¬
tion, and we must make the sharpest distinction between
talk and intuitive experience. What we experience in
the depths of our souls is realisation. Nothing indeed
is so uncommon as common sense in regard to this
matter.

By our present constitution we are limited and bound
to see God as man. If, for instance, the buffaloes
want to worship God, they will, in keeping with their
own nature, see Him as a huge buffalo; if a fish wants
to worship God, it will have to form an idea of Him as
a big fish; and man has to think of Him as man. And
these various conceptions are not due to morbidly
active imagination. Man, the buffalo, and the fish, all
may be supposed to represent so many different vessels
so to say. All these vessels go to the sea of God to
get filled with water, each according to its own shape
and capacity; in the man the water takes the shape of
man, in the buffalo the shape of a buffalo, and in the


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


281


fish the shape of the fish. In each of these vessels
there is the same water of the sea of God. When men
see Him, they see Him as man, and the animals, if
they have any conception of God at all, must see Him
as animal, each according to its own ideal. So we
cannot help seeing God as man, and, therefore, we are
bound to worship Him as man. There is no other way.

Two kinds of men do not worship God as man — the
human brute who has no religion, and the Parama -
hamsa , who has risen beyond all the weaknesses of
humanity and has transcended the limits of his own
human nature. To him all nature has become his own
Self. He alone can worship God as He is. Here too,
as in all other cases, the two extremes meet. The
extreme of ignorance and the other extreme of knowl¬
edge— neither of these go through acts of worship.
The human brute does not worship because of his
ignorance, and the Jivanmuktas (free souls) do not
worship because they have realised God in themselves.
Being between these two poles of existence, if any one
tells you that he is not going to worship God as man,
take kindly care of that man; he is, not to use any
harsher term, an irresponsible talker; his religion is for
unsound and empty brains.

God understands human failings and becomes man to
do good to humanity. 4 4 Whenever virtue subsides
and wickedness prevails I manifest myself. To estab¬
lish virtue, to destroy evil, to save the good I come
from yuga to yuga.'* 44 Fools deride me who have
assumed the human form, without knowing my real


Digitized by


Google



282


BHAKTI-YOGA.


nature as the Lord of the universe/' Such is £rt
Krishna's declaration in the Gitd on incarnation.
“When a huge tidal wave comes," says Bhagavdn
SriRdmakrishna % “all the little brooks and ditches
become full to the brim without any effort or con¬
sciousness on their own part; so when an incarnation
comes a tidal wave of spirituality breaks upon the
world, and people feel spirituality almost full in the
air."


The Mantra: Om: Word and Wisdom.

But we are now considering not these Mahd-purushas y
the great incarnations, but only the Siddha-Gurus
(teachers who have attained the goal); they as a rule
have to convey the germs of spiritual wisdom to the
disciple by means of words ( mantra ) to be meditated
upon. What are these mantras ? The whole of this
universe has, according to Indian philosophy, both
name and form as its conditions of manifestation. In
the human microcosm, there can not be a single wave
in the mind-stuff (chitta), unconditioned by name and
form. If it be true that nature is built throughout on
the same plan, this kind of conditioning by name and
form must also be the plan of the building of the whole
of the cosmos. “ As one lump of clay being known,
all clay is known," so the knowledge of the microcosm
must lead to the knowledge of the macrocosm Now,
form is the outer crust, of which the name or the idea
is the inner essence or kernel. The body is the form,
and the mind, or the antahkarana } is the name, and


Digitized by Google



BH AKTI-YQGAi


2S3


sound-symbols are universally associated with name in
all beings having the power of speech. In the individual
man the thought-waves arising in the limited mahat or
mind-stuff (chitta) must manifest themselves, first as
words, and then as the more concrete forms .

In the universe, Brahma or Iliranya-garbka , or the
cosmic intelligence (mahat) first manifested himself as
name, and then as form, £ r., as this universe. All
this expressed sensible universe is the form, behind
which stands the eternal inexpressible sphota the mani-
festor as Logos or Word. This eternal sphota , the
essential eternal material of all ideas or names, is
the power through which the Lord creates the universe;
nay, the Lord first becomes conditioned as the spkota ,
and then evolves himself out as the yet more concrete
sensible universe. This sphota , has one word as its
only possible symbol, and this is the Om . And as by
no possible means of analysis we can separate the word
from the idea, this Om and the eternal sphota are
inseparable; and therefore it is out of this holiest of
all holy words, the mother of all names and forms, the
eternal Om, that the whole universe may be supposed
to have been created. But it may be said that,
although thought and word are inseparable, yet as
there may be various word-symbols for the same
thought, it is not necessary that this particular word
Om should be the word representative of the thought,
out of which the universe has become manifested.
To this objection we reply that this Om is the only
possible symbol which covers the whole ground, and


284


BHAKTI-YOGA.


there is none other like it. The sphota is the mate¬
rial of all words, yet is not any definite word in
its fully formed state. That is to say, if all the
peculiarities which distinguish one word from another
be removed, then what remains will be the sphota;
therefore this sphota is called the Ndda-Brahma (the
sound-Brahman). Now, as every word-symbol, in¬
tended to express the inexpressible sphota will so par¬
ticularize it that it will no longer be the sphota, that
symbol which particularizes it the least and at the same
time most approximately expresses its nature, will be the
truest symbol thereof; and this is the Om, and the Om
only; because these three letters A, U, M, pronounced in
combination as Om , may well be the generalised symbol
of all possible sounds. The letter A is the least differen¬
tiated of all sounds, therefore Krishna says in the Gitd
44 1 am A among the letters.*' Again; all articulate
sounds are produced in the space within the mouth
beginning with the root of the tongue and ending in
the lips — the throat sound is A, and M is the last
lip sound; and the U exactly represents the rolling
forward of the impulse which begins at the root of
the tongue till it ends in the lips. If properly pro¬
nounced, this Om will represent the whole phenomenon
of sound-production, and no other word can do this;
and this, therefore, is the fittest symbol of the sphota,
which is the real meaning of the Om . And as the
symbol can never be separated from the thing signified,
the Om and the sphota are one: And as the sphota,
being the finer side of the manifested universe, is nearer


Digitized by Google



BH AKTI—Y GGA*


285


to God, and is indeed the first manifestation of Divine
Wisdom, this Om is truly symbolic of God, Again,
just as the “one only * 1 Brahman, f the Akhanda —
Satchiddnanda , the undivided Existence-Knowledge-
Bliss, can be conceived by imperfect human souls only
from particular standpoints of view and associated with
particular qualities, so this universe. His body, has
also to be thought of along the line of the thinker's
mind.

This direction of the worshipper's mind is guided by
its prevailing elements or Tattvas . The result is that
the same God will be seen in various manifestations as
the possessor of various predominant qualities, and the
same universe will appear as full of manifold forms.
In the same way in which, even in the case of the least
differentiated and the most universal symbol Om ,
thought and sound-symbol are seen to be inseparably
associated with each other, this law of their inseparable
association applies to the many differentiated views of
God and the universe: each of them must have a par¬
ticular word-symbol to express it. These word-sym¬
bols, evolved out of the deepest spiritual perceptions
of sages, symbolize and express as nearly as possible
the particular view of God and the universe they stand
for. And as the Om represents the Akhanda , the
undifferentiated Brahman , the others represent the
Khanda or the differentiated views of the same Being;
and they are all helpful to divine meditation and the
acquisition of true knowledge.


286


BHAKTI-YOGA.


Worship of Substitutes and Images,

The next points to be considered are the worship of
Prattkds or of things more or less satisfactory as substi¬
tutes for God, and the worship of Pratimds or images.
What is the worship of God through a Pratika t It is
"Joining the mind with devotion to that which is not
Brahman y taking it to be Brahman” Says Bhagavdn
Rdmdnuja :—"Worship the mind as Brahman , this is
internal; and the Akdia as Brahman } this is the sense-
meaning." The mind is an internal Pratikd , the Akdia
is an external one; and both have to be worshipped as
substitutes of God. Similarly — 4 The Sun is Brahman ,

this is the command*. 4 He who worships Name as

Brahman ,’ and in all such passages the doubt arises as

to the worship of Pratikds .** says Sankara. The

word Pratikd means going towards, and worshipping
a Pratikd is worshipping something which as a substi¬
tute, is, in some one or more respects, like the Brahman
more and more, but is not the Brahman . Along with
the Pratikds mentioned in the Srutis there are various
others to be found in the Purdnas and the Tantras.
In this kind of P rat ikd-worship may be included all the
various forms of Pitri-worship and Deva-worship .

Now worshipping Igvara and Him alone is Bhakti j
the worship of anything else, Deva % or Pitrt\ or any
other being cannot be Bhakti . The various kinds of
worship of the various Devas are all to be included in
ritualistic Karma y which gives to the worshipper only
a particular result in the form of some celestial enjoy-


Digitized by Google


BHAKTf—YOGA,


287


ment, but can neither give rise to Bhakti nor lead to
Mukti . One thing, therefore , has to be carefully
borne in mind. If, as it may happen in some cases,
the highly philosophic ideal supreme Brahman is Him¬
self dragged down by Prattkd-warship to the level of
the Fratikd , and the Fratikd itself is taken to be the
Atman of the worshipper, or his Antaraydmin % the wor¬
shipper gets entirely misled, as no Fratikd can really
be the Atman of the worshipper. But where Brahman
Himself is the object of worship, and the Fratikd
stands only as a substitute or a suggestion thereof,
that is to say, where through the Fratikd the omni¬
present Brahman is worshipped — the Fratikd itself
being idealized into the cause of all, the Brahman —
the worship is positively beneficial; nay, it is abso¬
lutely necessary for all mankind, until they have all
got beyond the primary or preparatory state of the
mind in regard to worship. When, therefore, any
gods or other beings are worshipped in and for them¬
selves, such worship is only a ritualistic Karma ; and
as a Vidyd (science) it gives us only the fruit belong¬
ing to that particular Vidyd; but when the Devos or
any other beings are looked upon as Brahmam and wor¬
shipped, the result obtained is the same as by the wor¬
shipping of Jhiara* This explains how, in many cases,
both in the Srutis and the Smritis y a god, or a sage,
or some other extraordinary being is taken up and
lifted, as it were, out of its own nature and idealized
into Brahman , and is then worshipped. Says the
Advaitin , “is not everything Brahman when the name


288


BHAKTI—YOGA.


and the form have been removed from it” “Is not
He, the Lord, the innermost self of every one ? ” says
the Visishtddvaitin . “The fruition of even the wor¬
ship of the Adityas, etc, Brahman Himself bestows,
because he is the Ruler of all,” says Sankara in his
Brahma-Sutra-Bhdshya. 44 Here in this way does Brah¬
man become the object of worship, because He, as
Brahman, is superposed on the Prattk&s , just as
Vishnu, etc., are superposed upon images, etc."

The same ideas apply to the worship of the Prattmds
as do to that of the Pratik&s; that is to say, if the
image stands for a god or a saint, the worship is not
the result of Bhakti , and does not lead to liberation;
but if it stands for the one God, the worship thereof
will bring both Bhakti and Mukti . Of the principal
religions of the world we see Ved&ntism, Buddhism,
and certain forms of Christianity freely using images;
only two religions, Mahomedanism and Protestanism,
refuse such help. Yet the Mahomedans use the graves
of their saints and martyrs almost in the place of
images; the Protestants, in rejecting all concrete helps
to religion, are drifting away every year farther and
farther from spirituality, and at present there is
scarcely any difference between the advanced Protest¬
ants and the followers of Auguste Comte, or the
Agnostics who preach ethics alone. Again, in
Christianity and Mahomedanism whatever exists of
image-worship is made to fall under that category in
which the Pratikd or the Prattmd is worshipped in
itself but not as a 44 help to the vision ” of God; there*


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


2S9


fore it is at best only of the nature of ritualistic Karmas
and cannot produce either Bhakti or Mukti . In this
form of image worship the allegiance of the soul is
given to other things than f$vara y and, therefore, such
use of images or graves, of temples or tombs, is real
idolatry; yet it is in itself neither sinful nor wicked —
it is a rite —a Kar?na r and worshippers must and will
get the fruit thereof*

The Chosen Ideal

The next thing to be considered is what we know as
Ishta Nishthd * One who aspires to be a Bkakta must
know that 44 so many opinions are so many ways,”
He must know that all the various sects of the various
religions are the various manifestations of the glory
of the same Lord, 11 They call You by so many
names; they divide You, as it were, by different
names, yet In each one of these is to be found Your

omnipotence..You reach the worshipper through all

of these; neither is there any specialty of time so long
as the soul has intense love for You.*. You are so easy
of approach; it is my misfortune that I cannot love
You*” Not only this, the B/mkta must take care not
to hate, nor even to criticize, those radiant sons of
light who are the founders of various sects; he has not
even to hear them spoken ill of. Very few, indeed,
are those who are at once the possessors of an exten¬
sive sympathy and power of appreciation as well as an
intensity of love. We find as a rule that liberal and
sympathetic sects lose the intensity of religious feeling,
*9


290


BHAKTI-YOGA.


and in their hands religion is apt to degenerate into a
kind of politico-social club life. On the other hand
intensely narrow sectaries, whilst displaying a very
commendable love of their own ideals, are seen to have
acquired every particle of that love by hating every
one who is not exactly of the same opinion as they are.
Would to God that this world was full of men who
were as intense in their love as world-wide in their sym¬
pathies ! But such are only few and far between. Yet
we know that it is practicable to educate large numbers
of human beings into the ideal of a wonderful blending
of both the width and intensity of love; and the way
to do that is by this path of the Ishta NishthA or the
“chosen ideal . 99 Every sect of every religion pre¬
sents only one ideal of its own to mankind, but the
eternal Vedintic religion opens to mankind an infinite
number of doors for ingress into the inner shrine of
Divinity, and places before humanity an almost inex¬
haustible array of ideals, there being in each of them a
manifestation of the Eternal One. With the kindest
solicitude the Ved&nta points out to aspiring men and
women the numerous roads hewn out of the solid rock
of the realities of human life by the glorious sons, or
human manifestations, of God in the past and in the
present, and stands with outstretched arms to welcome
all — to welcome even those that are yet to be — to
that Home of Truth and that Ocean of Bliss wherein
the human soul liberated out of the net of MAyd may
transport itself with perfect freedom and with eternal
joy.


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI—YOGA.


291


Bhakti~Yoga y therefore, lays on us the imperative
command not to hate or deny any one of the various
paths that lead to salvation. Yet the growing plant
must be hedged around to protect it until it has grown
into a tree. The tender plant of spirituality will die if
exposed too early to the action of a constant change
of ideas and ideals. Many people, in the name of
what may be called religious liberalism, may be seen
to be feeding their idle curiosity with a continuous
succession of different ideals. With them hearing new
things grows into a sort of disease, a sort of religious
drink-mania. They want to hear new things just to
get a sort of temporary nervous excitement, and, when
one such exciting influence has had its effect on them,
they are ready for another. Religion is with these
people a sort of intellectual opium-eating, and there it
ends. “There is another sort of men,” says Bhag-
aMn Rdmakrishna p “who are like the pearl oyster of
the story. The pearl oyster leaves its bed at the bot¬
tom of the sea, and comes up to the surface to catch
the rain water when the star Svdti is in the ascendant.
It floats about on the surface of the sea with its shell
wide open until it has succeeded in catching a drop of
the rain water, and then it dives deep down to its seabed
and there rests until it has succeeded in fashioning a
beautiful pearl out of that rain drop / 1

This is indeed the most poetical and forcible way in
which the theory of I&hta Nishthd has ever been put.
This Eka NishtM , or devotion to one ideal is absolutely
necessary for the beginner in the practice of religious


ipn


292


BHAKTI-YOGA.


devotion. He must say with Hanum&n in the RAtnd -
yana — “ Though I know that the Lord of Sri and the
Lord of Jdnaki are one and the same manifestation of
the same Supreme Being, yet my all in all is the lotus¬
eyed Rdma;” or, as was said by the sage Tulasidds, he
must say — “ Take the sweetness of all, sit with all,
take the name of all, say yea, yea, but keep your seat
firm.” Then, if the devotional aspirant is sincere, out
of this little seed will come a gigantic tree like the
Indian banyan, sending branch after branch and root
after root to all sides, till it covers the entire field of
religion. Thus will the true devotee realize that He
who was his own ideal in life is worshipped in all ideals
by all sects, under all names, and through all forms.


The Method and the Keans.

In regard to the method and the means of Bhakti -
Yoga we read in the commentary of BhagavAn Rdmdnuja
on the Veddnta Sdtras: — “The attaining of That
comes through discrimination, controlling the pas¬
sions, practice, sacrificial work, purity, strength, and
suppression of excessive joy.” Viveka or discrimina¬
tion is, according to Rdmdnuja , the discriminating,
among other things, the pure food from the impure.
According to him, food becomes impure from three
causes: namely, (1) by the nature of the food itself, as
in the case of garlic, etc.; (2) owing to its coming from
wicked and accursed persons; and (3) from physical
impurities, such as dirt, or hair, etc. The Srutis say,


Digitized by


Google



BH AKTI-YOGA*


293


" When the food is pure the Sattva element gets
purified, the memory becomes unwavering/' and
Ramanuja quotes this from the Chhdndagya Upamshad.

The question of food has always been one of the
most vital with the Bhaktas. Apart from the extrava¬
gance into which some of the Bhakti sects have run,
there is a great truth underlying this question of food.
We must remember that, according to the S&nkhya
philosophy the sattva , rajas , and lamas , which in the
state of homogeneous equilibrium form the Prakriti and
in the heterogenous disturbed condition form the uni*
verse, are both the substance and the quality of
Prakriti . As such they are the materials out of which
every human form has been manufactured, and the
predominance of the sattva material is what is absolutely
necessary for spiritual development. The materials
which we receive through our food into our body-struc¬
ture go a great way to determine our mental constitu¬
tion; therefore the food we eat has to be particularly
taken care of. However, in this matter as in others,
the fanaticism into which the disciples invariably fall
Is not to be laid at the door of the masters.

And this discrimination of food is after all of second¬
ary importance. The very same passage quoted above
is explained by Sankara in his Bhdshya on the Upani-
shads in a different way by giving an entirely different
meaning to the word dhdra , translated generally as
food. According to him, " That which is gathered in
is Akdra . The knowledge of the sensations such as
sound, etc., is gathered in for the enjoyment of the


294 BHAKTI-YOGA.

enjoyer (Self); the purification of the knowledge which
gathers in the perception of the senses is the purifying
of the food ( dhdra ). The word * purification-of-food #
means the acquiring of the knowledge of sensations
untouched by the defects of attachment, aversion, and
delusion; such is the meaning. Therefore, such knowl-
edge or dhdra being purified the sattva material of the
possessor of it — the internal organ — will become
purified, and the sattva being purified an unbroken
memory of the infinite One who has been known in His
real nature will result."

These two explanations are apparently conflicting,
yet both are true and necessary. The manipulating
and controlling of what may be called the finer body,
viz., the mind, are no doubt higher functions than the
controlling of the grosser body of flesh. But the con¬
trol of the grosser is absolutely necessary to enable one
to arrive at the control of the finer. The beginner,
therefore, must pay particular attention to all such
dietetic rules as have come down from the line of his
accredited teachers; but the extravagant, meaningless
fanaticism, which has driven religion entirely to the
kitchen, as may be noticed in. the case of many of our
sects, without any hope of the noble truth of that
religion ever coming out to the sunlight of spirituality,
is a peculiar sort of pure and simple materialism. It
is neither Gndna , nor Bhakti y nor Karma ; it is a spe¬
cial kind of lunacy, and those who pin their souls to it
are more likely to go to lunatic asylums than to
Brahma-loka . So it stands to reason that discrimina-


Digitized by Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


295


tion in the choice of food is necessary for the attain¬
ment of this higher state of mental composition which
can not be easily obtained otherwise.

Controlling the passions is the next thing to be
attended to. To restrain the Indriyas (organs) from
going towards the objects of the senses, to control them
and bring them under the guidance of the will is the very
central virtue in religious culture. Then comes the
practice of self-restraint and self-denial. All the
immense possibilities of divine realisation in the soul
cannot get actualised without struggle and without
such practice on the part of the aspiring devotee.
" The mind must always think of the Lord." It is
very hard at first to compel the mind to think of the
Lord always, but with every new effort the power to do
so grows stronger in us. 44 By practice, oh son of
Kunti, and by non-attachment is It attained," says
§rl Krishna in the Gitd.

Purity is absolutely the basic work, the bed-rock
upon which the whole Bhakti-building rests. Cleansing
the external body and discriminating the food are both
easy, but without internal cleanliness and without
purity, these external observances are of no value
whatsoever. In the list of the qualities conducive to
purity, as given by Riminuja, there are enumerated,
Sofya , truthfulness; Arjava , sincerity; JDayd, doing
good to others without any gain to one’s self; Ahimd y
not injuring others by thought or word or deed;
Abhidhyd , not coveting other’s goods, not thinking vain
thoughts, and not brooding over injuries received


Digitized by v. )Qle



BHAKTI-YOGA.


296

from another. In this list the one idea that deserves
special notice is Ahimsd , non-injury to others. This
duty of non-injury, so to speak of it, is obligatory on
us in relation to all beings; as with some, it does not
simply mean the not-injuring of human beings and
mercilessness towards the lower animals; nor, as with
some others, does it mean the protecting of cats and
dogs and the feeding of ants with sugar, with liberty
to injure brother man in every horrible way. It is
remarkable that almost every good idea in this world
can be carried to a disgusting extreme. A good prac¬
tice carried to an extreme and worked in accordance
with the letter of the law becomes a positive evil.

The test of Ahimsd is absence of jealousy. Any man
may do a good deed or make a good gift on the spur
of the moment, or under the pressure of some super¬
stition or priestcraft; but the real lover of mankind is
he who is jealous of none. The so-called great men of
the world may all be seen to become jealous of each
other for a small name, for a little fame, and for a few
bits of gold. So long as this jealousy exists in a heart
it is far away from the perfection of Ahimsd. The
cow does not eat meat, nor does the sheep. Are they
great Yogins , great non-injurers (Ahimsakas)f Any
fool may abstain from eating this or that; surely that
gives him no more distinction than to herbivorous ani¬
mals. The man who will mercilessly cheat widows and
orphans, and do the vilest deeds for money, is worse
than any brute, even if he lives entirely on grass alone.
The man whose heart never cherishes even the thought


Digitized by


Google



BHAKTI-YOGA.


297


of injury to any one, who rejoices at the prosperity of
even his greatest enemy, that man is the Bkakta , he is
the Yogin % he is the Guru of all, even though he lives
every day of his life on the flesh of swine. Therefore
we must always remember that external practices have
value only as helps to develop internal purity. It is
better to have internal purity alone when minute atten¬
tion to external observances is not practicable. But
woe unto the man and woe unto the nation, that for¬
gets the real, internal, spiritual essentials of religion,
and mechanically clutches with death-like grasp all the
external forms and never lets them go. The forms
have value only so far as they are the expressions of
the life within. If they have ceased to express life,
crush them out without mercy.

The next means to the attainment of Bhakti-Yoga is
strength (anavasdda). 41 This Atman is not to be
attained by the weak, " says the Sruti. Both physical
weakness and mental weakness are meant here. “ The
strong, the hardy, 1 ' are the only fit students. What
can puny, little, decrepit things do ? They will break
to pieces, whenever the mysterious forces of the body
and mind are even slightly awakened by the practice
of any of the Yogas. It is “ the young, the healthy,
the strong 1 ' that can score success. Physical strength,
therefore, is absolutely necessary. It is the strong
body alone that can bear the shock of re-action result¬
ing from the attempt to control the organs. He who
wants to become a Blmkta must be strong, must be
healthy. When the miserably weak attempt any of


298


BHAKTI-YOGA.


the Yogas , they are likely to get some incurable malady,
or they weaken their minds. Voluntarily weakening
the body is really no prescription for spiritual enlighten¬
ment.

The mentally weak also cannot succeed in attaining
the Atman . The person who aspires to be a JBhakta
must be cheerful. It is the cheerful mind that is per¬
severing. It is the strong mind that hews its way
through a thousand difficulties. And this, the hardest
task of all, the cutting of our way out of the net of
Afdyd, is the work reserved only for giant wills.

Yet at the same time excessive mirth should be
avoided ( anuddharsha ). Excessive mirth makes us
unfit for serious thought. It also fritters away the
energies of the mind in vain. The stronger the will,
the less the yielding to the sway of the emotions.
Excessive hilarity is quite as objectionable as too
much of sad seriousness, and all religious realisation is
possible only when the mind is in a steady, peaceful
condition of harmonious equilibrium.

It is thus that one may begin to learn how to love
the Lord.


Digitized by



PARA-BH AKTI

OR

SUPREME DEVOTION

[•ml


Digitized by L^OOQle



Digitized by Google


PARA-BHAKTI


OR

SUPREME DEVOTION


The Preparatory Renunciation.

We have now finished the consideration of what may
be called the preparatory Bhakti , and are entering on
the study of the Pard-Bhakti y or supreme devotion.
We have to speak of a preparation to the practice of
this Pard-Bhakti . All such preparations are intended
only for the purification of the soul. The repetition
of names, the rituals, the forms, and the symbols, all
these various things are for the purification of the soul.
The greatest purifier among all such things, a purifier
without which no one enters the regions of this higher
devotion (Pard-Bhakti) y is renunciation. It is a fright¬
ening thing to many; yet, without it, there cannot be
any spiritual growth. In all our Yogas this renuncia¬
tion is necessary. This is the stepping stone and the
real centre and the real heart of all spiritual culture —
renunciation. This is religion — renunciation. When
the human soul draws back from the things of the
world and tries to go into deeper things; when man,

[301]


Digitized by Google



302


parA-bhakti.


the spirit which is here somewhat being concretised
and materialised, understands that he is thereby going
to be destroyed and to be reduced almost into mere
matter, and turns his face away from matter; then
begins renunciation, then begins real spiritual growth.
The Karma-Yogin's renunciation is in the shape of
giving up all the fruits of his actions; he is not attached
to the results of his labors; he does not care for any
reward here or hereafter. The Rd/a- Yogin knows
that the whole of nature is intended for the soul to
acquire experience, and that the result of all the expe¬
riences of the soul is for it to become aware of its
eternal separateness from nature. The human soul
has to understand and realize that it has been spirit,
and not matter, through eternity; and that this con¬
junction of it with matter is and can be only for a
time. The Rd/a- Yogin learns the lesson of renuncia¬
tion through his own experience of nature. The
yndna - Yogin has the harshest of all renunciations to go
through, as he has to realise from the very first that
the whole of this solid-looking nature is all an illusion.
He has to understand that all that is any kind of mani¬
festation of power in nature belongs to the soul, and
not to nature. He has to know, from the very start,
that all knowledge and all experiences are in the soul,
and not in nature; so he has at once and by the sheer
force of rational conviction to tear himself off from all
bondage to nature. He lets nature and all her things
go, he lets them vanish and tries to stand alone *

Of all renunciations, the most natural, so to say, is


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhaktl


303


that of the Bhakti- Yogin. Here there is no violence,
nothing to give up, nothing to tear off, as it were, from
ourselves, nothing from which we have violently to
separate ourselves, the Bhakta s renunciation is easy,
smooth, flowing, and as natural as the things around
us. We see the manifestation of this sort of renuncia¬
tion, although more or less in the shape of caricatures,
every day around us, A man begins to love a woman;
after awhile he loves another, and the first woman he
lets go. She drops out of his mind smoothly, gently,
without his feeling the want of her at all, A woman
loves a man; she then begins to love another man, and
the first one drops off from her mind quite naturally,
A man loves his own city, then he begins to love his
country, and the intense love for his little city drops
off smoothly, naturally. Again, a man learns to love
the whole world; his love for his country, his intense,
fanatical patriotism drops off, without hurting him,
without any manifestation of violence. Uncultured
man loves the pleasures of the senses intensely; as he
becomes cultured he begins to love intellectual pleas¬
ures, and his sense-enjoyments become less and less.
No man can enjoy a meal with the same gusto of
pleasure as a dog or a wolf, but those pleasures, which
a man gets from intellectual experiences and achieve¬
ments, the dog can never enjoy. At first, pleasure is
in association with the lower senses; but as soon as
an animal reaches a higher plane of existence, the
lower kind of pleasures become less intense. In human
society the nearer the man is to the animal, the


3°4


parA-bhakti.


stronger is his pleasure in the senses; and the higher
and the more cultured the man is, the greater is his
pleasure in intellectual and such other finer pursuits.
So, when a man gets even higher than the plane of the
intellect, higher than that of mere thought, when he
get to the plane of spirituality and of divine inspiration,
he finds there a state of bliss, compared to which all
the pleasures of the senses, or even of the intellect,
are as nothing. When the moon shines brightly all
the stars become dim, and when the sun shines the
moon herself becomes dim. The renunciation neces¬
sary for the attainment of Bhakti is not obtained by
killing anything, but just comes in as naturally as, in
the presence of an increasingly stronger light, the less
intense ones become dimmer and dimmer until they
vanish away completely. So this love of the pleasures
of the senses and of the intellect is all made dim, and
thrown aside and cast into the shade by the love of
God Himself. That love of God grows and assumes
a form which is called ParA-Bhakti , or supreme devo¬
tion. Forms vanish, rituals fly away, books are super¬
seded, images, temples, churches, religions, and sects,
countries and nationalities, all these little limitations
and bondages fall off by their own nature from him
who knows this love of God. Nothing remains to bind
him or fetter his freedom. A ship, all of a sudden,
comes near a magnetic rock and its iron bolts and
bars are all attracted and drawn out, and the planks
get loosened and freely float on the water. Divine
grace thus loosens the binding bolts and bars of the


Digitized by


PARA-BHAKTL


305


soul* and it becomes free* So, in this renunciation
auxiliary to devotion, there is no harshness, no dry¬
ness, no struggle, no repression or suppression. The
Bhakta has not to suppress any single one of his emo¬
tions, he only strives to intensify them and direct them
to God.

The Bhakta's Renunciation Results from Love,

We see love everywhere in nature. Whatever in
society is good and great and sublime, is the working
out of that love; whatever in society is very bad, nay
diabolical, is also the ill-directed working out of the
same emotion of love. It is this same emotion that
gives us the pure and holy conjugal love between hus¬
band and wife, as well as the sort of love which goes
to satisfy the lowest forms of animal passion. The
emotion is the same, but its manifestation is different
in the different cases* It is the same feeling of love,
well or ill-directed, that impels one man to do good
and to give all he has to the poor, while it makes
another man cut the throats of his brethren and take
away all their possessions. The former loves others
as much as the latter loves himself. The direction of
the love is bad in the case of this latter, but it is right
and proper in the other case. The same fire that
cooks a meal for us may burn a child, and it is no fault
of the fire if it did so; the difference lies in the way in
which it is used. Therefore, love, the intense longing
for association, the strong desire on the part of two to
become one, and, it may be after all, of all to become


parA-bhakti.


306

merged in one, is being manifested everywhere in higher
or lower forms as the case may be. Bhakti- Yoga is the
science of higher love; it shows us how to direct it; it
shows us how to control it, how to manage it, how to
use it, how to give it a new aim, as it were, and from
it obtain the highest and most glorious results, that is,
how to make it lead us to spiritual blessedness. BhakH •
Yoga does not say “Give up;” it only says “Love;
love the Highest;” and everything low naturally falls off
from him the object of whose love is this Highest.

“ I cannot tell anything about Thee, except that
Thou art my love. Thou art beautiful, Oh Thou art
beautiful! Thou art beauty itself.” What is after
all really required of us in this Yoga is that our thirst
after the beautiful should be directed to God. What
is the beauty in the human face, in the sky, in the
stars, and in the moon? It is only the partial appre¬
hension of the real all-embracing Divine Beauty. “ He
shining, everything shines. It is through His light
that all things shine.” Take this high position of
Bhakti which makes you forget at once all your little
personalities. Take yourself away from all the world’s
little selfish clingings. Do not look upon humanity as
the centre of all your human and higher interests.
Stand as a witness, as a student, and observe the phe¬
nomena of nature. Have the feeling of personal non¬
attachment with regard to man, and see how this mighty
feeling of love is working itself out in the world. Some¬
times a little friction is produced, but that is only in
the course of the struggle to attain the higher real


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhakti.


30;


love. Sometimes there is a little fight, or a little fall;
but it is all only along the way. Stand aside, and
freely let these frictions come. You feel the frictions
only when you are in the current of the world, but when
you are outside of it simply as a witness and as a stu¬
dent, you will be able to see that there are millions and
millions of channels in which God is manifesting Him¬
self as Love.

“Wherever there is any bliss, even though in the
most sensual of things, there is a spark of that Eternal
Bliss which is the Lord Himself.” Even in the lowest
kinds of attraction there is the germ of Divine love.
One of the names of the Lord in Sanskrit is Hari , and
this means that He attracts all things to Himself. His
is in fact the only attraction worthy of human hearts.
Who can attract a soul really? Only He! Do you
think dead matter can truly attract the soul? It never
did, and never will. When you see a man going after
a beautiful face, do you think that it is the handful of
arranged material molecules which really attracts the
man? Not at all. Behind those material particles
there must be and is the play of divine influence and
divine love. The ignorant man does not know it; but
yet, consciously or unconsciously, he is attracted by
it and it alone. So even the lowest forms of attraction
derive their power from God Himself. “ None, O
beloved, ever loved the husband for the husband’s
sake; it is the Atman , the Lord, who is inside, and for
His sake the husband is loved.” Loving wives may
know this or they may not; it is true all the same


Digitized by Google



308


parA-bhakti.


” None, O beloved, ever loved the wife for the wife’s
sake, but it is the Self within the wife that is loved.”
Similarly no one loves a child or anything else in the
world except on account of Him who is within. The
Lord is the great magnet, and we are all like iron
filings; all of us are being constantly attracted by
Him, and all of us are struggling to reach Him. All
this struggling of ours in this world is surely not
intended for selfish ends. Fools do not know what
they are doing; the work of their life is all to approach
the great magnet. All the tremendous struggling and
fighting in life is intended to make us go to Him ulti¬
mately and be one with Him.

However, the Bhakti- Yogin knows the meaning of
life’s struggles; he understands it. He has passed
through a long series of these struggles, and knows what
they mean, and earnestly desires to be free from the
friction thereof; he wants to avoid the clash and go
direct to the centre of all attractions, the great Hari.
This is the renunciation of the Bhaktaj this mighty
attraction, in the direction of God makes all other
attractions vanish for him; this mighty infinite love of
God which enters his heart leaves no place for any
other love to live there. How can it be otherwise?
Bhakti fills his heart with the divine waters of the ocean
of love, which is God Himself; there is no place there
for little loves. That is to say, the Bhakta*s renuncia¬
tion is that vairdgya , or non-attachment for all things
that are not God, which results from anurdga % or great
attachment to God.


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhakti.


309


This is the ideal preparation for the attainment of
the supreme Bhakti. When this renunciation comes,
the gate opens for the soul to pass through and reach
the lofty regions of Supreme Devotion or Pard-Bhakti.
Then it is that we begin to understand what Pard -
Bhakti is; and the man who has entered into the inner
shrine of the Pard-Bhakti y he alone has the right to say
that all forms and symbols are useless to him as aids
to religious realisation. He alone has attained that
supreme state of love commonly called the brother¬
hood of man; the rest only talk. He sees no distinc¬
tions; the mighty ocean of love has entered into him,
and he sees not man in man, but beholds his Beloved
everywhere. Through every face shines to him his
Hart. The light in the sun or the moon is all His
manifestation. Wherever there is beauty or sublimity,
to him it is all His. Such Bhaktas are still living; the
world is never without them. Such, though bitten by
a serpent, only say that a messenger came for them
from their Beloved. Such men alone have the right
to talk of universal brotherhood. They feel no resent¬
ment; their minds never react in the form of hatred,
or of jealousy. The external, the sensuous, has van¬
ished from them forever. How can they be angry,
when, through their love, they are always able to see
the Reality behind the scenes?


Digitized by Google



3io


parA-bhaktl


The Vatur&lness of Bhakti-Yoga and lie Oentral Secret

99 Those who with constant attention always worship
You, and those who worship the Undifferentiated, the
Absolute,— of these who are the greater Yogtnst
Arjuna asked of Srf Krishna. The answer was: —
11 Those who concentrating their minds on Me worship
Me with eternal constancy, and are endowed with the
highest faith — they are My best worshippers, they are
the greatest Yogins . Those that worship the Absolute,
the Indescribable, the Undifferentiated, the Omnipres¬
ent, the Unthinkable, the All-comprehending, the
Immovable, and the Eternal, by controlling the play
of their organs and having the conviction of sameness
in regard to all things, they also, being engaged in
doing good to all beings, come to Me alone. But to
those whose minds have been devoted to the unmani¬
fested Absolute, the difficulty of the struggle along the
way is much greater, for it is indeed with great diffi¬
culty that the path of the unmanifested Absolute is
trodden by any embodied being. Those who, having
offered up all their work unto Me, with entire reliance
in Me, meditate on Me and worship Me without any
attachment to anything else — them I soon lift up from
the ocean of death and ever-recurring birth, as their
mind is wholly attached to Me.” yn&na-Yoga and
BhakH - Yoga are both referred to here. Both may be
said to have been defined in the above passage, yttdno-
Yoga is grand; it is high philosophy; and almost every
human being thinks, curiously enough, that he can


Digitized by



parA-bhakti.


311


surely do everything required of him by philosophy;
but it is really very difficult to live truly the life of
philosophy. We are often apt to run into great dan¬
gers in trying to guide our life by philosophy. This
world may be said to be divided between persons of
demoniacal nature, who think the care-taking of the
body to be the be-all and the end-all of existence, and
persons of godly nature who realise that the body is
simply a means to an end, an instrument intended for
the culture of the soul. The devil can and indeed
does quote the scriptures for its own purposes; and
thus the way of knowledge appears to offer justification
to what the bad man does as much as it offers induce¬
ments to what the good man does. This is the great
danger in Jndna- Yoga. But Bhakti - Yoga is natural,
sweet, and gentle; the Bhakta does not take such high
flights as the JnAna- Yogin, and therefore he is not apt
to have such big falls. Until the bondages of the soul
pass away, it cannot of course be free, whatever may
be the nature of the path that the religious man takes.

Here is a passage showing how, in the case of one of
the blessed Gopts , the soul-binding chains of both merit
and demerit were broken. “ The intense pleasure in
meditating on God took away the binding effects of
her good deeds. Then her intense misery of soul in
not attaining unto Him washed off all her sinful pro¬
pensities, and she became free.” In Bhakti-Yoga the
central secret is, therefore, to know that the various
passions and feelings and emotions in the human heart
are not wrong in themselves; only they have to be


Digitized by


Google



312


parA-bhakti.


carefully controlled and given a higher and highei
direction, until they attain the very highest condition
of excellence. The highest direction is that which
takes us to God; every other direction is lower. We
find that pleasure and pain are very common and oft-
recurring feelings in our lives. When a man feels
pain, because he has not got wealth or some such
worldly thing, he is giving a wrong direction to the
feeling. Still pain has its uses. Let a man feel pain
that he has not reached the Highest, that he has not
reached God, and that pain will be to his salvation.
When you become glad that you have got a handful of
coins, it is a wrong direction given to the faculty of
joy; it should be given a higher direction, it must be
made to serve the Highest Ideal. Pleasure in that
kind of ideal must surely be our highest joy. This
same thing is true of all our other feelings. The
Bhakta says that not one of them is wrong, he gets
hold of them all and points them unfailingly towards
God.

The Forms of Love-manifestation.

Here are some of the forms in which love manifests
itself. First there is reverence. Why do people show
reverence to temples and holy places ? Because He is
worshipped there, and His presence is associated with
all such places. Why do people in every country pay
reverence to teachers of religion? It is natural for
the human heart to do so, because all such teachers
preach the Lord. At bottom, reverence is a growth


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhakti.


313


out of love; we can none of us revere him whom we
do not love. Then comes Priti —pleasure in God.
What an immense pleasure men take in the objects of
their senses! They go anywhere, run through any
danger, to get the thing which they love, the thing
which their senses like. What is wanted of the Bhakta
is this very kind of intense love which has, however,
to be directed to God. Then there is the sweetest of
pains, Viraha , the intense misery due to the absence of
the beloved. When a man feels intense misery, because
he has not attained to God, has not known that which
is the only thing worthy to be known, and becomes in
consequence very dissatisfied and almost mad — then
there is Viraha; and this state of the mind makes it
feel disturbed in the presence of anything other than
the beloved. In earthly love we see how often this
Viraha comes. Again, when men are really and
intensely in love with women, or women with men,
they feel a kind of natural annoyance in the presence
of all those whom they do not love. Exactly the same
state of impatience, in regard to things that are not
loved, comes to the mind, when Pard- Bhakti holds
sway over it; even to talk about things other than God
becomes distasteful then. 44 Think of Him, think of
Him alone, and give up all other vain words." Those
who talk of Him alone, the Bhakta finds to be friendly
to him; while those who talk of anything else appear
to him to be unfriendly. A still higher stage of love is
reached when life itself is maintained for the sake of
the one Ideal of Love, when life itself is considered


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhakti.


314

beautiful and worth living only on account of that
Love. Without it, such a life would not remain even
for a moment. Life is sweet because it thinks of the
Beloved. TadiyatA (Hisntss) comes when a man
becomes perfect according to Bhakti; when he has
become blessed, when he has attained to God, when he
has touched the feet of God, as it were, his whole
nature is purified and completely changed. All his
purposes in life then become fulfilled. Yet, many such
Bhaktas live on just to worship Him. That is the
bliss, the only pleasure in life, which they will not give
up. “ Oh king, such is the blessed quality of Hart
that even those, who have become satisfied with every¬
thing, all the knots of whose hearts have been cut
asunder, even they love the Lord for love's sake"—
the Lord “ whom all the gods worship, all the lovers of
liberation, and all the knowers of the Brahman
Such is the power of love. When a man has forgotten
himself altogether, and does not feel that anything
belongs to him, then he acquires the state of TadtyatA;
everything is sacred to him, because it belongs to the
Beloved. Even in regard to earthly love the lover
thinks that everything belonging to his beloved is so
sacred and so dear to him. He loves even a bit of the
cloth belonging to the darling of his heart. In the
same way, when a person loves the Lord, the whole
universe becomes so dear to him, because it is all His.


Digitized by Google



parA-bhakti.


315


Universal Love and How It Leads to Self-surrender.

How can we love the vyashti , the particular, without
first loving the samashti , the universal? God is the
samashti , the generalised and the abstract universal
whole; and the universe that we see is the vyashti , the
particularised thing. To love the whole universe is
possible only by way of loving the samashti — the uni¬
versal — which is, as it were, the one unity in which
are to be found millions and millions of smaller unities.
The philosophers of India do not stop at the particu¬
lars; they cast a hurried glance at the particulars, and
immediately start to find the generalised forms which
will include all the particulars. The search after the
universal is the one search of Indian philosophy and
religion. The yndnin aims at the wholeness of things,
at that one absolute and generalised Being, knowing
which, he knows everything. The Bhakta wishes to
realise that one generalised abstract Person, in loving
Whom, he loves the whole universe. The Yogin wishes
to have possession of that one generalised form of
power, by controlling which he controls his whole uni¬
verse. The Indian mind, throughout its history, has
been directed to this kind of singular search after the
universal in everything — in science, in psychology, in
love, in philosophy. So the conclusion to which the
Bhakta comes is that, if you go on merely loving one
person after another, you may go on loving them so
for an infinite length of time without being in the least
able to love the world as a whole. When, at last, the


Digitized by Google



316


parA-bhakti.


central idea is, however, arrived at, that the sum-total of
all love is God, that the sum-total of the aspirations
of all the souls in the universe, whether they be free,
or bound, or struggling towards liberation, is God,
then alone it becomes possible for any one to put forth
universal love. God is the samashti y and this visible
universe is God differentiated and made manifest. If
we love this sum-total, we love everything. Loving
the world and doing it good will all come easily then;
we have to obtain this power only by loving God first;
otherwise it is no joke to do good to the world.
" Everything is His and He is my Lover; I love Him,"
says the Bhakta. In this way everything becomes
sacred to the Bhakta y because all things are His. All
are His children, His body, His manifestation. How
then may we hurt any one ? How then may we not
love any one ? With the love of God will come, as
a sure effect, the love of every one in the uni¬
verse. The nearer we approach to God, the more
do we begin to see that all things are in Him. When
the soul succeeds in appropriating the bliss of this
supreme love, it also begins to see Him in everything.
Our heart will thus become an eternal fountain of love.
And when we reach even higher states of this love, all
the little differences between the things of the world
are entirely lost; man is seen no more as man, but only
as God; the animal is seen no more as animal, but as
God; even the tiger is no more a tiger, but a manifesta¬
tion of God. Thus, in this intense state of BhakH y
worship is offered to everyone, to every life, and to


Digitized by Google



parA-bhakti.


317


every being. “ Knowing that Hari, the Lord, is in
every being, the wise have thus to manifest unswerving
love towards all beings." As a result of this kind of
intense all-absorbing love, comes the feeling of perfect
self-surrender, the conviction that nothing that hap¬
pens is against us. Then the loving soul is able to say,
if pain comes, “Welcome pain." If misery comes,
it will say “Welcome misery, you are also from the
Beloved." If a serpent comes, it will say “ Welcome
serpent." If death comes, such a Bhakta will welcome
it with a smile. “ Blessed am I that they all come to
me; they are all welcome." The Bhakta in this state
of perfect resignation, arising out of intense love to
God and to all that are His, ceases to distinguish
between pleasure and pain in so far as they affect him.
He does not know what it is to complain of pain or
misery; and this kind of uncomplaining resignation to
the will of God, who is all love, is indeed a worthier
acquisition than all the glory of grand and heroic per¬
formances.

To the vast majority of mankind, the body is every¬
thing; the body is all the universe to them; bodily
enjoyment is their all in all. This demon of the wor¬
ship of the body and of the things of the body has
entered into us all. We may indulge in tall talk, and
take very high flights, but we are like vultures all the
same; our mind is directed to the piece of carrion
down below. Why should our body be saved, say,
from the tiger? Why may we not give it over to the
tiger? The tiger will thereby be pleased, and that is


Digitized by


Google



3‘S


PARA-BHAKTL


not altogether so very far from self-sacrifice and wor¬
ship. Can you reach the realisation of such an idea in
which all sense of self is completely lost? It is a very
dizzy height on the pinnacle of the religion of love,
and few in this world have ever climbed up to it; but
until a man reaches that highest point of ever-ready
and ever-willing self-sacrifice he cannot become a per¬
fect Bhakta , We may all manage to maintain our
bodies more or less satisfactorily and for longer or
shorter intervals of time. Nevertheless, our bodies
have to go; there is no permanence about them.
Blessed are they whose bodies get destroyed in the
service of others. “ Wealth, and even life itself, the
sage always holds ready for the service of others. In
this world, there being one thing certain, viz ,, death,
it is far better that this body dies in a good cause than
in a bad one.’ 1 We may drag our life on for fifty years
or a hundred years; but after that, what is it that
happens? Everything that is the result of combina¬
tion must get dissolved and die. There must and will
come a time for it to be decomposed. Jesus and Bud¬
dha and Mohammed are all dead; all the great prophets
and teachers of the world are dead. “ In this evanes¬
cent world, where everything is falling to pieces, we
have to make the highest use of what time we have,”
says the Bhakta ; and really the highest use of life is to
hold it at the service of all beings. It is the horrible
body-idea that breeds all the selfishness in the world,
just this one delusion that we are wholly the body we
own, and that we must by all possible means try our


parA-bhakti.


319


very best to preserve and to please it. If you know
that you are positively other than your body, you have
then none to fight with or struggle against; you are
dead to all ideas of selfishness. So the Bhakta declares
that we have to hold ourselves as if we are altogether
dead to all things of the world; and that is indeed self-
surrender. Let things come as they may. This is the
meaning of “Thy will be done;” not going about
fighting and struggling, and thinking all the while that
God wills all our own weaknesses and worldly ambitions.
It may be that good comes even out of our selfish strug¬
gles; that is, however, God’s look out. The perfected
Bhakta's idea must be never to will and work for him¬
self. “ Lord, they build high temples in Your name;
they make large gifts in Your name; I am poor; I am
nothing; so I take this body of mine and place it at
Your feet. Do not give me up, O Lord.” Such is the
prayer proceeding out of the depths of the Bhakta'3
heart. To him who has experienced it, this eternal
sacrifice of the self unto the Beloved Lord is higher
by far than all wealth and power, than even all soaring
thoughts of renown and enjoyment. The peace of the
Bhakta's calm resignation is a peace that passeth all
understanding, and is of incomparable value. His
AprAtikAlya is a state of the mind in which it has no
interests, and naturally knows nothing that is opposed
to them. In this state of sublime resignation every¬
thing in the shape of attachment goes away completely,
except that one all-absorbing love to Him in Whom all
things live and move and have their being. This


Digitized by Google



320


parA-bhaktl


attachment of love to God is, indeed, one that does not
bind the soul but effectively breaks all its bondages.

The Higher Knowledge and the Higher Love are One to
the True Lover.

The Upanishads distinguish between a higher knowl¬
edge and a lower knowledge; and to the Bhakta there is
really no difference between this higher knowledge and
this higher love ( Para-bhakti ). The Mundaka Upanishad
says:—“The knowers of the Brahman declare that
there are two kinds of knowledge worthy to be known,
namely, the Higher (Bard) and the Lower (Apard).
Of these the Lower (knowledge) consists of the Rigveda,
the Yajurveda , the Sdmaveda y the Atharvaveda , the
Sikshd (or the science dealing with pronunciation and
accent), the Kalpa (or the sacrificial liturgy), Gram¬
mar, the Nirukta (or the science dealing with etymology
and the meaning of words), Prosody, and Astronomy;
and the Higher (knowledge) is that by which that
Unchangeable is known/' The higher knowledge is
thus clearly shown to be the knowledge of the Brah¬
man; and the Devt-Bhdgavata gives us the following
definition of the higher love (Pard-bhakti): —“ As oil
poured from one vessel to another falls in an unbroken
line, so, when the mind in an unbroken stream thinks
of the Lord, we have what is called Pard-bhakti or
supreme love.” This kind of undisturbed and ever
steady direction of the mind and the heart to the Lord
with an inseparable attachment is indeed the highest


Digitized by



parA-bhakti.


321


manifestation of man's love to God. All other forms
of Bhakti are only preparatory for the attainment of
this highest form thereof, viz., the Pard-bhakti which
is also known as the love that comes after attachment
( Rdgdnugd ). When this supreme love once comes into
the heart of man, his mind will continuously think of
God and remember nothing else. He will give no
room in himself to thoughts other than those of God,
and his soul will be unconquerably pure, and will alone
break all the bonds of mind and matter and become
serenely free. He alone can worship the Lord in his
own heart; to him forms, symbols, books and doctrines
are all unnecessary and are incapable of proving ser¬
viceable in any way. It is not easy to love the Lord
thus. Ordinarily human love is seen to flourish only
in places where it is returned; where love is not returned
for love, cold indifference is the natural result. There
are, however, rare instances in which we may notice
love exhibiting itself even where there is no return of
love. We may compare this kind of love, for purposes
of illustration, to the love of the moth for the fire; the
insect loves the fire, falls into it and dies. It is indeed
in the nature of this insect to love so. To love, because
it is the nature of love to love, is undeniably the highest
and most unselfish manifestation of love that may be
seen in the world. Such love working itself out on the
plane of spirituality necessarily leads to the attainment
of Pat'd-bhakti.
tl


Digitized by Google



$22


parA-bhakti.


The Triangle of Love.

We may represent love as a triangle, each of the
angles of which corresponds to one of its inseparable
characteristics. There can be no triangle without all
its three angles; and there can be no true love with¬
out its three following characteristics. The first angle
of our triangle of love is that love knows no bargaining.
Wherever there is any seeking for something in return,
there can be no real love; it becomes a mere matter of
shop-keeping. As long as there is in us any idea of
deriving this or that favour from God in return for our
respect and allegiance to Him, so long there can be
no true love growing in our hearts. Those who wor¬
ship God because they wish Him to bestow favours on
them are sure not to worship Him if those favours are
not forthcoming. The Bhakta loves the Lord because
He is lovable; there is no other motive originating or
directing this divine emotion of the true devotee. We
have heard it said that a great king once went into a
forest and there met a sage. He talked with the sage
a little and was very much pleased with his purity and
wisdom. The king then wanted the sage to oblige
him by receiving a present from him. The sage refused
to do so, saying, “ The fruits of the forest are food
enough for me; the pure streams of water flowing
down from the mountains give enough of drink for me;
the barks of the trees supply me with enough of cover¬
ing; and the caves of the mountains form my home.
Why should I take any present from you or from any*


Digitized by


Google



parA-beaktl


3 2 3


body ? " The king; said, 11 Just to benefit me, sir, please
take something from my hands, and please go with me
to the city and to my palace .' 1 After much persuasion,
the sage at last consented to do as the king desired,
and went with him to his palace. Before offering the
gift to the sage the king repeated his prayers, saying,
“ Lord, give me more children; Lord, give me more
wealth; Lord, give me more territory; Lord, keep my
body in better health ;** and so on. Before the king
finished saying his prayer the sage had got up and
walked away from the room quietly. At seeing this
the king became perplexed and began to follow him,
crying aloud, 11 Sir, you are going away, you have not
taken my presents. 1 ' The sage turned round and
said, Beggar, I do not beg of beggars. You are a
beggar yourself, and how can you give me anything?
I am no fool to think of taking anything from a beggar
like you. Go away, do not follow me." There is well
brought out the distinction between mere beggars and
the real lovers of God. To worship God even for the
sake of salvation or any other reward is equally degene¬
rate. Love knows no reward. Love is always for
love's sake. The Bhakta loves because he cannot help
loving. When you see beautiful scenery and fall in
love with it, you do not demand anything in the way
of favour from the scenery; nor does the scenery
demand anything from you. Yet the vision thereof
brings you to a blissful state of the mind, it tones
down all the friction in your soul, it makes you calm,
almost raises you, for the time being, beyond your


le


324


parA-bhakti.


mortal nature, and places you in a condition of quite
divine ecstasy; this nature of real love is the first angle
of our triangle. Ask not anything in return for your
love; let your position be always that of the giver;
give your love unto God, but do not ask anything in
return even from Him.

The second angle of the triangle of love is that love
knows no fear. Those that love God through fear are
the lowest of human beings, quite undeveloped as men.
They worship God from fear of punishment. He is a
great Being to them, with a whip in one hand and the
sceptre in the other; if they do not obey Him they are
afraid they will be whipped. It is a degradation to
worship God through fear of punishment; such worship
is, if worship at all, the crudest form of the worship of
love. So long as there is any fear in the heart, how
can there be love also ? Love conquers naturally all
fear. Think of a young mother in the street, and if a
dog barks at her she is frightened; she flies into the
nearest house. Suppose the same mother is in the
street with her child; and a lion springs upon the child.
Where then will the mother's place be? Of course at
the mouth of the lion. Love does conquer all fear.
Fear comes from the selfish idea of cutting one’s self
off from the universe. The smaller and the more self¬
ish I make myself, the more is my fear. If a man
thinks he is a little nothing, fear will surely come upon
him. And the less you think of yourself as an insignifi¬
cant person, the less fear will there be for you. So long
as there is the least spark of fear in you there r.a n


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhakti.


325


no love there. Love and fear are incompatible; God
is never to be feared by those who love Him. The
commandment, * * Do not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain,” the true lover of God laughs at.
How can there be any blasphemy in the religion of love?
The more you take the name of the Lord, the better
for you, in whatever way you may do it. You are only
repeating His name because you love Him.

The third angle of the love-triangle is that love knows
no rival, for in it is always embodied the lover’s
highest ideal. True love never comes until the object
of our love becomes to us our highest ideal. It may
be that in many cases human love is misdirected and
misplaced, but to the person who loves, the thing he
loves is always his own highest ideal. One may see his
ideal in the vilest of beings, and another in the highest
of beings; nevertheless, in every case it is the ideal
alone that can be truly and intensely loved. The
highest ideal of every man is called God. Ignorant or
wise, saint or sinner, man or woman, educated or
uneducated, cultivated or uncultivated, to every human
being the highest ideal is God. The synthesis of all
the highest ideals of beauty, of sublimity, and of power
gives us the completest conception of the loving and
lovable God. These ideals exist, in some shape or
other, in every mind naturally; they form a part and
parcel of all our minds. All the active manifestations
of human nature are struggles of those ideals to become
realised in practical life. All the various movements
that we see around us in society are caused by the


Digitized by Google



326


parA-bhakti.


various ideals in various souls trying to come out and
become concretised; what is inside presses on to come
outside. This perennially dominant influence of the
ideal is the one force, the one motive power, that may
be seen to be constantly working in the midst of man¬
kind. It may be after hundreds of births, after strug¬
gling through thousands of years, that man finds out
that it is vain to try to make the inner ideal mould
completely the external conditions and square well
with them; after realising this he no more tries to pro¬
ject his own ideal on the outside world, but worships
the ideal itself as ideal, from the highest standpoint of
love. This ideally perfect ideal embraces all lower
ideals. Every one admits the truth of the saying that a
lover sees Helen's beauty on an Ethiop's brow. The
man who is standing aside as a looker-on sees that love
is here misplaced, but the lover sees his Helen all the
same, and does not see the Ethiop at all. Helen or
Ethiop, the objects of our love are really the centres
round which our ideals become crystallised. What is it
that the world commonly worships? Not certainly this
all-embracing ideally perfect ideal of the supreme
devotee and lover. That ideal which men and women
commonly worship is what is in themselves; every per¬
son projects his or her own ideal on the outside world
and kneels before it. That is why we find that men
who are cruel and bloodthirsty conceive of a blood¬
thirsty God, because they can only love their own
highest ideal. That is why good men have a very


Digitized by Google



FARA-BHAKTI,


32;

high ideal of God; and their ideal is indeed so very
different from that of others.

The God of Love is His own ProoL

What Is the ideal of the lover who has quite passed
beyond the idea of selfishness, of bartering and bar*
gaining, and who knows no fear? Even to the great
God such a man will say—'* I will give you my all,
and I do not want anything from you; indeed there is
nothing that I can call my own/* When a man has
acquired this conviction, his ideal becomes one of per¬
fect love, one of the perfect fearlessness of love. The
highest ideal of such a person has no narrowness of
particularity about it; it is love universal, love without
limits and bounds, love itself, absolute love. This
grand ideal of the religion of love is worshipped and
loved absolutely as such without the aid of any symbols
or suggestions. This is the highest form of Pard-bhakti ,
the worship of such an all-comprehending ideal as the
ideal; all the other forms of Bkakti are only stages on
the way to reach it. All our failures and all our suc¬
cesses in following the religion of love are on the road
to the realisation of that one ideal. Object after object
is taken up, and the inner ideal is successively projected
on it all; and all such external objects are found
inadequate as exponents of the ever-expanding inner
ideal, and are naturally rejected one after another.
At last the aspirant begins to think that it is vain to
try to realise the ideal in external objects, that all
external objects are as nothing when compared with


328 parA-bhakti.

the ideal itself; and, in coarse of time, he acquires the
power of realising the highest and the most generalised
abstract ideal entirely as an abstraction that is to him
quite alive and real. When the devotee has reached
this point, he is no more impelled to ask whether God
can be demonstrated or not, whether He is omnipotent
and omniscient, or not. To him He is only the God
of Love; He is the highest ideal of love and that is
sufficient for all his purposes; He, as love, is self-evi¬
dent ; it requires no proofs to demonstrate the existence
of the beloved to the lover. The magistrate-gods of
other forms of religion may require a good deal of
proof to prove them, but the Bhakta does not and can¬
not think of such gods at all. To him God exists
entirely as Love. “ None, O beloved, loves the hus¬
band for the husband's sake, but it is for the sake of
the Self who is in the husband that the husband is
loved; none, O beloved, loves the wife for the wife’s
sake, but it is for the sake of the Self who is in the wife
that the wife is loved.” It is said by some that self¬
ishness is the only motive power in regard to all human
activities. That also is love lowered by being par¬
ticularised. When I think of myself as comprehending
the universal, there can surely be no selfishness in me;
but when I, by mistake, think that I am a little some¬
thing, my love becomes particularised and narrowed.
The mistake consists in making the sphere of love nar¬
row and contracted. All things in the universe are of
divine origin and deserve to beloved; it has, however,
to be borne in mind that the love of the whole includes


Digitized by


Google



PAKA-B11AKTL


3 2 9


the love of the parts. This whole is the God of the
Bh&kta$ y and all the other Gods, Fathers in Heaven,
or Rulers, or Creators, and all theories and doctrines
and books have no purpose and no meaning for them,
seeing that they have through their supreme love and
devotion risen above those things altogether. When
the heart is purified and cleansed and filled to the brim
with the divine nectar of love, all other ideas of God
become simply puerile, and are rejected as being inade¬
quate or unworthy. Such is indeed the power of Pard -
Bhakti or Supreme Love; and the perfected Bhakta no
more goes to see God in temples and churches; he
knows nowhere to go where he will not find Him. He
finds Him in the temple as well as out of the temple;
he finds Him in the saint's saintliness as well as in the
wicked man's wickedness, because he has Him already
seated in glory in his own heart, as the one almighty,
inextinguishable Light of Love which is ever shining
and eternally present

Human Representations of the Divine Ideal of Love.

It is impossible to express the nature of this supreme
and absolute ideal of love in human language. Even
the highest flight of human imagination is incapable of
comprehending it in all its infinite perfection and
beauty. Nevertheless, the followers of the religion of
love in its higher as welt as its lower forms have alt
along and in all countries had to use the inadequate
human language to comprehend and to define their


330


PARA—BHAKTI.


own ideal of love. Nay more; human love itself, in all |
its varied forms, has been made to typify this inex¬
pressible divine love. Man can think of divine things j

only in his own human way; to us the Absolute can be <

expressed only in our relative language. The whole
universe is to us a writing of the infinite in the language
of the finite. Therefore Bhaktas make use of all the
common terms associated with the common love of |
humanity in relation to God and His worship of love.

Some of the great writers on Pard-bhakti have tried to
understand and experience this divine love in so many
different ways. The lowest form in which this love is
apprehended is what they call the peaceful; the Sdnta. j
When a man worships God without the fire of love in
him, without its madness in his brain, when his love is
just the calm commonplace love, a little higher than
mere forms and ceremonies and symbols, but not at all
characterised by the madness of intensely active love,
it is said to be &dnta . We see some people in the world
who like to move on slowly, and others who come and
go like the whirlwind. The Sdnta-Bhkata is calm,
peaceful, gentle. The next higher type is that of Ddsya
(servantship); it comes when a man thinks he is the
servant of the Lord. The attachment of the faithful
servant unto the master is his ideal. The next is what
is known as Vdtsalya y loving God not as our Father but
as our Child. This may look peculiar, but it is a dis¬
cipline to enable us to detach all ideas of power from
the concept of God. The idea of power brings with
it awe. There should be no awe in love. The ideas


Digitized by


Google



parA-bhakti.


331


of reverence and obedience are necessary for the forma-
tion of character, but when character is formed, when
the lover has tasted the calm, peaceful love, and tasted
also a little of its intense madness, then he need talk
no more of ethics and discipline. To conceive God as
mighty, majestic and glorious, as the Lord of the Uni¬
verse, or as the God of Gods, the lover says he does
not care. It is to avoid this association with God of
the fear-creating sense of power that he worships God
as his own child. The mother and the father are not
moved by awe in relation to the child; they cannot
have any reverence for the child. They cannot think
of asking any favour from the child. The child's
position is always that of the receiver, and out of love
for the child the parents will give up their bodies a
hundred times over. A thousand lives they will sacri¬
fice for that one child of theirs, and therefore God is
loved as a child. This idea of loving God as a child
comes into existence and grows naturally among those
religious sects which believe in the incarnation of God.
To the Mahomedans it is impossible to have this idea
of God as a child; they will shrink from it with a kind
of horror. But the Christian and the Hindu can realise
it easily, because they have the baby Jesus and the
baby Krishna. The women in India often look upon
themselves as Krishna’s mothers; Christian mothers also
may take up the idea that they are all Christ's mothers,
and it will bring to the West the knowledge of God's
Divine Motherhood which they so much need. The
superstitions of awe and reverence in relation to God


Digitized by Google



33 2


parA-bhakti.


are deeply rooted in the heart of our hearts, and it
takes long years entirely to sink in love our ideas of
reverence and veneration, of awe and majesty and glory
with regard to God.

The next type of love is Sakhya (friendship). ** Thou
art our beloved friend.” Just as a man opens his heart
to his friend, and knows that the friend will never chide
him for his faults, but will always try to help him, just
as there is the idea of equality between him and his
friend, so equal love flows in and out between the wor¬
shipper and his friendly God. Thus God becomes our
friend, the friend who is near, the friend to whom we
may freely tell all the tales of our lives; the innermost
secrets of our hearts we may place before him with the
greatest assurance of safety and support; He is the
friend whom the devotee accepts as an equal; God is
viewed here as our playmate. We may well say that
we are all playing in this universe. Just as children
play their games, just as the most glorious kings and
emperors play their own games, so is the Beloved Lord
Himself in sport with this universe. He is perfect;
He does not want anything. Why should He create?
Activity is always with us for the fulfillment of a certain
want, and want always presupposes imperfection. God
is perfect; He has no wants. Why should He go on
with this work of an ever active creation? What pur¬
pose has He in view? The stories about God creating
this world, for some end or other that we imagine, are
good as stories, but not otherwise. It is all really in
sport; the universe is His play going on. The whole


Digitized by


Google



farA-bhakti,


333


universe must after all be a big piece of pleasing fun
to Him. If you are poor enjoy that as a fun; if you are
rich enjoy the fun of being rich; if dangers come, it
is also good fun; if happiness comes there is more good
fun. The world is just a play-ground, and we are here
having good fun, having a game, and God is with us
playing all the while, and we are with Him playing,
God is our eternal playmate. How beautifully He is
playing! The play is finished, the cycle comes to an
end. There is rest for a shorter or longer time, again
all come out and play. It is only when you forget
that it is all play, and that you are also helping in the
play, it is only then that misery and sorrows come;
then the heart becomes heavy, then the world weighs
upon you with tremendous power; but as soon as you
give up the serious idea of reality as the character¬
istic of the changing incidents of the three minutes of
life, and know it to be but a stage on which we are
playing, helping Him to play, at once misery ceases
for you. He plays in every atom; He is playing when
He is building up earths, and suns, and moons; He is
playing with the human heart, with animals, with
plants. We are his chessmen; He puts the chessmen
on the board, and shakes them up. He arranges us
first in one way and then in another, and we are con¬
sciously or unconsciously helping in HU play. And
Oh bliss! we are His playmates!

There is one more human representation of the divine
ideal of love. It is known as Madkura (sweet), and is
the highest of all such representations. It is indeed


LJ I y 11 r^-cvj uy


334


parA-bhakti.


based on the highest manifestation of love in this world,
and this love is also the strongest known to man.
What love shakes the whole nature of man, what love
runs through every atom of his being, makes him mad,
makes him forget his own nature, transforms him,
makes him either a God or a demon as the love between
man and woman? In this sweet representation of
divine love God is our husband. We are all women;
there are no men in this world; there is but the One
Man, and that is He, our Beloved. All that love
which man gives to woman, or woman to man, has here
to be given up to the Lord. All the different kinds of
love which we see in the world, and with which we
are more or less playing merely, have God as the one
goal; only unfortunately man does not know the infinite
ocean into which this mighty river of love is constantly
flowing; and so, foolishly, he often tries to direct it to
little dolls of human beings. The tremendous love
for the child that is in human nature is not for the little
doll of a child; if you bestow it blindly and exclusively
on the child, you will suffer in consequence; but
through such suffering will come the awakening by
which you are sure to find out that the love which is
in you, if it is given to any human being, will sooner
or later bring pain and sorrow as the result. Our
love must therefore be given to the Highest One, who
never dies and never changes, to Him in the ocean of
whose love there is neither ebb nor flow. Love must
get to its right destination, it must go unto Him who
is really the infinite ocean of love. All rivers flow into


Digitized by Google



parA-bhakti.


335


the ocean. Even the drop of water coming down from
the mountain side cannot stop its course after reaching
a brook or a river, however big it may be; at last even
that drop somehow does find its way to the ocean.
God is the one goal of all our passions and emotions.
If you want to be angry, be angry with Him. Chide
your Beloved, chide your Friend. Whom else can
you safely chide? Mortal man will not patiently put
up with your anger; there will be a reaction. If you
are angry with me I am sure quickly to react, because
I cannot patiently put up with your anger. Say unto
the Beloved, 44 Why do You not come to me; why do
You leave me thus alone? M Where is there any enjoy¬
ment but in Him? What enjoyment can there be in
little clods of earth? It is the crystallised essence of
infinite enjoyment that we have to seek, and that is in
God. Let all our passions and emotions go up unto Him.
They are meant for Him, for if they miss their mark
and go lower, they become vile; and when they go
straight to the mark, the Lord, even the lowest of
them becomes transfigured; all the energies of the
human body and mind, howsoever they may express
themselves, have the Lord as their one goal, as their
Ekdyana . All loves and all passions of the human heart
must go to God. He is the Beloved; whom else can
this heart love? He is the most beautiful, the most
sublime, He is beauty itself; sublimity itself. Who in
this universe is more beautiful than He? Who in this
universe is more fit to become the husband than He?
Who in this universe is fitter to be loved than He?


Digitized by Google



parA-bhaktl


336

So let Him be the husband, let Him be the Beloved
Often it so happens that divine lovers who sing of this
divine love accept the language of human love in all
its aspects as adequate to describe it. Fools do not
understand this; they never will. They look at it only
with the physical eye. They do not understand the
mad throes of this spiritual love. How can they?
“ One kiss of Thy lips, O Beloved! He that has been
kissed by Thee, his thirst for Thee goes on increasing
for ever, all his sorrows vanish, and he forgets all
things except Thee.” Aspire after that kiss of the
Beloved, that touch of His lips which makes the Bhakta
mad, which makes of man a god. To him, who has
been blessed with such a kiss, the whole of nature
changes, worlds vanish, suns and moons die out and
the universe itself melts away into that one infinite
ocean of love. That is the perfection of the madness
of love. Aye, the true spiritual lover does not rest
even there; even the love of husband and wife is not
mad enough for him. The Bhaktas take up also the
idea of illegitimate love, because it is so strong; the
impropriety of it is not at all the thing they have in
view. The nature of this love is such that the more
obstructions there are for its free play the more pas¬
sionate it becomes. The love between husband and
wife is smooth, there are no obstructions there. So the
Bhaktas take up the idea of a girl who is in love with her
own beloved man, and her mother or father or hus¬
band, objects to such love; the more anybody obstructs
the course of her love the more is her love tending to


Digitized by Google



parA-bhakti.


33;


grow in strength. Human language cannot describe
how Krishna was in the groves of Brinda, how madly
he was loved, how at the sound of his voice all rushed
out to meet him, the ever blessed Gopts , forgetting
everything, forgetting this world and its ties, its duties,
its joy and its sorrows. Man, oh man, you speak of
divine love and at the same time are able to attend to
all the vanities of this world—are you sincere? ‘ ‘Where
Rima is, there is no room for any desire — where
desire is there is no room for Rima: these never co¬
exist— like light and darkness they are never
together.”


Conclusion.

When this highest ideal of love is reached philosophy
i$ thrown away; who will then care for it? Freedom,
Salvation, Nirudna — all are thrown away; who cares
to become free while in the enjoyment of divine love?
“ Lord, I do not want wealth, nor friends, nor beauty,
nor learning, nor even freedom; let me be born again
and again, and be Thou ever my Love/’ Be Thou ever
and ever my Love. “ Who cares to become sugar/’
says the Bhakta y “ I want to taste sugar.” Who will
then desire to become free and one with God? ” I may
know that I am He, yet will I take myself away from
Him and become different, so that I may enjoy the
Beloved.” That is what the Bhakta says. Love for
love’s sake is his highest enjoyment. Who will not
be bound hand and foot a thousand times over to enjoy
the Beloved? No Bhakta cares for anything except
22


Digitized by


Google



338 parA-biiakti.

love, except to love and be loved.. His unworldly love
is like the tide rushing up the river; this lover goes
up the river, against the current. The world calls him
mad. I know one whom the world used to call mad,
and this was his answer. “ My friends, the whole
world is a lunatic asylum; some are mad after worldly
love, some after name, some after fame, some after
money, some after salvation and going to heaven. In
this big lunatic asylum I am also mad, I am mad after
God. If you are mad after money, I am mad after
God. You are mad; so am I. I think my madness is
after all the best. M The true Bkakta's love is this
burning madness, before which everything else vanishes
for him. The whole universe is to him full of love
and love alone; that is how it seems to the lover. So
when a man has this love in him, he becomes eternally
blessed, eternally happy; this blessed madness of divine
love alone can cure for ever the disease of the world
that is in us.

We all have to begin as dualists in the religion of
love. God is to us a separate being, and we feel our¬
selves to be separate beings also. Love then comes in
the middle, and man begins to approach God, and God
also comes nearer and nearer to man. Man takes up ;
all the various relationships of life, as father, as mother, j
as son, as friend, as master, as lover; and projects j

them on his ideal of love, on his God. To him God I

exists as all these, and the last point of his progress is
reached when he feels that he has become absolutely
merged in the object of his worship. We all begin


Digitized by Google



parA-bhakti,


339


with love for ourselves, and the unfair claims of the
little self make even love selfish; at last, however,
comes the full blaze of light in which this little self is
seen to have become one with the one Infinite. Man him¬
self is so transfigured in the presence of this Light of
Love. His heart is cleansed of all impurities and vain
desires of which it was more or less full before; and
he realises at last the beautiful and inspiring truth
that Love, Lover and the Beloved are one.


Digitized by Google



Digitized by Google



GLOSSARY


[ 34 *]


Digitized by



A rKW SIMPLE HXLP8 TO PROKUKCIATIOV

A like a in far ; A like oo in too ;

a almost like u in b#t; / like sh in s/A p;

/ like a in name; ch like ch in ri ckj

t like ee in see ; as like / in fine.

No attempt is made to give the finer distinctions of
Sanskrit pronunciation, as a thorough knowledge of the
language would be needed to grasp them.

In this glossary are to be found words commonly *
used in books and pamphlets on Ved&nta, as well as
those that are employed in this volume.

fs»]


Digitized by L^OOQle


Abhaya .. Fearlessness,

Abhdva .. Bereft of quality.

Abheda ... Non-separateness; sameness;

without distinction*

Abhidhyd .Not coveting others* goods,

not thinking vain thoughts,
not brooding over injuries
received from others,

Abhigh&ta .. Impediment

Abhim&na . Pride.

Abkinmtsa .*, * Attachment to life.

Abkydsa ...Practice.

Achdrya ... Great spiritual teacher,

Adarsa * A mirror — a term sometimes

used to denote the finer
power of vision developed
by the Vogt.

Adhidaivika . Supernatural

Adhtkdri .* One qualified as a seeker of

wisdom.

Aditi .The infinite, the goddess of

the sky.

Aditya .The Sun.

Adityas ..... Twelve planetary spirits.

[ 345 ]


344 GLOSSARY.

* Adharma ...Absence of virtue; unright-

eousness.

Adrogha . Not injuring.

Adrogha- V&k . One who does not harm others

even by words.

x Advaita . (A-dvaita) Non-dualism. The

monistic system of VedAnta
philosophy.

x Advaitin .A follower of Advaita .

* Adhy&sa . Reflection, as the crystal re¬

flects the color of the object
before it. Superimposition
of qualities of one object
over another, as of the snake
on the rope.

Agni .The god of fire. Later, the

Supreme God of the Vedas.

Aham . 44 1.”

Aham-3 rahmAsmt . 44 1 am Brahman . 99

Ahamkdra . Egoism. Self-consciousness.

Ah&ra . Gathering in,— as food to sup¬

port the body or the mind.

AhimsA . Non-injuring in thought, word,

or deed.

Ahimsaka . One who practises AhimsA.

y AjnA .The sixth lotos of the Yogis ,

corresponding to a nerve-
centre in the brain, behind
the eyebrows. Divine per¬
ception.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY. 345


i Ajndta. . One who has attained divine

wisdom.

^ Akdfa .. The all-pervading material of

the universe,

Akbar ...Mogul Emperor of India, 1543-

1605,

Akhanda . Undivided,

Y Akhanda-Satchiddnanda m “The undivided Existence-

Knowledge -Bliss Abso¬
lute,"

Alambana .... Objective contemplation. The

things which are supports
to the mind in its travel
God wards.

f Amritatuam ...Immortality,

y Andhaia . lit. “unstruck sound." The

fourth lotos of the Yogis in
the Suiumnd^ opposite the
heart.

Y Amnda .. Bliss,

Amnya-BhakH .Worship of one particular


Deity in preference to all
others. In a higher sense,
it is seeing all Deities as but
so many forms of the One
God, Singleness of love
and worship,

Anavasdda .... Cheerfulness, not becoming

dejected. Strength, both
mental and physical.


TP


346 GLOSSARY.

Animd . Attenuation.

Aniahkarana . Internal organ. The mind

with its three functions, the
cogitative faculty, the de¬
terminative faculty and the
egoism.

Antarydmin .The name of Ifvara , — mean¬

ing, He who knows every¬
thing that is going on within
(antara ) every mind.

Antardrdma .The Yogi who rests in the final

contemplation of the Su¬
preme Lord, ( [Ifvard ).

Anubhava . Realization.

Anuddharsa . Absence of excessive merri¬

ment.

Anumdna . Inference.

Anurakti. . The attachment that comes

after the knowledge of the
nature of God.

Anurdga .Great attachment to ISvara.

Anuvdda . A statement referring to some¬

thing already known.

Apakshiyate .To. decay.

Apdnd ...One of the five manifestations

of prdqa. The nerve-cur-
rent in the body which gov¬
erns the organs of excre¬
tion.

Aparapratyaksha .Super-sensuous perception.


Digitized by VjOOQle


GLOSSARY. 347

Apardvidyd .Lower knowledge; knowledge

of externals.

y Aparigraha .Non-receiving of gifts; not in*

dulging in luxuries.

y Apas .One of the elements; x water;

liquid.

ApritikUya .State of sublime resignation.

Apta . One who has attained to reali¬

sation of God; one who is
self-illumined.

Aptavdkyam ... .Words of an Apta.

Apura . Merit.

V Aranyakas ...The ancient Rishis, dwellers in

the forest, also a name given
to the books composed by
them.

AriftAa . Portents or signs by which a

Yogi can foretell the exact
time of his death.

Arjavam . Straight-forwardness.

V Arjuna .The hero of the Bhagavad

GttA , to whom Krishna (in
the form of a charioteer)
taught the great truths of
the VedAnia Philosophy.

Artha . Meaning.

Arthavattva . Fruition.

Arttpa .( A-rdpd ) Without form.

+ Arydvarta. . The land of the Aryans. The

name applied by the Hindus
to Northern India.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY.


348


Asamprajndta .The highest super-conscious

state.

f Asana . Position ot the body during

meditation.

* Asat„ . Non-being or existence. Op¬

posite of Sat . Applied to
the changing existence of
the universe.

AsmitA . Non-discrimination.

1 Atoka .A noted Buddhist King, 259-

222 B. C.

* Airama .. Hermitage.

AsvAda .lit. “taste,”—applied to the

finer faculty of taste devel¬
oped by the Yogi\

Astcyam . Non-stealing.

Asti . To be, or exist.

' Atharva Veda . That portion of the Veda which

treats of psychic powers.


Athdto Brahma-jijndid. . 44 Then therefore, the enquiry

into Brahman” [Veddnta
Sutra, x-x-I.]

1 Atikrdnta-Chavamya . •. The stage of meditation which


ends with what is called
“Cloud (or Showerer) of
Virtue ” Samddhi.

Atithi . A guest.

Atman . The Eternal Self.

'* Avar ana . Coverings (of the mind).

d Avatdra .A divine Incarnation.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY,


349


Avidyd .Ignorance.

Avritti-rasakrit-upadeidt 41 Repetition (of the mental

functions of knowing, medi¬
tating, etc., is required) on
account of the text giving in¬
structions more than once.’*
[ Veddnta Sutra , i-i-IV.]

V Avyaktam .Indiscrete; undifferentiated.

Stage of nature, when there
is no manifestation.

Bdhya-Bhakti . External devotion (as worship

through rites, symbols, cere¬
monials, etc., of God).

Bandha .Bondage.

Banyan-Tree . (Ficus Indicd) Indian fig tree;

the branches drop roots to
the ground, which grow and
form new trunks.

^ Bhagavad- Git A . 44 The Holy Song.” A gem

of Indian literature contain¬
ing the essence of the
Veddnta Philosophy.

■/> Bhagavdn .lit. 44 Possessor of all powers.”

A title meaning Great Lord.

Bhagavdn Rdtnakfishna . A great Hindu prophet and

teacher of the 19th century,
1835-1886. [See 44 Life and
Sayings of &ri Rdmakrishna”
by F. Max Mtiller. London,
1898. Longmans, Green &
Co., and Charles Scribner’s
Sons. New York.]


Digitized by ooQle


350


GLOSSARY.


^ Bhdgavata-PurSna

Bhakta .

i Bhakti .

^ Bhakti- Yoga ..

Bharat a .,


Bhdshya .
Bhautika

Bhdvand,
Bheda . •.
i Bhikshn .


f Bhoga .

Bhoja .

i BMtas .

Bodha .

Brahmd ..

A- Brahmacharya

Brahmachdrin


Brahman


One of the principal Purd$as.

A great lover of God.

Intense, love for God.

Union with the Divine through
devotion.

A great Yogi who suffered
much from his excessive
attachment to a deer which
he brought up as a pet.

A commentary.

Pertaining to the Bh&tas % or
elements.

Pondering; meditation.

Separateness.

A religious mendicant, a term
now usually applied to the
Buddhist monks.

Enjoyment of sense objects.

The annotator of the Yoga
Aphorisms.

Gross elements.

Intelligence.

The Creator of the universe.

Chastity in thought, word and
deed.

One who has devoted himself
to continence and the pur¬
suit of spiritual wisdom.

The One Existence, the Abso¬
lute.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY. 351


V Brahmaloka.*.* . The world of Brahmd, the

highest heaven.

Brdhmana ..A “ twice*born man,” a Brah¬

min.

Brdhma$as . . Those portions of the Vedas

which state the rules for the
employment of the hymns
at the various ceremonials.
Each of the four Vedas has
its own Brdhmana .


Brahma-Sufra-Bhdskya * Commentary on the aphorisms


of Veddnta,

Brahmavddin . Teacher of Brakman y one who

speaks or teaches of Brah
man or Absolute Being.

BrahmavidyA .. Knowledge of Brahman , the

supreme wisdom that leads
to MuktL

Brahmayoga .The Yoga which leads to the

realization of the Brahman .
(Chap. VIII of the Bhagavad
Gtfd is called by that name),

* Brahmin .. An Anglicized form of Brdh-

mana y a member of the
Brdhmana caste.

Buddha lit. “The Enlightened, 1 * the

name given to one of the
greatest Incarnations recog¬
nized by the Hindus, born
sixth century B. C.

i* Buddht .... *.* • ■ The determinative faculty.


352


GLOSSARY.


V Chaitanya .Pure intelligence. Name of a

great Hindu sage (bom
1485) who is regarded as a
Divine Incarnation.

y Chdndegya Upanishad ... One of the oldest Upemiskadt


of the Sima-Veda.

Ch&rvAka .A materialist

f Chid&kdtd .The space of knowledge, where

the Soul shines in its own
nature.

y Chitta. . “Mind-stuff.” (The fine ma-

terial out of which the mind
has been manufactured).

^ ChittAkASA .The mental space.

Dakshind .Offering made to a priest, or

teacher, at religious cere*
monies.

Dama . Control of the organs.

Ddfia .Charity.

Ddsya .“Servantship;” the state of

being a devoted servant of
God.

'/ Dayd .Mercy, compassion, doing

good to others without hope
of return.

Deha .Matter, gross body.

Devadatta . “God-given.”

Dam .The “ shining ones,” semi-di¬

vine beings representing
states attained by workers
of good.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY. 353

i Devaloka ... Abode of the gods.

Y Dcvaydna .... The path which leads to the

sphere of the gods, or the
different heavens.

Devi-BMgavaia .One of the Purdnas, which

describes the deeds of the
Divine Mother.

Dkdrand, .*.Holding the mind to one

thought for twelve seconds.
Concentration.

Dkarma . Virtue. Religious duty.

Dkarma-mtgha ,,.. u Cloud of virtue, ” (applied to

a kind of Samddhi ),

Y Dhydna .* Meditation.

Dhydnamdrga .... The way to knowledge through

meditation.

Y Dvandas . Dualities in nature, as heat

and cold, pleasure and pain,
etc., etc.

‘ Dveska .., Aversion.

Dydva-Prtthivt Heaven (and) Earth.

Ekdgra . Concentrated state of the

mind.

Ekam ...One.

Eka-Nisthd .. Intense devotion to one chosen

ideal.

Ek&nta-Bhakti. ...Singleness of love and devo¬

tion to God.


n


GLOSSARY.


354

Ehdtma-Vddam . Monism. The theory, accord*

ing to which there is only
one intelligent Entity. Pure
idealism.

EkAyana .The one stay or support

of all things,— hence the
Lord.

Ganxpati. .One of the Hindu deities.

'f- Gaiftia .A woman-sage mentioned in


the Upanishads. She prac¬
tised Yoga and attained to
the highest super-conscious
state.

Gdrgi ... God of wisdom and “ remover

of obstacles.” He is always
invoked at the commence¬
ment of every important
undertaking.


Gaum . Preparatory stage of Bhakti-

Yoga.

G&yatri .A certain most holy verse of

the Vedas.

Ghata ...A jar.

^ Gopts . Shepherdesses, worshippers of

Krishna.

1 Grahams... .Sense-perception.

- Grihastha . A householder, head of a fam¬

ily.

*- Gunas . Qualities, attributes.


Digitized by L^OOQle


GLOSSARY.


355


Guru . lit. “the dispeller of dark¬

ness.” A religious teacher
who removes the ignorance
of the pupil. The real guru
is a transmitter of the spirit¬
ual impulse that quickens
the spirit and awakens a
genuine thirst for religion.


V Hamsa .The Jtva y or individual soul.

Hanumdn . The great Bhakta hero of the

RAmdyana.

Hart ... lit. “ One who steals the hearts

and reason of all by His
beauty,” hence the Lord, a
name of God.

' Hatha Yoga .The science of controlling body

and mind, but with no spirit¬
ual end in view, bodily per¬
fection being the only aim.


Hafha- Yogi (or Yogin ).. One who practices “ Hafha -


./ Yoga”

Hiranyagarbha . lit. “golden wombed.” Ap¬

plied to BrahmA , the Crea¬
tor, as producing the uni¬
verse out of Himself.

Hum ..A mystic word used in medi¬

tation as symbolic of the
f highest Bliss.

’ LJA. . . .The nerve current on the left

side of the spinal cord; the
left nostril.


Digitized by Google


356 GLOSSARY.

y Indra . Ruler of the gods.

Indriyim . Sense organs.

v Indrtyas . The internal organs of percep-

tion.

v If Ana . One of the dcvas .

IsAtam. . Chosen ideal (from “tsA,” to

wish). That aspect of God
which appeals to one most.

^ IsAt a NistAd . Devotion to one ideal.

IshtApArta ............ The works which bring as re¬
ward the enjoyments of the
heavens.

.** Ifvara . The Supreme Ruler; the high¬

est possible conception
through reason, of the Ab¬
solute, which is beyond all
thought.


IfvarapramdAAna .Meditation on Ifvara .

Ifvara PranidAAn&dvA .. A S&tra of Patanjali —■ entitled


“ By worship of the Supreme
Lord.”

Jada . Inanimate.

JAgrat . Waking state.

JAti ...Species.

’’ JAyatc . To be born.

4 jtva ... The individual soul. The one

Self as appearing to be sepa¬
rated into different entities;
corresponding to the ordi¬
nary use of the word “soul"


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY.


357


Jivatman ....
Jtvan Mukta


Jndna ..

% fndna-chaksu H


Jndmkdnda .
Jndna-yaJna


Jndnt [or Jndnin\

Kaivalya ,*.

S Kdla m „„ .

£ Katpa ... ...

Katy&na ..

K&ma .

Kapila. ..


Kapilavastu
Kdrikd ....


The manifesting as the

Jtva.

lit. “Living Freedom/' One
who has attained liberation
(MukH) even while in the
body.

Pure intelligence. Knowledge.

One whose vision has been
purified by the realization of
the Divine.

The knowledge portion or
philosophy of the Vedas,

“Wisdom-Sacrifice/' Perfect
unselfishness, purity and
goodness which lead to
Jndna t or supreme wisdom
(Moksha).

One who seeks liberation
through pure reason or
philosophy.

Isolation, Oneness with Ab¬
solute Being.

Time.

A cycle (in evolution).

Blessings.

Desire.

Author of the Sdnkkya Phi¬
losophy, and the father of
the Hindu Evolutionists.

Birthplace of Gautama the
Buddha .

A running commentary.


358 GLOSSARY.

Karma . Work or action, also effects of

actions; the law of cause and
effect in the moral world.

Karmak&nda .The ritualistic portion of the

Vedas.

* ' Karmendriyas . Organs of action.

' Karma - Yoga . Union with the Divine through

the unselfish performance of
duty.

Khanda ... Differentiated, or divided; di¬

vision.

f Klesa .Troubles.

^ Krishna ... An Incarnation of God who

appeared in India about
1400 B. C. Most of his
teachings are embodied in
the Bhagavad Gttd.

t Kriyd .. Action, ritual, ceremonial.

KriyamAna •. The Karma we are making at

present.

Kriyd - Yoga . Preliminary Yoga f the perform¬

ance of such acts as lead
the mind higher and higher.

KsAana .Moments.

Kshatriya .. Member of the warrior (or

second) caste of ancient
India.

Kshetra .lit. “ the perishable,!’ also 44 a

field.” Applied to the human
body (as the field of action.)


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY, 359


Kshetrajfta ,...The knower of Kshttra. (Gita,

Chap, XII.) The soul,

Kumbkaka ...Retention of the breath in the

practice of prdndydma ,

Kundalim . lit, 44 the coiled-up." The


residual energy, located ac¬
cording to the Yogis , at the
base of the spine, and which
in ordinary men produces
dreams, imagination, psychi¬
cal perceptions, etc,, and
which, when fully aroused
and purified, leads to the
direct perception of God.

fCunti .*«* * The mother of the five Pdnda-

rns, the heroes who opposed
the Kaurovas at the battle
of Kuruksheira , the account
of which forms the principal
theme of the Mahdbkdrata ,
the Indian epic.


Kurma . .. The name of a nerve upon

which the Yogis meditate.

Kurma-Purdna . One of the eighteen principal

Purdnas.

Kuia .A kind of Indian grass used

in religious rites,

Madhubhumiba .... The second stage of the Yogi

when he gets beyond the ar¬
gumentative condition.


360 GLOSSARY.

' Madhumati ..... lit. “ honeyed.” The state

when knowledge gives satis¬
faction as honey does.

MathurA ..... Sweet. That form of Bhakti

in which the relation of the
devotee towards God is like
that of a loving wife to her
husband.

^ MadvAchArya .Commentator of the dualistic

school of the Vedinta phi¬
losophy.

Mah&kdia .lit. “ Great space ” (applied

to ordinary space).

^ Mah&purusha .Great Soul. (Incarnation.)

si Mahat .lit. “The great one.” Cosmic

intelligence.

V Mahattattva ..... • Great principle. The ocean

of intelligence evolved first
from indiscrete nature, ac¬
cording to SAnkkya philos¬
ophy.

MahAyoga .Seeing the Self as one with God.

v Maitriya .lit. “ Full of compassion.” The

name of a Hindu sage.

^ Manas . The deliberative faculty of the

mind.

Mantra . Any prayer, holy verse, sacred

or mystic word recited or
contemplated during wor¬
ship.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY. 361

Mantra-drashtd .

44 Seer of thought. ” One pos¬
sessed of super-sensuous

V

knowledge.

* ManipAra .

lit. 44 Filled with jewels.” The
third lotos of the Yogis , op¬
posite the navel (in the

Sufumnd).

MAiris .

Seconds.

Mat ha. ..

Mathuri [Now known

Monastery.

as 44 Muttra"] .

Birth-place of Krishna.

' MdyA .

Mistaking the unreal and phe-


nomenal for the real and
eternal. Commonly trans¬
lated illusion, (lit. 44 which

,

baffles all measurement.”)

Mtmdnsi .

lit. 44 Solution of a problem.”

One of the six schools of


Indian philosophy.

' Moksha .

Freedom, liberation ( Mukti ).

Moksha-dharma .

The virtues which lead to lib¬
eration of the soul.

Mrityu .

Death. Another name for

Yama.

’ Mukti .

Emancipation from rebirth.

s' MMdh&ra .

The basic lotos of the Yogis.

Mumukiutvam .

Desire for liberation.

Mundaka- Upanishad ....

One of the twelve principal
Upardshads.

^ Muni ..

A (religious) sage.

Digitized by CjOO^Ic


362 GLOSSARY.

' m ' Ndda .Sound, finer than is heard by

our ears.

^ NAda-Brahma .The “sound-Brahman” The

Om y that undifferentiated
Word, which has produced
all manifestation.

vf NA$i ... A tube along which something

flows—as the blood cur¬
rents, or nervous energies.

v NAfi-suddhi .lit. “ Purification of the chan¬


nel through which the nerve
currents flow.” One of the
elementary breathing exer¬
cises.


NaUthika .One possessed of a singleness

of devotion towards a high
ideal of life.

Namah ...Salutation.

NAma-rdpa . Name and form.

NAmaiakti .The power of the name of

God.

^ Nhrada .,. The great “god-intoxicated”

sage of ancient India, who
is reputed to have possessed
all the “powers” described
in Yoga philosophy.


NArada-Sutra .The Aphorisms of NArada on

Bhakti.

NArdyana . ‘ 1 Mover on the waters,” a title

of Vishnu .


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY.


363


Natardja ... lit. “ Lord of the stage.”

Sometimes used for God as
the Lord of this vast stage
the universe.

44 Netty Neti ” . . 44 Not this, not this.”

Nimitta . Operative cause.

Nirdlambana .lit. 44 Supportless,” a very high

stage of meditation, accord¬
ing to Yoga philosophy.

' ! Nirbija . lit. “Without seed.” The


highest form of Sam&dhi or
super-conscious state of the
mind according to Yoga
philosophy.


Nirguna .Without attributes or quali¬

ties.

Nishkimakarma .Unselfish action. To do good

acts without caring for the
results.

v Nitya .. Permanent, eternal.

Nirukta . Science dealing with etymol¬

ogy and the meaning of
words.

* Nirvdna . Freedom; extinction or “blow¬

ing out ” of delusions.
NirviehAra .Without discrimination.

* Nirvikalpa .Changeless.

Nirvitarka . Without question or reasoning

Nivritti . 44 Revolving away from.”

^ NishthA . Singleness of attachment.


Digitized by L^OOQle


3^4

^ Niyama
^ Nydya ..
^ ...


Om or Omkdra


x Om tat sat


Pada .

Pdda .

/ ParA .

j Pard-Bhakti .
^ Paramahamsa
‘ PardvidyA ...

Parinamate ..
> Parjanya . ...
7 Patanjali ....


GLOSSARY.

.. The virtues of cleanliness,
contentment, mortification,
study and self-surrender.

• • The school of Indian logic.

The science of logical phi¬
losophy.

.• lit. “The illuminating or
bright." The highest form
of energy attained by a con¬
stant practice of continence
and purity.

.. The most holy word of the
Vedas. A symbolic word
meaning the Supreme Being,
the Ocean of Knowledge and
Bliss Absolute.

• • lit. “Om That Existence."

That Ocean of Knowledge
and Bliss Absolute, the only
Reality.

.. Foot.

.. Chapter.

.. Supreme.

.. Supreme devotion.

.. Supreme soul.

.. Highest knowledge.

.. To ripen.

.. God of rain, and of the clouds.

.. Founder of the Yoga School
of Philosophy.


Digitized by L^OOQle


GLOSSARY.


365


^ Pingald .The nerve-current on the right

side of the spinal cord; also
the right nostril.

* Pingald ..A courtesan who abandoned

her vicious life and became
remarkable for her piety and
virtue.

f Pitris . Forefathers, ancestors.

v Pradhdna . lit. “The chief." The prin¬

cipal element; a name used
for nature in Sdnkya phi¬
losophy.

x Prajnd . Highest knowledge which

leads to the realization of
the Deity.

Prajndjyoti .. One who has been illumined

with knowledge transcend¬
ing the senses.

N Prakriti . Nature.

v Prakritilayas .Souls that have got all the

powers that nature has by
becoming one with nature.

PrahUda .The chief of BAaktas. [Devo-.

tees.]

PramAna . Means of proof.

Pramtya . Correct cognition.

I Prdna . The sum total of the cosmic

energy, the vital forces of
the body.

^ Prdpdydma . . .Controlling the prd$a.


Digitized by Google


366 GLOSSARY.

Pramdhdna .Unceasing devotion.

v Prirabdha .. •. • The works or Karma whose

fruits we have begun to reap
in this life.

Prasankhydna .Abstract contemplation.

Prathamakalpika .Argumentative condition of

the conscious Yogi.

Pratibhd .. Divine illumination.

Pratika .. lit. “Going towards." A

finite symbol standing for
the infinite Brahman.

Pratimd .The use of images as sym¬

bols.

Prativishaya . That which is applied to the


different objects, /. e . 9 the
organs of sense.

PratyihAra .....Making the mind introspeo


tive.

Pratyagdtman ......... The internal self; the self-

luminous.

. /

Pratyaksham .Direct perception.

Pravritti . “ Revolving towards."

v Priti ...Pleasure in God.

“ Priihnd .... One of the elements; earth;

solids.

Pdraka .Inhalation.

V Purdnas . Writings containing the Hindu

mythology.

^ Puruia . The Soul.

Pdrva-paksha . The prima facie view.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY, 367

Quran ... The Mahommedan Scriptures

Rdga .Attachment to those things

that please the senses.

Rdgdnugd .,.. ..... The highest form of love and

attachment to the Lord.

Rd/a ***** ...lit “ To shine. *' Royal,

y Rd/a Hamsa . .,,.. Swan,

Rajas .. Activity, One of the three

' principles which form the

- essence of nature,

X Rd/a Yoga** .lit lt Royal yoga*' The

science of conquering the
internal nature, for the pur
* pose of realizing the Divin¬

ity within,

> Rdkshasa . A demon,

Rdmdnuja ** . A noted commentator of the

VishiUadvaita School of Phi¬
losophy (qualified monistic),

Rdma ..An Incarnation of God, and

hero of the celebrated epic—
the 11 Rdmdyana .”

Rdmdyam .. A celebrated Indian epic poem

written by Valmiki, a sage.

Rang .. A symbolic word for the high¬

est wisdom.

Rasdyanas ...The alchemists of ancient

India.

Reckaka .. ..Exhalation,


V


368

Rig-Veda


GLOSSARY.


V Rhhi


RitambharAprajna .

^ Rudra ..

/ .

Sabdabrahma .

^ &abda Nishtham /ago /••
X Sabija Yoga .


^ Saguna .

/ Saguna-Brahma

f Saguna-vidyd ...
^ Sahairdra .


>' Sakhya
V &*//. .,
Sdlokva


Oldest portion of the Vedas,
composed of hymns.

lit “Seer of mantras ”
(thoughts). One possessed
of super-sensuous knowl¬
edge.

One whose knowledge is truth¬
supporting.

A name of a Vedic god

Sound.

The creative word correspond¬
ing to the Logos.

“Through sound the world
stands/’

44 Seeded ” meditation (that is
where all seeds of future
Karma are not yet de¬
stroyed).

With qualities.

The qualified or lower Brah¬
man.

Qualified knowledge.

The “thousand-petalled lotos,”
a figurative expression of
the Yogis describing the
brain.

Friendship.

Power.

Dwelling in the presence of
God.


Digitized by Google


Santa .

y Sdtna-Vtda .

Samddhi .

y Sam&dh&na .

Samdna . .

£&md nyatadrishta

SamdpaUi ..


Samarasa ,..

Samasti .

S&mipya ,.,,
Samprajn&ta.

y Samsdra
y Samskdras . *

/ Samyama m t *


*4


GLOSSARY, 369

.* Not allowing the mind to ex¬
ternalize.

■. The hymn portion of the Veda,
or that portion which was
sung during the ceremonies,
P , Super-consciousness,

.■ Constant practice.

,, The nerve current that controls
the function of digestion.

.. Inference based on superficial
reasoning.

lit. “Treasures.” Used in
Yoga philosophy to indicate
the different stages of medi¬
tation.

*, Equality.

*. The universal.

.. Closeness to God
,. The first stage of super-con¬
sciousness which comes
through deep meditation.

., Endless cycle of manifestation,

,, Impressions in the mind-stuff
that produce habits,

.. lit. “Control.” In the Yoga
philosophy it is technically
used for that perfect control
of the powers of the mind,
by which the Yogt can know
anything in the universe,


^ S&uiV&t......

SdmSfya .

V Sankardchdrya

7 Sinkbya .

Sankoeka.....
/ Sannydsa .


The “blissful SmmSdMT The
third step of tbcsMM prm/mdi m
iwldi. The object of
Medit a ti o n in this state is
the * thinking organ " bereft
of activity and dullness.
iMmjms and Tmmms.)

The stored up, past Karma^
whose fruits we are not reap¬
ing now, but which we shall
have to reap in the future.

Writer of the Aphorisms of
Divine Love (Bkakti) from
the Advaita point of view.

The great exponent and com¬
mentator of thenon-dualistic
school of Ved&nta. He is
supposed to have lived in
India about the eighth cen¬
tury A. D.

lit. “ That which reveals truth
perfectly.” The name of a
famous system of Indian
philosophy, founded by the
great sage Kapila.

Shrinking, contraction or non¬
manifestation.

Complete renunciation of all
worldly position, property
and name.


Digitized by L^OOQle


GLOSSARY.


371


'' SanttyAsin .One who makes Sannydsa , and

lives a life of self-sacrifice,
devoting himself entirely to
religion.

Sdnta . Peaceful or gentle love.

Sdnta-Bhakta .A devotee who has attained to

peace through the path of
Divine love.

V Sdntih ...Peace.

v Santoia .Contentment.

Sdrupya . Growing like God.

V Sdstra . Books accepted as Divine au¬

thority. Sacred Scriptures.

v Sat . Existence-Absolute.

y Satchiddnanda . “ Existence-Knowledge-Bliss

Absolute.”

V Sattva ...Illumination material. One

of the three principles which
form the essence of nature.


Sattva-purshdnyatdkhydti The perception of the Self as


different from the principles
of nature.

^ Sdttvika . Having the Sattva quality

highly developed, hence one
who is pure and holy.

7 Satyam . Truthfulness.

^ Saucham .Cleanliness.

-L Savichdra .With discrimination. (A mode

of meditation.)


Digitized by L^OOQle


372 GLOSSARY.

' ' Savitarka . Meditation with reasoning or

question.

Sdyujya . Unity with Brahman.

; Sdkshi .Witness.

Siddha-Guru .A teacher who has attained

Mukti,

'■ Siddhdnta . Decisive knowledge.

'Z Siddhas .. Semi-divine beings, or Yogis 9

who have attained super¬
natural powers.

y Siddhis .The supernatural powers

which come through the
practice of Yoga .

Z Sikshd....\ mm * .The science dealing with pro-

/ nunciation and accents.

Sisfiya ....».A student or disciple of a

Guru .

Siva .The “Destroyer” of the

Hindu trinity. Sometimes
regarded in the Hindu
mythology as the One God.

Srooham .. “lam Siva ” (or eternal bliss).

Sloka . Verse.

V Smfiti . (i) Memory. (2) Any authori¬

tative religious book, ex¬
cept the Vedas .

/ Soham . “Iam He.”

Soma . A certain plant, the juice of

which was used in the
ancient sacrifices.


Digitized by Google


GLOSSARY.


373


if


Sphota.


Srdddkd

&ravana


&rf .

&ri Bh&shya

Srotiyas >lal


Sruti.


The eternal, essentia! material
of all ideas or names, which
makes words possible, yet is
not any definite word in a
fully formed state. The in¬
expressible Manifestor be¬
hind all the expressed, sensi¬
ble universe. The power
through which the Lord
creates the universe. Its
symbol is the eternal Om ,
Strong faith in religion.

(i) Hearing, the ears. (2) The
finer power of hearing de¬
veloped by the Vogt
Holy, or blessed.

Name of the qualified non-
dualistic commentary of
Vedanta by Rdmdnuja .
lit. 14 High born," or born of
a noble fami!y. The Hindu
students who know the
Vedas by heart.

The Vedas , so called because
transmitted orally from
father to son in ancient
times. The Vedas are re¬
garded by all orthodox
Hindus as Divine revelation
and as the supreme author¬
ity in religious matters.


374


GLOSSARY.


Stkiti .

1/ y Sihuia Sarira .

/ Y Sukshma Sarira [some¬
times called “Lingo

Sarira ”].

Sanyo, Vida .

S Sushupti .

Sushumnd .


•' Sitra .

v SvAdMsthdna


SvAdhyAya
Svdh&t . • •


Svapna .

Svapne&vara .

Svaripa .

Svasti .

Sviti .

Svarga .

SvAmi .

SvctdsvcUara- Upamskad.


Stability.
Gross body.


Fine or subtle body.

Doctrine of the void; nihilism.

Deep, dreamless sleep.

The name given by the Yogis
to the hollow canal which
runs through the centre of
the spinal cord.

lit. 44 Thread. ” Usually means
aphorism.

lit. “Abode of Self.” Second
lotos of the Yogis , between
base of spine and the navel.

Study.

44 May it be perpetuated,” or
44 so be it.” An expression
used in making oblation.

The dream state.

Commentator of the Aphor¬
isms of SAndilya .

Natural form.

A blessing, meaning “Good
be unto you.”

Name of a star.

Heaven.

A title meaning 44 master,” or
“spiritual teacher/*

One of the chief Upamshads of
the Yqjur.V*da.


Digitized by L^OOQle


GLOSSARY.


375


Taiiyatd .lit. 44 His-ness.” The state

when a man has forgotten
himself altogether, in his
love for the Lord, and does
not feel that anything be¬
longs to him personally.


Tamos ... 44 Darkness,” inertia.

t Tanmdtras . Fine materials.

Tantras . Books held to be sacred by a

certain sect in India.

Tantrfkas .Followers of the Tantras.

Tapas ..Controlling the body by fast¬

ing or other means. Aus¬
terity.

Tdraka . Saviour.

Tarka ...Question or reasoning.

44 Tat tvam asi n . 44 That thou art.”

Tattoos . Categories, principles, truths.

Tejas .One of the elements; fire; heat.

Titikshd .Ideal forbearance. 44 All-suf-

feringness.”

TrishnA .Thirst, desire.

TulsidAs .A great sage and poet who


popularised the famous epic,
the RAm&yana> by translat¬
ing it from Sanskrit into
Hindustani dialect.

Turtya .The fourth, or highest state of

consciousness.

Tydga . Renunciation.


Digitized by Google


37^ GLOSSARY.

y

Uddna •. Nerve current governing the

organs of speech, etc.

UddhArsa . Excessive merriment.

v Udgtiha .lit. “That which is chanted

aloud/ 9 hence the Pranava
or Om.

Udgdtha .Awakening the Kundalim.

Updddna .The material cause of the

world.

Upddhi .Limiting adjunct.

UparOti .Not thinking of things of the

senses; discontinuing exter¬
nal religious observances.

Updyapratyaya .A state of abstract medita¬

tion.

Uttara Gttd .The name of a book supposed

to be related by Sri Krishna
for the further instruction of
Arjuna .


K Uttara Mtmdnsd .Another name for the Veddnta


philosophy, written origin¬
ally in the form of aphorisms
by Vydsa.

Vach or Vdk .lit. “speech.” The Word, the

Logos.

Vdda .Argumentative knowledge.

Vairdgyam . Non-attachment to the attrac¬

tions of the senses. Re*
nunciation.


Digitized by L^OOQle


GLOSSARY.


377


'' Vaiicshika . A branch of the Nydya school

of philosophy; the Atomic
school.

N Vaishnavas .The followers or worshippers

of Vishnuy who form one of
the principal Hindu religious
sects.

^ Vdmadeva .. A great Rishi who possessed

the highest spiritual enlight¬
enment from the time of his
birth.

y Vdnaprastha .The forest life. Third of the

four stages into which the
life of a man was divided in
ancient India.

Vardha-Purdna .One of the eighteen principal

Puranas.

Vardhate . To grow.

Vdrtikam . A concise explanatory note.

Varuna .The old Vedic god of the sky.

Vdsand . A habit or tendency arising

from an impression remain¬
ing unconsciously in the
mind from past Karma,

N Vdsudtva . Manifestation of the highest

Being.

Vdtsalya .The affection of parents for

children.

^ Vdyu.. . lit. “the vibrating.” The

air.


Digitized by Google


378 GLOSSARY.

Vedand. .The fine power of feeling de¬

veloped by the Yogt.

y Vidas . The Hindu Scriptures, consist¬


ing of the Rtg-VedOy the Ya-
jur- Veda, the Santa- Veda , the
Artharva- Veda; also the
Brahmanas and the Upanish-
ads; comprising the hymns,
rituals and philosophy of the
Hindu religion.

Ved&nta ...The final philosophy of the

Vedas, as expressed in the
Upanishads . The philosoph¬
ical system which embraces
all Indian systems of phi¬
losophy,— the monistic, the
mono-dualistic and the dual-
Istic.


Vtddvat anantah .A quotation from the Vedas,

meaning “The Scriptures
are infinite.”

Videha . Disembodied, or unconscious

^ of body.

V Vidyd . Science, or knowledge.

“ *' Vidv&n . One who knows.

V Vijndna . The higher knowledge.

v Vikalpa . Verbal delusion, doubt, notion,

fancy.

Vikaranabhdva .Uninstrumental perception.


Digitized by Google


CLOSSARY. 379


Vikshipia •. A scattered or confused state

of the mind.

^ Vimoksha .Absence of desire. Absolute

freedom.

^ Vind ...A stringed musical instrument

v of India.

> Viparyaya ..False conception of a thing


whose real form does not
correspond to that concep¬
tion, as mother of pearl mis¬
taken for silver.


Vipra .A sage who was bom and bred

a Brahmin.

Viraha ...Intense misery due to separa¬

tion from the beloved one.

" Vitya .Strength, energy.

X Vishnu ...The “Preserver” of the


Hindu trinity, who takes
care of the universe, and
who incarnates from time to
time to help mankind.

/ ViHshtddvaita .Qualified non-dualism. A

school of Indian philosophy,
founded by Rlminuja, a
great religious reformer,
which teaches that the indi¬
vidual soul is a part of God.

ViUshiAdvaitin .A follower of the above school

of philosophy; a qualified
non-dualist.


Digitized by Google


380 glossary.

Vttoka . “Sorrowless.”

Vivekdnanda . “ Bliss-in-discrimination. M

Vitarka .Questioning or philosophical

enquiry.

Vweka ...Discrimination (of the true

from the false).

Viiuddha ...... The fifth lotos of the Yogts>

opposite the throat (in the
Sushumni).

Vraja .•••••••••••••.• A suburb of the city of Muttra^

where Krishna played in his
childhood.

Vrinid .. The attendant of the principal

Gopt .

Vritti ...lit “ The whirlpool." Wave

form in the chitta ; a modifi¬
cation of the mind.

Vydna ...The nerve current which cir¬

culates all over the body.

Vydsa .lit. “ One who expands ” (as a


commentator). One Vydsa
was the author of the Mahd-
bhdrata and of the Uttara
Mtmdnsd ..


Vydsa Sutras .. The Ved&nta Aphorisms by

Vydsa.

Vyaffi.... .The particular (as opposed to

the universal).

Vyutthdna .Waking, or returning to con¬

sciousness after abstract
meditation.


Digitized by Google


V Yajur-Veda
‘ Yatna .


' Yoga


v

Yoga Sdtra

V Yogi .

V Yudhisfhira


*>' Yuga


GLOSSARY. 381

•. The ritualistic portion of the
Veda.

.. The internal purification
through moral training, pre¬
paratory to Yoga. The god
of Death, so called from his
power of self-control.

.. Joining; union of the lower
self with the higher self, by
means of mental control.
Any sort of culture that
leads us to God.

.. Aphorism on Yoga.

.. One who practices Yoga.

.. A great Hindu Emperor who
lived about 1400 B. C. He
was one of the five P&ndavas.

.. A cycle or age of the world.
The present cycle is known
in India as the “ Kali- Yuga"
or “Iron-Age.”


Digitized by Google


Digitized by Google



BAKE* Sr TAYLOR CW5 F l BUCA TtQXS.


BOOKS ON THE

VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY.

BY SWAM1 VIVEKANANDA.

RAJA YOGA. —Lectures by Swamt rtrekmudu, contain'
iog also Patanjali’s Yoga Aphorisms, with Commentary, and a
copious Sanskrit Glossary. The book includes a lecture on
“ Immortality,** and the Swami's lectures on BNAKTt YOGA.
A fine portrait of the author, frontispiece. The whole hand*
somely bound in cloth, $1.50.

44 With the simplicity of language of a child's primer, and the pnw
gressive logic of a mathematical proposition, the Swami explains the
simple working rules of this science. . . . The book is charming to
any one interested in the subject, and an instructive study in logic to
even the most indifferent*’— Public Opinio*, N. Y., July ayth, l#uu»

KARMA YOGA. —Eight lectures on the practical applica*
tion of the Vedanta Philosophy to the affaire of daily life,
showing in a clear and forcible manner how It is possible to
lead the highest life without abandoning the duties and avo¬
cations of one’s station in the world, and proving conclusively
that the loftiest aspiration and attainment are entirely com¬
patible with the humblest occupation, and are open to every
human being. Cloth, with portrait. New and revised edi¬
tion. $1.00.

MY MASTER, besides telling of tho life of Sri Rama-
krishna, gives us an insight into some of the religious Ideas
of the Hindus and sets forth the more important Ideals that
vitally influence India’s teeming millions. If we art willing
to sympathetically study the religious views of our Aryan
brethren of the Orient, we shall find them governed by spirit¬
ual concepts in no way inferior to the highest known to our¬
selves; concepts that were thought out and practically applied
by these ancient philosophers in ages so remote as to antedate
history. i2mo, cloth. 50 cents.

Sent, postpaid, on receipt 0/ the price bp

■ THE BAKER & TAYLOR CO., PUBLISHERS,
99-37 B. 17 th St., Union Sq. North, Now York.


Digitized by Google



BAKER 6* TAYLOR CO.’S PUBLICATIONS.


PRESS NOTICES OF RAJA YOGA.

The whole spirit of the book is candid in the extreme. It i
appeals to what is best and noblest in ma. It makes no
foolish mysteries, and demands no blind belief. It puts forth
its system in a plain and simple manner. It is able to pre¬
sent its own method without in any way attacking the
method of others. It manifests a charity that it is usual to
call Chri .ian, b.t which Vivekananda proves is equally the
property of the Hindu. If this little book had nothing to
teach but the beautiful toleration it advocates, it ..ould be
well worth reading; but many will find in it valuable sug¬
gestions to aid in reaching the higher life.— Arena, March,

1897.

This work embraces a series of lectures that fully explain
the doctrines and principles of the philosophy of the Indian
monks, wV > have aroused such a widespread interest in this
country. To the reader who is seeking after the truth and
light, this volume will be indeed welcome. It is written in
an unusually clear style that all readers can understand.—
Bookseller and Newsman.

How to get at the soul and put the reins of the mind and
the body into its hands, is the problem that Raja Yoga at¬
tempts to solve, and all those persons who practice Yoga
are known as Yogis. Then—how to become a Yogi, how to
rise to a high state of psychic control is what Vivekananda
endeavors to point out in these lectures .—Literary Digest.

A large part of the book is occupied with that method of
attaining perfection known as Raja Yoga, and there are also
translations of a number of aphorisms and an excellent glos¬
sary .—Living Age , Aug. 5th, 1899.

A valuable portion of the volume to students is the glos¬
sary of Sanskrit technical terms. This includes not only
such terms as are employed in the book, but also those fre¬
quently employed in works on the Vedanta philosophy in
general .—New York Times , July 22nd, 1899.

A new edition, with an enlarged glossary, which will be
welcomed by students of comparative religion, who are al¬
ready familiar with the author’s lectures in this country.—
Review of Reviews , Oct., 1899.

The methods of practical realization of the divine within
the human are applicable to all religions, and all peoples,
and only vary in their details to suit the idiosyncrasy of race
and individuals.—Washington, D. C., June 12th, 1899.


Digitized by L^OOQle


BAKER < 5 e TAYLOR C 0 . 9 S PUBLICATIONS.


PRESS NOTICES OF RAJA YOGA. —( Continued,)

This application of an ancient system of Indian philosophy
will doubtless be of much interest to those who delve into
such subjects.— Los Angeles Times , July 2nd, 1899.

The mental and physical processes are described through
which man may be brought to a full knowledge in life of the
secrets of his being.— San Francisco Chronicle , Aug. 6th, 1899.

The work is exceedingly interesting.— Religio-rhilosophical
Journal > San Francisco, Sept. 21st, 1899.

As a study of Vedanta Philosophy and Raja Yoga it is,
perhaps, unequalled by any other book in the English lan¬
guage.— The Progressive Thinker , Sept. 26th, 1899.

With the simplicity of language of a child’s primer, and
the progressive logic of a mathematical proposition, the
Swami explains the simple working rules of this science*
. . . The book is charming to any one interested in the sub¬
ject, and an instructive study in logic to even the most in¬
different.— Public Opinion , N. Y., July 27th, 1899.

You cannot, you must not, fail to study it. It is truth, life,
peace, joy. We beg all our readers to look into it in the
most thorough manner.— Occult Truths , Sept., 1899.

This work is essentially uplifting and breathes in every
line the divinity of man. It is, of course, the Hindu idealist’s
conception of God, infinity, man, and his relations to the
whole, and carries throughout the pure and lofty idealism
of the Hindu philosophy.— Light of Truth , Sept, nth, 1897.

As an exposition the book is good. It conveys a definite
idea of what the aim and end of the Hindu religion is.—
The Truth Seeker , Nov. nth, 1899.

That he (Swami Vivekananda) is master of the science of
Raja Yoga, that contains so much that is mysterious to the
Western world, there can be no doubt. These lectures give
a thorough and lucid explanation of it, and contain much
that Christians must accept as sound and wise.— Bookseller ,
Newsdealer , and Stationer , Aug. 1st, 1899.

Raja Yoga is an ancient system of Indian Philosophy, and
one of the four chief methods that the Vedanta Philosophy
offer to obtain freedom and perfection.— Book News, Aug.,
1899.

The foregoing books mailed postpaid on receipt of the
price by

THE BAKER & TAYLOR C0. # PUBLISHERS,
aa -47 B> 17 th 6 t.i Union 6 q« North» Now York*


Digitized by L^OOQle



Pamphlets on Vedanta Philosophy.

The following lectures by Swami Vivekananda contain a
comprehensive statement of the fundamental teachings of Ve¬
danta, and furnish a clear exposition of this Philosophy.
They are in pamphlet form and will be mailed to any address
for 10 cents each and i cent postage.

The Ideal of a Universal Religion,— s etting forth the fun¬
damental principles underlying all religions, in which
principles those of different faiths can find a basis for har¬
mony, thus promoting toleration and sympathy instead of
bigotry and hatred.

The Cosmos ,—two lectures giving a survey of the Vedantic
conception of the Universe and the philosophy upon
which that conception rests.

The Atman* —The “Self” of the Vedanta. A lecture deliv¬
ered before the Brooklyn Ethical Association, explaining
the most important doctrine of the Vedanta Philosophy.
The Real and tne Apparent Man.— A further elucidation of
the doctrine of the “Self,” or Atman.

Bhakti Yoga, —which most beautifully expounds the ideal
held up by Vedanta of a religion of Love for love's sake
alone, of absolute devotion to the All-Merciful Ruler of
the Universe.


LECTURES BY SWAMI ABHEDANANDA:


Christian Seience and Vedanta.
Cosmic Evolution and its Purpose.
Divine Communion.

Does the Soul Exist after Death 7
Religion of the Hindus.

Scientific Basis of Religion.
Simple Living.

Spiritualism and Vedanta.

The Philosophy of Good and EviL


The Way to the Blessed Life.

The Word and Cross in Ancient
India.

Who is the Saviour of Souls?
Woman’s Place In Hindu Religion.
Why a Hindu Accepts Christ and
Rejects Churchianity.

Why a Hindu is a Vegetarian.


NEW BOOK BY SWAMI ABHEDANANDA .
Self-Knowledge (Atma-Jnana). Cloth, $1.00. Postage, 7
cents. Portrait of author, frontispiece.

Mailed on receipt of price and postage by

THE VEDANTA SOCIETY,

6a West 71st Street, N. Y.


Digitized by Google



Digitized by



Digitized by Google


CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY
STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004
(650) 723-1493
grncirc@sulmoil.stonford.edu

All books are subject to recall.
