BS
1830
T4A3
1917
viuoWemMf4fAliMWS^
^rly Docuinetits

THE LIBRARY
OF
THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA
LOS ANGELES


TRANSLATIONS OF EARLY DOCUMENTS
SERIES
I
PALESTINIAN JEWISH TEXTS
(PRE-RABBINIC)
THE TESTAMENTS OF THE
TWELVE PATRIARCHS


THE
TESTAMENTS OF THE
TWELVE PATRIARCHS
BY
CHARLES,
R. H. D.Litt., D.D.
CANON OF WESTMINSTER; FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE;
FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY THE
Rev. W. O. E. OESTERLEY, D.D.
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
LONDON : 68, HAYMARKET, SAV.
1917

Printed in Great Britain by
Richard Clay S: Sons, Limited,
brunswick st., stamfordst.,s.e.,
and bungay, suffolk.

^5
EDITORS' PREFACE
The object of this series of translations is primarily
to furnish students with short, cheap, and handy
text-books, which, it is hoped, will facilitate the
study of the particular texts in class under competent teachers. But it is also hoped that the
volumes will be acceptable to the general reader
who may be interested in the subjects with which
they deal. It has been thought ad^•isable, as a
general rule, to restrict the notes and comments to
a small compass; more especially as, in most cases,
excellent works of a more elaborate character are
available. Indeed, it is much to be desired that
these translations may have the effect of inducing
readers to study the larger works.
Our principal aim, in a word, is to make some
difficult texts, important for the study of Christian
origins, more generally accessible in faithful and
scholarly translations.
In most cases these texts are not available in a
cheap and handy form. In one or two cases texts
have been included of books which are available
in the official Apocrypha but in ever\' such case
;
reasons exist for putting forth these texts in a new
translation, with an Introduction, in this Series.
We desire to express our thanks to Canon Charles
and Messrs. A. & C. Black for their permission to
reprint here the translation of the Testaments published in 1908. With some small exceptions tliis is
reprinted here in extenso ; owing to the exigencies
of space we have been unable to give here the parallel
columns (two, and sometimes three) representing
2071694

vi EDITORS' PREFACE
different manuscript authorities which occur here
and there in the large edition. We have given,
wherever available, the translation of the MS. called
a by Charles, where this is not available, the translation is that of the MS. called c by Charles.
W. O. E. Oesterley.
G. H. Box.
—
The following brackets are used
^ "^ the words within these brackets do not occur
in the Armenian Version.
words supplied by the editors are enclosed
( )
within these brackets.
[ ] interpolations are enclosed within these
brackets.

:
INTRODUCTION
General Character of the Book
The book purports to give the last words, at the
approach of death, of each of the twelve patriarchs
to his sons. It is evident that the general idea of
the book is based upon Jacob's last words to his
sons as recorded in Gen. xlix. 1-27. Just as Jacob
portrays the character of his sons and declares to
them what shall befall them, so in our book each
of the patriarchs is represented as describing, in
some sense, his own character and as foretelling
what shall come to pass among his posterity in the
last times. From this latter point of view the book
partakes of the character of a prophetic-apocalyptic
work. In six of the testaments, those of Reuben,
Simeon, Judah, Dan, Naphthali and Joseph, there is
a certain correspondence between our book and Gen.
xlix. regarding thecharactersof the patriarchs asfor
;
the remaining six patriarchs no such correspondence
exists. Speaking generally, though there are considerable modifications of this in some of the testaments, each testament contains the three following
component parts
(a) An autobiographical sketch in which the
patriarch's special vice or virtue is described. In
some cases the biblical story forms the basis for
this ; in others the Bible is not followed. But in
each case the autobiographical details are enlarged
by many haggadic embellishments.
{b) A warning to avoid the special sin, or an exhortation to cultivate the special virtue, which each
patriarch has declared to be specially characteristic
of him.

;
INTRODUCTION
viii
(c) A prophecy concerning the patriarch's posterity in the last times; in nearly each case the
patriarchs foretell a falling-away of their descendants
which will result in misfortune coming upon them;
this takes the form, as a rule, of captivity among the
Gentiles.
In some of the testaments sections of special
content are introduced which have nothing at all
to do with the three main topics just enumerated. These sections have an interest of their own
but it may well be doubted whether they formed
part of the original work. They are as follows :
The seven spirits of deceit (Reuben ii. i-iii. 8).
The vision of the heavens (Levi ii. i-v. 7).
The vision of the seven men in white raiment
(Levi viii. 1-18).
A Messianic hymn (Levi xviii. 2-14).
The spirits that wait upon man (Judah xx. 1-5).
The constitution of man (Naphthali ii. i-io).
The vision on the mount of Olives (Naphthali .v.
1-8).
The vision of the wrecked ship (Naphthali vi..
1-9).
The two ways (Asher i. 3-vi. 6).
Joseph's vision (Joseph xix. 1-12).
The good inclination (Benjamin vi. 1-7).
The sword of Beliar (Bejamin vii. 1-5)-
These offer much that is of great interest, and
should be specially studied.
The original language of the book was, in all probability, Hebrew (rather than Aramaic) but the
;
earliest form at present Icnown to be in existence is
a Greek translation of this.
Historical Background of the Book ^
As we shall see later on there are certain portions
of the book which belong to a later date than the
ground-work. In this historical survey, therefore,
it will be necessary to take into consideration the
1 For the dale ol our book see p. xvi.

^
INTRODUCTION
ix
periods to which each of these parts of the book
belong. It is true, the later portions do not embody many long passages of the book, but some of
these are important from more than one point of
view, and their significance cannot be appreciated
\\ithout some clear knowledge of the history of
times which they reflect.
It will be con\-enient to begin with the reign of
Hyrcanus I, as, with the death of Judas Maccabaeus
in B.C. 135, the year in which Hyrcanus became
ruler, what is in some sense a new epoch in Jewish
history opens. Simon the Maccabee had three sons,
Mattathias, Judas and John Hyrcanus the two
;
former were, together with their father, treacherously
murdered in B.C. 135 by Ptolemy the son of Abubus,^
sirategos over the plain of Jericho. As the highpriesthood, together with the leadership of the nation,
had been declared hereditary in the house of Simon,
John Hyrcanus ^ was recognized as the rightful heir.
The troubles that beset Hyrcanus on becoming ruler
are recorded in i Mace, xvi., and in greater detail in
Josephus, Antiq., XIII. vii. viii., Bell. Jud., I. ii.
3, 4. Ptolemy, the one just mentioned, was a less
dangerous foe than the king of Syria, Antiochus VII
(Sidetes) the defeat he suffered from the latter
;
would have been more disastrous in its consequences
had it not been for the friendship of the Romans,
which had been acquired by the wisdom and foresight of Simon the Maccabee. But HjTcanus' defeat
by Antiochus VII showed that the independence of
the small Jewish state was only conditioned by
weakness in the Syrian kingdom as soon as the
;
Syrian king found himself free from foreign entanglements and able to undertake vigorous action
in his own kingdom, he proved himself too strong,
and Jewish resistance gave way. However, when
1 See I Mace. xvi. 11-17; Josephus, Antiq. XIII. vii. 4.
- See I Mace. xiv. 41-49.
3 The name Hyrcanus is probably derived from that of
the Parthian province of Hyrcania.

X INTRODUCTION
Antioclius, in B.C. 128, had fallen in battle against the
Parthians, Hyrcanus felt himself strong enough to
assert liis independence once more. For some time
he was successful, but again Syria became too strong
for him, and it was only owing once more to Roman
friendship that he was able to hold his own in spite
of defeat. So that what with the troubles of Syria
on the one hand, and the friendship of Rome on
the other, John Hyrcanvis was enabled to rule with
success over a kingdom more extensive than it
had been since the days of Jeroboam II. Thus
Josephus is justified in regarding his reign as a
prosperous one; he says that Hyrcanus "lived
happily, and administered the Government in the
best manner for thirty-one years ... he was
esteemed by God worthy of the three greatest privileges the government of his nation, the dignity of
:
the high-priesthood, and prophecy; for God was
with him. ." ^ On the coins of his reign the
. .
inscription runs " John the High-priest, head of
:
the congregation (== the Church) of the Jews";
from this it is clear that the head of the Jewish
State looked upon himself first and foremost as a
priest nevertheless, the fact that John Hjaxanus
;
had his name inscribed on coins (he is, as far as is
known, the first high-priest of the Jews to do so)
shows that he regarded himself as in some sense
a king, though he did not actually assume this title,
as well as high-priest. This is the first point of
special importance to note.
The second point of special interest, in the present
connection, that the reign of John Hyrcanus has for
us is that we hear for the first time of a collision
between the Pharisees and Sadducees; the passage
from Josephus in which this episode is recounted is
important for more than one reason ; it is, therefore, worth quoting. After telling of Hyrcanus'
successes which he was able to achieve on the death
of Antiochus in Parthia, Josephus proceeds " How-
:
1 Aiitiq. XII f. X. 7.

;
INTRODUCTION
xi
ever, this prosperous state of affairs moved the Jews
to envy Hyrcanus, but they that were the worst
disposed to him were the Pharisees. These have
. . .
so great a power o^•er the multitude, that when they
say an}-thing against the king, or against the highpriest, they are presently believed. Now Hyrcanus
was a disciple of theirs, and greatly beloved by
them." Then we are told of a banquet which
Hyrcanus gave to the leaders of the Pharisees, when
the latter spoke in high terms of theirhost Hyrcanus
;
expressed his desire to do all that was right according to the teaching of the Pharisees. Then the
narrative continues : " But still there was one of his
guests there, whose name was Eleazar, a man of ill
temper, and delighting in seditious practices. Tliis
man said, ' Since thou desirest to know the truth,
if thou wilt be righteous in earnest, lay down the
high-priesthood, and content tlwself with the civil
government of the people.' And when he desired
to know for what cause he ought to lay down the
high-priesthood, the other rephed, ' We have heard
it from old men that thy mother had been a captive
in the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes.' " This insulting, and, at the same time, untrue reflection
upon Hyrcanus' descent greath- aroused his wrath
and he appealed to the Pharisees to declare what
punishment was due to the man who had thus outraged the ruler's dignity. To his surprise and indignation the Pharisees replied that he deserved
" bonds and stripes," Hyrcanus expecting that they
would have suggested the death sentence. He, no
doubt rightly, suspected that the whole thing had
been gotup with the purposeof ousting him from the
high-priesthood, and, in consequence broke with
the Pharisees entirely, going so far as "to abolish
the decrees they had imposed upon the people, and
to punish those that observed them." ^ Hyrcanus
then definitely joined the party of the Sadducees.
From this time onwards the Pharisees and Sadducees
1 Antiq. XIII. x. 3-6.

;
INTRODUCTION
xii
appear as parties opposed politically as well as
religiousl}'.
John Hyrcanus died in B.C. 104 and was succeeded
by his son Aristobulus I, who was the first Jewish
ruler since the days of the Monarchy to assume
definitely the title of king. After a very short reign
hediedof apainful disease/andhisbrotherAlexander
Jannaeus began his long reign (B.C. 102-76). He
concentrated his entire energy upon the one object
of extending the borders of his kingdom. His reign
was one long series of wars, and the duties of his
high-priesthood were wholly neglected. He died on
the battle-field. It is said that Alexander Jannaeus
counselled his wife Alexandra, before he died, to
permit to the Pharisees a more extended influence
he doubtless realized how grossly he had neglected
his religious duties, and thus desired to make some
amends. His widow Alexandra, or, according to
her Jewish name, Salome (Salma), reigned B.C. 7667 the high-priestly office was conferred upon her
;
eldest son Hyrcanus. She managed to retain the
extended boundaries of the kingdom gained b}- her
husband. Within the kingdom the Pharisaic party
had complete mastery.
On the death of Alexandra entirely new conditions arose Palestine came under the suzerainty
of Rome. T ; he Roman power would, it is true,
have asserted itself over Palestine in any case,
sooner or later; but, as a matter of fact, circumstances in this country, during the reign which
followed that of Alexandra, were such as to invite
the intervention of Rome. At the very end of her
reign the Sadduca?an party, which had been oppressed by the dominant Pharisaic party, broke
out into revolt in Jud.xa. Of Alexandra's two sons
Hyrcanus upheld the Pharisaic party while Aristobulus, the younger, sided with the Sadducees. The
latter was the more vigorous of the two brothers
and gained considerable success at the outset of
1 Josephus, Antiq. XIII. xi. 3.

;
INTRODUCTION
xiii
this struggle. Alexandra died at the beginning of
the civil strife. During her reign she had appointed,
as we have seen, her eldest son, Hyrcanus, to the
high-priesthood (he was, in any case, the rightful
successor), but immediately upon her death her
second son, Aristobulus, sought to gain the kingdom. He conquered his brother in battle near
Jericho, and Hyrcanus fled to Jerusalem. Hyrcanus
then made peace by renouncing both the highpriesthood and the kingship in favour of Aristobulus. This, one would suppose, would have settled
the matter; but it was not so. Urged on by
Antipater,^ the governor of Idumaea, H^Tcanus was
induced to fight for his rights. An alliance, brought
about by Antipater, was made between Hyrcanus
and Aretas, an Arab prince. Together they attacked
Aristobulus, and overcame him he fled to Jerusalem,
;
where he was besieged.
Whilst this fratricidal struggle was going on,
Pompey had been conducting his victorious campaign in Asia. In the year B.C. 65 he sent one of
his generals, Scaurus, into Syria, where the latter
heard of the ci^^l war which was taking place
in Palestine. Both brothers sent deputations to
Scaurus and sought to gain him in the end he
;
decided to uphold Aristobulus. For the time being,
therefore, Aristobulus was master in Judaea. This
did not, however, last long. Pompey himself arrived
in Syria in B.C. 63, and while sojourning in Damascus
he was approached by three deputations of Jews
these represented the parties of Aristobulus and
Hyrcanus respectively, and a further one representing the Jewish nation this last wished to have
;
nothing to do with the two others.^ As Pompey
was about to undertake an expedition against the
^ The father of Herod the Great.
* This is important, showing, as it does, that there was at
least a considerable section of the Jews at this time which
would have nothing to do with either the Sadducaean or
Pharisaic party.

;;
xiv INTRODUCTION
Nabatseans, he told his petitioners that they must
wait until this had been accomplished, and that
then he would decide upon what course he would
follow. On his way south, however, Pompey had
reason to suspect Aristobulus of treachery; so he
postponed his intended campaign. He now commanded Aristobulus to deliver up Jerusalem seeing
;
that resistance was useless Aristobulus submitted
he left the capital and came to Pompey. Thereupon Pompey sent his general, Gabinius, to take
possession of Jerusalem. Gabinius, however, returned without having accomplished his purpose,
for the defenders of Jerusalem refused to give up
the city in spite of Aristobulus' surrender. So
Pompey himself came against Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem itself matters were in a deplorable state, for the supporters of Aristobulus and
Hyrcanus were quarrelling amongst themselves
those of Aristobulus determined to resist, while those
of Hyrcanus wanted to submit because they regarded Pompey as their deliverer. These latter,
being more numerous, had their way, and Pompey
was admitted into Jerusalem without having to
strike a blow. The supporters of Aristobulus, however, withdrew to the Temple mount, the position of
which was very strong here they held out for three
;
months, but were ultimately compelled to surrender.
Jerusalem, together with the whole land of the
Jews, became tributary to Rome. But Judaea became greatly circumscribed the whole coast-land
;
was cut off from it, as well as all the non-Jewish
cities east of the Jordan; Samaria also, together
with a large tract of country, was divided from
Judaea. What was left of Judaea was placed under
the high-priesthood of Plyrcanus II, but he was not
permitted to retain the title of king. The whole of
Syria thus became a Roman province.
From the taking of Jerusalem by Pompey in
B.C. 63 to the year B.C. 47, when Caesar became
actively interested in the Jews, the lot of the people

INTRODUCTION xv
was a hard one. But things altered in consequence
of Caesar's gratitude to the Jews for supporting him
in his Alexandrine war. Hyrcanus II had sent
Antipater with a small Jewish army to join that of
Mithridates of Pergamum, who was on his way to
fight forCcesar thishadtheresultofinducingvarious
;
other small communities in Syria to espouse Caesar's
cause. Both Hyrcanus II and Antipater had good
reason to congratulate themselves on what they had
done for Caesar expressed his gratitude in the
;
following way In addition to being confirmed in
:
the high-priesthood Hyrcanus was made temporal
ruler in Judaea with the title of Ethnarch, which was
to be hereditary; the supreme court for the administration of justice in aU that related to Jewish law
was also placed under the immediate jurisdiction of
Hyrcanus; a number of cities were given back to
Judaea, including Joppa on the coast and many
;
taxes were remitted. Antipater was rewarded by
being nominated Procurator of Judaea. It is, however, necessary to point out that by receiving this
office direct from Caesar, Antipater was no more
subject to Hyrcanus, as he had been hitherto, but
was responsible to Rome alone. This is of importance for the further history of Judaea, for Antipater
was thereby enabled to increase his power. He
managed, indeed, to procure important posts for his
sons Phasae being appointed to administer the
:
district of Jerusalem, and Herod that of GaHlee.
On the death of Antipater both his sons were made
Tetrarchs, with the result that Hyrcanus to all
intents and purposes lost his authority as temporal
ruler. This happened in the year B.C. 41. In the
following year the whole condition of affairs in
Judaea became again altered owing to the invasion
of Syria by the Partliians. There is no need to go
into the detailsof tliis invasion ; the important point,
among its various consequences, is that Herod was
made king of Judaea by the Roman power. On his
death Judaea was divided up.

xvi INTRODUCTION
To sum up by the end of the Maccabgean struggle
:
the Jewish State enjoyed practical independence
under the high-priest, the " head of the people "
;
for a brief while it became a kingdom. Then the
whole of Syria came under Roman suzerainty, and
the rulers of the different provinces received the
titles of Ethnarch, Tetrarch, Procurator. Then
Herod was appointed king of Judaea. On his
death the whole of Syria was divided between his
three sons Archelaus became Ethnarch of Judaea,
:
Idumaea, and Samaria (cp. Matt. ii. 22) ; Antipas,
who is always called Herod in the New Testament,
received the title of Tetrarch (he is called " king "
in Mark vi. 14), and he inherited from his father
Galilee and Peraea Philip was made Tetrarch of
;
Northern Palestine.
Date of the Book
The date of the book in its original form is not
difficult to define within fairly close limits, as the
following quotations will show
:
Test. Reuben vi. 10-12 " And draw ye near to
:
Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive
a blessing from his mouth. For he shall bless Israel
and Judah, because him hath the Lord chosen to be
king over all the nation. And bow down before his
seed, for on our behalf it will die in wars visible and
invisible, and will be among you an eternal king."
Test. Simeon v. 5 : " But they shall not be able
to withstand Levi for he shall wage the war of the
;
Lord, and shall conquer all your hosts."
In speaking of Levi the writer refers, of course,
to the high-priest ; and the high-priest is spoken of
as having been chosen king by the Lord ; he is also
spoken of as one who " shall wage the war of the
Lord." This combination of high-priest, king, and
warrior can only be in reference to the Maccabaean
priest-kings. But, further, in Test. Levi viii. 11-15,
it is said : " Levi, thy seed shall be divided into
three offices, for a sign of the glory of the Lord who

INTRODUCTION xvii
is to come. And the first portion sliall be great;
yea, greater than it shall none be. The second shall
be in the priesthood. And the third shall be called
by a new name, because a king shall arise in Judah,
and shall establish a new priesthood, after the fashion
of the Gentiles. And his presence is beloved, as a
prophet of the ]\Iost High, of the seed of Abraham
our father." Here we have the reference to king,
priest and prophet, all centred in one person ; taking
this with the quotation from Josephus gi\'en above
(p. x), who speaks of John Hyrcanus as possessor
of the three greatest privileges, " the government of
his nation, the dignity of the high-priesthood, and
prophecy," it is clear that this is the ruler referred
to in this passage, because no other in all Jewish
history combined these three offices in himself. In
regard to the " new name," spoken of in the passage
quoted, Charles points out that the Maccabsean
high-priests " were the first Jewish priests to assume
the title ' priests of the Most High God.' This title,
anciently borne by ]Melchizedek (Gen. xiv. i8), was
revived by the new holders of the high-priesthood
when they displaced the Zadokite priesthood, the
legitimate holders of the office. The title is found
in the Book of Jubilees, the Assumption of Moses,
the Talmud and Josephus.^ A kindred title of the
same significance appears in Ps. ex., where the priestking, taken by a growing number of expositors to be
Simon the Maccabee, is addressed as a priest for
ever after the order of IMelchizedek. In due accord
with this, our text declares that a new name should
mark the new priesthood." ^ In Test. Levi viii. 14,
15, then, this is applied to John Hyrcanus; he
reigned, as we have seen, B.C. 135-104; our book
in its original form may, therefore, well belong to
this period; but the possibility of a rather later
^ Book of Jub. xxxii. i, xxxii. 16; Assumption of Moses
v h i a . -s I h;an J a o h sep i h 8i u . s, Antiq. XVI.vi.2; and in the Talmud, Rosh
* The Testamentsofthe Twelve Patriarchs, pp. li. f. (1908).
B

;;;
INTRODUCTION
xviii
date is not excluded. Some later portions of the
book were added during the middle of the last
century B.C., with the purpose of denouncing what
had become the degenerate Maccabsean high-priesthood. We saw in the preceding section that during
the reign of Alexander Jannaeus the duties of the
high-priesthood were wholly neglected, and that
on the death of Alexandra the general conditions
of the land, both spiritual and civil, were deplorable. It was owing to this that the later additions
were made Charles, with every justification, re-
;
gards the following passages as comprising these
:
Test. Levi x., xiv.-xvi ; Test. Judah xvii. 2-xviii. i
(?), xxi. 6-xxiii., xxiv. 4-6; Test. Zebulun ix,
Test. Dan v. 6, 7, vii. 3 (?); Test. Naphthali iv.
Test. Gad viii. 2 ; Test. Asher vii. 4-7. In the case
of Test. Levi xiv. 4, he says that it " refers undeniably to Alexander Jannaeus for this very fact
;
is recounted of him by Josephus " ^ {Antiq. XIII,
xiv. 2). A few other passages are probably also of
later date.^ Another set of passages of later date
have a special interest of their own, viz. the Christian
additions these are, almost always, easily dis-
;
cerned, their Christian character being obvious,
e. g. Test. Simeon vi. 7, vii. 2 ; Test. Levi xiv. 2
i
T
i
e
i.
st
8
.
, i
D
x
a
.
n
3v
5
i
.
. g A;
f
T
u
e
l
s
l
t.
lis
A
t
s
o
h
f
e
t
r
he
vi
s
i
e
.
i
3
s
;
gi
T
v
e
e
s
n
t.
by
Be
C
n
h
j
ar
a
l
m
e
i
s
n
,
op. cit., pp. 61-65.
Authorship
The question of Authorship is difficult. At the
time when the ground-work of the book was written
it is questionable whether the distinctive doctrinal
differences between the Pharisees and Sadducees
had already become sufficiently marked to enable
us to say with certitude whether the standpoint in
the book is either Pharisaic or Sadducaean. The
Law and the Temple services are strongly upheld,
' op cit., p. 58. 2 See Charles, op. cit., pp. 59If.

INTRODUCTION xix
and the Messianic kingdom is believed in ; this
might have been equally the standpoint of a Pharisee
or a Sadducee, though it must be said that the
specifically Pharisaic attitude as to the Law is not
to be found in the book. Moreover, nothing could
be more un-Pharisaic than the spirit so often manifested, and well described by Charles (though he
believes the ground-work to have been the work of
"A
a Pharisee of the Chasid type) in the words
:
true son of the larger-hearted Old Testament prophets
he proclaims the salvation of the Gentiles. The
promised time has come. The kingdom is already
established, and all the Gentiles \\\\\ be saved through
Israel. In the Judgement the conduct of the best
heathen will form the norm according to which Israel
will be judged." ^ Such an universalistic spirit is
wholly alien to the Pharisaic outlook upon the world.
A strong case has been made out for Sadducaean
authorship,- and when one thinks of the deeply
religious elements in the Wisdom of Ben-Sira, which
admittedly emanated from " Sadducaean " circles
{i. e. circles from which, in later times, the Sadducees
as a party developed), and notices the many points
of similarity in the general religious attitude between
it andthe Testaments, one seesthe justiceandstrength
of this contention. What undoubtedly gives a
Pharisaic tone to the book is the fact that it has
been worked over b}' a later Pharisaic editor; but
the ground-work of the book does not show any
specifically Pharisaic traits. The exhortations to
peace and brotherly kindness which so often occur
in the book show that the author 3'earned for a
spirit of brotherly kindness, which presumably did
n b o e t tw e e x e is n t S ; a h d e d n u c c e ee i s t i a s n p d os P s h i a b r l i e se t e h s at m t a h y e h p a a v r e ty p w r r o a m n p g t l e e d s
a peace-lo\'ing Sadducee to appeal in this wa}" for a
better understanding between the two parties. But
after all, it is just possible that the book was originally written by a good Jew, neither Sadducaean nor
^ Leszynsky, Die Saddnzder, pp. 239ff. 2 Qp ^^-^ p xcvii.

: ;
XX INTRODUCTION
Pharisaic, who loved all that was best among his
people.
Charles believes, though with some hesitation, in
unity of authorship so far as the ground-work of the
book is concerned, though it presents, " it must be
confessed, a want of coherence at times, and the
parts deahng with the duty of submission to Levi,
or to Levi and Judah jointly, come in occasionally
very abruptly." That is certainly so, and it is also
true of some other passages nevertheless, in reading
;
the book carefully through most people will be inclined to agree with Charles ; though it is possible
that the ground-work does not comprise as much as
eleven-twelfths of the Testaments, after the removal
of the Jewish and Christian additions, as Charles
holds.
Importance of the Book for the Study of
Christian Origins
There are some sayings of Christ which should be
borne in mind when reading a pre-Christian work
such as this for in face of the teaching of certain
;
passages in this—book, which clearly belong to it in
its original form the whole c—ontext shows them to
be integral parts of the book some people may be
inclined to ask where the originality of Christ's
ethical teachingcomes in if before Him there existed
Jewish teachers whose ethical teaching appears to
be on a level with that of the Gospel. T — he sayings
of our Lord referred to are the following and there
are others of similar import
" Think not that I came to destroy the law or
the prophets ; I came not to destroy, but to fulfil "
(Matt. V. 17).
" Therefore e\'ery scribe who hath been made a
disciple to the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man
that is a householder, which bringeth forth out of
his treasure things new and old " (Matt. xiii. 52).
' The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat
'

INTRODUCTION xxi
all things therefore whatsoever they bid you, these
do and observe ." (Matt, xxiii. 1-3).
Whatever else . p . assages of this kind may teach,
there can be no doubt that they show that Christ
fully recognized both the permanent good in what
earlier teachers had taught, as well as the authoritati^•e character of much that had been taught. The
originality of Christ's teaching, which is abundantly
clear from the Gospel records, did not prevent Him
from incorporating into His teaching much that was
good in what earlier teachers had taught. To speak
of the influence of earlier writings upon Christ is
incorrect because there could be no scope for such
influence to be exercised upon One in Whom was all
knowledge and understanding; but that does not
mean to say that Christ would not have utilized the
writings and teachings of others, especially if (as
was very probably the case) a knowledge of the
contents of such writings was current among the
people. This should be borne in mind in reading
the following extracts, chosen from a number of
similar import, which reveal an astonishingly high
ethical standard in the pre-Christian parts of our
book:
" Love the Lord with all your life, and one another
mth a true heart " (Test. Dan v. 3; cp. ]\Iatt. xxii.
37-39)-
" Love ye one another from the heart ; and if a
man sin against thee, speak peaceabh^ to him, and
in thy soul hold not guile ; and if he repent and
confess, forgive him. . . . But if he be shameless
and persisteth in his wrong-doing even so forgive
"
him from the heart, and leave to God the avenging
(Test. Gad ^^. 3, 7; see also \'ii. 7; cp. ]\Iatt. xviii.
35; Luke xvii. 3). Similar teaching is contained in
another long and striking passage (Test. Gad iv., v.),
one or two verses from which are worth quoting
:
"ForthespiritofhatredworkethtogetherwithSatan,
through hastiness of spirit, in all things unto men's
death ; but the spirit of lo\-e worketh together with

;; ; ;;:
INTRODUCTION
xxii
the law of God in long-suffering unto the salvation
of men. Righteousness casteth out hatred,
. . .
humility destroyeth envy. For he that is just and
humble is ashamed to do what is unjust, being reproved not of another, but of his own heart, because
the Lord looketh upon his inclination. He speaketh
not against a holy man, because the fear of God
overcometh hatred. For fearing lest he should
offend the Lord, he will not do wrong to any man,
even in thought."
Ethical teaching of this kind is as exalted as much
that we read in the Gospels andthere iseveryreason
;
for believing that such teaching was not restricted to
favoured circles, but that it was given, as opportunity offered, to the people at large. That similar
teaching is found in the Gospels shows that Christ
was ready to receive and so hand on whatever was
truly good in that which earlier teachers had
taught.
There are many other passages in this book which
show such close affinity in thought and language
with what we read in the Gospels that it is difficult
not to believe that Christ was familiar with our
book, and willingly made use of it sometimes in His
teaching. Of the large number of such passages,^
the following one offers a good example
" I was sold into-slavery, and the Lord of all made
me free
I was taken into captivity, and His strong hand
succoured me.
I was beset with hunger, and the Loi'd Himself
nourished me
I was alone, and God comforted me
I was sick, and the Lord \isited me
I was in prison, and my God showed favour
unto me
In bonds, and He released me ." (Test.
. .
Joseph i. 5-G ; cp. Matt. xxv. 35, 36, and in
^ A veryuseful list is givenbyCharles,of>.cit.,pp.Ixxviii. ff.

INTRODUCTION
xxiii
connection with these two passages one should
recall Matt. v. 48 : " Ye, therefore, shall be
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect ").
For the doctrinal teaching of the book see Charles,
op. cit., pp. xcii.-xcix., and for the bibliography pp.
28-41, and Schiirer, Geschichte des Jiidischen Volkes,
iii. pp. 352-356 (1909)-


THE TESTAMENTS OF
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
THE TESTAMENT OF REUBEN, THE FIRSTBORN SON OF JACOB AND LEAH
I. i-io. Introduction. Reuben's Confession
and Repentance
1. The copy of the. Testament of Reuben, even the
commands which he gave his sons ^before he died
in the hundred and twenty-fifth year of his hfe."'
2. Two years after the death of Joseph ''his brother"",
when Reuben fell ill, his sons and his sons' sons were
gathered together to visit him. 3. And he said to
them My children, behold I am dying, and go the
way o : f my fathers. 4. And seeing ^there"i Judah,
and Gad and Asher, his brethren, he said to them
Raise me up, that I ma}- tell to my brethren and to :
my children what things I have hidden in my heart,
forbehold now at length I am passing awa\'. 5. And
he arose and kissed them, and said unto them
Hear, my brethren, and do ye, my children, give ear :
to Reuben your father, in the commands which I
give you. 6. And behold I call to witness against
you this da-Y the God of heaven, that 3'e walk not in
the ignorance of ^-outh and fornication, wherein I
was poured out, and defiled the bed of my father
Jacob. 7. And I tell \'0u that He smote me with a
sore plague in my loins for seven months and had
;
not m\- father Jacob prayed for me to the Lord, the
25

26 THE TESTAMENTS OF
Lord would have destroyed me. 8. For I was thirty
years old when I wrought the evil thing before the
Lord, and for seven months I was sick unto death,
g. And after this I repented with set purpose of my
soul for seven years before the Lord. lo. And wine
and strong drink I drank not, and flesh entered not
into my mouth, and I ate no pleasant food; but I
mournedover my sin, for it was great, such as hadnot
been in Israel.
IL i-IIL 8. The Seven Spirits of Deceit
IL And now hear me, my children, what things
I saw concerning the seven spirits of deceit, when I
repented. 2. Seven spirits therefore are appointed
against man, and they are the leaders in the works of
youth.
3. [And seven other spirits are given to him at his
creation, that through them should be done every
work of man. 4. The first is the spirit of life, with
which the constitution (of man) is created. The
second is the sense of sight, with which ariseth desire.
5.
Thethirdisthesenseofhearing,withwhichcometh
teaching. The fourth is the sense of smell, with
whichtastesaregiventodrawairandbreath. 6. The
fifth is the power of speech, with which cometh
knowledge. 7. The sixth is the sense of taste, with
which cometh the eating of meats and drinks and
;
by it strength is produced, for in food is the foundation of strength. 8. The seventh is the power of
procreation and sexual intercourse, with which
through love of pleasure sins enter in. 9. Wherefore it is the last in order of creation, and the first
in that of youth, because it is filled with ignorance,
and leadeth the youth as a blind man to a pit, and as
a beast to a precipice.
in. Besides all these there is an eighth spirit of
sleej), with which is brought about the trance of
nature and the image of death. 2. With these
spirits are mingled the s])irits of error.]
3. First, the spirit of tornication is seated in the

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
27
nature and in the senses the second, the spirit of
;
insatiableness, in the belly 4. The third, the spirit
of fighting, in the liver and ; gall. The fourth is the
spirit of obsequiousness and chicanery, that through
officious attention one may be fair in seeming.
5. The fifth is the spirit of pride, that one may be
boastful and arrogant. The sixth is the spirit of
lying, in perdition and in jealousy to practise deceits,
and concealments from kindred and friends. 6. The
seventh is the spirit of injustice, with which are
thefts and acts of rapacity, that a man may fulfil
the desire of his heart for injustice worketh together
;
with the other spirits by the taking of gifts. [7. And
with all these the spirit of sleep is joined which is
(that)oferrorandfantasy.] S. Andso perishethevery
3'oungman darkeninghismindfromthetruth,andnot
,
understandingthelawofGod,norobeyingthe admonitions of his fathers, as befell me also in my youth.
in. g-15. Reuben's Sin
9. And now, my children, love the truth, and it
will preserve you : hear ye ''the words of^ Reuben
your father.
10. Pay no heed to the face of a woman.
Nor associate with another man's wife,
Nor meddle with affairs of womankind.
II. For had I not seen Bilhah bathing in a covered
place, I hadnot fallenintothisgreatiniquity. 12. For
my mind taking in the thought of the woman's
nakedness, suffered me not ""to sleep"' until I had
wrought the abominable thing. 13. For while Jacob
our father had gone to Isaac his father, when we were
in Eder, near to Ephrath in Bethlehem, Bilhah became drunkandwas asleepuncoveredinherchamber.
14. Having therefore gone in and beheld her nakedness, I wrought the impiety '"without her perceiving
it"^, and leaving her sleeping I departed. 15. And
forthwith an angel of God revealed to my father concerning my impiety, and he came and mourned over
me, and touched her no more.

;
28 THE TESTAMENTS OF
lY. i-VL 4. A Warning against Sin
IV. Pay no heed, therefore, '"my children"^, to the
beauty of women, nor set your mind on their affairs
but walkin singleness of heart in the fearof the Lord,
and expend labour on good works, and on study and
on your flocks, until the Lord give you a wife, whom
He will, that ye suffer not as I did. 2. For until
my father's death I had not boldness to look in his
face, or to speak to any of my brethren, because of
the reproach. 3. Even until now my conscience
causeth me anguish on account of my impiety.
4. And yet my father comforted me much, and
prayed for me unto the Lord, that the anger of the
Lord might pass from me, even as the Lord showed.
And thenceforth until now I have been on myguard
andsinnednot. 5. Therefore, my children,^Isayunto
you"', observe '^alfthingswhatsoever I commandyou,
and ye shall not sin. 6. For a pit unto the soul is
the sin of fornication, separating it from God, and
bringing it near to idols, because it deceiveth the
mind and understanding, and leadeth down young
men into Hades before their time. 7. For many
hath fornication destroyed; because, though a man
be oldornoble, '"orrichorpoor"",he bringethreproach
upon himself with the sons of men and derision with
Beliar. 8. For hear ye regarding Joseph how he
guarded himself from a woman, and purged his
thoughts from all fornication, and found favourinthe
sight of God and men. 9. For the Egyptian woman
did many things imto him, and summoned magicians,
and offered him love potions, but the ynn-pose of his
soul admitted no evil desire. 10. Therefore the God
of your fathers delivered him from every evil (and)
hidden death. 11. For if fornication overcomes not
your mind, neither can Beliar overcome you.
V. rpor"" evil arewomen, my children and since
;
they have no power or strength over man, they use
wiles by outward attractions that they may draw
him to themselves. 2. And whom they cannot

THE T\VEL\ E PATRIARCHS 29
bewitch b\' outward attractions, him they o\'ercome
by craft. 3. '"For"' moreover, concerning them, the
angel of the Lord told me, and taught me, that
women are overcome by the spirit of fornication
more than men, and in their heart they plot against
men and by means of their adornment the}' deceive
;
first their minds, and by the glance of the eye instil
the poison, and then through the accomplished act
theytakethemcaptive. 4. For awomancannotforce
a man openly, but by a harlot's bearing she beguiles
him. 5. Flee, therefore, fornication, my children,
and command your wives and your daughters, that
they adorn not their heads and faces to deceive the
mind because every woman who useth these wiles
;
hath been reserved for eternal punishment. 6. For
thus they allured the \A'atchers who were before the
flood; for as these continually beheld them, they
lusted after them, and theyconceivedthe act intheir
mind for they changed themselves into the shape of
;
men, and appeared to them when they were with
their husbands. 7. And the women lusting in their
minds after their forms, gave birth to giants, for the
Watchers appeared to them as reaching even unto
heaven.
VL Beware, therefore, of fornication; and if you
wishto be pure in mind, guardyoursensesfrom every
woman. 2. And command the women likewise not
to associate with men, that they also may be pure in
mind. 3. For constant meetings, even though the
ungodly deed be not wrought, are to them an irremediable disease, and to us a destruction of Beliar
and an eternal reproach. 4. For in fornication there
is neither understanding nor godliness, and all
jealousy dwelleth in the lust thereof.
VL 5-12. An Exhortation to obey Levi, in
whom is vested a Royal Priesthood
5. Therefore, '"then, I say unto j'ou,"" ye will be
jealous ''against the sons of Levi"", and will seek to be
exalted over them but ye shall not be able. 6. For
;

THE TESTAMENTS OF
30
God will avenge them '"and ye shall die by an evil
death"!. ^ Yov to Levi God gave the sovereignty
[and to Judah with him and to me also, and to Dan
and Joseph, that we should be for rulers]. 8. Therefore I command you to hearken to Levi, because he
shall know the law of the Lord, and shall give ordinances for judgement and shall sacrifice for all Israel
until the consummation of the times, as the anointed
High Priest, of whom the Lord spake, g. I adjure
you by the God of heaven to do truth each one unto
his neighbour and to entertain love each for his
brother. lo. And draw ye near to Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive a blessing from his
mouth. II. For he shall bless Israel and Judah,
because him hath the Lord chosen to be king over all
the nation. 12. And bow down before his seed, for
on our behalf it will die in wars visible and invisible,
andwill be amongyou aneternal king.
VII. 1-2. Reuben's Death and Burial
VII. And Reuben died, having given these commands to his sons. 2. And they placed him in a
coffin until they carried him up from Egypt, and
buried him '"in Hebron'' in the cave where his father
was.
THE TESTAMENT OF SIMEON, THE SECOND
SON OF JACOB AND LEAH
I. i-II. 14. Introduction. Simeon's Confession
and Repentance
I. The copy of the words of Simeon, the things
which he spake to his sons before lie died, in the
hundred and twentieth year of his life, at which time
Joseph, 'his brother,"' died. 2. Forwhen Simeon was

;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
31
sick, his sons came to visit him, and he strengthened
himself and sat up and kissed them, and said
IL Hearken, my children, to Simeon your fathe : r,
And I will declare unto youwhat things I have
my
in heart.
2. I was born of Jacob as my father's second
son
And my mother Leah called me Simeon,
Because the Lord had heard her prayer.
3. Moreover, I became strong exceedingly;
I shrank from no achievement,
Nor was I afraid of ought.
4. For my heart was hard,
And my liver was immovable.
And my bowel without compassion.
5. Because valour also hath been given from the Most
High to men insoul and body. 6. For inthe time of
myyouthIwasjealous ""in manythings"' ofJoseph,because my father loved him ''beyoncl air. 7. And I
set mymind against himto destroyhim, because the
prince of deceit sent forth the spirit of jealousy and
blinded my mind, so that I regarded him not as a
brother, nor did I spare even Jacob my father.
8. But his God and the God of his fathers sent forth
Hisangel,anddeliveredhimoutof myhands.
9.
For
when I went to Shechem to bring ointment for the
flocks, and Reuben to Dothan, where were our
necessaries and all our stores, Judah my brother sold
him to the Ishmaelites. 10. And when Reuben
heard these things he was grieved, for he wished to
restore him to his father. 11. But on hearing this
I was '"exceedingly"^ \M"oth against Judah in that he
let him go awayalive, andfor five months I continued
wrathful against him. 12. But the Lord restrained
me, and withheld '"from me"' the power of my hands
for my right hand was half withered for seven days. ;
13. And I knew, my children, that because of Joseph
t I hi b s es h o a u d gh b t efa t l h l e en L m o e r , d a G n o d d I t r h e a p t en m te y d h a a n n d d we m p i t gh ; t an b d e
restored,andthat I might holdalooffrom all pollution

THE TESTAMENTS OF
32
and envy, ''and from all folly"'. 14. For I knew that
I had devised an evil thing before the Lord and Jacob
my father, on account of Joseph my brother, in that
I envied him.
III. 1-6. The Evil of Envy, and its Cure
III. And now, my children, ""hearken unto me and""
beware of the spirit of deceit and of envy. 2. For
envy ruleth over the whole mind of a man, and suffereth him ^neither to eat nor to drink"^, nor to do
any good thing. 3. But it ever suggesteth (to him)
to destroy him that he envieth and so long as he
;
that is envied flourisheth, he that envieth fadeth
away. 4. Two years '"therefore"' I afflicted my soul
with fasting in the fear of the Lord, and I learnt that
deliverance from env}' cometh by the fear of God.
5. For if a man fleeto theLord, the evilspiritrunneth
away from him, and his mind is lightened. 6. And
henceforward he sympathiseth with him whom he
envied and agreeth with those who love him, and so
ceaseth from his env}^
IV. 1-7. Joseph's Good Example
IV. And my father asked ""concerning me"", because he saw that I was sad; and I said unto him,
I am pained in my liver. 2. For I mourned more
than they all, because I was guilty of the selling of
Joseph. 3. And when we went down into Egypt,
and he boundme as aspy, I knewthat I wassuffering
justly, and I grieved not. 4. Now Joseph was a good
man, and had the Spirit of God within him being
:
compassionate and pitiful, he bore no malice against
me but loved me even as the rest of his brethren.
5. B ; eware, therefore, my children, of all jealousy
and envy, andwalk in singleness of heart, that God
may give ""you also"! grace and glory, and blessing
upon your heads, even as ye saw in Joseph's case.
6. All his days he reproached us not concerning this
thing, but loved us as his own soul, and beyond his
own sons glorified us, and gave us riches, and cattle

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
33
and fruits. 7. Do ye also, my cliildren, love each
one his brother with a good heart, and the spirit of
'envy will withdraw from you.
IV. 8-9. The Evil of Envy
8. For this maketh savage the soul and destroyeth
the body ; it causes anger and war in the mind, and
stirreth up unto deeds ofblood, andleadeth themind
into frenzy, [and causeth tumult to the soul and
trembling to the bod\^]. g. For even in sleep some
malicious jealousy, deluding him, gnaweth, and with
wicked spirits disturbeth his soul, and causeth the
body to be troubled, and waketh the mind from
sleep in confusion and as a wicked and poisonous
;
spirit, so appeareth it to men.
V. I. The Comeliness of Joseph
V. Therefore was Josephcomelyinappearance, and
goodly to look upon, because no wickedness dwelt in
him for some of the trouble of the spirit the face
;
manifesteth.
V. 2-3. An Exhortation to Goodness
2. And now, my children.
Make your hearts good before the Lord,
And 3'our ways straight before men,
And ye shall find grace before the Lord and
men.
3. Beware, therefore, of fornication,
For fornication is mother of all evils.
Separating from God, and bringing near to
Beliar.
V. 4-6. Levi is to wage the War of the Lord
4. I have seen it inscribed in the writing of Enoch
that your sons shall be corrupted in fornication, and
shall do harm to the sons of Levi with the sword.
5. But they shall not be able to withstand Levi ; for
he shall wage the war of the Lord, and shall conquer
"alP yourhosts. 6. Andtheyshallbe fewin number,
c

THE TESTAMENTS OF
34
di^dded in Levi and Judah, and there shall be none
of you for sovereignty, even as also our father
prophesied in his blessings.
VI. 1-7. The Blessedness of Simeon's
Posterity if Sin be avoided
VI. BeholdIhavetoldyouallthings,that I maybe
acquitted of your sin. 2. Now, if ye remove from
5^ou your envy and all stiff-neckedness,
As a rose shall my bones flourish in Israel,
And as a lily my flesh in Jacob,
And my odour shall be as the odour of Libanus
And as cedars shall holy ones be multiplied ;
from me for ever.
And their branches shall stretch afar off.
3. Then shall perish the seed of Canaan,
And a remnant shall not be unto Amalek,
^And all the Cappadocians shall perish,"^
And all the Hittites shall be utterly destroyed.
4. Then shall fail the land of Ham,
And all the people shall perish.
Then shall all the earth rest from trouble.
And all the world under heaven from war.
5. Then shall asign be glorified greatlyunto Israel,
For the Lord God appearing on earth shall
come [as man].
And saving through him man.
6. Then shall all the spirits of deceit be given to be
trodden under foot.
And men shall rule over wicked spirits.
7. Then shall I arise in joy,
And will bless the Most High because of His
marvellous works,
[Because God hath taken a body and eaten with
men and saved men].
VII. 1-3. An Exhortation to obey Levi and
Judah
VII. And now, my children, obey Levi and Judah,
and be not lifted up against these two tribes, for

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
35
from them shall arise unto3'ou the salvation ''of God"^.
2. For the Lord shall raise up from Levi as it were a
High-priest, and from Judah as it were a King [God
andman], Heshallsave all [the Gentiles and]the race
of Israel. 3. Therefore I give you these commands
that ye also may command your children, that they
may observe them throughout their generations.
VIII. i-IX 2. Death and Burial of Simeon
VIII. And when Simeon had made an end of commanding his sons, he slept with his fathers, being an
hundred and twenty years old. 2. And they laid
himin awoodencoffin,totakeuphisbonesto Hebron.
And they took them up secretly during a war of the
Egyptians. 3. ForthebonesofJosephthe Egyptians
guarded in the tombs of the Kings. 4. For the
sorcerers told them, that on the departure of the
bones of Joseph there should be throughout all the
land darkness and gloom, and an exceeding great
plague to the Egyptians, so that even with a lamp a
man should not recognise his brother.
IX. And the sons of Simeon bewailed their father.
2. And they were in Eg^'pt until the day of their
departure by the hand of Moses.
THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI, THE THIRD SON
OF JACOB AND LEAH
I. 1-2. Introduction
I. The copy of the words of Levi, the things which
he ordained unto his sons, according to all that they
should do. and what things should befall them until
the day of judgement. 2. He was sound in health
when he called them to him for it had been revealed
to him that he should die. ; And when they were
gathered together he said to them
:

36 THE TESTAMENTS OE
II. i-V. 7. The Vision of the Heavens
II. I, Levi, was born in Haran, and I came with
.my father to Shechem. 2. And I was young, about
twenty years of age, when, with Simeon, I wrought
vengeance on Hamor for our sister Dinah. 3. And
when I was feedingthe flocksin Abel-Maul,the spirit
ofunderstandingofthe Lordcameupon me,andI saw
all men corrupting their way, and that unrighteousness hadbuiltfor itselfwalls,andlawlessnesssat upon
towers. 4. And Iwas grievingfortherace ofthesons
of men, and I prayed to the Lord that I might be
saved. 5. Then there fell upon me a sleep, and I beheld a high mountain, and I was upon it. 6. And
behold the heavens were opened, andanangelof God
said to me, Levi, enter. 7. And I entered from the
first heaven, and I saw there a great sea hanging.
8. And further, I saw a second heaven far brighter
and more brilliant, for there was a boundless height
also therein, g. And I said to the angel, Why is this
so? And the angel said to me, Marvel not at this,
for thou shalt see another heaven more brilliant and
incomparable.
10. And when thou hast ascended thither,
Thou shalt stand near the Lord,
And shalt be His minister.
And shalt declare His mysteries to men.
And shalt proclaim concerning Him that shall
redeem Israel.
11. And by thee and Judah shall the Lord appear
among men,
^Savingeveryrace of men"'.
12. And from the Lord's portion shall be thy life.
And He shall be thy field and vineyard.
And fruits, gold, and silver.
III. Hear, therefore, regarding the heavens which
have been shown to thee. The lowest is for this
cause gloomy unto thee, in that it beholds all the
unrighteous deeds of men. 2. And it has fire,
snow, and ice made ready for the day of judgement,

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
37
in the righteous judgement of God; for in it are all
the spirits of the retributions for vengeance on men.
3. And in the second are the hosts of the armies
which areordained for the dayof judgement,to work
vengeance on the spirits of deceit andof Beliar. And
above them are the holy ones. 4. And in thehighest
of all dwelleth the Great Glory, far above allholiness.
5. In [the heaven next to] it are the archangels, who
minister and make propitiation to the Lord forall the
sins of ignorance of the righteous 6. Offering to the
;
Lord a sweet-smelling savour, a reasonable and a
bloodlessoffering. 7. And [in the heavenbelowthis]
are the angelswho bear answers to the angels of the
presence of the Lord. 8. And in the heaven next to
this arethrones and dominions, in which always they
offer praise to God. 9. When, therefore, the Lord
lookethuponus,all ofus areshaken yea,theheavens,
;
and the earth, and the abysses are shaken at the
presence of His majesty. 10. But the sons of men,
having no perceptionof these things, sin and provoke
the Most High.
IV. Now, therefore, know that the Lord shall
execute judgement upon the sons of men.
Because when the rocks are being rent,
And the sun quenched,
And the waters dried up,
And the fire cowering.
And all creation troubled,
And the invisible spirits melting away.
And Hades taketh spoils through the visitations
of the Most High,
Men will be unbelieving and persist in their
iniquity.
On this accovmt with punishment shall they be
judged.
2. '"Therefore"' the Most High hath heard thy
pra3'er.
To separate thee from iniquity, and that thou
shouldest become to Him a son.
And a servant, and a minister of His presence.

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
38
3. The light of knowledge shall thou light up in
Jacob,
And as the sun shalt thou be to all the seed of
Israel.
4. And there shall be gi\'en to thee a blessing, and
to all thy seed,
Until the Lord shall visit all the Gentiles in His
tender mercies for ever.
5. ""And^ therefore there have been given to thee
counsel and understanding,
That thou mightest instructthvsons concerning
this
6. Because they that bless Him shall be blessed.
And they that curse Him shall perish.
V. Andthereuponthe angelopenedto me the gates
of hea\'en, and I saw the holj^ temple, and upon a
throne of glory the Most High. 2. And He said to
me : Levi, I have given thee the blessings of the
priesthood until I come and sojourn in the midst
of Israel. 3. Then the angel brought me down to
the earth, and gave me a shield and a sword, and said
to me Execute vengeance on Shechem because of
:
Dinah, thy sister, and I will be with thee because
the Lord hath sent me. 4. And I destroyed at that
timethesonsofHamor,asit iswrittenintheheavenly
t te a l b l le m t e s. Th 5 y . n A a n m d e, I t s h a a i t d I to ma h y im ca : ll I u p p r o a n y T T h h e e e e, in O a lo d r a d y ,
of tribulation. 6. And he said : I am the angel who
intercedeth for the nation of Israel that they may not
be smitten utterh^, for everj^ evil spirit attacketh
it. 7. And after these things I awaked, and blessed
the yiost High, and the angel who intercedeth for the
nation of Israel and for all the righteous.
VI. i-VII. 3. Retribution upon Shechem
VI. And when I was going to my father, I found a
brazen shield wherefore also the name of the moun-
;
tain is Aspis, which is near Gebal, to the south of
Abila. 2. And I kept these wordsin my heart. And

THE T\VEL\'E PATRIARCHS 39
after this I counselled my father, and Reuben my
brother, to bid the sons of Hamor not to be circumcised for I was jealous because of the abomination
which ; they had wrought on my sister. 4. And I
slew Shechem first, and Simeon slew Hamor. 5. And
after this my brothers came and smote ''that'' city
with the edge of the sword. 6. And my father heard
''these things'* and was wroth; and he was grieved
in that they had received the circumcision, and after
that had been put to death, and in his blessings he
looked amiss upon us. 7. For we sinned because
we had done this thing against his will, and he was
sick on that day. 8. But I saw that the sentence
of God was for evil upon Shechem for they sought
;
to do to Sarah ''and Rebecca'' as they had done to
Dinah our sister, but the Lord prevented them. g.
AndtheypersecutedAbraham ourfatherwhenhe was
a stranger, and they vexed his flocks when they were
big with young; and Eblaen, who was born in his
house, they most shamefully handled. 10. And thus
they did to all strangers, taking awa}' their wives
byforce, andtheybanishedthem. 11. Butthe wrath
of the Lord came upon them to the uttermost.
Vn. And I said to my father Jacob : By thee will
the Lord destroy the Canaanites, and will give their
land to thee and to thy seed after thee. 2. For from
this day forward shall Shechem be called a city of
imbeciles ; for as a man mocketh a fool, so did we
mock them, 3. Because also they had wrought folly
in Israel by defiling my sister. And we departed
and came to Bethel.
VIII. 1-18. The Vision of the Seven Men
in White Raiment
VIII. And there again I saw a \dsion even as the
former, after we had spent there seventy da3-s. 2.
And I saw seven men in white raiment saying unto
me Arise, put on the robe ofthe priesthood, and the
:
crown of righteousness, and the breastplate of under-

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
40
standing, and the garment of truth, and the plate of
faith, and the turban of the head, and the ephod
of prophecy. 3. And they severally carried (these
things) and put (them) on me, and said unto me
:
From henceforth become a priest of the Lord, thou
and thy seed for ever. 4. And the first anointed me
with holy oil, and gave to me the staff of judgement.
5. The second washed me with pure water, and fed
me with bread and wine (even) the most holy things,
and clad me with a holy and glorious robe. 6. The
third clothed me with a linen vestment like an ephod.
7. The fourth put round me a girdle like unto purple.
8. The fifth gave me a branch of rich olive, g. The
sixth placed a crown on my head. 10. The seventh
placed on my head a diadem of priesthood, and filled
my hands with incense, that I might serve as priest
to the Lord God. 11. And they said to me Levi,
:
thy seed shall be divided into three offices, for a sign
of the glory of the Lord who is to come. 12. And
the first portion shall be great yea, greater than it
shall none be. 13. The second ; shall be in the priesthood. 14. And the third shall be called by a new
name, because a king shall arise in Judah, and shall
establish a new priesthood, after the fashion of the
Gentiles [to all the Gentiles]. 15. Andhis presence is
beloved, as a prophet of the Most High, of the seed of
Abraham our father.
16. Therefore, every desirable thing in Israel shall
be for thee and for thy seed,
And ye shall eat everything fair to look upon.
And the table of the Lord shall tliy seed apportion.
17. And some of them shall be high priests, and
judges, and scribes
For by their mouth shall the holy place be
guarded.
18. And when I awoke, I understood that this
(dream) was like the first dream. 19. And I hid
this also in my heart, and told it not to any man
upon the earth.

THE TWEU'E PATRIARCHS
41
IX. 1-14. Isaac's Instruction to Levi
IX. And after two da3's I and Judah went up with
our father Jacobto Isaac ourfather's father. 2. And
my father's father blessed me according to all the
words ofthe visions which I hadseen. Andhe would
not come with us to Bethel. 3. '"And when we came
to Bether, my father Jacob saw a vision concerning
me, that I should be their priest unto God. 4. And
he rose up early in the morning, and paid tithes of
all ^to the Lord"^ through me. 5. And ''so'' we came
to Hebron to dwell there. 6. And Isaac called me
continuall}' to put me in remembrance of the law of
the Lord, even as the angel of the Lord showed unto
me. 7. And he taught me the law of the priesthood,
of sacrifices, whole burnt-offerings, first-fruits, freewill-offerings, peace-offerings. 8. And each day he
was instructing me, and was busied on my behalf
before the Lord, and said to me : 9. Beware of the
spirit of fornication for this shall continue and shall
;
by thy seed pollute the holy place. 10. Take, therefore, to thyself a wife without blemish or pollution,
w^hile yet thou art young, and not of the race of
strange nations. 11. And before entering into the
holy place, bathe and when thou offerest the
;
sacrifice, wash and again, when thou finishest the
;
sacrifice, wash. 12. Of twelve trees having leaves
offer to the Lord, as Abraham taught me also. 13.
And of ever}^ clean beast '"and bird"' offer a sacrifice
to the Lord. 14. And of all thy first-fruits and of
wine offer the first, as a sacrifice to the Lord God;
andeverysacrifice thou shalt salt with salt.
X. 1-5. Levi's Prophecy concerning- his
Posterity
X. Xow, therefore, observe whatsoever I command
y f o r u o , m m ch y il f d a r t e h n e ; rs fo '' r I h w a h v a e ts d o e e c v l e a r red th u i n n t gs o 3 I -o h u. ave 2. he A a n r d d
behold,"1 I am clear from your ungodliness and transgression, which ye shall commit in the end of the ages

THE TESTAMENTS OF
42
[against the Saviour of tlie world, Clirist, acting
godlessly], deceiving Israel, and stirring up against
it great evils from the Lord. 3. And ye shall deal
lawlessly together with Israel, so He shall not bear
with Jerusalem because of your wickedness but the
;
veil of the temple shall be rent, so as not to cover
yourshame. 4. Andye shallbe scatteredas captives
among the Gentiles, and shall be for a reproach and
for a curse there. 5. For the house which the Lord
shall choose shall be called Jerusalem, as is contained
in the book of Enoch the righteous.
XL i-XII. 7. Levi's Sons and Grandchildren
XL Therefore when I took a wife I was twent}^-
eight years old, and her name was Melcha. 2. And
she conceived and bare a son, and I called his name
Gersam,forwe weresojournersinourland. 3.' And I
saw concerning him, that he would not bein the first
rank. 4. And Kohath was born in the thirty-fifth
year '"of my life"', towards sunrise. 5. And I saw
in a vision that he was standing on high in the midst
of all the congregation. 6. Therefore I called his
name Kohath [which is, beginning of majesty and
instruction]. 7. And she bare me a third son,
Merari, in the fortieth year of my life ; and since his
mother bare him with difficulty, I called him Merari,
that is my bitterness, because he also was like to die.
8. And Jochebed was born in Egj^pt, in my sixtyfourth year, for I was renowned then in the midst of
my
brethren.
XII. And Gersam took a wife, and she bare to him
Lomni and Semei. 2. And the sons of Kohath,
Ambram, Issachar, Hebron, and Ozeel. 3. And the
sons of Merari, Mooli and Mouses. 4. And ""in my
ninety-fourth year"i Ambram took Jochebed my
daughter to him to wife, for they were born in one
day, he and my daughter. 5. Eight years old was I
when I M'ent into tlie land of Canaan, and eighteen
years when I slew Shechem, and at nineteen \'cars

THE T\AELVE PATRIARCHS
43
I became priest, and at twenty-eight 3'ears I took a
wife, and at forty-eight I went into Egypt. 6. And
behold, my children, ye are a third generation. 7.
In my hundred-and-eighteenth year Joseph died.
XIII. 1-9. Levi's Instruction to his Children
XIII. And now, my children, I command you :
FeartheLordyour God ^with\^ourwholeheart"^,
And walk in simplicity according to all His
law.
2. And do \-e also teach 3'our children letters,
That they may have understanding all theirlife,
Reading unceasingly the law of God.
3. For every one that knoweththe law of the Lord
shall be honoured.
And shall not be a stranger whithersoever he
goeth.
4. Yea, many friends shall he gain more than his
parents,
And many men shall desire to serve him,
And to hear the law from his mouth.
5. Work righteousness, ""therefore,"^ my children,
upon the earth.
That ye may have (it) as a treasure in heaven.
6. And sow good things in your souls,
That \'e may findthem in 3'our life.
But if \'e sow evil things.
Ye shall reap every trouble and affliction.
7. Get wisdom in the fear of God with diligence ;
For though there be a leading into captivit}',
And cities and lands be destroyed,
And gold and silverandeverypossession perish,
The wisdom of the wise naught can take away,
Save the blindness of ungodliness, and the callousness (that comes) of sin.
8. f"For if one keep oneself from these evil things,"^
Then even among his enemies shall wisdom be a
glory to him.
And in a strange countrj" a fatherland,
And in the midst of foes shall prove a friend.

THE TESTAMENTS OF
44
9.
Whosoeverteachethnoblethingsanddoeththem,
Shall be enthroned with kings,
As was also Joseph my brother.
XIV. i-XVL 5. Levi foretells the Falling-away
of his Children
XIV. Therefore, my children, I have learnt that
at the end of the ages ye will transgress against the
Lord, stretching out hands to wickedness [against
Him]
;
and to allthe Gentilesshallye become ascorn.
2. For our father Israel is pure from the transgressions ofthe chief priests [who shalllaytheirhands
uponthe Saviourofthe world]. 3. Forastheheaven
is purer in the Lord's sight than the earth, so also be
ye, the lights of Israel, (purer) than all the Gentiles.
4. But if ye be darkened through transgressions,
what, therefore, will all the Gentiles do living in
blindness? Yea, ye shall bring a curse upon our
race, because the light of the law which was given
for to lighten every man, this ye desire to destroy
by teaching commandments contrary to the ordinances of God. 5. The offerings of the Lord ye shall
rob, and from His portion shall ye steal choice portions, eating (them) contemptuouslywithharlots. 6.
And out of covetousness ye shallteachthe commandments of the Lord, wedded women shall ye pollute,
"and the virgins of Jerusalem shall ye dsfile"' ; and
with harlots and adulteresses shall ye be joined, and
the daughters of the Gentiles shall ye take to wife,
purifying them with an unlawful purification and
;
your union shall be like unto Sodom and Gomorrah.
7. And ye shall be puffed up because of your priesthood, lifting yourselves up against men, and not only
so, but also against the commands of God. 8. For
ye shall contemn the holy things with jests and
laughter.
XV. Therefore the temple, which the Lord shall
choose, shall be laid waste through yom- uncleanness,
and ye shall be captives throughout all nations. 2.
And ye shall be an abomination unto them, and ye

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
45
shall receive reproach and everlasting shame from
the righteous judgement of God. 3. And all who
hate you shall rejoice at your destruction. 4. And if
you were not to receive mercy through Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, our fathers, not one of our seed
should be left upon the earth.
XVI. And now I have learnt that for seventy
weeks 3'e shall go astray, and profane the priesthood,
and pollute the sacrifices. 2. And ye shall make
void the law, and set at nought the words of the
prophets by evil perverseness. And ye shall persecute righteous men, and hate the godly the words
;
of the faithful shall ye abhor. 3. [And a man who
reneweth the law in the power of the Most High, ye
shall call a deceiver ; and at last \^e shall rush (upon
him) to slay him, not knowing his dignity, taking
innocent blood throughwickednessupon yoxirheads].
4. And your holy places shall be laid waste even to
the ground because of him. 5. And ye shall have no
placethat isclean
;
but yeshall be amongthe Gentiles
a curse anda dispersion until He shall again visit you,
and in pity shall receive you [through faith and
water].
XML III. A Decadent Priesthood
XVII. And whereas ye have heard concerning the
seventy weeks, hear also concerning the priesthood.
2. For in each jubilee there shall be a priesthood.
And in the first jubilee, the first who is anointed to
the priesthood shall be great, and shall speak to God
as to a father. And his priesthood shall be perfect
with the Lord, [and in the day of his gladness shall
he arise for the salvation of the world]. 3. In the
second jubilee, he that is anointed shall be conceived
in the sorrow of beloved ones and his priesthood
;
shall be honoured and shall be glorified by all. 4.
And the third priest shall be taken hold of by sorrow.
5. And the fourth shall be in pain, because unrighteousness shall gather itself against him exceedingly,
and all Israel shall hate each one his neighbour.

; ;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
46
6. The fifth shah be taken hold of by darkness. 7.
Likewise also the sixth and the seventh. 8. And in
the seventh shall be such pollution as I cannot express before men, for theyshall know it who do these
things. 9. Therefore shall they be taken captive
andbecome a prey, andtheirland andtheirsubstance
shall be destroyed.
10. And in the fifth week they shall return to
their desolate country, and shall renew the house
of the Lord. 11. And in the seventh week shall
come priests, (who are) idolaters, adulterers, lovers
of money, proud, lawless, lascivious, abusers of
children and beasts.
XVIIL 1-14. A Messianic Hymn
XVIII. And after their punishment shaU have
come from the Lord, the priesthood shall fail.
2. Then shall the Lord raise up a new priest.
And to him all the words of the Lord shall be
revealed
And heshallexecutearighteous judgementupon
the earth for a multitude of days.
3. Andhis starshall arise in heaven as of a king,
Lighting up the light of knowledge as the sun
the day.
And he shall be magnified in the world.
4. He shall shine forth as the sun on the earth.
And shall remove all darkness from under
heaven.
And there shall bepeace in all the earth.
5. The heavens shall exult in his days,
And the earth shall be glad.
And the clouds shall rejoice
[And the knowledge of the Lord shall be poured
forthupon the earth,as the waterofthe seas
And the angels of the glory of the presence o ; f ]
the Lord shall be glad in him.
6. The heavens shall be opened,
And from the temple of glory shall come upon
him sanctification.

; ;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
47
With the Father's voice as from Abraham to
Isaac.
7. And the glory of the Most High shall be uttered
over him,
And the spirit of understanding and sanctification shall rest upon him [in the water].
8. For he shall give the majesty of the Lord to
His sons in truth for evermore
And there shall none succeed him for all generations for ever
9. And in his priesthood the Gentiles shall be
multiplied in knowledge upon the earth,
Andenlightenedthrough the grace of the Lord
:
In his priesthood shall sin come to an end,
And the lawless shall cease to do evil.
[And the just shall rest in him.]
10. And he shall open the gates of paradise,
And shall removethethreateningsword against
Adam.
11. And he shall give to the saints to eat from the
tree of life.
And the spirit of holiness shall be on them.
12. And Beliar shall be bound by him.
And he shall give power to His children to
tread upon the evil spirits.
13. And the Lord shall rejoice in His children.
And be well pleased in His beloved ones for
ever.
14. Then shall Abraham and Isaac andJacobexult,
And I will be glad,
And all the saints shall clothe themselves with
XIX. 1-5. Levi's Last Words to his Children.
His Death and Burial
XIX. And now, my children, ye have heard all
choose, therefore, for yourselves either the light or
the darkness, either the law of the Lord or the works
of Beliar. 2. And his sons answered him, saying.
Before the Lord we will walk according to His law.

,
THE TESTAMENTS OF
48
3. And their father said unto them, The Lord is
witness, and His angels are witnesses, and ye are
witnesses, and I am witness, concerning the word of
3-our mouth. And his sons said unto him We are
:
witnesses. 4. And thus Levi ceased commanding
his sons ; and he stretched out his feet ^on the bed''
and was gathered to his fathers, after he had hved
a hundred and thirty-seven years. 5. And they
laid him in a cofhn, and afterwards they buried him
in Hebron, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH, THE FOURTH
SON OF JACOB AND LEAH
I. i-VHL 3. Judah's Mighty Deeds
L The copy of the words of Judah, what things he
spake to his sons before he died. 2. They gathered
themselves together, therefore, and came to him,
and he said to them : 3. ^Hearken, my children,
to Judah your father."' I was the fourth son born
to my father Jacob and Leah my mother named me
;
Judah, saying, I give thanks to the Lord, because
He hath given me a fourth son ^also"'. 4. I was
swift in my youth, andobedienttoni}^fatherineverything. 5. And I honoured my mother and my
mother's sister. 6. And it came to pass, when I
became a man, that my father blessed me, saying,
Thou shalt be a king, prospering in all things.
H. And the Lord showed me favour in all my
works both in the field and in the house. 2. I know
that I raced a hind, and caught it, and prepared the
meat for my father, and he did eat. 3. And the
roes I used to master in the chase, and overtake all
that was in the plains. A wild mare I overtook,
and caught it and tamed it. 4. I slew a lion and
plucked a kid out of its mouth. I took a bear by
itspawandhurledit downthecliff,anditwascrushed.

THE TWEU^E PATRIARCHS
49
5. I outran the wild boar, and seizing it ^as I ran"",
I tare it in sunder. 6. A leopard in Hebron leaped
upon my dog, and I caught it by the tail, and hurled
it on the rocks, and it was broken in twain. 7. I
found a wild ox feeding in the fields, and seizing
it b}' the horns, and whirling it round and stunning
it, I cast it from me and slew it.
III. And when the two kings of the Canaanites
came, sheathed in armour, against our flocks, and
much people with them, single-handed I rushed upon
the kingof Hazor, and smote him on the greaves and
dragged him down, and so I slew him. 2. And the
other, the king of Tappuah, as he sat upon his horse,
[I slew, and so I scattered all his people. 3. Achor,
the king] a man of giant stature ^I found"', hurling
javelins before and behind as he sat on horseback,
and I took up a stone of sixty pounds weight, and
hurled it and smote his horse, and killed it. 4. And
I fought with (this) other for two hours and I clave
;
his shield in twain, and I chopped off his feet, and
killed him. 5. And as I was stripping off his breastplate, behold nine men, his companions, began to
fight with me. 6. And I wound my garment on my
t h h a e n m d , ; a a n n d d t I h s e lu r n e g st st f o l n ed e . s at 7. th A e n m d , a Ja n c d o k b il m le y d f f o a u t r he o r f
slew Beelesath, king of all the kings, a giant in
strength, twelve cubits high. 8. And fear fell upon
them, and the}^ ceased warring against us. g.
Therefore my father was free from anxiety in the
wars when I was with my brethren. 10. For he
saw in a vision '"concerning me"^ that an angel of
might followed me everywhere, that I should not be
overcome.
lY. And in the south there came upon us a greater
war than that in Shechem and I joined in battle
array with my brethren, a ; nd pursued a thousand
men, and slew of them two hundred men and four
kings. 2. And I went up upon the wall, and I slew
four mighty men. 3. And so we captured Hazor,
and tool: all the spoil.
D

THE TESTAMENTS OF
50
V. On the next day we departed to Aretan, a
city strong and walled and inaccessible, threatening
us with death. 2. But I and Gad approached on
the east side of the city, and Reuben and Levi on
the west. 3. And the}' that were upon the wall,
thinkingthatwe were alone,were drawn down against
us. 4. And so my brothers secretly climbed up the
wall on both sides by stakes, and entered the city,
while the men knew it not. 5. And we took it with
the edge of the sword. And as for those who had
taken refuge in the tower, we set lire to the tower
and took both it and them. 6. And as we were
departing the men of Tappuah seized our spoil, and
seeing (this) we fought with them. 7. And we slew
them all and recovered our spoil.
VI. And when I was at the waters of Kozeba, the
men of Jobel came against us to battle. 2. And we
fought with them and routed them '"and their
;
allies from Shiloh we slew,"' and we did not lea%'e
them Tpower"' to come in against us. 3. And the
men of Makir came upon us the fifth day, to seize
our spoil and we attackedthem and overcame them
;
in fierce battle for there was a host of mighty men
:
amongst them, and we slew them before they had
gone up the ascent. 4. And when we came to their
city their women rolled upon us stones from the
brow of the hill on which the city stood. 5. And
I and Simeon hid ourselves behind the town, and
seized upon the heights and destroj-ed this city
also.
VII. And the next dayit was told us that the king
of the city of Gaash with a mighty host was coming
against us. 2. I, therefore, and Dan feigned ourselves to be Amorites, and as allies went into their
city. 3. And in the depth of night our brethren
came and we opened to them the gates and we destroyedall the men and their substance, ; and we took
for a prey all that was theirs and their three walls
we cast down. 4. And we drew near to Thamna,
where was all the substance of the hostile kings.

;;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
51
5. Then being insulted by them, I was therefore
wroth, and rushed against them to the summit
and they kept shnging against me stones and darts.
6. And had not Dan my brother aided me, they
would have slain me. 7. We came upon them,
t b h y er a ef n o o r t e h , er wit w h ay w , ra t t h h e , y an b d es t o h u e g y ht all my fled fa ; th a e n r d , p a a n s d si h n e g
made peace with them. 8. And we did to them no
hurt, andtheybecametributarytous, andwe restored
to them their spoil. 9. And I built Thamna, and
my father built Rabael. 10. I was twenty years
old when this war befell. 11. And the Canaanites
feared me and mj' brethren.
VHL And I had much cattle, and I had for chief
herdsman Iram the Adullamite. 2. And when I
went to him I saw Barsaba, king of Adullam ; ^and
he spake unto us,"^ and he made us a feast ; and
when I was heatedhe gave me his daughter Bathshua
to wife. 3. She bare me Er, and Onan, and Shelah
and two of them the Lord smote for Shelah lived,
:
and his children are ye.
IX. 1-8. The Conflict between Jacob and
Esau
IX. And eighteen 3'ears my father abode at peace
with his brother Esau, and his sons with us, after
that we came from Mesopotamia, from Laban. 2.
Andwhen eighteen years were fulfihed, in the fortieth
year of my life, Esau, the brother of my father, came
upon us with a mighty and strong people. 3. And
Jacob smote Esau with an arrow, and he was taken
up wounded on Mount Seir, and as he went he died
at Anoniram. 4. And we pursued after the sons of
Esau. Now they had a city with walls of iron and
gates of brass; and we could not enter '"into if,
and we encamped around, and besieged it. 5. And
when they opened not to us in twenty days, I set up
a ladder f'in the sight of air, and with my shield
upon my head I went up, sustaining the assaults
of stones, upwards of three talents weight and I
;

THE TESTAMENTS OF
52
slew four of their mighty men. 6. And Reuben and
Gad slew six others. 7. Then they asked from us
terms of peace and having taken counsel with our
;
father, we receivedthem as tributaries. 8. And they
gave us five hundred cors of wheat, five hundred
baths of oil, five hundred measures of wine, ""until
the famine,'' when we went down into Eg3'"pt.
X. i-XII. 12. The Story of Tamar
X. And after these things my son Er took to
wife Tamar, from Mesopotamia, a daughter of Aram.
2. Now Erwaswicked, andhe wasinneedconcerning
Tamar, because she was not of the land of Canaan.
And on the third night an angel of the Lord smote
him. 3. ^And he had not known her according to
the evil craftiness of his mother, for he did not wish
to have children by her. 4. In the days"^ of the
wedding-feast I gave Onan to her in marriage and
;
he also in wickedness knew her not, though he spent
with her a year. 5. And when I threatened him he
went in unto her, but he spilled the seed on the
ground, according to the command of his mother,
and he also died through wickedness. 6. And I
wished to give Shelah also to her, but his mother
did not permit it ; '^for she wrought evil against
Tamar, "^ because she was not of the daughters of
Canaan, as she also herself was.
XL And I knew that the race of the Canaanites
was wicked, but the impulse of youth blinded my
mind. 2. And when I saw her pouring out wine,
owing to the intoxication of wine was I deceived,
and took her although my father had not counselled
(it). 3. And while I was away she went and took
forShelahawife from Canaan. 4. And when I knew
what she had done, I cursed her in the anguish of my
soul. 5. And she also died through her wickedness
together with her sons.
XIL And after these things, while Tamar was a
widow, she heard after two years that I was going
up to shear my sheep, and adorned herself in bridal

THE T\VEL\E PATRIARCHS
53
array, and sat in the city Enaim by the gate. ^2.
For it was a law of the Amorites, that she who was
about to marry should sit in fornication seven days
by the gateJ 3. Therefore being drunk with wine,
I did not recognise her and her beauty deceived
;
me, through the fashion of her adorning. 4. And
I turned aside to her, and said Let me go in unto
t A h n e d e. I A g n av d e s h h e e r s m a y id s : taf W f, ha a t nd w : i m lt y t g h ir o d u le, gi a ve nd m t e he ?
diadem of my kingdom ''in pledge.'' And I went in
unto her, and she conceived. 5. And not knowing
what I had done, wished to slay her; but she privily
sent my pledges, and put me to shame. 6. And
when I called her, I heard also the secret words
which ''I spoke"" when lying with her in m}" drunkenness ; and I could not slay her, because it was from
the Lord. 7. For I said. Lest haply she did it in
subtlety, having received the pledge from another
woman. 8. But I came not again near her while
I lived, because I had done '"this"' abomination in
"alP Israel. 9. ]\Ioreo^'er, they who were in the
cit}^ said that there was no harlot in the gate, because
she came from another place, and sat for a while
inthegate. 10. And Ithoughtthat nooneknewthat
I had gone in to her. 11. And after this we came
into Egypt ""to Joseph"', because of the famine. 12.
And I was forty and six years old, and seventy and
three years lived I in Egypt.
XIII. i-XIX. 4. Judah warns his Sons against
Drunkenness, Fornication, and the
Love of Money
XIII. And now I command you, my children,
hearken ""to Judah your father,"" and keep my sayings
to perform all the ordinances of the Lord, and to
obe}^ the commands of God. 2. And walk not after
your lusts, nor in the imaginations of your thoughts
in haughtiness of heart and glory not in the deeds
;
and strength of your youth, for this also is evil in
the eyes of the Lord. 3. Since I also gloried that

THE TESTAMENTS OF
54
in wars no comely woman's face ever enticed me,
and reproved Reuben my brother concerning Bilhah,
the wife of my father, the spirits of jealousy and of
fornication arrayed themselves against me, until I
lay with Bathshua the Canaanite, and Tamar, who
wasespousedto my sons. 4. For I saidto my fatherin-law : I will take counsel with my father, and so
will I take thy daughter. And he was unwilling, but
he showed me a boundless store of gold in his daughter's behalf; for he was a king. 5. And he adorned
her with gold and pearls, and caused her to pour out
wine for us at the feast with the beauty of women.
6. And the wine turned aside my eyes, and pleasure
blinded my heart. 7. And I became enamoured of
and I lay with her, and transgressed the commandment of the Lord and the commandment of my
fathers, and I took her to wife. 8. And the Lord
rewarded me according to the imagination of my
heart, inasmuch as I had no joy in her children.
XIV. And now, my children, ^I say unto you,"i
be not drunk with wine for wine turneth the mind
away from the truth, a ; nd inspires the passion of
lust, and leadeth the eyes into error. 2. For the
spirit of fornication hath wine as a minister to give
pleasure to the mind for these two also take away
;
the mind of man. 3. For if a man drink wine to
drunkenness, it disturbeth the mind with filthy
thoughts Heading to fornication"', and heateth the
body to carnal union and if the occasion of the lust
;
be present, he worketh the sin, and is not ashamed.
4. Such is the inebriated man, my children; for he
who is drunken reverenceth no man. 5. For, lo, it
made me also to err, so that I was not ashamed of
the miiltitude in the city, inthat before theeyesof all
I turned aside unto Tamar, and I wrought a great
sin, and I uncovered the covering of my sons'
shame. 6. After I had drunk wine I reverenced not
the commandment of God, and I took a woman of
Canaan to wife. 7. For much discretion needeth
the man who drinkethwine, my children and herein
;

;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
55
is discretion in drinking wine, a man may drink so
long as he preserveth modesty. 8. But if he go
beyond this Hmit the spirit of deceit attacketh his
mind, and it maketh the drunkard to talk filthily,
and to transgress and not to be ashamed, but even
togloryinhisshame, and-accounthimselfhonourable.
XV. He that committeth fornication is not aware
when he suffers loss, and is not ashamed when put
to dishonour. 2. For even though a man be a king
and commit fornication, he is stripped of his kingship
by becoming the slave of fornication, as I m^'self
also suffered. 3. For I gave my staff, that is, the
s a t n a d y m of y m d y ia t d r e ib m e , ; t a ha n t d i m s, y t g h i e rd g l l e, or t y ha o t f i m s, y my kin p g o d w o e m r .
4 f . ies A h n I d ea i t nd n e o e t d u I nt r i e l p m en y te o d ld of ag t e h , es n e or th d i i n d gs I ; be w h i o n l e d a a n n d y
joy. 5. And the angel of God showed me that for
ever do women bear rule over king and beggar alike.
6. And from the king they take awa\^ his glory, and
from the valiant man his might, and from the beggar
even that little which is the stay of his poverty.
XVL Observe, therefore, my children, the (ri—ght)
limit in wine for there are in it four evil spirits of
;
lust, of hot desire, of profligac}^ of filthy lucre. 2.
If ye drink wine in gladness, be ye modest with the
fear of God. For if in (your) gladness the fear of
God departeth, then drunkenness ariseth and shamelessness stealeth in. 3. But if you wouldlive soberh'
do not touch wine at all, lest ye sin in words of outrage, andin fightings andslanders, andtransgressions
of the commandments of God, and ye perish before
your time. 4. Moreover, wine revealeth the mysteries of God and men, even as I also revealed the
commandments of God and the mysteries of Jacob
my father to the Canaanitish woman Bathshua,
which God bade me not to reveal. 5. And wine is
a cause both of war and confusion.
XVII. And now I command you, my children,
not to love money, nor to gaze upon the beauty of
women because for the sake of money and beauty
;

THE TESTAMENTS OF
56
I was led astray to Bathshua the Canaanite. [2.
For I know that because of these two things shall my
race fall into wickedness. 3. For even wise men
among my sons shall they mar, and shall cause the
kingdom of Judah to be diminished, which the Lord
gave me because of my obedience to my father. 4.
For I never caused grief to Jacob, my father; for
all things whatsoever he commanded I did. 5. And
Isaac, the father of my father, blessed me to be king
in Israel, andJacobfurtherblessedmeinlike manner.
6. And I know that from me shall the kingdom be
established.
XVIII. And I know what evils ye will do in the
last days.]
2. Beware, therefore, my children, of fornication
and the love of money, andhearkento Judah
your father.
3. For these things withdraw you from the law of
God,
And blind the inclination of the soul,
And teach arrogance,
And suffer not a man to have compassion upon
his neighbour.
4. They rob his soul of all goodness.
And oppress him with toils and troubles,
I" And drive away sleep from him,"^
And devour his flesh.
5. And he hindereth the sacrifices of God;
'"And he remembereth not the blessing of God,''
Hehearkenethnottoaprophetwhenhespeaketh,
And resenteth the words of godliness.
'^6 For he is a slave to two contrary passions,
And cannot obey God,
Because they have blinded his soul,
And he walketh in the day as in the night."'
XIX. My children, the love of money leadeth to
idolatry; because, when led astray through money,
men name as gods those who are not gods, and it
causeth him who hath it to fall into madness. 2.
For the sake of money I lost my children, and had

;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
57
not my repentance, ''and my humiliation,"^ and the
prayers of my father been accepted, I should have
died childless. 3. But the God of my fathers had
mercy on me, because I did it in ignorance. 4. And
the prince of deceit blinded me, and I was ignorant
as a man and as flesh, being corrupted through sins
'"and I learnt my own weakness while thinking myself
invincible"'.
XX. 1-5. The Spirits that wait upon Man
XX. Know, therefor—e, my children, that two
spirits wait upon man the spirit of truth and the
spirit i)f deceit. 2. And in the midst is the spirit
of the understanding of the mind, to which it belongeth to turn whithersoever it will. 3. And the works
of truth and the works of deceit are written upon the
hearts of men, and each one of them the Lord
knoweth. 4. And there is no time at which the
worksof men can be hid foron the heart itself have
they been written down ; ""before the Lord"". 5. And
the spirit of truth testifieth all things, and accuseth
all ; and the sinner is burnt up ""by his own heart"^,
and cannot raise his face ^to the judge"'.
XXL 1-5. The Levitical Priesthood and the
Kingdom of Judah
XXL And now, ni}- children, I command you, love
Levi, that ye may abide, and ""exalt not yourselves
against him"", lest ye be utterly destroj-ed. 2. ""For
to me the Lord gave the kingdom, and to him the
priesthood, and He set the kingdom beneath the
priesthood. 3. To me He gave the things upon the
earth ; to him the things in the heavens. 4. As the
heaven is higher than the earth, so is the priesthood
of God higher than the earthly kingdom, unless it
falleth awaythroughsin from the Lord and is dominated by the earthly kingdom."' 5. For ^the angel
ofthe Lordsaiduntome"' The Lordchose himrather
:
than thee, to draw near to Him, and to eat of His
table ""and to offer Him the first-fruits"^ of the choice

; ; ; ;,
58 THE TESTAMENTS OF
things of the sons of Israel but thou shalt bekingof
;
Jacob.
XXI. 6-XXII. 3. Turmoil in the Last Times
6. And thou shalt be amongst them as the sea.
For as, on the sea, just and unjust are tossed about,
^some taken into captivity while some are enriched,''
so also shall every race of men be in thee some shall
:
be impoverished, being taken captive, ""and others
grow rich by plundering the possessions of others"i.
7. For the kings shall be as sea-monsters.
They shall swallow men like fishes
:
The sons and daughters ""of freemen"' shall they
enslave
Houses,lands, flocks, money shallthey plunder
:
8. And with the flesh of many shall they '"wrongfully^ feed the ra^'ens and the cranes
"And they shall advance in evil, in covetousness
uplifted,"'
g. Andthereshall be false prophets '"like"' tempests,
And they shall persecute all righteous men.
XXII. And the Lord shall bring upon them
divisions '"one against another"'.
And there shall be ""continuaP wars in Israel
2. And among men of another race shall my kingdom be brought to an end.
Until the salvation of Israel shall come,
"UntiltheappearingoftheGodofrighteousness"'
That Jacob [and all the Gentiles] may rest in
peace.
3. AndHeshallguardthe mightof mykingdom for
ever
For the Lord sware to me with an oath that He
would not destroy the kingdom from my seed
for ever.
XXIII. i-XXV. 5. The Sins of Israel ; Regeneration in the Messianic Era
XXIII. Now I have much grief, my children,
because of your lewdness and witchcrafts, and idola-

; ; ;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
59
tries which ye sliall practise ^against the kingdom"',
following them that have familiar spirits, diviners,
and demons of error. 2. Ye shall make your daughters singing girls and harlots, and ye shall mingle
in the abominations of the Gentiles. 3. For which
things' sake the Lord shall bring upon you famine
and pestilence, death and the sword, beleaguering
by enemies, and revilings of friends, the slaughter of
children, the rape of wives, the plundering of possessions, [the burning of the temple of God,] the laying
waste of the land, the enslavement of yourselves
among the Gentiles. 4. And they shall make some
of 5^ou eunuchs for their wives. 5. Until the Lord
visit you, when with perfect heart ye repent and
walk in all His commandments, and He bringyou up
from captivity among the Gentiles.
XXIV. And after these things shall a stararise to
you from Jacob in peace.
And a man shall arise [from my seed], like the
sun of righteousness.
Walking with the sons of men in meekness and
righteousness
And no sin shall ; be found in him.
2. And the heavens shall be opened unto him,
To pour out the spirit, (even) the blessing of the
HolyFather
3. And He shall pour out the spirit of grace upon
you
And 3'e shall be unto Him sons in truth.
And ye shall walk in His commandments first
and last.
4. [This Branch of God Most High,
And this Fountain giving life unto all.]
^. Then shall the sceptre of mv kingdom shine
forth
Andfrom your root shall arise a stem
6. And from it shall grow a rod of righte ; ousness to
the Gentiles,
To judge and to save all that call upon the
Lord.

;
6o THE TESTAMENTS OF
XXV. And after these things shall Abraham and
Isaac andJacobariseuntolife, and I andmybrethren
shallbechiefsofthetribes '"ofIsraeP : Levi first, I the
second, Joseph third, Benjamin fourth, Simeon fifth,
Issachar sixth, and so all in order. 2. And the Lord
blessed Levi,and the Angel of the Presence, me the
;
powers of glory, Simeon the heaven, Reuben the
; ;
earth, Issachar the sea, Zebulun the mountains,
; ;
Joseph; the tabernacle, Benjamin; the luminaries,
Dan Eden,Naphtali thesun, Gad the moon, Asher.
3.
;Andye
shall be t
;
he people of t
;
he Lord,andhave
one tongue
And there sha ; ll be there no spirit of deceit of
TBehar^
For he shall be cast into the fire forever.
4. And they who have died in grief shall arise
Tin joy\
"And they who were poor for the Lord's sake
shall be made rich,"^
And they who are put to death for the Lord's
sake shall awake ""to life''.
5. And theharts ofJacobshall run ^in joyfulness"",
And the eagles of Israel shall fly ""in gladness"'
And all the peoples shall glorify the Lord for
ever.
XXVI. 1-4. Judah's Last Words to his Sons.
His Death and Burial
XXVI. Observe, therefore, my children, all the
law of the Lord, for there is hope for all them who
hold fast unto His ways. 2. And ""he said to them :
Behold,"' I die before your eyes j;his day, a hundred
and nineteen years old. 3. Let no one bury me Hn
costly apparer, nor tear open my bowels, ^for this
shall they who are kings do ;'' and carry me up to
Hebron with you. 4. And Judah, when he had said
these things, fell asleep ; and his sons did according
to all whatsoever he commanded them, and they
buried him in Hebron with his fathers.

THE T\VEL^'E PATRIARCHS 6i
THE TESTAMENT OF ISSACHAR, THE FIFTH
SON OF JACOB AND LEAH
I. i-II. > Introduction. The Dissension
between Rachel and Leah
1. The copy of the words of Issachar. For he
called his sons and said to them
Hearken, my children, to Is : sachar your father
Give ear to the words of him who is beloved o ; f
the Lord.
2. I was born the '"fifth son to Jacob"", by wa}' of
hireforthemandrakes. 3. For Reuben ""mybrother"^
brought in mandrakes from the field, and Rachel met
himandtook them. 4. And Reubenwept,andat his
voice Leah my mother came forth. 5. Now these
(mandrakes) were '"sweet-smelling"' apples whichwere
producedinthelandofHaranbelowaravine ofwater.
6. And Rachelsai4 : I will not give themtothee,but
theyshallbetomeinsteadof children. '"Forthe Lord
hath despised me, and I have not borne children to
Jacob."1 7. Now there were two apples ; and Leah
s t a a i k d en ''to my Rac h h u e s P ba : n L d et : i w t il s t uff t i h ce ou the t e ak t e ha t t he t s h e ou al h s a o st ?
8. And Rachelsaid ""toher"" : Thou shalt have Jacob
this night for the mandrakes '"of thy son"^. 9. And
Leah said to her : Jacob is mine, for I am the wife
of his youth. 10. But Rachel said Boast not, and
:
vaunt not thyself; for he espoused me before thee,
and for my sake he served our father fourteen years.
II. And hadnot craftincreasedon the earth andthe
wickedness of men prospered, thouwouldest not now
see the face of Jacob. 12. For thou art not his wife,
but in craft wert takento himin my stead. 13. And
my father deceived me, ^and removed me on that
night"1, and did notsuffer ""Jacobto see me
;
for"" had
I been there, this had not happened '"to him''. 14.
Nevertheless, for the mandrakes I amhiring Jacobto

;
62 THE TESTAMENTS OF
thee for one night. 15. And Jacob knew Leah, and
she '"conceived and'' bare me, and on account of the
hire I was called Issachar.
IL Then appeared to Jacob an angel of the Lord,
saying Two children shall Rachel bear, inasmuch as
:
she hath refused company with lier husband, and
hath chosen continency. 2. And had not Leah
my mother paid the two apples for the sake of his
company, she would have borne eight sons for this
;
reason she bare six, and Rachel bare the two for
:
on account of the mandrakes the Lord visited her.
3. For He knew that for the sake of children she
wished to company with Jacob, and not for lust of
pleasure. 4. For on the morrow also she again gave
up Jacob. Because of the mandrakes, therefore,
the Lord hearkened to Rachel. 5. For though she
desired them, she ate them not, but offered them in
the house of the Lord, presenting them to the priest
of the Most High who was at that time.
HL i-V. 8. Issachar's Exhortation to his Sons
HL When, therefore, I grew up, my children, I
walked in uprightness of heart, and I became a
husbandman for my father and my brethren, and I
brought in fruits from the field according to their
season. 2. ''And my father blessed me, for he saw
that I walked in rectitude before him."' 3. And I
was not a busybody in my doings, '"nor envious and
maliciousagainst myneighbour. 4. Ineverslandered
any one, nor did I censure the life of any man, walking as I did in singleness of eye"^. 5. Therefore,
when I was thirty-'"five"' years old, I took to myself
a wife, for my labour wore away my strength, and
o I wi ne n v g er to t m ho y ug t h o t il, up sl o e n ep p o l v e e as r u c r a e me wi m t e h . wo 6. me A n nd ; b m u y t
my
father '"always"' rejoiced in rectitude, '"because I
offered through the priest to the Lord all first-fruits
then to my father also. 7. And the Lord increased
ten thousandfold His benefits in my hands and
also Jacob, my father, knew that God aide ; d my

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
63
singleness. 8. For on all the poor and oppressed I
bestowed the good things of the earth in the singlemy
ness of heart"1.
IV. And now, hearken to me, my children,
And walk in singleness ""of your heart"",
For I have seen in it '"air that is well-pleasing
to the Lord.
2. ""The single-(minded) man coveteth not gold,
He overreacheth not his neighbour,
He longeth not after manifold dainties.
He dehghtethnot in varied apparel.
3. He doth not desire to live a long life,
But only waiteth for the will of God."i
4. And the spirits of deceit have no power against
him.
Forhe looketh not on the beautyof women,
"Lest he should pollute his mind with corruption"".
5. There is no env}' in his thoughts,
[Nor malicious person maketh his soul to pine
away,]
Nor worry with insatiable desire in his mind.
6. For he walketh in singleness ^of souP,
And beholdeth all things in uprightness ""of
hearf.
Shunning eyes (made) evil through the error of
the world.
Lest he should see the perversion of any of the
commandments of the Lord.
V, Keep, therefore, my children, the law of God,
And get singleness,
^And walk in guilelessness.
Not playing the busybody with the business of
your neighbour.
2. But love the Lord and your neighbour,
Have compassion on the poor and weak."!
Bow down your back unto husbandry,
3.
And toil in labours Hn all manner of husbandry,
Offering gifts to the Lord with thanksgiving"'.
4. For with the first-fruits of the earth will the

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
64
Lord bless you, ^even as He blessed all the saints
from Abel even until now"!. 5. For no other portion
is given to you '"than of the fatness of the earth,
whose fruits are raised by toir. 6. For our father
Jacob blessed me with blessings of the earth and of
first-fruits. 7. And Levi and Judah were glorified
by the Lord even among the sons of Jacob for the
;
Lord gave them an inheritance, and to Levi He gave
the priesthood, and to Judah the kingdom. 8. And
do ye therefore obey them, and walk in the singleness
of 3^our father [for unto Gad hath it been given to
destroy the tr ; oops that are coming upon Israel].
VL 1-3. Iniquity in the Last Times
VL Know ye, therefore, my children, that in the
last times
Your sons will forsake singleness,
I" And will cleave unto insatiable desire
And"' leaving ""guilelessness, will
draw;
near to
malice
And forsa ; king the commandments of the Lord,
They will cleave unto Beliar
2. And leaving"' husbandry.
They will follow after their own '"wickecP
devices.
And they shall be dispersed among the Gentiles,
Andshall serve theirenemies.
3. And do ye therefore give these commands to
your children, that, if they sin, they may the more
quickly return to the Lord; 4. For He is merciful,
and will deliver them, even to bring them back into
their land.
VIL 1-7. Issachar's Blamelessness
VIL Behold, therefore, as ye see, I am a hundred
and twenty-six years old and am not conscious of
committing any sin. 2. Except my wife I have not
known any woman. I never committed fornication
by the uplifting of my ^eyes"'.
3. I drank not wine, to be led astray thereby;

; ; ;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
65
I coveted not any desirable thing that was my
neighbour's.
4. Guile arose not in my heart
A lie passed not through my lips.
5. If any man were in distress I joined my sighs
with his,
And I shared my bread with the poor.
I wrought godliness, all my days I kept truth.
6. I loved the Lord
Likewise also every man with all my heart.
7. So do ye also these things, my children,
And ever}^ spirit of Beliar shall flee from you,
And no deedofwicked men shall rule overyou
Andevery wild beast shall ye subdue,
Since ye have with you the God of heaven and
earth
(And) walk with men in singleness of heart."^
VII. 8-9. Issachar's Death and Burial
8. And having said these things, he commanded his
sons that they should carry him up to Hebron, and
buryhimthereinthecave ""withhisfathers"" . 9. And
he stretched out his feet and died, the fifth son of
Jacob, at a good old age with every limb sound,
;
and with strength unabated, he slept the eternal
sleep.
THE TESTAMENT OF ZEBULUN, THE SIXTH
SON OF JACOB AND LEAH
I. i-IV. 13. Introduction. Zebulun's Account
of the Selling- of Joseph
I. The copy of the words of Zebulun, which he
enjoined on his sons ""before he died"" in the hundred
and fourteenth year of his life, two years after the
death of Joseph. 2. And he said to them : Hearken
to me, ye sons of Zebulun, attend to the words of
E

66 THE TESTAMENTS OF
your father. 3. I, Zebulun, was born a good gift
to my parents. For when I was born m}^ father was
increased very exceedingly^ both in flocks and herds,
when with the straked rods he had his portion. 4. I
am not conscious tliat I have sinned all my days,
^save in thought "'. 5. Nor yet do I remember that
I have done any iniquity, except the sin of ignorance
w wi h t i h ch m I y c b o r m e m t i hr t e t n ed no a t ga t i o n t s e t ll J m os y ep f h at ; he f r or wh I a c t ov h e a n d an be t e e n d
done. 6. But I wept '"in secret"^ many days on
account of Joseph, for I feared my brethren, ""because
they had all agreed, that if any one should declare
the secret, he should be slain"^. 7. But when they
wished to kill him, I adjured them much ""withtears""
not to be guilt}^ of this sin.
II. For Simeon and Gad came against Joseph ^to
m ki e l , l h m im y "", b a re n t d hr h e e n, sai h d av u e nto me t r h c e y m u w p i o t n h t t e h a e rs b : ow 2 e . ls Pit o y f
Jacob our father : lay not upon me your hands ""to
shed innocent blood"^, for I have not sinned against
you. 3. And ifindeed I have sinned,withchastening
chastise me, "^my brethren"^, but lay not upon me
your hand, for the sake of Jacob our father. 4. And
as he spoke these words, ""wailing as he did so"", I
was unable to bear his lamentatioms, and ^began to
weep"", and my liver was poured out, and all the
substance of my bowels was loosened. 5. And I
wept with Joseph, and my heart sounded, ""and the
joints of my body trembled"", and I was not able to
stand. 6. And when ""Joseph"" saw me weeping with
him, and them coming against him to slay him,
he fled behind me, beseeching them. 7. But meanwhile Reuben roseand said ""Come,"^ my brethren,let
:
us not slay him, but let us cast him into one of these
drypits,whicli ourfathersdiggedandfoundno water.
8. For for this cause the Lord forbade that water
should rise upin them, in orderthat Josephshould be
preserved. 9. And they did so, until they sold liim
to the Ishmaelites.
III. For in his price I had no share, my children.

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
67
2. But Simeon and Gad andsixotherofour brethren
tookthe price of Joseph, andbought sandals forthemselves, and their wives, '"and their children"', saying
3. We will not eat of it, for it is the price of our :
brother's blood, but we will assuredly tread it under
foot, because he said that he would be king over us,
"and so let us see what will become of his dreams"'.
4. Therefore it is written in the writing of the law of
Moses, that whosoever will not raise up seed to his
brother, his sandal should be unloosed, and they
should spit into his face. 5. And the brethren of
Joseph wished not that their brother should live, and
the Lord loosed from them the sandal which they
w^ore against ^Joseph their brother'^. 6. For when
they came into Egypt ^they were unloosed by the
servants of Josephoutside the gate, andso they made
obeisanceto Josephafterthefashionof KingPharaoh.
7. And"" not onlydidtheymakeobeisance to him, but
"were spit upon also, falling down before him forthwith, and so"! they were put to shame before the
Egyptians. 8. For after this the Egyptians heard
all the evils that they had done to Joseph.
IV. And after he was sold my brothers sat down
to eat and drink. 2. But I, through pity for Joseph,
did not eat, but watched the pit, since judah feared
lest Simeon, Dan, and Gad should rush off and slay
him. 3. But when theysaw that I did not eat, they
set metowatchhim ,tillhewassoldtothe Ishmaehtes.
5. And when Reuben came and heard that while he
wasawav (Joseph)hadbeensold,herenthisgarments,
m (a y nd f ) at m h o e u r r J n a i c n o g b , ? sai 6 d . : A H n o d w he sha t l o l ok I t l h o e ok mo o n n e t ^ h ' e a f n a d ce ra o n f
after the merchants, but as he failed to find them he
returned grieving. But the merchants had left the
broad road and marched through the Troglodytes
byashortcut. 7. ""ButReubenwasgrieved,"' and ate
no food that day. Dan therefore came to him and
said : 8. Weepnot, neithergrieve ; forwe have found
whatwecansayto ourfatherJacob. 9. Letusslaya
kidofthe goats, anddipinit the coatof Joseph
;
and

68 THE TESTAMENTS OF
let ussendit to Jacob,saying : Know, is thisthe coat
ofthyson? Andthey didso. lo. '"Fortheystripped
off from Joseph his coat when they were selhng him,
and put upon him the garment of a slave."^ ii. Now
Simeon took the coat, and would not give it up, ^for
he wished to rend it with his sword,"• as he was angry
that Joseph lived and that he had not slain him.
12. Then we ""alP rose up and said unto him If
:
thougivest notupthe coat,we willsay ""to ourfather^i
that thoualone didstthisevilthinginIsrael. 13. And
so he gave it unto them, and they did even as Dan
hadsaid.
V. i-IX. 4. Zebulun's Exhortation to his Sons
V. And now, my children, I bid you to keep the
commands of the Lord, ^and td show mercy to your
neighbours, and to have compassion towards all,
not towards men only, but also towards beasts.
2. For, for this thing's sake the Lord blessed me,""
and when all my brethren were sick, I escaped without sickness, for the Lord knoweth the purposes of
each. 3. Have, therefore, compassion in yourhearts,
my children, because even as a man doeth to his
neighbour, even so also will the Lord do to him.
4. For the sons of my brethren were sickening and
were dying on account of Joseph, ''because they
showed not mercy in their hearts"' but my sons
;
were preservedwithoutsickness, as 3'e know. 5. And
when I was in the land of Canaan, by the sea-coast,
I made a catch of fish for Jacob my father and
;
when many were choked in the sea, I continued
unhurt.
VI. I was the first to make a boat to sail upon the
sea, forthe Lord gave me understanding '"and wisdom
therein"'. 2. And I let down a rudder behind it,
and I stretched a sail upon another upright piece of
wood in the midst. 3. And Isailedtherein along the
shores, catching fish for the house of my father until
we came to Egypt.
[4. And through compassion I shared my catch

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
69
witheverystranger. 5. And ifamanwereastranger,
or sick, or aged, I boiled the fish, and dressed them
well, and offered them to all men, as every man
had need, grieving with and having compassion
upon them. 6. Wherefore also the Lord satisfied me
with abundance of fish w'hen catching fish; for he
that shareth with his neighbour receiveth manifold
more from the Lord.] 7. For five years I caught
fish, [andgave thereofto everyman w^hom I saw, and
sufficed for all the house of my father]. 8. And
in the summer I caught fish, and in the winter I kept
sheep with my brethren.
VII. [Now I will declare unto you what I did. I
saw a man in distress through nakedness in wintertime, and had compassion upon him, and stole away
a garment secreth'from my father's house, and gave
it to him who was in distress. 2. Do ye, therefore,
my children, from that which God bestoweth upon
you, show compassion and mercy without hesitation
to ah men, and give to every man with a good heart.
3. And if ye havi not the w^ierewithal to give to him
that needeth, have compassion for him in bowels
of mercy. 4. I know that my hand found not the
wherewithal to giveto himthat needed,and Iwalked
with him weeping for seven furlongs, and my bowels
yearned towards him in compassion.
VIII. Have,therefore,3'ourselvesalso, my children,
compassion towards every man with mercy, that the
Lord also ma}'have compassion and mere}"upon you.
2. Because also in the last da3's God will send His
compassion on the earth, and wheresoever He findeth
bowels of mercy He dwelleth in him. 3. For in
the degree in which a man hath compassion upon
his neighbours, in the same degree hath the Lord
also upon him.] 4. And when we went down, into
Egypt, Joseph bore no malice against us. 5. To
whom taking heed, do ye also, my children, '"approve
3^ourselves without malice, and"^ love one another;
and do not set down in account, each one of j-ou,
evil against hisbrother. 6. For this breakethunity.

THE TESTAMENTS OF
70
and dividetli ""all kindred, and troubleth the sour,
and weareth away the countenance.
IX. Observe, '"therefore,'^ the waters, and know
when they flow together, they sweep along stones,
trees, earth, and other things. 2. But if they are
chvided into many streams, the earth swalloweth
them up, and they become of no account. 3. So
shall ye also be if ye be divided. 4. Be not ye,
therefone, divided into two heads, for everything
which the Lord made hath but one head, and two
shoulders, two hands, two feet, but all the remaining
members.
IX. 5-9. Zebulun's Prophecy concerning
his Posterity
5. For I have learnt in the writing of my fathers,
that
Ye shall be divided in Israel,
And ye shall follow two kings.
And shall work every abomination.
6. And yourenemies shall lead you captive.
AndyeshallbeevilentreatedamongtheGentiles,
With many infirmities and tribulations.
7. And after these things ye shall remember the
Lord and repent.
And He shall have mercy upon you, for He is
merciful and compassionate.
And He setteth not down in account evilagainst
the sons of men.
Because they are flesh, and are deceived through
their own wicked deeds.
8. And after these things shall there arise ""unto j'ou''
the Lord Himself,thelightofrighteousness.
And ye shall return unto your own land.
And ye shall see Him in Jerusalem, ^for His
name's sakc"^.
9. And again ""through the wickedness of your
works"" shall ye provoke Him to anger.
And ye shall be cast away ""by Him"" unto the
time of consunnuation.

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
71
X. 1-7. Zebulun's Last Words to his Sons.
His Death and Burial
X. And now, my children, grieve not that I am
dying, nor be cast down in that I am coming to my
end. 2. For I shall rise again in the midst of you,
i ^ n as t a he ru m l i er ds i t nt o h f e m mi y ds t t ri o b f e, hi a s s so m n a s" n ^ y ; a as nd sh I a s l h l al k l ee re p jo t i h c e e
law of the Lord, f"and the commandments of Zebulun
their father"". 3. But upon the ungodly shall the
Lord bring eternal fire, and destroy them throughout
all generations. 4. But I am now hastening away
to mj^rest, as did also my fathers. 5. But do yefear
the Lord ^ourGod with allyourstrength all the da\^s
of your life"'. 6. And when he had said these things
he fell asleep, ""at a good old age"". And his sons
laid him in a '"wooden"' coffin. 7. And afterwards
they carried him up and buried him in Hebron, with
his fathers.
THE TESTAMENT OF DAN, THE SEVENTH
SON OF JACOB AND BILHAH
L i-H'. 7. Dan's Confession. His Warningagainst harbouring Wrath
I. The copy of the words of Dan, which he spake
tohissonsinhislast days,inthehundredandtwentyfifth year of his life. 2. For he called together his
family, and said Hearken to my words, ye sons of
:
Dan; and give heed to the words '"of your father"'.
3. I have proA-ed in my heart, and in my whole life,
that truth with just dealing is good and well-pleasing
to God, and that lying and anger are evil, because
they teach man all wickedness. 4. I confess, therefore, this da\' to you,my children,that in my heart I
resolved on the death of Joseph ^my brother"', the
true and good man. [5. And I rejoiced that he was

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
72
sold, because his father loved him more than us.]
6. Forthespirit ofjealousyandvain-glorysaidto me :
Thouthyselfalsoart hisson. 7. Andoneofthespirits
ofBeliar stirred me up, saying Takethissword,and
:
^with it"' slay Joseph ; so shall thy father love thee
when he is dead. 8. Now this was the spirit of
angerthat persuaded me to crush Joseph as a leopard
crusheth a kid. 9. But the God of my fathers did
not suffer him to fall into myhands, so that I should
find him alone and slayhim, and causea secondtribe
to be destroyedin Israel.
II. And now, my children, behold I am dying, and
I tell you of a truth, that unless ye keep yourselves
from the spirit of lying and of anger, and love truth
and long-suffering, ye shall perish. 2. For anger is
blindness, and doth not suffer one to see the face of
anyman with truth. 3. For though it be afather or
a mother, ^he behaveth towards them as enemies""
though it be a brother, he knoweth him not ; though
it beaprophetofthe Lord,hedisobeyethhim though
;
a righteous man, he regardeth him not ""though a
;
friend, he doth not acknowledge him"^. 4. For the
spirit of anger encompasseth him with the net of
deceit, andblindeth hiseyes, and through lying darkenethhis mind, andgivethhimits ownpeculiarvision.
5. And wherewith encompasseth it his eyes? With
hatred of heart, so as to be envious of his brother.
III. For anger is an evil thing, my children, for it
troubleth even the soul itself.
2. And the body of the angry man it maketh its
own, and over his soul it getteth the mastery, and it
bestoweth upon the body ""power that it may work
all'' iniquity. 3. And when the body doeth all these
things, the soul justifieth what is done, since it seeth
not aright. 4. Therefore he who is wrathful, if he
be a mighty man, hath athreefold powerin his anger
:
one by the lielp of his servants and a second by his
;
wealth, whereby lie persuadeth and overcometh
wrongfully and thirdly, having his own natural
;
power he worketh thereby the evil. 5. And though

; ;
THE TWELVE PATRL'^RCHS
^^
the wratliful man be weak, yet hath he a power
twofold of that which is by nature ; for wrath ever
aideth such in lawlessness. 6. This spirit goeth
always with Ij'ing ^at the right hand of Satan, that
with cruelty andh'ing"! his works ma}^ be wrought.
IV. Understand ye, therefore, the power of wrath,
that it isvain. 2. Forit first of all giveth provocation
by word; then by deeds it strengtheneth him who
is angr\% and with sharp losses disturbeth his mind,
andsostirrethupwithgreatwrathhissoul. 3. Therefore, when anj^ one speaketh against you, be not ye
moved to anger, [and if any man praiseth you as
holy men, be not uplifted be not moved either to
:
delight or to disgust]. 4. For first it pleaseth the
hearing, and so makeththe mind keen to perceive the
grounds for provocation and then being enraged, he
;
thinketh that he is justly angr}-.
5. If 5'e fall into any loss or ruin, my children, '"be
not afflicted"' ; for this very spirit maketh (a man)
desire that which is perishable, in order that he may
be enraged through theaffliction. 6. And if yesuffer
loss voluntarily, or involuntarily, be not vexed for
;
from vexation ariseth wrath '"with lying"^. 7. Moreover, a twofold mischief is wrath mth l^'ing ; and
they assist one another in order to disturb the heart
andwhen the soul is continuall}'disturbed, the Lord
departeth from it, and Beliar ruleth over it.
V. 1-3. An Exhortation to keep the Law
V. Observe, therefore, my children, the commandments of the Lord,
And keep His law
;
Depart from wrath.
And hate h'ing.
That the Lord may dwell among you,
And Beliar may flee from you.
2. Speak truth each one with his neighbour,
So shall ye not fall into wrath and confusion
But yeshallbein peace,havingthe Godofpeace,
So shall no war prevail over you.

;; ;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
74
3. Love the Lordthrough all yourlife,
And one another with a true heart.
V. 4-13. The Last Times
4. I know that in the last days ye shall depart
from the Lord,
And ye shall provoke Le\'i unto anger,
And fight against Judah
;
But ye shall not prevail against them,
For an angel of the Lord shall guide them
both
For by them shall Israel stand.
5. And whensoever ye depart from the Lord, ye
shall walk in all evil and work the abominations of
the Gentiles, going a-whoring after women of the
lawless ones, while with all wickedness the spirits of
wickedness work Hn you"!. [6. For I have read in
the book of Enoch, the righteous, that your prince is
Satan, andthat all the spirits ofwickedness and pride
will conspire to attend constantly on the sons of
Levi, to cause them to sin before the Lord.
7. And my sons will draw near to Levi,
And sin with them in all things
And the sons of Judah will be co ; vetous.
Plundering other men's goods like lions.]
8. Therefore shall ye be led away [with them] into
captivity,
And there shall }'e receive all the plagues of
Egypt,
And all the evils of the Gentiles.
9. And so when ye return to the Lord ye shall
obtain mercy.
And He shall bring you into His sanctuary.
And He shall give you peace.
10. And there shall arise unto you from the tribe
of [Judah and of] Levi the salvation of the
Lord
And he shall make war against Beliar,
And execute an everlasting vengeance on our
enemies

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
75
11. And the captivity shall he take from Beliar
[the souls of the saints],
Andturn disobedient hearts unto the Lord,
And give to them that call upon him eternal
peace.
12. And the saints shall rest in Eden,
And in the New Jerusalem will the righteous
rejoice,
And it shall be unto the glory of God for ever.
13. AndnolongershallJerusalemendure desolation,
Nor Israel be led captive
;
For the Lord shall be in the midst of it [living
amongst men].
And the Holy One of Israel shall reign over it [in
humility and in poverty; and he who believeth on
Him shall reign amongst men in truth].
VI. i-ii. An Exhortation to Depart from Evil
VI. And now, fear the Lord, ni}' children, and
beware of Satan and his spirits. 2. Draw near unto
God and to the angelthat intercedeth foryou,for he
is amediator between Godandman, andforthe peace
of Israel he shall stand up against the kingdom of the
enemy.
3.
Thereforeistheenemyeagertodestroyall
that call upon the Lord. 4. For he knoweth that on
the day on which Israel shall repent, the kingdom of
the enemy shall be brought to an end. 5. For the
ver}' angel of peace shall strengthen Israel, that it
fall not into the extremitj' of evil. 6. And it shall
be in the time of the lawlessness of Israel, that the
Lordwill (not) depart from them, but will transform
them into anation thatdoeth His will, fornone ofthe
angels will be equal unto him. 7. And His name
shall be in every place of Israel, ""and among the
Gentiles"'.
8. Keep, therefore, yourselves, m}^ children, from
every evil work,
And cast away wrath and all lying,
And love truth and long-suffering.
9. And the things which ye have heard from your

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
76
father, do ye ^also"' impart to your children [that the
Saviour of the Gentiles may receive you ; for he is
true andlong-suffering, meek andlowly, andteacheth
by his works the law of God]. lo. Depart, therefore, from all unrighteousness, and cleave unto the
righteousness of God, and your race will be saved
for ever. ii. And bury me near my fathers.
VII. 1-3. Dan's Death and Burial
VII. And when he had said these things he kissed
them, and fell asleep at a good old age. 2. And his
sons buried him. And after that they carried up
Qiis bones"^, and placed them near Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob. 3. [Nevertheless, ^Dan'i prophesiedunto them that theyshould forget their God, and
should be alienated from the land of their inheritance
^and from the race of IsraeP, and from the family
of '"theirseed."!]
THETESTAMENTOFNAPHTALI,THEEIGHTH
SON OF JACOB AND BILHAH
I. 1-12. Introduction. Naphtali's Birth
I. The copy of the testament of Naphtali, which he
ordained at the time of his death in the hundred and
thirtieth year of his life. 2. When his sons were
gathered together in the seventh month,on the first
day of the month, while still in good health, he made
them a feast of food and wine. 3. And after he was
awake in the morning, he said to them, I am dying
and they believed him not. 4. And as he glorified
the Lord, he grew strong and said that after yesterday's feast he should die. 5. And he began then to
say Hear, my children, ye sons of Naphtali, hear
:
the words of your father. 6. I was born from
Bilhah ^and"" because Rachel dealt craftily, andgave
;

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
'j^
Billiah in place of herself to Jacob, and she conceived
and bare me upon Rachel's knees, ''therefore she
called my name Naphtali. 7. For Rachel loved me
very much because I was born upon her lap"" ; and
when I was still young she was wont to kiss me, and
say : May I have a brother of thine from mine own
womb, like unto thee. 8. Whence also Joseph was
like unto me ''in all things'', according to the prayers
of Rachel. 9. Now my mother was Bilhah, daughter
of Rotheus the brother of Deborah, Rebecca's nurse,
who was born on one and the self-same day with
Rachel. 10. And Rotheus was of the family of
Abraham, a Chaldean, God-fearing, free-born, and
noble. II. Andhewastakencaptiveandwasbought
by Laban and he gave him Euna his handmaid to
;
wife, and she bore a daughter, and called her name
Zilpah, after the name of the village in which he had
been taken captive. 12. Andnext she bore Bilhah,
saying Mydaughterhasteneth afterwhat is new, for
:
immediately that she was born she seized the breast
and hastened to suck it.
n. i-io. The Constitution of Man
II. And I was swift '"on my feef like the deer, and
my father Jacob appointed me for all messages, and
as a deer did he give me his blessing. 2. For as
the potter knoweth the vessel, how much it is to
contain, and bringeth clay accordingly, so also doth
the Lord make the body after the likeness of the
spirit, and according to the capacity of the body doth
He implant the spirit. 3. And the one doth not fall
short of the other by a third part of a hair for by
;
weight, and measure, and rule was all the creation
made. 4. And as the potter knoweth the use of
each vessel, what it is meet for, so also doth the Lord
knowthe body, howfarit will persistin goodness, and
when it beginneth in evil. 5. For there is no inclination or thought which the Lord knoweth not,
for He created every man after His own image.
6. For as a man's strength, so also is his work ; as

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
78
his eye, so also is his sleep ; as his soul, so also is his
word either in the law of the Lord or in the law of
Beliar.
7. And as there is a division between light and
darkness, between seeing and hearing, so also is there
a divisionbetween manandman, andbetweenwoman
and woman ; and it is not to be said that the one is
like the other either in face or in mind. 8. rFor^
God made all things good in their order, the five
senses in the head, and He joined on the neck to the
head, adding to it the hair also for comeliness and
glory, then the heart for understanding, the belly for
excrement, and the stomach for grinding, the windpipe for taking in (the breath), the liver for wrath,
the gall for bitterness, the spleen for laughter, the
reins ""for prudence, the muscles of the loins'^ for
power, thelungs for drawingin, the loins forstrength,
and so forth. 9. So '"then"', my children, let all
your works be done in order with good intent in the
fear of God, and do nothing disorderlyin scorn or out
of its due season. 10. For if thou bid the eye to
hear, it cannot ; so neither while ye are in darkness
can ye do the works of light.
HI. 1-5. An Exhortation to do the Will of God
III. Be ye, therefore, not eager to corrupt your
doings through covetousness or with vain words to
beguile your souls ; because if 3^e keep silence in
purity of heart, ye shall understand how to hold fast
the will of God, and to cast away the will of Beliar.
2. Sun and moon and stars change not their order
so do ye also change not the law of God in the disorderliness of your doings. 3. The Gentiles went
astray, and forsook the Lord, and changed their
order, and obeyed stocks and stones, spirits of deceit.
4. But ye shall not be so, my children, recognising
in the firmament, in the earth, and in the sea, and in
allcreated things,the LordWho made all things,that
ye become not as Sodom, which changed the order of
nature. 5. InlikemannertheWatchersalsochanged

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
79
the order of their nature, whom the Lord cursed at
the flood, on whose account He made the earth without inhabitant and fruitless.
IV. 1-5. Naphtali's Prophecy concerning
his Posterity
IV. These things I say unto you, my children, for 1
have read in the writing of Enoch that ye yourselves
also shall depart from the Lord, walking according
to all the lawlessness of the Gentiles, and ye shall do
according to all the wickedness of Sodom. 2. And
the Lord shall bring captivity upon you, and '"there"^
shall ye ser\'e your enemies, and ye shall be bowed
down with every affliction and tribulation, until the
Lord have consumed you all. 3. And after ye have
become minished and made few, ye shall return and
acknowledge the Lord your God and He shall bring
;
you back into your own land, according to His
abundant mercy. 4. And it shall be, that after that
they come into the land of their fathers, the5^ shall
again forget the Lord and become ungodly. 5. And
the Lord shall scatter them upon the face of all the
earth, vmtil the compassion of the Lord shall come, a
man working righteousness and working mercy unto
all them that are afar off, and to them that are near.
V. i-VII. 4. Naphtali's Visions
V. For in the fortieth year of ni}' life, I saw a
vision on the Mount of Olives, on the east of Jerusalem, that the sun and the moon were standing still.
2. And behold Isaac, the father of my father, saidto
us Run and lay hold of them, each one according
:
to his strength ^and to him that seizeth them will
;
the sun and moon belong''. 3. And we all of us ran
together, and Levi laid hold of the sun, and Judah
outstripped the others and seized the moon, and they
were both of them lifted up with them. 4. And
when Levi became as a sun, '"lo"', a certain youngman
gave to him twelve branches of palm and Judah was
;
bright as the moon, and under their feet were twelve

8o THE TESTAMENTS OF
rays. [5. And the two, Levi and Judah, ran, and
laid hold of them.] 6. And lo, a bull upon the earth,
with two great horns, and an eagle's wings upon his
back; and we wished to seize him, but could not.
7. But Joseph came, and seized him, and ascended
up with him on high. 8. And I saw, for I was there,
and behold a holy writing appeared to us, saying
:
Assyrians, Medes, Persians, [Chaldeans,] Syrians,
shall possess in captivitythe twelve tribes of Israel.
VI. And again, after seven days, I saw our father
Jacob standing by the sea of Jamnia, and we were
with him. 2. And, behold, there came a ship sailing
by,withoutsailorsorpilot andtherewaswrittenupon
;
the ship, The ship of Jacob. 3. And our father saith
to us : Come let us embark on our ship. 4. And
when we had gone on board, there arose a vehement
storm, and a mightj^ tempest of wind and our
;
father, who was holding the helm, departed from us.
5. And we, being tost with the tempest,were borne
along over the sea ; and the ship was filled with
water, (and was) pounded by mighty waves, until it
was broken up. 6. And Joseph fled away upon a
littleboat, ^andwe all were divideduponnineplanks,"^
and Levi and Judah were together. 7. And we were
all scattered unto the ends of the earth. 8. Then
Levi, girt about with sackcloth, prayed for us all
unto the Lord. 9. And when the storm ceased, the
shipreachedtheland, ''asitwere"'inpeace. 9. And,lo,
our father came, and we all rejoiced with one accord.
VII. These two dreams I told to my father; and
he said to me These things must be fulfilled in their
:
season, after that Israel hath endured many things.
2. Then my father saith unto me : I believe God
that Joseph liveth, for I see '"always"' that the Lord
numberetli him with j^ou. 3. And he said, weeping :
Ah me, m}^ son, Joseph, thou livest, though I behold
thee not, and thou seest not Jacob that begat thee.
4. He caused me also, therefore, to weep by these
words, and I burned in my heart to declare that
rJoseph"' had been sold, but I feared my brethren.

; ;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 8i
VIII. i-io. The Last Times. Naphtali's
Charge to his Sons
VIII. And lo my children, I have shown unto you
!
the last times, how everything shall come to pass
in Israel. 2. Do ye also, ^therefore,"' charge your
children that they be united to Levi and to Judah
For through them shall salvation arise unto
Israel,
Andin them shall Jacob be blessed.
3. For through their tribes shall God appear
[dwelling among men] on earth,
To save the race of Israel,
And to gather together the righteous from
amongst the Gentiles.
4. If ye workthat whichis good, my children,
'"Both"^ men and angels shall bless you
And God shall be glorified among the Gentiles
throughyou,
And the devil shall flee from you,
'"And the wild beasts shall fear you,""
And the Lord shall love you,
[And the angels shall clea\'e to you],
5. As a man who has trained a child well is kept
in kindly remembrance
So also for a good work th ; ere is a good remembrance before God.
6. But him who doeth not that which is good,
''Both"' angels and men shall curse.
And God shall be dishonoured among the
Gentiles through him,
Andthe devilshall make him as his ownpeculiar
instrument,
And every wild beast shall master him,
And the Lord shall hate him.
7. Forthe commandments ofthelaw are twofold,
'"And"' through prudence must they be fulfilled.
8. For there is a season for a man to embrace his
wife.
Andaseasonto abstaintherefrom forhis prayer.
F

82 THE TESTAMENTS OF
9. So, then, there are two commandments ; and,
unless they be done in due order, they bring '"very
great"" sin ^upon men"*. So also is it with the other
commandments. 10. Be ye therefore wise in God,
'"my children,'' and prudent, understanding the order
of His commandments, and the laws of every word,
that the Lord may love 3'ou.
IX. 1-3. Naphtali's Death and Burial
IX. And when he had charged them with many
such words, he exhorted them that they should
remove his bones to Hebron, and that they should
bury him with his fathers. 2. And when he had
eaten and drunken with a merry heart, he covered
his face and died. 3. And his sons did according to
all that Naphtali their father had commanded them.
THE TESTAMENT OF GAD, THE NINTH SON
OF JACOB AND ZILPAH
I. i-II. 5. Introduction. Gad's Hatred of
Joseph aforetime
I. The copy of the testament of Gad, what things
he spake unto his sons, in the hundred and twentyf m i y fth ch y i e l a d r ren o , f "' hi I s w li a fe s , t s h a e yi n n i g nt u h nt s o on th bo e r m n : to 2. J ' a ' c H o e b a , rk a e n n d ,
I was valiant in keeping the flocks. 3. Accordingly
I guarded '"at night"^ the flock ; and whenever the
lion came, '"or the wolf,"" or any wild beast against
the fold, I pursued it, and '"overtaking (it)"' I seized
its foot with my hand and hurled it about a stone's
throw, and so killedit. 4. Now Joseph '"my brother"'
was feeding the flock with us for upwards of thirty
days, and Ixiing young, he fell sick by reason of the
heat. 5. And he returned to Hebron to our father,
who made him lie down near him, because he loved

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
83
him greatly. 6. AndJosephtoldour father thatthe
sons of ^Zilpah and"" Bilhah were sla3ang the best
''of the flock'' and eating them againstthe judgement
of Reuben and Judah. 7. For he saw that I had
delivered a lamb out of the mouth of the bear, and
put the bear to death but had slain the lamb, being
;
grieved concerning it that it could not live, and that
we had eaten it. 8. And regarding this matter I
was wroth with Joseph ''until the day that he was
sold. 9. And the spirit of hatred was in me,"" and
I wished not either to hear of Joseph with the ears,
or to see himwith the eyes,because he rebuked usto
our faces ''saying'' that we were eating of the flock
without Judah. For whatsoever things he told our
father, he believed him.
II. I confess now my sin, my children, that oftentimes Iwished to kill him, because I hated him from
my heart. 2. Moreover, I hated him yet more for
his dreams ; and I wished to lick him out of the land
ofthe living, even as an oxlicketh up the grass ofthe
field.
3. And Judah sold him secretly to the Ishmaelites.
4. And thus through covetousness we were bent
on slaying him.
5. Thus the God of our fathers delivered him from
our hands, that we should not work great lawlessness
in Israel.
III. i-V. II. Gad warns his Sons against
Hatred
III. And now, my children, hearken to the words
of truth to work righteousness, and all the law of the
Most High, and go not astraythrough the spirit of
hatred,foritisevilin allthedoingsofmen. 2. Whatsoever a man doeth the hater abominateth him and
though amanworkeththelawofthe Lord,he pra : iseth
him not though amanfeareththe Lord, andtaketh
;
pleasure in that which is righteous, he loveth him
not. 3. He dispraiseth the truth, he envieth him
thatprospereth,he welcomethevil-speaking,heloveth

THE TESTAMENTS OF
84
arrogance, for hatred blindeth his soul; as I also
f'then"! looked on Joseph.
IV. Beware, therefore, my children, of hatred; for
it worketh lawlessness '"even"' against the Lord Himself. 2. For itwill not hear ""the words of"i Hiscommandmentsconcerning the lovingof one's neighbour,
'"and"' it sinneth against God. 3. '"For if a brother
stumble, "1 it delighteth immediatelyto proclaim it to
all men, and is urgent that he should be judged for
it, and be punished and be put to death. 4. And
if it be a servant it stirs him up against his master,
and with every affliction it deviseth against him, if
possibly he can be put to death. 5. For hatred
worketh with envy also against them that prosper
:
so longasithearethofor seeththeir success, it always
languisheth.
6. For as love would quicken ^even"^ the dead, and
would call back them that are condemned to die, so
hatred would slay the living, and those that had
sinned venially it would not suffer to live. 7. For
the spirit of hatred worketh together with Satan,
through hastiness of spirit, in all things unto men's
death but the spirit of love worketh together with
;
the law of God in long-suffering unto the salvation of
men.
V. ^Hatred, therefore, is evil,"^ for it constantly
mateth with lying, speaking against the truth and
;
it maketh small things to be great, and causeth the
light to be darkness, and calleth the sweet bitter, and
teacheth slander, and '"kindleth"' wrath, and '"stirreth'^
up war, and violence, and all covetousness ; it filleth
the heart with evils and devilish poison. 2. These
things, ''therefore"^, I say to you from experience, my
children, that ye may drive forth hatred, which is of
thedevil,andcleavetotheloveofGod. 3. Righteousness casteth out hatred, humility destroj-eth envy.
For he that is just and humble is ashamed to do what
is unjust, ''being reproved not of another,"^ but ofhis
ownheart,becausethe Lordlookethonhisinclination.
4. He speaketh not against a holy man, because the

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
85
fear of God overcometh hatred. 5. For fearing lest
he should offend the Lord, he will not do wrong to
any man, even in thought. 6. These things I learnt
at last, after I had repented concerning Joseph.
7. For true repentance after a godlysort [destroj'eth
ignorance, and] driveth away the darkness, and
enlighteneth the eyes, and giveth knowledge to the
soul,andleadeththemindtosalvation.
8.
Andthose
things which it hath not learnt from man, it knoweth
through repentance. 9. For God brought upon me a
disease of the liver and had not the prayers of
Jacob my father succ ; oured me, it had hardly failed
but my spirit had departed. 10. For by what things
a man transgresseth, by the same also is he punished.
II. Since, ^therefore,"' my liver was set mercilessly
my
against Joseph, in liver too I suffered mercilessh',
and was judged for eleven months, for so long a time
as I had been angr}" against Joseph.
VL i-VHL 2. Gad exhorts his Sons to love,
and to avoid Envy
VI. And now, my children, '"I exhort you,"' love
ye each one his brother, and put away hatred from
yourhearts,loveoneanotherindeed,andinword,and
in the inclination of the soul. 2. For in the presence
of my father I spake peaceably to Joseph and when
;
Ihadgoneout,thespirit ofhatreddarkenedmj^mind,
and stirred up my soul to slay him. 3. Love 3'e one
another from the heart ; and if a man sin against
thee,speakpeaceablyto him, and in thy soul holdnot
guile ; andif herepentandconfess,forgivehim. 4. But
if he deny it, do not get into a passion with him,
lest catchingthe poison fromthee he take to swearing
and so thou sin doubly. [5. Let not another man
hear thy secrets when engaged in legal strife, lest
he come to hate thee and become thy enemy, and
commit a great sin against thee for ofttimes he
;
addresseth thee guilefully or busieth himself about
thee withwicked intent.] 6. And though he deny it
and yet have a sense of shame when reproved, give

86 THE TESTAMENTS OF
over reprovinghim. Forhe who denieth may repent
so as not to wrong thee again yea, he may also
;
honour thee, and [fear and] be at peace with thee.
7. But if he be shameless andpersisteth in his wrongdoing, even so forgive him fromthe heart, andleave
^to Godthe avenging.
VII. If a man prosper more than you, do not be
vexed, but pray also for him,"^ that he may have
perfect prosperity. For so it is expedient for you.
2. And if he be further exalted, be not envious '"of
him"', remembering that all flesh shall die ; and offer
praise to God, who giveth thingsgood andprofitable
to all men. 3. Seekout the judgements of the Lord,
and thy mind will rest and be at peace. 4. And
though a man become rich by evil means, even as
Esau, the brother of my father, be not jealous ; ^but""
wait for the end of the Lord. 5. For if He take
away (from a man) wealth gotten by evil means He
forgiveth him if he repent, but the unrepentant is
reserved for eternal punishment. 6. For the poor
man, if free from envy he pleaseth the Lord in all
things, is blessed beyond all men, because he hath not
the travail of vain men. 7. Put away, therefore,
jealousy from your souls, and love one another with
uprightness of heart.
Vill. Do ye also,therefore,tellthese thingsto your
children, that they honour Judah and Levi, for from
them shall the Lord raise up salvation to Israel.
[2. For I know that at the last your children shall
depart from Him, and shall walk in all wickedness,
and affliction, and corruption before the Lord.]
VIII. 3-5 Gad's Death and Burial
3. And when he had rested for a little while, he
said again My children, obey your father, and bur}^
me near to
:my
fathers. 4. And he drew up his feet,
and fell asleep in peace. 5. And after five years they
carried him up to Hebron, and laid him with his
fatheni.

;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
87
THE TESTAMENT OF ASHER, THE TENTH
SON OF JACOB AND ZILPAH
I. i-VL 6. Asher instructs his Sons concerning
the Good and the Evil Tendency
L The copy of the testament of Asher, what things
he spake to his sons in the hundred and twentj^-fifth
year of his Hfe. 2. '"For'^ while he was still in health,
he said to them Hearken, ye children of Asher, to
:
your father, and I will declare to j^ou all that is upright in the sight of God. 3. Two ways hath God
given to the sons of men, and two inclinations, ^and
two kinds of action, and two modes (of action)"', and
'"two"' issues. 4. Therefore all things are by twos,
one over against the other. 5. '"For"' there are two
ways of good and evil, and with these are the two
inclinations in our breasts discriminating them.
6. Therefore if the soul take pleasure in the good
(inclination), all its actions are in righteousness; and
if it sin it straightway repenteth. 7. For, having its
thoughts set upon righteousness, and casting away
wickedness, it straightway overthroweth the evil,
and uprooteth the sin. 8. But if it incline to the
evil inclination, all its actions are in wickedness, and
it driveth away the good, and cleaveth to the evil,
and is ruled by Beliar ; even though it work what is
good, he perverteth it to evil. g. For whenever it
beginneth to do good, he forceth the issue of the
action into evil for him, seeing that the treasure of
the inclination is filled with an evil spirit.
II. A person, then, may with w'ords help the good
for the sake of the evil, yet the issue of the action
leadethto mischief. 2. There is a man who showeth
nocompassionupon him who serveth his turn inevil
and this thing hath twoaspects,but thewhole isevil.
3. And there is a man that loveth him that worketh
evil, because he would prefer ''even'^ to die in evil
for his sake ; and concerning this it is clear that

;
88 THE TESTAMENTS OF
it hath two aspects, but the whole is an evil work.
4. Though, indeed, he have love, yet is he wicked
who concealeth what is evil for the sake of the good
name, but the end of the action tendeth unto evil.
5. Another stealeth, doeth unjustly, plundereth, defraudeth, and withal pitieth the poor : this '"too"'
hath a twofold aspect, but the whole is evil. 6. He
who defraudeth his neighbour provoketh God, and
sweareth falsely against the Most High, and yet
pitieth the poor the LordWho commandeth the law
:
he setteth at nought and provoketh, and yet he
refresheth the poor. 7. He ""defileth the soul, and'^
maketh gay the body he killeth many, and pitieth a
;
few : this, too, hath atwofold aspect, but the whole is
evil. 8. Another committeth adultery and fornication, and abstaineth from meats, and when he fasteth
he doeth evil, and by the power of his wealth overwhelmeth many and notwithstanding his excessive
;
wickednesshe doeth ^the"^ commandments : this, too,
hath atwofold aspect, but the whole is evil. 9. Such
men are hares for they are half clean, but in very
;
deed are unclean. 10. For God in the tables of the
commandments hath thus declared.
ni. But do not 3'e, my children, wear two faces
like unto them, of goodness and of wickedness but
;
cleave unto goodness only, for God hath His habitation therein, and men desire it. 2. But from wickedness flee away, destroying the (evil) inclination by
your good works for they that are double-faced
;
serve not God, but their own lusts, so that they may
please Beliar and men like unto themselves.
IV. For good men, even they that are of single
face,thoughthe\^bethought bythemthat are doublefaced to sin, are just before God. 2. For many in
killing the wicked do two works, of good and evil
but the whole is good, because he hath uprooted and
destroyed that which is evil. 3. One man hateth
the merciful and imjust man, and the man who committeth adultery and fasteth this, too, has a two-
:
fold aspect, but the '"whole"' work is good, because

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
89
he followetli the Lord's example, in that he accepteth
not the seeming good as the genuine good. 4.
Another desireth not to see a good day with them
that riot, lest he defile his body and pollute his soul :
this, too, is double-faced, but the whole is good.
5. For such men are like to stags and to hinds, because in the manner of wild animals they seem to
be unclean, but they are altogether clean; because
^they walk"" in zeal for the Lord and abstain from
what God'also hateth and forbiddeth by His commandments, warding off the evil from the good.
V. Ye see, my children, how that there are two
Hn all things,"^ one against the other, and the one is
hidden by the other : ^in wealth (is hidden) covetousness, in conviviahty drunkenness, in laughter grief,
in wedlock profligacy"^. 2. Death succeedeth to life,
[dishonour to glory,] night to daj^, and darkness
to light; [and all things aie under the day, just
things under life, '"unjust things under death"'
;]
wherefore also eternal life awaiteth death. 3. Nor
may it be said that truth is a lie, nor right wrong;
for all truth is under the light, ""even as all things are
under God"'. 4. All these things, therefore, I proved
in my life, and I wandered not from the truth of the
Lord, and I searched out the commandments of the
Most High, walking according to all my strength
withsingleness offaceuntothat wiiichisgood.
YI. Take heed, therefore, ye also, my children, to
the commandments of the Lord, following the truth
with singleness of face. 2. Forthey that are doublefaced are guilty of a twofold sin ^iov they both do
;
the evil thing and they have pleasure in them that
do it,"' following the example of the spirits of deceit,
and striving against mankind. 3. Do ye, '"therefore,
my children"', keep the law of the Lord, and give
not heed unto evil as unto good but look unto the
;
thing that is reallygood, and keep it in all commandments of the Lord, having your conversation therein,
and resting therein. 4. For the latter ends of men
do show their righteousness (or unrighteousness).

90 THE TESTAMENTS OF
when they meet the angels of the Lord and of Satan.
5. For when the soul departeth troubled, it is tormented bythe evil spirit which also it served in lusts
and evil works. 6. But if he is peaceful with joy he
meeteth the angel of peace, and he leadeth him into
eternal life.
VH. 1-7, Asher's Prophecy concerning his
Posterity
VII. Become not, my children, as Sodom, which
knew not the angels of the Lord, and perished for
ever. 2. For I know that ye shall sin, and be delivered into the hands of your enemies ; ''and"' your
land shall be made desolate, and your holy places
destroyed, and ye shall be scattered unto the four
corners of the earth. And ye shall be set at nought
in the Dispersion as useless water, 3. Until the Most
High shall visit the earth, coming Himself [as man,
with men eating and drinking], and breaking the
head of the dragon in the water. He shall save
Israel and all the Gentiles [Godspeakingin the person
of man]. [4. Therefore do ^ye also, my children,""
tell these things to your children, that they disobey
Himnot.
5.
ForIhaveknownthatyeshallassuredly
be disobedient, and assuredly act ungodly, not giving
heed to the law of God, but to the commandments of
men, being corrupted through wickedness. 6. And
therefore shall ye be scattered as Gad and Dan my
brethren, and ye shall know not your own lands,
tribe, and tongue. 7. But the Lord will gather you
together in faith through His tender mercy, ^and""
for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.]
VIII. 1-2. Asher's Death and Burial
VIII. And when he had said these things unto
them, he commanded saying Bury me in Hebron.
:
Andhefell asleepand diedat agoodoldage. 2. And
his sons did as he liad commanded them, and they
carried him up to Hebron, and buried him with his
fathers.

; ; ;
THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
91
THETESTAMENTOFJOSEPH,THEELEVENTH
SON OF JACOB AND RACHEL
L i-XVL 6. Joseph tells the Story of his Life
L The cop}^ of the testament of Joseph. When he
was about to die he called his sons and his brethren
together, and said to them : 2. My brethren and my
children.
Hearken to Joseph the beloved of Israel
Give ear, my sons, unto 5^ourfather.
3. I have seen in my lifeenvy anddeath.
Yet I went not astray, '"but persevered'^ in the
truth ofthe Lord.
4. These my brethren hated me, but the Lord
loved me
They wished : to sla}' me, but the God of my
fathers guarded me
:
Theylet me down into a pit, and the Most High
brought me up again.
5. I wassoldinto slavery, andthe Lordof all made
me free
:
I was taken into captivity, and His strong hand
succoured me.
I was beset with hunger, and the Lord Himself
nourished me.
6. I was alone, and God comforted me :
Iwassick, andthe Lordvisitedme
I was in prison, and my God sh : owed favour
unto me
In bonds, and He released me
7. B S i l t a t n e d r e l r y ed s , po a k n e d n H a e ga p i l n e s a t de b d y m th y; e c E a g u y s p e t ; ians, and
He delivered me
Envied bymy fellow-slaves, and He exalted me.
II. And this chief captain of Pharaoh entrusted
to mehis house. 2. And Istruggledagainst ashameless woman, urging me to transgress with her; but

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
92
the God of Israel my father dehvered me from the
burning flame. 3. I was cast into prison, I was
beaten, ^i -was mocked'' but the Lord granted me to
;
find merCy in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
4. For the Lord doth not forsake them that fear
Him.
Neither in darkness, nor in bonds, nor in tribulations, nor in necessities.
5. For God is not put to shame as a man,
Nor as the son of man is He afraid,
Nor as one that is earth-born is He [weak or]
affrighted.
6. But in all these things doth He give protection.
And in divers ways doth He comfort,
(Though) for a little space He departeth to try
the inclination of the soul.
7. In ten temptations He showed me approved.
And in all of them I endured
For endurance is a mighty charm.
And patience giveth many good things.
III. How often did the Egyptian woman threaten
me with death How often did she give me over to
!
punishment, and then call me back and threaten me,
and when I was unwilling to company with her, she
said to me : 2. Thou shalt be lord of me, and all that
is in mine house, if thou wilt give thyself unto me,
andthoushalt be asourmaster. 3. But I remembered
the words of my father, and going into my chamber,
I wept and pra3^ed unto the Lord. 4. And I fasted
in those seven years, and I appearedto the Egyptians
as one living delicately, for they that fast for God's
sake receive beauty of face. 5. And if my lord were
a da w y a s y di f d ro I m ta h k o e m m e, y f I oo d d r , a b n u k t n I o ga w v i e ne it ; to n t o h r e f p o o r or th a r n e d e
sick. 6. And I sought the Lord early, and I wept
for the Egyptian woman of Memphis, for very unceasingly did she trouble me, for also at night she
came to me under pretence of visiting me. 7. And
because she had no male child she pretended to
regard me as a son. 8. And for a time she embraced

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
93
me as a son, and I knew it not ; but later, she sought
to draw me into fornication, g. And wlien I perceived it I sorrowed unto death ; and when she had
gone out, I came to myself, and I lamented for her
many da^-s, because I recognised her guile and her
deceit. 10. x^nd I declared unto her the words of
the Most High, if haply she would turn from her
evil lust.
IV. Often, therefore, did she flatter me with words
as a holy man, and guilefully in her talk praise my
chastity before her husband, while desiring to ensnare me when we were alone. 2. ^For'' she lauded
me openl}' as chaste, and in secret she said unto me
Fearnot myhusband ; forhe is persuaded concerning :
thy chastity : for evenshouldone tell him concerning
us, he would not believe. 3. Owingto all these things
I lay upon the ground, and besought God that the
Lordwoulddeliverme from herdeceit. 4. Andwhen
she prevailed nothing ""thereb}'^, she came '"again"^
to me under the plea of instruction, that she might
l I e f a t r h n o t u he wil w i o es r t d t o h f at Go I d s . hou 5 l . d A l n ea d ve sh m e y sa id i o d ls u , n l t i o e w m i e th :
me, and I will persuade my husband to depart from
his idols, and we will walk in the law of thy Lord.
6. And I said unto her : The Lord willeth not that
those that reverence Him should be in uncleanness,
nor doth He take pleasure in them that commit
adultery, '"but in those that approach Him with a
pure heart and undefiled lips"". 7. But she held
her peace, longing to accomplish her evil desire.
8. And I gave myself yet more to fasting and prayer,
that the Lord might deliver me from her.
V. ^And"' again, at another time she said unto
h m u e sb : a If nd th b o y u p w o i i l s t on n , ot an c d om t m ak i e t t a h d e u e lt t e o ry b , e I m w y il h l u k s i b ll an m d y .
2. I therefore, when I heard this, rent my garments,
and said unto her Woman, reverence God, and do
:
not this e^il deed, lest thou be destroyed for know-
;
indeed that I will declare this thy device unto all
men. 3. She therefore, being afraid, besought that

THE TESTAMENTS OF
94
I would not declare this device. 4. And she departed, soothing me with gifts, and sending to me
every delight of the sons of men.
VI. And '^afterwards"' she sent me food mingled
with enchantments. 2. And when the eunuch who
brought it came, I looked up and beheld a terrible
man giving me withthe dish asword, and I perceived
that (her) scheme was to beguile me. 3. And '"when
he had gone out"i I wept, nor did I taste that nor any
other of her food. 4. So then after one day she came
to me and observed the food, and said unto me
Why is it that thou hast not eaten of the food? :
5. And I said unto her : It is because thou hast filled
it with '"deadly"^ enchantments ; andhowsaidstthou :
I come not near to idols, but to the Lord ^alone"^ ?
6. Now therefore know that the God of my father
hath revealed unto me byHis angel thywickedness,
and I have kept it to convict thee, if hapl}' thou
mayestsee andrepent.
7.
Butthatthoumayestlearn
thatthewickednessoftheungodlyhathnopowerover
them that worship God with chastity, behold I will
take of it and eat before thee. And having so said,
I prayed thus The God of my fathers and the angel
:
ofAbraham, be with me; and ate. 8. And '"when
she sawthis"^ she fell upon her face at my feet,weeping; and I raised her up and admonished her.
9. And she promised to do this iniquity no more.
VII. But her heart was still set upon evil, and she
looked around howto ensnare me, and sighing deeply
she became downcast, though she was not sick.
2. And when her husband saw her, he said unto
g h " r e u o r n a t : n o i W n h h g i s y m"! o i f s : t m I h y y h s a c p v o i e u ri n t t a e o n p p a a p n i r c n e e ss a f t a m l m e le y n? a h n e d a A r n t s , o d h a s e h n e d c s o t a m h i - e d
forted her who was not sick. 3. T ; hen accordingly
seizing an opportunit}' she rushed unto me while
her husband was yet without, and said unto me : I
will hang myself, or cast myself over a cliff, if thou
wilt not lie with me. 4. And when I saw the spirit
of Beliar was troubling her, I prayed unto the Lord,

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
95
and said unto her : 5. Win', f"\vretclied woman, "^ art
thou troubled and disturbed, blinded through sins ?
Rememberthat ifthou killthyself, Asteho,the concubine of thy husband, th}^ rival, will beat thy children,
and thou wilt destroy thj' memorial from off the
earth. 6. And she said unto me Lo, then thou
l l i o f v e es ' t "a m nd e m; y let ch t i h l i d s ren s ' u ' f , hc a e nd me I : e o x n p l e : y ct st t r h i a v t e f I or sh m al y l
enjoy my desire ''also''. 7. But she knew not that
because of mj^ lord I spake thus, and not because of
her. 8. For if a man hath fallen before the passion
of a wicked desire and become enslaved by it, even
as she, whatever good thing he may hear with regard
to that passion, he receiveth it with a view to his
wicked desire.
VIII. I declare, therefore, unto you, my children,
that it was about the sixth hour when she departed
from me ; and I kneltbefore the Lordall theday,and
all the night ; and about dawn I rose up, weepingthe
while and praying for a release from her. 2. At
last, then, she laid hold of my garments, forcibly
dragging me to haveconnection with her. 3. W'hen,
''therefore,'^ I saw that in her madness shewasholding fast to my garment, I left it behind, and fled
awaynaked. 4. Andholdingfastto thegarment she
falsely accused me, and when her husband came he
cast me into prison in his house and on the morrow
;
he scourged me and sent me into Pharaoh's prison.
5. And when I was in bonds, the Egyptian woman
was oppressed with grief, and she came and heard
how I gave thanks unto the Lord and sang praises
inthe abode ofdarkness, andwithglad voice rejoiced,
glorifying my God that I was delivered from the
lustful desire of the Egyptian woman.
IX. And often hathshe sent unto me saying Consent ''to fulfil my desire"^, and I will release thee : from
thy bonds, '"and I will free thee from the darkness.
2. And not even in thought did I incline unto her.
For God loveth him who in a den of darkness combineth fastingwithchastity, rather than the man who

THE TESTAMENTS OF
96
in kings' chambers combinethluxurywithhcence. 3.
And ifamanhveth inchastity,anddesirethalsoglory,
and the Most High knoweth that it is expedient for
him, He bestoweth this also upon him, even as upon
me. 4. How often,"^ though she were sick, did she
come down ^to me"' at unlooked-fortimes,andlistened
t g o roa m n y ing v s oi I ce he a l s d I my pr p a e y a e c d e. ! A 5. nd ''F w or h "' en wh I en he I a w r a d s he i r n
her house she was wont to bare her arms, and
breasts, and legs, '"that I might lie with her; for she
was"^ very beautiful, ^splendidly adorned"' in order
to beguile me. And the Lord guarded me from her
devices.
X. Ye see, therefore, my children, how great
things patience worketh, and prayer with fasting.
2. So 5^e too, ""if ye follow after chastity and purity
with patience and prayer with fasting in humilit}^ of
heart, the Lord will dwell among you, because He
loveth chastity. 3. And wheresoever the Most High
dwelleth, even though envy, or slavery, or slander
befalleth (a man), the Lord who dwelleth in him, for
the sake of his chastity not only"' delivereth him
from evil, ""but also exalteth him even as me. 4. For
in every way the man"i is lifted up, whether in deed,
orin w^ord, orin thought. 5. My brethren knew how
my father loved me, and yet I did not exalt myself
"in my mind"' although Iwas a child, ^1 hadthe fear
of Godin my h : eart "^ ; for I knewthat allthings would
pass away. 6. And I did not raise myself (against
them) with evil intent, but I honoured my brethren
;
and out of respect for them, even when I was being
sold, I refrained from telling the Ishmaelites that I
was the son of Jacob, a great man and a mighty.
XL Do ye also, therefore, my children, i^have the
fear of God in all your works before your eyes, and""
honour your brethren. For every one who doeth
the law of the Lord shall be loved by Him. 2. And
when I came to the LidocoljntcCwiththe Ishmaelites,
they asked me, saying
:
Art thou a slave? And I
said that I was a home-born slave, that I might not

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
97
put my brethren to shame. 3. And the eldest of
them said unto me Thou art not a slave, for even
:
thy appearance doth make it manifest. But I said
that I was ''their'' slave. 4. Nowwhenwe came into
Eg3-pt they strove concerning me, which of them
sliould buyme and take me. 5. Thereforeitseemed
good to all that I should remain in Egypt with the
merchant of their trade, until they should return
bringing merchandise. 6. And the Lord gave me
favour in the eyes of the merchant, and he entrusted
unto me his house. 7. And God blessed him by
my means, and increased him in gold and silver ''and
in household servants''. 8. And I was with him
three months and five days.
XIL And about that time the Memphian woman,
the wife of Pentephris, came down ''in a chariot"',
''with great pomp, because she had heard from her
eunuchs concerning me''. 2. And she told her
husbandthat the merchanthadbecome richbymeans
ofayoungHebrew,andtheysaythathehadassuredly
been stolen out of the land of Canaan. 3. Now,
therefore, render justice unto him, and take awaythe
3^outh to thy house so shall the God of the Hebrews
;
bless thee, for grace from heaven is upon him.
XIIL And Pentephriswaspersuadedbyherwords,
and commanded the merchant to be brought, and
said unto him : What is this that I hear ''concerning
thee'', that thou stealest persons out of the land of
Canaan, and sellest them for slaves? 2. But the
m I er b c es h e a e n c t h fe t l h l ee a , t h m is y fe l e o t r , d, an I d b k e n s o ou w gh' n t ot hi w m h , a s t ay t i h n o g u :
saj^est. 3. And Pentephris said unto him : Whence,
then, is the Hebrew slave? And he said: The
Ishmaelites entrusted him to me until the}^ should
return. 4. But he believed him not, but commanded
him to be stripped and beaten. And when he persisted in this statement, Pentephris said Let the
:
youth be brought. 5. And when I was brought in, I
did obeisance to Pentephris (for he was third in
rank of the officers of Pharaoh). 6. And he took
G

:
THE TESTAMENTS OF
98
me apart from him, and said unto me Art thou
a slave or free? And I said : A slave : . 7. And
h 8. e A s n a d id h : e W s h ai o d s : e H ? ow An di d dst I t s h a o i u d b : e T c h o e me I t s h h e m i a r el s i l t a e v s e '. ?
And I said : They bought me out of the land of
Canaan. 9. And he said unto me : '"Xruly"' thou
liest; and ^straightway'' he commanded me to be
stripped andbeaten.
XIV. Now the Memphian woman was looking
through a window ''at me while I was being beaten,
forherhousewasnear,andshesentuntohim,saying''
Thy judgement is unjust ; for thou dost punish a
''free"' man who hath been stolen, as though he were
a transgressor. 2. And when I made no change in
m}?statement, ^though Iwas beaten,"' he ordered me
to be imprisoned, until, he said, the owners ofthe boy
should come. 3. And the woman said unto her
husband Wherefore dost thou detain the captive
:
and well-born lad in bonds, who ought rather to be
set at liberty, and be waited upon ? 4. For she
wished to see me out of a desire '"of sin^^, but I was
ignorant concerning all these things. 5. And he
said to her : It is not the custom of the Egyptians to
take away that which belongeth to others before
proof is given. 6. This, therefore, he said concerning the merchant but as for the lad, he must be
;
imprisoned.
XV. Now after four and twenty days came the
Ishmaelites for they had heard that Jacob '"my
;
father"" was mourning '"much'^ concerning me. And
they came and said unto me : 2. How is it that thou
saidst that thou wast a slave? andlo,we havelearnt
that thou art the son of a mightyman in the landof
Canaan, and thy father '"stilP mourneth for thee in
sackcloth '"and ashes"". 3. '"When I heard this my
bowels were dissolved and my heart melted"", and I
desiredgreatlyto weep, but I restrainedmyself,that I
should not put my brethren to shame. '"And T said
unto them, I know not, I am a slave"'. 4. Then,
'"therefore"', theytookcounseltosellme, thatIshould

THE T\\TLVE PATRIARCHS
99
not be found in theirhands. 5. For they feared my
father, lest he ''should come and"" execute upon them
a grievous vengeance. For they had heard that he
was mighty with God and with men. 6. Then said
the merchant unto them Release me from thejudge-
:
mentof Pentephris. 7. And the}^cameandrequested
me, saying '"Say"' that thou wast bought byuswith
:
money, and he will set us free.
XVI. Now the Memphian woman said to her
husband : Buy the youth ; for I hear, said she, that
they are selling him. 2. And straightwayshe sent a
eunuch to the Ishmaelites, and askedthemto sellme.
3. But since the eunuch would not agree to buy me
(attheir price) hereturned,havingmadetrialofthem,
and he made known to his mistress that theyasked a
large price for their slave. 4. ""And she sent another
eunuch,"' saying Even though they demand two
:
minae, '"give them,"" do not spare the gold; only
buy the boy, and bring him to me. 5. The eunuch
thereforewent and gave them eight}^ pieces of gold,
and he received me but to the Egj'ptian woman he
;
said : I have given a hundred.
6. And though I knew (this) I held ni}^ peace, lest
the eunuch should be put to shame.
XVII. i-XVIII. 4. Joseph's Exhortation to his
Sons
XVII. Ye see, therefore, my children, what great
things Ienduredthat I shouldnot put mj-brethrento
shame. 2. Do ye also, '"therefore,"' love one another,
^and with long-suffering hidej^e oneanother'sfaults"'.
3. For God delighteth ''in the unity of brethren, and"'
in the purpose of aheartthattaketh pleasure inlove.
4. And when my brethren came into Egj'pt they
learnt that I had returned their monej^ unto them,
and upbraided them not, and comforted them.
5. And after the death of Jacob my father I loved
them ''more abundantly"^, and all things whatsoever
he commanded I did '"very abundantly"' for them.
6. And I suffered them not to be afflicted even in the

100 THE TESTAMENTS OF
s u m n a t l o le t s h t em m . att 7 e . r ^ ; An a d n "' d t a h l e l i t r h c a h t il w d a r s en in we m r y em ha y n c d hi I ld g r a e v n e ,
a wa n s d m m} y ^ li c f h e, il a d n re d n al a l s th t e h i e r ir su s f e fe r r v i a n n g ts wa ; s a m nd y s t u h f e f i e r ri l n i g f , e
^and all their sickness was my infirmity"^. My land
wastheirland, andtheircounsel my counsel. 8. And
I exalted not myself among them ''in arrogance"'
becauseof my '"worldly"^ glory, ""butIwasamongthem
as one of the least"'.
XVIII. If ye also, therefore, walk in the commandments of the Lord, my children. He will exalt
you there, and will bless you with good things for
ever and ever. 2. ""And if any one seeketh to do
evil unto you, do well unto him, and pray for him,
and ye shall be redeemed of the Lord from all evil.'^
my
3. ''For,i behold, ye see that '"out of humility
and long-suffering"! I took unto wife the daughter of
the priest of Heliopolis. And a hundred talents of
goldwere given me withher, andthe Lordmade them
to serve me. 4. And He gave me also beauty as a
flower beyond the beautiful ones of Israel and He
;
preservedme '"untooldageinstrengthand""inbeauty,
because I waslikein allthingsto Jacob.
XIX. 1-12. Joseph's Vision (from the Armenian
Version).
XIX. Hear ye, therefore, the vision which I saw.
2. I saw twelve harts feeding. And nine of them
were dispersed. Now the three were preserved, but
onthefollowingdaytheyalso were dispersed, 3. And
I saw that the three harts became three lambs, and
they cried to the Lord, and He brought them forth
into a flourishing and well-watered place, yea He
brought them out of darkness into light. 4. And
there they cried unto the Lord until there gathered
together to them the nine harts, and they became as
twelve sheep, and after a little time they increased
and became many flocks. 5. And after these things
I saw and behold, twelve bulls were sucking one cow,
whichproduceda sea of milk, andthere drankthereof

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS loi
the twelve flocks and innumerable herds. 6. And the
horns of the fourth bull \\ent up unto heaven and
became as a wall for the flocks, and in the midst of
the [two] horns there grew another horn. 7. And I
saw a bull calf which surrounded them twelve times,
and it became a help to the bulls wholly. 8. And I
saw in the midst of the horns a virgin [wearing a
many-coloured garment, and from her] went forth a
lamb ; and on his right (was as it were alion ; and) all
the beasts and all the reptiles rushed (against him),
and the lamb overcame them and destroyed them.
9. And the bulls rejoiced because of him, and the
cow [and the harts] exulted together with them.
10. And these things must come to pass in their
season. 11. And do ye, my children, honour Levi
•
and Judah, for from them shall arise the sah-ation
of Israel. 12. For m^- kingdom which is among you
shall come to an end as a watcher's hammock, which
\\ill not appear after the summer.
XX. 1-6. Joseph's Last Words to his Sons.
His Death and Burial
XX. rpor"^ I know that after my death the
Egyptians will afflict you, but God will avenge you,
and will bring you into that which He promised to
yourfathers. 2. But yeshall carr\-upmybones with
3^ou ''for when my bones are beingtaken up thither,
;
the Lord shall be with 3'ou in light, and Beliar shall
be in darkness with the Egyptians''. 3. And carry
ye up Asenath3'ourmother [tothe Hippodrome], and
near Rachel your mother bur}-her. 4. x'Vnd when he
had said these things he stretched out his feet, and
died at a good old age. 5. And all Israel mourned
for him, and all Egypt, with a great mourning.
6. And when the children of Israel went out of
Egypt, theytook with them the bones of Joseph, and
they buried him in Hebron with his fathers, and the
years of his life were one hundred and ten years.

;
102 THE TESTAMENTS OF
THE TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN,
THE TWELFTH SON OF JACOB AND RACHEL
L 1-6. Introduction. Benjamin's Birth
I. The copy of the words of Benjamin, which he
commanded his sons to observe, after he had hved a
hundred and twenty-five years. 2. And he kissed
them, and said As Isaac was born to Abraham in his
:
old age, so also was I to Jacob. 3. And since Rachel
my mother died in giving me birth, I had no milk
therefore I was suckled by Bilhah her handmaid.
4. For Rachel remained barren for twelve years
•"after she had borne Joseph "^ ; and she prayed the
Lord ""with fasting twelve days, and she conceived
and bare me"^. 5. For '"my father"" loved Rachel
dearly, ""and prayed that he might see two sons born
from her"". 6. Therefore was I called Benjamin, that
is, a son of days.
II. 1-5. Benjamin and Joseph in Egypt
II. Andwhen Iwent intoEg3^pt,toJoseph,andmy
brother recognised me, he said unto me What did
they tell my father when they sold me? : 2. And I
said ""unto him"", They dabbled thy coat with blood
andsent it, and said : Know whetherthis be thyson's
c w o h a e t n ? th 3 e . y A h n a d d s h t e ri s p a p i e d d u m n e to of m m e y: c E o v at en th s e o y , g b a ro v t e he m r e ,
to the Ishmaelites, and they gave me a loin cloth,
and scourged me, and bade me run. 4. And as for
one of them that bad beaten me with a rod, a lion
met him andslew him. 5. And so his associateswere
affrighted.
III. i-V. 5. Benjamin exhorts his Sons to
Goodness after the Example of Joseph
III. Do ye also, therefore, my children, Qove the
Lord God of heaven and earth, and keep His com-

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
103
mandments"^, following the example of the good and
holy man ''Joseph''. 2. And let your mind be unto
good,even asye knowme forhe that hath his mind
;
right,seetli all things rightly. 3. Fear 3'e the Lord,
and love 3'ourneighbour and eventhough the spirits
;
of Beliar claim you to afflict you with everyevil, yet
shall theynot have dominion over you, even as they
had not over Josephmy brother. 4. Howmanymen
wished to slay him, and God shielded him For he
!
that feareth God and loveth his neighbour cannot be
smitten by the spirit of Beliar, being shielded by the
fear of God. 5. Nor can he be ruled over b}' the
device of men or beasts, for he is helped b}' the Lord
throughthelove whichhehathtowardshisneighbour.
6. For Joseph also besought our father '"that he
would pray for his brethren"^, that ''the Lord"^ would
not impute to them as sin '"w^hatever evil the}' had
d M o y ne go u o n d to chi h l i d m , ." t ' hou 7. ha A s n t d pr t e h v u a s ile J d ac ov o e b r c t r h i e ed bo o w u e t ls :
of thy father Jacob. And he embraced him, and
k fu i l s f s i e l d le h d i t m he f p o r r o t p w h o ec h y ou o r f s h , e s a a v y e i n ng [c : on 8. ce I r n ni t n h g e t e h s e ha L l a l m b b e
of God, and Saviour of the world], that a blameless
one shallbe deliveredupfor lawlessmen, andasinless
shall die for ungodly men [in the bloodof the covenant, for the salvation of the Gentiles and of Israel,
and shall destroy Beliar and his servants].
IV. See ye, therefore, my children, the end of the
good man ? Be followers of his ''compassion, therefore, with a good mind'', that ''ye also"' may wear
crowns of glor\'. 2. For the good man hath not a
dark ej^e ; for he showeth mercy to all men, even
though theybe sinners. 3. ''And though they devise
with evil intent concerning him, b}' doing good he
overcometh evil, being shielded bj^ God;'' and he
loveth the righteous as his own soul. 4. If any one
is glorified,heenviethhim not ; if anyone isenriched,
he is not jealous ; if any one is valiant, he praiseth
him ; the virtuous man he laudeth ; ''on the poor
manhehathmercy onthe weakhehathcompassion
; ;

;
THE TESTAMENTS OF
104
unto God hesingeth praises"!. 5. And him that hath
the grace of a good spirit he lovethas his own soul.
V. If, ""therefore, ye also"" have agood ''mind'^, tlien
will both wicked men be at peace with you, and the
profligate will reverence you ^and turn unto good;
and the covetous will not only cease from their
inordinate desire, but even give the objects of their
covetousness to them that are afflicted. 2. If ye
do well, even the unclean spirits will flee from you^
;
and the beasts will dread you. 3. ""For where there
is reverence for good works and light in the mind,
even darkness fleeth away from him."! 4. '"For"' if
any one doeth violence to a holy man, he repenteth
for ""the holy man"" is merciful to his reviler, and
holdeth his peace. 5. And if any one betrayeth a
righteous man, the righteous man prayeth though
:
for a little he be humbled, yet not long after he
appeareth far more glorious, as was Joseph my
brother.
VI. 1-7. The Good Inclination
VI. The inclination of the good man is not in the
power of the deceit of the spirit of Beliar, for the
angel of peace guideth his soul. 2. '"And"' he gazeth
not '"passionately"' upon corruptible things, nor
gathereth together riches '"through a desire of pleasure"'. 3. He delightethnot in pleasure, '"[he grieveth
nothisneighbour],hesatethnot himselfwithluxuries,
he errethnot inthe upliftingofthe eyes"^, forthe Lord
is his portion. 4. The good inclination receiveth not
glory ""nor dishonour"^ from men, and it knoweth not
any guile, or lie, or fighting, or reviling ; for the Lord
dwelleth in him and lighteth up his soul, and he
rejoiceth towards all men alwa}'. 5. The good mind
hath not two tongues, of blessing and of cursing, of
contumely and ""of honour"', of sorrow and of joy, of
quietness and of confusion, of hypocrisy and of truth,
[of poverty and of wealth] ; but it hath one '"disposition"', uncorrupt and pure, concerning all men. 6. It
hath no double sight, nor double hearing; for in

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
105
everything which he doeth, '"or speaketh, or seeth, he
knoweth that the Lord looketh on his souL 7. And
he cleanseth his mind that he be not condemned by
men as well as"' by God. And in like manner the
works of Beliar are twofold, and there is no singleness
in them.
VIL 1-5. The Sword of Beliar the Warning
;
of Cain
VII. Therefore, my children, I tell you, flee the
malice of Beliar for he giveth a sword to them that
;
obey him. 2. And the sword isthe mother of seven
evils. Firstthe mind conceiveth through Beliar, and
first there is bloodshed; secondly, ruin; thirdly,
tribulation fourthly, exile fifthly, dearth sixthly,
; ; ;
panic ; seventUy, destruction. 3. Therefore was
Cain also delivered over to sevenvengeances by God,
for in every hundred years the Lord brought one
plague upon him. 4. Andwhen he was two hundred
years oldhebegantosuffer,andinthenine-hundredth
year he was destroyed. For on account of Abel, his
brother,with all theevils was he judged, but Lamech
with seventy times seven. 5. Because forever those
who are like unto Cain ^n envy and hatred of
brethren"", shall be punished ""with the same judgement"^.
VIII. 1-3. Benjamin exhorteth his Sons to
flee from Evil
VIII. And do \'e, my children, flee evil-doing,
envy, and hatred of brethren, and cleave to goodness
and love. 2. He that hath a pure mind in love,
looketh not after awomanwitha viewto fornication;
for he hath no defilement in his heart, because the
Spirit of God resteth upon him. 3. For '"as"' the sun
is not defiled by shining on dung and mire, ^but
rather drieth up both and driveth away the evil
smeir so also the pure mind, though encompassed
;
by the defilements of earth, rather cleanseth (them),
and is not itself defiled.

;
io6 THE TESTAMENTS OF
IX. 1-5. Benjamin's Prophecy concerning
his Posterity
IX. And I believe that there will be also evildoings among you, from the words of Enoch the
righteous that ye shall commit fornication with the
:
fornication of Sodom, and shall perish, all save a
few, and shall renew wanton deeds withwomen and
;
the kingdom of the Lord shall not be among you, for
straightway He shall take it away. 2. Nevertheless
the temple of God shall be in your portion, and the
last (temple) shall be more glorious than the first.
And the twelve tribes shall be gathered together
there, and all the Gentiles, until the Most High shall
send forth His salvation in the visitation of an onlybegotten prophet. 3. [And He shall enter into the
[first] temple, andthereshalltheLordbetreatedwith
outrage, and He shall be lifted up upon a tree. 4.
Andthe veilofthe temple shallbe rent, andthe Spirit
ofGodshallpassontotheGentilesasfirepouredforth.
5. And He shall ascend from Hades and shall pass
from earth into heaven. And I know how lowly He
shall be upon earth, and how glorious in heaven.]
X. I. Benjamin's Vision of Joseph
X. Now when Joseph was in Egypt, I longed to
see his figure '"and the form of his countenance"^
and through the prayers of Jacob my father I saw
him, while awake in the day-time, even his entire
figure exactly as he was.
X. 2-10. Benjamin's Inheritance to his Sons
2. ''Andwhenhehadsaidthesethings, he saidunto
them :"i Know ye, therefore, my children, that I am
dying. 3. Do ye, therefore, truth each one to his
neighbour,andkeep thelawof theLord andHis commandments.
4.
Forthesethingsdo Ileaveyouinstead
of inheritance. Do ye also, '"therefore,"^ givethem to
your children for an everlasting possession for so
;
did both Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. 5. For

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 107
all these things they gave us for an inheritance,
saying Keep the commandments of God, until the
:
Lord shall reveal His salvation to all Gentiles. 6.
'"And"' thenshall ye see Enoch, Noah, and Shem, and
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, rising on the right
handin gladness. 7. Thenshallwe also rise, eachone
overourtribe, worshippingthe Kingof heaven, [Who
appearedupon earth inthe form of amaninhumility.
And as many as believe on Him ontheearthshall rejoicewithHim]. 8. Thenalsoall menshallrise,some
unto gloryandsomeuntoshame. Andthe Lordshall
judge Israel first, for their unrighteousness [for
when He appeared as God in the flesh to d ; eliver
them theybelieved Him not]. 9. And then shall He
judge all the Gentiles, [as many as believed Him not
when He appeared upon earth]. 10. And He shall
convict Israel throughthe chosen onesofthe Gentiles,
even as he reproved Esau through the Madianites,
who deceived their brethren, [so that they fell into
fornication, and idolatry; and they were alienated
from God,] becomingtherefore children in the portion
of them that fear the Lord.
X. ii-XI. 5. A further Prophecy concerning
Benjamin's Posterity
II. If ye ^therefore, my children,"^ walk in holiness
"according to the commandments of the Lord,'' ye
shall again dwell securelywith me, and all Israel shall
be gathered unto the Lord,
XL And I shall no longer be called a ravening
wolf on account of your ravages, but [a worker of the
Lord distributing food to them that work what is
good. 2. And there shall arise in the latter days]
one beloved of the Lord, [of the tribe of Judah and
Levi"", a doer of His good pleasure in his mouth, [with
new knowledge enlightening the Gentiles]. 3. Until
the consummation of the age shall he be in the s^magogues of the Gentiles, and among their rulers, as a
strainofmusicinthemouthofall.
4.
Andheshallbe
inscribedintheholybooks,bothhisworkandhisword.

io8 THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS
and he shall be a chosen one of God for ever. 5.
And through them heshall goto andfro as Jacob my
father, saying : He shall fill up that which lacketh of
thy tribe].
Xn. 1-4. Benjamin's Death and Burial
Xn. Andwhenhehadsaidthesethingshestretched
out his feet, 2. And died in [a beautiful] and good
sleep. 3. And his sons did as he had enjoined them,
and they took up his body and buried it in Hebron
with his fathers. 4. And the number (of the days)
of his life were a hundred and twenty-five years.
Printed in Gkeat Bkitain bv Rjchard Clay & Sons, Ljmitkd,
brunswick st., stamford st., s.e., and bungay, suffolk.

TRANSLATIONS OF
EARLY DOCUMENTS
A
Seiies of texts important for the study of
Christian origins^ by various authors
UNDER THE JOINT EDITORSHIP OF
The Rev. W. O. E. OESTERLEY, D.D.
AND
The Rev. CANON G. H. BOX, M.A.
THE
object of the Series is to provide short,
cheap, and handy text-books for students,
either working by themselves or in classes. The
aim is to furnish in translations important texts
unencumbered by commentary or elaborate notes,
which can be had in larger works.

FIRST SERIES
Palestinian-Jewish and Cognate Texts
(Pre-Rabbinic)
1. Aramaic Papyri. A. E. Cowley, Litt.D.,
Sub-Librarian of the Bodleian Library,
Oxford.
2. The Wisdom of Ben-Sira (Ecclesiasticus).
The Rev. W. O. E. Oesterley, D.D.,
Vicar of St. Alban's, Bedford Park, W.
;
Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of
London.
3. The Book of Enoch. The Rev. R. H.
Charles, D.D., Canon of Westminster.
4. The Book of Jubilees. The Rev. Canon
Charles.
5. The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs.
The Rev. Canon Charles.
6. The Odes and Psalms of Solomon. The
Rev. G. H. Box, M.A., Rector of Sutton,
Beds., Hon. Canon of St. Alban's.
7. The Martyrdom of Isaiah. The Rev. Canon
Charles.
8. The Second (Fourth) Book of Ezra. The
Rev. Canon Box.
9. The Apocalypse of Baruch. The Rev. Canon
Charles.
10. The Assumption of Moses. The Rev. W.
J.
Ferrar, M.A., Vicar of Holy Trinity, East
Finchley,

SECOND SERIES
Elellenistic-Jewish Texts
1. The Wisdom of Solomon. The Rev. Dr.
Oesterley.
2. The Sibylline Oracles (Books iii—v). The
Rev. H. N. Bate, M.A., Vicar of Christ
Church, Lancaster Gate, W. Examining
;
Chaplain to the Bishop of London.
3. The Letter of Aristeas. H. St. John Thackeray, M.A., King's College, Cambridge
;
Grinfield Lecturer in the Septuagint in the
University of Oxford.
4. Selections from Philo. J. H. A. Hart, B.D.,
Fellow and Lecturer of St. John's College,
Cambridge.
5. Selections from Josephus. H. St. John
Thackeray, M.A.
6. The Fourth Book of Maccabees. The Rev.
C. W. Emmet, M.A., Vicar of West
Hendred, Oxon.

THIRD SERIES
Palestinian-Jewish and Cognate Texts
(Rabbinic)
*i. Pirqe Aboth. The Rev. Dr. Oesterley.
"^2. Berakhoth. The Rev. A. Lukyn Williams,
D.D., Vicar of Guilden Morden, Hon.
Canon of Ely.
*3. Yoma. The Rev. Canon Box.
*4. Megillath Taanith. The Rev. Canon Box.
5. Tamid 11. Megillah
6. Shabbath 12. Sukkah
7. Sanhedrln 13. Taanith
8. Abodah Zara 14. Qimchi's ComMiddoth mentary on the
9.
Psalms (Book
i)
10. Sopherim
* It is proposed to publish these texts first by way of
experiment. If the Series should so far prove successful the
others will follow.
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
London: 68, hay.market, s.w. ; 43, queen victoria street, e.c.
Brighton: 129, north street
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS


BS1830.T4 A3 1917
y
L 009 607 212 9
UCSOUTHERNREGIONALLIBRARYFACILITY
AA 001 304 976 2
