The Rig Veda (Ralph T. H. Griffith translation, 1896)
=====================================================
Ralph T. H. Griffith’s 1896 public-domain translation of the Rig Veda, both volumes, complete with all 1,028 hymns. The oldest Vedic scripture; source: Internet Archive.

# VOLUME I

10 83U 










^ 

BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


THE HYMNS OF THE SAMAVEDA, in one V 
Koyal 8vo., cloth boards, gilt lettered, Rs. 4-' 

THE HYMNS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA, in 
Volumes, Royal 8vo., cloth bound, gilt lettc 
Rs. 6-0-0, each Volume. 

A METRICAL TRANSLATION OF vALMII 
rAmAYAN, complete in one Volume, Ci 
8vo., cloth bound, gilt lettered, Rs. 6-0-0. 


►5 



THE 


HYMNS OF THE KTGVEDA 

4NSLATED WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY 

BY 

RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M.A.,C.IE. 

ER PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE, AND LATE DIRECTOR 
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION N.-W. P. AND OUDH. 


Second Edition. 

COMPLETE IN TWO VOLUMES. 


VOL. I. 



BENARES : 

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY B. J. LAZARUS ANDCO.- _ 


1896. 

All rights reserved 









CONTENTS, . 



Page, 

FACE TO THE FIRST EDITIOIf.. ' 

INS, Translation and Commentary ‘ 

... V. 

K 1 . ^ ... 

1 

ir. ^ 

... 259 

iir. ... ■ ^ • 

... 315 

IV. 

... 391 

V. 

... 465 

VI. 

555 

ENDix I.—Hymn I. 126. 6, 7; and I. 179. 

649 

pNDix II.~Metre... 

... 651 

;x of Hymns 

... 657 

>x of Names, Etc. 

673 

jigenda et Addenda 

705 




PREFACE 

TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


What can bo more tedious than the Veda, and yet what can be more 
r teresting, if once we know that it is the first word spoken by the Aryan 
nan J ’* 

^ ^ “ The Voda has a two-fold interest : it belongs to the history of the 

rorld and to the history of India As long as man continues to take an 

iterest in the history of his race, and as long as we collect in libraries and 
Quseums the relics of former ages, the first place in that long row of books 
diich contains the records of the Aryan branch of mankind, will belong for 
ver to the Rig-veda.” P. Max Mullkr, 

This work is an attempt to bring within easy reach of all 
eaders of English a translation of the Hymns of the Rigveda 
v'hich, while aiming especially at ' 'se fidelity to the letter and 
ho spirit of the original, shall be as readable and intelligible as 
he nature of the subject and other circumstances permit. 

Veda, meaning literally knowledge, is the name given to 
ertain ancient works which formed the foundation of the early 
eligious belief of the Hindus. These are the Rigveda, the Sama- 
!eda, the Yajiirvoda, and the Atharvaveda ; and of these the 
iigveda — so called because its Sanhita or collection of mantras 
r hymns consists of Richas or verses intended for loud recitation 
“-is the oldest, the most important, and the most generally in- 
presting, some of its hymns being rather Indo-European than 
indu, and representing the condition of the Aryans before their 
a 1 settlement in India. Those four Vedas are considered to be 
divine origin and to have existed from all eternity, the Rishia 
sacred poets to whom the hymns are ascribed being merely in- 
ired see’-s who saw or received them by sight directly from the 
premo Creator. In accordance with this belief these sacred 
aks haiTG boon preserved and handed down with the most re- 
rential care from generation to generation, and have accom- 



Vi 


PREFACE TO THE ElKOX JW7iriv«. 


panied the great army of Aryan immigrants in tlieir onward 
march from the Land of the Seven Eivers to the Indian Ocean 
and the Bay of Bengal. Each of these four Vedas is divided into 
two distinct parts, one the Mantra containing prayer and praise, 
the other the Brahraana containing detailed directions for the 
performance of the ceremonies at which the Mantras were to be 
used, and explanations of the legends connected with them, the 
whole forming a vast body of sacred literature in verso and in 
prose, devotional, ceremonial, expository and theosophic. 

The Sanhita of the Rigveda is a collection of hymns and 
songs brought by the remote ancestors of the present fiindus 
from their ancient homes on the banks of the Indus where they 
had been first used in adoration of the Father of Heaven, of the 
Sun, of Dawn, of Agni or the God of fire, in prayers for health, 
■wealth, long life, ofispring, cattle, victory in battle, and freedom 
from the bonds of sin ; and celebration of the ever-renewed war- 
fare between the beneficent thunder- wielding Indra, the special 
champion of the Aryans, and the malevolent powers of darkness 
and the demons of drought who withheld the rain of heaven. 

Of these hymns there are more than a thousand, arranged in 
ten Mandalas, Circles, or Books, in accordance with an ancient 
tradition of what we should call authorship, the hymns ascribed 
to the same Rishi, inspired poet or seer, or to the same school or 
family of Rishis being placed together. Within these divisions 
the hymns are generally arranged more or less in the order of the 
deities to whom they are addressed. Agni and Indra are the Gods 
most frequently invoked. Hymns to Agni generally come first, 
next come those addressed to Indra, and after them those in 
honour of other deities or deified objects of adoration. The ninth • 
Book is devoted almost entirely to Soma, the deified juice used in 
pouring libations to the Gods, and the tenth forms a sort of ap- 
pendix of peculiar and miscellaneous materials. Indepondently- 
)f the evidence afforded by Indian tradition, there can be no rea- 
lonable doubt of the great antiquity of the Rigveda Sanhit^^ 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


rii 


which, with the exception of the Egyptian monumental records 
and papyrus rolls, and the recently discovered Assyrian literature, 
is probably the oldest literary document in existence. But it 
seems impossible to fix, Avith anything approaching to certainty, 
any date for the composition of the hymns. In the first Hymn 
of Book I. ancient and recent or modern Rishis or seers are 
spoken^ of, and there is other internal evidence that some hymns' 
are much older than others. Colebrooke came to the conclusion, 

, from astronomical calculations, that a certain Vedic calendar was 
composed in the fourteenth century before the Christian era ; 
from which it would follow, that as this calendar must have been 
prepared after the arrangement of the Rigveda and the inclusion' 
of the most modern hymn, the date of the earliest hymn might 
be carried back, perhaps, some thousand years. The correctness 
of Colebrooke’s conclusions, however, has been questioned, and 
some recent scholars consider that his calculations are of a very 
vague character, and do not yield any such definite date. In the 
absence of any direct evidence, the opinions of scholars vary and 
must continue to vary with regard to the age of the Hymns of 
the Rigveda. “The reasons, however,” (to quote Professor 
Weber*) “ by Avhich Ave are fully justified in regarding the liter- 
ature of India as the most ancient literature of which written 
records on an extensive scale haA^e been handed down to us are 
these : - In the more ancient parts of the Rigveda Sanhitd, we 
fifid tlfe Indian race settled on the north-western borders of India, 
in the Panj^b, and even beyond the Panj^b, on the Kubh6, or 
Ku)(j)rjv, in Kabul. The gradual spread of the race from these 
seats toAvards the east, beyojid the Sarasvati and over Hindustdn 
as far as the Ganges, can be traced in the later portions of the 
A^edic writings almost step by step. The Avritiugs of the follow- 
ing period, that of the epic, consist of accounts of the internal 
conflicts among the conquerors of Hindustdn themselves, as, for 

* The Huiovy of Indian Likraiw% by Albrecht Weber. TrUbner’a 
Oriental Series, 1878. . 



viii 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITIOX. 


instance, the Mah^bharata ; or of the farther spread of Brah- 
manism towards the south, as, for instance, the RdmJtyan^. If 
we connect with this the first fairly accurate information about 
India which we have from a Greek source, viz., from Megasthpnes,* 
it becomes clear that at the time of this writer the Brahmanising 
of Hindustan was already completed, while at the time of the 
Periplus (see Lassen, /. AK.^ ii. 150, n; /. ii. 192) the ^very 
southern-most point of the Dekhau had already become the seat 
of the worship of the wife of iSiva. What a series of years, of 
centuries, must necessarily have elapsed before this boundless 
tract of country, inhabited by wild and vigorous tribes, could 
have been brought over to Brahmanism ! ” 

I must beg my European readers not to expect to find in 
these hymns and songs the sublime poetry that they meet with 
in Isaiah or Job, or the Psalms of David. “ To me,’’ says Professor 
Wilson, “the verses of the Veda, except in their rhythm, and in 
a few rare passages, appear singularly prosaic for so early an era 
as that of their probable composition, and at any rate their chief 
value lies not in their fancy but in their facts, social and religious.” 
Professor Cowell, also, says : “The poetry of the Rig-Veda is sin- 
gularly deficient in that simplicity and natural pathos or sublimity 
which we naturally look for in the songs of an early period of 
civilisation. The language and style of most of the hymns is sin- 
gularly artificial Occasionally we meet with fine outbursts of 

poetry, especially in the hymns addressed to the dawn, but the’Se 
are never long sustained, and as a rule we find few grand similes 
or metaphors.” The worst fault of all, in the Collection regarded 
as a whole, is the intolerable monotony of a great number of the 
hymns, a monotony which reaches its climax in the ninth Book 
which consists almost entirely of invocations of Soma Pavamana, 
or the deified Soma juice in process of straining and purification. 

* Who M ambassador of Seleucus resided for some time at the court of 
Chandragupta. His reports are preserved us chiefly in the ’I veiled of 
Arrian who lived in the second century A. D. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION*. ix 

^he great interest of the Rigveda is, in fact, historical rather than 
poetical. As in its original language we see the roots and shoots 
of the languages of Greek and Latin, of Kelt, Teuton and Slavonian, 
S9 the. deities, the myths, and the religious beliefs and practices 
of the Veda throw a flood of light upon the religions of all European 
countries before the introduction of Christianity. As the science 
of copiparative philology could hardly have existed without the 
study of Sanskrit, so the comparative history of the religions of 
, the world would have been impossible without the study of the 
Veda. 

My translation, which follows the text of Max Muller’s splendid 
siX'VoUime edition, is partly based on the work of the great 
scholiast Siiyana who was Prime Minister at the court of the King of 
Vijayanagar — in what is now the Madras District of Bellaiy — in 
the fourteenth century of our era. S^yana’s Commentary has 
been consulted and carefully considered for the general sense of 
every verse and for the meaning of every word, and his interpreta- 
tion has been followed whenever it seemed rational, and consistent 
with the context, and with other passages in which the same word 
or words occur. With regard to Sayana’s qualifications as an in- 
terpreter of the Veda there is, or was, a conflict of opinion among 
European scholars. Professor Wilson — whose translation of the 
Rigveda is rather a version of Sayana’s paraphrase — was firmly 
pejrsuaded that he had a “ knowledge of his text far beyond the 
pretensions of any European scholar, and must have been in 
possession of all the interpretations which had been perpetuated 
by traditional teaching from the earliest times.” Yet, as Dr. J. 
Muir has pointed out, Professor Wilson in the notes to his transla- 
■ tion admits that he “occasionally failed to find in Sayana a per- 
fectly satisfactory guide,” that “ the scholiast is evidently puzzled,” 
and that his explanations are obscure. On the other hand Pro- 
( fessor Roth — the author of the Vedic portion of the great St. 
Petersburg Lexicon— says in his preface to that work : “ so far 
as regards one of the branches of Vodic literature, the treatises 



X 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITIONv 


on theology and worship, we can desire no better guides than 
these commentators, so exact in all respects, who follow their 
texts word by word, who, so long as even the semblance of a mis- 
conception might arise, are never weary of repeating what they 
have frequently said before, and who often appear as if they ,had 
been writing for us foreigners rather than for their own priestly 
alumni who had grown up in the midst of these conceptions and 

impressions. Here they are in their proper ground. The 

case, however, is quite different when the same men assume the 

task of interpreting the ancient collections of hymns 

Here were required not only quite different qualifications for in- 
terpretation but also a greater freedom of judgment and a greater 
breadth of view and of historical intuitions. Freedom of judgment, 
however, was wanting to priestly learning, whilst in India no one 
has over had any conception of historical development. The very 
qualities which have made those commentators excellent guides 
to an understanding of the theological treatises, render them un- 
suitable conductors on that far older and quite differently circum- 
stanced domain. As the so-called classical Sanskrit was perfectly 
familiar to them, they sought its ordinary idiom in the Vedic 
hymns also. Since any difference in the ritual appeared to them 
inconceivable and the present forms were believed to have existed 
from the beginning of the world, they fancied that the patriarchs 
of the Indian religion must have sacrificed in the very same man- 
ner. As the recognized mythological and classical systems of their 
own age appeared to them unassailable and revealed verities, they 
must necessarily (so the commentators thought) be discoverable 
in that centre point of revelation, the hymns of the ancient Rishis, 
who had, indeed, lived in familiar intercourse \\ith the Gods, and . 

possessed far higher wisdom than the succeeding generations 

It has never occurred to any one to make our understanding of the 
Hebrew books of the Old Testament depend on the Talmud and 
the Rabbins, while there arc not wanting scholars who hold it as 
the duty of a conscientious interpreter of the Veda to translate in 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


conformity with Sayana, Mahidhara, etc. Consequently, we do 
not believe like H. H. Wilson, that Sayana, for instance, under- 
stood the expressions of the Veda better than any European in- 
terpreter ; but we think that a conscientious European interpreter 
may understand the Veda far better and more correctly than 
Sayana. We do not esteem it our first task to arrive at that un- 
derslapding of the Veda which was current in India some centuries 
ago, but to search out the sense which the poets themselves have 
put into their hymns and utterances. Hence we arc of opinion 
that the writings of Sayana and the other commentators do not 
form a rule for the interpreter, but are merely one of those helps 
of which the latter will avail himself for the execution of his un- 
doubtedly difficult task, a task which is not to be accomplished 
at the first onset, or by any single individual..., AVe have, there- 
fore, endeavoured to follow the path prescribed by philology, to 
derive from the texts themselves the sense which they contain, 
by a juxtaposition of all the passages which are cognate in diction 
or contents ; — a tedious and laborious path, in which neither the 
commentators nor the translators have preceded us. The double 
duty of exegete and lexicographer has thus devolved upon us. A 
simple etymological procedure, practised as it must be by those 
who seek to divine the sense of a word from the sole consideration 
of the passage before them without regard to the ten or twenty 
other passages in which it recurs, cannot possibly lead to a correct 
result.”* 

Professor Max Miiller says : “ As the authors of the Brah- 

manas were blinded by theology, the authors of the still later 
Niruktas were deceived by etymological fictions, and both conspir- 
ed to mislead by their authority later and more sensible commen- 
tators, such as S.vyana. AVhere Sayana has no authority to mislead 
him, his commentary is at all events rational ; but still his schol- 
astic notions would never allow him to accept the free interpreta- 
tion which comparative study of these venerable documents forces 

^ On tilt Inltrpntaim of the I'cda, by J. Muir Esq. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EPITIOK. 


xii 

upon tho unprejudiced scholar. We must therefore discover our- 
selves the real vestiges of these ancient poets.” 

Professor Benfey says : “ Every one who has carefully studied 
the Indian interpretations is aware that absolutely no continuous 
tradition extending from the composition of the Veda to their ex- 
planation by Indian scholars, can be assumed ; that, on the con- 
trary, between the genuine poetic remains of Vedic antiquity and 
their interpretations a long-continued break in tradition must have 
intervened, out of which at most the comprehension of some par- 
ticulars may have been rescued and handed down to later times 
by means of liturgical usages and words, formulee, and perhaps, 
also, poems connected therewith. Besides these remains of tradi- 
tion, which must bo estimated as very scanty, the interpreters of 
the Veda had, in the main, scarcely any other helps than those 
which, for the most part, are still at our command, the usage of 
the classical speech, and the grammatical and etymological-lexico- 
graphical investigation of w’ords. At the utmost, they found some 
aid in materials preserved in local dialects; but this advantage is 
almost entirely outweighed by the comparison which we are able 
to institute with the Zend, and that which we can make (though 
here we must of course proceed with caution and prudence) with 
the languages cognate to the Sanskrit, — a comparison which has 
already supplied so many helps to a clearer understanding of the 
Vedas. But quite irrespectively of all particular aids, the Indian 
method of interpretation becomes in its whole essence an entirely 
false one, owing to the prejudice with which it chooses to conceive 
the ancient circumstances and ideas which have become quite 
strange to it, from its own religious stand-point, so many centuries 
more recent, whilst, on the other hand, an advantage for the com- 
prehension of the whole is secured to us by the acquaintance (drawn 
from analogous relations) with the life, the conceptions, the wants, 
of ancient peoples and popular songs, which we possess, — an 
advantage which, even if the Indians owed more details than they 
actually do owe, to tradition, would not be eclipsed by their inter 
pretation.”* 


* Oa the Interpretatum of the Veda, by J, Muir Esq. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


xiii 

A very different opinion of the value of the Indian commenta- 
tors was hold and expressed by Professor Goldstucker. “ Without 
the vast information,” he says, “which those commentators have 
Jisclesed to us, — without their method of explaining the obscurest 
text, — in one word, without their scholarship, we should still stand 
at the outer doors of Hindu antiquity.” He ridicules the assertion 
that a European seholar can understand the Veda more correctly 
than Sayana, or arrive more nearly at the meaning which the 
Rishis gave to their own hymns, and yet even this stanch champion 
of the Indian commentators “ cannot be altogether acquitted (as 
Dr. J. Muir says and shows) of a certain heretical tendency to devi- 
ate in practice from the interpretations of Sayana.” 

The last quotation which I shall make in connexion with this 
question is from Professor E. B, Cowell’s Preface to his edition of 
Vol. V. of Wilson’s Translation of the Rig- Veda Sanhitd : “ This 
work does not pretend to give a complete translation of the Rig- 
Veda, but only a faithful image of that particular phase of its in- 
terpretation which the mediajval Hindus, as represented by Sayana, 
have preserved. This view is in itself interesting and of an his- 
torical value ; but far wider and deeper study is needed to pierce 
to the real meaning of these old hymns. Sflyana’s commentary 
will always retain a value of its own, — oven its mistakes are often 
interesting, — but his explanations must not for a moment bar the 
progress of scholarship. We can bo thankful to him for any real 
help ; but l§t us not forget the debt which we owe to modern 
scholars, especially to those of Germany. The great St. Petoi’sburg 
Dictionary is indeed a monument of triumphant erudition, and 
it has inaugurated a new era in the interpretation of the Rig- 
Veda.” 

My translation, then, is partly based on the commentary of 
Sayana, corrected and regulated by rational probability, context, 
and intercomparison of similar words and passages. For constant 
ind most valuable assistance in my labour I am deeply indebted ' 
to the works of many illustrio»is scholars, some departed, and some, 



xiv preface to the first EDITIOI?. 

liappily, still flourishing. I am thankful to Sayana, my first guide ^ 
to the hymns of the Kigveda ; to my revered Master, Professor H. 
n, Wilson; to I’rofessors Roth, Benfey, Weber, Ludwig, Max 
Muller, Orassmann, and Monier Williams, and Dr. John Muir and 
Mr. Wallis. I have also consulted, and shall probably make more 
Use hereafter of, the works of M. Berg ligne and Dr. Oldenberg ; 
nor can I omit to mention the Siehenzig Lieder de8 Rigvedn by 
Geldner and Kacgi, Der Rigveda, by Kacgi, and Hymns from the 
RigveAa^ by Professor Peterson of Bombay, all of which I have 
read with pleasure and profit. 

But it must not be supposed that Kuropean students and in- 
terpreters of the Veda claim anything like infallibility, comple- 
teness, or finality for the results to which their researches have 
led them. All modem scholars will allow that many hymns ai-e 
dark as the darkest oracle, that, as Professor Max Muller says, there 
arc whole verses whicli, as yet, yield no sense whatever, and words 
the meaning of which wc can only guess. As in the intei’pretation 
of the more difficult books of the Old Testament and the Homeric 
poems, so in the explanation of the Veda complete success, if ever 
attainable, can be attained only by the labours of generations of 
scholars. 

The Hymns are composed in various metres, some of which , 
arc exceedingly simple and others comparatively complex and 
elaborate, and two or more different metres are frequently foupd 
in the same Hymn ; one Hymn, for instance, in Book I. show's 
nine distinct varieties in the same number of verses. The verses 
or stanzas consist of three or moife— generally three or four 

pddaSf semi-hemistichs or lines, each of which contains eight, 

eleven, or twelve syllables, sometimes, but rarely, five, and still 
less frequently four or more than twelve. As regards quantity 
the first syllables of the line are not strictly defined, but the last 
four are regular, the measure being iambic in the eight and ^ 
twelve syllable verses and trochaic in these of eleven syllables. 
Partly by way of safeguard against the besetting temptation to 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. XY 

paraphrase and expand, and partly in the hope of preserving, 
however imperfectly, something of the form of the Hymns, I have 
translated each verse by a verae syllabically commensurate with 
the original and generally divided into corresponding hemistich?. 

The verses consisting of three or four octosyllabic lines are 
tolerably well represented by the common octosyllabic or dimeter 
iambic metre which I have employed. In other verses I have not 
attempted to reproduce or imitate the rhythm or metre of the 
original : such a task, suppo.sing its satisfactory completion to be 
possible, would require more time and labour than 1 could spare 
for the purpose. All that I have done, or tried to do, is to show 
to some extent the original external form of the Hymns by render- 
ing them in syllabically commensurate hemistichs and verses, as 
Benfey and the translators of the Seventy Hymns have done for a 
portion of the Rigveda, and Grassmann for nearly the whole of 
the Collection. 

For further information regarding the Bigveda the English 
reader is referred to Max Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit 
JAteralure^ Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts^ and Weber’s History 
oj Indian Literature ; or if a simpler and more popular exposition 
bo required, to Mrs. Manning’s India^ Ancient and Mediaevaf or 
to Kaegi’s Der Riyveda, of which an English translation has 
recently appeared. The student who reads German and French 
will, 08 a matter of course, consult Ludwig’s great work/^er Rigveda 
and Bergaigne’s Etudes sur la Religion Vcdiqne. 

To conclude, my reasons for publislring this work arc chiefly 
these : there is at present no complete translation of the Rigveda 
in English, Professor Wilson’s version— of which the last two 
volumes have only lately appeared— being “only a faithful image 
of that particular phase of its interpretation which the medieval 
Hindus, as represented by Sayana, have preserved,” and, more- 
over, the price of Wilson’s six volumes — upwards of ninety rupees 
—puts the work beyond the reach of the great majority -of 
readers in India. 



XVI 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


I can hardly hope that my work will find acceptance with 
Pandits and Indian scholars inasmuch as I venture to deviate 
both widely and frequently from Sayana whom they have been 
taught to regard as infallible. No arguments are likely to. shake 
this belief. Nothing short of a course of study similar to that to 
which the leaders of the modern school of Vedic interpretation 
have devoted half their lives w ill enable them to see with onr eyes 
and accept our view's. I trust, however, that they will at any 
rate give the leaders and the follower of this modern school 
credit for deep devotion to ancient Indian literature and due 
admiration of the great Indian scholars who have expounded it ; 
and will acknowledge that these modern scholars — however mis- 
taken their views may appear to be — are labouring sincerely and 
solely to discover and declare the spirit and the truth of the most 
ancient and venerated literary records that are the heritage of 
Aryan man. 

R. T. H, GRIFFITH. 

Kotagiri, Nilgiiu : 

May 25ih, 1880. 


Note. 

This second edition of my translation is in the main a re- 
print in conipacter and cheaper form, with some corrections and 
other improvements in text and commentary, of the original four- 
volume edition. 

R. T. H. a 

Kotagiri : 

16th Octoberj 1896. 



THE HYMNS OP THE RIGVEDA. 


BOOK THE FIRST. 


HYMN I. Agni. 

T LAUD li, tho clioscn Priest, God, minister of sacrifice, 

The hotar, lavish est of wealth. 

2 Worth}^ is Agni to bo praised by living as by ancient seers : 
He shall bring hitherward the Gods. 

3 Ihrongh Agni man obtaineth wealth, yea, plenty waxing day 

by (lay, 

Alost riLh in heroes, glorious. 

4 Agni, the perfect saerifiec M’hicli thou encompassost about 
Verily goeth to the Gods. 

5 May Agni,sapiont-minde..l Priest, truthful, most gloriously great, 
The God, come hither with the Gods. 

G Whatever blessing, Agni, thou wilt grant unto thy worshipper. 
That, Angiras, is indeed thy trutli. 


Tlie I'n^t two liyujiis of this Hook arc asoiibcil to the llitihi or seer Madhu* 
chchliairlas Vdibv’diiiif r.i, a .‘•on or dc'.cond'int of the famous Visvdmitra. The 
deity to wIkhjj this hyiuu is a(J.lre<scd i.s Agiii, the God of fire', the most pro* 
^iiiinciii, next to Iiidia, of the ilcitics of the lugveda. Agni i.s the messenger 
and mediator betu eon earth and heaven, amiouiieing to the Gods the hymns, 
and conveying to thorn the oblations od theif worsliip[»ers, inviting them with 
thi^ bouml of Ids crackling flames and bringing them down to the place of sacri- 
fioe. As concentrating in him.-,elf the various sacriticial duties of different 
classes of human priests, Agni is calleil the Parohita or chosen priest, the 
pru:positus or pnp^en Ife is a Ritiu/, a priest or minister who sacrifices at the 
pro[)er seasons, and a Ilittnr, an invoking priest, a heiald who calls the Gods to 
enjoy the oUeniig, All riches are it liis disposal, and he is the most bountiful 
irowarder, both directly and indirectly, of the pious whose oblations he carries 
to the Gods. 

2 Ancient »cers said by Sdyana to be lihrigu, Angiras, and others. The ^ 
expresshni iiidiVSktftfiJiiie existence of eajliev Ifyuujis. 

)H rich in heroes ■ the heroes here spoken of, who accompany the 
»V‘lnisition and increase of wealtli, are brave sons and dependents. 

\ lyr feet : uninterrupted by Rilkshasas or fiends, who are unable to mar a 
iacrilico wliich Agni protects on ah sides. 

6 Amtirns : here a name of Agni. The Angirases appear to have Gfein' 
’<'Kirdcd ag a rape of higher, beings between (bids and men, the typical first 
iicriiicers, whose ritual is the ]»attern which later priests must follow. 



2 THE HYMNS OP, [BOOK P 

7 To thee, dispeller of the night, 0 Agiii, day by day with prayer 
Bringing thee reverence, we come ; 

8 Ruler of sacrifices, guard of Law eternal, radiant One, 
Increasing in thine own abode. 

9 Be to us easy of approach, even as a father to his son : 

Agni, be with us for our weal 

HYMN IT. VAyu. 

Beautiful Vayu, come, for thee these Soma drops havco been 
prepared : 

Drink of them, hearken to our call. 

2 Knowing the days, witii Soma juice poured forth, the singers 

glorify 

Thee, V^yu, with their hymns of praise. 

3 Vayu, thy penetrating stream goes forth unto the worshipper, 
Far-spreading for the Soma draught. 

8 Law eternal: The word used to denote the conception of the order of the 
world is ritd. Everything in the univer.se which i.s conceived as showing 
regularity of action may be said to have the ritd for its principle. In it.s 
most general application the oniception expres.swl by the word occupied to 
some extent the place of natural and moral law, fate, or tlie will of a supreme 
God. See Wallis, The Costnolo /;) of the Ritjvcdn, p. 92. 

In thine own abode - see ddme, snd doino, in the sacnHcial hall or chamber 
in which fire- woi’ship i.s performed, and in which tlio tire (Agni) increases as 
the oblations of clarified butter arc pourotl upon it by the priest. 

1 Vdyu: God of the wind. 

Soma drops : libatioms of the juice of the Soma, or Muon-plant, said to be 
the Acid A.scleiiias or Sarcostema Viminalk The plant wa.s gathered by 
moonlight on certain mountains, stripped of its leaves, and then carried to tlie 
place of sacrifice ; the stalks having been there ennshed by the priests were 
sprinkled with water and placed a sieve or stainer, whence, after further 
pressure, the acid juice trickle*! into a ve.s.sel called Drona ; after which it 
was mixed with Hour etc., made t<3 ferment, ami than offered in libations' to 
the Gods or drunk by the Br.ihmans, by both of whom ite exhilarating quali- 
ties were supixweil to lie highly j)ri5^ed. Thi.s famous plant has remained 
unidentified till recently (see Max Muller, Biographies of Words, Appendix 
III.) ‘ Dn Aitchi.son has lately .stated that Soma mu.st be the Ephedra pachy- 
clade, which in the Harirud valley issaul to bear the name of him, liuma, and 
yahma. This supposition is confirmed by Dr. Joseph Bornmuller, a botanist 
long re.sident in Kerman, who identifies the Soma plant with some kind of. 
Ephedra, probably Ephedra distachya, but who remarks that different varie- 
tie.s of Ephedra are to be found from Siberia to the ll)orian penin.sula, so that 
we must give up the hope of determining the original home of the Aryas by 
means of the habitat of the Soma plant ’ (Quarterly Review, No. 354, October 
1894, p. 455). 

2 Knowing the days • knowing the pmper days for sacrifices ; or perhaps, 
knowing or marking the time of daybreak, the exact time for the commence- 
ment of sacrificial rites. 

8 Hymns of praise : ukthas, lauds ecited or spoken, in opposition to verse* 
that are chanted or sung. 



HYMN 3.] THE RJOVEDA. 3 

4 These, Indra-Vayu, have been shed ; come for our offered 
dainties’ sake : 

The drops are yearning for you both. 

6 Well do ye mark libations, ye Vayu and Indra, rich in spoil ! 

, So come ye swiftly hitherward. 

6 Vayu and Indra, come to what tlie Soma-presser hath prepared; 
Soon, Heroes, thus I make my prayer. 

7 N^itra, of holy strength, T call, and foe-destroying Vanina, 
Who make tlie oil-fed rite comjilete. 

8 Mitra and Varuna, througli Law, lovem and cherishers of Law, 
Have ye obtained your mighty power. 

9 Our Sages, Mitra- Varuna, of wide dominion, .strong by birth, 
Vouchsafe us strength that worketh well. 

HYMN III Asvin.. 

Ye Aavins, rich in treasure, Lords of splendour, having nimble 
hands, 

Accept the sacrificial food. 


4 Indra and V^yu are here conjointly addressed in a dual compound, Indra- 
vllyil. Indra was the favourite national deity of I he Aryan Indians in the 
Vedic Age, and more hymns are dedicated to his honour than to the praise of 
any other divinity. He is the Clod who reins over the intermediate region or 
atmosphere ; ho fights against an<l conquers with his thunderbolt the demons 
of drought and darkness, and is in general the type of noble heroi.sm. 

7 According to Silyana, Mitra pre.sides over the day as Varuna over the 
night ; hence the closest connexion subsists between these two deities who 
are more frccpiently invoked together than Varuna is invoked singly ; together 
they uphold and rule the earth and sky, together they guard the world, to- 
gether they promote religious rites, avenge sin, and are the lords of truth and 
light. 

,.OU-f<d . performed with ghrildm (the modern ghi)^ and clarified butter, or 
butter which ha.s been boiled gently and then allowed to cool. The butter 
is then used for culinary purposes and also offered in sacrifice to the Gods. 
Complete: by gran ling the worshipper’s prayer. 

8 Through Law : i. e, in accordance with ritd, the eternal law or everlasting 
order of the universe. See I, 1. '. 

1 ‘The Asvins seem to have been a puzzle even to the oldest Indian Com- 
mentators. YAska thus refers to them in the Nirukta, XII. 1 ‘Nextin order 
are tlie deities whose 8})here is the heaven ; of these the Asvins are the first 
to arrive... Who then arc these Asvins ? ‘ Heaven and Earth,’ say some ; ‘ Day 
and Night,’ say others ; ‘ The Sun and Moon,’ say others ; ‘Two Kings, per- 
formers of holy acts,’ say the legendary writers.’ Professor Roth thus speaks 
of these Gods : ‘ The two Asvins, though, like the ancient interpreters of the 
Veda, we are by no means agreed as to the conception of their character, hold 
nevertheless, a perfectly distirfet position in the entire body of the Vedic 
deities of light, They are the earliest bringers of light in the morning sky, 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 

2 Ye Asvins, rich in wondrous deeds, ye lieroes worthy of our 

praise, 

Accept our songs with mighty thought. 

3 Nasatyas, wonder-workers, yours are these libations with dipt 

grass : 

Come ye whose paths are red with flame. 

4 0 ludra, niarvollously bright, come, these libations long for 

thee. 

Thus by fine fingers purified. 

5 Urged by the holy singer, sped by song,*come, Tndra, to the 

prayers 

Of the libation-pouring priest. 

6 Approach, 0 ludra, hasting thee. Lord of Bay Horses, to the 

prayers : 

Tn our libation take delight. 

7 Yc Visvedevas, who {)rotect, reward, and cherish men, approach 
Your worship[)er s drink-oflering. 

8 Ye Visvedevas, swift at work, come hither quickly to the 

draught. 

As milch-kine hasten to their stalls. 

9 The Visvedevas, changing shape like serpents, fearless, void of 

guile, 


who in their chariots hasten onward hofore the ilawn, and prepare the way for 
her.’ — J. Muir, O. S Ttxls, V. 234. 

Nimble hands hands outstretched and (piick t« seize the ofTcriiif's. 

2 Rich in wondrous deeds . some of the.se deeds for the piotection and 
benefit of those who craved the aid of the Asvins arc mentioned in Hymns 
CXII., eXVT,, and the thiee following, of this Book. 

3 Ndsatyas, derived by Indian C/ornnicn!ator.s from na + asatya ‘ not untrue,’ 
is a name of common occurrence applied jointly to the two Asvins. I^'dsatya 
is said to be specially the name of one of (he Asvins, the (tther being then 
called Dasra, ‘ wonder-worker,’ or perhaps ‘ destroyer’ (of the wicked). 

With dipt grass. The sacred Kusa grass (Poa cynosuroide.s), after having 
the roots cut off, i.s spread on the ledi or altar , and upon it the libation of 
Soma juice, or oblation of clarified butter is poured out. It j.s also spread over 
the .sacrificial ground orfloim to serve as a seat for the Hods and the sacrificere. 

4 Thus by fine fingers purified . carefully strained by the priests. 

6 Lord of Bay Horses HarivAn and Haryasva, ‘ having bay or tawny 
hor.‘'eR,' are frequently occurring epithets of Indra. 

7 Ye Visvedevas Visve dev4h may have originally denoted ‘all the Gods 
collectively,' though the introduction of the Visvas under the name visvadevdh" 
or risi'ederd/i as a separate troop of deities seems to have taken place at an 
early period. It w sometimes difficult to decide whether the expression visve- 
devdh refers to all the Gods or the particular troop. 

9 Ehimdydsah appears to be another form of ahimdydsah which is explained 
by Bohtlingk, and Roth as ‘ multiform or vensatile like a snake, showing the 



HYMN 4.] 


THE RIOVEhA. 


5 


Bearers, accept the sacred draught ! 

10 Wealthy in spoil) enriched with hymns, may bright ^ Saras vati 

desire, 

With eager love, our sacrifice. 

11 Inciter of all pleasant songs, inspirer of all gracious thought, 
. • ^arasvati acco})t our rite ! 

12 Sarasvati, the mighty flood, -she with her light illuminates, 
. She brightens every pious thought. 

• HYMN IV. ludra. 

As a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of fair deeds 

To our assistance day by day. 

same variety of colour and shape.’ Sayana explains it as ‘ those who have 
uhtained knowledge universally,’ It is more than jnobahle, says Professor 
Wilson, that the origin and iinpint of the term were forgotten when S^ana 
wrote. 

Bearers, of riches, according to S.lyana. 

10 Sarasvati ‘ is a goddess (jf some, though not of very giCat iinporiance in 
the Uigveda. As observed by Yiska (Nirukta ii, 2d) she is eclebiated both as 
a river and as a deity .She was, no doubt, primanly a river-dcity, as her 
name, “ the watery,” clearly denotes, and in this capacity she is celebrated in 
a few scjiaratc pas^ages. Allusion is made in the llynins. as well as in the 
Brahmanas .to sacriticcs being performed on the banks of this river and of 
the adjoining nn^liadvati ; ami the Sarasvati in paiticular acems to have been 
associated with the lepntation for sanctity, which accouling to the W’ell-known 
passage in the Institutes of Mann, was asciibcd to the whole icgiun, called 
Erahmftvarl la, l)ing lietwcen thoo tw.) small stieams, and situated imme- 
diately to the westwaul <if the Jumna. The Sarasvati thus appears to have 
been to the early Indians wdiat the (langes (which is only twice named in the 
Rigveda) became to their descendants... When once the river had acquired a 
divine character, it was quite natural that she should be regarded ,as the 
patroness of the ccrcmonie.s which were celebiated on tlio inaigin of her holy 
waters, and that her direction and blessing should be invoked as essential to 
their proper perfoi mance aiid success. The connection into which she was 
thus brought with sacred nte.s may have led to the furtlier ste)» of imagining 
her to have an influence on the Composition of the hymns wliich formed so 
important a part of the proceedings, and of identifying her with Vikh, the 
goddess of speech,'- -J. Muir, 0. S. 'l\xts, V. 338. 

12 ‘ S.'lyana explains ; “the S rasvatt liy her act (of flowing) displays a 
copious flool.” Roth in his Illustrations of the Nirukta (xi. 26), p. 1.^)2, 
translates, “a mighty stream is Sarasvati ; with her light she lightens, illu- 
minates, “ all pious minds.” He liowevev, regards the coinnieneing wairda as 
figurative, and nut as referring to the river. Beiifey renders: “Sarasvati, 
by her light, causes the great .sea to be known ; she shines through all 
thoughts.” He understands the “great sea” as the universe, or as life The 
conceptions of Sarasvati as a river, and as the ilirectress of ceremonies, may 
bo blended in the pas-sage.’— Muir 0. S. T., V. p. 339. 


1 The doer of fair deeds . luch-a, 



6 


THE HYMNS OF 


BOOK L 


2 Come tlioii to our libations, drink of Soma, Soma-drinker thou ! 
The rich One’s rapture giveth kiiie. 

3 So may we be accpiainted with thine innermost benevolence : 
Neglect us not, come hitherward. 

4 Go to the wise unconquered One, ask thou of Indra, skilled in 

song, 

Him who is better than thy friends. 

5 .Whether the men >yho tnoek us say, Depart unto another place, 
Ye wiio^§i^6‘'1tVd aiul "none else ; 

6 Or whether, God of wondrous deeds, all our true people call us 

blest. 

Still may we dwell in Indra’s care. 

7 Unto the swift One bring the swift, man-cheering, grace of 

sacrifice. 

That to the Friend gives wings and joy. 

8 Thou, Satakratu, drankost this and wast the Vritras’ slayer; 

tliou 

Holpest the warrior in the fray. 

9 Wo strengtlien, Satakratu, thee, yea, thee the powerful in fight, 
That, Indra, we may win us wealth. 

10 To fiim the mighty stream of wealth, prompt friend of him who 
pours tlie juice. 

Yea, to this fndra sing your song. 


2 Indra is especially the lord of Soma and its chief drinker. The exhilar- 
ation produced by drinking the fermented juice offered in libations stimulates 
his warlike energies and ilisposes him to give out of lus boundless riches 
liberal rewards in the shape of cattle and other wealth to those who worship 
him. 

6 The general meaning of this and the two preceding verses seems to be : 
Indra is the best friend and protector, and so long as we enjoy his fricndsliip 
and protection we care nothing for the revilings of the ungodly who mock at 
our faithful worship, 

7 The swift One indra. The Soma juice which exhilarates monorlierocB 
and accompanies (»!■ graces the .sacrifice is also calle<l swift both because it 
flows quickly and because it makes Indra hasten to the solemnity. The 
Friend, is Indra whom the juice exhilarates and send.s ijuickly to the sacrifice. 

8 Satuh'atn, a name of Indra, ‘ is oxplainetl by Hdyana, he who is connected 
with a hundred (many) acts, religious rites {bahuhannuj/nltu), either as their 
performer or their object : or it may be rendered ‘ endowed with great wis- 
dom ; ’ Icratu implying either /.(tn/ia, act, or putjtid, knowledge.’ — Wilson. 
The Vritras, tlie enemies, the oppressors, or obstructors, are ‘ the hostile 
powers in the atmosphere Avho malevolently shut up the watery treasures in 
the clouds. These denion.s of drought, called by a variety of names, as Vrittra 
Ahi, Sushna, Namuchi, Pipru, Sambara, Urana, etc., etc., armed on their side, 
also, with every variety of celestial artillery, attempt, but in vain, to resist 
the onset of the gods.’— Muir, 0. S. Texts, V, 95, 



HYMN 6.] 


THE niOVEDA. 


7 


HYMN V. Indra. 

0 COME yc hither, sit ye down; to Indra sing ye forth your song, 
Companions, bringing hymns of praise ; 

, 2 To him the richest of the rich, the Lord of treasures excellent, 
Indra, with Soma juice outpoured. 

• ^ May he stand by us in our need and in abundance for our 
wealth : 

,May he come nigh us with his strength ; 

4 Whoso pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen challenge 

not : 

To him, to Indra sing your song. 

5 Nigh to the Soma-drinker come, for his enjoyment, these pure 

drops, 

Tlie Somas mingled with the curd. 

6 Thou, grown at once to perfect strength, wast born to drink 

the Soma juice. 

Strong Indra, for preeminence. 

7 0 Indra, lover of the song, ma}' these quick Somas enter thee : 
May they bring bliss to thee the Sage. 

8 Our chants of praise have strengthened thee, 0 Satakratu, and 

our lauds ; 

So strengthen thee the songs we sing. 

9 fndra, wiiose succour never fails, accept these viands thousand- 

fold, 

Wherein all manly powers abide. 

10 0 Indra, tiiou who lovest song, let no man hurt our bodies, keep 
Slaughter far from us, for thou canst. 

HYMN VI. Indra. 

They who stand round him as he moves harness the bright, 
the ruddy Steed ; 

The lights are shining in the sky. 

1 Companions. The call is addressed to the ministering priests. 

3 ‘Two separate cases Rpi>car to be meant: yotje, where the God must 
recognize the necessity of his intervention, and purandhydin, whore he may 
deem it superfluous,’- -Ludwig. 

4 At the sight of whose chariot and horses all enemies flee. 

9 Wkercin all manly powers abide. The oblations of worshippers, as well as 
their hymns of praise, stimulate and strengthen the Gods for deeds of heroism. 

1 They who stand round : lolatrayavartimh pnlninah, ‘ the living beings of 
the three worlds,’ is Sdy ana’s c ;planation. Probably the Maruts, Iiidra’s 
constant companions are intended. 

The briyht, the ruddy Steed, { liradJtmm arushdm ), is probably the Sun, with 
whom Indra is frequently connected. 



8 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 

2 Oil both sides to the car they yoke t!ie two bay coursers dear 
to him, 

Bold, tawny, bearers of the Cliief. 

^ Thou, making light where no light was, and form, 0 men : 
where form was not, 

Wast born together with the Dawns. 

4 Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state of babes 

unborn. 

Assuming sacritieial names, 

5 Thou, Tndra, with the Tcinpest-Oods, the breakers down of 

what is Hrm, 

Foundest the kine even in the cave. 

6 Worshipping even as tliey list, singers laud him who findeth 

wealth, 

The far-renowned, the mighty One. 

7 Mayest thou verily be seen coming by fearless Indra’s side : 
Both joyous, equal in your sheen. 

8 With Indra’s well beloved hosts, the blameless, hastening to 

heaven, 

The sacriticer cries aloud. 


2 On both sides : vipidshasi- haniossod dii diflVront si<l<'.s. 

3 Thou, i. e. the .Sun. O men / pcMliapN mf'icl)' an exclamatii.ii exju'esHivo 
of admiration. If maiijdh, men, ho lakon to mean the Marut-, the woi'ds 
thou, inalinf/, ^cust bom, alrhoui'li in the .singular niunbor, may apply to tho.se 
Gods reganlod as one host or coiui)any and horn at one hirth. 

4 Threio off the state of babes unborn - according to Prof. M. Muller ‘as- 
sumed again the fomi .)f new-boin babes.’ ‘The idea that the Maruts 
assumed tlie foiin of a garhha, lit. of an embryo or a new liorn cliild, i.s only 
meant to expres.s that the .stoiius humt ioitli fiom the womb of the .sky as 
soon as Indra arises to do battle agaiii'.t the demon of darkne.S''. As as.^i.^ting 
Indra in thi.s battle, the .Maruts, who.se name retaine,<l for a long -time its 
purely appellative meaning of "torm.s, attained their rank as deitie.s by the 
side of Indra, or as the ]ioet expresses it, they a.ssumed their .sacred name. 
This .seem.- to be the whole meaning "f the later legend that the Maiut.s, like 
the Ribhus were not originally gods, but became defied for their works.’ 
M. Muller. Rujeeda Sanhitd, i. p. 25. 

5. The Tcnipest-Oods : the M.aruts, the friends and helpers of Indra. 

The line, arc .streams of water and the beams of light which follow their 
effusion, The'care is tlic thick dark cloud which holds the imprisoned waters 
and which Indra clcave.s a.sunder with hi" thunderbolt or lightning. 

7 Thou: the host of Maruts, According to Bcnfcy, the Sun, 

8 The sacrifieer cries aloud. This is the interpretation proposed by Professol 
Max Muller, hut it is only conjectural and not altogether satisfactory. Bcnfe; 
translates : Mightily shines the sacrifice ; and Ludwig : The warrior sing 
triumphantly, 



HYMN 7.] THE RIOVEDA. 9 

9 Come from this place, 0 Wanderer, or downward from the 
light of licavcn : 

Our songs of praise all yearn for this. 

10 ludra we seek to give ns help, from here, from heaven above 
the earth, 

. • Or from the spacious firmament. 

HYMN VII. Indra. 

Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their 
Mauds, 

Indra the choirs have glorified. 

2 Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and word-yoked 

car, 

Indra the golden, thunder-armed. 

3 Indra hath raised the Sun on high in heaven, that he may sec 

afar : 

He burst the mountain for the kine. 

4 Help us, 0 Indra, in the frays, yea, frays, where thousand spoils 

are gained. 

With awful aids, 0 awful One. 

5 In mighty battle we invokes Indra, Indra in lesser fight, 

The Friend who bends his bolt at fiends. 

6 Unclose, our manly Hero, thou for ever bounteous, yonder 

cloud, 

For us, thou irresistible. 

7 Still higher, at each stiain of mine, thunder-armed Iiidra's 

pi’aises rise : 

I find no laud wiwthy of him. 

8 Even as the bull drives on the herds, he drives the people with 

his might, 

The Ruler irresistible : 

9 From this ]>htc(’ . frotn earth. 

WiDulerer . (parljiiKni) here appl’^d to Indra, 

10 The spacious firmament the e.’cpansc between earth and heaven. 


1 The choirs : (vitnl) referring perhaps to both singers and chanters. 

2 The golden: i. e. richly decorated (sarvdbharanabhhhitah) according to 
tlyana. 

3 The mountain ; is the mountaiTi-shapod mags of thick cloud, and the hint 
'’e the waters as in I, H. .5. The wt.rds Adri ainl parvata mean both nnmntain 
lid cloud, these being constantly seen in close juxtaposition and being often 
Klistinguishablc one from the oHier, 



10 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 1, 


9 Indra who rules with single sway men, riches, and the^fi^fold 
race 

OjTtKose who dwell upon the earth. 

10 For your sake from each side wc call Indra away from other 
men : 

Ours, and none others’, may he be. 

HYMN VIIT. Indra. 

Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor’s ever-con- 
quering wealth, , 

Most excellent, to be our aid ; 

2 By means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to 

hand, 

By thee assisted with t he car. 

3 Aided by thee, the thunder-armed, Indra, may we lift uj) the 

bolt , 

AnTcoiiqucr all our foes in fight. 

4 With thee, 0 Indra, for ally with missile-darting heroes, may 
W ^ 0 conquer our embattled foes. 

5 Mighty IS ludra, yea supreme ; greatness he his, the Thunderer: 
Wide as the heaven extemls his power; 

6 Which -lideth tliosc to win tlicm sons, who come as heroes to 

the tight, 

Or singers loving holy thoughts. 

7 His belly, drinking deepest draughts of Soma, like an ocean 

swells, 

Ijike wide streams from the cope of heaven. 

8 So also is his excellence, great, vigorous, rich in cattle, like 
A ripe branch to the worshipper. 

9 For verily tiiy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps at 

once 

Unto a worshipper like inc. 

9 The jii'efij/d race Jton/cy explain.s (hi.s as 'the whole inhabited world.' 
But the ex])rc.sh)oii .seein.s to mean the Aryai» settlements or tribes only, and 
not tlie indigcTious inhabitants of the eountiy Tlie five 1 jibes or BettlcmenUs 
wcj’o probafijy liie eonfedej’atioii of the Turvasas, Yadus, Anus, Druhyus, and 
Purus. Sayana’s ex]ilanati<;n is ‘ those who are tit for habitations, ’ and the 
phra.se i.s .said to nnjdy the four caste.s and Nisadas or indigenous barbarians. 
But theie wcic no such dwtinctions of caste when the hymn was composed. 

2 With the car ajrdtd, literally, wuth a horse, is explained by vStlyana to 
mean fighting on horseback. But horses seem to have been used in war as 
drawers of chariots only, and Arvutd here stands for ratkena^ with a car or 

i chariot. 

3 May we lift up the halt. The thunderbolt here spoken of is sacrifice which) 
^'when employed against enemies, is as powerful a weapon as the bolt of Indraj 



HYMN 9.] 


THE RWVEDA. 


11 


10 So are his lovely gifts ; let lauds and praises be to Indra sung, 
That he may drink the Soma juice. 

hymn IX. Indra. 

Comb, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all the Soma 
•feasts, 

Protector, mighty in thy strength. 

2 To Indra pour ye forth the juice, the active gladdening juice 

to him 

life gladdening, omnilic God. 

3 0 Lord of all men, fair of cheek, rejoice thee in the gladdening 

lauds. 

Present at these drink-ofterings. 

4 Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the strong, 

the guardian Lord, 

And raised themselves unsatisfied. 

5 Send to us bounty manifold, 0 Indra, worthy of our wish, 

For power supreme is only tiiinc. 

C 0 Indra, stimulate thereto us emulously fain for wealth, 

And glorious, 0 most splendid One. 

7 Give, Indra, wide and lofty fame, wealthy in cattle and in 

strength, 

Lasting our life-time, failing not. 

8 Grant us high fame, 0 Indra, grant riches bestowing thousands* 

those 

Fair fruits of earth borne home in ^]olin,s. 

9 Praising with songs the praisc-wortliy who cometh to our aid, 

we call 

’ Indra, the Treasure-Lord of wealth. 

10 To lofty Indra, dweller by eacli libation, the pious man 
"Sini^s tbrth aloud a strengthening hymn. 

10 Let lauds and praises be to Indra sung, more exactly, 'be lauds, spoken 
and sung, to Indra given ; uU/ui being properly the laud that is recited, and 
stoma the hymn of praise that is sung 

4 And raised themseh'fs unsalisjicd • djo^hdh, not contented, that is, with 
)rayer.s ever new. Ludwig observe.s that the SArnaveda has preserved the 
orrect reading sajdsb ih, ‘ with one accord,’ 

8 Those fair fruits of mitkhiong>it home in wains, ‘The original of this 
yinn, as of many others, is so coimiso and elliptical as to be unintelligible 
ithoui the liberal amplihcation of the Scholiast. We have in the text simply 
those car-having viands,” id rathint. isUuh, meaning, SAyana says, those 
tides of food which are conveyed in cars, carts, or waggons, from the site of 
eir production ; as rice, barley, and other kinds of grain.’— Wilson, 

The meaning of rathintr is not clear, 



12 THE HYMNS OF [FOOK t. 

HYMN X. Indra. 

The cliantens hymn thee, they who say the word of praise . 

magnify thee. ^ 

The priests have raised thee np on high, 0 Satakratu, like a 
pole. 

2 As up^hc clomb from ridge to ridge and looked upon che 

toilsome task, 

Indra observes this wish of his, and the Ram hastens with his 
troop. 

3 Harness thy pair of strong bay steeds, long-maned, whose 

bodies lill the girths, 

And, Indra, Soma-drinker, eome to listen to our songs of 
praise. 

4 Como hither, answer thou the song, sing in approval, cry 

aloud. 

Good Indra, make our prayer succeed, and prosper this our 
sacrilice. 

5 To Indra must a laud be said, to strengthen him who freely 

gives, 

That Sakra may take pleasure in our friendship and drink-offer- 
ings 

6 Him, him we seek for friendship, him for riches and heroic 

might. 

For Indra, he is Sakra, he shall aid us while he gives us wealth. 

7 Easy to turn and drive away, Indra, is spoil bestowed by thee. | 


1 ‘ The concluding phrase, tiid Aid vaiisam iva ygmh’C, “ they have rai.sed 
thee, like a bamboo,” is ratlior obscure. The Scholiast says, they liave ele- 
vated Indra, as tumblers raise a bamboo- on the summit of which the> 
balance thcmsclve.s ; a feat not uncommon in India : or, as vuiisn means, also, 
a family, it may be rendered, as ambitious persons rai&e their tamily to con- 
sequence.’ — Wilfton. 

2 The text has only, mounting from ri<1ge to ridge, or from height to height, 
which the Sclioliai't completes l)y ol)ser\ing that thiM.Hsuid ot the YajamAna, the 
person who iiintitute.s or performs a regular .sa<Tilicc and pays the exjienses ol 
it, who goes to the mountain to gather the Soma-])lant, fuel, etc. Lud\\i( 
thinks that India is meant, rising higher and higher, and yet not delaying U 
come to the sacrifice. I 

The Ram, ( rrishnih) is Indra, and his flock or troop are the Maruts. 

Hastens : comes quickly to the sacrifice. 

5 S ikra, a common name of Indra, used in the next stanza as an epithet- 
‘ the powerful,’ from sale, to be able. 

7 Easy to turn : The Booty spoken of in the Kigveda consists chiefli 
cattle, which with Indra’s assistance are easily turned and driven away f 
the enemy who possesses them, 



HYMN 11.] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


13 


Unclose the stable of the kiiie, and give us wealth 0 Thunder- 
armed. 

8 The heaven and earth contain thee not, together, in thy wrath- 

ful mood. 

^Win us the waters of the sky, and send us kine abundantly. 

9 Hear, thou whoso ear is quick, iny call ; take to thee readily 

my SOULES 

0 Indra, let this laud of mine come nearer even than thy 
f?iend. 

[0 Wo know tliec migliticst of all, in battles hearer of our cry. 

Of thee most mighty we invoke tlie aid that giveth thousand- 
fold. 

11 0 Indra, Son of Kusika, drink our lihation with delight. 
Prolong our life anew, and cause the seer to win a thousand 

gifts. 

12 Lover of song, may these our songs on every .side encompass 

thee : 

Streiigtheuiiig thee of lengthened life, may they be dear de- 
lights to thee. 

HYMN XI. I,ara. 

All sacred songs have magiiilied Indra cxpa uslvo as the sca^ 
d'he best of warriors borne on ears, the Lwd, tile vehyXoi^ of 
strength. 

2 Strong in thy friendship, Indra, Lord of power and might, wc 

have no fear. 

Wc glorify with praises thee, the never-conquered conqueror. 

3 The gifts of Indra from of old, his saving succours, never fail, 
When to the praise-singers ho gives the boon of substance 

rich in kine. 

Vne/ftse (he stable of the kine Ojjen the thick cloud that holds the w'ater 
ipri.soiied, and fertilize our tichls with rain. 

!» Tki/ ft lend ■ ])ro))ably the vdjra or thunderbolt which is Indra’s insepar- 
>lc a.s.suciate and .illy. 

11 Son of Knsikn Kufiika wa.s the father or the grandfather of VisvAmitra 
:!io was the fatlior of the ])oet or .seer of thi.s hymn. This epithet Kausika, 
in of KuPikii, IS here apidicd to Indra a.s being t he chief or special (lod of the 
nr’.s family. 

12 Of lengthened /?/r = immortal. 

|l Tliis hymn is ascribed to Jetar the son of Madhuchchhandas the seer of 
k preceding hymn, . 

Ul^pansiveas the sea • cf, I. 8, 7. Or the expre.ssion may be, as Wilson says, 
1 vague mode of indicating the univcr.sal diffusion of India as the firma- 

nt.’ 



u 


THE HYMNS OF 


YBOOK /. 


4 Crusher of forts, the young, the wise, of strength unmeasured, 

"was KTBcSrn 

Sustainer of each sacred rite, Indra, the Thunderer, much- 
extolled. 

5 Lord of the thunder, thou didst burst the cave of Vala rich 

ill cows. 

The Gods came pressing to thy side, and free from terror aided 
thee. 

6 1, Hero, through Lliy bounties am come to the flood addiessing 

thee. 

Song-lover, hero the singers stand and testify to thee thereof. 

7 The wily Sushna, indra ! thou o’erthresvest with thy wondrous 

powers. 

The wise beheld this deed of thine : now go beyond their 
eulogies. 

8 Our songs of praise have glorilied Indra who ruleth by his 

might, 

Whose precious gifts in thousands come, yea, even more 
abundantly. 

HYMN XT I. Agni. 

We choose Agni the me.sseuger, the herald, master of all wealth, 

Well skilled m this our sacriflee. 

2 With callings ever they invoke Agni, Agni, Lord of the House, 

Oblation-bearer, much beloved. 

3 Bring the Gods hither, Agni, born for him who strews the sacred 

grass : 

Thou art our herald, meet for praise. 

4 Crasher of forts : destroyer or breaker-down of the cloud.s that witlihold 

the rain, which are rcgimled a.s the fort;3 or strongholds of Viitra and the! 
other hostile power.H of the air . . f 

0 The cave of Vala: Vala is the brother of Vntra, or Vritra hiin.self underf 
another name, who stole the cows of the Gods and lud them m a cave, that isj 
ke})t the light and waters imprisoned in dark clouds. 

6 To the flood . i, e. to Indra, the river or sea of bounty. 

7 The wily Sashna: Sushna h described as a demon slain by Indra 
The word means drier up ; bhiiidndnx snshanaheta, cause of the drying up o 
beings, the excessive heat and drought before the Rains, which Indra puts ai 
end to. 

Now go beyond their eulogies • i. e. do deeds worthy of still higher prais* 
Or it may mean, make their eulogies eudui'e. 

1 The Hymns from XII to XXUI inclusive are ascribed to Medhittitk 

son of Kauva. , 

The messenger ; the mediator between men and Gods. The herald: devdndl, 
dhvdtdram, the inviter of the Gods, is Sdyana’s explanation. J 

3 Born ; newly produced by attrition for the man who has prepared aij 
spread the sacrificial grass as a seat for the expected deities. 



HYMN 13.3 


THE RIQVEDA. 


15 


4 Wake up the willing Gods, since thou, i^gni, perfonuest 

embassage : 

Sit on the sacred grass with Gods. 

5 0 Agni, radiant One, to whom the holy oil is poured, burn up 
, Our enemies w horn fiend.s protect. 

6 By Agni Agni is inHamed, Lord of the House, wise, young, who 

bears 

The gift : the ladle is his mouth. 

7 Praise Agni in the .sacrifice, the Sage whose ways are ever true. 
The God who drivetli grief away. 

8 God, Agni, be his strong defence who, lord of sacrificial gifts, 
Worshippeth thee the messenger, 

9 Whoso with sacred gift would fain call Agni to the feast of 

Gods, 

0 Purifier, favour him. 

0 Such, Agni, Purifier, bright, bring hither to our sacrifice, 

To our oblation bring the Gods 

1 So lauded by our newest song of praise bring opulence to us, 
And food, with heroes for oiir sons. 

2 0 Agni, by elFulgent flame, by all invokings of the Gods, 

Show pleasure in thi,s laud of ours. 


HYMN XIII. 


Agui. 


Agni, well-kindled, Iiring the God.s for him whoofler.s holy gifts. 
Worship them, Purifier, Priest. 

2 Son of Thyself, present, 0 Sage, our sacrifice to the Gods to- 
day. 

Sweet to the taste, that they may feast. 


6 By Xyiii Ayni u inflamed ; The fire into which the oblation is ^wureU i» 
jilted by the application of other fire. 

Young : as newly born each time the fire is pro^luccd. The ladle ; used for 
luring the .sacrificial butter into the fire. 

8 Lord of sacrificial gif tii . the wea.thy i>atron orimstitutor of the sacrifice. 

9 0 Purifier : 2 >dvaka, purifying, is in later Sanskrit a common word for fire. 

This is one of the Aprlor propitiatory hymns, constsfing of invocations to a 
ries of dcifieil objects, and .said to be introductory to tlie animal sacnfice. 
U the deified objects addressed in this hymn are said by SSyana to be forms 
: Agni. 

1 1 For him who oflers holy gifts : for the institutor of the sacrifice. 

|2 Son of Thyself TanfinapAt, son or descendant of oneself, is a frequently 

f urring name of Agni, so called because fire is sometimes solf-generatcd, as 
the lightning, or produced by attrition, and not necessarily derived from 
ler fire. Other fanciful derivatioiw are given. 



16 


THE HYMNH OF 


{BOOK T. 


3 Dear Narasansa, sweet of tongue, the giver of oblations, I 
Invoke to this our sacritice. 

4 Agiii, oil thy most easy car, glorified, hither bring the Gods : 
Maiiu a})poiiited thee as Priest. 

5 Strew, 0 ye wise, the sacred grass that drips with oil, inoidor 

due, 

Wliere the Immortal is beheld. 

6 Thrown open be the Doors Divine, unfailing, that assist the rite, 
For sacrifice this day and now. 

7 I call the lovely Night and Dawn to seat them on the holy grass 
At this onr solemn sacrifice. 

8 The two Invokers I invite, the wise, divine, and sweet of 

tongue, 

To celebrate this onr sacrifice. 

9 f]'i, Sarasvati, Malii, three Goddesses who bring delight, 

Be seated, peaceful, on the grass. 

10 Tvashtar I call, the earliest born, the wearer of all forms at 

will : 

M ly he be ours and ours alone. 

11 God, Sovran of the Wood, present this our oblation to the 

Gods, 

And let the giver 'be renowned. 


3 N<irdsaitii<t, ‘ Praise of Men ’ ia one of Agni’s mystical names. 

4 Mu)ih is the man par i’xrc'l( ure, or the representative man and father of 
the human race, regaided as the tir^t m->tiiutor of saculiecs and lehgious cere- 
monies. 

5 The immortal : according to Stijana either the clarified butter or Agni 
the (lod. 

6 The Boon Divine : the iloora of the chamber in which the oblation ia 
offered. 

Unfailing ; the signification of asasrJidtah in the text is uncertain. Sfl-yanai 
explains the word variously m various places. 

8 The two Jnvoktrs. It seems uucci tain wiio these two invokers or priests) 
{hoidrd) are, whether Agni and Aditya, or Agni and Varuna, or Varuna an 
Aditya See M. Muller’s A. S', LUeratine, p. 464. 

9 lid . the tloddess of sacred speech and action. 

Saranvatt . see I. 3. 10. 

Maid: ‘the great’ (Goddess), said to be identical with Bharatl, also 
Godiless of speech, 

10 TvmMar, is the Hephaistos, or Vulcan, of the Indian pantheon, the ides 
artist, the (livine artihan, the most skilful of workmen, versed in all wonderfu 
and admirable contrivances. 

11 God, Sovran of the Wood : vanaspati, lord of the wood ; usually, a largi 
tree ; here said to bean Agni,— as if the fuel and the burning of it wore idcij 
tifietl. Or the Sacrificial Post may be intended, which is enumerated anioul 
the Apri deities or deified objects. 



THE RiaVEDA. 


17 


14.] 

12 AVith Svalia pay the sacrilice to Jndra in the offerer’s house; 
Thither I call the Deities. 

HYMN XIV. Visvedevas. 

To drink the Soma, Agni, come, come to our service and our 
• * songs 

AVith all these Gods; and worship them. 

2 fflie Kanvas have invoked thee; they, 0 Singer, sing thee 

•songs of praise : 

Agni, come hither with the Gods ; 

3 IndiM, Vayu, Brihaspati, Mltra, Agni, Pushan, Bhaga, 

Adi by as, and the Marut host. 

12 SnVtA is the Scocred word or exclaumtiou (Hail! ' ) used in 

pouring ilie oblation on the lire. According to SAyana, SvAhi also may be 
identitied with Agni. 

2 The Kanvas : flons or descendants of Kanva, men of the same family as the 
seer of the hymn. 

3 bulva, Viti/ii, etc. Tlie names of those Oods are in the accusative case, 
govemed by ‘ they (the K.iuvas) have invoked,’ or * worship them,’ undei stood, 

Brihayyati, 'alternating with Br.ilimaii.tspati is the name of a deity in 
whom tlie action of tlie worshipper upon the Uods is personified. He i.s 
the suppliant, the priest who inteicede.s with the Gods for men, and protects 
them ag.iinst the wicked. Hence lie appe.irs as the prototype of the priests 
and the piiestly older, and is also dosiguatod as the Purnhita of the divine 
corninuiiity. The e.s.sential ditferonce between the original idea represented 
in this God and those expre.s.sed in most of the other and older deities of the 
Vo la consists in the fact that tlie latter a'c personifications of vaiious de- 
paruneiits of nature, or of phy.sical force.s, while the former is the product of 
niiu.d ideas, and an impersonatiou of the power of devotion.’ — Muir, 0. S. 
Texts, V. 272. 

Pilshan is a God who piotectsand multiplies cattle and human possessions 
geiierally. In character he is a solar deity, beholds the entire universe, and is 
a. giU(lc,on roads and jnuniey.s. 

Bha;ja, the gracious Lord and protector, is regarded as the bestower of 
wealth. 

Aditi/as. 'There (in the higluest heaven) dwell and reign those God.s who 
boar in common the name of Adity ..s. We rnu.st, however, if we would dis- 
cover their earliest character, abainion the conceptions which in a later age, 
and even in that of the heioie poems, were entertained regarding these deities. 

, AcoouUug to this conception they weio twelve Sun-gods, bearing evident 
1 reference to the twelve months. But for the ino.st ancient period we must 
hold f ist the pi imaiy signification of their name. They are the inviolable, 
im[terish.ible, eternal being.s, Aditi, eternity or the eternal, is tlie element 
, wliicli sustains them and is sinstained by them . The eternal and inviolable 
lelemeiih ill which the Adityas dwell and winch forms their essence, is the 
jcelestial light, ..Tlic Adityas, the Gods of this light, do not therefore by any 
iiicaiis coincide with any of the forms in which light is manifested in the um- 
Verse. They are neither .'»iui, nor moon, nor stars, nor dawn, but the etenul 
Mut, liners of this luminous life, which exi.st,s, as it were, behind all those 
plu'iioiiieii.i.’— Roth, quoted by Midi, 0. -S'. Tixts, V. p, 5t>. 



18 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I 

4 For you these juices are poured forth that gladden and exhi 

larate, 

The mcath-drops resting in the cup. 

5 The Sons of Kanva fain for help adore thee, having strewn tin 

grass, 

With offerings and all things prepared. 

6 Let the swift steeds who carry thee, thought-yoked and drop 

ping holy oil, 

Bring the Gods to the Soma draught. 

7 Adored, the strengtheners of Law, unite them, Agni, with theii 

Dames : 

Make them drink mcath, 0 bright of tongue. 

8 Let them, 0 Agni, who deseiwe worship and praise drink with 

thy tongue 

The meatli in solemn sacrifice. 

9 Away, from tlie sun’s realm of light, the wise invoking Priest 

shall bring 

All Gods awaking with the dawn. 

10 With all the Gods, with In Ira, with Vayu, and Mitra’s splen- 

dours, drink, 

Agni, the pleasant Soma juice. 

1 1 Ordaine l by Mann as our Priest, thou sittest, Agni, at each rite 
Hallow thou this our sacrifice. 

1 2 Harness the Red Mares to thy car, the Bays, 0 God, the flam 

ing ones : 

With those bring liitherwai'd the Gods. 

HYMN XV. ibtu 

0 Indra drink the Soma juice with Rita ; let the cheermg drop^ 
Sink deep within, which settle there. 

The M'lmt hoat : the Maruts are the Tlorb of the wln>U and storms, tin 
companions ijid friends of Indra. They are said in the Veda to be the sons o 
Rudra and Pri-ni, the latter being explained by Say.uia as 'the many-coloar 
ed earth,’ but regarded by Professor Roth as a per^unitication of the specklei 
clouds. 

7 Unite them with their Dames : j>dtiitvatas kridhi ; make them (come) witl 
their consorts. 

9 The wise invoicing Priest : Agni, who calls the Gods. 

10 Aik the Qods ; or Visvedevas ; see I. 3. 7. 

11 Manu : see I. 13. 4. 

1 Ritu : meaning generally a season, a sixth part of the Indian year, is her< 
personified and addressed as a deity. 



2 Drink from the Purifier’s cup, Manits, with Ritu; sanctify 
T’ne rite, for ye give precious gifts. 

3 0 Neslitar, with thy Dame accept our sacrifice ; with Ritu drink, 
For thou art he who giveth wealth. 

,4 ]h-ing the Gods, Agni ; in tlie three appointed places set them 
down : 

Surround them, and with Ritu drink. 

5 Drink Soma after the Ritus, from the Brahmana’s bounty : un- 

'dissolved, 

0 Indra, is thy friendship’s bond. 

6 Mitra, Vanina, ye whose ways are firm — a Power that none 

deceives — , 

With Ritu ye have reached the rite. 

7 The Snma-pressers, fain for wealth, praise t.he Wealth-giver in 

the rite, 

In sacrifices praise tlie God. 

8 May the Wealth-giver grant to us riches that shall be far 

renowned : 

These things we gain among the Gods. 

9 Ho with the Ritus fain would drink, Wealth-giver, from the 

Neshtar's bowl. 

Haste, give your offering, and depart. 

10 As w^e this fourth time. Wealth-giver, honour thee with the 

Ritus, be 

A Giver bountiful to us. 


2 T/ie Purifier’s cup : the ^acriticial vessel of the Potar, or Purifier, wlio 
nours into the fire the libation for the Maruts. 

3 0 Xeshtar : the NeslUar is one of the chief officiating priests, who leads 
forward the wife of the iastitutor of the sacrifice. In tliis place Ne^>htor is 
said to he another name for the God TvashUr from his having on some oc» 
;asion assumed the function of a Ne-dilar priest. 

4 The three appointed places : by the three sacrificial fires. 

: 5 The Brdhmana's bounty. The Brfthmana here is said to be the BrAhma- 
ichchhansl, one of the sixteen priests employed in sacrifices ; and perhaps hiji 
lice may have been to hold some ladle or vase in which the offering is pre- 
iited. 

7 The Soma-pressers : gr^kvahastdsah, men having stones in their hands 
ith which to bruise the Soma plant. The Wealth-giver is Agni. 

In the rite, In sacrifices : ‘ m the adhvara and in the yajnas, the first said 
> be the primary or essential ceremony, such as the Agnishtoma ; the second, 
le modified cerettonies, such as the Ukthya which is elsewhere termed an 
f'ering with Soma juice.’— Wilson. 

10 ds we this fourth time : Agni, as DravinodAs or Wealth-giver, has now 
en celebrated in four stanzas instead of the usual tricha or tri^ ; or we may 
anslate with Ludwig, ‘ As w’e in fourth place,’ Agni being fourth in the ia- 
cation (Indra, Maruts, Tvash^r, Agni). 



20 


THE inuy^s OP 


^BOOK L 

11 Drink ye tlie meatb, 0 Asvins briglit with flames, whose acts 

are pure, who with 
llitus accept the sacrifice. 

12 Wjtli Hitu, through the house-fire, thou, kind Giver, guidest 

sacrifice : 

Wors/iip the Gods for the pious man. 

HY^m XV f. Tnrira. 

Let thy Bay Steeds bring thee, tlie Strong, hither to drink the 
Soma draiiglit — 

Those, Indra, who are bright as suns. 

2 Here are the grains bedewed with oil : hither let the Bay 

Coui'sers bring 
Indra upon Ins easiest car. 

3 Indra at early morn wo call, Indra in course of sacrifice, 

Indra to diink the Soma juice. 

4 Como hither, with thy long-maned Steeds, 0 Indra, to the 

draught wo pour ; 

Wc call thee when the juice is shed. 

5 Come thou to this our song of praise, to the libation poured 

for thee : 

Drink of it like a stag athirst. 

6 Here are the drops of Soma juice expressed on sacred grass : 

thereof 

Drink, Indra, to increase thy might. 

7 Welcome to thee be this our hymn, reaching thy heart, most 

excellent : 

Then drink the Soma juice expressed, 

8 To every draught of pressed-out juice Indra, the Vritra-slayer, 

comes. 

To drink the Soma for delight. 

9 Fulfil, 0 Satakratu, all our wish with horses and with kine: 
With holy thoughts wc sing tliy praise. 

1*2 Thromjh the hotne-fire. The <j<(rhitpatija is the sacicd tire perpetually 
niaiiitaiiK'd by ihe h«)UHch(»lder ; the tire from which fires for sacrificial pur- 
poses are lighted, 

1 Bright (ts suvR ■ R^rnchalfinsnh. Styaua understands this to refer to the 
priests, and Wilson renders'accordingly : may (the priests), radiant as the sun 
(make thee manifest). 

2 Eadeat c,m' ; sukhuttme r<Uhe : that is, most easily moving, swiftest, 

3 Indra at curJff morn ve call. Although not more jwticularly named, the 
ppocificalion implies the morning, mid-day, and evening worship. 

5 Lihe a »t<ig athirst like a ganrn (Bo.s (Janrus) a kind of buffalo. 

‘ I rink like a thirsty buffalo,’ uou’d perhaps be a more strictly accurate 
rciideimg. 



HYMN 18 .] 


THE RIGVEEA. 


21 


HYMN XVIL Indra-Varuna. 

I CRAVE liolp from the Imperial Lords, from I ndra- Vanina ; 
may they 

Both favour one of us like me. 

Guardians of men, ye ever come with ready succour at the call 

Of ovary singer such as f.* 

3 Sate you, according to your wish, O Iiidra- Vanina, with wealth ; 

Fain would we have you nearest us. 

4 JVfay we be sh.irers of the powers, sharers of the benevolence 

Of you who give strength bouuteou.sly. 

5 Indra and Vanina, among givers of thousands, meet for praise, 

Are Powers who merit highest laud. 

6 Through their protection may we gain great store of wealth, 

and heap it u]) : 

Enough, and stdl to spare, be ours. 

7 0 Indra-Vaniua, on you for wealth in many a form I call : 

Still keep ye us victorious. 

8 0 Indra- Vanina, through our songs that seek to win you to 

ourselves, 

Give us at once yoiir sheltering help. 

9 0 Indra- Vanina, to you may fair praise which I offer cOme, 

Joint eulogy which ye dignify. 

HYMN XVIIT. Brahmana.pati. 

0 Brahman ASP ATI, make him who presses Soma glorious, 

Even Kakshivan Ausija. 

1 Indra the Hero and V.iiuna the King are addressed conjointly a.** 
a dual deity, Tmli Av.ii ano. The nio.sb protninont of the other dual deitie.s ara 
Agni-Soiiia, India- Vdyu, Indra- Agni, Indra-Bi ihasp iti, India-Soma, Mitra- 
Varnna^ Indra- I’ush.ui, India- Vishnu, Dyaus-Piithivi and Soma-Rudra. 

Brahmanaspdti. See I. 14,3. Professor WiKsonsays: ‘ The Scholiast fur- 
nishes us wifli no account of the station or functions of this divinity. The 
“tymology will justify Hr. Roth’s definition of him as the deity of sacred 
nayer, or lather, pei haps, of the text of the Veda; hut whether he is to be 
Jonsidered as a distinct peisonification, or as a modified form of one of those 
dready recognized, and especially of Agni, is doubtful. His giving wealth, 
sealing disease, and promoting nouri.sliriieiit, are propeities not poculiar to 
nm ; and his being associ.ited with Indra and Soma, while it makes him dis- 
aiict fiom them, leaves him Agni as hi.s prototype. His being, in an especial 
fanner, connected with praj’er appears more fully in a subsequent passage, 
pyinu XL. Agni is, in an eHj)ecial degiee, the deity of the Brahman ; and, 
Coordnig to some statements, the R’gveda is supposed to proceed from him ; 

I notion, liowever, which according to Medhdtithi, the coinuientator on Manu, 
vas suggested by its opening with whe hymn to Agni, Agnhn Ue.' 

Kaksluvdn, called Aus’ja, or son of Usij, was a renowned Risbi or seer, of 
t e family of Pajia, and the author of several of the hymus of the lligYcda# 



I THE ^AMAKR'SHNA WiSSION 
I mSTlTuTi OF ULTUHE 



22 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /. 

2 The rich, the healer of disease, who giveth wealth, increaseth 

store, 

The prompt, — may he bo with us still. 

3 Let uot the foemaii’s curse, let not a mortal’s onslaught fall on 

us : 

Preserve us, Brahmanaspati. 

4 Ne’er is the mortal hero harmed whom Tndra, Brahmanaspati, 
And S(3ma graciously inspire. 

5 Do, thou, O Bi’ahmanaspati, and Tndra, Soma, Dakshina, 
Preserve that mortal from distress. 

6 To the Assembly’s wondrous Lord, to Indra’s lovely Friend who 

gives 

Wisdom, have I drawn near in prayer. 

7 lie without whom no sacrifice, e’en of the wise man, prospers ; 

ho 

Stirs up the series of thoughts. 

8 Tie makes the oblation prosper, he promotes the course of 

sjicriiice : 

Our voice of praise goes to the Gods. 

9 1 have seen Naraaansa, him most resolute, most widely famed, 
As ’twere the Household l^riest of heaven. 


2 The rich, the healer of disease ; BrahmanaspAti. 

.4 Soma: tbo God who represents and uniinatea the juice of the Soma 
Ho WAS in former times the Iieli.ui Dionysus or Bacchus. ‘ The 
simple minded Aryan people,’ 8^»ys Professor Wliitpey, ‘whose whole religion 
was a worship of the wonderful powcis and phenomena of natute, had no 
sooner perceived that this liquid [Soma juice] had power to elevate the 
spiiits, and pioduce a tompoiaiy frenzy, under the influence of which the 
iurlividual was prompted to, and capable of, rleeds beyond his n.itural powers, 
than they found in it sometlnng divine ; it \va-« to theii Hpprehen^^lon a God, 
endowing those into whom it enteied with godlike powers; the plant which 
afforded it became to them the king of plants; the piocess of piepaiing it 
became a holy saenflee. The high antiquity of this cultus is attested by the 
references to it found occurring m the Peisiau Avesta.’ — See Muir, 0. S. Itxts, 
V. 258. 

5 Dahshind : properly the present made to the priests at the conclusion of 
a sacrifice, here personifled as a Goddess. 

6 The A^emhly's wondrous Lord: Sadasaspati, the raa',ter or protector of 
the assembly of priests, is here a title of Agui. 

9 Household Priest • sddmamahhasavn ; according to Sdyana, ‘radiant as 
heaven,’ according to Ludwig, ‘as one who fought to win he.vven’s seat.’ 

Nardsdnsa has already occurred as a name of Agni (I. 13. 3.) The meaning 
ajipears to be : through my invocation and praise I have reached the Gods, 
and with the eye of the spirit have looked on Agni in heaven. 



HYMN 20.] 


23 


THE RIGVEDA. 

HYMN XrX. Agni. Marut.. 

To this hvir sacrifioe to driiilc the milky draught thou art in- 
voked : 

0 Agni, with the Maruts come. 

^ No mortal man, no God exceeds thy mental power, O Mighty 
One : 

0 Agni, with the Maruts come : 

3 All Gods devoid of guile, who know the mighty region of mid- 

• air ; 

0 Agni, with those Maruts come. 

4 The terrible, who sing their song, not to be overcome by 

might ; 

O Agni, with those Maruts come. 

5 Brilliant, and awful in their form, mighty, devourers of their 

foes : 

0 Agni, with those Maruts come. 

6 Who sit as Deities in heaven, above the sky-vault’s luminous 

sphere : 

O Agni, with those Maruhs come. 

7 Who scatter clouds about the sky, away over the billowy sea : 
O Agni, with those Maruts come. 

8 Who with their bright beams spread them forth over the 

ocean in their miglit : 

0 Agni, with those Maruts come. 

9 For thee, to be thine early draught, I pour the Soma-mingled 

meath : 

0 Agni, with the Maruts come. 

HYMN XX. Ribhus. 

For the Celestial Race this song of praise which gives wealth 
lavishly 

Was made by singers with their lips. 

2 They who for Indra, with their mind, formed horses harnessed 
by a word, 

Attained by works to sac»*’fice. 


1 hor the Celestiil It tee. deintt/a Jdnniane, tlie divine chwa or i ace of the 
Ribhus, the three sons of iSiidh.uivMii who id Sriid to have been a descendant of 
^iigir.is. Tljey woi e 11 iniod severally Itibhu, Vibliv-ui, and V4j\a and styled 
Jollcctively Uibhus from the name of the eldest. ' Tlirongh their assidiioud 
peiforniaiiee of good works they obtained divinity and became entitled to 
feceivo pr.iise and adoration. They aie supposed to dwell in the solar sphere, 
f-nd there is an indistmet identitica. imi f*f them with the rays of thesnn : but, 
^aether typical or not, tliuy prove the adoii'.sion, at an earlyld.ite of the doc- 
trine that men might become divinitiea.’ — Wilaou. 



3 I’liey for the two Nasityas wrouglit a light cir moving every 

way: 

They formed a nectar-yielding cow. 

4 The Ilibhiis with eftectiial prayers, honest, with constant 

labour, made 

Their Sire and IMother }ouug again. i 

5 Together came your gladileniug drops with Indra by the 

Maruts giyt. 

With the Adityas, with the Kings. 

6 The sacrificial ladle, wrought newly by the God Tvash tar’s 

hand — 

Four ladles have ye made thereof. 

7 Vouchsixfe us wealth, to him who pours thrice seven libations, 

yea, to each 

Give wealth, pleased with our eulogies. 

8 As ministering Priests they held, by pious acts they won 

themselves, 

A share in sacrifice with Gods. 

HYMN XXI. Indra-Agiii. 

Indra and Agni I invoke; fain arc we for their song of praise : 

(diief Soma-drinkers arc they both. 

3 Tke tio tlje Aavms. I. 3. 3. Tao Ribhns imy have 

been the fiut t ) attetiii>t tlic bodily reprt>sentvtioii of the horses of India and 
the chariot of tlie Asvins. 

4 Sire and Mother: Heaven and Earth, which they, as deities of the 
seasons, refitsh and lestnre to yduth. 

5 ‘Accoidingto Asv.ildy.ui.i, as quoted by Sdyana, the libations oEleicd 
at the third daily (or ev- ning) .s.ic itice are pioenti d to India along with the 
Adityas, together with Uibhn, Viblivao, and Vaja, with Biiliaspati and the 
Visvadevas.’ — Wilson. 

G ‘TvasliUr, in the P.iuranik mythology, is the carpenter or artisan of 
the Gods ; so iSdyana says of him, he is a divinity whose ilnty, with relation to 
tlie Gods, is carpentry . . Sdyana also c.dls the llihhus the disciples of Tvash- 
par...The ac* asciibed to them in the text, of ni. iking one ladle lour, has, pio- 
bably, rather leference to some innovation in the objects of libation than to 
the mere multiplication of the wooden spoons used to pour out the Soma ji.ice. 
The Niti-Manjarl says that Ai-iii, coming to a saciifice which the liibhus ce- 
leljiateil, became .is one of them, and, therefoie, they made the ladle fouifold, 
that each might have his share.’ -Wilson. 

7 Or the ‘thiice seven' may refer to rdlndni, grant thrice seven rich trea- 
sures. 

1 Indra and Agni ; addressed conjointly as a dual deity, Indrftgni, that is, 
ludia-Agni. See. I. 17. 1. 



HYMN 22.] 


THE niGVEDA. 


25 


2 Praise ye, 0 men, and glorify Indra-Agni in the holy rites : 
Sing praise to them in sacred songs, 
f 3 Indra and Agni we invito, the Sonia*drinkers, for the fame 
Of Mitra, to tlic Soma-dranglit. 

4 Strong (h)ds, we bid them come to this libation that stands 
. • ready here : 

Indra and Agni, come to ns. 

5 Indra and Agni, mighty Lords of our assembly, crush the 

• fiends : 

Childless be tlic devouring ones. 

6 Watch ye, through this your truthfulness, there in the place 

of spacious view : 

Indra and Agni, send us bliss. 

HYMN XXII. Asvins and OtlTOrs, 

Waken the Asvin Pair who yoke their car at early mom : 
may they 

Aj)proach to drink this Soma juice. 

2 We call the As /ins Twain, the Cods borne in a noble car, the 

best 

Of charioteers, who reach the heavens. 

3 Dropping with honey is your whip, Asvins, and full of plea- 

santness : 

Sprinkle therewith the sacrfice. 

4 As ye go thither in your car, not far, 0 Asvins, is the home 
Of him who offers Soma juice. 

5 P\)r my protection I invoke the golden-handed Savitar : 

Ho knoweth, as a God, the place. 


3 F on the fame of Mitra : the meaning i.s not clear. Rl it ra appears to be 
^garded as the guardian of the world. Sdy.ina takes Mitra in the sense of 
lend, and refers it to the institntor of tlu» saciifice. 

5 Crash the fiends the Hdkshasas, demons who go abont at night, ensuar- 
ig and even devuming hinnan being.s, disturbing saciificea and devout men, 
id generally hostile to the Aijan race. 

6 la the place of spacious vieio Sdyana explain.^ ‘in the station which 
leeiniuently makes known the expeiienoe of results (of actions) that is in 
saveu (Svarga).’ In the place where what is hidden will be made known. 


^ Yoar whip : the madhulcast or Honey-whip of the Asvins is perhaps the 
iml.uing morning breeze. See Atharva-veda IX. 1, the whole of which 
Qn is a glorification of this wondrous whip. 

Savitar : the generator or vivifier, is a name of the Sun, in the Veda 
letiiucs identified with ^d SVi^^stimcs distinguished from Sfirya. 



26 TUB HYMNS OP [BOOK 1. 

6 That ho may send us succour, praise, the Waters’ Offspring 

Savitar ; 

Fain arc we for his holy ways. 

7 We call on him, distributer of wondrous bounty and of wealth, 
On Savitar who looks on men. 

8 Come hither, friends, and seat yourselves; Savitar, to be" 

praised by us, 

Giving good gifts, is beautiful. 

9 0 Agni, hither bring to us the willing Spouses of the Gods, 
And Tvashtar, to the Soma draught. 

10 Most yoiitlifiil Agni, hitherbring their Spouses, Ilotra, Bharati, 
Varutri, Dhishana, for aid. 

1 1 Spvwisos of Heroes, Goddesses, with whole wings may they come 

to us 

With great protection and with aid. 

12 TndrAyi, Varunini and Agnayi hither I invite, 

For weal, to drink the Soma juice. 

13 May Heaven and Eartli, the Mighty Pair, bedew for us our 

sacrifice, 

And feed us full with nourishments 

14 Their water rich with fatness, there in the Gandharva’s sted- 

fast place, 

The singers taste through sacred songs. 


Q The Waterf^' Offaprhu) Savitar: son or offspring of tlie Waters, apdni 
ndpdt, is an epithet in»>ie frequently applied to Agni. J^ilyana explains it 
otherwise as ‘ one who does not cherish (ua pfilakain) the water, but dries it 
up with his heat.’ 

10 Ilotrd is called the wife of Agni, or the personified invocation ; Bhdrati 

is Holy Speech or Prayer: is explained as ‘she who is to bachoseu, 

the excellent ; ’ an<l Dkishand is ^aul to be a syiionyiu of VAk oi VAgdevI 
the Goddess of Speech. 

11 With whole 7 oin(fs : literally, with undipped wings ; that is, swift a 
birds whose wiiign have not been out. 

12 lAdruiu, Vaiundly and Ayndyl- are respectively the consorts of ludn 
Vanina, and Agni. 

1 4 Their water rich in fatness : the fertilizing rain sent by Heaven an 
Eanli. The meaning .ippeais to l>e • the holy singers enjoy, as guerd«tn fc 
their hymns, tlie kindly rain and other gocnl gifts which are sent down frot 
the regions above by the great parents Heaven and Earth. 

The Gandharva's stedfast place : Though in later times the Qandharvas ar 
regaided as a class, in the Uigveda more than one is seldom mentioned. H 
is commonly <lesigiiated as ‘ the heavenly Gaiidh irva,’ whose babiration i 
the sl.y, and whose especial duty is to guard the heavenly Soma, whicfi th 
Gods obtain through bis permksiou. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


27 


HYMN 22.] 

15 Thornless be thou, 0 Earth, spread wide before us for a dwell- \< 

ing-place •. 

Vouchsafe us shelter broad and sure. 

16 The Gods be gracious unto us even from the place whence 

, • ‘ Vishnu strode ■ 

Through the seven regions of the earth ! 

17 Through all this worM strode Vishnu ; thrice his foot he 

♦pVanted, and the whole 
Was gathered in his footstep’s dust. 

18 Vishnu, the Guardian, he whom none deceiveth, made three 

steps ; thencefortli 
Estahlishing his high decrees. 

19 Look ye on Vishnu’s works, whereby the Friend of Indra, 

close allied, 

Hath let his holy ways be seen. 

20 The princes evermore behold that loftiest place where Vishnu is, 
Laid as it were an eye in heaven. 

21 This, Vishnu’s station most sublime, the singers, ever vigilant, 
Lovers of holy song, light up. 


16 Visima: This God, ‘ the all-pervading or encompassing,’ is not placed 
in the Voda in the foremost rank of deities, and, though frequently invoketl 
with Indra, Varuna, the Maruts, lludra, Vilyu and the Adilyas, his superiority 
to them is never stated, and lie is cvefli described in one place as celebrating 
the praise of Indra and deriving his power from that God. The point wdiich 
distinguishes him from the other Vedic deities is cliielly his striding over the 
heavens, which he is said to do in three paces, explained as denoting the three- 
fold manifestation of light in the form of fire, lightning and the sun, or as 
designating the three daily stations of the sun, in his rising, culminating and 
getting. 

Tile meaning of the stanza is obscure ; Wilson, after Sdyana, translates : 
May the Gods pieserve us (from that portion) of the eaith whence Vishnu, 
aided) by the seven metres, stepped, and notes : ‘ According to the Taitti* 
iyas, as cited by the scholiast, the Gods with Vishnu at their head subdued 
he invincible earth, using the seven metres of the Veda as their instruments, 
layan A conceives the text to allud ■ to the Trivi/,r(ima Avatdva. in which 
^ishnu traversed the throe worlds in three steps. The phrase “ preserve us 
rom the earth” implies according to the commentary,«»the hiiulerance of tlic 
in of those inhabiting tlie earth. 

17 I'ke lu/iofc was gathered in his footstep's dust : This is the meaning ac- 
^’ding to Sayana. Vishnu was so mighty that the dust raised by his foot- 
fcp envelofied the whole world, or the earth vvixs formed fi'om the dust of his 

Tidps. 

20 The princes : the Suris, the wealthy patrons of sacrifice. 

21 Light ap : glorify with their praises. 



28 


[nooK I 


THE HYMNS OP 

HYMN XXIIL VAyu and Others. 

Strong are the Sonias; come thou nigh; these juices have 
been mixt with milk : 

Drink, Vayu, the presented draughts. 

2 Botli Deities who touch the heaven, liidra and Vayu wc invoke. 
To drink of this our Soma juice. 

3 The singers, for their aid, invoke Indra and V^yu, swift as 

mind, 

The tliousand-eycd, the Lords of thouglit. 

4 Mitra and Varuna, renowned as Gods of consecrated might, 

We call to drink the Soma juict;. 

5 Those who by Law, uphold the Law, Lords of the shining light 

of Law, 

Mitra I call, and Varuna. 

6 Let Varuna be our chief defence, lot Mitra guard us with all 

aids ; 

Both make us rich exceedingly. 

7 In Ira, by M iruts girt, wo call to drink the Soma juice : may ho 
Sate him in union with his troop. 

8 Gods, Marut hosts whom Indra leads, distributers of Pushan’s 

gifts, 

Hearken ye all unto my cry. 

9 With coiupiering Indra for ally, strike Vritra down, ye boun- 

teous Gods : 

Let not the wicked master us. 

10 Wc call the Universal Gods, and Maruts to the Soma draught, 
For passing strong are Prisni’s Sons. 

1 1 Fierce comes the Maruts’ thundering voice, like that of con- 

querors, when ye go 
Forward to victory, 0 Men. 

12 Born of the laughing lightning, may the Maruts guard u« 

everywhere : 

May they l)e gracious unto us. 

This hymn is addrossed to VAyu, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, the Visve Devas, 
Pushan, the Waters, Agni. 

3 Lordu of thoiujht ■ dki, thought, means especially in the Veda holy 
thought, devotion, prayer, a religious rite, a sacrifice. 

8 Pdahan Ls the guardian of flocks and herds and of property in general. 

10 Priaowidtaroh, ; Pnsni’s sons, those who have for their mother Prisiii,! 
tlie many-coloured earth or the speckled cloud ; the Maruts, 

110 Men : 0 heroic Maruts. 



HYMN^^Z.] THE RIGVEDA. 29 

13 Like some lost animal, drive to us, bright Pushan, him who 

bears up heaven. 

Resting on many-coloured grass. 

14 Pushan the Bright has found the King, concealed and hidden 

•in a cave. 

Who rests on grass of many hues. 

15 And may he duly bring to me the six bound closely, through 

these drops, 

As* one who ploughs with steers brings corn. 

1 6 Along their paths the Mothers go, Sisters of priestly ministrants, 
Mingling their sweetness with the milk. 

17 May Waters gathered near tlie Sun, and those wherewith the 

Sun is joined, 

Speed forth this sacrifice of ours. 

18 I call the Waters, (Joddesses, wherein our cattle quench their 

thirst ; 

Oblations to the Streams be given. 

10 Amrit is in the Waters; in tbe Waters there is healing balm: 
Be swift, ye Oods, to give them ])raisc. 

20 Within tlie Waters — Soma thus hath told me — dwell all balms 

that heal, 

And Agni, he who blesseth all. The Waters hold all medicines. 

21 (0 Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm> 

• So that 1 long may sec the Sun. 

12 Wliatevcr sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought,^ 
If I have lied or falsely sworn. Waiters, remove it far from me., 

13 The Waters 1 this day have sought, and to their moisture! 

have we come : 

0 Agni, rich in milk, come thou, and with thy splendour 
cover me. 


13 U'nn who hcd) » up heaven : Som.t, the juice which prompts the world- 
a.uiimg det'ds of the duds, 

M The Kijif/ : Soma. 

'Ton eealed and hidden in a rave : in a place difficult of ‘access; the refer- 
la to the flight of Agni. See III. 9. 4. 

15 llie six : tlie six seasons, spring, summer, the rains, autumn, winter, the 
VH. Th roinjh these drops : May this libation induce him to bring, etc. 

16 The Mothers : the Waters, reg.nded as the close allies of the priests, as 
fv aio miuglt'd with the ingredicins of the Soma litiation. 

19 Amrit. n«'etar, the drink that confers immortality ; the Greek Ambrosia, 
10 hoina thus hath told me . Soina ih especially loid of medicinal pl.ute. 



30 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I. 

24 Fill me with splendour, Agiii ; give offspring and length of 
days ; the Gods 

Shall know me even as I am, and Agni, with the Rishis, know. 

HYMN XXIV. Varuna and OtljerR, 

Who now is he, what God among the Immortals, of whose’ 
auspicious name we may bethink us 1 
Who shall to mighty Aditi restore us, that I may See my 
Father and my Mother? 

2 Agni the God the first among the Immortals, — of his auspici- 

ous name let us bethink us. 

He shall to mighty Aditi restore us, that I may see my Father 
and my Mother. 

3 To thee, 0 Savitar, the Lord of precious things, who holpest us 
Continually, for our share we come — 

4 Wealth, highly lauded ere reproach hath fallen on it, which is 

laid, ‘,o^!3iA 

Free from all hatred, in thy hands. 


24 Indra with the : Perhaps the .sovi-n great Kmliis are iutonded,— 

Marie’ li, Atri, Augiias, Pulastya, Pulaha, Ktatu, and Vusishtha. 


This hymn, addropsed to Vainna, Prajfipati, Agni, Savitar, and Bhaga, i 
the first of a .scries attiibuted to S uiahs^^pa, the sun of Ajtgarta. The legciu 
\6 told in full detail in tlie Ait<xrey<i Brdhmana, A king, named Harisch.india 
worships Vaiuna in order to obtain a son, promising to saciifice to him hi 
tiifet-born. A sou is bum, named Rohita ; but the king delays the saciifici 
until Rohita grows up, when his father comm u ideates to him his intendc-i 
fate. Rohita refuses bubmi.- 5 sion, and spend.s scveial yeais in the forest awa; 
from home. There, at last, he meets with Ajig.u ta, a Rishi in great distte^ 
aiivl persuades him to part with his second sou Sunahsepa to be offeied, as 
substitute, to Vanma. Sunahs ‘pa is about to be sacrilicetl, when, by the nd 
vice of ViS\Ainitra, one of the officiating piiests, he appeals to the G ds, an< 
is liberated. See Wilson, Rigreda, i. p. bO,, Muir, 0. S. Texts, i. 355, 407 
413, and M. Muller, A. S. Literature, p. 408. 

1 Mighty Aditi: Professor Muller {Trans, of the Rigveda, 1. 230 
sa^s that ‘Aditi, an ancient god or goddess, is in reality the earliest naiii 
invented to express the Infinite; not the Intinite as the result of a long pn' 
cess of abstract reasoning, but the visilde Infinite, the endless expanse beyoiK 
the earth, beyond the clouds, beyond the sky.’ 

‘ These words [Who shall to mighty Aditi restore us ? ] may be under^tooi 
as spoken Viy some one in danger of death ..who prayed to be permitted agaii 
to behold the face of nature... If we should understand the father and mothc* 
whom the suppliant is anxious to behold, as meaning heaven and eaith, i 
would become still more probable that Aditi is to be understood as meaning 
n ttuie,’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts, v. 45. 

Sayan i explains Aditi in the text as Eaith ■ Roth, as freedom or security 
Bcufey, ab bmlefaiiiieBs, 



HYMN 24.] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


31 


5 Through thy protection may we come to even the height of 
^ afilucijce 

Which Bhaga hath dealt out to us. ^ 

6 Ne’er iiavc those birds that fly through air attained to thy 

•high dominion or thy might or spirit; 

Nor these the waters that flow on for ever, nor hills, abaters 
of the wind’s wip fury. 

7 Varuna, King, of hallowed might, sustiiineth erect the Tree’s 

stem in tlie baseless re.^‘ion. 

Its rays, whose root is high above, stream downward. Deep 
may they sink within us, and be hidden. 

8 King Varuna hath made a spacious pathway, a pathway for 

the Sun wlierein to travel. 

Where no way was he made him set his footstep, and warned 
afar whate’er afflicts the spirit. 

9 A hundml hulms are thine, 0 King, a thousand ; deep and 

wide-reaching also bo thy favours. 

Far from us, far away drive thou Destruction. Put from us 
e’en the sin we have committed. 

10 Whither by day dep trt the constellations that shine at niglit, \ 
set high ill heaven above us? ' ' 

Varuna’s holy laws remain unweakened, and through the night 
the Aloon moves on in splendour. 

1 I ask this of thee with my prayer adoring ; thy worshipper 
craves this with his oblation. 

Varun%, stay thou here and be not angry ; steal not our life ^ 
from us, O thou Wide-Kuler. 

i2 Nightly and daily this one thing they tell me, this too the 
thought of mine own heart repcateth. 

May he to whom prayed fettered Sunahsepa, may he the 
Sovran Varuna release us. 


5^^ Bhaga hath dealt out to us : the riches which the distributer of 
altli, J3Laga, hate or Fortune, has allotted to us. 

^ Vanasya stdpam in the text app irs to mean ‘ the stem of the tree ’ and 
8 explanation ‘ the mass oi pile of light' seems forced and uuna’turd 

rna but perhaps the ancient myth of the world-tree, the 
irce of life, may be alluded to. ’ ® 

l.nitiJif' m’ Personified, the Goddess of death aud 

luptiou. SAyana pdpadevatd, the deity of sin. 

0 Varuria^s holy laios : Varuna is the chief of the lords of natural order 

1 aaivity displays itself preeminently in the control of the most regular 
orneua of nature. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 97 f. ^The 

laws of Vaiu’na are inviolable, aud 

cousv-ellations will duly reappear. 



32 


THE IlYMH^ OF 


[BOOK I. 

13 Bound to throe pilkrs captured Suiiahscpa thus to the Aditya 

made his supplication. 

Him may the Sovran Vanina deliver, wise, ne’er deceived, 
loosen the bonds that bind him. 

14 With bending down, oblations, sacrifices, 0 Vanina, we deprci, 

cate thine anger : 

Wise Asura, thou King of wide dominion, loosen the bonds of 
sins by us committed. 

15 Loosen the lionds, 0 Varuna, that hold me, loosen the bonds 

above, between, and under. 

So ill thy holy law may we made sinless belong to Aditi, 0 
thou Aditya. 

HYMN XXV. Varnn. 

Whatever law of thine, 0 (Jod, 0 VaruiiA, as we are men, 
Day after day we violate, 

2 Clive us not as a prey to death, to be destroyed by thee ii 

wrath, 

To thy fierce anger when dis])leascd. 

3 To gain thy mercy, Varuna, with hymns we bind thy heart, 

j^sjnnds 

The cli.iriotcer his tethered horse. 

4 They flee from me dispirited, bent only on obtaining wealth. 
As to their nests the birds of air. 

5 When shall w’o bring, to bo appeased, the Hero, Lord of 

warrior might. 

Him, the far-seeing Varuna? 

6 This, this with joy they both accept in common : never d( 

they fail 

The ever-faithful worshipper. 

7 He know's the path of birds that lly through heaven, ami, 

Sovran of the sea. 

He knows the ships that arc thereon. 


13 Three pillars, or trees, apparently the Saciificial [)ost, a sort of tripod. 

The Aditya Varuna, <>ne of the sons of Aditi. Sac I. U. 3. 

14 Asura: an incorporeal, Hpiiitual, divine beiiii' ; the Zend Ahiira. 

15 The bonds • according to S%ana, the ligatures fastening the head, t1i| 
waist and the feet. But the bonds of sin are liere intended. 

May we belong to Aditi : May we be restored to fieedom and the enjoyrae 
of nature. ; 

4 They flee: apparently, my enemies; but the passage is very obscure. 

6 Both: Varuna and .\iitra. Why Mitra is thus suddenly introduced* 
not deal. Tlie stanza bieaks the connexion between stanzas 5 and 7 ; and 
proVi.ibly an m^rpolation. 

7 Varum i-> King of the air and of the .sea, the latter Icing often regaid 
as ideutiCcd with the foimci. 



SYUN 25.] 


THE MIQVEDA. 


38 


8 True to his holy law, he knows the twelve moons with their 

progeny : 

He knows the t?ioon of later birth. 

9 He knows the pathway of the wind, the spreading, high, and 

.mighty wind : 

• He knows the Gods who dwell above. 

0 Vanina, true to holy law, sits down among his people ; he, 
Most wise, sits there to govern all. 

1 Frt)m thence perceiving he beholds all wondrous things, both 

what hath been, 

And what hereafter will be done. 

2 May that Aditya, very wise, make fair paths for us all our days : 
May he prolong our lives for us. 

3 Varuna, wetging gp M^ ^ i p^ jl^h ath clad him in a shining robe: 
His spie^ i^^s^teyr^M 

4 The Goa whom enemies threaten not, nor those who tyrannize 

o’er men, 

Nor those whose minds are bent on wrong. 

5 He who gives glory to mankind, not glory that is incomplete, 
To our own bodies giving it. 

6 Yearning for the wide-seeing One, my thoughts move 

unto him. 

As kine unto their pastures move. 

7 Once more together let us speak, because my meath is brought : 

priest-like 

Thou eatest what is dear to thee. 

8 Now saw I him whom all may see, I saw his car above the 

earth : 

He hath accepted these my songs. 

>, Varnna, hear this call of mine : be gracious unto us this day 
Longing for help I cried to thee. 

) Thou, 0 wise God, art Lord of all, thou art the King of earth 
and heaven : 

Hear, as thou goest on thy way. 

8^ The twelve moons with their progeny : the twelve months with the days 
lich are their offspring. 

The moon of later birth: the thirteenth, the supplementary or intercalary 
)nth of the luni-solar year. 

3 Hie spies: Vanina’s Spies, messengers or angels, are probably the rest of 
Adityas. See M. MUller, A. S. Literaturej p. 536. 

7 My meath: or honey (mAdhu), the libation of Soma juice. 

8 Now saw I him : I saw Vi^oa, visible to the mental eye of his wor- 

[ppers. - ' 

‘ 8 




84 Tff£ BTMNB OF IMOM I 

21 Release us from the upper bond, untie the bond between, and 
loose 

The bonds below, that I may live. 

HYMN XXVI. . Agni 

0 WORTHY of oblation. Lord of prospering powers, assume tfo^ 
robes, 

And offer this our sacrifice. 

2 Sit, ever to be chosen, as our Priest, most youthful, througl 

our hymns, 

0 Agni, through our heavenly word. 

3 For here a Father for his son. Kinsman for kinsman worshippeth 
And Friend, choice-worthy, for his friend. 

4 Here let the foe-destroyers sit, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 

Like men, upon our sacred grass. 

5 0 ancient Herald, be thou glad in this our rite and fellowship : 
Hearken thou well to these our songs. 

6 Whate’er in this perpetual course we sacrifice, to God anc 

God, 

That gift is offered up in thee. 

7 May he be our dear household Lord, Priest, pleasant and 

choice-worthy : may 
We, with bright fires, be dear to him. 

8 The Gods, adored with brilliant fires, have granted precious 

wealth to us : 

So, with bright fires, we pray to thee. 

9 And, 0 Immortal One, so may the eulogies of mortal men 
Belong to us and thee alike. 

10 With all thy fires, 0 Agni, find pleasure in this our sacrifice. 
And this our speech, 0 Son of Strength. 


21 Release vs from the upper bond ; see I. 24. 15. 


1 Assume thy robes: clothe thyself in thy vesture of flames. 

2 Most youthful : continually renewed for sacrifice, either from the house 
hold fire or by repeated attrition. 

3 here a Father for his son : Agni, who stands In the place of fathei 
kinsman, and friend to his worshipwr. 

4 Aryaman; the name of an Aditya commonly invoked together wit 
Varuna and Mitra. He is said to preside over twilight. 

5 lake men: or, according to B^ya^a, aa they sate at the sacrifice 
Manus, who is the same as Menu. 

10 Son of Strength : the appellation is of fiyquent occurrence, and is sonu 
times applied to Indra also as a specially mighty Gk)d, The Cxpreesion, u 
plied to Agni, aludes to the stren^h employe m rubbing tcgethei^ the t| 
pieces of wood to generate fire. i 



Bmif 27 .] 


TBB niOVBBA. 


se 

HYMN XXVII. Agni. 

I With worship will I glorify thee, Agni, like a long-teiled steed, 
^ Imperial Lord of sacred rites. 

2 May the far-striding Son of Strength, bringer of great 
, • felicity, 

Who pours his gifts like rain, be ours. 

3 Lord of all life, from near, from far, do thou, 0 Agni evermore 
Protect us from the sinful man. 

4 0 Agni, graciously announce this our oblation to the Gods, 
And this our newest song of praise. 

5 Give us a share of strength most high, a share of strength 

that is below, 

A share of strength that is between. 

6 Thou dealest gifts, resplendent One ; nigh, as with waves of 

Sindhu, thou 

Swift streamest to the worshipper. 

7 That man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in 

the fi^t, 

Agni, or urgest to the fray. 

8 Him, whosoever he may be, no man may vanquish, mighty One: 
Nay, very glorious power is his. 

9 May he who dwells with all mankind bear us with war-steeds 

through the fight. 

And with the singers win the spoil. 

LO Help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, this eulogy to 
Rudra, him 

Adorable in every house. 

il May this our God, great, limitless, smoke-bannered, excel- 
lently bright. 

Urge us to strength a nd holy thought. 

^ Agni, or Fire, is likened to ahorse, probably, 

im^tucwity; and his long flames, curled and driven by 
. .compart to the horse's flowing tail. Sflyana explains : scat- 

mlSeTim^^ flamea m a horse brushes away the flies that 

““J- for any river, and the 

pression mean, with great abundance. 

I *** *%«■>.• the priesta who eing hymns of preise at the sacriBce. 
StTme hX^: nTto*";!^!; to *0 t^e 9ishi or 

or HowIot, i» heie a name of Agni, on account of 



S6 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 1. 

^2 Like some rich Lord of men may he, A^i, the banner of 
the Gods, 

Refulgent, hear us through our lauds. 

13 Glory to Gods, the mighty and the lesser, glory t6 Gods the^ 
younger and the elder ! 

Let us, if we have power, pay the Gods worship : no better 
prayer than- this, yo Gods, acknowledge, 

HYMN XXVIII. lBdra,Etc. 

Thebe where the broad-based stone is raised on high to press 
the juices out, 

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. 

2 Where, like broad hips, to hold the juice, the platters of the 
press are laid, 

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. 


3 There where the woman marks and learns the pestle’s constant 
rise and fall, « 

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. 


4 Where, as with reins to guide a horse, they bind the churning* 
staff with cords, 

0 Indra, drink with eager thirst the droppings which the 
mortar sheds. i 


5 If of a truth in every house, 0 Mortar, thou art set for 
work, 

/ Here give thou forth thy clearest sound, loud as the drum 
. conquerors. 


12 The banner of the Gods : who like a banner brings the Gods together ; 
it may be rendered ‘ the herald of the Gods/ he who notifies tq them, 
SAyana explains it. 

13 These distinctions of greater and lesser, older and younger Gods, or 
we should say, angels, are nowhere further explained, ^unal^sepa, it is sa 
by the advice of Agni, worships the Visvedevas or the Univers^ Gods. 1 
Visvedevas, as a separate troop or class of Gods, are ten in number, especia 
worshipped at funeral obsequies, and moreover, according to the laws of Mai 
entitled to daily ofierings. 


This hymn— a song sung during the preparation of the Soma juioe— is si 
to be addressed to Indra, and to the pestle and mortar and other utene 
used in the work. 

2 platters : two shallow plates, one being used as a receiver and the otl 
as a cover. 

They bind the chuming-staff with cords : the churning -stick is moved 
a rope passed round its handle and round a pmt uSed as a pivot. J 

5 0 Mortar: according to SAyapathe divinities presiding over the mori 
and pestle, and not the implements themselves, are addressed. 



nitMN 29.] TBS BIGVBjyA, 87 

6 0 Sovran of the Forest, as the wind blows soft in front of 

thee, 

1 Mortar, for Indra press thou forth the Soma juice that he may 

drink. 

7 Best strength-givers, ye stretch wide jaws, 0 Sacrificial Imple- 
. • ments, 

Like two bay horses champing herbs. 

8 Ye Sovrans of the Forest, both swift, with swift pressers press 

to-day 

Sweet Soma juice for Indra^s drink. 

9 Take up in beakers what remains : the Soma on the filter 

pour, 

• And on the ox-hide set the dregs. 

HYMN XXIX. Indra. 

0 SoMA-DHiNKER, ever true, utterly hopeless though we be, 

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

2 0 Lord of Strength, whose jaws are strong, great deeds are 

thine, the powerful : 

Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kige, 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

3 Lull thou asleep, to wake no more, the pair who on each 

other look : 

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine, 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

1 .Hero, let hostile spirits sleep, and every gentler genius wake : 
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine. 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

[6 ’ 0 Sovran of the Forest : {vanaspati) a large tree ; used in this place, by 
itonymy, for the mortar, and in verse 8, in the dual number, for the mortar 
d pestle. 

7 Strength-ffivers : explained by SAyana as especially givers of food. The 

0 platters mentioned above are probably meant. When the upper platter 
^ised to receive the juice of the Soma sticks the aperture between the two 
ike a horse’s mouth when he ohews succulent grass. 

1 This verse is addressed to the ministering priest. What remains : after 
libation. The filter or sieve was used to ptrify the juice before it was 
red into the receptacle. Ox-hide : laid under the morti:. 


5^ pair vfho on each other look : * The text is very elliptical and obscure. 
I, literally ; Put to sleep the two reciprocxdly looking ; let them sleep, not 
g awakened. The Scholiast calls them tne two female messengers of 
'a [the Qod of the Dead].* WU6qu» 



38 


TkE HYMNS OP 


[mri 

5 Destroy this ass, 0 Indra, who in tones discordant brays to thee * 
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beau^ous horses and of kin 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy Qne. 

6 Far distant on the forest fall the tempest in a circling course 
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kin 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

7 Slay each reviler, and destroy him who in secret injures us : 
Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kir 
In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

HYMN XXX. Indr 

Wb seeking strength with Soma-drops fill full your Indi 
like a well, 

Most liberal, Lord of Hundred Powers, 

[ 2 Who lets a hundred of the pure, a thousand of the milk-blei 
draughts 

Flow, even as down a depth, to him ; 

3 When for the strong, the rapturous joy he in this mann( 
hath made room 
Within his belly, like the se a. 

This is thine own?' ’thou "Jiawest near, as turns a pigeon t 
his mate : 

Thou carest too for this our prayer. 

5 0 Hero, Lord of Bounties, praised in hymns, may power an 

joyfulness 

Be his who sings the laud to thee. 

6 Lord of a Hundred Powers, stand up to lend us succour i 

this fight : 

In others too lot us agree. 

7 In every need, in every fray we call as friends to bucqout us 
Indra the mightiest of all. 


5 Thii ; our adversary, says the Scholiast. * Therefore is he called t 
ass, as braying, or uttering h^h sounds intolerable to hear.* 

6 For distant on the forest ; may the cyclone or tempest expend its fury < 

the wood, and not come nigh us. The word hundtinSeMi which I have wnde 
ed in accordance with S&yana, means elsewhere a - certain kind of eoimal, 
lieard according to S&yana. passap may perhaps mean, *may tha wii 
fall on the forest with the Icu^findchtf whatever that may be^ . ' 

1 Lord of Hundred Powert : ^takratu. 

3 The etrong, the rapturoue joy : the exhilarating Soma juio^ 

4 This it thine om> : this Soma libation is for thee alone. 

6 tn this fght ; the hymn is a prayer for aid in a coming battle. 




arm so.] the EJCfVEHJi, 

8 If he will hear us let him come with succour of a thousand kinds, 
And all that strengthens, to our call. 

\ 9 1 call him mighty to resist^ the Hero of our ancient home, 
Thee whom my sire invoked of old. 

10 We pray to thee, 0 much-invoked, rich in all precious gifts, 
0 Friend, 

Kind God to those who sing thy praise. 

110 Soma-drinker, Thunder-armed, Friend of our lovely-featured 
•dames 

And of our Soma-drinking friends. 

12 Thus, Soma-drinker, may it be: thus. Friend, who wieldest 

thunder, act 

To aid each wish as we desire. 

13 With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening 

things wherewith, 

Wealthy in food, we may rejoice. 

1 4 Like thee, thyself, the singers* Friend, thou movest, as it were, 

besought. 

Bold One, the axle of the car, 

15 That, Satakratu, thou to grace and please thy praisers, as it were, 
Stirrest the axle with thy strength. 

16 With champing, neighing, loudly-snorting horses Indra hath 

ever won himself great treasures. 

A car of gold hath he whose deeds are wondrous received from 
us, and let us too receive it. 

17 Come, Asvins, with enduring strength wealthy in horses and 
[ in kine, 

^ And gold, 0 ye of wondrous deeds. 


^ T?ie Hero of our arioient home : the tutelary God of our family. 
ll Friend of our lovdy -featured damee : the meaning of ifiprintndm in the 
ext is very dpubtful. Wilson, following S&yana, paraphrases : (bestow upon) 
IS, thy friends, (abundance of cows) with projecting jaws. Benfey takes the 
7ord to mmn bmutiful women. Ludwig suggests helmeted, from a possible 
arm fijprtnt, i^reeing with vUdm, of men, understood. Roth considers the 
eading to be ntulty, and sugg^ts, 8ijorinimn,Jn the vocative case, agreeing 
^ith Soma-drinker. 


14 The linw in this and the following stazuea referring to the axle and the 
iimot or wain are somewhat obscure and have been variously interpreted, 
jidwig’s explanation, which I follow, appears to be the simplest and the best. 

expression, movest, or stirrest, the axle, which is the &mxest and strongest 
pi) of the car, is introded to signify India’s great strength exerted at his 
torshippers’ prayer. 

1 16 The hymn r^ajly on^ mth the prepeding stanza. The <jar of gold given 
} Inara is the hynm. ew J)i gold prayed for is abundant wawtn. 


18 Your chariot yoked for both alike, immortal, ye of mighty acts, 

Travels, 0 Asvins, in the sea. i 

1 9 High on the forehead of the Bull one chariot wheel ye ever keep, ^ 
The other round the sky revolves. 

20 What mortal, 0 immortal Dawn, enjoyeth theel Where 

lovest thou ? • • 

To whom, 0 radiant, dost thou go ? 

21 For we have had thee in our thoughts whether anear or far away, 
Red-hued and like a dappled mare. 

22 Hither, 0 Daughter of the Sky, come thou with these thy 

strengthenings. 

And send thou riches down to us. 

HYMN XXXI. Agni. 

Thou, Agni, wast the earliest Angiras, a Seer ; thou wast, a 
God thyself, the Gods^ auspicious Friend. 

After thy holy ordinance the Maruts, sage, active through 
wisdom, with their glittering spears, were born. 

2 0 Agni, thou, the best and earliest Angiras, fulfillest as a Sage 

the holy law of Gods, 

Sprung from two mothers, wise, through all existence spread, 
resting in many a place for sake of living man. 

3 To M&tarisvan first thou, Agni, wast disclosed, and to Vivas- 

v&n through thy noble inward power. 

Heaven and Earth, Vasu ! shook at the choosing of the PriCst ; 
the burthen thou didst bear, didst worship mighty Gods. 

18 The sea ; the ocean of air. 

19 T/ie Bull : apparently the Sun. The car of the Aevine standa at hh i 
head or in front of him, and the Asvins precede him in his course rounc 
heaven. But the meaning is not very clear. 

20 We are reminded of the old Grecian myth of Eos and Tithonus. Ushaa 
Dawn, or Morning, is the daughter of personified Heaven, Dyaus, or Dyu. ' 

This hymn, and the four following, are ascribed to Hirapyastfipa, soi 
of Angiras. 

1 ThoUf AffrU, wast the earliest Angiras : the Angirases are the most im 
portant priestly family mentioned in the Veda. See I. 1. 6. 

With their glittering spears^: the spears of the Maruts or Storm-Gods m 
lightning flashes. 

2 The holy law of Gods : sacrifice to the Gods, which Agni performs. 

Sprung from two mothers : from the two pieces of wood used to prepuce 

3 Mdtari^van:t\Le name of a divine being described ini. 60.1 as oringing th< 
hidden Agni to Bhrigu, and identified by S&yapa with Vftyu ^he Gk»d of yrind 

Vivasvdn : * the brilliant he appears to be the God of daylight and th< 
morning sun, the personification of all manifestations of light. He is said tc 
be the mther of Yama, and the Gods are called his offspring. 

Vam : (good) often used as a name or epithet of Agni The Vasus as a olass 
of Gods, eight in number, were at first per^nifioations of natural phenomenal 




THS RtOVEDA, 


41 


HYMN 31.] 

, 4 Agni thou madest heaven to thunder for mankind ; thou, yet 
more pious, for pious Puriirav4s. 

f When thou art rapidly freed from thy parents, first eastward 
' they bear thee round, and, after, to the west. 

5 Thou, Agni, art a Bull who makes our store increase, to be 
' • invoked by him who lifts the ladle up. 

Well knowing the oblation with the hallowing word, uniting all 
who live, thou lightenest first our folk. 

6 Agfii, thou savest in the synod when pursued e’en him, far- 

seeing One ! who walks in evil ways. 

Thou, when the heroes fight for spoil which men rush round, 
slayest in war the many by the hands of few. 

7 For glory, Agni, day by day, thou liftest up the mortal man 

to highest immortality, — 

Even thou who yearning for both races givest them great 
bliss, and to the prince grantest abundant food. 

0 Agni, highly lauded, make our singer famous that he may 
win us store of riches : 

May we improve the rite with new performance. 0 Earth and 
Heaven, with all the Gods, protect us. 

0 blameless Agni lying in thy Parents’ lap, a God among the 
Gods, be watchful for our good. 

Former of bodies, be the singer’s Providence : all good things 
#hast thou sown for him, auspicious One ! 

Agni, thou art our Providence, our Father thou : we are thy 
brethren and thou art our spring of life. 

In thee, rich in good heroes, guard of high decrees, meet hund- 
red, thousand treasures, 0 infallible ! 


Pui'Hravds : son of Budha. He is said to have instituted the three sacri- 
1 ’fires. • Agni, to reward him, sent thunder the forerunner of rain. 
reed from thy jparenta : produced And separated from the fire-sticks. 
i^stward they hear thee : the fire is first applied to light the Ahavanlya fire 
then the Gdrhapatya. 

A Bull : exceedingly strong. 

ith the hcdlowiny word ; the exclamation Vathai (may he (Agni) bear 
» the Gods), used at the moment of pouring the sacrificial oil or clarified 
Br on the fiw. 

Agnif thm savest in the synod : the viddtha, synod or sacrificial assembly, 
|b to have been regarded as an inviolable asylum. 

; Gk)dB and men. 

P prince : the Sfiri, the nobje or eminent man who institutes and pays 
Purges of the sacrifice. 

Parents : here said to meaij Heaven and Earth. 
of bodies : gim of children, 




42 TffS fftMNS OF [BOOM I 

1 1 Thee, Agni, have the Gods made the first living One for living 

man, Lord of the house of Nahusha. * ^ 

!]& they made the teacher of the son^ of men, what time a 
was bom to the father of my race. 

12 Worthy to be revered, 0 Agni, God, preserve our wealthy 

patrons with thy succours, and ourselves. ^ , 

Guard of our seed art thou, aiding our cows to bear, mcea* 
santly protecting in thy holy way. 

13 Agni, thou art a guard close to the pious man; kindled art 

thou, four-eyed 1 for him who is unarmed. 

With fond heart thou acceptest e^en the poor man^s prayer, 
when he hath brought his gift to gain security. 

14 Thou, Agni gainest for the loudly-praising priest the highest 

wealth, the object of a man^s desire. 

Thou art called Father, caring even for the weak, and, wisest, 
to the simple one thou teachest lore. 

15 Agni, the man who giveth guerdon to the priests, like well- 

sewn armour thou guardest on every side. 

He who with grateful food shows kindness in his house, an 
offerer to the living, is the type of heaven. j 

16 Pardon, we pray, this sin of ours, 0 Agni, — the path whi( 

we have trodden, widely straying, 

Dear Friend and Father, caring for the pious, who speede 
nigh and who inspirest mortals. 

17 As erst to Manus, to Yay&ti, Angiras, so Angiras ! pure ^gn 

come thou to our hall. 

Bring hither the celestial host and seat them here upon tl 
sacred grass, and offer what they love, 

18 By this our prayer be thou, 0 Agni, strengthened, pray( 

made by us after our power and knowledge. 

Lead thou us, therefore, to increasing riches ; endow us wi 
thy strength-bestowing favour. 


11 Nahusha : one of the great progenitors of the human race. 

Jld: the personification of prayer, and the first teacher of the rules 
sacrifice. 

What time a Son was horn : this Son is Agni himself. 

Hiranyastfipa, the HUehi of the hymn, is the son or descendant of Angii^ 
who, as one of the first introducers of the sacrtfidal .fire and the rites 
worship, is r^rded as the generator or father of A^pi. The ine an!)Pg of \ 
verse is that Agni was app<^ted priest, and teaeW of the rulsa ^ div 
worship in the earliest time when Agni was first bom on earth as saorifii:^ i 

13 P<yu/r‘^ed : illuminating the four oardlmd points, or looking in all 

15 4n offerer to the living : probably, one who offers food and hdipita] 
to n htttisan being, the worship of man, of Manu. Or It may 

as Ludwig auggests, one who offers a sacrifice that transports the lacrr 
at OUO& living, to h^ven. 

10 Faydli ; a celebrated king, one of the sons of Kahuidua 


HTMN 81] 


THE RIGYEDA, 
HYMN XXXII. 


48 




Indra« 


I WILL declare the ^nly deeds of Indra, the first that he 
achieved, the Thumrer-wielder. 

He slew the Dragon, then disclosed the waters, and cleft the 
•channels of the mountain torrents. 

* 2 He slew the Dragon lying on the mountain : his heavenly bolt 
of thunder Tvashter fashioned. 

Like lowing kine in rapid flow descending the waters glided 
’downward to the ocean. 


3 Impetuous as a bull, he chose the Soma, and in three sacred 

beakers drank the juices. 

Maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon, and smote to 
death this firstborn of the dragons. 

4 When, Indra, thou hadst slain the dragons^ firstborn, and 

overcome the charms of the enchanters, 

Then, giving life to Sun and Dawn and Heaven, thou foundest 
not one foe to stand against thee. 

5 Indra with his own great and deadly thunder smote into pieces 

Vritra, worst of Vritras. 

As trunks of trees, what time the axe hath felled them, low 
on the earth so lies the prostrate Dragon. 

6 He, like a mad weak warrior, challenged Indra, the great 
^ impetuous many-slaying Hero. 

He, brooking not the clashing of the weapons, crushed — Indra’s 
foe — the shattered forts in falling. 

f Footless and handless still he challenged Indra, who smote 
him with his bolt between the shoulders. 

Emasculate yet claiming manly vigour, thus Vritra lay with 
scattered limbs dissevered. 


I ‘ In this and subsequent Saktas we have an ample elucidation of the ori- 
al purport of the legend of Indra’s slaying Vritra, converted by the Paurft- 
^ writers into a litei^ contest between Indra and an Asura, or chief of the 
from vhat in the Vedas is merely an allegorical narrative of the pro- 
Ition of rain. Vritra, sometimes <tl8o named Ahi, is nothing more than the 
hunulation of vapour, condensed or figuratively shut up in, or obstructed 
[a cloud. Indra, with his thunderbolt, or atmospheric or electrical influ- 
B, divides the aggre^ted ma(ss, and vent is given to the rain which then 
Bends upon the earth.' WUiwn. 

: Ahi, literally a serpent. TmsUar is the artist of the Gods. 
wmaghwiKM : the weidthy and libera] ; Lord B<mntiful. 
fThe eHmnt cf Me mckmnivrB : magical or supematund powers ascribed 

P hoaksT^ : trtkadrt^hu ; according to EM^yana, on the Trikad' 

p, the nxBt three dayr of the Abhiplava.ceremQny, 



ii TBE BYMS8 Of lEOOB I 

8 There as he lies like a bank-bursting river, the vraters taking 

courage flow above him. 

The Dragon lies beneath the feet ^ torrents which Vyitra 
with his greatness had encompassed. 

9 Then humbled was the strength of Vvitra’s mother: Indra 

hath cast his deadly bolt against her. * * 

The mother was above, the son was under, and like a cow 
beside her calf lay Dinu. 

10 Rolled in the midst of never-ceasing currents flowing without 

a rest for ever onward, 

The waters bear off* Vritra’s nameless body : the foe of Indr? 
sank to during darkness. 

11 Guarded by Ahi stood the thralls of Dasas, the waters stayec 

like kine held by the robber. 

But he, when he had smitten Vritra, opened the cave where 
in the floods had been imprisoned. 

12 A horse’s tail wast thou when he, 0 Indra, smote on thy bolt 

thou, God without a second, 

Thou hast won back the kine, hast won the Soma; thou hasi 
let loose to flow the, Seven Rivers. 

13 Nothing availed him lightning, nothing thunder, hailstorm oi 

mist which he bad spread around him : 

When Indra and the Dragon strove in battle, Maghavan gained 
the victory for ever. ^ 

14 Whom sawest thou to avenge the Dragon, Indra, that fear 

possessed thy heart when thou hadst slain him; 

That, like a hawk affrighted through the regions, thou crossedst 
nine-and-ninety flowing rivers 1 

9 Ddim : according to S&yana, the mother of Vritra. 

11 Thralh of Ddsas: in the power of Vritra and his allies. Pftsa is a 

G eneral name applied in the Veda to certain evil beings or demons, hostile to 
ndra and to men. It means, also, a savage, a barbarian, one of the non 
Aryan inhabitants of India. 

The robber : panl (literally, one who barters and traffics) means a miser, a 
niggard ; an impious man wno gives little or nothing to the Oods. The wprd 
is used also as the name of a class of envious demons watching over treasure^ 
and as an epithet of the fiends who steal cows and hide tlwm in mountaii 
caverns. 

12 A hor8€*9 tail wot thou: destroying thy enemies u evilly as a hors 
sweeps away flies with his taU, Cf. 1. 27. 1. 

The Seven Rivere : according to Professor Ma]t Uilller, the Indus, the five river 
of the Panjab (Vitastfi, Asiknl, Parush^ ^^tudri) and the Sarasvat 
Lassen and Ludwig put the Kubhfi in the place of the last>named. 

14 This fight of Indra is frequently alluded to. It is said that he fl«^ 
thinUng that he had committed a great sin in killing Vritra. 

Ni/nc-a'nd’nvnety ; used indefinitriy for a great number* 




THE jilOVSDA. 


45 


hymn 33.] 

16 Indra is King of all that moves and moves not, of creatures 
tame and homed, the Thunder-wielder. 
i Over all living men •he rules as Sovran, containing all as 
" spokes within the felly. 

HYMN XXXIII. Indm. 

Comb, fain for booty let us seek to Indra : yet more shall he 
increase his care that guides us. 

Will not the Indestructible endow us with perfect knowledge 
* of this wealth, of cattle 1 

2 I fly to him invisible Wealth-giver as flies the falcon to his 

cherished eyrie. 

With fairest hymns of praise adoring Indra, whom those 
who laud him must invoke in battle. 

3 Mid all his host, ho bindeth on the quiver ; he driveth cattle 

from what foe he pleaseth : 

Gathering up great store of riches, Indra, be thou no 
trafficker with us, most mighty. 

4 Thou slowest with thy bolt the wealthy Dasyu, alone, yet 

going with thy helpers, Indra ! 

Far from the floor of heaven in, all directions, the ancient 
riteless ones fled to destruction. 

5 Fighting with pious worshippers, the riteless turned and 

fled, Indra ! with averted faces. 

When thou, fierce Lord of the Bay Steeds, the Stayer, 
blewest from earth and heaven and sky the godless. 

5 They mot in fight the army of the blameless: then the 
Navagvas put forth all their power. 

^ They, like emasculates with men contending, fled, conscious, 
by steep paths from Indra, scattered. 

1 Pain for booty : gavyantafy^ literally seeking or eager for kine, that is, 
3ty or wealth consisting chiefly of cattle. 

3 Be thou no trafficker 'witK us : Do not deal illiberally with us like a 
^ty trader ; do not give sparingly, nor demand too much in return. 

4 The wealthy Dasyu : according to S4yana, ‘ Vritra the robber,’ the 
hholder of tlm fertilizing rain. The Dasyus are also a class of demons, 
plies of gods and men, and sometimes the word means a savage, a 
barian. 

''he omieTa riteless ones : the followers of Vritra; here apparently identified 
h indigenous races who had not adopted, or were hostile to, the ntual of the 

Stayer: he who stands firm in battle. The word in the text 
jfer appears to correspond exactly with the Latin Stator (Jupiter Stator), 
^nfey, OiHent und Occident, 1. 48. ' 

^ The Navagvas : the name of a mythological family often associated with 
I of Angiras, and described as sharing m Indra’s battles, regulating the 
phip of the Gods, etc, 



4« TSB OF {BOOS I 

7 Whether they weep or laugh, thou hast o’erthrown them, 

0 Indra, on the sky’s extremest limit* 

The Dasyu thou hast burned from heaven, and welcomed 
the prayer of him who pours the juice and lauds thee, 

8 Adorned with their array of gold and jewels, they o’er the 

earth a covering veil extended. ’ ’ 

Although they hastened, they o’ercame not Indra: their 
spies he compassed with the Sun of morning. 

As thou enjoyest heaven and earth, 0 Indra, on ever»y side 
surrounded with thy greatness, | 

So thou with priests hast blown away the Dasyu, and those 
who worship not with those who worship. 

10 They who pervaded earth’s extremest limit subdued not 

with their charms the Wealth-bestower : 

Indra, the Bull, made his ally the thunder, and with its 
light milked cows from out the darkness. 

1 1 The waters flowed according to their nature ; he mid the 

navigable streams waxed mighty. 

Then Indra, with his spirit concentrated, smote him for ever 
with his strongest weapon. 

12 Indra broke through Hibisa’s strong castles, and Sush^ia wdth 

his horn he cut to pieces : 

Thou, Maghavan, for all his might and swiftness, slowest thy 
fighting foemau with thy thunder. 

13 Fierce on his enemies fell Indra’s weapon : with his sharp 

bull he rent their forts in pieces. * 

He with his thunderbolt dealt blows on Vritra, and cou 
quered, executing all his purpose. 

14 Indra, thouholpest Kutsa whom thou lovedst, and guardeds 

brave Dasadyu when he battled. 

The dust of trampling horses rose to heaven, and Svitra’s b( 
stood up again for conquest. 


8 With the Sun of rnorning : * We revert here to the allegory. The fc 
lowers of Vritra are here said to be the shades of night which are diapers* 
by the rising of the sun ; according to the Brahma^a “Verily the sun, wh( 
he rises in the east, drives away the B&kshasas.” ’ Wilson. 

10 Milked cowe : struck the cloud with his lightning, and made the miii 
streams of fertilizing rain flow forth. 

12 I libido,* $ strong castles : Illbisa is said by SAyapa to be Vritra ‘who sle« 
in caverns of the earth.' Probably one of the confederate demons is intendeii 
Suskna with his horn: the demon of drought, ‘furnished,' says ^ 
Scholiast, ‘ with weapons like the horns of bulls and buflaloes.' The nmauii 
of ‘ hom*^ ' or ‘ with his horn ' is simply * mighty,' the horn being used, As 
Hebrewpoetry, as the emblem of stren^h. 

13 With his sharp bull : the rushing thunderbolt. 

14 Kutta : said to have b^n a Bishi or seer, founder of a religiout 
or school, and elsewhere spoken of as the particular friend of Indra. 


fao| 



THE BIOVEDA, 


47 


hymn Z4.] 

Svitra’a mild steer, 0 Maghavan thou holpest in combat for 
[ * the land, mid Tugra’s houses. 

Long stood they there before the task was ended ; thou waat 
the master of the foemen's treasure. 

HYMN XXXIV. Asvins. 

* Yb who observe this day be with us even thrice ; far-stretch- 
ing is your bounty, Asvins, and your course. 

To you, as to a cloak in winter, we cleave close : ye are to be 
drawn nigh unto us by the wise. 

2 Three are the fellies in your honey-bearing car, that travels 

after Soma’s loved one, as all know. 

Three are the pillars set upon it for support: thrice journey 
ye by night, 0 Asvins, thrice by day. 

3 Thrice in the self-same day, ye Gods who banish want, sprinkle 

ye thrice to-day our sacrifice with meath ; 

And thrice vouchsafe us store of food with plenteous strength, 
at evening, 0 ye Asvins, and at break of day. 

4 Thrice come ye to our home, thrice to the righteous folk, 

thrice triply aid the man who well deserves your help. 
Thrice, 0 ye Asvins, bring us what shall make us glad ; 
thrice send us store of food as nevermore to fail. 

6 Thrice, 0 ye Asvins, bring to us abundant , wealth ; thirce in 
the Gods’ assembly, thrice assist our thoughts. 

Thrice grant ye us prosperity, thrice grant us fame ; for the 
Sun’s daughter hath mounted your three-wheeled car. 

6 Thrice, Asvins, grant to us the heavenly medicines, thrice 
those of earth and thrice those that the waters hold. 

Favour and health and strength bestow upon my son ; triple 
protection. Lords of Splendour, grant to him. 

Thrice are ye to be worshipped day by day by us ; thrice, 0 ye 
Asvins, ye travel around the earth. 

!ar-b6me from far away, 0 ye NAsatyas, come, like vital air to 
bodies, come ye to the three. 

Da»adyu, ia also said to have been a Rishi, but nothing is known of him. 
same may be said of Svaitreya or §vitrya, the son of a woman named 
arft. 

|i The meaning of tugrydm in the text is not clear. Sdyapa explains it 

K waters ; ’ Benfey translates ‘ among Tugra’s daughters,’ and the 
Lexicon takes it to mean *among the families of the Tugryans.’ 
strong but gentle son. 

mt mtk ui^vtn tAriee : that is, at all the three daily sacrifices, 
is here the Moon. His darling is JyotsnA or KaumudI, Moonlight, 
ith Sflryfi, the light borrowed from the Sun. 

! Sun'i daughter ; Sfiryft, who is called the consort of the Asvins. 
at.- a common appellation of the Asvins, See I, 3. 3. 

’se to the three daily sacrifices. ’ ‘ 




4S TffE HYMNS OF [BOOK I 

8 Thrioe, 0 ye Aavins, with the Seven Mother Streams ; thre% 

are the jars, the triple offering is prepared. 

Three are the worlds, and moving on above the sky ye guarc^ 
the firm-set vault of heaven through days and nights. 

9 Where are the three wheels of your triple chariot, where are 

the three seats thereto firmly fastened 1 
When will ye yoke the mighty ass that draws it, to bring yoi 
to our sacrifice, Nasatyas ? 

10 Nasatyas, come : the sacred gift is offered up ; drink the swee 

juice with lips that know the sweetness well. 

Savitar sends, before the dawn of day, your car, fraught witl 
oil, various-coloured, to our sacrifice. 

11 Come, 0 Nasatyas, with the thrice-eleven Gods; come, 0 y 

Asvins, to the drinking of the meath. 

Make long our days of life, and wipe out all our sins : ward oi 
our enemies ; be with us evermore. 

1 2 Borne in your triple car, 0 Asvins, bring us present prosperity 

with noble offspring, w 

I cry to you who hear me for protection : be ye our helper 
where men win the booty. 

HYMN XXXV. Savitai 

Agni I first invoke for our prosperity ; I call on Mitra, Varuiia 
to aid us here. 

I call on Night who gives rest to all moving life ; I call oi 
Savitar the God to lend us help. 

2 Throughout the dusky firmament advancing, laying to resi 

the immortal and the mortal. 

Borne in his golden chariot he cometh, Savitar, God who looi 
on every creature. 

3 The God moves by the upward path, the downward ; with U 

bright Bays, adorable, he journeys. 

Savitar comes, the God from the far distance, and chases froi 
us all distress and sorrow. 


8 The Seven Mother Streami: see I. 82. 12. , 

Three are the jars : three sorts of pitchers, used to contain and pour out ti 

Soma juice at the three daily sacrifices. 

Three worlds : earth, middle air, and heaven. 

9 The mighty ass : according to the Nighantu * two asaea are the ate 
of the Asvins.’ 


10 Savitar ; imping that the Asvins are to be worshipped with this h^ 

at dawn. Savitar is the Sun. :;s \ >; 

11 The thrie^eUven Qods : * This is authority for the usual PaurApQl 
ation of thirty-three deities, avowedly resting on Vaidik text*. Tte|. IW^ 
there, made up of the eight Vasus ; eleven Budras ; twelve Adityas, Trt 
pati, and VashatkAra.’ Wilson. 



THE niGVEDA. 


49 


tyMN 36.] 

4 Hia chariot decked with pearl, of various colours, lofty, with 

golden pole, the God hath mounted. 

The many-r.iyed One, fSavitar the holy, bound, bearing power 
and might, for darksome regions. 

5 Drawing the gold-yoked car his Bays, white-footed, have 

manifested light to all the peoples. 

Hold in the lap of Savitar, divine One, all men, all beings 
have their place for ever. 

6 Three heavens there are ; two Savitar’s, adjacent : in Yama’s 

world is one, the home of heroes. 

As on a linch-pin, firm, rest things immortal : he who hath 
known it, let him here declare it. 

7 He, strong of wing, hath lightened up the regions, deep-quiver- 

ing Asura, the gentle Leader. 

Where now is Surya, where is one to tell us to what celestial 
sphere his ray hath wandered ? 

8 The earth’s eight points his brightness hath illumined, three 

desert regions and the Seven Rivers. 

God Sa\itar the gold-eyed hath come hither, giving choice 
treasures unto him who worships. 

9 The golden-handed Savitar, far-seeing, goes on his way be- 

tween the earth and heaven. 

Drives away sickness, bids the Sun approach us, and spreads 
I the bright sky through the darksome ^region. 

May he, gold-handed Asura, kind Leader, come hither to us 
with his help and favour 

Driving off Rakshasas and Y&tudh4uas, the God is present, 
praised in hymns at evening. 

0 Savitar, thine ancient dustless pathways are well established 
, in the air’s mid-region : 

0 God, come by those paths so fair to travel, preserve thou 
us 'from harm this day, and bless us. 

Two Savitar' s : heaven and earth, or the heaven of day and the heaven of 
t. As on a hneh-pin the linch pin is the emblem of stability, retaining 
oaition unchanged by the revolution of the wheels. So the Gods remain 
oved, unaffected by death or change, unlike the mortals who depart to 
(*ealm of Yama. See J. Ehni, Der Mythus des Yaraa, p. 116. 

He, strong of wing : ( suparnah ) an epithet or a name of the Sun. Asura : 

f imortal and divine One. 

ids the Sun approach us : SAyapa says ‘ approaches the Sun,’ and 
that although Savitar and the Sun are the same as regards their 
Sy, yet they are two different forma, and therefore one may be said to 
the other. 

Ydtudhdnas : a class of demons or evil spirits, much like RAkshasas, 
ore particularly practisers of ^orcery. 



^ THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1 

HYMN XXXV [. Agni 

With words sent forth in holy hymns, Agni we supplicate 
the Lord 

Of many families who duly serve tlie Gods, yea, him whon 
others also praise. 

2 Men have won Agni, him Avho makes their strength alx»u«d. 

we, with oblations, worship thee. 

Our gracious-min led Helper in our deeds of might, be thou 
0 Excellent, this day. 

3 Thee for our messenger we choose, thee, the Omniscient, foi 

our Priest. 

The flames of thee the mighty are spread wide around : thj 
splendour reaches to the sky. 

i The Gods enkindle thee their ancient messenger, — Vanina 
Mitra, Aryaman. 

That mortal man, 0 Agni, gains through thee all wealth, win 
hath poured offerings unto thee. 

5 Thou, Agni, art a cheering Priest, Lord of the House, men! 
messenger : 

All constant high decrees established by the Gods, gathci 
together, meet in thee. 

b In thee, the auspicious One, 0 Agni, youthfullest, each sacr 
gift is olfered up : 

This day,, and after, gracious, worship thou our Gods, tl 
we may have heroic sons. 

7 To him in his own splendour bright draw near in worsi. 
the devout. 

Men kindle Agni with their sacrificial gifts, victorious ( 
the enemies. 

S Vritra they smote and slew, and made the earth and hea^ 
and firmament a wide abode. 

The glorious Bull, invoked, hath stood at Kanva’s side : Ic 
neighed the Steed in frays for kine. 


This Hymn and the twelve following are ascribed to Kanva, a very celebr* 
Rishi who is called the sou of Ghora and is said to belong to the family 
Angiras. 

5 The preservation of the whole world rests, according to the Vaidik 
o!i the sacrifices offered by men, as these give the Gods strength and em 
them to perform their duties. 

S The glorious Bull : the mighty Agni, strong as a bull and 
ab a war horse, has aided his favourite Kanva in battle. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


51 


YMN 8«.] 

) Seat thee, for thou art mighty ; shine, best entertainer of 
the Gods. 

Worthy of sacred food, praised Agni ! loose the smoke, ruddy 
and beautiful to see. 

0 Bearer of offerings, whom, best sacrificing Priest, the Gods for 

Mann’s sake ordained ; 

' Whom Kanvk, whom Medhyatithi made the source of wealth, 
and Vrishan and Upastuta. 

1 Him, Agni, whom Medhyatithi, whom Kanva kindled for his 

rtte, 

Him these our songs of praise, him, Agni, we extol ; his powers 
shine out preeminent. 

2 Make our wealth perfect thou, 0 Agni Lord divine : for thou 

hast kinship with the Gods. 

Thou rulest as a King o’er widely-famous strength : be good 
to us for thou art great. 

] Stand up erect to lend us aid, stand up like Saritar the God : 
Erect as strength-bestower when we call aloud, with unguents 
and with priests, on thee. 

[ Erect, preserve us from sore trouble ; with thy flame burn 
thou each ravening demon dead, 
liaise thou us up that we may walk and live ;.so thou shalt 
find our worship mid tlio Gods. 

5 Preserve us, Agni, from the fiend, preserve us from malicious 
wrong. 

Save us from him who fain would injure us or slay. Most 
Youthful, thou with lofty light. 

5 Smite down as with a club, thou who hast fire for teeth, 

' smite thou the wicked, right and left. 

, Let not the man who plots against us in the night, nor any 
I foe prevail o’er us. 


.0 Medhyatithi : SAyana takes this word to be an epithet of Kanva, ‘ en- 
tainer of guests who are worthy of sacrificial food.’ But it appears to be 
\ name of a Rishi of Kativa’s family, the seer of twenty-eight hymns of 
kks VIII. and IX. 

yUhan and Upa»tuia : rendered by Wilson, after SAyana, ‘Indra and 
e other worshipper,’ are also apparently the names of two other Rishis. 

B Stand up erect : Agni, as erect, is identified by SAyana with the yUpa or 
ficial post to which the victims, at an animal sacrifice, were bound. 
>rdingly he takes anjibhih to mean * with unguents’ wherewith the post 
anointed. This word may how'^ver refer to the ornaments — another 
ification of the word — worn by the ministering priests. 



62 


THE HYM.yS OF 


[BOOK 


4 The steep declivities, the valleys, and the heights, thee 
nels full of water, and the waterless — 

May those who swell with water, gracioiis Goddesses, i 
afflict ns with the Sipada disease, may all the rivers 
us free from Simid^. 

HYMN LI. Ad 

Through the Adityas^ most auspicious shelter, through 
most recent succour may we conquer. 

May they, the Mighty, giving ear, establish this sacrlfli 
make us free and sinless. 

2 Let Aditi rejoice and the Adityas, Vanina, Mitra, Arya 

rj)Ost righteous. 

May they, the Guardians of the world, protect us, an 
show favour, drink this day our Soma. 

3 All Universal Deities, the Maruts, all the Adityas, yea 

all the Hibhus, 

Iiidra, and Agni, and the Asvins, lauded. Preserve us 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LII. M 

May we be free from every bond, Adityas I a castle among 
and men, ye Vasus. 

Winning, may we win Vanina and Mitra, and, being, m 
be, 0 Earth and Heaven. 

2 May Varuna and Mitra grant tins blessing, our Guan 

shelter to our seed and offspring. 

Let us not suffer for another’s trespass, nor do the thing 
ye, 0 Vasus, punish. 

3 The ever-prompt Angirases, imploring riches from Savita 

God, obtained them. 

So may our Father who is great and holy, and all the 
accordant, grant this favour. 

HYMN LIIT. Heaven and 

As priest with solemn rites and adorations I worship Hi 
and Earth, the High and Holy. 

To them, great Parents of the Gods, have sages of ai 
time, singing, assigned precedence^ 

4 The ^'pada disease : ‘perhaps the Vaulikform oi Slipada, the( 
leg.'_Wilson. §imidd : apparently a female demon, or a disease atW 

to her malevolence. * , , 

3 Universal Deities : vi§ve devffh ; the All-Gods, lauded ; the senti 
incomplete, the substantives in the nominative case having no verb. 

1 Being : really and truly being, rich, powerful, and distinguished, j 
3 Our Father: Varuna, the father of Vasish^ha ; or Savitar, or i’n 
may be intended. 



rm RTorEDA. 


53 


55.] 

|th newest hymns set in the seat of Order, those the Two 
Parents, born before all others, 

^e, Heaven and Earth, with the Celestial People, hither to 
b, for strong is your protection. 

p, Heaven and Earth, ye hold in your possession full many 
i treasure for the liberal giver. 

bit us that wealth which comes in free abundance. Preserve 
iis evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LTV, VAstoahpati. 

pNOWLEDOxE US, 0 Guardian of the Homestead : bring no 
lisease, and give us happy entrance. 

^ate’er we ask of thee, be pleased to grant it, and prosper 
[hou our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

kector of the Home, be our promoter : increase our wealth 
h kine and steeds, 0 Indu. 

y we bo evor-youtbful in thy friendship : be pleased in ua 
Is in his sons a father. 

rough thy dear fellowship that briugeth welfare, may we bo 
ictors. Guardian of the Dwelling ! 

itect our happiness in rest and labour. Preserve us 
vcrmorc, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LV. va.toshp.ti. 

fcTOSHPATi, who killest all disease and we<arest every form, 
m\ auspicious Friend to us. 

en, 0 bright Sou of Saramal, thou showest, tawnv-hiicd * 
Ihy teeth, 

3y gleam like lances’ points within thy mouth when thou 
vouUlst bite : go thou to sleep. 

■am Vs Son, retrace thy way : bark at the robber and the 
liief. 

India’s singers barkest thou? Why dost thou seek to tcr- 
ify us ? Go to sleep. 

the Ubeml giver : or, for Sudds, 

fehpati i« tlie Qeniu« or tutelary God of the house. In thia hymn 
Hre-xaed also aa Indu, another ii.inie of Soma the Moon- God. 

‘hpati is the deity of the first stanz. », and Indra of the rest, 
letre is Gilyatii in 1, Upaiishtddbiihatl (8x3 f- 12) in 2-4, 

slitup in 5-8, and the hymn appears to be made up of three corres- 
pieces unconnected by their subjects. 

Saramd : Saramd. the houn«l of Indra, is mother of the two 
rts, the brindled watch-dogs of Yama, God of the Dead. This stanza 
Avo following appear t-o be addre^^ed by the spirits of Indra’s worship- 
>tte of the dogs who would prevent their entering the home of the 



54 the hymns op [BOOK j 

4 Be on thy guard against the boar, and let the boar bewan 

thee. 

At IndiVs singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou see^ 
terrify us ? Go to sleep. 

5 Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog and master of 

house. 

Let all the kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who are roi 
about. 

6 The man who sits, the man who walks, and whosoever 1( 

on us, 

Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely shut 
house. 

7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up from 

the sea, — 

By him the Strong and Mighty One we lull and make 
people sleep. 

8 The women sleeping in the court, lying without, or stretc 

on beds, 

The matrons with their odorous sweets— these, one and 
we lull to sleep. 

HYMN LVI. ^ Bh 

Who are these radiant men in serricil rank, Rudra's yo 
heroes borne by ncble steeds 1 

2 Verily no one knoweth whence they sprang : they, and t 

only, know each other’s birth. 

3 They strew each other with their blasts, these Hawks: t 

strove together, roaring like the wind. 

5 This and the three following stanzas form a lull.iby or sleep-song, 
brtbly sung as a charm by a lover on a secret visit to hi.^ love. ^ 

7 The Ball who hath a thousand Im'ns : the Smi, wh^e setting biiugi 
time of rest and sleep ; or i>cihaps the starry heaven is intended 

8 With their odoims sweets : wearing garlands of fragiant flowers on fi 
occasions, according to Sayana : ‘decoiatcd with holhhty perfumes. ^ 
According to a legend mentioned by Sdyuiia, Yasishtha having fasted for 
days was entering the house of Varuna in hope of food, when the waU 
set upon him and was put to sleep ty the repetition of the last four' 
which are to be recited on similar occadons by thieves and bouse-biei 
>See Wilson’s note. The hymn h.a3 been discussed by Aufrecht, 
Stadien, IV. 337f, and by Lauman, Sanskrit Header, p. S70. 

3 They strew each other with their blasts : the meaning of JvapHJ 
uncertain. ‘ They go together by their own pure patlis.’ -Wilson 
plucked each other with their beaks Muller. ‘They bestrew 

other with light.’— Grassmann. ‘’They scatter dust over each other 
besoms.’— Roth. I follow Professor Ludwig. The meaning appears to W 
the Hawks or rapid Maruts are so crowded in their onward sweep iha 
in front feel the quick breath of those who follow. Similarly (VIU. ^ 
the crowded Maruts are likened to cattle who lick each other’s heads or m 



THE RIO VEDA. 


56 


r 66.] 


gage was he who knew these mysteries, what in her udder 
mighty Prisni bore. 

er victorious, through the Mariits, be this band of Heroes, 
nursing manly strength, 

ist bright in splen lour, fleetest on their way, close-knit to 
^lory, strong with varied power. 

a, mighty is your power and firm your strength : so, 
30 tent, with the Maruts, be the band. 

‘dit is your spirit, wrathful are your minds : your bold 
;roop’s minstrel is like one inspired. 

er avert your blazing shaft from us, and let not your dis- 
pleasure reach us here. 

nr dear names, conquering Maruts, we invoke, calling aloud 
dll we are satislied. 

dl arrned, impetuous in their haste, they deck themselves, 
dieir forms, with ornaments of gold. 

re, Maruts pure } ourselves, are your oblations : to you, the 
}urc, pure sacrifice I offer. 

^ Law they came to truth, the Law’s observers, bright by 
dieir birth, and pure, and sanctifying. 

.ir rings, 0 Maruts, rest upon your shoulders, and chains 
►f gol(l are twined upon your bosoms, 
aming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, after your 
vont ye whirl about your weapons. 

|dc in the depth of air spread forth your glories, far, most 
adorable, ye bear your titles. 

fruts, accept this tlnasandfold allotment of household 
Sacrifice and household treasure. 

.Mar its, ye regard the praise recited here at this mighty 
singer’s invocation, 

Inch safe us quickly wealth with noble heroes, wealth which 
ho man who hateth us may injure. 


in her udder: according to SAyani, what beings (Maruts, etc.) 
Pibni bore at her udder or in the firmament. 

nr bold troop's minstrel : the leader .f the Maruts’ th»inder-p8alm. Like 
.* mdiiiriva, like a Muni or inspired saint ‘ The sounds produced 
Ihaking of the trees are like the varied intonations of a i eciber of praises, 
(as explanation.’ — Wilson. Lanman translates differently: Clear is 
listling. Your hearts are wrathful as the wild onward-rush of a doughty 

^ your titles : you make yourselves known. 'You send down 
^rs) that beat down (the dust).’ — Wilson, NHmdni^ names, according 
means waters, because they bend down the dust, pdnsUn namayantit 



THE HYMNS OF 


56 


[BOOE 1 


16 The Maruta, fleet as coursers, while they deck them] 

youths spectators of a festal meeting, 

Linger, like beauteous colts, about the dwelling, like frisl^ 
calves, these who pour down the water. 

17 So may the Maruts help us and be gracious, bringing! 

room to lovely Earth and Heaven. 

Far be your bolt that slaycth men and cattle. Ye Vai 
turn yourselves to us with blessings. 

18 The priest, when seated, loudly calls you, Maruts, praisiiij 

song your universal bounty. 

He, Bulls ! wlio hath so much in his possession, free ( 
duplicity, with hymns invokes you. 

19 These Maruts bring the swift man to a stand-still, 

strength with mightier strength they break and hurnW 
These guard the singer from the man who hates him and 
their sore di.spleasure on the wicked. 

20 Tliese Maruts rouse even the poor and needy : the Vasiis 

him as an active champion. 

Drive to a distance, 0 ye Bulls, the darkness : give ua 
store of children and descendants. 

21 Never, 0 ^^laruts, may we lose your bounty, nor, cur-b 

Lords ! be hindmost when ye deal it. 

Give us a share in that delightful treasure, the gen 
wealth that. Bulls ! is your possession. 

22 What time the men in fury rush together for running stre; 

for pastures, and for houses, 

Then, 0 ye Maruts, ye who spring from Rudra, be our pr 
tors in the strife with foemen. 

23 Full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of li 

which, even of old, they sang yon. 

The strong man, with the Maruts, wins in battle, the cliti 
with the Maruts, gains the booty. 

24 Ours, 0 ye Maruts, be the vigorous Hero, the Lord Divin 

men, the strong Sustaincr, 

With whom to fair lands we may cross the waters, and c 
in our own home with you beside us. 

25 May Indra, Mitra, Varuna and Agni, Waters, and Plants, 

Trees accept our praises. 

May we find shelter in the Maruts’ bosom. Preserve us < 
more, yo Gods, with blessings. 

i 24 T/ie lord Divine : liter.illy, the Astira. We may crou the waUn 
Miruts are besought to favour an expedition for the acquisition of uej 
Uements on the further side of a river. 



THE EIQVEDA. 


57 


y 58.J 

HYMN LVIL Maruta. 

BA, through the power of your sweet juice, ye Holy ! the 
Marut host is glad at sacrifices. 

[ley cause even spacious heaven and earth to tremble, they 
make the spring flow when they come, the Mighty, 
le Maruts watch the man who sings their praises, promoters 
of the thought of him who worships. 

lat you on sacred grass in our assembly, this day, with 
friendly minds, to share the banquet. 

0 others gleam so brightly as these Maruts with their own 
forms, their golden g.iuds, their weapons. 

'ith all adornments, decking earth and heaven, they heighten, 
ifor bright show, their common splendour, 
dr from us be your blazing dart, 0 Maruts, when we, 
through human frailty, sin against you. 

}t us not be exposed to that, ye Holy ! May your most lov- 
ing favour still attend us. 

ay even what we have done delight the Maruts, the blame- 
[Ic.ss Ones, the bright, the purifying. 

[irther us, 0 ye Holy, with your kindness ; advance us 
'mightily that we may pro.sper. 

id may the Maruts, praised by all their titles. Heroes, enjoy 
the taste of our oblations. 

VC us of Amrit for the sake of offspring : awake the excel- 
lent fair stores of riches. 

Ither, ye Maruts, praised, with all your succours, with all 
felicity come to our princes, 

ho, of themselves, a hundredfold increase us Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LVIII. Maruts. 

to the troop that pours down rain in common, the 
Mighty Compaiiy of celestial nature. 


according to S&yana, the Maruts are adtiressed. The Marut 
ima MtnUam : the Marut name, t e those who are called Maruts. 

hymn, and nil the hymns to the Maruts have been translated and 
in Max Mullers Vedic IlymnSy I. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 

'e us of Amrit : the secret essence which pervades the world and nour- 
sustains all must naturally also be the element that promotes re- 
explains the passage differently; ‘Add us to 
rr J"® P®<^pl® eternity, i, e, to the blessed.’ * Vouchsafe our 
g lue, QrasaxuaDD. * Bestow water upon our progeny.'— Wilson, 



68 


THE BYMNS OF 


[BOOK vir. 

They make the world-halves tremble with their greatness : 
from depths of earth and sky they reach to heaven. 

2 Yea, your birth, Maruts, was with wild commotion, ye who 

move swiftly, fierce in wrath, terrific. 

Ye all-surpassing in your might and vigour, each looker on the 
light fears at your coming. 

3 Give ample vital power unto our'princes : lot our fair praises 

gratify the Maruts. 

As the way travelled helpeth people onward, so further us 
with your delightful succours. 

4 Your favoured singer counts his wealth by hundreds : the 

strong steed whom ye favour wins a thousand. 

The Sovran wdiom ye aid destroys the foeman. May this 
your gift, ye Shakers, be distinguished. 

5 I call, as such, the Sons of bo\uiteous Kudra : will not the 

Maruts turn again to us-ward ? 

What secret sin or open stirs their anger, that we implore the 
Swift Ones to forgive us. 

6 This eulogy of the Bounteous hath been spoken : accept, ye 

Maruts, this our hymn of praises. 

Ye Bulls, keep those who hate us at a distance. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LIX. Maruta. 

Whomso ye rescue here and there, whomso ye guide, 0 Deities, 
To him give shelter, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, ye Maruts, and 
thou Aryaman. 

2 Through your kind favour, Gods, on some auspicious day, the 

worshipper subdues his foes. 

That man increases home and strengthening ample food who 
brings you offerings as ye list. 

3 Vasishtha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all. 

0 Maruts, of our Soma juice effused to-day drink all of you 
with eager haste. 

4 Your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye, 

Heroes, grant your gifts. 

1 From depths of earth and sky : nirriti here is said to be synonymous with 
hhdmi, earth, and avansi, the unsupported, with antariksha, firmament. But 
nirriti, Death, Destruction, as identified with bhUmi, may be the Prithivl of 
the atmosphere (see V. 84.), w'hich must originally have been considered to be 
the place of departed spirits. 

2 Each looker on the lijht: vi^vah svardrik: according to SAyana, every tre®- 


4 Injures not : a litotes for, is of the greatest advantage to. 



hymn 59.] THE RIG VEDA . 69 

May your most recent favour turn to us again. Come quickly, 
ye who fain would drink. 

5 Come hitherward to drink the juice, 0 ye whose bounties give 

you joy. 

These offerings are for you, these, Maruts, I present. Go not 
to any place but this. 

6 Sit on our sncred grass, be graciously inclined to give the 

wealth for which we long, 

To take delight, ye Maruts, Friends of all, with Sv^ha, in 
sweet Soma juice. 

7 Decking the beauty of their forms in secret the Swans with 

purple backs have flown down hither. 

Around me all the Company hath settled, like joyous Heroes 
glad in our libation. 

8 Maruts, the man whose wrath is hard to master, he who would 

slay us ere we think, 0 Vasus, 

May he be tangled in the toils of mischief ; smite ye him 
down with your most flaming weapon. 

9 0 Maruts, ye consuming Gods, enjoy this offering brought for 

you, 

To help us, ye who slay the foe. 

10 Sharers of household sacrifice, come, Maruts, stay not far away, 
That ye may help us, Ik^unteous Ones. 

11 Here, Self-strong Maruts, yea, even here, ye Sages with your 

sunbright skins ! 

I dedicate your sacrifice. 

12 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity. 

As from its stein the cucumber, so may I be released from 
death, not reft of immortality. 


6 Whose hounties give you joy : or follow each other closely, and are ever 
fre.-h and ready. 

6 Svdkd : an exclamation, like Ave ! or Hail ! used in making oblations to 
the Gods. 

7 With purple backs : n^laprishthlh : cf. Horace’s * piirpurei olores.' 

8 Mischief : or one of the malicious spirits called Diuhs. 

12 Tryambaka : a name of Rudra. iSiceet : according to SAyana, 
Bweet-sjnelling, means here, ‘ whose fame is frajp-.uit.’ ‘ The verse occurs in Uia 
\ ajur- Veda, (J 30, and is, in some instances, differently interpreted ; Tryam* 
wta is tei ined netratrayopetam 7?«rfrawi, the triocular Rudra: sugundhim, 
dtvyaf/andhopeiitm, of celestial fragrance : the nrvaruka is said to mean the 
of the jujube*tree], which, when ripe, falls of itself fiom ita 

Btalk.’— Wilson. 



60 TIIB HYMNS OF [BOOK VIl 

HYMN LX. Mitia-Varuna. 

When thou, 0 Sun, this day, arising sinless, shalt speak the 
truth to Varuna and Mitra, 

0 Aditi, may all the Deities love us, and thou, 0 Aryaman, 
while we arc singing. 

2 Looking on man, 0 Varuna and Mitra, this Sun ascendeth up 

by both the pathways, 

Guardian of all things fixt, of all that moveth, beholding 
good and evil acts of mortals. 

3 He from their home hath yoked the Seven gold Coursers who, 

dropping oil and fatness, carry Surya. 

Yours, Variifii and Mitra, he survoycth the worlds and living 
creatures like a herdsman. 

4 Your coursers rich in store of sweets have mounted : to the 

bright ocean Surya hath ascended, 

For whom the Adityas make his pathway ready, Aryaman, 
Mitra, Varuna, accordant. 

5 For these, even Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra, are the chas- 

tisers of all guile and falsehood. 

These, Aditi’s Sons, infallible and mighty, have waxen in the 
home of Law Etcnml. 

6 Those, Mitra, Varuna, whom none decciveth, with great power 

quicken even the fool to wisdom. 

And, wakening, moreover, thoughtful insight, lead it by easy 
paths o’er grief and trouble. 

7 They ever vigilant, with eyes that close not, caring for heaven 

and earth, lead on the thoughtless. 

Even in the river’s bed there is a shallow : across this broad 
expanse may they conduct us, 

8 When Aditi and Varuna and Mitra, like guardians, give Sudas 

their friendly shelter, 

Granting him sons and lineal s\iccession, let us not, bold ones ! 
move the Gods to anger. 


The hymn is addressed chiefly to Mitra and Varuna, but S rya or the Sun 
is the deity of the first stanza. 

1 Sinlm: SAyana makes ‘ declare the truth... that wc 

are void of pin.’— Wilson. But this seems forced, and the implied meaning 
the poet is clear enough if the word is taken in its u.sual signification. 

2 Both the pathways : near the earth and high in the firmament. 

6 Mitra, Varuna: and Aryaman, understootl ; the verbs are in the plural. 

8 Bold ones : the warning is addressed to the people of SudAs, who has been 

MnMf-'nn&rl in n*. 1 n <r Vivmna 



llY}fN 61.1 


THE JRIQVEDA, 


61 

9 May he with offerings purify the altar from any stains of 
Varuna's re viler. 

Aryaman save ns from all those who hate us : give room and 
freedom to Sudas, ye Mighty. 

10 Hid from our eyes is their resplendent meeting: by their 

mysterious might they hold dominion. 

Heroes ! we cry trembling in fear before you, even in the great- 
ness of your power have mercy. 

11 He wbo wins favour for his prayer by worship, that he may 

gain him strength and highest riches, 

That good man’s mind the Mighty Ones will follow : they have 
brought comfort to his spacious dwelling. 

12 This priestly task, Gods ! Vanina and Mitra ! hath been per- 

formed for you at sacrifices. 

Convey *U3 safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, ye 
Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXI. Mitra- Varuna. 

0 Varuna and Mitra, Surya spreading the beauteous light of 
you ''I’wain Gods ariseth. 

He who bcholdeLh all existing creatures observeth well the zeal 
that is in mortals. 

2 The holy sage, renowned afar, directeth his hymns to you, 0 

Varuna and Mitra,— 

He whose devotions, sapient Gods, ye favour so that ye fill, as 
’twere, with power his autumns. 

3 From the wide earth, 0 Varuna and Mitra, from the great 

lofty heaven, > e, Bounteous Givers, 

Have in the fields and houses set your warders who visit every 
spot and watch unceasing. 

4 I praise the strength of Varuna and Mitra : that strength, by 

mightiness, keeps both worlds asunder. 

Heroless pass the months of the ungodly : he who loves sacri- 
fice makes his home enduring. 


9 Mai/ he : Agni may be intended. Varuna's revile)' : those who speak evil 
of princes like Sufhla, Varuna being the king’s prototype — Ludwig. 

10 27ieir resplendent mectinfj : that of Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman. 

11 Have brought comfort to his spacious dicdling: ‘ bestow a spacious man- 
sion for a dwelling upon him.’— Wilson. 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK FII, 

5 Steers, all infallible are these your people in whom no wondrous 

thing is seen, no worship. 

Guile follows close the men who are untruthful ; no secrets 
may be hidden from your knovN ledge. 

6 I will exalt your sacrifice with homage : as priest, I, Mitra- 

Varui.a, invoke you. 

May these new hymns and prayers that I have fashioned 
delight you to the profit of the singer. 

7 This priestly task, Gods ! Varuna and Mitra ! hath been per- 

formed for you at sacrifices. 

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, ye 
Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX II. Mitra-Varu^a. 

SrRYA hath sent aloft his beams of splendour . o’er all the 
tribes of men in countless places. 

Together with the heaven he shines apparent, formed by his 
Makers well with power and wisdom. 

2 So hast thou mounted up before us, Surya, through these our 

praises, with fleet dappled horses. 

Declare us free from all oflbnce to Mitra, and Varuna, and 
Aryaman, and Agni. 

3 May holy Agni, Varuna, and Mitra send down their riches 

upon us in thousands. 

May they, the Bright Ones, make our praise-song perfect, and, 
when we laud them, grant us all our wishes. 

4 0 undivided Heaven and Earth, preserve us, us, Lofty Ones! 

your nobly-born descendants. 

Let, us not anger V.iruna, nor Vayu, nor him, the dearest 
Friend of mortals, Mitra, 

5 Stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthened : 

with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle. 

Ye Youthful, make us famed among the people : hear, MitrA- 
Varuua, these mine invocations. 

.5 This stanza i« difficult SAyana’s interpretation as given by Wilson is: 

‘ Unperplexed, all-pervading showerers (of benefits), these piaises «re for you, 
in which nothing surprising, no adoration (wot thy of you), is belield: the in^ 
sincere commendations of men serve as offences ; eulogies of you, although 
offered in secret ure not unappreciated.' The version of the Seventy Hyrnnm 
somewhat ns bdlows : ‘ All your avenging spirits, 0 ye Mighty, follow unerr- 
ingly the sinner’s traces. They have no ►ign that men may mai k, no figure. 
Naught is so secret that ye fail to know it.’ This latter involves a slight 
alteration of the text. I prefer Ludwig’s interpretation, although it is b®* 
absolutely convincing. 

7V» th* nf th* • 


Vpilitrh^ SttuHfn. I. 43. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


UYMN 64 ] 

6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room, 
for us and for our children. 

May we find paths all fair and good to travel. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXIII. Mitra*Varuna. 

Common to all mankind, auspicious Surya, ho who beholdeth all, 
is mounting upward ; 

The God, the eye of Varuna and Mitra, who rolled up dark- 
ness like a piece of leather. 

2 Siirya’s great ensign, restless as the billow, that urgeth men 

to action, is advancing ; 

Onward he still would roll the wheel well-rounded, which 
Etasa, harnessed to the car-pole, moveth. 

3 Refulgent from the bosom of the Mornings, he in whom singers 

take delight ascendeth. 

This Savitar, God, is my chief joy and pleasure, w'ho breaketh 
not the universal statute. 

4 Golden, far-seeing, from the heaven he riseth : far is his goal, 

ho hasteth on resplendent. 

Men, verily, inspirited by Sdrya speed to their aims and do 
the work assigned them. 

5 Where the Immortals have prepared his pathway he flieth 

through the region like a falcon. 

With homage and oblations will we serve you, 0 Mitra-Varuna, 
when the Sun hath risen. 

6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room, 

for us and for our children. 

May wo fin I paths all fair and gool to travel. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXIV. Mitra-Varuna. 

Ye Twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, clothed 
be your clouds in robes of oil and fatness. 

May the imperial Varnnv, and Mitra, and high-born Aryaman 
accept our presents. 

2 Kings, guards of mighty everlasting Order, come hitherward, 
ye Princes, Lords erf Rivei*8. 

Send us from heaven, 0 Varuna and Mitra, rain and sweet 
food, ye who pour down your bounties. 

2 Elaiia : or, the bright or dappled s^eed ; one of the horses of the Sun. 

3 Breaketh not : faithfully observes and supports. 



64 


the hymns Olf 


[BOOK VJI, 


t th. a.„ OA .na aw »d «'.» •»»«»"> ‘a 

in food with Gods to guai us. 

4 Him who hath wrouglit for you tta car P 

w j. Ki»s» !'- 

s t;';~ r.tf: *0 *<«”■■ ■■• ■>»■“■«' >'* 

FavoHr'oiir sont,'. ol pmise, aako thotight and spirit, Prescrn 


lid nir/irmnrp. 


hymn LXY. Mitra Varuiii 

With hymns I call you, when the Sun hath risen, Mitra, and 
Varuna whose' though*. s arc holy, 

Whose Power Divine, supreme and everlasting, comes with good 
heed at each man s supplication. 

2 For they are Asuras of (h) Is, the friendly : make, both of you, 

our lands e.\.cecding fruitful, 

May we obtain you, \aruna and j\Iitrii, whet ever Heaven and 
Earth and days may bless us. 

3 Bonds of the sinner, they boar many nooses : the wicked mortal 

hardly may escape them. 

Varuna-Mitra, may your path of Order bear us o’er trouble as 
a boat o’er waters. 

4 Como, taste our offering, Varuna and Mitra : bedew our pasture 

with sweet food and fatness. 

Pour down in plenty hero upon the people the choicest of your 
fair celestial water. 


3 Th“ second half of the .stanza is obscure. The meaniu" appeals to be 
that even our h-es, the godless u ho oiler no sacrifices, shall envy the pro. 
nerity which we enjoy through the liberality of Sudds, and shall wish to fo 
low our example, b) sacrifice to the Gods and to enjoy their p.obcction aud 
the blc'sing.s which they send. 

4 This cxr: this c.irefully*formed hymn which goes, like a chariot, to the 
Gods. 

5 To Vina : who receives the Bret draught of Soma juice at the morni»8 

^'^Thriiymn appears to be composed of fragments of other hymns with > 
few ori&ddftions. Cf. VII. 63. 5; 66. 7. 12; VI, 68. 8; VII. t2. 5; W 
62 16. See von Bradke, Dyaus Asura, 3—5, 

1 Power Divine : asuryhm : Asurahood. WTwac .• refers to Mitra and Varuna. 

2 Aniras of Gods : the high or ruling Gods of all the deities. 

3 Bonds : binders. Many nooses : ‘ Your guiles, ye Holy Ones, to quell oP' 
pressoM, your snares spread out against the foe, Adityas’ (H. 27, 16). 



THE RIQVBDA. 


65 


6d.] 


5 To you this laud, 0 Varuna and Mitra, is offered, like bright 

^ Soma juice to Vayu. _ 

Favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 


HYMN LX VI. Mitra- Varuna. 

Ut our strong hymn of praise go forth, the laud of Mitra- 
Varuna, 

With homage to that high-born Pair ; 
j The Two exceeding wise, the Sons of Daksha, whom the Gods 

ordai’cd 

For lordshi/), excellently great. 

3 Such, Guardians of our homes and us, 0 Mitra-Varuna, fulfil 
The thoughts of those who sing your praise. 

4 So when the Suii hath risen to-day, may sinless Mitra, Arya- 

inan, 

Bhaga, and Savitar send us forth. 

5 May this our home be guarded well : forward, ye Bounteous, 

on the way. 

Who bear us safely o’er distress. 

0 And those Self-reigning, Aditi, whose statute is inviolate. 

The Kings who lule a vast domain. 

7 Soon as the Sun h vth risen, to you, to Mitra-Varuna, I sing, 
And Aryainaii wlio slays the foe. 

8 With wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested 

power and might. 

And, Brahmans, gain the sacrifice. 

9 May we bo thine, God Varuna, and with our princes, Mitra, 

thine : 

Food and Heaven’s light will we obtain. 

p Many are they who strengthen Law, Sun-eyed, with Agni for 
I their tongue, 


2 Sons of EaJesha ’ see VI. 50. 2. For lordship : literally for Asurahood. 

i Sinless ; SAyana heie, as in VII 60. 1, takes dndf/dh ns = andgasahy so 
^lat, according to his interpretMtion, the translation would be : may Savitar, 
Mitra, Aryanian, and Bhaga send us sinless forth. 

6 A diti is out of place here, as there is no copulative in the text ; whose 
mother is Aditi, seems to be intended. 

8 And, hrahmans, gain the soerifice : the exact meaning is uncertain : ‘May 
t (be ettective), sages, for the iulfilment of (the objects of) the sacrifice.’ — 
fT ildon. 


5 





TEE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK VII 


They «ho' diffeet the three great gatherings with their 
thoughts, yea, all things with surpassing might. 

II They who have stablished year and month and then the day, 
night, sacrifice and holy verse, 

VaruV, Mitra, Aryaman, the Kings, have won dominion which 
none else may gain. . , v 

U Se at the rising of the Sun we think of yon with hy«m 

Evmits Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman deserve: ye are the chariot- 

eei-s of Law. ^ i 

13 True to Law, born in Law, the strengtheners of Law, terrible, 

haters of the false, 

In their felicity which gives the best defence may we men and 
our princes dwell. 

14 Uprises, on the slope of lieaven, that marvel that attmets the 
As^swift celestial Etasa bears it away, prepared for every eye 

15 LordoTeach single head, of fixt and moving things, equally 

through the whole expanse. 

The Seven sister Bays bear Surya on his car, to bring m 
wealth and happiness. 

16 A hundred autumns may we see that bright >ye, o or an 

cd, arise : 

A hundred autumns may we live. 

17 Infallible through your wisdom, come hither, resplendent 

Varuna, 

And Mitra, to the Soma draught. 

,8 c.™ „ th. 1..S ,t H»..» M..», ...J .< 

guile : « • ■ 

Press near and drink the Soma juice. 

19 Come, Mitra, Varuna, accept Heroes, our sacnfiml gift . 
Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. ^ ^ 

The meaning i. not cle.r. 

Lua Jfu of opinion that the three caates are intended. 

The meaning of stansaa 10 and U ie that although there be many 
Vanina, Mitra, and Aryaman are supreme. 



rMN 67 .} 


THE RIOVBDA, 67 

HYMN LXVII. Asrin*. 

I WITH a holy heart that brings oblation will sin^ fotth praise 
to oieet yonr car, ye Princes, 

Which, Much-desired ! hath Wakened as your envoy. I call 
you hither as a son his parents. 

I Brightly hath Agni shone by us enkindled : the limits even 
of darkness wore apparent. 

Eastward is seen the Banner of the Morning, the Banner born 
to give Heaven’s Daughter glory. 

I With hymns the deft priest is about you, Asvins, the eloquent 
priest attends you now, N^satyas. 

Come by the paths that ye arc wont to travel, on car that 
tiiids the light, laden with treasure. 

[ When, suppliant for your help, Lovers of Sweetness ! I seek- 
ing wealth call you to our libation, 

HilhorWard let your vigorous horseS bear you : drink ye with 
us the well-pressed Soma juices. 

) Bring forward, Asvins, Gods, to its fulfilment my never-weari- 
ed prayer that asks for riches. 

Vouchsafe us all high spirit in the combat, and with your 
powers, 0 Lords of Power, assist us. 

) Favour us in those prayers of ours, 0 Asv-ins. May we have 
genial vigour, ne’er to fail us. 

So may we, strong in children and descendants, go, wealthy, 
to the banquet that awaits you. 

Lovers of Sweetness, we have brought this treasure to you as 
’twere an envoy sent for friendship. 

Come unto us with spirits free from anger, in homes of men 
enjoying our oblation. 

1 With one, the same, intention, ye swift movers, o’er the Serven 
Rivets hath your chariot travelled. 

Yoked by the Gods, your strong steeds rtevet Weary WWltf 
speeding forward at the pole they bear you. 

Exhaustless be your bounty to our princes who with their 
wealth incite the gift of riches, 

Who further friendship with their noble natures, combining 
wealth ill kiiio with wealth hi hdrscs. 


' Much desired : * adorable.’ —WilsoD. 

Incite the gift of riches : move the Gods to give riches in return. 
^rietidikip : or, si kitisraSri, meaning, apparently, the priest 



68 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK F//. 

10 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation: come, Asvins, 
to the home where food aboundeth. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXVIII. Asviu^. 

Come, radiant Asvins, with your noble horses: accept your 
servant’s hymns, ye Wonder-Workers : 

Enjoy oblations which we bring to greet you. 

2 The -gladdening juices stand prepared before you : come quick- 

ly and partake of mine oblation. 

Pass by the calling of our foe and hear us. 

3 Your chariot with a hundred aids, 0 Asvins, beareth you swift 

as thought across the regions, 

Speeding to us, O ye whose wealth is Siirya. 

4 What time this stone of yours, the Gods’ adorer, upraised, 

sounds forth for you as Soma-presscr, 

Let the priest bring you, Fair Ones, through oblations. 

5 The nourishment ye have is, truly, wondrous : ye gave there- 

of a quickening store to Atri, 

Who, being dear to you, receives your favour. 

6 That gift, which all may gain, ye gave Chyav^na, when he 

grew old, who offered you oblations. 

When yc bestowed on him enduring beauty. 

7 What time his wicked friends abandoned Bhujyu, 0 Asvins, 

in the middle of the ocean, 

Your horse delivered him, your faithful servant. 


3 Whose wealth is SM: having Shrya for your possession or tre,^, 
Surya, the daughter of the Sun. is the consort of the Asyms. See 116. 1?, 

4 The Gods' adorer: deratilth: literally, ttirning or going to the Gods, in 
Mmuch as it is employed in prepaiing the Soma juice. 2 he priest: here, 


perhaps, the pressing stone. ^ 

5 A quickening store : the moaning of mihishvantam, which does not occu 
elsewhere, is uncertain. According to SAyana it means a pit cavern:? 
liberated Atri fmm the cavern, or, literally, ye separated the cavern from A 
For the legend, see I. 116. 12. 

6 Which aU may gain: which you Asvins are ready 

worshipper who needs it. For the story of ChyavAna seel. 116 . 10 , n/. 
13; 118.6. . 

7 Bhujyu : see Vol, I , Index. Your horse : tins meaning is auggestert ^ 
von Roth for the uncertain word Mvd, wliich gnierally appears to n) 
hr^stile or illiberal ‘ ut may perhaps simd m tins par^sage for art^, a , 
lord signifying hor e. S.e I. 117. 14 With horses b.own of hue that fl* 
with swift Wings ye Irou^iht back Bhujyu from the sea of billows, bee 


YU. 01^. 7. 



^TMN 69.] ^ ntOtBDA. <« 

8 Ye lent your aid to Vfika when exhausted, and listened when 

invoked to Sayu’s calling. 

Ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, Asvins, 
strengthened with your strength the barren. 

9 With his fair hymns this singer, too, extols you, waking with 

glad thoughts at the break of morning. 

Ma.y cow nourish him with milk to feed him. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LKIX, . A?vin«. 

Mvy vour gold chiriot, drawn by vigorous horses, come to us, 
blncKing up the earth and heaven, 

Bright with its fellies while its way drops fatness, food-laden, 
rich in coursers, man’s protector. 

2 Let it approach, yoked by the will, three-seate 1, extending far 

and wide o’er fivefold beings. 

Whereon ye visit God-adoring races, bending your course 
whither ye wdl, 0 Asvins. 

3 Renowned, with noble horses, come ye hither : drink. Wond- 

rous Pair, the cup that h dds sweet juices. 

Your ( 5 ar whereon your Spouse is wont to travel marks with 
its track the farthest ends of heaven. 

4 When night was turning to the grey of morning the Maiden, 

Surya’s Daughter, chose your splendour 
When with your power and might yc aid the pious he comes 
through heat to life by your assistance. 
b 0 Chariot-borne, this car of yours invested with rays of light 
comes harnessed to our dwelling. 

Herewith, 0 Asvins, while the dawn is breaking, to this our 
sacrifice bring peace and blessing. 

C Like the wild cattle thirsty for the lightning, Heroes, come 
nigh this day to our libations. 

Men call on you with hymns in many places, but let not other 
worshippers detain you. 

8 Vrika ; liter.illy wolf, or robber. Some man so named seems to bo meant. 
So/w; see I. 118 8; VI 13. 5. 

^ Thu singer: the Rishi Vasishtha. The cow: that is brought to supply 
the milk required for hbatious. 

2 Fivefold beings: ' sarvaprdninah! all living beings, says S&yana. 

3 lowv Spouse : SuryA, daughter of the Sun. 

4 Chose your splendour : seel. 110. 17. 

6 Thirsty for the lightning : which immediately precedes, or accompanies, 
the ram tliey long for. » 



70 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR Vu, 

7 Bhujyu, abandoned in the midst of ocean, ye raised from out 

the water with your horses, 

Uninjured, wingM, flagging not, undaunted, with deeds of 
wonder saving him, 0 Asvins. 

8 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation : come, AsyIrs, 

to the home where food aboundeth. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve U8 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXX. Asvin,. 

Rich in all blessings, Asvins, come ye hither : this plane on 
earth is called your own possession, 

Like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth, whereon, as 
in a lap, ye seat you firmly. 

2 This most delightful eulogy awaits you ; in the man s house 

drink-ofiering hath been heated, ^ 

Which bringeth you over the seas and rivers, yoking as twere 
two well-matched- shining horses. 

3 Whatever dwellings ye possess, 0 Asvins, in fields of men or 

in the streams of heaven. 

Resting upon the summit of the mountain, or bringing food 
to him who gives oblation, 

4 Delight yourselves, ye Gods, in plants and waters when Rishis 

give them and ye find they suit you. 

Ekiriching us with treasures in abundance ye have looked back 
to former generations. 

5 Asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, regard the 

many prayers which Rishis offer. 

Come to the man even as his heart desireth : may we enjoy 
your most delightful favour. 

6 Come to the sacrifice offered you, Nasatyas, with men, obla- 

tions, and prayer duly uttered. 

Come to Vasishtha as his heart desireth, for unto you these 
holy hymns are chanted. 

7 ffoi'ses : not in the text, but supplied by Sftyanaand ubviouMly understood. 
ifiee preceding hymn, 7, note. 

1 This place : the altar. 

2 Drink-offering : ghara^a : the libation of hot milk ; or, the caldron in which 
it is prepared. 

4 Ye have looked hack to former gmerations : Sftyapa explains yugRniM^ 
rently : ‘ (favour ua) as you have favoured former couples [*. e, sacrificers Ww 
their wives]. —Wilson. 

^ r/w man : the institutor of the sacrifice. 



me RtaVBDA. 




74.1 

1 7 This is thp thought, thk is -the song, 0 Aevins; accept this 
hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour, 
j^ay these oiw prayers addressed to you come nigh you. 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXI. Asvbs. 

Thb Night retireth from the Dawn her Sister; the Dark one 
yield eth to the Red her pathway. 

Let us invoke you rich in steeds and cattle : by day and night 
keep far from us the arrow. 

2 Bearing rich treasure in your car, 0 Asvins, come to the 

mortal who presents oblation. 

Keep at a distance penury and sickness ; Lovers of Sweetness, 
day and night preserve us. 

3 May your strong horses, seeking bliss, bring hither your 

chariot at the earliest flush of morning. 

With coursers yoked by Law drive hither, Asvins, your car 
. whose reins are light, laden with treasure. 

4 The chariot, Princes, that conveys you, moving at daylig^it, 

triple-seated, fraught with riches, 

Even with this come unto us, Nasatyas, that laden with all 
food it may approach us. 

5 Ye freed Chyav^na from old age and weakness : ye brought 

the courser fleet of foot to Pedu. 

Ye rescued Atri from distress and darkness, and loosed for 
Jahusha the bonds that bound him. 

6 This is the thought, this is the song, O Asvins : accept this 

hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour. 

May tliese our prayers addressed to you come nigh you. 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXIl. A8vin«. 

Gomb, 0 Nasatyas, on your car resplendent, rich in abundant 
wealth of kine and horses. 

As harnessed steeds, all our laudations follow you whose forms 
shine with nmst delightful beauty. 

2 Come with the Gods associate, come ye hither to us, Nasatyas, 

with your car accordant. 

Twixt you and us there is ancestral friendship and common 
kin : remember and regard it. 

1 The Red : the Sun. The arrow : of disease and death. 

3 Seeking bliss : for men. 

5 For Ckgavdtia, Pedu, Atri, and Jdhusha, Bee Vol. I. Index. There-*p- 
. i^rance, herylded by the Aevins «r Gods of Twilight, of the departed Sun 
ppeai’s to be eymboliaad in all these legends. 



72 OP [BOOK VJi 

3 Awakened are the songs that praise the Asvins, the kindreii 

prayers and the Celestial Mornings. 

Inviting those we long for, Earth and Heaven, the singer 
calleth these Nasixtyas hither. 

4 What time the Dawns break forth in light, 0 Asvins, to you 

the poets otter their devotions. 

God Savitar hath sent aloft his splendour, and fires sing praises 
with the kindled fuel. 

5 Come from the west, come from the east, Nasatyas, come. As- 

vins, from below and from above us. 

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blesvsings. 

HYMN LXXIII. Asvin, 

Wb have overpassed the limit of this darkness while, worship. 

ping the Gods, we sang their praises. 

The song invoketh both Immortal Asvins, far-reaching, born 
of old, great Wonder-Workers. 

2 And, 0 Nasatyas, man’s dear Priest is seated, who brings to 

sacrifice and offers worship. 

Bo near and taste the pleasant juice, 0 Asvins: with food, 

I call you to the sacrifices. 

3 We choosing you, have let our worship follow its course ; je 

Steers, accept this hymn with favour. 

Obeying you as your apjwinted servant, Vasishtha singing 
hath with lauds aroused you. 

4 And these Two Priests come nigh unto our people, united, 

demon-slayers, mighty-handed. 

The juices that exhilarate are mingled. Injure us not, but 
come with happy fortune. 

5 Come from the west, come from the cast, Nasatyas, come, As- 

vins, from below and from above us. 

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXIV. ABvins. 

These morning sacrifices call you. Asvins, at the break of duy, 
For help have I invoked you rich in power and might : for, 
house by house, yc visit all. 


5 The Fivefold People : the five Aryan tribes. See I. 7. 9. 

1 Tlie first half-line has occurred before in I. 92. 6, and 183. 6. 

2 Man's dear Priest : Agn'f. 

4 These Two Priests : the k^-vinn. Demon-slayers ! sl&yen <A R^ikshasafl 
evil spirits of the night which disappear at the coming of the heralds of day- 



TUE RtQVEDA. 


75 


\rMN 75.] 


i 0 Heroes, ye bestow wonderful nourishment : send it to him 
whose songs are sweet* 

Accordant, both of you, drive your car down to us, and drink 
the savoury Soma juice. 

\ Approach ye and be near to us : drink, 0 ye Asvins, of the 
meath. 

Dra v forth the milk, ye Mighty, rich in genuine wealth : in- 
jiiie us not, and come to us. 

It The horses that convey you in their rapid flight down to the 
worsiiipper’s abode, 

With tfiese your speedy coursers. Heroes, Asvins, come, ye 
' Gods, come well-inclined to us. 

5 Yea, verily, our princes seek the Asvins in pursuit of food. 
These shall give lasting glory to our liberal lords, and, both 

Nasatyas, shelter us. 

6 Those who have led the way, like cars, offending none, those 

who are guardians of the men — 

Also through their own might the heroes have grown strong, 
and dwell in safe and happy homes. 


HYMN LXXV. Dawn. 


Bdun in the heavens the Dawn hath flushed, and showing her 
i majesty is come as Law ordaineth. 

8ho hath uncovered fiends and hateful darkness ; best of 
Angirases, hath waked the pathways. 

*2 Rouse us this day to high and happy fortune : to great felicity, 
0 Dawn, promote us. 

Vh:)uchsafe us manifold and splendid riches, famed among mor- 
tals, man-befriending Goddess ! 

3 See, lovely Morning’s everlasting splendours, bright with their 
varied colours, have approached us. 

Filling the region of mid-air, producing the rites of holy wor- 
ship, they have mounted. 

She yokes her chariot far away, and swiftly visits the lands 
wheie the Five Tribes are settled. 

Looking upon the works and ways of mortals. Daughter of 
Heaven, the world’s Imperial Lady. 


3 Ih aw forth the mill' : milk the sweet rain from the firrn.inient. 

^ h ^10 hare led the wa}/, like care : wealthy nobles or princes, ‘the heroes' of 

‘e second line. J > 


iLir ^ • endowed with the noblest ehara'^teristics of the holy 

6 awes. Waked the paihwarje i lighted them for men to use. 



74 THE OF IBOOK F/j 

5 She who is rich in spoil, the Spouse of Surya, wondrous^j 

opulent, rules all wealth and treasures. 

Consumer of our youth, the seers extol her : lauded by priests 
rich Dawn shines out refulgent. 

6 Apparent are the steeds of varied colour, the red steeds car. 

rying resplendent Morning. 

On her all-lovely ear she comes, the Fair One, and brings ricli 
treasure for her faithful servant 

7 True w-ith the True and Mighty with the Mighty, with Gods 

a Goddess, Holy with the Holy, 

She brake strong fences down and gave the cattle : the kiiu 
were lowing as they greeted Morning. 

8 0 Dawn, now give us wealth in kine and heroes, and horses, I 

fraught with manifold enjoyment. ‘ 

Protect our sacred grass from man’s reproaches. Preserve ujj 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX XVI. Dm 

Savitar God of all men hath sent upward his light, designed 
for all mankind, immortal. 

Through the Gods’ power that Eye was first created. Dawn 
hath made all the universe apparent. 

2 I see the paths which Gods are wont to travel, innocuous path 

made ready by the Vasus. 

Eastward the flag of Dawn hath been uplifted ; she hath come 
hither o’er the tops of houses. 

3 Great is, in truth, the number of the Mornings which were 

aforetime at the Sun’s uprising. 

Since thou, 0 Dawn, hast been beheld repairing as to thy love 
as one no more to leave him. 

4 They were the Gods’ companions at the banquet, the ancieii 

sages true to Law Eternal. 

The Fathers found the light that lay in darkness, and will 
effectual words begat the Morning. 


7 Gave the r, attic : restored the rays of light that had beeu imprisoned I*] 
the demons of darkness. 

S At to thy love: to the Sun, who is sometimes called the lover and bo# 
times the husband of Ushas or Dawn. 

4 The Fathers : the ancestors of the ]^i8hw in the spirit-world are nssociat^i 
with the Gods as companions, friends, and assistants. See M. Muller, 
What can it Teach ut f pp. 223, 224. 



THE niQVEDA, 


75 


W 77.1 

Meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive not, of one 
mind, one with another. 

They never break the Gods^ eternal statutes, and injure none, 
in rivalry with Vasus. 

Extolling thee, Blest Goddess, the Vasish{,ha8, awake at early 
morn, with lauds implore thee. 

Leader of kine and Queen of all that strengthens, shine, come 
as first to us, 0 high-born Morning. 

She bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices. The flush- 
ing Dawn is sung by the Vasishthas, 

Giving us riches famed to distant places. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXVII. Dawn. 

She hath shone brightly like a youthful woman, stirring to 

i motion every living creature. 

r Agni hath come to feed on mortals’ fuel. She hath made 

I light and chased away the darkness. 

^ Turned to this All, far-«preading, she hath risen and shone in 
brightness with white robes about her. 

She hath beamed forth lovely with golden colours. Mother of 
kine, Guide of the days she bringeth. 

\ Bearing the Gods’ own Eye, auspicious Lady, leading her 
Courser white and fair to look on. 

Distinguished by her beams Dawn shines apparent, come 
forth to all the world with wondrous treasure. 

r Draw nigh with wealth and dawn away the foeman : prepare 
for us wide pasture free from danger. 

Drive away those who hate us, bring us riches ; pour bounty, 
opulent Lady, on the singer. 

1 Send thy most excellent beams to shine and light us, giving 

us lengthened days, 0 Dawn, O Goddess, 

Grunting us food, thou who hast, all things precious, and 
bounty rich in chariots, kine, and horses. 

' 0 Ushas, nobly-born. Daughter of Heaven, whom the Vasish- 
tnas with their hymns make mighty, 

estow thou on us vast and glorious riches. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

In the same enclosure : the vast aerial hall in which the Gods assemble. 

t hath come to feed on mortals' fuel : * Agni is to be kindled for the 

^ of men.*— Wilson. 

2 Kx'm: rays of light. 

P Qodi ovm Eye, and Dawn’s tehite Courser are the Sun. 



76 THE ITYUfXS OF [BOOK Vi 

HYMN LXXVIIL Daw 

Wb have beheld her earliest lights approaching : her m.ir 
glories part, on high, asunder. 

On car sublime, refulgent, wending hither, 0 Ushas, brin^^tl 
wealth that makes us happy. 

2 The fire well-kindled sings aloud to greet her, and with thci 

hymns the priests are chanting welcome. 

Ushas approaches in her splendour, driving all evil darkne« 
far away, the (loddess. 

3 Apparent eastward are those lights of Morning, sending on 

lustre, as they rise, around them. 

She hath brought forth Sun, sacrifice, and Agni, and far awa 
hath fled detested darkness. 

4 Rich Daughter of the Sky, we all behold her, yea, all raei 

look on Dawn as she is breaking. 

Her car that moves self-harnessed hath she mounted, the cai 
drawn onward by her well-yoked horses. 

5 Inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee, we am 

our wealthy nobles have awakened. 

Show yourselves fruitful, Dawns, as ye are rising. Preset 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXrX. Dawi 

Rousing the lands where men’s Five Tribes are settled, Dawi 
hath disclosed the pathways of the people, 

Sl»e hath sent out her sheen with beauteous oxen. TlieSoi 
with light hath opened earth and heaven. 

2 They paint their bright rays on the sky’s far limits: tli! 

Dawns come on like tribes arrayed for battle. 

Thy cattle, closely shutting up the darkness, asSavitar spreaii 
his arms, give forth their lustre. 

3 Wealthy, most like to Indra, Dawm hath risen, and brougti 

forth lauds that shall promote our welfare. 

Daughter of Heaven, a Godde.ss, she distributes, best of Anp 
rases, treasures to the pious. 


1 Five Tribes: of Aryans Pathways: pathy'A here has 

name meaning as in VII. 75. 1. But according to the Pada text and ^ 1 . 
it is an adjt-ctive agreeing with Us/wth (Dawn), and hignifying beneficial. 

2 They : the Dawns. For battle : supplied by Siyaua. 

3 Best of Angiraset : see VII. 75. 1. I 



TffB JtIQVEBA. 


77 


81 .] 

iBestow on us, 0 Dawn, that ample bounty which thou didst 
send to those who sang thy praises ; 

Thou whom with bellowings of a bull they quickened : thou 
didst unbar the firm-set mountain’s portals. 

Impelling every God to grant his bounty, sending to us the 
charm of pleasant voices. 

Vouchsafe us thoughts, for profit, as thou breakest. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX XX. Dawn. 

; The priests, Vasishthas, are the first awakened to welcome 
Ubhas with their songs and praises, 

Who makes surrounding regions pan asunder, and shows ap- 
parent all existing creatures. 

(living fresh life when she hath hid the darkness, this Dawn 
hath wakened there with new-born lustre. 

Youthful and unrestrained she cometh forward : she hath 
turned thoughts to Sun and tiro and worship. 

I May blessed Mornings shine on us for over, with wealth of 
kine, of horses, and of heroes. 

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, w’ith blessings. 

HYMN LXXXI. Dawn. 

AnvANCiNQ, sending forth her rays, the Daughter of the Sky 
is seen. 

Uncovering, that we may see, the mighty gloom, the friendly 
Lady makes the light. 

I Ihe Sun ascending, the refulgent Star, pours down his beams 
tOL^ether with the Dawui. 

0 Dawn, at thine arising, and the Sun’s, may we attain the 
share alhjttcd ns. 

1 I romptly w'e woke to welcome thee, 0 Ushas, Daughter of 
the Sky, 

Ihec, bounteous One, who hringest all we long to have, and to 
the oflerer health and w'ealth. 


r 4 riu* 8ccond line ia translated hy Prof. Wilson : • thou whom (thy worship- 
welcomed with clamour (loud a.s U bellowing) of a bull.’ 

1 / the doors of the mountain or cloud in which the cows or rays of 

t ^ open th*.* dour. 

! 3 This stanza is repeated from VII. 41. 7, 



n TBS HYMNS OP [BOOK ?/ 

4 Thou, dawning, workest fain to light the great world, ye, 

heaven, Goddess ! that it* may be seen. 

We yearn to be thine own, Dealer of Wealth : may wo bet 
this Mother like her sons. 

5 Bring us that wondrous bounty. Dawn, that shall be famei 

most far away. 

What, Child of Heaven, thou hast of nourishment for man 
bestow thou on us to enjoy. 

6 Give to our princes opulence and immortal fame, and strengti 

in herds of kiue to us. 

May she who prompts the wealthy. Lady of sweet strains, maj 
Ushaa dawn our foes away. 


HYMN LXXXir. Indra-Varuna. 

Grant us vour strong protection, Indra-Varuna, our people, 
and our family, for sacritice. 

May we subdue in fight our evil-hearted foes, him who attach 
the man stedfast in lengthened rites. 

2 0 Indra-Varuna, mighty and very rich ! One of you is called 

Monarch and One Autocrat. 

All Gods in the most lofty region of the air have, Oye Steers, 
combined all power and might in you. 

3 Ye with 3 ’’our strength have pierced the fountains of the floods: 

the Sun have ye brought forward as the Lord in lieavcri. 
Cheered by this magic draught ye, Indra-Varuna, made the dry 
places stream, made songs of piaise flow forth. 

4 In battles and in frays we ministering priests, kneeling upon 

our knees for furtherance of our weal, 

Invoke you, only you, the Lords of twofold wealth, you prompt 
to hear, we bards, 0 Indra-Varuna. 

5 0 [ndra-Varnna, as ye created all tliese creatures of the world 

by your surpassing might, 

In peace and quiet Mitra waits on Varima, the Other, awtui, 
witli the Maruts seeks renown. 


« Lady of sweet strains: sUnritMi:^ according to SAyana, 'speaker of 
truth.’ ‘ Possessing all that is excellent.’— Ludwig. 


2 One of you: Varuiia is called f « 

.plendentfaLrding to Styana), and Indra svarS}. independent ruler, 
according to SAyana, self-resplendent. 

4 Twofold wealth : celestial and terrestrial. 

5 Waits on Varana : and bo acknowledges hU supremacy. TU 
Indra. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


79 


83 .) 


That Variina^s high worth may shine prefiirrinent, these Twain 
have measured each his proper power and might. 

The One siibdueth the destructive enemy; the Other with a 
few forth ereth many a man. 

No trouble, no misfortune, Indra-Variina, no woe from any 
side assails the mortal man 

Whoso sacrifice, 0 Gods, ye visit and enjoy : ne'er doth the 
crafty guile of mortal injure him. 

With your divine protection, Heroes, come to us ; mine invo- 
cation hear, if ye be pleased therewith. 

Bestow ye upon us, 0 Indra-Varuna, your friendship and your 
kinship and your favouring grace. 

In battle after battle, Indra-Varuna, be ye our Championsr, ye 
who are the peoples’ strength, 

When both opposing bands invoke you for the fight, and men 
that they may gain offspring and progeny. 

Vlay Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us glory 
and great shelter spreading far. 

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar’s song 
of praise, the God who strengthens Law. 

HYMN LXXXllI. Indra-Varuna. 

Looking to you and your alliance, 0 ye Men, armed with 
lm)ad axes they went forward, fain for spoil. 

ifc smote and slew his DiVsaand his Aryan enemies, and helped 
Sadas' with favour, Indra-Varuna. 

Where heroes come together with their banners raised, in the 
encounter where is naught for us to love, 

^here all things that behold the light are terrified, there did 
ye comfort us, 0 Indra-Varuna. 

The boundaries of earth were seen all dark with dust : 

0 Indra-Varuna, the shout went up to heaven. 

The enmities of the people compassed me about. Ye heard 
niy calling and ye came to me with help. 

The One : Varuna. 


praised by the VrtBiiBhthae, the family priesta' of Sud As, 
3^ cj ^ given him the victory over the ten confederate 

* beeVII, 33. 3, 

Hfroes ; India and Varuna, Armed ibith broad axes: 
ini? i * f f^ioMes.’ — Wilson. Ludwfg maintains th«t the former 
Perfectly impossible, and argues that prithupdh'savah muAt mee^n 
^ f'tlnis and the ParSuS'.’ / . z' v . 

' G'^assmann, whom Prof. Petersoa 

’ P differentty : * wb^e all' fhAt H dear w at stake.* 



80 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vj 

4 With your resistless weapons, Indra-Varuria, ye conquere 

Bheda and ye gave Sudas your aid. 

Ye heard the prayers of these amid the cries of war: effectue 
was the service of the Tritsus’ priest. 

5 0 Indra-Varuna, the wickedness of foes and mine assailautj 

hatred sorely trouble me. 

Ye Twain are Lords of riches both of earth and heaven : s 
grant to us your aid on the decisive day. 

6 The men of both the hosts invoked you in the fight, Iiidr 

and Varuna, that they might win the wealtl), 

What time ye helped Sudas, with all the 1 ritsu folk, when th 
Ten Kings had pressed him down in their attack. 

7 Ten Kings who worshipped not, 0 Indra-Varuna, oonfederatj 

in war prevailed not o’er Sudas. 

True was the l>oast of heroes sitting at the feast : so at tliei 
invocations Gods were on their side. 

8 0 Indra-Varuna, ye gave Sudas your aid when the Ten King 

in battle compassed him about, 

There where the white robed Tritsus with their braided haii 
skilled in song worshipped you with homage and with hymii 

9 One of you Twain destroys the Vritras in tlie fight, the 0tli{ 

evermore maintains his holy Laws. 

We call on you, ye Mighty, with our hymns of praise. Voucl 
safe us your protection, Indra-Varuna. 

10 May India, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryarnan vouchsafe us glor 
and great shelter sj>reading far. 

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savi tar’s sooj 
of praise, the God who strengthens Law. 

HYMN LXXXIV. Indra-Varu« 

Kings, Indra-Vanma, I would turn you hither to thisoiii 
sacrifice with gifts and homage. 

Held in both arms the ladle, dropping fatness, goes of itseii 
to you whose forms are varied. 

2 Dyaus quickens and promotes your high dominion who bi« 
with bonds not wrought of rope or cordage. 

Far from us still be Varuiia’s displeasure : may ludra gi«" 
spacious room to dwell in. . 

4 Bheda: nee VII. 18. X9. i i Vm+n aiflea 

5 Both of earth and heaven : or, perhaps, belonging to both Bides. 

8 With their braided hair : see VII 33. 1. 

10 This stanza ia repeated from the preceding hymn. 

2 Dyau*. cf. VI. 62. 9. Not wrought of roft: moral and figurative," 
material* 



THE RIGYEDA. 


81 


rYMN 85 .] 

; y® sacrifice fi\ir amid the assemblies : make ye our 
prayers approved among our princes. 

May God-sent riches come for our possession : further ye us 
with your delightful succours. 

0 Iiidra-Varuna, vouchsafe us riches with store of treasure, 
food, and every blessing; 

For the Aditya, banisher of falsehood, the Hero, dealetU 
wealth in boundless plenty. 

May this my song reach Varuna and Tndra, and, strongly 
urging, win me sons and offspring. 

To the Gods’ banquet may we go with riches. Pi;eserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXV. Indra-Varmia. 

Full you I deck a harmless hymn, presenting the Soma juice 
to Varuna ami Indra — 

A hymn that shines like heavenly Dawn with fatness. May 
they be near us on the mareh and guard us. 

\ Hero where the arrows fall amid the banners both hosts invoke 
the Gods in emulation. 

0 liidra-Varuna, smite hack those our foemcn, yea, smite them 
with your shaft to every quarter. 

1 Self-liicid in their scats, e’en heavenly Waters endowed with 
Godhead Varuna and Indra. 

One of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, the Other 
smites and slays resistless foemcn. 

[ Wise be the priest and skilled in Law Eternal, who wdth liis 
sacred gifts and adoratiurn 

Brings you to aid us with your might, Adityas: let him have 
viands to promote his welfare. 

) May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, strongly 
urging, win me sons and offspring. 

I To the Gods’ banquet may wo go \vith riches. Preserve ns 
! evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

h— 

The Aditya: Varuna. 

|1 On the march : the Rishi prays for ai ' in an expected battle. 

3 ^VitU Godhead : libations of Soma juice, with which water is mingled, 
pport the (h)da in their several stations : iomcndpydyivt hi devatdh sve hik 
^^ ite'vaiishthante . — SAyana. Distinct and sumicred : differently treated, re- 
U’ded or punished in accordance with their deserts. ‘The other sustains 
« separate creatures.’ — Muir. ‘The one protects the tribes which are scat- 
reu abioad.’— Grassinann. 

4 1L<(C he the priest: or, wise must the priest be, 8kille<l, etc. He: the 
^titutor of sacrifice. Viands : sacrificLd food to be offered to the Gods. 



{2 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vll 

HYMN LXXXVI. Varuna. 

Wise, verily, arc creatures through his greatness who stayed 
even spacious heaven ami earth asunder ; 

Who urged the liigh and mighty sky to motion, the Star of 
old, and spread the earth before him. 

2 With mine own heart I commune on the question how Varuiia 

and I may be united. 

What gift of mine will he accept unangcred ? When may I 
calmly look and find him gracious ? 

3 Fain to know this my sin I question others : I seek the wise, 

0 Vanina, and ask (hem. 

This one same answer even the suges gave me, Surely 
Vanina is angry with thee. 

4 What, Varun- 1 , hath been my chief transgression, that thou 

w'ouldst slay the friend who sings thy praises ? 

Tell me, Uncon<|uorable Lord, and quickly sinless will I ap- 
proach thee with mine homage. 

5 Free us from sins committed by our fathers, from those where- 

in \ve have ourselves otTended. 

0 King, loose, like a thief who feeds the cattle, as from the 
cord a calf, set free Vasislitha. 

6 Not our own will betrayed us, but seduction, thoughtlessnesij, 

Varnna I wine, dice, or anger. 

The old is near to lead astray the younger: even sleep removetb 
not all evil-doiiig. 

7 Slavelike may I do service to the Bounteous, serve, free from 

sin, the God inclined to anger. 

This gentle Lord gives wisdom to the simple : the wiser Cod 
leads on the wi^e to riches. 

8 0 Lord, 0 Vanina, may this laudation come close to thee and 

lie within thy spirit. 

May it be well wdth ns in rest and labour. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 


1 The Star • the Sun. 

6 Like a thief who feeds the cattle : who has performed penance for hid thefh 
and, at the completion of the service, offered fodder to the stolen animal: 
has feasted on stolen cattle.’ — M. Muller. But see Pisohel, Vedische Studies, 

1. p. 106. 

6 Seduction : or, as Slyana explains, ‘the settled course of fate.’ 

The old is near : ‘ The stronger perveits the weaker.’ — Muir. ‘ There i«* 
senior [God] ia the proximity of the junior [man].’— Wilson. 



•TltE ElOVEDA, 


63 


r/fj/y 87.] 

HYMN LXXXVII. Varuna. 

VARU!jrA cut a pathway out for Surya, and led the watery floods 
of rivers onward 

The Marcs, as in a race, speed on in order. Ho made great 
channels for the days to follow. 

2 The wind, thy l)reath, hath sotinded through the region like 

a wild beast that seeks his food in pastures. 

Within these two, exalted Earth and Heaven, 0 Varuna, are 
all the forms thou lovest. 

3 Vanina’s spies, sent forth upon their errand, survey the two 

world-halves well formed and fashioned. 

Wise are they, holy, skilled in sacrilicos, the furtherers of the 
praise-songs of the prudent. 

4 To mo who iinderstand hath Varuna spoken, the names borne 

by the (>ow are three times seven. 

The sapient Clod, knowing the place’s secret, shall speak as 
’twere to teach the race that cometh. 

5 On him three heavens re.t and arc supported, and the three 

earths are there in sixfold order. 

The wise King V’arnna hath made in heaven that Golden Swing 
to cover it with glory. 

0 Like Vanina from heaven he sinks in Sindhu, like a white- 
shining spark, a strong wild creature. 

Rtiling in depths and meting out the region, great savin^y 
power hath he, this world’s (kmtroller. ° 


1 The Mares: the swift lis ers. The half line i.s <lifHcult. ‘ Hastening (to 
iH tabk) as .1 hvTse let loo e rushes to (a Hock of) mares, he divided the great 
ight. from the days Wdson. ‘ Like a troop (of hor.s,^s) Jet louse, following 
mares, he lias made great chantiels for the days ’ — Muir. 

3 I arena's apies • the other Adityas, or perhaps the Fathers. 

4 The Vow: according to Siyana, Y^k or Speech in the form of a cow 

aviiig twenty-one metres attached to lier breast, throat, and head, or holdin>- 
len lines of twenty-one kinds of sacrifice. Aditi may be intended, or Piisnl 
nil the thrice-seven Maruts. * ’ 

'III, s'lpiciit (rod: ‘The wise god. though he know.s them, has not revealed 

1C mysteries of (her) place, which he desires to grant to a future generation.’ 

^nr According to Sayana, 7i<f in tlii.s line i.s not negative. 

•> l^or the three heavens and three cm ths see Vol. I , Index. In sixfo’d order 
'1 flaps leferriug to the heavens and earths, or else the three earths arbitrarily 
■" >le 1. ‘ The three earth.s with their ix seasons ’ — Wilson. That Golden 
"’(’If/' the Sun. 

*1 //e.’ th« Sun. Sindhu: or the sea. Riding in depths: referring t<» 
whose dominion, following the setting sun, reaches to the depths of 
Iv region : or, who measured out the firmament. 

IS interpretation of this .stanza is dififerent : ‘(Radiant) as the sun, 
i intp/ I ocean (in its bed), white as a drop (of water), vigorous as 
profound praise, distributor of water, the powerful 
P rter beyond sin, the ruler of this existing (world).* — Wilson, 



84 TBE HYMNS OF {BOOK F//. 

7 Before this Vanina may we be sinless — him who shows mercy 
even to the sinner — 

AVhile we are keeping Aditi’s ordinances. Preserve us ever^ 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXVIII, Varuna, 

Present to Varnna thine hymn, Vasishtha, bright, most de^ 
lightfiil to the Bounteous Giver, 

Who bringctli on to us the Bull, the lofty, the Holy, laden 
with a thousand treasures. 

2 And now, as I am come before his presence, I take the face o( 

Varuna for Agni's. 

So might he bring — Lord also of the darkness — the light in 
heaven that I may sec its beauty ! 

3 When Varuna and I embark together and urge our boat into 

the midst of ocean, 

We, when we ride o’er ridges of the waters, will swing within 
that swing and there be happy. 

4 Varuna placed Vasishtha in the vessel, and deftly with hia 

might made him a Rishi. 

When days shone bright the Sage made him a singer, while 
the heavens bioadened and the Dawns were lengthened. 

5 What hath become of those our ancient friendships, when 

without enmity we walked together 1 
T, N'aruna, thou glorious Lord, liave entered thy lofty home, 
thine house with thousiuid portals. 

6 If he. thy true ally, hath sinned against thee, still, Varuiiii, 

he is the fiiend thou lovedst. 

Let us not, Living One, as sinners, know thee : give shelter, 
as a Sage, to him who lauds thee, 


7 Aditi's ordinances • according to Sayana, Aditi h<?re means ‘the Mighty,’ 
that i.s, Varuna. 

1 The Bull : the Snu, 

2 For Aejni's: that i.-i, it appears to mo to be flaming with anger. 

3 ‘ The kernel of the hymn lies in vcr.sei 3 to 6. The singer believes that 
he has been forsaken by his helper Viu-una : with anguish he remembers hu 
ci-inmuuion with the God in former times. In a vision he sees himself tr 'iiti; 
hite<l into Vurnna’a realm, he goes a.ailiiig with the God, is called to be 

or Iioly singer Ui the God, and i.s in liis palace with him, Now, Varuna 
\\ithdiawn his f.ivour, yet let him liavo mercy on his singer, and not punish 
him ho grievously fur his sin. The hymn perhaps originally closed with verso 
6.’ — Prof, von Roth’s note in the Sichenzhj Lieder, translated by 
pfteiv-ou. But see Hillebrandt, Varuna und Mitra, pp. 25, 20, 



RIQVEDA. «5 

7 While wo abide in these fixed habitations, and from the lap of 
Aditi win favour^ 

May Varuna untie the bond that binds us. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXDt. Varnra. 

Let me not yet. King Vanma, enter into the house of clay : 
Have meicy, spare me, Mighty Lord. 

2 When, Thunderer ! I move along tremulous like a wind-blown 

skin 

Have mercy, spare me> Mighty Lord. 

3 0 Bright and Powerful God, through want of strength I erred 

and went astray : 

Have mercy, spare me. Mighty Lord. 

4 Thirst found thy worshipper though he stood in the midst of 

water-floods : 

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord. 

5 0 Varuna, whatever the offence may he which wc as men com- 

mit against the heavenly host. 

When through our want of thought we violate thy laws, 
punish us not, 0 God, for that iniquity. 

HYMN XG. V.^yu, 

To you pure juices, rich in raeath, are offered by priests through 
longing for the Pair of Heroes. 

Drive, Vayn, bring thine harnessed horses hither : drink the 
pressed Soma till it make thee joyful. 


7 Aditi: here said to tiieaii earth. 


Tlie hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir 0. Texts, V. 67, Prof. M. 
luller, Ave Sand'. Lit., .'>40, the authors of Siebeuzig Licder, p. 12, and Prof, 
^eterson, /fgnuts from the Iligveda, p. 287. 

1 The house of day : the grave. Cf. Atharva-veda, V. 30. 14. 

2 Thunderer: adrivnh, Caster of the Stone, a comuion epithet of Indra, 
nt not ssuitible to Varuna. TiYmHlous: Sfty.iiia adds saityens, witli cold; 

Prof. Wilson observes that ‘ the l^urnna-piUa, a kiml of dropsy, seems to 
'cteferred to.' Cf. Atharva-veda, IV. 16 7, 

4 Thirst: avarice. /» the midst of ivaterjlonds : when surrounded by 
ihuiidant wealth. According to the Commentator, the allusion is to Vasish- 
jha’s sea- voyage ; or perhaps the perpetual thirst of dropsy may be inteuiled. 

The last three stanzas are addressed to Indra and Vftyu as a dual Deity. 

2 The Pair of Beross : Indra and "V Avu. 



56 TUE HYMENS OP [BOOK Vli, 

2 Whoso to thee, the Mighty, brings oblation, pure Soma unto 

thee, piire-driuking Vayu, 

That mail thou makcst famous among mortals : to him strong 
sons are born in quick succession. 

3 The God whom both these worlds brought forth for riches, 

whom heavenly Dhishana for our w calth appointeth, 

His team of harnessed horses waits on Vayu, and, foremost, on 
the radiant Treasure-bearer. 

4 The spotless Dawns with fair bnght days have broken; they 

found the spaidous light when tliey were shining. 

Eagerly tliey disclosed the stall of cattle : floods streamed for 
them as in the days aforetime. 

5 These with their truthful spirit, shining brightly, move on 

provided with tlieir natural insi'iht. 

Viands attend the car that beareth Heroes, your car, ye Sovran 
Pair, India and Vayu. 

C May those who give us heavenly light, these rulers, with gifts 
of kiiie aud hor.*<es, gold aiul treasures, 

These pimces, through full life, Indra and Vayu! oercorae 
in battle with their steeds aud heroes. 

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 Indra- \ ayu, 
with our fair laudations, 

Exerting all our power call you to aid us. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCI. Vftyii. 

Were not, in sooth, the Gods aforetime blameless, wliose 
plensure was increased by adoration! 

Fur Vayu and f ;r man in his aflliction they caused the Morning 
to arise with hiCtrya. 

.3 The God: apparently, Indra Dhukaiyt : a Uoddea.^ of prosperity and 
gain. The radiant Treasure beara' : perhapa Soma. 

4 They foinul : tlie Angirases. ‘Tliey arc not named in the text, but 
SAyaiici refers the whole to them ; by their praise of Vdyu the dawn bide, 
the stolen cattle weie rescued, aud the obstructed rain set at liberty. " 
Wilson. 

6 These : the institntors of Hacrifice. 

6 These rulers, these }trinces, are the wealthy nobles who defray the expenses 
and reward the pi iests. 

Indra is associated with VAyu in almost every stanza. 

1 For Fdyu: I translate the vdyare of the text, but it is evident 
dydee, for Ayu, or the living one, should be read in its stead. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


87 


UTMN 92.1 

2 Guardians infallible, eager as envoys, preserve us safe through 

many months and autumns. 

. Addressed to you, our fair praise, Indra-Vayu, implores your 
favour 'and renewed well-being. 

3 Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he seeketh men with rich 

food whose treasures are abundant. 

They have arranged them of one mind with Vayu : the men 
have wrought all noble operations. 

4 So far aa native power and strength permit yon, so far as men 

behold whose eyes have vision, 

0 ye pu re-drinkers, drink with us pure Soma : sit on this 
sacred grass, Indra and Vayu. 

5 Driving down teams tliat bear the lovely Heroes, hitherward, 

India- Vayu, come together. 

To you this [irime of savoury juice is offered : here loose your 
horses and be friendly-minded. 

C Your hundred and your thousand teams, 0 Indra and Vayu, 
all-uiunihcent, which attend \ou, 

With these most graoioiis-minded come yo hither, and drihk, 
O Heioes, of the mcath we offer. 

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 Indra-Yayu» 
witli our fair laudations, 

Exerting all our power, call yon to aid us. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCTI. ' y.\vu. 

0 Vayu, drinker of the pure, bo near us : a thousand teams 
are tiiine, All-bounteous Giver. 

To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, \vhoso first 
draught, God, thou takest as thy portion. 

2 Prompt at the holy rites forth camo the presser with Soma- 

draughts for India and for Vayu, 

Vheii iniuibteriiig priests with strong devotion bring to you 
-1 wain the first taste of the Soma. 

3 file teams wdierewith thou seekest him who offers, within his 
home, 0 Vayu, to direct him. 

1 herewith send wealth to us with full enjoyment, a hero son 

^'-nd gifts of kine and horses. 

3 Jh iccheth: Vityu. The meaning of the stanza is obscure. 

Ileroct: Indra and VAyu. 

1 Erinlcv of the mire: or brierbt. Soma. 



83 tub hymns of [BOOK F//. 

4 Near to the Gods and making Indra joyful, devout and 0 % 

ing precious gifts to Va,yu, 

Allied with princes, smiting down the hostile, may we witli 
heroes conquer foes in battle. 

5 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come (5 

our sacrifice and solemn worship. 

Come, Vayn, make thee glad at this libation. Preserve nj 
evermore, ye Gods, with i)lessings. 

HYMN XCIII. Indra-i^n^, 

Slayers of enemies, Indra and Agni, accept this day our new- 
born pure laudatkui. 

Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly 
strength to him who craves it. 

2 For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, growing tojie- 

ther, waxing in your vigour. 

Lords of the pasture filled with ample riches, bestow upon ib 
strength both fresh and lasting. 

^3 Yea when the strong have entered our assembly, and singer, 
seeking with their hymns your favour. 

They are like steeds wh() come into the race-course, thos* 
men who call aloud on Iiidra-Agiii. 

4 The singer, seeking with his hymns your fiivour, bogs splen- 

did riches of their first possessor. 

Further us with new bounties, Indra-Agni, armed with stroig 
thunder, slayers of Hie foeman. 

5 When two gi eat hosts, arrayed sgainst each other, meet 

clothed with brightness, in the fierce encounter 
Stand ye beside the godly, smite the godless; and still assist 
the men who press the Soma. 

G To this our Soma-pressing, Indra-Agni, come ye prepared to 
show your loving-kindness, 

For not at any time have ye despised us. So may I dnw 
you with all strengthenings hither. 

7 So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou Mim, 
Vanina, and Indra. ^ 

4 Allied: the priesta are the allies and moral supporters of the princes 
in war. 

, .5 Jn hundreds and in thousands : cf. I. 135. 3. 

3 The strong : the nobles who institute sacrifices. 

4 Their first possessor : each God who is invoked. 

5 Great hosts: ‘hosts' must be supplied. The feminine dual adjeck'®* 
have no substantive in the text. 



TEn RIOVEDA. 


'jYME 81.1 

1 Forgive whatever sin we have committed : may Aryaman and 

Aditi remove it* 

8 While we accelerate these our sacrifices, may we win strength 
from both of you, 0 Agni : 

ISe’ev may the Maruts, India, Vishnu slight us. Preserve Us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blesssngs. 

HYMN XCIV. Indra-Agni. 

As rain from out the cloud, for you, ludra and Agni, from 
my soul 

This noblest praise hath been produced. 

2 Do ye, 0 Indra-Agni, hear the singer’s call ; accept his songs. 
Ye Rulers, grant his heart’s desire. 

3 Givo ns not up to poverty, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni, nor 
To slander and reproach of men. 

4 To Indra and to Agni we bring reverence, high and holy hymn, 
And, craving help, soft words with prayer. 

5 Dor all these holy singers here implore these Twain to succour 

them, 

And priests that they may win them strength. 

C Eager to laud you, we with songs invoke you, bearingsacred faod» 
Fain for success in sacrifice. 

7 Indra and Agni, coin^ to us with favour, ye who conquer men : 
Lot not the wicked master us* 


8 At MO time let the injurious blow of hostile mortal fallen us : 
0 Indra-Agni, slielter us. 

9 Wliatever wealth wc crave of you, in gold, in cattle, or in 

Steeds, 

That, Indra-Agni, let us gain ; 

0 When heroes prompt in worship call Indra and Aani, Lords 

or steeds, 

Beside the Soma juice effused. 

1 Call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the 

loemoi), those 

— delight in hymns of praise. 

awl Aditi : Mitra aiiU others being umlerBtocKl, aa the verb is 
8 0 Ag)ii : that Indra and Agni. 


t*i. “ copious m its how, and is doubly benc- 

^^1, ^7 ? " 7 . ‘'"nging blessings to the worshipper. From my 

B pa.s,,Ko of H,;, explained by the Commentator here and in the correspond- 
D (Jui) I A SAmaveda by 9totu}%, praiser or worshipper. 

’K'lltotoA wWnh’'i.L!®ii7! svitsbota, instead of 



»0 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 7/; 

12 Slay ye the wicked man whose thought is evil, of the deoioii 
kind. 

Slay him who stays the waters, slay the Serpent with youj 
deadly dart. 

HYMN XCV. Sara.vati 

This stream Sarosvati with fostering current comes forth, om 
sure defence, our fort of iron. 

As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty an^ 
inight all other waters. 

2 Pure in her course from mountains to the ocean, alone ol 

streams Snrasvati hath listened. 

Til inking of wealth and the great world of creatures, shs 
poured for Nahusha her milk and fatness. 

3 F'riendly to man he grew among the women, a strong yoim^ 

Steer amid the Holy Ladies. 

He gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and deeb 
their bodies for success in battle. 

4 May this Sarasvati be pleased and listen at this our sacrifice, 

auspicious Lady, 

When we with reverence, on our knees, implore her close kiii 
' to wealth, most kind to those she loveth. 

5 These offerings have ye made with adoration : say this, Saras 

vatk and accept our praises; ^ 

And, placing us under tliy dear protection, may wo approacl 
thee, as a tree, for shelter. 

6 For thee, 0 Blest Sarasvati, Vasishtha hath here unbarred thf 

doors of sacied Order. 

Wax, Bright One, and give strength to him who lauds thee 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. ^ 

12 Him who sUujk the waters: udadhim: according to Sftyana, like ai 
ududlih. water-holder or pitcher. The Serpent: dbho[/dm,‘ thecoiler,’ e.xph™ 
differently by SAyaiia, aa ‘one who enj^ya good tliinga taken ftoui ti 
worshippers.’ 

1 Sarasv<(ti : Sindhu or Indus appears to be intended under this 
See VI. 61. 3, and Vedic Hymns, I. p. 60, 

2 A^d/m,s •'( a ; according to the legend, a King who prayed to Saras\atl 
gave him butter and milk sufficient for the thonsaud year sacrifice ^ 
was about to i)erform. Tlie Nahushas, the people living on the banks o 
river, are probably intended. 

3 He grew : S.iraavAn, the consort of Sarasvati. 

5 'These offerings : this lialf-line is very obscure. Prof. Ludwig 
these words may be supposed to be spoken by Sarasvati to her vvordiipr^ 
but he is not satisfied of the correctness of his conjectnre. * "Jej 

thee S , these oblations with reverence (may we receive fi om thee afnue 
' — Wils m. 



YMN 97.] 


THE RIGVEDA, 


91 


HYMN XCVI. SaraBTfttl. 

I SING a lofty song, for she is mightiest, most divine of Streams. 

Sarasvati will 1 exalt with hymns and lauds, and, 0 Vasishtha, 
Heaven and Earth, 

When in the fulness of their strength the Purus dwell, Beau- 
teous One, on thy two grassv banks. 

Favour us thou who ha.st the Maruts f^or thy friends •: stir up 
the hounty of our chiefs. 

So nuiy Sarasvati auspicious send good luck; she, rich in spoil, 
is never niggardly in thought, 

AVhon praised in Jainadagui's way and lauded as Vasishtha 
liiuds. 

We call upon Saras van, as tin married men who long for wives, 

I As liberal men who yearn for sons. 

^ Be tliou our kind protector, O Sarasvan, with those waves of 
' thine 

Baden with sweets and dropping oil. 

6 May we enjoy Sarasvau's breast, all-beautiful, that swells with 
streams, 

May we gain food and progeny. 

HYMN XeVir. Brihaspati. 

Wheue Heaven and Earth combine in men’s assembly, and 
those who love the Gods delight in worship, 

Where the libations are effused for India, may he come first 
to drink and make him stronger. 

! We crave the heavenly grace of Gods to guard us — so may 

^ lirihaspati, 0 friends, exalt us — 

lhat he, the Bounteous God, may find us sinless, who giveth 
from a distance like a father. 

I Ilcavni and Earth : heaven as the home of the Goddess, and earth where 
3 nuwfs as a river. 

‘'ibe settled on both banks of the Sarasvati or 
^Cf Vol L, IiKlex. Grnss;! banks : this, as vou Roth has .Miirgeated, 

1 / but the expression is difficult. ISee 

lebrandt, Vedische Mytkologie, p 2.54. 

^ Jumadagni: u celebrated ancient Uishi. 


lid 9 \u ^ o Brnhmanaspati are the deities of 

liasmti * Bnhaspati of 10, and the lest of tlie hynm is addres.>ed to 

‘dot Brahmanaspati are one and the same God, the 

I H'l 1. 14. 3. 

f^acrihW ^iirth combine : where Gods and men meet at the place 

^av hisVs«/]r SftNana explains differently : 

I yp thorses approach).’— Wilson 

lier h« i^ f«r away he gives us what we ask like a 

'UU 13 near at hainl r.urlurir* 



92 ra2 ByUNS OP [BOOK F/^ 

3 That Brahmana^ipati, most High and Gracious, I glorify/ \vi(| 

ofteringa and with homage. 

May the great song of praise, divine, reach Indra who k thj 
King of prayer the Goda^ creation. 

4 May that Brihaspati who brings all blessings, most dearlj: 

loved, be seated by our altar. | 

Heroes and wealth we crave ; may he bestow them, and liejj 
us safe beyond the men who vex us. j 

5 To us these Deathless Ones, erst born, have granted this 

of ours which gives the Immortal pleasure. I 

Let U.S invoke Brihaspati, the fueless, the clear-voiced God,tliJ 
Holy One of households. 

6 Him, this Brihaspati, his red-hued horses, drawing togetlie 

full of strength, bring hither. 

Rolled in red colour like the cloud, they carry the Lordi 
Might whose friendship gives a dwelling. 

7 For he is pure, with hundred wings, refulgent, with sword c 

gold, impetuous, winning sunlight. 

Sublime Brdiaspati, easy of accotes, grantefch his friends mo 
bountiful refreshment. 

8 Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the Deity’s Parents, hav 

made Brihaspati increase in grandeur, 

Glorify him, 0 friends, who merits glory : may he give pray 
fair way and easy passage. 

0 This, Brahmanaspati, is your laudation : prayer hath be( 
made to thunder-wielding India. 

Favour our songs, wake up our thought and spirit : destn 
the godless and our foeraeii’s malice. 

10 Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, 
Brihaspati, and thoU, 0 Indra. 

Mean though he bo, give wealth to him who lauds yo 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings* 

3 The GocU creation / devakfUasya i inspired, or, literally, made, by tl 

Gods, ^ 1 rM lis 

6 Our hymns of praise which arc acceptable to the immortal 
been given to us by the everlasting deities themselves. SHyana s ‘ 
is different : ‘ may the first born immortals (by his command) bestow f 
the food that ia necessary for existence.’— Wilson. 

6 Whou friendship gives a dwelling t I adopt the interpretation g"’ 
Professor Cowell in his note on the passage in Wilson’s translation. 

7 With hundred mngs : ‘ borne by numerous oonveyanoes.’—Wilaofl. 

8 In grandeur! or, by their might. 

10 Mean : or. Door. 



■UN 99,] the RIOVEDA, 93 

HYMN XCVIir, I,,,,. 

Priests, offer to tho Lord of all the people the mjlked-out 
stalk of rforaa, radiant-coloured. 

No wild-bull knows his drinking-place like ludra who ever 
seeks him who hath pressed the Soma. 

Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant 
food which thou hast had aforetime. 

0 liulra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma 
set before thee. 

Thou, newiy-born, for strength didst drink the Soma ; the 
Mother told thee of thy future greatness. 

3 Iiulra, thou hast filled mid-air’s wide region, and given the 
Gods by battle room and freedom, 

; MJieii thou hast urged the arrogant to combat, proud in their 
streiigth of arm, wo will subdue them. 

Or, Indra, when thou tightest girt by heroes, we in tho glori- 
ous fray with thoo will conquer. 

1 1 will declaio the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent nets 

i which Maghavau hath accomplished. 

When ho had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma be- 
came his own entire possession. 

Tlane is this woiM of llocUs and herds around ttiee, which 
With the eye ut Surya thou beholdest. 

Thon, India, ait alone the Lord of cattle : may we enjoy the 
treasure which thou givest, 

Ye Tivain are Lords of wealtli in cartli and heaven, thon, 0 
bnhiispati, and thou, 0 Indr, a. 

-Mean though lie be, give wealth to liira who lauds you. 

1 reserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

,, HY.MN XCIX. 

-IHV come not nigh thy majesty who growest beyond all bound 

. ■uid nioasuro with thy body, 

ihetli thy two regions of tl.e earth, 0 Visb.ni, we know : thou, 
Lod, luiowest the highest also. 


ruddy, here explained by the Com- 


“«::Cu'r-' p-e-- hath 

6 10.0 bom already, nor among those who shall be born hereafter. 


[lovvor Tedious Crow firmament. ‘The 

r"- 'vhithf.,. of our perception; the thiid belongs to 

'd hia aacending strides.’-— Wullia, 



H Tm OP [BOOK fji 

2 None who is born or being born, God Vishnu, bath reacliei 

the utmost limit of thy grandeur. 

The vast high vault of heaven hast thou supported, and fixed 
earth’s eastern pinnacle securely. 

3 Rich in sweet food he ye, and rich in milch-kiiie, with fertile 

pastures, fain to do men service, 

Both tiiesc worlds, Vishnu, hast thou stayed asunder, and 
firmly fixed tlio earth with pegs around it. 

4 Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating 

Sfirya, Dawn, and Agni. 

0 Heroes, ye h!‘ve conquered in your battles even the, bull, 
jawed Dasa’s wiles and magic. 

5 Ye have destroyed, thou, Indra, and thou, Vishnu, Samlmn' ' 

niiie-and ninety fenced castles. 

Ye Twain smote down a hundred times a thousand resistle 
heroes of the royal Varchiu. 

G This is the lofty hvmn of praise, exalting the Lords of Miight 
Stride, the stronur and lofty. 

1 laud you iu the solemn synods, Vishnu : pour ye food on n 

in our camp.s, 0 Indra. 

7 0 Vishnu, unto thoe my lips cry Vaslut ! Let this mine offer 
iug, Sipivislita, please thee. 

May these my .songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us e\e[' 
more, ye Gods, with hlcssings. 

HYMN C. Vi^iinii, 

Ne’kr doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, briugeth luJ 
gift to the far-striding Vishnn. 

He who adoretli hiin^willi all his spirit winneth himself so 
great a beuof.ictor. 

2 Thou, Vishnu, con>tant in thy courses, gavest good-will to all 
men, and a hymn that lasteth, 

That thou m’glitst move us to abundant comfort of verfi 
splemlid wealth with store of iiorses. 


3 The first line appe.ar.s to be Visbpu’a blessing on heaven and earth " 
be parted and supported them. 

4 Bull-jawed ; or Vrinlinsipra may be the name of the D&sa. 

r> Royal Varchin ’ see II. 14. 6. 

7 Vaifhat : the exclamation used on making an oblation. SipivislUa 
of Vishnu of uncertain etymology and meaning ‘ Invested with rays ot ig o 
according to Sdyana. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 87, 88, note, 

2 A hymn that latteth : continually recurring occasion to praise thee. 



THE niQVEDA, 


95 


'MN 101 .] 

Three times strode forth this God in all his grandeur over this 
Ciirth briglit with a hundred splendours. 

Koremost be Visbnn, stronger than the strongest : for glorious 
IS his name who lives for ever. 

Over this earth with mighty step strode Vishnu, ready to 
gi\e it for a home to Mann. 

Ill him the hiimhle people trust for safety : he, nobly born, 
liath made them spacious dwellings. 

To tlay I land tliis name, 0 Sipivishta, I, skilled in rules, the 
name of thee the Noble. 

Yea, I the poor and weak praise thee the Mighty who dwellest 
ill the realm beyond this region. 

What was there to be blamed in thee, 0 Vishnu, when thou 
declaredst, I am Sipivishta 1 

Hide not tins form from us, nor keep it secret, since thou didst 
vear ayotlier shape in battle. 

0 Vishnu, unto tliee my li()S cry Vashat ! Let this mine offer- 
ing, Sipivislita, please tliee. 

May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, witli blessings. 

HYVIN (’I. Parjanya. 

Si’R\K fortli three w’ords, the words which light precedeth, 
wliieh milk this udder that producetli nectar. 

Quickly made manifest, the Hull hath bellowed, engendering 
the germ of plants, tlie Infant. 

(fiver of growth to plants, the God who rulethover the waters 
mill all moving creatures, 

Vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge, and threefold light 
to succour and befriend us. 


Th}» earth: meaning, says the Commentator, earth, tinnament, and heaven. 
Iliis stanza i.s unintelligible The Commentator on the corret-ponding 

E ge of the Samaveda Hays : ‘ Vishnu formerly ab.nidoning hi' own form, 
‘■''suiiiing aiKjther artificial shape, succoureil Vusishtha in battle. Hecog- 
g the goflj tlio Uishi ad(lres.se.s him with the vcr.'e ’ Sipivishta is said to 
W'jid of eijuivocal meaning, ‘ clothed with ray.s of light,’ and ‘denuded.’ 

I Ison s note, and 0 S. Texts, IV. 8’^ 88, note The passage looks like 
prm of the later incarnations of the God which occur in the Sftapatha- 
iinuna and the Purdnas. 

wjrd.s; or texts of the three Vedas. HVacA lifjht precedeth: intro- 
1 'y ^he H icred syllable Om. More probably Parjanya is addressed, the 
^ woidB being hU voice, the thunder (V. 63. 6), lieurd in heaven, air, ami 
P''^^eded by the lightning-ilash. See Beigaigne, Quuraute IJymnei 
[fti/// . weWtr.* drawdown the sweet rain from the cloud. 

• Parjanya. The Infant: Agni in the form of lightning. 

[ llfjht * with rpfar^Tin^i 4*^ _ 1 1 i - - 



90 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR Vij 

3 Now he is sterile, now begetteth otFspriiig, even as he willetli 

doth he change his figure. 

The Father’s genial flow bedews the Mother; therewith tlie 
Sire, therewith the son is nourished. 

4 In him all living creatures have their being, and the three 

licavens with triply -flowing waters. 

Three reservoirs tliat sprinkle down their treasure shed their 
sweet streams around him witli a murmur. 

5 May this my song to Sovran Lord Parjaiiya come near unto 

his heart and give him pleasure. 

May we obtain the showers that bring enjoyment, and God- 
protected plants with goodly fruitage. I 

G Ho is the Bull of all, and their impregncr : he holds the m 
of m11 things fixed and moving. 

May this rite save me till my hundredth autumn. Prcser^ 
us evermoie, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN CIl. Parjanv 

SixG forth and laud Parjanya, Son of Heaven, who sends tli 
gitt of rain : 

May he provide our pasturage. 

2 Parjanya is the God who forms in kine, in mares, in plant 

of earth, 

And wom:iid\ind, tiic germ of life. 

3 Ofier and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice 
May he for ever give us food. 

HYMN cm. 

They who lay quiet for a year, tiie lirah mans who fulfil their vows 
The Frogs ha\e lilted up their voice, the voice Parjanya liatt 
inspired, 

3 J/c is sterile : sends no rain, like a barren cow that gives no milk 

The Father's f/eyiutl jhan : ‘The fatlicr i-s the sky, earth the mother, uhore- 
ceive.s the rain bom the foimei, which, pioducing the means of oflerinK 
tions and oblations, returns again to the parent heaven, as well as supiioitsliu 
oh^piing— all living creatuies.’ — Wilson. 

4 Three reservoirs: according to bayana, clouds in the east, west, and nortii. 

6 The Bull of all : the plants, understoo<b 

5 Into his mouth : that is, Agni, who is the mouth by which the otlior Go^l 
con.sume the ofiei ings that are made to them, 

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S Texts, V. 436, and by Pi 
fessor F. Max Miiller in his A7icient Sanahrit Literature, pp, 4941, 
remarks: ‘The hymn... .which i.s called a panegyiic of the frogs, h deai 
a satire on the priests ; and it is curious to observe that the same au’f 
should have been ohosen by the Vedic satirist to represent the priests, 
by the earliest satirist of Greece, wa.s selected as the representative of 1 
Homeric heroes.’ But see Oldenberg, Die Religion dea Veda, p. 70. 7' 
hymn evidently belongs to a late period of Yedic poetry, 



THE RIOVEDA, 


fMN 103 .] 


97 


What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the pool's bed 
the floods of heaven descended, * 

The masio of the Frogs comes forth in concert like the cows' 
lowing with their calves beside them. 

When at the coming of the Rains the water has poured upon 
tliem as they yearned and thirsted, ^ 

One seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of 
pleasure as a son his father. 

Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while they are 
revelling in the flow of waters, 

When the Frog moistened bv the rain springs forward, and 
Green and Spotty both combine their voices. 

When one of these repeats the other's language, as he who 
learns the lesson of the teacher, 

Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse 
with eloquence on the waters. 

One is Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat the other, one Frog is Green 
and one of them is Spotty. 

They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, talking 
modulate the voice diversely. * 

As Brahmans, sitting round the brimful vessel, talk at the 
Soma-rite of Atiritra, 

So, Frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all 
the year, the first of Raiii-time. 

Ihese Brahmans with the Soma juice, performing their year- 
long rite, have lifted up their voices; 

Alia these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, come forth 
and show themselves, and none are hidden. 

riiey keep the twelvemonth’s God appointed order, and never 
do the men neglect the season. 


l dhhkhal^ picasiu'e : (ikhkhalikrltya : uttering the iu)^"‘Ative exclama" 
^^our every limb : this abrupt change of person is ‘lot unfrequent in the 

I ^irdtra : a cerfemony accompanied by thre- nocturnal recitations. 

’ it to Oavdm ayanam, a sacrificial 

rell’ . " and ends with ‘^he atirdtra, and lasts a whole year.’— 

)ble <)7 Translation, sweating with their kettles : ‘ There is a 

rite ^ gharminah. having or bearing the vessel, or perfonnin 
Bou sufffvmg from gharma, heat, or the hot season 

le forft ri hidAl^ : guhyd nd U chit : some take nd here as* like 

have been hidden. —Muir. ‘ Pop out like her- 

Ua priestlike frogs. These who were heated kettles: the frogs 



Soon as the Rain- time in the year returneth, these who wen 
heated kettles gain their freedom. 

10 Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat have granted riches, and Green and 
Spotty have vouchsafed us treasure. 

The Frogs who give us cows in hundreds lengthen our live^ 
ill this must fertilizing season. 

HYMN CIV. Iudra-So,a 

Indra and Soma, burn, destroy the demon foe, send downward 
0 ye Bulls, those who add gloom to gloom. 

Annihilate tlie fools, slay them and burn them up : chase them 
away from us, pierce the voracious ones. 

2 Indra and Soma, let sin round the wicked boil like as a caldron 

set amid the flames of fire. 

Against the foe of prayer, devonrer of raw flesh, the vile fiend 
fierce of e}e, keep ye perpetual hate. 

3 Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, yea, casi 

them into darkness that hath no support, 

So that not one of them may ever thence return : so mayyom 
wrathful might prevail and conquer them. 

4 Indra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on tbi 

wicked fiend from lieaveu and from the e.irrh. 

Yea, forge out of the mountains your celestial dart wherevvitl 
ye burn to death the waxing demon lace. 


10 Have granted riches : as the earliest proclaimers of the adveut of th 
Rains which revive and fertilize the earth. 

* It is posnibly an echo of this production that we find in a description o 
autumn in the Harivamia, V 8803, where the poet compare.s tlio noise iiuJi 
by a frog, after his rest of sixteen half mouths, along with his wives, to thi 
recitation) of the Jlig-veda by a Biahm.in sunoutided by his pupils . . 
this verse Uiu late M. Langlois somewhat naively remarks a.s follow, s : Dun: 
nos moeurs rVnn n’ 6g, derail 1’ impeitmence d’ uiie comparaison dans liviuellf 
une grenouille assimilde ii mi re.speotable eccldsi.istn^ue. Les IiulieiiJi 

a ce qu il parait. voyaient dans telle e-^poce de ra[>piochement aueuw 
teinte d’ iinpiete.’— Muv, 0. tS. Texts, V. 438. But see Bergaigne, La Rcbf^ 
Vedique, I. 29*2. 

The hymn consists chiefly of n.orecations directed against demons afl' 
evil spirits, Rdk.shasas and ViitudhAnas. qq,e deities are various. 

1 The demon foe : rdkshah • the Rftksh.^ia.^, fiends, demons, goblina. 
about at night, disturbing sacrifices and (t«vvout men. ensnaring aniie'® 
devouring human beings, and geneially hostile u the human race. 

2 The vile fiend: klmidine: explained by the Commentator asoiiewb 
goes about saying, Kimidintm or What now ? A quidnunc, a vfi® ^ 
treacherous spy and informer. The word is used as the name of a clasu' 

evil spirits. 



Iiidra and Soma, cast ye downward out of Leaven your deadly 
darts cf stone burning with fiery flame, 

Eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones within the 
depth, and let them sink without a sound. 

ludra and Soma, let this hymn control you both, even as the 
girth encompasses two vigorous steeds — 

Tiie song of praise which I with wisdom offer you : do ye, as 
Lords of uieu, animate these my prayers. 

7 lu your impetuous manner think ye both thereon: destroy 

these evil beings, slay the treacherous fiends. 

India and Soma, lot the wicked have no bliss who evermore 
assails us with malignity. 

8 Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when I pursue my 

way with guileless spirit, 

May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra, like water which 
the hollowed hand compresses. 

9 Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, and with their 

evil natures harm the righteous, 

May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the lap of 
Nirriti consign them. 

10 The fiend, 0 Agni, who designs to injure the essence of our 

food, kiue, steeds, or bodies, 

j\lMy he, the adversary, thief, and roliber, sink to destruction, 
both himself and ofLpring 

11 May he be swept away, himself and children : may all the 

three earths press him down beneath them. 

May Ins fair gloiy, 0 ^e Gods, be blighted, who in the day or 
night would fain destroy us. 

[2 The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and false : 
their words oppose each other. 

Of these two that which is the true and honest, Soma protects, 
and brings tlie false to nothing. 

13 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who falsely 
claims the Warrior’s title. 

1 He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly : both lie en- 
tangled in the noose of Indra. 

5 Without a sound : so suddenly that, they have w’^t time to cry out. 

9 To the serpent: or to death by serpents’ Cites. Nirriti: Death and 
Jestniction. 

^13 The Wandor's title : the rank of a ivsiatriya or prince of the military 

Tile first eleven stan/as ‘ are consi^iered to be a malediction upon the 
by the RiahL To account for the change of tone [in 12 — 16], 
«yana give® unueui^l version of the legend told in the Makdbhirata of 



jQO TBE HYMNS OF {BOOK r//. 

14 As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought vain 

thoughts about the Gods, 0 Agni. 

Why art thou angry with us, Jatavedas t Destruction fall on 
those who lie against thee ! 

15 So may I die this day if I have harassed any man’s life or if 

I be a demon. 

Yea, may he lose all his ton sons together who with false 
tongue hath called me Yatudhana. 

16 May India slay him with a mighty weapon, and let the vilest 

of all creatures perish, 

The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me a demon 
tlioiigh devoid of demon nature. 

17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her 

body in her guile and malice, 

May she fall downward into endless caverns. May press-stones 
with loud ring destroy the demons. 

18 Spread out, ye Manits, search among the people : seize ye and 

grind the Ilakshasas to pieces, 

Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, or sully 
and pollute our holy worship. 

19 Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, 0 ludra : sharpen 

it, Maghavan, made keen by Soma. 

Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite down the 
demons with thy rocky weapon. 

20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would 

they harm indomitable Indra. 

Sakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked : now ht him 
cast his bolt at fiendish wizards. 

21 Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil oblations 

of the Gods’ invokeis: 

Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the timber, attacks and 
smashes them like earthen vessels. 

king Kalma^hapdda being transformed to a Rakshoia^ and devouring the lOO 
sons of Vasishtha : here it is said that a Rdksham, having devoured tw 
RUhi's sons, assumed his shape, and said to him, “ I am VasisJdfia, t ion 
iheRdkshasar to which Vaaishtha replied by repeating this 
12], declaratory ot V-i's discriminating between truth and falsehood. ^ 

‘ The verses may, as Professor Mux Muller supjxisea, have arisen ouio 
Vasishtha’s contest with TJavamitra [see III. 53. 21, note], and it may 

been the latter peisonage wh« brought those charges of heresy, and of mm* 
ous and demoniacal character agdnst his rival ’—Muir, 0. S. TtxU, I- 
15 YdtudJidna: explained by Sayana as » RAkshasa. The YAtudhiinap 
bably was rather the goblin or sorcerer while the RAkshasa was the vio 
and voracious ogre. . , i 

17 Here the malediction on evil spirits in general is resumed and cou 
fd to the end of the hymn. She too ; the or she fiend. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


101 


YMN 104.] 

2 Destroy the fiend shaped like nn owl or owlet, destroy him in 
tlie form of dog or cuckoo. 

Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture : as with a stone, 
0 Indra, crush the demon. 

] Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us: may Dawn 
drive off the couples of Kimidins. 

Karth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble : from grief 
that comes from heaven mid-air preserve us. 

4 Slay the male demon, Indra! slay the female, joying and 

triumphing in arts of magic. 

Let the fools’ gods with bent nocks fall and perish, and see no 
more the Sun when he arises. 

5 Look each one hither, look around : Indra and Soma, watch 

ye well. 

Cast forth your weapon at the fiends; against the sorcerers 
hurl your bolt. 


23 Kimidins: or vile spirits. See note on stanza 2. 

21 Fools' gods : mitnadevdK : explained by SAyana M — mdranahiddK, ‘ those 
lio make killing their sport.’ According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, 
i]iradevdh = millad€vdh^ a species of demons or goblins. 




BOOK THE EIGHTH. 


HYMN I. Indra. 

Glorify naught besides, 0 friends; so shall no sorrow trouble 
yon. 

Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your 
lauds repeatedly : 

g Even h'lfn, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men^s Con- 

I queror, bounteous like a cow ; 

I Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides 
most munificent. 

3 Although these men in sundry ways invoke to obtain 

thine aid. 

Bo this our prayer, addressed, O Yndra, unto thee, thine exal- 
tation every day. 

i Those skilled in so>'6. 0 Mnghavaii, among these men o’er- 
como with -fght tlie foeman’s songs. 

;si'tnei’, bring us strength in many a varied form most 
near that it may succour us. 

5 0 Caster of the Stone, I would not sell thee for a mighty price, 

Not for a thousand, Thunderer! nor ten thousand, nor a 
hundred, Lord of countless wealth ! 

5 0 Indra, thou art more to me than sire or niggard brother is. 

Thou and my mother, 0 Good Lord, appear alike, to give me 
wealth abundantly. 

1 AVhere art thou 1 Whither art thou gone 1 For many a 

place attracts thy mind. 

Haste, Warrior, Fort-ilestroyer, Lord of battle’s din, haste, 
holy songs have sounded forth. 

fe Sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles for his 
faithful friend, 

Verses to bring the Tlmnderer to destroy the forts and sit on 
K inva’s sacred grass. 

2 Bountcoua like a cow : the adjeet’'’c is not in the text, but must be sup- 

k‘(I lu order to make the comparibon intelligible. See Vcdische ISludim, I. 

To hath sides : to the singers and the iustitutors of sacrifice. 

>> A handred: meaning ‘infinite,’ according to the Commentator . 

8 Fo)’ his faithful friend : Ludwig takes V&vdtar to be the name of a king 

*0 has been (ieserted by Indra and consequently defeated in battle, Kdnva'i 

'•'ed (jrass ; trimmed and prepared by Medh4tithi and MedhyUUithi, each of 
ia a son of Kanva. 



104 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK Vn, 

9 The Horses wluch are thine in tens, in hundreds, yea, ii 
thousands thine, 

Even those vigorous Steeds, fleet-footed in the course, wit] 
those come quickly near to us. 

10 This day I call Sahardugh^ who animates the holy song, 
Indra the richly-yielding Milch-cow who provides unfailint 

food in ample stream. 

11 When Sura wounded Etasa, with Vata's rolling wingM car 
Indra bore Kutsa Arjuneya off, and mocked Gaudharva thi 

unconquered One. 

12 He without ligature, before making incision in the neck. 
Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Maghavan, who 

maketh whole the injured part. 

13 May we never cast aside, and strangers, as it were, to thee 
We, Thnnder-wibWing Indra, count ourselves as trees rejected 

and unfit to burn. 

14 0 Vritra-slayer, we were thou-Vf. gio^ and unready for the fray, 
Yet once in thy great bounty may have delight, 0 Hero, 

after praising thee. 

15 If he will listen to my laud, then may our Sonn* 

flow 

Rapidly through the strainer gladden Indra, drops due to the 
Tugryas’ Strengthener. 

16 Come now unto the common laud of thee and of thy faithful 

friend. 

So may our wealthy nobles' praise give joy to thee. Fain 
would I sing thine eulogy. 

17 Press out the Soma withjthe stones, and in the waters wash it 

clean. 


10 Sahardughd : the general name of cows which supply the milk i'e<iuire(l 
for sacrificial purposes. See VI. 48. 11, note. Here Indra himself is intended, 
as is shown in the following line. 

11 Sdra: Surya, the Sun-God. Wounded: ‘harassed.’- -Wilson. Etan’i 
proUge of Indra. See Vol. I , Index. Vdla: the Wind-God. Kutm : see Vol. b 
Index. Gandkarva : the Sun. The meaning of the stanza is somewhat obscuie, 

12 Closed up the wound again : healed Etasa who had been wounded by 
Surya. 

13 Count ourselves as trees : or, 'count us not as trees,’ the meaning of 
'not ’ and ‘ like ’ being ambiguous. 

15 Due to the Tugryas' Strengthener : that belong to Indra the protector of 
the chiefs of the race of Tugra, who appear to have been the patrons of the 
Rishis of Ka’iva’s family. 

19 Faithful friend: nee 



TUE mUVEUA. 


105 


1 ] 

The men investing it with raiment made of milk shall milk it 
forth from out the stems. 

3 Whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty 
heaven, 

Wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise : fill full 
all creotures, 0 Most Wise. 

) For Indra press the Soma out, most gladdening and most 
excellent. 

May Sakra make it swell sent forth with every prayer and ask- 
ing* as it were, for strength. 

) Let me not, still beseeching thee with earnest song at Soma 
rites. 

Anger thee like some wild beast. Who would not beseech 
him who hath power to grant his prayer ] 

i The draught made swift with rapturous joy, effectual with its 
mighty strength, 

All-conquering, distilling transport, let him drink : for he in 
ectstasy gives us gifts. 

: Where bliss is not, may he, All-praised, God whom the pious 
glorify, 

Bestow great wealth upon the mortal worshipper who sheds 
the juice and praises him. 

] Como, India, and rejoice thyself, 0 God, in manifold affluence. 

Thou fillest like a lake thy vast capacious bulk with Soma 
and with draughts besides. 

1 A thousand and a hundred Steeds are harnessed to thy golden 
car. 

So may the long-maned Bays, yoked by devotion, bring Indm 
to drink the Soma juice. 

> ^okod to thy chariot wrought of gold, may thy two Bays 
with peacock tails, 

Convey theo hither, Steeds with their white backs, to quaff 
sweet juice that makes us eloquent. 


ILf'Tv’'* **'’'*"” *«« ^edische Sttidim, t. 133, 178. Sfty.nniv explain, 
7 ri//r 1 'J'P • ‘ by 80 doint?) the leaders (of the rain, the 

f » vesture of the hide of the 

nulk forth (the water) for the rivers.’-Wilson. 

supplied by the Scholiast ; there being no verb 

'ire ^ **’. defeat and trouble. But the meaning of 

sU ‘ in ■*^^*'i*e “e''>fioe.' is Sfty.na’s explanation. Von Roth sug- 

23 IP ; ‘■^-•“''TC chxuber.- I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation. 

n t(/» dravghU beHdet ; with thy fellow-topers (the Maruts).’— Wilson. 



106 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR Vlu 

26 So drink, thou Lover of the Song, as the first drinker, of th 

juice. 

This the outpouring of the savoury sap prepared is good an 
meet to gladden thee. 

27 He who alone by wondrous deed is Mighty, Strong by ho] 

works, 

May he come, fair of cheek ; may he not stay afar, but com 
and turn not from our call. 

28 Sushna's quick moving castle thou hast crushed to piece'^ wit 

tliy bolls. 

Thou, Indra, from of old, hast followed after light, since ^ 
have had thee to invoke. ^ 

20 My praises when the Sun hath risen, my praises at the tim 
of noon. 

My praises at the coming of the gloom of night, 0 Vasu, hav 
gone forth to thee. 

30 Praise, yea, praise him. Of princes these are the most liber, i 

of tlieii’ gifts, 

These, Paiamajya, Ninditasva, Prapathi, most bounteons, ( 
Modhy.itithi. 

31 When to the car, by faid), I yoked the horses longing for tin 

way — 

Fur skilled h Yaibi’s son in dealing precious wealth, he wli( 
is rich m herds of kinc. 

32 May lie who gave me two brown steeds together with tlieii 

cloths of gold. 

May ho, A^anga’s son Svanadratha, obtain all joy and higfc 
felicities 

26 ds the first (h ittln- : ‘ Acconling to the scholiast, imrvapah nieann U;/“i 
who, having nriived first in the r.aco, drank the Soma before tlie otlur H*' 
The allusitjn is to tile [»rin<-iial tjrnha libation, called Aindnivdyuvit, wl'i® 
Judra mid share together.’ - W iloon 

28 Castle: »)f el -ud. Foltoiecd after ti;/ht : to find and hi ing it hack. 

30 Praise him: liidra Ihi.ainajyA, NinditAsva, aiid Prapathi appo.ir hi M 
the uaiucd of Llie cliieL wiio aie praised for their liberality. Sayaua 
A-^anga the sp^ak'-r : ‘ Pral■^e me, for wo are the most liberal givers : (pi'"® 
uie .us one) who be.irs the best m ms ( /)«rturt«;vd), follows the right patli{/)'' 

and Miitstiips a liois ' in speed (iiindi^dji'a).' _ ^ i i 

31 The horses : prC'Cnted by tlie prince. The sentence is incornpie e. 

Scholiast «u|)i)lies at the end of the line taddntm evammdin ntnJd, then p>‘ 
me thus Yadu’s sou : Asanga, d»*scendant of the nneient , Ij^ 

Yadu. See Vol. 1 , Index. Jihk in herds ofkine: pashh which apijc;n>5 

ill apiyodtiun with }/.Urah, is li.'irdly intelligible here. 

pasnmda, having b-asts or c.attle, a.s a derivative of pa to ***’‘^> ej. 

ing one wlio sees what is subtile, s&kshmatija drashtd. Neither oi , V^jp^k 
planations has anything but Silya^’s uauie to recommend it, but 1 r 
former as a raakenhift. I 



THE ElOVEDA. 


107 


2 .] 

Playoga’s son Asanga, hy ten thousand, 0 Agni, hath surpass- 
ed the rest in giving. 

^or oie ten bright-hued oxen have come forward like lotus- 
stalks from out a lake upstanding. 

Wliat time her husband’s perfect restoration to his lost 
strength and manliood was apparent, 

[ps consort Sasvati with joy addressed him, Now art thou 
uell, my lord, and shalt be happy. 

HYMN TI. ^"'^**^* 

[lEiiR is the Soma juice expressed; 0 Vasu, drink till thou art 
full : 

Undaunted God, we give it time. 

iVaslied by the men, pressed out with stones, strained through 
the filter made of wool, 

Tis like a courser bathed in streams. 

'fliis juice have wo made sweet for thee like barley, blending 
it with milk. 

Tiidra, I call thee to our feast 

beloved of all, Indra alone drinks up the flowing Soma juice 
Annmg the Gods and mortal men. 

The Friend, whom not tlie brilliant-hued, the badly-mixt or 
hitter draught 

Repels, the far extending God; 

While other men than we with milk chase him as hunters 
chase a deer, 

Atul with their kine inveigle him. 

1 Ten hyi'ifu-kw'd ocen: mi.uiing ten thousand, according to Silyana. 
t Asinga. tlio King who^e liberality, with that of his sou (32), and perhaps 
(30), has been e\ilogized in the four preceding 8tanz:^s,^had, the 
nd aavH, been changed to a W()Lnin by the imprecati«ni of the Gods and 
rwaids restored to his manhood in eonseqaence of his repentance and the 
rccssion of Modhdtithi and MedhyAtithi whom he richly rewarded. In this 
iz 1 tS ifivati congratulates him on his restorati^)n. Professors Ludwig and 
ssniaun have translated the stanza more literally. 

0 Vasu ; or, Good Lord. ‘ Qivor of dwelling.s,’ according to SAyana. 
‘'^trained through the jilter wide of wool: more literally, ‘clean.se<l by the 
'Wool of the sheep,’ the material of . Inch the sieve, strainer, or filter used 
clearing and purifying the l5oma juico was made. 

1 Tike harlty : or, like the sacrificial cake made of barley-meal. 

\ Alone drinks up ; he alone is to receive the entire libation, which other 

! ■< only share among them. 

JT'illiant’hued : without sufficient mixture with milk to thicken it and 
ige its colour. The meaning of this and the following stanza is : Indra 
ers our liV)ationa, imperfectly prepared as they may be, to the milk-oflerings 
I which other men endeavour to attract him. 



108 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR Fi// 

7 For him, for Indra, for the God, be pressed three draughts | 

Some juice ! 

Ill the Juice drinker’s own abode. 

8 Three reservoirs exude their drops, filled are three beakers | 

the brim, 

All for one offering to the God. 

9 Pure art thou, set in many a place, and blended in the midj 

with milk 

And curd, to cheer the Hero best. 

10 Here, Indra, are thy Soma-draughts pressed out byus,tli 
strong, the pure : 

They crave admixture of the milk. 

110 Indra, pour in milk, prepare the cake, and mix the Somj 
draught : 

I hear them say that thou art rich, 

12 Quaffed juices fight within the breast. The drunken praisi 

not by their wine. 

The naked praise not when it rains. 

13 Rich be the praiser of one rich, munificent and famed like thee; 
High rank be his, 0 Lord of Bays. 

14 Foe of the man who adds no milk, he heeds not any chauteJ 

hymn 

Or holy psalm that may be sung. 

15 Give us not, Indra, as a prey unto the scornful or the proutl; 
Help, Mighty One, with power and might. 

16 This, even this, 0 Indra, we implore : as thy devoted frieiiJe, 
The Kanvas praise thee with their hymns. 


8 Three reservoin: or troughs used in the preparation of the Soma-libcUioiiv 
They are called severally, dronakalann, 2 )dtaf)krit, and ddhavaniya. 

9 In the midst : ‘ in the middle (of the day ? ).’ — Hillebrandt. 

12 This stanza breaks the connexion between stanzas 11 and 13, andisK 
itself almost unintelligible. Wilson parapbra‘<es, after SAyana ; ‘ The 

(of Soma) contend in thy interior (for thine exhilaration) like the cbiie| 
caused by wine ; thy worshippers praise thee (filled full of Soma) hw 
udder (of a cow with milk)/ SAyana’s explanation of nagnRK, naked 
as worshippers, stotdmh, ‘ who do not desert the verses of the Veda,’ isobfi 
ously impossible. V'dhak, udder, frequently means the rainy sky, 
have this meaning l)ere ; so that the sense of the passage may possibly 
Ludwig suggests, that neither great wealth nor abject poverty tends /’jj 
a man devout. The rich man when he drinks his wine at home and the^ 
clad wretch exposed to the drenching rain are equally regardless of the ' 

13 Rich be the jyraiser of the rich : this appears to be the contiuuatiei' 

* thou art l ich ’ of stanza 11. 

14 Indra will not accept worship without oblation, 



109 


\mN 2.] THE RIOVEDA. 

; Naught else, 0 Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer’s 

eulogy : 

On thy laud only have I thought. 

The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire 
not sleep : 

They punish sloth unweariedly. 

Come hither swift with gifts of wealth— be not thou an<a-v 
with us — like ^ 

\ A great man with a youthful bride. 

Let him not, wrathful with us, spend the evening far from 
US to-day, 

Like some unpleasant son-in-law. 

For well we know this Hero’s love, most liberal of the boons 

he- gives, 

His plans whom the three worlds display. 

Pour forth the gift which Kanvas bring, for none more glorious 
do we know 

Thau the Strong Lord with countless aids. 

0 presser, offer Soma first to Indra, Hero, Sakra, him 
The Friend of man, that he may drink; 

Who, in untroubled ways, is best provider, for his worsliippers 
Of strength in horses and in kine. ^ 

Presseis, for him blend Soma juice, each draught most excel- 
lent, for him 

The Brave, the Hero, for his joy. 

The Vritia-slayer driuks the juice. May he who gives a bun- 

dred aids 

Approach, nor stay afar from us. 

May the strong Bay Steeds, yoked by prayer, bring hither 
unto us our Friend, 

Lover of Song, renowned by songs. 

Sweet aretlic Soma juices, come! Blent are the Soma juices, 

come ! 

Hishi-like, mighty, fair of cheek, come hither quickly to the 
feast. 

wan: the exact meaning of nmMn, great, is not certain. SAyana 
i L \ e eminent on account of his good qualities. ‘ ^ 

< s III, like the ardent husbaud of a new bride.’ — Wilson. ‘ Like a rich 

Mewly married.’- Grassmann. 

L ’ who sees that his company is uuwel* 

r consequently stays at home. 

Indra: see VIII. 1, 26. Saha: Indra, the Mighty One. 



110 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK 


29 And lands which strengthen thee for great bounty and valo 

and exalt 

India who doeth glorious deeds, 

30 And songs to thee who iovest song, and all those Lyoj 

addressed to thee — 

These evermore confirm thy might. 

31 Thus he, sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds thundi 

gives ns strength, 

He who hath never been subdued. 

- 32 Vritra he slays with his right hand, even Indra, great ^ii 
mighty power, 

And much-invoked in many a place. 

33 He upon whom all men depend, all regions, all achievements I 
Takes pleasure in our wealthy chiefs. 

31 All this hath he accomplished, yea, Indra, most glorioihl 
renowned. 

Who gives our wealtliy princes strength. 

35 Who drives his chariot seeking spoil, even from afar, to hit 

he loves : 

For swift is he to bring men wealth. 

36 The Sage who, winning spoil with steeds, slays Vritra, Hen 

with the men. 

His vservant’s faithful succourer. 

37 0 I’riyainedhas, worship with ccdlcctcd mind this Indra whom 
The Soma hath full well inspired. 

38 Ye Kanvas, sing the Mighty One, Lord of the Brave, whj 

loves renown, 

All-present, glorified by song. 

39 Strong Friend, who, with no trace of feet, restores the cattlj 

to the men 

Who rest their wish and hope on him. 

40 Shaped as a Karn, Stone-hurler ! once thou earnest hitbertoj 

the son 

Of Kanva, wise Medhyatithi. 


34 Allthhhnthhe accomplinlml : the slaughter of Vritra and other gre 
deeds ; or, he made all these cn’atures. 

36 The Sage - Indra With the men; accompanied by the Muruts. 

37 Pviyamedhas : membeis of the family of ojie of tlie Rishin. 

39 With no trace of feet: without traolving the lost cattle (the rays of 
by their footstepa. 

40 Shaped as a Ram: see I. 61. 1. The legend U told in the 
Brdhmana, I. 1. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


Ill 


^MN 3.] 

Vibhiudu, thou hast helped this tuau, giviug him thousands 
four times ten, 

And afterward eiglit thousand more. 

And these twain pouring stieauis of milk, creative, daughters 
of delight, 

For wedlock sake I glorify. 

hymn til Indra. 

Dkink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee with our 
milky draught. 

Be, for cur weal, our Friend and sharer of the feast, and let 
thy wisdom guard us well. 

In thy kind grace and favour may we still be strong : expose 
us not to foe’s attack. 

With manifold assistance guard and succour us, and bring us 
to felicity. 

, May these my songs of praise exalt thee, Lord, who hast 
abundant wealth. 

Men sk'Jlod in holy hymns, pure, with the hues of fire, have 
suug^hom with their lauds to thee. 

[ lie, with his might enhanced hy Uislus thousandfold, hath 
like an ocean spread himself. 

His mujesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his power where 
holy singers rule. 

i India for worship of the (Jods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds, 
Indra, as worshippers in battle-shock, we call, Indra that we 
may win the spoil. 

) With miglit hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with 
power hath Indra lighted up the Sun. 

In Indra arc all creatures closely held; in him meet the 
distilling Soma-drops. 

J Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the 
Soma first. 

Tlic Uibhus ill accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras 
sung thee as the first. 

41 Vibhindii: the prince, the iustitutor of the saciifice. 

42 The sUnzii is obscure, the nieanin^ of milt, a ftininiiie dual which Slyana 

ipliuus by nirniAtvyaa, makers or creators, i. c. heaven and earth, being un- 
iibiiu. Sdyana’s paraphrase of the stanza is : ‘ I glorify these two (heaven and 
ath), the Hugiueiiters of water, the originators (of lieing.s), the benefactors of 
ie wt)i!shipper, uu account of their geueiatiou (of the wealth so given to me).* 
hWilnou 

i 3 IT ith the hues of Jive : or, radiant as Agni. 

1 ^ Ribhus : Hs deities connected with the seasons which are regulated by 
whom Indra has caused to shine. 



112 TffE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vui 

8 Indra increased hia manly strength at sacrifice, in the 

rapture of this juice. . i. . • 

And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praisej 
to his majesty. 

9 I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou mayst first 

regard this prayer, j i 

Wherewith thou holpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and 1 raskanvj 
when the prize was staked. 

10 Wherewith thou seutest mighty watera to the sea, that, Indra^ 

is thy manly strength. 

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the woiiils 
have cried aloud. 

11 Help us, 0 India, when we pray to thee for wealth and licti 

might. 1 • X ■ 

First help thou on to strength the man who strives to win, 

and aid our laud, 0 Ancient One. 

12 Help for us, Indra, as thou holpest Paura once, this mauj 

devotions bent on gain. 

Help, as thou gavest Rusama and Syavaka and Svarnaraand 
Ki’ipa aid. 

13 What newest of imploring prayers shall, then, the zealous 

mortal sing 1 

For have not they who laud his might, and Indra-power moh 
for themselves the light of heaven 1 

14 When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid the Gods! 

Who counts as Kishi and as sage ] , 

When ever wilt thou, Indra Maghavan, come nigh to pressers 
or to praiser’d call? 

15 These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of praise 

ascend to thee, , , 

Like ever-conquering chariots that display their streiig i 
gain wealth, and give unfailing aid. 

16 The Bhrigus are like Suns, like Kaiivas, and have gained all 

that their thoughts were bent upon. 

The living men of Priyainedha's race have sung exalting lu 
with their lauds. 

9 Bhrifju : see Vol. L, Index. Yatis : an ancient race of ascetics connecj^ 
with the Bhrigus, and, according to one legend, said to have taken part ni 
creation of the world. Praskanva : a Iwishi, son of Kauva, the seer of 
hymns of Book I. 

10 The worlds : all men, or all living creatures. 

12 Paura : the son of King Puni. Rusama, Sf/dvaka, Svarnara, and 
appear to have been princes especially favoured by India. Of. stanza 2 oi 



THE RIQVEDA. 


113 


4 .] 

Best slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy Bay Steeds, ladra, from 
afar. 

Come with the High Ones hither, Maghavan, to us, Mighty, to 
drink the Sorna juice. 

For these, the bards and singers, have cried out to thee with 
prayer, to gain the sacrifice. 

As such, 0 Maghavan, ludra, who lovest song, even as a lover 
hear my call. 

Thou from the lofty plains above, 0 Indra, hurledst Vritra 
down. 

Thou dravest forth the kine of guileful Mrigaya and Arbuda 
from the mountain’s hold. 

Bright were the flaming fires, the Sun gave forth his shine, 
and Soma, Indra’s juice, shone clear. 

Indra, thou blewost the great Dragon from the air : men must 
regard that valorous deed. 

The fairest courser of them all, who runneth on as 'twere to 
heaven. 

Which Indra and the Maruta gave, and Pakasthaman Kaura- 

To me hath’Pakaathaman given, a ruddy horse, good at the 
pole, 

Filling his girth and rousing wealth ; 

Compared with whom no other ten strong coursers, harnessed 
to the pole. 

Bear Tugrya to his dwelling place. 

Raiment is body, food is life, and healing ointment giveth 
strength. 

As tlie free handed giver of the ruddy steed, I have named 
Pakasthaman fourth, 

HYMN IV. Indra. 

Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward, 
north and south, 

. Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave Champion ! 
urged by men to come. 

7 Hifjh Ones: the Maruts. 

8 To gain the sacrifice : to ensure it proper performance and the blessings 

ch flow from it. 

9 Mrigaya: see IV. 16. 13, Arhuda: see Vol. L, Index. 

0 TAc great Dragon : or Serpent, Ahi. 

1 Kauraydn : Kaurayana, the son of Kuruyilna. PAkasth^man, whose 

rahty u praised in stanzas 21 — 24, is not mentioned elsewhere. 

■3 Tugrya : Bhujyu, son of Tugra. See Vol. I., Index. 

Anava: descendant of the enonvmous Anu. Turvam: see Vol. L. Index. 



114 


THE HYMNS OP 


[EOOJC (7// 

2 Or, Indra, when with llama, Ruaama, S)4vaka, and Kripj 

thou rejoicest thee. 

Still do the Kanvas, bringing praises, with their prayea 
0 Indra, draw thee hither : come. 

3 Even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert’i 

watery pool, 

Come hither quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the 
Kanvas drink thy fill. | 

4 May the drops gladden thee, rich Indra, and obtain bounty 

for him who pours the juice. 

Soma pressed in the mortar didst thou take and drink, aiii 
hence liast won surpassing might. 

6 With mightier strength he conquered strength, with energy 
he crushed their wrath. 

0 Indra, Strong in youth, all those who sought the fray ben 
and bowed down to thee like trees. 

6 He who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thou 

sand mighty men of war. 

He makes his son preeminent in hero might : he serves wit! 
reverential prayer. 

7 AVith thee, the Mighty, for our Friend, we will not fear or fee 

fatigue. 

May we sec Turvasa and Yadu : thy great deed, 0 Hero, mini 
be glorified. 

8 On his left hip the Hero hath reclined himself : the profferei 

feast offends him not. 

The milk is blended with the honey of the bee : quickly corai 
hither, haste, and drink. 

9 Indra, thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses, cars, and kine 
He evermore hath food accompanied by wealth, and radian 

joins the company. 

10 Come like a thirsty antelope to the drinking-place: drinl 
Soma to thy heart's desire. 

Raining it down, 0 Maghavaii, day after day, thou gainesttlij 
surpassing might. 

2 Rusama, Sydvaka, and Kripa have been mentioned in stanza 12 of tlw 
preceding hymn. Ruma was another of India’s favourites. 

8 The wild-hull: or Gaura (Bos Gaums), a kind of buffalo, 

7 May we see Turvasa and Yadu : enjoying happiness through thy favour.- 
S4yana. . 

9 Thyfnend: the man whom thou favourest. Joins the company ' ‘ 

assembly of his equals. ^ 

10 Raining it down : pouring down the traosformod Soma in the “ 
rain. See Vedische Studien, I. 88. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


\MN 4 .] 


115 


Priest, let the Soma juice flow forth, for Indra longs to drink 
thereof. 

He even now hath yoked hia vigorous Bay Steeds : the Vritra- 
slayer hath come near. 

The man with whom tlioii fillest thee with Soma deems him- 
solf a pious worshipper. 

This thine appropriate food is here poured out for thee : come, 
hasten forward, drink of it. 


Press out the Soma juice, ye priests, for Indra borne upon liis 
car. 

The pressing-atoiies speak loud of ludra, while they shed the 
juice which, otfered, lionours him. 

To ilie brown juice may his dear vigorous Bay Steeds bring 
Indra, to our holy task. 

Hither let thy Car-steeds who seek the saciifice bring thee to 
our driuk-otferings. 

Piishan, the Lord of ample wealth, for firm allinnco we elect. 

May he with wisdom, Sakra ! Looser! Much-invoked! aid us 
to I'iclics and to seed. 


Sharpen 118 like a razor in the barbeCs hands j scud riches 
thou who settest free. 

Easy to tiud with thee are treasures of the Dav\n for mortal 
man whom thou dost speed. 

Pudian, I long to win thy love, I long to praise thee, Radiant 
Cod. 

Excellent Lord, ’tis strange to me, no wish have I to sing the 
psalm that Pajra sings. 

My kiue, 0 Kadiaut God, seek pasture wheie they will, my 
durimj; wealth, Immortal One. 

Be our protector, Pushan ! be, most liberal Lord, propitious to 
our gathering strength. 

Rich was the gift Kurunga gave, a hundred steeds at morniiiff 
rites. ® 

Among the gifts of Turvasas we thought of him, the opulent, 
the splendid King. 

What by his morning songs Kanva, the powerful, hath, with 
the Pi'iyainedhasf gained — 


Bn ^ name of Indra. Looser ; of the chariot-horsei 

u comest to sacrifices ; or, according to {SAyana, liberator (from sin). 

nvJ^i^ZL Pajras, a celebrated priestly family, with whom the 

nvas appear to have been on hostile terms. 

Am? ungo, : this prince’s name does nut occur again, 



116 


JL nc^ aimDio \jc 


luwUA VIJl 

The herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, have l 
the Rishi, driven away. 

21 The very trees were joyful at my comiug : kine they obtained 
in plenty, steeds in plenty. 

hymn V. 

When, even as she were present here, red Dawn hath shon^ 
from far away, 

She spreadeth light on every side. 

2 Like Heroes on your will-yoked car far-shining. Wonder. 

Workers ! ye 

Attend, 0 Asvins, on the Dawn. 

3 By you, 0 Lords of ample wealth, our songs of praise have 

been observed : 

As envoy have I brought the prayer. 

4 Kanvas must praise the Asvins dear to many, making many 

glad, 

Most rich, that they may succour us. 

5 Most liberal, best at winning strength, inciters, Lords oi 

splendour who 
Visit the worshipper's abode. 

6 So for devout Sudeva dew with fatiiess his unfailing mead, 
And make it rich for sacrilice. 

7 Hitherward running speedily with horses, as with rapid hawks, 
Come, Asvins, to our song of praise : 

8 Wherewith the three wide distances, and all the lights tkl 

are in heaven 

Ye traverse, and three times of night. 

9 0 Finders of the Day, that we may win us food of kine m 

wealth, 

. Open the paths for us to tread. 

10 0 Asvins, bring us wealth in kine, in noble heroes, and in cars 
Bring us tlie strength that hordes give. 

11 Ye Lords of splendour, gloritied, ye Wonder-Workers borne ot 

paths 

Of gold, drink sweets with Soma juice. 

i:0 Pure and spotless : I follow Sft> ana’s iiite»pretation of 
correctneps is at lea.it doubtful Von Hoth suggests ‘to the waiermg P' 
as the meaning of the word, and Ludwig ‘ so th.it none remained beliuKi. 

3 Lords of ample wealth : ‘affluent in sacrifices,’--- Wilson. SeeV. Jt? 
A 9 envoi/ : as the messenger of the patron of the sacrifice. 

8 Times of nljht : ydinas, night-watches of three hours each. 

11 Sweets: or meath, mudhu; here, perhaps, the milk.— Ludwig. 



]^MN 5.] TH^^BIGVEDA, 117 

\ To us, yo Lords of ample wealth, and to our wealthy chiefs 

[ extend 

? Wide shelter, ne’er to be assailed. 

|| Come quickly downward to the prayer of people whom yi 
favour most : 

E Approach not unto other folk. 

t Ye Asvius whom our minds perceive, drink of this lovely 
gladdening draught, 

The nmath which we present to you. 

) Bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in thousands, 
source 

Of plenteous food, sustaining all. 

J Verily sages call on you, yo Heroes, in full many a place. 

i^Ioved by the priests, 0 Asvins, come, 
r Men who have trimmed the sacred grass, bringing oblations 
and prepared, 

0 Asvins, are invoking you. 

5 May this our hymn of praise to*day, most powerful to bring 

you, be, 

0 Asvius, nearest to your hearts. 

6 The skill filled full of savoury meath, laid in the pathway of 

your oar — 

0 AsviuH, drink ye both therefrom. 

[) For this, yo Lords of ample wealth, bring blessing for our herd, 
our kiue, 

Our progeny, and plenteous food, 

I Ye too unclose to us like doors the strengthening waters of the 

sky» 

And rivers, ye who find the day. ^ 

I When did the son of Tiigra serve you, Men ? Abandoned in 
the sea, 

That with winged steeds your car might fly. 

5 Yo, 0 Nasatyas, ministered to Kanva with repeated aid, 
When cast into the heated pit. 


il6 Bi/ the priests : vdghddbhih : according to SHjana, * with horses.’ 

19 The Asvins appear to be invited to halt and drink the libations prepared 
* them by their worshippers, and not, as SAyana explains, to drink from the 
:in suspended in their own car.— Ludwig. 

22 The son of Tugra : Bhujyu, whose rescue by the Asvins has frequently 
>en related and referred to. The meaning is, I do not honour you only when 

in distress, as others whom you have aided have done* 

23 Ministered to Kanva: see I, I’’ 2, 5, and 118. 7. 



118 THE UYM^^ OF {BOOK r//; 

24 Come near witli those most recent aids of yours which 

eulogy, 

When I invoke you, Wealthy Gods. 

25 As ye protected Kanva erst, Priyamedha and Upastiita, 
Atii, Sinjara, Asvins Twain ! 

26 And Ansu in decisive fight, Agastya in the fray for kine, 
And, in his battles, Sobhari. 

27 For so much bliss, or even more, 0 Asvins, Wealthy God^ 

than this, 

We pray while singing hymns to yon. 

28 Ascend your car with golden seat, 0 Asvins, and with rein 

of gold, 

That reaches even to the sky. 

29 Golden is its supporting shaft, the axle also is of gold, 
And both the wheels are made of gold. 

30 Thereon, ye Lords of ample wealth, come to us even from afa^ 
Come ye to this mine eulogy. 

31 From far away ye come to us, Asvins, enjoying plenteous foo 
Of Dasas, 0 Immortal Ones. 

32 With splendour, riches, and renown, 0 Asvins, hither com 

to ns, 

Nasatyas, shining brilliantly. 

33 May dappled horses, steeds who fly with pinions, bring yo 

hitherward 

To people skilled in sacrifice. 

34 The wlieel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied 1 

80 ..g, 

That cometh with a store of food. 

55 Horne on that chariot wrought of gold, with coursers vei 
fleet of foot, 

Come, 0 NAsatyas, swift as thought. 


24 WenHhy Qoch: the meaning of vriakanvasH is uncertain : ‘ rich in shows 
is SAya ^a’^ explanation, and ‘execllent ae Mteera ’ Prof. Ludwigs. I 
von lloth, but hi.s interpretation Is conjectural. ^ , 

2.'5 Kanva, Priifumed/ia. Upasluta and Atri have been mentione<^l in Boo 
SAyaaa takes »ihjltr<im to lx* an epithet of Atri, ‘ repeating praises. ^ 
26 Anna: a worshipi>er so named. — 8ilyana. Agastna: appears in !• | _ 
where ho is said to have been the family -priest of Khela. The • 

Agastya is the seer of Hymn.s I6h — 191 of Book I. See also Vli- 
Sobhari: a Rishi, the seer of Hymn.s 19- 22 of this Book. 

31 Plenteous food of Ddsas : the meaning appears to be that 
in the east the DAsas or non-Aryan inhabitants sacrifice to the Asvins. » d 
explains the stanza differently ; ‘ Immortal Asvins, destroyers of the ci 
the JDdsas, ye bring to us food from afar.’ — Wilson. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


119 


■ 

\rMii 6 ] 

5 0 Wealthy Gods, ye taste and find the brisk and watchful wild 
beast good. 

Associate wealth with food for us. 

7 As such, 0 Asvias, find for me my sfiare of new-presented 

gifts, 

As Kaau, Chedi’s son, gave me a hundred head of buffaloes, 
and ten thousand kine. 

8 He who hath given me for mine own ten Kings like gold to 

look upon. 

At Chaidya’s feet are all the people round about, all those 
who think upon the shield. 

9 No man, not any, goes upon the path on which the Chedis 

walk. 

No other prince, no folk is held more liberal of gifts than they. 

hymn VL Indra. 

Indra, great in his power and might, and like Parjanya rich 
in rain, 

Is magnified by Vatsa’s lauds. 

3 When tlie priests, strengthening the Son of Holy Law, present 
their gifts, 

Singers with Order’s hymn of praise. 

3 Since Konvas with their lauds have made Indra complete the 
sacrifice, 

Words are their own appropriate arms, 
i Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men, bow 
down, 

As livers bow them to the sea. 

5 This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought 
together, like 

A skin, the worlds of heaven and earth. 

36 According to S&yana the watchful wild beast is ther the Soma which must 
le chased or sought after by the Gods. Ludwig would read svapathOf with 4 
raaaitive and causal meaning, instead of svadalho, t e , ye when ye appear 
Q the morning send to sleep the wild beasts that have been awake all night. 
Phe strinza is obscure. 

37 Buffaloes ; or camels. 

38 This stanza appears to be spoken by Kasu who is called Chaidya or son 
[f Chedi. Who think upon the shield : who are practised in wearing armour 
Ji leather, according to S&yana. 

1 3 Uorrfa are their own appropriate arms: 'thcv declare all weapons 

eedle8B.’-Wilson. 




120 THE HYUm OP [BOOK F/zj 

6 The fiercely-moving Vritra’s head he severed with his thunder- 

bolt, 

His mighty hundred-knotted bolt. 

7 Here are — wo sing them loudly forth — our thoughts among 

the best of songs, 

Even lightnings like the blaze of fire. 

8 When hidden thouglita, spontaneously advancing, glow, and 

with tlio stream 
Of sacrifice the Kanvas shine. 

9 India, may we obtain that wealth in horses and in herds ol 

cows, 

And prayer that may be noticed first. 

10 I from my leather have received deep knowledge of the Holj 

Law : 

I was born like unto the Sun. 

11 After the lore of ancient time I make, like Kanva, beauteoua 

songs, 

And ludra’s self gains strength thereby. 

12 Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra, or have hiudeJ 

thee, 

By me exalted wax thou strong. 

13 When his wrath thundered, when he rent Vritra to pieces, 

limb by limb, 

He sent the waters to the sea. 

14 Against the Dasyu Sushna thou, Indra, didst hurl thy during 

bolt : 

Thou, Dread One, hast a hero's fame. 

15 Neitlier the heavens nor firmaments nor regions of the eaitli 

contain 

Indra, the Thunderer with his might. 

16 0 Indra him who lay at length staying thy copious waters 

thon, 

In his own footsteps, smotest down. 

17 Thou hiddest deep iu darkness him, 0 Indra, who had set hi; 

grasp 

On spacious heaven and earth conjoined. 


10 Frojn my Father; ‘from Indra, the true protector,’ according toS\vw* 
12 Have not praised thee : have not praised thee yet, that is, will praisf 
thee hereafter.— -Ludwig. 

16 /« his own footsteps : or, in the (waters) at his feet. ‘ Into the rushinS 
streams.’ — Wilson. 

17 Conjoined : like two bowls turned towards each other. 



TEE RIQVBDA. 


121 


YMN 6.] 

fe Indra, whatever Yatis and Bhrigus have offered praise to thee, 

I Listen, thou Mighty, to my call. 

^ India, these spotted cows yield thee their butter and the 
milky draught, 

Aiders, thereby, of sacrifice ; 

[) Which, teeming, have received thee as a life-germ, Indra, with 
their mouth, 

Like Surya who sustaineth all. 

1 0 Lord of Might, with hymns of praise the Kanvas have 

increased thy power. 

The drops poured forth have strengthened thee. 

2 Under thy guidance, Indra, mid thy praises, Lord of Thunder, 

shall 

The sacrifice be suoo performed. 

5 Indra, disclose much food for us, like a stronghold with store 
of kine: 

Give progeny and heroic strength. 
i And, Indra, grant us all that wealth of fleet steeds which 
shone bright of old 
Among the tribes of Nahiishas. 

5 Hither thou seemest to attract heaven’s fold which shines be- 
fore our eyes, 

When, Indra, thou art kind to us, 

S Yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, Indra, thou governest 
the folk, 

Mighty, unlimited in strength. 

I The tribes who bring oblations call to thee, to thee to give 
them help, 

With drops to thee who spreadest far. 

3 There where the mountains downward slope, there by the 

meeting of the streams 
The Sage was manifest with song. 

5 Thence, marking, from his lofty place downward he looks 
upon the sea. 

And thence with rapid stir he moves. 

‘20 Rages.’ — Wilson. Angirasea, according to Sityapi'- 

1 he stanza is unintelligible to uiC. Sayana says that ‘ thee’ means Indra 
^ fchape of the grass which his fertilizing energy causes to grow, and by 
e( mg on which the cows multiply. This energy of Indra’s is all-supporting 
o, Wilson’s note. Ludwig proposes an alteration of the text. 

28 77 ' ; or, perhaps, the neighbouring tribes. 

lat •• Indra. ‘SAyana’a conclusion of the purport of the verse is, 

I sacrifice in those places where Indra is said to be manifest- 

29 Ihcnea: the reservoir of Somp juice. 



THE HYMNS OF 


122 


[BOOR Vjj 


30 Then, verily, they see the light refulgent of primeval seed, 
Kindled on yonder side of heaven. 

31 Indra, the Kanvas all exalt thy wisdom and thy manl 

power, 

And, Mightiest ! thine heroic strength. 

32 Accept this eulogy of mine, Indra, and guard me carefully; 
Strengthen my thouglit and prosper it. 

33 For thee, 0 Mighty, Thunder-armed, we singers through deyi 

tion have 

Fashioned the hymn that we may live. 

34 To Indra have the Kanvas sung, like waters speeding dow 

a slope : 

The song is fain to go to him. 

35 As rivers swell the ocean, so our hymns of praise make Indr 

strong, 

Eternal, of resistless wrath. 

36 Come with thy lovely Bay Steeds, come to us from regions fa 

away : 

0 Indra, drink this Soma juice. 

37 Best slayer of the Vritras, men whose sacred grass is read 

trimmed 

Invoke thee for the gain of spoil. 

38 The heavens and earth come after thee as the wheel follow 

Etasa : 

To thee flow Soma-drops effused. 

39 Rejoice, 0 Indra, in the light, rejoice in Saryanavan, be 
Glad in the sacrifleer’s hymn. 

40 Grown strong in heaven, the Thunder-armed hath bellowed 

Vritm slayer, Bull, 

Chief drinker of the Soma juice. 

41 Thou art a Rishi born of old, sole Ruler over all by might: 
'I’hou, Imlra, guardest well our wealth. 

42 May thy Bay Steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, bi'ifl 

thee to the feast. 

Bring thee to these our Soma-draughts. 

43 The Kanvas with their hymns of praise have magnified 

ancient thouglit 

That swells with streams of meath and oil. 

30 The liffht : the Sun which is lighted up beyond the range of men a eigt 

38 .(4 « the wheel follows Etam: as the chariot of the Sun follows the 

that draws it. ^ i ji 

39 Siryanivdn said to be a lake and district in Kurukshetra. oee 
H, note. 



rr.tf.V 7.1 Tm RIOVEDA. 

4 Mid mightiest Gods let mortal man choose Indra at the 
sacrifice, 

Indra, whoe’er would win, for help. 

15 Thy steeds, by Priyamedhas praised, shall bring thee, God 
whom all invoke, 

Hither to drink the Soma juice. 

.,e A hundred thousand have I gained from Parsu, from 
Tiriiidira, 

And presents of the Yadavas. 

tr Ten thousand head of kine, and steeds throe times a hundred 
they bestowed 

I On I’ajra for the S^ma-song. 

(8 Kukulia hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffaloes yoked 
in fours, 

And matched in fame the Yadavas. 


hymn VI [. 

0 Maruts, when the sage hath poured the Trishtup forth as 
food for you, 

Ye shine amid the mountain-clouds. 

2 When, Bright Ones, fain to show your might ye have deter- 

mined on your course, 

The mountain clouds have bent them dowu. 

3 Loud roaring with the winds the Sous of Prisni have upraised 

themselves : • • r 

They have poured out the streaming food. 

4 The Maruts spread the mist abroad and make the mountains 

rock and reel, 

When with the winds they go their way; 

6 What time the rivers and the hills before your coming bowed 
them down, 

So to sustain your mighty force. 


prindira: ‘f.om Tirindira the son of Parsu 
« Ti'idate., Persa). See Weber’s 

(Sit.uag.beriohte der K. P. Akadeufle der 

}Mivas: or Yadua, descendants of the hero Yadu. 

Pajra: see VIII. 4 . 17 . 

48 Kakuha : or, the lofty one, meaning Tirindira. 


Buffalott : or camels. 


of SHyana's three interpretation., the 
letre. ^ ^ midday libation accompanied by hymns in the Trishtup 



124 THB HYMNS OP [BOON Vlii 

6 We call on you for aid by nigbt, on you for succour in the day, 
Oil you while sacrifice proceeds. 

7 These, verily, wondrous, red of hue, speed on their courses 

with a roar 

Over the ridges of the sky. 

8 With might they drop the loosened rein so that the Sun may 

run his course. 

And spread themselves with beams of light. 

9 Accept, ye Maruts, this my song, accept ye this mine hymn 

of praise. 

Accept, Ribhnkshans, this my call. 

10 The dappled Cows have poured three lakes, meath for the 
Thunder- wielding God, 

From the great cask, the watery cloud. 

110 Maruts, quickly come to us when, longing for felicity. 

We call you hither from the sky. 

12 For, Rudras and Ribhukshaiis, ye, Most Bountiful, are in the 

house, 

Wise when the gladdening draught is drunk. 

13 0 Maruts, send us down from heaven riches distilling raptiir- 

ousjoy, 

With plenteous food, sustaining all. 

14 When, Bright Ones, hither from the hills ye have resolved to 

take your way, 

Ye revel in the drops effused. 

15 Man should solicit with his lauds happiness which belongs to 

them, 

So great a band invincible. 

IG They who like fiery sparks with showers of rain blow throiigli 
the heaven and earth, 

Milking the spring that never fiiils. 

17 With chariots and tumultuous roar, with tempests and witli 

hymns of praise 
The Sons of Prisni hurry forth. 

18 For wealth, we think of that whereby ye aided Yadu, Tiirvasa, 
And Kanva who obtained the spoil. 


8 They drop the loosened rein : they speed forward to prepare the Wiiy 
the Sun. 

9 Jlibhuhshans : Mighty Ones, according to Sftyana. 

10 The dappled Cows: the^Maruts, Three lakes: three large Soma [ecep 
tacles, the Dronakalasa, the Adhavantya, and the PHtabhrit The meaning 
the Maruts have poured down abundant water from the rain -cloud. 



THE nmyEEA, 


125 


YW 7.] 

9 Mav these our viauds Bounteous Ones ! that flow in streams 
like holy oil, 

With Kanva’s hymns, increase your might. 

[) Where, Bounteous Lords for whom the grass is trimmed, are 
ye rejoicing now ? 

What Brahman is adoring you % 

1 L it not there where ye of old, supplied with sacred grass, 

for lauds 

Inspired the strong in sacrifice 1 

2 They brought together both the worlds, the mighty watei^, 

and the vSun, 

And, joint by joint, the thunderbolt. 

3 They sundered Vritra limb from limb and split the gloomy 

moiintain-clouds, 

Perfonning an heroic deed. 

:1 They reinforced the power and strength of Trita as he fought, 
and hel})cd 

Iiidra in battle with the foe. 

5 They deck themselves for glory, bright, celestial, lightning in 
their hands, 

And helms of gold upon their heads. 

'6 When eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern of the Bull, 
He bellowed in his fear like Heaven. 

7 Borne by your golden-footed steeds, 0 Gods, come hither to 
■ receive 

The sacrifice we offer you. 

IS When the red leader draws along their spotted deer yoked to 
the car. 

The Bright Ones come, and shed the rain, 
b Sushoina, Saryanavaii, and Arjika full of homes, have they, 
These Heroes, sought with downw^ard car. 

9 With Kdnva' 8 hi/ inns : hy mm the Ki.shi Puiiarvalsa, a descendant of 

nva 

U The strong in sacrifice : the Maghavans, wealthy worshippers. 

U Trita : a Vodic deity, perhaps Agni in his third form, genevally associated 
di ludra, Vayn, and the Maruts. JSoe. Vol. I., Index. In battle xcith the 
; or, tn overcome Vritra. 

26 The cavern of the Ball: perhaps, the hollow of the rain-cloud; ‘the 
?ning of the rainy (firmament).’ — Wilson. 

28 Leader : or side-horse. 

29 Sarijavdodn ;^has occurred before (see I. 84. 14, and VIII 6. 89) as the 
aie of a lake. Arjtka is said by S&yana to be the name of a district, and 
takes sushdma (containing excellent Soma) to be an adjective qualifying it. 
c Zimmer, Altindisches Xe6en, p. Td. 



126 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK r/y/ 

30 When, Mavuta, will ye come to him, the singer who invokes 

you thus, 

With favours to your suppliant 1 

31 What now 1 where have ye still a friend since ye left Indra all 

alone ? 

Who countoth on your friendship now? 

32 The Kanvas sing forth Agui’s praise together with oar 

Maruts’ who 

Wield thunder and wear swords of gold. 

33 Hither for new felicity may I attract the Impetuous Ones, 
The Heroes with their wondrous strength. 

34 Before them sink the very hills deeming themselves abysses; 

yea, 

Even the mountains bend them down. 

35 Steeds flying on their tortuous path through mid-air carrj 

them, and give 

The man who lauds them strength and life. 

36 Agni \vas born the first of all, like Surya lovely with his light; 
With lustre these have spread abroad. 

HYMN VIII. Asvin., 

With all the succours that are yours, 0 Asvins, hither come 
to us : 

Wonderful, borne on paths of gold, drink yo the meath with 
Soma juice. 

2 Como now, ye Asvins, on your car decked with a sun-bright 

canopy. 

Bountiful, with your golden forms, Sages with depth of 
intellect. j 

3 Come hither from the Nahushas, come, drawn by pure hymns, 

from mid-air. 

0 Asvins, drink the savoury juice shed in the Kanvaa' 
sacrifice. 


31 Lf/t Indra all alone ? .• Tliis is merely a rhetorical question meaning, J’fl 
never did desert him. The Maruta alone stood by him when he fought willJ 
Vritra. 

36 With lustre these have spread abroad : ‘ then they (the Marnts) stW 
round in their radiance ’ ‘ The 8choliast intimates that this verse refers to 

the ceremony c.dled Agnimdruta, when Agni is first worshipped, then tw 
Maruts' --Wilson. 

3 Fr(m the Nahuihat: or, according to others, from the neighbouri»8 
people. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


127 


YMN 8 .] 

t Come to us hither from the heavens, come from mid-air, well- 
loved by us : 

Here Kanva’s son hath pressed for you the pleasant meath of 
Soma juice. 

) Come, Asvins, to give ear to us, to drink the Soma, Asvins, 
come. 

Hail, Strengtheners of the praise-song ! speed onward, ye 
Heroes, with your thoughts. 

5 As, Heroes, in the olden time the Rishis called you to their 
aid. 

So now, 0 Asvins, come to us, come near to this mine eulogy. 

J Even from the luminous sphere of heaven come to us, ye who 
find the light. 

Carers for Vatsa, through our prayers and lauds, 0 ye who 
hear our call. 

3 Do others more than we adore the Asvins with their hymns 
of praise? 

The itishi Vatsa, Kanva’s son, hath magnified you with his 
songs. 

9 The holy singer with his hymns hath called you, Asvins, hither- 
ward ) 

Best Vritra-slay ers, free from stain, as such bring us felicity. 

P What time, ye Lords of ample wealth, the Lady mounted on 
1 your car, 

Then, 0 ye Asvins, ye attained all wishes that your hearts 
desired. 

1 Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand 

ornaments : 

Vatsa the sage, the sago’s son, hath sung a song of sweets to 
you. 

2 Cheerers of many, rich in goods, discoverers of opulence. 

The Asvins, Riders through the sky, have welcomed this my 

song of praise. 

3 0 Asvins, grant us all rich gifts wherewith no man may 

interfere. 

Make us observe the stated times : give us not over to reproach. 
i Whether, Nasatyas, ye be nigh, or whether ye be far away, 
Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand 
I ornaments. 


7 Carers for Vatsa: ye who favour and provide for Vatsa, the Ilishi of 
VI. of thU Book. 

10 The Lady ; saryA, Daughter of the Sun. See. 1. 116. 17. 



128 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Vlii 


15 Vatsa the Rishi with his songs, Nasatyas, hath exalted you; 
Grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a thousand 

ornaments. 

16 Bestow on him, 0 Asvins, food that strengthens, and that 

drops with oil, 

On him who praises you for bliss, and. Lords of bounty, prays 
for wealth. 

17 Como to us, ye who slay the foe, Lords of rich treasure, to 

this hymn. 

0 Heroes, give us high renown and these good things of earth 
for help. 

1 8 The Priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours that 


21 


22 


are yours. 

You, Asvins, Lords of solemn rites, with calls entreating you 
to come. 

19 Come to us, Asvins, ye who bring felicity, auspicious Ones, 
To Vatsa who with prayer and hymn, lovers of song, hath 

honoured you. 

20 Aid us, 0 Heroes, for those hymns for which ye helped 

Gosarva erst, n ^ • r- 

Gave Vasa, Dasavraja aid, and Kanva and Medhatithi ; 

And favoured Trasadasyu, ye Heroes, in spoil-deciding fray : 
For these, 0 Asvins, graciously assist us in acciuiring strength, 
0 Asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and praises, 
honour vou : 

Best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly yearn 
for you. 

23 Three places of the Asvins, erst concealed, are made apparent 

now'. . 

Both Sages, with the flight of Law come hither unto tlioH 

w'ho live. . 

HYMN IX. ^ 

To help and favour Vatsa now, 0 Asvins, come ye hithciaunl 
Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, and ecp 
malignities away. 

20 Goftrya : said by SAyana to bo a namo of Siyu. Sea I. HO, 22. hisi 
and Damcraja are known only as prot6(j68 of the Asvins. 

21 'Trasadasyu: see Vol. I., Index. u i fKo Asvins' 

23 Three places: according to SAyana, u,id 

chariot are intended. The three places can only be heaven, 
earth, hidden during the darkness of night and made visible by tl 

of the Asvins and Dawn. , « u K4nva ot 

1 VaUa: apparently another name of Sasakarua, called also Mn 

descendant of Kanva, the llishi of the hymOf 



THE JUG VEDA, 


129 


MS 9.] 


All manliness that is in heaven, with the Five Tribes, or in 
mid-air, 

‘ Bestow, ye Asvins, upon us. 

1 Remember Kfinva first of all among the singers, Asvins, who 

Have thought upon your wondrous deeds. 

Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused, 

This your sweet Soma juice, ye Lords of ample wealth, through 
which ye think upon the foe. 

, -Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, Wonder-Wor- 
kers, and in growing plants, 

Therewith, 0 Asvins, succour me. 

i What force, Nasatyas, ye exert, whatever. Cods, ye tend and 
heal. 

This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone ; ye visit 
him who oilers gifts. 

f Now hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the Asvins’ 
hymn of praise. 

Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, and Soma 
very rich in sweets. 

J Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls upon its 
way. 

May these my praises make you speed hitherward like a cloud 
of heaven. 


) When, 0 Nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither with 
our hymns, 

Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember Kanva 
specially. 

) As erst Kakshivaii and the Rishi Vyasva, as erst Dirghatamas 
invoked your presence, 

Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prithi, so be ye mind- 
ful of us here, 0 Asvins. 


i3 Tkuiujkl upon ; or touched upon, handled. 

4 Think upon the foe : plan the destructhni of the demon of darkness. 

5 Whatever i/c hare done: Prt)feH»or Wilson p»vaphrH^es after SAjana; 
rerterve me with that (he«iling vit i,uc) dept sited b} you in the wateia, in 
J tr. es, in the herbs.' 

7 The A tharvan : the priest who has special charge of the fire and the Soma, 
ollow Ludwig in taking atharrani as a nominative and not as a locative as 
yaiia docs : ‘ he will spi inkle the sweet- flavoured Soma and the gharma 
elation) (fu the Atharvan fire. ’—Wilson. 

|0 hithshtvhi : seel. 18. 1. Vgif$vi : see I 112 15. Dirghatamas: see Vol. 
[Index. Vui.ij/a; son of Vena. PtUhi: the first anointed king. 



180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VllI, 

1 1 Come as home-guardians, saving us from foemen, guarding 

our living creatures and our bodies, 

Come to the house to give us seed and offspring, 

12 Whether with Indra ye bo faring, Asvins, or resting in oiTe*^ 

dwelling-place with Vayu, 

In concord with the Ribhus or A dityas, or standing still in 
Vishnu’s striding-])lHCCs. 

13 When I, 0 Asvins, call on you to-day that I may gather 

strength. 

Or as all-conquering might in war, bo that the Asvins’ noblest 
grace. 

14 Now come, yc Asvins, hitherward: here are oblations set 

for you ; 

These Soma-draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, these offered 
you mid Kanva’s sons. 

15 Wiiatcver healing balm is yours, Nasatyas, near or far away, 
Therewith, great Sages, grant a home to Vatsa and to Vimada. 

16 Together with the Goddess, with the Asvins’ Speech have I 

awoke. 

Thou, Goddess, hast disclosed the hymn, and holy gift from 
mortal men. 

17 Awake the Asvins, Goddess Da\Mi ! Up Mighty La^y of sweet 

strains ! 

Rise, straightway, priest of sacrifice ! High glory to the 
gladdening draught ! 

18 Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light shinest together 

with the Sun, 

And to this man-protecting home the chariotof the Asvins comes. 

19 When yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows from udders 

pour their milk, 

And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins’ w’orshippers 
show first. 

20 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall 

conquer men. 

And power and skill, most sapient Ones ! 

11 Our living creatures : our dependents and our cattle. 

12 Vishnu's striding aces : from which he mude his three great strides 
through earth, hrmament, and heaven. 

18 That: the granting of my request. 

18 And to Vimada : us ye did to Vinaada.— Sliyana. See Vol. L, Index. 

16 The Goddess : Dawn. The Asvins' Speech : V&k or S[)eech who glorifies 

the Asvins ; i. e. the hymn that praises them. 

19 Yellow stalks : of Soma plants. 

20 Forward for glory : advance and come to give us glorj’’, etc. 



TBE Rl&VBDA. 


181 


IfiV 11.] 

When, Afvins, worthy of our lauds, ye seat you in the father’s 

house. 

With wisdom or the bliss ye bring. 

f HYMN X. Asvins. 

Whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of 
heaven, 

Or in a mansion that is built above the sea, come thence, ye 
Asvins, hitherward. 

2 Or if for Manu ye prepared the sacrifice, remember also Kanva’s 

son. 

I call Brihaspati, Indra, Vishnu, all the Gods, the Asvins borne 
by rapid steeds. 

3 Those Asvins I invoke who work marvels, brought hither 

to receive, 

With whom our friendship is most famed, and kinship passing 
that of Gods. 

4 On whom the solemn rites depend, whose worshippers rise 

without the Sun : 

These who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice, and by their 
Godhead drink the sweets of Soma juice. 

5 Whether ye, Lords of ample wealth, now linger in the east 

or west, 

With Druhyu, or with Anu, Yadu, Turvsa, I call you hither ; 
come to me, 

6 Lords of great riches, whether through the firmament ye fly 

or speed through heaven and earth, 

Or with your Godlike mitures stand ujx)n your cars, come 
thence, 0 Asvins, hitherward. 

HYMN XI. Agui. 

Thou, Agni, God mid mortal men, art guard of sacred rites, 
thou art 

To be adored at sacrifice, 

21 In the father's house : in the sacrificial hall of the father of the family, 
the wealthy householder who in.stitutes the sacrifice. This stanza is a conti- 
nuation of 19, aUhough the connexion is interrupted by the intervening stanza. 

1 Above the sea: above the ocea^ of air. 

3 To receive : our oblations. 

4 Without the sun : S'lyana explains asllre differently, connecting in with 
f'Ari instead of sUra : ‘ of whom there are worshipjiers in a place where there 
»3 no worship.’— Wilson. 

5 Druhyu and the other names stand for the tribes called after these 
ancient chieftains. See Vol. L, Index. 

ia translated in Mnx Muller’s Hitiory of * Ancient Sanskrit 



332 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIJI 


2 0 Miglity Agni, thou must be glorified at our festivals, 
Bearing our offerings to the Gods. 

3 0 Jatavedas Agni, fight and drive our foes afar fiom us, 

Them and their godless enmities. 

4 Thou, Jatavedas, seekest not the worship of a hostile man, 
However nigh it be to thee. 

5 We sages, mortals as we are, a lore the mighty name of thee, 
Immortal Jatavedas' name. 

6 Sages, wo call the Sage to help, mortals, we call the God to aid : 
We call on Agni with our songs. 

7 May Vatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwel- 

ling-place, 

Agni, with song that yearns for thee. 

8 Thou art the same in many a place : mid all the people thou 

art Lord. 

In fray and fight we call on thee. 

9 When we are seeking strength we call Agni to help us in 

the strife, 

The giver of rich gifts in war. 

10 Ancient, adorable at sacrifices, Priest from of old, meet for our 
praise, thou sittest. 

Fill full and satisfy thy body, Agni, and win us happiness by 
offering worship. 

HYMN Xri. InJra. 

Joy, Mightiest Tndra, known and marked, sprung most from 
Soma-draughts, wherewith 

Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that we long. 

2 Wherewith thou holpest Adhrign, the great Dasagva, and 

the God 

Who stirs the sunlight, and the sea, for that we long. 

3 Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and all the 

mighty flood.s 

To go the way ordained by Law, for that we long. 

2 Bearinn our offerings to tJfe Gods: liieially, ‘the charioteer of solemn rites. 

1 Joy: m(id<ih : the rapturous exhilaration produced in Indra by di inking 

the Soma juice. For that ur lotnj : the short refr.iin or burden which 
generally concludes each stn-nza of each triplet of this hymn is sometimes 
rather loo.se1y attached and cannot always be clearly brought out in the proper 
place in translation. 

2 Adkrigu : according to SAyana a Rishi so named. See 1112. 20. Dasagva : 
one of the priestly family connected with, or identical with, the AngiMses, 

‘ the accomplisher of the ten (months’ rit*).’ -Wilson. Ludwig tliinks ihat^ 
Dasagva here may mtan the Sun The sea; of air. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


133 


UYMN 12 .] 


4 Accept this laud for aid, made pure like oil, thou Caster of 

the Stone, 

Whereby even in a moment thou hast waxen great. 

5 Be pleased, Song-lover, with this song : it flows abundant 

like the sea. 

Tndra, with all thy succours thou hast waxen great. 

6 The Ood who from afar hath sent gifts to maintain our 

friendship’s bond. 

Thou, spreading them like rain from heaven, hast waxen great. 

7 The beams that mark him have grown strong, the thunder 

rests between his arms, 

When, like the Sun, he hath increased both Heaven and Earth. 

8 When, Mighty Lord of Heroes, thou didst eat a thousand 

buttaloes, 

Then grew and waxed exceeding great thine Indra-power. 

9 Indra consumeth with the rays of Surya the malicious man : 
Like Agiii coiKiucriiig the woods, he hath grown strong. 

10 This newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches 

unto thee : 

Serving, beloved in many a place, it metes and marks. 

11 The pious germ of sacrifice directly purifies the soul. 

By Iiidra’s lauds it waxes great, it metes and marks. 

12 Tndra who wins the friend hath spread himself to drink the 

Sorna-draught : 

Like worshipper’s dilating praise ; it metes and marks. 

13 He whom the sages, living men, have gladdened, offering up 

their hymns, 

Hath swelled like oil of sacrifice in Agni’s mouth. 


8 Duht cat a thousand buffaloes: the buffaloes probably represent the clouds 
whicli the Sun dissiputea or ciaiaumcs. — Ludwig. ‘ When thou hast slain 
tliDusiiiiils of miglity foC''.’ — Wilson. 

10 It metes and marks: defines and diacriininatea ludra’s good qualities.— 

fSily.ina. 

11 llie germ of sacrijice is probably the wish that prompts the offering. 

^ lyina explains differently : ‘ 7 ’.e devout j>raiser of the adorable (Tndra) 
pun ties in due succession the otfrring (of the Soma) ; with sacred hymns he 
iuagnihes(the might of Indra; he voiily proclaims the measure (of his merits).’ 

s diluting praise : I follow SAyana ; but the stanza is unin- 
* Indra, the benefaetf>r of his friend (the worshipper), haa 
an 1 drink the Soma, in like manner as the pious praise dilates 

measure of hia merits.’ — Wilson. The meaning of wtst 
f unceitnin. Von Roth thinks that the two 

! iu meant, and other explain it as the sword) knife, or axe used 



THE HYMNS OP 


134 


[BOOK Vlii 


1 4 Aditi also hath brought forth a hymn for Indra, Sovran Lord ; 

The work of sacrifice for help is glorified. 

1 6 The ministering priests have sungtheir songs for aid and eulogy; 
God, thy Bays turn not from the rite which Law ordains. 

16 If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu’s or Trita Aptya’s sidei 
Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops ; 

17 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air, 
Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops. 

18 Or, Lord of Heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who sheds the 

juice. 

Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing drops, 

19 To magnify the God, the God, Indra, yea, Indra for your help, 
And promptly end the sacrifice — this have they gained. 

20 With worship, him whom men adore, with Soma, him who 

drinks it most, 

Indra with lauds have they increased — this have they gained. 

21 His leadings are with power and might and his instructions 

manifold : 

He gives the worshipper all wealth : this have they gained. 

22 For slaying Vritra have the Gods set Indra in the foremost 

place. 

Indra the choral bands have sung, for vigorous strength. 

23 We to the Mighty with our might, with lauds to him who 

hears our call. 

With holy hymns have sung aloud, for vigorous strength. 

24 Not earth, nor heaven, nor firmaments contain the Thunder- 

wielding God : 

They shake before his violent rush and vigorous strength. 

25 What time the Gods, 0 Indra, set thee foremost in the furious 

fight, 

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on. 

26 When Vritra, stayer of the floods, thou slewest, Thunderer 

with might, 

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on. 

27 When Vishnu, through thine energy, strode wide those three 

great steps of his, 

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on. 

28 When thy two beautiful Bay Steeds grew great and greater 

day by day, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee. 

16 Trita iptya : see VIII. 7. 24, note. Here he appears as the preparer d 

SnmcL fnr Tnffrd- 



TUE RIQVELA. 


1S5 


i[^U^ 13.] 

19 When, Indra, all theMarut folk humbly submitted them to thee, 

Kven then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee. 

,0 Wl»en yonder Sun, that brilliant light, thou settest in the 
heaven above, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee. 

\\ To thee, 0 Indra, with this thought the sage lifts up this eulogy, 

Akin and leading as on foot to sacritice. 
i2 When in thine own dear dwelling all gathered have lifted up 
the- voice 

Milk-streams at worship’s central spot, for sacrifice, 

3 As Priest, 0 Indra, give us wealth in brave men and good 
steeds and kine 

That we may first remember thee for sacrifice. 


HYMN XIII. lodra. 

Indra, when Soma juices flow, makes his mind pure and meet 
for lauds. 

He gains the power that brings success, for great is be. 

2 In heaven’s first region, in the seat of Gods, is he who brings 

success, 

Most glorious, prompt to save, who wins the water floods. 

3 Him, to win strength, have I invoked, even Indra mighty for 

the fray. 

Be thou most near to us for bliss, a Friend to aid. 

4 Indra, Song-lover, here for tliecthe worshipper’s libation flows 
Rejoicing in this sacred grass thou shinest forth. 

5 Even now, 0 Indra, give us that which, pressing juice, w'o 

crave of thee. 

Bring us wealth manifold which finds the light of heaven. 

0 What time the zealous worshipper hath boldly sung his songs 
to thee, 

Like branches of a tree up-grows what they desire. 

7 Generate songs even as of old, give ear unto the singer’s call : 
Thou for the pious hiist grown great at each carouse. 


31 The Kecond line is difficult. VVilson, following SAya'.ia, j>araphrase8 the 
Btanza: ‘The wise (worshipper), India, offers thee this gratifying sincere 
prn^ise along with pious rites at the sacrifice, as (a man places) a kinsman in 
(a pi’ominent) position.’ 

32 iMilk-streitma : the sweetly-flowing hymns. 

Wilson remarks : ‘ This is probably an ancient hymn, both by ite repetitions 
no combination of simplicity and obscurity.’ 


7 


it 



136 


THE hymxs op [BOOK rill 


8 Sweet strains that glorifyiliini play like waters speeding do*,, 

a slope, ^ 1 f. tt 

Yea, him who in this song is called the Lord of Heaven ; 

9 Yea, who alone is called ihe Lord, the single Ruler of the follj 
By worshippers seeking aid ; may he joy in the draught. 

10 Praise him, the Glorious, skilled in song, Lord of tlie two 

victorious Bays : 

They seek the worshipper’s abode who bows m prayer. 

11 Put forth thy strength: with dappled Steeds come, thou ol 

mighty intellect, , 

With swift Steeds to the sacrifice, for ’tis thy joy. 

12 Grant wealth to those who praise thee. Lord of Heroes, 

Mightiest Indra : give 
Our princes everlasting fume and opulence. 

13 I call thee when the Sun is risen, I call thee at the noon of day; 
With thy car-horses, Indra, come well-jileased to us. 

14 Speed forward hither, come to us, rejoice thee in the milky 

draught : , 

Spin out the threal of jnicicnt time, as well is known. 

lo If, Sakra, Vritra-slayor, tliou be far away or near to us, 

Or in the sea, thou art the guard of Soma juice. 

16 Let songs we sing and Soma-drops expressed by us make 

Indra strong : . 

The tribes who bring oblations find dcbght in him. 

17 Him sages longing for his aid, with ofl’orings firought in eager 

haste, 

Him, even as brnnclies, all mankind have made to grow. 

18 At theTrikadruka.s the Gods span sacrifice that stirred thciund: 
May our songs strengthen him who still hath strengthciud us. 

19 When, true to duty, iit duo times tlie \vorshii)pcr onVrs laiuls 


to thee, 

They call him Purifier, Pure, and Wonderful. 


iT spin out the thread of ancirut times : ‘ oxteiiJ the anoient Bncrifioe. 

The due peifnrni.incp of Kacrific** is rogaolt-d rb an nnt»r<>kon thie.id reaeWu? 
thtough ;i Bnccessit.n of IlinhiH ftoin ain-jent to modem times. 

15 I a the sen: in the lirm:.mont. or oreni, of air. 

AH mankind : HhnnfK But Boe M. Muller I edic j; ^ ^ 

18 Atifte Trikmhnkas: aoco.ding to Stlyana the^e are the hrfit ti ce 

of the Ahhiplava coremony. Aeroiding to ROine «ch() arw ^ 

probtibly tliree peetdiar Soma-vpssrls, or an ohlati..n collating 
fugs of Soma. Span iacriUcc : sec above note on U. That *UrHd the 
that nrgod otlipra to follow tlie example. 

19 Him : a change of per.-*(m, India being meant. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


1^7 


Q That mint! of Rudra, fresh and strong, moves conscious in the 
ancient ways, 

With reference whereto the wise have ordered this. 

\ If thou elect to be my Friend drink of this sacnHcial juice, 

By help whereof we may subdue all enemies. 

9 0 Ln Ira, Lover of the song, when shall thy praiser be most blest? 

When wdt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds? 

3 And thy two highly-lauded Bays, strong stallions, draw thy 
car who art 

I Untouched l)y age, most gladdening car for which we pray. 

I4 With ancient offerings wo implore the Young and Strong 
' whom many praise. 

He from of old hath sat upon dear sacred grass. 

) Wax mighty, thou whom many laud for aids ^^hicll Rishis 
have extolled. 

Pour down for us abundant food and guard ns well. 

] 0 fndra. Caster of the Stone, thou helpest him who praises thee: 

From sacrifice I send to thee a mind yoked hymn 
J Here, yoking for the Soma draught these Iloi'ses, sharers of 
tl y feast, 

Thy Bay Steeds, Inclra, fraught with wealth, consent to come. 

^ Atteu lants on thy glory, Igt the Ilmiras roar assent to thee, 
And all the Marut companies come to the feast. 

[) Those his victorious followers hold in the heavens the place 
they love, 

Leagued in the heart of sacrifice, as well we know. 

D rhat we may long l)ehold the light, what time the ordered 
rite proceeds, 

He duly measures, as he views, the sacrifice. 

1 0 Indra, strong is this thy car, and strong arc these Bay 
Steeds of thine : 

0 S<itakratu, thou art strong, strong is our call. 

20 Ifiive ordered this : son" of praise, or holy ceremony. — Liulwig. 

I 26 }f!nd-)jol’rd : ui.nle ready by the p(*et’s mind, a.s a ch.iiiot — to wliicli the 
J’inn is fre(piemly comp,ared — is equipped for a journey. 

28 The Rndras : the sons of Rudra, the Maruts. 

‘■^9 The heart, literally navel, tha; is the central point, of sanrifrr, is the 
>Cf*j't'icle on which oblations are placed, or the uttaravedt or north altar. 

31 *8'/ro)>y ; irlshd * as h.'s been noticed before (see I. 177 2. 3 ) S(une of 
f'- odic poets delight in the repetition of this word end derivatives from the 
’oe root Sily ana explains ; ns ‘ showerer nf benefits,’ mid Tmdwig 

fins it by ‘ ltiei kr;iftig,' strong as a bull. The original meaning of the 
^ 18 mule, masculine, and, hence, strong. 



THE HYMNS OF 


188 


[BOOR 


32 Strong is the press-stone, strong thy joy, strong is the flowing 

Soma juice: ® 

Strong is the rite thou furtherest, strong is our call. 

33 As strong I call on thee the Strong, 0 Thunderer with thy 

thousand aids : ^ 

For thou hast won the hymn of praise. Strong is our call, 


HYMN XIV. 

If I, 0 Tndra, were, like thee, the single Sovran of all 
My worshipper should be rich in kino. 


Indra, 


2 I should be fain, 0 Lord of Power, to strengthen and enricli 
the sage, 

Were I the Lord of herds of kine. 


3 To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, Indra, ha 

cow 

Yielding in plenty kine and steeds. 

4 None is there, Indra, God or man, to hinder thy munificence 
The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give. 

6 The sacrifice made Indra strong when ho unrolled the earth, 
and made 

Himself a diadem in heaven. 


6 Thine aid we claim, 0 Indra, thine who after thou hast waxeu 

great 

Hast won all treasures for thine own. 

7 In Soma’s ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and realms of 

light. 

When he cleft Vali limb from limb. 


8 Showing the hidden he dravo forth the cows for the Angirasea, 
And Vala he cast headlong down. 

9 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven established 

and secured, 

Firm and immovable from their place. 

10 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of water- 

floods : 

Briglit shine the drops that gladden thee. 

11 For thou, 0 Indra, art the God whom hymns and praises 

magnify : 

Thou blessest those who worship thee. 

12 Let the two long-maned Bay Steeds bring Indra to drink the 

Soma juice, 

The Bountiful to our sacrifice. 



THE RIGVEDA, 


1S9 


^MN 1 ^ 5 -] 

With waters’ foam thou tores t off, Indra, the head of Namuchi, 
Subduing all contending hosts. 

The Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic arts and 
mount to heaven, 

Thou, Indra, castest down to earth. 

As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou scatteredst to every side 
Their settlement who poured no gifts. 

HYMN XV. Indra. 

Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom 
many laud : 

Invite tne powerful Indra with your songs of praise. 

Whose lofty might — for doubly strong is he — supports the 
heavens and earth, 

And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power. 
Such, Praised by many ! thou art King : alone thou smitest 
Vritras dead, 

To gain, 0 Indra, spoils of war and high renown. 

We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which conquers 
in the fray, 

Which, Caster of the Stone ! gives room and ghincs like gold. 
Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and for Manu’s 
sake : 

Now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth. 

This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this might 
of thine : 

Will thou the waters day by day, thralls of the strong. 

That lofty Indra-powcr of thine, thy strength and thine 
intelligence, 

Thy thunderbolt for which we long, the wish makes keen. 

^ 0 Indra, Heaven and Earth augment thy manly power and 
thy renown : 

The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on. 

) Vishnu the lofty ruling Power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise : 
In thee the Maruts’ company have great delight. 

13 With xoiiters' foam: with a thmi<ierbolt in the form of foam, according 
slater legend. Sec Lanmau, SanskHt Reader, p. 375, who takes Namuchi 
• be a waterspout in a lake, and ‘ with foam ’ to mean ‘ accompanied by foam.* 

4 Wildjklifjht : Soma juice, the cause of thy raptuie. 

5 ior Mamds sake : that is for man. Ayu was the son of 

“'■^'avasand Urvash 

^ Thralls of the sti'ong : controlled and imprisoned by Vritra. 

The wish : our wishes expressed in prayer and praise. 



140 THE IIYMXS OF [BOOR Vj 

10 0 Indra, thou wast bom the Lord of men, most liberal of tU 

gifts ; 

Excellent deeds for evermore are all thine own. 

11 Ever, alone, 0 highly-praised, thou sendest Vritras to tlicir 

rest ; 

None else than Tndra executes the mighty deed. 

12 Though here and there, in varied hymns, India, men call on 

thee for aid, 

Still with our heroes fight and win the light of heaven. 

13 Alrearly have all forms of him entered our spacious dwelling. 

place : 

For victory stir thou Tndra, up, the Lord of Might. 

HYMN XVT. 1,4 

Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, sole Sovran i 
mankind, the Chief 
Most liberal who controllcth men. 

2 In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the glory-oiving 

songs, 

Like the floods’ longing for the sea. 

3 Him I invite with eulogy, best King, effective in the fight, 
Strong for the gain of mighty spoil. 

4 Whose perfect ecstasies are wide, profound, victorious, aol 

give 

Joy in the field where heroes win. 

5 Him, when the spoils of war are staked, men call to be theii 

advocate : 

They who have Indra win the day. 

6 Men honour him with stirring songs, and magnify with solcnn 

rites : 

Indra is he who giveth ease. 

7 Indra is Priest and Uishi, he is much invoked by many men, 
And mighty by his mighty powers. 

8 Meet to be lauded and invoked, true Hero with his deeds d 

might, 

Victorious even when alone. 


13 AH forms of him: the various qualities of Indra have been celebrated. 

Stir thou: the Ui^hi addresses hiiiihelf. Loni of Mif/ht: 
later literature, lord or husband of Saebt or his might personified and icga 
as his consort. 

7 Priest: ftroAwnr, meaning, according to S&yana, greater than all Seejl 
45 7, ‘The Brahman who accepts the prajei,’ that is, Indra regfidec 
priest. Rishi: according to Sayava, ‘ the beholder of all the Aryan lace. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


141 


17.] 

The mon, the people magnify tliat Indra with their Sama songs, 
With hymns and sacred eulogies : 

Him who advances them to wealth, sends light to lead them 
ill the war, 

And quells their foemcn in tlie fray. 

jMiiy he, the saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear us in a 

ship 

Sufiily beyond all enemies. 

As such, 0 Indra. honour us with gifts of booty, further us, 
And lead us to felicity. 

HYMN XVII. iHdra. 

CuME, we have pressed the juice fur thee ; 0 Indra, drink 
this Sonia here : 

Sit thou on this my sacred grass. 

0 Indra, let thy loiig maned Bays, yoked by prayer, bring 
thee hitherward : 

Give car and listen to our prayers. 

We Soma-bearing Brahmans call thee Soma-drinker with thy 
friend, 

We, Intira, bringing Soma juice. 

Chine unto us who bring the juice, come unto this our eulogy, 
Fair visored ! drink thou of the juice. 

1 pour it down within thee, so through all thy members let it 
spread : 

Take with thy tongue the pleasant drink. 

Sweet to thy botly let it bo, delicious be the savoury juice : 
Sweet be the Soma to thine heart. 

Like women, let this Soma-draught, invested with its robe, 
approach, 

0 active Indra, close to thee. 

Lulra, transported with the juice, vast in his bulk, strong in 

1 his neck 

:Aii(l stout arms, smites the Vritras down. 

Indra, go thou forward, thou who rulest over all by might : 
[Ihou Vritra-slaycr slay the fiends. 

bo thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest ample wealth 
to him 

ho sheds the juice and worships thee. 


•' bab'a’s companion, the thunderbolt. ‘ With suitable 

'' il'un. 

1 in white garments and moving slowly. Jls rohe: 



TBE HYMNS OP 


142 


[BOOR viii 


1 1 Here, Indra, is thy Sonia-draught, made pure upon the sacnj 

grass : 

Run hither, come and drink thereof. 

12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well ! this juice isgligd 

for thy delight : ^ 

Thou art invoked, Akhandala! 

13 To Kundapayya, grandson’s son, grandson of Sringavrish ! to 

thee, 

To him have I addressed my thought. 

14 Strong pillar thou. Lord of the homo ! armour of Soma-offerers; 
The drop of Soma breaketh all the strongholds down, and 

Indra is the Kish is’ Friend. 

15 Holy Pridakusanu, winner of the spoil, one eminent o’er macj 

men, 

Lead on the wild horse Indra with his vigorous grasp for^^ani' 
to drink the Soma juice. 


HYMN XVIII. Adity., 

Now let the mortal offer prayer to win the unexampled grace 
Of these Adityas and their aid to cherish life. 


12 Famed for thy radiance^ worshipped well: the words thus rendered, 
fitchiyo aud sitchip^janay have not been satisfactorily explained by the Comj 
meiitator, and tlieir meaning is still uncertain. According to SiiyanH, tk| 
former may mean ‘thou whose cattle are strong,’ or ‘thou who.so radiance 
is renowned,’ and the latter ‘thou of renowned adoration’ or ‘ whose hynmil 
are renowned ’ See Wilson’s note. Thou art invoked, Akhandalal : or, ‘Thou 
0 De.stroyer, art invoked.’ This appellation of Indra does not occur again ii 
the Rigvetla. See Muir, 0 S. Texts, IV, 190. 

13 Kundaplyya and Sringavrish appear hero to be names of men. Accord 
ing to Stlyana, knndaplKyya is the name of a particular Soma cereinuny, aw 
the offspring of Srinyavrish is Indra him.self. ‘(In<lra), who wast the off 
spring of Sringavrish, of whom the kundapdyya rite wa-s the protector, (tli« 
sages) have fixed (of old) their minds upon this ceremony.’ See Wilaoui 
note who obst^rves that ‘the construction is loose, aud the explauatiunnol 
very satisfactory.' 

14 Lord of the home : apparently the householder who institutes the Hscri 
fice is addres-sed. he vdstoshpate grihapate. — SAyana. The Rishis 
rminiadm sakhA, the friend of the Munis, sages, saintly men or ascetics; ofw 
Kishis, according to SAyana. 

15 Priddkusdnu : I follow Ludwig in taking this to be the natneoftbe 
institutor of the sacrifice. According to SAyana who explains it as ‘ 
up the head or back like a serpent,’ or ‘ to be propitiated, as a serpent is, w 
gems, charms, medicaments, etc.,’ it is an epithet of Indra ; and the 
forward of Indra in the second line is the worshipper, understood, dr-u** 
mann banishes the last three stanzas to his Appendix as not originally 
ing part of the hymn. 


1 Adilyas : see I. 14. 3. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


143 


fMN 18.1 

I For not an enemy molests the paths which these Adityas tread : 

Infallible guards, they strengthen us in happiness. 

[ Now soon may Bhaga, Savitar, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman 
Give us the shelter widely spread which we implore. 

With Gods come thou whose fostering care none checks, O 
Goddess Aditi : 

Come, dear to many, with the Lords who guard us well. 

) For well these Sons of Aditi know to keep enmities aloof : 

Unrivalled, giving ample room, they save from woe. 

) Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, by night, 
Aditi, ever strengthening, save us from grief ! 
r And in the day our hymn is this : May Aditi come nigh to help, 
With loving-kindness bring us weal and chase our foes. 

] And may the Asvins, the divine Pair of Physicians, send us 
health : 

May they remove iniquity and chase our foes. 

) May Agni bless us with his fires, and Surya warm us 
pleasantly : 

May the pure Wind breathe sweet on us, and chase our foes. 

) Drive ye disease and strife away, drive ye away malignity : 

Adityas, keep us ever far from sore distress. 

I Remove from us the arrow, keep famine, Adityas ! far away : 

Keep enmities afar from us, Lords of all wealth ! 

I Now, 0 Adityas, grant to us the shelter that lets man go free, 
Yea, even the sinner from his sin, ye Bounteous Gods ! 

3 Whatever mortal with the power of demons fain would 

injure us. 

May he, impetuous, suffer harm by his own deeds. 

4 May sin o’ertake our human foe, the man who speaketh evil 

things. 

Him who would cause our misery, whose heart is false. 

^ Gods, ye are with the simple ones, ye know each mortal in 
your hearts : 

Ye, Vasus, well discriminate the false and true. 

6 Fain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains and of 
water-floods : 

I Keep far from us iniquity, Heaven and Earth. 

F So with auspicious sheltering aid do ye, 0 Vasus, carry us 
Beyond all trouble and distress, borne in your ship. 

4 With the Lords : sHribhth ; that is, the Gods. 

! ^ llifA the power of demons : ‘ from his diabolical nature.’— Wilson. 



14 i THE HYMXS OS [BOOR Vlij 

18 Adityaa, ye Most Mighty Ones, grant to our children an^ 
their seed 

Extended term of life that they may live long days. 

10 Sacrifice, 0 Adityaa, is your inward monitor : be kind, 

For in the bond of kindred we are bound to you. 

20 The Maruts’ high protecting aid, the Asvins, and the Go(j 

who saves, 

Mitra and V^iruna for weal we supplicate. 

21 Grant us a home with triple guard, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna! 
Unthreateiicd, Maruts! meet for praise, and tilled with mon. 

22 And as we human beings, 0 Adityas, are akin to death, * 
Graciously lengthen ye our lives that we may live. 

HYMN XIX. 

Si NO praise to him, the Lord of Light. The Gods have made 
the God to bo their messenger, 

And sent oblation to the Gods. 

2 A :ni, the Bounteous Giver, bright with varied flames, land 

thou, 0 singer Sobhari — 

Him who controls this sacred food with Soma blent, who hath 
first cl.iim to sacrifice. 

3 Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, Immortal Priest 

among the Gods, 

Wise finisher of this holy rite : 

4 The Son of Strength, the blesskl, brightly-shining One, A;^ui 

whoso light IS excellent. 

M ly he by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of Mitrn, 
Vanina, and the Floods. 

5 The mortal who hath ministered to Agni with oblation, fuel, 

r.tual lore, 

And reverence, skilled in .sacrifice, 

19 y<)U)’ imearff vionUor : or ueir remenibraocer, not sntf'M'iag you tu re-'t, 
until you have rew.inled men for tlieir devotions. Ijudwig Hay^^ that tbe 
lilWx i>f the text i.s leally hi ilah For saerilice, A'litya.s, is your iieaiest 
dwelling pltce 

20 Tk< (rod icko snres : Indra. wlio is esjxjL-ially the tutelary Oodof A'yaus. 

21 With triple ffU'fid. or, triply defending or defended Accoixliiig 
Silyana, protecting fr(»m heat, cold, ainl wet ; or three-stoieyed. 

22 Akin, to dmth : born subject to death, 

1 The Gods: in the first line are, according to Sily.ina, the priests, i. c. 
who praise : dioyanti stuvaniiti devd ritvijo ; but the word may be taken m 
its ordinary signification, 

5 Ritual lore : viden'i here can hardly mean, as SAyana explains it, 
studying the Vedu’ It may perhaps mean ‘ by knowledge of the 
of the sac'cd formulas.’ or .is M Muller says, ‘by the bundle of 
in sacrifice. See Anc. S. LiUrature^ p. 28, note, and p. 205. 



19 ] RIO VEDA. 146 

1 Verily swift to run are his fleet-footed steeds, and most re- 
splendent fame is his. 

No trouble caused by Gods or wrought by mortal man from 
any side o’ertaketh him. 

' May we by thine own fires be well supplied with fire, 0 Son 
of Strength, 0 Lord of Might : 

Thou as our Friend hast worthy men. 

\ Agni, who praises like a guest of friendly mind, is as a car 
that brings us gear. 

Also in thee is found perfect security : thou art the Sovran 
Lord of wealth. 

) That man, moreover, merits praise who brings, auspicious 
Agni, sacrificial gifts : 

May he win riches by his thoughts. 

) He for whose sacrifice thou standest up erect is prosperous 
and rules o’er men. 

He wins with coursers and with singers skilled in song : with 
heroes he obtains the prize. 

1 He in whose dw'elling Agni is chief ornament, and, all-desired, 

loves his laud well, 

And zealously tends his offerings — 

2 His, or the lauding sage’s word, his, Son of Strength ! who is 

most prompt with sacred gifts, 

Sot thou beneath the Gods, Vasu, above mankind, the speech 
of the intelligent. 

5 He who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very skilful 
Agni nigh. 

Or him who flashes fast with song, 
i The mortal who with blazing fuel, as his laws command, 
adores the Perfect God, 

Blest with his tl)Ought8 in splendour shall exceed all men, as 
though he overpassed the floods. 

P Give us the splendour, Agni, which may overcome each 
; greedy fiend in our abode. 

The wrath of evil-hearted folk. 


7 Utnt icorthy men : in us thy wot ohippers. 

• 0 With coiirgers and with singers : is successful in chariot-races and if 
by the Gods for his sacrifices. 

the Gods and above manHndf is snid to mean * spread 
all the sky.’ The meaning of this and the preceding stanza is some- 

obscurely expressed. 

hvSle explained by Sftyana as akhajidanlyam, 



14« THE HYMNS OF [BOOK r// 

16 That, wherewith Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, the Asvinf 

Bhaga give us light, 

That may we, by thy power finding best furtherance, worshir 
0 Indra, helped by thee. ^ 

17 0 A gni, most devout are they, the sages who have set thei 

Sage exceeding wise, 

0 God, for men to look upon : 

18 Who have arranged thine altar. Blessed God, at morn, brouglii 

thine oblation, pressed the juice. 

They by their deeds of strength have won them migMj 
wealth, who have set all their hope in thee. 

19 May Agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, Blessi^ 

One, and sacrifice bring bliss : 

Yea, may our praises bring us bliss. 

20 Show forth the mind that brings success in war with fiends, 

wherewith thou conquerest in fight. 

Bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, and let us 
vanquish with thine aid. 

21 I praise with song the Friend of man, whom Gods sent down 

to be herald and mcssei>gcr, 

Best worshipper, bearer of our gifts. 

22 Thou unto sharp-toothed Agni, Youiig and Radiant God, 

proclaimcst with thy song the feast — 

Agni, who for our sweet strains moulds heroic strength when 
sacred oil is oftered him, 

23 While, seiwed with sacrificial oil, now upward and now down- 

ward Agni moves his sword. 

As doth the Asura his robe. 

24 The God, the Friend of man, who bears our gifts to heaver 

the God with his sweet-srnelling mouth. 

Distributes, skilled in sacrifice, his precious things, Invokinj 
Priest, Immortal G(xl. 

25 Son of Strength, Agni, if thou wert the mortal, briglit ai 

Mitra ! worshipped with our gifts ! 

And I were the Immortal God, 


16 Thai : ra<liance or splendour. 

20 BHny down the many fii'in. hopef : there ia no aubatantive in the tex 
and hopes, resolves, thoughts or something similar must be supplied. 

21 The Fiiend of man: or mdnurhitam may mean ‘him who was establijli 
•d by Manus.’ 

23 His sword: the flashing flame. The Asura: the Sun, according** 
Sdytya. : outward form. 



THE mo VEDA. 


147 


fYMN 19 .] 


6 I would not give thee up, Vasu, to calumny or misery, O 

Bounteous One. 

My worshipper should feel no hunger or distress, nor, Agni, 
should he live in sin. 

7 Like a son cherished in his father^s house, let our oblation 

rise unto the Gods. 

8 With thine immediate aid may I, excellent Agni, ever gain 

my wish, 

A mortal with a God to help. 

9 0 Agni. by thy wisdom, by thy bounties, by thy leading may 

I gather wealth. 

Excellent Agni, thou art called my Providence : delight thou 
to be liberal. 


0 Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of noble 

heroes and great strength, 

Whose bond of friendship is thy choice. 

1 Thy spai'k is black and crackling, kindled in due time 

0 Bounteous, it is taken up. * 

Thou art the dear Friend of the mighty Mornings: thou 

shinest In glimmerings of the night. 

2 We Sobharis have come to him, for succour, who is good to help 

with thousand powers. 

The Sovran, Trasadasyu’s Friend. 

3 0 Agni, thou on whom all other fires depend, as branches on 

the parent stem, 

I make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine own, while 

1 exalt thy sovran might. 

|4 The mortal vyhom, Adityas, ye, Guileless, lead to the farther bank 
I Of all the princes, Bounteous Ones ! — 

p Whoe’er he be, Man-ruling Kings ! the Regent of the race of 
men — 


May we, 0 Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, like him be further* 
crs of your law. 

6 A gift of fifty female slaves hath Trasadasyu given me, Puru- 
kutsa’s son. 

Most liberal, kind, lord of the brave. 


33 as neglect of the Gods in con»equeno6 of poverty, 

an other W^arMo be : ‘I praise Agni better 

‘‘f they were intenZTobteln'-^™'”' “ 

general^ftnrTk^ * ; vadhd means usually a bride, a wife, a woman 

Nuered i)Afl slaves, the wives or daughters of 

aerfemalft^' ^ ^ meant. According to von Roth, marwi or 

lemale draught-animaU are intended. i or 



148 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK VlJi 


37 


And Syava too for me led forth a strong steed at Suvastu’a 
ford : 

A herd of three times seventy kine, good lord of gifts, he gave 
to me. 


HYMN XX. 


Let none, Swift Travellers ! check you ; come hither, like- 
spirited, stay not far away, 

Ye bendera even of what is firm. 


2 Maruts, Ribhukshans, Rudras, come ye with your cars stronw. 
fellied and exceeding bright. 

Come, ye for whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, come ye 
with love to Sobhari. 


3 For well we know the vigorous might of Rudra’s Sons, the 

Maruts, who are passing strong. 

Swift Vishnu’s band, who send the rain. 

4 Islands are bursting forth and misery is stayed : the heaven 

and earth are joined in one. 

Decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses out, 
when ye. Self-luminous, stirred yourselves. 

5 Even things immovable shake and reel, the mountains and the 

forest trees at your approach, 

And the earth trembles as ye come. 

6 To lend free course, 0 Maruts, to your furious rush, heaven 

high and higher still gives way, 

Where they, the Heroes mighty with their arms, display their 
gleaming ornaments on their forms. 

7 After their Godlike nature they, the bull-like Heroes, dazzling 

and impetuous, wear 
Great splendour as they show erect. 


37 Suv^stu is in all probability the Soastos of Arrian (Suwad or Swat) near 
the Kdphfin or Kabul river. Kine: there is no Bub«tantive in the text The 
stanza, which has no comment in the printed edition, is very obscure and can 
be only conjecturally translated, bee Ludwig’s Translation and Commentaryi 
I. 427, and IV. 380. 

4 S4ya^ seems to explain this verse, ‘ The islands fall asunder, the 
(trees) experience distress ; they (the winds) distreRS heaven and earth , 
waters hurry onward, 0 bright wea|x>neil, self-shining ones, when y®'* ,, 

them.’-E. B. C/s note in Wilson’s Translation. The stanza is ditticuit 
I have followed, generally, Ludwig’s version, hdandt : the higher 
merged grounds. Misery: caused by the preceding hot and 
Are joined in one: as the heavy rain obscures the horizon. 
worn on the arms or the ankles or carried by the Maruts on their shou 
See I. 161 9. ^ 

7 Bull-like : the exact meaning of vrishapsavah is uncertain. 
uhriUapiavah is conjecturally translated. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


149 


0YMN 20 .] 

8 The pivot of the Sobharis’ chariot within the golden box is 

balmed with milk. 

Inlay they the Well-born, Mighty, kindred of the Cow, aid us 
to food and to delight. 

9 Bring, ye who sprinkle balmy drops, oblations to your vigorous 

Marut company. 

To those whose leader is the Bull. 

10 Come hither, 0 ye Maruts, on your strong-horsed car, solid in 

look, with solid naves. 

Lightly like winged falcons, 0 yo Heroes, come, come to enjoy 
00 r offerings. 

11 Their decoration is the same: their ornaments of gold are 

i)right upon their arms ; 

Their lances glitter splendidly. 

12 They toil not to defend their bodies from attack, strong He- 

roes with their mighty arms. 

Strong are your bows and strong the weapons in your cars, 
and glory sits on every face. 

13 Whose name extendeth like a sea, alone, resplendent, so that 

all have joy in it. 

And life-power like ancestral might. 

14 Pay honour to these Maruts and sing praise to them, for of 

the wheel-spokes of the car 

Of these loud roarers none is last : this is their power, this 
moves them to give mighty gifts. 

15 Blest by your favouring help was he, 0 Maruts, at the earlier 

flushings of the morn, 

And even now shall he be blest. 

16 The strong man to whose sacrifice, 0 Heroes, ye approach 

that ye may taste thereof, 

With glories and with war that winneth spoil shall gain great 
I bliss, ye Shakers of the world. 

[17 Even as Rudra's Sons, the brood of the Creator Dyaus, the 
Asura, desire, 

0 Youthful Ones, so shall it be : 

8 Box : the interior of the chariot. With milk : with fertilizing rain sent 
the Maruts. The Cow : Pi iani. 

9 1c who sprinkle balmy drops: j.iieats who offer libations. Whose leader 

* ^ ' whom Indra leatls. Or, it may be, whose chariot is drawn by 

Julls, as in the following stanza. 

1 4 bull-like, or strong look. 

4 None is last : no part of their chariot wheel is behind the rest in speed. 
moves them to give mighty g^fts : or, this (characteristic belongs to them) 
Hugh greatness of their gif^^^ 

10 He: your worshipper. 



160 Tnn HYMNS OF [BOOK Tin 

18 And these the bounteous, worthy of the Maruts who movi 

onward pouring down the rain — 

Even for their sake, 0 Youthful Ones, with kindest heart taki 
us to you to be your own. 

19 0 Sobhari, with newest song sing out unto the youthful purj 

fying Bulls, 

Even as a plougher to his steers. 

20 Who, like a celebrated boxer, overcome the challengers in ever] 

They who, like shining bulls, are most illustrious— honom 
those Maruts with thy song. 

21 Allied by common ancestry, ye Maruts, even the Cows, alik( 

in energy, 

Lick, all by turns, each other s head. 

22 Even mortal man, ye Dancers breast-adorned with gold, attain! 

to brotherhood with you. 

Mark ye and notice us, 0 Maruts; evermore your friendshii 
is secured to us. 

23 0 Maruta, rich in noble gifts, bring us a portion of the Maruts 

medicine, 

Ye Coursers who are Friends to us. 

24 Haters of those who serve you not, bliss-bringers, bring u 

bliss with those auspicious aids 
Wherewith ye are victorious and guard Sindhu well, and sue 
cour Krivi in his need. 

25 Maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm soere) 

Sindhu or Asikni hath. 

Or mountains or the seas contain, 

26 Ye carry on your bodies, ye who see it all : so bless us gracious ; 

Cast, Maruts, to the ground our sick man s malady . replac 
the dislocated limb. 


18 6<mnt€oua; the liberal institutors of sacrifice. 

19 Punfying bulls : the stroog Maruts who send the sweet win. 

21 Allied by common ancestry: as the oflfspring of theh coursf 

Maruts. Lick.... each other's head : as they aky.’ 

According to SAyana, ‘ the cows severally hek up the quarters 

22 ye Z)ancer»; ye who dance through the wr. i-ter time 

24 Krivi : the eponyiuus of a wwrior tn^ in bei 

combined with, or identical with the /f^-^Ootamar— ^ile^n. 

to meana well: ‘with which vou pixiv.ded a well 

25 Asikni : the Aoesmes of Quintus Curtius, the Vedio na 

bhftirA. the modern ChenAb. fnime ’-^Wilwi 

26 Replace the dislocated limb: ‘re-establish his enfeebled fra e. 



jYMN 21 .] 


THE RIG VS DA 


151 


HYMN XXI. Indra. 

We call on thee, 0 Matchless One ! We seeking help, posses- 
sing nothing firm ourselves, 

Call on thee wonderful in fight : 

2 On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, the hold, 

the mighty, hath gone forth. 

We therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen thee, free- 
giver, as our Guardian God. 

3 Como hither, for the drops are here, 0 Lord of corn-lands, 

Lord of horses, Lord of kine : 

Drink thou the Soma, Soma’s Lord ! 

4 For we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee, 0 Indra, 

who hast numerous kin. 

With all the forms thou hast, come thou of bull-like strength, 
come near to drink the Soma juice. 

5 Sitting like birds beside thy meath, mingled with milk, that 

gladdenetli and exalteth thee, 

Indra, to thee we sing aloud. 

6 We speak to thee with this our reverential prayer. Why 

art thou pondering yet awhile ? 

Here are our wishes ; thou art liberal, Lord of Bays : we and 
our hymns are present here. 

7 For not in recent times alone, 0 Indra, Thunder-armed, have 

we obtained thine aid. 

Of old we knew thy plenteous wealth. 

8 Hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards: these, 

Thunderer, now we crave of thee. 

0 Vasu, for all wealth that coiueth of the kine, sharpen our 
powers, fair-visored God. 

9 Him who of old hath brought to us this and that blessing, 

him I magnify for you. 

Even Indra, 0 my friends, for help : 

0 Borne by Bay Steeds, the Lord of heroes, ruling men, for it 

is he who takes delight. 

May Maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hundreds of 
cattle and of steeds. 

1 Hero, may we, with thee for Friend, withstand the man w^ho 

pants against us in his wrath, 

In fight with people rich in kine. 

2 May we be victors in the singer’s battle-song, and meet the 

wicked, Much-invoked ! 

2 Thit yodtk d/ ourt : the uoble who Ua& instituted the sacrihee. 


152 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vii, 

With heroes smite the focman and show forth our strengtl] 
0 Indra, further thou our thoughts. 

13 0 Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and compani 

onless art thou : 

Thou seekest comradeship in war. 

14 Thou findest not the wealthy man to bo thy friend: thosi 

scorn thee who are flown with wine. 

What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as 
a Father, art invoked. 

15 0 Indra, let us not, like fools who waste their lives at home 

with friendship such as thine 
Sit idly by the poured-out juice. 

IG Giver of kine, may we not miss thy gracious gifts ; lot us nol 
rob thee of thine own. 

Strip even the strong places of the foe, and bring : thy gifts 
can never be made vain. 

17 Indra or blest Sarasvati alone bostows such wealth, treasuri 

so great, or thou, 

0 Chitra, on the worshipper. 

18 Chitra is King, and only kinglings are the rest who dwell 

beside Sarasvati. 

He, like Parjanya with his rain, hath spread himself with 
thousand, yea, with myriad gifts. 

HYMN XXII. Asvin*. 

Hitherward have I called today, for succour, that modt 
wondrous car 

Which ye ascended, Asvins, ye whose paths are red, swift to 
give ear, for Surya’s sake. 

2 Car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoked, soon guided, 
first in deeds of might, 

Which waits and serves, 0 Sobhari, with benevolence, without 
a rival or a foe. 

1 3 Thou seekest comradeship in war : befrieudest thy worshippers when 
they nee<l thine assistance in battle. 

14 Gatherest: the clouds. - M Muller. 

17 Chitra : the name of this king does not occur elsewhere in the Uigveda. 

18 Kinj : rdj'l Kinf/linf/s : rdjahlfh. Parjanya : God of the rain cloud? 
regarded as the type of liberal beneficence. 

1 Ye whose paths art red : rudravartani : this epithet of the Aflvine h 
variou.sly explained ; ‘ having a path which causes weeping in battle, ^ 
‘ whose paths are praised,’ — Slysna ; ‘advancing on the path to battle 
Wilson; ‘ proceeding on terrible roads.’ — Muir; ‘going on liudra's 
Ludwig; ‘on your light path,’ — Grassmann ; ‘going on a reddish 
Pischel. See VedUche Studien, I., pp. 15 and 55 — 60. For Sil,ri/d'9 8*^^* 
choot the Aavius as her husbimds. See 1. 110. 17* 



THE RIGVEDA. 


155 


jYHN 22 .] 

3 These Asvins with oar homage, these Two Omnipresent 

Deities 

Hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who seek the 
dwelling of the worshipper. 

4 One of your chariot wheels is moving swiftly round, one 

speeds for you its onward course. 

Like a milch-cow, 0 Lords of splendour, and with haste let 
your benevolence come to us. 

5 That chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of 

gold, 

The f-mioiis car that traverseth the heaven and earth, thereon 
Niisatyas, Asvins, come. 

6 Ye with your plough, when favouring Manu with your help, 

ploughed the first harvest in the sky. 

As such will we exalt you, Lords of splendour, now, 0 Asvins, 
with our prayer and praise. 

7 Come to us, Lords of ample wealth, by paths of everlasting Law, 
Whereby to high dominion ye with mighty strength raised 

Trikshi, Trasadasyu’s son. 

8 This Soma pressed with stones is yours, ye Heroes, Lords of 

plenteous wealth. 

Approach to drink the Soma, come, drink in the worshipper’s 
abode. 

9 0 Asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, ye who 

are Lords of plenteous wealth, 

And bring to us abundant food. 

10 The aids wherewith ye helped Paktha and Adhrigu, and 

Babhru severed from his friends, — 

With those, 0 Asvins, come hither with speed and soon, and 
heal whatever is diseased. 

i AVhen we continually invoke the Asvins, the resistless, at this 
time of day, 

We lovers of the song, with songs, 


4 The movements of the two wheels are not very intelligibly described. See 
'0. 19, and V. 73 3 Like a milch-cow: a common type of liberality. 

6 Plowfhed the first harvest: fiisc ploughed the ground and 3owe<l and 

^ped: that is, taught, by example, men to do so. Cp. 1. 117. 21 : ‘ Ploughing 
?' barley, 0 ye Asvins. milking out foexi for men, ye wonder-workers, 

po?/th Bdsyu with your trumpet, ye have bestowed wide light 

7 Trihshi : see VI 46. 8. 

Adhriyu^ and Babhru are iNud to have been kings. 



THK HYMNS OF 


154 


[BOOK Vlii 


12 Through these, ye Mighty Ones, come hither to my call )vliicli 

brings all blessings, wears all forms, — 

Through wiiich. All-present Heroes, lavishest of food yg 
strengthened Krivi, come through these. 

13 I speak to both of these as such, these Asvins whom I rever. 

ence at this time of day : 

With homage we entreat them both, 

14 Ye who are Lords of splendour, ye whose paths are red, at 

eve, at morn, at sacrifice, 

Give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye Rudras, Lords 
of ample wealth. 

15 For bliss I call the blissful car, at morn the inseparable Asvina 

with their car I 

I call, like Sobhari our sire. 

16 Rapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to the joy, bring- 

ing your swiftly-coming help. 

Be to us a protection even from far away. Lords of great wealth, 
with many aids. 

17 Come, Wonder-Workers, to our home, our home, 0 Asvins, 

rich in cattle, steeds, and gold. 

Chief drinkers of the Soma’s juice ! 

18 Choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, uninjured 

by the Rakshas foe, 

At this your coming nigh, ye Lords of ample wealth and all 
good things, may W’c obtain. 


HYMN XXIir. AgDi, 

Worship thou Jatavedas, pray to him who willingly accepts, 
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame. 

2 Thou, all men’s friend, Visvamanas, exaltest Agni with thy 

song, 

The Giver, and his flames with which no cars contend. 

3 Whose resolute assault, to win vigour and food, deserves our 

praise, — 


12 Krivi : Bee VIII. 20. 24. 

14 Ye Rudras : ye red-liued or bright Ooda. 

17 Rich in cattle: proleptic ; which your coming will make rich. 

The Rishi is Visvamanas the son of Vyasva. 

1 Who wilUayly accepts : prattvydm : according to SAyana, * disposed to 

encounter enemies ’ , 

2 The second line is difficult, as the adjective vishpardhasah stands withou 
a substantive and may be either the accusative plural or the genitive singular- 
< who is the giver «>f chariots to the unenvious (worshipper).’ — WiLca. 

3 Assault : on the ublatious which the fire consumes. 



TEE RIO VEDA, 


155 


23.] 

Through whose discovering power the priest obtaineth 

wealth. 

Up springs the imperishable flame, the flame of the Reful- 
gent One 

Most bright, with glowing jaws and glory in his train. 

Skilled in fair sacrifice, extolled, arise in Godlike loveliness. 
Shining with lofty splendour, with effulgent light. 

Called straight to our oblations, come, 0 Agni, through our 
eulogies. 

As thou hast been our envoy bearing up our gifts. 

I call your Agni, from of old Invoking Priest of living men : 
Him with this song I laud and magnify for you. 

, Whom, wondrous wise, they animate with solemn rites and 
his fair form, 

Kind as a friend to men who keep the holy Law. 

I Him, true to Law, who perfecteth the sacrifice, Law-loving 
ones ! 

Ye with your song have gratified in the place of prayer. 

► May all our sacrifices go to him the truest Angiras, 

Who is among mankind the most illustrious Priest. 
Imperishable Agni, thine are all these high enkindled lights, 
Like horses and like stallions showing forth their strength. 

\ So give us, Lord of Power and Might, riches combined with 
hero strength. 

And guard us with our sons and grandsons in our frays. 

\ Soon as the eager Lord of men is friendly unto Manu’s race, 
Agni averteth from us all the demon host. 

1 0 Hero Agni, Lord of men, on hearing this new laud of mine. 
Burn down the Rakshasas, enchanters, with thy flame. 

) No mortal foe can e’er prevail by arts of magic over him 
Who serveth Agni well with sacrificial gifts. 

B Vyasva the sage, who sought the Bull, hath won thee, finder 
of good things : 

As such may we enkindle thee for ample wealth. 

? Usana KA,vya stablished thee, 0 Agni, as Invoking Priest : 
Thee, Jatavcdas, Sacrificing Priest for man. 


^ Law-loving ones: ‘pious worshippers.* — Wilson. Have gi'atijied: or 

ist gratify. 

IS Who sought the Bull: the strong Agui. According to SAyapa, ‘the 
owerer (of rain).* 

H V^and Kdvya: see Vol. I., Index. 



156 


THE OF 


[BOOK Vlii 

18 All Deities of one accord appointed thee their messenger; 
Thou, God, through hearing, hadst first claim to sacrifice. 

1 9 Him may the mortal hero make his own immortal messengej. 

Far-spreading, Purifier, him whose path is black. ’ 

20 With lifted ladles let us call him splendid with his brillia^{ 

flame. 

Men’s ancient Agni, wasting not, adorable. 

21 The man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial 
Obtains both plenteous nourishment and hero fame. 

22 To Jatavedas Agni, chief in sacrifices, first of all 
With homage goes the ladle rich with sacred gifts. 

23 Even as Vyasva did, may we with these most high and liberal 

hymns 

Pay worship unto Agni of the splendid flame. 

24 Now sing, as Sthurayfipa sang, with lauds to him who spread 

eth far. 

To Agni of the home, 0 Rishi, Vyasva’s son. 

25 As welcome guest of human kind, as offspring of the forest 

kings. 

The sages worship ancient Agni for his aid. 

26 For men’s oblations brought to him who is the mighty Lord 

of all. 

Sit, Agni, mid our homage, on the sacred grass. 

27 Grant us abundant treasures, grant the opulence which many 

crave. 

With store of heroes, progeny, and high renown. 

28 Agni, Most Youthful of the Gods, send evermore the gift of 

wealth 

Unto Varosushaman and to all his folk. 

29 A mighty Conqueror art thou. 0 Agni, so disclose to us 

Food in our herds of kinc and gain of ample wealth. , 

30 Thou, Agni, art a glorious God : bring hither Mitra, Varunfl,| 

Imperial Sovrans, holy-minded, true to Law'. , 

18 Through heanng : and, by causing the Gods to hear, men’s prayers. 

24 SthUrayUpa : said by SAyana to be the name of a Rishi. 

25 Forest Hugs : tall trees, or trees in general. 

28 VarosushAinan : I follow the ISt. Petersburg Lexicon in joining 
tushKmne and taking the whole as one word and the name of a chief. 
translates somewhat as follows : ‘ Agni, send quickly to the folk who ko® 
the goodly SAman well, the gift of wealth, for ever, Youngest God ! to » 
But in a later volume of his work (III. p. 162) he comes to the 
that SushAman is a proper name, aftd that raro (which may, he thinks, w 
iatcrjecticoj must not be combined with it, 



24.] 


THE niQVEDA. 


157 


HYMN XXIV. Indra. 

Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom the thunder 

arms, 

To glorify your bold and most heroic Friend. 

For thou by slaying Vritra art the Vritra-slayer, famed for 

rfligbt. 

Thou, Hero, in rich gifts surpassest wealthy chiefs, 
j As such, when glorified, bring us riches of very wondrous 
fame, 

Set in i>he highest rank, Wealth-giver, Lord of Bays ! 
t Yea, Indra, thou disclosest that preeminent dear wealth of 
men : 

Boldly, 0 Bold One, glorified, bring it to us. 

) The workers of destruction stay neither thy right hand nor 
thy left : 

Nor hosts that press about thee, Lord of Bays, in fight. 

5 0 Thunder-armed, I come with songs to thee as to a stall 
with kmc : 

Fulfil the wish and thought of him who sings thy praise, 
f Chief Vritra-slayer, through the hymn of Visvamanas think 
of all. 

All that concemeth us. Excellent, Mighty Guide. 

1 May we, 0 Vritra-slayer, 0 Hero, find this thy newest boon. 
Longed-for, and excellent, thou who art much invoked I 

I 0 IndiM, Dancer, Much-invoked ! as thy great power is un- 
surpassed, 

So he thy bounty to the worshipper unchecked. 

) Most Mighty, most heroic One, for mighty bounty fill thee full. 
Though strong, strengthen thyself to win wealth, Maghavan ! 

1 0 Thunderer, never have our prayers gone forth to any God 

but thee : 

So help us, Maghavan, with thine assistance now. 

2 For, Dancer, verily I find none else for bounty, saving thee, 

I For splendid wealth and power, thou Lover of the Song. 

p For Indra pour ye out the drops ; meath blent with Soma let 
him drink : 

With bounty and with majesty will he further us. 

9 Dancer : of the dance of war. According to S&yana, ‘ dancer, or who 
to dance, i. e. agitator, exciter, from Indra'e faculty of internal impulse 

I all beingB.’_WiUon. 



158 


THE HYMNS OF {BOOR Viji 


14 1 spake to the Bay Coursers’ Lord, to him who gives ability; 
Now hear the son of Asva as he praises thee. 

15 Never was any Hero born before thee mightier than thou; 
None certainly like thee in goodness and in wealth. 

16 0 ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice what glad 

dens most ; • 

So is the Hero praised who ever prospers us. 

17 Indra, whom Tawny Coursers bear, praise such as thine 

preeminent. 

None l)y his power or by his goodness hath attained. 

18 We, seeking glory, have invoked this Master of all power an( 

might 

Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice. 

19 Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends, the Hero who deserve 

the laud, 

Him who with none to aid o’ercomes all tribes of men. 

20 To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, Cele 

tial God, 

Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and tha 
meath. 

21 Whose hero powders are measureless, whose bounty ne’er mi 

be surpassed, 

Whose liberality, like light, is over all. 

22 As Vyasva did, praise Indra, praise the Strong unfluctuatii 

Guide, 

Who gives the foe’s possessions to the worshipper. 

23 Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the tenth tir 

still is new. 

The very Wise, whom living men must glorify. 

24 Thou knowest, Indra, Thunder-armed, how to avoid destnicti 


powers. 

As one secure from pitfalls each returning day. 


14 iion of Asva: i. e. of Vyasva, the Rishi \ i^-vamanas. 

20 Who keem no cattle back : either literally who aids his worshipped 
win cattle in their raids and gives them all the booty ; or, who for 
the kine or rays of light that he has recovered from the iwwere ot d&m 
According to SAyana, ‘ who rejects no praise.’ 

23 Who to the tenth time still is neio : continually renews his liberality 
U8. This seems to be the meaning of the da^amam ndvam (tenth 

text. SAyana explains differently ; ‘ who is the tenth (of the perv* mg 
principles), the adorable.’ 

24 Destructive powers : the plural of Nirnti, Death or Destruction, 
adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of the second line. 



THE RIGVBDA, 


S 26.] 


169 


j 5 0 Indra, bring that aid wherewith of old, Most Wondrous 1 
thou didst slay 

His foes for active Kutsa ; send it down to us. 

16 So now we seek thee fresh in might, Most Wonderful in act ! 
- for gain : 

I F(ir thou art he who conquers all our foes for us. 

^7 Who will set free from ruinous woo, or Arya on the Seven 


Streams : 

0 valiant Hero, bend the Dasa’s weapon dowm. 

18 As to Varosushaman thou broughtest great riches, for their 


gain. 

To Vyasva’s sons. Blest Lady, rich in ample wealth ! 

19 LctNarya’s sacrificial meed reach Vyasva’s Soma-bearing sons : 

111 hundreds and in thousands be the great reward. 

10 If one should ask thee. Where is he who sacrificed ? Whither 
lookest thou ? 

Like Vala he hath passed away and dwellcth now on Gomati. 


HYMN XXV. Mitra-Varuna. 

I WORSHIP you who guard this All, Gods holiest among the 
Gods, 

You, faithful to the Law, whose power is sanctified. 

2 So, too, like charioteers are they, Mitra and sapient Vanina, 
Sons high-born from of old, whose holy laws stand fast. 

3 These Twain, possessors of all wealth, most glorious, for 

supremest sway 

Aditi, Mighty Mother, true to Law, brought forth. 

27 Anja on the Seven : from any Aryan enemy in the land of the 

even Kivers, probably the Indus, the five rivers of the PanjUb, and the 
Lubhii. 

2S Varosushdman : see VIII. 23. 28. Blest Lady: Ushas or Dawn is 
ddivs.^ed. 

29 Xarija's saa'ijicial meed : Ndrya appears to be the name of the inatitutor 

i the sucrifice. 

1 30 Ludwig obvserves : ‘ This stanza clearly refers to the greatness of the 
Ward given by NArya, and its meaning is : here are so many cows (presented 
’ Ni\iya) that one might think that, in consequence of the sacrifice, Vala had 
veil up his cows [which be had sttden from the Gods, and hidden in a cave], 
id taken his <leparture.' Ushas says also, ‘ my cows are quite superfluous 
-Old I will drive them away to some other place.’ The stanza is s^ddressed 
b bhas, and the secon<l line is the answer ah© is to give to the question 
fidained in the first. Gomati : some afifluent of the Indus, which in later 
ijjeb lent its name to the Qomatl, or Qumti, which flows through Oudh and 
ktt into the Ganges. 

2 Charioteers : furtherers of Internal Law. See VII. 66. 12. 



160 THE EYMNS OF [BOOK r///. 

4 Great Varuiia and Mitra, Gods, Asuras and imperial Lords, 
True to Eternal Law proclaim the high decree. 

5 The olFspring of a lofty Power, Daksha’s Two Sons exceeding 

strong, 

Who, Lords of flowing rain, dwell in the place of food. 

6 Ye wlm have gathered up your gifts, celestial and tori^strial 

food, 

Let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven. 

7 The Twain, who from the lofty sky seem to look down on 

herds below, 

Holy, imperial Lords, are set to be revered. 

8 They, true to Law, exceeding strong, have sat them down 

for sovran rule : 

Princes whose laws stand fast, they have obtained their sway, 

9 Pathfinders even better than the eye, with unobstructed sight, 
Even when they close their lids, observant, they perceive. 

10 So may the Goddess Aditi, may the Nasatyas guard us well, 
The Maruts guard us well, endowed with mighty strength. 

11 Do ye, 0 Bounteous Gods, protect our dwelling-place by day 

and night : 

With you for our defenders may we go unharmed. 

12 May we, unharmed, serve bountiful Vishnu, the God who 

slayeth none : 

Self-moving Sindhu hear and be the first to mark. 

13 This sure protection we elect, desirable and reaching far, 
Which Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman afford. 

14 And may the Sindhu of the floods, the Maruts, and the Asvin 

Pair, 

Boon Indra, and boon Vishnu have one mind with us. 

15 Because these warring Heroes stay the enmity of every foe, 
As the fierce water-flood repels the furious ones. 

16 Here this one God, the Lord of men, looks forth exceeding 

and wide : 

And we, for your advantage, keep his holy laws. 

17 We keep the old accustomed laws, the statutes of siipreniacyi 

The long-known laws of Mitra and of Varuna. i 


5 Dakiha't Two Sot\6 : or sons of power or energy, according to 
Dakeba as a creative power, ie frequently associated with Aditi. V 
fond : heaven from which the food-producing rain comes. 

12 Sindhu: the Indus. According to Sdya^, VUbpu who causes wesH 
to flow to his w'oi shippers. 



TSB RIOVEDA. 


fYMN 26.] 


HI 


g He who hath measured with his ray the boundaries, of heaven 
and earth, 

And with his majesty hath filled the two worlds full, 

9 Surya hath spread his light aloft up to the region of the sky, 
Like Agni all aflame when gifts are offered him. 

10 With him who sits afar 4he word is lord of food that comes 

from kine, 

Controller of the gift of unempoisoned food. 
jl So unto Sdrya, Heaven, and Earth at morning and at eve 1 
• speak. 

Bringing enjoyments ever rise thou up for us. 

2 From Ukshanyayana a bay, from Harayana a white steed, 

And from Susliaman we obtained a harnessed car. 

|3 These two shall bring me further gain of troops of tawny- 
coloured steeds, 

The carriers shall they be of active men of war. 
l4 And the two sages have I gained who hold the reins and bear 
the whip. 

And the two great strong coursers, with my newest song. 

HYMN XXVI. Asvins. 

I CALL your chariot to receive united praise mid princely 
men, 

Strong Gods who pour down wealth, of never vanquished 
might 1 

2 Ye to Varosushaman come, Nisatyas, for this glorious rite, 
With your protecting aid. Strong Gods, w^ho pour down wealth. 


20 Varuna has only to command and men have milk and wholesome food. 
Ayana explains ditfereiitly : ‘ Raise your voice in the spacious hall of sacrifice 
■i hitn who is lord over food derived from cattle ’ — Wilson, 

21 Thou: Sfirya, that is, according to 8&yaoa, Mitra and Varuna in Sfirya's 

lape. 

22 Sushdman : here without Varo, the prefix or interjection or whatever it 
ay be. See VIII. 23 28. 

23 These two ; horses. 

24 Tm gaffes : vlprd : the meaning is uncertain. According to SAyana th« 

Old is ail epithet of ‘ coursers ' : ‘ sagacious.’ — Wilson. Ludwig thinks that 
le glooms (probably enslaved enemies) are ironically called sages, or as he 
‘analates, Brdhmsna. Dr. Muir translates the stanza differently : ‘ I have 
debrated at the same time with a new’ hymn, these two sages and mighty 
>rmcesj, strong, swift, and carrying whiiw.’ But this rendering has little to 
Commend it. - 

1 1 Princely men : the (Sdm or institutors of the sacrifice. 

l .* see VHI, 23. 29. Who pour down wealth, : vrithanvaed; 

60 10, note, ... 

11 



Kl 


THB HYMNS OF 


[BOOR Yiii 


3 So with oblations wo invoke you, rich in ample wealth, to-day, 
When night hath passed, 0 ye who send us plenteous food. 

4 0 Asvins, Heroes, let your car, famed, best to travel, come to m, 
And* for his glory, mark your zealous servant’s lauds. 

5 Asvins, who send us precious gifts, even when offended, think 

of him : , , # 

For ye, 0 Rudras, lead us safe beyond our foes. 

6 For, Wonder-Workers, with fleet steeds ye fly completely 

round this All, , . , , t. u j 

Stirring our thoughts, ye Lords of splendour, honey-hued, 

7 With all-sustaining opulence, Asvins, come hitherward to us, 
Ye rich and noble Heroes, ne’er to be o’erthrown. 

8 To welcome this mine offering, 0 ye Indrali^ N^satyas, com 
As Gods of best accord this day with other Gods. 

9 For we, like Vyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, call on you 

With all your loving kindness, Sages, come to us. 

10 0 Rishi, laud the Asvins well. Will they not listen to thy call 
Will they not burn the Panis who are nearer them i 
110 Heroes, listen to the son of Vyasva, and regard me here, 
Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, of one accord. 

12 Gods whom we yearn for, of your gifts, of what ye bring I 

us, bestow j 1 j 

By princes hands on me, ye Mighty, day day. 

1 3 Him whom your sacrifices clothe, even as a woman with her rol 
The Asvins help to glory honouring him well. 

14 Whoso regards your care of men as succour widest in its reac 
About his dwelling go, ye Asvins, loving us. 

15 Come to us ye who pour down wealth, come to the hoi 

which men must guard : 

Like shafts, ye are made meet for sacrifice by song. 

16 Most fetching of all calls, the laud, as envoy. Heroes, call 

to you : 

Be it your own, O Asvin Pair. 

17 Be ye in yonder sea of heaven, or joying in the home of to 
Listen to me, Immortal Ones. 


5 Rudrai : bright Gods. ^ 

6 Honey-hued: madhuvai-nd : ‘ of fascinating complexion. - Wilson. ^ 

15 Like ihafU : as arrows are sha^ned for 
nreoared for the sacrifice by the Rishi s hymn. and expl 

plained by S&yana as two arrows, is difficult, and other readings 

lions liave been suggested. 



THE riovsda: 




T«3 


5 This river with his lucid flow attracts you, more than all the 
streams, — 

Even Sindhu with his path of gold. 

3 0 Asvins, with that glorious fame come hither, through our 
brilliant song, 

Come ye whose ways are marked with light. 

0 Harness the steeds who draw the car, 0 Vasu, bring the well- 

fed pair. 

0 V&yu, drink thou of our meath : come unto] our drink- 
offerings. 

1 Wonderful V&yu, Lord of Right, thou who art Tvashtar’s son- 

in-law, 

Tliy saving succour we elect. 

2 To TvashUr’s son-in-law we pray for wealth whereof he hath 

control : 

For glory we seek Viyu, men with juice effused. 

3 From heaven, auspicious Vayu, come ; drive hither with thy 

noble steeds : 

Come on thy mighty car with wide-extending seat. 

14 We call thee to the homes of men, thee wealthiest in noble 

food, 

And liberal as a press-stone with a horse’s beck. 

15 So, glad and joyful in thine heart, do thou, God, VUyu, first 

of all * 

Vouchsafe us water, strength, and thought. 


HYMN XXVII. VisveclevaB. 

CiHEF Priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass at saeri- 
tice : 

With song I seek the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, Gods for help 
much to be desired. 


18 With his lucid jU)W : ^veiay^vari : taken by Sfiyana ae the name of a river. 
21 Tvashtar'g son-in-law : the Commentators give no satisfactory explanation, 
aranyd, Tvashtar’s daughter, was the wife of Vivasvftn, who cannot be identi- 
ed with VAyu, See Hillebrandt, Vediache Mytholoyie, I. p. 521. 

24 The second line is difficult. The press-stone which produces the Soma 
lice which makes the Gods bountiful is regarded as a type of liberality ; 
may be called d^vap^ishtham^ liteially, horae-backed, because it bears its 
»d of Soma stalks like a horse. ‘ Sharp-backed’, ‘ with sharp ridges’, as 
‘ggested by Pischel, givts a better meaning. 

il Chief Priest : according to S&yana, pur6hito}i here is taken in its primary 
paeof ‘ placed in front,’ that is, set by the priests on the uitaravedi 
F^hern altar or fire-reoeptaole. The laud : ukthd : a kind of religious servi^ 
Ranting of the recitation of certain eulogistic verses. 



164 WE H7MN8 OF [BOOK ViJi 

2 I sing to cattle and to Earth, to trees, to Dawns, to Night, to 

plants. 

0 all ye Vasus, ye possessors of all wealth, be ye the further, 
ers of our thoughts. 

3 Forth gOj, with Agni, to the Gods our sacrifice of ancient ugg 
To the Adityas, Varuna whose Law stands fast, and the all! 

lightening Marut troop. 

4 Lords of all wealth, may they be strengtheners of man, de- 

stroyers of his enemies. 

Lords of all wealth, do ye, with guards which none may harm, 
preserve our dwelling free from foes. 

6 Come to us with one mind to-day, come to us all with one 
accord, 

Maruts with holy song, and, Goddess Aditi, Mighty One, toom 
house and home. 

6 Send us delightful things, ye Maruts, on your steeds : come 

ye, 0 Mitra, to our gifts. 

Let Indra, Varuna, and the Adityas sit, swift Heroes, on our 
sacred grass. 

7 We who have trimmed the grass for you, and set the banquet 

in array, 

And pressed the Soma, call you, Varupa, like men, with sacri 
ficial fires aflame. 

8 0 Maruts, Vishnu, Asvins, Pushan, haste away with mindi 

turned hitherward to me. 

Let the Strong Indra, famed as Vritra’s slayer, come first mi\ 
the winners of the spoil. 

9 Ye Guileless Gods, bestow on us a refuge strong on every sidf 
A sure protection, Vasus, unassailable from near at hand c 

from afar. 

10 Kinship have I with you, and close alliance, 0 ye Gods, d 

stroyers of our foes. 

Call us to our prosperity of former days, and soon to new folicit 

1 1 For now have I sent forth to you, that I may win a fair rewan 
Lords of all wealth, with homage, this my song of praise lil 

a milch-cow that faileth not. 

2 / sing to : or I glorify, in order that I may win or propitiate them* 

6 Come ye, 0 Mitm : Varuna and Aryaman being understood. 

7 Like men : manushvdt : or after the manner of Manus. 

11 Like a milck-cow that faileth not : the meaning of dnydm here is soP 
*what uncertain. SAyana explaius it by adrishtapHn^dm, unprecedented! « 
Grassmann by *a stream tnat never dries up.’ I have adopted 
'mterpr^UoQ. ' 



THE RiaVED A. 


27 .] 




j Excellent Savitar hath mounted up on high for you, ye sure 
and careful Guides. 

Bipeds and quadrupeds, with several hopes and aims, and 
birds have settled to their tasks. 

1 Singing their praise with Godlike thought let us invoke each 
God for grace, 

Each God to bring you help, each God to strengthen you. 

t For of one spirit are the Gods with mortal man, co-sharers all 
of gracious gifts. 

May they increase our strength hereafter and to-day, provid- 
ing ease and ample room. 

) I laud you, 0 ye Guileless Gods, here where we meet to render 
praise. 

None, Varuna and Mitra, harms the mortal man who honours 
and obeys your laws. 

5 He makes his house endure, he gathers plenteous food who 
pays obedience to your will. 

Born in his sons anew he spreads as Law commands, and pros- 
pers every way unharmed. 

f E’en without war he gathers wealth, and goes his way on 
pleasant paths. 

Whom Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman protect, sharing the gift, 
of one accord. 


I E’en on the plain for him ye make a sloping path, an ea^ 
way where road is none : 

And far away from him the ineffectual shaft must vanish, 
shot at him in vain. 

I If ye appoint the rite to-day, kind Rulers, when the Sun as- 
cends, 

Lords of all wealth, at sunset or at waking-time, or be it at 
the noon of day, 

Or, Asuras, when ye have sheltered the worshipper who goes 
to sacrihee, at eve. 

May we, 0 Va3U8,.ye possessors of all wealth, come then into 
the midst of you. 

If ye to-day at sunrise, or pt noon, or in the gloom of eve. 

Lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, the wise 
man who hath sacrificed. 

Then we, imperial Rulers, claim of you this boon, your wide 
protection, as a son. 

we, Adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that which 6hall 
bring us greater bliss. 



THE HYMNS OF 


m 


[BOOK Vlii 


HYMN XXVIII. Yisvedeva,. 

The Thirty Gods and Three besides, whose seat hath been the 
sacred grass, 

From time of old have found and gained. 

2 Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, Agnis, with Consorts, sending boons 
To whom our Vashat ! is addressed : ’ 

1 These are our guardians in the west, and northward here, anfli 

in the south, 

And on the east, with all the tribe. 

4 Even as the Gods desire so verily shall it be. None minisheth 

this power of theirs, 

No demon, and no mortal man. 

5 The Seven carry seven spears ; seven are the splendours they 

possess. 

And seven the glories they assume. 

HYMN XXIX. Visvedev.., 

One is a youth brown, active, manifold : he decks the golden 
one with ornament. 

2 Another, luminous, occupies the place of sacrifice, Sage, among 

the Gods, 

3 One brandishes in his hand an iron knife, firm, in his seat 

amid the Deities. 

4 Another holds the thunderbolt, wherewith he slays the Vritra*, 

resting in his band. 


1 Thirty Gods and Three: see I. 139. 11. 

2 Agnis : Agni in his various forms and under different names. With Co)i- 
sorts: with the QnAs, Celestial Dames, wives of the Gods, Vashat}'- the ex- 
clamation made when the oblation is offered, 

4 No demon and no mortal man : or no mortal who presents no offeriDgij 
to the Gods. 

5 The Seven : the Marute, seven, or seven times nine, or seven times sevffl 
in number. SAyana mentions the legend of their birth, which will be found 
in the Mmdyana, Book I., Cantos 46, 47. The meting is merely that tb« 
Maruts carry lances, that is, their lightnings, and are splendidly adorned. 
See I. 37. The connexion of this stansa with the preceding is not obvious. 

1 One : Soma. ‘ The yellow Soma juice is itself an ornament to the goW^ 
the finger (Atharvaveda, XVllI. 3. 18, hiranyaplv^i) of the priest.' -Ludwig 
According to others. Soma as the Moon is intended, who * decorates (hiio»« i 
with golden ornaments.’— Wilson. 

2 Another^ luminous : Agni. 

3 One brandishes : Tvashpir, as the Artificer of the Gods. 

4 Another holds tlie (hunelerholt : Indra. 



THE RIOVEDA, 


1«7 


UYMN 31.] 

5 Another bears a pointed weapon : bright is he, and strong, 
with healing medicines. 

C Another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and knows the 
places where the treasures lie. 

7 Another with his mighty stride hath made his three steps 

thither where the Gods rejoice. 

8 Two with one Dame ride on with wingM steeds, and journey 

forth like travellers on their way. 

9 Two, highest, in the heavens have set their seat, worshipped 

with holy oil. Imperial Kings. 

10 Some, singing lauds, conceived the Sama hymn, great hymn 
whereby they caused the Sun to shine. 

HYMN XXX. VisvedevaB. 

Not one of you, ye Gods, is small, none of you is a feeble 
child : 

All of you, verily, are great. 

2 Thus be ye laude<l, ye destroyers of the foe, ye Three-and- 

Thirty Deities, 

The Gods of man, the Holy Ones. 

3 As such defend and succour us, with bene lictions speak to us : 
Lead us not from our fathers’ and from Manu’s patli into the 

distance far away. 

4 Ye Deities who stay with us, and all ye Gods of all mankind, 
Give us your wide protection, give shelter for cattle and for 

steed. 

HYMN XXXI. Various Deities. 

That Brahman pleases Indra well, who worships, sacrifices, pours 
Libation, and prepares the meal. 

5 Another : Rudra. See 1. 48. 4. 

6 Another : Puslian. See I, 42. 

Another with hit miyhty. iiride : Vishnu. Thither: to his station in the 
height of heaven. 

8 Two with one Dnme : the Asvins with Suryd. See I. 116. 17. 

[ 9 Two, hiyheti : Mitra aud Vavuna. 

10 BoTiUi ringing laudt: the Augira'^es, or, according to S4yana, the Atris. 

2 Three and- Thirty Deitiet : see «. 139. 11. The Qodt of 7nan : or, God 
tiotn Manu wor8hii>ped, which inteipretation is supported by stanza 3. 

4 ir/to ttay with U9 : or are present at this sacrlAce. 

1 i^rakman : here any pious woi'shipper, not one of the regular professional 
'eats, l)ut the iiistitutor of sacrifice who during the ceremony may be re- 
jnled as their chief. Pref'area the meal; petfUpureA^fHikam pachati: S4yana; 
the cake which is an e:!6eutiai part of the animal sacrifice, etc.’ 



l«a THE HYUm OP [BOOK ry/j 

2 Sakra protects from woe the man who gives him sacrificiji 

cake 

And offers Soma blent with milk. 

3 His chariot shall be glorious, sped by Gods, and mighty 

he be, 

Subduing all hostilities. 

4 Each day that pjisscs, in his house flows his libation, ricbiB 

milk, 

Exhaustless, bringing progeny. 

5 0 Gods, with constant draught of milk, husband and \yi(j 

with one acoord 

Press out and wash the Soma juice. 

6 They gain sufficient FcxmI ; they come united to the sacred grass, 
And never do they fail in strength. 

7 Never do they deny or seek to hide the favour of the Gods: 
They win high glory for themselves. 

8 With sons and daughters by their side they reach their full 

extent of life, 

Both decked with ornaments of gold, 

9 Serving the Immortal One with gifts of sacrificial meal aud 

wealth. 

They satisfy the claims of love and pay due honour to the Gods, 

10 We claim protection from the Hills, wo claim protection oi 

the Floods, 

Of him who stands by Vishnu^s side. 

1 1 May Pushan come, and Bhaga, Lord of wealth, All-bounteous, 

for our weal : 

Broad be the path that leads to bliss : 

12 Aramati, and, free from foes, Visva with spirit of a God, 

And the Adityas' peerless might. 

13 Seeing that Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna are guarding us, 
The paths of Law are fair to tread. 


9 The Immortal One : amrit^ya : Agni, or the Immortal (hoat), that is, 
Gods in general. According to Hily ma, ‘ that they may obtain iinmoitalit; 
(in their HOMH and dertceivhmts).' They tatiinfy : this pdda is consideied Ij; 
Bome, on metrical and other gi oundb, to be an interpolation. According^ 
Tiiichel {Vednohe Studlen, I p. 178), the half-line refeia to the beating ft**' 
preparation of the rough stalks v)f the Soma plant, 

10 Of him who itancU by Vishnu's side : of Vishnu and his associate Indn 
— Ludwig. 

12 Ararmti: the Genius of Devotion. Vuva: Dyaus ?-»Ludwig- 
the worshippers,’ according to SAyapa, 



THE R10VBD4. 


jYMN 82.) 




i I glorify with song, for wealth, Agni the God, the fir$t 
of you. 

We honour as a well-loved Friend the God who prospereth 
our fields. 

^ As in all frays the hero, so swift moves his car whom Gods 
attend. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

; Ne’er are ye injured, worshipper, presser of juice, or pious man. 
The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

' None in his action equals him, none holds him far or keeps 
him off. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

I Such strength of heroes shall be his, such mastery of fleet- 
foot steeds. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who W'orship not. 

HYMN XXXII. Indra. 

Kanvas, tell forth with song the deeds of Indra, the Im- 
petuous, 

Wrought in the Soma^s wild delight. 

Strong God, ho slew Anarsani, Sribinda, Pipru, and the fiend 
Ahisuva, and loosed the floods. 

Thou broughtest down the dwelling-place, the height of lofty 
Arbuda. 

That exploit, Indra, must be famed. 

3old, to your famous Soma I call the fair-visored God for aid, 
f)owu like a torrent from the hill. 

Rejoicing in the Soma-draughts, Hero, burst open, like a fort, 
The stall of horses and of kine. 

f my libation gladdens, if thou takest pleasure in my laud, 
Jouie with thy Godhead from afar. 

11 /to pi'ospereth our fields: kshetrasddhasani : Slvima explains kshetra 
^nuclern Hind! khet, a field), as sacrifice : ‘ the bountiful perfeoter of the 
ice. — Wilson. 


Tl^ ' Hhe drinker of the stale Soma,* —'WWbou. 

^ fiend ; the DAsa, or savage. All the names are names of demons of 
g t, of whom Pipru has been mentioned frequently in preceding Books, 
see I 51. 6 ; II. 11. 20; 14. 4. 

I ^ from the hill : ‘ as (a traveller iuvokes) the water 'from a, 

‘•'"Wilson, 



170 


Tff£ HYMNS OP 


[BOOK 

7 0 Indra, Lover of the Song, the singers of thy praise are 
0 Soma-drinker, quicken us. 

8 And, taking thy delight with us, bring us still undiminshed 

food: 

Great is thy wealth, 0 Maojhavan. 

9 Make thou us rich in herds of kine, in steeds, in gold ; let 

us exert 

Our strength in sacrificial gifts. 

10 Let us call him to aid whose hands stretch far, to whom higli 

laud is due, 

Who worketh well to succour us. 

11 He, Satakratu, even in fight acts as a Vritra-slayer still : 

He gives his worshippers much wealth. 

12 May he, this Sakra, strengthen us, Boon God who satisfiej 

our needs, 

Indra, with all his saving helps. 

13 To him, the mighty stream of wealth, the Soma-presber' 

rescuing Friend, 

To Indra sing your song of praise ; 

14 Who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth glorj i 

his wars, 

Lord of vast wealth through power and might. 

15 There liveth none to check or stay his energies andgracioD 

deeds : 

None who can say. He giveth not. 

16 No debt is due by Brahmans now, by active men who pre 

the juice : 

Well hath each Soma-draught been paid. 

17 Sing ye to him who must be praised, say lauds to him wl 

must be praised. 

Bring prayer to him who must be praised. 

18 May he, unchecked, strong, meet for praise, bring hundrw 

thousands forth to light, 

Indra who aids the worshipper. 

19 Go with thy Godlike nature forth, go where the folk J 

calling thee ; 

Drink, Indra, of the drops we pour. 

1 1 Satakratu ; Lord of a Hundred Powert. 

12 ^tkra: the Mighty. 

16 The Brahmans or worshippers have, by offeiing libaUons, 
their obligations to the Gods, and the Gods have repaid them, or 
repay them for their oflferings. 

18 Hundredi, thoumnds: countless treasures for us t<i enjoy. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


171 


YM^ 83 .] 

) Drink milky draughts which are thine own, this too which 
was with Tugrya once, 

This is it, Indra, that is thine. 

Pass him who pours libations out in angry mood or after sin : 
Here drink the juice we offer thee. 

Over the three great distances, past the Five Peoples go thy way, 
0 India, noticing our voice. 

, Send forth thy ray like S6rya : let my songs attract thee 
hitherward 

Like waters gathering to the vale. 

^ to the Hero fair of cheek, Adhvaryu, pour the Soma forth : 

Bring of the juice that he may drink : 

I Who cleft the water-cloud in twain, loosed rivers for their 
downward flow, 

And set the ripe milk in the kine. 
i He, meet for praise, slew Vritra, slew Ahlsuva, Ornav^bha’s son, 
And pierced through Arbuda with frost. 

^ To him your matchless Mighty One, unconquerable Conqueror, 
Sing forth the prayer which Gods have given ; 

\ Indra, who in the wild delight of Soma juice considers ‘ e 
All holy Laws among the Gods. 

) Hither let these thy Bays who share thy banquet, Steeds with 
golden manes, 

Convey thee to the feast prepared. 

) Hither, 0 thou whom many laud, the Bays whom Priyamedha 
praised 

Shall bring thee to the Soma-draught. 

HYMN XXXIIL Indra. 

We compass thee like waters, we w'hose grass is trimmed and 
Sorna pressed. 

Here where the filter pours its stream, thy worshippers round 
thee, 0 Vritra-slayer, sit. 

W IPAic/V iwii mth Tugrya: like that which thy favourite Bhujyu (see Vol. 
Index) formerly offered thee. 

22 The three great diitanoes : the space in front of thee, behind thee, and 
tny aide. Noticing our voice : hearing and attending to our invocation*, 
me to U8 who are thy true worshippers, and pass by others who worship 
Be in the hope of being avenged upon their enemies or of obtaining pardon 

' 8ome sin. 

? ” *^^*^*'* *^^ ■* XurnavAbha : a demon of drought. 8eeII.il. 18. 
jrost ; making the piercing cold of winter his weafx)n. 

‘ woollen strainer through which the Soma juice is run to 



17a 


THE HTlUm OP [BOOK W;/J 

3 Men, Vasu ! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to the fore. 

most place : , . . u rv t , 

When coraest thou athirst unto the juice as home, O Indra, 

like a bellowing bull 1 

3 Boldly, Bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the Kanvas' 

0 Tc^tive Maghavan, with eager prayer wo crave the yellow, 
hued with store of kine. 

4 Medliyatithi, to Indra sing, drink of the juice to make thee glad, 
Close-knit to Ids Bay Steeds, bolt-armed, beside the juice is 

he : his chariot is of gold. ui. i 

5 He who is praised as strong of hand both right and left, most 

wise and bold : . , j u . 

Indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, honoured 

as breaker-down of forts. 

6 The bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands m bearded 
Much-laudcd, very glorioua, overthrowing foes, strong Helper 

like a bull with might. 

7 Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside thi 

ThU°Is"ho“fltJ-cheeked God who, joying in the draught 
breaks down the castles in his strength. 

8 As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way, ma 

Nime'may compel thee, yet come hither to the draught : thoi 

9 Whcn'ht^he Myhty,L^ero’erthr stedfast, made read 

When Indra Maghavan lists to his praiser’s call, he will no 

stand aloof, but come. non 

10 Yea, verily, thou art a Bull, with a bulls rush, uho 

may stay : 


2 Ai home : as familiar to thee as thine own home. 

3 The ifdlow hued : there is no subsUntive, but gold ® ^ (lii 

6 In bearded confidence: . conjectural j/'"^iau8 asLcdwi 

beard) is said by S&yana to mean here m f hardly 1 

auggesU, among ranks of men bristling with for d 

thfmeaDingof t^e word which rs probaUyan^W^ ex|re,^ ^ 

6erce look of a warttor who challenges the foe. , . V^^'b vow 

ThOrr, when about to meet a foe, is ^ 

See Grimm. Teutonic Mythology, I. 177 (hnghsh 1^”^). 

8 Mud with heat : that is, ma,t. o. as *P*'h been ob«er^ 

10 Thou art a Htdl : vrUhA : or strong and ®'«hty. A» h“ “ 
before (VIII. 13, 81, note), »me of the Vedio poets delight in 
of this word and its derivatives. 



THE niGVEDA. 


fYM^ 38.] 


178 


Thou, Mighty One, art celebrated as a Bull, famed as a Bull 
both near and far. 

1 Thy reins are very bulls in strength, bulls’ strength is in thy 

golden whip. 

Thy car, 0 Maghavan, thy Bays are strong as bulls : thou, 
Satakratu, art a Bull. 

2 Let the strong presser press for thee. Bring hither, thou 

straight-rushing Bull. 

The mighty makes the mighty run in flowing streams for thee 
whom thy Bay Horses bear. 

5 Come, thou most potent Indra, come to drink the savoury 
Soma juice. 

Maghavan, very wise, will quickly come to hear the songs, the 
prayer, the hymns of praise. 

i When thou hast mounted on thy car let thy yoked Bay Steeds 
carry thee 

Past other mens’ libations, Lord of Hundred Powers, thee, 
Vritra-slayer, thee our Friend. 

^ 0 thou Most Lofty One, accept our laud as nearest to thine 

; heart. 

May our libations be most sweet to make thee glad, 0 Soma- 
drinker, Heavenly Lord. 

Neither in thy decree nor mine, but in another’s he delights, — 

The man who brought us unto this. 

Indra himself hath said, The mind of woman brooks not dis- 
cipline, 

Her intellect hath little weight. 

Ilis pair of horses, rushing on in their wild transport, draw 
his car : 

High-lifted is the stallion’s yoke. 

Cast down thine eyes and look not up. More closely set thy 
feet. Let none 

See what thy garment veils, for thou, a Brahman, hast become 
a dame. 


whip ; the lightning, w \th which Indra laahea the clouds, his 

Jhe mighty makes the mighty run : the priest makes the Soma juice flow. 

inexill^ h^t four stanzas of the hymn are not very intelligible, nor is their 
8Dokn« k preceding verses obvious. Stanzas 16 and 18 appear to 

ludrl woman and 17 by a man. Stanza 19 is said to be addressed 
Jrecati'fY. Playoga who had been changed to a woman by the 

of the Qodu, aud who was afterwards restored to manhood* 



THE HYMNS OP 


[Boor vinj 


in 


HYMN XXXIV. 

CoMK hitlier, Indra, with thy Bays, come thou to Kunvi^', 
euloj^y. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day ! havj 
gone to heaven. 

2 May the stone draw thee sis it speaks, the Soma-stone witl 

ringing voice. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, etc. 

3 The stones’ rim shakes the Soma here like a wolf worrying j 

sheep. 

Ye, etc. 

4 The Kanvas call thee hitherward for succour and to win tin 

spoil. 

Ye, etc. 

5 I set for thee, as for the Strong, the first draught of the juic( 

shed. 

6 Come with abundant blessings, come with perfect care to su 

cour us. 

7 Come, Lord of lofty thought, who hast infinite wealth ai 

countless aids. 

8 Adorable mid Gods, the Priest good to mankind shall brii 

thee near. 

9 As wings the falcon, so thy Bays rushing in joy shall cai 

thee. 

10 Come from the enemy to us, to Svahi ! and the Soma-draug 

1 1 Come hither with thine ear inclined to hear, take pleasure 

our lauds. 

12 Lord of well-nourished Horses, come with well-fed Steeds al 

in hue. 

13 Come hither from the mountains, come from regions of 

sea of air. 


The Riehi i« tfipAtithi of the family of Kanva, but stanzas 
ascribed in the In<lex to the thouRand Vaaurochishas who are wid to I 
been a division of the family of Angiras. 

1 The exact meaning of the second line, which is the burden of the 
fifteen stanzHS, is obscure. Ye probably means Indra’s horses, and Ood o' 
by day / { divdvasoj Indra himself ; that is, ye, horses, and thou, Indra, 
gone to heaven. The Scholiast offers two different explanations, in one 
boldly altering two words of the text. See Wilson’s Translation, note. 

8 The Priest good to mankind ; or, the Invoking Priest, Invoker or H 
Mtablicihed by Manu, namely AgnL 

10 Svdhi ; an exolamation used in sacrifice ; Avo i or Hail ! 




fHN 35 .] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


175 


pisclose to U3, 0 Hero, wealth in thousands both of kine and 
steeds 

Bring riches hitherward to us in hundreds, thousands, myriads. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day ! have 
gone to heaven. 

The thousand steeds, the mightiest troop, which we and Iiidra 
have received 

From Vasurochis as a gift, 

The brown that match the wind in speed, and bright bay 
coursers fleet of foot, 

hike Suns, resplendent are they all. 

Mid the P4i*4vata*s rich gifts, swift steeds whose wheels run 
rapidly, 

I seemed to stand amid a wood. 

HYMN XXXV. Asdns. 

With Agni and with Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, with the Adityaa, 
Riidras, Vasus, closely leagued ; 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
drink the Suma juice. 

I With all the Holy Thoughts, all being, Mighty Ones ! in close 
alliance with the Mountains, Heaven, and Earth ; 

Accord int, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
drink the Soma juice. 

! With all the Deities, three times eleven, here, in close alliance 
with the Maruts, Bhrigus, Floods ; 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
drink the Soma juice. 

i Accept the sacrifice, attend to this my call : come nigh, 0 ye 
Twain Gods, to all libations here. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sflrya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
bring us strengthening food. 

Accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. Come nigh, 
0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
bring us strengthening food. 

VamrochiB : vdsurochishah ia p.’obably the ablative elngular, and not the 

inative plural, of the mme of the insti tutor of the sacrifice. Wilson, 
SAyana, translates ; * We, the thousand Vasurochishas, and Indra 
n obtain vigoi'ous herds of horses, — 

I < Pdrdvata is Vasurochis. The PAravatas are probably the jrapvilTal 
who were settled northwards of Araohosia — Ludwig. 

youtlui. ‘ As youths are delighted (by the voices 



TEE SYMNB OF 


170 


[BOOK 


6, Accept the songs we sing, accept the solemn rite. Come nia], 
0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.' ^ 

Accordant, of one mind with Suryaand with Dawn, 0 Asyinj 
bring us strengthening food. 

7 Ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees; like bufialocaj 
seek the Soma we have shed. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, com 
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home. 


S Ye fly like swans, like those who travel on their way; lij 
buflalocs ye seek the Soma we have shed. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, cod 
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our homo. 

9 Ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks ; like buffaloes i 
seek the Soma wo have shed. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, cor 
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home. 

10 Covne hitherward and drink and satisfy youi*selves, best' 

upon us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvi 
grant us vigorous strength. 

1 1 Conquer your foes, protect us, praise your worshippers ; best 

upon us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvi 
grant us vigorous strength. 

12 Slay enemies, animate men whom ye befriend ; bestow \\\ 

us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sflrya and with Dawn, 0 Asv 
grant us vigorous strength, 

13 With Mitra, Variina, Dharma, and the Maruts in your c 

pany approach unto your praiser’s call. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, and ' 
the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

14 With Vishnu and the Angirases attending you, and with 

Maruts come unto your praiser’s call. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sirya and with Dawn, and ’ 
the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

15 With Ribhus and with Vajas, 0 ye Mighty Ones, leagued 

the Maruts come ye to your praiser’s call. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 

. with the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

8 Ye come eagerly to the Soma as thirsty hanmt (gwahs, geese, or 
goes) travellers, and buffaloes bssten to the water. 

13 Dharma : Right, Justice, Law, Virtue or Duty perfQuified. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


177 


YMif 35 .] 

; Give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts j slay ye 
the Rakshasas and drive away disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the 
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

Strengthen the Ruling Power, strengthen the men of war ; 
slay ye the RaLkshasas and drive away disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the pres- 
scr’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

I Give strength unto the milch-kine, give the people strength, 
sby ye the Rakshasas and drive away disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the 
pressor’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

) As ye heard Atri’s earliest eulogy, so hear Syavasva, Soma- 
presser, ye who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink 
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

3 Further like running streams Syav.isva’s eulogies who presses 
out the Soma, ye who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink 
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

Seize, as ye grasp the reins, Syavasva’s solemn rites who pres- 
ses out the Soma, yc who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink 
juice, 0 Asvins, three days aid. 

Drive down your chariot hitherward : drink ye the Soma's 
savoury juice. 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your 
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

When sacrifice which tells our reverence hath begun. Heroes ! 
to drink the gushing juice, 

Approach, yc Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your 
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

i Sate you with consecrated drink, with juice effused, ye Deities. 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your 

! aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

The Riding Power : ksJuitrdm • hence Kshatriya, a man of the princely 

military order. 

18 The people : visas : hence Vai^ya^ a man of the mercantile class or order. 

19 Atri's : as he was the progenitor of the Rishi of the Hymn. See Vol, I., 

h Solemn ntes : that is, the oblations presented thereat. 

^^ Comecrated drink: libations oflfered with the sacrificial exclamation 
! Ave ! or Hail ! 

12 



178 


THE HYMNS OF 

HYMN XXXVI. 


[BOOK Vii^ 




Thou helpost him whoso grass is trimmed, who sheds the 
juice, 0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad. 

The share which tlicy have fixed for thee, thou, Indra, Victor 
o’er all hosts and space, begirt with Maruts, Lord of Heroes 
winner of the floods. 


2 Maghavan, help thy worshipper : let him help thee. 0 Sata. 

kratu, drink Soma to make thee glad. 

The share which they have fixed for thee, etc. 

3 Thou aidcst Gods with food, and that with might aids thee 

0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad. 

4 Creator of the heaven, creator of the earth, 0 Satakratu 

drink Soma to make thee glad. 

5 Father of cattle, father of all steeds art thou. 0 Satakratu 

drink Soma to make thee glad. 

6 Stone-luirler, glorify the Atris’ liymn of praise. 0 Satakratu 

drink Soma to make thee glad. 

7 Hear tliou SyavAsva while he pours to thee, as erst tho 

heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites. 

Indra. thou only gavest Trasadasyii aid in the fierce figlj 
with heroes, strengthening his prayers. 


HYMN' XXXVII. M 

This prayer, and those who shed tho juice, in wars wil 
Vritra thou holpest, Indra, Lord of Strength, with all tl 
suceouis. 

0 Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink of tl 
Soma juice, tl)oii blameless Thunderer. 

2 Thou mighty Coinpieror of hostile armaments, 0 Indra, Lor 
of Strength, with all thy saving help. 


1 ^Vhicli they have fixed : which all the Gods have assigned. This balf-ver 
is the refrain of stanzas 1—6. Aud space, heyirt : or, and wide space, girt, i 
flood*: the waters of heaven, the rain. 

2 Let him help thee : according to SAyana, ‘ protect thyself (by drinki 
the Soma).’ ‘ The mutual relation between the God and his worshipper 
expressed, and the translation ‘ help thyself ’ is ridiculous.’ — Ludwig. 

3 Pood : sacrificial footl. That : food, especially in the shape of Soma. 

7 Trosadasyu ; an e.special favourite of Indra and the Asvins, celebra* 

for his victories and liberality. See Index. 


1 0 Vptra-ilayer, etc : this half-verse is repeated as a refrain in the 
following stanzas. 



THE RIQVEHA. 


38.] 


179 


3 Sole Ruler, thau art Sovran of this world of life, 0 Indra, 

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help. 

4 Thou only sunderest these two consistent worlds, 0 Indra, 

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help. ^ 

5 Thou art the Lord supreme o’er rest and energy, 0 Indra, 

Lord of Strength, with all tliy saving help . 

6 Thou helpest one to power, and one thou hast not helped, 0 

Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving aid. 

7 Hear thou Syaivasva while he sings to thee, as erst thou 

heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites. 

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce fight 
with heroes, strengthening his powers. 


HYMN XXXVIII. Indra-Agni. 

Ye Twain are Priests of sacrifice, winners in war and holy 
works : 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

2 Yo bounteous riders on the car, ye Vritra-slayers unsubdued : 
Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

2 The men with pressing-stones have pressed this meath of 
yours which gives delight : 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

4 Accept our sacrifice for w’eal, sharers of praise ! the Soma 

shed ; 

Indra a4id Agni, Heroes, come. 

5 Be pleased with th^^'^e libations which attract you to our 

sacred gifts ; 

Indra and Ag«b Heroes, come. 

B Accept th‘S eulogy of mine whose model is the Gayatri: Indra 
and Agni, Heroes, come. 


Cnnmtcnt rcorUls : there is no substantive in the text, and loJcau (worlds^ 
supplied by SAyana. ' i 

5 Rest and energy : or pence and war. ‘ Prosperity and gains.’ — Wilson. 

C To power : hatrTya ; the rule exercised by princes. 

I the preceding I-mn with the alteration of two words— 

t'Ka/i singing, instead of sunvatdkf pouring (libations), and 
rincely) powers instead of brdhmdni, prayers, ‘as if,’ observes Dr. Muir, 
oe former (brahmdnij cpntaiuetl a reference to the functions of the priest, 
^ fne latter to those of the prince.’ — 0. S. Texts, I. 263. 


this well : * hear (the praise) of this (thy worshipper).’ — Wilson. 
; tojfEsd : according to SAyana, * destroyers (of fo#s)d 
me model is Ike Odyatrt : composed in GAyatrl metre. 



180 TEE EYMNS OF [BOOR 

7 Come with the early-faring Gods, ye who are Lords of genuiaj 

wealth : 

Indra-Agni, to the Soma-draught ! 

8 Hear ye the call of Atris, hear Syavasva as he sheds tin 

juice : 

Indra-Agni to the Soma-draught ! 

9 Thus have I called you to our aid as sages called on you o 

old: 

Indra-Agni to the Soma draught ! 

10 Indra’s and Agni’s grace I claim, Sarasvati’s associates 
To whom this psalm of praise is sung. 

HYMN XXXIX. 

The glorious Agni have I praised, and worshipped with tb 
sacred food. 

, May Agni deck the Gods for us. Between both gatherint 
places he goes on his embassy, the Sago. May all the othej 
die away. 

2 Agni, bum down the word within their bodies through on 

newest speech, 

All hatreds of the godless, all the wicked man’s malignitie 
Away let the destroyers go. May all the others die away. 

3 Agni, I offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy mouth. 
Acknowledge them among the Gods, for thou art the rnoi 

excellent, the worshipper’s blissful messenger. Let all tl 
others die away. 

4 Agni bestows all vital power even as ea^^h man supplioatos. 
He brings the Vasus strengthening gifts, u^d grants deligh 

in rest and stir, for every calling on the God#<. Lot all tl 
others die away. 

5 Agni hath made himself renowned by wonderful victoritnsac 
He is the Priest of all tlie tribes, chosen with sacrificial mwd 

He urges Deities to receive. Let all the others die away. 

7 Early-fanng Qods: ‘But Thou wast up at break of day.'-* George Herbe 
to SarasvaiCs assoc iatet : according to SAyana, ‘ to whom praise belongs. 

1 Deck the Gods for us: * brighten the gods with the oblations at < 
sacrifice.’ — Wil< 4 on, Both gathering-places : heaven and earth. All the o 
anyaJee same : meaning, according to SAyapa, all our enemies. 

2 All hatred of the godless : ardttr ardvrylm must be read instead of ® 

rardrndm.— Lutlwig. , 

6 With sacrijicial meeds : ddhshindhhify : his dakthinds or honoraria as 
are the oblations which he receives as a Qod. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


181 


fifiV 40.] 

Agiii knows all that springs from Gods, he knows the mystery 

of meDv 

Giver of wealth is Agni, he uncloses both the doors to us when 
worshipped with our newest gift. Let all the others die 
away. 

Acrni inhabiteth with Gods and men who offer sacrifice. 

He cberisheth with great delight much wisdom, as all things 
that be, God among Gods adorable. May all the others die 
away. 

A"ni who liveth in all streams, Lord of the Sevenfold Race of 
men, 

Him dweller in three homes we seek, best slayer of the Dasyus 
for Mandhatar, first in sacrifice. Let all the othei^s die away. 

Agni the Wise inhabiteth three gathering- places, triply formed. 
Decked as our envoy let the Sage bring hither and conciliate 
the Thrice Eleven Deities. Let all the others die away. 

Our Agni, thou art first among the Gods, and first mid living 
men. 

Thou only rulest over wealth. Round about thee, as natural 
dams, circumfluous the waters run. Let all the others die 
away. 

HYMN XL. Iiidra-Agni. 

Indra and Agni, surely ye as Conquerors will give us wealth. 
Whereby in fight we may o’ercome that which is strong and 
firmly fixed, as Agni burns the woods wuth wind. Let all 
the others die away. 

\ We set no snares to tangle you ; Indra we worship and adore, 
Hero of heroes mightiest. 

Once may he come unto us with his Steed, come unto us to 
win ns strength, and to complete the sacrifice. 

6 That eprinf/s from Oods : the past and the present, while the mystei'y of 
cn is the future. — Ludwig, Both the doors: of wealth, or, perhaps of 
javen also. 

8 Lord of the Sevenfold Race of men : perhaps moaning, Clod of all men, 
ke VaisvAnara ; or the reference may be to the seven priests : ‘ Who is minis- 
ired to by seven priests.’ — Wilson. ‘Acting as seven priests.’ — M. Muller. 
ImdMlar : said to be the same at. MdndhAtar, son of Yuvundsva, and Rishi 
f X. 134. 

9 Three gathering -places : heaven, firmament, and earth. 

10 Round about thee . the waters run: Cf. ‘Him, pure, resplendent, 

Offspring of the Waters, the waters pure have on all sides encompassed’ 
II. 35. 3). L 

1 Let all the others die away : this refrain recurs in all stanzas of the hymn 
tlie final. 

^ Once : kaddehU : enpressive o* impatience.— Ludwig. 



382 THBBYMNSOP [BOOK Viu 

3 For, famous Indra-Agni, ye are dwellers in the midst of frayg 
Sages in wisdom, ye are knit to him who seeketh you as 

friends. Heroes, bestow on him his wish. 

4 Nabhaka-like, with sacred song Indra’s and Agni^s praise I sing 
Theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven and tht 

mighty earth which bear rich treasure in their lap. 

5 To Indra and to Agni send your prayers, as was Nabhaka’s 

wont, — 

Who oped with sideway opening the sea with its foundations 
seven — Indra all powerful in his might. 

6 Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creeping plant 
Demolish thou the Dasa's might. May we with Indra's help 

divide the treasure he hath gathered up. 

7 What time with this same song these men call Indra-Agni 

sundry ways, 

May we with our own heroes quell those who provoke us to the 
fig!»t, and conquer those who strive with us. 

8 The Two refulgent with their beams rise and come downward 

from the sky. 

By Indra’s and by Agni’s best, flowing away, the rivers run 
which they released from tlioir restraint. 

9 0 Indra, many are thine aids, many thy ways of guiding ns, 
Lord of the Bay Steeds, Hinva’s Son. To a Good Hero eome 

our prayers, which soon shall have accomplishment. 

10 Inspire him with your holy hymns, the Hero bright and 

glorious, 

Him who with might demolisheth even the brood of Sushna, 
and winneth for us the heavenly streams. 

11 Inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious Hero 

truly brave. 

He brake in pieces Sushna’s brood who still expected not the 
stroke, and won for us the heavenly streams. Let all the 
others die away. 

4 Nahhdka-like : NabhAka may have been the father of N&bhAka the Rishi 
of the hymn. 

5 Who oped : ‘ who overspread (with their lustre).’ — Wilson. The Commcri' 
tator does not explain the passage. 

7 This same song : a hymn like our own, for victory in battle. 

8 The Two refulgent with their beams : apparently the Sun and Moon. Ac- 
cording to SAyana, Indra and Agni are intended. 

9 Hinva's Son : Hinva (the driver, impeller, instigator of actions), a father 
invented for Indra by the poet. To a Good Hero to Indra. ‘ The meaning o 
the verse, even with the help of the scholiast, is far from intelli^ble.'— Wilsoo* 



THE RTQVEDA. 


183 


rr.v.v 41.] 

2 Tluis have we sung anew to Indra-Agni, as sang our sires, 
Angirases, and Mandh^tar. 

1 Guard us with triple shelter and preserve us : may we be 

masters of a store of riches. 

HYMN XLI. Varun,. 

To make this Varuna come forth, sing thou a song unto the 
band of Maruts wiser than thyself, — ■ 

This Varuna who guardeth well the thoughts of men like 
herds of kine. 

Let all the others die away. 

2 Him altogether praise I with the song and hymns oiir fathers 

sang, and with Nablnika’s eulogies, — 

Him dwelling at the rivers’ source, surrounded l)y his Sisters 
Seven. 

3 The nights he hath encompassed, and stablished the morns 

with magic art ; visible over all is he. 

His dear Ones, following his Law, have prospered the Three 
Dawns for him. 

4 Ho, visible o’er all the earth, stablished the quarters of the 

sky : 

Ho measured out the eastern place, that is the fold of Varuna : 
like a strong herdsman is the God. 

5 He who supports the worlds of life, he who well knows the 

hidden names mysterious of t!»e morning beams, 

He cherishes much wisdom, Sago, as heaven brings forth each 
varied forni. 

6 111 whom all wisdom centres, as the nave is set within the 

wheel. 

Haste ye to honour Trita, as kiue haste to gather in the fold, 
even as they muster steeds to yoke. 


^ To make thU Varuna come forth : SAyana explains prahktiiaye iis an adjec- 
prakrUhtadhanAt/a : ‘ to that opulcMit V^aruna.’ — Wilson. IVacr : more 

skilled in singings The thoufjhts : holy tliouijhts and devotions. The refrain, 
hetall, etc., recurs at the end of e\e y staii/.a. 


2 S/ihkAka's : that is, mine own Sisters Seren : the five rivers of thePanj ib, 
he Indus, and perhaps the KubhA. See 1 32, note. 

n. ‘ apparently the niuhts, which give place to the mornings. 

Dawns : according to SAyana, morning, noon, and evening 
^ The fold : or, perhaps, the course, meaning the place from which he starts. 
^ Trita; Varuna, here, apparently, identifieti with this ancient God who 
^presents the expanse of heaven, Acooidiug to SAyana, (Varuna) ‘who abides 
tlie three worlda.' 



TBE BYMNS OP [BOOK F/; 

7 He wraps these regions as a robe ; he contemplates the tribe 

of Gods and all the works of mortal men. 

Before the home of Varuna all the Gods follow his decree. 

8 He is an Ocean far-removed, yet through the heaven to bi 

ascends the worship which these realms possess. 

With his bright foot ho overthrew their magic, and went u 
to heaven. 

9 Ruler, whose bright far-seeing rays, pervading all three eartli 

have filled the three superior realms of heaven. 

Finn is the seat of Varuna ; over the Seven he rules as Kin 

10 Who, after his decree, o’erspread the Dark Ones with a rd 
of light; 

Who measured out the ancient seat, who pillared both tl 
worlds apart as the Unborn supported heaven. Let all tl 
others die away. 

HYMN XLII. Vani 

Lord of all weal th, the Asura propped the heavens, and m 
sured out the broad earth^s wide expanses. 

He, King supreme, approached all living creatures. All ik 
are Vanina’s holy operations. 

2 So humbly worship Varuna the Mighty ; revere the wi 
Guard of the World Immortal. 

May he vouchsafe us triply-barred protection. 0 Earth a 
Heaven, witliin your lap pre.serve us. 

7 This stanza is \ery obscure, anfl rny rendering is conjectural. Thecc 
mentary is defective, aud von Koth an<l Ludwig think that the correotn.si 
one wonl in the text is doubtful. According to the slight alteration Buggi 
ed by the latter scholar, ‘ under the lea'i ’ would stand instead of ‘ before 1 
Lome.' 

8 The first line of this stanza also is difficult. Wilson, following S3ya 
translate.^ : ‘ He is the hidden ocean ; swift he mounts (the hciuen) as ( 
sun) the sky ; when he has placed the sacrifice in those (regions of the tm 
nient).’ Ludwig’s inten>retation, which I follow, requires tirdh to be r 
instead of iunih (swift). Their mayic : the magical arts of the fiends of darto 

9 Firm: so Hesiod (Theog. V. 127) calls Ourano6 = Vanina the « 
a(T(t)a\k> the firm seat of the Gods. See M. Muller, Chips from a Gem 
Workshop, IV. XX (new edition). The Seven : rivers, understood. 

10 The Dark Ones the nights, which Varuna turns into days. 
Chips, IV. xxii. The Unlm'n : the primeval, everlasting, uncreated v 
Being. According to S&yana, the Sun. 

1 The Asura : the High God, Vamna. * The wise spirit.’— M. Muller-^ 

2 Of the World Immortal ; amrUasya : according to Sftyana, of a®*’ 
ambrosia. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


185 


43.] 

i Sharpen this song of him who strives his utmost, sharpen 
God Vanina, his strength and insight ; ^ ’ 

May we ascend the ship that bears us safely, whereby we may 
pass over all misfortune. ^ 

i Asvins, with songs the singer stones have made you hasten 
hitherward, 

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away. 

5 As the sago Atri with his hymns, 0 Asvins, called you eagerly, 
Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away. 

5 So have I called you to our aid, even as the wise have called 
of old, 

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away. 


HYMN XLIII. 


Agni. 


These songs of mine go forth as laudsof Agni, the disposing Sage, 
Whose worshipper is ne’er o'erthrown. 


2 Wise Agni Jatavedas, I beget a song of praise for thee. 
Who willingly receivest it. 


3 Tliy sharpened flames, 0 Agni, like the gleams of light that 
! glitter through, 

Devour the forests wdth their teeth. 


i Gold-coloured, bannered with the smoke, urged by the wind, 
t aloft to heaven 

Rise, lightly borne, the flames of fire. 

5 These lightly kindled fiery flames are all around made visible, 
Even as the gloamings of the Dawns. 

6 As Jatavedas speeds along, the dust is black beneath his feet, 

I When Agni spreads upon the earth. 

7 Making the plants his nourishiucnt, Agni devours and w’earies 

not. 

Seeking the tender shrubs again. 

^ Bending him down with all his tongues, he flickers with his 
fiery glow : 

Splendid is Agni in the woods. 

^ Agni, thine homo is in the floods : into the plants thou 
forcest way, 

And as their Child art born anew. 

^ Worshipped with offerings shines thy flame, 0 Agni, from 
the sacred oil, 

^J With kisses on the ladle’s mouth. 

•’ metaphorical expression for hymn and sacrifice. Cf. I. 46. 7 ; 
■ • ; IX. 89- Q • Y A A A . in . ini O . lAR Q 



186 


THE HYMHS OF 


[SOOK Viii 

1 1 Let ua serve Agni with our hymns, Disposer, fed on ox aui 

cow, 

Who bears the Soma on his back. 

12 Yea, tliee, 0 Agni, do we seek with homage and with fug 

Priest 

Whose wisdom is most excellent. 

13 0 worshipped with oblations, pure Agni, we call on thee i 

erst 

Did Bhrigu, Manus, Angiras. 

14 For thou, 0 Agni, by the fire, Sage by the Sage, Good by tl 

Good, 

Friend by the Friend, art lighted up. 

15 So wealth in thousands, food with store of heroes give thoui 

the sage, 

0 Agni, to the w'orshipper. 

16 0 Agni, Brother, made by strength, Lord of red steeds at 

brilliant sway, 

Take pleasure in this laud of mine. 

17 My praises, Agni, go to thee, as the cows seek the stall 

meet 

The lowing calf that longs for milk. 

18 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have pleasant horn 
Apart, have turned as to their wish. 

19 The sages skilled in holy song and thinkers with their thougl 

have urged 

Agni to share the sacred feast. 

20 So, Agni, unto thee the Priest, Invoker, strong in forays, pr 
Those who spin out the sacrifice. 

21 In many a place, the same in look art thou, a Prince o’er 

the tribes : 

In battles we invoke thine aid. 


11 Fed on ox and cow: ‘the cater of the ox, the eater of the marrow. 
Wilson. Who bears the Soma on his back : s&mapriskthdya : ‘ on whose b 
the libation is i>oure<l.’ — Wilson. 

14 SAyana refers to the Aitareya Erdhmana, I. 16, ‘which describes 1 
the fire produced by friction from the two aranis [fire-sticks] is thiow’m 
the Ahavaniya fire, in the Atithyeshfi ceremony. “ In the verse twam Af 
[For thou, 0 Agni] etc., the one vipra (a sage) means one Agni, the other 
the other Agni ; the one san (being, existing) means the one, the other 
(in satA) the other Agni.’ (Haug’s trans.).’ — Note by E. B. C. in 
Translation. Sdn and satE may also mean ‘ good.’ 

16 Made by strenyth: produced by violent agitation of the fire- stick. 



THE EIQVBDA, 


JMN 44.1 


187 


j Pray thou to Agni, pray to him who blazes served with sacred 
oil ; 

Let him give ear to this our call. 

I We call on thee as such, as one who hears, as Jatavedas, one, 

Agiii ! '^'^ho beats away our foes. * 

, I pray to Agni, King of men, the Wonderful, the President 

Of holy Laws : may he give ear. 

Him like a bridegroom, him who stirs all people, like a noble 
horne. 

Like a fleet steed, we instigate. 

Slaying things deadly, burning up foes, Rakshasas, on every 
side, 

Shine, Agni, with thy sharpened flame. 

Thou whom the people kindle even as Manus did, best Angiras ! 

0 Agni, mark thou tijis my speech. 

i 0 Agni, made by strength ! be thou bom in the heavens or 
born in floods. 

As such wo call on thee with songs. 

Yea, all the people, all the folk who have good dwellings, 
each apart. 

Send food for thee to eat thereof. 


0 Agni, so may wo, devout, gazed at by men, throughout our 
days 

Pass lightly over all distress. 

We venerate with cheerful hearts tlie cheerful Agni, dear to all, 
Burning, with purifying flame. 

So thou, 0 Agni rich in light, beaming like Surya with thy rays 
Boldly demolishest the gloom. 

We pray to thee for this thy gift, Victor ! the gift that failcth 
not, 

0 Agni, choicest wealth from thee. 


HYMN XLIV. Agni. 

Pay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your Guest with 
oil : 

Li him present your oftcrings. 

Agni, do thou accept my laud, he magnified by this my song : 
^olcomo my sweetly-spoken words. 

Lhtuing ^ Sun. In Jloods : in tho waters of tixe firmament 

• objects of their admiration. ‘ Beholding men.’— Wilson. 



188 THE HYUm OF [BOOK Fj 

3 Agni, envoy, I place in front ; the oblation-bearer I address 
Here let him seat the Deities. 

4 Agni, the lofty flames of thee enkindled have gone up on hi 
Thy bright flames, thou Refulgent One. 

6 Belovfed ! let my ladles full of sacred oil come near to thee 
Agni, accept our offerings. 

6 I worship Agni — may he hear ! — the cheerful, the In^ol 

Priest 

Of varied splendour, rich in light. 

7 Ancient Invoker, meet for praise, belovM Agni, wise and strc 
The visitant of solemn rites. 

8 Agni, best Angiras, accept straightway these offerings, and gi 
The seasonable sacrifice. 

9 Excellent God, with brilliant flames, enkindled bring t 

hitherward, 

Knowing the way, the Heavenly Host. 

10 Him, Sage and Herald, void of guile, ensign of sacrifices, hie 
Smoke-bannered, rich in light, wo seek. 

110 Agni, be our Guardian thou, God, against those who injure 
Destroy our foes, thou Son of Strength. 

12 Making his body beautiful, Agni the Sage hath waxen by 
The singer and his ancient hymn. 

13 1 invocate the Child of Strength, Agni with purifying flai 
At this well-ordered sacrifice. 

14 So Agni, rich in many friends, wnth fiery splendour, 

thyself 

With Gods upon our sacred grass. 

15 The mortal man who serves the God Agni within his 

abode, 

For him he causes wealth to shine. 

16 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the e 

is he : 

He quickeneth the waters’ seed. 

17 Upward, 0 Agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplendent, 

ing high. 

Thy lustres, fair effulgences. 

14 Rich in many friendt : ‘thou who hast Mitra’s iplendour.'— Ludwi 

1 5 For him he causa wealth to shine : or, ‘ To him he shineB forth opul 
* To him he gives riches.' — Wilson. 

16 The mters' seed : as lightning, he impregnates the wate ra of the < 



THE RIGVEDA, 


XV 45.] 


ISO 


For, Agni, thouas Lord of Light rulest o'er choicest gifts; 
may I, 

Thy singer, find defence in thee. 

0 Agni, they who understand stir thee to action with their 
thoughts : 

So let our songs enhance thy might. 

We ever claim the friendship of Agni, the singing messenger 

Of Godlike nature, void of guile. ’ 

Agni who bears most holy sway, the holy Singer, holy Sage, 

Shines holy when we worship him. 

Yea, let my meditations, let my songs exalt thee evermore : 

Think, Agni, of our friendly bond. 

If I were thou and thou wert I, 0 Agni, every prayer of 
thine 

Should have its due fulfilment here. 

For Excellent and Lord of wealth art thou, 0 Agni, rich in 
light : 

May w’e enjoy thy favouring grace. 

Agni, to thee whose laws stand fast our resonant songs of 
praise speed forth 

As rivers hasten to the sea. 

Agni, the Youthful Lord of men, who stirreth much and 
eateth all, 

The Sage, T glorify wdth hymns. 

To Agni let us haste with lauds, the Guide of sacrificial rites. 

Armed with sharp teeth, the Mighty One. 

And let this man, good Agni, bo with thee the singer of thy 
praise : 

Be gracious. Holy One, to him. 

For thou art sharer of our feast, wise, ever w'atchful as a 
Sage : 

Agni, thou shinest in the sky. 

0 Agni, Sage, before our foes, before misfortunes fall on us. 

Excellent Lord, prolong our lives. 

HYMN XLV. IndrR. 


Hitherward ! they who light the flame and straightway trim 
the sacred grass, 

Whose Friend is Tndra ever young. 

•’ the entire oblation. — SAvana. But the meaning 

|robably general 

^ This man : the Rishi or singer himself, 

*9 In the Mlu . n,. 



190 Tilk HYMNS OP [POOR 7/ 

2 High is their fuel, great their laud, wide is their splinter fn 

the stake. 

Whose Friend is Indra ever young. 

3 Uuquclled in fight the heroleads his army with the warriorchi 
Whose Friend is Indra ever young. 

4 The new-born Vritra-slayer asked his Mother, as he sei 

his shaft, 

Who are the fierce? Who are renowned? 

5 Savasi answered, He who seeks thine enmity will battle lil 
A stately elephant on a hill. 

6 And hear, 0 Maghavan ; to him who craves of thee t 

gran test all : 

Whate’er thou makest firm is firm. 

7 What time the Warrior Indra goes to battle, borne by 

steeds. 

Best of all charioteers is he. 

8 Repel, 0 Thunder-armed, in all directions all attacks on u 
And be our own most glorious God. 

9 May Indra set our car in front, in foremost place to win the s 
He whom the wicked injure not. 

10 Thine enmity may we escape, and, Sakra, for thy bounty, 
In kinc, may wc come near to thee ; 

11 Softly approaching. Thunder armed ! W'ealthy by hundi 

rich in steeds, 

Unrivalled, ready 'with our gifts. 

12 For thine exalted excellence gives to thy worshippers each 
Hundreds and thousands of thy boons. 

13 Indra, we know thee breaker-down even of strong f 

winner of spoil. 

As one who coiupiers wealth for us. 

14 Though thou art highest, Sage and Bold ! let the drops c 

thee w hen we come 
To thee as to a trafficker. 

2 Splinter : the first Bhavin^r, splinter, or strip of wood, cut from the 
or sacrificial post, and used in t!ie sacrifice. 

4 Aa soon as lie was Ijorn Indra showed his warlike disposition, and 
what worthy opponents he should have. 

5 Suvast, or, the Strong Dame ; his mother Aditi. A stately 
follow SAyana who explains upmh as darfaniyo gajafi, a beautiful elei 
although in other places the word seems to mean beauty (I. 124 7)» 
head (V. 80, 6). The allusion is to the size and strength of Vfitra, Indri 
ture antagonist. 

14 As to a trafficktr: as to one who knows the value of our \vorsn>I 
•blaiiont and wifi give us something in return. 



TH£ RIQVEDA, 


\Y}IN 45.] THE EIQVEHA, 191 

f Bring unto U8 the treasure of the opulent man who, loth to 
give, 

Hath sliglited thee for gain of wealth. 

1 Iiidra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and 
look to thee, 

As men with fodder to the herd. 

And time who art not deaf, whose cars are quick to listen for 
our aid, ^ 

We call to us from far away. 

When thou hast listened, make our call one which thou never 
wilt forget, 

And be our very nearest Friend. 

When even now, when we have been in trouble we h^v^ 
thought of thoe, ’ 

0 Iiidra, give us gifts of kine. 

0 Lord of Strength, we rest on thee, as old men rest upon a 
Wc long to have thee dwell with us. 

fo Iiidra sing a song of praise. Hero of mighty valour him 
Whom no one challenges to war. ’ 

Ifeio the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink- 
bfito thee and finish thy carouse. 

Lot not tlie fools, or those who mock, beguile thee when they 
seek thine aid : ^ 

Love not the enemies of pra\ er. 

Horclct them with rich milky draught cheer thee to great 
munificence: ^ 

brink as the wild-buII diiuks the lake. 

”'*aw-!y ' assemblies what deeds, new and ancient, far 

Tiic \ ritra-slayer hath achieved. 

In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadru’s Soma juice: 
mie ho displayed his manly might. 

Tnie nudeniable strength he found in Yadu and in Turvasa 
And conquered through the sacrifice. 


enemies of prayer ; according to S&yana those who bate BrAhmane. 
mld.buU : the gaura. 

ml’’® the name of a ^liehi or 

honi a Petersburg Lexicon takes it to 
" _**<wrMor Soma- vessel. 

aud^ according to SAyana, ia the name ef the enemy 

he overcame Aimavftvva in batti©.’- Wilson. 



192 


TEB EYEm OP 


[BOOK 

28 Him have I magnified, our Lord in common, Guardian of tm,. 

folk, 

Discloser of great wealth in kine ; 

29 Ribliukshan, not to be restrained, who strengthened Tugrj 

son in lauds, 

Indra beside the flowing juice ; 

30 Who for Trisoka clave the hill that formed a wide receptacli 
So that the cows might issue forth. 

31 Whate’er thy plan or purpose bo, whate’er, in transport, thoi 

wouldst do, 

Do it not, Indra, but be kind. 

32 But little hath been heard of done upon the earth by odi 

like thee : 

Let thine heart, Indra, turn to us. 

33 Thiue then shall be this high renown, thine shall those loftj 

praises be, 

When, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

34 Not for one trespass, not for two, 0 Hero, slay us, nor fo 

three, 

Nor yet for many trespasses, 

35 I fear one powerful like thee, the crusher-down of enemies, 
Mighty, repelling all attacks. 

36 0 wealthy God, ne’er may I live to see my friend or son ii 

need : 

Hitherward let thy heart be turned. 

37 What friend, 0 people, unprovoked, hath ever said unto; 

friend, 

He turns and leaves us in distress 1 

38 Hero, insatiate enjoy this Soma juice so near to thee, 

Even as a hunter rushing down. 


29 Rihhuhkan : Indra, Lord of the Ilibhus. Tugra'$ ion ; Bhujyu. ^ 
cording to SAyana, tuyryavrUlham means ‘ augmenter of water.’ 

30 Tht hill is the massive rain -cloud, and the cows are streams of water. 

31 Do it not : ‘ SAyana understands this, “ do it not, for thou hast done 

for us, — only make us happy.” Could it bo that the worshipper had a feein 
of nemesis 1 or would he monopolize all ? ’ — Note by E. B. C. in WiM 
Translation. J 

32 ‘ In the following verses (32—33) the poet seems to express disspH 
ment at the inadequate manifestation of Indra’s power, while he at the 
time entreats his grace and forgiveness,'— 0. S. Texts, V. p, 11 L J 

37 This stanza is Indra’s answer to the poet’s complaint. Tjie 
seems to be : no friend without good cause calls bis friend a 
then have I done, or left undone, that thou shouldst say that I 
thee ? See Ludwig's Commentary on the very difilcult^aWf kdh 



THE RIOVEDA. 


My 46 .] 


193 


Hither I draw those Bays of thine yoked by our hymn, with 
splendid car, 

That thou mayst give unto the priests. 

Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes who press 

around, 

And bring the wealth for which we long : 

0 Indra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipi- 
tous : 

Bring us the wealth for which wo long : 

Great riches which the world of men shall recognize as sent 
by thee : 

Bring us the wealth for which we long. 

HYMN XLVI. 

VVe, Indra, Lord of ample wealth, our Guide, depend on one 
like thee, 

Thou driver of the Tawny Steeds. 

For, Hurler of the Bolt, we know thee true, the giver of our 
food, 

We know thee giver of our wealth. 

0 thou whoso majesty the bards celebrate with their soncs 
thou Lord ’ 

Of hundred powers and hundred aids. 

Fair guidance hath the mortal man whom Aryaman, the Marut 

host. 

And Mitra, void of guile, protect. 

hino, steeds, and hero strength he gains, and prospers, by the 
Adityas sped, 

Ever ill wealth which all desire. 


We pray to Indra for his gift, to him the Fearless and the 
Strong, 

We pray to him the Lord of wealth. 

Eor verily combined in him are all the fearless powers of aid. 
Him, rich in wealth, let swift Steeds bring to us, his Bays, to 
ooma juice for his carouse : 

Yea, that most excellent carouse, Indra, which slays most ene- 
mies, 

^Yith Heroes wins the light of heaven, and is invincible in war : 


Phclml 4o be compoaed of two or more originally separate hymoa 

fsee / I. pp. 7 — 9). There are seventeen varieties of 

oiilv Hymns). The hymn is difficult and obscure in parts, 

Poml translations can be given. 

* or, sucoouren ; the Haruts may be intended. 



194 THS HYMNS OP l^OOK r/j] 

9 Which merits fame, all-bountiful 1 and, unsubdued, hath Yi( 
tory in deeds of might. 

So come to our libations. Strongest ! Excellent ! May we ol 
tain a stall of kine. 

10 Responding to our wish for cows, for steeds, and chariots, aj 

of old. 

Be gracious, Greatest of the Great ! 

1 1 For, Hero, nowhere can I find the bounds of thy munificence, 
Still do thou favour us, 0 Bolt-armed Maghavan : with strengtii 

hast thou rewarded hymns. 

12 High, glorifier of his friend, he knows all generationa, he 

whom many praise. . i i , 

All races of mankind with ladles lifted up invoke that Mighty 

ludra’s aid. 

13 Be he our Champion and Protector in great deeds, rich in all 

wealth, the Vritra-slayer, Maghavan. 

U In the wild raptures of the juice sing to your Hero with high 
laud, to him tlie Wise, 

To Indra, glorious in his name, the Mighty One, even asthi 
hymn allow eth it. 

15 Thou givest wealth to me myself, thou givest treasure, Ei 

ccllent ! and the strong steed, 

0 Much-invoked, in deeds of might, yea, even now. 

16 Him, Sovran Ruler of all precious things, who even hatl 

power o’er this fair form of his, 

As now it taketh shape, and afterward, 

17 We praise, so that the Mighty One may speed to you, Pouiei 

of bounties. Traveller, prepared to go. 

Thou favourest the Maruts known to all, by song and sacrihca 
With song and praise I sing to thee. 

18 We in the sacrifice perform their will whose voice is lifted 

high, , 

The worship of those Thundering Ones who o’er the ridges o 
these mountains fly in troops. 

13 This stanza may have been the conclusion of one of the original l^y®° 
\i As the hDmn alloweth it : in due accordance with the metre. 

1« S&yana explains the latter part of the first line and the 
of the second as, ‘ who overcomea this obstructor (the enemy) ft® vfogbaviH 
war.’ I follow Ludwig’s interpretation who refers to 
weareth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic changes in his boay , 

VI. 47. II, ‘ Indra moves multiform by his illusions.’ 

18 Their will : the pleasure of the Maruti. 



TBB RIGYEBA. 


Wflf 46.] 


195 


Oindra, Mightiest, bring ua that which crushes men of evil minds, 

Wealth suited to our needs, O Stirrer of the thought, best 
wealth, 0 thou who stirreat thought. 

0 Winner, noble winner, strong, wondrous, most splendid, 
excellent, 

Sole Lord of victory, bring all-overpowering wealth, joy-giving, 
chief in deeds of might. 

Now let the godless man approach who hath received reward 
so <yreat 

As Vasa Asvya, when this light of morning dawned, received 
from Prithusravas, from Kanita’s son. 

Steeds sixty thousand and ten thousand kine, and twenty 
hundred camels I obtained ; 

Ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in three spots: 
in all, ten thousand kino. 

Ten browns that make my wealth increase, fleet steeds whose 
tails are long and fair. 

Turn with swift whirl my chariot w'heol ; 

The gifts which Prithusravas gave, Kanita^s son munificent. 

He gave a chariot wrought of gold : the prince was passing 
bountiful, and won himself most lofty fame. 

Come thou to this great rite of ours, Vayu ! to give us vigor- 
ous light. 

We have served thee that thou mightest give much to us, yea, 
mightest quickly give great wealth. 

Who with thrice seven times seventy horses comes to us 
invested with the rays of morn. 

Through these our Soma-draughts and those who press, to 
give, drinker of pure bright Soma juice. 

Who hatii inclined this glorious one, bounteous himself, to 
give me gifts, 

Borne oil firm chariot with the prosperous Nahusha, wise, to 
a man yet more devout. 


I 0 winner: of wealth to bo given to thy worshippers. *0 bountiful. 

t bountiful.’— Wilson. 

^ the Riahi of the hj’mn. Seel. 112. 10. Pfitkufravas: 

i 116. 21. 

\ h all, ten thoiuand kine : the exact meaning U not very clear. Tlie last 
18 rendered diflferently in Wilson’s Translation : * a thousand brown 
ten times ten thoasand cows with three red patches.' 

I ™ ' apparently Vdyu, but, according to Sdyapa, Prithusravas. 

t'a chaidot: literally, on a car made of the wood of the Aradu tree 
osanthes Indica). But S&yapa makes two proper names of the ’words, 

fbAradvaand Aksha.’ 



tbe hyubs of 


IBOOK vii, 


m 

28 Solo Lord in beauty moot for praise, 0 V^yu, dropping fatnc, 

along by steeds, by camels, and by hounds, spread,; 
forth thy train : even this it is. 

29 So as a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand have Igainej, 
Bulls that resemble vigorous steeds. 

30 To me come oxen like a herd, yea, unto mo the oxen oomo. 

31 And in the grazing herd he made a hundred camels bleat for^ 
And twenty hundred mid the white. 

32 A hundred has the sage received, Dasa Balbutha s and Tatuk- 

Thesfare?hy people, Viyu, who rejoice with Tndraforth,i 
guard, rejoice with Gods for guards. • i i r n 

33 And now to Vasa Asvya here this stately woman is led (ortl, 
Adorned with ornaments of gold. 

hymn XLVII. Aditya 

Great help yc give the worshipper, Varnpa.Mitra, Mighty Oaei 
Srsorrow ever reaches him whom ye, Ad|tyas, keep fromhar® 
Yours are incomparable aids, and good the succour they atfori 

2 0 Gods Adityas, well ye know the way to keep all wocsatai 
As the birds spread their sheltering wings, spread your protei 

tion over us. 

3 As the birds spread their sheltering wings let your prote€tiO| 
Wrmeln all shelter and defence, yc who have all things loi 

4 To^Xmrever they. Most Wise, have given a home ad 

oCt^wMerichesotthis man they,the Adityas, havecou^^ 

6 For^verily men sink and faint through loss of wealth 

MiSrShS^ainedfrom you. 0 Gods, whom ye. Adity* 

have approached. — — 

■ 28 The «(«*, andl^nd. are apparently the fanUstic forma of H 

clouds that tty before Viyu or the wmd. 

l\ r- abongiaal .Uy of Pnthuarsv. 

1 Yours ors, rtc; the refrein recurs in every verse of the hymn. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


rMS 47.] 


ic^r 


On him shall no fierce anger fall, no sore distress shall visit 
him, 

To whom, Adityas, ye have lent your shelter that extendeth 
far. 


Resting in you, 0 Gods, wo are like men who fight in coats of 
mail. 

Ye guard us from each great offence, ye guard us from each 
lighter fault. 

May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guai*d and shelter us, 

Mother of wealthy Mitra and of Aryaman and Varuna. 

The shelter, Gods, that is secure, auspicious, free from malady, 

A sure protection, triply strong, oven that do ye extend to us. 

Look down on us, Adityas, as a guide exploring from the 
bank. 

Lead us to pleasant ways as men lead horses to an easy ford. 


111 be it for the demons’ friend to find us or come near to us. 
But for the milch-cow be it well, and for the man who strives 
for fame. 


Each evil deed made manifest, and that which is concealed, 
0 Gods, 

The whole thereof remove from us to Trita Aptya far away. 

Daughter of Heaven, the dream that bodes evil to us or to 
our kine. 

Remove, 0 Lady of the Light, to Trita Aptya far away. 

Even if, 0 Child of Heaven, it make a garland or a chain of 

The whole bad dream, whate’er it be, to Trita Aptya we 
consign. 

To him whose food and work is this, who comes to take his 
share therein, 

To Trita, and to Dvita, Dawn ! bear thou the evil dream away. 


13 To Trita Aptya far away : Trita Aptya is a divinity dwelling in the re- 
Dtest part of the heavens to whom it was customary to wish away and 
tisign any threatened calamity or unpleasantness. As Sdyana regards Trita 
as the Ilishi of the hymn, he compelled to force a different interpre- 
tion on the first half of the second line : ‘ (let it not be found) in Trita 
ptya, keep it far from U8.’ — Wilson. 
jl4 daughter of Heaven : Ushas or Dawn. 

P ‘ The sense would then be ‘ even though parte of it be pleasant, we put 
p whole of the evil dt'eam away.” — Macdonell, Journal of R. A. S., July, 
p. p. 461. 

to Trita whose business it is to receive these consignments, 
a similar being, sometimes associated with Trita. SeeV. 18. 2, 



198 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK F/ij; 


17 As we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteentli 

part, ^ 

So unto Aptya we transfer together all the evil dream. 

18 Now have we conquered and obtained, and from our trespaj, 

ses are free. 

Shine thou away the evil dream, 0 Dawn, whereof we are 
afraid. Yours are incomparable aids, and good the succour 
they afford. 


HYMN XLVIII. 


Soffij, 


Wisely have I enjoyed the savoury viand, religious-thoughted, 
best to find out treasure, 

The food to which all Deities and mortals, calling it meatli, 
gather themselves together. ' 

2 Thou shalt be Aditi as thou hast entered within, appeaser o! 

celestial auger. 

Indu, enjoying Indra^s friendship, bring us — as a swift steed 
the car — forward to riches. 

3 We have drunk Soma and become immortal ; wo have attained 

the light, the Gods discovered. 

Now what may foemaii’s malice do to harm usl What, 0 Im- 
mortal, mortal man's deception ? 


4 Absorbed into the heart, be sweet, 0 Indu, as a kind father t( 
his son, 0 Soma, 

As a wise Friend to friend : do thou, wide-rulor, 0 Soma 
lengthen out our days for living. 

6 These glorious drops that give me freedom have I drun^ 
Closely they knit my joints as straps secure a car. 

Let them protect my foot from slipping on the way : yea, Id 
the drops I drink preserve me from disease. 

6 Make me shine bright like fire produced by friction : give usJ 

clearer sight and make us better. 

For in carouse I think of thee, 0 Soma, Shall I, as a rich mflUi 
attain to comfort ? 

7 May we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juice thou givesti 

like ancestral riches. . 

0 Soma, King, prolong thou our existence as Surya makes tM 
shining days grow longer. 


1 M$(Uh : madku : or, iweet 

2 WMin : within my heart. Indu : Soma. 

8 We have drunk Soma : aee Muir, 0. S. Texts, III. 264, 265. 

5 Prom slipping on the wag : ‘ may they keep ui from a loos j | 
worship.’— Wilson, 



rm RIOVBDA. 


199 


King Soma, favour us and make us prosper : we are thy de- 
votees ; of this be mindful. 

Spirit and power are fresh in us, 0 Indu : give us not up unto 
our foeman’s pleasure. 

for thou hast settled in each joint, 0 Soma, aim of men’s eyes 
and guardian of our bodies. 

When we offend against thine holy statutes, as a kind Friend, 
dod, best of all, bo gracious. 

May I be with the Friend whose heart is tender, who, Lord of 
Bays ! when quaffed will never harm me — 

This Soma now deposited within me. For this, I pray for longer 
life to Indra. 

Our maladies have lost their strength and vanished : they feared, 
and passed away into the darkness. 

Sonia hath risen in uh, exceeding mighty, and we are come 
where men prolong existence. 

Fathers, that Indu which our hearts have drunken, Immortal 
ill himself, hath entered mortals. 

So let us serve this Soma with oblation, and rest securely in his 
grace and favour. 

I Associate with the Fathers thou, 0 Soma, hast spread thyself 
abroad through earth and heaven, 
j So with oblation let us servo thee, Indu, and so lot us become 
' the loixis of riches, 

j Give us your blessing, 0 ye Gods, preservers. Never may sleep 
or idle talk control us. 

But evermore may we, as friends of Soma, speak to the synod 
with brave sons around us. 

On all sides, Soma, thou art our life-giver : aim of all eyes, 
light-finder, come within us. 

Indu, of one accord with thy protections both from behind and 
from before preserve us. 

HYMN XLIX. Agni. 

Aoni, come hither with thy fires ; we choose thee as Invoking 
Priest. 

Let the extended ladle Il'I of oil balm thee, best Priest, to 
sit on sacred grass. 

9 Altn of men's eyes: or, beholder of men. 

^ mmortal in himself: see note on I. 18. 4. 

here tlie Moon-Q.Kl, who is intimately connected with the Pitria 
See f/ymns of the Atharva veda, XVIII. 4. 72. 

. place at the end of this Book the eleven hymns, called the V41akhilya, 
[ are usually inserted after Hymn XLVIII. These hymns are not 



200 TBE BtMNS OF [BOOK 

2 For unto thee, 0 Angiras, 0 Son of Strength, move ladles ' 

tlie sacrifice. 

To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we seek fo 
most in sacrificial rites. ’ 

3 Agni, thou art Disposer, Sage, Herald, bright' God! arv 

worshipful, 

Best ofiercr, cheerful, to be praised in holy rites, pure Lord 
by singers with their hymns. 

4 Most Youthful and Eternal, bring the longing Gods to me 

the guileless, for the feast. ' 

Come, Vasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared : rejoice 
thee, gracious, with our songs. 

5 Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide. Preserver, righteous, and 

a Sago. 

The holy singers, 0 refulgent kindled God I arrangers, call on 
thee to come. 

6 Shine, Most Resplendent ! blaze, send bliss unto the folk, and 

to thy worshipper : Great art thou. 

So may my princes, with good fires, subduing foes, rest intlij 
keeping of the Gods. 

7 0 Agni, as thou burncst down to earth even high-growi 

underwood, 

So, bright as Mitm is, burn him who injures us, him who plot 
ill against thy friend. 

8 Give us not as a prey to mortal enemy, nor to the wicked 

friend of fiends. 

With conquering guards, auspicious, unassailable, protect us, 
0 Most Youthful God. 

9 Protect us, Agni, through the first, protect us through tb! 

second hymn, 

Protect us through three hymns, 0 Lord of Power and Migbtj 
through four hymns, Vasu, guard thou ns, 

reckoned in the division of the Kigretia into Mandalas (Books) and Anuvnka 
(Chapters), and SAyana does not notice thorn in his Commentary. See Mi 
son's Translation, V. p. 96, note by Cowell. See also Max Muller’s 
Hymn9 I, (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXII.), pp. xlvi— xlviii. 

Eleven must be added to the number of this hymn and of all that loWJ 
in this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Max Mowr 
edition of the text. 

2 Whoit lod'i drctp oil : ^butter-haired.’ — Wilson, 

5 The arrangers : of the ritual of sacrifice. ^ p 

a Princes : wealthy patrons. According to Sftyana, the Risbi’s owD s 
and others may be intended. , 

9 The numbers probably have reference to the four quarters of the s ;• 
Ludwig. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


201 


49,] 

) Preserve us from each fiend who brings the Gods no gift, 
preserve thou us in deeds of strength : 

For we possess in thee the nearest Friend of all, for service 
of the Gods and weal. 

0 Holy Agni, give us wealth renowned with men and strength- 
ening life. 

Bestow on us, 0 Helper, that which many crave, more glorious 
still by righteousness ; 

5 Wherewith we may overcome our rivals in the war, o’erpower- 
ing the foe's designs. 

So wax thou by our food, 0 Excellent in strength. Quicken 
our thoughts that find out w'calth. 

5 Agni is even as a bull wdio whets and bmndishes his horns. 

Well-sharpened are his jaws which may not be withstood : the 
Child of Strength hath powerful teeth. 

[ Not to be stayed, 0 Bull, 0 Agni, are thy teeth wdicn thou 
art spreading far and wide. 

Make our oblations duly offered up, O Priest, and give us 
store of precious things. 

) Thou Host in the •wood : from both thy Motliers mortals kindle 
thee. 

Unwcaricdly thou boarcst up the offerer’s gifts, then shinest 
bright among the Gods. 

5 And so the seven priests, 0 Agni, worship thee, Free-giver, 
Everlasting One. 

Thou cleavest through the rock with heat and fervent glow, 
Agni, rise up above the men. 

1 For you let us whoso grass is trimmed call Agni, Agni, rest- 
less God. 

Let us whose food is offered call to all the tribes Agni the 
Invoking Priest of men. 

8 Agni, with noble psalm that tells his wish he dwells, thinking 
on thee who guardest him. 

Speedily bring us strength of many varied sorts to be most 

i near to succour us. 

P Agni, Praise-singer! Lord (*'* men, God! burner-up of Rakshasas, 

Mighty art thou, the ever-present Household-Lord, Home- 

h'iond and Guardian from the sky. 

U herewith : referring to the wealth which Agni is asked to give. 

In the wood: in the pieces of wood used for the production of Agni. 
ocrcn prints : minor Hotar priests, such as the MaitrAvaruna and others. 

iV 7»i explained by SAyana as fnegham, the cloud. 

18 or, ' the irresistible.* — Wilson. 

dwdli ; that is, the pious inatitutor of sacrifice. 



TBB BYMNS OP l^OOR p;„; 

20 Let no fiend come among us, 0 thou rich in light, no spell o| 
those who deal in spells. 

To distant pastures drive faint hunger: far away, 0 Agni, 
chase the demons’ friends. 


HYMN L. Indni 

Both boons,— may Indra, hitherward turned, listen to thij 

And^mlghtic^sTMaghavan with thought inclined to us com, 
near to drink the Soma juice. 

2 For him, strong, independent Ruler, Heaven and Earth Ime 

fashioned forth for power and might. 

Thou seatcst thee as first among thy peers m place, fonli, 
soul longs for Soma juice. 

3 Fill thyself full, 0 Lord of wealth, 0 Indra, with the juice w( 

We^k^ww thee. Lord of B,ay Steeds ! victor in the fight, vm- 
quishiug e’en tlie invincible. 

4 Changeless, in truth, 0 Magha van Indra, let it be as thou in 

wisdom wiliest it. . , j n rn 

May we, 0 fair of cheek, win booty with thine aid, 0 Thun- 
derer, swiftly seeking it. 

5 Indra, with all thy saving help.s give us assistance, Lord of 


ForTfter thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, Hero, 
fiuder-out of wealth. 

6 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well,0 

Forgone may impair the gifts laid up in thee. Bring rat 
whatever thing 1 ask. 

1 For thou,— come to the worshipper !— wilt find great «ea 
to make us rich. , 

Fill thyself full, 0 Maghavan, for gam of kme, full, man, 
for the gain of steeds. 

8 Thou as thy gift bestowost many hundred herds, yea> 
thousands dost thou give. 

With singers’ hymns have wo brought the Fort ren 
singing to Indra for his grace. 

20 Spdl of thou vMdnlm $pelU: : • tormsnt of 

evil spirito.’— WUuon. 

1 Both boom ; Indra i* »»ked to hear th« prayor and to drink the Som»- 



the rigveda. 


203 


Whether thesimple or the sage, Indra, have offered praise to thee, 

He, Satakratu ! by his love hath gladdened thee, ambitious ! 
ever pressing on ! 

If he the Strong of arm, the breaker-down of forts, the great 
Destroyer, hear my call. 

We, seeking riches cry to Indra, Lord of wealth, to Satakratu 
with our lauds. 

We count not then as sinners, nor as niggardly or foolish men, 

When with the Soma juice which we have shod we make Indra, 
the Mighty One, our Friend. 

Him have we yoked in fight, the powerful Conqueror, debt- 
claimer, not to be deceived. 

Best charioteer, the Victor marks each fault, ho knows the 
strong to whom ho will come near. 

Indra, give us security from that whereof wo are afraid. 

Help us, 0 Maghavan, let thy succour give us this : drive 
away foes and enemies. 

For thou, 0 liberal Lord of bounty, strengthenest his ample 
home who worships thee. 

So Indra, Maghavan, thou Lover of the Song, we with pressed 
Soma call on thee. 


f Indra is Vritra-slaycr, guard, our best defender from the foe. 

May ho preserve our last and middlemost, and keep watch 
from behind us and before. 

) Defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all sides, 
Indra, shield us w ell. 

Keep far away from us the terror sent from heaven : keep 
impious weapons far away. 

( Protect us, Indra, each to-day, each morrow, and each follow- 
ing day. 

, Our singers, through all days, shalt thou. Lord of tlie brave, 
keep safely both by day and night. 

5 A crushing Warrior, passing rich is Maghavan, endowed with 

' all heroic might. 

Thine arms, 0 Satakratu, are exceeding strong, arms which 
have grasped the thundurbolt. 


I I T/ie smp/e oy the tage : * the unakilled or the skilled, ’ — Wilson. 

uurlcs each fault; the meaning of hhrimdm is uncertixin : aocortling to 
is ‘ his supporter or feeder,’ that is, the worshipper who presents 
jr ^ fo<x^l« SAyana takes it with vdjinam : * the strong racer.’— 

) 0 *^**®"^ *. and powerful worshipper, 

ana • pwimw, son, being understood, according to 

expression probably means ‘all of us.’ 

Ae terror sent from heaven ; ‘ supernatural alarm.*— Wilson. 



201 the hymns op [book m, 

HYMN LI. , , 

■iDdrj, 

Offer ye up as praise to him that wherein Indra takes dcligh* 
The Soma-bringers magnify Iiidra’s great energy with 
Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

2 Sole among chiefs, companionless, impetuous, and peerless, h 
Hath waxen great o’er many folk, yea, over all things born 

in might. ^ 

3 Lord of swift bounty, he will win e’en with a steed of 

less sort. 

This, Indra, must be told of thee who wilt perform heroic deeds 

4 Come to us hither : let us pay devotions that enhance tb 

might, ^ I 

Fur which, Most Potent ! thou woiildst fain bless the mai 
here who strives for fame. 

5 For thou, 0 Indra, makest yet more bold the spirit of the bole 
Who with strong Soma servetli thee, still ready with hi 

reverent prayers. 

6 AVorthy of song, he looketh down as a man looketh into welk 
Pleased with the Soma-bringer’s skill he maketh him his mate 

and friend. 

7 In strength and wisdom all the Gods, Indra, have yielded unt« 

thee. 

Be thou the Guard of all, 0 thou whom many praise. 

8 Praised, Indra, is this might of thine, best for the service of 

the Gods, 

That thou with power dost slay Vritra, 0 Lord of Strength, 

9 He makes the races of mankind like synods of the Beauteous 

One. 

Indra knows this his manifest deed, and is renowned. 

10 Thy might, 0 Indra, at its birth, thee also, and thy mental 
power. 

In thy care, Maghavan rich in kine ! they have increased 
exceedingly. 


1 Good are, etc : the refrain is repeated in each verse, 

2 Chiefs: nribhih: men, meaning Oods, according to SAjana. Folhiot^ 
tribes. 

3 Ife will win e’ en with a steed of worthless sort: ‘ He.,,... wishes to beetot 
blessings (upon us) with his unurged courser’ — Wilson. 

6 He looketh down : kindly on us as a thirsty man looks eagerly into a 
^ 9 Like synods of the Beauteous One : like assemblies that meet to bon® 
him ; but the meaning is obscure. 

10 They ; thy worshippers, 1 



THE RIGVEDA. 


205 


0 Vritra-slayer, thou and I will both combine for winning 
spoil. 

Even malignity will consent, 0 Bolt-armed Hero, unto us. 

Let us extol this Indra as truthful and never as untrue. 

Lire is his death who pours no gifts : great light hath he who 
oflers them. Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

HYMN LII. Indra. 


powers of Mighty Ones hath he, Ancient, Beloved, been 
e(iuipped, 

Throiudi whom the Father Maim made prayers efficacious 
with the Gods. 


j Him, Maker of the sky, lot stones wet with the Soma ne’er 
forsake. 

Nor hymns and prayer that must be said. 

\ Indra who knew full well disclosed the kinc to the Angirases. 

This his great deed must be extolled. 

I Indra, promoter of the song, the sage’s Strengthener as of old. 
Shall come to- bless and succour us at presentation of this 
laud. 

5 Now after their desire’s intent the pious singers with the cry 
Of Hail ! have sung loud hymns to thee, Indra, to gain a stall 

of kine. 

6 With Indra rest all deeds of might, deeds done and yet to be 

performed, 

Whom singers know devoid of guile. 

7 When the Five Tribes with all their men to Indra have sent 
I out their voice. 

And when the priest hath strewn much grass, this is the Friend’s 
own dwelling-place. 

3 This praise is verily thine own : thou hast performed these 
manly deeds, 

And sped the wheel upon its way. 


11 Malignity; or the malignart man. ‘ The niggard.’ — Wilson. 

12 Eire is his death : or, great is Lis destruction. 

i 1 This difficult verso is variously interpreted both by Indian commentators 
id by European scholars. I follow partly Aufrecht’s translation as given by 
r. Muir, and partly Ludwig’s Commentary. See 0. S. Texts, I. pp. 163—164; 
^dwig’s Aiyrerfa, V. pp. 167 — 168 ; and Wilson’s Translation, V. p. 107. 
se Ancient, Beloved appears to be Soma and not Indra. 

7 The Friend's : ludra’s. The second line is very obscure. See Bergaigne, 
• vi., and Vedio Hymns, I., p. 226. I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation. 

I 8 The wheel: the Sun. 



so« TBB smm OF [fiooir f;,,! 

9 At the overflowing of this Steer, boldly he strode for life^ 
took 

Soma as cattle take their corn. ^ 


10 Receiving this and craving help, we, who with you are Bakslja'j 
sons, 

Would fain exalt the Maruts’ Lord. 


11 Yea, Hero, with the singers we sing to the duly-coming Band. 
Allied with thee may we prevail. 

12 With us arc raining Rudras, clouds accordant in call to battle 

at the death of Vritra, 

The strong assigned to him who sings and praises. May Gods 
with Iiidra at their head protect us. 


HYMN Lin. 


Indra 


May our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy bounty 
Thunderer. 

Drive off the enemies of prayer. 

2 Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts 

flighty art thou : 

Tlicre is not one to equal thee. 

3 Thou art the Lord of Soma pressed, Soma impressed is abo 

thine. 

Thou art the Sovran of the folk. 


4 Come, go thou forth, dwelling in heaven and listening to the 

prayers of men : 

Thou fillest both tlio heavens and earth. 

5 Even that hill with rocky heights, with hundreds, thousands 

held within, 

Thou for thy worshippers brakcst through. 

6 We call on thee both night and day to ta-ite the flowing Soma 

juice : 

Do thou fulfil our hearts’ desire. 

'3 This Steer: Suma ; that is, when abundant libations had been offered, 
He : Indra. 

1 0 Dakshai tons : of the same origin with you. ' Lords of food/ according 
to kSAvana. 

11 Duiy-comiru) Band: of Maruts, led by Indra 

12 The strong : perhaps the thunderbolt with which Indra aids the wor- 
shipper. — 

8 Unprttsed : in its natural state in the stalks of the plant. Or, a? L'*dw‘g 
suggests, the Soma which Indra drinks in heaven may be meant. See > 
26 . 1 . 

5 Thai hill : the cloud with its countless treasures of rain. 

6 Night: just before dawn. 



TRB RIQVEDA. 


207 


54.] 


Where is that ever-youthful Steer, strong-necked and never 
yet bent down ? 

What Brahman ministers to him ? 

To whose libation doth the Steer, betake him with delight 
therein f ® 

Who takes delight in Indra now? 

Whom, Vritra-slayer, have thy gifts and hero powers accom- 
panied ? 

Who is thy dearest in the land ? 

For thee among mankind, among the Paras is this Soma shed. 

Hasten thou hither : drink thereof. 

This, growing by Sushoma and by Saryan^v^n, dear to thee, 

In Arjikiya, cheers thee best. 

Hasten thou hitherward, and drink this for munificence to-day 

Delightful for thine eager draught. ' 


HYMN LIV. 


Indra. 


Though, Tndra, thou art called by men from east and west 
from north and south, ^ 

Como hither (juickly with fleet steeds ; 

If ill the ofliuenco of heaven, rich in its light, thou takest joy 

Or in the sea in Soma juice. ^ * 

With songs I call thee, Great and Wide, even as a cow to 
profit us, 

Indra, to drink the Soma-dranght. 

Hither, 0 Indra, lot thy Bays bear up and bring upon thv car 

Thy glory, God ! and majesty. 

Thou, Indra, wouldst bo sung and praised as great, stroncr 
lordly in thy deeds : 

Come hither, drink our Soma juice. 

We who have shed the Soma and prepared the feast are call- 
ing thee 

To sit on this our sacred grass. 


0 Amonrj the PHrus : among men, or among Kings named Pdrup.— SAyana. 

: ; apparently a river which cannot now be identified. Arjtktya : 

5uril or district. Suryandvdn is said to be a lake m the district 

ilktvn conjectures regarding SushomA and 

1 see Zimmer, AlUndiiches Lehen, pp. 12, 13. Cf. VIII. 7. 29. 


JB T ; or the place in heaven from which the Amrit 

• n the sea : of air ; the firnament. 

<» «oa? ; as the most useful of ^ animals. 



208 THE HYMm OP [BOOK Vlj 

7 As, Indra, thou art evermore the common Lord of all alit 
As such we invocate thee now. 

8 The men with atones have milked for thee this nectar of tli 

Soma juice : 

Indra, bo pleased with it, and drink. 

9 Neglect all pious men with skill in sacred song : come hithej 

ward 

With speed, and give us high renown. 

10 Gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the King who gives, mi 

spotted kine, 

Kine decked with golden ornaments. 

11 Beside a thousand spotted kino I have received a gift of gold 
Pure, brilliant, and exceeding great, 

12 Dtirgaha’s grandsons, giving me a thousand kine, munificent 
Have won renown among the Gods. 

HYMN LV. 

Loud singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows we priostj 
invoke 

With haste, that he may help, as the bard’s Chorisher, Indra 
who findeth wealth for you. 

2 Whom with fliir helm, in rupture of the juice, the firm resist 

less slayers hinder not : 

Giver of glorious wealth to him who sing his praise, hotioiiriii^ 
him who toils and pours : 

3 Sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden goad, 
indra, the Vritra-slayer, urges eagerly the opening of the 

stall of kiue : 


9 All pious men : all other worshippera. 

10 The King : who iuatituted the sacrifice. According to SAyana, Indnu 
meant ; but this ia impossible. 

12 Durrjahas grandsons : SAyana explains durgdkasya by duhkham 
mdnasya me, of me plunged in grief, and nci/>fic(A (uepotes) as urahkiUi^i 
unprotected ; ‘ Unprotected as I am, and plunged in sorrow (ooy . 

by the favour of the go<ls obtain f<K)d, and are blessed with abuucluuce 
thousand cattle.' See Wilson’s Translation, and Cowell’s note. 

1 We priests invoke : the construction is difficult. I follow Ludwig, aud 
AuW, an infinitive, as equivalent to the first jHirson plural. 

3 Curry-comb for horses : the purifier of his worshippers and 
horses, according to SAyana, Golden goad: wonderful and golden-b 
acwrding to SAyana. The meaning of IcKjah, as well as of mnksmh, u 
tain, but both seem to signify instruments connected with horses. 

J 



THE RIOVEDA. 


209 


55.] 

[ Who for the worshipper scatters forth ample wealth, even 
though buried, piled in heaps : 

May Iiulra, Lord of Bay Steeds, fiiir-helmcd Thunderer, act 
at his pleasure, as he lists. 

Hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, even of 
old, from men. 

All that we cfFer unto thee, 0 Indra, now, sacrifice, laud, cffect- 
II al speech. 

To Soma, Much-invoked, Bolt-armed ! for thy carouse. Celestial, 
Sorna-drinlter ! come. 

Thou to the man who prays and pours the juice hast been 
he.'it giver of dclightbil wealtli. 

Here, vcril}^ yesterday we Jot the Thunder-wielder drink his fill. 
So ill like manner offer liini the juice to-day. Now range you 
by the Glorious One. 

Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, follows 
the path of his decrees. 

So giMciously accepting, Indra, this our praise, with wondrous 
thought come forth to us. 

What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra hath 
not done 1 

Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, the Vritra- 
slaycr from his birth 1 

How great his power resistless ! how invincible the Vritra- 
slayer’s matchless might ! 

Indra excels all usurers who see the day, excels all tralfickers 
in strength. 

0 Indra, Vritra slayer, we, thy very constant worshippers, 
bring prayers ne’er heard before to thee, 0 Much-invoked, 0 
Til under-armed, to be thy meed. 

3 thou of mighty acts, the aids that are in thee call forward 
many an enger hope. 

^ast tlie drink-offerings, Vasu, even of the good, hear my 
call, Strongest God, and come. 

^erily, Indra, wo are tlimo, we worshippers depend on thee. 

*or there is none but only thou to show us grace, 0 Maghavan. 
thou much invoked. 


^^ned : as gold, precious stones, etc. 

according to SAyana, the robber. The reason of mentioning 
’ ni this place is not obvious. 

/io .see the day ; who live. According to SAyana, who look upon tJie 
a their present life, but will be sunk in darkness after death. 



210 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlli 

14 From this onr misery and famine set us free, from this dire 

curse deliver ns. 

Succour us with thine help and with thy wondrous thought 
Most Mighty, finder of the way. ’ 

15 Now lot your Soma juice be poured : be not afraid^ 0 Kali’s sous. 
This darkening sorrow goes away; yea, of itself it vanishes. 

HYMN LVI. Aditya, 

Now pray we to tlie.se Kshatriyas, to the Adityas for thekaid, 
These who are gracious to assist. 

2 May Mitra bear us o’er distress, and Varuna and Aryamau, 
Yea, the Adityas, as they know. 

3 For wonderful and meet for praise is these Adityas’ saving help 
To him who offers and prepares. 

4 The niiglity aid of you, the Great, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 

claim to be our sure defence. 

5 Guard us, Adityas, still alive, before the deadly weapon strike: 
Are ye not they who hear our call ? 

6 What sheltering defence ye have for him who toils in pouring 

gifts, 

Graciously bless ye ils therewith. 

7 Adityas, Gods, from sorrow there is freedom, for the sinless, 

wealth, 

0 ye in whom no fault is seen. 

8 Let not this fetter bind us fast : may he release us for success; 
For strong is Indra and renowned. 

9 0 God.s who fain would lend your aid, destroy not us as je 

destroy 

Your enemies who go astray. 

10 And thee too, 0 Great Aditi, thee also, Goddess, I address, 
Thee very gracious to assist. 

11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thou Mother ol 

Strong Sons : 

Let no one of our seed be harmed. 

1 2 Far-spread ! wide-ruling ! grant that we, unharmed by envy 

may expand : 

Grant that our progeny may live. 


14 Prom tJds our misery : the hymn was ‘ seen ’ and employed in a time o 
dearth and famine. Finder of the way : to prosperity. 

15 Kali’s sons : Kali is the Kishi or seer of the hymn. 

I Kshatriyas : royal princes. 

II Of Strong Sons; thft 



TEE RIOVEDA. 


211 


57.1 

3 Those who, the Priuoes of the folk, iu native gloiy, ne *er 
deceived, 

Maintain their statutes, void of guile— 

[4 As such, from mouth of ravening wolves, 0 ye Adityas, 
rescue us, 

Like a bound thief, 0 Aditi. 

[5 Adityas, let this arrow, yea, let this malignity depart 
From us or e’er it strike us dead. 

16 For, Bountiful Adityas, we have evermore enjoyed your help, 
Both now and in the days of old. 

17 To every one, 0 ye Most Wise, who turneth even from sin to 

you, 

Ye Gods vouchsafe that he may live. 

18 May this new mercy profit us, which, ye Adityas, frees like one 
Bound from his bonds, 0 Aditi. 

10 0 ye Adityas, this your might is not to be despised by us ; 

So be ye graciously inclined. 

20 Lot not Vivasv^n’s weapon nor the shaft, Adityas, wrought 

with skill. 

Destroy us ere old age bo nigh. 

21 On every side dispel all sin, Adityas, all hostility, 

Indigence, and combined attack. 

HYMN LVII. 

Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for our bliss, 
Strong in thy deeds, checking assault, Lord, Mightiest Indra, 
of the brave ! 

2 Great in thy power and wisdom, Strong, with thought that 

comprehendeth all ! 

Thou hast filled full with majesty. 

3 Thou very Mighty One, whose hands by virtue of thy greatness 

grasp 

The golden bolt that breaks its way. 

4 Your Lord of might tiiat ne’er bath bent, that ruleth over all 

mankind, 

I call, that he, as he is wont, may aid the chariots and the 
men. 


n Who turneth even from sin : who comes to you for forgiveness. 

^0 Fivasvdn’i weapon : the deadly bolt of the Sun, or perhaps, metaphor- 
ically, of the sacrificer, r r 

21 Combined attack : * the closely drawn net.’— Wilson. 

^ Tlwu Utt jlUti JttW ; 



212 tub hymns of [BOOR F///. 

5 Whom, ever farthering, in frays that win the light, in both 

the hosts 

Men call to succour and to help. 

6 Indra, the Strong, the measureless, worthy of praise, Most 

Bountiful, 

Sole Ruler even over wealth. 

7 Him, for his ample bounty, him, this Indra do I urge to 

drink, 

Who, as his praise was sung of old, the Dancer, is the Lord 
of men. 

8 Thou Mighty One, whose friendship none of mortals ever hath 

obtained : 

None will attain unto thy might. 

9 Aided by thee, with thee allied, in frays for water and for sun, 
Bolt-armed ! may we win ample spoil. 

10 So seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief Lover of the 

Song, 

As, in our battles, Indra, thou to Purumflyya gavest help. 

11 0 Thunderer, thou whose friendship and whose onward 

guidance both are sweet, 

Thy sacrifice must bo prepared. 

12 To us, ourselves, give ample room, give for our dwelling ample 

room : 

Give ample room to us to live. 

13 We count the banquet of the Gods a spacious pathway for 

the men, 

And for the cattle, and the car. 

14 Six men, yea, two and two, made glad with Soma juice, come 

near to me 

With oflferings pleasant to the taste. 

15 Two brown-hued steeds, Indrota's gift, two bays from Rikslui’s 

son were mine, 

From Asvainedha’s son two red. 

7 The Dancer : in the dance of war. 

10 Puriimdyya : according to SAyana, ‘ me (tbe Rishi) the possessor ol 
much wisdom.' 

13 Sacrifice to the Gods procures freedom and security for us and all who 
belong to uh. 

15 ‘ These princes with their respective fathers are the six of V. 14. Tlifi 
sons of Riksha and Atvamedha had originally commenced the sacrifice, but 
Indrota and his father Atilkigva came to see it and added their gifts, "be 
sons alone are mentioned : the son is the father’s second self, pitri-putrayor 
Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. 



TEE ElOVEEX, 


21S 


58.] 

[6 From Atithigva good car-steeds, from Arksha rein-obeying 
steeds, 

From Asvamcdha beauteous ones. 

17 Indrota, Atithigva’s son, gave me six horses matched with 

mares : 

And Putakratu gave besides. 

18 Marked above all, amid the brown, is the red mare Viishanvati, 
Obedient to the rein and whip. 

19 0 bound to me by deeds of might, not even the man who loves 

to blame 

Hath found a single fault in you. 

HYMN LVIII. iDdra. 

I SEND you forth the song of praise for Tndu, hero-gladdener. 
With hymn and plenty he invites you to complete the sacrifice. 

2 Thou wishest for thy kine a bull, for those who long for his 

approach, 

For those who turn away from him, lord of thy cows whom 
none may kill. 

3 The dappled kino who stream with milk prepare his draught 

of Soma juice : 

Clans in the birth-place of the Gods, in the three luminous 
realms of heaven. 

4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of 

the kine, 

The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave. 

16 Arhha: the son of Riksha. Asvamcdha: the son of A.svamedha. 

17 Pfltakratu : son of Asvamcdha. 

18 Vrishanvatt : according to von Roth, ‘perhaps, that may be found 
nnong stallions.’ 

19 0 bound to me : this stanza ivS addrcs.sed to the princes who instituted 
file sacrifice and gave the rewards which liave been mentioned. 

1 The sonff of praise: trhhtuhham : n.sed in a general sense for any hymn 
'I praise. Indu : Soma. According to S.lyana, Indra is meant. 

2 The stanza is difficult. I "dopt Pisehel’s explanation of nadum and 

imttu'lm. 

^ Clans: v’sah : possibly the cows arc meant. Epgcling translates : ‘At 
IS birth tlie well-like milking, speckled one.s mix the Soma (drauglit), the 
-■ <1113 (A the gods in the three spheres of the heavens’ (Sacred Books of the 
XLI. p. 307). Pischel observes : ‘The connexion of the first three 
ai)zas is probably this : Soma shall be celebrated by you in your song of 
fim^ liberally reward you. What thou wishest for 
^^lyself is a bull for the cows, in order that they may be propagated and 
^ovide Indra with milk to be mixed with his Soma Juice, while they serve 
, of Gods in all the three realms of heaven,' — Vediseke Studietif 1, 



S14 


THE HYMNS OH 


[BOOR nil 


5 Hither his Bay Steeds have been sent, red Steeds are on the 
sacred grass 

Where we in concert sing our songs. 

€ For Indra Thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk 
and mcath, 

What time he found them in the vault. 

7 When I and Indra mount on high up to the Bright One’s place 

and home, -ci • j 

We, having drunk of meath, will roach his seat whose h nendg 

are three times seven. 

8 Sing, sing ye forth your songs of praise, ye Priyamedhas, sing 

Yea, let yoving children sing their lauds : as a strong castle 
praise ye him. 

9 Now loudly let the viol sound, the lute send out its voice with 

Shrilfbo'the music of the string. To Indra is the hymn up- 
raised. 

10 When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, easy to be 
Seize quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma j nice for Indra s 

11 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk : all Deities have drunk 

Her^Varuna shall have his home, to ^hom the floods have 
sung aloud as mother-kinc unto their calves. 

12 Thou, Varuna, to whom belong Seven Rivers, art a glorious 

The waters flow into thy throat as ’twere a pipe with ample 
mouth. 

13 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessoa, 

the worshipper, 

6 In the vault : ‘ in the cavity of the Soma- vessel.’— von lloth*, on the horizon 

—Ludwig ; ‘near at hand.’— Sftyana. jy.Wa are 

7 The Bright One’s place: the sUtion of the Ludwig 

three times seven : Indra who is the friend of the Maruts. v ^ord. 

in combining the sdkhguh of the 

SAyana’s explanation is different ; ‘ let us be united in the t y 
of the (universal) friend/— See note in Wilson’s Translation.^ 

9 The viol: girgarah: *a kind of musical ..lu, and 

Oodh^, originally the leather guard worn by iiatm* 

^ihgd (said to mean bowstrmg) are also, apparently, names of mus 

ments. , , . , aeven 

12 Varuna’s throat, or palate, is said to mean the sea, into whi 

wivTora flnw. 



59.] THE RIGVEDA, 215 

He, the swift Guide, is that fair form that loosed the horses 
near at hand. 

4 Indra, the very Mighty, holds his enemies in utter scorn. 

He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten by his 
voice. 

[5 He, yet a boy exceeding small, mounted his newly-fashioned 
car. 

He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild mighty buffalo. 

16 Lord of the home, fair-helmcted, ascend thy chariot wrought 

of gold. 

We will attend the Heavenly One, the thousand-footed, red of 
line, matchless, who blesses where he goes. 

17 With reverence they come hitherward to him as to a Sovran 

Lord, 

That they may bring him near for this man’s good success, to 
prosper and bestow his gifts. 

18 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the men of old, 
Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred grass, and 

spread their sacrificial food, 

HYMN LIX. Indra, 

He who, as Sovran Lord of men, moves with his chariots un- 
restrained. 

The Vritra-slayer, vanquisher of fighting hosts, preeminent, 
is praised with song. 

2 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman ! for his aid, in whose sus- 

taining hand of old 

The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the great Sun 
was set in heaven. 

3 No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens 

evermore : 

No, not by sacrifice, to Indra praised of all, resistless, daring, 
bold in might 


If) Uk Mother and his Sire: Earth and Heaven. The buffalo is the dark 
rain-cloud which Indra piercea v/ith his lightning, or peihapa the demon Vala 
is intended. 

16 The Heavenly One: the Sun, which is Indra’ a chariot Thousand -footed : 
bright with countiesa rays of light. 

17 This man’s ; whounstitutea the sacrifice. 


2 Puruhanman : the Rishi of the hymn addresses himself. Sustaininej ; 
^ vidkartari may (with Ludwig) be taken as a nominative with v^jrah^ the 
bolt of thunder as a austftiner (of Order). 



216 the hymns of [BOOK Vlu, 

4 The potent Conqueror, invincible in war, him at whose birth 

the Mi< 4 hty Ones, 

The Kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens, 
earths sent their loud voices out. 

5 0 Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were 

thine — “ 

No, not a thousand Suns could match tlice at thy birth, nut 
both the worlds, 0 Thunderer. 

6 Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with might, yea, 

all with strength, O Strongest One. 

Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, 0 Thunderer, with 
wondrous aids. 

7 Let not a godless mortal gain this food, 0 thou whose life is 

long ! 

But one who yokes tlie bright-hued steeds, the Etasas, even 
Indra yoker of the Bays. 

8 Urge ye the Conqueror to give, your Indra greatly, to bo 

praised. 

To be invoked in shallow waters and in depths, to be invoked 
in deeds of might. 

0 0 Vasu, 0 thou Hero, raise us up to ample opulence. 

Raise us to gain of mighty wealth, 0 Maghavan, 0 Indra, to 
sublime renown. 

10 Indra, thou justifiest us, and trarnplest down thy slanderers. 
Guard thyself, valiant Hero, in thy vital parts : strike down 

the Dasa with thy blows. 

11 The man who bring.s no sacrifice, inhuman, godless, infidel. 
Him let his friend the mountain cast to rapid death, the 

mountain cast the Dasyu down. 

12 0 Mightiest Indra, loving us, gather thou up, as grains of corn 
Within thine hand, of these their kine, to give away, yea, 

gather twice as loving us. 

13 0 my companions, wish for power. How may we perfect Saras 

praise. 

The liberal princely patron, never to be harmed ? 


4 The Kine : the heavens and tlie eartliH. 

7 Etauis: the hi>rso.s of tlie Sun 

10 In thij vitnl parts: liteiully, between thy thighs, * Shelter us between 
thy thighs ’ — Wil.'son. 

11 His friend - in which he hopes to find refuge: according to SAya<?®> 
Parvata (mountain) is a Kishi, the friend of Indra. 

12 Their kine: the property of the hostile aboi iginea, 

la Sara's praise : Sara must be the iustitutor of the sacrifice: accoidwg 
to SAyana be is ludra, ‘the destroyer.’ 



0MN 60.] THn RIOVEDA. 217 

14 By many a sage whose grass is trimmed thou art continually 

praised, 

That thou, 0 Sara, hast bestowed here one and here another 
calf. 

15 The noble, Suradcva’s son, hath brought a calf, led by the car, 

to three of us, 

As a chief brings a goat to milk. 

HYMN LX. Agni. 

0 Aoni, with thy mighty wealth guard us from all malignity, 
Yea, from all hate of mortal man. 

2 For over thee, 0 Friend from birth, the wrath of man hath 

no control : 

Nay, Guardian of the earth art thou. 

3 As such, with all the Gods, 0 Sou of Strength, auspicious in 

thy flame. 

Give us wealth bringing all things good. 

4 Malignities stay not from wealth the mottal man whom, Agiii, 

thou 

Protectest while he oflers gifts. 

5 Sage Agni, he whom thou dost urge, in worship of the G^ds, 

to wealth. 

With thine assistance winneth kine. 

G lliches with many heroes thou hast for the man who offers gifts : 
Lead thou us on to higher bliss. 

7 Save us, 0 J^tavedas, nor abandon us to him who sins. 

Unto the evil-bearted man. 

8 0 dgui, let no godless man avert thy bounty as a God : 

Over all treasures thou art Lord. 

9 So, Son of Strength, thou uidest us to what is great and 

excellent. 

Those, Vasu 1 Friend I who sing thy praise. 

10 Let our songs come anear to him beauteous and bright with 

piercing flame, 

Our offoiings, with our homage, to the Lord of wealth, to 
him whom many praise, fur help : 

G Ifei'e one and here another : tlkam-ekam : iiieviiing many, 

G Silrndeva's son : Sara. S;\yana cxpl.tins s niradcvi/ah as covvjj won in 
Dattle. ‘May Maghavan, taking them hy Iho load the cows with their 
calvos from our three (destructive enemies), as the owner leads a goat to 

drn.k '--Wilson. 

2 Guardian of the earth : kshdpdodn : ‘ Lord of the night.’ — SAyana. 

^ Winneth kine : literally, is a goer among cows : ' walks (lord) among 
'crowds of cattle.’- Wilson. 



218 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vljy 


11 To Agui Jatavedas, to the Son of Strength, that he may give 

us precious gifts, 

Immortal, from of old Priest among mortal men, the most 
delightful in the house : 

12 Agni, made youi's by sacrifice, Agni, while holy rites advance; 
Agni, the first in songs, first with the warrior steed ; Agni to 

win the land for us. 


13 May Agui who is Lord of wealth vouchsafe us food for friend- 

ship sake. 

Agni we ever seek for seed and progeny, the Vasu who 
protects our lives. 

14 Solicit withyourchants, for help, Agtu the God with pierciugflame, 
For riches famous Agui, Purumi]ha and ye men ! Agui to 

light our dwelling well. 

15 Agni we land that he may keep our foes afar, Agni to give us 

health and strength. 

Let him as Guardian he invoked in all the tribes, the lighter- 
up of glowing brands. 

HYMN LXL 

Prepare oblation : let him come ; and let the minister serve again 
*Who knows the ordering thereof. 

2 Rejoicing in his friendship, lot the priest be seated over man. 
Beside the shoot of active power. 

3 Him, glowing bright beyond all thought, they seek among th( 

race of man ; 

With him for tongue they seize the food. 

4 He hath inflamed the twofold plain : life-giving, he hat 

climbed the wood, 

And with his tongue hath struck the rock. 

12 With the warrior steed : arvuti : tho fierce and rapid fire that clears tl 
jungle for the advance of the Aryan gettlers. , 

14 To light our dwelling well: I follow Ludwigs explanation, bayai 
takes mdltdye as a proper name : ‘ a house for (me) Sudtti. Wilson. 

15 The lighter-up of ylo 2 ving brands : vhturrishUndni : according to bayai 
' the giver of homes to us Rishis.’ 


The language of the hymn is intentionally obscure, and much o i 
translation (in which I generally follow Ludwig) must be regar e 
conjectural. 

1 Let him come : Agm, TAe miniafer; or, the Adhvaryu. 

2 The shoot: Agui, according to S&ya^ : the stalks of the Soma-p 
according to von Roth. 

3 They seek: that is, the Gods. /-r;- i j 

4 The twofold plain : the expanses of earth and heaven. ClimOea me 
a forest conflagration is referred to. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


21D 


UYMH 61.] 

5 Wandering here the radiant Calf finds none to fetter him, and 

seeks 

The Motlier to declare his praise. 

6 And now that great and mighty team, the team of horses that 

are his, 

And traces of his car, are seen. 

7 The seven milk a single cow ; the two set other five to work, 
On the stream’s loud-resounding bank. 

8 Entreated by Vivasvan’s ten, Indra cast down the water-jar 
With threefold hammer from the sky. 

9 Three times the newly-kindled flame proceeds around the 

sacrifice : 

The priests anoint it with the meath. 

0 With reverence they drain the fount that circles with its 

wheel above, 

Exhaustless, with the mouth below. 

1 The pressing-stones are set at work : the meath is poured into 

the tank, 

At the out-shedding of the fount. 

2 Ye cows, protect the fount : the two Mighty Ones bless the 

sacrifice. 

The handles twain are wrought of gold. 

3 Pour on the juice the ornameut which reaches both the heaven 

and earth : 

Supply the liquid to the Bull. 


5 The radiant Calf: Agui in the form of lightning Here : in the sky 
bove us. The Mother : the cloud, which will praise him with a tliunder-psalm. 

7 2'hc seven : officiating priests, or assistants. See If. 1, 2 A single cow : 
be text has only 6lcdni (unam). Sftyana supplies, cow, which hn explains as the 
harma^ pitcher or caldron used for heating milk, etc., in the Piavargya cere* 
lony. Loud-resounding bank : with reference to the saciificial exclamations, 
ttered by the officiating priests. The two : the Adhvaryii and the Pratipras- 
biitar.his Assistant, direct the five others in the performance of the ceremony. 

8 Entreated by Vivasvdn's ten: according to Slyana, tlie ten ^fingers of the 
i^orshipper. Ten pi iests are probably meant. Indra : Agui or Aditya may be 
[leant.— Silyana. The water-jar • the rainy cloud. Hammer : meaning, pro- 
bably, the zigzag lightning. Sdyana explains it by rasmind, with his ray. 

10 The fount : avatdm : the gharma or mahdvtra, the contents of which are 
>oured into the fire. Its wheel: apparently, the circular liin on which it 
[anally stands and which is now inverted that all the liquid may flow out. 
iccoiding to Hillebraudt {Vedlsehe Mythologies I. 325) the fount is the Moon. 

12 The two Mighty Ones : Heaven and Earth. But as the meaning of 
'^pskid is unknown, the sentence can be only conjectural ly translated : ‘ (The 
wo kinds of milk) in the sacrifice are plentiful and fruit-giving.’— Wilson. 

13 The ornatnent : the milk which is mingled with the Soma. To the Bull: 
'0 Agni, 



220 THE UYMNB OF [BOOK VjJi 

14 These know their own abiding-place : like calves beside the 

mother cows 

They meet together with their kin. 

15 Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food 

in heaven, 

To Indra, Agni light and prayer. 

16 Tho Pious One milked out rich food, sustenance dealt in po^- 

tions seven, 

Together with the Sun’s seven rays. 

17 1 took some Soma when the Sun rose up, 0 Mitra, Varuna. 
That 18 the sick man’s mediciuo. 

18 From where oblations must be laid, which is the VVell-belov^Jil’!} 

home, 

Ho With his tongue hath compassed heaven, 

HYMN LXII. Asvin«. 

House ye for him who keeps the Law, yoke your steeds, 
Asvins, to your car : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

2 Come, Asvins, with your car more swift than is the twinkling 
• of an eye : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

3 Asvins, ye overlaid with cold the fiery pit for Atri’s sake : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

4 Where are ye? whither are yo gone? whither, like falcons, 

have ye flown ? 

Let your protecting help be near. 

5 If ye at any time this doy arc listening to this my call, 

Let your protecting help bo near. 

6 The Asvins, first to hear our prayer, for closest kinship I 

appioach : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

7 For Atri ye, 0 Asvins, made a dwelling-place to shield him well. 
Let your protecting help be near. 


14 These know: the cows know, and coine to, the phice where they are to 
be milked foi saciificial purposes as well as they know their own stable. 

3 5 DevoHviiKj : peihaps the flames ; but the stanza is obscure. 

16 The Pious One : Ai^ni. Dealt in portions sevtn ; one for each priest. ^ 
18 This Well- beloved's home: ‘ the place wliich I, the eager offerer, choose* 
— Wilson. Haryatdt ‘the well-belovfed,’ is perhaps the Soma. 


1 Who keeps the Law : which enjoins sacrifice. The Rishi means himself. 
3 For Atri' 8 »ake : see 1. 116. 8. 



THE mGVEBA. 


221 


YMN 620 

j Ye warded off the fervent heat for Atri when he sweetly spake : 
Let your protectin'^ help be near. 

) Krst Saptavadhri by his prayer obtained the trenchant edge 
of fire ; 

Let your protecting help be near. 

) Come hither, 0 ye Lords of wealth, and listen to this call of 
mine : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

1 What is this praise told forth of 3^11 as Elders in the ancient 
way 1 

Let your protecting help be near. 

] One common brotherhood is yours, Asvins, your kindred is the 
same : 

Let your piMtecting help be near. 

] This is your chariot, Asvius, which speeds through the regions, 
earth and heaven : 

Let your protecting aid bo near. 

1 .'Ipproach ye hitherward to us with thousands both of steeds 
and kiiie : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

) Pass us not by, remember us with thousands both of kine 
and steeds ; 

Let your protecting help be near. 

G The purple tinted Dawn hath risen, and true to Law hath made 
the light : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

I He looked upon the Asvins, as an axe-armed man upon a tree : 
Let your protecting help be near. 

B By the black band encompassed round, break it down, bold 
one, like a fort. 

Let your protecting help be near. 

9 Saptavadhri ■ see V. 78, 6. His rele:ise seems to have beeu effected by 
ia[)loying fire. But soo Myiiantheus, Die Ai^rins, pp. 88, 90. 

II ‘ Wby is this (repeated invocation) addieased to you as if you were 
^erepit like old men ? ’ — Wilson. 

12 One comiYion brotherhood : as twin children of the consort of VivasvAn, 
lie Sun. 

17 Tho meaning is obscure. ‘ Asvins, the splendidly-brilliant (sun cleaves 
daikness) as the woodman with his axe a tree.’— Wilson. ‘ He [the demon] 

^oked at the Asvins.’ — Grassmaun. 

18 The first line is said by SAyana to be addressed to Saptavadbri. It 
to e-epre-^s self-encouragement before an attack upon a DAsa enemy. 

ut see Myriantheus, Die Alvins, p. 90. 



222 


THE HYMNB OP 


[BOOK Vlli 


HYMN LXIIL Agtti, 

Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify 
in speech 

Agni your dear familiar Friend, the darling Guest in everj 
home. 

2 Whom, served with sacrificial oil like Mitra, men presenting giftj 
Eulogize with their songs of praise ; 

3 Much-lauded Jatavedas, him who bears oblations up to heaven 

Prepared in service of the Gods. 

4 To noblest Agni, Friend of man, best Vritra-slayer, are we come, 
Him in whose presence Rikslia’s son, mighty Srutarvan, waxea 

great ; 

5 To deathless Jatavedas, meet for praise, adored with sacred oil 
Visible through the gloom of night ; 

6 Even Agni whom these priestly men worship with sacrificia 

gifts, 

With lifted ladles offering them. 

7 0 Agni, this our newest hymn hath been addressed from us t( 

thee, 

0 cheerful Guest, w'ell-born, most wise, worker of wonders, 
ne’er deceived. 

8 Agni, may it be dear to thee, most grateful, and exceedinj 

sweet : 

Grow mightier, eulogized therewith. 

9 Splendid with splendours may it be, and in the battle wit! 

the foe 

Add loftier glory to thy fame. 

10 Steed, cow, a lord of heroes, bright like Indra, who shall fi! 

the car, 

Whose higii renown ye celebrate, and people praise each glo 
rious deed. 

11 Thou whom Gopavana made glad with song, 0 Agni Angiras, 
Hear this rny call, thou Holy One. 

12 Thou whom the priestly folk implore to aid the gathering c 

the spoil, 

Such be thou in the fight with foes, 

1 I follow Ludwig in bis interpretation of this stanza, the construction o 
which is difficult. 

2 Like Mitra : or as a friend ; or like the Sun. — Sftyana. 

10 Steed, cow: there is no verb to govern these accusatives. Perhaps, 1* 
it, that is, the hymn, give, may be understood. SAyane explains cov 
by gantdrartiy goer. ‘ (Worship) ye men, the bright (Agni) who goes 
horse and fills our chariots (with spoil),’ — Wilson. 



THE RIGYEDA. 


m 


13 I, called to him who reels with joy, Srutarvan, Riksha’s son, 

shall stroke 

The heads of four presented steeds, like the long wool of fleecy 
rams. 

14 Four coursers with a splendid car, Savistha^s horses, fleet of foot, 
Shall bring me to the sacred feast, as flying steeds brought 

Tugra’s son. 

15 The very truth do I declare to theo, Parushni, mighty flood. 
Waters ! no man is there who gives more Lorbos than Savish- 

tha gives. 

HYMN LXIV. Agni. 

Yoke, Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who beat invite the Gods : 
As ancient Herald seat thyself. 

2 And, God, as skilfullest of all, call for us hitherward the Gods : 
Give all our wishes sure effect. 

3 For thou, Most Youthful, Son of Strength, thou to whom 

sacrifice is paid, 

Art holy, faithful to the Law. 

4 This Agni, Lord of wealth and spoil hundredfold, thousand- 

fold, k head 

And chief of riches and a Sage. 

5 As craftsmen bewd the felly, so bend at our general call : come 

nigh, 

Angiras, to the sacrihoe. 

6 Now, 0 Virupa, rouse for him, Strong God who shines at early 

morn, 

Fair praise with voice that ceases not. 

7 With missile of this Agni, his who looks afar, will we lay low 
The thief in combat for the kine. 

8 Let not the Companies of Gods fail us, like Dawns that float 

away, 

Like cows who leavo the niggardly. 


14 Turjra's son: Bhujyu. See Vol. I., Index. 

15 Parushnt: now the liavi, the river on whose bank Srutarvan offered 

tiij sacrifice. 

1 Ancient Herald ; or, chief Invoker. 

fi Vinlpa : the Rishi of the hymn who addresses himself. Who shines at 
early morn: or, aspiring lieavenward. 

7 The thief: the hymn is a prayer for aid in an expedition for the recovery 

stolen cattle. 

8 Like Dawns that float away : Mike cows that bathe them in the stream,' 

according to the explanation given in the St. Petersburg Lexicon. Like cows 
who leave the ninanrdbi • ‘tb* kinA nhaiidnn not a little Wilson. 



224 THE HYMNS OF [SOOK VlJi 

9 Let not the sinful tyranny of any fiercely-hating foe 
Smite us, as billows smite a ship. 

10 0 Agui, God, the people sing reverent praise to thee for 

strength : 

With terrors trouble tliou the foe. 

11 Wilt thou not, Agni, lend us aid in winning cattle, winniuo 

weal til 1 

Maker of room, make room for us. 

12 In this great battle cast us not aside as one who bears a load : 
Snatch up the wealth and win it all. 

13 0 Agni, let this plague pursue and fright another and not us: 
Make our impetuous strength more strong. 

14 Tho reverent or unwearied man whose holy labour he aceepti?, 
Him Agui favours with success. 

15 Abaudoning the foemau’s host pass hither to this company : 
Assist the men with whom I stand. 

16 As we have known thy gracious lielp, as of a Father, long ag^, 
So now we pray to thee for bliss. 

HYMN LXV. 

Not to forsake me, 1 invoke this Tndra girt b/ Maruts, Lord 
Of magic power who rules with might, 

2 This Iiidra with his Marut Friends clarc into pieces Vritra’s 

head 

With hundred knotted thnnderholt. 

3 Tndra, with Manit Friends, grown strong, hath rent asunder 

Vritra, and 

lleleased the waters of the sea. 

4 This is that Tndra who, begirt by Maruts, won tho light of 

heaven 

That he might drink tho Soma juice. 

5 Mighty, impetuous, begirt by Maruts, him who Toudly roars, 
Tndra we invocate with songs. 

6 Tndra begirt by Maruts we invoke after the ancient plan, 

That he may drink tho Soma juice. 

7 0 liberal Tndra, Marut-girt, much-lauded Satakratu, drink 
The Soma at this sacrifice. 

8 To thee, 0 Indra, Marut-girt, these Soma juices, Thunderer! 
Are offered from the heart with lauds. 


3 Of the sea : of the firmament or ocean of air. 



66.1 TffE RiaVEDA, m 

9 Diiiik, Iiidra, with thy Marut Friends, pressed Soma at the 
morning rites, 

Wlietting thy thunderbolt with strength, 

10 Arising in thy might, thy jaws thon ahookest, Indra, having 

quatfed 

The Soma which the mortar pressed. 

11 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy 

feaiful roar, 

What time thou smoteat Dasyus dead. 

12 From Indra have I meusured out a song eight-footed with nine 

parts, 

Delicate, faithful to the Law. 

HYMN LXVI. Indra. 

Scarcely was Sata\ratu born when of his Mother he inquired, 
Who are the niigiity 1 Who are famed 1 

2 Then Savasi declared to him Aurnavabha, Ahisuva : 

Son, these be they thou must o'erthrow, 

3 The Vritra-slayer smote them all as spokes are hammered in- 

to naves : 

The Dasyu-killer waxed in might. 

4 Then Indra at a single draught drank the contents of thirty 

pails, 

Pails that wore filled with Soma juice. 

5 Indra in groundless realms of space pierced the Gandharva 

through, that he 

Might make the Brahmans’ strength increase. 

11 Complained to thee : in terror. When uttering thg fearful roar : the 
coeAning of kraUhamdnum, rendered thud coujeoturdlly, id uncertain. 

12 Eight-footed with nine parts: the hymn conaidta of triplets, each of 

which contains nine Pddad, p.irts or half-lines, of eight feet or syllabled each. 
That id, the metre is octosyllabic (8 x .3), and the triplet con tains three atanzaa 
in that metre, or nine octodyliabic Piidas. From Indra ; originating in him 
as its subject or inspirer. Faithful to tlte Law: closely connected with 
Bscrifice, ^ 

1 Cp. VIII. 45. 4. 

2 ^avasi: or, the Mighty One, Indra’s Mother. Aurnavdbha: or Ornav^bha’s 
*on. See Vlll. 32. 26. Then: and other fiends, as these, is plural. 

4 Pails: or bowls ; literally, lakes. The memingof the word IcdnuMvi 
fliis stanza is uncertain. It appears to be an adjective qualifying sardnti 
pads or lakes. See note in Wilson’s Translation. 

5 The Oandharva : a lieavenly being who dwells In the region of the air 
and guards the celestial Soma, that is, the rain. See I. 22. 14, and 163. 2. 
According to S&yana, the Gandharva is the rain-cloud itself, which Indra shat- 
^f^d, and so released the fertilizing water. 



22<3 THE HYMNS OP {BOOK VlU 

6 Down from the mountains Indra shot hither his woll-directcc 

shaft : 

He gained the ready brew of lico. 

7 One only is that shaft of thiiio, with thousand feathei’s, hand 

red barbs, 

Which, Indra, thou hast made thy friend. 

8 Strong the llibhus at thy birth, therewith to those wli< 

praise tiiee, men 

And women, bring thou food to eat. 

9 By thee these exploits were achieved, the mightiest deed^ 

abundantly : 

Firm in Ihy heart thou softest them. 

10 All these things Vishnu brought, the Lord of ample strid 

whom thou hadst sent — 

A hundred burta!a;s, a brew of rice and milk : and Indr, 
slew the ravening l)oar. 

11 Most deadly is thy bow, successful, fashioned well ; good] 

thin 3 a’ row, decked with gold. 

Warlike and well equipped thine arms are, which incrciis 
siweoLiioss for him who drinks the sv\eet. 

HYMN LXVll. lu.tn 

Buing us a thousand, Indra, as our guerdon for the Soin 
juice ; 

Hiindieds of kine, 0 Hero, bring. 

2 Bring cattle, bring us ornament, bring us embellishment [w 
steeds, 

Give us, besides, twm rings of gold. 


6 The 'html.irlv explained by S.iy.ina. Iirlra siii'jte the rain fryr 

the cloud'', and obtained food for men. 

7 One on!'/ : Indra alone is the wielder of the thunderbolt. 

10 All these thin<js : the hutlaloea or drirk cloud, and the lice and milk t 
fertilizing lain. Slew: the veibis supplied by SA) ana. The ravening lw(o 
Viitra. (If. I. 61 7. wheie tlie deed is sitnilaily related. 8ee Prof. A. A. 
donell, Journal R. A. Society, 189.5, p. 186. 

11 Which increase sweetness for hvn who drinks the sweet : this is Ludwig 
interpretation of two very difficult words which mean according to Wiifinn 
Translation, ‘ destructively overthrowing, dosti uctively piercing;’ accordin 

to the St. Peter.■^bu^g Le.xicoii, ‘ like two bees delighting in sweetness an 

according to Grassinaiin, ‘ sweetness loves thy two lips.’ 

1 A thousand: cows, understood. 

2 Two rings: the meaning of here is somewhat uncertain, 

Muller, India, Wfud can it Teach us ^ pp 125, 126 ; Weber, Episohen irn 
chen Ritual, p. 30 ; and Ziuuuer, Altindischcs Lcben, pp. 50, 51, 



TffE RIG VEDA. 


227 


iW cs.] 


3 And, Bold One, bring in ample store rich jewels to adorn the ear, 
For thou, Good Lord, art far renowned. 

4 None other is there for the priest, Hero ! but thou, to give 

him gifts. 

To win much spoil and prosper him. 

5 Indra can never be brought low, Sakra can never be subdued: 
He heareth and beholdeth all. 

6 He spieth out the wrath of man, he who can never be deceived ; 
Ere blame can come he marketh it. 

7 Ho hath his stomach full of might, the Vritra-slayer, Conqueror, 
The Soma-drinker, ordering all. 

8 In thee all treasures are combined, Soma ! all blessed things 

in thee, 

Uninjured, easy to bestow. 

9 To thee speeds forth my hoi)C that craves the gift of corn, and 

kinc and gold, 

Yea, craving horses, speeds to thee. 

0 fiuirn, through hope in thee alone even this sickle do I grasp. 
Fill my hand, Maghavan, with all that it can hold of barley 
cut or gatiiered up. 

lIYxMN LXVIII. Soma. 

Tins here is Soma, ne’er restrained, active, all-conquering, 
iiursting forth, 

Risln and Sage by sapience. 

2 All that is bare he covers o’er, all that is sick he medicines: 
The blind man sees, the cripple walks. 

3 Thou, Soma, givest wide defence against the hate of alien men, 
Hatreds that waste and weaken us. 

4 'riiou by thine insight and thy skill. Impetuous One, from 

heaven and eaith 
Brivest the sinner’s enmity. 

When to their task they come with zeal, may they obtain the 
Giver’s grace, 

And satisfy his wish wht thirsts. 

5 Norna .• here Raid to mean Indra himself. 

‘ It would appear as if the field were a barren one and the poet sought 
roin hidra a harvest which he had not sown.’ — Wilson. 

^ Jinvsting forth : according to Silya^a, causing (fruit) to spring forth. 

* ^mpetuoua One : rijUhin : according to Slyana, ‘ possessed of the raniaiii* 
of the Soma juice offered in the third auvuna.’ 

: the priests. The Qivefi : bountiful Indra 's. Mia wish ; Indra’f 
onging for Soma- libations. 



238 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vll 

6 So may he find what erst was lost, so may be speed the pioo 

man, 

And lengthen bis remaining life. 

7 Gracious, displaying tender love, unconquered, gentle in th 

thoughts, 

Be sweet, 0 Soma, to our heart. 

8 0 Soma, terrify us not; strike us not with alarm, 0 King : 
Wound not our heart with dazzling flame. 

9 When in my dwelling-place I see the wicked enemies of Godf 
King, chase their hatred far away, thou Bouuteous One 

dispel our foes. 

HYMN LXIX. Indn 

0 Satakratu, truly I have made none else my Comforter. 
Ineira, be gracious unto us. 

2 Thou who hast ever aided us kindly of old to win the spoil, 
As such, 0 Indra, favour us. 

3 What now % As prompter of the poor thou helpost him wli 

sheds the juice. 

Wdt thou not, Indra, strengthen us? 

4 0 Indra, help our chariot on, yea, Thunderer, though it la 

behind ; 

Give this my car the foremost place. 

5 Ho there ! why sittest thou at ease ? Make thou my charit 

to be first : 

And bring the fame of victory near. 

6 Assist our car that seeks the prize. What can be easier f( 

thee ? 

So make thou us victorious. 

7 Indra, be firm : a fort art thou. To thine appointed plai 

proceeds 

Tho auspicious hymn in season due. 

8 Let not our portion be disgrace. Broad is the course, the pri 

is set, 

The barriers are opened wide. 

9 This thing we wish, that thou mayst take thy fourth, tl 
sacrificial ifame. 

So art thou held to be our Lord. 

9 The wicked enemies : or, the enmities ; that is, when I see that the Gc 

are"displea:«ed with me. 

4 The hymn is a prayer for success in a coming chariot race. 

' 7 To thine appointed place: *to thee the repeller (of enemies).’ — Wilson. 

9 Thy fquHh, thy tacHficial mme : the other three, according to S4yana,« 
the constellation-name, the secret name, and the revealed name. 



TffS RtOVEDA. 


m 


niMS 71.] 

10 Ekadyu hath exalted you, Iinmortala : both Goddesses and 
Gods hath he delighted. 

Bestow upon him bounty meet for praises. May he, enriched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 

HYMN LXX. Indra. 

Indra, God of the mighty arm, gather for us with thy right 
hand 

Manifold and nutritious spoil. 

2 We know thee mighty in thy deeds, of mighty bounty, mighty 

wealth, 

Mighty in measure, prompt to aid. 

3 Hero, when thou art fain to give, neither may Gods nor 

mortal men 

Restrain thee like a fearful Bull, 

4 Come, let us glorify Indra, Lord supreme of wealth, Self- 

ruling King : 

In bounty may he harm us not. 

5 Let prelude sound and following chant : so let him hear the 

Satnan sung, 

And with his bounty answer us. 

6 0 Indra, with thy right hand bring, and with thy left remem- 

ber us: 

Let us not lose our share of wealth. 

7 Come nigh, 0 Bold One, boldly bring hither the riches of 

the churl 

Who giveth least of all the folk. 

8 Indra, the booty which thou hast with l)oly singers to receive. 
Even that booty win with ns. 

9 Indra, thy swiftly-coming spoil, the booty which rejoices all, 
Sounds quick in concert with our hopes. 

HYMN LXXI. Indra. 

Haste forward to us from afar, or, Vritra slayer, from anear, 
To meet the offering of the meath. 


10 The Qods in general are.the deities of this stanza. EkadyH is the seer of 
the hymn. He, enriched with prayer : India, exalted by our hymn. 

5 Let prelude «ound; prd itoihad tipagdsishat : let the prastotar and thettrf* 
two of the officiating priests at the chanting of a Saraan, discharge their 
functions ; the former singing the prelude and the latter the accompaniment. 

8 Win with us : make us thy allies. 

^ Sounds in concert with our hopes : answers to our expectation. Perhaps 
M Ludwig thinks, the word ‘ sounds ’ refers to the herd of cattle which pro- 
bably cooatituted the spoil tUt ii spoken of. 



230 the hymns op [boos rin, 

2 Strong are the Soma-draiights ; come nigh : the juices fill thes 

with delight : 

Drink boldly even as thou art wont. 

3 Joy, Indra, in the strengthening food : let it content thy wish 

and thought, 

And be delightful to thine heart. 

4 Come to us thou who hast no foe : we call thee down tohymus 

of praise, 

In heaven’s sublirnest realm of light. 

5 This Soma here expressed with stones and dressed with milk 

for thy carouse, 

Indra, is offered up to thee. 

6 Graciously, Indra, hear my call. Come and obtain the draught, 

and sate ’ 

Thyself with juices blent with milk. 

7 The Soma, Indra, which is shed in chalices and vats for thoe, 
Drink thou, fur thou art Lord thereof. 

8 Tlie Soma seen within the vats, as in the flood the Moon is seen, 
Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof. 

9 Tiiat which the Hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, through 

the air to thee, 

Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof. 

HYMN LXXII. Visvedem. 

Wh ohoose unto ourselves that high protection of theMighty Guds 
That it may help and succour us. 

2 May they be ever our allies, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 
Far-seeing Gods who prosper us. 

3 Ye furtherers of holy Law, transport us safe o'er many woes, 
As over water-floods in ships. 

4 Dear wealth bo Aryarnan to us, Varuna dear wealth meet for 

praise ; 

Dear wealth we choose unto ourselves. 

5 For Sovrans of dear wealth are ye, Adityas, not of sinner's 

wealth, 

Ye sapient Gods who slay the foe. 

6 We in our homes, ye Bounteous Ones, and while we journey 

on the road, 

Invoke you, Gods, to prosper ua. 


8 The Moon: in allusion to the double meaning of Soma, the plaut and its 
juice, and the Muon. 

9 The Haxok : see I. 80. 2, and 93 6. 



THE RIGVEDA, 


231 


74 ,] 

! 7 Regard ua, Indra, Vishnu, here, ye Asvius and the Marut host, 
Us wlio nre kith and kin to you. 

S Ye Hounteous Ones, from time of old we here set forth our 
brotherhood, 

Our kinship in the Mother’s womb. 

9 Then come with Indra for your chief, at early day, ye Boun- 
teous Gods : 

Yea, I address you now for this. 

HYMN LXXIII. Agni. 

Agni, your dearest Guest, I laud, him wlio is loving as a friend, 
Who brings us riches like a car. 

2 Wiioin as a far-foreseeing Sage the Gods have, from the olden 

time, 

ICstablished among mortal men. 

3 Do thou, Most Youthful God, protect the men who offer, hear 

their songs, 

And of thyself preserve their seed. 

4 What is the praise wherewith, 0 God, Angiraa, Agni, Son of 

Strength, 

Wc, after thine own wish and thought, 

5 M.iy serve thee, 0 thou Child of Power, and with what sacri- 

fice’s plan 1 

What prayer shall I now speak to thee ? 

6 Our God. make all of us to dwell in liappy habitations, and 
Reward our songs with sjHiil and wealth. 

7 Lord of the house, what plenty fills the songs wliich thou ins- 

pi rest now, 

Thou whose hymn helps to win the kine? 

8 Him Wise and Strong they glorify, the foremost Champion in 

tlie fray, 

And miglity in his dwelling-place. 

9 Agni, he dwells in rest and peace who smites and no one smites 

again : 

With hero sons he prospers well. 

HYMN LXXIV. Asvin*. 

To this mine invocation, 0 ye Asvius, ye Nasatyas, come. 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

S In the, Motker'i womb : as couimou children of Aditi the General Mother 
hU living beings 

3 And of thmlf preserve their .eed : or, and guard our oftspring and oui selves. 
^ Ec: the faiihful worshipper. 



382 THEHYMNS OF {BOOK Vlll 

2 This laud of mine, ye Asvins Twain, and thi» mine invitation 

hear, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

3 Here Krishna is invoking you, 0 Asviiis, Lords of ample wealth, 
To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

4 Lidt, Heroes, to the singer’s call, the call of Krishna lauding 

you. 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

6 Chiefs, to the sage who sings your praise grant an inviolable 
home, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

6 Come to the worshipper’s abode, Asvins, who here is lauding 

you. 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

7 Yoke to the firmly jointed car the ass which draws you. Lords 

of wealth, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

8 Come hither, Asvins, on your cur of triple form with triple seat, 
To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

9 0 Asvins, 0 Nasatyas, now accept with favoining grace my 

songs, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

HYMN LXXV. A«Tini. 

Ye Twain are wondrous strong, well-skilled in arts that heal, 
both bringers of delight, ye both won Dakslm’s praise. 
Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not 
off our friendship, come and set me free. 

2 How shall he praise you now who is distraught in mind? Ye 
Twain give wisdom for the gain of what is good. 

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not 
off onr friendship, come and set me free. 

5 To drink : so that ye may drink. 

7 The asjt: cf. I. 34. 9 ; 116. 2 ; and 1C2 21. 

8 Of triple form with triple seat: see I. 34. 2, 9. 

The Rishi is Visvaka son of Krishna. 

\ Daksha' 8 praise : on the occasion mentioned in I. 116. 2 ; or when the 
Asvins won SuryA for their bride, I. 116. 17. To save his life: according to 
SAyana, ‘for the sake of his son ’ Come and set me free: ‘ flying loose (your 
reins and gallop hither).’ — Wilson. ‘Unyoke your horses.’ — Grassmann. 

2 Distraught in mind : referring either to Visvaka himself, or the man for 
whom he invokes the Asvins’ aid. According to SAyapa, YiniauAb (distraught 
in mind) here ia the name of a Rishi 



76.1 THE RIGVEDA. 

3 Already have ye Twain, poseessors of great wealth, prospered 

Vishnapu thus for gain of what is good. 

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not 
olF our friendship, come and set me free. 

4 And that Impetuous Hero, winner of the spoil, though he is 

far away, we cmU to succour ns, 

Whose gracious favour, like a father’s, is most sweet. Break 
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

5 About the holy Law toils Savitar the God i the horn of holy 

Law hath he spread far and wide. 

The holy Law hath quelled even mighty men of war.^ Break 
ye not otf our friendship, come and set me free. 

HYMN LXXVI. Asvins. 

Splendid, 0 Asvins, is your praise. Come, fountain-like, to 
pour the stream. 

Of the sweet juice effused — dear is it, Chiefs, in heaven — drink 
like two wild bulls at a pool. 

2 Drink the libation rich in sweets, 0 Asvins Twain : sit, Heroes, 

on the sacred grass. 

Do ye with joyful heart in the abode of man preserve his life 
by means of wealth. 

3 The Priyamedhasbidyou come with all thesnccoursthatareyonrs, 
Como to his house whose holy grass is trimmed, to dear sacri- 
fice at the moruiug rites. 

4 Drink ye the Soma rich in meath, ye Asvins Twain : sit gladly 

on the sacred grass. 

So, waxen mighty, to oui eulogy from heaven come ye as wild- 
bulls to the pool. 

5 Come to us, Oye Asvins, now with steeds of many a varied hue, 
Ye Lords of splendour, wondrous, borne on paths of gold, 

drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. 

6 For we the priestly singers, fain to hymn your praise, invoke 

yon for the gain of strength. 

So, wondrous, fair, and famed for great deeds come to us, 
^roiigh our hymn, Asvins, when ye hear, 

3 Vishnt^pil .• tiiQ Uishi’s son or grandison. 

4 That Impetuous Hern : Indra. ‘ These two verses,’ says Qrassmann, ' are 
taken from another hymn. Verse 5 is addressed to Savitar, and verse 4, as 
Jt appears, to Indra. The refrain, which is altogether unsuitable here, has 

added in order to connect the verses with the preceding hymn.' 

L- ^ .* gharmiLm: tbs heated milk or pthw )?«y«rage, or the vessel 

it is heated. 

* : Priyamedha and his family, 



*84 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VJli 

HYMN LXXVII. Indr&. 

As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with onr songs we 
glorify 

This Indra, even your Wondrous God who checks attack, who 
joys in the delicions juice. 

2 Celestial, l>oiinteou8 (iiver, girt about with might, rich, mouiv 

tain-like, in precious things, 

Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, brought 
hundredfold and thousandfold. 

3 Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar thy way. 
None stay that act of thine when tliou wouldst fain give 

wealth to one like me w'ho sings thy piaise. 

4 A Warrior thou by strength, wisdom, and wondrous deed, in 

might excel lest all that is. 

Hither may this our hymn attract thee to our help, the hymn 
which Gotamas have made. 

6 For in thy might thou strctchest out beyond the boundaries 
of heaven. 

The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. After thy 
Godhead hast thou waxed. 

6 When, Maghavan, thou honourest the worshipper, no one is 
there to stay thy wealth. 

Most liberal Giver thou, do tlmu inspire our song of praise, 
that we may win the spoil. 

HYMN LXXVIII. Indra. 

To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts! that slaysthe Vritras best, 
Whereby the Holy Ones created for the God the light divine 
that ever wakes. 

2 Indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, and then in 

splendour came to ns. 

Indra, refulgent with thy Marut host ! the Gods strove eagerly 
to win thy 1 »ve. 

3 Sing to your lofty Indra, sing, Maruts, a holy hymn of piaise. 
Let Satakratu, Vritra-slaycr, kill the foe with hundred-knotted 

thunderbolt. 

1 As cows: the cows who are milked for saciificial purposes, whose cahe! 
are shut up during the ceremony _ . / t. 

6 The earthly reyion : the rajas region, middle air, or fiimament is 
ly divided into two, one half belonging to the earth and the other to the 
See Wallis, Cosmology of the Miyveda, pp. 114, 115. 

I Maruts: here meaning the singers of the hymn of praise. ‘ 

Wilson. The light divine : the Suu, which the Visvedevaa generated or cjeai 
for Indra. 



THE ElQVETiA, 


235 


4 Mm and fetch boldly forth, 0 thou whose heart is bold : great 

glory will be thine thereby. 

In rapid torrent let the mother waters spread. Slay Vritra, win 
the light of heaven. 

5 When thou, unequalled Maghavan, waat born to smite the 

Vritras dead, 

Thou spreadest out the spacious earth and didst support and 
prop the heavens. 

6 Then was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, and song 

of joy, 

Thou in thy might surpasses! all, all that now is and yet 
shall be. 

7 Raw kine thou filledst with ripe milk. Thou madcst Surya 

rise to heaven. 

Heat him as milk is heated with pure Sama hymns, great joy 
to him who loves the song. 

HYMN LXXIX. Indra. 

May Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, be near to us. 
May the most mighty Vritra-slayer, meet for praise, come t® 
libations and to hymns. 

2 Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gifts, true art 

thou, lordly in thine act. 

We claim alliance with the very Glorious One, yea, with the 
Mighty Son of Strength. 

3 Prayers unsurpassed are offered up to thee the Lover of the 

Song. 

Indra, Lord of Bay Steeds, accept these fitting hymns, hymns 
which we have thought out for thoe. 

4 For thou, 0 Maghavan, art truthful, ne’er subdued, and 

bringest many a Yritra low\ 

As such, 0 Mightiest Lord, Wielder of Thunder, send wealth 
hither to the worsliipper. 


7 Raw kine: cf I. 62 9 ; 180 3 ; II. 40. 2 ; IV 3 9 ; VI. 72. 4 ; 17. 6 ; 44. 

; Vril, 32, 25, Thou madest rise to heaven : Sriyaiia relates a legend that 
■^lien the Panis had carried off the cows of the Angirases and placed them in a 
iJiouiitaiu enveloped in darkness, Indra, at the pmyer of the R'shis, set the 
in heaven in order that he might see and recover their cattle. Heat him 
U heated : this line is difficult. ‘ (Prie.sts) excite (Indra) with your 
praibea as men heat the Oharma with iS'dwian-hy inns '—Wilson. Oharma 
itteana either the hot milk or other bevei age offered in the Pravargya cere* 
inony, or the vessel in which it is he.ated Great joy to him who torei the song: 

perhaps the meaning is, the Brihat*S4raan (one of the mo.>it impoitant Sama 
qmuSj the first and second veises of R. V. VI 46), is dear to him who loves 
flung. • 

3 Pitting hymns : y6jand : see Wilson's Translation and note. 



fas ^YMNS OP 




[BOOR VUi 


6 0 Indra, thou art far-renowned, impetuous, 0 Lord of Strengtli. 
Alone thou slayost with the guardian of mankind resistless 
liever-conquered foes. 

6 As such we seek thee now, 0 Asura, thee most wise, craving 
thy bounty as our share. 

Thy sheltering defence is like a mighty cloak. So may thy 
glories reach to us. 

HYMN LXXX. Indra. 

Down to the stream a maiden came, and found the Soma by 
the way. 

Bearing it to her home she said, For Indra will I press thee 
out, for Sakra will I press thee out 

2 Thou roaming yonder, little man, beholding every house in 

turn. 

Drink thou this Soma pressed with teeth, accompanied witli 
grain and curds, with cake of meal and song of praise. 

3 Fain would we learn to know thee well, nor yet cart wo attair 

to thee. 

Still slowly and in gradual drops, 0 Indu, unto Indra flow. 

4 Will he not help and work for us? Will he not make ui 

wealthier ? 

Shall we not, hostile to our lord, unite ourselves to Indra now 

5 0 Indra, cause to sprout again three places, these which 

declare, — ■ 

My father's head, his cultured field, and this the part belo\ 
my waist. 

6 Make all of these grow crops of hair, yon cultivated field o 

ours, 

My body, and my father’s head. 

7 Cleansing Apala, Indra ! thrice, thou gavest sunlike skin t 

her. 

Drawn, Satakratu ! through the hole of car, of wagon, and c 
yoke. 

5 The fjuardian of mankind : Iiulr.i's thunderbolt with which he slays tb 

demons of drought _ ^ 

The Tlishi is ApAld of the family of Ati i. 

1 A m iiden : Apdld 

2 Little man : vtrakah: according to Sdyaua, hero. Indra is intende* 
perhaps as Surya the Suu-Qod. 

3 Indu : Soma. ^ ^ 

4 He: Indra. Hostile to our lord : Apdit, it ia said, was afflicted with 
cutaneous disease and was consequently repudiated by her husband. 

7 Sunlike : bright and clear. ‘ Sftyapa saya that Indra dragged her throng 
the wide hole of his chariot, the narrower hole of the cart and the small ho 
of the yoke; and aheoaat off three skitM. The first skin becftme a hedgeh^ 



jYM!^ 81.] THE ItlOVEDA, 957 

HYMN LXXXI. Indr*. 

Invite ye Indra with a song to drink your draught of Soma 
juice, 

All-conquering Satakratu, most munificent of all who live. 

2 Lauded by many, much-invoked, leader of song, renowned 

of old : 

His name is Indra, tell it forth. 

3 Indra the Dancer be to us the giver of abundant strength : 

May he, the mighty, bring it near. 

4 Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshipping 

Siidaksha’s draught, 

The Soma juice with barley mixt. 

6 Call Indra loudly with your songs of praise to drink the Soma 
juice, 

For this is what augments his strength. 

6 When )ie hath drunk its gladdening drops the God with 

vigour of a God 

Hath far surpassed all things that are. 

7 Thou speedest down to succour ua this ever-oonqueriug God 

of yours, 

Him who is drawn to all our songs; 

8 The Warrior not to be restrained, the Soma-drinker ne’er 

o’erthrown. 

The Chieftain of resistless might. 

9 0 Indra, send us riches, thou Omniscient, worthy of our 

praise : 

Help us in the decisive fray. 

tile second au alligator, the third a chameleon. 1 auppoae, with Prof. Aufrecht, 
tliab the hole or space of the chariot and cait represents the opening between 
the four wheels ; the hole of the yoke seems to me to mean the opening 
through which the animal’s head passed, corresponding to Homer’s ^tvyXri, 
II. 19. 406.’— Cowell. 

For the legend from the Bifthmana, founded on the hints con- 

tained in this hymn and repeated by Sdyana in his Commentary, see also 
Wilson’s Ti-anslation, Vol, V. 

Frof. Aufrecht has published the text and commentary of this hymn in 
^^isc/ie Studien, IV. p. 1 aqq. See Muller’s llig-veda Samhitft, Vol. III., 
2ud edition, p. 33 sqq. 

3 The Dancer : active in battle, dancer of the war dance. Near : ahhijnii : 
oi*} up to our knees. 

4 Sudaksha'e draught : oflFered by a Rishi of that name. 

7 According to S4yapa this ptanza is addressed by the Yajamdna or sacri- 
“cer to the Stotar or praising priest, he gives an imperative sense to the 
indicative, thou speedest down ; ‘ Bring hither.’— Wilson. 



238 


TUE HYMNS OF 


[BOON Vln, 

10 Even thence, 0 Indra, come to ua with food that gives a 

hundred powers, 

With food that gives a thousand powers. 

11 We sought tlie wisdom of the wise. Sakra, Kine-giver, 

Thunder-armed ! 

May we with steeds o’ercome in fight. 

12 We make thee, S.itakratu, find enjoyment in the songs we sing, 
Like cattle in the pasture lands. 

13 For, Satakratn, Thunder-armed, all that we craved, as men 

are w<nit., 

All that we hoped, have we attained. 

14 Those, Son of Strength, are come to thee who cherish wishes 

in their hearts : 

0 Indra, none cxcelletli theo. 

15 So, Hero, guard us with thy care, with thy most liberal 

providence, 

Speedy, and terrible to foes. 

IG 0 Satakratu fiidra, now rejoice wdtii that carouse of thine 
Wliich is most splendid of them all; 

17 Even, Indra, that carouse wliich slays the Vritras best, most 

widely famed, 

Best giver of thy power and might. 

18 For that which is thy gift we know, true Soma-drinker, 

Thunder-armed, 

Mighty One, amid all the folk. 

19 For Indra, Lover of Carouse, loud be our songs about the 

juice : 

Let poets sing the song of praise. 

20 We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all glories rest, 

in whom 

Tlio seven communities rejoice. 

21 At the Tnkadrnkas the Gods span sacrifice that stirs the 

mind : 

Let our songs aid and prosper it. 

10 Even thence: from where thou art ; from heaven. 

11 Of the wise: Indra. Kine-giver: godare : perhaps, ‘burster open 
the cew-stall ‘ cleaver of mountains.’— Wilson 

12 Like cattle : as the cowherd refreshes his cattle — SAyana. 

18 Thy gift : the wealth which thou givest. Amid all the folk : among ah 
the worshippers who offer thee Soma. — SAyana. 

20 Seven communities : sapta sanmilah : probably = all the folk, in stanza 
18; ‘ the seven associated priests.’ — Wilson. 

21 At the Trikadrukat : see Vlll. 13. 18, and note. 



f/MN 82.] THE RIG VEDA. 239 

2 Let the drops pass within thee as the rivers flow into the sea : 

0 Iiidra, naught excelleth thee. 

3 Thou, wakeful Hero, by thy might hast taken food of Soma 

juice, 

Which, Iiidra, is within thee now. 

4 0 India, Vritra-slayer, let Soma bo ready for thy maw, 

The drops be ready for thy forms. 

5 Now Srutukaksha sings his song that cattle and the steed may 

come, 

Tliat Indra’s very self may come. 

IG Here, Indra, thou art ready by our Soma juices shed for thee, 
Sakra, at hand that thou mayst give. 

7 Kven from far away our songs reach thee, 0 Caster of the 
Stone : 

Miy we come very close to thee. 

S For so thou art the hero’s Fiieud, a Hero, too, art thou, and 
stioug : 

So may thine heart be vvon to us. 

9 So hath the offering, wealthiest Lord, been paid by all the 

worshippers : 

So dwell then, Indra, even with me. 

10 He not thou like a slothful priest, 0 Lord of spoil and wealth : 

rejoice 

111 the pressed Soma blent with milk. 

1 0 Indra, let not ill designs surround us in the sunbeams' light ; - 
'riiis may we gain with thee for Friend. 

•2 With thee to help us, Indra, let us answer all our enemies : 

For thou art ours and we are thine. 

ludra, the poets and thy friends, faithful to thee, shall loudly sing 
Thy praises as tliey follow thee, 

HYMN LXXXII. Lidra. 

SuRYA, thou mountcot up to meet the Hero famous for hia 
wealth, 

Who hurls the bolt and works for man : 

2 Him who with might of both his arms brake nine-and*ninety 

castles down, 

Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead. 

forms : thy various bodies or splendours. — Sdyana. 

-■0 Srutakahsha : the Rishi of the hymn. 

PrieM: brahmt : Brahman or praying priest. 

I II the sunbeams' light: as Indra stands in the closest relationship to 

•‘Q bun, , 

2 ^^ine-and-ninety castles : cloud-castles of the demon Sambara. 



TBS BYUNS OP 


S40 


[BOOK nil, 




3 This Indra is our gracious Frieud. He sends us in a full 

broad stream 

Riches in horses, kine, and corn. 

4 Whatever, Vritra-slayer ! thou, Sarya, hast risen upon to-day 
That, liidra, all is in thy power. 

5 When, Mighty One, Lord of the brave, thou thinkest thug, 

I shall not die. 

That thought of thine is true indeed. 

6 Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma libations shed for thee. 
Both far away and near at hand. 

7 We make this Indra very strong tostrike the mighty Vritra dead; 
A vigorous Hero shall he be. 

8 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o’er the joyous 

draught. 

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song. 

9 By song as ’twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry 

was prepared : 

Lofty, invincible he grew. 

10 Indra, Song-lover, lauded, make even in the wilds fairways for U8, 
Whenever, Maghavan, thou wilt. 

11 Thou whose commandment and behest of sovran sway nono 

disregards. 

Neither audacious man nor God. 

12 And both these Goddesses, Earth, Heaven, Lord of the beau- 

teous helm ! revere 
Thy might which no one may resist. 

13 Thou in the black cows and the red and in the cows with spot- 

ted skin 

This white milk hast deposited. 

14 When in their terror all the Gods shrank from the Dragon’s 

furious might, 

Fear of the monster fell on them. 

15 Then ho was my Defender, then, Invincible, whose foe is not 
The Vritra-slayer showed his might. 

16 Him your best Vritra-slayer, him the famous Champion oi 

mankind 

I urge to great munificence, 

8 W<u made : was created by PrajApati. — SAyana. 

12 Lord of the heautwm helm : or, * deity of the haudsomo jaw.’ — Wilson. 

13 In the black cows: cf I. 62. 9. 

14 The Dragon' s furious might : the fierce attack of the demon Ahi. ^ 
the monster : or, of the wild beast, Ahi. 

16 Champion: 1 joinprd to sardham^ as suggested in the St Petersburg 



TIIU MGVEDA. 


241 


laYiL'f 82 ] 

17 Tocomc, Miiuli-laiuled! Many-named! with this same thought 

that longs for milk, 

Whouc’cr the Soma juice is shed. 

18 Much- honoured by libations, may the Vritra-slayer wake for us : 
May Sakra listen to our prayers. 

19 0 Hero, with what aid dost thou delight us, with what suc- 

cour bring 

niches to those who worship thee 1 

20 With whose libation joys the Strong, the Hero with his team 

who quells 

The foe, to drink the Sqma juice? 

21 Ihqoicing in thy spirit bring tliousandfold opulence to us : 
Eiiricli thy votary with gifts. 

22 I’liose juices with tlieir wedded wives How to enjoyment lov- 

iiigly : 

To waters speeds the restless one. 

23 Presented strengthening gifts have sent Indra away at sacri- 

lice, 

With might, unto the cleansing bath. 

21 These two who share his feast, Hiy Steeds with golden manes, 
sliall bring bim to 
The banquet that is laid for bim. 

2j For thee, 0 Lord of Light, are shed these Soma-drops, and 
grass is strewn : 

Bring Indra to his worshippers. 

% Miy Indra give thee skill and lights of heaven, wealth to his 
votary 

And priests who praise him : laud ye him. 

27 0 Satakratu, wondrous strength and all our lauds I bring to 
thee : 

Be gracious to thy worshippers. 


17 Tacoine: that is, that thou, Tndra, mayst come. This abrupt change 
P'M’mju Kj not uiicoiniuou in the Veila. 

c jonia juices are sahl to be the two waters 

^ and ehulhaiidh, used in the Soiua cereinonies. To enjoy- 

<h'unk by IiiUra. To waten »pmh the restless one : or, with Gra«iS- 
lanii, ^ rho lover of the waters speeds ’ The exact meaning of aiehunipnndh 
to Y.iska deriving it from eham, to eat, .and Mahidhara fimn chup^ 

Schu'r^^f *^^eve slowly, The meaning of the sentence is, according to the 
to f concludn\g puriticatory ceremony which is 

tlirow^^^' *tn<l omissions in the principal •^acriftce, the stale Soma is 

og waters. See CowelTs note in Wilson’s Translation, 

in \vl hath: the avahkritha, here, apparently, the bath or vessel 

I the Soiua plants were riused and purified. 



242 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlii, 

28 Bring to us all things excellent, 0 Satakratu, food and strength; 
For, Iiulra, thou art kind to us. 

29 0 Satakratu, bring to us all blessings, all felicity : 

For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

30 Bearing the Soma juice we call, best Vritra-slayer, unto thec: 
For, Indra, thou urt kind to us. 

31 Come, Lord of rapturous joys, to our libation with thy Buy 

Steeds, come 

To our libation with thy Steeds. 

32 Known as best Vritia-slayer cist, as Indra Satakratu, come 
With Bay Steeds to the juice we shed. 

33 0 Vritra-slayer, thou art he who drinks these drops of Soma ; 

come 

With Bay Steeds to the juice we shod. 

34 May Indra give, to aid us, wealth handy that rules the Skilful 

Ones : 

Yea, may the Strong give potent wealth. 

HYMN LXXXIII. Marutu. 

The Cow, the famous Motiier of the wealthy Maruts, pourti 
her milk : 

Both horses of the cars are yoked, — 

2 She in whoso bosom all the Gods, and Sun and Moon for men 

to see, 

Maintain their everlasting Laws. 

3 This all the pious sing to us, and sacred poets evermore : 

The Maruts to the Soma-draught ! 

4 Here is the Soma ready pressed : of this the Maruts drink, of 

this 

Self-luminous the Asvins drink. 


34 Handy: ribhum. That rules the Skilful Ones: ribhukshanam. The 
Stromj : vdjt. These words are u^-cd as plays ujaai the namc»3 of the Rithus, 
or as Grassmaim says, (he veise may have bemi tuki'ii from a hymn addressed 
to the Ribhus. ‘ May Indra bring to us tlie bounteous Kibliu Ivibhukthana 
to partake of our sacrificial viands ; may he, the mighty, biiug the mighty 
(VAja).’ — Wilson. Cowe’l remarks : ‘ Itibhuksha. a ws a the eldest and Vdja 
the youngest of the three brotliers. The lUblius have a share in the eveiiing 
Kbation between PrajApati, and Savitri, see Ait. lii.ahm. id. 30. This verse 
is addressed to the Ribhus in the evening libation on the ninth day of the 
DwddasAha ceremony [ib. v. 21).’ 

1 The Cow : Prisni. 

2 In whose bosom: ^in whose presence.’— Wilson. 

Ths Maruts: arc io be invoked, understood. 



THE RIQVEBA. 




2a 


5 Of this, moreover, purified, set in three places, procreant, 
Drink Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman. 

G And Indra, like the Herald Priest, desirous of the milky juice, 
At early morn will quaff thereof. 

7 When have the Princes gleamed and shone through waters as 

through troops of foes? 

When hasten they whose might is pure? 

8 Wiiaft favour do I claim this day of you great Deities, you 

who arc 

Wondrously splendid in yourselves? 

9 I call, to drink the Soma, those Mariits who spread all realms 

of earth 

And luminous regions of the sky. 

LO You, even such, pure iu your might, you, 0 ye Maruts, I in- 
voke 

From heaven to drink this Soma juice. 

11 The Maruts, those who have sustained and propped the 

heavens and earth apart, 

I call to drink this Soma juice. 

12 Tlnit vigorous hand of Manits that abidetli iu the mountains, I 
Invoke to drink this Sorna juice. 

HYMN LXXXIV. India. 

SoNG-LOVBR I like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma 
Hows. 

0 Indra, they have called to thee as mothcr-kine unto their 
calves. 

2 Bright juices hitherward have sped thee, ludra, Lover of the 

Song. 

Drink, Indra, of this flowing sap : iu every lionse 'tis set for thee. 

3 Drink Soma to inspirit thee, juice, Indra, which the Falcon 

brought : 

For thou art King and Sovran Lord of all the families of men. 
I 0 Indra, hear Timschi’s call, the call of him who serveth thee. 
Satisfy him with wealth of kiue and valiant otispriiig : Great 
art thou. 

5 in, three places first iii a trough ; thou iu a stiaiiiiug-clutli ; then in 
fcthiid trough or vessel called PAtubhrit. Procreant: granting progeny to 
the worshipper. 

<5 The Herald Pnest : Agni. * 

^ Like a charioteer : straight and swift to their o\)ject. 

3 mUch the Falcon brought: see 1. 80. 2, and 93. 6. 



w ^ 


244 TUE UYUm OF [BOOK V]li 

5 For he, 0 ludra, hath produced for thee the newest gladden- 

ing song, 

A hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, and full 
of sacred truth. ^ 

6 That Indra will we laud whom songs and hymns of praise have 

magnified. 

Striving to win, wo celebrate his many deeds of hero might. 

7 Como now and let us glorify pure Indni with pure Sama hymn. 
Let the pure milky draught delight him strengthened by pine 

songs of praise. 

8 0 Indra, come thou pure to us, with pure assistance, pure thy- 

self. 

Pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for Soma, puro, 
be glad. 

9 0 Indra, pure, vouchsafo us wealth, and, pure, enrich the 

worshipper. 

Pure, thou dost strike the Vritras dead, and strivest, pure, 
to win the spoil. 

HYMN LXXXV. I, Kira 

For him the Mornings made their courses longer, and Night; 

with pleasant voices spake to Indra. 

For him the Floods stood still, the Seven Mothers, Stream 
easy for the heroes to pass over. 

2 The Darter penetrated, though in trouble, thrice-soven close 

pressed ridges of the mountains. 

Neither might God nor mortal man accomplish what the Stron 
Hero wrongiit in full-grown vigour. 

3 The mightiest force is Iiidra’s bolt of iron when firmly graspc 

ill both the arms of Indra. 

Ills head and moutli have powers that pass all others, and a 
his people hasten near to listen. 

5 Newest ancient • rocciit in form and c.^prosfciiou, but ancient 

Biibstance. See Mnir, 0. S. Texts, lit. 238, 239. 

7 Parc Tmlra with pure S'haa hi/inns : according to Sdyana, ‘ Indra. purifi 
ith pore Saina-hynnw,’ from tbo p(»llution he had incurred by killing t 
lahman Vutra. See Wilnou’!! Translation, note, 

1 The heroes : perhaps Turva^a and Yadn— Ludwig. 

^ The Darter oi the thnndei\)oU ; Indra. Thouijh in trouhle. . bccanso 
had none to aid him. What the thrice-seven close-pressed ridges of theimnuta 
aic, is \incertam See WiLon’s Tr.inalation, note. Ludwig thinks that ' 
battle of the Sun with the demons of winter may be meant. 

3 To lisim : to the commands which issue from Lis mouth. 



TUB niG VEDA. \ 


245 


'0MN 850 

4 I count thee as the Holiest of the Holy, the easter-down of 

what hath ne’er been shaken. 

I count thee as the Banner of the heroes, I count thee as the 
Chief of all men living. 

5 What time, 0 Indra, in thine arms thou tookcst thy wildly 

rushing bolt to slay the Dragon, 

> The mountains roared, the cattle loudly bellowed, the Brah- 
mans with their hymns drew nigh to Indra. 

C Let us praise him who made these worlds and creatures, all 
things that after him sprang into being. 

May we win Mitra with our songs, and Indra, and wait upon 
our Lord with adoration. 

I Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra, all Deities who were 
thy friends forsook thee. 

So, Indra, be thy friendship with the Maruts : in all these 
battles thou shalt be the victor. 

8 ThricO'Sixty Maruts, waxing strong, were with thee, like piles 

of beaming light, worthy of worship. 

We come to thee : grant ns a happy portion. Let us adore 
thy might with this oblation. 

9 A sharpened weapon is the host of Maruts. Who, Indra, dares 

withstand thy bolt of thunder ? 

Weaponless are the Asuras, the godless : scatter them with 
thy wheel, Impetuous Hero. 

10 To him the Strong and Mighty, most auspicious, send up the 

beauteous hymn for sake of cattle. 

Lay on his body many songs for Indra invoked with song, for 
will not he regard them? 

11 To him, the Mighty, who accepts laudation, send forth thy 

thought as by a boat o’er rivers, 

Stir with thy hymn the body of the Famous and Dearest One, 
for will not he regard it 1 

12 Servo him with gifts of thine which Indra welcomes : praise 

A^ith fair praise, invite him with thine homage. 


^ Wildly rmhitig ■ thifl i'^ M M\iUer'ft tranalation of madachyutam. It 
r^iKlor**d also * sped in tliy rapturous joy.’ * llausclibeHchlounigteii.’ — 

7 With the ManUs : as they alone stood by him iu the conflict, 
inr^ ^ ; or sixty-tliree, according to SAyana, nine companies consist- 

hcH each. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Tianslation Like 2Ak8 of 

cows gat)»ered together.’ — Wilson ; ‘ like morning stars.’ 
^wia^stnann. I have foll<>wed Ludwig. 

^ IktiA thy fjoheel : or discus, a sharp-edged quoit usea as a weapon o war. 



246 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK Via 

Draw near, 0 singer, and refrain from outcry. Make thy voice 
heard, for will not ho regard it ? 

13 The Black Drop sank in Ansumati’s bosom, advancing with 

ten thousand round about it. 

Indra with miglit lotiged for it as it panted : the hero-hearted 
laid aside his weapons. 

14 1 saw the Drop in the far distance moving, on the slope bank 

of Ausumati’s river, 

Like a black cloud that sank into the water. Heroes, I send 
you fortli. Go, fight in battle. 

15 And then the Drop in Ansumati^s bosom, splendid with light, 

assumed its proper body ; 

And Indra, with Brihaspati to aid him, concpicred the godless 
tribes that came against him. 

16 Then, at thy birth, thou wast the foeman, Indra, of those the 

seven who ne'er had met a rival. 

The hidden Pair, the Heaven and Earth, thou foundost, and 
to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure. 

17 So, Thunder-armed ! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst 

boldly smite that power which none might equal ; 

With weapons broughtest low the might of Sushna, and, Indra, 
foundest by thy strength the cattle. 

18 Then wast thou, Chieftain of all living mortals, the very 

mighty slayer of the Vritras. 

Then didst thou set the obstructed rivers flowing, and win 
the floods that were enthralled by Dusas. 

19 Most wise is he, rejoicing in libations, splendid as day, resist 

loss in his anger. 

He only doth great deeds, the only Hero, sole Vritra-slayei 
he, with none beside him. 


12 Draw near, 0 singer, and ref rain from outcry : * 0 priest, adorn thysel 
grieve not (for poverty).’ — Wilson. 

13 The Black Drop : tho darkened Moon. Ansumatt: a mystical river q 
the air into which the Moon dips to recover its vanished light. Ten thousand 
probably, demons of darkness ; the numerals are witliout a substantive. Ai « 
panted : while striving against its assiiilants. Laid aside his weapons : afte 
conquering the demons and restoring tho darkened Moon. 

14 Indra addresses the Maruts. 

Sdy ana explains stanzas 13—15 differently, in accordance with a legem 
which was probably suggested by this passage. He takes drapsdh krishruil 
black drop, to raeaii ‘ tho swift moving Krishnah,’ an Asura or demon wh 
with ten thousand of his kind had occupied the banks of tho river Ansuraat 
which, he says, ia the YamuuA or Jumna, and was there defeated by 
Brihaspati, and the Maruts. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. 

16 The seven: Krishna, Vritra, Namuchi, Sambara, and othersi— 



THE RIO VEDA. 


SYM^ 86 .] 


247 


20 Indra is Vritra’s slayer, man’s sustainer : ho must be called; 

with fair praise let us call him. 

Maghavau is our Helper, our Protector, giver of spoil an^ 
wealth to make us famous. 

21 This Iiidra, Vritra-slayer, this Uibhukshan, even at his birth, 

was meet for invocation. 

Doer of many deeds for man’s advantage, like Soma quaffed, 
for friends we must invoke him. 

HYMN LXXXVL Indra. 

0 Indra, Lord of Light, what joys thou broughtest from the 
As liras, 

Prosper therewith, 0 Maghavau, him who lauds that deed, 
and those whose grass is trimmed for tliec. 

2 The unwasting share of steeds and kine which, Indra, thou 

hast fast secured, 

Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives guerdon, 
not unto the churl. 

3 The ritclcss, godless man who sleeps, 0 Indra, his unbroken 

sleep, — 

May ho by following his own devices die. Hide from him 
wealth that nourishes. 

4 Whether, 0 Sakra, thou be far, or, Vi-itra-slayer, near at hand, 
Thence by heaven-reaching songs he who hath pressed the 

juice invites thee with thy long-maned Steeds. 

5 Whether tliou art in heaven’s bright sphere, or in the basin of 

the sea ; 

Whether, chief Vrjtra-slaycr, in some place on earth, or in the 
firmament, approach. 

G Thou Soma-driiiker, Lord of Strength, beside our flowing 
Soma juice 

Delight us with thy bounty rich iu pleasantness, 0 Indra, with 
abundant wealth. 

7 0 Indra, turn us not away : be the companion of our feast. 
For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kill ; 0 ludra, 
turn us not away. 

^ Sit down with us, 0 Indra, sit beside the juice to drink the meath. 
Show forth great favour to the singer, Maghavau ; Indra, with 
us, beside the juice. 


2f I^ibhukihan : or, Lord of Ribhus. • 

1 ; riches, — Sliyaua. From, the A suras : from the powerful RAkehasas* 

2 (Jives guerdon: liberally rewards the priests. 



THE HYMNS OF 


243 


[BOOK FIJI 


9 0 Caster of tlie Stone, nor Gods nor mortals have attained to 
thee. 

Thou in thy might surpassest all that liath been made : tljc 
Cods have not attained to thee. 

10 Of one accord they made and formed for kingship India, the 

Hero who in all encounters overcoincth, 

Most eminent for power, destro3"er in the conflict, fierce and 
exceeding strong, stalwart and full of vigour. 

11 Bards joined in song to India so that he might drink the 

Soma juice, 

The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid 
with power and with the help he gives. 

12 The hol)^ sages form a ring, looking and singing to the Bam 
Inciters, full of vigour, not to be deceived, are with the chant 

ers, nigh to hear. 

13 Loudly' I call that Indra, Maghavan the Mighty, who cverinor 

possesses power, ever resistless. 

Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, Thundei 
armed, make all our -jiathways pleasant for us. 

14 Thou knowest Avell, 0 Sakra, thou Most Potent, with th 

strength, Indra, to destroy tlieso castles. 

Before thee, Thuiider-armeil ! all lieings tremble : the heaven 
and eurth iicfore thee shako with terror. 

15 May thy truth, Indra, Wondrous Hero! be my guard : boo 

me o’er much woe, Thunderer ' ns over floods. 

When, Indra, wilt thou honour us Avith opulence, all-nouriHl 
ing and much-to-be-desired, 0 King? 

HYMN LXXXVIL Indr, 

'I’o Indra sing a Sama hymn, a lofty song to Lofty Sage, 

To him who guards the Law, inspired, and fain for praise. 

3 Thou, Indra, art the Compicror : thou gavest splendour I 
the Sun. 

Maker of all things, thou art Mighty and All-Cod. 

3 Kadiant with light thou wontest to the sky, the luniiiun 

realm of heaven. 

The Deitie.s, Indra, strove to win thcc for their Friend. 

4 Come unto us, O Indra, denr, stdl conquering, unconcealabl 
Vast as a mount. on spre.id on all sides, Lord of Heaven. 

12 The Rdm : Tq^dra. Sec I. 61. 1, aud YllI 2, 40. Inciters: apptvrentl 
the Ooda theinaelvea. 


2 All -God: visr'tdernh : * the lord of all tlio goda,’ — Wilson. 
4 UiiConcealable : as the Sun-Uod. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


m 


llYM^I 88 .] 

§ 0 truthful Soma-drinkor, thou art mightier than both the 
worlds. 

Thou strengtheneat him who poiir.s libation, Lord of Heaven. 

6 For thou art he, 0 Indra, who stormeth all castles of the foe? 
Slayer of Dasyus, man’s Snj>p(»rter, Lord of Heaven. 

7 Kow have wo, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great wishes 

forth to time, 

Coming like floods that follow floods. 

8 As rivers swell the ocean, so, Hero, our prayers increase tliy might, 
Though of thyself, 0 Thunderer, waxing day by day. 

9 With holy song they bind to the broad wide-yoked car the Bay 

vSteeda of the rapid God, 

Bearers of Indra, yoked by word. 

10 0 Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu, 

thou most active, bring 
A hero conqueiing in war. 

11 For, gracious Satakratu, thou hast ever been a Mother and a 

Sire to us, 

So now for bliss wc pray to tlice. 

12 To thee, Strong, Much-invoked, who showest forth thy strength, 

0 Satakratu, do I speak : 

So grant thou us heroic strength. 

HYMN LXXXVTIL Indra. 

0 THUNDERER, zcalous wovshippcTs gave thee drink this time 
yesteiday. 

S ), Indra, listen here to those who bring the laud : come near 
unto our dwelling-place. 

3 Lord of B ly Steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee : tliis wo crave. 
Here the disposers wait on tlieo. 

Thy loftiest glories claim our lauds beside the juice, 0 Indra, 
Lover of the Song. 

3 Turning, as ’twore, to meet the Sun, enjoy from Indra all good 
things. 

Wlicn he who will bo born is born with power wc look to trea- 
sures as oiir heiitagc. 

7 Coin iiig hi, c floods : m crowds lint the half-line i.s very obscure. ‘As 
aien going by water (,spla.s]i their fiicud.s) with handfuF.’ — WiFoii. 

10 hero : an heroic won. 

2 Disposers ; the priests who order religious ceremonies. 

' stanz-i is difficult and ob-^cure. Mahtdh.ara’s explanation is : ‘The 
pthering (rays) proceeding to the sun distribute all Iiidra's treasures (to 
'''ing being..,, sc, as rain, corn, etc.) ; may wc too by our power leave tlioso 
I’^asures as an inheritance to him who has been or will be born,’ See Co^Yc•ll’9 
m Wilson’s Translatiou. 



250 THE nr Mm of [BOOK VJJI 

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whoso bounties injure none 

good are the gifts which Indra grants. 

He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns hi 
mind to giving boons. 

5 Thou in tliy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands. 
Father art thoii, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, tho 

victor of the vanquisher. 

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might, i 

to their calf two rnother-cows. 

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands shrink ai 
faint, Indra, at thy wiath. 

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and none m 

shoot at him, 

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’s unvi 
quished Stiengthener ; 

8 Arranger of things unarrangcd, e’en Satakratu, source 

might, 

Indru, tho Friend of all, for succour we invoke, Guardiai 
treasure, sending wealth. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra. 

I MOVE before thee here present in person, and all tho Dei 
follow behind me. 

When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with mo t 
shalt perform heroic actions. 

2 Tho food of mcath in foremost place I give thee, thy S 

shall be pressed, thy share appointed. 

Thou on my right sh.ilt be my friend and comrade : - 
shall we two smite dead full many a foeman. 

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a trut 

hymn if he in truth cxisteth. 

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath be 
him ? Whom then shall we honour ? 


6 As to their caff: or the traiiHldtion may be, aa sire and mother to 
child. 

7 Tugrya ia Bhujyu, the son of Togra. See Vol. I , Index. 

8 Arranger of things unarranged : ‘ the conaecrator of othera but h 
eouaecrated by none.’ — Wilaon. 

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni. 

2 Indra answers. 

3 Addressed to tho priests. One and another : nSma ; but accord 
SAyaua, Nema is the name of tho lltahi. 'Ncma says, “verily there 
Indra.” ’—Wilson. 



THE RIOTED A. 


YMN 89.] 


m 


t Here am I, look upon mo here, 0 slngor. All that cxistcth I 
surpass in greatness. 

The Holy Law’s commandments make me mighty. Rending 
with strength I rend the worlds asunder. 

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me as I sate 
lone upon the dear sky’s summit, 

Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My friends have 
cried unto me with their children. 

; All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-fcasts, wrought, 
Indra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice, 

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought 
from far away to Sarabha, the Kishi’s kin. 

Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept 
you back. 

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vritra’s vital 
part 1 

! On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he 
pressed : 

The Falcon wont to heaven and brought the Soma to tho 
Thunderer. 

) Deep in tho ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round 
about. 

And in continuous onward flow tho floods their tribute bring 
to it. 

) When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vak, 
Queen of Gods, tho Gladdcncr, was seated, 

Tho heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now 
whither hath her noblest portion vanished? 


4 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. 

6 The Law's lovers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According 
Hillebrandt (F, Mytholoyie^ L 354), the Maruts ; siaumaiitah meaning not 
vith their children,’ but ‘ with the Infant (Bom.i).’ 

6 The priest addresses Indra. S(7'abha: a llishi of that name. — Sftyana, 
^0 origin.il hymn appears to end with this stanza. 

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’s battle witli Vritra. 

^ -Tfc; the Falcon. The iron fort: the stronghold or cloud in which tho 
or ambrosial rain was imprisoned. Cf. IV. 27. 2 

5 In the ocean ; as produced naturally in tho sea of air. 

^9 This and the following stanza havo no apparent connexion with what 
recedes. Vdk : or Vdeh, vox, voice, or Speech personifietl. Her unintel- 
51 e Words are the thunder. Jler mbleat portion : according to Sdyana, the 
i)w follows thunder. Or tho thunder itself may be intended. 800 
® 8 note in Wilson’s Translatioiu lFa« seated : at tho sncrilico offwed 



250 Tm HYMNS OP [BOOK nil 

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whoso bounties injure none 

good are the gifts which Indra grants. 

Ho is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns hi 
mind to giving lioons. 

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands. 
Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the cuise, tho 

victor of the vanquisher. 

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might, 

to tlieir calf two mother-cows. 

When thou attackest Vntra all tho hostile bands shrink ai 
faint, Indra, at thy wrath. 

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and none no 

shoot at him, 

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’s uiiv 
quished Stiengthcncr ; 

8 Arranger of things unarrauged, e’en Satakratu, source 

might, 

Indra, the Friend of all, for succour we invoke, Guardiai 
treasure, sending wealth. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra. 

I MOVE before thee here present in person, and all the Dei 
follow behind me. 

When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with mo t 
shalt perform heroic actions. 

2 Tho food of mcath in foremost place I give thee, thy S 

shall be pressed, thy share appointed. 

Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade : I 
shall wc two smite dead full many a foeman. 

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a trut 

hymn if he in truth existeth. 

Olio and another .say, There is no Indra. Who hath be 
him ? Whom then shall we honour 1 


6 As to their calf: or the tran.slatiun may be, as ftiro and mother to 
child. 

7 Tugrya is Bhujyu, the aon of Tugra. See Vol. I , Index. 

8 Arranger of things unarranged : ‘ the couaecrator of olliers but b 
consecrated by none.' — Wilaon. 

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni. 

2 Indra answers. 

3 Addreased to tho priests. One and another : nStna ; but accord 
SAyaua, Nema is the name of the Rishi. ‘ Noma says, “ verily there 
Indra.” ’ — Wilson. 



TUB RIOVEDA, 


•YHN 89.] 




( Hero am I, look upon mo here, 0 singer. All that cxistcth I 

surpass in greatness. 

The Holy Law’s commandments make mo mighty. Rending 
with strength I rend the worlds asunder. 

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached mo as I sato 
lone upon the dear sky’s summit, 

Then spake my spirit to tho heart within me, My friends have 
cried unto me with their children. 

5 All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-feasts, wrought, 
ludra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice, 

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought 
from far away to Sarabha, the Rishi’s kin. 

I Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept 
you back. 

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vritra’s vital 
part ? 

3 Oii-rushing with tho speed of thought within the iron fort he 
pressed : 

Tiie Falcon wont to heaven and brought tho Soma to the 
Thunderer. 

9 Deep in tho ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round 
about, 

And in continuous onward flow the floods their tribute bring 
to it. 

0 When, uttering words which no ono comprehended, Vak, 
Queen of Gods, the Gladdcner, was seated, 

The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now 
whither hath her noblest portion vanished? 


1 Indra Bpeaks this and tho following stanza. 

5 The Law’s lovers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According 
i> Hillebraiidt {V. Mytholoyic, 1, 3.^4), the Maruts ; shumantah meaning nob 
tlieir children,’ but ‘ with the Infant (Som.i).’ 

1 6 Tho priest addresses Indra. Strabha: a Uishi of that narae.~S4yana. 
ho origin, il liyniu appears to end .vith this stanza. 

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after ludra’s battle with Vritra. 

® tho Falcon. The Iron fori: the stronghold or cloud in which tho 
nnia or ambrosial rain was imprisoned. Cf. IV. 27. 2 

® fa the ocean ; as produced naturally in the sea of air. 

This and the follow ing stanza h.ave no api>arent cminexion with what 
tecedus. Vdk; or V^ch, vox, voice, or Spe«mh per.souifiod. Her unintel- 
’ ^^ords are the thunder. Her nobleat portion : according to SAyana, the 
w 'll’ f^^lowa thunder. Or the thunder itself may be intcinlod. See 
^ 8 note in Wilson’s Translation, Was tented ; at the sacrifice offered 



252 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Viii 

11 The Deities generated Vak the Goddess, and animals of every 

figure s])cak her. 

May she, the Gladdencr, yielding food and vigour, the Milch- 
cow Vak, approach us meetly lauded. 

12 Sicp forth with wider stride, my comrade Vislinu; make room 

Dyaus, for the leaping of the lightning. 

Let us slay Vi’itra, let us free the rivers : let them flow loosed 
at the command of Indra. 

HYMN XC. Various. 

Yea, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service of the 
Gods, 

Who quickly hath brought near ^litra and Varuna to share 
his sacrificiid gifts. 

2 Supreme in sovran power, far-sighted, Chiefs and Kings, most 

swift to hear fiom far away, 

Both, wondrously, set them in motion as with arms, in com 
pany with Surya’s beams. 

3 The rapid messenger who runs before yon, Mitra-Varuna, witl 

iron head, swift to the draught, 

4 He whom no man may question, none may summon back, wh( 

stands not still for colloquy, — 

From hostile clash with him keep ye us safe this day; kco] 
us ill safety with your arms. 

5 To Aryaman and Mitra sing a reverent song, 0 pious one, 

A pleasant hymn that shall protect to Varuna : sing forth 
laud unto the Kings. 

6 The true, Red Treasure they have sent, one only Son born ( 

the Tliree, 

They, the Immortal Ones, never deceived, survey the familic 
of mortal men. 

7 My songs are lifted up, and acts most splendid are to be pei 

formed. 

Come hither, ye Nasatyas, with accordant mind, to meet an 
to enjoy my gifts. 


11 Speak her : ai ticuUtely-speakiug men and lower animals all derive the 
voices from her. 

12 This stanza, which is out t»f place here, is spoken by Indra when he 
about to attack Viitra. See IV. 18 11 

3 The rapid messenger : the lightning, as one of the forms of Agni. 

0 The true, Red Treasure: the Sun. The Three: heaven, mid-air, and ead 



THE RIQVEDA. 


258 


nYMN 90.] 

g Lords of great wealth, when we invoke your bounty which no 
demon checks, 

Both of you, furthering our eastward-offered praise, come, Chiefs 
whom Jamadagui lauds ! 

9 Come, Vayu, drawn by fair hymns, to our sacrifice that reaches 

heaven. 

Poured on the middle of the straining-cloth, and cooked, this 
bright drink hath been offered thee. 

10 He comes by straightest paths, as ministering Priest, to taste 

the sacrificial gifts. 

Then, Lord of harnessed teams 1 drink of the twofold draught, 
bright Soma mingled with the milk. 

11 Verily, Siirya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great. 

As thou art groat indeed, thy greatness is admired : yea, verily, 

thou, God, art great. 

12 Yea, Surya, thou art great in fame : thou evermore, 0 God, 

art great. 

Thou by thy greatness art tho Gods' High Priest, divine, far- 
spread unooiHiuerable light. 

13 She yonder, bonding lowly down, clothed in red hues and rich 

in rays, 

Is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, amid the ten 
surrounding arms. 

li Past and gone are three mortal generations: the fourth and 
last into the Sun hath entered. 

He mid tho worlds his lofty place hath taken. Into green 
plants is gone the Purifying. 

15 The Rmlras’ Mother, Daughter of tho Vasus, centre of nectar, 
tho Adityas’ Sister — 

To folk who understand will I proclaim it— injure not Aditl, 
the Cow, the sinless. 

She yorulcr: Uehas or Dawu. The ten sarroiinding arms: the tea 
'' 0^10118 of the woi Id. 

Three mortal generations : .T''Cordin£; to tho legentl, Prajrlpati produced 
in siiocesHion three kinds of cicaturcs who ail died. The fourth generation 
I'^ed and enjo 3 ^ed the liglit and warmth of the Sun. See Ci»weU a note in 
Wilsdn’s Translation, or Ih 5. 1. 1 — 4. Into green plants : 

explains haritah as the quarters of the sky, and pdi'anuhioK (the Puri- 
fj nig) as Ytlyu or the Wind. Grassmaiui takes jKiraiiofatt/i. to he the Soma, 
and haritah to be tho horses of the Sun I have followed Ludwig’s inter- 
pi’ctcition ; but I find the stanza almost uuiulelligihle. 

In Centre of nectar: or, of ainiit. or immortality, or tho world of the 
fniuiortal Gods. The Cow; the earthly cow, as the type of Aditi or universal 
N.duio, must not be offended. The stauza ia spoken by the priest who has 
received tho Of^w n,« hi» I'fiward. 



TBE OF 


m 


[BOOK Vll\ 


16 Weak-minded men have as a cow adopted me who came liithe 
from the Gods, a Goddess, 

Who, skilled in eloquence, her voice upliftoth, who standetl 
near at hand with all devotions. 


HYMN XGI. 


Agni 


Lord of the house, Sage, ever young, high power of life, ( 
Agni, God, 

Thou givest to thy worshipper. 

2 So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, Lordo 

spreading light, 

Agni, bring hitherward the Gods. 

3 For, Ever-Youthful One, with thee, best Furtherer, as our ally 
We overcome, to win the spoil. 

4 As Aurva Bhrigu used, as Apnav ina used, I call the pure 
Agni who clothes him with the sea. 

5 I call the Sage who sounds like wind, the Might that lik 

Par j any a roars, 

Agni who clothes him with the sea. 

6 As Savitar’s productive Power, as him who sends down bliss, I cal 
Agni who clothes him with the sea. 


7 Hither, for powerful kinship, I call Agni, him who prospers you 
Most frequent at our solemn rites ; 

8 That through this famed One’s power, he may stand by u 

even as Tvash^r comes 
Unto the forms that must be shaped. 

9 This Agni is the Lord supreme above all glories mid the Gods 
May he come nigh to us with strength. 

10 Here praise ye him the most renowned of all the ministeriii| 

Priests, 

Agni, the Chief at sacrifice ; 

11 Piercing, with purifying flume, enkindled in our homes, mos 

high, 

Swiftest to hear from far away. 


16 Weak-minded men: ‘ Men are too feeble in their intellect to coinprehen 
me in my true form and my real nature ; they can only understand my wort 
in the shape of a cow.’ — See Ludwig, R, V., IV. 245, 246. 

The concluding stanza is simkeii by Aditi as a cow. 

4 Aurva Bhrigu: or, perhap.s, Aurva and Bhrigu. The ancient KIsl 
Aurva is said to have been the grandson of Bhrigu. Apnavdna : anothe 
ancient Ilishi, mentioned in connexion with the Bhrigus and the eailie« 
worship of Agni, in Book IV. 7. 1. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


255 


nuN 91 .] 


2 Sage, laud the Mighty One who wins the epoil of \ictory like 
a steed, 

And, Mitra-like, unites the folk. 

13 Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation-bearer’s sister 
hymns 

Have come to thee before the wind. 

\i The waters find their place in him, for whom tfie threefold 
sacred grass 

Is spread unbound, unlimited. 

15 The station of the Bounteous God hath, through his aid which 

none impair, 

A pleasant aspect like the Sun. 

16 Blazing Avith splendour, Agni, God, through pious gifts of 

sacred oil, 

Bring thou the Gods and worship them. 

17 The Gods as mothers brought thee forth, the Immortal Sage, 

0 Angiras, 

The bearer of our gifts to heaven. 

18 Wise Agni, Gods established thee, the Seer, noblest messenger, 
As bearer of our sacred gifts. 

19 No cow have I to call mine own, no axe at hand wherewith 

to work, 

Yot what is here I bring to thee. 

20 0 Agni, whatsoever bo the fuel that we lay for thee. 

Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God. 

21 That which the white-ant cats away, that over which the 

emmet crawls — 

Way all of this be oil to thee. 

22 When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend 

the song : 

I with the priests have kindled him. 


12 Sage: the piiest is addiessed. 

13 Before the wind : or, in front of the wind, with ^vhich the flame is 
hnneJ. 


_ H • The waters rest in Agni, wl - abides as lightning in the. finnaiuent.’ — 
Note in Wilson’s Translation which I have followed closely in this stjanza. 

, 15 Or, a comma being substituted for the full stop at the end of the preced- 
Ing stanza, and paddm (station) taken as in apposition to 2 >ad dm (place) in 14 : 
llie station of the bounteous : he hath, through his aid which none impair, 
A pleasant aspect like the Sun.’ 

® .A.8piayoga, the Rishi of the hymn, has no cow and no axe to ent wood, 
a^ked in this and the two following stanzas todvspense with the custom- 
1 22 milk, and to accejit such wood as tlie worehifiper can pick up. 

j ^ With his heart • a devout spirit will coinpeu.sute the want of milk and 
prepared fuel. 



256 


[BOOK Vli 


THE HYMNS OF 

HYMN XCII. Agn 

That noblest Fnrtherer hath appeared, to whom men brini 
their holy works. 

Our songs of praise have risen aloft to Agni who was born t 
give the Arya strength. 

2 Agui of Divodasa turned, as ’twerc in majesty, to the C!o(b. 
Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took his staiio 

in the height of heaven. 

3 Him before whom the people shrink when ho performs h 

glorious deeds, 

Him who wins thousands at the worship of the Gods, himscl 
that Agni, serve with songs. 

4 Tlic mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulence, 0 Vas 

he who brings thee gifts. 

Ho, Agni, wins himself a hero singing lauds, yea, one who fee 
a thousand men. 

5 He with the steed wins spoil even in the fenced fort, andgai 

iui|;erishablc fame. 

Ill thee, 0 Lord of wealth, continually we lay all prccio 
offerings to the Gods. 

G To him wlio dealeth out all wealth, who is the cheerful Piii 
of men, 

To him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to A* 
go the songs of praise. 

7 Votaries, lichly-giftod, deck him with their songs, even as t 

steed who draws the car. 

On both, Strong Lord of men ! on child and grandson pc 
the bounties which our nobles give. 

8 Sing forth to him, the Holy, most munificent, sublimo w 

his refulgent glow, 

To Agni, ye Upastutas. 

9 Worshipped with gifts, enkindled, splendid, Maghavan sli 

win himself heroic fame. 

And will not his most newly shown benevolence come to 
with abundant strength 1 


2 Of DivodAsa : whom Divocldsa eypcci.illy worsliipped aud claimed as 
tutelary God. The stanza is obscuie, and my tianslation founded on 
Roth’s interpretation of prd vi vdvrite, which has been accepted by Cowell, n 
be regarded as cunjecturab See Wilson’s Tianslation and note. 

4 A hero: a biave son. 

7 The second line is obscure. ‘ Graceful lord of men, grant wealth tons 
n cliildren and grandchildren.* — Wilson. 

8 Upoitutai : singers so named after the Rishi Upaatuta, See I. 36. 1 



THE RIQVEDA. 


257 


92 .] 

0 priest, prcsser of the juice ! praise now the dearest Guest of 

all our friends, 

Agui, the driver of the cars. 

1 Who, finder-out of treasures open and concealed, bringeth them 

hither, Holy One ; 

Whose waves, as in a cataract, are hard to pass, when he, 
through song, would win him strength. 

2 Let not the nohlo Guest, Agni, be wroth with us; by many a 

man his praise is sung, 

Good Herald, skilled in sacrifice. 

3 0 Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in any way 

with lauds to thee. 

Even the lowly, skilled in rites, with offered gifts, secketh thee 
for the envoy’s task. 

i Friend of the Maruts, Agni, come with Riidras to the Soma- 
drauglit, 

To Sobhari’s fair song of praise, and be thou joyful'in the light. 


10 Priest, prmer of the juice: ds<tva: slotak — S^ana. ‘ Singer of hymns.* 
-Wilfion. 

11 Whose leaves; billowy floodg of flame rushing on like waters falling down 
piecipioe. * Whose (flames), as he hastens to wage the battle by means of our 
iiicrcd rite, are bard to be passed through as waves rushing dow'u a decli- 
iLy.’— Wilson. See also Pischel, Vedische Studien, I. p. 184. Through Sony : 
iifipirii-fid and strengthened by our hymns. 

13 For the envoy's tosh : to bear his oblations to the Gods. 



17 




VALAKHILYA. 


(Book VIII. Hymns 49—59. AT. Muller.) 


HYMN 1. Indra. 

To yoii will I sing Indra’s praise who gives good gifts as well 
we know ; 

The praise of Ma^havan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers 
with wealth thousandfold. 

2 As with a hundred hosts, he rushes boldly on, and for the 

offerer slays his foes. 

As from a moimtaiu flow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts 
who feedeth many a one. 

3 The drops effused, the gladdening draughts, 0 Indra, Lover of 

the Song, 

As waters seek the lake where they are wont to rest, fill thee, 
for bounty, Thunderer. 

4 The matchless draught that strengthens and gives eloquence, 

the sweetest of the meath drink thou. 

That iu thy joy thou mayst scatter thy gifts o’er us, plente- 
ously, even as the dust. 

5 Come quickly to our laud, urged on by Soma-pressers like a 

horse — 

Laud, Godlike Indra, which milch-kine make sweet for thee : 
with Kanva’s sons are gifts for thee. 

6 With homage have we sought thee as a Hero, strong, pre- 

eminent, with unfailing wealth. 

0 Thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its stream, so, 
liidra, flow our songs to thee. 

I If now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth, 
Come thence, high-thoiiglited ! to our sacrifice with the Swift, 
come, Mighty with the Mighty Ones. 

See Book VIII., Hymn XLIX., note. Professor Cowell’s version of these 
^eveo hyinna will be found in Appendix I. of Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V. 

ara indebted to him for some improvements on the version which I had 
pieviously prepaied. 

4 mf ^ huadred hosts : ‘like a weapon with a -hundred edges.'—Cowell. 
uhh _ eloquence : vivdkshanam : from rack ; ‘ swelling,’ (turn vaksh = 

the hoth, and Cowell. Plenteously, even as the dust : the meaning of 
ithene+i The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes dhrtshdd-drishad, 

7 ; ‘just as the mill-stone pours out me^,’— Cowell, 

tc Ciwift and the Mighiu Ones* are Indra’s horses. 



260 THE IIYUm OF [VALAKHILY, 

8 The active, fleet-foot, tawny Coursers that are thine are swi 

to victory, like the Wind, 

Wherewith thou goest round to visit Manus^ seed, wherewit 
all heaven is visible. 

9 Indra, from thee so great we crave prosperity in wealth of kin 
As, Maghavan, thou favouredst Medhyatithi, and, in the figh 

Nipatithi. 

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva, Trasadasyu, and to Paktha ar 
Dasavraja j 

As, Indra, to Gosarya and llijisvan thou vouchsafedst wcall 
in kino and gold. 

HYMN II. ludr 

Sakra I praise, to win his aid, far-famed, exceeding bountifu 
Who gives, as 'tworo in thousands, precious wealth to hi 
who sheds the juice and worships him. 

2 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this Iiidw 

mighty arms in war. 

lie streams on liberal \vorshippers like a hill with sprinji 
when juices poured have gladdened him. 

3 What time the flowing Soma-drops have gladdened with tlu 

taste the Friend, 

Like water, gracious Lord ! were my libations made, like mile 
kino to the worshipper. 

4 To him the peerless, who is calling you to give you aid, for 

flow the drops of pleasant meath. 

The Soma-drops which call ou thee, 0 gracious Lord, ha 
brought thee to our hymns of praise. 

5 He rushes hurrying like a steed to Soma that adorns our ri 
Which hymns make sweet to thee, lover of pleasant food. T 

call to Paura thou dost love. 

6 Praise the strong, grasping Hero, winner of tlie spoil, ruli 

supreme o’er mighty wealth. 

Like a full spring, 0 Thunderer, from thy store hast th 
poured on the worshipper evermore. 

9 Medhijdtitki : a Rishi whose name has frequently occurred. Nijidtit 
mentioned only here and VAlakhilya Hymn 111. 

10 Trasadasjfti : see. Vol. L, Index. Paktha: a favourite of the Afv 
See VIIl. 22 10. Dasavraja : see VIII. 8.20. Oosarya : see VIII. 8. 
JRiJisvan: see Vol. I., Index. 

5 The call to Paura : the invitation to Paura’s house. According to 
Roth paurd means the filler, the satiwfier : ‘ thou approvest the Buuimon 
the satisfying beverage.’ — Cowell. See V. 74. 4, 



THE RIQYELA. 


261 


?mxV 3.] 

7 Now whether thou be far away, or in the heavens, or on the 
earth, 

0 Inclra, mighty-thoughted, harnessing thy Bays, come Lofty 
with the Lofty Ones. 

3 The Bays who draw thy chariot. Steeds who injure none, sur- 
pass the wind’s impetuous strength — 

With whom thou silenccst the enemy of man, with whom thou 
goest round the sky. 

3 0 gracious Hero, may wo learn anew to know thee as thou art : 

As in decisive fight thou holpest Etasa, or Vasa ’gainst 
Dasavraja, 

) As, Maghavan, to Kanva at the sacred feast, to Dirghanitha 
thine home-friend, 

As to Gosarya thou, Stone-darter, gavest wealth, give mo a gold- 
bright stall of kino. 

HYMN IIL ludra. 

As with ^lanu Samvarani, Indra, thou drankcst Soma juice, 

And, Maghavan, with Nipatithi, Medhyatithi, with Pushtigu 
and Srushtigu, — 

3 The son of Pidshadvana was Praskanva’s host, who lay decre- 
pit and forlorn. 

Aided by thee the Rishi Dasyave-vrika strove to obtain thou- 
sands of kino. 

3 Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks not hymns 
of praise, 

Him who observes and knows, inspirer of the sage, him who 
seems eager to enjoy. 

i He unto whom they sang the seven-beaded hymn, three- 
parted, in the loftiest place, 

He sent his thunder down on all these living things, and so 
displayed heroic might. 

7 This stanza is almost a lepetitioii of stanza 7 of Hymn I. 

,9 Etdin: see I. 61. 15. Va^a: mentioned as a favourite of the Asvins in 
• 7. Dasavraja : said in stanza 10 of Hymn I. to have been helped by 

idra. 

10 Dh'ghanUha : Ludwig takes this word to be an adjective qualifying 
adhvard^ ‘ at the saciificial feast of long dviration.’ A gold-bright stall 
f kine : according to Ludwig, a stall graced with bay steeds, would be a 
ettur translation. 

1 Sdmvarani: son of the Vedic Rishi Samvarana. See V. 33. 10. At the 
“d of the stanza, ‘ so drink with us/ is to be understood. 

^ Foiiorn ; rejected and cast ouL by his kindred, Dasyave-vfika : literally, 
® u olf to-tlie-Dusyu, that is, Destroyer of fiends or barbarians. 
seven -headed ; sung by seven neavenly singers, 



262 Tm OF [vliAKmir, 

5 We invocate that Tndra who bestoweth precious things on u* 
Now do we know his newest favour; may we gain a stable tha 

is full of kine. 

6 He whom thou aidest, gracious Lord, to give again, obtait 

great wealth to nourish him. 

We with our Soma ready. Lover of the Song ! call, ludi 
Maghavan, on thee. 

7 Ne’er art thou fruitless, ludra ; ne’er dost thou desert tl 

worsliipper : 

But now, 0 Maghavan, thy bounty as a God is poured fori 
ever more and more. 

8 He w’ho hath overtaken Krivi with his might, and silence 

Sushna with death-bolts, — 

When he supported yonder heaven and spread it out, then fir 
the son of earth was born. 

9 Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, Dasas here I 

long. 

Directly unto thee, the pious Rusama Paviru, is that weall 
brought nigh. 

10 In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song distilli 
oil and rich in sweets. 

Riches have spread among us and heroic strength, with us o 
flowing Soma-drops. 

HYMN IV. I>i^ 

Ab, Sakra, thou withManu called Vivasvan drankest Somajuii 
As, indra, thou didst love the hyrnn by Trita’s side, so d( 
thou joy with Ay a now. 

2 As thou with Matarisvan, Medhya, Prishadhra, hast cheer 

thee, Indra, with pressed juice, 

Drunk Soma with Kijiinas, Syiiinarasmi, by Dasonya’s, Dai 
sipra’s side. 

3 ’Tis he who made the lauds his own and boldly drank i 

Soma juice, 


8 The son of earth : man. ^ 

9 Rusama Paviru : the Uusamas are mentioned in V. 80. 13 15. 
name of Paviru does not occur again. 

1 Vivasvdn : or Vivasvat, was the father of Manu who is generally cal 
Vaivasvata. Ayu : the llishi of the hymn, or the sacrificer. 

2 MdtarUvan: the Rishi of Hymn VI. of the VAlakhilya, Medhy^’ 
Bishi of Hymns V. IX.*and X. Priihadhra: th« Rishi of Hymn VIIL ^ 
marasmi : mentioned, as a favourite of the Asvins, in I. 112. 16. The n 
of Rijunas, Dasonya, and Dasasipra do not occur again in the Rigveda. 



THE E 10 VEDA. 


263 


5 .] 

He to whom Vishnu came striding his three wide steps, as 
Mitra’s statutes ordered it. 

4 In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great deed, 0 

Satakratu, Mighty One ! 

Seeking renown we call thee as the milkers call the cow who 
yields abundant milk. 

5 He is our Sire who gives to us, Great, Mighty, ruling as he wills. 
Unsought, may he the Strong, Rich, Lord of ample wealth, 

give us of horses and of kine. 

6 He to whom thou, Good Lord, givest that he may give increas- 

es wealth that nourishes. 

E)ger for wealth we call on Indra, Lord of wealth, on Sata- 
kratu with our lauds. 

7 Never art thou neglectful: thou guardest both races with thy 

care. 

The call on Indra, fourth Aditya I is thine own. Amrit is 
stablished in the heavens. 

8 The offerer whom thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, liberal 

Magliavan, fuvourest, — 

As at the call of Kanva so, 0 gracious Lord, hear thou our 
songs and eulogy. 

9 Sung is the song of ancient time : to Indra have yc said the 

prayer. 

They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice, poured forth the 
worshipper’s many thouglits. 

10 Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, and both 
the worlds, yea, and the Sun. 

Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the draughts 
of Soma have made Indra glad. 

HYMN V. Indr. 1 , 

As highest of the Maghavans, preeminent among the Bulls, 
Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, Lord of wealth, we 
seek thee, Indra Maghavaii. 

2 Thou who subduedst Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva, waxing daily in 
thy might, 

5 Ruling ai he wills : ‘he who acts as the sovereign.’ — Cowell. 

7 Eoth races : Gods and men. Fourth Aditya: Varuvui, Mitra, and Arya- 
iiiau being the other three. A mrit • ‘ ambrosia.’ — Cowell. 

8 As thou hearest, must be supplied at the beginning of the stanza. 

9 Brihati : verse in the Brihall metre. 

1 ffigh^t ■ or, nearest The Bulls : strong heroes. 

2 AyUf Kutsa, Atithigva ; see 1. 63. 10. 



264 THE HYMNS OF [vllAKHllYi 

As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, t’le 
Satakratu, Lord of Bays. 

3 The pressing-stones shall pour for us the essence of the m.'at 

of all. 

Drops that have been pressed out afar among the folk, an 
those that liave been pressed near us. 

4 Repel all enmities and keep them far away ; let all wi 

treasure for their own. 

Even among SishUs are the stnlks that make thee gla( 
where thou with Soma satest thee, 

5 Come, Indra, very near to us with aids of firmly-based resolve 
Como, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious help, goo 

Kinsman, with good kinsmen, come ! 

6 Bless thou with progeny the chief of men, the lord of hcroe 

victor in the fray. 

Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds and kcc 
their spirits ever pure and bright. 

7 May we be such in battle as arc surest to obtain thy grace : 
With holy offerings and invocations of the Gods, we mcar 

that wo may win the spoil. 

8 Thine, Lord of Bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the spoi 

Still with thy help I seek the fight. 

So, at the raiders’ head, f, craving steeds and kine, unit 
myself with thee alone. 

HYMN VI. Ml 

Indra, the poets with their hymns extol this hero might ( 
thill c : 

They strengthened, loud in song, thy power that droppeth oi 
With hymns the Paiiras came to thee. 

2 Through piety they came to Indra for his aid, they whos 
libations give thcc joy. 

As thou with Krisaand Samvarta hast rejoiced, so, Indra, I 
thou glad with us. 

4 SUlilas: apparently a tiibe of no gre.at importance. Stulls: of tl 
^oriia-plant. 

8 At the raiders* head : at the bead of the band who are going forth to set 
he cattle of their enemies. Von Uoth thinks that matindm should be reatl i 
lead of mathIniXm, and Grassinann translates accordingly, ‘ in Anfang incim 
iitteu,’ * at the beginning of my prayeru.’ 

1 Pauras : ‘ the offerers.' — Cowell. See VAlakhilya, II. 5. 

2 Krim •’ the Uishi of Hymn VII. of the V^lakhilya. Samvarta : 
nentioued elsewhere. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


265 


IYMN 7.] 

3 A'^i'eeing in your spirit, all ye Deities, come nigh to us. 

Vasus and Jdudras shall come near to give us aid, and Mavuta 
listen to our call. 

1 May Pushan, Vishnu, and Sarasvati befriend, and the Soveu 

Streams, this call of mine : 

May Waters, Wind, the Mountains, and the Forest-Lord, and 
Earth give car unto my cry. 

5 Indrr, with thine own bounteous gift, most liberal of the 
Mighty Ones, 

Be our boon benefactor, Vritra-slayer, be our f cast-corn panion 
for our weal. 

S Leader of heroes, Lord of battle, lead thou us to combat, thou 
Most Sapient One. 

High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts and cntcr- 
tainmont of the Cods. 

f Our hopes rest on the Faithful One : in Indra is the people's life. 
0 Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid : make 
j)lenteous food stream forth for us. 

8 Thee would we worship, Indra, with our songs of praise : 0 
Sataknitu, bo thou ouis. 

Pour down u[)on Praskanva bounty vast and firm, exuberant, 
that shall never fail. 

HYMN VIL Praskanva’s Gift. 

Great, verily, is Indra’s might. I have beheld, and hither 
comes 

Thy bounty, Dasyave-vviha ! 

2 A liundred oxen white of hue are shining like the stars in 

heaven. 

So tall, they seem to prop the sky. 

3 Bamboos a hundred, hundred dogs, a hundred skins of beasts 

well- tanned, 

A hundred tufts of Balbaja, four hundred red-hued mares 
are mine. 


4 The Forat Lord: vanasjxiti: the tall timber tree, fiequently meaning the 
Post. 

^ Lchcf actor : or Bhaga, the God who distiibutcs wealth. 

1 ‘Groat is Indra’s power, and the gifts which I have received from thee, 0 
of the Dasyus, can be coinjwred only to his bounty.’ Dasyaye- 
pka, here, is the name, not of the Kishi, but of a heio who in alii moo with 
Kanvas has been victorious in his attack on the hostile barbaiiaus. fcJee 

Voi, III. p. 104. 

t riiilhaja ; a kind of coarse grass (Eleusine Indica), used in religious cere- 
and for other purposes when plaited. 



266 THE HYMNS OP {VALAKBIL^ 

4 Blest by the Gods, K&iiv&yanas ! be ye who spread throuj 

life on life : 

Like horses have ye stridden forth. 

5 Tlien men extolled the team of seven : not yet full-grown j 

fame is great. 

The dark mares rushed along the paths, so that no eye cou 
follow them. 

HYMN VIII. Praskanva’sG: 

Thy bounty, Dasyavc-vrika, exhaiistless hath displayed itscl 
Its fulness is as broad as heaven. 

2 Ten thousand Dasyave-vrika, the son of Putakrata, hath 
From his own wealth bestowed on me. 

3 A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of fleecy shee 
A hundred slaves, and wreaths besides. 

4 There also was a mare led forth, picked out for Putakrat^’s sal 
Not of the horses of the herd. 

5 Observant Agni hath appeared, oblation-bearer with his car, 
Agni with his resplendent flame hath shone on high as shin 

the Sun, hath shone like Siirya in the heavens. 

HYMN IX. Aavi 

Endowed, 0 Gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quick 
with your chariot, 0 ye Holy. 

Come with your mighty powers, 0 ye Nasatyas ; come hith< 
drink ye this the third libation. 

2 The truthful Deities, the Three-and-Thirty, saw you approa 
before the Ever-Truthful. 


1 Kdnv4^an<ts ; desceudants of K.uiva. 

5 The team of seven: ‘ 8iebeiige.-jpa)meP.’— Grassmaiin ; *8eveii-yok 
team.’ — Cowell. But the exact meaning here of is uncertain. V 

Roth thinks that it is probably a pjoper n.ime. Ludwig takes it in the sei 
of a bond of friendship or alliance. The dark mares : there is no substanti 
and ‘mares’ is conjecturally supplied. According to Ludwig, the dark ho 
of the Dasyus conquered by Da-syave-vrika are intended, and the whole stai 
would be more correctly translated ; 

‘Then no more thought they of the great renown of the collective bond. 

The dark tribes rushed along the paths so that no eye could reach to thei 
See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol. V. p. 652. 

2 The son of Pdtahratd : or, more probably, called Pautakrata after I 
father Pdtakratu — Ludwig. 

3 Slaves: dislXn: conquered barbarians. 

4 Picked out: or, adorned. Pdtakratd: the wife of Pdtakratu. 

1 Ndsatyas: ‘ truthful ones.’ — Cowell. See Vol I., Index. 

2 The Three-and-Thirty : or, Turice-Eleven. See 1. 84. 11. ThA Ei 
Truthful : the Sun, whose approach is heralded by the Asvins. 



THE RIGVEDA, 


267 


EYMN 11 .] 

Accepting this our worship and libation, 0 Asvins bright with 
fire, drink ye the Soma. 

3 Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder, — the Bull of 

heaven and earth and air’s mid region ; 

Yea, and your thousand promises in battle, — to all of these 
come near and drink beside us. 

4 Hero is your portion laid for you, ye Holy: come to these 

songs of ours, 0 ye Nasatyas. 

Drink among us the Soma full of sweetness, and with your 
powers assist the man who worships. 

HYMN X. Visvedevas. 

He whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice, 
of one accord, bring hither, 

Who was appointed as a learned Brahman, — what is the sacri- 
ficer’s knowledge of him 1 

2 Kindled in many a spot, still One is Agni; Surya is One 

though high o’er all he shineth. 

Illumining this All, still One is Ushas. That which is One 
hath into All developed. 

3 The chariot bright and radiant, treasure-laden, three-wheeled, 

with easy seat, and lightly rolling, 

Which She of Wondrous Wealth was born to harness, — this 
car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth. 

HYMN XL India- Varuna. 

In offerings poured to you, 0 Indra-Varuna, these shares of 
yours stream forth to glorify your state. 

Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye assist the 
worshipper who sheds the juice. 

2 The waters and tlio plants, 0 Indra-Varuna, had efficacious 

vigour, and attained to might : 

3 The Bull : the Sun, whom, as his heralds and revealera, they may be said 
to have created. Thousand promises : ‘a characteristic periphrasis for the 
Maghavans, or wealthy nobles.’— Ludwig. 

1 The- hymn appears to consist of unconnected fragments, and the purport 
of this stanza is not obvious. 

3 She of Wondrous Weatlh : Ushas or Dawn. PTiw born to harness : or, iw 
Prof. Cowell translates : ‘At whose yoking the Dawn was bom.’ The chariot 
of the Asvins precedes that of the Dawn, 

2 The waters and the plants : used in sacrifice ; the Soma-plants and the 
Water employed in preparing the juice for libation. The meaning of the 
stanza seems to be : although you are far away in the most distant firmament, 

libations have had power to attract you. Regard us only : the godless 
^au is unworthy of your consideration even as an enemy. 



>68 THE RIQ VEDA. [ VALA Kim Ya 

Ye who have gone beyond the path of middle air, — no godlcs 
man is worthy to be called your foe. 

3 True is yonr Kriaa’s word, Indra and Varuna : The seven holj 

voices pour a wave of mcath. 

For their sake, Lords of splendour ! aid the pious man who 
unbewildercd, keeps you ever in his thoughts. 

4 Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their stream 

are the Seven Sisters in the seat of sacrifice. 

These, dropping oil, are yours, 0 Indra-Varuna : with thesi 
enrich with gifts and help the worshipper. 

5 To our great happiness have w’c ascribed to these Two Brigh 

Ones truthfulness, great strength, and majesty. 

0 Lords of splendour, aid us through the Three-times-Seven 
as we pour holy oil, 0 Indra-Varuna. 

6 What ye in time of old, Indra and Varuna, gave Kishis — rc 

velation, thought, and powder of song. 

And places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice, — thesi 
through my spirit’s fervid glow have I beheld. 

7 0 IndraA'aruna, grant to the w'orshippers cheerfulness voii 

of pride, and wealth to nourish them. 

Vouchsafe us food, prosperity, and progeny, and lengthen oir 
our days that wo may see long life. 

3 The seven holi/ voices: t,lio voices of the seven priests or sacred barck 
Ce IX. 103. 3. A wave of meath: ‘a stream of honey.’ — Cowell. 

4 27ie Seven Si.slevs : ‘ feistor-.streams of the Soma.’ — Cowell. 

5 The T hr cc thies- Seven : perhaps the Maruts, thrice-seven being used in 
efinitely for a laiger number con.sibting of troops of seven. See I. 133. 6. 

0 Revelation: srathn: that which was heard (fiotn the beginning) ; saere» 

tiowledge, ‘Fame.’ — Cowell. Places: perliaps, as Ludwig suggests, huinc 
i the world to come, which the wi.se Kishi.s have prepared for thomselvc.s bj 
Bifuiming sacrifice here below. Throxujh xay sjjir it's fervid gloio : tdpnsd 
^cording to (ji a.ssmann and Cowell, thi-s Idpas means ‘ the holy austerities 
f the llishis, and not the sacred fervour of the iscer of the hyoiD. 1 havt 
dlowed Ludwig. 



BOOK THE NINTH, 


HYMN I. Soma PavamAua. 

In sweetest and most gladdening stream flow pure, 0 Soma, 
on thy way, 

Pressed out for Indra, for his drink. 

2 Fieud-queller, Friend of all men, he hath with the wood at- 

tained unto 

• Ills place, his iron-fashioned home. 

3 Be thou best Vritra-slaycr, best grantor of bliss, most liberal : 
Promote our wealthy princes’ gifts. 

4 Flow onward with thy juice unto the banquet of the Mighty 

(lods : 

Flow hither for our strength and fame. 

5 0 TndU; we draw nigh to thee, with this one object day by day : 
To thee alone our prayers arc said. 

6 By means of this eternal fleece may Surya’s Daughter purify 
Thy Soma that is foaming forth. 

7 Ton sister maids of slender form seize him within the press 

and hold 

Him tirmly on the final day. 

8 The virgins send him forth : they blow the skin musician- 

like, and fuse 

The triple foe-repelling meath. 

Nearly all the hymns of this Book are a^hlresscd to the deified Soma juice, 
or to Soma, or Iiidu, the Moon, who as containing tlie celestial nectar, the drink 
of the Clods, is identified with the Soma-plant and its. exhilarating juice. As 
tie Moon-God ponr.3 down his ambrosial rain through the sieve of heaven, ho is 
actlrexfjcd and worshipped as P.ivamAna (Self-Purifying), represented by tho 
juice as it undergoes purification by flowing through the wool which 
'Misefl as a filter or strainer. Sec Muir, 0 S. Texts, V. ‘2.')8 scpi , Hillebrandt, 
^(discKc ^fl|tltnlogk\ I. 38.') .sijq., and M.xx Muller, Chips, IV. 353 — 367. But cf. 
Religion des Veda, 599—612. 

1 Rlow pure : pdvasva: ‘ purify thyself.’- -Ludwig. 

2 With the wood: some woode.i vessel or implement, perhaps the snivel or 
^Ifl'l'ing-spoon. Iron-fashioned home: receptacle that h.)s been hammered or 
(ortned with a tool of dt/as, iron or other metal. It is not clear what vessel is 
lat ended. 

6 Sdrya's Daughter : SiaddhA or Faith. See S itapaiha-Brdhmana, XII. 7. 
3 11 . 

. 7 Ten sister maids : the priest’s fingers. day ; on which the Soma 

effused. 

8 Virgins: the unwedded ores; the fingers. Musician-liJee ■' or, as men 
'|'»w a bagpipe ; but the meaning of hikurdm and tho second half-liue is not 
' ’ They seize it glittering like a water-skiu.’— Wilson. 



270 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK U 

9 Inviolable milch-kine round about him blend, for Indra's driul 

The fresh young Soma with their milk. 

10 In the wild raptures of this draught, Indra slays all th 

Vritras : he, 

The Hero, pours his wealth on us. 

HYMN II. Soma Pavamani 

Soma, flow on, inviting Gods, speed to the purifying cloth : 
Pass into Indra, as a Bull. 

2 As mighty food speed hitherward, Indu, as a most splendi 

Steer : ♦ 

Sit in thy place as one with strength. 

3 The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream of tb 

creative juice : 

The Sage drew waters to himself. 

4 The mighty waters, yea, the floods accompany thee Mighty Oik 
When thou wilt clothe thee with the milk. 

5 The lake is brightened in the floods. Soma, our Friend 

heaven’s prop and stay, 

Falls on the purifying cloth. 

6 The tawny Bull hath bellowed, fair as mighty Mitra to behold 
He shines together with the Sun. 

7 Songs, Indu, active in their might are beautified for thee 

wherewith 

Thou deckest thee for our delight. 

S To thee who givest ample room we pray, to win the joyou 
draught : 

Great are the praises due to thee. 

9 Indu, as Indra’s Friend, on us pour with a stream of sweet 
ness, like 

Parjanya sender of the rain. 

10 Winner of kine, Indu, ait thou, winner of heroes, steeds, an( 
strength : 

Primeval Soul of sacrifice. 


3 The Sage - the Soma. Waters: with which the stalks of the plantar 
sprinkled. 

5 The lake • the Soma juice. 

6 The tawny Bull : ‘ the golden-hued showerer of blessings.' — Wilson. Tb 
strong greenish -yellow Soma juice. Hath bellowed: an exaggerated expressioi 
for the sound made by the juice as it drops, but in keeping with its represent 
ation as a bull. 

9 Like Parjanya: eniiching and blessing us as the rain-cloud fertilizes tb 
ground. 



nWiV 4.] 


TBE RIOT ED A. 


271 


HYMN III. Soma Pavamftna. 

Here present this Immortal God flies, like a bird upon her 
wings, ^ 

To settle in the vats of wood. 

2 This God, made ready with the hymn, runs swiftly through 

the winding ways, 

Inviolable as he flows. 

3 This God while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed for war 

by men ^ 

Devout and skilled in holy songs. 

4 He, like a warrior going forth with heroes, as he flows along 
Is fain to win all precious boons. 

5 This God, as he is flowing on, speeds like a car and gives his gifts : 
He lets his voice be heard of all. 

G Praised by the sacred bards, this God dives into waters, aud 
bestows 

Rich gifts upon the worshipper. 

7 Away he rushes with his stream, across the regions, into* 

heaven, 

And roars as he is flowing on. 

8 While flowing, meet for sacrifice, he hath gone up to heaven 

across 

The regions, irresistible. 

9 After the way of ancient time, this God, pressed out for 

Deities, 

Flows tawny to the straiuiug-cloth. 

10 This Lord of many Holy Laws, even at his birth engendering 
strength, 

Effused, flows onward in a stream. 

HYMN IV. Soma Pavamdna. 

0 Soma flowing on thy way, win thou and conquer high re- 
nown ; 

And make us better than we are. 


1 The vats of wood : dr&tidni : large wooden vessels, tuba or troughs, which 
receive the Sonia juice. 

2 The winding ways: of the wool which forma the strainer.— Ludwig, 
pushes against the enemies,' — Wilson. 

Dives into waters : called maMiivaryaihf with which the stalks of the Soma- 
Plant are sprinkled. 

9 Pressed out for Deities: -the Soma juice being identified with the Amrit 
iiectar, the drink of the Qodb, contained in the Moon. 

" ^ Pttter than we an ; or, happier than are. 



272 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /: 

2 Win thou the light, win heavenly light, and. Soma, all fel 

cities ; 

And make us better than we are. 

3 Win skilful strength and mental power. 0 Soma, drive awa 

our foes ; 

And make us better than we are. 

4 Ye purifiers, purify Soma for Indra, for his drink : 

^Makc thou us bettor than we are. 

5 Give us our portion in the Sun through thine own ment; 

power and aids ; 

And make us better than we are. 

6 Through thine own mental power and aid long may wc loc 

upon the Sun ; 

^fakc thou us better than we are. 

7 Wcll-weaponed Soma, pour to us a stream of riches doubl 

great ; 

And make us better than we arc. 

8 As one victorious, unsubdued in battle pour forth wealth to u 
And make us better than we arc. 

9 By worship, Pavamana ! men have strengthened thee to pro 

the Law : 

Make thou us better than we are. 

ICO Indu, bring us wealth in steeds, manifold, quickening a 
life ; 

And make us better than we are. 

TIYMN V. April 

Enkindled, Pavamana, Lord, sends forth his light on every sid 
In friendly show, the bellowing Bull. 

2 He, Pavamana, Self-produced, speeds onward sharpening hi 

horns : 

He glitters through the firmament. 

3 Brilliant like wealth, adorable, with splendour Pavamair 

shines. 

Mightily with the streams of mcath. 


4 Parijiers : priests whose business is to purify the juice. M<xkc thou: C 
Soma. 

9 To prop the L m ; vidharmani : * for their own upholding.’ — Wilson. 

10 Quickening all life : vi^vdyum: explained by Sdy an a as =»«arv(iytfw 2 wawi 

‘ all-reaching.’ — Wilson. 

In this Apr! hymn atributes of Agni are transferred to Soma Pavam/lna. 

1 Enkindled : sdmiddkah : proi>erly applicable to Agni. The bcllowini 
Bull : ‘ the showerer of blessings, uttering a loud sound.’— Wilson. 

2 Self produced : Tandndpdt ; properly a name of Agni ; here, the Moon. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


273 


rrUN 6 .] 

[ The tawny Pavam5.na, who strews from of old the grass with 

might, 

Is worshipped, God amid the Gods. 

) The golden, the Celestial Doors are lifted with their frames 
on high, 

By Pcivamana glorified. 

i With passion Pavamana longs for the great lofty Pair, well- 
formed, 

Like beauteous maidens, Night and Dawn. 

Both Gods who look on men I call, Celestial Heralds : IndiVs 
Self 

Is Pavamina, yea, the Pull. 

; This, Pavamana’s sacrifice, shall the three beauteous Goddes- 
ses, 

Sarasvat’ and Bharati and Ila, Mighty One, attend. 

1 summon TvaslUar hither, our protector, champion, earliest- 
born, 

Tiidu is ludra, tawny Steer; Pavamina is Prajapati. 

0 Pavamina, with the meath in streams anoint Vanaspati, 

The ever-green, the golden-hued, refulgent, with a thousand 
boughs. 

Come to the consecrating rite of Pavam ina, all ye Gods, — 
Vayu, Sdrya, Brihaspati, ludra, and Agni, in accord. 

HYMN Vr. Soma Pavamina. 

; Soma, flow on with pleasant stream, a Bull devoted to the Gods, 
Our Friend, unto the woollen sieve. 

2 Pour hitherward, as ludra’s Self, Indu, that gladdening 

stream of thine, 

And send us coursers full of strength. 

3 Flow to the filter hitherward, pouring that ancient gladden- 

ing juice, 

Streaming forth power and high renown. 

^ Hither the sparkling drops have flowed, like waters down a 
steep descent : 

They have reached Indra purified. 

The, Celestial Doors : the doors of the hall of sacrifice are here identified 
'^itli the portals of the east through which light conies into the world. See 
I. 3. 5. 

7 Celestial Heralds : seel. 13.8. Indra' s Self : indrah here is explained 
‘y Siyana A^-diptafi ; * radiant.’ — Wilson. 

10 Vanaspati : the sacrificial stake. 

H The consecrating rite: svHhdkriiim : oblation accompanied with the 
'iterance of the sacred formula SvAhA. 

18 



V4 THE HYMNS OF [ BOO K 

b AVbom, having passed the filter, ten dames cleanse, as 'tw 
a vigorous steed. 

While he disports him in the wood, — 

6 The steer-strong juice with milk pour forth, for feast a 
service of the Gods, 

To liirn who bears away the draught. 

^ Effused, the God flows ouward with his stream to Indra, 
the God, ’ 

So that liis milk may strengthen him. 

8 Soul of the sacrifice, the juice effused flows quickly on ; 
keeps 

His ancient wisdom of a Sage. 

0 So ]>oiiring forth, as Indra’s Friend, strong drink, best Gk 
dener ! for tl\c feast, 

Thou, even in secret, storest hymns. 

H\ MN VII. Soma Pavainfti 

Forth on their way the glorious drops have flowed for inai 
tenanco of Law, 

Knowing this sacrifice's coui’se. 

2 Down in the mighty watci*s sinks the stream of meath, mo 

excellent, 

Oblation best of all in worth. 

3 About the holy place, the Steer true, guileless, noblest, ha 

sent forth 

(Continuous voices in the wood. 

4 When, clothed in manly strength, the Sage flows in celcsti 

wisdom round, 

The Strong would win the light of heaven. 

5 When purified, he sits as King above the hosts, amonghisfol 
What time the sages bring him nigh. 


5 WAo?/i: relative to juice in the following stanza. Ten damei : the fingei 
Tlte wood ■ the vat or trough. 

H To him who hears away the draught ; to Indra. Others take hhdrdya 
moan ‘ for strength or prowe.ss in battle.’ 

9 Even in secret • wi.sdoiii lies hidden in the Soma, and cannot be lecu 
nized until one drinks the juice. — Ludwig. 

2 The mighty waters : the holy waters called vasatiraryah. 

3 In the wood: according to Siyaua, vane Lere — udeiJce^ in the water. T1 
stanza is very diflficult, and I am unable to offer a satisfactory translation. 

4 The Strong : Indra. ^ Then the mighty (Indra) in heaven is eager 
repair to the oblation ’ — Wilson. 

5 Above the hosts, among his folk : or, as preferred by Prof. Ludwig in b 
Commentary, above the contending tribes or people [vitfah). 



275 


YMN 8.] RIQVEDA. 

i Dear, golden-coloured, in the fleece he sinks, and settles in 
the wood : 

The Singer shows his zeal in hymns. 

He goes to Indra, Vayu, to the Asvins, as his custom is, 

With gladdening juice which gives them joy. 

1 The streams of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra-Varnna, — 

, Well-knowing through his mighty powers. 

9 Gain for us, 0 ye Heaven and Earth, riches of meath to win 
us wealth : 

Gain for us treasures and renown. 

HYMN VIII. Soma Pavamftna. 

Obeying Tndra’s dear desire these Soma juices have flowed 
forth. 

Increasing his heroic might. 

2 Laid in the bowl, pure-flowing on to Vayu and the Asvins, 

may ^ 

These give us great heroic strength. 

3 Soma, as thou art purified, incite to bounty Indra’s heart. 

To sit in place of sacrifice. 

4 The ten swift fingers deck thee forth, seven ministers impel 

thee on : 

The sages have rejoiced in thee. 

0 When through the filter thou art poured, we clothe thee with 
a robe of milk 

To be a gladdening draught for Gods, 

6 When purified within the jars, Soma, bright red and golden* 

lined. 

Hath clothed him with a robe of milk. 

7 Flow on to us and make us rich. Drive all our enemies away. 
0 Indu, flow into thy Friend. 

8 Send down the rain from heaven, a stream of opulence from 

earth. Give us, 

0 Soma, victory in w ar. 

0 May we obtain thee, Indra’s drink, who view’est men and 
findest light. 

Gain thee, and progeny and food. 

8 fVell-knowingr, thro^igh his mighty powers • that is, the streams that, 
through the power of Soma, know the way they should go. ‘ The worshippers 
knowing its (virtues are rewarded) with happiness.’ — Wilson. 

7 Flow on to us and make us rich : or, ‘ Flow to us wealthy worshippers.' 

Friend : Udxs,, Cf. IX. 2. I. 



THE HYMNS OF 


[FOOK 


TiS 

HYMN IX. SomaPavatnfl 

The Sage of Hcavea whoso heart is wise, when laid betwc 
both hands and pressed, 

Sends us delightful powers of life. 

2 On, onward to a glorious homo; dear to the people void 

guile, 

With excellent enjoyment, flow. 

3 He, the bright Son, when born illumed his Parents who h 

sprung to life, 

Great Son great Strengtheners of Law. 

4 Urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guilel 

rivers which 

Have magnified the Single Eye. 

5 These helped to might the Youthful One, high over all, inv 

cible. 

Even Indu, Indra ! in thy law. 

6 The Immortal Courser, good to draw, looks down upon t 

Seven : the fount 
Hath satisfied the Goddesses. 

7 Aid us in holy rites, 0 Man : 0 Pavam'ina, drive away 
Dark shades that mnst be met in fight. 

8 Make the paths ready for a hymn newer and newer evcrmoi 
Make the lights shine as erst they shone. 

9 Give, Pavamana, high renown, give kine and steeds and h( 

sons : 

Win for us wisdom, win the light. 

HYMN X. Soma Pavama 

Like cars that thunder on their way, like coursers eager 
renown, 

Have Soma-drops flowed forth for wealth. 

2 Foith have they rushed from holding hands, like cbarii 

that are urged to speed, 

Like joyful songs of smging-men. 

1 The ScKjeoflfenvcn the Soma. Both hands : naptybh: literally, < 
granfidaughtern. Accoi<iing to Sayana, two boards used in preasing the So 
aie intended. See Cowell’n note in Wilson’s Translation. 

3 His Parents : indtnrd : literally, his two mothers ; Heaven and Earth. 

4 Seven devotions : j)ractised in the preparation of the Soma. SAyanata 
saptoL with nadyhh : * gladdens the seven guileless rivers.' — Wilson. Sh 
Eye : Soma, the Moon. 

6 Courser: the flowing Soma. The Seven : rivers. The fount: ‘Full, a 
well, he has satisfied the divine streame.’ — Wilson. 

7 0 Man : manlv Soma. 



277 


11.] RIOVEDA. 

{ Tlie Somaa deck themselves with milk, as Kiiigs are graced 
with eulogies, 

And, with seven priests, the sacrifice. 

. Pressed for the gladdening draught, the drops flow forth abund- 
antly with song. 

The Soma juices in a stream. 

) Winning Vivasvau’s glory and producing Morning’s light, the 
Suns 

Pass through the openings of the cloth. 

G The singing-men of ancient time open the doors of sacred 
songs, — 

Men, for the mighty to accept. 

7 Combined in close society sit the seven priests, the brother- 

hood. 

Filling the station of the One. 

8 He gives us kinship with the Oods, and with the Sun unites 

our eye: 

The Sage’s offspring hath appeared. 

9 The Sun with his dear eye beholds that quarter of the heav- 

ens which priests 

Have placed within the sacred cell. 

HYMN XT. Soma Favam^na. 

Sing forth to Indu, 0 ye men, to him who now is purified, 
Fain to pay worship to the CJods. 


5 The Sam : so called as being creators of the light : * the sun-bright 
juices.’ — Wilson. Viiasvdn : the morning Sun. 

6 Men, for the miyhty to accept: ‘men, oflerers of Soma,’ according to 
Sdya'ia. 

7 The seven priests • the adkt'aryits who bring the water with which the 
stalks of the Soma-plants are spiinkled. The One : Soma. — S.iyana. 

8 lie (fives us kinship with the Gods: 1 follow Prof. Pisch^rB interpretation 

of this difficult passage. ‘ Soma unites our navel with the navel of the Gods, 
our eye with the Sun, that is, he biings us into union with the Gods in 
heaven Vcdische Stadlen, I , p. 69 ‘1 take into my navel the navel of the 

sacrifice [the Soma]. ’—Wilson. ‘ Ho [Soma] as kinsman has brought us a 
kinsman [Surya].’-- -Ludwig. The Satjes ofspring : a periphrasis for the Sage 
himself, that is, Soma. — Ludwig. 

^ 9 This stanza b very obi>cure. I have adopted Benfey’s explanation who 
here follows an occasional interpretation of div or dyuloka, given by the 
Schdli^t, which identifies it with the dronakalasa or lai'ge <So«i«-trough. He 
I 48 meaning that the Sun looks towaids the place where the Soma lies 

while it is pressed S&yana seems to interpret this verse as meaning that 

indra views the Soma with affection even ^ter it has been drunk by the 
priests [fixed in the heart].’— Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation. 



2n THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 

2 Together with thy pleasant juice the Atharvans have c( 

mingled milk, 

Divine, devoted to the God. 

3 Bring, by thy flowing, weal to kine, weal to the people, 

to steeds. 

Weal, O thou King, to growing plants. 

4 Sing a praise-song to Soma brown of hue, of independent mig 
The Red, who reaches up to heaven. 

5 Purify Soma when effused with stones which hands mi 

rapidly, 

And pour the sweet milk in the meath. 

6 With humble homage draw ye nigh ; blend the libation w 

the curds : 

To Indra offer Indii up. 

7 Soma, foe-quellcr, chief o’er men, doing the will of Goi 

pour forth 

Prosperity upon our kine. 

8 Heart-kno wer, Sovran of the heart, thou art effused, 0 Soma, tl 
Indra may drink thee and rejoice. 

9 0 Soma Pavam uia, give us riches and heroic strength, — 
Indu ! with Indra for ally. 

HYMN XII. SomaPavamii 

To Indra have the Soma-drops, exceeding rich in sw'eets, b.e 
poured, 

Shod in the seat of sacrifice. 

2 As mother kine low to their calves, to Indra have the sag 

called, 

Called him to drink the Soma juice. 

3 In the stream’s wave wise Soma dwells, distilling rapture, 

his seat. 

Resting upon a wild-cow's hide. 

4 Far-sighted Soma, Sage and Seer, is worshipped in the centr 

point 

Of heaven, the straining-cloth of wool. 

2 The Atharvans : the priests, who perform the duties of the Adhvaryus. 

3 King : the usual designation of Souta in the Br/lhmana. 

4 2%e Red : kaddehidarunavarndya : ‘ sometimes red-coloured.' — S&yana 

3 In the stream's wave : in the water with which the stalks are spriukk 
Upon a wild^cows hide: this, which is Beufey’s explanation of gauri, seei 
to be borne out by g6r ddhi tvacki, ujjon the ox-hide, of IX. 101. 1 
SAyana’s interpretation is different ; ‘ to a chant in the middle tone.’ - Wilsu 

4 Of heaven : divafi, : see IX, 10, 9, and note. 



279 


rii/.vi3.] tbe rioveda, 

j In close embraces Indu holds Soma when poured within the 
jars, 

And on the purifying sieve. 

(5 Indu sends forth a voice on high to regions of the sea of air, 
Shaking the vase that drops with meath. 
j The Tree whose praises never fail yields heavenly milk among 
our hymns, 

Uiging men’s generations on. 

8 The Wise One, with the Sage’s stream, the Soma urged to 

speed, flows on 

To the dear places of the sky. 

9 0 Pavainana, bring us wealth bright with a thousand splen- 

dours, yea, 

0 Indu, give us ready help, 

HYMN XIII. Soma PavarviAna, 

Passed through the fleece in tlioiis.iiid streams the Soma, 
purified, flows on 
To Iiidra’s, Vayu’s special place. 

2 Sing forth, ye men who long for help, to Pavamana, to the Sage, 
Effused to entertain the Gods. 

3 The Sorna-drons with thousand powers are purified for victory, 
Hymned to become the feast of Gods. 

4 Yoa, as thou flowcst bring great store of food that we may 

win the spoil : 

Indu, bring splendid manly might. 

, 5 May they in flowing give us wealth in thousands, and heroic 
! power, — 

Those Godlike Soma-drops ofFused. 

I S Lulu hold* Soma: ‘the deity seems t<3 he thus opp 'sed to the mete 
Iplaqt ' — Cowell’s note Ludwig sugi^e'^ts that Indu here miy he the Moon, 
as llie time of important liturgn-ii coremotues depends upon the Moon’s 
jphases So also Hillehrandt, V, d/., L, p. 310. 

I 6 To vetfiojis of the sea of air : or sumudrasj/a h-'re may mc.in, of the sea 
or water into which the Soma juice falls Shaliiu/- or, perhaps, Ktnrmg 
(with j(iy) The vase : k6sam: I a dronakahra the largo wooden vessel for 
holdini' the juice. Acconling to Say ana, who^c interpretation I have followed 
in the first line kdsam here means the cloud. 

7 TkeTiee: Soma. Men's generations: sacrificial geasons, acerding to 
S^iyana 

1 Indra's, V'ii/u'n sveeial place • the ve>sels especially prepared to hold 
libations intended for Indra and Vftyu. 

Z For victory; vAjasdtaye : ‘for the attainment of food.’ — Wilson. So 
Sayaiia in stanzas 3 and 4 ; but in 6 the word is explained by mugnlrndya, 
to battle, in the first clause where he inserts it after hii/dnHfk, urged, and by 
f^nmldbhdya, for the attainment of food, in the second clause. 



280 HYMm OP [BOOR i 

6 Like coursers by their drivers urged, they were poured fon 

for victory, 

Swift through the woollen straining-cloth. 

7 Noisily flow the Soma-drops, like milch-kine lowing to tin 

calves: 

They have run forth from both the hands. 

8 As Gladdener whom Tndra loves, O Pavamaiia, with a roar 
Drive all our enemies away. 

9 O Pavamanas, driving off the godless, looking on the light, 
Sit in the place of sacrifice. 

HYMN XIV. SomaPavamA 

Ritposing on the river’s wave the Sage hath widely flow 
around, 

Bearing the hymn which many love. 

2 When the Five kindred Oompauies, active in duty, with t 

song 

Establish him, the Powerful, 

3 Then in his juice whose strength is great, have all the Go* 

rejoiced themselves, 

When he hath clothed him in the milk. 

4 Freeing himself he flows away, leaving his body’s severed linV 
And meets his own (Njinpanion here. 

5 He by the daughters of the priest, like a fair youth, hath be 

adorned, 

Making tlio milk, as ’twerc, his robe. 

6 O’er the fine fingers, through desire of milk, in winding com 

he goes, 

And utters voice which he hath found. 

7 The nimble fingers have approached, adorning him the Lo 

of Strength : 

They grasp the vigoi-ons CourseFs back. 

8 with a roar: making a loud noise in <]roppiiig. 

1 On the river's wave: in the vasativaH watens, which are used tosprin 
the stalks Bearimj the h}/inn : Prof. Oekluer exphins this as moaning, ‘ fio 
ing away th^ much covcte<l pri7.e,’ Soma being rogardwl us a courser or ra 
horse Seo Vcdische Studien^ I., p. 12(J 

2 Five kindred Curnpaiiie.^ : refeiring, pmbubly, to some saci ifice institiil 
in common by representatives of the five Aryan tribes. 

4 Ills own Companion ; Inilra. He meets : this {sanyato bhavati) is SAyao 
e.Tplanation of s 'lmjvjhnate ; but it is not easy to seo how the word b 
this signification. 

6 Daughters : or granddaughters ; the fingers. 

6 Which hf hath found : ‘ which the worsWpper recognizes.’ — Wilson. 



THE RtQVEDA, 


281 


nMN 16 .] 

8 Comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens and on 
the earth, 

Come, Soma, as our faithful Friend. 

' HYMN XV. Soma PavamAna, 

Through the fine fingers, with the song, this Hero comes with 
rapid cars, 

Going to Indra’s special place. 

2 hi holy thought he ponders much for the great worship of 

the Gods, 

Where the Immortals have their seat. 

3 Like a good horse is he led out, when on the path that shines 

with light 

Tlie mettled steeds exert their strength. 

4 He brandishes his horns on high, and whets them, Bull who 

leads the herd, 

Doing with might heroic deeds. 

5 He moves, a vigorous Steed, adorned with beauteous rays of 

shining gold, 

Becoming yovran of the streams. 

6 He, over filaces rougii to pass, bringing rich treasures closely 

packed, 

Descends into the reservoirs. 

7 Mon beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be beautified, 
Him who brings forth abundant food. 

8 Him, even him, the fingers ten and the seven songs make 

beautiful, 

Well-weapoiied, best of gladdeners. 

HYMN XVI. Soma Pavamaim. 

The pressers from the Soma-press send forth thy juice for 
rapturous joy : 

The speckled sap runs like a flood. 

1 liidra'a special place: ‘ Indra’s abode ’ —WiPoii. In Hymn XIII. 1, 
nishkntdm is explained by SAyr la as the vessel j)rcpaied and set apart 

3 Like a good horse : the text has only hlt<(k which may mean either gfxxl 
or placed ‘ Placed (in the cart) he is brought.’ — Wil&on. 

4 Ifnriis : cf. IX 5. 2. 

fi Jill I/s of shining gold : as tlie Moon. 

Pliices rough to pass : the wool of the strainer SAyana gives a totally 
diflerent explanation of this stanza. See Wilson’s Translation. I have follow- 
ed Pi of. Ludwig. 

3 Seven songs : the songs of the seven priests. 

the Soma-press : ablative dual of onl, signifying apparently 

or a vessel, consisting of two pieces, used in the preparation 



282 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

2 With strength we follow through the sieve him who brii 

might and wius the kine, 

Enrobed in water with his juice. 

3 Pour on the sieve the Soma, ne’er subdued in waters, waterl^ 
And make it pure for Indra’s drink. 

4 Moved by the purifier’s thought, the Soma flows into the siev 
By wisdom it hath gained its home. 

5 With humble homage, Indra, have the Soma-drops flowed foi 

to thee, 

Contending for the glorious prize. 

6 Purified in his fleecy garb, attaining every beauty, he 
Stands, hero-like, amid the kine. 

7 Swelling, as ’twcre, to heights of heaven, the stream of t 

creative juice 

Falls lightly on the cleansing sieve. 

8 Thus, Soma, purifying him who knoweth song mid living hk 
T liou wanderest through the cloth of wool. 

HYMN XVII. So.ua PavamA 

Like rivers down a steep descent, slaying the Vritras, f 
of zeal. 

The rapid Soma-streams have flowed. 

2 The drops of Soma juice effused fall like the rain upon t 

earth : 

To Indra flow the Soma-streams. 

3 With swelling wave the gladdening drink, the Soma, flo 

into the sieve, 

Loving the Gods and slaying fiends. 

4 It hastens to the pitchers, poured upon the sieve it wa: 

stroll g 

At sacrifices through the lauds. 

5 Soma, thou shinest mounting heaven as ’twere above I’g'i 

triple realm. 

And moving seem’st to speed the Sun. 

of the .Soma juice. The wuid in Baiti to be employed to denote, inetaplx 
Cally, heaven and eaith. ‘ They who express thee, the juire of heaven fl 
earth.’ — Wilson. 

3 Waterleii:^ : dnaptam, which Sdyana explains by andplam, not reach 
or overtaken, by eneinien. Tlie meaning is not clear. 

4 Jts home: in the large wooden vessel called di'onakalaaa,. 

5 Conteiuling for the qlorLous prize : like race-horses. ‘ Giving thee vJg.^ 
for the gieat conflict.’ — Wilsoii. 


5 Addressed to Soma as the Moon. 



THE RIQVEDA 


283 


19.] 

him, the head of sacrifice, singers and bards have sung 
, leir songs, 

ering what he loves to see. 

^he men, the sages with their hymns, eager for help, deck thee 
strong steed. 

Deck thee for service of the Gods. 

8 Flow onward to the stream of meath : rest efficacious in 
thy home, 

Fair, to be drunk at sacrifice. 

HYMN XVIII. Soma Pavarn.lna. 

Tifou, Soma, dweller on the hills, effused, hast flowed into 
the sieve : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

2 Thou art a sacred Bard, a Sage ; the meath is offspring of 

thy sap : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

3 All Deities of one accord have come that they may drink 

of thee : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

4 He who containeth in his hands all treasures much to ba 

desired : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

5 Who milketh out this mighty Pair, the Earth and Heaven, 

like mother kine : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

6 Who in a moment mightily floweth around these two world- 

halves : 

A 11- bounteous art thou in carouse. 

7 The Strong One, being purified, hath in the pitchers cried 

aloud : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

HYMN XIX. Soma Pavamftna. 

D Soma, being purified bring us the wondrous treasure, meet 
■ror lau(is, that is in earth and heaven. 


Tht head of sacHJice : the most important element of the ceremony, 
ccording to Sdyann, at the head, that is, (m the last and most important day 
le effusion of the Soma juice. Offering what he loves to see: ‘ euteitaining 
nection for him the all-beholdii'g/— Wilson 

meath i or honey. In thy home : in the dronakalafa. 


on the hilU : 


‘ proseed between the etones.’ — Wilson. 



284 TRE BYMRS OP [BOOK 

2 For ye Twain, Tndra, Soma, are Lords of the light, Lord 

the kine : 

Great Rulers, prosper ye our songs. 

3 The tawny Steer, while cleansed among the living, bello v 

on the grass. 

Hath sunk and settled in his homo. 

4 Over the Steer’s productive flow the sacred songs w 

resonant, 

The mothers of the darling Son. 

5 Hath he not, purified, impregned the kine who long to n 

their Lord, 

The kine who yield the shining milk ? 

6 Bring near us those who stand aloof : strike fear into 

enemies : 

0 Pavamana, find us wealth. 

7 Soma, bring down tlie foeman’s might, his vigorous stren 

and vital power, 

Whether he be afar or near. 

HYxMN XX. SomaPavan 

Forth through the straining-cloth the Sago flows to 
banquet of the Gods, 

Subduing all our enemies. 

2 For he, as Pavamana, sends thousandfold treasure in 

shape 

Of cattle to the singing-men. 

3 Thou graspest all things with thy mind, and purifiest 1 

with thoughts : 

As such, O Soma, find us fame. 

4 Pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal lore 
Bring food to those who sing thy praise. 

5 As thou art cleansed, 0 Wondrous Steed, 0 Soma, thou 1 

entered, like 

A pious King, into the songs. 

6 He, Soma, like a courser in the floods invincible, made cle 
With hands, is resting in the jars. 

4 Hymns are sung over the Soma-stream, and are called mothers of 
precious juice bec«iuse it is prepared while they are sung 

5 The kine: the vasativail waters which long to mingle with the Soma. 

5 Steed : vahne : ' bearer (of our offerings) ’ — Wilson. 

6 Like a courser : * the bearer (of oblations)’. — Wilson* 



THE RIO VEDA. 


285 


22 .] 

porting, like a liberal chief, thon goest, Soma, to the sieve, 
iding the laud a Hero’s strength. 

HYMN XXL Soma PavamAna. 

To Indra flow these running drops, these Somas frolicsome in 

mood, 

Exhilarating, finding light ; 

2 Driving ofif foes, bestowing room upon the presser, willingly 
Bringing their praiser vital force. 

3 Lio'htly disporting them, the drops flow to one common reservoir, 
And fall into the river’s wave. 

1 These Pavamanas have obtained all blessings much to be desired, 
Like coursers harnessed to a car. 

5 With view to us, 0 Soma-drops, bestow his manifold desire 
On him who yet hath given us naught. 

6 Bring us our wish with this design, as a wright brings his new- 

wrought wheel : 

Flow pure and shining with the stream. 

7 Those drops have cried with resonant voice : like swift steeds 

they have run the course, 

And roused the good man’s hymn to life. 

HYMN XX 11. Soma Pavam^na. 

These rapid Soma-streams have stirred themselves to motion 
like strong steeds, 

Like cars, like armies hurried forth. 

2 Swift as wide winds they lightly move, like rain-storms of 

Parjanya, like 

The flickering flames of burning fire. 

3 These Soma juices, blent with curds, purified, skilled in sa- 

cred liymns, 

Have gained by song their hearts’ desire. 

4 Immortal, cleansed, these drops, since first they flowed, have 

never wearied, fain 

To reach the region and their paths. 

7 Chief : Sdyana explains makhah by ddnaniy gift. 


^ This stanza is obscure, and Sdyana’s commentary is imperfect. It seems 
hat the Soma-drops are prayed to enrich the iiistitutor of the sacrifice who 
las not as yet rewarded the priests 
7 Hun tht course : reached the dronakala^a. 


By song : vip^ : by knowleage, according to Sftyana, *The St. Petersb. 

K lains vtp 08 the twigs (cf. vepres) which form the bottom of the 
1 support the filteriug.cloth.’—Cowell, in Wilson s Translation. 



2SG the HYMm OF [BOOH IX 

T) Advancmg they have travelled o’er the ridges of the earth 
and lieaven, 

And this the highest realm of all. 

6 Over the heights have they attained the highest thread 

is spun out. 

And this which must be deemed most high. 

7 Tho\i, Soma, boldest wealth in kine which thou hast seized 

from niggard churls : 

Thou calledst forth the ontspun thread. 

HYMN XX rn. SomaPavamftna. 

Swift Soma drops have been effused in stream of meath, the 
gladdening drink, 

For sacred lore of every kind. 

2 Hither to newer resting-place the ancient Living Ones are 
come. 

They made the Sun that he might shine. 

d 0 Pavamana, bring to us the unsacrificing foeman’s wealth, 
And give us food with progeny. 

4 The living Somas being cleansed diffuse exhilarating drink, 
Turned to the vat which drips with meath. 

0 Soma flows on intelligent, po.sscssing sap and mighty strength, 
llrave Hero who repels the curse. 

6 For Indra, Soma ! thou art cleansed, a feast-companion for 

the Gods : 

Indu, thou fain wilt win us strength. 

7 When he had drunken draughts of this, Indra smote down 

resistless foes : 

Yea, smote them, and shall smite them still. 

HYMN XXIY. Soma Pav^rndna. 

Hitherw^aud have the Somas streamed, the drops while they 
arc purified : 

When blent, in waters they are rinsed. 

6 Or, ‘ Streamy roshing down have filled tlio tliread^i, most excellent, spread 
out beueath ’ ; that is, the threads of the straining-cloth. See note in Wilson. 
According to SAyana ‘the thiead’ is s.acrifice ; and ‘this which must be 
deemed most high ’ may be, as Ludwig suggests, the place of sacrifice which 
is also to be held holy. Wilson translates the second line : — ‘ this rite ia 
glojifted thereby ’ 

7 From niggard churls : or from the Panis. Thou calledst out the outspnn 
thread ; ‘ thou hast called aloud at the outspread sacrifice.* — Wilson. 

2 Hewer- resting-place : a newly- prepared place of sacrifice. The aneyg^ 
Living Ones : the Soma-drups. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


287 


IN 25 3 

Vlie milk hath run to meet them like floods rushing down a 
precipice : 

They come to Indra, being cleansed. 

3 0 Soma Pavamrma, thou art flowing to he Indra’s drink : 

'I'hc men have seized and lead thee forth. 

4 Victorious, to be hailed with joy, 0 Soma, flow, delighting 

men, 

Vo him who ruleth o’er mankind. 

5 Thou, Indu, when, effused by stones, thou runnest to the 

filter, art 

Kcady for Indra’s high decree. 

6 Flow on, host Vyitra-slayer ; flow meet to be hailed with joyful 

lauds. 

Pure, purifying, wonderful. 

7 Pure, [)urifying is ho called the Soma of the meath effused, 
Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods. 

HYMN XXV. Soma PavamAna. 

Gurex-hued ! as one who giveth strength flow on for Gods to 
drink, a draught 
T'^r Vayu and tlic Marut host. 

2 0 Pav..mana, sent by song, roaring about thy dwelling-place, 
Pass into Vayu as liaw bids. 

3 Tlie Steer shine*»^with the Deities, dear Sage in his appointed 

home. 

Foe-slayer, most beloved by Gods. 

4 Taking each Ijeauteous form, he goes, desirable, while purified, 
Thitlier where the Immortals sit. 

5 To Indra Soma flows, the Ked, engendering song, exceeding 

wise. 

The visitor of living men. 

t To him loho vuhth o'er mankind : to Indra. 

5 Reaiiy for Imlra's high decree : Wilson, following S/iyana, translates : 
ample portion for Indra’s belly.’ See Bergaigne, La Religion Vedique, 
111. 210 ff, for the meaning of dJiMnian in the liigve<la. 

2 Into Vdyu: into the vessel appropriated to Vftyu — SAyana. 

5 The Red . aritakdh : here explained by SAyana 9i.A — drochamdnah, shining 
radiant J'he visitor of living men : dyushdk . the meaning of this word 
^ uncertain The St. Petersburg Lexicon explains it as, conjointly with 
; With human co-operation. Ludwig in his tran.slation renders it by 
‘i*"u lebenden beaucht,’ who visits the living man ; but in his Coniment- 
PN^ggests that it may mean, during the whole of life. ‘ Constantly. 
punneiV- 



283 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


6 Flow, best exhilarator, Sage, flow to the filter in a stream 
To seat thee in the place of song. 

HYMN XXVI. Soma PavamAty; 


The sa^es with the fingers' art have dressed and decked that 
vigorous Steed 
Upon the lap of Aditi. 

2 The kine have called aloud to him cxhaustless with a thou- 

sand streams, 

To Indu who supporteth heaven. 

3 Him, nourisher of many. Sage, creative Pavamana, they 
Have sent, by wisdom, to the sky. 

4 Him, dweller with Vivasv.in, they with use of both arms have 

sent forth, 

The Lord of Speech infallible. 

5 Him, green, beloved, many-eyed, the Sisters with the pressing- 

stones 

Send down to ridges of the sieve. 

6 0 Pavamana, Indu, priests hurry thee on to Indra, thee 
Who aidest song and cheerest him. 

HYMN XXVII. Soma PavamUna. 

This Sage, exalted by our lauds, flows to the purifying cloth. 
Scattering foes as he is cleansed. 

2 As giving power and winning light, for Indra and for Vayu he 
Is poured upon the filtering-cloth. 

3 The men conduct him, Soma, Steer, Omniscient, and the Head 

of Heaven, 

Effused into the vats of wood. 


^ R Of mna’ arMsua : archaniyasyendrasya, of the adorable Indra, accord- 

i„^ tSnk AvL two nfeaning, in the Rigve,la (1) Bong or hymn rf 
pSse and (^flight or splendour. See P.schel, i- PP- 


1 Aditi : the earth. . , , „ 

2 The kiue : who supply the milk that is mixed with the Soma juice. 

a Vivatvdn- meaning here the sacrificer. Of both arms ; bhuiijo^ 
ine toXaua = M/ooh.thearmsof the body. The St. Petersburg Lexicon 
explains the word as me.ming a sort of vice or implement for holding w 

while it is being cut. W of speech ; making men el.Kiuent 

5 Many.eyed: ‘ far-beholding.’-Wilson. The Sisters: the fingers of the 
officiating piiest. 


3 0.,,me;e„t: or, all-possessing, Vot. of wood: vdneshw: according tc 
Benfey, into the streams of water. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


280 


'UN 29.] 

Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indii Pavamana lowed, 
r Still Conqueror, never overcome. 

) This Pavamana, gladdening draught, drops on the filtering- 
cloth, and then 

Mounts up with Surja to the sky. 

6 To Tndra in the firmament this mighty tawny Steer hath flowed, 
This Indu, being purified. 

HYMN XXVIIL SomaPavamAna. 

Urged by the men, this vigorous Steed, Lord of the mind, 
Omniscient, 

Runs to the woollen straining-cloth. 

2 Within the filter hath ho flowed, this Soma for the Cods 

effused, 

Entering all their essences. 

3 He shines in beauty there, this God Immortal in his dwelling- 

place, 

Foe-slayer, dearest to the Cods. 

4 Directed by the Sisters ten, bellowing on his way this Steer 
Runs onward to the wooden vats. 

5 This Pavamana, swift and strong, Omniscient, gave splendour 

to 

The Sun and all his forms of light. 

6 This Soma, being purified, flows mighty and infallible. 

Slayer of sinners, dear to Cods. 

H\ MN XXIX. Soma Pavamdna. 

Forward with mighty force have flowed the currents of this 
Steer effused, 

Of him who sets him by the Cods. 

2 The singers praise him with their song, and learned priests 

adorn the Steed, 

Hrought forth as light that merits laud. 

3 These things thou winnest lightly while purified. Soma, Lord 

of wealth ; 

Fill full the sea that claims our praise. 

4 Lodging for kine: who supply milk to mix with the Soma juice. Gold ■ 
worn on the finger of the priest who presses out the juice. Lowed, made 
a noise m dropping. 

5 Mounts up : as the Moon. 

1 Who %eU him hij the Gods : or, who decorates the Gods. ‘Who seeks to 
surpass the gods.'- Wilson. 

lese things : for which we pray. The sea : the Soma-vat or reservoir. 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L 

4 Winning all precious things at once, flow on, O Soma, wii 

thy stream : 

Drive to one place our enemies. 

5 Preserve us from the godless, from ill-omened voice of oi 

and all, 

That so wo may be freed from blame. 

(3 O fndu, as thou flowest on bring us the wealth of earth ai 
heaven, 

And splendid vigour, in thy stream. 

HYMN \XX. Soma Pavam.^ii 

Streams of this Potent One have flowed easily to the strai 
ing-cloth : 

While he is cleansed he lifts his voice. 

2 Indu, by pressers urged to speed, bellowing out while bcautifie 
Sends forth a very mighty sound. 

3 Pour on us, Soma, with thy stream man-conquering migi 

which many crave, 
x\ccompanied with hero sons. 

4 Hither hath Pavamana flowed, Soma flowed hither in a streai 
To settle in the wits of wood. 

0 To waters \\ith the stones they drive thee tawny-hued, me 

rich in sweets, 

0 Indu, to be Indra’s drink. 

6 For Indra, for thcThunderer press the Soma very rich in sweet 
liOvely, inspiriting, for strength. 

HYMN XXXI. Soma Pavairi&n 

The Soma drops, benevolent, come forth as they are purifie 
Bestowing wealth which all may see. 

2 0 Inlu, high o’er heaven and earth be thou, increaser of oi 

might : 

The Master of all strength be thou. 

3 The winds are gracious in their love to the?}, the rivers flo 

to thee : 

Soma, they multiply thy power. 

.5 Ill-omened voice . explained by mbdStnmnd'h'UpdtybOM 

or word iu the form of blame; the raging fury of the demon or the gy‘ll^ 
man, according to Grassmann. 

2 A very mighty sound : or, a sound which Indra loves. 

1 Wealth which all may set : ‘ intellectual wealth.’— Wilson. 

3 The winds, cf. ‘ VAyu is Soma's guardian God’ (X. 85. 5). 



THE MOVED A. 


291 


32.] 

4 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite 

in thee ; 

Be in the gathering-place of strength. 

5 For thee, brown-huod ! the kine have poured imperishable oil 

and milk 

Aloft oil the sublimcst height. 

C Friendship, 0 Indu, wo desire with thee who bearost noble 
arms, 

With thee, 0 Lord of all that is. 

HYMN XXXIT. Soma Pavamitua. 

The rapture-shedding Soma-drops, effused in our assembly, 
have 

Flowed forth to glorify our prince. 

2 Then Trita’s Maidens onward urge the Tawny-coloured with 

the stones, 

Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

3 Now like a swan he makcth all the company sing each his 

hymn : 

He, like a steed, is bathed in milk. 

4 0 Soma, viewing heaven and earth, thou runnest like a dart- 

ing deer : 

Set in the place of sacrifice. 

5 The cows have sung with joy to him, even as a woman to her 

love : 

He came as to a settled race. 

6 Bestow illustrious fame on us, both on our liberal lords and me, 
Glory, intelligouce, and wealth. 

4 Tliirt stanza has occurred before See 1. 91. 16. Tie in the gathering place 
of strength ■ be the ceniial point and source of all power. 

5 The kine, ; of the clouds, the waters. Oil and milk: sweet and fertilizing 
I’ain. Or the cows who supply milk for the libation may be intended, in 
'vhich case ‘ the sublimest ’ would bo the place of sacrifice. 

1 (hir prince : the noble wh^ institutes the sacrifice. 

2 2'ritas Maidens : the fingers of the priest. See IX. 38. 2. 

3 Like a swan: as a sentinel A,ansa (swan, wild-goose, or flamingo) at the 
each of danger sounds a note of alarm which is answered by all the 

rest— Ludwig. 

4 Darting: Sdyana takes taktah with ‘thou,’ Soma, and explains it by 
mi'yaih payaidibhirmnritah san, being mixed with milk, curds, etc. Else- 
where Sdyana explains it by ‘ swift.’ 

5 Cows : praises, according to Slyana. As to a settled race: as a horse is 
'^^ought to run a race that has been arranged. ' As a hero hastens to the 
Welcome contest.’ — Wilson, 



292 THE HYMNS OF [EOOE n 

HYMN XXXIII. Soma PavamAna 

Like waves of waters, skilled ia song the juices of the Some 
speed 

Onward, as buffaloes to woods. 

2 With stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowee 

with strength in store 
Of kine into the wooden vats, 

3 To Indra, Va.yu, Varuna, to Vishnu, and the Maruts, flow 
The drops of tSoma juice effused. 

4 Three several words are uttered : kine are lowing, cows who 

give their milk : 

The Tawny-hiied goes bellowing on. 

5 The young and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered 

praise ; 

They decorate the Child of Heaven. 

6 From every side, 0 Soma, for our profit, pour thou forth 

four seas 

Filled full of riches thousandfold. 

HYMN XXXIV. Soma PavamAna, 

The drop of Soma juice effused flows onward with this stream 
impelled, 

Hcnding strong places, with its might. 

2 Poured forth, to Indra, Varuna, to Vayu and the Marut host, 
To Vishnu, flows the Soma juice. 

3 With stones they press the Soma forth, the Strong conducted 

by the strong : 

They milk the liquor out with ivkill. 

4 'Tis he whom Trita must refine, Tis he who shall make Indra 

glad : 

The Tawny One is decked with tints. 


4 Thrre several words : according to SAyana, trividhd stntih, praise of tliree 
kinds, from the three Vedas. ‘ The pnests utter the tliree sacred texts.’— 
Wilson. Probably three tiiplets chanted during the ceiemony. See Beigaigue, 
1. 288. 

3 Mothers of the holy rite : apparently, tlie cows who supply milk for 
libations. The Child of Heaven : the Soma, which, according to a text quoted 
by SAyana, ‘ was in the third heaven from hence.’ 

Q Four seas : imaginary seas, to correspond with the four quarters of heaven. 

1 Strong places : the strongholds of enemies, the fiends who withhold the 
rain. 

4 Trita : the preparer of the Celestial Soma. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


208 


nrUK 36.] 

5 Him do the Sons of Pvisiii milk, the dwelling-place of sacrifice, 
Oblation lovely and most dear. 

6 To him in one united stream these songs flow on straight 

forward : he, 

Loud-voiced, hath made the milch-kine low. 

HYMN XXXV. Soma Pavamdna. 

Pour forth on us abundant wealth, 0 Pavarndna, with thy 
stream, 

Wherewith thou mayest find us light. 

2 0 Indu, swayer of the sea, shaker of all things, flow thou on, 
Bearer of wealth to us with might. 

3 With thee for Hero, Valiant One ! may we subdue our ene- 

mies : 

Let what is precious flow to us. 

4 Indu arouses strength, the Sage who strives for victory, 

winning power. 

Discovering holy works and means. 

5 Mover of speech, wo robe him with our songs as ho is purified, 
Soma, the Guardian of the folk ; 

G On whose way, Loid of Holy Law, most rich, as he is purified. 
The people all have set their hearts. 

HYMN XXXVI. Soma Pavamlna. 

Forth from the mortar is the juice sent, like a car-horse, to 
the sieve ; 

The Steed steps forward to the goal. 

2 Thus, Soma, watchful, bearing well, cheering the Gods, flow 
past the sieve. 

Turned to the vat that drops with meath. 


•'J The dwell in g-^tlace of sacrifice: the Soma-plant contains within itself the 
chief element of sacrifice, and the pieparatiou of the juice is only the devel- 
opment of its nature. — Ludwig. 


2 The sea ; the reservoir of Soma juice. 

4 Discovering holy works and ‘ acquainted with sacred rites and 

arms.’ — Wilson. 

6 Oa whose way : on whose statutes or decrees. 


1 To the goal : Mrshman ; apparently, a line or furrow drawn across the 
end of the race-course. In I. 116 17, S&yana explains Mrshman as a piece 
of wood serving as a goal, but in this place he takes it to mean, ‘ the God- 
attracting battle-field called a sacrifice,’ devdndmdkarshanavati yajndkhye sang- 
Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation, 

^ The vat : the dronakalafa. 



294 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

3 Excellent Pavamdna, make the lights shine brightly out 

for us : 

Speed us to mental power and skill. 

4 He, beautified by pious men, and coming from their hands 

adorned, 

Flows through the fleecy straining-cloth. 

5 May Soma pour all treasures of the heavens, the earth, the 

firmament 

Upon the liberal worshipper. 

6 Thou mountest to the height of heaven, 0 Soma, seeking 

steeds and kinc, 

And seeking heroes, Lord of Strength ! 

HYMN XXXVir. Soma PavamAna. 

Soma, the Steer, effused for draught, flows to the purifying sieve, 
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods 

2 Far-sighted, tawny-coloured, he flows to the sieve, intelligent, 
Bellowing, to his place of rest. 

3 This vigorous Pavamana runs forth to the luminous realm of 

heaven, 

Fiend-slayer, through the fleecy sieve. 

4 This Pavamana up above Trita’s high ridge hath made the Sun, 
Together with the Sisters, shine. 

5 This Vritra-slaying Steer, effused, Soma, room-giver, ne’ei 

deceived, 

Hath gone, as Twerc, to win the spoil. 

G Urged onward by the sage, the God speeds forward to th( 
casks of wood, 

Indu to Indra willingly. 

HYMN XXXVIIT. Soma Pavamdna 

This Steer, this Chariot, rushes through the woollen filter 
as he goes 

To war that wins a thousand spoils. 


1 For draught : pUdge : ‘ for the drinking (of the gods).’ — Wilson. 

2 Intelligent: or, endowed with strength. 

4 Trita'a high ridge : according to SAya ia, ‘ the high place (of the sacrifice 
of Trita’ the ilishi. But the heavenly home of Trita, the celestial preparer o 
the Soma for Indra, is intended. The Sisters : the Dawns. 

Q Willingly: mahhdnd : ‘ plenteoiisly.’ — Ludwig. ‘ In his might.’— CoweU 

1 To war that wins a thousand spoils : more literally, to thousandfold booty 
or deed of miirht. 



THE RtOVEDA, 


295 


39.] 

2 The Dames of Trita with the stones onward impel this 

Tawny One, 

Indu to Jndra for his drink. 

3 Ten active fingers carefully adorn him here ; they make him 

bright 

And beauteous for the gladdening draught. 

4 He like a falcon settles down amid the families of men, 
Speeding like lover to his love. 

5 This young exhilarating juice looks downward from its place 

in heaven, 

This Soma-drop that pierced the sieve. 

6 Poured for the draught, this tawny juice flows forth, intel- 

ligent, crying out, 

Unto the well-belov6d place. 

HYMN XXXIX. Soma PavamAna. 

Flow on, 0 thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy beloved 
form. 

Saying, I go where dwell the Gods. 

2 Preparing what is unprepared, and bringing store of food 

to man, 

Make thou the rain descend from heaven. 

3 With might, bestowing power, the juice enters the purifying 

sieve. 

Far-seeing, sending forth its light. 

4 This is it which in rapid course hath with the river’s wave 

flowed down 

From heaven upon the straining-cloth. 

5 Inviting him from far away, and oven from near at hand, the 

juice 

For Indra is poured forth as meath. 

G 111 union they have sung the hymn : with stones they urge the 
Tawny One. 

Sit ill the place of saorifico. 

2 The Dames of Trita: a.s Tiita is the celestial purifier of the ISoiiia, the 
fingors of the earthly purifiers aie called hie dames, or his En<tideus as m 
IX. 32. 2. 

5 Fvo\n its place in heaven : or divdh may be the genitive case, taken with 
the Child of Heaven, as in IX. 83. 5. 

G The xcell-belovcd place: the dronakalam or vat in which it rests. 

2 Preparing what is unprepared: ‘consecrating the unconsecrated worship- 
per or place,’ is S&yana’s explanation. 

0 Hit : 0 Gods.— Siyana. 



2^6 


[^ooK a 


THE HYMNS OP 

HYMN XL. Soma Pavamdua. 

The Very Active hath assailed, while purified, all enemies : 
They deck the Sage with holy songs. 

2 The Red hath mounted to his place ; to Indra goes the mighty 

juice : ^ 

He settles in his firm abode. 

3 0 Indn, Soma, send us now great opulence from every side 

Pour on us treasures thousandfold. ’ 

4 0 Soma Pavamana, bring, Indu, all splendours hitherward; 
Find for us food in boundless store. 

5 As thou art cleansed, bring hero strength and riches to thy 

worshipper, 

And prosper thou the singer’s hymns. 

C 0 Indu, Soma, being cleansed, bring hither riches doubly- 
piled. 

Wealth, mighty Indu, meet for lauds. 

HYMN XLI. Soma Pavatnima. 

Active and bright have they come forth, impetuous in speed 
like bnll.s, 

Driving the black skin far away. 

2 Quelling the r.tclcss Dasyu, may we think upon the bridge of 

bliss, 

Leaving the bridge of woe behind. 

3 The mighty Pavamana’s loir is heard as ’twere the rush of rain : 
Lightnings are flashing to the sky. 

4 Pour out oil us abundant food, when thou art pressed, 0 Indu, 

wealth 

In kiue and gold and steeds and spoil. 

5 Flow oil thy way, Most Active, ihou : fill full the mighty heav- 

ens and earth, 

As Dawn, as Surya with his beams. 


2 The Red: Soma. II is place: tlxei dronakalasd, or reservoir. J/is firm 
abode : heaven. 

6 Doahhj -piled . dvihdrhasam : according to S4yana, * from both worlds, 
heaven and earth ’ 

1 They : the Soma juices. The black skin : meaning, apparently, both tbe 
black pall or covering of night and the lUkshasas or dark-skinned Dasyus or 
hostile aborigines. 

3 The cleansing of the terrestiial Soma is identified with the purification 
of the celestial nectar accompanied by rain and lightning. See HiUebrandt, 



j7fil/iV 43.] Min HIQVEDA. 207 

6 On every side, 0 Soma, flow round us with thy protecting 
btrearn, 

As llasa flows around the world. 

HYMN XLII. Soma PavamSina. 

Engendering the Sun in floods, engendering heaven’s lights, 
greeu-hued, 

Kubed in the waters and the milk, 

2 According to primeval plan this Soma, with his stream, effused 
Flows purely on, a God for Gods. 

3 For him victorious, waxen great, the juices with a thousand 

powers 

Ate purified for winning spoil. 

4 Shedding (he ancient fluid he is poured into the cleansing sieve : 
He, thuuderiug, hath produced the Gods. 

5 Soma, while purifying, sends hither all things to be desired. 
He sends the Gods who stiengthon Law. 

G Soma, effused, pour ou us wealth in kine, in heroes, steeds, 
and spoil, 

Send us abundant store of food. 

HYMN XLIII. Soma Pavamdna. 

We will enrobe with sacred song the Lovely One who, as a 
Steed, 

ts decked with milk for rapturous joy. 

2 All songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way, 
Indu for ludra, for his drink. 

3 Soma flows on when purified, belov6d and adorned with songs, 
Songs of the sage Medhyatithi. 

4 0 Soma Pavamaua, find exceeding glorious wealth for us, 
Wealth, Indu, fraught with boundless might. 

5 Like courser raeiiig to the prize ludu, the lover of the Gods, 
Hoars, as he passes, in the sieve. 

^ E'lsd; a mythical stream that flows round the atmospheie aud the earth. 
See V. 41. 15, and X. 108. 1. 

1 hi floods : in the waters ou high ; in the firmament. 

^ 4 Ihilh produced the Gods: yatrasonio 'hhishdifate Ultra devd niyatamprldur- 
^havanti; where Soma is effused, there the gods constantly apptar. — Sftyana. 

1 ^5 a steed : is bathed in water. For rapturous joy : ‘ for the exhilaration 
.of the gods) ^—Wilson. 

^ Medhydtithi : the Rishi of the hymn, 
y tiuciny to the prize : vdjasrlt : ‘rushing into battle.’ — Wilson, 



208' THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

6 Flow on thy way to win us strength, to speed the sage who 
praises thee : 

Soma, bestow heioic power. 

HYMN XLI V , Soma Pavamilna. 

Indu, to us for this great rite, bearing ns ’twere thy wave to 
Gods, 

Unwearied, thou art flowing forth. 

2 Pleased with the hymn, impelled by prayer, Soma is hurried 

far away, 

The Wise One in the Singer’s stream. 

3 Watchful among the Gods, this juice advances to the cleans- 

ing sieve : 

Soma, most active, travels on. 

4 Flow onward, seeking strength for us, embellishing the sacri- 

fice : 

The priest with trimmed grass calletli thee. 

5 May Somi, ever bringing power to Bhaga and to Vayu, Sage 
And Hero, lead us to the Gods. 

0 So, to inci’case our w'ealth to-day, Tnspirer, best of Furtherei's, 
Win for us strength and high renown. 

HYMN XLV. Som'ri Pavamiliia, 

Flow, thou who viowest men, to give delight, to entertain the 
Gods, 

Tndu, to Indra for his drink. 

2 Stream to thine embassy for us : thou hastencst, for Indra, h 
The Gods, 0 better than our friends. 

3 Wc balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rap 

turous joy : 

Unbar for us the doors of wealth. 


6 Heroic power : ‘excellent male offspring.’ — Wilson. 

1 For this great rite : ‘ to give us abundant wealth.’ — Wilson. Umuearied 
ay^syah : according to S/lyana, this is the name of the Rishi : 

(goeth) towards the gods (in sacrifice).’ — Wilson. 


2 Thou hastenest : Silyana gives a different explanation of this part of tb 
stanza : ‘ thou (who) art drunk for Indra, (pour) on the gods wealth for (» 
their) friends.’ — Wilson. I have adopted Ludwig’s interpretation. 

3 We balm thee, red of hue: or, ‘Yea, we adorn thee, red.’ For the ra} 
turous joy : mudiya : ‘ for the purpose of exhilaration.’— Wilson, 



HYM^ 46.] TUB RIQVEDA. 209 

4 He through the sieve hath passed, as comes a courser to the 

pole, to run : 

Indu belongs unto tlie Gods. 

5 All friends have lauded him as he sports in the wood, beyond 

the fleece : 

Singers have chanted Indu’s praise. 

6 Flow, Indu, with that stream wherein steeped thou announc- 

ost to the man 

Who worships thee heroic strength. 

HYMN XLVI. Soma PavamAna. 

Like able coursers they have been sent forth to be the feast 
of Gods, 

Joying in mountains, flowing on 

2 To Yayu flow the Soma-streams, the drops of juice made 

beautiful 

Like a bride dowered by her sire. 

3 Pressed in the mortar, these, the drops of juice, the Somas 

rich in food. 

Give strength to Indra with their work. 

4 Deft-hand cd men, run hither, seize the brilliant juices blent 

with meal, 

And cook with milk the gladdening draught. 

5 Thus, Soma, Conqueror of wealth ! flow, finding furtherance 

for us, 

Giver of ample opulence. 

6 This Pavamana, meet to be adorned, the fingers ten adorn, 
Tlie draught that shall make Indra glad. 


4 To the 'pole : the meaning of dhuram here is not clear, and the corapari- 
80 U ia not obvious. ‘As a horse in going passes the shaft (of the chariot).’ — 
Wihon ‘As a horse (presses) thi'ough the yoke,’ — Grassmanu. Ludwig 
su^^^ests ‘ hedge ’ or ‘ barrier ’ as the probable meaning of the word in this 

pUcft. 

-Wn the wood, beyond the fief e ■ when he has passed through the woollen 
strainer and fallen into the wooden trough or vat. Singers: ndvdh: shouts 
of joy, according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon. 

1 They have been sent forth : dsrigran (effusi sunt) is applicable both to the 
©iiuaed Soma-dreps and to hoi sea loosed or started for a race. Joying in 
'^tioHntains ; coming from plants grown on hills. 

2 Lowered by her sire : meaning, perhaps, possessed of property inherited 
from her father; 

4 Left-handed : suhastyal} cannot be satisfactorily accounted for. Suhastyd, 
^ d ial, may have been the original reading. See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol. 
847, 348. 



800 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 

HYMN XLVIL Soma Pavamilna. 

Great as he was, Soma hath gained strength by this high 
solemnity : 

Joyous he riseth like a bull. 

2 His task is done : his crushings of the Dasyus are made 

manifest : 

He sternly reckoneth their debts. 

3 Soon as his song of praise is born, the Soma, Indra’s juice, 

becomes 

A thousand- winning thunderbolt. 

4 Seer and Sustainer, he liimself dcsireth riches for the sage 
When ho embcllisheth his songs. 

5 Fain would they both win riches as in races of the steeds. In war 
Thou art upon the coiupierors’ side. 

PlYMN XLVIir. Soma Pavamana 

With sacrifice we seek to thee kind Cherishcr of manly might 
In mansions of the lofty heavens ; 

2 Gladdening, crusher of the bold, ruling with very mighty sway, 
Destroyer of a hundred forts. 

3 Hence, Sapient One ! the Falcon, strong of wing, unwearied 

brought thee down, 

Lord over riches, from the sky. 

4 That each may see the light, the Bird brought us the guarc 

of Law, the Friend 
Of all, the speeder through the air. 

5 And now, sent forth, it hath attained to mighty power anc 

majesty, 

Most active, ready to assist. 

1 Riseth : or, roareth. Sahdam karoti — SAyaT’a. 

2 He sternly reckoneth their debts : ‘ rcbolute he acquits the debts (of th 
W 01 shipper) ’ — Wilson. 

3 A thousand-winning thunderbolt : all-powerful to slay the wicked aud t 
reward worshipjieis. 

4 Sustainer • I follow Ludwig in taking vidhartdri as a nominative singulai 
Hut see Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. 

5 They both * Soma and tlie sage or singer — Ludwig. SAyana interpret 
the stanza differently : — ‘ Thou deairest to give wealth to those who conque 
in combat as (men offer fodder) to horses in battle.’ — Wilson. 

1 Kind Cherisher of manly might : * auspicious bearing wealth.’ — Wilson. 

2 Hundred forU : cf, IV 26. 3. 

3 The Falcon : see IV. 26 and 27. , 

4 The Friend of all : or, the common possession. The speeder through tl 
air : rajaiHram : * the showerer of water.’ — Wilson. 



hymn 60.] 


THE RIQVEHA. 


301 


HYMN XLIX. Soma Pavam^lna. 

Pour down the rain upon us, pour a wave of waters from the 

sky, 

And plenteous store of wholesome food. 

2 Flow onward with that stream of thine, whereby the cows 

have come to us, 

The kine of strangers to oiir home. 

3 Chief Friend of Gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with 

thy stream, 

Pour down on us a flood of rain. 

4 To give us vigour, with thy stream run through the fleecy 

straining cloth ; 

For verily the Gods will hear. 

5 Onward hath Paviimana flowed and beaten off the Rakshasas, 
Flashing out splendour as of old. 

HYMN L. Sotna PavamUna. 

Loud as a river’s roaring w^ave thy powers have lifted up 
themselves : 

Urge on thine arrow’s sharpened point. 

2 At thine effusion upward rise three voices full of joy, when thou 
Flowest upon the fleecy ridge. 

3 On to the fleece they urge with stones the tawny well-belovt:d 

One, 

Even Pavamana, dropping meath. 

4 Flow with thy current to the sieve, 0 Sage most powerful to 

cheer, 

To seat thee in the place of song. 

5 Flow, Most Exhilarating ! flow anointed with the milk for 

balm, 

Indu, for Tndra, for his drink. 


4 The, Qnds will hear : the sound that thou makest in (lowing — Silyrtna. 

5 Flashing out splendour as of old . or, ‘ Making lights shine as erst they 

shone ’ 

1 Urge on thine arrow’s sharpened point : vdnd'^yn chodayd pavim : apparent- 
ly a bold metaphorical expression for ‘make a noise like th.it of a discharged 
arrow.’ ‘ Emit thy sound like that of a (rushing) arrow ’ —Wilson. Or 
rdndsya may mean of (thy) reed, pipe, flute, oi other musical instrument, and 
bilyana explains parfm by s<<6(faw». Benfey accoidingly (S^linaveda, II. 5. 1. 

b) renders the passage ; ‘ Erhebe deiner Flote Schall.’ ' Lift up the music 
of thy flute.’ According to Hillebrandt, V. M , 1. p. 43, the reed or arrow 
the sharp-pointed stalk of the Soma-plant. 

2 Three voices fuR of joy : or, three several joyful words. See IX. 33. 4. 
The. fleecy ridge : ‘ the summit of the fleece.’ — Wilson. 

4 In the place of song : see IX. 25. fl. ‘ On Indra’s lap.’— Wilson. 



302 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX, 

HYMN" LI. Soma Pavam4na. 

Adiivaryu, on the filter pour the Soma juice expressed with 
stones, 

And make it pure for Indra’s drink. 

2 Pour out for Indra, Thunder-armed, the milk of heaven, the 

Soma’s juice. 

Most excellent, most rich in sweets. 

3 These Gods and all the Marut host, Indu ! enjoy this juice o 

thine. 

This Pavamana’s flowing meath. 

4 For, Soma, thou hast been effused, strengthening for the wik 

carouse, 

0 Steer, the singer, for our help. 

5 Flow with thy stream. Far-sighted One, effused, into the cleans 

ing sieve : 

Flow on to give us strength and fame. 

HYMN LTI. Soma PavamUnf 

Wealth-wtnner, dwelling in the sky, bringing us vigour will 
the juice, 

Flow to the filter when effused. 

2 So, in thine ancient ways, may he, belov6d, with a thousan< 

streams 

Run o’er the fleecy straining-cloth. 

3 Him who is like a caldron shake : 0 Indu, shako thy gift to ii 
Shake it, aimed Warrior ! with thine arms. 

4 Indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the vigour o 

these men, 

Of liirn who threatens us with war. 

5 Indu, Wealth giver, with thine liolp pour out for us a hundred 

yea, 

A thousand of thy pure bright streams. 


4 For the wild carouse: ‘for speedy exhilaration.’ — Wilson. 


2 May he : the juice, regarded as distinct from Soma who is addressed. 

3 Him who is like a caldron : beat or bruise the Soma that is full of j»nc 
as a caldron is of water. With thine arms : or, with the blows (of the pres8lI)^ 
stones) The meaning of the second and third ‘shake’ seems to be ‘sen 
rapidly.’ ‘ (Soma), send (us) him who is like a pot ; Indu, send us now wealth 
swift-flowing (Soma), send it with blows (of the stones).’ — Wilson. Profess^ 
Grassmann says that by ‘ him who is like a caldron’ the wealthy enemy 
intended, whose possessions are to be poured out upon the pious worshipp®^^' 



jjYMN 55.] 


THE RIQVEDA. 


303 


HYMN LIII. Soma Pavam&na. 

0 THOU with stones for arms, thy powers, crushing the fiends, 
have raised themselves : 

Chase thou the foes who compass us. 

2 Thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, and 

when the prize is staked : 

With fearless heart will I sing praise. 

3 Nj one with evil thought assails this Pavamana’s holy laws : 
(hush him who fain would fight with thee 

4 For liidra to the streams they drive the tawny rapture-drop- 

ping Steed, 

Indu the bringer of delight. 

HYMN LTV. Soma PavamAna. 

After his ancient splendour, they, the bold, have drawn the 
bright milk from 

The Sage who wins a thousand gifts. 
i In aspect he is like the Sun; he runneth forward to the lakes, 
Seven currents flowing through the sky. 

3 Ho, shining in his splendour, stands high over all things that 

exist — 

Soma, a God ns Surya is. 

4 Thon, Indn, in thy brilliancy, ponrest on us, as ludra’s Friend, 
Wealth from the kino to feast the Gods. 

HYMN LV. Soma Pavamlina. 

Four on us with thy juice all kinds of corn, each sort of noiuish- 
mont, 

And, Soma, all felicities. 

- As thine, 0 Indu, is the praise, and thine wluat springeth from 
tlie juice, 

Seat tliee on the dear sacred giTiss. 

1 it h stones for <inns : udrk'ah . goiier.dly an appellative of ladra, the 
or caster of the stone thunderbolt; here, accudiiig to Sayana, = 

'J^''n'iivan soraa, 0 Sotna, possessor of, that is, expressed by, the stones. 

2 11 hen car meets car : in battle. When the prize is staked: in the chariot- 
rave ; or the reference may be also to battle. 

4 To the streams : the msativari waters. 

1 They^ the hold : the Soma-pressera. The Sage : or Rishi ; Soma. 

2 The lakes : of air. Seven currents : corres|)onding to the seven earthly 
1 lyers. ‘ unites with the seven down-descending rivers of heaven. 
'Vilson, 

^ From the kine : consisting of milk, curds, etc. 



304 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK IZ 

3 And, finding for ns kine and steeds, 0 Soma, with thy juice 

flow on 

Through days that fly most rapidly. 

4 As one who conquers, ne’er subdued, attacks and slays tht 

enemy, 

Thus, Vanquisher of thousands ! flow. 

HYMN LVI. SomaPavamAna 

Swift to the purifying sieve flows Soma as exalted Law, 
Slaying the bends, loving the Gods. 

2 When Soma pours the strengthening food a hundred ever 

active streams 

To Indra’s friendship win their way. 

3 Ten Dames have sung to welcome thee, even as a maide 

greets lier love : 

0 Soma, thou art decked to win. 

4 Flow hitherward, 0 Indu, sweet to Tndra and to Vishnu : guar 
The men, the singers, from distress, 

HYMN LVJL SomaPavaniib 

Tiiy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like sho\^ei 
of rain from heaven, 

To bring a thousand stores of strength. 

2 He flows beholding on his way all well-bclovM sacred lore, 
Green-tinted, brandishing his arms. 

3 He, when the people deck him like a docile king of elephant 
Sits as a falcon in the wood. 

4 So bring thou hitherward to us, Tndu, while thou art purific 
All treasures both of heaven and earth. 

HYMN LVIII. SomaPavamfti 

SwTPT runs this giver of delight, even the stream of flowii 
juice : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 


4 Vanquisher of thousands : or, thou who winnest thousands, i. c. countU 

Bptiils or treasures. 

3 Ten Dames : the fingers, whose sound is heard in the operation of pressi 

the Soma juice. 

3 Like a docile kinq of elephants : von Roth, in the St. Petersbu 
Lexicon, suggests ibhe for ibhuh, * like a pious king among his retinue ; ’ 
no alteration is necessary, ibhah and rd,Jd being taken together in tlie ser 
of elephant-king or stately and noble elephant. See Vedische Stvdien, l‘ 
XV. Sits as a falcon in the wood : in the wood, as referring to the 
meaning the wooden trough or vat. ‘ Sits on the waters like a hawk.’ — 'ViU 

1 SwifU tdrat : * rescuing (his worshippers from sin).’— Wilson. 



BYUN 60.] TDE EIGVEDA, 80S 

2 The Morning knows all precious things, the Goddess knows her 

grace to man : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

3 We have accepted thousands from Dhvasra^s and Purushanti^s 

hands : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

4 From whom we have accepted thus thousands and three times 

ten besides : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

HYMN LIX. Soma PavamAna. 

Flow onward, Soma, winning kinc, and steeds, and all that 
gives delight : 

Bring hither wealth with progeny. 

2 Flow onward from the waters, flow, inviolable, from the plants : 
Flow onward from the pressing-boards. 

3 Soma, as Pavamana, pass over all trouble and distress : 

Sit on the sacred grass, a Sage. 

4 Thou, Pavamana, foundest light ; thou at thy birth becamest 

great : 

0 Indu, thou art over all. 

HYMN LX. Soma PavamAna. 

Sing forth and laud with sacred song most active Pavamana, 
laud 

Iiidu who sees with thousand eyes. 

2 Thee who hast thousand eyes to see, bearer of thousand bur- 
thens, they 

Have filtered through the fleecy cloth. 


3 Dhvasra and Purushanti were ‘ two kings who conferred great wealth on 
Tarantu and Parmnilha, two rishis of the family of Vidadaha. See p. 
XXXllI. of Max-Mullor’a llig-veda, Vol. V.’ — Cowell’s note in Wilson’s 
Translation. 

4 Thui thoumnds and thre times ten : vSAyana, taking tdnd (thus, in this 
manner) to mean ‘garments,’ mistaking trihsdtum, thirty, for tiimtam, three 
hundred, and neglecting the cha (and), interprets ‘ three hundred thousand 
garments.’ ‘ Thnty robes and thousands ’ — E. B Cowell. Grasbmann places 
this hymn in his Appendix as a composition of fragments and out of place 
where it stands in the text. 

2 The waters: the timiaifvarf waters The pressing^hoards : dhishandbhyah : 
according to SAyana, yrdvdbhgah, the piessing-stones. 

1 With sacred song ; gdyatrina : ‘ with a Qdyatri hymn.’ — Wilson. 

2 Bearer of thousand burthens ; or, bringer of thousand bounties. 



306 THE BYMNS OF [BOOK ll 

3^ He, Pavamaua, hath streamed through the fleece: he rung 
into the jars, 

Finding his way to Indra’s heart. 

4 That Indra may be bounteous, flow, most active Soma, for our 
weal : 

Bring genial seed with progeny. 

H\ MN LX I. Soma PavamAna, 

Flow onward, Indii, with this food for him who in thy wild 
delight 

Battered the ninc-and-ninoty down, 

2 Smote swiftly forts, and Sambara, then Yadu and that Turvasa 
For pious Divodasa’s sake. 

3 Finder of horses, pour on us horses and wealth in kine ano' 

gold, 

And, Indu, food in Ix^undlesa store. 

4 We seek to win thy friendly love, even Puvamana’s flowirij 

o'er 

The limit of the cleansing sieve. 

5 With those same waves which in their stream overflow th 

purifying sieve, 

Soma, be gracious unto ns. 

6 0 Soma, being purified, bring ns from all sides,— for the 

canst, — 

Kiches and food with hero sons. 

7 Him here, the Child whom streams have borne, the ten swi 

fingers beautify : 

With the Adityas is he seen. 

8 Witli Indra and with V^yu he, effused, flows onward with t' 

beams 

Of Surya to the cleansing sieve. 

9 Flow rich in sweets and lovely for onr Bhaga, Vayu, Pusha 

flow 

For Mitra and for Yaruna. 

iO High is thy juice’s birth : though set in heaven, on earth 
hath obtained 

Strong sheltering power and great renown. 

1 The nine-and-ninety : ‘ ninety -nine (cities of the foe).’ — Wilson. 

3 In houndlesi store : literally, in thousands. 

7 Whom streams have boi'ne : sindhumdlccram : * whose parents are 
rivers,’ — Wilson. B<»rn as the Moon in the ocean of air. With the Adii 
he seen : that is, he is counted as one of the Adityas. 



THE maVEDA. 




m 


11 Striving to win, with him we gain all wealth from the ungodly 

man, 

Yea, all the glories of mankind. 

12 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra w’hom we must 

adore, 

For Varuna and the Marut host. 

[3 The Gods have come to Indu well-descended, beautified with 
milk, 

The active crusher of the foe. 

1 4 Even as mother cows their calf, so let our praise-songs strength- 
en him. 

Yea, him who winneth Indra’s heart. 

5 Soma, pour blessings on our kinc, pour forth the food that 

streams with milk : 

Increase the sea that merits laud. 

6 From heaven hath Pavamana made, as ’twcre, the marvellous 

thunder, and 

The lofty light of all mankind. 

.7 The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, of Pavamana, 
King! 

Flows o’er the woollen straining-cloth. 

.8 Thy juice, 0 Pavamana, sends its rays abroad like splendid 
skill. 

Like lustre, all heaven’s light, to see. 

9 Flow onward with that juice of thine most excellent, that 

brings delight, 

Slaving the wicked, dear to LJods. 

10 Killing the foeman and his hate, and winning booty evfery 

Gainer art thou of steeds and kine. 

11 Red-huod, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its 

lovely breast, 

kalcon-like resting in tiiine home. 


Well-deicended : literally, well-born or w'ell-produced ; ‘(who ig) oouj- 
geneiated.’— Wilson. 


15 Tkt sea : samudrdm : according to S&yana, water generally. 

1 6 ‘ The purified [Soma] has generated the great light which is common to 
V *^119 wonderful thundering of the sky.’-— Muir, 0. S. TesUs , , 
• , The great light common to all men, or vaifvdnardm or the loftif' 

of all mankind, is Agni VaisvAnara. 

0 foeman and hii Kate: ‘the hostile Vritra.’ — Wilson. 



the hymns op [BOOK lx 

22 Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to slaughte 

Vritra who 

Compassed and stayed the mighty floods. 

23 Soma who rainest gifts, may we win riches with our her 

sons : 

Strengthen, as thou art cleansed, our hymns. 

24 Aided by thee, and through thy grace, may we be slayei 

when we war : 

Watch, Soma, at our solemn rites. 

25 Chasing oar foemcn, driving off the godless. Soma floweth o 
Going to IndiVs special place. 

26 0 Pavamana, hither bring great riches, and destroy our foe 
0 Indu, grant heroic fame. 

27 A hundred obstacles have ne’er checked thee when fain 

give thy t)oons, 

When, being cleansed, thou combatest. 

28 Indu, flow on, a mighty juice; glorify us among the folk : 
Drive all our enemies away. 

29 Indu, in this thy friendship most lofty and glorious may we 
Subdue all those wlio war with us. 

30 Those awful weapons that tho\i hast, sharpened at point 

strike men down — - 
Guard us therewith from every foe. 

HYMN LXII. Soma Pavamt 

These rapid Soma-drops have been poured through the pi 
fyiug sieve 

To bring us all felicities. 

2 Dispelling manifold mishap, giving the courser’s progeny, 

Yea, and the warrior steed, success. 


26 The godless: Ardvndh: those who present no sacrificiil offerings; 
withholders (of wealth).’ — Wilson. Special place: that ia, the vesBel 
•part for his libations. 

26 Heroic fame : or, fame with brave eons. 

27 Obstacles: or enemies, according to S&yana. Thou combatest: mo 

eydse: according to Sflyana, ‘when thou wi.shest to give us wealth.’ 
meanings “fight,” “strive,” etc,, aie foreign to Sfiya.a, being derived 
• comparison of macto, etc.’— Editor’s note in Wilson’s T 

lation. 


20. Weapons : the Moon being the warrior who overcomes the darkn* 
iQlkht See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 340. Cf. ‘The moon .... advances lil 
iaqignanll warrior through a fleeing army.*— S. T. Coleridge. 



TBE RIQVEDA. 


809 


yrilfiV 62.] 

3 Bringing prosperity to kine, they make perpetual IjsL flow 
To us for noble eulogy, 

4 Strong, mountain-born, the stalk hath been pressed in the 

streams for rapturous joy : 

Hawk-like he settles in his home. 

5 Fair is the God-loved juice; the plant is washed in waters, 

pressed by men : 

The milch-kine sweeten it with milk. 

6 As drivers deck a courser, so have they adorned the meath’s 

juice for 

Ambrosia, for the festival. 

7 Thou, Indn, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which 

were poured for help, 

Hast settled in the cleansing sieve. 

8 So flow thou onward through the fleece, for Indra flow, to be 

his drink, 

Finding thine home in vats of wood. 

9 As giving room and freedom, as most sweet, pour butter forth 

anl milk, 

0 Indu, for the Angirases. 

0 Most active and benevolent, this Pavamana, sent to us 
For lofty friendship, meditates, 

1 Quellerof curses, mighty, with strong sway, this Pavamina 

shall 

Bring treasures to the worshipper. 

2 Pour thou upon us thousandfold possessions, both of kineand 

steeds, 

Exceeding glorious, much-desired. 

^3 Wandering far, with wise designs, the juice here present is 
effused. 

Made beautiful by living men. 


8 lli : here, according to Sftyana, meaning ‘ food,’ ‘ Labetrank,’ refreshing 

3raught.~Grasemann. 


4 Tht stalk : the Soma-plant, which is said to have grown on the mountain*. 

5 In waters : the vasattvart waters. 

6 For amhroiia: amfitdya: ‘for the sake of immortality.’ — Wilson, 

^ Eor the Angirases : or, from the Angirases. The Jamadaguis were not 
nembera of that family. -Ludwig. 

10 Meditates: He known (to all).’— Wilson. 

7 many **^^^”^ '^'*** * **•**V‘^y^^* according to Sftyana, much-lauded, or praiied 



810 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK i: 

14 For Indra flows tho gladdening drink, the measurer of U 

region, Sage, 

With countless wealth and endless help. 

15 Born on the mountain, lauded here, Indu for Indra is set dow 
As in her sheltering nest a bird. 

1 6 Pressed by the men, as 'twere to war hath Soma Pavamd 

sped, 

To rest with might within the vats. 

17 That he may move, they yoke him to the three-backed trip 

seated car 

By the Seven Bishis’ holy songs, 

18 Drive ye that Tawny Courser, 0 ye pressers, on his way to w 
Swift Steed who carries off the spoil. 

19 Pouring all glories hither, he, effused and entering the jar 
Stands like a hero mid the kiije. 

20 Indu, the living men milk out thy juice to make the raptur 

draught : 

Gods for the Gods milk out the meath. 

21 Pour for the Gods into the sieve our Soma very rich in swe 
Him whom the Gods most gladly hear. 

22 Into his stream who gladdens best these Soma juices I 

been poured. 

Lauded with songs for lofty fame. 

23 Thou flowest to enjoy the milk, and bringcst valour, b 

cleansed : 

Winning tho spoil flow hitherward. 

24 And, hymned by Jaruadagnis, let all nourishment that 

supply, 

And general praises, flow to us. 

25 Soma, as leader of the song flow onward with thy wonc 

aids, 

For holy lore of every kind. 


14 The measurer of the region : who measured out and made the firms 

15 fioim on the mountain: or, perhaps, as Sa\aiia takes it, ‘made mj 
by song ’ 

17 By the Seven RUhis’ holy songs: or ‘ Of Rishis, with seven holy s 
the car being the sacrifice, tlie three backs or ridges being the thre< 
libations, the thiee seats being the three Vedas. 

19 Mid the Icine : among the enemy’s cattle, for whose poesessioi 
fighting. So, says S&yana, Soma stands among the sacrifices. 

20 The living men : the worshippers, according to SAya^a ; but perh 
Ludwig suggests, his stotdrah should be iotdrah, presaers, Oodi : dev^ 
priests. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


ants 63.] 


hi 


2G Po thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of the sea, 
Flow onward, thou who moveat all. 

27 0 Soma, 0 thou Sage, these worlds stand ready to attest thy 

might ; 

For thy behoof the rivers flow. 

28 Like showers of rain that fall from heaven thy streams per- 

petually flow 

To the bright fleece spread under them. 

29 For potent Tndra purify I ndu effectual and strong, 

Eiijoyineiit-giver, Mighty Lord. 

90 Soma, true, Pavaiuaua, Sage, is seated in the cleansing sieve, 
(jiving his praiser iiero strength, 

HYMN LXIII. Soma Pavamina. 

Pour hitherward, 0 Soma, wealth in tliousands and heroic 
strength, 

And keep renown secure for us, 

2 Thou mikest food andvigiur swell for Indra, best of glad- 

den ers ! 

Within the cups thou seatest thee. 

3 tor Indr<i and for Vishnu poured, Soma hath flowed into 

the jar : 

May Vayu find it rich in sweets. 

4 These Somas swift and brown of hue, in stream of solemn 

sacrifice 

Have flowed through twisted obstacles, 

5 Performing every noble work, active, augmenting Indra’s 

Strength, 

Driving away the godless ones. 


Brown Soma-drops, effused, that seek Indra, to their appro' 
pri.ite place 

t low through the region hitherward. 

7 flow onward with that stream of thine wherewith thou gavest 

^S irya light, ^ 

Urging oil waters good to men. 

8 He, PavamG,na, liigh o’er man yoked the Sun’s courser Etasa 

^ travel through the realm of air. 

Vaters of tke tea: of the soa of air, the firmaiueut. 


* ®iBier the twigu of whicli the frame of the filter was 
the Rilcshagat ’^Wilson straiuer. ‘Are let loose upou 

^ hi thi^ aud the following stanza Soma is identified with the Sun. 



811 Tff£ HYMNS OP [POOK JX, 

9 And those ten Coursers, tawny-hued, ho harnessed that the 
Sun might come : 

Indu, he said, is Indra’s self. 

10 Hence, singers, pour the gladdening juice to V^lyu and to 
Indra, pour 

The drops upon the fleecy cloth. 

110 Soma Pavamaiia, find wealth for iis not to be assailed, 
Wealth which the focman may not win. 

12 Send riclics hither with thy stream in thousan Is, both ol 

steeds nnd kino. 

Send spoil of war and high renown. 

13 Soma the Cod, expressed with stones, like Surya, floweth oc 

his way, 

Pouring the juice within the jar. 

14 These brilliant drops have poured for us, in stream of solemr 

sacrifice. 

Worshipful laws and strength in kine. 

15 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Somas, blent witl 

curdled milk, 

Effused for ludra Thunder-armed. 

16 Soma, do thou most rich in sweets, a gladdening drink moa 

dear to Gods, 

Flow to the sieve to bring us wealth. 

17 For Indra, living men adorn the Tawny Courser in the streamf 
Indu, the giver of delight. 

18 Pour for us, Soma, wealth in gold, in horses and heroic sons, 
Bring hither strength in herds of kine. 

19 For Indra pour ye on the fleece him very sweet to taste, wh 

longs 

For battle as it were in war. 

20 The singers, seeking help, adorn the Sage who must be deckc 

with songs : 

Loud bellowing the Steer comes on. 

21 The singers with their thoughts and hymns have, in the streai 

of sacl ifice. 

Caused Soma, active Steer, to roar. 


9 Coursers: or Harita. Cf. IV. 6. 9 and 13. 3. 

10 /fence: from thii vessel. 

14 Worshipful laics : the meaning of dht/mdnyStryd is not clear. ‘ (FIowie 
towards the dwellings of respectable (worshippers).’— Wilson. ‘Yenerai 
might.’ — Ludwig. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


313 


22 God, working with mankind, flow on ; to Indra go thy gladden- 

ing jviice ! 

To Vayu mount as Law commands.. 

23 0 Soma Pavamana, thou poorest out wealth that brings re-* 

nown I 

Enter the lake, as one we love. 

24 Soma, thou flowest chasing foes and bringing wisdom and de- 

light : 

Drive off the folk who love not Gods. 

2i) The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of Soma 
juice, 

For holy loro of every kind. 

26 The Pavamanas have been shed, the beautiful swift Soma- 

drops, 

Driving all enemies afar. 

27 From heaven, from out the firmament, hath PavamAna been 

efiusod 

Upon the summit of the earth. 

28 0 Soma, Indn, very wise, drive, being purified, with thy stream 
All foes, all Ibikshasas away. 

29 Driving the Ilakshasas afar, 0 Soma, hellowing, pour for us 
Most excellent and splendid strength. 

30 Soma, do thou secure for us the treasures of the earth and 

heaven, 

Indu 1 all boons to bo desired. 

HYMN LXIV. Soma PavaraAna, 

SoMA, thou art a splendid Steer, a Steer, 0 God, withsteerliko 
sway : 

Thou as a Steer ordainest laws. 

2 Steer-strong thy might is as a steer’s, steer strong thy wood, 
steer-like thy drink : 

A Steer indeed, 0 Steer, art thou. 

5 Thou, Indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steeds 
and kine : 

Unbar for us the doors to wealth. 


23 The lake : the dronakalu^a, vat or reservoir. 

27 The summit of the earth : the raieed altar. 

1 ^teer SAyana, as usual, explains vHshi by vnrshakah ‘ Sprinkler.'— Wilson, 
• collected, through the efificacy of the sound thou 
®‘»t m di opping through the filter, and enriched us with, steeds and kine. 



SU ^tiE OP [^OOk 

4 Out of desire of cows and steeds and heroes potent Soma-dr 
Brilliant and swift, have been effused. 

5 They purified in both the hands, made beautiful by holy t 
Flow onward to the fleecy cloth. 

6 These Soma juices shall pour forth all treasures for the 

shipper 

From heaven and earth and firmament. 

7 The streams of l*avamana, thine, Finder of all, have 1 

effused, 

Even as Surya’s rays of light. 

8 Making the light that shines from heaven thou flowestc 

every form : 

Soma, thou swcllest like a i-ca. 

9 Urged on thou sendest out thy voice, 0 Pavamana; thou 

moved, 

Like the God Surya, to the sieve. 

10 Indu, Enlightener, Friend, hath been purified by the si 

liymns : 

So starts the charioteer his steed — 

11 Thy God-delighting wave which hath flowed to the purif 

sieve, 

Alighting in the home of Law. 

12 Flow to our sieve, a gladdening draught that hath most ii 

course with Gods, 

Indu, to Indra for his drink. 

13 Flow onward with a stream for food, made beautiful by saj 

men : 

Indu with sheen approach the milk. 

14 While thou art cleansed, Song-Lover, bring comfort 

vigour to the folk, 

Poured, Tawny One ! on milk and curds. 

1.3 Purified for the feast of Gods, go thou to Tndra’s special plj 
Kcsplcndent, guided by tlic strong 

16 Accelerated by the hymn, the rapid drops of Soma juice 
Have flowed, urged onwaid, to the lake. 

17 Easily have the living diops, made beautiful, approai 

the lake, 

Yea, to the place of sacrifice. 

8 To every form, : to bring ua blesaiiiga in every shape. 

9 To the sieve : vidharmani; ‘ in observance of the law,’ according t 
Bergaigne. See La Religion Vedique, III 218, note. 

The lake : samudrdm : according to SAyana, the sea of air, the firmai 
The dronakalofa, vat or reaervoir, is probably intended. 



UYMN 64.] THE RIQVEDA, 315 

18 Compass about, our faithful Friend, all our possess ons with 

thy might ; 

Guard, hero like, our sheltering home. 

19 Loud neighs the Courser Etasa, with singers, harnessed for 

the place, 

Guided for travel to the lake. 

20 What time the Swift One resteth in the golden place of sacrifice, 
He leaves the foolish far aw'ay. 

21 Tfie friends have sung in unison, the prudent wish to sacrifice : 
Down sink the unintelligent. 

22 For Indra girt by Maruts, flow, thou Indu, very rich in sweets, 
To sit in place of sacrifice. 

23 Controlling priests and sages skilled in holy song adorn thee 

well : 

The living make thee beautiful. 

21 Aryaman, Mitra, Varnna drink Pavamana’s juice, yea, thine: 
0 Sage, the Maruts drink thereof. 

25 0 Soma, Indu, thou while thou art purified urgest onward 

speech 

Thousandfold, with the lore of hymns. 

26 Yea, Soma, Indu, while thou art purified do thou bring to us 
Speech thousandfold that longs for war. 

27 0 Indu, Much-invoked, while thou art purifying, as the Friend 
Of these men enter thou the lake. 

28 Bright are these Sonias blent with milk, with light that flashes 

brilliantly 

And form that utters loud acclaim. 

29 Led by his drivers, and sent fortli, the Strong Steed hath come 

nigh for spoil. 

Like warriors when they stand arrayed. 

30 Specially, Soma, coming as a Sage from heaven to prosper us, 
Flow like the Sun for us to see. 


The Courser Etnm : here meaning Soma. FdA?n'^ (from ra/t, Lat. veh o) 
is properly a horse of burden, or drauglit-horse. 

21 The friends : the piiests ; or perhaps the Maruts, Down sink; narake, 
into hell, says S3yana, 

26 That longs for war: mahhasguvam : * desiring wealth.’ — Wilson. Se© 
IX. 61. 27, note. 

28 Form : krip ^ ; stream, according to SAyana. 

80 Specially ; j'idJidk : said by YAska to be the Vedic form of prithak^ and 
w be used in the sense of prospering. See Wilson’s Translation, Kditor’s note. 
ridhak may mean, lightly, easily, without effort. 



81« THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l 

HYMN LXV. Soma Payamin 

The glittering maids send Sura forth, the glorious sisters, clos 
nlliedi 

Send Indu forth, their mighty Lord, 

2 Pervade, 0 Paviimann, all our treasures with repeated light, 
God, coming hither from the Gods. 

3 Pour on ns, Pavamana, rain, as service and fair praise f( 

Gods : 

Pour all to bo our nourishment. 

4 Thou art a Steer by lustre ; we, 0 Pavamana, faithfully 
Call upon thee the Splendid One. 

5 Do thou, l ejoicing, nobly armed ! pour upon us heroic strengtl 
O Indu, come thou hitherward. 

6 When thou art cleansed with both the hands and dipped 

waters, with tlic woo I 
Thou comest to the gathering-place. 

7 Sing forth your songs, as Vyasva sang, to Soma Pavamana, 
The Mighty One with thousand eyes; 

8 Whose coloured sap they drive with stones, the yellow meat 

distilling juice, 

Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

9 We seek to g.iin the friendly love of thee that Strong ai 

Mighty One, 

Of thee the winner of all wealth. 

10 Flow onward with thy stream, a Steer, inspiriting the Maru 
Lord, 

Winning all riches by thy might. 

Ill send thee forth to battle from the press, 0 PavamHi 
Strong, 

Sustainer, looker on the light. 

12 Acknowledged by this song of mine, flow, tawny colour 

with thy stiearn ; 

Incite to b.iltle thine ally. 

13 0 Indu, visible to all pour out for us abundant food : 

Soma, be thou our pro8[)erer. 

1 The glittering maids: the fingers, perhaps with reference to the g 
riogs worn by the pi iests when they press the Soma. SHni : here said 
0iean Soma ; ‘ the invigorating ’ — Wibon. The glorioui sistert : the 6ugei 
3 service • as the cause of worship. 

6 With the wood : * (taken up) with the wooden vessel.' — Wilson. Cf. 

1 . 2 . 

7 Vyafva: a l^ishi frequently mentioned in Book VIIL 
12 Thine ally: India, 



THE RIQVEDA. 


317 


hymn 65 .] 

U The pitchers, Iiidn, with thy streams have sung aloud in 
vigorous might : 

Enter them, and let Indra diink. 

15 0 thou whose potent gladdening juice they milk out with the 

stnues, flow on, 

Destroyer of our enemies. 

16 King Pavamana is implored witli holy songs, ou man's behalf, 
To travel through the fiimament. 

17 Bring us, 0 Indu, hundredfold increase of kine, and noble 

steeds, 

The gift of fortune for our help. 

18 Pressed for the banquet of the Gods, 0 Soma, bring us might, 

and speed, 

Like beauty for a brilliant show. 

19 Soma, flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to the wooden 

vats. 

Falcon-like resting in thino homo. 

20 Soma the Water- winner flows to Indra, V«iyu, Varuna, 

To Vishnu and the Mavut host. 

21 Soma, bestowing food upon our progeny, from every side 
Pour on us riches thousandfold I 

32 The Soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at 
hand, 

Or there on Saryanavan's bank, 

23 Those pressed among Arjikas, pressed among the active, in 

men’s homes, 

Or pressed among the Races Five — 

24 May these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon us, as 

they flow, 

Rain from the heavens and hero strength. 

25 Urged forward o’er the ox-hide flows the Lovely One of 

tawny hue, 

Lauded by Jamad.igni’s song. 

26 Like horses urged to speed, the drops, bright, stirring vital 

power, when blent 

With milk, are beautified in streams. 

22 BxvyaryUvdifC i bank : this lake is said to be on the borders of the Kuru- 
kshetra country. 

63^11 : apparently a non- Aryan people in the North- West, See VIII. 

25 O'er the ox-hide : the leather sheet that received the droppings of the 
boiua. 



SIS THE HYMNS OP [BOOR ] 

27 So they who toil with juices send thee forward for the Goc 

repast : 

So with this splendour flow thou on. 

28 We choose to-day that chariot-steed of thine, the Strong, th 

brings us bliss, 

The Cuardian, the desire of all, 

29 The Excellent, the Gladdener, the Sage with heart that u 

derstaiids. 

The Guardian, the de-ire of all ; 

30 Wlio for ourselves, 0 thou Most Wise, is wealth and h 

intelligence. 

The Guardian, the desire of all. 

HYMN I.XVI. Soma Piivatnd 

For holy lore of every sort, flow onward thou whom all men lo) 
A Friend to be besought by fi lends. 

2 O’er all thou rulest with those Two which, Soma Pavamac 

stand, 

Turned, as thy stations, hitherward. . 

3 Wise Soma Pavanvina, thou cncompassest on every side 
d hy stations as the seasons come. 

4 Flow onward, generating food, for precious boons of every kir 
A Fiiend for fi lends, to l)e our help. 

3 Up<)n the lofty ridge of heaven thy bright rays with tli 
essences, 

Soma, spread purifying power. 

6 0 Soma, these Seven Rivers flow, as being thine, to g: 

command : 

The streams of milk run forth to thee. 

7 Flow onward, Soma in a stream, effused to gladden Tndra’a liea 
Bringing imperishable fame, 

8 Driving thee in Vivasvan’s course, the Seven Sisters 

their hymns 

Made melody round thee the Sage. 

23 The (juardiaii : p/fntmn • according to Pisehel, ‘den schwelleutl 
‘ the swelling one.’ Sec his exhaustive excursus on the word in Vedii 
Studien, 1. pp. 191—194. 

The Rishis are the hundred Vaikhnnasaa, said to have been a race of sail 
hermits sprung fiom tlie nails of PrajApati. 

2 With these Tm : probably a double asterism. See Hillebrandt, P. 
p. 446 ; and Gaidicke, Der Accusativ im Veda, p 199. 

8 The stream of Soma is likened to the course of VivasvAn or the Sun. 
The Seven Sisters are probably the Seven Rivers of stanza 6. Accordiuj 
8 A} ana ‘ the seven kindred (priests)’ aie intended. 



TBE RlaYEDA. 819 

9 The virgins dech thee o’er fresh streams to drive thee to the 

.sieve wlien thou, 

A singer, bathcst in the wood. 

[0 The streams of Pavamana, thine, Sage, Mighty One, have 
poured them forth 
Like coursers eager for renown. 

[1 They have been poured upon the fleece towards the meath- 
distilling vat : 

The holy songs have sounded forth. 

12 Like milch-kinc coming home, the drops of Soma juice have 

readied the lake, 

Pave reached the place of sacrifice. * 

13 0 Indu, to our great delight the running waters flow to ns. 
When thou wilt robe thyself in milk. 

U 111 this thy friendship, and with thee to help us, fain to 
sacrifice, 

Indu, we crave thy friendly love. 

15 Flow on, 0 Soma, for the great Viewer of men, for gain of kine 
Enter thou into Iiidra’s throat. 


IG Best ait thou, Soma, of the great, Strongest of strong ones, 
Indu : thou 

As Wanior ever hast prevailed. 

17 Mightier even than the strong, more valiant even than the 
bnivo, 

More liberal than the bountiful, 

Soma, as Sura, bring us food, win offspring of our bodies : wo 
I Elect thee for our friendshij), we elect thee for companionship. 
1 9 Agni, thou pourest life; send down upon ns food and vigorous 
I strength ; 

j Drive thou misfortune far aw'ay. 

pfi Agni is Pavamana, Sage, Chief Priest of all the Races Five : 

[ D> him whose wealth is great we pray. 

1 Skilled in thy task, 0 Agni, pour splendour with hero strength 
on us, 

L ranting me wealth that nourishes. 


fingei 8. 

‘ dromkalagd or reservoir. 

' gain of kine ; gdvishlaye: according to Sftyana, ‘ for the seeker of 
kine of the Angirasoa.’ e ^ » 

u(lwi~* D * VTho art a hero.' — Wilson. * From the Sum' — 


• duchchMndm : frequently personified as an evil power ,* 
i2uh^a«ai.’_WiUon. 



820 


THE HYMNS OF 


[^OOK 


22 Beyond his enemies away to sweet praise Pavam^na flows 

Like Sflrya visible to all. ’ 

23 Adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, rich 

food, 

Far-sighted Indu is a Steed. 

24 Ho, Pavamana, hath produced the lofty Law, the brilli 

light, 

Destroying darkness black of hue. 


25 From tawny Pavamana, the Destroyer, radiant streams h 

sprung, 

• Quick streams from him whose gleams are swift. 

26 Best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise 

beauteous ones, 

Gold-gleaming with the Marut host, 

27 May Pavamfina, best to win the booty, penetrate with rayi 
Giving the singer hero strength. 

28 Over the fleecy sieve hath flowed the drop effused : to Ir 

comes 

Indu while he is purified. 

29 This Soma, through the pressing-stones, is sporting on th( 

hide, and 

Summoning India to the draught. 

30 0 Pavamana, bless us, so that we may live, with that bri 

milk 

Of thine which hath been brought from heaven. 


HYMN LXVII. Soma and Ot 

Thou, Soma, hast a running stream, joyous, most strong 
sacrifice : 

Flow bounteously bestowing wealth. 

2 Effused as chceror of the men, flowing best gladdener, thou 
A Prince to India with thy juice. 

3 Poured forth by pressing-stones, do thou with loud roar i 

us in a stream 

Most excellent illustrious might. 


23 Is a Steed : ‘ one who continually goes to the Gods/ is SAya;is’a exi 
tion of dtijah, horee or courser. 

26 The Destroyer • of darkness. Of. IX. 61. 30. 

27 Penetrate • the whole world. — SAyana. 

29 On the ox-hide : see IX. 65. 25. 

2 A Prince : tHrih : a rich and liberal patron. 



TUB mOYBBA. 


321 


YW 67 ] 

. Indii, urged forward, floweth through the fleecy cloth : the 
Tawny One 

With bia loud roar hath brought us strength. 

I Indii, thou flowest through the fleece, bringing felicities and 

fame, 

And, Soma, spoil and wealth in kine. 

, Hither, 0 Iiidu, bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundred- 
fold : 

Bring wealth, 0 Soma, thousandfold. 

In purifying, through the sieve the rapid drops of Soma juice 
Come nigh to ludra in their course. 

1 For Indra floweth excellent Indu, the noblest Soma juice, 
The Living for the Living One. 

I The glittering maids send Sura forth: they with their song 
have sung aloud 
To Pavamijina dropping mcath. 

) May Piishan, drawn by goats, be our protector, and on all his 
paths 

Bestow on us our share of maids. 

. This Soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the 
braided locks : 

He shall give us our share of maids. 

: This Soma juice, 0 glowing God, flows like pure oil, cflused 
for thee : 

Ho shall give us our share of maids. 

i Flow onward. Soma, in thy stream, begetter of the sages' 
speech : 

Wealth-giver among Gods art thou. 

The Falcon dips within the jars : ho wraps him in his robe 
• and goes 

Loud roaring to the vats of wood. 

* Soma, thy juice hath been effused and poured into the 

pitcher : like 

A rapid hawk it rushes on. 

* for Indra flow most rich in sweets, 0 Soma, bringing him 

delight. 

Th glittering maids send SHra forth: repeated from IX. 65. 1. 

] '>^<^ids : desirable and appioved wives. — Sdyana. 

hmwlio wears the braided locks : kapardine : see I. 114. 1, and VII. 
Here Pa^han is intendea. 

\ y^l^«9(?od;Pa8han. 

ie Balcon : the falcon-like Soma. 

21 



322 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

17 They wore sent forth to feast the Gods, like chariots 

display their strength. 

18 Brilliant, best givers of delight, these juices have sent Va 

forth. 

19 Bruised by the press-stones and extolled, Soma, though 

to the sieve, 

Giving the worshipper hero strength. 

20 This juice bruised by the pressing-stones and lauded pa; 

through the sieve, 

Slayer of demons, through the fleece. 

21 0 Pavamana, drive away the danger, whether near at b 
Or far remote, that finds me here. 

22 This day may Pavamana cleanse us with his purifying po 
Most active purifying Priest. 

23 0 Agni, with the cleansing light diftused through all thy 1 

glow, 

Purify thou this prayer of ours. 

24 Cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, 0 Agni, th 

bright with flame, 

And by libations poured to thee. 

25 Savitar, God, by both of these, libation, purifying pc 
Purify me on every side. 

26 Cleanse us, God Savitar, with Three, 0 Soma, with siibli 

forms, 

Agni, with forms of power and might. 

27 May the Gods^ company make me clean, and Vasus maki 

pure by song. 

Purify me, ye General Gods ; O Jatavedas, make me pur 

28 Fill thyself full of juice, flow forth, 0 Soma, thou with al 

stalks, 

The best oblation to the Gods. 

29 We with our homage have approached the Friend who 

our wondering praise, 

Young, strengthener of the solemn rite. 


18 Have sent Vdyxifm'th: have drawn him down from heaven. ‘ 
forth for VAyu.’ — Wilson. 

26 The Three mhlimeet forme said to be Agni, VAyu, and Sui 
Fire, Wind, and Sun, 

27 The Gods’ company : the yajamdnas or sacrificers, or the troop ol 
Indra and others.— SAyaua, General Gods : visve devdh ; or, all ye Gfo< 



THE RIGVEDA. 


323 


68 .] 

Lost is Alayya’s axe, 0 Soma, God : do thou send it back hither 
in thy flow 

Even, Soma, God, if ’twero a mole. 

The man who reads the essence stored by saints, the PavamSnr 
hymns. 

Tastes food completely purified, made sweet by Matarisvan’s 
touch. 

Whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the P^vamani 
hymns, 

Sarasvati draws forth for him water and blitter, milk and 
meath. 

HYMN LX VII I, Soma PavamAna. 

The drops of Soma juice like cows who yield their milk have 
flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the Shining One, 

And, seated on the grass, raising their voice, assumed the milk, 
the covering robe whereivith the udders stream. 

He bellows with a roar around the highest twigs : the Tawny 
One is sweetened as he breaks them up. 

Then, passing through the sieve into the ample room, the God 
throws off the dregs according to his wish. 

The gladdening drink that measured out the meeting Twins 
fills full with milk the Eternal Ever-waxing Pair. 

Bringing to light the Two great Regions limitless, moving 
above them he gained sheen tliat never fades. 

10 This stanza is well-nigh unintelligible. Alayya may, as is suggested 
the St Petersburg Lexicon, be a name of Indra, and the lost axe may be 
} thunderbolt which the poet thinks has long lain idle, and which Soma 
prayed to replace in the hands of the Thunderer, even though it were 
I’thless and mischievous like a mole. SAyana’s interpretation is different ; — 
ay the battle-axe of the foe destroy the foe alone : flow to us, bright Soma ; 
ly) the villain only, bright Soma.’— Wilson. 

11 .-Sy minU : by the Rishis to wlioni they were revealed. Pdvam^nt 

>a)i8 ; the hymns in this Book dedicated to the purification of the Soma 
ve. By Mhtariivan's touch: ‘ SAyana says il/dian'smn means Pdyw because 
breathes in the atmosphere antarikshe swanti : the food is sweetened and 
rifled by the purifying wind and the man eats it.’ — Wilson, MAtarisvan 
^bably represents Agni. 

1 Th Shining One : devdm ; the radiant Indra. The second line is obscure, 
cording to SAyapa, uariydfi here means * cows’ and not milk ‘the lowing 
le sitting on the bavhis grass hold in their udders the pure (juice) welling 
’ — Wilson. 

2 TAc highest twigs: of the Soma-plant, which as being the tenderest and 
ciest are crushed first. — Ludwig. ‘ He with a noise reechoes the principal 

• ^^P^-rating the growing herbs, the green-tinted (Soma) sweetens 

em --Wilson. 

H n Twins : Soma is called the Creator and Preserver of heaven 

p “artn. 



824 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK ] 

4 Wandering through the Parents, strengthening the flooc 

the Sage make$ his place swell with his own native mig] 
The stalk is mi^ed with grain : he comes led by the m 
together with the sisters, and preserves the Head. 

5 With energetic intellect the Sage is born, deposited as ge] 

of Law, far from the Twins. 

They being young at first showed visibly distinct the Creati 
that is half-conccalcd and half-exposed. 

6 The sages knew the form of him the Gladdcner, what ti 

the Falcon brought the plant from far away. 

Him who assures success they beautiHcd in streams, the st 
who yearned therefor, mighty and meet for praise. 

7 Together with the Kishis, with their prayers and hymns 

women deck thee, Soma, friendly when effused. 

Led by the men, with invocations of the Gods, through 
fleece, thou hast given us strength to win the spoil. 

8 Songs resonant with praise have celebrated him, Soma, Frie 

springing forth, with his fair company. 

Even him who, rich in meath, with undulating stre 
Winnner of Wealth, Immortal, sends his voice from hea^ 

9 He sends it into all the region forth from heaven. So 

while he is filtered, settles in the jars. 

With milk and waters is he decked when pressed with sto 
Indu, when purified, shall find sweet rest and room. 

10 Even thus poured forth flow on thy way, 0 Soma, vouchsa 
us most manifold lively vigour. 

Wo will invoke benevolent Earth and Heaven. Give us 
Gods, riches with noble heroes. 

HYMN LXIX. Soma Pavati 

Laid like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been lo 
like a young calf to the udder of its dam. 

4 The Parents: heaven and earth. The floods: the waters of the i 
meut. Orain : especially barley. Mahis his place swell : enriches hh 
station, the xUtaravedi or northward alt.ir. The sisters : the fingers.^ 
Head: apparently SUrya. * Silyana’s explanation of sirah, viz., 
hhutajatam (the withered world ?), needs explaining more than the or 
itself.’ — Wilson. 

5 The Sage : the Sun. Far from the Txvins : rising in a distant r 
beyond heaven and earth. The Creature that is half -concealed and 
exposed : the meaning appears to be, as Ludwig says, that heaven and 
while they were yet unseparated, produced the Moon : the Sun came 
being only when they had been separated through Soma’s energetic ager 

7 Ten women : the fingers. 

1 Hath leen loosed, dec. : * is let loose to (Indra) the fosterer as a calf i 
udder of ii» mother,’ * S4yana takes Hdhani [to the udder] twice ove 



jY^TN 69.1 THE RIO VEDA. 325 

As one who cometh first with full stream she is milked : thus 
Soma is impelled to this man’s holy rites. 

2 The thought is deeply fixed; the savoury juice is shed; the 

tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth ; 

And Pavarnfma, like the shout of combatants, the drop rich 
in sweet juice, is flowing through the fleece. 

3 He flows about the sheep-skin, longing for a bride : he loosens 

Aditi’s Daughters for the worshipper. 

The sacred drink hath come, gold-tinted, well-restrained : like 
a strong Bull he shines, whetting his manly might. 

i The Bull is bellowing ; the Cows are coming nigh : the God- 
desses approach the God’s own resting-place. 

Onward hath Soma passed through the sheep’s fair bright 
fleece, and hath, as ’twero, endued a garment newly washed. 

5 Tlie golden-hucd, Immortal, newly bathed, puts on a brightly- 

shining vesture that is never harmed. 

Ho made the ridge of heaven to be his radiant robe, the 
sprinkling of the bowls from moisture of the sky. 

6 Even as the beams of Surya, urging men to speed, that cheer and 

send to sleep, together rush they forth. 

These swift outpourings in long course of holy rites : no 
form save only Indra shows itself so pure. 

7 As down the steep slope of a river to the vale, drawn from 

the Steer the swift strong draughts have found a way. 


lys it is used of Indra because he is the nouiisihcr of everything.’ — Wilson. 

one uho cometh first : according to S^yana, as a cow coming before her 
alf yields her milk, (so Indra, coming before his worship] era pours various 
'lessiugs upon them). First: dgre: at the head; at the beginning of the 
eligious ceremony. 


2 The tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth : probably the 
nt'st’a tongue influenced by the exhilarating Soma juice. ‘ The Soma stream, 
muting pleasant juice is driven into (Indra’s) mouth.’ — Wilson. 

3 Lonying for a hridc : seeking the waters with which he is to be united. 
idai s Daughters : probably, tho plants, whose buds Soma as the Moon opens 

i fertilizes with his nectareous beams. ‘ The daughters of Infinity [Aditi] 
fe probably the quarters of the sky.’ — Ludwig. 

^ The Dull : Soma. According to SAyana, the Cows are the propitiatory 
jmns of praise, which are called also Goddesses or divine. 

S ^^'ightly shining vesture : the milk with which the Soma juice is mixed . 

the second half of the stanza differently, taking chamvdh , 
ill into which the Soma juice is poured, as meaning metaphori- 

' y the two great receptacles uf all Uving beings, or heaven and earth, and 
Aditya who is not mentioned in the text ‘ he has created (Aditya) 
tands on the^back of the sky for the destruction (of sin) and purification, 
_ ^ created) Aditya’s brilliance, the cover of the two worlds,’— Wilson. 



826 TUB HYMNS OP [BOOB . 

Well be it with the men and cattle in our home. May powe 
0 Soma, may the people stay with us. 

8 Pour out upon us wealth in goods, in gold, in steeds, in cat 

and in corn, and great heroic strength. 

Ye, Soma, are my Fathers, lifted up on high as heads 
heaven and makers of the strength of life. 

9 These Pavamanas here, these drops of Soma, to Indra hi 

sped forth like cars to booty. 

Effused, they pass the cleansing fleece, while, gold-hued, tl 
cast their covering off to pour the rain down. 

10 0 Indu, flow thou on for lofty Indra, flow blameless, vi 
gracious, foe-destroyer. 

Bring splendid treasures to the man W’bo lauds thcc 
Heaven and Earth, with all the Gods protect us. 

HYMN LXX. Soma Pavami 

Tiie three times seven Milch-kino in the eastern heaven h 
for this Soma poured the genuine milky draught. 

Four other beauteous Creatures hath he made for his ad 
ment, when he waxed in strength through holy rites. 

2 Longing for lovely Amrit, by his wisdom he divided, ( 

apart from other, earth and heaven. 

He gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, w 
through their glory they found the God’s resting-place. 

3 May those his brilliant rays be ever free from death, inviol 

for both classes of created things, — 

Rays wherewith powers of men and Gods are purified, 
even for this have sagos welcomed him as King. 

4 He, w])ile he is adorned by the ten skilful ones, that he tc 

the Midmost Mothers may create, 

7 V^j^h and krisktdyah, powers and people^ are explained by Sdyai 
‘ food ’ and ‘ offspring.’ 

8 Ye, Soma : ‘ Soma is treated as plural by attraction ; or, as SAyana 
it, the plurality of the pitris is applied to Soma.’— Wilson. Probably 
and Stars are intended. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. p. 398. 

10 With all the Qods: devaih: ‘ subhagairdhanaih with auspicious rich 

SAyana. ’ 

1 The three times seven Milch-Une are, according to Sdyana, the t 
months, the five seasons, the three worlds, and Aditya or the Sun. Pro! 
as Ludwig says, the seven celestial rivers, multiplied by three to corre 
with the threefold division of the heavens, are intended. These suppt’ 
genuine draught, in contrast to the four other beauteous features, iho v 
var! and the three EkadhanA waters, which are terrestrial and factitious, 
to adorn or purify Soma. 

8 Both elmses : animate and inanimate. Or Qods and men. 

A The ten skilful ones : the fingers. The Midmost Mothers : the 



TEE RIQVEDA. 


827 


70.] 

While ho is watching o’er the lovely Amrit’s ways, looks on 
both races as Beholder of mankind. 

5 He, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength, 

rejoices in his place between the earth and heaven. 

The Steer dispels the evil-hearted with his might, aiming at 
offerings as an archer at the game. 

6 Beholding, as it were. Two Mother Cows, the Steer goes roar- 

ing on his way even as the Maruts roar. 

Knowing Eternal Law, the earliest light of heaven, he, pas- 
sing wise, w^as chosen out to tell it forth. 

7 The fearful Bull is bellowing with violent might, far-sighted, 

sharpening his yellow-coloured horns. 

Soma assumes his seat in the well-fashioned place : the cowhide 
and the sheepskin are his ornament. 

8 Bright, making pure his body free from spot and stain, on 

the sheep’s back the Golden-coloured liath flowed down. 
Acceptable to Mitra, Vayu, Varuna, he is prepared as three- 
fold meath by skilful men. 

9 Flow on for the Gods’ banquet, Soma, as a Steer, and enter 

Indra’s heart, the Soma’s reservoir. 

Bear \is beyond misfortune ere wa be oppressed : the man who 
knows the laud directs the man who asks. 

10 Urged like a car-stecd, flow to strength, 0 Soma: ludu, flow 
onward to the throat of Indra, 

Skilled, bear us past, as in a boat o’er water : as battling 
Hero save us from the foeman. 


that harg between heaven and earth, in which, perhaps, Soma aids in produc- 
mg the rain. But the meaning is uncertain. SAyana explains prami by 
pramdtum, ‘ to measure out, or create, the worlds.’ Both races : Gods 
and men. 


^ As U were, Two Mother Cows: Heaven and Earth, SAyana explains the 
^coiid PAdaof the second line differently the intelligent (Favamina) 
hose man to be the offerer of his praise.’ — Wilson. 

8 Threefold : according to SAya^, mixed with the Vasattv.art water, curds, 
nd milk, ^ Probably, poured into three separate vessels, one for each of the 
tnree deities mentioned. 


I man who knows the land : who is .acquainted with the roads or ways. 
Dayana completes the simile : “ as by telling him he protects (helps) him, so 
’fi ^ knowest the roads of the sacrifice protect us by telling us the 
‘«n cial paths.” ’—Wilson. But, of course, the application is intended to 
general. 


10 Bear «« past ; carry us over all difficulties and dangers. From the foe 
niddh: ‘fjrom the reviling (of the foe).’--Wilson, 



THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK IX 




HYMN LXXI. SomaPavamftnj 

The guerdon is bestowed : the Mighty takes his seat, and, evei 
watchful, guards from fiend and evil sprite. 

Gold-hucd, ho makes the cloud his diadem, the milk his carpe 
in both worlds, and prayer his robe of state. 

2 Strong, bellowing, he goes, like one who slays the folk; he let 

t})is hue of Asuras flow off from him, 

Throws off his covering, seeks his father’s meeting-place, an 
thus makes for himself the bright robe ho assumes. 

3 Onward he flows, from both the hands, pi-essed out wit 

stones : excited by the prayer, the water makes him wild 
He frolics and draws near, com])lctes his work with song, am 
bathes in streams to satisfy the \voi*sbippcr. 

4 They pour out meath around the Master of the house, Celestia 

Strengtbener of the mountain that gives might ; 

In whom, through his great powers, oblation-eating cows ii 
their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk. 

5 They, the ten sisters, on the lap of Aditi, have sent him for 

ward like a car from both the arms. 

He wanders and comes near the Cow’s mysterious place, eve 
the place which his inventions have produced. 

6 Like as a falcon to his home, so speeds the God to his ow 

golden wisely-fashioned place to rest. 


1 The guerdon : the honorarium given to the priests, consisting originall 

of a cow. The Mighty : His carpet : upastire : that which is sjircaf 

scattered, orspiiukied. Cp. IX. G9. 5, where upastaranara translited 1> 
‘ sprinkling.’ 

2 Hue of Asuras ; or, celestial hiightness; ‘ HimmcLsglanz.’ — Grassmanr 
* He puts forth that JaM?’a-slaying tint of hia’. — Wilson. Seeks his father 
meeting place : goes to meet the yajamdna or aacrificer According to SayaV‘^ 
‘the food ( 2 ntyh), that is, the homa, goes to the prepared reservoir.’ 

3 The u’ater makes him wild: vrishdyhtc nahhasd : nahkas in the Som« 
hymns is used to .signify either the rain-water in which, or the cloud frou 
which, the Soma flows to the earth. Here it means the water with whiol 
the Soma-plant i.s spi inkled. See Fedwe/te Studien, I. p 135. According t 
Ludwig : ‘he acts like a hull in the sea of cloud.’ To satisfy the worshipper 
I adopt Ludwig’s suggestion and take ydjate as a dative of the participle 
Wilson translates, after SAyana : — ‘he is honoured at the (god)— pro tec te 
(sacrifice) ’ 

4 The Master of the house: according to Sayana, the conqueror of the for 
of the enemy. See IX. 78 3. The mountain that gives might: the clout 
In the second half of this stanza I adopt S.lyana’s interpretation as a mab 
shift, although it seems impossible that mikrdhan^ ‘ head,’ should here mea 
‘ uplifted.’ Ludwig takes ddhani, * udder,’ in the sense of ‘ behalter/ or 
ceptacle into which the Soma flows. 

5 On the lap of Aditi: on the earth, ‘near to the ground.’ — Wilsoi 
The Cow' s mysterious place : or, distant place, is the udder of heaven, tb 
cloud. 



THE RIO PEP A, 


829 


nMN 72.] 

With song they urge the darling to the sacred grass : the 
Holy One goes like a courser to the Gods. 

7 From far away, from heaven, the red-hued noted Sage, Steer 

of the ti iplo height, hath sung unto the kiiie. 

With thousand guidings ho, leading this way and that, shines, 
as a singer, splendidly through many a morn. 

8 His covering assumes a radiant hue ; where’er he comes into 

Mie fight he drives the foe afar. 

The Winner of the Floods, with food he seeks the host of 
heaven, ho comes to praises glorified with milk. 

9 Like a bull roaming round the herds he bellows : he hath 

assumed the brilliancy of Surya. 

Down to tho earth hath looked the lieavcnly Falcon : Soma 
with wisdom views all living creatnves. 

HYMN LXXII. Soma Pavam&na. 

They cleanse the Gold-hued : like a red Steed is he yoked, and 
Soma in the jar is mingled with t!ie milk. 

He sendeth out his voice, and many loving friends of him the 
highly-lauded hasten with their songs. 

2 The many sages utter words in unison, while into Indra’s 

throat tliey ])our the Soma juice, 

When, with the ten that dwell together closely joined, the 
men whose hands are skilful cleanse the lovely meath. 

3 He goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over tho roaring 

sound which Surya’s Daughter loves. 

The Falcon brought it to him for his own delight: now with 
the twofold kindred sisters is his home. 

4 Washed by the men, stone-pressed, dear on the holy grass, 

faithful to seasons. Lord of cattle from of old, 

^lost liberal, completing sacrifice for men, 0 Indra, pure bright 
Soma, Indu, flows for thee. 

^7 0/ the triple kcifjht : working in heaven, firmament, and earth. — Ludwig 
^ce IX. 75. 3. 

IV : divya:*. snparndh: ‘celestial, flying gracefully.’ — 
VV ilson. Soma, says Sdyana, is said to go gracefully, ‘ because it is carried 
by Gdyatri iu the shape of a hawk.’ 

2 Indra' s : throat : literally, belly ; the d}'onal:alam or reservoir. The 
.■ the fingers. 

3 'jhe cows: the milk and curds. The roaring sound of the effused Soma 
said to be dear to Sfirya’a Daughter, Ushas or Dawn, because it is chiefly 

^ eard in the early morning. 7'he Falcon: I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of 
yford vinamgrisdh as no other meaning seems suitable here. 
^ SAyana, the word means praiser, or worshipper. The twofold 
sistm : the fingers of both hands. 



330 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR H 

5 0 Indra, urged by arms of men and poured in streams, Soma 

flows on for thee after his Godlike kind. 

Plans thou fulfillest, gatherest thoughts for sacrifice ; in the 
bowls sits the Gold-hued like a roosting bird. 

6 Sages well-skilled in work, intelligent, drain out the stalk that 

roars, the Sage, the Everlasting One. 

The milk, the hymns unite them with him in the place of 
sacrifice, his seat who is produced anew. 

7 Earth’s central point, snstainer of the mighty heavens, distil- 

led into the streams, into the waters’ wave, 

As Indra’s thunderbolt, Steer with far-spreading wealth. Soma 
is flowing on to make the heart rejoice. 

8 Over the earthly region flow thou on thy way, helping the 

praiser and the poorer, thou Most Wise. 

Let us not lack rich treasure reaching to our home, and may 
we clothe ourselves in manifold bright wealth. 

9 Hither, 0 Indu, unto us a hundred gifts of steeds, a thousand 

gifts of cattle and of gold, 

Measure thou forth, yea, splendid ample strengthening food: 
do thou, 0 Pavamana, heed this laud of ours. 

HYMN LXXIII. Soma ravam.^na. 

They from the spouting drop have sounded at the rim : naves 
speed together to the place of sacrifice. 

That Asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. The 
ships of truth have borne the pious man across. 

2 The strong Steers, gathering, have duly stirred themselves, 

and over the stream’s wave the friends sent forth the song. 
Engendering the hymn, with flowing streams of meath, Indra’s 
dear body have they caused to wax in strength. 

3 With sanctifying gear they sit around the song : their ancient 

Father guards their holy work from harm. 


7 The heart : of Indra. As Indra's thunderbolt : cp. IX. 77. 1. 

1 They: the pressing stones, from whose rim or edge the Soma-drops Wl 
noisily. Naves ; by synecdoche wheels, again by the same figure, chariots, 
and then by metaphor the swiftly-running Soma-dropg, That Asura 
divine Soma. To seize : to be lield and used. Three lofty heights : the three 
elevated worlds. The skips of truth: or, of the truthful (Soma). According 
to Sftyana, the four vessels which hold the Aditya, Agrayana, Ukthya, an 
Dhruva libations. 

2 The strong Steers : the priests. 

3 Their ancient Father: Soma; or, perhaps, Agni. Varuna: *Soma 
aU-envelopper.‘ — Wilson. Him: Soma. In sustaining Hoods : in the Vasa 
vaij waters.- SAyana, 



THE RiaVEDA. 


331 


nrUN 74.1 

Varuna hath o’erspreacl the mighty sea of air. Sages had 
power to hold him in sustaining floods. 

4 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their voices down 

together, in heaven’s vault that pours a thousand streams. 
His wildly-restless warders never close an eye : in every plac® 
are found the bonds that bind man fast. 

5 O’er Sire and Mother they have roared in unison, bright with 

the verse df praise, burning up riteless men, 

Blowing away with supernatural might from earth and from 
the heavens the swarthy skin which Indra hates. 

6 Those which, as guides of song and counsellors of speed, were 

manifested from their ancient dwelling place, — 

From these the eyeless and the deaf have turned aside: the 
wicked travel not the pathway of the Law. 

7 What time the filter with a thousand streams is stretched, 

the thoughtful sages purify their song therein. 
Bright-coloured aro their spies, vigorous, void of guile, excel- 
lent, fair to see, beholders of mankind. 

8 Guardian of Law, most wise, he may not bo deceived : three 

Purifiers hath he set within his heart. 

With wisdom he beholds all creatures that exist : he drives into 
the pit the hated ritelcss ones. 

9 The thread of sacrifice spun in the cleansing sieve, on Varuna’s 

tongue-tip, by supernatural might, — 

This, by their striving, have the prudent ones attained : ho 
who hath not this power shall sink into the pit. 

HYMN LXXIV. Soma Pavamdna* 

Born like a youngling he hath clamoured in the wood, when 
ho, the Red, the Strong, would win the light of heaven. 

4 They: t lie beams that radiate from Soma ; somarasnayah : Soma-rays.— 
; S&yana. 

j 5 Sire and Mother : the general parents, Heaven and Earth. The swarthy 
I shin - ‘ the black -skinned — Wilson. 

j 6 Time: rays, I follow S^yaiia’s interpretation. The first line is very 

obficure. 

7 The filter : the tip of their tongue. Cf. stanza 9, and hymn 75. 2. See Ber- 
gaigne, La Religion Vidique, 1. 283. Bright coloured : rudrftmh : sons of 
Kudra, according to S&yana. But see Vedische Studien, I. pp. 55, 66, 

8 Of Law : of law-ordained sacrifice. The three Purifiers whom Soma sets 
within hi^ heart and combines in his own being are Agni, V&yu, Surya, the 

powers of fire, wind, and sun. 

9 On Varund's tongue-tip: the Vasattvarl waters in which Soma dwells 
(vasati) stand on the tip of Varuna’s tongue. — S&yana. He who hath not this 
power : ‘ he who is incompetent for the rite.’ — Wilson. 

^ -fn the wood: in the wooden vat. According to Sdyana, ‘in the water.' 



332 the BYMNS of [BOOK IX, 

He comes with heavenly seed that makes the water swell : him 
for wide-spreading shelter we implore with prayer. 

2 A far-extended pillar that supports the sky, the Soma-stalk, 

filled full, moves itself every way. 

He shall bring both these great worlds while the rite proceeds: 
the Sago holds these who move together and all food. 

3 Wide space hath he who follows Aditi’s right path, and mighty 

well-made food, mcath blent with Soma juice ; 

He who from hence commands the rain, Steer of the kino, 
Leader of floods, who helps us hence, who claims our laud. 

4 Butter and milk are drawn from animated cloud ; thence 

Amrit is produced, centre of sacrifice. 

Him the Most Bounteous Ones, ever-united, love ; him as our 
Friend the Men who make all swell rain down. 

5 The Soma-stalk hath roared, following with the wave : he 

swells with sap for man the skin which enjoy. 

Upon the lap of Aditi ho lays the germj by means wherof we 
gain children and progeny. 

6 In the third region which distils a thousand streams, may the 

Exhaustlcss Onoa descend with procreant power. 

The kindred Four have been sent downward from the heav- 
ens : dropping with oil they bring Amrit and sacred gifts. 

7 Soma assumes white colour when ho strives to gain : the 

bounteous Asura knows full many a precious boon. 

Down the steep slope, through song, ho comes to sacrifice, 
and ho will burst the water-holding cask of heaven, 

2 lie shall hriufj both these great worlds : shall bring Heaven and Earth to 
the sacrifice. 

3 lie whr follows Aditi 8 right path: the regularly moving moon. Sayana 
takes ddiuh with gdvyUtlh : ‘ the way to eaith is broad.’ — Wilson. Somewhat 
similarly liillebiandt, V. M., I. 360. 

4 The Most Bounteous Ones, the Men who maJee all sioell, are, probably, the 
Maruts who fertilize the earth, and send Soma down in the rain. SHyana’s 
explanation is different: — ‘the a.'^sembled liberal givers [the yajamdnasot 
eacrificers] delight him : (the Soma juices) the leaders, the protectors shower 
down the accumulated (water) ’ — Wilson. For the meaning of pdravah, tho.se 
who swell, or cause to swell, ‘ protectors’ according to S4yana, see Vedischc 
Studies, I p. 85. 

5 For man : for the sacrificer. The skin : his own body. — S&yana. Ujpon 
the lap of Aditi : of the earth, according to Sfiyana. The meaning is 
Soma is the source of all Nature’s productive power. 

6 In the th ird region : dwelling in heaven. The Exhaustless Ones : these 
are the kindred Four of the following line, meaning, according to Sflyaua, four 
rays or digits of Soma. It is most probable that the four Goddesses SinivilU) 
Kuhft or Gungil, R4ka, and Anumati are meant. Cp. II. 32. 6, 7 .’— Ludwig- 

7 Strives to gain : seeks to enjoy heaven, — SS^yana. The waterdiolding 
the water- laden cloud. 



THE mo VEDA. 


333 


SYMH 75.] 


8 Yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his goal, hath 

stepped the conquering Courser. 

Pious-soulcd men have sent their gifts of cattle unto Kak- 
shivan of the hundred winters. 

9 Soma, thy juice when thou art blended with the streams, 

flows, Pavamana, through the long wool of the sheep. 

So, cleansed by sages, 0 best giver of delight, grow sweet for 
Indra, Pavamana ! for his drink. 

HYMN LXXV. Soma PavamAna. 

Graciously-minded he is flowing on his way to win dear 
names o’er which the Youthful One grows great. 

The Miglity and Far-seing One hath mounted now the mighty 
Surya’d car which moves to every side. 

2 The Speaker, unassailable Master of this hymn, the Tongue of 

saciifice pours forth the pleasant meath. 

Within the lustrous region of the heavens the Sou makes the 
third secret name of Motlicr and of Sire. 

3 Sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars, led by the 

men into the golden reservoir. 

The milky streams of sacrifice have sung to him : he of the 
triple height shines l)iigLtly through the morns. 

4 Pressed by the stones, with hymns, and graciously inclined, 

illuminating both the Parents, Heaven and Earth, 
lie flows in ordered season onward through the fleece, a cur- 
rent of sweet juice still swelling day by day. 

5 Flow onward. Soma, flow to bring prosperity : cleansed by the 

men, invest thee with the milky draught. 

What gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceeding strong, 
even with these incite Indra to give us wealth. 


8 The conquering Course?' : the swiftly-flowing Soma, Aakshtvun : the 
Rishi of the hymn. 

1 O’er which : that is the Youthful One, the fresh and strong Soma, 
exceeds in greatness even the high titles which he wins by his gracious deeds. 

‘^Speaker; Master; Tongue of sacrifice: Soma, the giver of eloquence. 
The Son ; Soma. Of Mother and of Sire : of his parents, Heaven and Earth. 
What the third secret na?ne, that is, probably, a name in addition to those of 
Heaven and Earth, and comprising both deities, may be, does not appear. 
Sayana’s explanation is different the son (the sacrificer) assumes a third 
name unknown to his parents ; ’ that is, Wilson adds, ‘ a name not given at 
, With ..He [Sdyana] cites Baudhayana, who gives So?na?jdjin [Somaydga sacri* 
‘ neerj as an instance of a third name.’ 

} The milky streams : cf. I. 144. 2. Of ike triple height: dwelling in three 
places, heaven, the firmament or the mountain- top, and the place of sac- 
nhee. Cf. IX. 71, 7. 



334 


{BOOK IX. 


THE HYMNS OP 

HYMN LXXVL Soma Pavamina. 

On flows the potent juioo, sustainer of the heavens, the strength 
of Gods, whom men must hail with shouts of joy. 

The Gold-hued, started like a courser by brave men, impe- 
tuously winneth splendour in the streams. 

2 He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his hands, fain to win 

light, car-borne, in forays for the kine. 

Indu, while stimulating Indra’s might, is urged forward and 
balmed by sages skilful in their task. 

3 Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy 

strength enter thou Indra’s throat. 

Make both worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the clouds : 
mete out exhaustless powers for us, as ^twere through song. 

4 Onward he flows, the King of all that sees the light : the 

Rishis’ Lord hath raised the song of sacrifice ; 

Even he who is adorned with Surya’s arrowy beam, Father of 
hymns, whose wisdom is beyond our reach. 

5 Like as a bull to herds, thou flowest to the pail, bellowing as 

a steer upon the waters’ lap. 

So, best of Cheerers, thou for Indra flowest on that we, with 
thy protection, may o’ercome in fi^bt. 

HYMN LX XVII. Soma Pavatn&na. 

More beauteous than the beautiful, as Indra’s bolt, this Soma, 
rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat. 

Dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice flow unto him 
like milch-kine, lowing, with their milk. 

2 On flows that Ancient One whom, hitherward, from heaven, 

sped through the region of the air, the Falcon stmtehed. 
He, quivering with alarm and terrified in heart before bow* 
aimed Krisauu, holdeth fast the sweet. 

3 May those first freshest drops of Soma juice effused flow on 

their way to bring us mighty strength in kine. 

Beauteous as serpents, worthy to be looked upon, they whom 
each sacred gift and all our prayers have pleased. 

3 .4* 'twere through song : *now with the rite, i. e. at the very time the 
rite is being performed.’ —Wilson, 

2 The Falcon : see I. 93. 5. He : Soma, according to SAyana, but more 
probably the falcon. KrUdnu : the archer who guards the celestial Soma. 

Sw 1.112.21. 

3 Serpents : the meaning of ahydli is uncertain here. SAyana explwnB it 
by striyahf women ; — ‘ pleasing to look upon like beautiful well-adome 
(women).'— Wilson. 



TBE mo VEDA, 


835 


hymn 78.1 

4 May that much-lauded Indu, with a heart inclined to U9, well- 

knowing, fight against our enemies. 

Ho who hath brought the germ beside the Strong One's seat 
moves onward to the widely-opened stall of kine. 

5 The active potent juice of heaven is flowing on, great Varuna 

whom the frowavd man can ne’er deceive. 

Mitra, the Holy, hath been pressed for troubled times, neigh- 
ing like an impatient horse amid the herd. 

hymn LXXVIII. SomaPavam&na. 

Kaising his voice the King hath flowed upon his way : invest- 
ed with the waters he would win the kine. 

The fleece retains his solid parts as though impure, and bright 
and cleansed he seeks the special place of Gods. 

2 Thou, Soma, art effused for Indra by the men, balmed in the 

wood as wave, Sage, Viewer of mankind. 

Full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go : a thousand 
bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls. 

3 Apsarasea who dwell in waters of the sea, sitting within, have 

flowed to Soma wise of heart. 

They urge the Master of the house upon his way, and to the 
Eternal Pavamana pray for bliss. 

4 Soma flows on for us as winner of the kine, winner of thousands, 

cars, water, and light, and gold ; 

He whom the Gods have made a gladdening draught to drink, 
the drop most sweet to taste, weal-bringing, red of hue. 


4 He who hath brought the germ : here the sacrificer and not Soma ia 
meant.— Ludwig. The Strong One : Agni. 

5 In this stanza Soma is compared to, or mystically identified with, Varuna 
and Mitra. Sdyana leaves Varuna unexplained, but interprets Mitra by 
saneshdm mitrahhiitahj ‘ (Soma) tho fiiend of all.’ 

1 The fleece: literally, the sheep ; the filter made of wool. Solid parts: 
taiivd : the fragments of stalk wdiich will not pass through the strainer. 
According to SAyapa, ‘ with its own covering,’ — ‘ the sheep with its fleece.’ — 
Wilson. The special place of Gods : the vessels which hold the libations 
iisdgned to various Sods. 

2 Balmed in the wood : according to Sftyana, * art driven into the water.’ 

Ueeds : swiftly-running tawny drops. 

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea : * nymphs of the firmament.’ — 
Wilson. The mymphs are identified with their element, and represent the 
water with which the Soma juice is mixed. 2 he Master of the house: har> 
^^yasya sakshunim ; Soma. In IX. 71 . 4 , Sdyana explains these words as 

overpowerer, or stormer of the foit of the enemy,’ and in this place as ‘the 
Sprinkler of the hall of sacrifioe.’ Sakshdni, from the root «aA, means over- 
powerer, and from the root mh* connected with, especially as master wid 
possessor. 



336 THE BYMNS OF [BOOR ii 

5 Soma, as PavamS.na thou, our faithful Friend, making for ug 
these real treasures, flowest on. 

Slay thou the enemy both near and far away : grant us secur 
ity and ample pasturage. 

HYMN LXXIX. ‘ Soma Pavamaaa, 
Spontaneous let our drops of Soma juice flow on, pressed, go]. 

den-hucd, among the Gods of lofty heaveu. 

Perish among us they who give no gifts of food ! perish the 
godless ! May our prayers obtain success. 

2 Forward to us the drops, distilling mcath, shall flow, like riches 

for whoso sake we urge the horses on. 

Beyond the crafty hindering of all mortal men may we conti- 
nually bear precious wealth away. 

3 Yea, veiily, foe of liate shown to himself is he, yea, verily, des- 

troyer too of otiicr hate. 

As thirst subducth in the desert, conquer thou, 0 Soma Pava- 
mana, men of evil thoughts. 

4 Near kin to thcc is he, raised loftiest in the heavens : upon the 

earth’s high ridge thy scions have grown forth. 

The press-stones clicw and crunch tliee on the ox’s hide : sages 
have milked thee with their hands into the streams. 

5 So do they hurry on thy strong and beauteous juice, 0 Indu, 

as the first ingredient of the draught. 

Bring low, thou Pavamaiia, every single foe, and be thy might 
shown forth as sweet and gladdening drink. 

HYMN LXXX. Soma Pavamflna. 

On flows the stream of Soma who beholds mankind : by ever- 
lasting Law ho cnlls the Gods from heaven. 

He lightens witli the roaring of Brihaspati : the lakes have not 
contained the pourings of the juice. 


1 They who give no gifts of food : I can find no satisfactory explanation of 
ishdh drdtiijah, so I give Say ana’s interpretation as a makeshift. ‘ May they 
be destroyed who are the withliolders of food from us.’ — Wilson. 

2 Urge the horses on : Sdyana explains drmtah, horses, by ‘ strong enemy.’ 
*By whose aid we encounter the powerful (enemy).’ — Wilson. 

3 ‘ Soma knows how to defend not only himself, but us also.’ — Ludwig. 
Destroyer ; literally, the wolf. 

4 He: ‘the Moon.’ — Ludwig. ‘Thy best juice dwells in the navel of 

heaven, that which receives (the oblation).’ — Wilson. On the ox's hide- 
* Although men of the present time pour out the Soma upon the skin of « 
black antelope and not on a cowhide or oxhide, still it is measured out for 
sale on an oxhide.’ — SAyana, ^ . 

1 The roaring of Brihaspati : that is, says SAyana, the voice or praise ot 
the worshipper. Agni may be intended, as Ludwig suggests. The lakes : or 
seas ( samudrdsah ), probably the Soma-reservoirs. SAyana takes na as “ 
particle of comparison ‘ the libations cover (the earth) like rivers.’— WikoU' 



THE RIQVEDA. 


337 


aUN 81.] 

2 Tliou, powerful Soma, thou to whom the cows have lowed, as- 

cendest, bright with sheen, thine iron-fashioned home. 

Thou, lengthening our princes’ life and high renown, flowest for 
India as his mighty gladdening drink. 

3 Best giver of delight, he flows to Indra’s throat, robing him- 

self in might. Auspicious One, for fame. 

He spreads himself abroad to meet all things that be : the 
vigorous Tawny Steed flows sporting on his way. 

4 The men, the ten swift fingers, milk thee out for Gods, even 

thee most rich in mcath, with thousmd flowing streams. 
Soma who winncst thousands, driven by the men, expressed 
with stones, bring, as thou flowest, all the Gods. 

5 Deft-handed men with stones, the ten swift fingers, drain thee 

into waters, thee, the Steer enriched with sweets. 

Thou, Soma, gladdening Indra and the Heavenly Host, flowest 
as Pavamana like a river’s wave. 

HYMN LXXXI. Soraa PavamAna. 

Onward to Tndra’s throat move, beauteously adorned, the 
waves of Soma as he purifies himself. 

When they, brought forward with the lovely curd of kine, 

' crt'used, have cheered the Hero to bestow his gifts. 

2 Hither hath Soma flowed unto the beakers, like a chariot- 

horse, a stallion swift upon his way. 

Thus, knowing both the generations, he obtains the rights and 
dues of Gods from yonder and from hence. 

3 While thou art cleansed, 0 Soma, scatter wealth on us ; 

Indu, bestow great bounty as a liberal Prince. 

Giver of life, with wisdom help to opulence; strew not our 
home possessions far away from us. 

Hither let Pushan Pavamana come to us, Varuna, Mitra, 
bountiful, of one accord, 

The Maruts, Asvins, Vayu, and Brihaspati, Savitar, Tvashtar, 
ti actable Sarasvati. 


2 Iron-fashioned home ; see IX. 1. 2. 

2 I^oth the generations : nf Gods ami men. SAyana takes uhhdyasya jdn- 
unuh with dev^ndni: — ‘and knowing both races of gods — those who come 
(the Hacrifice) from the other world and those who (come) from this world.’ 

-Wilson. 

3 to ,* according to SAy ana, ‘help Vasu (the Rishi of the 

to prosperity.’ 

iti mydmd: easily led (by prayer). According to S4yana = swp** 

beautiful in form. 



838 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK JX 

5 Both Heaven and Earth, the all-invigorating Pair, Vidhatar 
Aditi, and Aryaman the God, ’ 

Bhaga who blesses men, the spacious Firmament, — let all the 
Gods in Pavamaiia take delight. 

HYMN LXXXII. Soma Pavamftn. 

Even as a King hath Soma, red and tawny Bull, been presbed 
the Wondrous Une hath bellowed to the kine. 

While purified he passes throngh the filtering fleece to seal 
him hawk like on the place that drops with oil. 

2 To glory goest thou, Sago with disposing skill, like a groomed 

steed thou rushest forward to the prixe. 

0 Soma, be thou gracious, driving oft‘ distress : thou goest, 
clothed in huttcr, to a robe of state. 

3 Parjanya is the heather of the Mighty Bird : on moiintaiug 

in earth’s centre hath he made his home. 

The waters too have flowed, the Sisters, to the kine : he meets 
the pressing-stones at the beloved rite. 

4 Thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. Listen, 0 

Child of Pajru, for to thee I speak. 

Amid the holy songs go on that we may live : in time of 
trouble, Soma, watch thou free from blame. 

5 As to the men of old thou earnest, Indu, unharmed, to 

strengthen, winning hundreds, thousands, 

So now for new felicity flow onward : the waters follow as thy 
law ordaineth. 

HYMN LXXXIIL Soma Pavamftna 

Spread is thy cleansing filter, Brahmanaspati : as Prince, 
thou enterc't its limbs from every side. 

5 All-invi(jurating : vUimmimi : ‘ ali-i)ervadm^.’ — Sftyana. VidhiUar . the 
Dispo^ser, regarded as a separate deity, aa DliAtar ia the Maker, Ordainer, or 
Eatahliaher. 

1 a King ^ ‘ magnificeut as a king.' — Wilson. That dnyp9 with oil- 
SAya^i here explains ghritdvantam by udakuvantam, watery. 

2 To a robe of state : nirnijam : ‘to the cleansing (vessel).’ — Wilson.^ 

3 Parjanya : the Gfxl of the rain-cloud and wate»& of the air in which the 
mighty &rd, the Moon, is boro. In earth' $ centre : at the altar, in 
oblation. 

4 Pujrd : acconling to SHyana, the earth. Tlie St. Petersburg Lexicon 

explains the word as meaning the moist fresh Soma-plant of which Soma, the 
juice, is the child. Peilkap, as Ludwig suggests, PajrA may be the nanio^ 
the sacrificer's wife. , 

1 Brahmauappati’s filter appears to be the heavenly filter through wnic|i 
the rain descends to earth. See Bergaigne, La Religion V4diqne, I. ’ 
The raw : uncooked oblation. Which bear ; ‘ bearing (the sacrifice).’— 

This : according to Sftyana, to this filter. Ludwig thinks that Agni ot Sury 
is meant by * tat,' 



THE RIQVEDA. 


339 


qYMN 84 .] 


The raw, whose mass hath not been heated, gains not this ; 
they only which are dressed, which bear, attain to it. 

2 High in the seat of heaven is spread the Scorcher’s sieve : its 

threads are standing sepaiate, glittering with light. 

The Swift Ones favour him who purifieth this : with cons- 
ciousness they stand upon the height of heaven. 

3 The foremost spotted Steer hath made the Mornings shine, 

and yearning after strength sustains all things that be. 

By his high wisdom have the Mighty Sages wrought : the 
Fathers who behold mankind laid down the germ. 

4 Gandharva verily protects his dwelling-place ; Wondrous, he 

guards the generations of the Gods. 

Lord (jf the snare, he takes the foeman with the snare ; those 
who are most devout have gained a share of meath. 

5 Rich in oblations ! robed in cloud, thou compassest oblation, 

sacrifice, the mighty scat of Gods. 

King, on thy chariot-sieve thou goest up to war, and with a 
thousand weapons winnest lofty fame. 

HYMN T.XXXIV. Soma Pavam&na. 


Flow, cheering Gods, most active, winner of the flood, for 
Indra, and for Vayu, and for Varuna. 

Bestow on us to-day wide room with happiness, and in thine 
ample dwelling laud the Host of Heaven. 

2 lie who hath come anear to creatures that have life, Immortal 
Soma flows onward to all of them. 

Effecting, for our aid, both union and release, Indu, like 
Surya, follows closely after Dawui. 

2 The Scorchev'a sieve: ‘The filter of the foe-scorching (Soma).’ — Wilson. 
The Swift Ones : ‘ hia swift-flowing (juices) protect the purifier (the worship- 
per) ’—Wilson. 

3 The Mighty Sages : those who possess supernatural wisdom ; the Gods. 
The Fathers : ‘The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, which give birth to gOds 
and men, is described as j)roduced by the fathers.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the 

72. SeeX. 64. 14. 

^ Oavdkai'va ; here, the Sun. His: Soma’s. 

5 Robed in cloud: ndbhah : meaning, water from the clouds. a thou- 

sand weapons : more literally, having a thousand, that is, countless, sharp 
points. ‘ Thousand-rayed.’ — Ludwig. 


1 In thine ample dwelling ; ‘on the spacious sacrificial ground.’— Sdyana. 

2 The second line is obscure. Wilson tianslates, after Sdyana ; — ‘Indu, 

J^nd loosing, accompanies the sacrifice (for its protection) as the sun 
[the dawn ;’ that is, binding or connecting the sacrifice with the gods and loos- 
l^og or separating it from the Asaras or evil spirits. But this explanation is 
pnsatiKfactory. Ludwig suggests that ‘union’ refers to Soma’s binding to- 
heaven and earth, Gods and men, and for the meaning of ‘release ’ he 
refers to IX. 68. 5. 



340 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX, 

3 He who is poured with milk, he who within the plants hastes 

bringing treasure for the happiness of Gods, 

He, poured forth in a stream flows with the lightning’s flash, 
Soma who gladdens Indra and the Host of Heaven. 

4 Winner of thousands, he, this Soma, flows along, raising a 

vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn. 

Indii with winds drives on the ocean of the air, he sinks 
within the jars, he rests in Indra’s heart. 

5 The kine with milk dress him who makes the milk increase, 

Soma, amid the songs, who finds the light of heaven. 
Winner of wealth, the effectual juice is flowing on. Singer 
and Sage by wisdom, dear as heaven itself. 

HYMN LXXXV. Soma Pavamdna. 

Flow on to Indra, Soma, carefully effused : let sickness stay 
afar together with the fiends. 

Let not the double-tongued delight them with thy juice : here 
be thy flowing drops laden with opulence. 

2 0 Pavamana, urge us forward in the fight : thou art the 

vigour of the Gods, the well loved drink. 

Smite thou our enemies who raise the shout of joy : India, 
drink Soma juice, and drive away our foes. 

3 Unharmed, best Cheerer, thou, 0 Indu, flowest on; thou, 

even thou thyself, art Indra’s noblest food. 

Full many a wise man lifts to thee the song of praise, and 
hails thee with a kiss as Sovran of this worl 1. 

4 Wondrous, with hundred streams, hymned in a thousand songs, 

Indu pours out for Indra his delightful meath. 

Winning us land and waters, flow thou hitherward : Riiinei’ 
of bounties, Soma, make broad way for us. 

5 Roxring within the beaker thou art balmed with milk ; thoii 

• passest through the fleecy filter all at onoe. 

Carefully cleansed and decked like a prize-winning steed, 0 
Soma, thou hast flowed down within ludra’s throat. 

6 Flow onward sweet of flavour for the Heavenly Race, 

Indra sweet, whose name is easily invoked : 

Flow sweet for Mitra, Varuna, and Vlyu, rich in meatli, ii^' 
violable for Brihaspati. 

7 Ten rapid fingers deck the Courser in the jar ; with hyn^i^^ 

the holy singers send their voices forth. 

The filtering juices hasten to their eulogy, the drops that 
gladden find their way to India’s heart. 



THE lilQVEDA, 


841 


EYMN 86 .] 

8 While thou art purified pour on U8 hero strength, great, far- 

extended shelter, spacious pasturage. 

Let no oppression master this our holy work : may we, 0 
Indu, gain all opulence through thee. 

9 The Steer who sees afar hath risen above the sky : the Sage 

hath caused the lights of heaven to give their shine. 

The King is passing through the filter with a roar : they drain 
the milk of heaven from him who looks on men. 

10 High in the vault of heaven, unceasing, honey-tongued, the 

Loving Ones drain out the mountain-haunting Steer, — 

The drop that hath grown great in waters, in the lake, meath- 
ricb, in the stream’s wave and in the cleansing sieve. 

11 The Loving Ones besought with many voices the Eagle who 

had flown away to heaven. 

Hymns kiss the Youngling worthy of laudation, resting on 
earth, the Bird of golden colour. 

12 High to heaven's vault hath the Gandharva risen, beholding 

all his varied forms and figures. 

His ray hath shone abroad with gleaming splendour : pure, 
he hath lighted both the worlds, the Parents. 

HYMN LXXXVI. Soma Pavam^na. 

Thy gladdening draughts, 0 Pavamana, urged by song flow 
swiftly of themselves like sons of fleet-foot mares. 

The drops of Soma juice, those eagles of the heavens, most 
cheering, rich in rneath, rest in the reservoir. 

2 As rapid chariot-steeds, so turned in several ways have thine 

exhilarating juices darted forth, 

Soma-drops rich in rneath, waves, to the Thunder-armed, to 
Indra, like milch-kine who seek their calf with milk. 

3 Like a steed urged to battle, finder of the light, speed on- 

ward to the cloud-burn reservoir of heaven, 

A Steer that o'er the woolly surface seeks the sieve. Soma 
: while purified for K ira’s uourishment. 


9 Yhe Steer xcho sees afar : wise Soma, the Moon. 

Loving Ones : veri^K : (lie Gods or, specially, the Marnts. Accord- 
K 0 great Rishis, called Venae. The mountahuhaunting Steer : Soma, 

rst 8oen over the mountain heights. See Hillebrandt, F. ilf., I. 389. 

stanza is the Eagle, the Youngling or infant, and the Bird 
2'Ae Gandharva: here Soma, the Moon. See Hillebrandt, F. M., I. 429. 

^ ^pted onward : hasten to pour down the rain from the cloud. 



342 TltE tlYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

4 Fleet as swift steeds, thy drops, divine, thought-swift, have 

been, 0 Pavamana, poured with milk into the vat. 

The Rishis have poured in continuous Soma-drops, ordainera 
who adorn thee, Friend whom Rishis love. 

5 0 thou who seest all things, Sovran as thou art and passing 

strong, thy rays encompass all abodes. 

Pervading with thy natural powers thou flowest on, and as 
the whole world’s Lord, O Soma, thou art King. 

6 The beams of Pavamana, sent from earth and heaven, his 

ensigns who is ever stedfast, travel round. 

When on the sieve the Golden-hued is cleansed, he rests 
within the vats as one who seats him in his place. 

7 Served with fair rites he flows, ensign of sacrifice ; Soma 

advances to the special place of Gods. 

Ho speeds with thousand currents to the reservoir, and passes 
through the filter bellowing as a bull. 

8 The Sovran dips him in the sea and in the streams, and set 

in rivers with the waters’ wave moves on. 

High heaven’s Sustainer at the central point of earth, raised 
on the fleecy surface Pavamana stands. 

9 He on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend hath 

roared and thundered like the summit of the sky. 

Soma flows on obtaining Indra’s friendly love, and, as they 
purify him, settles in the jars. 

10 He, light of sacrifice, distils delicious meath, most wealthy, 

Father and begetter of the Gods. 

He, gladdening, best of Chcerers, juice that Indra loves, enrich- 
es with mysterious tieasure earth and heaven. 

11 The vigorous and far-seeing one, the Lord of heaven, flows, 

shouting to the beaker, with his thousand streams. 
Coloured like gold he rests in seats where Mitra dwells, the 
Steer made beautiful by rivers and by sheep. 

1 2 In forefront of the rivers Pavamana speeds, in forefront of 

the hymn, foremost among the kine. 

4 Friend whom Rishis love : rishishdna : the word doea not occur elsewheiSi 
and its precise me^uiug is unceitain. ‘ 0 risAi-en joyed.’ — Wilsou. ‘ Thou wLo 
playest the part of a Rishi.’ — Ludwig. 

8 The sea and the streams aro the firmament and its waters. Soma, who 
is at the same time the God in heaven and the earthly beverage, ia 
combine with the solar rays in the clouds, and thus to cause the rain to 
descend. See HiUebrandt, V. M,, 1. 215. Central point of earth : the plac* 
of sacrifice. ,, j 

11 By rivers and by sheep : by the purifying waters and the wool 
•trainer. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


343 


bun 86 .] 


He shares the niight3; booty in the van of war : the well-armed 
Steer is purified by worshippers. 

13 This heedful Pavam^ua, like a bird sent forth, hath with his 

wave flowed onward to the fl(3ecy sieve. 

0 Indra, through thy wisdom, by thy thought, 0 S^ge, Soma 
flows bright and pure between the earth and heaven. 

14 He, clad in mail that reaches heaven, the Holy One, filling 

the firmament, stationed amid the woilds, 

Knowing the lealin of light, hatli come to us in rain: he sum- 
mons to himself his own primeval Sire. 

15 He who was first of all to pcnetiatc his form bestowed upon 

his race wide shelter and defence. 

From that high station which ho hath in loftiest heaven he 
comes victorious to all encounters here. 

10 Indu hath started forth for IikIim’s special place, and slights 
not as a Fncnd the jiromise of his Fiiend. 

Soma speeds onward like a youth to 3 0uthful maids, and gains 
the beaker by a course of hundred p iths. 

17 Your songs, exhilarating, tuneful, uttering praise, are come into 

the places where the jieojde meet. 

Worshippers have exilted Soma with their hymns, and milcli- 
kine have come near to meet him with their milk. 

18 0 Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, pour on us accumu- 

lated, plentiful, nutritious food, 

Wliicli, ceaseless, tin ice a day shall yield us hero power en- 
riched with store of nouri&hment, and strength, and meath. 

19 F.ir-seeiug Soma fl<jws, the Steer, the Lord of hymns, the 

Furtherer of <lay, of morning, and of heaven. 

Mixt with tiie stieams he ciuscd tlie beakers to resound, and 
with the singers’ aid they entered Indra’s heart. 

20 On, with the prudent singers, flows the ancient Sage and guided 

by the men hath roared about the v.its. 

Producing Trita’s name, may lie pour forth the meath, that 
Vayuand that India may become his Friends. 


H Hii own primeval Sire : or, the ancient Father of this (All). Indra is 
meant. 

He: Soma Jlisform: Indja’s. Ills race : Indra and the Gods. 

16 Slights not as a F) iend the promise of his Friend: ‘the friend leaves 
the Rtomach of In? friend.’ — Wilson Sdyana derives gumjiram from 

to Hvv-allow, instead of from samjrt, to a8.sent. Hundred paths : 
the interstices of th . wool, 
on “ da.v : at the three appointed Bacrifices. 

20 Producing Trita'g name : literally, begetting, that is, making (jandyan) 
tOe name of Trita ; meaning probably, as Prof. Ludwig Buggeste, reminding 



344 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX. 

21 He, being purified, hath made the Mornings shine : this, even 

this is he who gave the rivers room. 

He made the Three Times Seven pour out the milky flow; 
Soma, the Clieerer, yields whatever the heart finds sweet. 

22 Flow onward, Soma, in thine own celestial forms, flow, Indu, 

poured within the beoker and the sieve. 

Sinking into the throat of Indra with a roar, led by the men 
thou madcst Surya mount to heaven. 

23 Pressed out with stones thou flowest onward to the sieve, 0 

Indu, entering the depths of India's throat. 

Far-sighted Soma, now tlioii lookest on mankind: thou didst 
unbar the cow-stall for the Angirases. 

24 In thee, 0 Soma, while thou punfiedst thee, high-thoughted 

sages, seeking favour, have rojoieod. 

Down from the heavens the Falcon brought thee hitherward, 
even thee, 0 Indu, thee whom all our liymns adorn. 

25 Seven Milch-kine glorify the T iwny-colonred One while with 

his wave in wool he jinrifies himself. 

The living men, the mighty, have impelled the Sage into the 
waters’ lap, the place of sacrifice. 

26 Indn, attaining purity, plunges through the foe, making his 

ways all easy for tlie pion-s man. 

Making the kine his mantle, he, the lovely Sage, runs like a 
sporting courser onwaid through the fleece. 

27 The ceaseless watery fountains with their hundred streams 

sing, as they hasten near, to him the Golden-hucd. 

Him, clad in robes of milk, swift fingers beautify on the third 
height and in the lumiiions realm of heaven. 

28 These are thy generations of celestial seed : thou art the 

Sovran Lord of all the world of life. 

This universe, 0 Pavamana, owns thy sway; thou, Iiidu, art 
the first establisher of Law. 


of Trita, with whom he is closely connected. * Generating the water of 
the threefold (Indra) ’ — Wilson 

21 The Three Times Seven : the seven celestial rivers, corresponding to the 
rivers of earth, multiplied by three to accord with the threefold division o 
the lieavens. According to Sftyana, c<jws are meant. 

23 Thou didst unbar the cow- stall : didst recover the cattle stolen by th® 
Panis, that is the rays of light that the fiends of darkness had carried on » 
the great deed of Indra being ascribed to ISoina his inspirer. 

25 Seven Milch-kine : the celestial rivers. 

26 Making the kine his mantle : he who is afterwards covered or 
with milk. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


345 


hymn 86 .] 

29 Thou art the sea, 0 Sage who brinjiest all to light : under 

thy Law arc these five regions of the world. 

Thou readiest out beyond the earth, beyond the heavens : 
thine are tiie lights, 0 Pavaniana, thine the Sun. 

30 Thou in the filter, Soma Pavaiiiuna, art purified to support 

the region for the Gods. 

The cliief, the longing ones have sought to hold thee fast, 
and all these living creatures have been turned to thee. 

31 Onward the Singer travels o’er the fleecy sieve : the Tawny 

Steer hath bellowed in the wooden vats. 

Hymns have been sung aloud in resonant harmony, and holy 
songs kiss him, the Child who claims our praise. 

32 He hath assumed the rays of Sur\a for his robe, spinning, as 

he knows bow, the triply-twisted thread. 

He, guiding to the newest rules of Holy Law, comes as the 
Women’s Consort to the special place. 

33 On flows the King of rivers and the Lord of heaven : he 

follows with a shout the paths of Holy Law. 

The Golden-hucd is jiouied foith with Ins hundred streams, 
Wealth-bringer, lifting up bis voice while purified. 

34 Pain to be cleansed, thou, Pavamana, pourest out, like wond- 

rous Sura, through the fleece, an ample sea. 

Purified with the hands, pressed by the men with stones, thou 
speedest on to mighty booty-bnnging war. 

35 Thou, Pavamaiin, seiidest food and power in streams: thou' 

sittest in the beakers as a hawk on trees, 

Por Indra poured as cheering juice to make him glad, as near- 
est and far-seeing bcarer-up of heaven. 

36 The Sisters Seven, the Mothers, stand around the Babe, the 

noble, new-liorn Infant, skilled in holy song, 

Gnndharva (►! the floods, divine, beholding men, Soma, that lie 
may reign as King of all the world. 


29 Thou art the sea: Soma and the sea being alike producers of rain, 
stars. 

80 The refjion : mid-air ; the firmament. The chief, the loi\ging ones : the 
the Maruts. 

32 Spinning., the triply-twisted thread * be-aiing his part in morning, noon- 
'p and evening saciifice. 7'he WomoTs Cousoit: Loid and husband of the 
sitern of heaven. 27ie special pl,ac€ : ‘ the consecrated (vessel).’ — Wilson. 

34 Like wondrous JSHra : adorable like the Sun. 

The Siiters Seven : the great rivers which may provide water for Sonia- 
(ranrfAarra ; frequently identified with the Sun, heie means Soma, 



THE HYMNS OP 


846 


i^OOK n 


37 As Sovran Lord thereof thou passeat through these worlds, ( 

Indu, harnessing thy tawny well-winged Mares. 

May they pour forth for thee milk and oil rich in sweets ; ( 
Soma, let the folk abide in thy decree. 

38 0 Soma, tiioii beholdest men from every side : 0 Pavamana 

Steer, thou wanderest through these. 

Pour out upon us wealth in treasure and in gold : may w 
liave strength to live among the things that be. 

39 Winner of gold and goods and cattle flow thou on, set as ini 

pregner, Indu, mid the worlds of life. 

Rich in brave men art thou, Soma, who winnest all : these liol; 
singers wait upon thee with the song. 

40 The wave of flowing incath hath wakened up desires : tin 

Steer enrobed in milk plunires into the streams. 

Borne on his chariot-sieve the King hath risen to war, aiic 
with a thousand rays hath won him high renown. 

41 Dear to all life, he sends triumphant praises forth, abundantj 

bringing offspring, eacl» succeeding day. 

From Indra crave for us, Indu, when tliou art quaffed, the bles- 
sing that gives children, wealth that harbours steeds. 

42 When days begin, the strong juice, lovely, golden-hued, is 
recognized by wisdom more and more each day, 

He, stirring both the Rices, goes between the two, the bearer 
of the word of men and word of Oods. 

43 They balm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, caress 
the mighty strength and balm it with the meath. 


37 Tawny . Marcs: har'Uah ; Hants Cf IV. 6. 9 ; 13. 3 ; VII 66. 15; 

IX. 63. 9. 

38 Through these : there is no substantive. Silyana supplies apah, waters. 

40 ; the meaning of vauan^h is not certain ; ‘voices (of praise)’— 
Wilson With a thousand rays : sah israbhrishtih : literally, having a thousand 
edges or sharp points. Cp. IX. 83. 5 

41 The blessing: this seems to be very nearly the meaning of brdhma li^re. 
But the word may as usual le rendeied by prayer, or devotion. ‘Solicit 
Indra (to give) us food productive of progeny.’ — Wilson. 

42 When days begin : according to SAyana, early in the morning. TH® 

commencement of tlie year is inoie probably intended The second half of 
the stanza is obscurely expre.ssed. It aY)pcars to mean that Soma acts as & 
mediator between lieaven and eartb, urging men to offer, and the Gods 
receive, worship, bearing up to heaven the hymns and praises of hunia^ 
worshippers and biinging back to them the assurance that their petiti'>n 
will be granted. SAyatta’s explanation is different: ‘approaching the 
men (the praiser and the worshipper or secular and sacred people) he i>^ i 
in the midst (of heaven and earth, bestowing), upon the upholder (of . 
rite) both human and divine (riches).’ — Wilson. I follow Ludwig who w 
dhartari os nominative singular, J 



THE RIQVEDA, 


847 


BYMN 87 ] 

They seize the flying Steer at the stream’s breathing-place ; 
cleansing with gold they grasp the Animal herein. 

44 Sing forth to Pavamana skilled in holy song : the juice is 

flowing onward like a mighty stream. 

He glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and like a 
playful horse the Tawny Steer hath run. 

45 Dweller in floods, King, foremost, ho displays his might, set 

among living things as measurer of days. 

Distilling oil he flows, fair, billowy, golden-hued, borne on a 
car of light, sharing one home with wealth. 

46 Loosed is the heavens’ support, the uplifted cheering juice : 

the triply-mingled draught flows round into the worlds. 

The holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our praise, when 
singers have approached his beauteous robe with song. 

47 Thy streams that flow forth rapidly collected run over the 

tine fleece of the sheep as thou art cleansed. 

When, Indu, thou art balmed with milk within the bowl, 
thou sinkest in the jars, 0 Soma, when expressed. 

48 Winner of power, flow. Soma, worthy of our laud : run on- 

ward to the fleece as well-bclov6d meath. 

Destroy, 0 Indu, all voracious Rakshasas. With brave sons 
in the assembly let our speech be bold. 

HYMN LXXXVII. Soma Pavamllna. 

Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee : cleansed by the 
men speed forward to the battle. 

Making thee beauteous like an able courser, forth to the 
sacred grass with reins they lead thee. 

2 Indu, the well-armed God, is flowing onward, who quells the 

curse and guards from treacherous onslaught, 

Father, begetter of the Gods, most skilful, the buttress of 
the heavens and earth’s supporter. 

3 Rishi and Sage, the Champion of the people, deft and sagaci- 

ous, Usana in wisdom, 

43 At the stream's breathinff-place : where the stream seems to stay still 
a moment to recover breath. Cleansing with gold: with gold-ringed 
ngers. The Animal: Soma, 

4a As measurer of days : Soma being identified with the Moon. 

46 Triply.fningled : or, poured into three vessels, the dronakalasa, ddhava- 
and pHtabhrit. Robe : the integuments which cover the juice : that is 
ke exterior of the stalk and shoots. 

3 U^and in wisdom: as wise as the celebrated UsanA. Sftyana explains 
^fferently, regarding U^n& aa the discoverer ; ‘ Usanas—ha verily by his 



S48 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX, 

He hftth discovered even their hidden nature, the Cows’ con- 
cealed and most mysterious title. 

4 This thine o\An Soma lich in meath, 0 Indra, Steer for the 

Steer, hath flowed into the filter. 

The strong Free-gi\cr, winning hundreds, thousands, hath 
reached the holy grass that never fails him. 

5 These Somas are for wealth of countless cattle, renown there- 

for, and mighty strength immortal. 

These have been sent forth, punfled by strainers, like steeds 
who rush to battle fain for glory. 

6 He, while he cleanses him, invoked of many, hath flowed to 

give the people all enjo}mcnt. 

Thou whom the Falcon brought, bring dainty viands, bestir 
thyself and send ns wealth and booty. 

7 This Soma, pressed into the cleansing filter, hath run as 

’tw’ere a host let loose, the Courser; 

Like a strong bull who whets his horns keen-pointed, like a 
brave wariior in the fray for cattle. 

8 He issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and founc 

kine hidden s<»mewherc in a stable. 

Soma’s stream clears itself for thee, 0 Indra, like lightning 
thundering through the clouds of heaven, 

9 Cleansing thyself, and borne along with Indra, Soma, thou gocst 

round the herd of cattle. 

May thy praise help us, Mighty One, prompt Giver, lo tlie 
full ample food which thou bestowest, 

HYMN LXXXVIll. Soma Pavni^fin. 

For thee this Soma is efifused, 0 Indra: diink of this juice; 

for thee the stream is flowing — 

Soma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, even ludii, 
for thy special drink to cheer thee. 

poetic gift discovered the secret milk of those cows which was hidden and 
concealed ’ — Wilson. By title or name of the Cows, water appears to b® 
intended 

4 Steer for the Steer : or, Strong for the Strong. 

5 Mighty strength immortal: ‘ample food and ambrosia.* — Wilson. 

8 From out the loftiest mountain: S4yana makes antdrddreji depend upon 
kdehitf Somewhere : ‘ This Soma stream has come from on high ami b®* 
detected the cattle which were in a stall < hidden) somewhere within the 
mountain.’ — Wilson. Grassmann translates ; ‘Er ist entsprungen aus 
hochsten Pressstein.’ * IJe hath sprung forth from the most lofty press-sbo”®- 

9 The hei’d of cattle : Soma accompanies Indra in his expedition to recover 
the stolen cattle. —S^yana. Or the cattle or cows may be the milk witU wbic 
Soma is mixed. 



THE RIG VEDA, 


849 


0MS 89.] 

2 Like a capacious car hath it been harnessed, the Mighty, to 

acquire abundant treasures. 

Then in the sacrifice they celebrated all triumphs won by 
Nall us in the battle. 

3 Like Vayu with his team, moving at pleasure, most gracious 

when invoked like both Nasatyas, 

Thou art thyself like the Wealth-Giver, Soma! who grants 
a' I boons, like song-inspiring IMshaii. 

4 Like Indra who hath done great deeds, thou. Soma, art slayer 

of the Vritras, Fort-dost rover. 

Like Pedu’s horse who killed the brood of serpents, thus thou, 
0 Soma, slayest every Dasyu. 

5 Like Agui loosed amid the forest, fiercely he winncth splen- 

dour in the running waters. 

Like one who fights, the roaring of the mighty, thus Soma 
Pavamana sends his current. 

j These Somas pissing thiough the fleecy filter, like rain de- 
scending from the clouds of heaven, 

H.ive been elfused and poured into the beakers, swiftly like 
rivers running lowly seaward. 

! Flow onward like the potent band of Maruts, like that 
Celestial Host whom none revileth. 

Quickly be gracious unto us like waters, like sacrifice victo- 
rious, thousand-f.isliioued. 

5 Thine are King Vanina’s eternal statutes, lofty and deep, 0 
yoma, is thy glory. 

All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, like Arya- 
nian, 0 Soma. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Soma Pavamana. 

Tins Chariot-horse hath moved along the pathways, and Pava- 
inana flowed like rain from heaven. 

2 I can make nothing out of the second line of this stanza. The version 
iich I give as a temporary makeshift is founded on Ludwig’s remarks m 
i Coinmentciry on the passage, Vol. V. p. 308, of his Riyveda, Wilson, 
kwing ISAyana, translate-^ : — ‘ After this {i. e. after the harnessing of the 
ggi>n— Note ) miy all the races of men expecting our (attack) go to the 
S'rable battle.’ * Now let the r.aces of all men, rising up like trees, come 
to him in order to obtain success,’ would, according to Grassmann, be 
the meaning. 

1 horse: given to him by the Asvins. See I. 116. 6 : 117. 9 ; 118. 

I 119 . 10 . 

Like sacnjice : according to S.lyana, yajnah, sacrifice, means here, worthy 
acnfice ‘ (thou art) of a thousand shapes, adorable like (Indra) the 
m battle ’--Wilson. 

hi3 stanza is found also in Book I. 91. 3. 



wo TBE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX, 

With us hath Soma with a thousand currents sunk in the wood 
upon his Mother’s bosom. 

2 King, he hath clothed him in the robe of rivers, mounted the 

stiaightest-going ship of Order. 

Sped by the JHawk the drop hath waxed in waters : the father 
drains it, drains the Father’s offspring. 

3 They come to him, red, tawny, Lord of Heaven, the watchful 

Guardian of the meath, the Lion. 

First, Hero in the fight, he seeks the cattle, and with his eye 
the Steer is our protector. 

4 They harness to the broad-w heeled car the mighty Courser 

whose back bears meath, uinvcaried, awful. 

The twins, the sisters brighten him, and strengthen — these 
children of one dame — the vigorous Racer, 

5 Four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting together 

in the same container. 

To him they flow, when purified, with homage, and still, 
from every side, are first about him. 

C lie is the buttress of I he heavens, supporter of earth, and in 
his hand are all the people. 

Be the team’s Lord a well to thee the singer : cleansed is the 
sweet plant’s stalk for deed of glory. 

7 Fighting, uninjured come where Gods arc feasted ; Soma, as 
Vritra-slayer flow for Indra. 

Vouchsafe us ample riches very splendid : may we be masters 
of heroic vigour. 

HYMN XC. Soma Pavam4na, 

Urged on, the Father of the Earth and Heaven hath gone 
forth like a car to gather booty. 

Going to India, sharpening his weapons, and in his hand 
containing every treasure. 

2 The father drains it : ‘ The Rcholiaat find'i it difficult to make sense of 
this: pitd (palako lohih) \\e to mean the Adhvaryu, who extracts 

the juice of the Sonia which is born from the heaven as from a father 
first milker may be the yajamdna and the second the Adhvaryu; or dukt 
may be repeated out of respect.’ — Wilson. 

4 Sisters .. . children of one dame: the priest’s fingers. 

5 Four: the quarters of the sky. Container: the firmament. 

6 The team's Lord: Soma as resembling Vflyu. Cp IX. 88. 3. Sitya”* 
explains differently ; ‘ may ( Soma ) the fountain (of desires) be poBseeaed o 
horses for thee (his) adorer.’ — Wilson. 

1 Father : janitd : generator, of earth by sending rain, and of heaven 
obtaining oblations for the gods. — SAyana. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


Z51 


hymn 91 .] 

2 To him the tones of sacred song have sounded, Steer of the 

triple height, the Life-bestower. 

Dwelling in wood as Varuna in rivers, lavishing treasure he 
distributes blessings. 

3 Gieat Conqueror, warrior-girt, Lord of all heroes, flow on 

thy way as ho who winneth riches ; 

With sharpened arms, with swift bow, never vanquished in 
battle, vanquishing in light the foernen. 

4 Giving security. Lord of wide dominion, send us both earth 

and heaven with all their fulness. 

Striving to win the Dawns, the light, the waters, and cattle, 
call to us abundant vigour. 

5 0 Soma, gladden Varuna and Mitra ; cheer, Indu Pavamana ! 

India, Vishnu. 

Cheer thou the Gods, the Company of Maruts : Indu, cheer 
mighty Indra to rejoicing. 

6 Thus like a wise and potent King flow onward, destroying 

with thy vigour all misfortunes. 

For our well-spoken hymn give life, 0 Indu, Do ye preserve 
us evermore with blessings, 

HYMN XCI. Soma PavarnAiia. 

As for a chariot-race, the skilful Speaker, Chief, Sage, In- 
ventor, hath, with song, been started. 

The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the Car-horse 
to the resting-places. 

The drop of Soma, pressed by wise Nahushyas, becomes the 
banquet of the Heavenly People — 

Indu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal, 
with the sheep and cows and waters. 

Steer roaring unto Steer, this Pavamana, this juice runs to 
the white milk of the milch-cow. 

Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful Singer, like 
Sura by his fair and open pathways. 

Of the triple height: see IX. 71. 7. 

to m : send us with thy shout or roar. 

The hymn ends with the usual concluding half -line of the hymns ascribed 
he Vasishthas, 

The skilful Speaker : Soma who makes us eloquent. The rating-places : 
andni : thi seats, the reservoirs in which he settles. 
l^ahushyas: probably a neighbouring people. See VI. 46. 7, and note on 
which hss the same meaning. ^ 

: Sflrya, the Sun. Fair and open : adhvasmdbhih : ‘ imperishable. — 
son. 



852 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK n, 

4 Break down the strong seats even of the demons : cleansing 

thee, Indu, robe thyself in vigour. 

Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, those whc 
are near and those who yet are distant. 

5 Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new hymn 

thou Giver of all bounties. 

Those which are high and hard for foes to conquer may ^vl 
gain from thee, Active ! Kood-bes tower ! 

6 So purifying thee vouchsafe us waters, heaven’s light, and cows 

offspring and many children. 

Give us health, ample land, and lights, 0 Soma, and grant in 
long to look upon the sunshine. 

HYMN XCII. Soma PavamAna 

The gold-hued juice, poured out upon the filter, is started liki 
a car sent forth to conquer. 

He hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed him, anc 
hath rejoiced the Gods with entertainments. 

2 He who beholdeth man hath reached the filter: bearing hii 

name, the Sage liath sought his dwelling. 

The Rishis came to him, seven holy singers, when in the bowli 
he settled as Invoker. 

3 Shared by all Gods, most wise, propitious, Soma goes, whik 

they cleanse him, to his constant station. 

Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom : to the Five Tiihei 
the Sage attains with labour. 

4 Tn thy mysterious place, 0 Pavamana Soma, are all the Gods 

the Thrice-Eleven. 

Ten on the fleecy height, themselves, self-prompted, and sevei 
fresh riyers, brighten and adorn thee. 

5 Now let this be the truth of Pavamana, there whei e all singers 

gather them together, 

That he hath given us room and made the daylight, hath holpeii 
Mann and lepellcd the Dasyu. 


5 Those : portions of thee, according to Sayana 

6 In the second half of the stanza, instead of taking w'ii, wide, ainpk» 
with ksJUtrarn, field, land, Sdyana joins it, a^ — urUni, with ji/dtihshi, lights 

" make our land prosper, diffuse the luminaries widely (in the firmament). 
Wilson. 

2 The Rishis : according to Sftyana, Bharadvflja, Kasyapa, Qotama, Atr'i 
Visvtmitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha. ’ 

3 The Five Tribes : the five Aryan tribes. According to Sftyana, ' the five 
classes of beings,’ i e., four castes and the Nishftdaa. 

4 The Thrice-Eleven : see I. 139. 11. Ten: the fingers. 

6 Manu : as the l epresentative of the Aryan race. 



TBE RmVEDA. 


353 


^rUN 94.] 

6 As priest seeks the station rich in cattle, like a true King 
who goes to great assemblies, 

Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him, and, 
like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled. 

HYMN XCIII. Soma PavamAna. 

Ten sisters, pouring out the rain together, swift-moving think- 
ers of the sage, adorn him. 

Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of Sdrya and reached 
the vat like a fleet vigorous coarser. 

2 Even as a youngling crying to his mothers, the bounteous 

Steer hath flowed along to waters. 

As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens on to the chosen 
meeting-place, the beaker. 

3 Yea, swollen is the udder of the milch-cow : thither in streams 

goes very sapient Indu. 

The kine make ready, as with new-washe<l treasures, the 
Head and Chief witli milk within the vessels. 

4 With all the Gods, 0 Indu Pavaniana, while thou art roaring 

send us wealth in horses. 

Hither upon her car come willing Plenty, inclined to us, to 
give us of her treasures. 

5 Now unto us nmte riches, while they cleanse thee, all-glorious, 

swelling wealth, with store of heroes. 

I Long he his life who worships thee, 0 Indu. May he, enriched 
with prayer, come soon and enrly. 

HYMN XCIY. Soma PavaraAna. 

When beauties strive for him as for a charger, then strive 
the songs like soldiers for the sunbglit. 

Acting the Sage, he flows enrobed in waters and song as 
’twere a stall that kine may prosper. 


6 The station rich in cattle : ‘ the hall where the victim ia stationed ’ — 
i^ibon. To great assemblies : or, to war and battle. I'he wood : the wooden 

at or reservoir. 

Ten sisters: the fingers wlch press out the juice of the Soma -plant. 
I^inlcers: or thoughts, devotions. According to SAyai;a, fingers. Child of 
SAyana explains offspring, by wives, i e., the quarters of 

he heaven, called Sffrya’s wives because they arc made manifest by his ra^s. 

3 The Head and Chief ‘ * the elevated Soma ’ — Wilson. 

4 ^nd us ; more literally, open or disclose to us 

5 The hymn ends with the half-line which i® the special conclusion of the 
J wns asci ibed to Nodhas. See Book 1. 58, 60-64. 

^ The meaning is apparently : when the beautifying "waters hasten emu- 
to cleanse Soma as though ho were a horse, the voices of singing 

‘’"shippers vie with each other like the shouts of men who aie fighting for 
23 



TUE IlYMNB OP 


354 


[BOOK 11 


2 The worlds expand to him who from aforetimo found light to 

spread the law of life eternal. 

The swelling songs, like kine ' within the stable, in deep 
devotion call aloud on Indu. 

3 When the Sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a cor 

visiting all worlds, the Hero, 

Becoming fame, mid Gods, unto the mortal, wealth to tlie 
skilled, worth praise mid the Ever-present, 

4 For glory horn he hath come foith to glory : he giveth life 

and glory to the singers. 

They, clothed in glory, liave become immortal. He, measured 
in bis coarse, makes frays successful. 

5 Stream to us food and vigour, kiue and borses : give us broad 

lights and fill the Gods with rapture. 

All these are easy things for thee to master : thou, Pavamui 
Soma, quellcst foemcn. 


HYMN XCV. Soma Pavan>.h 

Loud neiy^hs the Tawny Steed when started, settling deep 
the wooden vessel while tliey cleanse him. 

Led by the men he takes the milk for raiment : then shall h 
through his powers, engender praise-songs. 

2 As one who rows drives on his boat, he, Gold-hued, sem 

forth his voice, loosed on the patii of Order. 

As God, the secret names of Gods he utters, to be declare! c 
sacred grass more widely. 

3 Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymi 

are pressing nigh to Soma. 

To him they come with lowly adoration, and, longing, cnt( 
him who longs to meet them. 

4 They drain the stalk, the Steer who dwells on mountain 

even as a Bull who decks him on the upland. 


light and life. Soma flows on in his wif-dom, blent with the waters;, an 
surrounded with hymns into the midst of which he enters as into a stab 
full of kine in order to make them increase and multiply. 

3 The stanza is somewhat obscure. Worth praise : or, adorable. The Eve 
present - the Gods who come to help men Wilson, following SAya.a, tran 
lates the second line; ‘then desirous of be.stnwing upon mortals the weaH 
that abides with the gods, he (is) to be glorified iu the many places of eacrifif 
fur the preservation of the riches he has given ' 

5 All these: all the R&ksbasas, according to Sflyana. 

1 Deep in the wooden vessel: literally Hn the belly of the wood.' 

2 He utters : reveals to the priest who is to declare them at sacrifice. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


365 


EYMS 96.] 

Hyrans follow and attend him as he bellows : Trita bears 
Varuna aloft in ocean. 

5 Sending thy voice out as Director, loosen the Invoker’s thought, 
0 Indu, as they cleanse thee. 

While thou and Indra rule for our advantage, may we be 
masters of heroic vigour. 

HYMN XCVI. Soma PavamS,na. 

In forefront of the cars forth goes the Hero, the Leader, win- 
ning spoil : his host rejoices. 

Soma endues his robes of lasting colours, and blesses, for his 
friends, their calls on Indra. 

2 Men decked with gold adorn his golden tendiil, incessantly 

with steed-impelling homage. 

The Friend of ludra mounts his car: well-knowing, he conies 
thereon to meet the pruyer we offer. 

3 0 God, for service of the Gods flow onward, for food sublime, 

as Indra’s diiuk, 0 Soma. 

Making the floods, bedewing earth and heaven, come from the 
vast, comfort us while we cleanse thee. 

4 Flow for prosperity and constant vigour, flow on for happi- 

ness and high perfection. 

This is the wish of all these friends assembled : this is my 
wish, 0 Soma Pavamana. 

5 Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward, the Father of the 

earth, Father of heaven j 

Father of Agui, Surya’s generator, the Father who begat Indra 
and Vishnu. 

6 Br.ihman of Gods, the Leader of the poets, Rishi of sages. 

Bull of savage creatures, 

Falcon amid the vultures, Axe of forests, over the cleansing 
sieve goes Soma singing. 


1 Trita : the preparer of the celestial Soma. Varuna ; hero meaning 
‘the defeater of enemir .’ — Wilson. In ocean: in the hrrnament. 

5 As Director ; upavakUva : upavakUi here appears to mean Adhvaryu : 
‘■thddhvaryuh. — Sdyana. Loosen the Invoker's thought: aid the Hotar or 
‘'oking piiest to give free utterance to his thought or hymn, 

1 Of lasting colours : rahlm^ni: ‘hastily made.’— Wilson. ‘Brilliant.’— 
t’^ssmann. 

2 Steed- impelling : urging him on, as a whip urges on a horse. 

3 Prom the vast : from the wide firmament. There is no substantive in 
‘6 text. 

® Prahman of Gods : thou art Brihaspati, the Lord of Prayer, among the 
or, chief among the priests. Axe: the handle of the axe being 



356 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR n 

7 He, Soina Pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the wave of 

voice, our songs and praises 

Beholding these infoi ior powers in cattle, he rests among them 
as a Steer well- knowing. 

8 As Gladdcner, Warrior never harmed in battle, wit)^ thousand 

genial streams, pour strength and vigour. 

As thoughtful Pavamana, urge 0 Indu, speeding the kiiie, 
the plant’s wave on to Indra. 

9 Dear, grateful to the Gods, on to the beaker moves Sonm, 

sweet to Indra, to delight bun. 

With hundred powers, with thousand currents, Indu, like 
a strong car-horse, goes to the assembly. 

10 Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained with the 

stone, decking himself in waters, 

Warding off curses, King of all existence, ho shall find way 
for prayer the while they cleanse him. 

11 For our sago fathers, Soma Pavamana, of old performed, by 

thee, their siicred duties. 

Fighting unvauquished, open the enclosures: enrich us with 
huge gifts of steeds and heroes. 

12 As thou didst flow for Manu Life-bestowing, Foe-quoller, 

Comforter, rich in oblations, 

Even thus flow onward now confeiring riches : combine with 
Indra, and biing foitli thy weapons. 

13 Flow onward, Soma, rich in sweets and holy, enrobed iu 

waters on the fleecy summit. 

Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering and most 
gladdening drink for Indra. 

14 Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty at the 

Gods’ banquet, pour the rain of heaven. 

While thou with rivers roarcst in the beaker, and blent with 
milk prolongcst our existence. 

15 Purified with our holy hymns, this Soma overtakes maligni- 

ties like some strong charger, 

naturally made of tbe sti'ongest wood — M. Muller. Ludwig think« th^t 
liglitning may be inteudt'd. According to the >St. Petersburg Lexicon, 
svadhitih here means a tree with very h.»r<l wood. See V. 32 10. 

7 The second line in obKcure. Wdson translates ; ‘ the showerer (of bene- 
fits) beholding the hidden (treasure) presides over these irresistible powvrt, 
knowing about the cattle.’ 

9 Goes to the assembly • 'proceeds like a strong horse to battle ’ — Wilso*'* 
11 The enclosures ; the obstructions ndiich keep the rain from falling. 

13 Full of fatness: ghritdvdnti: according to SAyana, ‘ water- holding- 



ffYMN 9(5.] THE RIGVEDA, Z57 

Like fresh milk poured by Aditi, like passage in ample room, 
or like a docile car-horse. 

16 Cleansed by the prossers, armed with noble weapons, stream 

to us the fair secret name thou bearcat, 
pour booty, like a horse, for love of glory : God, Soma, send 
us kine, and send us Vayu. 

17 They deck him at his birth, the lovely Infant, the Maruts 

with their troop adorn the Car-horbe. 

By songs a Poet and a Sage by wisdom, Soma goes singing 
through the cleansing filter. 

18 Light-winner, Kishi-minded, Rishi-maker, hymned in a thou- 

sand hymns, Leader of sages, 

A Steer who strives to gain his third form. Soma is, like 
Vinij, resplendent as a Singer. 

19 Hawk seated in the bowls, Bird wide-extended, the Banner 

seeking kine and wielding weapons, 

Following close the sea, the wave of waters, the great Bull 
tells his fourth form and declares it. 

!0 Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing 
to the gain of riches, 

A steer to herds, so, flowing to the pitcher, he with a roar 
hath passed into the beakers. 

l\ Flow on with might as Pavamaiia, Indu : flow loudly roaring 
through the fleecy filter. 

Enter the beakers sporting, as they cleanse thee, and let thy 
gladdening juice make Indra joyful. 

^2 His streams have been elTuscd in all their fulness, and he 
hath entered, balined with milk, the goblets. 

Singing his psalm, well-skilled in song, a Chanter, he comes 
as ’twere to his friend’s sister roaring. 

23 Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana ! Indu, besung, as 
lover to his darling. 

As a l)ird flies and settles in the forest, thus Soma settles, 
puritied, in goblets. 


Bi/ Aditi: regarded as the Cosmic Cow. 

Ifi Vdyu: the breatli of life, life. — Sayaua. 

is Uh third form : the form that he wears in heaven ; ‘ the third region 
(heavHn).'__'^Y^gQQ yir^j . splendid or most illustrious liulra.— Sayana. 

Ill The banner : drap^uh • usually meaning, a drop, or a sparL See IV. 13. 2. 
Y fourth form : the Moon. According to Sdyana, the region of the Moon 
^ 00 ^ i® said to be above that the Sun. ^ ^ ^ x -m a 

dj 'twere to hu friend's sister: Sftyana explains sister, by jayatn, 
‘ like (a libertine) to the wife of a friend.’ — Wilson. The meaning le 
Probably no more than ‘as lover to his darling’ in the following stanssa. 



THk HtMNS OP 


358 


[book n 


24 With fall stream and abundant milk, 0 Soma, thy beam 
come, like a woman, as they cleanse thee. 

He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hatl 
roared within the goblet of the pious. 

HYMN XeVn. Soma PavamAnt 

Made pure by this man’s urgent zeal and impulse, the Go( 
hath to the Gods his juice imparted. 

He goes, effused and singing, to the filter, like priest to mea 
sured seats supplied with cattle. 

2 Robed in fair r.iiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty Sag( 

pronouncing invocations. 

Roll onward to the beakers as they cleanse thee, far-seeing a 
the feast of Gods, and watchful. 

3 Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a Prince amon^ 

us, nobler than the noble. 

Roar out as thou art puritied, run forward. Do ye preserve 
us evermore with blessings. 

4 Let us sing praises to the Gods : sing loudly, send ye the 

Soma forth for mighty riches. 

Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter, and let oui 
pious one rest in the pitcher. 

5 Winning the friendship of the Deities, Indu flows in a thou- 

sand streams to make them joyful. 

Praised by the men after the ancient statute, he hath coma 
nigh, for our great bliss, to India. 

6 Flow, Gold-hued, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer : let thy 

juice go to Indra to support him. 

Come nigh, together with the Gods, for bounty. Do ye pre- 
serve us evermore with blessings. 

7 The God declares the Deities’ generations, like Usantl., pro- 

claiming lofty wisdom. 

With brilliant kin, far-ruling, sanctifying, the Boar advances, 
singing, to the places. 

1 Urgent zeal and impulse: kemand, by impulse (from the root hi) is said 
by SAyana to mean ‘ by gold,’ that is, by the gold-adorned hand of the priest, 
Measured seats supplied i(rith cattle : ‘the halls prepared (for sacrifice) con- 
taining victims.’ — Wilson. Singing : the sound of the flowing juice ia com- 
pared to the priest’s recitation of sacred texts. , 

7 The Qod: Soma, who has been called the Father of the Gods, 
U^anA : the sound of the flowing and dropping Soma juice is likened to tue 
song of the famous sage and sacred poet. The Boar : strong, swift Soma- 
Singing: making a sound with the descending drops of juice. SAyana explajJ’* 
difterently : — ‘ making a noise (as) a wild boar (makes a noise) with its foot- 
‘Wilson, Th!e places ; the filters. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


359 


97 .] 

8 The Swans, the Vdshnganas fiom anear us have brought their 

rehtlcss spirit to our dwelling. 

Friends come to Pavam^na meet for praises, and sound in con- 
cert their resistless music. 

9 He follows the Wide>strider’s rapid movement : cows low, as 
I ’twere, to him who sports at pleasure. 

He with the sharpened horns brings forth abundance: the 
Silvery shines by night, by day tljc Golden. 

10 Strong ludu, bathed in milk, flows on for India, Soma ex- 

citing strength, to make him joyful. 

He quells malignities niid slays the demons, the King of mighty 
power who brings ns comfort. 

11 Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press-stones, 

mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy filter — 
ladu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens, 
for tlie God’s enjoyment. 

12 As he is purified he pours out treasures, a God bedewing Gods 

with his own juices. 

Indii hath, wearing qimlities by seasons, on the raised fleece 
engaged the ten swift fingers. 

13 The Red Bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing the 

heavens and earth to roar and thunder. 

Well is he hoard like Iiidra’s shout iu battle : letting this voice 
be known he hastens hither. 

|U Swelling with milk, abounding iu sweet flavours, urging the 
[ meath-rich plant thou goest oiiwaid. 

! Raising a shout thou flowest as they cleanse thee, when thou, 
0 Soma, art effused for India. 

15 So flow thou on inspiriting, for mpture, aiming death-shafts 
at him who stays the waters. 

Flow to ns wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager 
for the kine, 0 Soma. 

8 The Swans * the singers, descendants of tlie Ri.shi Vrishagana. 

9 The Wide-strider's rapid movement: the course of the Sun. Cows 

as'tiecre : Sayana explains gtrah cows, hy atn/e gavtdrah. other goers. 

'kes a. s negative, and derives minuUe fn»m md. to mea'^iuc, instead of 
md, to bleat or low ; — ‘ other goers cannot overtake him (though he is) 
loving easily.’— Wilson. He with the sharpened horns : Soma as the Moon, 
fie bilvery light by night and the golden-coloured juice by day. 

^2 Wearing qualities by seasons: ‘ clothed iu j^Ieasaut radiance according to 
fie season. ’—Wilsou. 

15 Him who stays the waters : Vritra, 



360 THE HYMNS OF ' [FOOR /j 

16 Pleased with us, ludu, send us as thou flowest good easy patb 

in ample space and comforts. 

Dispelling, as ’twere with a clnb, misfortunes, run o’er th 
height, run o’er the fleecy summit. 

17 Pour on us rain celestial, quickly streaming, refreshing, fraiigh 

with healtli and ready bounty. 

Flow, Indu, send these Winds thy lower kinsmen, setting then 
free like locks of hair unbraided. 

18 Part, like a knotted tangle, while they cleanse thee, 0 Soma 

righteous ami unrighteous conduct. 

Neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come likeayoutb 
0 God, a hou-e-posheasor. 

19 For the Gods’ service, for delight, 0 Indu, run o’er the height 

run o’er the fleecy summit. 

With thousand streams, inviolate, sweet scented, flow on fo 
g.iin of strength that conquers heroes. 

20 Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyoked, liki 

coursers started in the contest, 

These brilliant drops of Soma juice run forward. Do ye, C 
Deities, come nigh to drink them. 

21 So for our banquet of the Gods, 0 Indu, pour down the rain 

of heaven into the vessels. 

May Soma grant us lichcs sought W'ith longing, mighty, ei 
ceeding strong, with store of heroes. 

22 What time the loving spirit’s word had formed him Chief o 

all food, by stfitute of the Highest, 

Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the chosen, well 
loved Mastci in the beaker. 

23 The S.ige, Celestial, liberal, raining bounties, ])Ours as he flow 

the Genuine for the Truthful. 

The King shall be effectual strength’s upholder : he by the te 
bright reins is mostly guided. 

24 He w'ho beholds mankind, made pure with filters, the Kin 

supreme of Deities and mortals, 

From days of old is Treasure-Lord of riches: he, Indu, cher 
shes fair w'ell-kept Order. 


17 Winds: cf. ‘ Vdyu is Soma’s guardian God’ (X. 85. 5), 

22 Sdyan.x’s explanation of the first hne is extremely laboured : 
the piaise of the zealous worshipper sanctifies him as that of a noisy 
ill front (praises) a distinguished (prince) for the support (he affords).’— 

23 Tice Genuine for the Truthful : rithm ritHya : the Soma juice for 
The ten bright reins : or rays, ». e., the fingers. The half line is difficult. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


361 


nM^ 97.] 

15 Haste, like a steed, to victory for glory, to Indra's and to 
Vayu’s entertainment. 

Give us food ample, thousandfold : be, Soma, the finder-out 
of riches when they cleanse thee. 

6 Effused by us let God-delightiug Somas bring as they flow a 
home with noble heroes — 

Rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the worship^ 
pers of heaven, the best of Cheercrs. 

:7 So, God, for service of the Gods flow onward, flow, drink of 
Gods, for ample food, 0 Soma. 

For we go forth to war against the mighty : make heaven and 
earth well stablished by thy cleansing. 

8 Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, swifter 

than thought is, like an awful lion. 

By paths directed hitherward, tlie straightest, send thou us 
happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee 

9 Sprung from the Gods, a hundred streams, a thousand, have 

been effused : sages prepare and purge them. 

Bring us from heaven the means of winning, Indu; thou art 
forerunner of abundant riches. 

0 The streams of days were poure I as’twere from heaven : the 

wise King doth not treat his friend unkindly. 

Like a son following his father’s wishes, grant to this family 
success and safety. 

1 Now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweetness, 

when, purified, thou goest through the filter. 

The r.ice of kine is thy gift, Pavanuiia : when born thou 
madest Surya rich with brightness. 

2 Bright, bellowing along the path of Order, thou sliinest as the 

form of life etiirnal. 

Thou flowest on as gladdening drink for Indra, sending thy 
voice out with the hymns of .sages. 

3 Pouring out streams at the Gods’ feast with seivice, thou, 
^ Soma, lookest down, i heavenly Kagle. 

Luter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a roar ap- 
proach the ray of Surya. 

^ Three are the voices that the Courser utters : he speaks the 
thought of prayer, the law of Order. 

7Vie of days : the lil)ationa of Soma juice which we offered eveiy 

Lilce a son : the Soma juice is regarded as the son of the yajanulna or 
'^4 7 ? prepared. 

1 ihe Courser is Soma, and the three voices (vychoh) or words which he 
arc according to SAyana praises or sacred texts in the form of the tluee 



laji iiijxi£^s UJf [BOOK II 

To the Cow’s Master come the Cows inquiring: the hymng 
with eager longing come to Soma. 

35 To Soma come the Cows, the Milch-kine longing, to Soma 

sages with their hymns inquiring. 

Soma, effused, is purihed and blended ; our hymns and Trish- 
tup songs unite in Soma. 

36 Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while thou art puii 

fied flow for o\ir welfare. 

Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring : make the voice swell 
and generate abundance. ’ 

37 Singer of true songs, ever- watchful, Soma hath settled in the 

ladles when they cleanse him. 

Him the Adhvaryus, paired and eager, follow, leaders of sacri- 
fice and skilful-handed. I 

38 Cleansed near the Sun as ’twere, he as Creator hath filled full 

heaven and earth, and hath disclosed them. 

He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield 
the precious meed as to a victor. 

39 He, being cleansed, the Strengthener and Increaser, Soma the 

Bounteous, helped us with his lustre. 

Wherewith our sires of old who know the footsteps found 
light and stole the cattle from the mountain. 

40 In the first vault of heaven loud roared the Ocean, King of 

all being, generating creatures. 

Steer, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, Soma, the Drop 
effused, hath waxen mighty. 

41 Soma the Steer, in that as Child of Waters he chose the Gods, 

performed that great achievement. 

He, Pavamina, granted strength to Indra; he, Indu, gene- 
rated light in Stirya. 

42 Make Vayu glad, for furtherance and bounty : cheer Varuna 

and Mitra, as they cleanse thee. 

Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Marnts ; make Heaven 
and Earth rejoice, 0 God, 0 Soma. 

43 Flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked, driving awny 

our enemies and sickness, 

Blending thv milk with milk which cows afford us. We are 
thy friends, thou art the Friend of Indra. 


Vedas. The three tones, low, middle, and high, are probably intended. 0i 
vdhriih (the courser) may mean the bearer of the oblation, yajamiwi, ** 
Sdyana explains. 

40 In the Jlret vault : that is in the highest firmament. The Ocean ; SoflW 



fHi! RIGVEDA, 


363 


^7 ] 

[ pour us a fount of meath, a spring of treasure ; send us a 
hero son and happy fortune. 

]3e sweet to Indra when they cleanse thee, Indu, and pour 
down riches on us from the ocean. 

i Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, hath flowed 
ill stream as a flood speeding downward. 

Clennsed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling : Indu hath 
^iowed with milk and with the waters. 

Strong, wise, for thee who longest for his coming, this Soma 
here flows to the bowls, 0 Indra. 

He, cluiriot-borne, sun-bright, and truly potent, was poured 
forth like the longing of the pious. 

He, purified with ancient vital vigour, pervading all his 
Diingliter’s forma and figures, 

Finding his threefold refuge in the waters, goes singing, as a 
priest, to the assemblies. 

Now, chariot‘borne, flow unto us, God Soma, as thou art 
purified flow to the saucers, 

Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as Savitar the 
God is, truthful-minded. 

To feast him, flow mid song and hymn, to Vdyu, flow purified 
to Varuna and Mitra. 

Flow to the song-inspiring car-borne Hero, to mighty Indra, 
him who wields the thunder. 

Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send, 
purified, milch-kine, abundant yielders. 

(loil Soma, send us chariot-drawing horses that they may 
bring us treasures bright and golden. 

Send to us in a stream celc.stial riches, send us, when thou 
art cleansed, what earth containeth, 

So that thereby we may acquire possessions and Rishihood in 
Jamadagni’s manner. 

Pour forth this wealth with this purification : flow onward to 
the yellow lake, 0 Indu. 

Here, too, the Ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, shall give 
a son to him who cometh quickly. 


ffis Daughter's forms and figures : Soma pervades, and imparts a share 
^ nutritions power to, the grass, herbs, and shrubs which are the vai ied 
by Earth his daughter, 

m^i/iood in Jamodagni's manntr ; ‘wake our aapred prayer (sweet) as 
-Wilson. ‘ ^ ^ ^ 

r ; the meaning of mdnfchatv^ is uncertain. See VII. 44. 8, note 



364 THE HYMNS OP {^OOK H 

53 Flow on for us with this purification to the famed ford of the( 

whose due is gloiy. 

May the Foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, like a tree’ 
ripe fruit, sixty thousand treasures, 

54 EHgerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lak( 

and Prisana, wrought in battle. 

He sent our enemies to sleep and slew them, and turned awaj 
the foolish and unfriendly. 

55 Thou comest unto three extended filters, and hastencsl 

through each one as they cleanse tiice. 

Thou ait the giver t>f the gift, a Bhaga, a Maghavan for 
liberal lords, 0 Indu. 

56 This Soma here, the Wise, the All-obtaiiier, flows on his way 

as King of all existence. 

Driving the drops at our assemblies, Indu completely traverses 
the fleecy filter. 

57 The Great Inviolate are kissing Indu, and singing in his place 

like eager sagos. 

The wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, and balm 
his form with essence of the waters. 

58 Soma, may we, with thee as Pavamana, pile np together aii 

our spoil in liatlle. 

This boon vouchsafe us Varuna and Mitra, and Aditi and 
Sindhu, Earth and Heaven ! 

HYMN XCVIII. Soma Pavaniana 

Stream on us riches that are souglit by many, best at wiiiuiiif 
strength, 

Riches, 0 Indu, thousandfold, glorious, conquering the great. 

53 To the famed ford: possibly, as Ludwig suggests, the aid of Somai 
ciaved at some ford of a neigliltouring river, famous on iiccoUMt of a b-ittl 
that has been fought there, and destined to be the scene of an appruachiD] 
conflict, 

64 The first line is conjecturally tian.slated after Ludwig, who tak« 
Prhdua to be the name of a place. SHy.ma’s elaborate explanation is li'l 
feieiit: — ‘These two gi eat acts, the raining (of arrows) and the hnniiliabd 
(of foes), are the givers of happincbs ; tin y aie deadly either in a fight o 
boiseback or in a hand-to-hand fight’ — Wilson. Here S.lyana explah 
mdngchatv^ (at the blue or yellow lake by ‘in battle with horses,’ an 
prisane (at Piisana?) by ‘in close, or hand-to-hand encounter.’ Two victorn 
appear to be refei i ed to, and that is about all that can be said. 

66 The three extended fUten are said to be fire, wind, and sun, in additK 
to the one artificial filter of wool. 

67 The Great Inviolate: the Gods. Rinsing : or sipping. 

53 All our spoil in hdtle : yet be won in the approaching fight where 
we look to Soma for help and victory. 



93 ] 


TUB RIQVEDA. 


365 


Effused, he hath, as on a car, invested him in fleecy mail : 
Oiiwaid hath Indu flowed in streams, impelled, sniTounded by 
the wood. 

Effused, this Indu hath flowed on, distilling rapture, to the 
fleece : 

He goes erect, as seeking kine, in stream, with light, to sacrifice. 
For thou thyself, 0 Indu, (lod, to every mortal worshipper 
Attractest iiches thousandfold, made manifest in hundied 
forms. 

Good Vritra-slayer, may we be still nearest to this wealth of 
tliine 

Which many crave, nearest to food and happiness. Resistless 
One ! 

Wliom, bright with native splendour, crushed between the 
pair of pressing-stones — 

The wavy Friend whom Indra loves — the twice-five sisters 
dip and bathe, 

Hun with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved 
of nil, 

Who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the Deities. 
Through longing for this sap of yours yo drink what brings 
ability, 

Kven him who, dear as heaven’s own light, gives to our princes 
high renown. 

Indu at holy rites produced you. Heaven and Earth, the 
Friends of men, 

Hill-haunting God the Goddesses. They bruised him where 
the roar was loud. 

For Vritra-slaying ludra, thou, Soma, art poured that he may 
drink, 

Foured for the guerdon-giving man, poured for the God who 
sitteth there. 

Those ancient Somas, at the break of day, have flowed into 
the sieve, 

Snorting away at early morn these foolish evil-hearted ones. 

2 V}ood : the wooden vat or trough. 

^ kine : desirous of the milk which i« to be mixed with hia juice. 

^ nis stanz.i is difficult S^yana explains it differently ‘ Divine heaven 
^ earth the progeny of Mann, the Boma juice is generated at your sacrifices, 
an s abiding in the grinding stones ; (the priests) bruise him at the loud- 
uciing ceremony.’- Wilson. HiU-haunting : cf. IX. 85. 10. 
rifice* fl'Wtfrdon-flpivhigr man: for the good of the institutor of the 

^ Snorting away : driving away with the bubbling sound they make. 



366 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK li 

12 Friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this Most Re- 
splendent One, 

Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him \vhos« 
home is very strength. 

HYMN XCIX. Soma PavamSai 

They for the Bold and Lovely One ply manly vigour like a bow ; 
Joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the 
Lord Divine. 

2 And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward into strength- 

ening food, 

What time the sacrificer’s thoughts speed on his way the 
Golden-hucd. 

3 We cleanse this gladdening drink of his, the juice which Indra 

chiefly drinks, — 

That which kine took into their mouths, of old, and princes 
take it now. 

4 To him, while purifying, they have raised the ancient psalm 

of praise : 

And sacred songs which bear the names of Gods have suppli- 
cated him. 

5 They purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve. 
Him they instruct as messenger to bear the sage’s morning 

prayer. 

6 Soma, best Cheercr, takes his seat, the while they cleanse himj 

in the bowls. 

He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, the Lord of Song. 


12 Who hath the smell of strength : vHjagandhyam : ‘fragrant and invigo 
rating.’ — Wilson, ‘ Forming or having a wag'»n-load of goods or spoil.’— S. P- 
Lexicon. Him whose home is strength : vdja past gam : ‘food and dwellings. 
Wilson. ‘ Him who has a house full of goods.’ — S. P. Lexicon. 


1 They : the priests. Ply manly vigour like a bow : * stretch the bow of 
manhood.’ — Wilson. They exert all their manly strength, or as Bcnfeyi 
suggests, attack and storm the God with prayer and sacrifice, ‘ beseeching 
besieging ’ as Milton says. The Lord Divine : the Asura (Zend, Ahuia), here 
meaning Soma. 

2 By night : kshapd : * at the end of the night.’ — Wilson. Ludwig tran- 
slates kshapiX by ‘ der furst,’ ‘ the prince.' 


3 Whkh kine took into their mouths : in the form of the juices of gra** 
from which the milky portion of the libation is evolved. 

4 Sfly ana’s explanation of the second line of this stanza, is different 

the fingers exercising their pressure are able (to prepare the oblation) tor t 
gods.’— Wilson, ^ 

^ Heat U were impregns the coio: meaning, perhaps, as Ludwig 
that the milk becomes efficacious as a libation only when it is mixed wi 
Soma juice. 



the RIQVEDA. 


867 


1000 

7 He is effused and beautified, a God for Gods, by skilful men 
He penetrates the mi^uity floods collecting all he knows therein. 

1 8 Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to the clean- 
ing sieve. 

Thou, yielding ludra highest joy, takest thy seat within the 
bowls. 


HYMK C. Soma Pavamdna. 

The Guileless Ones are singing praise to Indra’s well belovOd 
V 1 lend, 

As, in the morning of its life, the mothers lick the new born 
calf. 

2 0 Indu, while they cleanse thee, bring, 0 Soma, doublv-waxinc 

wealth ; ■' ® 

Thou in the worshipper’s abode causest all treasures to in- 
increase. 

3 Set free the song which mind hath yoked, even as thunder 

frees the rain : 

All treasures of the earth and heaven, 0 Soma, thou dost 
nudtiply. 

4 Thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some victorious 

warrior’s steed, 

Hastening onward through the fleece like a swift horse who 
wins the prize. 

5 Flow on, Sage Soma, with thy stream to give us mental power 

and strength, 

Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for Varuna. 

6 h low to the filter with thy stream, effused, best winner, thou, 

of spoil, 

0 Soma, as most rich in sweets for Indra, Vishnu, and the 
Gods. 

^ The mothers, void of guiles, caress thee. Golden-coloured, in 
the sieve, 

As cows, 0 Pavamana, lick the new-born calf, as Law com- 
mands. 


^ GoUecthig aV he knows therein : the meaning of this half-line is not clear : 
Wilson recognized amongat these (people) as the giver (of riches).’ 

J Guileless Ones : the vasativari waters. 

I commands : vidharmani: see Bergaigne, La Religion Vidiqnt. 

2. ‘At the sacrifice.*— Wilson, * In the realm of heaven.’ — 



368 THE BYMN& OF [BOOK /x 

8 Thou, Pavamaiia, movest on with wondrous rays to great re- 

nown. 

Striving within the votary's house thou drivest all the glooms 
away. 

9 Lord of great sway, thou liftest tbee above the heavens, above 

the earth. 

Thou, Pavamana, hast assumed thy coat of mail in majesty. 

HVMN Cl. Soma Pavam&ua. j 

For first possession of your juice, for the exhilarating drink, 
Drive ye aw'ay the dog, my friends, drive ye the long-tongued < 
dog away. 

2 He who with purifying stream, effused, comes flowing hither- 

ward, 

Indu, is like an able steed. 

3 The men with all-pervading song send unassailable Soma forth, 
Py pressing-stones, to sacrifice. 

4 The Soinas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is des- 

tined, flow, 

Effused, the source of Indra's joy : may your strong juices 
reach the Gods. 

5 Indu flows on for Indra's snkc : thus have the Deities declared, 
The Lord of Speech exerts himself, Kuler of all, because oi 

might. 

6 Inciter of the voice of song, wdth thousand streams the ocean 

flows, 

Even Soma, Lord of opulence, the Friend of Indra, dayh] 
day. 

7 As Pushan, Fortune, Bliaga, comes this Soma while they mak 

him pure. 

He, Lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the eart 
and heaven. 

8 The dear cows lowed in joyful mood together to the gladdr 

ing drink. 

The drops as they were purified, the Soma juices, made tbe 
paths. 

9 0 Pavamana, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy to 

famed. 

Which the Five Tribes have over them, whereby we may ^ 
opulence. ^ 

9 The coat of mail: drdptm: see IX. 86. 14. 

1 Drive ye away : prevout dogs or Klksliasas from drinking the Soma 



THE RIQVEDA, 


369 


jjYMN 102 J 


10 For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of our 
weal, 

Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders of the 
light. 

[1 Effused by means of pressing-stones, upon the ox-hide visible, 
They, treasure-finders, have announced food unto us from 
every side. 

12 These Soma juices, skilled in song, purified, blent with milk 

and curd, 

When moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely Suns. 

13 Let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpour- 

ing juice : 

As Bhrigu s sons chased Makha, so drive ye the greedy hound 
away. 

14 The Friend hath wrapped him in his robe, as in his parents’ 

arms, a son. 

He went, as lover to a dame, to take his station suitor-like. 

15 That Hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both 

worlds apart, 

Gold-hupd, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, priest- 
like, ill his place. 

(D Soma upon the ox’s skin through the sheep’s wool flows purified. 
Bellowing out, the Tawny Steer goes on to Indra’s special 
place. 


HYMN Cl I. Soma Pavamftna. 

Tuk Child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan 
of sacrifice, 

Surpasses all things that are dear, yea, from of old. 

2 The place, near the two pressing-stones of Trita, hath he 
occupied, 

Secret and dear through seven lights of sacrifice, 
igveda^^^^' apparently, a demon whose name does not occur again in the 
station.'— Wilson. The vessel conUining the 

oation appro|.nated to Iiidra. 



[IlCUlt ftfn mr l wa WHO VkllKJk MIC VOI / 

eparftft n The place: faraway iu heaven where Trita presses and 

4 0 / Soma for India. He : Soma. Dear ; io Soma. Seven 

which q ^ ‘ probably the seven rays or tongues of the sacrificial fire 
'fifices ^ closely connected. 'Through the seven ordmauces of 



370 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX 

3 Urge to three courses, on the heights of Trita, riches iu a 

stream : 

He who is passing wise measures his courses out. 

4 Even at his birth the Mothers Seven taught him, for glory, 

like a sage, ’ 

So that he, tirm and sure, hatli set his mind on wealth. 

5 Under his sway, of one accord, are all the guileless Deities: 
Warriors to bo envied, they, when they are pleased. 

6 The Babe whom they who strengthen Law have generated, 

fair to see, 

Much longed for at the sacrifice, most liberal Sage, — 

7 To him, united, of themselves, come tlie young Parents of the 

rite, 

When they adorn him, duly weaving sacrifice. 

y With wi'sdoin and with radiant eyes unhar to us the stall of 
heaven, 

Speeding at solemn rite the plan of Holy Law\ 

HYMN cm. SoDia Pavamfiua, 

To Soma who is pnrifud as ordering Piiest tVo song is raised: 
Bring meed, as Twere, to one who makes thee glad wvtli hynm 

2 Blended with milk and curds he flows ou through the 

wool of the sheep. 

The Guld-hucd, purified, makes him three seats for rest. 

3 On through the long wool of theslreepto the meath-droppiiij 

vat he flows : 

The Uisliis’ sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him. 

4 Shared hy all Gods, Infallible, the Leader of our holy hymm 
Golden-hued Soma, being cleansed, hath reached the bowls. 

3 nnvm jiistificvtion of my interpretation/ ways Prof. Mactlouell, ' 
that Innpply no extraneous woid with ‘tih*i,’ but explain it by the tliii 
hue. Tlie lueaniug of my translition is : ‘ Do thou, Soma, on the heiguw 
Trita, direct the fertilizing streams which produce wealth into the cbaiim 
of Trita, for thou knowest these channels, having measured them out 
thy sti earns.’ Three conrus: or channels, of Tiita. He who is p(iS$iitg u>n 
Soma His : Trita’s. 

4 TAe the Seven Rivers. 

I) Warriors to be envied : the meaning of the line is uncertain. 

6 Thei/ who strenytlien Law : according to Sfiyana, the vasativari waters^ 

7 The youiKj Parents of the rite ; ever-young, fresh and strong Heaveii 

Earth. 

2 Three seats for rest : three reservoirs in which he may settle. Tbe<f 

nakalasa, the ddhavanti/a, and the i., wilic 

' 3 The Rishis' sevenfold quire : ‘ the seven metres of the -“n* 



TBE niQVEDA, 


371 


IYMN 105.] 

5 After tby Godlike qualities, associate with Indra, go, 

As a Priest purified by priests, Immortal One. 

6 Like a car-horse who shows his strength, a God effused for 

Deities, 

Tlie penetrating Pavamana flows along. 

HYMN CIV. Soma PavamUna. 

Sit dow’n, 0 friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself : 
Deck liim for glory, like a child, with holy rites. 

2 Unite him bringing household wealth, even as a calf, with 

mother kino. 

Him who hath double strength, the God-delighting juice. 

3 Purify him who gives us power, that he, most Blessed One, 

maybe 

A banquet for the Troop, Mitra, and Vanina. 

4 Voices have sung aloud to thee as finder-out of wealth for us : 
We clothe the hue thou wcarest with a robe of milk. 

5 Thou, Indu, art the food of Gods, 0 Sovran of all gladdening 

drinks : 

As Friend for friend, be thou best finder of success. 

6 Drive utterly away from us each demon, each voracious fiend, 
The godless and the false : keep sorrow far away. 

HYMN CV. Soma PavamAna. 

SixG ye aloud, 0 friends, to him who makes him pure for glad- 
dening drink : 

dlicy shall make sweet the Cliild with sacrifice and laud. 

2 Like as a calf with mother cows, so Indu is urged forth and sent, 
Glorified by our hymns, the God-delighting juice. 

3 Effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the Troop, 
He who hath hecu effused, most licli in meatli, for Guds. 

^ Flow to us, Indu, passing strung, effused, with wealth of kinc 
and steeds : 

1 will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue. 

5 Lord of the tawny, Ir.du, thou who art the Gods’ most special 
food, 

As Friend to friend, for splendour be thoq good to men. 

5 After thy Oodlihe qualities : according to SAyana, ‘ to the hosts of the goda.’ 

’ : vydnasih: ‘ spreading widely into the ve«bels.’— Wilson. 

l? him the support of the mansion with the mater- 

“ I waters) as the calf (with che mother).’- Wilson 
Troop: the banded Maruts. 

5 loi'd of the tamy ; harindm : SAyana supplies patUndm, cattle. 



THE HYMXS OF [BOOK IX. 

6 Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each voracious 
foe : 

0 Iiidu, overcome and drive the false afar. 

HYMNCVI. SomaP.v.u,4„. 

To Indra, to theMighty Steer, may these gold-coloured juices go 
Drops rapidly produced, that find the light of heaven. “ ’ 

2 Effused, this juice victorious flows for ludra, for his mainte- 

nance. 

Soma bethinks him of the Conqueror, as he knows. 

3 May India in his raptures gain from him the grasp that gath- 

ers spoil, 

And, winning waters, wield the steer-strong thunderbolt. 

4 Flow vigilant for Indra, thou Soma, yea, Tndii, run thou on : 
Bring hither splendid strength that finds the light of heaven. 

5 Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra’s sake the mighty juice, 
Path-maker thou, far seeing, with a thousand ways. 

6 Best finder of prosperity for us, most rich in sweets for Gods, 
Proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths. 

7 0 Indu, with thy streams, in might, flow for the banquet of 

the Gods : 

Rich in meath. Soma, in our beaker take thy place. 

8 Thy drops that swim in water have exalted Indra to delight- 
The Gods have drunk thee up for immortality. 

9 Stream opulence to us, ye drops of Soma, pressed and purified, 
Pouring down rain from heaven in floods, and finding light. 

10 Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool 

of the sheep. 

Shouting while purified before the voice of song. 

11 With songs they send the Mighty forth, sporting in wood, 

above the fleece : 

Our psalms have glorified him of the triple height. 

12 Into the jars hath he been loosed, like an impetuous steed 

for war, 

And lifting up his voice, while filtered, glided on. 

13 Gold-hued and lovely in his course, through tangles of the 

wool he flows, 

And pours heroic fame upon the worshippers. 


Tbe hymn is a sort of Hfaccimento of Hymn 104. 

2 For hit maintenance : bhdrdya: or, for bstfcle. The Conquerm': Tadru. 
11 Him of the triple height : tripruhthdm: the three heights are probably 
the firmament, the mountain, and the altar. ‘ Abiding in three receptacle** 
—Wilson, ^ 



hymn 107.] THE RIGVEDA, 


873 


14 Flow thus, a faithful votary : the streams of meath have 
been effused. 

Thou comest to the filter, singi^ig, from each side. 


HY^^N evil. Soma PavamAna. 


Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, Soma, the beat of 
sacred gifts. 

Who, friend of hath run amid the water-streams. 

He hath Soma out with stones. 

2 Now, being puHfied, flow hither through the fleece inviolate 

and iiiodt odoiuus. 

We gliiddcn tliee in waters when thou art effused, blending 
thee ‘^till with juice and milk. 

3 Pressed out for all to see, delighting Gods, Indu, Far-sighted 

is mental power. 

4 o^ansing thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest in a watery 

Giver of wealth, thou sittest in the place of Law, 0 God, a 
fountain made of gold. 

5 Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath, he hath sat in 

the ancient gathering-place. 

Washed by the men, the Strong, Far-seeing One streams forth 
nutritious food that all desire. 


6 0 Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the 

sheep’s long wool, 

Thou hast become a Singer most like Aiigiras : thou madest 
Surya mount to heaven. 

7 Bountiful, best of furtherers. Soma floweth on, Rislii and 

Singer, keen of sight. 

Thou hast become a S ige most welcome to the Gods : thou 
madest Surya mount to heaven. 

8 Pressed out by pressers. Soma goes over the fleecy backs of 

sheep, 

Loes, even as with a mare, in tawny-coloured stream, goes 
m exhilarating stream, 

9 Down to the water Soma, rich in kine, hath flowed with cows, 

With cows that have been milked. 


^ He : the priest. 

5 Law-ordained Bacrifice. 

udder for dear meath ; extracting the sweet and 
juice from the stalk and tendrils of the Soma plant. 



374 THE HYMNS OP [BOOE IX, 

They h<ave approached the mixing- vessels as a sea : the cheerer 
streams for the caroirf^e. 

10 Effused by atones, 0 Soma, and urged through the long wool 

of the sheep, 

Thou, entering the saucers as a rxian the fort, gold-hued hast 
settled in the wood. 

11 He beautifies himself through the shcxp^s long fine wool, like 

an impetuous steed in war, 

Even Soma Pavamana who shall be the [py of sages and of 
holy bards. 

12 0 Soma,— for the feast of Gods, river-like he hath swelled 

with surge, 

With the stalk’s juice, exhilarating, resting not, \nto the vat 
that drops with meath. 

13 Like a clear son who must bo decked, the Lovely hath 

clad him in a shining robe. 

Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into 
rivers from their hands. 

14 The living drops of Soma juice pour, as they flow, the glad- 

dening drink, 

Intelligent drops above the basin of the sea, exhilarating, 
finding light. 

15 May Pavamana, King and God, speed with his wave over the 

sea the lofty rite : « ^ • n. 

May he by Mitra’s and by Varuna’s decree flow furthering tiie 

lofty rite. 

16 Far-seeingr, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose hotncii 

in the sea — 

17 Soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for Indra withhii 

Marut host ; 

He hastens o’er the fleece with all his thousand streams; w 
make him bright and beautiful. 

18 Purified in the bowl and gendering the hymn, wise Soma jop| 

among the Gods. , , , . ^e «,ith 

Robed in the flood, the Mighty One hath clad himself ^ 
milk and settled in the vats. 

9 They have aj>proachcd the mixing-vesteh like a sea: aa»nvrfrawff«j> f*"®® 
samvri, to cover, enclose, surround, must, apparently, mean the vesse ^ 
contain the juices and not the juices themselves as Sftyana explains 
enjoyable juices go (to the pitcher as waters) to the ocean.'— Wilson. 

12 0 Soma Atf, is a sort of periphrasis for Soma in the nommativ 

14 0/ the sea : of the firmament, or sea ot air. 



THE RIGVEDA, 


375 


108.] 

9 0 Soma, Indu, every day thy friendship hath been my delight. 
Many fiends follow me ; help me, thou Tawny-hucd \ pass on 
beyond these harriers. 

>0 Close to thy bosom am I, Soma, day and night, OTawny-hned, 
for friendship sake. 

Surya himself refulgent with his glow have we o’crtaken in his 
C(3iirse like birds. 

1 Dcft-handed ! thou when purified liftest tliy voice amid the sea. 
Thou, Pavamaiiii, makcst riches flow to us, yellow, abundant, 

much-desired. 

;2 Making thee pure and bright in the sheep’s long wool, thou 
hast bidlowcd, steer-like, in the wood. 

Thou flowest, Soma Pavamaiia, balmcd with milk unto tlie 
special place of (iods. 

3 Flow on to will us strength, flow on to lofty lore of every kind. 
Thou, Soma, as Rxhilarator -.xast the first to spread the .sea 
abroad for Gods, 

14 Flow to the realm of earth, flow to the realm of heaven, 0 
Soma, in thy righteous ways. 

Fair art thou whom the sages, 0 Far-sccing One, urge onward 
with their songs and hymns. 

1 .) Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Pavamanas in a stream, 
(jirt by the Mai uts, gladdening, Steeds with Inra’s strength, 
for wisdom and for dainty food. 

6 Urged onward by the pressers, clad in watery robes, Indu is 
speeding to the vat. 

He gendering light, hath made the glad Cows low, the while 
he takes them as his garb of state. 

HYMN eVin. Soma PavamAn.v 

For Iiidra, flow thou Soma on, as gladdening juice most 
sweet, intelligent, 

Great, cheering, dwelling most in heaven. 

2 Thou, of whom having drunk the Steer acts like a steer : 

drinking of this (hat hnds the light, 

Many fiends • the text has only pnrdni, inany, in the neuter plural. 
\vatia Puppliea rakshdhsi RAksha.sas or fiends. Pass on beyond these barriers : 
'vercotne those who sinround me.’ — Wilson. 

^0 Close to thy bosom am I : ‘I (delight) in thy presence.’ — Wilson. 

^ the sea : antarikshe kalase vd An iXie firmament or in the beaker, 
SAyana * 

^•'5 The Pavamdnas : ‘ tby purified juices,’ — Wilson. 

j ^ ^teer acts like a steer : vrishahhd vrishdydte : ‘ the showerer Indra is 
J'gorated. ’—Wilson. Etasa: one of the horses of the Sun; or a horse in 
neial ‘as a horse coxnee to the battle.’ — SAyana. 



376 THE BYMN& OF [BOOK H 

He, Excellently Wise, is come to strengthening food, to spoil 
and wealth like Etasa. 

3 For, verily, Pavamana, thou hast, spleiididest, called all the 

generations of 
The Gods to immortality. 

4 By whom Dadhyach Navagva opens fastened doors, by whom 

the sages gained their wish, 

By whom they won the fame of lovely Amrita in the felicity of 
Gods. 

5 Effused, he floweth in a stream, best rapture-giver, in the long 

W'ool of the sheep, 

Sporting, as ’twere the 'watciV wave. 

6 He w ho from out the rocky cavern took wdth might the red- 

rcfnlgcnt watery CWs, — 

Thou mastcrest the stable full of kine and steeds : burst it, 
brave Lord, like one in mail. 

7 Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laud-worthy, speeding 

through the region and the flood, 

Who swims in water, roars in wood ; 

8 Increaser of the water. Steer with thousand streams, dear to 

the race of Deities ; 

Who born in Law' hath waxen mighty by the Law, King, Gud, 
and lofty Ordinance. 

9 Make splendid glory shine on ns, thou Lord of strengthening 

food, God, as the Friend of Gods : 

Unclose the fount of middle air. 

10 Roll onward to the bowls, 0 Mighty One, effused, as Prince 

supporter of the tribes. 

Pour on us r.iiu from heaven, send us the waiters’ flow : incite 
our thoughts to wdn the spoil. 

1 1 They have drained him the Steer of heaven, him with ft 

thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy, 

Him who brings all thing excellent. 

12 The Mighty One was born Immortal, giving life, lightening 

darkness with his shine. , 

Well-praised by sages he hath by his wondrous power assiimea 
the t hreefold as his robe. ^ 

4 Dadhifach Navagva: Padhyaoh was the son of Atharvan T/’J 

first obtained fire and offered Soma and pi ayer to the Gods Here he is c 
a Navagva and consequently one of the Angirases. See both name-s m • 
I., Index. Won the fame of lovely Amrita : ‘obtained the sustenance oi 
delicious (ambrosial) water.’ — Wilson. 

12 The Threefold: the morning, noon, and evening libation. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


377 


109 .] 

13 Effused is he who brings good things^ who brings us bounteous 

gifts and sweet refreshing food, 

Soma who brings us quiet homes : 

14 He whom our Indra and the Marut host shall drink, Bhaga 

shnll drink with Aryaman, 

By whom we bring to us Mitra and Varuna and Indra for our 
great defence. 

15 Soma, for Indra’s drink do thou, led by the men, well-weapon- 

cd and most gladdening. 

Flow on with greatest store of sweets. 

16 Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra’s heart, as rivers pass into 

the sea, 

Acceptable to Mitra, Vayu, Varuna, the noblest Pillar of the 
heavens. 


HYMN CIX. Soma Pavamlna. 

Pleasant to Indra’s, Mitra’s, Pushan’s Bhaga’s taste, speed 
onward. Soma, with thy flowing stream. 

2 Let Indra drink, 0 Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, and all 

Deities for strength. 

3 So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the vast, im- 

mortal dwelling-place. 

4 Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as Father of the Gods, 

to every form. 

5 Flow on, 0 Somn, radiant for the Gods and Heaven and Earth, 

and bless our progeny. 

6 Thou, bright Juice, art Sustainer of the sky ; flow, mighty, in 

accordance with true Law. 

7 Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream through the 

great fleece as in the olden time. 

S Born, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the Light-finder 
make all blessings flow. 


thp n/ ™®tre of this stanza is GAyatri YavatnadhyA. that is QAyatr? having 
firgt a'm f ^ barley-corn, thick in the middle and tapering at both ends : 
aua of eight syllables, then one of twelve, and lastly another of eight. 


The Risliis 
fions of" 


'sliis ^re the Agnayo DhishnyAh, sacrifical Agnis or Fires, said to be 
^ isvara the Supreme Deity of post-Vedic times. 

"paciou8Tb!3de^^.~^nao^^ ‘flow for immortality and 

‘‘ “B the forms or essences of the Gods into which he 
to every power, to aid us in every way. 



m THE HYMNS OF {BOOR H 

9 Indu, while cleansed, keeping the people safe, shall give U8 
all possessions for our own. 

10 Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong courser 

bathed, to win the prize. 

11 The pressers purify this juice of thine, the Soma, for delight, 

and lofty fame. 

1 2 They deck the Gold-hucd Infant, newly-born, even Soma, 

Indu, in the sieve for Gods. 

13 Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy. Sage for good 

fortune in the waters’ lap. 

14 He bears the beauteous name of Indra, that wherewith he 

overcame all demon foes. 

15 All Deities are wont to drink of him, pressed by the men and 

blent with milk and curds. 

16 He hath flowed forth with thousand streams effused, flowed 

through the filter and the sheep’s long wool. 

17 With endless genial flow the Strong hath run, purified by the 

waters, blent with milk. 

18 Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go forth, 0 

Soma, into Indra’s throat. 

19 The mighty Soma with a thousand streams is poured to Indra 

through the cleansing sieve. 

20 Indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for Indra, for the 

Steer, for his delight. 

21 Lightly, for sheen, they cleanse thee for the Gods, gold-colour- 

ed, wearing water as thy robe. 

22 Indu to Indra streams, yea, downward streams, Strong, 

ing to the floods, and mingling there. 

HYMN CX. Soma PavamAnft. 

O’erpowering Vritras, forward rnn to win great strength : 
Thou speedest to snbdiie like one exacting debts. 

2 In thee, effused, 0 Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great su- 

premacy in fight; 

Thou, Pavamana, enterest into mighty deeds. 

3 0 Pavamana, thou didst generate the Sun, and spread the m 

ture out with power, 

Hasting to us with plenty vivified with milk. 

14 He hears: according to SAyana, the translation of the first half 
would be : ludra’s fair body he supports, wherewith, etc. 

3 With plenty vivified with milJc ; * with ahuudaut wisdom 
cattle (for thy worshippers).’— Wilson, 



111'] RtQVEDA, 379 

4 Thou didst produce him, Deathless God ! mid mortal men 

for maintenance of Law and lovely Amrita : 

Thou evermore hast moved making stiength flow to us. 

5 All round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as ’twere 

a never-failing well for men to drink, 

Borne on thy way in fragments from the presser's arras. 

6 Th3n, beautifully radiant, certsiin Heavenly Ones, have sung 

to him their kinship as they looked thereon, 

And Savitar the God opens as ’twere a stall. 

7 Sonia, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the 

hymn to thee for mighty strength and for renown ; 

So, Hero, urge us onward to heroic power. 

8 They have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky 

the old primeval milk of heaven that claims the laud : 

They lifted up their voice to Indra at his birth. 

9 As long as thou, 0 Pavamaiia, art above this earth and heaven 

and all existence in thy might, 

Tliou standest like a Bull the chief amid the herd. 


10 In the sheep’s wool hath Soma Pavainana flowed, while they 
cleanse him, like a playful infant, 

Indu with hundred powers and hundred currents. 


11 

12 


Holy and sweet, while purified, this Indu flows on, a wave of 
pleasant taste, to Indra, — 

Strength-winner, Treasure-finder, Life-bestower. 

^'"fiow thou on, subduing our assailants, chasing the demons 
to be encountered, 

vVell-arm^fj and conquering our foes, 0 Soma. 


HYMN CXT. Soma Pavamana. 

Wini this his gOKL.^ splendour purifying him, he with his 
own allies subdues au enemies, as Sura with his own allies, 
eaiising himself with stio^oi of juice he shines forth yellow- 
uied and red, when with the ^jraisers he encompasses all 
lorms, with praisers having seven mouths. 

6 stalk »nd ahoots of the aoraa-plaat. 

VasimiPlioo * 1 radiant • roaunwAaA .• according to SAyana, a proper name, 

«b*uctmg\dtknea8).’^ikon. 


fillies ■ : the fieuda of darkneaa. Ji Silra viith his ovm 

rUnfY . the Sun with his attendant beams of light. Allfoi'mi: 

Wdt ^ mansions, according to SHyana. According to Hille- 

^'‘girasea i With the praueys: flkvahh'fi: perhaps the 

hpJn? ’“™“ded. Having seven mouths: that is, one mouth each, the 
mg mentioned in reference to their love of SnmA 



3S0 fBE BTMNS OP [BOOK n 

2 That treasure of the Panis thou disooveredst ; thou with thy 

mothers deckest thee in thine abode, with songs of worship 
in thine home. 

As 'twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy songs 
resound in joy. He with the ruddy-hued, threefold hath 
won life-power, he, glittering, hath won life-power. 

3 He mDves intelligent, directed to the East. The very beau- 

teous car rivals the beams of light, the beautiful celestial 
car. 

Hymns, lauding manly valour, came, inciting Indi a to success, 
that ye may be unconquered, both thy bolt and thou, both 
be uncouqiiered in the war. 

HYMN CXII. Soma Pavamansi. 


We all h\v 0 various thoughts and plans, and diverse are the 
ways of men. 

The Brahmin seeks the worshipper, wriglit seeks the cracked, 
and leech the maimed. Flow, Indn, How for Indra’s sake, 


2 The smith with ripe and seasoned plants, with feathers of the 

birds of air, 

With stones, and with enkindled flames, seeks him who hath 
a store of gold. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

3 A bard am I, my dad’s a leech, mammy lays corn upon the 

stones. 

Striving for wealth, with varied plans, we follow our desire'’ 
like kiiie. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. ^ 


2 Treasure of the Panis : the rays of light carried off and 

demons of <l.irknes8. Thi/ Mothers: apparently the Dawns. Accor-' 
tlie waters. Threefold: there is no substantive 

is uncertain what tridhatubhih refers to. Sftyana > GrasBinaun 

waters, and explains it by ‘ the eupportere of the ^ „ith tb. 

thinks that the beverages, eo..««ting of three J^’.poken of a» tbt« 

Soma juice are intended. Probably the Bometiuioa 

(cf. VIII. 41. 3), are meant. ^ 

3 The very beauteous car: of Som^- Beams of light: bu 


The hymn appears to be an old popular song will 

to Soma by attaching to each stanza » ®“TKymu i< 

the subject of the song B>it see Vedische Studien, I. p. 107. i y 
translated in Muir’s 0 S. Texts, V. 424. ^ 

1 The Brahman: ‘Tins verse distinctly proves that the pneatho 

formed a profession ’—Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 252 ^ With 

2 Plants : meaning here reeds which were made into ^rows. t 

and with enkindled fUimes: according to SAyana, be abl 

form the heads of the arrows Who hath a store of gold and will 

to pay well for the arrows which the artisan makes ^ niammy 

^ eruression. corresponding to narw, 



THE RIGVEDA. 


381 


YMN 113.] 

1 The horse would draw an easy car, gay hosts attract the laugh 

and jest. 

The male desires his mate’s approach, the frog is eager for the 
flood. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

HYxMN CXIII. Soma PavaraAna. 

Let Vritra-slaying Iiidra drink Soma by Sjiryanavan’s side, 
Storing up vigour in his heart, prepared to do heroic deeds. 
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

2 Lord of the Quarters, flow thou on, boon Soma, from Arjika land, 
Elfiised with ardour and with faith, and tho true hymn of 

sacrifice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

3 Hither hath Surya’s Daughter brought the wild Steer whom 

Parjanya nursed. 

Gandharvas have seized hold of him, and in the Soma laid 
the juice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

4 Splendid by Law ! declaring Law, truth-speaking, truthful in 

thy works. 

Enouncing faith, King Soma ! thou, 0 Soma, whom thy maker 
docks. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

5 Together flow the meeting streams of him the Great and truly 

Strong. 

I The juices of the juicy meet. Made pure by prayer, 0 Golden- 
lined, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

0 Pavamana, where the priest, as he recites the rhythmic 
prayer, 

Lords it o’er Soma with the stone, with Soma bringing forth 
delight, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

0 Pavamana, place me in that deathless, undecaying world 
^'fherein the light of heaven is set, and everlasting lustre shines. 
Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

^ Make me‘*rnmortal in that realm where dwells the King, Vivas- 
van’s Son, 

Where is the secrf>t shrine of heaven, where are those waters 
young and fresh. Flow, Indii, flow for Indra’s sake. 

^ Siryandvdn : a lake in the Kurukshetra district. 

2 Of the Quarters : of the four regions of the sky. Arjtka land : accord- 
^SAyaria, the country of the Rijlkas. Cf VIII. 7. 29. 

^ Parjanya nursed : the mighty Soma-plant whose 

fostered by the God of the rainy cloud. Sdrya's Daughter : 
Faith. Cf. IX. 1. 6. Gandharvas: guardians of the heavenly 
[ L, Index. 

1 •* the Soma-presser, or the institutor of the sacrifice the 

(of the rite).’~Wil8on. 

^1 1 Yama, the ruler of departed spirits, son of VivasvAn. See 



332 


THE RIQVEDA. 


WOK 11 

9 Makemeimmort ilin thatrealm where they move evenas they list 
In the third sphere of inmost heaven where lucid worlds are 
full of light. Flow, Indu, flow for Tndra’s sake. 

1 0 Make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and strong desire, 
The region of the radiant Moon, where food and full delight 

are found. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

1 1 Make me immortal in that realm where happiness and tran- 

sports, where 

Joys and felicities combine, and longing wishes are fulfilled i 
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

HYMN CXIV. SomaPavamanf 

The man wl\o walkcth as the Laws of Indu PavamS,na bid,— 
Men call him rich in children, him, 0 Soma, who hath met thj 
thought. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

2 Kasyapa, Kishi, lifting up thy voice with hymn-composers’ lauds 
Pay reverence to King Soma born tbe Sovran Ruler of tbf 

plants. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

3 Seven regions have their several Suns ; the ministering priests 

are ''even ; 

Seven arc the Aditya Deities,— with these, 0 Soma, guard thou 
us. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

4 Guard us with this oblation which. King Soma, hath been 

dressed for tlicc. 

Let not malignity conquer us, let nothing evil do us liarra. 
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

9 Where they Tmove even as (hey list : ^ where action is unreatiained.’— Muir. 

‘ Wheie tlio sun wan(l«*r.s at will.’ — Wilson, 

10 Of the radiant Moon : the a<ljective bradhndsya, of the ruddy or firilliautt 
stands without a substantive. ‘Sun’ is 8ii]>plied by Sdyaua. ‘ Dcs 
tralenden.’ — L'ldwig. See Hillebrandt, VedLsche Mytholoyic, L, 39B. 

As regards the joys of the departed, referred to in stanzas i 

von llotb observes (Jouru. Amer. Orient Soc. iii. 343, quoted F',’ L' 
0. S, Texts, V. 307) ‘ The place where the.se glorified ones are Ih ’® i 
III order to show that not merely an outer court of the Jivine 
set apart for them, the highe.st heaven, the midst or innermost part of 
is expressly spoken of ns their seat. This is tbefr place of rest ; an 
divine splendour is not disfigured by any specifi^a-tb'n of particular eau ^ 
or enjoyments, such as those with which other religions have been wo 
adorn the mansions of the blest .. . There they are happy : 
to describe their condition is the. same with which is denoted the most e 
felicity.’ 

2 Kasyapa : the seer of the hymn addresses himself. ^ 

3 Seven regions : the regions of the sky, the four quarters with 
points. They arc sometimes said to be five, six, or seven in uuna . 
more frequently eight. Aditya Deities: Varuua, Mitra, Aryaman, ^ 
Daksha, Ansa, and perhaps Dh&tar, Other enumerations 

their number is sometimes said to be eight See M. Muller, y 

... iSfti'rAd Rooks of the East. XXXll). 1 



BOOK THE 


A\^SU1N Ii'J.SV/, 

WtH. 

V ■■'■-, .... 



Agui. 


HYMN I. ' 

Hroii luith the risen before the dawning, and come to 

us with li;j:lit from nut the darkness. 


Fair-shapen Agni with white-shining splendour hath filled at 
birtli all human habitations. 


Thou, being born, art Child of I^cirth and Heaven, parted 
among the plants in beauty, Agni ! 

The glooms of night thou, Brilliant Babe, subduest, and art 
come forth, loud roaiiug, from thy Mothers. 

Here, being manifested, lofty Vishnu, full wise, protects his 
own supremest station. 

Wiicn tlioy have otTerod in his mouth their sweet milk, to 
him with one aeord they sing forth piaises. 

Tlicuce bearing food the Mothci-s come to meet thee, N\ith 
food for thee who givest food its increase. 

These in their altered form again thou meotest. Thou art 
Invoking Piiest in homes of mortals. 

Priest of the holy rite, with car that glitters, refulgent Ban- 
^ ner of each act of worship, 

^^haiing i,i every God through might and glory, even Agni 
Guest of men I summon hither. 

Agni stands on earth's most central station, invested in 
well-decorated garments. 

born, red of hue, wliere men pour out libations, 0 King, as 
great High Priest bring the Gods hither. 

the earth and over heaven, 0 Agui, thou, Son, h.ist over 
spread above thy Parents. 

OHIO, Youthfullest ! to liose who long to meet thee, and 
other bring the Gods, 0 Mighty Victor. 

^Hyhty ; Agni. 

^noitg the plants : accordiug to Sftyana, in the fire-aticks. 

‘^li'ppei's Agni who is his manifestation on earth. They : 

J’Ac ; the plants which nourish life. In their aHcred form: a» 

Agni, 06 fire, consumeB. 

I’*®*'*®* Agni as the bearer of men's oblations supports all 



sot 


TJtlJS aiMNS VJf 




HYMN 1 1. 

Gladden the yearning Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful : bring 
them, 0 Lord of Seasons, knowing seasons, 

With all the Priests Celestial, 0 Agni. Best worshipper art 
thou of all Invokers. 

3 Thine is the Herald’s, thine the Cleanser’s office, thinker art 
thou, wealth-giver, true to Order. 

Let us with Svahi offijr up oblations, and Agni, worthy God, 
pay the Gods worship. 

3 To the Gods’ pathway have we travelled, ready to execute 

what work we may accomplish. 

Let Agni, for he knows, complete the worship. He is the 
' Priest : let him fix rites ami seasons. 

4 When we most ignorant neglect the statutes of you, 0 Deities 

with whom is knowledge, 

Wise Agni shall correct our faults and failings, skilled to 
assign each God his fitting season. 

5 When, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, mortals bethink 

them not of sacrificing, 

Then shall the prudent and discerning Agni worship the Godsij 
best worshipper, in season. 

6 Because the Father hath produced tliee, Leader of all oi 

solemn rites, their brilliant Banner : 

So win by worship pleasant homes abounding in heroes, an 
rich food to nourish all men. 

7 Thou whom the Heaven and Earth, thou whom the Water 

and Tvashtar, maker of fair things, created, 

Well knowing, all along the Fathers’ pathway, shine ^Yit 
resplendent light, enkindled, Agni. 

HYMN 111. Agn 

0 King, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for strength,! 
manifest in beauty. 

He shines, all-knowing, with his lofty splendour ; chasinj 
black Night he comes with white rayed Morning. 

1 Seasons: the proper times of worsliip. Priests Cdestiuf : Agni 

Hotar, the Aavins the Adhvttryus, Tvashtar tlie Agnl«lh, and Mitrs ' 
Upavaktar. AsvaUyana, as cited by SAyana, gives a different enmaeiatio 
See Wilson, note. ^ t, 

2 The flerahi i« the Hotar or invoking priest : the Cleanser is the r"^ 
Purifier, the assistant of the Brahman. Sv^hd : an exclamation = Ave ! or » 

3 The Gods' pathway : ‘ the path that leads to the gods ’ — Wilson. 

($ The father : PrajApati ; or the institutor of the sacrifice. — SAyaW. 

7 The Fathers' pathway : the way that leads to the home of the Ma 

Ancestral Spirits. , t‘i(. 

1 0 Kiwj : Ludwig takes Yd)an here as the nominative case. 
rayed Morning: I follow Ludwig in taking rusattm as instruiusu 
ru^atydm. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


385 


UrUN 4.] 


2 Having o’crcome the glimmering Black with beauty, and 

bringhjg forth the Dame, the Great Sire’s Daughter, 

Holding aloft the radiant light of Sdryn, as messenger of heav 
en he shines with treasures. 

3 Attendant on the BlcssM Dame the BlessM hath come : the 

Lover followeth his Sister. 

Agni, f.ir-spreading with conspicuous lustre, hath compassed 
Night with whitely-shining garments. 

4 His goingS'forth kindle as ’twero higli voices, the goings of the 

auspicious Friend of Agni. 

The rays, the bright beams of the strong-jawed, mighty, 
adorable Steer arc visible as he cometh. 

) Whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, his who 
is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent, 

Who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres, sportive 
and piercing even to the summit. 

5 His powers whoso chariot fellies gleam and glitter have loudly 

ro.ired while, as with teams, ho hasted. 

He, the most Godlike, far-extending env<»y, shines with flames 
ancient, resonant, whitely-shining. 

7 So bring us ample wealth : seat thee as envoy of the two 
youthful Matrons, Earth and Heaven. 

Let Agni rapid with his r.ipid horses, impetuous with impe- 
tuous Steeds, come hither. 


HYMN IV. 


Agni. 


To thee will I send praise and bring oblation, as thou hast 
merited lauds when wo invoked thee. 

A fountain in the desert art then, Agni, 0 Ancient King, to 
mail who fain would worship. 

2 Thou unto whom resort the gathered people, as the kine seek 

the warm stall, 0 Most Youthful, 

Thou art the messenger of Gods and mortals, and goest glori- 
ous with thy light between them. 

3 Making thee grow as ’twere some noble Infant, tliy Mother 

nurtures tliee with sw^ ct affection. 

Over the desert slopes thou passcst longing, and seekest, like 
be-ist set free, thy fodder. 

(^lhmenn(j Black ; dark night, faintly lighted hy .stara. The Gnat Sire» 
' tJslj.ia yr Dawn, daugliter of Dyaua or Heaven. 

/orer • Agni who appears together with Dawn, 
hrst hue is almost nuiutolligihle. ‘The blazing flames of that mighty 
do nut (deter) his adorers.’- Wilson. 


J '^0 tnan : or, to Pflru. 



4 Foolish arc we, O Wise and free from error: verily, Agni^ thou 

dost know thy grandeur. 

There lies the form : he moves, and licks, and swallows, and 
as House-Lord, kisses the Youthful Maiden. ’ 

5 He rises ever fresh in ancient fuel : smoke-bannered, gray, he 

makes the wood his dwelling. 

No swiinmer, Steer, he presses through the waters, and to lug 
place accordant mortals boar him. 

6 Like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest, the 

twain with their ten girdles have secured him. 

This IS a new hymn meant for thee, 0 Agin : yoke as it were 
thy car with parts that glitter. 

7 Homage and prayer are tliine, O JAtavedas, and this iny son^ 

shall evermore exalt thee. 

Agni, pioteot our children and descendants, and guard will 
evor-watchful care our bodies. 

HYMN V. Agni, 

Hb only is the Sea, holder of treasures: born many a time 
he views the hearts within us. 

Ho hides him m the secret couple’s bosom. The Bird dwells 
in the middle of the fountain. 

2 [nhabiting one dwelling-place in common, strong Stallions and 

the Mares have come together. 

The saj{es guard the seat of Holy Order, and keep the highest 
names concealed within them. 

3 The Holy Pair, of wondrous power, have coupled : they formed 

the Infant, they who bred proiluced him, 

*rhe central point of all that moves and moves not, the while 
they wove the Sage’s thread with insight. 

4 The form: the Afiavanhfa fire. The Youthful Maiden: according to 
SAyan.i, eitlier the mixed oblation, oi the young earth as compared with hw 
witheicd plants. 

6 The twain : the two anna, with their grasping fingeru which pioJucefiK 
by agitation of the fire-atick. 

1 lie : Agni as the Sun. The secret couple's bosom : the meaning is uncer 
tain. The fire-sticks in which Agni is latent may be intended. ‘ He wait* 
on the cloud in the neigh bouriiood of the hidden (firmament).’ — Wilson. 
Bird : the Sun. 2' he fountain : the source of light in the east. 

2 Strong Stallions • peihapa the llainca of the Sun. Mares: waters of t» 

firmament. The highest names : of Agni, such as Jfttavedas and VaisvUDar*' 
Concealed within them • in their secret hearts, for worship. , 

3 The Holy Pai)' : Heaven and Earth. The Infant: Agni. The while 
wove: viyantah in the text is unintelligible, and I follow Wallis in/® 
vayanti in its stead, The Sage's thread ; the series of sacrifices to whid^ Aff* 
is entitled. 



ME ElQVEDA, 




ssr 


4 For tracks of Order and refreshing viands attend from ancient 

times the goodly Infant. 

Wearing him as a mantle, Earth and Heaven grow strong by 
food of pleasant drink and fatness. 

5 He, calling loudly to the Seven red Sisters, hath, skilled in 

sweet drink, brought them to be looked on. 

Ho, born of old, in middle air hath halted, and sought and 
found the covering robe of Pushan. 

6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned; to 

one of these may come the troubled mortal. 

Ho standeth in the dwelling of the Highest, a Pillar, on sure 
ground whore paths are parted. 

7 Not Being, Being in the highest heaven, in Aditi’s bosom and 

in Daksha’s birthplace, 

Is Agni, our first-born of Holy Order, the Milch-cow and the 
Bull in life’s beginning. 


HYMN VI. Agni. 


This is that Agni, he by whose protection, favour, and help 
the singer is successful ; 

Who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth en- 
compassed with far-spreading lustre. 


5 The Seven red Sisters : the seven tongues or flames of Agni, called Icdlt, 
'driUi, etc. — Sfiyana. And found the covering robe of Pdshan: and hath 
eappeared in the form of Pnshan or tlie Sun. 

6 Pathways: long linea of light. The Wise: the Fathers. The troubled 
\ortal; the man who is longing for daybreak may approach the pathway of 
il'ht Wallis translates the second line differently : — ‘ The support of life in 
be home of the highest, at the divergence of the ways, standeth on sure 
round ’ He: apparently Agni as the Sun, to whom the troubled nr sinful 

comes for light or forgiveness. Pdlar : support and stay of the uni- 
like the Skambha of Atharva-veda, X. 7. Where paths are parted: 
Inhere ends the dark road which the Sun travels by night, and the bright 
of his daily course begins. 

1 Not Being, Being: nonexistent, existent. *asachcha sachcha, ‘both 
iuevoived and evolved,’ identifying Agni with the first cause and first effect, 
'idi a reference to such_ texts as Asad evam idani agra dsU ‘the non existent 
’fistent (or uuevolved) was verily before this (creation) ’ — Wilson, from 
iyaiia Aditi = Svva^ig, Daksha-lvipyua. Heie Agni is lopieaented ae 
•■^japati who as a yet undeveloped embryo is at the same time both male 
iemale.--Ludwig. Or Daksha may be the Sun and Aditi the Earth. ‘In 
Agni is identified with all things. These latter hymns to Agni are veiy 
: the notions are mystical; many of the terms are unusual, or are 
Wilson ^ applied; and the construction is singularly elliptical and loose.’ — 

has been wholly translated, with comments, by Wallis. Sed 
r of the Rigveda, pp. 48-50. 



dss 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I 


2 Agni, the Holy One, the everlasting, who shines far beaming 

with celestial splendours ; 

He who hath come unto his friends with friendship, like a 
fleet steed who never trips or stumbles. 

3 He who is Lord of all divine oblation, shared by all living 

men at break of morning, 

Agni to whom our olforings are devoted, in whom rests he 
whose car, through might, is scatheless. 

4 Increasing by his strength, while lauds content him, with 

easy flight unto the Gods he travels. 

Agni the cheerful Priest, best Sacriticer, balms with his tongue 
the Gods with whom he mingles. 

5 With songs and adorations bring ye hither Agni who stirg 

himself at dawn like Indra, 

Whom sages laud with hymns as Jataved.is of those who wield 
the sacrificial ladle. 

6 In whom all goodly treasures meet together, even as steeds 

and riders for the booty. 

Inclining hither bring us help, 0 Agni, even assistance most 
desired by Indra. 

7 Yea, at thy birth, when thou hadst sat in glory, thou, Agni, 

wast the aim of invocations. 

The God^ came near, obedient to tliy summons, and thus at- 
tained their rank as chief Protectors. 

HYMN VII. 


O Agni, shared by all men living bring us good luck for 
sacrifice from earth and he<ivcn. 

With us be thine intelligence, Wonder-Worker! Protect us, 
God, with thy far-rcuching blessings. 

2 These hymns brought forth for thee, 0 Agni, laud thee for 
bounteous gifts, with cattle and with horses. ^ 


a Tlie exact meaning ofthe second line is uncertain and m wtow (iN 
Bacriticer), whose sacrifice is undisturbed by his foes, throws his choice obia 


tion.’ — Wilson. ^ ^ , i *• 

6 At dawn ; with Grassmann I take usrl^ni here to be a locative. 


SAyana 


5 At dawn ; witii urassmann i bant; — a to 

explain# it as hUp/imim utsrdUnain, the bestowo. of enjoymeiito. ^TOOrdrag 
Ludwig’s iuterpretatiun, the translation of the first hne would be : W tji soif 
and adoration# bring ye hither the Lord «/ iiiwntiiy sktrui, quivering ^ 

6 Riders : sdjMmnldh : the word properly means possessed of 'J“i“ > . 
is applicable to dtivers as well as riders, for the booty; to win the sj . 
to guard it from others. 


1 Thine intelligence : t\\e meaning of praitefuit he>e is 
transhites it by * indications (of favour) ’ ; Ludwig by wisnea ; a 
mftnn bv ‘lieht.’ 



THE RlQVEDA. 


38d 


8 .] 

Good Lord, when man from thee hath chained enjoyment, by 
hymns, 0 nobly-born, hath he obtained it. 

3 Agni I deem my Kinsman and my Father, count him my 

Brother and my Friend for ever. 

I honour as tlie face of lofty Agni in heaven the bright and 
holy light of Siirya. 

4 r^fFectual, Agni, are our prayers for profit. He whom, at home, 

thou, Priest for ever, guardest 

Is rich in food, drawn by red steeds, and holy : by day and 
night to him shall all be pleasant. 

5 Men with their arms have generated Agni, helpful as some kind 

friend, adorned with splendours, 

And stablished as Invoker mid the people the ancient Priest, 
the sacrifice’s lover. 

6 Worship, thyself, 0 God, the Gods in heaven ; what, void of 

knowledge, shall the fool avail thee 1 
As thou, 0 God, hast worshipped Gods by seasons, so, nobly- 
born ! to thine own self pay worship. 

7 Agni, be thou our Guardian and Protector : bestow upon us 

life and vital vigour. 

Accept, 0 Mighty One, the gifts we offer, and with unceasing 
care protect our bodies. 

HYMN VIII. Agm. 

Aont advances with his lofty banner: the Bull is bellowing to 
the earth and heavens. 

He hath attained the sky’s supremest limits : the Steer hath 
waxen in the lap of waters. 

file Bull, the youngling with the hump, hath frolicked, the 
strong and never-ceasing Calf hath bellowed. 

Bringing our offerings to the Gods’ assembly, he moves as 
Chief in his own dwelling-places. 


Tlie secoinl line is remarkable as a direct declaration of the relationship 
^giii and fcjuiya. — Ludwig. 

thm our Guardian and Protector: aritd, says SAyana, is a protector 
n oUvioua dangers and gopii a preserver from perils that are unseen, 

Advances: through the firmament. His lofty banner: the lightning. 
• of the firmament. 

: asremSt : according to SAyana, * undecaying,’ ' Glorious.’ — 



B90 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOS i. 


3 Him who hath grasped his Parents’ head, they stablished at 
sacrifice as a wave of heavenly lustre. 

In his swift flight the red Dawns borne by horses refresh their 
bodies in the homo of Order. 


4 For, Vasu, thou precedost every Morning, and still hast been 

the Twins’ illuminator. 

For sacrifice, seven places thou retainest while for thine owa 
self thou engondercst Mitra. 

5 Thou art the Eye and Guard of mighty Order, and Varuna 

when to sacrifice thou comest. 

Thou art the Waters’ Child, O Jdtavedas, envoy of him whose 
offering thou acceptest. 

6 Thou art the Leader of the rite and region, to which with thine 

auspicious teams thou tendest. 

Thy light-bestowing he vd to heaven thou liftest, making thy 
tongue the oblation-bearer, Agni. 

7 Through his wise insight Trita in the cavern, seeking as ever 

the Chief Sire’s intention, 

Carefully tended in his Parents’ bosom, calling the weapons 
kin, goes forth to combat. 

8 Well-skilled to use the weapons of his Father, Aptya, urged 

on by Indra, fought the battle. 

Then Trita slew the foe seven-rayed, three-headed, and freed 
the cattle of the Son of Tvaslitar. 


3 Uis Parents' head : the liead or forehead of Heaven and Earth, <>r “Hhe two 
fire sticks The red Dawns ■ or tlie Uauies, according to Sayaua. There is do 
T u^tSve in the text. The home of Order: probably the Sun ‘f the D.™ 
are spoken of ; and the place of law-ordained sacinfioo according to Sftyauii 

**4**rAf Twins' Uluminator: lighter-up of lUy and 

of night, or very early morning. But see Hillebrandt, Varuna ^ 

p 116. Seven places: seven altars for the sacrificial fire. Mitr . 

5 Varuna: King and Governor. f he firmament. 

B And region: thou knoweat, and canat shoW the way t 

7 In the cavern: in the secret depth of tlie perhaps »f 

Chief Sire’s intention : wishing to carry out the design .Lwilso"' 

Dyaia or Dyu. Dis Parents: ‘the parental heaven and earthy « 
Calling the weapons kin: calling the weapons, » e. ® to bi> 

duced from the sky, akin, simply means cl.uming 

father Dyu as they are in the next stanza spoken of aa paternal (p Y 

Macdonell, J. R. A, S., July, 1893, p. 428 -fansa 7 The foe' 

8 Of his Father: belonging to the Chief Si^ of y^varClpa 

anecial enemv of Trita is Trisiras the son of Tvaslitar, callel ’ j-^necl by 
tL Multiform. The cattle of the Son of Tvaihtar : the cows impr 

him. the showers obstructed by the fiend. nee 

For the legends founded on the last three stanzas fi- 

0. S, Texts, V. pp. 229-233. See also Bergaigne, La Religvon ve 

829, ’330. ’ 



THE RTOVEDA. 


m 


9 fjord of the brave, Tndra cleft him in pieces who sought to 
gain much strength and deemed him mighty. 

He smote his three hemls from his body, seizing the cattle of 
the omniform Son of Tvaslitar. 

HYMN IX. Waters. 

Yn, Waters, are beneficent ; so help ye ns to energy 
That we may look on great deliglit. 

2 (live us a t)ortion of the sap, the most auspicious that ye liavc, 
Like motliers in their longing love. 

3 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye send ns on ; 
And, Waters, give ns procreant strength. 

4 The Waters be to us for drink, (Joddesses for onr aid and bliss : 
Let them stream to us health and strength. 

5 I bog the Floods to give us balm, these Queens who rule o’er 

precious things, 

And have snj»remc control of men. 

6 Within the Waters — Soma thus hath told me— dwell all balms 

that heal, 

And Agiii, ho who blcsscth all. 

7 0 Waters, teem with medieine to keep my body safe from harm, 
So that I long may s(‘e the Sun. 

8 Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought, 

Tf I have lied or falsely sworn. Waters, remove it far from me. 

9 The Waters I tliis d.iy have sought, and to their moisture 

have we come : 

OAgni,rich in milk, come thou, and with th}" splendour cover me. 

HYMN X. Vama. Yami. 

Fain would I win my friend to kindly friendship. So may the 
S.igc, come through the air’s wide ocean, 

Kcmemberiiig the earth and days to follow, obtain a son, the 
issue of his father. # 

1 Great delight: according to the scholi:wt, meaning perfect knowledge of 
Brahma. See Wilson’s note. 

3 The meaning of the stanza is obscure. It appears to have been recited 
5y the priest at the consecration of a new house. 

'the first three stanzas are to be repeated by Bi Alimans at their morning 
^*>lution8. See Colcbrooke’s Essays, E.ssay I. On the Religious Ceremonies of 
ffiudug. See aleo Lainnan, Sanshdt Render, p. 3/6 
6 vStauzas 6— 9 aie repeated from Book I. 23. 20—23. 

and Yarat, son and daughter of VivasvAn, are tlie Itishis as well as 
““Mleities of the hymn which is a dialogue between them. 

and Yami are, says von Roth, ‘as their names denote, twin brother 
sister, and are the first human pair, the originators of the race. As the 



802 TUE HYMNS OP [^iOOR i 

2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her whoig 

near in kindred as a stranger. 

Sons of the mighty Asiira, the Heroes, supporters of the 
heavens, see far around them. 

3 Yea, this the Immortals seek of thee with longing, progeny ol 

the sole existing moital. 

Then let thy soul and mine be knit together, and as a loving 
hu.Nband take thy consort. 

4 Shall we do now vhat we ne’er did aforetime? we who spake 

righteously now talk impurely ? 

Gandharva in the floods, the Dame of Waters -such is oni 
bond, such our most lofty kinship. 

5 Even in the wonib God T'.adiUr, Vivifier, shaping all fonna 

(Teator, made us consorts. 

None violates his holy ordinances ; that we are his the heavens 
and eaiTh acknowledge. 

G Who knows that earliest day whereof tliou speakest ? WIio 
hath beheld it ? Who can here declare it ? 

Hebrew conception closely connected the parents of mankind by making tke 
woman formed horn apoitionof the body of the man. so I ^y the Indian 
tradition they are placed in the relationship of twins. This thought is laiJ 
by the hymn In question in tlio mouth of Yarn! herself, when she is made to 
say : ‘ Kven in the womb the Creator made us for husband and wife.’ ’ Profes 
sor Muller, on the other hand, says (Lectures on the Science of Language, 
second .serie.s, p 510) : ‘ There is a curious dialogue between lier (Yaiuij 
her brother, where she (the night) implores her brother (the day) to make ho 
his wife, and where he declines her offer, ‘because,’ as he .says, ‘theyiiavt 
called it a sin that a brother .‘‘honld m.trry his sister.” Again, p. 521, ‘There 
i.s not a single w’ord in the Veda pointing to Yavin and Yaml .as tlie fir.st couple 
of mortals, the Indian Adam and Eve . .. If Yama had been the first created 
of men, .surely the Vedic poets, in speaking of him, could not have I'asstd this 
over in silence.’ See, however, the passage from the Atharva-veda, XVIll. 
3, 13, to be quoted further on. [Reverence ye with an oblation Yama, the Miij 
of Vivasvat, the assembler of men, wlio wa.s the fiist of men that died, xud 
the first that depaited to this (celc.sti.d) world].’ Muir, 0. S. Texts, 

2S8. Yama as the fir-t man may |>eih.ips be,^s Prof. Max Mullor holds, a 
Inter phase of leligious thought.’ 

1 Yaml speaks The t^nf/e ; redh'lh : Yarna. wdiom she wishes to give her a 

son. Come: S.\vana explains the masculine participle by the femi- 

nine ffninvatl, that is, I, Yami who have come. The earth : which, other'vis^i 
will remain without Imman inhabitants. 

2 Yama replies. A strnvprr : of a different family, and so a lawful wue. <50 
of the mighty Anura : the spies or sentinels spoken of in stanza 8. 

3 Yarn! speaks. . 

4 Yama replies. Oandhnrvn : VivasvAn or the Sun. In the floods: , i 

waters of the firmament. The Dame of Woters : SHrmyu. ‘ 

— Muir. Such in our bond: these are our parents. But see Ludwig, icoc 
nenesten Arheiten^ u. i. w , p. 107. 

5 Yam! speaks. 



the niOVEDA, 


UYMN 10 ]. 


S93 


Great is the Law of Vanina and Mitra. What, wanton i wilt 
thou say to men to tempt them? 

7 I, Yamt, am possessed by love of Yama, that I may rest on the 

same couch beside him. 

I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car-wheels 
let us speed to meet each other. 

8 They stand not still, they never close their eyelids, those 

sentinels of Gods who wander round us. 

Not me— go quickly, wanton, with another, and hasten like a 
chariot wheel to meet him. 


9 May Sucya s eye with days and nights endow him, and ever 
may his light spread out before liirn. 

In heaven and earth the kindred Pair commingle. On Yarn! 
1)0 the unbrothcrly act of Yama. 

10 Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers and 

sisters will do acts unme(‘t for kinsfolk. 

Not me, 0 fair one, — seek another husband, and make thine 
arm a pillow for thy consort. 

11 Is he a brother when no lord is left her 1 Is she a sister when 

Destruction cometh ] 

Forced by my love these many words I utter. Come near, 
a) id hold me in thy close embraces. 

12 I will not fold mine arms about thy body : they call it sin 

when one comes near his sister. 

Not me,— prepare thy pleasures with another: thy brother 
seeks not this from thee, 0 fair one. 


6^ Yam:? replies. To tempt them : the meaning of Aehyd ia uncertain. The 
o 1‘. hoxiGon explains it by ‘deceitfully.’ ‘Falsely.’ — Grassinann. ‘What 
Sftyest thou, who puntshest men with hell ?’ — Wilson. 

7 ^nme couch : see Benfey, Vedica und Verwandtes, pp 39—42, for a differ- 
ent exjihuiation of samdni ydnan. 

8 Y/ima replies. SentineU of Gods: recording angels wlio watch men’s 
aotiona. 

9 Yarn! speaks The meaning seems to be : if there be any guilt let me 

e it upon my'self, and let not Yama’s life be shortened by way of punish* 

The kiudred Pair : Day and Night. 

10 Yama replies, * Make thine arm a pillow.’ — Wilson. 

speaks. Destmetion : Nirriti ; the utter extinction of the human 
ftiiff + Th® oieaning is, a true hrothf*r will not let his si«iter lack a husband, 
a true sister will not let her brother lack a wife.’ — Wibou’s Translation, 
note. 

12 Yama replies. 



894 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK jr 

13 Alas ! thou art indeed a weakling, Yama ; we find in thee no 

trace of heart or spirit. 

As round the tree the woodbine clings, another will cling 
about thee girt as with a girdle. 

14 Embrace another, Yami ; let another, even as the woodbine 

rings the tree, enfold thee 

Win thou his heart and let him win thy fancy, and ho shall 
form with thee a blest alliance. 


HYMN XL 


Agui, 


The Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of heaven : the 
Son of Aditi can never be deceived. 

According to his wisdom Varuna knoweth all : may he, the 
Holy, hallow times for sacrilice. 

2 Gandharvi spake : may she, the Lady of the flood, amid the 
river’s roaring leave my heart untouched. 

May Aditi accomplish all tluit we desire, and may our eldest 
Brother tell us this as Chief. 


3 Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, splendid, 
with heavenly lustre, hath shone out for man, 

Since they, as was the wish of yearning Gods, brought forth 
that yearning Agui for the assembly as the Priest. 

13 Yaml speaks. 

Silyari.v’s interpretation of this difTicult hynin difFi'rs in many places from 
that which I have .ido[)tc(l, and Wd^on’s TransI.rliou should bo coiihullod for 
the views of the gre.it Indi.in Comnienbatoi and the Pandits of his tinn\ The 
hymn has been tian^litmated, tianslale<l, and annotated by Dr Muir, 0 
Texts, V. 288 — 291. It ha.s also been translated by the autliois of the Si\t 
heuzig Liedcr, and fully di'CUhsed by l)i J Ehni in Dir Vcdische Mgthusda 
Yama. !See also llillebrandt, Vcdische M gthoLogic, 1. p. 495. 


The subject of the hymn is the origin and institution of sacrifice, first j 
established by Agni under the authority of Varuna, who must be regarded as j 
the deity of the first htan/,a. 

1 The Bull: the mighty Soma. For the Bull: for mighty Varuna, Th 

milk of heaven : the divine Soma juice, to be used at sacrifice. The Son of 
Aditi - Varuna. According to his wisdom : gathddhigK: tlie two words taken 
together as an adverbial phra.se. Accoiding to Sdyana, it is Agni who milks 
the streams of prosperity from heaven for the worshipper. I have geneiMliy 
follow.'d Pi.-ichel's interpretation of the first five stanzas ( Vcdische Siudien, t 
pp 188, 189). . 

2 Gandharvi : said to be the daughter of Surabhi (one of the daughters'’ 

Daksha), and the mother of the race of horses. Here she appears to he 
Apsaras or water-nymph, haunting the banks of rivers and practising t>® 
seductive arts of a siren. The meaning seems to be, let no disturbing 
ence unsettle my devout tlioughts. Oar eldest Brother : Varuna, legaidefl 
the founder of society united by common religious observances. . 

3 The poet regards the coming of the dawu as a proof that the sacrifice 
successful. Since theg : the piiests. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


BYMN 12 .] 


m 


4 And the fleet Falcon brought for sacrihce from afar this flow- 

ing Drop most excellent and keen of sight, 

Then when the Aryan tribes chose as Invoking Priest Agni 
the Wonder-Worker, and the hymn rose up. 

5 Still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass, and, 

skilled in sacrifice, offers thee holy gifts. * * 

When thou, having received the sage’s strengthening food 
with lauds, after long toil, comest with nniny more. 

6 Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover, to delight: the Lovely 

One desires and craves it from his heart. 

The priest calls out, the sacrificer shows his skill, the Asura 
tries his strength, and with tlie hymn is stirred. 

7 Far-famed is he, the mortal man, 0 Agni, thou Son of Strength, 

who hath obtained thy favour. 

Ho, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, makes his 
days lovely in his might and splendour. 

8 When, Holy Agni, the divine assembly, the sacred synod mid 

the Gods, is gathered, 

And when thou. Godlike One, dealest forth treasures, vouch- 
safe us, too, our portion of the riches. 

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid 

car, the car of Amrit. 

Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither : stay 
with us here, nor from the Gods be distant. 


HYMN XII. Agni. 

Hbaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speakers of 
truth, are near enough to hear us, 

When the God, urging men to worship, sitteth as Priest, as- 
suming all his vital vigour. 


Hrop : the Soma, brought from heaven by the Falcon. Sec 

tv. 26 and 27. 

with grass : ^ as pasture satisfies (the herds).’ — Wilson. 

' ^ more : bringing many other Gods to the sacrifice. 

6 ds a lover : woos his mistress. Agni is called upon to entreat his parents, 
Sac'-'T^ Eii'rth, to reprcHluce him perpetually. The Lovely One: Agni. 
j ; see Vcdic HymnSy I. p. 47. The origiird hymn appears 

end with this difficult stanza. 

; taken by SAyana with amritasya and explained by 
the ern drink of Gods.’ Nor from tfie Oods be distant : ‘ let none of 

® gods be absent.’— Wilson. 

as exalted as well aa most ancient. The God: Agni. As Prkst : 

tlotar, invoker, or hftr«ld ^ 



896 THE HYMI^S OP [BOOR t 

2 As God comprising Gods by Law Eternal, bear, as the Chief 

who knoweth, our oblation, 

Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise 
and worship. Priest for ever. 

3 When the cow’s nectar wins the God completely, men here 

below are heaven’s and earth’s sustainers. 

All the Gods came to this thy heavenly Yajus, which fromtlie 
motley Pair milked oil and water. 

4 I praise your work that ye may make me prosper : hear, Heaver 

and Earth, Twain Worlds that drop with fatness. 

Wliile days and nights go to the world of spirits, here let the 
Parents with sweet meath refresh us. 

5 Hath the King sedzed us ] How have v\e offended against h.’s 

holy ordinance ? Who knoweth 1 

Fur even Miti*a nnd the Gods is angry : there are both song 
and strength for those who come not. 

6 ’Tis hard to understand the Immortal’s nature, where she ^vllO 

is akin becomes a stramrer. 

Guard censelessly, great Agni, him who ponders Yama’s name, 
easy to be comprehended. 

7 They in the svnod where the Gods rejoice them, where they 

are seated in Vivasvan’s dwelling, 

Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splendour • the 
Two unweariedly maintain their brightness. 

2 Bitter to praise: more skilled than men in praising the Gods. 

3 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning seems to be that, by po‘sp«s- 

ing the anirit, ambrosia, or nectar contained in the milk of the sscriflcial coff 
and in the Horna juice which wins and captivates Agni, men are enabled to 
otfer acceptable sacrifices to the Gods, and thus to support the heavens and 
earth. Heavenly Yajus: divine sacrificial prayer or formula. But I'J 

its position in the verse seems rather to belong to ghritani, butter or sacri- 
ficial oil. The motley Pair : 4ni : many-coloured heaven and earth. 

‘When the self- aggregated ambrosia of the divine Agiii is generated from 
his radiance, then the piorlucts from it sustain both heaven and earth, a 
the worshippers glorify this thy oblation, the celestial nutritious water whu 
tby white radiance milks forth.’ — Wilson. According to Sftyana, the prO( net 
from it are the plants and trees which spring from the amrit or rain w ic 
rewards the olilations of men, and the visve devifh of the text 
stotdrah. all the worshippers. Some meaning is ajipaient in this paraphras , 
but it cannot be extracted from the words of the text. 

6 The King: Varuna. For even Mitra: we must have committed som 
sin. for even Mitra, the Friend, the gracious God, is wroth with us. 
strengthening sacrificial viands. For those veho come not : for the Gods 
will not yet come to receive our worship and oblations. • u fl f line 

6 This stanza is apparently a later addition. The latter half of the nis 

is taken from X. 10. 2, but its application here is not obvious. upaTen 

7 In VivasvAn's dwelling : * on the altar of the sacrificer.’ — Wilson, 
or the realm of the Sun is intended. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


897 


13.] 

3 The counsel which the Gods meet to consider, their secret 
pl.m,— of that we have no knowledge. 

There let God Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to Varuna 
that we are sinless. 

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid 
car, the car of Am lit. 

Biing Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither: stay 
with us here, nor from the Gods be distant. 

HYMN XIII. Haviidhduaa. 

I YOKE with prayer your ancient inspiration : may the laud 
rise as on the prince’s p.ithway. 

All Sous of Immortality shall hear it, all the possessors of ce- 
lestial n.itures. 

2 When speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters, religious- 

hearted votai ies brought you forward. 

Take your place, ye who know your proper station : be near, 
be very near unto our Soma. 

3 Five paces have I risen from Eaith: I follow her who hath 

four feet with devout obsoivance 
This by the Sucied Sellable have I measured : I purify in the 
central place of Order. 

I He, for Gods’ sake, chose death to be his portion. Ho chose 
not, for men’s good, a life eternal. 

Tliey sacrificed Briliaspati the Rishi. Yama delivered up his 
own dear body. 

‘Tug deities are the two Hakaias, small carts or banows used at sacrifices 
) carry the materials eftpeoially the So/au-plaut, hcuce called HaviriUulaas, 
bktion-bearers.’ — Wilson 

1 The prince is.the noble who institutes the sacrifice. * Like the path of 
he \vor8lii[)per ' — Wilson. 

i 3 This stuiza is most ob.scure. Wilson, following SAyana, translates : ‘ I 
pake the five st ages of the sacrifice a&ceml ; I take four steps by pious 
sorvances ; with the sacred syllable I perfect this (adoration); I purify 
on the navel of the sacnfice.* The fiie stit(j<H aie, according to 
}aiu, the five elements of the sacrifice, grain, Soma, the kiiie, the Purtjdftsa 
ie, and the ol-trified butter. The /■ ir steps uie the metres most commonly used 
The words as they stand in the text do not appear t(» be susceptible of any 
tistactury explanation. 

4 He. Ynmn See X. 14. 1. For Gods' sake: his death being the type of 
o«aoii(ices whicli support and delight the Gods. For men's ;jood : See X. 

• °;-14 for the re-sults of the sacrifice of Puruslia, with whom Yama may be 
'^Qblie l. Tuey : the Gods Tins Pdda is unintelligible as it stands, 
of ynjtVini akrinvato rishim, Prof. Ludwig would read 

y ijflani atanuta rishik, the Rishi pei formed the Vaivasvata, 
i^inerah sacnftce (Ueber die neucsten, u. s. «?, p. 110). I have mainly 

r fowed Oer Vcdische Mythus des Yama, pp. IfiO — 162, but the exact 

of the stanza is still doubtful to me. 



398 THE HYMNS OF [EOOKl 

5 The Seven flow to the Youth on whom the Maruts wait : the 
Sons unto the Father brought tl)e sacrifice. 

Both these are his, as his they are the Lords of both ; both 
toil j belonging unto both they prosper well. 

HYMN XIV. Yam 

Honour the King with thine oblations, Yama, Vivasvan’s Son, 
who gathers men together, 

Wlio travelled to the lofty heights above us, who searches out 
and shows the path to many. 

2 Yama first found for us a place to dwell in : this pasture nevei 

can be taken frum us. 

Men born on earth tread their own paths that lead them 
whither our ancient F.ithers have departed. 

3 Matali prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with Angiras’ sons, 

Brihaspati with Rikvans : 

Exaiters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, some joy in praise and 
some in our oblation. 

4 Come, seat thee on this hod of giass, 0 Yama, in company 

with Angi rases and Fathers. 

Let texts recited by the sages bring thee: 0 King, let this 
oblation make thee joyful. 

5 Come, Yama, with the Angirases the Holy, rejoice thee here 

with children of Virupa. 

To sit on sacred grass at this our worship, I call Vivasvan, too, 
thy Father hither. 

5 The Seven : rivers. According to S.iyana, metres. The Youth : Indrs. 
The Sons : theMaiuts. The Father: Indra. Both these: havirdhdnas.^ Of 
both: Gods and men. Unto both: to Gods and men, or to Heaven and Earth. 


The hymn is a fnneral address, partly to Yama the God of the Dead and 
partly to the Suul of the departed who.se body is being consumed on the pi 

1 Yama • the deifitMl Loul of the Dead : originally the first who died and 
80 showed the souks of his .successors the way to the home of the depar e 
See X. 12. Lofty hciyhts : of heaven, the abode of the Blest. 

3 Mdtalt : a divine being, identified by the Commentators with Indra whosfl 
charioteer was Matali. Kavyas : a class of Maues, the spirits of a 
race of ancient time. Anyiras' sons : the Angirases, the typical 

ficers. See Vol. I., Index. RLkvans : or singers, a class of spirits or ^ 
who attend and sing the praises of Brihaspati, See VII. 10. 4. Some fy^^ 
praise : the Gods delight in Sv.ahd, the sacrificial exclamation, 
praise. Some in our oblation : the Manes delight in SvadhA, the sweet 
or oblation which is presented to them. 

4 Angirases and Fathers : or, perhaps, Angirases our Fathers. 

5 Children of Virdpa: Vairfii)a8, a aub-division of the Angiiases. 



14.] TUB RfCfVEDA. 8(ld 

g Oui* Fathers are Angirasea, Navagvas, Atharvaus, Bhrigua who 
deserve the Soma. 

May these, the Holy, look on ua tvith faVoUr, may we enjoy 
their gracious loving-kiiidnesa. 

y Oo forth, go forth upon the ancient pathways whereon our 
sires of old have gone before us. 

There shalt thou look*on both the Kings enjoying their sacred 
food, God Varuna and Yama. 

8 Meet Yama, meet tlie Fathers, meet the merit of free or or- 

dered acts, in highest heaven. 

Leave sin and evil, seek anew thy dwelling, and bright with 
glory wear another body. 

9 Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions : this place for him 

the Fathers have provided. 

Yama bestows on him a place to rest in adorned with days 
and beams of light and waters. 

10 Run and outspeed the two dogs, Sarania’s oflspriiig, brindled, 

four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway. 

Draw nigh then to the gracious-minded Fathers where they 
rejoice in company with Yama. 

11 And those two dogs of thine, Yama, the watchers, four-eyed, 

who look on men and guard the pathway, — 

Entrust this man, 0 King, to their protection, and with pros- 
perity and health endow him. 

2 Dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama’s two en- 

voys roam among the people; 

May they restore to ua a fair existence here and to-day, that 
we may see the sunlight. 

3 To Yama pour the Soma, bring to Yama consecrated gifts : 

To Yama sacrifice prepared and heralded by Agni goes. 

1 Ofiei’ to Yama holy gifts enriched with butter, and draw near: 
bo may he grant that we may live long days of life among 
the Gods. 

6 Navmjvas, Atfiarvaus, Bhrhjus • prie.sily families of ancient times. 

7 Tills and the folio winj; st’oiza are addressed to the spirit of the dead 
iJian wliose funeral rites are being celebrated 

8 Pi'ce or ordered acts : voluntary good works and prescribed sacrifices, 
idiose merit is stored up in heaven to be enjoyed on arrival by the spirits of 

^ wh(j have performed them. 

r According to Sityapa, this stanza is addressed to the Pisftchas and other 
that haunt the place of cremation. 

The spirit of the departed is addressed. The two dogs : offspring of 
hound of Indra. See Vol. I., Index. 

4 The three following stanzas are addressed to the priests. 



THE HYMNS OP 


400 


[BOOK X, 


15 Offer to Yama, to the King, oblation very rich in mejith ; 
Bow down before tiie Rislns of the ancient timed, who made 

this path in days of old. 

16 Into the six Expanses flies the Great One in Ti ikadrukas 
The Gayatri, the Tiishtup, all metres in Yuma arc contained 

HYxMN XV. 


May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Father 
who deserve a sh.iro of Soma. 

May they who have attained the life of spirits, gentle am 
righteous, aid us wlien we call them. 

2 Now let us pay tins homage to the Fathers, to those wIk 

passed of old and those who followed. 

Those who have rested in the eaithly region, and those i\li( 
dwell among the Mighty Races. 

3 I have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have gaine( 

son and progeny from Vishnu. 

They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated on saciei 
grass, come oftencst hither. 

4 Father who sit on sacred grass, come, help us : these offei 

ings have we made for you ; accept them. 

So come to us with most auspicious favour, and give us healtl 
and strength without a trouble. 

6 May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited to tliei 
favourite oblations 

Liiid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen : may they b 
gracious unto us and bless us. 


16 The meaning i.ppeare to be that the Great Unit, Yama as All-Gocl, bm' 
ens and fills the universe after plentiful libations of Soma juice in the 
Kadruka days, or first three days of the Abhipt.vs festival. See Em .1 
pn 154—157. For dilfereiit explaiwtious, see Bergai^iie, I. 178, 11. l-A 
This hvtnn with the exceptioo of the last stanza, has been translated, - 
anloteterb; Muh-. O.S.tI.U, V pp 291 -29.5. by the authors of H 
Skben^J Lilkr, and by Prof. Peterson, //yians /rom tht R.yvcda. 


1 A »cend ■ rise to higher rank ; obt ain the best oblation, according to S1y«^ 

LLT^hXrr^idmo.t : the Fathers are classified according to then degro. 
of merit acquired on earth. TmT 77 ' 

2 m gaW/i/y ; the firmament nearest to the earth. See VUi. 

The Mighty Races: of the' Gods. I 

and nrogeny : nhpdtam cha viJerdmanatn cha : the meaning . | 

be as sugg^tfd that the speaker hae discharged 
the Father by begetting a son through the favour of Vishnu. Stid «lr 
is an unintelligible expression m this eoonexion. See The Un 
Atharva-veda, XVUI. 1. 46, note. 



'm.v 15.] 


the rwteda. 




6 Bowing your bendod knees and seated southward, accept this 
sacrifice of ours with favour. 

Punish us not for any sin, 0 Fathers, which we through 
human frailty have committed. 

; Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give riches to 
the man who biings oblations. 

Giant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present 
give them energy, ye Fathers. ' 

5 Our ancient Fathers who deserve the Soma, who came, most 
noble, to our Soma-banquet, — 

With these let Yama, yearning with the yearning, rcjoiciiK' 
eat our offerings at his pleasure. 

) Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who dwell in 
glowing light, the very Kavyas, 

Who thirsted mid the Gods, who hasten hither, oblation- 
winners, theme of singers’ praises. 

I Como, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, dwellers in 
light, primeval, God-adorers, 

Eaters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, who travel with 
the Deities and Indra. 


Fathers whom Agni’s flames have tasted, come ye nic^h • ye 
kindly leaders, take ye each your proper place. ^ ^ 

Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass : grant riches with 
a multitude of hero sons. 


Thou, Agni Jatavedas, when entreated, didst bear the offer- 
ings which thou madest fragrant. 

And give them to the Fathers who did eat them with Svadha. 
Eat, thou God, the gifts we bring thee. 

Thou, Jatavedas, knowest well the number of Fathers who are 
here and who are absent, 

Of Fathers whom we know and whom wo know not : accept 
the sacrifice well-prepaied with portions. 


‘Seated in the proximity 

ne radiant flames (of the altar). ’-Wilson. ^ 

' as: see X. 14. 3. ’ 

; whose bodies have been burnt. A class 
2 Agmshvattas, according to Sayana. 

portio^^^ * Svadhd, or, with their 

^ portions • 

26 


or, with SvadbAs. 



402 THE HYMNS OP [BOOKi 

14 They who, consumed by fire or not cremated, joy in thei 
offering in the midst of heaven, — 

Grant them, 0 Sovran Lord, the world of spirits and the 
own body, as thy pleasure wills it. 

HYMN XVf. 

Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni : let not L 
body or his skin be scattered. 

0 Jatavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send him c 
his way unto the Fathers. 

2 When thou hast made him ready, Jatavedas, then do the 

give him over to the Fathers. 

When he attains unto the life that waits him, he shall becon 
the Deities’ controller. 

3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit ; go, as tl 

merit is, to earth or heaven. 

Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters ; go, make thine hon 
in plants with all thy members. 

4 Thy portion is the goat : with heat consume him \ let tt 

fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him, 

With thine auspicious forms, 0 Jatavedas, bear this man ' 
the region of the pious. 

6 Again, 0 Agni, to the Fathers send him who, offered in the 
goes with our oblations. 

Wearing new life let him increase his offspring : let hi 
rejoin a body, Jatavedas. 

14 The world of spirits : dsvnUim : a difficult word whose meaning issoi 
what uncertain. S4yana joins it with tanvdm, and explains the two words 
‘ the body that leads to life/ ‘ that body that is endowed with breath,’ 
Wilson. See X. 12. 4. 

This hymn has been partially transliterated, translated, and annotated 
Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. pp. 295—297. 

Stanzas 1 — 6 are to be repeated while the body of the departed is bei 
partially consumed on the funeral pile. 

2 The life that waits him: dsunitim: see X. 16, 14. Controller: by winni 
their favour. 

3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit : let like return to lil 
See Muir’s note, 0. S. Texts, V. 298. 

4 Agni is addressed. The goat : that was slaughtered and laid limb by In 
on the corpse. 

5 Let him increase his offspring : when he becomes one of the Father 
whom is ascribed the fruitfulness of heaven and earth, the parents of 
and men. See X. 64, 14. Let him rejoin: or, let life rejoin hfs body:^ 
nominative is not expressed. 



Tm morEDA, 


m 


^ymn 16.] 


6 What wound soe’er the dark bird hath inflicted, the emmet, 

or the serpent, or the jackal, 

May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and Soma who 
hath passed into the Brahmans. 

7 Shield thee with flesh against the flames of Agni, encompass 

thee about with fat and marrow. 

So will the Bold One, eager to attack thee with fierce glow 
fail to girdle and consume thee. 

8 Forbear, 0 Agni, to upset this ladle : the Gods and they who 

merit Soma love it. 

This ladle, this which serves the Gods to drink from, in this 
the Immortal Deities rejoice them. 

9 I send afar flesh-eating Agni, bearing off stains may he depart 

to Yama’s subjects. 

But let this other Jatavedas carry oblation to the Gods for 
he is skilful. ' 


0 I choose as God for Father-worship Agni, flesh-eater, who 

hath past within your dwelling, 

While looking on this other Jatavedas. Let him light flames 
in the supreme assembly. 

1 With offerings meet let Agni bring the Fathers who support 

the Law. 

Let him announce oblations paid to Fathers and to Deities. 

2 Bight gladly would we set thee down, right gladly make thee 

barn and glow. 

Gladly bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the food of sacrifice. 

3 Cool, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou hast 

scorched and burnt. 

Here let the water-lily grow, and tender grass and leafy herb. 

1 0 full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh moisture, 
freshening Herb, 

Come hither with the female frog: fill with delight this Agni 
here. 


addressed. Fk^h : the caul and other parts of a slaughtered 
ma which covered the corpse to prevent too quick and complete cremation. 
P- stam*6 or impurity which may have attached to the departed. 

11 typically offer sacrifice in the assembly of the Gods. 

literally, bearing Kavyas or Kavya-worehip, that 
19 kavU, sages, or Fathers. 

13 

some kind of acquatio plant. Tender gratt: 


B.IUU Wi UlttUb. JL C, 

l4 P’lJ of dUrvd grass (Panicum Dactylon). 

dtfZigiAe; meaning, euphemistically, extinguish, 'After the 
consumed the corpse, water is poured upon it to extinguish it. Then 



404 


TRE RYMR^ OF 


\.BOOKx 

HYMN XVII. Various Deiti,,. 

Tvashtar prepares the bridal of his Daughter : all the world 
hears the tidings and assembles. 

But Yama’s Mother, Spouse of great Vivasv^n, vanished as 
she was carried to her dwelling. 

2 From mortal men they hid the Immortal Lady, made one like 

her and gave her to Vivasvan. 

Saranyu brought to him the Asviii brothers, and then deserted 
both twinned pairs of children. 

3 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne’er are injured, may V\i- 

shan bear thee hence, for he hath knowledge. 

May he consign thee to these Fathers’ keeping, and to the 
gracious Gods let Agni give thee. 

4 May Ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear thee forward 

on the distant pathway. 

Thither let Savitar the God transport thee, where dwell the 
pious who have passed before thee. 

5 Pushan knows all these realms : may ho conduct us by ways 

that are most free from fear and danger. 

Giver of blessings, glowing, all-heroic, may he, the wise and 
watchful, go before us. 


furthermore certain water-plants are pub there lu addition to these a frog- 
here a female, elsewhere a male— is put upon the place where the hre ha? 
burned. These, as representatives of life in the waters, are symbolicaily 
supposed both to prevent and extinguish fire ' (M. Bloomfield, Contributions 

to the Interpretation of the Veda, Second Series, Baltimore : 1800). 

Dy. ^\x\v'h Original Sanskrit V. pp. 297 — 299, should be consulted 

with regard to this funeral hymn addi eased to Agni, and much additional 
information on tlie subject may be obtainerl from the essays, there referred 
to, by von Roth and Max Muller. 

1 The first two stanzas are difficult, and appear to have no connexion with 

the rest of the hymn. Tvashtar : a God often regarded, as here, as an agent 
in natural phenomena. Ilis Daughter • Saranyfi, the stormy cloud ; or, pet 
haps, the dawn. Vivasvdn: representing the blight heavens, or the Sun. 
Yuma's Mother : Saranyfi, who afterwards gave birth to Yama and Yaini 
See X. 10, note. Vanished: or was stolen away. Carried: as a bride, in ptu 
cession. . , 

2 They : the Gods. The Immortal Lady : Saranyfi. Brought to him : nna 

another form bore to Vivasvdn. Both twinned pairs: Yama and Yaml and tin 
Asvins. For the legend which has been formed out of these obscure hints, 
Wilson’s Translation, and Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 228. f i de 

3 Here the funeral hymn begins, with an address to the spirit of , 

parted. PUshan : as a Sun-God and the heavenly Herdsman who knows 
path through the heavens and is therefore a go<^ conductor of the spin 
the departed. , , 

4 iyu: according to SAyana, VAyu is intended, the letter ' v ’ being 
Or the meaning may be, life of full vitality. 



THE RWVBEA. 


405 


17 .] 

6 Pushan was born to move on distant pathways, on the road far 

from earth and far from heaven. 

To both most wonted places of assembly he travels and returns 
with perfect knowledge. 

7 The pious call Sarasvati, they worship Sarasvati while sacri- 

fice proceedeth. 

The pious called Sarasvati aforetime. Sarasvati send bliss to 
him who givcth. 

8 Sarasvati, who earnest with the Fathers, with them rejoicing 

thee in our oblations, 

Seated upon this sacred grass be joyful, and give us strength- 
ening food that brings no sickness. 

9 Thou, called on as Sarasvati by Fathers who come right for- 

ward to our solemn service, 

Give food and wealth to present sacrificers, a portion, worth 
a thousand, of refreshment. 

0 The Mother Floods shall make us bright and shining, cleans- 

ers of holy oil, with oil shall cleanse us : 

For, Goddesses, they bear off all defilement ; I rise up from 
them purified and brightened. 

1 Through days of earliest date the Drop descended on this 

place and on that which was before it. 

I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the Drop which 
still to one same place is moving. 

2 The Drop that falls, thy stalk which ar^^s have shaken, which 

from the bosom of the press hath ^'’u.llen, 

Or from the Adhvaryu’s purifying' 1 offer thee with heart 
and cry of Vashat I 

3 That fallen Drop of thino the stalk which from the ladle fell 

away, 

This present God l^ihaspati shall pour it forth to make us rich. 

^ The plants of -arth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this 
my spee^^i; 

And rH;h in milk the essence of the Waters : make me pure 
tJ«ere\vith. 


7 see 1. 8. 10. 

®tanza is not very intelligible. The Drop ig apparently the Soma ; 

*^he Sun. See Satapatha^ 

VII. 4. 1. 20 (Sacred Books of the East, XLI. 368). ‘ 

in milk ; full of sap, vigour, vital and vivifying power. 



406 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l 

HYMN XVIIL Various Deities. 

Go hence, 0 Death, pursue thy special pathway apart from 
that which Gods are wont to travel. 

To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest : Touch not our 
offspring, injure not our heroes. 

2 As ye have come effacing Mrityu’s footstep, to further times 

prolonging your existence, 

May ye he rich in children and possessions, cleansed, purified, 
and meet for sacrificing. 

3 Divided from the dead are these, the living : now be our 

calling on the Gods successful. 

We have gone forth for dancing and for laughter, to further 
times prolonging our existence. 

4 Here I erect this rampart for the living ; let none of these, 

none other, reach this limit. 

May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may 
they bury Death beneath this mountain. 

5 As the days follow days in close succession, as with the sea- 

sons duly come the seasons. 

As each successor fails not his foregoer, so form the lives of 
these, 0 great Ordainer 

5 Live your full lives and find old ago delightful, all of you 
striving one behind the other. 

May Tvash W, maker of fair things, be gracious and lengthen 
out the days your existence. 


1 Death: Mrityu, the God of ; distinct from Yama the judge and 

ruler of the departed. Our offspring . prajKm : meaning here, says Sfiyan*) 
female offspring, duhitridauhitrdtvnikdtn form of daughters and their 

daughters. Ourheroee: sons and their soi.,,_^Sfty ana. 

2 Addressed to the kinsmen of the deoeasi^. Effacing Mrityu' s 

a wisp or clog was fastened to the foot of the oorp.*, which represented J 
or Death, in order to prevent the premature return wf Death to carry oti tw 
living. See A. F., V. 19. 12. Gleamed : from sins of a«ormer life. 
from sins of the present life. ^ 

3 Dancing and laughter : the enjoyments of ordinary life after the fulw* 

ment of our duties to the dead. , 

4 Thi» rampart: of stone, or earth, reised by the Adhvaryu as ' line 

demarcation between the dead and the living, and hmiting, as it 

jurisdiction of Death untU the natural time for his approach. TM» 
the mound or bank. ^ nrdaintn 

6 So form the lives : let them pMs away in due order of 
Dhdtar : the name of a divine being who is the creator, arrange , 
and manager of all things. 

6 Om behind the other : the oldest reaching the end of their joum 1 



THE mOVEDA, 


407 


qYhiy 18'] 

7 Let tho30 unwidowed dames with noble husbands adorn them- 
\ selves with fragrant balm and unguent. 

Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free from sorrow, first let the 
dames go up to where he lieth. 

8 Eise, come unto the world of life, 0 woman : come, he is life- 

less by whose side thou lieat. 

Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion, who took thy 
hand and wooed thee as a lover. 

9 From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, that it may be 

our power and might and glory. 

There art thou, there; and here with noble heroes may we 
overcome all hosts that fight against us. 

10 Betake thee to the lap of Earth the Mother, of Ei^rth far-spread- 

ing, very kind and gracious. 

Young Dame, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, may she pre- 
serve thee from Destruction’s bosom. 

11 Heave thyself, Earth, nor press ttee downward heavily ; afford 

him easy access, gently teyming him. , 

Cover him, as a mother wraps her skirt about her child, 0 Earth. 

12 Now let the heaving ea-^i^ ^*“66 from motion : yea, let a thou- 

sand clods remain above him. 

Be they to him a ^lome distilling fatness, here lot them ever be 
his place of refuge. 

13 I stay the oarth from thee, while over thee I place this piece 

of ea'th. May I be free from injury. 

Here the Fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, and there 
lot Yama make thee an abiding-place. 

14 ZJven as an arrow’s feathers, they have set me on a fitting day. 
/ The fit word have I caught and held as ’twere a courser with 

the rein. 

7 First: a ijre; to begin with ; i. e. before the ceremonies begin. See M. 
Juller, Chips, IV. 35—39 (edition of 1895). On the whole stanza, see Dr. F. 
tlall. Journal of R A S., Vol. Ill, Part I., p. 185f. 
iJ ‘This verse is to be spoken by the husband’s brother, etc , to the wife of 
tie dead man, and he is to nake her leave her husband’s body. See the 
iswaldyana Orihya SiUras, IV. 2,’ — Editor’s note, in Wilson’s Translation. 

0 This stanza is applicable only when the deceased was a Kahatriya or man 
I the princely and military order. 

Addressed to the body. Guerdon- giver : the liberal rewarder of the 
inests. Destruction's bosom : or the lap of Nirriti. 

; ‘ I keep off the earth above thee with thy lid.* ‘ This 
8 addressed to the urn containing the bones and ashes, which is buried after 
® corpse has been burnt.'— Wilson. Pillar : perhaps a beam laid over the 
■etnams. 

H This stanza, which seems to be a later addition, is not noticed in SAyana's 
" ‘^“ientary, and the meaning of the second line is not very clear. I have 



408 


THE HYMNB OF [BOOR i 

HYMN XIX. Waters or Cow,. 

Turn, go not farther on your way ; visit us, 0 ye Wealth 
Ones. 

Agni and Soma, ye who bring riches again, secure us wenith. 

2 Make these return to us again, bring them beside us ouce 

again. 

May Indra give them back to us, and Agni drive them hither- 
ward. 

3 Lot them return to us again : under this herdsman let them 

feed. 

Do thou, 0 Agni, keep them here, and let the wealth we 
have remain. 

4 I call upon their herdsman, him who knoweth well their coming 

nigh. 

Their parting and their home-return, and watcheth their 
approach and rest. 

5 Yea, let the herdsman, to^, return, who marketh well their 

driving-forth ; 

Marketli their wandering away, their turning back and com- 
ing home. 

6 Home-leader, lead them home to us; liHra, restore to us our 

kine : 

We will rejoice in them alive. 


followed Prof. Whitney’s rendering (Lanman, p. 386). The verse, says 
Lanman, ‘ seems to express the poet’s satisfaction at having mac^. a good 
hymn at the right time and place, and with as good skill as a skilfui horse- 
man has.’ 

The hymn has been translated by the authors of the Siehenzig Liedcr. 
Zimmer’s Altindischei Leben, pp. 400 — 407, Mr. Knmeah Chunder Dutt’i 
Civilization in Ancient India, pp. 108, and 278, 279, Lanman ’s Sanskrit 
Reader, pp. 382 --386, and Z<5naide Ragozin’s Vedic India, pp. 351—353. 
The essays of von Roth and Max Muller have already been referred to. 

The hymn is a prayer for the return of strayed cows, to whom the first 
line is addressed. 

1 Ye who bring riches again : punarvas-d : ‘ye who clothe (your worship- 
pers) again.’ — Wilson, See Hillebrandt, V. M,, I. 460. 

2 These : cows, or waters. — Slyana. Make return is the imperative singular, 
and Sftyana says that the seer of the hymn addr^ses himself. The address 
is to Indra. 

4 Sdyana explains this stanza somewhat differently : — ‘ I invoke the 
knowledge of the place, of their going, of their coming, of their departure, 
of their wandering, of their returning : (I invoke) him who is their keeper 
— Wilson. This is a more strictly literal rendering of the abstract nouna 
the text. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


409 


hymn 20 .] 

7 I offer you on every side butter and milk and strengthening food. 
May all the Holy Deities pour down on us a flood of wealth. 

8 0 thou Home-leader, lead them home, restore them thou who 

bringest home. ' 

Four are the quarters of the earth ; from these bring back to 
us our kine. 

HYxMN XX. Agni. 

Send unto us a good and happy mind. 

2 I woiship Agni, Youthfnllest of Gods, resistless, Friend of laws j 
Under whose guard and heavenly light the Spotted seek the 
Mother’s breast : 


3 Whom with their mouth they magnify, bannered with flame 

and homed in light. 

He glitters with his row of teeth. 

4 Kind, Furtherer of men, he comes, when he hath reached the 

ends of heaven. 

Sage, giving splendour to the clouds. 

5 To taste man’s offerings, he, the Strong, hath risen erect at 

sacrifice : 

Fixing his dwelling he proceeds. 

6 Here are oblation, worship, rest : rapidly comes his furtherance. 
To sword-armed Agni come the Gods. 

7 With service for chief bliss 1 seek the Lord of Sacrifice, Agni, 

whom ^ 


They call the Living, Son of Cloud. 

8 Blest evermore be all the men who come from us, who magnify 
^gni with sacrificial gifts. 

9 The path he treads is black and white and red, and striped, 

and brown, crimson, and glorious. 

His sire begat him bright with hues of gold. 

5 Thus with his thoughts, 0 Son of Strength, 0 Agni, hath 
Viniada, accordant with the Immortals, 

Altered thee hymns, soliciting thy favour. Thou hast brought 
^ > rood, strength, a prosperous dwelling. 


The variegated oblatioUvS, as Sayaua says, 
■'^lament Mothers breast maybe the clouds 'of the 

^ A ‘ u translation must be tentative. 

‘^Ver,’ afonrrii '*^7*‘* ^he meaning of hipdnUavi is uncertain. ‘Pitying 
5 He ‘ Sustainer of pious works/- Wilson. 

® from one fire receptacle or altar to another. 

^ men Jh ' I'i^ sword or knife of pieiciug flame. 

^ '^^^enaih ^ ’*’“d grandsons of the worshippers. 

ymadn .according to Sdyana, his chariot, 

i : the Rishi of the hymn. 



410 


THE HYMNS OP 


moK i 


HYMN XXI. Agnl 

With ofFeringa of our own we choose thee, Agni, as Invoking 
Priest, 

For sacrifice with trimmed grass, — at your glad carouse- 
piercing and brightly shining. Thou art waxing great. 

2 The wealthy ones adorn thee, they who bring us horses as 

their gift : 

The sprinkling ladle, Agni, — at your glad carouse — and glow- 
ing offering taste thee. Tliou art waxing great. 

3 The holy statutes rest by thee, as 'twere with ladles that o’er 

flow. 

Black and white-gleaming colours, — at your glad carouse —all 
glories thou assiiniest. Thou art waxing great. 

4 0 Agni, what thou deomost wealth, Victorious and Immortal 

One ! 

Bring thou to give us vigour, — at your glad carouse 'splendid 
at sacrifices. Thou art waxing great. 

5 Skilled in all lore is Agni, he whom erst Atharvan brought to 

He was VivasvaiVs envoy, at your glad carouse— the well-loved 
friend of Yama. Thou art waxing great. 

6 At sacrifices they adore thee, Agni, when the rite proceeds. 
All fair and lovely treastires— at your glad carouse-thoii 

givest him who offers. Thou art waxing great. 

7 Men, Agni, have established thee as welcome Priest at holy 

rites. 

Thee whose face shines with butter,— at your glad carouse- 
bright, with eyes most observant. Thou art waxing 

8 Wide and aloft thou spreadest thee, 0 Agni, with thy brilliant 


thou 

A Bull art thou when bellowing, — at your glad carouse 
dost impregn the Sisters. Thou art waxiug great. ^ 

1 At your qlad carouse: apparently a Soma-drinking oi 

the Visvedevaa or All-Gode. Thou art waxing great : a 

burden' addi eased to Agni. See Wilson’s Translation, note. Grass 
both refrains, which he considers to be later interpolations. 

2 Taste thee: feel the power of the fire. , . worship thff 

3 The first line is difficult The estab hshers (of /(ghowera] 

with their ladles (filled with the oblation), p igni 

—Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation. Those who worship 

ing to his Law are regarded as hia own obtain ^ 

5 Athai-van: the priest who is said to have been the firs t 
ind offer Soma and prayers. Viyasvdn the Soma-pnM^ or 
8 Toe Sisters : the plants, which Agm, descending in rai , 



BJMN 22 .] 


THE RIOVEDA. 


411 


HYMN XXII. Indra. 

Where is famed Indra heard of? With what folk is he renown- 
ed to-day as Mitra is, — 

Who in the home of Rishis and in secret is extolled with song? 

2 Even here is Indra famed, and among us this day the glorious 

Thunderer is praised, 

He who like Mitra mid the folk hath won complete and full 
renown. 

3 He who is Sovran Lord of great and perfect strength, exerter 

of heroic might, 

Who bears the fearless thunder as a father bears his darling 
sou. 

4 Harnessing to thy car, as God, two blustering Steeds of the 

Wind-God, 0 Thunderer, 

That speed along the shining path, thou making ways art 
glorified. 

5 Even to these dark Steeds of Wind thou of thyself hast come 

to ride. 

Of which no driver may be found, none, be he God or mortal 
man. 

6 When ye approach, men ask you, thoe and Usantl : Why come 

ye to our dwelling-place? 

Why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of earth 
and heaven ? 

7 0 Indra, thou shalt speak us fair : our holy prayer is offered 

up. 

We pray to thee for help as thou didst strike the monster 
Sushna dead. 

8 Around us is the Dasyu, riteless, void of sense, inhuman, 

keeping alien laws. 

Baffle, thou Slayer of the foe, the weapon which this Dasa 
wields. 

9 Hero with Heroes, thou art ours : yea, strong are they whom 

thou dost help. 

In many a place are thy full gifts, and men, like vassals, sing 
thy praise. 

1 Jn secret ; in the forest, according to SAyana. 

^ ^ light, making paths through the pathless 

1 i or Usanas KAvya, who has been frequently mentioned as 

I »nd companion of Indra. 

fferoet : the attendant Maruts. 



412 


THE HYMNS OP 


Wok I 

10 Urge thou these heroes on to slay the enemy, brave Thunder 

er ! in the fight with swords, 

Even when hid among the tribes of Sages numerous as stars 

11 Swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rent 

and burn, 0 Hero Thunder-armed : 

As thou with thy Companions didst destroy the whole o 
Sushna’s brood. 

12 Let not thine excellent assistance come to us, 0 Hero Indra 

profitless. 

May we, may we enjoy the bliss of these thy favours, Thun 
derer ! 

13 May those soft impulses of thine, 0 Indra, be fruitful am 

innocent to us. 

May we know these whose treasures are like those of milch 
kine, Thunderer ! 

14 That Earth, through power of knowing things that mayb( 

known, handless and footless yet might thrive, 

Thou slowest, turning to the right, Sushna for every living 
man. 

15 Drink, drink the Soma, Hero Indra; be not withheld as tho« 

art good, 0 Treasure-giver. 

Preserve the singers and our liberal princes, and make us 
wealthy with abundant riches. 

HYMN XXIIL Indra 

Indra, whose right hand wields the bolt, we worship, drivei 
of Bay Steeds seeking sundered courses. 

Shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, casting hii 
weapons forth and dealing bounties. 

2 The treasure which his Bay Steeds found at sacrifice, this 
wealth made opulent Indra slayer of the foe. 

10 The enemy : or Vritra. Hid among ike tribes of Sages : dwelling atnonj 

the wise Gods and invisible to men. Numerous stars : the meaning 
iial’shutrasavas/itn is uncertain. . , . 

1 1 Whose hand is prompt to rend and burn • I follow Ludwig s m ^'rp 
tion, but the meaning which he gives to dlcshAnJ. is doubtful. 

13 Soft impulses of thine : ‘ our (praises) reaching thee.’— Wilson. | 

14 For every living man : visvdyave : according to S&yana, for t , Lg, 
Visvjlyii, a king, the son of Urvasl, the Apsaras or nymph of heaven 
came the wife ojf PurAravas. Turning to the right: circumambul^nig . 
with the right hand towards him for good luck ; performing the Gae i 

1 Seeking sundered courses : vlvratdndm : unruly, and pulling 

each other, or wandering. According to S&yana, having many forest' 

2 At saci'ijice : SAyana explains vdne by ‘ at iacriflce, or, m t 
The exact meaning of the word here is not certain. Of the foe : or, o 



\rM^ 24.] TUB RIOVEDA. 4^3 

I Bibhu, Ribhukshan, Vaja,— he is Lord of Might. The Dasa’s 
very name I utterly destroy. 

3 When, with the Princes, Maghavan, famed of old, comes ni^h 
the thunderbolt of gold, and the Controller’s car ^ 

Which his two Tawny Coursers draw, then Indra is the 
Sovran Lord of power whose glory spreads afar. 

[ With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds : Indra 
throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard. 

When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant place, and 
stirs the worshipper as wind disturbs the wood. 

i We laud and praise his several deeds of valour who, fatherlike, 
with power hath made us stronger ; ’ 

Wlio with his voice slew many thousand wicked ones who 
spake in varied manners with contemptuous cries. 

> Indra, the Vimadas have formed for thee a laud, copious 
unparalleled, for thee Most Bountiful. 

We know the good we gain from him the Mighty One when we 
attract him as a herdsman calls the kino. 

Ne’er may this bond of friendship bo dissevered, the Rishi 
Vimada’s and thine, 0 Indra. 

Wc know thou carest for us as a brother: with us, 0 God, be 
thine auspicious friendship. 


HYMN XXIV. India. A.vins. 

0 Indra, drink this Soma, pressed out in the mortar, full of 
sweets. 

Send down to us great riches, — at your glad carouse— -in thou- 
sands, 0 Most Wealthy. Thou art waxing great. 

To thoe with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds wo come, 
of all strength and power, grant— at your glad carouse— 
the best choice-worthy treasure. Thou art waxing great. 
Tliou who art Lord of precious boons, inciter even of the churl, 

Guardian of singers, Indra,— at your glad carouse — save us 
rorn woe and hatred. Thou art waxing great. 

Rtbhuhhan, Vdja : Indra, combining tho three Ribhus in his own 


! the Princes .• with the Maruts. 

L Perhaps the rain which he pours upon the lightning 

kerof Ludwig. The pleasant place, the 

I te'cAas j y^orshipper : or, according to S&yaoa, his own body. 

^ no Word to express the object here. 

l^nrden or refrain of Hymn XXL is employed in the first 

\^f^^ngers; worshippers; ' eulogists.’— Wilson. 



14 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK I 

4 Strong, Lords of Magic power, ye Twain churned the united 

worlds apart, 

When ye, implored by Vi in ada, Nasatyas, forced apart the pair 

5 When the united pair were rent asunder all the Gods com 

plained. 

The Gods to the Nasatyas cried, Bring these together onci 


again. 

6 Sw^eet be my going forth, and rich in sweets be my approacl 
to home. 

So, through your Deity, both Gods, enrich us with all plea 


santness. 


HYMN XXV. 


SOEQ! 


Send us a good and happy mind, send energy and mental powei 
Then — at your glad carouse — let men joy in thy love, Swee 
Juice ! as kine in pasture. Thou art waxing great. 


2 In all thy forms, O Soma, rest thy powers that influence th 


heart. 

So also these my longings— at your glad carouse— spreai 
themselves seeking riches. Thou art waxing great. 


3 Even if, O Soma, I neglect thy laws through my simplicity, 
Be gracious— at your glad carouse— as sire to son. Preserv 

us even from slaughter. Thou art waxing great. 

4 Our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to tli 

wells, . , 

Soma, that we may live, grant— at your glad carouse-lui 
powers of mind, like beakers. Thou art waxing great. 

5 O Soma, through thy might who art skilful aud strong, the# 


longing men, .. 

These sages, have thrown open— at your glad carouse-w 
stall of kine and horses. Thou art waxing great. 

6 Our herds thou guardest, Soma, and the moving world spres 

far and wide. , . I 

Thou fittest them for living,— at your glad carouse-ioon 


upon all beings. Thou art waxing great. 

4 Churned . . .apart : or perhaps, produced by 
SAyana explains dififeiently ‘you have churned forth (the tire;. 


1 The first half line of this stanza has occurred of" 

X. 20. The double burden or refrain is again employed, wit 
connexion with the rest of the stanza. 

4 Like beaken : filled full, like chalices of Soma juice. ^ 

5 The longing men : the priests. Have thrown open, etc, : nav , 
sacrifices, opened the way to wealth. 



TBE HIQVEBA, 


415 


26.] 

On all sides, Soma, be to us a Guardian ne’er to be deceived. 

King, drive away our foemen — at your glad carouse let not 
the wicked rule us. Thou art waxing great. 

1 Bo watchful, Soma, passing wise, to give us store of vital 
strength. 

More skilled than man to guide us, — at your glad carouse — 
save us from harm and sorrow. Thou art waxing great. 

) Chief slayer of our foemen, thou, Indu, art Indra’s gracious 
Friend, 

When warriors invoke him — at your glad carouse~in fight, 
to will them offspring. Thou art waxing great. 

) Victorious is this gladdening drink : to Indra dear it grows in 
strength. 

This — at your glad carouse — enhanced the mighty hymn of the 
great sage Kakshivaii. Thou art waxing great. 

I This to the sage who offers gifts brings power that comes from 
wealth in kine. 

This, better than the seven, hath — at your glad carouse — fur- 
thered the blind, the cripple. Thou art waxing great. 


HYMN XXVI. PtUhan. 

Forward upon their way proceed the ready teams, the lovely 
songs. 

Further them glorious Pfishan with yoked chariot, and the 
Mighty Twain ! 

2 With sacred hymns let this man here, this singer, win the 
God to whom 

Belong this maj esty and might. He hath observed our eulogies. 

Pushan the Strong hath knowledge of sweet praises even as 
Indu hath. 

He dews our corn with moisture, he bedews the pasture of 
our kine. 

We will bethink ourselves of thee, 0 Pushan, 0 thou God, 
as One. 


^ famous Rishi, the seer of some hymns of Book I. See 

Dkif •' effectually than the seven priests. SAyana 
ml • k wealth to the seven (priests). — Wilson. The 

e hnO. ^ ®®®®*'ding to Sdyana. The cripple: ParAvrij. 

e both names m Vol. I., Index. o j . 


^rdinff of OHr words. The Mighty Twain : the Asving. 

• the daerd^dar^niya}^, of goodly aspect, applied to PAshan ; 

two performers of the ritei the Piyawdna and^ Wife. 



416 THE HYMNS OF WOK I 

Who biings fulfilment of our hymns, and stirs the singer and 
the sage. 

5 Joint-sharer of each sacrifice, the driver of the chariot steeds 

The Rishi who is good to man, the singer’s Friend and faith- 
ful Guard. 

6 One who is Lord of Sucha, Lord of Sucha caring for herself; 
Weaving the raiment of the sheep and making raiment bean- 

tiful. 

7 The mighty Lord of spoil and wealth. Strong Friend of all 

prosperity ; 

He with light movement shakes his beard, lovely and ne’er to 
be deceived. 

8 0 Pushan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy 

chariot-pole. 

Friend of all suppliants art thou, born in old time, and firm 
and sure. 

9 May the majestic Pushan speed our chariot with his power 

and might. 

May he increase our store of wealth and listen to this call of 
ours. 


HYMN XXVII. Mra 

This, singer, is my firm determination, to aid the worshipper 
who pours the Soma. 

I slay the man who brings no milk-oblation, unrighteous, 
powerful, the truth’s perverter. 

2 Then will I, when I lead my friends to battle against the 
radiant persons of the godless, 

Prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullock, and pour for 
thee the fifteeiifold strong juices. 


6 and SucM: uiirnesiof a man and woman. — Ludwig. According 
Sayana and Wil.ion, ‘ the pure (he-goat) and the pure (ahe-goat).’ ^ WmvM} 
the raiment : ‘ making woollen cloths such as the woollen filter, etc.'— 

And making raiment beau tif til : or, he hath made vesture pure and brig a > 
that is, says SAyana, he hath purified all aiound with his heat and light. 

7 Friend : the augmenter. Shakes his heard : when he drinks the 

8 Those goals : Pfishan’s chariot is said to be drawn by a team of 
Cf. I. 38. 4. 

1 Indra addresses the Rishi, Powerful : dbhfm : perhaps, possessed of 
means that would enable him to offer sacrifices. 

2 The Rishi replies. Fifteenfold strong juices: according to ’ jjth 

juices of the Soma-plant whose leaves grow during the light half of the 
and die away during the dark half. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


417 


JYMS 27.] 

3 I know not him who sayeth and declareth that he hath slain 

the godless in the battle. 

Soon as they see the furious combat raging, men speak forth 
praises of my vigorous horses. 

4 While yet my deeds of might were unrecorded, all passed for 

Maghavaiis though I existed. 

The potent one who dwelt in peace I conquered, grasped by 
the foot and slew him on the mountain. 


5 None hinder me in mine heroic exploits, no, not the moun- 

tains when I will and purpose. 

Even the deaf will tremble at my roaring, and every day will 
dust be agitated. 

6 To see the Indraless oblation-drinkers, mean offerers, overtaken 

by destruction ! 

Then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who have 
blamed my joyous Frien(i and scorned him. 

1 Thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour: an earlier saw, 
a later one shall see thee. 

Two canopies, as ’twere, are round about him who reacheth to 
the limit of this region. 

3 The freed kino eat the barley of the pious. I saw them as 
they wandered with the herdsman. 

The calling of the pious rang around them. What portion 
will these kine afford their owner ? 

) When we who eat the grass of men are gathered I am with 
barley-eaters in the corn-land. 

There shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock, and he who 
iiath been yoked seek one to loose him. 


‘ speaks, rebuking the Ivishi and asciibing all victories to himself. 

4 The potent one: t!ie powerful fiend Sambara, for iubtauce. 

^ of battle, stirred up by India. 

0 ite: ddrmn • according to SAyana, I, Indra, see. Oblatioyi-drinkei'S : 

0 nynselves consume the oflferings that should be presented to Indra. 

an oferers, bdhuJcshddah : UtevnWy , arm-cutters. Accoiding to von Roth, 
simonious worshippeis who oher the forelegs, or inferior parts of the 
ilsnn'^ ‘ Who cut (the worshippers) to pieces with their hands.’ — 

rmio V • “nencf.- Vishnu.— Ludwig. Or the meaning may be, your 

1 Th himself, the friend of his worshippers. 

ftr earlier «aw ; the meaning of the half-line is not 

lie an • already felt thy power, and otheis yet shall feel it. 

verily destroys (his foe), the other does not destroy 
8 Indr heaven and earth. Him: IndvA, 

fearing, apparently, that the worshipper will h»ve no milk 

^ *• 

iiis ®®*^*^ent on this obscure verse, and WiJoon leaves a blank 

"Editor of WiUou’s Translation, Vol. VI. Ludwig says that 



418 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK X, 

10. There wilt thou hold as true my spoken purpose, to bring 
together quadrupeds and bipeds. 

I will divide, without a fight, his riches who warreth here 
against the Bull, with women. ’ 

11 When a man's daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, knowing^ 

will be wroth with her for blindness*? 

Which of the two will loose on him his anger — the man ^hc 
leads her home or he who W'oos her'? 

12 How many a maid is pleasing to the suitor who fain would 

many for her splendid riches? 

If the girl be both good and fair of feature, she finds, herself, 
a friend among the people. 

13 H is feet liave grasped : lie eats the man who meets liim 

Around his head he sets the head for shelter. 

Sitting auear and right aliovo he smites us, and follows caitli 
that lies spread out beneath him. 

14 High, leafless, sliadowlc.ss, and swift is Heaven : the Motlier 

stands, the Youngling, loosed, is feeding. 

Loud hath she lowed, licking Another’s offspring. In what 
woild hath the Cow Uid down her udder? 


Indra declnrcs that he has brought luou and cattle together and made the 
Utter subject to the foiincr, to be yoked ivnd to remain yoked wlieii aiidai 
long as their masters please According to this interpretation, the fiist half 
of the stanza might be rendered : ‘ Grass-eating beasts with men havu I cun 
n^cted, and those who eat grain in tlie wide spicad corn-land.’ 

10 Af/ainst the Bull: against me, the mighty Indra. womeri. with 

weak allies. 

11 ‘Hitherto,’ says Prof. Ludwig, ‘ it is possible to establish a contiexioD 
and interdependence of the separate strophes ; with stiophe 11 the diillciilty 
begins.’ On him • on the father. Who woos Acr .* seeks her in niariiage for 
his fiiend or employer. 

12 Herself: svaydm chit : by her own w'oith, independently of her dowry. 

13 His feet have grasped: Indra, as the Sun, has seized and drawn up the 
water of the riveis with the rays which are his feet. Eats the man who 
him: peihaps, merely, scorches the man who exposes himself to his burning 
rays. According to SAyana, ‘ feeds upon, t. e. takes into his orb, the water 
that approaches him,’ Another explanation is, that the pious after deathgo 
to the Sun and become sunbeams.— Ludwig. He sets the head for shelter 
takes the height of heaven as a covering. Anear and right above : in his meri- 
dian height. Follows earth : descends to the horizon and sets beyond it. ^ 

14 Leafless, shadowless : heaven being compared to a tree that overshadi'^ 

the earth. According to Sftyana, drvA here is the ever-moving Sun. 
Motli^r : Ushas or Dawn. According to S&yana, vndtd here means ‘ the bui i 
(of the world).’ The Youngling: or Calf ; Agni who feeds on the obla low 
Shf : Heaven, or the atmospheric Prithivi, roaring as the rain /i 

Another's offspving : Indra as Aditya or the Sun, the offspring of A i 
wheU world, etc. : that i», who knows where the rain comes *,^,3 
ths Sky. The second half-stanza has occurred before. See III. 55. 1 • 



THE niOVEDA, 


419 


SYMN 27.] 

15 Seven heroes from the nether part ascended, and from the 

upper part came eight together. 

Nine from behind came armed with winnowing-baskets : ten 
from the front pressed o’er the rock’s high ridges. 

16 One of the ten, the tawny, shared in common, they send to 

execute their final purpose. 

The Mother carries on her breast the Infant of noble form 
and soothes it while it knows nut. 

17 The Heroes dressed with fire the fatted wether: the dice were 

thrown by way of sport and gaming. 

Two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters, hallowing and 
with means of purifying. 

18 Crying aloud they ran in all directions : One half of them will 

cook, and not the othci*. 

To me hath Savitar, this God, declared it : Ho will perform, 
whose food is wood and butter. 

19 I saw a troop advancing from the distance, moved, not by 

wheels but their own Godlike nature. 

The Fiioiidly One seeks human generations, destroying, still 
new, bands of evil beings. 

20 These rny two Bulls, even Pramara's, are harnessed : drive 

thorn not far ; here let thcr>i often linger. 

The waters even shall aid him to his object, and the all-cleans- 
ing Sun who is above us. 


15 Seven heroes: accor<^ing to SAyana, VisvAmitra and olher Rishis, sons of 
Prajapati. Eight: the Vc^lakhilyas, a numerous race of divine pygmies. Nine: 
theBluigus. Ten- Angirases. Or, alternatively, seveu Maruts, on Indra’s 
right, eiglit on left, nine behind him, and ten in fiont. These explauationa 
hy Sdyana cannot bo accepted ; but it is hard to say what is meant. Ludwig 
thinks t’lat the various classes of letters of the alphabet arc intended. His iu- 
frenicna explanation will be found in the Pieface to his fourth volume of the 
B-gvoda, pp. xxxiii.—xxxv. 

‘ kapildm • according to S Ay an a, the famous Rishi Kapila, 
rhe Sun ? ’ — Qrassmann. The Mother : Night ? — Grassmaun. The Infant : 
young Sun, if the Mother is Night. 

wether : perhap , the swollen rain-cloud The dice • the stars. 
Ts 7 'A Moon. These are Ludwig’s suggestions. 

Ihcy : according to S.Ay ana, the Angirases. Perhaps the contentious 
Agiii whom Agui the veritable priest is contrasted. — Ludwig. He : 

the stars. The Friendly One : Indra as the Sun. Evil beings: 
Sun spirits of darkness that vanish at the coming of the 

befit according to SAyana. Pramara's : belonging to me, the 

Death. But the whole stanza is obscure. All-deansing : so 
which von Roth interprets by ‘ obscuration.' Ludwig 
* that the Moon, ‘ the obscurer of the Sun’ is meant, 



THE HYMNS OF 


420 


[BOOK X, 


21 This is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the 

lofty misty realm of Siirya. 

Beyond this realm there is another glory : so through old age 
they pass and feel no sorrow. 

22 Bound fast to every tree the cow is lowing, and thence the man- 

consuming birds are flying, 

Then all this world, though pressing juice for Indra and 
strengthening the Rishi, is affrighted. 

23 In the Gods’ mansion stood the first-created, and from their 

separation came the later. 

Three warm the Earth while holding stores of water, andT^vo 
of these convey the murmuring moisture. 

24 This is thy life : and do thou mark and know it. As such, hide 

not thyself in time of battle. 

He manifests the liglit and hides the vapour : his foot is never 
free from robes that veil it. 


HYMN XXVIII. Indra. Vasuka 

Now all my other friends are here assembled: my Sire-iii-l.iw 
alone hatli not come hither. 

So might he cat the grain and drink the Soma, and, satisfied, 
return unto his dwelling. 


21 This is the thunderbolt : the meaalvig, probably is, ‘ this dakshini or 
honorarium given to the priests is a veriUUe thunderbolt.’ — Ludwig. Bat, a» 
Wilson observes, the stauza may V^e ‘ intended to express the usual theoiy of 
rain ; the moisture of the earth being drawn up the solar region as vapour, 
and thence descending as rain by the action of the i/V underbolt and the wmt’ 

22 According to SAyana, tree here means ‘ bow,’ C'>u; means ‘ bowstiing,’ 
and man-consuming birds ‘deadly arrows.’ The genertJ meaning is thiit 
sacrifices to Indra and libeml gifts to priests will not free men from the fear 
of death. 

23 The first-created : the ^clouds. The later : the waters of ihe r&ln. 

Three: Parjanya, VAyu. and Aditya or the Sun. Holding stores of mtef: 
anilplXh : ‘ Sowing in succe-i.sion.’ — Wilson. ‘ Following the water.’ — Ludwig. 
* Rich in water.’ — Grassmann Two : VAyu and Aditya. . , 

24 Accordine to SAyana, Indra is adtlroi.-ed. The following is Wilsous 

translation of SAyana’s paraphrase of the stauza ; — ‘ That thy (divine nature 
identified with the sun) is the cause of life : and know such (solar form) 
hU (to be worthy of adoration) at the sacrifice ; conceal nothing : thatnuotion 
of him the all-cleMising (sun) makes manifest the universe ; it absorbs ® 
moisture ; it is nevei discontinued ’ The robes that veil the foot, or rays, o 
the Sun are the waters Into which they are supposed to vanisti. , 

The hymn is enigmatical and difficult in the highest degree, and 
SAyana nor later scholars have succeeded in making it intelligible throug o 

The Riabi is Vasukra son of Indra, and the hymn is mainly ^ 
between the Father and the son. Vasukra’s wife is the seer as well as 
speaker of stanza 1. , ^ 

1 This stanza is spoken by Vasukra’s wife in ignorance, says tne i 6 
that her Father-in-law Indra is present in disguise. 



TEE RIO VEDA. 


421 


28.] 

2 Loud belloweth the Bull whose horns are sharpened : upon 

the height above earth’s breadth he standeth. 

Tliat man I guard and save in all his troubles who fills my 
flanks when he hath shed the Soma. 

3 Men with the stone press out for thee, 0 Indra, strong, glad- 

dening Soma, and thereof tliou drinkest. 

Bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest when, 
Maghavan, with food thou art invited. 

4 Resolve for me, 0 singer, this .uy riddle : The rivers send their 

swelling water backward : 

The fox steals up to the approaching lion : the jackal drives 
the wild-boar from the brushwood. 

5 How shall I solve this riddle, I, the simple, declare the 

thought of thee the Wise and Mighty 1 
Tell us, well knowing, as befits the season ; Whitherward is 
thy prosperous car advancing? 

6 Thus do they magnify me, mo the mighty : higher than even 

high heaven is my car-pole. 

Tail at once demolish many thousands: my Sire begot me with 
no foe to match me. 

7 Yea, and the Gods have known me also, Indra, as mighty, fierce 

and strong in every exploit. 

Exulting with the bolt I slaughtered Vritra, and for the offerer 
oped with might the cow-stall. 

8 The Deities approached, they carried axes; splitting the w^ood 

they came with their attendants. 

They laid good timber in the fire-receivers, and burnt the grass 
up where they found it growing, 

9 The hare hath swallowed up the opposing razor : I sundered 

with a clod the distant mountain. 

The great will I make subject to the little : the calf shall wax 
in strength and eat the bullock. 

2 Indra speaka. T/ie Bull: tl'< mighty Indra. 

3 Vasukra apeaka. 

ndra must be the speaker, although Sftyana gives the stanza to Vasukra. 
ra declares his power to alter the course of nature. See Wilson’s Trans- 
«on note by the Editor. 

J vwukra 8|>eak8. 

ndra speaks. My Sire: or, the general Father PrajApati,— SAyana. 

8 u ®^*^d tells what he has done with Indra’s help. 

sche^V r stanza is probably an account of the Gods’ fir^t sacrifice. See 
®clea Studien, I. pp. 1/8 — 180. According to SAyana, it refers to 

clouds, and the filling of the rivers. Ludwig sees in it a 

9 Of ^ beginning of agriculture. Their attendants: the Maruts. 

with stanza 4. 



^22 THE HYMNS OP {SOOK i 

10 There hath the strong winged eagle left his talon, as a snarert 

lion leaves the trap that caught him. 

Even the wild steer in his thirst is captured ; the leather fifran 
still holds his foot entangled. ^ 

11 So may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on 

viands of the Brahman. ® 

They all devour the bulls set free to wander, while they them- 
selves destroy their bodies^ vigour. 

12 They were well occupied with holy duties who sped in cernnti 

with their lauds to Soma. 

Speaking like man, mete to us wealth and booty ; in heaven 
thou hast tho name and fame of Hero. 


HYMN XXIX. 


^ndra. 


As sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing, ye, swift Pair 
have been roused by clear laudation, 

Whose Herald-Priest through many days is Indra, earth’s Guar- 
dian, Friend of men, the best of Heroes. 

May we, when this Dawn and the next dance hither, be thy 
best servants, most heroic Hero ! 

Let the victorious cir with triple splendour bring hitherward 
the hundred chiefs with Kutsa. 


3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, Indral 

Speed through our doors to songs, for thou art mighty. 
Why comest thou to me, what gift attracts thee? Fain would 
I bring thee food most meet to offer. 

4 Indra, what fame hath one like thee mid heroes ? With what 

plan wilt thou act? Why hast thou sought us? 

As a true Friend, Wide-Strider ! to sustain us, since food 
absorbs the thought of each among us. 


10 The application of this stanza is not apparent. Slyana’s explanation of 
this and the following vetae is entirely different from that of must recent 
scholars. 

1 The meaning of the stanza U obscure, and the text of the first half lin® 

is unintelligible. I follow the reading which S&yana gives in his Com- 
mentary, vdyo instead vd yd. ‘As (the bird) who deposits its youug 
nest) in the tree (is) eagerly looking around.’ — Wilsou Stvift Pair: Asvins* 

2 Dame hither: or, come dancing. Cp Milton’s ‘Kowthe bright moriiiug 

star, day’s harbinger, Comes dancing from the east.’ Triple splenml'^ 
perhaps with reference to Agni, V.iyu, and Shrya. — Ludwig. Hundred chieP- 
the Marnts may be intended, ‘ hundred ’ being used indefinitely. ^ 
Indra’s favourite companion. ^ ^ 1^1 

4 Indra is reminded that the protection of his worshippers is his sp 
glory. Wide-Strider ! : as identified with the Sun ; ‘widely renowned, . 
ing to S&yana. Food : the hymn appears to have been * seen ’ or reveaie 
time of dearth or famine.’— Ludwig, 



TUB RIQVBDA, 


423 


30.] 

Speed liappily those, aa Sdiya enda Ida journey, who meet his 
wisli as bridegrooms meet tlieir spouses ; 

Men who present, 0 Indra strong by nature, with food the many 
sungs that tell thy praises. 

Tliino are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, heaven for 
thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom. 

Hero tor thy choice are Somas mixed with butter : may the 
sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking. 

7 They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full of sweet 

juice, for faithful is his bounty. 

O’er earth’s expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, the 
Friend of man, and by heroic exploits. 

8 India hath conquered in his wars, the Mighty: men strive in 

multitudes to win his friendship. 

Ascend thy cliariot as it were m battle, which thou sluilt 
drive to us with gracious favour. 

HYMN XXX. Waters. 

As ’twerc with swift exertion of the spirit, let the priest speed 
to the celestial Waters, 

Thogloiious food of Varuna and Mitra. To him who spreade^h 
far this laud I offer. 

2 Adhvuryus, be ye ready with oblations, and come long- 

ing to the longing Waters, 

Down on which looks the [lurple-tinted lour ye that 

flowing wave this day, deft-handed. 

3 Go to the reservoir, 0 ye Adhvaryu*" worship the Waters 

Child witli your oblations. 

A consecrated wave he now wi^’g'^e you, so press for him the 
Soma rich in sweetness. 


5 Meet his wish satisfy h-'> Indra’s, longing for Som:i-libation.s. 

^ T'hiae are two measui"^ • Thy majosly or gieatuess is vast and lofty as 
hoaveu, and tliy wisdor wide .is earth ; or. ‘ with confusion of the measure 
ti’id the tiling laea^o '’'h' ^hou h .st inoasured out the heaven by thy greatness 
the earth by wisdom. See Wdllis, Cosmohxjy of the Riyveda, p. 18. 

The is the ceremony of fetching the sacred waters required for the 
Preparati'*! of the Soma juice. 

1 T' fdui who spreadeth far ; Indra, according to Silyana. 

*> The purple-tinted Eagle ; Soma, the Moon. 

3 2o W.iteivs. The Waters' Child usually 

v'b as the lightning that springs from the cloudn or waters of the firraa- 
I ^74^^^ Deity who produces the rain, the Moon. See Hillebrcindt;, 



424 THE HYMNS OF [BOOZi 

4 He who shines bright in floods, unfed with fuel, whom sage^ 

worship at their sacrifices ; 

Give waters rich in sweets, Child of the Waters, even thog? 
which gave heroic might to Indra: 

5 Those in which Soma joys and is delighted, as a young man 

with fair and pleasant damsels. 

Go thou unto those Waters, 0 Adhvaryu, and purify with herba 
what thou iiifusest. 

6 So maidens bow before the youthful gallant who comes witb 

love to them who yearn to meet him. 

In heart accordant and in wish one-minded are the Adlivaryua 
and the heavenly Waters. 

7 He who made room for you when fast imprisoned, who freed 

you from the mighty imprecation, — 

Even to that Indra send the meath-rich current, the wave that 
gratifies the Gods, 0 Waters. 

8 Send forth to him the meath-rich wave, 0 Rivers, which is 

your off'jpring and a w^ell of sweetness, 

Oil-balmed, to be implored at sacrifices. Ye wealthy Waters, 
hear mine invocation. 

3 Send forth the rapture-giving wave, 0 Rivers, which Indra 
drinks, which sets the Twain in motion ; 

The ^vell that springeth from the clouds, desirous, tliat 
wandw^h triple-formed, distilling transport. 

10 These g breams which with their double cunent, like 

cattle-raiders, lower pastures, — ^ 

Waters whicb dwell thrive together. Queens, Mothers 

of the world, these, o.ishi, honour. 

11 Send forth our sacrifice jjoiy worship, send forth the 

hymn and prayer for gain <o Riches. 

For need of sacrifice disclose the bidder. Give gracious hear- 
ing to our call, 0 Wateis. 

4 In floods : of the aerial ocean. Cp II 35. 4. 

5 With, herbs • probably l^arblia or Kn^a grass. 

6 Tlie Waters bow to Soma as maidens t<> their lovers. 

9 The Twain: ubh6: probably, Heaven and Eartli ^ explains tlii- 

ferently : — ‘which sends us both (kinds of fruit) that is, ‘thee, uit. whether 
reward or pimiahment, of the present life, and of a former life — "Vilson.sna 
Editor’s note. Desirous • eager to mix with the Soma, according 

but the meaning of ausitiam is uncertain. Ludwig and Hillebrandt tu»^ate 
it by ‘ des Usanas,’ belonging to Usanas or Usan^, Tripie-formta . 
with two admixtures.— Grassmnnn. . palled 

10 Double current: meaning, probably, the two kinds of watc 
respectively EkadhanA and Vasatlvar!. 

11 Ditclon the udder: let your streams flow. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


YMN 81.] 


425 


3 For, wealthy Waters, ye control all treasures : ye brine 

auspicious intellect and Amrit. ° 

Ye are the Queens of iiidependeut riches. Sarasvati give full 
life to the singer ! ® 

) When I behold the Waters coming hither, carrying with them 
milk and meath and batter, 

i Bearing the well-pressed Soma juice to India, they harmonize 
111 spirit with Adhvaryu.s. 

4 Rich, they are come with wealth for living beings. 0 friends, 

Adhvaryus, seat them in their places. 

Seat them on holy grass, ye Soma-bringers, in harmony with 
the Offspring of the Waters. 

5 Now to this grass are come the longing Waters : the Pious 

Ones are seated at our w^orship. 

Adhvaryus, press the Soma juice for Indra: so will the service 
of the Gods be easy. 


HYMN XX XT. Visvedevaa. 

May benediction of the Gods approach us, holy, to aid us with 
all rapid succours. 

Therewith may we be happily befriended, and pass triumphant 
over all our troubles. ■ 

I A man should think on wealth and strive to win it by adora- 
tion on the path of Order, 

Counsel himself with liia own mental insight, and grasp still 
nobler vigour with his spirit. 

The hymn is formed, poured are the allotted portions : as to 
a ford friends come unto the Wondrous. 

"e have obtained the power of ease and comfort, we have 
^ become acquainted with Immortals. 

I’leasedbe the Eternal Lord who loves the household with this 
man whom God Savitar created. 

haga Aryanian grace him with cattle ; mny he appear 

tohim, and be, delightful. 

<iwelling-placo be this assembly, where in 
^ight men rich in food have gathered, 


^ • as chief and wisest of the Water-Goddesses. 

Ludwig snggeats. ‘May the power 
same time the Gods themselves come to us,' 
n. • meaning, perhaps. Soma. 


‘ 

•''''titntor of to SAyana, PrajApati. This man: 

® Bhaoa A f®*^***”®®- Savitar has given him life and now let Agni 
y '>i/uman ; Aiyaman as Bhaga who distributes wealth. 



426 


TUE HYMNS OF 


Wok I 

Striving to share the praises of this singer. To ua cooi 
strengthening and effectual riches ! 

6 This Bull’s most gracious far-extended favour existed first ( 

all in full abundance. 

By his support they are mnintained in common who m tl 
Asura’s mansion dwell together. 

7 What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, hoi 

which they fashioned forth the Earth juid Heaven ^ 

These Twain stand fast and wax not old for ever : these ha^ 
sung praise to many a day and morning. 

8 Not only here is this : more is beyond us. He is the Bui 

the Heaven’s and Earth’s supporter. 

With power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the Ba 
Coursers bear him on as Siirya. 

9 He passes o’er the broad earth like a Stega : he penetrates th 

wi)rld as Wind the mist-cloud. 

He, balmcd with oil, near Varuna and Mitra, like Agiii in tli 
wood, hath shot forth splendour. 

10 When suddenly calved the cow that erst was b.inen, she 

self-protected, ended all her troubles. 

Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cas 
up the Sami, that which men were seeking. 

11 To Nrishad’s son they gave the name of Kanva, andhoth 

brown hued courser won the treasure. 

For him dark-colourcd streamed the shining udder : non 
made it swell for him. Thus Order willeij^it. 

6 Thi$ B ill : Agio as the Sun The Asura is Dyaus. 

8 Not only here the first half-line is obscure. ‘ Not such (is their power) 
there is another greater than they’ — Wilson. ‘There is no other tli'HI 
besides like unto him ’ — Wallis. A filter : pavitrain ; which purifies the raji 
of light which stream through it. 

9 A Steya . said to be a certain biting or stinging insect. According 

Sdyana, ‘ the aggregation of rays, the Sun.’ Ludwig conjectures that ‘pbeg 
share ’ may be the meaning. i 9 wi 

10 This stanza is very obscure. ‘The cow which was barren is 
tree, which brings forth the Aswattha^ and from the wood of these tw * 
arc made the arunt, the two pinces of wood which are ruhlied 
produce the sacred fire — the upper and harder piece is tlie Stmi ( , 
Surna), and the loW'-r and soft is the Aaioattha (the Ficus religiosa)- — ‘ 

‘ The verses [7 —10] deal with the formation of the three main compo 
of the universe, heaven, earth, and the sun. Of the first two the j||J 
little to tell us and passes on at once to the third. The sun is " ^ J 
with the bull, Agui of the sacrifice, and the earth with ‘cJ 

stick anointed with ghee, which ia licked up [‘devours’ iusteai 
up ’ ] as soon as fire is struck.’ —Wallis, Coiinoloyy of the Rigredn, PP J 

11 This stanza appears to have no connexion with the hymn, an« J 

plicable as it stands here. See I. 117. 8, where the son of Nrisna 
tioned as a favourite of the Asvius. 



I'M 32 ] RIQVEDA. ^27 

HYMN XXXII. 

; Forth speed the Pair to bring the meditating God, benevolent 
with boons sent in return for boons. 

May ludra graciously accept both gifts from us, when he l.ath 
knowledge of the flowing Soma juice. 

! Thou watiderest far, 0 Indra, through the spheres oflight and 
tjalms of earth, the region, thou whom many praise ' 

Lot those who often bring thee to their solemn rites conquer 
. the noisy babblers wh'> present no gifts. 

3 More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, when the 
son duly careth for his parents’ line. 

' The wife attracts the husbanl : with a shout of joy the man’s 
auspicious marriage is performed aright. 

1 This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, where 
like railoh-cows, the kino order the marriage train ’ 
Where the Herd’s Mother counts as first and best of all, and 
round her are the seven-toned people of the choir. 

5 The Pious One hath reached your place before the rest : One 

only moves victorious with the Kudras’ band. 

To these your helpers pour out meath. Immortal Gods, with 
whom your song of praise hath power to win their gifts. 

6 He who maintains the Laws of Gods informed me that thou 

wast lying hidden in the watci's. 

India who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. By him 
instructed am I come, 0 Agni. 

^ knows it: taught by 

the skilful guide he travels onward. 


?Iy Jrrsion of the first line follow, the 
liiffereiit tnSM J." **'s. Commentary. S.tyana's interpretation 

raisWpiwil eMletint / qmck-goiiiK horses to the service of tlie 

0 expectant (of his arrival).’- Wilson. Both yifU: oblation and 

IjawTxpUins *7- becoming a father ; or as 

'rilices instituted by^tii"* according to custom in 

Wording to S™vana'^t*Ae* the meaning of this halt-line is uncertain. 
’<*«r is Stiiti or Prsii, * 1 **’^'^ company of sacrificeis and priests, its 

asons, or the nrj’ * inven toried, or st^veufold, are the metreH, or the 
otliei'of the Manita Mother is more probably Prisui, the 

“'™' upon this eWnt^^i! is translated by Wilson Shine, 

'P'oach) as milch •“* *»crifice. when our praises desire (thy 

’PPer precedes ' *‘“®® “'® P™8« of me the wor* 

^ the seven offioLf company, and this person accompanied 

5 The Piox,. Q priests is the offerer of praise.* 

^ • Pei han^ Vim worshipper of Gods. One only : Indraa 

l*«iuaps Soma. Thou ; Agni. Cp. I. 23. 20, 



423 THE HYMNS OF l^OOKi 

This is, in truth, the blessing of instruction : he finds the path 
that leads directly forward. 

8 Even now he breathed : these days hath he remembered. Con- 

cealed, he sucked the bosom of his Mother. 

Yet in his youth old nge hath come upon him : he hath grown 
gracious, good, and free from anger. 

9 0 Kalasa, all these blessings will wo bring them, 0 Kurusra- 

vana, who give rich presents. 1 

May he, 0 wealthy princes, and this Soma which I am bearin] 
in my heart, reward you. 

HYMN XXXIII. Various Deltie 

The urgings of the people have impelled me, and by theneai 
est way I bring you Pu^han. 

The Universal Gods have brought me safely. The cry wa 
heard. Behold, Duhsasu cometh ! 

2 The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like riva 

wives. 

Indigence, nakedness, exhaustion press me sore : my mind i 
fluttering like a bird’s. 

3 As rats eat weavers’ threads, cares arc consuming me, th; 

singer, Satakratu, me. 

Have mercy on us once, 0 Indra, Bounteous Lord : be thou i 
Father unto us. 

4 I the priests’ Kishi chose as prince most liberal Kuruaravana 

The son of Trasadasyu’s son, ^ 


8 Even now he breathed : began to show signs of life. The connexion bet 
ween stanzas 1 — 4 and 5—8 is not apparent. Sucked the bosom of his Mother 
enjoyed oblations, in the shape of Soma jtjice, etc., produced by the eaitb. 

9 The meaning of A'a/astt, literally ^pitcher’ or ‘beaker,' here is uncertain 
‘(Indra), the possessor of the pitchers.’ — Wilson. Ludwig suggests 

as the right reading : — ‘ We will perform these holy cereraonies in then 
minutest details.’ Ktirvsravana : accoiding to SAyana, ‘ hearer of the praisi 
of priests ; ’ but probably the name of a prince, as in the following hymn. 

1 Dvhsdsu: literally, ‘the malevolent.’ Perhaps, as Lnd wig suggests, ( 
hostile prince wliose victory over Kurusravana has caused the distress 
tioned in the following stanza. 

2 The first line is taken from I. 105. 8. 

3 This first line is taken from 1. 105. 5 Weavers* threads: threads steep 

in water, according to Sdyana. Once: ‘after having so often given us up 
misery.’— Ludwig. ' , 

4 The Priests' Rishi: higher in rank than the other priests, 

chose to keep him* as my master in order to go out to battle with ni»i- 
man, Sansh'it Reader, p. 386. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


42d 


YMH 34.1 

Whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me straight on- 
ward : I will laud 
The giver of a thousand meeds, 

The sire of Upamasravas, even him whose words were passing 
sweet, 

As a fair field is to its lord. 

Mrrk, Upamasravas, his son, mark, grandson of Mitratithi : 

I am thy father’s eulogist. 

If r controlled Immortal Gods, yea, even were I Lord of men, 
My liberal prince were living still. 

None lives, even had ho hundred lives, beyond the statute of 
the Gods : 

So am I parted from my friend. 

HYMN XXXIY. Dice, Etc. 

Spruno from tall trees on windy heights, these rollers trans- 
port me as they turn upon the table. 

Dearer to me the die that never slumbers than the deep 
draught of Mujavan’s own Soma. 

She never vexed me nor was angry with me, but to my friends 
and me was ever gracious. 

For the die’s sake, whoso single point is final, mine own devot- 
ed wife I alienated. 

My wife holds me aloof, her mother hates me : the wretched 
man finds none to give him comfort. 

As of a costly horse grown old and feeble, I find not any profit 
of the gamester. 

Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath covet- 
ed, that rapid courser : 

This and tho three f-tllowing stanzaa arc said to be consolatory verses 
■eased by the Rishi Kavasha to Upamasravas ou the death of his father 

ritithi. 

I Lord of men: as one of the Gods. My liberal prince : Mitr&tithi. 

^^yond the statute of the Gods : beyond the time fixed for the duration 

life. 

hisi h^rnn has been placed by Grassmann in his Appendix as a composite 
■action consisting of incoherent fragments. See Laumao, Sanskrit Reader^ 
386 , 389 . 

from tall trees : the nuts of the Vibhtdaka, or, later, Vibbltaka, 
j.y^^^inalia Bellerica) were used as dice in early times. Rollei't : 

7 rolling dioe. MUjavin: said to be a mountain on which the finest 
“y‘«i^t8grew. 

is final: the speaker has apparently lost all by throw- 



430 THE HYMNS OP [Book i 

Of him speak father, mother, brothers saying, We know hiti 
not : bind him and take him with you, 

5 When I resolve to play with these no longer, my frieu(] 

depart from mo and leave me lonely. 

When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have rattled, lit 
a fond girl I seek the place of meeting. 

6 The gamester seeks the gambling-house, and wonders, hi 

body all afire, Shall I be lucky 1 
Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his gain 
against his adversary. 

7 Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, deceh 

iijg and tormenting, causing grievous woe. 

They give frail gifts and then destroy the man who wins 
thickly anointed with the player’s fairest good. 

8 Merrily sports their troop, the three-and- fifty, like Savita 

the God whose ways are faithful. 

They bend nob even to the mighty’s anger : the King himael 
pays homage and reveres them. 

9 Downward they roll, and then spring quickly upward, am 

handless, force the man with hands to servo them. 

Cast on the board, like lump.s of magic charcoal, though col 
themselves they burn the heart to ashes. 

10 The gambler’s wife is left forlorn nnd wretched : the raotli{ 

mourns the son who wanders homeless. 

In constant fear, in debt, and seeking riches, he goes \ 
night unto the homo of others. • 

1 1 Sad is the gambler when he sees a matron, another’s wife, an 

his well-ordered dwelling. 

He yokes the brown steeds in the early morning, and 
the fire is cold sinks down an outcast. j 


4 Bind him : he has staked his personal freedom, and lost ; and liia peop 
renounce him 

7 Driving hooks : used by mahouts or elephant-drivers. The last kalf 
the stanza is difficult ; — ‘ they appear to the gambler covered with honey.’ 

8 Thrce-and-jifty : or, perhaps, thrice five in number. It would app« 

from SAyana’s Commentary that fifty-three was the usual number of dice ci 
ployed; and yet this seems hardly probable. Ludwig suggests ‘ three 
five' as the meaning heie of tripanchdfdh. and Prof. Weber .r 

trij^fichasah instead of tripafichdsah^Ueher den RdjasHyat p, 72). 
‘[disposing men’s destinies] like the god S.’ — Muir. 

10 Riches : wealth gained by robbery, according to SAya^a. 

11 Yokes the brown steeds: begins throwing the nut-dice. When 
cold: * by the time when the file goes out he has sunk into a 
wretch.’ — Muir, 



THE RIQVEDA, 


431 


(U^ 35.] 

To the great captain of your mighty array, who hath become 
the host's imperial leader, 

To him I show my ten extended fingers : I speak the truth. 
No wealth am I withholding. 

1 play not with dice : no, cultivate thy corn-land. Enjoy the 
gain, and deem that wealth sufficient. 

There are thy cattle, there thy wife, 0 gambler. So this good 
Savitar himself hath told me. 

1 Make me your friend : show us some little mercy. Assail us 

not with your tenific fierceness. 

Appeased be your malignity and anger, and lot the brown 
dice snare some other captive. 

HYMN XXXV. Visvedevas. 

Thksb fires associate with Indra are nwake, bringing their 
light when first the Dawn begins to .shine. 

May Heaven and Eartli, great Pair, observe our holy work. 
We claim for us this day the favour of tlie Gods. 

2 Yea, for ourselves we claim the grace of Heaven and Earth, 

of Saryanavan, of the Hills and Mother Streams. 

For iiiiioceuce we pray to Surya and to Dawn. So may the 
llovving Soma bring us bliss to-day. 

3 May the great Twain, the Mothers, Heaven and Earth, this 

day preserve us free from sin for peace and happiness. 

May iMorning sending forth her light drive sm afar. We pray 
to kindled Agni for felicity. 

May this first Dawn bring us the host of gracious Gods : 

rich, may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth. 

The wrath of the malignant may we keep afar. We pray to 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

' Dawns, who como forward with the bright beams of the Sun, 
and at your earliest flushing bring to us the light, 

^2 The great captain: the highest-uumbered of all tho dice. Tm Jingen : 
bHow that I have nothing left. 

Thiij stanza is a farewell address to the Dice. Some other : our enemy.— 

iyana. 

Tile hymn or ky has been transliterated, translated in prose, and freely 
produced in rhymed octosyllabic verse, by Dr. J, Muir, 0 S. Texts, V. 

It has also been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder. 
J Jl'k Indra: as a God of the morning light. 

^ V Saryandvdny of the Bills : according to Sdyana, ‘ of the mountains of 
panAvan/ a lake in the distri^ t of Kurukshetra. I follow Ludwig in 
both pdrvatdn and saryafUXvatah as genitives. 

Jour • according to the text ‘ their,’ the verb in the first line being in 

person. 



432 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK: 


Shine yo on us to-day auspicious, for renown. We pray i 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

6 Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, and 1( 

our fires mount upward witli a lofty blaze. 

The Asvin Pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. 
pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

7 Send us tc-day a portion choice and excellent, 0 Savitar, f( 

thou art he who dealeth wealth. 

I cry to Dhishan^, Mother of opulence. We pray to kindh 
Agni for felicity. 

8 Further me this declaring of Eternal Law, the Law of God 

as we mortals acknowledge it ! 

Tlie Sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn. We pray I 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

9 This day wc pray with innocence in strewing grass, adjustin 

pressing-stones, and perfecting the hymn. 

Thou in the Adityas’ keeping movest restlessly. We pray t 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

10 To our groat holy grass I bid the Gods at morn to banque 

and will seat them as the seven priests, — 

Varuna, Indra, Mitra, Bhaga for our gain. We pray to kind 
ed Agni for felicity. 

11 Come hither, 0 Adityas, for our perfect weal : accordant liel 

our sacrifice that we may thrive. 

Pushan, Brihaspati, Bhaga, both Asvins, and enkindled Agn 
we implore for happiness. 

12 Adityas, Gods, vouchsafe that this our home may be praisi 

worthy, prosperous, our heroes’ sure defence, 

For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We pray t 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

13 This day may all the Maruts, all be near us with aid : ma, 

all our fires be well enkindled. 

May all Gods come to us with gracious favour. May spoil an 
wealth be ours, and all possessions. 

7 Dhishand : a Goddess who presides over prosperity ; according to Hill 

braudt, the 'Earth, ^ , li 

8 Further me: ‘May that glorification of the gods which men repe 
connexion with the rite preserve me.’— Wilson. 

9 Movest restlessly : performe.st thy duties, according to SAyapa* E 
pidly biiruing the fuel appears to be intended. 



TEE mo VEDA. 


438 


rMN 36.] 

He whom ye aid, 0 Deities, in battle, whom ye protect and 
rescue from affliction, 

Wlio fears no danger at your milk-libation, — such may we be 
to feast the Gods, ye Mighty. 

HYMN XXXVr. Visvedevas. 

There are the Dawn and Night, the grand and beauteous 
I’air, Earth, Heaven, and Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman. 

Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, nnd the Floods, Adityas, 
Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Sky. 

May Dyaus and Prithiv?, wise, true to Holy Law, keep us in 
safety from distress and injury. 

Let not malignant Nirriti rule over us. We crave to-day this 
gracious favour of the Gods. 

Mother of Mitra and of opulent Varuna, may Aditi preserve 
us safe from all distress. 

May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe. We crave 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

May ringing press-stones keep the Rakshasas afar, ill dream, 
and Nirriti, and each voracious fiend. 

May the Adityas and the Maruts shelter us. We crave this 
gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

Full flow libations ; on our grass let Indra sit; Brihaspati the 
singer laud with Sama hymns ! 

Wise be our hearts’ imaginings that we may live. We crave 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

» Ye Asvins, make our sacrifice ascend to heaven, and animate 
the rite that it may send us blis.s, 

Offered with holy oil, with forward-speeding rein. We crave 
the gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

Hither I call the band of Maruts, swift to hear, great, purify- 
ing, bringing bliss, to be our Friends. 

May we increase our wealth to glorify our name. We crave 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

* We bring the Stay of Life, who makes the waters swell, swift- 
hearing, Friend of Gods, who waits on sacrifice. 

Who fear$ no danger ; who feels assured that his worship ot the Gods 

** protect him. 

2 Waters : of the firmamer^. 

^ and Pfithivt : Heaven and Earth. Nirriti : Death or Destruction. 
males the waters swell : apEmp4rum: ‘protector of the waters.’— 

^ 'Drinker of the waters.’— Ludwig. Soma is meant. See IX. 76. 4. 
28 



434 


THE HYMNS OF 


May we control that Power, Soma whose rays are bright, w 
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. ' 

9 Alive ourselves, with living sons, devoid of guilt, may 

this with winners by fair means to win. ** 

Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every side. We crav 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

10 Hear us, O ye w bo claim the worship of mankind, and giy 

us, 0 3"c God.s, the gift for which we pray, ® 

Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with wealth. % 
crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods. 

11 We crave the gracious favour of the Gods to-day, great favon 

of great Gods, sublime and free from foes, 

That we may gain rich treasure sprung from hero sons, wj 
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

12 In great enkindlod Agni s keeping, and, for bliss, free from 

sin before Mitra and Vanina, 

May we share b'avitars best animating help. We crave t 
gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

13 All ye, the Gods whom Savitar the Father of truth, and \ 

runa and Mitra govern, 

Give us pimpcrity with hero children, and opulence in ki 
and various treasure. 

14 Savitar, Savitar from east and westward, Savitar, Savit 

from north and southward, 

Savitar send us perfect health and comfort, Savitar let o 
days of life be lengthened ! 

HYMN XXXVII. Siiii 

Do homage unto Vanina’s and Mitra’s Eye : offer this soleu 
worship to the Miglity God, 

Who seeth far aw^ay, the Ensign, born of Gods. Sing prais 
unto SHrya, to the Son of Dyaiis. 

2 May this my truthful speech guard me on every side, wb£ 

ever heaven and earth and days arc spread abroad. 

All else that is in motion finds a place of rest : the wate 
ever flow and ever mounts the Sun. 

3 No godless man from time remotest draws thee down wlie 

thou art driving forth with winged dappled Steeds. 

One lustre waits upon thee moving to the east, and, Siirya, tho 
arisest with a different light. 

1 Varuna's and Mitra' s Eye: Surya or the Sun. ‘The eye of 
Vanina and Agni,’ — 1. 115. 1, 

3 Dappled Steedt : ‘ with Etasae.’— Ludwig. Oneluitre: by night. Cf. 
115. 5 ; and Altar eya^Brdkmana, III. 4. 44. ‘One ancient radiance fo^®' 


XMS 37.] TUB RIG VEDA. 


435 


and 


0 SArya, with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom 
with thy ray impellcst every moving thing, 

Keep far from us all feeble, worthless sacrifice, and drive awav 
disease and every evil dream. ^ 


Sent forth thou gmardest well the Universe’s law, and in thv 
wonted way ariscst free from w’rath. ^ 

When Sflrya, we address our prayers to thee to-day, may the 

I Gods favour this our purpose and desire. 

^ This invocation, these our words may Heaven and Earth and 
Indra and the Waters and the Maruts hear. ’ 

Ne’er may we suffer want in presence of the Sun, and, living 
happy lives, may we attain old age. ^ 

1 Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with store 
of children, free from sickness and from sin. 

Long-living, may we look, 0 Siirya, upon thee uprising day bv 
day, thou great as Mitra is ! ^ 


\ Sarya, may we live long and look upon thee still, thee, 0 Far- 
seeing One, bringing the glorious light, 

The radiant God, the spring of joy to every eye, as thou art 
mounting up o’er the high sl)iuing flood. 

> Tlioii by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth, and by 
thy beams again returns unto its rest, 

0 Surya with the golden hair, ascend for us day after day, 
still bringing purer innocence. 

0 Bless us with shine, bless us wuth perfect daylight, bless us 
with cold, with feiveut heat and lustre. 

Bestow on us, 0 Surya, varied riches, to bless us in our home 
and when we travel, 

G(^s, to our living creatures of both kinds vouchsafe protection, 
both to bipeds and to quadrupeds, * 

That they may drink and eat invigorating food. So grant us 
health and stiongth and perfect Jimocenco. 

by some grievous sin we have provoked the Gods, 0 Deities, 
with the tongue or thoughtlessness of heart, 

^hat guilt, 0 Vasus, lay upon the Evil One, on him who ever 
leads us into deep distress. 

^117 ^**^®*^ another. ’—Wilson. See Wallis. Cosmology of 

h thy wonted way : svadhJX dnu : * after the swadhd offerings.* — Wilson. 

2 floor of heaven. 

d>rdvd: here probably a kind of Diabolus or Devil.— 



«6 TBE nr MBS OF [BOOK l 

HYMN XXXVIII. j 

0 INDRA, in this battle great and glorious, in this loud dinot 
war iielp us to victory, 

■Where in the strife for kine among bold ring-decked meu 
arrows fly all around and heroes arc subdued. 

2 At homo disclose to us opulence rich in food, streaming 

milk, 0 Indra, meet to be renowned. j 

Sakra, may we bo thine, the friendly Conqueror’s : even as uj 
desire, O Vasu, so do thou. 

3 The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be Dasai 

be Arya, who would war with us, — 

Easy to conquer be for thee, with us, these foes: with thee ma 
we subdue them in the clash of fight. 

4 Him who must bo invoked by many and by few, who standet 

nigh with comfort in the war of men, 

India, famed Hero, winner in the deadly strife, let us biin 
hitherward to-day to favour us. 

5 For, Indra, I have heard thee called Self-capturer, One, Steer 

who never yields, who urges even the churl. 

Release thyself from Kutsa and come hither. How shall on 
like thee sit still bound that he may not move? 

HYMN XXXIX. Asvini 

As ’twere the name of father, easy to invoke, we all assemble 
here invoke this Car of yours, 

Asvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient (?ar which he whi 
worships must invoke at eve and dawn. 

2 Awake all pleasant strains and let the hymns flow forth : raisi 
up abundant fulness : this is our desire. 

Asvins, bestow on us a glorious heritage, and give our princei 
treasure fair as Soma is. 


1 Ring-decked : adorned with armlets, or quoits as weapons. 

5 Self-capturer : it is difficult to assign a rea'^onable and appropriate mead 
ing to svavrijam. S.lyana explains it by svayam eva chhettdram, ‘ one wlio cut 
himself;’ ‘ self mutilator.’ — Wilson. According to the St. Pe^sburg 
coo, the meaning is ‘ one who appropriates or takes to himself ; ' accordmg u 
Ludwig ‘ tbe self- rescuer,’ and according to Geldner * one who sufifers 
to be captured.’ The poet calls on Indra to tear himself away from his 
ito Kutsa in order to aid his worshippers in the coming fight. ‘ A 
here somewhat obscurely related, that Kutta and Lu§a having summone 
dra at the same time to their respective sacnficos, he went first to 

then detained him, having fastened him with a hundred leather t ^ 

This verse is addressed to Indra by Lma^ exhorting him to free himse • 

Wilson. 

The Rlshi is Qhoahil, daughter of Kak8htv4n. 



TUE kiaVEEA. 


437 


39.J 

} Yc are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, and helpers 
of the slow although he linger last. 

Men call you too, N iisatyas, healers of the blind, the thin and 
feeble, and the man with broken bones. 

I Ye made Chyavann, weak and worn with length of days, 
young again, like a car, that ho had power to move. 

Yo lifted up the sou of Tugra from the floods. At our liba- 
tions must all these your acts be praised. 

5 We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic ; 

yea, ye were Physicians bringing health. 

You, you who must be lauded, will we bring for aid, so that 
this foe of ours, 0 Asvins, may believe, 

6 Listen to me, 0 Asvins ; I have cried to you. Give me your 

aid as sire and mother aid their son. 

Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. Save me, 
before it be too late, from this my curse. 

7 Yo, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the comely 

maid of Purumitra as a bride. 

Ye came unto tho calling of the weakling’s dame, and granted 
noble offspring to the happy wife. 

8 Ye gave again the vigour of his youthful life to the sage Kali 

when old age was coming nigh. 

Ye rescued Vandana and raised him from the pit, and in a 
moment gave Vispala power to move. 

9 Ye, Asvins Twain, endowed with manly strength, brought 

forth Rebha when hidden in tho cave and well-nigh dead, 
Freed Saptavadhri, and for Atri caused the pit heated with 
fire to be a pleasant resting-place. 

10 On Pedu ye bestowed, Asvins, a courser whito, mighty with 

nine-and'uiuety varied gifts of strength, 

A horse to be renowned, who bore his friend at speed, joy-giv- 
ing, Bhaga-like to be invoked of men. 


3 Of Ktr who groweth old at home : referring to GhoshA herself. See I. 17. 7. 
Healers of the blind : see I. 112. 8. 

^ Chyaviina: see I. 116. 10, and 117. 13. Son of Tugra: Bhujyu. See 
I, Index. 

® curse : leprosy, which prevented her marriage. 

7 Vimada ; see I. 117. 20. Th : weakling’s dame : see I. 117. 24. 

8 For ^aii, Fandana, and Vispald in thw stanza, and Rebha, Atri, and 

iu 9 and 10, see Vol. I., Index. For Saptavadhn (stanza 9) see V. 78. 6. 



TBE HYMBS OP 


43S 


[^OOKl, 


11 From no aide, ye Two Kings whom none may check or stay 

doth grief, distress, or danger come upon the man ’ 

Whom, Asvins swift to hear, borne on your glowing path, 
with your Consort make the foremost in the race. 

12 Come on that Chariot which the Ribhus wrought for you, 

the Chariot, Asvins, that is speedier than thought, 

At harnessing whereof Heaven's Daughter springs to birth, 
and from Vivasvan come auspicious Night and Day. 

13 Come, Conquerors of the sundered mountain, to our home, 

Asvins who made the cow stream milk for Sayu’s sake, 

Ye who delivered even from the wolf's deep throat and set 
again at liberty the swallowed quail. 

14 We have prepared this laud for you, 0 Asvins, and, like the 

Bhrigiis, as a car have framed it, 

Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brought 
it as a son, our stay for ever. 

HYxMN XL. AsviDs. 


Your radiant Chariot — whither goes it on its way ? — who decks 
it for you, Heroes, for its happy course. 

Starting at daybreak, visiting each morning every house, borne 
hitherward through prayer unto the sacrifice? 

2 Where arc ye, Asvins, in the evening, where at mom ? Where 

is your halting-place, where rest ye for the night? 

Who brings you homeward, as the widow bedward draws her 
husband’s brother, as the bride attracts the^room? 

3 Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald's voice, and, meet 

for worship, go each morning to the house. 

Whom do ye ever bring to ruin ? Unto whose libations come 
ye, Heroes, like two Sons of Kings? 


11 Whom none may check or »tay : adite = adtnau. — SAyana. Your Consort: 
SuryA. The foremost in the race : that is, geaerally, preeminent. 

12 Heaven's Daughter : Ushae or Dawn. Vivasvdn: the moming Sun. 

13 Conquerors of the sundered mountain: probably with reference to the 
deliverance of Jflbuaha, — Ludwig. See I. 116. 20. The swalhwed quail: 

I. 112. 8 The quail is probably Dawn delivered from the jaws of the woll 
Night by the twin Light-Gods, 

14 Our stay for ever : who will perpetuate our family ; ‘ the eternal 
former of rites.' — Wilson. 

Z As the undent); in certain circurastances a widow was bound to mmy her 
deceased husband’s brother. See Manu ( MdnavadharmafdstraJ, IX. 69. < • 
The law of the Jews was the same. See Deuteronomy, xxv. 6. i um • 

8 As with a JuraUTs voice : /fcfpayd is thus explained by SAya^a. Tht hov 
of the laodficer. 



TUB RIGVBDA. 


439 


YM^ 40 .] 


[ Even as hunters follow two wild elephants, we with oblations 
call you down at morn and eve. 

To folk who pay you offerings at appointed times, Chiefs, Lords 
of splendour, ye bring food to strengthen them. 

5 To you, 0 Asvins, came the daughter of a King, Gho^ha, and 
said, 0 Heroes, this I beg of you : 

Be near me in the day, be near me in the night: help me to 
gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds. 

0 0 Asvins, ye are wdse : as Kutsa comes to men, bring your car 
nigh the folk of him who sings your praise. 

The bee, 0 Asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the 
maid carries it purified in her hand. 

7 To Bhujyu and to Vasa yc came near witli help, 0 Asvins, to 

Sinjara and to IJsana. 

Your worshipper secures yonr friendship fur himself. Through 
your protection I desire felicity. 

8 Krisa and S,iyu ye protect, ye Asvins Twain : ye Two assist 

the widow and the worshipper; 

And yc tlirow open, A.svins, unto those who win the cattle-stall 
that tliunders with its sc*. enfold moutli. 

9 The Woman hath brought forth, the Infant hath appeared, 

t!ie plants of wondrous beauty stmightway have sprung up. 
To him the rivers run as down a deep descent, and ho this 
day becomes their rna.ster and their lord. 

10 They mourn the living, cry aloud, at sacrifice : the men have 

set their thoughts upon a distant cast. 

A lovely thing for fathers who have gathered liere, — a joy to 
husbands, — are the wives their arms shall clasp. 


5 The second half of the second line is difl&cult ; ‘ be able (to grant favour) 
to the son of my brother, who has horees and a chariot.’— Wilson. 

6 As Kutsa comes to men • borne on India’s chariot. Bears your ■ 

Rips honey when the Asvins have ushered in the day. .4s the maid: Dr. 
Muir and Prof. tStrassmaun e.Tplain this half-line ditfeiently, * as a maid, or a 
Woman, resorts to her rendezvous (with her lover).' 

7 ; see I 112. 10 Siujdi.. : see VIII. 5. 25. r^ina • see Vol. I., Index. 

8 Krm ; a Rishi favoured by Indra ; or, as Sdyana explains the word hwe, 

the feeble man in general. S tyn : has been meutioned frequently. ic 

tattle-stall: the rain-cloud whoso wateis are the cows. 

9 The Wrnian ; perhaps the water of the cloud. The Infant : the lightning. 
T'o him : the sacriheer may perhaps be intended. 

, 10 They mourn the lidng ; perhaps, show their sorrow for the ^ 

ftetuueral of his wife. See Lanmau (Saaekrii Reader, p “ 

Have boriowed. Set their thought, upon a dutant cosC of the nome or 
usring-net ; apparently a periphraaie for, havf taken thought for t 
future aud children to live after them. 



440 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK i 

1 1 Of this we have no knowledge. Tell it forth to us, how th 

youth rests within the chambers of the bride. 

Fain would we reach the dwelling of the vigorous Steer wh 
loves the kine, 0 Asvins : this is our desire. 

12 Your favouring grace hath come, ye Lords of ample wealth 

Asvins, our longings are stored up within your hearts. 

Ye, Lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard : ma 
we as welcome friends reach Ar 3 'aman’s abode, 

13 Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give herosoi 

and riches to the elo(iuent. 

Make a ford, Lords of splendour, where men well may driul 
remove the spiteful tree-stump standing in the path. 

14 0 Asvins, Wonder-Workers, Lords of lustre, where and wit 

wiiat folk do ye delight yourselves to-day ? 

Who hath detained them with him? Whither are they gom 
Unto w'hat sage’s or wdiat worshipper’s abode? 

HYMN XLI. Asvin 

That general Car of yours, invoked by many a man, that 
comes to our libations, three wheeled, meet for lauds, 

That circumambient Car, worthy of sacrifice, we call with our 
pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn. 

2 Ye, 0 Nasatyas, mount that early-harnessed Car, that travels 

early, laden with its freight of balm. 

Wherewith ye, Heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even the poor 
man’s worship where the priest attends. 

3 If to the deft Adhvaryu vvith the meath in hand, or to the 

Kindler firm in strength, the household friend. 

Or to the sage’s poured libations ye approach, come thence, 0 
Asvins, now to drink the offered meath. 


11 GhosliA appears to speak of herself in the plural number. She plaii^iy 
expresses her wishes for marriage. 

12 Aryaman's abode : Aryainan is here used in the original sense of the 
word, bosom-friend and companion, especially the friend who asks a woman 
in marriage for another. 

Prof. Grassmaiin places stanzas 10—14 in his Appendix as being obscure 
and in his opiuiou forming no part of the original hymn. 


1 Three wheeled : see I. 34. 9. 

3 The Kindler : the Aguldh, the priest who kindles the sacrificial fire* 



441 


42] THE ElOVEDA. 

HYMN XLII. Indra. 

Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud to him 
with meet adornment. 

Quell with your voice the wicked's voice, 0 sages. Singer, 
make Indra rest beside the Soma. 

2 Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking : 0 Singer, 

wake up Indra as a lover. 

Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel 
filled brimful with treasure. 

3 Why, Maghavan, do they call thee Bounteous Giver ] Quicken 

me ; thou, I hear, art he who quickens. 

Sakra, let my intelligence bo active, and bring us luck that 
finds great wealth, 0 Indra. 

4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people, 

Indra, in the fray invoke thee. 

Him vvho brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade : with him 
who pours no juice he seeks not friendship. 

5 Whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong Somas as 

much quickly-coming treasure. 

For him ho overthrows in early morning his swift well-weapon- 
ed foes, and slays the tyrant. 

6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath 

joined to ours his wdshes, — 

Before him even afar the foe must tremble : low before him 
must bow all human glories. 

7 With thy fierce bolt, 0 God invoked of many, drive to a 

distance from afar the foeman. 

0 Indra, give us wealth in coni and cattle, and make thy 
singer's prayer gain strength and riches. 

8 Indra, the swallower of strong libations rich in the boons 

they bring, the potent Somas, 

He, Maghavan, will not restrict bis bounty : he brings much 
wealth unto the Soma-presser. 

9 Yea, by superior play lit. wins advantage, when he, a gambler, 

piles his gains in season. 

Cclo.stial-natured, he o'erwhelms ivith riches the devotee who 
keeps not back his treasure. 

1 voice: ‘the praises of your adversaries.’ — Wilson. 

^ nc7/cro: Indra. 

m quickly -coming trearure : representing the wealth which the offer- 

I ot the libations is expected to produce. 

Unto whom we offer pmwM : or, in whom we have placed our hope. 
im he^ a yamblir : cp. X. 43. 5. 



442 THE BYMN8 OP [BOOK X 

10 O Much-invoked, may we sub5ue all famine and evil want 

with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with pi’inces obtain posseybions 
by our own exertion. 

1 1 Brihaspati protect ua from the rearward, and from above, and 

from below, from .siuners ! 

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to 
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN XLIII. Indra. 

In perfect unison nil yearning hymns of mine that find the 
light of heaven have siinu forth Indra’s praise. 

As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they 
compass Maglnivaii about that he may help. 

2 Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have set my 

hopes on thee, 0 Much-invoked ! 

Sit, WondeifuP as King upon the sacred grass, and let thy 
drinking-place be by the Soma juice. 

3 From indigence and hunger Indra turns away : Magliavaii 

hath dominion over precious w'ealth. 

These the Seven Kivers flowing on their downward path in- 
crease the vital vigour of the potent Steer. 

4 As on the fair-leafed tiee rest birds, to Indra flow the gladden- 

ing Soma juices that the bowls contain. 

Their face that glows with splendour through their miiThty 
power hath found the shine of heaven foi^an, the Aryas’ 
light. 

5 As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so Maghavan, 

sweeping all together, gained the Sun. 

This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none, 
Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time. 

6 Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men : the Steer 

took notice of the people’s songs of praise. 

The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by means of 
potent Somas vauquisheth his foes. 

10 With princes : 'With men eminent for their wealth ; rdjahhir-dhanA^^^ 
mffrarai^.— SAyana. 


8 Turns away : SAyana makes viskuvfit transitive ; — ‘ May Indra be the 
remover of thirst and huugt-r,’ — Wilson, , 

5 Gained the Sun : conquers him by taking away his moisture, that 
water that he has absorbed. — SAyana. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


443 


44.] 

7 When Soma streams together unto Indra flow like waters to 

the river, rivulets to the lake, 

In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the rain swells 
the corn by moisture sent from heaven. 

8 He rushes through the region like a furious Rull, he who hath 

made these flood.s the diimes of worthy lords. 

This Maghavioi hath found light for the man who biings ob- 
lation, sheds the juice, and proinjitly pours his gifts. 

9 Let the keen axe come forth together with the light : here be, 

as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice. 

Let the Red God shine bright with his refulgent ray, and lot 
the Lord of heroes glow like heaven’s clear sheen. 

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with 

store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions 
by our own exertion. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and 

from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to 
friends, vouolisafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN XLIV. Indra. 

May Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by Holy Law 
is strong and active. 

The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great steer- 
like power that hath no limit. 

2 Finmseated is thy car, tliy Steeds are docile ; thy hand, 0 

King, holds, firmly grasped, the thunder. 

On thy fair path, 0 Lord of men, come quickly : we will in- 
crease thy powers when thou hast drunken. 

3 Let strong and mighty Steeds who bear this Mighty Indra, the 

Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder, 

^nng sharers of our banquet, the Steer of conquer- 

ing might, of real vigour. 

lords: that is, subjected them to the Aryans, 
^'eas they had been the thralls of DA^sas. See I. 32. 11. 

fcnd who is frequently likened to an axe. See I. 127. 3, 

Ldra'- L Ood: arushaK : according to SAyana, ‘the radiant 

prefers probably intended, or perhaps ‘ the red bolt’ as M. Miiller 

1^ The two concluding stanzas are identical in Hymns 52, 53, 54. 



444 TffE HYMNS OP [POOP X, 

4 So like a Bull thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trough, 

the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat. ’ 

Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself : be for our 
profit as the Master of the wise. 

5 May precious treasures come to us, — so will I pray. Come to 

the votaiy's gift offered with beauteous laud. 

Thou art the Lord, as such sit on this holy grass : thy vessels 
are inviolate as Law commands. 

6 Far went our earliest invocations of the Gods, and won us 

glories that can never be surpassed. 

They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice, sink down in 
desolation, trembling with alarm. 

7 So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses, difficult 

to harness, have been yoked. 

Here in advance men stand ancar to offer gifts, by whom full 
many a work that brings reward is done. 

8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook. 

Dyaus tlmndered forth and made the air’s mid-region quake. 
He stays apart the two confronting bowls ; he sings lauds in 
the potent Soma’s joy when he hath drunk. 

9 I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine, wherewith thou, 

Maghavan, shalt break the strikers with the hoof. 

At this libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake the 
juice, partake the worship, Maghavan. 

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want 

with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes offtain possessions 
by our own exertion. 

1 1 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and 

from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as Friend to 
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

4 The Lord: pdtim : the Soraa. Collect them in thytelf : Hake us mto 
thjself.’ — Wilson. Of the wise: kenipdndm is thus explained by the Comineii’ 
tators, but the meaning seems doubtful. Ludwig thinks that ‘the master 
of the oars,' that is, the steersman, is intended. 

6 In desolation : irmd' ^eprj/bioi. — Ludwig. Trembling in alarm : or, doer* 

of ill deeds, according to YAska’s interpretation of kipayah, ^ 

7 Who'^e horses, difficult to harness, have been yoked: whose ill-maD®'?^ 
attempts to perform acceptable sacrifice have failed. In advance : hefoi 
death, according to S Ay ana. 

8 He : India. As they shook: cp. II. 12. 2. Two confronting bowls: neav 
and earth. 

9 Goad: the hymn of praise which urges Indra to action. The sinkers ^ 
the hoof: a class of Y4tudhAaas or demons. See X. 87. 12. 



\rYMN 45.] 


445 


THE EIGVEHA. 

HYMN XLV. Agni. 

First Agni sprang to life from out of Heaven : the second 
time from us came Jatavedas. 

Thirdly the Manly-souled was in the waters. The pious lauds 
and kindles him the Eternal. 

2 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know 

thy forms in many a place divided. 

We know what name supremo thou hast in secret : we know 
the source from which thou hast proceeded. 

3 The M.inly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, man’s Viewer 

lit thee in the breast of heaven. 

There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Steers 
increased thee in the waters’ bosom. 

4 Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders : he licked 

the ground, about the plants he flickered. 

At once, when born, he looked around enkindled, and lightened 
heaven and earth within with splendour. 

5 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts 

and guardian of the Soma, 

Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront 
of the Dawns he shines enkindled. 

6 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, be sprang to life 

and filled the earth and heavens. 

Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when the Five 
Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni. 

7 So among mortals was Immortal Agni stablished as holy 

wise and willing envoy. 

He waves the red smoke that he lifts above him, striving to 
reach the heavens with radiant lustre. 


1 From out of Heaven : or, from Dyaus or Heaven his father; in the shape 
of the 8un. From ; produced by men in the shape of sacrificial and do- 
niestic fire. In the waters : of the firmament, in the shape of lightning, the 
third form of Agni. 

2 In secret : unknown to those who know not the Veda.— SfLy ana. 

3 The Manly-souled ; or, the Friend of men; Varuna, according to Sftyana, 
and Prajftpati, according to Mahldhara. Perhaps Dyaus (cp. stanza 8) may 
be intended.— Ludwig. Qrassinann thinks that Indra, the kindler of the 
lightning, is meant. The Steers : or, the Mighty Ones; the Maruts. 

, ^ The irm rock : ‘the solid cloud.’— Wilson. Some extraordinary conflagra- 
tion of jungle may perhaps be referred to. The Five Ti'ibes : pdlioha jandh : 
literally, the five men, meaning, according to SAyana, men in general, and, 
according to Mahldhara, the inatitutor of the sacrifice and the four chief 
prieata. 



446 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK x\ 

8 Like gold to look on, far he shone refulgent, beaming imper- 

ishable life for glory, 

Agni by \ital powers became immortal when his prolific Father 
Dyaus begat him. 

9 Whoso this day, O God whoso flames are lovely, prepares a 

cake, 0 Agni, mixt with butter. 

Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss bestowed 
by Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful. 

10 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every song of 

praise sung forth enrich him. 

Dear lot him be to Siirya, dear to Agni, preeminent with sou 
and children’s children. 

11 While, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship they win 

themselves all treasures worth the wishing. 

Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclos- 
ed the stable filled with cattle, 

12 Agni, the Friend of men, the Soma’s keeper, Vaisvanara, 

hath been lauded by the Kishis. 

We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven : ye Deities, 
give us wealth with hero children. ' 

HYMN XLVr. Agni. 

Stablished for thee, to lend thee vital forces, Giver of wealth, 
Guard of his servant’s body. 

The Great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, Abider with 
men, is seated in the lap of w'aters. • 

2 Worshipping, seeking him with adoration like some lost crea- 

ture followed by its footprints, 

Wise Bhrigus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and 
found him lurking where the floods are gathered. 

3 On the Cow’s forehead, with laborious searching, Trita, the 

offspring of Vibhiivas, found him. 

Born in our houses, Youthful, joy-be.stower, he now becomes 
the central point of brightne.ss. 

12 Soma 8 keeper : as identified with the Muon, the great receptacle of the 
celestial 8oma, the nectar or ambrosia of the Gods. See Hillebrandt, V. M>) h 
330—336. 

1 For thee : the Bishi addre.sses himself. Who knows the clouds : 
which he (Agiii) comes in the form of Lightning. Of waters: of the 
ment. 

2 Wise Bhrigus : frequently mentioned as specially connected with th 
worship of Agni. Cf II 4. 2. Pursued him : see I. 65. 1. 

3 On the Cow' s forehead : *on the head of the cloud.' Trita: Agni in n' 
third form aa lightning. The abstract personified form of the celestial Agi 



THE RIO VEDA. 


447 


YHN 46.] 


{ Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe 
Priest among mankind, oblation-bearer, 

Leader of rites and Puritier, envoy of men, as saciifico that 
still advances. 

5 The foolish brought the ne’er-bewildered forward, great, Victor, 

Song-i 1 1 spircr, F ort-d estroycr. 

Leading the Youtli gold-bearded, like a courser gleaming with 
wealth, they tinned their hymn to prolit. 

6 Holdiijg his station firmly in the houses, Trita sat down within 

his home surrounded. 

Tlience, as Law bids, departs the Tribes’ Companion, having 
collected men with no compulsion. 

7 His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses 

move, whose smoke is shining. 

White, w'axing in their strength, for ever stirring, and sitting 
in the wood ; like winds are Somus. 

8 The tongue of Agni bears awny the praise-song, and, through 

Ins care for Earth, her operations. 

Hun, briirht and radiant, living men have stablished as their 
hlirhe Priest, the Chief of Sacnficers. 

9 That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, the 

Waters, Tvashtar, and, with might, the Bhrigus, 

Him Matarisvan and the Gods have fashioned holy for man 
and first to be entreated. 


13 hpie rcprewenli'd as endeavouring to find the lurking fire in the sky. — 
Macdoiiell. ()Jj',spnug of Vibhuvas: or, connected with Vibhuvasu, the very 
wealthy, Soma. 

4 dii sacrifice that still advances : ‘als das sioh vorwarts bewegende opfer.’ 
—Ludwig Accoi(l-ng to Siy.ina, ‘the object of sacrifice, him who goes forward 
[from one fire receptacle to another] ’ 

5 The foolith liuman priests, weak and foolish in comparison with the wise 
Agni. Gleaminy with wealth: the meaning of dhdnatcham is uncertain. The 

Petersburg I^exieon offers dhanarjam, ‘ striving to w'iu the prize,’ as pro- 
t djly the right rejiding. 

6 On stanzas 3 and 6 .see Macdoiiell (J. R. A. S., July, 1893, pp. 450 — 452), 
"ho tian-slates the second half of 6 as fidlows : From hence the house-friend 
ff settlers collecting (them) goes among men by distiibutiou, not by (means 
of) bonds \ i e., carried frcim place, not freshly produced by cord and drill 

7 That make the hoxises move : this seems to he what the words damltm 
aj’hrd should mean, though how flames can be thus qualified is not clear. 
‘The lescueib from the humiliated (spirits of ill).’ —Wilson. * Protectors of 
the hoii.se.s.’— Mahidhara, Like winds are Somas : as winds fan flame, so 
Soma libations increase the might of Agni. Accoiding to S.lyana, the flames 

‘ like the fast-flowing juices of the ^owia.’— Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s 
®X|)1, Illation, but the meaning '^f the passage is doubtful. 

“ Hei' operations : holy works performed by men 

9 Mtltari^van : a divine or semi-divine being who brought Agni from 
‘^«aven. See I. 81 3, and 60. 1. 



448 TRE HYMNS OF [BOOK X 

10 Agni, whom Gods have made oblation-bearer, and much-desir- 
ing men regard as holy, 

Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then 
shall glorious men in troops adore thee. 

HYMN XLVII. IiKlra Vaikuntha. 

Thy right hand have we grasped in ours, 0 Indra, longing 
for treasure, Treasure-Lord of treasures ! ° 

Because we know thee, Hero, Lord of cattle : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches 

2 Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, spruiu^ 

from four seas, the prop and stay of treasures, 

Fraught with great bounties, meet for praise and glory 
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

3 Wealth, with good Brahmans, Indra ! God-attended, high, 

wide, and deep, and based on broad foundations, 

Strong, with famed Rishis, conquering our foemen : vouch 
safe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

4 Victorious, winning strength, with hero sages, confirmed in 

power, most useful, wealth-attracting, 

True, Indra ! crushing forts and slaying Dasyus : vouchside 
us mighty and resplendent riches. 

5 Wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses, strength hundred- 

fold and thousandfold, 0 Indra, 

With manly sages, happy troops, light- winning: vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. ^ 

6 To Saptagu the sage, the holy-minded, to him, Brihaspati, the 

song approaches, 

Angiras’ Son who must be met with homage : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. 

7 My lauds, like envoys, craving loving-kindness, go forth to 

Indra with their strong entreaty. 

Moving his heart and uttered by my spirit : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. 

Vaikuntha is said to mean son of VikunthA, an Asufl or female demon wto 
was allowed by Indra to become his second mother. 

2 W€{tlth: S4y ana gives another interpretation : — ‘ (We know thee to be) 
well armed,’ etc. — Wilson. Sprung from four seaa : regarded as the store- 
houses of jewels. ‘ (Renowned throughout) the four oceaus.’— [applied 
Indra] Wilson. 

6 Bnhaspati: according to the Scholiast meaning Saptagu, *the 
much (praise) ’ — Wilson. According to others, the Brihaspati call* 

Saptagu as being drawn by seven oxen : * der fahrt mit sieben Bindern^ 
Orassmann. 4ugira8' Son: meaning apparently Brihaspati as especially 

and honoured by Angiras and his descendants. See VI. 73. 1. 



TBE EJQVEDA, 


44d 


TiZ-V' 48.] 


g Grant us the boon for which I pray, 0 Indra, a spacious home 
unmatched among the people. 

To this may Heaven and Earth accord approval : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. 

HYMN XLVIII. Indra Vaikuntha. 

I WAS the first possessor of all precious gear ; the wealth of 
every man I win and gather up. 

On me as on a Father living creatures call : I deal enjoyment 
to the man who offers gifts. 

2 I, Indra, am Atharvan’s stay and firm support ; I brought forth 
kiue to Trita from the Dragon’s grasp. 

I stripped the Dasyus of their manly might, and gave the 
cattle-stalls toMatarisvan and Dadhyach. 

5 For me hath Tvashtar forged the iron thunderbolt : in me the 

Gods have centred intellectual power. 

My sheen is like the Sun’s insufierably bright : men honour 
me as Lord for past and future deeds. 

1 I won myself these herds of cattle, steeds and a me, and gold 
in ample store, with my destructive boj^ 

I give full many a thousand to tb** ••'^**Shipper, what time the 
Son)as and the lauds have 

> Indra am I : none er" ff""* me : never at 

any time *' “ death. 

the Soma, ask riches from mo alone : ye, Purus, in 
my friendship shall not suffer harm. 

6 These, breathing loud in fury, two and two, who caused Indra 

to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray, 

The challengers, I struck with deadly weapon down : firm 
stand what words the God speaks to his worshippers. 

^ Unmatched ; dsamam : ‘ not held in comiuou.'— Wilson. 


Indra Vaikuntha is the Rishi of this hymn, which is a self-laudatory reply 
to Saptagu in Hymn XLVII. ^ 

Atharvan is the name of the priest who first obtained fire and offered 
^ I- 83. 6. The Dragon is ap- 

of T •+ > ^ ^ generated the waters above the cloud for the sake 

'MAi. . ' Wilson* Mdtaidfvan and Dadhyach: or, according to Sdyaua 
^fttarisvan’s son Dadhyach.’ ’ 

P'0,ru»: ‘0 men.’— Wilson. 

rior I these were is uncertain. Two probably the war- 

latin^ f fights on the chariot and the chariot-^‘’-~budwig. The literal tiaiis- 
the last half-liue of the stanza Pi'pears to be ‘ tlie non -worshipper 

vpre u P words to worshippers ; Jnnmwjuh, he who has no other to re- 
brov"”®’ Indra, whose pro«iiso of victory to his worshippers is never 
o«en. —bud wig. 

29 



450 THE HYMNS OP 

7 This One by stronger might I conquered singly ; yea, also two; 

shall three prevail against me^ 

Like many sheaves upon the floor I thrash them. How can 
my foes, the Indraless, revile me 1 

8 Against the Giingns I made Atithigva strong, and kept him' 

mid the folk like Vritra-conqueriiig strength, i 

When I won glory in the great foe-slaying fight, in battle 
where Karanja fell, and Parnaya. 

9 With food for mine enjoyment Sapya Nami came : he joined 

me as a friend of old in search of kiiie. I 

As I bestowed on him an arrow for the fight I made hitn 
worthy of the song and hymn of praise. ' 

10 One of the two hath Soma, seen within it; the Herdsman with 

the bone shows forth tlie other. 

He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were sharpened, stood' 
fettered in the demon’s ample region. 

11 I, as a Ood, ne’er violate the statutes of Gods, of Vasus, Ru 

driyas, Aav«;,^g 

These Gods have Yno for auspicious vigour, unconquer 

ed and invincible for v. 

HYMN Xi-r.v Indra Vaikunth 

I HAVE enriched the singer with surpassing ; I have iv 

lowed the holy hymn to strengthen me. 

I, furtherer of him who offers sacrifice, have conquered in eac 
fight the men who worehip not. • 


7 This One • or, this one thing, that is, ‘ the primordial substance or uu 
out of which the universe was developed.’— Wallis, Cosmology of the Piavrdi 

p. 68. , . vu)' 

8 AgaimttheOmgu>: or. to aid the 

these people were is uncertain. A lUhigva : Diyodasa son o£ ^tithigUja 
ing to S'W. Vol. I., Index. Karanja ..and Parnaya: apparent 

tree-demons : see I. 63. 8. ,, 

9 Sdpya : a family name of Indra’s friend Kami, who mV. . * 

10 One of the two : the Moon. The Herdsman ; Mra. Wth the 

ol Dadhyach. s!eo I. 84. 13. The other : Vntia. by t 

Indra. The demoie. ample region • mid-air, which was retati 

Dnih or malignant spiivi drought. I follow Prof. Ludwig s m ? ^ 

of this obscure stanza wnivit ia evidently an interpolation motive ^ 
mention of Dadhyach in stanza « For a somewhat different iuterprch«v 
see Hillebraudt, V. M., I. 337. 

11 Pudriyas: the Maruts, sons of Rno.,, 


Indra Vaikuntha is the Rishi also. 



THE R1Q7EDA. 


451 


nr MS 4d.] 


2 The People of the heavens, the waters, and the earth have 

stablished me among the Gods with Indra’s nnme. 

I took unto myself the two swift vigorous Bays that speed on 
divers paths, and the fierce bolt for strength. 

3 With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi’s sake ; I guarded 

Kutsa well with these my saving helps. 

Ao Sushna’s slayer I brandished the daiT of death : I gave not 
up the Aryan name to Dasyii foes. 

4 Smadibha, Tugra, and the Vetasus I gave as prey to Kutsa, 

father-like, to succour him. 

I was a worthy King to rule the worshipper, when I gave Tuji 
dear inviolable gifts. 


5 I gave up Mrigaya to Srutarvan as his prey because he ever 

followed me and kept my laws. 

For Ayu’s sake I caused Vesa to bend and bow, and into Sa- 
vya’s hand delivered Padgribhi. 

6 I, I crushed Navavastva of the lofty ca>’) the Dasa, as the 

Vritra-slayer kills the fiends ; 

When straightway on the region’s farthest edge I brought the 
God who makes the lights to broaden and increase. 

7 I travel round about borne onward in my might by the-‘eet. 

footed dappled Horses of the Sun. 

When man’s libation calls me to the robe of state T<ioon repel 
the powerful Dusyu with my blows- 


mentioned again in Uv-n »» ^ 


JCavi ; the father of 


3 Atka 
Iiidra’s friend Usanft. 


‘ with all his followers.’ 


ISmadiito; as having b^n con- 

See VI. 20. 8, wher^ ^ where together with 

quered by * ’ ’ 

that of Tiv-' / i-i, • IV. 16. 13, and^VIIL 3. 19. Smtarvan : 

5 .rwa; adeiDonof theair^^^ . sometimes spoken 

- prince whose liberality la ip other times as conquered by him. See 

of as a King favouied by m occur again. Savya : the Rishi of Hymns 
Index. The .. some demon or savage enemy who is not 


51—67 of Book I, 
oientioned again. 

8 Navavdstva • ^ 


6 18 and VI. 20. 11. Of the lofty car: or Bri- 

*^7 'rUvToT^U ra^arltly the milk which is the royal mantle where- 
^ith Soma is invested. 



452 


THE HYMNS OF {BOOR X 


8 Stronger am I than Nahiis, I who slew the sevon ; I glorifieij 

with might Yadu and Turvasa. 

I brought another low, with strength I bent his strength : ; 
let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power. 

9 Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth, I took the 

Seven Rivers as mine own domain. 

I, gifted with great wisdom, spread the floods abroad : by ^ar 
I found for mau the way to high success. 

10 I set within these cows the white milk which no God, not even 

Tvash tar’s self, had there deposited, — 

Much-longcd-for, in the breasts, the udders of the kine, the 
savoury sweets of meath, the milk and Soma juice. 

11 Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, sped Gods 

and men with mighty operation. 

The pious glorify all these thine exploits, Lord of Bay Cours- 
etu, Strong, and Self-resplendent. 


HY^MN L. Indra Vaikunths. 

I LAUD your IVlighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is 
shared by all inen, who created all ; 

Indra, whose conquering strength is powerful in war, whose 
fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth revere. 

2 He with his friend is active, lauded, good to man, Indra who 

*>U8t be glorified by one like me. 

Hero,T,ord of the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with 
Vritru Qj. waters, or for spoil. ^ 

3 Who are whom thou wilt further, Indra, who strivf 

to win thy »3;gg allied waK riches ? 

Who urged thee i ^ward to exert thy power divine, to valour 
in the war for wau,,g their fieic., ? 


8 Stronger arn I than Nahus : ndhushtaruh ; '■^i:,rally, more Naliu 

than Nahus ; I out-Nahus Nahus, a contended wio, i^dra ; ‘ I 

nLrer than the neighbour,’ according, Roth whom follow! 

»T am the especial bond of bonds.’— Wilsoi. i Ludwig’s interp. +atioi 

KliotUw the seven: the seven perhaps, ai the chief of the demons ... 
ivvnvad bv Indra. Ludwig takes saptaM to ‘ seven times ^ “ 

.evL^imes stronger than Nahus.’ Another : is 

^wer : until they became worthy antagonists. 1 have demolished niD 

juice: sweet ambrosial rain ; the being the teemn 
cloud^^ this stanza Indra as Rishi addresses himself aa thedei^.y of the by® 

2 His friend: his constant companion, tho thunderbolt. . 

3 Alldd with riches: the happiness which Indra sends being g 
return for costly sacrificial oflferings. 



0MN 61.] fjjE smVEPA. 45S 

4 Thou, Indra, through jj^jy prayer art mighty, worthy of 

sacrince at all libations. 

In every fight thou casteat herobu on the ground ; thou art the 
noblest song, 0 Lord of all the folk. 

5 Help now, as Highest, those who toil at sacrifice ; well do the 

people know thy great protecting might. 

Thou shalt be Everlasting, Giver of success : yea, on all these 
libations thou bestowest strength. 

6 All these libations thou makest effectual, of which thou art 

thyself supporter, Son of Power. 

Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, sacrifice, holy 
text, prayer, and exalted speech. 

7 They who with flowing Soma pray to thee, 0 Sage, to pour on 

them thy gifts of opulence and wealth, 

May they come forward, through their spirit, on the path of 
bliss, in the wild joy of Soma juice effused. 

HYMN LI. Agni. Gods. 

Large was that covering, and firm of texture, folded wherein 
thou enteredst the waters. 

One Deity alone, 0 Jatavedas Agni, saw all thy forms in sun- 
dry places. 

2 What God hath seen me ? Who of all their number clearly be- 

held my forms in many places? 

Where lie, then, all the sacred logs of Agni that lead him God- 
ward, Varuna and Mitra ? 

3 In many places, Agni Jitavedas, we sought thee hidden in the 

plants and waters. 

Then Yama marked thee, God of wondrous splendour! effulgent 
from thy tenfold secret dwelling. 

1 ^ong : mdntrah : subject of thy worshippers’ songs of praise. 

0 Vmel; pdtrom: * protection.’ — Wilson. 

The legend says that Agni, fearing to share the fate of hid three elder 
mothers who had perished in the service of the Gods, fled away and hid 
in the waters. The Gods discovered him and persuaded him to 
return to his sacred duties. 

St^zas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 are spoken by the Gods, and 2, 4, 6, 8 by Agni. 

* He must have been very well wrapped up, the Gods ironically say, or the 
ater would have extinguished him.— Ludwig. Forms: literally, ‘ bodies.* 

pieces of Sami and Asvattba wood, from which alone the 
n^aal fire is produced. Others explain samldhak by ‘ flatnes.* 

L ^ old secret dwelling: according to S&yana, ‘the three worlds, -i- 
the^ earth ; three divinities, Agni, V4yu, Aditya ; the Waters, 
Lj. the trees, and the bodies of living beings.’ — Wilson. The mean- 

L ® to be, as Ludwig conjectures, that Yama knew that Agni wduld 

ipear again from the fire-sticks worked by the fingers of both hands. 



45* TBS HYMNS OP WOR J. 

4 I fled in fear from sacrifloial worehi'* Varuna, lest the Gods 

should thus engage me. 

Thus were my forms laid in many places. This, as my 
goal, I Agni saw before me. 

5 Come ; man is pious and would fain do worship ; he waits pre- 

pared : in gloom thou, Agni, dwellest. 

Make pathways leading God-ward clear and easy, and bear ob- 
lations with a kindly spirit. 

6 This goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he who drives a 

car the way to travel. 

So, Varuna, I fled afar through terror, as flies the wild-bull 
from an archer’s bowstring. 

7 We give thee life unwasting, Jatavedas, so that, employed, 

thou never shalt be injured. 

So, nobly born ! shalt thou with kindly spirit bear to the Gods 
their share of men^s oblations. 

8 Grant me the first oblations and the latter, entire, my force- 

ful share of holy presents, 

Tho soul of plants, the fatness of the waters, and let there be 
long life, ye Gods, to Agni. 

9 Thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, thy forceful 

shares of holy presents. 

Let all this sacrifice be thine, 0 Agni, and let the world's four 
regions bow before thee. 

HYMN LII. 0* 

Instruct me, all ye Gods, how I, elected your Priest, must 
seat me here, and bow address you. 

Instruct me how to deal to each his portion, and by what path 
to bring you man’s oblation. 

2 I sit as Priest most skilled in sacrificing : the Maruts and all 
Deities impel me. 

Asvins, each day yours is the Adhvaryus’ duty : Brahman and 
wood are here : ’tis yours to offer. 

8 Thejirit ohlation» and the latter: or the PrayUjas and the Anuyajas, th 
former being texts and oblations forming part of the introductory a 
at a Soma sacrifice, and the Utter the secondary or final offerings, 'o' 
share : the potent concentrated portion. The fatness : ghritam : ghi, c 
butter. 

1 Agni, having been elected Oblation-bearer, asks the Gods to instru' 
him in his duties. 



455 


63.] the RIO VEDA. 

3 Who is this Priest -I la btj tbe Priest of Yama? On whom is 

thrust this God -appointed honour 1 
He springs to life each month, each day that passes; so Gods 
have made him their oblation-bearer. 

4 The Gods have made me bearer of oblations, who slipped away 

and passed through many troubles. 

Wise Agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether five-wayed, 
threefold, or seven-threaded. 

5 So wil^ strength and life for ever, 0 Gods, that I 

may give you room and freedom. 

To Indra’s arms would I consign the thunder; in all these 
battles shall he then be victor, 

6 The Deities, three thousand and three hundred and thirty- 

nine, have served and honoured Agni, 

Strewn sacred grass, anointed him with butter, and seated 
him as Priest, the Gods’ Invoker. 

HYMN LI IT. Agni Sauchlka. Gods. 

Hr hath arrived, he whom wo sought with longing, who skil- 
led in sacrifioG well knows its courses. 

Let him discharge his sacrificial duties : let him sit down as 
Friend who was before us. 

2 Best Priest, he hath been won by being seated, for he hath 
looked on the well-ordered viands. 

Come, let us worship Gods who must be worshipped, and 
pouring oil, laud tliose who should be lauded. 


3 Tho first line is spoken by some God who doubts Agni’s competence, li 
he the Pvkst of Yama ? : can he convey offeiings to the Blest iu the realms of 
the God of the departed ? In the second half of the first line I follow Lud- 
wiR, but the meaning is uncertain. The second line is the answer of smother 
Gofl. Emil month, each day : the Pltriyaj^a, or sacrifice to the is 

offered miinthly, and the AgnihotrejL, or oblation to Agni and Gods, daily, 
these comprehend all dther periodical rites. 

[ 4 The first line is spoken by Agni. Slipped away'-^^^ the preceding hymn, 
toe second line is what the God » said. Fire-ivam^ ' consisting of five courses 
parts, seeX. 124. 1. Threefold: consistimr the three daily Soma-libations, 
>€0 X. 124 1. Seven^threaded: perforn-^^ priests. See X. 124. 1. 

Stanza 5 is spoken by Agni. St*‘J 2 a 6 is the poet’s conclusion, 
h^or an explanation of thp number of the Gods (33 + 303 -f 3003) see The 
of the Athdrva-ved'^ X. 7. 13, note. 

Hymns 51—53^66 Macdonell, J. R. A. S., January, 1894, pp. 11—22. 



^ The Gods speak. Couraee : or portions. 

^ % being seated ; * by his seat (at the altar).’— Wilsoq, 



456 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOR 

3 Now hath he made the feast of Godo cffoctive : now have \re 

found the secret tongue of worship. 

Now hath he come, sweet, robed iu vital vigour, and made our 
calling on the Gods effective. 

4 This prelude of my speech I now will utter, whereby we Gods 

may quell our Asura foemen. 

Eaters of strengthening food who merit worship, 0 ye Five 
Tribes, bo ploaood minA oblation. 

5 May the Five Tribes be pleased with mine ond the 

Cow’s Sons and all who merit worship. 

From earthly trouble may the earth protect us, and air’s mia 
realm from woe that comes from heaven. 

6 Spinning the thread, follow the region’s splendid light : guard 

thou the pathways well which wisdom hath prepared. 
Weave ye the knotless labour of the bards who sing : be Mauu 
thou, and bring the Heavenly People forth. 

7 Lovers ef Soma, bind the chariot traces fast : set ye the reins 

in order and embellish them. 

Bring hitherw<ard the car with seats where eight may sit, 
whereon the Gods have brought the treasure that we love. 

8 Here flows Asmanvati : hold fast each other, keep yourselves 

up, and pass, my friends, the river. 

There let us leave the Powers that brought no profit, and 
cross the flood to Powers that are auspicious. 

9 Tvashtar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic art, bring- 

ing most blessed bowls that hold the drin(^ of Gods. 

His axe, wrought of good metal, he is sharpening now, where- 
with the radiant Brahmanaspati will cut, 

8 Tongue of worship • Agni, by whose fiei y tongues the Gods drink libations. 
4 Agni speaks. Asura foemen : the Asuras in the later hymns of the ^ a 
are evil noirits in perpetual hostility with the Gods, not to be confounded v,\ 
the great co^gtial Asuras, the chiefs of the Gwis, nor with the Kakshasas, de- 
mons or ogi’es, .-iiQ disturb the saciifices of men. , 

6 The Five Tribe., according to some, says YAska, ‘ the Gandharvas, gods. 
Fathers, Asuras, and See Muir, O. S. Texts, I. 177. But the hv 

Aryan tribes may be (jow’s Sons: the Mariits, children oi 

Piisni. Von Both explains as ‘born in the starry heaven.’ See vu. 

36. 14. 

6 The Gods speak. The region's splena'.i n^f^t : the Sun. Weave ye : 

of Agni. Assist the singer in his holy tash. and let there be no difficulti 
in his way. . j 

7 This stanza appears to begin a new hymn, made .p of fragments. Accur 

ing to SAy.ana it is spoken by the Gods to one .another. , 

8 Apnanvutt: or, the stony stream. See ST/tc Ilgmns of the Atharva-'t^ » 

Xll 2* 26 

9 * Will cut : perhaps, will cut and destroy demons ; but the meaning i 
uncertain. 



54.] the RIQVEDA. 45i 

[0 Now, 0 ye Sapient Ones, make ye the axes sharp wherewith 
ye fashion bowls to hold the Amrita. 

Knowing the secret places make ye ready that whereby the 
Gods have gotten immortality. 

11 Ye with a secret tongue and dark intention laid the maiden 
deep within, the calf within the mouth. 

They evermore are near us with their gracious help : successful 
is the song that strives for victory. 

HYMN LIV. Indra. 

I SING thy fame that, Maghavan, through thy greatness the 
‘ and earth invoked thee in thf-ir 

Thou, aiding Gods, didst quell the power of Dasas, what time 
thou holpest many a race, 0 Indra, 

2 When thou wast roaming, waxen strong in body, telling thy 

might, Indra, among the people. 

All that men called thy battles was illusion : no foe hast thou 
to-day, nor erst hast found one. 

3 Who are the Eishis, then, who comprehended before our time 

the bounds of all thy greatness ? 

For from thy body thou hast generated at the same time the 
Mother and the Father, 

4 Thou, Mighty Steer, hast four snpremest natures, Asura 

natures that may ne’er bo injured. 

All these, 0 Maghavan, thou surely k nowest, wherewith thou 
hast performed thy great achievements. 

5 Thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession, treasures made 

manifest and treasures hidden. 


10 0 ye Sapient Ones : ye Kibhus. That : perhaps Amrita or celestial Soma 
]uice. Cf. 1. 20. 6; no. 3. 

• obscure. ‘(The Maruts) placed a female in the envelop. 

hide (of a dead cow), and a calf in the mouth (of a dead cow).’ — Wilson. 
According to this interpretation the miracle ascribed to them would somewhat 
r^einble that mentioned in I. 110. 8. See Bergaigue, La Religion V^diquCt 
1- 27. The first half of these jnd line is hard to construe. Wilson para- 
peases the line ; — ‘daily the generous (fraternity of the Ribhus) offers suita- 
praises (to the gods), granting victory over our foes.’ Prof. Geldner takes 
f/’®’ Pada text, as a locative, and renders the last half-line to 

le following effect ; — ‘ ‘May he (the sacrificer), when he wishes to win, gaiu 
Ihe victory in the race.’ 

con question is rhetorical. The great Rishis of the olden time could not 
thy greatness, much less can we comprehend it. 

Mull ^ the Father : Earth and Heaven, parents of all. See M. 

t^dia. What can it Teach ns 7, p. KJl. 
stu'a .• diviue, with a vague sense of supremo grandeur. 



458 


TUB HYMN& OP 


6 


[^OOK X 


Defer not thou, 0 Maghavan, my longing : thou art Directnv 
Indra, thou art Giver. ’ 


To him who set the light in things of splendour, and with all 
sweetness blent essential sweetness, 

To Indra hath this welcome hynjn that strengthens been 
uttered by the votary Brihadnktha. 


HYMN LY. Indra. 

Far is that secret name by which, in terror, the worlds invoked 
thee and thou gavest vigour. 

The earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and, Ma- 
ghavan, madest bright thy Brother's Children. 

2 Great is ttiat secret uauxe wuereoy thou 

madest all that is and shall be. 

The Five Tribes whom he loveth well have entered the light 
he loveth that was made aforetime. 


3 He filled the heavens and earth and all between them, Goda 

five times sevenfold in their proper seasons. 

With foui--and-thirty lights he looks around him, lights of one 
colour though their ways are divers. 

4 As first among the lights, 0 Dawn, thou shonest, whereby thou 

broughtest forth the Stay of Increase, 

Great art thou, matchless is thine Asura nature, who, high 
above, art kin to those beneath thee. 

5 The old hath waked tlie young Moon from his slumber who 

runs his circling course with many round him, 

6 Who &tt the light : the firat essential light. 


1 Far is that secret name : thou art not present with us now. In terror : 
terrified by Vritra. Thy Brother's Children: according to Sfiyana, Indra’s 
brother is Parjanya, the God of the rain-cloud, and his children are the gath- 
ered waters, V.iruna and his stars are probably intended. — Ludwig. 

3 Gods Jive times sevenfold : ‘It cannot be doubted that the original Gods 
were the constellations.’— Ludwig. According to S3.ya’ia, the five orders of 
beings and the cla.sses of seven ; that is, Gods, men, Fathers and RAkshasas, 
and the seven troops of Maruts, the seven rays of the Sun, the seven souses, 
etc. The four-and-thirty lights : are probably the sun, moon, and five planets, 
and the twenty-seven lunar asterisnis or mansions of the moon. According 
to SAyana, the four and thirty are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Aditj as, 
PrajApati, VashatkAra, and VirAj. 

4 The Stay of Increase : that which is the foundation and support of all enb- 

sistence; according to SAyana, the Sun. Art kin to those beneath thee: a'/ 
allied and connected with men as provider of their food. The second line la 
difficult, and is differently interpreted by others. . , 

5 SAyana explains this stanza differently, making Indra, identified wita 
Time, the subject. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation (Commentary, II. P- 
which seems to be nearer to the sense of the words, and is simpler and inor^ 
rational. With many round him : stars of the asterisms through which he paase . 



THE RIGVEDA. 


450 


jYMN 56.] 

Behold the Gods’ high wisdom in its greatness : he who died 
yesterday to-day is living. 

6 Strong is the Red Bird in his strength, great Hero, who from 

of old liath had no nest to dwell in. 

That which he knows is truth and never idle : he wins and 
gives the wealth desired of many. 

7 Tlirough these the Thunderer gained strong manly vigour, 

through whom he waxed in power to smite down Vritra, — 
Who through the might of Indra’s operation came forth as 
Gods in course of Law and Order. 

8 All-strong, performing works with his companion, All-marking, 

rapid Victor, Curse-averter, 

The Hero, waxing, after draughts of Soma, blew far from heav- 
en the Dasyus with his weapon. 

HYMN LVI. Viavedevas. 

Here is one light for thee, another yonder : enter the third and 
be therewith united. 

Uniting with a body bo thou welcome, dear to the Gods in their 
sublimest birth-place. 

2 Bearing thy body, Vajin, may thy body afford us blessing and 

thyself protection. 

Unswerving, stablish as it were in heaven thine own light as 
the mighty Gods’ supporter. 

3 Strong Steed art thou : go to the yearning Maidens with vigour, 

happily go to heaven and praises : 

6 The Red Bird : the Sun, with whom ludra is k.eutified. 

7 Through these: probably the stars are iuteuebd. ‘(Accompanied) by 
these Maruts.' — Wilson. 

8 Jlis companion : the thunderbolt. 

‘ The mystical union of the Fathers with the rays of light is the funda- 
mental idea underlying the abstruse allusions ’ of this funeral hymn. ‘ The 
iwet bids the deceased man unite himself w’ith the beams of the heavenly 
light ; he takes occasion to celebrate the power and greatness of the Fathers, 
to whom the spirit of the depai i ed is journeying ; and ends with a statement 
oi the success of the journey for which he has prayed.’ See Wallis, Cos- 
mlogy of the Rigveda, pp. 72, 73. 

1 One light: the earthly, fire of the funeral pile. Another: in the firma- 
Jient. The third : the light in the highest region above the firmament. A 

: a new body after cremation. Their suHimest birth-place • the Sun. 

2 Vdjin: apparently the name of the deceased, the eon of Brihaduktha 
Rishi of the hymn. The word means originally ‘ strong, strong steed’ 

^ in stanza 3. 

. ^ The yearning Maidens : perhaps the Dawns ; but the meaning of suventh 
>8 uncertain, 2'o heaven and praises : * to the (land of) praise, and to the 
"^y’-Wallia. 



4ao TUE HYMNS OF [BOOE X, 

Fly happily to the Gods with easy passage, according to the 
first and faithful statutes. 

4 Part of their grandeur have the Fathers also gained : the 
Gods have seated mental power in them as Gods. 

They have embraced within themselves all energies, which 
issuing forth, again into their bodies pass. 

6 They strode through all the region with victorious might, es- 
tablishing the old immeasurable laws. 

They compassed in their bodies all existing things, and stream- 
ed forth offspring in many successive forms. 

6 In two ways have the sons established in his place the Asura 

who finds the light ; by the third act. 

As fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, their off- 
spring, as a thread continuously spun out. 

7 As in a ship through billows, so through regions of air, with 

blessings, through all toils and troubles 

Hath Brihaduktha brought bis seed with glory, and placed it 
here and in the realms beyond us, 

HYMN LVII. ViBvedevas. 

Let us not, Tndra, leave the path, the Soma-presser’s sacrifice : 

Let no malignity dwell with us. 

2 May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun out to 
reach the Gods, 

That perfecteth the sacrifice. ^ 

4 Of their grandeur : d the greatness of the Gods. 

5 Establitshing the old inuneasurable laws : or, in accordance with the more 
generally received interpretation of dhdmdni here, ‘ measuring ancient 
stations never measured out.’ 

6 In two ways : in Leaven and on earth. The sons : explained by Sdyana 
as the Anmrases, sons of Aditya. The Fathers in general appear to be in- 
tended. The Asura: Agni. The third act: or third sacred duty, that of 
continuing their family ; religious study and sacrifice being the first ana 
second. — Silyana. 

7 Placed it hei'e and in the realm beyond us : established his offspring in 
heavenly regions as well as here upon earth. 

Mr Wallis, from whose translation I have borrowed, remarks The iB' 
terpretation of one or two expres-sions is uncertain ; the general sense is 
clear. The rays of light are here the bodies of the fathers, which emanate 
from the sun, assume the forms of all things on the earth and of 
sacrificers, the descendants of the fathers, and again return to their birtfl- 
place in the sky from which they had extended themselves.’ — Cosmology oj 
the Bigveda, pp. 74, 76. 

For* Prof. Max Miiller’s translation of Hymns 67 — 60, with the 
ed upon them, and ample elucidative matter, see Journal R. A. S., VoL H- ** 
II., 1806, pp. 426—465, 



THE RIQVEDA. 


461 


UYME 58.] 


3 call the spirit hither with the Soma of our parted sires, 

Yea, ,vith the Fathers’ holy hymns. 

4 Thy spii'fv come to thee again for wisdom, energy, and life, 

That thou Icjjg behold the sun ! 

5 0 Fathers, may tti^^cf^Yenly Folk give us our spirit once again, 
That we may be with ^v^ose who live. 

6 0 Soma, with the spirit stfti within us, blest with progeny. 

May we be busied in thy law. 

HYMN LVIIl. Manas or Spirit. 

Tiiy spirit, tliat went far away to Yama, to Vivas van’s Son, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

2 Thy spirit, that went far away, that passed away to earth and 

heaven, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

3 Thy spirit, that wont far away, away to the four-cornered earth, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

4 Thy spirit, that w^enl far away to the four quarters of the world, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

5 Thy spirit, that went far away, away unto the billowy sea, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

6 Thy spirit, that went far away to beams of lit?^^ 

flow. 

We cause tu cumo lu ciiat inou mayst live and so- 

journ here. 

7 Thy spirit, that wont far away, went to the waters and the 

])lants, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

8 Thy spirit, that went far away, that visited the Sun and Dawn, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

^ spirit : of the deceased whose obsequies are performed. Of our sires : 

: explained as meaning, suited to man; that is to deified men, 
® leathers or Spirits of the Blest. 

^eath^ is an address to recall the fleeting spirit of a man at the point of 
^ .planU; of. X. 16, i). 



462 


THE HYMN8 OF [BOOR '« 


9 Thy spirit, that went far away, away to lofty mountain 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayat so. 

journ here. 

10 Thy spirit, that went far away into th“ that lives and 

We cause to oonie to thee again 'ft^t thou mayst live and so- 
journ iiore. 

1 1 Thy spirit, that went faraway to distant realms beyond our ken, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 

journ here. 

12 Thy spirit, that went far away to all that is and is to he, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and 

sojourn here. 

LIX. Nirriti and Otliera 


Hi3 life hath been renewed and carried forward as two men, 
car-borne, by the skilful driver. ^ 

One falls, then seeks the goal with quickened vigour. Let 
Nirriti depart to distant places. 

2 Here is the psalm for wealth, and food, in plenty : let us dc 

many deeds to bring us glory. r . xt 

All these our doings shall delight the singer. Let Niirit 

depart to distant places. 

3 May we o’ercome our foes with acts of valour, as heaven is 

over earth, hills over lowlands. . t nf Nirrit 

All these nnr deeds the singer hath consioered. Let JNnpt 
uepait to djKfjiut places. 

4 Give us not up dpoth O Soma • still let us lool 

upon the Sun arising. 

Let our old age with passing days be kindly. Let Ninit 
depart to distant places. 


6 0 Asuntti, keep the soul within us, and make the days w( 
have to live yet longer. 

Grant that we still may look upon the sunlight : strengtliei 
thy body with the oil we bring thee. 


1 His life : the life of Subandhu one of the Rishis of the hymn. 
ing to SAyana the first line is a prayer ‘ May the life of 
augmented so as to be more lasting and newer.’ — Wilson. 
mentioned in the text. Two men : the warrior and the charioteer, 

Sftyana explains differently : — ‘ he who falls (from life) increase (his/ 
to live.’ — Wilson. Nirriti: the Goddess of death and destruction. , 

6 Asuntti: apparently the pereonification of a deity presiding ^ jife, 
It may be a name for Yama, or it may mean ‘ guide to hfe, or ^ y 
See Muir, 0 3, Texts, V. 297, and Bergaigne, La Religion Vedtq'^f, a. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


463 


60.] 

6 Give ns our sight again, 0 Asuniti, give us again our breath 

and our enjoyment. 

Long may we look upon the Sun uprising : 0 Anumati, 

. favour thou and bless us. 

7 May Earth restore to us our vital spirit, may Heaven the 

Goddess and mid-air restore it. 

May Soma give us once again our body, and Pashan show 
the Path of peace and comfort. 

8 May both Worlds bless Subandhu, young Mothers of ever- 

lasting Law. 

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame 
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. 

9 Health-giving medicines descend sent down from heaven in 

twos and threes, 

Or wandering singly on the earth. May Heaven and Earth 
uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away : nor sin nor 
sorrow trouble thee. 

10 Drive forward thou the wagon-ox, 0 Indra, which brought 

Usiuaiani’s wagon hither. 

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame 
* away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. 

HYMN LX. Asamftti and Others. 

Bringing our homage we have come to one magnificent in 
look. 

Glorified of the mighty Gods ; 

^ ^samati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, a radiant car, 
The conqueror of Bhajeratha ; _ 

, [ rT7::7r.Tr_..“z - iv nu wnich the Gods regard 

the sacrifices and prayers of the pious. ‘Gracious (goddess).’— Wilsou. 

8 Iniquity and shame : rdpas, according to Williams’s Dictionary means, 
defect, fault, sin ; hurt, iujuiy. In Ris Conirnentaiy on I. .69. 4, Sftyana 
paraphrases rdpdnsi, the plural of the word, by bddhakdni rdkshasdclini, dis- 
tuibing UAkshasas, etc. 

9 In twoa and threes : according to Silyana, in the persons of the two 
Asvins and of the three Godder^'es lift, Sarssvat!, anil Bhdratl. 

10 U^tnardnt must mean the wife of Uslnara, chief of the Ustnaras who 
re mentioned in later times as living in Madhyadesa or the Midland country, 
file meaning of the line is not obvious. 

Stanzas 8, 9, 10, which Prof. Grassmann places in his Appendix, are of a 
'liferent character from that of the preceding part of the hymn, and seem 
Oe a separate song or fragment of a song. 

^ Asamdti: according to SAyana, the name of a King. But the wo^ is 
probably an adjective, as in stanza 5, qualifying rdiham, car, and sigui- 
unequalled. Bhajeratha : it is unceitaiu whether this is the name of a 
or of a country. 



464 TUE UYMNS OF \.^00K t 

3 Who, when the spear hath armed his hand, or even weaponless 

o’erthrowa 

Men strong as buffaloes in fight ; 

4 Him in whose service flourishes Ikshvaku, rich and dazzling. 

bright 

As the Five Tribes that are in heaven. 

5 ludra, support the princely power of Rathaproshthaa matched 

by none, 

Even as the Sun for all to see. 

6 Thou for Agastya's sister’s sons yokest thy pair of ruddy 

steeds. 

Thou troddest niggards under foot, all those, 0 King, who 
brought no gifts. 

7 This is the mother, this the sire, this one hath come to bo 

thy life. 

What brings thee forth is even this. Now come, Siibandhu, 
get thee forth. 

8 As with the leather thong they bind the chariot yoke to hold 

it fast, 

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not for 
death, held it for thy security. 

9 Even as this earth, the mighty earth, holds fast the monarchs 

of the wood, 

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life^and not for death, 
held it for thy security. 


4 VjyiHvrf according to Sftyana. , 

Bigveda. The Five Tribes : the deities rejjfaprtCtl'ftS 

iiig to the five ti ibes on earth, in the same manner as the seven rivers of tlie 
land of the Aryans have their counterparts in heaven. See Muir, 0 S. 

I. p. 177 S&yaiia explains differently ‘(so that) the five orders of loeu 
(are as happy) as if they were in heaven.’ — Wilson. 

6 Fatiuiproshthas : the family of the prince, Asamflti or another, whose praises 
the poet celebrates. 

6 Agastya's sister's sons : Bandhu and his brothers, the Rishis of the hymn- 
Stanzas 1 — 6 have no apparent connexion with the six stanzas that follow. 

7 This: Agni, according to Sflyana. The speaker probably means him- 
self.— Ludwig. Subandhu seems to have been in a trance and 

dead. ‘ It is supposed that the brothers of Subandhu have addressed t 

supplications to Agni, to restore him to life, and that he has come acco 
ingly, being, as it were, his parent and begetter. Another interpre 
explains the terms literally as, Subandhu, your father, mother, an > 
have come to mourn your decease ’ — Wilson. 

8 So /lavc I held : ‘so has Agni placed,’ according to SAyana. 



ffWV 61.] TffE RIQVEDA, 405 

IQ spirit I have brought from Yama, from Vivas- 

vaii's Son, 

Brought it for life and not for death, yea, brought it for 
security. 

11 The wind blows downward from on high, downward the Sun- 

God sends his heat, 

Downward the milch-cow pours her milk : so downward go thy 
pain and grief. 

12 Felicitous is this mine hand, yet more felicitous is this. 

This hand contains all liealing balms, and this makes whole 
with gentle touch. 

HYMN LiXI. Visvedevaa. 

The welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with 
might this prayer to win the Asvins, 

Wlieu the most lil)eral God, for Paktha, rescued his parents, 
and assailed the seven Ilotars. 

2 Chyavana, purposing deceptive presents, with all ingredients, 
made the altar ready. 

Moat sweet-voiced Turvayana poured oblations like floods of 
widely fertilizing water. 


11 Thy pain and grief: ‘ tby diti ’ — Sft^'rtna, 

12 More felicitous is this • iny other ^a»d, probably the right. With gentle 
touch, with light frictiou, layiug-on hands, or hypnotizing passes. 


This Hymn, as Ludwig obse’ >^68, belongs to the most difficult, one might 
almost say most hopeless, p<» tions of the Rigyeda. It is made up of several 
puts which are in no iiite^iKihlc connexion with one another. 

1 According to the v-^w taken by Pischel who has most carefully studied 
and eUborately di8Ci»i««d the first three stanzas ( Vedische Studien, I. pp. 71 — 
77), they contain i* brief the ancient story of Turvayana, the young King 
of the Pakthas. •»<! Chyavdna. Chyavana, a favourite of the Asvins who 
had restored to youth (I. 116, 10, and 117. 13), intended to sacrifice to 
them, hoping' with their aid to conquer Tdrvayana and his parents. But 
Indra stay* the sacrifice, drives the priests away, and enables Turvayana who 
had poured rich libations to him jo gain the victory over his opponent. 

The<iiekome speaker : Tfirvaydna, whoso words were welcome to the Gods. 
To the A svins : ra'&dram : not ‘ addressed to Rudra,’ hut to the As^ns 
vhcJ are called raUdrau in stanza 1 5, and, elsewhere, rudr^ and rudrdvartant, 
pa mst liberal God : ludra. Paktha: King of the Pakthas (see VI 1. 18.7), 
that 'm, apparently, Tttrvayftna, who has been mentioned in I. 63. 10, and VI. 

13, as especially aided by Indra. Stven Ilotars: the usual number of 
n"tar priests employed at important sacrifices. 

2 Deceptive presents : his intended sacrifice was displeasing to Indra, whom, 
possibly^ ChyavAna falsely pretended that he was about to worship. WUh 
^^a ingceiiieiits : required for the preparation of the Soma juice. Poured 

tolndrT 

30 




40D 


XSlJCt HA yjX’ 


3 To his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and welcomed 

eagerly the prayers he offered. 

With arrows in his hand the Very Mighty forced from him all 
obedience of a servant. 

4 I call on you the Sons of Dyans, the Asvins, that a dark cow 

to rny red kine be added. 

Enjoy my sacrifice, come to my viands, contented, not deceiv- 
ing expectation. 

10 Uttering praise to suit the rite Navagvas came speedily to 

win the damsers friendship. 

They who approached the twice-strong stable's keeper, meed- 
less, would milk the rocks that naught had shaken. 

1 1 Swift was new friendship with the maid : they quickly accept- 

ed it as genuine seed and bounty. 

Milk which the cow Sabardugha had yielded was the bright 
heritage which to thee they offered. 

12 When afterwards they woke and missed the cattle, the speaker 

thus in joyful mood addressed them : 

Matchless are singers through the Vasu’s nature ; he bringeth 
them all food and all possessions. 

13 His followers then who dwelt in sundry places came and desired 

to slay the son of N^shad. 

Resistless foe, he found the. hidden treasure of Sushna multi- 
plied in numerous offspring. 

3 To his oblations: to the ofFering.s of Cl^y*v\na Ye f Aavins. The Very 
Mighty: Indra, who threatened Chyavdna, madj^ him his obedient 
servant. 

4 The llishi now prays to the Asvins on hi.s own *ccount, and a^ks for a 
dark-coloured cow a.s a reward. Silyana, whom l iofe.^sors Ludwig and 
Grassm.mn follow, explains the second half of the Hist lim more poetically 

‘ When the dark night retires before the purple oxen (of chaiiot of the 
dawn).’ — Wilson. ‘ When the black sits among the red cows , that is, while 
it is still dark, but the grey of moniing U beginning to appear.’— Ludwig 

5 I pa<^s over stanzas 5 — 9, which contain an ancient legend, p-obably the 
germ of the later story of Brahm.^ or Pnj/lpati and his daughter, lonceruicg 
two deities or powers of natuie, male and female. See Appendix. 

10 Navayvas : ^ the Angirasas.' — Wilson. The damsel's: S Ay ana say? that 
Prfeni may be meant. Perh.aps SaraniA is intended The twice-strong stthU'i 
keeper : the Pani or Panis wlio kept the stolen cows or vanished rays of Uaht 
concealed. Meedless • as the Panis refused to give up the cows. Would mii'^ 
the rocks : would force from the rocky prison the meed or honorarium which 
they deserved in the shape of the cows. 

11 Sabardughd: ‘nectar-yielding;’ the general name of cows milked at 
sacrifices. Which to thee they offered : which the Angirases offered to Indra, 

12 The Vasu is India. 

13 The son of Nrishad: NArshada, nsnally a patronymic of Kanva, bu 
•said to be in this place the name of a ceituiu demon. Resistless foe : hwi*’*' 



THE RIGVEDA. 


467 


hymn 61.] 

14 Thou, called Effulgence, in whose threefold dwelling, as in the 

light of heaven, the Gods are sitting, 

Thou who art called Agni or Jatavedas, Priest, hear us, guile- 
less Priest of holy worship. 

15 And, Indra, bringfi that I may laud and servo them, those 

Two residciident glorious Nasatyas, 

BlitJjc, bounteous, man-like, to the sacrificer, honoured among 
our men with offered viands. 

IG This King is praised and honoured as Ordainer : himself the 
bridge, the Sage speeds o’er the waters. 

He hath stirred up Kakshivan, stirred up Agni, as the steed’s 
swift wheel drives the felly onward. 

17 Vaitarana, doubly kins^man, sacrificer, shnll milk the cow who 

ne’er hath calved, Sabardhu, 

When I encompass Varuna and Mitra with lauds, and Arya 
man in safest shelter. 

18 Their kin, the Prince in heaven, tliy nearest kinsman, turning 

his thought to thee thus speaks in kindness : 

This is our highest bond : I am his offspring. How many 
others came ere I succeeded ? 

19 Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in : these are my 

Gods; I in full strength am present. 

Twice-born am I, the first-born Son of Order : the Cow milked 
this when first she had her being. 


14 More begins another part of tlio hymn. Agni is .atblressed. Effulgence : 
identitied with the Sun. Threefold dwelling : earth, firmament, and heaven. 

15 Man like : as men reward one who in.stitutes a saciilice for their benefit, 

16 This King: Sflrya, the Sun God. ‘This royal Soma.’ — Wilson. Him- 
idf the bridge: the long beams of light fonn the bridge by which Sflrya 
passes over the waters of the firmament or sea of air Kakshtvdn , the cele- 
tr^ed Kishi. See Vul. I , Index. 

17 Vaitarana : ‘(Agni), the conveyer (of all).’ -Wilson. Agni is so called, 
probably, as sacrificer for a prince Vitarana. Doubly kiumxan : closely allied 
to heaven and earth. Sabardhu : the Cow whose milk is used in sacrifice ; 
also called Sabaiduglifl, as in starza 11. According to Ludwig, the New Year 
^hicli has not yet distributed its treasures is meant. 

18 Their kin : akin to Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman. The Prince : iUri : 
SfJrya, the Sun God. Thy nearest kinsman: Shrya. I adopt Ludwig's iuter- 
pietati(.n of nHhhdn4dishthoh, which appeals unintelligible as the name of the 
jonof Manu who was deprived of his inheritance by his father according to 
jhe Yajur^veda, and by his brothers according to the Aitareya-Brdhmana. 
hut see Weber, Episches im V. Ritual, pp. 40f. This : Dyaus. ffow many 

many Savitars (suns that introduce the new year) have been before 
-Ludwig. 

These aVe my Gods: ‘these are my resplendent (rays).’ — Wilson. Pro* 

ijly the priests are intended. —Ludwig. The Cow: Aditi. Milked this: 

hked fuiih this uuiveise,’ — Wilson. Agni is the speaker of this stauzai. 



THE HYMNS OF 


463 


{JiOOK X, 


20 So mid these tribes he rests, the friendly envoy, borne on two 

paths, refulgent, Lord of fuel. 

When, like a line, the Babe springs up erectly, his Mother 
straight hath borne him strong to bless us. 

21 Then went the milch-kine forth to plea«o the damsel, and for 

the good of every man that livetli. 

Hear us, O wealthy Lord; begin our worship. Tliou hast 
grown mighty through Asvaghna’s virtues. 

22 And take thou notice of us also, Indra, for ample riches, King 

whose arm wields thunder ! 

Protect our wealthy nobles, guard our princes unmenaced near 
thee, Lord of Tawny Coursers. 

23 When he goes forth, ye Pair of Kings, for booty, speeding to 

war and praise to please the singer, — 

I was the dearest sage of those about him, — let him lead thotse 
away and bring them safely. 

24 Now for this noble man’s support and comfort, singing with 

easy voice we thus implore thee : 

Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser : and may I be }>is 
priest to win him glory, 

25 If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win your friend- 

ship made the laud accepted. 

That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for every one to 
whom the songs arc suited. ^ 

26 Glorified thus, with holy hymns and homage : — Of noble race, 

with Waters, God-attended — 

May he enrich us for our prayers and praises : now can the cow 
be milked ; the path is open. 


20 He Agni. Two paths : from earth to heaven and from heaven to earth, 

21 The reference iu the first Hue is, apparently, to the imprisoned cows and 
Saramft (see stanza 10); but all explanatious of the allusions in this hymn are 
mote or less conjectural. Ludwig thinks that the reference may be to the act- 
ual milking of the sacrificial cows at the ceremony which this hymn accompa- 
nied. Wilson translates : — ‘ The words of a dewirable praise, of^a certain tian 
quil person (XAbhAuedishtba), attain the prototype (Indra)' A^vaghm: pro* 
bably the p.itronymic of Vitarana. — Ludwig. See note on Vaitarana iu fttan^a 

17. 

23 He: Asvaghna Vitarana. Ye Pair of Kings : Mitra and Varuna. 

26 Glorified thus : that is, May Varuna glorified with song beginning, 
noble race, etc.,’ enrich us. Now cun the cow he milked : it is now time 
the morning Agnihotram.— Ludwig. 

Prof. Grassmann has banished this almost unintelligible hymn to hisApp®^ 
dix. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


UYMN 62.] 




27 Be to us, then, ye Gods who merit worship, be ye of one accord 
our strong protection, 

AVho went on various ways and brought us vigour, ye who are 
undeceivable explorers. 

HYMN LXII. ^ ViBvedevas, Etc. 

Ye who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, have won 
you Indra’s friendship and eternal life, 

Even to you be happiness, Angirases. Welcome the son of 
Manu, ye who are most wise. 

2 The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, have in the 

year’s course cleft Vala by Eternal Law ; 

A lengthened life be yours, 0 ye Angirases. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

3 Ye raised the Sun to heaven by everlasting Law, and spread 

broad earth, the Mother, out on every side. 

Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Angirases. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wdse. 

4 This kinsman in your dwelling-place speaks pleasant words : 

give ear to this, yc Rishis, children of the Gods. 

High Brahman dignity b« yours, Angirases. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

5 Distinguished by coheir varied form, these Rishis have been 

deeply moved. 

These ar» Che sons of Angiras : from Agni have they sprung 
to h’fe. 


6 Distinguished by their varied form, they sprang from Agni, 

from the sky. 

Navagva and Dasagva, noblest Angiias, he giveth bounty 
with the Gods. 

7 With Indra for associate the priests have cleared the stable 

full of steeds and kine, 

Giving to me a thousand with their eight-marked ears, they 
gained renown among the Gods. 

i The Mn of Ufanu: Nftbh/lnedishtha M4iuva. See X. 61. 18 note. 

^ The Fathers; the Angirases. Vala: the demon who stole the cows of 

tlie ® 

i Law: ‘ by means of your sacrifice.’ — Wilson. 

1 This kiv man : or, this NS.bh4, that is, Nabh&uedishtha. 

l^iMinijuUhed by their vaned form : or, Virfipas. See III, 53. 7. 

^ Prom the shy : or, from Dynus Noblest Angiras: Agni himself, accord- 
A n H® i® ®l®o called Navagva and Dasagva as those priestly names 

7 ' w- Cc or are closely connected with the Angirases. 
k Iheir eight-marked ears : having marks branded on their ears ; or per- 
with slit ears. Cf. Hymns of the Athuna-veda, VI. 141. 2. 



470 THE HYMNS OF [SOOK t 

8 May this man’s sons be multiplied ; like springing com niav 

Manu grow, ^ 

Who gives at once in bounteous gift a thousand kiue a 
hundred steeds. ^ 

9 No one attains to him, as though a min would grasp the 

heights of heaveji. * 

Saviirnya’s sacrificial meed hath broadened like an ample flood. 

10 Yadu and Turva, too, have given two Dasas, well disposed, to 

serve, ^ 

Together with great store of kine. 

1 1 Blest be the hamlet’s chief, most liberal Manu, and may his 

bounty rival that of Suiya. 

May the Gods let Savarni’s life be lengthened, with whom 
unwearied, we have lived and prospered. 

HYMN LX HI. Visvedevas, 

May they who would assume kinship from far away, Vivasvan’s 
generations, dearly loved of men, 

Even the Gods who sit upon the sacred grass of Nahusha’s 
son Yayati, bless and comfott us. 

2 For worthy of obeisance, Gods, ara all your names, worthy of 

adoration and of sacrifice. 

Ye who were born from waters, and from Aditi, and from the 
earth, do ye here listen to my call. 

3 I will rejoice in these Adityas for my weal, 4or whom the Mo- 

ther pours forth water rich in balm. 

And Dyaus the Infinite, firm as a rock, sweet milk, — Gods act- 
ive, strong through lauds, whose might the Bull upholds. 


8 Manu : here apparently the name of S^varni the prince whose munificence 
is the subject of stanzas 8 — 11. A thousand kine^ a hundred steeds ; ‘ kine’^ is 
conjecturally supplied. ‘A thousand and a hundred horses.’— Wilson. 'A 
thousand times a hundred horses.’ — Ludwig. 

9 Sdvarnya here means SAvarni. 

10 Turva : equivalent to Turvasa ; a prince of the clan called after the 
eponymus Turva. Ddsas : enslaved natives. 


1 Kinship ; relationship with us, and the duties of protection and aid which 
relationship implies. Cf. I. 109. 7, note. Vivasvdn'a genei'ations : SAyaija^sup- 
plies a verb, and explains differently ; — ‘(support) the generations of (Manu 
the son of) Vivasvat.’ — Wilson. Yaydti: see I. 81. 17, and 108. 8, note, 

2 From toaters : the aerial waters, or intermediate region of air. Addi 
Both understands Aditi here to mean ‘ infinity,’ the boundlessno^ 
heaven as opposed to the limitation of earth. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 
SAyana’s explanation is similar. 

3 The Mother: Earth. Dyaus: Heaven. The Ball: the Sun. . 
explains vrishahhardn as ‘ bringers of rain,’ 


von 

of 



THE RIO VEDA. 


ill 


//yjjf.v 63.] 


4 Looking on men, ne’er slumbering, they by their deserts at- 

tained as Gods to lofty immortality. 

Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents’ powers, they 
robe them, for our welfare, in the height of heaven. 

5 Great Kings who bless us, who have come to sacrifice, who, 

ne’er assailed, have set their mansion in the sky, — ^ 

These I invite with adoration and with hymns, mighty Adityas, 
Aditi, for happiness. 

6 Who offereth to you the laud that ye accept, 0 ye All-Gods of 

Manu, many as ye are ? 

Who, Mighty Ones, will prepare for you the sacrifice to bear 
us over trouble to felicity ? 

7 Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled fire, offered 

the first oblation with his heart and soul, 

Vouchsafe us, ye Adityas, shelter free from fear, and make us 
good and easy paths to happiness. 

8 Wise Deities, who have dominion o’er the world, ye thinkers 

over all that moves not and that moves, 

Save us from uncommitted and committed sin, preserve us 
from all sin to-day for liappiness. 

9 111 battles we invoke ludra still swift to hear, and all the holy 

Host of Heaven who bani.sh grief, 

Agni, Mitra, and Varuna that we may gain, Dyaus, Bhaga, 
Maruts, IVithivi for ha})puies3: 

10 Mightily-^aviug Earth, incomparable Heaven, the good guide 

Aditi who gives secure defence. 

The well-oared heavenly Ship that lets no waters iu, free from 
defect, will we ascend for happiness. 

11 Bless us, all Holy Ones, tliat we may have your help, guard 

and protect us from malignant injury. 

With fruitful invocatiou may we call on you, Gods, who give 
ear to us for grace, for happiness. 

12 Keep all disease afar and sordid sacrifice, keep off the wicked 

man’s malicious enmity. 

Keep far away from us all hatred, 0 ye Gods, and give us 
ample shelter for our happiness. 

13 Untouched by any evil, every mortal thrives, and, following 

the Law, spreads in his progeny, 

Whom ye with your good guidance, 0 Adityas, lead safely 
through all his pain and grief to happiness. 

^ With serpents' powers : * of unBurpassable wisdom.’ — Wilson. 

heavenly Ship} acoordiag to Slyana, a metaphorical expression for 



472 


THE HYMNS OF 


[^OOK 


14 That which ye guard and grace in battle, O ye Gods, ye 

ruts, where the prize is wealth, where heroes win, 

That conquering Car, 0 Indi a, that sets forth at dawn, that 
never breaks, may we ascend for happiness. 

15 Vouchsafe us blessing in oiir paths and desert tracts, blessing 

in waters and in battle for the light ; ® 

Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth, and 
blessing, 0 ye Maruts, for the gain of wealth. 

16 The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who comes to whal 

is good by distant pathway, — 

May she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with ui 
under the Gods’ protection. 

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you, 

0 Aditi and all Adityas. 

Men are made rich by tliose who are Immortal : the Heavenlj 
Folk have been extolled by Gaya. 

HYMN liXIV. Viavedevas 

What God, of those who hear, is he wiiose well-praised name wi 
may record in this our sacrifice ; and how ] 

Who will be gracious? who of many give us bliss ? Who ou 
of all the Host will come to lend us aid? 


2 The will and thoughts within my breast exevt their power 

they yearn with love, and fly to all the regions round. 
None other Comforter is found save only'^ these : my longing 
and my hopes are fixt upon the Gods. 4 

3 To Naraeansa and to Pushan I sing forth, to unconcealabl 

Agni kindled by the Gods; 

To Sun and Moon, two Moons, to Yama in the heavens, to Trit 
Vata, Dawn, Night, and the Asvins Twain. 

4 How is the Sage extolled whom the loud singers praise 

What voice, what hymn is used to land Brihaspati ? 

May Aja-Ekapad with Rikvans swift to hear, and Ahi of tl 
Deep listen i nto our call. 


14 For happiness : svasMye^ for happiness or welfare, recurs at the end 
all the stanzas from 3 to 14 inclusive. 

16 Svasti : Pathyd Svasti, according to the Index; the Goddess of prospen 
and happiness. 

17 The son of Plati : Gaya, the Rishi of the hymn. 

3 Unconcealable Agni : or, to the unconcealable (Savitar) and Agni. ^ 
Moons: New Moon and Full Moon. 

4 Aja-Hkapdd: see VI. 50. 14. Rikvavs • singers; minor deities ^ 
attend and aiug the praises of some superior God. Ahi of the Veep : 
Diagon of the depths of the aerial ocean ; Ahibudhuya. See Vol. hi tu 



64.] THE niQ VEDA . 473 

5 Aditi, to the birth of Dakaha and the vow thou summonest the 

Kings Mitra and Varuna. 

With course unchecked, with many chariots Aryaman cornea 
with the seven priests to tribes of varied sort. 

6 May all those vigorous Coursers listen to our cry, hearers of 

invocation, speeding on their way ; 

Winners of thousands where the priestly meed is won, who 
gather of themselves great wealth in every race. 

7 Bring ye Purandhi, bring Vayu who yokes his steeds, for 

friendship bring ye Pushan with your songs of praise : 

They with one mind, one thought attend the sacrifice, urged 
by the favouring aid of Savitar the God. 

B The thrico-seven wandering Rivers, yea, the mighty floods, 
the forest trees, the mountains, Agni to our aid, 

Krislnu, Tishya, archers to our gathering-place, and Rudra 
strong amid the Rudras, we invoke. 

9 Let the great Streams come hither with their mighty help, 

Sindhu, Sarasvati, and Sarayu with waves. 

Ye Goddess Floods, ye Mothers, animating all, promise us 
water rich in fatness and in balm. 

10 And let BrihaddivA, the Mother, hear our call, and Tvashtar, 

Father, with the Goddesses and Dames. 

Ribhukshan, Vaja, Bhaga, and Rathaspati, and the sweet 
8[)eech of him who labours guard us well ! 

11 Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the blest 

favour of the Maruts, Rudra^s Sons. 

May we be famed among the folk for wealth in kiiie, and ever 
come to you, ye Gods, with sacred food. 


5 Dakaha : meaning here the Sun, according to 84} ana. Ludwig thinke 
>at the sacrificer, regarded as Daksha or PrajApati, and said to be born again 
‘fougji completion of his vow, is intended. In the second line also Aryaman 
considered by S4yana to be the Sun : — ‘ Ar} aman, whose course is not 
iiined, the. giver of delight to many, having seven ministering (lays) proceeds 
' his multiform births.’ — Wilson. 

6 Courm's ; the horses which bring the Gods to men’s sacrifices. 
'^Purandhi: Plenty personified as a deity. Or purandhim may be an ad- 
ictive ‘ the spirited, or liberal, Pushan ’ 

8 Thrice- seven ; the seven rivers of the land of the Aryans having their coun- 
'‘'P'J'ts in heaven and in the firmament. Krisdnu: the archer who guaids 
heavenly Soma. TUhya: an asterism regarded ns being in the form of 
> and so here identified with KrisAiiu. 

10 Brikuddivd: a Goddess associated with 114, Sarasvati, and others. 

the consorts of the Gods. Rathaspati: the God who presides over 
'‘‘Hots uf vvar. Upeech ; or prayer. Who labours: at the aaciifice. 



474 THE IJYUm OF [BOOK X, 

12 The thought which ye, 0 Maruts, Indra, and ye Gods have 

given to me, and ye Mitra and Varuna, — 

Cause this to grow and swell like a milch-cow with milk. Will 
ye not bear away my songs upon your car? 

13 0 Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again to mind 

(his our relationship ? 

When next we meet together at the central point, even there 
shall Aditi confirm our brotheihood. 

14 The Mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty Goddesses^ 

worthy of sacrifice, come with the race of Gods. 

These Two with their support uphold both Gods and men, and 
with the Fathers pour the copious genial stream. 

15 This invocation wins all good that we desire: Brihaspati, highly- 

praised Aramati, are here, 

Even where the stone that presses meath rings loudly out, 
and where the sages make their voices heard with hymns. 

16 Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers’ duties, desiring 

riches, yearning after treasure, 

Gay^a, the priestly singer, with his praises and hymns content- 
ed the Celestial People. 

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you, 

0 Aditi and all Adityas. 

Men are made rich by those who are Immortal : the Heavenly 
Folk have been extolled by Gaya. ^ 

HYMN LXV. Visvedevas. 

May Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna consent, Aryaman, Vayu, Push- 
aii, and Sarasvati, 

Adityas, Maruts, Vishnu, Soma, lofty Sky, Kudra, and Aditi, 
and Brahmanaspati. 

2 Indra and Agni, Hero-lords when Vritra fell, dwelling together, 

speeding emulously on. 

And Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, have 
with their power filled full the mighty firmament. 

3 Skilled in the Law I lift the hymn of praise to these, Law- 

strengtheners, unassailcd, and great in majesty. 

13 At the central point: the place of eacrifice, 

14 With the Fathers : ‘ The fruitfulnesa of heaven and earth, which gh® 
birth to godn and men, ie described as produced by the fathers.* Bee o 
Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 72. 

15 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion. 

17 The concluding stanza of Hymn 63 is repeated here. 



THE RtQVEDA, 


in 


BYMN 65.] 

These in their wondrous bounty send the watery sea : may 
they as kindly Friends send gifts to make us great. 

4 They with their miglit have stayed Heaven, Earth, and Prithi- 

VI, the Lord of Light, the firmament, the lustrous spheies. 
Even as fleet-foot steeds who make their masters glad, the 
princely Gods are praised, most bountiful to man. 

5 Bring gifts to Mitra and to Varuna who, Lords of all, in spirit 

never fail the worshipper, 

Whose statute shines on high through everlasting Law, whose 
places of sure refuge are the heavens and earth. 

6 The cow who yielding milk goes her appointed way hither to 

us as leader of our holy rites. 

Speaking aloud to Varuna and the worshipper, shall with 
oblation serve Vivasvan and the Gods. 

7 The Gods whose tongue is Agni dwell in heaven, and sit, aid- 

ers of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law. 

They propped up heaven and then brought waters with their 
might, got sacrifice and in a body made it fair. 

8 Born in the oldest time, the Parents dwelling round are shar- 

ers of one mansion in the homo of Law. 

Bound by their common vow Dyaus, Prithivi stream forth the 
moisture rich in oil to Varuna the Steer. 

9 Parjanya, Vata, mighty, senders of the rain, Indra and Vayu, 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman : 

We call on Aditi, A lityas, and the Gods, those who are on 
the earth, in waters, and in heaven. 

10 Tvashtar and Va)'u, those who count as Ribhus, both celestial 

Hotar-priests, and Dawn for happiness, 

Winners of wealth, we call, and wise Brihaspati, destroyer of 
our foes, and Soma Indra’s Friend. 

11 They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, the 

forest trees, the earth, the waters, and the hills. 


^ Tht watery sea : the cloud b and rain. 

4 Prithivi : meaning here the region of mid-air. 

^ of sure refuge: SAyana explains nMhusl differently * upon whom 
iolicitoas worlds remain dependent.’ 

6 The cow : who is milked at sacrifice. According to SAyana, thunder may 
^ nieant, and by ‘ milk ’ strength may be intended. 

7 /n a body ; that is, personified. Cf. X. 66. 9, note, 

® Parents : Heaven and Earth. 

1^ t'destial Hotar-prieste ! see I. 13. 8. 



476 THE BY Mm OF {BOOR ^ 

These very bounteous Gods made the Sun mount to heaven 
and spread the righteous laws of Aryas o’er the land. ’ 

12 0 Asvins, ye delivered Bhujyu from distress, ye animated 

Syava, Vadhrimati’s son. 

To Vimada ye brought his consort Kamadyfi, and gave his 
lost Vishnapfi back to Visvaka. 

13 Thunder, the lightning’s daughter, Aja-Ekapad, heaven’s bear- 

er, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea : 

Hesr all the Gods my words, Sarasvati give ear together with 
Purandhi and with Holy Thoughts. 

14 With Holy Thoughts and with Purandhi may all Gods, know- 

ing the Law immortal, Manu’s Holy Ones, 

Boon-givers, favourers, finders of light, and Heaven, with gra- 
cious love accept my songs, my prayer, my hymn. 

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high 

above all other beings. 

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom ; ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN LXVL Visvedevas. 

I CALL the Gods of lofty glory for our w^eal, the makers of the 
light, well-skilled in sacrifice ; 

Those who have waxen mightily, Masters of all wealth, Im- 
mortal, strengthening Law, the Gods whom Indra leads. 

2 For the strong band of Maruts will we frame a4iymn: the chiefs 

shall bring forth sacrifice for Indra’s troop. 

Who, sent by Indra and advised by Vanina, have gotten for 
themselves a share of Surya’s light. 

3 May Indra with the Vasus keep our dwelling safe, and Aditi 

with Adityas lend us sure defence. 

May the God Rudra with the Kudrns favour us, and Tvashtar 
with the Dames further us to success. 

4 Aditi, Heaven and Earth, the great eternal Law, Indra, Vishnu, 

the Maruts,^and the lofty Sky. 

We call upon Adityas, on the Gods, for help, on Vasus, Rudras, 
Savitar of wondrous deeds. 


12 These deeds of the Asvins are told in I. 10 and 17. 

13 Aja-EhapM : see VI. 60. 14. Holy ThougkU : Devotions personified. 

14 ManiCs Holy Ones: deities whom Manu worshipped. 

16 Vasishiha: that is, a descendant of the great Rishi Vasishtha. 

4 The names in the first line are in the nominative case and without a verb . 
* are invoked/ may be understood. 



THE niGVEDA. 


477 


EYMN 66 .] 

5 With Holy Thoughts SarasvS.H, firm-lawed Varuna, great V^iyu, 

Pushan, Vishnu, and the Asvins Twain, 

Lords of all wealth, Immortal, furtherers of prayer, grant us 
a triply-guarding refuge from distress. 

6 Strong be the sacrifice, strong be the Holy Ones, strong the 

preparers of oblation, strong the Gods. 

Miirhty be Heaven and Earth, true to eternal Law, strong be 
Parjtvnya, strong bo they who laud the Strong. 

7 To win us strength I glorify the Mighty Twain, Agni and 

Soma, Mighty Ones whom many laud. 

May these vouchsafe us shelter with a triple guard, these 
whom the strong have served in worship of the Gods. 

8 Potent, with firmdixt laws, arranging sacrifice, visiting solemn 

rites in splendour of the day. 

Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from falsehood, 
poured the waters out when Vritra died. 

9 The Holy Ones engendered, for their several laws, the heavens 

and earth, the waters, and the plants and trees. 

They filled the firmament with heavenly light for help : the 
Oods embodied Wish and made it beautiful. 

10 Miiy they who bear up heaven, the Ribhus deft of hand, and 

Vata and Parjanya of the thundering Bull, 

The waters and the planis, promote the songs we sing; come 
Bhaga, Rati, and the Vajins to my call. 

11 Sindh n, the sea, the region, and the firmament, the thunder, 

and the ocean, Aja-Ekapad, 

The Dragon of the Deep, shall listen to my words, and all 
the Deities and Princes shall give ear. 

2 May we he yours, we men, to entertain the Gods ; further 
our sacrifice and give it full success. 

Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, givers of good gifts, quicken the holy 
hymns which wo are singing now. 

6 Strong: vrlskan repeated in the way loved by some of the Ve<lic poets ; 
snowerer of benehts,’ according to SAx^ana. The Gods : meaning, says ISftyana, 
'•>e priests. 

9 h<im : courses of action. Embodied Wish : gave a body to the wishes and 
of worshippers, and [)ersonified them in the same manner as sacrifice is 
to have been embodied and beautified in X. 65. 7. 

^^dta and Parjanya of the thundering Bull : meaning the wind and storm 
attend the thundorou.s iain-cloud, Jidti: divine Favour or Bounty. 
: a class of divinities according to Sftyana. See VII. 88. 7. 

Dragon of the Deep: Aliibudhnya. See 



478 * TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

13 1 follow with success upon the path of Law the two celestial 

Hotars, Priests of oldest time. 

We pray to him Avho dwelleth near, Guard of the Field, to all 
Immortal Gods who never are remiss. 

14 Vasislitha’s sons have raised their voices, like their sire, Kishi- 

like praying to the Gods for happiness. 

Like fuendly-minded kinsmen, come at onr desire, 0 Gods, and 
shake down treasures on us from above. 

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high 

above all other beings. 

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN LX VI I. Brihaspati. 

This holy hymn, sublime and seven-headed, sprung from eter- 
nal Law, our sire discovered. 

Ayasya, friend oi all men, hath engendered the fourth hymn 
as he sang his laud to Indra. 

2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyausthe 

A sura, those heroes, 

Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice’s 
holy statute. 

3 Gilt by his friends who cried with swandike voices, bursting 

the stony barrieis of the prison, 

Brihnspati spake in thunder to the cuttle, Aid uttered praise 
and song when he had found them. 

4 Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave the kine 

that stood in bonds of falsehood. 

Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, drave forth the 
bright cows : three lie made apparent. 


13 Two ceUitud Hutars : Agni and Aditya, according to Sly ana. Guard oj 
the Field: probably Indra. 

15 Repeated from the preceding hymn. 


1 Seven headed: having seven divinions. Accompanied by seven bands o! 
the Maruts, or having seven metres, according to S^yara. Our sire : Angua" 
Fourth : or, extending to all four sides, mighty. 

3 The cattle : the lost cows of the Angirases, representing metaphoricallj 
the rays of light which had been stolen by the fiends of darkness. See I. 

4 Apart from one, away from, two : the meaning is uncertain. PerhapS) » 
a distance from the earth, down from heaven and the firmament. Falsehoo 
the wickedness of the treacherous Panis. Three: heaven, firmament, aii' 
earth. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


470 


hymn ( 37 .] 

5 When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he cut off three 

from him who held the waters. 

Brihaspati discovered, while he thundered like Djans, the 
dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning. 

6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through, 

the guardian of the cattle. 

Seeking the milk-draught with sw^eat-shining comrades he stole 
the Pani’s kine and left him weeping. 

7 lie with bright faithful Friends, winners of booty, hath rent 

the milker of the cows asunder. 

Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty, sweating with 
heat, hath gained a rich possession. 

8 They, longing for the kine, with faithful spii it incited with 

their hymns the Lord of cattle. 

Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked, 
averting shame from one another. 

9 In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who 

roareth like a lion, 

May we, in every fight where heroes conquer, rejoice in strong 
Brihaspati the Victor. 

0 When he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven 

and its most lofty mansions, 

Men praised Brihaspati the Mighty, bringing the light within 
their mouths from sundry places. 

1 Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour : aid in your wont- 

ed manner even the humble. 

Let all our foes bo turned an I driven backward. Hear this, 
0 Heaven and Earth, ye All-producers. 

2 Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the head of 

Arbuda the watery monster, 

Slain Ahi, and set free the Seven Rivers. 0 Heaven and Earth, 
with all the Gods, protect us. 

5 Wt^leni c(t&tle : this is obscure. Ludwig suggests that raay mean 

Hostile’ or ‘ detested.’ Three: heaven, firmnmeiit, and earth. Him who held 
waters: the demon Vala, who kept the rain, as well as the cows or rays of 
Hght, imprisoned. The coir - the cattle ; the beams of light. 

H Comrades: his faithful friends the Maruts. Wild boars: the strong fierce 
; according to SAyana, ‘ bearers of excellent water.’ 

8 Yhe Lord of cattle : Brihaspati, so called because he had released them. 

3|3 The liqht : that is, the hjmna of praise which will bring them the light 
0 help, The stanza is difficult. 

H The watery movsier • the fiend who dominated tlie ocean of air. Ahi : 
the Dragon, Vritra or his brother. 



480 THE HYMNS OF [HOOK X, 

HYMN LXVIll. Biihaspatl 

Like birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, like the 
loud voices of the thundering rain-cloud, 

Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to 
Brihaspati our hymns have sounded. 

2 The Son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bhaga, brought in 

Aryaman among us. 

As Friend of men ho decks the wife and husband : as for the 
race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers. 

3 Brihas[)ati, having won them from the mountains, strewed 

down, like barley out of winnowing-baskets. 

The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, desired of 
all, of blameless form, well-coloured. 

4 As the Sun dews with mcath the seat of Order, and casts a 

flaming meteor down from heaven, 

So from the rock Bnhaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the 
earth’s skin as it were with water. 

5 Forth from mid-air with light he drave the darkness, as the 

gale blows a lily from the river. 

Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Brihaspati ga- 
thered to hijuself the cattle. 

6 Brihaspati, when he witli fiery lightnings cleft through the 

weapon of reviling Vala, 

Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth h^e compassed : ho 
threw the prisons of the red cows open. 

7 That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave 

Brihaspati discovered, 

And dravo, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like s 
bird’s young after the eggs’ disclosure, 

2 The Son of Angiras : Briliaspati, especially worshipped a»id cherished b; 
Angiras. Aryaman : the institution of marriage, represented by Aiyaman 
one meaning of the name being groomsman or matchmaker. 

3 Oat of winnowing-baskets: sthivibhyah : the exact meaning of the word 
is somewhat uncertain, but it is evidently a measure, basket, or 
connected with corn. Sthivimdntah, ‘ armed with sthivis* occurs in X. 
and is said by Siyana to mean ‘occupants of stations.* Wilson render 
sthivibhyah \n place hy ‘from the granaries.’ The cows bestowed 
Biihaspati* are countless as grains of barley on the threshing-floor or wiuno 
ing- place. 

4 Cleft the earth's skin : or surface, with the hoofs of many cattle. 

6 A lily : ftpdla : according to Sftyana the same as 9ftivala» the 

Octandra, a common aquatic plant. u • y IS 

6 Weapon : I adopt S&yapa’s explanation of jdsum, although in A. 
the same word means ‘exhaustion.* 



THE RIQVEDA, 


481 


8 He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who 

eyes a fish in scanty water. 

Brihaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, brought it 
forth like a bowl from out the timber. 

9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning : with 

lucid rays he forced apart the darkness. 

As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of Vala as he 
gloried in his cattle. 

10 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the 

cows Brihaspati had taken. 

He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, whereby the 
Sun and Moon ascend alternate. 

11 Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers have deco- 

rated heaven with constellations. 

They set the light in day, in night the darkness. Brihaspati 
cleft the rock and found the cattle. 

12 This homage have we offered to the Cloud-God who thunders 

out to many in succession. 

May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and 
horses, men, and heroes. 

HYMN LXIX. Agni. 

Auspicious is the aspect of Vadhryasva’s fire ; good is its 
guidance, pleasant are its visitings. 

When first the people of Suniitra kindle it, with butter pour- 
ed thei’eon it crackles and shines bright. 

2 Batter is that which makes V.idhryasva’s fire grow strong ; 
the butter is its food, the butter m ikes it fat. 

It spreads abroad when butter h ith been offered it, and balm- 
ed with streams of butter slimes fortli like the Sun. 

8 ; the sweet milk ; that is, the cows who pinduced it. 

Like a botol; which already exists potfuti.illy iu the wood from which it is 
roduced by cutting. 

» Wtlaou, following S&yana, paraphrases the second line ‘ be seized (the 
»ttl 0 from the rock) of V.da surrounded by the kine as (one extracts) mar- 
from a bone,’ 

11 The Fathers : ‘ The connection of the fathers with the light, of which 
'•ey are both the embodiments and the guardians, is alone sufficient to ex- 
IMQ their action in placing the stars iu the sky.’ — Wallis, Cosmoloqif of the 
Lp P- 08. Or, as Ludwig remarks, the Fathers themselves may he llie 

[12 To many ; ’cows ’ is, apparently, understood. Slyana supplies richat 
r *'®^lte8 in order many (sacred stanzas).’ — Wilson. 

Utl has been mentioned, in VI. 61. 1, aa a worshipper of Saras- 

I ■ he appears as a special worshipper of Agni. 

' 31 



482 THE HYMNS OP [BOOE X, 

3 Still newest is this face of thine, 0 Agni, which Manu and Sn- 

mitra have enkindled. 

So richly shine, accept our songs with favour, so give us strength, 
euing food, so send us glory. 

4 Accept this offering, Aojni, whom aforetime Vadhryasva hath 

entreated and enkindled. 

Guard well our homes and people, guard our bodies, protect 
thy gift to us which thou hast granted. 

5 Be splendid, guard us, Kinsman of Vadhryasva ; let not the 

enmity of men o'ercome thee. 

Like the bold heroCbyavana, I Siimitra tell forth the title of 
Vadhryasva^s Kinsman. 

6 All treasures hast thou won, of plains and mountains, and 

quelled the Dasaa’ and the Aiyas’ hatred. 

Like the bold hero Chyavana, O Agni, mayst thou subdue the 
men who long for battle. 

7 Deft Agni hath a lengthened thread, tall oxen, a thousaiui 

heifers, numberless devices. 

Decked by the n>en, splendid among the splendid, shine 
brightly forth amid devout Sumitras. 

8 Thine is the teeming cow, 0 Jatavedas, who pours at once her 

ceaseless flow, Sabardhuk. 

Thou art lit up by men enriched with guerdon, 0 Agni, by 
the pious-souled Sumitias. 

9 Even Immortal Gods, O Jafatvedas, VadH^yasYa^s Kinsman, 

have declared thy grandeur. 

When human tribes drew near with supplication thou conquer 
edst with men whom thou hadst strengthened. 

10 Like as a father bears his son, 0 Agni, Vudhryasva bare thei 

in his lap and served thee. 

Thou, Youngest God, having enjoyed his fuel, didst vanquisl 
those of old though they were mighty. 

11 Vadhi 7 asva '8 Agni evermore hath vanquished his foes will 

heroes who had pressed the Soma. 

Lord of bright rays, thou burn test up the battle, subduin^ 
as our help, e’en mighty foemen. _ 

3 Sumitra : sou of Vadhryasva and RUhi of the hymn. , , ^ 

6 Chyavana: a son of Bhiigu. Or tile word may mean ‘conqueringi 

SAysna interprets it. Vadhryasva' 9 Kinsman : Ets having been 

worshipped and cheiibhed by that Iliahi. See stanza 10.) <. f*me) 

7 A lenythsued thread : continual sacrifices, from ancient to present i 

Devices : ways of attaining bis object. Or satdnUha may **^*®°> : 

hundred or many musical modes or sacred soug^ ; ' or ‘ praised by ma : 

* the leader of hundreds (of burnt offerings).’ — WilsCa. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


48t 


70.] 

]2 This Agni of Vadhryasva, Vritra-slayer, lit from of old, must 
be invoked with homage. 

As such assail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether the foes be 
strangers or be kinsmen. 

HYMN LXX. Aprts. 

Enjoy, 0 Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled ludle wheie 
we pour libation. 

Rise up for worship of the Gods, wise Agni, on the earth’s 
height, while days are bright with beauty. 

2 May he who goes before the Gods come hither with steeds 

whose shapes are varied, Nurasansa. 

May he, most Godlike, 8i>eed our offered viands with homage 
God-ward on the path of Order. 

3 Men with oblations laud most constant Agni, and pray him to 

perform an envoy’s duty. 

With lightly-rolling car and best draught-horses, bring the 
Gods hither and sit down as Hotar. 

4 May the delight of Gods spread out transversely : may it be 

with us long in length and fragrant. 

0 Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou the wil- 
ling Gods whose Chief is Indra. 

5 Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven, or spring apart 

to suit the wide earth’s measure. 

Yearning, ye Doors, with those sublime in greatness, seize 
eagerly the heavenly Car that cometh. 

6 Here in this shrine may Dawn and Night, the Daughters of 

Heaven, the skilful Goddesses, be seated. 

In your wide lap, auspicious, willing Ladies, mtfy the Gods teat 
them with a willing spirit. 

7 Up stands the stone, high burns the fire enkindled ; AditTs lap 

contains the Friendly Natures. 

Ye Two Chief Priests who serve at this our worship, may ye, 
more skilled, win for as rich possessions. 

Other Apr! hymns may be compared ; I. 18, 142, and 188 ; II. 8 ; IH. 4 ; 
5 ; VII. 2, and IX. 6. The usual deities and deified objects, with the ex* 
•ption of TanfinapAt, are invoked. 

1 if ^ ministrant priest.’ — Wilson. 

J delight of Ood» : the sacred grass. 

• heavenly Car : which brings the Gods. " 

* ^heetone: with which the Soma juice is expressed. AditVs lap: the 
gusce of the earth. The Friendly Naturee; the Gods. According to 

y»na, ‘the acceptable sacfrificial vessels.* Tvh> Chief PHette: pvrdhffau : 
PVhapi Xgni and Aditya. Afore ehiUed : than human priests. 



484 


THE HYMNS OP 


[book X. 


8 On our wide gra&s, Three Goddesses be seated : for you have 

we prepated and made it pleasant. 

May I]^, sUe whose foot drops oil, the Goddess, taste, mandike 
sacrifice and well-set presents. ’ 

9 Since thou, God Tvashtar, hast made beauty perfect, sinco 

thou hast been the Angirases' Companion, 

Willing, most wealthy, Giver of possessions, grant us the Gods’ 
assembly, thou wlio knowest. 

10 Well knowing, binding with thy cord, bring hither. Lord of 
the Wood, the Deities’ assembly. 

The God prepare and season our oblations : may Heaven and 
Earth be gracious to my calling. 


11 Agni, bring hither Vanina to help us, Indra from heaven, 
from air’s mid-realm the Maruts. 

On sacred grass all Holy Ones be seated, and let the Immortal 
Gods rejoice in Svaha. 


HYMN LXXI. 

Whbn men, Brihaspati, giving names to objects, sent out Vik’s 
first and earliest utterances. 

All that was excellent and spotless, treasured within them, was 
disclosed through their affection. 

% Where, like men cleansing corn-flour in a cribble, the wise in 
spirit have created language, 

Friends see and recognize the marks of friendship : their speech 
retains the blessM sign imprinted. 


8 Three Goddesses : IIA, Sarasvatl, and BhAratt. Taste • the verb is pluul 
meaning, may 114 and the others taste. Man-like ; as at the sacrifice of Ma«u 
according to Styana. 

9 Grant us the Gods' assemhhf : the Commentators explain -p^thas some 
idmes as ‘ place,’ sometimes as ‘ food ’ or * nir ’ or ‘ water.’ Here Wilson, follow 
ing SAyana, translates ; — ‘ offer the food of the gods (to them).’ 

10 Binding with thy cord: it is not clc.ir what is to be bound, or 

in order. According to SAyana, the p^thas, which he explains as nantji 
devdndm, food of the Gods, is to be fastened with a rope. Lord of the Wood, 
vdnaspati : the ydpa or Sacrificial Post. 

11 Svdhd: that is, in the sacnfi-ciai offerings presented with the exclamatior 

SvAhA, Ave, or Hail. 

JIlAnam or Knowledge, the subject of this very difficult hymn, ia said bj 
SAyana to mean Paramabrahm.*jftAn ira, knowledge of the higher truths o 
Religion, which teaches man lus own nature and how he may be reunited 
the Sui^reme Spirit. < 

1 Vdk : Voice or Speech, the Sacred Word. Hvre specially the . 
the hymn regarded as the means of communication between men and » 
See Vedie India (Story of the. Nations Seiiea), pp 269—271. 




THE EtQVEDA. 


485 


71.] 

3 With sacrifice the trace of Vak they followed, and found her 

harbouring within the Rishis. 

They brought her, dealt her forth in many places : seven 
singers make her tones resound in concert. 

4 One man hath ne’er seen Vak, and yet he seeth : one man 

hath liearing but hath never heaid her. 

But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well- 
dressed woman to her husband. 

5 One man they call a laggard, dull in friendship: they never 

urge him on to deeds of valour. 

He wanders on in {(rofitlcss illusion : the Voice he heard yields 
neither fruit nor blossom. 

6 No part in Vak hath he who hath abandoned his own dear 

friend who knows the truth of friendship. 

Even if he hears her still in vain he listens : naught knows 
he of the path of righteous action. 

7 Unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends endowed 

alike with eyes and hearing. 

Some look like tanks that leach the mouth or shoulder, others 
like pools of water fit to bathe in. 

8 When friendly Brahmans sacrifice together with mental im- 

pulse which the heart hath fashioned, 

They leave one far behind through their attainments, and some 
who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere. 

9 Those mou who step not back and move not forward, nor 

Brahmans nor preparers of libations, 

Having attained to Vak in sinful fashion spin out their thread 
in ignorance like spinsters. 

10 All friends are joyful in tlio friend Avho cometh in triumph, 

having conquered in assembly. 

He is their blame-averter, food-provider : prepared is he and 
fit for deed of vigour. 


3 Harbouring within tht Rishh : they discovered, in the course of sacrifioe, 
tat the inspiied Rishia Hloue understood Speech as required for religioua 
^iirposea. /n inany plwes : among the Hotar-priesta. Seven singers : ‘ the 
noisy (birds) meet together.’ — Wilson : referring, aays S&yaya, to the 
leveu metres, the G&yatri, etc. 

o Some who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere : ‘ others walk about 
— Muir. 

not back and move not forward : take no active part in religious 
‘ Those who do not walk (with the Brdhmans) in this lower 
('^ith the gods) in the upper world,’ is Wilson’s paraphrase of the 
iuch ' f fiave rendered literally. Like spinsters : ‘ (like) female weavers. 
mlt which Prof. Aufrecht thinks may, with probability, be 

pea to sirls, a vrord which occurs only here,’— Muir, 



486 


TBE HYMNS OF 


[BOOKX^ 

1 1 One plies his constant task reciting verses : one sings the holy 
psalm in Sakvart measures. 

One more, the Brahman, tells the lore of being, and one lays 
down the rules of sacrificing. 


HYMN LXXII. The Gods. 

Lbt us with tuneful skill proclaim these generations of the Gods 
That one may see them when these hymns are chanted in a 
future age. 

2 These Brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelting, like 

a smith. 

Existence, in an earlier age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang, 

3 Existence, in the earliest age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang, 
Thereafter were the regions born. This sprang from the Pro- 
ductive Power. 


4 Earth sprang from the Productive Power; the regions from 
the earth were born. 

Baksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi was Daksha’s Child. 

6 For Aditi, 0 Daksha, she who is thy Daughter, was broughi 
forth. 

After her were the blessed Gods born sharers of immortal life, 
6 When ye, 0 Gods, in yonder deep close-clasping one anothei 
stood. 


11 Reciting verses : repeating richas or verses of the^igveda. This is tb 
duty of the Hotar. The holy psalm : the Gftyatra or ^man. The Udg^ta 
or Chanter, one of the four chief priests is intended. The love of being ’ th( 
knowledge of all that exists. Lays down the rules : ‘ prescribes the order 
—Muir. ' Measures the materials.'— Wilson. This is the duty of the Adh 
▼aryu another of the chief priests. The hymn has been transliterate( 
and translated by Dr. J. Muir, O S, Texts, I. pp. 254 -256. It has also beei 
metrically rendered by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder des Rtgveaa, wn 
have endeavoured, by transposing some of the stanzas, to bring them mt 
closer connexion. According to Sdyana, the subject of the whole hy^ i 
* the eulogy of the understanding of the Veda as essential to divine knowieag 

2 These : all beings. Like a smith : as a blacksmith blows up his fire aii( 

3 The regions: * the quarters (of the horizon).’— Wilson. This: 

earth. Productive Power: the meaning of uttdnapadoh is uncertain, w 
renders it by ‘ the begetter (the sky)’; Wdsou by ‘ the b 

4 And Aditi was Daksha; s Child: ‘Yaska remark8.........How can to b 

possible ? They m.iy have had the same origin ; or, acrarding fo the na 
the gods, they may have been born from each other, — have derive t 
tance from one another.’-O. S. Texts. IV. 13. Aditi is or the Infinii 

and Daksha is Force or Power personified. See Vedic Hymns, 1. p 

6 ‘ The two verses 6 and 7 are interesting as containing an mdepena 
of the origin of the world ; the gods are said to have p. 48. 

the atoms which formed the earth. — Wallis, Cosmology of tht Rtyve » V 



THE RiaVBHi. 


487 


truN 7S.] 

Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening cloud of dust 
arose. 

7 When, 0 ye Gods, like Yatis, ye caused all existing things to 

grow, 

Then ye brought SArya forward who was lying hidden in 
the sea. 

8 Eight are the Sons of Aditi who from her body sprano; to life. 
With seven she went to meet the Gods: she cast Martanda 

far away. 

9 So with her Seven Sons Aditi went forth to meet the earlier 

age. 

She brought Miirtanda thitherward to spring to life and die 
againl 

HYMN LXXIII. India. 

Tnou wast born mighty for victorious valour, exulting, strong- 
est, full of pride and courigo. 

There, even there, the Mariits strengthened Indra when hla 
most rapid Mother stirred the Hero. 

2 There with fiend’s w iys e’en Pnsini was seated : with much 

laudation they exalted Indra, 

As if encompassed l»y the Mighty-footed, from darkness, near 
at hand, forth came the Children. 

3 High are thy feet when on thy way thou goest : the strength 

thou foundest here hath lent thee vigour. 

Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou boldest O Indra, niayst 
thou turn the Aavins hither. 


7 Yatis: devotees. 

8 Bight are the Sons ; according to the Commentator, Mitra, Varunji, Dhitar, 
Aryaman, An^a, Bliaga, Vivaaviln, and Aditya (the Sun). Milrt^ndu: Surya, 
tile Sun. His exposure probably rofera to his sweeping through the eky, — 
Ludwig. But see Bergaiguo, La Religion V4diqae, III. 107. 


1 M^other : Aditi. Stirred th^ Hero : gave him free motion ns «oon as lie was 
torn, or incited him to action by telling him of his future oppoueut See VllI 

*5. 5, and 66. 2 . 

2 This stanza is unintelUgiblo to mo Prie int • meaning perh m 

Ij'id wig conjectures. The An ghty- footed . Imlra.. T/ie Ck<,'(li co ■ ^ ■ u 

yuts. WiUuu translates, aft ^r SAya.ia : — ‘ Tiie mardal r<»op of lu ir- 
ojurer encamped around Indra (accompanied) by the swift-iuovmg ^Alarut^*} : 
•tfS? him with abundant pi awe; like (cattl**) penned up within a great 

7. ’ embryonic (waters) isvued from the ( VritraJ who h.id arrived in the 
of darkness.’ ‘ 

jlkali^ travelling through the heavens. Hyena* : sAluvriUin : 



488 TUV. HYMNS OF [BOOK x 

4 Speeding at once to sacrifice thou comest : for friendshin 

thou art bringing'both Ndsatyas. ^ 

Thou hndst a thousand treasures in possession. The AsTins 
O thou Hero, gave thee riches. ‘ ' 

5 Glad, for the race that rests on holy Order, with friends ^hc 

hasten to their go-d, hath Indra 
With these his rnngic powers assailed the Dasyu : he casi 
away the gloomy mists, tlie darkness. 

6 Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as Indra strik 

ing down the car of Ushas. 

With thy beloved lofty Friends thou earnest, and with th( 
assurance of thine heart thou slowest. 


7 War-loving Namiichi thou smotest, robbing the H&sa of hi? 

magic for the Rishi. 

For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, paths lead 
ing as it were directly God-ward. 

8 These names of thine thou hast fulfilled completely : as Lord 

thou boldest in thine arm, 0 Indra. 

In thee, through thy great might, the Gods are joyful : thi 
roots of trees hast thou directed upward. 

9 May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoil 

that lies in depth of waters. 

Thou from the udder which o’er earth is fastened hast ponre( 
the milk into the kine and herbage. 

10 When others call him offspring of the Courier, my meaning i 
that Mighty Power pr<'duced him. 

Ho came from Manyu and remained in houses : whence h 
hath bpruiig is known to Indra only. 


(5 Two of like name : or, of similar nature; gloomy mists and darkness. ^ 
ear of Uthas ; see IV. 30. 8—11. The ugaurance of thy heart: thy iruste 
thunderbolt. 

8 Thou hait fulfilled: hast acted in full accordance with the 
benrest, such as Vritra-slayer. Sakra, etc. Thou boldest: the thuuderW 
The roots of trees • the clouds arc often compared to trees. The ram i 
fruit, and when they pour it down their roots are supposed to be tum i 
ward. 

9 Quoit : chaJerdm : meaning the thunderbolt. The udder : the firmamen 

10 The Courser: meaning Heaven. Manyu: wmth, 

'personified. My meaning is: the speaker declares sprini 

common myti ©logical explanations. He considers the God to nav r 
from a transcendental Power. — Ludwig. obacui 

Grassmanu bsoi^hes this hymn to his Appendix as being 
and in parts absolutely uniuteliigioie. I ha\e, for the most pa » 
Ludwig’s interpretation. 



THE ttlGVEDA. 


yrJi/A' 74.] 


m 


1 Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedbas, Eishis, im- 
ploring, have come nigh to Indra : 

Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision : deliver us as men 
whom snares entangle. 


HYMN LXXIV. I„ara. 

I \M prepared to laud with song or worship the Noble Ones 
who are in earth and heaven, 

Or Coursers who have triumphed in the contest, or those who, 
famed, have won the prize with glory. 

2 Their call, the call of Gods, went up to heaven : they kissed 

the ground with glory-seeking spirit, 

There where the Gods look on for happy fortune, and like 
the kindly heavens bestow their bounties. 

3 This is the song of those Immortal Beings who long for trea- 

sures ill their full perfection. 

May these, completing prayers and sacrifices, bestow upon us 
wealth where naught is wanting. 

4 Those living men extolled thy deed, 0 Indra, those who would 

fain burst through the stall of cattle, 

Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose Sons 
are many and her streams past number. 

6 Sachivan, win to your assistance Indra who never bends, who 
overcomes his foemen, 

Hibhukshan, Maghavan, the hymn's upholder, who, rich in 
food, beais man’s kind friend, the thunder. 

6 Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, India hath 
earned his name of Vritra-slayer. 

Ho hath appeared, the mighty Lord of Conquest. What we 
would have him do let him accomplish. 


The Rubject of the hymn is a coming horse-race, and the Rishi invokes in 
avour of the Yaj imAna, the Vasus, racers who have won the prize in former 
times, and the men who owned t.hem. Indra also is appealed to for help, 
tsee VedUche Studien, I. p. 129. 

2 The call of Gods : the Gods are imagined as present and interested in the 
face. They kissed the ground: the horses lightly touched the earth as they 


men : the Angiraaea. IJer who hare hut once : Heaven, accord- 
^ ' Earth, according toQiassmann. Prisni, the mother of the 

must be meant. ->Ludwig. See VI. 48. 22. ' ' 

^ ?'tchh<an; apparently a man's name. ‘ Celebrator of holy rites.’ — Wilson. 

; the YajamAua. Ue hath appeared : the poet ima- 
huira luuiself to be present. ^ 



490 


[BOOK 


THE hymns op 

HYMN LXXV. The River, 

Thb singer, 0 ye Waters, in Vivasv&n’s place, shall tell you 
grandeur forth that is beyond compare. 

The Rivern have come forward triply, seven and seven. Sindhi 
in might surpasses all the streams that flow. 

2 Varuria cut the cliannels for thy forward course, 0 Sindhu, 

when thou rannest on to win the race. 

Thou speedest o’er precipitous ridges of the earth, when thoi 
art Lord and Leader of these moving floods. 

3 His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth : he puts foitl 

endless vigour with a flash of light. 

Like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the cloud, so Sin 
dhu rushes on bellowing like a bull. 

4 Like mothers to their calves, like milch-kine with their milk 

so, Sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers run. 

Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army’s wings what tinu 
thou comest in the van of these swift streams. 

b Favour ye this my laud, 0 Gang i, Yamun^, 0 Sutudri, Parii 
shni, and Sarasvati : ^ 

With Asikni, Vitasta, 0 Marudviidh^, 0 Arjikiy^ with Su 
shoma hear my call. 

6 First with TrishUma thou art eager to flow forth, with Rasa, 
and Susartu, and with Svety^ here, 

With Kubhi ; and with these, Sindhu ! ar^ Mehatnu, thou 
seekest in thy course Krumu and Gomat?. 

\ 0 ye Waters : apparently the Rivers are avMressed aa representing all the 
divine Waters. Vivasvdns place: wliero the singers stand when they sing 
hymns. 2'riply, seven and seven : twenty-one rivers ; two other sets of seven 
each being added to the seven chief rivers of the PanjAb. SAyapa explaina 
differently: — ‘ they flowed by sevens through the three (worlds),’— Wilson. 
' Each set of seven [streams] has followed a threefold course.’ — Muir, fly 
seven and seven in three courses.’ — M. Muller. 

5 The poet addresses first the most distant rivers. Oangd : the Ganges n 
mentioned, indirectly, in only one other verse of the Rlgveda, and 

the word is said by some to be the name of a woman. See VI 45 - 

Yamund: the Jumna. S Uudri : the Sutlej or Satlaj. Parushnt .- the K v • 
Sarasvati: see VI. 61. 2.’ Asihit: the ancient Acesinea ; the Vedic name 
the ChandrabhAgA, the present ChenAb. Vitastd: probably the 
Sydaspes of the ^Greeks. Marudvridhd : meaning, increased by 
not identified. Arjtkiyd and Sushomd are said by YAska to be the Vip » 
the Sindhu ; but this is not possible, and it is uncertain what rivers 
meant. 

6 Kubhd, KrumUf and Oomati have been mentioned in previous 

The other streams whose names occur in this stanza are probably ^ jj, 

iffliients of the Indus. All that is known regarding the rivers 
itansas 5 and 6 may be found in Zimmer’s AUindischet Leben, pp- 4ii* 



THE nroVEDA. 


491 


/mV 76.] 

7 Flashing and whitely-gleamiug in her mightiness, she moves 

along her ample volumes through the realms, 

Most active of the active, Sindhu unrestrained, like to a dap- 
pled mare, beautiful, fair to see. 

8 Rich in good steeds is Sindhu, rich in cars and robes, rich in 

gold, nobly-fashioned, rich in ample wealth. 

Blest Silamivati and young t)rnavati invest themselves with 
raiment rich in store of sweets. 

9 Sindliu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by steeds, 

and with that car shall she win booty in this fight. 

So have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, of 
independent glory, roaring as it runs. 

HYMN LXXYL Press-atone*. 

I GRASP at you when power and strength begin to dawn : 

bedew ye, Indra and the Maruts, Heaven and Earth, 

That Day and Night, in every hall of sacrifice, may wait on us 
and bless us when they first spring forth. 

2 Press the libation out, m ist excellent of all : the Pressing- 

stone is grasped like a hand-guided steed. 

So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and the fleet 
courser’s might that speeds to ample wealth. 

3 J nice that this Stone pours out removes defect of ours, as in 

old time it brought prosperity to man. 


1 In her mightiness : in the preceding stanzas Sindhu appears to be a River- 
lod, but in this and following verses the epithets are feminine. 

^ Silamdoati And. tfrntoati appear to be names of rivers. According to 
I4yana, the words are epithets of Sindhu and mean respectively ‘ abounding 
nStlamd plants,’ said to be used for cordage, and ‘rich in wool.’ The 
neaning of the second half of the second line is uncertain : — ‘ wears [as only 
•aa river is supposed to be the subject] houey-growing (flowers).’ — Wilson. 

9 In this fight: the hymn may, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, be a prayer 
aid in a battle that is to be fought on the banks of the Sindhu or Indus. 
The hymn has been transliterated and translated by Dr. J Muir, 0. S. Texts^ 
V. 343—345, and a version of st. uzas 1 — 8 is given by Prof. Zimmer, Altindis- 
^tben, p. 4. A complete translation, with full explanatory notes, is given 
a Max Muller’s India, What can it Teach us pp. 164 — 168. 


1 I grasp at you: 'I propitiate you ’ — Wilson. Power and strength: the 
beams which bring new vigour. Day and Night : or, ‘ both day-halves.' 
bv T ° •' or, to Manu. Tvashlar's milk-blent juice : the Soma juice brewed 

y ivaahiar for the year, which represents the life-sustaining power of Nature. 

witiA the hue <>/ steeds: tawny-coloured. SAyana interprets 
^^erently ‘when the son of Twa.shlri, hidden by the (stolen) cows, and 
form of a horse, (was to be slain).’— Wilson. Trisiras the son of 
DdMi. • regarded as an enemy of the Clods. Indra slew him and took 
of the Som». 



492 5r//^ HYMNS OF [SOOK X 

At sacrifices they established holy rites on TvashUr’s milk* 
blent juice bright with the hue of steeds. 

4 Drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us: keep 

Nirriti afar and banish penury. 

Pour lichcs forth for us with troops of hero sons, and bear ye 
up, 0 Stones, the song that visits Gods. 

5 To you who are more nnghty than the heavens themselves, 

who, finishing your task with more than Vihhvan’s speed, 
More rapidly than Vayu seize the Soma juice, better than 
Agni give us food, to you I sing. 

6 Stirred be the glorious Stones: let it press out the juice, the 

Stone w'ith heavenly song that reaches up to heaven, 
There where the men diaw' fortli the mcath for which they 
long, sending their voice around in rivalry of speed. 

7 The Stones press out the Soma, sw ift as car-borne men, and, 

eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap thereof. 

To fill the bcjiker, they exhaust the udder’s store, as the men 
purify oblations with their lips. 

8 Ye, present men, have been most skilful in your work, even 

ye, 0 Stones who pressed Soma for Indra’s drink. 

May all ye have of fair go to the Heavenly Race, and all your 
treasure to the earthly worshipper. 

HYMN LXXVII. MaruU 

As with their voice fiom cloud they sprinkle treasure so are the 
wise man’s liberal sacrifices. 

1 praise their Company that merits worship as the good MaruU’ 
priest to pay them honour. 


4 Nirriti: the Goddess of Death and Destruction, 

6 Vibhvan : one of the three Ribhus. Vdyu : or, the wind. 

6 The men : meaning the presa^stones. Cf. stauea 8. 

7^ The udder's store: the juice contained in the milky Soma-plant. With 
\heir lips : with the praises that they utter. 

8 Worshipper: SAyana explains sunvati by ynjamdnaya, to the Yajani4n» 
)r saciificer. The more literal translation would be ‘ to the presser,’ the niRfl 
ftLo pi esses out or effuses the Soma juice. 


1 This stanza is obscure. According to SAyana. vij^nHsha^ (the wise tnsn *) 
a formed from jan, to generate, and not from jUd, to know ‘they 
generators (of the world) like sacrifices abounding in libations.* — Wilson. ^ ^ 
vod Maruts' priest : either the band of the Maruts themselves regarded 
Irahman, or a human priest specially skilled in propitiating them. ' 

duller translates differently. See Hymns^ I. p. 412. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


493 


{YMN 77.] 

2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through 

many nights,— this noble band of Maruts. 

Like stags the Sons of Dyaus have striven onward, the Sons 
of Aditi grown strong like pillars. 

3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own 

mass, as from the cloud spreads Siirya ; 

Like mighty Heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly gallants 
who destroy the wicked. 

4 When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the earth is 

loosened, as it were, and shaken. 

This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : come all united, 
fraught, as 'twere, with viands. 

5 Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, luminous with 

your beams, with splendour as at d.iwn ; 

Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked men, like hover- 
ing birds urged forward, scattering rain around. 

6 When ye come forth, 0 Murats, from the distance, from the 

great treasury of rich posse-sions, 

Knowing, 0 Vaaus, boons that should be granted, even from 
afar drive back the men who hate us. 

7 He who, engaged in the rite’s final duty, brings, as a man, 

oblation to the Maruts, 

Wins him life’s wealthy fulness, blest with heroes : he shall 
be present, too, where Gods drink Soma. 

8 For these are Helps adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune 

by their name Adityas. 

Speeding on cars let them protect our praises, delighting in 
our sacrifice and worship. 


2 This noble band of Maruts : Prof. Ludwig suggests that 
means hero a festival held in honour of the Maruts at the end of the perioc i- 
cal rriins, and that, after many nights, the Maruts adorn themselves for this. 
Pillars . I follow Ludwig ; but ;he meaning of akr&h is uncertain. Geldner 
Mo. it to mean * horses,’ a parallelism to stags, or antelopes. Slyana makes 
"11.11116,06^11^6, and explains aMh by Akramana^Mh : ~ the swift-goiug 
80118 of Aditi do not increase in glory,’ — Wilson. 

4 This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : ‘ this manifold sacrifice cornea 
towards you.’— Wilson. 

7 h the rite's final duty : SA-yana explains udrichi yajiii by yajfle 

sampUrne satL when the sacrifice has its praise peifccted, when the 
jjoiifice ig complete. Asaman: according to Ludwig, ‘ no ^ 

not in hia human character but having iUa 

Gods drink Soma: he, a God himself, shall be admitted to the 
^ods’ lociety. 



494 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X, 


HYMN LXXVIII. Marnt,. 

Yb by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, skilful 
inviting Gods with saeiifices; 

Fair to behold, like Kings, with bright adornment, like spot- 
less gallants, leaders of the people : 

2 Like fiie with flashing flame, breast-bound with chains of gold, 

like tempest-blasts, self-moving, swift to lend your aid; 

As best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, like Somas, good 
to guard the man who follows Law. 

3 Shakei 8 of all, like gales of wind they travel, like tongues o) 

burning fires in their effulgence. 

Mighty are they as Warriors clad in armour, and, like the 
Fathers’ prayeis, Most Bounteous Givers. 

4 Like spokes of car-wheels in one nave united, ever victorioui 

like heavenly Heroes, 

Shedding their precious balm like yo\ithfnl suitors, they rais( 
their voice and chant their psalm as singers. 

6 They who are fleet to travel like the noblest steeds, long tc 
obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers, 

Like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods, like 
omniform Angirases with Sania-hymns. 

6 Bom from the stream, like press-stones are the Princes, fo! 

ever like the stones that crush in pieces ; 

Sons of a beauteous Dame, like playful children, like a grea 
host upon the march with splendour. S- 

7 Like ra\s of Dawn, the visitors of sacrifice, they shine witl 

ornaments as eager to be bright. 

Like rivers hasting on, glittering with their spears, from fa 
away they measure out the distances. 

8 Gods, send us happiness and make us wealthy, letting us sin^ 

ers prosper, 0 ye Maruts. 

Bethink you of our praise and of our friendship: ye from of oJ 
have riches to vouchsafe us. 


HYMN LXXIX. 

I HAVE beheld the might of this Great Being, Immortal in th 

midst of tribes of mortals. a vou 

His jaws now open and now shut together : much they cie 
iiisatiately chewing. * 


4 Shedding their precious balm : pouring out the fertilizing rain as liberal 
M young wooere give preseuta. . , ^ the 

6 Born from the stream : from the sea of air, or from Sm ? ^ 

7 They measure out the distances: ‘have traversed leasee. 

‘ They measure many miles.' — M. MUller. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


495 


rrKA^ 80.] 

2 His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden : unsated with 

his tongue he eats tlie fuel. 

With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses, for him 
they quickly bring his food together. 

3 Seeking, as ’twere, his Mother’s secret bosom, he, like a child, 

creeps on tlirongh wide spread bushes. 

One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing 
deep within the earth’s recesses. 

4 This holy Law I tell you, Karth and Heaven : the Infant at 

his birth devours his Parents. 

Ho knowledge of the God have I, a mortal. Yea, Agni know- 
eth best, for he hath wisdom. 

5 This man who quickly gives him food, who offers his gifts of 

oil and butter and supports him, — 

Him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on : thou showest 
him thy face from all sides, Agni. 

6 Agni, hast thou committed sin or treason among the Godst In 

Ignorance I ask thee. 

Playing, not plnyini?, hegold-hued and toothless, hath cut his 
food up as the knife a victim. 

7 He, born in wood hath yoked his horses rushing in all direc- 

tions, held with reins that glitter. 

The well-born friend hath carved his food with Vasus: in all 
his limbs he hath increased and prospered. 

HYMN LXXX. Agni. 

Aqni bestows the fleet prize-winning courser ; Agni, the hero 
famed and firm in duty. 

Agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven, and fills the 
fruitful dame who teems with heroes. 


2 His eyes : according to Sdyana, the eyes of Agni are the distant Sun and 
Hoon, and his head is hidden in mens’ stomachs, in the shape of the heat 
winch enables them to digest their food, llis food : the sticks for fuel, which 
^re bound up into fagots. 

3 This stanza is very obscure. Agni, born from the wood of the fire-sticks, 
seems, as he creeps through the brushwood that he is burning, to seek 
entrance again into his mother’s side, fie then finds an old dry tree or log, 
which had been deeply rooted in the earth, and feeds on it as on food that 
**^8 been specially prepared for him. 

f His Parents .*• the two fire-sticks from which he has been produced.^ 

3 Hast thou committed sin f : Art thou as voracious and destructive in 
8Avtn as thou art on earth f Playing^ not “playing : playing about the fuel, 
jet earnestly intent on devouiing his food. * Sporting (here), not sporting 
7 A victim : gEm : ox or cow. 

‘ / well-born Pnend : Agni. In all hU IMt : parvahhih : ‘ with logs of 

wuod.^wilson. 



496 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK x\ 

2 Bleat be the wood that feeds the active Agni : within the two 

great worlds both Agni entered. 

Agni impels a single man to battle, and with him renda in 
pieces many a foeman. 

3 Agni rejoiced the ear of him who praised him, and from the 

waters burnt away Jarutha. 

Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavern, and made Nrimedha rich 
with troops of children. 

4 Agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero, and sent the 

sage who wins a thousand cattle. 

Agni hath made oblations rise to heaven : to every place are 
Agni’a laws extended. 

5 With songs of praise the Rishis call on Agni ; on Agni, heroes 

worsted in the foray. 

Birds flying in the region call on Agni : around a thousand 
cattle Agni wanders. 

6 Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who have sprung 

from Nahus’ line adore him. 

Stablished in holy oil is Agni’s pasture, on the Gandharva 
path of Law and Order. 

7 The Ribhus fabricated prayer for Agni, and wo with mighty 

hymns have called on Agni. 

Agni, Mjst Youthful Goil, protect the singer : win us by wor* 
ship, Agni, great po3se>sions. 

HY.MX LXXXI. Visvakarman 

He who site down as lIo^ar-p^est, the }{ishi, our Father, 
offering up all things existing. — 

He, seeking through hi.s wish a great possession, came among 
men on earth as archetypal. 

3 JarUtha: see VII 1. 7, and 9 6. AlH: his deliverance is ascribed tr 
the Asvins in I 112 7, ll*> 8, 117, 3 and U8. 7. 

5 Around a thousand cattle : in the tires liglited to keep off wild beasb 
and demons of darkness. 

6 Gandharva path : sublime ; that which the Gaiidharvas in heaven 
to travel. 

7 The Ribhus : or Rishis skilful as the Ribhus. 

Visvakarinan, the Oumific, is represented in this hymn as the univem 
Father and Generator, the Creator of all things and Architect of the won s 

I All things exlstinff : regarded as being contained in the offerings pre^'entei 
by Visvakarman. Through hU wish: through his desire to create. A'w y 
pal : the meaning of pnUhamachhdd is uncertain. In Wilson’s Transja loi 
* inventor ’ is a mi'.print for ‘investor,* that is, ‘ first investing Agni with 
worlds,’ accoiding to S.iyana's explanation. ‘First appearing.’— o 
‘ The first worshipper.'— Wallis. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


497 


rm 81 •] 

What was the place whereon he took his station 1 What was 
it that supported him 1 How was it 1 
Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, with 
mighty power disclosed the heavens. 

He who hath eyes on all sides round about him, a mouth on 
all sides, arms and feet on all sides, 

He, the Sole God, producing earth and heaven, weldeth them, 
with his arms as wings, together. 

What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which 
they fashioned out the earth and heaven 1 
Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit whereon he stood 
when he estai)lished all things. 

Thine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid- 
most here, 0 Visvakarman, 

Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, 0 Bless6d, and come thy- 
self, exalted, to our worship. 

; Bring thou thyself, exalted with oblation, 0 Visvakarman, 
Earth and Heaven to worship. 

Let other men around us live in folly : here let us have a rich 
and liberal patron. 

f Let us invoke to-day, to aid our labour, the Lord of Speech, 
the thought-swift Visvakarman. 

May he hear kindly all our invocations who gives all bliss for 
aid, whose works are righteous. 

3 Weldeth them: cp. IV. 2. 17, and X. 72. 2. With hii arms as wings : 
mning the fiame in which the matter is enielted. Ludwig thiuka that 
hirlwinds, produced by the action of hands, feet, and wings, are intended. 

4 The first half-line occurs also in X. 31. 7. They: the makers of the 
forld directed by Paramesvara — Sfiyana. 

5 Or the fira half -line maybe rendered Thy sacrificial forms, the 
ighest, lowest’ Come thyself, exalted, to our worship : ‘ exhilarated, thyself 
ffer up thyself.’— Muir. ‘ Do thou sacrifice to thyself delighting thyself.’ ~ 
Vallis. ‘According to Mahidhara the moaning is that man is incompetent 

0 worship the creator, that is, in his forms, and it must be done by 
limself; -Wilson. I have adopted Prof. Ludwig’s explanation of the last clause. 

6 Bniiy to worship ; or, sacrifice to Heaven and Earth. 

7 Our labour: the arduous work of sacrificing. ‘In our conflict ’—Mnir. 
Tlie hynan has been translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts, IV. pp. 6, 7, by 

Cosmology of the Rigveda, Wi — 83, and, partly, by Prof. F. 

Muller in his Hibhert Lectii, es, p. 293f. 
also Mtno. Zdnaide Ragozin, Vedic India, pp. 263, 416. 

32 



m 


THE JIYMHS OP 


V^OOKx 


HYMN LXXXII. Viavakarman 

The Fatlier of the eye, the Wise in spirit, created both thcbi 
worlds submerged in fatness. 

Then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened, the heaven 
and the earth weie far extended. 

2 Mighty in mind and power is Visv.ikarman, Maker, Disposer 

and most lofty Presence. 

Their offerings joy in rich juice where they value One, on); 
One, beyond the Seven Hishis. 

3 Father who mide us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth all race 

and all things existing, 

Even he alone, the Deities’ name-giver,— him other being 
seek for information. 

4 To him in sacrifice they ofiered treasures, — Rishxs of old, n 

numerous troops, as sin gel's, 

Who, in the distant, near, and lower region, made ready al 
tliesc things that have existence. 

5 That which is earlier than this earth and heaven, before thi 

Asiiras and Go Is had being, — 

What was tl»e germ primeval which the waters received when 
all the Gods were seen together'! 

6 The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein tin 

Gods wore gathered fdl together. 

It rested set upon the Unb)nFs navel, that One wherein abuli 
all things existing. 

7 Ye will not find him who produced these creature^ : anuthe 

thing hath risen up among >ou. 

Enwrapt m rni^ty cloud, with lips that stammer, hymi 
chanters wamler and are discontented. 


" r/te Father of the eye : Vievakarinan, who made the light which enaW^ 
the eve W see. Suhmrjed U fatw>s : SAyan. explains ghntmn honj 
‘watei :’-‘engen.lerea the water, (and then) theae two (heaven and earth 
floating (on the w'atcrs).’ — Wilson. ^ imao 

2 Mbst lofty Presence: literally, the highest apjiantian ; tlic 

oi- obiect of spintnal contemplation. Their ojferings ; the offering!, or lie 
U H the wi.,L, „f the F-dhe.., eemi-perann,fied. The 
conate!lat,i..n Ui-sa Major, the seven stare of which are the n. 

Atri, Angiras, Pedastya, Pulalia. Kratii, and VaBiehtlia. The “*'“"‘”8 “ 

the spirits of tlie blest enjoy the fulfilment of all their desires y 
starry heavens wl.ere the Ono Being, the gireat sew 

3 Fov infovnuUion : to learn who is the bupieuie God ; or 

ral functions are. , , Koaveulv, tb 

4 Distant, near, and loioer region : meaning, apparently, the 

earthly, and the intermediate atmosphere VJ«vAtarman. Se 

6 The Unborn, Aja, seeraa here to be identified with V , 


Vedic India, pp. 423, 424. 

7 Another thing : meaning, according to the Commentator, 


VisvakariiW 



83.] 


THE RIQVEDA, 
HYMN LXXXIII. 


499 


Manyu. 


jJb wlio hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt, breeds 
for himself forthwith all couqueiing energy. 

Arya and Disa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the 
Conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped. 

2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the God was Manyu, Manyu was 

Hotar, Varuna, Jdtavedaa. 

T1 0 tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accordant with 
thy fervour, Manyu, guard us. 

3 Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty ; chase, with 

thy feivour for ally, our foemen. 

Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou to us all 
kinds of wealth and treasure. 


For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, queller of 
the foe, and self-existent, 

Shared by all men, victorious, subduer : vouchsafe to us 
supeiior strength in battles. 

I have departed, still without a portion, wdae God ! according 
to thy will, the Mighty. 

I, feeble man, was wioth with thee, 0 Manyu : I am myself; 
come thou to give me vigour. 

Come hither, I am all thine own ; advancing turn thou to 
me, Victorious, All-suppoiter I 


I different entity from you who are sentient beings, who have individual 
isciousness, nnd so foith’— See Editor’s note in WiKou’s trandatiou. 
^aua ‘gives the geneial sense of the la^t clause [of the stanza] as “You 
' merely anxious fi>r enjoyment in this world and in the next, therefore 
1 know nothing of Vi^iuikarman.’* ukthus Isa K as implying singing 

mns with a view to gaining felicity in a future state Malddhara has a 
nlar explanation : “you who aie engaged in the enjoyments of this world 
the next, being subject to false knowledge or ignorance, Lave n-j knowledge 
the Truth.’’ ’ — Wilson. 

Witli legmd to this and the preceding hymn Mr. Wallis observes that 
ey make no attempt to explain in wh.at way the process of saciifice could 
regarded as an act of creation. We are told little more thau that Visva- 
rman was a primeval sacrifice!’ and also a creator ; we have no hint how to 
tnbine the two ideas into a hanntmious unity. See Cosmology of the Eigveda, 
'• 83, 84, and Muir, 0. S Texts, IV. 7, 8, where tlie hymn is tiauala’ted and 
its difficulties are discussed. Prof Ludwig's Commentary is especi- 
ly full and valuable, aud should be consulted by all students of the Veda. 

\ ' Anger, Passion, personified. 

“ thy fervour : tdpasd: means ‘ heat,’ ‘burning,’ and, secondly, 

abstraction. • 

^ a portion: without a share in thy favours. / am myself : I am 

what I am ; a weak mortal, for whose infirmity allowance should be made, 
(incorporated with) my body, approach me. Wilson. 




500 


THE HYMNS OF 


Wok X 


Come to me, Manyu, Wielder of the Thunder : bethink thee oj 
thy friend, and slay the Dasyus. 

7 Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station : so shall w( 
slay a multitude of foemeii. 

The best of meath I offer to suppoit thee : may we be first t( 
. driuk thereof in quiet. 

HYMN LXXXrV. Many. 


Borne on with thee, 0 Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brav 
men, impetuous, bursting forward, 

March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointei 
arrows, sharpening their weapons. 

2 Flashing like fire, be thou, 0 conquering Manyu, invoked, ( 

Victor, as our ai my’s leader. 

Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions : show fort 
thy vigour, scatter those who hate us. 

3 0 Manyu, overcome thou our assailant : on ! breaking, slaj 

ing, crushing down the foemen. 

They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour : Might] 
Sole born I thou makest them thy subjects. 

4 Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu : sharpen th 

spirit of each clan for battle. 

With thee to aid, 0 thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift ih 
glorious shout for conquest. 

5 Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, ^ Manyu, be thu 

here our Sovran Ruler. 

To thy dear name, O Victor, wo sing priiises ; we know tl 
spring from which thou art come hither. 

6 Twill-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highe 

conquering might is thine. Subduer ! 

Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu, 0 Much-invoked, i 
shock of mighty battle. 

7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth of bol 

sides gathered and collected ; 

And let our enemies with stricken spirits, overwhelmed wil 
terror, slink away defeated. 


1 Lihejlamea of fire inform: agnirUpdh' Homer’s Sfjuac TTVpOQ aif/o/itroi 
3 Sole born : ‘ 0 thou who art without companion- — Wilson. 

5 The spring ; the source. , Rfiizure 

7 For spoil : the preservation of their own property and 
their enemies’ goods being regaided as a double conquest. 
ubhdyam may mean wealth of both kinds, horses and cows. 

This hymn and the preceding are to be lepeated, SAyaya says, at 
ensure the destruction of enemies. 



86.] the niQVEDA. 501 

HYMN LXXXV. saryft’g Bridal. 

TrUTU is the base that bears the earth ] by Sdrya are the heav- 
ens sustained. 

By Law the Adityas stand secure, and Soma holds his place in 
heaven. 

2 By ooma are the Adityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth. 
Thus Soma in the midst of all these constellations hath his place. 

3 One thinks, when they have brayed the plant, that he hath 

drunk the Soma’s juice ; 

Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma no one ever tastes. 

4 Soma, secured by sheltering rules, guarded by hymns inBrihati, 
Thou standcst listening to the stones : none tastes of thee who 

dwells on earth. 

5 When they begin to drink thee, then, 0 God, thou swellest out 

again. 

Vayu is Soma’s guardian God. The Moon is that which shapes 
the yeara. 

6 Raibhi was her dear bridal friend, and Narasansi led her home. 
Lovely was Sdry^’s robe : she came to that which GHha had 

adorned. 

’ Thought was the pillow of her couch, sight was the unguent 
for her eyes ; 

Her treasury was earth and heaven when Surya went unto 
her Lord. 


The main subject of this composite hymn, which is one of the latest in the 
gveda, is the ceremony of marriage in general and more especially the wed- 
tigof SOryA, the Daughter of the Sun, another form of Dawn, who is re- 
rded as the typical bride. 

1 Truth ; or reality ; sdli/am, used interchangeably with rUanif the Law 
id Order of the universe. 

2 % Soma : by the power of the deified Soma whoso influence pervades, 
dekens, and supports all existence. In the second line Soma is the Moon, 
it pel haps there is an allnsioi. to the other sense also of the word. These 
mtellations : the nakshatras or lunar mansions. ‘ In the centre of these 
ifirs.’— Muir, 

3 Know as Soma : know to be the Moon, regarded as the food of Gods only. 
I % hymvs in Brihati : that is by hymns in that metre. But the meaning 
E ^'hhataih is uncertain. According to SAyana, the B&rhatas are the seven 
JJ'diana of the Soma, Svftna, Bhrftja, Angh& ri, and otheia. 

5 They ; the Gods. Thee : the ambrosia contained in thee, which the 
drink duiing the waning ot' the Moon. 0 Ood ; Soma, the Moou.^ 

3 Soma is the deity of the preceding five stanzas. Snryfi’s Bridal i6 the 
'ihjectof 6—17. Raibht, Mrd^ansU aud Qdthd are ritual verse, eulogistic 
*^*^<1 non*Vedic song personified. 

' Treasury ; kdfafi : meaning, probably, trousseau or bridal outfit. Accord- 
lo 301HQ tb<} bo5 or body of the chariot is intended. 



502 TUE tiruys OF [BOOKx. 

8 Hymns were the ci^oss-bars of the pole, Kurira-nietre decked 

the cnr ; 

The bridesmen were the Asvin Pair : Agni was leader of the 
train. 

9 Soma was he who wooed the maid : the groomsmen were botli 

Asvins, when 

The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing Sdr}^ on her Lord 

10 Her spirit wa^ the bridal car; the covering thereof wai 

heaven : 

Bright were both Stcois that drew it, when Sdr^'a approachec 
her husband’s home. 

11 T&y Steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse auc 

Saina hymn : 

All ear w'ere thy two chariot wheels : thy path was tremuloui 
in the sky. 

12 Clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels; wund was the axh 

fastened there. 

Surya, proceeding to her Lord, motinted a spirit-fashioned car 

13 The bridal pomp of Surya, which Savitar started, movec 

along. 

In Magha days are oxen slain, in Arjunis they w'cd the bride 

14 When on your three-wheeled chariot, 0 Asvins, ye came a 

wooers unto Surya’s bridal, 

Then all the Gods agreed to your proposals Pfishan as So 
elected you as Fathers. 

15 0 ye Two Lords of lustre, then when ye to Suryil’s wooing came 
Where was one chariot-wheel of yours ? Where stood ye fo 

the Sire’s command % 

8 Decked her car : formed its canopy. But the meaning of here i 

uncertain. ^ Kurira metre was tlie thong of the whip’ — Wilson. 2h 
bridesmen: in I. 119. 7 and elsewheie the Asvins are said to be the h'lsbaud 
of SClryft. Here they are represented as the friends who had asked her i 
marriage for Soma. 

11 All ear : the text has $>'6(ram, an ear, which SAyana says, means srotfi 
two ears. ‘The two wheels were thy e^irs ’ — Wilson 

13 /n Maghd days : or in stricter accordance with the text, ‘ In AghA days 
when the Moon is in the lunar mansion MaghA See Jacobi, Festgruss an I 
von Roth, p. 69, and Weber, Vedische Btitrdge, p 32f. Slain : only o 
especially festive occasions, weddings for instance*. ‘ Are whipped along •* 
Wilson. In Arjunis : two astcrisms or lunar mfmsions, more commonly calle 
Phalgunts. They wed the bride • she is ec'C 'rted to her husband’s home. 

14 As wooers: on behalf of Soma. Pdshan : here meaning Savitar. /’ 

and Fathers : intended to express close relationship and Savitar's obliga i<J 
to the Asvins who had arranged the marriage. . . 

15 For the Sire's command : to receive Savitar’s invitation to take patt 
the bridal procession. According to SAyana, ‘ to ofier your gift.’ 



THE RIQVEDA. 


503 


n%V 85.] 

5 The Brahmans, by their seasons, know, 0 Suryal, those two 
wheels of thine ; 

One, kept concealed, those only who arc skilled in highest 
truths have learned. 

J To Sury^l and the Deities, to Mitra and to Varuna, 

Who know aright the thing that i'<, this adoration have I paid. 

3 By their own power these Twain in close succession move ; 

They go as playing children round the sacrihee. 

One of the Pair behuldeth all existing things ; the other 
orderetli seasons and is born again. 

[9 He, born afresh, is new and new for ever : ensign of days he 
goes before the Mornings. 

Coming, he orders for the Gods their portion. The Moon pro* 
longs the days of oar existence. 

10 Mount this, all-shaped, gold-hued, witli stiong wheels, fash- 
ioned of Kinsuka and S.ihnali, light-rolling. 

Bound for the world of life immortal, Surya : make for thy lord 
a happy bridal journey. 

21 Else up from hence : this m ddcii hath a husband. I laud 

Viavavasu with hymns and homage. 

Seek in her fatlier’s homo another fair one, and find the 
portion from of old assigned thee. 

22 Rise up from hence, Visvavnsii : with reverence we worship thee. 
Seek thou another willing maid, and with lier hiishand leave 

the bride. 

23 Straight in direction be the pa Mis, and thornless, whereon 

our fellows travel to the wooing. 

Let Aryaman and Bhaga lead us : perfect, 0 Gods, the union 
of the wife and husband. 


16 The two wheels are probably heaven and earth, and the thiid, one lepl 
(oncealedf is the mysterious invi^ible world bryoud thein. 

18 111 this stanza and the folU'wing one, which arc but. loo.'^ely connecte<l 
^ilh the rest of the hymn, Sarya reprcbents the Sau, and Sonia us the Moon. 

20 Stanzas 20—33 contain a collection of forniula? re{.eaUd when the l.rid® 
iwunts her chariot, while she is tiavelling to her husband’s house, when .she 
■rrives t.h*"re, and on the following morniiig. 2Vi/« - ch.irud. Kineid a - tho 
’ood of the Butea fruudosa. Silmtdi : the silk cotton tree ; SaliiKiha nod-i- 
xrica. SHryd: the girl is addressed by the name of S iryd, the tyninal 
3ride. 

21 VUvdvasu: one of the Gandharvaa, the protector of viigins. He i? told 
tukive the bride who no longei nef^ds his care, and to transfer his gumvlian- 
“kip to some marriageable maid<'n who has not yet found a husband. Fair 

vyhktdm : ‘decorated with ornaments.’ - Wilson 

23 To the wooing : to the- father, to whom tlte iiitcic ders are to apply fur 
(laughter’s hand on behalf of their friend, according to ^SAyuua. 



<504 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X 

24: Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, wherewith Mosi 
HlessM Suvitar hath bound thee, 
lu Law’s seat, to the world of virtuous action, I give thee tit 
uninjured with thy consort. 

25 Hence, and not thence, I send thee free. I make thee softh 

fettered there, 

That, Bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her fortune aiic 
her sons. 

26 Let Pushan take thy hand and hence conduct thee ; may th( 

two Asvins on their car transport thee. 

Go to the house to he the household’s mistress and speak as 
lady to thy gatheied people. 

27 Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here : be vigi 

lant to rule thy household in this home. 

Closely unite thy body with this man, thy lord. So shall ye 
full of years, address your company. 

28 Her hue is blue and red : the fiend who clingeth close is 

driven off. 

Well thrive the kinsmen of this bride : the husband is bound 
hast in bonds. 

29 Give thou the woollen robe away : deal treasure to the Biah 

man priests. 

This female fiend hath got her feet, and as a with attendf* 
her lord. ^ 

30 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this wicked fiend, 
What time the husband wraps about his limbs the garmuiil 

of his wife. 


24 The noose of Varuna : the ginlle with whiuli the bride is girded aftei 
sbe has been bathecl, coiiibod, uiul dressed for the roarrijige ceremony Sei 
Prof Max Muller’s Rigveda-SanhitA, Vol. VI , Pref.ice, p 14. Or^aaLanmar 
suggests, the noose may mean the tie by which a girl is bound to her fathei 
till mairiage. Law's seat: the place of saciifice, the altar. 

Stanzas 24 —26 and 32, 33 are spoken just before the biide’s depaitur< 
from her father’s house. 

25 Hence and 7toC thence : from thy father’s house and not from thy 
husband's. 

27 lie vigilant to thy household: this is SAyana's explanation. 

watchful over the dome.'itic h«e.’ — Wilson. The vei’se is addresst-d to 
bride, and to the newly wed*ied pair on anival at the bndegtewm’s house. 

28 Her hue: the colour of Kiity.1, Magic personified, a female deity 
fiend. 

29 The woollen robe: ‘the garment soiled by the body,’ — Wilson. Aittv> 
her lord: the magic, or evil spell, returns to Us oiigiuator. — LudwJg. 



Tn£ RIQVEDA. 


605 


^YiVy 35 .] 

1 Consumptions, from her people, which follow the biide'a re- 

splendent train, — 

These let the Holy Gods again bear to the place from which 
they came. 

2 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wed- 

ded pair. 

By pleasant ways let them escape the danger, and let foes 
depart. 

3 Signs of good fortune mark the bride : come all of you and 

look at her. 

Wish her prosperity, and then return unto your homes again. 

1 Pungent is this, and bitter this, filled, as it were, with arrow- 
barbs, Empoisoned and not fit for use. 

The Brahman who knows Suiya well deserves the garment of 
the bride. 

5 The fiinge, the cloth that decks her head, and then the triply 

parted robe, — 

Behold the hues which Surya wears : these doth the Brahman 
purify. 

6 I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou mayst 

reach old age with me thy husband. 

Gods, Ar\aman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have given thee to 
be my household’s mistress. 

7 0 Pushan, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the 

sharer of my pleasures ; 

Her who shall twine her loving arms about me, and welcome all 
iny love and mine embraces. 

3 For thee, with bridal train, they, first, escorted Sfnya to her 
home. 

Give to the husband in return, Agni, the wife with progeny. 


^l^Froin her people : ‘ a most remarkable and direct assumption of “ here* 
^ y as a lurking danger.' — Mm^. Zdnaule llagozin, Vedic India, p. 371. 

^,‘^diaps spoken, on the way, to the spectators of the procession. 
itiiJal the bride’s garmeut, SHryd: meaning here the song of SfiryA’a 

^rof UM dsdsanam, visnsanam, and adhiviknrtanam is uncertain. 

p hon renders these words by ■ border- cloth,’ ‘ head-cloth,’ and ‘divided 
Ij ■ ^ Weber and the St. Petersburg Lexicon explain the passage as refer- 
Preparation of the carcass of the animal that has I etrii slanglitered 
The b 7 ^<^cording to this view the first lii»e might be rendered 

the cutting up, the se\enng of limb and joint’ ; and for 
35 T ' *i^ight be substituted. 

38 addi esses ihe bride. 

Agni. I'hty ; the Gaudhaivas> accoiding to SAyana. 



500 the hymns of [BOOK X 

31? Agni liatli given the bride again with splendour and witli 
ample life. 

Long-lived be he who is her lord ; a hundred autumns let hm 
live. 

40 Soma obtained her first of all ; next the Gandharva was hei 

lord. 

Agni was thy third husband : now one born of woman is ih 
fourth. 

41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave : 
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sous and this nr 

spouse. 

42 Be ye not parted ; dwell ye here ; reach the full time of humai 

life. 

With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing in you 
own abode. 

43 So may Prajapati bring children forth to us; may Aryaraa 

adorn us till old age come nigh. 

Not inauspicious enter thou thy husband’s house : bring bless 
ing to our bipc<ls and our quadrupeds. 

44 Not evil-eyed, no slayer of thy husband, bring weal to cattl< 

radiant, gentle hearted ; i 

Loving the Gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing t 
our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

45 0 Bounteous Indra, make this bride blest ih her sons and fo 

t unate. j u i *■ 

Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband the elevent 


Ul<l 11. 

46 Over thy husband’s father and thy husband’s mother bear fu 

sway. , 

Over the sister of thy lord, over his brothers rule supreme. 

47 So mav the Universal Gods, so may the Wateis join our heart 
May Matarisvan, Dhatar, and Deshtrt together bin^ci^ 

“ 4 ^ A« the typical~V«yai^^ hrst ma.ried 
originally belong** to him, then to the g marriage cei 

then to Agni as the eacred fire lound which she walks 

loony, and fourthly to her human husband —Grassniann. ^, 1 , 

42 The formulae containe<l m stanzas 42 47 aie j.,gcc with fi 

groom has returned with his biide to his home, and oflerB gacr ^ 

The wedded pair aie addressed firsb and , ^^1. jf a„d himself, 

blessed. Stanza 47 is sp.iken by the bridegroom for hw wif ^ 

47 HeshtH: bistructress, a female deity, not mentmne ,, 

lUgveda. According to SAyana, ddtii phaldndm taiastat 

bountiful (Saroawatl).’— Wilson. ^ Hindis, derived h 

For a full account of the marriage ceremonies of the tim 



YMN sfl.] 


iJ07 


TITE JIIOVEEA. 


Indra. 

they count not Indra 


HYMN LXXXVL 

Mkn have abstained from pouring juice 
as a Ood 

Wliero at the votary’s store my friend Vrishakapi hath drunk 
his fill. Supreme is Indra over all. 

[ Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishakapi hath wrought; 

Yet nowhere else thou findest place wherein to drink the Soma' 
juice. Supreme is Indra over all. 

5 What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast Vrishakapi, 

With whom thou art so angiy now ] Wh.it is the votary’s food- 
ful store? Supreme is India over all. 

[ Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him and bite 
him in the ear, 

0 Indra, that Vrishakapi whom thou protectest as a fiiend. 
Supreme is Indra over all. 


) Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly wrou-dit, 
that were my joy. 

In pieces will I rend his head ; the sinner’s portion shall be 
woe. Supreme is Indra over all. 

) No Dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater wealth of 
love’s delights. 

None with more ardour offers all lier beauty to her bid’s em- 
brace. Supj'cme is Indra over all. 


e ntufil of BrAhmana who use the S4ina-veda, see Colebrooke’a MlsccUancons 
'taya, No. HI , and Weber and Haas, Ivdische Studim, V. pp, 177 ff. See 
io Hym)is of the Atharva-veda, Book XIV., and Dr. J. Ehni’s paper, Zeits- 
djt der Deutschen Morgenlandiscken (rescllschaft, XXXIll. pp. 166 ff 1 
ive relied mainly on Ludwig’s Commentary. Pi of. Grafesmanu has banished 
e hymn to his Appendix. 

1 Sftyana ascribes this stanza to Indra ; otheis make Indifinl the speaker, 
fiebikapi is said to have monopolized the ofleiings that should have been 
cstinted to Indra. Prts//4,i:apt— literally ‘thcstiong ape,’ or ‘ the male ape’ 
H’pertrs to be a sort of intermediate being between a demigod and a demon ; 
>Mt i8not easy to determine his nature SAyaua calls him the son of Indra. 
d® n also said to be the setting sun, and the sun who diaws up vapour and 
' ‘gates with mist. According to M. Bergaigue, La Religion V4diqne, II. 270, 
a mythical sacrificer. 

»ai,1,nt blames Indra for his apathy. 

ri BP^-'aks. What U the votary's food fnl store f : w'hy should his appio- 
4 rVf worshipper’s offerings make thee so angry ? 
jj is the speaker of this stanza and of the two, or three, that follow. 

Tf'-’ the ape; an abbreviation of Vrishakapi. Hath maned ththean- 
y according to Baya a, bath spoileil the oblations piepared foi me 

j But it seejins more probable that Vrishakapi has assault* 

6 I I? ‘ inflicted injuries on her person. 

hi speaks with pride of her voluptuous charms which incited ViibhA- 
'‘’“'■hisamo.oui. assault. 



508 


I'HB OP 


[Boon X, 

7 Mother whose love is quickly won, I say what verily will bo. 
My breast, 0 Mother, and my head and both my hips seen 

quivering. Supreme is Iiidra over all. 

8 Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad hair-plait 

add ample hips, 

Why, 0 thou Hero’s wife, art thou angry with our Vrishakapi 
Supreme is Indra over all. 

9 This noxious creature looks on mo as one bereft of hero’s love 
Yet Heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts’ Friend and Indra’ 

Queen. Supreme is Indra over all. 

10 From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice 
Mother of Heroes, Indra’s Queen, the rite’s ordainer is extolled 

Supreme is Indra over all. 

11 So have I heard Indnini called most fortunate among these Danioi 
For never shall her Consoit die in future time through lengt 

of days. Supreme is Indra over all. 

12 Never, Indiani, have I joyed without my friend Vrishakapi, 
Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth t 

the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all. 

13 Wealthy Vyishakap^yi, blest with sons and consorts of thy son,' 
Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblatiou that etfecteth mucli 

Supreme is Indra overall. 

14 Fifteen in number, then, for mo a score of bullocks they prepare 
And I devour the fat thereof ; they fill my oelly full with foot 

Supreme is Indra over all. 

15 Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing amid the herds 
Sweet to thine heart, O Indra, is the brow which she 'vh< 

tends thee pours. Supremo is Indra over all. 

7 This stanza is ascribed by SAyana to Vrish.akapi. It is hardly intelligibt 
but, as Ludwig says, it seems to be spoken by ludiAni, expressing her 

tion at VrishAkHpi’s audacity which makes all her body quiver with rage. 

8 Indra speaks. » ; . . wl 

9 IndrAnt speaks this and the following stanea. Bereft of hero 8 love. 

has no brave husband to protect her. ^ ^ u Ik 

10 The matron goes to feast : ludrAnt means that VrishAkapiassau e ^ 
when she was on her way to a fe.'^tivai, which women were acenstome o * 
tend ; and that her rank as Indra’s consort did not preserve her from m 

11 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. ^ A^rAser 

13 Spoken by VrishAkapi to his wife ViishAkapAjl who is said s 

the dawn, or, by others, the gloaming which follows the setting - 

14 Indra speaks. Fifteen: sacrificers ; probably VrishAkapi ana 

and their sons and daughters-in-law. SAyana explains differently • 
worshippers dress for me fifteen (and) twenty bulls.’ — Wilson. 

15 IndrAnt speaks, endeavouring to attract him to her own libati 

of the offerings of VrishAkapi. , , . . 

I pass over stanzas 10 and 17, which I cannot translate into ue 



THE RIQVEDA, 


509 


rmv 86.] 

8 0 Indra this Vrishakapi bath found a slain wild animal, 
Dresser, nnd new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load 

of wood. Supreme is Indra over all, 

9 Distingiiishing the Dasa and the Arya, viewing all, I go. 

I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary’s Soma juice. 
Supreme is Indra over all. 

0 The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in 

length they spread ! 

Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, Vrishakapi. 
Supremo is Indra over all. 

1 Turn thee again Vrishakapi ; we twain will bring thee happiness. 
Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path wnicli leads 

to sleep. Siq^reme is Indra over all. 

2 When, Indra and Vrishakapi, ye travelled upward to yonr l)ome. 
Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the beast 

that troubles man ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

3 Daughter of Mann, Parsu bare a score of children at a birth. 
Her portion verily was bliss although her burthen caused her 

grief. 


18 Iiulr/l .1 speaKs, but her speech is difficult to understand. Wild an»- 
^al: von Rotli conjectures ‘wild ass’ as tlie nn^aning of p^rasvantam 
ere Dresser: or slaugliter-bench. ‘A fiie-pl.ice (to cook it).’ -Wilson, 
adr.ini seems to speak depreciatingly of a saciitice olfeied by Vushilkapi as 
oiisisting of an unsuitable victim, prepared with instruments and means 
hich chance has thrown in his way. Ludwig thinks that VrisliAkajU may 
epresent the Moon whose spots arc fancifully cousideied to be the objects 
mentioned by Indr^ul. 

19 I look : with favour. The simple votai'y is the worshipper who offers his 
ibatioii in a sincere spirit of devotion. The stanza and the two following 
le spoken by Indra. 

20 Viishdkapi appears to meditate flight into distant deserts to escape 
rom the wrathful Iiidrdnt. Indra dissuades him, and promises to reconcile 
udraiil to him. 

22 The two concluding stanzas seem to be spoken by Indrilni. Stanza 22 is 
bsoure, and stanza 23 has no disc verable connexion with the icst of the hymn. 

23 Daughter of Manu : that is, of the progenitor of men. Nothing more 

8 known of wdiich means a rib Much of this hymn appears to be 

Inexplicable. M.‘ Bergaigiie thinks that Vrishakapi, India’s friend, represents 
^«'na, and InjJiani the wife of Indra represents Prayer. ‘ This bizarre m 3 th 

symbolize the frequently expressed idea that Indra loves neither the 
I'ncred beverage without prayer nor prayer without the sacred beverage. He 
^nsnes therefore his union with Prayer to be accompanied by the union of 
with Soma, and he neglects sacrifice as long as ibis union of the two 
^lornents of worship remains unaccomplished.’ — See La Religion 
^dique^ II 270, 271. 

bn v* gives a different interpretation of the hymn, which he has 

®*kaustively discussed in Vediseke Sludicn, II. pp. 22-4-. 
^ Oldenberg, Religion deg Veda, 172—174. 



510 


THE HYMNS OF 


[^OOK X 


HYMN LXXXVII. Ag^i 

I BALM with oil the mighty Rakshas-alayer j to the nuja 
famous Friend I come for shelter. 

Enkindled, sharpened hy our rites, may Agni protect us h 
the day and night from evd. 

2 0 Jatavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flaru 

attack the demons. 

Seize with tiiy tongue the foolish gods’ adorers : rend, pu 
within thy mouth the raw-flesh eaters. 

3 Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who has 

both, enkindled and destroying. 

Roam also in the air, 0 King, around us, and with thy ja\\ 
assail the wicked spirits. 

4 Bending thy shafls through sacriliccs, Agni,^whetting the 

points with song as if with whetstones, 

Pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudh^nas, and break the 
arms uplifted to attack thee. 

5 Pierce through the Yatudhana’s skin, 0 Agni ; let the destio 

ing dart with lire consume him. 

Rend his joints, J.atavcdas, let the eater of flesh, flesh-seekin 
track his mangled body. 

6 Where now thou aeest Agni Jatavedas, one of these demo: 

standing still or roaming, 

Or flying on those paths in air’s niid-regiorf, sharpen the shs 
and as an archer pierce him. 

7 d'ear from the evil spirit, Jatavedas, what he hath seized n 

with his spears hath captured. 

Blazing before him strike him down, 0 Agui ; let spott 
carrion-eating kites devour him. 

8 Here tell this foi th, 0 Agni : whesoever is, he himself, or ach 

as, a demon, 

Him giasp, 0 thou Most Youthful, with thy fuel : to the Mi 
seer’s eye give him ns booty. 

9 With keen glance guard the fiacriflee, 0 Agni : thou Sa 

conduct it onward to the Vasus. 

Let not the fiends, 0 .Man-beholder, harm thee buming agai 
the Rak^iasas to slay them. 

*2 The demons : YfttudhAnaB, explained by S&yapa 
104. 15 Foolish gods' adorers; milradtvdn: according to Sfl.y«na, a r 
claBS of evil spirits called MOrndevas because they make destruction 
5 The eater of jicsh : the wolf or other carnivorous animal. 

8 The Man-seer here is either Agni himself or SOiya the Sun. jjj 

9 To the Vasus ; to the Gods to whom the oblations are made. « J • 



TJIE RIG VEDA. 


511 


/)XV 87 ] 

0 Look on the fiend mid men, as Maii-beliolder ; rend thou his 

three extremities in pieces. 

Demolish with thy flame his ribs, OAgni; the Yatudhaiia’s 
root destroy thou triply. 

1 Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who with his 

^‘ilsehood injures Holy Order. 

Loud roaring with thy flame, 0 Jatavedas, crush him and 
cast him down before the singer. 

[2 Lend thou the worshipper that eye, 0 Agni, wherewith thou 
lookest on the hoof-armed demon. 

With light celestial in Atharvan’s manner burn up the fool 
who ruins truth with falsehood. 

3 Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, what heated 
word the worshippers have spoken, 

Each arroNvy taunt sped from the angry spirit, — pierce to the 
heart therewith the Yatudhanas. 
t Witli fervent heat exterminate the demons; destroy the fiends 
with burning flame, 0 Agni. 

Destroy with fiie the foolish gods’ adorers; blaze and destroy 
the insatiable monsters. 

5 May Gods destroy this day the evil-doer: may each hot curse 
(This return and blast him. 

L?t arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva’s net enclose 
the Yatudhaiia. 

The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, wdth flesh 
of horses and of human bodies, 

Who steals the milch-cow’s milk away, 0 Agni, — tear off* the 
heads of such with fiery fury. 

7 The cow gives milk each year, 0 Mau regarder : let not the 
Yiitudhana ever taste it. 

If one would glut him with the biestings, Agni, pierce with 
tliy flame his vitals as he meets thee. 

vasubhyah here by vasHnimarikdya : — ‘ to (the acquisition of) riches.’ — 

ihon. 

extremities: his three heads, according to S&yana. * Kopf 
^chultrrn/ head and shoulders. — Graasmann. R(tot : meaning hia feet. 
[¥!!■ used vaguely, to correapond with the three upper extremities. 

triple foot of the Ydtndhana.’ — Wilson, 
il I ; striking with the hoof. According to SAyapa, ‘ having 

In Atharvan*s manner : like Atharvau, the ancient priest 
have been the first who obtained fire. 

■ pair ; the married pair ; perhaps the sacrificer and his wife. The 

I that every hasty word that may have been uttered by pious people 

*^®®d as a weapon to wound the YAtudhiaa. 

(JiCt 3 net : thi» nrtrtaa rtf fliA •ll.nArva.dinir Airni. 



512 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK I 


18 Let the fienrls drink the poison of the cattle; may Aditi cay 

oft’ the evil-doers. 

May the God Savitar give them np to ruin, and bo their sliar 
of plants and herbs denied them. 

19 A^ni, from days of old thon slayest demons: never sha 

iRakshasas in fight o’ercome thee. 

Burn up the foolish one^, the flesh-devonrers : let none of tliei 
escape thine heavenly arrow. 

20 Guard ns, 0 Agni, from above and under, protect us froi 

behind us and before us ; 

And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, g^o^YiI 
with fervent heat, consume the sinner. 

21 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, 0 Kin| 

protect us as a Sage with wisdom. , ^ . . 

Guard to old age thy friend, 0 Friend, Eternal : 0 Agni, 
Immortal, guard us mortals. 

22 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sag 
Of hero lineage, day by day, destroyer of our treacherous foe 

23 Burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood 

Kakehasas, , j -.i • 

0 Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with lances armed with pom 

of flame. ^ 

21 Burn thou the pairedKimidinH, burn, Agni, ^e Yatudhanapai 

1 sharpen thee. Infallible, with hymns. (T Sage, be vigil.'Ui 
25 Shoot forth, 0 Agni, with thy flame : demolish them on eveij si. 

Break thou the YiUudhaua’s strength, the vigour of tlit 1. 

shasa. , Ac 

HYMN LXXXVIII. 

Dear, ageless sacrificial drink is offered in light-discovciii 

heaven-pervading Agni. . , xr 

The Gods spread forth through his Celestial Nature, 
might bear the world up aud sustain it. 

2 The world was swallowed aud concealed in darkness, 
was born, and light became appiireiit. 

The Deities, the broad earth, and the heavens, a P 
and waters gloried in his friendship. 

TTne poUoa of the caUU: it they .Link ‘LCh”!* k 

Accordiiif? to Silyana, let them drmk the poison ^ f„r exte) 

in the house), meaning peihaps some poisonous oiutme 

treacherous and mal^leut spirits. See VII. 104. 2. 

1 Saerijietal drink ; ‘ swelling oblation,’ according to Trof. Pnohel 



THE RTQVEDA. 


513 


88 .] 

Inspired by Gods who claim our adoration, I now will laud 
Eternal Lofty Agui, 

Him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre, this heaven, 
and both the worlds, and air’s mid-region. 

^ Earliest Priest whom all the Gods accepted, and chose him, 
and anointed him with butter, 

He bwifty made all things that fly, stand, travel, all that hath 
motion, Agni J&tavedaa. 

I Because thou, Agni, Jatavedas, atoodest at the world’s head 
with thy refulgent splendour, 

We sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises : thou 
filledst heaven and earth, God meet for worship. 

I Head of the world is Agni in the night-time ; then, as the 
Sun, at morn springs up and rises. 

Then to his task goes the prompt Priest foreknowing the 
wondrous power of Gods who must be honoured. 

' Lovel}' is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath shone forth, 
seated in the heavens, refulgent. 

With resonant hymns all Gods who guard our bodies have ' 
offered up oblation in this Agni. 

1 First the Gods brought the hymnal into being ; then they 
engendered Agni, then oblation. 

He was their sacrifice that guards our bodies : him the heav- 
ens know, the earth, the waters know him. 

1 He, Agni, whom the Gods have generated, in whom they 
offered up all worlds and creatures, 

He with i»is bright glow heated earth and heaven, urging him- 
self right onward in his grandeur. 

) Then by the laud the Gods engendered Agni in heaven, who 
fills both worlds through strength and vigour. 

They made him to appear in threefold essence : he ripens 
plants of every form and nature. 

Mfe scn^ thee forth : the Rishi glorifies the power of the priests who 
^iie Agni their messenger to the Gods. 

^ Agni, who is the Moon by night, at dawn becomes Silrya or the Sun-God 
when he sets again becomes Agni. 

te and creatures : proleptically : meaning that the oblation 

p eri by the gods was destined to produce tlie universe. — Ludwig. Accord- 
‘ in whom all beings have offered oblations but it is clear 
to m of the Gods are intended. 

U and vigoiir: ^iktbhih: *hy his functions Wilson, 

t ^prrettrU ^ Sun, lightning, 

33 



514 


THE HYMNS OF 


1 1 What time the Gods, whose due is worship, set him as Shrr 

Son of Aditi, in heaven, 

When the Pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, allcreatun 
that existed looked upon them. 

12 For all the world of life the Gods made Agni Vaisvanara 

be the days’ bright Banner, — 

Him who hath spread abroad the radiant Mornings, and coi 
mg with his light, unveils the darkness. 

13 The wise and holy Deities engendered Agni Vaisvanara who 

age ne’er touches, 

The Ancient Star that wanders on for ever, lofty and stroi 
Lord of the Living Being, 

14 We call upon the Sage with holy verses, Agni Vaisvanara t 

ever-beaming, 

Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatnciib 
is a God below, a God above us. 

15 I have heard mention of two several pathways, ways of i 

Fathers and of Gods and mortals. 

On those two paths each moving creature travels, each tlii 
between the Father and the Mother. 

16 These two united paths bear him who journeys born from 

head and pondered with the spirit. 

He stands directed to all things existing, hasting, unrest 
in his fiery splendour. 

17 Which of us twain knows where they ^eak together, up 

and lower of the two rite-leaders ? 

Our friends have helped to gather our assembly. They ct 
to sacrifice; who will announce it? 

18 How many are the Fires and Suns in number ? What is 

number of the Dawns and Wateis? 

Not jestingly I speak to you, 0 Fathers. Sages, I ask 
this for information. 


11 T/ie Pair : the Sun and Moon. Accruing to SAyana, ILhas .'xiid Sd 

13 Lord of the Living Being: the meaning of yakshdsi/a is uncer 
S&)AMa explains it by pdjyasyd devasya, of the adorable Qod. ‘The obat 
of what is fii m.’ — Ludwig. ‘The lord of meteors.’ — Qrassmaun. ‘Suj 
lant du Yaksha.’— Bergaigue, 

14 Below: on earth. 

15 Two several pathways : the way to the other world and the way ba 

the earth. The Father and the Mother : heaven and earth. a 

IG Him who journeys : Agni. From the head : of the world. From Ac 
the he-id or chief of all existence, according to S&yana. , q. 

Us twain : Agni and the Rishi. Upper and lower : according to 
the upper tire is V4yu and the lower is terrestrial Agni. Who wiU ann 
it ? ; Agni alone will make the sacrifice known to the Gods. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


515 


89.1 

9 As (?reat as is the fair-winged Morning’s presence to him who 
dwells beside us, Matarisvan ! 

Is what the Brahman does when he approaches to sacrifice 
and sits below the Hotar. 

HYMN LXXXIX. India. 

I wiLU extol the most heroic Indra who with his might forced 
earth and sky asunder ; 

Who hath filled all with width as man’s Upholder, surpassing 
floods and rivers in his greatness. 

2 Sirya is he : throughout the wide expanses shall Indra turn 

him, swift as car-wheels, hither, 

Like a stream resting not but ever active ; he hath destroyed, 
with light, the black-hued darkness. 

3 To him I sing a holy prayer, incessant, new, matchless, common 

to the earth and heaven, 

Who marks, as they w'ere backs, all living creatures : ne’er 
doth he fail a friend, the noble Indra. 

4 I will send forth my son<rs in flow unceasing, like water from 

the ocean’s depth, to Indra 

Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth 
and heaven as with an axle. 

5 Rousing with droughts, the Shaker, rushing onward, im- 

petuous, very strong, armed as with arrows 
Is Soma; forest trees and all the bushes deceive not Indra 
with their offered likenes^^* 


Morning's presence : tb« iigbt of Dawn which spreads over heaven and 
saitli. Him who dwells beside us the Yajara.^na, or inetitutor of the 
sacrifice —Ludwig Belo*^ I'be Hotar below the legular Hotar-priest. 
%ana explains this 6 t»‘» 2 a diffetcntly ‘ As long, M.ttarisvan, as the swiftly- 
moving (nights) corer the face of the dawn, (so long) the Brahman, the 
"ifeuor sitting down (to perform the work) of the Iloiri, approaching the 
saciifice supports (the ceremony).’— Wilson. 

1 With width: with his own extended magnitude. ‘With radiance.’- - 

Wilson 

^ is he : Indra is identified with the Sun whose course he directs. 
rAfoording to S4yana, s^ryah here-= suvf7’yn/i, heroic. 

3 Incessant: or unerring’ that ia. in strict accordance with the rules of 
Ine ntnal, As they were bach : as if they were horses or oxen, the length 
N shape of whose backs must be carefully consideied in forming a judgment 

worth. 

i Pi of. WiUon observes 'This verse is obscure, partly becRuse the words 
r® 'iQusual, partly because there is a confusion between Indra and Soma' 
Ibiirtr .• he will not accept any substitutes : he will have nothing 

genuine Soma-plant and its juice. 



616 THE HYMNS OF ISOOK X. 

6 Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, the earth, 

the heavens, the firmament, the mountains, — 

When heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm 
and breaks the strong in pieces. 

7 As an axe fells the tree so he slew Vritra, brake down th^ 

strongholds and dug out the rivers. 

He cleft the mountain like a new-made pitcher. Indra broughi 
forth the kine with his Companions. 

8 Wise art thou. Punisher of guilt, 0 India The sword lops 

limbs, thou smitest down the sinner, 

The men who injure, as it were a comrade, the lofty Law of Va 
runa and Mitra. 

9 Men who lead evil lives, who break agreements, and injun 

Varuna, Aryaman, and Mitra, — 

Against these foes, O Mighty Indra, sharpen, as furious death 
thy Bull of fiery colour. 

10 Indra is Sovran Lord of Earth and Heaven, Indra is Lord o 

waters and of mountains. 

Indra is Lord of prosperers and sages : Indra must be invoke( 
in rest and effort. 

11 Vaster than days and nights, Giver of increase, vaster tha 

firmament and flood of ocean, 

Vaster than bounds of earth and wind's^extension, vasto 
than rivers and our lands is Indra, 

12 Forward, as herald of refulgent Morning, let thine insatiat 

arrow fly, 0 Indra, 

And pierce, as 'twere a stone launched forth from heaven, wit 
hottest blaze the men who love deception. 

13 Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed the talltrei 

followed and the plants and herbage. 

Yearning with love both Worlds approached, the AYatois wai 
ed on Indra when he first had being. 

7 His Companions : the Maruts, who asBisted him in i>erforming his exploil 

8 Punisher of guilt : here Indra ie said to discharge the duties whic 
more ancient hymns are ascribed to Agni and to Mitrs and Varuna. 

0 Thy Bull: thy thunderbolt. ‘The heavy strong red weapon. 
Muller. ^ , 

10 fn rest and effort: ‘for the acquirement and preservation of wea 
Wikon. * , . j 

18 The moons: or, the months. Waited on Indra: as the ropreseu 
of the Sun, the originator of all life.— Ludwig. 



Tm: nroVEDA. 


617 


hymn 90.] 


[4 Where was the vengeful dart when thou, 0 Indra, clavest the 
demon ever bent on outrage ? 

When fiends lay there upon the ground extended like cattle in 
the place of immolation 1 

[5 I’hose who are set in enmity against us, the Oga^ias, 0 Indra, 
waxen mighty,— 

Let blinding darkness follow those our foemen, while these 
shall have bright shining nights to light them. 

16 May plentiful libations of the people, and singing Rishis’ holy 

prayers rejoice thee. 

Hearing with love this common invocation, come unto us, pass 
by all those who praise thee. 

17 0 Indra, thus may we be made partakers of thy new favours 

that shall bring us profit. 

Singing with love, may we the Visvamitras win daylight even 
now through thee, 0 Indra. 

18 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight 

where spoil is gathered. 

The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 

HYMN XC. 

A THOUSAND heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a thousand 
feet. 

On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide. 

2 This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that is to be ; 
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still by food. 


14 Fiends-: Diitrakruva^ : the exact meaning of the word is uncertain. 
Prof. Ludwig takes it as a genitive c-ase : ‘ What time they lay there on the 
earth extended like oxen in a demon’s place of slaughter.’ 

15 Ogams : probably the name of some hostile clan. According to SAyana, 
enemies assembled in numbers. These • us and our friends here, 

16 All those who praise thee: all other worshippers. 

^ 1^ This is the concluding sU-iza of several hymns of the VisvAmitras. 
'ee HI. 30. 22 ; 31. 22; 32. 17 j 34. 11 ; 36. 11 ; 36. 11. 

1 Pitraska, embodied spirit, or Man personified and regarded as the soul 
original source of the universe, the personal and life-giving principle in 
I animated beings, is said to have a thousand, that is, innumerable, heads, 
and f€et,9.B being one with all created life. A space ten jingers wide : 
the heart of man, wherein the soul was supposed to reside. 
L the Universal Soul he pervades the universe, as the Individual 

5 “6 is enclosed in a space of narrow dimensions. See Hymns of the 

pW.ecia,XIX.6. I, note, 

Rma is explained in various ways. The meaning of the words 

ihicli ^ immortality or the immortal world of the Gods, 

I grows greater by food, that is, by the sacrificial offerings of men. 



518 


THE HYMNE OF 


\JiOOK I 


3 So mighty ia his greatness ; yea, greater than this is Punishf 
All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths eternal lif 

in heaven. 

4 With three-fourths Purusha went up : ono-fourth of him agai 

was here. 

Thence he strode out to every side over what eats not and \vli{ 


eats. 

5 From him Viraj was born ; again Pi,irusha from Viraj was bon 
As soon as he was born be spread eastward and westward o’l 

the earth. 

6 When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha as the 

offering, 

Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn ; summer w 
the wood. 

7 Tlieybalmedasvictimonthe grass Purushaborn in earliesttim 
With him the Deities and all Sadhyas and Rishis sacrificed. 


According to Silyana : he is the lord or diatributer of immortality becau 
he becomea the visiblo world in order that living beiuga may obtain the frui 
of their actiona and gain moksha or final liberation from their bonds, he 
also the lord of immortality ; for he mounts beyond (bis own conditio 
for the food (of living beings).’ —Wilson. Colebrooke translates the line: 
? he U grows b/nourishmeut. and he is the distiibuter of immo 

♦alii-tf ’ Dr Muir renders it by ‘ Ho also the lord of immortality, sin 
bv food Im expands ’ According to the paraphrase in the Bhdgavata-Par/{\ 
tL meining’^of the last clause ia : ‘aince he hj^ tranaoenaed mar 
> ^Prnf Ludwi^-^’s version is: ‘ auch uber die unsterblichk 
”^V^vSnd^*rdaer I’was du?ch speise [ist,] vveit uberragV ruling also ov 
f:' t,-anaLudi whit [exuta] through ^ood ; but .a 
Comraentarr» somewhat different explanation la given. Kuliiig oven 
mortality, he was all that grows by food.’— Peterson. , 

3 Eternal It fe : amritam: immoitality, or the immortal Gods. 

4 Over ivhat cats not and what eats : over animate and r thin 

According to Sayana and Mahidhara, over both c asses ^ 

those capable of enjoyment, that is, who ^ aniinSs, « 

meiit of good and evil actions, such as Gods, men, and lowe 

those who are incapable thereof, such as mountains and rivers 
conscious, achetanam, or unconscious, creation. -fanzas 3 a 

5 From him : or, from that, the ‘ one-fou. th mentmned f fo 

4 . Virdj, or, in the nominative form, Vir/lt, is said ^ ’^r presid 

of the mundane egg, from Adi-Puruaha, 

Male or Spirit, ‘ who th™ entered into this - counterpart 

vital soul or divine principle. Or Viraj J'® * Mai™s exhaustive N 

Purusha as Aditi of Daksha in X. 72. 4, 6. ®®® 0^“'! Cotmology »/ 

on this passage, 0. S. Text,, V. pp. 3«9 870; and Wallis, Sit 

Jtigwda,V- «7- Sattward and wetfmrd ; °r. before and ^ 

t The laerikce : mdiuuam yajliam, a mental or jmagina y y 

ing to Slyana. ; gi fsAmd does not iwur in any 

Spring : vaiantd occurs in only one other V. Sidhyat : * 

7 Snthegrau: on the sacred grace used in sacnaoes. saany 
of oelestUl beings, probably ancient divine saenBoers. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


510 


TJfiV 90.] 

g Fioin that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gifher- 
ed up. 

He formed the creatures of the air, and animals both wild and 
tame. 

9 From tl»at great general sacrifice Richas and Sima-liymns 
were burn : 

Therefrom were spells and charms produced ; the Yajus had 
its birth from it. 

) From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of 
teeth : 

From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were 
born. 

1 When they divided Purushahow many portions did they make 1 
What do they call his mouth, his arms ‘I What do they call his 

thiglis and feet ? 

2 The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rajanya 

made. 

His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the Shdra was 
produced. 

3 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the 

Sun had birth ; 

Iiidra and Agiii from his mouth were born, and Vayii from 
his breath, 

1 Forth from his navel came mid-air ; the sky was fashioned 
from his head ; 

Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. Thus they 
formed the worlds. 


8 The dripping fat: ‘the mixture of curds and hutter.’- Wilson. He: 
it; the sacrificeil victim Purusha, or the sacred clarified hutter. The crea- 

n’es o/ the air : ‘those anim.ils over wliuia VAvu piosides.’ — Wilson. 

9 Spells and charms: proh.kbly tliose of the latei collection of the Atharva- 
eda. The Yajus. the Yajur-veda. 

12 Rijanya: the second or Ksliatriya caste, the rei^al and military class. 
aisija ■ the husbandman ; he whose busine.sa i.sai^ricnlture and trade. SUdva : 
lie labourer. The BrAhmaii is called the mouth of Purusha, as having the 
pecial privilege, as a ptiest, of addre.ssing the Gods in prayer. The anus of 
urusha became the RAjanya, the prince and soldier who wields tlie sword 
spear. Hjg thighs, the strongst parts of his body, became the agricul- 
^nst and tradesman, the chief support of society ; and his feet, the emblems 
I'^vigoiir and activity, became the S idra or labouring man on whose toil and 
Qdustry all ultimately rests. This is the only passage in the Rigveda which 
the four castes. 

Cf. the creation myth 6f the world-giant Yrnir or Hyrnir in old Northern 
The hilU are his bones, the vault of the sky his skull, the sea hi^a 
I Slid the clouds his brains.— -Cbrjjui Poeticum Eoreafe, Vol. II* p* 468. 



620 


THE HYMNS OF 


15 Seven fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers of fuel 

prepared, 

When the Gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their victin 
Puruslia. 

16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim: these were the earliei 

holy ordinances. 

The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there whei 
the Sadhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling. 

HYMN XCL Ag, 

Brisk, at tlie place of I]a, hymned by men who wake, oi; 
own familiar Friend is kindled in tlie house ; 

Hotar of all oblation, worthy of onr choice. Lord, beaming 
trusty friend to one who loveth him. 

2 He, excellent in glory, guest in every house, finds like aswif 

winged bird a home in every tree. 

Benevolent to men, lie scorns no living man: Friend to th 
tribes of men he dwells with every tribe. 

3 Most sage with insight, passing skilful with thy powers at 

thou, 0 Agni, wise with wisdom, knowing all. 

As Vasu, thou alone art Lord of all good things, of all tli 
treasures that the heavens and earth produce. 

4 Foreknowing well, 0 Agni, thou in Ha’s place hast occapie 

thy regular station balmed with oil. 

Marked are thy comings like the comingt of the Dawns, tl 
rays of him who sUiuetli spotless as the Sun. 

1.5 Pencil^ g- sticks : guards, or pieces of wood laid round the eaciificial f 
to enclose it. SAyana explains 'paridhannh as the seven metres, or as six slialk 
trenches dug round the fire, and an imaginary one round the Suu. Mahidlia 
says that the seven oceans may be intende<l. 

This pantheistic hymn, which h generally called the Purusbasfikta, is 
comparatively recent origin, and appeals to be an attempt to harmonize t 
two ideas of sacrifice and creation. For further information regarding it, s 

Muir, 0 S. Texts, I. pp 6 — 11, and V. 368—377, Prof. Max Muller, Amt 
Sanskrit JAtei'ature, pp. 570f, and Dr. Scherman, PhilosophUche Hymnen a 
der Rig-und Atharva-vefi<i-Sanhitd,pp. 11—23. The hymn has also been tiai 
late<i by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, pp, 167, 168; by Wallis. 
mology of the Rigveda, pp. 87, 88; and by Peterson, Hymns from the Hi<f vu 
pp. 289, 290; also by Burnouf, Bh/tgavata PuMna, Preface to Vol. i., and 
Weber, Indische Siudien, IX. p. 5. Qrassmann’s Translation in his Appem 
to Vol. II., and Ludwig's Tianslation and Commentary should be . 

See also Hymns of the Atharva-veda, XIX. 6, which is a reprodne 
this hymn with transpositions and variations. 

1 The place of lid : the shrine where clarifl^ butter is poured upo» * 
fire. Our ovm familiar Friend: Agni, the Friepd of the house. . • 

2 Swift-winged bird: or, bird of prey. ‘ Huuter,' according o 

3 Vasu ' the word meauiug aho good and treasure. 



I THE RIQVEDA. 


021 


n/iV 91] 


5 Tliy glories are, as Ifehtnings from the rainy cloud, marked, 

many-hued, like hsralds of the Dawns’ approach, 

When, loosed to winder over plants and forest trees, thou 
crammest by thyself thy food into thy mouth. 

6 Him, duly comingas their germ, have plants received: this 

Agni have raate’nal Waters brought to life. 

So in like manne* do the forest trees and plants bear him 
witliin them aid produce liirn evermore. 


7 When, sped and urged by wind, thou spreadest thee abroad, 

swift piercingthrough thy food according to thy will, 

Thy never-ceasng blazes, longing to consume, like men on 
chariots, Agii, strive on every side. 

8 Agni, the Hotir-priest who fills the assembly full, Waker of 

knowledgo, Hiief Controller of the thought, — 

Him, yea, noie other than thyself, doth man elect at sacri- 
ficial ofTcriigs great and small alike. 

9 Hiu’o, Agni, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee 

as tho’r R’iest in sacred gatherings, 

Wlien men with strewn dipt grass and sacrificial gifts ofter 
thee entertainment, piously inclined. 

Thine is tlie Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed; Leader 
art thou, and Kindler for the pious man. 

Thou art bireotor, thou the ministering Priest : thou art the 
Brahman, Lord and Master in our homo. 

When mortal man presents to thee Immortal God, Agni, his 
fuel (jr his sacrificial gift, 

Then thou art his Adhvaryu, Hotar, messsenger, callest the 
Gods and orderest the sacrifice. 

! From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him, these 
holy words, these Richas, songs and eulogies. 

Eager for wealth, to Jatavedas fain for wealth : when they 
have waxen strong they please their Strengthener. 


6 Agni is produced ia the form of lightning by the waters of the firma- 
[ent, 01 the clouds, and descends with the rain into plants and trees, trom 
® wood of which he is brought forth by attrition, 

' ^ ami small : with Soma or without it. 

J The arrangers: priests who order and conduct the sacrificial ceremonies. 

Asni discharges the duties of the aeren chief prie^ta, officiatmg as 
Petav, Neshtar, Agnt.lh, Prae&star, Adhvaryu, and Biahmau. bee n. 


) where this stanza originaily occurs. 

I talkst the Qods: 'sayest the formulee.’- 
^ ^A’/iaa ; verses of praise, 


-Ludwig. 



522 THU HYMNS OH {BOOK X. 

13 This newest eulogy will I speak forth to him, the Ancient Oue 

who loves it. May he heat* our voiie. 

May it come near his heart and raak^ it stir with love, as a 
fond well-dressed matron clings abort her lord. 

14 He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and bctreu cows, and rams 

when duly set apart, are ofifered up, — 

To Agni, Soma-spnnkled, drinker of swed; juice, Disposer, witl 
my heart 1 bring a fair hymn forth. 

15 Into thy mouth is poured the offering, \gni, as Soma iut 

cup, oil into ladle. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, strength-winning, blest with heroe 
wealth lofty, praised by men, and full ofsplendour. 

HYMN XCII. VisveJeva 

I PRAISE your Charioteer of sacrifice, the Lo^d of men, Prie 
of the tribes, refulgent. Guest of night. 

Blazing amid dry plants, snatching amid the gieen, the Struiij 
the Holy Heralil hath attained to heaven. 

2 Him, Agui, Gods and men have made their ebijf support, wl 

drinks the fatness and completes the sacrifice 
With kisses they caress the Grandson of the Red, like t 
swift ray of light, the Household Priest of Dbwn. 

3 Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard’s ways: his brand 

evermore are sent forth to consume. 

When his terrific flames have reached the I nrnortals’ wor 
then men remember and extol the Heavenly Folk, 

4 For then the net of Law, D vans, and the wide expanse, Far 

Worship, and Devotion meet for highest praise, 

Varuna, Indra, Mitra were of one accord, and Savitar i 
Bhaga, Lords of holy might. 

5 Onward, with ever-roaming Rudra, speed the floods: ovei I 

mati the Mighty have they run. 

With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, I 
bellowing, bedews all things that are within. 

2 CompUU, the menjice; or. fills the aseembly full. Oranison of 
* son of the brilhiut V\ya.’ — Wilson. Sprung from his own red glu''', 
being kindled fioiu another. 

3 Men remember : because then their prayers are granted. 

5 Aramati: the earth. — Sftyana. Armaiti, of the Avesta, 

pernonified as well as Devotion or Piety. Parijman: ‘the circumamoie 
— Wilson. 

5 The Amra ; Dyaus himself. 



THE RIQVBDA. 


623 


qYMS & 2 .] 

6 Straightway the Rudras, Maruta visiting all men, Falcons of 

Dyaus, home-dwellers with the Asura, — 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and the swift- 
moving Indra with swift-moving Gods. 

7 With Indra have they found enjoyment, they who toil, in the 

light’s beauty, in the veiy Strong One's strength; 

The singers who in men’s assemblies forged for him, according 
to his due, his friend the thunderbolt. 

8 Even the Sun’s Bay Coursers hath he hold in check : each one 

fears Indra as the mightiest of all. 

Unhindered, from the air’s vault thunders day by day the loud 
triumphant breathing of the fearful Bull. 

9 With humble adoration show this day your song of praise to 

mighty Rudra, Ruler of the brave : 

With whom, the Eager Ones, going their ordered course, he 
comes from heaven Self-bright, auspicious, strong to guard, 

10 For these have spread abroad the fame of human kind, the 

Bull Brihaspati and Soma’s brotherhood. 

Atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure : through skill the 
Bhrigus were esteemed of all as Gods. 

11 For these, the Earth and Heaven with their abundant seed, 

four-bodied NaiAsansa, Yama, Aditi, 

God Tvash^r Wealtli-bestower, the Ribhukshanas, Rodasi 
Maruts, Vishnu, claim and merit praise. 

P And may he too give ear, the Sage, from far away, the Dragon 
of the Deep, to this our yearning call. 

Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and 
with your thought, 0 Earth and Sky, observe this well. 

3 Dear to all Gods, may Pushan guard the ways wc go, the 
Waters’ Child and Vayu help us to success. 

Sing lauds for your greuc bliss to Wind, the breath of all : ye 
I Asvins prompt to hear, hear this upon your way. 

\ Worshippers are rewarded in heaven for the hymns and prayers with 
iich they have strengthened and armed Indra for hia great deeds. 

3 MtK whom ; the Maruts. 

Soma's brotherhood: all Gods who are entitled to drink Soma juice. 
® wwu ; gave them assurance of obtaining what they asked. 

B Nard^ansa : Agni provided with four fires, or complete in 

^Sparta, .•‘Ribhus. Rodasi : consort of the Maruts. 

2'4e Dragon of the Deep : Ahibudhnya, regent of the sea of air. 

^ Tae Waters’ Child : Aomi. born as lightning from the clouds. 



524 


HYMNS OF 


[FOOK Ji 

14 With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as Lor 

over these fearless tribes, the Self-resplendent One. 

We praise Night’s youthful Lord benevolent to men, the foeles 
One, the flree, with all celestial Dames. 

15 By reason of his birth here Angiras first sang : the pressing 

stones upraised beheld the sacrifice — 

The stones through which the Sage became exceeding vast, an 
the sharp axe obtains in fight the beauteous place. 

HYMN XCllI. Vimdeva 

Mighty are ye, and far-extended, Heaven and Earth : hot 
Worlds are evermore to us like two young Dames. 

Guard us thereby from stronger foe ; guard us hereby to giv 
us strength. 

2 In each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth the Godi 
He who, most widely known and famed for happiness, invitet 
them. 


3 Ye who arc Rulers overall, great is your sovran power as God 
Ye all possess all majesty : all must be served in sacrifice. 

4 These are the joyous Kings of Immortality, Parijman, Mitn 

Ary a man, and Varuna. 

What else is Rudra, praised of men 1 the Maruts, Bhagi 
Pdshana? 

5 Come also to our dwelling, Lords of ampj^ wealth, comino 

partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon, 

When the great Dragon of the Deep hath settled down upo 
their floors. 

6 And let the Asvins, Lords of splendour, set us free,— hot 

Gods, and, with their Laws, Mitra and Varuna. 

Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to ample opuleiic 

14 The Self resplendent One: Agni. Night's youthful Lord: the Moo 

Celestial Dames : the lunar asterisma. , 

15 The Sage: Indra, according to SAyapa. Sharp axe: the thunderoo, 
The meaning of this stanza is obscure. 


1 Theiehy... . hereby : literally * by those by these.’ SAyapa snpph 

pdlanaih, protections, iu l-oth cases. The former may refer to the Mftgnav 
and the* latter to the people in general. , , y. 

4 Immortality : or, the immoi tal world. Parijman : Roamer 

What else : that is, Rudra is also one of these Kings. Pdshana : a lengi 
form of the usual Pflshan. . hv rdtre 

5 Waters: libations of Soma juice. SAyana explains 

‘by night.’ It is, as Prof. Ludwig has pointed out, a shorten 
nakshtanif ‘come ye.’ Upon their floors : ‘in their company m 
mental (clouds).’— Wilson. The meaning is obscure. 

6 He : the sacrificer whom these Gods protect, 



TRE RIQVEDA. 


525 


YUN 93.] 

Yea, let the Asvins Twain be gracious unto us, even Rudras, 
and all Gods, Bhaga, Rathaspati \ 
parijman, Ribhu, Vllja, 0 Lords of all wealth Ribhukshanas. 

\ Prompt is Ribhukshan, prompt the worshipper’s strong dnnk : 

may thy fleet Bay Steeds, thine who speedest on, approach. 
Not man’s but God’s is sacrifice whose psalm is unassailable. 

j 0 God Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us a place among 
wealthy princes. 

With his Car-steeds at once hath our Indra guided the reins 
and the car of these men. 

0 To these men present here, 0 Heaven and Earth, to us grant 

lofty fame extending over all mankind. 

Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with wealth for 
victory. 

1 This speaker, Indra — for thou art our Friend -wherever he 

may be, guard thou, Victor ! for help, ever for help : 

Thy wisdom, Vasu ! prosper him. 

2 So have they strengthened this mine hymn which seems to 

tike its bright path to the Sun, and reconciles the men : 
Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced. 

3 Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and 

bright with gold, 

Lightly, with piercing ends, as ’twere two ranks of heroes 
ranged for fight. 

This to Duhsima Prithavana have I sung, to Vena, Rama, to 
the nobles, and the King. 

They yoked five hundred, and their love of us was famed 
upon their way. 

) Besides, they showed us seven-and-seventy horses here. 

T^nva at once displayed his gift, Parthya at once displayed 
his gift, and straightway Mayava showed his. 

7 l^ithuspati : the guardi<in of war-chariots. Cf. X. 64. 10. Ribhukshanas : 

-ibhus. 

8 Mhukshan : ‘ the mighty (Indra).’ — Wilson. 

® his Cur-steeds: with us priests, who draw the chariot of sacrifice. 

So have they strengthened : ‘ May (the priests) strengthen.’— Wilson. 
r pke: as the yoke keeps a pair of horses together so the hymn addressed 
vot’ reconciles worshippers and fills them with like feelings of 

n of the axle, a hich pa^s through the naves. 

Pfukavdna, Vena, and Rima were Maghavans or wealthy 
tutors of sacrifices. To theJCing: dsure : to the Asura, lord or chief. 
. wiu/red; horses or chariots. . 

Worses; there is no substantive in the text. S^yaua supplies gavam, 



526 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK I 


HYMN XCIV. Presa-Btone 

Let these speak loudly forth ; let us speak out aloud : to th 
loud speaking Pressing-stones address the speech ; 

When, rich with Soma juice, Slones of the mountain, y 
united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise. 

2 They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men : tin 
cry aloud to us with their green-tinted mouths. 

While, pious Stones, they ply their task with piety, and, evi 
before tlie Hotar, taste the offered food. 


3 Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meatl 
they make a humming sound over the meat prepared. 

As they devour the branch of the Red-coloured Tree, the' 
the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered bellowings. 


4 Tliey cry aloud, with strong exhilarating drink, calling! 

ludra now, for they have found the meath. 

Bold, with the sisters they have danced, embraced by thei 
making the earth reecho with their ringing sound. 

5 The Eagles have sent forth tlieir cry aloft in heaven; in I 

sky s^ault the dark impetuous ones have danced. 

Then downward to the nether stone’s fixt place they sin 
and, splendid as the Sun, effuse their copious stream. 

G Like strong ones drawing, they have put forth all tli 
strength : the Bulls, liaine^scd together, bear the chariot-pol 
When they have bellowed, panting, swillowing their fo( 
the sound of their loud snorting is like that of steeds. 

7 To these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth, to th 
who have ten yokc-strups and ten binding thongs, 

To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye praise, 
these \^ho bear ten car-poles, ten hen they are yoked. 


i/8, These horses, or cows, were presented to the priests. TnnvaJ'drt) 
\ Mdyava are patronymics wliich do not occur again in the Rigveda. 


cows, 

and Mdyava are patronymics wnica no noo ouem lu li.v » , 

Ludwig thinks that a quanel had arisen between the Maghavans or ny 
(stanza 14) and the Visas or people (stanza 9), and tliat the priests, who 
reconciled the two parties, wore piescuted wdth the chaiiots which a 
prepared for battle. See stanza 13, in which, accoiding to this exi^an. 
nd should be Tendered by ‘and not’ instead of ‘as ’twere. The hy > 
is difficult and in parts almost unintelligible, is placed by Grasstnann 


^Hotai' : ‘ (Agni) the invoker (of the gods).’ — Wilson. Or the human H 
priest may be intended. 

^ 3 Red-coloured Tree: the Soma -plant. WeU-paatured : the m 
siibharrd is obscure. See Hillebrandt, V, M.y I. 18. 

4 The sisters : the fingers. 

6 The Eagles : the rapidly moving celestial press-stones, 

7 Ten toorkers : the fingexv of both bands. 



Tata iiGVEDA. 


527 


HYM^ ] 

8 These Stones with ten conoictors, rapid in their course, with 

lovely revolution travel nund and round. 

They have been first to driih the flowing Soma juice, first to 
enjoy the milky fluid of tin stalk. 

9 These Soma-eaters kiss Indrda Bay-coloured Steeds : draining 

tlie stalk they sit upon theox’s hide. 

1 idra, when he hath drunk Sona meath drawn by them, waxes 
in strength, is famed, is mi^ty as a Bull. 

10 Strong is your stalk ; ye, verib, never shall bo harmed : yc 

have refreshment, ye are eve* satisfied. 

Fair aie ye, as it were, througl splendour of his wealth, his 
in whose sacrifice, 0 Stones, p find delight. 

11 Bored deep, but not pierced tlrongh with holes, are ye 0 

Stones, not loosened, never wciry, and exempt from death. 
Eternal, undiseased, moving in suidry ways, uuthirsting, full 
of fatness, void of all desire. 

12 Your fathers, verily, stand fiim from age to age : they, loving 

rest, arc not dissevered from thdr scat. 

Untouched by time, ne’er lacking green plants and green 
tiees, they with their voice hav^ caused the heavens and 
earth to hear. 

13 This, this the Stones proclaim, whai time they are disjoined, 

and when wnth i inging sounds they nove and di ink the balm. 
Like tillers of the ground when thej are sowing seed, they 
mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minish it. 

14 They have raised high their voice for juice, for sacrifice, strik- 

ing the Mother E.irth as though thc\ danced thereon. 

So loose thou too his thought who lia(l\ elFuscd the i-ap, and 
let the Stones which we arc honouring be disjoined. 

HYMN XCV. Uiv. ai. PurCiravas. 

Ho theie, my consort! Stay, thou fierce-souled lady, and let 
us reason for a while together. 

Such thoughts as the e of ouin, while yet unspoken in days 
gone by have never brought us comfort. 

^ '^'hc ox's hide ; aprexl underneath to cauh and hold tue droppinj^s. 

lour fathers: the monnt.iina from width \ ou came, 
i"! Striking the Mother Edith ‘ Eaith ’ is not in the test ‘they made a 
like (children^ at. play, etiiking their mother.’ — Wilaon. I have followed 
Ludwig’s esplanatiun. 

File hymn is a dialogue between Purin-avas an<l Urvasi, and they are 
'^«rally the llishis of the stanzas which they speak. The dialogue, which 
. almost uniiitelligible, contains the germs of a legend whic >s 

in the ^atapatha’Bi d/mana, reappears in the MMbhdrata and 



528 THE HYAffs OF [EOOE X 

2 What am I now to do with this thy saying 1 I have gone 

from thee like the first of ]^ornings. 

Purfiravas, return thou to th^ dwelling : I, like the wind, am 
difficult to capture. 

3 Like a shaft sent for glory from the quiver, or swift steed 

winning cattle, winning hundreds, 

Tlie lightning seemed to flfsh, as cowards planned it. The 
minstrels bleated like a fimb in trouble. 

4 Giving her husband’s fat)er life and riches, from the near 

dwelling, when her love; craved her, 

She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accept- 
ing day and night her jbrd’s embraces. 

5 Thrice in the d«y didst thou embrace thy consort, though 

coldly she received thy fond caresses. 

To thy desires, Purfiravts, I yielded: so wast thou king, 0 
hero, of my body. 

6 The maids Sujurni, Srmi, Sumne-api, Charanyu, Granthini, 

and Hradechakshus,— 

These like red kine hare hastened forth, the bright ones, and 
like milch-cows havi lowed in emulation. 


Purdnas, and forms the plot d the well-known drama, Vih'amorva^t, or The 
Hero and the Nymph. According to this legend, Urva^i, an Apsaras or 
Nymph of heaven, has been pamshed to earth where she con'^onts to live 
with King PurCiravas on conhtion that ho takes care of her two pet ramB, 
and that she never sees him (inclotlied. She lives wit^f Pururavas for four 
years, when the Gandharva^ or heavenly minstrels resolve to bring her hack. 
They steal one of the ram^ by night. Purflravas springs from his bed ; the 
Gandharvas send on him a flash of magic liglitning, and Urvasi sees her 
husband naked. One of the conditions of the continuance of their union la 
broken, and the nymph i/istantly vanishes. Purdravas meets her afterwards 
and in vain implores her to return. At last she relents, and in due time a 
son is born to them. Tliese are the main outlines of a somewhat variously 
told story. 

1 Pururavas speaka, when be has mot Urvasi again after her sudden 
departure. 

2 Urvasi replies. ^ . u- t, v, 

3 Purflravas spetks, reminding her of the circumstances in which she 
vanished, ‘Yea,’ he says, ‘thou wentest from me with the speed of aufrroy 
or a racer. The cowardly Gandharvas deluded us. They bleated like a laui 
to make us think that one of thy pets was in pain or danger, an<i then, by a 
flash of factitious lightning, made me visible to thee in my nakedness. 

4 Life and riches : meaning, perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, 
future grandson. The near dwelling : her father-in-law’s house, where s 
spent much of her time. Her lover : her husband Purflravas. 

This stanza and the next arc spoken by Urvsl. , 

6 This stanza is ascribed by sAyana to Purflravas, who mentions the no 
of the Apsarases who were the companions of Urva^ after her flight. 
are compared to red kine, meaning, perhaps, bright flashes of lightning 
lowed by the lowing or bellowing of the thunder. 



j^YMN 95 ] THE RIG VEDA . 


520 


7 While he vfas born the Dames sate down together, the Rivers 

with free kindness gave him nurture; 

And then, Pmflravas, the Gods incvea’sed thee for miehtv 
battle, to destroy the Dasyus. ^ ^ 

8 When I, n mortal, wooed to mine embraces these heaverdv 

lyinphs who laid aade their raiment, ^ 

Like a scared snake they fled from me in terror, like chariot 
horses when the car has touched them. 

iWheii, loving these Immortal Ones, tlie mortal hath converse 

with the nymplis as they allow him, 

Like swan’s theysiiow the beauty of their bodies, like horses 
in their play they bite and nibble. 

10 She who flasl^d brilliant as the failing lightning brought me 

delicious piesenta fumi the waters. 

Now iVom tie flood be born a strung young hero ! May Urvasi 
prolong lifir life for ever ! 

11 Thy birth bath made me drink from earthly miloh-kine : this 

power, i^ururavas, hast thou vouchsafed me. 

I knew, And, warned thee, on that day. Thou wouldst not 
I hear jae. What sayest thou, when naught avails thee ? 

12 When ^ill the son be born and seek his father? Mourner-like, 

wilihe weep when first he knows him? 

Who, shall divide the accordant wife and husband, while fire 
isshining with thy consort’s parents? 


7 l^»*iisl speaks, reminding Puriiravas uf the favour shown hhii at iiia birth, 
>y tWcelestial Dames who were present, the Rivers Who nursed him. and 
him strength. Another explanation is that in the tii-st 
lalf/of the stanza Urvasi speaks, by anticipation, of the. son whom she will 
fo Puriiravas. 


— — j of the shyness of the nymphs mentioned in stanza 6, 
h j society he h.id sought to console him'^elf. A mortal : meaning that 
a® U'>d their beliaviour would have been different. Raimtnt : 

explained by Sdyana as uvak^am rUpam, their own proper form. 

1 ’eplies. The Apsarases, she says, as a rule only coquet with mor- 
Am ; h’dtuhhirnd; see Geldner, V. 3., I. 276. Like 
imv it explains nd here differently ; —‘they (becoming) ducks do not 
'ojtheir bodies.’-Wilson. 

« TFrvasl, he says, did not treat him so coldly. From 
«wate* ^ firmament. ’ From Ike flood: from Urvasi who comes from 

Uiifl P' above. SAyana explains apdh differently : — % sun able m 

\\ u^an has been bo in.' — Wilson. 

^l^ner Til to SAyapa, whom Wilson, Qrassmann, and 

en boin tianslatioii ^ the first half-line would be ‘Thou h^iat 
len I Htf. protection.’ Warned thee on that duf/ : told. 

T^tnenf to live with thee what would happen if the oouditiona of th#" 
Id* .. ''t Were not. 



530 


THE I/rMNS OF 


[BOOK] 


13 I will console him wlieii hi:) tears are falling; he shall ik 

weep and cry for care that blesses 
That which is thine, between us, will 1 send thee. Go hon 
again, thou fool ; thou hast not won me. 

14 Thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever, to seek, wilho 

return, the faithest distance. 

Then let his hod be in Destruct-on , bosom, and there] 
fierce rapacious wolves devour him. 

15 Nay, do not die, Pururavas, nor vanish ; jet not the evil-oniQn 

wolves devour thee. 

With women there can be no listing friuidsbip ; hearts 
hyenas are the hearts of women. 


2G When amid men in altered shape I sojouried, and thron 
four autumns spent the nights among then, 

I tasted once a day a drop of butter ; and eve^ now with tli 
am 1 contented. 


17 1, her best love, c.ill Urvasi to meet me, her whi fills air ai 

mea.sures out the region. 

Let the gift brought by piety approach thee. 'lurn thou 
me again : my hcatt is troubled. 

18 Thus speak these Gods to thee, 0 son of Tii: As (eath lia 

verily got thee for his Hubjet.t, 

Thy sons shall serve the Gods with th^- oblation, a»d tli 
moreover, ahalt rejoice in S,avga 


when he tnows niy story, know.*, how Ins father luia been deserted. Wti{e 
it ^hinwfj : eo lou^ as tlie fathor-in law and uiolher-in-lav\ who sanciiouul 
union live and uiaiiiUiu their hou.sehoid fire. 

13 Urvafci answers. Thit which it httyettn us: our child, our i 
luon treasure. 

14 Pururavas threatens to de.stroy himself. 

15 Urvasi speaks this and the next Htoi/a 

16 A- drop of butter : one of the conditions on which the conthuianc 
their union depended was that she should e.it nothiug but a small quai 
of ghritd or clarified butter daily. See stanza 11. 

17 Pur. ravas 8|)eiik8. Jler best love : v isiththoh bore is evidently, m 
S choliast says, an epithet and not a name, meaning ‘most excellent, 
precious.' Fills air : representing the morning mift, or the first 
light, that spreads over the heavens before the ri-iug of the sun. 

18 There is an hiatus between this stanza and 17, au entire break of 
tinuity. The fragment is a.scriV>ed tw Urvasi, who consoles Pururava 
te’ling him of the promise of the deitit-s tliat after his death his sods 
offer sacrifice to the Gods, and he himself shall be blest in heaven. 
Jld: Purfiravas, called Aila or son of I|.t who was the daughter 

Some of the stanzas should be transposed, and their order should > 
8 , 4 . 6, 16, 6, 7, 8. 9, 1 1. 13 13, 14 15, 10. -Ludwig. ^ 

Of this very difficult hymn there is a complete translatioUf 



(fj/.v 9fi.] 


fUE mavEDA. 


531 


WYMN xcvi. 

Is fchfi great synod will 1 laud thy two Bay Steeds' 1 
the sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior-God 
Ills who pours lovely oil as ’twerc with yellow drops 
my songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints ’ 


Indra. 

prize 

Let 


2 Yo who in concert sing nnto the gold-huod place, like Bav 

Steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat, ^ 

For Indra laud ye strength allied with Ta-w’ny Steeds laud 
him whom cows content as ’twerc with yellow drops. ' 

3 His is that. thunderbolt, of iron, goldcn huod, gold-coloured 

very dear, and yellow in his arms ; ’ 

Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage In 
indra are set fast all forms of golden hue. ^ ^ 


4 As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden thunder- 
bolt spread out as in a race. 

That iron bolt with yellow jaw smo^e Ahi down. A thousand 
flames had he who bore the tawiy-hued. 


5 Thou, thou, when praised by mer who sacrificed of old, hadst 
pleasure in their lauds, 0 Ind'a golden-haired. 

All that befits thy song of prahe thou welcomeat, the perfect 
pleasant gift, 0 Guldeu-hue< from birth. 


6 These two dear Bays biing bther Indra on his car, Thunder- 
armed, joyous, meet for hud, to dnnk his fill. 

Many libations flow for bin who loveth them • to Indra have 
the gold-huod Soma juices run. 


jr much aoeistance), by Prof, (teldner, Vedh>'he Stud'mi, I pp 243—295. 
lie myth has been discuesed by von Hoth, IHuntrahons of the Nirukta, and* 
'Muche Studieu, 1. 196; by Prof Max Muller, Oxford Essayg {Chips, IV. 
Oilf);by Prof. Adalbert Kuhn, Dir Herabkurtft des Feuers, pp. 85flF; and 
y Professors Holtzmann and Oldenberg in more recent days. Profeaaor 
w Muller coiifliderS the stoiy to be ‘one of the myths of the Vedas which 
^presses the coi relation of the dawn and the sun.’ According to Dr. Gold* 
Jicker, III vast is the morning mist which vanishes away as soon as Purdravaa 
displays himself. See Chambers's Encychpeedia, hi edition, under 
'J^uravas. 

the hymn the poet rings the changes on words said to be 
di'i ^®ke, as haryatd, delightsome, harydn, loving, 

Hiei tawny, hkrit, gieen, yellow, or gold-coloured Cp. Ill 44. 

conjectuiaUy explained by the Conimentatoj, and are 
j P of various renderings. 

^ • or fatness, fertilizing rain. 

3 for aaoriflciil purpo^'es. 

perhaps with reference to the effect of anger on the faoew— * 



58^ THE HYMNS OF [BOOK K 

7 The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish : th( 

yellow drops have urged the swift Bays to the Strong. 

He who speeds on with Bay Steeds even as he lists hath satis 
fled his longing for the golden drops. 

8 At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in mighty th 

Iron One with yellow beard and yellow hair. 

He, Lord of Tawny Coursers, Lord of fleet-foot Mares, wi' 
bear his Bay Steeds safely over all distress. 

9 His yellow-coloured jaws, like Indies, move apart, what timi 

for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted stir. 

When, while the bowl stands there, he grooms his Tawn 
Steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, the sweet jni( 

• that he loves. 

10 Yea, to the Dear One’s seat in homes of heaven and earth tl 

Bay Steeds’ Lord hath whinnied like a horse for food. 
Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, and tli 
BelovM One hath guned high power of life. 

1 1 Thou, comprehending \Vth thy might the earth and heavei 

acceptest the dear hynn for ever new and new. 

0 Asura, disclose thou ard make visible the Cow’s belovi 
home to the bright goldei Sun. 

12 0 Indra, let the eager wishes :>f the folk l^ing thee, delightf 

golden-visored, on thy car, 

That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, th 
mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered meath. 

13 Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest; and tb 

especially is this libation. 

Gladden thee, Indra, with the meath-rich Soma : pour it dc 
ever, Mighty One ! within thee. 


7 To the Strong ; to Indra ; that they may be harneaaed and come to 
■scrifiee. 

8 The Iron One : * iron-hearted Indra.’--Wilson. 

9 Fw ttrength: for strengthening food. The ydUno-tinUd : his yellow , 

10 The Dear One must be the Soma, found both in heaven and earth 
homes of Gods and men. According to SAyana, Indra himself is meant. 
Belovid One : Indra, whose vital vigour is increased by Soma-draugbta. 

11 fi.e Covft heloM home: the Ccw may be the Sun whose home’ 
univtrsd which Indra will allow Surya to illumine. 

19 Eaerifiee : according to Siyapa, the sacrificial Soma juice which i« 
•cd and prepared by the fingers of the priest. 



{YMN 97 .] 


TUB RIQVEDA. 


533 


HYMN XCVII. Praise (rf Herbs. 

Herbs that sprung up in time of old, three ages earlier than 
tfie Gods, — 

Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the hundred 
powers and seven. 

2 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are 

your growths. 

Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from 
disease. 

] Be glad and jo^^ful in the Plants, both blossoming and bearing 

fruit, 

Plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in 
the race. 

i Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the 
Goddesses : 

Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self, 
0 man. 

5 The Holy Fig tree is your home, your mansion is the Parna tree : 
Winners of cattle shall ye be if ye regain for me this inan. 

3 He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd 

of men, — 

Physician is that sage’s name, fiond-slayer, chaser of disease, 

1 Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishment, in strength- 
ening power, — 

All these have I provided here, that this man may be whole again. 

8 The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like cattle 
from the stall, — 

Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital 
breath, 0 man. 

S Reliever is your mother’s name, and hence Restorers are ye 
called. 

Rivers are ye w'ith wings that fly : keep fur whatever brings 
disease. 

^ Over all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold. 

Plants have driven fioni the frame whatever malady was 
I there. 


carrier than the Oodt : ‘for the gods before the three ages.’— 
^ See Satapalha Brdhfnaj^, VII. 2. 4. 26 {S, B, E,, XLI. p. 339). 

5 garment : as my fee for curing you. 

utea V Asvattha, or Ficus Religiosa. Parna tree : the Pal&M, 

1 .. , foudosa vaacAla ArA tnA^A t\f fhft wood of these trees 





l*-'vyvA i 


11 When, bringing brtck the vanished strength, I hold these herb 

within my hand, 

The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life. 

12 He through whose frame, 0 Plants, ye creep member b 

member, joint by joint, — 

From him yedrive away disease like some strong arbiter of strif 

13 Fly, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and kingfi^he 
Fly with the wind’s impetuous speed, vanish together wit 

the storm. 

14 Help every one the other, lend assistance each of you to eacl 
All of you be accordant, give furtherance to this speech of nun 

15 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitles'^, those that blossom, and tl; 

blosaomless, 

Urged onward by Brihaspati, release ns from our pain and grie 

16 Release me from the cm se’s plague and woe that comes fro 

Varuna ; 

Free mefrom Yama’s fetter, from sin and offence against the Goc 

17 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew cartl 

ward, thus they spake : 

No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth we pervad 
13 Of all the many Plants whose King is Soma, Plants of hundr 
forms, 

Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompfc to the wish, swe 
to the heart. 

19 0 all ye various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o’erspre 

the earth, , 

Urged onward by Brihaspati, combine your virtue in this I la 

20 UnhaiTOcd be he who digs you up, unharmed the man 

whom I dig : 

And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours. 

21 All Plants that hear this speech, and those that have depJ 

ed far away, , 

Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon 
Herb. 

12 Like some strong arbiter of strife: ‘like a mighty (prince) atati 

the midst of his host.’— WiFon. , 

13 With the bine jay and kingfisher : with the ijrus 

Together with the storm : according to S4yana, ‘ perish along wi ^ 

15 Urged onward : Brihaspati, says S4yana, is the deity who pr® 
mantras or spells and charms. 

19 This Plant : the medicinal herb which I, the physician, am 
make use of. ^ 



BYMtf 98 ] TBE RIQVBDA. 535 

33 With Soma as tlieir Sovran Lord the Plants hold colloquy 
and say : ^ ^ 

0 King, we save from death the man whose cure a Biihman 
undertakes. 

23 Most excellent of all art thou, 0 Plant : thy vassals are ihe trees. 
Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to in- 
jure us. 

HYMN XCVIII. The God«. 

Comb, he thou Mitra, Varuna, or Pushan, come, 0 Brihaspati, 
to mine oblation : 

With Maruts, Vasus, or Adityas, make thou Parjanya pour 
for San tan u his rain-drops. 

2 The God, intelligent, the speedy envoy whom thou hast sent 

hath come to me, Devapi : 

Address thyself to me and turn thee hither; within thy lips 
will I put brilliant language. 

3 Within my moutl), Brihaspati, deposit speech lucid, vigorous, 

and fiee from weakness. 

Thereby to win for Santanu the rain-fall. The meath-nch 
drop from heaven hath passed within it. 

4 Let the sweet drops descend on us, 0 Indra ; give us enough 

to lade a thousand wagons. 

Sit to thy Hotar task ; pay worship duly, and serve the God-*, 
Devdpi, with oblation. 

5 Knowing the Gods' good-will, Devapi, Rishi, the son of Kish- 

tishena, sare as Hotar. 

He liath brought down from heaven’s most lofty summit the 
ocean of the laiii, celestial watered. 


‘This StakU is remarkable as representing tme of two brothers, both of the 
Kshattiya casto, becoming the Pu,>ofiita, or farnilv paest, and //ofrt or sacrifia- 
priest, of the other who u the lldjl’— Wilson. 

I Devipi add^e ^»808 Bnhaaputi, who ia identifiable with Mitia, Varuna, 
ughaiii and otheig, in hia apecial character of Purohita, or family Priest, of 
^bods, and as the prototype of all human Purohitas. With Maiut»: 
J l-hou be attended by Maruts, Vasus, or, Adir-yae. For S.mtunu: the 
DevApi. 

^ Brihaspati replies. Brilliiwt lan^uafje - a ‘brilliant hymn.’ — Muir. 

3 Dev&pi speaks, praying Brihaspati, as Lorfl of Speech (cp X 71. 1.), to 
with eloquence thak he may addres*! the 0 j<)s eflcctuolly. The 
I ^ -^ch drop; thy Kweet eh'qnence for which he has pr.u ed. 

I ^ sweet dropn of rain. This stanwi is spoken by Santanu. 

1 Aon., ; . , 



•'A ^ 


6 Gathered to 2 :<'t,her in that highest ocean, the waters stood, fc 

deities obstructed. 

They hurried down set free by Arshtisbena, in gaping cleft 
urged onward by Dev^pi. 

7 When as chief priest for Santanu, Devapi, chosen for Hotai 

duty, prayed beseeching, 

Graciously pleased Brihaspati vouchsnfed him a voice thj 
reached the Gods and won the waters. 

8 0 Agni whom Devapi Arshtishena, the mortal man, hal 

kindled in his glory, 

Joying in him with all the Gods together, uige on the send 
of the ram, Parjanya. 

9 All ancient Rishis with their songs approached thee, ev( 

thee, 0 Much-invoked* at sacritices. 

We have provided wagon-lo ids in thousands : come to tl 
solemn rite, Lord of Red Horses. 

10 The wagin-loads, the nine-and-ninety thousand, these Im 

been otfcred ui> to tliee, 0 Agni. 

Hero, with these increase thy many bodies, and, stimulate 
send us rain from licavcn. 

11 Give thou these ninety thousand loads, 0 Agni, to Indra, 

the Bull, to be his portion. ^ 

Knowing the paths which Deities duly tiavel, set mid tl 
Gods in lieaven Aulana also. 

12 0 Ajiii, drive afar our foes, onr troubles ; chase malady aw; 

and wick' d demons. 

From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, send down on 
a mighty flood of waters. 

6 A i sht ishena • pationytme, son of Hit^hudlu na ; Devftpi. 

7 priest ..r fannly or hoiineMoM pneat ; Purohita 

9 Wagon-loads: an oxti.aoMl>i».'<ry qu.'uitity of fuel for the aacrifice, as 
occasion wa.s one of the gieate^t iinjioitance 

\ 1 A ufdna : S inlanu, as a desccndunt. of TTla, oppoan to be meant. Accf 
in^ t'> some Hoholar.s, nieau.s otdatinn or stiorificial offt'img. 

fact of Davaoi being repntwl as the autlior of thia hymn, and as 
and hotri of hia brother ^ecm8 to have led the legendary writers to in 
the story of his becoming a Bifthman. which (as montioned ^ t 
We»)er, JndUche Studieu/i p. 203) is lecorded in the 
Mahftbharat 1 , verses 2281 ff, where he is said tp have attained this . 
at a certain place of pilgrimage called Pi ithadaka ; Sin 

Visvftmitra also were received into the higher caste. nuoted 

270 ff. For the legend on which the hymn is said to be basea, q 
SAyana from the Nirukta, see Wilson’s Translation. 





JlllX ¥ PjUA, 


637 


HYMN XCIX. 


ludra. 


What Splendid One, Loud-voiced, Far-striding, dost, thou well 

knowing, urge us to exalt wiih praises? ’ 

What give we him ? When his might dawned, he fashioned 
the Vritra-slayiug bolt, and sent us waters. 


2 Be itoos to end his work with lightning flashes; wide is the 
sent his Asura j^lory gives him. 

With his Comfianions, not without his Brother, he quells this 
Saptatha’s magic devices. 


3 Oil most auspicious path he goes to battle; lie toiled to win 
heaven’s light, full fain to gam it; 

He seized the hundred gated ca^itle’s treasure bv craft, un- 
checked, and slew tlie lustful demons. 


4 Fighting for kine, the prize of war, and roaming among the 

hold he hiiugs the young streams hither, 

Where, footless, joined, without a car to bear them, with jars 
fo! steeds, th(*y pour their flood like butter. 

5 Bold, uusidicitod for wealtli, with Riidras ho came, the Blame- 

IcbS, having left his dwelling, 

Came, seized the food of Yainra and his consoit, and left the 
couple weeping and unsheltered. 

6 Lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who i oared aloud, 

ftix-eved and triple-lieaded. 

fiita, made stronger by the might ho lent liim, struck down 
ilio l)oar wuth sliaft whose point was iron. 

' Hi 3 raised himself on high and shot his airow against tlie guileful 
and oppressive foeman. 

•Strmig, glorious, manliest, for ns he shattered the forts of 
Naims when ho slew the D.isyus. 

I llie qiiHsucn m the first line is a ilietorical fii^urc, the meaning being, 
(Iiidra) wlnni tlion (the Y.>j iiiulaa ?) urg.-^t ns to exalt ! 
f)i mtuin for what lie has done 

Narnts H s Bi'otho' Vidinn. Wlio was 

word iri'-ans Septimus, the seventh, and probably some 

demon is intended. 

Vll ^'^ 0 us : the exact rn-^aning of s's ta leiiiu U uncertain. See 

0 and note. 

nothing intelligible of the second line ‘ I think of the two 
hri . II j fi’t^o fiom fever Having obtained (the enemy’s) 

)1 9. jj’ij jg whilst stealing it.’— Wilson. Vamra is mentioned in I. 

or, with Ludwig, The Lord and Giver. The 
T Viavardpa. sou of Tvashtar. See X. 8. 8. The boar ; Yritra. 



53S TUB UYMNB OF [BOOK 

S He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath found 
us the way to dwell in safety. 

When the Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed with 
iron claws he slays the Dusyus. 

9 He with his potent Friends gave up the mighty, gave Susl 
up to Kutsa for affliction. 

He led the lauded Kavi, he delivered Atka as prey to him ( 
to Ilia heroes. 

10 He, with his Guds who love mankind, the Wondrous, gh 

like Vanina who works with magic, 

Was known, yet young, as guardian of the seasons ; and 
quelled Aiaru, four-fouted demon. 

11 Through lands of him hath Ausija Rijisvan burst, with 

Mighty's aid, the stall ^f Pipru. 

When the >aint piessed the juice and shone as singer, he sei 
the forts and wuth lus craft subdued them. 

12 Sv), swiftly Asm a, for exaltation, hath the great V^amrakacc 

nigh to Iridra. 

He will, when supplic ited, bring him blessing : he hath brou; 
ail, food, strength, a happy dwelling. 

HYMN C. Vistedc 

Be, like thyself, O Itvlra, strong for our delight: here land 
aid us, Magliavan, <l( inker of the juice# 

Savitar with tlie Gods protect us : hear ye Twain. We ask 
freedom and complete felicity. 


8 The /fiUf'tc the fierce hikI wwift Indn. 

9 fCiict • accordiug to SAyuna, Usani KAvya or son of Kavi is intenc 
A tied : flee X 49. :i 

10 HinGofh: theMirnt^ Araru ■ I follow Slyan^. Ci. S'ltapathfi-Bi 
mana, I. 2 4. 17 (8. B. K XIT. 57) According to Prof Ludwigs conject 
explanation the translation would be: — ‘he measured out the year m 
divisions ’ 

n • son f)f UHij. But as this patronymic does not properly be 

to Rijiflvan, the word here may perhaps meiiu, ‘vehement,’ ‘eagerly eaiiu 
Pipru : one of the demons of drought. 

12 A sura • 0 divine and mighty Indra. For exaltation: 
Vamraka : a Ieny:th«-ue<l form of Vamra, the Kishi of the hymn, 
clause of the stann-i is borrowed from X. 20. 10. • i 1 

This hymn, which is obscure and in some places unintelligible. P 
Prof. GraflBrnann in his Appendix Dr Muir has translated atan 
0. B. Texts, IV. pp. 408, 409 (2nd edition). 

1 Ye Twain : Iiidra and Mavitar. Freetlnm ■ adititn. 
translates diffciently : ‘We implore .\dili for health and ^ 



TUE RJGVEDA, 


iWS 100 .] 


539 


2 Bring swift, for offering, the share that suits the time, to the 

pure-drmkcr Vayu, roaring as he goes, 

To him who hath approached the draught of shining milk. 
We ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

3 May Savitar the God send us full life, to cacli who sacrifices, 

lives alight and pours the juice; ’ 

lhat we with simple hearts may wait upon the Gods. We ask 
for freedom and complete felicity. 

i May Tndra evermore be gracious unto ns, and may King Soma 
meditate our happiness, 

Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We ask for free- 
dom and complete felicity. 

5 Indra hath given the body with its song and strength : Brihas- 

pati, thou art the Icngthcner of life. 

The sacrifice is Maiiu, Providence, our Sire. We ask for 
freedom and complete felicity. 

6 Indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed: the singer in 

the house is Agni, prudent Sage. 

He is the sacrifice in synoii, fair, most near. We ask for free- 
dom and complete felicity. 

7 Not often have we sinned against }ou secretly, nor, Vasus, 

have we openly provoked the Gods. 

Notone of us, ye Gods, hath woin «ui alien shape. We ask 
for freedom and complete felicity. 

8 May Savitar remove from us our malady, and may the Moun- 

tains keep it far away fnun where 
The press-st)ue as it sheds tlie meatli uu^s loudly fortli. We 
ask for freedom and complete felieity. 

9 Yc Vasua, let the stone, the pre.>s<T, stand erect: avert all 

enmities and keep them far remote. 

Our guard to bo adored is Savitar tins God. Wc ask for free- 
dom and complete felicity. 

hat .strength and fatness in the pasture, kine, whoarebalmed 
at the reservoir and at the scat of Law. 

So let your body be our body's medicine. We ask for freedom 
complete felicity. 

5 ; drinker of pure Sorna juice. 

fhi h • w Manu : we o ve our existence and preservation to sacrifiqe, 

c 18 to U 8 another Manu, the father of Aryan men. 

7 . ® in synod : ‘ \jrorthy of sacrifice at the altar.’— -Wilbon. 

10 shape : a.s sorcerers are accustomed to do. 

’laitis reservoir-, anointed befoie being milked. SAyana ex- 

irddn..- • pc by f/oshthe. ‘in the cowstall.’ Let your body: may the milk, the 



540 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK : 

1 1 The singer fills the spirit : all mens’ love hath he. India tab 

kindly care of those who pour the juice. 

For his libation is the heavenly udder full. We ask for fre 
dom and complete felicity. 

12 Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, triumphant; thy hosts sa 

from decay and are resistless. 

The pious votury by straightest pathway speeds to possi 
the best of all the cattle. 

HYMN Cl. Visvede^ 

Wake with one mind, my friends, and kindle Agni, ye ^ 
are many and who dwell together. 

Agni and Dadlnkras and Dawn the Goddess, you, Gods w 
Iiidra, I call down to help us. 

2 Make pleasant hymns, spin out your songs and praises : bi 

ye a ship equipped with oars for transport. 

Prepare the implements, make all things ready, and let 
sacrifice, my friends, go forward. 

3 Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: formed ia 

fnriow, sow the seed within it. 

Through song may we find heaiing fraugiit with plenty: i 
to the ripened grain ajiproach the sickle. 

4 Wise, througli desire of bliss from Gods, the skilful I 

tlie traces last, ^ 

And lay the yokes on either side. 

5 Arrange the buckets in their place : securely fasten on 

straps. 

We will pour forth the well that bath a copious stream, 
flowing well that never fails. 

* may the body of the cow offered in Baciifice be the expiation for 
the 8 AC 1 ificer, enabling him to attain 8 icar^a. Or may the milk be tl 
rective the Soma ’--WilBoii. 

11 The heaicnlt) udder : the clouds of the firmament 

12 Save from decoy : thia i-i I’lof. Ludwig’s inteipictation of the o 
vord jmaniptdh, winch nic.iU', aocoidmg to SAyana, replenishing the 
of thy wot shippers The last hue i^ exj'lained differently hy SAyan.i.— 
fore) Dnvasyu haHteiis in front of the \ictim cow, (leading it) 

c*»rd.’ — WiLon. According to the name authority ihe nieauiug of 
of stdjizas 1 — 11 la ; — ‘ We long for the univerBal Adiii.' 

-1 Dadhikvds : probably a personification of the Morning Sun. ^ 

20 1 ; IV. 38. 2 ; 40. 6 note. 

2 Ship; sacrifice, repteaen ted under this figure. ^ . 

3 In this and the following stanzas sacrifice is figuratively spo 
•" ploughing, sowing aud reaping. See Satapatkch'BTdhinund, > 1 • 

n V XLl. 320). 



THE niQVEDA, 


srm 101 .] 


541 


5 I pour the water from the well with pails prepared and goodly 
straps, 

Unfailing, full, with plenteous stream. 

7 Rtifresh the horses, win the prize before you : equip a chariot 

fraught with happy fortune. 

Pour forth the well with stone wheel, wooden buckets, the 
drink of heroes, with the trough for armour. 

8 Prepare the cow-stall, for there drink your heroes : stitch ye 

the coats of armour, wide and many. 

Make iron forts, secure fiom all assailants : let not your pit- 
cher leak : stay it securely. 

9 Hither, for help, I turn the holy heavenly mind of you the 

Holy Gods, that longs for sacrifice. 

May it pour milk for us, even as a stately cow who, having 
sought the pasture, yields a thousand streams. 

10 Pour golden juice within the wooden vessel ; witli stone-made 

axes fashion ye and form it. 

Embrace and compass it with tenfold giidle, and to both 
chariot-poles attach the car-horse. 

11 Between both poles the car-horse goes pressed closely, as in 

his dwelling moves the doubly-wedded. 

Lay in the wood the Sovran of the Forest, and sink the well 
although ye do not dig it. 

12 Indra is he, 0 men, who gives ns happiness : sport, urge the 

giver of delight to win us strength. 

Bring quickly down, 0 priests, hither to give us aid, to drink 
the Soma, Indra Son of Nishtigri. 


The lacrifice ii a chariot ; and the ritual is a race. The well : the stream 
Soma juice. Stone wheel : with allusion to the pi ess-stones, 
i The coW'Stall : figuratively, for the place where the Snma is pressed, 
of armour: the filters for straining the juice. Iron forts: the 
-guards obtained by sacrificing. 

* Milk : abundant blessing. 

^^Shne.made: with allusion to the press stones. Tenfold girdle : the fingers 
both hands. Both chariot-poles : the arms. The oar-horse : the upi)er 
«8-8toDe ; or the pestle. 

The douhhj-wedded : the man who has two wives. The comparison is 
cear. TVie Sow'an of the Forest: the Soma plant. Sinh the well: ‘store 
^ke juice.'-. Wilson. 

(T 5^ SAyapa in hW interpretation of the first line. Von Roth, 
^ S) and Qrassmann explain it differently. Nwhtigri: meaning according 
who swallows up her rival wife Nisbti, i. e, Diti,’ is said to be 




542 


THE HYMN^ OP 


VmK X. 


HYMN (HI. I.Klra 


For thee msiy Indra. boldly speed the car that works oneithei 
side. 

Favour us, Much-invoked ! in this most glorious fi^kt aguiisi 
the raiders of our wealth. 

2 Loose in the wind the woman’s robe was streaming what tiim 

she won a car-load worth a thousand. 

The charioteer in fight was Mudgalani : she, India’s dart, heap 
ed up the prize of battle. 

3 0 Indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughte 

us : 

The weapon both of Dasa and of Arya foe keep far away, ( 
Maghavan. 

4 The bull in joy had drunk a lake of w'atcr. His shatteriiij 

horn encountered an opp<»ncnt. 

Swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he stretched In 
forefeet, fain to win and triumph. 

5 They came ancar the bull ; they made him thunder, made Inra 

pour rain down ere the fight was ended. * 

And Mudgalt thereby won in the contest well-pastured kiiv 
in hundreds and in thousands. 

G In hope of victory that bull was harnessed : Kesi the drive 
urged him on with shouting. ^ 

As he ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels presi 
ed close on Mudgalani. 


The deified subject of the hymn is said to be, alternatively, Drughana (Mac 
Club or Hammer. See stanza 9). The Rishi is Mndgala 

According to the legend quoted by SAyana, all Mudgala’s cattle h«d b^ 
stolen except an old ox which he harnessed to his wagon mid w»*nt n pursu 
of the lohlMjrs He threw his club or mace before him, which showed him t 
way to the thieves, and thus recovered his property. 

1 For thee : 0 Mndgala. That works on either side ’ 

ing to SSlj A nti -asahd jam, ‘ that has no companion. The meaning 

2 Mudgaldni : Mudgala’s wife. Indra's dart : sped swiftly on her way 
Indra. 

3 This stanza Hcems to be an interpolation. i, • f nf Mu 

4 The bull . apparently one of the buffaloes 

gaWnt’s chief opponent Had drunk : just before ^ ‘ hei 
tered an opponent : meaning, perhaps, that feeling un J . | vire 

ttod .truck the grouod with hU horn.. ‘ He cleft the mountsun peak, 
against the enemy.'— Wilson. . „„^prtftin • according 

*6 7/1 hope of victory : kakd^’dave : the ^ the f^rtli 

S4yana, ‘ for the destruction of the enemy. I.udwtg thin 



/fj/.v 102 j 


77//; IlIGVKDA 




: IMlly fartiiin lit* stretclied the car-polo forward, guided tlie 
bull thiireto o.nd finiily yokeii bun ^ 

Jiidra vouclia.t^d the lo-d of cows his favour : with inio-htv 
steps the bufFalo ran onward. ° 


^ Touohed by tlie gold the shagry bcist w^cut nobly, b iund to 
ihe pole by the yoke’s thong of leather. 

Performingdeods of might for many people, he, lookimr on the 
cows, gamed strength and vigour. ° 

1 Hire look upon this mace, this bull’s companion, now lying 
midway on the field of bitt’e. ^ ^ 

Therewith hath Mudgala in ordered contest won for cattle for 
himself, a hundred thousand 


3 Far is the evil : who hath here beheld it^ Hither they biirn^^ 
the bull whom they are yoking. 

To this they give not either food or water Reaching beyond 
the pole it gives directions. 

[ Like one forsaken, she hath found a husband, and teemed as 
if her breast were full and flowing. 

With swiftly-racing chariot m ly we conquer, and rich and 
blessed be our gains in Imttle. 

1 Tlioti, Iiidra, art tiio mark whereon the eyes of all life rest, 
when thou, 

A Bull who driv’-est with thy bull, wilt win the race together 
with thy weakling friend. 


7 Mijrl.5ala\s b etter fortune is now relneil For him for hw owu buffalo. 

Mud{jala. Cur-pole ■ 1 follow Lu<l wig's conjeet-uro , but it is uncertaiu 
nt part of the chariot the prudhl wis , ' the p'Tijihery of the wheel,’ aceoni- 
?ti)the St. Petersbuig Lc.xicon ; ‘the fi.ime ot the w.tggou ’--Wilson, 
iyatias explanation is not veiy cb-ar, but he ^^'cms tn tiiiiik that the linchpin 
iiiteiidod, Nouf* of these tlirce explanations sceiihs .suitable here. Tne lord 
coirt • the bull buffalo. 

Mace: drxujhandm ‘ accordinf' to Smyrna, the club which MudgaU had 
'■ned with him on his expedition, and wbicli. together with the ox that drew 
* C'tr had enabled him to recover his cattle. I. yin j mid may after the vic- 
h ''I*®, had thrown down bis uuvm; upon tbetioM of bittle.- hudwic: 
i find this stanza uuintelligi ole Perbyp^ the nccond line contaiiiB the 
of tliat pnrt of the legend wbicb iiientions tlie club thrown in front of 
^0 point out the way that the ri»bb(’ni h.id taken. 

: puri rrikUva ; ‘App.uenily MudgeUnt was a pari- 
lad ^ esteemed iu compari.Mm wdth the favourite wife] who 

for her .'sterility by driving her husband’s chariot to battle and 
him back victorious, with the booty which she had helped him to 
12"u;^ of the cbild'en that she had not borne him ’—Ludwig. 

‘icji'i ■ fierce and strong thuiKlerbult With, thy U'takling 

SfphM.. mort.J man whom thou protectest, and who is weak and 



TEE EyUES OF 


[BOOK } 


^44 


HYMN cm. 

Swift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens hia horn 
terrific, atining up the people, 

With eyes that close not, bellowing, Sole Hero, Indm subdue 
at once a hundred armies. 

2 With him loud-ronring. ever w’atchful, Victor, bold, hard j 

overthrow’, Rouser ot‘ battle, 

Indra the Strong, whose hand bears arrows, conquer, i 
warriors, now, now vanquish in the combat. 

3 He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, Indra wl 

with his band brings hosts togethei', 

Foe conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, with mighi 
bow, shooting with well-laid arrows. 

4 Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demon 

driving off our focmen. 

Be thou protector of our cars, destroyer, victor in battl 
breaker-ii|> of armies. 

5 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, might 

and tierce, victorious, all-subduing, 

The Son of Conquest, passing men and heroes, kiiiG-winiie 
mount thy conquering car, 0 Indra. 

6 Cleaver of stalN, kiue winner, armed with“‘thunder, who que 

an army and with might destroys it, — 

Follow him, brothers! quit yourselves like heroes, and lii 
this Indra show your zeal and coinage. 

7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra, t 

pitiless Hero, wihl with anuer, 

Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless, — may he protect o 
armies in our battles. 

8 Indra guide these : Brihaspati precede them, the guerdc 

and the sacrifice, and Soma ; 

And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of heaver 
hosts that conquer and demolish. 

Bfttisfactonly. I have followed in some stan^^aa the interpretations of 1 
authors of Vedinche Studieti, I. pp. 124 and 138. But see tlie later trunsla^ 
and exhaustive dir'cut^sion by Prof. Geldner in Part II. pp- I — 22, and Pi 
Ludwig's remarks theieun in Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dm 
JRgveda-forschttng. ~ 

The hymn is a prayer for aid and victory in battle. 

8 Guide thete : be the leader of our troops. The guerdon: ddkfhind: 
reward of the nriesia who oerfoim the saciiflce offered before battle. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


104 .] 


545 


9 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King Varuna, and 
Maruts, and Adityas. 

Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer high-minded Gods 
who cause the worlds to tremble. 

0 Bristle thou up, 0 Maghavan, our weapons : excite the spirits 

''f my warring heroes. 

Urge on the strong steeds’ might, 0 Vritra-slayor, and let the 
din of conquering cars go upward. 

1 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered : victorious be 

the arrows of our army. 

May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods, protect 
us in Ihe shout of onset. 

2 Bewildering the senses of our foemcn, seize thou their bodic.s 

and depart, 0 Apva, 

Attack them, set their hearts on fire and burn them : so let 
our foes abide in utter darkness. 

3 Advance, 0 heroes, win the day. M.iy India be your sure 

defence. 

Plxceeding mighty be your arms, that none may wound or in- 
jure you. 

HYMN CIV. indr.. 


Soma hath flowed for I hee, Invoked of many! Speed to our 
sacrifice with both thy Coursers. 

To thee have streamed the songs of mighty singers, imploring 
Indra, drink of our libation 

2 Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, and till 

thee full, 0 Lord of Tawny Horses. 

0 Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stones liave 
mixed for thee enhance thy rapture. 

3 fo make thee start, a strong true draught 1 offer to thee, the 

Bull, 0 thou whom Bay Steeds carry. 

Here take delight, 0 Indra, in our voices while thou art 
bymned with power and all our spirit. 

^ 0 Mighty ludra, through thine aid, thy prowess, obtaining 
life, zealous, and skilled in Order, 

]} ^htn our fiags are gathered: * apparently comparable with tlia signis 
of the Romans.’- Ludwig. 

according to SAyana, a female deity who preside.^ over sin: 
cording to Mahtdhara, fiickn^as, or fear. Apparently Apvi was a sort nf 
^y®®ntery, likely to attack soldiers in the field. And depart . or, pA'S 
% ^71’. attack US, 







Men in the house who share the sacred banquet stand singin 
praise that brings them store of children. 

5 Tiirough thy directions, Lord of Tawny Coursers, thine wli 
art firm, spl^^ndid, and blest, the people 
Obtain most liberal aid for their salvation, and praise the 
Indra, through thine excellencies. 

() Lord of the Bays, come with thy two Bay Horses, come 
oiir prayers, to drink the juice of Soma. 

To thee comes sacrifice which thou acceptest : thou, skilh 
in holy rites, art he who giveth. 

7 Him of a thousand powers, subduing foemen, Maghavan pra 
ed with liyrnns and pleased with Soma, — 

Even him our songs approach, resistless Indra : the adoratio: 
of the singer laud him. 

S The way to bliss for Cods and man thou foundest, Indi 
seven lovely floods, divine, untroubled, 

Wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, ai 
uiiie-and-ainety flowing streams of water. 

9 Thou from the curse didst free the mighty Waters, andi 
their only God didst watch ami guard them. 

0 Indra, cherish evermore thy body with those which th( 
hast won in quelling Vritra. 

10 Heroic power and noUe praise is Indra: ^ea, the song w( 

ships him invoked of miny. 

Vritni ho quelled, and g we men room and freedom : Saki 
victorious, hath conquered armies. 

1 1 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in tl 

fight where spoil is gathered, 

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who sla 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 

HYMN CV. Inc 


When, Vasu, wilt thou love the laud 1 Now let the chain 
bring tlie stream. 

The juice is ready to ferment. _ 

8 Didst move the ocean : didst bring the sea of rain from heaven. 


9 Tfiote: waters. A,«i+rft8 

11 This is the concluding verse of several hymns of the Visvami 

Indra. Let the channel bring the stream: to the 
which has stood long enough for fermentation —Ludwig. The P 
in very obscure, and Silyana gives a totally different 
will he, (like) a dam, obstruct and let loose the long* protracted h 
the aake of wind-driven (lain). Wilson. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


647. 


fjYMN 105.] 

2 He whose two Bay Steeds harnessed well, swerving, pursue 

the Bird’s tail-plumes, 

With flowing manes, like heaven and earth, he is the Lord 
with power to give. 

3 Bereft of skill is Indra, if, like some out-wearied man he fears 
The sinner, when the Mighty hath prepared himself for victory. 

4 Iniira with these drives round, until he meets with one to wor- 

ship him : 

Indra is Master of the pair who snort and swerve upon their way. 

5 Borne onward by the long-maned Steeds who stretch them- 

selves as ’twere for food, 

The God who wears the he^oi defends them with his jaws. 

6 The Mighty sang with Lofty Ones : the Hero fashioned with 

his strength, 

Like skilful Miitarisvan with his power and might, 

I The bolt, which pierced at once the vitals of the Dasyu easy 
to he slain. 

With jaw uninjured like the wondrous firmament. 

8 Griud off our sins : with song will we conquer the men who 

wng no hymns ; 

Not easily art thou pleased with prayerlcss sacrifice. 

9 When threefold flame burns high for thee, to rest on poles of 

sacrifice, 

Thou with the living joyest in the self-bright Ship. 


2 The Bird : the allusion seems to be to a race between the horses of Indra 
nd those of Sflrya or the Sun who is the Bird of the heavens.— Ludwig. Like 
men and earth : the meaning of rajt is unknown. S.'lyairia explains the word 
y ‘ heaven and earth,’ or * sun and moon ; ’ but these are mere guesses. Prof, 
iudwig thinks that two animals of some kiud (‘ rajitiere,’ ‘ raj i -beasts’) are 
neaiit. In VI. 26 6, Raji is said by Bilyana to be the name of a maiden. 

3 The sinners : Vritra, the chief of sinners, according to SAyana. Or pSfpaJe 
nay be a verb, and the stanza ma^^ be rendered : — ‘ Without them Indra holds 
nin still, like a man weary and alarmed, Vr hen he hath made himself ready 
w noble deed.’ — See Pischel, Vedische Studien, 1. p. 198. 

4 /i ^fa8ter ; literally ‘ hero.’ The meaning apparently is that when Indra 
*neeta with a worshipper he stops his horses and attends the sacrifice. 

5 W/io wears the helm: fiprintvdn ; ‘ possessing mighty jaws.’— Wilson. With 
jaws : with bis roar, the thunder, 

J Ufty Ones : the Manits. , . , . . . x- ^ i ^ 

1 The stanza is obscure. I follow Prof Ludwig’s interpretation of Atrf- 
hirimdn, which mean, according to SAyana, ‘ gold-bearded ’ and * lord of 
‘l^y horses.’ * 


8 

9 


G'nnd of: remove them by whetting. * Comminute/— Wilson. 

'^hreefdd • nt fhrftfl aacred fires. The livwg : the sacrifioer. 



548 


THE HYMNS OF 


WOK X 


1 0 Thy glory was the speckled cup, thy glory was the flawless scoou 

Wherewith thou poorest into thy receptacle. ^ 

1 1 As hundreds, 0 Immortal God, have sung to thee, so hat! 

Sumitra, yea, Durmitra praised thee here, ^ 

What time thou holpest Kutsa’s eon, when Dasyus fell, yec 
holpest Kutsa’s darling when the Dasyus died. ^ 


o 


3 


HYMN CVI. 


Asvin 


This very thing ye Twain hold as your object : ye weave you 
songs as skilful men weave garments. 

That ye may come united have I waked you : ye spread on 
food like days of lovely weather. 

Like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, and seek lik 
eager guests your bidder’s banquet. 

Y^e are like glorious envoys mid the people : like bulla, ai 
proach the place where ye are watered. ’ 

Like the two pinions of a bird, connected, like two choice an 
mals, ye have sought our worship. 

Bright as the fire the votary hath kindled, ye sacrifice i 
many a spot as roamers. 


4 Ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong, i 
your splendour and like kings for conquest ; 

Like rays for our enjoyment, Lords to feed us, ye, like qui« 
hearers, have obeyed our calling. # 

9 Like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in deptl 
like feet for one who fords a shallow. 

Like ears ye will attend to him who orders : ye Two enj 
our wondrous work as sharers. 


Like toiling bees ye bring to us your honey, as bees into t 
hide that opens downward. 


10 Cup: upas^chani: a ladle or cup used for sprinkling. Thy receptac 
drinking-vessel, or perhaps Agni, that is, the fire, may be intended. 

11 Sumitra and Durmitra are alternative names of the Uishi of the hyi 
Kutsa's son : Durmitra himself, according to Silyana. 

The metres in some places are somewhat irregular, the meanings of so 
words are uncertain, and the hymn generally is obscure. Prof. OraMUi- 
has placed the hymn in his Appendix. ^ 

4 Like Tays for our enjoyment : * like brooms to sweep with,’ according 
Prof. Ludwig. 

I do not attempt the hopeless task of translating stansas 5, 6, 7, 8 
which nearly every word is a dififioult riddle. See Appendix. 

\(i The hide that opens downward : the honey*comb is compared to a wsi 
•kin inverted. I cannot translate intelligibly the second line : — *1*^® ' 
labourers you are dripping with perspiration, like a tired cow eating «« 
herbtRe. you attend fthe saGrifieeh'_Wi1iinn 



THE RJOVEDA. 


549 


BYHS 107.] 

U May we increase the laud and gain us vigour: come to our 
song, ye whom one chariot carries. 

Filled be our kine with ripened meath like 'glory : Bhutansa 
hath fulfilled the Asvius’ longing. 


HYMN evil. DakBliul 


Thbsb men’s great bounty hath been manifested, and the 
whole world of life set free from darkness. 

Great light hath come, vouchsafed ns by the Fathers: ap- 
parent is the spacious path of Guerdon. 

High up in heaven abide the Guerdon-givers : they who give 
steeds dwell with the Sun for ever. 

They who give gold are blest with life eternal : they who give 
robes prolong their lives, 0 Soma. 

I Not from the niggards— for they give not freely— comes Meed 
at sacrifice, G^s’ satisfaction : 

Yea, many men with hands stretched out with Guerdon 
present their gifts because they dread dishonour. 

I Tliese who observe maukiud regard oblation as streamy Vayu 
and light-finding Arka. 

They satisfy and give their gifts in synod, and pour in streams 
the seven-mothered Guerdon. 

5 He who brings Guerdon comes as first invited : chief of the 

hamlet comes the Guerdon-bearer. 

Him I account the ruler of the people who was the first to 
introduce the Guerdon. 

6 They call him UUhi, Brahmun, Sima-chanter, reciter of the 

laud, leader of worship. 

The brightly-shining God’s three forms he knoweth who first 
bestowed the sacrificial Guerdon. 


The hymn enlogites Dakehint, the largese, guerdon, 
fdb, the inetitators of the sacrificea to the prieste w p .itemativcly 
ui'miee. The yajamina, who give thie gue.don liberally are alWUvely 

deified aubjects of the hymu. 

i Titaemen: the wealthy institntore of the sacrifice. Father i. w 

embodiments and guardians of the light. 

I Theu who ohmve mmUnd. the that enables 

t consider the coet of sacrifice, but regard »t ^ ^ Wind-God 

em to show their liberality: and to gam the favo y > the 

“bring, emratleM diowen of rain, *nd Arka or the 
Ikk WmecAered; originating in, and accompanying, neven term. 

!e:or l-anN.UA-J »-- •» • ' 



560 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 1 

7 Guerdon beatowe the horse, bestows the bullock, Guerdoi 

bestows, moreover, gold that glisters. 

Guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit. He who i 
wise takes Guerdon for his armour. 

8 The liberal die not, never are they ruined : the liberal sufFe 

neither harm nor trouble. 

The light of heaven, the universe about us, — all this dot] 
sacrificial Guerdon give them. 

9 First have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, and go 

themselves a bride in fair apparel. 

The liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, and coi] 
quered those who, unprovoked, assailed them. 

10 They deck the fleet steed for the bounteous giver: the ir}ai( 

adorns herself and waits to meet him. 

His home is like a lake with lotus-blossoms, like the Godij 
palaces adorned and splendid. 

11 Steeds good at draught convey the liberal giver, and lightl^ 

rolling moves the car of Guerdon. 

Assist, ye Gods, the liberal man in battles : the liberal give 
conquers foes in com\)at. 

HYMN CVIII. Saramft. Pani. 

What wish of Sarama hath brought her#hither ? The pat! 

leads far away to distant places. 

What charge hast thou for us ? Where turns thy journey 1 Bo\ 
hast thou made thy way o’er Rasa’s waters. 

2 I come appointed messenger of Indra, seeking your ampl 
stores of wealth, 0 Panis. 

This hath preserved me from the fear of crossing : thus hav 
I made my way o’er Ras&’s waters. 

9 Draught of liquor: antahp^yam ; ‘deep potations of wine.’— Wil^r 

10 The maid adorns ho self; * he obtains a brilliant damsel for hia portioi 
— Muir. 

11 Car of Guerdon: cf I. 123. 1. 

The hymn is a colloquy between Sarami, the messenger of the Gods or c 
Indra (see I. 62. 3, note ; 72. 8 ; III. 31. 6; V. 45. 8), and the Panis or enviou 
demons who have carried oflf the cows or rays of light which Indra wishes t 
recover. Saram4 and the Panis are alternately subject and Bishl 
1 The Papis address Saram4 who has found her way to the rocky strong 
hold h? which the stolen cows are imprisoned. The Panis speak the uoeve 
stanzas, with the exception of stanza 11, and Sarani4 the even. 
this place a mythical stream that flows round the atmosphere and the 
See V. 41. 16. In I. 112. 12, and V. 63. 9, Rasl appearo to be a river of tn 
Faniflb. nrobablv an affluent of the Indue. Sea ^mmer. AUindisehts w 



THE RtOVEDA, 


551 


108 .] 

3 Wbat is that Indra like, what is his aspect whose envoy, Saraina, 
from afar thou comest 1 

Let him approach, and we will show him friendship : he shall 
be made the herdsman of our cattle. 


4 I know him safe from harm : but he can punish who sent me 

hither from afar as envoy. 

Him rivei*s flowing with deep waters hide not. Low will ye lie, 
0 Panis, slain by Indra. 

5 These are the kine which, Sarama, thou seekest, flying, 0 Blest 

One, to the ends of heaven. 

Who will loose these for thee without a battle 1 Yen, and siiai ]j 
pointed are our warlike weapons. 

() Even if your wicked bodies, 0 yc Panis, were arrow-proof, your 
words are weak for wounding ; 

And were the path to you as yet unmastered, Brihaspati in 
neither case will spare you. 

7 Paved with the rock is this our treasure*chambcr ; filled full 

of precious things, of kine, and horses. 

These Panis who are watchful keepers guard it. In vain hast 
thou approached this lonely station. 

8 Rishis will come inspirited with Soma, Angirases unwearied, 

and Navagvas. 

This stall of cattle will they part among them : then will the 
Panis wish these words unspoken. 

9 Even thus, 0 Sarama, hast thou come hither, forced by celest- 

ial might to make the journey. 

Turn thee not back, for thou shalt be our sister : 0 Blest One, 
we will give thee of the cattle. 

10 Brotherhood, sisterhood, I know not either: the dread Angi- 

rases and Indra know them. 

They seemed to long for kine when I departed. Hence, into 
distance, be ye gone, 0 Panis. 

11 Hence, far away, ye Panis! Let the cattle lowing come forth 

as holy Law commandeth, 

Rine which Brihaspati, and Soma, Rishis, sages, and pressing- 
stones have found when hidden. 


Wtdk for wounding : * not in the place of armies.’— Wilson. Brihaspati : 
companion and ally in battle. . . 

8 Navagvas : members of a mythological family, forming a division of the 
Angirases or closely connected with them. WUk these words mspoken : more 
1?’ mouths ; retract their threats. 

AnoietAm: are allied by such ties of kinship. , , • f 

11 It ... . n, . ..L i... V... S.\vftna asaiirns jt 



552 Till HYMNS OF [BOOK 

HYMN CIX. ViHvedev 

Tukse first, the boundless Sea, and Matarisvan, fierce-glo\\’i 
Fire, the Strong, the Bliss-bestower, 

And heavenly Floods, first-born by holy Order, exclain 
against the outiage on a Brahman. 

H King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made restitution 
the Bi'ahman’s consort. 

Mitra and Vanina were the inviters : Agni as Hotar took 1 
hand and led her. 

3 The man, her pledge, must by her hand be taken when tli 

have cried. She is a Bralmian’s consort 
She stayed not for a herald to conduct her : thus is the kii 
dom of a ruler guarded. 

4 Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Rishis who sj 

them down to their austere devotion : 

Dire is a Brahman’.s wife led home by others ; in the supre 
est heaven she plants confusion. 

5 The Brahmnch^n goes engaged in duty: he is a member 

the Gods’ own body. 

Tlirough him Brihaspati obtained his consort, as the Gc 
gained the ladle briuight by Soma. ^ 

C So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the w’oman ba 
again. 

The Kings who kept their promises restored the Brahmai 
wedded wife. 

7 Having restored the Brahman’s wife, and freed them, withGoi 
aid, from sin, 

, Tfiey shared the fulness of the earth, and won themseU 
extended sway. 

The hymn has been tranaUted hy tli'^ auth'^ra of Slfhemig Lieier dc» U 
i da. See also Mme. 2^na!fle U.igozin, Vedic India, f». 256. 

1 Outrage on a Brahman : ‘ Btahm&’a sin,’ according to S&yana. 

5 B rah machl rt : n re]ig\o\iB stuilent. For hia glorification, aee 

the A thftrva-veda. XI. 5 7'ke ladle : juhvdm : Prof Lndvng takes it to d( 
l-roper name Juhfl. 0 Oo<l», conducted home by Soma.’ 

The wife of a Brahman anpeare to have been taken t<) his home ^ ® 
triya, and then restored A legend quoted by S&yana says that Junu or 
the wife of Brihaspati who is identified with BrahmA, had been aeser 
tier husbind. The Qod» then cnneult/e^l together as to the mean* of expi 
bis ain. and restored her to him. See Wilson’s Translation. ^ 

rru.. Kirmn t«i «n *1mniifc uniutalliffihlA fra.irment Slid of OODOpatatively 





653 


lUQVBDA. 

hymn CX. Apri«. 

Thou in the house of man this day enkindled worshippest 
Gods as God, 0 Jatavedas. 

Observant, bright as Mitra, bring them hither : thou art a 
sapient and foreknowing envoy. 

2 Taniinap^t, fair-tongued, with sweet meath balming the paths 

and Ways of Order, make them pleasant. 

Convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy thoughts 
our hymns of praise and worship. 

3 Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, 0 Agni, come ac^ 

cordant with the Vasns. 

Thou art, 0 Youthful Lord, the Gods’ Invoker, so, best of 
Sacrificers, bring them quickly. 

4 by rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a robe to 

clothe this earth when dawns are breaking. 

Widely it spreads around and far-extended, fair for the Gods 
and bringing peace and freedom. 

5 Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like wives who 

deck their beauty for their husbands. 

Lofty, celestial, all-impelling Portals, admit the Gods and 
give them easy entrance. 

6 Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, each close 

to each, be seated at their station, — 

Lofty, celestial DamCvS with gold to deck them, assuming all 
their fair and radiant beauty. 

7 C(»me the two first celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, arranging 

sacrifice for man to worship, 

As singers w'ho inspire us in assemblies, showing the eastward 
light with their direction. 

^ Let Bharati come quickly to our worship, and I]a showing like 
a human being. 

•So let Sarasvati and both her fellows, deft Goddesses, on this 
fair grass bo seated, 

9 Hotar more skilled in sacrifice, bring liitlier with speed to-day 
God Tvashto, thou who knowest, 

Kven him who formed these two, the Earth and Heaven, the 
Parents, with their forms, and every creature. 

See preceding hymns addressed to the same deities and deified objects : 
'• ^ ; H2, 188 ; II. 8 ; III. 4 ; V. f. ; VII. 2 ; and IX. 6. 

, Jdtavedat and Tan'Anandi are nauies of AkhI The Doort of the sacnucial 



554 


TBE BYMNS OP 

10 Send to our offerings which thvself thou balmest the Om 

panies of Gods in ordered season. 

Agni, Vanaspati the Inamolator sweeten our offered cift uMf 
meath and butter. ^ 

1 1 Agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacrifice an 

was the Gods’ preceder. ’ 

May the Gods eat our offering consecrated accordincr to thi 
true Priest’s voice and guidance, ^ 


2 


3 


HYMN CXI. 



Bring forth your sacred song ye prudent singers, even as ai 
the thoughts of humau beings. 

Let us draw Tndra with true deeds anear us : he loves on 
songs, the Hero, and is potent. 

The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship : to th 
kiue came the Bull, the Heifer’s Offspring. 

With mighty bellowing hath he arisen, and hath pervadci 
even the spacious regions. 

Indra knows, verily, how to hear our singing, for he, victori 
ous, made a path for Sfirya. 

Ho made the Cow, and he became the Sovran of Heaven 
primeval, matchless, and unshaken. * 


4 Praised by Angirases, Indra demolished with might the work 

of the great watery monster. 

Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his trutl 
supported earth’s foundation. 

5 The counterpart of heaven and earth is Indra : he knowetl 

all libations, slayeth Sushna. 

The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended, and, best o 
pillars, stayed it with a pillar. 

6 The Vritra-slayer with his bolt felled Vritra: the magic of 

the godless, waxen mighty, 

Here hast thou, Bold Assailant, boldly conquered. Yea, thei 
thine arms, 0 Maghvan, were potent. 


2 The hine : who are milked for sacrificial purposes. The Bull : Indra. Tk 
Heifer' t Offering : cp. IV. 18. 10 : ‘ The Heifer bath brought forth the strong 
the mighty, the unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra ’ The Heifer is Aditi. 

3 Be made the Cow : the words m^ndm the cow, ‘ the female oi 

the bull.*— *Muir; ‘ Dea Stieres Weib,’ — Qrassmann, — are difficult. Pro 
Ludwiar sufiscrests that the earth may be intended. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


555 


112 .] 

j When the Dawns come attendant upon SArya their rays dis- 
cover wealth of divers colours. 

The Star of heaven is seen as ’twere approaching : none 
knoweth aught of it as it departeth. 

g Far have they gone, the first of all these waters, the waters 
that flowed forth when India sent them. 

Where is their spring, and where is tlieir foundation 1 Where 
now, ye Waters, is your inmost centre ] 

9 Thou didst free rivers swallowed by the Dragon ; and rapidly 

they set themselves in motion. 

Those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom. 
Excited now to speed they run unresting. 

10 Yearning together they have sped to Sindhu : the Fort-des- 

troyer, praised, of old, hath loved them. 

Iiidra, may thy terrestrial treasures reach us, and our full 
songs of joy approach thy dwelling. 

HYMN CXII Inch a. 

Drink of the juice, 0 Indra, at thy pleasure, for thy first 
draught is early morn’s libation. 

Rejoice, that thou mayst slay our foes, 0 Hero, and we with 
lauds will tell thy mighty exploits. 

2 Thou hast a car more swift than thought, 0 Iiidra ; thereon 

come hither, come to drink the Soma. 

Let thy Bay Steeds, thy Stallions, hasten hither, with whom 
thou comest nigh and art delighted. 

3 Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splend- 

our of the Sun adorn it. 

0 Indra, turn thee hitherw’ard invited by us thy friends ; be 
seated and be joyful. 

^ 0 thou whose grandeur in thy festive transpoils not even these 
two great worlds have comprehended. 

Come, Indra, with thy dear Bay Horses harnessed, come to our 
dwelling and the food thou lovest. 

Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma whereof 
thou, Indra, ever drinking, 

Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, which prompts 

the mighty flow of thine abundance. 

>. * _______ 

\'IP^ Star of heaven; the Sun. Departeth: onite nightly journey from 
1 to east 



6r»« 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 


C Foun<^ from of old is this thy cup, 0 Indra : 0 Satakrat 
drink therefrom the Soma. 

Filled is the beaker with the moath that gladdens, the beak 
which all Deities delight in. 

7 From many a side with proffered entertainment the folk a 

calling thee, 0 Mighty Indra. 

Those our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meat! 
drink thereof and find them pleasant. 

8 I will declare thy deeds of old, 0 Indra, the mighty acts whi( 

thrui hast first accomplisiied. 

In genuine wTath thou loosenedst the mountain so that tl 
Brahman easily found the cattle. 
d Lord of the hosts, amid our bands be seated : they call thi 
greatest Sage among the sages. 

Nothing is done, even far aw'ay, without thee : great, wondrou 
Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee. 

10 Aim of our eyes be thou, for we implore thee, 0 Maghavai 
Friend of friends and Lord of treasures. 

Fight, Warrior strong in truth, fight thou the battle : give u 
our share of undivided riches. 

HYMN CXIII. “ 


The Heavens and the Earth accordant with all Gods encou 
nged graciously that vigorous might of his. 

When he came showing forth his majesty and power, hedran 
of Soma juice and waxed exceeding strong. 

2 This majesty of his Vishnu extols and lauds, making thestal 

that gives the meath flow forth with might. 

When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him naa s 
ton Vritra he deserved the choice of Gods. 

3 When, bearing warlike weapons, fain to win thee praise, t o 

mettest Vritra, yea, the Dragon, for the , 

Then all the Maruts who were gathered with thee tne 
tolled, 0 Mighty One, thy poweiful majesty. 

4 Soon as ho sprang to life he forced asunder hosts . forwar 

Hero looked to manly deed and war. 

He cleft the rock, he let concurrent streams flow foit , 
with his skilful art stablished the heavens wide^ 

5 Indra hath evermore possessed surpassing ® 

far from each other, heaven and earth apart. . ^y^vu 
He hurled impetuous down his iron thunderDOlt, j j 

(la’s and Mitra’s worshipper. 

8 The Brahman : according to Slvana. BrahnoA who is identiM 



114 .] 


THE SiaVEBA. 


S57 


S Then to the mighty powers of Indra, to his wrath, his the fierce 
Stormer, loud of voice, they came with speed • 

What time the Potent One rent Vritra with his krengih, who 
held the waters back, whom darkness compassed round. 

J Even in the first of those heroic acts which they who strove 
logether came with might to execute, 

Deep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won by victory 
the right of being first invoked. ^ 


8 Then all the Gods extolled, with eloquence inspired by drauc^hts 

of Soma juice, thy deeds of manly might. ^ 

As Agni eats the dry food with his teeth, he ate Vritra the 
Dragon, maimed by Indra’s deadly dart. ‘ ' 

9 Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, made 

with singers, with the skilful and the eloquent. 

Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Chumuri, lists to Dablrti 
for his faithful spirit’s sake. 


0 Give riches manifold with noble horses, to be remembered 
while my songs address thee. 

May we by easy paths pass all our troubles ; find us this day 
a ford wide and exteusive. 


HYMN CXIV. Visvedeva. 

Two perfect springs of heat pervade the Threefold, and come 
for their delight is Matarisvan. 

Craving the milk of heaven the Gods are present : well do 
they know the praise-song and the Saman. 

2 The priests heard far away, as they are ordered, serve the 
three Niryitis, for well they know them. 

Sages have traced the cause that first produced them, dwelling 
in distant and mysterious chambers. 

6 They came : it is uncertain v aether the Gods, or the Maruts, or thr waters 
the understood subject. 

7 Titep darknea fell upon the slain: ‘ Vritra being slain, the thick darkness 
wtw destroyed.’— Wilson. 

8 He ate: Indra utterly destroyed him. Sftyana explains in a more matter- 

devoured Vritra, that is, the food produced by the waters 
^ Q n no longer obstructed by him. 

9 Dhuni and Chumuri were demons and enemies of Indra’s friend Dabhtti. 

*^?Vol. l., Index. 

I Springs of heat : gharmi : Agni and SArya. The Threefold : the universe, 
firmament, and earth. J^dtari^van : Vdyu, according to SApna. ‘ Thus 
9 fiere the well-known triad, Agni, VAyu, SOrya.’— Ludwig. 

^ Three NirpitU ; according to ^lyaija, heaven, mid-air, and earth, or the 
®®uiM that control them. Prof. Ludwig thinks that the Dawns are meant, 



o58 


TEB HYMNS OP 


[book 


3 The Youthful One, well-shaped, with four locks braided brit 

ened with oil, puts on the ordinances. * ^ 

Two Birds of mij^hty power are seated near her, there ^1 
the Deities receive their portion. 

4 One of these Birds hath passed into the sea of air : thence 

looks round and views this universal world. 

With simple heart I have beheld him from anear ; his Mol 
kisses him and he returns her kiss. 


5 Him with fair win^s though only One in nature, wise sin' 
shape, with songs, in many figures. 

While they at sacrifices fix the metres, they measure 
twelve chalices of Soma. 

fi While they arrange the four and six-and-thirty, and c 
order, up to twelve, the mensures, 

Having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful snges send* the 
forward with the Rich and Saman. 


7 The Chariot’.^ majesties are fourteen others : seven sages 1 
it onw’ai’d with their voices. 

Who will declare to us the ford Apn^na, the path whei 
they drink first draughts of Soma? 

S The fifteen lands are in a thousand places: that is as vas 
heaven and earth in measure. 

A thousand spots contain the mighty tnousand. Vak spi 
cth forth as far as Prayer extendeth. 


3 The Youthful One • the altar, represented as a woman. With four 
braided quadrangular, according to Sftyana. Pvti on the ordimnet 
dressed or arranged in the manner prescribed for sacrifice. Two B 
probably Airni and Soma. According to Sftyana, the husband and hia 
or the Yftjaui^lDa and the Brahman. 

4 One : Agni as the Sun. Jlis mother • perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig 
Dawn. 

b Thirty-six fjrnhas, chalices, or saucers for Soma juice or other liba 
are to be used .at the Agnishtoma, and four in addition at the AtyagDiBl 
sacrifice. The measure* • the proper metres for particular rites or pw 
the service. The Car : the sacrifice. Mich : the holy verse that is re 
Siman ; the psalm that is sung or chanted. 

7 Majesties : the abstract used for the concrete, the mighty ones, pfc 
the priests. The ford Apndna : the passage leading to the place of sac 
They : the Gods. 

8 That : meaning the fifteen lauds regarded as a whole. The f 

thousand : the meaning is uncertain : * the thousand great {functions; 
a thousand places.’ — Wilson. This means, according to S&y^a> tna 
function of the body has its appropriate object. Dr. Muir trane a 
* A thoussnd times fifteen uhthas A thousand 

7laD 





JEtJJA, 


m 

What sage hath learned the metres’ application % Who hath 
gained V&k, the spirit’s aim and object? 

Which ministering priest is called eighth Hero ? Who then 
hath tracked the two Bay Steeds of Indra ? 

Yoked to his chariot-pole there stood the Coursers : they only 
travel round earth’s farthest limits. ^ ^ 

These, when their driver in his home is settled, receive the 
allotted meed of their exertion. 

HYMN CXV. Agni. 

Verily wondrous is the tender Youngling's growth who never 
draweth nigh to drink his Mothers’ milk. 

As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his 
great errand, suddenly grew strong. 

Then Agni was his name, most active *to bestow, gathering up 
the trees with his consuming tooth ; 

Skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, im- 
petuous as a bull that snorteth in the mead. 

Pr.iise him, Jour God who, bird-like, rests upon a tree, scatter- 
ing drops of juice and pouring forth his flood. 

Speaking aloud with flame -as with his lips a priest, and broad- 
ening his paths like one of high command. 

Thou Everlasting, whom, far-striding fain to burn, the winds, 
uninterrupted, never overcome, 

They have approached, as warriors eager for the fight, heroic 
’Vita, giii ling him to gain his wish. 

> This Agni is the best of Kanvaa, Kanvas’ Friend, Conqueror 
nfthe foe whether afar or near. 

May Agni guard the singers, guard the princes well : may 
Agui grant to ns our princes’ gracious help. 

Do thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself the lord of 
Jatavedas, mightiest of all, 

^ t^ightk Hero : Agni ia meant, as presiding over the seven ritvijas or 
‘mistering priests. 

i Ifis Mothm are the two fire-aticks, the lower of which, in which the spark 
being ^he who hath no udder. 

inta ; according to S&yana, him who is stationed in the three fire- 
^ceptaclea, that is, Agni. 

a well-known family with which Upastuta was connected, 
f Siyana, worshippers in general are meant ‘ the most earnest 

jQ the friend of those who praise him ’ — Wilson. 

(ootf (‘ who hast fair ancestors.’ — Wilson) seems to be an epithet of 
To h addressed by hinaself. S4yana applies it to Agni. The con- 
» hu difficult, and the translation of the first half, which 

somewhat conjectural. Thirsty land : Agni by his 



560 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 

Who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land, most powerf 
prepared to aid us in the wilds. . 

7 Thus noble Agni with princes and mortal men is lauded 

cellent for conquering strength with chiefs, ’ 

Men who are well-dispoaod as friends and true to Law, e\ 
as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind. 

8 0 Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upastuta’s m 

potent voice reveres thee. 

Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, and lengt 
out the days of our existence. 

9 Thus, Agni, have the sons of Vrisbtihavya, the Bishis, 

Upastutas invoked thee. 

Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. V 
Vashat ! have they come, with hands uplifted, with t 
uplifted hands and cries of Glory ! 

HYMN CXVI. Ii 

Drink Soma juice for mighty power and vigour, drink, Stn 
est One, that t)»ou mayst smite down Vritru. 

Drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches : drink thou 
fill of meath and pour it down, 0 Indra. 

2 Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what I 

chooseat of the flowing Soma. 

Giver of weal, be joyful in thy spirit, tAd turn thee hit 
ward to bless and prosper. 

3 Let heavenly Soma gladden thee, 0 Indra, let that elFt 

among mankind delight thee. 

Rejoice in that whereby thou gavest freedom, and that wher 
thou conquerest thy foemen. 

A Let Indra come, impetuous, doubly mighty, to the po’ 
juice, the Bull, with two Bay Coursers. 

With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, glut ' 
more thy bolt, 0 Foe-destroyer. 

5 Dash down, outflaraing their sharp flaming weapons, the 
holds of the men urged on by demons. 

I give thee, Mighty One, great strength and conquest 
meet thy foes and rend them in the battle. 

Prof. Oraastnanii observes *. ‘ Das Lied enthalt, namentlich Ib Vers 
niaDches Dunkle, godasa bier die Auelegung zwuifelhaft bleibt. 

1 Pour it down: ‘shower down (blegsings).’— Wilson. aat e 

3 Qavut freedom ; by slaying Vritra : or, riches, according wj-anslaw 
I Png.deAtroiier : arufahX : according to the 8t, Peteraburg/timea a ^ 



THE RIGVEDA. 


561 


H7.] 

6 Extend afar the votary’s fame and glory, as the firm archer's 

strength drives off the foeman. 

Ranged on our side, grown strong in might that conquers, 
never defeated, still increase thy body. 

7 To thee have we presented this oblation : accept it, Sovran 

Kuler, free from anger. 

Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened : eat, Indra, 
drink of that which stirs to meet tliee. 

R Eat, Indra, tliese oblations which approach thee : be pleased 
with food made ready and with Soma. 

With entertainment we receive thee friendly : effectual he 
the sacrificer’s wishes. 

K I send sweet speech to Indra and to Agni : with hymns I 
speed it like a boat through waters. 

Even thus, the Gods socm moving lound about me, the foun- 
tains and bestowers of our riches. 

HYMN CXVII. Liberality. 

Tub Gods have not ordained hunger to be onr death : even to 
the well-fed man comes death in vaned shape. 

The riches of the liberal never waste away, while he who will 
not give finds none to comfort him. 

1 The man with food in store who, when the needy comes in 
miserable case begging for br(3ad to eat, 
lardeiis his heart against him— oven when of old he did him 
service — finds not one to comfort him. 
louateous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him 
in want of food and feeble. 

iuccess attends him in the shout of battle. He makes a friend 
of him in future troubles. 

^0 friend is ho who to his friend and comrade who comes im- 
ploring food, will offer nothing. 

him depart — no homo is that to rest in — , and rather seek 
a stranger to support hjin. 

the rich satisfy the poor miplorer, and bend his eye upon 
a longer pathway. 

fb the firm arohei''8 strength : the construction is obscure ‘ (stretch 
toy strength like strong bows against our enemies. ’—Wilson. 

,^ymn eulogiises Liberality or Bounty in the shape of gifts of wealth 
ooct • 

^ o»r death : men must not attenapt to justify their ^fusal of food 
e hun^ >,y hunger as a pw»’shment for nn ^ 



562 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK } 

Kicbes come now to one, now to another, and like the wheei 
of cars are ever rolling. 

6 riio foolish man wins food with fruitless labour : that food- 

. [ speak the truth — shall be his ruin. 

He feeds no trusty friend, no man to love him. All guilt 
he who eats with no partaker. 

7 The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us, ai 

with its feet cuts through the path it follows. 

Better the speaking than the silent Brahnum : the liberal frier 
outvalues him who gives not. 

8 He with one foot hath far outnni the biped, and the twcvfoot( 

catches the threc-footed. 

Four-footed creatures come when bipeds call them, and star 
aud look where five are met together. 

The hands arc both alike : their labour differs. The yield 
sister milch-kine is unequal 

T ^ ins even differ in their strength ami vigour : two, even km 
men, differ in their bounty. 

HYMN CXVllI. Ag 

Aoyi, refulgent among men thou slayest the devouring fiei 
Bright Ruler in thine own abode. ^ 

'i 'I’hou springest up when woi shipped well : the drops of but 
are thy joy 

When ladles are brought near to thee. 

Honoured with irifts he shines afar, Agni adorable with sor 
Tire dripping Isdle balms his face. 


6 ShnJl he his ruin : with reference to xtanz * T. 

7 Active exertion is necessary for eucc»^s8. Tlhe spenlcinff Brnhmrtv ■ 
piiest who duly discharges the task of recifation for which he is eug l 
‘A Brahman expounding (the Veda).’— Wilson. 

S The victory is not always theirs who appear t© be more nclily 
than others. He wth one foot: ikajpnd . the Sun appears to be me 
elsewhere called A ja-Ekapftd. See VI 50. 1 4. The biped is man. The tl 
footed is the old man who walks with a staff and is overtaken by one 
(l..es not require such assistance Four-footed ereatures : dogs. Pm;^ 
men together ; the d(»gs being at first uncertain whether 
amonn- them or not. Pahktth, sets of five, is apparently used with rei 
to the one, two, three, and four in the preceding compmtnd words, 
explain natiMk by ‘steps’ or ‘traces.’ r 

I have adopted the explanation given by the authors of the 
^ All men should be liberal ; hut we must not expect all to be sq' 
^ Tiie hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texti^ V. PP* ^ 



lift.] THE RIO VEDA. 


563 


4 Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, is balmed 

with oil, 

Refulgent in his wealth of light. 

5 Praised by our bymns thou kindlestthee, Oblation-bearer for 

the Gods : ’ 

As such do mortals call on thee. 

6 To that Immortal Agiii pay worship witli oil, ye mortal men — 

Lord of the house, whom none deceive. ’ 

7 0 Agni, burn the lUkshasas with thine unconquerable flame • 
Shine guardian of Eternal Law. 

S So, Agni, with thy glowing face burn fierce against the female 
flends, 

Shining among Urukshayas. 

<1 Urukshayas have kindled thee. Oblation-bearer, thee, with 
hymns. 

Best Worshipper among mankind. 

HYxMN CXIX. Indra. 


This, even this was my resolve, to win a cow, to win a steed : 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

2 Like violent gusts of wind the draughts thai I have drunk 
have lifted me : 


Have [ not drunk of Soma juice? 

3 The draughts I drank have borne me ^ip, as fleet-foot horses 
draw a car : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

^ The hymn hath reached me, lik- a cow who lows to meet her 
darling calf : 

Have I not drunk of Soma.^ice? 

^ As a Wright bends a chaKot-seat so round my heart I bend the 
hymn : 

Have I not drunk of •iJoma juice ? 

^ Not as a mote witAin the eye count the Five Tribes of men 
with me : 

[Have I not dr«nk of Soma juice ? 


^^^kthayas : members of the Riahi’s family. 

himself in^he form of Lava. He describes his sensa- 
ou ft ^ “Hnking Soma juice. But see Bergaigne, 1. 151, who considers it 
1 y ® .utterance of an exhilarated mortal. 

liu ® to strengthen and inspirit himself for battle, and so to 
horses for his worshippers. 

r® explains diffpi antlv •— .< Tbp fivp najitPH have nnt eluded the crlanoe 



504 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK I 

^ The heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to om 
half of me : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

8 I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and all thii 

spacious earth : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

9 Aha ! this spaoious earth will I deposit either here or there 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

10 In one short moment will I smite the earth in fury here oi 

there : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

1 1 One of my flanks is in the sky ; I let the otlier trail below : 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

12 1, greatest of the Mighty Ones, am lifted to the firmament: 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

13 1 seek the worshipper’s abode; oblation-bearer to the Gods 
Have I not drunk ot Soma juice? 

HYMN CXX. Indra 

In all tht worlds That was the Best and Highest whence sprang 
the Mignty Gods, of splendid valour. 

As soon as l)o»‘n he overcomes his foemen, he in whom all whi 
lend him aia are joyful. ^ 

2 Grown mighty in Vis strength, with ample vigour, he as a fo 

strikes fear into Dasa, 

Elager to wm the breavhing and the breathless. All sang th; 
praise at banquet ana oblation. 

3 All concentrate on thee tlair mental vigour, what time these 

twice or thrice, arc thine itH.^^istants. 


11 Cp. 111.32. 11. , 

13 This stanza ia difficult. The word g)ik6 in unintelligible, ana grim 
as Prof. Ludwig »ugg('8ts, should, perhaps, bo '•■ead instead. Ob^cUion-beartr 
Indra, in his excitement, fancies that he is Agn\ Prof. Grasstuann, who wi 
Dr. Muir, considers grih6 txj m**an servant or minuter, places the stanM > 
hie* Appendix as a fragment fiom a hymn to Agni. 

The hymn has been tiansl.Ued by Dr. Muir. 0 S Ttfxts, V. p. 5L ^ , 

authors of the Siebemig Lieder, and by Prof. Peterson, Hymnifrom the JiiT’ 
(Bombay Sanskrit Series). 


1 Th^t: meaning, acoording to SAy ana, Brahma the original cause of 

%Mer U> 9om : Prof. Lndwig makes eanni an infinitive, 
the correct rfading. See Gra8»*mann, W^rterbuoh sum 
and the bre^tUees : the animate and the inanimate 
3 Umtal vigour: krdtum: ‘adoration.’ — Wilson. 
or tkfioi : with reference, poihapa, to the three 


These: 3“^ 

JLa 



THE RIQVEDA. 


m 


fjfiV 120.] 


Blemi what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness : win 
quickly with our meath that meath in battle, 

[ 'Therefore in thee too, thou wlio winnest riches, at every ban- 
quet are the sages joyful. 

Wi^h mightier power, Bold God, extend thy firmness : let not 
malignant Ysitudhanas harm tliee. 

) Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold 
great wealth the prize of comlmt. 

I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen 
with my prayer thy vital vigour. 

Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, most energetic, 
Aptya of the Aptyas ; 

He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many 
who were deemed his equals. 

Tuou in that hous’e which thy protection guardeth bestowest 
wealth, the higher and the lower. 

Thou stiblishest the two much-wandering Mothers, and bring- 
est many deeds to their completion. 

i Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats these holy 
prayers, this strength to Indra. 

He rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and all the 
do )rs of light hath ho thrown open. 

Thus hath Brihaddiva, the great Atharvan, spoken to Indra 

as himself in person. . , , . i. 

The spotless Sisters, they who are his Mothers, with power 
exalt him and impel liim onward. 


imtter th<m the Meet ; thine own celestial Soma. Sftyana explains the 
mza differently ‘To thee all (w'-rshippers) offer adoration, whether those 
jpiliators be two or three. Combine that which is swe^er than the sweet 
til sweetness, unite that honey with honey.’-Wilson. The two or three, 
iording to SAyana. are the sacrifi *ir and his wife and child, the second 
If of the stanza contains a reference to the propagation of children. 

1 : the name of a class of deities, of which Trita 

lost accessible of the accessible.’ — Wiiaon. The first line is wi ou 

wee him, may be understood. Mnus: a class of demons. 

I Ththigherandaelowtr: heavenlyand earthly. Mothers: Heaven and Earth, 
^Jsremost of lujkt-minners : according to Slyana, ‘chief 
ioyor of hejeven, or servant of Aditya, the Sun, Indra. o j 
«f«gion of light . . « 1, 

*?J«srea{ Alharmn; ‘the great prieet.’-GraMmand. As 
hiuiMlf witi the Qod wliom he worshipe. Tks spotlas 
“ W his Mothers ; according to SAyapa, the “/ff , 9 ^ 

Von Roth adopta the reading of A^arva-veda V. i 9. ^ 
‘Mtead of the m«art6Wtfr of the text. Heaven and Barth affeai 



566 TEE BYUSS OP [ 500 ^ xj 

HYMN CXXI. 

In the hej^inning rose Hiranyagarbha, born Only Lord of all 
created beings. 

He fixed and holdeth up this earth and heaven. What God 
shall we adore with our oblation ? 

2 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose command 

ments all the Gods acknowledge : 

The Lord of death, whose ‘shade is life immortal. What Go( 
shall we adore with our oblation ? 

3 Who by his grandeur hath become Sole Ruler of all th* 

moving world that breathes and slumbers ; 

He who is Lord of men and Lord of cattle. What God shal 
we adore with our oblation ? 

4 His, through his might, are these snow-covered mountains 

and men call sea and Rasa his possession : 

His arms are these, his are these heavenly regions. What Goi 
shall we adore with our oblation? 


5 By him the heavens are strong and earth is stedfast, by liin 
light’s realm and sky-vault are supported : 

By him the regions in mid-air wore measured. What Goi 
shall we adore with our oblation ? 


C To liitn, supported by his help, two arjttes embattled loot 
while trembling in their spirit, „ . . n , 

When over them the risen Sun is shining. What God shall s 


adore with our oblation ? 

7 What time the mighty waters came, containing the univeisi 
germ, producing Agni, , P 

Thence sprang the Gods’ one spirit into being, 
shall we adore with our oblation 1 


Ks. ksb, (quis) meaning Who ? that la. the Unknown CW, has 
as a name to Prajftpati, and to other Gods, from a forced i p • 
interrogative pronoun which occurs in the refrain of each v 

1 ‘the eold-cerm ; ’ ‘ source of goitten- K 


1 Hiranyagarbha : literally ‘ the gold-germ ; sourw 6 
the Sun-god ‘ as the great power of the universe, from w which ia f 

and existences, divine and earthly, are denv^, a *Lg creator 

nearest approach to the later mystical conception 2 '-dine to other 

he world.’— Wallis. What Ood : kdsmai dfv^ya: cui deo the mea 

Worship we Ka the God with our oblation.’ According W bua g, 


nearest approacn to tne larer ^ to otuer 

the world.’— Wallis. What Ood : kd»mai d^ya: cui deo the mea 

‘ Worship we Ka the God with our oblation.’ According W bua g, 
ing U * What other God than Praj4pati shall wo worship \ 

^ 3 Breedhes and tlumben: that is of Gods and men. Of men on 
literally, ‘ of quadruped and biped.’ * X 108. 1* 

4 Sea: air. Batd : the mythical river of the firmament. y > t 

7 Thence : from the coming of the waters. Ow sptrit ; « - > 



the RIGVEDi. 




})%V 122.1 

S He in his might snmyed the floods containing productive 
force and generating Worship. 

He is the God of gods, and none beside him. Wlut God shall 
we adore with our oblation ? 

9 Ne’er may he harm us who is earth’s Begetter, nor he whose 

laws are sure, the heavens’ Creator, 

He who brought forth the great and lucid waters. Wiiat God 
shall we adore with our oblation? 

10 Prajapati ! thou only comprehendest all these created tlimgs, 

and none beside thee. ” 

Grant us our hearts’ desire when we invoke thee : may we 
have store of riches in possession. 

HYMN eXXIL A^ni. 

I PRAISB the God of wondrous might like Indra, the lovely 
pleasant Guest whom all must welcome. 

May Agni, Priest and Master of the household, give here; 
strength and all-sustainiiig riches. 

2 0 Agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou jiassin.e 

wise who knowest every oidmance. 

Enwrapped in holy oil further the course of prayer : the dods 
bestow according to thy holy law. 

3 Immortal, wandering round the seven stations, give, a lihrr.il 

Giver, to the pious worshipper, 

Wealth, Agni, with brave sons and ready for his use : welcome 
the man who comes with fuel unto thee. 

4 The seven who bring oblations worship thee, the Strong, the 

first, the Great Chief Priest, Ensign of sacrifice, 

The oil-anointed Bull, Agni who hears, who sends as Gwl full 
hero strength to him who freely gives. 

8 Generating Worship: ‘giving biith to sacrifice.’— Wilson. 
iO Prajdpati ; Lord of life, creatures or creation. Savitar the Sun (hwl 
w BO called in IV. 53. 2, and Soma PavAOiAna iu IX. 5. 9. Prajdpati w-isafter- 
the name of a separate God, the bestower of progeny and caitle, and 
^metiuaes invoked as the Creator 

hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0 S. Texts, IV,, pp. ; 

*y Prof. Max Muller, A. S. Lit., p. 559, and Vedic Htjmns, Purl I. (Saoied 
of the Bast. XXXII) p.l.' by Mr. Wallis, Comologg of tiu RigmUi, 
’ bv Prof. Peterson, ffymmfrom theRIgiyda : and by Dr. L Scherm .n, 
‘owp/iMcde Hymnen Avls Rig-n,Hd Atharva-vedu’Sankitd, p. 21. 

I /wrira ; vdsHmna; like the Vaeu, or chief Vasu. ‘Like the sun 
Richet: or viands. 

- stiUiens : regions of the universe, according to Sdyana. 
iJ. seven . 



508 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK i 

f) First, mosaengor art thou, meet for election : drink thou tbv 
lill invire»l to the Amtit. 

I'he Maiuta in the votarv's bouse a(iornod thee; \^ith lauda 
the Bhrigus gave thee light and glory. 

h M Jking the teemiiig Cow for all-sustaining food, 0 Wise One 
ror the worship-loving worshipper, 

T'iom, Agiii, Hropping oil, thrice lighting works of lisw, show 
eat thy wisdom circling home and sacnhce. 

7 Tl>ey who at flushing of this dawn appointed thee their mes 

senger. these men have paid thee reverence. 

(h'ds strengthened thee f<»r work that must be glorified, Agni, 
while they made butter pure for sacrifice. 

8 Arrangers in our synods, Agni, while they sang, Vasishtha’s 

sons have called thee down, tlie Potent One. 

Maintain the growth of wealth with men who sacrifice. Ye 
Gods, preserve us, with your blosings evoimore. 

HYMN OXXIII. Venij 

Sbe, Vena, born in light, hath driven hither, on chariot of the 
air, the (Jalve^ of Pri ni. 

Singers with liymns caress him as an infant there whore the 
waters and the sunlight miiiglo, 

2 Vena draws up his w.ive from out the otgtan ; mist-bori), the 

fair cue’s back is made apparent. 

Brightly he shone aloft on Order's summit : the hosts sang 
glory to their common birthplace. 

3 Full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling together 

stood the D.aling’s Mothers. 

Ascending to the lofty height of Order, the bands of singers 
sip the SACcU of Amrit. 

7 (Jod»: Ijcre meaning piiesta ‘Verily there are two kinda of gods; for, 
indeed, tlie gods are the gods, and the Brilhinrins who haveatudied and teach 
holy lore are the human g(»da’ {SUapatka- Br^hmanaf II. 2 2. 6 ; ik B. 

X 11. 1^09). ’ * . . L 

Vena, ‘the loving 8nn ’ of I. 83. 5, Kdvta or ‘ the beloved,’ is ssid 1^7^ 
Scholiast, in this place to be mudkyanthduo devaK ‘the Go! of the mmuie 
logioii.’ He 18 , apparently, the Sun m he riaea in the mist and dew of t e 
morning. 

1 Prifni. the Speckled Cow, ie the variegated cloud, and her Calves are ths 

masaea of mist whicli the Sun dispria. , 

2 Ocean : the sea of air. On Order's summit : * on the aummit of J 
course.* — Wallis. Order, here and in the following atanaa, is Kosmos, 
ordered or law^regulated universe. Common birthplase: tb^ shy* 

8 JoirU-possestion : the child which they have produced in commoo* 
Darling's Mothers : the Dawns, or the Waters, or the songs. ^ 



THE nrOVEDA, 


. 569 


griify 123 .] 

4 Knowing his form, the saoes yearned to’ meet him : they have 

come nigii to hear the wild Bull’s bellow. 

Performing sacrifice they reached the river : for the Gandharva 
found the immortal waters. 

5 The Apsaras, the Lady, sweetly smiling, supports her Lover 

in snblimest heaven. 

In his Fneiid’s dwelling as a Friend he wanders: he. Vena, 
rests him on his golden pinion. 

6 Thoy gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strong- 

wmged bird that monnteth sky-ward ; 

On thee with winirs of gold, Vaninas envoy, the Bird that 
hasteneth to the home of Yaina. 

I Erect, to heaven hath tlie Gandharva mounted, pointing at 
us his many-coloured weapons ; 

Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light, 
produceth forms tiiat please us. 

8 When as a spark he corneth near the ocean, still looking with 
a vulture’s eye to heaven, 

His lustre, joving in its own bright splendour, maketh dear 
glories in the lowest region. 


i The wild Bull’s bellow: the .sound made by the dropping Soma juice. 

''/le Gandharva : Vena, the rising Sun. 

5 The Apsaras: the celesti.d nymph who symbolizes the waters of beaveD. 

'h Lover: Vena, the Gandhaiva, Surya ‘Ourb^nm illu>tr«te8 the two 
eiisea ill which the sun is bioutht into connection witli the waters , trs , as 
fiiietr.itirig with Ids beams the watnrv masses of tha sky, and secondly in e 
^simiUtion of his light to the waters, soma ot amhro-ia, whence the depths 
i light become the aerial ocean. This association is stereotyped in e 
1 the Gaiidh irvtis and the Apsarases.’ — WalUs. His Friend sdwt ® 

iMisiou of bis father Heaven. 

8 Taruna's envoy : the setting sun Cf VII 87 8 Ynma: Cf. X. 1 • 

7 Okd in sweet raiment : surabhi, sweet, may. as Mr^Walhs ^ 

phy ou the word gandha^ occurring in the name first a* 

J'l 3 merely recapitulate, as Ludwig observes, the deeds o wu ‘ , 

1'® light of living men and then as the illuminator of the regions 
urtli 

The hymn is one of the obscurest in the whole Rigveda. Mahld^ra “*^*7 
Vena by chandra, the Muon. Wilson ssys : ‘ The general ^ 

“^‘^makesittVonaj^uivaleutto the thunder-cloud ’ Von 
follow.., identilleB V«a G«Ddhi.rva wit, I, the 
Udwig Vena u the Moon and the Gandliarva ie the Sun. Mr. Walli M 
explamed the hymn in his Ludwigi 

Wtlci* interpretation see Hillebrandt, V. if., I 

thereon {^Vthtr dU neutsUn Arheitm, u, «. p. 109f). See also m 



670 


THE HYMNS OP 


[tiOOKl 

HYMN CXXIV. Agui, Etc 

Come to this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni, threefold, with sevo 
threads and five divisions. 

Be our oblation-bearer and preceder: thou hast lain Ion 
enough in during darkness, 

2 I come a God foreseeing from the godless to immortality In 

secret pathways, 

While I, ungracious one, desert the gracious, leave mine owi 
friends and seek the kin of strangers. 

3 I, looking to the guest of other lineage, have founded many a 

rule of Law and Order. 

I bid farewell to the Great God, the Father, and, for neglect 
obtain my share of worship. 

4 I tarried matiy a year within this altar : I leave the Father, 

for my choice is Indra. 

Away pass Agni, Varuna, and Soma. Rule ever changes : thu 
1 come to favour. 

5 These Asuras have lost their powers of magic. But thou, 0 

Varuna, if thou dost love me, 

0 King, discerning truth and right from falsehood, come and 
be Lord and Ruler of my kingdom. 

6 Here is the light of heaven, here all is ^vely ; here there n 

radiance, here is aiFs wide region. 

Let us two slaughter Vritra. Forth, 0 Soma ! Thou art obLi- 
tiou ; we therewith will serve thee. 

1 ladra speaks. Threefold : performed with three daily libations ; or com 
prising the 'pdkayajfla^ the kaviryajila, and the somayajiUi, the simple domes 
tic oblation, the oblation of claiified butter, etc., and the offerinj' of Som>' 
juice. With seven threads : conducted by the seven chief priests. Wilfi 
divisions : with five oblations, or regulated by the Yajamilna and four of t k 
chief priests, according to S4yana. The exact meaning is uncertain 

2 Aiiiii speaks. He has left Varuna, originally the Supi erne Deity, w 

power was waning, and associated liimself with Indra who has superb 
tliat God. From the godless: fiom Varuna who in the decline of 
inacy h<w neglected Agni aud sacrifice, skyana interprets the first me 
ferently : — ‘ From being no divinity I issue a divinity from the 
solicitation (of the gods), aud being manifest I attain immortality. - 
Seek the kin of strangers : come to be born and domesticated in a 1 
with Indra. . , y runi 

3 Of other lineage : of the other branch ; terrestrial fire. 

4 Within this altar: or, close to this Varuna. This: the sup 

Indra. r^nvie ^ 

6 Indra speaks. These Asuras: Agni, Varuna, and Soma. ^ ^yatio 
Lord : Indra offers Vanina spiritual and moral sovereignty as <> F 
for his loss of general supremacy. „ 

6 Let us two : the exhortation U addressed by Indra tc ^ ‘ 

. . - • . XT Ansmv In the ^ 



125.] THE RlaVEDA^ 

7 The Sage hath fixed hia form by wisdol in the heavens • Va- 

runa with no violence let the waters low. 

Like women-folk, the floods that bring rospeiity have cauelit 
his hue and colour as they gleamed nd shone. 

8 These wait upon his loftiest power am viuour- he dwells in 

these who triumph in their Godhead! 

And they, like people who elect their liler, have in abhor- 
rence turned away from Vritra. 

0 They call him Swan, the abhorrent flood!’ Companion, moving!; 
in friendship with celestial Waters. 1 
The poets in their thought have looked In ludra swiftly ap- 
proaching when Anushtup calls him. 

HYMN CXXV. Viik. 

I TRAVBL with the Rudras and the Vasul with the Adityas 
and All-Gods I wander. 1 

I hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, Indrl and Agni, and the 
Pair of Asvins. 

2 I cheris|i and sustain high-swelling Soma, ;nd Tvashtar 1 sup- 

port, Pushan, and Bhaga, ' ‘ 

I load with wealth the zealous sacrificer pours the juice 
and offers hia oblation.*^ 

3 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures^ most thoughtful, 

first of those who merit worship.* 

Thus Gods have stablished me in many pkces with many 
homes to enter and abide in, 

^ Through mo alone all eat the food that feeds them, — each 
man who sees, breathes, hears the word outspoken. 

They know it not, but yet they dwell beside rae. Hear, one 
and all, t he truth as I declare it. 

, \ • perhaps Soma, in answer to Indra’s appeal ; Mitra, according 

w odyana. 

5 mi* power : the supreme might of Indra. 
this stanza appears to have been added on account of the occurrence of 
. ® ^^bhatgftTutm (abhorrentium) which seems to connect it with the 


Receding stanza where btbkatsiivaK (abhorrentes) occurs. Smn: hahsa ■ 
Sun-God is sometimes so called. Cf. IV. 40. 5 Swiftly approach- 
Anushtup eaUs him : ‘ or the ceaselessly moving Indra, who is worthy 
praised with an Wilson. Or, ‘dancing the Anushtup, 


-o to Prof. Max Muller’s interpretation. 
idL has translated and explained this hymn. See La Relfgton 

PP* 1^5-149. See also Book IV. 42, for hints of the rivalry 

Varuna and Indra. 

!8ll5r'i!®'’T‘>P«"onified, the Word, the firet creation and represen b|ti»e 
an.j a of communication between men and Gods, rleie 



572 TBB HYMm OP [^qok x 

5 I, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods and 

men alike shall ,vel come. 

1 make the man Iiove exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a 
Rishi, and' a Brhman. 

6 I bead the bow foi Uudra that his arrow may strike and slay 

the hater of deotion. 

I nuise and order ,)attlc for the people, and I have penetrated 
Earth and Hia’Cii. 

7 On the world’s snrimit I bring forth the Father: my home ia 

in the waters, h the ocean. 

Thence 1 extend yer all existing creatures, and touch even 
yonder heavenwith my forehead. 

8 I breathe a stror^ breath like the wind and tempest, the while 

I hold togethc’ all existence. 

Beyond this wid* earth and beyond the heavens I have become 
so mighty in ny grandeur. 

HYMN eXXVI. Visvedevafl. 

No peril, no sewre distres'^, ye Goils, affects the mortal man 

Whom Aryamai and Mitra lead, and Varu^ia, of one accord, 
beyond his hes. 

2 This very thin? do we desire, Varnna, Mitra, Aryaman, 

Whereby ye giard the mortal man from 8(^ distress, and lead 

him safe beyond his foes. , 

3 These are, eaih one, our present helps, Varuna, Mitra, Arya- 

man, 

Best leaders, best deliverers to lead us on and bear us safe 
beyond our foes. _____ 

7 Tht Father • Heaven or Sky, produced from VAk identified with Para* 
tuAtniA, the supre'ne and univeiHHl Soul. 

The hymn haa been tr-mslated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneout Bssaytt > 
by the authoia of the Sitbenzif/ Lieder ; by Prof. Petersen, Hymns jTom f 
Higvtda (Bombay Sjinfikiit Series); and by Prof. Whitney, Notes to oe* 
b) ooke's AWy on ^Ae Forfaa, p. 113. . , , 

Mr. Walli-i observes; ‘ Vftc, ‘Speech’ is celebrated alone in two wncue 
hymns, X 71. and X. 126., of which the former shows that the primary 
application of the name was to the voice of the hymn, the means o 
munication between heaven and earth at the sacrifice. The J ^ 

illuHtiates th -1 constant assimilation of the varied phenomena of na 
the sacrifice; all that has a voice in nature, the thunder of of the 

rea waking of life at dawn, with songs of rejoicing over the •l.gpj^ti, 

world, are embodied in this Vftc in the same way as it ia said of u. 
that he embraces all things that are. It is thus another exijression 
idea of the unity of the world, which we have seen crowning tn J 
speculations of ^1 the more abstract hymns of the collection, t 
tkt ^igveda, p. 86, See elio Weber, Vie unA "kiyot, MUA* Smifh 



THE RIQVEDA. 


573 


^YUE 127 .] 

i Ye compass round and guard each mai, V'aruna, Mitra, Arya- 
mau : 

In your dear keeping may we be, ye vho are excellent as 
guides beyond our foes. 

5 Adityas are beyond all foes,— Varuna, Aitra, Aryaman : 

Strong Rudra with the Murut host, Inda, Agni let us call for 

weal beyond our foes. 

6 These lead us safely over all, Varuna, ^itra, Aryaman, 

These who are Kings of living men, ovr all troubles far away 

beyond our foes. 

1 May they give bliss to aid us well, Vauna, Mitra, Aryaman : 
May the Adityas, when we pray, grait ua wide shelter and 

defence beyond our foes. 

8 As in this place, 0 Holy Ones, ye Va8« freed even the Gauri 
when her feet were fettered. 

So free us now from trouble and afflictoa : and let our life be 
lengthened still, 0 Agni. 

HYMN CXXVII. Night. 

With all her eyes the Goddess Nightiooks forth approaching 
many a spot : 

She hath put all her glories on. 

2 Immortal she hatlt filled the waste the Goddess hath filleii 
[ height and depth ; 

She conquers darkness with her ligh.. 

3 The Goddess as she comes hath set ./he Dawm her Sister in her 

place : 

And then the darkness vanishes, 
i So favour us this night, 0 thou wlnse pathways wo have visited 
As birds their neat upon the tree 
5 The villagers have sought their homes, and all that walks 
and all that flies, 

I Kven tlie falcons fain for prey. 

^ Keep ofi* the she-wolf and the wulf ; 0 Orraya, keep the thief 
away ; 

Easy be thou for us to pass. 


the wild»cow, the fetualo of the Gaura or Bos Oaurus. The 
Wo aaiti delivered her from Viavavsau the Qaadharva, 

U the expanded (Armament).’— WiieSii. 



574 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK I 

7 CleMrly, bath yhecoiie uigh to me who decks the dark >vit| 

richest hues : 

0 Morning, cauc<l if like debts. 

8 These have I broight to thee like kine. 0 Night, thou Child 

of Heaveii, acc^t 
This laud as for aconqueror. 

HYMN CXXVIII. 

Let me win glory, Agni, in our battles : enkindling thee, niai 
we support our bdies. 

May the four regiens bend and bow before me : with thee loi 
guardian may w< win in combat. 

2 May all the Gods b on my side in battle, the Maruts led 

Indra, Vishnu, .gni. 

Mine be the middh air’s extended region, and may the wim 
blow favouring tlese my wishes. 

3 May the Gods gram me riches; may the blessing and iinoca 

tion of the Gods ijsist me. 

horemost in fight bethe divine Invokers : may we, unwounded 
have brave heroesround us. 

4 For me let them preent all mine oblatioi^, and let my mind’ 

intention be acconphshed. , 

May I be guiltless of ;he least transgression : and, all ye Gods 
do yc combine to Hess us. 

o Ye six divine Lxpansei, grant us freedom : here, all ye Gods 
acquit yourselves life heroes. 

Let us not lose our chidren or our bodies : let us not benefi 
the foe, King Soma ! 

6 Baffling the wrath of Oir opponents, Agni, guard us as ou 
infallible Protector. 

Let the.se thy foes turn back and seek their bouses, and le 
their thought who w’atdi at home be ruined. 


8 TNitit : verses. 

1 The four regions : the King who is praying for assistance is about to ui 
del tske « Higvijaya, the subjugation of all neighbouring countries in a 
directions. 

8 Divine InvoJcers: the EoiAT^ipneBtM of the Gods. SAyana explains di 
ferently ‘ may my invokers of the gods be the first to propitiate them.’- 
Wilson. 

5 Six divine Expanses : the four cardinal points and upper and lower spac®® 
or, according to Sdyanai>. Heaven. Eikrih Tkav KtVkf w^f^r aniLElaatl^ 



THE RIQVEBA, 


675 


j Lord of the world, Creator of creators: the saviour God who 
overcomes the foeman. 

May Gods, Brihaspati, both Asvins shelter from ill this sacri- 
fice and sacrificer. 

8 Foodful, and mnch-invoked, at this our calling may the great 
Bull vouchsafe us wide protection. 

Lord of Bay Coursers, India, bless our childi-en : harm us not, 
give us not as prey to others. 

f) l,et those who are our foemen stay afar from us: with Indra 
and with Agni we will drive them off. 

Vasiis, Adityas, Rudras have exalted me, made me far-reach- 
ing, mighty, thinker, sovran lord. 

HYMN CXXIX. Creation. 


Then was not non-existent nor existent : tliere was no realm 
ot air, no sky beyond it. 

Wliat covered in, and where ^ and wliat gave shelter ? Was 
water there, unfathomed depth of water ? 

'1 Death was not then, nor was there anght immortal : no sign 
vaa there, the day’s and night’s divider. 

That One Thing, bre<aldess, lire'ithed by its own nature : apart 
frcin it was nothing whatsoever. 

•i Darkness there was : at first concealed in darkness this All 
was in discriminated chaos. 

All that existed then was void and formless : by the great 
powei of Warmth was born that Unit. 

I Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the primal 
seed and germ of Spirit. 

^ages who searched with their heart’s thought discovered the 
existent’s kinship in tiie non-existent. 


' After SAyana supplies ‘that Uod I 

pirtisr ’ Indra or S.ivitar i« intended. 

^ Thp (freat BuV : Indra. , , i. i. 4 . n 

^ .♦ in the beginning. Non-existent : ditaf: that does not yet actually 

but which has in itself the latent potentiality of existence ‘ There whs 
unapparent condition,’ says an Indian Commentator, which, from 
absence ot distinctness, was not an ‘ entity,^ while from ite being the 
'"‘Junuent of the world’s pi‘oduct‘(in, it was not a ‘ non entity. 

1 - Riibstance. the unit ( 


'^uriient of the world’s pi‘oducf on, it was not a ‘ non entity, 
i “ T’Lri Out Thing ; the single primordial substance, the unit out of which 
f universe was developed, dp. I. 164. 6 and 46. 

! 'i Prof. Wilson, following SAyana, translates t6pa$ah by ‘ austen- 

I meaniug the contemplation of the things that were to be ^ 

r the Aryae u the prineiple expleinin* movement, life, end tliought. 



576 


THE BTMNS OP 


[Boo/ri 


5 Transversely was their severing line extended; what 

above it then, and what below it ? 

There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free action ben 
and energy up yonder. 

6 Who verily knows and who can here declare it, whence it wai 

born and whence comes this creation ? 

The Gods are later than this world^s production. Who knows 
then whence it first came into being ? 

7 He, the first origin of this creation, whether he formei it all or 

did not form it, 

Whose eye controls this world in highest heaven, he verily 
knows it, or perhajis he knows not. 

HYMN eXXX. Crpafion 


The sacrifice drawn out with threads on every side, stretched 
by a hundred sacred ministers and one,— 

This do these Fathers weave who hitherward are come; they 
sit beside the warp and cry, Weave forth, weave back. 

2 The Man extends it and the Man unbinds it : even to this 

vault of heaven hath he outspnn it. 

These pegs are fastened to the seat of worship : they made 
the Sama-hymns their weaving shuttles. 

3 What were tlie rule, the order and the iiodel ? What were 

the wooden fender and tl»e butter ? * , 1,1 

What were the hymn, the cnuiit, the recitation, when to tne 
God all Deities paid worship ? . 


6 Line: a line drawa by the ancient llishis to make » 
upper world and the lower, and to brim? duality out of 
&ther. may be meant. Pr.. action ; the t in 

The stinza U obscure, and its connexion with stanza 4 is not ob 
tervenini; stanza m^iy, perhaps, have been lost K»mva I P'’- 

The hymn b-eu translated by „ of the Siefti-’” 

33, 34 ; by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 356, 357 ; by the ^ ^ UUttt 

zig Litd^r, and by Mr. Walli-*, (Josm^Aogy of the Whitney iU 

of the many Commentators «»n this hymn are t D,. Soberman, 

Journal of the American Oriental Society, yol. xi. p. « ifta? Walh*. 

PhilosophischeHymuen aus i>p. 559 - 56ii. 

See Prof. Max Miilier, Ilistorg of Ancient Sanskrit Liteiatu e, IP 

As the subject of the hymn is creation 
teriouB primeval sacriface (cp. X. 90), Prajftpati the Ci ^ 
to be tha deity. The R-shi is Yajfta "n”iitute« creatio» 

1 PoAhtf^' 

— SSyana. A hundred and one : maaninp: an 

8AyanaixplHin«?)t«dr4 here Prt^jApati. sceonl 

i The Man : the first Mau or Male ; Purusha, Adipunwha, rraj t- 

ing t^SAyana. ^ ^ 



TEE EmEM. 


jrj/*Y 131.] 



^ Closely was G&yatrf conjoined with Agtii, and closely Savitar 
combined with Ushnih. 

Brilliant with Ukthas, Soma joined Anushtup: Brihaspatis 
voice by Bvihati was aided. 

5 Vir^j adhered to Varuna and Mitra : here Trishtup dny by day 

was Indra’ii portion. 

Jagati entered all the Gods together : so by this knowledge men 
were raised to Rishis. 

6 So by this knowledge men were raised to Riehis, when ancient 

sacrifice sprang up, our Fathers. 

With the mind’s eye I think that I behold them who first per- 
formed thia saciificial worship. 

1 They who were versed in ritnal and metre, in hymns and rules, 
were the Seven Godlike Risliis 

Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up tlie 
reins like chariot-drivers. 

HYMN CXXXr. Indra. 

Drive all our efiemios away, 0 Indra, the western, mighty 
Uoncjiieror, and the eastern. 

Hero, drive otf our northern foes and southern, that we in thy 
wide shelter niuy be joyful, 

2 What then 1 As men whose fiehls are full of barley reap the 

ri^)e corn removing it in order, 

So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who went not 
to prepare the grass for worship. 

3 Men come not with one horse at sacred seasons; thus they 


obtain no honour in assemblies. 

Sages desiring herds of kiiie and horses strengthen the mighty 
Indra for Ids friendship. 


i/miani with UHha»: ‘gladdening (us) through hymns 
kuir. Brikaspaii’t voice: beonuse lija duty was to speak as Accor 

bgtothe Aiiavtya^Iivdhrdana, UI. 13, Pr.ijipatl ‘allotted to the deities 
tlieir (different) parts in the sacrifice and nietn's ‘ „ 

i 5 Day 6y day : was Indra a portion of the raid-day (oblation). Wil^. 

^ nehold them : or, according to Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation Ihese 
»'th the eyes of mind, I think, beheld them ’ , , 

J 'Ti« ,eva„ U„hi. hero not the Anjsiraae., but Bhajndvtja. Kesyap,. 
J'toa, Atri, Vaeiahtha, Vi^vAmitra, and Jamadagm. J*?®. 

h^e“u*t?anelat.d by Dr. Muir 0 S. PP' 

'^^7 Prof. Whitney, Noiea to Golebrooke's hmy on tfu Veiiae, p. U4. 

Ua«».toharrb;.n c«n.idrr«l J;; 

yiAble for a wealthy man to come to the nacrihoe in a oae-horae w . 

PrticiaQ inaanino .a# *-l.» * — ..«<aa».fia»n 



578 


THE Br3f,ys OF 


[^OOK ’ 

4 Ye, Asvins, L^rds of Splendour, drank full draiights of grat 

ful Sonia juice, 

Abd aided India in his work with Namuchi of Asura birth 

5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee with the 

wondrous powers and wisdom. 

When thon, with might, hadst drimk the draught that gla( 
dens, Saiasvati, 0 Magiiavan, refreshed thee. 

b Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance : may he, possessin 
all, be kind and gracious. 

May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and may we b 
the lords of hero vigour. 

7 May we enjoy his favour, his the Holy : may we enjoy hi 
blessM loving-kindness. 

May this rich liulra, as our good Plrotector, drive off and kee 
ufar all those who hate us. 

HYMN CXXXII. Mitra. Varun, 

M.\y Dyaus the Lord of lauded wealth, and Earth stand b; 

the man who offers sacrifice, ' 

And may the Asvins, both the Gods, strengthen the worshi] 
per with bliss. 

t As such we honour you, Mitra and Va^^a, with hasty zea 
most blest, you who sustain the folk. 

So may we, through your frienship for the worshipper, subdu 
the fiends. 

3 And when we seek to win your love and friendship, we wh 

have precioas wealth in our possession. 

Or when the worshipper augments his ncheS) let not his trej 
sures be shut up. 

4 That other, Asura ! too was bom' of Heaven : thou art, 0 Vi 

runa, the King of all men. 

The chariot’s Lord was well content, forbearing to anger Deal 
by sin so great. 

4 Hillebraodt. V. M., 1. 146, and Eggeling, Sacred Bookt of the E(Ut, XI 
1»5, interpret differently. The myth referred to in the following Btanz 
not been preaerved. See Weber, Ueber den RdjasHya^ pp. 96, 

4 Th'itotker: Mitra. Theeharioft Lord: literally, ‘ hw*' ''“2 
The meaning is uncertain. I find the rest of the hymn unmteUigi ’ ^ 
Ludwig conjectures that two brothers. Nrimedhas and t 

tended for sorereigiity, and that the adherents of one had wwued w p ' 
other brother to death, but had not carried out their purpose. . 
j * 1 .. and the brothaw are reconoiwd. 



THE RiaVEDA. 


m 


1*3 ] 

5 This sin hath SakapCita here committed. Heroes who fled to 
their dear friend he slayeth, 

When the Steed bringeth down your grace and favour in 
bodies dear and worshipful. 

^ Yuur Mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water even as 
earth is purified from heaven. 

Show love and kindness here below: wash her in rays of 
heavenly li^ht. 

7 Ye Twain have seated you as Lords of Wealth, as one who 
mounts a car to him who sits upon the pole, upon the wood. 
These our disheartened tribes Nrimedhas saved from woe, 
Sumedhas saved from woe. 

HYMN CXXXIIL Indra. 

Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in the fore- 
most place. 

Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war, 
be thou our great encourager. Let the weak bowstrings 
break upon the bows of feeble enemies. 

2 Thou didst destroy the Dragon : thou sentest the rivers down 

to earth. 

Foeloss, 0 Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendest well each 
choicest thing. Therefore we draw us close to thee. Let 
the weak bowstrings, etc. 

3 Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy's designs. 

Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, 0 Indra, who would smite us 
I dead : thy liberal bounty gives us wealth. 

1 The robber people round about, Indra, who watch and aim at 
' us,— 

Trample them down beneath thy foot ; a conquering scatterer 
art thou. 

> Whoso assails us, Indra, be the man a stranger or akin, 
firing down, thyself, his strength although it be as vast as are 

the heavens. 

> Close to thy friendship do we cling, 0 Indra, and depend on 

thee. ' 

Lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of holy Law. 

‘ Sleti ; the 8un.-Ludwig. Tour grate : Mitra’e end Vamne'e. 

jjWifrtWidiii.. perhaps the motherol the two brothers ieintended.- 

iewierino. nr - i- ■**"“* 



TBE BYMN8 OP [BOOK ] 

7 Do thou bestow upon us her, 0 ladra, who yields according t 
the singer’s longing, 

That the great Cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring 
thousand streams, give milk to feed us. 

HYMN CXXXIV. ludr, 

As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, 0 Indra, both the earti 
and heaven, 

So as the Mighty One, great King of all the mighty world o 
men, the Goddess Mother brought thee forth, the Bless^ 
Mother gave thee life. 

2 Relax that mortal’s stubborn strength whose heart is bent 

wickedness. 

Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and ai 
at us. The Goddess Mother brought thee forth, etc. 

3 Shake down, OSlayer of the foe, those great all-splendid energi 
With all thy powers, 0 Sakra, all thiue helps, 0 Indra, sha 

them down ; 

4 As thou, 0 Satakratu, thou, 0 Indra, shakest all things do 
As wealth for him who sheds the juice, with thine assistar 

thousandfold. 

5 Around, on every side like drops of swea^let lightning-flaBl: 

fall. 

Let all malevolence pass away from us like threads of Dur 
grass. 

6 Thou bearest in thiue hand a lance like a long hook, gn 

Counsellor ! 

As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the branch, 
Maghavan. 

7 Never, 0 Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate : ^ 

walk as holy texts command. 

Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, beneal 
your arms. 


7 The great Cow : probably the Earth. 

1 The Qoddtit Mother : Adlth The refrain is repeated in all the 
except the \eat. 

8 EnergU* : influences in the shape of rain and sunlight 
4 §(Uakratu : or, Lord of Hundred Powers. 

8 PArvdgrasi: Pantouni Daotylon ; aspeoietof bent grass whose fila®®' 

stfetch horizontally away from the stem, 




mN 136 .] 


THE RIO VEDA, 


681 


HYMN CXXXV. Tama. 

In the Tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama drinketh 
with the Gods, 

The Father, Master of the house, tendeth with love our an- 
cient Sires. 

I looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old, 

Oil him who treads that evil path, and then I yearned for 
this again. 

Thou mountest, though thou dost not see, 0 Child, the new 
and wheel-less car 

Which thou hast fashioned mentally, one-poled but turning 
every way. 

The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the 
Sages, Child 1 

This hath the Saman followed close, hence, laid together on a ship. 

Who was the father of the child ? Who made the chariot roll 
away 1 

Who will this day declare to us how the funereal gift was made t 

When the funereal gift was placed, straightway the point of 
flame appeared. 

A depth extended in the front : a passage out was made behind 

Hero is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the 
Home of Gods ; 

Here minstrels blow the flute for him : here he is glorified 
with songs. 


Tht Tree : where the spirits of the pious dead rest after their labours. 

I Father; Yama. 

! The spirit of the dead child speaks. / yearned for this : to return to 
> world of life. 

^ Yama speaks. Fashioned mentally : figuratively prepared by being burnt 
the funeral pile. 

) Ship ; meaning, apparently, the funeral pile. The funereal gift : the 
aping of anuddyt is uucertain ‘ Restitution.’— Wilson. ‘Surrender’ or 
iliveiy/ according to Prof. Zimmer. Stansas 6 — 7 are spoken by the poet. 

^ d depth : the meaning is obscure. Postage out : probably for l^e removal 
the ashes. 

I'he subject of the hymn appears to be the funeral ceremony of a hoy 
said by some to be the name of a man). According to the legend 
^ by SAyapa a youth named Nachiketas was sent by his father to the 
of Tama who treated him kindly and allowed ,him to return to this 
mu. 'The hymn la made tWbougbont appboable ioAditya as weU as to 
if possible, a still greater degree of obscurity. It seems to have 
of the discussion in the Tuittiriya Brfthmana (III. U. 8) and 
diilft! Upanishad, respecting what becomes of the soul after death, in 
between HaehikOai and YanMk’-Wilwn. 



582 




TBS HYMNS OF 

HYMN CXXXVr. Keain^ 

Hb with the long loose looks supports Agni, and moisturej 
heaven, and earth : 

He is all sky to look upon : he with long hair is called thii 
light. 

2 The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments soiled oi 

yellow hue. 

They, following the wind's swift course go where the Goda 
have gone before. 

3 Transported with our Munihood we have pressed on into the 

winds : 

You therefore, mortal men, behold our natural bodies anJ 
no more. 

4 The Muni, made associate in the holy work of every God, 
Looking upon all varied forms flies through the region of the aii 

5 The Steed of Vata, V^u’s friend, the Muni, by the Gods 

impelled, 

In both the oceans hath his home, in eastern and in western sea 

6 Treading the path of sylvan beasts, Gandharvaa, and Ap 

sarases, 

He with long locks, who knows the wish, is a sweet mos 
delightful friend. ^ 

7 Vayu hath churned for him : for him he poundeth thing 

most hard to bend, 

When he with loOg loose locks hath drunk, with Rudra, watc 
from the cup. 


The Kesins, Jce^lnah, wearers of long loose hair, are Agni, V&yu, and Sflry 
Each stanza has for its Rishi one of the seven sons of VAtarasana. aee lna( 


longlooit locin probably the .acetic, 

According to Slyana, the radiant Sun. Mouture: vuham, usually 
‘poison’ is so explainod in this place. n- ji j 

2 Mmi»: ascetics inspired or in a state of ecstasy. Girdled with th 
exposed without girdles to the wind. According to SAyana, sons ot 
rasana. or Wind-Girdled. , . tn i 

'5 In both the oceans : everywhere in the firmament from its eastern 

’’^Ttehymu^howsthe conception that by a life of eanctity 

attain to the feliowehip of the deities of the air, the Viyue, th. Budiw, 

A w rMM , and the Gandharvaa j and, furnished like 

poCre, can travel aleng with them on their couree 

the long haired, that ie to eay, the Muni, who during the time of bw au 

tiea does not^ave his hair, upholds fire, “d, co; 

reaemblee the World of light, ideas which the l^r ^ beii 

tains ’—Von Both, quoted ^ Dr. Muir, 0. S. Taet$, lY. 819, the ny 



'JfiV 138.J 


TUE JSIGVEDA. 


583 


HYMN CXXXVII. Visvedeva.. 

Ye Gods, raise up once more the man whom have humbled 
and brought low. 

0 Gads, restore to life again thd man who hath committed sin. 
Ywo several winds are blowing here, from Sindhu,* houi a 

distant land. 

May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow disease away. 
Hither, 0 Wind, blow healing bairn, blow all disease away, 
thou Wind ; 

For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods. 

1 am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee re^i and koep 
thee safe. 

Ibriugthee blessM strength, I drive thy weakening malady away. 
Here let the Gods deliver him, the Maruts’ band deliver liirn . 
AH things that be deliver him that he be freed from his disease. 
The Waters have their healing power, the Waters drive disease 
away. 

The Waters have a balm for all : let them make medicine for thee. 
The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our ten- 
fold branching hands, 

With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle 
touclu 

HYMN CXXXVIII. Judra. 

Allibd with thee in friendship, Indra, these tby piiests, ro- 
nieinbering Holy Law, rent Vritra limb from limb, 

When tJiey bestowed the Dawns and let the waters flow, and 
when thou didst chastise dragons at Kutsa’s call. 

Thou sen test forth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou 
dravest forth the kiue, thou drankest pleasant ineath. 

Thou gavest increase through this Tree’s surpassing might. 
The Sun shone by the bvinii that sprang from Holy Law. 

iach stanza is ascribed to one of the seven great Rishis. See Index of 
The hymn is a charm to restore a sick man to health. Cf. Hymns of 
Mharva-vedti^ IV. 13. 

^ho katkeonmUted tin: sickness and death being regaided as the conse- 
ence of sin. 

2 SindJiu: or, ocean. 

1 The Wind speaks. Weaheninyi malady : ya^shma may be sickness in gene- 
• or the name of a large class of diseases, probably of a consumptive nature. 

' Tile stanza is important as showing that the Indians employed touches 
hyiog.on cf hands to relieve suffering or to restore health. Cp. X. 60. iJi. 

^ P^prietts: the Angirases. But see Vedic llymnt, I. p. 44. DUst 

2 7 * 1 clause is very difficult. I adopt Prof. Grassmann’s interpretation. 
Ail Trtt't surpattina ntiakt : the power of the juice of the Soma plant. 



3 In t]j 0 njid-way of heaven the Sun imyoked his oar : the Ary 
found a umtch to meet his foe. 

Associate with Rijisvan Indra overthrew the solid forts c 
Pi pi'll, conjuring Asura. • 


4 Ho boldly cast down forts which none had eW assailed: ui 

weaned ho destroyed the godless treasure-stores. 

Tiike Sun and Moon he took the stronghold^s wealth away, am 
praised in song, demolished foes with flashing dart. 

5 Aimed witli reaUtle'is weopons, with vast power to cleave, tt 

Vritra-slayer whets his darts and deals forth wounds. 
Blight Uttlias was afraid of Indra’s slaugliteriug bolt : she wei 
upon her way and left her chariot there. 

6 These are thy finaous exploits, only thine, when thou alon 

hast left the other reft of sacrifice. 

Thou in tlie heavens h.ist set the ordering of the Moons : th 
Father boars the felly portioned out by thee. 

HYMN CXXXIX. 

Savitar, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright with lb 
sunbeams, his eternal lustre; 

He in whose energy wise Pusbau marches, surveying all exia 
ence like a herdsman. 

2 Belioldiag men he sits amid the heavens, filling the two worl 

halves and air’s wide region. 

He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between t! 
eastern and the westein limit. 

3 He, rout of wealth, the gatherer-up of treasures, looks wii 

his might on every form and figure. 

S.ivitar, like a God whose Law is constant, stands in the ball 


for the spoil like India. 

4 Waters from sucufico came to the Gandharya Visv&vasu, 
Soma, when they sow him. 

ludra, approaoliing quickly, marked their going, and looki 
around upon the Sun’s enclosures. 


3 Unyoled his car : the allu^i »n in porhapi?, to an eclipse, or a deien i 
of the Sun to etial)le the Aryan* couiple e the overthrow of their eneiuM 
Rijuran: a pious worslupper befriended by Indra. Pip^'u: a demon 
drouglit. See Vol. 1,, Index. , wo 

5 Bright Ushas was afraid: aee II. 1.5. 6, IV. 80. 8— U, and X. • 

6 The other: thy foe, the demon or RAksh ma. The Fath^: to 
Heaven. The felfy portioned out by thee: the course of the Moon 
the aaieriams, which thou hast an antjod. 


2 Pastures : there is no aubstantive in the text. SAyapa tupplie* 
of ap«ce Ludwig ‘ ladlea and GraaamHnn ‘ paatuiea.’ yg^-iAarr 

4 Viatersi uaad in the preparation of the Soma juice. 
regarded as the ouatodixn of the celestial Soma. TAe i 





'my 140 j 


TffS RIG VEDA. 


585 


5 This son^: Visvavasu shall sing us, meter of air’s mid-realm, 

celestial (iand4iarva, 

That we may know aright both truth and falsehood : may he 
inspire our thoughts and h^elp our piaises. 

6 In the floods’ track he found the booty-seeker: the rocky 

cow-pen’s doors he threw wide open. 

These, the Gandharva told him, flowed with Amrit. Indra 
knew well the puissance uf the dragons. 

HYMN CXL. Agni. 

Aoni, life-power and fame are thine : thy fires blaze mightily, 
thou rich in wealth of beiims ! 

Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with 
strength, the food that merits laud. 

2 With brilliant, purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest 

up thyself in light. 

Thou, visiting both thy Mothers, aidest them as Son : thou 
joinest close the earth and heaven. 

3 0 Jitavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our 

fair hymns and songs. 

In thee are treasured variotis forms of strengthening food, 
born nobly and of wondrous help. 

4 Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth 

to us, Immortal God. 

Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon : thou leadest 
us to conquering power. 

5 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who bath great riches 

under bis control, 

Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest 
him wealth that conquers all. 

S The men have set before I hem for their welfare Agni, atrimg, 
visible to all, the Holy. 

Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men’s 
generations magnify with praise-songs. 


5 : the celestial Gandharva, here the Suu-God. He : Visvftvaeu. 

hooty-seeker : Indra who sought to win the waters. Of the dragont • the 
*rpent-deinons who obstructed ilie floods of heaven. The last three stanass 
‘re very diflScult and obscure. See Hillebrandt, V. 4f., 1. pp. 436, 487, and 
Ueberdie neuetten A, m i. w., p. 101. 


^ Mothers : Heaven and Earth, lowest cfoie : or, fillest full. 

° T*® him .• to the institutor of the sacrifice. 

the eipositioo of the hymn in ^aiapaihA BrdhfMif(St VII, 3. 1. *9 — 34 



m 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK . 


HYMN CXLL Visvedeva 

Turn hither, Agni, speak to us : come to us with a gracioi 
mind. * 

Enrich us, Master of the house : thou art the Giver of on 
wealth. 

3 Let Aryaman vouchsafe us wealth, and Bhaga, and Brihaspat 
Let the Gods give their gifts, and let Sunrita, Goddess, gran 
us wealth. 

3 We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs an 

hymns, 

Adityas, Vishnu, Surya, and the Brahman Priest Brihaspati. 

4 Indra, Vayu, Brihaspati, Gods swift to listen, we invoke. 
That in the synod all the folk may be benevolent to us. 

5 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brihaspati, 
Vata, Vislmu, Sarasvati and the Strong Courser Savitar. 

6 Do thou, 0 Agni, with thy fires strengthen our prayer am 

sacrifice : 

Urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our service of th 
Gods. 

HYMN CXLII. Agni 

With thee, 0 Agni, was this singer of th| laud : he hath m 
other kinship, O thou Son of Strength. 

Thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard. Keep th( 
destructive lightning far away from us. 

2 Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, Agni; a! 

Comrade thou win nest all living things. 

Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious : they of them 
selves advance like one who guards the herd. 

3 And thou, 0 Agni, thou of Godlike nature, sparest the stonesi 

while eating up the brushwood. 

Then are tliy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. Let us not 
stir to wrath thy mighty arrow. 

4 O^er hills, through vjiles devouring as thou goest, thou partesi 

like an army fain for booty. 

As when a barber shaves a beard, thou shavest earth when 
the wind blows on thy flame and fans it. 

$ Apparent are his lines as he approaches : the course is singl^i 
but the cars are many, j 


2 SAnr^d : Pleasantness ; Gladness, personified. Cf. I. 40. 3. 

3 Sparest the stones : 8ee,Pischel, VcdischeStudienf I. p. 180. Op. Hi- 



TBB RIOVEDA. 


587 


143.] 

When, Agni, thou, making thine arms resplendent, advancest 
o’er the land spread out beneath thee. 

5 Now let thy strength, thy burning flames fly upward, thine 
energies, 0 Agni, as thou toilest. 

Gane widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour : let all the 
Vasus sit this day beside thee. 

7 This is the waters’ reservoir, the great abode of gathered streams. 
Take thou another path thi^ this, and as thou listest walk 

thereon. 

8 On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durva grass 

spring up. 

Let there be lakes with lotus blooms. These are the mansions 
of the flood. 

HYMN CXLIII. Asvins. 

Yk made that Atri, worn with eld, free as a horse to win the goal. 
When ye restored to youth and strength Kakshivan like a car 
renewed, 

2 Ye freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him newly-born 

to earth. 

Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which Gods unsoiled by 
dust had bound. 

3 Heroes who showed most wondrous power to Atri, strive to 

win fair songs ; 

For then, 0 Heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise shall 
cease no more. 

4 This claims your notice, Bounteous Gods I — oblation, Asvins ! 

and our love. 

That ye, 0 Heroes, in the fight may bring us safe to ample room. 

5 Ye Twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region’s end, 
Nasatyas, with your wiugM steeds came nigh, and gave him 

strength to win. 

Is Come with your joys', most liberal Gods, Lords of all treasures, 
bringing weal. 

Like fresh full waters to a well, so, Heroes, come and be with us. 

^ Stanzas 7 and 8 seem to belong to some other hymn, being a prayer to Agni 
‘‘the may spare the speaker’s houie where, he says, there in nothing to invite 
devouring God. See Hymiu of the Atharva-vedOy VI. 106. 

m — 

1 Mri: see 1. 112. 7. Kahshivdn: the Scholiast says that this Riahi was 
^ally dull of undertitanding and that the Aavins endowed him with know- 
Prof. Ludwig takes kaktMvantam to be an adjective agreeing with 
•• ‘ Again ye made him youthful like a chariot that is braced with bauds. 

• tee Vol I., Indei. 



m 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK X, 


HYMN CXLIV. Indra. 

This deathles'j Indu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality, 
Belongs to thee, the Orderer. * 

2 Here, by iis, for the worshipper, is the wise bolt that works 
with skill. 

It brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man brings the 
eftectual strong drink. 

S Impetuous Ahiauva, a bull among these cows of his, 

Looked down upon the restless Hawk, 

4 That the strong-pinioned Bird hath brought, Child of th 

Falcon, from afar, 

What moves upon a hundred wheels along the female Dragon 
path. 

5 Which, fair, unrobbed, the Falcon brought thee in his fool 

the red-hued dwelling of the juice ; 

Through this came vital power winch lengthens out our days 
and kinship through its help awoke. 

6 So Indra is by Indu’s power : e’en among Gods will it repe 

great treachery. 

Wisdom, Must Sapient One, brings force that lengthens life. 
May wisdom bring the juice to us. 

HYMN CXLV. 4 SapatnlbftdhaDsn 

From out the earth I dig this plant, an herb of most effectua 
power, 

Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husbani 
for oneself. 


1 /nrftt ; Soma. The Orderer : disposer and arranger of the universe, 

"i Bolt : the VashatkAra, or sacrificial exclamation, it to the priests whs 
the thunderbolt is to Indra. 

3 I find this and the following stanza unintelligible. Ahtpiva in othe 
plac*-'8 is the name of a demon ; but the meaning here is uncertain. 
thcie i« no substantive to d)fd srKsu, ‘ these his own,’ in the feminine gender. 

4 Whit moves upon a hundred wheeli : fatiohakram. : * the beatower o 
many boons.’ — Wilson. 

5 Dwelling of the juice i the Soma-plant, which the Falcon brought froij 
heaven. See IV, 26 and 27. 

6 It : or he ; Indu or the Soma juice. , . . 

Prof. Qraasmann places this hymn in his Appendix as being in hw opw ^ 

made up of fragments. Ho con8ider< Ahtsuva (stanza .3) to be * the arc 
Kri^nu,’ of IV 27. 8 and other places, wlio gum^ the celestial Soma, an 
•t^ of * cows ’ he understands * wives.’ 

The hymn Is a spell to rid a jealous wife of a more favoured ^ 
I[lt8ht is Indrfint, the Consort of Indra. 

1 Thit pUnt : said to be the PfitA, probal 
Hcmandifolia), a climbing plant pMSessing 


i)Iy identical with TA|W ( yPl 
various mediciaiapmo«rti"’ ■ 



TEE RIQVEDA. 


nruN 146 .] 


580 


2 Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious 

plant, 

Blow thou the rival wife away, and make my husband only mine. 

3 Stronger am I, 0 Stronger One, yea, mightier than the mightier; 
And she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames. 

4 Her very name I utter not : she takes no pleasure in this man. 
Far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away. 

5 I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also art victorious : 

As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellow-wife. 

6 I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a 

stronger spell. 

As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirit speed to me, 
hasteu like water on its w.iy. 

HYMN CXLVI. Aranyam, 

Goddess of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight, 
How is it that thou seekest not the village? Art thou not afraid? 

2 What time the grasshopper replies and swells the shrill cicala’s 

voice. 

Seeming to sound with tinklingbells, the Lady of the Woodexults. 

3 And, yonder, cattle seem to graze, what seems a dwelling-place 

appears : 

Or else at eve the Lady of the Forest seems to free the wains. 

4 Here one is calling to his cow, another there hath felled a tree : 
At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath 

screamed. 

5 The Goddess never slays, unless some murderous enemy ap- 

proach. 

Maneatsof savoury fruit and then takes, even as he wills, his rest. 
® Thy $piHt : tha husband’H. 

The deity, Aranyftnt, is the tutelary Goddess of the forest and wildernees. 

2 Ora$»hopper cicala : the chiokchika la aaid to be a little creature that 

ehtcht: and the vrithdravd is said to be a sort of cricket. Others take 
wem to be birds of some unascertained kind. 

^0(Utlc teem to grate : deer feeding in the glades. What teem a dwelling- 
4 bower of branches and creepers, 

ootinda are heard as of a cowman calling bis cattle, or of a woodman at 
iwta f * imagine the thousund strange sounds and delusions which 

^ ®**®®®pa88 the solitary hstener of an evening in the darkening forest.’ — 
Ragozin, Vedic India (Story of the Nations), p. 272. 
he to Sr^^*** * Gie text has only anyrfit, ‘another,’ by which, aocord- 

jA. ^»yana, a tira or robber is meant. Prof. Ludwig suggests that the 
should be Aanjfah, ‘ one who is destined to be killed.’ The hymn has 
ihs “J*'*** Textif V. p. 423 ; and by the authors »f 



5»0 tbs RYmS OP [BOOK X, 

6 Now have I praised the Forest Queen, sweet-scented, redolent 
of balm. 

The Mother of all sylvan things, who tills not but hath stores 
of food. 

HYMN CXLVII. Indra. 

I TRUST in thy first wrathful deed, 0 Indra, when thou slewest 
Vritra and didst work to profit man ; 

What time the two world-halves fell short of thee in might, 
and the earth trembled at thy force, 0 Thunder-armed. 

2 Thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer Vritra, 

O Blameless One, with heart that longed for fame. 

Heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey, thee in all 
sacrifices worthy of renown. 

3 God Much-invoked, take pleasure in these princes here, who, 

thine exalte rs, Maghavan, have come to wealth. 

In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the Strong foi 
sons and progeny and riches undisturbed. 

4 That man shall find delight in well-protected wealth whose 

care provides for him the quick-sought joyous draught. 
Bringing oblations, strengthened, Maghavan, by thee, he swift 
ly wins the spoil with heroes in the fight. 

5 Now for our band, 0 Maghavan, when jauded, make ampli 

room with might, and grant us riches. 

Magician thou, our Varuna and Mitra, deal food to us, ( 
Wondrous, as Dispenser. 

HYMN CXLVIII. 

When we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, aii( 
when, Most Valorous ! we have won the booty. 

Bring us prosperity, as each desires it : under thine own pro 
tection may we conquer. 

2 Sublime from birth, raayst thou 0 Indra, Hero, with S6ry 

overcome the Daaa races, , 

As by a fountain’s side, we bring the Soma that lay concealec 
close-hidden in the waters. 

3 Answer the votary’s hymns, for these thou knowest, cravin 

the Rishis’ prayer, thyself a Singer. 

May we be they who take delight in Somas ; these with swe 
food for thee, 0 Chariot-rider. ^ 

5 Prince* : the Sflrii, the wealthy insti tutors of the sacrifice., 
thee, the mighty Indra. 

3 These with twut food : 'these (praises are offered) with aawifirial 

Wilson. 



[rM.V 149 .] 


rzr^ RIGVEDA, 


m 

4 These holy prayers, 0 Tndra, have I sung thee : grant to the 

men the strength of men, thou Hero. 

Be of one mind witli those in whom thou joyest : keep thou* 
the singers safe and their companions. 

5 Listen to Prithi s call, heroic Indra, and be thou lauded by 

the hymns of Venya, 

Him who Itath sung thee to thine oil-rich dwelling, whose roh 
ling bangs have sped thee like a torrent. 

HYMN CXLIX. Savitar. 

Savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and made heaven 
stedfast where no prop supported. 

Savitar milked, as 'twere a restless courser, air, sea bound fast 
to what no foot had trodden. 

2 Well knoweth Savitar, 0 Child of Waters, where ocean, firmly 

^ fixt, o’erfliowed its limit. 

Thence sprang the world, from that uprose the region : thence 
heaven s[^read out and the wide earth expanded. 

3 Then, with a full crowd of Immortal Beings, this other realm 

came later, high and holy. 

First, verily, Savitar^s strong-pinioned Eagle was born : and 
he obeys his law for ever. 

4 As warriors to their steeds, kine to their village, as fond milk- 

giving cows approach their youngling, 

As man to wife, let Savitar come downward to us, heaven^s 
bearer, Loid of every blessing. 

5 Like the Angirasa Hiranyastdpa, I call thee, Savitar, to this 

achievement : 

So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch for thee 
as for the stalk of Sorna. 


4 Companion* ; or, dependents, 

5 PfiihVt call : the invocation of Prithn, the Rishi of the hymn, according 
‘S&yaoa. Prof. Ludwig suggests that Prithu’s wife is intended. Venya: 
nthl, son of Vena. 

what no foot had trodden, atHrte: Ho the indestructible (ether).’— 

"ilion, 

} : identified by SfiyanaVith Tfirkehya, brother of Garuda, who brought 

® Soma from the Moon at Savitar’s command. 

5 4)»ptra#a.- a descendant of the Angirases. Achievement: vSje: food, 

_ oniing to SAyapa, i. e, oblation. Lauding ; drehm : or, I, Archan, honour- 
K tuee to win thy favour. 



TffS HYMNS OF 


l^OOK X, 




HYMN CL. Agni. 

Thou, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kindled for the 
Gods. 

With the Adityas, Rudras, Vasns, come to ns ; to show us 
vour come to ns. 

2 Come hither and accept with joy this sacrifice and hymn of ours, 

0 kindled God, we mortals are invoking thee, calling oil theo 
to show us grace. 

3 I laud thee JatavCvlas, thee Lord of all blessings, with my song, 
Agni, bring hitherward the Gods whose Laws we love, wh.se 

Laws we love, to show us grace. 

4 Agui the God was made the great High-Priest of Gods, Rish 

have kindled Agni, men of mortal mould. 

Ag.ii I invoeate for winning ample wealth, kindly disposed f 
winning wealth. 

5 Atri and Bharadv&ja and Gavishthira, Kanva and Trasadasy 

in our fight he helped. 

On Agni calls Vasishtha, even the household priest, tl)e hous 
hold priest to win his grace. 

HYMN CLI. Fa. 

By Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith ^ oblation offered i 
We celebrate with praises Faith npon the height of happine 

2 Bless thou the m.in who gives, 0 Faith ; Faith, bless the m 

who fain would give. 

Bless thou the liberal worshippers ; bless thou the word tl 
I have said. 

3 Fven as the Deities maintained F.uth in the mighty Asnras 
So make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal w 

shippers. 

4 Guarded by V^yu, Gods and men who sacrifice draw near 

Faith. 

Man winneth Faith by yearnings of the heart, and opulei 
by Faith. __ 

1 Though kindled: although thou art already burning frwh fire is addec 
thee. To $hote ue favour: mrdikdga: this play upon the Riahi’s nameMp 
ja repeated in each atanea. 

The Riahi is Sraddh4 (Faith) of the family of K4ma (Love). ^ , 

1 Upon the height of happineea : * (who ia seated) ou Bhag» « » 
Wilson. . , 

3 Aiuras: the primeval Aryan Gods, Dyaus, Vanina, and some Pin • 
were venerated by Indra and other Indo- Aryan deities of * 

4 Ouarded by Vdyu : the meaning is not clear. 


/fl/.v 154.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


5D3 


5 Faith in the early morning, Faith at noond ly will we invocate, 
Faith at the setting of the Sun. 0 Faith, endow ua with belief. 

HYMS CLII. Indra. 

A MIGHTY Governor art thou, Wondrous, Destroyer of the foe, 
Whose frien I iy never done to death, and never, never overcome. 

2 Lord of the dan, who brings us bliss, Strong, Warrior, Slaver 

of the fiend, 

May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who gives uspeace. 

3 Drive llikshasas and foes away, break I lum in pieces Vritra’s jaws; 
0 Vritra-sUying Indra, quell the fueman’s wrath who threat- 
ens us. 

4 0 Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge ns : 
Send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do us injury, 

5 Baffle the foeman’s plan, w'ard off his weapon who would con- 

quer US. 

Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his murdering 
dart afar. 

HYxMN CLII I. Indra. 

Swaying about, the Active Ones came nigh to Indra at his birth. 
And shared his great heroic might. 

2 Based upon strength and victory and power, 0 Indra is thy birth : 
Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed. 

3 Thou art the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread the firma- 

ment : 

Thou hast with might upheld the heavens. 

4 Thou, Indra, bearest in thine arms the lightning that accords 

with thee, 

Whetting thy thunderbolt with might. 

^ Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in thy might : 
Thou hast pervaded every place. 

HYMN CLIV. New Life. 

For some is Soma purified, some sit by sacrificial oil : 

To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to those let 
him depiirt. 

^ Active One$: the Water-Goddeasea may be meant. The Consorts of 
according to SAyuna. 

Miijhijf One : or, ‘ 0 Bull, thou art a Bull indeed.’ ‘Thou, 0 hero, 
‘indeed a hero’.-MsX MUller.* 

^^yunituf: or, praise-song, hymn. SAyana explains artaw hereby itur 
thy laudable or adorable thunderbolt. 

this funeral hymn » Yaml, sister of Yarna. 

^^tkoae let hhn dtnart : let the snirit of the dead Ro to the realm of the 



594 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK ^ 

'1 Invincible through Fervour, those whom Fervour hath ad 
vanned to heaven, 

Who showed great Fervour in their lives,— even to those le 
him depart. 

a I'he heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives awa) 
Or who give guerdon thousandfold, — even to those let hii 
depart. 

4 Yea, the first followersof Law, Law’s pure and holy strengtheneri 
The Fathers, Yama 1 Fervour-moved,— even to those let hii 

depart. 

5 Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who protci 

the Sun, 

The Rishis, Yamal Fervour-moved,— even to those let hi 
depart. . 

HYMN CLV. Va..ou 

Akayi, one-eyed limping hag, fly, ever-screeching, to the hill 
We frighten thee away with these, tlie heroes ot Sirimbitha. 

2 Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of each gen 

Go sharp-homed Brahmanaapati and drive Arayi far away. 

3 Yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the river 

SerlTt’Thou thing with hideous jaws, tnd go thou far aw 

4 Wbenl^Toui with secret stain and spot, ye hastened onward 

the breast, - 

All Indra’s enemies were slam and passed away like fro 

and foam. — 

\Zmed. to the Fathers who receive Seringa So™ 3““ 

tPi- MetUh ■ according to SAyana, honey, which le offered to , 

'‘"o literally, warmth, heat; religious dervour, secetia 

by Prof. Zimioer, Altinditehei Ltbtny p. 41o. 

The subject or object of the hymn is the 

1 Ardyt : ‘ the stingy ; ’ one of a cl w of roslevolTOt gthew 

ing : according to Sftyana’s eaplanation "rfSi of the by* 

«d with D4niis, Dtoavas, or demons. ^inmhgAa . the fits 

a S/ugrp-komtd.- aimed with piercing rays of W - ^ }„ 

4 The meaning of this stanza la eot clear. Ma^HradMn 9 
iay/lfvoh are difficult words that do not occur again. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


595 


YMN 157.] 

, These men have led about the cow, have duly carried Agni 
round, • 

And raised their glory to the Gods. Who will attack them 
with success ? 

HYMN CLVI. Agni. 

Let songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race, 

And we will win each prize through him. 

\ Agni, the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves with help 
from thee, — 

That send us for the gain of wealth. 

I 0 Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine: 

Oil thou the socket, turn the wheel. 

t 0 Agni, thou hast made the Sun, Eternal Star, to mount the 

8ky, 

Bestowing light on living men. 

) Thou, Agni, art the people’s light, best, dearest, seated in 
thy shrine : 

Watch for the singer, give him life. 

HYMN CLVII. Viavedevas. 

We will, with Indra and all Gods to aid us, bring these exist- 
ing worlds into subjection, 

! Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra form to- 
gether with Adityas. 

i With the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra be 
Protector of our bodies. 

i As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered the 
Asuras, keeping safe their Godlike nature, 

> Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked 
about them on their vigorous Godhead. 


,5 Tkete men : the text has only inU, ‘ theBO.’ According to Siyana, the 
*vedeva8 are meant, who have brought back the stolen cattle. But the 
hrence is probably to the sacrifice which the prieets are performing. 


2 The dart ; ‘ that army.’— Wilaon. 

^ ^rn the whtel : I adopt the reading of the SAmaveda, pavim, instead of 
According to the text, the rendering would be : * Balm heaven and 
the Pani hence. * 

first three veniee of this hymn were recited at the Asyamedha or Horse- 

I explains the second half of the stanza differently * then (men) 
® ® around them the swift descending rain.' — Wilson. 



m 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOKx, 


HYMN CLVIIL SQrya 

MAYSdrya guard us out of heaven, and Vata from the firmament 
And Agni from terrestrial spots. ’ 

2 Thou Savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations, be thou 

pleased : 

From falling lightning keep us safe. 

3 May Savitar the God, and may Parvata also give us sight : 
May the Creator give us sight. 

4 Give siglit unto our eye, give thou our bodies sight that they 

may see : 

May we survey, discej^'u this world. 

5 Thus, Surya, may we look on thee, on thee most lovely to behold, 
See clearly with the eyes of men. 

HYMN CLIX. SacbJ Paulomi. 

Yon Sun hath mounted up, and this my liappy fate hat’’ 
mounted high. 

1 knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband for mine owi 

2 I am the banner and the head, a mighty arbitress am I : 

I am victorious, and my Loru shall be submissive to my will 

3 My Sons are slayers of the foe, my Daughter is a ruling Queen 
I am victorious : o’er my Lord my song of4riumph is sinrem 

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious an 

most high, — 

This have I offered, 0 ye Gods, and rid me of each rival wife 

5 Destroyer of the rival wife, Sole Spouse, victorious, conquero 
The others’ glory have I seized as 'twere the wealth of weak' 

Dames. 

6 I have subdued as conqueror these rivals, these my fellow-wive 
That I may hold imperial sway over this Hero and the folk. 

HYMN CLX. Indr 

Taste this strong draught enriched with offered viands : wil 
all thy chariot here unyoke thy Coursers. 

Let not those other sacrificers stay thee, Indra ; these juice 
shed for thee are ready. ' 

1 Ovt of heaven : ‘ from (foe» dwelling in) heaven.’ — WiUon. 

3 The Creator : Dhfttar. 


§achl Pauloml, called also Indr^nl, the Consort of Indra, is also the R)*!* 
of the hymn. ' Literally, this is a song of exultation by ^ichi over her 
wives ; but locAi means also an “ act,” ” exploit,” and this hymn is metAph®*’ 
cally the praise of Indra' t glorious acta.’— Wilson. 



nruN 161.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


597 


2 Thine is the j nice effused, thine are the juices yet to be pressed : 

our resonant songs invite thee. , 

0 India, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who 
knowest all and drink the Soma. 

3 Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him with yearn- 

ing heart and spirit, — 

Never doth lodra give away his cattle : for him he makes the 
lovely Soma famous. 

1 He looks with loving favour on the mortal who, like a rich 

man, pours for him the Soma. 

Maghavan in his bended arm supports him ; he slays, unasked, 
the men who hate devotion. 

5 Wo call on thee to come to us, desirous of goods and spoil, of 
cattle, and of horses. 

For thy new love and favour are we present : let us invoke 
thee, Indra, as our welfare. 

HYMN CLXI. Iijdra. 

Fob life I set thee free by this oblation from the unknown 
decline and from Consumption ; 

Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from 
hfcr, 0 Indra, thou and Agni. 

2 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought very 

near to death already, 

Out of Destruction’s lap again I bring him, save him for life 
to last a hundred autumns. 

3 With hundred-eyed oblation, bimdred-autumned, bringing a 

hundred lives, have I restored him, 

That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe to the 
farther shore of all misfortune. 

1 Live, waxing in thy strength, a hundred autumns, live through 
a hundred springs, a hundred winters. 

Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brihaspati, Savi- 
tar yield him for a hundred ! 

^ f)r. Qaedicke (Areusativ m Veda, p. 127) tran«lat«8 Pftdaa 1—3 of the 
tauza differently ; der wird von ihm erspaht, der, obvohl reich, ihm keineu 
presat, den holt der machtige heraus aua dem Winkel (Versteck). 

According to the Index the subject of the hymn U the cure of the disease 
®^j«yRkshma (Consumption or Atrophy). 

^ ^^^nown decline : some insidious disease, differing from R&jayakshma. 
liJ^^P®» Prof. Zimmer sug^ts, hypertrophy and atrophy are the two 
intended. See AlU^itchet Leben, p. 377. The grasping dmon : 
y from grah, to seise ; a female spirit wno seises men and kills themt 

c hundt'^A • VAAM 



598 THE HYMNS OF [^OOJT ’ 

5 So have I found and rescued thee : thou hast returned 
youth renewed. 

Whole in thy members ! I have found thy sight and all th 
life for thee. 

HYMN CLXIV. Dmm-char. 

Avaunt, thou Master of the mind ! Depart, and vanish far awaj 
Look on Destruction far from hence. The live man's mind i 
manifold. 

2 A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they obtain. 
Bliss with Vaivasvata they see. The live man’s mind seek 

many a place. 

3 If by address, by blame, by imprecation we have committei 

sin, awake or sleeping, 

All hateful acts of ours, all evil doings may Agni bear away t 
distant places. 

4 When, Indra, Brahmanaspati, our deeds are wrongful ai: 

unjust, 

May provident Angiraaa prevent our foes from troubling i 

5 We have prevailed this day and won : we are made free fro 

sin and guilt. 

Ill thoughts, that visit us awaka or sleeping, seize the ma 
we hate, yea, seize the man who bateth us. 

HYMN CLXV. * Viivedev 

Gods, whatsoe’er the Dove came hither seeking, sent to us ! 
the envoy of Destruction, 

For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. Well 
it with our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harmle 
bird, ye Gods, within our dwelling. 

May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may tl 
Missile borne on wings avoid us. 

For Hymns CLXIL, CLXIIL, and CLXXXIV. see Appendix. 

1 Master of the mind : the spirit of evil dreams is addressed. Ecsin 
tion : the Goddess Nirriti. Manifold : * attentive to various objects, w 
soon diverted from any regard to evil dreams.’— Wilson. 

2 Vaivatvala : Tama, the son of VivasvAn, who presides over evil area 

S&yan>*^. . •.} 

4 Ingirasa: according to Siyana, Varuna, the wise God who ** 
connected with his worshippers the Angirases, may be intended, ot. 3 
of the Atharva-reda, VI. 45. 8. ^ h 

1 A dove, r^rded as an ill-omened bird imd the messenger of ^ 

flown into the house. Similarly, in North- Lincolnshire, *If » ^ 

sitting on a tree, or comes into the house, or from bein^ wild «ua / 
oomes tame, it is a sign of death.’ — Notee omd QuerUit viii. p. oo£. 

2 MitiiU borne on winot : the ill-omened bird. 



r^N 166.] TjiJS KIGVEDA. 599 

)Let not the Arrow that hath wings distract us: beside the 
fire-place, on the hearth it settles. 

May it bring welfare to nur men and cattle; here let the 
Dove, ye Gods, forbear to harm us. 

1 The screeching of the owl is ineffective; and when beside the 
fire the Dove hath settled, 

To him who sent it hither as an envoy, to him be reverence 
paid, to Death, to Yama. 

) Diive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses: rejoiciiK^, 
bring ye hither food and cattle, 

Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Let the swift 
bird fly forth aud leave us vigour. 

HYMN CLXVL* Sapatnani?auam. 

Make me a bull among my peers, make me my rivals’ con- 
queror : 

Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord of kine. 

! 1 am ray rivals’ slayer, like Indra unwounded and unhurt, 
And all these enemies of miue are vanquished and beneath 
my feet. 

1 Here, verily, I bind you fast, as the two bow-ends with the string. 
Press down these men, 0 Lord of Speech, that they may 
humbly speak to me. 

I Hither I came as conqueror with mighty all-effecting power, 
And 1 have mastered all your thought, your synod, aud your 
holy work. 

5 May I be highest, having gained your strength in war, your 
skill in peace : my feet have trodden on your heads. 

Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the 
water croak, as frogs from out the water croak. 

HYMN CLXVII. Indra. 

This pleasant meath, 0 iadra, is effused for thee : thou art 
Ihe ruling Lord of beaker and of juice. 

Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons : thou, having 
^ glowed with Fervour, wonnest heavenly light. 

5 With holy veriet : Sftyana takes richS mlh itAyamdndh, understood 
*^4i8ed) by our hymn (0 Gods). 

subject is the Destruction of Rivals. 

Bishis are VisvAmitra an<! Jamadagni. Stanziis 1—3 are spoken by the 
and 4 by Indra. 

'Wiag glowed with Fervour : * performing arduous penance.’ — Wilson. 

4 Favour personified. 



600 THE HYMyS OF [BOOK I 

'1 Li't \i3 oall StkiM to li'oations here etFused,- winner of light wh 
joveth in the patent juice. 

Mark well tliws sacrifice of ours end come to us: we pray t 
Maghuvau the Vanquisher of hosts. 

3 By royal Soma’s and l)y Vanina’s decree, under Brihasputi’ 
.iiid Anumatrs guard, 

Th s day by thine authority, 0 Maghavan, Maker, Dispose 
tiiou ! have i enjoyed the jars. 

' 4 I, t > 0 , urged on, have had jny portion, in the bowl, and as firs 
l^rince I drew forth this my hymn of praise. 

When with the prize I came unto the flowing juice, 0 Visva 
initra, Janiadagni, to your liome. 

HYMN CLXVni. VAyi, 

0 THE Wind s chariot, 0 its power and glory ! Crashing itgue 
and hath a voice of tl Hinder. 

It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and as itmovci 
the dust of earth is scattered. 

2 Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come to hiraai 
dames to an assembly. 

Ijorno on his car with these for his attendants, the Godspeeds 
fortii, the universe's Monarch. ^ 

3. 'fravelling on the paths of air’s mid-region, no singloday dotl 

, he take rest or slumber. 

Holy and earlicst-born, Friend of the waters, where did h( 
spring and fiom what region came he? 

4 Germ of the world, the Deities’ vital spirit, this God moves evei 
as his will inclines him. 

His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let us adore 
this Wind with our oblation. 

HYMN CT.XIX. Cow« 

May the witi'i lilow upon our Cows with healing: may thif 
(;at herbage full of vigorous juices. 

May tliey drink waters rich in life and fatness: to food that 
rnove.s on feet be gr.'icioiis, Rudra. 

2 Like-coloured, various-hued, or siiuile-coloured, whose name^ 
tiirough sacrifice are known t«> Agui, 

2 'They : the Waters Prof. Max Muller iaierprets differently. See 
trauslation, Vedic Hymm, 1. 449. 

1 Pood that moves on feet ; the wandering miK*h*cow#. But see Bergaig®^ 
III. 159. 



THE RjavnTtA. 


601 


//}'j/V 171-1 

Whom the Vtigirases produced by vouchsfife to 

these, Pai jauya, great protection. 

3 Those wlio have offered to the Gods their bodies, whose varied 

forms are all well known to Soma, — 

Those grant us in our cattle-pen. 0 Indra, with their full streams 
of milk and plenteous offspring. 

4 Prajapati, bestowing these upon me, one minded with all Gods 

and with the Fathers, 

H-ith to our cow-pen brought auspicious cattle : so may we own 
tlie off^piing they will bear us. 

HYMN CLXX. Surya. 

May the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled meath, 
giving the ^ucrihee’s lord iininjuied life; 

He who, w’ind-nrged, in person guards our offsprntg well, hath 
nourished them with food and shines o’er many a land. 

I Radiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning strength, 
Truth based upon the statute that supports the heavens, 
He rose, a light, that kills Vritras and enemies, best slayer 
of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes. 

1 This light, the best of lights, supreme, all-conquering, winner 

of riches, is exalted with high laud. 

All-lighting, radiant, mighty as the Sun to see, he spreadeth 
wide unfailing victory and strength, 
t Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast attained 
heaven’s lustrous realm. 

By thee were brought together all existing things, possessor 
of all Godhead, All-effecting God. 

HYMN CLXXI. Indra. 

For IWa sake who pressed the juice, thou, Iiidra, didst protect 
his car, 

And hear the Soma-giver’s call. 

2 Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving 

combatant, 

And sought the Soma-pourer’s home. 

' — X — — 

^ P^'ajdpati hath brought: ‘may Prajdpati bring,’ according to SAyana 

here meaning ^body.’ Combatant: mahhdtpa: according to the 
ptwi citp^ Sftyana. Sacrifice pernonified, whose head as he attempted to 
Luiuitn foim from the Ouda. was cut off bv ludra. See WUSOQ. 



602 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X 

3 Venya, that mortal man, hast thou, for Astrabudhna th( 

devout, 

0 Indra, many a time set free. 

4 Bring, Indra, to the east again that San who now is iu thi 

west, 

Even against the will of Gods. 

HYMN CLXXII. Dawr 

With all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with ful 
udders follow on thy path. 

2 Come with kind thoughts, most liberal, rousing the warrior'i 

hymn of praise, with bounteous ones. 

3 As nourishers we tie the thread, and, liberal with our bounty 

oSer sacrifice. 

4 Dawn drives away her Sister’s gloom, and, through her ex 

cellence, makes her retrace her path. 

HYMN CLXXIII. The King, 

Bk with us ; I have choseu thee : stand stedfast and im- 
movable. 

Let all the people wish for thee : let not thy kingship fall away. 

2 Be even here ; fall not away ; be like a mountain unremoved. 
Stand stedfast here like Indra’s self, and Mold the kingiship iu 

thy grasp, 

3 This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by strong obla- 

tion’s power. 

May Soma speak a benison, and Brahmanaspati, on him. 

4 Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also are these 

hills. 

Stedfast is all this living world, and stedfast is this King of men. 

5 Stedfast, may Varuna the Kin 2 , stedfast, the God Brihaspati' 
Stedfast, may Indra, stedfast, too, may Agni keep thy sted 

fast reign. 

3 Venya : said to be Prithu, the eon of Vena. See X. 148. 5. Astrabudhna 
the name of a man not mentioned elsewhere, the son of Astrabudhna. btt 
free: Cp. L 24. 15. 

2 Moit liberal : Sdrya appears to be meant. Rousing the mirun'y 
of praise: jdraydninakhah : the meaning is uncertain bringing t 
sacrifice to completion,’ according to S&yana. m 

B As Hoarishers : because sacrifice brings the food that nourishes life. 
thread: of sacHfice. 

4 Her Sitter's gloom : the darkness of Night. 

The subject is the benediction of a newly 'elected king. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


603 


jYMH 176.] 


6 On constant Soma let us think with constant sacrificial gift. 

And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee 
alone. 

HYMN CLXXTV. The King. 

With offering for success in fight whence Indra was victorious. 
With this, 0 Brahmanaspati, let us attain to royal sway. 

2 Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities, 
Withstand the man who menaces, withstand the man who 

angers us. 

3 Soma and Savitar the God have made thee a victorious King : 

All elements have aided thee, to make thee general conqueror. 

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and 

most high,— . 

This have 1 offered, Gods ! and hence now, verily, am rivalless. 

5 Slayer of rivals, rivalless, victorious, with royal sway, 

Over these beings may I rule, may I be Sovran of the folk. 

HYMN CLXXV. PresB-atoneg. 

May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you according to the 
Law : 

Be harnessed to the shafts, and press. 

2 Stones, drive calamity away, drive ye away malevolence : 

Make ye the Cows our medicine, 

3 Of one accord the upper Stones, giving the Bull his bull-like 

strength, 

Look down with pride on those below. 

4 May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir yoa as ‘Law commands 

for him 

Who sacrifices, pouring juice. 

HYMN CLXXVI. Agni. 

With hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Ribhus’ 
mighty deeds 

Wlio, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as twere a mo- 
ther cow. 

1 With ofenngfor luccat : ‘ By the Mivarta oblstion.’-Wilaon. 

» Cp. X, 168. 4. 

1 Tk,h^; or ohariot-poree; h'^ meaning the guiding arms of the 

^3'Kim; or, the rayt of morning, at whoee approach robbers and de- 
>0118 fly, 

^ Soma. 



604 THE HYMNS OP [BOOiC X 

2 forth the God with song divine, bring Jatavedas hithei 
ward, 

To bear onr gifts at once to heaven. 

3 Ho here, a God-devoted Priest, led forward comes to sacrifice 
Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himsell 

the vva^. 

4 ThisAgni rescues from distress, as ’twerefromthe Immortal Race 
A God yet mightier than strength, a God who hath been mad 

for life. 

HYMN CLXXVIL MAyftbh.da 

The sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the Bin 
adorned with all an Asiira’s magic might. 

Sages observe him in the ocean's inmost depth : the wise dis 
posers seek the station of his rays. 

2 The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit : erst the Gan 

dharva in the womb pronounced it : 

And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant, 
heavenly-bright invention. 

3 I saw the Herdsman, him who never resteth, approaching an 

departing on his pathways. 

He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, within tli 
worlds continually travels, ^ 

HYMN CLXXVIII. T4rk«hy 

This very mighty one whom Gods commission, the Conquen 
of cars, ever triumphant, 

Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarkshj 
for our weal will we call hither. 

Likt a car : perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggeata, like a chariot which, i 
the diiver is concealed from sight by the canopy, eeetna to find its way witi 
out a guide, , . . u 

4 Ai 'twerc from the Immortal Race : ‘ aa (well as) from peril caused by tt 

immortals .'—Wilson. Stanswi 2—4 are recited at the Agni-pranayana, ti 
ceremony of cai tying the aacrificisl fire to the altar used for animw su 
Soma aacnficea. See iiaug'a Aitareya Brdhmariamt II. 60, 01. 

The aubject ia M&y&bheda, ‘the diacerument of or illusion (d 

caiiae of material creation).’ — Wilson. ^ , 

1 The Bird : the Sun, In the ocean's inmost depth : in the 
according to SAyana. Wise disposers : ‘ ordainers (of solar worship). 

2 Speech : or song ; the morning song of the Sun -Bird. 

the breath of life, according to SAyapa. The ray of the Sun is Su 

3 This stanza has occurred before. Seel. 164. 31. The HerdsmMt: 

RtsUiK : or, stumbleth ; literally, sinks or falls down. 

1 Tdrkshya ; a personification of the Sun, ususlly described w » 
horse. Cp. I. 6. ^ 



FA^.V 180.J 


THE RJQVEDA. 


605 


I As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we ascend 
him as a ship for safety. 

Liko the two wide worlds, broad, deep, far-extended, may we 
be safe both when he comes and leaves you. 

1 He who with might the Five Lands hath pervaded, like Surya 

with his lustre, and the waters, — 

His strength wins hundreds, thousands : none avert it, as the 
young maid repelleth not her lover. 

HYMN CLXXIX. Indra. 

Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra’s seasonable share. 

If it be ready, offer it ; unready, ye have been remiss. 

2 Oblation is prepared : come to us, Indra; the Sun hath travel- 

led over half his journey. 

Friends with their stores are sitting round thee waiting like 
lords of clans for the tribe’s wandering chieftain. 

3 Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy ; well-dressed, I 

fancy, is this recent present. 

Drink, Indra, of the curd of noon’s libation with favour, 
Thunderer, thou whose deeds are mighty. 

HYMN CLXXX. Indra. 

0 MUCH-INVOKED, thou hast subdued thy foemen : tby might is 
loftiest ; here display thy bounty. 

In thy right hand, 0 Indra, bring us treasures : thou art the 
Lord of rivers filled with riches. 

2 Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast 
approached us from the farthest distance. 

Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, 0 Indra, crush thou 
the foe and scatter those who hate us. 

^hou, mighty Indra, sprangest into lieing as strength for 
lovely lordship o’er the people. 

Thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the 
Gods thou gavest room and freedom. 

^ .* I adopt, with a modification, Professor Pischel’s interpretation 

°<iifilcult words yavatim ni fdrydm. See Vedische Studien, I. p. 106. 

is twice cooked ; first matured in the cow’s udder and then 

rel the hynnn was employed in the Dadhigharma 

ilk Soma juice was offered mixt with curd or sour iQspi.seated 

‘ VIII. 2. 9, and IX 11. 6. Sec Uillcbrandt, F. .V, I. 321. 



THE HYMNS OF {BOOR X. 

HYMN CLXXXI. Vtavedeva,, 


VA8I8HTHA mastered the Rathantara, took it from radiant 
Dh&tar, Savitar, and Vishnu, 

Oidation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by the names of 
Saprathas and Prathas. 

2 These sages found what lay remote and hidden, the sacrifice’s 

loftiest secret essence. 

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Agni, Bharad- 
vaja brought the Brihat. 

3 They found with mental eyes the earliest Yajus, a pathway to 

the Gods, that had descended. 

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Sfirya di( 
these sages bring the Gharma. 

HYMN CLXXXII. Brihaspat 


BRiH.asPATi lead us safely over troubles, and turn his evi 
thought against the sinner ; 

Repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacr 
ficer peace and comfort ! 

2 May Nariiaansa aid us at Prayija : blest# be our Anuyaja i 

invokings, , „ 

May be repel the curse, and chase ill-feeling, and give tl 
sacrificer peace and comfort. 

3 May he whose head is flaming burn the demons, haters 

prayer, so that the arrow slay them. 

May he repel the curse and chase ill-feeling, and give tlie sacri- 
ticer peace and comfort. __ 

~rZtkantara: one of the 

22 and 23 of ^R.gveda V 32 “ S&maveda ll. i. 


3 Yajul : eacriBcial prayers and formulas of the Yajurveoa 

warm libation of milk or other beverage. „ W is Dveo M 

2 ATardronsa: Agni. Fraydfa: part of the intr^uotory oeremoay •“ 

aomfsacrifice. B^taspati or Agni n 

3 He vhoit head is Jlaming: taparmirdhan . Bnhaspati 

Lightning. 



7 YMX 187.] 


THE EIGVEHA. 


cor 


HYMN CLXXXIII. The Saorificer, Etc. 

1 SAW thee" meditating in thv spirit what sprang from Fervour 
and hath thence developed. 

Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread in thine off^ 
spring, thou who cravest children. 

2 I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying that in due 

time thy body might be fruitful. 

Come as a youthful woman, rise to meet me : spread in thine 
offspring, thou who cravest children. 

3 In plants and herbs, in all existent beings I have deposited the 

germ of increase. 

All progeny on earth have I engendered, and sons in women 
who will be hereafter. 

HYMN CLXXXV. Aditi 

Great, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of Three Gods, 
Varuna, Mitra, Aiyaman. 

2 O’er these, neither at home nor yet abroad on pathways that 

are strange, 

The evil-minded foe hath power : 

3 Nor over him, the man on whom the Sons of Aditi bestow 
Kternal light that he may live. 

HYMN CLXXXVI. vayu. 

FiLLtNG our hearts with health and joy, may Vata breathe his 
l>alm on us : 

May he prolong our days of life. 

2 Thou art our Father, Vata, yea, thou art a Brother and a friend: 
So give us strength that we may live. 

1 The store of Amrit laid away yonder, 0 Vata, in thine home, — 
Give us thereof that we may live. 

HYMN CLXXXVII. Agui. 

To Agni send I forth my song, to him the Bull of all the folk : 
So may he bear us past our foes. 

file deities are the Sacrificer, hU Wife, and the Hotar-prieet. 

\ According to S&yaua, the wife is the speaker of the first stanza, ^the 
hinftna or sacrificer of the second, and the Hotar-priest of the third, 
idwig considers Agni to be the speaker of the whole hymn. Whai sprang 
Ptrvow : the results of ardent devotion or tdpas. 

The Hotar-priest regards himself as the procreator of all living beinga 
r^ugh the efficacy of the ‘sacrifices which he performs ; matsddhytna ydgena 
^^^^yotpatteraham sarvajanaheturbhavdmi.^^jtkus^. 

}• ; chief and lord, as the indispensable household fire. 



608 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

2 Who from the distance far away shines brilliantly across the 

wastes : 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

3 The Bull with brightly-gleaming flame who utterly consumes 

the fiends : 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

4 Who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with 

his view : 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

5 Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region of the air : 
So may he bear us past our foes. 

HYMN CLXXXVITI. Agni, 

Now send ye Jativedas forth, send hitherward the vigorous 
Steed 

To seat him on our sacred grass. 

2 I raise the lofty eulogy of Jatavedas, raining boons, 

^V1th sages for his hero band. 

3 With flames of Jatavedas which carry oblation to the Gods 
May lie promote our .sacrifice. 

HYMN CLXXXIX. ^ Suij 

This spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the Mothei 
the east, 

Advancing to his Father heaven. 

2 Expiring when he draws his breath, she moves along the luci 

spheres : 

The Bull shines out through all the sky. 

3 Song is bestowed upon the Bird : it rules silpreme thronj 

thirty realms 

Throughout the days at break of morn. 


2 Acrots the waitci : as the fire that burns the junprle and prepares tl 
ground for cultivation. 

5 Jnfarthett region of the air : or beyond the firmament, as the Sun. 

Tkc deity is alternatively S&rpar&jfi!, the Serpent-Queen, Kadru, who 
also the Kiehi of the hymn. 

1 Thii Bpotted Bull ; the Sun. The Mother: Dann ^ 

■3 The Bird: the Sun. Hia morning song, representing prayer, 
through all the divisions of the world, the uumbei thirty being u«ed m 
iiiicly. Cf. I. 123 . 8. * 

1 Fram Fervour : from the ttipae. dev*'ti<>nal ardour or asceticism of ^ 

according to SAyan a But the meaning ho»e may be ' from warmth 

129. 3 and note. Thence; from that fervour, o r warmth. ^ 



r}XV 191.] 


THE RIGVEDA, 


609 


. ,.„™CXC. Creation. 

From Fervour kindled to its height Eternal Law and Truth 
were born : 

Tlioiice was the Night produced, and thence the billowy flood 
of sea arose. ^ 


0 From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was afterwards 
produced, 

Ordainer of the days and nights, Lord over all who close the 
eye. 

3 Dhatar, the great Creator, then formed in due order Sun and 
Moon. 

He formed in order Heaven and Earth, the regions of the air 
and light. ’ 


HYMN CXCI. 

Tiiou, mighty Agni, gatherest up all that is 
friend. 


Agni. 

precious for thy 


Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libation’s place. 
3 Assemble, speak together : let your minds be all of one accord, 
As ancient Cods unanimous sit down to their appointed share! 

3 The place is common, common the assembly, common the 
mind, so be their thought united. 

A common purpose do I lay before you, and worship with 
your general oblation. 


4 One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds of one 
accord. 

United be the thoughts of all that all may happily agree. 


The dfeity or subject of stanzas 2 - 4 is SaihjMnam, Agreetnent or Unani- 
■"ty in assembly. * 

3 Common the, assembly ; this sdmiti appears to have been a general aesem- 
Jy of the people on some import * >t oceasioD, such as the election of a Kintr 
'1- ifymns of ike Atkarva-vedaf VI. 64. 




APPENDIX. 


Page 466, Hymn LXL 

I subjoin a Latin version of stanzas 5 — 8, and borrow Wilson’s 
laiislation of stanza 9. 

5 Membrum suum virile, quod protentum fuerat, mas ille re- 

traxit. Rursus illud quod in juvenem tiliam sublatum fuerat, 
non aggressurus, ad se retrahit. 

6 Quiim jam in medio congressu, semiperfecto opere, amorem in 

puellam pater impleverat, ambo discedentes seminispaulum 
in terrae superficie in sacrorum sede effusum emiserunt. 

I Quum pater suam filiam adiverat, cum e^ congressus suura 
semen supra terram effudit. Turn Dii benigni precem 
(brahma) progenuerunt, et Vastoshpatim, legum sacrarum 
custodem, formaverunt. 

S Ille tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit ; tunc discedens 
pusillanimis hue profectus est. Quasi dextro pede claudus 
processit, ** inutiles fueruut illi mei complexus,” ita locutus. 
9 ‘ The fire, burning the people, does not approach quickly (by 
day) : the naked (Rdkskasas approach) not Agni by night ; 
the giver of fuel, and the giver of food, he, the upholder 
( of the rite), is born, overcoming enemies by his might.’ 


Tlie whole passage is difficult and obscure, and stanza 9 is unintelligible. 
With regard to the myth of Prajflpati and his daughter, Prof. Max Muller 
ys When Kum&rila is hard pressed by his opponents about the immoral- 
of his gods, he answers with all the freedom of a comparative my- 
“ It is fabled that PrajApati, the Lord of Creation, did violence to 
‘8 daughter. But what does it mean ? Praj&pati, the Lord of Creation, is 
oame of the sun, and he is called so, becauw he protects all cr^tures. 
Ii8 daughter Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he vvas in love 
dth her, this only means that, at sunrise, the sun runs after the dawn, the 
S being at the same time called the daughter of the sun, because she 
^8 when he approaches Mutory of Anc. Sans, Literature, pp. 629. 630. 
0. 8, TexU, IV. pp. 46, 47, where stanzas 4—7 are translated. 

^ ^<istothpatitn : VAsiothpati, the guardian of the house ; *the loi^ 

(of sacrifice). —Wilson. The word may be in apposition with brahma, 

«iyer. 

ihjkffu linn to BAvana. RAkshasas who consume like fire. 



612 


APPENDIX. 


Page 548, Hymn CVI. 

I borrow Wilsoii^s translation of the omitted stanzas. 

5 ‘You are like two pleasantly moving well-fed (hills) like Mitra 

and Varuna, the two bestowers of felicity, veracious, pos- 
sessors of infinite wealth, happy, like two horses plump with 
fodder, abiding in the firmament, like two rams (are you) to 
be nourished with sacrificial food, to be cherished (with 
oblations). 

6 ‘ You are like two mad elephants bending their forequarters 

and smiting the foe, like the two sons of Nitosa destroying 
(foes), and cherishing (friends) ; you are bright as two water- 
born (jewels), do you, who are victorious, (render) my decay- 
ing mortal body free from decay. 

7 ‘Fierce (Aswins), like two powerful (heroes), you enable this 

moving, perishable mortal (frame) to cross over to the olt- 
jects (of its destination) as over water ; extremely strong, 
like the Ribhus, your chariot attained its destination swift 
as the wind, it pervaded (everywhere), it dispensed riches, 

8 ‘ With your bellies full of the Soma, like two saucepans, preserv 

ers of wealth, destroyers of enemies, (you are) armed witr 
hatchets, moving like two flying (birdsjjiwith forms like th 
moon, attaining success through the mind, like two laudabl 
beings, (you are) approaching (the sacrifice).’ 

Page 598, Hymn CLXIT. 

May Agni, yielding to our prayer, the Rakshas-slayer, clriv 
away . 

The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring worat 

2 Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of thy flest 
The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe au( 

womb. 

3 That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, movi»i 

embryo, , . ... 

That which will kill the babe at birth,— oven this will we arivi 

far away. 

4 That which divides thy legs that it may lie between the m* 

ried pair, . . , fgj 

That penetrates and licks thy side, — tTOn this will 
minato. 

Th« subject is the Prevention of Abortion. The Rishi is Rakshohft ( 

of RAkshasM), son of BrahmA a eviUpirits 

SUnsaa 1, 2 are directed against diseases, and 8—6 against evil P 
attack women who are about to become mothers. 



APPENDIX. 


613 


5 What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, or of lord, 
And would destroy thy progeny,-— even this will we exterminate! 

6 That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and 

lies down by thee, 

And will destroy thy progeny, — even this will we exterminate. 
Page 598, Hymn CLXIII. 

From both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both thine ears 
and from thy chin. 

Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive thy malady 
away. 

2 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones 

and from the spine. 

From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy malady away. 

3 From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, from the 

heart, 

From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy malady away. 

4 From thighs, from kuee-caps, and from heels, and from the 

forepart of the feet, 

From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive thy malady 
away. 

5 From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, and from 

thy nails. 

From all thyself from top to toe, I drive thy malady away. 

6 From every member, every hair, disease that comes in everyjoint. 
From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away. 

Page 607, Hymn CLXXXIV. 

May Vishnu form and mould the womb, may Tvashtar duly 
shape the forms, 

Praj&pati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay the germ for thee. 

2 0 Siuivalt, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvati ; 

May the Twain Gods bestow the germ, the Asvins crowned 
with lotuses. 

3 That which the Asvins Twain rub forth with the attrition- 

sticks of gold, — 

That germ of thine we invocate, that in the tenth month thou 
mayst bear. 

The deity or subject is th^cure of Yaksbma or phthisis or consumption, 

2 Siniv^li : a lunar Goddess, who aids the birth of children. Cp. II. 32. 6. 
Verses 1 and 2 are incorporated in Atbarva-veda, V. 26, which is a charm 
' ecoompany the (Hrbh&&2aa ceremony to ensure or facilitate and bless 




THE HYMNS OP 




1 1 Hither, 0 friends, with newest song drive her who 
her milk : 

Loose her who never tunis away ; 


r^OOA’ Vj 

f'^clypout 


1 2 Who, for the host of Maruts bright with native sheen h 

shed immortal fame like milk ; > at 

Whom the im]x^tuous Maruts look upon with love, whom 
in splendour on their ways. ’ 

13 For BharadvAja she poured down in days of old 

The milch-cow yielding milk for all, and food that gives all 
nourishment. 


14 Your friend like Indra passing wise, with magic power lib 

Varuna. 

Like Aryaman joy-giving, bringing plenteous food like Vishni 
for my wish, 1 praise, 

15 Bright as the host of Maruts mighty in their roar. May tliei 

bring Puahan free from foes ; 

May they bring hither hundreds, thousands for our men 
may they bring hidden stores to light, and make wealtl 
easy to be found. 

1 6 Haste to me, Puahan, in thine ear, bright Deity ! I fain would 

speak : 

Most sinful is our foeraan's hate. 


17 Tear not up by the roots the KAkamblra tree : destroy tlwii 
all malignity. 

Let them not snare by day the neck of that Celestial Bird 
the Sun. 


18 Uninjured let thy friendship be, like the smooth surface of a 
skill, 


1 1 Who fi tdy pourn her milk : iabardwjhA ; the general name of the cow oi 
cowa milked at sacriHces. 

12 The sacrificial cow is here identified with Prisni, the mother of tb( 
Maruts. 

13 According to my version, which follows that of Professor Ludwig, 
Piisni should be the deity of this stanza. SAyana explains it cbllerently t 
Maruts, milk, etc. 

14 y'our friend ■ PQshan Pw my vieh : that I may obtain my wii»h; 
the distributioo of wealth,’ — Wilson. 

1 7 Ttu K ilcamlArn tree : acconling to SAyapa, kikamht’a means | 
‘ crow- bearer : ’ * with its progeny of cnjws.’ — Wilson It is H, 

name of some umbrageous tree, and in this place implies 
S^myu the Ahshi of the hymn with his many branches of sons and gnin a 

Ld them not mare: let not our enemies deprive us of the sunlight - the 
Ijeiug frequently called a bird, those who would deprive the speaKcr 
light of day are regarded as fowleia. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


615 


0HS 

flawless skin, containing curds, full to the mouth, contain- 
ing curds. 

9 For thou art high above mankind, in glory equal to the Gods. 
Therefore, 0 Pushan, look upon us in the fight : now help us 
as in days of old. 

•>0 May the kind excellence of him the Kind, loud Roarers! be 
our guide, 

ge it tlie God’s, 0 Maruts, or a mortal man’s who worships, 
ye impetuous Ones ! 

21 They whose high glory in a moment like the God, the Sun, 

goes round the space of heaven, 

The Maruts have obtained bright strength, a sacred name, 
strength that destroys the Vritras, strength Vritra-destroy- 
ing, excellent. 

22 Once, only once, the heaven was made, once, only once, tlie 

earth was formed. 

Once, only Prisni’s milk was shed : no second, after this, 
is born. 

HYMN XLIX. Vmedeva... 

I LAUD with newest songs the Righteous People, Mitra and 
Varuna who make us happy. 

bet them approach, here let them listen, — Agni, Varuna, 
Mitra, Lords of fair dominion. 

2 Him, to be praised at each tribe’s sacrifices, the Two young 

Matrons’ sober-minded Herald, 

The Son of Strength, the Child of Heaven, the signal of sacri- 
fice, red Agni will I worship. 

3 Unlike in form are the Red God’s two Daughters : one is the 

Sun’s, and stars bedeck the other. 

Apart, the Sanctifiers, in succession, come to the famed hymn, 
praised in holy verses. 

^ I with a lofty song call hither Vayu, all-bounteous, filler of 
his car, most wealthy. 

18 Containing curds ; ‘ Such a skill of curds, Sdgana says, is always carried 
in Ptls^han's chariot ’—Wilson. 

‘^0 The God's : Agni’s. 

E^rth, having once been made or brought forth, are peruia- 
l***^^' the mother of the Maruts, has once £'»r all given birth to her 

rood. second: fdrdkaji, host (of Maruts) is understood with anyah. 

Matrons : Heaven and Earth. The Child of Heaven : or 

nt Uyaua or Dyu. 

4 Tv/ f ‘‘"d Night 

t)i(. J- ‘V wealth to reward his worshipiiers. The prudent . 

uie wise worshipper. 



616 


THE HYUm OF 


{BOOK r/j 

Thou, Sage, with bright path, Lord of harnessed horses, imne 
tiious, promptly honourest the prudent ^ 

5 That chariot of the Asvins, fair to look on, pleaseth me well 

yoked with a thought, refulgent, 

AVherewith, Nasatyas, Chiefs, ye seek our dwelling, to give 
new strength to us and to onr children. 

6 Bulls of the Earth, O V&ta and Parjanya, stir up for us the 

regions of the water. 

Hearers of truth, ye, Sages, World-Supporters, increase his 
living wealth whose songs delight you. 

7 So may Sarasvati, the Heroes Consort, brisk with rare life, the 

lightning’s Child, inspire us. 

And, with the Dames accordant, give the singer a refuge unas- 
sailable and flawless. 

8 I praise with eloquuence him who guards all pathways. Ho, 

when his love impelled him, went to Arka. 

May he vouchsafe us gear with gold to grace it : may Pashar 
make each prayer of ours effective. 

9 Alay Herald Agni, fulgent, bring for worship Tvash^r adored 

in homes and swift to listen, 

Glorious, first to share, the life-bestower, the ever active God 
fair-armed, fair-handed. 

10 Rudra by day, Rudra at night we honour with these our songs 
the Universe’s Father. . 

Him great and lofty, blissful, undecaying let us call speciall; 
as the Sage impels us. 


6 BalU of the EiHh : or of Prifchivl a«i identified with Priani, VAta i 
another name of V\yu, the Wiiid-Qod ; and Parjanya is the Rain-clou 
personified. Hearers of truth : the Maruta are thus addressed, as making tru 
or realizing the prayer.s of men to which they listen. I follow SAyapa s iutei 
pretation of the second half of the stanza. 

7 The Hero's Consort : vtr tp itnt ; according to Silyana, she whose husban 
is the hero PrajApati, or, the protectress of heroes. The River-God Sarasva 
or Sarasvat is more usually considered to be the consort of Sarasvati, wh 
originally a River- Goddess, appears in this place in her later and present -da 
cliaracter of the Goddess of learning and eloquence. See note, borrowe 
from Muir, on I. 3 10. The Dames: GnAs, or Consorts of the Gods. , 

8 Him who guards all pathways : Pfishan, the special protector of 

and guardian of roads and paths. See I. 42. Arka : the Sun, to whom Pus i 
appears to have gone both as an envoy on behalf of the other Gods when S r 
was to be given in marriage, and as a suitor on his own account. Su^A, itm 
he remembered, chose the Asvins to be her husbands. See I. 116. 17. I fo j 
Professor Piachel ( Vedisehe Studkn, I. pp. 1—52) in his interpretation of w 
difficult stanza. 

10 The Sage : the wise, that is, wUdom-giving, Soma. 



THE RIO VEDA, 


617 


YMN 60.3 

1 Ye who are youthful, wise, and meet for worship, come, 

Maruts, to the longing of the singer* 

Coming, as erst to Angiras, 0 Heroes, ye animate and quicken 
e’en the desert. 

2 Even as the herdsman driveth home his cattle, I urge my 
• songs to him the strong swift Hero. 

May he, the glorious, lay upon his body the singer’s hymns, 
as stars bedeck the heaven. 

3 He who for man’s behoof in his affliction thrice measured out 

the earthly regions, Vishnu — 

When one so great as thou afFordeth shelter, may we with 
wealth and with ourselves be happy. 

1 4 Sweet be this song of mine to Ahibudhnya, Parvata, Savitar, 

with Floods and Lightnings ; 

Sweet, with the Plants, to Gods who seek oblations. May 
liberal Bhaga speed us on to riches. 

15 Give riches borne on cars, with many heroes, contenting men, 

the guard of mighty Order. 

Give us a lasting home that we may battle with godless bands 
of men who fight against us, and meet with tribes to whom 
the Gods are gracious. 

HYMN L. Visvedevas. 

I CALL with prayers on Aditi your Goddess, on Agni, Mitra, 
Varuna for favour, 

On Aryaman who gives unasked, the gracious, on Gods who 
save, on Savitar and Bhaga. 

2 Visit, to prove us free from sin, 0 Surya, Lord of great might, 
the bright Gods sprung from Daksha, 

Twice-born and true, observing sacred duties, Holy and full of 
light, whose tongue is Agni, 


11 As erst to Angiras : angirasvdt ; ‘ like rays (of light).' — Wilson; ‘ like the 
^ngirasas,’ — Roth ; ‘like messengers of the Gods.’ — GrHSsmann 

12 The strong swift Hero : Vishnu seems to l>e intended, and not the 
'ompany of Maruts as SAyapa explains the passage, taking vh'^tya as an 
adjective = heroic or powerful. 

14 Ahibudhnya : the Dragon of the Deep, or ‘ leviathan of the Sea of 
leaven,’ the distant, invisible and deified being who presides over the 
irmament. 

15 The guard of mighty Ordei' : the wealth that enables men to institute 
die law-ordained sacrifices. To whom the Gods are gracious : ‘ to whom the 
;*od8 come to accept libations.’ I follow SAyana in thus distinguishing ddev'K 
roia adevth, godless. 

2 Vint, to prove ui free from sin : visit and invite the Gods to come and 
witness to our Innocence before the all-seeing Sun. The word audgdstv6 



«18 


TR^ HYMNS OP 


[POOR n 

3 And, 0 ye Heaven and Earth, a wide dominion, 0 ye mo- 

blissful Worlds, our lofty shelter, 

Give ample room and freedom for our dwelling, a home, y, 
Hemispheres, which none may rival. 

4 This day invited may the Sons of Rudra, resistless, excellent 

stoop down to meet us ; 

For, when beset with slight or sore afidiction, we ever call upot] 
the Gods, the Maruts ; 

5 To whom the Goddess Rodasl clings closely, whom Pu&hai 

follows bringing ample bounty. 

What time ye hear our call and come, 0 Maruts, upon your 
separate path all creatures tremble. 

6 With a new hymn extol, 0 thou who singcst, the Lover of the 

Song, the Hero Indra- 

May he, exalted, hear our invocation, and grant us mighty 
wealth and strength when lauded. 

7 Give full protection, Friends of man, ye Waters, in peace and 

trouble, to our sons and gnmdsons. 

For ye are our most motherly physicians, parents of all that 
staudeth, all that moveth. 

8 May Savitar come hither and approach us, the God who rescues 

Holy, golden-handed, 

The God who, bounteous as the face of Morning, disclose! 
precious gifts for him who worships. 

9 And thou, 0 Son of Strength, do thou turn hither the Gods 

to-day to this our holy service. 

May I for eveimore enjoy thy bounty, and, Agni, by thy 
grace be rich in heroes. 

10 Come also to my call, O yc N&satyas, yea, verily, through my 
prayers, ye Holy Sages. 

As from great darkness ye delivered Atri, protect us, Chiefs, 
from danger in the conflict. 

in the locative case (in sinlessneBd) is used with a dative sigoiftcation. Sprung 
from Duksha : Dakaha is a creative Power associated with A'Un, and therefore 
sometimes identified with PrajApati. Sftyana explains ddkshupitrtn^ in 
commentary on VII. 66, 2, a.a ‘ preservers or lords of strength,’ and the com- 
pound may mean Lords of vigour, or fathers of strength in this passage a w, 
Tioice-born ; having two births or manifestations, dwelling in heaven and ap- 
pearing also on eaith. Whose tongue is Ajni: who consume oblations by means 
of fire. 

3 Ye Hemispheres : dkishane ; literally, ‘ two bowls,’ a frequently-occurring 
expression for heaven and earth. 

5 JHodast : the Consort of Rudra* 



THE ElOVEDA. 


rMS 51.] 




0 Go^ls, bestow upon us riches, splendid with strength and 
heroes, bringing food in plenty. 

Be gracious, helpful Gods of earth, of heaven, born of the Cow, 
and dwellers in the waters. 

I iklay Rudra and Sarasvdtl, accordant, Vishnu and VAyu, pour 

' down gifts and bless us ; 

Ribliukshan, Vaja, and divine Vidhatar, Parjanya, Vafca make 
our food abundant. 

I May this God Savitar, the Lord, the Offspring of Waters, pour- 
ing down his dew be gracious. 

And, with the Gods an I Dames accordant, Tvashtar ; Dyaus 
with the Gods and Prithivi with oceans. 

1 Miy Aja-Ekapad and Ahibudhnya, and Earth and Ocean hear 
our invocation ; 

All Gods who strengthen Law, invoked and lauded, and holy 
texts uttered by sages, help us. 

5 So with my thoughts and hymns of praise the children of 
Bharadvaja sing aloud to please you. 

The Dames invoked, and the resistless Vasus, and all ye Holy 
Ones have been exalted. 

HYMN LL Visvedevae, 

That mighty eye of Yaruna and Mitra, infallible and dear, is 
moving upward. 

The pure and lovely face of holy Order hath shone like gold of 
heaven in its arising. 


U Bovn of the Cow : the Maruta, sons of the Cow Prisni, according to f^&yana. 
The (loda of heaven are said to bo the Adityas, those of earth the Vasus, and 
tliohc of water, that is, the firmainent, the Rudnw. lloth expUiua gdjdtdk as 
‘ 1 k)i 11 of the starry heaven.’ 

12 This and the four following stanzas form a new hymn, or are a rccapitu- 
latum, with additions, of the preceding verses And dhiue Vtdhdtar ; or 
‘ the divine Disposer.’ 

14 Aju-Ekupdd: according to Ruth, probably a genius the storm, ‘the 
former of one foot ’ See II. 31. 6. Buta;a may signib ‘ unborn’ rather than 
‘diiver,’ and the Sun may be intended, in accordance with the explanation of 
the Commentators. Aja-EkapUd is called in X. 65. 13. the bearer of heaven, 

‘ and the ascription of one foot to the Sun might be due to his appearance 
alone in the sky as opposed to the Dawns and the Asvins.’ See Wallis, 

of the Rigvedn, p. 54 M. Bergaigne says ; ‘ Aja-Ekap^d, then is 
the ‘ unborn who has only one foot,’ that is to say, ‘ who dwells in the single 
isolated world, the place of mystery,’ in opposition to the god who manifests 
himself in divers worlds, to Agui oi Soma in their various visible forms.’ See 
ha lielir/ion VMique, HI pp. 20 — 25. 

1 5 F^yaiia interprets the first line somewhat differently : ‘ Thus do my sous 
the Bharadvijas worship the Gods with sacred rites and hymns.’ 

1 Eye of Varun'j, and MUra : the Sun. 



620 


TBE BTUm OP 


2 


[book t 


The Sage who knows these Gods^ three ranks and orders 
all their generations near and distant, 

Beholding good and evil acts of mortals, Sura marks well 
doings of the pious. 


3 I praise you Guards of mighty Law eternal, Aditi, Mitra Vanm 
the noble, ’ • • 

Aryaman, Bhaga, all whose thoughts are faithful ; hither 1 
the Bright who share in common. ^ 


4 Lords of the brave, infallible, foe-destroyers, great Kings b( 

Stowers of fair homes to dwell in, ® ' 

Young, Heroes, ruling heaven with strong dominion, Aditva^ 
Aditi I seek with worship. ^ 

5 0 Heaven our Father, Earth our guileless Mother, 0 Brothe 

Agni, and ye Vasus, bless us. 

Grant us, 0 Aditi and ye Adityas, all of one mind, your man 
fold protection. 

6 Give us not up to any evil creature, as spoil to wolf or she 

wolf, O ye Holy. 

For ye are they who guide aright our bodies, ye are the rulers 
of our speech and vigour. 

7 Let us not suffer for the sin of others, nor do the deed which 

ye, 0 Vasus, punish. 

Ye, Universal Gods ! are all-controllers : may he do harm unto 
himself who hates me. 

S Mighty is homage ; I adopt and use it. Homage hath held 
in place the earth and heaven. 

Homage to Gods ! Homage commands and rules them. I 
banish even committed sin by homage. 

9 You Furtherers of Law, pure in your spirit, infallible, dwel- 
lers in the home of Order, 

To you all Heroes mighty and far-seeing I bow me down, 0 
Holy Ones, with homage. 

10 For these are they who shine with noblest splendour; through 
all our troubles these conduct us safely — 

2 Three ranks and orders : according to SAyana, the three cognizable Worlds 
or Btationa of the Goda, tiie earth of the Vasu8,’the Brmament of the Rudras, 
and heaven of the Adityaa. SHra : SQrya ; the Sun. 

.1 Who share in common: sadhanydh; according to SAyana, dhanasahitin, 
^accompanied by wealth.’ 

7 Let us not suffer for the sin of others : so, VII. 86. 5. * Loose us from sins 
c.)mraitted by our fathers.’ Compare also Taittirfya-BrAhmana, III. 7. 12. 3. 
cited by Muir, 0 S. T., V. 66. ‘ May Agni free me from the aiu which my ~ 
mother or my father committed when I wm a babe unborn.’ 



THE RIGVEDA. 


621 


m 52.] 

Varuna, Mitra, Agiii, mighty Rulers, true-minded, faithful to 
the hymn^s controllers. 

May they, Earth, Aditi, Indra, Bhaga, Pashan increase our laud, 
lucre. 'Se the Fivefold people. 

Giving good help, good refuge, goodly guidance, be they our 
• good deliverers, good protectors. 

; Come now, 0 Gods, to your celestial station : the Bhara- 
dvajas' priest entreats your favour. 

He, sacrificing, fain for wealth, hath honoured the Gods with 
those who sit and share oblations. 

I Agni, drive thou the wicked foe, the evil-hearted thief away. 
Far, far, Lord of the brave! and give us easy paths. 

[ Soms, these pressing-stones have called aloud to win thee for 
our Friend. 

Destroy the greedy Pani, for a wolf is he. 

) Ye, 0 most bountiful, are they who, led by Indra, seek the 
sky. 

Give us good paths for travel ; guard us well at home. 

6 Now have we entered on the road that leads to bliss, without 
a foe, 

The road whereon a man escapes all enemies and gathers 
wealth. 

HYMN LII. Visvedevaa. 

This I allow not in the earth or heaven, at sacrifice or in 
these holy duties. 

May the huge mountains crush him down : degraded be 
Atiyaja’s sacrificing patron. 

10 The hymn’s controllers : ‘ those who are prominent in (their) praise,' — • 

•Vilteon 

II The. Fivefold People : pdficha jdn4h; the five Aryan tribes ; ‘ the five 
jrdeiBof beings.’ — Wilson. 

I’i This stanza is difficult, and I do not thoroughly understand it. 

14 Pani either one of the envious demons who steal away the light, or the 
ivarieious and niggardly trafficker who offers no sacrifices to the Gods. 

15 Ye, 0 Most Bountiful : all ye Gods. 

Id These four concluding stanzas, in changed metres, are a prayer for 
protection on a journey. Pr''fe88or Grassmann banishes them, together with 
stanzas 11 and 12, to the Appendix as being in his opinion later additions to 
Llie original hymn. 

1 According to S&yana Rijiavan curses a rival Rishi Atiyftja ; but the name 
Aliyftja (from ati and yaj) seems to be employed expressly to signify one who 
“ver-sacrifices, that is, sacrifices more than is necessary or prescribed, super- 
Juity, as well as deficiency, being a fault that causes a sacrifice to fail. See 
Ludwig, IV. 220. 



622 Tnn HYMNS OF iSOOK Yr 

2 Or he who holds us in contempt, 0 Maruts, or seeks to blame 

the prayer that we are making, 

May agonies of burning be his portion. May the sky scordi 
the man who hates devotion. 

3 Why then, 0 Soma, do they call thee keeper of prayer? why 

then our guardian from reproaches? 

Why then beholdest thou how men revile us? Cast thy hot 
dart at him who hates devotion. 

4 May Mornings as they spring to life protect me, and may the 

Rivers as they swell preserve me. 

My guardians be the firmly-seated mountains : the Fathers, 
when 1 call on Gods, defend me ! 

5 Through all our days may we be healthy-minded, and look up- 

on the Sun when he arises. 

Grant this the Treasure-Lord of treasures, coming, observant, 
oftenest of Gods, with succour! 

6 Most near, most oft comes Indra with protection, and she, 

Saras vat i. who swells with rivers : 

Parjanya, bringing health with herbs, and Agni, well lauded, 
swift to listen, like a father. 

7 Hear this mine invocation ; come hither, 0 Universal Gods. 
Be seated on tliis holy’ grass. 

8 To him who comes to meet you. Go Is, with offerings bathed 

in holy oil — 

Approach ye, one and all, to him. 

9 All Sons of Immortality shall listen to the songs we sing, 

And be exceeding good to us. 

10 May all the Gods who strengthen Law, with Ritus, listening 

to oar call, 

Be pleased with their appropriate draught. 

11 May Indra with the Marut host, Tvishtar, Mitra, Aryaman, 
Accept the laud and these our gifts. 

12 0 Agni, Priest, as rules ordain, offer this sacrifice of ours. 
Remembering the Heavenly Folk. 


3 Soma: the Moon-God. 

5 Tveasurc-Lord of treamres : Agni, from whom, or through whom, all blesB- 
ings come to the pious. 

9 Sons of Immortality : according to the Scholiast, ‘ sons of the immortal 
(Prajdpati, regarded as the progenitor of Gods and men). 

10 With Ritas: together with the Seasons person! hed ; or, at the presci ibed 
seasons, as Sdyana explains. 



THE niQVEBA. 


625 


ryiN 58.) 

Listen, All-Gods, to this mine invocation, ye who inhalnt 
heaven, and air’s mid-regions, 

All ye, 0 Holy Ones, whose tongue is Agni, seated upon this 
sacred grass, be joyful. 

J^lay the All-Gk)d8 who claim our worship hear my thought ; 
•may the two World-halves hear it, and the Waters’ Child. 

Let me not \itter words that ye may disregard. Closely allied 
with you may we rejoice in bliss. 

, And those who. Mighty, with the wiles of serpents, were born 
on earth, in heaven, where waters gather — 

May they vouchsafe us life of full duration. May the Gods 
kindly give us nights and mornings. 

) At this my call, 0 Agni and Parjanya, help, swift to hear, my 
thought and our laudation. 

One generates holy food, the other offspring, so grant us food 
enough with store of children. 

J When holy grass is strewn and fire enkindled, with hymn and 
lowly homage I invite you. 

All-Gods, to day in this our great assembly rejoice, ye Holy, 
in the gifts we offer. 


HYMN LTTT. P.lghan. 

Lord of the path, 0 Pushan, we have yoked and bound thee 
to our hymn, 

Even as a car, to win the prize. 

2 Bring us the wealth that men require, a manly master of a 

house. 

Free handed with the liberal meed. 

3 Even him who would not give, do thou, 0 glowing Pushan, 

urge to give, 

And make the niggard’s soul grow soft. 


13 All Godi : Vi»ve devdh, or Universal Go<l8. 

15 With the wiles of serpents: dhimdydh ; according to Sftyana, ‘ possessed 
•f the wisdom or knowledge that kills.’ Cf. 1.3 9, note. 

16 The other offspring : Parjanya, the personified Rain-cloud, produces corn 
ind foo?l offered in sacrifice, and Agni promotes the procreatii»n of children. 


1 lord of the path : custodian of roads and guide of travellers. To win the 
• or, to win us wealth or food. 

2 Master of a house: a householder who will institute sacrifices and liber - 
reward the officiating priests. 



624 


THE HYMNS OP 


{^OOK vj 

4 Clear paths that we may win the prize ; scatter our enemies af. ' 
Strong God, be all our thoughts fulfilled. 

5 Penetrate with an awl, O Sage, the hearts of avaricious churl 

And make them subject to our will. ^ 

6 Thrust with thine awl, O Pashan : seek that which the 

gard’s heart holds dear, * * ^ 

And make him subject to our will. 

7 Tear up and rend in pieces. Sage, the hearts of avaricious churls 
And make them subject to our will. 

8 Thou, glowing Pushan, earnest an awl that urges men u 

prayer ; 

Therewith do thou tear up and rend to shreds the heart o 
every one. 

9 Thou bearest, glowing Lord ! a goad with horny point thal 

guides the cows : 

Thence do we seek thy gift of bliss. 

10 And make this hymn of ours produce kine, horses, and auton 
of wealth 

For our delight and use as men. 

HYMN LIV, Pr.Hhan 

0 POsMAN, bring us to the man who knows, who shall dn ec- 
us straight. 

And say unto us. It is here. 

2 May we go forth with Pubhan who shall point the houses out 

to us, 

And say to us, These same are they. 

3 Unharmed is Pfishan’s chariot wheel ; the box ne’er falleth to 

the ground, 

Nor doth the loo.sened felly shake. 

4 Wirt the prize : or, win us wealth, or food. 

5 WUh aw awl : ‘ with a goad.’ — Wilson. 

9 With hornt/ point : the exact meaning of gdopasd is uncertain. Others ex- 
plain it .as ‘director of cattle;’ ‘ furnished with leathern thongs ' cow Uiled.’ 

This hymn and the five following have been translated by Dr. Mmr, OrHji- 
nal Sanskrit Texts, V. 176 — 180. Professor Peterson also gives a tranblation 
of Hymns LIII — LVII. in his Uynim from the Rigveda (Bombay Sanskrit 
Series No. XXXVI} 

1 This stanza, SAyaiia says, is to be muttered by one who seeks his lost 
property. The man who knows : the wise man or wizard. 

2 These same are they : these are the houses in which the stolen property i» 
cimcealed. 

3 The box: basket, or inner part of the car. Professor Wilson, following 
S&yana, translates ; * The discus of Pfishan does not destroy ; its sheath is no 
discarded, its edge harms not us.' But the three things mentioned are evi- 
deotlj parts of Pfishan’a chariot. 



THE RTQVEDA, 


6‘25 


56.] 

4 pushan forgetteth not the man who serveth him with offered 

gift : 

That man is first to gather wealth. 

5 May Ptishan follow near our kine ; may Pushan keep our 

horses safe : 

May Pashan gather gear for us. 

6 Follow the kine of him who pours libations out and worships 

thee ; 

And ours who sing thee songs of praise. 

7 Let none be lost, none injured, none sink in a pit and break 

a limb. 

Beturn with these all safe and sound. 

8 P ishaii who listens to our prayers, the Strong whose wealth 

IS never lost, 

The Lord of riches, we implore. 

9 Secure in thy protecting care, 0 Pushan, never may we fail : 
We here arc they who sing thy praise. 

10 From out the distance, far and wide, may Pushan stretch liis 

right hand forth, 

And drive our lost again to us. 

HYMN LV. PAshan. 

Son of Deliverance, come, bright God ! Let us twain go to- 
gether ; be our charioteer of sacrifice. 

2 We pray for wealth to thee most skilled of charioteers, with 
braided hair, 

Lord of great riches, and our Friend. 

'6 Bright God whose steeds arc go its, thou art a stream of wealth, 
a treasure-heap, 

The Friend of every pious man. 


7 With these : cows. 

S We pray to Pushan for the safety of our property because he is the Lord 
<'f wealth ; he himself loses nothing that is his, and he always listens to our 
prayers, 

1 Son of Deliverance : that is, ‘ Deliverer,’ one who gives men ample room 
anfl freedom. SAyana explains vimucho napdt in another place as ‘ offspring 

the cloud.’ See I 42. 1. Hero, he says, the meaning is, ‘ son of Praj;1pati, 
who at the creation sends forth from himself all creatures.’ Hoth explains 
ro)i? 4 cA as ‘ unyoking ’ horses at the end of a journey Pushan would then be 
^lie son of return,’ the God who brings travellers safely home, which is one 

his especial functions. 

2 With braided hair : kapardinam ; an epithet of Rudra also. Seel. 114. 1. 

3 Whose steeds are goats: cf. I. 138. 4. 

40 



626 


THE HYMNS OP 


{eoor r/. 

4 Pushan, who driveth goats for steeds, the Strong and Mieht 

who is called ® 

His Sister’s lover, will we laud. 

5 His Mother’s suitor I address. May he who loves his Sister hear 

Brother of Indra, and my Friend. ’ 

6 May the sure-footed goats come nigh, conveying Pushan on 

his car. 

The God who visiteth mankind. 


HYMN LVI. 


Pilehan. 


Whoso remembers Pushan as eater of mingled curd and meal 
Need think no more upon the God. 


2 And he is best of charioteers. Indra, the hero’s Lord, allied 
With him as Friend, destroys the foes. 


3 And there the best of charioteers hath guided through the 
speckled cloud 

The golden wheel of Sura’s car. 


4 Whate’er we speak this day to thee. Wise, Wondrous God 
whom many praise. 

Give thou fultilmcnt of our thought. 


6 Lead on this company of ours, that longs for kine, to win the spoil; 

Thou, Pdshan, art renowned afar. 

6 Prosperity we crave from thee, afar from sin and near to wealth, 
Tending to perfect happiness both for to-morrow and to-day. 


4 Hii Sister s lover : according to Sftyana, Pushan’s sister is Ushas or Dawn. 

6 His Mother' s suitor : Sftyana explains rndtUr didhishum as rdtreh patim, 
lord or husband of Night. Probably SdryA is intended. See Bergaigne, La 
Religion Vidique, II. 428 Compare also Book VI. 48. 8. Brother of Indra • 
as an Aditya or son of Aditi. 

6 Sure-footed: nisrimhhKh: this word does not occur elsewhere and its 
meaning is uncertain. Wilson renders it ‘ harnessed,' and other explanations 
have been proposed, but as Dr. Muir observes : ‘ All seems guess work.’ 


1 Eater of mingled curd and meal : karamhh^t ; karambhd was some soft 
food, a sort of gruel, offered especially to Pdshan. 

I have followed Professor Ludwig in my translation of this difficult passage, 
the meaning seeming to be that in setting before Pdshan the food that he loves 
the worshipper has done all that is necessary to secure his help. SAyana’s expla- 
nation is much the same if ‘ a God ’ be substituted for * the God ’ in line 2, that 
is, Phshan alone is sufficient : the worshipper need think upon no other God. 

3 pdshan seems to be intended. He is said to have driven the Sun’s wheel 
parusJii gdvi, literally, ‘ in the brindled bull,’ meaning apparently, the speck- 
led cloud, or train of variegated clouds. * He, the impeller, the chief of 
charioteers (Pdshan), ever urges on that golden wheel (of his car) for the radi- 
ant sun.’ — Wilson. Others think that the verse refers to Indra’s pressing 
down the wheel of the Sun from the mountain of cloud and bringing back the 
light. See Peterson, Hymns from the Rigveda, p. 171, 



/yjlfiV 58.1 


627 


TffE RIQVEDA. 

HYMN LVII. Indra and Piishan. 

In DBA and Pushan will we call for friendship and prosperity 
And for the winning of the spoil. 

2 One by the Soma sits to drink juice which the mortar hath 
. expressed : 

The other longs for curd and meal. 

3 Goats are the team that draws the one : the other hath Bay 

Steeds at hand ; 

With both of these he slays the fiends. 

4 When Indra, wondrous strong, brought down the streams, the 

mighty water-floods, 

Pushan was standing by his side. 

5 To this, to Pushan’s favouring love, and Indra’s, may we closely 

cling, 

As to a tree’s extended bough. 

6 As one who drives a car draws in his reins, may we draw 

Pushan near, 

And Indra, for our great success. 

HYMN LVIII. PLUhau. 

Like heaven art thou : one form is bright, one holy, like Day 
and Night dissimilar in colour. 

All magic powers thou aidest, self-dependent ! Auspicious be 
thy bounty here, O Pushan, 

2 Goat-borne, the guard of cattle, he whose home is strength, 

inspirer of the hymn, set over all the world ; 

Brandishing here and there his lightly -moving goad, beholding 
every creature, Pushan, God, goes forth. 

3 0 PCishan, with thy golden ships that travel across the ocean, 

in the air’s mid-region, 

Thou goest on an embassy to Sdrya, subdued by love, desirous 
of the glory. 


3 The Jiendt : the Vritras, the demons of drought, or enemies in general. 


One holy: ‘venerable.’ — Wilson This is apparently a euphemism for 
wk.’ PQsUan is here regarded as the Sun present by day and even in his 
ibaence regulating the night also. According to Professor Ludwig, he is re- 
presented as the summer Sun and the winter Sun. Thou aidest * thou exer- 
cisest.’— Muir. 

3 Subdued by love : of Sdryft, the daughter of the Sun, See VI. Id. 8. 0/ 
me glory; of winning SuiyA for his bride. 



THE HYMNS OF 


623 


[EOOK ?] 


4 Near kinsman of the heaven and earth is Piishan, liberal, Lor( 
of food, of wondrous lustre, 

Whom strong and vigorous and swiftly-moving, subdued by 
love, the Deities gave to Surya. 

HYMN LIX. I„ara.Ai.„i, 

I WILL declare, while juices flow, the manly deeds that yo 
have done : 

Your Fathers, enemies of Gods, were smitten down, and, Indra- 
Agni, yc survive 

2 Thus, ludra-Agni, verily your greatness merits loftiest praise. 
Sprung ii'om one common Father, brothers, twins are ye ; your 

Mother is in every place. 

3 Those who delight in flowing juice, like fellow horses at their 

food, 

Indra and Agni, Gods armed with the thunderbolt, we call thin 
day to come with help. 

4 Indra and Agni, Friends of Law, served with rich gifts, your 

speech is kind 

To him who praises you while these libations flow : that man, 
0 Gods, ye ne’er consume. 

5 What mortal understan<ls, 0 Gods, Indra and Agni, tins 

your way ? 

One of you, yoking Steeds that move to every side, advance-i 
in your common car. 

4 The Deities gave to SUnj i : ‘ tbe formula of the verse gives the idea 
rather of a birth than of a marriage. But Puahan is the lover of his mother, 
VI 56 5 • Siirya then might be tiie spouse a.s well as the mother of Pushan 
She is doubtlessly also the sister with whom POshan is united, VI. 05. 4. o.’- 
Bergaigne, La Religion VHviue, II. 4*28. 


1 Yonr Fathers . ,.Avere smitten down : hatdso vdm pitdro : the meaning it 
obscure Sayana explains pitdro as Asuras or demons, deriving the word from 
A root pi to iiijure ; ‘ The Pitri.s tho enemies of the gods, have been slain bj 
YOU ’—Wilson Prof (irassmann reads, conjectuially, pigavo.' ‘ scorners, ms 
tead of the unsuitable pituro.’ Gods of an elder generation, the fathers of Imlrs 
and Arai appear to be intended, and the words as they st^nd can hardly beat 
any other meaning. Hatdto then would mean, ‘ not were slain,’ were ^trucl 
down degraded, and deprived of their power, like the earlier Hellenic Gods 
Professor Ludwig suggests other possible explanations. See also l^rgaigne 
La Religion V^dique, III. 75, and Ehni, Der My thus des Yama, p. 80. 

2 One common Father : Dy2e\i<i. According to SAyana, Praj^pati. 

Your Mo'.her: Aditi, infinite and omnipresent; according to bayaps 
identified with the wide-extouded earth. But see Ehni, Der Mythus dei 

Yonder consume : Prof Ludwig suggests the reading bhartiatha^, ‘ threa 


teu,’ instead of bhasdtah. , , , i.u 

b One of you: India, as the Sun, whose horses here are the spreamn 
beams of light, pursues hia appointed Way through* heaven. 



60.1 TffE MOVED A. 62# 

6 First, Indra-Agni, bath this Maid come footless unto those 

with feet. 

Stretching her head and speaking loudly with her tongue, she 
hath gone downward thirty steps. 

7 E’en now, O Indra-Agni, men hold in their arms and stretch 

their bows. 

Desert us not in this great fray, in battles for the sake of kine. 

8 The foeman’s sinful enmities, Indra and Agni, vex me sore. 
Drive those who hate me far away, and keep them distant 

from the Sun. 

9 Indra and Agni, yours are all the treasures of the heavens 

and earth. 

Here give ye us the opulence that prospers every living man. 

10 0 Indra Agni, who accept the laud, and hear us for our praise, 
Come near us, drawn by all our songs, to drink of this our 

Soma juice. 

HYMN LX. Indra-Agni. 

Hk vslays the foe and wins the spoil who worships Indra and 
Agni, strong and mighty Heroes, 

Who rule ns Sovrans over ample riches, victorious, showing 
forth their power in conquest. 

2 So battle now, 0 Indra and thou, Agni, for cows and waters, 

sunlight, stolen Mornings. 

Team-borne, thou makest kinc thine own, 0 Agni, thou, 
Indra, light, Hawns, regions, wondrous waters. 

3 With Vritra-slaying might, Indra and Agni, come, drawn by 

homage, 0 ye Vritra-slayers. 

Indra and Agni, show yourselves among us with your supreme 
and unrestricted bounties. 


6 Thiz Maid: the text has only the feminine pronoun iydm (baec) ; Unhaa 
or Dawn is intended Footless : moving unsupported in the sky. Cf. 1. 162. 
Stretching her head : according to one of SAyana’s explanaticms, ‘ having, 
abandoned the head, being herself headless,' which is hardly consistent with 
what follows. Thirty steps : the thirty diNisions of the Indian day and night 
through which Dawn passes before she reappears. But cf. I. 123, 8. 

7 The hymn is a prayer for aid in a fray. 

2 Stolen Mornings : the Dawns and light that have been carried away and 
concealed by the Panis or demons of darkness, 

3 V xit%'a-tlvkying : or, generally, ‘ foeman slaying.’ 



6S0 


Tfft! HYMNS OF [BOOK VI, 


4 I call the Twain whose deeds of old have all been famed in 

ancient days : 

O Indra Agni, harm us not. 

5 The Sti*ong, the scatterers of the foe, Indra and Agni, we 

invoke ; • 

May they bo kind to one like me. 

6 They slay our Arya foes, these Lords of heroes, slay our Dasa 

foes : 

And drive our enemies away. 

7 Indra and Agni, these our songs of praise have sounded 

forth to you : 

Ye who bring blessings ! drink the juice. 

8 Come, Indra-Agni, with those teams, desired of many, which 

ye have, 

O Heroes, for the wershipper. 

9 With those to this libation poured, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni, 

come : 

Come ye to drink the Soma juice. 

10 Glorify him who compasses all forests with his glowing flame, 
And leaves them blackened with his tongue. 

1 1 He who gains Indra’s bliss with fire enkindled finds an easy 

way 

Over the floods to happiness. 

12 Give us fleet coursers to convey Indra and Agni, and bestow 
Abundant strengthening food on us. 

13 Indra and Api, I will call you hither and make you joyful 

with the gifts I offer. 

Ye Twain are givers both of food and riches : to win me 
strength and vigour I invoke you. 

14 Como unto us with riches, come with wealth in horses and 

in kine. . 

Indra and Agni, we invoke you both, the Gods, as Friends or 
friendship, bringing bliss. 

15 Indra and Agni, hoar his call who worships with libations 

Come and enjoy the offerings, drink the sweetly-flavoured 
Soma juice. ^ 


10 Glorify : addressed to the stotar or praise-singer. 

11 Over the foods : the dangers and troubles that bar his way. 

12 To convey Indra and Agni ; to bring you, Indra and Agni, to our 


sacrifice. 



IYUN 61.] 


631 


THE RJQVEDA. 

HYMN LXI. SaraBvatt. 

To Vadhryasva when he worshipped her with gifts she gave 
fierce Divodasa, canceller of debts. 

Consumer of the churlish niggard, one and all, thine, O 
, Sarasvati, are these effectual boons. 

2 She with her might, like one who digs for lotus-stems, hath 

burst with her strong waves the ridges of the hills. 

Let us invite with songs and holy hymns for help Sarasvati who 
slayeth the Piravatas. 

3 Thou castest down, Sarasvatt, those who scorned the Gods, 

the brood of every Bri>aya skilled in magic arts. 

Thou hast discovered rivers for the tribes of men, and, rich in 
wealth ! made poison flow away from them. 

4 May the divine Sarasvatt, rich in her wealth, protect us well, 
Furthering all our thoughts with might ; 

6 Whoso, divine Sarasvati, invokes thee where the ^rize is set, 
Like Indra when he smites the foe. 

6 Aid us, divine Sarasvati, thou who art strong in wealth and 

power : 

Like Pushan, give us opulence. 

7 Yea, this divine Sarasvati, terrible with her golden path, 
Foe-slayer, claims our eulogy. 

8 Whose limitless unbroken flood, swift-moving with a rapid 

rush, 

Comes onward with tempestuous roar. 

0 She hath spread us beyond all foes, beyond her Sisters, Holy One, 
As Sflrya spreadeth out the days. 


1 Vadhryasva : a celebrated Rishi. See X 69. She : Sarasvatt, the River- 
Goddess. Gave : as a eon. Canceller of debts : acquitting, by his birth, the 
debt which hia father owed to his progenitors, the religious obligation of 
begetting a aon who should perform the ceremonies which they require. 
Churlish niggard : who offers no sacrifices. The meaning of avamui is uncer- 
tain. S&yana explains it as ‘gratifying himself only ’ Professor Ludwig 
regards it as compounded of a + vcwd = thin or meagre. These effectual boons : 
the gift of a son. 

2 She : Sarasvati as the river. The description given in the text can hardly 
apply to the small stream generally known uinler that name; and from this 
and other passages which will be noticed as they occur it seems probable that 
Sarasvati is also another name of Sindhu or the Indus. See Zimmer, Altin- 
disckes Leben, pp, 6 ff. Pdidvutas : see V. 52. 11. 

3 Every Brisaya : every demon like Brisaya, who is said to have been the 
father of Vritra. See 1. 93. 4. Rich in wealth: vijintvati : accordiug to 
S^lyana, ‘ giver of sustenance ' 

9 Her Sisters : the other rivers of the Panjdb. 



TBE HYMNS OF 


682 


IBOOK VI, 


10 Yea, she most dear amid dear streams, Seven-sistered, graciously 

inclined, 

Sarasvati hath earned our praise. 

11 Guard us from hate Sarasvati, she who hath filled the realms 

of earth, 

And that wide tract, the firmament ! 

12 Seven-sistered, sprung from threefold source, the Five Tribes’ 

prosperer, she must be 
Invoked in every deed of might. 

13 Marked out by majesty among the Mighty Ones, in glory swift- 

er than the other rapid Streams, 

Created vast for victory like a chariot, Sarasvati must he ex 
tolled by every sage. 

14 Guide us, Sarasvati, to glorious treasure : refuse us not tliy 

milk, nor spurn us from thee. 

Gladly accept our friendship and obedience : let us not go from 
thee to distant countries. 


HYMN LXTI. 


Asvins. 


I LATiD the Heroes Twain, this heaven’s Controllers : singing 
with songs of praise I call the Asvins, 

Fain in a moment, when the morns are breaking, to part the 
earth’s ends and the spacious regions. 

2 Moving to sacrifice through realms of lustre they light the 

radiance of the car that bears them. 

Traversing many wide unmeasured spaces, over the wastes ye 
pass, and fields, and waters. 

3 Yo to that bounteous path of yoiirs, ye mighty, have ever 

borne away our thoughts with horses, 

Mind-swift and full of vigour, that the trouble of man ^^ho 
offers gifts might cease and slumber. 


12 Spimnn from, threefold source : * abiding in the three worlds, 
pervading heaven, earth, and hell, according to SAyana, like Gaugft 
timea. 


that is, 
in later 


1 To part the earth's ends : as heralds of light to define the limits of earth 
and sky and so separate one from the other. 

3 This stanza is very obscure. SAyana’s paraphrase is inconsistent wU i 
the plain meaning of several of the words of the text. Fierce Aswin , 
that humble mansion to which (you have repaired), you have ever born 
YOur desirable horses, as swift as thought, the pious worshippers 
manner (to heaven) : Let the injurer of the Uberal man (be consignea 
you) to (final) repose.’— Wilson. 



TBE RIOVEDA, 


63S 


qrMN 62.] 

4 So ye, when ye have yoked your chariot-hofses, come to the 

hymn of the most recent singer. 

Our true and ancient Herald Priest shall bring you, the Youth- 
ful, bearing splendour, food, and vigour. 

5 With newest hymn I call those Wonder-Workers, ancient and 
* brilliant, and exceeding mighty, 

Bringers of bliss to him who lauds and praises, bestowing 
varied bounties on the singer. 

6 So ye, with birds, out of the sea and waters bore Bhujyu, son 

of Tugra, through the regions. 

Speeding with winged steeds through dustless spaces, out of 
the bosom of the flood they bore him. 

7 Victors, car-borne, ye rent the rock asunder; Bulls, heard the 

calling of the eunuch’s consort. 

Bounteous, ye filled the cow with milk for Sayu : thus, swift 
and zealous Ones, ye showed your favour. 

8 Whate’er from olden time. Heaven, Earth ! existeth, great 

object of the wrath of Hods and mortals, 

Make that, Adityas, Vasus, sons of Kudra, an evil brand to 
one allied with demons. 

9 May ho who knows, as Vanina and Mitra, air’s realm, ap- 

pointing both the Kings in season, 

Against the secret fiend cast forth his weapon, against the 
lying words that strangers utter. 

10 Come to our home with friendly wheels, for offspring ; come 

on your radiant chariot rich in heroes. 

Strike off, ye Twain, the heads of our assailants who with 
man’s treacherous attack approach us. 

11 Come hitherward to us with teams of horses, the highest and 

the midmost and the lowest. 

Bountiful Lords, throw open to the singer the doors e’en of 
the firm-closed stall of cattle. 


6 Bhujyu : see I. 116. 3—6. 

7 The eunuch' » consort: Vadhrimatl See I. 116. 13. • see T. 116 22 

9 Mitra and Varuna appear here as comprehended in a thirH Of>d, who 
must be the Asura Dyaua. He, comprising the heaven of night as well as tlie 
heaven of day, assigns to Mitra and Varuna the charge, respectively of day 
and night. See Ludwig’s Commentary. 

10 For offspring ; tdnaydya; to give us offspring. The second line of the 
®fan/,a might be rendered : ‘ Turn back, ye Twain, the heads, with secret on- 
slaught, even of those who seek to harm the moi tal ’ 

11 The highest and the midmost or the lowest : or, as Professor Ludwig trans- 
latoa ; ‘ the earliest, the midmost, and the latest.’ 



634 


THE HYMNS OF 
HYMN LXIII. 


[EOOK Vf, 


Aevins, 


Where hath the hymn with reverence, like an envoy, found 
both fair Gods to-day, invoked of many — 

Hymn that hath brought the two N^satyas hither? To this 
man’s thought be ye, both Gods, most friendly. 

2 Como readily to this mine invocation, lauded with songs, that 

ye may drink the juices. 

Compass this house to keep it from the foeman, that none 
may force it, either near or distant. 

3 Juice in wide room hath been prepared to feast you: for you 

the grass is strewn, most soft to tread on. 

With lifted hands your servant hath adored you. Yearning 
for you the press-stones shed the liquid. 

4 Agni uplifts him at your sacrifices : forth goes the oblation 

dropping oil and glowing. 

Up stands the grateful-minded priest, elected, appointed to 
invoke the two Nasatyas. 

5 Lords of great wealth ! for glory Surya’s Daughter mounted 

your car that brings a hundred succours. 

Famed for your magic arts were ye, magicians ! amid the race 
of Gods, ye dancing Heroes ! 

6 Ye Twain, with these your glories fair to look on, brought, to 

win victory, rich gifts for Siiry^. 

After you flew your birds, marvels of beauty : dear to our 
hearts ! the song, well lauded, reached you. 

7 May your winged coursers, best to draw, Nasatyas ! convey 

you to the object of your wishes. 

Swift as the thought, your car hath been sent onward to focjd 
of many a sort and dainty viands. 

8 Lords of great wealth, manifold is your bounty : ye filled our 

cow with food that never faileth. 

Lovers of sweetness ! yours are praise and singers, and poured 
libations which have sought your favour. 


2 Either near or distant : neighbour or strang'^r. 

3 In wide room ; where there is ample space for the sacrificial ceremonies. 

5 SHrya’s Daughter: see I. 116. 17. Dancing Heroes-, ye who 
through the air. Cf. VIII. 20. 22, and ‘ Day’s harbiuger comes dancing trom 
the e.i8t’ (Milton— Song On May Morning). 

6 Rich gifts for SHryd ; who chose the Asvin*) to be her husbands. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


636 


64 .] 


9 Mine were two mares of Puraya, brown, swift-footed ; a hun- 
dred with Sumidha, food with Peruk. 

Sanda gave ten gold-decked and well-trained horses, tame and 
obedient and of lofty stature. 

0 ^i^Asatyas ! Purupanth.^s offered hundreds, thousands of steeds 

to him who sang your praises, 

Gave, Heroes ! to the singer Bharadvkja. Ye Wonder-Workers, 
let the fiends be slaughtered. 

1 May I with princes share your bliss in freedom. 

HYMN LXIV. Dawn. 

The radiant Dawns have risen up for glory, in their white 
splendour like the waves of waters. 

She maketh paths all easy, fair to travel, and, rich, hath 
shown herself benign and friendly. 

2 We see that thou art good : far shines thy lustre ; thy beams, 

thy splendours have flown up to heaven. 

Decking thyself, thou makest bare thy bosom, shining in 
majesty, thou Goddess Morning. 

3 Red are the kine and luminous that bear her the Blessed One 

who spreadeth through the distance. 

The foes she chaseth like a valiant archer, like a swift warrior 
she repelleth darkness. 

4 Thy ways are easy on the hills : thou passest Invincible ! 

Self-luminous ! through waters. 

So lofty Goddess with thine ample pathway. Daughter of 
Heaven, bring wealth to give us comfort. 

9 This and the following stanza eulogize the liberality of several wealthy 

nstitutors of sacrifice ; but it is difficult to make out what were the gifts 
-hey gave as the verses are filled with epithets without nouns. Vadave^ 
Dares, suits the dual epithets and raghv% brown and swift After iatdrriy 
i hundred, Sfty ana supplies cows. Instead of ‘ well- trained Sftyana s 

endenng is ‘ handsome,’ and he supplies asvdn, ‘ horses,’ or rathdn, ‘ chariot 
or the absent noun. ‘ Obedient, gallant, and well-favoured servants ’ would 
epresent his rendering of the last half-line of the stanza. The translations 
pven by Professors Ludwig and Grassmann differ from each other and from 
%ana’8 version As Professor Wikon remarks; ‘ If we render the stanza 
literally, it is utterly unintelligible ; the greater part of the Silkta is very 
obscure/ Puraya, Sumidha, and Peruka are the names of libei’al patrons. 

10 PurupantMs : another of these generous nobles. In this case davayidTn, 
horses, appears in the text. 

11 Vour bliss : the felicity which the Asvins bestow. 

1 Dawns : the plural may be honorific, or may signify Dawn and her rays 

^^tlight. 

3 Warrior : borne on a chariot. 

4 Through waters : of the firmament, 



m jffYMNS OF [^ooK Vt, 

5 Dawn, bring me wealth : untroubled, with thine oxen thou 

bearest riches at thy will and pleasure ; 

Thou who, a Goddess, Child of Heaven, hast shown thee 
lovely through bounty when we called thee early. 

6 As the birds fly forth from their resting-places, so men with 

store of food rise at thy dawning. 

Yea, to the liberal mortal who remaineth at home, 0 God- 
dess Dawn, much good thou bringest. 

HYMN LXV. Dawn. 


Shedding her light on human habitations this Child of Heaven 
hath called us from our slumber ; 

She who at night-time with her argent lustre hath shown her 
self e’en through the shades of darkness. 

2 All this with red-rayed steeds have they divided : the Dawns 

on bright cars shine in wondrous fashion. 

They, bringing near the stately rite’s commencement, drive 
far away the night’s surrounding shadows. 

3 Dawns, bringing hither, to the man who worships, glory and 

power and might and food and vigour, 

Opulent, with imperial sway like heroes, favour your servant 
and this day enrich him. 

4 Now is there treasure for the man w’ho serves you, now for the 

hero, Dawns 1 who brings oblation; 

Now for the singer when he sings the praise-song. Even to 
one like mo ye brought aforetime. 

5 0 Dawn who standest on the mountain ridges, Angirascs no\Y 


praise thy stalls of cattle. 

With prayer and holy hymn they burst them open ; the 
heroes’ calling on the Gods was fruitful. 

6 This stanza occur.s in a hymn to Dawn ascribed to the Rishi KakshnAn 
I. 124. 12. With store of food. j>UubMjah, ‘ J 

explained by S/lyana as annasyopdyakdh, ‘ who have to gam j 

The wealthy may be meant, who share their store with others ana n 
to replenish it. The liberal mortal . man who sacrifices to the ^ 

bring out this meaning more clearly the last ^’^^’^l^Vmvestarnpk 

who stays at home and pours oblations, O Goddess Dawn, thou g ^ 

riches.’ . u f ■ ih( 

1 At night-time; an allusion, perhaps, to the * false 'i'LlPf 

appearance of the real dawn, although this faint glimmer can bar y 
lustre. Or the liglit of stars may be intended, as belonging to Da 

than to Night. , 

2 All this have they divided: separated light from darknes . 

stately rite : the Agnihotra, or great morning saenfice. ^ ^ , , 

5 Angivases here praise: ‘What we are doing here is m reali y 
repetition of what the Angirasas did in ancient times.’ — Ludwig. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


637 


60.] 

g Shine on us as of old, thou Child of Heaven, on him, rich 
Maid ! who serves like Bharadvaja. 

Give to the singer wealth with noble heroes, and upon us bestow 
wide-spreading glory. 

HYMN LXVI, Maruta. 

E’en to the wise let that be still a wonder to which the gene- 
ral name of Cow is given. 

The one hath swelled among mankind for milking ; Prisni 
hath drained but once her fair bright udder. 

2 They who like kindled flames of fire arc glowing, the Maruts, 

twice and thrice have waxen mighty. 

Golden and dustlcss were their cars, invested with their great 
strength and their heroic vigour. 

3 They who are Sons of the rain-pouring Hudra, whom the long- 

lasting One had power to foster ; 

The Mighty Ones whoso germ great Mother Prisni is known 
to have received for man’s advantage. 

i They shrink not from the birth ; in this same manner still 
resting there they purge away reproaches. 

When they have streamed forth, brilliant, at their pleasure, 
with their own splendour they bedew their bodies. 

5 Even those who bear the brave bold name of Maruts, whom 
not the active quickly wins for milking. 

Even the liberal wards not oft' those fierce ones, those who are 
light and agile in their greatness. 


6 Bharadvija . the great ancedtor of the xa'iostly family of which the Rishi 
of the hymn waa a member. 


1 This meaning may be that while things of different nature are designated 
by tlie name of Cow, all that is so called h <8 a claim to our wonder and ad- 
miration, The Cow of earth yields hei milk fioquently and in abundance : 
IVi-ni, the Cow of the firmament, has given milk but once, when she brought 
forth her ofiP>,pring. the Maruts. ‘ Once only Prisni’s milk waa shed : no second, 
after this, is bom' i.VI. 48. 22). Siyana’s intei pi etation is utterly inconsistent 
I'lth tlie plain meaning of the womIs of the text, 

‘i Twice and thiiee : perhaps in i elation to earth and heaven, and to earth, 
finuauieut, and heaven, 

4 Still resting there ; while yet unborn they fiee their mother from the 
leproaoh of barrenness. 

5 iPoia for milking \ persuades to grant his petitions. The version of the 
second line is merely conjeotural as the meaning of staunSh (explained by 

as = stendh, robbere) is unknown. * The liberal donor pacifies the angry 
M uuts who ai a otherwise in their might the resistless plunderers (of their 

vieultb),'- Wilson. 



THE HYMNS OP 


633 


[POOP 1 


6 When, strong in strength and armed with potent weapon 

they had united well-formed earth and heaven, 

Rodasi stood among these furious Heroes like splendour shin-’ 
ing with her native brightness. 

7 No team of goats shall draw your car, 0 Maruts, no hoyse; 

no charioteer be he who drives it. 

Halting not, reinless, through the air it travels, speeding 
along its paths through earth and heaven. 

8 None may obstruct, none overtake, 0 Maruts, him whom ye 

succour in the strife of battle 

For sons and progeny, for kine and waters : he bursts the cow- 
stall on the day of trial. 

9 Bring a bright hymn to praise the band of Maruts, the Singers, 

rapid, strong in native vigour, 

Who conquer mighty strength with strength more mighty : 
earth shakes in terror at their wars, 0 Agni. 

10 Bright like the flashing flames of sacrifices, like tongues of fire 

impetuous in their onset. 

Chanting their psalm, singing aloud, like heroes, splendid from 
birth, invincible, the Maruts. 

11 That swelling band I call with invocation, the brood of Rudra, 

armed with glittering lances. 

Pure hymns are meet for that celestial army : like floods and 
mountains have the Strong Ones battled. 

HYMN LXVII. Mitra-Varuna. 

Now Mitra-Varuna shall be exalted high by your songs, noble, st 
of all existing ; 

They who, as ’twere with reins are best Controllers, unequallea 
with their arms to check the people. 

6 United : by obscuring the horizon with cloud and rain. 

7 No feeble or ordinary team must convey you ; no common charioteei 
must diive your chariot, 

8 Bursts the cow-stall : carries away the enemy’s cattle. 

10 Smging aloud : ' causing their opponents to tiemble,’ according to SAyana 
who derives the word from the root dhU, to shake. Derived from dhvan, tc 
sound, dhunayah means singers, musicians, minstrels, leaders of tbe wild musu 
of the wind and storm (sttirmer.— Ludwig). See Vedische Studien, 1. -^0^- 

11 Like Jloods and mountains: perhaps, with the impetuosity of rushing 
waters and the firm strength of mountains. But the meaning of this i 
half-line, as of many other passages of the hymn, is very obscure. 

The hymn has been translated and thoroughly discussed by Peter von Bradk< 
(Festgi-uss an R. von Roth, 1893, pp. 117-126). See also Vedic Hynmi, 
308 — 372 (Sacred Books of the East, XXXII). 



THE RWVEDA. 


67.1 

2 To you Two Gods is this my thought extended, turned to the 

sacred grass with loving homage. 

Give us, O Mitra-Varuna, a dwelling safe from attack, which 
ye shall guard, Boon-Givers ! 

3 Gome hither, Mitra-Varuna, invited with eulogies and loving 

adoration, 

Yc who with your own might, as Work-Controllers, urge even 
men who quickly hear to labour. 

< Whom, of pure origin, like two strong horses, Aditi bore as 
babes in proper season. 

Whom, Mighty at your birth, the Mighty Goddess brought 
forth as terrors to the mortal foeman. 

5 As all the Gods in their great joy and gladness gave you with 

one accord your high dominion, 

As yc surround both worlds, though wide and spacious, your 
spies are ever true and ne’er bewildered. 

6 So, through the days maintaining princely power, ye prop the 

height as ’twere from loftiest heaven. 

The Star of all the Gods, established, filleth the heaven and 
earth with food of man who liveth. 

7 Take the strong drink, to quaff till ye are sated, when he and 

his attendants fill the chamber. 

The young Maids brook not that none seeks to win them, when, 
Quickeners of all 1 they scatter moisture. 

8 So with your tongue come ever, when your envoy, faithful 

and very wise, attends our worship. 

Nourished by holy oil ! be this your glory : annihilate the 
sacrificer’s trouble. 

9 When, Mitra-Varuna, they strive against you and break the 

friendly laws ye have established, . . 

They, neither Gods nor men in estimation, like Api s sons have 
godless sacrifices. 


5 Your spies : messengers or angels, probably the rest of the Adityas. See 
I 25. 13 

6 The height : the high ridge or summit of heaven. The Star of all the 
Oods . representing all the Gods ; the Sun. He draws up the waters which 

to fertilize the earth. x r e 

7 He: the worshipper ; or, perhaps. Soma. The chximber ; of awnfice. 

Tk Young Maids : the water, necessary for the preparation of the Soma libation, 
h ready and impatiently waiting to be used. 

8 IVtt/i your tongue ; A^i, by whose tongue of fire they consume the obla- 
tions Your envoy : Afimi. .... 

9 like ApYs sons : ‘ oi the Waters.’— Qrasamann. The meaning is un- 
<=eitain. Qodlm saenjices : unattended by Gods, and therefore fruitless. 



«40 


THE HYUm OP 


[BOOK vi 

10 When Bingers in their song uplift their voices, some chant tij 

Nivid texts with steady purpose. 

Then may we sing you lauds that shall be fruitful : do ye noi 
rival all the Gods in greatness ? 

11 0 Mitra- Vanina, may your large bounty come to us hither 

near to this our dwelling, ' 

When the kine haste to us, and when they harness the fleet- 
foot mettled stallion for the battle. 

HYMN LXVIII. Irdra-Va™., 

His honouring rite whose grass is trimmed is offered swiftly 
to you, in Mann’s wise, accordant, 

The rite which Indra-Varuna shall carry this day to high 
success and glorious issue. 

2 For at Gods’ worship they are best through vigour ; they have 

become the strongest of the Heroes ; 

Witli mighty strength, most liberal of the Princes, Chiefs of 
the host, by Law made Vritra’s slayers. 

3 Praise those Twain Gods for powers that merit worship, Indra 

and Vart.na, for bliss, the joyous. 

One with his might and thunderbolt slays Vritra; the other 
as a Sage stands near in troubles. 

4 Though dames and men have waxen strong and mighty, m 

all the Gods self-praised among the Heroes, 

Ye, Indra-Varuna, have in might surpassed them, and thu 
were ye spread wide, 0 Earth and Heaven. 

5 Highteous is he, and liberal and helpful who, Indra-Varuna, 

brings you gifts with gladness. 

That bounteous man through food shall conquer foemen, anc 
win him opulence and wealthy people. 

6 May wealth which ye bestow in food and treasure on him whe 

brings you gifts and sacritices, 

Wealth, Gods ! which breaks the curse of those who vex ub 
be, Indra-Varuna, e’en our own possession. 

10 Nivid lejctu ; Hhort formularies of invocation inserted in a liturgy. 

11 When the kiue haste to lis : when the cattle of the men whom we arj 
about to attack are ready and eager to be carried off. Sfty ana’s iuterpretatioj 
of the last line is totally different : ‘ when (your) praises are uttered, and tiid 
sacrificers add in the ceremony the Honui that inspires straightforwarduess 
and resolution, and is the showerer (of benefits).’ - Wilson. 

3 In troubles: 'in deed-4 of might’ — Ludwig. ‘ With snares, or noo8< 
according to Professor Oeldner, V edische Studien, I. 142. 

4 Self -Upraised : on account of their own deeds, or their own nature. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


041 


I'J/xV 69.] 

go also, Indra-Varuna, may our princes have riches swift to 
save, with Gods to guard them — 

They whose great might gives victory in battles, and their 
triumphant glory spreads with swiftness. 

! hidra and Varuna, Gods whom we are lauding, mingle ye 
•wealth with our heroic glory. 

May we, who praise the strength of what is mighty, pass 
dangers, as with boats we cross the waters. 

) Now will I sing a dear and far-extending hymn to Varuna 
the God, sublime, imperial Loi*d, 

Who, mighty Governor, Eternal, as with flame, illumines both 
wide worlds with majesty and power. 

[) True to Law, Indra-Varuna, drinkers of the juice, driaik this 
pressed Soma which shall give you rapturous joy. 

Your chariot cometh to the banquet of the Gods, to sacrifice, 
as it were home, that ye may drink. 

1 Indra and Varuna. drink your fill, ye Heroes, of this in- 

vigorating sweetest Soma. 

This juice is shod by us that yc may quaff it : on this trim- 
med grass be seated, and rejoice you. 

HYMN LXIX. Indra- Vishnu. 

Indra and Vishnu, at my task's completion I urge you on 
with food and sacred service. 

Accept the sacrifice and grant us riches, leading us on by 
unobstructed pathways. 

2 Ye who inspire all hymns, Indra and Vishnu, ye vessels who 

contain the Soma juices, 

May hymns of praise that now are sung address you, the lauds 
that are recited by the singers, 

3 Lords of joy-giving draughts, Indra and Vishnu, come, giving 

gifts of treasui’e, to the Soma, 

With brilliant rays of hymns let chanted praises, I'epeated 
with tho lauds, adorn and dock you. 


8 Of , what is mighty : apparently, riches. 

[ 9 This stanza, in honour of Varuna alone, appears to bo the beginning ot 
Another hymn. Professor Grassmann banishes stanzas 9 and 10 to his Ap- 
hndix. 

1 At my task's completion : when all arrangements for the sacrifice have 
»een made. 

1 2 Who inspire : literally, ‘ the generators,’ janit^rd. By the singers : or, 
laudations.’ 

41 



642 


TllK HYMNS OP 


\B00K 1 

4 May your foe-conquering horses bring you hither, Indra anl 

Vishnu, sharers of the banquet. 1 

Of all our hymns accept the invocations : list to my prayer 
and hear the songs I sing you. ^ 

5 This your deed, Indi'a-Vishnu, must be lauded : widely yi 

strode in the wild joy of Soma. j 

Ye made the firmament of larger compass, and made thj 
regions broad for our existence. i 

G Strengthened with sacred offerings, Indra-Vishnu, first eaters, 
served with worship and oi)lation, 

Fed with the holy oil, vouchsafe us riches : ye are the lake, 
the vat that holds the Soma. 

7 Drink of this meath, O Indra, thou, and Vishnu ; drink ye 

your fill of Soma, Wonder-Workers. 

The sweet exhilarating juice hath reached you. Hear ye my 
prayers, give ear unto my calling. 

8 Ye Twain have conquered, ne’er have ye been conquemd : 

never hath either of the Twain been vanquished. 

Ye, Indra-Vishnu, when yc fought the battle, produced this 
infinite with three divisions. 

HYMN LXX. Heaven and Ell th 

Filled full of fatness, compassing all things that be, wide, 
spacious, dropping meath, beautiful in their form, 

The Heaven and the Earth by Vanina’s decree, uuwasting, 
rich in germs, stand parted each from each. 

2 The Everlasting Pair, with full streams, rich in milk, in their 

pure rule pour fatness for the pious man. 

Ye who are Regents of this world, O Earth and Heaven, pour 
into us the genial flow that prospers men. 

3 Whoso, for righteous life, pours offerings to you, 0 Heaven 

and Earth, ye Hemispheres, that man suceeds. 


8 Produced this {infinite : brought into existence the world with alhts crea- 
tures, the three divisions being heaven, firmament, and earth. See Professor 
Wilson’s note for Sfty ana’s explanation of the passage. 

The deities are DyAvAprithivf, that is Dyaus, Heaven, and Prithivf, Eaitli, 
combined in a compound dual. 

1 PuU of fatness : containing ghrita, gM, clarified butter, fatness in general, 
especially the fertilizing rain. 

3 Ye Hemispheres : rf/iwAawe / two bowls. ‘Firm-set/ — Wilson. Pn 
in the course of nature. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


M/.V 71 1 


M 


lie in Uis seed is born again and spreads by Law ; from you 
flow things diverse in form, but ruled alike. 

Enclosed in fatness, Heaven and Earth are bright therewith : 

they mingle with the fatness which they still increase, 

\yide, broad, set foremost at election of the priest, to them 
the singers pray for bliss to further them. 

5 May Heaven and Earth pour down the balmy rain for us, 

balm-dropping, yielding balm, with balm upon your path, 
Bestowing by your Godhead sacrifice and wealth, great fame 
and strength for us and good heroic might. 

6 May Heaven and Earth make food swell plenteously for us, 

all-knowing Father, Mother, wondrous in their works. 

Pourin ' out bounties, may, in union, both the Worlds, all- 
beneficial, send us gain, and power, and wealth. 


HYMN LXXI. Savltar. 

FuLTi of effectual wisdom Savitar the God hath stretched out 
golden arms that he may bring forth life. 

Young and most skilful, while he holds the region up, the 
Warrior sprinkles fatness over both his h inds. 

2 May we enjoy the noblest vivifying force of Savitar the God, 

that he may give ns wealth : 

For thou art mighty to produce and lull to rest the world of 
life that moves on two feet and on four. 

3 Protect our habitation, Savitar, this day, with guardian aids 

around, auspicious, firm and true. 

Cod of the golden tongue, keep us for newest bliss : let not 
the evil-wisher have us in his power. 

4 This Savitar the God, the golden-handed. Friend of the home, 

hath risen to meet the twilight. 

With cheeks of brass, with pleasant tongue, the Holy, he sends 
the worshipper rich gifts in plenty. 


4 8et foremost at election of the priest : ‘ first propitiated at the sacrifice.’— 
I’ilson. . 

i Savitar : the Sun as the great generator or vivifier. Sprinkles fatness : 
'rofeasor Ludwig thinks that this may be somewhat ironical. ‘ The god 
priokles his hands, probably, as a preparation for the hard work which he 
' about to perform ; but there is an underlying thought that a good deal of 
F fatness [in the shape of fertilizing rain] also falls down to the earth.’ 

[ ^ 7*0 meet the twilight : *at the close of night.’ — Wilson. Cheeks brass: 
; according to S&yana, ‘ golden-jawed.’ 



«44 


THE HYMNS OP 


[book 

5 Like a Director, Savitar hath extended hia golden arms 

ing fair to look on. * 

He hath gone up the heights of earth and heaven, and madi 
each monster fall and cease from troubling. ] 

6 Fair wealth, 0 Savitar, to-day, to-morrow, fair wealth prodncj 

for us each day that passes. ^ . 

May we through this our song be happy gainers, God of 
fair and spacious habitation. ’ 

HYMN LXXII, 

Great is this might of yours, Indra and Soma ; the first hig 
exploits were your own achivemeiits. 

, Ye found the Sun, ye found the light of heaven : ye killed a’ 
darkness and the Gods’ blasphemers. 

2 Ye, Indra-Soma, gave her light to Morning, and led the Su 

on high with all his splendour. 

Ye stayed the heaven with a supporting pillar, and spreauj 
abroad, apart, the Earth, the Mother, 

3 Ye slew the flood-obstructing serpent Vritra, Indra and Soma: 

Heaven approved your exploit. 

Ye urged to speed the currents of the rivers, and many sca-'s 
have ye filled full with waters. 

4 Ye in the unripe udders of the milch-kine have set the ripo 

milk, Indra, thou, and Soma. 

Ye have held fast the unimpeded whiteness within these many- 
coloured moving creatures. 

5 Verily ye bestow, Indra and Soma, wealth, famed, victorious, 

passing to our children. 

Ye have invested men, ye Mighty Beings, with manly strength 
that conquers in the battle, 

HYMN LXXIIT. Brihaspati. 

Served with oblations, first-born, mountain-render, Angiras’ 
son, Brihaspati, the Holy, 

With twice-firm path, dwelling in light, our Father, roars 
loudly, as a bull, to Earth and Heaven. 

5 A Director ; a priest who directs others. Or, perhaps, ‘ an Invoker, Jw 
Professor Ludwig suggests. Each monster : tvei y terror of the night. Sayana a 
interpretation of the last line is totally different : ‘ and, moving along, 
delights every thing that is.’ — Wilson. 

4 Ye in thf> unripe udders : the unripe, that is raw, udders are 
with the warm milk that is cooked or matured in them. See I. 62. 9. 
unimpeded whiteness : the milk which is not prevented from flowing, 
colour of the milk is contrasted! with the colour of the cows that produce it. 

1 Brihaspati : Lord of Prayer ; the Deity in whom the action of the worshij 



645 


vV /5i klQVEDA. 

xnade ?or svlcVi a people wide room and verge 
when Gods were invocated, 

Slaying his enemies, breaks down their castles, quelling his 
foes and conquering those who hate him. 

^ pvihaspati in war hath won rich treasures, hath won, this God, 
"the great stalls filled with cattle. 

Striving to win waters and light, resistless, Brihaspati with 
lightning smites the foeman. 

HXMN T.XXTV. Soma-Rudra. 

Bold fast your Godlike sway, O Soma-Rudra : let these our 
sacrifices quickly reach you. 

Placing in every house your seven great treasures, bring bless- 
ing to our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

2 Soma and Rudra, chase to every quarter the sickness that 

hath visited our dwelling. 

Drive Nirriti away into the distance, and give us excellent 
and happy glories, 

3 Provide, 0 Soma-Rudra, for our bodies all needful medicines 

to heal and cure us. 

Set free and draw away the sin committed which we have 
still inherent in our persons. 

4 Armed with keen shafts and weapons, kind and loving, be 

gracious unto us, Soma and Rudra. 

Release us from the noose of Varuna ; keep us from sorrow, in 
your tender loving-kindness. 

HYMN LXXV. Weapons of War. 

The warrior’s look is like a thunderous rain-cloud’s, when, armed 
with mail, he seeks the lap of battle. 

Be thou victorious with unwounded body : so let the thickness 
of thy mail protect thee. 

2 With Bow let us win kine, with Bow the battle, with Bow be 
victors in our hot encounters. 

per upon theGods is personified. See I. 14. 3. Mountain-render : ‘Brihaspati 
deft the mountain* (I. 62. 3 Dwelling in light: or, perhaps, in the Sun. 
The haeauing oi prdigharma9dd is uncertain. 

2 Such a 'people : so good a people. When Oodi tvere invocated : in battle. 

3 With lightning : or with Sunlight : ‘ with sacred prayers.’ — Wilsctn. 

1 Quadrupeds and bipeds: or, ‘ bless all of us, men and four-footed creatures. 

2 Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Destruction. 

4 The noose of Varuna : Varuna, the moral Governor of the world, is repre- 
ented as armed with a noose or lasso for the captuie and destruction of 
the wicked, 



ti6 THE liYMSS OP {BOOK r/, 

The Bow brings grief and sorrow to the foeman : armed with 
the Bow may we subdue all regions. 

3 Close to his ear, as fain to speak, She presses, holding hei 

well-loved Friend in her embraces. 

Strained on the Bow, She whispers like a woman — this Bow- 
string that preserves us in the combat. 

4 These, meeting like a woman and her lover, bear, mother-like 

their child upon their bosom. 

May the two Bow-ends, starting swift asunder, scatter, in uni- 
son, the foes who hate us. 

5 With many a son, father of many daughters, He clangs and 

clashes as he goes to battle. 

Slung oil the back, pouring his brood, the Quiver vanquishes 
all opposing bands and armies. 

6 Upstanding in the Car the skilful Charioteer guides his strong 

Horses on whithersoever he will. 

See and admire the strength of those controlling Reins whicli 
from behind declare the will of him who drives. 

7 Horses whose hoofs rain dust are neighing loudly, yoked tc 

the Chariots, showing forth their vigour. 

With their forefeet descending on the foemen, they, nevei 
flinching, trample and destroy them. 

8 Car-bearer is the name of his oblation, whereon are laid his 

Weapons and his Armour. 

So let us here, each day that passes, honour the helpful Cai 
with hearts exceeding joyful, 

9 In sweet association lived the fathers who gave us life, profound 

and strong in trouble. 

Unwearied, armed with shafts and wondrous weapons, free, 
real heroes, conquoroi*s of armies. 

3 She: the bowstring. Her well-loved friend : the arrow. Whupers likec 

leoman ; ‘ twangs like the scream of a woman.’ — Muir. But the faint sounc 
made by the string while it is being drawn to the ear is intended. Horae: 
likens the sound to the voice of a swallow. ^ 

4 These : the two ends of the bow. Like a woman and her lover : or, draw 
ing close like two women to their lovers ’ Their child : the arrow. 

5 With many a son : the quiver is called the father of sons and daughters 
it is said, because the words signifying arrow are both masculine and feminine 

8 Car-heard’ : rathavKhanam . a platform, stand, or truck on which 
chariot is placed when not in use The word seems in this place to mean a s 
the oblation offered by the warrior to the ideal war-chariot personified, or 

a tutelary deity of chariots. ^ * l g 

9 There is no verb in this stanza, and the only substantive, pitarah, fa 
is explained by both Commentators as pdlayitdrah, guards, defenders, tna 
apparently, those who attend the chariot of the chief. Professor 



THE moVEDA. 


U7 


IYMN 75.] 

0 The Brahmans, and the Fathers meet for Soma-draughts, and, 

graciously inclined, unequalled Heaven and Earth. 

Guard us from evil, Pushan, guard ua strengtheners of Law ; 
let not the evil-wisher master us. 

[1 Her tooth a deer, dressed in an eagle’s feathers, bound with 
cow-hide, launched forth. She flieth onward. 

There where the heroes speed hither and thither, there may 
the Arrows shelter and protect us. 

12 Avoid us thou whose flight is straight, and let our bodies be 

as stone. 

May Soma kindly speak to us, and Aditi protect us well. 

13 He lays his blows upon their backs, he deals his blows upon 

their thighs. 

Thou, Whip, who urgest horses, drive sagacious horses in the 
fray, 

U It compasses the arm with serpent windings, fending away the 
friction of the bowstring : 

So may the Brace, well-skilled in all its duties, guard manfully 
the man from every quarter. 

15 Now to the Shaft with venom smeared, tipped with deer-horn, 

with iron mouth. 

Celestial, of Parjanya’s seed, be this great adoration paid. 

16 Loosed from the Bowstring fly away, thou Arrow, sharpened 

by our prayer. 

Go to the foemen, strike them home, and let not one be left alive. 

owing Sftyana, translates : ‘ The guards (of the chariot), revelling in the 
savoury (spoil), distributors of food, protectors in calamity, armed with spears, 
resolute, beautifully arranged, strong in arrows, invincible, of heroic valour, 
robust, and conquerors of numerous hosts.’ 

10 The Brdkmaus and the Fathers . or, perhaps, the sacerdotal Fathers. 
The stanza, which is grammatically difficult, seems out of place. 

11 Her tooth a deer : the point of the arrow is made of a piece of deer’s 
horn attached to the shaft with leather strings. The butt of the arrow is 
feathered. 

13 He : the whip. 

U It : the brace or guard worn on the archer’s left arm, fastened on with 
leather straps. 

15 With venom smeared : by the Laws of Manu, that is, the ideal Code of 

1 the MAnavas, Kshatriyas were forbidden W poison their arrovvs. Anows ap- 
P^r to have been of two kinHs, one, the ^Ider and less effective, tipped with 
deer-kornt and the other ivith iron month, pointed with aya$, bronze or iron. 

j Oelestiaf, of Parjanya'a seed : made of the tall reed.s that grow in the Rains 
1 under the influence of Par j any a the God of the rain-cloud. 

16 Sharpened by our prayer ; ‘ whetted by charm.*— Wilson. 



648 THE RIQVEDA. ImOK V] 

17 There where the flights of Arrows fall like boys whose lock* 

are yet unshorn. 

Even there may Brahmanaspati, and Aditi protect us well 
protect us well through all our days. 

18 Thy vital parts I cover with thine Armour: with immortalih 

King Soma clothe thee. * 

Varuna give thee what is more than ample, and in thy triumpl 
may the Gods be joyful. 

19 Whoso would kill us, whether ho be a strange foe or one of us 
May all the Gods discomfit him. My nearest, closest Mail h 

prayer. 


17 Like boys whose locks are yet unshorn : ‘ the point of the comparison n 
not very obvious, but it may mean that the arrows fall where they list, as 
boys before they are left with the lock of hair, before the religious tonsure, 
play about wherever they like.’ — Wilson. Professor Roth separates visikht 
from kumdrSt, and translates : ‘ Where the arrows fly, young and old : that is, 
feathered and unfeathered.’ 

18 Thy vital parts : the rdrmaw, or coat of mail, protected the shoulders, 
back, chest, and lower parts of the body. If not made of metal, it was 
strengthened and adorned with metal of some kind. The Indians m the 
army of Xerxes are said by Herodotus to have worn (ifiara OTTO 
TreiTOlTj/uivn, clothes made out of the baik of trees (VII. 65) ; but he pro- 
bably meant the common soldiers only, and not the chiefs. For a full des- 
cription of the arms, offensive and defensive, used in Vedic times, see Muir, 
O. S. Texts, V. 469 ; AUiudisches Leben, pp. 293 — 301 ; or Dutt’s liisiorij oj 
Civilization in Ancient India, I. p. 88. 



APPENDIX I. 

Page 174, Hymn CXXVI. 

I subjoin a Latin version of the two stanzas omitted in my' 
translation. They are in a different metre from the rest of the 
hymn, have no apparent connexion with what precedes, and look 
like a fragment of a liberal shepherd’s love-song. The seventh 
stanza should, it seems, precede the sixth : 

6 [Hie loquitur]. Adhaerens, arete adhaerens, ilia quae 
niustelae similis se abdidit, multum humorem effundens, dat mihi 
complexuum centum gaudia. 

7 [Ilia loquitur]. Prope, propc accede ; molliter me tange. 
Ne putes pilos corporis mei paucos esse : tota sum villosa sicut 
Gandharidum ovis. 

Professor Ludwig thinks that Yddurt (multum humorem, 
i e, semen genitale, effundens) may be the name of a slave-girl. 
Gandharidun ovis : a ewe of the Gandharis. The country of 
Gandhara is placed by Lassen to the west of the Indus and to the 
south of the Kophen or Kabul river. King Darius in a rock- 
inscription mentions the Ga()i)ddra together with the Ui(n)d\i 
as people subject to him, and the Gandarii, together with the 
Piirthians, Khorasmians, Sogdians, and Dadikae, are said by Hero- 
dotus to have formed part of the ai*my of Xerxes. The name of 
the country is preserved in the modern Kandahar. See Muir, 
0. S. TextSy ii. 342, and Zimmer, Altindisches Lehen^ p. 30. 

Page 243, Hymn CLXXIX. 

The deified object of this omitted hymn is said to be Rati or 
hove, and its Rishis or authors are Lop&mudra, Agastya, and a 
disciple. Lopamudra is represented as inviting the caresses of 
her aged husband Agastya, and complaining of his coldness and 
^oglect. Agastya responds in stanza 3, and in the second half of 



650 


APPBNDIX r. 


stanza 4 the disciple or the poet briefly tells the result of tin 
dialogue. Stanza 5 is supposed to be spoken by the disciple wIk 
has overheard the conversation, but its connexion with the rest o 
the hymn is not very apparent. In stanza 6 ‘ toiling with strong en 
deavour ’ is a paraphrase and not a translation of the original Ho 
namdnah hkanitraih (ligonibus fodiens) which Sayana explains by | 
* obtaining the desired result by means of lauds and sacrifices.’ i 

M. Bergaigne is of opinion that the hymn has a mystical : 
meaning, Agastya being identifiable with the celestial Soma whom ! 
Lopamudra, representing fervent Prayer, succeeds after long labour 
in drawing down from his secret dwelling place. See La Religion 
Yidique^ ii. 394 f. 

1 ‘ Through many autumns have I toiled and laboured, at night 

and morn, through age-inducing dawnings. 

Old age impairs the beauty of our bodies. Let husbands still 
come near unto their spouses. 

2 For even the men aforetime, law-fulfillers, who with the Gods 

declared eternal statutes, — 

They have decided, but have not accomplished : so now let 
wives come near unto their husbands. 

3 Non inutilis est labor cui Dii favent : nos omnes aemulos et 

aemulas vincamus. 

Superemus in hac centum artium pugna in qua duas partes 
convenientes utrinque commovemus. 

4 Cupido me cepit illius tauri [viri] qui me despicit, utrum hinc 

utrum illinc ab aliqua parte nata sit. 

Lopamudra taurum [inaritum suum] ad se detrahit : insipiens 
ilia sapientem anhelantem absorbet. 

5 This Soma I address that is most near us, that which hath 

been imbibed within the spirit. 

To pardon any sins we have committed. Verily mortal man 
is full of longing. 

6 Agastya thus, toiling with strong endeavour, wishing for ehild- 

ren, progeny and power. 

Cherished — a sage of mighty strength — both classes, and with 
the Gods obtained his prayer’s fulfilment. 

By ‘ both classes ’ probably priests and princes, or institutovs 
of sacrifices, are meant. M. Bergaigne understands the expression to 
mean the two forms or essences of Soma, the celestial and the 
terrestrial. 



APPENDIX II. 

Metre. 


Rhyme is not used in the Rigveda. The metres are regulated 
)v the number of syllables in the stanza, which consists generally 
)f three or four Padas, measures, divisions, or quarter verses, with 
I distinctly marked interval at the end of the second Pada, and 
50 forming two hemistichs or semi-stanzas of equal or unequal 
length. These P^idas most usually contain eight or eleven or 
twelve syllables each ; but occasionally they consist of fewer and 
sometimes of more than these numbers. The Padas of a stanza 
are generally of equal length and of more or less corresponding 
prosodial quantities ; but sometimes two or more kinds of metre 
are employed in one stanza, and then the Pfidas vary in quantity 
and length. As regards quantity, the first syllables of the PSda 
are not subject to very strict laws, but the last four are more 
regular, their measure being generally iambic in Padas of eight 
and of twelve syllables and trochaic in those of eleven. In the 
printed text the first and second Padas form one line, and the third* 
or third and forth, or third, fourth, and fifth, complete the distich 
or stanza. This arrangement I have followed in my translation. 

Subjoined, in alphabetical arrangement, are the names, with 
brief descriptions, of the metres used in the Hymns of the Rigveda. 
The Index of Hymns will show the metre or metres employed in 
each Hymn. 

Mhisdrint : a species of Trishtup, in which two Padas contain 
twelve instead of eleven syllables. 

^nushtupf or Anuihiubh : consisting of four Padas of eight syl- 
lables each, two P^das forming a line. This is the prevailing 
form of metre in the Manava-dharma-sastra, the Mahabharata, 
Ihe Ram^yana, and the Puranas, 



653 


APPfi)Nl)ll£ 1#. 


Anushtuhgarhhd : a metre of the Ushnih class; the first 
containing five syllables, and the three following Padas 
syllables each. 

Anu^hiup Piptmarnadhyd : a species of Aniish^up having the secoiu 
P4da shorter than the first and third (8 syllables + 4 + 8 + 8) 

Ashti: consisting of four P^das of sixteen syllables each, or sixty 
four syllables in the stanza. 

ABtdrapanJcti : consisting of two Padas of eight syllables each 
followed by two Padas of twelve syllables each. 

Atidhriti : four Padas of nineteen syllables each, = 76 syllables- 

Atijagati: four Padas of thirteen syllables each. 

Atinichxit : consisting of three Padas containing rcpectivcly seven, 
six, and seven syllables. 

Ati^alcoari : four Pildas of fifteen syllables each. 

Atyashii : four Padas of seventeen syllables each. 

Brihati : four Padas (8 + 8 + 12 + 8) containing 36 syllables in the 
stanza. 

Chaturvinsatikd Dvipadd : a Dvipada containing 24 syllables in 
stead of 20. 

Dhriti : consisting of seventy-two syllables in a stanza. 

Dvipadd Virdj a species of Gayatri consisting of two Padas only 
(12 + 8 or 10+10 syllables); inadequately represented in the 
translation by two decasyllabic iambic lines. 

Ekapadd Trishtup : a Trish^p consisting of a single Pada or 
quarter stanza. 

Ekapadd Virdj : a Viraj consisting of a single Pada. 

Gdyatri : the stanza usually consists of twenty -four syllables, 
variously arranged, but generally as a triplet of three P^das 
of eight syllables each, or in one line of sixteen syllables and a 



METRE. 


653 


gccoiKl Hue of eight. There are eleven varieties of this metre, 
and the number of syllables in the stanza varies accordingly 
from nineteen to thirty-three. 

: a metre consisting of forty-eight syllables arranged in 
four Padas of twelve syllables each, two Padas forming a line or 
hemistich which in the translation is represented by a double 
\lexandrine. 

Kakii^ or Kakuhh : a metre of three Padas consisting of eight, 
twelve, and eight syllables respectively. 

laknhh Nyanhusird : consisting of three Padas of 9 + 12-f4 
syllables. 

Kriti: a metre of four Padas of twenty syllables each. 

Uadhyejyotia : a metre in which a Pada of eight syllables stands 
between two Padas of twelve. 

UMhrihati : four Padas of eight syllables each, followed by one 
of twelve. 

Mahdpadapankti : a two-lined metre of thirty-one syllables, the 
first lino consisting of four Padas of five syllables each, and the 
second being a Trishtup of the usual eleven syllables. See 
Vedic Hymns, Part I. (S. Books of the East, XXXII), p. xcviii, 

Mahdpaiikti : a metre of forty-eight syllables (8x6 or 12 x 4). 
Mahdsatob^ihati : a lengthened form of Satobrihati. 

Nashtardpi : a variety of Anushtup. 

^yahkusdrini : a metro of four Padas of 8-fl2 4-8 + 8 syllables. 

Pddanichrit : a variety of G&yatri in which one syllable is want- 
ing in each P&da : 7x3=21 syllables. 

^^idapaniti : a metre consisting of five Padas of five syllables 
each. 

: a metro of five octosyllabic PA.das, like Anushtup with 
an additional P^da. 


I 





APPENDir TT. 


’Pankiyuiiard : a metre which ends with a Pahkti of 5 + 5 sjH 
bles. 

Plpilikamadhyd : any metre the middle Pada of which is shorter 
than the preceding and the following. , 

Prdgdtka : a metre in Book VIII. consisting of strophes combining 
two verses, viz. a Brihati or Kakup followed by a Satobrihati. 

Prastdrapavhti : a metre of forty syllables : 12 + 12 + 8 + 8. 

Pratishthd : a metre of four Padas of four syllables each ; also a 
variety of the Gayatri consisting of three Padas of eight, seven, 
and six syllables respectively. 

PuTdstddhTihcLtt : a variety of Brihati wdlh twelve syllables in the 
first Pada. 

Pura-ushnth : a metre of three Padas, containing 12 + 8 + 8 sylla- 
bles. 

Sakvart : a metre of four Padas of fourteen syllables each. 

Satobrihati : a metre whose even PMas contain eight syllables, 
each, and the uneven twelve : 12 + 8-hl2 + 8- 40. 

Skandhogrtva : consisting of four Padas of 8 + 12 + 8+ 8 syllables. 

V ' consisting of three Padas of 11+11 + 6 syllables. 

TrUhtup or Trishiuhh : a metre of four PMas of eleven syllables 
each. 

Vparishlddbrihatl : consisting of four Padas of 12 + 8-t8t8 
syllables. 

Uparishtdjjyotis : a Trishtup stanza the last P^da of which con- 
tains only eight syllables. 

t}rdhvahrihati : a variety of Brihati. 

Vrohrihati : a variety of Brihati : 8 + 12 + 8't-8 syllables. 

U$hniggarbhA : a Galyatr; of three Pildaa of six, seven, and eleven 
syllables respectively. 



METRE. 


655 


Uhnih : consisting of three Padas of 8 + 8 + 12 syllables. 
Tardhamdnd : a species of Gayatri : 6 + 7 + 8= 21 syllables. 
fiparttd : a metro of four Padas resembling Vishtarapankti, 

]^ird(jlrdpd : a Trishtup metre of four P^as, 11 + 11+11+7 or 
8 syllables. 

Wrdj : a metre of four Padas of ten syllables each, 
firdlpdrvd : a variety of Trishtup. 

Yiratsthd7id : a variety of Trishtup 
Yishaviapadd ; metre of uneven stanzas. 

Yhhtdrahrihatt : a form of Briliati of four Padas containing 8 + 
10+10 + 8 = 36 syllables. 

Yishidrapankti : a form of Pankti consisting of four P&das of 8 
+ 12 + 12 + 8 = 40 syllables. 

Yavamadhyd : a metre having a longer Pada between two shorter 
ones. 




T 


Trajb 




INDEX OF HYMNS. 

BOOK I. 


RUhi. 

1 Madhuch* 

chhand&s. 

2 The same. 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 Jetar or Jetd. 

12 Medh^ltithi. 

13 The same. 

14 . .. 

15 


16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 


23 Medhatithi. 


24 Sunahsepa. 

25 The same. 

26 


Leity. 


Agni. 

Vdyu ludra-Varuna. 

Mitra-Varuna. 

Aavins. Indra. Visvedevas. 

Saraavati. 

Indra. 

Indra. 

Indra, Maruts, Indra and 
Maruts. 

Indra. 

The same. 


Agni. 

Apria. 

Viavedevas. 

Ilitus. Indra. Maruts. Tvash- 
tar. Agni. Mitra-Varuua. 
Asvins. 

Indra. 

Indra-Varuna. 

Brahmanaspati. Indra and 
Soma. Dakshin^. 

Agni and Maruts. 

Uibhus. 

Indra-Agni. 

Asvins. Savitar. Agni. In- 
drd;il, Varun&ul,acd Ag- 
nftyi. Heaven and Earth. 
Earth. Vishnu. 

Vdyu. Indra- Vdyu. Mitra- 
Varuna. Visvedevas. Pu- 
shan. Waters. 

Varuna. Agni. Savitar. 

Varuna, 

Agni. 


Mitre, 

Gdyatri. 

The same. 


Anushtup. 
The same, 
Odyatri. 
The same. 


Gdyatri. 4, 5 PddanichHt. 
Giiyatrl. 

The same. 


Gdyatrt. 19 Pura-ushnih. 20 
Anushtup 21 Pratishtha. 
22-24 Anushtup. 
Trishtup. 3-5 Gdyatri. 
Gdyatrt. 

The same. 



Hymn. 


653 


INDBX OF HYMNS. 


27 Sunalasepa. 

28 The same 

29 

30 

31 HiranyaatOpa. 

32 The same. 

33 

34 

35 

86 Kanva. 

37 The same. 

38 

39 


42 

43 

44 Praskanva. 

45 The same. 


Indra. Visvedevas. 

Indra. Pestle and Mortar. 
Indra. 

Indra. Asvina. Ushas. 

Agni. 

Indra. 

The same. 

Asvina. 

Savitar. Agni. Mitra-Va- 
runa. Night. 

Agni. 13-14 Sacrificial Post. 

Maruts. 

Maruts. 

The same. 

Brahmanaspati. 

Varuna-Mitra-Aryaman. 

Adityas. 

Pilahan. 

Kudra. Mitra-Varuna. Soma 
Agni. 


GAyatrl. 13 Trishtup. 
Anushtup. 7-9 Gayatrt. 
Pankti. 

Gfiyatrl. 11 PAdanichrit. 16 
Trishtup. 

Jagatt. 8, 16, 18 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 

Jagati. 9 and 12 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 1 and 9 Jagati. 

Brihati and Satobrihatl 
alternately. 

G^yatri. 

The same. 

Brihati and Satobrihatl 
alternately. 

The same. 

GAyatri. 

The same. 

i. Giiyatri. 9 Anushtup, 
Brihati and Satobrihati 
alternately. 

Anushtup. 


46 

47 

Asvins. 

The same. 

GAyatri. 

Bjihati and Satobrihatl 
alternately. 

48 

49 

60 

61 Savya. 

62 The same. 

63 T -- 

Ushas. 

The same. 

Surya. 

Indra. 

The same. 

The same. 

Anushtup. 

GAyatri. 10-13 Anushtup. 
Jagati. 14-15 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 13 and 15 Trishtup 
Jagati. 10 and 11 Trishtup 

54 


Jagati. 6,8,9,11 Trishtup. 

55 


Jagati. 

56 - - 


The same. 

57 

68 Nodhas. 

59 The same. 

60 

Agni. 

Agni VaisvAnara. 

Agni. 

Indra 

Jagati. 6-9 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 

61 

62 

The same. 





Hymn. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


659 


Riihi. 

63 NodhAs. 

64 The same 

65 ParAsara. 

66 ^he same, 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 Cotama. 

75 The same. 

76 

78 

79 

80 

81 

82 

83 .... 

84 


85 Gotama, 

86 The same. 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 


Kutaa. 

The same. 


Deity. 


Metre. 


Iiidra. 

Maruts. 

Agni. 

The same. 


Trislitup. 

Jagati. 15 Trislitup. 
Dvipadil Vir.lj, 

The .same. 


Trislitup. 
Tlie same. 


Indra. 

The same. 


Maruts. 
The same. 


Visvedevas. 

The same. 

Soma. 

Ushas. Asvlns. 

Agni-Soma. 

Agni. Gods. Mitra, Varuna, 
Aditi, Sindhu, Heaven and 
Esrth. 

Agiii 


GayatH. 

The same, 

Tiishtup. 

The same. 

Oayatii. 

1-3 Trislitup. 4-6 Ushmh, 
7-12 UAyatri. 

Pankti. 

The same. 

Pankti. 6 Jagatt, 

J agatt. 

1-6 ,\nuKhtup. 7-9 Ushnih. 
10-12 Pankti ; 13-15 GA- 
yatri. 16-lH Tri.shLup. 19 
Brihati. 20 Satobiihati. 

Jagati 5 and 12 Trislitup. 

GAyatri. 

Jagati. 

1 and 6 PrastArapankti. 5 
ViradrupA 2-4 Trislitup. 

Jagati. 6 VirAtsthAiiA. 8-10 
Trislitup. 

GAyatri. 9 Aiiushtup. 

Trishtup. 5-16 GAyatri. 17 
Ushnih. 

Jagati. 5-12 Trislitup. IS- 
IS Ushnih. 

Aiiushtup. 9-11 GAyatri. 
4-7 and 12 Trishtup. 8 
Trishtup and Jagati. 

Jagati. 15 and 16 Tfishtup. 


Trishtup. 



m 


INDEX OF 


S Rishi. 

96 Kutea. 

97 The same 

98 

99 Kaeyapa. 

100 Rijrftava, and 

others. 

101 Kutsa. 

102 The same. 

loa 

104 

105 The same, or 

Trita Aptya. 

106 Kutsa. 

107 The same. 

108 

109 

110 

111 

112 Kutsa. 

113 

114 

115 

116 KakshtvAn. 

1 17 The same. 

118 

119 

120 


Deity. 


Agni. 

The same. 


Indra. 

The same. 


Visvedevaa. 

The same. 

Indra- Agni. 

The same. 

Ivibbus. 

The same. 

Heaven and Earth. Asvins. 
Agni. 

Ushas. Ushas and ISfight. 

Rudra 

Surya. 

Asvins 
The same. 


121 

Viavedevas or Indra, 

122 

Visvedevas 

123 

Ushas. 

124 

The same. 

125 

Svanaya. 

126 KakshlvAn, 

BhAvayavya, 
Romas A. 

BhAvayavya. Roma* A. 

127 Paruphchhepa. 

Agni. 

128 The same. 

The same. 

129 

Indra, Indu. 


Metre. 


Trishtup. 
GAyatrl. 
Trishtup. 
The same. 


Jagatl. 8-12 Trishtup, 
Jagatl. 11 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 

Pankti. 8 Mahdbrihatl. Ya 
vamadhyA 19 Trit'htup 
Jagatf 7 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 

Jagatil. 8 and 9 Trishtup. 
Jagati 5 Trishtup. 

Jagatl. 24 and 25 Trishtui 

Trishtup. 

Jagatl. 10 and 11 Trishtu 
Trishtup. 

The same. 


Jagrttt. 

1, 10-12 GAyatrl. 2 Kakup.' 

8 K&virAj 4 Nashtarupl. 
5 TanusirA. 6 Ushnih. 7 
VishUr'abrihatt. 8 Kriti. 

9 VirAj. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 6 and 6 VirAdrdpA. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 4, 5 Jagatl. 
Trishtup. 6 and 7 Anushtup. 


Atyaehti. 6 Atidh|iti. 
Atyashti. 

Atyashti. 8, 9 Ati^^tvarl. 
11 Ashti. 



rNOKlC OF HTlfNg. 


961 


S tiUki. 

Deity, 

Metre, 

130 Paruchchhepa. 

Indra. 

Atyashti. 10 Trishtup. 

131 The same 

The same. 

Atyashti. 

132 4 

Indra. Indra and Parvata. 

The same. 

133 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 2-4 Anushtup. 5 
Gftyatrt. 6 Dhiiti. 7 Aty- 
ashti. 

134 

VAyu. 

Atyashti 6 Ashti. 

135 

Vftyu. Vftyu and Indra. 

Atyashti 7, 8 Ashti* 

136 

Mitra and Varuna. 

Atyashti. 7 Trishtup. 

137 

Mitra and Varuna. 

Atisakvart. 

138 

Pdahan. 

Atyashti. 

139 

Visvedevas. Mitra and Varu- 
na. Afvins. Indra Agni. 
Maruta. Indra and Agni. 
Brihaapati. 

Atyashti. OBrihatt. 11 Triah- 
tup. 

UO Dtrghatama84 

Agni. 

Jagati 10 Tri.shtup or Jaga- 
ti. 12, 13 Trishtup. 

141 The same. 

The aarne. 

Jagati. 12, 13 Trishtup. 

142 

Aprta Indra. Agni. 

Anushtup. 

143 

Agni. 

Jagati. 8 Trishtup. 

144 

The same. 

Jagati. 

145 


Jagati. 5 Trishtup. 

146 


Trishtup. 

147 


The same. 

148 



149 


Virftj. 

150 


tfshuilu 

151 

Mitra. Mitra and Varuna. 

Jagati. 

152 

Mitra and V.iruna. 

Trishtup. 

153 

The same 

The same. 

154 

Viah’iu. 


155 

Viahnu and Indra. Vishnu. 

Jagati. 

156 . 

Vishnu. 

The same. 

157 

Asvina. 

Jagati. 5, 6 Trishtup. 

158 ... 

The same. 

Trishtup. 6 Anushtup. 

159 .. 

Heaven and Earth. 

Jagati. 

160 • 

The same. 

The same. 

161 

Ribhufl. 

Jagati. 14 Trishtup. 

162 

Eulogy of the Horse. 

Trishtup. 3, 6 Jagati. 

163 

The same. 

Trishtup. 

164 

Visvedevas. VAk. Waters. Trishtup. 12, 15, 23, 29, 36,41 


Soma. Agni. S irya. Vftyu. Jagati. 42 Prast4rapanktL 
Time. Sarasvatl. S'ldhyas. 51 Anuahtup. 

Saraavd.u or Surya. 



C62 


INDEX OF HVMNS, 


i: 

Rishi. 

Duty, 

Mttvc. 



165 Indra Maruts. 
Agastya. 

Indra, 

Trishtup, 

166 Agaatya. 

Maruts. 

Jagatl. 14, 15 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. ' 

167 The same. 

Indra Maruts. 

168 

Maruts. 

Jagatt 8-10 Trishtup. 

169 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 2 ViriVj. 

170 Indra- Agastya. 

Indra. 

1 BrihatL 2-4 Anush tup. 

5 Trislitup. 

171 Agastya. 

172 The same. 

173 

174 

175 

Maruts Indra. 

Maruts. 

IiKlra. 

The same 

Trishtup. 

GAyatri. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

Anushtup. 1 Skandhogrivl. 




6 Trishtup. 

176 


Anushtup. 6 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

177 

178 

179 LopilmudiA Ag 



■ Rati (Pleasuie). 

Trishtup 5 Biihati. 

astya. Pupil. 



180 Agastya. 

Alvins 

Trishtup. 

181 The same. 

The same. 

The same. 

182 


Jagatl. 6, 8 Trishtup. 

183 


Trishtup. 

The same. 

184 


185 

Heaven an<l Earth. 


186 

Visvedevas. 


187 

Praise of Food. 

1 Anush tuhgarbhA 2, 4, 


8, 10 Gayatri 3, 5, 6, 7 
Anushtup or Bfihatl 


188 

Apiis. 

Gayatri. 

189 

Agni 

Trishtup. 

190 

Brihaspati, 

The same. 

191 

Water. Grass. Surya. 

Anushtup 1 0-12 Mahapank 

BOOK II. 

ti 13 Mahabrihati. 


1 Gritaamada. 

2 The aame. 

3 

4 Somihuti. 

5 The same 

6 

7 

Agni. 

The same. 

Apiis. 

Agni. 

The same. 

Jagati. 

The same. 

Trishtup. 7 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

AnushWp. 

Gayatri. 

The same. 


8 Gfitsamada. 


Uayatii. 6 Anushtup. 



Hymv., 


INDEX 0 * HVMNB. 


668 


UHhi. Deity, Metre, 

9 Qritsamada. Agni, Trishtup. 

10 The same. The same The same. 

11 , Indra. VirAtethftnA Trishtup. 

21 Trishtup. 

12 The same. Trishtup. 

13 Jagall 13 Trishtup. 

^4 Trishtup. 

15 The same. 

16 Jagati. 9 Trish^p. 

17 Jagati. 8, 9 Trishtup. 

18 Trishfaip, 

19 The same. 

20 Trishtup. 3 VirAdrOpA. 

21 ...... .. Jagati. 6 Trishtup. 

22 Ashli. 2, 3 Atisakvari. 4 Ati- 

sakvart or Ashti. 

23 Brahmanaspati. Brihaspati. Jagati. 15, 19 Trishtup. 

24 Brahmanaspati. Brahma las- Jagati. 12, 16 Trishtup. 

pati and Indra. 

2.^) Brahmanaspati. Jagati. 

26 The same. The same. 

27 Kurraa. Grit- Adityas. Trishtup. 

samada’s son, 
or Gritsamada. 

28 The same. Varuno. The same. 

29 Vi8vedeva.s. 

30 Qritsamada. Indra. Indra and Soma. Sa- Trishtup. 15 Jagati. 

rasvatl. Biihaspati. Maruts. 

31 The same. Visvedevas. Jagati. 7 Trishtup. 

32 Heaven and Earth Indra or Jagati. 6-8 Anush tup, 

Tvashtar. HAkA. SlnlvAll. 

33 Rudra. Trishtup. 

34 Maruts. Jagati. 15 Trishtup. 

35 ApAmnapAt. Trishtup. 

36 Ilitus. Jagatt 

37 The same. The same. 

38 Savitar. Trishtup. 

Asvins. Trishtup. 

Soma and PTishan. Aditi. The same. 

VAyu Indraand VAyu. Mitra Gdyatii. 16, 17 Anushtup, 

andVaruna Asvins. Indra. 18 Brihutl. 

Visvedevas. Sarasvatl. 

The Kapinjala. Trishtup. [Ashti. 

The *ame. 1-8 Jagati. 2 Atisakvari or 



m 

IKDEX OF RTlfNt. 



BOOK m. 


^ JRiahi. 

Deity, 

Metre. 

1 VievAmitra. 

Agni. 

Trishtup. 

2 The same^ 

VaisvAnara. 

Jagatf. 

8 

The same. 

The same. 

4 

Aprls. 

Trishtup. 

6 

Agni. 

The same. 

6 

The same. 


7 Viavftmifcra. 

Agni. 


8 The same. 

YOpa. Visvedevas. 

Trishtup. 3, 7 Anush tup. 

9 

Agni. 

Brihati. 9 Trishtup. 

30 

The same. 

Ushnih. 

11 


GAyatri. 

12 

Indra and Agni. 

The same. 

13 Rishabha. 

Agni. 

Anushtup. 

14 The same. 

The same. 

Trishtup, 

15 Utktia. 


The same. 

16 The same. 


Brihat! and Satobphatt. 

17 Kata. 


Trishtup. 

18 The same. 


The same. 

19 GAthin. 



20 The same. 

Visvedevas. Agni. 


21 

Agni. 

1, 4 Trishtup. 2,3 Anushtup, 
6 VirAdrupA Satobrihat!. 

22 

The same. 

Trishtup. 4 Anushtup. 

28 DevasraTas and 

Trishtup. 3 Satobrihat!. 

DeyavAta. 


24 VisvAmitra. 


GAyatri. 1 Anushtup. 

25 The same. 

Agni. Agni and Indra. 

VirAj. 

26 

VaisvAnara. Agni. Maruts. 

1-6 Jagatt 7-9 Trishtup. 

27 

Agni. 

GAyatri. 

28 

The same. 

1, 2, 6 GAyatri. 3 Ushnih. 

4 Trishtup. 5 Jagatl. 

29 


Trishtup. 1, 4, 10, 12 Anush- 
tup.* 6, 11, 14, 15 Jagatt. 

80 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

81 

82 

The same. 

The same. 

83 VisvAmitra. The The Rivers. VisvAmitra. 

Trishtup. 13 Anushtup, 

Rivers, 

Indra. 

84 VisvAmitra. 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

86 The same# 

36 

The i^arae. 

The same. 

37 


Gdyatri. 11 Anushtup, 



Hymn. 


INDEX OF HTlfNS. 


m 


Deity. Metre, 

88 PrajftpatijOr Indra. Trishtup. 

Vi8v4mitra. 

89 Vifvftmitra. The same. ' The same. 

40*The same. GAyalrt. 

41 The same, 

42 

43 Triahtup. 

44 Brihat!. 

45 The same. 

46 Trishtup*. 

47 The same. 

48 

49 

50 

51 1-3 Jagafct. 4-9 TrisKtup. 

10-12 GAyatrl. 

52 l-4Qftyatrl. 5, 7, STrishtup. 

6 Jagatl. 

53 Indra, Parvata, Vdk. Triahtup. 10, IBJagat!. 13 

GftyatrJ. 12, 20, 22 Anush- 
tup. 18 Brihatt. 

54 Prajdpati. Visvedevas. Trishtup. 

56 The same. The same. The same. 

66 

57 Visvftmitra. 

58 The same. Asvius. 

59 Mitra. Trishtup. 6-9 GAyatrt, 

60 Bibhus. Indra. Jagati. 

61 Ushas (Dawn). Triah^p, 

62 Indra and Varuna. Brihas- 1-3 Trishtup. 4-18 QAyatrt, 

pati. PiUhan. Savitar. 

Soma. Mitra and Varuna. 


BOOK IV. 

1 Vdmadeya. Agni. Varuna. Trishtup. 1 Ashti. 2 Atija- 

. gatl. 3 Dhriti. 

2 The same. Agni, Trishtup. 

3 The same. The same. 

4 Agni RakshohA 

6 Agni Vaisvftnara. 

6 Agni. 

7 The same. 1 Jagatt. 2-6 Anushtup, 7*11 

Trishtup. 



666 


IKMX OP HTIINS. 


S Pishi. 

Deity. 

Mein. 




8 VAmadeva. 

Agni. 

GAyatr!. 

9 The same. 

The same. 

The same. 

10 


Padapankti. 5 MahApada- 



pankti. 8 Ushnih. 

11 


Trishtup. 

12 


The same. 

14 



15 

Agni. Somaka. Asvins. 

GAyatrl. 

16 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

17 

The same. 

Trishtup. 15 EkapadA VirAj. 

18 Indra. Aditi. 

Indra. Aditi. VAmadeva. 

Trishtup. 

VAmadeva. 



19 VAmadeva. 

Indra. 

The same. 

20 The same. 

The same. 


21 



22 

2*^ 



24 


Trishtup. 10 Anush tup. 

25 


Trishtup. 

26 

Indra The F.ilcon. 

The same. 

27 

The Falcon. 

Trishtup. 3 Sakvarl. 

28 

Indra and Soma. 

Trishtup. 

20 

Indra. 

The same. 

30 

Indra and Ushas. 

GAyatri. 8, 24, Anush ^p. 

31 

Indra. 

GAyatrl. 3 PAdanichrit. 

32 

Indra. Indra’s Horses. 

GAyatrl. 

33 

JJ,ibhu8. 

Trishtup. 

84 

The same. 

The same. 

oO 


Jagati. 9 Trishtup. 

OD 

j^7 


1-4 Trishtup. 5-8 Anush tup. 

38 

Heaven and Earth. Dadhi 

- Trishtup. 


kras. 


30 

DadhikrAs. 

Trishtup. 6 Anush^p. 

40 

DadhikrAa. S'lrya. 

1 Trishtup. 2-5 Jagati. • 

41 

Indra and Varuna. 

Trishtup, 

42 Trasadasyu. 

Trasadasyu. Indra and 

The same. 


Varuna. 


43 Purumilha and 

Asvins. 


Ajamilha. 



44 The same 

The same. 


45 Varnadeva 


Jagati. 7 Trishtup. 



IJJDEX OF HTMN6. 


^ 6 / 


Deity. 


46 Vdmadeva. > 

VAyu. Indra and Vayu. 

47 The same. 

The same. 

48 

VAyu. 

49 

Indra and Brihaspati. 

.50 

Brihaspati. Indra and 
Brihaspati. 

'1 

Ushaa (Dawn). 

52 

* The same. 

53 

Savitar. 

54 

The same. 

55 

Visvedevas. 

56 

Heaven and Earth. 

57 

Kshetrapati Sana. Suna 
and Sira. Sitl. 


Metre. 


G/iyatri. 

AnuBhtup. 

The same. 

GAyatii. 

Trishtup. 10 Jagatt, 

Trishtup. 

Gilyatrl. 

Jagati. 

Jagatt. 6 Trish^p. 
Trishtup. 8-16 Gft-yatrt. 
Trishtup. 5-7 Oftyatri. 

1, 4, 6, 7 Anushtup. 2, 3. 8 
Trishtup. 5 Pura-ushvih. 


Agni, or Surya, or Water.s, Trishtup. 11 Jagatt. 
or Cows, or Ghrita. 


BOOK V. 

1 Budha and Ga- Agni. Trishtup. 

vishthira. 

2 KumAraorVrisa, The same. Trish^p. 12 Sakvarl, 


3 Vasusruta. Agni. Maruts. Rudra Trishtup. 

and Vishnu. 

4 The same. Agni. The same. 

5 Apris. Gayatrl. 

6 Agni. Pankti. 

7 Isha. The same. Anushtup. 10 Pankti. 

8 The same. Jagati. 

9 Gaya, Anushtup. 5, 7 Pankti. 

10 The same. Anushtup. 4, 7 Pankti. 

11 Sutambhara Jagati. 

12 The same. Trishtup. 

13 Gftyatri, 

14.. The same. 

15 Dharuna. Trishtup. 

10 Puru. Anushtup. 5 Pankti. 

17 The same. The same. 

18 Dvita. 

10 Vavri. 1, 2 GAyatrl 3, 4 Anushtup. 

5 Vil•;ld^^ip^i. 

20 Prayasvats. Anushtup. 4 Pankti. 



IKDBX OF riYSilTft. 


m 


Deity. Metre, 

21 Sasa. Agni., Anuahtup. 4 Pankti. 

22 Visvasaman. The same. The same. 

23 Dyumna Visva- 

charshani. 

24 GaupAyanas or DvipadA VirA]. 

LaupAyanas. 

25 VasAyuSi Anilshtup. 

26 The same. Agni. Viavedevaa. GAyatrt* 

27 Tryaruna Trasa- Agni. Indra and Agni. Trishtup. 4-6 Anushtun 

daayu, and As^ ‘ * 

Vamedha, or 

Atri. 

28 Vi^ivaYArA. Agni. 1, 3 Trishtup. 2 JagatJ. 4 

Anushtup. 6, 6 GAyatrt. 

29 Gaurivlti. Indra. Indra or tJsanA. Trishtup. 

30 Babhru. Indra. The same. 

3 1 .\vasyu. The same, 

32 GAtu. 

33 Samvarana, 

34 The same. Jagati. 9 Trishtup. 

35 Prabhdvasu Anushtup 8 Pankti. 

86 The same. Trishtup. 3 Jagati, 

37 Atri Bhauma Trishtup. 

38 The same. Anushtup. 

Anushtup. 5 Pankti. 


Indra. Surya. Atri. 1, 3 Uahnih. 4 Trishtup. 

5-9 Anushtup. 6-8 Trish- 
tup. 


41 Visvedevas. Trishtup. 16, 17 Atijagati. 

20 KkapadA Virdj. 

42 Vi8vedeva.s. Rudra. Trishtup. 17 EkapadA Virdj. 

Trishtup. 16 EkapadA Virij. 

43 Visvedevas. Trishtup. 

44 AvatsAra and The same. Jagati. 14, 15 Trishtup. 

others. 

45 SadAprina. Trishtup. 

46 Pratikshatra. Visvedevas. Consorts of Jagatt. 2, 8 Trishtup. 

the Gods. 

47 Pratiratha. Visvedevas. Jagatt. 

48 PratibhAnu. The same, Trishtup. 

49 Pratiprabha Anushtup. 5 Pankti. 

50 Svasti. 1-4 GAyatrt. 5-10 Ushnih. 11 

51 The same. 13 Jagatt or Trishtup. 1^ 

15 Anushtup. 



INDEX OF HYMNS. 


£ Rtski. 

s 

f,2 SyAvAsvft. 

53 The pame. 


54 

56 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 Srutavid. 

63 ArchanAnaa. 

64 The same. 

65 RAtahavya, 

6(1 The same. 

67 Yajata. 

68 The same. 

69 Uruchakri. 

70 The same, 

71 BAhuvrikta, 

72 The same. 

73 Paura. 

74 The same. 

75 Avasyu. 

76 Atri Bhauma. 

77 The same. 

78 Saptavadhri. 

79 Satyasravas. 

80 The same. 

81 SyAvAsva. 

82 The same. 

83 Atri Bhauma. 

84 The same. 

85 

86 

ii7 Evay^manit. 


m 


Deity, 

Metre. 

Maruts. 

Anush tup. 6, 16, 17 Pankti, 

The same. 

1, 5, 10, 11, 15 Kakup. 2 
Brihati. 3 Anushtup. 4 
Pura-ushnih. 6, 7, 9, 13, 
14, 16 Satobrihatl. 8, 12 
GAyatri. 



Jagatl. 14 Trish^p. 


Jagati. 10 Trishtup, 


Brihatt. 3, 7 Satobrihatt. 


Jagati. 7, 8 Trishtup, 


Trishtup, 


Jagati. 8. Trishtup. 


Tiishtup. 7, 8 Jagati. 

Maruts and others. 

GAyatri. 5 Anushtup. 9 
SSatobnhati. 

Mitra and Varu la. 

Trishtup. 

The seme. 

Jagati 


Anushtup. 7 Pankti. 


Anushtup. 6 Pankti, 


Anushtup. 


The same. 


GAyatri. 


Trishtup. 


GAyatri. 


The same. 


Ushnih. 

Asvins. 

Anushtup. 

The .same. 

The same. 


Pankti. 


Trishtup . 


The same. 


1-3 Ushnih. 4 Trishtup, 6*9 
Anushtup. 

Ushas (Dawn), 

Pankti. 

The satne. 

Trishtup. 

Savitar. 

Jagati. 

The same, 

GAyatri. 1 Anushtup. 

Parjanya, 

1, 5-8, 10 Trishtup. 2-4 Ja« 
gatl. 9 Anushtup. 

Pfithivt. 

Anushtup. 

Yaruna. 

Trishtup. 

Indra and Agni, 

Anushtup. 6. VuAtpflrvA. 

Maruts, 

AUJagati. 



Hymn. 


m 


INDEX OF HYMNS, 


RhKi. Deity. 

BOOK VI. 

1 BharadvAja. Agni. 

2 The same. The same. 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 VaiavAnara Agni. 

8 The same. 

9 

10 Agni. 

The same. 

12 

13 

14 


15 Vltahavya, or 
Bharadvdja. 


16 The same 


17 Indra. 

18 The same. 

19 

20 

21 Indra. Visvedevau. 

22 The same. 


23 

24 

25 

26 
27 


28 The Cows. 

29 Indra, 

30 The same. 


31 Suhotra. 

32 The same. 

33 Sunahotra. 

34 The same. 


Metre. 


Tribhtup, 

Anushtiip. 11 Sakvarl. , 
Trishiup. 

The same. 


Trishtup. 7 DvipadA VnAj 
Jagatf. 7 Trishtup 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 7 Dvipa<la Viiuj. 
Trishtup. 


Anushtup. 6 Sakvart. 

Jagatl 3, 15 Sakvari. 6 Ati- 
sakvaH. 10*14,16, 19 Trish- 
tup. 17 Anushtup, 18 Bri' 
hati . 

GAyatri. 1, 6 Vardhamdnil 
27, 47, 48 Anushtup, 4t 
Tiishtup. 

Trishtup. 15 Dvlpadd Trish 
tup. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 

Tri^hUlp. 7 Virij. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 


Trishtup. 2*4 Jagatl. 
Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 

TriahtfUp. 4 Sakvart. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 



Hymn. 


INDEX OF HTMN3, 


671 


JRUhi. 

35 Nara. 

36 The same. 

37 Bharadv^ja. 

38 The same. 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 Samyu. 

45 The same. 

46 

47 Garga. 

48 Samyu. 


49 llijisvan. 

50 The same. 

51 

52 

53 Bharadvftja. 

54 The same. 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 ; 

62 

63 


Deity. 


Metre, 


Indra. 

The same. 


Indra. Bribu. 

Indra. 

Soma. Indra. Bnhaspati. 
Prastoka. Chariot, Drum, 

Agni. Maruts. Pushan. 
Priani and others. 


Visvedevas. 
The same. 


Pdshan. 
The same. 


Pdsbau and Indra. 
pa.shan. 

Indra and Agni. 
The same. 

Saraavatl. 

ABvins, 

The same. 


Trishtup. 
The same. 


Anuahtup. 4 Biihaih 
Uahnih. 

Trishtup. 1-6 Anush^p. 7-9 
Viraj or Tri.shtup 8 Vint j. 
Gdyatri. 29 Atinichrit. 31 
Pddanichrit. 33 Ann.'^htup, 
Brihati and Satobrihati al- 
ternately. 

Trishtup. 19 Brihati. 23 An- 
ush tup. 34 Gdyatrt. 25 
Dvipad.d. 27 Jagail 
1,3,5, 9, 14, 19, 20 Brihati. 
2, 4, 10, 12, 17 Satobrihati. 
6, 8 Mahdsatobrihatl. 7 
M.ihAbiihatl 11,16 Kakup. 
1.3, 18 Pnra-u.shnih .51 
Atijagatl. 21 Yawamadhyd- 
mahdbrihati.22 Auushtup, 

Tri.shtup. 15 Sakvari. 
Trishtup. 

Tiishtup 13-15 Uahnih. 16 
Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 7-12 Gayatrt. 14 
* Jagali. 

Gdyatri, 8 Anushtip. 
Gdyatii. 

The same. 

Gdyatri. 6 Anuahtup. 
Olyatri. 

Trishtup. 2 Jagati. 

Brihati. 7-10 Anushtup. 
Gftyatri. 1-3, 13 Tiishtup. 

14 Brihati. 15 Anushtup. 
Gdyatri,l-3, 13 Jagat!. 14 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 1 Virdj. 11 Eka- 
padd Trishtup. 



ffymn. 


072 


INDIEX OF HYMNS. 


Rithi. 


Deity. 


Metre. 


64 Bharadvaja. 

65 The same. 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 PAyu. 


Uahas (Dawn). Triihtup. 

The same. The seme. 

Maruts. 

Mitra and Varuna. 

Indra and Varuna. Trishtup. 9, 10 Jagatt. 

Indra and Vialmu. Trish^p. 

Heaven and Earth. Jagati. 

Savitar. Jagati. 4-6 Trishtup. 

Indra and Soma. Trishtup. 

Brihaspati. The same. 

Soma and liudra. 

Men, Weapons, and Imple- Trishtup. 6, 10 Jagatt. 12, 
ments of War. Armour. 13, 15, 16, 19 Anush^up. 
Bow. Bowstring. Quiver. 17 Pankti. 

Arrow. Charioteer. Hor- 
ses. Chariot, Whip, etc. etc. 



INDEX OF NAMES. ETC. 


jhiplava, the name of 114, 217-219, 265, 294, 357, 376, 378-881, 383 - 

a religious ceremony, 386,425,461, 510,521, 385,388,391-410, 421, 

43,.272, 286 notes. 525, 563, 626. 423, 427, 429, 430, 440, 

)hy4vartin Ch^lyamftna, Adityas, Varu'^a, Mitra, 443, 446, 458-460, 463- 

the name of a king, 589. Aryaman, Bh.iga, Dak- 488, 492, 498-500, 502- 

aotigines, 184,412noi6«; sha, Ahaa, and one or 5<H, 606, 509-512, 614, 

Bee Dftsas, Dasyus, Kt- two others, 17, 24,27, 516-518,526, 529-531, 

katas, Simyus. 32, 33, 48, 58, 62, 97, 633 538. 544, 552, 553, 

bsoiuto God, the, 379 121,139,189,252,259, 655-574.577,612, 613, 

note. 260, 263, 292-294, 297, 615-618, 622, 623, 628- 

jknowledgment of a son, 311,313,328,337,378, 630, 634. 

334. 379, 383, 427, 439, 458, Agni. the Soul of All, 341 ; 

ilhrigu, the name of a 505,519,537, 539,572. Universal King, 380; 

Uishi, 148. 619, 633. Mother and Father, 

dbvara, primary essen- Adoption of sons, 347 401, 403, 555, 578; Fa- 

tial sacrifice, 19 note. Aeschylus, 443 note. ther and Brother of 

dlivaryuCs), the priest Agastya, a great Vedxc men, 41 ; identified with 

and priests who per- Ilishi, 228, 230, 235, all Gods, 259, 266, 468 ; 

form the practical work 236, 244, 248, 255, 649, essential in all sacri- 

of the sacrifice. 122, 650. fices, 562 ; his names, 

HO, 142, 199, 259, 275- the family priest of epi^^xets, and qualities, 

277, 280, 306, 327, 357, King Khela, 156, 159. U 2, 15, 1 6, 35, 80, 81, 

402,494, 508, 600 602. AghAsva, a name or functions as 

diti, Infinity, Infinite thet of Pedu, ' royal priest, oblation -bearer. 

Nature, the mother of Rishi prote-^^^ V mediator, 1,14,15, 

the Gods, 30, 32, 59, 83, Asvin.'* 18, 3,5 50, 51, 79, 80, 

07,114 115 121 123 AgnA/'» consort of 122,178,267,330,336, 
125, 126, 138, 139, 151, Agui, 26. 515. ^ 475 ; consecrator _ of 

189, 206 217 231 2^^, Agni, the God of Fire marriage, 468 : spiri- 
260* 292-294 *29^/310, and Light, vi., 1,2, 14- tual husband of maid- 

323,’ 329 36% ^68, 372, 19, 21, 24, 26, 28-30, ens, 9i, 463; Lord of 

379! 39L’'i08, 416, 417, 34-36, 40-42, 48, 50-52, matrons, i e. giver of 

427! ^48^ 458, 459, 493, ^4, 56, 60-63, 80-82, children, 91, 92 ; jun- 

.»:45, 506, 5H, 515^517, 90-102, 114, 120-127, gle-clearing fire, 79, 80, 

619, 539, 549, 580, 617, 136-138, 140, 144, nd, 194, 264, 265, 398,399 ; 

618,620, 626, 628, 639, 150, 153, 168, ir3, 175- funeral fire (KravyAd), 

648. 178, 190-2W> 208, 209, 396 ; his flight from his 

masculine deity, 212-215,217,223,226, duties, 329, 477, 663, 

445, 227, 235, 236, 239, 245, 570 ; his birth, 40, 41, 

%a, a son of Aditi, 260,259-270,275,282, 81, 82, 145, 195, 196. 

especially Varuna and 200,298,304-307,312, 259, 318; his produo* 

theSun, 16, 32-'34,68, 316-377,329-344, 350, tion by attrition, 14 , 

43 



674 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


195, 342, 380; bia Agrn, t,bn name of a wo- Ambartslia, the name of 

double birth, 81, 82, man, 419, 433 a man, 130. 

145 194, 203; hia three Ahavantya, the eastern AmbrosiH, 29,341,604, 
bodies, 337 ; three ma- sacrificial fire, 41, 306, Amrit, nectar, the drink 
nifestations, 391 ; three 337, 464 nofea. of Gods, 29, 97, 143, 

splendours, 319 ; three Alii, the serpent of the 186,317,341,461,^66, 
boms, 509; threebirth- cloud, demon of drought, 528, 597, 603, 604. 

places, 124; three 6, 43, 44, 103, 133, Amritsar, 353 no<c. 

homes, 470, '563, 566 ; 134, 181, 270, 275, 283, Ancient, the, Dyau3,Heav 

three receptacles or 296, 352, 354, 367, en, 385. 

hearths, 472 ; three 413, 430, 492, 493, Indra, 582. 

stations, 337 ; three 496, 497, 577, 592. Angira, a member of the 
forma, 101, 219, 319; Ahibudlmya, the dragon family of Angira-s, 4.')5. 

various forms, 1 6, 252 ; of the deep, an atmos- Angiras, a semi-divine 

three powers, 337; phcric deity, 250, 298, patriarchal llishi; also 

three tongues, 337; re- 459,505,817,619. a name of Agni and 

gulator, as the bun, of AhimA^Asah, versatile or Brihaspati, 1, 23, 30, 
theseasons, 124,468,478; wise as serpents, 4 noie. 42,45,50, 62, 69, 84, 
and of sacred rites, 568.Ahura, God, Iranic equi- 99, 101, 121, 143, 148, 
Agnichayana, preparation valent of Asui’a, 32 164,180,193,289,303, 

of the sacred hearth, mote. 349, 350, 361, 373, 

96 note. peraonifietl, 328. 398, 406, 445, 475,477, 

Agtiidh, Kindler, the Aitarcya-Bnlhmana, 30, 483, 490, 513, 517, 

piiest who lights ^he 154, 327, 330, 570. 617, 644. 

sacred fire, 259, 306, i itchison, Dr., 2. Angirases, descendants 

510 notea. Aja, Unborn, 377 mote, of Angiras, 1, 40, 69, 


Agnihotra, oblation to 
Agni, 307, 636 notes. 

Agnishtoma, Praise of 
Agni, a protracted Soma 
ceromony, 19 note. 

Agnl-Sotfia, the two Gods 
as a dual deitj 21 note. 

A^ivesa, the name of a 
prince, 498 note. 

Agnivesi, Satri son of 
Agnivesa, 498. 

Agriculture, 460, 461 ; 
plough, ploughing, 29, 
460, 461; ploughing 
and sowing, 160; goad, 
460 ; sickle, 80, 420; 
garner, 278; barley or 
grain, 160; furrow per- 
sonified, 461. 


Aja-EkajA,]^ the Unborn- 
One-footea, the Sun, 
298, 619. 

Ajamllhas, men of 
family of the llishi 
Ajamilha, 450. 

Ajigarta, a llishi, father 
of Sunahsepa, 30 note. 
All-Gods, 623; see Vis- 
* vedevas. 

ArV-pervading, Vishnu, 

; 27 noie. 

, Altar(s), 4, 177, 199, 

; 203, 225, 2^8, 263, 

268, 323, 324, 339, 
; 343, 344, 873, 381, 

r 397, 401, 406, 407, 

- 410,477,566,567,613. 

Amarakosha, 227. 


71, 84,85, 94,106,128, 
131, 139, 148,165,164, 
165, 176,184,192, 272, 
279, 280, 284,290, 348, 
349, 361, 373, 392,395, 
398,401, 411,455, 
477, -iao, 512, 613, 555, 
566, 575, 593 j 596, 

598, 617, 636. 

Angirases, the Bharniiv.'t- 
jas, descendants of An- 
giras, 596. 

Animals, tame and wild, 
horse, bull, cow, fas- 
sim ; ram, ewe, 60, 69, 
71; goat, 191, 215, 
219, 309; ass, 48, 156, 
217, 441; dog, 214,246, 
309, 418; lion, 88,340, 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


675 


12, 479, 641, 542; title of Agni as Light- 132-135,140,146,158, 
uflalo, 422; gaura, ning, 26, 303 305; 160,181,183,209,240, 

22, 462; gavaya, 462; Watery Child of the. 241, 262, 272, 285, 333, 

iiielope, 88; deer, 54, Apay^, a small unidenti- 339, 340, 355, 374, 380, 
36, 217; spotted deer, fied stream, 339. 387, 398. 428, 433, 495, 

2, d9; bear, 626; wild Apnavdna, the name of a 497, 513, 552, 576, 583, 

oar, 83, 113, 162; wild Ui.shi, 403. 586, 592, 594, 604, 621, 

422; wolf, 136-138, Apri(a), a class of pro- 630. 

56, 160, 203; mun- pitiatory hymns ad- Arya, colour, t. e race, 356. 

oose, 257; scorpion, dressed to Agni, 15, 16, Aryainan, one of the Adi- 

57 ; serpent, 4, 254 ; 197, 252, 262, 263, 321, tya«,31, 50, 57, 5S, 61, 

^gle, 161, 217, 312; 471,472 102, 114-116, 136, 137, 

iloon, hawk, 44, 161, Apsaras, a celestial nym- 140, 189, 192, 196, 214, 

12, 403 ; pe.afowl, 257, ph, 373. 233, 249, 259, 292, 293, 

36 ; swan, 90, 218 ; Apsarascs, 129. 308. 379,394, 397, 433, 

lakwd, 309; pigeon, Aptya, dwelling in the 458, 459, 468,502,514, 

quail, 146, 156, waters (of air), Trita, 51.5, 537, 614, 617, 622, 

59 ; kapinjala, 312; 137, 251, 503. Asiknt, one of the five 

arrot, 68 : starling, Aramati, the Genius of rivers of the Panjdb, 

? See also under se- devotion, 307, 508. 44 note 

irate words. A.rbuda, a demon of the Asna, the name of a de- 

tsbhd, probably an air, 70, 272, 277. mon, 384, 559. 

fluent of the Indus, Archaninas, a Itishi, 536. Ass, figurative, a rival 

12. Archer, 89, 91, 9), 95, worshipper, 33. 

ast, apparently an 175,203,538, 635. As.ses<>f the Asvins, 

aidentified river, 135, Arjuna, a man’s name, 48,156,217,411. 

)9 note. 168. Assembly, congregation, 

lets, 524, Arjuui, the father of synod, 41, 206, 469. 

astuti, hymn to Food, Kutaa, 149,428. Assembly’s Lord, Agui, 

e. Soma, 251- Arka, the Sun, 616. 22. 

S the distributer, one Armlets, 522. Asura, Lord God, 32, 49, 

the Adityas, 259, 292. Armour, 33, 42, 195, 440, 75, 143, 167, 182, 239, 

aka, the Ender, Death, 646, 648 260, 293, 297, 344, 360, 

14, Arna, a prince slain by 373, 39-^, 457, 477, 479, 

•hill, 419. Indra, 433. 5^7, 519, 534, 535, 

15, a Vedic tribe, dcs' Arriar viii., 353. 579, 596, 633. 

udants of Anu, 10, Arrow, the Lofty. demon (later use), 

10,402. ning, 397. ^34, 159, 501. 

yaja, an after-sacri- Arrows, 52.% 608, 647. Asura-slayer, Indra, 683. 

cc, 57 note. voisoned, 647. Asura<», ancient Gods, 

Miis, the invoking 204,276. 

‘me of one of the Ma 410 note. demons (later use), 

'k 96 note. Arya(f'), Aryan, v , vi., 43, 72, 74, 129. 1 40, 146, 

ninapdt, offspring of xvi , 3, 10, 22, 70, 80, 147, 160, 182,281, 285, 

Waters (of air), a 84, m, 125, 129, 130, 505, 545, 581. 



INDEX OF NAMES, BTO. 


« 7 « 

Asva, father of the Rishi 
*Va^, 140. 

Aavalfiyana, 24 note. 

Asvamedha, Horse-aacri- 
fice, 217. 

the name of a prince, 

487 . 

Asvatha, a name of Divo- 
dAsa, 611, 

Asvattha, the Holy Fig 
Tree, 188 note, 

Asvinl, the consort of 
the Asvina, 515. 

Aavina, the two horse- 
men, Twin Heralds of 
Dawn, 3, 4, 20, 24, 25, 
39, 40, 47, 48, 60, 01, 
63-65, 87, 108, lU, 
119, 120, 142, 144-164, 
168,192,209,210, 213, 
217,224,232,238, 243- 
248, 250, 298, 306, 308, 
309,311,336, 337, 344, 
301, 378, 385, 386, 394 
408-410, 417, 429, 438, 
440, 441, 444, 449-451, 
456, 459, 487,502, 507- 
509, 513, 514,517-519, 
540-546, 575,616, 632- 
634. 

their character, 4, 

25, 47, 78 ; their mi- 
racles, 145-149, 154- 
163, 245, 246. 633 ; 
their chariot, 25, 54Q ; 
their steed or steeds, 
48, 154, 217, 541-643 ; 
their whip, 25, 209 ; 
their favourite num- 
ber, 47, 48. 

Asylum, the sacrificial 
enclosure, 533. 
Atharvan, the first Fire- 
priest, 104, 106, 108, 
J55, 160, 570, 571. 


Alharvans, 611. 
Aiharva-veda, vi., 26, 
108, 209, 224, 396, 429. 
Atithigva, a name of 
DivoilAsa, 70, 74, 75, 
147,181,277, 428, 577, 
587, 600, 611. 

AtiyAja, one who over- 
sacrifices, 621 . 
Atmospheres, two, 563. 
Atri, a great Rishi, 30, 
62, 69, 145, 168, 161, 
162, 193, 243, 247, 268, 
501-503, 518, 519, 539- 
541, 545, 546, 618. 

Atrin, a voracious fiend, 
111 , 112 . 

Atris, descendants of 
Atri, 484, 501, 538. 
Attock, the river, 522 
note. 

Auchathya, a Rishi, 210 
Aufidus, 354 note. 

, Aufrechfc, Prof. Th., 420 
596. 

AurnavAbha, a demon 
272. 

Aurora, 170 note. 

Ausija, the Rishi Kaksht 
vAn, son of Usij, 21, 
146,16.3,168, 421,422, 
503, 559. 

Autumn forts, 183, 239, 
580. 

Autumns, 598, 610. 
Avasyu, a Rishi accord- 
ing +o Sayana, 493, 
543. 

AvatsAra, a RnA«i, 511. 
Avesta, 22, 148, 189.jo^cs. 
Awl, Pfishan’s, 624. 

Axe, hatchet, 215, 217, 
318, 319, 329, 375, 
516, 558. 

figurative, 175, 474 


Axe, the celestial, Agni 
as Lightning, 495. 

Ayas, metal, iron, 72, 78. 
Ayavasa, the name of a 
King. 169. 

Ayu, 76, 125, 214, 240, 
277, 502, 577. 

Babhru, the name of a 
lUshi, 491. 

Bacchus, 22. 

Bahuvrikta, a Rishi, 511. 
Barhi8,322, 471,601; see 
Sacred Grass. 

Rarley, 74, 426, 551. 
Battle, 41 9, 420, 126,411, 
— . = dimeo, 496. 

Bay Horses, Lord of, a 
title of Indni, pamvi. 

steeds of Agni, 18 , 

of Dyaus, 75 ; of Savi- 
tar, 49 ; of Sfirya, 68. 
Bear, 526. 

, BeAs, 353 note. 

Beast, the, Vritra, 489,49! 
, Ben fey, Prof. Th.,xii xiv 
XV , 5, 8, 10, 30, 39, 45 
47, 52, 58, 88, 119, 133 
135, 138, 140, 146-118 
163, 417, 609. 
Bentley, 171. 

Bergaigne, Abel, xiv. 53 
167, 169-171, 192, 225 
246, 368,438, 581,615 
626, 628, 650, 

Bhaga, one of the Adii 
yas, God of Good For 
tune, 17, 30,31, 58,61 
85, 114, 115, 170, ’I8i 
196,199, 260,281,29: 
298, 337, 369, 378, 38: 
384, 897, 433, 459, 48' 

, 49ft, 503-506, 514-51 

619,545), 567,590,61 

621 . 



INDBX OF NAMES, ETC. 


67 ^ 


lAgavaU-Purina, 289. Birds, see Animals. Brahmanaspati, Lord of 

laradvaja(a), *a great * stars, 137. Prayer, another name 

Jliahi and his descend* = flying horses, 449, of Brihaspati, 17, 21, 

ants, 81, 147, 156, 556, 683. 22, 56-68, 114,115,269. 

665,668, 571, 573,576, Bird-catching, 296, 366, 287-292,514, 648. 

5&5, 587, 59.f^, 596, 606, 614. Brahmanism, viiu 

R1Q f52l 685. B]oom6cld. Prof. M., 429, Bralimaputra, a Brah* 

C37. 536. man-priest’s son, 313 

harata, Warrior ; the Boar, see Wild Boar. note. 

name of a king, 305, = Vritra, 166. Brahmaudana,acereinon- 

338, 373, 376, 427, 525, Boat, 471 ; see Ship ial distribution of boil- 

571. = sacrifice, 195. ed rice to Brahmans, 

harataa, 267, 354, 373, Bohtlingk and Roth, see 462 note. 

477, 572, 674. St. Petersburg Lexicon. BrahmAvartta, a sacred 

Ih&rata, a title of Agni, Bollensen, 429. region, 6 note. 

267, 427, 672. Boneless, the. Nature, 220.Br6astplate, 622. 

}liarata8,sou8of Bharata, Bony, the^ the Visible Bribu, a liberal merchant, 
33S, World, 220. 606, 607. 

Iharatl, a Goddess of Bornmuller, Dr. J., 2. Bride, gifts to obtain a, 
Speech, 16,26,198,252, Bow, 645, 646. 141. 

260, 263, 304, 322, 383, Bowls, two, heaven and Brihaddivft, a Goddess of 
339! tsarth, 211, 225, 382, Speech, 607. 

Bharvara, 421. 563, 618. Brihadralha, name of a 

Bharvara, 421. three, heaven, fir- chief, 52. 

Bhivayavya, a liberal mament.andeartb, 638 Briliaduktha, name of a 
prince, 174. Bracelets, 528. priest, 482. 

Bhftvya, the same, 174 no<c. Bradke, Peter von, 638. Brihaspati, Lord of Pray. 
Bhayam^na, the name of Brahma, the Absolute, er, 17, 24, 55, 85, 122, 
a man, 130. 564 note. 138, 139, 147, 193, 213. 

Bhojas, desccndatitp of Brahmd, 182, 224, 368, 254, 265, 28/ -290, 297, 

King Sud5s, 87? 374. 337, 340, 389, 445, 463- 

Bhrigu, an ancJ^nt \lishi, Brahman (.s),prie.st(s), 103, 455, 606, 509, 614, 519, 

l, 40, 71. i^l, 95, 164, 122,225,269,276,306, 611,644, 645. 

176 26^, 403, 404. 313, 332, 406, 454, 462, Brisaya, a fiend or savage 

BhrigU 80,176,199, 264, 488, 492, 496, 602, 604, enemy, 120, 631. 

m, $24, 403, 413, 467, 647. Budha, the father of Pu- 

492. Bi'^hmanCs), 2, 77, 131, rCiravas, 41 note. 

Bhujyu, a protiff 6 of the 140, 211, 375. Buffalo, 20 ; = Agni, 

Asvins, 146, 148, 154, BrAhmapa, theological 462; = cloud, 226. 
159, 162,163,429,633. exegesis, vi., 46, 462 Buffaloes, three hundred 

BihUr, 374 note. notes. dressed for and eaten 

Bird, the, the Sun, 97,218, a priest, 19. by 

227,228,323,401,614. Br&hmanftchchhansl, the Building, 278, 400,402. 

Agni as the Sun, Brahman’s assistant, Bull (the Male, the 

201, 327, 1^1 Strong), lodi-a, lo, 77, 



675 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


134, 237, 242, 274, 276, Camel, 190. Chariot, parts of a, 375. 

280, 345, 846, 350, 356, Canopus, 230. hlessing of a, 375 ; 

358, 360, 3(52, 366-369, Car, deified, 612, 646. see Car. 

382, 411, 417, 491, 496, used in battle, 375. =.8acnfice, 319. 

676, 579, 583, 603, 606, with sharp-edged fel- — Dakshin^, priest’s 

609. lies, 231, 520. fee, 169. 

Bull, Agni, 41, 50, 175, hymn or sacrifice, Chariot-noTe = 

177, 104 - 100 , 201 , 2 UO, 2 oi, 'Abi. task, 109, 261, 325,51'; 

264,305,319,326,327, golden, = hymn, ri- Charites, 403 no;e. 

334, 342, 343, 384, 392, dies, 39. Childbirth, liturgy ©f, 

397, 401, 466, 468, 477, priest s’ guerdon, 170. 545 note. 

488, 509, 555, 556, 561, Agni, 481. Goddesses associated 

662, 613. Dyaus, 75. with, 232, 299. 

the Sun, 40, 108, the Sun, 535. Childien, prayer for; sfg 

166,388,393,423,515, Car-pole = sacrificial task, Prayer. 

516. 109, 261, 375. the gift of Agni, 44, 

Dyaus, 75. Carpenter, 83, 121, 138, 92, 262, 334, 485, 623. 

Vishnu, 207. 139, 190. the Asvins, 48, 

Rudra, 300, 301. of the Gods, Tvash- 633. 

- B.riliaspati, 389. tar, 24. Dawn, 151. 

— — Pai janya, 459, 616. Caste, uiikmiwn in car- Sarasvatt, 631, 

PiLsni, 397. licst Vedic time, 10 Siuivali, 299. 

—— Regent of the Year, note. Soma, 189. 

383. Castes, allusions to four, Chiti-aratha, an Aryan 

Marut host, 52. 150,374,498. kingslainby Indr8,433. 

thunderbolt, 182. Castles, cloud-forts of Chumuri, a demon, 279, 

Vata, 616. fiends, 83, 570, 577; 577,581,588. 

rain-cloud, 102. sec Forts. Clmrning-stafF, 36. 

Asvins’ chariot, 245. Cattle, rain-clouds or rays Chyavdna, a proUg€ of 

— insti tutor of sacri- of light, 84, 283, 396, Uie Asvins, 155, 159, 

fice, 237. 398, 411, 420, 454, 465, 16i, 163, 343, 543. 

Bulls, the Maruta, 83. 675. Chyavatf.ua, a liberal 

Asvins, 633. Cattle-raiding, 473, 563, prince, 4^6. 

• priests, 109, 237, 593. Cleanser, ont of the 

827, 342. Cattle-stealing, 90. priests, 100, 21.9, 2G5, 

- — - livers, 364. Cave = cloud that impri- 305, 406, 569; see Potar. 

«— stars, 137. sons rain, 8, 14, 44, 392. Colebrooke, vii. 

— blasts of wind, 188, Centre of earth = altar, Consorts of the Gods, 83, 

blames of Agni, 660. 324. 134,213,260,503,5.14, 

Bullock = Soma, 226. ChakravAka, ChakwA, 517, 616. 

Butter, clarified, we Ghrita. Chakwi, a species of Constellations, 31, 67. 

bird, 309. Copartners, Day and 

Calendar, Vedic, vii. Chandragupta, viii. Night, 199, 200. 

Calf, cloud, 221 ; young Chariot, used in war, 10, Cord, series of sacrifices, 
Sun, 222 ; Sun, 381. 13. 141, 392. 



index of names, BTC. 


67 ^ 


arser, Agni, 203; the Cows, Day and Night, 3S1. Daivav4,ta, son of Deva* 

3un, 204, 243, 348, 556. ripe milk in raw, 86, vftta, another name of 

vv, the Cosmic, 243, 379 675, 644, Abhydvartin, 689. 

— Ushas, Dawn, 222, white milk in black Daksha, Creative Power, 

272, 346, 349, 360, or red, 86, 397, 644. an Aditya, 114, 292, 

38^5,401,513. Cow-j)en, the aerial stall, 433, 617,618. 

— Earth, 210, 212, 213, the firmament, 533. Dakshina, southern, name 
218, 301, 437, 438, Cowell, Prof. E. B , viii., of one of the sacrificial 

440. xiii. fires, 306, 337 notes. 

— Plenty, 192, 299, Creation of the worlds, DakshinS,, Priests’ honor- 

355, 447, 449. asci'ibed to Agni, 91, arium, 22, 169, 272, 

— Pi isni, 110, 530, 619 465, 562. 385 ; see Guerdon, and 

637. India, 507. Liberality to Priests. 

- Cloud, 224. ludra and *Soma, Dame, the, Vak or Roda- 

- Vak, Speech, 326, 609, 644. bl, 131. 

384, 393. Soma, 609. Dames, Consorts of Gods, 

—hymn of praise, 262. the Unborn, 18, 83, 85, 134, 260, 

— poet, 249. the Sun, 91. 308,316,325,439, 509, 

—boon given by Indra, Tvashtar, 124, 515,617,616, 619. 

272-285. 382. DAiiava, one of a class of 

—buffalo tied as repre- Sages or Rishi.s, demons, 271, 272, 489, 

sent ant of a penitent 360. 494. 

sinner, 408. Creator, Agni, 92. Dancer, of the war dance, 

jvvs, hymn in honour Supreme God, 180. ludra, 181, 286, 496,591. 

of, 589, 590. Tvashtar, 124, 382. female. 118. 

— of Ushas, light clouds, Dancers, Asvins, 634. 

67, 94, 118, 536. DabhIti, a Rishi protect- Danu, the mother of the 

- — rays of light, 14, 85, ed by Indra, 149, 276- Dauavas, 432, 489, 494. 

118, 120, 131, 172, 287, 27l), 433, 581, 588. DAiiu, a kind of demon, 

290, 348,383,392, 393, Dadhicha - Dadhyach, 44,345. 

401, 411, 512, 513, lOS note. Darbha, a species of 


576. 

— rain-clouds, 11 4, 316, 
382. 419. 


Dadhiknl = Dadhikrfts, 255. 

336, 443 notes. 

Dadlukrls, a peraonifioa- Dilibhya, Darbha, 


— of the Maruts, 54, 
301, 626. 

'—floods of rain, 423. 

' — sacrificial, 54,98,121, 
384. 

— milk, 108, 357. 

— -Heaven and Eartk, 
201, 325, 381, 425. 

— Air-Goddflssea, 326. 

■ — Waters, 468. 

■ — Rivers, 507. 


tion of the morning 532 


Sun, 108,336, 337,423- 

H6. 

Dadhikrav 0 .ti == Dadlv- 
kjds> 445, 446. 
Datliiyach, son oi Athar- 
van, 104, 108, 155, 160, 
163, 193, 571. 

Dadikae, 649- 
Deggci’s, of the Maruts, 

517. 


Djvius, 649. 

Dark, aborigines, 611 ; 
see Dusky, etc. 

DAsaCs) savage foe(8), de- 
nion(B), 44, 133, 134, 
210,240, 270,275, 285, 
351,354,417, 430, 432, 
433, 436,490,491, 496, 
497, 580, 583, 586, 588j 
594,611,630. 



630 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Basadyu, the name of a Dead, Departed, God of DhiahnyAs, aide-altara, 
Rishi, 46, 47, 687. the, Yama, 87, 64, 85, 897 note. 

Da8agva8,apriestly fami- Death, Agni, as a God of, Dhuni, a demon, 279, 
ly, 86, 303, 361, 455, 396, 677, 681. 

490, 613. Decay, 31. Dhvanya, the name of a 

Dasoni, a man’s name, 580. Deer, 624, 545; red, 66; man, 496. ^ 

Dasra(s), Wonder-work* Spotted (the steeds of Dhvasanti, a proUgi of 
er(8), Asvin8,4,156,449. the Maruts, rain-clouda), the Asvins, 149. 

Dasyu(s), demon(s\ 66, 88, 110, 128, 225, Diespiter, 76. 

savage foe(s), 45, 46, 301,522,625,627. Dice, 68, 149. 

62, 70, 74, 81, 87, 101, Deer-skins, 231. Digvijaya, conquest in all 

130, 131,133, 136,158, Deification, of the Ribhus, directions, 448, 476. 

160, 240,272, 273, 276, 2-3, 24, 143, 387 ; 437, Dionysus, 22. 

229,286,344,355,369, 438, 441, 442 ; of the Director, Pras&star, 122, 

411, 412, 430, 443, 470, Maruts, 96, 112. 306, 644. 

474,479,487,489,491, Delhi, 108. Dirghasravas, the name 

493, 639, 672, 576, 681, Deluge, the, 301 note. of a Kishi, 146. 

682, 684,680,591,693. Demons of diought or Dlrghatamas, a celebrated 
Dasyu-slayer, the, Indra, darkness ; see Ahi, Ar- Rishl, 193, 202, 210, 

606. buda, Aurnavabha, As- 211,400. 

Dawn, vi., 40, 43, 60, 63- na, Biisaya, Chumuri, Diseases, jaundice, 68 ; 
67, 78, 86, 93, 94, 118, Da?oni, Dhuni, Dribhl- leprosy, 158, 168. 
119,149-161,163,169- ka, Ilibisa, Karanj a, Dispenser, the, Bhaga, 
173,188, 190,209,222, Kunaru, Kushava, Kri- 614. 
243,245,247,260,272, vi, Kuyava, Mriga, Distributer, the, Ansa, 
278, 286, 303, 307, 336, Mrigaya, Namuchi, 259, 292. 
861,385,392,393,395, Parnaya, Pipru,Rudhi- Diti, the antithesis of 
401, 409, 432, 446, 4 46, krfts, §ambara, Sushna, Aditi, 634. 

455, 456, 459, 46.5, 481, Svarbhanu, Svasna, Div, Heaven, 123 note. 

512, 613, 615, 618, 643, Urana, Vala, Vangrida, Divodasa, a liberal prince, 

64b fS48, 507, 609, 626, Varcbin, Vetasu, Vis- 70, 147,156, 162, 181, 

629, 6b\ 63^ vach, Vyansa. 182, 283, 453, 671, 672, 

Dawns, 9, l^q^ 450, 151, Destruction, 31, 305. 677, 588, 593, 600, 611, 

169, 171, 186,''95 206, Devab, Bright Bangs, 631. 

823, 348, 355, 886,396^ Gods. 293 nofc, see Gods. Doga, 309, 418. 

402, 409, 445, 456, 4tr. Devasravas, a Rishi, 338, figurative. 246. 

467,515,530,644, 698, 339. * Donations, eulogies of, 

604,629. Dev^vata a Hishi, 338, 168, 174, 410, 496 ; 

•— Consort of the, the 339, ilO, 589 nou. Liberality to Priests. 

Sun, 604, 635, 036. Dharuna, said to be Doors, divine, 16, 1^7, 

the two, night and Rishi’s name, 479 note. 252, 263, 322, 471. 

morning, 465. Dhishana, a Soma bowl ; Dragon («), cloud -8erpent(8), 

Day, 172. Wish, Wish-Goddess, a drought-d«mon(B), 43, 

Pay and Night, 3, 123, Goddess of prosperity ,20, 44, 69, 73, 83, 103, 

172, 210, 512, «27. 125, ?19, 3«9, 138,543. 104, 228, 251, 270, 273, 



index of names, BTC. 6&1 

274,278,283,413,414, Dyaushpitar, Father Hea- Eos, 40. 

488, 489,491, 494,575, ven, 75, 114 Ephedra, a species of 

579. Byaus-Prithivt, Heaven- plant, 2 note. 

I'agOD of the Deep, AM- Earth, 2L note. — distachya, 2 note. 

budhnya, an atmosphe- DyftvAprithivl, Heaven- Etasa, a favourite of In- 
rij deity, 250, 208, 459, Earth, 377, 642 notes. dra, 84, 166, 167, 283, 

505, 617. Dyotana, said to be the 432, 489, 569. 

ravinodAs, W ealth- name of a king, 580 note. one of the Sun’s hor- 

Giver, Agni, 19, 306 Dyu = Dyaus, 40, 88, 615 ses, 415, 493, 648. 

'O'Otes. notes. EvAvada, a Rishi, 511. 

ribhlka, the name of a Dyumna, splendour, said EvayAmarut, a sacrificial 
demon, 277. to be a Rishi’a name, exclamation, 653, 654. 

rishadvati. Rocky, the 484 note. Exorcism, see Incantation, 

name of a stream, 5, Exposure of children, '296. 

839. Earth, 27, 66, 114, 123, Eye, the, the Sun, 189. 

ruh, a spirit of mis- 126-127, 129, 226-255, Agni, 475. 

chief, an oppressor, 4 25, 266, 298, 328, 835,339, of Varunaand Mitra, 

480. 877, 397,411, 413,456, the Sun, 619. 

ruhyus, men of a cer- 458, 495, 605, 507, 509, Eyes of heaven, Sun and 
tain Vedic tribe, 10, 611,514,629,537,616, Moon, 97. 

140,608. 619,621. 

rum, 36, 612. central point of, the Fair-complbxionbd, 

— addressed and glori- altar, 199. Ary as, 130. 

fied, 612. ——and Heaven, 41, 167, Rudra, 800, 

ual deities, 3, 21. 249 ; see Heaven and Falcon, hawk, 44, 45, 

'urga, a commentator, Earth. 162, 642, 545, 608. 

376 note Ecclesiastes, 515. Soma-bringer, 

•urgaha, the father of Eclipse, 182, 412, 415, 120, 365, 418, 428, 429, 

Purukutsa, 418 no^e. 4 30,431,489,501,502, 511,513. 

•ushyanta, a famous 581, 592. Falsehood, 205, 478. 

King, 671 note. Edda, 192 7iote. False worshipper, 70 note. 

)u8ky, dark, brood, skin Eggeling, Prof. J., 446. Famine, 328, 374. 

(hostile natives), 130, EhimAyAsah, 4 wo^e. Far strider, Vishnu, 326. 
181. Ehni, Dr. J., 49, 106, 164, Fate, 31 note. 

)utt, R. Ch., 648. 628. Father, Heaven, 95, 114, 

)vita, the name of a God, Eight points of earth, 49. 116, 196, 208, 211, 

481, Eifeht-footed, Gauri, VAk, 212,225. 

^yms, Heaven, 40, 75, 2^6. Agni, 564. 

8^, 114, 167, 179, 182, Eileithyia, 232. Brihaspati, 454, 644. 

189, 196, 208, 212, 225, Elephant, 88, 559. Parjanya, 650. 

255, 389, 344, 348, 380, Eleven Gods of heaven, the Primeval, 616. 

378, 386, 392, 413, 421, of waters, of earth, 193. Rudra, 616. 

503, 615, 629, 630, 634, Enchanter, Ahi, 270. Savitar, 143. 

558,666, 667, 679, 616, Engulfer, Vritra, 489. Sun, 223, 

619, 628, 633, 642. .Enthusiasm* 606. Supreme God, 180. 



Father and Mother, Hea- Forest life of Brahmans, Garbe, Dr,, 572. 

veil and Earth, 211, apparent allusion to, 7 7 Garga, a Vedic llishi, 611 

212, 219, 643. Forts, cloud-castles, 46, note. 

Fathers, Manes, Ances- 70, 74, 132, 183, 304, Gdrhapatya, housoholder’a 
tral Spirits, 115, 159, 489,573, 580. western sacred fire, 20, 

192,312,380,395,479, of aborigines, 133, 41,219,306, 337. 

515,622, 647. 183, 605. Gilrtsamada, a name of 

“—cause of the fruitful- autumnal, 183, 239. R. V. Book II., 259. 

ness of he.iven and of iron, 80, 285, 429. Garutmdn, the Celestial 

earth, 395. Fortune, 31 note. Bird, the Sun, 227. 

Fervour, personifieil, 505 Four, priests or Gods, 515. Gaura, a wild bull, 20, 

note. castes, 374. 422, 462, 545, notes. 

Field, Master of the, the chalices, 213, 437, Qaurl, a wild cow; buffalo; 

Genius Loci, 460. 440, 441. cloud, 226 note. 

Fig-tree, Holy, 188. dice, 58 note. Gauriviti, a Vedic llishi, 

Filter for Soma juice, 37, liorns of Agui, 462. 4S9. 

188. Vedas, 462 wofe. Gavaya, a wild ox, 42Z 

F'ire, 137, 488 ; see Agni. Four-eyed, Agni, 42. note. 

- -production of, 343. Four-faced, Varuna, 516. Gaya, a llishi, 476 note. 

Fire-altars, 477. Four-footed, cloud, Gayatri, a Vedic metre , 

Fire drill, 34, 41, 82, 124, Gauri, V.-Vk, 222. a specially sacred verse 

125, 175, 176, 343, Fowler, 119. in that metre, 83, 223, 

466, 474, 477. Friend, Mitra, 535. 224, 312, 390. 

Five Races, Tribes, etc. Fruit, 366, 524. Gcklner, Prof. K, xiv., 

10, 115, 129, 158. 183, Furrow, personified, 461. 172. 493, 592, 640. 

241, 262, 359, 374, 387, Gharina, libation of hot 

445, 495, 498, 552,566, GAdhi, father of VisvA- milk ; caldron ; 459, 
608,621, 632. mitra, 374 note. 492, 523, 544. 

- — Rivers, Laud of the, Gaia, 575 note. Ghnia, father of the 

353. Gairikshita, a patronymic Rishi Kanva, 50. 

Adhvaryus, 327, 605. of Trasadasyu, 496. Ghosha, said to be son of 

Bulls, 327. Gambler, 58, 273, 296. GhoshA, 164. 

Hotar-priests, 303. Gambling, 58, 149, 296, Ghosha, a of the 

Seasons, 221, 382. 552. Asvins, 158, 160, 1C4, 

Fivefold gift, 56. cheating in, 552. 168. 

Five-footedSire,theYear, Qa(n)dflra, Gandani, Ghrita'mb clarified but- 
221. Oandhira, Gandhflris, ter, 3, 461, 462, 509 

Floods, waters of heaven, modern Kandahilr and 538, 642 nofes. 

479, 614, 617. its people, 649 note. fatness, fertilnilnj 

Floods’ Child, Agni, 298, Gandharva, the, a Genius rain, 533, 538 notes. 

S03, 317. closely connected with Gnfls, consorts of tb 

Flower, see Lotus. the Sun, 26, 217. Gods, 316, 616 notes, 

Food, Soma, 251. Gandharvas, 26, 119,360. Goad, 624, 627. 

Feotless Maid, Dawn, GangA, 606, 632 note. Goat, sacred to POshtu 

206, 629, Ganges, vii., 6, 85 notes. 215. 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


688 


Ooat-lborne, Paahau, 191, Ooklon-handed, Savitar, H<lridra a> 68 7iote. 

625-627. 25, 49, 618 ; Golden HaristJandra, the name 

God, One, .see Monotheism. One, the Sun, 19, 365 ; of a king, 30 7iote. 

Goddess, Goddesses, 16, Golden Bull, the Sun, Ha^tala, a tree, according 
22, 26, 29, 31, 65, 67, 366; Golden Pair, Hea- to Silyana, 68. 

74,78,119, 139, 151, von and Earth, 365 ; horses of the Sun, 

153, 169-171, 173, 211, golden ornaments, 110 167, 403, 409. 

2G4, 340, 351, 398, 231,526; car, Hariv&n, Lord of Bay 

.'92, 423, 455, 456, 78,192,517; Steeds, Indra, 4 note. 

450, 406, /;04. .50.5, 500, 482^ 524 ; IlariyOpiyd, the name of 

513-515, 539, 547, 601, Ipeed (Age). 162; a place, 589. 

635,639. car, 169 a\'ord, 59 ; Haryasva = HarivAn, 4 

Vis, Devas, Bright —visors, 5^4 man- note. 

Beings, passun. ties, 52.5. Haug, Dr. M., 327, 330, 

— origin of, 62, 211, (Joldstucke’, Prof. Th , 570 

248, 39 4, 4 59, 5 7 5. xiii, Havirdhlinas, carts for 

— lumber of, 48, 330. Gotama, a celebrated bringing Soma, 312, 

■ — m!i(le immortal by Rihbi, 79, 82, 86, 99, note. 

Agni, 498 ; by Savitar, 101, 102, 111, 155, Hawk,44 ; Soma-bringcr, 

457. 247, 391, 399, 520,527. 103, 580 ; .<?ec Falcon. 

— immorUl, 39, 97, Gotainas, 82, 84, 87, 101, Heaven, Dyaus, 40,43, 73, 

253,319,3^1,448,539. 113, 118, 43.5, 436. 75,88,95,114,115,118, 

d\vel]iiig-])iic;cs of, Gras.sniann, Piof. II., xiv. 323, 125-127, 218, 225, 

377, 383, 587, 620, 623. xv , ct passim. 247, 255, 328, 335, 841, 

— abide in Indra 379. Giitsamada, a Vedic 360, 373,378,385,395, 

— mother of, Aditi, llishi, 259, 311. 897,410,415,432,450, 

458 ; l^’shas, 151. Gritsamadas, 265, 284, 455,456,458,503,512, 

— Father of, Agni, 93 ; 309, 312. 614, 515, 534. 548, 566, 

BiahmanabiMti, 292 ; Guerdon, 57, 170, 173, 567,678,581,015,635- 

byaus, Heaven, 211, 385 ; see IlakshinSt. 637, 642-044. 

248, .975. Guest, 95, 519. homo of the Blest, 

■*— coii.-jui l.i of, 26, 83, of men, Agni, 97, 207, 510 

213,200,816,325,389. 177. 262, 318, 393, 44G, Heaven-Earth, ^ 

— greater and lesser, 36. 469, 481, 574. deity, 377. 

— elder and younger ,36.Guests, the Asvins, 299. Heaven and Earth, 3, 24, 

- King of, ludra, 239. GuugO, a lunar Goddess, 26, 41, 100, 123, 124, 
— akin to men, 193, -99, 136-139,143,144,165- 

290, 370, 372, 378. 1^7, 170, 172, 189, 190, 

— -* — priests, 327. Hair, braided, 152. 200, 204, 208, 211, 212, 

Wd, 39, 60, 64, 79. 88, Hall, Dr. F. E , 135. 219, 248, 249, 262, 274, 

218,304,399, 443, 520, Hands, uplifted in prayer, 294, 298, 312, 315, 316, 

I "‘25, 533. 333, 634. 321, 324-327, 334, 340, 

-the Sun, 682. healing by touch of, 349, 368, 376, 877, 379, 

d-eyed, Savitar, 49 ; 800. 384,385,389,394,401. 

old-girt, horse, 394. tiahsa, Swan, the Sun, 446. 403, 423, 425, 438, 443, 



684 


INDEX OF NABiES, BTC. 


444, 46D, 460, 4to, 482, Horn, emblem of Hundi*ed autumns, ditto 
495, 608, 616, 51/ 519 ^ strength, 46, 529. 114, 293» 358. 

629, 566, 568> 570, '.72, Horse, rain-cloud, 88 . » PoWeTa, Lord of, 

674 , 693,601, 615, dh^ lightniUgor the SUn, Indra, passim-y see 

633, 642, 643, 647. 304. ^atakratui 

Heaven and Earth, Father Agni, 238. Hundred-wintered, 4l4, 

and Mother, 508. - — halter, headstall, 260. 

Heifer, Ushas, 346; Aditi) 8’-ths, etc., 216. Hunting, wild beasts, 

417. head of, given to 463; birds, 312, 

Hell* 401. Dad^ach, 108 note. Husband and wife as- 

Hemispheres, 618, 642. Sacsiftce of the, 214- sociate ill sacrifice, 106, 

Hephaistos, 16, 72. 219. 182, 509. 

Herald, Agni, 34, 36, 62, Horses, Inlra’s, 8, 20, Husbandry, personified, 
79-81,94,100,190,202, 39,86,101,107, 131, 461. 

269, 261, 265, 267, 268, 180, 217, 182, 382, Hymn, personified. 515. 

318,319,872.393, 404, 451,452, 482,611. Hyphasis, the modern 

405, 409* 565, 665, 572, Agni’s, 268, 392, 394, BeAs, 353. 

615. 403, 661, 574. 

Herdsman, the Sun. 224 ; the Asvins’, 450. 451, Icterici, Icterm, 68 note. 

Indra, 361. 633. IdA, libation; Grayer, 67, 

Herodotus, 648. ——Dawn's, 388, 636. 117. 

Heroes = Gods. 26, 252. the Sun’s, 08, 218, Idaspati, a ^ame of Par- 

Maruts, 529,531, 461, 533, 604. janya, f07. 

651, 654, 576, 617. thoMarute’, 252, 622,idri?, tl>a sacrificial title 

Aevins, 540. 623, 625, 627-629, 532. of o;»e of the Maruts, 


Hillebrandt, Prof. A , 
143, 211, 461, 601. 

HimAlaya, 353. 

Hi(n)du, 649 note. 

HindustAn, vii., viii. 

Hippocrene, 155. 

Hiranyahasta, name of a 
man, 166, 160. 

Hiranyaatupa, a son of 
Angiras, 40, 42. 

Holy Grass, 323, 481 ; 
»ee Grass, and Sacred 
Grass. 

Holy Speech, 26. 

Homa, oblation* 109 note. 

Homer, 498, 646. 

Honey, 33, 82, 243. 

Honey-whip of the Asvins 
25, 209, 

Horace, 354. 


Mitra-Varuna’s, 533. 

VAyu’s, 451-463. 

— in battle, 645 
Hotar, thief priest; in- 
voker; 1, 65, 81, 100, 
122, 193, 196, 199, 

269, 208, 275, 305,308, 
357, 372 , 380, 406,629. 
Hotars, the two Celestial, 
16,108,252,322,327,471 
HotrA, Invocation per- 
sonified, 26, 198, 260, 
389. 

Hundred castles, forts, 
277, 429,433, 693,613. 
Years, natural life- 
time, 556. 

, winters, ditto, 89, 

98, 260, 625, 560, 665, 
607 , 676, 586, 613. 


96 note. 

a Goddess of Prayer, 
16, 42, 57, 177, 178, 
198, 252, 260, 293, 
304, 326, 339, 343,. 

381,383, 470, 471, 605. 

Ilibisa, a drought-demon, 
46*. 

Immolator, the celestial, 

. 264. 

Immortal, originally only 
Agni, and the other 
Gods by him, 468. 

men, in their child- 
ren, 127,471. 

Immortality of man, 525. 

——the drink of, 29 ; tee 
Amrit. 

Impeller, the Sun, 561* 
566. 



!NMX OF NAMES, ITO. 


6S5 


[ncanfation, against Chief of Gods, 182, Indu, Soma; Moon; 60, 

jaundice, 68 ; against 239; King qf all things, 1 15, 165, 286, 430, 520, 

venomous reptiles, etc , 45, 415; All-sustainor, 593,603. 

256, 256. 383; identifiable with Indus, vi., 35, 44, 61, 90, 

Indians, originally in- other Gods, 61 1 ; tutc* 123,168.174,250,430, 

habitants of a colder lary God of the Ar- 607, 522, 562, 608, 631, 

country, 525 note, yans, 3, 9, 128, 129; Infinite, Aditi, 30, 115, 

Indigence, 335. God of Battles, 71, 231,293. 

Indipnous races, aee Ab- 419, 426. «« Battle; Dyaua, 530. 

origines. fiis birth, 416; his Inspiration, 112, 355, 

Indika, Arrian’s, viii. mother, 296, 416, 417; 400, 407, 616, 563, 

ludra, vi., 3-5, 14. 17-21, his father, Dyaus, 119, 664, 641. 

23, 24,26, 28, 34,36- 413; Tvashtor, 368; Invoker, 100, 122, 399; 

39, 43-46, 51, 56, 57, Vyansa, 416, 417; his see Hotar. 

60, 69-79, 81, 82-87, Consort, TndrAnl, 26, Invokers, the two celes- 

95. 0\ 101, 108-110, 106, 373, 388; his tial, 16, 263, 322, 327; 

112, 113, 115, 128-135, greatness, 13, 73, 83, see Hotars. 
137-140,143,144,147, 351, 411; his battles IrAvatl, the river RAv!, 

155, 157, 163-168, 173, witij demons of the 422 no^e. 

1/8-185, ’ 487 , 191,193, air, 14, 43, 44, 46, 69, Iron, or bronze, (ayaa), 

197, 207 2«9, 213-215. 70, 80, 103, 104; hi.s 78, 80 113, 218, 443. 

317 , 218, 22fi, 227-229, attribnte.s and deeds, 533,534,558.610,647, 
232-243, 246,250. 251, 9, 272-274; his rivalry Isaiah, 114. 

259, 263, 268,270-287, with Varuna, 448; his Isha, said to be a Rishi'a 
290, 294, 296,-298, 305, relations with his wor- name, 473 note^ 

308, 310-313, 327, 323, shippers, 6, 7, 11, 12, 

340, 845-379, 381-334, 45, 76, 77, 128, 129, JagatI, a Vedic metre, 

387-389,394,410 441, 284, 285; hia various 223,224. 

445, 449,451-455,458, forma, 373; his horses, Jahnu, a Great Rishi, 
459 461, 462, 465, 406, 382 ; his flight, 44. 157, 386, 

468, 471, 472,477,488, Indra-Agni, 21, 24, 25, JAhusha, a proteg^eA thq 
503, 606-508, 510, 512- 331, 332, 487, 652, 553, Asvins, 157. 

514, 517-519, 527 , 552, 628, 029. Jamadagni, a Uishi, 390, 

553 , 568, 561, 569, 57 4- IndrAgnl, 24, 140-142. Jamadagnis, 374. 

612, 618, 621,622, 626- IndrAni, 26, 106, 373, 515. JamtA = Latin genito(r), 
631, 640-642, 444. Ind-a-Biihaspati, -1, 433, 18U note, 

God of the blue sky; Indra-POshan, 21. JAtavedas, Omniscient 

Thunderer; Cftster of Indra-Soma, 644. Agni, 60-62, 81, 101, 

the Stone; Bounteous Indra-Varuna, 23, 389, 102,121,127,264,317, 

Lord (Maghavaa); The 446-449, 64Q, 641. 322, 323, 326, 334, 335, 

Mighty (Sakra); Lord IndrAvariinA, 21. 337,338,340,343,385, 

of Hundred Powers Indra-VAyu, 3, 187, 451, 393,397,402,470,409, 

(Satakratu); Lord of ^5?. 470,471,475,484,486, 

the Brave; Lord of Indra- Vjbhnu, 21, 458, 509, 559, 569, 564, 666, 

Bay Steeds, etc., * 641, 642. 570, 573, 574. 



686 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC, 


Jathara, a xrord of doubt- K.iranja, a demon, 74. King, Soma, 29, 116. 

ful meaning, 148 note. Karkandhu, a of Varuna, 21, 31, 32, 

Jdt.lshthira, a man’s the Asviiia, 145, 294, 296. 

name, 270. Karhlatl, a name of Kings, Adityas, 24, 293. 

Jaundice, 68. Piialian, 433 Asvina, 3. 

Jetar, a Tlishi, 13 noic. Ka^oju, the name of a Gods, 440. 

Jewels, 46. prince, 147. Mitra and Varuna, 

Jones, Sir W., 390. K:isyapa, a famous Jlishi, 95, 168, 189, 190, 192, 

Joshua, the Book of, 431. 127, 3G8. 306, 311, 360 , 3 8 4. 533- 

Jumna, the Yamunil, 6, Kaumudi, Moonlight per- 536, 538, 572, 633 

511 notes. sonified, 47, 595 notes. Varuna, Mitra, Arya- 

Jupiter, 45, 75, 114, Kau&ika, God of Kusikas, man, 57. 

600. Indra, 13. — — warriors, 110. 

Jyotishtoraa, a Soma Ka\i, father of Uaand, K6])h^n, Greek name of 
ceremony, 266 note. 70, 159, 411, 580. the Kabul river, vii , 

Jyutbua, Moonlight per- KAvya, Usanii, Kavi’s 522, 649 notes. 

sonified, 47, notes. son, 70, 71, 106, 159, Kosala, the modern Oudh, 

166, 411. 374 note 

Kabul, vii., 522, 649. KeresAni, Iranic form of Kratu, act, power, 6 note. 

Kaegi, Prof. A., xiv., xv. Krisanu, 148. the name flf a Great 

Kdkamblia, a branching Klildi, ring, discus, quoit, llishi, 30 
tree, symbolizing father 89. KrisAnu, a 'guardian of 

and sons, 614. Khadira, Khayar, a spe- the celestial Soma, 14 8, 

KakshivAn, a llishi, 21, cies of tree, 375. 2 08, 429. 

71, 145, 146, 154, 155, Khela, the name of a Krishna, the name of a 
158, 163, 164, 168, 173, King. 156. 1.59. Rishi, 157, 158. 

174, 421, 428, 503, 513. Khorasmians, 649. Krivi, a cloud-demon, 

Kali, a Rishi, 147. Kikalas, a non- Aryan 281,286. 

Kalpa, the ceremonial of people, 374. Krumu, a tributary of 

the Veda, 462 note. Kindler, Agntdh, Fire- the Indus, 522, 

KandahAr, 649. lighter, 259, 306. Kshatra, the name of a 

KAnlta, patronymic of Kine, rays of light, Rishi, 511. 

Prithusravas, 157 note. streams of rain, 8, 13, Kshatriya, 315, 647. 

Kanva, a Rishi, 14, 17, 18, 44, 69, 106, 120, 348- Kshetrapati, Lord of the 

60 53,50, 00, 64,66, 350, 355, 367, 430, Field, Genius Loci, 460 

145,158,161,193,503, 456, 479, 515, 633, note. 

Kanvas, 17, 52, 61, 63- 538, 576, 598, 635. KubhA, the KAbul river, 

^5, 67. King, taxer of the rich, 90. vii., 44, 507,622, 662. • 

Kapardin, wearing braid- Agni, 51, 127, 317, Kuhn, Prof. A, 163, 

ed hair, 162, 625 note. 380, 656, 661-663, 566, KuhO, a lunar Goddess, 29 9. 
Kapinjala, a species of 636. Kulisl, an unidentified 

partridge, 312, 313. Brihaspati, 297. stream, 135, 609 note. 

KApishthala, a patrony- Indra, 4.5, 87, 413, Kulitara, a demon or sa- 
rnie of Durga, 370 679, 683, 592, 610. vage, said to be the 

note, Mitra, 386. father of S ambara, 432. 



INDBX OF NAMES, ETC. 687 

unam, a demon, 345. 2SS, 292, 295, 296, 318, Macdonell, Prof. A. A., 
urukahetra, a district in 323,330, 337,388,397, 83. 

N.-W. India, 108 note. 402,404, 419, 425, 446, Mada, delight, rapturous 

urura, 522 note. 448, 460, 465, 471, 478, joy, 69 note. 

usa grass, 4, 343; see 483,510,528,529, 533, MadhuchcbhandAs, a Ve- 
Saftred Grass. 536, 538, 540, 547, 557, die Pishi, 1, 13. 

ushavd, name of a fe- 567,570,593,613,619, Madhuvidy;!, knowledge 
male fiend, 417. 022, 628, 640, 642, 643, of Soma, 155, 543 notes. 

uBika(8), a famous Rishi 647. Maghavan, Lord of Bouu- 

and his descendants. Law, Sacrifice, 40, 68, 60, ty, Indra, passim. 

13, 340, 345, 347, 353, 90, 92, 107, 268, 381, Maghavans, wealthy men, 

364, 370, 373, 374, 386. 382, 390, 397, 398, 425, nobles, institutors of 

utsa, a favourite of 468, 477, 484, 486, 508, sacrifice, 77, 263, 488, 

Indrn, 46, 70, 75,87, 510, 573. 598, 602. 546. 

3 21,126, 130, 136, 139, Leader, Neshtar, one of Magic, power of Gods, 
143, 146, 166, 239, 241, the priests, 259, 266. 433, 552, 627, 634. 

277,283,412, 428, 431, Leprosy, 158 note. of fiends, 43, 44, 46, 

489,493, 577, 580, 587, Leviticus, 338. 70, 75, 631 

592, 600. Liberality to priests, Mahflbh.lrata, viii,, 300. 

uvitsa, a certain mali- praises of, 76, 168, 173, Mahl, Gieat Goddess, as- 
cious man, according 174,410,482,487,492, sociated with Ihi and 

to Sdyana, 606 note. 496, 499,532,607,635. Saraavatl, 16, 198 471. 

uyava, Harvest-Spoiler, Life, natural duration of. Mahfdhara, xi,, 214, 229, 
a demon, 134, 135, 412, see Hundred Winters. 462, 477, 486, 551. 

592 note, duration of, fixed by Maiden, the, Dawn, 213, 

uyav.dch, a demon or the Gods, 114. Rodasl, 232, 

savage 240. Lightning, a form of Maidens, fingers, 195, 304. 

Agni, 101, 124, 137, Dawns, 205. 

^DY OP THE Light, 65, 219, 264, 263. Waters, 303. 

66, the bride of the Rivers, 419, 

ikshmana, the name of Maruts, 232 note. Maitrdvarun.'}, one of the 
a man, 493. Lightnings, personified, priests, 122 note. 

vkshmt, 412 note. 617. Male, the, Agni, 326. 

inces of theMarut8,524, Linch-pin, emblem of Mamatd, wife of Uchath- 
525,638; see Spears. stability, 49. ya, 202, 211, 565. 

anman, Prof. C., 485, Lion 88, 340, 412, 479, Mdmateya, Dirghatamas, 
602. 541 ^ 542. son of Maraatd, 202, 

assen, Prof. Ch., viii., the, Agni, 124, 319. 400. 

44, 649. — — Parjanya, 550. Man, service of, 42. 

Cosmic and Moral Lopdmudrd, Agastya's Mdua, a Rishi, 229, 335, 
(ritd), 2, 3, 28, 52 61, wife, 649, 650. 242, 248, 253. 

64, 90, 92, 97, 100, 106, Lotu8(es), 545, 571. Mdnas, men of Mana's , 

115, 119, 136, 137, 151, items, 631. family, 235, 237, 246, 

171,199-202,204,205, Ludwig, Prof. A., xiv., 248. 

209, 211, 225, 253, 268, iv., e( passim. Manasa, a Rishi, 511. 



tmdex of names, etc. 


Mandala, division, Book 
of the R. V., vi. 259. 
MAnd4rya, a Vedic bard, 
230, 231, 233, 234. 
HandhAtaTi a royal Rishi, 
147. 


260, 263,270,271, 296- 
303, 305,311,317,322, 
323,332-334,340, 845, 
348-351, 356, 357, 403, 
411,418,419,421, 428, 
439, 440,453, 454, 459, 


Manes, 115,139; afieFatherg. 468, 472, 487 489, 491- 


Manning, Mrs., XV. 
Manslaughter, fine for, 
543 not€. 

Mantra, vi., 462. 

Mann, man ; the father 
(of mankind, 16, 18, 34, 


493, 499, 501-507, 509, 
512, 514, 519 532, 550, 
553-555, 558, 561. 565, 
572, 575, 576, 579, 582, 
591,599,602,509, 612, 
614-619, 622, 637, 638. 


42.51,52, 61, 62, 64, Maruts, originally storms, 
92, 100, 125, 147, 148, deified, 8, 96, 112. 

152.177,181,193,270, Music of the, 5^, 

30o[ 320. 370, 387, 405, 55, 88, 109, 112. 

41 q’ 428, 457, 483, 513, M^rut'sva, the name of a 
582, 64o! piince. 496. 

■ institvites of, 5, 21, MasarsAra, a man’s name, 

30, 606, 647. 

Manu8^Manu,34,42,100, M.ltaiievan, a mystic 
104 442, 433, 568, 571. being, 40, 81, 95, 120, 

mmi son of MAna, 229. 126, 145, 177, 196, 198, 

Mare Ushaa compared to 202, 227, 254, 318, 319, 

’ nftrt OJA oij Kao 


a, 40. 456. • . ' 

Mares Indrs’s 693. 602. Matrons. Heaven snd 


329, 340, 344, 563. 


rivers compared to, Earth, 61 6. 

gjg Measure, measuring line, 

ts hymns, 447. 

= libations, 200. Meath-- rain, 524. 

s= Waters or Air-God-MedhAtithi, a Vedic Rishi, 

desses, 326. 14,21,69,373. 

MaHchi, a Great Risbi, Medbj Atitbi, a Rishi, 51, 
127. 

Maruts, Storm-Gods, 7. Mediator, Agni, 1, 1^3, 
8, 12. 17-19, 23, ?4, 27, 192, 391, 393, 397. 

28, 4'\ 52 66, 61, 69, Rudia, 162. 

73,’ 87-89, 95, 96, 103, Medicine, 29, 60, 114, 152, 
199-116, 123, 128-131, 210, 645. 

134 138,139,144,152, heavenly, 47. 

353 ! 165. 167, 176, 178, Megasthenes, viii. 

• ^85,186,190,192,198, Men, deification of, 23, 
199* 209,214,' 17, 228- 387. 

237,239,246,250,251, akin to Gods, 225. 


MenA, daughter of King 
Vrishanasva, 71. 

an Apsaras, mother 

of S.ikuntalA, Z7'i note. 
Meru, a sacred mountain, 
120 note. 

Metal, 72 , 78 ; see Iron. 
Metres, 223, 563. 

of the Rigveda, 223 ; 

see Appendix. 
Milch-cow, milch-kine ; 
see Cow, Cows, Kine. 

= hymn, 262. 

, Milk, passim. 

= rain, 88, 230,551 

, note. 

= hymn, 249. 

\ water, 632. 

Milky Way, 136 note. 

, Milton, 266, 634. 

Mitah, sacred name of 
G one of the Maruts, 96 
I, note. 

I, Mitra, a Light-God, 3, 
17-19, 25, 28-32, 34j 
48, 50, 62, 55, 57-59, 
a 61. 95, 99, 102, 114 
116, 123, 125-127, 138 
5, 144, 163. 154,103, 169 

179,180,189-191, 196 
204,208,214,227,233 
d, 249,250,259,261,292 
297, 301,306,308, 321 
1, 323, 337, 360, 361, 37? 

380, 336-389, 393, 39^ 
3, 397,400,408,443,445 

468-460, 468,480, 48; 
502, 605, 606, 514-611 
52, 519,633-540,648,656 

658, 660, 662, 566, 56! 
568,572. 582, 685,611 
015,617,619,622, 631 
;3, Mitra- Varuna, 3, 21, 16 
188, 204, 205, 311,39 
15. 502, 533, 639, 638-64 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETO. 


689 


jnogamy, indications 
of, 136, 172, 398. 
jnotheism, 227, 377. 
jnth, intercalary, 33, 
222 . 

onths = monthly festi- 
vals, 349, 

oon, 31, 33, 47, 108, 
123.132,136-131, 154, 
189, 217,222,234,255, 
261,310,461,595, 598, 
603, 609, 622. 
oonliglit, personified, 
47, 575 notes, 
oona, twelve, 33. 
orning, 40, 63, 65, 167, 
170, 273, 298, 337, 
346, 350, 351, 388,393, 
471, 575, 593, 635,64 4. 
ornings, 151, 170, 243, 
327, 379, 408, 445,455, 
456, 698, 622. 

[ortar, 36, 37, 627. 

[other. Earth, 211, 2*20, 
644. 

— Aditi, 580. 

Dawn, 395, 613. 

- — the Mighty, V4k,516. 

Priani, 637. 

RasA, 606. 

[others. Heaven and 
Earth, 316, 318, 324. 

Waters, 29, 48, 196, 

271. 

Rivers, 48, 353, 

Dawns, 616. 

regions of spaoe,378. 

VI oiintain = cloud, 9, 69, 
83, 93,94,108, 392-394, 
411, 413, 693, 698. 

home of the Soma 

plant, 2, 12, 60. 
Mountains, Gods presid- 
ing over, 439, 

— — personified; 614, 682. 

44 


Mouthless, barbarians, NavavAstva, 62, 681. 

489. Nectar, 29, 186, 609. 

Mi’iga, the Beast, a de- Neslitor,one of the priests, 
*mon, 497. 19, 259, 306. 

Mrigaya, a demon of air, N^vo, Fdlix (Essay on the 
412, Ribhus), 438. 

Muir, Dr. J., ix., xii., xiii., ^Nighantu, a Vedic gloss- 
XV., et passim. ary, 48. 

Muller, Prof. F. Max, ix , Night, 48, 85, 119, 172, 


298, 307, 456, 471,632, 
626. 

and Day, 360. 

and Dawn, 16, 98, 

126, 167, 322. 


xi., xiv., XV., ct passim. 

Mungoose, 267 note, 

Munja-grass, 213, 

Nahusha, Man, 42, 478, 

Nahushas, men, neigh and Morning, 86, 197, 

bouring people. 540 222, 242, 249, 252, 263, 

note, 583, 588, 608. 298, 316, 333,382, 458, 

Nami,a fiiend andproic'i/d 4G5, 471. 

of Iiidra, 74, 680. Nine-footed, Gaurt, Vdk, 
Nainuchi, a demon 6, 226. 

75, 277, 491, 580. Niiiers, ninefold, the Na- 
Narakasthdnam, hell, 401 vagvas, 513 note. 

note. Ninety floods, rivers, 

Nardsausa, Praise of Men, 103. 

Agni, 16, 22, 139, 197, forts, 181, 331. 

263, 308, 344,403,471, 8teed8 = days, 208. 

585 ^ Ninety-nine arms, 277. 

.Ndrmara, a fiend, 275. forts, 76, 283, 428, 

Ndrminl, perhaps the 489, 609. 

name of a fort, 203. rivers, 44, 255. 

Narva, a chief or Uishi, Viyu’s horses, 463. 

Vritras, demons, 

Ndsatyas,thcAsvins,4,24, 108. , 

47, 48, 63, 65, 154-162, Nirriti, Destruction, 31, 
238, 244, 246 248, 311. 64, 605, 645 

h;8, 386, 409, 443, 449, Nirukta, Ytoka s Com- 
45o! 614, 640,.643, 645, mentary on the Ni- 


665, 616,618,634,635. 

Nature, Aditi, 30, 32, 97, 

118, 534. 

— — Prakiiti, 220. 

Diti, 634. 

Navagvaa, a mythical 
. race, 45, 85, 361, 456, Nivid(B), liturgi^ invo- 
490, 618, 614, 561, 662. oationa, 880, 417, 640. 


ghantus, xi., 3, 6, 193 
876’. ’ 

Nishddas, aboriginal tri- 
bes, 10 note. 

Niti-Manjarl, a treatise 
on ethics, 24 note. 



m 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


Kawa, 168. 

UCEAN, 77, 95, 246, 353, 
867, 461, 525, 619. 

— — of air, 23, 513, 627. 
Oceana, 619. 


Nodhaa, a Vedic liishi, 823 , 326 , 349, 392, 394, Parijman, the Roamer 
79, 84, 86, 87, 89. 404. round, Indra, the Sun, 

Noose of Varuna, 68, 646. Ornaments, of the Maruts, 87, 102. 

Non- Aryans, 44, 331. 88. Parjanya, God of the rain- 

Noseless, Dasyus, barba of priests, 61. cloud, 196, 224, 382, 

rians 489. Oudh, 374, 433, 622 461,507,634,636,549, 

Nriyajiia, service of man. Oxen = stars, 207. 650, 616, 622, 623, 647. 

*42 no«e. Oxhide, laid under the Par na, the Pal Asa tree, 429. 

Niishad, the father of Soma mortar, 37. Parnaya, a demon, 74. 

Parrots, jaundice trans- 
Pair, the ancient, Hea- ferred to, 68. 

veil and Eaith, 122. PArthavas, descendants 
PajraCs), a Rishi and his of Prithu, 589 note. 
family, 21. 71, 155, 158, Parthians, 649. 

159, 164, 168, 174. Paruchchhepa, a Vedic 
Offspring of the Flood, Paksha, the Sun, 374. Rishi, 175, 182, 193. 
A<^ui 168 ; see Waters, Palasa, atree,ButeaFron- Parushnt, the modem 
sd of the. dosa, 429. P6v!, 44, 422, 520. 

Okeauoa 146. PanKs), demons of dark- ParvaU, Genius of moun> 

Old aee * 157 *^ess, 44, 85, 106, 120, tain and cloud, 167, 184 

Oldeiiberg, Dr. H , xiv. 131, 165, 204, 291, 462, 372, 459, 583, 617. 

567, 580, 594, 598, 603, Parvatas, 439, 503. 

606, 621, 629. Pasupati, Lord of Cattle, 

Panjft’b, vii., 44, 146, 422, Rudra, 60 note. 
430,433,607,520,522, Pathani, 147, H8 notes. 
562, 631. PatharvA, said to be : 

Pautlieism, 115. man’s name, 147. 

PApadevatA, Goddess of PAthya, the name of i 
Sin, 31 note. sacidficer? 572. 

ParamatmA, Supreme PatbyA, a Goddess c 
Spirit, Self, or Soul, wealth, wife of POshai 

wiic All, 014 . 428, 564 no<e«. 519. 

One Supreme Being, 227. Paramesvara, the Supre- Paura, perhaps the nam 
One-footed, buffalo, cloud, me Lord, God, 611 note. of a Rishi, 540, 542^ 

226. Pai-Asara, a Vedic Rhhi, Paurukutsya, son of P. 

Ordeals, by Ore, water, 90. rukutsa, 496 noie. 

combat, 210. PArAvatas, a hostile tribe, PAvaka, Purifier, 

Order, Cosmic and Moral, 520, 631. hright, Agni, 1 5, 33 

31 102, 171, 172, 227, ParAvrij, an outcast, 146, PavamAna, a name 
295,316,327,347,381, 163.279.433. 

397, 401, 403, 408, 421, Parents, the, Heaven and PAyu, a Rishi, 611. 
448,455,456,479,513, Earth, 208, 211, 213, Pearl, 49, 174. 

534, 535, 547, 575, 699, 214, 349, 693. Pedu, a f 

617, 619. of all, the Waters, Asvins, 165, 158, 16 

•——sacrifice, 109, 322, 618* 


Om, 226. 

Omen, 312, 313. 
Omnific, Indra, 11. 
Omniscient, Gods, 221. 

Agni, 50, 470, 

Asvins, 64. 

Indra, 600. 

— — the Sun, 377. 

Varuna, 32, 33. 

One, 220. 

One All, 377. 



lUlTEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


\&upi, 155 woftf. " Pole, sacrificial task, 2«1, Pravargya v i d y & , the 
ury, 395, 499. 514; jee Car- pole, Cha* science of the aborcr 

deprecated for others, riot-pole. 155 wofe^ 

94-296. Polygamy, indkatiohs of, Prayflja, a preliminary 

ik(a), a liberal priCce, 86, 94. offering, 57. 

^5. troubles of, 13/. Prayasvats, saered food 

ble, for pounding the Porpoise, 156. bringers, the title of 

oraa plant, 36, 37. Potar, the Cleanser, one certain Rishis, 483 

jrson. Prof. P., iiv; of the priests, 19, 122, Prayer, personified, 26^ 

07, 458, 624, 62ff, 259. 265, 305, 308, 406. 42 ; see Hotrft, IJcl. 

sician, Radra, 309. Poverty, 74, 328. Lord of, Brihaspati, 

- Varuna, 31. Frabhfivasu, a Vedic 56, 85, 114, 254, 287, 

sicians, Asvins, 146, Rishi, 499. 389, 644. 

S6, 210. Praise of Men, Narffcsansa, Agni, 56. 

- Maruts, 300^ Agni, 16, 263, 308, 403. power of, 85, 94. 

- Waters, 29. Indra, 585. the best armour, 6 4 8. 

vana, the name of Praj^p'iti, Lord of Crea for aid in battle, 10, 

, prince, 65, 148. tures, 30, 48, 62, 154, 38, 71, 98, 128-130, 132, 

ars, splinters from the 421. 438, 50/, 618, 628 133, 183, 184, 297, 49/. 

acrificial stake, 328. notes. for general safety, 

ru, a demon of air, a Rishi, 359. 7, 27, 49, 189, 190. 

70, 130,277, 412, Prajftpatis, the progcni- for long life, 13, 30; 

18, 677, 580. tors of men, 69 note. 31, 48, 114, 116, 157, 

Icht, a female fiend, Frakriti,NAture,220 note. 189, 2l0. 

l75 note. Pramaganda, a prince of for children, 15, 48, 

ichel. Prof. R., 152, the Ktkatas, 3/4. 151,299, 518. 

116,558,581,586,592, Pranava, the sacred syl- for health, wealth, 

►97, 602, 616. lable Om, 226 note. and happiness, 47, 51, 

aras. 312 ; ««e Fathers. Prasistar, Director- priest, 69,66, 119, 121, 126, 
blaas, a man’s Jname, 122, 259, 266, 306 nofea. 152, 253, 299, 300, 

)88. Praskanvaj a Vedic Rishi, 334, 336, et fccevim. 

luts, personified, 582, 60-62. for rain, 534, 535,643, 

Jl7. Prastoka, a name of Di* —for a safe and spaci- 

—King of, Agni, 306 vodAsa, 611. ous home, 643, 644. 

— Lord of, Soma the Prata’’dana, a prince, 688. for freedom from 

Moon, 29, 116. PrAtardani, son of Fra- sieknese, 645. 

— luminosity of, 173, tardana, 688. — — for Divine mercy 

1*74, 269. Pratidris, sacrificial title and pardon of sin, 31 , 

— medicinal, Lord* of, of one of the Maruts, 32, 42, 296, 408, 55 2. 

69, 60. 96 note. —for sinlessness, 185. 

easantness, personified, Pratikshatra, a VetKc — — for victory in a 
56. Bkhi, 51 4 note. chariot race, 297. 

liny, 68. Pravorgya, an introdUc- for ttie deatruefson} 

oison, poisonous reptiles, 'tory Soma ceremony, of fiends, etc., 6 J, 52y 
chariai against, ,255-257. 462, 492, lll,185y 



m 


INDEX OP NAMES, BTO, 


Prieata, names and duties 490; boat-building, Pdshan, a Sun-God, giver 

of, 269 note. 464, 226 ; leather- of prosperity, and guide 

the two divine, 193, working, 110, 256, 450; of travellers, 17, 28, 29, 

471. physic, 29, 31, 146,156; 68, 59, 106, 114, 116, 

called Gods, 327, rope-making, 216, 276; 139, 168, 190, 1 91, 198, 

the Asvins, 244. smelting, 337, 476, 558; 215, 245, 247,250, 

fee of, 169 ; see vintner, 256; weaving, 292, 298, 309-311,372, 

Dakshiu^. 663; working of iron, see 378,384,389 390,397, 

— special gifts to ; see Axe, Dagger, Spear, etc. 433, 461,503, 508, 514, 

Liberality to Priests. Prosperity, personified, 517, 519,548,685,614- 
Prikshaydmas, a Pioper 160, 298, 506. 616.618,621,623,628, 

Name, 168. Providence, 41, 74, 604. 631, 647. 

Prishtha, a kind pf Stotra Purina, 433. pushan-Vishnit, 575. 

or laud, 401, 523 noic. Purandhi, the Intelligent Pashan8 = Asvins, 247. 
Prisni, mother of the or Spirited, 160, 298, 

Maruts, 13, 28, 54, 506, 533. Quail, Dawn; the set- 

109, 110, 114, 234, Puray.'i, a liberal prince, tiug Sun, 146, 156, 

301, 397, 401, 521. 635. 159. 161, 247. 

527, 529, 530, 637. Purifier, Potar, Cleanser, Quarterly Review, on the 

Earth, 561, 614- 19,259. Soma plant, 2. 

616, 619. Purohita, family or tribal Qi^een, the chief, 486. 

Prisnigu, a o( the priest, 1, 17, 122, 564. Questionings regaixling 

Asvins, 115. P0ru(8), the eponymus Gods, Nature, Man, 31, 

Prisnimfttarab, Pnani’s and men of a great 220, 222, 225, 248, 296, 
gons, the Maruts, ^ 8 noftf. Vedic tribe, 10,81, 87, 377, 409. 

Prison, 408. 184, 183, 443-445, Quivera, 527, 646. 

Prithi, a royal Rlshi, 147. 580, 603. Quoits, missiles and orna- 

Prithivt, Broad Earth, Purukutsa, a favourite njeuts of the Maruts, 
123,323,537,646,619, of India and the As- 89,528. 

642 ; see Earth. vins, 87, 145, 148. 239, 

Goddess of the 448, 449, 496, 580. Rack-Course, 87. 

firmamebt, 550, 651 Purumilha(s), a prince Racing, see Chariot-race. 
note. or Uishi and Ips pep- R4hu, the post-Vedic De- 

Prithu, an ancient King, pie, 204, 247, 502. Jbon of eclip.se, 501 note. 

5S9 note. Purumitra, a Rishi, 143, RahQgaua, a llishi, 99, 

Piithuaravi^s, a prince, 160. 101. 

157 . Purunitha, a prince, 81. Rains, the, 328, 694 note. 

Priyamedha, a fainous Purupapth^ls, a liberal Rftjarshi, royal sage, 71 
Rishi, 62, 198. prince, 63^. mte. 

priyaratha, a prince, 108. PurOravAs, an ancient Raji, the name of a girl ^ 
Professiona, trades, and king, 41. 683. 

crafts, inculcations qf, Puruahanti, iv liberal Rdkll, Goddess qf Pull 
agriculture, 460, 461 ; prince, 149. Moon, 299, 507. 

cfirpentry, 83, 121, PurOvasq, a Yedic llishi, Rakshaa, the race of R^k- 

138, 181, 369, 468, 499. shasas, 467. 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


jhasas, nocturnal Ribhukshan, chief of Ritus, seasons, personi- 

imona, 1,25,46,49, the Ribhns, Indra, 214, fied, 19.20. 213,308, 

!, 100, 102, 129, 347, 233 *250, 2dS, 439,502. 439, 455, 022. 

>3,400, 412,574,583. Ribhu as eldest of R.tvij, a saorificer in due 

shasi, a female de- the throe, 438, 506, 619. aeasou, a priest, 1 

on, 417 noie. Ribhukshans^Uibhus, note. 

i, Indra as lover of 439, 442, 443. Rivers, personified, 322, 

itfcle, 12, 69, 71. Richas, sacred verses for 614, 617, 622, 

la, 230 note. recitation, v., 512. — — the Seven, 44, 132. 

lAyana, viii., 217, 230,Riehatka, a Rishi, 167. Rianier, the, Wind, 167, 

15. Richtshama, a title of Indra, 693. 

ha, Zoroastrians’ Indra, 607 Roarer, the, Agni, 35. 

ime of RasA, 146. Riding on horseback, 216, Robber, 547 ; see Thief. 

1, a seihi- mythical 217, 531. Rock = cloud, 416, 601. 

ver, 146, 505, 522. lligveda, v , vi., vii., ix , Rodast, Lightning per- 
, a Lighb-Goddoss,! 15. xiii., xv., 512. sonitied as the wife of 

ahavya, a Rishi, 537. Rijishin, 351 note. Rndraor of theManits, 

haviti, a prince, 532 Rijisvan, a jivotige of 131,232,515,527,531, 

hantara, an impor* Indra, 70, 74, 130, 412, 618, 633. 

uit SAman, 224. 489,580, 621. Uohita, son of King Haris* 

i, sexual enjoyment, RijrAsva, a royal Rishi, chandia, 30 note. 

49. 130, 156, 159, 160. Romasd, wife of King 

/S, 137. Rinanchaya, king of Svauaya, 174 note. 


ihina, a cloud-demon, the Rusamas, 491, 492, Roth, von, Prof. R., ix. 


33, 274. Rings, or quoits, 112, 

d, modern name of the 231, 233, 
iver Parushnt, 122, 520.Ri8habha, a Rishi, son of 
oha, ^proUgd of the VisvAmitra, 332. 
Uvins, 145, 157-159, Rishi, Seer of a hymn, 


xiv., 3,5,17, 18,21,30, 
67, 86, 243, 261, 267, 
417, 461,484,495, 497, 
508, 542, 546,652,553, 
691, 693,617, 619,648. 


61-163. 

I Bird, the Sun, 515. 
-Bull, Agni, 613. 
—Steer, Dyaus, 529. 
relation, 400 note, 
rille, M., 375. 


an inspired bard, vi., Rudra, the roaring or 


21, 108, et passim. 
Rishis, vi., vii., xiii., 30, 
* 66, 107, 222, 511, 602. 

childlike simplicity 

of questions and pra- 


jhu,23, 24, 144,213,260, yers of, 409, 

188,487, 438,443, 506. the Seven, 30, 448. 

)huB, three deities of Rita, Right, the True, 
nid-air, of whom Ri- Cosmic Order, Moral 
ihu is the eldest bro- Law, 2, 3, 107, 337, 


flashing Tempest-God, 
father of the Maruts ; 
sometimes a gentle 
healer and beneficent 
deity, 18,27,64, 59,60, 
80,88,96,109,128,131, 
152,153, 167, 179,230, 
232, 260, 299-302, 305, 
308,340,373, 397,460, 
468, 602-504, 506, 507, 


/her, 8, 23, 24, 69, 87, 288, 425 Law, Order. 516, 621, 527 630,690. 

)6. 142-144, 211-214, Ritastup, a Rishi, 148. 616,618,619,633,638, 

223, 260, 868, 371, 879, Ritu, a season of the year, 645. 

187, 888, 437*448, 456, sometimes personified, a name of Agni, 85, 

• 07 , 614, 519, 528, 566. 18-20, 307 . 318, 396. 





INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 

Rudrag, sous of R.idra, Sacrificer, 73, 77, 78, 80,95 Sakra, Mighty One, Indra, 

the Marute, 48, 55, 59, Celeatial, VivaavAi), 12, 75, 85, 242, 357, 

62,83, 109, 123,131, 79, 355. 359,411,497,596,610.* 

210, 230, 270, 297, 302, Sacrifioer’a wife, aesociat- Sakti, a Rislii, 90, 374. 
303,328, 337,351,524, ed iu the performance SakuntalA, daughter of 

527, 554, 619, 625. of sacred rites, 106, VisvAmitra, 373, 5Jl 

the Asvinm, 210, 541. 182, 509. notes. 

Ultra aud Varuna, Saerifieial names, titles, SAma, SAman, song, chan- 

539. 8, 112, 555. ted hymn, 224, 237, 

Rusaiuas, the name of a assembly, 41. 313, 401, 412. 

people, 491, 492. luill, 2, 322. SAma-priests, 65 ; SAma- 

Riishatl, wife of the Riahi fiie(a), 20, 41, 42, 64. chanter, 313. 

SyAva, 158. victim, goes straight SAmaveda, v, 11, 224, 

to heaven, 215, 217. 313, 607 notes. 

SABaRDUonA,uectar-yield- — — . victims, 402. Sambara, a demon of 

iug, the Cow milked for post or stake, 16, drought, 6, 70, 75, 81, 

sacrihoial libations, 186. 32,51, 118, 225. 264, 130, 147, 274,277,283, 

Sachf, Power, pei sonified 327, 323, 402, 456. 289, 367, 423. 429, 432, 

as [udra’awife,383, 412. offeungs, milk, 121, 577, 588, 593, 600, 

iiaeied Books of the Ea.st, 165, 206, et passim; 609, 611. 

446,532, 543. ghrita(claiified butter) Sammitah, one of the 

haoied glass, 42, 72, 107, 5, 187 ; gharma (heated Maruts, 96 tiote, 

110, 484, 584, 623. milk), 459; Soma juice, Samudra, sea, gathering 

Saciifice, fiist iustitutors 6, 18, 20, 25, 37, 62, or receptacle of waters, 

of; see Augiids, Athar- 107, 140, et passim; 78. 

van, Bhrigu, Dadliyach, Soma juice and milk, 7, Samvarana, a Risbi, 496. 

Mduu. 28, 38, 108, 190, 250, Samyu, a Rishi, 614. 

—— importance of, 50. et passim ; Soma juice SAnda, a prince, 635. 

makes priests and with grain, groats, Sandikas, a family or 

sacrificeri immortal, meal, cakes, etc. 183, clan, 297. 

41,175. 342, 371, 487; man 30; SanhitA, Collection of 

morning and even- horse, 214 219; bul- Vedichymna, v., vi , vii. 

iug, 408. locks, 267; barren cows, Sanaa, Prayer or Wish, 

morning, noon, and 267; cows in calf, 267. personified, 514, 

evening, 20, 47, 265, — — ve.ssels and imple- Sanskrit, ix-xii. 

373, 407, 410. men ts, 215. Saptavadhri, name of a 

nine and ten months’, SadAprina, a Rishi, 511. man, 545, 546. 

513, 514. Sadasaspati, Lord of the Sira, a RUhi, 157. 

of first-born son, Assembly, Agui, 22, SaramA, Indra’s hound 

30 note. Sadhri, a Rishi, 511. and moaaonger, per- 

chariot, 319. SAdhyas, a class of deities, haps the Dawn, 85, 

= ship, 63, 195. 227. 97, 348, 411, 513. 

=. thunderbolt, 10,57. Sahadeva,aprince, 130,410 SlrameyaSjSaraml’s sons, 

— — - =3 woven cloth, 563 SAkins, Mighty Ones, Yama's watch-dogs, 85 
Nobles, <521. note. 


note. 



INBEX OF NAMES, BTO. 


695 


lavAn, Sarasvat, name Satapatha-BrAhmana, Sea, of air, cloud, 32,40, 

: a Kiver-God, 616 446, 648. 63, 217, 232, 243, 463, 

He \ applied to the ^atarchins, epithet of the 629,641. 

un, 228. Seers of Book I. of the Sons of the, the 

isvati, a river; a Rigveda, 269 note. Asvins, 63. 

jver*Goddess ; God- Satavani, a prince, 81. Season,the, the Rains, 274. 
388 of eloquence and Satri, a prince, son of Seasons, the, 29, 221, 222, 
kcred poetry, vii. 5, Agnivesa, 498. 382 notes. 

3, 44, 114, 135, 198, Satyasravas, a Rishi, 646. personified, 306, 439. 

27, 262, 260, 263, SauclAsa, a prince, 374. Seloucus, viii. 

)7, 304, 311, 312, Savitar, the Sun as ge- Semal, Silk-cotton tree, 

22, 339, 378, 383, nerator, vivifier, and 375. 

10, 471, 507, 509, stimulator, 25, 26, 30, Serpents, wisdom of, as- 

L4, 662, 616, 619, 48, 49, 51, 61, 97, 124, cribed to Gods, 623. 

22, 631, 632. 137, 140, 143, 149, 170, Service of man, 42. 

it, according to Sd- 171,209,211,224,249, Seven, castles, 87. 

i\a a demon, 680 260, 296, 298, 307, 308, celestial streams, 97, 

^te. 337, 353, 360, 378, 383, 219 note. 

lyu, the Sarj:., 433, 384,389,390,402,408, cows, 219. 

22. 409, 438,439,457-459, days of the week, 

0, a river in Oudh, 506,514,516,617,648, 68 no2e. 

13, 522. 649,570,582,617,618, divisions of the year, 

ijaya, son of Srinja* 619, 643, 614. 219 note. 

1, 611 note. Sdvitrl, the QAyatrl par flames of Agni, 137, 

'■andvdn, a Jake and exceJlencey a verse of 201, 392, 404, 454, 

strict, 108, especial sanctity ad> foits of the aborf- 

dta, a Rishi, 147, 370. dressed to Savitar, 390. gines, 239. 

Ata, son of Sarydta, Savya, a Rishi, seer of germs, solar rays, 225. 

i, 370. Hymns 51-57 of Book horses, 219. 

i^dti, probably the I., 69. horses of the Sun, 

me as Sarydta, 148, Sdyana, SAyar Achdrya, 68, 323, 409, 513, 604. 

0. the great Commenta metres of the Veda, 

, a Rishi; or food, or tor of the Rigveda, 27, 326, 455, 462. 

cred grass, 483, 484. ix. xi. xiii. xiv. xv. xvi., Mothers, 195. 

rpari (the meaning et pa^nim. mouths of Brihas- 

uncertain) 374, Sayu, a Riehi, prot^(/S of pati, 454. 

rasl, wife of Taranta, the Asvins, 145, 147, priests, 219, 265, 

1 note. 157, 160-162, 633. 322, 844, 348, £92. 

ram, recited laud or Sayya, the father of reins (priests), 265. 

vocation, 65 note. Naml, 580. regions of the earth, 27. 

kratu, Lord of Hun- Scorpion, 257. Rishis, 30, -448. 

ed Powers, Indra, 6, Sea, 32, 38, 72. Rivera, v., 44, 48, 

12, 20, 88, 39, 76, the Sun, 616. 49, 96, 132, 219, 257, 

7, 369, 498, 600, o'f wealth and boun- 273, 316, 316, 430, 607, 

0, 606. ty, Indra, 14, 69. 562. 



696 


INOBX OF names, etc. 


Seven sages, 395, 582. Sin, the deity of, Kirriti, Six-spoked car, the yea 

Singers, 85. 112. with six seasons, 221. 

— — Sisters, 219, 257,632. searchera-out of. Sky, personified, 40, Q'S, 

sunbeams, 137, 219, Maruts, 112. 65-67, 432, 614, 647 

225, 462. punisher of, Arya- 648, 

times seven, the, man, 233 ; Brahmanas- Smelter, 476, 558, 566. 

Maruts, 621. pati, 288 ; Varuna, 178 ; Sogdians, 649. 

tones, 326, 455. Agni, 563, Soma, the Moon-God, 21, 

treasures, 645. Sindhu, the Indus, 35, 22, 29, 47, 60, 90, 

Seven-headed, the, the 61, 90,106,123, 125, 114-117,120,121,151, 

Sun, 323. 127, 168, 174, 250, 449, 156,217, 222. 255, 268, 

Seven-rayed, Agni, 201. 458, 520, 622, 631. 309,310,389,390,430, 

reined car, of the Sinivjlli, a lunar Goddess, 512,514,519,603,609, 

Sun, 604. 299. 622, 644, 645, 648. 

Seven-wheeled car, the, Sinless, 170, 549, 617. Soma, the plant, 2, 12, 16, 
219, 221. Sinlessness, 30, 617, 618. 60, 368. 

Shadgurusishya, 374. Sinsip{l,Si8U,Si8Soo wood, deified juice of, vi , 

Shelley, 132, 163, 351. 375. y iii., et passiw. 

Ship, 32, 65, 127, l82,354,SiphA, a river, 135. grown on mountains, 

486, 513, 524, 529, 627. Sira, Plo>igh, Agricul- 368, 420, 508, 651. 

=s hymn, sacrifice, tural <leity, 461. -——preparation of, 2, 

63, 195. Sister, the, Dawn, 243, 19, 36, 37. 

Sickle(s), 80, 420. 266. drunk by Brahmans, 2. 

Siebenzig Lieder des Rig- Sisters, Heaven and ——produces inspiration, 
veda (Geldiier and Kae- Earth, 377, 482. 112. 

gi), xiv., 417. the Dawns, 172. — — eloquence and wis- 

Sikhs, 89. Day and Night, 381. dom, 598. 

Siinbala, the Silk-Cotton — • — Night and Dawn, rapture, 6, 22, 69, 

* tree, 375. 149, 172 242. 71, 73, 78, 110, 448. 

Siinyua, a race of hostile of priests, the waters, Lord of, Indra, 100, 

natives, 130, 29, 351, 601. 

Sin, a burden, 295. rivers, 315, 354, 4 23, Soma-drinker, a title of 

the bonds of, 32. 34, 631. Indra, 6, 7, 12, 37, 274, 

295, 408, 467, 552. fingers, 86, 94, 344, 362, 368, 436, 584, 606. 

prayer for pardon 384, 403. Som&huti, a Rishi, 264. 

or removal of, 29, 31, Slta, Furrow personified, Somaka, a prince, son of 
32, 42, 48, 64, 126, 127, 460, 461. Sahadeva, 410. 

210, 217, 249, 253,294- Siva, the Auspicious One, Soma- Rudra, 21, 645.^ 

296, 311, 327, 408, 458, viii., 300 noCe. Sou, begetting of, a debt 

407, 552,645. Six, the, seasons, 29, 222, to Fathers, 631. 

imputed, prayer for 382, 383. Son of Strength, Agni, 

freedom from, 295, 398. regions, 220. 34, 36, 56, 62, 267 ; 

punishment of, 178, directions, 276. Strength, Sou of. 

233, 288, 292, 295, 296, expanses, 609. Sons, 720, days and 

08, 426, 663. ——burthens, 383. nights, 221. 



INDBX dF NAMES, BTC. 


667 


erers, Sorcery, 49, Stator, Jupiter, 45, 600 Sun, Sun-God, vi,. 7, 8, 
75, 477. notes. 40 43, 47, 48, 58, 78, 

eresses, 185 Stayer, the, Indra, 4.5. 85,91-93,05,106,108, 

tr, Indm’s 577. Steed, Agni, 50, 93,203, 114, 119, 123,124,126, 

ira of theMaruts,40, 327. 132,133, 136, i38, 147, 

I, 10, 112, 520; see Steeds, priests, 322,327. 149,153,161, 162, 166, 

ances. Red, flames of Agni, 170-172,190,205,211, 

ich, Goddess of, 5, 97. 212, 214, 217-219,221, 

J, 50, 125, 225, 503, Steer, see Bull. 224-226, 228, 234,240, 

16, 541 ; 3CC Vslk. Steesrs, strong Soma li- 243,245,247,254,255, 
-fourth division of, bations, 193. 268,273,283,298,323, 

xlinary language, Stoma, hymn of praise, 325,338,350,351,360, 
27. 11. 374,379,380,385,397, 

eder, the, Vishnu, Stone, the heavenly, the 409, 410, 424, 425, 435, 

5 the Sun, 666. Sun, 491, 526. 438,449.451,457,461, 

nta-Armaiti (cf. Ara- Strength, a Goddess, 78. 479, 481.488, 502, 510, 

lati), 508 rjoic. Son of, Agni, 34, 612,513,515,529,534, 

js of Varuna, 33. 33, 56, 62, 79, 80, 538,540,561,563,57 5, 

-of Agni, 398. 102, 125, 175, 196, 604,615,627,639,644. 

•it, the Supremo, 222. 198, 267, 316, 333, judge of innocence, 

kes, twelve, the 335, 336, 336, 339, 170. 

lonths, 227. 340, 342, 343, 407, and Moon, 3, 97,223, 

-360, the days of the 425, 468-470, 473,477, 619 

ear, 227. 481, 556, 559, 560, S in a. the Luck of agri- 

uses of Gods, 26 ; see 566, 567, 572, 573, ’ culture 460,461. 

James, Consorts. 577, 613, 615, 618. Sunahutia^^s), the chief 

ead of Aryan popula- Indra, 379, 383. and members of a fami- 

ou, 631. Sons of, the ly, 282, 311, 312. 

ijaya, the name of a Ribhus, 214, 440, 4 41, Sunaljsepa, a youth about 

rince, 410, 689, 612 4 43. to be sacrificed, saved 

ijayas, a people in Subhanl, the name of a by prayer, 30, 32, 36, 

r.-W. India, 410 note. woman, 148, 467. 

taratha, a prince, 499. Suchadratha, a prince, Sunttha, a man’s name, 

tarya, a Rishi, 146. 640, 546. 

tavit, a Rishi, 611. Suchi Radiance, a form SunritA, Pleasantness, 

John, 327. of Agni, 337. OUduess, personified, 

Petersburg Lexicon, Sudds, King of the Trit- 66. 

c., xiiL, et passim. bus, 63, 87, 148, 316, Suparna, Strong-winged, 

11, aerial home of the 353, 373, 376. Fair- winged, an eagle, 

laruts, 453. Sudhaii van, father of the the Sun, 49 note. 

llion, the rain-cloud, Ribhus, 23, 143, 212, Suparnd, (dual), perhaps 

50, 651, 213, 387, 440, 441. Sun and Moon, 223 note 

r of the Gods, the Suhastya, son of GhoshA, Supporter, Indra, 600. 

lun, 639. 164 note. Supreme God, 2, 91, 92, 

xs, 92, 108, 112. Sumidha, a prince, 625. ISO, 446 notet. 



693 


INDEX OF NAMES, STO. 


Supreme Spirit, Soul, or Svadhiti, axe, perhaps the Taranta, a liberal prince, 
Self, 222, notes. thunderbolt, 495 note. 151, 152. 

Sdra, the Sun, 620, 626. Sv4h&, a sacrificial excla- Tdrkshya, a mythical 
Sur&dhila, a regal Rishi, naation, Ave ! Hail ! being, probably a form 

130. ’ Blessing!, 17, 142,198, of the Sun, 114, 443. 

Siiri, insti tutor of sacri- 264, 305, 369, 472. Tarya, a Rishl, 511. , 
fice, prince, chief, 27, Svaitreya, son of Svitrd, Tempest-Qods, 8 ; see 
41, 431, 521. 47, 482. Maruts. 

Suri«, Gods, 196; Maruts, Svanaya, a pious prince. Ten, the, the fingers, 195. 

521. 1-73, 174. sisters, fingers, 344. 

Sfirya, the Suu-Qod, 25, Svarbhlnu, the demon of tlaughters of Tvash- 

49, 67, 68, 84, 87, 124, eclipse, 501, 502. tar, fingers, 124. 

127, 128, 130, 153, 154, Svarga, heaven, 25, 120 legions, 221, 515. 

156, 165, 167, 209, 211, notes. Sfirya’s horses, 221. 

211,270,272,283,323, Svasna, a demon, 277. months’ sacrifice, 5 13. 

341, 346, 350, 365, 374, Svasti, Prosperity, 453. indefinitely for many, 

380, 384,393, 397,407- said to be a Rislii’s 361, 427. 

409,412,415,428,430, name, 517. usual number of 

435, 445, 449, 462, 465, SvitrA the name of a things presented, 174, 
470,480,481,489,496, woman, 47, 482. 496, 611, 635. 

499-503, 511-513, 515, Svitriya, son of Svitrd, months of human 

533, 538, 548,551,558, 47 note. gestation, 545. 

559,561,566,569,617, Swan(s) 90, 213, 416, Tenfold draught, 169. 

627, 631, 634. 451,545. Tenth age, or decade of 

Sflryl, Sunlight, daughter Swords, or daggers, 52. life, 211. 
of the Sun-God, 47, Sydva, a Rishi, 158, 160, Thief, thieves, 67, 90,134, 
154, 156, 162,232,247, * 532. ’ 444,469,480,621. 

449,450,510,616,623, SyAvAsva, a Rishi, 519, Third lucid regions, 604. 
634. 525, 531, 532, 548. Thirty regions, 171. 

Su^hna, Parcher, a de- Synod, sacrificial assem- steps, divisions of 

mou of drought, 6,14, bly, 41, 57, 78, 160, day and night, 629. 

46, 70, 71, 76, 78, 130 565 ; see assembly. Thirty-three Gods, 48, 

134, 166, 241,277,283, inviolability of, 41 62,193,325. 

349,412, 432,489,493, note. Thdrr, 191. 

494, 577, 580, 587, 592, Syfimarasmi, a Rishi, 147. Three, Agni, SJirya, Vdyu, 
600. * 226. 

SusravAs, a prince, 74,76.TJ1 dris, the sacrificial Gods, 193 note. 

Sustainer, the, Agni, 509. name of one of the favourite number of 

Varuna, 294. Maruts, 96 note. the Asvins, 47, 48. 

Sutarabhara, a Rishi, 512. Taittirlyas, followers of altars, 306, 477. 

Sutlej, one of the Five the Taittirtya school birth-places of Agni, 

Rivera of the PunjAb, of the Yajurveda, 27. 124. 

333. TanfinapAt, Son of Him- forms of Agni, 101, 

Suttidrl, the Sutlej, 44, self, a title of Agni, 319, 341, 391. 

* 353. 15, 197, 321, 344. lights, 488. 



INDEX OP NAlfXS, ETC. &99 

lustres, 488. Three-and-Thirty, the, Trasadasyu, Tenor o£ 
Tins of light (Agni), 325; see Thirty-three Dasyus, a prince, 147, 

101, 457. Gods. ' 443, 444, 448, 449, 

et of Agui, 462. Three*wheeled car, of 487, 496, 608 note, 
visions, heaven, Asvins, 209, 246, 441. Tricha (triplet), 19, 68. 
ament, earth, 642. Threefold, the, earth, hea- Trikadrukas, three Soma 
lily sacrifices, 201, ven, living creatures, 207. vessels; or the first 

373, 383, 442, 458. Amrit, 604. three days of the Abhi- 

teers, Agui, Sfirya, Three thousand, three plava ceremony, 43, 
u, 538. hundred, and thirty- 272, 278, 286. 

sters, Dawns, 266. nine Gods, 330. Trikshi, a prince, son, i e. 

.crificial fires, 19, 41, Thrice, in connexion peer, of Trasadasyu, 608. 

with Asvins, 47, 48. Trinaskauda, a prince, 237. 
>rnsof Agni, 509. Thrice-eleven Gods, 48, Triple-headed, Agni, 201. 
oruings, 335. 193; see Thirty- three Trishtup, one of the 

oddesses, 322. Gods. chief Vedic metres, 

eps or strides of Thrice-seven brave (Ma- 223, 312, 489. 
uiu, 27, 207, 208, ruts) 185. iVisoka, a of the 

617. names or forms of Asvius, 146. 

adies of waters, the cow, 393. Tiita, an old Vedic God, 

384. libations, or treasures, 217,251,298,303, 476, 

irths, 132, 141, 221, 24. 481, 503, 504, 513. 

457,538,609. mystic things, 97. a Rishi, 72, 136, 

3aveus,49,221,293, peahens, 257. 138, 272, 302, 552. 

Thrice- mingled Soma li- Trivikrama Avatfi,ra, 27 
rmaments, 49, 221, bation, 487. note. 

Thunderbolt = sacrifice, Trivrishan, a Rishi, 487# 
istes, 356. 10, 57. Truth = uaturai law, 137. 

lllais, stakes for Indra’s friend, 13, Tryaruna, a Rishi, 487. 

lan victim, 32. 74, 682. Tugra, father of Bhujyii, 

inks or orders of of gold, 79, 110. 47, 145, 154, 159, 161, 

a, 620. of ayas (iron or 210, 243, 246, 580, 688, 

j.dms of earth, 638. bronze), 78, 105. 633. 

jgions, 201, 457. Time, 208 no<<j. a demon, or savage 

vers, 6C9. Tishya, an asterism, 524, enemy, conquered by 

pheres of light, 548. 625. Indra, 580, 588. 

nations of the Sun, Tithonus, 40 Jiote. Tugryans, families des- 

Tools, awl, 624; axe, cended from Tugra, 47. 

orlda, 7, 48, 383, 215, 216, 318, 319; Tuji, 580 note, 588. 

, 566, 632. kuife, 181; needle, 299; Tumblers, 12 note. 

mrld-bowls, 538. sickle, 80, 420. Turva8a(8), the epony- 

acred beakers, 43; Towns, cloud-castles of mus of one of the Five 
Trikatlrukas. drought fiends, 14, Tribes, and his people, 

lawns, 266. Traitkna, name Qf ft DAsa, 10, 52, 65, 76, 140,240, 

laves = seasons, 227. 210. ^33, 403, 581, 688, 0Q4. 



too 


INDBX OF NAMFS, BTO. 


TOrvayftna, a king aided Udder = sacrifice, 424. Ushas, her chariot shatter 

by Indra, 74, 75, 277, = sourccot profit, 426. ed by Indra, 278,432. 

677. Ugradeva, a chief, 62. Ufcij, a Riahi, 21, 71, 

Turviti, a prince, 62, 76, Uktha, a recited laud, 2, 14B, 163, 168, 603. 

84, 149, 276, 318. 11, 65 notes. 

Tutuji, a Proper Name, Ukthya, an olfering with VadhrimatI, a prot^g^e 
680 n^te. Soma, 19 note. bf the Asvins, 156. 

Twain.Day and Night, 6 49. Unborn, the, the Suit as Vadhryasva, a celebrate<i 
Twain, the, Heaveu and Supreme God, 91, 377. Rishi, 631. 

Earth, 294. Babe, the, the Sun Vclgdevata, Goddess of 

Tvashtar, the Artificer before rising, 205. Speech, 56, 503 notes. 

of the Gods, 16, 19, 24, Universal Gods, 28, 36, Vagdevi, the8ame,26j<o^£ 
26, 43, 70, 72, 83, 101, 622 ; see Visvedevaa. Vahnilj, priest ; or lumi 

108, 110, 124,143,160, Upanishads, theological nous, 307 note. 
166,198,212,213,216, treatises, 377. Vaidadasvi a prince, 532 

250, 252,260, 264, 272, Upasad,a Soma ceremony, Vais vadeva Nivid, invo 
288, 298, 305, 308,322, 266. cation of the All-Gods, 

368, 878, 382,383, 416, Upastuta, a Rishi, 51, 330. 

437,448,472,493,503, 52, 147. Vaisvdinitra, descendant 

614,575, 597,603,611, Urana, a demon of drought, of VisvAmitra, 1 note. 
616, 619, 622. 6, 277. VaisvAnara, Dear to All 

Twelve days, 438. Uranus, 575 note. Men, Agni, 80, 81,1*27, 

moons (months), 33. UrjAni, Strength pereo- 318 321, 340, 400, 401, 

forms (months), 221. nified, 162. 463, 487, 561-564. 

spokes (months), 221. Crjavya, ft prince, 605. VaitAna- Sutra, 572 note. 

Adityas, Sun-Gods, Orjayanti, she who Vaivasvata, son of Vivas • 

^7, 58. strengthens, 276. vAn, 148, 370. 

Twice-ten kings, 74. UrmyA, Night, 532. VAja, one of the RiV»hui5, 
Twins, the. Heaven and Dri avAblia, a demon,272 23, 24, 144, 213, 371, 
Earth, 211. t,ote 388, 437-439, 442-506, 

Two Sages, celestial Urukaksba, the name of 619. 

priests, 262. a man, 607 note. VAjas, VAja and his bro- 

Heralds, Divine Ho- Urvasi, an Apsaras or there, the three Ribhue 

tar-priests, 263. celestial nymph, 505. 144, 439. 

Two-footed, Gauif, VAk, UsanA, a Rishi favoured VAk or VAch, Voice, the 
226. by Indra, 70, 71, 106, Word, Speech peraoni- 

169, 166, 411,428,489, fied, 6, 26, 125, 232, 

UcHATHYA, a Rishi, 193, 493, 497, 681. 359, 372, 374, 3d4, 

20*2,210. * Ushas, Eos, Aurora, 303, 616, 516, 541. 

UdgAtar, a priest who Dawn, 40, 60, 01, 68, Vala, cave, imprisoning 
chants SAma-hymns, 65 67, 93, 169, 188, cloud, personified as a 

237, 313. 222, 243, 272, 278,307, drought-demon, 14,72 

Udder = altar, 404, 407. 336,361, 385, 888,393, 86, 272, 273, 277, 279, 

cloud, 88, 201, 401, 432,443, 512,515, 289, 356,454, 576, 69^ 

423, 468. 667, 626, 629. 603. 



INDEX OP NAMES, HTO. 701 

leva, a Rishi, 891, 685, 612, 614, 615,617, Vosuyus, a family, 

416, 418, 427,450. 619, 633, 640, 641,645, 485. 

„ said to be a Rishi, 648. V^ta, Wind, the Wind- 

147. Varuna, chief of the God, 70, 71, 250, 493, 

^>ati, Sovran of tho Lords of Natural and 563, 514, 616, 619. 

>d, a tall tree, the Moral Order, 31, 33, VatApi, the fermenting 
•ififial stake, 16, 68, 136. Soma, 951. 

252, 264, 322, King of heaven and V.avri (covering), a Rishi 

472. earth, 33. according to Silyana, 

le mortar for pound Punisher of the 482. 

the Soma plant, wicked, 178. Vayu, Wind, the Wind- 

in the dual, mor- pardons the sins of God, 2, 3, 17, 18, 27, 

and pestle, 37. penitents, 32, 34, 295 28, 40, 81, 151, 154, 

,na, a of 186 188,191,198,214, 

ins, 145, 155, 158, ——sends rain, 651. 223, 224, 226, 235,251 

163. his rivaliy within- 270, 310, 341,350,356, 

•ida, a demon, 74* dra, 448. 369, 384, 386, 421, 

luti, name of a Varu.^nt, Vavuna’s Con- 451-453, 461, 476,502, 
dal sacrifice, 508 sort, 26, 515. 503, 503, 518,519, 538, 

;. Vardtri, a tutelary God- 559, 597, 615, 616, 619. 

ikha, a demon or dess, 26, 504. VAyus, honorific plural 

ige enemy, 588, 589. Varutris, 389. for Vdyu, 271. 

tin, a demon or Vasa, a Rishi, 146,157. Vayya, father or comrade 
ige, 277, 432, 611. Vashat, a sacrificial excla- of Turvlti, 76, 145, 
dgiras, sons of King mation, 41, 104, 30.5. 27t), 418, 546. 

shilgir, 128, 130. Vashatkdra, the cry Va- Veda, v. lx xi. xii. xiv. 
la.theEncompasser, shat deified, 43 note. Vedas, three, 462 note. 

1 qf the starry hea- Vasishtha, a famous ^four, v. vi. 462 nofe. 

,3,16,19,21,26-28, Rishi, seer of Book VI I. Ved&nti(8), 563,564. 
34,48,50,51,57-59, of the R. V., 30, 90, Vedi, altar, 4 note; see 
68,95, 99,102, 114- 146, 315, 374, 376. Altar. 

123,125, 126,130, Vdstoshpati, Lord of the Vedic India, 373 note. 
-138,144, 163,164, Homestead, Indra, 503. Vedische Studien, 172, 
-170, 178, 179,189- Vasu, good, kind. Good 592, 697, 602,616,638, 

, 196, 199, 204,209, L,ord. 40,123, 199,267, 640. 

i 218,227, 233, ^;47, 276, 278, 336, 363,385, Vena, probably Agni, 462. 

259,292, 297,306, 446, 469, 336. Venomous reptiles, charm 

1,321-323, 333, 337, Vasus, a class of Gods, agaipst, 255, 256. 

►, 361, 378-380,388, 40, 48, 62, 80, 123, Vetasu, a fiend or aav- 

,394, 397, 400,408, 138, 139, 164, 210,217, age, 680, 587, 588. 

1, 438, 439 , 443 , 445 , 218, 263, 293,297,302, VibdU, ^ orook ? 432. 

!, 458, 459,463,472, 828, 337, 362, 369,384, Vibhvan, one of the 

7,502,605-607,614- 884,468,603,606,617, Ribhus, 23, 24, 144, 

7, 519, 683-640,651, 619, 626, 619, 633. 213, 368, 437, 438,442, 

2, 557, 665,672,582, Vasusruta, a Rishi, 471. 606, 607, 514, 62.8. 



702 


rRMt 6T NAXfRS, BTCf. 


Vidadasva, father of Visva, Heaven personi* 
Purumt^ha, 532 n<yte. fied, 571. 

Vidatha, sacrificial as- VisvAch, an Aaura or 
sembly, 41 note. fiend, 159'. 

Vidathin, father of Rij is- ViSvacharshani, Dear to 
van, 412, 489. all men, Agni, 485. 

Vidhdtar, the Disposer, a Rishi, 484. 


019. 

V/khanas, a Rishi, 147 
note. 

Vimada, an ancient Rishi, 
69, 148, 154, 160.' 

Vindhyan Mountains, 
230 note. 

Vintner, 255. 

Vipda, the river Bed's, 
44, 353, 432. 

Vtrabhadra, the destroyer 
of Daksha’s sacrifice, 
433 note. 


Vkivaka, a ^ishi, 157, 
158. 

VisvAmitra, a famous 
^ishi, 1, la, SO-, 315, 
332, 339, 353, 354,359, 
361, 364, 373, 375, 
376, 384, 390. 

VisvAmitras, 318, 336, 
374. 

Visvarupa, a three-head- 
ed monster slain by 
Indra, 272. 

Visvae, a class of Gods, 


Vi rapatnt, the Hero’s Wife, 4, 540. 
perhaps the river Saras- VisvasAman, a ^ishi,434. 
vati, 135, 609,616 notes VfsvavAra, a Rishi, 511. 
Virupa(8),a Rishi and his VisvavArA, a woman said 
descendants, 62, 373. to be the seer of hymn 
VishnApO, a Rishi’s son V. 23. 
restored to his father VisvAvasu, chief of the 
by the Asvins, 157, Qandharvas, 217 note. 

Visvedevas, ViSvedevAb, 
Vishnu, Pervader, or Visve DevA'h, All-Gods, 
Active Worker, a per- 


sonification of the Sun, 
27, 83, 110, 116, 207- 
209, 226, 250,259,286, 
302, 325, 378,581,324, 
397, 416, 417, 468,614, 
517, 619, 553, 554,666, 
575, 579, 582, 614,617, 
619, 641, 642. 


Univeieal Gods, a class 
of deities, 4, 24, 28, 
36, 113, 115,136,142, 
167, 191, 219;249,297, 
330, 376, 379, 383, 
384, 458, 602,607,510, 
5 '2, 614, 613, 531, 
616, 617, 619- 621. 

VltahaVya, a J^ishi, 668. 


— - — css Indra, 207. Vi UustAr, Greek Hydaspes, 

Visisipra, probably a modem Jehlam or Jhe- 
barbanan,513. lum, a river of the 

VispalA, a proUgie of the PanjAb, 44. 

Aavina, 46, 156, 169, VivaavAn, Brilliant, a 
161, 245. name of the morning 


Sun ; a sacrificer, 40; 
64, 73, 73, 81, 191, 
355, 370, 404, 477,662. 

Voice, see VAk, Sp*»ech. 

= thunder, 238. 

V richayA, a damsel given 
to KakshtvAn by the 
Asvins, 71. 

Vrichlvan(8), chief and 
people of a tribe, 589. 

Vrika, wolf, robber, 59', 

Vrikodvaras, the name 
of a king, 237. 

Vrishabha, bull, manly, 
strong, 242 note. 

VrishAgir, a royal Risln, 
128, 156. 

Vrishan, male, strong, 
bull, hero, chief, 242 
note. 

a Rishi, 51. 

Vrishanasva*, a king, 71. 

Viitra, Vritras, the chief 
cloud-demon and fiends 
of drought, 6', 1 4, 28, 
43-46, 50, 69, 72-74, 
76, 78, 83, 84, 87, 99; 
103, ■»04, 107, 108,110, 
112, 120, 132, 134,142, 

, 166^228,223,251,271,, 

272, 276; 283; 286, 296; 
345, 347, 360, 351,353, 
355, 358, 369, 366-368, 
411, 4'I3-4M6, 417-419; 
422, 423, 426; 427, 4'35, 
446; 448, 489'-491, 494, 
437,606, 613, 61 6, 573, 
674, 676, 677, 679; l583, 
584, 687, 694-696, 696, 
602, 604, 609, 616,627, 
631, 640-644. 

Yritra’s mother, 44'. 

Vritra-slayer, a title of 
Indra, 20, 104,107, 128, 
139, 260, 285, 340; 350; 



iND®x OP Names,' etc. 


703 


67, 371, 372,378, Wafers, Son of the, Agni, 26, Wi8h-Godde88,Dhi8lia’;iA, 

33, 436, 498, 500, 124, 198, 260, 303-306, 369. 

97, 609. 329, 504, 510, 567, 623. Witches, 135 ; see Sorce- 

ilayor,. Agni, 81, Savitar, 26-, 6-19. resaes. 

160, 337,671,572, Wealth-giver, Agui, 19, Wizard, 6-24 nof^. 

100, 126, 306. Wolf, 59, 138, 156, 150, 

Soma, the Moon- —Indra, 45, 46. 247 567; she-wolf, 

11&. Weavers, weaving, web, 150, 160, 247, 621. 

(layers, tiidra- 263, 307. Wolves = enemies, 560. 

140, 629. Web = hymn, 151. Women, praised, 531 ; 

Ira-Varuna, 640*. = worship, 263. abduction of, 415,. 492; 

, 16, 72 notes. Weber, Prof. A., vii. riv. prize of war, 415; at- 
,, a demon of xv. 287, 607. tend festivals, 172,463; 

ght,130, 133,275, Weregild, 532. take part in sacrifice. 

Wheel = the year, 227. 96, 106, 182. 

dra’s father, 416, Whip, of the Aavins, 25-, = fingers, see Mai- 

tiotes. 209. dens, Sisters. 

,, a protege of the of the Maruta, 52, Woods, personified, 504. 

aa. deified, 647. Wool, 242, 5-20. 

lightning compared Word8,playupon, vrishan 

s, H. W.,xiv. 2, 31, to a, 533. strong, 242, 280, 357, 

189, 252, 552, 619. Wliitney, Prof W. D., 22. 499, 501, 603 ; ddmao, 

irer, the. Wind, Wicked, place of punislv- bond, bounty, 585. 

145, 504. ment of the, 401. World-halves, heaven and 

idra as the Sun, 9, Wide-strider, the, Vishnu earth, 81, 566. 

as the Sun, 207, 378. Worlds, pair of, 104. 

weapons of, bow, Wife, careful and active, three, 7, 48, 383, 

w, chariot, armour, 91, 101 ; benevoleut, 498, 566*, 632. 

, 645 ; spear, lance, 531 ; decks herself for World-tree. 31, 223 notes^ 
88,110,112, 113, herhusband. 396 ; takes 
, 235 ; sword, 52, part in sacrifice, 96, Xsrxes, 648 note. 

, 113 ; dagger, 527; 106, 182. 

S 51, 87; sling, 166. Williams, Sir M. M., xiv., Yadu( 8), chief and raem- 
or, the (Bharata), 443. here, of a great Aryan- 

Ira, 305. Wilson, Prof. H. H., viii. tribe, 10, 52, 76, 140, 

avitar, 643. xi. xiv. xv. et passim. 240, 433, 493, 581, 604. 

and woof, 563,564. Wind, personified, 114, Yajam&na, institutor of 
rs, personified, 28, 145, 167, 214, 226,412; sacrifice, worshipper, 
83, 106, 124, 129, see Vftta, Vfiyu. wealthy householder, 

, 305, 379, 383,384, Wind’s-Bride, I3l note. 12 note. 

, 404, 458, 514,618. Windisch, Prof., 297. Yajata, a Rishi, 511. 

lealing power of the, Wine (surA), 1 56. Yajnas, sacrificial cere- 

Wine-skin, 255. monies, 19. 

emoversofsin, 29. Winters, hundred, kc Yajurveda, the Veda of 
physicians, 618. Hundred Winters. gRcrificial texts, v.,417. 



704 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC, 


Yajus, sacrificial text, dis- 
tinguished from recited 
hymn and chant, 122. 

YAjya, sacrificial verse 
littered when the ob- 
lation is offered, 193, 
566 notes. 

Varna, King of the De- 
parted, son of Vivasvdu, 
37, 40, 49, 54, 64, 85, 
J06, 154, 217, 


Yamuna, the Aiajuovva 
of Ptolemy, the Jomanea 
of Pliny, the modern 
Jumna, 521. 

Y&ska, author of the 
Nirukta, 3, 5, 68, 114, 
118, 141, 146, 227,346, 
348, 353, 461. 

Yatudhdnas, aoj’cerers, 
fiends, 49. 


Yavydvatt, the name o 

a river, 589. 

YayAti, an ancient pa- 
triarch, 42, 140. 

Zend, xii. • 

Zeus, 75, 114. 

Zimmer, Prof. H., 86 
631, 648. 

Zoroastrians, 146, 508. 



CORRIGENDA ET ADDENDA. 

0 Hue 4 from below, 0 /t^* Vrittra a cotunia 
. » 2 from below, read resist for resis, 

9 » 1 of note 7, read gi^^vahustdsah for grdkiaJtastd^oh 

B • i dele the full stop aftei' invoke 

f i» 3 from below, read flight fm' fight 

7 K 1 of stanza 6, read thrice for thirce 

6 »» 1 ef stanza 10, inaei't a hyphen after earth 

8 » 3 of notes, read hibhiydd for hihhhjM 

0 ■ 3 of stanza 9, read Immortal for Imortal 

4 » 1 of notes, read came for come 

0 » 3 of note 9, read collections for collection 

1 » 3 of stanza 13, read Vrishanaava’s /or Vrishanasva’a 

n 4 of note 13, read Vrishanasva/w Vrisanasva 

2 s 4 of stanza 6, as Tiita cleaveth Vala'a fences, cleft 

him through. 

. » 6 from below, add ButTTiita appears to be Indra’s associate 

Agni. See Macdonell, Journal R. A. Sedety, July, 1893. 

4 ■ 4 of notes, read Nami/cw* Kami. 

^ » 7,8, substitute Thou hast, with speeders, with Dasagvtis, India, 

Sakra, with thunder rent obstructive Vala. 

0 w 2 of notes, read Vasishtha/w Vasish^a 

1 » 19, read thee for the 

*2 from below, read for /or fo 
11 s 3 from below, visert a full stop after us 

5 » 15, read Mitra /or Mitra. 

6 ■ 2 of notes, add But see Macdonell, Journal of the R. A. 

Society, July, 1893, pp. 422 note 2, and 4G0. 

7 • 13, iyisert a comma after Sayu 

8 ■ 7, substitute brought the host of kind Gods for carried home 

Sudevi 

7 » 4 of stanza 23 and 6 from below, read Vishnapu for VishiApu 

5 • 2 of stanza 7, make the same correction ; and correct the 

Index accordingly. 

i ■ 2 of notes, read Bhivya /or BhAva 

6 n 2 of stanza 10, read waking /or walking 

• 1 of notes, a/fer grass tnjerf and 

3 ■ 15, read priests /or priest 

» 1 of note, read wether's for wethers's 

6 » 3 and 4 from below, read Aditi /or aditi and aditi/or Aditi 

0 « 6 of notes, dele the 

0 •» 4 from below, read Sttong God for Strong-God 

1 ■ 3 of notes, read ip for in 

4 ■ 2 of stanza 10, read MAna’s /or MAnas 

5 • 7, after Asvius insert a comma 



706 

Page 257 
•» 200 
N 264 
- 265 

» 267 
» 272 


• 291 

• 299 

■ 302 

I. 305 
» 307 
« 327 
IT 345 
- 347 

• 352 

» 315 

» 360 
» 378 

39S 
» 419 

» 432 

« 433 

ft 

« 438 
t> 442 
443 
476 

f> 489 

• 

» 492 
ft 500 
ft 523 


OORKiaRn)A Vf A91WTOA. 

line 3, venom dele the colon 
ft 1 of stanza 11, c^ier Hotra itwrf a comma 

t 4 from below, put the lino of division under 6 of notes . 

ft 1 of stanza 9, after Agni insert a comma 
ft 9 of notes, dele first line of note 2 
■ 25, read a way for away 
ft 2 of stanza 19 after Dasyus insert a full atop 
ft 2 of notes read Crnavfibha for Urnav&bha 
ft 7 of notes, add Prof. IMLacdonell’s interpretation of the stanza 
has much to recommend it: ‘ That we, ov^copiing all otic 
foes by thy aids, (and) the barbarian by Aryan prowess, 
might prosper, therefore for our benefit thou didst delivet 
over Viyvarupa, the son of Tvaatr, to the Trita of (thy 
friendship* i.e, to thy ally the God Trita, See Journal qI 
the R. A. Society, July, 1893, pp. 432, 433. 
n II, read omnipotent /or omnipoten 
ft 12 from billow, read worship for worsihip 
ft 3, 4 of stanza 10, ^ infallible, /or the infallible 

I 3 of stanza 3, read Ttrash^r for Tvashtar 
ft 4 of notes, read vdhnik for vdhnik 
ft 2 from below, read Aifcareya/or Aitarey. 
ft 2 of stanza 4, read Vritras /or Vritras 
ft 5 from below, read recognized for recongnized 
ft 1 of stanza 17, read this for the. Make the same correction 
in other places where this concluding stanza recurs, 
ft 5, insert a hyphen e^ter im 

ft 5 from below, insert the sign of parenthesis after fodder, 
ft last of notes, read like for ike 
ft 3 of stanza 2, read wingM for winged 
ft 1 of stanza 11, read power for powers 
ft 6 from below, after Varchin sabetitiste a full .sto^ for the 
comma 

ft 3 of stanza 24, read KarUlatl for Kar9lati 
ft 1 of note 24, read KarHSiati for KarUatX 
» 4 from below, read N^ve/or Ndve 

ft 2 of notes read vibkoatashtd^ for vihhvatashldjy 
ft 7 of notes, after milk dele the full stop 
ft 2 of note, add See Maodon^ R. A. S. Journal, July, 189^, 
p. 446 

ft 2 from below, read mentioned for mentioue 
ft l^t of notes, read in for n 
ft 2 of stanza 4, insert a full stop after glitters 
ft 6 from below, insert full (tfter filling 
9 3 of note, insert the after of 



cohbioenda et addenda. 


707 


’«ge 526 
« 534 
« 542 
«t 643 
» 546 
N ,550 
» 562 

» 555 
» 571 

« 576 
581 
p> 586 
» 583 

• 593 
1. 597 
0 608 

« 615 
*> 622 
0 629 

■ 635 

• 655 


line 4 of note, r^ad master for masters 
« 13, iwri a comma Mitra-Varuna 

• 5 of notes, inicrt a comma q/tef dual 

• 9, insert a comma q/Ur cmne 

N 1 of stanza 5, insert to 4^* or 
f 2, ineert a full atop a/ter forward 

'» 5 of notes, add See Macdonell, R. A. S. Journal, July 1893, 

p. 426. 

» 3, insert a comma after conquer 

" 1 of stanza 7 suistittUe a comma for the full stop after rites 

» 2 of stanza 10, insert a full stop aftet* gifts 

• 2 from below, read it for t 

" 2 from below, tWrt a comma after Dasyu 
n 1 of notes, dde the full stop after 41) 

« 1 of stanza 1, insert a comma after quaffing 

■ 7 ftrom below, put a full stop after * mares ’ 

• 7, substitute a colon for the comma after invoketh 

• 4 of stanza 12, substitute a full stop for the comma qftej 

hostility 

0 3 of stanza 22, dete the comma qfter once 

• I of stanza 11, after host iissert with 

r 3 of stanza 2, substitute a semicolon for the comma after Agni 

• 7 from below, read dfedadm for Ofvandm 

• S, read Viaht&rapahkti/or VishUIjrapankti 

• 4 from below, read Vish^rapahkti for Vtshldrapanleti 
» 4 from below, read Pankti/hr Pankti 



PriiUed d published by k. 4. lazarus A co,, a< fAf Hull Press Benares^ 














# VOLUME II

76117 







HYMNS OB' THE RIGVEDA 

translated with a popular commentary 


BY 

RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M.A..C.I.E. 

FORMER PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE, AND LATE DIRECTOR 
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION N.-W. P. AND OUDH. 


1 

Second Edition. 

COMPLETE IN TWO VOLUMES. 


VOL. II. 



BENARES: 

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY E. J. LAZARUS AND CO. 

1897. 

All rights rest 



LIBRARY 





CONTENTS. 

Pagt. 

Hymns, Translation and Commentary : — 

Book VII. ... ... ... ... 1 

„ VIII ... 103 

VAlakhilya ... ... ... ... 259 

Book IX. ... ... ... ... 269 

» x * ••• ... ... 383 

Appendix.— H ymns lxi., cvi., clxh.-olxiil, clxxxiv. ... 611 

index of Hymns ... ... ... ... 015 

General Index of Hymns ... ... ... 633 

Index of Names, Etc. ... ... ... 637 

Corrigenda et Addenda ... ... ... 671 




the hymns of the rigveda. 

BOOK THE SEVENTH. 

HYMN I. Agni. 

The men from fire-sticks, with their hands’ swift movement, 
have, i« deep, thought, engendered glorious Agni, 

Far-seen, with pointed flame, Lord of the homestead. 

? l'he Vasus set that Agni in the dwelling, fair to behold, for 
help from every quarter : 

Who, in the home for ever, must be honoured. 

) Shine thou before us, Agni, well-enkindled, with flame, Most 
Youthful God, that never fadeth. 

To thee come all our sacrificial viands. 

1 Among all fires these fires have shone most brightly, splendid 
with light, begirt by noble heroes, 

Where men of lofty birth sit down together. 

5 Victorious Agni, grant us wealth with wisdom, wealth with 
brave sons, famous and independent, 

Which not a foe who deals in magic conquers. ^ 

To whom, the Strong, at morn and eve comes, -maid-like, the 
ladle dropping oil, with its oblation : 

Wealth-seeking comes to him his own devotion. 

Burn up all malice with those flames, 0 Agni, wherewith of 
old thou burntest up Jarfttha, 

And drive away in silence pain and sickness. 

With him who lighteth up thy splendour, Agni, excellent, 

, pure, refulgent, Purifier, 

Be present, and with us through these our praises. 

Agni, the patriarchal men, the mortals who have in many 
i places spread thy lustre, — 

Be gracious to us here for their sake also. 

.11 the hymns of this Book are ascribed to the Itishi Vaaishtha, with whom 
sons are associated as the seels of parts of two Lymns. 

i In deep thought : ‘ with their fingers/ according to SAyana, this meaning 
ll >g been attributed without any philological grounds to the word dfdhiti* 
from its use in this and similar passages. 
fits own devotion ; the worship which belongs especially to him. 
w'&tha ; a RAksh isa or demon with a loud harsh voice. — SAyana, 



2 THE HYMNS OF [BOOj 

10 Let these men, heroes in the fight with foemen, prevail aj ' 

all godless arts of magic, — 

These who approve the noble song I sing thee. 

11 Let us not sit in want of men, 0 Agni, without descenj ; 

heroless, about thee : 

But, 0 House-Friend, in houses full of children. 

12 By sacrifice which the Steeds’ Lord ever visits, there m 

our dwelling rich in seed and offspring, 

Increasing still with lineal successors. 

13 Guard us, 0 Agni, from the hated demon, guard us j 

malice of the churlish sinner : 

Allied with thee may I subdue assailants. 

14 May this same fire of mine surpass all others, this fire ) 

offspring, vigorous and firm-handed, i 

Wins, on a thousand paths, what ne’er shall perish. ! 

15 This is that Agni, saviour from the foeman, who guarcn 

kindler of the flame from sorrow : 

Heroes of noble lineage serve and tend him. 

16 This is that Agni, served in many places, whom the ricll i 

who brings oblation kindles, 

And round him goes the priest at sacrifices. 

17 Agni, may we with riches in possession bring thee cont^ 

offerings in abundance, 

Using^both means to draw thee to our worship. 

18 Agni, bear thou, Eternal, these most welcome oblation 

the Deities’ assembly : 

Let them enjoy our very fragrant presents. 

19 Give us not up, Agni, to want of heroes, to wretched clod 

to need, to destitution. 

Yield us not, Holy One, to fiend or hunger; injure us i) )t 
home or in the forest. ! 

20 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agii: 

God, pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles. 

Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye Gc 
protect us evermore with blessings. 

21 Thou Agni, swift to hear, art fair of aspect : beam forth 

Son of Strength, in full effulgence. 

Let me not want, with thee, a^son for ever : let not a mw 
hero ever fail us. 

12 The Steeds' Lord : Agni, whose swift flames are called horses. 

17 Both means : prayer and praise. 

21 Far 'ever ; ntiyt; perpetual ; who shall live for ever in his pop 



THE RlGVEDA. 


8 


\lttf 2.J 

: Condemn ua not to indigence, 0 Agni, beside these flaming 
fires which Gods have kindled ; 

Nor, even after fault, let thy displeasure, thine as a God, 0 
Son of Strength, overtake us- 

0 Agni, fair of face, the wealthy mortal who to the Im- 
mortal offers his oblation 

Hath him who wins him treasure by his Godhead, to whom 
the prince, in need, goes supplicating. 
k Knowing our chief felicity, 0 Agni, bring hither ample 
riches to our nobles, 

Wherewith we may enjoy ourselves, 0 Victor, with undimini- 
shed life and hero children. 

6 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agni ; 0 God, 
pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles. 

Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye 
Gods, protect us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN II. Aprts. 

Gladly accept, this day, our fuel, Agni : send up thy sacred 
smoke and shi^e sublimely. 

Touch the c^estial summits with thy columns, and overspread 
thee »*ith the rays of Surya. 

2 Wifch sacrifice to these we men will honour the majesty of 

holy Naraeansa — 

To these the pure, most wise, the thought-inspirers, Gods who 
enjoy bet^h sorts of our oblations. 

3 We will'&fctol at sacrifice for ever, as men may do, Agni whom 

Manu Kindled, 

Your very skilful Asura, meet for worship, envoy between 
both worlds, the truthful speaker, 
r Bearing the sacred grass, the men who serve him strew it 
with reverence, on their knees, by Agni. 

Calling him to the spotted grass, oil-sprinkled, adorn him, ye 
Ad h vary us, with oblation. 

22 Which Qods have kindled : lighted by the ministering priests. 

23 Hath him : possesses, or ©njoye the favour of, Agni. * That deity (Agni) 
fours the presenter of (sacrificial) wealth.’ — Wilson, 

24 Knoicing our chief felicity : understanding what we want to make us 
PPy. that is, riches. 

Hie Aprfs are the divine or deified beings and objects to which the propi- 
tory verses are addressed. For other Anri hymns see I. 13 ; 188 ; II. 8 : III. 

L v - 5 ; IX. 5 ; X. 70 ; HO. 

[ Hwdmnsa: * the Praise of Men’ ; Agni. Both tortt of our oblation$ : 

P r U2a °f Sfyitot pH or clarified butter, and libations of Soma juice. 



4 ' JFHF HYMNS OF [BOOK } 

5 With holy thoughts the pious have thrown open Doors fain 

chariots in the Gods’ assembly. 

Like two full mother cows who liok their youngling, like ma 
ens for the gathering, they adorn them. 

6 And let the two exalte^ Heavenly Ladies, Morning and Nig 

like a cow good at milking, 

Come, inuch-invoked, and on our grass be seated, wealtl 
deserving worship, for our welfare. 

7 You, Bards and Singers at men’s sacrifices, both filled wi 

wisdom, I incline to worship. 

Send up our offerings when we call upon you, and so amoi 
the Gods obtain us treasures. 


8 May Bharati with all her Sisters, IJa accordant with the Gc 

with mortals Agni, 

Sarasvati with all her kindred Rivers, come to this gra 
Three Goddesses, and seat them. 

9 Well pleased with us do thou, O God, 0 TvashUr, give rea 

issue to our procreant vigour, 

Whence springs the hero, powerful, trilled in action, lo\ 
of Gods, adjuster of the press-stones. 

10 Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Forests, and let t 
Immolator, Agni, dress it. 

He as the truer Priest shall offer worship, for the Gods’ m 
rations well he knowoth. 

J1 Come thou to us, 0 Agni, duly kindled, together with 
potent Gods and Indra. 

On this our grass sit Aditi, happy Mother, and let our H i 
delight the Gods Immortal. 

HYMN III. A\ 

Associate with fires, make your God Agni envoy at sacrif 
best skilled in worship, 

Established firm among mankind, the Holy, flame-crowi 
and fed with oil, the Purifier. 


5 Doors: the deified doors of the hall of sacrifice wheie the Gods assem 
Fain for chariot * . welcoming the approach of the cars in wliioh the prii 
coino to the ce> mony, The latter half of the stanza is obscure : ‘ (the laq 
placed to the east are plying the fire with ghi at sacrifices, as the moi 
q®ws liok the calf, or as riyers (water the fields).’— Wilson. ^ 

6 Like a cow: the dual dhend, two cows, instead of dhenuh, woi \ as 1} 


wig suggests, seem to us to be preferable. 

7 Bards and Singers: the h6t4>4, or ‘two Invokers’ of J. 13. 8; 
Agni and Varuna, pr Varuna and Aditya. 

8 Stanzas 8-^11 are identical with stanzas 8— 11 of Book III. 4. 


perl 


1 Associate: sajdsMK being a shortened form of sajfahasah, the no aim* 
plural. Sftyana explains it as an accusative singular, qualifying Agni, 



lai i IULt Y JLU A. 


r N 3.] 


5 


,ike a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath 
stepped forth from the great enclosure : 

’hen the wind following blows upon his splendour, and, 
straight, the path is black which thou hast travelled. 

[from thee a Bull but newly born, 0 Agni, the kindled ever- 
, lasting flames rise upward. 

i.]oft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth : Agni, thou 
speedest to th<j Gods as envoy. 

Thou whose fresh lustre o’er the earth advanceth when greed- 
ily with thy jaws thy food thou eatest. 
jike a host hurried onward comes thy lasso : fierce, with thy 
tongue thou piercest, as ’twere barley. 

The men have decked him both at eve and morning, Most 
Youthful Agni, as they tend a courser. 

They kindle him, a gitest within his dwelling : bright shines 
the splendour of the worshipped Hero. 

0 fair of face, beautiful is thine aspect when, very near at 
hand, like gold thou gleamest. 

Like Heaven’s thundering roar thy might approaches, and 
like the wondrous Sun thy light thou showest. 

That we may worship, with your Hail to Agni ! with sacrificial 
cakes and fat oblations, 

Guard us, - 0 Agni, with those boundless glories as with a 
hundred fortresses of iron. 

Thine are resistless songs for him who offers, and hero-giving 
hymns wherewith thou savest ; 

With these, 0 Son of Strength, 0 Jatavcdas, guard us, pre- 
serve these princes and the singers. 

When forth he cometh, like an axe new-sharpened, pure in 
his form, resplendent in his body, 

Sprung, sought with eager longing, from his Parents, for the 
Gods’ worship, Sage and Purifier : 

Shine this felicity on us, 0 Agni : may we attain to perfect 
understanding. 

A.11 happiness be theirs who sing and praise* thee. Ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 


— - 

2 From the great enclosvn't ; ‘ from the vast enclosing (forest)/ — Wilson, 
-hers understand It as the enclosure in which the horse is confiued. 

4 Ckoupiercett as 'twere baiiey : the comparison is somewhat compressed : 
e meaning is, thon penetratest and fellest the trees of the forest with thy 
as men cut down barley with a reaping-hook, 

& From his Parents; the two fire-sticks* 



TUB HYMNS OP 


[BOOK 1 




HYMN IY. A 

Bring forth your gifts to his refulgent splendour, your hy 
as purest offering to Agni, 

To him who goes as messenger with knowledge between 
sons of men and Gods in heaven. 

2 Wise must this Agni he, though young and tender, since 

was born, Most Youthful, of his Mother ; 

He who with bright teeth seizeth fast the forests, and e? 
his food, though plenteous, in a moment. 

3 Before his presence must we all assemble, this God's wh( 

men have seized in his white splendour. 

This Agni who hath brooked that men should seize him ha 
shone for man with glow insufferable. 

4 Far-seeing hath this Agni been established, deathless m 

mortals, wise among the foolish. 

Here, 0 victorious God, forbear to harm us : may we for evi 
share thy gracious favour. 

5 He who hath occupied his God- made dwelling, Agni, in wisdoi 

hath surpassed Immortals. 

A Babe unborn, the plants and trees support him, and th 
earth bearetb him the All-snstainer. 

6 Agni is Lord of Amrit in abundance, Lord of the gift of wealt 

and hero valour, 

Victorious God, let us not sit about thee like men devoid c 
strength, beauty, and worship. 

7 The foeman’s treasure may be won with labour : may we tx 

masters of our own possessions. , 

Agni, no son is he who springs from others : lengthen not ovu 
the pathways of the foolish. 1 

8 Unwelcome for adoption is the stranger, one to be thought o 

as another's offspring, 

Though grown familiar by continual presence. May our strong 
hero come, freshly triumphant. 1 


3 Musi we all assemble : I follow Ludwig in his interpretation of sariw&di 
as we are forsaken, ami our protector is far away («t, 6, 7, 8), we must crow 
to the God of Fire for defence. 

6 In the second line I have borrowed from Prof. Max Miiller, Vcdic Hymni 
I. p. 80. 

7 Let us remain in undisturbed possession of our own property, and let m 
have sons of our own begetting and not the adopted children of others. 

8 Men do not look with pleasure and affection on adopted sons ; but we aft 
longing to see our absent protector return to us. — Ludwig. Others espial 
the last half- verse differently : ‘ therefore let there come to us (a son) new-btM 
possessed of food, victorious over foes.’— -Wilson. 



TBE MOVED A. 


bv 5.1 


T 


Juard us from him who would assail us, Agni ; preserve us 
0 thou Victor, from dishonour. 

Jere let the place of darkening come upon thee : may wealth 
be ours, desirable, in thousands, 
jhine this felicity on us, 0 Agni : may we attain to perfeot 
understanding. 

\11 happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee. Ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN V. Agni. 

IBring forth your song of praise to mighty Agni, the speedy 
messenger of earth and heaven, 

Vaisvanara, who, with those who wake, hath waxen great in 
the lap of all the Gods Immortal. 

Sought in the heavens, on earth isJAgni stablished, leader of 
rivers, Bull of standing waters. 

Vaisvanara, when he hath grown in glory, shines on the tribes 
of men with light and treasure. 

For fear of thee forth fled the dark-hued races, scattered 
abroad, deserting their possessions, 

When, glowing, 0 Vaisvanara, for Puru, thou, Agni, didst 
light up and rend their castles. 

Agni Vaisvanara, both Earth and Heaven submit them to 
thy threefold jurisdiction. 

Refulgent in thine undecaying lustre thou hast invested both 
tho worlds with splendour. 

Agni, the tawny horses, loudly neighing, our resonant hymns 
that drop with oil, attend thee; 

Lord of the tribes, our Charioteer of riches, Ensign of days, 
Vaisvanara of mornings. 

This stanza is a repetition of VI. 15, 12, where see note. 

1 Repeated from stanza 10 of the preceding hymn. 


ie hymn is addressed to Agui as Vaisvanara, the God who is present with, 
benefits, all Aryan men. 

With those who wake: tended by the priests. According to SAyana ‘as* 
ted with the wakened Gods.’ 

Bull of standing 'maters : the meaning of stiy India is uncertain. Perhaps, 
pudwig suggests, plants and bushes are intended which Agni like a bull 
jels with the ground. 

1 The dark-hued races : according to von Roth, the spirits of darkness. For 
ru : or, for man. 

i Threefold jurisdiction : in heaven, mid-air, and earth. 

> The tawny horses : the hymns that hasten to Agni like eager horses, 
dwig translates the harltah of the text by ‘gold -yellow,’ qualifying ‘hymns;’ 
it is, hymns with libationB of yellow Soma juice. 



a THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vll, 

6 In thee, 0 bright ns Mitra, Vasus seated the might of Asuras, 

for they loved thy spirit. 

Thou dravest Dasyus from their homo, 0 Agni, and brought 
est forth broad light to light the Arya. 

7 Bom in the loftiest heaven thou in a moment readiest, like 

wind, the place where Gods inhabit. 

Thou, favouring thine offspring, roaredst loudly when giving 
life to creatures, Jatavedas. 

B Send us that strength, Vai^vanara, send it, Agni, that 
strength, 0 J&tavedas, full of splendour, 

Wherewith, all-bounteous God, thou pourest riches, as fame 
wide-spreading, on the man who offers. 

9 Agni, bestow upon our chiefs and nobles that famous power, 
that wealth which fecdeth many. 

Accordant with the Vasus and the Rudras, Agni, Vaisvanara, 
give us sure protection. 

HYMN VI. Agni. 1 

Praise of the Asura, high imperial Ruler, the Manly One in 
whom the folk shall triumph — • 

I laud his deeds who is as strong as Indra, and lauding celebrate 
the Fort-destroyer. 

2 Sage, Sign, Food, Light, — they bring him from the mountain, 

the blessed Sovran of the earth and heaven. 

I decorate with songs the mighty actions which Agni, Fort- 
destroyer, did aforetime. 

3 The foolish, faithless, rudely-speaking niggards, without belie! 

or sacrifice or worship, — 

Far, far away hath Agni chased those Dasyus, and, in thd 
east, hath turned the godless westward. 

4 Him who brought eastward, manliest with his prowess, tfa 

Maids rejoicing in the western darkness, 

That Agni I extol, the Lord of riches, unyielding tamer o 
assailing foemen. 

5 Him who brake down the tvalls with deadly weapons, an< 

gave the Mornings to a noble Husband, 

6 Thou drave&t: cf. I. 117. 21. 

1 Fort-destroyer : demoli.sher of the cloud-castles of the demons of drought 
9r of the strongholds of the non- Ary an tribes. 

2 From, the mountain : fram the cloud, as lightning. 

3 Westward : into the darkness of night. 

4 Who brought eastward : brought back the vanished lights of dawn. 

5 To a noble Husband : the Sun, or Agni himself. The tribes of Nahut: or, 
according to von Roth, neighbouring people. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


Mft 7.) 


y 


Young Agni, who with conquering strength subduing the 
tribes of Nahus made them bring their tribute. 

Jn whose protection all men rest by nature, desiring to enjoy 
his gracious fatour— 

Agni Vaisvanara in his Parents’ bosotri hath found the choic- 
est seat in earth and heaven. 

Vaisv&nara the God, at the sun’s setting, hath taken to 
himself deep-hidden treasures,: 

Agni hath taken them from earth and heaven, from the sea 
under and the sea above us. 


HYMN YII. Agni. 

I send forth even your God, victorious Agni, like a Strong 
courser, with mine adoration. 

Herald of sacrifice be he who knoweth : he hath reached Gods, 
himself, with measured motion. 

By paths that are thine own come hither, Agni, joyous, delight- 
ing in tho Gods’ alliance, 

Making the heights of earth roar with thy fury, burning with 
eager teeth the woods and forests. 

The grass is strewn ; the sacrifice advances : adored as Priest, 
Agni is made propitious, 

Invoking both All-boon-bestowing Mothers of whom, Most 
Youthful ! thou wast born to help us. 

Forthwith the men, the best of these for wisdom, have made 
him leader in the solemn worship. 

As Lord in homes of men is Agni stablished, the Holy One, 
the joyous, sweetly speaking. 

He hath come, chosen bearer, and is seated in man’s home, 
Brahman, Agni, the Supporter, 

He whom both Heaven and Earth exalt and strengthen, 
whom, Giver of all boons, the Hotar worships. 

Those have passed all in glory, who, thq manly, have wrought 
with skill the hymn of adoration ; 


f Agni becomes the representative of the Sun, and in his absence gives 
lit and other blessings to man. The sea above us : the ocean of air. 

I Like a strong courser : glorified with my praises, like a horse that has 
m groomed and adorned. Or. perhaps, merely, rapid as a horse. W ith 
isured motion ; or, a speedy runner. S&yana explains the word mitadruh 
this place as ‘consumer of trees/ but in IV. 6. £> as parimitagatih, ‘with 
ftsured motion/ 

* ..Mothers ; Heaven and Earth. 



10 TBS HYMNS OP [POOR V 

Who, listening, have . advanced the people’s welfare, and s 
their thoughts on this my holy statute. 

J 7 We, the Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 Son 
Strength, the Lord of wealth and treasure. 

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye Got 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN VIII. Ag 

The King whose face is decked with oil is kindled with homa 
offered by his faithful servant. 

The men, the priests adore him with oblations. Agni ha 
shone forth when the dawn is breaking. 

2 Yea, he hath been acknowledged as most mighty, the joyo 

Priest of men, the youthful Agni. 

He, spreading o’er the earth, made light around him, ai 
grew among the plants with blackened follies. 

3 How dost thou decorate our hymn, 0 Agni ? What pow 

dost thou exert when thou art lauded ? 

When, Bounteous God, may we be lords of riches, winners 
precious wealth which none may conquer? 

^ 4 Far famed is this the Bharata’s own Agni : he shineth lil 
the Sun with lofty splendour. 

He who hath vanquished Puru in the battle, the heaven 
guest hath glowed in full refulgence. 

5 Full many oblations are in thee collected : with all thii 

aspects thou hast waxen gracious. 

Thou art already famed as praised and lauded, yet still, 
nobly born, increase thy body. 

6 Be this my song, that winneth countless treasure, engender* 

with redoubled force for Agni, 

That, splendid, chasing sickness, slaying demons, it ms 
delight our friend and bless the singers. 

7 We, tho Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 Son i 

Strength, the Lord of wealth and riches. 

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye God 
preserve us evermoro with blessings. 

6 Who set their thoughts on this my holy statute : that is, apparently, w! 
duly observe the law which requires us to worship Agni. ‘ Who are glorilie 
of this truthful (deity).’— Wilson. 

2 With blackened fellies : leaving black tracks behind him: * dark-pathed.’- 
Wilson. 

4 The Bharata : Vasishtha, the purohita of the Bharatas. PHru ; tl 
Pftrus, (one of the Five Aryan Tribes) who opposed the Bharatas. 

6 Countless treasure : literally, hundreds, thousands. Our friend: ti 
institutor of the sacrifice. 



MN 10 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


11 


HYMN IX. Agni. 

Roused from their bosom is the Dawns’ beloved, the joyous 
Priest, most sapient, Purifier. 

He gives a signal both to Gods and mortals, to Gods oblations, 
riches to the pious. 

Most wise is he who, forcing doors of Papis, brought the 
bright Sun to us who feedeth many. 

The cheerful Priest, men’s Friend and home-companion, 
through still night’s darkness he is made apparent. 

Wise, ne’er deceived, uncircumscribed, refulgent, our gracious 
gue^t, a Friend with good attendants, 

Shines forth with wondrous light before the Mornings : the 
young plants hath he entered, Child of Waters. 

Seeking our gatherings, he, your Jata vedas, hath shone ador- 
able through human ages, 

Who gleams refulgent with his lovely lustre : the kine have 
waked to meet him when enkindled. 

Go on thy message to the Gods, and fail not, 0 Agni, with 
their band who pray and worship. 

Bring all the Gods that they may give us riches, Sarasvati, 
the Maruts, As v ins, Waters. 

Vasishtha, when enkindling thee, 0 Agni, hath slain Jarutha. 
Give us wealth in plenty. 

Sing praiso in choral song, 0 Jatavedas. Ye Gods, preserve 
us overmore with blessings. 

hymn X. Agni. 

He hath sent forth, bright, radiant, and refulgent, like the 
Dawn’s Lover, his far-spreading lustre. 

Pure in his splendour shines the golden Hero : our longing 
thoughts hath he aroused and wakened. 

He, like the Sun, hath shone while Morn is breaking, and 
priests who weave the sacrifice sing praises, 

Agni, the God, who knows their generations and visits Gods* 
most bounteous, rapid envoy. 


ie y Dawns' beloved : Agni, as lighted up at day-break. A signal : of 
hee, which men are to offt-r and n 0 ds are to receive. 

Jardtha : see VII. 1.7, where the destruction of Jarfttha ia ascribed to 
1 himself. Jarutha, said by S&yana to have been a RAkshasa or demon, 
probably an enemy who was slain in a battle at which Vasishtha was 
Jnt as purohita.— Ludwig. 

Like the Dawn's Lover : the Sun. See I. 69. 1. 

And priests ; I adopt Sdyana’s interpretation of this half-line. 



12 THE HYMNS OF t BOOK Vl\ 

3 Oar songs and holy hymns go forth to Agni, seeking the Got 

and asking him for riches, 

Him fair to see, of goodly aspect, mighty, men’s messengei 
who carries their oblations. 

4 Joined with the Vasus, Agni, bring thou indrsi, bring hithei 

mighty Rudra with the Rudras, 

Aditi good to all men with Adityas, Brihaspati All-bounteou^ 
with the Sihgersj 

5 Men eagerly implore at sacrifices Agni, Most Youthful GoJ 

the joyous Herald. j 

For he is Lord and Ruler over riches, and for Gods’ worshi| 
an unwearied envoy. 

HYMN XL Agn 

Great art thou, Agni, sacrifice’s Herald t not without thee at 
deathless Gods made joyful. 

Come hither with all Deities about thee : here take thy sea 
the first, as Priest, 0 Agni. 

2 Men with oblations evermore entreat thee, the swift, to undei 

take an envoy’s duty. 

He on whose sacred grass w ith Gods thou sittest, to hip 
0 Agni, are the days propitious. 

3 Three times a day in thee are shown the treasures sent fc 

the mortal who presents oblation. 

Bring the Gods hither like a man, 0 Agni : be thou our envo; 
guarding us from curses. 

4 Lord of the lofty sacrifice is Agni, Agni is Lord of every gi: 

presented. 

The Vasus were contented with his wisdom, so the Gods mad 
him their oblation-bearer. 

5 0 Agni, bring the Gods to taste our presents : with Indi 

leading, here let them be joyful. J 

Convey this sacrifice to Gods in heaven. Ye Gods, presen 
us evermore with blessings, 1 


4 Singers : or Rikvans, deities who attend and sing the praises of soi 
God : ‘ the adorable (Angirasas).’— Wilson. 


3 Three times a day : at the morning, the noon, and the evening Hbatio 
Or the meaning may be, in the three fire-receptacles. Like a man : actii 
like a human priest. The Commentators explain manushvdt by ‘ as (at l 
•acrifice) of Maiiu/ 



THE RIG VEDA. 


U 


fMN 14 .] 

HYMN XII. Agni. 

We with great reverence have approached The Youngest who 
hath shone forth well-kindled in his dwelling, 

With wondrous light between wide earth and heaven, well* 
worshipped, looking forth in all directions. 

Through his great might o’ercoming all misfortunes, praised 
in the bouse is Agni J&tavedas. 

May he protect us from disgrace and trouble, both us who 
laud him and our noble patrons. 

0 Agni, thou art Varuna and Mitra : Vasishthas with their 
holy hymns exalt thee. 

With thee be most abundant gain of treasure. Ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XIII, Agni. 

Biiing song and hymn to Agni, Asura-slayer, enlightener of 

; all and thoughkbestower. 

I Like an oblation on the grass, to please him, I bring this to 

j Vaisvanara, hymn-inspjrer. 

| Thou with thy flame, 0 Agni, brightly glowing, hast at thy 
birth filled full the earth and heaven. 

Thou with thy might, Vaisvanara Jatavcdas, settest the Gods 
free from the curse that bound them. 

Agni, when born, thou lookedst on all creatures, like a brisk 
herdsman moving round his cattle. 

The path to prayer, Vaisvanara, thou foundest. Ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings, 

HYMN XIV. Agni, 

With reverence and with offered gifts serve we the God whose 
flame is bright •. 

Let us bring Jatavedas fuel, and adore Agni when we invoke 
the Gods. 

Agni, may we perform thy rites with fuel, and honour thee, 
0 Holy One, with praises : 

Honour theo, Priest of sacrifice ! with butter, thee, God of 
blessed light ! with our oblation. 


The Youngest : Agni, most youthful of the Gods, as being continually 
xluced. 

The curse that bound them : the Gods seem to have been suV)ject to the 
nities of old age until lndra, or, as is here said, Agni, freed them, $ee 
9 , 2 . 



14 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK r/j 


3 Como, Agni, with the Gods to our invoking, come, pleased,! 
offerings sanctified with Vashat. 

May we be h'is who pays thee, God, due honour. Ye God 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XV. A g , 

Offer oblations in his mouth, the bounteous God's whom \ 


must serve, 

His who is nearest lun to us r 

2 Who for the Fivefold People's sake hath seated him in evci 

home, 

Wise, Youthful, Master of the house. 

3 On all sides may that Agni guard our household folk ar 


property ; 

May he deliver us from woe. 

4 I have begotten this new hymn for Agni, Falcon of the sky 
Will he not give us of his wealth 1 

5 Whose glories when he glows in front of sacrifice are ft 

to see, 

Like wealth of one with hero sons. 

6 May he enjoy this hallowed gift, Agni accept our songs, wl 

bears 

Oblations, best of worshippers. 

7 Lord of the I iouse, whom men must seek, we set thee dow 

0 Worshipped One ! 

Bright, rich in heroes, Agni 1 God t 

8 Shine forth at night and mom : through thee with fires a 

we provided well. 

Thou, rich in heroes, art our Friend. 

9 The men come near thee for their gain, the singes with tin 

songs of praise r 

Speech, thousandfold, comes near to th pc. 

10 Bright, Purifier, meet for praise, Immortal with refuse 

glow, 

Agni drives R&kshasas away. 

11 As such, bring us abundant wealth, young Child of Streng 

for this thou canst : 

May Bhaga give us what is choice. 


3 Sanctified with, Va,hat: Vashat (may he hear it to the Gode) ^ 
exclamation used at the moment of pouring the sacrificial oil or dan 


butter on the fire. 


9 Speech : dhskard, the imperishable ; here speech in th© shape of pn 
and prayer. 



iy 16 ] 


THE RIG VEDA . 


'hou, Agni, gives fc hero fame: Bhaga and Savitar the God 
nd Diti give us what is good. r 

^gm, preserve us from distress : consume our enemies, 0 God, 
Eternal, with thy hottest flames. 

Lnd, irresistible, be thou a mighty iron fort to ur 
^ ith hundred walls for man’s defence ’ 

ST'" “ d 

nfallible ! by day and night. 

HYMN XVI. 

'srsr h ~ 1 “ u a. sonZ 

J"X J ' “ ,,el * i,h ”*»« immortal 

Uis two red horses, all-supportincr let him mV T 
well-worshipped, urge them fast . ’ ^ ' et ll " m > 

hen hath the sacrifice good pravers owl i 

^ heavenly gift of wealth to men. en< ^ an< * 

' mounted up'"" 1 the B ° Untifu1 ’ the Muc, -invokod, hath 

and t0l,ch the sky : 

h the God/ilitW te the feast™ ^ '** messen S cr - Bring 
tcril^ 1 ’ art th ° h0mestead ’ 3 Lord, our Herald at the 

-ii^X-OYthe a gl th0 Cl0anSer aUdaS ^ 

1 ^o n grttetht e air ifiCer ’ ° M ° St Wise ’ '<* thou art he 

th! — 1 «» rite, all who 

Agni who art worshipped well dear let- • 
wealthy patrons who are governors ^ mT K* t0the °’ 
Affts, their stalls of kine. ® f men ’ who P art , a* 

““y tavT^; 

regular, wto Diti. &e Ve&J$j£i p'm*’ wbo C0B «dered the 

t raid : Rntn* • . . 

om cl ati D « Pr i es t s mv l^"f a.. : »tb«r 


u 



THE HYMNS OF 


M 

8 


9 


10 


11 


12 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 


[BOOH } 


They in whose home, her hand bearing the sacred oil, IJ& s 
down well-satisfied— 

Guard them, Victorious God, from slander and from har 
give us a refuge famed afar. 

Do thou, a Priest with pleasant tongue, most wise, and Vf 
near to us, 

Agni, bring riches hither to our liberal chiefs, and speed I 
offering of our gifts. 

They who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of steeds, moi 
by desire of great renown — 

Do thou with saving help preserve them from distress, M 
Youthful ! with a hundred forts. , 

The God who gives your wealth demands a full libation poir 
to him. 

Pour ye it forth, then fill the vessel full again : then doth i 
God pay heed to you. 

Him have the Gods appointed Priest of sacrifice, oblatii 
bearer, passing wise. 

Agni gives wealth and valour to the worshipper, to folk ^ 
offer up their gifts. 


HYMN XVII. * 

Agni, be kindled well with proper fuel, and let the grass 
scattered wide about thee. 

Let the impatient Portals be thrown open *. bring thou 
Gods impatient to come hither. 

Taste, Agni : serve the Gods with our oblation. Offer g 
sacrifices, J atavedas J 

Let J&tavedas pay fair sacrifices, worship and gratify 
Gods Immortal. 

Wise God, win for us things that are all-goodly, and let 
prayers we pray to-day be fruitful. 

Thee, even thee, the Son of Strength, 0 Agni, those ( 
have made the bearer of oblations. 

To thee the God may we perform our worship ; do tl 
besought, grant us abundant riches. 


8 l\d : the Goddess who is regarded as the sacrificial food or oblation 
sonified : annardpd havirlakshand devt. — S&yana. 

2 The impatient Portals : the doors of the sacrificial chamber which | 
to bear their part in the holy ceremony. 

6 Those Gods : the famous Gods, 



THE RIGVEHA k 


17 


tN 1 *} 

I HYMN XVIII. Indr*. 

iLh is with thee, 0 Indra, all the treasures which erst our 

fathers won who sang thy praises. 

Vith thee are milch-kine good to milk, and horses ; best win- 
ner thou of riches for the pious. 

’or like a King among his wives thou dwellest : with glories, 
as a Sage, surround and help us. 
fake us, thy servants, strong for wealth, and honour our 
songs with kine and steeds and decoration. 

[ere these our holy hymns with joy and gladness in pious 
emulation have approached thee. 

litherward com^ thy path that leads to riches : may we find 
shelter in thy favour, Indra. 

asishtha hath poured forth his prayers, desiring to milk thee 
like a cow in goodly pasture. 

II those my people call thee Lord of cattle : may Indra come 
unto the prayer we offer. 

r hat though the floods spread widely, Indra made them 
shallow and easy for Sudas to traverse. 

, worthy of our praises, caused the Simyu, foe of our hymn, 
to curse the rivers’ fury. 

iger for spoil was Turvasa Purodfts, fain to win wealth, like 
fishes urged by hunger. 

he Bhrigus and the Druhyus quickly listened : friend rescued 
friend mid the two distant peoples. 


hymn glorifies Indra as the protector of Sudds, the King of the Tritsus, 
•aises the liberality of that prince. See Vedic India (Story of the* 
a Series), pp. 319— 832. * 


mshtha: the Rishi of the hymn, and the chief priest who had 
•anted the warlike expedition of Sudds. To milk thee : to obtain 
through thy favour by means of my hymn, as men milk the cow at 
3 tor the milk which is required for libations. 

e poet begins to recount the events of Sudds’s victorious expedition, 
ire not always intelligible partly on account of the obscure phraseology 
ed, and partly on account of our ignorance of details which are vaguely 
' a this 8tanza Sudds, king or chief of the Tritsu tribe, has, with 
ot Indra, crossed a deep river (the Parushnt which is now called the 
ind put the Simyus to flight, some of the fugitives being drowned in 
1 , he ? lr »yu8 are mentioned together with the Dasyus, in I 1 °0 
hostile barb irians slain by India. The second half of the stanza is 
J ’ tne meaning of two of the words being uncertain, 
rva$a , Purodls : Turvasa appears here as one of the enemies of Sudds. 
L. W1 /rn muc ^ filiation, Ludwig in taking Purodds as au appellative of 
t i ul 'W» w k° preceding (at solemn ‘rites) ’—Wilson. 77i« 
and the Druhpm: here, apparently, allies of Turvasa. Fnhet; 
fg to others, Matsyas, a people. 



18 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Fj| 

i 

7 Together came the Pakthas, the Bhal&nas, the Alinas, ^ 

Sivas, the Vishanins. 

Yet to the Tritsus came the Arya’s Comrade, through, love 
spoil and heroes’ war, to lead them. 

8 Fools, in their folly fain to waste her waters, they parted i 

exhaustible Parushni. 

Lord of the Earth, he with his might repressed them : still L 
the herd and the affrighted herdsman. 

9 As to their goal they sped to their destruction : they soug 

Parushni ; e’en the swift returned not. 

Indra abandoned, to Sudas the manly, the swiftly flying fo< 
unmanly babblers. 

10 They went like kine unherded from the pasture, each clit 

in g to a friend as chance directed. 

They who drive spotted steeds, sent down by Prisni, ga 
ear, the Warriors and the harnessed horses. 

11 The King who scattered one-and-twenty people of h 

Vaikarna tribes through lust of glory — 

As the skilled priest clips grass within the chamber, so h 
the Hero Indra wrought their downfall. 


7 The Pakthas , and the rest mentioned in the first line of the i 
appear to have been non-Aryan tribes opposed to the Tritsus. Accord 
the Scholiast these names are the denominations of various minisl 
religious lites. and following this interpretation Wilson translates the < 
as follows : * Those who dress the oblation, those who pronounce ausp 
words, those who abstain from penance, those who bear horns (in their h 
those who bestow happiness (on the,world by sacrifice), glorify that 
who recovered the cattle^ of the Arya from the plunderers, who sic 
enemies in battle.’ The Arya 8 Comrade : Indra, the ally of Tritsu a 
the non-Aryan confederacy. 

8 The confederates, who were on the right or farther bank of the Pari 
intending to attack Sudfts and the Tritsus, appear to have attempted to 
the river fordable by diguing channels and so diverting the water, wh 
se^ma, rushed back into its natural bed and drowned the men who were 
ing the stream. The second line of the stanza is obscure and the trans 
is conjectural. Wilson translates : * but he by his greatness pervade 
earth, Kavi, the son of Chayam&na, like a falling victim, sleeps (in de 
The herd and the herdsman are, of course, the hostile band and its leader 

10 They went : the fugitives who escaped drowning. They who drive q 
steeds : the Maruts, sent down by their mother Prisni to aid Sudfts. 

11 People: or. houses, i. e. families. Both Vaikarna tribes: perhaps 
allies of the Druhyus ; but the meaning of vaikarndyoh is uncertain. 
Zimmer, AUindisches Leben, p. 103. Ludwig thinks that the reference 
a mythic battle at some place called Vaikarnau between Indra (the I 
and the Maruts (the one-and-twenty people). Clips grass : with one cle# 



THE RIO VEDA. 


19 


(N 18 .] 

Thou, thunder-armed, o’erwhelmedst in the waters famed 

| ancient Kavasha and then the Druhyu. 

pthers here claiming friendship to their friendship, devoted 

: unto thee, in thee were joyful. 

Indra at once with conquering might demolished all their 
strong places and their seven castles. 

The goods of Anu’s son he gave to Tritsu. May we in sacrifice 
conquer scornful Pfiru. 

The Anavas and Druhyus, seeking booty, have slept, the sixty 
hundred, yea, six thousand, 

And six-and-sixty heroes. For the pious were all these mighty 
exploits done by Indra. 

These Tritsus under Indra’s careful guidance came speeding 
like loosed waters rushing downward. 

The foenfen, measuring exceeding closely, abandoned to Sudas 
all their provisions. 

The hero’s side who drank the dressed oblation, Indra’s denier, 
far o’er earth he scattered. 

[ndra brought down the fierce destroyer’s fury. He gave 
them various roads, the path’s Controller. * * 

f E>en with the weak he wrought this matchless exploit : e’en 
, with a goat he did to death a lion. 

|He pared the pillar’s angles with a needle. Thus to Sudas 
f Indra gave all provisions. 


2 Kavasha ; perhaps the priest of one of the two Vaikarna tribes which 
iner is inclined to identify with the Kuru-Krivis. See A Hindis ekes Leben. 
11. Others here: ‘for they, Indra. who are devoted to thee and glorify 
i 3 preferring thy friendship, enjoy it.’ -Wilson. The exact meaning is 


1 To Tritsu : to Sud&s, the King of the Tritsus. 

mei \ ° f the Anutribe< The sixty hundred: ‘Theenu- 
y -°^ SC u re ? e *P re8Sed > shashtih said shat sahasi'd shashtir adhi 
n 81xt y hu . ndr , ed *. six thousands, sixty, with six more : SAyana 
rstands by jatdni, thousands, sakasrdntiyarthafr Wilson. ‘Sixty- 

t Z J* w^ d h red 8iX ; L .t dWig «¥*■*" ^at should be read 

&!%&, pp m-m. number 66S6 ' See Ben %- 

teki “8 great care of their good. 

’ *^, e par V tke hostile leader, the non-Aryan, who 
toted to \?m W deTOU red the oblations that should have been 

, He gave them various roads : made them fly in all direo- 


f£stowe a r. ff0<W ' i®pos.ible deeds mentioned as illustration, of Indra’. 



THE HYMNS OF 


80 


[book n 


18 To thee have all thine enemies submitted : e’en the fierq 

Bheda hast thou made thy subject. 

Cast down thy sharpened thunderbolt, 0 Indra, on him wh 
harms the men who sing thy praises. 

19 Yamun& and the Tritsus aided Indra. There he stripped 

Bheda bare of all his treasures. 

The Ajas and £he Sigrus and the Yakshus brought in to hin 
as tribute heads of horses. 

20 Not to be soorned, but like Dawns past and recent, 0 Indr^ 

are thy favours and thy riches. 

Devaka, Manyam&na’s son, thou slewest, and smotest Sambars 
from the lofty mountain. 

21 They who, from home, have gladdened thee, thy servant* 

Parasara, Vasishtha, Satay&tu, 

Will not forget thy friendship, liberal Giver. So shall th< 
days dawn prosperous for the princes. 

22 Priest-like, with praiso, I move around the altar, earning 

Paijavana’s reward, 0 Agni, 

Two hundred cotfs from DevavSn’s descendant, two chariots 
from Sudas with mares to draw them. 

23 Gift of Paijavana, four horses bear me in foremost place 

trained steeds with pearl to deck them. 

SudiU’s brown steeds, firmly-stepping, carry me and my soi 
for progeny and glory. 

24 Him whose fame spreads between wide earth and heaven, who 

as dispenser, gives each chief his portion, 

Seven flowing Rivers glorify like Indra. He slew Yudhyaj 
madhi in close encounter. 


18 Bheda : an enemy of Sudls, or an unbeliever, says Sdyana. 

19 Yamund : the Jumna. But it is not easy to see how the espeditio: 
reached so far. The Ajas, Sigrus, and Yakshus were perhaps subject to Bheda 
but nothing is known regarding them. Heads of horses : which had beei 
killed in battle. 

20 Like Dawns : renewed every day. Devaka : not mentioned elsewhed 
According to Grassmann dAvakam mdnyamdudm. refers to Sambara, 1 thinks 
himself a God.* 

21 Pardsara is said by one authority to have been the son, and by another th 
grandson o'f the llishi Vasishtha. Sataydtu is said to be Sakti, Vasishtha’ssoi 

22 Here begins the ddnastuti or praise of the prince’s liberality.' Paifl 
vma : Sud&s, descendant of Pijavana. Devavdn’s descendant : Sud&s, Devi 
vftn being either the same as Divod&sa, the father of Sudfcs or one of ii 
forefathers. 

24 Seven flowing Rivers glorify : the seven chief rivers of the Panja 
glorify him as they glorify Indra. Or, they (men) praise him as the sevfl 
rivers praise Indra. 1 The seven rivers bear his glory far and wide* (L 102-2i 
Yudhydmidhi ; not mentioned elsewhere. 



19.] THE MOVED A. 21 

Attend on him, 0 ye heroic Maruts as on Sud&s’s father 
t)ivod&sa. 

further Paijavana*s desire with favour. Guard faithfully 
his lasting firm dominion. 

HYMN XIX. lndra. 

He like a bull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly excites 
and agitates all the people : 

Thou givest him who largely pours libations his goods who 
pours not, for his oWn possession. 

Thou, verily, lndra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly giving 
ear to him in battle, 

When, aiding Arjuneya, thou subduedst to him both Kuyava 
and the D&sa Sushna. 

) Bold One, thou with all thine aids hast boldly holpen Sud&s 
whose offerings were accepted, 

?dru in winning land and slaying foemen, and Trasadasyu 
Son of Purukutsa. 

it' the Gods’ banquet, hero-souled ! with Heroes, Lord of Bay 
Steeds, thou slowest many foemen. 

Phou sentest in swift death to sleep the Dasyu, both Chumuri 
and Dhuni, for Dabhiti. 

'hese were thy mighty powers that, Thunder-wielder, thou 
swiftly crushedst nine-and-ninety castles : 

'hon capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught; thou 
slewest Namuchi, thou slewest Vpitra. 

Id are the blessings, lndra, which thou gavest Sudas the 
worshipper who brought oblations. 

r thee, the Strong, I yoke thy strong Bay Horses : may our 
prayers reach thee and win strength, Most Mighty ! 

ive us not up, Lord of Bay Horses, Victor, in this thine own 
assembly, to the wicked. 

eliver us with true and faithful succours : dear may we be 
to thee among the princes. 

\farnt9 / here, perhaps, the Maghavans or wealthy nobles are intended 
and in the same relation to Sud4s as the Maruts to lndra. 


M Godof bafctlea - Thou - Mra. This abrupt 
irom the third person to the second is not unusual in the Veda. 

juneya; Kutsa, descendant of Arjuna. See L 112. 23. Kuyava: see 


r Chumuri, Dhuni, and Dabhiti , see Vol. I. Index 
oTto de “ on J of d r ou & ht ’ See L 53. 7. In thine onslaught; 

c? of abX’~Wilson dW ® lmg : ‘ thou hast the hundredth 

d&s: the Kin at of Jthe Tritana n.. ~ a : u 



22 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V 

8 May we men, Maghavan, the friends thou lovest, near thee 

joyful under thy protection. 

Fain to fulfil the wish of Atithigva humble the pride of Tu 
vasa and Yadva. 

9 Swiftly, in truth, 0 Maghavan, about thee men skilled 

hymning sing their songs and praises. 

Elect us also into their assembly who by their calls on t\ 
despoiled the niggards. 

10 Thine are these lauds, 0 manliest of heroes, lauds whi 

revert to us and give us riches. 

Favour these, Indra, when they fight with foemen, as Friei 
and Hero and the heroes’ Helper. 

1 1 Now, lauded for thine aid, Heroic Indra, sped by our pray 

wax mighty in thy body. 

Apportion to us strength and habitations. Ye Gods, protect i 
evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XX. 1 

Strong, Godly-natured, born for hero exploit, man’s Fri 
he doth whatever deed he willeth. 

Saving us e’en from great transgression, Indra, the Yout 
visiteth man’s home with favour. 

2 Waxing in greatness Indra slayeth Vritra : the Hero wit! 

aid hath helped the singer. 

He gave Sudils wide room and space, and often hath gra 
wealth to him who brought oblations. 

3 Soldier unchecked, war-rousing, battling Hero, unconqu 

from of old, victorious ever, 

Indra the very strong hath scattered armies ; yea, he 1 
slain each foe who fought against him. 

4 Thou with thy greatness hast filled full, 0 Indra, even 

the worlds with might, 0 thou Most Mighty. 

Lord of Bays, Indra, brandishing his thunder, is gratified 
Soma at the banquet. 

5 A Bull begat the Bull for joy of battle, and a strong Me 

brought forth him the manly. 

8 Atithigva: probably a descendant of SudAs who must hare lived 
before the composition of this hymn, as the favour bestowed upon hi 
Indra is spoken of as old in stanza 6. Yddva : or Yadu’s son. 

9 Elect ns a/so: that is, let us share the blessings which thou withho 
from the illiberal churls who offer no oblations and givest to those who 
upon thee and worship thee. 

5 A Bull begat the Bull : * A vigorous (god) begot a vigorous (son)>' 5 
The father of Indra is Kasyapa, according to SAyapa ; but probably Py* 
intended. A itrong Mother : Aditi. 



MN 5 1. J in.njn'iwvauA. 23 

He who is Chief of men, their armies’ Leader, is a strong Hero, 
i bold, and fain for booty. 

jThe people falter not, nor suffer sorrow, who win themselves 
j this God’s terrific spirit. 

He who with sacrifices worships Indra is lord of wealth, law- 
\ born and law’s protector. 

[Whene’er the elder fain would help the younger, the greater 
cometh to the lesser’s present. 

|3hall the Immortal sit aloof inactive 1 0 Wondrous Indra, 
bring us wondrous riches. 

Thy dear folk, Indra, who present oblations, are, in chief 
place, thy friends, 0 Thunder-wielder. 

(day we be best content in this thy favour, sheltered by One 
who slays not, but preserves us. 

To thee the mighty hymn hath clamoured loudly, and, 
Maghavan, the eloquent hath besought thee. 

Desire of wealth hath come upon thy singer : help us then, 
j Sakra, to our share of riches. 

Place us by food which thou hast given, 0 Indra, us and the 
i wealthy patrons who command us. 

Let thy groat power bring good to him who lauds thee. Ye 
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XXL Indra. 

Messed is the juice divine with milk commingled : thereto 
hath Indra ever been accustomed. 

Ve wake thee, Lord of Bays, with sacrifices : mark this our 
laud in the wild joy of Soma. 

>n to the rite they move, the grass they scatter, these Soma- 
drinkers eloquent in synod. 

lither, for men to grasp, are brought the press-stones, far-thun- 
dering, famous, strong, that wait on heroes. 

mo-born : born in accordance with the law. 

’he relations between Gods and men resemble those between elders and 
*s, superiors and inferiors among men. The inferior comes to his superior 
iome offering in his hand and is assisted by him in return. So Indra 
I accept our oblations, and rew ird us with wealth. 

he eloquent: stdmtih, ; according to Ludwig, the Greek 
(TTopa, mouth), mouthy, talkative, and, in a good sense, fluent, eloquent, 
loramentators explain the word as ‘praiser.* 


Ve wake thee : or, we think of thee, serve thee. 



24 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH f 

3 Indra, thou settest free the many waters that were encompa&sc 

Hero, by the Dragon. 

Down rolled, as if on chariots borne, the rivers : through fe 
of thee all things created tremble. 

4 Skilled in all manly deeds the God terrifio hath with 1 

weapons mastered these opponents* 

Indra in rapturous joy shook down their castles i he sle 
them in his might, the Thunder-wielder. 

5 No evil spirits have impelled us, Indra, nor fiends, 0 Mightie 

God, with their devices. 

Let our true God subdue the hostile rabble : let not the lei 
approach our holy worship. 

6 Thou in thy strength surpassest Earth and Heaven: tl 

regions comprehend not all thy greatness. 

With thine own power and might thou slowest Vritra: no f 
hath found the end of thee in battle. 

7 Even the earlier Deities submitted their powers to thy suprer 

divine dominion. 

Indra wins wealth and deals it out to others : men in the str 
for booty call on Indra. 

8 The humble hath invoked thee for protection, thee, Lord 

great felicity, 0 Indra. 

Thou with a hundred aids hast been our Helper : one who brin 
gifts like thee hath his defender. 

9 May we, 0 Indra, be thy frionds for ever, eagerly, Conquerc 

yielding greater homage. 

May, through thy grace, the strength of us who battle qul 
in the shock the onset of the foeman. 

10 Place us by food which thou hast given, 0 Indra, us and 
wealthy patrons who command us. 

Let thy great power bring good to him who lauds thee. 
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XXII. In, 

Drink Soma, Lord of Bays, and let it cheer thee : Indra, i 
stone, like a well guided courser, 

Directed by the presser’s arms hath pressed it. 

4 These opponents : according to S&yana, the demons of the air. The t 
has no noun for ‘ these.’ 

5 The lewd : those who do not follow Vedio observances, according 
Y&ska. For a full discussion of the meaning of si^nddevdh see Muir, 0- 
Texts , IV. 40<f— 411. 

8 One who brings gifts like thee: Sftyana interprets differently: ‘be< 
defender against every overpowering (assailant) like to thee.’ — Wilson, 



THE RIGVEDA. 


V 23 .] 


2 $ 


i let the draught of joy, thy dear companion, by 'which, 0 

Lord of Hays, thou slayest foemen, 

slight thee, Indra, Lord of princely treasures* 

irk olosely, MaghaVan, the words I utter, this eulogy 

recited by Vasishtha : 

ccept the prayers I offer at thy banquet. 

jar thou the call of the juice-drinking press-stone : hear thou 

the Brahman’s hymn who sings and lauds thee. 

ke to thine inmost self these adorations, 

mow and ne’er forgot the hymns and praises of thee, the 

Conqueror, and thy strength immortal. 

iy name I ever utter, Self-Refulgent ! 

nong mankind many are thy libations, and many a time the 
pious sage invokes thee. 

Maghavan, be not long distant from us. 

I these libations are for thee, 0 Hero : to thee I offer these 

my prayers that strengthen. 

er, in every place, must men invoke thee. 

ver do men attain, 0 Wonder-Worker, thy greatness, Mighty 

One, who must be lauded, 

r, Indra, thine heroic power and bounty. 

long all Rishis, Indra, old and recent, who have engender- 
;d hymns as sacred singers, 

on with us be thine auspicious friendships. Ye Gods, 
reserve us evermore with blessings. 


HYMN XXIII. Indra. 


^yers have been offered up through love of glory : Yasishtha, 
lonour Indra in the battle. 

who with might extends through all existence hears words 
diich I, his faithful servant, utter. 

ry was raised which reached the Gods, 0 Indra, a cry to 
hem to send us strength in combat. 

ie among men knows his own life’s duration : bear us in 
afety over these our troubles. 


! Bays, the booty-seeking car I harness : my prayers have 
oached him who accepts th.m gladly. 


tu ?. r688 ? 8 0ut the i uioe of the plant, and eo may be 
rlin rr\ \ ^ Scholiast inserts mama , of me : ‘ Hear the invocation of 

dmg) stone (of me) repeatedly drinking (the &mia).’—Wilyn. 

of thu d “ 



26 


i U tj 


Indra, when he had slain resistless foemen, forced w 
might the two world-halves asunder. 

4 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters : the s 

sought thy holy rite, 0 Indra. 

Come unto us as with his team comes Viiyu : thou, th 
our solemn hymns bestowest booty. 

5 So may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee, Indr 

Mighty, very bounteous to the singer. 

Alone among the Gods thou pitiest mortals : 0 Hero, 
thee glad at this libation. 

6 Thus the Vasishthas glorify with praises Indra the Poi 

whose arm wields thunder. 

Praised, may he guard our wealth in kine and hero 
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYNM XXIV”. 

A home is made for thee to dwell in, Indra : 0 Much-in 1 
go thither with the heroes. 

That thou, to prosper us, mayst be our Helper, vouchg 
wealth, rejoice with draughts of Soma. 

2 Indra, thy wish, twice-strong, is comprehended : prei 

the Soma, poured are pleasant juices. 

This hymn of praise, from loosened tongue, made p 
draws Indra to itself with loud invoking. 

3 Come, thou Impetuous God, from earth or heaven come 

holy grass to drink the Soma. 

Hither to me let thy Bay Horses bring thee to listen 1 
hymns and make thee joyful. 

4 Come unto us with all thine aids, accordant, Lord c 

Steeds, accepting our devotions, 

Fair-h el meted, o’ercoming with the mighty, and lendi 
the strength of bulls, 0 Indra. 

5 As to the chariot pole a vigorous courser, this laud is br 

to the great strong Upholder. 

This hymn solicits wealth of thee : in heaven, as ’twere 
t' e sky, set thou our glory. 

6 With precious things. 0 Indra, thus content us: may wei 

to thine exalted favour. 

Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Pie 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

4 Barren cows : which are fatter than others. 

% 

1 A home : in the sacrificial chamber. Heroes : or. men ; the prieata.l 
4 Fair- hd meted : or fair-cheeked, or handsome chinned. I 



HYMN XXV. Iadra. 

HEN with thy mighty help, 0 potent Indra, the armies rush 
together in their fury, 

hen from the strong man’s arm the lightning flieth , let not 
thy mind go forth to side with others. 

[ndra, where the ground is hard to traverse, smite down 
our foes, the mortals who assail us. 

lep far from us the curse of the reviler : bring us accumulat- 
ed store of treasures. 

d of the fair helm, give Sudas a hundred succours, a 
thousand blessings, and thy bounty. 

rike down the weapon of our mortal foeman : bestow upon 
us splendid fame and riches. 

yait the power of one like thee, 0 Indra, gifts of a Helper 
Buch as thou art, Hero. 

rong, Mighty God, dwell with me now and ever : Lord of 
Bay Horses, do not thou desert us. 

^re are the Kutsas supplicating Indra for might, the Lord 
bf Bays for God-sent conquest. 

Ike our foes ever easy to be vanquished : may we, victorious, 
win the spoil, 0 Hero. 

ith precious things, 0 Indra, thus content us : may we 
attain to thine exalted favour. 

nd our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXVI. Mra. 

ha unpressed ne’er gladdened liberal Indra, no juices 
pressed without a prayer have pleased him. 
generate a laud that shall delight him, new and heroic, 
so that he may hear us. 

every laud the Soma gladdens Indra : pressed juices please 
lim as each psalm is chanted, 

lat time the priests with one united effort call him to aid, 
is sons invoke their father. 

ese deeds he did; let him achieve new exploits, such as the 
priests declare at their libations. 

>attle has begun, and the singer prays to Indra for aid. 
e lightning : the swift and flashing arrow. Others : the enemy. 
ids : according to SAyana, ‘ the liberal donor (of oblations).’— Wilson. 
zutxas ; apparently the priests of the hostile party. 

na impressed: cp VI. 41. 4, Soma when (properly) presseS excels the 
ed (<>r ill-pressed > Soma. Not only must the juice bo duly expressed, 
lust be expressed and offered with prayer. 



*8 tHti HYMNS OF [bOdti tnJ 

Indra hath taken and possessed all castles, like as one c< 
mon husband doth his spouses* 

4 Even thus have they declared him. Famed is Indra as 0 

queror, sole distributer of treasures ; 

Whose many succours come in close succession. May d 
delightful benefits attend us. 

5 Thus, to bring help to men, Vasishtha laudeth Indra, 

peoples’ Hero, at libation. 

Bestow upon us strength and Wealth in thousands. Prese 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXVII* 1* 

Men call on Indra in the armed encounter that he may mi 
the hymns they sing decisive. 

Hero, rejoicing in thy might, in combat give us a portion 
the stall of cattle* 

2 Grant, Indra Maghavan, invoked of many, to these my frier 

the strength which thou possessest. 

Thou, Maghavan, hast rent strong places open : unclose 
us, Wise God, thy hidden bounty. 

3 King of the living world, of men, is Indra, of all in vari 

form that earth containeth. 

Thence to the worshipper he giveth riches : may he enrich 
also when we laud him. 

4 Maghavan Indra, when we all invoke him, bountiful ei 

sendeth strength to aid us : 

Whose perfect guerdon, never failing, bringeth wealth tot 
men, to friends the thing they covet. 

5 Quick, Indra, give us room and Way to riches, and let 

bring thy mind to grant us treasures, 

That we may win us cars and steeds and cattle. Preser 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXVIII. ™ 

Come to our prayers, 0 Indra, thou who knowest : let tl 
Bay Steeds be yoked and guided hither. 

Though mortal men on every side invoke thee, still give thi 
ear to us, 0 All-impeller. 


3 All cattle « ; all the strongholds of the demons of drought, the cloudy 
ties in whieh the rain is imprisoned. 

1 Give tit a portion , etc : aid us to capture and carry off the cattle of 
enemy. 



TEE JRIQVE&A. 


W 29 .} 


% 


thy greatness reaoheth to our invocation, the sages’ prayei 
[ whioh, Potent God. thou guardest. 

^Vhat time thy hand, 0 Mighty, holds the thunder, awful ir 

. strength thou hast become resistless. 

k^hat time thou drewest both world-halves together, lik< 

f heroes led by thee who call each other — 

k r thou wast borp for strength and high dominion — ther 

[ e’en the active overthrew the sluggish. 

[onour us in these present days, 0 Indra, for hostile men ar< 
making expiation. 

lur sin that sinless Yaruna discovered, the Wondrous-Wis< 
hath long ago forgiven. 

Je will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that be maj 
grant us gifts of ample riches, 

est favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve ui 
I evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 


HYMN XXIX. Indra 

His Soma hath been pressed for thee, 0 Indra : come hither 
Lord of Bays, for this thou lovest. 

rink of this fair, this well effused libation : Maghavan, givi 
us wealth when we implore thee. 

>me to us quickly with thy Bay Steeds, Hero, come to ou 
prayer, accepting our devotion. 

ljoy thyself aright at this libation, and listen thou unto th< 
prayers we offer, 

hat satisfaction do our hymns afford thee ? When, Magha 
van? Now let us do thee service. 

fmns, only hymns, with love for thee, I weave thee : ther 
hear, 0 Indra, these mine invocations, 


\y greatness reacheth to our invocation : thou hast the power to conn 
ball if thou wilt. 

rewest both woi'ld-halves together : settest heaven and earth opposite to 
hnr, like armies arrayed for battle. E'en the active : the meaning of 
If-line is doubtful, and chit, even, seems to be out of place. Wilson 

I es, after Stiyana : ‘ whence the presenter of offerings overcomes him 
irs them not.’ According to Professor Grassmann, ‘ the active’ is Indra, 
ie inactive * is the sluggish demon. Ludwig suggests an alteration of 

1 making expiation : or, possibly, set themselves in order, that is, 
id prepare themselves for battle. The Wondrous-Wise : mdyt; Varuna, 


ohttydo thee tervice : nUtndm / 1 no time like the present.’— Ludwig. 



SO THE HYMNS OF [BOOR } 

4 They, verily, were also human beings whom thou wast 

to hear, those earlier sages. 

Hence I, 0 Indra Maghavan, invoke thee : thou art our { 
vidence, even as a Father. 

5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that he ^ 

grant us gifts of ample riches, 

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. * 

HYMN XXX. 

With power and strength, 0 Mighty God, approach us 
the augmenter, Indra, of these riches ; 

Strong Thunderer, Lord of men, for potent valour, for m 
exploit and for high dominion. 

2 Thee, worth invoking, in the din of battle, heroos invoke 

fray for life and sunlight. 76177 
Among all people thou art foremost fighter : give up 
enemies to easy slaughter. 

3 When fair bright days shall dawn on us, 0 Indra, and t 

shalt bring thy banner near in battle, 

Agni the Asura shall sit as Herald, calling Gods hithei 
our great good fortune. 

4 Tidne are we, Indra, thine, both these who praise thee i 

those who give rich gifts, 0 God and Hero. 

Grant to our princes excellent protection : may they wax 
and still be strong and happy. 

5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that hei 

grant us gifts of ample riches, 

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preservi 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXI. 

Sing ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, Lord of T 
Steeds, 

The Soma-drinker, 0 my friends. 

2 To him the Bounteous say the laud, and let us glorify, as 

May do, the Giver of true gifts. 

3 0 Indra, Lord of boundless might, for us thou winnest stre 

and kine, 

Thou winnest gold for us, Good Lord. 


1 Far potent valour : that w, to give us potent valour. 

2 Foremoet fighter : caster of the spear, warrior, according to vonlj 

but the meaning of etnyah is somewhat uncertain. * 1 



w 82.] THE RIG VEDA. 

etithful to thee we loudly sing, heroic Indra, songs to thee : 
[ark, 0 Good Lord, this act of ours. 

ive us not up to man’s reproach, to foeman’s hateful calumny : 
1 thee alone is all my strength. 

hou art mine ample coat of mail, my Champion, Vritra-slayer, 
thou : 

Jith thee for Friend I brave the foe. 

ea, great art thou whose conquering might two independent 
[ Powers confess, 

fhe Heaven, 0 Indra, and the Earth. 

o let the voice surround thee, which attends the Maruts on 
their way, 

eaching thee with the rays of light. 

Bt the ascending drops attain to thee, the Wondrous God, in 
heaven : 

Let all the folk bow down to thee. 

tiring to the Wise, the Great, who waxeth mighty, your offer- 
ings, and make ready your devotion : 

Po many clans he goeth, man’s Controller. 

Tor Indra, the sublime, the far-pervading, have singers gener- 
ated prayer and praises : 

The sages never violate his statutes. 

The choirs have stablished Indra King for ever, for victory, 
him whose anger is resistless : 

Lud, for the Bays’ Lord, strengthened those he loveth. 


HYMN XXXII. 


Indra. 


^et none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us. 

Sven from far away come thou unto our feast, or listen if al- 
ready here. 

•'or here, like flies on honey, these who pray to thee sit by the 
juice that they have poured. 

Vealth-craving singers have on Indra set their hope, as men 
set foot upon a car. 


'independent : svadhftvart ; ‘abounding in food,’ — Wilson. 

Vhe voice: ‘the praises of thine adorers.’— Wilson. 

Strengthened : ‘ bar hay 4 : for abarhayan, as is clear from what pre- 
) —■ Ludwig. SAyana takes barhayd as the imperative : 4 urge thy kinsmen, 
nipper, to glorify) the lord of bay steeds.’ — Wilson. 


K indebted to Max M tiller's translation of this hymn in his Ancient 
Literature for many of the renderings which I have adopted. 



3,2 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH pJ 

3 Longing for wealth I call on him, the Thunderer with 

strong right hand, 

As a son calleth on his sire, 

4 These Soma juices, mixed with curd, have been expressed: 

Indra here, 

Come with thy Bay Steeds, Thunder-wielder, to our home, 
drink them till they make thee glad. 

5 May he whose ear is open hear us. He is aBked for wealt 

will he despise our prayer ? 

Him who bestows at once a hundred thousand gifts none sh 
restrain when he would give. 

6 The hero never checked by men hath gained his streng 

through Indra, he 

Who presses out and pours his deep libations forth, 0 Vi'it 
slayer, unto thee. 

7 When thou dost drive the fighting men together be, th 

Mighty One, the mighty’s shield. 

May we divide the wealth of him whom thou hast slain ; brii 
us, Unreachable, his goods. 

8 For Indra, Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press the Sou 

juice. 

Make ready your dressed meats ; cause him to favour us. T1 
Giver blesses him who gives. 

9 Grudge not, ye Soma-pourers ; stir you, pay the rites, I 

wealth, to the great Conqueror. 

Only the active conquers, dwolls in peace, and thrives : not I 
the niggard are the Gods. 

10 No one hath overturned orstayed the carof him who freely gii 
The man whom Indra and the Marut host defend comes to| 

stable full of kine. 

11 Indra, that man when fighting shall obtain the spoil, whc 

strong defender thou wilt be. 

Be thou the gracious helper, Hero ! of our cars, be thou t 
helper of our men. 

12 His portion is exceeding great like a victorious soldier’s spoi 
Him who is Indra, Lord of Bays, no foes subdue. He gii 

the Soma-pourer strength. 

3 With the strong right hand : or, giver of good gifts. 

7 The mighty's shield : 1 the shield of the mighty (Vasishthas).’ — M. 1 
‘a protection of the Maghavans/ i. e. the institutors of the sacrifice.— Ludi 

8 The Oiver blesses him who gives : Indra rewards the liberal worshipper. 

10 Comet to a stable full of kine : carries off rich booty. 



TIIE RWVEDA. 


W 32;] 


ft? 


Make for the Poly Gods a hymn that is not mean, but well- 
arranged and fair of form. 

Even many snares and bonds subdue not him who dwells with 
Indra through his sacrifice. 

[ndra, what mortal will attack the man who hath his wealth 
in thee ? 

The strong will win the spoil on the decisive day through faith 
in thee, 0 Maghavan. 

[n battles with the foe urge on our mighty ones who give thfc 
treasures dear to thee, 

ind may we with our princes, Lord of Tawny Steeds ! pass 
through all peril, led by thee. 

Thine, Indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest the mid- 
most wealth, 

Thou ever rulest all the highest : in the fray for cattle none 
resisteth thoe. 

Thou art renowned as giving wealth to every one in all the 
battles that are fought. 

graving protection, all these people of the earth, 0 Much- 
invoked, implore thy name. 

[f I, 0 Indra, were the Lord of riches ample as thine own, 

: should support the singer, God who givest wealth ! and not 
abandon him to woe. 

Sach day would I enrich the man who sang my praise, in 
whatsoever place he were. 

*o kinship is there better, Maghavan, than thine : a father 
even is no more. 

W’ith Plenty for his true ally the active man will gain the 
spoil. 

four Indra, Much-invoked, I bend with song, as bends a 
wright his wheel of solid wood. 

i mortal wins no riches by unworthy praise: wealth comes 
not to the niggard churl. 

^iglit is the task to give, 0 Maghavan, to one like me on the 

I decisive day. 

! ike kine unmilked we call aloud, Hero, to thee, and sin* 
thy praise, 

ooker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord. 
Indra, of what moveth not. 


Plenty ; or, Spirit, Boldness. 



84 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR fj 

23 None other like to thee, of earth or of the heavens, hath be« 

or ever will be horn. 

Desiring horses, Indra Maghavan 1 and kine, as men of mig[ 
we call on thee. 

24 Bring, Indra, the Victorious Ones; bring, elder thou, tl 

younger host. 

For, Maghavan, thou art rich in treasures from of old, an 
must be called in every fight. 

25 Drive thou away our enemies, 0 Maghavan : make riches eaj 

to be won. I 

Be thou our good Protector in the strife for spoil : Cherish 
of our friends be thou. 

26 0 Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons. 
Guide us, 0 Much-invoked, in this our way : may we still lii 

and look upon the light. 

27 Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, unhallow 

tread us to the ground. 

With thine assistance, Hero, may we pass through all t‘ 
waters that are rushing down. 

HYMN XXXIII. Vaaisht 

These who wear hair-knots on the right, the movers of hi 
thought, white-robed, have won me over. 

I warned the men, when from the grass I raised me, Not frt 
afar can my Vasishthas help you. 

2 With Soma they brought Indra from a distance, over Vaisam 
from the strong libation. 

Indra preferred Vasishthas to the Soma pressed by the sod 
Vayata, Pasadyumna. 

24 Bring , Indra, the Victorious Ones : these would be the Marats. ‘ E 
Indra, bring that (wealth to me) being the junior/— Wilson. ‘ Bring all 
to those who are good, 0 Indra, be they old or young/— M. Muller. 

The hymn is a glorification of Vasishtha and his family, the latter 
relating his birth and the earlier verses referring to his connexion with 1 
Sudis. 

1 Hair-knots : kaparda ia the chuda or single lock of hflir left on the 1 
at tonsure, which, according to the Scholiast, it was characteristic of 
Vasishthas to wear on the right of the crown of the head. White-rol 
white-coloured, according to S&yana. Me : Vasishtha, who is the speake 
stanzas 1—6. * Von Roth (under the word av) regards Indra as the spea 
May it not be Sud&s ? ’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 319, 320, where stanzas 1- 
are translated. From the grass : the sacred grass laid on the floor of the si 
ficial chamber. 

2 Vaifanta : probably the name of a river. Pdfadyumna : another king' 
was sacrificing to Indra at the same time as Sud&s. 



THU HtGTEDA* 


33.] 


SB 


So, verily, with these he crossed the river, in company with 
these he slaughtered Bheda. 

So in the fight with the Ten Kings, Vasishthas l did Indra 
help Sudas through your devotions. 

I gladly, men ! with prayer prayed by our fathers have fixed 
your axle : ye shall not be injured : 

Since, when ye sang aloud the Sakvari verses, Vasishthas ! ye 
invigorated Indra. 

Like thirsty men they looked to heaven, in battle with the 
Ten Kings, surrounded and imploring. 

Then Indra heard Vasishtha as he praised him, and gave the 
Tritsus ample room and freedom. 

like sticks and staves wherewith they drive the cattle, strip- 
ped bare, the Bharatas were found defenceless : 

Vasishtha then became their chief and leader; then widely 
were the Tritsus’ clans extended. 

Three fertilize the worlds with genial moisture : three noble 
Creatures cast a light before them. 

Three that give warmth to all attend the Morning. All these 

| have they discovered, these Vasishthas. 

lake the Sun’s growing glory is their splendour, and like the 
sea’s is their un fathomed greatness, 

'heir course is like the wind’s. Your laud, Vasishthas, can 
never be attained by any other. 

'hey with perceptions of the heart in secret resort to that 
which spreads a thousand branches. 

'he Apsaras brought hither the Vasishthas wearing the vesture 
spun for them by Yama. 


P* river : Yamuna. See VII. 18. 19. Ten Kings : of the confederate 
who opposed Sudds. See VII. 18. 

ukvart verses : hymns of praise in the Sakvarf metre (14 x 4). 

rUsus .- the tribe of which Sudds was King. Bharatas ; apparently the 

as the Tritsus. rr J 


idra is the speaker of the rest of the hymn. ‘ In explanation of this 
\ quotes a passage from the Sdtydyana Brahman* ; (1) Agni produces a 
img fluid on the eaith, Vdyu in the air, the Sun in the sky. (2) The 
• are the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas. The Sun is 

ight. (3) Agni, Vdyu, and the Sun each attend the Dawn ’—Muir, 


whtch spreads * thousand branches: according to Ludwig’s Trans- 
xne Sun-God is meant ; according to his later view, the reference is to 
ystic tree sustained by Varuna in the baseless region (I. 24 7). 
’f . the 'body. The stanza is very obscure, and Sftyana’s explana- 

mch overrides grammar, is not satisfactory; • By the wisdom seated in 
rt the Vasishthas traverse the hidden thousand-branched world, and 
turasas sit down, wearing the vesture spread out bv Yama.’— WiUn*. 



$8 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

10 A form of lustre springing from the lightning wa*t thou, w 

Varuna and Mitra saw thee. 

Thy one and only birth was then, Vasishtha, when from 
stock Agastya brought thoe hither. 

11 Born of their love for Urvas*, Vasishtha, thou, priest, art 

of Varuna and Mitra ; 

And as a fallen drop, in heavenly fervour, all the Gods 
thee on a lotus-blossom. 

12 He, thinker, knower both of earth and heaven, endowed v 

many a gift, bestowing thousands, 

Destined to wear the vesture spun by Yama, sprang from 
Apsaras to life, Vasishtha. 

13 Born at the sacrifice, urged by adorations, both with a © 

mon flow bedewed the pitcher. 

Then from the midst thereof there rose up Mana, and the 
they say was born the sage Vasishtha. 

14 He brings the bearer of the laud and Saman : first shall 

speak bringing the stone for pressing. 

With grateful hearts in reverence approach him : to you 
Pratridas, Vasishtha cometh. 

HYMN XXXIV. Visvedc 

May our divine and brilliant hymn go forth, like a si 
chariot wrought and fashioned well. 

2 The waters listen as they flow along : they know the origii 
heaven and eaith. 


10 Vasishtha, appears here as an embodiment of lightning, light, or 
and to have been brought down to men by Agastya who was born in the s; 
way as Vasishtha. 

1 1 Urvasl : the most celebrated of the Apsarases or nymphs of heave" 
a lotus-blossom : or, according to others, * in the sacred pitcher,’ or wat 
used in sacrifice. ‘ In the lake.’— Wilson. 

For a full account of this production of Vasishtha, the curious rea 
referred to Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 821. See M. Muller, Chips, IV. 108, 1 05 
Hillebrandt, Varuna und Mitra , 148, 149. 

12 The Apsaras : Urvasi. 

13 Mdna : said to be another name of Agastya. 

14 The hearei' of the laud and Siman : the pressing-stone, which was w 
during the lecitation of Bacred verses. Pratridas : a name used he 
designate the Tiitsus. 

This difficult and obscure hymn has been translated and thoroughl 
cussed by Geldner ( Vedische Stvdien , II pp. 129—155, criticized by 
Ludwig, Uther die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Oebiete der Ryvedaforst 
pp. 163-167). 

2 ‘ An allusion, perhaps, to the subsequently received cosmogony: 
$tanu, that water was the first of created things.’— Wilson. 



t&E RtO VEDA. 


■V 3*.} 

ea, the broad waters swell their flood for him : of him strong 
heroes think amid their foes. 

st ye for him the coursers to the pole : like Indra Thunderer 
is the Golden-armed. 

rouse you, like the days, to sacrifice : speed gladly like a 
traveller on the way. 

o swift to battles, to the sacrifice : set up a flag, a hero for 
the folk. 

p from his strength hath risen as ’twere a light : it beara 
the load as earth bears living things. 

gni, no demon I invoke the Gods : by law completing it, t 
form a hymn* 

losely about you lay your heavenly song, and send your 
voice to where the Gods abide* 

aruna, Mighty, with a thousand eyes, beholds the paths 
wherein these rivers r un. 

e, King of kings, the glory of the floods, o*er all that liveth 
hath resistless sway. 

ay he assist us among all the tribes, and make the envier*s 
praise devoid of light. 

ay the foes’ threatening arrow pass us by : may he put far 
from us our bodies’ sin. 

yni, oblation-eater, through our prayers aid us : to him our 
dearest laud is brought, t 

jcordant with the Gods choose for our Friend the Waters* 
Child : may he be good to us. 

ith lauds I sing the Dragon born of floods : he sits beneath 
the streams in middle air. 

B’er may the Dragon of the Deep harm us : ne’er fail this 
faithful servant’s sacrifice. 

) these our heroes may they grant renown : may pious men 
march boldly on to wealth. 

fading great hosts, with fierce attacks of these, they burn 
;their foes as the Sun burns the earth. 

h 

V him : Indra. 

\e Golden armed : Savitar. 

mro : a sort of personification of the sacrifice. * An expiatory sacrifice 
good of) mankind.’— Wilson. 

me Dr&gon born of floods : Ahibudhnya, or the Dragon of the Deep of 
[owing stanza ; the regent of the sea of air. 
they : the Gods. 

v ; Gods, or Maruta, according to the Scholiast. 



W THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 

20 What time our wives draw near to us, may he, deft-han 

Tv ashlar, give us hero sons. 

21 May Tvashtar find our hymn acceptable, and may Arair 

seeking wealth, be ours. 

22 May they who lavish gifts bestow those treasures : i 

Rodasi and Varunant listen. 

May he, with the Varutrls, be our refuge, may bount 
Tvashtar give us store of riches. 

23 So may rich Mountains and the liberal Waters, so may 

Herbs that grow on ground, and Heaven, 

And Earth accordant with the Forest-Sovrans, and both 
World-halves round about protect us. 

24 To this may both the wide Worlds lend approval, and Vai 

in heaven, whose Friend is Indra. 

May all the Maruts give consent, the Victors, that we i 
hold great wealth in firm possession. 

25 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Agni, Waters, Herbs, T 

accept the praise we offer. 

May we find refuge in the Maruts’ bosom. Protect us c 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXV. Viaved 

Befriend us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra 
Varuna who receive oblations ! 

Indra and Soma give health, strength and comfort, Ii 
and Pushan be our help in battle. 

2 Auspicious Friends to us be Bhaga, Sansa, auspicious 

Purandhi and all Riches ; 

The blessing of the true and well-conducted, and Aryama 
many forms apparent. 

3 Kind unto us be Maker and Sustainer, and the far-reaci 

Pair with Godlike natures. 

Auspicious unto us be Earth and Heaven, the Mountain, 
the Gods’ fair invocations. 


21 Aramati : the Genius of Devotion and active piety. 

22 VarUtrts : protecting Goddesses. 

23 Forest -Sovrans : tall timber trees. 

1 Befriend us : »dm no bhavatdm . The indeclinable word fdm, signil 
happy, auspicious, pleasant, sweet, kind, agreeable, etc., etc., is uaed wit 
without the verb bhil, in the first thirteen stanzas. 1 have varied the ex 
sion here and there. 

2 Sansa: Prayer or Wish personified. Or it may be NarAsmsa, * 
Purandhi: Plenty, or Spirit, Boldness personified, 

3 Far-reaching Pair ; Heaven and Earth. 



rtf 35.] the MG VEDA. 39 

favour us Agni with his face of splendour, and Varuna and 
Mitra and the Asvins. 

i’avour us noble actions of the pious, impetuous VAta blow on 
us with favour. 

My invoked, may Heaven and Earth be friendly, and Air's 
mid-region good for us to look on. 

’o us may Herbs and Forest-Trees be gracious, gracious the 
, Lord Victorious of the region. 

pe the God Indra with the Vasus friendly, and, with Adityas, 

\ Varuna who blesseth, 

jtind, with the Rudras, be the Healer Rudra, and, with the 
| Dames, may Tvashtar kindly listen. 

Jlest unto us be Soma, and devotions, blest be the Sacrifice, 

■ the Stones for pressing. 

Meat be the fixing of the sacred Pillars, blest be the tender 
Grass, and blest the Altar. 

fay the far-seeing Sun rise up to bless us : be the four 
Quarters of the sky auspicious, 
auspicious bo the firmly-seated Mountains, auspicious be the 
Rivers and the Waters. 

[ay Aditi through holy works be gracious, and may the 
Maruts, loud in song, be friendly. 

[ay Vishnu give felicity, and Pushan, the Air that cherisheth 
our life, and Vayu. 

rasper us Savitar, the God who rescues, and let the radiant 
[ Mornings be propitious. 

Auspicious to all creatures be Parjanya, auspicious be the 
i held s benign Protector. 

ilay all the fellowship of Gods befriend us, Sarasvatl, with 
Holy Thoughts, be gracious. 

sriendly be they, the Liberal Ones who seek us, yea, those 
I w “° dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters. 

(ay the great Lords of Truth protect and aid us : blest to us 
; be our horses and our cattle. 

^ind be the pious skilful-handed Ribhus, kind be the Fathers 
! a t our invocations. 

(ay Aja-Ekapad, the God, be gracious, gracious the Dragon 
^ofthe^Deep, and Ocean. * 

Lord Victorious : Indra. ~~ 

the field's benign Protector: Agni, or Rudra. See IV. 57. 1 , 
ija-hkapdd : the Sun. See VI. 50. 14, and footnote. 
i rajm the Dee P ; Ahibudhnya, regent of the depth* of the firms- 



40 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK | 

Gracious be he, the swelling Child of Waters, gracious 
Pfisni who hath Gods to guard her. 

14 So may the Rudras, Vasus, and Adityas accept the newhy 

which we now ure making. 

May all the Holy Ones of earth and heaven, and the Co 
offspring hear our invocation. 

15 They who of Holy Gods are very holy, Immortal, know 

Law, whom man must worship, — 

May these to-day give us broad paths to travel. Preserve 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXVI. ViBvede 

Let the prayer issue from the seat of Order, for Surya w 
his beams hath loosed the cattle. 

With lofty ridges earth is far extended, and Agni’s flame h 
lit the spacious surface. 

2 0 Asuras, 0 Varuiaa and Mitra, this hymn to you, like fo 

anew I offer. 

One of you is a strong unerring Leader, and Mitra, speaki 
stirreth men to labour. 

3 The movements of the gliding wind come hither : like co 

the springs are filled to overflowing. 

Born in the station e’en of lofty heaven the Bull hath lou 
bellow r ed in this region. 

4 May I bring hither with my song. O Indra, wise Aryan 

who yokes thy dear Bay Horses, 


14 Cow's offspring : the Maruts. According to von Roth those who are l 
and live in radiant heaven. 

15 Broad paths to travel : perhaps, generally, an easy road to prosperity 

1 The seat of Order : ‘the hall of the sacrifice.’ — Wilson. The cattle: 
of light. 

2 ‘ One of you (Varuna) is the lord and unassailable guide, and he wb 
called Mitra, ( i . e the friend) calls men to activity. Here so much at leas 
declared (and the same thing is expressed in nearly the same words in ni 
places), that the light of day, which awakens life, and brings joy and acti 
into the world, is the narrower sphere of Mitra’s power ; though, howo 
Varima is not relegated to the night alone, for he continues to be the 1 
and the first.’ — Von Roth, quoted by Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. 70. The mear 
of indh translated by * lord ’ in this extract, is, in the Veda, rather ‘ stro 
'energetic,* and is so given in the St. Petersburg Lexicon, the meaning * b 
belonging to later literature. The second half of the second line is repea 
with a variation, from III. 59. 1. 

3 The springs : the fountains of rain ; the clouds. The Bull : Parjai 
God of the raiu-cloud. This region : literally, this udder ; the firmameu 



TffE MOVE DA. 


it 


V 37.] 

oraoious, with thy noble oar, 0 Hero, him who defeats the 
wrath of the malicious. 

i their own place of sacrifice adorers worship to gain long 
life and win his friendship. 

G hath poured food on men when they have praised him ; 
be this, the dearest reverence, paid to Rudra, 
jming together, glorious, loudly roaring-— Sarasvati, Mother 
of Floods, the seventh — 

ith copious milk, with fair streams, strongly flowing, full 
swelling with the volume of their water ; 
id may the mighty Maruts, too, rejoicing, aid our devotion 
and protect our offspring. 

it not swift-moving Akshara neglect us : they have increas- 
ed our own appropriate riches. 

ring yo the great Aramati before you, and Pushan as the 
Hero of the synod, 

laga Who looks upon this hymn with favour, and, as ovfr 
strength, the bountiful Purandhi. 

ay this our song of praise reach you, 0 Maruts, and Vishnu 
guardian of the future infant. 

ay they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXVII. Viavedevas. 

ct your best-bearing car that must be lauded, ne'er injured, 
bring you Vajas and Ribhukshans. 

11 you, fair-helmeted ! with mighty Soma, thrice-mixed, at 
our libations, to delight you. 


u-aciouft : epithet of horses; but the meaning of dhdyft is uncertain, 
ing to Sftyana, it means ‘holding/ ‘vigorous/ according to Ludwig, 
ig forth rain according to Grassmann, ‘ thirsty.’ 

's friendship : Rudra’s. 

>e seventh : with the six other celebrated rivers. See I. 32. 12. 

; V&k, or Voice ; ‘ the imperishable goddess of speech.’ — Wilson. 

ramati the personification of religious worship, or active piety. See 
#.21. According to Sftyana, ardmatim here is an epithet of maAfm, 
ever-resting Earth.’ For the various meanings assigned by S&yana to 
)rd in the various places in whi \i it occurs, see Muir, 0. S. Texts , 

fhnu ; cf. X. 184. 1. 

jas and Ribhukskann : that is, Ribhukshan or Ribhu, Vibhvan, and 
unmonly called the Ribhus from the name of the first of the three. 
meted: ‘ handsome-chinned/ — Wilson: ‘ Strong* jawed/ — Ludwig. 
toixed; with milk, curds, and meal. 



4* THE HYMNS OF [BOOR 

2 Ye who behold the light of heaven, Ribhukshaus, give our 

patrons unmolested riches. 

Drink, heavenly-natured, at our sacrifices, and give us be 
ies for the hymns we sing you, 

3 For thou, 0 Bounteous One, art used to giving, at par 

treasure whether small or ample. 

Filled full are both thine arms with great possessions : 
goodness keeps thee not from granting riches. 

4 Indr a, high-famed, as Vaja and Ribhukshan, thougoestw 

ing, singing to the dwelling. 

Lord of Bay Steeds, this day may we Vasishthas offer 
prayers to thee and bring oblations. 

5 Thou winnest swift advancement for thy servant, thre 

hymns, Lord of Bay Steeds, which thou hast favoured. 
For thee with friendly succour have we battled, and wher 
Indra, wilt thou grant us riches ? 

6 To us thy priests a home, as ’twere, thou givest : when, In 

wilt thou recognize our praises ? 

May thy strong Steed, through our ancestral worship, b 
food and wealth with heroes to our dwelling. 

7 Though Nirriti the Goddess reigneth round him, Autui 

with food in plenty come to Indra. 

With three close Friends to length of days he cometh, 
whom men let not rest at home in quiet. 

8 Promise us gifts, 0 Savitar : may riches come unto u 

Parvata’s full bounty. 

May the Celestial Guardian still attend us. Preserve us e 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXVIII. sat 

On high hath Savitar, this God, extended the golden lui 
which he spreads around him. 

Now, now must Bhaga be invoked by mortals, Lord of gi 
riches who distributes treasures. 


3 Bounteous One : Maghavan ; Indra. 

4 Woi'kiny : 1 the fulfiller { of wishes ).’— Wilson. The first line is some? 
obscure. 

7 Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Destruction, who has no power! 
Indra. Three close Friends : the Ribhus, who represent the year, the an! 
course of Indra bb the Sun. S^ymm's explanation is different: ‘Indra,! 
upholder of the three regions, whom the divine Nirriti acknowledges as ni 
whom abundant years pass over, whom mortals detain from his own ah 
approaches to ( recruit ) his decaying strength.’ — Wilson ; who observes : ‘ 
explanation is not very clear.’ 

8 ParvakC s full bounty ; the Genius of mountain and cloud. 



V 39-] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


43 


se up, 0 Savitar whose hands are golden, and hear this man 
while sacrifice is offered, 

>reading afar thy broad and wide effulgence, and bringing 
mortal men the food that feeds them. 

>t Savitar the God be hymned with praises, to whom the 
Yasus, even, all sing glory. 

ireet be our lauds to him whose due is worship : may he with 
all protection guard our princes. 

rcn he whom Aditi the Goddess praises, rejoicing in God 
Savitar’s incitement : 

rcn he whose praise the high imperial Rulers, Varuna, Mitra, 
Aryaman, sing in concert. 

ley who come emulous to our oblation, dispensing bounty, 
from the earth and heaven, 

ly they and Ahibudhnya hear our calling : guard us Yarfitri 
with the Ekadhenus. 

lis may the Lord of Life, entreated, grant us, — the wealth 
which Savitar the God possesses. 

le mighty calls on Bhaga for protection, on Bhaga calls the 
weak to give him riches. 

ess us the Vajins when we call, while slowly they move, 
strong Singers, to the Gods’ assembly, 
ushing the wolf, the serpent, and the demons, may they 
completely banish all affliction. 

jep-skilled in Law eternal, deathless, Singers, 0 Y&jins, help 
us in each fray for booty. 

•ink of this meath, be satisfied, be joyful : then go on paths 
which Gods are wont to travel. 

HYMN XXXIX. Viavedevas. 

3ni, erect, hath shown enriching favour : the flame goes for- 
ward to the Gods' assembly. 

ke car-borne men the stones their path have chosen : let the 
priest, quickened, celebrate our worship. 


ie Vasus: the Gods in general, according to SAyana. 

irUtrl : * the protectress (the goddess of speech).’ — Wilson Ekadhenus : 

iters are probably meant : ‘excelh nt cattle.’ — Wilson. 

jyin* : a class of divinities so named, according to SAyana ; but, accord* 

Wahid hara, horses, i . e. the teams which draw the chariots of the Gods. 

v • or the robber. The serpent : or the assassin. The demons : the 

[«a8. See Satapntha- Brdhmatyt, V. 1.5. 21 — 24, (S. Books of the East, 

a) for a different version of stanzas 6 and 7« 


le stones : the prewing- stones have begun their course. 



44 fltE BYMtiS OF [BOOK 

2 Soft to the tread, their sacred grass is scattered : these go 

Kings amid the band around them, 

At the folk’s early Call on Night and Morning, — Vayu, 
Pushan with his team, to bless us. 

3 Here on their path the noble Gods proceeded : in the y 

firmament the Beauteous decked them. 

Bend your way hither, ye who travel widely : hear this 
envoy who hath gone to meet you. 

4 For they are holy aids at sacrifices : all Gods approach 

place of congregation. 

Bring these, desirous, to our worship, Agni, swift the N 
tyas, Bhaga, and Purandhi. 

5 Agni, to these men’s hymns, from earth, from heaven, br 

Mitra, Vanina, Indra, and Agni, 

And Aryaman, and Aditi, and Vishnu. Saras vati be joy 
and the Maruts. 

6 Even as the holy wish, the gift is offered : may he, unsa 

come when men desire him. 

Give never-failing ever-conquering riches : with Gods for 
allies may we be victors. 

7 Now have both Worlds been praised by the Vasishthas, 

holy Mitra, Varuna, and Agni. 

May they, bright Deities, make our song suprcmest. Pres( 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XL. Viaverli 

Be gathered all the audience of the synod : let us begin tl 
praise whose course is rapid. 

Whate’er God Savitar this day produces, may we be wi 
the Wealthy One distributes. 

2 This, dealt from heaven, may both the Worlds vouchsafe 

and Varuna, Tndra, Aryaman, and Mitra. 

May Goddess Aditi assign us riches, Vayu and Bhaga m 
them ours for ever. 

3 Strong be the man and full of power, 0 Maruts, whom 

borne on by spotted coursers, favour. 


2 These go like Kings ; according to S&yana, * may the two lords of pec 
(Vftyu and P&shati) .. appear now.’ 

3 Our envoy : Agni. 

6 Agni : in his own form as a celestial God, not in that of terrestrial & 
6 lie, umated : Agni. 

1 Their praise : praise of the Gods. 

2 Dealt from heaven : or. distributed hv Tlvii nr Dr*iin. 



THE MOVE DA. 


45 


V 41.] 


im, too, Sarasvati and Agni further, and there is none to rob 
him of his riches. 

hi& Varuna is guide of Law, he, Mitra, and Aryaman, the 
Kings, our work have finished. 

dvine and foeless Aditi quickly listens. May these deliver 
us unharmed from trouble. 

j ith offerings I propitiate the branches of this swift-moving 
God, the bounteous Vishnu. 

[ence Rudra gained his Rudra-strength : 0 Aflvins, ye sought 
the house that hath celestial viands. 

le not thou angry here, 0 glowing Pushan, for what Varutri 
and the Bounteous gave us. 

ay the swift-moving Gods protect and bless us, and Vata send 
us rain, who wanders round us. 

ow have both worlds been praised by the Vasishthas, and holy 
Mitra, Varuna, and Agni. 

[ay they, bright Deities, make our song supremest. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLI. Bhaga. 

lgni at dawn, and Indra we invoke at dawn, and Varuna and 
Mitra, and the Asvins twain : 

Ihaga at dawn, Pushan, and Brahmanaspati, Soma at dawn, 
Rudra we will invoke at dawn. 

Vo will invoke strong, early-conquering Bhaga, the Son of 
Aditi, the great supporter : 

hulking of whom, the poor, yea, even the mighty, even the 
King himself says, Give me Bhaga. 
haga our guide, Bhaga whose gifts are faithful, favour this 
song, and give us wealth, 0 Bhaga. 

Ihaga, augment our store of kine and horses, Bhaga, may we 
be rich in men and heroes. 


)ur work : tho sacrifice. 

| ; c branches: ‘ yayah , brandies : all other deities are, as it were, branches 
iniiy anye deyak , Sakha iva bhavanti : as by a text cited by the scholiast, 

- is all divinities, Vishnu h sarvd divatd iti srnteh.' — Wilson. This, 
l remarks, gives no satisfactory interpretation; but I am unable to 
iy thing better at present. Gras nann alters vayfth into vaydma : * we 
ir offerings approach the banquet of this swift-moving God, the boun- 
v ish, u ; i. e. come to offer him sacrificial food.* 

hymn is addressed chiefly to Bhaga the bountiful, whose name, slightly 
ted, survives in the Slavonic languages as a general name for God ; but 
s mentioned in stanza 1 , and Ushas, Dawn or Morning, are also regard- 
ne deities of the verses in which their names occur. 

>ve me Bhaga : or riches. 



44 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK \ 

4 So may felicity be ours at present, and when the day approach 

and at noontide ; 

And may we still, 0 Bounteous One, at sun»t be happy im 
Deities’ loving-kindness. 

5 May Bhaga verily be bliss-bestower, and through him, G<x 

may happiness attend us. 

As such, 0 Bhaga, all with might invoke thee ; as such 
thou our Champion here, 0 Bhaga. 

6 To this our worship may all Dawns incline them, and com? 

the pure place like Dadhikr&van. 

As strong steeds' draw a chariot may they bring us hithert 
Bhaga who discovers treasure. 

7 May blessed Mornings dawn on us for over, with wealth 

kine, of horses, and of heroes, 

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLII. Visvede 

Lbt Brahmans and Angirases come forward, and let the r 
of cloudy heaven surround us. 

Loud low the Milch-kine swimming in the waters : set be 
stones that grace our holy service. 

2 Fair, Agni, is thy long-known path to travel : yoke for 

juice thy bay, thy ruddy horses, 

Or red steeds, Hero-bearing, for the chamber. Seated, 1 1 
the Deities’ generations. 

3 They glorify your sacrifice with worship, yet the glad Pii 

near them is left unequalled. 

Bring the Gods hither, thou of many aspects : turn hit! 
ward Aramati the Holy. 


6 The pure place : the chamber of sacrifice. Like Dadhikrdvan : swift 
Dadhikr&vau, the famous horse, the type and model of racers. {See IV. 3S 
40. 1—3. 

1 Angirases : llishis so named, according to Sftyana. The Milch-kine: 
clouds in the watery firmament, with allusion also to the milk and water mi 
with 'the Soma juice. The stones : the press-stones. SAyana’s explanatio 
differentXjuay the pious couple, (the Yajamdna and his wife) coujoii 
appreciate th#4^auty of the sacrifice.'— Wilson. 

2 Thy bay , thyfwddy horses : or the Hai its and the Rohits. Red steedi 
AruBhas. Hero-bearing: carrying the Hero Agni. For the chamber: 
sacrificial hall ; ‘in thy stable.’— M. Muller. 

3 The human priests cannot equal Agni iu efficiency. Aramati : theCta 
of Devotion. See VII. 3d. 8. 



jy 43.] THE RIQ VEDA. 47 

that time the Guest hath made himself apparent, at ease 
reclining in the rich man's dwelling, 

gni, well-pleased, well-placed within the chamber gives to a 
house like this wealth worth the choosing. 

ccept this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni ; glorify it with Indra 
and the Maruts. 

ere on our grass let Night And Dawn be seated : bring long- 
ing Varuna and Mitra hither. 

hus hath Vasishtha praised victorious Agni, .yearning for 
wealth that giveth all subsistence. 

ay he bestow on us food, strength, and riches. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLIII. Visvedevas. 

[NG out the pious at your sacrifices to move with adorations 
Earth and Heaven — 

he Holy Singers, whose unmatched devotions, like a tree’s 
branches, part in all directions. 

Bt sacrifice proceed like some fleet courser : with one accord 
lift ye on high the ladles. 

;rew sacred grass meet for the solemn service : bright flames 
that love the Gods have mounted upward. 

ike babes in arms reposing on their mother, let the Gods sit 
upon the grass’s summit. 

it general tire make bright the flame of worship : scorn us 
not, Agni, in the Gods’ assembly. 

adly the Gods have let themselves be honoured, milking 
the copious streams of holy Order. 

ae highest might to-day is yours, the Vasus’ : come ye, as 
many as ye are, one-minded. 

k Agni, send us wealth among the people : may we be 
closely knit to thee, 0 Victor, 

f harmed, and rich, and taking joy together. Preserve us 
wermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 


t Guest : Agni. 

jh general fire : or, according to S&yana, < Let the full ladle balm the 
worship.’ The exact meaning is uncertain as both Bubject and object 
tctives without substantives. 

the copious streams : enjoying tUo libations of law -ordained sacri- 
fWho are the bestowers of water, the shedders of showers/ — Wilson. 



B THE HYMNS OF IBOOK 

IIYMN XL1V. Da <lhii 

I CALL on Dadhikras, the first, to give you aid, the Asv 
Bhaga, Dawn, and Agni kindled well, 

India, and Vishnu, P.ishan, Brahmanaspati, Adityas, He; 
and Earth, the Waters, and the Light. 

2 When, rising, to the sacrifice we hasten, awaking Dadhi 

with adoiations, 

Seating on sacred grass the Goddess I]a, let us invoke 
-sage swift-hearing Asvins. 

3 While I am thus arousing Dadhikravan I speak to A 

Earth, and Dawn, and Surya, 

The red, the brown of Varuna ever mindful : may they i 
off from us all grief and trouble. 

4 Foremost is Dadhikravan, vigorous courser; in forefro 

the cars, his way he knoweth, 

Closely allied with Surya and with Morning, Adityas, 
Angirases, and Vasus. 

5 May Dadhikras prepare the way we travel that we may 

along the path of Order. 

May Agni hear us, and the Heavenly Army: hear us all Mi 
Ones whom none deceiveth. 

HYMN XLV. Si 

May the God Savitar, rich in goodly treasures, filling 
region, borne by steeds, come hither, 

In his hand holding much that makes men happy, lulli 
slumber and arousing oreatures. 

2 Golden, sublime, and easy in their motion, his arms e: 
unto the bounds of heaven. 


1 Dadhikrds : see. IV. 38. 1. 

3 Dadhikr&can : a lengthened form of Dadhikras. See IV. 39. 2, a 
The red , the biown: apparently the horse of Varuna, that is. the Sun, 
tended. Ever mindful : * who is mindful of his adorers.’ — Wilson. The 
ng of the word mahsekatth, or mAhschatdh, is uncertain. Von Roth 
that a colour, dun or yellow, is meant. Ludwig would explain it as ‘ki 
snares or nooses.’ Grasstnann translates it by, ‘dcs Mondversclieu 
‘ who scares away the Moon.’ 

4 In forefront of the cars : according to S&yana, the chariots of the 
are intended. But, as Pischel observes ( Vcdische Studien t I. 124), E 
rdvan, the famous racediorse, was for ‘the gentlemen of the turf ’ i" 
Trasadasyu’s time what the matchless English horse Eclipse was in 
days. It seems probable that DahhikrAvan may have been originally 
most distinguished racer, glorified and deified by the exaggerated prJ 
the bards of a people who were passionately fond of chariot- racing. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


49 


y 46 ] 

ow shall that mightiness of his be lauded : even Sftra yields 
to him in active vigour. 

;ay this Cod Savitar, the Strong and Mighty, the Lord of 
precious wealth, vouchsafe us treasures, 
iiy he, advancing his far-spreading lustre, bestow on us the 
food that feedeth mortals. 

hese songs praise Savitar whose tongue is pleasant, praise 
him whose arms arc full, whose hands are lovely, 
igh vital strength, and manifold, may he grant us. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLVI. Rudra. 

o Rudra bring these songs, whose bow is firm and strong, the 
self dependent God with swiftly-flying shafts, ° 

he Wise, the Conqueror whom none may overcome, armed 
with sharp-pointed weapons : may he hear our call. 

e through his lordship thinks on beings of the earth, on 
heavenly beings through his high imperial sway, 
mie willingly to our doors that gladly welcome thee, and heal 
all sickness, Rudra, in our families. 

ay thy bright arrow which, shot down by thee from heaven, 
flieth upon the earth, pass us uninjured by. 5 

aou. very gracious God, hast thousand medicines : inflict no 
evil on our sons or progeny. 

ay us not, nor abandon us, 0 Rudra : let not thy noose, v hen 
thou art angry, seize ns. 

ve us trimmed grass and fame among the living. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 


'm : the Sun as distinguished from, or a different form of, Savitar who 

by Sayaua to be the Sun befoie his rising. 


yractoug God: svapivdta. ‘This word is not explained in the 
L text o f Sayana, although in the “ Varietas LeetioniV’ appended to 
face, Prof. Muller notes that in one MS , B. 4, svapivdta is rendered 
prana, he by whom life (or breath) is conquered.” In the Nirukta 
| is explained by svapta-vac/iana, “thou whose words are very suitable 
tentative. Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. 314, where an exhaustive note on 
[d will be found. Wilson renders svapivdta by ‘ wind-appeaser,’ and 
[ aun b y vielbegehrter,’ ‘ much-desired.’ 

P>e u« trimmed grass : let us share in sacrifice. Fame among the living: 
Petersburg Lexicon takes jtvasnhst to mean rule over the living. 
|take the word as qualifying barhUki , trimmed grass, i. e. sacrifice, and 

fee L p ta 4 ]£ prai8ed am0D « “ e “-' * dong) 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


' 50 


HYMN XLVII. \v a 

May we obtain this day from you, 0 Waters, that wavi 
pure refreshment, which the pious 
Made erst the special beverage of Indra, bright, stainless, i 
in sweets and dropping fatness. 

2 May the Floods’ Offspring, he whose course is rapid, prol 

that wave most rich in sweets, 0 Waters, 

That shall make Indra and the Vasus joyful. This may 
gain from you to-day, we pious. 

3 All-purifying, joying in their nature, to paths of Gods; 

Goddesses move onward. 

They never violate the laws of Indra. Present the oil-i 
offering to the Rivers. 

4 Whom Surya with his bright beams hath attracted, and I 

dug the path for them to travel, 

May these Streams give us ample room and freedom, 
serve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLVIII. Ri 

Ye liberal Heroes, Yajas and Ribhukshans, come and de 
you with our flowing Soma. 

May your strength, Vibhus, as ye come to meet us, turn hii 
ward your car that brings men profit. 

2 May we as Ribhu with your Ribhus conquer strength with 

strength, as Vibhus with the Vibhus. 

May Vaja aid us in the light for booty, and helped by Ii 
may we quell the foeman. 

3 For they rule many tribes with high dominion, and com 

all their foes in close encounter. 

May Indra, Vibhvan, Vaja, and Ribhukslian destroy by t 
the wicked foeman’s valour. 

4 Now, Deit.es, give us ample room and freedom : be all of] 

one-minded, our protection. 

So let the Vasus grant us strength and vigour. Presen 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

1 Wave of pure refreshment: ‘sweet essence of the earth ; ’ Urmi u 
here to imply the Soma juice produc* cl from the earth. Wilson. ^ 

3 All- purifying : stidpavitrdh ; literally, with a hundred, that is, coun 
means of purification. The Goddesses : the divine W.tters. 

1 Vdjas and Ribhukshans : ye three, Ribhu, Vibhvan, and Vftja. 

2 The meaning is, may we be as powerful as Ribhu, as mighty as tb 

pany of the Vibhus (another name of the Ribhus). SAyaua explains n 
great, and vibhvah as powerful. In the fight for booty : rffjasltuu ; a f 
the word and name vftja, ... 

4 The Vasus : according to SAyana, vdsavah here is an epithet or /P 
understood ; ‘ the exalted (Ribhus).’— Wilson. 



N 50.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


51 • 

| HYMN XLIX. Waters. 

pRTH from the middle of the flood the Waters — their chief 
jthe Sea — flow cleansing 1 , never sleeping. 

Ira, the Bull, the Thunderer, dug their channels : here let 
; those Waters, Goddesses, protect me. 

Waters which come from heaven, or those that wander dug 
from the earth, or flowing free by nature, & 

right, purifying, speeding to the Ocean, here let those 
Waters, Goddesses, protect me. 

hose amid whom goes Varuna the Sovran, he who discri- 
minates men’s truth and falsehood — 

[stilling meath, the bright, the purifying, here let those 
Waters, Goddesses, protect me. 

»ey from whom Varuna the King, and Soma, and all the 
Deities drink strength and vigour, 

ley into whom Vaisvanara Agui entered, here let those 
Waters, Goddesses, protect me. 


HYMN L. Various Deities. 

:Mitra- Varuna, guard and protect me here: let not that 
come to me which nests within and swells. 

Irive afar the scorpion hateful to the sight : let not the 
winding worm touch me and wound my foot. 

uption that appears upon the twofold joints, and that 
which overspreads the ancles and the knees, 
ij the refulgent Agni banish far away: let not the winding 
worm touch me and wound my foot. 

e poison that is formed upon the Sulmali, that which is 
ound in stretms, that which the plants produce, 
l this may all the Gods banish and drive away : let not the 
winding worm touch me aud wound my foot. 


} Jood : the ocean of air, the firmament. 

LWm ar p! 1 | M f itra an A, Va , ru ’ a - (2) A « oi ’ (’) V 'V« Devlb, (i) Praise 

in or Hi J? h a ^. n ? a .° f thell y m " to be repeated a as an antidote to 
►n or disease which it specifies. 

f «AicA nest, within and, swells : ‘the insidious and spreading (poison)- 

' .„Y f a?a 8U ? ph ? 9 the substantive visham. The scorpion : ajakd- 
ie exact meaning is uncertain. 

onWhicl! u ^ the . a T 9 an , d Ie « 3 ' SAy»na’s interpretation is different: 
generated in the manifold knots (of trees). * — Wilson. 

the silk-cotton tree. AU the Gods, or, the All-Gods or 



4 The steep declivities, the valleys, and the heights, the 
nels full of water, and the waterless — 

May those who swell with water, gracious Goddesses, 
afflict us with the Sipada disease, may all the river* 
us free from Simidd. 

HYMN LI. i 

Through the Adityas' most auspicious shelter, througl 
most recent succour may we conquer. 

May they, the Mighty, giving ear, establish this sacri: 
make us free and sinless. 

2 Let Aditi rejoice and the Adityas, Varuna, Mitra, Arj 

most righteous. 

May they, the Guardians of the world, protect us, f 
show favour, drink this day our Soma. 

3 All Universal Deities, the Maruts, all the Adityas, y( 

all the Riblius, 

Indra, and Agni, and the Asvins, lauded. Preserve us 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LII. 

May we be free from every bond, Adityas! a castle amon 
and men, ye Vasus. 

Winning, may we win Varuna and Mitra, and, being, i 
be, 0 Earth and Heaven. 

2 May Varuna and Mitra grant this blessing, our Gua 

shelter to our seed and offspring. 

Let ns not suffer for another’s trespass, nor do the thii 
ye, 0 Vasus, punish. 

3 The ever-prompt Angirases, imploring riches from Savi 

God, obtained them. 

So may our Father who is great and holy, and all tin 
accordant, grant this favour. 

HYMN LIII. Heaven an- 

As priest with solemn rites and adorations I worship ] 
and Earth, the High and Holy. 

To them, great Parents of the Gods, have sages of i 
time, singing, assigned precedence. 

4 2'he jjfi pada disease : ‘perhaps the Vaidikform of Slipada, the 
Wilson. Simidd : apparently a female demon, or a disease at 

to her malevolence. „ „ , , f , .. 

3 Universal Deities : vi§ve devfh ; the All-Gods. Lauded : the sei 
incomplete, the substantives in the nominative case having no verb. 

1 Being : really and truly being, rich, powerful, and distinguished. 
3 Our Father: Varuna, the father of Vasish^ha j or Savitar, or 1 
may be intended. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


53 


' 55.] 

jth newest hymns set in the seat of Order, those the Two 
parents, born before all others, 

jne, Heaven and Earth, with the Celestial People, hither to 
[is, for strong is your protection. 

bt, Heaven and Earth, ye hold in your possession full many 
jt treasure for the liberal giver. 

t nt us that wealth which comes in free abundance. Preserve 
s evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

| HYMN LTV, VAstoshpati. 

Knowledge us, 0 Guardian of the Homestead : bring no 
lisease, and give us happy entrance. 

Ute’er we ask of thee, be pleased to grant it, and prosper 
Ihou our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

Rector of the Home, be our promoter : increase our wealth 
|n kine and steeds, 0 Indu. 

jy we be ever-youthful in thy friendship : be pleased in us 
is in his sons a father. 

kugh thy dear fellowship that bringeth welfare, may we be 
Victors, Guardian of the Dwelling ! 

itect our happiness in rest and labour. Preserve us 
Ivcrmorc, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LV. V4»toshpati. 

fTOSHPATi, who killest all disease and wearest every form, 

San auspicious Friend to us. 

len, 0 bright Sou of Sarama, thou showest, tawny-lmed ! 
hy teeth, 

5y gleam like lances’ points within thy mouth when thou 
rouldst bite: go thou to sleep. 

am Vs Son, retrace thy way : bark at the robber and the 
hief. 

Indra’s singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou seek to tcr- 
ify us 1 Go to sleep. 

the libeml giver : or, for Sudds. 

hpati is the Genius or tutelary God of the house. In this hymn 
l reused also as Indu, another name of Soma the Moon-God. 

hpati is the deity of the first stanzi, and Tndra of the rest, 
ictre is Gdyatii in stanza 1, Uparishtddbiihati (8x3 f- 1 2) in 2-4, 
shtup in 5-8, and the hymn appears to be made up of three corres- 
pieces unconnected by their subjects. 

SaramA : Saramd. the hound of Indra, is mother of the two 
J h ® brindled watch-dogs of Yama, God of the Dead. Thia stanza 
avo following appear to be addressed by the spirits of Indra’s worship- 
urn of the dogs who would prevent their entering the home of the 



54 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

4 Be on thy guard against the boar, and let the boar bewai 

thee. 

At fndra’s singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou seel 
terrify us ? Go to sleep. 

5 Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog and master oi 

house. 

Let all the kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who are r< 
about. 

6 The man who sits, the man who walks, and whosoever ] 

on us, 

Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely shut 
house. 

7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up from 

the sea, — 

By him the Strong and Mighty One we lull and maki 
people sleep. 

8 The women sleeping in the court, lying without, or stret 

on beds, 

The matrons with their odorous sweets— these, one am 
we lull to sleep. 

HYMN l/VJ. ^ M 

Wiio are these radiant men in serried rank, Rudra's v 
heroes borne by ncble steeds 1 

2 Verily no one knoweth whence they sprang : they, and 

only, know each other’s birth. 

3 They strew each other with their blasts, these Hawks: 

strove together, roaring like the wind. 

5 This and the three following Btanzas form a lull.iby or sleep-song, 
bably sung as a charm by a lover on a secret visit to his love. ^ 

7 The Bull who hath a thousand homs : the Son, wh'-we setting bnuj 
time of rest and sleep ; or j>eihaps the starry heaven is intended 

8 With their odoiws sweets : wearing garlands of fragiant flowers mi: 
occasions, according to Sayana : ‘decoiatcd with holiday perfumes. \ 
According to a legend mentioned by Sayana, Vasishtha having fasted fo 
days was entering the house of Vanina in hope of food, when the wat 
set upon him and was put to sleep by the repetition of the last four 
which are to be recited on simikir occasions by thieves and house-bi< 
See Wilson’s note. The hymn has been discussed by Aufrecht, h 
Studien , IV. 337f, and by Lanman, Sanskrit Header, p. 370. 

3 They strew each other with their blasts : the meaning of 
uncertain. ‘ They go together by their own pure paths.’ -Wilson 
plucked each other with their beaks i?)— M. Muller. ‘They bestrei 
other with light.’— Grassmimn. ‘They scatter dust over each other 
besoms.’— Roth. I follow Professor Ludwig. The meaning appears to i 
the Hawks or rapid Maruts are so crowded in their onward sweep in* 
in front feel the quick breath of those who follow. Similarly (VIIl.j 
the crowded Maruts are likened to cattle who lick each other’s heads or i 



THE RIO VEDA. 


r MJ 


S6 


gage was he who knew these mysteries, what in her udder 
mighty Prisni bore. 

, er victorious, through the Maruts, be this band of Heroes, 
nursing manly strength, 

)st bright in splen lour, fleetest on their way, close-knit to 
glory, strong with varied power. 

a, mighty is your power and firm your strength : so, 
potent, with the Maruts, bo the band, 
kht is your spirit, wrathful are your minds : your bold 
iroop’s minstrel is like one inspired. 

er avert your blazing shaft from us, and let not your dis- 
pleasure reach us here. 

ur dear names, conquering Maruts, we invoke, calling aloud 
dll ve are satislied. 


jll-armed, impetuous in their haste, they deck themselves, 
fclieir forms, with ornaments of gold. 

re, Maruts pure yourselves, are your oblations : to you, the 
pure, pure sacrifice I offer. 

Law they came to truth, the Law’s observers, bright by 
;heir birth, and pure, and sanctifying, 
nr rings, 0 Maruts, rest upon your shoulders, and chains 
>f gold are twined upon your bosoms. 

laming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, after your 
vont ye whirl about your weapons. 

.do in the depth of air spread forth your glories, far, most 
adorable, ye bear your titles. 

ruts, accept this th msandfolcl allotment of household 
lacrifice and household treasure. 


Mar its, ye regard the praise recited here at this mighty 
finger’s invocation, 

uchsafe us quickly wealth with noble heroes, wealth which 
no man who hateth us may injure. 


wt in her udder: according to S&yani, what beings (Maruts, etc.) 
P;Lni bore at her udder or in the firmament. 

V[ troop's minstrel : the leader <f the Maruts’ thunder-psalm. Like 
V j / wubartiwi, like a Muni or inspired saint ‘ The sounds produced 
inakmg of the trees are like the varied intonations of a leciter of praises, 
las explanation.’ — Wdson. La n man translates differently: Clear is 
ustling. Your hearts are wrathful as the wild onward-rush of a doughty 

\ V° ur titles : you make yourselves known. ‘You send down 
pers) that beat down (the dust).’— Wilson. Nfimdni, names, according 
?a, means waters, because they bend down the dust, pdnsHti namayantit 



THE IIYMNS OF 


56 


[BOOK J 


16 The Maruts, fleet as coursers, while they deck them], 

youths spectators of a festal meeting, 

Linger, like beauteous colts, about the dwelling, like friskj 
calves, these who pour down the water. 

17 So may the Maruts help us and be gracious, bringing f, 

room to lovely Earth and Heaven. 

Far be your bolt that slaycth men and cattle. Ye Vas: 
turn yourselves to us with blessings. 

18 The priest, when seated, loudly calls you, Maruts, praising 

song your universal bounty. 

He, Bulls ! who hath so much in his possession, free f t 
duplicity, with hymns invokes you. 

19 These Maruts bring the swift man to a stand-still, j 

strength with mightier strength they break and humble 
These guard the singer from the man who hates him and 
their sore displeasure on the wicked. 

20 These Maruts rouse even the poor and needy : the Vasusl 

him as an active champion. 

Drive to a distance, 0 ye Bulls, the darkness : give us i 
store of children and descendants. 

21 Never, 0 Maruts, may we lose your bounty, nor, enr-to 

Lords ! be hindmost when ye deal it. 

Give us a share in that delightful treasure, the genii 
wealth that, Bulls ! is your possession. 

22 What time the men in fury rush together for running strei: 

for pastures, and for houses, 

Then, 0 ye Maruts, ye who spring from Rudra, be our pro 
tors in the strife with foemen. 

23 Full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of In 

which, even of old, they sang you. 

The strong man, with the Maruts, wins in battle, the char, 
with the Maruts, gains the booty. 

24 Ours, 0 ye Maruts, be the vigorous Hero, the Lord Divine 

men, the strong Sustaincr, 

With whom to fair lands we may cross the waters, and di 
in our own home with you beside us. 

25 May Indra, Mitra, Varuna and Agni, Waters, and Plants, 1 

Trees accept our praises. 

May we find shelter in the Maruts’ bosom. Preserve us e 
more, yo Gods, with blessings. 

j 24 The Lord Divine: literally, the Asura. We may cross the watert 
Maruts are besought to favour an expedition for the acquisition of 
tie men t a on the further side of a river. 



V 58.J 


THE RIQVEDA. 


57 


HYMN LYIT. Maruts. 

Ea, through the power of your sweet juice, ye Holy ! the 
SMarut host is glad at sacrifices. 

|iey cause even spacious heaven and earth to tremble, they 
[make the spring flow when they come, the Mighty, 
he Maruts watch the man who sings their praises, promoters 
of the thought of him who worships. 

>at you on sacred grass in our assembly, this day, with 
friendly minds, to share the banquet. 

o others gleam so brightly as these Maruts with their own 
forms, their golden gauds, their weapons. 

'ith all adornments, decking earth and heaven, they heighten, 
for bright show, their common splendour, 
ir from us be your blazing dart, 0 Maruts, when we, 
through human frailty, sin against you. 
it us not be exposed to that, ye Holy ! May your most lov- 
ing favour still attend us. 

ly even what we have done delight the Maruts, the blame- 
less Ones, the bright, the purifying. 

irther us, 0 ye Holy, with your kindness : advance us 
mightily that we may prosper. 

id may the Maruts, praised by all their titles, Heroes, enjoy 
the taste of our oblations. 

vc us of Amrit for the sake of offspring : awake the excel- 
lent fair stores of riches. 

ther, ye Maruts, praised, with all your succours, with all 
felicity come to our princes, 

ho, of themselves, a hundredfold increase us Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LVIII. Maruts. 

s' o to the troop that pours down rain in common, the 
Mighty Compaiiy of celestial nature. 


: acc ° r di n g to S&yana, the Maruts are addressed. The Marut 
ima MTrutam : the Marut name, t e those who are called Maruts. 

hymn, and all the hymns to the Maruts have been translated and 
in Max Muller a Vedic Hymns, l. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 

us of Amrit : the secret essence which pervades the world and nour* 
sustains all must naturally also be the element that promotes re- 
on. Budwig. Von Both explains the passage differently: ‘Add us to 
r« r! . People of eternity, i, e. to the blessed.’ * Vouchsafe our 
g uie. — Grasstnann. ‘Bestow water upon our progeny.’— Wilson. 



58 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII 

They make the world-halves tremble with their greatness : 
from depths of earth and sky they reach to heaven. 

2 Yea, your birth, Maruts, was with wild commotion, ye who 

move swiftly, fierce in wrath, terrific. 

Ye all-surpassing in your might and vigour, each looker on the 
light fears at your coming. 

3 Give ample vital power unto our'princes : lot our fair praises 

gratify the Maruts. 

As the way travelled helpeth people onward, so further us 
with your delightful succours. 

4 Your favoured singer counts his wealth by hundreds : the 

strong steed whom ye favour wins a thousand. 

The Sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman. May this 
your gift, ye Shakers, be distinguished. 

5 I call, as such, the Sons of bounteous lludra : will not the 

Maruts turn again to us-ward ? 

What secret sin or open stirs their anger, that we implore the 
Swift Ones to forgive us. 

6 This eulogy of the Bounteous hath been spoken : accept, ye 

Maruts, this our hymn of praises. 

Ye Bulls, keep those who hate us at a distance. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LIX. Maruts. 

Whomso ye rescue here and there, whomso ye guide, 0 Deities, 
To him give shelter, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, ye Maruts, and 
thou Aryaman. 

2 Through your kind favour, Gods, on some auspicious day, the 

worshipper subdues his foes. 

That man increases home and strengthening ample food who 
brings you offerings as ye list. 

3 Vasishtha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all. 

0 Maruts, of our Soma juice effused to-day drink all of you 
with eager haste. 

4 Your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye, 

Heroes, grant your gifts. 

1 From depth 8 of earth and sky : nlrriti here is said to be synonymous with 
hh&mi , earth, and avansi, the unsupported, with antariksha , firmament. But 
nlrriti, Death, Destruction, as identified with bh&mi, may be the Prithivi of 
the atmosphere (see V. 84.), which must originally have been considered to be 
the place of departed spirits. 

2 Each looker on the light: vhtvah svardrxk: according to S&yana, every tree. 

4 Injures not : a litotes for, is of the greatest advantage to. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


59 


| HYMN 59 . j 

May your most recent favour turn to us again. Come quickly, 
ye who fain would drink. 

5 Come hitherward to drink the juice, 0 ye whose bounties give 

you joy. 

These offerings are for you, these, Maruts, I present. Go not 
to any place but this. 

6 Sit on our sncred grass, be graciously inclined to give the 

wealth for which we long, 

To take delight, ye Maruts, Friends of all, with Sv&ha, in 
sweet Soma juice. 

7 Decking the beauty of their forms in secret the Swans with 

purple backs have flown down hither. 

Arouud me all the Company hath settled, like joyous Heroes 
glad in our libation. 

8 Maruts, the man whose wrath is hard to master, he who would 

slay us ere we think, 0 Vasus, 

May he be tangled in the toils of mischief ; smite ye him 
down with your most flaming weapon. 

9 0 Maruts, ye consuming Gods, enjoy this offering brought for 

you, 

To help us, ye who slay the foe. 

10 Sharers of household sacrifice, come, Maruts, stay not far away, 
That ye may help us, Bounteous Ones. 

11 Here, Self-strong Maruts, yea, even here, ye Sages with your 

sunbright skins ! 

I dedicate your sacrifice. 

12 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity. 

As from its stem the cucumber, so may I be released from 
death, not reft of immortality. 


5 Whose bounties give yon joy : or follow each other closely, and are ever 
fre.-h and ready. 

6 Svdhd : an exclamation, like Ave ! or Hail ! used in making oblations to 
the Gods. 

7 With purple backs : nflaprishthlh : cf. Horace’s * purpurei olores.* 

8 Mischief : or one of the malicious spirits called Diuhs. 

12 Tryambaka : a name of Rudra. diceet : according to SAyana, sugdndhim, 
Bweet-smelling, means here, * whose fame is fra$p»nfc.’ ‘ The verse occurs in the 
htjur-Veda, 6 30, and is, in some instances, differently interpreted ; TVyaw 
is tei med netrntvayopetam Jiudram, the triocular Rudra: sugundhim , 
divyagandhopeiam, of celestial fragrance : the urvdruka is said to mean the 
hind hit [fruit of the jujube- tree], which, when ripe, falls of itself fiom its 
stalk. — Wilson. 



eo THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

HYMN LX. Mitra-Varuna. 

When thou, 0 Sun, this day, arising sinless, shalt speak the 
truth to Vanina and Mitra, 

0 Aditi, may all the Deities love us, and thou, 0 Aryaman, 
while we arc singing. 

2 Looking on man, 0 Vanina and Mitra, this Sun ascendeth up 

by both the pathways, 

Guardian of all things fixt, of all that moveth, beholding 
good and evil acts of mortals. 

3 He from their home hath yoked the Seven gold Coursers who, 

dropping oil and fatness, carry Surya. 

Yours, Varuryi and Mitra, he surveycth the worlds and living 
creatures like a herdsman. 

4 Your coursers rich in store of sweets have mounted : to the 

bright ocean Surya hath ascended, 

For whom the Adityas make his pathway ready, Aryaman, 
Mitra, Varuna, accordant. 

5 For these, even Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra, are the chas- 

tisers of all guile and falsehood. 

These, Aditi’s Sons, infallible and mighty, have waxen in the 
home of Law Eternal. 

6 These, Mitra, Varuna, whom none deeeiveth, with great power 

quicken even the fool to wisdom, 

And, wakening, moreover, thoughtful insight, lead it by easy 
paths o’er grief and trouble. 

7 They ever vigilant, with eyes that close not, caring for heaven 

and earth, lead on the thoughtless. 

Even in the river’s bed there is a shallow : across this broad 
expanse may they conduct us. 

8 When Aditi and Varuna and Mitra, like guardians, give Sudas 

their friendly shelter, 

Granting him sons and lineal succession, let us not, bold ones ! 
move the Gods to anger. 


The hymn is addressed chiefly to Mitra and Varuna, but S .rya or the Sun 
is the deity of the first stanza. 

1 Sinless: Sdyana makes dnrfydh ^andyasah : ‘ declare the truth... that wc 
are void of sin.’— Wilson. But this seems forced, and the implied meaning <>£ 
the poet is clear enough if the word is taken in its u.sual signification. 

2 Both the pathicays : near the earth and high in the firmament. 

6 Mitra , Varuna: and Aryaman, understood : the verbs are in the plural. 

8 Bold ones : the warning is addressed to the people of Sudds, who has been 

ntnnlinna/! !n 1 n <V KvmrU 


1IYMN 61.1 


THE RIG VEDA. 


61 


9 May he with offerings purify the altar from any stainB of 
Varuna’s reviler. 

Aryaman save us from all those who hate us : give room and 
freedom to Sudas, ye Mighty. 

10 Hid from our eyes is their resplendent meeting: by their 

mysterious might they hold dominion. 

Heroes ! we cry trembling in fear before you, even in the great- 
ness of your power have mercy. 

11 He who wins favour for his prayer by worship, that he may 

gain him strength and highest riches, 

That good man’s mind the Mighty Ones will follow : they have 
brought comfort to Ins spacious dwelling. 

12 This priestly task, Gods ! Varuna and Mitra ! hath been per- 

formed for you at sacrifices. 

Convey ’us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, ye 
Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXI. Mitra-Varuna. 

0 Varuna and Mitra, Surya spreading the beauteous light of 
you Twain Gods arisoth. 

He who hoholdeth all existing creatures observeth well the zeal 
that is in mortals. 

2 The holy sage, renowned afar, directeth his hymns to yon, 0 

Varuna and Mitra,— 

He whose devotions, sapient Gods, ye favour so that ye fill, as 
’twere, with power his autumns. 

3 From the wide earth, 0 Varuna and Mitra, from the great 

lofty heaveu, ye, Bounteous Givers, 

Have in the fields and houses set your warders who visit every 
spot and watch unceasing. 

4 I praise the strength of Varuna and Mitra : that strength, by 

mightiness, keeps both worlds asunder. 

Heroless pass the months of the ungodly : he who loves sacri- 
fice makes his home enduring. 


9 May he : Agni may be intended. Varuna' s revile)' : those who speak evil 
of princes like Suchts, Vuruna being the king’s prototype — Ludwig. 

10 Their resplendent mutiny : that of Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman. 

11 Have bronyht comfort to his spacious dwelling: ‘ bestow a spacious man- 
si 011 for a dwelling upon him.’— Wilson. 



<52 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIl 

5 Steers, all infallible are these your people in whom no wondrou 

thing is seen, no worship. 

Guile follows close tho men who are untruthful : no secrets 
may be hidden from your know ledge. 

6 I will exalt your sacrifice with homage : as priest, I, Mitra 

VaruLci, invoke you. 

May these new hymns and prayers that I have fashionec 
delight you to the profit of the singer. 

7 This priestly task, Gods ! Varuna and Mitra ! hath been per 

formed for you at sacrifices. 

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, yi 
Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX II. Mitra- Varuna 

Scry a hath sent aloft his beams of splendour , o’er all th 
tribes of men in countless places. 

Together with the heaven he shines apparent, formed by hi: 
Makers well with power ami wisdom. 

2 So hast thou mounted up before us, Surya, through these ou 

praises, with fleet dappled horses. 

Declare us free from all oflence to Mitra, and Varuna, anc 
Aryarnan, and Agni. 

3 May holy Agni, Varuna, and Mitra send down their riches 

upon us in thousands. 

May they, the Bright Ones, make our praise-song perfect, and 
when we laud them, grant us all our wishes. 

4 0 undivided Heaven and Earth, preserve us, us, Lofty Ones 

your nobly-born descendants. 

Let. us not anger V.iruna, nor Vayu, nor him, the dearest 
Friend of mortals, Mitra. 

5 Stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthened 

with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle. 

Ye Youthful, make us famed among the people : hear, Mitn 
Varuna, these mine invocations. 

5 This stanza is difficult. Sfty ana’s interpretation as given by Wilson is 
‘ Unperplexed, all-pervading showerers (of benefits), these piaises are for you, 
in which nothing surprising, no adoration (woithy of you), is beheld: tho iir 
sincere commendations of men serve as offences : eulogies of you, although 
offered in secret are not unappreciated.’ The version of the Seventy Hyvnisit 
somewhat ns follows : ‘ All your avenging spirits, 0 ye Mighty, follow unerr 
iugly the sinner’s traces. They have no «dgn that men may mark, no figure 
Naught is so secret that ye fail to know it.’ This latter involves a slight 
alteration of the text. I prefer Ludwig’s interpretation, although it is n°' 
absolutely convincing. 

A 7V» th* m *fUtt ft f the t Inn • baa 


Veiiitrh* StiLtlipn I. 43. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


.68 


rjYMN 64 ] 

6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room, 
for us and for our children. 

May we find paths all fair and good to travel. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXI1I. Mitra-Varuna. 

Common to all mankind, auspicious Surya, ho who beholdeth all, 
is mounting upward ; 

The God, the eye of Yaruna and Mitra, who rolled up dark- 
ness like a piece of leather. 

2 Surya’s great ensign, restless as the billow, that urgeth men 

to action, is advancing ; 

Onward he still would roll the wheel well-rounded, which 
Etasa, harnessed to the car-pole, movcth. 

3 Refulgent from the bosom of the Mornings, he in whom singers 

take delight asccndeth. 

This Savitar, God, is my chief joy and pleasure, who breaketh 
not the universal statute. 

4 Golden, far-seeing, from the heaven he riseth : far is his goal, 

he hasteth on resplendent. 

Men, verily, inspirited by Surya speed to their aims and do 
the work assigned them. 

5 Where the Immortals have prepared his pathway he flieth 

through the region like a falcon. 

With homage and oblations will we serve you, 0 Mitra-Yaruna, 
when the Sun hath risen. 

6 Now Mitra, Yaruna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room, 

for us and for our children. 

May wo fin 1 paths all fair and goo 1 to travel. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX I Y. Mitra-Varuna. 

Ye Twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, clothed 
be your clouds in robes of oil and fatness. 

May the imperial Varnni, and Mitra, and high-born Aryaman 
accept our presents. 

- Kings, guards of mighty everlasting Order, come hitherward, 
ye Princes, Lords of Rivers. 

Send us from heaven, 0 Varuna and Mitra, rain and sweet 
food, ye who pour down your bounties. 

2 Elam : or, the bright or dappled steed ; one of the horses of the Sun. 

3 Breaketh not : faithfully observes and supports. 



64 


the hymns of 


[BOOK VII, 


, May ft. to. Cod, and V«w - “ bj “» 

- <***. “■ « 

j It 2S r iu • 1,lr “’ ,,h ° 

»T. , 3i'S3? ! w“ 1I .\Iitra i y. King.. ».k. tU 

» —< ** 

*££&£$!**, “ k * tl ">" sht “ d ,pirit ' p "”"' 
11 a evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 


HYMN LXV. Mitra Vuruiu, 

With hymns I call you, when the Sun hath risen, Mitra, and 
Varuna whose though! s are holy, 

Whose Power Divine, supreme and everlasting, comes with good 
heed at each mans supplication. 

2 For they are Asuras of Go Is, the friendly : make, both of you, 

our lands exceeding fruitful, 

May we obtain you, \aruna and Mitra, wheicvcr Heaven and 
Earth and days may bless us. 

3 Bonds of the sinner, they bear many nooses ; the wicked mortal 

hardly may escape them. 

Varuna-Mitra, may your path of Order bear us o’er trouble as 
a boat o’er waters. 

4 Como, taste our offering, Varuna and Mitra : bedew our pasture 

with sweet food and fatness. 

Pour down in plenty here upon the people the choicest of your 
fair celestial water. 


3 Th Q second half of the stanza is obscure. The meaning appeals tube 
that even our foes, the godless who oiler no sacrifices, shall envy the pro* 
peri tv which we enjoy through the liberality of Sudds, and shall wish to fo 
low our example, to sacrifice to the Gods and to enjoy their protection and 
the blessings which they send. 

4 This cxr: this care fully* formed hymn which goes, like a chariot, to the 
Gods. 

5 To Vdyu : who receives the first draught of Soma juice at the morning 

62 16. See von Bradke, Dyaus Asura, 8 5, 

1 Power Divine: asuryhm : Asurahood. Whose : refers to Mitra and Varuna. 

2 Antras of Goils : the high or ruling Gods of all the deities. 

3 Bonds : binders. Many nooses : * Your guiles, ye Holy Ones, to quell op 1 
pressor*, your snares spread out against the foe, Adityas’ (II. 27. 16). 



THE RIO VEDA. 


YM& 

. To you this laud, 0 Varuna and Mitra, is offered, like bright 

Soma juice to Vayu. . . 

Favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. Preserve 
us evermore, yo Gods, with blessings. 


HYMN LXVI. Mitra- Varuna. 

Let our strong hymn of praise go forth, the laud of Mitra- 

Varuna, . 

With homage to that high-born Pair ; 

1 2 The Two exceeding wise, the Sons of Dakslia, whom the Gods 
ordai’-ed 

For lordship, excellently great. 

3 Such, Guardians of our homes and us, 0 Mitra- Varuna, fulfil 
The thoughts of those who sing your praise. 

4 So when the Suu hath risen to-day, may sinless Mitra, Arya- 
man, 

Bhaga, and Savitar send us forth. 

5 May this our home be guarded well : forward, ye Bounteous, 
on the way, 

Who bear us safely o’er distress. 

0 And those Self-reigning, Aditi, whose statute is inviolate, 

The Kings who lule a vast domain. 

7 Soon as the Sun h ith risen, to you, to Mitra-Varuna, I sing, 
And Aryaman who slays the foe. 

8 With wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested 
power and might, 

And, Brahmans, gain the sacrifice. 

9 May we bo thine, God Varuna, and with our princes, Mitra, 
thine : 

Food and Heaven’s light will we obtain. 

p Many are they who strengthen Law, Sun-eyed, with Agni for 
their tongue, 


2 Sons of Dakslia • see VI. 50. 2. For lordship : literally for Asurahood. 

4 Sinless: S&yana heie, as in VII 60. 1. takes andf/dh ns = andgamh, bo 
tkat, according to his interpretation, the translation would be : may Savitar, 
Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga send us sinless forth. 

6 Aditi is out of place here, as there is no copulative in the text : whose 
mother is Aditi, seems to be intended. 

8 And , Brahmans , gain the sacrifice : the exact meaning is uncertain : ‘May 
t (be effective), Bages, for the fulfilment of (the objects of) the sacrifice.’ — 
r> llson. 


5 



M 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


They who direct the three great gatherings with their 
thoughts, yea, all things with surpassing might. 

1! They who have stablished year and month and then the day, 
night, sacrifice and holy vers«, 

Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, the Kings, have won dominion which 
none else may gain. 

12 So at tba rising of the Sun we think of you wit yittm 

Evenas ' Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman deserve: ye are the chariot- 

eei*s of Law. . . 

13 True to Law, born in Law, the strengthened of Law, terrible, 

haters of the false, 

In their felicity which gives the best defence may we men and 
our princes dwell. 

14 Uprises, on the slope of heaven, that marvel that attracts the 

sight, . . 

As swift celestial Etasa bears it away, prepared for every eye 

to sec. 

15 Lord of each single head, of fixt and moving things, equally 

through the whole expanse, 

The Seven sister Bays bear Surya on h.s car, to bring m 
wealth and happiness. 

16 A hundred autumns may we see that bright .ye, o or am 

ed, arise : 

A hundred autumns may we live. 

17 Infallible through your wisdom, come hither, resplendent 

Varuna, 

And Mitra, to the Soma draught. 

18 Come as the laws of Heaven ordain, Varuna, Mitra, void a 

Pilssnear and drink the Soma juice. 

19 Come, Mitra, Varuna, accept Heroes, our sacrificial gift : 
Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. 

•*"“¥*£• , T , he *'**** “ ” 0t d * 
Ludwig U of opinion that the three castes are intended. 

The meaning of stanzas 10 and 11 is that although there be many 
Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman' are supreme. 

IS Sister Bays : the Harits. See IV. 6. 9; 13. 3. 



ryjfN «7J 


THE MOVED A. 67 

HYMN LXVII. Asrins. 

I with a holy heart that brings oblation will sing forth praise 
to me£t your car, ye Princes, 

Which, Much-desired ! hath wakened as your envoy. I call 
you hither as a son his parents. 

2 Brightly hath Agni shone by us enkindled : the limits even 

of darkness wore apparent. 

Eastward is seen the Banner of the Morning, the Banner born 
to give Heaven’s Daughter glory. 

3 With hymns the deft priest is about you, Asvins, the eloquent 

priest attends you now, N&satyas. 

Come by the paths that ye are wont to travel, on car that 
finds the light, laden with treasure. 

4 When, suppliant for your help, Lovers of Sweetness ! I seek- 

ing wealth call you to our libation, 

Hither Ward let your vigorous horses bear you : drink ye with 
us the well-pressed Soma juices. 

5 Bring forward, Asvins, Gods, to its fulfilment my never-weari- 

ed prayer that asks for riches. 

Vouchsafe us all high spirit in the combat, and with your 
powers, 0 Lords of Power, assist us. 

(> Favour us in these prayers of ours, 0 Asv-ins. May we have 
genial vigour, ne’er to fail us. 

So may we, strong in children and descendants, go, wealthy, 
to the banquet that awaits you. 

J Lovers of Sweetness, we have brought this treasure to you as 
’twere an envoy sent for friendship. 

Come unto us with spirits free from anger, in homes of men 
enjoying our oblation. 

\ With one, the same, intention, ye swift movers, o’er the Serven 
Rivets hath your chariot travelled. 

Yoked by the Gods, your strong steeds rtevet Weary White 
speeding forward at the pole they bear you. 

Exhaust! ess be your bounty to our princes who with their 
wealth incite the gift of riches, 

Who further friendship with their noble natures, combining 
wealth in kino with wealth ; n hdrses. 


T Much-desired: ‘adorable/ — Wilson. 

f Incite the gift of riches : move the Gods to give riches in return. 
friendship ; or, st kinsman, meaning, apparently, the priest 



68 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlt, 

10 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation: come, Afivins, 
to the home where food aboundeth. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX VIII. As vim, 

Come, radiant As vins, with your noble horses: accept your 
servant’s hymns, ye Wonder-Workers : 

Enjoy oblations which we bring to greet you. 

2 The gladdening juices stand prepared before you : come quick* 

Iy and partake of mine oblation. 

Pass by the calling of our foe and hear us. 

3 Your chariot with a hundred aids, 0 Asvins, beareth you swift 

as thought across the regions, 

Speeding to us, 0 ye whose wealth is Surya. 

4 What time this stone of yours, the Gods’ adorer, upraised, 

sounds forth for you as Soma-presscr, 

Let the priest bring you, Fair Ones, through oblations. 

5 The nourishment ye have is, truly, wondrous : ye gave there- 

of a quickening store to Atri, 

Who, being dear to you, receives your favour. 

6 That gift, which all may gain, ye gave Chyavana, when he 

grew old, who offered you oblations, 

When ye bestowed on him enduring beauty. 

7 What time his wicked friends abandoned Bhujyu, 0 Asvins, 

in the middle of the ocean, 

Your horse delivered him, your faithful servant. 


3 Whose wealth is SHn,<U having KAryft for your possession or -trenail* 
Surya, the daughter of the Sun. is the consort of the Asvms. See 1. 116. 1/, 

4 The Gods' adorer: ilevay/th: literally, turning or going to the Gods, in 

asmuch as it is employed in prepat ing the Soma juice. Ihe priest: here, 
perhaps, the pressing stone. ( 

5 A auickeninq store : the moaning of mdhithvantam , which does not occu 
elsewhere, is uncertain. According to Sdyana it means a pit or cavern . J 
liberated Atri from the cavern, or, literally, ye separated the cavern from AW 
For the legend, see I. 116. 12. 

6 Which all may gain: which you Asvins are ready to grant to ©verf 
worshipper who needs it. For the story of Ghyavdna seel. 116. 10, 

13; 118.6. , 

7 Bhujyu : see Vol. I , Index. Your horse : tliis meaning is suggested 
von Roth for the uncertain word arM, which generally appears to«£ 
hostile or illiberal ' ut may perhaps stand in this passage for arva, a 
wora signifying hor e. sfe I. Ilf 14 With horses b. own of hue that fl* 
with »wit't wings ye Lwu^lit back Bhujyu from the sea of billows, bee 

VII. Off. 7. 



hymn 60.] Tffit MQVBDA. 6ft 

S Ye lent your aid to Vfika when exhausted, and listened when 
invoked to Sayu’s calling. 

Ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, Asvins, 
strengthened with your strength the barren. 

9 With his fair hymns this singer, too, extols you, waking with 
glad thoughts at the break of morning. 

May the cow nourish him with milk to feed him. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN IAIX, # Asvins. 

M\y vour gold chiriot, drawn by vigorous horses, come to us, 
blocking up the earth and heaven, 

Bright with its fellies while its way drops fatness, food-laden, 
rich in coursers, man’s protector. 

2 Let it approach, yoked by the will, three-seate 1, extending far 

and wide o’er fivefold beings, 

Whereon ye visit God-adoring races, bending your course 
whither ye will, 0 Asvins. 

3 Renowned, with noble horses, come ye hither : drink, Wond- 

rous Pair, the cup that h >lds sweet juices. 

Your car whereon your Spouse is wont to travel marks with 
its track the farthest ends of heaven. 

4 When night was turning to the grey of morning the Maiden, 

Surya’s Daughter, chose your splendour 
When with your power and might yc aid the pious he comes 
through heat to life by your assistance, 
o 0 Chariot-borne, this car of yours invested with rays of light 
comes harnessed to our dwelling. 

Herewith, 0 Asvins, while the dawn is breaking, to this our 
sacrifice bring peace and blessing, 
f) Like the wild cattle thirsty for the lightning, Heroes, come 
nigh this day to our libations. 

Mon call on you with hymns in many places, but let not other 
worshippers detain you. 

8 Vrika : liter.illy wolf, or robber. Some man so named seems to be meant. 
&'.»/« : see I. 118 8; VI 13. 5. 

9 Thu singer: the Rishi Vasishtha. The cow : that is brought to supply 
the milk required for libations. 

2 Fivefold beings: ‘ sarvaprdnhwh* all living beings, says S&yana. 

3 Your Spouse : SuryA, daughter of the Sun. 

4 Chose your splendour : seel. 116. 17. 

6 Thirsty for the lightning : which immediately precedes, or accompanies, 
the raiu they long for. 



70 THE HYMNS OF {BOOR Vlf, 

1 Bhujyu, abandoned in the midst of ocean, ye raised from out 

the water with your horses, 

Uninjured, winged, flagging not, undaunted, with deeds of 
wonder saving him, 0 Asvins, 

8 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation : come, Asvins, 
to the home where food aboundeth. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXX. Asvins. 

Rich in all blessings, Asvins, come ye hither : this plane on 
earth is called your own possession, 

Like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth, whereon, as 
in a lap, ye seat you firmly. 

2 This most delightful eulogy awaits you : in the man's house 

drink-offering hath been heated, 

Which bringeth you over the seas and rivers, yoking as 'twere 
two well-matched- shining horses. 

3 Whatever dwellings ye possess, 0 Asvins, in fields of men or 

in the streams of heaven, 

Resting upon the summit of the mountain, or bringing food 
to him who gives oblation, 

4 Delight yourselves, ye Gods, in plants and waters when Rishia 

give them and ye find they suit you. 

Enriching us with treasures in abundance ye have looked back 
to former generations. 

5 Asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, regard the 

many prayers which Rishis offer. 

Come to the man even as his heart desireth : may we enjoy 
your most delightful favour. 

6 Come to the sacrifice offered yon, Nasatyas, with men, obla- 

tions, and prayer duly uttered. 

Come to Vasishtha as his heart desireth, for unto you these 
holy hymns are chanted. 

7 Horses : not in the text, but supplied by S&yanaand obviously understood. 
See preceding hymn, 7, note. 

1 This place : the altar. 

2 Drink-offering : gharn^a : the libation of hot milk ; or, the caldron in which 
it is prepared. 

4 Ye have looked back to former generations: S&yapa explains yugStni diffe- 
rently : ‘ (favour us) as you have favoured former couples [». e. sacrifices W 
their wives].’— Wilson. 

Tin man : the institutor of the sacrifice. 



TBB R1QVEDA . 


11 


jyyfW 

7 This is the thought, this is -the song, 0 Aevins ; accept this 
hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour, 
ftiay these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you. 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXI. Asvins. 

Thb Night retireth from the Dawn her Sister; the Dark one 
yieldeth to the Red her pathway. 

Let us invoke you rich in steeds and cattle : by day and night 
keep far from us the arrow, 

2 Bearing rich treasure in your car, 0 Asvins, come to the 

mortal who presents oblation. 

Keep at a distance penury and sickness ; Lovers of Sweetness, 
day and night preserve us. 

3 May your strong horses, seeking bliss, bring hither your 

chariot at the earliest flush of morning. 

With coursers yoked by Law drive hither, Asvins, your car 
. whose reins are light, laden with treasure. 

4 The chariot, Princes, that conveys you, moving at daylight, 

triple-seated, fraught with riches, 

Even with this come unto us, Nasatyas, that laden with all 
food it may approach us. 

5 Ye freed Chyavaua from old age and weakness : ye brought 

the courser fleet of foot to Pedu. 

Ye rescued Atri from distress and darkness, and loosed for 
Jahusha the bonds that bound him. 

3 This is the thought, this is the song, O Asvins : accept this 
hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour. 

May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you. 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXI1. Asvins. 

Gome, 0 Nasatyas, on your car resplendent, rich in abundant 
wealth of kine and horses. 

As harnessed steeds, all our laudations follow you whose forms 
shine with most delightful beauty. 

2 Come with the Gods associate, come ye hither to us, N&satyas, 

with your car accordant. 

Twixt you and us there is ancestral friendship and common 
kin : remember and regard it. 

1 The Red : the Sun. The arrow : of disease and death. 

3 Seeking bliss : for men. 

^ For Chyavdna, Pedu, Atri, and Jdhnsha , see Vol. I. Index. There-ap- 
arance, heralded by the Alvins or Gods of Twilight, of the departed Sun 
pears to be symbolized in all these legends. 



72 Tffti ItYMtfS OF [BOOK F/| 

3 Awakened are the songs that praise the Asvins, the kindred 

prayers and the Celestial Mornings. 

Inviting those we long for, Earth and Heaven, the singer 
calleth these Nasatyas hither. 

4 What time the Dawns break forth in light, 0 Asvins, to you 

the poets otter their devotions. 

God Savitar hath sent aloft his splendour, and fires sing praises 
with the kindled fuel. 

5 Come from the west, come from the east, Nasatyas, come, As- 

vins, from below and from above us. 

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve 
us evermoro, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXIII. Asvina 

We have o’erpassed the limit of this darkness while, worship. 

ping the Gods, we sang their praises. 

The song invoketh both Immortal Asvins, far-reaching, born 
of old, great Wonder-Workers. 

2 And, 0 Nasatyas, man’s dear Priest is seated, who brings to 

sacrifice and offers worship. 

Be near and taste the pleasant juice, 0 Asvins : with food, 

I call you to the sacrifices. 

3 We choosing you, have let our worship follow its course : ye 

Steers, accept this hymn with favour. 

Obeying you as your appointed servant, Yasishtha singing 
hath with lauds aroused you. 

4 And these Two Priests come nigh unto our people, united, 

demon-slayers, mighty-handed. 

The juices that exhilarate are mingled. Injure us not, but 
come with happy fortune. 

5 Come from the west, come from the east, NAsatyas, come, As- 

vins, from below and from above us. 

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXX1V. Asvins. i 

Tfiese morning sacrifices call you. Asvins, at the break of day. I 
For help have I invoked you rich in power and might : for, ! 
house by house, ye visit all. 


5 The Fivefold People : the five Aryan tribes. See I. 7. 9. 

1 The first half-line has occurred before in I. 92. 6, and 183. 0. 

2 Man's dear Priest : Agni. 

4 These Two Priests : the Alvins. t>cm on •slayers : slayers of RAksh&siw 
evil spirits of the night which disappear at the coming of the heralds of day- 



ME RtGVEDA. 


7S 


\YMtt 75.] 

| 0 Heroes, ye bestow wonderful nourishment : send it to him 
whose songs are sweet, 

Accordant, both of you, drive your car down to us, and drink 
the savoury Soma juice. 

) Approach ye and be near to us: drink, 0 ye Asvins, of the 
meath. 

t Draw forth the milk, ye Mighty, rich in genuine wealth : in- 
jme us not, and come to us. 

i The horses that convey you in their rapid flight down to the 
worshipper’s abode, 

With these your speedy coursers, Heroes, Asvins, come, ye 
Gods, come well-inclined to us. 

5 Yea, verily, our princes seek the Asvins in pursuit of food. 

These shall give lasting glory to our liberal lords, and, both 
Nasatyas, shelter us. 

5 Those who have led the way, like cars, offending none, those 

who are guardians of the men — 

Also through their own might the heroes have grown strong, 
and dwell in safe and happy homes. 

HYMN LXXV. Dawn. 

Born in the heavens the Dawn hath flushed, and showing her 
majesty is come as Law ordaineth. 

. She hath uncovered fiends and hateful darkness ; best of 

i Angirases, hath waked the pathways. 

? Bouse us this day to high and happy fortune : to great felicity, 
0 Dawn, promote us. 

j Vouchsafe us manifold and splendid riches, famed among mor- 
tals, man-befriending Goddess ! 

3 Sec, lovely Morning’s everlasting splendours, bright with their 
varied colours, have approached us. 

Filling the region of mid-air, producing the rites of holy wor- 
ship, they have mounted. 

* She yokes her chariot far away, and swiftly visits the lands 
"'here the Five Tribes are settled, 

Looking upon the works and ways of mortals, Daughter of 
Heaven, the world’s Imperia 1 Lady. 

3 Draw forth the milk : milk the sweet rain from the firmament. 

b II ho have led the way, like cars : wealthy nobles or princes, ‘the heroes’ of 

‘e second line. 

^ * endowed with the noblest characteristics of the holy 

6 lanes, Waked the “pathways l litrhted thorn for men to use. 



74 THE HYMNS OF IBOOK F/ } 

C She who is rich in spoil, the Spouse of Surya, wondrousfy 
opulent, rules all wealth and treasures. 

Consumer of our youth, the seers extol her : lauded by priests 
rich Dawn shines out refulgent. 

6 Apparent are the steeds of varied colour, the red steeds car- 

rying resplendent Morning. 

On her all-lovely car she comes, the Fair One, and brings rich 
treasure for her faithful servant 

7 True with the True and Mighty with the Mighty, with Gods 

a Goddess, Holy with the Holy, 

She brake strong fences down and gave the cattle : the kina 
were lowing as they greeted Morning. 

8 0 Dawn, now give us wealth in kine and heroes, and hors* 

fraught with manifold enjoyment. 

Protect our sacred grass from man’s reproaches. Preserve 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXVI. Dan 

Savitar God of all men hath sent upward his light, design! 
for all mankind, immortal. 

Through the Gods’ power that Eye was first created. Daw 
hath made all the universe apparent. 

2 I see the paths which Gods are wont to travel, innocuous patl 

made ready by the Vasus. 

Eastward the flag of Dawn hath been uplifted ; she hath com 
hither o’er the tops of houses. 

3 Great is, in truth, the number of the Mornings which wei 

aforetime at the Sun’s uprising, 

Since thou, 0 Dawn, hast been beheld repairing as to thy lovi 
as one no more to leave him. 

4 They were the Gods’ companions at the banquet, the aneieii 

sages true to Law Eternal. 

The Fathers found the light that lay in darkness, and will 
effectual words begat the Morning. 


7 flave the rattle : restored the rays of light that had beeu imprisoned k 
the demons of darkness. 

3 As to thy love: to the Sun, who is sometimes called the lover and sonw 
times the husband of Ushas or Dawn. 

4 The Fathers : the ancestors of the ljUahis in the spirit- world are associate 
with the Gods as companions, friends, and assistants. See M. Muller, hw 
What can it Teach us f pp. 223, 224. 



THE HIGVEDA . 


75 


YMN 77.] 

Meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive not, of one 
mind, one with another. 

They never break the Gods’ eternal statutes, and injure none, 
in rivalry with Vasus. 

Extolling thee, Blest Goddess, the Vasish^has, awake at early 
morn, with lauds implore thee. 

Leader of kine and Queen of all that strengthens, shine, come 
as first to us, O high-born Morning. 

She bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices. The flush- 
ing Dawn is sung by the Vasishthas, 

: Giving us riches famed to distant places. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXVIT. Dawn. 

She hath shone brightly like a youthful woman, stirring to 
motion every living creature. 

Agni hath come to feed on mortals’ fuel. She hath made 
light and chased away the darkness. 

5 Turned to this All, far-spreading, she hath risen and shone in 
brightness with white robes about her. 

She hath beamed forth lovely with golden colours, Mother of 
kine, Guide of the days she bringeth. 

i Bearing the Gods’ owu Eye, auspicious Lady, leading her 
Courser white and fair to look on, 

Distinguished by her beams Dawn shines apparent, come 
forth to all the world with wondrous treasure. 

Draw nigh with wealth and dawn away the foeman : prepare 
for us wide pasture free from danger. 

Drive away those who hate us, bring us riches : pour bounty, 
opulent Lady, on the singer. 

Send thy most excellent beams to shine and light us, giving 
us lengthened days, 0 Dawn, 0 Goddess, 

Granting us food, thou who hast, all things precious, and 
bounty rich in chariots, kine, and horses. 

0 Ushas, nobly -born, Daughter of Heaven, whom the Vasish- 
thas with their hymns make mighty, 

Bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

5 In the same enclosure : the vast aerial hall in which the Gods assemble. 

f , Ag . nt C0T »* to feed on mortals’ fuel ; * Agni is to be kindled for the 

od of men.’— Wilson. 

r Kine: rays of light. 

P The Qode ’ own Eye, and Dawn’B white Courser are the Sun. 



76 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V / 

HYMN LXXVIII. Da* 

We have beheld her earliest lights approaching : her man 
glories part, on high, asunder. 

On car sublime, refulgent, wending hither, 0 Ushas, bring tli 
wealth that makes us happy. 

2 The fire well-kindled sings aloud to greet her, and with thoi 

hymns the priests are chanting welcome. 

Ushas approaches in her splendour, driving all evil darkne^ 
far away, the Goddess. 

3 Apparent eastward are those lights of Morning, sending on 

lustre, as they rise, around them. 

She hath brought forth Sun, sacrifice, and Agni, and far awai 
hath fled detested darkness. 

4 Rich Daughter of the Sky, we all behold her, yea, all men 

look on Dawn as she is breaking. 

Her car that moves self-harnessed hath she mounted, the car 
drawn onward by her well-yoked horses. 

5 Inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee, we and 

our wealthy nobles have awakened. 

Show yourselves fruitful, Dawns, as ye are rising. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXfX. 

Rousing the lands where men’s Five Tribes are settled, Dawn 
hath disclosed the pathways of the people. 

Site hath sent out her sheen with beauteous oxen. The Son 
with light hath opened earth and heaven. 

2 They paint their bright rays on the sky’s far limits : the 

Dawns come on like tribes arrayed for battle. 

Thy cattle, closely shutting up the darkness, asSavitar spreadij 
his arms, give forth their lustre. 

3 Wealthy, most like to Indra, Dawn hath risen, and brought 

forth lauds that shall promote our welfare. 

Daughter of Heaven, a Goddess, she distributes, best of Anp 
ra3es, treasures to the pious. 


1 Five Tribes: of Aryans Pathways: pathy'A here has apparent y 
same meaning as in VII. 75. 1. But according to the Pada text and ; ■ 
it is an adjective agreeing with UsMh (Dawn), and nignifying beneficial. 

2 They : the Dawns. For battle : supplied by S&yaua. 

3 Best of Angirases : see VII. 75. 1. j 



THE RIO VEDA. 


77 


MN 81.] 

Bestow on us, 0 Dawn, that ample bounty which thou didst 
send to those who sang thy praises ; 

Thou whom with bellowings of a bull they quickened : thou 
didst unbar the firm-set mountain’s portals. 

Impelling every God to grant his bounty, sending to us the 
charm of pleasant voices, 

Vouchsafe us thoughts, for profit, as thou breakest. Preserve 
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LX XX. Dawn. 

The priests, Vasishthas, are the first awakened to welcome 
Ushas with their songs and praises, 

Who makes surrounding regions part asunder, and shows ap- 
parent all existing creatures. 

(living fresh life when she hath hid the darkness, this Dawn 
hath wakened there with new-born lustre. 

Youthful and unrestrained she cometh forward : she hath 
turned thoughts to Sun and fire and worship. 

May blessed Mornings shine on us for ever, with wealth of 
kino, of horses, and of heroes, 

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve us 
evermore, yo Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXI. Dawn. 

Advancing, sending forth her rays, the Daughter of the Sky 

is seen. 

Uncovering, that we may see, the mighty gloom, the friendly 
Lady makes the light. 

Ihe Suu ascending, the refulgent Star, pours down his beams 
together with the Dawn. 

0 Dawn, at thine arising, and the Sun's, may we attain the 
share allotted us. * 

Promptly we woke to welcome thee, 0 Ushas, Daughter of 
the Sky, • 

Thee, Bounteous One, who bringest all we long to have, and to 
the offerer health and wealth. 


k 1H \ IV, a r *v * rof - Wilson : ‘ thou whom (thy worship- 

riMj welcomed with clamour (loud as th> bellowing) of a bull.’ 


1 ^ u> second line is translated by Prof. 
iHj welcomed with clamour (loud as tto 

/ art ah : the doors of the mountain or cloud in which the cows or rays of 

L L U f ha3 iB im phcation entreated to open these doors 

r 01 Llle singer of the hymn. 


^'>^?Sun/:ndA K ni r «:Vli r '78 Wi 3 h S4ya?tt ’ h * th 

3 This stanza is repeated from VII. 41. 7. 



n THIS HYMNS OP [BOOK V/} 

4 Thou, dawning, workest fain to light the great world, yea, 

heaven, Goddess ! that it* may be Been. 

We yearn to be thine own, Dealer of Wealth : may we be to 
this Mother like her sons. 

5 Bring us that wondrous bounty, Dawn, that shall be famed 

most far away. 

What, Child of Heaven, thou hast of nourishment for man, 
bestow thou on us to enjoy. 

6 Give to our princes opulence and immortal fame, and strength 

in herds of kiue to us. 

May she who prompts the wealthy, Lady of sweet strains, may 
Uslias dawn our foes away. 


HYMN LXXXIL Indra-Varuna, 

Grant us your strong protection, Indra-Varuna, our people, 
and our family, for sacrifice. 

May we subdue in fight our evil-hearted foes, him who attach 
the man stedfast in lengthened rites. 

2 0 Indra-Varuna, mighty and very rich ! One of you is called 

Monarch and One Autocrat. 

All Gods in the most lofty region of the air have, 0 ye Steers, 
combined all power and might in you. 

3 Ye with your strength have pierced the fountains of the floods: 

the Sun have ye brought forward as the Lord in heaven. 
Cheered by this magic draught ye, Indra-Varuna, made the dry 
places stream, made songs of piaise flow forth. 

4 In battles and in frays wo ministering priests, kneeling upon 

our knees for furtherance of our weal, 

Invoke you, only you, the Lords of twofold wealth, you prompt 
to hear, we bards, 0 Indra-Varuna. 

5 0 Indra-Varuna, as ye created all these creatures of the world 

by your surpassing might, , , 

In peace and quiet Mitra waits on Varuna, the Other, aw 11 , 
with the Maruts seeks renown. 


« Lady of sweet strains: sdnrMmdi: according to SHyana, ‘speaker »f 
truth.’ ‘ Possessing all that is excellent.’— Ludwig. 

2 One of you ; Varuna is called samrUj or universal ruler (thoroughly » 
splendent, according to Styana), and ludra svarS}, independent ruler, 
according to S&yana, self-resplendent. 

4 Twofold wealth : celestial and terrestrial. 

5 Waite on Varuna: and so acknowledges his supremacy 
ludra. 


The Otter : 


i 



THE RIQVEDA. 


79 


WN 83 .) 

That Varuna’s high worth may shine preeminent, these Twain 
have measured each his proper power and might. 

The One subdueth the destructive enemy; the Other with a 
few furthereth many a man. 

No’ trouble, no misfortune, Indra-Varuna, no woe from any 
side assails the mortal man 

Whoso sacrifice, 0 Gods, ye visit and enjoy : ne'er doth the 
crafty guile of mortal injure him. 

With your divine protection, Heroes, come to us : mine invo- 
cation hear, if ye be pleased therewith. 

Bestow ye upon us, 0 Indra-Varuna, your friendship and your 
kinship and your favouring grace. 

In battle after battle, Indra-Varuna, be ye our Champions, ye 
who are the peoples’ strength, 

When both opposing bands invoke you for the fight, and men 
that they may gain offspring and progeny. 

May Iudra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us glory 
and great shelter spreading far. 

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar’s song 
of praise, the God who strengthens Law. 

HYMN LXXXIII. Indra- Vanina. 

Looking to you and your allianco, 0 ye Men, armed with 
Irroad axes they went forward, fain for spoil. 

ife smote and slew his Dasaand his Aryan enemies, and helped 
Sudfts' with favour, Indra-Varuna. 

Where heroes come together with their banners raised, in the 
encounter wire re is naught for us to love, 

Where all things that behold the light are terrified, there did 
ye comfort us, 0 Indra-Varuna. 

The boundaries of earth were seen all dark with do»st : 

^ 0 Indra-Varuna, the shout went up to heaven. 

I he enmities of the people compassed me about. Ye heard 
m y calling and ye came to me with help. 

The One : Varuna. 


*7 ** praised by the Vasishthas, the family priests 1 of Sud As, 

° the Tiitsus, for having given him the’victory over the ten confederate 
*■ bee VII. 33. 3. 

; or Heroes; India and Varuna. Armed Dith broad axes: 
inir iq l ^ f ^ cT des.’— Wilson. Ludwig maintains thut the former 
Pn tii perte , ct y impossible, and argues that prithupth favah muAfc metfn 
1 f‘thu 8 and the ParSufc.’ 

? f nr io l° ve: Prof. Grassmann, whom Prof. Peterson 
8 ’ explains differently : f whdre all thAt U dear is at stake.’ 



80 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F]j 

4 With your resistless weapons, Indra-Varuna, ye conquer^ 

Bheda and ye gave Sudas your aid. 

Ye heard the prayers of these amid the cries of war: effectual 
was the service of the Tritsus’ priest. 

5 0 Indra-Varuna, the wickedness of foes and mine assailants’ 

hatred sorely trouble me. 

Ye Twain are Lords of riches both of earth and heaven: jo 
grant to us your aid on the decisive day. 

6 The men of both the hosts invoked you in the fight, Indr» 

and Varuna, that they might win the wealth, 

What time ye helped Sudas, with all the Tritsu folk, when the 
Ten Kings had pressed him down in their attack. 

7 Ten Kings who worshipped not, 0 Indra-Varuna, confederate, 

in war prevailed not o’er Sudas. 

True was the boast of heroes sitting at the feast : bo at their 
invocations Gods were on their side. 

8 0 Indra-Varuna, ye gave Sudas your aid when the Ten Kingi 

in battle compassed him about, 

There where the white robed Tritsus with their braided hair, 
skilled in song worshipped you with homage and with hymn, 

9 One of you Twain destroys the Vritras in the fight, the Other 

evermore maintains his holy Laws. 

We call on you, ye Mighty, with our hymns of praise. Vouch* 
safe us your protection, Indra-Varuna. 

10 May India, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us gloij 
and great shelter spreading far. 

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar’s song 
of praise, the God who strengthens Law. 

HYMN LXXXIV. Indra-Varuin 

Kings, Indra-Varuna, I would turn you hither to this our 
sacrifice with gifts and homage. 

Held in both arms the ladle, dropping fatness, goes of itscii 
to you whose forms are varied. 

2 Dyaus quickens and promotes your high dominion who biM 
with bonds not wrought of rope or cordage. 

Far from us still be Varuna’s displeasure : may Iudra gi?e» 
spacious room to dwell in. 

4 Bheda : see VII. 18, 19. , 

6 both of earth and heaven : or, perhaps, belonging to both Bides. 

8 W ith their braided hair ; see VII 33. I- 

10 This stanza is repeated from the preceding hymn. 

2 Dyaut: of. VI. 62. 9. Not wrought of rope: moral and figuratiM,* 
material* 



THE RJOVEDA. 


81 


1 1YMN 85 .] 

L Make ye our sacrifice fair amid the assemblies : make ye our 
' prayers approved among our princes. 

May God-sent riches come for our possession : further ye us 
with your delightful succours. 

[ 0 Indra-Varuna, vouchsafe us riches with store of treasure, 
food, and every blessing; 

For the Aditya, banisher of falsehood, the Hero, dealetU 
wealth in boundless plenty. 

5 May this my song reach Varuna and Tndra, and, strongly 

urging, win me sons aud offspring. 

I To the Gods' banquet may we go with riches. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXV. Indra-Varuna. 

Foil you I deck a harmless hymn, presenting the Soma juice 
to Varuna and Indra — 

A hymn that shines like heavenly Dawn with fatness. May 
they be near us on the march and guard us. 

I Here where the arrow's fall amid the banners both hosts invoke 
the Gods in emulation. 

0 indra- Varuna, smite back those our foemen, yea, smite them 
with your shaft to every quarter. 

) Self-lucid in their seats, e'en heavenly Waters endowed with 
Godhead Varuna and Indra. 

One of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, the Other 
smites and slays resistless foemen. 

I Wise be the priest and skilled in Law Eternal, who with his 
sacred gifts and adoration 

Brings you to aid us with your might, Adityas: let him have 
viands to promote his welfare. 

6 May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, strongly 
i urging, win me sons and offspring. 

To the Gods' banquet may wo go with riches. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

4 The Aditya: Varuna. 

1 On the march : the Rishi prays for ai ' in an expected battle. 

3 With Godhead : libations of Soma juice, with which water is mingled, 
pport the (tods in their several stations : somcndpyrtyitrt hi devatdh sve w 
Mne’vatishthante. — Sftyana. Distinct and sundered: differently treated, re- 
irded or punished in accordance with their deserts. ‘The other sustains 
e ^parate creatures.' — Muir. ‘The one protects the tribes which are scat- 
red abioad.’-— Grassmann. 

4 Mae be the priest: or, wise mufifc the priest be, skilled, etc. He: the 
(stitutor of sacrifice. Viands : sacrificed food to be offered to the Gods. 



£2 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Vll 

HYMN LXXXVI. Varur*. 

Wise, verily, are creatures through his greatness who stayed 
even spacious heaven ami earth asunder ; 

Who urged the high and mighty sky to motion, the Star of 
old, and spread the earth before him. 

2 With mine own heart I commune on the question how Varuna 

and I may be united. 

What gift of mine will he accept unangcred ? When may I 
calmly look and find him gracious? 

3 Fain to know this my sin I question others : I seek the wise, 

0 Varuna, and ask them. 

This one same answer even the sages gave me, Surely thi, 
Varuna is angry with thee. 

4 What, Varun-i, hath been my chief transgression, that thou 

wouldst slay the fiieud who sings thy praises ? 

Tell me, Unconquerable Lord, and quickly sinless will I ap- 
proach thee with mine homage. 

5 Free us from sins committed by our fathers, from those where- 

in we have ourselves offended. 

0 King, loose, like a thief who feeds the cattle, as from the 
cord a calf, set free Vasishtha. 

6 Not our own will betrayed us, but seduction, thoughtlessness, 

Varuna ! wine, dice, or anger. 

The old is near to lead astray the younger: even sleep removeth 
not all evil-doing. 

7 Slavelike may I do service to the Bounteous, serve, free from 

sin, the God inclined to anger. 

This gentle Lord gives wisdom to the simple : the wiser God 
leads on the wi>e to riches. 

8 0 Lord, 0 Varuna, may this laudation come close to thee and 

lie within thy spirit. 

May it be well with us in rest and labour. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 


1 The Star • the Sun. 

5 Like a thief who feeds the cattle : who has performed penance for his theft, 

and, at the completion of the service, offered fodder to the stolen animal : ‘who 

has feasted on stolen cattle.’— M, Muller. But see Pischel, Vedische Studien, 

I. p. 106. 

6 Seduction : or, as Slyana explains, * the settled course of fate.’ 

The old is near : ‘ The stronger perveits the weaker.’ — Muir. 1 * * * * 6 There w® 
senior [God] in the proximity of the junior [man].’— Wilson. 



mftf 87.] 


THE MOVE DA. 


83 


HYMN LXXXVII. Varuna. 

Varuna cut a pathway out for Surya, and led the watery floods 
of rivers onward 

The Marcs, as in a race, speed on in order. Ho made great 
channels for the days to follow. 

2 The wind, thy breath, hath sounded through the region like 

a wild beast that seeks his food in pastures. 

Within these two, exalted Earth and Heaven, 0 Varuna, are 
all the forms thou lovest. 

3 Varuna’s spies, sent forth upon their errand, survey the two 

world-halves well formed and fashioned. 

Wise are they, holy, skilled in sacrifices, the furtherers of the 
praise-songs of the prudent. 

4 To me who understand hath Varuna spoken, the names borne 

by the Cow are three times seven. 

The sapient Cod, knowing the place’s secret, shall speak as 
’twere to teach the race that cometh. 

5 On him three heavens rot and are supported, and the three 

earths are there in sixfold order. 

The wise King Yanina hath made in heaven that Golden Swing 
to cover it with glory. 

6 Like Varuna from heaven he sinks in Sindhu, like a white- 

shining spark, a strong wild creature. 

Killing in depths and meting out the region, great savincr 
power hath lie, this world’s Controller. ° 

1 The Mares: the swift iher.s. The half-line is difficult. ‘ Hasten in g~(to 
s h'»rse let lno e rushes to (a Hock of) mares, he divided the great 

ght* from the days ’—Wilson. ‘ Like a troop (of horses) let loose, following 
1H lie lias made great, channels for the days ’—Muir. 

3 lanrna s spies ‘ the other Adityas, or perhaps the Fathers, 

4 The Cow: according to Siyana, V,U or Speech in the form of a cow 

lV,n K twenty-one metres attached to her breast, throat, and head, or holding 

e n imes of twenty-one kinds of sacrifice. Aditi may be intended, or Piisni 

ith the thrioe-seven Maruts. ' ' 

lh, s' t pi at Cod: ‘ The wise god. though he knows them, has not revealed 

c mysteries of (her) place, which he desires to grant to a future generation.’ 

mr. According to Sayan a. nd in this line is not negative. 

•» For the three heavens and three em ths sec Vol. J , Index. In sixfo'd order 

1 ups inferring to the heavens and earths, or else the three earths arbitrarily 
. ' The three earths with their ix seasons ’—Wilson. That Golden 

U TI- the Sun. 

He: th* Sun. Sindhu: or the sea. Haling in depths: referring to 

min, i whose dominion, following the setting sun, reaches to the depths of 

v no ” ? nt Hie region : or, who measured out the firmament. 

inin 1 * 3 4 * * * * * * * * * * * * * 1 8 ! nter P'' etat i°n °f this stanza is different: ‘(Radiant) as the sun, 
a placed the ocean (in its bed), white as a drop (of water), vigorous as 

, Wn object of profound praise, distributor of water, the powerful 
■porter beyond sin, the ruler of this existing (world).’ — Wiison, 



84 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Vll, 

7 Before this Varuna may we be sinless — him who shows mercy 
even to the sinnor — 

While we are keeping Aditi’s ordinances. Preserve us ever^ 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXVIII, Varuna, 

Present to Vanina thine hymn, Vasishtha, bright, most de> 
lightful to the Bounteous Giver, 

Who bringeth on to us the Bull, the lofty, the Holy, laden 
with a thousand treasures. 

2 And now, as I am come before his presence, I take the face of 

Varuna for Agni’s. 

So might he bring — Lord also of the darkness — the light in 
heaven that I may see its beauty ! 

3 When Varuna and I embark together and urge our boat into 

the midst of ocean, 

We, when we ride o’er ridges of the waters, will swing within 
that swing and there be happy. 

4 Varuna placed Vasishtha in the vessel, and doftly with his 

might made him a Uishi. 

When days shone bright the Sage made him a singer, while 
the heavens bioadened and the Dawns were lengthened. 

5 What hath become of those our ancient friendships, when 

without enmity we walked together ? 

I, Vanina, thou glorious Lord, have entered thy lofty home, 
thine house with thousand portals. 

6 If lie. thy true ally, hath sinned against thee, still, Varuna, 

he is the Mend thou lovedst. 

Let us not, Living One, as sinners, know thee : give shelter, 
as a Sage, to him who lauds thee, 


7 Aditi's ordinances • according to Suyana, Aditi here means ‘the Mighty/ 
that is, Varuna. 

1 The Bull: the Suu, 

2 For AynVs: that is, it appears to mo to be flaming with anger, 

3 ‘ The kernel of the hymn lies in verses 3 to 0. The singer believes that 
Lt* has been forsaken by his helper Varuna ; with anguish ho romembers hi* 
communion with the God in former times. In a vision he sees himself tr-ms- 
kited into Varuna’s realm, he goes sailing with the God, is called to be 

or holy singer to tho God, and is in his palace with him, Now, Varuna 
withdrawn his favour, yet let him have mercy on his singer, and not pun^ 1 2 3 
him so grievously for his sin. The hymn perhaps originally closed with verso 
6.’ — Prof, von ltoth’s note in the Siebcutiy Lieder , translated by P r °*' 
Peteiv-pa. But see Hillebrandt, Varuna und Mitra , pp. 25, 20. 



jmW 90.] THJS RIQVEDA. «5 

7 While we abide in these fixed habitations, and from the lap of 
Aditi win favour , 

May Varuna untie the bond that binds us. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXlN. Varura. 

Let me not yet, King Vanina, enter into the house of clay : 
Have meicy, spare me, Mighty Lord. 

2 When, Thunderer ! I move along tremulous like a wind-blown 

skin 

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord* 

3 0 Bright and Powerful God, through want of strength I erred 

and went astray : 

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord. 

{ Thirst found thy worshipper though he stood in the midst of 
water-floods : 

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord* 

5 0 Vanina, whatever the offence may he which we as men com- 
mit against the heavenly host, 

When through our want of thought we violate thy laws, 
punish us not, 0 God, for that iniquity. 

HYMN XG. V&yu, 

To you pure juices, rich in meath, are offered by priests through 
longing for the Pair of Heroes. 

Drive, Vayu, bring thine harnessed horses hither : drink the 
pressed Soma till it make thee joyful. 


7 Aditi: here said to mean earth* 

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir 0 . S. Text s, V. 67, Prof. M. 
biller, Ane. Sand’. Lit., 540, the authors of Sicbenzig Lieder , p. 12, and Prof, 
‘eterson, JFymm from the Rigveda , p. 287. 

1 The house of clay : the grave. Cf. Atharva-veda, V. 30. 14. 

2 Thunderer: adrivah , Carter of the Stone, a common epithet of Indra, 
'<ifc not suitable to Varuna. Tremulous: Sfty.uia adds mitycna r, with cold; 
n, l Prof. Wilsou observes that ‘the V urima-p<Ha , a kind of dropsy, seems to 
)c »eferred to.’ Cf. Atharva-vcda, IV. 16 7. 

4 Thirst: avarice. Jn the midst of water foods : when surrounded by 
ihimdant wealth. According to the Commentator, the allusion is to Vasish- 
iha’s sea- voyage ; or perhaps the perpetual thirst of dropsy may be intended. 

The last three stanzas are addressed to Indra and Vftyu as a dual Deity. 

2 The Pair of Heroes : Ihdra and \ Avu. 



56 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vli 

2 Whoso to thee, the Mighty, brings oblation, pure Soma unt( 

thee, pure-drinking Vayu, 

That man thou makcst famous among mortals : to him strong 
sons are born in quick succession. 

3 The Clod whom both these worlds brought forth for riches, 

whom heavenly Dhishana for our w ealth appointeth, 

His team of harnessed horses waits on Vayu, and, foremost, on 
the radiant Treasure-bearer. 

4 The spotless Dawns with fair bright days have broken ; they 

found the spacious light when they were shining. 

Eagerly they disclosed the stall of cattle : floods streamed for 
them as in the days aforetime. 

5 These with their truthful spirit, shining brightly, move on 

provided with their natural insight. 

Viands attend the car that beareth Heroes, your car, ye Sovran 
Pair, India ami Vayu. 

C May these who give us heavenly light, these rulers, with gifts 
of kine and horses, gold and treasures, 

These pimces, through full life, lndra and Vayu! oercome 
in battle with their steeds and heroes. 

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 lndra- \ ;iyu. 
with our fair laudations, 

Exerting all our power call you to aid us. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCI. VAyn. 

Were not, in sooth, the Gods aforetime blameless, whose 
pleasure was increased by adoration ! 

Fur Vayu and fur man in bis affliction they caused the Morning 
to arise with SQrya. 

3 The God : apparently, lndra Dhishand : a Ooddess of prosperity and 
gain. The radiant Treasure bearer' : perhaps Sonia. 

4 They found: the Angirases. ‘They are not named in the text, but 
S&yaiu refers the whole to them ; by their praise of \6yu the dawn bi ohe, 
the stolen cattle weie rescued, and the obstructed rain set at liberiy. - 
Wilson. 

5 These: the institutors of sacrifice. 

6 These riders, these princes, are the wealthy nobles who defray the expenses 
and reward the priests. 

lndra is associated with Vdyu in almost every stanza. 

1 For Vdyu: I translate the vdydre of the text, but it is evident 
dydve, for Ayu, or the living one, should be read in its stead. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


87 


HYMN 92.3 

2 Guardians infallible, eager as envoys, preserve us safe through 

many months and autumns. 

. Addressed to you, our fair praise, ludra-Vayu, implores your 
favour *and renewed well-being. 

3 Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he seeketh men with rich 

food whose treasures are abundant. 

They have arranged them of one mind with Vayu : the men 
have wrought all noble operations. 

4 So far as native power and strength permit you, so far as men 

behold whose eyes have vision, 

‘ 0 ye pure-driukers, drink with us pure Soma: sit on this 
sacred grass, Indra and Vayu. 

5 Driving down teams that bear the lovely Heroes, hitherward, 

IndiM-Vayu, come together. 

To you this prime of savoury juice is offered : here loose your 
horses and be friendly-minded. 

C Your hundred and your thousand teams, 0 Indra and Vayu, 
all-muniticent, which attend \ou, 

With these most gracious-minded come ye hither, and drihk, 
0 Heioes, of the meath we offer. 

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 Indra-Vayu* 
with our fair laudations, 

Exerting all our power, call you to aid us. Preserve us 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCII. ' vayu. 

0 Vayu, drinker of the pure, bo near us : a thousand teams 
are thine, All-bounteous Giver. 

To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, whose first 
draught, God, thou takest as thy portion. 

2 Prompt at the holy rites forth came the presser with Soma- 

dr.iiiglits for India and for Vavu, 

Vlieu minUtemig priests with strong devotion bring to you 
Twain the first taste of the Soma. 

3 Hie teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers, within his 
home, 0 Vayu, to direct him, 

1 herewith send wealth to us with full enjoyment, a hero son 

a ud gifts of kine and horses. 


3 He seekrth: VAyu. The meaning of the stanza is obscure. 
5 The Lovely Heroes : Indra and VAyu. 

1 Drinker of th * i — a 



83 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vtj. 

4 Near to the Gods and making Iudra joyful, devout and offer. 

ing precious gifts to Vayu, 

Allied with princes, smiting down the hostile, may we with 
heroes conquer foes in battle. 

5 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to 

our sacrifice and solemn worship. 

Come, Vayu, make thee glad at this libation. Preserve m 
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCIII. India -A** 

Slaters of enemies, Indra aud Agni, accept this day our new. 
born pure laudation. 

Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly 
strength to him who craves it. 

2 For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, growing toge- 

ther, waxing in your vigour. 

Lords of the pasture filled with ample riches, bestow upon u, 
strength both fresh and lasting. 

*3 Yea when the strong have entered our assembly, and singer, 
seeking with their hymns your favour, 

They are like steeds who come into the race-course, thw 
men who call aloud oil Indra-Agui. 

4 The singer, seeking with his hymns your favour, bogs splen- 

did riches of their first possessor. 

Further us with new bounties, Indra-Agni, armed with strong 
thunder, slayers of the foeman. 

5 When two gieat hosts, arrayed against each other, meet 

clothed with brightness, in the fierce encounter 
Stand ye beside the godly, smite the godless; and still assist 
the men who press the Soma. 

G To this our Soma-pressing, Indra-Agni, come ye prepared to 
show your loving-kindness, 

For not at any time have ye despised us. So may I draff 
you with all strengthenings hither. 

7 So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou Mitra, 
Varuna, and Indra. __ 

4 Allied: the priests are the allies and moral supporters of the prince 
in war. 

5 In hundreds and in thousands : cf. I. 135. 3. 

3 The strong : the nobles who institute sacrifices. 

4 Their first possessor : each God who is invoked. 

5 Great hosts: 'hosts’ must be supplied. The feminine dual adjective 
have no substantive in the text. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


89 


{YEN 94 .) 


Forgive whatever sin we have committed : may Aryaman and 
Aditi remove it* 


8 While we accelerate these our sacrifices, may we win strength 
from both of you, 0 Agni : 

fle’er may the Maruts, India, Vishnu slight us. Preserve ns 
evermore, ye Gods, with blesssngs. 

HYMN XCIV. Indra-Agni. 

As rain from out the cloud, for you, Iudra and Agni, from 
my soul " ° 

This noblest praise hath been produced. 

2 Do ye, 0 Indra-Agni, hear the singer’s call.' accept his songs. 
Ye llulers, grant his heart’s desire. 

3 Give us not up to poverty, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni, nor 
To slander and reproach of men. 

4 To Indra and to Agni we bring reverence, high and holy hymn, 
And, craving help, soft words with prayer. 

5 For all these holy singers here implore these Twain to succour 

them, 

And priests that they may win them strength. 

G Eager to laud you, we with songs invoke you, bearingsacred food* 
Fain for success in sacrifice. 

7 Indra and Agni, com^ to us with favour, ye who conquer men : 
Let not the wicked master us* 


8 At no time let the injurious blow of hostile mortal fall on us : 
0 Indra-Agni, shelter us. 

9 Whatever wealth we crave of you, in gold, in cattle, or in 

steeds, 

That, Indra-Agni, let us gain ; 

0 When heroes prompt in worship call Iudra and Agni, Lords 

of steeds, 

Beside the Soma juico effused. 

1 Call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the 

mermen, those 

Whotako delight in hymns of praise, 
lural ryamaa aml Aditi : Mitra and others being understood, as the verb is 
8 0 Agni : that is, Indra and Agni. 

° f \ 8 co P ioU3 ‘ m flow, and Is doubly bene* 

Ul: uuitimnnnh . 0 ? "“‘I brill S m £ blessings to the worshipper. From i ny 

ig pas,s,n, 0 of * ®*P lftlne( I hy the Commentator here and in the correspond- 
11 c u n } -A t e SAmaveda by stotuh, praiser or worshipper. 

Mdsatah A'_? f h_ Lu , dwif; , in r ? aaiu S aviv&tato, instead of 



90 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V/} 

12 Slay ye the wicked man whose thought is evil, of the demon 
kind. 

Slay him who stays the waters, slay the Serpent with yo^ 
deadly dart. 

HYMN XCY. Sarasvati, 

This stream Sarnsvati with fostering current comes forth, our 
sure defence, our fort of iron. 

As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty anj 
might all other waters. 

2 Pure in her course from mountains to the ocean, alone of 

streams Sarasvati hath listened. 

Thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures, she 
poured for Nahusha her milk and fatness. 

3 Friendly to man he grew among the women, a strong young 

Steer amid the Holy Ladies. 

He gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and decks 
their bodies for success in battle. 

4 May this Sarasvati be pleased and listen at this our sacrifice, 

auspicious Lady, 

When we with reverence, on our knees, implore her close knit 
* to wealth, most kind to those she loveth. 

5 These offerings have ye made with adoration : say this, Saras- 

vati. and accept our praises; 

And, placing us under thy dear protection, may wo approach 
thee, as a tree, for shelter. 

6 For thee, 0 Blest Sarasvati, Vasishtha hath here unbarred the 

doors of sacied Order. 

Wax, Bright One, and give strength to him who lauds thee. 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

12 Him who stays the waters: udmlhim : according to SAyana, like aa 
udmlhih. water-holder or pitcher. The Serpent : A bhoydm, ‘ the coder,’ explained 
differently by SAyana, as ‘one who enjoys good things taken fiom tin 
worshippers.’ 

1 Sarasvati : Sindhu or Indus appears to be intended under this nun* 
See VI. 61. 2, and Vulic Hymns, I. p. 60. 

2 Ndhusha : according to the legend, a King who prayed to Sarasvati * j 
gave him butter and milk sufficient for the thousand-year sacrifice vv ia' 
was about to perform. The Nahushas, the people living on the banks o 
river, are probably intended. 

3 He grew: Saras vAn, the consort of Sarasvati. 

5 These offerings : this half-line is very obscure. Prof. Ludwig think® ^ 
these words may be supposed to be spoken by Sarasvati to her worslnj’PL 
but he is not satisfied of the correctness of his conjecture. 1 2 3 Presen ns 
thee S , these oblations with reverence (nmy we receive from thee ftfnue 
' — Wils-m. 



YMN 97.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


91 


HYMN XCVI. SauBTHtl. 

I sing a lofty song, for she is mightiest, most divine of Streams. 
Saras vati will J exalt with hymns and lauds, and, 0 Vasishtha, 
Heaven and Earth. 

2 When in the fulness of their strength the Purus dwell, Beau- 
teous One, on thy two grassv banks, 

Favour us thou who hast the Maruts for thy friends •: stir up 
the bounty of our chiefs. 

^ So may Sarasvati auspicious send good luck; she, rich in spoil, 
i is never niggardly in thought, 

When praised in Jainadagni's way and lauded as Vasishtha 
lauds. 

i We call upon Saras van, as unmarried men who long for wives, 
As liberal men who yearn for sons. 

5 Be thou our kind protector, 0 Sarasvati, with those waves of 
thine 

Laden with sweets and dropping oil. 

5 May we enjoy Sarasvan’s breast, all-beautiful, that swells with 
streams, 

May we gam food and progeny. 

HYMN XCVII. Brihaspati. 

Where Heaven and Earth combine in men’s assembly, and 

1 those who love the Gods delight in worship, 

Where the libations are effused for Indi a, may he come first 
to drink and make him stronger. 

2 We crave the heavenly grace of Gods to guard us — so may 

Brihaspati, 0 friends, exalt us — 

That he, the Bounteous God, may find us sinless, who giveth 
from a distance like a father. 

1 Heaven and Earth : heaven as the home of the Goddess, and earth where 
e nows as a river. 

’."V "" Aryan tiibe settled on both banks of the Sarasvati or 
i i l ” Index ' Gra ™U banks : this, as von Roth has .suggested, 

° n of '^nihasl but the expression is difficult. See 

1 ebrandt, Vcdische Mythologie , p 254. 

■ Jui)ut <-l«yni : u celebrated ancient liishi. 


Ji * , t >e tle , lfc y ?, f stanza 3 > Illdia and Brnhmanaspati are the deities of 
ilmnuk H uT B P has P atl of ]0 » ft “<l die lest of the hymn is addressed to 
id 0 f p' B r lh{ wpati and Brahmanaspati are one and the same God, the 
1 irk L 14. 3. 

sacvZ Uwve * an < i f '“»•<* combine : where Gods and men meet at the piaoe 
(lay hwV.«.!»?' u 6 hlm 3t " JI “J er Sft.'ana explains niyafcka differently : 
? Like r (hor8ei> approach).’— Wilson 1 

ilier wliu 10 t n >er ’ ^bough f«r aw»y he gives us what we ask like a 
« near at nantl — T.nriuri» 



92 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vi 

3 That Brahmanaspati, most High and Gracious, I glorify wj t 

offerings and with homage. 

May the great song of praise, divine, reach Indra who its tj 
King of prayer the Gods’ creation. 

4 May that Brihaspati who brings all blessings, most dear] 

loved, be seated by our altar. 

Heroes and wealth we crave ; may he bestow them, and 
us safe beyond the men who vex us. 

5 To us these Deathless Ones, erst born, have granted this lan 

of ours which gives the Immortal pleasure. 

Let us invoke Brihaspati, the foeless, the clear-voiced God, tli 
Holy One of households. 

6 Him, this Brihaspati, his red-hued horses, drawing togothe 

full of strength, bring hither. 

Rohed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the Lord i 
Might whose friendship gives a dwelling. 

7 For he is pure, with hundred wings, refulgent, with sword < 

gold, impetuous, winning sunlight. 

Sublime Brdiaspati, easy of access, grantefch his friends ino 
bountiful refreshment. 

8 Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the Deity’s Parents, hat 

made Brihaspati increase in grandeur. 

Glorify him, 0 friends, who merits glory : may ho give pray 
fair way and easy passage. 

0 This, Brahmannspati, is your laudation : prayer hath bei 
made to thunder-wielding India. 

Favour our songs, wake up our thought and spirit ; destri 
the godless and our foemen’s malice. 

10 Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, 
Brihaspati, and thoit, 0 Indra. 

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds }" : 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings* 


3 The God*' creation : devakfdasya i inspired, or, literally, made, b} T * 

5 Our hymns of praise which arc acceptable to the immortal 
been given to us by the everlasting deities themselves. SAyana s c.\p 
is different : ‘ may the first-born immortals (by liis command) bestow } 
the food that is necessary for existence.’— Wilson. 

6 Whole friendship gives a dwelling : I adopt the interpretation g ;v 
Professor Cowell in his note on the passage in Wilson’s translation. 

7 With hundred wings : ‘ borne by numerous con veyanoes.*— Wils^ 11 ' 

8 In grandeur t or, by their might. 

1 n Mean • nr. nmr. 



*MN 99,] THE RIQVEDA , 93 

HYMN XCVIII, indra. 

Priests, offer to the Lord of all the people the milked-out 
stalk of iSoraa, radiant-coloured. 

No wild-bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who ever 
seeks him who hath pressed tlie Soma. 

Thou dost desifo to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant 
food which thou hast had aforetime, 

0 Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma 
set before thee. 


Tli on, newiy-born, for strength didst drink the Soma ; the 
Mother told thee of thy future greatness. 

0 Indra, thou hast filled mid-air’s wide region, and ° r iven the 

Gods by battle room and freedom, ° ' 0 

When thou hast urged the arrogant to combat, proud in their 
strength of arm, we will subdue them. 

Or, Indra, when thou tightest girt by heroes, we in the glori- 
ous fray with thoe will conquer. 

1 will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent aots 
which Maghavan hath accomplished. 

When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma be- 
came his own entire possession. 

Tlmie is this world of flocks and herds around thee, which 

^ with the eye of Surya thou beholdest. 

Thou, Indra, art alone the Lord of cattlo : may we enjoy the 
treasure which thou givest, 

Ye Twain are Lords of wealth iu earth and heaven, thou, O 
bnhnspati, and thou, 0 India. 

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. 
1 reserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 


1 . , HYMN XOIX. VLhnu. 

-li.N come not nigh thy majesty who groweat beyond all bound 
and measure with thy body. 

! h f two re « iolls ot ' Hie earth, 0 Vishim, we know ; thou, 
God, knowest the highest also. ’ 


ruddy, here explained by the Com- 


tiidmnt-colourcd : arumm , iod, 

' 0,1 dr»c/iuntdnam, shining. 

4/t::CuT ; r IV * l8 ' Am «*» *** *** 

u already, nor among those who shall be born hereafter. 

kvvor Siure ^J 10 oarth aud the firmament. ‘The 
’>». whiter be 1 U -It ° f J our P^^eptiou ; the thiid belongs to 
lolo, Ji/ Of the 'Vln the fc k' rd " f hia amending strides.’ -Wallis, 



U THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vjj 

2 None who is born or being born, God Vishnu, hath reached 

the utmost limit of thy grandeur. 

The vast high vault of heaven hast thou supported, aud fixed 
earth’s eastern pinnacle securely. 

3 Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kine, with fertile 

pastures, fain to do men service. 

Both these worlds, Vishnu, hast thou stayed asunder, ^ 
firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it. j 

4 Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating 

Sftrya, Dawn, and Agni. 

0 Heroes, ye have conquered in your battles even the, bull, 
jawed Dasa’s wiles and magic. 

5 Ye have destroyed, thou, Indra, and thou, Vishnu, SambarA 

nme-and ninety fenced castles. 

Ye Twain smote down a hundred times a thousand resistless 
heroes of the royal Varchin. 

G This is the lofty hvmn of praise, exalting the Lords of Mighty 
Stride, the strong and lofty. 

1 laud you in the solemn synods, Vishnu : pour ye food on us 
in our camps, 0 Indra. 

7 0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vaslut ! Let this mine offer 
ing, Sipivislita, please thee. 

May these my .songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us ever- 
more, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN C. VMinii. 

Ne’er doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, bringeth im, 
gift to the far-striding Vishnu. 

He who adoreth him^vith all his spirit winneth himself so 
great a benefactor. 

2 Thou, Vishnu, con>tnnt in thy courses, gavest good-will to all 
men, and a hymn that lasteth, 

That thou nvghtst move us to abundant comfort of very 
splendid wealth with store of horses. 


3 The first line appears to be Vishpu’s blessing on heaven aud earth 
be parted and supported them, 

4 Bull-jawed : or Vriuhnsipra may be the name of the DfUa. 

. r > Royal Varchin ■ see II. 14. 6. . I 

7 Vafthal : the exclamation used on making an oblation. Sipivishta ■ a n * 
of Vnhnu of uncertain etymology and meaning ‘ Invested with rays ot Jig >i 
according to S&yana. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 87, 88, note. 

2 A hymn that lasteth : continually recurriug occasion to praise thee. 



THE MOVED A. 


95 


n(N 101 .] 

Three times strode forth this God in all his grandeur over this 
earth bright with a hundred splendours. 

Foremost be Vishnu, stronger than the strongest : for glorious 
is his mime who lives for ever. 

Over this earth with mighty step strode Vishnu, ready to 
<rj \ e it for a home to Mann. 

In him the humble people trust for safety .* he, nobly born, 
hath made them spacious dwellings. 

Today I laud this name, 0 Sipivishta, I, skilled in rules, the 
name of thee the Noble. 

Yea, I the poor and weak praise thee the Mighty who dwellest 
in the realm beyond this region. 

What was there to be blamed in thee, 0 Vishnu, when thou 
deelaredst, I am Sipivishta! 

Hide not this form from us, nor keep it secret, since thou didst 
vear ayother shape in battle. 

0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vushat ! Let this mine offer- 
ing, Sipivishta, please thee. 

j May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us 
I evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYV1N CL Parjanya. 

Srrc\k' forth three words, the words which light precedeth, 
winch milk this udder that produceth nectar. 

Quickly made manifest, the Bull hath bellowed, engendering 
the germ of plants, the Infant. 

Giver of growth to piant.s, the God who ruleth over the waters 
and all moving creatures, 

Vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge, and threefold light 
to succour and befriend us. 

^~T!us earth: meaning, says the Commentator, earth, firmament, and heaven. 
'This stanza is unintelligible The Commentator on the corresponding 
|f ige of the Samaveda says: ‘Vishnu formerly abandoning hB own form, 
assuming another artificial shape, succoured Vasislitha in battle, ltecog- 
ng the god, the Hishi addresses him with the verse ’ Sipivishta is said to 
t word of equivocal meaning, ‘ebthed with rays of light,’ and ‘denuded.’ 
'h'lns note, and 0 S. Texts , IV. S' 7 88, vote The passage looks like 
of the later incarnations of the Cod which occur in the Srtapatha - 
»» ( <na and the Purdnas. 

'Ihiec beards : or texts of the three Vedas. Which Vujht precedeth : int-ro- 
* j y , , K , cred syllable Om. More probably Parjanya is addressed, the 
woids being his voice, the thunder (V. 63. 6), heard in heaven, air, an<l 
hWw ple i e( v led . b > T the , lightning-flash. See Beigaigne, Qnaravte IJymves 
V*'. udder: drawdown the sweet rain from the cloud. 

Parjanya. The Infant: Agni in the form of lightning. 

to et 'fold ll fjht with TP fQi’flnno +1.^. . 1 . - 



96 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK p// 

3 Now he is sterile, now begetteth offspring, even as he willetli 

doth he change his figure. 

The Father’s genial flow bedews the Mother; therewith the 
Sire, therewith the son is nourished. 

4 In him all living creatures have their being, and the three 

heavens with triply flowing waters. 

Three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed thei 
sweet streams around him with a murmur. 

5 May this my song to Sovran Lord Parjauya come near unt 

his heart and give him pleasure. 

May we obtain the showers that bring enjoyment, and God 
protected plants with goodly fruitage. 

G Ho is the Bull of all, and their impregner ; he holds the lif 
of nil things fixed and moving. 

May this rite save me till my hundredth autumn. Preseni 
us evermoie, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN Cl I. Parjanvi 

Sing forth and laud Parjauya, Son of Heaven, who sends tin 
gift of rain : 

May he provide our pasturage. 

2 Parjauya is the God who forms in feme, in mares, in plants 

of earth, 

And womankind, the germ of life. 

3 Offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice. 
May he for ever give us food. 

HYMN Cl II. Fro, 

They who lay quiet for a year, the Brahmans who fulfil their vows, 
The Frogs lm\e lifted up their voice, the voice Parjauya luth 
inspired. 

3 He is sterile : sends no rain, like a barren cow that gives no milk 

The Fathers genial jl<nn : ‘The father is the sky, earth the mother, uhore 
ceives the rain fiom the foimei, which, piotlueing the means of offering lib* 
tions and oblations, returns again to the parent heaven, as well as sup>poits lia 
otb>p»iug— all living creatutes.’ — Wilson. 

4 Three reservoirs: according to bay ana, clouds in the east, west, and north 

6 The Bull of all : the plants, understood. 

3 Into his mouth : that is, Agni, who is the mouth by which the other Godi 
consume the otfeiings that are made to them. 

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S Texts , V. 436, and by ^ 
fessor F. Max Muller in his Ancient Sanskrit Literature , pp. 494f, ^ 
remarks: ‘The hymn... .which is called a panegyiic of the frogs, is 
a satire on the priests ; and it is curious to observe that the same 
Bhould have been ohosen by the Vedic satirist to represent the priests, wOT 
by the earliest satirist of Greece, was selected as the representative of fj 
Homeric heroes.’ But see Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda , p. 70. 7® 
hymn evidently belongs to a late period of Yedic poetry, 



THE RIOVEDA . 


|rjfy 103.] 


97 


i What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the pool's bed 
the floods of heaven descended, * 

The music of the Frogs comes forth in concert like the cows' 
lowing with their calves beside them. 


When at the coming of the Rains the water has poured upon 
them as they yearned and thirsted, e 

One seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of 
pleasure as a son his father. 

Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while they are 
revelling in the flow of waters, 

When the Frog moistened bv the rain springs forward, and 
Green and Spotty both combine their voices. 


When one of these repeats the other's language, as he who 
learns the lesson of the teacher, 

Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse 
with eloquence on the waters. 


Due is Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat the other, one Frog is Green 
and one of them is Spotty. ° 

They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, talking, 
modulate the voice diversely. ‘ 

Ls Brahmans, sitting round the brimful vessel, talk at the 
Soma-rite of Atiratra, 

Jo, Frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all 
the year, the first of Rain-time. 

ihese Brahmans with the Soma juice, performing their year- 
long rite, have lifted up their voices; 

And these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, come forth 
and show themselves, aud none are hidden. 

They keep the twelvemonth’s God-appointed order, and never 
do the men neglect the season. 


oHkhaUi ^ ea8ure 4 ukhkhalikritya, : uttering the involve exclama* 
You) every limb : this abrupt change of person is -*ot unfrequent in the 


Atir&tra : a cerfemony accompanied by tlire- nocturnal recitations. 

ntC * ‘ SA W a makes it ref- f ^ Oavdm ayanam, a sacrificial 

,]]’ . lc jjc°ramences and ends with atirdtra , and lasts a whole year.’ 

ble oi f k 8011 ’ 8 Translation, sweating with their kettles : ‘ There is a 
ite Jr 6 W ,° rd yharminah. having or bearing the vessel, or performiu 
m . j med ; or » sufficing from gharma, lieat, or the hot season 
b fort Km mne are Ki(i * n : Titkyd nd H chit : some take nd here as‘ like 
’ M ]VT a i erS ° US * Wh ° hftVG been hiddea ' , ~ Muir - ‘ Bop out like her- 

hi? ”!l n \ t,ie priestlike frogs. These who were heated kettles: the frogs 



Soon as the Rain- time in the year returneth, these who were 
heated kettles gain their freedom. 

10 Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat have granted riches, and Green and 
Spotty have vouchsafed us treasure. 

The Frogs who give ns cows in hundreds lengtheu our lives 
iu this most fertilizing season. 

HYMN CIV. Indra-Son 

Indra and Some, burn, destroy the demon foe, send downwar 
0 ye Bulls, those who add gloom to gloom. 

Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up : chase the 
away from us, pierce the voracious ones. 

2 Indra and Soma, let sin round tho wicked boil like as a caldrt 

set amid the flames of fire. 

Against the foe of prayer, devourer of raw flesh, the vile fiei 
fierce of eye, keep ye perpetual hate. 

3 Indra and Soma, plunge tho wicked iu the depth, yea, cn 

them into darkness that hath no support, 

So that not one of them may ever thence return : so raayyo 
wrathful might prevail and conquer them. 

4 Iudra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on t 

wicked fiend from heaven and from the earth. 

Yea, forge out of the mountains your celestial dart wlierowi 
ye bum to death the waxiug demon lace. 


10 Have granted riches : as the earliest proclaimed of the advent of I 
ltaina which revive and fertilize the earth. 

‘ It is possibly an echo of this production that we find in a description 
autumn in the Harivamsa, V 8803, where the poet compares tho noise m. 
by a frog, after his rest of sixteen half months, along with his wives, to 
recitation of the Rig-veda by a Brfihm.m surrounded by his pupils . , 
this verse Un* late M. Langlois somewhat, naively remarks as follows : Di 
nos mueurs r^n n ’ og.ilerait 1’ impel Imence d’ uue cmnparaison dans la<jut 
uno grenouille so^t assimilde a un respectable eccldsiastique. Les Indie 
a ce qu il parait., in voyaient dans telle espcce de rappiochement huci 
teinte d’ impiete.’— Mw r , U. 6’. Texts, V. 433. But see Bergaigne, La Rdi<j 
Vedique , I. 202. 

The hymn consists chiefly of n»orecat-ions directed ngainst demons i 
evil spirits, R&kahasas and Yafcudhdna^ The deities are various. 

1 The demon foe . rdkshuh ■ the fiends, demons, goblins, S 11 

about at night, disturbing sacrifices and <u V out men, ensnaring amU 
devouring human beings, and geneially hostde u the human race. 

2 The vile Jicnd : kimldme: explained by tho Commentator as one' 
goes about saying, Kvnidintm or What now ? A quidnunc, a vile 
treacherous spy and informer. The word is used as the name of 
evil spirits. 



r ' ‘ 

f) Indra and Soma, cast ye downward out of Leaven your deadly 
darts cf stone burning with fiery flame, 

Eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones within the 
depth, and let them sink without a sound. 

6 Iudra aud Soma, let this hymn control you both, even as the 

girth encompasses two vigorous steeds — 

The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you : do ye, as 
Lords of men, animate these my prayers. 

7 In your impetuous manner think ye both thereon : destroy 

these evil beings, slay the treacherous fiends. 

Indra and Soma, lot the wicked have no bliss who evermore 
assails us with malignity. 

8 Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when I pursue my 

way with guileless spirit, 

May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra, like water which 
tho hollowed hand compresses. 

9 Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, and with their 

evil natures harm the righteous, 

May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the lap of 
Nirriti consign them. 

0 The fiend, 0 Agni, who designs to injure the essence of our 

food, kiue, steeds, or bodies, 

May he, the adversary, thief, and robber, sink to destruction, 
both himself and offspring 

1 May he be swept away, himself and children : may all the 

three earths press him down beneath them. 

May his fair glory, 0 \ e Gods, be blighted, who in the day or 
night would fain destroy us. 

2 The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and false : 

their words oppose each other. 

Of these two that which is the true and honest, Soma protects, 
and brings the false to nothing. 

3 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who fairly 

claims the Warrior’s title. 

He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly : both lie en- 
tangled in the noose of Indra. 

5 Without a sound: so suddenly that they have ®ot time to cry out. 

9 To the serpent: or to death by serpents’ bites. Nirriti : Death and 
estruction. 

J3 Tkc W um’or’s title: the rank of a ivsAatriya or prince of the military 

‘der. 

Tlie first eleven stanzas ‘are considered to be a malediction upon the 
wthasuS' by the Rishi. To account for the change of tone [in 12 — 16], 
yana gives an unusual version of the legend told in the Mahabhdrata of 



100 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK v n 

14 As if I worshipped deities ot falsehood, or thought vain 

thoughts about the Gods, 0 Agni. 

Why art thou angry with us, Jatavedas i Destruction fall on 
those who lie against thee ! 

15 So may 1 die this day if I have harassed any man’s life or if 

I be a demon. 

Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together who with fal 8 e 
tongue hath called me Yatudhana. 

16 May Indra slay him with a mighty weapon, and let the vilest 

of all creatures perish, 

The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me a demon 
though devoid of demon nature. 

17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her 

body in her guile and malice, 

May she fall downward into endless caverns. May press-stones 
with loud ring destroy the demons. 

18 Spread out, ye Maruts, search among the people : seize ye and 

grind the Rakshasas to pieces, 

Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, or sully 
and pollute our holy worship. 

19 Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, 0 Indra : sharpen 

it, Maghavan, made keen by Soma. 

Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite down the 
demons with thy rocky weapon. 

20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would 

they harm indomitable Indra. 

Sakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked : now ht him 
cast his bolt at fiendish wizards. 

21 Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil oblations 

of the Gods’ invokeis : 

Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the timber, attacks and 
smashes them like earthen vessels. 

king Kalmcuthapada being transformed to a Rdkshata, and devouring the 100 
eons of Vaaishtha : here it is said that a Jtakshasa , having > devoured tue 

FUhi't sons, assumed his shape, and said to him, “ I am Vasishtha, t mu & 
the Ruleshasa ; ' to which Vasishtha replied by repeating this verse 
12], declaratory discriminating between truth and falsehood. Wi^ 

‘ The verses may, as Professor Max Muller supposes, have arisen outo 
Vasishtha’s contest with Tigv&mitra [see III. 53. 21, note], and it may a 
been the latter peieonage wh* brought those charges of heresy, and of nj' u ‘ 
ous and demoniacal character agdnst his rival ’—Muir, 0. S, Text*, I. ’ 
15 Ydtudhdna : explained by Styana as =» Rftkshasa. The YAfcudhnuap 
bably was rather the goblin or sorcer%r while the KAkshasa was the vio 
and voracious ogre. , inlI 

17 Here the malediction on evil spirits in general is resumed ana cou 
ed to the end of the hymn. She too : the M Jcshast, or she fiend. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


101 


l\ r MN 104.] 

9 Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, destroy him in 
the form of dog or cuckoo. 

Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture : as with a stone, 
0 Indra, crush the demon. 

3 Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us: may Dawn 

drive off the couples of Kimidins. 

Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble : from grief 
that comes from heaven mid-air preserve us. 

4 Slay the male demon, Indra ! slay the female, joying and 

triumphing in arts of magic. 

Let the fools’ gods with bent necks fall and perish, and see no 
more the Sun when he arises. 

5 Look each one hither, look around : Indra and Soma, watch 

ye well. 

Cast forth your weapon at the fiends; against the sorcerers 
hurl your bolt. 


23 Kimidins: or vile spirits. See note on stanza 2. 

24 Fools' gods : mftradevdh : explained by S&yana f\H~mdranah'tddh t 1 those 
pho make killing their sport.’ According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, 
wmda'&h-miUadcvdh, a species of demons or goblins. 




BOOK THE EIGHTH. 


HYMN I. Indra. 

Glorify naught besides, 0 friends; so shall no sorrow trouble 
yon. 

Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your 
lauds repeatedly : 

l Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men's Con- 
queror, bounteous like a cow ; 

Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides 
most munificent. 

) Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to obtain 
thine aid, 

Be this our prayer, addressed, O ^ndra, unto thee, thine exal- 
tation every day. 

I Those skilled in so>'6> 0 Mnghavan, among these men o’er- 
como with -05"* tllc focman’s songs. 

Conm knng us strength in many a varied form most 

near that it may succour us. 

i 0 Caster of the Stone, I would not sell thee for a mighty price, 

Not for a thousand, Thunderer! nor ten thousand, nor a 
hundred, Lord of countless wealth ! 

1 0 Indra, thou art more to me than sire or niggard brother is. 

Thou and my mother, 0 Good Lord, appear alike, to give me 

wealth abundantly. 

Where art thou ? Whither art thou gone ? For many a 
place attracts thy mind. 

Haste, Warrior, Fort-destroyer, Lord of battle’s din, haste, 
holy songs have sounded forth. 

Sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles for his 
faithful friend, 

Verses to bring the Thunderer to destroy the forts and sit oil 
K-inva’s sacred grass. 

2 Bounteous like a cow : the adjeet ; 'c is not in the text, but must be sup- 
p'd order to make the comparison intelligible. See Vcdische Btudien, I. 
3. To both sides: to the singers and the iustitutors of sacrifice. 

*> A hundred: meaning ‘infinite,’ according to the Commentator. 

8 For hi* faithful friend : Ludwig takes V&v&tar to be the name of a king 
io has been deserted by Indra and consequently defeated in battle. Kdnvu't 
wd ijrass : trimmed and prepared by Medh&tithi and Medbyfttithi, each of 
^om ia a son of Kanva. 



104 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/// 

9 The Horses wliich are thine in tens, in hundreds, yea, i Q 
thousands thine, 

Even those vigorous Steeds, fleet-footed in the course, 
those come quickly near to us. 

10 This day I call Sabardugh& who animates the holy song, 
Indra the richly-yielding Milch-cow who provides unfailin® 

food in ample stream. 

11 When Sura wounded Etasa, with Vata's rolling wingM car 
Indra bore Kutsa Arjuneya off, and mocked Gandharva t’ 

unconquered One. 

12 He without ligature, before making incision in the neck, 
Closed up the wouud ngain, most wealthy Maghavan, wl 

maketh whole the injured part. 

13 May we ho never cast aside, and strangers, as it were, to the 
We, Thunder-wit>vjj n <r f n dra, count ourselves as trees reject 

and unfit to burn. 

14 0 Vritra-slayer, we were though 8 i 0w an a unready for the fra 
Yet once in thy great bounty may have delight, 0 Her 

after praising thee. 

15 If he will listen to my laud, then may our Somud,. 0 p 8 ^ 

flow 

Rapidly through the strainer gladden Indra, drops due to tl 
Tugryas’ Strengthener. 

16 Come now unto the common laud of thee and of thy faithft 

friend. 

So may our wealthy nobles' praise give joy to thee. Fai 
would I sing thine eulogy. 

17 Press out the Soma withjthe stones, and in the waters wash 

clean. 


10 Sabardughd ; the general name of cows which supply the milk require 
for sacrificial purposes. See VI. 48. 11, note. Here Indra himself is intends 
as is shown in the following line. 

11 Sdra: Surya, the Sun-God. Wounded: ‘harassed.’* -Wilson. Etasv 
protige of Indra. See Vol. I , Index. VdU t: the Wind-God. Kutsa : see Vol.I 
Index. Gandharva : the Sun. The meaning of the stanza is Bomewhat obscuu 

12 Closed up the wound again : healed Etasa who had been wounded bj 
Surya. 

13 Count ourselves as trees : or, 'count us not as trees,’ the meaning of m 
'not ’ and * like ’ being ambiguous. 

15 Due to the Tugryas ’ Strengthener : that belong to Indra the protector ol 
the chiefs of the race of Tugra, who appear to have been the patrons of tw 
Rishis of Kanva’s family. 

10 Faithful friend : see stanza 8. 



THE Rl 0 VEDA. 


105 


IYMN 1.] 

The men investing it with raiment made of milk shall milk it 
forth from out the stems. 

8 Whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty 

heaven, 

Wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise : fill full 
all creatures, 0 Most Wise. 

9 For Indra press the Soma out, most gladdening and most 

excellent. 

May Sakra make it swell sent forth with every prayer and ask- 
ingj as it were, for strength. 

[) Let me not, still beseeching thee with earnest song at Soma 
rites, 

Anger thee like some wild beast. Who would not beseech 
him who hath power to grant his prayer 1 

1 The draught made swift with rapturous joy, effectual with its 
mighty strength, 

All-conquering, distilling transport, let him drink : for he in 
ectstasy gives us gifts. 

\ Where bliss is not, may he, All-praised, God whom the pious 
glorify, 

Bestow great wealth upon tho mortal worshipper who sheds 
the juice and praises him. 

3 Come, India, and rejoice thyself, 0 God, in manifold affluence. 

Thou fillest like a lake thy vast capacious bulk with Soma 
and with draughts besides. 

1 A thousand and a hundred Steeds are harnessed to thy golden 
car. 

So may the long-maned Bays, yoked by devotion, bring Indra 
to drink the Soma juice. 

0 \okcd to thy chariot wrought of gold, may thy two Bays 
with peacock tails, 

Convey theo hither, Steeds with their white backs, to quaff 
sweet juice that makes us eloquent. 


17 From out the sterna : see VedUehe Sttudien, I. 133, 178. Slyana explains 
V! n , \ n .° differently : « (for by so doim*) the leaders (of the rain, the 

w m sky with c,ou<,8) “ wit, ‘ a vesture of the hide of tho 

w, milk forth (the water) for the rivers.’-Wilson. 

tlis^text*™ pibatu, : supplied by the Scholiast ; there being no verb 

ivlre e ^ *** ** no f ! * n defeat and trouble. But the meaning of 

* ,, lt ' e * rUlU ' ‘ A tthe sacrifice,’ is SAyana’s explanation. Von Roth sug. 
23 , tr " aS,,Te chaQlber .’ I «dopt Ludwig’s interpretation. 

’ ,th dra ' l 9>M besides : with tby fellow-topers (the Maruts).’— Wilson. 



THE HYMNS OF 


106 


[BOOK Vli 


26 So drink, thou Lover of the Song, as the first drinker, of thj, 

juice. 

This the outpouring of the savoury sap prepared is good and 
meet to gladden thee. 

27 He who alone by wondrous deed is Mighty, Strong by hoh 

works, 

May lie come, fair of cheek ; may he not stay afar, but cook 
and turn not from our call. 

28 Sushna's quick moving castle thou hast crushed to pieces wit! 

thy bolts. 

Thou, Indra, from of old, hast followed after light, since ws 
have had thee to invoke. * 

20 My praises when the Sun hath risen, my praises at the time 
of noon, 

My praises at the coming of the gloom of night, 0 Vasu, have 
gone forth to thee. 

30 Prahe, yea, praise him. Of princes these are the most liberal 

of their gifts, 

These, Paiamajya, Ninditasva, Prapathi, most bounteous, 0 
Medliy.itithi. 

31 When to the car, by faph, I yoked the horses longing for the 

way — 

For skilled is Yadu’s sou in dealing precious wealth, he who 
is rich m herds of kinc. 

32 May he who gave me two brown steeds together with their 

cloths of gold, 

May he, A^anga’s son Svanadratha, obtaiu all joy and high 
felicities 

26 As the first d> in far : ‘ According to the .^clioliast, purvapdh me'ins 
who, having armed first in the race, drank the Soma before the other 
The allusion is to the principal yraha libation, called A indrardyara, "'ucii 
Indra and 1 'ayu share together.’ - WiUoti 

28 Castle: of el >ud. Followed after li/ht : to find and bung it brick. 

30 Praise him : India Paiamajyd, Nindit&sva, and Pmpatld appear to 
the names of tbe chiefs who at e praised for their liberality. Sayana im’®* 
As.mga the speaker : ‘ Praise me, for we are the most liberal giveM : (p wls 
me .is one) who bears the best aim a ( paramajyd), follows the right pat n{p 
pathl), and oiitstiips a hois* in speed ( ninditdsra ).’ 

31 The horses : presented by the prince. The sentence is incomplete, i 
Scholiast supplies at the end of the line taddnha evummim atuhi, then P _ 
me thus Yadu’i non : Asanga, descendant of the ancient epoiiymoin 
Yadu. See Vol. I , Index. Rich in herds of l ine : pasuh which 

in apportion with yldrah, is hardly intelligible here. Siyana exp 
pawned a, having blasts or cattle, or as a derivative of pa j, to M, ’ e ’ e3e e j. 
ing one who sees what is subtile, sdkshmatya drashtd. Neither o ^ 
plantations has anything but Sayana’s name to recommend it, but lap 
former as a makeshift. 



TIIE EIO VEDA. 


W - 


MN 2 ] 

playoga's son Asanga, by ten thousand, 0 Agni, hath surpass- 
ed the rest in giving. 

For me ten bright-hued oxen have come forward like lotus- 
stalks from out a lake upstanding. 

What timo her husband’s perfect restoration to his lost 
strength and manhood was apparent, 

His consort Sasvati with joy addressed him, Now art thou 
well, my lord, and shalt be happy. 

HYMN II. Indra - 

IIeue is the Soma juice expressed; 0 Vasu, drink till thou art 
full : 

Undaunted God, we give it thee. 

Washed by the men, pressed out with stones, strained through 
the filter made of wool, 

’Tis like a courser bathed in streams. 

This juice have wo made sweet for thee like barley, blending 
it with milk. 

Indra, I call thee to our feast. 

Beloved of all, Indra alone drinks up the flowing Soma juice 
Among the Gods and mortal men. 

The Friend, whom not the brilliant-hued, the badly-mixt or 
bitter draught 

Repels, the far extending God; 

While other men than we with milk chase him as hunters 
chase a deer, 

And with their kine inveigle him. 

3 Ten bright hiv'd o ten : miming ten thousand, according to S-tyatu- 
14 Asmga. the King who->e liberality, with that of his sou (32), and perhaps 
igi.iii'lvms (30), has been eulogized in the four preceding stanzas, ^had, the 
bid says, been changed to a worn m by the imprecation of the Gods and 
pwaids restored to his manhood in consequence of his repentance and the 
'cession of Medhfitithi and Medhy&tithi whom he richly rewarded. In this 
7 . i S iRvati congratulates him on his restoration. Professors Ludwig and 
vsmaun have translated the stanza more literally. 

0 .* or, Good Lord. * Giver of dwellings,’ according to S&yana. 

Strained through the filter made of wool : more literally, 1 cleansed by the 
wool of the sheep,’ the material of . hich the sieve, strainer, or filter used 
clearing and purifying the Soma juice was made, 

Like barky : or, like the sacrificial cake made of barley-meal. 

Alone drinks up : he alone is to receive the entire libation, which other 
b only share among them. 

brilliant-hued: without sufficient mixture with milk to thicken it and 
nge its colour. The meaning of this and the following stanza is : Indra 
fers our 1 ibations, imperfectly prepared as they may be, to the milk-offering* 
k which other meu endeavour to attract him. 



108 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK V}}, 

7 For him, for Indra, for the God, be pressed three draughty 

Some juice 

In the Juice drinker’s own abode. 

8 Three reservoirs exude their drops, filled are three beakers to 

the brim, 

All for one offering to the God. 

9 Pure art thou, set in many a place, and blended in the mjJ 

with milk 

And curd, to cheer the Hero best. 

10 Here, Indra, are thy Soma-draughts pressed out byus,tl 
strong, the pure : 

They crave admixture of the milk. 

110 Indra, pour in milk, prepare the cake, aud mix the Som 
draught : 

I hear them say that thou art rich. 

12 Quaffed juices fight within the breast. The drunken praii 

not by their wine, 

The naked praise uot when it rains. 

13 Rich be the praiser of one rich, munificent and famed like thee 
High rank be his, 0 Lord of Bays. 

14 Foe of the man who adds no milk, he heeds not any cbaute 

hymn 

Or holy psalm that may be sung. 

15 Give us not, Indra, as a prey unto the scornful or the proud 
Help, Mighty One, with power and might. 

1G This, even this, 0 Indra, we implore : as thy devoted friends 
The Kanvas praise thee with their hymns. 


8 Three reservoirs: or troughs used in the preparation of the Soma-libaiioui 
They are called severally, dronakalasn , pdtabkrit , and ddkavanlya. 

9 In the midst : 1 in the middle (of the day ? ).' — Hillebrandt. 

12 This stanza breaks the connexion between stanzas 11 and 13, andisii 
itself almost unintelligible. Wilsou paraphrases, after Sityana : ‘ The |v>taW 
(of Soma) coutend in thy interior (for thine exhilaration) like the cbnn 
caused by wine : thy worshippers praise thee (filled full of Soma) like 
udder (of a cow with milk).’ SAyana’s explanation of ncignflh, naked 
as worshippers, stotdmh, * who do not desert the verses of the Veda, 1 > s ot) 
ously impossible, u'dhah, udder, frequently means the rainy sky, an( j ^ ' u ‘ 
have this meaning here ; so that the sense of the passage may possibly 
Ludwig suggests, that neither great wealth nor abject poverty tends to ■ ® 
a man devout. The rich man when he drinks his wine at home and the 
clad wretch exposed to the drenching rain are equally regardless of the 1 

13 Rich be the praiser of the rich : this appears to be the contiuuation 
* thou art rich ’ of stanza 11. 

14 Indra will not accept worship without oblation. 



TUN 2.] THE RIOVEDA. 109 

Naught else, 0 Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer’s 
eulogy : 

On thy laud only have I thought. 

The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire 
not sleep : 

They punish sloth unweariedly. 

Come hither swift with gifts of wealth— be not thou an^rv 
with us — like ° J 

A great man with a youthful bride. 

Let him not, wrathful with us, spend the evening far from 
us to-day, 

Like some unpleasant son-in-law. 

For well we know this Hero’s love, most liberal of the boons 
he- gives, 

His plans whom the three worlds display. 

Pour forth the gift which Kanvas bring, for none more glorious 
do we know ® 

Than the Strong Lord with countless aids. 

0 prosser, offer Soma first to Indra, Hero, Sakra, him 

The Friend of man, that he may drink; 

Who, in untroubled ways, is best provider, for his worshippers 

Of strength in horses and in kine. ’ 

Pressers, for him blend Soma juice, each draught most excel- 
lent, for him 

The Brave, the Hero, for his joy. 

fho Vritra-slayer drinks the juice. May he who gives a hun- 
dred aids 

Approach, nor stay afar from us. 

Hay the strong Bay Steeds, yoked by prayer, bring hither 
unto ns our Friend, 

Lover of Song, renowned by songs. 

iwcot are tire Soma juices, come! Blent are the Soma juices, 
come ! 

Rishi-like, mighty, fair of cheek, come hither quickly to the 
feast. 


■f man ; . th ® ® xact meaning of maMn, great, is not certain. SAyana 

. I 1 9 u V<MradhiJcah, eminent on account of liis good qualities. ‘ Be 

as tul, like the ardent husbaud of a new bride.’ — Wilson. ‘ Like a rich 
newly married,' — Grassm&nn. 


Like some unpleasant son-in-law : who sees that his company is unwel- 
consequently stays at home. * 

Firntto Indra: see VIII. 1. 20. Saha : India, the Mighty One. 



THE HYMNS OP 


no 


[BOOK Vli 


29 And lauds which strengthen thee for great bounty and valoni 

and exalt 

India who doeth glorious deeds, 

30 And songs to thee who lovest song, and all those Ly^ 

addressed to thee— 

These evermore confirm thy might. 

31 Thus he, sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds thunder 

gives us strength, ' 

He who hath never been subdued. 

- 32 Vritra he slays with his right hand, even Indra, great v 1 ’ 1 
mighty power, 

And much-invoked in many a place. 

33 He upon whom all men depend, all regions, all achievements 
Takes pleasure in our wealthy chiefs. 

31 All this hath he accomplished, yea, Indra, most gloriou 
renowned, 

Who gives our wealthy princes strength. 

35 Who drives his chariot seeking spoil, even from afar, to h 

he loves : 

For swift is he to bring meu wealth. 

36 The Sage who, winning spoil with steeds, slays Vritra, He 

with the men, 

His servant’s faithful succourer. 


37 0 Priyamedhas, worship with collected mind this Indra who 
The Soma hath full well inspired. 

38 Ye Kanvas, sing the Mighty One, Lord of the Brave, wl 

loves renown, 

All-present, glorified by song. 

39 Strong Friend, who, with no trace of feet, restores the cattl 

to the men 

Who rest their wish and hope on him. 

40 Shaped as a Ram, Stone-hurler ! once thou earnest hither tf 

the son 

Of Kanva, wise Medhyatithi. 


34 All this hath he accomplished: the slaughter of Vritra and other gr^ 
deeds ; or, he made all these eieatures. 

36 The Sage Indra With the men : accompanied by the Maruts. 

37 Priyamedhas : membete of the family of one of the RishU. 

39 With no trace of fed: without tracking the lost cattle (the rays oi iig^ 
by their footsteps. 

40 Shaped as a Ram: sea I. 51. 1. The legend ia told iu the 
Brdhmana , 1.1. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


Ill 


tMN 3.] 

Vibhiudu, thou bust helped this nmu, giviug him thousands 
four times ten, 

And afterward eight thousand more. 

And these twain pouring sti earns of milk, creative, daughters 
of delight, 

For wedlock sake I glorify. 

HYMN TIL Indra. 

Dkink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee with our 
milky draught. 

Be, for our weal, our Friend and sharer of the feast, and let 
thy wisdom guard ns well. 

: in thy kind grace and favour may we still be strong : expose 
us not to foe’s attack. 

With manifold assistance guard and succour us, and bring U3 
to felicity. *** 

1 May these my songs of praise exalt thee, Lord, who hast 
abundant wealth. 

Men skilled m holy hymns, pure, with the hues of fire, have 
sung^hem with their lauds to thee. 

[ He, with his might enhanced by lvishis thousandfold, hath 
like an ocean spread himself. 

His majesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his power where 
holy singers rule. 

> India for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds, 
Indra, as worshippers in battle-shock, we call, India that we 
may win the spoil. 

3 With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with 
power hath Indra lighted up the Sun. 

In Indra are all creatures closely held; in him meet the 
distilling Soma-drops. 

1 Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the 
Soma first. 

The Kibhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras 
sung thee as the first. 

41 Vibhindu: the prince, the institutor of the sacrifice. 

42 The stanza is obscure, the ineanin^ of mUt, a feminine dual which S&ynna 

tplaina by nirmdtryau , maker's or creators, *. e. heaven and earth, being un- 
p'tain. Sdyana’s paraphrase of the stanza is : ‘ I glorify these two (heaven and 
h'th), the auginentet'8 of water, the originators (of beings), the benefactors of 
Mi worshipper, cm account of their generation (of the wealth so giveu to me).* 
r Wilson 

1 3 the hues of jive: or, radiant as Agni. 

1 ^ Ribhus : as deities connected with the seasons which are regulated by 
e Suu whom Indra has caused to shine. 



112 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/// ( 

8 Indra increased bis manly strength at sacrifice, in the wi ty 

rapture of this juice. 

And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praia^ 
to his majesty. 

9 I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou mayst firs) 

regard this prayer, 

Wherewith thou holpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and Iraskanvi 
when the prize was staked. 

10 Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, that, Indra 

is thy manly strength. 

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the world 
have cried aloud. 

11 Help us, 0 Indra, when we pray to thee for wealth and her 

might. _ . . . 

First help thou on to strength the man who strives to wit 
and aid our laud, 0 Ancient One. 

12 Help for us, Indra, as thou holpest Paura once, this ir.au' 

devotions bent on gain. 

Help, as thou gavest Rusama and Syavaka and Svarnaiaan 
Kripa aid. 

13 What newest of imploring prayers shall, then, the zealou 

mortal sing 1 

For have not they who laud his might, and Indra* power wo 
for themselves the light of heaven ? 

14 When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid the Gods 

Who counts as Hishi and as sage ? 

When ever wilt thou, India Maghavan, come nigh to presser 
or to praiser’s call ? 

15 These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of piw 

asceud to thee, . . 

Like ever-conquering chariots that display their stieng 
gain wealth, and give unfailing aid. 

16 The Bhrigus are like Suns, like Kanvas, and have gained * 

that their thoughts were bent upon. 

The living men of Priyamedha’s race have sung exalting u 1 
with their lauds. __ 

9 Bhrigu : see Vol. I., Index. Yatis : an ancient race of ascetics conned 
with the Bhrigus, aud, according to one legend, said to have taken part in 
creation of the world. Praskanva : a Uishi, son of Kanva, the seer of 8011 
hymns of Book I. 

10 The worlds : all men, or all living creatures. 

12 Paura : the son of King Punt. Rusama , S'/dvalm, Svarnara, and ^ 
appear to have beeu princes especially favoured by India. Of. stanza % ot 
following hvrnu. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


113 


yMX 4 .] 

L j3est slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy Bay Steeds, Indra, from 

f afar. 

; Come with the High Ones hither, Maghavan, to us, Mighty, to 
drink the Soma juice. 

$ For these, the bards and singers, have cried out to thee with 
prayer, to gain the sacrifice. 

As such, 0 Maghavan, Indra, who lovest song, even as a lover 
hear my call. 

) Thou from the lofty plains above, 0 Indra, hurledst Vritra 
down. 

Thou dravest forth the kine of guileful Mrigaya and Arbuda 
from the mountain’s hold. 

j Bright were the flaming fires, the Sun gave forth his shine, 

| and Soma, Indra’s juice, shone clear. 

I Indra, thou blewest the great Dragon from the air : men must 
regard that valorous deed. 

[ The fairest courser of them all, who ruuneth on as ’twere to 

I heaven. 

Which Indra and the Maruts gave, and Pakasthaman Kaura- 
yan, 

To me hath'Pakaathaman given, a ruddy horse, good at the 
pole, 

Filling his girth and rousing wealth ; 

Compared with whom no other ten strong coursers, harnessed 
to the pole, 

Bear Tugrya to his dwelling place. 

Raiment is body, food is life, and healing ointment giveth 
strength. 

As the free-handed giver of the ruddy steed, I have named 
Pakasthaman fourth. 

HYMN IV. Indra. 

Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward, 
north and south, 

Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave Champion ! 
urged by men to come. 

7 High Ones: the Maruts. 

8 To gain the sacrifice : to ensure it proper performance and the blessings 

ch flow from it. 

9 Mrigaya: see IV. 16. 13. Arbuda: see Vol. I. f Index. 

0 The great Dragon : or Serpent, Ahi, 

il Kauraydn : Kauray&na, the Bon of KuruyAna. P&kasth&man, whose 

nility is praised in stanzas 21 — 24, is not mentioned elsewhere. 

& Tugrya: Bhujyu, son of Tugra. See Vol. I., Index. 

A . . 

Anava : descendant of the eponymous Anu. Turvasa : see Vol. I., Index ■ 



114 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH Vj n 

2 Or, Indra, when with Rama, Rusama, Sy&vaka, and Kr',p a 

thou rejoices t thee, 

Still do the Kanvas, bringing praises, with their prayeri 
0 Indra, draw thee hither : come. 

3 Even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert’i 

watery pool, 

Come hither quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the 
Kanvas drink thy fill. 

► 4 May the drops gladden thee, rich Indra, and obtain bounty 

for him who pours the juice. 

Soma pressed in the mortar didst thou take and drink, and 
hence bast won surpassing might. 

5 With mightier strength he conquered strength, with energy 

be crushed their wrath. 

0 Indra, Strong in youth, all those who sought the fray bent 
and bowed down to thee like trees. 

6 He who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thou- 

sand mighty men of war. 

He makes his son preeminent in hero might : he serves with 
reverential prayer. 

7 With thee, the Mighty, for our Friend, we will not fear or feel 

fatigue. 

May we see Turvasa and Yadu : thy great deed, 0 Hero, must 
be glorified. 

8 On his left hip the Hero hath reclined himself : the proffered 

feast offends him not. 

The milk is blended with the honey of the bee : quickly come 
hither, haste, and driuk. 

9 India, thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses, cars, and kine, 
He evermore hath food accompanied by wealth, and radian 

joins the company. 

10 Come like a thirsty antelope to the drinking-place: drink 
Soma to thy heart’s desire. 

Raiuing it down, 0 Maghavan, day after day, thou gainest thy 
surpassing might. 


2 Rusama , Sydvaka , and Kripa have been mentioned in stanza 12 of the 
preceding hymn. Ruma was another of India’s favourites. 

3 The wild-bull: or Gaura (Bos Gaums), a kind of buffalo. 

7 May we tee Turvata and Yadu : enjoying happiness through thy favour.- 
84yana. . 

9 Thy friend : the man whom thou favoureat. Joint the company • 1 

assembly of his equals. ^ 

10 Raining it down : pouring down the transformed Soma in the shape » 

rain. See Vedische Studien , I. 88. i 



THE RIGVEDA. 


f MS 4.] 


115 


! priest, let the Soma juice flow forth, for Indra longs to drink 
thereof. 

He even now hath yoked his vigorous Bay Steeds : the Vritra- 
slayer hath come near. 


The man with whom thou fillest thee with Soma deems him- 
self a pious worshipper. 

This thine appropriate food is here poured out for thee : come, 
hasten forward, drink of it. 


Press out the Soma juice, ye priests, for Indra borne upon his 
car. 

The pressing-stones speak loud of Indra, while they shed the 
juice which, offered, honours him. 

To the brown juice may his dear vigorous Bay Steeds bring 
Indra, to our holy task. 

Hither let thy Car-steeds who seek the saciifice bring thee to 
our drink-offerings. 

Puslian, the Lord of ample wealth, for firm alliance we elect. 

May he with wisdom, Sakra ! Looser! Much-invoked! aid us 
to riches and to seed . 


Sharpen us like a razor in the barber's hands; scud riches 
thou who set test free. 

Easy to find with thee are treasures of the Davui for mortal 
man whom thou dost speed. 

Pudiau, I long to win thy love, I long to praise thee, Radiant 
God. 

Excellent Lord, tis strange to me, no wish have I to sing the 
psalm that Pajra sings. 3 

Mykiue, 0 Radiant God, seek pasture wheic they will, my 
during wealth, Immortal One. 

Be our protector, Pushan ! be, most liberal Lord, propitious to 
our gathering strength. 

Rich was the gift Kurunga gave, a hundred steeds at morning 
rites. e 

Arnoug the gifts of Turvasas we thought of him, the opulent, 
the splendid King. 

What by his morning songs Kanva, the powerful, hath, with 
the I riyamedhasi gaiued — 


may here be a name of Indra. Looser: of the chariot-horse* 
“ u comesfc t0 orifices ; or, according to Silyana, liberator (from sin). 

v ot ? e ? f Pajras, a celebrated priestly family, with whom the 

vas appear to have beeu on hostile terms. 

Kurungct, : this prince’s name does not occur again, 



116 THE HYMNS OF L BOOK Vijj 

The herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, have I 
the Rishi, driven away. 

21 The very trees were joyful at my coming : kine they obtained 
in plenty, steeds in plenty. 

HYMN V. A^j 

When, even as she were present here, red Dawn hath shone 
from far away, 

She spreadeth light on every side. 

2 Like Heroes on your will-yoked car far-shining, Wonder. 

Workers ! ye 

Attend, 0 Asvins, on the Dawn. 

3 Bv you, 0 Lords of ample wealth, our songs of praise \ m 

been observed : 

As envoy have I brought the prayer. 

4 Kanvas must praise the Asvins dear to many, making many 

glad, 

Most rich, that they may succour us. 

5 Most liberal, best at winning strength, inciters, Lords ol 

splendour who 

Visit the worshipper’s abode. 

6 So for devout Sudeva dew with fatness his unfailing mead, 
And make it rich for sacrifice. 

7 Hitherward running speedily with horses, as with rapid hawks, 
Come, Asvins, to our song of praise : 

8 Wherewith the three wide distances, and all the lights that 

are in heaven 

Ye traverse, and three times of night. 

9 0 Finders of the Day, that wo may win us food of kine and 

wealth, 

* Open the paths for us to tread. 

10 0 Asvins, bring us wealth in kine, in noble heroes, and in cars: 
Bring us the strength that hordes give. 

11 Ye Lords of splendour, glorified, ye Wonder-Workers borne on 

paths 

Of gold, drink sweets with Soma juice. 

‘20 Pure and spotlm : I follow SAyana’s interrelation of nirmajdm, but * 
correctness is at least doubtful Von Roth suggests ‘ to the watering-p^ 
as the meaning of the word, and Ludwig ‘ so that none remained belimu. 

3 Lords of ample wealth : ‘affluent in sacrifices.’-- Wilson. See VJ4- ■ 
A 9 envoy: as the messenger of the patron of the sacrifice. 

8 Times of night : ydmas, night-watches of three hours each. 

11 Sweets: or meath, mddhu; here, perhaps, the milk.— Ludwig. 



mN 5 .] TH^RIGVEDA. 117 

; To us, ye Lords of ample wealth, and to our wealthy chiefs 

extend 

Wide shelter, ne’er to be assailed. 

I Come quickly downward to the prayer of people whom ye 
favour most : 

Approach not unto other folk. 

. Ye Asvins whom our minds perceive, drink of this lovely 
gladdening draught, 

The meuth which we present to you. 

\ Bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in thousands, 
source 

Of plenteous food, sustaining all. 

I Verily sages call on you, ye Heroes, in full many a place. 

Moved by the priests, 0 Asvins, come, 
r Men who have trimmed tho sacred grass, bringing oblations 
and prepared, 

0 Asvins, are invoking you. 

3 May this our hymn of praise to-day, most powerful to bring 
you, be, 

0 Asvins, nearest to your hearts. 

D The skin filled full of savoury meath, laid in the pathway of 
| your car — 

| 0 Asvins, drink ye both therefrom. 

0 For this, ye Lords of ample wealth, bring blessing for our herd, 

: our kine, 

Our progeny, and plenteous food. 

1 Ye too unclose to us like doors the strengthening waters of the 
| sky, 

| And rivers, ye who find the day. # 

£ When did the sou of Tugra serve you, Men 1 Abandoned in 
the sea, 

That with winged steeds your car might fly. 

Ye, 0 Nasatyas, ministered to Kanva with repeated aid, 
When cast into the heated pit. 


6 By the priests : vdghddbhih : according to S&yana, * with horses.’ 

9 The Asvins appear to be invited to halt and drink the libations prepared 
them by their worshippers, and not, as Sdyana explains, to drink from the 
in suspended in their own car. — Ludwig. 

22 The son of Tugra: Bhujyu, whose rescue by the Asvins has frequently 
en related and referred to. The meaning is, I do not honour you only when 
&ni in distress, as others whom you have aided have done. 

23 Ministered to Kanva: see I, 1 1 2 . 5, and 118. 7 . 



118 TUB IIYMIfS OF [BOOK P//j 

24 Come near with. those most recent aids of yours which 

eulogy, 

When I invoke you, Wealthy Gods. 

25 As ye protected Kanva erst, Priyatnedha and Upastuta, 
Atii, Smjara, Asvins Twain ! 

26 And Ansu in decisive fight, Agastya in the fray for kine, 
And, in his battles, Sobhari. 

27 For so much bliss, or even more, 0 Asvins, Wealthy God* 

than this, 

We pray while singing hymns to you. 

28 Ascend your car with golden seat, 0 Asvins, and with rein 

of gold, 

That reaches even to the sky. 

29 Golden is its supporting shaft, the axle also is of gold, 
And both the wheels are made of gold. 

30 Thereon, ye Lords of ample wealth, come to us even from afai 
Come ye to this mine eulogy. 

31 From far away ye come to us, Asvins, enjoying plenteous foe 
Of Dasas, 0 Immortal Ones. 

32 With splendour, riches, and renown, 0 Asvins, hither con 

to us, 

Nasatyas, shining brilliantly. 

33 May dappled horses, steeds who fly with pinions, bring yc 

hitherward 

To people skilled in sacrifice. 

34 The wheel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied 1 

song, 

That eometh with a store of food. 

J5 Horne on that chariot wrought of gold, with coursers ve 
fleet of foot, 

Come, 0 Nfisatyas, swift as thought. 


24 Wealthy 6 och: the meaning of vriskanvasH is uncertain : ‘ rich in show 

is Sfiya’a’s explanation, and ‘excellent as nteers ’ Prof. Ludwigs. I 
von ltoth, but his interpretation is conjectural. , 

2 5 Kanva, Priyamedha . Upastuta and Atri have been mentioned in B (>0 
Sftyaoa takes sinj&ram to Ik* an epithet of Atri, ‘ repeating praises.’ 

2d Ansu: a worshipper so named. — Sdyana. Af/astya: appears in I- ‘ ' 
where he is said to have been the family-priest of Khela. The grea . 
Agastya is the seer of Hymns 1Gb — 191 of Book I. See also VII. 
Sobhari: a Rishi, the seer of Hymns 19- 22 of this Book. 

31 Plenteous food of Ddmn: the meaning appears to be that ey en . 

in the ea*t the Dfisas or non-Aryan inhabitants sacrifice to the Asvins. 

explains the stanza differently : ‘ Immortal Asvins, destroyers of the ci 
the D&aas, ye bring to us food from afar.’— Wilson, 



THE RIG VEDA. 


119 


lYMV 6 ] 

5 0 Wealthy Gods, ye taste aud find the brisk and watchful wild 
beast good. 

Associate wealth with food for us. 

7 As such, O Asvins, fiud for me my share of new-presented 

gifts, 

As Kasu, Chedi’s son, gave me a hundred head of buffaloes, 
and ten thousand kine. 

8 He who hath given me for mine own ten Kings like gold to 

look upon. 

At Chaidya’s feet are all the people round about, all those 
who think upon the shield, 

9 No mau, not any, goes upon the path on which the Chedis 

walk. 

No other prince, no folk is held more liberal of gifts than they. 

HYMN VI. Indra. 

Indra, great in his power and might, and like Parjanya rich 
in rain, 

Is magnified by Vatsa’s lauds. 

2 When the priests, strengthening the Son of Holy Law, present 

their gifts, 

Singers with Order’s hymn of praise. 

3 Since Kanvas with their lauds have made Indra complete the 

sacrifice, 

Words are their own appropriate arms. 

4 Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men, bow 

down, 

As livers bow them to the sea. 

5 This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought 

together, like 

A skin, the worlds of heaven and earth. 


36 According to SAyana the watchful xcild beast is therthe Soma which must 
5 chased or sought after by the Gods. Ludwig would read svapatho, with 4 
ansitive and causal meaning, instead of svddatho , i e , ye when ye appear 
i the morning send to sleep the wild beasts that have been awake all night, 
he st.mza is obscure. 

37 Buffaloes : or camels, 

33 This stanza appears to be spoken by Kasu who is called Chaidya or son 
c Chedi. Who think upon the shield : who are practised in wearing armour 
t leather, according to SAyana. 

3 arc their own appropriate arms: ‘thev declare all weapons 

eedlc8s.’-Wilaon. 



120 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Vm 

6 The fiercely-moving Vritra’s head he severed with his thunder- 

bolt, 

His mighty hundred-knotted bolt. 

7 Here are — we sing them loudly forth — our thoughts among 

the best of songs, 

Even lightnings like the blaze of fire. 

8 When hidden thoughts, spontaneously advancing, glow, and 

with the stream 
Of sacrifice the Kanvas shine. 

9 Iudra, may we obtain that wealth in horses and in herds of 

cows, 

And prayer that may be noticed first. 

.0 I from my Father have received deep knowledge of the Holy 
Law : 

I was born like unto the Sun. 

.1 After the lore of ancieut time I make, like Kanva, beauteous 
songs, 

And Indra' s self gains strength thereby. 

2 Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra, or have lauded 

thee, 

By me exalted wax thou strong. 

3 When his wrath thundered, when he rent Vritra to pieces, 

limb by limb, 

He sent the waters to the sea. 

14 Against the Dasyu Sushna thou, Indra, didst hurl thy during 
bolt : 

Thou, Dread One, hast a hero's fame. 

^5 Neither the heavens nor firmaments nor regions of the earth 
contain 

Indra, the Thunderer with his might. 

.6 0 Indra him who lay at length staying thy copious waters 
thou, 

In his own footsteps, smotest down. 

L7 Thou hiddest deep in darkness him, 0 Indra, who had set his 
grasp 

On spacious heaven and earth conjoined. 


10 From my Father : ‘from Indra, the true protector,’ according to 
12 Have not praised thee : have not praised thee yet, that is, will praise 
;hee hereafter.— Ludwig. 

16 In his own footsteps : or, in the (waters) at his feet. ‘Into the rushing 
itreams.’ — Wilson. 

17 Conjoined ; like two bowls turned towards each other. 



TEE RIGVEDA. 


121 


YMN 6.] 

) Indra, whatever Yatis and Bhrigus have offered praise to thee, 

Liston, thou Mighty, to my call. 

) Indra, these spotted cows yield thee their butter and the 
milky draught, 

Aiders, thereby, of sacrifice ; 

I Which, teeming, have received thee as a life-germ, Indra, with 
their mouth, 

Like Surya who sustaineth all. 

0 Lord of Might, with hymns of praise the Kanvas have 
increased thy power, 

The drops poured forth have strengthened thee. 

! Under thy guidance, Indra, mid thy praises, Lord of Thunder, 
shall 

The sacrifice be suoo performed. 

, Indra, disclose much food for us, like a stronghold with store 
of kine: 

Give progeny and heroic strength. 

: And, Indra, grant us all that wealth of fleet steeds which 
shone bright of old 

Among the tribes of Nahushas. 

i Hither thou seemest to attract heaven’s fold which shines be- 
fore our eyes, 

When, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

! Yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, Indra, thou governest 
the folk, 

Mighty, unlimited in strength. 

The tribes who briug oblations call to thee, to thee to give 
them help, 

With drops to thee who spreadest far. 

> There where the mountains downward slope, there by the 
meeting of the streams 

The Sage was manifest with song. 

1 Thence, marking, from his lofty place downward he looks 
upon the sea, 

And thence with rapid stir he moves. 

yo * P *°. U8 Ra £ e 8 -’ — Wilson. Angirnses, according to Sftyana. 

the stanza is unintelligible to me. Sayanasays that ; thee’ means Indra 

Ae shape of the grass which his fertilizing energy causes to grow, and by 

ll ] g 011 which the cows multiply. This energy of Indra’ a is all-supporting 

n, ^ ee Wilson’s note. Ludwig proposes an alteration of the text. 

28 Tit • or, perhaps, the neighbouring tribes. 

t * e ■< rc; Indra. ‘Sftyana’s conclusion of the purport of the verse is, 

,l~*ht to sacrifice in those places where Indra is said to be manifest- 

29 2 he sea; the reservoir of Some juice. 



THE HYMNS OF 


122 


[BOOK Vjj 


30 Then, verily, they see the light refulgent of primeval seed, 
Kindled on yonder side of heaven. 

31 Indra, the Kanvas all exalt thy wisdom and thy maul 

power, 

And, Mightiest! thine heroic strength. 

32 Accept this eulogy of mine, Indra, and guard me carefully; 
Strengthen my thought and prosper it. 

33 For thee, 0 Mighty, Thunder-armed, we singers through dev 

tion have 

Fashioned the hymn that we may live. 

34 To Indra have the Kanvas sung, like waters speeding don 

a slope : 

The song is fain to go to him. 

35 As rivers swell the ocean, so our hymns of praise make Indr 

strong, 

Eternal, of resistless wrath. 

36 Come with thy lovely Bay Steeds, come to us from regions h 

away : 

0 Indra, drink this Soma juice. 

37 Best slayer of the Vritras, men whose sacred grass is read 

trimmed 

Invoke thee for the gain of spoil. 

38 The heavens and earth come after thee as the wheel follow 

Etasa : 

To thee flow Soma-drops effused. 

31 Rejoice, 0 Indra, in the light, rejoice in Saryan-lvan, be 
Glad in the sacri fleer’s hymn. 

40 Grown strong in heaven, the Thunder-armed hath bellowet 

Vritra slayer, Bull, 

Chief drinker of the Soma juice. 

41 Thou art a Rishi born of old, sole Ruler over all by might : 
Thou, Indra, guardest well our wealth. 

42 May thy Bay Steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, brin 

thee to the feast, 

Bring thee to these our Soma-draughts. 

43 The Kanvas with their hymns of praise have magnified th 

ancient thought 

That swells with streams of meath and oil. 

30 The light : the Sun which is lighted up beyond the range of menssigli 

38 As the wheel follows Etasa; as the chariot of the Sun follows the 

that draws it. c t jj 

39 Saryanlvdn said to be a lake and district in Kurukshetra. & ee 
14, note. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


123 


|r)H/.V 7.1 

14 Mid mightiest Gods let mortal man choose Indra at the 

sacrifice, 

Indra, whoe’er would win, for help. 

5 Thy steeds, by Priyamedhas praised, shall bring thee, God 
whom all invoke, 

Hither to drink the Soma juice. 

16 A hundred thousand have I gained from ParBu, from 
Tirindira, 

And presents of the Yadavas, 

[7 Ten thousand head of kiue, and steeds throe times a hundred 
they bestowed 
On Pujra for the SS,ma-song. 

8 Knluilia hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffaloes yoked 
in fours, 

And matched in fame the Y&davas. 


HYMN VI f. 


Marat*. 


O Marots, when the sage hath poured the Trishtup forth as 
food for you, 


Ye shine amid the mountain-clouds. 


2 When, Bright Ones, fain to show your might ye have deter- 

mined on your course, 

The mountain-clouds have bent them down. 

3 Loud roaring with the wiuds the Sons of Prisni have upraised 

themselves : 


They have poured out the streaming food. 

4 The Harms spread the mist abroad and make the mountains 

rock and reel, 

When with the winds they go their way; 

5 What time the rivers and the hills before your coming bowed 

them down, 

So to sustain your mighty force. 


Puryi, from Tirindira: 1 f i om Tirindira the son of Parsu . 
w V?di a 2n h p^ m ? Ure ! ™ n,an (cf * Tiridates * Perpa )- See Weber’s EpUchcs 
(SitZUD8sberifhte derK - P ' Akadeuue der 

r Mams: or Yadus, descendants of the hero Yadu. 

*< Pajra: see VIII. 4. 17. 

48 Kakuha ■' or ’ the lo % °ne. meaning Tirindira. Buffalo*, or camels. 

toL r J4rinfluL‘Sd iD8 ri 0 . 0ne of Sfl W*' 8 three interpretations, the 
metre. g at th9 midda >’ hbation accompanied by hymns in the Trishtup 



124 * THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V //, 

6 We call on you for aid by night, on you for succour in the daj 
Oil you while sacrifice proceeds. 

7 These, verily, wondrous, red of hue, speed on their course 

with a roar 

Over the ridges of the sky. 

8 With might they drop the loosened rein so that the Sun ma 

run his course, 

And spread themselves with beams of light. 

9 Accept, ye Maruts, this my song, accept ye this mine hyw 

of praise, 

Accept, Ribhukshans, this my call. 

10 The dappled Cows have poured three lakes, meath for tin 
Thunder- wielding God, 

From the great cask, the watery cloud. 

110 Maruts, quickly come to us when, louging for felicity, 

We call you hither from the sky. 

12 For, Rudras and Ribhukshans, ye, Most Bountiful, are in th 

house, 

Wise when the gladdening draught is drunk. 

13 0 Maruts, send us down from heaven riches distilling raptur 

ousjoy, 

With plenteous food, sustaining all. 

14 When, Bright Ones, hither from the hills ye have resolved t 

take your way, 

Ye revel in the drops effused. 

15 Man should solicit with his lauds happiuess which belongs! 

them, 

So great a band invincible. 

1G They who like fiery sparks with showers of rain blow throng 
the heaven and earth, 

Milking the spring that never fails. 

17 With chariots and tumultuous roar, with tempests and witl 

hymns of praise 
The Sons of Prism hurry forth. 

18 For wealth, we think of that whereby ye aided Yadu, Turvas 
And Kanva who obtained the spoil. 


8 They drop the loosened rein : they speed forward to propare the way ^ 
the Sun. 

0 Ribhukshans : Mighty Ones, according to Sftyana. 

10 The dappled Cows: the ^Maruts, Three lakes: three large Soma 
tflcles, the JJronakalasa, the Adhavaniya } and the Pdtabhrit. The meaning 
the Maruts have poured down abundant water from the rain-cloud, 



THE MOVED A. 


125 


r MN 7.] 

Mav these our viands Bounteous Ones ! that flow in streams 
like holy oil, 

With Kanva’s hymns, increase your might. 

Where, Bounteous Lords for whom the grass is trimmed, are 
ye rejoicing now ? 

Wlmt Brahman is adoring you % 

Is it not there where yo of old, supplied with sacred grass, 
for lauds 

Inspired the strong in sacrifice I 

They brought together both the worlds, the mighty waters, 
aud the Sun, 

And, joint by joint, the thunderbolt. 

They sundered Vritra limb from limb and split the gloomy 
mountain-clouds, 

Performing an heroic deed. 

They reinforced the power and strength of Trita as he fought, 
and helped 

Indra in battle with the foe. 

i They deck themselves for glory, bright, celestial, lightning in 
their hands, 

And helms of gold upon their heads, 
i When eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern of the Bull, 
He bellowed in his fear like Heaven. 
r Borne by your golden footed steeds, 0 Gods, come hither to 
receive 

The sacrifice we offer you. 

5 When the red leader draws along their spotted deer yoked to 
the car. 

The Bright Ones come, and shed the rain. 

) Sushoma, Saryanav.in, and Arjika full of homes, have they, 
These Heroes, sought with downward car. 

19 With Kdnva's hymns: hymns of the Rishi Punnrvalsa, a descendant of 
iinva 

21 The strong in sacrifice : the Maghavans , wealthy worshippers. 

24 Trita : a Vedic deity, perhaps Agni in his third form, geneially associated 
ith Indra, Vftyu, and the Maruts. See. Vol. I., Index. In battle with the 
>c: or, to overcome Vritra. 

26 The cavern of the Bull: perhaps, the hollow of the rain-cloud; ‘the 
pening of the rainy (firmament).’ — Wilson. 

28 Leader ; or side-horse. 

29 Saryawdvdn : A has occurred before (see I. 84. 14, and VIII 6. 89) as the 
&uie of a lake. Arjika is said by S&yana to be the name of a district, and 
e takes sushdma (containing excellent Soma) to be an adjective qualifying it. 
tc Zimmer, Altindisches Zeben, p. 1 9. 



THE HYMNS OF 


126 


[BOOR VUi 


30 When, Maruts, will ye come to him, the singer who invokes 

you thus, 

With favours to your suppliant ? 

31 What now 1 where have ye still a friend since ye left Indra all 

alone ? 

Who countoth on your friendship now? 

32 The Kanvas sing forth Agni’s praise together with our 

Maruts 5 who 

Wield thunder and wear swords of gold. 

33 Hither for new felicity may I attract the Impetuous Ones, 
The Heroes with their wondrous strength. 

34 Before them sink the very hills deeming themselves abysses; 

yea, 

Even the mountains bend them down. 

35 Steeds flying on their tortuous path through mid-air carrj 

them, aud give 

The man who lauds them strength and life. 

36 Agni was born the first of all, like Surya lovely with his light; 
With lustre these have spread abroad. 


HYMN VIII. Asvim, 

With all the succours that are yours, 0 Asvins, hither come 
to us : 

Wonderful, borne on paths of gold, drink ye the meath with 
Soma juice. 

2 Como now, ye Asvins, on your car decked with a sun-bright 

canopy, 

Bountiful, with your golden forms, Sages with depth of 
intellect. 

3 Come hither from the Nahushas, come, drawn by pure hymns, 

from mid-air. 

0 Asvins, drink the savoury juice shed in the Kanvas’ 
sacrifice. 


31 Left Indra all alone ? ; This is merely a rhetorical question meaning, )' fl 
never did desert him. The Maruts aloue stood by him when he fought with 
Vritra. 

36 With lustre these have spread abroad : * then they (the Maruts) stood 
round in their radiance ’ 3 4 The Scholiast intimates that this verBe refers to 

the ceremony called Agnimdruta , when Agni is first worshipped, theu tw 
Maruts .’ — Wilson. 

3 From the Nahushas : or, according to others, from the neighbouring ^ 

people. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


127 


MN 8 .] 

Come to us hither from the heavens, come from mid-air, well- 
loved by us : 

Here Kanva’s son hath pressed for you the pleasant meath of 
Soma juice. 

Come, Asvins, to give ear to us, to drink the Soma, Asvins, 
come. 

Hail, Strengthened of the praise-song S speed onward, ye 
Heroes, with your thoughts. 

As, Heroes, in the olden time the Rishis called you to their 
aid, 

So now, 0 Asvins, come to us, come near to this mine eulogy. 

Even from the luminous sphere of heaven come to us, ye who 
find the light, 

Carers for Yatsa, through our prayers and lauds, 0 ye who 
hear our call. 

Do others more than we adore the Asvins with their hymns 
of praise? 

The Tiishi Vatsa, Kanva’s son, hath magnified you with his 
songs. 

The holy singer with his hymns hath called you, Asvins, hither- 
ward ; 

Best Vritra-slayers, free from stain, as such bring us felicity. 

What time, ye Lords of ample wealth, the Lady mounted on 
your car, 

Then, 0 ye Asvins, ye attained all wishes that your hearts 
desired. 

Come thence, O Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand 
ornaments : 

Vatsa the sage, the sago’s son, hath sung a song of sweets to 
you. 

Oheerers of many, rich in goods, discoverers of opulence, 

The Asvins, Riders through the sky, have welcomed this my 
song of praise. 

0 Asvins, grant us all rich gifts wherewith no man may 
interfere. 

Mako us observe the stated times : give us not over to reproach. 

: Whether, Nasatyas, ye be nigh, or whether ye be far away, 

Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand 
ornaments. 


7 Carers for Vatsa: ye who favour and provide for Vatsa, the IUahi of 
yum VI. of thia Book. 

10 The Lady ; SdryA, Daughter of the Sun. See. I. 116. 17. 



12 * 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Yin 


15 Vatsa the Rishi with his songs, Nasatyas, hath exalted you; 
Grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a thousand 

ornaments. 

16 Bestow on him, 0 Asvins, food that strengthens, and thal 

drops with oil, 

On him who praises you for bliss, and, Lords of bounty, pray* 
for wealth. 

17 Como to us, ye who slay the foe, Lords of rich treasure, t< 

this hymn. 

0 Heroes, give us high renown and these good things of eart! 
for help. 

1 8 The Priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours tha 

are yours, 

You, Asvins, Lords of solemn rites, with calls entreating yoi 
to come. 

19 Come to us, Asvins, ye who bring felicity, auspicious Ones, 
To Vatsa who with prayer and hymn, lovers of song, liatl 

honoured you. 

20 x\id us, 0 Heroes, for those hymns for which ye hclpe- 

Gosarya erst, . 

Gave Vasa, Dasavraja aid, and Kanva and Medhatithi ; 

21 And favoured Trasadasyu, ye Heroes, in .spoil-deciding fray : 
For these, 0 Asvins, graciously assist us in acquiring strengtl 

22 0 Asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and praise 

honour vou : 

Best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly year 
for you. 

23 Three places of the Asvins, erst concealed, are made apparent 


now. . 

Both Sages, with the flight of Law come hither 
who live. 

HYMN IX. 


unto those 
A'dM- 


To help and favour Vatsa now, 0 Asvins, come ye hitherward. 
Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, ant CC P 


malignities away. __ 

20 Gofirya : said by SAyana to bo a name of Siyu. Sea I. HO, 22. 
and Dasacraja are known only as proUyis of the Asvins. 

21 Trasadasyu: see Vol. I., Index. . • Aavins' 

23 Three places: according to S&yana, the three wheels of e A 

chariot are intended. The three places can only be heaven, Brina 
earth, hidden during the darkness of night and made visible by tt 


of the Asvins and Dawn. 

1 Vatsa: apparently another name of Saaakarua, 
descendant of Kanva, the ltishi of the hymn, 


called also Klava or 



THE RIG VEDA. 


129 


MS 9-] 


All manliness that is in heaven, with the Five Tribes, or in 
mid-air, 

Bestow, ye Asvins, upon us. 

Remember Kanva first of all among the singers, Asvins, who 

Have thought upon your wondrous deeds. 

Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused, 

This your sweet Soma juice, ye Lords of ample wealth, through 
which ye think upon the foe. 

Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, Wonder-Wor- 
kers, and in growing plants, 

Therewith, 0 Asvins, succour me. 

What force, Nasatyas, ye exert, whatever, Gods, ye tend and 
heal, 

This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone : ye visit 
him who offers gifts. 

Now hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the Asvins 5 
hymn of praise. 

Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, and Soma 
very rich in sweets. 

Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls upon its 
way. 

May these my praises make you speed hitherward like a cloud 
of heaven. 

When, 0 Nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither with 
our hymns, 

Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember Kanva 
specially. 

As erst Kaksbivati and the Rishi Vyasva, as erst Dirghatamas 
invoked your presence, 

Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prithi, so be ye mind- 
ful of us here, 0 Asvins. 


Thuiujkt upon : or touched upon, handled. 

Think upon the foe : plan the destruction of the demon of darkness. 

1 Whatever ye hare done: Professor Wilson paraphrases after Sftjana: 
eserve me with that (healing vit^ue) deposited b} you in the wateis, in 
tives, in the herbs.’ 

The A tkavvan ; the priest who has special charge of the fire and the Soma, 
illow Ludwig in taking a tharrani as a nominative and not as a locative as 
^vnadoes: 4 he will spi inkle the sweet-flavoured Soma and the gharma 
Ltiou) ou the Atharvan fire.’ — Wilson. 

10 hahshivlu: seel. 18. 1. Vyasvi : see I 112 15. Dirghatamas : see Vol, 
ludex. Vui.iya; son of Vena. P>itM: the first anointed king. 



180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

11 Come as home-guardians, saving us from foemen, guarding 

our living creatures and our bodies, 

Come to the house to give us seed and offspring, 

12 Whether with India yc be faring, Asvins, or resting in oiie* 

dwelling-place with Vayu, 

In concord with the Kibhus or A dityas, or standing still in 
Vishnu’s striding-places. 

13 When I, 0 Asvins, call on you to-day that I may gather 

strength, 

Or as all-conquering might in war, bo that the Alvins’ noblest 
grace. 

14 Now come, ye Asvins, hitherward: here are oblations set 

for you ; 

These Soma-draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, these offered 
you mid Kanva’s sons. 

15 Whatever healing balm is yours, Nasatyas, near or far away, 
Therewith, great Sages, grant a home to Vatsa and to Vimada. 

16 Together with the Goddess, with the Asvins’ Speech have 

awoke. 

Thou, Goddess, hast disclosed the hymn, and holy gift fron 
mortal men. 

17 Awake the Asvins, Goddess Dawn ! Up Mighty Lady of swee 

strains ! 

Rise, straightway, priest of sacrifice ! High glory to th< 
gladdening draught ! 

18 Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light shinest togethei 

with the Sun, 

And to this man-protecting home the chariot of the Asvins comes 

19 When yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows from udders 

pour their milk, 

And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins’ worshippers 
show first. 

20 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall 

couquer men, 

And power and skill, most sapient Ones ! 

11 Out living creatures : our dependents and our cattle. 

12 Vishnu's striding pf accs : from which he made hi« three great strides 
through earth, firmament, and heaven. 

18 That: the granting of my request. 

15 And to Vimada : as ye did to Vimada. — Sflyana. See Vol. I., Index. 

16 The Goddess : Dawn. The A » mns' Speech : V&k or Speech who glorifies 
the Asvins ; i. e. the hymn that praises them. 

19 Yellow stalks : of Soma plants. 

20 Forward for glory : advance and come to give us glory, etc. 



When, Asvins, worthy of our lauds, ye seat you in the father’s 
house. 

With wisdom or the bliss ye bring. 

HYMN X. Asvins. 

Whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of 
heaven, 

Or in a mansion that is built above the sea, come thence, ye 
Asvins, hitherward. 

2 Or if for Manu ye prepared the sacrifice, remember also Kanva’s 

son. 

I call Brihaspati, Indra, Vishnu, all the Gods, the Asvins borne 
by rapid steeds. 

3 Those Asvins I invoke who work marvels, brought hither 

to receive, 

With whom our friendship is most famed, and kinship passing 
that of Gods. 

4 On whom the solemn rites depend, whose worshippers rise 

without the Sun : 

These who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice, and by their 
Godhead drink the sweets of Soma juice. 

5 Whether ye, Lords of ample wealth, now linger in the east 

or west, 

With Druhyu, or with Anu, Yadu, Turvsa, I call you hither ; 
come to me. 

6 Lords of great riches, whether through the firmament ye fly 

or speed through heaven and earth, 

Or with your Godlike natures stand upon your cars, come 
thence, 0 Asvins, hitherward. 

HYMN XI. Agui. 

Thou, Agni, God mid mortal men, art guard of sacred rites, 
thou art 

To be adored at sacrifice. 

21 In the father's house : in the sacrificial hall of the father of the family, 
the wealthy householder who institutes the sacrifice. This stanza is a conti- 
nuation of 19, although the connexion is interrupted by the intervening stanza. 


1 Above the sea : above the ocea^ of air. 

3 To receive : our oblations. 

4 Without the sun : S'tyana explains astire differently, connecting in with 
pm instead of sfira : ‘ of whom there are worshippers in a place where there 

is no worship.’— Wilson. 

5 Druhyu and the other names staud for the tribes called after these 
ancient chieftains. See Vol. I., Index. 

iIZ!Z ma “ translated in Mvx Muller’s History of * Ancient Sanskt'U 



132 


THE HYMNS OF 


f BOOK VIJI 


2 0 Mighty Agni, thou must be glorified at our festivals, 
Bearing our offerings to the Gods. 

3 0 Jatavedas Agni, fight and drive our foes afar fiom us, 

Them and their godless enmities. 

4 Thou, Jatavedas, scekest not the worship of a hostile man, 
However nigh it be to thee. 

5 We sages, mortals as we are, a lore the mighty name of thee, 
Immortal Jatavedas’ name. 

6 Sages, wo call the Sage to help, mortals, we call the God to aid : 
We call on Agni with our songs. 

7 May Yatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwel- 

ling-place, 

Agni, with song that yearns for thee. 

8 Thou art the same in many a place : mid all the people thou 

art Lord. 

In fray and fight we call on thee. 

9 When we are seeking strength we call Agni to help us in 

the strife, 

The giver of rich gifts in war. 

10 Ancient, adorable at sacrifices, Priest from of old, meet for our 
praise, thou sittest. 

Fill full and satisfy thy body, Agni, and win us happiness by 
offering worship. 

HYMN XII. Indra. 

Joy, Mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung most from 
Soma-draughts, wherewith 

Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that we long. 

2 Wherewith thou holpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, and 

the God 

Who stirs the sunlight, and the sea, for that we long. 

3 Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and all the 

mighty floods 

To go the way ordained by Law, for that we long. 

2 Bearing our offering* to tie Gorts: liteially, ‘the charioteer of solemn rites.’ 

1 Joy: mddah : the rapturous exhilaration produced in Indra by d linking 
the S«>ma juice. For that we Lout/; the short refrain or burden which 
generally concludes each stanza of each triplet of this hymn is sometimes 
rather loosely attached and cannot always be clearly brought out in the proper 
place in translation. 

2 Adhrigu : according to S Ay ana a Rishi so named. See I 1 1 2. 20. Dasagva : 
one of the priestly family connected with, or identical with, the Angirases, 

* the accomplisher of the ten (months’ rib).’ -Wilson. Ludwig thinks that^ 
Dagagva here may m< an the Sun The sea : of dir. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


133 


hymn 12.3 


4 Accept this laud for aid, made pure like oil, thou Caster of 

the Stone, 

Whereby even in a moment thou hast waxen great. 

5 Be pleased, Song-lover, with this song : it flows abundant 

like the sea. 

Indra, with all thy succours thou hast waxen great. 

6 The God who from afar hath sent gifts to maintain our 

friendship’s bond, 

Thou, spreading them like rain from heaven, hast waxen great. 

7 The beams that mark him have grown strong, the thunder 

rests between bis arms, 

When, like the Sun, he hath increased both Heaven and Earth. 

8 When, Mighty Lord of Heroes, thou did.st eat a thousand 

buffaloes, 

Then grew and waxed exceeding great thine Indra-power. 

9 Indra consumeth with the rays of Surya the malicious man: 
Like Agni conquering the woods, he hath grown strong. 

10 This newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches 

unto thee : 

Serving, beloved in many a place, it metes and marks. 

11 The pious germ of sacrifice directly purifies the soul. 

By Indra’s lauds it waxes great, it metes and marks. 

12 Indra who wins the friend hath spread himself to drink the 

Sorna-draught : 

Like worshipper’s dilating praise ; it metes and marks. 

13 He whom the sages, living men, have gladdened, offering up 

their hymns, 

Hath swelled like oil of sacrifice in Agni’s mouth. 


8 Didst cat a thousand buffaloes: the buffaloes probably represent the clouds 
which the Sun dissipates or consumes. — Ludwig. ‘When thou hast slain 
thousands of mighty foes.’ — Wilson. 

10 It metes and marks: defines and discriminates Indra’s good qualities.— 

»S;ty. in a. 

H the germ of sacrifice is probably the wish that prompts the offering. 

My. ma explains differently : ‘ 7 . e devout praiser of the adorable (India) 
pun is in due succession the offering (of the Soma) ; with sacred hymns he 
magnifies (the might of Indra; he voiily proclaims the measure (of his merits).* 
t diluting praise : I follow Sftyana ; but the stanza is unin- 

‘ tgi jle to me. ‘Indra, the benefactor of his friend (the worshipper), has 

at ged himself to drink the Soma, in like manner as the pious praise dilates 
fnrJ )10C auns the measure of hia merits.’ — Wilson. The meaning of ivtaf 
accort * in S to Siyava) is unceitAin. Von Roth thinks that the two 
in sapJitw 8 are meaut i aQ d other explain it as the sword, knife, or axe used 



THE HYMNS OF 


134 


[BOOK Yin 


14 Aditi also hath brought forth a hymn for Indra, Sovran Lord: 
The work of sacrifice for help is glorified. 

1 5 The ministering priests have sungtheir songs for aid and eulogy; 
God, thy Bays turn not from the rite which Law ordains. 

16 If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu’s or Trita Aptya's side> 
Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops ; 

17 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air, 
Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops. 

18 Or, Lord of Heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who sheds the 

juice, 

Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing drops. 

19 To magnify the God, the God, Indra, yea, Indra for your help, 
And promptly end the sacrifice — this have they gained. 

20 With worship, him whom men adore, with Soma, him who 

drinks it most, 

Indra with lauds have they increased — this have they gained. 

21 His leadings are with power and might and his instructions 

manifold : 

He gives the worshipper all wealth : this have they gained. 

22 For slaying Vritra have the Gods set Indra in the foremost 

place. 

Indra the choral bands have sung, for vigorous strength. 

23 We to the Mighty with our might, with lauds to him who 

hears our call, 

With holy hymns have sung aloud, for vigorous strength. 

24 Not earth, nor heaven, nor firmaments contain the Thunder- 

wielding God : 

They shake before his violent rush and vigorous strength. 

25 What time the Gods, 0 Indra, set thee foremost in the furious 

fight, 

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on. 

26 When Vritra, stayer of the floods, thou slewest, Thunderer 

with might, 

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on. 

27 When Vishnu, through thine energy, strode wide those three 

great steps of his, 

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on. 

28 When thy two beautiful Bay Steeds grew great and greater 

day by day, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee. 

16 Trita Aptya : see VIII. 7. 24, note. Here he appears as the preparer d 

fnr Indra. 



TIIE RIO VEDA. 


1S5 


ffYMN 13.] 

jO When, Indra, all theMarut folk humbly submitted them to thee, 
Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee. 
jO When yonder Sun, that brilliant light, thou settest in the 
heaven above, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee, 
jl To thee, 0 Indra, with this thought the sage lifts up this eulogy, 
Akin and loading as on foot to sacrifice. 

J2 When in thine own dear dwelling all gathered have Lifted up 
the voice 

Milk-streams at worship’s central spot, for sacrifice, 

)3 As Priest, 0 Indra, give us wealth in brave men and good 
steeds and kinc 

That we may first remember thee for sacrifice. 

HYMN XIII. I Ddrtt . 

Indra, when Soma juices flow, makes his mind pure and meet 
for lauds. 

Ho gains the power that brings success, for great is he. 

2 In heaven’s first region, in the seat of Gods, is he who brings 

success, 

Most glorious, prompt to save, who wins the water-floods. 

3 Him, to win strength, have I invoked, even Indra mighty for 

the fray. 

Be thou most near to us for bliss, a Friend to aid. 

4 Indra, Songdover, here for thee the worshippers libation flows 
Rejoicing in this sacred grass thou shinest forth. 

5 Even now, 0 Indra, give us that which, pressing juice, wo 

crave of thee. 

Bring us wealth manifold which finds the light of heaven, 
fi What time the zealous worshipper hath boldly sung his songs 
to thee, 

Like branches of a tree up-grows what they desire. 

7 Generate songs even as of old, give ear unto the singer’s call : 
Thou for the pious hast grown great at each carouse. 

31 The second line is difficult. Wilson, following S4ya*ja, paraphrases the 
Btauza : ‘ The wise (worshipper), India, offers thee this gratifying sincere 
pra^LMe along with pious rites at the sacrifice, as (a man places) a kinsinau in 
(a prominent) position.’ 

32 M ilk- stream* : the sweetly -flowing hymns. 

Wilson remarks : ‘ This is probably an ancient hymn, both by it* repetitions 
nd combination of simplicity and obscurity.’ 



139 


THE BY MSS OF [BOOK T/// 


8 Sweet strains that glorify^him play like waters speeding down 

a slope, . . TI 

Yea, him who in this song is called the Lord of Heaven ; 

9 Yea, who alone is called i he Lord, the single Ruler of the folk, 
By worshippers seeking aid : may he joy in the draught. 

10 Praise him, the Glorious, skilled in song, Lord of the two 

victorious Bays : 

They seek the worshipper's abode who bows in prayer. 

11 Put forth thy strength: with dappled Steeds come, thou o! 

mighty intellect, 

With swift Steeds to the sacrifice, for ’tie thy joy. 

12 Grant wealth to those who praise thee, Lord of Heroes, 

Mightiest fndra : give 
Our princes everlasting fame and opulence. 

13 I call thee when the Sun is risen, I call thee at the noon of day; 
With thy car-horses, Indra, come well-pleased to us. 

14 Speed forward hither, come to us, rejoice thee in the milky 

draught : . „ . . 

Spin out the threal of ancient time, as well is known. 

13 If, Sakra, Vritra-slayer, thou he far away or near to us, 

Or in the sea, thou art the guard of Soma juice. 

16 Let songs we sing and Soma-drops expressed by us make 

Indra strong : . 

The tribes who bring oblations find defight in him. 

17 Him sages longing for bis aid, with offerings brought in eager 

haste, 

Him, even as branches, all mankind have made to grow. 

18 At theTrikadrnkas the Coils span sacrifice that stirred the mud: 
May onr songs strengthen him who still hath strengthened 

19 When, true to duty, at due times the worshipper offers lands 


to thee, 

They call him Purifier, Pure, and Wonderful. 


TI Spin out the thread of ancient times : * extend the ancient Bncrifiee. 

^Thedue peiformanoe of sacrifice is regaided as an unbroken thieatl reaching 
th'ongh a Hiiocesvdon of Ilinhia f'om ancient to modern times. 

15 lathcsea: in the firmament, or ocenti i of air. 

17 AV mankind: HlmM But.ee M. Muller \ (die Hymns I. 6W- 

18 At the TAkfulruhis : arroiding to Silyana these are the first t! 

of the Ahhiplava ceremony. Aeeoidmg to Rome modern i bcIm> » rH 
probably tliree peculiar Soma-vessels, or an oblation consisting of . 

ing« of Soma. Span sacrifice : see above note on 14. That stirred 

that urged others to follow the example. 

19 Him : a change of per-on, India being meant. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


1&7 


YMN 13] 

) That mind of Rudra, fresh and strong, moves conscious in the 
ancient ways, 

With reference whereto the wise have ordered this, 
jf thou elect to be my Friend drink of this sacrificial juice, 

By help whereof we may subdue all enemies. 

) () In Ira, Lover of the song, when shall thy praiser be most blest? 

When wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds? 

\ And thy two highly-lauded Bays, strong stallions, draw thy 
car who art 

Untouched by age, most gladdening car for which we pray. 

I With ancient offerings we implore the Young and Strong 
whom many praise. 

He from of old hath sat upon dear sacred grass. 

) Wax mighty, thou whom many laud for aids which Risliis 
have extolled. 

Pour down for us abundant food and guard us well. 

3 0 fndra, Caster of the Stone, thou helpest him who praises thee: 

From sacrifice l send to thee a mind yoked hymn 
J Here, yoking for the Soma draught these Horses, sharers of 
tl y feast, 

Thy Bay Steeds, Indra, fraught with wealth, consent to come. 

R Attendants on thy glory, lgt the Rudras roar assent to thee, 
And all the Marut companies come to the feast. 

9 These his victorious followers hold in the heavens the place 
they love, 

Leagued in the heart of sacrifice, as well we know. 

0 That we may long behold the light, what time the ordered 

rite proceeds, 

He duly measures, as he views, the sacrifice. 

1 0 Indra, strong is this thy car, and strong are these Bay 

Steeds of thine : 

0 Satakratu, thou art strong, strong is our call. 

| 20 Have ordered thin : son" of praise, or Imly ceremony. — Ludwig, 
i 26 Mind-yoked : m ule ready by the poet’s mind, as a chariot — to which the 
J’tnu is frequently compared — is equipped for a journey. 

28 The Rudras : the sons of Rudra, the Maruts. 

^9 The heart, literally navel, tha; is the central point, of sacrifice, is the 
icoptvcle on which oblations are placed, or the uttaravedl or north altar. 

31 Strong ; irlshd * as h.>s been noticed before (see I. 177 2. 3 ) some of 

|f! ' r ° ( h c poets delight in the repetition of this word and derivatives from the 
loetdot SHyana explains vrishi : ns ‘ showerer of benefits,’ nnd Ludwig 
fin* ate* it by ‘ itierkijiftig,* strong as a bull. The original meaning of the 
01 is mule, masculine, and, hence, stroug, 



138 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

32 Strong is the press-stone, strong thy joy, strong is the flowii 

Soma juice: 

Strong is the rite thou furtherest, strong is our call. 

33 As strong I call on thee the Strong, 0 Thunderer with th 

thousand aids : 

For thou hast won the hymn of praise. Strong is our call, 

HYMN XI V. Indn 

Ip I, 0 Indra, were, like thee, the single Sovran of all wealth 
My worshipper should bo rich in kino. 

2 I should be fain, 0 Lord of Power, to strengthen and enricl 

the sage, 

Were I the Lord of herds of kine. 

3 To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, Indra, iaa 

cow 

Yielding in plenty kine and steeds. 

4 None is there, Indra, God or man, to hinder thy munificence 
The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give. 

5 The sacrifice made Indra strong when ho unrolled the earth, 

and made 

Himself a diadem in heaven. 

6 Thine aid we claim, 0 Indra, thine who after thou hast waxeu 

great 

Hast won all treasures for thine own. 

7 In Soma’s ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and realms of 

light, 

When he cleft Vala limb from limb. 

8 Showing the hidden he dravo forth the cows for the Angirases, 
And Vala he east hoadlong down. 

9 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven established 

and secured, 

Firm and immovable from their place. 

10 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of water 

floods : 

Bright shine the drops that gladden thee. 

11 For thou, 0 Indra, art the God whom hymns and praises 

magnify : 

Thou blessest those who worship thee. 

12 Let the two long-maned Bay Steeds bring Indra to drink the 

Soma juice, 

The Bountiful to our sacrifice. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


139 


With waters* foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of Namuchi, 
Subduing all contending hosts. 

The Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic arts and 
mount to heaven, 

Thou, Indra, castest down to earth. 

\ As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou scatteredst to every side 
Their settlement who poured no gifts. 

HYMN XV. Indra. 

Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom 
many laud : 

Invite tue powerful Indra with your songs of praise. 

I Whose lofty might — for doubly strong is he — supports the 
heavens and earth, 

And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power. 

\ Such, Praised by many ! thou art King : alone thou smitest 
Vritras dead, 

To gain, 0 Indra, spoils of war and high renown. 

1 We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which conquers 
in the fray, 

Which, Caster of the Stone ! gives room and ^hincs like gold. 

5 Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and for Manu*s 

sake : 

Now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth. 

6 This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this might 

of thine : 

Win thou the waters day by day, thralls of the strong. 

7 That lofty Indra-powcr of thine, thy strength and thine 
] intelligence, 

I Thy thunderbolt for which we long, the wish makes keen. 

P 0 Indra, Heaven and Earth augment thy manly power and 
thy renown : 

The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on. 

9 Vishnu the lofty ruling Power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise : 
In thee the Maruts’ company have great delight. 

13 With waters' foam: with a thunderbolt in the form of foam, according 
> a later legend. See Lanmau, Sanskrit Reader , p. 375, who takes Namuchi 
) be a waterspout in a lake, and ‘ with foam ’ to mean ‘ accompanied by foam.‘ 

4 Wild'deliyht Soma juice, the cause of thy raptuie. 

» 4 5 / ur Ayu and for Manu's sake : that is for man. Ayu was the son of 
i muiavaa and Urvaat. 

^ Thralls of the sU'ong : controlled and imprisoned by Vritra. 

The with : our wishes expressed in prayer and praise. 



140 THE I1YMSS OF [BOOK T//| 

10 0 Indra, thou wast born the Lord of men, most liberal of tin 

gifts : 

Excellent deeds for evermore are all thine own. 

11 Ever, alone, 0 highly- praised, thou sendest Vritras to tlicii 

rest : 

None else than Indra executes the mighty deed. 

12 Though here and there, in varied hymns, India, men call on 

thee for aid, 

Still with our heroes fight and win the light of heaven. 

13 Already have all forms of him entered our spacious dwelling. 

place : 

For victory stir thou Indra, up, the Lord of Might. 

HYMN XVT. Iuifai 

Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, sole Sovran ol 
mankind, the Chief 
Most liberal who controllcth men. 

2 In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the glory-givin| 

songs, 

Like the floods’ longing for the sea. 

3 Him I invite with eulogy, best King, effective in the fight, 
Strong for the gain of mighty spoil. 

4 Whose perfect ecstasies are wide, profound, victorious, am 

give 

Joy in the field where heroes win. 

5 Him, when the spoils of war are staked, men call to be thei 

advocate : 

They who have Indra win the day. 

6 Men honour him with stirring songs, and magnify with solcni 

rites : 

Indra is he who giveth ease. 

7 Indra is Priest and Hishi, he is much invoked by many mer 
And mighty by his mighty powers. 

8 Meet to be lauded and invoked, true Hero with his deeds < 

might, 

Victorious even when alone. 


13 All forms of him: the various qualities of Indra have been yeMmite • 
Stir thou: the Ilinhi addresses himself. Loui of Might: S'tchipatvn ■ 
later literature, lord or husband of Sachl or his might personified and icgar 
as his consort. 

7 Priest: brnhmtt , meaning, according to S&yana, greater than all 
45 7, ‘The Brahman who accepts the praje*,' that is, Indra regi'R^ 
priest, Rishi : according to Sayat.a, ‘ the beholder of all the Aryan iw* 



THE RIG VEDA. 


141 


iy 17.3 

The men, the people magnify that Indra with their Sama songs, 
tV i th hymns and sacred eulogies : 

iim who advances them to wealth, sends light to lead them 
in the war, 

\nd quells their foemcn in the fray. 

Way he, the saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear us in a 
ship 

Safely beyond all enemies. 

Vs such, 0 indra. honour us with gifts of booty, further us, 
Vnd lead us to felicity. 

HYMN XVII. i„< Jra . 

?ome, we have pressed the juice fur thee ; 0 Indra, drink 
this Soma here : 

$it thou on this my sacred grass. 

3 Indra, let thy long maned Bays, yoked by prayer, bring 
thee hitherward : 

live car and listen to our prayers. 

Ye Soma-bearing Brahmans call thee Soma-drinker with thy 
friend, 

Ye, Indra, bringing Soma juice. 

3omo unto us who bring the juice, come unto this our eulogy, 
hxir visored ! drink thou of the juice. 

1 pour it down within thee, so through all thy members let it 
spread : 

lake with thy tongue the pleasant drink. 

jweet to thy body let it bo, delicious be the savoury juice : 

hveet be the Soma to thine heart. 

dke women, let this Soma draught, invested with its robe, 
approach, 

) active Indra, close to thee. 

rnlra, transported with the juice, vast in his bulk, strong in 

his neck 

bid stout arms, smites the Vritras down. 

^dra, go thou forward, thou who rulest over all by might : 
h°u Vritra-slayer slay the fiends. 

he thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest ample wealth 
to him 

^ ho sheds the juice and worships thee. 

\u‘! •' Iudra’s companion, th© thunderbolt. ‘With suitable 

WiU,n. 

flilk that € '‘ \ <lre ^ G(l white garments and moving slowly. Its robe: 



THE HYMNS OF 


142 


[BOOR yjjj 


1 1 Here, Indra, is thy Soma-draught, made pure upon the sacred 

grass : 

Run hither, come and drink thereof. 

12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well ! this juice is shed 

for thy delight : 

Thou art invoked, Akhandala ! 

13 To Kundapayya, grandson’s son, grandson of Sringavrish ' to 

thee,** * 

To him have I addressed my thought. 

14 Strong pillar thou, Lord of the home ! armour of Soma-offerers 
The drop of Soma breaketh all the strongholds down, an 

Indra is the Kish is’ Friend. 

15 Holy Pridakusanu, winner of the spoil, one eminent o’er man] 

men, 

Lead on the wild horse Indra with his vigorous grasp forwart 
to drink the Soma juice. 


HYMN XVIII. Adityu 

Now let the mortal offer prayer to win the unexampled grace 
Of these Adityas and their aid to cherish life. 


12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well: the words thus rendered, 
stitch igo aud sttchipUjana , have not been satisfactorily explained by the Com- 
mentator, and their meaning is still uncertain. According to Siiyaiin, tk 
former may mean ‘thou whose cattle are strong,’ or ‘thou whose radiand 
is renowned,’ and the latter ‘thou of renowned adoration ’ or ‘whose hymn, 
are renowned * 8ee Wilson’s note. Thou urt invoked, Akhandalal : or, ‘Thou, 
0 Destroyer, art invoked.’ This appellation of Indra does not occur agaiu is 
the Rigveda, 8ee Muir, 0 S. 'Texts, IV. 190. 

13 Kvndaplyya and Sringavrish appear hero to be names of men. Accord 
ing to S&yana, knndaptityya is the name of a particular Soma ceremony, and 
the offspring of Sringavrish is Indra himself. ‘(Indra), who wad: the off 
spring of Sringavrish, of whom the kundapdyya rite was the protector, (the 
sages) have fixed (of old) their minds upon this ceremony.’ See Wilson* 
note who observes that ‘ tho construction is loose, aud the exphuiationnk 
very satisfactory.’ 

14 Lord of the home : apparently the householder who institutes the satfi 
fice is addressed, he vdstoshpate grihapate. — tt&yana. The Riskin' 
munindm sakhd , the friend of the Munis, sages, saintly men or ascetics; of n* 
Rishis, according to S&yana. 

15 Priddkusdnu : I follow Ludwig in taking this to be the name of the 
insti tutor of the sacrifice. According to Sftyana who explains it as 'lif^ 
up the head or back like a serpent,’ or * to be propitiated, as a serpent is, 
gems, charms, medicaments, etc.,’ it is an epithet of Indra ; and the le*®* 
forward of Indra in the second line is the worshipper, understood. 11^ 
mania banishes the last three stanzas to his Appendix as not originally for®* 
ing part of the hymn. 

1 Adityat: see I. 14, 3. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


143 


rj/zv 18.1 


for not an enemy molests the paths which these Adityas tread : 
Infallible guards, they strengthen us in happiness, 
tfow soon may Bhaga, Savitar, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman 
Give us the shelter widely spread which we implore. 

With Gods come thou whose fostering care none checks, O 
Goddess Aditi : 

Come, dear to many, with the Lords who guard us well. 

For well these Sons of Aditi know to keep enmities aloof : 
Unrivalled, giving ample room, they save from woe. 

Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, by night, 
Aditi, ever strengthening, save us from grief ! 

And in the day our hymn is this : May Aditi come nigh to help, 
With loving-kindness bring us weal and chase our foes. 

And may the Asvins, the divine Pair of Physicians, send us 
health : 

May they remove iniquity and chase our foes. 

May Agni bless us with his fires, and Surya warm us 
pleasantly : 

May the pure Wind breathe sweet on us, and chase our foes, 
i Drive ye disease and strife away, drive yo away malignity : 
Adityas, keep us ever far from sore distress. 


Remove from us the arrow, keep famine, Adityas ! far away : 

Keep enmities afar from us, Lords of all wealth ! 

! Now, 0 Adityas, grant to us the shelter that lets man go free, 

Yea, even the sinner from his sin, ye Bounteous Gods ! 

► Whatever mortal with the power of demons fain would 
injure us, 

May he, impetuous, suffer harm by his own deeds. 

1 May sin o’ertake our human foe, the man who speaketh evil 
things, 

Him who would cause our misery, whose heart is false. 

) Gods, ye are with the simple ones, ye know each mortal 
your hearts : 

Ye, Vasus, well discriminate the false and true. 

} Kain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains and 
water-floods : 

Keep far from us iniquity, O Heaven and Earth. 

? So with auspicious sheltering aid do yo, 0 Vasus, carry us 

Beyond all trouble and distress, borne in your ship. 


in 


of 


4 With the Lords : sHrihhth ; that is, the Gods. 

With the power of demons : ‘ from his diabolical nature.’— Wilson. 



THE ffYMXS OF 


144 


[BOOK Via 


18 Adityas, ye Most Mighty Ones, grant to our children and 

their seed 

Extended term of life that they may live long days. 

19 Sacrifice, 0 Adityas, is your inward monitor : be kind, 

For in the bond of kindred we are bound to you. 

20 The Maruts’ high protecting aid, the Asvins, and the God 

who saves, 

Mitra and Varuin for weal we supplicate. 

21 Grant us a home with triple guard, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna! 
Unthreatened, Maruta ! meet for praise, and tilled with men. 

22 And as we human beings, 0 Adityas, are akin to death, * 
Graciously lengthen ye our lives that wo may live. 

HYMN XIX. 

Sing praise to him, the Lord of Light. The Gods have made 
the God to be their messenger, 

And sent oblation to the Gods. 

2 A:ni, the Bounteous Giver, bright with varied flames, laud 

thou, 0 singer Sobhari — 

Him who controls this sacred food with Soma blent, who hath 
first claim to sacrifice. 

3 Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, Immortal Priest 

among the Gods,’ 

Wise finisher of this holy rite : 

4 The Son of Strength, the blesskl, brightly-shining One, Agni 

whose light is excellent. 

M ty he by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of Mitra, 
Varuna, and the Floods. 

5 The mortal who hath ministered to Agui with oblation, fuel 

r.tual lore, 

And reverence, skilled in sacrifice, 


19 Your inward monitor : or neir remembrancer, not suffering you to reu 
until you have rewarded men for their devotions. Ludwig gays that tin 
Juf/th of the text is leally hi Uah For sacrifice, Adityas, is your neaiesi 
dwelling pi tee 

20 Tin (rod who saves: Imlra, who is especially the tutelary Oml of A'vaiw 

21 With triple fjnanl. or, triply defending or defended According h 
SAjaoa, protecting from heat, cold, and wot ; or three-stoi eyed. 

22 Akin to death: born subject to death. 

1 The Gods: in the first line are, according to S&y.uia, the priests, i. ^ 
who praise : dim/anti stuvantiti devd ritvijo ; but the word may be taken u 
its ordinary signification. 

5 Ritual lore : ridena here can hardly mean, as SAyana explains it, ty 
studying the Vedo’ It may perhaps mean ‘ by knowledge of the l jro P, crU ^ 
of the saccd formulas.’ or hh M Muller says, ‘by the bundle of gras* ub 
in sacrifice. See Anc. S. Literature . p. 28, note, and p. 205. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


UB 


TJLV 19.] 

$ Verily swift to run are his fleet-footed steeds, and most re- 
splendent fame is his. 

No trouble caused by Gods or wrought by mortal man from 
any side o’ertaketh him. 

f May we by thine own fires be well supplied with fire, 0 Son 
of Strength, 0 Lord of Might : 

Thou as our Friend hast worthy men. 

} Agni, who praises like a guest of friendly mind, is as a car 
f that brings us gear. 

| Also in thee is found perfect security : thou art the Sovran 
Lord of wealth. 

) That man, moreover, merits praise who brings, auspicious 
Agni, sacrificial gifts : 

May he win riches by his thoughts. 

0 He for whose sacrifice thou standest up erect is prosperous 

and rules o’er men. 

He wins with coursers and with singers skilled in song : with 
heroes he obtains the prize. 

1 He in whoso dwelling Agni is chief ornament, and, all-desired, 

loves his laud well, 

And zealously tends his offerings — 

2 His, or the lauding sage’s word, his, Son of Strength ! who is 

most prompt with sacred gifts, 

Set thou beneath the Gods, Vasu, above mankind, the speech 
of the intelligent. 

3 He who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very skilful 

Agni nigh, 

I Or him who flashes fast with song, 

|4 The mortal who with blazing fuel, as his laws command, 
adores the Perfect God, 

Blest with his thoughts in splendour shall exceed all men, as 
though he overpassed the floods. 

& Give us the splendour, Agni, which may overcome each 
greedy fiend in our abode, 

The wrath of evil-hearted folk. 


7 Hast worthy men: in us thy woi shippers. 

10 With coursers and with singers : is successful in chariot-races and is 
1 aided by the Gods for his sacrifices. 

beneath the Gods and above mankind, is rud to mean * spread 
ough all the sky.’ The meaning of this and the preceding stanza is some- 

obscurely expressed. 

^Uibie, P clmpleto!'’ <e; eiplained by S4y ™ a as akhandaniycm, 



THE HYMNS OF 


H6 


[BOOK VUi 


16 That, wherewith Mitra, Vanina, and Aryaman, the Asvinj 

Bhaga give us light, ’ ' 

That may we, by thy power finding best furtherance, worship 
0 Indra, helped by thee. " 

17 0 Agni, most devout are they, the sages who have set thee 

Sage exceeding wise, 

0 God, for men to look upon : 

18 Who have arranged thine altar. Blessed God, at morn, brought 

thine oblation, pressed the juice. 

They by their deeds of strength have won them mighty] 
wealth, who have set all their hope in thee. 

19 May Agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, Bles 

One, and sacrifice bring bliss : 

Yea, may our praises bring us bliss. 

20 Show forth the mind that brings success in war with fien 

wherewith thou conquerest in tight. 

Bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, and let 
vanquish with thine aid. 

21 I praise with song the Friend of man, whom Gods sent do 

to be herald and messenger, 

Best worshipper, bearer of our gifts. 

22 Thou unto sharp-toothed Agni, Young and Radiant G( 

proelaimest with thy song the feast — 

Agni, who for our sweet strains moulds heroic strength wh 
sacred oil is offered him, 

23 While, served with sacrificial oil, now upward and now do« 

ward Agni moves his sword, 

As doth the Asura his robe. 


24 The God, the Friend of man, who bears our gifts to heave 

the God with his sweet-smelling mouth, 

Distributes, skilled in sacrifice, his precious things, Invokii 
Priest, Immortal God. 

25 Son of Strength, Agni, if thou wert the mortal, bright 

Mitra ! worshipped with our gifts ! 

And I were the Immortal God, 


16 That : radiance or splendour. 

20 Bring down the many fim hopes : there is no substantive in the tel 
and hopes, resolves, thoughts or something similar must be supplied. 

21 The Fiiend of man : or mdnurhitam may mean ‘him who was establisl 
cd by Manus.’ 

23 His sword: the flashing flame. The Asura ; the Sun, according 1 
SAy*$a. Kobe : outward form. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


147 


YMN 19.] 


; I would not give thee up, Vasu, to calumny or misery, O 
Bounteous One. 

My worshipper should feel no hunger or distress, nor, Agni, 
should he live in sin. 

[ Like a son cherished in his father’s house, let our oblation 
rise unto the Gods. 

\ With thine immediate aid may I, excellent Agni, ever gain 
my wish, 

A mortal with a God to help. 

} 0 Agni. by thy wisdom, by thy bounties, by thy leading may 
I gather wealth. 

Excellent Agni, thou art called my Providence : delight thou 
to be liberal. 

) Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of noble 
heroes and great strength, 

Whose bond of friendship is thy choice. 

. Thy spark is black and crackling, kindled in due time 

0 Bounteous, it is taken up. 

Thou art the dear Friend of the mighty Mornings: thou 
shinest in glimmerings of the night. 

\ We Sobharis have come to him, for succour, who is good to help 
with thousand powers, 

The Sovran, Trasadasyu’s Friend. 

) 0 Agni, thou on whom all other fires depend, as branches on 
the parent stem, 

I make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine own, while 

1 exalt thy sovran might. 

1 The mortal vyhom, Adityas, ye, Guileless, lead to the farther bank 

Of all the princes, Bounteous Ones ! — 

) Whoe’er he be, Man-ruling Kings ! the Regent of the race of 
men — 

May we, 0 Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, like him be further* 
ers of your law. 

5 ^ fifty female slaves hath Trasadasyu given me, Puru* 

kutsa’s son, v 

Most liberal, kind, lord of the brave. 


33 ^ neglect of the Gods in consequence of poverty, 

[an other men * eC ° *2 Rppear " t0 be : <l praise A gni better 

"f they were f ° r reWWd * 

generaUndwi • ixwtttf means usually a bride, a wife, a woman 

Aquerert im here " an dm a >ds or female slaves, the wives or daughters of 
ler feuialft *ffi pea r ** rnean t- According to von Roth, marts or 

female draught-animals are intended. 



THAI UXM.JS8 Uf 


140 


ilSUUK VIII 


37 And Syava too for me led forth a strong steed at Suvastu’s 
ford : 

A herd of three times seventy kine, good lord of gifts, he gave 
to me. 

HYMN XX. Marute. 

Let none, Swift Travellers ! check you : come hither, like. 

spirited, stay not far away, 

Ye benders even of what is firm. 

2 Maruts, Ribhukshans, Rudras, come ye with your cars strong 

fellied and exceeding bright. 

Come, ye for whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, come ye 
with love to Sobhari. 

3 For well we know the vigorous might of Rudra’s Sons, the 

Maruts, who are passing strong, 

Swift Vishnu’s band, who send the rain. 

4 Islands are bursting forth and misery is stayed : the heaven 

and earth are joined in one. 

Decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses out, 
when ye, Self-luminous, stirred yourselves. 

5 Even things immovable shake and reel, the mountains and the 

forest trees at your approach, 

And the earth trembles as ye come. 

6 To lend free course, 0 Maruts, to your furious rush, heaven 

high and higher still gives way, 

Where they, the Heroes mighty with their arms, display their 
gleaming ornaments on their forms. 

7 After their Godlike nature they, the bull-like Heroes, dazzling 

and impetuous, wear 
Great splendour as they show erect. 

37 Suvfotu is in all probability the So.istos of Arrian (Suwad or Swat) near 
the Kdphfin or Kabul river. Kine: there is no substantive in the text. The 
stanza, which has no comment in the printed edition, is very obscure and can 
be only conjecturally translated. See Ludwig’s Translation and Commentary 
I. 427, and IV. 380. 


4 S&yana seems to explain this verse, ‘ The islands fall asunder, Me fir^ 
(trees) experience distress ; they (the winds) distress heaven and earth , 
waters hurry onward, 0 bright weaponed, self-shining ones, when y° ,l J$ l 
them.*— E. B. C/s note in Wilson’s Translation. The stanza is airncu • 
l have followed, generally, Ludwig’s version. Islands: the higher unw 
merged grounds. Misery : caused by the preceding hot and dry wea , ' 
Are joined in one: as the heavy rain obscures the horizon. Bright i 
worn on the arms or the ankles or carried by the Maruts ou their shou 
See I. 166. 9. . c . , r(ci: 

7 Bull-like: the exact meaning of vrlshapsavah is uncertain, o/ww 
ahrutapsavah is conjecturally translated. ^ 



THE RIG VEDA. 


VYMN 20 .] 


140 


8 The pivot of the Sobharis’ chariot within the golden box is 

balmed with milk. 

May they the Well-born, Mighty, kindred of the Cow, aid us 
to food and to delight. 

9 Bring, ye who sprinkle balmy drops, oblations to your vigorous 

Marut company, 

To those whose leader is the Bull. 

[0 Come hither, 0 ye Maruts, on your strong-horsed car, solid in 
look, with solid naves. 

Lightly like winged falcons, 0 ye Heroes, come, come to enjoy 
our offerings. 

[1 Their decoration is the same: their ornaments of gold are 
bright upon their arms ; 

Their lances glitter splendidly. 

2 They toil not to defend their bodies from attack, strong He- 
roes with their mighty arms. 

Strong are your bows and strong the weapons in your cars, 
and glory sits on every face. 

[3 Whose name extendeth like a sea, aloue, resplendent, so that 
all have joy in it, 

And life-power like ancestral might. 

[4 Pay honour to these Maruts and sing praise to them, for of 
the wheel-spokes of the car 

Of these loud roarers none is last : this is their power, this 
moves them to give mighty gifts. 

15 Blest by your favouring help was he, 0 Maruts, at the earlier 
flushings of the morn, 

And even now shall he be blest. 

.6 The strong man to whose sacrifice, 0 Heroes, ye approach 
that ye may taste thereof, 

With glories and with war that wiuneth spoil shall gain great 
bliss, ye Shakers of the world. 

t7 Even as Rudra's Sons, the brood of the Creator Dyaus, the 
Asura, desire, 

0 You thful Ones, so shall it be : 

8 Box: the interior of the chariot. With milk: with fertilizing rain sent 
the Maruts. The Cow : Piisni. 

9 1 e icha sprinkle balmy drops : nests who offer libations. Whose leader 
* „ Bull •' whom Indra leads. Or, it may be, whose chariot is drawn by 
3ull8, as in the following stanza. 

U 1°°^ : or bull-like, or strong look. 

4 None is last : no part of their chariot wheel is behind the rest in speed. 
u« moves them to give mighty gifts : or, this (characteristic belongs to them) 
f^ough greatness of their gifts. 

He; your worshipper. 



150 TBS BYMNS OF [BOOK Vlli 

18 And these the bounteous, worthy of the Maruts who move 

onward pouring down the rain — 

Even for their sake, 0 Youthful Ones, with kindest heart take 
us to you to be your own. 

19 0 Sobhari, with newest song sing out unto the youthful puri- 

fying Bulls, 

Even as a plougher to his steers. 

20 Who, like a celebrated boxer, overcome the challengers in every 

fight : 

They who, like shining bulls, are most illustrious-honour 
those Maruts with thy song. 

21 Allied by common ancestry, ye Maruts, even the Cows, alike 

in energy, 

Lick, all by turns, each other’s head. 

22 Even mortal man, ye Dancers breast-adorned with gold, attains 

to brotherhood with yon. 

Mark ye and notice us, 0 Maruts ; evermore your friendship 
is secured to us. 

23 0 Maruts, rich in noble gifts, bring us a portion of the Maruts’ 

medicine, 

Ye Coursers who are Friends to us. 

24 Haters of those who serve you not, bliss-bringers, bring us 

bliss with those auspicious aids , 

Wherewith ye are victorious and guard Sindhu well, and suc- 
cour Krivi in his need. 

25 Maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm soever 

Sindhu or Asikni hath, 

Or mountains or the seas contain, 

26 Ye carry on your bodies, ye who see it all : so bless us gracious j 

therewith. . , . , 

Cast, Maruts, to the ground our sick man s malady : rep 

the dislocated limb. 


18 The bounteous : the liberal institutors of sacrifice. 

19 Purifying bulls: the strong Maruts who send the Bweet rain. 

21 Allied by common ancestry: as the offspring ; of Bp?™- * ^ 

Maruts. Lick....eack other's head : as they crowd together in i their c 
According to SAyana, ‘ the cows severally lick up the quarters o ) 

22 Ye Dancers : ye who dance through the air. 

24 Krivi : the eponymus of a warrior tribe in the ben 

combined with, or identical with the p anchAlas. SAy^a ’^Wilson, 
to mean a well : ‘ with which you provided a well (f or Uotama;. ir> 

25 Asikni : the Aoesines of Quintus Curtins, the Vedie name of the tw 

bhAzA, the modern ChenAb. » » i fmrae * — Wils° n 

26 Redact the dislocated limb : ' re-e»tabh»h bis enfeebled fr*me- 



jYMN 21 .] 


THE RIG VEDA 


151 


HYMN XXI. Indra. 

We call on ^ e0, ^ Matchless One ! We seeking help, posses- 
sing nothing firm ourselves, 

Call on thee wonderful in fight : 

2 On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, the hold, 

the mighty, hath gone forth. 

We therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen thee, free- 
giver, as our Guardian God. 

3 Come hither, for the drops are here, 0 Lord of corn-lands, 

Lord of horses, Lord of kine : 

Drink thou the Soma, Soma’s Lord ! 

4 For we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee, 0 Indra, 

who hast numerous kin. 

With all the forms thou hast, come thou of bull-like strength, 
come near to drink the Soma juice. 

5 Sitting like birds beside thy meath, mingled with milk, that 

gladdeneth and exalte th thee, 

Indra, to thee we sing aloud. 

6 We speak to thee with this our reverential prayer. Why 

art thou pondering yet awhile ? 

Here are our wishes ; thou art liberal, Lord of Bays : we and 
our hymns are present here. 

7 For not in recent times alone, 0 Indra, Thunder-armed, have 

we obtained thine aid. 

Of old we knew thy plenteous wealth. 

8 Hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards: these, 

Thunderer, now we crave of thee. 

0 Vasil, for all wealth that cometh of the kine, sharpen our 
powers, fair-visored God. 

G Him who of old hath brought to us this and that blessing, 
him I magnify for you, 

Even Indra, 0 my friends, for help : 

10 Borne by Bay Steeds, the Lord of heroes, ruling men, for it 
is he who takes delight. 

i May Maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hundreds of 
cattle and of steeds. 

1 Hero, may we, with thee for Friend, withstand the man who 

pants against us in his wrath, 

In fight with people rich in kine. 

2 May we be victors in the singer’s battle-song, and meet the 

wicked, Much-invoked ! 


2 ThU youth of ours : the noble who has instituted the sacrifice. 



152 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VJij 

With heroes smite the foeman and show forth our strength. 
0 Indra, further thou our thoughts. 

13 0 Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and compani. 

onless art thou : 

Thou seekest comradeship in war. 

14 Thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend: those 

scorn thee who are flown with wine. 

What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as 
a Father, art invoked. 

15 0 Indra, let us not, like fools who waste their lives at home, 

with friendship such as thine 
Sit idly by the poured-out juice. 

1G Giver of kine, may we not miss thy gracious gifts : lot ua not 
rob thee of thine own. 

Strip even the strong places of the foe, and bring : thy gifts 
can never be made vain. 

17 Indra or blest Sarasvati alone bostows such wealth, treasure 

so great, or thou, 

0 Chitra, on the worshipper. 

18 Chitra is King, and only kinglings are the rest who dwell 

beside Sarasvati. 

He, like Parjanya with his rain, hath spread himself with 
thousand, yea, with myriad gifts. 

HYMN XXII. Asvin*. 

Hitherward have I called today, for succour, that moat 
wondrous car 

Which ye ascended, Asvins, yc whose paths are red, swift to 
give ear, for Surya’s sake. 

2 Car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoked, soon guided, 
first in deeds of might. 

Which waits and serves, 0 Sobhari, with benevolence, without 
a rival or a foe. 

13 Thou seefeest comradeship in war: befrieudest thy worshippers when 
they need thine assistance in battle. 

14 Gatherest: the clouds. - M Muller. 

17 Chitra: the name of this king d<>es not occur elsewhere in the Ttigv r eda. 

18 Kiivj : rtij'l Kinyliwjs : rdjablfh. Parjanya: God of the rain cloud, 
regarded as the type of liberal beneficence. 

1 Ye whose paths are red : rudravartard : this epithet of the Asvins h 
variously explained ; ‘ having a path which causes weeping in battle, 

‘ whose paths are praised,’ — Sly ana ; ‘advancing on the path to battle'* 
Wilson; ‘ proceeding on terrible roads.’ — Muir; ‘going on Kudra’s 
Ludwig; ‘on your light path.’— Grassmann ; ‘going on a reddish P ath v 
Pischel. See Vedisehe Studien , I., pp. 15 and 55 — 60. For SHvyd i i<iUi ^ 
choot the Asvins as her husbands. See 1. 110. 17* 



THE R IQ VEDA. 


153 


^yMN 22 .] 

[3 These Asvins with our homage, these Two Omnipresent 
Deities 

Hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who seek the 
dwelling of the worshipper. 

4 One of your chariot wheels is moving swiftly round, one 

speeds for you its onward course. 

Like a milch-cow, 0 Lords of splendour, and with haste let 
your benevolence come to us. 

5 That chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of 

gold, 

The famous car that traverseth the heaven and earth, thereon 
Nasatyas, Asvins, come. 

5 Ye with your plough, when favouring Manu with your help, 
ploughed the first harvest in the sky. 

As such will we exalt you, Lords of splendour, now, 0 Asvins, 
with our prayer and praise. 

7 Come to us, Lords of ample wealth, by paths of everlasting Law, 
Whereby to high dominion ye with mighty strength raised 

Trikshi, Trasadasyu’s son. 

8 This Soma pressed with stones is yours, ye Heroes, Lords of 

plenteous wealth. 

Approach to drink the Soma, come, drink in the worshipper's 
abode. 

9 0 Asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, ye who 

aro Lords of plenteous wealth, 

And bring to us abundant food. 

0 The aids wherewith ye helped Paktha and Adhrigu, and 

Babhru severed from his friends, — 

With those, 0 Asvins, come hither with speed and soon, and 
heal whatever is diseased. 

1 When we continually invoke the Asvins, the resistless, at this 

time of day, 

We lovers of the song, with songs, 


* The movements of the two wheels are not very intelligibly described. See 
•tO. 19, and V. 73 3 Like a milch-cow: a common type of liberality. 

6 Plowjhed the first harvest: fu si ploughed the ground and sowed and 

toped: that ia, taught, by example, men to do so. Cp. I. 117. 21 : 4 Ploughing 
?* s . ow ' n K barley, 0 ye Asvins, milking out food for men, ye wonder-workers, 
poi/th w ^h y°ur trumpet, ye have bestowed wide light 

7 Tnhhi : see VI 46. 8. 

IQ Adf/trt, AdhriyU) and Babhru are said to have been kings. 



THE HYMNS OF 


154 


[BOOK Viti 


12 Through these, ye Mighty Ones, come hither to my call which 

brings all blessings, wears all forms, — 

Through wuich, All-present Heroes, lavishest of food y e 
strengthened Krivi, come through these. 

13 I speak to both of these as such, these Asvins whom I rever- 

ence at this time of day : 

With homage we entreat them both. 

14 Ye who are Lords of splendour, ye whose paths are red, &t 

eve, at morn, at sacrifice, 

Give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye Rudras, Lords 
of ample wealth. 

15 For bliss I call the blissful car, at morn the inseparable Asvins 

with their car 
I call, like Sobhari our sire. 

16 Rapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to the joy, bring- 

ing your swiftly-coming help, 

Be to us a protection even from far away, Lords of great wealth, 
with many aids. 

17 Come, Wonder-Workers, to our home, our home, 0 Asvins, 

rich in cattle, steeds, and gold, 

Chief drinkers of the Soma’s juice ! 

18 Choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, uninjured 

by the Rakshas foe, 

At this your coming nigh, ye Lords of ample wealth and all 
good things, may we obtain. 


HYMN XXIII. Agni, 

Worship thou Jata vedas, pray to him who willingly accepts, 
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame. 

2 Thou, all men’s friend, Visvamanas, exaltest Agni with thy 

song, 

The Giver, and his flames with which no cars contend. 

3 Whose resolute assault, to win vigour and food, deserves oui 

praise, — 


12 Krivi: see VIII. 20. 24. 

14 Ye Rudras : ye red-hued or bright Goda. 

17 Rick in cattle : proleptic ; which your coming will make rich. 

The Rishi is Visvamanas the son of Vyasva. 

1 Wko williayly accepts : p vat ivy dm : according to S Ay ana, * disposed to 

encounter enemies ' , 

2 The second line is difficult, as the adjective vishpardhasah stands withou 
a substantive and may be either the accusative plural or the genitive singular ■ 
4 who is the giver <»f chariots to the unenvious (worshipper).’ — Wibon. 

3 Assault : on the oblations whioh the fire consumes. 



THE RIO FED A. 


155 


YMF 23 *1 

Through whose discovering power the priest obtaineth 

wealth. 

Up springs the imperishable flame, the flame of the Reful- 
gent One 

Most bright, with glowing jaws and glory in his train. 

; Skilled in fair sacrifice, extolled, arise in Godlike loveliness, 
Shining with lofty splendour, with effulgent light. 

; Called straight to our oblations, come, 0 Agni, through our 
eulogies, 

As thou hast been our envoy bearing up our gifts, 
r i ca ll your Agni, from of old Invoking Priest of living men : 

Him with this song I laud and magnify for you. 

\ Whom, wondrous wise, they animate with solemn rites and 
his fair form, 

Kind as a friend to men who keep the holy Law. 

) Him, true to Law, who perfecteth the sacrifice, Law-loving 
ones ! 

Ye with your song have gratified in the place of prayer. 

) May all our sacrifices go to him the truest Angiras, 

Who is among mankind the most illustrious Priest. 

L Imperishable Agni, thine are all these high enkindled lights, 
Like horses and like stallions showing forth their strength. 

I So give us, Lord of Power and Might, riches combined with 
hero strength, 

And guard us with our sons and grandsons in our frays. 

3 Soon as the eager Lord of men is friendly unto Manu’s race, 
Agni averteth from us all the demon host. 
i 0 Hero Agni, Lord of men, on hearing this new laud of mine, 
Burn down the Rakshasas, enchanters, with thy flame. 

B No mortal foe can e’er prevail by arts of magic over him 
Who serveth Agni well with sacrificial gifts. 

3 Vyasva the sage, who sought the Bull, hath won thee, finder 
of good things : 

As such may we enkindle thee for ample wealth, 
f Usana KA,vya stablished thee, 0 Agni, as Invoking Priest : 
Thee, Jatavedas, Sacrificing Priest for man. 


9 Lawloving ones: ‘pious worshippers.’ — Wilson. Have Ratified: or 

U8t gratify. 

18 Who sought the Bull : the strong Agui. According to SAyapa, ' the 
lowerer (of rain).’ 

H Uifand Kdvya : see Yol. I., Index. 



156 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK V h 

18 All Deities of one accord appointed thee their messenger: 
Thou, God, through hearing, hadst first claim to sacrifice. 

19 Him may the mortal hero make his own immortal messenge 

Far-spreading, Purifier, him whose path is black. c 

20 With lifted ladles let us call him splendid with his brilli ai] 

flame, 

Men’s ancient Agni, wasting not, adorable. 

21 The man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial gift 
Obtains both plenteous nourishment and hero fame. 

22 To Jatavedas Agni, chief in sacrifices, first of all 
With homage goes the ladle rich with sacred gifts. 

23 Even as Vyasva did, may we with these most high and libera 

hymns 

Pay worship unto Agni of the splendid flame. 

24 Now sing, as Sthuiayfipa sang, with lauds to him who spread 

eth far, 

To Agni of the home, 0 Rishi, Vyasva’s son. 

25 As welcome guest of human kind, as offspring of the fores! 

kings, 

The sages worship ancient Agni for his aid. 

26 For men’s oblations brought to him who is the mighty Lord 

of all, 

Sit, Agni, mid our homage, on the sacred grass. 

27 Grant us abundant treasures, grant the opulence which many 

crave, 

With store of heroes, progeny, and high renown. 

28 Agni, Most Youthful of the Gods, send evermore the gift of 

wealth 

Unto Varosushaman and to all his folk. 

29 A mighty Conqueror art thou. 0 Agni, so disclose to us 
Food in our herds of kine and gain of ample wealth. 

30 Thou, Agni, art a glorious God : bring hither Mitra, Varunn, 

Imperial Sovrans, holy-minded, true to Law. , 

18 Through hearing : and, by causing the Gods to hear, men’s prayers. 

24 Sthtiray&pa : said by HAyana to be the name of a Rishi. 

25 Forest kings : tall trees, or trees in general. 

28 Varosush/lman : I follow the St. Petersburg Lexicon in joining ? a,<> 
iushJXmtie and taking the whole as one word and the name of a chief. Luawtf 
translates somewhat as follows : 1 Agni, send quickly to the folk who kbo 
the goodly SAnian well, the gift of wealth, for ever, Youngest God ! to * 
But in a later volume of his work (III. p. 162) he comes to the conclj 81 
that SushAraan is a proper name, aftd that va.ro (which may, he thinks, w 
interjection) must not be combined with it, 



THE RIG VET) A. 


157 


fXX 24.] 

HYMN XXIV\ Indra. 

Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom the thunder 

arms, 

To glorify your bold and most heroic Friend. 

) p or thou by slaying Vritra art the Vritra-slayer, famed for 
rflight. 

Thou, Hero, in rich gifts surpassest wealthy chiefs. 

\ As such, when glorified, bring us riches of very wondrous 
; fame, 

j s e t in Jie highest rank, Wealth-giver, Lord of Bays ! 
jf Yea, Indra, thou disclosest that preeminent dear wealth of 
men : 

Boldly, 0 Bold One, glorified, bring it to us. 
i The workers of destruction stay neither thy right hand nor 
thy left : 

Nor hosts that press about thee, Lord of Bays, in fight, 
j) 0 Thunder-armed, I come with songs to thee as to a stall 
with kine : 

Fulfil the wish and thought of him who sings thy praise. 

Chief Vritra-slayer, through the hymn of Visvamanas think 
of all, 

All that concemeth us, Excellent, Mighty Guide. 

i May we, 0 Vritra-slayer, 0 Hero, find this thy newest boon, 
Longed-for, and excellent, thou who art much invoked ! 

> 0 Indra, Dancer, Much-invoked ! as thy great power is un- 
surpassed, 

So he thy bounty to the worshipper unchecked. 

) Most Mighty, most heroic One, for mighty bounty fill thee full. 
Though strong, strengthen thyself to win wealth, Maghavan 1 

1 0 Thunderer, never have our prayers gone forth to any God 

but thee : 

So help us, Maghavan, with thine assistance now. 

2 For, Dancer, verily I find none else for bounty, saving thee, 

| For splendid wealth and power, thou Lover of the Song. 

B For Indra pour ye out the drops ; meath blent with Soma let 
him drink : 

With bounty and with majesty will he further us. 

twicer : of the dance of war. According to S&yana, 1 dancer, or who 
dance, i. e. agitator, exciter, from Indra’a faculty of internal impulse 
PwlbeingB.*- Wilson. 



158 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR F//; 

14 1 spake to the Bay Coursers’ Lord, to him who gives ability; ' 
Now hear the son of Asva as he praises thee. 

15 Never was any Hero born before thee mightier than thou; 
None certainly like thee in goodness and in wealth. 

16 0 ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice what glad. 

dens most : • 

So is the Hero praised who ever prospers us. 

17 Indra, whom Tawny Coursers bear, praise such as thine, 

preeminent, 

None by his power or by his goodness hath attained. 

18 We, seeking glory, have invoked this Master of all power and 

might 

Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice. 

19 Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends, the Hero who deserves 

the laud, 

Him who with none to aid o’ercomes all tribes of men. 

20 To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, Celes- 

tial God, 

Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and than 
meath. 

21 Whose hero powers are measureless, whose bounty ne’er may 

be surpassed, 

Whose liberality, like light, is over all. 

22 As Vyasva did, praise Indra, praise the Strong unfluctuating 

Guide, 

Who gives the foe’s possessions to the worshipper. 

23 Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the tenth time 

still is new, 

The very Wise, whom living men must glorify. 

24 Thou knowest, Indra, Thunder-armed, how to avoid destructive 

powers, 

As one secure from pitfalls each returning day. 


14 Son of Asva: i. e. of Vyasva, the Rishi \ Lvamanas. 

20 Who keeps no cattle back : either literally who aids his worshipped J 
win cattle in their raids and gives them all the booty ; or, who send? ™ r k 
the kine or rays of light that he has recovered from the powers ot damn 
According to SHyana, ‘ who rejects no praise.’ 

23 Who to the tenth time still is new : continually renews Hia UberA . llt L h( 

us. This seems to be the meaning of the da^amdm ndvam (tenth new) o 
text. S&yana explains differently : * who is the tenth (of the pervading 
principles), the adorable.' . i 

24 Destructive powers : the plural of Nirriti, Death or Destruction, 
adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of the second line. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


159 


jyMN 25.] 

5 0 Indra, bring that aid wherewith of old, Most Wondrous ! 

thou didst slay 

His foes for active Kutsa : send it down to us. 

6 So now we seek thee fresh in might, Most Wonderful in act ! 

for gain : 

F<y thou art he who conquers all our foes for us. 

17 Who will set free from ruinous woe, or Arya on the Seven 

Streams : 

0 valiant Hero, bend the Dasa’s weapon down. 

18 As to Varosushaman thou broughtest great riches, for their 

gain, 

To Vyasva’s sons, Blest Lady, rich in ample wealth ! 

[9 Let Narya’s sacrificial meed reach Vyasva’s Soma-bearing sons : 

In hundreds and in thousands be the great reward. 

10 If one should ask thee, Where is he who sacrificed ? Whither 
I lookest thou 1 

Like Vala he hath passed away and dwellcth now on Gomati. 

HYMN XXV. Mitra-Varuna. 

1 WORSHIP you who guard this All, Gods holiest among the 
Gods, 

You, faithful to the Law, whose power is sanctified. 

2 So, too, like charioteers are they, Mitra and sapient Varuna, 
Sons high-born from of old, whose holy laws stand fast. 

3 These Twain, possessors of all wealth, most glorious, for 

supremest sway 

Aditi, Mighty Mother, true to Law, brought forth. 

27 Arya on the Seven Streams: from any Aryan enemy in the land of the 
even Rivers, probably the Indus, the five rivers of the Panjftb, and the 
'ubha. 

2S V arosush&man : see VIII. 23. 28. Blest Lady: Ushas or Dawn is 

id rested. 

29 X dry as saci'ijicial meed : Ndrya appears to be the name of the institutor 
f the sacrifice. 

: 30 Ludwig observes : * This stanza clearly refers to the greatness of the 
6ward given by Nary a, and its meaning is : here are so many cows (presented 
J Nihya) that one might think that, in cousequence of the sacrifice, Vala had 
jven up his cows [which he had str den from the Gods, and hidden In a cave], 
pd taken his departure.’ Ushas says also, * my cows are quite superfluous 
r re T > and I will drive them away to some other place.’ The stanza is addressed 
|> huhaa, ami the second line is the answer she is to give to the question 
ntained in the first. Gomati : some affluent of the Indus, which in later 
Jjes lent its name to the Gomati, or Gumti, which flows through Oudh and 
Us l »to the Ganges. 

2 Chwioteen : furtherera of eternal Law. See VII. 12. 



160 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F///, 

4 Great Vanina and Mitra, Gods, Asuras and imperial Lords, 
True to Eternal Law proclaim the high decree. 

5 The offspring of a lofty Power, Daksha’s Two Sons exceeding 

strong, 0 

Who, Lords of flowing rain, dwell in the place of food. 

6 Ye who have gathered up your gifts, celestial and terrestrial 

food, 

Let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven. 

7 The Twain, who from the lofty sky seem to look down on 

herds below, 

Holy, imperial Lords, are set to be revered. 

8 They, true to Law, exceeding strong, havo sat them down 

for sovran rule : J 

Princes whose laws stand fast, they have obtained their sway. 

9 Pathfinders even better than the eye, with unobstructed sight, 
Even when they close their lids, observant, they perceive. ^ 

10 So may the Goddess Aditi, may the Nasatyas guard us well, 
The Maruts guard us well, endowed with mighty strength. 

11 Do ye, 0 Bounteous Gods, protect our dwelling-place by day 

and night : 

With you for our defenders may we go unharmed. 

12 May we, unharmed, serve bountiful Vishnu, the God whe 

slayeth none : 

Self-moving Sindhu hear and be the first to mark. 

13 This sure protection we elect, desirable and reaching far, 
Which Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman afford. 

14 And may the Sindhu of the floods, the Maruts, and the Asvic 

Pair, 

Boon Indra, and boon Vishnu have one mind with us. 

15 Because these warring Heroes stay the enmity of every foe, 

As the fierce water-flood repels the furious ones. 

16 Here this one God, the Lord of men, looks forth exceeding ftf 

and wide : 

And wc, for your advantage, keep his holy laws. 

17 We keep the old accustomed laws, the statutes of supremacy) 
The long-known laws of Mitra and of Varuna. 


5 Daksha’t Two Som : or 8on8 of power or energy, according to SAya?* 
Daksha as a creative power, is frequently associated with Aditi. Pl act 
food ; heaven from which the food-producing rain comes. 

12 Sindhu: the Indus. According to Sdy ana, Vishpu who onuses we&l* 
to flow to his woi shippers. 



TBS RIO VEDA. 


ryMN 26 .] 


161 


g \{q who hath measured with his ray the boundaries, of heaven 
and earth, 

And with his majesty hath filled the two worlds full, 

9 Surya hath spread his light aloft up to the region of the sky, 
Like Agni all aflame when gifts are offered him. 

9 With him who sits afar 4he word is lord of food that comes 
from kine, 

Controller of the gift of unempoisoned food. 

1 So unto Surya, Heaven, and Earth at morning and at eve 1 
■ speak. 

Bringing enjoyments ever rise thou up for us. 

2 From Ukshanyayana a bay, from Harayjina a white steed, 

And from Sushaman we obtained a harnessed car. 

3 These two shall bring me further gain of troops of tawny- 

coloured steeds, 

The carriers shall they be of active men of war. 

{ And the two sages have I gained who hold the reins and bear 
the whip, 

And the two great strong coursers, with my newest song. 

HYMN XXVI. Aewins. 

I call your chariot to receive united praise mid princely 
men, 

Strong Gods who pour down wealth, of never vanquished 
might 1 

2 Ye to Varosushaman come, Nslsatyas, for this glorious rite, 
With your protecting aid, Strong Gods, who pour down wealth. 


20 Varuna has only to command and men have milk and wholesome food, 
lyana explains differently : * Raise your voice in the spacious hall of sacrifice 
)him who is lord over food derived from cattle ’ — Wilson. 

21 Thou: Silrya, that is, according to S&ya’.ia, Mitra and Varuna in Sfirya’s 

tape. 

22 Sushdman : here without Varo, the prefix or interjection or whatever it 
lay be. See VIII. 23 28. 

23 These two horses. 

24 Two wyes : vlprd : the meaning is uncertain. According to SAyapa the 

oid is an epithet of ‘coursers’: ‘ Hagacious.’--Wilson. Ludwig thinks that 
je grooms (probably enslaved enemies) are ironically called sages, or as he 
■anslates, BrAhmans. Dr. Muir translates the stanza differently: ‘I have 
itabratod at the same time with a new hymn, these two sages and mighty 
►nnces], strong, swift, and carrying whips.’ But this rendering has little to 
Commend it. - 

1 Princely men : the Sdm or institutors of the sacrifice. 

^ Vu'osuskdman see VIII. 23. 26. Who pour down wealth : vrishanvatd ; 
e IV. 60 10, note. ... 

f II 



$t tee HYMNS OF [BOOR Vllj 

3 So with oblations wo invoke you, rich in ample wealth, to-day, 
When night hath passed, 0 ye who send us plenteous food. 

4 0 Asvins, Heroes, let your car, famed, best to travel, come to us, 
And’ for his glory, mark your zealous servant’s lauds. 

5 Asvins, who send us precious gifts, even when offended, thinl 

of him : _ 

For ye, 0 Rudras, lead us safe beyond our foes. 

6 For, Wonder-Workers, with fleet steeds ye fly complete! 

round this All, , , , , 

Stirring our thoughts, ye Lords of splendour, honey-hued. 

7 With all-sustaining opulence, Asvins, come hitherward to us, 
Ye rich and noble Heroes, ne’er to be o’erthrown. 

8 To welcome this mine offering, 0 yelndralike N&satyas, con 
As Gods of best accord this day with other Gods. 

9 For we, like Yyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, call onyoi 

With all your loving kindness, Sages, come to us. 

10 0 Rishi, laud the Asvins well. Will they not listen to thy cai 
Wiil they not burn the Panis who are nearer them f 
110 Heroes, listen to the son of Vyasva, and regard me here, 
Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman, of one accord. 

12 Gods whom we yearn for, of your gifts, of what ye bring 

us, bestow 

By princes’ hands on me, ye Mighty, day day. 

1 3 Him whom your sacrifices clothe, even as a woman with her ro 
The Asvins help to glory honouring him well. 

14 Whoso regards your care of men as succour widest in its rea 
About his dwelling go, ye Asvins, loving us. 

15 Come to us ye who pour down wealth, come to the h( 

which men must guard : 

Like shafts, ye are made meet for sacrifice by song. 

16 Most fetching of all calls, the laud, as envoy, Heroes, ca 

to you : 

Be it your own, 0 Asvin Pair. 

17 Be ye in yonder sea of heaven, or joying in the home of 
Listen to me, Immortal Ones. 


5 Rudrat : bright Gods. . . 

6 Honey-hued : madhuvM'nd : ‘ of fascinating complexion. 1 * , 

15 Like thaft* : as arrows are sharpened for their work, so 

prepared for the sacrifice by the Rishi’s hymn. The word. ^ ^ 
plained by SAyana as two arrows, is difficult, and other readi gs 
lions liave been suggested. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


fYMN 27.J 


T63 


g This river with his lucid flow attracts you, more than all the 
streams, — 

Even Sindhu with his path of gold. 

9 0 Asvins, with that glorious fame come hither, through our 
brilliant song, 

Come ye whose ways are marked with light. 

>0 Harness the steeds who draw the car, 0 Vasu, bring the well- 
fed pair. 

0 V&yu, drink thou of our meath : come untcY our drink- 
offerings. 

|1 Wonderful V&yu, Lord of Right, thou who art Tvashtar’s son- 
in-law, 

Thy saving succour we elect. 

To Tvashtar’s son-in-law we pray for wealth whereof he hath 
control : 

For glory we seek V&yu, men with juice effused. 

3 From heaven, auspicious Vayu, come ; drive hither with thy 

noble steeds : 

Come on thy mighty car with wide-extending seat. 

4 We call thee to the homes of men, thee wealthiest in noble 

food, 

And liberal as a press-stone with a horse’s back. 

5 So, glad and joyful in thine heart, do thou, God, VAyu, first 

of all * 

Vouchsafe us water, strength, and thought. 


HYMN XXVII. Visvedevas. 

Chief Priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass at sacri- 
fice : 

With song I seek the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, Gods for help 
much to be desired. 


18 With his lucid flow : svetayftvart : taken by Sflyana as the name of a river. 
21 Tcashtar’s son-in-law : the Commentators give no satisfactory explanation, 
ranyft, Tvashtar’s daughter, was the wife of YivasvAn, who cannot be ideuti- 
A with V&yu. See Hillebrandt, Vtdische Mytholoyie , I. p. 521. 

24 The second line is difficult. The presB-Btone which produces the Soma 
ice which makes the Gods bountiful is regarded as a type of liberality ; 
may be called 6 fvapfishtham, liteially, horse-backed, because it bears it* 
*1 of Soma stalks like a horse. ' Sharp-backed 4 with 9harp ridges’, as 
ggested by Pischel, givse a better meaning. 


1 Chief Priest : according to SAyana, pur6hito^. here is taken in it* primary 
we of ‘ placed in front,’ that is, set by the priests on the uttaravedt yr 
Kthern altar or fire-receptacle. The laud : ukthd : a kind of religious service 
®»uting of the recitation of certain eulogistic verses. 



164 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Fty 

2 I sing to oattle and to Earth, to trees, to Dawns, to Night, to 

plants. * 

0 all ye Vasus, ye possessors of all wealth, be ye the further, 
ers of our thoughts. 

3 Forth go^ with Agni, to the Gods our sacrifice of ancient use 
To the Adityas, Vanina whose Law stands fast, and the alt 

lightening Marut troop. 

4 Lords of all wealth, may they be strengtheners of man, de- 

stroyers of his enemies. 

Lords of all wealth, do ye, with guards which none may harm, 
preserve our dwelling free from foes. 

5 Come to us with one mind to-day, come to us all with one 

accord, 

Maruts with holy song, and, Goddess Aditi, Mighty One, to our 
house and home. 

6 Send us delightful things, ye Maruts, on your Bteeds : come 

ye, 0 Mitra, to our gifts. 

Let Indra, Varuna, and the Adityas sit, swift Heroes, on our 
sacred grass. 

7 We who have trimmed the grass for you, and set the banquet 

in array, 

And pressed the Soma, call you, Varupa, like men, with sacri- 
ficial fires aflame. 

8 0 Maruts, Vishnu, Asvins, Piishan, haste away with minds 

turned hitherward to me. 

Let the Strong Indra, famed as Vritra’s slayer, come first witl 
the winners of the spoil. 

0 Ye Guileless Gods, bestow on ns a refuge strong on every side 
A sure protection, Vasus, unassailable from near at hand o 
from afar. 

10 Kinship have I with you, and close alliance, 0 ye Gods, di 

stroyers of our foes. 

Call us to our prosperity of former days, and soon to new felicit 

1 1 For now have I sent forth to you, that I may win a fair rewan 
Lords of all wealth, with homage, this my song of praise lil 

a milch-cow that faileth not. 

2 I sing to : or I glorify, in order that I may win or propitiate them- 

6 Come ye, 0 Mitm : Varuna and Aryaman being understood. 

7 Like men : manushvdt : or after the manner of Manus. 

11 Like a milch-cow that faileth not : the meaning of dnydm here is sop 
what uncertain. S&yana explaius it by adriehtaptirvdm, unprecedented) * 
Graasmann by * a stream that never dries up.’ I have adopted hudm 
interpretation. 



TUB RIO VEDA, 




105 


0 Excellent Savitar hath mounted up on high for you. ye sure 

and careful Guides. . J 

Bipeds and quadrupeds, with several hopes and aims, and 
birds have settled to their tasks. 

] Singing their praise with Godlike thought let us invoke each 
God for grace, 

Each God to bring you help, each God to strengthen you. 

4 For of one spirit are the Gods with mortal man, co-sharers all 
of gracious gifts. 

! May they increase our strength hereafter and to-day, provid- 

1 ing ease and ample room. 

I laud you, 0 ye Guileless Gods, here where we meet to render 
praise. 

None, Varuna and Mitra, harms the mortal man who honours 
and obeys your laws. 

He makes his house endure, he gathers plenteous food who 
pays obedience to your will. 

Born in his sons anew he spreads as Law commands, and pros- 
pers every way unharmed. 

E’en without war he gathers wealth, and goes his way on 
pleasant paths, 

Whom Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman protect, sharing the gift, 
of one accord. 


E’en on the plain for him ye make a sloping path, an easy 
way where road is none : 

And far away from him the ineffectual shaft must vanish, 
shot at him in vain. 


If ye appoint the rite to-day, kind Rulers, when the Sun as- 
cends, 

Lords of all wealth, at sunset or at waking-time, or be it at 
the noon of day, 

• Or, Asuras, when ye have sheltered the worshipper who goes 
to sacrifice, at eve, 

May we, 0 Vasus„ye possessors of all wealth, come then into 
the midst of you. 

If ye to-day at sunrise, or at noon, or in the gloom of eve, 

Lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, the wise 
man who hath sacrificed, 

Then we, imperial Rulers, claim of you this boon, your wide 
protection, as a son. 

May we, Adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that which Shall 
bring us greater bliss. 



166 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Vli 

HYMN XXVIII. Visvedevfo, 

The Thirty Gods and Three besides, whose seat hath been the 
sacred grass, 

From time of old have found and gained. 

2 Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, Agnis, with Consorts, sending boons 
To whom our Vashat S is addressed : 

Z These are our guardians in the west, and northward here, and 
in the south, 

And on the east, with all the tribe. 

4 Even as the Gods desire so verily shall it be. None minishetl 

this power of theirs, 

No demon, and no mortal man. 

5 The Seven carry seven speais ; seven are the splendours the; 

possess, 

And seven the glories they assume. 

HYMN XXIX. Visvedev* 

One is a youth brown, active, manifold : he decks the goldei 
one with ornament. 

2 Another, luminous, occupies the place of sacrifice, Sage, amonj 

the Gods. 

3 One brandishes in his hand an iron knife, firm, in his seal 

amid the Deities. 

4 Another holds the thunderbolt, wherewith he slays the Vritras, 

resting in his band. 


1 Thirty Gods and Three : Bee I. 139. 11. 

2 Agnis : Agni in his various forma and under different names. With Con- 
sorts : with the Gn/ts, Celestial Dames, wives of the Gods. Vashat I • the ex- 
clamation made when the oblation is offered. 

4 No demon and no mortal man : or no mortal who presents no offeringi 
to the Gods. 

5 The Seven : the Marute, seven, or seven times nine, or seven times seven 
in number. S&yana mentions the legend of their birth, which will be found 
in the Mmdyana , Book I., Cantos 46, 47. The me^ping is merely that the 
Maruts carry lances, that is, their lightnings, and are splendidly adorned. 
See I. 37. The connexion of this stanza with the preceding is not obvious. 

1 One : Soma. * The yellow Soma juice is itself an ornament to the gold** 
the finger (Atharvaveda, XVIII. 3. 18, hiranyaplv&l?) of the priest.'- hud' Wjj 
According to others, Soma as the Moon is intended, who * decorates (him * 8 1 
with golden ornaments.’— Wilson. 

2 Another , luminous : Agni. 

3 One bt'andishe* : Tvashpir, as the Artificer of the Gods. 

4 Another holds the thunderbolt : Indra. 



THE RIO VEDA . 


fYMN 31.] 


137 


5 Another bears a pointed weapon : bright is he, and strong, 

with healing medicines. 

6 Another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and knows the 

places where the treasures lie. 

7 Another with his mighty stride hath made his three steps 

thither where the Gods rejoice. 

8 Two with one Dame ride on with winged steeds, and journey 

forth like travellers on their way. 

9 Two, highest, in the heavens have set their seat, worshipped 

with holy oil, Imperial Kings. 

[0 Some, singing lauds, conceived the Sama hymn, great hymn 
whereby they caused the Sun to shine. 

HYMN XXX. Visvedevas. 

Not one of you, ye Gods, is small, none of you is a feeble 
child : 

All of you, verily, are great. 

2 Thus be ye lauded, ye destroyers of the foe, ye Threc-and- 

Thirty Deities, 

The Gods of man, the Holy Ones. 

3 As such defend and succour us, with benedictions speak to us : 
Lead us not from our fathers’ and from Manu’s path into the 

distance far away. 

4 Ye Deities who stay with us, and all ye Gods of all mankind, 
(live us your wide protection, give shelter for cattle and for 

steed. 

HYMN XXXI. Various Deities. 

That Brahman pleases Indra well, who worships, sacrifices, pours 
Libation, and prepares the meal. 

5 Another : Rudra, See I. 43. 4. 

6 Another : Pushan. See T. 42. 

S 'Another with hi» mighty stride : Vishnu. Thither: to his station in tha 
height of heaven. 

8 Two with one Dame : the Asvins with S'iryl. See I. 116. 17. 

9 Two , highest : Mitra aud Varuna. 

10 Som, tinging laud* : the Augira^es, or, according to S4yana, the Atria. 

, ^ Three and- Thirty Deitiet : see i. 139. 11. The Qod* of man: or, God 
|Whom Manu worshipped, which inteipretation is supported by stanza 3. 

1 IK/to stay with ut : or are present at this sacrifice. 

1 Brahman : here any pious worshipper. not one of the regular professional 
?r'c«tB, hut the institutor of sacrifice who during the ceremony may be re- 
^Nied as their chief. Prepares the meal: pasupurod ^dikam pachati : S4yau*; 
Coo “ the cake which is an essential part of the animal sacrifice, etc.’ 



l«a THE HYMNS OF [BOOK y In 

2 Sakra protects from woe the man who gives him sacrifi c i a j 

cake 

And offers Soma blent with milk. 

3 His chariot shall be glorious, sped by Gods, and mighty ^ 

he be, 

Subduing all hostilities. 

4 Each day that passes, in his house flows his libation, rich in 

milk, 

Exhaustless, bringing progeny. 

5 0 Gods, with constant draught of milk, husband and \yif e 

with one accord 

Press out and wash the Soma juice. 

6 They gain sufficient food : they come united to the sacred grass, 
And never do they fail in strength. 

7 Never do they deny or seek to hide the favour of the Gods: 
They win high glory for themselves. 

8 With sons and daughters by their side they reach their full 

extent of life, 

Both decked with ornaments of gold. 

9 Serving the Immortal One with gifts of sacrificial meal and 

wealth, 

They satisfy the claims of love and pay due honour to the Gods, 

10 We claim protection from the Hills, wo claim protection oi 

the Floods, 

Of him who stands by Vishnu's side. 

1 1 May Pushan come, and Bhaga, Lord of wealth, All-bounteous, 

for our weal : 

Broad be the path that leads to bliss : 

12 Aramati, and, free from foes, Visva with spirit of a God, 

And the Adityas' peerless might. 

13 Seeing that Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna are guarding us, 

The paths of Law are fair to tread. 


9 The Immortal One : amritdya : Agni, or the Immortal (boat), that is, th 
Gods in general. According to Mfty-ina, ‘ that they may obtain immortalit; 
(in their sous and descendants).’ They satisfy: this pdda is consumed b; 
some, on metrical and other gi omuls, to be an interpolation. According 
Pisehel ( Vedischt Studiev, I p. 178), the half-line refeis to the beating^ 
preparation of the rough stalks of the Soma plant, 

10 0/ him uho stands by Vishnu's side : of Vishnu and hia associate Indn 
— Ludwig. 

12 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion. Vuva: Dyaua ?— Ludwig- 
ttu> worshippers/ according to SAyana, 



TEE RIO VEDA. 


YMN 82.) 


m 


. l glorify with song, for wealth, Agni the God, the fir$t 
of you. 

We honour as a well-loved Friend the God who prospereth 
our fields. 

As in all frays the hero, so swift moves his car whom Gods 

attend. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

Ne’er are ye injured, worshipper, presser of juice, or pious man. 
The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

None in his action equals him, none holds him far or keeps 
him off. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

Such strength of heroes shall be his, such mastery of fleet- 
foot steeds. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities 
will conquer those who worship not. 

HYMN XX XII. Indr*. 

Kanvas, tell forth with song the deeds of Indra, the Im- 
petuous, 

Wrought in the Soma’s wild delight. 

Strong God, ho slew Anarsani, Sribinda, Pipru, and the fiend 
Ahisuva, and loosed the floods. 

Thou broughtest down the dwelling-place, the height of lofty 
Arbuda. 

That exploit, Indra, must be famed. 

Bold, to your famous Soma I call the fair-visored God for aid, 
Down like a torrent from the hill. 

Rejoicing in the Soma-draughts, Hero, burst open, like a fort, 
[The stall of horses and of kine. 

[ If my libation gladdens, if thou takest pleasure in my laud, 
Come with thy Godhead from afar. 

1 H/to pi'ogpereth our fields: kshetvas&dhasani : Sivana explains kshetra 
modern Hindi khet t a field), as sacrifice : ‘ the bountiful perfecter of the 
ince. — Wilson. 


Jj e topetnous : rijishinah : ‘the drinker of the stale Soma.’ — Wilson. 
lAt D&sh, or savage. All the names are names of demons of 

K t, of whom Pipru has been mentioned frequently in preceding Books. 
i^ a: see I 51. 6 ; II. 11. 20; 14. 4. 

d ’J.\y^° rrcnt f rom th* hill : ‘as (a traveller invokes) the water [from a, 



170 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOR tty 

7 0 Indra, Lover of the Song, the singere of thy praise are w e . 
0 Soma-drinker, quicken us. 

8 And, taking thy delight with us, bring us still undiminshed 

food : 

Great is thy wealth, 0 Maghavan. 

9 Make thou us rich in herds of kine, in steeds, in gold : 1# 

us exert 

Our strength in sacrificial gifts. 

10 Let us call him to aid whose hands stretch far, to whom high 

laud is due, ' 

Who worketh well to succour us. 

11 He, Satakratu, even in fight acts as a Vritra-slayer still : 

He gives his worshippers much wealth. 

12 May he, this Sakra, strengthen us, Boon God who satisfy 

our needs, 

Indra, with all his saving helps. 

13 To him, the mighty stream of wealth, the Soma-preBoer 1 

rescuing Friend, 

To Indra sing your song of praise ; 

14 Who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth glory i 

his wars, 

Lord of vast wealth through power and might. 

15 There liveth none to check or stay his energies and graciot 

deeds : 

None who can say, He giveth not. 

16 No debt is due by Brahmans now, by active men who pro 

the juice : 

Well hath each Soma-draught been paid. 

17 Sing ye to him who must be praised, say lauds to him wl 

must be praised, 

Bring prayer to him who must be praised. 

18 May he, unchecked, strong, meet for praise, bring hundre< 

thousands forth to light, 

Indra who aids the worshipper. 

19 Go with thy Godlike nature forth, go where the folk* 

calling thee : 

Drink, Indra, of the drops we pour. ^ 

11 Batakratu : Lord of a Hundred Power*. 

12 §akru: the Mighty. _ , 

16 The Brahmans or worshippers have, by offeting libations, disco 

their obligations to the Gods, and the Gods have repaid them, or will 
repay them for their offerings. 

18 Hundred s, thousands; counties* treasure* for u* to enjoy. 



THE RIQVBDA. 


m 


rtfX 33.] 

prink milky draughts which are thine own, this too which 
was with Tugrya once, 

This is it, Indra, that is thine. 

pass him who pours libations out in angry mood or after sin : 
Here drink the juice we offer thee. 

Over the three great distances, past the Five Peoples go thy way, 
0 India, noticing our voice. 

Send forth thy ray like Sfirya : let my songs attract thee 
hitherward 

Like waters gathering to the vale. 

Now to the Hero fair of cheek, Adhvaryu, pour the Soma forth : 
Bring of the juice that he may drink : 

Who cleft the water-cloud iu twain, loosed rivers for their 
downward flow, 

And set the ripe milk in the kine. 

He, meet for praise, slew Vritra, slew Ahfsuva, ftrnav&bha’s son, 
And pierced through Arbuda with frost. 

To him your matchless Mighty One, unconquerable Conqueror, 
Sing forth the prayer which Gods have given : 

Indra, who in the wild delight of Soma juice considers ' e 
All holy Laws among the Gods. 

Hither let these thy Bays who share thy banquet, Steeds with 
golden manes, 

Convey thee to the feast prepared. 

Hither, 0 thou whom many laud, the Bays whom Priyamedha 
praised 

Shall bring thee to the Soma-draught. 

HYMN XXXIII. Indra. 

We compass thee like waters, we whose grass is trimmed and 
Soma pressed. 

Here where the filter pours its stream, thy worshippers round 
thee, 0 Vritra-slayer, sit. 

20 Which teas mth Tugrya: like that which thy favourite Bhujyu (see Vol. 
Index) formerly offered thee. 

22 The three great distances : the space in front of thee, behind thee, and 
thy side. Noticing our voice : hearing and attending to our invocation*. 
>me to us who are thy true worshippers, and pass by others who worship 
ee m the hope of being avenged upon their enemies or of obtaining pardon 
[■ some sin. 

rnavdbha's son : Au rna v:\bha : a demon of drought. 8eeII.ll. 18. 
Jrott : making the piercing cold of winter his weapon. 

^ ter •* or woollen strainer through which the Soma juice is run to 



m the H7MNS OP [BOOK W//J 

2 Men, Va8u ! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to the for®. 

most place : , . . , ^ T , 

When comest thou athirst unto the juice as home, O Indra, 

like a bellowing bull ? 

3 Boldly, Bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the Kanvag’ 

O aetiv’e Maghavan, with eager prayer wo crave the yellow, 
hued with store of kine. 

4 Medhvatithi, to Indra sing, drink of the juice to make thee glad, 
Close-knit to his Bay Steeds, bolt-armed, beside the juice i, 

he : his chariot is of gold. . 

5 He who is praised as strong of hand both right and left, mo® 

wise and bold : , , , 

Indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, honoured 
as breaker-down of forts. 

6 The bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands in bearded 
Much-lauded, very glorious, overthrowing foes, strong Helper 

7 \Vho°knowa what vital power he wins, drinking beside thi 

Thl° is "he “to-cheeked God who, joying in the draught 
breaks down the castles in his strength. 

8 As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way, mtt 

None'may 1 compel thee, yet come hither to the draught : thoi 

9 When he, theMighty, jiier o’erthrown, stedfast, made read 

When ‘indS Maghavan lists to his praiser’s call, he will no 

stand aloof, but come. i m n0 « 

10 Yea, verily, thou art a Bull, with a bulls rush, who 

may stay : 


o a, home: as familiar to thee a» thine own home. ... 

3 The i/dlowhucd : there is no substantive, hut gold “““ ® (in (liii 

6 In bearded confidence: a conjectural paraphrase^ J Lu ,i wl 

beard) is said by S&yana to mean lu re in combats, that w, perh»p > ^ | 

suggests, among ranks of men bristling with apears- But t ^ ^ for „ 

the meaning of the word which .» probably So> the E« 

fierce look of a wamor who challenges the foe. h\i i g. » d * vol0 

ThOrr when about to meet a foe, is said to have raised b s beam 
See Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, I. 177 (hnglieh 

8 Mad with heat : that is, matt, oi as phonetically! >P*<V " f 1 cb , e „, 
10 Thou art a Bull: vrithd : or strong and “»8>»ty. As i repetiB' 
before (VIII. 13. 31, note), some of the Vedic poeU delight in 
oi this word and it* derivatives. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


yMN 38.] 


178 


Thou, Mighty One, art celebrated as a Bull, famed as a Bull 
both near and far. 

Thy reins are very bulls in strength, bull8 , strength is in thy 
golden whip. 

Thy car, 0 Maghavan, thy Bays are strong as bulls : thou, 
Satakratu, art a Bull. 

! Let the strong presser press for thee. Bring hither, thou 
straight-rushing Bull. 

The mighty makes the mighty run in flowing streams for thee 
whom thy Bay Horses bear. 

; Come, thou most potent Indra, come to drink the savoury 
Soma juice. 

Maghavan, very wise, will quickly come to hear the songs, the 
prayer, the hymns of praise. 

When thou hast mounted on thy car let thy yoked Bay Steeds 
carry thee 

Past other mens’ libations, Lord of Hundred Powers, thee, 
Vritra-slayer, thee our Friend. 

i 0 thou Most Lofty One, accept our laud as nearest to tbine 
heart. 

May our libations be most sweet to make thee glad, 0 Soma- 
drinker, Heavenly Lord. 

' Neither in thy decree nor mine, but in another’s he delights, — 

The man who brought us unto this. 

Indra himself hath said, The mind of woman brooks not dis- 
cipline, 

Her intellect hath little weight. 

I His pair of horses, rushing on in their wild transport, draw 
his car : 

High-lifted is the stallion’s yoke. 

1 Cast down thine eyes and look not up. More closely set thy 
feet. Let none 

See what thy garment veils, for thou, a Brahman, hast become 
a dame. 


l^^oWen ; the lightning, vuth which Indra lashes the clouds, his 

jjj Tht nighty makes the mighty run : the priest makes the Soma juice flow. 

inexin 6 la lVT 0tftuz ‘ ia of the hyrnu are not very intelligible, nor is their 
BDot “ k lth the P rec ©ding verses obvious. Stanzas 16 and 18 appear to 
Indra f V Woman al *d 17 by a man. Stanza 19 is said to be addressed 
?recatir n r AI !? a 80U °* Playoga who had been changed to a woman by the 
of the Gods, and who was afterward* restored to manhood* 



174 


THE HYMNS OP 


[&00K yuij 

HYMN XXXIV. Is 

Come hither, Indra, with thy Bays, come thou to Kmi V4 », 
eulogy. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day ! h avj 
gone to heaven. 

2 May the stone draw thee as it speaks, the Soma-stone with 

ringing voice. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, etc. 

3 The stones’ rim shakes the Soma here like a wolf worrying! 

sheep. 

Ye, etc. 


4 The Kanvas call thee hitherward for succour and to win tin 

spoil. 

Ye, etc. 

5 I set for thee, as for the Strong, the first draught of the juici 

shed. 


6 Come with abundant blessings, come with perfect care to au 

cour us. 

7 Come, Lord of lofty thought, who hast infinite wealth ai 

countless aids. 

8 Adorable mid Gods, the Priest good to mankind shall brii 

thee near. 

9 As wings the falcon, so thy Bays rushing in joy shall cai 

thee. 

10 Come from the enemy to us, to Svahfi, ! and the Soma-draug 

11 Come hither with thine ear inclined to hear, take pleasure 

our lauds. 

12 Lord of well-nourished Horses, come with well-fed Steeds al 

in hue. 

13 Come hither from the mountains, come from regions of 

sea of air. 


The R’mhi is Nip&tithi of the family of Kanva, but stanzas 16-18 
ascribed in the Index to the thousand Vaaurochishas who are said to * 
been a division of the family of Angiras. 

1 The exact meaning of the second line, which is the burden of the 
fifteen stanzas, is obscure. Ye probably means Indra’s horses, and Oodb 
by day t ( divdvaso) Indra himself ; that is, ye, horses, and thou, Indra, 
gone to heaven. The Scholiast offers two different explanations, in one 
boldly altering two words of the text. See Wilson’s Translation, note. 

8 The Priest good to mankind : or, the Invoking Priest, Invoker or H 
established by Manu, namely Agni. 

10 Svdhi : an exclamation used in sacrifice ; Ave ! or Hail ! 




THE RIQVEDA. 


YMN 35.] 


175 


. Disclose to ua, 0 Hero, wealth in thousands both of kine and 
steeds 

i Bring riches hitherward to us in hundreds, thousands, myriads. 
Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day 1 have 
gone to heaven. 

; The thousand steeds, the mightiest troop, which we and Indra 
have received 
From Vasurochis as a gift, 

[ The brown that match the wind in speed, and bright bay 
coursers fleet of foot, 
hike Suns, resplendent are they all. 

) Mid the PAr&vata's rich gifts, swift steeds whose wheels run 
rapidly, 

I seemed to stand amid a wood. 

HYMN XXXY. A,™*. 

With Agm and with Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, with the Adityas, 
Rudras, Vasus, closely leagued ; 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
drink the Soma juice. 

I With all the Holy Thoughts, all being, Mighty Ones ! in close 
alliance with the Mountains, Heaven, and Earth ; 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
drink the Soma juice. 

With all the Deities, three times eleven, here, in close alliance 
with the Maruts, Bhrigus, Floods ; 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
drink the Soma juice. 

Accept the sacrifice, attend to this my call : come nigh, 0 ye 
Twain Gods, to all libations here. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
bring us strengthening food. 

Accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. Come nigh, 
0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins, 
bring us strengthening food. 

6 Vasurochis : vdsurochiahah ia probably the ablative singular, and not the 
i native plural, of the name of the inatitutor of the sacrifice. Wilson, 
r T! n § V trane l a tea : ‘ We, the thousand Vasurochishas, and Indra 
8 'T/Td * 1611 vigorous herds of horses, — 

p e is Vasurochis. The P&rAvatas are probably the jr apvrjral 

®nry, who were settled northwards of Arachosia — Ludwig. 

de^ \Vi Uo 1 1 ^ tW ° youtlui * youths are delighted (by the voices 



THE HYMNS OP 


170 


[BOOK ri n 


6, Accept the songs we sing, accept the solemn rite. Come nj ff i 
0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.' 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Aby^ 
bring us strengthening food. 

7 Ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees; like buffaloes y 
seek the Soma we have shed. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, com 
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home. 


8 Ye fly like swans, like those who travel on their way; jjj 

buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, con 
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home. 

9 Ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks; like buffaloes i 

seek the Soma we have shed. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, cor 
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home. 

10 Come hitherward and drink and satisfy yourselves, best 

upon us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvi 
grant us vigorous strength. 

1 1 Conquer your foes, protect us, praise your worshippers ; best 

upon us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya aud with Dawn, 0 Asvi 
grant us vigorous strength. 

12 Slay enemies, animate men whom ye befriend; bestow iv 

us progeny and affluence. 

Aocordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 0 Asv 
grant us vigorous strength. 

13 With Mitra, Vanina, Dharma, and the Maruts in your c 

pany approach unto your praiser’s call. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya aud with Dawn, and \ 
the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

14 With Vishnu and the Angirases attending you, and with 

Maruts come unto your praiser’s call. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sirya and with Dawn, and ' 
the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

15 With Ribhus and with Vajas, 0 ye Mighty Ones, leagued 

the Maruts come ye to your praiser’s call. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 

, with the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

8 Ye come eagerly to the Soma as thirsty hantas (swans, geese, or 0 
goes) travellers, and buffaloes hasten to the water. 

13 Dharma : Right, J ustice, Law, Virtue or Duty perfqmfied. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


177 


35 .] 

Give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts ; slay ye 
the Rakshasas and drive away disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the 
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

Strengthen the Ruling Power, strengthen the men of war ; 
slay ye the RaLkshasas and drive away disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the pres- 
ser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

Give strength unto the milch-kine, give the people strength, 
slny ye the Rakshasas and drive away disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the 
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

As ye heard Atri’s earliest eulogy, so hear Syavasva, Soma- 
presser, ye who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink 
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

i Further like running streams Syavasva’s eulogies who presses 
out the Soma, ye who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink 
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

[ Seize, as ye grasp the reins, Syavasva’s solemn rites who pres- 
ses out the Soma, ye who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink 
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

I Drive down your chariot hitherward : drink ye the Soma's 
savoury juice. 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your 
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

I When sacrifice which tells our reverence hath begun, Heroes ! 
to drink the gushing juice, 

Approach, yc Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your 
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

Sate you with consecrated drink, with juice effused, ye Deities. 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your 
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

17 The Ruling Power : kshatrdm • hence Kshatriya, a man of the princely 

military order. 

jl3 The people: visas : hence Vai§ya , a man of the mercantile class or order. 

;! 9 diri’*.- as he waa the progenitor of the Rishi of the Hymn. See Vol. I., 

Hex. 

pi Solemn rites : that is, the oblations presented thereat. 

Consecrated drink: libations offered with the sacrificial exclamation 

l&hft ! Ave ! or Hail ! 



178 


THE HYMNS OF 
HYMN XXXVI. 


[BOOK Vjij 


Indn, 


Thou helpost him whoso grass is trimmed, who sheds the 
juice, 0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad. 

The share which they have tixed for thee, thou, Indra, Victor 
o’er all hosts and space, begirt with Maruts, Lord of Heroes 
winner of the floods. 


2 Maghavan, help thy worshipper : let him help thee. 0 

kratu, drink Soma to make thee glad. 

The share which they have fixed for thee, etc. 

3 Thou aidest Gods with food, and that with might aids thee 

0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad. 

4 Creator of the heaven, creator of the earth, 0 Satakratu 

drink Soma to make tlicc glad. 

f> Father of cattle, father of all steeds art thou. 0 Satakratu 
drink Soma to make thee glad. 

6 Stone-hurler, glorify the Atria* hymn of praise. 0 Satakratu 

drink Soma to make thee glad. 

7 Hear thou SvfivAsva while he pours to thee, as erst tho 

heartiest At ri when he wrought his holy rites. 

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce figl 
with heroes, strengthening his prayers. 


HYMN' XXXVII. Indj 

This prayer, and those who shed the juice, in wars nil 
Vritra thou holpest, Indra, Lord of Strength, with all tl 
succoms. 

0 Vritra-slaycr, from libation poured at noon, drink oft! 
Soma juice, thou blameless Thunderer. 

2 Thou mighty Conqueror of hostile armaments, 0 Indra, Lor 
of Strength, with all thy saving help. 


1 Which they have fixed : which all the Gods have assigned. This balf-ver 
is the refrain of stanzas 1—6. And space, begirt : or, and wide space, girt. 3 
flood* : the waters of heaven, the rain. 

2 Lei him kelp thee: according to Sftyana, ‘protect thyself (by drinki 
the Soma).’ ‘ The mutual relation between the God and his worshipper 
expressed, and the translation ‘ help thyself ’ is ridiculous.’ — Ludwig. 

3 Food : sacrificial food. That : food, especially in the shape of Soma. 

7 Trasadasyu : an especial favourite of Indra and the Asvins, celebra' 

for his victories and liberality. See Index. 


1 0 Vfitraslayer, etc: this half-verse is repeated as a refrain in the 
following stanzas. 



THE BIQVEDA . 


tfWt 38.] 


170 


3 Sole Ruler, thou art Sovran of this world of life, 0 Indra, 

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help. * * 

4 Thou only sunderest these two consistent worlds, 0 Indra, 

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help. 

5 Thou art the Lord supreme o’er rest and energy, 0 Indra, 

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help . 

6 Thou helpest one to power, and one thou hast not helped, 0 

Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving aid. 

7 Hear thou SyaLvasva while he sings to thee, as erst thou 

heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites. 

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce fight 
with heroes, strengthening his powers. 


HYMN XXXVIII. Indra-Agni. 

Ye Twain are Priests of sacrifice, winners in war and holy 
works : 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

2 Yc bounteous riders on the car, ye Vritra-slayers unsubdued : 
Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

2 The men with pressing-stones have pressed this meath of 
yours which gives delight : 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

4 Accept our sacrifice for weal, sharers of praise ! the Soma 

shed : 

Indra atad Agni, Heroes, come. 

5 Be pleased with tb^e libations which attract you to our 

sacred gifts : 

Indra and Ag»b Heroes, come. 

6 Accept tWs eulogy of mine whose model is the Gayatri: Indra 

and Agni, Heroes, come. 

^ Consistent worlds: there is no substantive in the text, and lolcau (worlds} 
supplied by S&yana. v l 

) Rest and energy : or pence and war. ‘ Prosperity and gains.’— .Wilson. 

1 To power : ksatrdfya : the rule exercised by princes. 

[ k e j?eated from the preceding Lmn with the alteration of two words 

» ^nging, instead of sunvatdh, , pouring (libations), and kshatrdni 
meely) powers instead of brdhnxdyi, prayers, ‘as if,’ observe# Dr. Muir, 

>e former ( brahmdni ,) contained a reference to the functions of the priest, 

1 the latter to those of the prince.’ — 0. S. Texts, I. 263. 

1 Mar '1c this well : * hear (the praise) of this (thy worshipper).’ — Wilson. 

B ; touted : according to SAyana, ‘ destroyers (of foes)/ 

" ”’ ioae nodd is the Gdyatri; composed in GAyatrl metre. 



180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK p ;// 

7 Come with the early-faring Gods, ye who are Lords of genuine 

wealth : 

Indra-Agni, to the Soma-draught ! 

8 Hear ye the call of Atris, hear Syavasva as he sheds th< 

juice *. 

Indra-Agni to the Soma-draught ! 

9 Thus have I called you to our aid as sagos called on you 0 

old: 

Indra-Agni to the Soma draught ! 

10 Indra’s and Agni’s grace I claim, Sarasvati’s associates 
To whom this psalm of praise is sung. 

HYMN XXXIX. AgD 

The glorious Agni have I praised, and worshipped with th 
sacred food. 

, May Agni deck the Gods for us. Between both gatherin' 
places he goes on his embassy, the Sage. May all the othei 
die away. 

2 Agni, burn down the word within their bodies through or 

newest speech, 

All hatreds of the godless, all the wicked man’s malignitie 
Away let the destroyers go. May all the others die away. 

3 Agni, I offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy mouth. 
Acknowledge them among the Gods, for thou art the rnoi 

excellent, the worshipper’s blissful messenger. Let all tl 
others die away. 

4 Agni bestows all vital power even as ea*L man supplicates. 
He brings the Vasus strengthening gifts, a*id grants deligh 

in rest and stir, for every calling on the God*. Let all tl 
others die away. 

5 Agni hath made himself renowned by wonderful victories a( 
He is the Priest of all the tribes, chosen with sacrificial mod 

He urges Deities to receive. Let ail the others die away. 

7 Earlyfanng Gods : * But Thou wast up at break of day.'— George Herbe 
t0 SarasvatU associates : according to Sdyana, * to whom praise belongs. 

1 Deck the Gods for us : * brighten the gods with the oblations at < 
sacrifice.’ — Wilson. Both gathering -places : heaven and earth. All the o 
anyake same : meaning, acoording to S&yapa, ail our enemies. 

2 All hatred of the godless : ardttr ardvndm muBt be read instead of « 

rardvndm.— Ludwig. . 

6 With sacrificial meeds : ddkshindbhih : his dakshinds or honoraria as 
are the oblations which he receives as a God. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


181 


jfifiV 40.] 

6 Agni knows ^ at s P rin g 8 from Gods, he knows the mystery 

of men* 

Giver of wealth is Agni, he uncloses both the doors to us when 
worshipped with our newest gift. Let all the others die 
away. 

7 A^ni inhabiteth with Gods and men who offer sacrifice. 

He cherisheth with great delight much wisdom, as all things 
that be, God among Gods adorable. May all the others die 
away. 

8 Agni who liveth in all streams, Lord of the Sevenfold Race of 

men, 

Him dweller in three homes we seek, best slayer of the Dasyus 
for Mandhatar, first in sacrifice. Let all the other’s die away. 

9 Agni the Wise inhabiteth three gathering-places, triply formed. 
Decked as our envoy let the Sage bring hither and conciliate 

the Thrice Eleven Deities. Let all the others die away. 

0 Our Agni, thou art first among the Gods, and first mid living 
men. 

Thou only rulest over wealth. Round about thee, as natural 
dams, circumfluous the waters run. Let all the others die 
away. 

HYMN XL. Indra-Agni. 

Indra and Agni, surely ye as Conquerors will give us wealth, 
Whereby in tight we may o’ercome that which is strong and 
firmly fixed, as Agni burns the woods with wind. Let all 
the others die away. 

2 We set no snares to tangle you; Indra we worship and adore, 
Hero of heroes mightiest. 

Once may he come unto us with his Steed, come unto us to 
win us strength, and to complete the sacrifice. 

6 That springs from Gods: tho past and the present, while the mystei'y of 
Ken is the future. — Ludwig. Both the doors: of wealth, or, perhaps of 
L ‘aven also. 

8 Lord of ike Sevenfold Race of men : perhaps meaning, God of all men, 
;e Vaisvftnara ; or the reference may be t<> the seven priests : ‘ Who is minis- 
red to by seven priests.’ — Wilson. ‘Acting as seven priests.’ — M. Muller. 
andMtar : said to bo the same at M&ndh&tar, boo of Yuvan&sva, and Rislii 
X. 134. 

9 Three gathering -places : heaven, firmament, and earth. 

10 Round about thee, the waters run : Cf. ‘Him, pure, resplendent, 

ffspring of the Waters, the waters pure have on all sides encompassed’ 
I. 35. 3). L 

1 Let all the others die away : this refrain recurs in all stanzas of the hymn 
[ce pt the final. 

^ Once: kad&chit : expressive o * impatience.— Ludwig. 



182 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vlij 

3 For, famous Indra-Agni, ye are dwellers in the midst of fray a 
Sages in wisdom, ye are knit to him who seeketh you a j 

friends. Heroes, bestow on him his wish. * ! 

4 Nabhaka-like, with sacred song Indra’s and Agni’s praise I si ne 
Theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven and this 

mighty earth which bear rich treasure in their lap. 

5 To Indra and to Agni send your prayers, as was Nabhaka’a 

wont, — 

Who oped with sideway opening the sea with its foundations 
seven — Indra all powerful in his might. 

6 Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creeping plant 
Demolish thou the Dasa’s might. May we with Indra’s help 

divide the treasure he hath gathered up. 

7 What time with this same song these men call Indra-Agni 

sundry ways, 

May we with our own heroes quell those who provoke us to the 
fight, and conquer those who strive with us, 

8 The Two refulgent with their beams riso and come downward 

from the sky. 

By Indra’s and by Agni’s best, flowing away, the rivers run 
which they released from their restraint. 

9 0 Indra, many are thine aids, many thy ways of guiding ns, 
Lord of the Bay Steeds, Hinva’s Son. To a Good Hero come 

our prayers, which soon shall havo accomplishment. 

10 Inspire him with your holy hymns, the Hero bright and 

glorious, 

Him who with might demolisheth even the brood of Sushna, 
and winneth for us the heavenly streams. 

11 Inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious Hero 

truly brave. 

He brake in pieces Sushna’s brood who still expected not the 
stroke, and won for us the heavenly streams. Let all the 
others die away. 

4 Nabhdka-like : Nabh&ka may have been the father of NAbh&ka the Kishi 
of the hymn. 

8 Who oped : ‘ who overspread (with their lustre).’ — Wilson. The Commen- 
tator does not explain the passage. 

7 This same song : a hymn like our own, for victory in battle. 

8 The Two refulgent with their beams : apparently the Sun and Moon. Ac- 
cording to SAyana, Indra and Agni are intended. 

9 Hinva's Son : Hinva (the driver, impeller, instigator of actions), a father 
invented for Indra by the poet. To a Good Hero : to Indra. ‘ The meaning 0 
the verse, even with the help of the scholiast, is far from intelligible.’— WiUou- 



THE RTGVEDA. 


183 


yyfy 41 .] 

> Tims have we sung anew to Indra-Agni, as sang our sires, 
Angirases, and Mandhatar. 

Guard us with triple shelter and preserve us : may we be 
masters of a store of riches. 

HYMN XLI. Vamna. 

To make this Varuna come forth, sing thou a song unto the 
band of Maruts wiser than thyself, — 

This Varuna who guardeth well the thoughts of men like 
herds of kine. 

Let all the others die away. 

! Him altogether praise I with the song and hymns our fathers 
sang, and with Nabhaka’s eulogies, — 

Him dwelling at the rivers’ source, surrounded by his Sisters 
Seven. 

; The nights he hath encompassed, and stablished the morns 
with magic art : visible over all is he. 

His dear Ones, following his Law, have prospered the Three 
Dawns for him. 

1 He, visible o’er all the earth, stablished the quarters of the 
sky : 

He measured out the eastern place, that is the fold of Varuna : 
like a strong herdsman is the God. 

5 He who supports the worlds of life, he who well knows the 
hidden names mysterious of the morning beams, 

He cherishes much wisdom, Sage, as heaven brings forth each 
varied form. 

i In whom all wisdom centres, as the nave is set within the 
wheel. 

Haste ye to honour Trita, as kine haste to gather in the fold, 
even as they muster steeds to yoke. 


1 To make this Varuna come forth : SAyana explains prabhfliaye as an adjec- 
Vf- prakr'ushtadhanAi/a : * to that opulent Varuna.' — Wilson. IViscr : more 

in singing. The thoughts : holy thoughts and devotions. The refrain, 
^all, etc., recurs at the end of e\e y stanza. 

2 A ihhdka's : that is, mine own Sisters Seven : the five rivers of thePanj;ib, 
le f utlus, and perhaps the KubhA. See 1 32, note. 

? d ea r Ones : apparently the nights, which give place to the mornings. 

Dawns : according to SAyana, morning, noon, and evening 
* The fold : or, perhaps, the course, meaning the place from which he starts. 
® Trita: Varuna, here, apparently, identified with this ancient God who 
spresentH the expanse of heaven. According to SAyaua, (Varuna) ‘who abides 
1 the three world*’ 



184 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK p// 

7 He wraps these regions as a robe ; he contemplates the tribe 

of Gods and all the works of mortal men. 

Before the homo of Varuna all the Gods follow his decree. 

8 He is an Ocean far-removed, yet through the heaven to hi 

ascends the worship which these realms possess. 

With his bright foot he overthrew their magic, and went t 
to heaven. 

9 Ruler, whose bright far-seeing rays, pervading all three earth 

have filled the three superior realms of heaven. 

Firm is the seat of Varuna : over the Seven he rules as Kin 
10 Who, after his decree, o’erspread the Dark Ones with a rol 
of light; 

AVho measured out the ancient seat, who pillared both tl 
worlds apart as the Unborn supported heaven. Let all tl 
others die away. 


HYMN XLII. Varu 

Lord of all wealth, the Asura propped the heavens, and irn 
sured out the broad earth's wide expanses. 

He, King supreme, approached all living creatures. All the 
are Varima’s holy, ope rat ions. 

2 So humbly worship Varuna the Mighty ; revere the wi 
Guard of the World Immortal. 

May he vouchsafe ns triply-barred protection. 0 Earth a 
Heaven, within your lap preserve us. 

7 This stanza is very obscure, and my rendering is conjectural. Thect 
mentary is defective, aud von Both and Ludwig think that the correctness 
one word in the text is doubtful. According to the slight alteration suggi 
ed by the latter scholar, ‘ under the lead ’ would stand instead of ‘ before 1 
home.' 

8 The first line of this stanza also is difficult. Wilson, following S3ya 
translates : ‘ He is the hidden ocean ; swift he mounts (the heaven) as ( 
8U n) the sky ; when he has placed the sacrifice in those (regions of the tin 
ment).’ Ludwig's interpretation, which I follow, requires tirdh to be ri 
instead of turdh (swift). Their magic : the magical arts of the fiends of darto 

9 Firm: bo Hesiod (Theog. V. 127) calls Ouranoe = Varuna the « 
a(T(pa AtC, the firm seat of the Gods. See M. Muller, Chips a ^ ern 
Workshop, IV. xx (new edition). The Seven : rivers, understood. 

30 The Dark Ones: the nights, which Varuna turns into days. M 
Chips, IV. xxii. The Unhorn : the primeval, everlasting, uncreated v 
Being. According to SAyana, the Sun. 

1 The Asura : the High God, Varuna. * The wise spirit.’— M. Mull^ 

2 Of the World Immortal ; amritasya : according to SAyana, of » mn 



THE R1QVEDA. 


185 


\rMN 43.] 

) Sharpen this song of him who strives his utmost, sharpen 
God Vanina, his strength and insight ; ’ 

May we ascend the ship that bears us safely, whereby we may 
pass over all misfortune. J 

[ Asvins, with songs the singer stones have made you hasten 
hitherward, 

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away, 

) As the sage Atri with his hymns, 0 Asvins, called you eagerly, 

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away. 

) So have I called you to our aid, even as the wise have called 
of old, 

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away. 

HYMN XLIII. Agni> 

These songs of mine go forth as lauds of Agni, the disposing Sage, 

Whose worshipper is ne’er o’ert brown. 

I Wise Agni Jatavedas, I beget a song of praise for thee. 

Who willingly receivest it. 

3 Thy sharpened flames, 0 Agni, like the gleams of light that 
glitter through, 

Devour the forests with their teeth. 

i Gold-coloured, bannered with the smoke, urged by the wind, 
aloft to heaven 

Rise, lightly borne, the flames of fire. 

5 These lightly kindled fiery flames are all around made visible, 

Even as the gleamings of the Dawns. 

6 As Jatavedas speeds along, the dust is black beneath his feet, 

When Agni spreads upon the earth. 

1 Making the plants his nourishment, Agni devours and w T earies 
not, 

! Seeking the tender shrubs again. 

k Bending him down with all his tongues, he flickers with his 
fiery glow : 

Splendid is Agni in the woods. 

Agni, thine home is in the floods : into the plants thou 
forcest way, 

And as their Child art born anew\ 

1 Worshipped with offerings shines thy flame, 0 Agni, from 
the sacred oil, 

^With kisses on the ladle’s mouth. 

5 Th* ship : a metaphorical expression for hymn and sacrifice. Cf. I. 46. 7 ; 

; IX. 89. Q • Y aa a . i n . i m o . ins q 



186 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vn j 

1 1 Let us serve Agni with our hymns, Disposer, fed on ox aiJ( 

cow, 

Who bears the Soma on Mb back. 

12 Yea, thee, 0 Agni, do we seek with homage and with f Ue 

Priest 

Whose wisdom is most excellent. 

13 0 worshipped with oblations, pure Agni, we call on thee i 

erst 

Did Bhrigu, Manus, Angiras. 

14 For thou, 0 Agni, by the fire, Sage by the Sage, Good by tl 

Good, 

Friend by the Friend, art lighted up. 

15 So wealth in thousands, food with store of heroes give thou i 

the sage, 

0 Agni, to the worshipper. 

16 0 Agni, Brother, made by strength, Lord of red steeds ai 

brilliant sway, 

Take pleasure in this laud of mine. 

17 My praises, Agni, go to thee, as the cow's seek the stall 

meet 

The lowing calf that longs for milk. 

18 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have pleasant horn 
Apart, have turned as to their wish. 

19 The sages skilled in holy song and thinkers with their thougl 

have urged 

Agni to share the sacred feast. 

20 So, Agni, unto thee the Priest, Invoker, strong in forays, pr 
Those who spin out the sacrifice. 

21 In many a place, the same in look art thou, a Prince o’er 

the tribes : 

In battles we invoke thine aid. 


11 Fed on ox and cow : ‘the eater of the ox, the eater of the marrow. 
Wilson. Who bears the Soma on his back: »<mapruhth&ya : ‘ on whose b 
the libation is poured.' — Wilson. 

14 S&yana refers to the Aitareya Erdhmana, I. 16, ‘which describes) 
the fire produced by friction from the two aranis [fire-sticks] is thrown i 
the Ahavamya fire, in the Atithyeshti ceremony. “ In the verse twain hf 
[For thou, 0 Agni] etc., the one ripra (a sage) means one Agni, the other r* 
the other Agni ; the one san (being, existing) means the one, the other 
(in satd) the other Agni.’ (Haug’s tratis.).' — Note by E. B. C. in ^ liS( 
Translation. Sdn and $at& may also mean ‘ good.’ 

16 Made by strength : produced by violent agitation of the fire-stick* 



THE MOVED A. 


TMN 44.J 


187 


5 Pray thou to Agni, pray to him who blazes served with sacred 
oil : 

Let him give ear to this our call. 

I We call on thee as such, as one who hears, as Jatavedas, one, 

Agni ! who beats away our foes. 1 

; I pray to Agni, King of men, the Wonderful, the President 

Of holy Laws : may he give ear. 

I Him like a bridegroom, him who stirs all people, like a noble 
horse, 

Like a fleet steed, we instigate. 

i Slaying things deadly, burning up foes, Rakshasas, on every 
side, 

Shine, Agni, with thy sharpened flame. 

Thou whom the people kindle even as Manus did, best Angiras ! 

0 Agni, mark thou this my speech. 

| 0 Agni, made by strength ! be thou bom in the heavens or 
born in floods, 

Vs such wo call on thee with songs. 

Tea, all the people, all the folk who have good dwellings, 
each apart, 

lend food for thee to eat thereof. 


) Agni, so may wo, devout, gazed at by men, throughout our 
days 

^ss lightly over all distress. 

Ve venerate with cheerful hearts the cheerful Agni, dear to all, 
burning, with purifying flame. 

»o thou, 0 Agni rich in light, beaming like Surya with thy rays 
ioldly demolishest the gloom. 

Vepray to thee for this thy gift, Victor! the gift that faileth 
not, 

) Agni, choioest wealth from thee. 


HYMN XLIV. Agni. 

5 ay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your Guest with 
oil : 

in him present your offerings. 

^gni, do thou accept my laud, be magnified by this my song : 
welcome my sweetly-spoken words. 

/tning ^ eaveni : 68 ® un - In floods: in the waters of the firmament 
t* ai men •’ objects of their admiration. ‘ Beholding men.’ — Wilson. 

▼ \&Q10nK PofilnaVv i Wf T avi nnn 



188 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR pj 

3 Agni, envoy, I place in front ; the oblation-bearer I address 
Here let him seat the Deities. 

4 Agni, the lofty flames of thee enkindled have gone up on hi 
Thy bright flames, thou Refulgent One. 

5 Beloved ! let my ladles full of sacred oil come near to thee 
Agni, accept our offerings. 

6 I worship Agni — may he hear ! — the oheerful, the InVol 

Priest 

Of varied splendour, rich in light. 

7 Ancient Invoker, meet for praise, beloved Agni, wise and strc 
The visitant of solemn rites. 

8 Agni, best Angiras, accept straightway IheBe offerings, and gi 
The seasonable sacrifice. 

9 Excellent God, with brilliant flames, enkindled bring t 

hitherward, 

Knowing the way, the Heavenly Host. 

10 Him, Sage and Herald, void of guile, ensign of sacrifices, liin 
Smoke-bannered, rich in light, wo seek. 

1 1 0 Agni, be our Guardian thou, God, against those who injure 
Destroy our foes, thou Son of Strength. 

12 Making his body beautiful, Agni the Sage hath waxen by 
The singer and his ancient hymn. 

13 1 invocate the Child of Strength, Agni with purifying flai 
At this well-ordered sacrifice. 

14 So Agni, rich iu many friends, with fiery splendour, 

thyself 

With Gods upon our sacred grass. 

15 The mortal man who serves the God Agni within his 

abode, 

For him he causes wealth to shine. 

16 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the e 

is he : 

He quickcneth the waters’ seed. 

17 Upward, 0 Agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplendent, 

ing high, 

Thy lustres, fair effulgences. 

14 Rich in many friends : 'thou who hast Mitra’s splendour/— Ludwi; 

15 For him he causes wealth to shine : or, *To him he shines forth opul 
* To him he gives riches.'— Wilson. 

16 The waters' seed ; as lightning, he impregnate* the wate rs of tbs i 



THE RIGVEDA . 


(N 45.] 


139 


?or, Agni, thou as Lord of Light rulest o'er choicest gifts: 
may I, 

"»hy singer, find defence in thee. 

) Agni, they who understand stir thee to action with their 
thoughts : 

5o let our songs enhance thy might. 

Ye ever claim the friendship of Agni, the singing messenger, 
)f Godlike nature, void of guile. 

Vgni who bears most holy sway, the holy Singer, holy Sage, 
Jhines holy when we worship him, 

fea, let my meditations, let my songs exalt thee evermore : 
Think, Agni, of our friendly bond. 

f I were thou and thou wert I, 0 Agni, every prayer of 
thine 

Jhould have its due fulfilment here. 

'or Excellent and Lord of wealth art thou, 0 Agni, rich in 
light : 

day we enjoy thy favouring grace. 

Vgni, to thee whoso laws stand fast our resonant songs of 
praise speed forth 
Vs rivers hasten to the sea. 

Vgni, the Youthful Lord of men, who stirreth much and 
eateth all, 

The Sage, I glorify with hymns. 

To Agni let us haste with lauds, the Guide of sacrificial rites, 
Vrmcd with sharp teeth, the Mighty One. 

Lnd let this man, good Agni, bo with thee the singer of thy 
praise : 

Be gracious, Holy One, to him. 

For thou art sharer of our feast, wise, ever watchful as a 
Sage : 

Vgni, thou shinest in the sky. 

3 Agni, Sage, before our foes, before misfortunes fall on us, 
Excellent Lord, prolong our lives. 

HYMN XLV. Indrn. 


Hitherward! they who light the flame and straightway trim 
the sacred grass, 

Whose Friend is Tndra ever young. 

> Sateth all : consumes the entire oblation.— SAyana. But the meaning 
robably general. 

This mm : the Rishi or singer himself. 
i the kIu • »\v ^ 



190 THE HYMNS OP [POOR y/ 

2 High is their fuel, great their laud, wide is their splinter f r , 

the stake, 

Whose Friend is Indra ever young. 

3 Uuquelled in fight the heroleads his army with the warriorchi 
Whose Friend is Indra ever young. 

4 The new-born Vritra-slayer asked his Mothor, as he sei 

his shaft, 

Who are the fierce? Who are renowned? 

D Savasi answered, He who seeks thine enmity will battle lil 
A stately elephant on a hill. 

6 And hear, 0 Maghavan ; to him who craves of thee t 

gran test all : 

Whate’er thou makest firm is firm. 

7 What time the Warrior Indra goes to battle, borne by a 

steeds, 

Best of all charioteers is he. 

8 ltepcl, 0 Thunder-armed, in all directions all attacks on u 
And be our own most glorious God. 

9 May Indra set our car in front, in foremost place to win the s 
He whom the wicked injure not. 

10 Thine enmity may we escape, and, Sakra, for thy bounty, 
In kinc, may we come near to thee ; 

11 Softly approaching, Thunder armed ! wealthy by hundi 

rich in steeds, 

Unrivalled, ready with our gifts. 

12 For thine exalted excellence gives to thy worshippers each 
Hundreds and thousands of thy boons. 

13 Indra, we know thee breaker-down even of strong f 

winner of spoil, 

As one who conquers wealth for us. 

14 Though thou art highest, Sage and Bold ! let the drops c 

thee when we come 
To thee as to a trafficker. 

2 Splinter: the first shaving, splinter, or strip of wood, cut from the 
or sacrificial post, and used in the sacrifice. 

4 Aa soon as he was born Indra showed his warlike disposition, and 
what worthy opponents he should have. 

5 Savasi, or, the Strong Dame ; his mother Adit-i. A stately 
follow S&yana who explains apsah m darjaniyo gajah, a beautiful elei 
although in other place* the word seems to mean beauty (I. 124 7), 
head (V. 80, 6), The allusion is to the size and strength of Vfitra, Indr* 
lure antagonist. 

14 As to a trafficker: as to one who knows the value of our worsnij 
•blations and will give us something in return. 



YMX 40.J 


TUE KlUVEDA, 


191 


Bring unto us the treasure of the opulent man who, loth to 
give, 

Hath slighted thee for gain of wealth. 

Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and 
look to thee, 

As men with fodder to the herd. 

And thee who art not deaf, whose ears are quick to listen for 
our aid, 1 

We call to us from far away. 

When thou hast listened, make our call one which thou never 
wilt forget, 

And be our very nearest Friend. 

When even now, when we have been in trouble we l» 4V « 
thought of thee, ’ 0 

0 Indra, give us gifts of kine. 

0 Lord of Strength, we rest on thee, as old men rest upon a 
staff : r 

Wc long to have thee dwell with us. 

To Indra sing a song of praise, Hero of mighty valour him 

\\ hum no one challenges to war. ’ 


Hem, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink- 
bate thee and finish thy carouse. 


Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee when they 
seek thine aid : J 


I hove not the enemies of pra\ er. 

i lc A 11,0,11 with 11011 milky draught cheer thee to great 
i munificence: b 


brink as the wild-bull di inks the lake. 

IV awsy 1 111 ° Ur asscmblius " hat dcctls > new and ancient, far 
TllC Vritra-slayer hath achieved. 

In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadru’s Soma juice: 
ieie lie displayed his manly might. 

Tnie undeniable strength he found in Yadu and in Turvasa 
"^conquered through the saeriticc. ' ’ 

1 J enc "““ of prayer : according to S&yana those who hate Brihmans. 
f ‘J'- mid-bull : the gaura. 

E^tlfc 8 om'-V W " ; . K : <lra t er ® 18 »PP» re ntly the name of a Rishi or 
», a g J ,r,C - T 1 * 6 St - Petersburg Lexicon takes it to 

r » hadru or Soma* vessel. 

furvasa aud^ Y«^ naf ^^ w * aocording to Sdyapa, is the name of the enemy 
f uiadu: he overcame Ahnav&vva in battle.’ — Wilson. 



28 Him have I magnified, our Lord in common, Guardian of 

folk, m 

Discloser of great wealth in kine ; 

29 Ribhukshan, not to be restrained, who strengthened TugraV 

son in lauds, I 

Indra beside the flowing juice ; 

30 Who for Trisoka clave the hill that formed a wide receptacli 
So that the cows might issue forth. 

31 Whate’er thy plan or purpose bo, whate’er, in transport, thoi 

wouldst do, 

Do it not, Indra, but be kind. 

32 But little hath been heard of done upon the earth by oa 

like thee : 

Let thine heart, Indra, turn to us. 

33 Thine then shall be this high renown, thine shall these loftj 

praises be, 

When, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

34 Not for one trespass, not for two, 0 Hero, slay us, nor fa 

three, 

Nor yet for many trespasses, I 

35 I fear one powerful like thee, tho crusher-down of enemies, 
Mighty, repelling all attacks. 

36 0 wealthy God, ne’er may I live to see my friend or son 

need : 

Hitherward let thy heart be turned. 

37 What friend, 0 people, unprovoked, hath ever said unto 

friend, 

He turns and leaves us in distress? 

38 Hero, insatiate enjoy this Soma juice so near to thee, 

Even as a hunter rushing down. 

20 Rihhuhhan : Indra, Lord of tho Ilibhus. Tugra’s ton: Bhujyu. A 
cording to Sftyana, tuyryavrklham means * augmenter of water.' 

30 The hill is the massive rain-cloud, and the cows are streams of water. 

31 Do it not : ‘ Sftyana understands this, “ do it not, for thou hast done 
for us, — only make us happy.” Could it be that the worshipper had a feeiu 
of nemesis 1 or would he monopolize all ? ' — Note by E. B. C. in WiW 
Translation. 

32 ‘ In the following venes (32—3(5) the poet seems to express disappo^ 
ment at the inadequate manifestation of Indra’s power, while he at the w 
time entreats his grace and forgiveness.'— 0. 8. Texit, V. p, 1U. 

37 This stanza is Indra’s answer to the poet's complaint. The 
seems to be : no friend without good cause calls bis friend a traitor . ■ 
then have I done, or left undone, that thou shouldet say that I have t 
thee ? See Ludwig's Commentary on the very difficult jahS kdK or;« 



THE RIGVEDA. 


b/w 46.] 


393 


| Hither I draw those Bays of thine yoked by our hymn, with 
splendid car, 

That thou mayst give unto the priests, 
i Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes who press 

around, 

And bring the wealth for which we long : 

0 Jndra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipi- 
tous : 

Bring us the wealth for which we long : 


Great riches which the world of men shall recognize as sent 
by thee : 

Bring us tho wealth for which we long. 


HYMN XL VI. 


Indra. 


We, Indra, Lord of ample wealth, our Guide, depend on one 
like thee, 

Thou driver of the Tawny Steeds. 

For, Hurler of tho Bolt, we know thee true, the giver of our 
food, 

We know thee giver of our wealth. 

) thou whose majesty tho bards celebrate with their sontrs 
thou Lord b ‘ ' 

)f hundred powers and hundred aids. 

-dr guidance hath the mortal man whom Aryaman, the Marut 

host, 

Vnd Mitra, void of guile, protect. 


Lne, steeds, and hero strength he gains, and prospers, by the 
Adityas sped, 

^ver in wealth which all desire. 


We pray to Indra for his gift, to him tho Fearless and the 
Strong, 

We pray to him the Lord of wealth. 


verily combined in him arc all the fearless powers of aid. 
im, rich in wealth, let swift Steeds bring to us, his Bays, to 
Soma juice for his carouse : 


fea, that most excellent carouse, Indra, which slays most ene- 
mies, 

With Heroes wins tho light of heaven, and is invincible in war : 


PiscLl r PI i Car T to <, 1,0 ?°mposed of two or more originally separate hymns 
e (see in* 6 l8c J ie .^ U( ^* en i L PP- 7 — 9). There are seventeen varieties of 
e only °/ *ty mna )- The hymn is difficult and obscure in parts, 
pZl c °BJ<*tural translations can be given. ^ 1 

atd: or, sucoourere ; the Maruts may be intended. 



THE HYMNS OF 


194 


[BOOR r/jj 


9 Which merits fame, all-bountiful 1 and, unsubdued, hath vic- 
tory in deeds of might. 

So come to our libations, Strongest 1 Excellent ! May we oV 
tain a stall of kine. 

10 Responding to our wish for cows, for steeds, and chariots,^ 

of old, 

Be gracious, Greatest of the Great ! 

1 1 For, Hero, nowhere can I find the bounds of thy munificence, 
Still do thou favour us, 0 Bolt-armed Maghavan : with strength 

hast thou rewarded hymns. 

12 High, glorifier of his friend, he knows all generations, k 

whom many praise. 

All races of mankind with ladles lifted up invoke that Might] 
Indra’s aid. 

13 Be he our Champion and ITotector in great deeds, rich in al 

wealth, the Vritra-slayer, Maghavan. 

11 In the wild raptures of the juice sing to your Hero with higl 
laud, to him the Wise, 

To Indra, glorious in his name, the Mighty One, even as th 
hymn allow eth it. 

15 Thou givest wealth to me myself, thou givcst treasure, Ei 

cellent ! and the strong steed, 

0 Much-invoked, in deeds of might, yea, even now. 

16 Him, Sovran Ruler of all precious things, who even hat 

power o’er this fair form of his, 

As now it takcth shape, and afterward, 

17 We praise, so that the Mighty One may speed to you, Pouk 

of bounties, Traveller, prepared to go. 

Thou favourest the Maruts known to all, by song and sacnnci 
With song and praise I sing to thee. 

18 We in the sacrifice perform their will whose voice is life 

high, .. 

The worship of those Thundering Ones who o’er the ridges i 
these mountains fly in troops. 

13 This stanza may have been the conclusion of one of the original hy® 1 

14 A s the hymn ailoweth it : in due accordance with the metre. 

16 S&yana explains the latter part of the first line and the following j* 
of the second as, ‘ who overcome* this obstructor (the enemy) m /je v( 
war.’ I follow Ludwig’s interpretation who refers to III. 5%. o, w 
weareth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic changes in hia ’ 
VI. 47. II, ‘ Indra moves multiform by his illusions/ 

18 Their will : the pleasure of the Maruts. 



the may eda . 




195 


Olndra, Mightiest, bring us that which crushes men of evil minds, 

Wealth suited to our needs, 0 Stirrer of the thought, best 
wealth, 0 thou who stirrest thought. 

0 Winder, noble winner, strong, wondrous, moat splendid, 

excellent, 

Sole Lord of victory, bring all-overpowering wealth, joy-giving, 
chief in deeds of might. 

Now let the godless man approach who hath received reward 
so <*reat 

As Vasa Asvya, when this light of morning dawned, received 
from Prithusravas, from Kanita’s son. 

Steeds sixty thousand and ten thousand kinc, and twenty 
hundred camels I obtained ; 

Ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in three spots: 
in all, ten thousand kino. 

Ten browns that make my wealth increase, fleet steeds whose 
tails are long and fair, 

Turn with swift whirl my chariot wheel ; 

The gifts which Prithusravas gave, KanitVs son munificent. 

He gave a chariot wrought of gold : the prince was passing 
bountiful, and won himself most lofty fame. 

Come thou to this great rite of ours, Vayu ! to give us vigor- 
ous light. 

We have served thee that thou mightest give much to us, yea, 
mightest quickly give great wealth. 

Who with thrice seven times seventy horses comes to us, 
invested with the rays of morn, 

Through these our Soma-draughts and those who press, to 
give, drinker of pure bright Soma juice. 

Who hath inclined this glorious one, bounteous himself, to 
give me gifts, 

Borne oil firm chariot with the prosperous Nahusha, wise, to 
a man yet more devout. 


) 0 winner: of wealth to be given to thy worshippers. * 0 bountiful, 
t bountiful.’— Wilson. 

[ V a WAi}vya: the Rishi of the hymn. Seel, 112. 10. Prithusravas: 
1 116. 21. 

\ h ten thousand hint : the exact meaning is not very clear. The last 
18 rendered differently in Wilson’s Translation : * a thousand brown 
? 8, J“ an d ten times ten thousand cows with three red patches.' 

I n V ft PP ar ©ntly VAyu, but, according to SAyapa, Prithusravas. 

chariot : literally, on a car made of the wood of the Aradu tres 
Manthes Indies). But SAyana makes two proper names of the words, 
f Aradva and Aksha.’ 



THE II Y MSS OF 


[BOOR r/fl! 


196 

28 Sole Lord in beauty meet for praise, 0 Vayu, dropping fatness 

Hurried' along by steeds, by camels, and by hounds, spread, 
forth thy train : even this it is. 

29 So M a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand have I gained, 
Bulls that resemble vigorous steeds. 

30 To me come oxen like a herd, yea, unto mo the oxen come. 
And in the grazing herd he made a hundred camels bleat forme, 
And twenty hundred mid the white. 

32 A hundred has the sage received, Dasa Balbutha s and Tarot 

The h so’are f thy people, Vayu, who rejoice with Indra for the, 
guard, rcjoico with Gods for guards. . , , , , 

33 And now to Vasa Asvya here this stately woman is led font, 
Adorned with ornaments of gold. 

HYMN XLVII. Adityi 

Great help yo give the worshipper, Varutia.Mitra, Mighty Ouei 
No sorrow ever readies him whom ye, Ad.tyas, keep romharn 
Youm are incomparable aids, and good the succour they affon 

2 O Gods Adityas, well ye know the way to keep all woesafa 
As the 'birds spread their sheltering wings, spread your proto 

tion over us. 

3 As the birds spread their sheltering wings let your protect™ 
We mean all shelter and defence, ye who have all things fi 

4 ToThomloevcr they, Most Wise, have given a home a, 
O’eTthe whole riches of this man they , tho Adityas, have coutn 

6 For verily men sink and faint through oss 

,»», O Cod., .b»r, 

have approached. — — * 

' 28 The tlttdt, camel., an 7h^d> are apparently the fantastic form, of 1 
clouds that tty before Vftyu or the wind. 

w l o{ iha ^ uewd ^ 

1 Yourt art, tic: the rsfrsin recurs in every verse of the hymn. 



THE RIQtEDA . 


jjr^v 47.] TI *E RIG? EDA. W 

\ On him shall no fierce anger fall, no sore distress shall visit 
him, 

To whom, Adityas, ye have lent your shelter that extendeth 
far. 


] Resting in you, 0 Gods, we are like men who fight in coats of 
mail. 

Ye guard us from each great offence, ye guard us from each 
lighter fault. 

) May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guard and shelter us, 

Mother of wealthy Mitra and of Aryaman and Varuna. 

) The shelter, Gods, that is secure, auspicious, free from malady, 
A sure protection, triply strong, oven that do ye extend to us. 

I Look down on us, Adityas, as a guide exploring from the 
bank. 

Lead us to pleasant ways as men lead horses to an easy ford. 


2 111 be it for the demons’ friend to find us or come near to us. 

! But for the milch-cow be it well, and for the man who strives 
for fame. 


j} Eacli evil deed made manifest, and that which is concealed, 

1 0 Gods, 

The whole thereof remove from us to Trita Aptya far away. 

[ Daughter of Heaven, the dream that bodes evil to us or to 
our kine, 

Remove, 0 Lady of the Light, to Trita Aptya far away, 
i Even if, 0 Child of Heaven, it make a garland or a chain of 
gold, 

The whole bad dream, whate’er it be, to Trita Aptya we 
consign. 

I To him whose food and work is this, who comes to take his 
share therein, 

1 To Trita, and to Dvita, Dawn ! bear thou the evil dream away. 


13 To Trita Aptya far away : Trita Aptya is a divinity dwelling in the re- 
vest part of the heavens to whom it was customary to wish away and 
asign any threatened calamity or unpleasantness. As S&yana regards Trita 
>tya as the lliahi of the hymn, he !s compelled to force a different interpre- 
tio u on the first half of the second line : ‘ (let it not be found) in Trit* 
>tya, keep it far from us.’ — Wilson. 

14 Daughter of Heaven : Ushas or Dawn. 

15 ‘ The sense would then be ‘ even though parts of it be pleasant, we put 
B whole of the evil dream away.” — Macdonell, Journal of R. A. S., July, 

P- 461. 

him: to Trita whose business it is to receive these consignments. 

Dvita: a similar being, sometimes associated with Trita, SeeV. 18. 2, 



193 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/jj 


17 As we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteen^ 

part, % 

So unto Aptya we transfer together all the evil dream. 

18 Now have we conquered and obtained, and from our trespas 

ses are free. 1 2 3 * * 

Shine thou away the evil dream, 0 Dawn, whereof we art 
afraid. Yours are incomparable aids, and good the succour 
they afford. 


2 


HYMN XLVIII. 


Soma, 


Wisely have I enjoyed the savoury viand, religious-thoughted, 
best to find out treasure, 

The food to which all Deities and mortals, calling it meath, 
gather themselves together. 

Thou shalt be Aditi as thou hast entered within, appeaser of 
celestial auger. 

Indu, enjoying Indra’s friendship, bring us — as a swift steed 
the car — forward to riches. 


3 We have drunk Soma and become immortal ; wo have attained 

the light, the Gods discovered. 

Now what may foeman’s malice do to harm us? What, 0 Im- 
mortal, mortal man’s deception ? 

4 Absorbed into the heart, be swoet, 0 Indu, as a kind father to 

his son, 0 Soma, 

As a wise Friend to friend : do thou, wide-rulor, 0 Soma, 
lengthen out our days for living. 

5 These glorious drops that give me freedom have I drunk] 

Closely they knit my joints as straps secure a car. 

Let them protect my foot from slipping on the way : yea, 
the drops I drink preserve me from disease. 

6 Make me shine bright like fire produced by friction: give us 

clearer sight and make us better. 

For in carouse I think of thee, 0 Soma, Shall I, as a rich na 
attain to oomfort ? 

7 May we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juioe thou givei 

like ancestral riches. 

0 Soma, King, prolong thou our existence as Surya makes t 
shining days grow longer. 


1 Meath : mddhu ; or, sweet. 

2 Within ; within my heart. Indu : Soma. 

3 We have drunk Soma : *ee Muir, 0. S. Texts, III. 264, 266. ^ 

6 From slipping on the wag : 1 may they keep us from a 1°° 8 

worship. ’—Wilson. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


199 


'MN 49*1 

King Soma, favour us and make us prosper : we are thy de- 
votees ; of this be mindful. 

Spirit and power are fresh in us, 0 Indu : give us not up unto 
our foeman’s pleasure. 

For thou hast settled in each joint, 0 Soma, aim of men’s eyes 
and guardian of our bodies. 

When we offend against thine holy statutes, as a kind Friend, 
God, best of all, bo gracious. 

May I be with the Friend whose heart is tender, who, Lord of 
Bays ! when quaffed will never harm me — 

This Soma now deposited within me. For this, I pray for longer 
life to Indra. 

Our maladies have lost their strength and vanished : they feared, 
and passed away into the darkness. 

Soma hath risen in us, exceeding mighty, and we are come 
where men prolong existence. 

Fathers, that Indu which our hearts have drunken, Immortal 
in himself, hath entered mortals. 

So let us serve this Soma with oblation, and rest securely iu his 
grace and favour. 

Associate with the Fathers thou, 0 Soma, hast spread thyself 
abroad through earth and heaven. 

So with oblation let us servo thee, Indu, and so let us become 
the lords of riches, 

Give us your blessing, 0 ye Gods, preservers. Never may sleep 
or idle talk control us. 

But evermore may we, as friends of Soma, speak to the synod 
with brave sons around us. 

On all sides, Soma, thou art our life-giver : aim of all eyes, 
light-finder, come within us. 

Indu, of one accord with thy protections both from behind and 
from before preserve us. 

HYMN XLIX. Agni. 

Aoxr, come hither with thy fires ; we choose thee as Invoking 
I Priest. 

| Let the extended ladle fi'.l of oil balm thee, best Priest, to 
[sit on sacred grass. 

9 Ann of men's eyes: or, beholder of men. 

^ immortal in himself: see note on I. 18. 4. 

Soma: here the Moon-God, who is intimately connected with the Pitris 
fatuera. See Hymns of the Atharvaveda, XVIII. 4. 72. 

* place at the end of this Book the eleven hymns, called the VAlakhilya, 
are usually inserted after Hymn XLVIII. These hymns are not 



200 


THE EYMNS OF 


[BOOS 


nn 


2 For unto thee, 0 Angiras, 0 Son of Strength, move ladles ' 
the sacrifice. !a 


To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we seek f 0 
most in sacrificial rites. ! ' 


3 Agni, thou art Disposer, Sage, Herald, bright 1 God! j 

worshipful, 

Best offerer, cheerful, to be praised in holy rites, pure Loi 
by singers with their hymns. 

4 Most Youthful and Eternal, bring the longing Gods to i 

the guileless, for the feast. 

Come, Vasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared : rejo 
thee, gracious, with our songs. 

5 Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide, Preserver, righteous, a 

a Sago. 

The holy singers, 0 refulgent kindled God ! arrangers, call 
thee to come. 


6 Shine, Most Resplendent ! blaze, send bliss unto the folk, a 

to thy worshipper : Great art thou. 

So may my princes, with good fires, subduing foes, rest in t 
keeping of the Gods. 

7 0 Agni, as thou burnest down to earth even high-grot 

underwood, 

So, bright as Mitra is, burn him who injures us, him who pic 
ill against thy friend. 

8 Give us not as a prey to mortal enemy, nor to the wickc 

friend of fiends. 

With conquering guards, auspicious, unassailable, protect u 
0 Most Youthful God. 

9 Protect us, Agni, through the first, protect us through tl 

second hymu, 

Protect us through three hymns, 0 Lord of Power and Migh 
through four hymns, Vasu, guard thou us. 


reckoned in the division of the Uigved* into Mandalas (Books) and Amivaki 
(Chapters), and Sftyana does n<>t notice them in his Commentary. See J*' 
eon's Translation, V. p. 96, note by Cowell. See also Max Muller’s 
Hymn* I. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXII.), pp. xlvi — xlviii. 

Eleven must be added to the number of this hymn and of all that ioi° 
in this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Max Mnller 
edition of the text. 

2 Whose locks drop oil : ‘butter-haired. ’—Wilson. 

5 The arrangers : of the ritual of sacrifice. 

6 Princes : wealthy patrons. According to Sftyana, the Rishi’s own s 

and others may be intended. , „ 

9 The numbers probably have reference to the four quarters of the s ;• 
Ludwig. j 



THE RIQVEDA . 


201 


'ryjfiV 49.] 

0 Preserve us from each fiend who brings the Gods no gift, 

preserve thou us in deeds of strength : 

For we possess in thee the nearest Friend of all, for service 
of the Gods and weal. 

1 0 Holy Agni, give us wealth renowned with men and strength- 

ening life. 

Bestow on us, O Helper, that which many crave, more glorious 
still by righteousness ; 

2 Wherewith we may o’ercome our rivals in the war, o’erpower- 

ing the foe’s designs. 

So wax thou by our food, 0 Excellent in strength. Quicken 
our thoughts that find out wealth. 

3 Agni is even as a bull who whets and brandishes his horns. 
Well-sharpened are his jaws which may not be withstood : the 

Child of Strength hath powerful teeth. 

4 Not to be stayed, 0 Bull, 0 Agni, are thy teeth w’hen thou 

art spreading far and wide. 

Make our oblations duly offered up, O Priest, and give us 
store of precious things. 

5 Thou Host in the wood : from both thy Mothers mortals kindle 

thee. 

Un wcaricdly thou bearcst up the offerer’s gifts, then shinest 
bright among the Gods. 

6 And so the seven priests, 0 Agni, worship thee, Free-giver, 

Everlasting One. 

Thou cleavest through the rock with heat and fervent glow. 
Agni, rise up above the men. 

7 For you let us whose grass is trimmed call Agni, Agni, rest- 
j less God. 

Let us whose food is offered call to all the tribes Agni the 
Invoking Priest of men. 

8 Agni, with noble psalm that tells his wish ho dwells, thinking 
, ou thee who g Hardest him. 

Speedily bring us strength of many varied sorts to be most 
near to succour us. 

9 Agni, Praise-singer! Lord o' men, God ! burner-up of Rakshasas, 
Mighty art thou, the ever-present Household-Lord, Home- 

h'kmd and Guardian from the sky. 

j2 H herewith : referring to the wealth which Agni is asked to give. 

In the wood: in the pieces of wood used for the production of Agni. 
wren prints : minor Hotar priests, such as the MaitrAvaruna and others. 
lV Xi ' explained by S&yana as mtgham , the cloud. 

18 dW : or, ‘the irresistible/ — Wilson. 

dwellt : that is, the pious inatitutor of sacrifice, 



02 THE HYMNS OF f / j , 

l0 Let no fiend oome among us, 0 thou rich in light, no spell o( 
those who deal in spells. 

To distant pastures drive faint hunger: far away, 0 Agni, 
chase the demons’ friends. 

HYMN L. Ind* 

Both boons,— may Indra, hitherward turned, listen to this 

And^ghtiest^Maghavan with thought inclined to ua com, 
near to drink the boma juice. 

2 For him, strong, independent Ruler, Heaven and Earth liavs 

fashioned forth for power and might. 

Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, forth, 

soul longs for Soma juice. 

3 Fill thyself full, 0 Lord of wealth, 0 Indra, with the juice n 

wfkuow thee, Lord of Bay Steeds ! victor in the fight, van 
quisliiug e’en the invincible. 

4 Changeless in truth, 0 Maghavan Indra, let it be as thou ii 

wisdom wiliest it. . . , . • i n ti 

May we, 0 fair of check, win booty with thine aid, 0 lliun 

derer,’ swiftly seeking it. 

5 Indra, with all thy saving helps give us assistance, Lord o 

For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, Her( 
finder-out of wealth. 

6 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well,- 

For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee. Bring m 
whatever thing 1 ask. 

1 For thou,— come to the worshipper !— wilt find great wea 
to make us rich. , 

Fill thyself full, 0 Maghavan, for gam of kine, full, 
for the gain of steeds. 

8 Thou as thy gift bestowest many hundred herds, yea, mal1 
thousands dost thou give. 

With singers’ hymns have we brought the Fort-render 
singing to Indra for his grace. 

20 SpM 7f thm who deal in tfdU: ydliryitumSxKUAm : -torment oft' 
evil spirits.’— Wilson. 

1 Both hoont : Indra is asked to hear the prayer and to drink the So»»' 



the riqved a. 


203 


~YMy 

I Whether thesimple or the sage, Indra, have offered praise to thee, 
He, Satakratu ! by his love hath gladdened thee, ambitious ! 
ever pressing on ! 

) If he the Strong of arm, the breaker-down of forts, the great 
Destroyer, hear my call, 

We, seeking riches cry to Indra, Lord of wealth, to Satakratu 
with our lauds. 

We couut not then as sinners, nor as niggardly or foolish men, 
When with the Soma juice which we have shed we make Indra, 
the Mighty Ono, our F riend. 

! Him have we yoked in fight, the powerful Conqueror, debt- 
claimer, not to be deceived. 

Best charioteer, the Victor marks each fault, ho knows the 
strong to whom ho will come near. 

\ Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid. 

Help us, 0 Maghavan, let thy Buccour givo us this : drive 
away foes and enemies. 

[ For thou, 0 liberal Lord of bounty, strengthenest his ample 
home who worships thee. 

So Indra, Maghavan, thou Lover of the Song, we with pressed 
Soma call on thee. 

5 Indra is Vritra-slayer, guard, our best defender from the foe. 
May ho preserve our last and middlemost, and keep watch 

from behind us and before. 

6 Defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all sides, 

Indra, shield us well. 

| Keep far away from us the terror seat from heaven : keep 

[ impious weapons far away. 

^ Protect us, Iudra, each to-day, each morrow, and each follow- 
ing day. 

Oar singors, through all days, shalt thou, Lord of the brave, 
keep safely both by day and night. 

1 A crushing Warrior, passing rich is Maghavan, endowed with 
all heroic might. 

Thine arms, 0 Satakratu, are exceeding strong, arms which 
have grasped the thunderbolt. 

1M/ 8 ^ tl ^ e ov sage: * the unskilled or the skilled.’ — Wilson. 

- Marks each fault; the meaning of bhrimdm is uncertain : aocording to 
^ Vl g it h 4 his supporter or feeder,’ that i«, the worshipper who presents 
ihiT 1 5?, cr ^°* a l f°°d- Sftyana takes it with vdjinam ; * the strong racer.’ — 
15 0 '1 * tron y the rich au d powerful worshipper. 
v U1 ™ an< ^ m McUmort ; putram, son, being understood, aocording to 
i«‘V» ; 16 e *pression probably means ‘ all of us.’ 

e teri 'or tent from htavtn ; ‘ supernatural alarm.’— Wilson. 



204 


THE HYMNS OP 
HYMN LI. 


[BOOK Vli 


2 


il 1 ill. Xl JU1. T , 

Indr 

Offer ye up as praise to him that wherein Indra takes deligh 
The Soma-bringers magnify Indra’s great energy with hyiaj 
Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

Sole among chiefs, companionless, impetuous, and peerless ft 
Hath waxen great o’er many folk, yea, over all things bom 
in might. 


3 Lord of swift bounty, he will win e’en with a steed of worth 

less sort. J 

This, Indra, must be told of thee who wilt perform heroic deeds, 

4 Come to us hither : let us pay devotions that enhance tb 

might, 

For which, Most Potent ! thou wouldst fain bless the man 
here who strives for fame. 


5 For thou, 0 Indra, makest yet more bold the spirit of the bold 
Who with strong Soma serveth thee, still ready with hia 

reverent prayers. 

6 Worthy of son g, he looketh down as a man looketh into wells. 
Pleased with the Soma-bringer’s skill he maketli him his mate! 

and friend. 1 2 * * * 6 


7 In strength and wisdom all the Gods, Indra, have yielded m 

thee. 

Be thou the Guard of all, 0 thou whom many praise. 

8 Praised, Indra, is this might of thine, best for the service 

the Gods, 

That thou with power dost slay Vritra, 0 Lord of Strength. 

9 He makes the races of mankind like synods of the Beauteo 

One. 

Indra knows this his manifest deed, and is renowned. 

10 Thy might, 0 Indra, at its birth, thee also, and thy ment 
power, 

In thy care, Maghavan rich in kine ! they havo incrcas* 
exceedingly. 


1 Good are, etc : the refrain is repeated in each verse. 

2 Chiefs: nrlbhih: men, meaning Gods, according to S&jana. Folk: a 

tribes. 

Z He mil win e'en with a steed of worthless sort : 1 He...... wishes to bestoi 

blessings (upon us) with his unurged courser.' — WilBon. 

6 He looketh down : kindly on us as a thirsty man looks eagerly into&w 

9 Like synods of the Beauteous One : like assemblies that meet to hoflfl 
him ; but the meaning is obscure. 

10 They ; thy worshippers. 



THE RIOTED A. 


205 


yjtfr 52.] 

[ 0 VYitra-slayer, thou and I will both combine for winning 
spoil. 

Even malignity will consent, 0 Bolt-armed Hero, unto us. 

) Let us extol this Indra as truthful and never as untrue. 

Dire is his death who pours no gifts : great light hath he who 
oilers them. Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

HYMN LII. Indra. 

\Vnu powers of Mighty Ones hath he, Ancient, Beloved, been 

equipped, 

Through whom the Father Manu made prayers efficacious 
with tho Gods. 

2 Him, Maker of the sky, lot stones wet with the Soma ne’er 

forsake, 

Nor hymns and prayer that must be said. 

3 Indra who knew full well disclosed the kine to tho Angirases. 
This his great deed must be extolled. 

4 Indra, promoter of tho song, the sage's Strengthener as of old, 
Shall come to - bless and succour us at presentation of this 

laud. 

5 Now after their desire's intent the pious singers with the cry 
Of Hail ! have sung loud hymns to thee, Indra, to gain a stall 

of kine. 

6 With Indra rest all deods of might, deeds done and yet to be 

performed, 

Whom singers know devoid of guile. 

7 When the Five Tribes with all their men to Indra have sent 

out their voice, 

And when the priest hath strewn much grass, this is the Friend's 
[ own dwelling-place, 

‘8 This praise is verily thine own : thou hast performed these 
manly deeds, 

And sped the wheel upon its way. 

11 Malignity: or the malignant man. ‘ The niggard.’— Wilson. 

12 Dire is his death : or, great is his destruction. 

1 This difficult verse is variously interpreted both by Indian commentators 
ttd by European scholars. I follow partly Aufrecht’s translation as given by 
r. Muir, and partly Ludwig’s Commentary. See 0. S. Texts , I. pp. 163 164, 

[Hwig’s Rigveda, Y. pp. 107—168 ; and Wilson’s Translation, V. p. 107. 
he Ancient, Belov&d appears to be Soma and not Indra. 

7 The Friend's : Indra’s, The second line is very obscure. See Bergaigne, 
vi., and Vedic Hymns, I., p. 226. I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation. 

8 The wheel: the Sun. 



THB HYMNS OF 


200 


[BOOK r// 


9 At the o’erflowing of this Steer, boldly he strode for life, a n 
took 

Soma as cattle take their corn. 

10 Receiving this and craving help, we, who with you are Dak«l ia 

8ons, 

Would fain exalt the Maruts’ Lord. 

11 Yea, Hero, with the singers we sing to the duly-coming Band 
Allied with thee may we prevail. 

12 With us are raining Rudras, clouds accordant in call to battle 

at the death of Yritra, 

The strong assigned to him who sings and praises. May God 
with Indra at their head protect us. 


HYMN LI II. 


Indra 


May our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy bounty, 
Thunderer. 

Drive off the enemies of prayer. 

2 Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts, 

Mighty art thou ; 

There is not one to equal thee. 

3 Thou art the Lord of Soma pressed, Soma impressed is also 

thine. 

Thou art the Sovran of the folk. 


4 Come, go thou forth, dwelling in heaven and listening to the 

prayers of men : 

Thou tillest both the heavens and earth. 

5 Even that hill with rocky heights, with hundreds, thousands, 

held within, 

Thou for thy worshippers brakest through. 

6 We call on thee both night and day to taste the flowing Soma 

juice : 

Do thou fulfil our hearts’ desire. 


‘J This Steer: Soma; that is, when abundant libations had been offered, 
lie : Indra. 

10 Dukthat sons: of the same origin with you. 1 Lords of food/ according 
to Sftvana. 

11 Duly-coming Band : of Maruts, led by Indra 

12 The strong : perhaps the thunderbolt with which Indra aids the wor- 

shipper. — - — 

3 Unprtssed : in its natural state in the stalks of the plaut. Or, a* LuiMl 
suggests, the Soma which Indra drinks in heaven may be meant. See > . 
20 . 1 . 

5 That hiU: the cloud with its countless treasures of rain. 

0 Night: just before dawn. 



THB RIG VEDA. 


20 / 


YMN 54.] 


Where is that ever-youthful Steer, strong-necked and never 
yet bent down ? 

What Brahman ministers to him 1 

To whose libation doth the Steer, betake him with delight 
therein ? 6 

Who takes delight in Indra now? 

Whom, Vritra-slayer, have thy gifts and hero powers accom- 
panied ? 

Who is thy dearest in the land ? 

For thee among mankind, among the Purus is this Soma shed. 

Hasten thou hither : drink thereof. 

This, growing by Sushoma and by Saryanav^n, dear to thee, 

In Arjikiya, cheers thee best. 

Hasten thou hitherward, and drink this for munificence to-day 

Delightful for thine eager draught. * ? 


HYMN LIV. 


India. 


riiouon, Indra, thou art called by men from east and west 
from north and south, 

Jomc hither quickly with fleet steeds ; 


:f ill the effluenoo of heaven, rich in its light, thou takest joy 
Jr in the sea in Soma juice. J * 

With songs I call thee, Great and Wide, even as a cow to 
profit us, 

ndra, to drink the Soma-draught. 

lithor, 0 Indra, let thy Bays bear up and bring upon thy car 
■hy glory, God ! and majesty. 

hou, Indra, wouldst bo sung and praised as great, strong 
^ lordly in thy deeds : ° 

'Ome hither, drink our Soma juice. 

Ve who have shed the Soma and prepared the feast are call- 
ing thee 

o sit on this our sacred grass. 


Among the PHrus : among men, or among Kings named POrup.— SAyana. 
Sushoynd: apparently a river which cannot now be identified. Arjtktya : 
uT ntr y or district. SuryanAvdn is said to be a lake m the district 
tnetra. See Vol. I., Index. For conjectures regarding SushomA and 
see Zimmer, Altindmhez Leben , pp. 12, 13. Cf. VIII. 7. 29. 


e ffl' ienc<! of heaven : or the place in heaven from which the Amrit 
n S€a • of air ; the firmament. 
a : as the most useful of animals. 



208 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK F/j 

7 As, Indra, thou art evermore the common Lord of all alife 
Aa such we invocate thee now. 

8 The men with stones have milked for thee this nectar of tl 

Soma juice : 

Indra, be pleased with it, and drink. 

9 Neglect all pious men with skill in sacrod song : come hithe 

ward 

With speed, and give us high renown. 

10 Gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the King who gives 

spotted kino, 

Kine decked with golden ornaments. 

11 Beside a thousand spotted kine I have reoeived a gift of golf] 
Pure, brilliant, and exceeding great. 

12 Durgaha’s grandsons, giving me a thousand kine, munificent 
Have won renown among the Gods. 


HYMN LV. 


Indri 


Loud singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows we priest? 
invoke 

With haste, that he may help, as the bard’s Cherisher, Indrs 
who findeth wealth for you. 

2 Whom with fair helm, in rapture of the juice, the firm resist 

less slayers hinder not : 

Giver of glorious wealth to him who sing his praise, honouring 
him who toils and pours : 

3 Sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden goad, 
Indra, the Vritra-slaycr, urges eagerly the opening of the 

stall of kiue : 


9 All pious men : all other worshippers. 

10 The King : who iustituted the sacrifice. According to Sftyana, Indra « 
meant ; but this is impossible. 

12 Durgaha' s grandsons : SAynna explains durgdkasya by duhkham 5^® 
mdnasya me, of me plunged in grief, and ndpUuh (nepotes) as avakshi^h 
unprotected : ‘ Unprotected as I am, and plunged in sorrow (roy depew cn 
by the favour of the gods obtain food, and are blessed with abundance 
thousand cattle.' See Wilson’s Translation, and Cowell’s note. 

1 We priests invoice : the construction is difficult. I follow Ludwig, and td* 
hutd, an infinitivo, as equivalent to the first person plural. 

3 Carry-comb for horses : the purifier of his worshippers and wdl-skill ‘ 
horses, according to SAyana. Golden goad: wonderful aud golden^ 
according to Sflyapa. The meaning of ktjah, as well as of mriksrMh 13 un 
tain, but both seem to signify instruments connected with horses. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


209 


pJf.V 55.] 

[ Who for the worshipper scatters forth ample wealth, even 
! though buried, piled in heaps : 

May ludra, Lord of Bay Steeds, fair-helmed Thunderer, act 
at his pleasure, as he lists. 

i Hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, even of 
old, from men. 

All that we offer unto thee, 0 Indra, now, sacrifice, laud, effect- 
ual speech. 

5 To Soma, Much-invoked, Bolt-armed ! for thy carouse, Celestial, 
Soma-drinker ! come. 

Thou to the man who prays and pours the juice hast been 
beat giver of delightful wealth. 

r Here, verily, yesterday we Jet the Thunder- xviclder drink his fill. 
So in like manner offer him the juice to-day. Now range you 
by the Glorious One. 

i Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, follows 
the path of his decrees. 

So graciously accepting, ludra, this our praise, with wondrous 
thought come forth to us. 

i What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra hath 
not done 1 

Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, the Vritra- 
slaycr from his birth ? 

How great his power resistless ! how invincible the Vritra- 
slayer’s matchless might ! 

ludra excels all usurers who see the day, excels all traffickers 
in strength. 

0 Indra, Vritra slayer, we, thy very constant worshippers, 

Bring prayers ne’er heard before to thee, 0 Much-invoked, 0 
Ih under-armed, to be thy meed. 

0 thou of mighty acts, the aids that are in thee call forward 
many an eager hope. 

Past the drink-offerings, Vasu, even of the good, hear my 
call, Strongest God, and come. 

; Eerily, Indra, wo aro thuio, we worshippers depend on thee, 
lor there is none but only thou to show us grace, 0 Maghavan. 
thou much invoked. 

j •' w gold, precious stones, etc. 

The wolf; according to S&yana, the robber. The reason of mentioning 
in this place is not obvious. 

l i ^ ie d a y : who live. According to Sftyana, who look upon the 

a their present life, but will be sunk in darkness after death. 



210 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/#,| 

14 From this onr misery and famine set us free, from this dire 

curse deliver us. 

Succour us with thine help and with thy wondrous thought 
Most Mighty, finder of the way, 

15 Now let your Soma juice be poured : be not afraid, 0 Kali's sons. 
This darkening sorrow goes away; yea, of itself it vanishes. 

HYMN LYI. ^ Adityii, 

Now pray we to these Kshatriyas, to the Adityas for their aid, 
These who are gracious to assist. 

2 May Mitra bear us o’er distress, and Yanina and Aryanian, 
Yea, the Adityas, as they know. 

3 For wonderful and meet for praise is these Adityas’ saving help 
To him who offers and prepares. 

4 The mighty aid of you, the Great, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 
We claim to be our sure defence. 

5 Guard us, Adityas, still alive, before the deadly weapon strike: 
Are ye not they who hear our call ? 

6 What sheltering defence ye have for him who toils in pouring 

gifts, 

Graciously bless ye its therewith. 

7 Adityas, Gods, from sorrow there is freedom, for the sinless, 

wealth, 

0 ye in whom no fault is seen. 

8 Let not this fetter bind us fast : may he release us for success ; 
For strong is Iudra and renowned. 

9 0 Gods who fain would lend your aid, destroy not us as yt 

destroy 

Your enemies who go astray. 

10 Aud thee too, 0 Great Aditi, thee also, Goddess, I address, 
Thee very gracious to assist. 

11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thou Mother oi 

Strong Sons : 

Let no oue of our seed be harmed. 

12 Far-spread 1 wide-ruling! grant that we, unharmed by envy 

may expand : 

Grant that our progeny may live. 

14 From this our misery : the hymn was ‘ seen ’ and employed in a time c 
dearth and famine. Finder of the way : to prosperity. 

15 Kali's sons : Kali is the Rishi or seer of the hymn. 

I Kshatriyas ; royal princes. 

II Of Strong >SQn« ; tbs 



TEE MOVE DA. 


7MS 57.] 


211 


I Those who, the Priuoes of the folk, in native glory, ne *er 
deceived, 

Maintain their statutes, void of guile — 

14 As such, from mouth of ravening wolves, 0 ye Adityas, 

rescue us, 

Like a bound thief, 0 Aditi. 

15 Adityas, let this arrow, yea, let this malignity depart 
From us or e’er it strike us dead. 

16 For, Bountiful Adityas, we have evermore enjoyed your help, 
Both now and in the days of old. 

17 To every one, 0 ye Most Wise, who turneth even from sin to 

you, 

Ye Gods vouchsafe that lie may live. 

18 May this new mercy profit us, which, ye Adityas, frees like one 
Bound from his bonds, 0 Aditi. 

19 0 ye Adityas, this your might is not to be despised by us : 

So be ye graciously inclined. 

20 Lot not Vivasvau’s weapon nor the shaft, Adityas, wrought 

with skill, 

Destroy us ere old age be nigh. 

21 On every side dispel all siu, Aditya3, all hostility, 

Indigence, and combined attack. 


HYMN LVII. 


Indra, 


Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for our bliss, 
Strong in thy deeds, cheeking assault, Lord, Mightiest Indra, 
of the brave ! 


2 Great in thy power and wisdom, Strong, with thought that 

comprehendeth all ! 

Thou hast filled full with majesty. 

3 Thou very Mighty One, whose hands by virtue of thy greatness 

grasp 

The golden bolt that breaks its way. 

^ Your Lord of might that ne’er hath bent, that ruleth over all 
mankind, 

I call, that he, as he is wont, may aid the chariots and the 
men. 


H Who turneth even from sin : who cornea to you for forgiveness. 

^0 Vhmv&ris weapon : the deadly bolt of the Sun, or perhaps, metaphor- 
C! %> of the sacrifices * 

21 Combined attack : * the closely drawn net.’— Wilson. 

* ThwWjftUa j»U: 



212 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR Vijj 

5 Whom, ever farthering, in frays that win the light, in both 

the hosts 

Men call to succour and to help. 

6 Indra, the Strong, the measureless, worthy of praise, Most 

Bountiful, 

Sole Ruler even over wealth. 

7 Him, for his ample bounty, him, this Indra do I urge to 

drink, 

Who, as his praise was sung of old, the Dancer, is the Lord 
of men. 

8 Thou Mighty One, whose friendship none of mortals ever hath 

obtained : 

None will attain unto thy might. 

9 Aided by thee, with thee allied, in frays for water and for sun, 
Bolt-armed ! may we win ample spoil. 

10 So seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief Lover of the 

Song, 

As, in our battles, Indra, thou to Purumflyya gavest help. 

11 0 Thunderer, thou whose friendship and whose onward 

guidance both are sweet, 

Thy sacrifice must be prepared. 

12 To us, ourselves, give ample room, give for our dwelling ample 

room : 

Give ample room to us to live. 

13 We count the banquet of the Gods a spaoious pathway for 

the men, 

And for the cattle, and the car. 

14 Six men, yea, two and two, made glad with Soma juice, come 

near to me 

With offerings pleasant to the taste. 

15 Two brown-hued steeds, Indrotu’a gift, two bays from Rikslut’s 

son were mine, 

From Asvatnedha’s son two red. 

7 The Lancer : in the dance of war. 

10 Purumdyya: according to SAyana, ‘ me (the Rishi) the possessor of 
much wisdom.’ 

13 Sacrifice to the Gods procures freedom and security for us and all 
belong to us. 

15 ‘These princes with their respective fathers are the six of V. 14. The 
sons of Riksha and AwameUhu had originally commenced the sacrifice, but 
Jndrota and his father Atithigva came to see it and added tbeir gifts. The 
boub alone are mentioned : the son is the father’s second self, pitri-putrayor 
abheddt.’—CoweW* note in Wilson’s Translation. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


213 


qYMN 58.] 

[6 From Atithigva good car-steeds, from Arksha rein-obeying 
steeds, 

From Asvamedha beauteous ones. 

17 Indrota, Atithigva’s son, gave me six horses matched with 

mares : 

And Putakratu gave besides. 

18 Marked above all, amid the brown, is the red mare Vrishanvati, 
Obedient to the rein and whip. 

19 0 bound to me by deeds of might, not even the man who loves 

to blame 

Hath found a single fault in you. 

HYMN LVIII. Indra. 

I send you forth the song of praise for Indu, hero-gladdener. 
With hymn and plenty he invites you to complete the sacrifice. 

2 Thou wishest for thy kine a bull, for those who long for his 

approach, 

For those who turn away from him, lord of thy cows whom 
none may kill. 

3 The dappled kino who stream with milk prepare his draught 

of Soma juice : 

Clans in the birth-place of the Cods, in the three luminous 
realms of heaven. 

4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of 

the kine, 

The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave. 

li> ArJcska: the son of Riksha. Asvamedha : the son of Asvamedha. 

17 Pfttakratu: son of Asvamedha. 

18 Vrishanvati: according to von Roth, ‘perhaps, that may be found 
among stallions.’ 

19 0 bound to me : this stanza is addressed to the princes who instituted 
the sacrifice and gave the rewards which have been mentioned. 

1 The son// of praise ; trishtubham : used in a general sense for any hymn 
of praise. Indu: Soma. According to S.tyana, Indra is meant. 
j The stanza is difficult. I °dopt Pischel’s explanation of nadam and 

vditthrtni, 

3 Clans: v;sah : possibly the cows arc meant. Eggcling translates : ‘At 

, ls birth the well-like milking, speckled ones mix the Soma (draught), the 
c mis of th e gods in the three spheres of the heavens’ (Sacred Books of the 
XLI. p. 307 ). Piachel observes : ‘The connexion of the first three 

aiizas i is probably this : Soma shall be celebrated by you in your song of 
^ if ln - or ^ er t'hat he may liberally reward you. What thou wishest for 
p I a bull for the cows, in order that they may be propagated and 
the 1 * 3 * * 6 * n( * ra w * fc b m ^k to be mixed with his Soma juice, while they serve 

race of Gods in all the three realms of heaven.'— Vedische Studien , I. 



214 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII, 


5 Hither his Bay Steeds have been sent, red Steeds are on the 
sacred grass 
Where we in concert sing our songs. 

C For Indra Thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk 
and meath, 

What time he found them in the vault. 

7 When I and Indra mount on high up to the Bright One’s place 

and home, . _ -n . , 

We, having drunk of meath, will roach his seat whose Fnends 

are three times seven. 

8 Sing, sing ye forth your songs of praise, ye Priyamedhas, sing 

Yea^let young children sing their lauds : as a strong castle 
praise ye him. 

9 Now loudly let the viol sound, the lute send out its voice with 

Shrilfbe’the music of the string. To Indra is the hymn up- 
reused* 

10 When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, easy to be 
SeiTe' 1 quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma juice for ludra’s 

11 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk : all Deities have drunk 

Here'varuna shall have his home, to whom the floods have 
sung aloud as mother-kine unto their calves. 

12 Thou, Varuna, to whom belong Seven Rivers, art a glorious 

The°waters flow into thy throat as ’twere a pipe with ample 
mouth. , 

13 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessoa, 

the worshipper, 

” 6 In the vault: ‘ in the oavity of the Soma- vessel.’— von ltoth ; ‘on the horizon 
— Ludwig; 4 near at hand.’— S&y ana. , , r , 

7 The Bright One's place: the Btation of the Sun ■ ^ 1 ° folio™ Ludwig 

three times seven: Indra who is the friend of the MaruU. I folio n ^ 
in combining the trih saptd sakhyuh of the text liitci one co p u w 

Stlyana’s explanation is different : ‘ let us be united in the twe y 
of the (universal) friend,’— See note in Wilson’s Translation. 

9 The viol: girgarah : ‘a kind of musloal instrument , sa y a J ao d 
GodhX, originally the leather guard worn by bowmen on the lett . 

pihgt (said to mean bowstring) are also, apparently, names of musioa 
ments. , , . v seven 

12 Vanina’s throat, or palate, is said to mean the sea, into which 



jYMN 59.] THE MG VEDA. 215 

He, the swift Guide, is that fair form that loosed the horses 
near at hand. 

4 Indra, the very Mighty, holds his enemies in utter scorn. 

He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten by his 
voice. 

[5 He, yet a boy exceeding small, mounted his newly-fashioned 
car. 

He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild mighty buffalo. 

16 Lord of the home, fair-helmeted, ascend thy chariot wrought 

of gold. 

We will attend the Heavenly One, the thousand-footed, red of 
hue, matchless, who blesses where he goes. 

17 With reverence they come hitherward to him as to a Sovran 

Lord, 

That they may bring him near for this man’s good success, to 
prosper and bestow his gifts. 

18 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the men of old, 
Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred grass, and 

spread their sacrificial food. 

HYMN LIX. Indra. 

He who, as Sovran Lord of men, moves with his chariots un- 
restrained, 

The Vritra-slayer, vanquisher of fighting hosts, preeminent, 
is praised with song. 

2 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman ! for his aid, in whose sus- 

taining hand of old 

The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the great Sun 
was set in heaven. 

3 No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens 

evermore : 

No, not by sacrifice, to Iudra praised of all, resistless, daring, 
bold in might 


15 If is Mother and his Sire : Earth and Heaven. The buffalo is the dark 
rain-cloud which Iudra pierces with his lightning, or peihaps the demon \ala 
is intended. 

16 The Heavenly One: the Sun, which is Indra’ s chariot Thousand -footed : 
bright with countless rays of light. 

17 This man's: whoinstitutes the sacrifice. 


2 Puruhanman : the Rishi of the hymn addresses himself. Sustaining : 
° r vidkartari may (with Ludwig) be taken as a nominative with v&jrah t the 
bolt of thunder as a austainer (of Order). 



216 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Via 

4 The potent Conqueror, invincible in war, him at whose birth 

the Mighty Ones, 

The Kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens, 
earths sent their loud voices out. 

5 0 Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were 

thine— 

No, not a thousand Suns could match thee at thy birth, nut 
both the worlds, 0 Thunderer. 

6 Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with might, yea, 

all with strength, 0 Strongest One. 

Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, 0 Thunderer, with 
wondrous aids. 

7 Let not a godless mortal gain this food, 0 thou whose life is 

long ! 

But one who yokes the bright-hued steeds, the Etasas, even 
Indra yoker of the Bays. 

8 Urge ye the Conqueror to give, your Indra greatly to be 

praised, 

To be invoked in shallow waters and in depths, to be invoked 
in deeds of might. 

9 0 Vasu, 0 thou Hero, raise us up to ample opulence. 

Raise us to gain of mighty wealth, O Maghavan, 0 Indra, to 
sublime renown. 

10 Indra, thou justifiest us, and trarnplest down thy slanderers. 
Guard thyself, valiant Hero, in thy vital parts: strike down 

the Dasa with thy blows. 

11 The man who brings no sacrifice, inhuman, godless, infidel, 
Him let his friend the mountain cast to rapid death, the 

mountain cast the Dasyu down. 

12 0 Mightiest Indra, loving us, gather thou up, as grains of corn 
Within thine hand, of these their kine, to give away, yea, 

gather twice as loving us. 

13 0 my companions, wish for power. How may we perfect Saras 

praise, 

The liberal princely patron, never to be harmed ? 


4 The Kine : the heavens and the earths. 

7 Etasas: the horses of the Sun 

10 In thy vital parts: liteially, between thy thighs. * Shelter us between 
thy thighs ’ — Wilson. 

11 His friend - in which he hopes to find refuge: according to SA-yana, 
Parvata (mountain) is a Uishi, the friend of Indra. 

12 Their kine: the property of the hostile aboi iginea. 

13 Sara’s praise : Sara must be the institutor of the sacrifice: according 
to Sftyanu he is ludra, ‘the destroyer,’ 



THE niOVEDA. 


217 


0MN 60 .] 

14 By many a sage whose grass is trimmed thou art continually 

praised, 

That thou, 0 Sara, hast bestowed here one and here another 
calf. 

15 The noble, Suradeva’s son, hath brought a calf, led by the ear, 

to three of us, 

As a chief brings a goat to milk. 

HYMN LX. Agni. 

0 Agni, with thy mighty woalth guard us from all malignity, 
Yea, from all hate of mortal man. 

2 For over thee, 0 Friend from birth, the wrath of man hath 

no control : 

Nay, Guardian of the earth art thou. 

3 As such, with all the Gods, 0 Son of Strength, auspicious in 

thy flame, 

Give us wealth bringing all things good. 

4 Maliguities stay not from wealth the mortal man whom, Agrfi, 

thou 

Protectest while he offers gifts. 

5 Sage Agni, he whom thou dost urge, in worship of the G^ds, 

to wealth, 

With thine assistance winneth kine. 

G Riches with many heroes thou hast for the man who offers gifts : 
Lead thou us on to higher bliss. 

7 Save us, 0 J&tavcdas, nor abandon us to him who sins, 

Unto the evil-bearted man. 

8 0 A grtii, let no godless man avert thy bounty as a God : 

Over all treasures thou art Lord. 

9 So, Son of Streugth, thou aides t us to what is great and 

excellent, 

Those, Vasii ! Friend 1 who sing thy praise. 

10 Let our songs come aneav to him beauteous and bright with 

piercing flame, 

Our offeiings, with our homage, to the Lord of wealth, to 
him whom many praise, for help : 

14 Here one. and here another : tlhim-eknm : meming many. 

1 § Silradeva's son : Sara. Mitya ua explains s ntradevt/ah aa cows won in 
attle. ‘May Maghavan, taking them l>y (ho e.tr*, lead the cows with their 

calvog from our three (destructive enemies), as the owner leads a goat to 
drink ’—Wilson. 

2 Guardian of the earth : kshfip&odn : 4 Lord of the night.’— S&yana. 
Winneth hint : literally, is a goer among cows : ' walks (lord) among 

cr owds of cattle,’— Wilson, 



218 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vljj> 

11 To Agui Jatavedas, to the Son of Strength, that he may give 

ns precious gifts, 

Immortal, from of old Priest among mortal men, the most 
delightful in the house : 

12 Agni, made yours by sacrifice, Agui, while holy rites advance; 
Agni, the first in songs, first with the warrior steed ; Agni to 

win the land for us. 

13 May Agni who is Lord of wealth vouchsafe us food for friend- 

ship sake. 

Agni we ever seek for seed and progeny, the Vasu who 
protects our lives. 

14 Solicit withyourchants, for help, Agni theGod with piercing flame, 
For riches famous Agni, Purumijha and ye men ! Agni to 

light our dwelling well. 

15 Agni we land that he may keep our foes afar, Agni to givo ua 

health and strength. 

Let him as Guardian be invoked in all the tribe3, the lighter- 
up of glowing brands. 

HYMN LXI. 

Prepare oblation : let him come ; and let the minister serve again 
*Who knows the ordering thereof. 

2 Rejoicing in his friendship, lot the priest be seated over man, 
Beside the shoot of active power. 

3 Him, glowing bright beyond all thought, they seek among tin 

race of man ; 

With him for tongue they seize the food. 

4 He hath inflamed the twofold plain : life-giving, he hat 

climbed the wood, 

And with his tongue hath struck the rock. 

12 With the warrior steed : grvati : the fierce and rapid fire that clears tl 
jungle for the advance of the Aryan settlers. 

14 To light our dwelling well : I follow Ludwigs explanation, bayai 
takes vtdltaye as a proper name : ‘ a house for (me) Suditi. Wilson. 

15 The lighter-up of glowing brands : vasturrisMnttm : according to ttayai 
1 the giver of homes to us Rishis.’ 

The language of the hymn is intentionally obscure, and much of i 
translation (in which 1 generally follow Ludwig) must be regar e 
conjectural. 

1 Let him come: Agni. The minister: or, the Adhvaryu. 

2 The shoot : Agui, according to S&yana : the stalks of the Sotna-p 
according to von lloth. 

3 They seek: that is, the Gods. , , .. 

4 The twofold plain : the expanses of earth and heaven. Climbed the w 
a forest conflagration is referred to. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


UYMN 61.J 


21 D 


5 Wandering here the radiant Calf finds none to fetter him, and 

seeks 

The Mother to declare his praise. 

6 And now that great and mighty team, the team of horses that 

are his, 

And traces of his car, are seen. 

7 The seven milk a single cow ; the two set other five to work, 
On the stream’s loud-resounding bank. 

8 Entreated by Yivasvan’s ten, Indra cast down the water-jar 
With threefold hammer from the sky. 

9 Three times the newly-kindled flame proceeds around the 

sacrifice : 

The priests anoint it with the meath. 

0 With reverence they drain the fount that circles with its 

wheel above, 

Exhaustless, with the mouth below. 

1 The pressing-stones are set at work : the meath is poured into 

the tank, 

At the out-shedding of the fount. 

2 Ye cows, protect the fount : the two Mighty Ones bless the 

sacrifice. 

The handles twain are wrought of gold. 

3 Pour on the juice the ornament which reachos both the heaven 

and earth : 

Supply the liquid to the Bull. 


5 The radiant Calf: Agni in the form of lightning Here: in the sky 
bove us. The Mother : the cloud, w r hich will praise him with a thunder-psalm. 

7 The seven : officiating priests, or assistants. See IT. 1. 2 A single cow : 
be text has only 6kdm (unam). Sftyana supplies, cow, which he explains as the 
hurma, pitcher or caldron used for heating milk, etc., in the Pravargya cere- 
mony. Loud-resounding hank : with reference to the saciificial exclamations, 
ittered by the officiating priests. The two : the Adhvaryu and the Pratipras- 
biitar, his Assistant, direct the five others in the performance of the ceremony. 

8 Entreated by Vivasvdns ten: according to Sty-ana, the ten a fingers of the 
Worshipper. Ten pi iests are probably meaut. Indra : Agni or Aditya may be 
neant.— Sdyana. The xoater-jar • the rainy cloud. Hummer : meaning, pro- 
>ably, the zigzag lightning. S&yana explains it by rasmind, with his ray. 

10 The fount : avatam : the gharma or ma hdvtra, the contents of which are 
>oured into the fire. Its wheel: apparently, the circular lim on which it 
iBually stands and which is now inverted that all the liquid may flow out. 
^coiding to Hillebraudt ( Vedische Mythologie , I. 325) the fount is the Moon. 

12 The two Mighty Ones : Heaven and Earth. But as the meaning of 
'apsudi is unknown, the sentenoe oan be only conjeoturally translated : ‘ (The 
wo kinds of milk) in the sacrifice are plentiful and fruit-giving.’ — Wilson. 

13 The ornament ; the milk whieh is mingled with the Soma. To the Bull: 
Agni, 



220 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/jj 

14 These know their own abiding-placo : like calves beside the 

mother cows 

They meet together with their kin. 

15 Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food 

in heaven, 

To Indra, Agni light and prayer. 

16 The Pious Ono milked out rich food, sustenance dealt in por- 

tions seven, 

Together with the Sun’s seven rays. 

17 1 took some Soma when the Sun rose up, 0 Mitra, Varuna. 
That is the sick man’s medicine. 

18 From where oblations must be laid, which is the Well-beloved's 

home, 

He with his tongue hath compassed heaven. 

HYMN LXII. Asvins. 

House ye for him who keeps the Law, yoke your steeds, 
Asvins, to your car : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

2 Come, Asvins, with your car more swift than is the twinkling 
■ of an eye : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

3 Asvins, ye overlaid with cold the fiery pit for Atri’s sake : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

4 Where are ye? whither are ye gone? whither, like falcons, 

have ye flown ? 

Let your protecting help be near. 

5 If ye at any time this day are listening to this my call, 

Let your protecting help be near. 

6 The Asvins, first to hear our prayer, for closest kinship I 

appjoach : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

7 For At ri ye, 0 Asvins, made a dwelling-place to shield him well. 
Let your protecting help be near. 


14 These, know: the cows know, and come to, the place where they are to 
be milked foi sacnficial purposes as well as they know their own stable. 

15 Devour in y : peihaps the flames ; but the stanza is obscure. 

16 The Pious One : Agni. Dealt in portions sevm : one for each priest. 

18 This Well-beloved's home: ‘the place which I, the eager offerer, choose. 
— Wilson. Mary atd , ‘ the well-belov&d,’ is perhaps the Soma. 


1 Who keeps the Law : which enjoins sacrifice. The Riski means himself. 
3 For Atri's take ; see 1. 116. 8. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


221 


f/yj/iV 62.] 

8 Ye warded off the fervent heat for Atri when he sweetly spake : 
Let your protecting help be near. 

9 Erst Saptavadhri by his prayer obtained the trenchant edge 

of fire ; 

Let your protecting help be near. 

0 Come hither, 0 ye Lords of wealth, and listen to this call of 

mine : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

1 What is this praise told forth of you as Elders in the ancient 

way 1 

Let your protecting help be near. 

,2 One common brotherhood is yours, Asvins, your kindred is the 
same : 

Let your pr ) tecting help be near. 

:3 This is your chariot, Asvins, which speeds through the regions, 
earth and heaven : / 

Let your protecting aid bo near. 

14 Approach ye hitherward to us with thousands both of steeds 
and kine : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

[5 Pass us not by, remember us with thousands both of kine 
and steeds ; 

Let your protecting help be near. 

1G The purple tinted Dawn hath risen, and true to Law hath made 
the light : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

17 He looked upon the Asvins, as an axe-armed man upon a tree : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

IB By the black band encompassed round, break it down, bold 
one, like a fort. 

Let your protecting help be near. 

9 Saptavadhri • see V. 78. 6. His release seems to have beeu effected by 
employing fire. But see Myriantheus, Die A^rins, pp. 88, 90. 

H ‘ Why is this (repeated invocation) addiessed to you as if you were 
decrepit like old men ? ’ — Wilson. 

12 One common brotherhood ; as twin children of the consort of VivasvAn, 
the Sun. 

17 The meaning is obscure. ‘ Asvins, the splendidly-brilliant (sun cleaves 
the daikness) as the woodman with his axe a tree.’— Wilson. ‘ He [the demon] 
looked at the Asvins.’— Grassmaun. 

18 The first line is said by S.iyana to be addressed to Saptavadhri. It 
to express self-encouragement before an attack upon a Dftsa enemy. 

ut 8ee Myriantheus, Die Alvins, p. 90. 



222 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Vlli 


HYMN LXIII. Agl>i 

Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify 
in speech 

Agni your dear familiar Friend, the darling Guest in every 
home. 

2 Whom, served with sacrificial oil like Mitra, men presenting gifts 
Eulogize with their songs of praise; 

3 Much-lauded Jatavedas, him who bears oblations up to heaven 

Prepared in service of the Gods. 

4 To noblest Agni, Friend of man, best Vritra-slayer, are we come, 
Him m whose presence Riksha’s son, mighty Srutarvan, waxes 

great ; 

5 To deathless Jatavedas, meet for praise, adored with sacred oil, 
Visible through the gloom of night ; 

6 Even Agni whom these priestly men worship with sacrificial 

gifts, 

With lifted ladles offering them. 

7 0 Agni, this our newest hymn hath been addressed from us to 

thee, 

0 cheerful Guest, well-born, most wise, worker of wonders, 
ne’er deceived. 

8 Agni, may it be dear to thee, most grateful, and exceeding 

sweet : 

Grow mightier, eulogized therewith. 

9 Splendid with splendours may it be, and in the battle with 

the foe 

Add loftier glory to thy fame. 

10 Steed, cow, a lord of heroes, bright like Indra, who shall fil 

the car, 

Whose high renown ye celebrate, and people praise each glo- 
rious deed. 

11 Thou whom Gopavana made glad with song, 0 Agni Angiras, 
Hear this my call, thou Holy One. 

12 Thou whom the priestly folk implore to aid the gathering o 

the spoil, 

Such be thou in the fight with foes. 

1 I follow Ludwig in his interpretation of this stanza, the construction c 
which is difficult. 

2 Like Mitra : or as a friend ; or like the Sun. — S&yana. . 

10 Steed , cow : there is no verb to govern these accusatives. Perhaps, » 

it, that is, the hymn, give, may be understood. Sftyana explains gdm, c°'> 
by gantdram , goer. ‘ (Worship) ye men, the bright (Agni) who goes like 
horse and fills our chariots (with spoil),’ — Wilson. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


223 


YMN 64.] 

) I, called to him who reels with joy, Srutarvan, Riksha’s son, 
shall stroke 

The heads of four presented steeds, like the long wool of fleecy 
rams. 

[ Four coursers with a splendid car, Savistha’s horses, fleet of foot, 
Shall bring me to the sacred feast, as flying steeds brought 
Tugra’s son. 

5 The very truth do I declare to theo, Parushni, mighty flood. 
Waters ! no man is there who gives more horses than Savish- 
tha gives. 

HYMN LXIY. Agni. 

Yoke, Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who best invite the Gods : 
As ancient Herald seat thyself. 

2 And, God, as skilfullest of all, call for us hitherward the Gods : 
Give all our wishes sure effect. 

3 For thou, Most Youthful, Sou of Strength, thou to whom 

sacrifice is paid, 

Art holy, faithful to the Law. 

4 This Agni, Lord of wealth aud spoil hundredfold, thousand- 

fold, m head 

And chief of riches and a Sage. 

3 As craftsmen bend the felly, so bend at our general call : come 
nigh, 

Angiras, to the sacrifice. 

6 Now, 0 Virupa, rouse for him, Strong God who shines at early 

morn, 

Fair praise with voice that ceases not. 

7 With missile of this Agni, his who looks afar, will we lay low 
The thief in combat for the kine. 

8 Let not the Companies of Gods fail us, like Dawns that float 

away, 

Like cows who leavo the niggardly. 


H Tugra’s son: Bhujyu. See Vol. I., Index. 

1£> Parushnt : now the Itftvi, the river on whose bank Srutarvan offerod 
his sacrifice. ' 

1 Ancient Herald : or, chief Invoker. 

6 Vinlpa: the Rishi of the hymn who addresses himself. Who shines at 
early morn ; or, aspiring heavenward. 

7 The thief: the hymn is a prayer for aid in an expedition for the recovery 

stolen cattle. 

8 Like Dawns that float away : Mike cows that bathe them in the stream/ 
according to the explanation given in the St. Petersburg Lexicon. Like cows 
who leave the niggardly : ‘ the kine abandon not a little (calf).’— Wilson. 



224 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII 

9 Let not the sinful tyranny of any fiercely-hating foe 
Smite us, as billows smite a ship. 

10 0 Agni, God, the people sing reverent praise to thee for 

strength : 

With terrors trouble thou the foe. 

11 Wilt thou not, Agni, lend us aid in winning cattle, winning 

weal tb ? 

Maker of room, make room for us. 

12 In this great battle cast us not aside as one who bears a load : 
Snatch up the wealth and win it all. 

13 0 Agni, let this plague pursue and fright another and not us: 
Make our impetuous strength more strong. 

14 The reverent or unwearied man whose holy labour he accepts, 
Him Agni favours with success. 

15 Abandoning the foeman’s host pass hither to this company: 
Assist the men with whom I stand. 

16 As we have known thy gracious help, as of a Father, long agi, 
So now we pray to thee for bliss. 

HYMN LXV. Indni.* 

Not to forsake me, I invoke this Indra girt by Maruts, Lord 
Of magic power who rules with might. 

2 This Indra with his Marut Friends clarC into pieces Vritra’s 

head 

With hundred knotted thunderbolt. 

3 Indra, with Marut Friends, grown strong, hath rent asunder 

Vritra, and 

Released the waters of the sea. 

4 This is that Indra who, begirt by Maruts, won the light of 

heaven 

That lie might drink the Soma juice. 

5 Mighty, impetuous, begirt by Maruts, him who loudly roars, 
Indra we invocate with songs. 

6 Indra begirt by Maruts we invoke after the ancient plan, 

That he may drink tho Soma juice. 

7 0 liberal Indra, Marut-girt, much-lauded Satakratu, drink 
The Soma at this sacrifice. 

8 To thee, 0 Indra, Marut-girt, these Soma juices, Thunderer! 
Are offered from the heart with lauds. 


3 Of the sea : of the firmament or ocean of air. 



0MX 66 .] THE RIGVEDA . 225 

9 Drink, Iudra, with thy Marat Friends, pressed Soma at the 
morning rites, 

Whetting thy thunderbolt with strength* 

[0 Arising in thy might, thy jaws thou ahookest, Indra, having 
quaffed 

The Soma which the mortar pressed. 

11 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy 

feat ful roar, 

What time thou smotest Dasyus dead. 

12 From Indra have I measured out a song eight-footed with nine 

parts, 

Delicate, faithful to the Law. 

HYMN LXYI. Indra. 

Scarcely was Satakratu born when of his Mother he inquired, 
Who are the mighty 1 Who are famed I 

2 Then Savasi declared to him Aurnavabha, Ahisuva : 

Son, these be they thou must o'erthrow. 

3 The Vritra-slayer smote them all as spokes are hammered in- 

to naves : 

The Dasyu-killer waxed in might. 

4 Then Indra at a single draught drank tho contents of thirty 

pails, 

Pails that were filled with Soma juice. 

5 Indra in groundless realms of space pierced the Gandharva 

through, that he 

Might make the Brahmans’ strength increase. 

11 Complained to thee: in terror. When uttering thy fearful roar: the 
meaning of fcraLshamdnuin, rendered thud conjeoturally, id uncertain. 

12 Eight-footed with nine parts : tho hymn consists of triplets, each of 

which contaius nine P&das, parts or half-lines, of eight feet or syllables each. 
That is, the metre is octosyllabic (8 x 3), and the triplet contains three stanzas 
in that metre, or nine octosyllabic Pddas. Erom Indra : originating in him 
as its subject or inspires Faithful to the Law: closely connected with 
sacrifice. _ . 

1 Cp. VIII. 45. 4. 

2 Savast: or, the Mighty One, Indra’ s Mother. Aurnavdbha: or Drnavdbha'a 
son. See V III. 32. 26. These: and other fiends, as U, these, is plural. 

4 Pails: or bowls ; literally, lakes. The memingof the word kdnukflt in 
this stanza is uncertain. It appears to be an adjective qualifying sardnsi 
pails or lakes. See note in Wilson’s Translation. 

5 The Gandharva : a heavenly being who dwells in the region of tbe air 
and guards the celestial Soma, that is, the rain. See I. 22. 14, and 163. 2. 
According to S&yana, the Gaudhitrva is the rain-cloud itself, which Indra shat- 

and so released the fertilizing water. 

15 



22<1 TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK V7/j 

6 Down from the mountains Indra shot hither his woli-directci 

shaft : 

He gained the ready brew of lice. 

7 One only is that shaft of thine, with thousand feathers, hund 

red barbs, 

Which, Indra, thou hast made thy friend. 

8 Strong ai the Uibhus at thy birth, therewith to those who 

praise thee, men 

And women, bring thou food to eat. 

9 By thee these exploits were achieved, tho mightiest deeda, 

abundantly : 

Firm in thy heart thou settest them. 

10 All these things Vishnu brought, the Lord of ample stride 

whom thou hadst sent — 

A hundred buHalois, a brew of riee and milk ; and Indr,* 
slow the ravening boar. 

1 1 Most deadly is thy how, successful, fashioned well ; good uj 

thin 3 a 1 2 row, decked with gold. 

Warlike and well equipped thine arms are, which increase 
sweetness for him who drinks tho sv\cot. 

HYMN LX VII. 

Bkixg us a thousand, Indra, as our guerdon for the Soma 
juice : 

Hundieds of kine, 0 Hero, bring. 

2 Bring cattle, bring us ornament, bring us embellishment and 
steeds, 

Give us, besides, two rings of gold. 


6 The st.m/a is dnularlv ex pi lined by S.iynua. Indra smote the rain from 
the cloud**, and obtained food for men. 

7 One only : Indra alone is the wielder of the thunderbolt. 

10 All these things : the buffaloes or dark clouds, and the lice and milk or 
fertilizing lain. Slew: the veibis supplied by SA) ana. The ravening born . 
Viitra. (If. I. 61 7. wheie the deed is siinilaily related. See Prof. A. A. 
donell, Journal R. A. Society , 1895, p. 186, 

11 Which increase sweetness for him who drinks the sweet : this is Ludwig* 
interpretation of two very difficult words which mean according to Wiwn* 
Translation, ‘ destructively overthrowing, desti uctively piercing;’ according 
to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, ‘ like two bees delighting in sweetness 
according to Grassmann, ‘ sweetness loves thy two lips.’ 

1 A thousand: cows, understood. 

2 Two rings: the meaning of mand here is somewhat uncertain. Se<* M, 13 
Muller, India, Wluit can it 'Teach us ? pp 125. 120 ; Weber, Episches im Vt* 1 * 
chen Ritual, p. 30 ; and Zimuier, Altindnches Lcben, pp. 50, 51, 



THE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN 68 .] 


3 And, Bold One, bring in ample store rich jewels to adorn the ear, 
For thou, Good Lord, art far renowned. 

4 None other is there for the priest, Hero ! but thou, to give 

him gifts, 

To win much spoil and prosper him. 

5 Indra can never be brought low, Sakra can never be subdued: 
He heareth and beholdeth all. 

6 He spicth out the wrath of man, lie who can never be deceived : 
Ere blame can come he marketh it. 

7 Ho hath his stomach full of might, the Vritra-slayer, Conqueror, 
The Soma-drinkcr, ordering all. 

8 In thee all treasures arc combined, Soma ! all blessed things 

in thee, 

Uninjured, easy to bestow. 

9 To thee speeds forth my hope that craves the gift of corn, and 

kino and gold, 

Yea, craving horses, speeds to thee. 

10 Indrn, through hope in thee alone even this sickle do I grasp. 
Fill my hand, Maghavan, with all that it can hold of barley 
cut or gathered up. 

HYMN LXVIII. Soma. 


Tins here is Soma, ne’er restrained, active, all-conquering, 
bursting forth, 

Rislu and Sage by sapience. 

2 All that is bare he covers o’er, all that is sick he medicines: 
The blind man sees, the cripple walks. 

3 Thou, Soma, givest wide defence against the hate of alieu men, 
Hatreds that waste and weaken us. 


i Thou by thine insight and thy skill, Impetuous One, from 
heaven and eaith 
Drivest the sinner’s enmity. 

^ When to their task they come with zeal, may they obtain the 
Giver’s grace, 

And satisfy his wish wht thirsts. 


$ Xoyna: here said to mean India himself. 

. ^ ‘ It would appear as if the field were u barren one and the poet fcought 
f n>m Indra a harvest which he had not sown.’— Wilson. 


■ * bursting forth : according to Sitya^a, causing (fruit) to spring forth. 

< ri O ne • fijUhiu : according to S&yapa, ‘ possessed of tho remain* 

" g r ^ 8 Soma juice offered in the third 8uvuna.* 

[ , : the priests. The Giver'* : bountiful Indra'*. Mia wish ,* Indra'i 

on gmg for Soma-libations. 



238 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vll 

6 So may he find what erst was lost, so may he speed the pious 

man, 

And lengthen his remaining life. 

7 Gracious, displaying tender love, unconquered, gentle in thy 

thoughts, 

Be sweet, 0 Soma, to our heart. 

8 0 Soma, terrify us not; strike us not with alarm, 0 King : 
Wouud not our heart with dazzling flame. 

9 When in my dwelling-place I see the wicked enemies of Gods, 
King, chase their hatred far away, thou Bouuteous One, 

dispel our foes. 

HYMN LX IX. Indra. 

0 Satakratu, truly I have made none else my Comforter. 
Indra, be gracious unto us. 

2 Thou who hast ever aided us kindly of old to win the spoil, 

As such, 0 Indra, favour us. 

3 What now ] As prompter of the poor thou helpost him who 

sheds the juice. 

Wilt thou not, Indra, strengthen us] 

4 0 Indra, help our chariot on, yea, Thunderer, though it log 

behind ; 

Give this my car the foremost place. 

5 Ho there ! why sittest thou at ease ] Make thou my chariot 

to be first : 

And bring the fame of victory near. 

6 Assist our car that seeks the prize. What can be easier for 

thee ? 

So make thou us victorious. 

7 Indra, be firm : a fort art thou. To thine appointed place 

proceeds 

Tho auspicious hymn in season due. 

8 Let not our portion be disgrace. Broad is the course, the prize 

is set, 

The barriers are opened wide. 

9 This thing we wish, that thou mayst take thy fourth, thy 
sacrificial lftune. 

So art thou held to be our Lord. 

9 The wicked enemies : or, the enmities ; that is, when I see that the Goda 

fcre" displeased with me. 

4 The hymn is a prayer for success in a ooming chariot race. 

- 7 To thine appointed place : 1 to thee the repeller (of enemies).’ — Wil«<> n - 
9 Thyfgurthy thy sacrificial name : the other three, according to SAyapa, are 
the couetellation-name, the secret name, and the revealed name. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


m 


!YMX 71.] 

0 Ekadyu hath exalted you, Immortals : both Goddesses and 
Gods hath he delighted. 

Bestow upon him bounty meet for praises. May he, enriched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 

HYMN LXX. Indra. 

Indra, God of the mighty arm, gather for us with thy right 
hand 

Manifold and nutritious spoil. 

2 We know thee mighty in thy deeds, of mighty bounty, mighty 

wealth, 

Mighty in measure, prompt to aid. 

3 Hero, when thou art fain to give, neither may Gods nor 

mortal men 

Restrain thee like a fearful Bull. 

4 Come, let us glorify Indra, Lord supreme of wealth, Self- 

ruling King : 

In bounty may he harm us not. 

5 Let prelude sound and following chant : so let him hear the 

Sam an sung, 

And with his bounty answer us. 

6 0 Indra, with thy right hand bring, and with thy left remem- 

ber us: 

Let us not lose our share of wealth. 

7 Come nigh, 0 Bold One, boldly bring hither the riches of 

the churl 

Who givelh least of all the folk. 

8 Indra, the booty which thou hast with holy singers to receive, 
Even that booty wiu with us. 

9 Indra, thy swiftly-coming spoil, the booty which rejoices all, 
Souuds quick in concert with our hopes. 

HYMN LXXI. Indra. 

Hastb forward to us from afar, or, Vritra slayer, from anear, 
To meet the offering of the meath. 

10 The Gods in general are.the deities of this stanza. Ekadyd is the seer of 
the hymn. He, enriched with prayer : India, exulted by our hymn. 

5 Let prelude sound : prd stoshad npagdsiskat : let the prastotar and the «d* 
gfttar, two of the officiating priests at the chanting of a S&man, discharge their 
functions : the former singing the prelude and the latter the accompaniment. 

8 Win with us : make us thy allies. 

9 Sounds in concert with our hopes : answers to our expectation. Perhaps 
M Ludwig thinks, the word * sounds ’ refers to the herd of cattle which pro- 
bably constituted the spoil that is spoken of. 



230 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 17//, 

2 Strong are the Soma-draughts ; come nigh : the juices fill thee 

with delight : 

Drink boldly even as thou art wont. 

3 Joy, Indra, in the strengthening food : let it content thy wish 

and thought, 

And be delightful to thine heart. 

4 Come to us thou who hast no foo : we call thee down tohymus 

of praiso, 

In heaven’s sublirnest realm of light. 

5 This Soma here expressed with stones and dressed with milk 

for thy carouse, 

Indra, is offered up to thee. 

6 Graciously, Indra, hear my call. Come and obtain the draught, 

and sate 

Thyself with juices blent with milk. 

7 The Soma, Indra, which is shed in chalices and vats for thee, 
Drink thou, fur thou art Lord thereof. 

8 The Soma seen within the vats, as in the flood the Moon i 3 seen, 
Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof. 

9 Tnat which the Hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, through 

the air to thee, 

Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof. 

HYMN LXXII. Visvedem. 

Wb ohoose unto ourselves that high protection of the Mighty Gods 
That it may help and succour us. 

2 May they be ever our allies, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, 
Far-seeing Gods who prosper us. 

3 Ye furtherers of holy Law, transport us safe o’er many woes, 
As over water-floods in ships. 

4 Dear wealth bo Aryaman to us, Varuna dear wealth meet for 

praise : 

Dear wealth we choose unto ourselves. 

5 For Sovrans of dear wealth are ye, Adityas, not of sinner’s 

wealth, 

Ye sapient Gods who slay the foe. 

6 We in our homes, ye Bounteous Ones, and while we journey 

on the road, 

Invoke you, Gods, to prosper us. 

8 The Moon: in allusion to the double meaning of Suma, the plant and its 
juice, and the Moon. 

9 The Hawk : see I. 60. 2, and 03 6. 



yj/JV 74. J 


THE KIGVEDA. 


231 


1 Regard us, Indra, Vishnu, here, ye Asvins and the Maruthost, 
Us who are kith and kin to you. 

5 Ye Bounteous Ones, from time of old we here set forth our 
brotherhood, 

Our kinship in the Mother’s womb. 

) Then come with Indra for your chief, at early day, ye Boun- 
teous Gods: 

Yea, I address you now for this. 

HYMN LXXIII. Agnt 

Agni, your dearest Guest, I laud, him who is loving as a friend, 
Who brings us riches like a car. 

2 Whom as a far-foreseeing Sage the Gods have, from the olden 

time, 

Established among mortal men. 

3 Do thou, Most Youthful God, protect the men who offer, hear 

their songs, 

And of thyself preserve their seed. 
i What is the praise wherewith, 0 God, Angiras, Agni, Son of 
Strength, 

Wo, after thine own wish and thought, 

5 May serve thee, 0 tliou Child of Power, and with what sacri- 
fice’s plan 1 

What prayer shall I now speak to thee? 

C Our God. make all of us to dwell in happy habitations, and 
Reward our songs with spoil and wealth. 

7 Lord of the house, what plenty fills the songs which thou ins- 

pi rest now, 

Thou whose hymn helps to win the kine? 

8 Him Wise and Strong they glorify, the foremost Champion in 

the fray, 

And mighty in his dwelling-place. 

9 Agni, he dwells in rest and peace who smites and no one smites 

again : 

With hero sons he prospers well. 

HYMN LXXIV. As vine. 

To this mine invocation, 0 ye Asvius, ye Nasatyas, come, 
lo drink the savoury Soma juice. 

8 In the Mother's womb : as common children of Aditi the General Mother 

°f all living beings 

3 And of tk if self preserve their .ccrf : or, and guard our offspring and oui selves. 
^ He: the faithful worshipper. 



332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlll, 

2 This laud of mine, ye Asvins Twain, and this mine invitation 

hear, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

3 Here Krishna is invoking you, 0 Asvins, Lords of ample wealth, 
To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

4 List, Heroes, to the singer’s call, the call of Krishna lauding 

yon, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

5 Chiefs, to the sage who sings your praise grant an inviolable 

home, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

6 Come to the worshipper’s abode, Asvins, who here is lauding 

you, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

7 Yoke to the firmly jointed car the ass which draws you, Lords 

of wealth, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

8 Come hither, Asvins, on your car of triple form with triple seat, 
To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

9 O Asvins, O Nasatyas, now accept with favouiing grace my 

songs, 

To drink the savoury Soma juice. 

HYMN LXXY. Asvins. 

Ye Twain are wondrous strong, well-skilled in arts that heal, 
both bringers of delight, ye both won Dakslm’s praise. 
Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not 
off our friendship, come and set me free. 

2 How shall he praise you now who is distraught in mind? Ye 
Twain give wisdom for the gain of what is good. 

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not 
off onr friendship, come and set me free. 

6 To drink : bo that ye may drink. 

7 The aw: cf. I. 34. 9 ; 116. 2 ; and 162 21. 

8 Of triple form with triple seat : see I. 34. 2, 9. 

The Rishi is Visvaka son of Krishna. 

1 Daksha’ 8 praise : on the occasion mentioned in I. 116. 2 ; or when the 
Asvins won SuryA, for their bride, 1. 116. 17. To save his life: according to 
Sftyana, ‘for the sa!<e of his Bon ’ Come and set me free: ‘flying loose (your 
reins and gallop hither).’ — Wilson. ‘ Unyoke your horses,’ — Grassmann. 

2 Distraught in mind : referring either to Visvaka himself, or the man for 
whom he invokes the Asvins’ aid. According to S&yana, YimanAh (distraught 
in mind) hero is the name of a Rishi. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


YMN 76.] 




) Already have ye Twain, possessors of great wealth, prospered 
Vishnapu thus for gain of what is good. 

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not 
off our friendship, come and set me free. 

[ And that Impetuous Hero, winner of the spoil, though he is 
far away, we call to succour us, 

Whose gracious favour, like a father's, is most sweet. Break 
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

\ About the holy Law toils Savitar the God : the horn of holy 
Law hath he spread far and wide. 

The holy Law hath quelled even mighty men of war.* Break 
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

HYMN LXXVI. Asvins, 

Splendid, 0 Asvins, is your praise. Como, fountain-like, to 
pour the stream. 

Of the sweet juice effused— dear is it, Chiefs, in heaven— drink 
like two wild bulls at a pool. 

2 Drink the libation rich in sweets, 0 Asvins Twain : sit, Heroes, 

on the sacred grass. 

Do ye with joyful heart in the abode of man preserve his life 
by means of wealth. 

3 The Priyamedhas bid you come with all th e succou rs that are yours. 
Come to his house whose holy grass is trimmed, to dear sacri- 
fice at the morning rites. 

1 Drink ye the Soma rich in meath, ye Asvins Twain : sit gladly 

on the sacred grass. 

So, waxen mighty, to oui eulogy from heaven come ye as wild- 
bulls to the pool. 

5 Come to us, Oye Asvins, now with steeds of many a varied hue, 
Ye Lords of splendour, wondrous, borne on paths of gold, 

drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. 

6 For we the priestly singers, fain to hymn your praise, invoke 

you for the gain of strength. 

So, wondrous, fair, and famed for great deeds come to us, 
through our hymn, Asvins, wheu ye hear. 

3 Vishn4p{i : the Ilishi’s son or grandson. 

4 That Impetuous Hero: Indra. ‘These two verses,’ says Grassmann, ‘are 
l * eri from another hymn. Verse 5 is addressed to Savitar, aud verse 4, as 

R Ppears, to Indra. The refrain, which is altogether unsuitable here, has 
Sea ft dded in order to connect the verses with the preceding hymn.' 

2 The libation : gharm&m : the heated milk or borage, or the vessel 

it is heated. 

9 Priymtdhat ; Priyamedha and his family, 



*34 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIH, 

HYMN LXXVII. Indra, 

As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our songs we 
glorify 

This Indra, even your Wondrous God who checks attack, who 
joys in the delicious juice. 

2 Celestial, bounteous Giver, girt about with might, rich, moan* 

tain-like, m precious things, 

Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, brought 
hundredfold and thousandfold. 

3 Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar thy way. 
None stay that, act of thine when thou wouldst fain give 

wealth to one like me who sings thy piaise. 

4 A Warrior thou by strength, wisdom, and wondrous deed, in 

might excellcst all that is. 

Hither may this our hymn attract thee to our help, the hymn 
which Gotamas have made. 

5 For in thy might thou stretchest out beyond the boundaries 

of heaven. 

The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. After thy 
Godhead hast thou waxed. 

6 When, Maghavan, thon honourest the worshipper, no one is 

there to stay thy wealth. 

Most liberal Giver thou, do thou inspire our song of praise, 
that we may win the spoil. 

HYMN LXXVIII. Indra. 

To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts ! that slays the Vritras best) 
Whereby the Holy Ones created fur the God the light divine 
that ever wakes. 

2 Indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, and then in 

splendour came to us. 

Indra, refulgent with thy Marut host ! the Gods strove eagerly 
to win thy l »ve. 

3 Sing to your lofty Indra, sing, Maruts, a holy hymn of piaise. 
Let Sati.kratu, Vritra-slaycr, kill the foe with hundred-knotted 

thunderbolt. 

1 As cows: the cows who are milked for saciifieial purposes, whose cahss 
are shut up during the ceremony . . 

6 The earthly reyion : the rajas region, middle air, or fiimament is freque n 
ly divided into two, one half belonging to the earth and the other to the 6 7 
See Wallis, Cosmology of the Jtigveda, pp. 114, 115. 

I Maruts: here meaning the singers of the hymn of praise. * Pi lest*. ' 
Wilson. The light divine : the Sun, which the Visvedevas generated or ci eu 
for Indra. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


235 


#n/A' 79.] 

4 Aim and fetch boldly forth, 0 thou whose heart is bold : great 

glory will be thine thereby. 

In rapid torrent let the mother waters spread. Slay Vritra, win 
the light of heaven. 

5 When thou, unequalled Maghavan, wast born to smite the 

Vritras dead, 

Thou spreadest out the spacious earth and didst support and 
prop the heaveus. 

6 Then was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, and song 

of joy, 

Thou in thy might surpassest all, all that now is and yet 
shall be. 

7 Raw kine thou filledst with ripe milk. Thou madest Surya 

rise to heaven. 

Heat him as milk is heated with pure Sama hymns, great joy 
to him who loves the song. 

HYMN LXXIX. indra. 

May Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, be near to us. 
May the most mighty Yritra-slayer, meet for praise, come t« 
libations and to hymns. 

2 Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gifts, true art 

thou, lordly in thine act. 

We claim alliance with the very Glorious One, yea, with the 
Mighty Son of Strength. 

3 Prayers unsurpassed are offered up to thee tho Lover of the 

Song. 

Indra, Lord of Bay Steeds, accept these fitting hymns, hymns 
which we have thought out for thee. 

4 For thou, 0 Maghavan, art truthful, ne’er subdued, and 

bringest many a Yritra low. 

As such, 0 Mightiest Lord, Wielder of Thunder, send wealth 
hither to the worshipper. 


7 Rt m kine : cf I. 62 9 ; 180 3 ; II. 40. 2 ; IV 3 9; VI. 72. 4 ; 17. 6 ; 44. 

; VIII. 32. 25. Thou madest Sd~ya rise to heaven : Silyana relates a legend that 
when the Panin had carried off the cows of the Angirases and placed them in a 
mountain enveloped in darkness, Indra, at the pmyer of tho R'shis, set the 
in heaven in order that ho might see and recover their cattle. Hmt him 
a * milk is heated : this Hue is difficult. * (Priests) excite (Indra) with your 
pr^ibea as men heat the Oharma with SdwaJi-hymns ' — Wilson. Gharma 
Ulean8 either the hot milk or other bevei age offered in the Pravargya cere* 
ttiony , or the vessel in which it is heated Great joy to him who lores the song: 
ju perhaps the meaning is, the Bribat-S&man (one of the most impoit&ut Sama 
Tunis, the first and second veues of R. V. VI 46), is dear to him who loves 
Song. • 

3 Fitting hymns : ydjand : see Wilson's Translation and note. 



ttlR HYMNS OP 


23* 


[BOOR Vlii 


6 0 Indra, thou art far-renowued, impetuous, 0 Lord of Strength, 
Alone thou slayost with the guardian of mankind resistless 
iiever*conquered foes, 

6 As such we seek thee now, 0 Asura, thee most wise, craving 
thy bounty as our share. * 

Thy sheltering defence is like a mighty cloak. So may thy 
glories reach to us. 

HYMN LXXX. I ndrai 

Down to the stream a maiden came, and found the Soma by 
the way. 

Bearing it to her home she said, For Indra will I press thee 
out, for Sakra will I press thee out 

2 Thou roaming yonder, little man, beholding every house ic 

turn, 

Drink thou this Soma pressed with teeth, accompanied \v ith 
grain and curds, with cake of meal and song of praise. 

3 Fain would we learn to know thee well, nor yet cart wo attair 

to thee. 

Still slowly and in gradual drops, 0 Indu, unto Indra flow. 

4 Will he not help and work for usl Will he not make ui 

wealthier ? 

Shall we not, hostile to our lord, unite ourselves to Indra now 

5 0 Indra, cause to sprout again three places, these which 

declare, — 

My father’s head, his cultured field, and this the part belo\ 
my waist. 

6 Make all of these grow crops of hair, yon cultivated field o 

ours, 

My body, and my father’s head. 

7 Cleansing Apala, Indra ! thrice, thou gavest sunlike skin t 

her, 

Drawn, Satakratu ! through the hole of car, of wagon, and c 
yoke, 

5 The guardian of mankind : Indra/ s thunderbolt with which he slays th 

demons of drought 

The Ilishi is Ap&lA of the family of Atii. 

1 A maiden : Ap&IA 

2 Little man : vtrakah : according to SAyaua, hero. Indra ifl intended 
perhaps a3 Surya the Sun-God. 

3 Indu : Soma. 

4 He : Indra. Hostile to our lord : ApAH, it is said, was afflicted with 
cutaneous disease and was consequently repudiated by her husband, 

7 Sunlike : bright and clear. ‘ SAyapa aaya that Indra dragged her throng 
the wide hole of hia chariot, the narrower hole of the cart and the small jj° 
of the yoke# and ihewwt off throe akiM, The first skin became a hedged 



0MN 81.] THE RIO VEDA . *87 

HYMN LXXXI. Indra. 

Invite ye Indra with a song to drink your draught of Soma 
juice, 

AU-conquering Satakratu, most munificent of all who live. 

2 Lauded by many, much-invoked, leader of song, reuowned 

of old : 

His name is Indra, tell it forth. 

3 Indra the Dancer be to us the giver of abundant strength : 

May he, the mighty, bring it near. 

4 Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshipping 

Sudaksha’s draught, 

The Soma juice with barley mixt. 

5 Call Indra loudly with your songs of praise to drink the Soma 

juice, 

For this is what augments his strength. 

6 When fie hath drunk its gladdening drops the God with 

vigour of a God 

Hath far surpassed all things that are. 

7 Thou speedest down to succour us this ever-oonquering God 

of yours, 

Him who is drawn to all our songs; 

8 The Warrior not to be restrained, the Soma-drinker ne’er 

o’erthrown, 

The Chieftain of resistless might. 

9 0 Indra, send us riches, thou Omniscient, worthy of our 

praise : 

Help us in the decisive fray. 

the second au alligator, the third a chameleon. I suppose, with Prof. Aufrecht, 
that the hole or space of the chariot and ca?t represents the opening between 
the four wheels ; the hole of the yoke seems to me to mean the opening 
through which the animal’s head passed, corresponding to Homer’s ^evyXrj, 
II. 19. 406.’— Cowell. 

For the legend from the SUy&yana Bi&hmana, founded on the hints con- 
tained in this hymn and repeated by S&yana in his Commentary, see also 
Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V. 

Prof. Aufrecht has published the text and commentary of this hymn in 
Indische Studien, IV. p. 1 sqq. See M. Muller’s Rig-veda SamhiiA, Vol. III., 
2ud edition, p. 33 sqq. 

3 The Dancer : active in battle, dancer of the war dance. Near : ahhijnri : 
or > up to our kneeB. 

* Sudaksha'e draught : offered by a Rishi of that name. 

; 7 According to S&yapa this stanza is addressed by the Yajamdna or sacri- 

j “ c er to the Stotar or praising priest, i&d he giveB an imperative sense to the 
f indicative, thou speedest down : ‘ Bring hither.’ — Wilson. 



238 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Vlll 

10 Even thence, 0 Indra, come to us with food that gives a 

hundred powers, 

With food that gives a thousand powers. 

11 We sought the wisdom of the wise. Sakra, Kine-giver, 

Thunder-armed ! 

May we with steeds o’ercome in fight. 

12 We make thee, S itakratu, find enjoyment in the songs we sing, 
Like cuttle in the pasture lands. 

13 For, Satakratu, Thunder-armed, all that we craved, as men 

are wmit, 

All that we hoped, have we attained. 

14 Those, Son of Strength, are come to thee who cherish wishes 

in their hearts : 

0 Indra, none cxeelleth thee. 

15 So, Hero, guard us with thy care, with thy most liberal 

providence, 

Speedy, and terrible to foes. 

1G 0 Satakratu Indra, now rejoice with that carouse of thine 
Which is most splendid of them all; 

17 Even, Indra, that carouse which slays the Vritras best, most 

widely famed, 

Best giver of thy power and might. 

18 For that which is thy gift we know, true Soma-driuker, 

Thunder-armed, 

Mighty One, amid all the folk. 

19 For Indra, Lover of Carouse, loud be our songs about the 

juice : 

Let poets sing the song of praise. 

20 We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all glories rest, 

in whom 

The seven communities rejoice. 

21 At the Tnkadrukas the Gods span sacrifice that stirs the 

mind : 

Let our songs aid and prosper it. 

10 Even thence: from where thou art ; from heaven. 

11 Of the wise: Indra. Kine-giver : godare : perhaps, ‘burster open of 
the cow-stall ‘ cleaver of mountains.’— Wilson 

12 Like cattle: as the cowherd refreshes his cattle — Sftyana. 

18 Thy gift : the wealth which thou givest. Amid all the folk : among ah 
the worshippers who offer thee Soma. — S&yana. 

20 Seven communities : sapta sansadah : probably = all the folk, in stanza 
18; ‘the seven associated priests.’ — Wilson. 

21 At the Trikadrukat: see VIII. 13. 18, and note. 



HYMN 82.] THE MIG VEDA. 230 

22 Let the drops pass within thee as the rivers flow into the sea : 

0 Indra, naught excelleth thee* 

23 Thou, wakeful Hero, by thy might hast taken food of Soma 

juice, 

Which, Indra, is within thee now. 

24 0 Indra, Vritra-slayer, let Soma be ready for thy maw, 

The drops be ready for thy forms. 

25 Now Srutakaksha sings his song that cattle and the steed may 

come, 

That Iudra’s very self may come. 

2G Here, Indra, thou art ready by our Soma juices shed for thee, 
Sakra, at hand that thou mayst give. 

27 Even from far away our songs reach thee, 0 Caster of the 

Stone : 

Miy we come very close to thee. 

28 For so thou art the hero’s Fiiend, a Hero, too, art thou, and 

stiong : 

So may thine heart be won to us. 

29 So hath the offering, wealthiest Lord, been paid by all the 

worshippers : 

So dwell thou, Indra, even with me. 

3i) He not thou like a slothful priest, 0 Lord of spoil and wealth : 
rejoice 

In tho pressed Soma blent with milk. 

31 11 Lidra, let not ill designs surround us in the sunbeams light : - 
This may we gain with thee for Friend. 

32 With thee to help us, Indra, let us answer all our enemies : 

For thou art ours and we are thine. 

33 Indra, the poets and thy friends, faithful to thee, shall loudly sing 
Thy praises as they follow thee. 

HYMN LXXXII. Indra. 

tiuRYA, thou mountest up to meet the Hero famous for hia 
wealth, 

Who hurls the bolt and works for man : 

2 Him who with might of both his arms brake nine-and-ninety 
castles down, 

Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead. 

24 Thy forms: thy various bodies or splendours. — S&yana. 

-5 Srutakakska : the Rishi of the hymn. 

Priest : brahmfl : Brahman or praying priest. 

. M l n the sunbeams' light: as Indra stands in the closest relationship to 
the Sun. , 

2 Nine-and-ninety castles ; cloud-castles of the demou Sambara. 



S40 THE HYMNS OF [. BOOK Vlij t 

3 This Indra is our gracious Friend. He sends us in a full 

broad stream 

Riches in horses, kine, and corn. 

4 Whatever, Vritra-slayer ! thou, Surya, hast risen upon to-day, 
That, Indra, all is in thy power. 

5 When, Mighty One, Lord of the brave, thou thinkest thus 

I shall not die, 

That thought of thine is true indeed. 

6 Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma libations shed for thee, 
Both far away and near at hand. 

7 We make this Indra very strong tostrike the mighty Vritra dead: 
A vigorous Hero shall he be. 

8 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o’er the joyous 

draught, 

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song. 

9 By song as ’twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry 

was prepared : 

Lofty, invincible he grew. 

10 Indra, Song-lover, lauded, make oven in the wilds fairways for us, 
Whenever, Maghavan, thou wilt. 

11 Thou whose commandment and behest of sovran sway none 

disregards, 

Neither audacious man nor God. 

12 And both these Goddesses, Earth, Heaven, Lord of the beau- 

teous helm ! revere 
Thy might which no one may resist. 

13 Thou in the black cows and the red and in the cows with spot- 

ted skin 

This white milk hast deposited. 

14 When in their terror all the Gods shrank from the Dragon’s 

furious might, 

Fear of the monster fell on them. 

15 Then he was my Defender, then, Invincible, whose foe is not 
The Vritra-slayer showed his might. 

16 Him your best Viitra-slayer, him the famous Champion ol 

mankind 

I urge to great munificence, 

8 Was made : waa created by Pr.ij&pati. — Silyana. 

12 Lord of the beauteous helm : or, ‘deity of the haudsome jaw.’ — Wilson. 

13 In the black cows : cf I. 62. 9. 

14 The Dragon s furious might : the fierce attack of the demon Ahi. Q 
the monster : or, of the wild beast, Ahi. 

16 Champion: 1 joined to sardham, as suggested in the St Petersburg Lexicon 



THE RIG VEDA. 


241 


UYMN 82 J 

;7 To comc » Milch-landed ! Many-named ! with this same thought 
that longs for milk, 

Whene’er tho Soma juice is shed. 

8 Much- honoured by libations, may the Vritra-slayer wake for us : 
May Sakra listen to our prayers. 

9 0 Hero, with what aid dost thou delight us, with what suc- 

cour bring 

Riches to those who worship thee? 

!0 With whose libation joys the Strong, the Hero with his team 
who quells 

The foe, to drink the Soma juice? 

21 Rejoicing in thy spirit bring thousandfold opulence to us : 
Enrich thy votary with gifts. 

22 These juices with their wedded wives How to enjoyment lov- 

ingly : 

To waters speeds the restless one. 

23 Presented strengthening gifts have sent Iiulra away at sacri- 

fice, 

With might, unto the cleansing hath. 

21 These two who share his feast, 13 ly Steeds with golden manes, 
shall bring him to 
The banquet that is laid for him. 

23 For thee, 0 Lord of Light, are shed these Soma-drops, and 
grass is strewn : 

Bring Indra to his worshippers. 

26 Miy Indra give thee skill and lights of heaven, wealth to bis 

votary 

And priests who praiso him : laud ye him. 

27 0 Satukratu, wondrous strength and all our lauds I bring to 

thee : 

Be gracious to thy worshippers. 


17 To come: that is, that thou, Indra, maysfc come. This abrupt change 
1 is not uncommon in the Veda. 

lNi^ e w A e< M C( l wives: of the joma juices are said to be the two waters 
^ im oasatloan/ak and ekadhaudh, used in the Soma ceremonies. To enjoy - 
, to be drunk by Indra. To waters speeds the restless one : or, with Gra«s- 
aim, ^ iho lover of the waters speeds ’ The exact meaning of nrchumpnndK 
to ? am ’ ^A fi ka deriving it from chain, to eat, and Mahidhara fioin chup, 
Scholl °u movd aluwl y* The meaning of the .sentence is, according to the 
to ^ le ^ lme t, ^ 1 ° colK 'ludmg purificatory ceremony which is 

throw 110 * en ors an< f emissions in the principal sacrifice, the stale Soma is 
11 ln ^° waters. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation, 
iu wh T[ lc dazing bath : tho avabhritha, here, apparently, the bath or vessel 
01 Bie ^°nm plants were riused and purified. 



242 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F///, 

28 Bring to us all things excellent, 0 Satakratu, food and Btrengtk; 
For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

29 0 Satakratu, bring to us all blessings, all felicity : 

For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

30 Bearing the Soma juice we call, best Vritra-slayer, unto thee; 
For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

31 Come, Lord of rapturous joys, to our libation with thy Buy 

Steeds, come 

To our libation with thy Steeds. 

32 Known as best Yritia-slajer erst, as Indra Satakratu, come 
With Bay Steeds to the juice we shed. 

33 0 Vritra-slayer, thou art lie who drinks these drops of Soma ; 

come 

With Bay Steeds to the juice we shod. 

34 May Indra give, to aid us, wealth handy that rules the Skilful 

Ones : 

Yea, may the Strong give potent wealth. 

HYMN LXXX1II. Maruts. 

The Cow, the famous Mother of the wealthy Maruts, poura 
her milk : 

Both horses of the cars are yoked, — 

2 Sho in whose bosom all the Cods, and Sun and Moon for men 

to see, 

Maintain their everlasting Laws. 

3 This all the pious sing to us, and sacred poets evermore : 

The Maruts to the Soma-draught ! 

4 Here is the Soma ready pressed : of this the Maruts drink, of 

this 

Self-luminous the Asvins drink. 


34 Hand)/: ribhu.ni. That rules the Skilful Ova: ribhukshanam. The 
Strong : v&jt These words are u.-cd as plays upon the names of the Ribhus 
or as Grassmann says, the veise may have been taken from a hymn addressed 
to the Ribhus. ‘ May Indra bring to us the bounteous ltibhu Ribhukdiana 
to partake of our sacrificial viands ; may he, the mighty, biiug the mighty 
(Vaja) — Wilson. Cowe'l remarks : ‘ ltibhuk*ha;a was the eldest and Vrfja 
the youngest of the three brothers. The llibhua have a share in the evening 
libation between Prajftpati, and Savitri, see Ait. iiirihm. iii. 30. This verse 
is addressed to the Ribhus in the evening libation on the ninth day of the 
Dwddasdha ceremony (t6. v. 21).’ 

1 The Cow : Prisni. 

2 In whose bosom: *ia whose presence.’— Wilson. 

The Maruts: are to be invoked, understood. 



THE R1QVEDA . 


IYMN 84.1 


243 


5 Of this, moreover, purified, set in three places, procreant, 
Drink Vanina, Mitra, Aryamnn. 

C And Indra, like the Herald Priest, desirous of the milky juice, 
At early morn will quaff thereof. 

7 When have the Princes gleamed and shone through waters as 

through troops of foes? 

When hasten they whose might is pure? 

8 Whatf favour do I claim this day of you great Deities, you 

who arc 

Wundrously splendid in yourselves? 

0 I call, to drink the Soma, those Maruts who spread all realms 

of earth 

And luminous regions of the sky. 

10 You, even such, pure in your might, you, 0 yo Maruts, I in- 

voke 

From heaven to drink this Soma juice. 

11 The Maruts, those who have sustained and propped the 

heavens and earth apart, 

I call to drink this Soma juice. 

12 That vigorous baud of Maruts that abidetli in the mountains, I 
Invoke to drink this Soma juice. 

HYMN LXXXIV. India. 

Song-lover ! like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma 
flows. 

0 Indra, they have called to thee as mother-kine uuto their 
calves. 

2 Bright juices hitherward have sped thee, Iudra, Lover of the 

Song, 

Drink, Indra, of this flowing sap : in every house *tia set for tbeo. 

3 Drink Soma to inspirit thee, juice, Indra, which the Falcon 

brought : 

For thou art King and Sovran Lord of all the families of men. 

1 0 Indra, hear TiraschPs call, the call of him who serveth theo. 
Satisfy him with wealth of kiue and valiant otispring : Great 

art thou. 

5 Set in three places : first in a trough ; thou in a stiaiuing-cloth ; then in 
* thiid trough or vessel called PdUbhrit. Procreant: granting progeny to 
the worshipper. 

6 The Herald Priest : Agni. 

1 Like a charioteer : straight and swift to their object. 

3 Which the Falcon brought: see 1. 80. 2, and 93. 6. 



2 44 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VUl. 

5 For he, 0 Indra, hath produced for thee the newest gladden- 

ing song, 

A hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, and full 
of sacred truth. ^ 

6 That Indra will we laud whom songs and hymns of praise have 

magnified. 

Striving to win, wo celebrate his many deeds of hero might. 

7 Como now and let uh glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymn. 
Let the pure milky draught delight him strengthened by pme 

songs of praise. 

8 0 Indra, come thou puro to us, with pure assistance, pure thy- 

self. 

Pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for Soma, pure, 
be glad. 

9 0 Indra, pure, vouchsafe us wealth, and, pure, onrich the 

worshipper. 

Pure, thou dost striko the Vrilras dead, and strivest, pure, 
to win tbo spod. 

HYMN LXXXV. Indra 

For him the Mornings made their courses longer, and Night; 

with pleasant voices spake to Indra. 

For him the Floods stood still, the Seven Mothers, Stream 
easy for the heroes to pass over. 

2 The Darter penetrated, though in trouble, thrice-sovcn clos( 

pressed ridges of the mountains. 

Neither might God nor mortal man accomplish what the Stron 
Hero wrought in full-grown vigour. 

3 The mightiest force is Indra’s bolt of iron when firmly graspc 

in both the arms of Indra. 

Ilis head and mouth have powers that pass all others, and a 
his people hasten near to listen. 

5 Newest ancient ‘ recent in form and exprestsiou, but ancient 

substance. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, III. 238, 239. 

7 Pure fmlra with pure S4ina hi/ inns : according to Sftyana, ‘ Indra. purifi 
with pure Sama-hymns,’ from the pollution he had incurred by killing t 
Biahman Viitra. See Wilson's Translation, note, 

1 The heroes: perhaps Turvasa and Yadu— Ludwig. 

2 The Darter of the thundeiholt ; Indra. Though in trouble . because 
bad none to aid him. What the thrice-seven close-pressed ridges of themoi tutu 
aie, is uncertain See Wilson’s Translation, note. Lndwig thinks that 1 2 3 
battle of the Sun with the demons of winter may be meant. 

3 To listen : to the commands which issue from his mouth. 



HUm\ oo.j 


L tit i iCiCr VtiVA. } 


•J45 

4 I count thee as the Holiest of the Holy, the caster-down of 

what hath ne’er been shaken. 

I count thee as the Banner of the heroes, I count thee as the 
Chief of all men living. 

5 What timo, 0 Indra, in thine arms thou tookest thy wildly 

rushing bolt to slay the Dragon, 

• The mountains roared, the cattle loudly bellowed, the Brah- 
mans with their hymns drew nigh to Indra. 

G Let us praise him who made these worlds and creatures, all 
things that after him sprang into being. 

May we win Mitra with our songs, and Indra, and wait upon 
our Lord with adoration. 

< Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra, all Deities who were 
thy friends forsook thee. 

So, Indra, be thy friendship with the Maruts : in all these 
battles thou shalt be the victor. 

8 Thrico-sixty Maruts, waxing strong, were with thee, like piles 

of beaming light, worthy of worship. 

We come to thee : grant us a happy portion. Let us adore 
thy might with this oblation. 

9 A sharpened weapon is the host of Maruts. Who, Indra, dares 

withstand thy bolt of thunder ? 

Weaponless are the Asuras, the godless : scatter them with 
thy wheel, Impetuous Hero. 

10 To him the Strong and Mighty, most auspicious, send up the 

beauteous hymn for sake of cattle. 

Lay on his body many songs for Indra invoked with song, for 
will not he regard them? 

11 To him, tho Mighty, who accepts laudation, send forth thy 

thought as by a boat o’er rivers, 

Stir with thy hymn the body of the Famous and Dearest One, 
for will not he regard it? 

12 Servo him with gifts of thine which Indra welcomes : praise 

with fair praise, invite him with thine homage. 


Wildly rushing • this is M Muller'* translation of madachyulam. It 
, be rendered also ‘sped in tliy rapturous joy.’ * ltauschbeschloumgten.’ — 
The Dragon : Alii. 

7 With the Maruts : as they alone stood by him in the conflict. 

• thrice- sixty ; or sixty-three, according to Sftynria, nine companies consist- 
o ot seven each. See Cowell’s note in Wilson's Tianslation Like piles of 
; 1 like cows gathered together.’ — Wilson ; ‘ like morning stars.* 
wsmann. I have followed Ludwig. 

With thy wheel : or discus, a sharp-edged quoit usea as a weapon o war. 



THE HYMNS OF 


246 


[BOOK Via 


Draw near, 0 singer, and refrain from outcry. Make thy voice 
heard, for will not ho regard it ? 

13 The Black Drop sank In Ansumati’s bosom, advancing with 

ten thousand round about it. 

Indra with might longed for it as it panted : the hero-hearted 
laid aside his weapons. 

14 1 saw tho Drop in the far distance moving, on the slope bank 

of Ansumati’s river. 

Like a black cloud that sank into tho water. Heroes, I send 
you forth. Go, fight in battle. 

15 And then the Drop in Ansimviti’s bosom, splendid with light, 

assumed its proper body ; 

And Indra, with Brihaspati to aid him, conquered the godless 
tribes that came against him. 

16 Then, at thy birth, thou wast tho foeman, Indra, of those tho 

seven who ne’er had met a rival. 

The hidden Pair, the Heaven and Karth, thou foundost, and 
to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure. 

17 So, Thunder-armed ! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst 

boldly smite that power which none might equal ; 

With weapons broughtost low the might of Sushna, and, Indra, 
foundest by thy strength tho cattle. 

18 Then wast thou, Chieftain of all living mortals, tho very 

mighty slayer of the Vritras. 

Then didst thou sot the obstructed rivers flowing, and win 
tho floods that were enthralled by Dasas. 

19 Most wiso is he, rejoicing in libations, splendid as day, resist 

loss in his anger. 

He only doth great deeds, the only Horo, sole Vritra-slayei 
he, with none beside him. 


12 Draw near , 0 singer, and ref rain from outcry ; * 0 priest, adorn thysel 
grieve not (for poverty).’ — Wilson. 

13 The Black Drop : tho darkened Moon. Ansumatt: a mystical river q 
the air into which the Moon dips to recover its vanished light. Ten thousand 
probably, demons of darkness ; the numerals are without a substantive. At « 
panted : . while striving against its assailants. Laid aside his weapons : afte 
conquering the demons and restoring the darkened Moon. 

14 Indra addresses the Maruts. 

SAyana explains stanzas 13—15 differently, in accordance with a legein 
which was probably suggested by this passage. He takes drapsdh krishndl 
black drop, to mea*i ‘ the swift moving Krishnah,’ an Asura or demon wh 
with teu thousand of his kind had occupied the banks of tho river Ansumat 
which, he says, is the Yamuu& or Jumna, and was there defeated by InJu 
Brihaspati, and the Maruts. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. 

16 The seven; Krishna, Vritra, Namuchi, Sambara, and others*— S&y a 9*' 



THE RIO VEDA. 


247 


BYMX 86 .] 

20 Indra is Vritra’s slayer, man’s sustainer : ho must be called; 

with fair praise let us call him. 

Maghavan is our Helper, our Protector, giver of spoil and 
wealth to make us famous. 

21 This Indra, Vritra-slayer, this Ribhukshan, even at hiB birth, 

was meet for invocation. 

Doer of many deeds for man’s advantage, liko Soma quaffed, 
for friends we must invoke him. 

HYMN LXXXVI. 

0 Indra, Lord of Light, what joys thou broughtest from the 
Asuras, 

Prosper therewith, 0 Maghavan, him who lauds that deed, 
and those whose grass is trimmed for thee. 

2 The unwasting share of steeds and kine which, Indra, thou 

hast fast secured, 

Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives guerdon, 
not unto the churl. 

3 The ritclcss, godless man who sleeps, 0 Indra, his unbroken 

sleep, — 

May ho by following his own devices die. Hide from him 
wealth that nourishes. 

4 Whether, 0 Sakra, thou be far, or, Vritra-slayer, near at hand, 
Thence by heaven-reaching songs he who hath pressed the 

juice invites thee with thy long-maned Steeds. 

5 Whether thou art in heaven’s bright sphere, or in the basin of 

the sea ; 

Whether, chief Vritra-slayer, in some place on earth, or in the 
firmament, approach. 

G Thou Soma-driuker, Lord of Strength, besido our flowing 
Soma juice 

Delight us with thy bounty rich in pleasantness, 0 Indra, with 
abundant wealth. 

7 0 Indra, turn us not away : be the companion of onr feast. 
For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin : 0 Indra, 

turn us not away. 

8 Sit down with us,0 Indra, sit beside the juice to drink the meath. 
Show forth great favour to the singer, Maghavan ; Indra, with 

us, beside the juice. 


21 Ribhukshan ; or, Lord of Ribhus. • 

1 Joys : riches.— S4y ana. From the A suras : from the powerful JMkahasas. 

2 (Jives guerdon : liberally rewards the priests. 



243 TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlii 

9 0 Caster of the Stone, nor Gods nor mortals have attained to 
thee. 

Thou in thy might surpassest all that hath been made : the 
Gods have not attained to thee. 

10 Of one accord they made and formed for kingship India, the 

Hero who in all encounters overcomcth, 

Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, iierce and 
exceeding strong, stalwart and full of vigour. 

11 Bards joined in song to India so that he might drink the 

Soma juice, 

The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid 
with power and with the help he gives. 

12 The holy sages form a ring, looking and singing to the Ilam 
Inciters, full of vigour, not to be deceived, are with the chant 

ers, nigh to hear. 

13 Loudly I call that Indra, Maghavan the Mighty, who cvermor 

possesses power, ever resistless. 

Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, Tlumdei 
armed, make all our pathways pleasant for us. 

14 Thou knowest well, 0 Sakra, thou Most Potent, with th 

strength, Indra, to destroy these castles. 

Before thee, Thunder-armed! all beings tremble : the heaven 
and earth before thee shake with terror. 

15 May thy truth, Indra, Wondrous Hero! be my guard : bca 

me o’er much woe, Thunderer ' ns over floods. 

When, Indra, wilt thou honour us with opulence, all-nourisl 
ing and much-to-be-desired, 0 King? 

HYMN LXXXVIL imir. 

To Indra sing a Satna hymn, a lofty song to Lofty Sage, 

To him who guards the Law, inspired, and fain for praise. 

2 Thou, Indra, art the Conqueror : thou gavest splendour t 

the Sun. 

Maker of all things, thou art Mighty and All-God. 

3 Radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the luminoi 

realm of heaven. 

The Deities, Indra, strove to win thee for their Friend. 

4 Come unto ns, O Indra, dent*, stdl conquering, unconccnlabl 
Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of Heaven. 

12 The Ram: Tqdni. See I. 51. 1, and VI LI 2. 40. Inciters: apparent! 
the Gods themselves. 

2 AH -God: visraderah: * the lord of all the gods,’ — Wilson. 

4 Unconceatable ; as the Sun-God. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


249 


0MX 88 .] 

§ 0 truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than both the 
worlds. 

Thou strengthened him who pours libation, Lord of Heaven. 

6 For thou art he, 0 Lidra, who stormeth all castles of the foe, 
Slayer of Dasyus, man’s Supporter, Lord of Heaven. 

7 Now have we, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great wishes 

forth to time, 

Coming like floods that follow floods. 

8 As rivers swell the ocean, so, Hero, our prayers increase thy might, 
Though of thyself, O Thunderer, waxing day by day. 

9 With holy song they bind to tho broad wide-yoked car the Bay 

Steeds of the rapid God, 

Bearers of Indra, yoked by word. 

10 0 Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu, 

thou most active, bring 
A hero conqueiing in war. 

11 For, gracious Satakratu, thou Last ever been a Mother and a 

Sire to us, 

So now for bliss we pray to thee. 

12 To thee, Strong, Much-invoked, who showest forth thy strength, 

0 Satakratu, do I speak : 

So grant thou us heroic strength. 

HYMN LX XX VII I. Indra. 

0 thundereii, zealous worshippers gave thee drink this time 
yesteiday. 

So, Indra, listen here to those who bring the laud : come near 
unto our dwelling-place. 

2 Lord of B iy Steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee : this wo crave. 

Here the disposers wait oil thee. 

Thy loftiest, glories claim our lauds beside the juice, 0 Indra, 
Lover of the Song. 

3 Turning, as ’twerc, to meet the Sun, enjoy from Indra all good 

tilings. 

When lie who will be born is born with power we look to trea- 
sures as our heiitage. 

7 Com iiuj hie. floods : m crowds But the half-line is very obscure. ‘As 
men going by water (splash their friends) with handfuls.’ — Wilson. 

10 ^4 hero : an heroic son. 

2 TCt spacers : tho priests who order religious ceremonies. 

1 r T‘ s stanza is difficult and obscure. Mahtdhara’s explanation is : ‘The 
gathering (rays) proceeding to the sun distribute all Indra’s treasures (to 
u ing bemgs, sc. as rain, corn, etc.) ; may we too by our power leave those 
tenures as an inheritance to him who has been or will be born.’ See Cowell's 
note 111 Wilson’s Translation , 



250 THE 117 M NS OF [BOOK V ] // 

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties injure none 

good are the gifts which Indra grants. 

He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns hi 
mind to giving boons. 

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands. 
Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, tho 

victor of the vanquisher. 

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might, , 

to their calf two mother-cows. 

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands shrink ai 
faint, Indra, at thy wiuth, 

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and nouo m 

shoot at him, 

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’s uuvf 
quished Stiengthener ; 

8 Arranger of things uuarraugcd, e’en Satakratu, sourco 

might, 

Indra, the Friend of all, for succour we invoke, Guardiai 
treasure, sending wealth. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra. 

I move before thee here present in person, and all tho Dei 
follow behind me. 

When, Indra, thou securest mo my portion, with mo t 
shalt perforin heroic actions. 

2 Tho food of mcath in foremost place I give thee, thy S 

shall be pressed, thy share appointed. 

Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade : ! 
shall we two smite dead full many a foeman. 

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a trut 

hymn if he in truth cxisteth. 

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath be 
him ? Whom then shall we honour 1 


6 As to their calf : or the translation may be, as sire and mother to 
child. 

7 Tugrya is Bhujyu, the son of Tugra. Seo Vol. I , Index. 

8 Arranger of things unnrranged : ‘ tho consecrator of others but b 
consecrated by none.’ — Wilson. 

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni. 

2 Indra answers. 

3 Addressed to tho priests. One and another : nima : but accord 
SAyaua, Noma is the name of tho llishi. ‘Noma Bays, “verily there 
Indra.” ’ — Wilson. 



THE RIO VEDA, 


YMN 89.] 


m 


1 Here am I, look upon mo here, 0 singer. All that cxistcth I 
surpass in greatness. 

The Holy Law’s commandments make me mighty. Rending 
with strength I rend the worlds asunder. 

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me as I sate 
lone upon the dear sky’s summit, 

Then spake niy spirit to the heart within me, My friends have 
cried unto me with their children. 

> All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-fcasts, wrought, 
Indra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice, 

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought 
from far away to Sarabha, the Rishi’s kin. 

Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept 
you back. 

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vritra’s vital 
parti 

] On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he 
pressed : 

The Falcon wont to heaven and brought the Soma to the 
Thunderer. 

) Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round 
about, 

Aud in continuous onward flow tho floods their tribute bring 
to it. 

) When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vak, 
Queen of Gods, tho Gladdencr, was seated, 

Tho heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now 
whither hath her noblest portion vanished 1 


4 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. 

5 The Law's levers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According 
1 Hillebrandt (F. Mytholoyic , I. 354), the Maruts ; sUumantuK meaning nob 
Vlt h their children,’ but ‘ with the Infant (Soma).’ 

6 The priest addresses Indra. S trabha : a ltishi of that name.— Sfty ana. 
ho original hymn appears to end with this stanza. 

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’s battle witli Vritra. 

® ^ C: the Falcon. The iron fort : the stronghold or cloud in which tho 
or ambrosial rain was iraprisoued. Cf. IV. 27. 2 
® ^ n ^ ,e ocean : as produced naturally in tho sea of air. 

^ This and the following stanza have no apparent connexion with what 
recedes. Vdk: or V&ch, vox, voice, or Speech personified. Her unintcl- 
B 1 le words are the thunder. Her noblest portion ; according to S&yana, the 
» which follows thunder. Or the thunder itself may be intended. So© 
.J 8 n °fo in Wilson’s Translation* IF«m seated : at tho sacrifice offered 



250 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK Via 

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties injure none 

good are the gifts which Indra grants. 

He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns hi 
mind to giving boons. 

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands. 
Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the cuise, the 

victor of the vanquisher. 

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might, 

to their calf two mother-cows. 

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands shrink a> 
faint, Indra, at thy wrath. 

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and nouo no 

shoot at him, 

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’a unv 
quished Stieugthcuor ; 

8 Arranger of things unarranged, o’ou Satakratu, source 

might, 

Indra, the Friend of nil, for succour we invoke, Guardiai 
treasure, sending wealth. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra. 

I move before thee here present in person, and all the Dei 
follow behind me. 

When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with mo t 
shalt perform heroic actions. 

2 The food of mcath in foremost place I give thee, thy S 

shall be pressed, thy share appointed. 

Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade : ! 
shall wc two smite dead full many a foeman. 

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a trut 

hymn if he in truth existeth. 

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath be 
him ? Whom then shall we honour ? 


6 As to their calf: or the translation may be, as sire and mother to 
child. 

7 Tugvya is Bhujyu, the son of Tugra. Seo Vol. I , Index. 

8 Arranger of things unarranged : ‘ the consecrator of others but h 
consecrated by none.’ — Wilson. 

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni. 

2 Indra answers. 

3 Addressed to the priests. One and another : n6ma : but accord 
SAyaua, Neuu is the name of the Rishi. * Noma says, “ verily there 
Indra.” ’ — Wilson. 



THE RIO FED A, 


ryjfV 80.] 


$51 


i Hero am I, look Upon me here, 0 singer. All that existeth I 
surpass in greatness. 

The Holy Law’s commandments make mo mighty. Rending 
with strength I rend the worlds asunder. 

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached mo as I sate 
lone upon the dear sky’s summit, 

Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My friends have 
cried unto me with their children. 

3 All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-feasts, wrought, 
Indra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice, 

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought 
from far away to Sarabba, the Rishi’s kin. 

1 Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept 
you back. 

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Yritra’s vital 
part ? 

3 On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he 
pressed : 

The Falcon wont to heaven and brought the Soma to the 
Thunderer. 

9 Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round 
about, 

Aud in continuous onward flow the floods their tribute bring 
to it. 

0 When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vak, 
Queen of Gods, the Gladdencr, was seated, 

The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now 
whither hath her noblest portion vanished? 


4 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. 

| 5 Tke Law’s lovers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According 
Hillebrandt (F. Mytholoyic, I. 354), the Maruts ; meaning not 

vdh their children,’ but ‘with the Infant (Soma).’ 

6 Tlio priest addresses Indra. Sirabha: a Rishi of that name. — SAyana, 
10 on gm,d hymn appears to end .vith this stanza. 

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’s battle with Yritra. 

® ‘ the Falcon. The iron fort : the stronghold or cloud in which the 

ama or ambrosial rain was imprisoned. Cf. IV. 27. 2 
9 In the ocean : as produced naturally in the sea of air. 
h) This and the follow ing stanza have no apparent connexion with what 
ecedoa, Vdk; or V^ch, vox, voice, or Speooh personified. Her unintel- 
B 1 J o words are the thunder. Her noblest portion : according to S&yana, the 
iiw V,,* 1 f° flows thunder. Or the thunder itself may be intruded. See 
^ 1 a note in Wilson’s Translation, Waa seated : at the sacrifice offered 



252 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VUi 

11 The Deities generated Vak the Goddess, and animals of every 

figure speak her. 

May she, the Gladdencr, yielding food and vigour, the Milch- 
cow Vak, approach us meetly lauded. 

12 Step forth with wider st ride, my comrade Vishnu; make room 

Dyaiis, for the leaping of the lightning. 

Let us slay Vritra, let us free the rivers : let them flow loosed 
at the command of India. 

HYMN XC. Various. 

Yea, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service of the 
Gods, 

Who quickly hath brought near Mitra and Vanina to share 
his sacrificial gifts. 

2 Supreme in sovran power, far-sighted, Chiefs and Kings, most 

swift to hear fiom far away, 

Both, wondrously, set them in motion as with arms, in com 
pany with Suryids beams. 

3 The rapid messenger who runs before you, Mitra-Varuna, w'itl 

iron head, swift to the draught, 

4 He whom no man may question, none may summon back, \vh< 

stands not still for colloquy, — 

From hostile clash with him keep ye us safe this day; kcoj 
us in safety with your arms. 

5 To Aryaman and Mitra sing a reverent song, 0 pious one, 

A pleasant hymn that shall protect to Varuna : sing forth 
laud unto the Kings. 

G The true, Red Treasure they have sent, ono only Soil born ( 
the Three. 

They, the Immortal Ones, never deceived, survey the familic 
of mortal men. 

7 My songs are lifted up, and acts most splendid are to be pei 
formed. 

Come hither, ye Nasatyas, with accordant mind, to meet an 
to enjoy my gifts. 

11 Speak her : ai ticuktely-speakiug men and lower animals all derive the 
voices from her. 

12 This stanza, which is out of place here, is spoken by Indra when he 
about to attack Yiitra. See IV. 18 11 

3 The rapid messenger : the lightning, as one of the forms of Agni. 

6 The true, Red Treasure : the Sun. The Three: heaven, mid-air, and ead 



THE RIO FED A. 


253 


YMX 90.] 

t Lords of great woalth, when we invoke your bounty which no 
demon checks, 

Both of you, furthering our eastward-offered praise, come, Chiefs 
whom Jamadagni lauds ! 

) Come, Vayu, drawn by fair hymns, to our sacrifice that reaches 
heaven. 

Poured on the middle of the straining-cloth, and cooked, this 
bright drink hath been offered thee. 

) He comes by stniightest paths, as ministering Priest, to taste 
the sacrificial gifts. 

Then, Lord of harnessed teams ! drink of the twofold draught, 
bright Soma mingled with the milk. 

1 Verily, Stirya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great. 

As thou art groat indeed, thy greatness is admired : yea, verily, 

thou, God, art great. 

2 Yea, Surya, thou art great in fame : thou evermore, 0 God, 

art great. 

Thou by thy greatness art tho Gods’ High Priest, divine, far- 
spread unconquerable light. 

3 She yonder, bending lowly down, clothed in red hues and rich 

in rays, 

Is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, amid the ten 
suiTouudiug arms. 

[ Past and gone are three mortal generations: the fourth and 
last into the Sun hath entered. 

He mid tho worlds his lofty place hath taken. Into green 
plants is gone the Purifying. 

15 The Rudi-as’ Mother, Daughter of tho Vasus, centre of nectar, 
tho Adityas’ Sister — 

To folk who understand will I proclaim it — injure not Aditi, 
the Cow, the sinless. 

13 She yonder: Ushas or Dawn. The ten surrounding arms: the ten 
regions of the woild. 

14 Three mortal generations : a '■cording to tho legend, Prajrtpati produced 
in succession three kinds of eicaturcs who all died. The fourth generation 
Ihod and enjoyed the light and warmth of the Sun. See Cowell a note in 
Wilson's Translation, or Satapatha- Bui/unana, If. 5. 1. 1 — 4. Into green plants: 
kiy.iua explains haritah as tho quarters of the sky, and pdvamdnoh (the Puri- 
ty 11 ^) as ViVyu or tho Wind. Urassmann takes pdramdnah to be the Soma, 
an, i harUuh to be tho horses of the Sun I have followed Ludwig’s inter- 
pretation ; but I find the stanza almost unintelligible. 

lo Centre of nectar: or, of ami it. or immortality, or tho world of the 
Immortal Gods. The Cow; the earthly cow, as the type of Aditi or universal 
must not be offended. The stanza is spoken by the priest who has 
Reived the cow as his reward. 



m 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Fin 


16 Weak-minded men have as a cow adopted me who came hithei 
from the Gods, a Goddess, 

Who, skilled in eloquence, her voice uplifteth, who standetb 
near at hand with all devotions. 


HYMN XGI. 


Agni 


Lord of the house, Sage, ever young, high powor of life, C 
Agni, God, 

Thou givest to thy worshipper. 

2 So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, Lord o 
spreading light, 

Agni, bring hitherward the Gods. 


3 For, Evcr-Youthful One, with thee, best Furtherer, as our ally 
We overcome, to win the spoil. 

4 As Aurva Bhrigu used, as Apnav \na used, I call the pure 
Agni who clothes him with the sea. 


5 I call the Sage who sounds like wind, the Might that lik 

Parjanya roars, 

Agni who clothes him with the sea. 

6 As Savitar’s productive Power, as him who sends down bliss, I cal 
Agni who clothes him with the sea. 


7 Hither, for powerful kinship, I call Agni, him who prospers you 
Most frequent at our solemn rites ; 

8 That through this famed One’s power, he may stand by u 

even as Tvashtar comes 
Unto the forms that must be shaped. 

9 This Agni is the Lord supreme above all glories mid the Gods 
May he come nigh to us with strength. 

10 Here praise ye him the most renowned of all the ministerinj 
Priests, 

Agni, the Chief at sacrifice ; 


11 Piercing, with purifying flump, enkindled in our homes, mos 
high, 

Swiftest to hear from far away. 


16 Weak-minded men : ‘ Men are too feeble in their intellect to coinprehen 
me in my true form and my real nature : they can only understand my wort 
iu the shape of a cow.’ — See Ludwig, R. V., IV. 245, 246. 

The concluding stanza is spoken by Aditi as a cow. 

4 Aurva Bhrigu: or, perhaps, Aurva and Bhrigu. The ancient Kid 
Aurva is said to have been the grandson of Bhrigu. Apnavdna : anothe 
ancient Itishi, mentioned in connexion with the Bhrigus and the eaihes 
worship of Agni, in Book IV. 7. 1. 



THE RIO VEDA . 


255 


jyMN 91.) 

2 Sage, laud the Mighty One who wins the spoil of \ietory like 

a steed, 

And, Mitra-like, unites the folk. 

3 Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation-bearer’s sister 

hymns 

Have come to thee before the wind, 
f The waters find their place in him, for whom tfie threefold 
sacred grass 

Is spread unbound, unlimited. 

5 The station of the Bounteous God hath, through his aid which 

none impair, 

A pleasant aspect like the Sun. 

6 Blazing with splendour, Agni, God, through pious gifts of 

sacred oil, 

Bring thou the Gods and worship them. 

7 The Gods as mothers brought thco forth, the Immortal Sage, 

0 Angiras, 

The bearer of our gifts to heaven. 

8 Wise Agni, Gods established thee, the Seer, noblest messenger, 
As bearer of our sacred gifts. 

9 No cow have I to call mine own, no axe at hand wherewith 

to work, 

Yet what is here I bring to thee. 

0 0 Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for thee, 

Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God. 

1 That which the white-ant eats away, that over which the 

emmet crawls — 

Way all of this be oil to thee. 

2 When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend 

the song : 

I with the priests have kindled him. 

12 Sayc: the piiest is addiessed. 

13 Before the wind: or, in front of the wind, with which the flame is 
■unieJ. 

H * The waters rest in Agni, wl > abides rb lightning in the fhmament.’ — 
tote in Wilson’s Translation which I have followed closely in this st»nza. 

15 Or, a comma being substituted for the full stop at the end of the preced- 
atan/ ^» aud padam (station) taken as in apposition to padam (place) in 14 ; 
18 Nation of the bounteous : he hath, through his aid which none impair, 
L pleabunt aspect like the Sun.’ 

" AsPiayoga, the Rislii of the hymn, has no cow and no axe to eut wood, 
^ u ;kt‘d in this and the two following stanzas to dwpeuse with the custom- 
VWu* of milk, and to accept such wood as the worshipper can pick up. 

« With his heart • a devout spirit will compensate the want of milk and 
ifoperly prepared fuel. 



256 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Via 


HYMN XCIL Agni 

That noblest Furtherer hath appeared, to whom men brim 
their holy works. 

Our songs of praise have rison aloft to Agni who was born t 
give the Ary a strength. 

2 Agni of Divodasa turned, as 'twerc in majesty, to the Cods. 
Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took his statio 

in the height of heaven. 

3 Him before whom the people shrink when ho performs h 

glorious deeds, 

Him who wins thousands at the worship of the Gods, himscl 
that Agni, serve with songs. 

4 The mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulence, 0 Vas 

he who brings thee gifts. 

Ho, Agni, wins himself a hero singing lauds, yea, one who fee 
a thousand men. 

5 He with the steed wins spoil even in the fenced fort, andgai 

imperishable fame. 

In thee, 0 Lord of wealth, continually we lay all precio 
offerings to the Gods. 

G To him who dealeth out all wealth, who is tho cheerful Frit 
of men, 

To him, like the first, vessels filled with savoury juice, to Aj. 
go the songs of praise. 

7 Votaries, lichly-gifted, deck him with their songs, even as t 

steed who draws the ear. 

On both, Strong Lord of men ! on child and grandson pt 
the bounties which our nobles give. 

8 Sing forth to him, the Holy, most munificent, sublime w 

his refulgent glow, 

To Agni, ye Upastutas. 

9 Worshipped with gifts, enkindled, splendid, Maghavan sli 

win himself heroic fame. 

And will not his most newly shown benevolence come to 
with abundant strength 1 


2 Of Divod/Jsa : whom Divoddsa especially worshipped aud claimed as 
tutelary God. The stanza is obscuie, and my translation founded on 
Roth’s interpretation of prd vi vdvrite , which has been accepted by Cowell, n 
be regarded as conjectural. See Wilson’s Tianslation and note. 

4 A hero: a biaveson. 

7 The second line is obscure. * Graceful lord of men, grant wealth tons 
n children and grandchildren.’ — Wilson. 

8 Upa*tuta»: singers so named after the Rishi Upastuta. See I. 36. 1 



-jYMX y *-J 


THE KU tV EVA. 


257 


0 Priest, pressor of tbo juice ! praise now the dearest Guest of 

all our friends, 

Agui, the driver of the cars. 

1 Who, finder-out of treasures open and concealed, briugeth them 

hither, Holy One; 

Whose waves, as in a cataract, are hard to pass, when he, 
through song, would win him strength. 

2 Let not the noblo Guest, Agni, be wroth with us: by many a 

man his praise is sung, 

Good Herald, skilled in sacrifice. 

3 0 Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in any way 

with lauds to thee. 

Even the lowly, skilled in rites, with offered gifts, secketh thee 
for the envoy’s task. 

4 Friend of the Maruts, Agni, come with Rudras to the Soma- 

draught, 

To Subhari’s fair song of praise, and be thou joyfuTin the light. 


10 Prictt, prester of the juice: dsdva: slotah — S&yana. * Singer of hymns.' 
-Wilson. 

11 Whose wares: billowy floods of flame rushing on like waters falling down 
piecipice. ‘ Whose (flames), as he hastens to wage the battle by means of our 
acred rite, are hard to be passed through as waves rushing down a decli- 
ily.’— Wilson. See also Piscliel, Ved ische Sludicn, I. p. 184. Through tony : 
lfipirited and strengthened by our hymns. 

13 For the envoy's task: to bear his oblations to the Gods. 



17 




VlLAKHILYA. 


(Book VIII. Hymns 49—59. M . Muller) 


HYMN I. Indra. 

To you will I sing Indra’s praise who gives good gifts as well 
we know ; 

The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers 
with wealth thousandfold. 

As with a hundred hosts, he rushes boldly on, and for the 
offerer slays his foes. 

As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts 
who feedeth many a one. 

The drops effused, the gladdening draughts, 0 Indra, Lover of 
the Song, 

As waters seek the lake where they are wont to rest, fill thee, 
for bounty, Thunderer. 

: Tho matchless draught that strengthens and gives eloquence, 
the sweetest of the meath drink thou, 

That in thy joy thou mayst scatter thy gifts o’er us, plente- 
ously, even as tho dust. 

> Come quickly to our laud, urged on by Soma-pressers like a 

horse — 

Laud, Godlike Indra, which milch-kine make sweet for thee : 
with Kanva’s sons are gifts for thee. 

> With homage have we sought thee as a Hero, strong, pre- 

eminent, with unfailing wealth. 

0 Thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its stream, so, 
Indra, flow our songs to thee. 

i ff now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth, 
Come thence, high-tboughted ! to our sacrifice with the Swift, 
come, Mighty with the Mighty Ones. 

See Book VIII., Hymn XLIX., note. Professor Cowell’s version of these 
even hymns will be fouud in Appendix I. of Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V. 
, aru . ,U( hhted to him for some improvements on the version which I had 
'eviously prepaied. 

4 n ? hmihvd hosts: ‘like a weapon with a -hundred edges.’—Cowell. 
hh ^ '^ V€$ eloquence : vivdkshanam : from rack ; ‘ swelling,’ f i om vaksk — 
le aQ d Cowell. Pleuteously , even as the dust : the meaning of 

ienA+i 18 °h scu re. The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes dhrishad = driskad } 

7 vi v ^iH 8 toue : ‘just as the mill-stone pours out meal,’— Cowell. 

IC & ud the Mighty Ones, are Indra’s horses. 



260 THE HYMNS OF [VALAKHlln 

8 The active, fleet-foot, tawny Coursers that are thine are swifi 

to victory, like the Wind, 

Wherewith thou goest round to visit Manus' seed, wherewitl 
all heaven is visible. 

9 Indra, from thee so great we crave prosperity in wealth of 
As, Maghavan, thou favouredst Medhyatithi, and, in the fight 

Nipatithi. 

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva, Trasadasyu, and to Paktha an 
Dasavraja ; 

As, Indra, to Gosarya and Rijisvan thou vouchsafedst wealt 
iu kine and gold. 

HYMN II. Inflr 

Sakra I praise, to win his aid, far-famed, exceeding bountifn 
Who gives, as 5 * 7 1 wore in thousands, precious wealth to hi 
who sheds the juice and worships him. 

2 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this Indra 

mighty arms in war. 

He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with spring 
when juices poured have gladdened him. 

3 What time the flowing Sonia drops have gladdened with tlu 

taste the Friend, 

Like water, gracious Lord ! weromy libations made, like mile 
kino to the worshipper. 

4 To him the peerless, who is calling you to givo you aid, for 

flow the drops of pleasant meath. 

The Soma-drops which call on thee, 0 gracious Lord, ha 
brought thee to our hymns of praise. 

5 He rushes hurrying like a steed to Soma that adorns our ri 
Which hymns make sweet to thee, lover of pleasant food. T 

call to Paura thou dost love. 

6 Praise the strong, grasping Hero, winner of the spoil, ruli 

supreme o’er mighty wealth. 

Like a full spring, 0 Thunderer, from thy storo hast th 
poured on the worshipper evermore. 

9 Medhydtitki : a Rishi whose name has frequently occurred. NipdUt 
mentioned only here and V&lakhilya Hymn III. 

10 Trasadasyu : see. Vol. I., Index. Paktha: a favourite of the Afv 
See VIII. 22 10. Dasavraja : see VIII. 8.20. Gosarya : see VIII. 8. 
Rljisvan : see Vol. I., Index. 

5 The call to Paura : the invitation to Paura’ s house. According to 

Roth paurd means the filler, the satisfiur : * thou approvest the summon 

the satisfying beverage.’ — Cowell, See V, 74. 4, 



■ , YMN 3.] the RIO VELA . 261 

- Now whether thou he far away, or in the heavens, or on the 
earth, 

0 Indra, mighty-thoughted, harnessing thy Bays, come Lofty 
with the Lofty Ones. 

[ The Bays who draw thy chariot, Steeds who injuro none, sur- 
pass the wind’s impetuous strength — 

With whom thou silencest the enemy of man, with whom thou 
goest round the sky. 

i 0 gracious Hero, may wo learn anew to know thee as thou art : 
As in decisive fight thou holpest Etasa, or Vasa ’gainst 
Dasavraja, 

i As, Maghavan, to Kanva at the sacred feast, to Dirghanitha 
thine home-friend, 

As to Gosarya thou, Stone-darter, gavest wealth, give mo a gold- 
bright stall of kine. 

HYMN IIL Indra. 

As with Manu Samvarani, Indra, thou drankest Soma juice, 
And, Maghavan, with Nlpatithi, Medhyatithi, with Pushtigu 
and Srushtigu, — 

I The son of Prishadvana was Praskanva’s host, who lay decre- 
pit and forlorn. 

Aided by theo the Bislii Dasyave-vrika strovo to obtain thou- 
sands of kino. 

1 Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks not hymns 
of praise, 

llim who observes and knows, inspirer of the sage, him who 
seems eager to enjoy. 

t He unto whom they sang the seven-headed hymn, three- 
parted, in the loftiest place, 

He sent his thunder down on all these living things, and so 
displayed heroic might. 

7 This stanza is almost a lepetition of stanza 7 of Hymn I. 

9 Etasa: see I. 61. 15. Pas a : mentioned as a favourite of the Asvins in 
■ to. 1\ Lctsavraja : said in* stau/a 10 of Hymn I. to have been helped by 
dra. 

10 Lirghanttha : Ludwig takes this word to be an adjective qualifying 
'dhc udhvarty * at the saciifieial feast of long duration. 1 A gold-bright stall 

km : according to Ludwig, a stall graced with bay steeds, would be a 
ttcr translation. 

1 Sfimvarani: son of the VcdicRiHhi Samvarana. See V. 33. 10. At the 
d of tho stanza, ‘ so drink with us/ is to be understood. 

“ Eyrlorn ; rejected aud cast ou j by his kindred. Lasyavc-vfika ; literally, 
ol f-to-the* Dasy u, that is, Destroyer of fiends or barbarians. 

The seven -headed ; sung by seven heavenly singers. 



262 THE HYMNS OF [ YlLAKHlLY \ 

5 We invocate that Tndra who bestoweth precious things on u« 
Now do wo know his newest favour; may we gaiu a stable tha 

is full of kine. 

6 He whom thou aidest, gracious Lord, to give again, obtain 

great wealth to nourish him. 

We with our Soma ready, Lover of the Song ! call, Inch 
Maghavan, on thee. 

7 Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra; ne’er dost thou desert tl 

worshipper : 

But now, 0 Maghavan, thy bounty as a God is poured fori 
ever more and more. 

8 He who hath overtaken Krivi with his might, and silent 

Sushna with death-bolts, — 

When he supported yonder heaven and spread it out, then fir 
the son of earth was born. 

9 Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, Dasas here l 

long. 

Directly unto thee, the pious Rusama Paviru, is that weal! 
brought nigh. 

10 In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song distilli 
oil and rich in sweets. 

Riches have spread among us and heroic strength, with us fl 
flowing Soma-drops. 

HYMN IY. Rd 

A s, Sakra, thou with Manu called Vivasvan drankest Somajui 
As, Indra, thou djdst love the hymn by Trita’s side, so d< 
thou joy with Ayu now. 

2 As thou with Matarisvan, Medhya, Prishadhra, hast cheer 

thee, Indra, with pressed juice, 

Drunk Soma with Rijunas, Syumarasmi, by Dasonya’s, Dai 
sipra’s side. 

3 ’Tis he who made the lauds his own and boldly drank t 

Soma juice, 


8 The son of earth : man. r 

9 Rusama Paviru : the Rusamas are mentioned in Y. 80. 13—15. 
name of Paviru does not occur again. 

1 Vivasvdn : or Vivas vat, was the father of Manu who is generally cal 
Vaivasvata. Ayu : the Itishi of the hymn, or the eacrificer. 

2 Mdtarisvan: the Rishi of Hymn VI. of the Vftlakhilya, Medhya: 
Hishi of Hymns V. IX. and X. Pfishadhra : the Rishi of Hymn VIU* 
marasmi : mentioned, as a favourite of the Asvins, in I. 112. 16. The na 
of Rijunas, Dasonya, and Dasasipra do not occur again in the Rigveda. 



THE RIO VEDA . 


He to whom Vishnu came striding his three wide steps, as 
Mitra’s statutes ordered it. 

4 In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great deed, 0 

Satakratu, Mighty One ! 

Seeking renown we call thee as the milkers call the cow who 
yields abundant milk. 

5 He is our Sire who gives to us, Great, Mighty, ruling as he wills. 
Unsought, may he the Strong, Itich, Lord of ample wealth, 

give us of horses and of kine. 

6 He to whom thou, Good Lord, givest that he may give increas- 

es wealth that nourishes. 

Eiger for wealth we call on Indra, Lord of wealth, on Sata- 
kratu with our lauds. 

7 Never art thou neglectful: thou guardest both races with thy 

care. 

The call on Indra, fourth Aditya ! is thine own. Amrit is 
stablished in the heavens. 

8 The offerer whom thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, liberal 

Maghavan, favourcst, — 

As at the call of Kanva so, 0 gracious Lord, hear thou our 
songs and eulogy. 

9 Sung is the song of ancient time : to Indra have yc said the 

prayer. 

They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice, poured forth the 
worshipper’s many thoughts. 

10 Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, and both 
the worlds, yea, and the Sun. 

Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the draughts 
of Soma have made Indra glad. 

HYMN V. Indra, 

As highest of the Maghavans, preeminent among the Bulls, 
Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, Lord of wealth, we 
seek thee, Indra Maghavan. 

2 Thou who subduedst Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva, waxing daily in 
thy might, 

5 Ruling at he wills : ‘he who acts as the sovereign.’ — Cowell. 

7 Roth races : Gods and men. Fourth Aditya: Varui.m, Mitra, and Arya- 
man being the other three. A mrit ■ ‘ ambrosia.’ — Cowell. 

8 As thou hearest, must be supplied at the beginning of the Btauza. 

9 Brihati : verse iu the Brihati metre. 

1 Highest ■ or, nearest The Bulls : strong heroes, 

2 Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva : see I. 53. 10. 



264 THE HYMNS OF [vlLAKBILn 

As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, tie 
Satakratu, Lord of Bays. 

3 The pressing-stones shall pour for us the essence of the m.\at 

of all, 

Drops that have been pressed out afar among the folk, an 
those that have been pressed near us. 

4 Repel all enmities and keep them far away : let all wi 

treasure for their own. 

Even among Sishtas are the stalks that make thee gku 
where thou with Soma satest thee, 

5 Come, India, very near to us with aids of firmly-based resolve 
Come, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious help, goo 

Kinsman, witli good kinsmen, come ! 

6 Bless thou with progeny the chief of men, the lord of heroe 

victor in the fray. 

Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds and kcc 
their spirits ever pure and bright. 

7 May we be such in battle as are surest to obtain thy grace : 
With holy offerings and invocations of the Gods, we mean 

that we may win the spoil. 

8 Thine, Lord of Bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the spoi 

Still with thy help I seek the fight. 

So, at the raiders’ head, I, craving steeds and kiue, unit 
myself with thee olone. 

HYMN VI. Mi 

Indiia, the poets with their hymns extol this hero might < 
thine : 

They strengthened, loud in song, thy power that droppeth oi 
With hymns the Pauras came to thee. 

2 Through piety they came to Indra for his aid, they whos 
libations give thee joy. 

As thou with Krisaand Samvarta hast rejoiced, so, Indra, l 
thou glad with us. 

4 Sishtas: apparently a tube of no great importance. Stalks: of tl 
Soma-plant. 

8 At the raiders' head : at the head of tho band who are going forth to seii 
the cattle of their enemies. Von ltoth thinks that matUidm should be read i 
stead of mathinflm, and Grassmann translates accordingly, ‘in Aufang mein* 
Bitten,’ i 2 at the beginning of my prayers.’ 

1 Pauras : * the offerers.’ — Cowell. See V&lakhilya, II. 5. 

2 Krisa : the Uishi of Hymn VII. of the Vftlakhilya. Samvarta: 
mentioned elsewhere. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


265 


■YMN 7.] 

j Agreeing in your spirit, all ye Deities, come nigh to us. 

Vasus and Ruclras shall come near to give us aid, and Mavuts 
listen to our call. 

[ May Pushan, Vishnu, and Sarasvati befriend, and the Seven 
Streams, this call of mine : 

May Waters, Wind, the Mountains, and the Forest-Lord, and 
Earth give ear unto my cry. 

> Indrr, with thine own bounteous gift, most liberal of tho 

Mighty Ones, 

Be our boon benefactor, Vritra-slayer, be our feast-companion 
for our weal. 

> Leader of heroes, Lord of battle, lead thou us to combat, thou 

Most Sapient One. 

High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts and enter- 
tainment of the Gods. 

Our hopes rest on the Faithful One : in Indra is the people's life. 
0 Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid : make 
plenteous food stream forth for us. 

5 Thee would wo worship, Indra, with our songs of praise : 0 
Satakratu, bo thou outs. 

Pour down upon Praskanva bounty vast and iirm, exuberant, 
that shall never fail. 

HYMN VI T. Praskatrva’s Gift. 

Great, verily, is Indra’s might. I have beheld, and hither 
comes 

Thy bounty, Dasyave-vyika ! 

! A hundred oxen white of hue are shining like the stars iii 
heaven, 

So tall, they seem to prop tho sky. 

1 Bamboos a hundred, hundred dogs, a hundred skins of beasts 
well- tanned, 

A hundred tufts of Balbaja, four hundred rcd-liued mares 
arc mine. 

4 The Forest Lord; vanaspati : the tall timber tree, frequently meaning the 
o-iticial Post. 

5 Lcncf actor ; or Bhaga, the God who distributes wealth. 

1 1 Great is Indra’s power, and the gifts which I have received from thee, 0 
^tioyer of the Dasyus, can be compared only to his bounty.’ Dasyaye- 
iKa, here, is the name, not of the Kishi, but of a hero who in allitncc with 
e Ilanvas has been victorious in his attack on the hostile batbaiians. bee 
‘fts-Vol. III. p. 181. . . . 

rkilbaj a .■ a kind of coarse grass (Eleusine Indica), used in religious cere* 
ou ios, and for other purposes when plaited. 



233 THE HYMNS OF [VALAKHliy 

4 Blest by the Gods, K&uv&yanas ! be ye who spread throui 

life on life : 

Like horses have ye stridden forth. 

5 Then men extolled the team of seven : not yet full-grown, i 

fame is great. 

The dark mares rushed along the paths, so that no eye cou 
follow them. 

HYMN VIII. Praskanva’s G: 

Thy bounty, Dasyavc-vrika, exhaustless hath displayed itacl 
Its fulness is as broad as heaven. 

2 Ten thousand Dasyave-vrika, the son of Putakrata, hath 
From his own wealth bestowed on me. 

3 A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of fleecy shee 
A hundred slaves, and wreaths besides. 

4 There also was a marc led forth, picked out for Putakrat&’s sal 
Not of the horses of the herd. 

5 Observant Agni hath appeared, oblation-bearer with his car, 
Agni with his resplendent flame hath shone on high as shin 

the Sun, hath shone like Siirya in the heavens. 

HYMN IX. A avi 

Endowed, 0 Gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quick 
with your chariot, 0 yc Holy. 

Come with your mighty powers, 0 ye Nasatyas ; come hithi 
drink ye this the third libation. 

2 The truthful Deities, the Three-and-Thirty, saw you approa 
before the Ever-Trutliful. 


4 Kdnvdyanas : descendants of Kanva. 

5 The team of seven: ‘ siebengespannes.’ — Grass maun ; ‘seven-yok 
team.’ — Cowell. But the exact meaning here of sdptdsya is uncertain. V 
Roth thinks that it is probably a pioper name. Ludwig takes it in the sei 
of a bond of friendship or alliance. The dark mares : there is no substanti 
and ‘mares’ is conjecturally supplied. According to Ludwig, the dark ho 
of the Dasyus conquered by Dasyave-vrika are intended, and the whole stai 
would be more correctly translated : 

‘Then no more thought they of the great renown of the collective bond. 

The dark tribes rushed along the paths so that no eye could reach to thei 
See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol. V. p. 552. 

2 The son of Pdtakratd : or, more probably, called Pautakrata after I 
father Pdtakratu — Ludwig. 

3 Slaves: digit n : conquered barbarians. 

4 Picked out: or, adorned. Pdtakratd : the wife of Pdtakr&tu. 

1 Ndsatyas: * truthful ones.’ — Cowell. See Vol I., Index. 

2 The Three-and-Thirty : or, Turice-Eleven. See I. 34. 11. The Ed 
Truthful : the Sun, whose approach is heralded by the Aavins. 



THE MOVED A, 


267 


VYMN 11J 

Accepting this our worship and libation, 0 Asvins bright with 
fire, drink ye the Soma. 

3 Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder, — the Bull of 

heaven and earth and air’s mid region ; 

Yea, and your thousand promises in battle, — to all of these 
come near and drink beside us. 

4 Hero is your portion laid for you, ye Holy: come to these 

songs of ours, 0 ye Nasatyas. 

Drink among us the Soma full of sweetness, and with your 
powers assist the man who worships. 

HYMN X. Visvedevas. 

He whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice, 
of one accord, bring hither, 

Who was appointed as a learned Brahman, — what is the sacri- 
fice's knowledge of him 1 

2 Kindled in many a spot, still One is Agni; Surya is One 

though high o’er all he shineth. 

Illumining this All, still One is Ushas. That which is One 
hath into All developed. 

3 The chariot bright and radiant, treasure-laden, three-wheeled, 

with easy seat, and lightly rolling, 

Which She of Wondrous Wealth was born to harness, — this 
car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth. 

HYMN XI. Iudra-Varuna. 

In offerings poured to you, 0 Iudra-Varuna, these shares of 
yours btream forth to glorify your state. 

Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye assist the 
worshipper who sheds the juice. 

2 The waters and the plants, 0 Indra-Varuna, had efficacious 

vigour, and attained to might : 

3 The Dull : the Sun, whom, as his heralds and revealers, they may be said 
to have created. Thousand promises : ‘ a characteristic periphrasis for the 
Maghavans, or wealthy nobles.’— Ludwig. 

1 TWhymn appears to consist of unconnected fragments, and the purport 
of this stauza is not obvious. 

3 She of Wondrous Weatlh : Ushas or Dawn. ITcwf horn to harness : or, as 
Prof. Cowell translates : ‘At whose yoking the Dawn was bom.’ The chariot 
°f the Asvins precedes that of the Dawn. 

2 The waters and the plants : used in sacrifice ; the Soma-plants and the 
'vater employed in preparing the juice for libation. The meaning of the 
stanza seems to be : although you are far away in the most distant firmament, 
0Ul ’ libations have had power to attract you. Regard us only : the godless 
mai * is uuworthv of vour consideration even as an enemy* 



208 THE RIG VEDA . [ VALA KIIIL Y A 

Ye who have gone beyond the path of middle air, — no godlcs 
man is worthy to be called your foe. 

3 True is yonr Krisa’s word, Indra and Yanina : The seven Lob 

voices pour a wave of meath. 

For their sake, Lords of splendour ! aid tho pious man who 
unbewildered, keeps you ever in his thoughts. 

4 Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their stream 

are the Seven Sisters in the scat of sacrifice. 

These, dropping oil, are yours, O Indra-Varuna : with thes^ 
enrich with gifts and help the worshipper. 

5 To our great happiness have we ascribed to these Two Brigh 

Ones truthfulness, great strength, and majesty. 

0 Lords of splendour, aid us through tho Three-times-Sevcn 
as we pour holy oil, 0 Indra-Varuna. 

6 What ye in time of old, Indra and Varuna, gave Risliis — rc 

velation, thought, and power of song, 

And places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice, — thcs< 
through my spirit’s fervid glow have I beheld. 

7 0 Indra- Varuna, grant to the worshippers cheerfulness voii 

of pride, and wealth to nourish them. 

Vouchsafe us food, prosperity, and progeny, and lengthen oir 
our days that we may see long life. 

3 The seven holt/ voices : tho voices of the seven priests or sacred bards 
Se e IX. 103. 3. A wave of meath: ‘a stream of honey.’ — Cowell. 

4 The Seven Sisters : 1 sister-streams of the Soma.’ — Cowell. 

5 The Thrcc-times-Sevcn : perhaps the Maruts, thrice-seven being used in 
definitely for a laiger number consisting of troops of seven. See I. 133. 6. 

0 Revelation: srutdm: that which was heard (fiotn the beginning); saerei 
knowledge. ‘Fame.’ — Cowell. Places: perhaps, ah Ludwig suggests, home 
in the world to come, which the wise Uishis have prepared for themselves bj 
pei foi ruing sacrifice here below. Through my spirit's fervid glow : tdpasu 
according to Grassmann and Cowell, this trfpas means ‘ the holy austerities 
of the Uishis, aud not the sacred fervour of the seer of the hymn. 1 have 
followed Ludwig. 



BOOK THE NINTH. 


HYMN I. Soma Pavamftua. 

In sweetest and most gladdening stream flow pure, 0 Soma, 
on thy way, 

Pressed out for Indra, for his drink. 

2 Fiend-qucllcr, Friend of all men, he hath with the wood at- 

tained unto 

• Ilis place, his iron-fashioned home. 

3 Be thou best Vritra-slaycr, best grantor of bliss, most liberal : 
Promote our wealthy princes’ gifts. 

4 Flow onward with thy juico unto the banquet of the Mighty 

Gods : 

Flow hither for our strength and fame. 

5 0 Iwlu, we draw nigh to thee, with this one object day by day : 
To thee alone our prayers arc said. 

6 By means of this eternal fleece may Surya’s Daughter purify 
Thy Soma that is foaming forth. 

7 Ten sister maids of slender form seize him within the press 

and hold 

Him firmly on the final day. 

8 The virgins send him forth : they blow the skin musician- 

like, and fuso 

The triple foe-repelling month. 


Nearly all the hymns of this Book are addressed to the deified Soma juice, 
or to Soma, or Indu, the Moon, who as containing the celestial nectar, the drink 
of the Gods, is identified with the Soma- plant and it* exhilarating juice. As 
the Moon-God pours down his ambrosial rain through the sieve of heaven, lie is 
addressed and worshipped as Pavam:\na (Self-Purifying), represented by the 
^'tna juice as it undergoes purification by flowing through the wool which 
h used as a filter or strainer. See Muir, 0 S. Texts, V. 258 sqq , llillebrandt, 
Vfdmche Mythology, I. 385 sqq., and Max M filler, Chips, XV. 353 — 367. But cf, 
Oldojiheig, Religion dcs Veda, 599 — 612. 

1 Plow pure : pdvasva: ‘ purify thyself.’- -Ludwig. 

2 With the wood: some wooden vessel or implement, perhaps the sruva or 
dipping-spoon. I von- fashioned home: receptacle that lias been liammerod or 
formed with a tool of dyas, iron or other metal. It is not clear what vessel is 
intended. 


6 Sdrya's Daughter : SiaddhA or Faith. Sec S itapatha-Brdhnana, XII. 7. 

3 Ip 

. 1 Ten titter maids: the priest’s fingers. The final day : on which the Soma 

8 Virgins: the unwedded ores: the fingers. Musician-likc ■ or, as men 
1 "w a bagpipe ; but the meaning of hdkurdm and the second half- line is not 
* ^ 4 They seize it glittering like a water-skin.’— Wilson. 



270 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK n 

9 Inviolable milch-kine round about him blend, for Indra’s drint 

The fresh young Soma with their milk. 

10 In the wild raptures of this draught, Indra slays all th 

Vritras : he, 

The Hero, pours his wealth on us. 

HYMN II. Soma Pavamftni 

Soma, flow on, inviting Gods, speed to the purifying cloth : 
Pass into Indra, as a Bull. 

2 As mighty food speed hitherward, Indu, as a most splendi 

Steer : # 

Sit in thy place as one with strength. 

3 The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream of tb 

creative juice : 

The Sage drew waters to himself. 

4 The mighty waters, yea, the floods accompany thee Mighty Oik 
When thou wilt clothe thee with the mdk. 

5 The lake is brightened in the floods. Soma, our Friend 

heaven’s prop and stay, 

Falls on the purifying cloth. 

6 The tawny Bull hath bellowed, fair as mighty Mitra to behold 
He shines together with the Sun. 

7 Songs, Indu, active in their might aro beautified for the( 

wherewith 

Thou deckest thee for our delight. 

8 To thee who givest ample room we pray, to win the joyou 

draught : 

Great are the praises due to thee. 

9 Indu, as Indra’s Friend, on us pour with a stream of sweet 

ness, like 

Parjanya sender of the rain. 

10 Winner of kine, Indu, art thou, winner of heroes, steeds, aii( 
strength : 

Primeval Soul of sacrifice. 


3 The Sage - the Soma. Waters: with which the stalks of the plantar 
sprinkled. 

5 The lake • the Somn juice. 

6 The tawny Bull : 1 the golden- hued showerer of blessings.’ — Wilson. Tb 
strong greenish -yellow Soma juice. Hath bellowed: an exaggerated expressioi 
for the sound made by the juice as it drops, but in keeping with its represent 
ation as a bull. 

9 Like Parjanya: eniiching and blessing us as the rain-cloud fertilizes tb 
ground. 



tfMX 4.] 


TEE RIO VEDA. 


271 


HYMN II I. Soma Pavamltna. 

Hebe present this Immortal God flies, like a bird upon her 
wings, . 

To settle in tho vats of wood. 

2 This God, made ready with the hymn, runs swiftly through 

the winding ways, v * ° 

Inviolable as he flows. 

3 This God while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed for war 

by men ' 

Devout and skilled in holy songs. 

1 lie, like a warrior going forth with heroes, as he flows along 
Is fain to win all precious boons. 57 

5 This God, as he is flowing on, speeds like a car and gives his gifts : 
He lets his voice be heard of all. 

G Praised by the sacred bards, this God dives into waters, and 
bestows 

Rich gifts upon the worshipper. 

7 Away he rushes with his stream, across the regions, into 

heaven, 

And roars as he is flowing on. 

8 While flowing, meet for sacrifice, he hath gone up to heaven 

across 

The regions, irresistible. 

9 After the way of ancient time, this God, pressed out for 

Deities, 

Flows tawny to the straining-cloth. 

10 This Lord of many Holy Laws, even at his birth engendering 
strength, 

Effused, flows onward in a stream. 

HYMN IV. Soma Pavam&na, 

0 Soma flowing on thy way, win thou and conquer high re- 
nown ; 

And make us better than we are. 

1 The vats of wood : dr&ndni : large wooden vessels, tubs or troughs, which 
receive the Soma juice. 

, p 2 winding ways : of the wool which forms the strainer —Ludwig. 
Pushes against the enemies/ — Wilson. 

, pi ves into waters : called vasativaryah , with which the stalks of the Soma* 
Plant are sprinkled. 

Pressed out for Deities : -the Soma juioe being identified with the Amrit 
nectar, the drink of the Godb, contained in the Moon, 

r * Better than we are ; or, happier than we are. 



z/z 


iaJCi many o vr 


L tfUUK /: 


2 Win thou the light, win heavenly light, and, Soma, all fd 

cities ; 

And make us better than we are. 

3 Win skilful strength and mental power. 0 Soma, drive awa 

our foes ; 

And make us better than we are. 

4 Ye purifiers, purify Soma for Indra, for his drink : 

Make thou us better than we are. 

5 Give us our portion in the Sun through thine own ment; 

power and aids ; 

And make us better than we arc. 

6 Through thine own mental power and aid long may wc loc 

upon the Sun ; 

Make thou us better than wc are. 

7 Wcll-weaponed Soma, pour to us a stream of riches doubl 

great ; 

And make us better than we arc. 

8 As one victorious, unsubdued in battle pour forth wealth to u 
And make us better than we are. 

9 By worship, Pavamana ! men have strengthened thee to pro 

the Law : 

Make thou us better than we are. 

10 0 Indu, bring us wealtli in steeds, manifold, quickening a 
life ; 

And make us better than we are. 

HYMN Y. April 

Enktndled, Pavamana, Lord, sends forth his light on every sid 
In friendly show, the bellowing Bull. 

2 He, Pavamana, Self-produced, speeds onward sharpening hi 

horns : 

He glitters through the firmament. 

3 Brilliant like wealth, adorable, with splendour Pavamaiu 

shines, 

Mightily with the streams of meath. 


4 Purifiers: priests whose business is to purify the juice. Make thou: ( 
Soma. 

9 To prop the Luw : vtdharmani : ‘ for their own upholding.* — Wilson. 

10 Quickening all Life : visvftyum: explained by SAyana as ^ sarvagdinincim 

‘all-reaching.’ — Wilson. 

In this Apr! hymn atributes of Agni are transferred to Soma PavamAna. 

1 Enkindled : sdmiddhuh : properly applicable to Agni. The bcllowi^l 
Pull : ‘ the showerer of blessings, uttering a loud sound.’ — Wilson. 

2 Self produced : Tan And put ; properly a name of Agni ; here, the Moon. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


273 


VfMN 6.] 

4 The tawny Pavam&na, who strews from of old the grass with 

| might, 

Is worshipped, God amid the Gods. 

5 The golden, the Celestial Doors are lifted with their frames 

on high, 

By Pavamana glorified. 

6 With passion Pavamana longs for the great lofty Pair, well- 

formed, 

Like beauteous maidens, Night and Dawn. 

1 7 Both Gods who look on men I call, Celestial Heralds : Indra’s 
Self 

Is Pavamina, yea, the Pull. 

8 This, Pa v am ana’s sacrifice, shall the three beauteous Goddes- 

ses, 

Sarasvat' and Bharati and Ila, Mighty One, attend. 

9 1 summon Tvashtar hither, our protector, champion, earliest- 

born, 

Indu is Indra, tawny Steer; Pavamina is Prajapati. 

0 0 Pavamina, with the meath in streams anoint Vanaspati, 

The ever-green, the golden-hued, refulgent, with a thousand 

boughs. 

1 Come to the consecrating rite of Pavamana, all ye Gods, — 
Vayu, Surya, Brihaspati, Indra, and Agni, in accord. 

HYMN VI. Soma PavamAna. 

Soma, flow on with pleasant stream, a Bull devoted to the Gods, 
Our Friend, unto the woollen sieve. 

2 Pour hitherward, as Iudra’s Self, Indu, that gladdening 

stream of thine, 

And send us coursers full of strength. 

3 Flow to the filter hitherward, pouring that ancient gladden- 

ing juice, 

Streaming forth power and high renown. 

I Hither the sparkling drops have flowed, like waters down a 
steep descent : 

They have reached Indra purified. 

The Celestial Doors : the doors of the hall of sacrifice are here identified 
itli the portals of the east through which light comes into the world. See 
1 . 3 . 5 . 

7 Celestial Heralds : seel. 13. 8. Indra 1 s Self: indrah here is explained 
F SAyana a %=diptaji ; 1 radiant.’ — Wilson. 

10 Vanaspati : the sacrificial stake. 

11 The consecrating rite: svlXhdkritim, : oblation accompanied with the 
Iterance of the sacred formula SvAhA. 



274 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

5 Whom, having passed the filter, ten dames cleanse, as ’tw 

a vigorous steed, 

While he disports him in the wood, — 

6 The steer-strong juice with milk pour forth, for feast a 

service of the Gods, 

To him who bears away the draught. 

*1 Effused, the God flows ouward with his stream to Indra 
the God, 

So that his milk may strengthen him. 

8 Soul of the sacrifice, the juice effused flows quickly on : 
keeps 

His ancient wisdom of a Sage. 

0 So pouring forth, as Indra’s Friend, strong drink, best Gin 
dener ! for the feast, 

Thou, even in secret, storest hymns. 

H\MN VII. Soma PavamiV 

Forth on their way the glorious drops have flowed for mai 
tenance of Haw, 

Knowing this sacrifice’s course. 

2 Down in the mighty waters sinks the stream of meath, mo 

excellent, 

Oblation best of all in worth. 

3 About the holy place, the Steer true, guileless, noblest, ha 

sent forth 

Continuous voices in the wood. 

4 When, clothed in manly strength, the Sage flows in celcsti 

wisdom round, 

The Strong would win the light of heaven. 

5 When purified, he sits as King above the hosts, amonghisfol 
What time the sages bring him nigh. 


*> Whom: relative to juice in the following stanza. Ten dames : the fingei 
The wood • the vat or trough. 

H To him who hears away the draught : to Indra. Others take lhardya 
mean ‘ for Ntrength or prowess in battle.’ 

9 Even in secret ■ wisdom lies hidden in the Soma, and cannot be ieco 
nized until one drinks the juice. — Ludwig. 

2 The mighty waters : the holy waters called vasatiraryah. 

3 In the wood: according to Siyaua, vane kiQYQ — udake, in the water. T1 
stanza is very difficult, and I am unable to offer a satisfactory translation. 

4 The Strong ; Indra. * Then the mighty (Indra) in heaven is eager 
repair to the oblation ’ — Wilson. 

5 Above the hosts, among his folk : or, as preferred by Prof. Ludwig in h 
Commentary, above the contending tribes or people (iv'foA). 



275 


\YMN 8.] THE RIO VEDA. 

6 Dear, golden-coloured, in the fleece he sinks, and settles in 

the wood : 

The Singer shows his zeal in hymns. 

7 He goes to Indra, Vayu, to the Asvins, as his custom is, 

With gladdening juice which gives them joy. 

$ The streams of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra-Varuna, — 
Well-knowing through his mighty powers. 

9 Gain for us, 0 ye Heaven and Earth, riches of meath to win 
us wealth : 

Gain for us treasures and renown. 

HYMN VIII. Soma Pavam&na. 

Obeying Indra’s dear desire these Soma juices have flowed 
forth, 

Increasing his heroic might. 

2 Laid in the bowl, pure-flowing on to Vayu and the Asvins, 

may . 

These give us great heroic strength. 

3 Soma, as thou art purified, incite to bounty Indra’s heart, 

To sit in place of sacrifice. 

4 The ten swift fingers deck thee forth, seven ministers impel 

thee on : 

The sages have rejoiced in thee. 

5 When through the filter thou art poured, we clothe thee with 

a robe of milk 

To be a gladdening draught for Gods. 

6 When purified within the jars, Soma, bright red and golden* 

hued, 

Hath clothed him with a robe of milk. 

7 Flow on to us and make us rich. Drive all our enemies away. 
0 Indu, flow into thy Friend. 

8 Send down the rain from heaven, a stream of opulence from 

earth. Give us, 

0 Soma, victory in war. 

9 May we obtain thee, Indra’s drink, who viewest men and 

findest light, 

Gain thee, and progeny and food. 

8 Well-knowing , through his mighty powers • that is, the streams that, 
trough the power of Soma, know the way they should go. 4 The worshippers 
lowing its (virtues are rewarded) with happiness.’ — Wilson. 

7 Flow on to us and make us rich : or, 4 Flow to us wealthy worshippers.’ 
' l y Friend : Indra. Cf. IX. 2. 1. 



276 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK. 

HYMN IX. SomaPavaa* 

The Sage of Heaven whoso heart is wise, when laid betwc 
both hands and pressed, 

Sends us delightful powers of life. 

2 On, onward to a glorious home; dear to the people void 

guilo, 

With excellent enjoyment, flow. 

3 He, the bright Son, when born illumed his Parents who h 

sprung to life, 

Great Son great Strengtheners of Law. 

4 Urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guile! 

rivers which 

Have magnified the Single Eye. 

5 These helped to might the Youthful One, high over all, inv 

cible, 

Even Indu, Indra ! in thy law. 

6 The Immortal Courser, good to draw, looks down upon t 

Seven : the fount 
Hath satisfied the Goddesses. 

7 Aid us in holy rites, 0 Man : 0 Pavamina, drive away 
Dark shades that must be met in fight. 

8 Make the paths ready for a hymn newer and newer evermoi 
Make the lights shine as erst they shone. 

9 Give, Pavamana, high renown, give kine and steeds and h( 

sons : 

Win for us wisdom, win the light. 

IlYMN X. Soma Pavama 

Like cars that thunder on their way, like coursers eager 
renown, 

Have Soma-drops flowed forth for wealth. 

2 Foith have they rushed from holding hands, like cbari< 
that are urged to speed, 

Like joyful songs of smgitig-men. 


1 The Sage of Heaven the Soma. Both hands : naptybh : literally, < 
granddaughters. Accoiding to Say ana, two boards used in pressing the So 
aie intended. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. 

3 His Parents : mdtard ; literally, his two mothers ; Heaven and Earth. 

4 Seven devotions: practised in the preparation of the Soma. SAysnata 
tapta with nadyAh : 4 gladdens the seven guileless rivers.’ — Wilson. Sir 
Eye : Soma, the Moon. 

6 Courser: the flowing Soma. The Seven : rivers. The fount: ‘Full, a 
well, he has satisfied the divine streams.’ — Wilson. 

7 0 Man : manly Soma. 



hymn n.] the move da . 277 

3 The Somaa deck themselves with milk, as Kings are graced 

with eulogies, 

And, with seven priests, the sacrifice. 

4 Pressed for the gladdening draught, the drops flow forth abund- 

antly with song, 

The Soma juices in a stream. 

5 Winning Vivas van’s glory and producing Morning’s light, the 

Suns 

Pass through the openings of the cloth. 

G The singing-men of ancient time open the doors of sacred 
songs, — 

Men, for the mighty to accept. 

7 Combined in close society sit the seven priests, the brother- 

hood, 

Filling the station of the One. 

8 He gives us kinship with the Gods, and with the Sun unites 

our eye: 

The Sage’s offspring hath appeared. 

9 The Sun with his dear eye beholds that quarter of the heav- 

ens which priests 

Have placed within the sacred cell. 

HYMN XI. Soma Pavam&na. 

Sing forth to Indu, 0 ye men, to him who now is purified, 
Fain to pay worship to the Gods. 


5 The Suns : so called as being creators of the light : * the sun-bright 

juices.’ — Wilson. Vitasvdn : the morning Sun. 

6 Men, for the mighty to accept: ‘men, offerers of Soma,’ according to 
S&ya’ia. 

7 The seven priests • the adhraryus who bring the water with which the 
stalks of the Soma-plants are spiinkled. The One : Souia. — S.iyana. 

8 He gives us kinship with the Hods: 1 follow Prof. PiscluTB interpretation 
of this difficult passage. 1 Soma unites our navel with the navel of the Gods, 
our eye with the Sun, that is, he bungs us into union with the Gods in 
heaven ’ — Vcdische Studien, I , p. 69 ‘I take into my navel the navel of the 
sacrifice [the Soma]. ’—Wilson. ‘ Ho [Soma] as kinsman has brought us a 
kinsman [Surya].’ — Ludwig. The Sages offspring : a periphrasis for the Sage 
himself, that is, Soma. — Ludwig. 

t 9 This stanza is very obscure. I have adopted Benfey’s explanation who 

here, follows an occasional interpretation of div or dyuloka, given by the 
Scholiast, which identifies it with the dronakalasa or large Soma-trough. He 
fakes it as meaning that the Sun looks towaids the place where the Soma lies 

while it is pressed SAyana seems to interpret this verse as meaning that 

lrulra views the Soma with affection even after it has been drunk by the 
pnesta [fixed in the heart].’-— Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation. 



278 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

2 Togother with thy pleasant juice the Atharvans have c< 

mingled milk, 

Divine, devoted to the God. 

3 Bring, by thy flowing, weal to kine, weal to the people, y 

to steeds, 

Weal, O thou King, to growing plants. 

4 Sing a praise-song to Soma brown of hue, of independent mig 
The Red, who reaches up to heaven. 

5 Purify Soma when effused with stones which hands ma 

rapidly, 

And pour the sweet milk in the meath. 

6 With humble homage draw ye nigh ; blend the libation w 

the curds : 

To Indra offer Indu up. 

7 Soma, foe-queller, chief o’er men, doing the will of Go< 

pour forth 

Prosperity upon our kine. 

8 Heart-knower, Sovran of the heart, thou art effused, 0 Soma, t! 
Indra may drink thee and rejoice. 

0 0 Soma Pavam ina, give us riches and heroic strength, — 
Indu ! with Indra for ally. 

HYMN XII. Soma Pavamli 

To Indra have the Soma-drops, exceeding rich in sweets, b,e 
poured, 

Shod in the seat of sacrifice. 

2 As mother kine low to thoir calves, to Indra have the sag 

called, 

Called him to drink the Soma juice. 

3 In the stream’s wave wise Soma dwells, distilling rapture, 

his seat, 

Resting upon a wild-cow's hide. 

4 Far-sighted Soma, Sage and Seer, is worshipped in the centr 

point 

Of heaven, the straining-cloth of wool. 

2 The Atharvans : the priests, who perform the duties of the Adhvaryus. 

3 King : the usual designation of Soma iu the Br&hmana. 

4 The Red : kaddehidurunavarndya : ‘sometimes red -coloured/ — S&yana 

3 In the stream's wave : in the water with which the stalks are spriukk 
Upon a wild-cow's hide: this, which is Beufey’s explanation of gaurt, seei 
to be borne out by g6r ddhi tvachi, upon the ox-hide, of IX. 101. 1 
S&yana’s interpretation is different .* * to a chant in the middle tone/ — Wusu 

4 Of heaven : divah> ; eee IX. 10. 9, and note. 



THE MOVED A. 


279 


13.] 

5 In close embraces Indu bolds Soma when poured within the 
jars, 

, And on the purifying sieve. 

|(j Indu sends forth a voice on high to regions of the sea of air, 
Shaking the vase that drops with meath. 

7 The Tree whose praises never fail yields heavenly milk among 
our hymns, 

Urgiug men’s generations on. 

, 8 The Wise One, with the Sage’s stream, the Soma urged to 

1 speed, flows on 

To the dear places of the sky. 

9 0 Ihivamana, bring us wealth bright with a thousand splen- 
dours, yea, 

0 Indu, give us ready help. 

HYMN XIII. Soma Pa vain An a. 

Passed through the fleece in thousand streams the Soma, 
purified, flows on 
To Indra’s, Vayu’s special place. 

2 Sing forth, ye men who long for help, to Pavamann, to the Sage, 
Effused to entertain the Gods. 

3 The Soma-drops with thousand powers are purified for victory, 
Hymned to become the feast of Gods. 

4 Yea, as thou flowest bring great store of food that we may 

win the spoil : 

Indu, bring splendid manly might. 

5 May they in flowing give us wealth in thousands, and heroic 

power, — 

These Godlike Soma-drops effused. 

5 Indu h olds Soma: ‘the deity seems to he thus opp >sed to the mete 
plaqt ’ — CoweH’B note Ludwig slights that, Indu here in »y he the Moon, 
is the tune of important liturgicJ core monies depends upon the. Moon’s 
phases So also Hillebrandt, V. M I., p. 316. 

6 To regions of the sea of air : or samndrasya lu re may mean, of the sea 
t>r water into which the Soma juice falls Shading • or, perhaps, stiirmg 
(with joy) The vase : kdsam: t e dronakahsa the largo wooden vessel for 
holding the juice. According to Sayana, who>c interpretation I have followed 
m the first line kdsam here means the cloud. 

7 The Tice: Soma. Men's generations: sacrificial seasons, according to 

%ana 

1 Indra’s , Venn's special place • the vessels especially prepared to hold 
libations intended for Indra and V&yu. 

3 For victory: v&jas&taye : ‘for the attainment of food.’ — Wilson. So 
Sayana in stanzas 3 and 4 ; but in 6 the word is explained by sauynlmdya, 
b> battle, in the first clause where he inserts it after hiydnSfh , urged, and by 
MnaldbMya, for the attainment of food, in the second clause. 



280 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR } 

6 Like coursers by their drivers urged, they were poured fori 

for victory, 

Swift through the woollen straining-cloth. 

7 Noisily flow the Soma-drops, like milch-kine lowing to tin 

calves: 

They have run forth from both the hands. 

8 As Gladdener whom Indra loves, 0 Pavamana, with a roar 
Drive all our enemies away. 

9 O Pavamanas, driving off the godless, looking on the light, 
Sit in the place of sacrifice. 

HYMN XIY. Soma Pavamfl 

Reposing on the river’s wave the Sage hath widely flow 
around, 

Bearing the hymn which many love. 

2 When the Five kindred Companies, active in duty, with t 

song 

Establish him, the Powerful, 

3 Then in his juice whose strength is great, have all the Go 

rejoiced themselves, 

When he hath clothed him in the milk. 

4 Freeing himself he flows away, leaving his body's severed linV 
And meets his own Companion here. 

5 He by the daughters of the priest, like a fair youth, hath he 

adorned, 

Making the milk, as 7 1 were, his robe. 

6 O'er the fine fingers, through desire of milk, in winding com 

he goes, 

And utters voice which he hath found. 

7 The nimble fingers have approached, adorning him the Lo 

of Strength : 

They grasp the vigorous Courser's hack. 

8 IFitA a roar : making a loud noise in dropping. 

1 On the river's wave : in the vasativaH waters, which are used tosprin 
the stalks Bearing the hi/mn : Prof. Geldner explains this as moaning, ‘ Fc 
ing aw.iy th- j much coveted prize,’ Soma being regarded as a courser or ra 
horse Seo Vcdisclte Studien, I., p. 120 

2 Fire kindred Companies : refei ring, probably, to some saci ifice institul 
in common by re preset datives of the five Aryan tribes. 

4 IHs own Coinprinimi : Indra. He meets : this { sanrjato bhavati) is S&yan 
explanation of samjighnate ; but it is not easy to sco how the word can b 
this signification. 

5 Daughters : or granddaughters ; the fingers. 

0 Which hf hath found : ‘ which the worshipper recognizes.’ — Wilson, 



THE MG VEDA. 


281 


UYMN 16.] 

8 Comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens and on 
the earth, 

Come, Soma, as our faithful Friend. 

' HYMN XV. Soma Pavamftna, 

Through the fine fingers, with the song, this Hero comes with 
rapid cars, 

Going to Indra’s special place. 

2 In holy thought he ponders much for the great worship of 

the Gods, 

Where the Immortals have their seat. 

3 Like a good horse is he led out, when on the path that shines 

with light 

The mettled steeds exert their strength. 

4 Ho brandishes his horns on high, and whets them, Bull who 

leads the herd, 

Doing with might heroic deeds. 

5 He moves, a vigorous Steed, adorned with beauteous rays of 

shining gold, 

Becoming Sovran of the streams. 

6 He, over places rough to pass, bringing rich treasures closely 

packed, 

Descends into the reservoirs. 

7 Men beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be beautified, 
Him who brings forth abundant food. 

8 Him, even him, the fingers ten and the seven songs make 

beautiful, 

Well-weaponed, best of gladdeners. 

HYMN XVI. Soma Pavamiina. 

The pressers from the Soma-press send forth thy juice for 
rapturous joy : 

The speckled sap runs like a flood. 


1 Indyus special place: 1 Imlra’s sibode ’ — WiLon. In Hymn XIII, 1, 
nshkritam is explained by S&yr la as the vessel prcpaied and set apart 

3 Like a good horse : the text has only hitah which may mean either good 
)r placed ‘ Placed (in the cart) he is brought.’ — Wilson. 

4 Ifurvs : cf. IX 5. 2. 

5 Rags of shining gold : as the Moon. 

6 Places rough to pass : the wool of the strainer SAyana gives a totally 
liflerent explanation of this Stanza, See Wilson’s Translation. I have follow- 
ed Pi of. Ludwig. 

8 Seven songs : the songs of the seven priests. 

Soma press : onydh, ablative dual of ont, signifying apparently 
or a vessel, consisting of two pieces, used in the preparation 




23*4 THE II I MIStS VI \BVVH 

2 With strength we follow through the sieve him who brii 

might and wins the kine, 

Enrobed in water with his juice. 

3 Pour on the sieve the Soma, ne’er subdued in waters, waterl^ 
And make it pure for Indra's drink. 

4 Moved by the purifier’s thought, the Soma flows into the siev 
By wisdom it hath gained its home. 

5 With humble homage, Indra, have the Soma-drops flowed foi 

to thee, 

Contending for the glorious prize. 

6 Purified in his fleecy garb, attaining every beauty, he 
Stands, hero-like, amid the kine. 

7 Swelling, as ’twere, to heights of heaven, the stream of t 

creative juice 

Falls lightly on the cleansing sieve. 

8 Thus, Soma, purifying him who knoweth song mid living mi 
Thou wanderest through the cloth of wool. 

HYMN XVII. Soma PavamA 

Like rivers down a steep descent, slaying the Vritras, f 
of zeal, 

The rapid Soma-streams have flowed. 

2 The drops of Soma juice effused fall like the rain upon t 

earth : 

To Indra flow the Soma-streams. 

3 With swelling wave the gladdening drink, the Soma, flo 

into the sieve, 

Loving the Gods and slaying fiends. 

4 It hastens to the pitchers, poured upon the sieve it wa: 

stron g 

At sacrifices through the lauds. 

5 Soma, thou shinest mounting heaven as ’twere above l’g'i 

triple realm, 

And moving seem’st to speed the Sun. 

of the Soma juice. The woid is said to be employed to denote, in eta pin 
Cally, heaven and eaith. ‘ They who express thee, the juice of heaven n 
earth.’ — Wilson. 

3 Waterless : dnaptum, which S&vana explains by andplam , not reach 
or overtaken, by enemies. The meaning is not clear. 

4 Its home: in the huge wooden vessel called dronakalaact. 

5 Contending for the qlorious prize : like race- horses. ‘ Giving thee vig*. 
for the gieat conflict.’ — Wilson. 


5 Addressed to Soma as the Moon. 



THE RIQVEDA 


253 


19.] 

him, the head of sacrifice, singers and bards have sung 
-heir songs, ° 

Rtering what he loves to see. 

The men, the sages with their hymns, eager for help, deck thco 
r strong steed, 

Deck thee for service of the Gods. 

3 Flow onward to the stream of meath : rest efficacious in 
thy home, 

Fair, to be drunk at sacrifice. 

HYMN XVIII. Soma Pavamfina. 

Thou, Soma, dweller on the hills, effused, hast flowed into 
the sieve : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

2 Thou art a sacred Bard, a Sage ; the meath is offspring of 

thy sap : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

3 All Deities of one accord have come that they may drink 

of thee : 

All -bounteous art thou in carouse. 

4 He who containeth in his hands all treasures much to be 

desired : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

5 Who milketh out this mighty Pair, the Earth and Heaven, 

like mother kine : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouso. 

6 Who in a moment mightily floweth around these two world- 

halves : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

7 The Strong One, being purified, hath in the pitchers cried 

aloud : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 


HYMN XIX. Soma Pavamftna. 

D Soma, being purified bring us the wondrous treasure, meet 
^°r lauds, that is in earth and heaven. 


The head of sacrifice : the most important element of the ceremony, 
ecorrtjng to Sdyana, at the head, that is, on the last and most important day 
off Vision of the Soma juice. Offering what he loves to ste : ‘ eutejtainmg 
auction for him the all-beholding,' ’—Wilson 

meath J or honey. In thy home : in the dronakala^a. 

'■ on the hills : ‘ pressed between the stones.’ — Wilson. 




284 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

2 For ye Twain, Indra, Soma, are Lords of the light, Lord 

the kine : 

Great Rulers, prosper ye our songs. 

3 The tawny Steer, while cleansed among the living, bello’v 

on the grass, 

Hath sunk and settled in his homo. 

4 Over the Steer’s productive flow the sacred songs w 

resonant, 

The mothers of the darling Son. 

5 Hath he not, purified, impregned the kine who long to n 

their Lord, 

The kine who yield the shining milk ? 

6 Bring near us those who stand aloof : strike fear into 

enemies : 

O Pavamana, find us wealth. 

7 Soma, bring down the focman’s might, his vigorous stren 

and vital power, 

Whether he be afar or near. 

HYMN XX. SomaPavan 

Forth through the straining-cloth the Sage flows to 
banquet of the Gods, 

Subduing all our enemies. 

2 For he, as Pavamana, sends thousandfold treasure in 

shape 

Of cattle to the singing-men. 

3 Thou graspest all things with thy mind, and purifiest t 

with thoughts : 

As such, 0 Soma, find us fame. 

4 Pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal lore 
Bring food to those who sing thy praise. 

5 As thou art cleansed, 0 Wondrous Steed, 0 Soma, thou 1 

entered, like 

A pious King, into the songs. 

6 He, Soma, like a courser in the floods invincible, made cle 
With hands, is resting in the jars. 

4 Hymns are sung over the Soma-stream, and are called mothers of 
precious juice because it is prepared while they are sung 

5 The kine: the vasatlvaii waters which long to mingle with the Soma. 

5 Steed : vahne : * bearer (of our offerings) ’ — Wilson. 

6 Like a courser : * the bearer (of oblations)’. — Wilson* 



THE RIG VEDA. 


285 


r 22.] 

bporting, like a liberal chief, thon goest, Soma, to the sieve, 
sliding the laud a Hero’s strength. 

_ ° HYMN XXI. Soma Pavam&na. 

r 

To Indra flow these running drops, these Somas frolicsome in 

mood, 

Exhilarating, finding light ; 

2 Driving off foes, bestowing room upon the presser, willingly 
Bringing their praiser vital force. 

3 Lightly disporting them, the drops flow to one common reservoir, 
And fall into the river’s wave. 

4 These Pavamanas have obtained all blessings much to be desired, 
Like coursers harnessed to a ear. 

5 With view to us, 0 Soma-drops, bestow his manifold desire 
On him who yet hath given us naught. 

6 Bring us our wish with this design, as a wright brings his new- 

wrought wheel : 

Flow pure and shining with the stream. 

1 These drops have cried with resonant voice : liko swift steeds 

they have run the course, 

And roused the good man’s hymn to life. 

HYMN XXII. Soma Pavamftna. 

These rapid Soma-streams have stirred themselves to motion 
like strong steeds, 

Like cars, like armies hurried forth. 

2 Swift as wide winds they lightly move, like rain-storms of 

Parjanya, like 

The flickering flames of burning fire. 

3 These Soma juices, blent with curds, purified, skilled in sa- 

cred hymns, 

Have gained by song their hearts’ desire. 

I Immortal, cleansed, theso drops, siuce first they flowed, have 
never wearied, fain 

To reach the region and their paths. 

7 Chief : S&yana explains maichak by ddnam , gift. 


5 This stanza is obscure, and Sdyana’s commentary is imperfect, It seems 
that the Soma-drops are prayed to enrich the msti tutor of the sacrifice who 
has not as yet rewarded the priests 
7 Run the course : reached the droryxkalasa. 


^ song : vip% : by knowledge, according to S&yana. * The St. Petersb. 
plains vip as the twigs (of. vepres) whioh form the bottom of the 
Heupport the filteriug-cloth,’— Cowell, in Wilson s Translation. 



2S (5 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX 

f> Advancing they have travelled o’er the ridges of the earth 
and heaven, 

And this the highest realm of all. 

6 Over the heights have they attained the highest thread tAat 

is spun out, 

And this which must be deemed most high. 

7 Thou, Soma, boldest wealth in kine which thou hast seized 

from niggard churls : 

Thou calledst forth the outspun thread. 

HYMN XXrri. Soma Pavamftna. 

Swift Soma drops have been effused in stream of meath, the 
gladdening drink, 

For sacred lore of every kind. 

2 Hither to newer resting-place the ancient Living Ones are 

come. 

They made the Sun that he might shine. 

3 O Pavamana, bring to us the unsacrificing foeman’s wealth, 
And give us food with progeny. 

4 The living Somas being cleansed diffuse exhilarating drink, 
Turned to the vat which drips with meath. 

C> Soma flows on intelligent, possessing sap and mighty strength, 
Brave Hero who repels the curse. 

6 For Indra, Soma ! thou art cleansed, a feast-companion for 

the Gods : 

Indu, thou fain wilt win us strength. 

7 When he had drunken draughts of this, Indra smote down 

resistless foes : 

Yea, smote them, and shall smite them still. 

HYMN XXI V. Soma PavsmAna. 

Hitherward have the Somas streamed, the drops while they 
are purified : 

When blent, in waters they are rinsed. 

6 Or, ‘ Streams rushing down have filled the threads, moat excellent, spread 
out beneath ’ ; that ia, the threads of the straining-cloth. See note in Wilson. 
According to S&yana ‘the thiead’ is sacrifice; and ‘this which must be 
deemed most high ’ may be, as Ludwig suggests, the place of sacrifice which 
is also to be held holy. Wilson translates the second line : — ‘ this rite ia 
gloufied thereby ’ 

7 From niggard churls : or from the Panis. Thou calledst out the outspun 
thread: ‘ thou hast called aloud at the outspread sacrifice.’ — Wilson. 

2 Hewer- resting-place : a newly- prepared place of sacrifice. The 
Living Ones : the Soma-drups. 



MN 25 3 


THE RIG VEDA. 


237 


The milk hath run to meet them like floods rushing down a 
precipice : 

They come to Indra, being cleansed. 

3 0 Soma Pavamana, thou art flowing to be Indra’s drink : 

The men have seized and lead thee forth. 

4 Victorious, to be hailed with joy, 0 Soma, flow, delighting 

men, 

To him who ruleth o’er mankind. 

5 Thou, Indu, when, effused by stones, thou runnest to the 

filter, art 

Heady for Indra’s higli decree. 

6 Flow on, host Vyitra-slayer ; flow meet to be hailed with joyful 

lauds, 

Pure, purifying, wonderful. 

7 Pure, purifying is he called the Soma of the ineath effused, 
Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods. 

HYMN XXV. Soma PavamAna. 

Gheen-hued ! as one who giveth strength flow on for Gods to 
drink, a draught 
r*>r Vayu and the Marut host. 

2 0 Pav»mana, sent by song, roaring about thy dwelling-place, 
Pass into Vayu as Law bids. 

3 The Steer shine^with the Deities, dear Sage in his appointed 

home, 

Foe-slayer, most beloved by Gods. 

4 Taking each beauteous form, he goes, desirable, while purified, 
Thither where the Immortals sit. 

5 To Indra Soma flows, the Ked, engendering song, exceeding 

wise, 

The visitor of living men. 

4 To him who ruleth o’er mankind : to Indra. 

5 Ready for Imtra’s high decree : Wilson, following SAyana, translates : 
‘an ample portion for Indra’s belly.' See Bergaignc, La Religion Vedique, 
Hk 210 ft’, for the meaning of dhetman in the Kigveda. 

2 Into Vdyu: into the vessel appropriated to VAyu — SAyana. 

1 0 The Red • arashdh. : here explained by SAyana a n — drockamdnah, shining 
)r ra( kant The visitor of living men : dyushdk . the meaning of this word 

8 uncertain The St. Petersburg Lexicon explains it as, conjointly with 
V 11 ; vv ‘tli human co-operation. Ludwig in his translation renders it by 
SjV ‘l* 1 ’ 1 kbenden besucht/ who visits the living man ; but in his Comment- 

that it may mean, during the whole of life. ‘Constantly.’'- 



288 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


6 Flow, best exhilarator, Sage, flow to the filter in a stream 
To seat thee in the place of song. 

HYMN XXVI. Soma 


The sages with the fingers’ art have dressed and decked that 
vigorous Steed 
Upon the lap of Aditi. 

2 The kino have called aloud to him cxhaustless with, a thou- 

sand streams, 

To Indu who supporteth heaven. 

3 Him, nourisher of many, Sage, creative Pavamana, they 
Have sent, by wisdom, to the sky. 

4 Him, dweller with Vivasv.tn, they with use of both arms have 

sent forth, 

The Lord of Speech infallible. 

5 Him, green, beloved, many-eyed, the Sisters with the pressing- 

stones 

Send down to ridges of the sieve. 

6 0 Pavamana, Indu, priests hurry thee on to Indra, thee 
Who aidest song and cheerest him. 

HYMN XXVII. Soma PavamAna. 

This Sage, exalted by our lauds, flows to the purifying cloth, 
Scattering foes as lie is cleansed. 

2 As giving power and winning light, for Indra and for Vayu he 
Is poured upon the filtering-cloth. 

3 The men conduct him, Soma, Steer, Omniscient, and the Head 

of Heaven, 

Effused into the vats of wood. 


~ R nf mna . arkdsya : archaniyaai/endntsya , of the adorable Indra, accord- 
J toWni. Arka has two meanings in the Rigveda (1) song or hymn <t 
praise and (2) light or splendour. See Piscliel, Vedischc Studien, X. pp. 


1 Aditi: the earth. . _ 

2 The Vine : who supply the milk that is mixed with the Soma juice. 

a v^unnuU ■ meaning here the sacrificer. Of both arms : bhutijoh ; accor • 

mg to s"y^a = «.thearmsof the body. The St. Petersburg Lex.« 
explains the word as meaning a sort of vice or implement for holding w 
while it is being cut. Lord of speech : makmg men eloquent. 

6 Many-eyJ: * far-beholding.’-Wilson. The Sister,: the fingers of the 
officiating piiest. 


3 Omniscient: or, all-possessing. Vat. of wood: vine.hu: according to 
Benfey, into the streams of water. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


280 


pLV 29.] 

Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indu Pavama.ua lowed, 
Still Conqueror, never overcome. 

5 This Pavamana, gladdening draught, drops on the filtering- 

cloth, and then 

Mounts up with Surya to the sky. 

6 To Indra in the firmament this mighty tawny Steer hath flowed, 
This Indu, being purified. 

HYMN XXVIII. Soma Pavamilna. 

Urged by the men, this vigorous Steed, Lord of the mind, 
Omniscient, 

Runs to the woollen straining-cloth. 

2 Within the filter hath he flowed, this Soma for the Cods 

effused, 

Entering all their essences. 

3 He shines in beauty there, this God Immortal in his dwelling- 

place, 

Foe-slayer, dearest to the Gods. 

4 Directed by the Sisters ten, bellowing on his way this Steer 
Runs onward to the wooden vats. 

f) This Pavamana, swift and strong, Omniscient, gave splendour 
to 

The Sun and all his forms of light. 

6 This Soma, being purified, flows mighty and infallible, 

Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods. 

HYMN XXIX. Soma Pavamdna. 

Forward with mighty force have flowed the currents of this 
Steer effused, 

Of him who sets him by the Gods. 

2 The singers praise him with their song, and learned priests 

adorn the Steed, 

Brought forth as light that merits laud. 

3 These things thou winnest lightly while purified, Soma, Lord 

of wealth : 

Fill full the sea that claims our praise. 

4 Longing for kine: who supply milk to mix with the Soma juice. Gold ■ 
worn on the finger of the priest who presses out the juice. Lowed . made 
a noiRe m dropping. 

5 Mounts up : as the Moon. 

1 Who sets him, by the Qods : or, who decorates the Gods. ‘Who seeks to 
Mirpass the gods/- Wilson. 

iese things : for which we pray. The sea : the Soma-vat or reservoir. 



290 


THE HYMNS OP 


[HOOK I. 


4 Winning nil precious tilings at once, flow on, O Soma, wii 

thy stream : 

Drive to one placo our enemies. 

5 Preserve us from the godless, from ill-omened voice of oi 

and all, 

That so we may be freed from blame. 

6 () Tndu, as thou flowest on bring us the wealth of earth ai 

heaven, 

And splendid vigour, in thy stream. 


1 1 \ M N XXX. Soma Pavawftn 

Streams of this Potent One have flowed easily to the strai 
ing-cloth : 

While he is cleansed he lifts his voice. 

2 Indu, by pressers urged to speed, bellowing out while bcautifie 
Sends forth a very mighty sound. 

3 Pour on us, Soma, with thy stream man-conquering migl 

which many crave, 

Accompanied with hero sons. 

1 Hither hath Pavamana flowed, Soma flowed hither in a streat 
To settle in the vats of wood. 

5 To waters with the stones they drive thee tawny-hued, mo; 

rich in sweets, 

O Indu, to be Indra’s drink. 

6 For Indra, for the Thunderer press the Soma very rich in sw eet 
Lovely, inspiriting, for strength. 

HYMN XXXI. Soma Pavam&n 

The Soma drops, benevolent, come forth as they are purifie 
Bestowing wealth which all may see. 

2 0 Inin, high o’er heaven and earth be thou, increaser of oi 

might : 

The Master of all strength be thou. 

3 The winds are gracious in their love to thet), the rivers flo 

to thee : 

Soma, they multiply thy power. 


5 Ill-omened voice . srantXt, explained l>y Sityana as = sabdttnninddrilpdt^oM 
or word iu the form of blame; the raging fury of the demon or the godle 
man, according to Grassmann. 

2 A very mighty sound : or, a sound which Indra loves. 

1 Wealth which all may see : 1 intellectual wealth.’— Wilson. 

3 The winds, cf. ‘ V&yu is Soma's guardian God ’ (X. 85. 5). 



IfYtfy 32.] THE RIGVEDA. 291 

4 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite 

in thee : 

Be in the gathoring-place of strength. 

5 For thee, brown-huod ! the kine have poured imperishable oil 

and milk 

Aloft on the sublimest height. 

G Friendship, 0 Indu, wo desire with thee who bearest noble 
arms, 

With thee, 0 Lord of all that is. 

HYMN XXXII. Soma Pavam&na. 

The rapture-shedding Soma-drops, effused in our assembly, 
have 

Flowed forth to glorify our prince. 

2 Then Trita’s Maidens onward urge the Tawny-coloured with 

the stones, 

Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

3 Now like a swan he maketh all the company sing each his 

hymn : 

He, like a steed, is bathed in milk. 

4 0 Soma, viewing heaven and earth, thou runnest like a dart- 

ing deer : 

Set in the place of sacrifice. 

5 The cows have sung with joy to him, even as a woman to her 

love : 

He came as to a settled race. 

6 Bestow illustrious fame on us, both on our liberal lords and me, 
Glory, intelligence, and wealth. 

i Tliis stanza has occurred before See I. 91. 16. Be in the gathering place 
of strength • be the cential point and source of all power. 

5 The kine : of the clouds, the waters. Oil and milk : sweet and fertilizing 
ram. Or the cows who supply milk for the libation may be intended, in 
which ease ‘ the sublimest ’ would be the place of sacrifice. 

1 Our prince : the noble wlm institutes the sacrifice. 

2 Tritas Maidens : the fingers of the priest. See IX. 38. 2. 

3 Like a swan: as a sentinel hansa (swan, wild-goose, or flamingo) at the 
appi oach of danger sounds a note of alarm which is answered by all the 
rest. — Ludwig. 

4 Darting: Sftyana takes taktah with ‘thou,’ Soma, and explains it by 
ffdvyaih payaldihhirmisritah san , being mixed with milk, curds, etc. Else- 
where S&yana explains it by ‘ swift.’ 

5 Cows : praises, according to Sly ana. As to a settled race: as a horse is 
brought to run a race that has been arranged. ' As a hero hastens to the 
welcome contest.’ — Wilson. 



292 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR a 

HYMN XXXIII. Soma Pavamftna 

Like waves of waters, skilled in song the juices of the Some 
speed 

Onward, as buffaloes to woods. 

2 With stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowee 

with strength in store 
Of kine into the wooden vats. 

3 To Indra, Vayu, Yaruna, to Vishnu, and the Maruts, flow 
The drops of !Soma juice effused. 

4 Three several words are uttered : kine are lowing, cows who 

give their milk : 

The Tawuy-hued goes bellowing on. 

5 The young and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered 

praise : 

They decorate the Child of Heaven. 

6 From every side, 0 Soma, for our profit, pour thou forth 

four seas 

Filled full of riches thousandfold. 

HYMN XXXIV. Soma Pavam&na, 

The drop of Soma juice effused flows onward with this stream 
impelled, 

Pending strong places, with its might. 

2 Poured forth, to Indra, Varuna, to Vayu and the Marut host, 
To Vishnu, flows the Soma juice. 

3 With stonos they press the Soma forth, the Strong conducted 

by the strong : 

They milk the liquor out with »vkill. 

4 ’Tis he whom Trita must refine, ’tis he who shall make Indra 

glad : 

The Tawny One is decked with tints. 


4 Three several words : according to Sftyana, trividhd stutih , praise of three 
kinds, from the three Vedas. ‘ The puests utter the three sacred texts.’— 
Wilson. Probably three tiiplets chanted during the ceiemony. See Beigaigue, 
I. 288 . 

5 Mothers of the holy rite : apparently, the cows who supply milk for 
libations. The Child of Heaven : the Soma, which, according to a text quoted 
by Sftyana, 4 was in the third heaven from hence/ 

fl Four seas : imaginary seas, to correspond with the four quarters of heaven. 

1 Strong places : the strongholds of enemies, the fiends who withhold the 
fain. 

4 Trita : the preparer of the Celestial Soma. 



THE MIO VEDA. 


288 


UYMK 36.] 

5 Him do the Sons of Pi'isui milk, the dwelling-place of sacrifice, 
Oblation lovely and most dear. 

6 To him in one united stream these songs flow on straight 

forward : he, 

Loud-voiced, hath made the milch-kine low. 

HYMN XXXV. Soma Pavamdna. 

Pour forth on us abundant wealth, 0 Pavam&na, with thy 
stream, 

Wherewith thou mayest find us light. 

2 0 Indu, swayer of the sea, shaker of all things, flow thou on, 
Bearer of wealth to us with might. 

3 With thee for Hero, Valiant One ! may we subdue our ene- 

mies : 

Let what is precious flow to us. 

4 Indu arouses strength, the Sage who strives for victory, 

winning power, 

Discovering holy works and means. 

5 Mover of speech, we robe him with our songs as he is purified, 
Soma, the Guardian of the folk ; 

G On whose way, Loid of Holy Law, most rich, as he is purified, 
The people all have set their hearts. 

HYMN XXXVI. Soma Pavam&na. 


Forth from the mortar is the juice sent, like a car-horse, to 
the sieve : 

The Steed steps forward to the goal. 

2 Thus, Soma, watchful, bearing well, cheering the Gods, flow 
past the sieve, 

Turned to the vat that drops with mcath. 


• r > The dwell in g-^dace of sacrifice : the Soma-plant contains within itself the 
chief element of sacrifice, and the pieparation of the juice is only the devel- 
opment of its nature. — Ludwig. 


2 The sea : the reservoir of Soma juice. 

4 Discovering holy works and means : * acquainted with sacred rites and 
arms.’ — Wilson. 

6 On whose way : on whose statutes or decrees. 


1 To the goal : Mrshman : apparently, a line or furrow drawn across the 
end of the race-course. In I. 116 17, S&yana explains Mrshman as a piece 
of wood serving as a goal, but in this place he takes it to mean, ‘ the God- 
attracting battle-field called a sacrifice,’ devdndmdkarshanavati yajndkhye sang • 
r o‘m ® ee P° we H ,s n ote ir. Wilson’s Translation. 

^ The vat ; the dronakalafa. 



294 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

3 Excellent Pavam&na, make the lights shine brightly out 

for us : 

Speed us to mental power and skill. 

4 He, beautified by pious men, and coming from their hands 

adorned, 

Flows through the fleecy straining-cloth. 

5 May Soma pour all treasures of the heavens, the earth, the 

firmament 

Upon the liberal worshipper. 

6 Thou mountest to the height of heaven, 0 Soma, seeking 

steeds and kine, 

And seeking heroes, Lord of Strength ! 

HYMN XXXVIT. Soma Pavamtaa. 

Soma, the Steer, effused for draught, flows to the purifying sieve, 
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods 

2 Far-sighted, tawny-coloured, he flows to the siove, intelligent, 
Bellowing, to his place of rest. 

3 This vigorous Pavamana runs forth to the luminous realm of 

heaven, 

Fiend-slayer, through the fleecy sieve. 

4 This Pavamana up above Trita’s high ridge hath made the Sun, 
Together with the Sisters, shine. 

5 This Vritra-slaying Steer, effused, Soma, room-giver, ne’ei 

deceived, 

Hath gone, as ’twerc, to win the spoil. 

G Urged onward by the sage, the God speeds forward to the 
casks of wood, 

Indu to Indra willingly. 

HYMN XXXVIII. Soma Pavamana 

THrs Steer, this Chariot, rushes through the woollen filter 
as he goes 

To war that wins a thousand spoils. 


1 For draught : pttdye : ‘ for the drinking (of the gods).’ — Wilson. 

2 Intelligent: or, endowed with strength. 

4 Trita! s high ridge : according to S&ya’ia, ‘ the high place (of the sacrifice 
of Trita' the ilishi. But the heavenly home of Trita, the celestial preparer o 
the Soma for Indra, is intended. 1'he Sisters: the Dawns. 

6 Willingly: mahhdnd : ‘ pleuteoualy.' — Ludwig. ‘ In his might.’— Cowell 

1 To war that wins a thousand spoils : more literally, to thousandfold booty 



THE RIO VEDA. 


295 


gYIMf 39.] 

2 The Dames of Trita with the stones onward impel this 

Tawny One, 

Indu to Jndra for his drink. 

3 Ten active fingers carefully adorn him here ; they make him 

bright 

And beauteous for the gladdening draught. 

4 He like a falcon settles down amid the families of men, 
Speeding like lover to his love. 

5 This young exhilarating juice looks downward from its place 

in heaven, 

This Soma-drop that pierced the sieve. 

6 Poured for the draught, this tawny juice flows forth, intel- 

ligent, crying out, 

Unto the well-belovi;d place. 

HYMN XXXIX. Soma Pavain&ua. 

Flow on, 0 thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy beloved 
form, 

Saying, I go where dwell the Cods. 

2 Preparing what is unprepared, and bringing store of food 

to man, 

Make thou the rain descend from heaven. 

3 With might, bestowing power, the juice enters the purifying 

sieve, 

Far-seeing, sending forth its light. 

1 This is it which in rapid course hath with the river’s wave 

flowed down 

From heaven upon the straining-cloth. 

5 Inviting him from far away, aud oven from near at hand, the 
juice 

For Indra is poured forth as meath. 

C In union they have sung the hymn : with stones they urge the 
Tawny One. 

Sit in the place of sacrifice. 

2 The. Dam €9 of Trita: as Tiitais the celestial purifier of the Sonia, the 
fingers of the earthly purifiers aie called hie dames, or his maidens us hi 

IX. 32. 2. 

5 From its place in heaven : or divtih may be the genitive ease, taken with 
the Child of Heaven, as in IX. *33. 5. 

® The well-beloved place: the dronakalasa or vat in which it rests. 

2 Preparing what is unprepared : ‘ consecrating the uuconsecrated worship- 
per or place/ ia S&yana’s explanation, 
fi bit : 0 Gods.— Siyana, 



296 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX. 

HYMN XL. Soma Pavam&u a . 

The Very Active hath assailed, while purified, all enemies : 
They deck the Sage with holy songs. 

2 The Red hath mounted to his place ; to Indra goes the mighty 

juice : J 

He settles in his firm abode. 

3 0 Indu, Soma, send us now great opulence from every side 

Pour on us treasures thousandfold. 1 * 3 * 

4 0 Soma Pavamana, bring, Indu, all splendours hitherward*. 
Find for us food in boundless store. 

5 As thou art cleansed, bring hero strength and riches to thy 

worshipper, 

And prosper thou the singer’s hymns. 

C 0 Indu, Soma, being cleansed, bring hither riches doubly- 
piled, 

Wealth, mighty Indu, meet for lauds. 

HYMN XLI. Soma PavamAna. 

Active and bright have they come forth, impetuous in speed 
bke bulls, 

Driving the black skin far away. 

2 Quelling the ntcless Dasyu, may we think upon the bridge of 

bliss, 

Leaving the bridge of woe behind, 

3 The mighty Pavamana’s io*ir is heard as ’twere the rush of rain : 
Lightnings are flashing to the sky. 

4 Pour out on us abundant food, when thou art pressed, 0 Indu, 

wealth 

In kine and gold and steeds and spoil. 

5 Flow on thy way, Most Active, thou : fill full the mighty heav- 

ens and earth, 

As Dawn, as Surya with his beams. 


2 The Red: Soma. II is place: t he dronaka fasti, or reservoir. His firm 
ibode : heaven. 

6 Doubly -piled . dvib&rhusam : according to S&yana, ‘ from both worlds, 
leaven and earth ‘ ^ ^ 

1 They: the Soma juices. The black skin : meaning, apparently, both tbe 

lack pall or covering of night and the lUkshasas or dark-skinned Dasyus or 
mstile aborigines. 

3 The cleansing of the terrestiial Soma is identified with the purification 

>f the celestial uectar accompanied by rain and lightning. See Hillebrandt, 
V. M, 343, 3(52, . 



HYMN 43.] Tilt' R10YEDA. 197 

g On every side, 0 Soma, flow round us with thy protecting 

stream, 

As Rasa flows around the world. 

HYMN XLII. Soma Pavam&na. 

Engendering the Sun in floods, engendering heaven’s lights, 
greeu-hued, 

Robed in the waters and the milk, 

2 According to primeval plan this Soma, with his stream, effused 
Flows purely on, a God for Gods. 

3 For him victorious, waxen great, the juices with a thousand 

powers 

Ate purified for winning spoil. 

4 Shedding (he ancient fluid he is poured into the cleansing sieve : 
He, thundering, hath produced the Gods. 

5 Soma, while purifying, sends hither all things to be desired, 
He sends the Gods who stiengthen Law. 

C Soma, effused, pour on us wealth in kine, in heroes, steeds, 
and spoil, 

Send us abundant store of food. 

HYMN XLII I. Soma Pavam&na. 

We will enrobe with sacred song the Lovely One who, ns a 
Steed, 

Is decked with milk for rapturous joy. 

2 All songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way, 
Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

3 Soma flows on when purified, belov6d and adorned with songs, 
Songs of the sage Medhyatithi. 

4 0 Soma Pavamana, find exceeding glorious wealth for us, 
Wealth, Indu, fraught with boundless might.. 

5 Like courser racing to the prize Indu, the lover of the Gods, 
Hoars, as he passes, in the sieve. 

6 R'Utd : a mythical stream that flows round the atwospheie and the earth. 
See V. 41. 15, and X. 108. 1. 

1 In floods : in the waters on high ; in the firmament. 

4 ILiik produced the Gods: yatrasomo ’bhishihjate Ultra devd niyatamprldur- 
vhavanti ; where Soma is effused, there the gods constantly appear. — !Sft)ana. 

1 ds a steed : is bathed in w'^ter. For rapturous joy : 1 for the exhilaration 
^ of the gods) ^-Wilson. 

* Medhydtithi : the Rishi of the hymn, 

6 daciny to the prize; vdjasrit ; ‘rushing into battle.’ — Wilson. 



208 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

6 Flow on thy way to win us strength, to speed the sage who 
praises thee : 

Soma, bestow heioic power. 

HYMN XLIY. Soma Pavamflna. 

Indu, to us for this great rite, bearing ns ’twere thy wave to 
Gods, 

Unwearied, thou art flowing forth. 

2 Pleased with the hymn, impelled by prayer, Soma is hurried 

far away, 

The Wise One in the Singer’s stream. 

3 Watchful among the Gods, this juice advances to the cleans- 

ing sieve : 

Soma, most active, travels on. 

4 Flow onward, seeking strength for us, embellishing the sacri- 

fice : 

The priest with trimmed grass calleth thee. 

5 May Soma, ever bringing power to Bhaga and to Vayu, Sage 
And Hero, lead us to the Gods. 

C So, to increase our wealth to-day, Tnspirer, best of Furthered, 
Win for us strength and high renown. 

HYMN XLY. Soma Pavamflna. 

Flow, thou who viowest men, to give delight, to entertain the 
Gods, 

Indu, to Indra for his drink. 

2 Stream to thine embassy for us : thou hastencst, for Indra, tc 
The Gods, 0 better than our friends. 

3 We balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rap 

turous joy : 

Unbar for us the doors of wealth. 


6 Heroic power : ‘excellent male offspring.’ — Wilson. 


1 For this great rite: ‘to give us abundant wealth.’ — Wilson. Unwearied 
ay ft sy ah : according to Sftvana, this is the name of the Kishi : ‘ AyA-sy 
(goeth) towards the gods (in sacrifice).’ — Wilson. 


2 Thou hastenest : S:\yana gives a different explanation of this part of tb 
stanza : ‘thou (who) art drunk for Indra, (pour) on the gods wealth for ( ll 
their) friends.’ — Wilson. I have adopted Ludwig’s interpretation. 

3 We balm thee , red of hue: or, ‘Yea, we adorn thee, red.’ For the ra j 
turous joy : madly a : ‘for the purpose of exhilaration.’— Wilson, 



HYMN 40.] TUB RIOVEDA. 299 

4 He through the sieve hath passed, as comes a courser to the 

pole, to run : 

Indu belongs unto the Gods. 

5 All friends have lauded him as he sports in the wood, beyond 

the fleece : 

Singers have chanted Indu’s praise. 

6 Flow, Indu, with that stream wherein steeped thou announc- 

ost to the man 

Who worships thee heroic strength. 

HYMN XLVI. Soma Pavam&na. 

Like able coursers they have been sent forth to be the feast 
of Gods, 

Joying in mountains, flowing on 

2 To Vayu flow the Soma-streams, the drops of juice made 

beautiful 

Like a bride dowered by her sire. 

3 Pressed in the mortar, these, the drops of juice, the Somas 

rich in food, 

Give strength to Indra with their work. 

4 Deft-handed men, run hither, seize the brilliant juices blent 

with meal, 

And cook with milk the gladdening draught. 

5 Thus, Soma, Conqueror of wealth ! flow, finding furtherance 

for us, 

Giver of ample opulence. 

6 This Pavamana, meet to be adorned, the fingers ten adorn, 
The draught that shall make Indra glad. 


4 To the pole : the meaning of dhuram here is not clear, and the compari- 
son is not obvious. ‘As a horse in going passes the shaft (of the chariot).’ — 
Wil«on ‘As a horse (presses) through the yoke,’ — Grassmanu. Ludwig 
suggests * hedge ’ or ‘ barrier ’ as the probable meaning of the word in this 
place . 

5 fn the wood, beyond theflete ■ when he has passed through the woollen 
strainer and fallen into the wooden trough or vat. Singers: ndvtth: shouts 

joy, according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon. 

1 They have been sent forth : asrigran (effusi sunt) is applicable both to the 
effused Soma-drops and to hoi sea loosed or started for a race. Joying in 
mountains : coming from plants grown on hills. 

fren ^ 0w, ^’ ec ^ % her sire ; meaning, perhaps, possessed of property inherited 

4 I) eft-handed : suhastyah, cannot be satisfactorily accounted for. Suhastyd , 
* dual, may have been the original reading. See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol. 
Jj V P 347, 348. 



800 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 

HYMN XLVII. Soma PavamAna. 

Great as he was, Soma hath gained strength by this high 
solemnity : 

Joyous he riseth like a bull. 

2 His task is done : his crushings of the Dasyus are made 

manifest : 

He sternly reckoneth their debts. 

3 Soon as his song of praise is born, the Soma, Indra’s juice, 

becomes 

A thousand- winning thunderbolt. 

4 Seer and Sustainer, he himself dcsireth riches for the sage 
When he embellisheth his songs. 

5 Fain would they both win riches as in races of the steeds. In wai 
Thou art upon the conquerors’ side. 

HYMN XLVITI. Soma Pavatoftna 

With sacrifice we seek to thee kind Cherisher of manly might 
In mansions of the lofty heavens ; 

2 Gladdening, crusher of the bold, ruling with very mighty sway, 
Destroyer of a hundred forts. 

3 Hence, Sapient One ! the Falcon, strong of wing, unwearied 

brought thee down, 

Lord over riches, from the sky. 

4 That each may see the light, the Bird brought us the guarc 

of Law, the Friend 
Of all, the speeder through the air. 

5 And now, sent forth, it hath attained to mighty power anc 

majesty, 

Most active, ready to assist. 

1 Riseth : or, roareth. Sabdam karoti — SAyapa. 

2 He sternly reckoneth their debts : ‘ rcbolute lie acquits the debts (of tli 
wot shipper) ’ — Wilson. 

3 A thousand-winning thunderbolt : all-powerful to slay the wicked and t 
reward worshipped. 

4 Sustainer ■ I follow Ludwig in taking vidhartdri as a nominative singulai 
Hut see Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation. 

5 They both * Soma and the sage or singer — Ludwig. SAyana interpret 
the stanza differently : — ‘ Thou desirest to give wealth to those who conque 
in combat as (men offer fodder) to horses in battle.’ — Wilson. 

1 Kind Cherisher of manly might : 1 2 3 4 auspicious bearing wealth.* — Wilson. 

2 Hundred fort* : cf. IY 20. 3. 

3 The Falcon : see IV. 26 and 27. . 

4 The Friend of all : or, the common possession. The speeder through tl 
air ; rajasttiram ; * the showerer of water.' — Wilson, 



BY MN 50.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


301 


HYMN XLIX. Soma PavamUna. 

Pour down the rain upon us, pour a wave of waters from the 

sky, 

And plenteous store of wholesome food. 

2 Flow onward with that stream of thine, whereby the cows 

have come to us, 

The kine of strangers to our home. 

3 Chief Friend of Gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with 

thy stream, 

Pour down on us a flood of rain. 

4 To give us vigour, with thy stream run through the fleecy 

straining cloth : 

For verily the Gods will hear. 

5 Onward hath Pavnmana flowed and beaten off the Rakshasas, 
Flashing out splendour as of old. 

HYMN L. Soma Pavam&na. 

Loud as a river’s roaring wave thy powers have lifted up 
themselves : 

Urge on thine arrow’s sharpened point. 

2 At thine effusion upward rise three voices full of joy, when thou 
Flo west upon the fleecy ridge. 

3 On to the fleece they urge with stones the tawny well-beloved 

One, 

Even Pavamana, dropping meath. 

4 Flow with thy current to the sieve, 0 Sage most powerful to 

cheer, 

To seat thee in the place of song. 

5 Flow, Most Exhilarating ! flow anointed with the milk for 

halm, 

Indu, for Tndra, for his drink. 


4 The Gods will hear : the sound that thou makes t in flowing — S&yana, 

5 Flashing out splendour as of old . or, ‘ Making lights shine as erst they 

shone ’ 

1 Urge on thine arrow's sharpened point : vdrtdsya chad ay d pa vim : apparent- 
ly a bold metaphorical expression for ‘make a noise like that of a discharged 
arrow.’ ‘ Emit thy sound like that of a (rushing) arrow ’ —Wilson. Or 
winds ij a may mean of (thy) reed, pipe, flute, oi other musical instrument, and 
htyana explains pavim by sabdam. Benfey accoidinglv (Sftmaveda, II. 5. 1. 
5. 1.) renders the passage : ‘ Erhebe deiner Flote Schall.’ ' Lift up the music 
°f thy flute.’ According to Hillebrandt, V. M , I. p. 43, the reed or arrow 
weans the sharp-pointed stalk of the Soma-plant. 

2 Three voices full of joy : or, three several joyful words. See IX. 33. 4. 
I he fleecy ridge : * the summit of the fleece.’ — Wilson. 

4 In the place of song : see IX. 25, 6. * On Indra’s lap.’— Wilson. 



302 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 

HYMN LI. Soma Pavam&na, 

Adiivaryu, on the filter pour the Soma juice expressed with 
stones, 

And make it pure for Indra’s drink. 

2 Pour out for Indra, Thunder-armed, the milk of heaven, the 

Soma’s juice, 

Most excellent, most rich in sweets. 

3 These Gods and all the Marut host, Indu ! enjoy this juice o 

thine, 

This Pavamana’s flowing meath. 

4 For, Soma, thou hast been effused, strengthening for the wilt 

carouse, 

O Steer, the singer, for our help. 

5 Flow with thy stream, Far-sighted One, effused, into the cleans 

ing sieve : 

Flow on to give us strength and fame. 

HYMN LI I. Soma PavRmftm 

Wealth-winner, dwelling in the sky, bringing us vigour wit' 
the juice, 

Flow to the filter when effused. 

2 So, in thine ancient ways, may lie, beloved, with a thousand 

streams 

Run o’er the fleecy straining-cloth. 

3 Him who is like a caldron shake : 0 Indu, shake thy gift to u 
Shake it, aimed Warrior ! with thine arms. 

4 Indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the vigour o 

these men, 

Of him who threatens us with war. 

5 Indu, Wealth giver, with thine help pour out for us a hundred 

yea, 

A thousand of thy pure bright streams. 


4 For the ivild carouse : ‘ for speedy exhilaration.’ — Wilson. 

2 May he : the juice, regarded as distinct from Soma who is addressed. 

3 Him who is Wee a caldron - beat or bruise the Soma that is full of j| 1,c 
as a caldron is of water. With thine arms : or, with the blows (of the pressing 
stones) The meaning of the second and third ‘shake’ seems to be ‘sen 
rapidly.’ ‘ (Soma), send (us) him who is like a pot ; Indu, send us now wealth 
swift-flowing (Soma), send it with blows (of the stones).’ — Wilson. Professc 
Grassmann says that by ‘ him who is like a caldron’ the wealthy enemy 
intended, whose possessions are to be poured out upon the pious worshipped 



HYMN 55.] 


THE III GV ED A. 


303 


HYMN LI II. Soma Pavam&na. 

0 thou with stones for arms, thy powers, crushing the fiends, 
have raised themselves : 

Chase thou the foes who compass us. 

2 Thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, and 

when the prize is staked : 

With fearless heart will I sing praise. 

3 No one with evil thought assails this Pavamana’s holy laws : 
Crush huu who fain would fight with thee 

4 For Indra to the streams they drive the tawny rapture-drop- 

ping Steed, 

I nd u the bringer of delight. 

HYMN LTV. Soma Pavamdna. 

After his ancient splendour, they, the bold, have drawn the 
bright milk from 

The Sage who wins a thousand gifts. 

2 In aspect he is like the Sun ; he runneth forward to the lakes, 
Seven currents flowing through the sky. 

3 He, shining in his splendour, stands high over all things that 

exist — 

Soma, a God as Surya is. 

4 Tliou, Indu, m thy brilliancy, ponrest on us, as Iudra’s Friend, 
Wealth from the kino to feast the Gods. 

HYMN LV. Soma Pavam&na. 

Four on us with thy juice all kinds of corn, each sort of nourish- 
ment, 

And, Soma, all felicities. 

- As thine, 0 Indu, is the praise, and thine what springeth from 
the juice, 

Seat thee on the dear sacred grass. 

} With stones for arms : adriruh . generally an appellative of Indra, the 
^linger or caster of the stone : thunderbolt; hero, acemding to Sayana,= 
'J r <ivnvan soma , 0 Soma, possessor of, that is, expressed by, the stones. 

2 11 ken car meets car : in battle. 1 Vhen the prize is staked : in the chariot- 
rave ; or the reference may be also to battle. 

4 To the streams ; the vasativuri waters. 

1 They, the hold : the Soma-pressers. The Sage : or Rishi ; Soma. 

2 The lakes : of air. Seven currents : corresponding to the seven earthly 
rivers. ‘ He unites with the seven down-descending rivers of heaven. 
Wilson . 

4 From the kine : consisting of milk, curds, etc. 



304 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX 

3 And, finding for us kine and steeds, 0 Soma, with thy jui Ce 

flow on 

Through days that fly most rapidly. 

4 As one who conquers, ne’er subdued, attacks and slays the 

enemy, 

Thus, Vanquisher of thousands ! flow. 

HYMN LVI. Soma Pavam&na 

Swift to the purifying sieve flows Soma as exalted Law, 
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods. 

2 When Soma pours the strengthening food a hundred ever 

active streams 

To lndra’s friendship win their way. 

3 Ten Dames have sung to welcome thee, even as a maide 

greets her love : 

0 Soma, thou art decked to win. 

4 Flow hitherward, 0 Indu, sweet to Tndra and to Vishnu : guar 
The men, the singers, from distress. 

HYMN LVJI. Soma Pavamftn 

Thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like shouci 
of rain from heaven, 

To bring a thousand stores of strength. 

2 He flows beholding on his way all well-beloved sacred lore, 
Green-tinted, brandishing his arms. 

3 He, when the people deck him like a docile king of elephant 
Sits as a falcon in the wood. 

4 So bring thou hitherward to us, Indu, while thou art purifie 
All treasures both of heaven and earth. 

HYMN LVIII. SomaPavamfti 

SwrFT runs this giver of delight, even the stream of flowii 
juice : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

4 Vanquisher of thousands : or, thou who winnest thousands, i. e. countie 

spoils or treasures. 

3 Ten Dames : the fingers, whose sound is heard in the operation of pressi 

the Soma juice. 

3 Like a docile king of elephants : von Roth, in the St. Petersbu' 
Lexicon, suggests ibhe for ibhuh, * like a pious king among his retinue ; ’ b 
no alteration is necessary, ibhah and r&jd being taken together in the ser 
of elephant-king or stately and noble elephant. See Vedische Stvdien, l- 
XV. Sits as a falcon in the wood : in the wood, as referring to the Sot 
meaning the wooden trough or vat. * Sits on the waters like a hawk.’ — Wih 

1 SwifU t drat : * rescuing (his worshippers from sin).'— Wilson. 



BTMN 60.] THE RIG VEDA. 805 

2 The Morning knows all precious things, the Goddess knows her 

grace to man : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

3 We have accepted thousands from Dhvasra’s and Purushanti ; s 

hands : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

4 From whom we have accepted thus thousands and three times 

ten besides : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

HYMN LIX. Soma PavamAna. 

Flow onward, Soma, winning kine, and steeds, and all that 
gives delight : 

Bring hither wealth with progeny. 

2 Flow onward from the waters, flow, inviolable, from the plants : 
Flow onward from the pressing-boards. 

3 Soma, as Pavamana, pass over all trouble and distress : 

Sit on the sacred grass, a Sage. 

4 Thou, Pavamana, foundest light; thou at thy birth becamest 

great : 

0 Indu, thou art over all. 

HYMN LX. Soma PavamAna. 

Sing forth and laud with sacred song most active Pavamana, 
laud 

Indu who sees with thousand eyes. 

2 Thee who hast thousand eyes to see, bearer of thousand bur- 
thens, they 

Have filtered through the fleecy cloth. 


3 Dhvusra and Purushanti were ‘ two kings who conferred great wealth on 
Taranta and PurumUha, two rishis of the family of Vidadasva. See p. 
XXX.III. of Max- Muller’s Rig-veda, Vol. V.’— Cowell’s note in Wilson’s 
Translation. 

4 Thus thousand * and thre times ten : SAynna, taking tdnd (thus, in this 
manner) to mean ‘garments,’ mistaking triiisdtam, thirty, for tiisatam , three 
hundred, and neglecting the cha (and), interprets ‘ three hundred thousand 
garments.’ ‘ Thuty robes and thousands ’ — E. B Cowell. Urasbmann places 
this hymn in his Appendix as a composition of fragments and out of place 
where it stands in the text. 

* The waters: the vnsatfvari waters The pressing -boards : dhishdndbhyah : 
according to S&yaria, yr&v&bh'jah, the piessing-stones. 

1 With sacred song ; gdyatrina : * with a Gdyatri hymn.’ — Wilson. 

2 Bearer of thousand burthens : or, bringer of thousand bounties. 



306 TEE BYMNS OF [BOOK IX 

3 # He, Pavamana, hath streamed through the fleece: he runs 
into the jars, 

Finding his way to Indra’s heart. 

4 That Indra may be bounteous, flow, most active Soma, for our 
weal : 

Bring genial seed with progeny. 

HA MN LX I. Soma PavamAna. 

Flow onward, Indu, with this food for him who in thy wild 
delight 

Battered the nine-and-ninety down, 

2 Smote swiftly forts, and Sambara, then Yadu and that Turvasa 
For pious Divodasa’s sake. 

3 Finder of horses, pour on us horses and wealth in kine and 

gold, 

And, Indu, food in boundless store. 

4 We seek to win thy friendly love, even Pavamana's flowin' 

o'er 

The limit of the cleansing sieve. 

5 With those same waves which in their stream o'erflow th 

purifying sieve, 

Soma, be gracious unto us. 

6 0 Soma, being purified, bring us from all sides, — for the 

canst, — 

Riches and food with hero sons. 

7 Him here, the Child whom streams have borne, the ten awi 

fingers beautify : 

With the Adityas is he seen. 

8 With Indra and with V&yu he, effused, flows onward with t’ 

beams 

Of Surya to the cleansing sieve. 

9 Flow rich in sweets and lovely for our Bhaga, Vayu, Pusha 

flow 

For Mitra and for Varuna. 

10 High is thy juice’s birth : though set in heaven, on earth 
hath obtained 

Strong sheltering power and great renown. 


1 The nine-and-ninety : * ninety -nine (cities of the foe).’— Wilson. 

3 In boundless store : literally, in thousands. 

7 Whom streams have borne : sindhumdtccram : * whose parents are 
rivers,’ — Wilson. B<>rn as the Moon in the ocean of air. With the Adti 
tis he seen : that is, he is counted as one of the Adityas. 



THE MOV EM. 


ttyUR 61 .] 


m 


11 Striving to win, with him we gain all wealth from the ungodly 

man, 

Yea, all the glories of mankind. 

12 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra whom we must 

adore, 

For Varuna and the Marut host. 

[3 The Gods have come to Indu well-descended, beautified with 
milk, 

The active crusher of the foe. 

14 Even as mother cows their calf, so let our praise-songs strength- 

en him, 

Yea, him who winncth Indra’s heart. 

15 Soma, pour blessings on our kine, pour forth the food that 

streams with milk : 

Increase the sea that merits laud. 

16 From heaven hath Pavamana made, as ’twere, the marvellous 

thunder, and 

The lofty light of all mankind. 

17 The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, of Pavamana, 

King ! 

Flows o’er the woollen straining-cloth. 

18 Thy juice, 0 Pavamana, sends its rays abroad like splendid 

skill, 

Like lustre, all heaven’s light, to see. 

,9 Flow onward with that juice of thine most excellent, that 
brings delight, 

.Slaying the wicked, dear to Gods. 

10 Killing the foeman and his hate, and winning booty evfery 

i d;i y> 

Gainer art thou of steeds and kine. 

!1 Rcd-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its 
^ lovely breast, 

l'alcon-like resting in thine home. 


13 Wdl-deicended : literally, well-born or well-produced; ‘(who is) com* 
' letel y geneiated.’— Wilson. 


15 fhe sea : samudr&m: according to S&yana, water generally. 

J ® 4 The purified [Soma] has generated the great light which is common to 
V n( h like the wonderful thundering of the sky.’— Muir, 0. S. Texts, ( 
■ i . The great light common to all men, or vaifvdnardm or the lofty' 
mankind, is Agui Vaisvftnara. 

0 The foeman and hit Kate: ‘the hostile Yritra.’ — Wilson. 



MS THE HYMNS OF [BOOK lx 

22 Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to slaughte 

Vritra who 

Compassed and stayed the mighty floods. 

23 Soma who rainest gifts, may we win riches with our her 

sons : 

Strengthen, as thou art cleansed, our hymns. 

24 Aided by thee, and through thy grace, may we be slayei 

when we war : 

Watch, Soma, at our solemn rites. 

25 Chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, Soma floweth o 
Going to Indra’s special place. 

26 0 Pavamana, hither bring great riches, and destroy our foe 
0 Indu, grant heroic fame. 

27 A hundred obstacles have ne’er checked thee when fain 

give thy boons, 

When, being cleansed, thou combatest. 

28 Indu, flow on, a mighty juice; glorify us among the folk : 
Drive all our enemies away. 

29 Indu, in this thy friendship most lofty and glorious may wt 
Subdue all those who war with us. 

30 Those awful weapons that thou hast, sharpened at point 

strike men down — - 
Guard us therewith from every foe. 

HYMN LXII. Soma Pavamf 

These rapid Soma-drops have been poured through the pi 
fyiug sieve 

To bring us all felicities. 

2 Dispelling manifold mishap, giving the courser’s progeny, 

Yea, and the warrior steed, success. 


26 The godless: drdvnah: those who present no sacrificid offerings; 
with holders (of wealth).’ — Wilson, Special place: that is, the vessel 
•part for his libations. 

26 Heroic fame : or, fame with brave sons. 

27 Obstacles: or enemies, according to S&yana. Thou combatest: ma 

lyase: according to Styana. ‘ when thou wi.shes't to give us wealth.’ 
meanings “fight," “strive,” etc., aie foreign to S&ya.a, being derived 
• comparison of macto, etc,’ — Editor’s note in Wilson’s T 

lation. 


'30. Weapons : the Moon being the warrior who overcomes the darkn< 
ght. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 340. Cf. ‘The moon .... advances HI 
at warrior through a fleeing army.’— S. T. Coleridge. 



THE R1QVEDA. 


809 


XYMN 62.] 

3 Bringing prosperity to kine, they make perpetual IlsL flow 
To us for noble eulogy. 

4 Strong, mountain-born, the stalk hath been pressed in the 

streams for rapturous joy : 

Iiawk-like he settles in his home. 

5 Fair is tho God-loved juice; the plant is washed in waters, 

pressed by men : 

Tho milch-kine sweeten it with milk. 

6 As drivers deck a courser, so have they adorned the meath’s 

juice for 

Ambrosia, for tho festival. 

7 Thou, Indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which 

were poured for help, 

Hast settled in the cleansing sieve. 

8 So flow thou onward through the fleece, for Indra flow, to be 

his drink, 

Finding thine home in vats of wood. 

9 As giving room and freedom, as most sweet, pour butter forth 

an l milk, 

0 Indu, for the Angirases. 

0 Most active and benevolent, this Pavamana, sent to us 
For lofty friendship, meditates. 

1 Quellerof curses, mighty, with strong sway, this Pavamina 

shall 

Bring treasures to the worshipper. 

.2 Pour thou upon us thousandfold possessions, both of kine and 
steeds, 

Exceeding glorious, much-desired. 

13 Wandering far, with wise designs, the juice here present is 
effused. 

Made beautiful by living men. 


3 III : here, according to SAyana, meaning ‘ food.’ ‘ Labetrank/ refreshing 
draught. — Grasbmann. 


^ The stalk : the Soma-plant, which is said to have grown on tho mountain#. 
6 In waters : the vasalivarl waters. 

\ ® ^ or ambrosia: amritdya: ‘for the sake of immortality.’ — Wilson, 

L ^ For the Angirases : or, from the Angirases. The Jamadagnis were not 
joembers of that family. -Ludwig. 

10 Meditates: He known (to all).’ -Wilson. 

r ^ a>lder *ng far : urugdydfr: according to SAyana, much-lauded, or praised 



810 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK t 

14 For Indra flows the gladdening drink, the me&surer of W 

region, Sage, 

With countless wealth and endless help. 

15 Born on the mountain, lauded here, Indu for Indra is set dow 
As in her sheltering nest a bird. 

1 6 Pressed by the men, as ’twere to war hath Soma Pavam& 

sped, 

To rest with might within the vats. 

17 That he may move, they yoke him to the three-backed trip 

seated car 

By the Seven Rishis’ holy songs. 

18 Drive ye that Tawny Courser, 0 ye pressers, on his way to w 
Swift Steed w T ho carries off the spoil. 

19 Pouring all glories hither, he, effused and entering the jar 
Stands like a hero mid the kine. 

20 Indu, the living men milk out thy juice to make the raptur 

draught : 

Gods for the Gods milk out the meath. 

21 Pour for the Gods into the sieve our Soma very rich in swe 
Him whom the Gods most gladly hear. 

22 Into his stream who gladdens best these Soma juices 1 

been poured, 

Lauded with songs for lofty fame. 

23 Thou flowest to enjoy the milk, and bringost valour, b 

cleansed : 

Winning tho spoil flow hitherward. 

24 And, hymned by Jamadagnis, let all nourishment that 

supply, 

And geueral praises, flow to us. 

25 Soma, as leader of the song flow onward with thy wonc 

aids, 

For holy lore of every kind. 


14 The measurer of the region : who measured out and made the firma 

15 Born on the mountain : or, perhaps, as S£\ ana takes it, ‘ made mi 
by song ’ 

17 By the Seven Rishis’ holy songs : or ‘ Of Rishis, with seven holy s 
the car being the sacrifice, the three backs or ridges being the thre< 
libations, the thiee seats being the three Vedas. 

19 Mid the kine : among the enemy’s cattle, for whose possessioi 
fighting. So, says SHyana, Soma stands among the sacrifices. 

20 The living men : the worshippers, according to S&yapa ; but perb 
Ludwig suggests, his t totdruh should be sotdrah, presaers, Qods ; dtvi 1 
priests. 



TEE RIGTEDA. 


nntx 63 .] 


&ii 


2G r>0 thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of the sea, 
Flow onward, thou who mo vest all. 

27 0 Soma, 0 thou Sage, these worlds stand ready to attest thy 

might : 

For thy behoof the rivers flow. 

28 Like showers of rain that fall from heaven thy streams per- 

petually flow 

To the bright fleece spread under them. 

29 For potent Indra purify Indu effectual and strong, 

Enjoyment-giver, Mighty Lord. 

30 Soma, true, Pavatnana, Sage, is seated in the cleansing sieve, 
Giving his praiser hero strength. 

HYMN LX 1 1 1. Soma Pavam&na. 

Pour hitherward, 0 Soma, wealth in thousands and heroic 
strength, 

And keep renown secure for us. 

2 rimu mikest food andvigmr swell for Indra, best of glad' 

deners ! 

Within the cups thou seatest thee. 

3 For Indra and for Vishnu poured, Soma hath flowed into 

the jar : 

May Vayu find it rich in sweets. 

4 These Somas swift and brown of hue, in stream of solemn 

sacrifice 

Have flowed through twisted obstacles, 

5 Performing every noble work, active, augmenting Indra’s 

strength, 

Driving away the godless ones. 

Brown Soma-drops, effused, that seek Indra, to their appro* 

^ priate place 

I low through the region hitherward. 

1 low onward with that stream of thine wherewith thou gavest 
S irya light, & 

Drging on waters good to men. 

8 Pav amana, high o’er man yoked the Sun’s courser Etasa 
travel through the realm of air. 

28 Waters of the sea: of the sea of air, the firmament. 

ma<le^ fth*. °^ tac ! es ; the twigs of which the frame of the filter was 

the Rikshasa* • i 8urf<lCe of tlie Wuo1 of the strainer. ‘Are let loose upon 

g j • ™ GoOD, 

11 his and the following stanza Soma ia identified with the Sun. 



81 1 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX, 

9 And those ten Coursers, tawny-hued, ho harnessed that the 
Sun might come : 

Indu, he said, is Indra’s self. 

10 Hence, singers, pour the gladdening juice to V&yu and to 
Indra, pour 

The drops upon the fleecy cloth. 

110 Soma Pavamana, find wealth for us not to be assailed, 
Wealth which the focnaan may not win. 

12 Send riches hither with thy stream in thousan Is, both ol 

steeds and kino, 

Send spoil of war and high renown. 

13 Soma the Cod. expressed with stones, like Surya, floweth or 

his way, 

Pouring the juice within the jar. 

14 These brilliant drops have poured for us, in stream of solemr 

sacrifice, 

Worshipful laws and strength in kine. 

15 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Somas, blent witl 

curdled milk, 

Effused for Indra Thunder-nrmed. 

16 Soma, do thou most rich in sweets, a gladdening drink moa 

dear to Gods, 

Flow to the sieve to bring us tvealth. 

17 For Indra, living men adorn the Tawny Courser in the streams 
Indu, the giver of delight. 

18 Pour for us, Soma, wealth in gold, in horses and heroic sons, 
Bring hither strength in herds of kine. 

19 For Indra pour ye on the fleece him very sweet to taste, wh 

longs 

For battle as it were in war. 

20 The singers, seeking help, adorn the Sage who must be deckc 

with songs : 

Loud bellowing the Steer comes on. 

21 The singers with their thoughts and hymns have, in the streai 

of sacrifice, 

Caused Soma, active Steer, to roar. 


9 Couriers: or Harita. Cf. IV. 6. 9 and 13. 3. 

10 Hence ; from this vessel. 

14 Worshipful laics : the meaning of dhXmdnyftryd is not clear. ‘ (Flowir 
towards the dwellings of respectable (worshippers).’— Wilson. ‘ Veneral 
might.’— Ludwig. 



\YUN 64«J THE RIQVEDA. 813 

2 God, working with mankind, flow on ; to Indra go thy gladden- 

ing juice 1 

To Vayu mount as Law commands- 

3 0 Soma Pavamana, thou poureat out wealth that brings re* 

nown 

Enter the lake, as one we love. 

1 Soma, thou flowest chasing foes and bringing wisdom and de- 

light : 

Drive off the folk who love not Gods. 

5 The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of Soma 

juice, 

For holy loro of every kind. 

6 The Pavamanas have been shed, the beautiful swift Soma- 

drops, 

Driving all enemies afar. 

7 From heaven, from out the firmament, hath Pavamana been 

effused 

Upon the summit of the earth. 

8 0 Soma, Indu, very wise, drive, being purified, with thy stream 
All foes, all lUkshasas away. 

9 Driving the Rakshasas afar, 0 Soma, bellowing, pour for us 
Most excellent and splendid strength. 

0 Soma, do thou secure for us the treasures of the earth and 
heaven, 

Indu 1 all boons to be desired. 

HYMN LXIV. Soma PavamAna. 

Soma, thou art a splendid Steer, a Steer, 0 God, with steerlike 
sway : 

Thou as a Steer ordainest laws. 

2 Steer-strong thy might is as a steer’s, steer strong thy wood, 

steer-like thy drink : 

A Steer indeed, 0 Steer, art thou. 

3 Thou, Indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steed* 

and kine : 

Unbar for us the doors to wealth. 


23 The lake : the dronakala^a, vat or reservoir. 
27 The summit of the earth : the raised altar. 


1 Steer SAyana, as usual, explains vrUhi by varshakah * Sprinkler.'— Wilson. 
Weighed togethei' : collected, through the efficacy of the sound thou 
*** in di opping through the filter, and enriched us with, steeds and kin*. 



314 THE HYMNS OP [kook 

4 Out of desire of cows and steeds and heroes potent Soma-dr 
Brilliant and swift, have been effused. 

5 They purified in both the hands, made beautiful by holy i 
Flow onward to the fleecy cloth. 

6 These Soma juices shall pour forth all treasures for the 

shipper 

From heaven and earth and firmament. 

7 The streams of Pavamana, thine, Finder of all, have 1 

effused, 

Even as Surya’s rays of light. 

8 Making the light that shines from heaven thou flowestc 

every form : 

Soma, thou swellest like a sea. 

9 Urged on thou sendest out thy voice, 0 Pavamana; thou 

moved, 

Like the God Surya, to the sieve. 

10 Indu, Enlightener, Friend, hath been purified by the si 

hymns : 

So starts the charioteer his steed — 

11 Thy God-delighting wave which hath flowed to the purif 

sieve, 

Alighting in the home of Law. 

12 Flow to our sieve, a gladdening draught that hath most ii 

course with Gods, 

Indu, to Indra for his drink. 

13 Flow onward with a stream for food, made beautiful by saj 

men : 

Indu with sheen approach the milk. 

14 While thou art cleansed, Song-Lover, bring comfort 

vigour to the folk, 

Poured, Tawny One ! on milk and curds, 
lo Purified for the feast of Gods, go thou to Indra’s special ph 
Resplendent, guided by the strong 

16 Accelerated by the hymn, the rapid drops of Soma juice 
Have flowed, urged onwatd, to the lake. 

17 Easily have the living dtops, made beautiful, approa* 

the lake, 

Yea, to the place of sacrifice. 

8 To every form : to bring us blessings in every shape. 

9 To the sieve : vidhavmani : ‘ in observance of the law,’ according t 
Bergaigne. See La Religion Ved ique, III 218, note. 

1# The lake : samudrdm : according to Sftyana, the sea of air, the firmai 
The dronakalofa, vat or reservoir, is probably intended. 



ffYMN 64.] THE RIO VEDA, 315 

18 Com pass about, our faithful Friend, all our possess'ons with 

thy might : 

Guard, hero like, our sheltering home. 

19 Loud neighs the Courser Etasa, with singers, harnessed for 

the place, 

Guided for travel to the lake. 

20 What time the Swift One resteth in the golden place of sacrifice, 
He leaves the foolish far away. 

21 The friends have sung in unison, the prudent wish to sacrifice : 
Down sink the unintelligent. 

22 For Indra girt by Maruts, flow, thou Indu, very rich in sweets, 
To sit in place of sacrifice. 

23 Controlling priests and sages skilled in holy song adorn thee 

well : 

The living make thee beautiful. 

24 Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna drink Pavamana’s juice, yea, thine: 
0 Sage, the Maruts drink thereof. 

25 0 Soma, Indu, thou while thou art purified urgest onward 

speech 

Thousandfold, with the lore of hymns. 

26 Yea, Soma, Indu, while thou art purified do thou bring to us 
Speech thousandfold that longs for war. 

27 0 Indu, Much-invoked, while thou art purifying, as the Friend 
Of these men enter thou the lake. 

28 Bright are these Somas blent with milk, with light that flashes 

brilliantly 

And form that utters loud acclaim. 

29 Led by his drivers, and sent forth, the Strong Steed hath come 

nigh for spoil, 

Like warriors when they stand arrayed. 

30 Specially, Soma, coming as a Sage from heaven to prosper us, 
Flow like tho Sun for us to see. 


19 The Courser Etasa : here meaning Soma. Vdhnih (from vah, Lat. veh o) 
is properly a horse of burden, or draught-horse. 

21 The friends : the piiests ; or perhaps the Maruts. Down sink: narakc, 
into hell, says Sfcyana. 

26 That longs for war : makhasyucam : ‘ desiring wealth.’ — Wilson. See 
IX. 61. 27, note. 

28 Form : krip$ .* stream, according to S&yana. 

80 Specially ; yidhak : said by Y&ska to be the Vedic form of pritkak, and 
to be used in the seuse of prospering. See Wilson’s Translation, Editor’s note. 

T t( ihak may mean, lightly, easily, without eflbrt. 



516 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOR /j 

HYMN LXV. Soma Pavamin 

The glittering maids send Sura forth, the glorious sisters, clos 
allied^ 

Send Indu fortl», their mighty Lord. 

2 Pervade, 0 Pavamana, all our treasures with repeated light, 
God, coming hither from the Gods. 

3 Pour on us, Pavamana, rain, as service and fair praise f< 

Gods : 

Pour all to be our nourishment. 

4 Thou art a Steer by lustre : we, 0 Pavamana, faithfully 
Call upon thee the Splendid One. 

5 Do thou, rejoicing, nobly armed ! pour upon us heroic strengtl 
O Indu, come thou hitherward. 

6 When thou art cleansed with both the hands and dipped 

waters, with the woo l 
Thou corniest to the gathering-place. 

7 Sing forth your songs, as Yyasva sang, to Soma Pavamana, 
The Mighty One with thousand eyes; 

8 Whose coloured sap they drive with stones, the yellow meat 

distilling juice, 

Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

9 We seek to gain the friendly love of thee that Strong ai 

Mighty One, 

Of thee the winner of all wealth. 

10 Flow onward with thy stream, a Steer, inspiriting the Maru 

Lord, 

Winning all riches by thy might. 

11 I send thee forth to battle from the press, 0 PuvamlU 

Strong, 

Sustainer, looker on the light. 

12 Acknowledged by this song of mine, flow, taw»y-colour< 

with thy stieam : 

Incite to battle thine ally. 

13 0 Indu, visible to nil pour out for us abundant food : 

Somn, be thou our prospered 

1 The glittering maids: the fingers, perhaps with reference to the g 
rings worn by the pi ieats when they press the Soma. SHm : here said 
mean Soma ; ‘ the invigorating ’ — Wilson. The glorious sisters : the fiugei 
3 As service • as the cause of worship. 

6 With the wood: ‘(taken up) with the wooden vessel.’- -Wilson. Cf. 

1. 2. 

7 Vyafva: a Risbi frequently mentioned in Book VIII. 

12 Thine ally: India. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


317 


HYMN 65.] 

14 The pitchers, Indu, with thy streams have sung aloud in 

vigorous might : 

Enter them, and let Indra d) ink. 

15 0 thou whose potent gladdening juice they milk out with the 

stones, flow on, 

Destroyer of our enemies. 

16 King Pavamana is implored with holy songs, on man’s behalf, 
To travel through the fiimameut. 

17 Bring us, 0 Indu, hundredfold increase of kine, and noble 

steeds, 

The gift of fortune for our help. 

18 Pressed for the banquet of the Gods, 0 Soma, bring us might, 

and speed, 

Like beauty for a brilliant show. 

19 Soma, flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to the wooden 

vats, 

Falcon-like resting in thine homo. 

20 Soma the Water-winner flows to Indra, Y.iyu, Varuna, 

To Vishnn and the Mavut host. 

21 Soma, bestowing food upon our progeny, from every side 
Pour on us riches thousandfold ! 

22 The Soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at 

hand, 

Or there on Saryanavan’s bank, 

23 Those prossed among Arjikas, pressed among the active, in 

men’s homes, 

Or pressed among the Races Five- 

24 May these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon us, as 

they flow, 

Rain from the heavens and hero strength. 

25 Urged forward o’er the ox-hide flows the Lovely One of 

tawny hne, 

Lauded by Jamad.igni’s song. 

26 Like horses urged to speed, the drops, bright, stirring vital 

power, when blent 

With milk, are beautified in streams. 

22 Sxryandvdn’s bank : this lake is said to be on the borders of the Kuru- 
kihetra country. 

apparently a non- Aryan people in the North-West. See VIII. 

25 O’er the ox-hide : the leather sheet that received the droppings of the 
boma. 



318 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 1 

27 So they who toil with juices send thee forward for the Goc 

repast : 

So with this splendour flow thou on. 

28 VVe choose to-day that chariot-steed of thine, the Strong, th 

brings us bliss, 

The Guardian, the desire of all, 

29 The Excellent, the Gladdener, the Sage with heart that n 

derstands, 

The Guardian, the de-ire of all ; 

30 Who for ourselves, 0 thou Most Wise, is wealth and U 

intelligence, 

The Guardi, tn, the desire of all. 

HYMN LXVI. Soma Pavanri 

For holy lore of every sort, flow onward thou whom all men loi 
A Friend to be besought by fiiends. 

2 O’er all thou rulest with these Two which, Soma Pavamac 

stand, 

Turned, as thy stations, hitherward. . 

3 Wise Soma Pavanvma, thou encompassest on every side 
Thy stations as the seasons come. 

4 Flow onward, generating food, for precious boons of every kir 
A Fiiend for fiiends, to be our help. 

5 Upon the lofty ridge of heaven thy bright rays with tli 

essences, 

Soma, spread purifying power. 

6 0 Soma, these Seven Rivers flow, as being thine, to g: 

command : 

The streams of milk run forth to thee. 

7 Flow onward, Soma in a stream, effused to gladden Indra’s hea 
bringing imperishable fame. 

8 Driving thee in Vivasvan’s course, the Seven Sisters w 

their hymns 

Made melody round thee the Sage. 

23 The guardian: pflntam • according to Piscliel, ‘den schwelleud 
* the swelling one.’ Sec his exhaustive excursus on the word in Vedu 
Studien , I. pp. 191—194. 

The Rishis are the hundred Vaikhnnasas, said to have been a race of sail 
hermits sprung fiom the nails of Prnj&pati. 

2 With these Tm : probably a double asterism. See Rillebrandt, V. 
p. 446 ; and Gaidicke, Der Accusativ im Veda , p 199. 

8 The stream of Soma is likened to the course of Vivasvftn or the Sun. 
The Seven Sisters are probably the Seven Rivers of stanea 6. Accordiui 
S4)ana ‘ the seven kindred (priests)’ aie intended. 



TJfy 66 J TBE RIG VEDA. 31$ 

9 The virgins deck thee o’er fresh streams to drive thee to the 
sieve when thou , 

A singer, bathest in the wood. 

) The streams of Pavamana, thine, Sage, Mighty One, have 
poured them forth 
Like coursers eager for renown. 

1 They have been poured upon the fleece towards the meath- 

distilling vat : 

The holy songs have sounded forth. 

2 Like milch-kinc coming home, the drops of Soma juice have 

reached the lake, 

Have reached the place of sacrifice. 

3 0 Indu, to our great delight the running waters flow to us, 
When thou wilt robe thyself in milk. 

f In this thy friendship, and with thee to help us, fain to 
sacrifice, 

Indu, we crave thy friendly love. 

5 Flow on, 0 Soma, for the great Viewer of men, for gain of kine 
Enter thou into Indra’s throat. 

5 Lest ait thou, Soma, of the great, Strongest of strong ones, 
Indu : thou 

As Wunior ever hast prevailed. 

7 Mightier even than the strong, more valiant even than the 
bravo, 

More liberal than the bountiful, 

£ Soma, as Sura, bring us food, win offspring of our bodies : wo 
Elect thee fur our friendship, we elect thee for companionship. 
3 Agni, thou pourest life; send down upon us food and vigorous 
strength : 

Drive thou misfortune far away. 

'0 Agni is Pavamana, Sage, Chief Priest of all the Races Five : 

To him whose wealth is great we pray. 

I Skilled in thy task, 0 Agni, pour splendour with hero strength 
on us, 

Granting me wealth that nourishes. 
v ^' lni •’ the fingei s. 

.. ^ C the dronakalagd or reservoir. 

' Eor gain of kinc : gdvishiaye : according to Sftyana, * for the seeker of 
is. ° f the Angirases.* 

aid wig ^ ra: 8ee 65. 1. ‘ Who art a hero.’— Wilson. * From the Sun.' — 

t !! : duchchhtinfim : frequently personified as an evil power ; 

u *R«hhasat:— Wilson. 



920 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


22 Beyond his enemies away to sweet praise Pavam&na Aowb 

Like S{irya visible to all. ' 

23 Adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, rich 

food, 

Far-sighted Indu is a Steed. 

24 He, Pavamana, hath produced the lofty Law, the brilli 

light, 

Destroying darkness black of hue. 


25 From tawny Pavamana, the Destroyer, radiant streams h 

sprung, 

# Quick streams from him whose gleams are swift. 

26 Best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise 

beauteous ones, 

Gold-gleaming with the Marut host, 

27 May Pavamana, best to win the booty, penetrate with rayi 
Giving the singer hero strength. 

28 Over the fleecy sieve hath flowed the drop effused : to b 

comes 

Indu while he is purified. 

29 This Soma, through the pressing-stones, is Bporting on th< 

hide, and 

Summoning Fndra to the draught. 

30 0 Pavamana, bless us, so that we may live, with that bri 

milk 

Of thine which hath been brought from heaven. 


HYMN LXVII. Soma and Ot 

Thou, Soma, hast a running stream, joyous, most strong 
sacrifice : 

Flow bounteously bestowing wealth. 

2 Effused as chccrer of the men, flowing best gladdener, thou 
A Prince to India with thy juice. 

3 Poured forth by pressiug-stones, do thou with loud roar i 

us in a stream 

Most excellent illustrious might. 


23 Is a Steed: ‘ one who continually goes to the Gods/ is SAyapa’s exj 
tion of dtyah, horse or courser. 

25 The Destroyer • of darkness. Cf. IX. 61. 30. 

27 Penetrate • the whole world. — SAyana. 

29 On the ox-hide : see IX. 65. 25. 

2 A Prince : t&Hh : a rich and liberal patron. 



THE RIO VELA. 


321 


{TMN 67 ] 


4 Indu, urged forward, floweth through the fleecy cloth : the 

Tawny One 

With his loud roar hath brought us strength. 

5 Indn, thou flowest through the fleece, bringing felicities and 

fame, 

And, Soma, spoil and wealth in kine. 

6 Hither, 0 Indu, bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundred- 

fold : 

Bring wealth, 0 Soma, thousandfold. 

7 In purifying, through the sieve the rapid drops of Soma juice 
Come nigh to Indra in their course. 

8 For Indra floweth excellent Indu, the noblest Soma juice, 
The Living for the Living One. 

9 The glittering maids send Sura forth : they with their song 

have sung aloud 
To Pavamana dropping mcath. 

0 May Pushan, drawn by goats, be our protector, and on all his 
paths 

Bestow on us our share of maids. 


1 This Soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the 

braided locks : 

He shall give us our share of maids. 

2 This Soma juico, 0 glowing God, flows like pure oil, eftused 

for thee : 

Ho shall give us our share of maids. 


3 Flow onward, Soma, in thy stream, begetter of the sages’ 
speech : 

; Wealth-giver among Gods art thou. 

J The Falcon dips within the jars : he wraps him in his robe 
• and goes 

Loud roaring to tho vats of wood. 

1 Soma, thy juico hath been effused and poured into the 
pitcher : like 

A rapid hawk it rushes on. 

1 ^or Indra flow most rich in sweets, 0 Soma, bringing him 
delight. 


10 maids send SUra forth: repeated from IX. 65. 1. 

11 i • are ma idt : desirable and appioved wives. — S&yana. 

I o °L ' Llm who wears the braided lochs : kanardlne : see I. 11*4. 1, and VII. 

Here Pashan is intended. 

4 Wkmng (fod : PiUhan. 

Le ^ c on : the falcon-like Soma, 

21 



322 THE HYMNS OF [B0 0K 

17 They were sent forth to feast the Gods, like chariots tl 

display their strength. 

18 Brilliant, best givers of delight, these juices have sent V2 

forth. 

19 Bruised by the press-stones and extolled, Soma, though 

to the sieve, ° 

Giving the worshipper hero strength. 

20 This juice bruised by the pressing-stones and lauded pa; 

through the sieve, 

Slayer of demons, through the fleece. 

21 0 Pavamana, drive away the danger, whether near at h 
Or far remote, that finds me here. 

22 This day may Pavamana cleanse us with his purifying po 
Most active purifying Priest. 

23 0 Agni, with the cleansing light diffused through all thy f 

glow, 

Purify thou this prayer of ours. 

24 Cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, 0 Agni, th 

bright with flame, 

And by libations poured to thee. 

25 Savitar, God, by both of these, libation, purifying pc 
Purify me on every side. 

26 Cleanse us, God Savitar, with Three, 0 Soma, with subli 

forms, 

Agni, with forms of power and might. 

27 May the Gods' company make me clean, and Vasus mak 

pure by song. 

Purify me, ye General Gods ; 0 Jata vedas, make me pur 

28 Fill thyself full of juice, flow forth, 0 Soma, thou with al 

stalks, 

The best oblation to the Gods. 

29 We with our homage have approached the Friend who 

our wondering praise, 

Young, strengthener of the solemn rite. 


18 Have sent Vdyn forth: have drawn him down from heaven. * 
forth for V&yu.’ — Wilson. 

26 The Three sublimest forms are said to be Agni, VAyu, and S fi; 
Fire, Wind, and Sun. 

27 The Gods’ company : the yajamdnas or sacrificers, or the troop oi 
Indra and others.— SAyaua. General Gods ; visve devdh ; or, all ye Gto 



THE RIG VEDA. 


323 


jYMX 68 .] 

0 Lost is Alayya’s axe, 0 Soma, God : do thou send it back hither 

in thy flow 

Even, Soma, God, if ’twero a mole. 

1 The man who reads the essence stored by saints, the Pavam&nr 

hymns, 

Tastes food completely purified, made sweet by Matarisvan’s 
touch. 

2 Whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the P&vamant 

hymns, 

Sarasvati draws forth for him water and butter, milk and 
meath. 

HYMN LXVIII. Soma PavamAna. 

The drops of Soma juice like cows who yield their milk have 
flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the Shining One, 

And, seated on the grass, raising their voice, assumed the milk, 
the covering robe wherewith the udders stream. 

2 He bellows with a roar around the highest twigs : the Tawny 

One is sweetened as he breaks them up. 

Then, passing through the sievo into the ample room, the God 
throws off the dregs according to his wish. 

3 The gladdening drink that measured out the meeting Twins 

fills full with milk the Eternal Ever-waxing Pair. 

: Bringing to light the Two great Regions limitless, moving 
| above them he gained sheen that never fades. 

[30 This stanza is well-nigh unintelligible! Alayya may, as is suggested 
the St Petersburg Lexicon, be a name of Indra, and the lost axe may be 
e thunderbolt which the poet thinks has long lain idle, and which Soma 
prayed to replace in the hands of the Thunderer, even though it were 
irthless and mischievous like a mole. SAyana’s interpretation is different : — 
lay the battle-axe of the foe destroy the foe alone : flow to us, bright Soma ; 
ay) the villain only, bright Soma.’— Wilson. 

31 .By mints : by the Rishis to whom they were revealed. Prfvamdni 
W?i8 ; the hymns in this Book dedicated to the purification of the Soma 
ice. By Mdtarisvan's touch: * SAyana says Matarisvan means Vdyu because 
breathes in the atmosphere antarikshe swasiti : the food is sweetened and 
irified by the purifying wind and the man eats it.’ — Wilson. MAtarisvan 
•obably represents Agni. 

1 The Shining One : devdm : the radiant Indra. The second line is obscure, 
pcording to SAyapa, usriydji here means ‘ cows’ and not milk : — ‘the lowing 
ie sitting on the barhis grass hold in their udders the pure (juice) welling 
'• —Wilson. 

^ The highest twigs: of the Soma-plant, which as being the tenderest and 
■ciest are crushed first. —Ludwig. ‘ He with a noise reechoes the principal 
> * 8e P a rating the growing herbs, the green-tinted (Soma) sweetens 
-m.-WHson. 

1 ne Meeting Twins ; Soma is called the Creator and Preserver of heaven 
* earth. 




mu a ijujxo vu 


IMVK ) 


4 Wandering through the Parents, strengthening the flooc 

the Sage make$ his place swell with liis own native mig] 
The stalk is mi^cd with grain : he comes led by the m 
together with the sisters, and preserves the Head. 

5 With energetic intellect the Sage is born, deposited as gei 

of Law, far from the Twins. 

They being young at first showed visibly distinct the Creati 
that is half-concealcd and half-exposed. 

6 The sages knew the form of him the Gladdener, what ti 

the Falcon brought the plant from far away. 

Him who assures success they beautitied in streams, the st 
who yearned therefor, mighty and meet for praise. 

7 Together with the Hishis, with their prayers and hymns 

women deck thee, Soma, friendly when effused. 

Led by the men, with invocations of the Gods, through 
fleece, thou hast given us strength to win the spoil. 

8 Songs resonant with praise have celebrated him, Soma, Frie 

springing forth, with his fair company. 

Even him who, rich in meath, with undulating stre 
Winnner of Wealth, Immortal, sends his voice from hea^ 

9 He sends it into all the region forth from heaven. So 

while he is filtered, settles in the jars. 

With milk and waters is he decked when pressed with sto 
Indu, when purified, shall find sweet rest and room. 

10 Even thus poured forth flow on thy way, 0 Soma, vouchsa 
us most manifold lively vigour. 

Wo will invoke benevolent Earth and Heaven. Give us 
Gods, riches with noble heroes. 

HYMN LXIX. Soma Pavan 

Laid like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been lo 
like a young calf to the udder of its dam. 

4 The Parents : heaven and earth. The floods : the waters of the f 
meut. Grain : especially barley. Makes his place swell : enriches bis 
station, the uttaravedi or northward altar. The sisters : the fingers.^ 
Head: apparently Sftrya. * S;\yana’s explanation of shah, viz., 
hhutajatam (the withered world ?),* needs explaining more than the or 
itself.’ — Wilson. 

5 The Sage: the Sun. Far from the Twins : rising in a distant i 
beyond heaven and earth, The Creature that is half- concealed and 
exposed : the meaning appears to be, as Ludwig says, that heaven and 
while they were yet unseparated, produced the Moon : the Sun came 
being only when they had been separated through Soma’s energetic ager 

7 Ten women : the fingers. 

1 Hath been loosed , dec. : * is let loose to (Indra) the fosterer as a calf i 
udder of it? mother,’ * S&yana takes Hdhani [to the udder] twice oyo 



jytfN 69-1 Tm MQySbA, 325 

As one who cometh first with full stream she is milked : thus 
Soma is impelled to this man’s holy rites. 

2 The thought is deeply fixed ; the savoury j uice is shed ; the 

tonguo with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth ; 

And Pavamfma, like the shout of combatants, the drop rich 
in sweet juice, is flowing through the fleece. 

3 He flows about the sheep-skin, longing for a bride : he loosens 

Aditi’s Daughters for the worshipper. 

The sacred drink hath come, gold-tinted, well-restrained : like 
a strong Bull he shines, whetting his manly might. 

4 The Bull is bellowing ; the Cows are coming nigh : the God- 

desses approach the God’s own resting-place. 

Onward hath Soma passed through the sheep's fair bright 
fleece, and hath, as ’twero, endued a garment newly washed. 

5 The golden-hued, Immortal, newly bathed, puts on a brightly- 

sinning vesture that is never harmed. 

He made the ridge of heaven to be his radiant robe, the 
sprinkling of the bowls from moisture of the sky. 

6 Even as the beams of Surya, urging men to speed, that cheer and 

send to sleep, together rush they forth, 

These swift outpourings in long course of holy rites : no 
form save only Indra shows itself so pure. 

7 As down the steep slope of a river to the vale, drawn from 

tho Steer the swift strong draughts have found a way. 


ays it is used of Indra because he is the noui idler of everything.’ — Wilson, 
is one uho cometh first : according to S&yana, as a cow coining before her 
la h yields her milk, (so Indra, coming before his worship] ers pours various 
>lessings upon them). First : dgre : at the head; at the beginning of the 
digious ceremony. 


2 The tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth : probably the 
wiest's tongue influenced by the exhilarating Soma juice. ‘ The Soma stream, 
fitting pleasant juice is diiven into (Indra’s) mouth.' — Wilson. 

3 Longing for a bride : seeking tho waters with which he is to be united. 
dtti s Daughters : probably, tho plants, whose buds Soma as the Moon opens 

fertilizes with his uectareous beams. ‘ The daughters of Infinity [Aditi] 
re P r °hably the quarters of the sky.’ — Ludwig. 

4 The Bull Soma. According to S&yana, the Cows are the propitiatory 
jmns of praise, which are called also Goddesses or divine. 

5 Brightly shining vesture : the milk with which the Soma juice is mixed, 
yana explains the second half of the stanza differently, taking chamvbh , 
111 +v> r ^ ea ^ ers * u to which the Soma juice is poured, as meaning metaphor i- 

1 y the two great receptacles of all living beings, or heaven and earth, and 
hn° ^ C11 ]8 Aditya who is not mentioned in the text : — ‘ he has created ( Aditya) 
tirl *)> 18 on the back of the sky for the destruction (of sin) and purification, 
48 created) Aditya’s brilliauce, the cover of the two worlds.’— Wilson. 



326 TEE HYMNS OP [BOOK , 

Well be it with the men and cattle in our home. May powe 
0 Soma, may the people stay with us. 

8 Pour out upon us wealth in goods, in gold, in steeds, in cat 

and in corn, and great heroic strength. 

Ye, Soma, are my Fathers, lifted up on high as heads 
heaven and makers of the strength of life. 

9 These Pavamanas here, these drops of Soma, to Indra hi 

sped forth like cars to booty. 

Effused, they pass the cleansing fleece, while, gold-hued, tl 
cast their covering off to pour tho rain down. 

10 0 Indu, flow thou on for lofty Indra, flow blameless, vi 
gracious, foe-destroyer. 

Bring splendid treasures to the man who lauds thee 
Heaven and Earth, with all the Gods protect us. 

HYMN LXX. Soma Pavami 

Tiie three times seven Milch-kino in the eastern heaven h 
for this Soma poured the genuine milky draught. 

Four other beauteous Creatures hath he made for his ad 
ment, when he waxed in strength through holy rites. 

2 Longing for lovely Amrit, by his wisdom he divided, ( 

apart from other, earth and heaven. 

He gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, w 
through their glory they found the God’s resting-place. 

3 May those his brilliant rays be ever free from death, inviol 

for both classes of created things, — 

Rays wherewith powers of men and Gods are purified, 
even for this have sagos welcomed him as King. 

4 He, while he is adorned by the ten skilful ones, that he tc 

the Midmost Mothers may create, 

7 Vftj4h and krishtdyah, powers and people, are explained by S&yai 
‘ food ’ and * offspring.’ 

8 Ye, Soma : * Soma is treated as plural by attraction ; or, as SAyana 
it the plurality of the pitris is applied to Soma.’— Wilson. Probably 
and Stars are intended. See Hillebrandt, V, M., I. p. 398. 

10 With all the Gods: devaih : ‘ subhagairdhanaih with auspicious rich 
SAyana. * 

1 The three times seven Milch -Jcine are, according to SAyana, the t 
months, the five seasons, the three worlds, and Aditya or the Sun. Pro! 
as Ludwig says, the seven celestial rivers, multiplied by three to corre 
with the threefold division of the heavens, are intended. These suppj; 
genuine draught, in contrast to the four other beauteous creatures, the V 
vari and the three EkadhanA waters, which are terrestrial and factitious, 
to adorn or purify Soma. 

8 Both classes : animate and inanimate. Or Gods and men. 

i The ten skilful ones : the fingers. The Midmost Mothers : the 



THE MOVED A. 


327 


tTMS 70.] 

While ho is watching o’er the lovely Amrit’s ways, looks on 
both races as Beholder of mankind. 

5 He, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength, 

rejoices in his place between the earth and heaven. 

The Steer dispels the evil-hearted with his might, aiming at 
offerings as an archer at the game. 

6 Beholding, as it were, Two Mother Cows, the Steer goes roar- 

ing on his way even as the Maruts roar. 

Knowing Eternal Law, the earliest light of heaven, he, pas- 
sing wise, was chosen out to tell it forth. 

7 The fearful Bull is bellowing with violent might, far-sighted, 

sharpening his yellow-coloured horns. 

Soma assumes his seat in the well-fashioned place : the cowhide 
and the sheepskiu are his ornament. 

8 Bright, making pure his body free from spot and stain, on 

the sheep’s back the Golden-coloured hath flowed down. 
Acceptable to Mitra, Vfiyu, Varuna, be is prepared as three- 
fold meath by skilful men. 

9 Flow on for the Gods’ banquet, Soma, as a Steer, and enter 

Indra’s heart, the Soma’s reservoir. 

Bear us beyond misfortune ere we be oppressed : the man who 
knows the laud directs the man who asks. 

10 Urged like a car-stecd, flow to strength, 0 Soma: Iudu, flow 
onward to the throat of Indra. 

Skilled, bear us past, as in a boat o’er water : as battling 
Hero save us from the foeman. 


that hang between heaven and earth, in which, perhaps, Soma aids in produc- 
ing the rain. But the meaning is uncertain. Sdyana explains pramt by 
man pramdtum, ‘ to measure out, or create, the worlds.’ Doth races: Gods 
and men. 


6 As U were, Two Mother Cows : Heaven and Earth. Sityana explains the 
cond PAda of the second line differently: — ‘the intelligent (Pavamina) 
wse man to be the offerer of his praise.’ — Wilson. 

8 Threefold : according to Sflyana, mixed with the Vasattvarl water, curds, 
nd milk. Probably, poured into three separate vessels, one for each of the 
t&ree deities mentioned. 


i q. ^ man who knows the land : who i« acquainted with the roads or ways. 

yana completes the simile : “ as by telling him he protects (helps) him, so 
0 w ho knowest the roads of the sacrifice protect us by telling us the 
^general ’ — Wilson. But, of course, the application is intended to 


10 Bear us past : carry us over all difficulties and dangers. From the foe 
1X1(111 : the reviling (of the foe).’— -Wilson. 



HYMN LXXI. SomaPavamftns 

The guerdon is bestowed : the Mighty takes his seat, and, evei 
watchful, guards from fiend and evil sprite. 

Gold-hucd, ho makes the cloud his diadem, the milk bi 3 carpe 
in both worlds, and prayer his robe of state. 

2 Strong, bellowing, he goes, like one who slays the folk; he let 

this hue of Asuras flow off from him, 

Throws off his covering, seeks his father’s meeting-place, an 
thus makes for himself the bright robe ho assumes. 

3 Onward he flows, from both the hands, pressed out wit 

stones : excited by the prayer, the water makes him wild 
He frolics and draws near, completes his work witli song, am 
bathes in streams to satisfy the w T orshipper. 

4 They pour out meath around the Master of the house, Celestia 

Strengthener of the mountain that gives might ; 

In whom, through his great powers, oblation-eating cows ii 
their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk. 

5 They, the ten sisters, on the lap of Aditi, have sent him for 

ward like a car from both the arms. 

He wanders and comes near the Cow’s mysterious place, ove 
the place which his inventions have produced. 

6 Like as a falcon to his home, so speeds the God to his ow 

golden wisely-fashioned place to rest. 


1 The guerdon : the honorarium given to the priests, consisting original 
of a cow. The Mighty : Soma. His carpet : upustirc : that which is sprew 
scattered, orspiinkied. Cp. IX. 69. 5, where upasturanam is translated 1> 
1 sprinkling.’ 

2 Hue of Asuras: or, celestial hiightness ; ‘ Himmelsglanz.’ — Grassmanr 

* He puts forth that daum-slaying tint of liis’. — Wilson. Seeks his father 
•meeting place : goes to meet the yajamdna or sacrifieer According to Sayana 

* the food (jritith), that is, the Soma, goes to the prepared reservoir.’ 

3 The water makes him wild: vrishdyate nabhasd : nabhas in the Soma 
hymns is used to signify either the rain-water in which, or the cloud frou 
which, the Soma flows to the earth. Here it means the water with whiol 
the Soma-plant is spiinklcd. See Vedische Studien , I. p 135. According t 
Ludwig : ‘ he act 3 like a bull in the sea of cloud.’ To satisfy the worshipper 
I adopt Ludwig’s suggestion and take ydjate as a dative of the participle 
Wilson translates, after Sdyana : — ‘he is honoured at the (god)— protecte 
(sacrifice) ’ 

4 The Master of the house : according to Sayana, the conqueror of the for 
of the enemy. See IX. 78 3. The mountain that gives miyht : the clout 
In the second half of this stanza I adopt SAyana’s interpretation as a maki 
shift, although it seems impossible that mdrdhan , ‘ head,’ should here mca 
‘uplifted.’ Ludwig takes tidhani, ‘ udder,’ in the sense of ‘behalter,’ or r( 
ceptacle into which the Soma flows. 

5 On the lap of Aditi: on the earth, ‘near to the ground.’ — Wilsoi 
The Cow's mysterious place : or, distant place, is the udder of heaven, tb 
cloud. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


829 


WMN 72.] 

With song they urge the darling to the sacred grass : the 
Holy One goes like ft courser to the Gods. 

7 From far away, from heaven, the red-hued noted Sage, Steer 

of the tuple height, hath sung unto the kine. 

With thousand guidings he, leading this way and that, shines, 
as a singer, splendidly through many a morn. 

8 His covering assumes a radiant hue; where’er he comes into 

Mie fight he drives the foo afar. 

The Winner of the Floods, with food he seeks the host of 
heaven, ho comes to praises glorified with milk. 

9 Like a bull roaming round the herds he bellows : he hath 

assumed the brilliancy of Surya. 

Down to the earth hath looked the heavenly Falcon : Soma 
with wisdom views all living creatures. 

HYMN LXX1I. Soma Pavam&na. 

They cleanso the Gold-hued : like a red Steed is he yoked, and 
Soma in the jar is mingled with the milk. 

He sendeth out his voice, and many loving friends of him the 
highly-lauded hasten with their songs. 

2 The many sages utter words in unison, while into Indra,’ s 

throat they pour the Soma juice, 

When, with the ten that dwell together closely joined, the 
men whose hands are skilful cleanse the lovely meath. 

3 He goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over the roaring 

sound which Surya’s Daughter loves. 

The Falcon brought it to him for his own delight: now with 
the twofold kindred sisters is his home. 

4 Washed by the men, stone-pressed, dear on the holy grass, 

faithful to seasons, Lord of cattle from of old, 

Most liberal, completing sacrifice for men, 0 Indra, pure bright 
Soina, Indu, flows for thee. 


7 0/ the triple heirjkt : working in heaven, firmament, and earth. — Ludwig 
aee IX. 75. 3. 

9 The heavenly Falcon : divyu a suparnah: ‘celestial, flying gracefully.’ — 
Vils°n. Soma, says Sftyana, is said to go gracefully, * becauso it is carried 
by Gdyatrl in the shape of a hawk.’ 

2 Indra’ s : throat : literally, belly ; the dronaJcalasa or reservoir. The 
,cn ' the fingers. 

2 The cows: the milk and curds. The roaring sound of the effused Soma 
s said to be dear to Sfirya’s Daughter, Ushas or Dawn, because it is chiefly 
th art f ln ^ ie ear] y m °rning. The Falcon : I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of 

Q strange word vinamgrisdh as no other meaning seems suitable here. 

sa y a ” a » the word means praiser, or worshipper. The twofold 
r ed sisters ; the fingers of both hauds. 



5 0 Indra, urged by arms of men and poured in streams, Soma 

flows on for thee after his Godlike kind. 

Plans thou fulfillcst, gatherest thoughts for sacrifice : in the 
bowls sits the Gold-hued like a roosting bird. 

6 Sages well-skilled in work, intelligent, drain out the stalk that 

roars, the Sage, the Everlasting One. 

The milk, the hymns unite them with him in the place of 
sacrifice, his seat who is produced anew. 

7 Earth’s central point, sustainer of the mighty heavens, distil- 

led into the streams, into the waters’ wave, 

As Indra’s thunderbolt, Steer with far-spreading wealth, Soma 
is flowing on to make the heart rejoice. 

8 Over the earthly region flow thou on thy way, helping the 

praiser and the pourer, thou Most Wise. 

Let us not lack rich treasure reaching to our home, aud may 
we clothe ourselves in manifold bright wealth. 

9 Hither, 0 Indu, unto us a hundred gifts of steeds, a thousand 

gifts of cattle and of gold, 

Measure thou forth, yea, splendid ample strengthening food; 
do thou, 0 Pavamana, heed this laud of ours. 

HYMN LXXIII. Soma Tavamilna. 

They from the spouting drop have sounded at the rim : naves 
speed together to the place of sacrifice. 

That Asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. The 
ships of truth have borne the pious man across. 

2 The strong Steers, gathering, have duly stirred themselves, 

and over the stream’s wave the friends sent forth the song. 
Engendering the hymn, with flowing streams of meath, Indra s 
dear body have they caused to wax in strength. 

3 With sanctifying gear they sit around the song : their ancient 

Father guards their holy work from harm. 


7 The heart: of Indra. As Indra's thunderbolt: cp. IX. 77. 1. 

1 They : the pressing stones, from whose rim or edge the Soma-drops fall 
noisily. Naves : by synecdoche wheels, again by the same figure, chariots, 
and then by metaphor the swiftly-running Soma-drops. That Asura: the 
divine Soma. To seize : to be held and used. Three lofty heights : the three 
elevated worlds. The ships of truth: or, of the truthful (Soma). According 
to Sftyana, the four vessels which hold the Aditya, Agrayana, Uktkya, an 
Dhruva libations. 

2 The strong Steers : the priests. 

3 Their ancient Father: Soma; or, perhaps, Agni. Varuna.' 'Soma 
all-envelopper.' — Wilson. Him: Soma. In sustaining Hoods : in the Vasa 
vart waters.- SAyana, 



THE RIO VEDA. 


331 


UYUN 74.] 

Varuna hath o’erspreacl the mighty sea of air. Sages had 
power to hold him in sustaining floods. 

4 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their voices down 

together, in heaven’s vault that pours a thousand streams. 
His wildly-restless warders never close an eye : in every plac» 
are found the bonds that bind man fast. 

5 O’er Sire and Mother they have roared in unison, bright with 

the verse <Jf praise, burning up riteless men, 

Blowing away with supernatural might from earth and from 
the heavens the swarthy skin which Indra hates. 

6 Those which, as guides of song and counsellors of speed, were 

manifested from their ancient dwelling place, — 

From these the eyeless and the deaf have turned aside : the 
wicked travel not the pathway of the Law. 

7 What time the filter with a thousand streams is stretched, 

the thoughtful sages purify their song therein. 
Bright-coloured aro their spies, vigorous, void of guile, excel- 
lent, fair to see, beholders of mankind. 

8 Guardian of Law, most wise, he may not be deceived : three 

Purifiers hath he set within his heart. 

With wisdom he beholds all creatures that exist : he drives into 
the pit the hated riteless ones. 

9 The thread of sacrifice spun in the cleansing sieve, on Varuna’s 

tongue-tip, by supernatural might, — 

This, by their striving, have the prudent ones attained : ho 
who hath uot this power shall sink into the pit. 

HYMN LXXIV. Soma Pavamdna* 

Born like a youngling he hath clamoured in the wood, when 
he, the Red, the Strong, would win the light of heaven. 

4 They: the beams that radiate from Soma ; somarasmayah : Soma-rays. — 
Siyana. 

5 Sire and Mother : the general parents, Heaven and Earth. The swarthy 
skin • ‘ the black -skinned ( Rakshasas ).' — Wilson. 

6 Time: rays. I follow S&yana's interpretation. The first line is very 
obscure. 

7 The filter : the tip of their tongue. Cf . stanza 9, and hymn 7 5. 2. See Ber- 
gaigne, La Religion Vddiquc, I. 283, Bright coloured : rudrttsah : sons of 
Rudra, according to S&yana. But see Vedische Studien , I. pp. 55, 56. 

.8 Of Law : of law-ordained sacrifice. The three Purifiers whom Soma sets 
within his heart and combines in his own being are Agni, V&yu, Surya, the 
P'^yiHg powers of fire, wind, and sun. 

» On Varuna’s tongue-tip: the Yasatlvarl waters in which Soma dwells 
(vasati) stand on the tip of Varuna’s tongue. — S&yana. He who hath not this 
power; ‘he who is incompetent for the rite. 1 — Wilson. 

1 In the wood: in the wooden vat. According to S&vana, ‘in the water.' 



332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 

He comes with heavenly seed that makos the water swell : him 
for wide-spreading shelter we implore with prayer. 

2 A far-extended pillar that supports the sky, the Soma-stalk, 

filled full, moves itself every way. 

He shall bring both these great worlds while tho rite proceeds: 
the Sago holds these who move together and all food. 

3 Wide space hath he who follows Aditi’s right path, and mighty 

well-made food, meath blent with Soma juice ; 

He who from hence commands the rain, Steer of the kino, 
Leader of floods, who helps us hence, who claims our laud. 

4 Butter and milk are drawn from animated cloud; thence 

Amrit is produced, centre of sacrifice. 

Him tho Most Bounteous Ones, ever-united, lovo ; him as our 
Friend the Men who make all swell rain down. 

5 The Soma-stalk bath roared, following with the wave : lie 

swells with sap for man the skin which Gods enjoy. 

Upon the lap of Aditi he lays the germ, by means wherof we 
gain children and progeny. 

6 In tho third region which distils a thousand streams, may the 

Exhaustless Ones descend with procreant power. 

The kindred Four have been sent downward from tho heav- 
ens : dropping with oil they bring Amrit and sacred gifts. 

7 Soma assumes white colour when he strives to gain : the 

bounteous Asura knows full many a precious boon. 

Down the steep slope, through song, he comes to sacrifice, 
and he will burst the water-holding cask of heaven, 

2 He shall briny both these yreat worlds : Bhall bring Heaven and Earth to 
the sacrifice. 

3 He who follows Aditi’ 8 right path: the regularly moving moon. Sayana 
takes ddit(h with gdvydtih : ‘ the way to eaith is broad.’ — Wilson. Somewhat 
similarly lidlebrandt, V. M., I. 360. 

4 The Most Bounteous Ones, the Men who make all swell , are, probably, the 
Maruts who fertilize the earth, and send Soma down in the rain. S&yana’a 
explanation is different : — ‘ the assembled liberal givers [the yajamdnas or 
aacrificers] delight him : (the Soma juices) the leaders, the protectors shower 
down the accumulated (water) ’ — Wilson. For the meaning of pdravah, those 
who swell, or cause to swell, * protectors’ according to SAyana, see Vedische 
Studien , / p. 85. 

5 For man : for the sacrificer. The skin : his own body. — S&yana. Upon 
the lap of Aditi : of the earth, according to Sayana. The meaning is that 
Soma is the source of all Nature’s productive power. 

6 In the th ird region : dwelling in heaven. The Exhaustless Ones : these 
are the kindred Four of the following line, meaning, according to S&yap&> f° ,ir 
rays or digits of Soma. It is most probable that tho four Goddesses Sinivilh 
Kuhil or Gungfi, R4k&, and Anumati are meant. Cp. II. 32. 6, 7.’— ;Ludwig- 

7 Strives to gain : seeks to enjoy heaven. — S&yana. The water-holding cm : 
the water- laden cloud. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


333 


3YMN 75.] 


8 Yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his goal, hath 

stepped the conquering Courser. 

Pious-soulcd men have sent their gifts of cattle unto Kak- 
shivan of the hundred winters. 

9 Soma, thy juice when thou art blended with the streams, 

flows, Pavamana, through the long wool of the sheep. 

So, cleansed by sages, 0 best giver of delight, grow sweet for 
Indra, Pavamana ! for his drink. 

HYMN LXXV. Soma Pavamana. 

Graciously-minded he is flowing on his way to wiu dear 
names o’er which the Youthful One grows great. 

The Mighty and Far-seing One hath mounted now the mighty 
Surya’s car which moves to every side. 

2 The Speaker, unassailable Master of this hymn, the Tongue of 
saciifice pours forth the pleasant meath. 

Within the lustrous region of the heavens the Son makes the 
third secret name of Mother and of Sire. 

\ Sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars, led by the 
men into the golden reservoir. 

The milky streams of sacrifice have sung to him : he of the 
triple height shines brightly through the morns. 

4 Pressed by the stones, with hymns, and graciously inclined, 

illuminating both the Parents, Heaven and Earth, 

He Hows in ordered season onward through the fleece, a cur- 
rent of sweet juice still swelling day by day. 

5 Flow onward, Soma, flow to bring prosperity : cleansed by the 

men, invest thee with the milky draught. 

What gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceeding strong, 
even with these incite Indra to give us wealth. 


8 The conquering Courser : the swiftly-flowing Soma, A al'shtvdn : the 
tishi of the hymn. 

1 O'er which: that is the Youthful Ono, the fresh and strong Soma, 
ixceedg iu greatness even the high titles which he wins by his gracious deeds. 

2 Speaker ; Master; Tongue of sacrifice: Soma, the giver of eloquence. 
The Son : Soma. Of Mother and of Sire : of his parents, Heaven and Earth. 
^Vhat the third secret name , that is, probably, a name in addition to those of 
deaven and Earth, and comprising both deities, may be, does not appear. 
% ana’s explanation is different ' 1 the son (the sacrifice^ assumes a third 
name unknown to his parents ; ' that is, Wilson adds, * a name not given at 
kkth ..He [Sdyana] cites Baudhftyana, who gives Somaydjin [Somayfiga sacri* 
freer) as an iustance of a third name.’ 

3 The milky streams : cf. 1. 144. 2. Of the triple height: dwelling in three 
nigh places, heaven, the firmament or the mountain-top, and the place of sac- 
nfree. Cf. IX. 71, 7, 



334 


[BOOK IX. 


THE HYMNS OP 

HYMN LXXYI. Soma PavamAna. 

On flows the potent juico, sustainer of the heavens, the strength 
of Gods, whom men must hail with shouts of joy. 

The Gold-hued, started like a courser by brave men, impe- 
tuously winneth splendour in the streams. 

2 He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his hands, fain to win 

light, car-borne, in forays for the kine. 

Indu, while stimulating Indra’s might, is urged forward and 
balmed by sages skilful in their task. 

3 Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy 

strength enter thou Indra’s throat. 

Make both worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the clouds : 
mete out exhaustless powers for ns, as ’twere through song. 

4 Onward he flows, the King of all that sees the light : the 

Rishis’ Lord hath raised the song of sacrifice ; 

Even he who is adorned with Surya’s arrowy beam, Father of 
hymns, whose wisdom is beyond our reach. 

5 Like as a bull to herds, thou flowest to the pail, bellowing as 

a steer upon the waters’ lap. 

So, best of Oheerers, thou for Indra flowest on that we, with 
thy protection, may o’ercome in fi^bt. 

HYMN LXXVII. Soma Pavamana. 

More beauteous than the beautiful, as Indra’s bolt, this Soma, 
rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat. 

Dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice flow unto him 
like milch-kine, lowing, with their milk. 

2 On flows that Ancient One whom, hitherward, from heaven, 

sped through the region of the air, the Falcon snatched. 
He, quiveriug with alarm and terrified in heart before bow- 
armed Krisauu, holdeth fast the sweet. 

3 May those first freshest drops of Soma juice effused flow oil 

their way to bring us mighty strength in kine. 

Beauteous as serpents, worthy to be looked upon, they whom 
each sacred gift and all our prayers have pleased. 

3 As ’twere through song : ‘now with the rite, i. e. at the very time the 
rite is being performed.’ —'Wilson. 

2 The Falcon : see I. 93. 5. He : Soma, according to SAyana, but more 
probably the falcon. Kritdnu ; the archer who guards the celestial Soma. 
Seel. 112.21. 

3 Serpents : the meaning of ahydh is uncertain here. SAyana explains it 
by striyah, women ' 1 pleasing to look upon like beautiful well-adorned 
(women).’— Wilson. 



THE MOVED A. 


335 


BYMN 78 .] 

4 May that much-lauded Indu, with a heart iuclined to us, well- 

knowing, fight against oul* enemies. 

He who hath brought the germ beside the Strong One's seat 
moves onward to the widely-opened stall of kine. 

5 The active potent juice of heaven is flowing on, great Varuna 

whom the fro ward man can ne'er deceive. 

Mitra, the Holy, hath been pressed for troubled times, neigh- 
ing like an impatient horse amid the herd. 

HYMN LXXVIir. Soma Pavam&na. 

Raising his voice the King hath flowed upon his way : invest- 
ed with the waters he would win the kme. 

The fleece retains his solid parts as though impure, and bright 
and cleansed he seeks the special place of Gods. 

2 Thou, Soma, art effused for Indra by the men, balmed in the 

wood as wave, Sage, Viewer of mankind. 

Full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go : a thousand 
bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls. 

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea, sitting within, have 

flowed to Soma wise of heart. 

They urge the Master of the house upon his way, and to the 
Eternal Pavamana pray for bliss. 

4 Soma flows on for us as winner of the kine, winner of thousands, 

cars, water, and light, and gold ; 

Ho whom the Gods have made a gladdening draught to drink, 
the drop most sweet to taste, weal-bringing, red of hue. 

4 He who hath brought the germ : here the sacrificer and not Soma is 
meant.— Ludwig. The Strong One : Agni. 

5 In this stanza Soma is compared to, or mystically identified with, Varuna 
and Mitra. S&yana leaves Varuna unexplained, but interprets Mitra by 
mveshdm mitrabhiUah, ‘ (Soma) the ftiend of all.’ 

1 Thejlecce: literally, the sheep ; the filter made of wool. Solid parts: 
tanvd : the fragments of stalk which will not pass through the strainer. 
According to Sftyana, ‘ with its own covering,’ — ‘ the sheep with its fleece.’ — 
Wilson. The special place of Gods : the vessels which hold the libations 
assigned to various Qods. 

2 Balmed in the wood : according to SAyana, ‘art driven into the water.’ 
Eay steeds : swiftly-running tawny drops, 

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea : * nymphs of the firmament.’ — 
Wilson. The mymphs are identified with their element, and represent the 
water with which the Soma juice is mixed. The Master of the house: Aar- 
*iya>sya sakshdnim : Soma. In IX. 71. 4 , Sdyana explaius these words as 

overpowerer, or stormer of the foit of the enemy,’ and in this place as ‘the 
sprinkler of the hall of sacrifice.’ Sakshani, from the root sah, means over- 
powerer, and from the root mh t connected with, especially as master wad 
possessor. 



330 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

5 Soma, as Pavamana thou, our faithful Friend, making for U8 
these real treasures, flowest on. 

Slay thou the enemy both near and far away : grant iis secur- 
ity and ample pasturage. 

HYMN LXXIX. * Soma PavamSna, 
Spontaneous let our drops of Soma juice flow on, pressed, go]. 

den-hucd, among the Gods of lofty heaven. 

Perish among us they who give no gifts of food ! perish the 
godless ! May our prayers obtain success. 

2 Forward to us the drops, distilling meath, shall flow, like riches 

for whose sake we urge tho horses on. 

Beyond the crafty hindering of all mortal men may we conti- 
nually bear precious wealth away. 

3 Yea, vetily, foe of hate shown to himself is he, yea, verily, des- 

troyer too of other hate. 

As thirst subducth in the desert, conquer thou, 0 Soma Pava- 
mana, men of evil thoughts. 

4 Near kin to tlicc is he, raised loftiest in the heavens : upon the 

earth’s high ridge thy scions have grown forth. 

The press-stones chew and crunch thee on the ox’s hide : sages 
have milked thee with their hands into the streams. 

5 So do they hurry on thy strong and beauteous juice, 0 Indu, 

as the first ingredient of the draught. 

Bring low, thou Pavamana, every single foe, and be thy might 
shown forth as sweet and gladdening drink. 

HYMN LXXX. Soma Pavamana. 

On flows the stream of Soma who beholds mankind : by ever- 
lasting Law ho calls the Gods from heaven. 

He lightens with the roaring of Brihaspati : the lakes have not 
contained the pourings of the juice. 


1 They who give no gifts of food : I can find no satisfactory explanation of 
tiketh ardtiyah, so I give Sayana’s interpretation as a makeshift. ‘ May they 
be destroyed who are the withholders of food from us.’ — Wilson. 

2 Urge the horses on: Sdyana explains drvatah , horses, by ‘ strong enemy. 
‘By whoso aid we encounter the powerful (enemy).’ — Wilson. 

3 * Soma knows how to defend not only himself, but us also,’ — Ludwig. 
Destroyer : literally, the wolf. 

4 He: ‘the Moon.’ — Ludwig. ‘Thy best juice dwells in the navel of 

heaven, that which receives (the oblation).’ — Wilson. On the ox's hide- 
* Although men of the present time pour out the Soma upon the skin of * 
black antelope and not on a cowhide or oxhide, still it is measured out fo f 
sale on an oxhide.’— Sdyana. _ t . 

1 The roaring of Brihaspati : that is, says Sdyana, the voice or praise of 
the worshipper. Agni may be intended, as Ludwig suggests. The lakes : or 
seas ( samudrttsah ) f probably the Soma-reservoirs. Sdyana takes na a 9 fl 
particle of comparison ‘the libations cover (the earth) like rivers.’ — 



THE RIG VEDA. 


337 


0MN 81.] 

2 Thou, powerful Soma, thou to whom the cows have lowed, as- 

eendest, bright with sheen, thine iron-fashioned home. 

Thou, lengthening our princes’ life and high renown, fiowest for 
India as his mighty gladdening drink. 

3 Best giver of delight, he flows to Indra’s throat, robing him- 

self in might, Auspicious One, for fame. 

He spreads himself abroad to meet all things that be : the 
vigorous Tawny Steed flows sporting on his way. 

4 The men, the ten swift fingers, milk thee out for Gods, even 

thee most rich in meath, with thousand flowing streams. 
Soma who winnest thousands, driven by the men, expressed 
with stones, bring, as thou fiowest, all the Gods. 

5 Deft-handed men with stones, the ten swift fingers, drain thee 

into waters, thee, the Steer enriched witli sweets. 

Thou, Soma, gladdening Indra and the Heavenly Host, fiowest 
as Pavamana like a river’s wave. 

HYMN LX XXL Soma PavamAna. 

Onward to Tndra’s throat move, beauteously adorned, the 
waves of Soma a* lie purifies himself, 

When they, brought forward with tho lovely curd of kine, 
effused, have cheered the Hero to bestow his gifts. 

I 2 Hither hath Soma flowed unto the beakers, like a chariot- 
horse, a stallion swift upon his way. 

Thus, knowing both the generations, he obtains the rights and 
dues of Gods from yonder and from hence. 

1 While thou art cleansed, 0 Soma, scatter wealth on us ; 
Indu, bestow great bounty as a liberal Prince. 

Giver of life, with wisdom help to opulence ; strew not our 
home possessions far away from us. 

1 Hither let Pushan Pavamana come to us, Varuna, Mitra, 
bountiful, of one accord, 

The Maruts, Asvins, Vayn, and Brihaspati, Savitar, Tvashtar, 
ti actable Sarasvati. 


2 Ivon-fashioned home : see IX. 1. 2. 

2 Both the generations : of Gods and men. S&yana takes ubhdyasya jdn - 

with devfltndn i: — ‘and knowing both races of gods — those who come 
J (the sacrifice) from the other world and those who (come) from this world.’ 
"Wllsou. 

3 Udp to opnknee : according to S&yana, ‘help Vasu (the Rishi of the 
ymn) to prosperity.’ 

‘f'vuctuble •' suyumd: easily led (by prayer). According to Sdyana = stm- 

beautiful in form. 

22 



838 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /£ 

5 Both Heaven and Earth, the all-invigorating Pair, Vidhatar 
Aditi, and Aryaman the God, 

Bhaga who blesses men, the spacious Firmament, — let all the 
Gods in Pavamana take delight. 

HYMN LXXXII. soma Pavamftn,. 

Even as a King hath Soma, red and tawny Bull, been presbed; 
the Wondrous One hath bellowed to the kine. 

While purified he passes through the filtering fleece to seat 
him hawk-like on the place that drops with oil. 

2 To glory goest thou, Sage with disposing skill, like a groomed 

steed thou rushest forward to the prize. 

0 Soma, be thou gracious, driving off distress : thou goest, 
clothed in l utter, to a robe of state. 

3 Parjanya is the Father of the Mighty Bird : on mountains, 

in earth’s centre hath be made his home. 

The waters too have flowed, the Sisters, to the kine : he meets 
the pressing-stones at the beloved rite. 

4 Thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. Listen, 0 

Child of Pajra, for to thee I speak. 

Amid the holy songs go on that we may live : in time of 
trouble, Soma, watch thou free from blame. 

5 As to the men of old thou earnest, Indu y unharmed, to 

strengthen, winning hundreds, thousands, 

So now for new felicity flow onward : the waters follow as thy 
law ordaineth. 

HYMN LXXXIII. Soma Pavamtna 

Spread is thy cleansing filter, Brahmanaspati : as Prince, 
thou entered its limbs from every side. 

5 All-invigorating: visvaminvt: ‘ all -invading.’ — S&yana. YidMtar . the 
Disposer, regarded as a separate deity, as Dh&tar is the Maker, Ordainer, or 
Establishes 

1 ^ a King: ‘ magnificent as a king/ — Wilson. That drops with oil • 
S&yana here explains ghritdvantam l>y udakuvantum, watery. 

2 To a robe of stale : mrnijam : ‘ to the cleansing (vessel).’ — Wilson.. 

3 Parjanya: the God of the rain-cloud and wateia of the air in which the 
mighty Bird, the Moon, is born. In earth’ a centre : at the altar, in the 
oblation. 

4 Pujrd : according to S&y an a, the earth. The St. Petersburg Lexicon 

explains the word as meaning the moist fre»h Soma-plant of which Soma, the 
juice, is the child. Pei haps, as Ludwig suggests, PajrA may be the name of 
the sacrificer's wife, , 

1 Brahmauaspatl’s filter appears to be the heavenly filter through whicj 1 
the rain descends to earth. See Bergaigne, La Religion Vtdique, I. 79 , 20 . 
The raw : uncooked oblation. Which bear : 1 bearing (the sacrifice).’— W” 800 ’ 
This : according to Sftyana, to this filter. Ludwig thinks that Agni or Surf 
is meant by * tat.' 



THE RIGVEDA, 


330 


HYMN 84.] 


The raw, whose mass hath not been heated, gains not this : 
they only which are dressed, which bear, attain to it. 

2 High in the seat of heaven is spread the Scorcher’s sieve : its 

threads are standing separate, glittering with light. 

The Swift Ones favour him who purifieth this : with cons- 
ciousness they stand upon the height of heaven. 

3 The foremost spotted Steer hath made the Mornings shine, 

md yearning after strength sustains all things that be. 

By his high wisdom have the Mighty Sages wrought: the 
Fathers who behold mankind laid down the germ. 

4 Gandharva verily protects his dwelling-place ; Wondrous, he 

guards the generations of the Gods. 

Lord of the snare, he takes the foeman with the snare : those 
who are most devout have gained a share of meath. 

5 Rich in oblations ! robed in cloud, thou compassest oblation, 

sacrifice, the mighty scat of Gods. 

King, on thy chariot-sieve thou goest up to war, and with a 
thousand weapons winnest lofty fame. 

HYMN LXXXIV. Soma PavamAna. 


Flow, cheering Gods, most active, winner of the flood, for 
ludra, and for Vayu, and for Varuna. 

Bestow on us to-day wide room with happiness, and in thine 
ample dwelling laud the Host of Heaven. 

! He who hath come anear to creatures that have life, Immortal 
Soma flows onward to all of them. 

Effecting, for our aid, both union and release, Indu, like 
Surya, follows closely after Dawn. 

2 The Scorcher's sieve: ‘ The filter of the foe-scorching (Soma).’ — Wilson, 
ic Swift Ones: ‘his swift-flowing (juices) protect the purifier (the worship- 
er) ’—Wilson. 

3 The Mighty Sages : those who possess supernatural wisdom ; the Gods. 

Fathers ; ‘The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, which give birth to gods 

id men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the 
• 72. SeeX. 64. 14. 

4 Gavdkarva : here, the Sun. Ilis: Soma’s. 

5 Robed in cloud: ndbhah : meaning, water from the clouds. With a thou - 
wd weapons : more literally, having a thousand, that is, countless, sharp 
wits. ‘Thousand-rayed.’ — Ludwig. 


1 In thine ample dwelling ; ‘on the spacious sacrificial ground.’ — S&yana. 

2 The second line is obscure. Wilson translates, after Sdyana : — ‘Indu, 
mding and loosing, accompanies the sacrifice (for its protection) as the sun 
le dawn that is, binding or connecting the sacrifice with the gods and loos- 

or separating it from the Asuras or evil spirits. But this explanation is 
satisfactory. Ludwig suggests that ‘union’ refers to Soma’s binding^ to- 
p ther heaven and earth, Gods and men, and for the meaning of ‘release ’ he 
‘ fer » to IX. 68. 5. 



340 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

3 He who is poured with milk, he who within the plants hastes 

bringing treasure for the happiness of Gods, 

He, poured forth in a stream flows with the lightning’s flash, 
Soma who gladdens Indra and the Host of Heaven. 

4 Winner of thousands, he, this Soma, flows along, raising a 

vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn. 

Indu with winds drives on the ocean of the air, he sinks 
within the jars, he rests in Iudra’s heart. 

5 The kine with milk dress him who makes the milk increase, 

Soma, amid the songs, who finds the light of heaven. 
Winner of wealth, the effectual juice is flowing on, Singer 
and Sage by wisdom, dear as heaven itself. 

HYMN LXXXV. Soma Pavamftna. 

Flow on to Indra, Soma, carefully effused : let sickness stay 
afar together with the fiends. 

Let not the double-tongued delight them with thy juice : here 
be thy flowing drops laden with opulence. 

2 0 Pavamana, urge us forward in the fight : thou art the 

vigour of the Gods, the well loved drink. 

Smite thou our enemies who raise the shout of joy : India, 
drink Soma juice, and drive away our foes. 

3 Unharmed, best Cheerer, thou, 0 Indu, flowest on: thou, 

even thou thyself, art Indra’s noblest food. 

Full many a wise man lifts to thee tho song of praise, and 
hails thee with a kiss as Sovran of this worl 1. 

4 Wondrous, with hundred streams, hymned in a thousand songs, 

Indu pours out for Indra his delightful meath. 

Winning ms laud and waters, flow thou hitherward : Rainer 
of bounties, Soma, make broad way for us. 

5 Rou'ing within the beaker thou art balmed with milk: thou 

• passest through the fleecy filter all at once. 

Carefully cleansed and decked like a prize- winning steed, 0 
Soma, thou hast flowed down within Indra’s throat. 

6 Flow onward sweet of flavour for the Heavenly Race, for 

Indra sweet, whose name is easily invoked : 

Flow sweet for Mitra, Varuna. and V&yu, rioh in meath,** 1 * 
violable for Brihaspati. 

7 Ten rapid fingers deck the Courser in the jar : with hyi» I1!) 

the holy singers send their voices forth. 

The filtering juices hasten to their eulogy, the drops that 
gladden find their way to Iudra’s heart. 



THE MOVED A. 


341 


HYMN 86 ,] 

8 While tlioii art purified pour on us hero strength, great, far- 

extended shelter, spacious pasturage. 

Let no oppression master tins our holy work : may we, 0 
Indu, gain all opulence through thee. 

9 The Steer who sees afar hath risen above the sky : the Sage 

hath caused the lights of heaven to give their shine. 

The Kiug is passing through the filter with a roar : they drain 
the milk of heaven from him who looks on men. 

10 High in the vault of heaven, unceasing, honey-tongued, the 

Loving Ones drain out the mountain-haunting Steer, — 

The drop that hath grown great in waters, in the lake, meath- 
rich, in the stream’s wave and in the cleansing sieve. 

11 The Loving Ones besought with many voices the Eagle who 

had flown away to heaven. 

Hymns kiss the Youngling worthy of laudation, resting on 
earth, the Bird of golden colour. 

12 High to heaven's vault hath the Gandharva risen, beholding 

all his varied forms and figures. 

His ray hath shone abroad with gleaming splendour : pure, 
lie hath lighted both the worlds, the Parents. 

HYMN LXXXYI. Soma Pavam&na. 

Thy gladdening draughts, 0 Pavamana, urged by song flow 
swiftly of themselves like sons of fleet-foot mares. 

The drops of Soma juice, those eagles of the heavens, most 
cheering, rich in meuth, rest in the reservoir. 

2 As rapid chariot-steeds, so turned in several ways have thine 
exhilarating juices darted forth, 

Soma-drops rich in meath, waves, to the Thunder-armed, to 
Iudra, like milch-kme who seek their calf with milk. 

5 Like a steed urged to battle, finder of the light, speed on- 
ward to the cloud-horn reservoir of heaven, 

A Steer that o’er the woolly surface seeks the sieve, Soma 
while purified for II Ira’s nourishment. 


9 The Steer icho sees afar : wise Soma, the Moon. 

Pt ^ ov ^ n( J ® ne8 ■' wntfh. : the Gods or, specially, the Maruts. Accord- 
S o oayan.t, great Rishis, called Venae. The mountain-haunting Steer : Soma, 
st 8, en 0Ver the mountain heights. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 389. 
p ^ a in this stanza is the Eagle, the Youngling or infant, and the Bird 

12 2 ’he Gandharva: here Soma, the Moon. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 429. 
^Jtyeed onward : hasten to pour down the rain from the cloud. 



342 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 

4 Fleet as swift steeds, thy drops, divine, thought-swift, have 

been, 0 Pavamana, poured with milk into the vat. 

The Kishis have poured in continuous Soma-drops, ordainera 
who adorn thee, Friend whom Rishis love. 

5 0 thou who seest all things, Sovran as thou art and passing 

strong, thy rays encompass all abodes. 

Pervading with thy natural powers thou flowest on, and as 
the whole world’s Lord, O Soma, thou art King. 

6 The beams of Pavamana, sent from earth and heaven, hig 

ensigns who is ever stedfast, travel round. 

When on the sieve the Golden-hued is cleansed, he rests 
within the vats as ono who seats him in his place. 

7 Served with fair rites he flows, ensign of sacrifice : Soma 

advances to the special place of Gods. 

Ho speeds with thousand currents to the reservoir, and passes 
through the filter bellowing as a bull. 

8 The Sovran dips him in the sea and in the streams, and set 

in rivers with the waters’ wave moves on. 

High heaven’s Sustainer at the central point of earth, raisod 
on the fleecy surface Pavamana stands. 

9 He on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend hath 

roared and thundered like the summit of the sky. 

Soma flows on obtaining Indra’s friendly love, and, as they 
purify him, settles in the jars. 

10 He, light of sacrifice, distils delicious meath, most wealthy, 

Father and begetter of the Gods. 

He, gladdening, best of Chcerers, juice that Indra loves, enrich- 
es with mysterious tieasure earth and heaven. 

11 The vigorous and far-seeing one, the Lord of heaven, flows, 

shouting to the beaker, with his thousand streams. 
Coloured like gold he rests in seats where Mitra dwells, the 
Steer made beautiful by rivers and by sheep. 

12 In forefront of the rivers Pavamana speeds, in forefront of 

the hymn, foremost among the kine. 

4 Friend whom Rishis love : rishishdna : the word does not occur elsewheifii 
and its precise meaning is unceitain. ‘ 0 mAi-enjoyed.’ — Wilsou. ‘ Thou who 
playest the part of a Rishi.’ — Ludwig. 

8 The sea and the streams are the firmament and its waters. Soma, who 
is at the same time the God in heaven and the earthly beverage, is saiu 
combine with the solar rays in the clouds, and thus to cause the rain to 
descend. See HiUebrandt, V, I. 215. Central point of earth : the p’ a( * 
of sacrifice. 

11 By rivers and by sheep : by the purifying waters and the wool 
strainer. 



BYMN 86.] 27 78 R1GVBDX. 343 

He shares the mighty booty in the van of war : the well-armed 
Steer is purified by worshippers. 

13 This heedful Pavam&na, like a bird sent forth, hath with his 
wave flowed onward to the fleecy sieve. 

0 Indra, through thy wisdom, by thy thought, 0 Sige, Soma 
flows bright and pure between the earth and heaven. 

U He, clad in mail that reaches heaven, the Holy One, filling 
the firmament, stationed amid the woilds, 

Knowing the lealm of light, hath come to us in rain: he sum- 
mons to himself his own primeval Sire. 

15 He who was first of all to pcnetiate his form bestowed upon 
his race wide shelter and defence. 

From that high station which he hath in loftiest heaven he 
comes victorious to all encounters here. 

LG Indu hath started forth for lndra’s special place, and slights 
not as a Friend the promise of his Fiiend. 

Soma speeds onward like a youth to youthful maids, and gains 
the beaker by a course of hundred paths. 

17 Your songs, exhilarating, tuneful, uttering praise, are come into 

the places where the people meet. 

Worshippers have exilted Soma with their hymns, and milcli- 
kiue have come near to meet him with their milk. 

18 0 Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, pour on ns accumu- 

lated, plentiful, nutritious food, 

Which, ceaseless, tin ice a day shall yield us hero power en- 
riched with store of nourishment, and strength, and tneath. 

19 Far-seeing Soma flows, the Steer, the Lord of hymns, the 

Furtherer of day, of morning, and of heaven. 

Mixt with the stieams he ciuscd the beakers to resound, and 
with the singers’ aid they entered Indra’s heart. 

20 On, with the prudent singers, flows the ancient Sage and guided 

by the men hath roared about the vats. 

Producing Trita’s name, maybe pour forth the meath, that 
Vayuaud that India may become his Friends. 

H HU own primeval Sire : or, the ancient Father of this (All). Indra is 
meant. 

He: Sonia His form: India's. IIU race : Indra and the Gods. 

16 Slights not as a Fiiend the promise of his Friend : ‘the friend leaves 
n °t the stomach of hi? friend.’ — Wilson S&yana derives sarhgiram from 
P'Ottyrt, to shallow, instead of from samjrl , to assent. Hundred paths : 
the interstices of th . wool. 
ot\ a day : at the three appointed sacrifices. 

| Producing Trita't name : literally, begetting, that is, making (jandyan) 
1 ihe of Trita ; meaning probably, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, reminding 



THE HYMNS OF 


344 


[BOOK IX. 


21 He, being purified, hath made the Mornings shine : this, even 

this is he who gave the rivers room. 

He made the Three Times Seven pour out the milky flow: 
Soma, the Cheerer, yields whatever the heart finds sweet. 

22 Flow onward, Soma, in thine own celestial forms, flow, Indu, 

poured within the beaker and the sieve. 

Sinking into the throat of Indra with a roar, led by the men 
thou madcst Surya mount to heaven. 

23 Pressed out with stones thou flowest onward to the sieve, 0 

Indu, entering the depths of India’s throat. 

Far-sighted Soma, now thou lookest on mankind : thou didst 
unbar the cow-stall for the Angirases. 

24 In thee, 0 Soma, while thou purifiedst thee, high-thoughted 

sages, seeking favour, have rejoiced. 

Down from the heavens the Falcon brought thee hitherward, 
even thee, O Indu, thee whom all our hymns adorn. 

25 Seven Milch-kine glorify the T i wny-coloured One while with 

his wave in wool he purifies himself. 

The living men, the mighty, have impelled the Sage into the 
waters’ lap, the place of sacrifice. 

26 Indu, attaining puritv, plunges through the foe, making his 

ways all easy for the pious man. 

Making the kine his mantle, he, the lovely Sage, runs like a 
sporting courser ornvaid through the fleece. 

27 The ceaseless watery fountains with their hundred streams 

sing, as they hasten near, to him the Golden-hucd. 

Him, clad in robes of milk, swift fingers beautify on the third 
height and in the luminous realm of heaven. 

28 These are thy generations of celestial seed : thou art the 

Sovran Lord of all the world of life. 

This universe, 0 Pavarnana, owns thy sway; thou, Indu, art 
the first establisher of Law. 


us of Trita, with whom he is closely connected. 1 Generating the water of 
the threefold (Indra) ’ — Wilson 

21 The Three Times Seven : the seven celestial rivers, corresponding to the 
rivers of earth, multiplied by three to accord with the threefold division or 
the heavens. According to Sftyana, cows are meant. 

23 Thou didst unbar the cow stall : didst recover the cattle stolen by th® 
Panis, that is the rays of light that the fiends of darkness had carried on * 
the great deed of Indra being ascribed to Soma bis inspirer. 

25 Seven Milch-kine: the celestial rivers. 

26 Making the kine his mantle : he who is afterwards covered or rniugl^ 
with milk. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


345 


HYMN 86 .] 

29 Thou art the sea, 0 Sage who bringest all to light : under 

thy Law are these five regions of the world. 

Thou readiest out beyond the earth, beyond the heavens : 
thine are the lights, 0 Pavamana, thine the Sun. 

30 Thou in the filter, Soma Pavamana, art purified to support 

the region for the Gods. 

The chief, the longing ones have sought to hold thee fast, 
and all these living creatures have been turned to thee. 

31 Onward the Singer travels o’er the fleecy sieve : the Tawny 

Steer hath bellowed in the wooden vats. 

Ilymns have been sung aloud in resonant harmony, and holy 
songs kiss him, the Child who claims our praise. 

32 He hath assumed the rays of Sun a for his robe, spinning, as 

he knows how, the triply-twisted thread. 

He, guiding to the newest rules of Holy Law, comes as the 
Women’s Consort to the special place. 

33 On flows the King of rivers and the Lord of heaven : he 

follows with a shout the paths of Holy Law. 

The Golden-hucd is ponied foith with his hundred streams, 
Wealth-bringer, lifting up his voice while purified. 

34 Fain to he cleansed, thou, Pavamana, ponrest out, like wond- 

rous Sura, through the fleece, an ample sea. 

Purified with the hands, pressed by the men with stones, thou 
speedest on to mighty booty-bunging war. 

35 Thou, Pavamana, sendest food and power in streams: thou 

sit test, in the beakers as a hawk on trees, 

For Indra poured as cheering juice to make him glad, as near- 
est and far-seeing bearer-up of heaven. 

36 The Sisters Seven, the Mothers, stand around the Babe, the 

noble, new-horn Infant, skilled in holy song, 

Gandharva of the floods, divine, beholding men, Soma, that he 
may reign as King of all the world. 


29 Thou art the sea: Soma and the sea being alike producers of rain. 
A( jhh: stars. 

SO The region: mid-air; the firmament. The chief, the longing ones: the 
the Maruts. 

32 Spinning., the triply-twisted thread • beating his part in morning, noon- 
and evening saciifice. The Women's Con sot t : Loid and husband of the 
1 ater8 °f heaven. The special place : ‘ the consecrated (vessel).’ — Wilson. 

3f Like wondrous SHra : adorable like the Sun. 

^ The Sitters Seven : the great rivers which may provide water for Soma- 
Oandharva : frequently identified with the Sun, heie meaus Soma, 



THE BYMNS OP 


846 


[BOOK i 


37 As Sovran Lord thereof thou passest through these worlds, 

Indu, harnessing thy tawny well-winged Mares. 

May they pour forth for thee milk and oil rich in sweets ; 
Soma, let t lie folk abide in thy decree. 

38 0 Soma, thou beholdest men from every side : 0 Pavaman 

Steer, thou w. inderest through these. 

Pour out upon us wealth in treasure and in gold : may v 
have strength to live among the things that be. 

30 Winner of gold and goods and cattle flow thou on, set as ir 
pregner, Indu, mid the worlds of life. 

Rich in brave men art thou, Soma, who winnest all : these ho! 
singers wait upon thee with the song. 

40 The wave of flowing mcath hath wakened up desires : tli 

Steer enrobed in milk plumres into the streams. 

Borne on his chariot-sieve the King hath risen to war, au 
with a thousand rays hath won him high renown. 

41 Dear to all life, he sends triumphant praises forth, abundant 

bringing offspring, each succeeding day. 

From Indra crave for us, Indu, when thou art quaffed, the bice 
sing that gives children, wealth that harbours steeds. 

42 When days begin, the strong juice, lovely, golden-hued, i 
recognized by wisdom more and more each day, 

He, stirring both the Rices, goes between the two, the bcare 
of the word of men and word of Gods. 

43 They balm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, cares 
the mighty strength and balm it with the mcath. 


37 Tawny . Marcs: haritah ; Haiits Cf IV. 6. 0 ; 13. 3 ; VII 66. 15 
IX. 63. 9. 

38 Through these : there is no substantive. SAyana supplies apah, waters. 

40 Desires : the meaning of vandnrfh is not certain ; ‘voices (of praise) 
Wilson With a thousand rays : sahisrabhrisht/h : literally, having a thousand 
edges or sharp points. Cp. IX. 83. 5 

41 The blessing: this seems to be very nearly the meaning of brdhma here, 
But the word may as usual le rendeied by prayer, or devotion. ‘Solicit 
Indra (to give) us food productive of progeny.’— -Wilson. 

42 When days begin : according to SAyana, early in the morning. Thfl 
commencement of the year is inoie probably intended The second half of 
the stanza is obscurely expressed. It appears to mean that Soma acts as a 
mediator between heaven and earth, urging men to offer, and the Gods 
receive, worship, bearing up to heaven the hymns and praises of huoift n 
worshippers and biinging back to tbein the assurance that their petifci‘ ,n ® 
will be granted. SAyana’s explanation is different: ‘approaching the 
men (the praiser and the worshipper or secular and sacred people) he l ,R8P ® 
in the midst (of heaven and earth, bestowing), upon the upholder (of . 
rite) both human and divine (riches).’ — Wilson. I follow Ludwig who w 
dhartdri os nominative singular. 



THE R1QVEDA. 


347 


nr mn 87 1 

They seize the flying Steer at the stream’s breathing-place : 
cleansing with gold they grasp the Animal herein. 

{{ Sins? forth to Pavamana skilled in holy song : the juice is 
flowing onward like a mighty stream. 

He glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and like a 
playful horse the Tawny Steer hath run. 

45 Dweller in floods, King, foremost, ho displays his might, set 

among living things as measurer of days. 

Distilling oil he flows, fair, billowy, golden-hued, borne on a 
car of light, sharing one home with wealth. 

46 Loosed is the heavens’ support, the uplifted cheering juice : 

the triply-mingled draught flows round into the worlds. 

The holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our praise, when 
singers have approached his beauteous robe with song. 

47 Thy streams that flow forth rapidly collected run over the 

tine fleece of the sheep as thou art cleansed. 

When, Indu, thou art balrned with milk within the bowl, 
thou sinkest in the jars, 0 Soma, when expressed. 

48 Winner of power, flow, Soma, worthy of our laud : run on- 

ward to the fleece as well-beloved meath. 

Destroy, 0 Indu, all voracious Rakshasas. With brave sons 
in the assembly let our speech be bold. 

HYMN LXXXVII. Soma Pavamana. 

Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee : cleansed by the 
men speed forward to the battle. 

Making thee beauteous like an able courser, forth to the 
sacred grass with reins they lead thee. 

2 Indu, the well-armed God, is flowing onward, who quells the 

curse and guards from treacherous onslaught, 

Father, begetter of the Gods, most skilful, the buttress of 
the heavens and earth’s supporter. 

3 Rishi and Sage, the Champion of the people, deft and sagaci- 

ous, Usana in wisdom, 

43 At the stream! s breathing -place : whore the stream seems to stay still 
a moment to recover breath. Cleansing with gold : with gold-ringed 
ingers. The Animal: Soma. 

45 -4s measurer of days : Soma being identified with the Moon. 

46 Triply. mingled : or, poured into three vessels, the dronakalasn, ddhava- 
'fya> and pHtabhrit. Robe : the integuments which cover the juice : that is 

exterior of the stalk and shoots. 

3 l^and in wisdom: as wise as the celebrated Usanft. S&yana explains 
Afferent! y, regarding Usanft as the discoverer : ‘ Usanas—ha verily by Ins 



348 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR /; 

He bath discovered even their hidden nature, the Cows’ coi 
cealed and most mysterious title. 

4 This thine own Soma lich in meath, 0 Indra, Steer for tl 

Steer, hath flowed into the filter. 

The strong Frce-gi\er, winning hundreds, thousands, hat 
reached the holy grass that never fails him. 

5 These Somas are for wealth of countless cattle, renown ther 

for. and mighty strength immortal. 

These have been sent forth, purified by strainers, like stee( 
who rush to battle fain for glory. 

6 He, while he cleanses him, invoked of many, hath flowed i 

give t fie people all enjoyment. 

Thou whom the Falcon brought, bring dainty viands, best 
thyself and send us wealth and booty. 

7 This Soma, pressed into the cleansing filter, hath run i 

’twere a host let loose, the Courser; 

Like a strong bull who whets his horns keen-pointed, like 
brave wan ior in the fray for cattle. 

8 He issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and four 

kine hidden somewhere in a stable. 

Soma’s stream clears itself for thee, 0 Indra, like lightnin 
thundering through the clouds of heaven, 

9 Cleansing thyself, and home along with Indra, Soma, thou goes 

round the herd of cattle. 

May thy praise help us, Mighty One, prompt Giver, to tli 
full ample food which thou bestowest. 

HYMN LXXXVIII. Soma Pavamto 

For thee this Soma is effused, 0 India: diink of this juice 
for thee the stream is flowing — 

Soma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, even Iudi 
for thy special drink to cheer thee. 


poetic gift discovered the secret milk of those cows which was hidden an 
concealed ’ — Wilson. By title or name of the Cows, water appears to 1) 
intended 

4 Steer for the Steer : or, Strong for the Strong. 

5 Mighty strength immortal: ‘ample food and ambrosia.’ — Wilson. 

8 From oat the loftiest mountain : S&yana makes antdrddreh depend up 0 
Jctichit, somewhere : ‘ This Soma stream has come from on high and b 
detected the cattle which were in a stall i hidden) somewhere within tb 
mountain.’ — Wilson. Grussmann translates : ‘Er ist entsprungen aus den 
hochsten Pressstein.’ * lie hath sprung forth from the most lofty preas-stone. 

9 The hei'd of cattle : Soma accompanies Indra in his expedition to recove 
the stolen cattle. —SAyana. Or the cattle or cows may be the milk with wM 
Soma is mixed. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


349 


UYM$ 89 .] 

2 Like a capacious car hath it been harnessed, the Mighty, to 

acquire abundant treasures. 

Then in the sacrifice they celebrated all triumphs won by 
Nah us in the battle. 

3 Like Vayu with his team, moving at pleasure, most gracious 

when invoked like both Nasatyas, 

Thou art thyself like the Wealth-Giver, Soma! who grants 
a'l boons, like song-inspiring Pashau. 

4 Like Indra who hath done great deeds, thou, Soma, art slayer 

of the Vritras, Fort-drstrovcr. 

Like Pedu’s horse who killed the brood of serpents, thus thou, 
0 Soma, slayest every Dasyu. 

5 Like Agni loosed amid the forest, fiercely he winneth splen- 

dour in the running waters. 

Like one who fights, the roaring of the mighty, thus Soma 
Pavamana sends his current. 

G These Somas pissing thiough the fleecy filter, like rain de- 
scending from the clouds of heaven, 

Have been effused and poured into the beakers, swiftly like 
rivers running lowly seaward. 

,7 Flow onward like the potent band of Maruts, like that 
1 Celestial Host whom none revileth. 

Quickly be gracious unto us like waters, like sacrifice victo- 
rious, thousand-fashioned. 

Thine are King Vanina’s eternal statutes, lofty and deep, 0 
Soma, is thy glory. 

All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, like Arya- 
nian, 0 Soma. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Soma Pavamftna. 

This Chariot-horse hath moved along the pathways, and Pava- 
n ia n a flowed like rain from heaven. 

' I can make nothing out of the second line of this stanza. The version 
l cli I give as a temporary makeshift is founded on Ludwig’s remarks in 
Commentary on the passage, Vol. V. p. 308, of his Riyvcda. Wilson, 
owing &\yana, translates : — ‘ After this ( i . e. after the harnessing of the 
>gon —Note ) miy all the races of men expecting our (attack) go to the 
mble battle.’ ‘ Now let the races of all men, rising up like trees, come 
r to him in order to obtain success,’ would, according to Grassmann, be 
irt “ r the meaning. 

■ Pedu’s horse: given to him by the Asvins. See I. 116 . 6 ; 117 . 9 ; 118 . 
119.10. 

Like sacrifice : according to S<iyana, yctjndh, sacrifice, means here, worthy 
aenfice (thou art) of a thousand shapes, adorable like (Indra) the 
J0 'm battle ’-Wilson, 
his stanza is found also in Book I. 91 . 3. 



350 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX, 

With us hath Soma with a thousand currents sunk in the wood, 
upon his Mother’s bosom. 

2 King, he hath clothed him in the robe of rivers, mounted the 

stiaightest-going ship of Order. 

Sped by the Hawk the drop hath waxed in waters: the father 
drains it, drains the Father’s offspring. 

3 They come to him, red, tawny, Lord of Heaven, the watchful 

Guardian of the meath, the Lion. 

First, Hero in the fight, he seeks the cattle, and with his eye 
the Steer is our protector. 

4 They harness to the broad-wheeled car the mighty Courser 

whose back bears meath, unwearied, awful. 

The twins, tho sisters brighten him, and strengthen — these 
children of one dame — the vigorous Racer, 

5 Four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting together 

in the same container. 

To him they flow, when purified, with homage, and still, 
from every side, are fiist about him. 

G He is the buttress of the heavens, supporter of earth, and in 
his hand are all the people. 

Be the team’s Lord a well to thee the singer : cleansed is the 
sweet plant’s stalk for deed of glory. 

7 Fighting, uninjured come where Gods arc feasted ; Soma, as 
Vritra-slayer flow for Indra. 

Vouchsafe us ample riches very splendid : may we be masters 
of heroic vigour. 

HYMN XC. Soma PavamAna. 

Urged ou, the Father of the Earth and Heaven hath gone 
foith like a car to gather booty, 

Going to India, sharpening his weapons, and in his hand 
containing every treasure. 

2 The father drains it : 1 The scholiast finds it difficult to make sense of 
this: piUi (palako lokah) he supposes to mean the Adhvaryu, who extracts 
the juice of the Soma which is born from the heaven as from a father ;or th 0 
first milker may be the yajamdna and the second the Adhvaryu; or duht 
may be repeated out of respect.’ — Wilson. 

4 Sisters .. . children of one dame: the priest’s fingers. 

5 Four: the quarters of the sky. Container : the firmament. 

6 The team's Lord: Soma as resembling VAyu. Cp IX. 88. 3. Sifya n ® 
explains differently : ‘ may ( Soma ) the fountain (of desires) be possessed ° 
horses for thee (his) adorer.’ — Wilson. 

1 Father : janitd : generator, of earth hy sending rain, and of heaven 
obtaining oblations for the godB,— SAyana. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


351 


HYMN 91.] 

2 To him the tones of sacred song have sounded, Steer of the 

triple height, the Life-bestower. 

Dwelling in wood as Varuna in rivers, lavishing treasure he 
distributes blessings. 

3 Gieat Conqueror, warrior-girt, Lord of all heroes, flow on 

thy way as he who winneth riches ; 

With sharpened arms, with swift bow, never vanquished in 
battle, vanquishing in fight the foemen. 

4 Giving security, Lord of wide dominion, send us both earth 

and heaven with all their fulness. 

Striving to win the Dawns, the light, the waters, and cattle, 
call to us abundant vigour. 

5 0 Soma, gladden Varuna and Mitra ; cheer, Indu Pavamana ! 

India, Vishnu. 

Cheer thou the Gods, the Company of Maruts : Indu, cheer 
mighty Indra to rejoicing. 

6 Thus like a wise and potent King flow onward, destroying 

with thy vigour all misfortunes. 

For our well-spoken hymn give life, 0 Indu. Do ye preserve 
us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XCI. Soma Pavamfttia. 

As for a chariot-race, the skilful Speaker, Chief, Sage, In- 
ventor, hath, with song, been started. 

The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the Car-horse 
to the resting-places. 

1 The drop of Soma, pressed by wise Nahushyas, becomes the 

banquet of the Heavenly People — 

Indu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal, 
with the sheep and cows and waters. 

3 Steer roaring unto Steer, this Pavamana, this juice runs to 

the white milk of the milch-cow. 

Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful Singer, like 
Sura by his fair and open pathways. 

2 Of the triple height: see IX. 71. 7. 

4 VaR to «« ; send us with thy shout or roar. 

6 The liymu ends with the usual concluding half-line of the hymns ascribed 
^ the Vasishthas. 

,1 The skilful Speaker : Soma who makes us eloquent. The resting-places : 
hdandni : the seat*, the reservoirs in which he settles. 

2 Nahushyas : probably a neighbouring people. See YI. 46. 7, and note on 

hhuahaa which has the same meaning. . , 

3 Sdra : Stirya. the Sun. Fair and open : adhvatmdWh : ‘ imperishable. — 
ulson. 



852 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK ij | 

4 Break down the strong seats even of the demons : cleansing 

thee, Indu, robe thyself in vigour. 

Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, those who 
are near and those who yet are distant. 

5 Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new hymn, 

thou Giver of all bounties. 

Those which are high and hard for foes to conquer may we 
gain from thee, Active ! Food-bestower ! 

6 So purifying thee vouchsafe us waters, heaven's light, and cows, 

offspring and many children. 

Give us health, ample land, and lights, 0 Soma, and grant us 
long to look upon the sunshine. 

HYMN XCII. Soma Pavam&m. 

The gold-hued juice, poured out upon the filter, is started like 
a car sent forth to conquer. 

He hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed him, and 
hath rejoiced the Gods with entertainments. 

2 He who beholdeth man hath reached the filter: bearing his 

name, the Sage hath sought his dwelling. 

The Rishis came to him, seven holy singers, when in the bowls 
he settled as Invoker. 

3 Shared by all Gods, most wise, propitious, Soma goes, while 

they cleanse him, to his constant station. 

Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom : to the Five Tribes 
the Sage attains with labour. 

4 In thy mysterious place, 0 Pavamana Soma, are all the Gods, 

the Thrice-Eleven. 

Ten on the fleecy height, themselves, self-prompted, and seven 
fresh riyers, brighten and adorn thee. 

5 Now let this be the truth of Pavamana, there where all singers 

gather them together, 

That he hath given us room and made the daylight, hath holpen 
Manu and lepellcd the Dasyu. 


5 Those : portions of thee, according to S.iyatia 

6 In the second half of the stanza, instead of taking urii, wide, aiopl e > 
with ksJUtram, field, land. S&yana joins it, ws—urUni, with jydtthshi, lights 

* make our laud prosper, diffuse the luminaries widely (in the firmament).’' 
Wilson. 

2 The Rishis : according to S&yana, Bharadvdja, Kasyapa, Gotarna, Ah’i 
Visv,\mitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha. 

3 The Five Tribes : the five Aryan tribes. According to Sftyana, ‘ the fi ye 
classes of beings,' i e. } four castes and the Nish&das. 

4 The Thrice-Eleven : see I. 139. 11. Ten: the fingers. 

5 Manu: as the representative of the Aryan race. 



TEE RIO VEDA. 


353 


rMN 94.] 

j As the priest seeks the station rich in cattle, like a true King 
who goes to great assemblies, 

Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him, and, 
like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled. 

HYMN XCIII. Soma Pavam&na. 

Ten sisters, pouring out the rain together, swift-moving think- 
ers of the sage, adorn him. 

Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of Sftrya and reached 
the vat like a fleet vigorous courser. 

2 Even as a youngling crying to his mothers, the bounteous 
Steer hath flowed along to waters. 

As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens on to the chosen 
meeting-place, the beaker. 

5 Yea, swollen is the udder of the milch-cow : thither in streams 
goes very sapient Indu. 

The kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, the 
Head and Chief with milk within the vessels. 

1 With all the Gods, 0 Indu Pavatuana, while thou art roaring 
send us wealth in horses. 

Hither upon her car come willing Plenty, inclined to us, to 
give us other treasures. 

) Now unto us mete riches, while they cleanse thee, all-glorions, 
swelling wealth, with store of heroes. 

Long he his life who worships thee, 0 Indu. May he, enriched 
with prayer, come soon and early. 

HYMN XCIV. Soma Pavara&na. 

When beauties strive for him as for a charger, then strive 
the songR like soldiers for the sunlight. 

Acting the Sage, he flows enrobed in waters and song as 
’twere a stall that kine may prosper. 


6 The station rich in cattle : ‘ the hall where the victim is stationed ’ — 
r ilson. To great assemblies : or, to war and battle. The wood : the wooden 
it or reservoir. 

\ Ten sisters: the finders wl eh press out the juice of the Soma -plant. 
hinlcers: or thoughts, devotions. According to S&yara, fingers. Child of 
S&yana explains jffh, offspring, by j'lytih wives, i e., the quarters of 
^heaven, called SUrya’s wives because they are made manifest by his ra^s. 

3 The Head and Chief ■ ‘the elevated Soma ’ — Wilson. 

4 Send us ; more literally, open or disclose to us 

* The hymn ends with the half-line which i« the special conclusion of the 
> wns asci ibed to Nodhaa. See Book l. 58, 60 — 64. 

1 The meaning is apparently : when the beautifying 'waters hasten emu- 
r ,s v. b> cleanse Soma as though he wei'e a horse, the voices of singing 
01 shippers vie with each other like the shouts of men who aie fighting for 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /* ’ 

2 The worlds expand to him who from aforetime fouud light to 

spread the law of life eternal. 

The swelling songs, like kine' within the stable, in deep 
devotion call aloud on Indu. 

3 When the Sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a cur 

visiting all worlds, the Hero, 

Becoming fame, mid Gods, unto the mortal, wealth to the 
skilled, worth praise mid the Ever-present, 

4 For glory born he hath come foith to glory : he giveth life 

and glory to the singers. 

They, clothed in glory, have become immortal. He, measured 
in his course, makes frays successful. 

5 Stream to us food and vigour, kine and horses : give us broad 

lights and fill the Gods with rapture. 

All these are easy things for thee to master : thou, Pavamuna 
Soma, quellest foemcn. 

HYMN XCV. Soma Pavamftna, 

Loud neighs the Tawny Steed when started, settling deep in 
the wooden vessel while they cleanse him. 

Led by the men he takes the milk for raiment : then shall he, 
through his powers, engender praise-songs. 

2 As one who rows drives on his boat, he, Gold-hued, sends 

forth his voice, loosed on the path of Order. 

As God, the secret names of Gods he utters, to be declared on 
sacred grass more widely. 

3 Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymns 

are pressing nigh to Soma. 

To him they come with lowly adoration, and, longing, enter 
him who longs to meet them. 

4 They drain the stalk, the Steer who dwells on mountains, 

even as a Bull who decks him on the upland. 


light and life. Soma flows on in his wisdom, blent with the waters, and 
surrounded with hymns into the midst of which he enters as into a stable 
full of kine in order to make them iucrease and multiply. 

3 The stanza is somewhat obscure. Worth praise: or, adorable. The Ever- 
present • the Gods who come to help men Wilson, following SAya.a, trans- 
lates the second line : 1 2 then desirous of bestowing upon mortals the weftM 
that abides with the gods, he (is) to be glorified in the many places of sacrifice 
for the preservation of the riches he has given ’ 

5 All these: all the R&kshasas, according to SAyana. 

1 Deep in the wooden vessel: literally *in the belly of the wood.' 

2 He utters : reveals to the priest who is to declare them at sacrifice. 



THE XIQVEDA. 


355 


HMN 96 .] 

Hymns follow and attend him as he bellows : Trita bears 
Varuna aloft in ocean. 

5 Sending thy voice out as Director, loosen the Invoker’s thought, 
0 Indu, as they cleanse thee. 

■While thou and Indra rule for our advantage, may we be 
masters of heroic vigour. 

HYMN XCYI. Soma Pavam&na. 

In forefront of the cars forth goes the Hero, the Leader, win- 
ning spoil : his host rejoices. 

Soma endues his robes of lasting colours, and blesses, for his 
friends, their calls on Indra. 

2 Men decked with gold adorn his golden tendiil, incessantly 
with steed-impelling homage. 

The Friend of fudra mounts his car: well-knowing, he comes 
thereon to meet the prayer we offer. 

\ 0 God, for service of the Gods flow onward, for food sublime, 
as Indra’s diiuk, 0 Soma. 

Making the floods, bedewing earth and heaven, come from the 
vast, comfort us while we cleanse thee. 
t Flow for prosperity and constant vigour, flow on for happi- 
ness and high perfection. 

This is the wish of all these friends assembled : this is my 
wish, 0 Soma Pavamana. 

Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward, the Father of the 
earth, Father of heaven ; 

Father of Agui, Surya’s generator, the Father who begat Indra 
and Vishnu. 

Brahman of Gods, the Leader of the poets, Rishi of sages, 
Bull of savage creatures, 

Falcon amid the vultures, Axe of forests, over the cleansing 
sieve goes Soma singing. 


Trita : the preparer of the celestial Soma. Varuna : here meaning 
>a; ‘the defeater of enemir .' — Wilson. In ocean: in the firmament. 

4s Director : upavakttva : upavaktft here appears to meau Adhvaryu : 
M dhvaryuh . — S&yana. Loosen the Invoker's thought : aid the Hotar or 
Aing piiest to give free utterance to his thought or hymn. 

Of lasting colours : rabhasflni: ‘hastily made.’— Wilson. ‘Brilliant.’— 
ssmann. 

Steed- impelling : urging him on, as a whip urges on a horse. 

Prom the vast ; from the wide firmameut. There is no substantive in 
text. 

brahman of Gods : thou art Brihaspati, the Lord of Prayer, among the 
°r, chief among the priests. Axe ; the handle of the axe being 



356 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR ft 

7 He, Soma Pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the wave of 

voice, our songs and praises 

Beholding these infoi ior powers in cattle, he rests among them 
as a Steer well- knowing. 

8 As Gladdcner, Warrior never harmed in battle, with thousand 

genial streams, pour strength and vigour. 

As thoughtful Pavamana, urge 0 Indu, speeding the kine, 
the plant’s wave on to Indra. 

9 Dear, grateful to the Gods, on to the beaker moves Somn, 

sweet to Indra, to delight him. 

With hundred powers, with thousand currents, Indu, like 
a strong car-horse, goes to the assembly. 

10 Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained with the 

stone, decking himself in waters, 

Warding off curses, King of all existence, ho shall find way 
for prayer the while they cleanse him. 

11 For our sago fathers. Soma Pavamana, of old performed, by 

thee, their sacred duties. 

Fighting unvanquhhed, open the enclosures : enrich us with 
huge gifts of steeds and heroes. 

12 As thou didst flow for Mann Life-bestowing, Foe-quoller, 

Comforter, rich in oblations, 

Even thus flow onward now con fei ring riches : combine with 
Indra, and bting foith thy weapons. 

13 Flow onward, Soma, rich in sweets and holy, enrobed in 

waters on the fleecy summit. 

Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering and most 
gladdening drink for Indra. 

14 Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty at the 

Gods’ banquet, pour the rain of heaven, 

While thou with rivers roarest in the beaker, and blent with 
milk prolongest our existence. 

15 Purified with our holy hymns, this Soma o’ertakes maligni- 

ties like some strong charger, 

naturally made of the strongest wood — M. Muller. Ludwig thinks tint 
lightning may be intended. According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, 
svadhitih here means a tree with very h.»rd wood. See V. 32 10. 

7 The second line i« obscure. Wilson translates: ‘ the showerer (of bene- 
fits) beholding the hidden (treasure) presides over these irresistible power*) 
knowing about the cattle.’ 

9 Goes to the assembly * ‘ proceeds like a strong horse to battle ’ — Wilson. 
11 The enclosures: the obstructions which keep the rain from falling. 

13 Full of fatness: ghritdvdnti : according to SAyana, ' water- holding* 



jjYMH 96. J THE R1GVEDA. 357 

Like fresh milk poured by Aditi, like passage in ample room, 
or like a docile car-horse. 

16 Cleansed by the prossers, armed with noble weapons, stream 

to us the fair secret name thou beared. 

Pour booty, like a horse, for love of glory : God, Soma, send 
us kine, and send us Vayu. 

17 They deck him at his birth, the lovely Infant, the Maruts 

with their troop adorn the Car-horse. 

By songs a Poet and a Sage by wisdom, Soma goes singing 
through the cleansing filter. 

18 Light-winner, Rishi-minded, Rishi-maker, hymned in a thou- 

sand hymns, Leader of sages, 

A Steer who strives to gain his third form, Soma is, like 
Yiraj, resplendent as a Singer. 

19 Hawk seated in the bowls, Bird wide-extended, the Banner 

seeking kine and wielding weapons, 

Following close the sea, the wave of waters, the great Bull 
tells his fourth form and declares it. 

20 Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing 

to the gain of riches, 

A steer to herds, so, flowing to the pitcher, he with a roar 
hath passed into the beakers. 

21 Flow on with might as Pavamaua, Indu : flow loudly roaring 

through the fleecy filter. 

Enter the beakers sporting, as they cleanse thee, and let thy 
gladdening juice make Indra joyful. 

22 His streams have been efl'uscd in all their fulness, and he 

hath entered, balined with milk, the goblets. 

Singing his psalm, well-skilled in song, a Chanter, he comes 
| as ’twere to his friend’s sister roaring. 

123 Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana ! Indu, besung, as 
lover to his darling. 

As a bird flies and settles in the forest, thus Soma settles, 
purified, in goblets. 

15 By Aditi: regarded as the Cosmic Cow. 
h> Vdyu: the breath of life, life. — Say ana. 
f 1^ JiiH third form : the fortn that he wears in heaven ; 1 the third region 
keav^n).’— Wilson. Virdj ; splendid or most illustrious Indra. — Silyana. 

19 The banner : drapsuh • usually meaning, a drop, or a spark. See IV. 13. 2. 
fourth form ; the Moon. According to S&yana, the region of the Moon 
' s 8a ^ to be above that o* the Sun. . p 

.p * twere to his friend's sister: SAyana explains jdmitn, sister, by jdyam, 

I : ‘ like (a libertine) to the wife of a friend.’ — Wilson. The meaning is 
Probably no more than ‘as lover to his darling’ in the following atansaa. 



358 TBh BTMiVS OP [POOP 

24 With full stream and abundant milk, 0 Soma, thy beams 
come, like a woman, as they cleanse thee. 

He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hath 
roared within the goblet of the pious. 

HYMN XCVII. Soma Pavamilna. 

Made pure by this man’s urgent zeal and impulse, the God 
hath to the Gods his juice imparted. 

He goes, effused and singing, to the filter, like priest to mea- 
sured seats supplied with cattle. 

2 Robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty Sage 

pronouncing invocations, 

Roll onward to the beakers as they cleanse thee, far-seeing at 
the feast of Gods, and watchful. 

3 Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a Prince among 

us, nobler than the noble. 

Roar out as thou art purified, run forward. Do ye preserve 
us evermore with blessings. 

4 Let us sing praises to tho Gods : sing loudly, send ye the 

Soma forth for mighty riches. 

Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter, and let our 
pious one rest in the pitcher. 

5 Winning tho friendship of the Deities, Indu flows in a thou- 

sand streams to make them joyful. 

Praised by the men after the ancient statute, he hath como 
nigh, for our great bliss, to India. 

6 Flow, Gold-hucd, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer : let thy 

juice go to Indra to support him. 

Come nigh, together with the Gods, for bounty. Do ye pre- 
serve us evermore with blessings. 

7 The God declares the Deities’ generations, like Usand, pro- 

claiming lofty wisdom. 

With brilliant kin, far-ruling, sanctifying, the Boar advances, 
singing, to tho places. 

1 Urgent zeal and impulse: hemdnd, by impulse (from the root hi) is sai( l 
by SAyana to mean ‘ by gold,’ that is, by the gold-adorned hand of the priest, 
Measured seats supplied with cattle : ‘the halls prepared (for sacrifice) con- 
taining victims.’ — Wilson. Singing : the sound of the flowing juice is com- 
pared to the priest’s recitation of Bacred tests. , 

7 The Ood .- Soma, who has been called the Father of the Gods. Ly 
U$and : the souud of the flowing and dropping Sonia juice is likened to tue 
song of the famous sage and sacred poet. The Boar : strong, swift Som a - 
Singing: making a sound with the descending drops of juice. SAyana explain 
diflerently : — ‘ making a noise (as) a wild boar (makes a noise) with its foot- ~ 
Wilson, Thfc places ; the filters. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


359 


ffY^y 97.] 

8 The Swans, the Vrishaganas fiom anear us have brought their 

restless spirit to onr dwelling. 

Friends come to Pavam&na meet for praises, and sound in con- 
cert their resistless music. 

9 He follows the Wide-strider’s rapid movement : cows low, as 

’twere, to him who sports at pleasure. 

He with the sharpened horns brings forth abundance : the 
Silvery shines by night, by day the Golden. 

10 Strong Indu, bathed in milk, flows on for India, Soma ex- 

citing strength, to make him joyful, 
lie quells malignities and slays the demons, the King of mighty 
power who brings us comfort. 

11 Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press-stones, 

mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy filter — 

Indu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens, 
for the God’s enjoyment. 

12 As he is purified he pours out treasures, a God bedewing Gods 

with bis own juices. 

Indu hath, wearing qualities by seasons, on the raised fleece 
engaged the ten swift fingers. 

3 The Red Bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing the 
heavens and earth to roar and thunder. 

Well is he hoard like Indra’s shout in battle : letting this voice 
be known he hastens hither. 

A Swelling with milk, abounding in sweet flavours, urging the 
meath-rich plant thou goest ouwnid. 

Raising a shout thou flowest as they cleanse thee, when thou, 
0 Soma, art effused for India. 

.5 Su flow thou on inspiriting, for rapture, aiming death-shafts 
at him who stays the waters. 

Flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager 
for the kine, 0 Soma. 


8 The Swans * the singers, descendants of the Rishi Vrishagana. 

9 The Wide- strider' s rapid movement: the swift course of the Sun. Com 
w as 'twere : Sayana explains gXvah cows, by anye gantdrah . other goers. 

no ns negative, and derives minuite from md. to moa^uie, instead of 
•roro md, to bleat or low : — ‘ other goers cannot overtake him (though he is) 
noving easily.’— Wilson. He with, the sharpened horns : Soma as the Moon. 
Tc silvery light by night and the golden-coloured juice by day. 

12 Wearing qualities by seasons: ‘clothed in pleasaut radiance according to 
he season.’ — Wilson. 

15 Him who stays the waters ; Vritra, 



860 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK II 

16 Pleased with us, Indu, send us as thou flowest good easy paths 

in ample space and comforts. 

Dispelling, as ’twere with a club, misfortunes, run o’er the 
height, run o’er the fleecy summit. 

17 Pour on us rain celestial, quickly streaming, refreshing, fraught 

with health and ready bounty. 

Flow, Indu, send these Winds thy lower kinsmen, setting them 
free like locks of hair unbraided. 

18 Part, like a knotted tangle, while they cleanse thee, 0 Soma, 

righteous and unrighteous conduct. 

Neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come like a youth, 
0 God, a hou>e-posi>e»sor. 

19 For the Gods’ service, for delight, 0 Indu, run o’er the height, 

run o’er the fleecy summit. 

With thousand streams, inviolate, sweet scented, flow on for 
gain of strength that conquers heroes. 

20 Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyoked, like 

coursers started in the contest, 

These brilliant drops of Soma juice run forward. Do ye, 0 
Deities, come nigh to drink them. 

21 So for our banquet of the Gods, 0 Indu, pour down the rain 

of heaven mto the vessels. 

May Soma grant us liches sought with longing, mighty, ei 
ceeding strong, with store of heroes. 

22 What time the loving spirit’s word had formed him Chief o 

all food, by statute of the Highest, 

Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the chosen, well 
loved Mastei in the beaker. 

23 The Sage, Celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours as he flow 

the Genuine for the Truthful. 

The King shall be effectual strength’s upholder : he by the te 
bright reins is mostly guided. 

24 He who beholds mankind, made pure with filters, the Kin 

supreme of Deities and mortals, 

From days of obi is Treasure-Lord of riches: he, Indu, cher 
shes fair w r ell-kept Order. 


17 Winds: cf. ‘ V&yu ia Soma’s guardian God’ (X. 85. 5). 

22 Sftyana’s explanation of the first line is extremely laboured : 
the piahe of the zealous worshipper sanctifies him as that of a noisy 
in front (praises) a distinguished (prince) for the support (he affords).’— 

23 Tke Genuine for the Truthful ; ritivn ritHya : the Soma juice for h^ 1 
The ten bright reins ; or rays, i. e., the fingers. The half -line is difficult. 



TIIE RIQVEDA. 


361 


YMN 97.] 

5 Haste, like a Bteed, to victory for glory, to Indra’s and to 
Vayu’s entertainment. 

Give us food ample, thousandfold : be, Soma, the finder-out 
of riches when they cleanse thee. 

3 Effused by us let God-delighting Somas bring as they flow a 
home with noble heroes — 

Rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the worship^ 
pers of heaven, the best of Cheerers. 

1 So, God, for service of the Gods flow onward, flow, drink of 
Gods, for ample food, 0 Soma. 

For we go forth to war against the mighty : make heaven and 
earth well stablished by thy cleansing. 

3 Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, swifter 
than thought is, like an awful lion. 

By paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send thou us 
happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee 

) Sprung from the Gods, a hundred streams, a thousand, have 
been effused : sages prepare and purge them. 

Bring us from heaven the means of winning, lndu; thou art 
forerunner of abundant riches. 

) The streams of days were poure l as’twere from heaven : the 
wise King doth not treat his friend unkindly. 

Like a son following his father’s wishes, grant to this family 
success and safety. 

I Now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweetness, 
when, purified, thou goest through the filter. 

The race of kine is thy gift, Pavanuna : when born thou 
madest Surya rich with brightness. 

1 Bright, bellowing along the path of Order, thou shinest as the 
form of life eternal. 

Thou flowest on as gladdening drink for Indra, sending thy 
voice out with the hymns of sages. 

1 Pouring out streams at the Gods’ feast with seivice, thou, 

^ Soma, lookest down, i heavenly Eagle. 

Enter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a roar ap- 
proach the ray of Surya. 

I lhrce are the voices that the Courser utters: he speaks the 
thought of prayer, the law of Order. 

SO rite streams of days : the libations of Soma juice which we offered eve»y 
a son : the Soma juice is regarded us the son of the yajamdna or 

34 ‘n W ^° causes 't to be prepared. 

Me Courser is Soma, and the three voices (vychah) or words which he 

er « urc according to S&yaua praises or sacred texts in the form of the thiee 



362 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR 

To the Cow’s Master come the Cows inquiring: the hymns 
with eager longing come to Soma. 

35 To Soma come the Cows, the Milch-kine longing, to Soma 

sages with their hymns inquiring. 

Soma, effused, is purified and blended : our hymns and Trish- 
tup songs unite in Soma. 

36 Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while thou art puri- 

fied How for our welfare. 

Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring : make the voice swell 
and generate abundance. 

37 Singer of true songs, evcr-watchful, Soma hath settled in the 

ladles when they cleanse him. 

Him the Ad h vary us, paired and eager, follow, leaders of sacri- 
fice and skilful-hauded. 

38 Cleansed near the Sun as ’twere, he as Creator hath filled full 

heaven and earth, and hath disclosed them. 

He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield 
the precious meed as to a victor. 

39 He, being cleansed, the Strengthener and Increaser, Soma the 

Bounteous, helped us with his lustre, 

Wherewith our sires of old who knew the footstops found 
light and stole the cattle from the mountain. 

40 In the first vault of heaven loud roared the Ocean, King of 

all being, generating creatures. 

Steer, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, Soma, the Drop 
effused, hath waxen mighty. 

41 Soma the Steer, in that as Child of Waters he chose the Gods, 

performed that great achievement. 

He, Pavamina, granted strength to Indra; he, Indu, gene- 
rated light in Surya. 

42 Make Vayu glad, for furtherance and bounty : cheer Vanina 

and Mitra, as they cleanse thee. 

Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Maruts : make Heaven 
aud Earth rejoice, 0 God, 0 Soma. 

43 Flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked, driving away 

our enemies aud sickness, 

Blending thv milk with milk which cows afford us. We are 
thy friends, thou art the Friend of Indra. 


Vedas. The three tones, low, middle, and high, are probably intended. Oi 
vdhmh (the courser) may mean the bearer of the oblation, yajawlna, ** 
Sdyana explains. 

40 In the first vault ; that is in the highest firmament. The Ocean : Som* 



THE RIGVEDA. 


363 


jfJflT 07.] 

4 pour us a fount of meath, a spring of treasure ; send us a 

hero son and happy fortune. 

Be sweet to Indra when they cleanse thee, Indu, and pour 
down riches on us from the ocean. 

5 Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, hath flowed 

in stream as a flood speeding downward. 

Cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling : Indu hath 
flowed with milk and with the waters. 

6 Strong, wiso, for thee who longest for his coming, this Soma 

here flows to the bowls, 0 Indra. 

He, chariot-borne, sun-bright, and truly potent, was poured 
forth like the longing of the pious. 

1 He, purified with ancient vital vigour, pervading all his 
Daughter’s forms and figures, 

Finding his threefold refuge in the waters, goes singing, as a 
priest, to the assemblies. 

] Now, chn riot-borne, flow unto us, God Soma, as thou art 
purified flow to the saucers, 

Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as Savitar the 
God is, truthful-minded. 

J To feast him, flow mid song and hymn, to V&yu, flow purified 
to Vanina and Mitra. 

Flow to the song-inspiring car-borne Hero, to mighty Indra, 
him who wields the thunder. 


• Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send, 
purified, milch-kine, abundant yielders. 

God Soma, send us chariot -drawing horses that they may 
bring us treasures bright and golden. 

I Send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us, when thou 
art cleansed, what earth containeth, 
l So that thereby we may acquire possessions and Rishihood in 
Jamadagni’s manner. 

Pour forth this wealth with this purification : flow onward to 
the yellow lake, 0 Indu. 

Here, too, the Ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, shall give 
a son to him who cometh quickly. 


his^ 8 P l } u 9^ tr ' 8 forms and figures : Soma pervades, and imparts a share 
s nutritious power to, the grass, herbs, and shrubs which are the vaiied 
^ assumed by Earth his daughter, 

in Jamadagni's manner ; ‘make qur saprsd prayer (sweet) &3 
g 2 a 7 ni -’-W il80n . ' r f N 

I e ow •' the meaning of mdnfc&aM is uncertain. See VII. 44. 3, note 



364 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK Ji 

53 Flow on for us with thi© purification to the famed ford of thee 

whose due is gloiy. 

May the Foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, like a tree’s 
ripe fruit, sixty thousnnd treasures, 

54 Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake 

and Prisana, wrought in battle. 

He sent our enemies to sleep and slew them, and turned away 
the foolish and unfriendly. 

55 Thou comest unto three extended filters, and hastencst 

through each one as they cleanse thee. 

Thou ait the giver of the gift, a Bliaga, a Maghavan for 
liberal lords, 0 Indu. 

56 This Soma here, the Wise, the All-obtainer, flows on his way 

as King of all existence. 

Driving the drops at our assemblies, Indu completely traverses 
the fleecy filter. 

57 The Great Inviolate are kissing Indu, and singing in his place 

like eager sages. 

The wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, and balm 
his form with essence of the waters. 

58 Soma, may we, with thee as Pavaniana, pile up together all 

our spoil in battle. 

This boon vouchsafe us Varuna and Mitra, and Aditi and 
Sindliu, Earth and Heaven ! 

HYMN XCVIII. Soma PavarnHus 

Stream on us riches that are sought by many, best at wining 
strength, 

Riches, 0 Indu, thousandfold, glorious, conquering the great. 


53 To the fumed ford: possibly, as Ludwig suggests, the aid of Somai 
ciaved at some ford of a neighbouring river, famous on account of a battl 
that has been fought there, and destined to be the scene of an approachinj 
conflict. 

64 The first line is conjecturally tianslated after Ludwig, who take 
pvhdna to be the name of a place. Sily ana’s elaborate explanation is d'l 
feient: — ‘These two gieat acts, the raining (of arrows) and the humiliatic 
(of foes), are the givers of happiness ; tin y aie deadly either in a tight o 
boiseback or in a hand-to-hand fight’ — Wilson. Here SAyana explatf 
vndnschatvt (at the blue or yellow lake by ‘in battle with horses,’ an 
prisane (at Piisana ?) by ‘in close, or hand-to-hand encounter.’ Two victoro 
appear to be refened to, and that is about all that can be said. 

66 The three extended filters are Baid to be fire, wind, and sun, in additio 
to the one artificial filter of wool. 

57 The Great Inviolate : the Qods. Kissing : or sipping. 

53 All our spoil in battle : yet t<» be won in the approaching fight wlier« 
we look to Soma for help and victory. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


365 


rrjriv 98 ] 

2 Effused, he hath, as on a cur, invested him in fleecy mail : 
Onwaid hath Indu flowed in streams, impelled, surrounded by 

the wood. 

3 Effused, this Indu hath flowed on, distilling rapture, to the 

fleece : 

He goes erect, as seeking kine, in stream, with light, to sacrifice. 

4 For thou thyself, 0 Indu, God, to every mortal worshipper 
Attractest nches thousandfold, made manifest in hundted 

forms. 

5 Good Vritra -slayer, may we be still nearest to this wealth of 

thine 

Which many crave, nearest to food and happiness, Resistless 
One ! 

6 Whom, bright with native splendour, crushed between the 

pair of pressing-stones — 

The wavy Friend whom Indra loves — the twiee-five sisters 
dip and bathe, 

7 Hun with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved 

of all, 

Who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the Deities. 

B Through longing for this sap of yours yo drink what brings 
ability, 

Even him who, dear as heaven’s own light, gives to our princes 
high renown. 

Indu at holy rites produced you, Heaven and Earth, the 
Friends of men, 

Hill-haunting God the Goddesses. They bruised him where 
the roar was loud. 

For Vritra-slaying Indra, thou, Soma, art poured that he may 
drink, 

Poured for tho guerdon-giving man, poured for the God who 
sitteth there. 

These ancient Somas, at the break of day, have flowed into 
the sieve, 

Snorting away at early morn these foolish evil-hearted ones. 


, My the wood : the wooden vat or trough. 

P ‘.c eking Line: desirouH of the milk which is to be mixed with his juice. 

I ®tanz«i is difficult S Ay ana explains it differently ‘ Divine heaven 
^ earth the progeny of Manu, the Soma juice is generated at your sacrifices, 
’’ hiding in the grinding stones ; (the priests) bruise him at the loud- 
ceremony.’— Wilson. Hill-haunting: cf. IX. 85. 10. 

man : for the good of the institutor of the 

1 Snorting away : driving away with the bubbling sound they make. 



366 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR jj 

12 Friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this Most He 
splendent One, 

Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him whosi 
home is very strength. 

HYMN XCIX. Soma Pa™** 

They for the Bold and Lovely One ply manly vigour like a bow 
Joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the 
Lord Divine. 

2 And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward into strength- 

ening food, 

What time the sacrificer’s thoughts speed on his way the 
Golden-hucd. i 

3 We cleanse this gladdening drink of his, the juice which Indra 

chiefly drinks, — 

That which kine took into their mouths, of old, and princes 
take it now. 

4 To him, while purifying, they have raised the ancient psalm 

of praise : 

And sacred songs which bear the names of Gods have suppli- 
cated him. 

5 They purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve. 

Him they instruct as messenger to bear the sage’s morning 

prayer. 

6 Soma, best Cheerer, takes his seat, the while they cleanse him 

in the bowls. 

He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, the Lord of Song. 

12 Who hath the smell of strength : vlljagandhyam : ‘fragrant and invigo- 
rating.' — Wilson. ‘ Forming or having a wagon-load of goods or spoil.’— S.^P. 
Lexicon. Him whose home is strength: vttja past yam : ‘food and dwellings.’— 
Wilson. ‘ Him who ha8 a house full of goods.’ — S. P. Lexicon. 

1 They: the priests. Ply manly vigour like a bow: ‘stretch the bow of 
manhood.’ — Wilson. They exert all their manly strength, or as Bcnfey, 
suggests, attack and storm the God with prayer and sacrifice, ‘ beseeching ona 
besieging ’ as Milton say b. The Lord Divine : the Asura (Zend, Ahuia), here 
meaning Soma. 

2 By night : kshap/t : * at the end of the night.’ — Wilson. Ludwig tran- 
slates kshapft by * der fiirBt,’ ‘ the prince.’ 

3 Which kine took into their mouths : in the form of the juices of gra* 1 2 3 4 * 6 * 8 
from which the milky portion of the libation is evolved. 

4 S&yana’s explanation of the second line of this stanza, is different 

the fingers exercising their pressure are able (to prepare the oblation) f° r 1 
gods.’ — Wilson. w 

6 He as it were impregns the coio : meaning, perhaps, as Ludwig. eugg e ® ’ 

that the milk becomes efficacious as a libation only when it is mixed w 

Soma juice. 



THE RIOVEDA . 


367 


STIW 100.] 

7 He is effused and beautified, a God for Gods, by skilful men. 
lie penetrates tho mighty floods collecting all he knows therein. 

8 Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to the clean- 

ing sieve. 

Thou, yielding Iudra highest joy, takest thy seat within the 
bowls. 


HYMN C. Soma Pavam&na. 

TnE Guilcloss Ones are singing praise to Indra’s well belovM 
Fiiend, 

As, in the morning of its life, the mothers lick the new horn 
calf. 

2 0 Indu^while they cleanse thee, bring, 0 Soma, doubly-waxing 

Thou in the worshipper’s abode causest all treasures to in- 
increase. 

3 Set free the song which mind hath yoked, even as thunder 

frees the rain : 

All treasures of the earth and heaven, 0 Soma, thou dost 
multiply. 

4 Thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some victorious 

warrior’s steed, 

Hastening onward through the fleece like a swift horse who 
wins the prize. 

5 Flow on, Sage Soma, with tby stream to give us mental power 

and strength, 

Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for Varuna. 

6 Flow to the filter with thy stream, effused, best winner, thou, 

of spoil, 

0 Soma, as most rich in sweets for Indra, Vishnu, and the 
Gods. 

? The mothers, void of guiles, caress thee, Golden-coloured, in 
the sieve, 

I As cows, 0 Pavamana, lick the new-born calf, as Law com- 
mands. 


J Collecting a if fa k nowg tfa re f n : the meaning of this half-line is not clear : 
he is recognized amongst these (people) as the giver (of riches)/ 

J OuUelcss Ones : the vamtivart waters. 

II commandi : vtdharnani : see Bergaigne, La Religion Vtdiqne, 

^wuiann* 10 * 6 ^ ^ 8acr ^ oe * , ~^ Wilson. ‘ In the realm of heaven/ — 



368 THE HYMNS OF [HOOK /* 

8 Thou, Pavamana, movest on with wondrous rays to great re- 

nown. 

Striving within the votary’s house thou drivest all the glooms 
away. 

9 Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above 

the earth. 

Thou, Pavamana, hast assumed thy coat of mail in majesty. 

HVMN Cl. Soma Pavam&na, 

For first possession of your juice, for the exhilarating drink, j 
Drive ye away the dog, my friends, drive ye the long-tongued ! 
dog away. 

2 He who with purifying stream, effused, comes flowing hither- 

ward, 

Indu, is like an able steed. 

3 The men with all-pervading song send unassailable Soma forth, 
By pressing-stones, to sacrifice. 

4 The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is des- 

tined, flow, 

Effused, the source of Indra’s joy : may your strong juices 
reach the Gods. 

5 Indu flows on for Indra’s sake : thus have the Deities declared. 
The Lord of Speech exerts himself, Ruler of all, because of 

might. 

6 Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams the ocean 

flows, 

Even Soma, Lord of opulence, the Friend of Indra, day to 
day. 

7 As Pushan, Fortune, Bhaga, comes this Soma while they mak 

him pure. 

He, Lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the eart 
and heaven. 

8 The dear cows lowed in joyful mood together to the gladd? 

ing drink. 

The drops as they were purified, the Soma juices, made the 
paths. 

9 0 Pavamana, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy to 

famed. 

Which the Five Tribes have over them, whereby we may # 
opulence. 

6 The coat of mail: drdpim ; aee IX. 86. 14. 

1 Drive ye away : prevent dogs or R&kshasas from drinking the Soffit J 11 



THE R1QVEDA . 


369 


UYMN 102 J 

10 For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of our 

weal, 

Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders of the 
light. 

11 Effused by means of pressing-stones, upon the ox-hide visible, 
They, treasure-tinders, have announced food unto us from 

every side. 

12 These Soma juices, skilled in song, purified, blent with milk 

and curd, 

When moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely Suns. 

13 Let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpour- 

ing juice : 

As Bhrigu’s sons chased Makha, so drive ye the greedy hound 
away. 

14 The Friend hath wrapped him in his robe, as in his parents’ 

arms, a son. 

He went, as lover to a dame, to take his station suitor-like. 

15 That Hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both 

worlds apart, 

Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, priest- 
like, in his place. 

to Soma upon the ox’s skin through the sheep’s wool flows purified. 

I Bellowing out, the Tawny Steer goes on to indra’s special 
place. 

HYMN Cl I. Soma PavamUna. 

Tub Child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan 
of sacrifice, 

Surpasses all things that are dear, yea, from of old. 

)j ^ ie place, near the two pressing-stones of Trita, hath he 
occupied, 

Secret and dear through seven lights of sacrifice. 

igveda^' Hppareutl ^» a (icalon whose name does not occur again in the 

lii Pedal pl " ce: ‘Prepaid station.’— Wilson. The vessel containing the 
nation appropriated to Indra. 

he streams : literally ‘ the great,* ‘waters’ being understood. 

>. 457. I 8/? de I > . ted 10 Pro . f ‘ Macdo »ell (Journal of the R. A S., July, 1893, 
ffi cult L or 10 t'Nmslatiou aud explanation of this and the following very 
leparfta »i ftnzas * . place: faraway in heaven where Trita presses and 
K, 0 f 16 celestial Soma for Indra. He : Soma. Bear : to Soma. Seven 
toll whipK C Q e ’ P r °L a hly the seven rays or tongues of the sacrificial fire 
Pfifices w closely connected. 4 Through the seven ordinance* of 



370 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ZOOK IX, 


3 Urge to three courses, on tho heights of Trita, riches in a 

stream : 

He who is passing wise measures his courses out. 

4 Even at his birth the Mothers Seven taught him, for glory, 

like a sage, 

So that he, firm and sure, hath set his mind on wealth. 

5 Under his sway, of one accord, are all the guileless Deities: 
Warriors to be envied, they, when they are pleased. 

6 The Babe whom they who strengthen Law have generated, 

fair to see, 

Much longed for at the sacrifice, most liberal Sage, — 

7 To him, united, of themselves, conic the young Parents of the 

rite, 

When they adorn him, duly weaving sacrifice. 

8 With wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the stall of 

heaven, 

Speeding at solemn rite the plan of Holy Law. 


HYMN CTII. Soma ravamftua. 

To Soma who is purified as ordering Piiest the song is raised: 
Bring meed, as ’twere, to one who makes thee glad with hymns. 

2 Blended with milk and curds he flows on through the 

wool of the sheep. 

The Gold-hued, purified, makes him throe seats for rest. 

3 Ou through tho long wool of the sheep to the meath-droppui| 

vat he flows : 

The ltishis’ sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him. 

4 Shared by all Gods, Infallible, the Leader of our holy hymn 
Golden-hued Soma, being cleansed, hath reached the bowls. 


3 s Tli<> n»am justification of my interpretation/ nays Prof. Macdouell, 
that l supply no extraneous wool with ‘tifoi,’ but, explain it by the thu 
hue. The meaning of my translation is : ‘ Do thou, Soma, on the heights 
Trita, direct the fertilizing streams which produce wealth into the ebanfl; 
of Trita, for thou knovvest these chanuels, having measured them out wi 
thy sti earns/ Three courses: or chanuels, of Tiita. He who is passing mi 
Soma His : Trita’s. 

4 The Mothers Seven : the Seven Rivers. 

f> Warriors to be envied : the meaning of tho line is uncertain. 

6 They who strengthen law : according to S&yana, the vasativari waters^ 

7 The young Parents of the rite : ever-young, fresh and strong Heaven 

Earth. 

2 Three seats for rest : three reservoirs in which he may settle. Tbe<* 
nakalata, the ddhavantya, and the pdtabhrit. , 

' 3 The Rtshis ’ sevenfold quire: ‘ the seven metres of the Rmis. — 



THE RIO VEDA. 


371 


1YMN 105.] 

5 After thy Godlike qualities, associate with Indra, go, 

As a Priest purified by priests, Immortal One. 

6 Like a car-horse who shows his strength, a God effused for 

Deities, 

Tlie penetrating Pavamana flows along. 

HYMN CIV. Soma PavamUna. 

Sit down, 0 friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself : 
Deck him for glory, like a child, with holy rites. 

2 Unite him bringing household wealth, even as a calf, with 

mother kino, 

Him who hath double strength, the God-delighting juice. 

3 Purify him who gives us power, that he, most Blessed One, 

maybe 

A banquet for the Troop, Mitra, and Varuna. 

4 Voices have sung aloud to thee as finder-out of wealth for us : 
We clothe the hue thou nearest with a robe of milk. 

5 Thou, Indu, art the food of Gods, 0 Sovran of all gladdening 

drinks : 

As Friend for friend, be thou best finder of success. 

6 Drive utterly away from us each demon, each voracious fiend, 
The godless and the false : keep sorrow 7 far away. 

HYMN CV. Soma PavamAna. 

Sing ye aloud, 0 friends, to him who makes him pure for glad- 
dening drink : 

r lhey shall make sweet the Child with sacrifice and laud. 

2 Like as a calf with mother cows, so Indu is urged forth and sent, 
Glorified by our hymns, the God-delighting juice. 

3 Effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the Troop, 
He who hath been eft used, most i ich in meath, for Gods. 

I Flow to us, Indu, passing strong, effused, with wealth of kine 
and steeds : 

I will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue. 

5 Lord of the tawny, Indu, thou who art the Gods’ most special 
food, 

As Friend to friend, for splendour be thoq good to men. 

« AAer thy Qodlike qualities : according to SAyana, ‘ to the hosts of the gods.' 
enetrating ; vydnasih : ‘spreading widely iuto the vessels.’ — Wilson. 

* ; ' Associate him the support of the mansion with the mater- 

o J?) aa ca ^ (with the mother).’— Wilson 
< Troop : the banded Maruta. 

5 of the tamy; hartndm : SAyana supplies paidntfm, cattle. 



8 ? 2 THE HYMXS OF [ BOOK a. 

6 Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each voracious 
foe : 

0 Indu, overcome and drive the false afar. 

HYMNCVI. Soma Pitvanifon 

To Indra, to theMighty Steer, may these gold-coloured juices go 
Drops rapidly produced, that find the light of heaven. 8 ’ 

2 Effused, this juice victorious flows for Indra, for his maintc- 

nance. 

Soma bethinks him of the Conqueror, as he knows. 

3 May India in his raptures gain from him tho grasp that gath- 

ers spoil, 

And, winning waters, wield the steer-strong thunderbolt. 

4 Flow vigilant for Indra, thou Soma, yea, Indu, run thou on : 
Bring hither splendid strength that finds the light of heaven. 

5 Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra’s sake the mighty juice, 
Path-maker thou, far seeing, with a thousand ways. 

6 Best finder of prosperity for us, most rich in sweets for Gods, 
Proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths. 

7 0 Indu, with thy streams, in might, flow for the banquet of 

the Gods : 

Rich in meath, Soma, in our beaker take thy place. 

8 Thy drops that swim in water have exalted Indra to delight- 
The Gods have drunk thee up for immortality. 

9 Stream opulence to ns, ye drops of Soma, pressed and purified, 
Pouring down rain from heaven in Hoods, and finding light. 

10 Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool 

of the sheep, 

Shouting while purified before the voice of song, 

11 With songs they send the Mighty forth, sporting in wood, 

above the fleece : 

Our psalms have glorified him of the triple height. 

12 Into the jars hath he been loosed, like an impetuous steed 

for war, 

And lifting up his voice, while filtered, glided on. 

13 Gold-hued and lovely in his course, through tangles of the 

wool he flows, 

And pours heroic fame upon the worshippers. 


Tbe hymn is a sort of rifaccimento of Hymn 104. 

2 For hit maintenance : bhdrdya: or. for battle. The Conqueror: Indra. 
11 Him of the triple height .- tripruhthdm : the three heights are probaW 
the firmament, the mountain, and the altar. ‘ Abiding in three recoptade* 
—Wilson. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


373 


HYMN 107.] 

14 Flow thus, a faithful votary : the streams of meath have 
been effused. 

Thou eomest to the filter, singing, from each side. 


HYMN CVII. Soma PavamAna> 


Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, Soma, the best of 
sacred gifts, 

Who, friend of m« n > hath run amid the water-streams. 

He hath preyed Soma out with stones. 

2 Now, being purified, flow hither through the fleece inviolate 

and most adoious. 

We gladden thee in waters when thou art effused, blending 
thee dtill with juice and milk. 

3 Pressed out for all to see, delighting Gods, Indu, Far-sighted 

0 * 0 , is mental power. 

4 finalising thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest in a watery 

robe : J 

Giver of wealth, thou sittest in the place of Law, 0 God, a 
fountain made of gold. 

5 Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath, he hath sat in 

the ancient gathering-place. 

Washed by the men, the Strong, Far-seeing One streams forth 
nutritious food that all desire. 

6 0 Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the 

sheep’s long wool, 

Thou hast become a Singer most like Angiras : thou madest 
Surya mount to heaven. 

7 Bountiful, best of furtherers, Soma floweth on, Rishi and 

Singer, keen of sight. 

Thou hast become a S <ge most welcome to the Gods : thou 
madest Surya mount to heaven. 

8 Pressed out by pressers, Soma goes over the fleecy backs of 

sheep, J 

boes, even as with a mare, in tawny-coloured stream, goes 
m exhilarating stream. 

9 Down to the water Soma, rich in kino, hath flowed with cows, 

with cows that have been milked. 


1 Se : the priest. 

5 ^ aCt ^ aW P* ace Law-ordained sacrifice. 

? 6 udder for dear meath : extracting the sweet and 

us 3 uice from the stalk and tendrils of the Soma plant. 



374 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 

They have approached the mixing- vessels as a sea : the cheerer 
streams for the carouse, 

10 Effused by stones, 0 Soma, and urged through the long wool 

of the sheep, 

Thou, entering the saucers as a man the fort, gold-hued hast 
settled in the wood. 

11 He beautifies himself through the shea's long fine wool, like 

an impetuous steed in war, 

Even Soma Pavamana who shall be the y>y of sages and of 
holy bards. 

12 0 Soma, — for the feast of Gods, river-liko he hath swelled 

with surge, 

With the stalk’s juice, exhilarating, resting not, into the vat 
that drops with meath. 

13 Like a dear son who must bo decked, the Lovely hath 

clad him in a shining robe. 

Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into *, e 
rivers from their hands. 

14 The living drops of Soma juice pour, as they flow, the glad- 

dening drink, 

Intelligent drops above the basin of the sea, exhilarating, 
finding light. 

15 May Pavamana, King and God, speed with his wave over the 

sea the lofty rite : _ . 

May he by Mitra’s and by Varuna’s decree flow furthering the 

lofty rite. 

1G Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose borne is 
in the sea — 

17 Soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for I ndra with his 

Marut host : , m 

He hastens o'er the fleece with all his thousand streams: mei 
make him bright and beautiful. 

18 Purified in the howl and gendering the hymn, wise Soma joy* 

among the Gods. , , . .. 

Robed in the flood, the Mighty One hath clad himself w 
milk and settled in the vats. 


9 They have approached the mixing-vessels like a sea: samvdraydni, ^ 
tamvri, to cover, enclose, surround, must, apparently, mean the vessel ^ 
contain the juices and not the juices themselves as Sftyana explains . 

enjoyable juices go (to the pitcher as waters) to the ocean. —Wilson. . 

12 0 Soma he, is a sort of periphrasis for Soma in the nominftbve 

14 Of the sea : of the firmament, or sea ot air. 



THE RIG VEDA . 


375 


BYXN 108.] 

19 0 Soma, Indu, every day thy friendship hath been my delight. 
Many fiends follow me ; help me, thou Tawny-hued ; pass on 

beyond these barriers. 

20 Close to thy bosom am I, Soma, day and night, 0 Tawny-hued, 

for friendship sake. 

Surya himself refulgent with his glow have we o’ertaken in his 
course like birds. 

>1 Deft-handed ! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea. 
Thou, Pavamanu, makcst riches flow to us, yellow, abundant, 
much-desired. 

12 Making thee pure and bright in the sheep’s long wool, thou 

hast bellowed, steer-like, in the wood. 

Thou flowcsfc, Soma Pavamana, balmcd with milk unto the 
special place of Gods. 

13 Flow on to win us strength, flow on to lofty lore of every kind. 
Thou, Soma, as Exhilarator wast the first to spread the sea 

abroad for Gods, 

H Flow to the realm of earth, flow to the realm of heaven, 0 
Soma, in thy righteous ways. 

Fair art thou whom the sages, 0 Far-sccing One, urge onward 
with their songs and hymns. 

25 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the ravamanas in a stream, 
Girt by the Mai uts, gladdening, Steeds with Inra’s strength, 
for wisdom and for dainty food. 

!6 Urged onward by the pressers, clad in watery robes, Indu is 
speeding to the vat. 

He gendering light, hath made the glad Cows low, the while 
lie takes them as his garb of state. 

HYMN CYIIf. Soma Pavam&na. 

For Indra, flow thou Soma on, us gladdening jnice most • 
sweet, intelligent, 

Great, cheering, dwelling most in heaven. 

2 Thou, of whom having drunk the Steer acts like a steer : 
drinking of this that finds the light, 

19 Many fiends ■ the text has only purftni, many, in the neuter plural, 
ayaoa supplies rakshdhsi R&kshasas or fiends. Pass on beyond these barriers : 
overcome those who surround me.’ — Wilson. 

^0 C lose to thy bosom am l : ‘I (delight) in thy presence.’ — Wilson. 

'G/urf the sea: antarikshe kalasc vd , in the firmament or in the beaker, 
Sftyana 

^ The Pavamdnas : * thy purified juices.’ — Wilson. 

^ Th e Steer acts like a steer : vrishabhd vrtshdydte: ‘the showerer Indra is 
v, ^ ora ^d.’— -Wilson. Etasa : one of the horses of the Sun; or a horse in 
neral a horse coxnee to the battle.’— SAyana. 



376 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK H 

He, Excellently Wise, is come to strengthening food, to spoil 
and wealth like Etasa. 

3 For, verily, Pavamana, thou hast, splendidest, called all the 

generations of 
The Gods to immortality. 

4 By whom Dadhyach Navagva opens fastened doors, by whom 

the sages gained their wish, 

By whom they won the fame of lovely Amrita in the felicity of 
Gods. 

5 Effused, he flo'weth in a stream, best rapture-giver, in the long 

■wool of the sheep, 

Sporting, as ’twere the waters' wave. 

6 He who from out the rocky cavern took with might the red- 

refulgent watery Cows, — 

Thou masterest the stable full of kine and steeds : burst it, 
brave Lord, like one in mail. 

7 Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laud- worthy, speeding 

through the region and the flood, 

Who swims in water, roars in wood ; 

8 Increaser of the water, Steer with thousand streams, dear to 

the race of Deities ; 

Who born iu Law hath waxen mighty by the Law, King, God, 
and lofty Ordinance. 

9 Make splendid glory shine on us, thou Lord of strengthening 

food, God, as the Friend of Gods : 

Unclose the fount of middle air. 

10 Roll onward to the bowls, 0 Mighty One, effused, as Prince 

supporter of the tribes. 

Pour on us r.tiu from heaven, send us the waters 7 flow : incite 
our thoughts to win the spoil. 

11 They have drained him the Steer of heaven, him with ft 

thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy, 

Him who brings all thing excellent. 

12 The Mighty One was born Immortal, giving life, lightening 

darkness with his shine. , 

Well-praised by sages he hath by his wondrous power assume 
the Threefold as his robe. 

4 Dadhyach Navagva : Padhyach was the son of Atharvan the pviest wbo 
first obtained fire and offered Sonia and pi ayer to the Gods Here he w c 
a Navagva and consequently one of the Angirases. See both names m • 
I„ Index. Won the fame of lovely Amrita : * obtained the sustenance oi 
delicious (ambrosial) water.’ — Wilson. 

12 The Threefold: the morning, noon, and evening libation. 



THE RIGVEHA. 


377 


UYHN 109.] 

13 Effused is he who brings good things, who brings us bounteous 

gifts and sweet refreshing food, 

Soma who brings us quiet homes : 

14 He whom our Indra and the Marut host shall drink, Bhaga 

shnll drink with Aryaman, ° 

By whom we bring to us Mitra and Varuna and Indra for our 
great defence. 

15 Soma, for Indra’s drink do thou, led by the men, well-weapon- 

ed and most gladdening, 

Flow on with greatest store of sweets. 

16 Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra’s heart, as rivers pass into 

the sea, 

Acceptable to Mitra, Vayu, Varuna, the noblest Pillar of the 
heavens. 


HYMN CIX. Soma Pavamlna. 

Pleasant to Indra’s, Mitra’s, Piishan’s Bhaga’s taste, speed 
onward, Soma, with thy flowing stream. 

2 Let Indra drink, 0 Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, and all 

Deities for strength. 

3 So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the vast, im- 

mortal dwelling-place. 

4 Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as Father of the Gods, 

to every form. 

o How on, 0 Soma, radiant for the Gods and Heaven and Earth, 
and bless our progeny. 

6 Thou, bright Juice, art Sustainer of the sky : flow, mighty, in 

accordance with true Law. 

7 Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream through the 

great fleece as in the olden time. 

8 Born, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the Light-finder 

make all blessings flow\ 


m’ °f this stanza is G&yatri YavamadhyA. that is G&yatri having 

firat ? 1 c ® barley-corn, thick in the middle and tapering at both ends : 
na of eight syllables, then one of twelve, and lastly another of eight, 


The Rishis 
&ons of * A 


's iis are the Agnayo DhishnyAh, sacrifical Agnis or 
■ ara the Supreme Deity of post-Yedic times. 


Fires, said to be 

5 pacioua°abod^— \vflso^ m0ria " -place : ‘flow for immortality and 

e nteiT° of? f° rm * to * orms °r essences of the Gods into which he 

to every power, to aid us in every way. 



378 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK ft, 

9 Indu, while cleansed, keeping the people safe, shall give us 
all possessions for our own. 

10 Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong courser 

bathed, to win the prize. 

11 The pressers purify this juice of thine, tho Soma, for delight, 

and lofty fame. 

1 2 They deck the Gold-hucd Tnfant, newly-born, even Soma, 

Indu, in the sieve for Gods. 

13 Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, Sage for good 

fortune in the waters’ lap. 

14 He hears the beauteous name of Indra, that wherewith he 

overcame all demon foes. 

15 All Deities are wont to drink of him, pressed by the men and 

blent with milk and curds. 

16 He hath flowed forth with thousand streams effused, flowed 

through the filter and the sheep’s long wool. 

17 With endless genial flow the Strong hath run, purified hy the 

waters, blent with milk. 

18 Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go forth, 0 

Soma, into India’s throat. 

19 The mighty Soma with a thousand streams is poured to Indra 

through the cleansing sieve. 

20 Indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for Indra, for the 

Steer, for his delight. 

21 Lightly, for sheen, they cleanse thee for the Gods, gold-colour- 

ed, wearing water as thy robe. 

22 Indu to [ndra streams, yea, downward streams, Strong, flow- 

ing to the floods, and mingling there. 

HYMN CX. Soma Pavam&nft. 

O’erpowering Vritras, forward run to win great strength : 
Thou speedest to subdue like one exacting debts. 

2 In thee, effused, 0 Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great su- 

premacy in tight: 

Thou, Pavamana, enterest into mighty deeds. 

3 0 Pavamana, thou didst generate the Sun, and spread the m 

ture out with power, 

Hasting to us with plenty vivified with m ilk. 

14 He bears: according to Sftyana, the translation of the first h»l 
would be : Indra’ s fair body he supports, wherewith, etc. 

3 With plenty vivified with milk ; ‘with abundant wisdom that p roC 
cattle (for thy worshippers)/— Wilson, _ 



q?MN 111.] THE RtGVEDA. 


379 


4 Thon didst produce him, Deathless God ! mid mortal men 

for maintenance of Law and lovely Amrita : 

Thou evermore hast moved making stiength flow to us. 

5 All round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as 'twere 

a never-failing well for men to drink, 

Borne on thy way in fragments from the pressor's arms. 

6 Tk 3 n, beautifully radiant, certain Heavenly Ones, have sung 

to him their kinship as they looked thereon, 

And Savitar the God opens as 'twere a stall. 

7 Soma, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the 

hymn to thee for mighty strength and for renown : 

So, Hero, urge us onward to heroic power. 

8 They have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky 

the old primeval milk of heaven that claims the laud : 

They lifted up their voico to Indra at his birth. 

9 As long as thou, 0 Pavamana, art above this earth and heaven 

and all existence in thy might, 

Thou standest like a Bull the chief amid the herd. 

10 In the sheep's wool hath Soma Pavamana flowed, while they 

cleanse him, like a playful infant, 

Indu with hundred powers and hundred currents. 

11 Holy and sweet, while purified, this Tndu flows on, a wave of 

pleasant taste, to Indra, — 

Strength- wiuncr, Treasure-finder, Life-bes tower. 

1^ S 

* Ou flow thou on, subduing our assailants, chasing the demons 
w n 1 to encountered, 

Weii-arin-xd. and conquering our foes, 0 Soma. 


HYMN CXI. Soma Pavamana. 

Wirii this his goi^ n splendour purifying him, he with his 
own allies subdues an enemies, as Sura with his own allies. 
eaii 8 ing himself with stit* m of juice he shines forth yellow- 
med and red, when with the ^raisers he encompasses all 
^ forms, with praisers having seven mouths. 


6 famVFfp 1 * : pieCea of the cru8hed 8talk and sh( >ots of the Soma- plant. 
Vasiiruohaa ? ra diant: vasnvitchah : according to SAyana, a proper name, 

^ away the 


AU enemies : the fieuds of darkness. 


allies ; 


,^ e ® un with his attendant beams of light. All foi'ms : 

brand t * 1 a 1 lunar mansion* nnonivlinor to fiAimne A 


As Silva with his own 


i lf n ’’ aP ^he lunar mansions, according to SAyana. According to 
irases a S r 8U ™x St \ ft j ^ eau ^* With the praisevs : rikvahhih : perha 


A,1 girases 


Hille- 
perhaps the 


• are intended. Havina seven mouths • that, is, one mouth each, the 



3S0 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK H 

2 That treasure of the Panis thou discoveredst ; thou with thy 

mothers deckest thee in thine abode, with songs of worship 
in thine home. 

As ’twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy songs 
resound in joy. He with the ruddy-hued, threefold hatl 
won life-power, he, glittering, hath won life-power. 

3 He udvcs intelligent, directed to the East. The very beau 

teous car rivals the beams of light, the beautiful celestia 
car. 

Hymns, lauding manly valour, came, inciting Indi a to success 
that ye may be unconquered, both thy bolt and thou, botl 
be uncouquered in the war. 

HYMN CXII. Soma Pavamftna 


We all hive various thoughts and plans, and diverse are the 
ways of men. 

The Brahmin seeks the worshipper, wright seeks the cracked, 
and leech the maimed. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake, 


2 The smith with ripe and seasoned plants, with feathers of tli 

birds of air, 

With stones, and with enkindled flames, seeks him who hatl 
a store of gold. Flow, Indu, flow for India’s sake. 

3 A bard am I, my dad’s a leech, mammy lays corn upon th 

stones. 

Striving for wealth, with varied plans, we follow our desire 
like kine. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 


2 Treasure of the Panis : the rays of light carried off and con £P ‘ oZ au! 
demons of darkness. Th>/ Mothers: apparently the Dawns. Ac . co /u e f ext a ndi 
the vasal) vari waters. Threefold: there is no substantive J* ’ 

is uncertain what tridhatuhhih refers to. S&yana refe*- , n mau , 
waters, and explains it by ‘ the supporters .of the 

thinks that the beverages, consisting of three Aa * ken of as tire 

Soma juice are intended. Probably the sometimes spoken of ss tw 

(cf. VIII. 41. 3), are meant. , 

1 3 The very beauteous car : of Son's- Beams of light ; sunbeams. 


The hymn app-ars to be an old popular song transformed into an a^dre 
to Soma by aching to each stanza a ref™,,, whmh has no con , 
the subject of the song But see Vedische Studien t . p. 
translated in Muir’s 0 S. Texts , V. 424. b , , ea( ] 

1 The Brahman: ‘This verse distinctly proves that the pnes o 

formed a profession ’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts , I. 252 # With tto# 

2 Plants : meaning here reeds which were made into - gton* 

and with, enkindled fames : according to SHyana, with ‘ ® nI b e ab 

form the heads of the arrows Who hath a store of gold . and win 

to pay well for the arrows which the artisan makes 

3 My dad: tatdh : a familiar expression, corresponding to noni», “ 



THE RIQVEDA. 


381 


YMN 113.] 

. The horse would draw an easy car, gay hosts attract the laugh 
and jest. 

The male desires his mate’s approach, the frog is eager for the 
flood. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

HYMN CXIII. Soma Pavam&na. 

Let Vritra-slaying Indra drink Soma by Saryana van’s side, 
Storing up vigour in his heart, prepared to do heroic deeds. 
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

> Lord of the Quarters, flow thou on, boon Soma, from Arjika land, 
Effused with ardour and with faith, and the true hymn of 
sacrifice. Plow, Indu, flow for Indra’ s sake. 

I Hither hath Surya’s Daughter brought the wild Steer whom 
Parjanya nursed. 

Gandharvas have seized hold of him, and in the Soma laid 
the juice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

1 Splendid by Law ! declaring Law, truth-speaking, truthful in 
thy works, 

Enouncing faith, King Soma ! thou, 0 Soma, whom thy maker 
docks. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

5 Together flow the meeting streams of him the Great and truly 

Strong. 

The juices of the juicy meet. Made pure by prayer, 0 Golden- 
lined, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

6 0 Pavamana, where the priest, as he recites the rhythmic 

prayer, 

Lords it o’er Soma with the stone, with Soma bringing forth 
delight, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

* 0 Pavamana, place me in that deathless, undecaying world 
^herein the light of heaven is set, and everlasting lustre shines. 
F ]u v, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

I® Make me^amortal in that realm where dwells the King, Vivas- 
van’s Son, 

Where is the secret shrine of heaven, where are those waters 
young and fresh. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

1 Saryandvdn : a lake in the Kurukshetra district. 

2 Of the Quarters : of the four regions of the sky. Arjika land: accord- 
8 on Sa W country of the Rijlkas. Cf VIII. 7. 29. 

, it w ^ om P^janya nursed : the mighty Soma-plant whose 
been Petered by the God of the rainy cloud. Sfirya's Daughter: 
« or *" a lth. Cf. IX. 1.6. Qandharvas: guardians of the heavenly 
See Vol. I., Index. * 

ma ^ er •' the Soma-presser, or the institutor of the sacrifioe 1 2 the 
W er (°f the rite)/— Wilson. 

°] j Yama, the ruler of departed spirits, son of Vivasv&n. See 



332 


THE MOVE DA, 


Wok i 

9 Makemeimmort ilin that realm where they move evenas they lj s 
In the third sphere of inmost heaven where lucid worlds a; 
full of light. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

] 0 Make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and strong desir 
The region of the radiant Moon, where food and full deligl 
are found. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake, 
ll Make me immortal in that realm where happiness and trai 
sports, where 

Joys and felicities combine, and longing wishes are fulfill# 
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

HYMN CX1V. Soma Pavamdm 

The man who walketh as the Laws of Indu Pavam&na bid, — 
Men call him rich in children, him, 0 Soma, who hath met th; 
thought. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

2 Kasyapa, Rishi, lifting up thy voice with hymn-composers’ lauds 
Pay reverence to King Soma born the Sovran Ruler of thi 

plants. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

3 Seven regions have their several Suns ; the ministering priests 

are ^even ; 

Seven are the Aditya Deities, — with these, 0 Soma, guard thou 
us. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

4 Guard us with this oblation which, King Soma, hath been 

dressed for thee. 

Let not malignity conquer us, let nothing evil do us bam 
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

9 Where they move even as they list : ‘where action is unrestiaiued.’— Muir. 
‘ Wlieie the sun wanders at will.’ — Wilson. 

10 0/ the radiant Moon : the adjective bmdhndsya, of the ruddy or IrilliM 
stands without a substantive. ‘Sun’ is supplied by S&yaua. ‘Dean'** 
tralenden.’ — Ludwig. See Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologic, I., 390. 

As regards the joys of the departed, referred to iu stanzas 7 — 12._r ro Jf , 
von Roth observes (Jouru. Amer. Orient, Soc. iii. 343, quoted ^y P 1 ’ 1 l ' 1 
0. 8. Texts, V. 307) ‘ The place where these glorified ones are h ve 13 . v 7 
In order to show that not merely an outer court of the divine dwellings 
set apart for them, the highest heaven, the midst or innermost part of heav 
is expressly spoken of ns their seat. This is tbefr place of rest ; an 
divine splendour is not disfigured by any specification of particular eau ^ 
or enjoyments, such as those with which other religions have been wo 
adorn the mansions of the blest .. . There they are happy : the language 
to describe their condition is the. same with which is denoted the moB e 
felicity.’ 

2 Kasyapa: the peer of the hymn addresses himself. > , y |# ti 

3 Seven regions : the regions of the sky, the four quarters with mterw ^ 

points. They arc sometimes said to be five, Bix, or seven in num • 
more frequently eight. Aditya Deities: Varuua, Mitra, Airyatnan, 
Daksha, Ansa, and perhaps Dh&tar. Other enumerations i are j, 

their number is sometimes said to be eight See M. Muller, VtnM y 

p. 252f (Sacred Books of the East, XXXI I). 




II io ii hath the Mighty risen before the dawning, and come to 
us with light from out the darkness. 

Fair-shapcn Agni with white-shining splendour hath filled at 
birth all human habitations. 

2 Thou, being bom, art Child of Earth and Heaven, parted 

among the plants in beauty, Agni ! 

The glooms of night thou, Brilliant Babe, subduest, and art 
come forth, loud roaiiug, from thy Mothers. 

3 Here, being manifested, lofty Vishnu, full wise, protects his 

own supremest station. 

When they have offered in his mouth their sweet milk, to 
him with one accord they sieg forth piaises. 

4 Thence bearing food the Mothers come to meet thee, with 

food for thee who givest food its increase. 

These in their altered form again thou meetest. Thou art 
Invoking Priest in homes of mortals. 

5 Priest of the holy rite, with car that glitters, refulgent Ban- 

ner of each act of worship, 

Shaimg in every God through might and glory, even Agni 
Guest of men I summon hither. 

6 So Agni stands on earth's most central station, invested in 

wcJl-decorated garments. 

horn, red of hue, where men pour out libations, 0 King, as 
great High Priest bring the Gods hither. 

^ 0\cr the earth and over heaven, 0 Agni, thou, Son, hast over 
spread above thy Parents. 

0lU0 > Yonthfullest ! to hose who long to meet thee, and 
hither bring the Gods, 0 Mighty Victor. 

1 The Mighty: Agni. ~ “ ~ 

g ^ on 9 the plants : according to S&yana, in the fire-sticks. 

"Shippers * ^ * orm °* Ag n i who is his manifestation on earth. They : 

n ; the plants wh'ch nourish life. In their altered, form: a» 

5 l^ Wh ! ch ** fire > consumes. 

Gods ^ * W ’ ^ ecause as the bearer of men’s oblations supports all 



384 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK, 


HYMN IT. Ag 

Gladden the yearning Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful : brii 
them, 0 Lord of Seasons, knowing seasons, 

With all the Priests Celestial, 0 Agni. Best worshipper a 
thou of all Invokers. 

2 Thine is the Herald’s, thine the Cleanser’s offioe, thinker a 

thou, wealth-giver, true to Order. 

Let us with Svahi offer up oblations, and Agni, worthy Go 
pay the Cods worship. 

3 To the Cods’ pathway have we travelled, ready to execu 

what work we may accomplish. 

Let Agni, for he knows, complete the worship. He is tl 
' Priest : let him fix rites and seasons. 

4 When we most ignorant neglect the statutes of you, 0 Deiti 

with whom is knowledge, 

Wise Agni shall correct our faults and failings, skilled i 
assign each Cod his fitting season. 

5 When, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, mortals bethin 

them not of sacrificing, 

Then shall the prudent and discerning Agni worship the God: 
best worshipper, in season. 

6 Because the Father hath produced time, Leader of all ou 

solemn rites, their brilliant Banner: 

So win by worship pleasant homes abounding in heroes, an 
rich food to nourish all men. 

7 Thou whom the Heaven and Earth, thou whom the Water' 

and Tvashtar, maker of fair things, created, 

Well knowing, all along the Fathers’ pathway, shine vritl 
resplendent light, enkindled, Agni. 

HYMN II I. Agni 

0 King, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for strength, a 
manifest in beauty. 

He shines, all-knowing, with his lofty splendour : chasing 
black Night he comes with white rayed Morning. 

1 Seasons: the proper times of worship. Priests Celestial : Agni being tht 

Hotar, the Asvins the Adlivaryus, Tvashtar the Agnldh, and Mitrft 
Upavaktar. AsvalAyana, as cited by SAyana, gives a different enumeiatw 
See Wilson, note. _ , .. 

2 The Herald is the Hotar or invoking priest : the Cleanser is the * j| 
Purifier, the assistant of the Brahman. Svdhd : an exclamation = Ave ! or 

3 The Gods' pathway : ‘ the path that leads to the gods ’ — Wilson. 

<J The father : PrajApati ; or the insfcitutor of the sacrifice. — SAyapa. 

7 The Fathers' pathway : the way that leadg to the home of the Man 

Ancestral Spirits. _ nr . fh m- 

1 0 Kitty : Ludwig takes vdjan here as the nominative case, wn ^ 
rayed Morning: I follow Ludwig in taking rusatlm as inatrunisuw 
rusatvdm. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


385 


jYMN L] 


2 Having o’ercome the glimmering Black with beauty, and 

bringing forth the Diime, the Great Sire’s Daughter, 

Holding aloft the radiant light of JSurya, as messenger of heav 
en lie shines with treasures. 

3 Attendant on the Blessed Dame the BlessM hath come : the 

Lover follovveth his Sister. 

Agni, far-spreading with conspicuous lustre, hath compassed 
Night with whitely-shming garments. 

4 His goings-forth kindle as ’twere high voices, the goings of the 

auspicious Friend of Agni. 

The rays, the bright beams of the strong-jawed, mighty, 
adorable Steer are visible as he cometh. 

5 Whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, his who 

is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent, 

Who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres, sportive 
and piercing even to the summit. 

6 His powers whoso chariot fellies gleam and glitter have loudly 

ro.ired wlulo, as with teams, he hasted, 
lie, the most Godlike, far-extending envoy, shines with flames 
ancient, resonant, whitely-shining. 

I So bring us ample wealth : seat thee as envoy of the two 
youthful Matrons, Earth and Heaven. 

Let Agni rapid with his rapid horses, impetuous with impe- 
tuous Steeds, come hither. 


IIYMN IV. 


Agni. 


To thee will I send praise and bring oblation, as thou hast 
merited lauds when we invoked thee. 

A fountain m the desert art thou, Agni, 0 Ancient King, to 
man who fain would worship. 

2 Thou unto whom resort the gathered people, as the kine seek 

the warm stall, 0 Most Youthful, 

Thou art the messenger of Gods and mortals, and goest glori- 
ous with thy light between them. 

3 Making thee grow as ’twere some noble Infant, thy Mother 

nurtures thee with sw. et affection. 

Over the desert slopes thou passes t longing, and seekest, like 
s omo beast set free, thy fodder. 

2 Glimmering Black : dark night, faintly lighted by stars. The Great Sire » 
yr Dawn, daughter of Dyaua or Heaven, 
i £, ^ ter ' Agni who appears together with Dawn, 
i ■ j e i'ue is almost unintelligible. ‘The blazing flames of that mighty 
bs’ndo nut (deter) his adorers.’- Wilson. 


1 To 


Man : 


to Pfiru. 



ooo m/s hi mm 8 \jf L &O0R } 

4 Foolish arc we, 0 Wise and free from error : verily, Agni, th 0 

dost know thy grandeur. 

There lies the form : he moves, and licks, and swallows, ant 
as llouse-Lord, kisses the Youthful Maiden. 

5 He rises ever fresh in ancient fuel : smoke-bannered, gray, \ 

makes the wood his dwelling. 

No swimmer, Steer, he presses through the waters, and to h 
place accordant mortals bear him. 

6 Like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest, tl 

twain with their ten girdles have secured him. 

This is a new hymn meant for thee, 0 Agin : yoke as it wei 
thy car with parts that glitter. 

7 Homage and prayer are thine, O Jatavedas, and this my son 

shall evermore exalt thee. 

Agni, piotect our children and descendants, and guard wit 
ever-wdtehful care our bodies. 

HYMN V. Agn 

His only is the Sea, holder of treasures: born many a tun 
he views the hearts within us. 

He hides him in the secret couple’s bosom. The Bird dwell 
in the middle of the fountain. 

2 Inhabiting one dwelling-place in common, strong Stallions ant 

the Mares have come together. 

The sages guard the seat of Holy Order, and keep the highea 
names concealed within them. 

3 The Holy Pair, of wondrous power, have coupled : they formec 

the Infant, they who bred produced him, 

The central point of all that moves and moves not, the whili 
they wove the Sage’s thread with insight. 

4 The form ; the Ahavanfya fire. The Youthful Maiden : according tc 
Silyana, either the mixed oblation, oi the young earth as compared with hK 
witheicd plants. 

(5 The twain : the two arms, with their grasping fingers which pi oduce to 
by agitation of the fire-stick. 

1 He : Agni as the Sun. The secret couple's bosom, : the meaning is uncer 
tain. The fire-sticks in which Agni is latent may be intended. ‘He wait* 
on the cloud in the neighbourhood of the hidden (firmament).’ — Wilson. 1" 
Bird: the Sun. The fountain : the source of light in the east. 

2 Strong Stallions ■ pei haps the flames of the Sun. Mares : waters of ® 

firmament. The highest names : of Agni, such as JfHavedas and VaisvAnafl 
Concealed within them • in their secret hearts, for worship. . 

3 The Holy Pair: Heaven and Earth. The Infant : Agni. The while W 
wove: viyanta h in the text is unintelligible, and I follow Wallis h J . reft fj 
vayantt in its stead. The Sage's thread; the series of sacrifices to which AJ® 
is entitled. 



TBE ElQVEDA. 


S8T 

4 Fof tracks of Order and refreshing viands attend from ancient 

times the goodly Infant. 

Wearing him as a mantle, Earth and Heaven grow strong by 
food of pleasant drink and fatness. 

5 lie, calling loudly to the Seven red Sisters, hath, skilled in 

sweet drink, brought them to be looked on. 

Ho, born of old, in middle air hath halted, and sought and 
found the covering robe of Pushan. 

6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned ; to 

one of these may come the troubled mortal. 

He standeth in the dwelling of the Highest, a Pillar, on sure 
ground where paths are parted. 

7 Not Being, Being in the highest heaven, in Aditi’s bosom and 

in Daksha’s birthplace, 

Is Agni, our first-born of Holy Order, the Milch-cow and the 
Bull in life’s beginning. 

HYMN VI. Agni. 

This is that Agni, he by whose protection, favour, and help 
the singer is successful \ 

Who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth en- 
compassed with far-spreading lustre. 


5 The Seven red Sisters : the seven tongues or flames of Agni, called kdlt, 
rdli, etc.— Sfiyana. And found the covering robe of Pdshan : and hath 
appeared in the form of Pushan or the Sun. 

6 Pathways : long lines of light. The Wise ; the Fathers. The troubled 
V'tal: the man who is longing for daybreak may approach the pathway of 
[ht Wallis translates the second line differently : — ‘ The support of life in 
e home of the highest, at the divergence of the ways, standeth on sure 
ouud ’ I/e : apparently Agni as the Sun, to whom the troubled or sinful 
*n comes for light or forgiveness. Pillar: support and stay of the uni- 
!r8e j like the Skambha of Atharva-veda, X. 7. Where paths are parted: 
here ends the dark road which the Sun travels by night, and the bright 
Mi of his daily course begins. 

7 Not Being, Being: nonexistent, existent. ( asachcha sachcha, ‘both 
evolved and evolved,’ identifying Agni with the first cause and first effect, 

. a reference to such. texts as Asad evarn ulam agra dsit ‘the non existent 
ist^nt (or unevolved) was verily before this (creation) ' — Wilson, from 
tyapa Aditi = Svvafiig } Daksha = lvlpytl(l' Heie Agni is lopiesented as 
rajapati who as a yet undeveloped embryo is at the same time both male 
'finale. — Ludwig. Or Daksha may be the Sun and Aditi the Earth. ‘In 
c Agui is identified with all things. These latter hymns to Agni are veiy 
;* CU!e i, : the notions are mystical; many of the terms are unusual, or are 
filBoii » Hn< * construction is singularly elliptical and loose.’ — 

This Hymn has been wholly translated, with comments, by Wallis. Sed 
0im ology of the Rigveda , pp. 48 — 50. 



3S8 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X. 


2 Agni, the Holy One, the everlasting, who shines far beaming 

with celestial splendours ; 

He who hath come unto his friends with friendship, like a 
fleet steed who never trips or stumbles. 

3 He who is Lord of all divine oblation, shared by all living 

men at break of morning, 

Agni to whom our offerings are devoted, in whom rests he 
whose car, through might, is scatheless. 

4 Increasing by his strength, while lauds content him, with 

easy flight unto the Gods he travels. 

Agni the cheerful Priest, best Sacriticer, balms with his tongue 
the Gods with whom he mingles. 

5 With songs and adorations bring ye hither Agni who stirs 

himself at dawn like Indra, 

Whom sages laud with hymns as Jataved.is of those who wield 
the sacrificial ladle. 

6 In whom all goodly treasures meet together, even as steeds 

and riders for the booty. 

Inclining hither bring us help, 0 Agni, even assistance most 
desired by Indra. 

7 Yea, at thy birth, when thou hadst sat in glory, thou, Agni, 

wast the aim of invocations. 

The God. came near, obedient to thy summons, and thus at- 
tained their rank as chief Protectors. 

HYMN VII. Agni, 


O Agni, shared by all men living bring us good luck for 
sacrifice from earth and heaven. 

With us be thine intelligence, Wonder-Worker! Protect us, 
God, with thy far-reaching blessings. 

2 These hymns brought forth for thee, O Agni, land thee f»r 
bounteous gifts, with cattle and with horses. 


3 The exact meaning "of the second line is uncertain and in whow (tl>« 
sacriticer), whose sacrifice is undisturbed by his foes, throws his choice 

tl °5 A tdawT: with Grassmann I take uarXm here to be a locative. sa . VH, ’ a 


5 At dawn : witn urassmann x «•*■*«* ~ — A^^wto 

explains it as bhogdndm utsrdiinam, the bestowe. of enjoyments. According 
Ludwig’s interpretation, the translation of the first line would be s Witji 
and adorations bring ye hither the Lord of mommy shine, the qinveniifc 

6 Riders : sdpttvantah: the word properly means possessed of hoi > or 
is applicable todiivers as well as riders. For the booty : to win the sj > 
to guard it from others. 

1 Thine intelligence : the meaning of praketaih heus is n ot clear. 
translates it by * indications (of favour) ’ ; Ludwig by wishes , 
mann by ‘light.’ 



THE RIG VEDA. 


389 


HYHS 8 .] 

Good Lord, when man from thee hath gained enjoyment, by 
hymns, 0 nobly-born, hath he obtained it. 

3 Agni I deem my Kinsman and my Father, count him my 

Brother and my Friend for ever. 

I honour as the face of lofty Agni in heaven the bright and 
holy light of Stirya. 

4 effectual, Agni, are our prayers for profit. He whom, at home, 

thou, Priest for ever, guardest 

Is rich in food, drawn by red steeds, and holy : by day and 
night to him shall all be pleasant. 

5 Men with their arms have generated Agni, helpful as some kind 

friend, adorned with splendours, 

And stal dished as Invoker mid the people the ancient Priest, 
the sacrifice’s lover. 

6 Worship, thyself, 0 God, the Gods in heaven : what, void of 

knowledge, shall the fool avail thee ? 

As thou, 0 God, hast worshipped Gods by seasons, so, nobly- 
born ! to thine own self pay worship. 

7 Agni, be thou our Guardian and Protector : bestow upon us 

life and vital vigour. 

Accept, 0 Mighty One, the gifts we offer, and with unceasing 
care protect our bodies. 

HYMN Yin. Agni. 

Agni advances with his lofty banner : the Bull is bellowing to 
the earth and heavens. 

He hath attained the sky’s supremest limits : the Steer hath 
waxen in the lap of waters. 

2 The Bull, the youngling with the hump, hath frolicked, the 
strong and never-ceasing Calf hath bellowed. 

Bringing our offerings to the Gods’ assembly, he moves as 
Chief in his own dwelling places. 


® The second line is remarkable as a direct declaration of the relationship 
and Siirya. — Ludwig. 

? Ee thou our Guardian and Protector : aritd, says S&yana, is a protector 
)ln °bvious dangers and gopit a preserver from perils that are unseen, 

} Advances : through the firmament. His lofty banner: the lightning. 
a<er » ' <>f the firmament. 

2 ^ever-ceasing : asremA f ; according to S&yana, ‘ undecaying.’ * Glorious.’-— 



890 


THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR * 


3 Him who hath grasped his Parents’ head, they stablished at 
sacrifice as a wave of heavenly lustre. 

In his swift flight the red Dawns borne by horses refresh their 
bodies in the home of Order. 


4 For, Vasu, thou precedost every Morning, and still hast been 
the Twins’ illuminator. 

For sacrifice, seven places thou retainest while for thine own 
self thou engendercst Mitra. 


5 Thou art the Eye and Guard of mighty Order, and Varuna 

when to sacrifice thou comest. 

Thou art the Waters’ Child, 0 Jatavedas, envoy of him whose 
offering thou acceptest. 

6 Thou art the Leader of the rite and region, to which with thine 

auspicious teamB thou tendest. 

Thy light-bestowing head to heaven thou liftest, making thy 
tongue the oblation-bearer, Agni. 

7 Through his wise insight Trita in the cavern, seeking as ever 

the Chief Sire’s intention, 

Carefully tended in his Parents’ bosom, calling the weapons 
kin, goes forth to combat. 

8 Well-skilled to use the weapons of his Father, Aptya, urged 

on by Indra, fought tho battle. 

Then Trita slew the foe seven-rayed, three-headed, and freed 
the cattle of the Son of Tvashtar. 


3 His Parents' hccul : the head or forehead of Heaven and Earth, or of the ‘w 
fire-sticks. The red Dawns ■ or the flames, according to Sdyana. There is 
substantive in the text. The home of Order • probably tho bun, : if : the Da* 
are spoken of ; and the place of law-ordained sacrifice according to Stya?» 

explanation. ulum{nator . fighter-up of day and night, that ib, of the erf 
of night, or very early morning. But see H.llebrandt, Vavu^ «** **' 
p 116. Seven places: seven altars for the sacrificial fire. Mitr . 

5 Varuna: King and Governor. , firmament. 

6 And region: thou knowest, and canst show the way through, t ^ 

7 In the cavern: in the secret depth of the firmament ( 

Chief Sire’s intention : wishing to carry out the design Ind ™ h P_Wil»o»- 
Dyaus or Dyu. His Parents: ‘the parental heaven andeart^ w 
Calling the weapons kin : calling the weapons, » e. t 'e loolte which 
duced from tho sky, akin, simply means claiming them ** °, _f tr jsui).- 

father Dyu as they are in the next stanza spoken of as paternal (p y 
Macdonell, J. R- A. S., July, 1893, p. 428 ^ 

8 Of his Father: belonging to the Chief Sire of stanza 7. 0 r 

■necial enemy of Trita is Trisiraa the son of Tvashtar, called . . by 

tL Multiform. The cattle of the Son of Tvashtar : the cows impr 

him, the showers obstructed by the fiend. see Mu ir. 

For the legends founded on the last three stanzas * h ®. J. I 1 
0. S. Texts, V. PP. 229 -233. See also Bergaigne, La Rehgwn vw x 



THE RIO VEDA. 


891 


HYMS 10 ] 

9 Lord of the brave, Tndra cleft him in pieces who sought to 
gain much strength and deemed him mighty. 

He smote his throe heads from his body, seizing the cattle of 
the omniform Son of Tvashtar. 

HYMN IX. Waters. 

Yu, Waters, are beneficent: so help ye us to energy 
That we may look on great delight. 

2 (live us a portion of the sap, the most auspicious that ye have, 
bike mothers in their longing love. 

3 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye send us on ; 
And, Waters, give us procreant strength. 

4 The Waters be to us for drink, Goddesses for our aid and bliss : 
Let them stream to us health and strength. 

5 I beg the Floods to give us balm, these Queens who rule o’er 

precious things, 

And have supreme control of men. 

6 Within the Waters — Soma thus hath told me — dwell all balms 

that heal, 

And Agni, ho who blcsseth all. 

7 0 Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm, 
So that 1 long may see the Sun. 

8 Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought, 

If I have lied or falsely sworn, Waters, remove it far from me. 

9 The Waters 1 this day have sought, and to their moisture 

have we come : 

0 Agni, rich in milk, come thou, and with thy splendour cover me. 

HYMN X. Varna. Yam!. 

Fain would I win my friend to kindly friendship. So may the 
S.igc, come through the air’s wide ocean, 

Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a son, the 
issue of his father. « 

1 Great delight : according to the scholiast, meaning perfect knowledge of 
Brahma. See Wilson’s note. 

3 The meaning of the stanza is obscure. It appears to have been recited 
by the priest at the consecration of a new house. 

'the first three stanzas are to be repeated by Br&hmans at their morning 
ablutions. See Colebrooke’s Essays, Essay I. On the Rcliyious Ceremonies of 
Me Hindus. See also Lainuan, Sanskrit Raider, p. 370 
6 Stauzas 6—9 aie repeated from Book I. 23. 20—23. 

Ya,nia and Yarnt, son and daughter of VivasvAn, are the Ilishis as well as 
tho deities of the hynm which is a dialogue between them. 

^ma and Yami are, says von Roth, ‘as their names denote, twin brother 
a Q<l sister, and are the first human pair, the originators of the race. As the 



392 TUE HYMNS OF [BOOK z 

2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her who i 8 

near in kindred as a stranger. 

Sons of the mighty Asura, the Heroes, supporters of the 
heavens, see far around them. 

3 Yea, this the Immortals seek of thee with longing, progeny of 

the sole existing moitnl. 

Then let thy soul and mine be knit together, and as a loving 
husband take thy consort. 

4 Shall we do now what we ne’er did aforetime ? we who spake 

righteously now talk impurely ? 

Gandharva in the floods, the Dame of Waters - such is our 
bond, such our most lofty kinship. 

5 Even in the womb God T.aditar, Vivificr, shaping all forms, 

Greater, made us consorts. 

None violates his holy ordinances : that we are his the heavens 
and earth acknowledge. 

G Who knows that earliest day whereof thou speak est HVlio 
hath beheld it 1 Who can here declare it 1 

Hebrew conception closely connected the parents of mankind by making the 
woman formed fiom a poition of the body of the man, so by the Indian 
tradition they are placed in the relationship of twins. This thought is laid 
by the hymn in question in the mouth of Yarn! herstdf, when she is made to 
say : ‘ Even in the womb the Creator made us for husband and wife.’ ’ Profes- 
sor Muller, on the other hand, says (Lectures on the Science of Language, 
second series, p 510) : ‘ There is a curious dialogue between her (Yami) and 
her brother, where she (the night) implores her brother (the day) to make her 
bis wife, and where he declines her offer, ‘because,’ as he says, ‘they have 
called it a sin that a brother should marry his sister.” Again, p. 521, ‘There 
is not a single word in the Veda pointing to Yama and Yaml as the first couple 
of mortals, the Indian Adam and Eve . .. If Yamahad been the first created 
of men, surely the Vedic poets, in speaking of him, could not have passed tins 
over in silence.’ See, however, the passage from the Atbarva-veda, XVIII. 
3, 13, to be quoted further on. [Reverence ye with an oblation Yauia, the Min 
of Vivasvat, the assembler of men, who was the fust of men that died, 
the first that depaited to this (celestial) world].’ Muir, 0.8. Texts, V . p. 
288. Yama as the fir-*t man may peihaps be, as Prof. Max Muller holds, i 

Inter phase of leligion.s thought.’ 

1 Yaml speaks The Sage: red/dh : Yama. whom she wishes to give her a 

son. Come: SAvana explains the masculine participle jaganvitn by the femi- 
nine gatavatl, that is, I, Yarn! who have come. The earth : which, otherwise, 
will remain without human inhabitants. » 

2 Yama replies. .4 strait per : of a different family, and so a lawful wife- ^ 0 
of the mighty Asura : the spies or sentinels spoken of in stanza 8. 

3 Yaml speaks. . 

4 Yama replies. Gandharva: VivaavAn or the Sun. In the floods: in _ 
waters of the firmament. The Dame of Waters: fWnnyu. ‘ His aqueous • 
— Muir. Such in our hand : these are our parents. But see Ludwig, tcoe 
nenesten Arheiten, u. 9. w, p. 107. 

5 Vat tit HnMilcti. 



JIYMN 10]. THE MOVED A. S93 

Great is the Law of Varuna and Mitra. What, wanton t wilt 
thou say to men to tempt them 1 

7 I, Yami. am possessed by love of Yama, that I may rest on the 

same couch beside him. 

I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car-wheels 
let us speed to meet each other. 

8 They stand not still, they never close their eyelids, those 

sentinels of Gods who wander round us. 

Not me— go quickly, wanton, with another, and hasten like a 
chariot wheel to meet him. 

9 May Surya 3 eye with days and nights endow him, and ever 

may his light spread out before him. 

In heaven and earth the kindred Pair commingle. On Yami 
lie the unbrotherly act of Yama. 

10 Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers and 

sisters will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk. 

Not me, 0 fair one, — seek another husband, and make thine 
arm a pillow for thy consort. 

11 Is he a brother when no lord is left her 1 Is she a sister when 

Destruction cometh ? 

Forced by my love these many words I utter. Come near, 
and hold me in thy close embraces. 

12 I will not fold mine arms about thy body : they call it sin 

when one comes near his sister. 

Not me, — prepare thy pleasures with another: thy brother 
seeks not this from thee, 0 fair one. 


6 Yama replies. To tempt them : the meaning of itchyd is uncertain. The 
5 P. Lexicon explains it by ‘deceitfully.’ ‘ Falsely.’— Grassmann. ‘What 
wye^t thou, who punishest men with hell ? ’ — Wilson. 

7 Same couch : see Benfey, Vedica und Verwandtcs , pp 39 — 42, for a difter- 
! ut explanation of samdnt f y6nan. 

8 Yuma replies. Sentinels of Gods: recording angels who watch men’s 

ictums. 

9 Yami speaks The meaning seems to be : if there be any guilt let me 
e it upon myself, and let not Yama’s life be shortened by way of punish* 

went. The kindred Pair : Day and Night. 

10 Yama replies. ‘ Make thine arm a pillow.'— Wilson. 

U Yami speaks. De&tmction : Nirriti ; the utter extinction of the human 
niff + The meaning is, a true brother will not let his sifter lack a husband, 
ft true sister will not let her brother lack a wife.’ — Wibou’s Translation, 
Star's note. 

12 Yama replies. 



394 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X, 

13 Alas ! thou art indeed a weakling, Yama ; we find in thee u 0 

trace of heart or spirit. 

As round the tree the woodbine clings, another will cling 
about thee girt as with a girdle. 0 

14 Embrace another, Yami ; let another, even as the woodbine 

rings the tree, enfold thee 

Win thou his heart and let him win thy fancy, and he shall 
form with thee a blest alliance. 


HYMN XL 


Agni, 


Tiie Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of heaven : the 
Son of Adi ti can never be deceived. 

According to his wisdom Varuna knoweth all : may he, the 
Holy, hallow times for sacritice. 

2 Gandharvi spake : may she, the Lady of the flood, amid the 
river’s roaring leave my heart untouched. 

May Aditi accomplish all that we desire, and may our eldest 
Brother tell us this as Chief. 


3 Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, splendid, 
with heavenly lustre, hath shone out for man, 

Since they, as was the wish of yearning Gods, brought forth 
that yearning Agni for the assembly as the Priest. 


13 Yarn! speaks. | 

SAy ana's interpretation of this difficult hymn differs in many places from 
that which I have adopted, and Wilson's Translation should be consulted for 
the views of the gre.it Indian Commentate and the Pandits of his tiin<\ The 
hymn has been tiamlitmated, translated, and annotated by Dr Muir, 0 8. 
Texts, V. 288 — 291. It has also been translated by the authors of the Sic 
benzig Liedcr t and fully di-eusscd by Di J Ehni in Der Vcdische Aiytliusdet 
Yama. fcsee also llillebrandt, Vcdische Mythologie , I. p. 495. 

The subject of the hymn is the origin and institution of sacrifice, first j 
established by Agni under the authority of Varuna, who must be regarded as j 
the deity of the first otanza. 

1 The Bull: the mighty Soma. For the Bull: for mighty Varuna. The 

mill: of heaven : the divine Soma juice, to be used at sacrifice. The Son of 
Aditi • Varuna. According to his wisdom : yathd dhiyet : the two words tnken 
together as an adverbial phrase. According to S-lyana, it is Agni who nnlk 9 
the streams of prosperity from heaven for the worshipper. I have generally 
followed Piscbel’s interpretation of the first five stanzas ( Vedische Sludien , l. 
pp 188, 189). . 

2 Gandharvi : said to be the daughter of Surabhi (one of the daughters') 
Daks ha), and the mother of the race of horses. Here she appears to be j 111 
Apsaras or water-nymph, haunting the banks of rivers and practising ti® 
seductive arts of a siren. The meaning seems to be, let no disturbing 1 ^ 
ence unsettle my devout thoughts. Our eldest Brother : Varuna, legatdeo 
the founder of society united by common religious observances. 

3 The poet regards the coming of the dawn as a proof that the sacrin ce 
successful. Since they: the piies ts. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


gYMN 12 .] 


395 


4 And the fleet Falcon brought for sacrifice from afar this flow- 

ing Drop most excellent and keen of sight, 

Then when the Aryan tribes chose as Invoking Priest Agni 
the Wondor- Worker, and the hymn rose up. 

5 Still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass, and, 

skilled in sacrifice, offers thee holy gifts. 

When thou, having received the sage’s strengthening food 
with lauds, after long toil, comest with many more. 

6 Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover, to delight: the Lovely 

One desires and craves it from his heart. 

The priest calls out, the sacrificer shows his skill, the Asura 
tries his strength, and with the hymn is stirred. 

7 Far-famed is he, the mortal man, 0 Agni, thou Son of Strength, 

who hath obtained thy favour. 

He, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, makes his 
days lovely in his might and splendour. 

8 When, Holy Agni, the divine assembly, the sacred synod mid 

the Gods, is gathered, 

And when thou, Godlike One, dealest forth treasures, vouch- 
safe us, too, our portion of the riches. 

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid 

car, the car of Amrit. 

Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither : stay 
with us here, nor from the Gods he distant. 


HYMN XU. Agni. 

Hkaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speakers of 
truth, are near enough to hear us, 

When the God, urging men to worship, sitteth as Priest, as- 
suming all his vital vigour. 


rJ P U8 ft ow i n 9 Drop : the Soma, brought from heaven by the Falcon. See 
iv. 26 ail( j 27. 

nr,^ ou ’ As with grass : ‘ as pasture satisfies (the herds).’ — Wilson. 

! ^ man y more : bringing many other Gods to the sacrifice. 

6 /Is a lover : woos his mistress. Agni is called upon to entreat his parents, 
an ^ reproduce him perpetually. The Lovely One: Agni. 

in A Y°V malchah ; see Vcdic Hymns , I. p. 47. The original hymn appears 
^e«d with this difficult stanza. 

dishMr^ii ^ rav j iniim ; taken by S Ay ana with amrUasya and explained by 
the ! ng i , drink of Gods.’ Nor from the Gods be distant : ‘ let none of 
16 gods be absent.’— Wilson. 

to IWof- m( J 8 ^ exft l fce d as well as most ancient. The God: Agni. As Priest ; 
Uotar, mvoker, or herald. 



896 THE HYMtfS OF [BOOR * 

2 As God comprising Gods by Law Eternal, bear, aB the Chief 

who knoweth, our oblation, 

Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise 
and worship, Priest for ever. 

3 When the cow’s nectar wins the God completely, men here 

below are heaven’s and earth’s sustainers. 

All the Gods came to this thy heavenly Yajus, which from the 
motley Pair milked oil and water. 

4 I praise your work thatj^e may make me prosper : hear, Heaven 

and Earth, Twain Worlds that drop with fatness. 

While days and nights go to the world of spirits, here let the 
Parents with sweet meath refresh us. 

5 Hath the King seized us 1 How have we offended against h.s 

holy ordinance ? Who knoweth 1 

For even Mitra mid the Gods is angry : there are both song 
and strength for those who come not. 

6 ’Tis hard to understand the Immortal’s nature, where she who 

is akin becomes a stranger. 

Guard ceaselessly, great Agni, him who ponders Yama’s name, 
easy to be comprehended. 

7 They in the synod where the Gods rejoice them, where they 

are seated in Vivasvan’s dwelling, 

Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splendour • the 
Two unweariedly maintain their brightness. 

2 Btttcr to praise: more skilled than men in praising the Gods. 

3 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning seems to be that, by poof's- 
ing the am rib, ambrosia, or nectar contained in the milk of the sacrificial coff 
and iu the Soma juice which wins and captivates Agni, men are enabled to 
offer acceptable sacrifices to the Gods, and thus to support the heavens aud 
earth. Heavenly Yajus: divine sacrificial prayer or formula. But ihvyfimhj 
its position in the verse seems rather to belong to ghritdm, butter or sacri* 
ficial oil. The motley Pair : ini: many-coloured heaven and earth. 

* When the self-aggregated ambrosia of the divine Agni is generated from 
his radiance, then the pioducts from it sustain both heaven and earth, a 
the worshippers glorify this thy oblation, the celestial nutritious water wnic 
thy white radiance milks forth.’ — Wilson. According to S&yana, t he pro< m < 
from it are the plants and trees which spring from the amrit or rain v-nic 
rewards the oblations of men, and the vlsve devflh of the text a,e 
Mtotdrak. all the worshippers. Some meaning is appaient in this paraphras , 
but it cannot be extracted from the words of the text. 

5 The Kim,: Varuna. For even Mitra: we must have committed som 

sin. for even Mitra, the Friend, the gracious God, is wroth with us. 
strengthening sacrificial viands. For those who come not: for the Gods 
will not yet come to receive our worship and oblations. , 1 

6 This stanza is apparently a later addition. The latter half of the tns j 

is taken from X. 10. 2, but its application here is not obvious. Heaven! 

7 In VivasvAn's dwelling : ‘ on the altar of the sacrificer.’ — Wilson. « 
or the realm of the Sun is iuteuded. 



tfif I 


g The counsel which the Gods meet to consider, their secret 
pl.m, — of that we have no knowledge. 

There let God Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to Varuna 
that we are sinless. 

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid 
car, the car of Ami it. 

Biing Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither: stay 
with us here, nor from the Gods be distant. 

HYMN XIII. HavhdhW 

I yoke with prayer your ancient inspiration : may the laud 
rise as on the prince’s pathway. 

All Sons of Immortality shall hear it, all the possessors of ce- 
lestial natures. 

2 When speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters, religious- 

hearted votaries brought you forward. 

Take your place, ye who know your proper station : be near, 
be very near unto our Soma. 

3 Five paces have I risen from Eaith: I follow her who hath 

four feet with devout obsei vance 
This by the Sacied Syllable have I measured: I purify in the 
central place of Order. 

4 He, for Gods’ sake, chose death to be his portion. Ho chose 

not, for men’s good, a life eternal. 

They sacrificed Brihaspati the Rishi. Yama delivered up his 
own dear body. 

‘Tuc deities are the two Sakutas, small carts or ban ows used at sacrifices 
) carry the materials especially the •Som-plant, heuee called HavirU/uiaas, 
lation-bearers.’ — W l Ison 

1 The prince is.the noble who institutes the sacriGce. 4 Like the path of 
e worshipper ' — Wilson. 

3 Tins stanza is most obscure. Wilson, following Stlyana, translates: ‘I 
ake the five st ages of the sacrifice a&cend ; I take four steps by pious 
i&orvances ; with the sacred syllable I perfect this (adoraiion) ; I purify 
he Soma.) on the navel of the saetifiee.’ The filestores ate, according to 
L'ana. the five elements of the saorifice, grain, Soma, the kine, the Purod&sa 
ke,aud the clarified butter. The / ir steps ate the metres must commonly used 
The words as they stand in the text do not appear to be susceptible of any 
■tistactary explanation. 

4 tfe. Yania See X. 14. 1. For Gods sake : his death being the type of 
lo sacrifices which support and delight the Gods. For rnen’s yood : See X. 

■ 3—14 for the results of the sacrifice of Purusha, with whom Yama may be 
°Qbned. Ttieoj : the Gods This Pada is unintelligible as it stands. 

of brili ispdt ini yujilim akrinmto nshim , Prof. Ludwig would read 
'WasccUan y tjhani atanuta rishih, the Rishi pet formed the Vaivasvata, 
uiieral sacufice (Uebcr die neucsten , u. 8. w , p. 110). I have mainly 
°wed Elini, Der Vedische Mythus des Yuma, pp. 1450 — 162, but the exact 
ani1 ^ of the stanza is still doubtful to me. 



wcrg 




5 The Seven flow to the Youth on whom the Maruts wait : the 
Sons unto the Father brought the sacrifice. 

Both these are his, as his they are the Lords of both : both 
toil ; belonging unto both thoy prosper well. 

HYMN XIV. Yam, 

Honour the King with thine oblations, Yama, Vivasvan’s Son, 
who gathers men together, 

Who travelled to the lofty heights above us, who searches out 
and shows the path to many. 

2 Yama first found for us a place to dwell in : this pasture never 

can be taken from us. 

Men horn on earth tread their own paths that lead them 
whither our ancient Fathers have departed. 

3 Matali prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with Angiras’ sons, 

Brihaspati with Rikvans : 

Exniters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, some joy in praise and 
some in our oblation. 

4 Como, seat thee on this bed of giass, 0 Yama, in company 

with Angirases and Fathers. 

Let texts recited by the sages bring thee: O King, let this 
oblation make thee joyful. 

5 Come, Yama, with the Angirases the Holy, rejoice thee here 

with children of Virupa. 

To sit on sacred grass at this our worship, I call Vivasvan, too, 
thy Father hither. 

5 The Seven : rivers. According to Sdyana, metres. The Youth : Indra. 
The Sons : theMaiuts. The Father: Iudra. Both these: havirdhdnns . Of 
both : Gods and men. Unto both : to Gods uud men, or to Heaven and Earth. 

The hymn is a funeral address, partly to Yama the God of the Dead and 
partly to the Soul of the departed whose body is being consumed on the pi «• 

1 Yama • the deified Loid of the Dead : originally the first who died aiid 
so showed the souls of his successors the way to the home of the departe 
See X. 12. Lofty heights : of heaven, the abode of the Bleat. 

3 Mdtatt : a divine being, identified by the Commentators with Indra whose 
charioteer was Mil tali. Kavyas : a class of Manes, the spirits of a P loU . 
race of ancient time. Angiras sons : the Angirases, the typical first sacr 
ficers. See Vol. I., Index. Rikvans: or singers, a class of spirits or dei 1 
who attend and sing the praises of Brihaspati. See VII. 1 0. 4. Some joy ^ 
praise : the Gods delight in Svahit, the sacrificial exclamation, worship 
praise. Some in our oblation : the Manes delight in SvadhA, the sweet 

or oblation which is presented to them. j 

4 Angirases and Fathers : or, perhaps, Angirases our Fathers. 

5 Children of Virdpa: Vairupas, a sub-division of the Angiiases. 



0MN 14.] THE RIQVEDA. 8 M 

(j Oar Fathers are Angirases, Navagvas, Atharvans, Bhrigus who 
deserve the Soma. 

May these, the Holy, look on us with faVotir, may we enjoy 
their gracious loving-kindness. 

7 (Jo forth, go forth upon the ancient pathways whereon our 

sires of old have gone before us. 

There shalt thou look'on both the Kings enjoying their sacred 
food, God Varuna and Yama. 

8 Meet Yama, meet the Fathers, meet the merit of free or or- 

dered acts, in highest heaven. 

Leave sin and evil, soek auew thy dwelling, and bright with 
glory wear another body. 

9 Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions : this place for him 

the Fathers have provided. 

Yama bestows on him a place to rest in adorned with days 
and beams of light and waters. 

10 Rim and outspeed the two dogs, Sarama's offspring, brindled, 

four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway. 

Draw nigh then to the gracious-minded Fathers where they 
rejoice in company with Yama. 

11 And those two dogs of thine, Yama, the watchers, four-eyed, 

who look on men and guard the pathway, — 

Entrust this man, 0 King, to their protection, and with pros- 
perity and health endow him. 

12 Dark-lined, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama’s two en- 

voys roam among the people ; 

May they restore to ns a fair existence here and to-day, that 
we may see the sunlight. 

'13 To Yama pour the Soma, bring to Yama consecrated gifts: 

To Yama sacrifice prepared and heralded by Agni goes. 

1 Offer to Yama holy gifts enriched with butter, and draw near: 
So mav he grant that we may live long days of life among 
the Gods. 


6 Ntivayvas, Atharvans, Bhriyus • priestly families of ancient times. 

7 This and tho following st’mza are addressed to the spirit of the dead 
lan whose funeral rites are being celebrated 

8 h ree or ordered acts: voluntary good works and prescribed sacrifices, 
|hose merit is stored up in heaven to be enjoyed on arrival by the spirits of 

* pious who have performed them. 

: According to Sdyapa, this stanza is addressed to the Pis&chas and other 
in' n^ 6 7 8 *hat haunt the place of cremation. 

, ^ The spirit of the departed is addressed. The two dogs : offspring of 
the hound of lndra. See Vol. I., Index. 

The three following stanzas are addressed to the priests. 



THE HYMNS OF 


400 


l BOOK l 


15 Offer to Yuma, to the King, oblation very rich in meath : 
Bow down before the Kish is of the ancient times, who made 

this path in days of old. 

16 Into the six Expanses flies the Great One in Trikadrukas. 
The Gayatri, the Tushtup, all metres in Yuma are contained, 

HYMN XV. Fathers. 


May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Fathers 
who deserve a sh ire of Soma. 

May they who have attained the life of spirits, gentle and 
righteous, aid us when we call them. 

2 Now let us pay this homage to the Fathers, to those who 

passed of old and those who followed, 

Those who have rested in the eaithly region, and those who 
dwell among the Mighty Races. 

3 I have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have gained 

son and progeny from Vishnu. 

They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated on sacied 
grass, come oftenest hither. 

4 Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help us : these offer- 

ings have we made for you ; accept them. 

So come to us with most auspicious favour, and give us health 
and strength without a trouble. 

5 May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited to their 

favourite oblations 

Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen : may they e 
gracious unto us and bless us. 


16 The meaning appears to be that the Great Unit, Yams as All-God, bro'd 
ena and fill* the universe after plentiful libations of Soma juice in he 
Kadruka days, or first three days of the Abhipltva festival, bee .mi. > 
pp 154—157. For different explanations, see Bergai^ne, I. 178, 11. 1- . 

This hvrnn with the exception of the last stanza, has been translated, 
annotated” by Muir, 0. S. tU V pp 291 -295, by the author, of th, 
Siebenzi'j Lieder, and by Prof. Peterson, llymne from the Rojieda. 


1 Atcend ■ rise to higher rank ; obtain the best oblation, according to 

LoJJ , the Fathers are classified accord, ng to then 

of merit acquired on earth. e V rrr 77 j, 

2 The earthly region : the firmament nearest to the earth. See V in- 

The Mighty Races: of the' Gods. (# 


the bathers uy — . tj 

Zm ia an unintelligible express, on m this connexion. 

Alharvaveda, XVUI. 1. *5, note 



mix is.] 


the rigveda. 


401 


6 Bowing your bended knees and seated southward, accept this 
sacrifice of ours with favour. r 

Punish us not for any sin, 0 Fathers, which we through 
human frailty have committed. 

i Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give riches to 
the man who brings oblations. 

Giant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present 
give them energy, ye Fathers. ? 

5 Our ancient Fathers who deserve the Soma, who came, most 
noble, to our Soma-banquet, — 

With these let Yama, yearning with the yearning, rejoicing 
eat our offerings at his pleasure. " ^ c> 

) Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who dwell in 
glowing light, the very Kavyas, 

Who thirsted mid the Gods, who hasten hither, oblation- 
winners, theme of singers’ praises. 

) Como, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, dwellers in 
light, primeval, God-adorers, 

Eaters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, who travel with 
the Deities and Indra. 


Fathers whom Agni’s flames have tasted, come ye ni^h • ve 
kindly leaders, take ye each your proper place. ° ’ 0 

Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass : grant riches with 
a multitude of hero sons. 


Thou, Agni Jata vedas, when entreated, didst bear the offer- 
ings which thou madest fragrant, 

And give them to the Fathers who did eat them with Svadha. 
Eat, thou God, the gifts we bring thee. 

Thou, Jatavedas, knowest well the number of Fathers who are 
here and who are absent, 

Of Fathers whom we know and whom wo know not : accent 
the sacrifice well-prepaied with portious. 


th i T ar P le Mornings : ‘Seated in the proximity 
ramant flames (of the altar).’— Wilson. 

: see X. 14. 3. ' 

8 fl arn €8 have tasted : whose bodies have been burnt. A class 

2 nr a ed Aguishvattas, according to S&yana. 

tted portion^ '* sacri ® c ^ exclamation Svadhft, or, with their 

3 T* portion, : or, with Svadhis. 

is 



402 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK £ 

14 They who, consumed by fire or not cremated, joy in their 
offering in the midst of heaven, — 

Grant them, 0 Sovran Lord, the world of spirits and then 
own body, as thy pleasure wills it. 


HYMN XYI. 


Agni 


Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni : let not hii 
body or his skin be scattered. 

0 Jatavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send him or 
his way unto the Fathers. 


2 When thou hast made him ready, Jatavedas, then do thor 
give him over to the Fathers. 

When he attains unto the life that waits him, he shall becorar 
the Deities’ controller. 


3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit ; go, as thj 

merit is, to earth or heaven. 

Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters ; go, make thine horai 
in plants with all thy members. 

4 Thy portion is the goat : with heat consume him ; let thy 

fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him. 

With thine auspicious forms, 0 Jatavedas, bear this man t( 
the region of the pious. 

5 Again, 0 Agni, to the Fathers send him who, offered iu thee 

goes with our oblations. 

Wearing new life let him increase his offspring : let bin 
rejoin a body, J&tavedas. 


14 The world of spirits : asunUim : a difficult word whose meaning issom 
what uncertain. Sftyana joins it with tanvilm, and explains the two words b; 
‘ the body that leads to life/ ‘ that body that is endowed with breath, 
Wilson. See X. 12. 4. 

This hymn has been partially transliterated, translated, and annotated bj 
Muir, 0. S. Texts, Y. pp. 295—297. 

Stanzas 1 — 6 are to be repeated while the body of the departed is beiaj 
partially consumed on the funeral pile. 

2 The life that waits him: asunitim: see X. 15, 14. Controller: by winnin| 
their favour. 

3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit : let like return to lik* 
See Muir’s note, 0. S. Texts , V. 298. 

4 Agni is addressed. The goat : that was slaughtered and laid limb by li® 1 
on the corpse. 

5 Let him increase his offspring : when he becomes one of the Fatkenjj 
whom is ascribed the fruitfulness of heaven and earth, the parents of Gjjj 
and men. See X. 64. 14. Let him rejoin: or, let life rejoin his body- 
nominative is not expressed. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


403 


VYMN 16.] 

6 What wound soe’er the dark bird bath inflicted, the emmet, 

or the serpent, or the jackal, 

May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and Soma who 
hath passed into the Brahmans. 

7 Shield thee with flesh against the flames of Agni, encompass 

thee about with fat and marrow, 

So will the Bold One, eager to attack thee with fierce glow 
fail to girdle and consume thee. 

8 Forbear, 0 Agni, to upset this ladle : the Gods and they who 

merit Soma love it. 

This ladle, this which serves the Gods to drink from, in this 
the Immortal Deities rejoice them. 

9 I send afar flesh-eating Agni, bearing off stains may he depart 

to Yama’s subjects. 

But let this other Jatavedas carry oblation to the Gods for 
he is skilful. ' 


0 I choose as God for Father-worship Agni, flesh-eater, who 

hath past within your dwelling, ’ 

While looking on this other J&tavedas. Let him light flames 
in the supreme assembly. 

1 With offerings meet let Agni bring the Fathers who support 

the Law. 

Let him announce oblations paid to Fathers and to Deities. 

2 Eight gladly would we set thee down, right gladly make thee 

burn and glow. 

Gladly bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the food of sacrifice. 

3 Cool, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou hast 

scorched and burnt. 

Here let the water-lily grow, and tender grass and leafy herb. 
I 0 full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh moisture, 
freshening Herb, 

Come hither with the female frog: fill with delight this Agni 
here. 


• r f ie ?? r P 8e ia addressed. Flt*\ : the caul and other parts of a slaughtered 
mai which covered the corpse to prevent too quick and complete cremation. 
P staim6 ° f Sin ° r impurity whi °k ma y have attached to the departed* 

11 typically offer sacrifice in the assembly of the Gods. 

offpnV 7 * meet ** literally, bearing Kavyas or Kavya-worship, that 
19 m/ n ^ 8 to tke ^ av ^> sages, or Fathers. 

\i wV £, gni; . the firo - 

! ciydmbu: *° me kind of ^uatio plant. Tender graft; 
H F'lf ,a varie . fc y grass (Panicum Dactylon). 

rehaswJ*** dai 9^’ meaning, euphemistically, extinguish. ‘After the 
usuined the corpse, water is poured upon it to extinguish it. Then 



404 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOKl 

HYMN XVII. Various Deiti*. 

Tvashtar prepares the bridal of his Daughter : all the world 
hears the tidings and assembles. 

But Yama’s Mother, Spouse of great Vivasv&n, vanished as 
she was carried to her dwelling. 

2 From mortal men they hid the Immortal Lady, made one like 

her and gave her to Vivasvan. 

Saranyu brought to him the Asvin brothers, and then deserted 
both twinned pairs of children. 

3 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne’er are injured, may Pd- 

shan bear thee hence, for lie hath knowledge. 

May he consign thee to these Fathers’ keeping, and to the 
gracious Gods let Agni give thee. 

4 May Ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear thee forward 

on the distant pathway. 

Thither let Savitar the God transport theo, where dwell the 
pious who have passed before thee. 

5 Pushan knows all these realms : may ho conduct us by ways 

that are most free from fear and danger. 

Giver of blessings, glowing, all-heroic, may he, the wise ami 
watchful, go before us. 


furthermore certain water-plants are put there In addition to these a frog- 
here a female, elsewhere a male— is put upon the place where the fire ha? 
burned. These, as representatives of life in the waters, are symbolically 
supposed both to prevent and extinguish fire ' (M. Bloomfield, Contributions 

to the Interpretation of the Veda , Second Series, Baltimore : 1800). 

Dr. Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts, V. pp. 297 — 299, should be consulted 
with regard to this funeral hymn addiossed to Agni, and much additional 
information on the subject may be obtained from the essays, there referred 
to, by von Roth and Max Muller. 

1 The first two stanzas are difficult, and appear to have no connexion with 

the rest of the hymn. Tvashtar : a God often regarded, as here, as an agent 
in natural phenomena. Ilis Daughter • Saranyft, the stormy cloud ; or, F r 
haps, the dawn. Vivasvdn: representing the bright heavens, or the Sun. 
Yuma's Mother : Saranyft, who afterwards gave birth to Yama and Yami. 
See X. 10, note. Vanished: or was stolen away. Carried : as a bride, in pre- 
cession. , , 

2 They : the Gods. The Immortal Lady : Saranyfi. Brought to him : 

another form bore to Vivasv&n. Both twinned pairs : Yama and Yainl and tie 
Asvins. For the legend which has been formed out of these obscure hints, see 
Wilson’s Translation, and Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. 228. _ , 

3 Here the funeral hymn begins, with an address to the spirit of the 

parted. Pilshan : as a Sun-God and the heavenly Herdsman who knows 
path through the heavens and is therefore a good conductor of the spin 
the departed. , , 

4 iyu : according to SAyana, Vdyu is intended, the letter * v ’ being eh e 
Or the meaning may be, life of full vitality. 



THE RIOt ED A. 


405 


VYMX 17.] 

6 Puahan was born to move on distant pathways, on the road far 

from earth and far from heaven. 

To both most wonted places of assembly he travels and returns 
with perfect knowledge. 

7 The pious call Saras vati, they worship Sarasvati while sacri- 

fice proceedeth. 

The pious called Sarasyati aforetime. Sarasvati send bliss to 
him who giveth. 

8 Sarasvati, who earnest with the Fathers, with them rejoicing 

thee in our oblations, 

Seated upon this sacred grass be joyful, and give us strength- 
ening food that brings no sickness. 

0 Thou, called on as Sarasvati by Fathers who come right for- 
ward to our solemn service, 

Give food and wealth to present sacrifices, a portion, worth 
a thousand, of refreshment. 

0 The Mother Floods shall make us bright and shining, cleans- 

ers of holy oil, with oil shall cleanse us : 

For, Goddesses, they bear off all defilement : I rise up from 
them purified and brightened. 

1 Through days of earliest date the Drop descended on this 

place and on that which was before it. 

I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the Drop which 
still to one same place is moving. 

2 The Drop that falls, thy stalk which ar* lS have shaken, which 

from the bosom of the press hath Allen, 

Or from the Adhvaryu’s purifying filter, I offer thee with heart 
and cry of Vashat I 

3 That fallen Drop of thino the stalk which from tho ladle fell 

away, 

This present God TVhaspati shall pour it forth to make us rich. 

4 The plants of -arth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this 

my spee^n; 

And r^h in milk the essence of the Waters : make me pure 
therewith. 


7 hratvatf: see I. 8. 10. 

8t,anza is not very intelligible. The Drop is apparently the Soma ; 
* ® x P laiua alternatively, by Aditya or the Sun. See Satapatha * 
4 * F 20 (Sacred Books of the East, XLI. 368). 
ic ^ Milk; full of sap, vigour, vital and vivifying power. 



406 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l 

HYMN XVIII. Various Deities, 

Go hence, 0 Death, pursue thy special pathway apart from 
that which Gods are wont to travel. 

To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest : Touch not our 
offspring, injure not our heroes. 

2 As ye have come effacing Mrityu’s footstep, to further times 

prolonging your existence, 

May ye he rich in children and possessions, cleansed, purified, 
and meet for sacrificing. 

3 Divided from the dead are these, the living : now be our 

calling on the Gods successful. 

We have gone forth for dancing and for laughter, to further 
times prolonging our existence. 

4 Here I erect this rampart for the living ; let none of these, 

none other, reach this limit. 

May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may 
they bury Death beneath this mountain. 

5 As the days follow days in close succession, as with the sea- 

sons duly come the seasons, 

As each successor fails not his foregoer, so form the lives of 
these, 0 great Ordainer 

5 Live your full lives and find old ago delightful, all of you 
striving one behind the other. 

May Tvashtar, maker of fair things, be gracious and lengthen 
out the days your existence. 


1 Death: Mrityu, the God of 'J e ath ; distinct from Yama the judge and 
ruler of the departed. Our offspring. p ra jflm : meaning here, says SAyana, 
female offspring, duhitridauhitrdtmika j u t h e f orm G f daughters and their 
daughters. Our heroes: sons and their so^,.__s&y a na. 

2 Addressed to the kinsmen of the decease , £ facing Mrityu'* 

a wisp or clog was fastened to the foot of the corp.*, which represented M.rityu 
or Death, in order to prevent the premature return vf Death to carry ott 
living. See A. V., V. 19. 12. Cleansed : from sins of a«o rmer life. Pww*' 
from sins of the present life. 

3 Dancing and laughter : the enjoyments of ordinary life */ter the «* 

ment of our duties to the dead. , 

4 This rampart: of stone, or earth, raised by the Adhvaryu as * hue 

demarcation between the dead and the living, and limiting, as ^ 

jurisdiction of Death until the natural time for his approach. This 

the mound or bank. . . Ordafo** 

5 So form the live* : let them pass away in due order of Bemwty. 

Dhdtar : the name of a divine being who is the creator, arrang , j 

and manager of all things. .. . . rneV first. 

6 One behind the other : the oldest reaching the end of their jou i 



THE RIGVEDA, 


407 


qYUy 13 *] 

7 Let these unwidowed dames with noble husbands adorn them- 
\ selves with fragrant balm and unguent. 

Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free from sorrow, first let the 
dames go up to where he lieth. 

8 Eise, come unto the world of life, 0 woman : come, he is life- 

less by whose side thou liest. 

Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion, who took thy 
hand and wooed thee as a lover. 

9 From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, that it may be 

our power aud might and glory. 

There art thou, there; and here with noble heroes may we 
overcome all hosts that fight against us. 

10 Betake thoc to the lap of Earth the Mother, of Earth far-spread- 

ing, very kind and gracious. 

Young Dame, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, may she pre- 
serve thee from Destruction’s boso«u- 

11 Heave thyself, Earth, nor press thee downward heavily; afford 

him easy access, gently ten-* ln g him. 

Cover him, as a mother wraps her skirt about her child, 0 Earth. 

12 Now let the heaving ea-’^h be free from motion : yea, let a thou- 

sand clods remain above him. 

Be they to him a Aome distilling fatness, here lot them ever be 
his place of refuge. 

13 I stay the oarth from thee, while over thee I place this piece 

of ea^h. May I be free from injury. 

Here *et the Fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, and there 
let Yama make thee an abiding-place. 

14 .Sven as an arrow’s feathers, they have set me on a fitting day. 
/ The fit word have I caught and held as 'twere a courser with 

the rein. 


7 First : agve ; to begin with ; i. e. before the ceremonies begin. See M. 
duller, Chips, IV. 35 — 39 (edition of 1895). On the whole stanza, see Dr. F. 
Sail, Jou riia i of H A S., Vol. III. Part I., p. 185f. 

o ‘This verse is to be spoken by the husband’s brother, etc , to the wife of 
he dead man, and he is to /lake her leave her husband’s body. See the 
tswalayana Grihya Sittras, IV. 2.’ — Editor’s note, in Wilson’s Translation. 

9 This stanza is applicable only when the deceased was a Ksliatriya or man 
►i the princely aud military order. 

19 Addressed to the body. Guerdon-giver : the liberal rewarder of the 
meats. Destruction's bosom : or the lap of Nirriti. 

& I stay the earth: * I keep off the earth above thee with thy lid.’ * This 
J addressed to the urn containing the bones and ashes, which is buried after 
' e c ? r pse has been burnt.’— Wilson. PiUar : perhaps a beam laid over the 
emams. 

H This stanza, which seems to be a later addition, is not noticed in SAyana’s 
' mQie ntary > and the meaning of the second line is not very clear. I have 



408 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOR x t 


HYMN XIX. Waters or Co* 9l 

Turn, go not farther on your way ; visit us, 0 ye Wealth 
Ones. 

Agni and Soma, ye who bring riches again, Becure us weoith. 
2 Make these return to us again, bring them beside us once 
again. 

May Indra give them back to us, and Agni drive them hither- 
ward. 


3 Let them return to us again : under this herdsman let them 

feed. 

Do thou, 0 Agni, keep them here, and let the wealth we 
have remain. 

4 I call upon their herdsman, him who knoweth well their coming 

Their parting and their home-return, and watcheth their 
approach and rest. 

5 Yea, let the herdsman, to*, return, who marketh well their 

driving-forth ; 

Marketh their wandering away, their turning back and com- 
ing home. 

6 Home-leader, lead them home to us; Indra, restore to us our 

kine : 

We will rejoice in them alive. 


followed Prof. Whitney’s rendering (Lanman, p. 386). The verse, says 
Lanman, ‘ seems to express the poet’s satisfaction at having mae<» a good 
hymn at the right time and place, and with as good skill as a skilfm horse- 
man has.’ 

The hymn has been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder. 
Zimmer’s Altmdisches Lcben, pp. 400—407, Mr. Rnmesh Chunder Dutt’i 
Civilization in Ancient India , pp. 108, and 278, 279, Lanman’s Sanskrit 
Reader , pp. 382- 386, and Zdnaide Ragozin’s Vedic India, pp. 351—353. 
The essays of von Roth and Max Muller have already been referred to. 


The hymn is a prayer for the return of strayed cows, to whom the first 
line is addressed. 

1 Ye who bring riches again : punarvasd : ( ye who clothe (your worship* 
pers) again.’ — Wilson. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 460. 

2 These : cows, or waters. — Slyana. Make return is the imperative ^ingulat 
and S&yana says that the seer of the hymn addresses himself. The address 
is to Indra. 

4 Sdyana explains this stanza somewhat differently : — ‘ I. invoke the 
knowledge of the place, of their going, of their coming, of their departure* 
of their wandering, of their returning : (I invoke) him who is their keeper 
— Wilson. This is a more strictly literal rendering of the abstract nouns 
the text. 



THE RIQVEDA . 


409 


fffMN 20 .] 

7 I offer you on every side butter and milk and strengthening food. 
May all the Holy Deities pour down on us a flood of wealth. 

8 0 thou Home-leader, lead them home, restore them thou who 

bringest home. ' 

Four are the quarters of the earth ; from these bring back to 
us our kine. 

HYMN XX. Agni. 

Send unto us a good and happy mind. 

2 I worship Agni, Youthf idlest of Gods, resistless, Friend of laws; 
Under whose guard and heavenly light the Spotted seek the 
Mother’s breast : 


3 Whom with their mouth they magnify, bannered with flame 

and homed in light. 

He glitters with his row of teeth. 

4 Kind, Furtherer of men, he comes, w r hen he hath reached the 

ends of heaven, 

Sage, giving splendour to the clouds. 

5 To taste man’s offerings, ho, the Strong, hath risen erect at 

sacrifice : 

Fixing his dwelling he proceeds. 

6 Here are oblation, worship, rest : rapidly comes his furtherance. 
To sword-armed Agni come the Gods. 

7 With service for clxief bliss 1 seek the Lord of Sacrifice, Agni. 

whom b 

They call the Living, Son of Cloud. 

8 Blest evermore be all the men who come from us, who magnify 
^gm with sacrificial gifts. 

9 Ihe path he treads is black and white and red, and striped, 

and brown, crimson, and glorious. 

His sire begat him bright with hues of gold. 

8 Thus with his thoughts, 0 Son of Strength, 0 Agni, hath 
Vimada, accordant with the Immortals, 

Ottered thee hymns, soliciting thy favour. Thou hast brought 
a 5 * ooc b strength, a prosperous dwelling. 


2 'pi r, 1_ ' — — _________ 

)pear ^ er f 110 noun - The variegated oblations, as Say ana says, 

•mameut T 1 . nfce ^ de d J.and the Mother s breast maybe the clouds 'of the 

3 Homed dlfficult .’ and translation must be tentative. 

ra y er / acomvi; ± t *7 e . mean ‘ n g °f kripanflam is uncertain. ‘Pitying 

5 He vvocerj n ^- t0 Ludwig. ‘ Sustainer of pious works.’— Wilson. 

6 ^o n Ln *j 18 Carn f d ? rom .°ne fire receptacle or altar to another. 

The men Jh '* arm ? d witdl hw sword or knife of pieiciug flame. 

9 The mth w ’ Bona an d grandsons of the worshippers. 

10 VlLL according to Sdyana, his chariot. 

m . the Rishi of the hymn. 



410 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOR x, 


HYMN XXI. Agni 

With offerings of our own we choose thee, Agni, as Invokiug 
Priest, 

For sacrifice with trimmed grass, — at your glad carouse- 
piercing and brightly shining. Thou art waxing great. 

2 The wealthy ones adorn thee, they who bring us horses as 

their gift : 

The sprinkling ladle, Agni, — at your glad carouse— and glow- 
ing offering taste thee. Thou art waxing great. 

3 The holy statutes rest by thee, as ’twere with ladles that o’er 

flow. 

Black and white-gleaming colours,— at your glad carouse-all 
glories thou assumest. Thou art waxing great. 

4 0 Agni, what thou deemest wealth, Victorious and Immortal 

One ! 

Bring thou to give us vigour,— at your glad carouse— splendid 
at sacrifices. Thou art waxing groat. 

5 Skilled in all lore is Agni, he whom erst Atharvan brought to 

He was VivasvaiVs envoy, at your glad carouse— the well-loved 
friend of Yama. Thou art waxing great. 

6 At sacrifices they adore thee, Agni, when the rite proceeds. 
All fair and lovely treasures — at your glad carouse— thou 

givest him who offers. Thou art waxing great. 

7 Men, Agni, have established thee as welcome Priest at holy 

rites, 

Thee whose face shines with butter,— at your glad carouse- 
bright, with eyes most observant. Thou art waxing g rea 

8 Wide and aloft thou spreadest thee, 0 Agni, with thy brilliant 


flame. , , _ f }, n u 

A Bull art thou when bellowing,— at your glad carouse— 
dost impregn the Sisters. Thou art waxiug gr eat. _ 

1 At your glad carouse: apparently a Soma-drinking ref ^1 # 
the Vievedevas or All-Gods. Thou art waxing great ; a 8 “““ r nll „„iu 
burden addiessed to Agni. See Wilson's Translation, note. Grassms 
both refrains, which he considers to be later interpolations. 

2 Taste thee: feel the power of the fire. wor8 hip th* 

3 The first line is difficult ‘ The estabhshers (of . klin g ( s hower4 
with their ladles (filled with the oblation), like (earth ) P ,• 

—Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation. Those who woreh p 8 

ing to his Law are regarded as his own statutes incarnate. O btaio ^ 

5 Atharvan: the priest who is said to have been the gacrificer- 

and offer Soma and prayers. Viyasvdn the Soma-pnest, o th^ fruit iuL 
8 Toe Sisters ; the plants, which Agw, descending m rai , 



HYMN 22 .] 


TEE RTOVEDA. 


411 


HYMN XXII. Indra. 

Where is famed Indra heard of? With what folk is he renown- 
ed to-day as Mitra is, — 

Who in the home of Rishis and in secret is extolled with song? 

2 Even here is Indra famed, and among us this day the glorious 

Thunderer is praised, 

He who like Mitra mid the folk hath won complete and full 
renown. 

3 He who is Sovran Lord of great and perfect strength, exerter 

of heroic might, 

Who bears the fearless thuuder as a father bears his darling 
son. 

4 Harnessing to thy car, as God, two blustering Steeds of the 

Wind-God, 0 Thunderer, 

That speed along the shining path, thou making ways art 
glorified. 

5 Even to these dark Steeds of Wind thou of thyself hast come 

to ride, 

Of which no driver may be found, none, be he God or mortal 
man. 

6 When ye approach, men ask you, thoe and Usan& : Why come 

ye to our dwelling-place? 

Why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of earth 
and heaven ? 

7 0 Indra, thou shalt speak us fair : our holy prayer is offered 

up. 

We pray to thee for help as thou didst strike the monster 
Sushna dead. 

8 Around us is the Dasyu, riteless, void of sense, inhuman, 

keeping alien laws. 

Baffle, thou Slayer of the foe, the weapon which this Dasa 
wields. 

9 Hero with Heroes, thou art ours : yea, strong are they whom 

thou dost help. 

In many a place are thy full gifts, and men, like vassals, sing 
thy praise. 

1 In secret : in the forest, according to SAyana. 

' 18 a ^°d °* hght, making paths through the pathless 

i or Usanas K&vya, who has been frequently mentioned as 

7w friend and of Indra ‘ 

Eeroet ; the attendant Maruts. 



412 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK i 

10 Urge thou these heroes on to slay the enemy, brave Thunder 

er ! in the fight with swords, 

Even when hid among the tribes of Sages numerous as stars 

11 Swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rent 

and burn, 0 Hero Thunder-armed : 

As thou with thy Companions didst destroy the whole o 
Sushna’s brood. 

12 Let not thine excellent assistance come to us, 0 Hero Indra 

profitless. 

May we, may we enjoy the bliss of these thy favours, Thun 
derer ! 

13 May those soft impulses of thine, 0 Indra, be fruitful am 

innocent to us. 

May we know these whose treasures are like those of milch 
kine, Thunderer ! 

14 That Earth, through power of knowing things that maybf 

known, handless and footless yet might thrive, 

Thou slewest, turning to the right, Sushna for every living 
man. 

15 Drink, drink the Soma, Hero Indra; be not withheld as thou 

art good, 0 Treasure-giver. 

Preserve the singers and our liberal princes, and make us 
wealthy with abundant riches. 

HYMN XXIII. Indra 

Indra, whose right hand wields the bolt, we worship, drivel 
of Bay Steeds seeking sundered courses. 

Shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, casting hif 
weapons forth and dealing bounties. 

2 The treasure which his Bay Steeds found at sacrifice, this 
wealth made opulent Indra slayer of the foe. 

10 The enemy : or Vritra. Hid among ike tribes of Sages : dwelling atn° D j 

the wise Gods and invisible to men. Numerous as stars : the meaning 
ualcshatrasavasdm is uncertain. . , . . 

11 Whose hand is prompt to rend and burn • I follow Ludwig s in er P 
tion, but the meaning which he gives to dkshdni is doubtful. 

13 Soft impulses of thine : * our (praises) reaching thee.’ — Wilson. , 

14 For every living man: visvdyave : according to S&yana, for t c ,. g . 
Visv&yu, a king, the son of Urvasl, the Apsaras or nymph of heaven 
came the wife of Purftravas. Turning to the right: circumambulating j . 
with the right hand towards him for good luck ; performing the Gae 

1 Seeking sundered courses : vlvratdndm : unruly, and pulling 

each other, or wandering. According to S&yana, having many functio forest' 

2 At saci'ijice : S&yana explains vdne by ‘ at sacrifice, or, in t y^ 
The exact meaning of the word here is not certain. Of the foe : or, o 



YMX 24.] THE RIGVEDA. m 

Bibhu, Ribhukshan, V&ja,— he is Lord of Might. The 
very name I utterly destroy. 

; When, with the Princes, Maghavan, famed of old, comes nigh 
the thunderbolt of gold, and the Controller’s car 6 

Which his two Tawny Coursers draw, then Indra is the 
Sovran Lord of power whose glory spreads afar. 

With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds : Indra 
throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard. 

When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant place, and 
stirs the worshipper as wind disturbs the wood. 

We laud and praise his several deed3of valour who, fatherlike, 
with power hath made us stronger ; * 

Who with his voice slew many thousand wicked ones who 
spake in varied manners with contemptuous cries. 

Indra, the Vimadas have formed for thee a laud, copious 
unparalleled, for thee Most Bountiful. 

We know the good we gain from him the Mighty One when we 
attract him as a herdsman calls the kine. 

Ne’er may this bond of friendship be dissevered, the Rishi 
Vhnada’s and thine, 0 Indra. 

We know thou carest for us as a brother : with us, 0 God, be 
thine auspicious friendship. 

HYMN XXIV. Indra. Asvins. 

0 Indra, drink this Soma, pressed out in the mortar, full of 
sweets. 

Send down to us great riches, — at your glad carouse — in thou- 
sands, 0 Most Wealthy. Thou art waxing great. 

To thee with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds we come. 
I'' 1 of ali strength and power, grant— at your glad carouse— 
the best choice-worthy treasure. Thou art waxing great. 

Thou who art Lord of precious boons, inciter even of the churl, 

ouardiau 0 f singers, Indra, -at your glad carouse— save us 
rorn woe ail( d hatred. Thou art waxing great. 

m"’ Vd J a ■ Indru, combining the three Ribhus in his own 


With the Princes : with the Maruts. 

;h moutur ' J ■’ P^haps the rain which he pours upon the lightning 

“beroLac°n-fi Ggard ^ ** h 2". b ^d.-Ludwig. The pleasant place, the 
‘ ' ntioe - The worshipper : or, according to SAyana, his own body. 


t*xt\ 


‘as no word to express the object here. 
e stauza^ 0 ^ ur ^ en or r ®f ra l Q of Hymn XXI. is employed in the first 


Of 8 ^gers : 


worshippers ; * eulogists.’— Wilson. 



414 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X 


4 Strong, Lords of Magic power, ye Twain churned the united 

worlds apart, 

When ye, implored by Viinada, Nasatyas, forced apart the pair 

5 When the united pair were rent asunder all the Gods com 

plained. 

The Gods to the N&satyas cried, Bring these together onci 


6 


again. 

Sweet be my going forth, and rich in sweets be my approacl 
to home. 

So, through your Deity, both Gods, enrich us with all plea 
santness. 


HYMN XXV. • Some 


Send us a good and happy mind, send energy and mental power 
Then — at your glad carouse — let men joy in thy love, Swec 
Juice ! as kine in pasture. Thou art waxing great. 


2 In all thy forms, 0 Soma, rest thy powers that influence th 

heart. 

So also these my longings— at your glad carouse— sprea< 
themselves seeking riches. Thou art waxing great. 

3 Even if, O Soma, I neglect thy laws through my simplicity, 
Be gracious— at your glad carouse — as sire to son. Preserv 

us even from slaughter. Thou art waxing great. 

4 Our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to th 

wells. , , 

Soma, that we may live, grant— at your glad carouse fui 
powers of mind, like beakers. Thou art waxing great. 

5 0 Soma, through thy might who art skilful and strong, thes 

longing men, . 

These sages, have thrown open— at your glad carouse- to 
stall of kine and horses. Thou art waxing great. 

6 Our herds thou guardest, Soma, and the moving world sprea 

far and wide. , , ■ 

Thou fittest them for living,— at your glad carouse-loo* , 
upon all beings. Thou art waxing great. 


4 Churned ...apart : or perhaps, produced by churning < °r violent agj^ 01 * * 4 5 
SAyana explains diffeiently ‘ you have ckurued forth (the nre;. 


1 The first half line of this stanza has occurred before as the „ 

X. 20. The double burden or refrain is again employed, wita 

connexion with the rest of the stanza. 

4 Like beaker t : filled full, like chalices of Soma juice. h e by & 

5 The longing men : the priests. Have thrown open, etc. : av > 
sacrifices, opened the way to wealth. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


415 


1YJ0 26 .] 

7 On all sides, Soma, be to us a Guardian ne’er to be deceived. 

1 King, drive away our foemen-— at your glad carouse let not 
the wicked rule us. Thou art waxing great. 

; J 3 C watchful, Soma, passing wise, to give U 3 store of vital 

strength. 

More skilled than man to guide us, — at your glad carouse — 
save us from harm and sorrow. Thou art waxing great. 

3 Chief slayer of our foemen, thou, Indu, art Indra’s gracious 
Friend, 

When warriors invoke him — at your glad carouse— in fight, 
to win them offspring. Thou art waxing great. 

) Victorious is this gladdening drink : to Indra dear it grows in 
strength. 

This — at your glad carouse — enhanced the mighty hymn of the 
great sage Kakshivan. Thou art waxing great. 

1 This to the sage who offers gifts brings power that comes from 

wealth in kine. 

This, better than the seven, hath — at your glad carouse — fur- 
thered the blind, the cripple. Thou art waxing great. 

HYMN XXVI. Pashan. 

Forward upon their way proceed the ready teams, the lovely 
songs. 

Further them glorious P&shan with yoked chariot, and the 
Mighty Twain ! 

2 With sacred hymns let this man here, this singer, win the 

i God to whom 

j Belong this majesty and might. He hath observed our eulogies. 

Pushan the Strong hath knowledge of sweet praises even as 
Indu hath. 

He dews our corn with moisture, he bedews the pasture of 
our kine. 

^ We will bethink ourselves of thee, 0 Pushan, 0 thou God, 
as One, 


Adex^V^ ’* a f^ amou s Ptishi, th.© seer of some hymns of Book I. See 

kplai^!vff^ an B€v 1 n: . more effectually than the seven priests. SAyana 
L ( 7 . n ?, 1 ,® ren % : — ‘ it gives wealth to the seven (priests). — Wilson. The 
L F e Dirghatamas, according to SAyana. The cripple: ParAvrij. 

^ both names in Vol. I., Index. * 


[ccordimf ' or dered series of ogr words. The Mighty Twain : the As vine, 
r, the tw.> ^ 7 a - a > da*r& = daffantya^, of goodly aspect, applied to Pftshan ; 
f tW0 P^formers of the rite;the Yajamdna IndU* wife. 



416 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

Who brings fulfilment of our hymns, and stirs the singer and 
the snge. iU 

5 Joint-sharer of each sacrifice, the driver of the chariot steeds 

The Rishi who is good to man, the singer’s Friend and faith- 
ful Guard. 

6 One who is Lord of Sucha, Lord of Sucha caring for herself; 
Weaving the raiment of the sheep and making raiment bean- 

tiful. 

7 The mighty Lord of spoil and wealth, Strong Friend of all 

prosperity ; 

He with light movement shakes his beard, lovely and ne’er to 
be deceived. 

8 0 Pushan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy 

chariot-pole. 

Friend of all suppliants art thou, born in old time, and firm 
and sure. 

9 May the majestic Pushan speed our chariot with his power 

and might. 

May he increase our store of wealth and listen to this call of 
Ours. 


HYMN XXVII. Iudra 

This, singer, is my firm determination, to aid the worshipper 
who pours the Soma. 

I slay the man who brings no milk-oblation, unrighteous, 
powerful, the truth’s perverter. 

2 Then will I, when I lead my friends to battle against the 
radiant persons of the godless, 

Prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullock, and pour for 
thee the fifteenfold strong juices. 


6 Sucha and SucM : names of a man and woman. — Ludwig. According M 
Sayana and Wilson, ‘ the pure (he-goat) and the pure (she-goat).’ , Weaving 
the raiment : * making woollen cloths such as the woollen filter, etc.'— Wilson. 
And making raiment beautiful : or, he hath made vesture pure and brig in 
that is, says Silyana, he hath purified all aiound with his heat and light. 

7 Friend : the augmenter. Shakes his beard : when he drinks the 

* 8 Those goats : Pilahan’s chariot is said to be drawn by a team of g° at0, 
Cf. I. 38. 4. 

1 Indra addresses the Rishi. Powerful : dbhum : perhaps, possessed of tb 

means that would enable him to offer sacrifices. ^ 

2 The Rishi replies. Fifteenfold strong juices : according to ’ th 

juices of the Soma-plant whose leaves grow during the light half of the 
and die away during the dark half. 



THE RIQVEDA. 


417 


tfMH 27 .] 

3 I know not him who sayeth and declareth that he hath slain 

the godless in the battle. 

Soon as they see the furious combat raging, men speak forth 
praises of my vigorous horses. 

4 While yet my deeds of might were unrecorded, all passed for 

Maghavans though I existed. 

The potent one who dwelt in peace I conquered, grasped by 
the foot and slew him on the mountain. 

5 None hinder me in mine heroic exploits, no, not the moun- 

tains when I will and purpose. 

Even the deaf will tremble at my roaring, and every day will 
dust be agitated. 

6 To see the Indraless oblation-drinkers, mean offerers, o’ertaken 

by destruction ! 

Then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who have 
blamed my joyous Friend and scorned him. 

7 Thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour : an earlier saw, 

a later one shall see thee. 

Two canopies, as ’twere, are round about him who reacheth to 
the limit of this region. 

3 The freed kino eat the barley of the pious. I saw them as 

they wandered with the herdsman. 

Tiie calling of the pious rang around them. What portion 
will these kine afford their owner ? 

) When we who eat the grass of men are gathered I am with 
barley-eaters in the corn-land. 

There shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock, and he who 
hath been yoked seek one to loose him. 

. l?^ ra 8 P ea, k B > rebuking the Rishi and asciibing all victories to himself. 

4 The potent one: the powerful fiend Sambara, for instance. 
b Bust: of battle, stirred up by India. 

o see: ddrsan • according to S&yana, I, Indra, see. Obi ation -drinkers : 
o nemselves consume the offerings that should be presented to Indra. 
an offerers, bdhukshdda h : literally, arm-cutters. Accoiding to von Roth, 
simomoue worshippeis who offer the forelegs, or inferior parts of the 
ilsnn r nima1, ‘Who cut (the worshippers) to pieces with their hands.' — 
roiia V ; Vishnu.— Ludwig. Or the meaning may be, your 

<1 rm tr ’ l u dra himself, the friend of his worshippers. 
jftr< 1 8 P ea ks. An earlier saw: the meaning of the half-line is not 

■lie ^ 8 t * oes ^ av ® aIread y f e l fc fc hy power, and otbeis yet shall feel it 
i * nc * ra veriI y destroys (his foe), the other does not d«*troy 

5 Indr ]■ Tw° canopies : heaven and earth. Him: Indra. 

off er h^ 6 ** 8 ’ f eari Hgi apparently, that the worshipper will h*ve no milk 

) Opl 

L 18 ®°. comment on this obscure verse, and WU^on leaves a blank 
! Editor of Wilson's Translation, Vol. \L Ludwig says that 

27 



418 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I 

10. There wilt thou hold as true my spoken purpose, to bring 
together quadrupeds and bipeds. 

I will divide, without a fight, his riches who warreth here 
agaiust the Bull, with women. 

11 When a man’s daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, knowing, 

will be wroth with her for blindness? 

Which of the two will loose on him his anger — the man \^c 
leads her home or he who woos her? 

12 How many a maid is pleasing to the suitor who fain would 

many for her splendid riches? 

If the girl be both good and fair of feature, she finds, herself, 
a friend among the people. 

13 His feet have grasped : he eats the man who meets him 

Around his head lie sets the head for shelter. 

Sitting anear and right above he smites us, and follows eaitli 
that lies spread out beneath him. 

14 High, leafless, shadowlcss, and swift is Heaven : the Mother 

stands, the Youngling, loosed, is feeding. 

Loud hath she lowed, licking Another’s offspring. In what 
woild hath the Cow laid down her udder? 


Indra declares that he lias brought mou and cattle together and made the 
latter subject to the foitnor, to be yoked and to remain yoked when and u 
long as their masters please According to this interpretation, the first half 
of the stanza might be rendered : ‘ Grass-eating beasts with men have I con 
nected, and those who eat grain in the wide spicad corn-land.’ 

10 Against the Bull: agaiust me, the mighty Indra. ^With, women, with 
weak allies. 

11 ‘Hitherto,’ says Prof. Ludwig, ‘ it is possible to establish a connexion 
and interdependence of the separate strophes ; with sttophe 11 the difficulty 
begins.’ On him • on the father. Who woos her: seeks her in maruagefor 
his fiiend or employer. 

12 Herself: svaydm chit : by her own woi th, independently of her dowry. 

13 His feet have grasped : Indra, as the Sun, has seized and drawn up the 
water of the riveis with the rays which are his feet. Eats the man who Mil 
him: peihaps, merely, scorches the man who exposes himself to his burning 
rays. According to S&yana, ‘ feeds upon, i. e. takes into his orb, the water 
that approaches him.’ Another explanation is, that the pious after death go 
to the Sun and become sunbeams.-- Ludwig. He sets the head for shelter :«* 
takes the height of heaven as a covering. Anear and right above : in his meri- 
dian height. Follows earth : descends to the horizon and sets beyond it. 

14 LeajlesSy shadowless : heaven being compared to a tree that overshadow 
the earth. According to S&y ana, drvd here is the ever-moving Sun. 
Mother : Ushas or Dawn. According to S&yana, mdt<X here means ‘ the hm 1 
(of the world).’ The Youngling : or Calf ; Agni who feeds on the °' ,la 1 
Sfo : Heaven, or the atmospheric Prithivi, roaring as the rain come* J . 
Anothei'' * offspring : Iudra as Aditya or the Sun, the offspring of Adi 
what world , etc . ; that is, who knows where the rain cornea from 1 

the Sky. The second half-stanza has occurred before. See III. 55. 1 ■ j 



THE RIO VEDA. 


HYMN 27.] 


419 


15 Seven heroes from the nether part ascended, and from the 

upper part came eight together. 

Nine from behind came armed with winnowing-baskets : ten 
from the front pressed o’er the rock’s high ridges. 

16 One of the ten, the tawny, shared in common, they send to 

execute their final purpose. 

The Mother carries on her breast the Infant of noble form 
and soothes it while it knows not. 

17 The Heroes dressed with fire the fatted wether : the dice were 

thrown by way of sport and gaming. 

Two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters, hallowing and 
with means of purifying. 

18 Crying aloud they ran in all directions : One half of them will 

cook, and not the other. 

To me hath Savitar, this God, declared it : lie will perform, 
whose food is wood and butter. 

19 I saw a troop advancing from the distance, moved, not by 

wheels but their own Godlike nature. 

The Kiiondly One seeks human generations, destroying, still 
new, bands of evil beings. 

20 These my two Bulls, even Pramara's, are harnessed : drive 

them not far ; here let them often linger. 

The waters even shall aid him to his object, and the all-cleans- 
ing Sun who is above us. 


15 Seven heroes : according to SAyana, Visv&mitra and other Rishis, sons of 
Prajftpati. Eight : the VAlakhilyas, a numerous race of divine pygmies. Nine: 
the Bln igus. Ten . Angirases. Or, alternatively, seven Maruts, on Indra’s 
right, eight on Jus left, nine behind him, and ten in fiont. These explanations 
hy Sdyana cannot be accepted ; but it is hard to say what is meant. Ludwig 
thinks Mat the various classes of letters of the alphabet arc intended. His iu- 
genicns explanation will be found in the Pieface to his fourth volume of the 
B.gvcda, pp. xxxiii.— xxxv. 

16 The tawny: kapildm • according to Sftyana, the famous Ilishi Kapila, 
,, ^ un ? ’ — Grassmann. The Mother : Night 1 — Grassmaun. The Infant : 
the young Sun, if the Mother is Night. 

1 7 7 lie fatted wether : perhap , the swollen rain-cloud The dice * the stars. 

Ti ^ UU an< * ^ oon * These are Ludwig’s suggestions. 

I hey; according to SAy ana, the Angirases. Perhaps the contentious 
Agn*i w k° m Agni the veritable priest is contrasted. — Ludwig. Be : 

st * r8, The Friendly One: Indra as the Sun. Evil beings: 
Sun *^shasa« an< * spirits of darkness that vanish at the coming of the 

best ' 8 t’ ee d« according to SAyana. Pramara's : belonging to me, the 
^ ^ er or . Death. But the whole stanza is obscure. All-cleansing: so 
fckint a u X ^ ain8 mar ^> which von Roth interprets by * obscuration.' Ludwig 

8 that the Moon, ‘ the obscurer of the Sun’ is meant. 



THE HYMNS OF 


420 


[BOOK i 


21 This is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the 

lofty misty realm of Surya. 

Beyond this realm there is another glory : so through old ag e 
they pass and feel no sok-ow. 

22 Bound fast to every tree the cow is lowing, and thence the man- 

consuming birds are flying, 

Then all this world, though pressing juice for Indra and 
strengthening the Rishi, is affrighted. 

23 In the Gods’ mansion stood the first-created, and from their 

separation came the later. 

Three warm the Earth while holding stores of water, and Two 
of these convey the murmuring moisture. 

24 This is thy life : and do thou mark and know it. As such, hide 

not thyself in time of battle. 

He manifests the light and hides the vapour : his foot is never 
free from robes that veil it. 

HYMN XXVIII. Indra. Vasukra, 

Now all my other friends are here assembled: my Sire-in-Uw 
alone hath not come hither. 

So might he eat the grain and drink the Soma, and, satisfied, 
return unto his dwelling. 


21 This is the thunderbolt : the meaning, probably is, ‘thin dahhinA or 
honorarium given to the priests is a veritable thunderbolt.’ — Ludwig. Bat, as 
Wilson observes, the stanza may be ‘ intended to express the usual themy of 
rain ; the moisture of the earth being drawn up into the solar region as vapour, 
and thence descending as rain by the action of the Thunderbolt and the wind’ 

22 According to S Ay ana, tree here means ‘ bow,* cw. means * bowstung,' 
and man-consuming birds ‘deadly arrows.’ The general meaning is that 
sacrifices to Indra and liberal gifts to priests will not free men from the fear 
of death. 

23 The first-created : the ^clouds. The later: the waters of the rain. 

Three: Parjanya, Vftyu. and Aditya or the Sun. Holding stores of wiler: 
antiptth : ‘Sowing in succession.’ — Wilson. ‘ Following the water.’ — Ludwig. 
‘ Rich in water.’ — Grassmann Two : Vftyu and Aditya. ..... 

24 According to Siiyana, Indra is addressed. The following is Wilsons 
translation of Sdyana’s paraphrase of the stanza : — ‘ That thy (divine nature 
identified with the sun) is the cause of life : and know such (solar form) o 
his (to be worthy of adoration) at the sacrifice ; conceal nothing : that motion 
of him the aU-cle&nsing (sun) makes manifest the universe ; it absorbs j 
moisture ; it is nevei discontinued ’ The robes that veil the foot, or rays, o 
the Sun are the waters into which they are supposed to vaniso. 

The hymn is enigmatical and difficult in the highest degree, and neit 
S4yana nor later scholars have succeeded in making it intelligible throug o 

The Rishi is Vasukra son of Indra, and the hymn is mainly ft 
between the Father and the son. Vasukra’s wife is the seer as well as 
speaker of stanza 1. . ^ 

1 This stanza is spoken by Vasukra’s wife in ignorance, says tM » e 
that her Father-in-law Indra is present in disguise. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


421 


n r MN 28.] 

2 Load belloweth the Bull whose horns are sharpened : upon 

the height above earth’s breadth he standeth. 

That man I guard and save in all his troubles who fills my 
flanks when he hath shed the Soma. 

3 Men with the stone press out for thee, 0 Indra, strong, glad- 

dening Soma, and thereof thou driukest. 

Bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest when, 
Maghavan, with food thou art invited. 

4 Resolve for me, 0 singer, this my riddle : The rivers send their 

swelling water backward : 

The fox steals up to the approaching lion : the jackal drives 
the wild-boar from the brushwood. 

5 How shall I solve this riddle, I, the simple, declare the 

thought of thee the Wise and Mighty 1 
Tell us, well knowing, as befits the season ; Whitherward is 
thy prosperous car advancing? 

6 Thus do they magnify me, me the mighty : higher than e^en 

high heaven is my car-pole. 

I all at once demolish many thousands : my Sire begot me with 
no foe to match me. 

7 Yea, and the Gods have known me also, Indra, as mighty, fierce 

and strong in every exploit. 

Exulting with the bolt I slaughtered Vritra, and for the offerer 
oped with might the cow-stall. 

8 The Deities approached, they carried axes \ splitting the wood 

they came with their attendants. 

They laid good timber in the fire-receivers, and burnt the grass 
up where they found it growing, 

9 The hare hath swallowed up the opposing razor : I sundered 

with a clod the distant mountain. 

The great will I make subject to the little : the calf shall wax 
in strength and eat the bullock. 

2 Indra speaks. The Dull : tit mighty India. 

3 Vasukra speaks. 

Indra must be the speaker, although S&yana gives the stanza to Vasukra. 
ra declares his power to alter the course of nature. See Wilson’s Trans- 
l J°n, note by the Editor. 

5 vasukra speaks. 

ndra speaks. My Sire: or, the general Father Praj&pati.— SAyana. 

8 T) 1 * I 0, s P R &ks, and tella what he has done with Indra’s help. 

;- GUre 8tttnza probably an account of the Gods’ fin>t sacrifice. See 
aclea , eillsc he Studien, I. pp. 1/8 — 180. According to Sftyana, it refers to 
ferenc' Vl ?®' °I .°l° u ^ 8 9 » an d the filling of the rivers. Ludwig sees in it a 

9 Of 2 3 * 5 6 * S, 0 beginning of agriculture. Their attendant t: the Maruts. 

w ‘th stanza 4. 



422 


THE HYMNS OP 


[fiOOtfj 

10 There hath the strong-winged eagle left his talon, as a snared 

lion leaves the trap that caught him. a 

Even the wild steer in his thirst is captured : the leather 
still holds his foot entangled. P 


11 So may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on 

viands of the Brahman. 

They all devour the bulls set free to wander, while they them, 
selves destroy their bodies’ vigour. * J 

12 They were well occupied with holy duties who sped in person 

with their lauds to Soma. 

Speaking like man, mete to us wealth and booty : i n heaven 
thou hast the name and fame of Hero. 


2 


HYMN XXIX. 


hidra, 


As sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing, ye, swift Pair 
have been roused by clear laudation, 

Whose Herald-Priest through many days is Indra, earth’s Guar- 
dian, Friend of men, the beat of Heroes. 


May we, when this Dawn and the next dance hither, be thy 
best servants, most heroic Hero ! 

Let the victorious cu* with triple splendour bring hitherward 
the hundred chiefs with Kutsa. 


3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, Indra I 

Speed through our doors to songs, for thou art mighty. 
Why comest thou to me, what gift attracts thee? Fain would 
I bring thee food most meet to offer. 

4 Indra, what fame hath one like thee mid heroes? With what 

plan wilt thou act? Why hast thou sought us? 

As a true Friend, Wide-Strider ! to sustain us, since food 
absorbs the thought of each among us. 


10 The application of this stanza is not apparent. SAyana’s explanation of 
this and the following veiae is entirely different from that of most recent 
scholars. 

1 The meaning of the stanza h obscure, and the text of the first half-lin® 

is unintelligible. I follow the reading which SAyana gives in his Com- 
mentary, vdyo instead vd y6, * As (the bird) who deposits its young (in »w 

nest) in the tree (is) eagerly looking around.’ — Wilson Sioift Paw ' Asvina* 

2 Dance hither : or, come dancing. Cp Milton’s ‘Now the bright morning 

star, day’s harbinger, Comes dancing from the east.’ Triple splendor ■ 
perhaps with reference to Agni, V.iyu, and S Cry a. — Ludwig. Hundred 
the Maruta may be intended, ‘hundred’ being used indefinitely. Am* ■ 
Indra’s favourite companion. < . ^ 

4 Indra is reminded that the protection of his worshippers is hw 8 P**V 
glory. Wide-Strider ! : as identified with the Sun ; ‘widely renowned, an 
ing to SAyana. Pood : the hymn appears to have been * seen ’ or reveaie 
time of dearth or famine. ’—Ludwig, 



THE RIQVEDA . 


423 


YMS 30.] 

5 Speed happily those, as SArya ends his journey, who meet his 

wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses ; 

Hen who present, 0 Indra strong by nature, with food the many 
sangs that tell thy praises. 

6 Thine are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, heaven for 

thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom. 

Here for thy choice are Somas mixed with butter : may the 
sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking. 

7 They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full of sweet 

juice, for faithful is his bounty. 

O’er earth’s expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, the 
Friend of man, and by heroic exploits. 

8 India hath conquered in his wars, the Mighty : men strive in 

multitudes to win his friendship. 

Ascend thy chariot as it were m battle, which thou slut It 
drive to us with gracious favour. 

HYMN XXX. Waters. 

As ’twerc with swift exertion of the spirit, let the priest speed 
to the celestial Waters, 

The gloiious food of Varuna and Mitra. To him who spreaded 
far this laud I offer. 

2 Adhvaryus, be ye ready with oblations, find come long- 

ing to the longing Waters, 

Down on which looks the purple-tinted Hag 1 "* Dour ye that 
flowing wave this day, deft-handed. 

3 Go to the reservoir, 0 ye Adhv.iryu*” worship the W aters 

Child with your oblations. 

A consecrated wave he now wi l ’g ive y ou > 80 P ress for him the 
Soma rich in sweetness. 


5 Meet his wish : satisfy b : ‘> Indra’s, longing for Soma-libations. 

6 Thiae are two mcaaur* : Thy maj**uty or gieatuess is vast and lofty as 
heaven, and thy wisdor 13 wide as earth ; or. 4 with confusion of the measure 
and the thing measv ot V thou h -at measured out the heaven by thy greatness 
and the earth by * i y wisdom. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , p. 18. 

The subj^t is the ceremony of fetching the sacred waters required for the 
prquratioi of the Soma juice. 

1 T> him who spreadeth far ; Indra, according to Sftyana. 

9 Tht Purple-tinted Eagle: Soma, the Moon. 

3 2o the reservoir: to fetch the holy Waters. The Waters' Child usually 

S'n, as the lightning that springs from the clouds or waters of the firraa- 
T.t?® ^ Deity who produces the rain, the Moon. See Hillebrandt, 
* I. 3/4. 



424 


THE HYMNS OF [BOO^i 


4 He who shines bright in floods, unfed with fuel, whom sage* 

worship at their sacrifices : 

Give waters rich in sweets, Child of the Waters, even those 
which gave heroic might to Indra: 

5 Those in which Soma joys and is delighted, as a young man 

with fair and pleasant damsels. 

Go thou unto those Waters, 0 Adhvaryu, and purify with herha 
what thou infusest. 


6 So maidens bow before the youthful gallant who conies with 

love to them who yearn to meet him. 

In heart accordant and in wish one-minded are the Adhvarytig 
and the heavenly Waters. 

7 He who made room for you when fast imprisoned, who freed 

you from the mighty imprecation, — 

Even to that Indra send the meuth-rich current, the wave that 
gratifies the Gods, 0 Waters. 

8 Send forth to him the meath-rich wave, 0 Rivers, which is 

your offspring and a well of sweetness, 

Oil-balmed, to be implored at sacrifices. Ye wealthy Waters, 
hear mine invocation. 


3 Send forth the rapture-giving wave. 0 Rivers, which Indra 
drinks, which sets the Twain in motion ; 

The 'veil that springeth from the clouds, desirous, that 
wandt>. 0 th triple-formed, distilling transport. 

10 These winch. ,, Streams which with their double current, like 

cattle-raiders, the l 0W er pastures, — — 

Waters which dwell ^gether, thrive together, Queens, Mothers 
of the world, these, ^ s hi, honour. 

11 Send forth our sacrifice >; t h j,oly worship, send forth the 

hymn and prayer for gain ‘''-riches. 

For need of sacrifice disclose the M dder. Give gracious hear- 
ing to our call, 0 Wateis. 


4 In floods: of the aerial ocean. Op II 35. 4. 

5 With herbs • probably Darbha or Ku*a grass. 

C The Waters bow to Soma as maidens to their lovers. 

9 The Twain : ubh6: probably, Heaven and Eartli . Sity-na explains dif- 
ferently : — ‘which sends us both (kinds of fruit) that is, ‘ thee, u it, whether 
reward or punishment, of the present life, and of a former life — 1 *Vilson,#nd 
Editor’s note. Desirous ■ eager to mix with the Soma, according 

but the meaning of auslndm is uncertain. Ludwig and Hillebrandb um^la 
it by * des Usanas,’ belonging to Usanas or UsanV Triple-forme . 
with two admixtures.— Grassmnnn. 

10 Double current : meaning, probably, the two kinds of watc 
respectively Ekadhand and Vasatlvarl. 

11 Ditcbte the udder ; let your streams flow. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


JYMN 81.] 


425 


2 For, wealthy Waters, ye control all treasures : ye brine 

auspicious intellect and Amrit. 6 

Ye are the Queens of independent riches. Sarasvati give full 
life to the singer ! 

3 When I behold the Waters coming hither, carrying with them 

milk and meath and batter, 

Bearing the well-pressed Soma juice to India, they harmonize 
in spirit with Adhvaryus. 

|4 Rich, they are come with wealth for living beings. 0 friends, 
Adhvaryus, seat them in their places. 

Seat them on holy grass, ye Soma-bringers, in harmony with 
the Offspring of the Waters. J 

5 Now to this grass are come the longing Waters : the Pious 
Ones are seated at our w’orship. 

Adhvaryus, press the Soma juice for India: so will the service 
of the Gods be easy. 


HYMN XXXI. Visvedevaa. 

May benediction of the Gods approach us, holy, to aid us with 
all rapid succours. 

Therewith may we be happily befriended, and pass triumphant 
over all our troubles. 

i A man should think on wealth and strive to win it by adora- 
tion on the path of Order, 

Counsel himself with his own mental insight, and grasp still 
nobler vigour with his spirit. 

The hymn i 3 formed, poured are the allotted portions : as to 
a ford friends come unto the Wondrous. 

, have obtained the power of case and comfort, we have 
Decome acquainted with Immortals. 

Tleased b e the Eternal Lord who loves the household with this 
man whom God Savitar created. 

? hnga Ary a man grace him with cattle; may he appear 
to him, and be, delightful. F 

'theism . I ] a . Wna, dwclljng-placo be this assembly, where in 
light men rich in food have gathered, 


2 faamtt: as chief and wisest of the Water- Goddesses. 

,rais innhe I *“ , J ation; that is > Lu(lwi g suggests, ‘ May the power 

The Wondmu. d . the 8anie t,me the Gods themselves come to us/ 
The EterZ, Vn P^haps. Soma. 

lnsti tiitor of f '' .f” 1. According to SAyana, PrajApati. This man : 
18 him. Bhaaa a aacn " ce ' Savitar has given him life and now let Agni 
y • Aiyaman as Bhaga who distributes wealth. 



426 


THE HYMNS OF 


IBOOK \ 

Striving to share the praises of this singer. To us com 
strengthening and effectual riches ! 

6 This Bull’s most gracious far-extended favour existed first 

all in full abundance. 

By his support they are maintained in common who m ty 
A sura's mansion dwell together. 

7 What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, froi 

which they fashioned forth the Earth and Heaven ? 

These Twain stand fast and wax not old for ever: these hat 
sung praise to many a day and morning. 

8 Not only here is this : more is beyond us. He is the Bui 

the Heaven’s and Earth’s supporter. 

With power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the Ba 
Coursers bear him on as Surya. 

9 He passes o’er the broad earth like a Stega : he penetrates th 

world as Wind the mist-cloud. 

He, balmcd with oil, near Vanina and Mitra, like Agni in th 
wood, hath shot forth splendour. 

10 When suddenly calved the cow that erst was barren, she 

self-protected, ended all her troubles. 

Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cas 
up the Sami, that which men were seeking. 

11 To Nrishad’s son they gave the name of Kanva, and lie th 

brown hued courser won the treasure. 

For him dark-coloured streamed the shining udder: non 
made it swell for him. Thus Order willec^it. 

6 This B ill : Agni as the Sun The Asura is Dyaus. 

8 Not only here the first half-line is obscure. ‘ Not such (is their power) 
there is another greater than they’ — Wila<>n. ‘There is no other thm| 
besides like unto him ’ — Wallis, A filter : puvltrain: which purifies the raji 
of light which stream through it. 

9 A Stega. said to be a certain biting or stinging insect. According 

S.iyana, ‘ the aggregation of rays, the Sun.’ Ludwig conjectures that *pb u K 
share ’ may be the meaning. . „ : 

10 This stanza is very obscure. ‘The cow which was barren is the * 
tree, which brings forth the Aiionttha , and from the wood of these tw» 1 ^ 
are made the arani, the two pieces of wood which are rubbed toget ® r ^ 
produce the sacred fire — the upper and harder piece is the Stmi (the 
Surna), and the low^r and soft is the Aswattha (the Ficus religion). — 

‘ The verses [7 —10] deal with the formation of the three main com poo ^ 
of the universe, heaven, earth, and the sun. Of the first two the po ' . 

little to tell us and passes on at once to the third. The sun is ^ 
with the bull, Agui of the sacrifice, and the earth with the lower ^ 
stick anointed with ghee, which is licked up [‘devours* instead ^ ^ 
up’ ] as soon as fire is struck.’ —Wallis, Co»inology of the Rigveda, pp ^ \ |ieJ 

11 This stanza appears to have no counexiou with the hymn, » n ' ^ 

plicable as it stands here. See I. 117. 8, where the eon of Nrish a 
turned as a favourite of the Asvins. 



Yuly 32 ] THE RIO HE DA. i2J 

HYMN XXXII. I ndra , 

Forth speed the Pair to bring the meditating God, benevolent 
with boons sent in return for boons. 

May Indra graciously accept both gifts from us, when he hath 
knowledge of the flowing Soma juice. 

: Thou wanderest far, 0 Indra, through the spheres of light and 
realms of earth, the region, thou whom many praise ■ 

j Let those who often bring thee to their solemn rites conquer 
the noisy babblers who present no gifts. 

3 More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, when the 
son duly careth for his parents’ line. 

Tho wife attracts the husban 1 : with a about of joy the man’s 
auspicious marriage is performed aright. * “ 

} This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, where 
like milch-cows, the kine order the marriage train; ? 

Where the Herd’s Mother counts as first and best of all, and 
round her are the seven-toned people of the choir. 

5 The Pious One hath reached your place before the rest : One 

only moves victorious with the Rudras’ band. 

To these your helpers pour out meath, Immortal Gods, with 
whom your song of praise hath power to win their gifts. 

6 He who maintains the Laws of Gods informed me that thou 

wast tying hidden in the waters. 

Indra who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. By him 
instructed am I come, 0 Agni. 

' a3 j 3 * he wa y of him who knows it: taught by 

the skilful gmde he travels onward. 


Iud - a - My ^Version of the Brat line follows the 
•tifferent < i nr Z, ud 'Y 1 8 * n his Commentary. S.tyana’s interpretation 
io, s |L W ) eJelm • hl3 . llor8es to the service of the 

rdise. expectant (of his arrival).’ — Wilson. Both gifts : oblation and 

ht * Parents’ line: by marrying and becoming a father ; or aa 
is ^u*th proclaimed according to custom in 


nw purema line: 

lya £ a explains, by having his 

iOrd ! n * tituted him 
Wording to sTvana .the meaning of this half-line is uncertain. 

is Stuti o? Praise 18 ^ c . om P an y °f sacrifices and priests, its 

toons, or tho Hot-ir nr?’ se % en tone( f, or sevenfold, are the metres, or the 
other of the Mirtitf Jm’ JIe, ' d s Mother is more probably Prisui, the 
,(lra > upon this' Wl u° le s ^ uzai » translated by Wilson Shine, 

>P r °ach) as milch lrint^ Ch - an ? b< J 1 ’ .° f sacrlfice> when our praises desire (thy 
^Pper precedes^ C /J' kln «( de8 3 r e) their stalls ; since the praise of me the wor- 
r th » seven of , the coin P au y> a °d this person accompanied 

5 The Pioxii n a ^ ln |> Prints is the offerer of praise.* 

6 ^ c * Perhans^Vam s P°f 3iid worshipper of Gods, One only : Indra. 

Peiuaps Soma, Thou : Agni. Cp. I, 23. 20. 



423 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK * 

This is, in truth, the blessing of instruction : he finds the path 
that leads directly forward. 

8 Even now he breathed : these days hath he remembered. Con- 

cealed, he sucked the bosom of his Mother. 

Yet in his youth old nge hath come upon him : he hath grown 
gracious, good, and free from anger. 

9 0 Kalasa, all these blessings will wo bring them, 0 Kuruara- 

vana, who give rich presents. 

May he, 0 wealthy princes, and this Soma which I am bearir 
in my heart, reward you. 

HYMN XXXIII. Various Deitii 

The urgings of the people have impelled me, and by the nea 
est way I bring you PiUhnn. 

The Universal Gods have brought me safely. The cry wi 
heard, Behold, Duhsasu cometh ! 

2 The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like riv 

wives. 

Indigence, nakedness, exhaustion press me sore : my mind 
fluttering like a bird’s. 

3 As rats eat weavers’ threads, cares are consuming me, tl 

singer, Satakratu, me. 

Have mercy on us once, 0 Indra, Bounteous Lord : be thou 
Father unto us. 

4 I the priests’ Kishi chose as prince most liberal Kurusravani 

The son of Trasadasyu’s son, m 


8 Even now he breathed : began to show signs of life. The connexion be 
ween stanzas 1 — 4 and 5 — 8 is not apparent. Sucked the bosom of his Mothe\ 
enjoyed oblations, in the shape of Soma juice, etc., produced by the eaitb. 

9 The meaning of Kalasa, literally ‘ pitcher* or ‘beaker,' here is uncertai 
‘(Indra), the possessor of the pitchers.’ — Wilson. Ludwig suggests kaldsn 
as the right reading : — ‘ We will perform these holy ceremonies in the 
minutest details.’ Kurvsravuna : accoiding to S&yana, ‘ hearer of the praif 
of priests ; ’ but probably the name of a prince, as in the following hymn. 


1 Dvhsdsit: literally, ‘the malevolent.’ Perhaps, as Ludwig suggests, 
hostile prince whose victory over Kurusravana has caused the distress mei 
tioned in the following stanza. 

2 The first line is taken from I. 105. 8. 

3 This first line is taken from I. 105. 5 Weavers' threads: threads steep® 

In water, according to Sdyana. Once : ‘after having so often given us up 
misery.'— Ludwig. ‘ , , 

4 The Priests' Rishi : higher in rank than the other priests. Chose ^ 
chose to keep him as my master iu order to go out to battle with Hi®- — 
man, Sansh'it Reader , p. 386. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


429 


YMN 34.1 

Whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me straight on- 
ward : I will laud 
The giver of a thousand meeds, 

The sire of Upamasravas, even him whose words were passing 
sweet, 

As a fair field is to its lord. 

Mrrk, Upamasravas, his son, mark, grandson of Mitratithi : 

I am thy father’s eulogist. 

If I controlled Immortal Gods, yea, even were I Lord of men, 
My liberal prince were living still. 

None lives, even had he hundred lives, beyond the statute of 
the Gods : 

So am I parted from my friend. 

HYMN XXXI V. Dice, Etc. 

Sprung from tall trees on windy heights, these rollers trans- 
port me as they turn upon the table. 

Dearer to me the die that never slumbers than the deep 
draught of Mujavan’s own Soma. 

She never vexed me nor was angry with me, but to my friends 
and me was ever gracious. 

For the die’s sake, whoso single point is final, mine own devot- 
ed wife l alienated. 

My wife holds me aloof, her mother hates me : the wretched 
man finds none to give him comfort. 

As of a costly horse grown old and feeble, I find not any profit 
of the gamester. 

Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath covet- 
ed, that rapid courser : 

This and tho three following stanzas are said to be consolatory verses 
'eased by the Rishi Kavasha to Upamasravas oil the death of his father 

r&tithi. 

Were I Lord of men; as one of the Gods. My liberal prince : Mitr&tithi. 
Beyond the statute of the Gods .' beyond the time fixed for the duration 

his life. 

his h7mn has been placed by Grassmann in his Appendix as a composite 
uction consisting of incoherent fragments. See Lauman, Sanskrit Reader, 
386 , 389 . 

, later, Vibhltaka, 
times. Rollers : 
which the finest 

8 * n yh point is final : the speaker has apparently lost all by throw* 


' jj? nn 9from tall trees : the nuts of the Vibhtdaka, or 
ftl er fV na ^ a Bellerica) were used as dice in early 
7 rolling dioe. MtLjavin: said to be a mountain on 



430 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK J 

Of him speak father, mother, brothers saying, We know hin 
not : bind him and take him with you. 

5 When I resolve to play with these no longer, my friend 

depart from me and leave me lonely. 

When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have rattled, lit 
a fond girl I seek the place of meeting. 

6 The gamester seeks the gambling-house, and wonders, hi 

body all afire, Shall I be lucky ? 

Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his gain 
against his adversary. 

7 Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, deceiv 

iug and tormenting, causing grievous woe. 

They give frail gifts and then destroy the man who wins 
thickly anointed with the player’s fairest good. 

8 Merrily sports their troop, the three-and- fifty, like Savita 

the God whose ways are faithful. 

They bend not even to the mighty’s anger : the King himsel 
pays homage and reveres them. 

9 Downward they roll, and then spring quickly upward, and 

handless, force the man with hands to servo them. 

Cast on the board, like lumps of magic charcoal, though cull 
themselves they burn the heart to ashes. 

10 The gambler’s wife is left forlorn nnd wretched : the mothfl 

mourns the son who wanders homeless. j 

In constant fear, in debt, and seeking riches, he goes bl 
night unto the home of others. • 

11 Sad is the gambler when he sees a matron, another’s wife, ai 

his well-ordered dwelling. 

He yokes the brown steeds in the early morning, and whi 
the fire is cold sinks down an outcast. 


4 Bind him : he has staked his personal freedom, and lost ; and hia peoi 
renounce him 

7 Driving hooks : used by mahouts or elephant-drivers. The last half line 
the stanza is difficult : — ‘ they appear to the gambler covered with honey.’ 

8 Three and-jifty : or, perhaps, thrice five in number. It would »PP® 

from SAyana’s Commentary that fifty-three was the usual number of dice e 
ployed ; and yet this seems hardly probable. Ludwig suggests ‘three tin 
five’ as the meaning heie of tripancMpih. and Prof. Weber w° u *“L 
tripafichatiuh instead of tripafichdsah(Ueber den RdjasHya, p. 72). LikeSavi , 
‘[disposing men's destinies] like the god S.’ — Muir. I 

10 Riches : wealth gained by robbery, according to SAyapa. J 

11 Yokes the brown steeds: begins throwing the nut-dice. When the /J 

cold: * by the time when the file goes out he has stink into a e 8 1 
wretch,’ — Muir. f 



THE RIO VEDA. 


431 


fifiV 35.] 

To the great captain of your mighty army, who hath become 
the host’s imperial leader, 

To him I show my ten extended fingers ; I speak the truth. 
No wealth am I withholding. 

[ play not with dice : no, cultivate thy corn-land. Enjoy the 
gain, and deem that wealth sufficient. 

There are thy cattle, there thy wife, 0 gambler. So this good 
Savitar himself hath told me. 

[ Make me your friend : show us some little mercy. Assail us 
not with your teriific fierceness. 

Appeased be your malignity and anger, and let the brown 
dice snare some other captive. 

HYMN XXXV. Visvedevas. 

Thkse fires associate with Indra are awake, bringing their 
light when first the Dawn begins to shine. 

May Heaven and Earth, great Pair, observe our holy work. 
We claim for us this day the favour of the Gods. 

2 Yea, for ourselves we claim the grace of Heaven and Earth, 

of Saryanavan, of the Hills and Mother Streams. 

For innocence we pray to Surya and to Dawn. So may the 
flowing Soma bring us bliss to-day. 

3 May the great Twain, the Mothers, Heaven and Earth, this 

day preserve us free from sin for peace and happiness. 

May Morning sending forth her light drive sm afar. We pray 
to kindled Agni for felicity. 

May this first Dawn bring us the host of gracious Gods : 

rich, may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth. 

The wrath of the malignant may we keep afar. We pray to 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

> Dawns, who come forward witli the bright beams of the Sun, 
and at your earliest flushing bring to us the light, 

12 The great captain : the highest-numbered of all the dice. Ten fingers : 
8 W that I have nothing left. 

b This stanza is a farewell address to the Dice. Some other : our enemy. — 

iyana. 

The hymn or lay has been transliterated, translated in prose, and freely 
produced in rhymed octosyllabic verse, by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts, V. 

It has also been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder. 
J Indra: as a God of the morning light. 

r Of Saryaniivdrif of the Mills : according to S&yana, ‘ of the mountains of 
pyanftv&n/ a lake in the distri* t of Kurukshetra. I follow Ludwig in 
[i ln £ ' both pdrvatdn and sargafUlmtah as genitives. 

L I° ur ‘ according to the text * their/ the verb iu the first line being in 

,e “*ird person. 



432 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l 

Shine yo on us to-day auspicious, for renown. We pray to 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

6 Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, and let 

our fires mount upward with a lofty blaze. 

The Asvin Pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. We 
pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

7 Send us tc-day a portion choice and excellent, 0 Savitar, for 

thou art he who dealeth wealth. 

I cry to DhishanA, Mother of opulence. We pray to kindled 
Agni for felicity. 

8 Further me this declaring of Eternal Law, the Law of Gods, 

as we mortals acknowledge it ! 

The Sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn. We pray to 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

9 This day we pray with innoeonce in strewing grass, adjusting 

pressing-stones, and perfecting the hymn. 

Thou in the Adityas’ keeping movest restlessly. We pray to 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

10 To our groat holy grass I bid the Gods at morn to banquet, 

and will seat them as the seven priests,— 

Varuna, Indra, Mitra, Bhaga for our gain. We pray to kindl- 
ed Agni for felicity. 

11 Come hither, 0 Adityas, for our perfect weal : accordant help 

our sacrifice that we may thrive. # 

Pushan, Brihaspati, Bhaga, both Asvins, and enkindled Agni 
we implore for happiness. 

12 Adityas, Gods, vouchsafe that this our home may be praise 

worthy, prosperous, our heroes’ sure defence, 

For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We pray t( 
kindled Agni for felicity. 

13 This day may all the Maruts, all be near us with aid : maj 

all our fires be well enkindled. 

May all Gods come to us with gracious favour. May spoil an 
wealth be ours, and all possessions. 

7 Dhishand : a Goddess who presides over prosperity ; according to Hill 

braudt, the Earth. _ ^ In 

8 Further me: ‘May that glorification of the gods which men repe 

connexion with the rite preserve me.’— Wilson. 

9 Movest restlessly : perforinest thy duties, according to SAya?*- S 
pidly burning the fuel appears to be intended. 



THE EIQ VEDA. 


433 


rtfN 36.] 

He whom ye aid, 0 Deities, in battle, whom ye protect and 
rescue from affliction, 

Who fears no danger at your milk-libation, — such may we be 
to feast the Gods, ye Mighty. 

HYMN XXXVI. Visvedevas. 

There are the Dawn and Night, the grand and beauteous 
I’air, Earth, Heaven, and Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman. 

Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, and the Floods, Adityas, 
Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Sky. 

May Dyaus and Prithiv 1 , wise, true to Holy Law, keep us in 
safety from distress and injury. 

Let not malignant Nirriti rule over us. We crave to-day this 
gracious favour of the Gods. 

Mother of Mitra and of opulent Varuna, may Aditi preserve 
us safe from all distress. 

May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe. We crave 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

May ringing press-stones keep the Rakshasas afar, ill dream, 
and Nirriti, and each voracious fiend. 

May the Adityas and the Maruts shelter us. We crave this 
gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

I Full flow libations ; on our grass let Indra sit; Brihaspati the 

singer laud with Sama hymns ! 

Wise be our hearts’ imaginings that wo may live. We crave 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

> Ye Asvius, make our sacrifice ascend to heaven, and animate 
the rite that it may send us bliss, 

Offered with holy oil, with forward-speeding rein. We crave 
the gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

r Hither I call the band of Maruts, swift to hear, great, purify- 
ing, bringing bliss, to be our Friends. 

May we increase our wealth to glorify our name. We crave 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

' bring the Stay of Life, who makes the waters swell, swift- 
hearing, Friend of Gods, who waits on sacrifice. 

14 Who fears no danger ; who feels assured that his worship ot the Gods 

II Protect him. 

I ^ Waters : of the firmamer*. 

g Vywis and Pfithivi : Heaven and Earth. Nirriti : Death or Destruction. 
males the waters swell : apflm ptrum : * protector of the waters.’ — 
’Drinker of the waters.’— Ludwig. Soma is meant. See IX. 76. 4. 
28 



434 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


May we control that Power, Soma whose rays are bright. ] 
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

9 Alive ourselves, with living sons, devoid of guilt, may we* 
this with winners by fair means to win. 

Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every aide. We era 
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

10 Hear us, O ye who claim the worship of mankind, and gi 

us, 0 j r e Gods, the gift for which we pray, 1 * 3 

Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with wealth. ] ] 
crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods. 

11 We crave the gracious favour of the Gods to-day, great favo 

of great Gods, sublime and free from foes, 

That we may gain rich treasure sprung from hero sons. 11 
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

12 In great enkindled Agni’s keeping, and, for bliss, free froma 

sin before Mitra and Vanina, 

May we share Savitar’s best animating help. Wo crave thi 
gracious favour of the Gods to-day. 

13 All ye, the Gods whom Savitar the Father of truth, and Va 

run a and Mitra govern, 

Give ns prosperity with hero children, and opulence in kirn 
and various treasure. 

14 Savitar, Savitar from east and westward, Savitar, Savitai 

from north and southward, 

Savitar send us perfect health and comfort, Savitar let ow 
days of life be lengthened ! * ~ 

HYMN XXXVII. Sury« 

Do homage unto Vanina’s and Mitra’s Eye : offer this solemi 
worship to the Mighty God, 

Who seeth far away, the Ensign, born of Gods. Sing praia 
unto Sftrya, to the Son of Dyaus. 

2 May this my truthful speech guard me on every side, wbf 

ever heaven and earth and days are spread abroad. 

All else that is in motion finds a place of rest : the wate 
ever flow and ever mounts the Sun. 

3 No godless man from time remotest draws thee down wbf 

thou art driving forth with winged dappled Steeds. 

One lustre waits upon thee moving to the east, and, Sfirya, the 
arisest with a different light. 

1 Vanina's and Mitra' s Eye: Surya or the Sun. ‘The eye of Hitt 

Varuna and Agni.’— I. 115. 1. 

3 Dappled Steeds : ‘ with Eta*as.’ — Ludwig. Oneluttre: by night. 

115. 5 ; and AitareyQ'Brdhinuna , III, 4. 44. ‘One ancient radiance 



<YIUX 37 .] 


TUB BIG VEDA . 


435 


0 saryft, with the light whereby thou seatterest gloom, and 
with thy ray impellest every moving thing, 

Keep far from us all feeble, worthless sacrifice, and drive awav 
disease and every evil dream. J 


5 Sent forth thou guardest well the Universe’s law and in thv 
wonted way ariscst free from wrath. ’ J 

When Sfirya, we address our prayers to thee to-day, may the 
Gods favour this our purpose and desire. J 


5 This invocation, these our words may Heaven and Earth and 
Indra and the Waters and the Maruts hear. 1 * * * S * * ^ 

Ne’er may we suffer want in presence of the Sun, and, living 
happy lives, may we attain old age. b 

r Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with store 
of children, free from sickness and from sin, 

Long-living, may we look, 0 Surya, upon thee uprising day by 
day, thou great as Mitra is 1 J 


8 Sfirya, may we live long and look upon thee still, thee, 0 Far- 

seeing One, bringing the glorious light, 

The radiant God, the spring of joy to every eye, as thou art 
mounting up o’er the high shining flood. 

9 Thou by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth, and by 

thy beams again returns unto its rest, 

0 Surya with the golden hair, ascend for us day after day, 
still bringing purer innocence. 

10 ^ ss 1,8 with shine, bless us with perfect daylight, bless us 

with cold, with feivent heat and lustre. 

Bestow on us, 0 Surya, varied riches, to bless us in our home 
and when wo travel. 

1 to our living creatures of both kinds vouchsafe protection, 
both to bipeds and to quadrupeds, 

That they may drink and eat invigorating food. So grant us 
health aud stiength and perfect innocence. 

' ^ b y sor ue grievous sin we have provoked the Gods, 0 Deities, 
with the tongue or thoughtlessness of heart, 

that guilt, 0 Vasus, lay upon the Evil One, on him who ever 
leads us into deep distress. 

' %S« 8 p 17 riSest anot her.’— Wilson. See Wallis, Cosmology of 

! % wonted way : wadkX anu : ‘ after the swadhd offerings. —Wilson. 

12 00c * ; or floor of heaven. 

dwig^ ^ V ^ : here probably a kind of Diabolus or Devil.-— 



436 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOR i 


HYMN XXXVIII. x 

0 Indra, in this battle great and glorious, in this loud din c 
war help us to victory, 

Where in the strife for kine among bold ring-decked me 
arrows fly all around and heroes are subdued. 

2 At homo disclose to us opulence rich in food, streaming wit- 

milk, 0 Indra, meet to be renowned. 

Sakra, may we be thine, the friendly Conqueror’s : even as w 
desire, 0 Vasu, so do thou. 

3 The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be Dim c 

be Arya, who would war with us, — 

Easy to conquer be for thee, with us, these foes : with thee ma 
we subdue them in the clash of fight. 

4 Him who must bo invoked by many and by few, who standetl 

nigh with comfort in the war of men, 

India, famed Hero, winner in the doadly strife, let us biiq 
hitherward to-day to favour us. 

5 For, Indra, I have heard thee called Self-capturer, One, Steer 

who never yields, who urges even the churl. 

Release thyself from Kutsa and come hither. How shallow 
like thee sit still bound that be may not move? 

HYMN XXXIX. Asvins 

Aa ’twere the name of father, easy to invoke, we all assembler 
here invoke this Car of yours, 

Asvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient (far which he whe 
worships must invoke at eve and dawn. 

2 Awake all pleasant strains and let the hymns flow forth : raisf 
up abundant fulnoss : this is our desire. 

Asvins, bestow on us a glorious heritage, and give our princeH 
treasure fair as Soma is. 

1 Ring-decked : adorned with armlets, or quoits as weapons. 

5 Self-ca/pturer : it is difficult to assign a reasonable and appropriate mean 
ing to fvavrijam. Sftyana explains it by svayam eva chhettdram, 1 one who cut) 
himself;’ ‘ self mutilator.’ — Wilson. According to the St. Petersburg t®* 1 ' 
coo, the meaning is ‘one who appropriates or takes to himself;’ according tj 
Ludwig ‘ the self- rescuer,’ and according to Geklner ‘ one who suffers hiu^ 
to be captured.’ The poet calls on Indra to tear himself away from his f& voU . 
ite Kutsa in order to aid his worshippers in the coming fight. ‘ A legen 
here somewhat obscurely related, that KuUa and Lufa having aummone ^ 
dra at the same time to their respective sacrifices, he went first to Atdja 

then detained him, having fastened him with a hundred leather t M 

This verse is addressed to Indra by Lma t exhorting him to free hinwe 1 
Wilson. 

The Rishi is Ghoshft, daughter of Kakshlv&n. 



THE kIGVEDA. 


437 


l $YMN 39.] 

3 Yc are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, and helpers 

of the slow although he linger last. 

Men call you too, Nasatyas, healers of the blind, the thin and 
feeble, and the man with broken bones. 

4 Ye made Chyavann, weak and worn with length of days, 

young again, like a car, that he had power to move. 

Ye lifted up the sou of Tugra from the floods. At our liba- 
tions must all these your acts be praised. 

5 We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic ; 

yea, ye were Physicians bringing health. 

You, you who must be lauded, will we bring for aid, so that 
this foe of ours, 0 Asvins, may believe. 

6 Listen to me, 0 Asvins ; I have cried to you. Give me your 

aid as sire and mother aid their son. 

Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. Save me, 
before it be too late, from this my curse. 

7 Ye, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the comely 

maid of Purumitra as a bride. 

Ye came unto the calling of the weakling’s dame, and granted 
noble offspring to the happy wife. 

8 Ye gave again the vigour of his youthful life to the sage Kali 

when old age was coming nigh. 

Ye rescued Vandana and raised him from the pit, and in a 
moment gave Vispala power to move. 

9 Ye, Asvins Twain, endowed with manly strength, brought 

forth Rebha when hidden in the cave and well-nigh dead, 
Freed Saptavadhri, and for Atri caused the pit heated with 
fire to be a pleasant resting-place. 

10 On Pedu ye bestowed, Asvins, a courser white, mighty with 

nine-and-uiuety varied gifts of strength, 

A horse to be renowned, who bore his friend at speed, joy-giv- 
ing, Bhaga-like to be invoked of men. 


3 Of her who groweth old at home : referring to Ghoshft herself. See I. 17. 7. 
Healers of the blind ; see I. 112. 8. 

4 Chyavdna : see I. 118. 10, and 117. 13. Son of Tugra: Bhujyu. See 
Vol* 1., Index. 

3 My curse : leprosy, which prevented her marriage. 

7 Vimada .* see I. 117. 20. Th <; weakling's dame : see I. 117. 24. 

8 For Kali, Vandana, and Vispald in this stanza, and Rebha , Atri , and 

iu 9 and 10, see Yol. I., Index. For Saptavadhn (stanza 9) see V. 78. 6. 



438 THE HYMtiS OP [BOOK l 

11 From no side, ye Two Kings whom none may check or stav 

doth grief, distress, or danger come upon the man 
Whom, Asvins swift to hear, borne on your glowing path, y, 
with your Consort make the foremost in the race. 

12 Come on that Chariot which the Ribhus wrought for you 

the Chariot, Asvins, that is speedier than thought, 

At harnessing whereof Heaven’s Daughter springs to birth 
and from Vivasvan come auspicious Night and Day. 

13 Come, Conquerors of the sundered mountain, to our home 

Asvins who made the cow stream milk for Sayu’s sake, 

Ye who delivered even from the wolf’s deep throat and sei 
again at liberty the swallowed quail. 

14 We have prepared this laud for you, 0 Asvins, and, like thi 

Bhrigus, as a car have framed it, 

Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brough 
it as a son, our stay for ever. 

HYMN XL. Asviua 

Your radiant Chariot — whither goes it on its way ? — who decks 
it for you, Heroes, for its happy course, 

Starting at daybreak, visiting each morning every house, borne 
hitherward through prayer unto the sacrifice? 

2 Where are ye, Asvins, in the evening, where at mom ? Where 

is your halting-place, where rest ye for the night? 

Who brings you homeward, as the widow bedward draws hei 
husband’s brother, as the bride attracts the^room? 

3 Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald’s voice, and, mcel 

for worship, go each morning to the house. 

Whom do ye ever bring to ruin ? Unto whose libations come 
ye, Heroes, like two Sons of Kings? 


11 Whom, none may check or stay : adite — adinau. — S&yana. Your Consort: 
SuryA. The foremost in the race : that is, generally, preeminent. 

12 Heaven's Daughter : Ushas or Dawn. Vivasvdn: the morning Sun. 

18 Conquerors of the sundered mountain: probably with reference to the 

deliverance of Jjfliusha, — Ludwig. See I. 110. 20. The swallowed quail : 

I. 112. 8 The quail is probably Dawn delivered from the jaws of the wolf 
Night by the twin Light-Gods. 

14 Our stay for ever : who will perpetuate our family ; ‘ the eternal per* 
former of rites.’ — Wilson. 

2 As the widow : in certain circumstances a widow was bound to marry her 
deceased husband’s brother. See Manu ( MdnavadharmoffistraJ, IX. 69. < • 
The law of the Jews was the Bnme. See Deuteronomy, xxv. 6. 

8 A* with a herald's voice ; Hpayd is thus explained by Sftya^a. The hQVi * 
of the sacrifioer. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


439 


1YMN 40.] 


4 Even as hunters follow two wild elephants, we with oblations 

call you down at morn and eve. 

To folk who pay you offerings at appointed times, Chiefs, Lords 
of splendour, ye bring food to strengthen them. 

5 To you, 0 Asvins, came the daughter of a King, Ghosha, and 

said, 0 Heroes, this I beg of you : 

Be near me in the day, be near me in the night: help me to 
gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds. 

6 0 Asvins, ye are wise : as Kutsa comes to men, bring your car 

nigh the folk of him who sings your praise. 

The bee, 0 Asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the 
maid carries it purified in her hand. 

7 To Bhujyu and to Vasa ye came near with help, 0 Asvins, to 

Sinjara and to Usana. 

Your worshipper secures your friendship for himself. Through 
your protection I desire felicity. 

Krisa and Suyu ye protect, ye Asvins Twain : ye Two assist 
the widow and the worshipper; 

And ye throw open, Asvins, unto those who win the cattle-stall 
that thunders with its sc\ enfold mouth. 

) The Woman hath brought forth, the Infant hath appeared, 
the plants of wondrous beauty stiaightway have sprung up. 
To him the rivers run as down a deep descent, and ho this 
day becomes their master and their lord. 

) They mourn the living, cry aloud, at sacrifice: the men have 
set their thoughts upon a distant cast. 

A lovely thing for fathers who have gathered here, — a joy to 
husbands, — are the wives their arms shall clasp. 


5 The second half of the second line is difficult : ' be able (to grant favour) 

) the son of my brother, who has horses and a chariot. Wilson. 

6 As Kutsa comes to men • borne on India’s chariot. Bears yow honey . 
ps honey when the Asvins have ushered in the day. As the maid : Dr. 
luirand Prof. Qrassmaun explain this half-line ditfeiently, ‘as a maid, or a 
foman, resorts to her rendezvous (with her lover).’ 

7 Vasa: see I 112. 10 Sinjdt .„ : see VIII. 5. 25. VftnA • see Vol. I., Index. 

8 Krisa: a Rishi favoured by Indra ; or. as Sdyana explains the word hare, 
:he feeble man in general. Styn: lias been mentioned frequently. Me 
'dttle-stall : the rain-cloud whose watei s are the cows. 

9 The Woman ; perhaps the water of the cloud. The Infant : the lightuing. 
Io him : the sacriftcer may perhaps be intended. 

,10 They mourn the living : perhaps, show their sorrow for the widower at 
Ike fuueral of his wife. See Lanmau {Sanlkrit Reader, p 38 J ) ., fl0 “ ^ “ 
have bon owed. Set their thoughts upon a distant cast :< of the 
&n&ring.net : apparently a periphrasis for, bav* taken thought for the distan 
Lture and children to live after them. 



440 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK i 

1 1 Of this we have no knowledge. Tell it forth to us, how the 

youth rests within the chambers of the bride. 

Fain would we reach the dwelliug of the vigorous Steer whc 
loves the kine, 0 Asvins : this is our desire. 

12 Your favouring grace hath come, ye Lords of ample wealth 

Asvins, our longings are stored up within your hearts. 

Ye, Lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard : mai 
we as welcome friends reach Aryaman’s abode. 

13 Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give hero sou 

and riches to the eloquent. 

Make a ford, Lords of splendour, where men well may drink 
remove the spiteful tree-stump standing in the path. 

14 0 Asvins, Wonder-Workers, Lords of lustre, where and witl 

what folk do ye delight yourselves to-day? 

Who hath detaiued them with him? Whither are they gone 
Unto what sage’s or what worshipper’s abode? 

HYMN XLI. Asvinf 

That general Car of yours, invoked by many a man, thai 
comes to our libations, three-wheeled, meet for lauds, 

That circumambient Car, worthy of sacrifice, we call with oui 
pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn. 

2 Ye, O Nasatyas, mount that early-harnessed Car, that travel 

early, laden with its freight of balm, 

Wherewith ye, Heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even the pool 
man’s worship where the priest attends. 

3 If to the deft Adhvaryu with the meath in hand, or to the 

Kindler firm in strength, the household frieud, 

Or to the sage’s poured libations ye approach, come thence, 0 
Asvins, now to drink the offered meath. 


11 Gliosliit appears to speak of herself in the plural number. She plainlj 
expresses her wishes for marriage. 

12 Aryaman' $ abode : Aryaman is here used in the original sense of tb 
word, bosom-friend and companion, especially the friend who asks a womai 
in marriage for another. 

Prof. Grassmatm places stanzas 10—14 in his Appendix as being obscun 
and in his opinion forming no part of the original hymn. 


1 Three-wheeled,: see I. 34. 9. 

3 The Kindler : the Aguidh, the priest who kindles the sacrificial fire. 



BTMX 42] 


THE MOVED A. 


441 


HYMN XLII. Indra. 

Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud to him 
with meet adornment. 

Quell with your voice the wicked’s voice, 0 sages. Singer, 
make Indra rest beside the Sonia. 

2 Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking : 0 Singer, 

wnke up Indra as a lover. 

Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel 
filled brimful with treasure. 

3 Why, Maghavan, do they call thee Bounteous Giver 1 Quicken 

me : thou, I hear, art he who quickens. 

Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us luck that 
finds great wealth, 0 Indra. 

4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people, 

Indra, in the fray invoke thee. 

Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade : with him 
who pours no juice he seeks not friendship. 

5 Whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong Somas as 

much quickly-coming treasure, 

For him ho overthrows in early morning his swift well-weapon- 
ed foes, and slays the tyrant. 

6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath 

joined to ours his wishes, — 

Before him even afar the foe must tremble : low before him 
must bow all human glories. 

7 With thy fierce bolt, 0 God invoked of many, drive to a 

distance from afar the foeman. 

0 Indra, give us wealth in com and cattle, and make thy 
singer’s prayer gain strength and riches. 

8 Indra, the swallower of strong libations rich in the boons 

they bring, the potent Somas, 

He, Maghavan, will not restrict his bounty : he brings much 
wealth unto the Soma-presser. 

9 Yea, by superior play he wins advantage, when he, a gambler, 

piles his gains in season. 

Colestial-iiatured, he o’erwhelms w r ith riches the devotee who 
keeps not back his treasure. 

1 weed's voice : ‘ the praises of your adversaries.' — Wilson. 

4 The Her o: Indra. 

j n ’ wucA quickly -coming treamre : representing the wealth which the oEfer- 
| ot the libations is expected to produce. 

nto whom we offer praites : or, iu whom we have placed our hope. 
y H am he, a gambltr : cp. X. 43. 5. 



442 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK % 


10 0 Much-invoked, may we subclue all famine and evil want 
with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions 
by our own exertion. 


1 1 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and 
from below, from sinners ! 

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to 
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 


HYMN XLIII. Indra. 

In perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the 
light of heaven have sum* forth Indra’s praise. 

As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they 
compass Magh.ivan about that he may help. 

2 Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have set my 

hopes on thee, 0 Much-invoked ! 

Sit, Wonderful 1 as King upon the sacred grass, and let thy 
drinking-placo be by the Soma juice. 

3 From indigence and hunger Indra turns away : Maghavan 

hath dominion over precious wealth. 

These the Seven Rivers flowing on their downward path in- 
crease the vital vigour of the potent Steer. 

4 As on the fair-leafed tiee rest birds, to Indra flow the gladden- 

ing Soma juices that the bowls contain. 

Their face that glows wi(h splendour through their mighty 
power hath found the shine of heaven fo%man, the Arps’ 
light. 

5 As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so Maghavan, 

sweeping all together, gained the Sun. 

This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none, 
Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time. 

6 Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men : the Steer 

took notice of the people’s songs of praise. 

The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by means of 
potent Somas vanquisheth bis foes. 

10 With prince* : with men eminent for their wealth : rdjabhir-dhandnd 
mlfvaraih. — SAyana. 


8 Turns away : SAyana makes vukuvrit transitive : — ‘ May Indra be tb« 
remover of thirst and haugt-r.’ — Wilson. , ^ 

5 Gained the Sun: conquers him by taking away hie moisture, that 
water that he has absorbed.— SAyana. 



gYMN 44.] THE R10VEDA . 443 

7 When Soma streams together unto Indra flow like waters to 

the river, rivulets to the lake, 

In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the rain swells 
the corn by moisture sent from heaven. 

8 He rushes through the region like a furious Hull, he who hath 

made these floods the dames of worthy lords. 

This Maghavan hath found light for the man who biings ob- 
, lation, sheds the juice, and promptly pours his gifts. 

9 Let the keen axe come forth together with the light : here be, 

as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice. 

Let the Red God shine bright with his refulgent ray, and lot 
the Lord of heroes glow like heaven’s clear sheen. 

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with 

store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions 
by our own exertion. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and 

from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to 
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN XLIV. Indra. 

May Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by Holy Law 
is strong and active, 

The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great steer- 
like power that hath no limit. 

2 Firm-seated is thy car, thy Steeds are docile ; thy hand, 0 

King, holds, firmly grasped, the thunder. 

On thy fair path, 0 Lord of men, come quickly : we will in- 
crease thy powers when thou hast drunken. 

3 Let strong and mighty Steeds who bear this Mighty Indra, the 

Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder, 

Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the Steer of conquer- 
[ ing might, of real vigour. 

td! f ames °f unrthy lords: that is, subjected them to the Aryans, 

9 eas tht >y had been the thralls of D^as. See I. 32. 11. 

tod nh n aXe: w ^° * 8 f re fl uenfc ly likened to an axe. See I. 127. 3, 

(ndra’ • 'u' * The Red Ood: aruehah : according to SAyana, ‘the radiant 
prefers * 8 P r °bably intended, or perhaps ‘ the red bolt' as M. Milller 

10 two concluding stanzas are identical in Hymns 52, 53, 54. 



444 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK \ 

4 So like a Bull thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trougl 

the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat. 

Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself : be for ou 
profit as the Master of the wise. 

5 May precious treasures come to us, — so will I pray. Come t 

the votaiy’s gift offered with beauteous laud. 

Thou art the Loid, as such sit on this holy grass : thy vessel 
are inviolate as Law commands, 

6 Far went our earliest invocations of the Gods, and won u 

glories that can never be surpassed. 

They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice, sink down i: 
desolation, trembling with alarm. 

7 So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses, difficul 

to harness, have been yoked. 

Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by whom ful 
many a work that brings reward is done. 

8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook 

Dyaus thundered forth and made the air’s mid-region quake 
He stays apart the two confronting bowls ; he sings lauds ii 
the potent Soma’s joy when he hath drunk. 

9 I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine, wherewith thou 

Maghavan, shalt break the strikers with the hoof. 

At this libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake th 
juice, partake the worship, Maghavan. 

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil wan 

with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes offtain possession 
by our own exertion. 

1 1 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, an( 

from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as Friend t 
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

4 The Lord: pat im: the Soma. Collect them in tkytelf: ‘take us hit 
thj self.’— Wilson. Of the wise: kenipflnam is thus explained by the CommeD 
tators, but the meaning seems doubtful. Ludwig thinks that ‘the maste 
of the oars,' that is, the steersman, is intended. 

6 In desolation : trmd' = tpr)/iOi. — Ludwig. Trembling in alarm : or, tlo er 
of ill deeds, according to YAska’s interpretation of kipayah, 

7 Whoie horses, difficult to harness, have been yoked: whose ill- manage 
attempts to perform acceptable sacrifice have failed. In advance: hew* 1 
death, according to SAyana. 

8 He : Indra. As they shook : cp. II. 12. 2. Two confronting bowls: bea?ei 

and earth. # ■. 

9 Goad: the hymn of praise which urges Indra to action. The striker/ w* 
the hoof: a class of Y&tudhAnas or demons. See X. 87. 12. 



HYMN 45.] THE RIQVELA. 445 

HYMN XLV. Agni. 

First Agni sprang to life from out of Heaven : the second 
time from us came Jata vedas. 

Thirdly the Manly-souled was iu the waters. The pious lauds 
and kindles him the Eternal. 

2 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know 

thy forms in many a place divided. 

We know what name supremo thou hast in secret : we know 
the source from which thou hast proceeded. 

3 The Manly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, man’s Viewer 

lit thee in the breast of heaven. 

There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Steers 
increased thee in the waters’ bosom. 

4 Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders : he licked 

the ground, about the plants he flickered. 

At once, when born, he looked around enkindled, and lightened 
heaven and earth within with splendour. 

5 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts 

and guardian of the Soma, 

Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront 
of the Dawns he shines enkindled. 

6 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, be sprang to life 

and filled the earth and heavens. 

Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when the Five 
Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni. 

7 So among mortals was Immortal Agni stablished as holy 

wise and willing envoy. 

He waves the red smoko that he lifts above him, striving to 
reach the heavens with radiant lustre. 


1 From out of Heaven : or, from Dyaus or Heaven his father; in the shape 
of the Sun. From us : produced by men in the shape of sacrificial and do- 
mestic fire. In the waters ; of the firmament, in the shape of lightning, the 
third form of Agni. 

2 In secret : unknown to those who know not the Veda. — S&yana. 

3 The Manly-souled ; or, the Friend of men; Varuna, according to S&yana, 
and PrajApati, according to Mahidhara. Perhaps Dyaus (cp. stanza 8) may 

^ lutended.— Ludwig. Grassmann thinks that Indra, the kindler of the 
1'ghtning, is meant. The Steers : or, the Mighty Ones; the Maruts. 

. 1 2 3 * * 6 The hrm rock : ‘the solid cloud.’— Wilson. Some extraordinary conflagra- 
tion of jungle may perhaps be referred to. The Five Ti'ibes : pdftcha jandh : 
literally, the five men, meaning, according to S&yana, men in general, and, 
according to Mahtdhara, the institutor of the sacrifice and the four chief 

priests. 



446 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X 

8 Like gold to look on, far he Bhone refulgent, beaming itnper- 

ishable life for glory, 

Agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific Father 
Dyaus begat him. 

9 Whoso this day, O God whoso flames are lovely, prepares a 

cake, 0 Agni, mixt with butter, 

Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss bestowed 
by Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful. 

10 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every song of 

praise sung forth enrich him. 

Dear let him be to Sfirya, dear to Agni, preeminent with sou 
and children’s children. 

11 While, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship they win 

themselves all treasures worth the wishing. 

Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclos- 
ed the stable filled with cattle. 

12 Agni, the Friend of men, the Soma’s keeper, Vaisvanara, 

hath been lauded by the liishis. 

We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven : ye Deities, 
give us wealth with hero children. 

HYMN XLVL Agni. 

Stabushed for thee, to lend thee vital forces, Giver of wealth, 
Guard of his servant’s body. 

The Great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, Abider with 
men, is seated in the lap of waters. • 

2 Worshipping, seeking him with adoration like some lost crea- 

ture followed by its footprints, 

Wise Bhrigus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and 
found him lurking where the floods are gathered. 

3 On the Cow’s forehead, with laborious searching, Trita, the 

offspring of Vibhuvas, found him. 

Born in our houses, Youthful, joy-bestower, he now becomes 
the central point of brightness. 

12 Soma s keeper : as identified with the Muon, the great receptacle of the 
celestial Soma, the nectar or ambrosia of the Gods. See Hillebrandt, V. M I- 
330 — 336 . 

1 For thee : the Rishi addresses himself. Who knows the clouds: f r °m 
which he (Agni) comes in the form of Lightning. Of waters : of the firm*' 
ment. 

2 Wise Bhrigus : frequently mentioned as specially connected with the 
worship of Agni. Cf II 4. 2. Pursued him : seel. 65. 1. 

3 On the Cow' s forehead : ‘on the head of the cloud.’ Trita : Agni in ntf 
third form as lightuing. The abstract personified form of the celestial Ag® 1 



THE R1QVEDA. 


447 


01ifH 46.] 


4 Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe 

Priest among mankind, oblation-bearer, 

Leader of rites and Purifier, envoy of men, as sacrifice that 
still advances. 

5 The foolish brought the ne’er-bewildered forward, great, Victor, 

Song-inspirer, Fort-destroyer. 

Leading the Youth gold-bearded, like a courser gleaming with 
wealth, they turned their hymn to profit. 

6 Holding his station firmly in the houses, Trita sat down within 

his home surrounded. 

Thence, as Law bids, departs the Tribes’ Companion, having 
collected men with no compulsion. 

7 His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses 

move, whose smoke is shining, 

White, waxing in their strength, for ever stirring, and sitting 
in the wood ; like winds are Somus. 

8 The tongue of Agni bears away the praise-song, and, through 

Ids care for Earth, her operations. 

Hun, bright and radiant, living men have stablished as their 
blithe Priest, the Chief of Sacnficers. 

9 That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, the 

Waters, Tvashtar, and, with might, the Bhrigus, 

Him Matarisvan and the Gods have fashioned holy for man 
aud first to be entreated. 


is hei e represented as endeavouring to find the lurking fire in the sky. — 
Maedonell. Offspring of Vibhuvas: or, connected with Vibhuvasu, the very 
wealthy, Soma. 

4 da sacrifice, that still advances : ‘ids das sieh vorwarts bewegende opfer.' 
—Ludwig Accoid ng to Siy.ina, ‘the object of sacrifice, him who goes forward 
[h’"tn one tire receptacle to another] ’ 

5 The foolish liuman priests, weak and foolish in comparison with the wise 
Agni. Gleaming with wealth: the meaning of dhanai chain is uncertain. The 
St. Petersburg Lexicon offers dhanarjam, * striving to win the prize/ as pro- 
bably the light reading. 

6 On stanza* 3 and 6 see Maedonell (J. K. A. S M July, 1893, pp. 450 — 452), 
w ho tianslates the second half of 6 .as follows : From hence the house-friend 
( >f settlers collecting (them) goto among men by distiibutiou, not by (means 
"f) bonds ; i e., carried from place, not freshly produced by cord and drill 

7 That make the houses move : this seems to be what the words danictm 
w'ltrd should mean, though how flames can be thus qualified is not clear. 
'The lcscueib from the humiliated (spirits of ill).’ — Wilson. * Protectors of 
the bouses.' — Mahidhara. Like winds are Somaa : as winds fan flame, so 
Soma libations increase the might of Agni. Accoiding to S.lyana, the flames 
a ' e ‘ like the fast-flowing juices of the Soma .' — Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s 
explanation, but the meaning ^f the passage is doubtful. 

® operations : holy works performed by men 

9 Mdtarifvan : a divine or semi-divine being who brought Agni from 
he *ven. See I. 31 3, and 60. 1. 



448 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X 

10 Agni, whom Gods have made oblation-bearer, and much-desk, 
ing men regard as holy, 

Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then 
shall glorious men in troops adore thee. 

HYMN XLVII. Inclra Vaikuntha. 

Thy right hand have we grasped in ours, 0 Indra, longiu» 
for treasure, Treasure-Lord of treasures ! 0 

Because we know thee, Hero, Lord of cattle : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches 

2 Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, sprung 

from four seas, the prop and stay of treasures, 

Fraught with great bounties, meet for praise and glory ■ 
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

3 Wealth, with good Brahmans, Indra! God-attended, high, 

wide, and deep, and based on broad foundations, 

Strong, with famed Rishis, conquering our foernen : vouch 
safe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

4 Victorious, winning strength, with hero sages, confirmed in 

power, most useful, wealth-attracting, 

True, Indra ! crushing forts and slaying Dasyus : vouchsafe 
us mighty and resplendent riches. 

5 Wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses, strength hundred- 

fold and thousandfold, 0 Indra, 

With manly sages, happy troops, light- winning: vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. # 

6 To Saptagu the sage, the holy-minded, to him, Brihaspati, the 

song approaches, 

Angiras’ Son who must be met with homage : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. 

7 My lauds, like envoys, craving loving-kindness, go forth to 

Iudra with their strong entreaty, 

Moving his heart and uttered by my spirit : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. 

Vaikuntha is said to mean son of Yikunthft, an Asufl or female demon who 
was allowed by Indra to become his second mother. 

2 Wealth: S&yana gives another interpretation : — ‘ (We know thee to be) 
well armed/ etc. — Wilson. Sprung from four seas : regarded as the store- 
houses of jewels, ‘ (Renowned throughout) the four oceans,’— [applied to 
Indra] Wilson. 

6 Brihaspati: according to the Scholiast meaning Saptagu, ‘the lord 
much (praise) ’ — Wilson. According to others, the God Brihaspati calj«^ 
Saptagu as being drawn by seven oxen : ‘ der fahrt mit sieben Bindero 
Grassmann. 4.ngiras' Son: meaning apparently Brihaspati as especially l yVea 
and honoured by Angiras and his descendants. See VI. 78. 1. 



TEE RIQVEDA, 


449 


0MX 48.] 

8 Grant us the boon for which I pray, 0 Indra, a spacious home 
unmatched among the people. 

To this may Heaven and Earth accord approval : vouchsafe us 
mighty and resplendent riches. 

HYMN XLVIII. Indra Vaikuntha. 

I was the first possessor of all precious gear : the wealth of 
every man I win and gather up. 

On me as on a Father living creatures call : I deal enjoyment 
to the man who offers gifts. 

2 I, Indra, am Atharvan’s stay and firm support : I brought forth 

kiue to Trita from the Dragon’s grasp. 

I stripped the Dasyus of their manly might, and gave the 
cattle-stalls toMatarisvan and Dadhyach. 

3 For me hath Tvashtar forged the iron thunderbolt : in me the 

Gods have centred intellectual power. 

My sheen is like the Sun’s insufferably bright : mon honour 
me as Lord for past and future deeds. 

4 I won myself these herds of cattle, steeds and a me, and gold 

in ample store, with my destructive bo[ i ; 

I give full many a thousand to th p •'Shipper, what time the 
Somas and the lauds have *' aae me ^ a( *- 

5 Indra am I : none e'"- wins m y weillth from me : never at 

any time <*;r * a thrall to death. 

the Soma, ask riches from me alone : ye, Purus, in 
my friendship shall not suffer harm. 

6 These, breathing loud in fury, two and two, who caused Indra 

to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray, 

The challengers, I struck with deadly weapon down : firm 
stand what words the God speaks to his worshippers. 


$ Unmatched : dsamam: ‘not held in common.’— Wilson. 

Itidra, Vaikuntha is the Hishi of this hymn, which is a self-laudatorv reulv 
to Saptagu in Hymn XLVII. y p y 

Atharvan is the name of the priest who first obtained fire and offered 
^oma and prayers to the Gods. See I. 80. 10, and 83, B. The Dragon is an- 
of •/ > * °F ^ fffra. ‘ I generated the waters above the cloud for the sake 
‘M^taris' ~~’^ r ^ 80n Mtttarifvan and Dadhyach: or, according to Sdyana, 


Alatarisvan’s son Dadhyach.’ 

* Hru * : ‘O men.’— Wilson. 


6 T) v — vv uHon. 

riar i n ; . who these were i3 uncertain. Two a**' tw0 •; probably the war- 
latin W t 011 chariot and the chariot<^ r *~ Ludwig. The literal tians- 
SDeivV Wf c last half-line of the stanza pri ,e ars to be ‘ the non-worshipper 
vorfi g f 1 "? 1 wor da to worshippers ; ^namasynh, he who has no other to re- 
brolr 1106 ’ t ing Indra » whose proviso of victory to his worshippers is never 
o*en. —bud wig. 

29 



450 THE HYMNS OF [BOOKl 

7 This One by stronger might I conquered Bingly ; yea, also two; 

shall three prevail against mel 
Like many sheaves upon the floor I thrash them. How can 
my foes, the Indraless, revile me ? 

8 Against the Gungus I made Atithigva strong, and kept him' 

mid the folk like Vritra- conquering strength, 

When I won glory in the great foe-slaying fight, in battle 
where Karanja fell, and Parnaya. 

9 With food for mine enjoyment Sapya Nairn came: he joined 

me as a friend of old in search of kine. 

As I bestowed on him an arrow for the fight I made him 
worthy of the song and hymn of praise. 

10 One of the two hath Soma, seen within it; the Herdsman with 

the bone shows forth the other. j 

He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were sharpened, stood 
fettered in the demon’s ample region. 

11 I, as a Q 0 d, ne’er violate the statutes of Gods, of Vasus, Ru- 

driyas, Aav^ H g 

These Gods have me f or auS pi c ious vigour, unconquer- 

ed and invincible for ^ . or# 

HYMN Xi^v Indra Vaikuntha, 

I have enriched the singer with surpassing — dth ; I have al- 
lowed the holy hymn to strengthen me. 

I, furtherer of him who offers sacrifice, have conquered in each 
fight the men who worship not. * 


7 This One • or, this one thing, that is, ‘ the primordial substance or unit 
out of which the universe was developed.’- Wallis, Cosmology of the Riovrf* 

V ’s Against the Omgus : or, to aid the Gang"*. » 

these people were is uncertain. A tithigva : Divodasa son of Atith g , J 

tag to slyana. See Vol. I., Index. Karanja ..and Parnaya: apparent 
tree-demons : see I. 53. 8. % 

9 Sdpya; a family name of Indra’s friend Nam!, who in VI* • 18 

Sayya’s son. , , , 

10 One of the two : the Moon. The Herdsman : Indra. With the ^ 
of Dadhyach. See I. 84. 13. The other: Vritra. He: Vnfcnj. £ db th0 
Indra. The demow , awp [ e region • mid-air, which was then domm ^ A ion 
Druh or malignant spuv. drought. I follow Prof. Ludwig s int P 

of this obscure stanza whiOt i 8 evidently an interpolation motivea y 
mention of Dadhyach in stanza Q For a somewhat different mterpr ^ 

eee Hillebraudt, V. M., I. 337. 

11 Rudriyas: the Maruts, sons of Rua,* t 


Indra Vaikuntha is the Riahi also. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


451 


lYMX 49.] 


2 The People of the heavens, the waters, and the earth have 

stablished me among the Gods with India’s nnme. 

I took unto myself the two swift vigorous Bays that speed on 
divers paths, and the fierce bolt for strength. 

3 With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi’s sake ; I guarded 

Katsa well with these my saving helps. 

Ao Sushna’s slayer I brandished the dart of death : I gave not 
up the Aryan name to Dasyu foes. 

4 Smadibha, Tugra, and the Vetasus I gave as prey to Kutsa, 

father-like, to succour him. 

I was a worthy King to rule the worshipper, when I gave Tuji 
dear inviolable gifts. 


1 I gave up Mrigaya to Srutarvan as his prey because he ever 
followed me and kept my laws. 

For Ayu’s sake I caused Vesa to bend and bow, and into Sa- 
vya’s hand delivered Padgribhi. 

i I, I crushed Navavastva of the lofty can the Dasa, as the 
Vritra-slayer kills the fiends ; 

When straightway on the region’s farthest edge I brought the 
God who makes the lights to broaden and increase. 

’ I travel round about borne onward in my might by the -Met. 
footed dappled Horses of the Sun. 

When man’s libation calls me to the robe of state P 

the powerful Dasyu with my blows- 


Kavi : the father of 


3 Atka: mentioned again in H*-“ 09 »« Bo^ 

India's friend Usand. ... ... 1 'ugra, ‘ with all his followers/ 

4 Smadibha : or, ^Ataliumd Tuara are -<>eiitioned as having been con- 

See VI. 20. 8, wher, ^ 4 where t* jir nauie8 occur together with 
quered by Ind^’ ana V * ’ 

that of Tiv-' ... . IV. 16. 13, and^VIII. 3. 19. Smtarvan : 

5 . rW a:adernonof theair.^ - n VUI 63 Ayu . sometimes spoken 

- prince whose liberality is p ftnc j other times as conquered by him. See 
of as a King favoui ed by Inj^ nofc ag ai n . Savya : the Rishi of Hymns 
index. The nameof ^ Bome ^ einoQ or savage enemy who is not 

oi — 67 of Book I. PocH* 

mentioned again. &nd VI . 20 . 11. Of the lofty ear: or Bri- 

« Navavdstva • “ -»w a y av ft»tva. The lights : the stars, or perhaps light 
Xensr a r m would be Dyau, or Varuna, and in 

latUr case 9Qrya or the Sun. Ludwig. 

7 The rote of state : apparently the milk wh.ch is the royal mantle where- 
with Soma is invested. 



462 


THE HYMNS UJ? 


IEVVK X, 


8 Stronger am I than Nahus, I who slew the seven : I glorified 

with might Yadu and Turvasa. ^ I 

I brought another low, with strength I bent his strength : \ 
let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power. 

9 Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth, I took the 

Seven Rivers as mine own domain. 

I, gifted with great wisdom, spread the floods abroad : by war 
I found for man the way to high success. 

10 I set within these cows the white milk which no God, not even 

Tvashtar’s self, had there deposited, — 

Much-longed-for, in the breasts, the udders of the kine, the 
savoury sweets of meath, the milk and Soma juice. 

11 Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, sped Gods 

and men with mighty operation. 

The pious glorify all these thine exploits, Lord of Bay Cours- 
es, Strong, and Self-resplendent. 


HYMN L. Indra Vaikunth*. 

I laud your Mighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is 
shared by all it\en, who created all ; 

Indra, whoso conquering strength is powerful in war, whose 
fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth revere. 

2 He with his friend is active, lauded, good to man, Indra who 

*>ust be glorified by one like me. 

Hero,T j0r a 0 f the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with 
Vritra or f ov waters, or for spoil. * 

3 Who are tVn men whom thou wilt further, Indra, who strive 

to win thy «; gs allied witK riches ? 

Who urged thee i rwar d to exert thy power divine, to valour 
in the war for wau rg on their fieiCr, ? 


8 Stronger ant I than Nahus : s j l0 ndhushtarah ; '-Orally, more Nairn 

than Nahua ; I out-NahuB Nahus, a *{ n g w ho contended wu, indra ; ‘ I aD 
nearer than the neighbour,’ according to Roth whom Grassy^ u follow 
• T the especial bond of bonds. — Wilsoi. X folloW Ludwig’s inters +a tioi 
J Who »Uw the >even: the seven perhaps, a. the chief of the demons a. 
+i»nvftd bv Indra. Ludwig takes saptaha to sr. ean ‘seven times . 
SSZ times Stronger than Nahus.’ Another: A is uncertain 

: until they became worthy antagonists. 1 have demolished nine 

ftQ 10 n X Milk and Soma juice : sweet ambrosial rain; the fas* being the teem* 1 

clouds^ ^ Bianza Indra aa RUhi addresses himself asthedefty of the by® 

2 His friend: hia constant companion, tho thunderbolt. . 

s Mfad W ith riches: the happiness which Indra sends being K 
return for costly sacrificial offerings, 



453 


HYMN 51.] mE r 1G V]? $A, 

4 Thou, Indra, through holy prayer art mighty, worthy of 

sacrifice at all libations. 

In every fight thou castest herot-ii on the ground : thou art the 
noblest song, 0 Lord of all the folk. 

5 Help now, as Highest, those who toil at sacrifice : well do the 

people know thy great protecting might. 

Thou shalt be Everlasting, Giver of success : yea, on all these 
libations thou bestowest strength. 

6 All these libations thou makest effectual, of which thou art 

thyself supporter, Son of Power. 

Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, sacrifice, holy 
text, prayer, and exalted speech. 

7 They who with flowing Soma pray to thee, 0 Sage, to pour oil 

them thy gifts of opulence and wealth, 

May they come forward, through their spirit, on the path of 
bliss, in the wild joy of Soma juice effused. 

HYMN LI. Agni. Gods. 

Large was that covering, and firm of texture, folded wherein 
thou enteredst the waters. 

One Deity alone, 0 Jatavedas Agni, saw all thy forms in sun- 
dry places. 

2 What God hath seen me 7 Who of all their number clearly be- 

held my forms in many places? 

Where lie, then, all the sacred logs of Agni that lead him God- 
ward, Varuna and Mitra 7 

3 In many places, Agni J&tavedas, we sought thee hidden in the 

plants and waters. 

Then Yama marked thee, God of wondrous splendour! effulgent 
from thy tenfold secret dwelling. 

4 Song : mdntrah : subject of thy worshippers’ songs of praise. 

6 Vessel : pfttram ; * protection.’— Wilson. 

The legend says that Agni, fearing to share the fate of his three elder 
brothers who had perished in the service of the Gods, fled away and hid 
himself in the waters. The Gods discovered him and persuaded him to 
return to his sacred duties. 

( Stanzas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 are spoken by the Gods, and 2, 4 , 6, 8 by Agni. 

| He must have been very well wrapped up, the Gods ironically say, or the 
ter would have extinguished him.— Ludwig. Forma: literally, ‘bodies/ 

^ Sacred logs : pieces of Sam! and Asvattha wood, from whioh alone the 
uncial fi re j 8 produced. Others explain samtdhah by * flames/ 

* oy Unfold secret dwelling: according to S&yana, ‘the three worlds,— 
^ v en, mid-air, earth ; three divinities, Agni, VUyu, Aditya ; the Waters, 
r 8bru hs, the trees, and the bodies of living beings.’ — Wilson. The mean- 
> appears to be, as Ludwig conjectures, that Yama knew that Agni wOuld 
P ear again from the fire-sticks worked by the fingers of both hands. 



454 THE HYMNS OP [BOOS X. 

4 I fled in fear from sacrificial worship Varuna, lest the Godj 

should thus engage me. 

Thus were my forms laid do**-** in many places. This, as my 
goal, I Agni saw before me. 

5 Come ; man is pious and would fain do worship ; he waits pre- 

pared : in gloom thou, Agni, dwellest. 

Make pathways leading God-ward clear and easy, and bear ob- 
lations with a kindly spirit. 

6 This goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he who drives a 

car the way to travel. 

So, Varuna, I fled afar through terror, as flies the wild-bull 
from an archer’s bowstring. 

7 We give thee life un wasting, Jatavedas, so that, employed, 

thou never shalt be injured. 

So, nobly born ! shalt thou with kindly spirit bear to the Gods 
their share of men’s oblations. 

8 Grant me the first oblations and the latter, entire, my force- 

ful share of holy presents, 

Tlio soul of plants, the fatness of the waters, and let there be 
long life, ye Gods, to Agni. 

9 Thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, thy forceful 

shares of holy presents. 

Let all this sacrifice be thine, 0 Agni, and let the world’s four 
regions bow before thee. 

♦ 

HYMN LII. ° 0(k 

Instruct me, all ye Gods, how I, elected your Priest, must 
seat me here, and how address you. 

Instruct me how to deal to each his portion, and by what path 
to bring you man’s oblation. 

2 I sit as Priest most skilled in sacrificing : the Maruts and all 
Deities impel me. 

Asvins, each day yours is the Adhvaryus* duty : Brahman and 
wood are here : ’tis yours to offer. 

8 The fir it oblation a and the latter: or the PrayUjas and the Anuytljaa, th 
former being texts and oblations forming part of the introductory ce ' cn ' , 
at a Soma sacrifice, and the latter the secondary or final offerings. MW 
share: the potent concentrated portion. The fatness: ghritam: yhh c R 
butter. 

1 Agni* having been elected Oblation -bearer, asks the Gods to instru< 
him in hia duties. 



ffjlll 53.] THE RIO VEDA. 455 

3 Who is this Priest. t io he the Priest of Yamal On whom is 

thrust this God-appointed honour] 

He springs to life each month, each day that passes; so Gods 
have made him their oblation-bearer. 

4 The Gods have made me bearer of oblations, who slipped away 

and passed through many troubles. 

Wise Agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether five-wayed, 
threefold, or seven-threaded. 

5 So will t )ou strength and life for ever, 0 Gods, that I 

may give you room and freedom. 

To Indra’s arms would I consign the thunder; in all these 
battles shall he then be victor. 

6 The Deities, three thousand and three hundred and thirty- 

nine, have served and honoured Agni, 

Strewn sacred grass, anointed him with butter, and seated 
him as Priest, the Gods’ Invoker. 

HYMN LIII. Agni Sauchika. Gods. 

Hr hath arrived, he whom wo sought with longing, who skil- 
led in sacrifice well knows its courses. 

Let him discharge his sacrificial duties : let him sit down as 
Friend who was before us. 

2 Best Priest, he hath been w r on by being seated, for he hath 
looked on the well-ordered viands. 

Come, let us worship Gods who must be worshipped, and 
pouring oil, laud those who should be lauded. 


3 The first line is spoken by some God who doubts Agni’s competence. Is 
he the Priest of Yama ? : can he convey offerings to the Blest in the realms of 
tbe God of the departed ? In the second half of the first line I follow L«d- 

but the meauing is uncertain. The second line is the answer of soother 
Owl. Each month , each day ; the PitriyajAa , or sacrifice to the -'&thets, is 
offered monthly, and the Agnihotra , or oblation to Agni and Gods, daily, 
these comprehend all dther periodical rites. 

4 The first line is spoken by Agni. Slipped away * jee the preceding hymn, 
the second line is what the Goc 1 2 » said. Five-wan ; consisting of five courses 
or Parts, seeX. 124. 1. Threefold: consisting the three dail y Soma-libations, 
860 X. 124 l. Seven-threaded: perform- 1 by scven priests. See X. 124. 1. 

Stanza 5 is spoken by Agni. St“ jZa ® Is the poet’s conclusion. 

For an explanation of the number of the Gods (33 + 303 + 3003) Bee The 
Hymns of the Athdrva-ved '*> x - 7. 13, note. 

I ° Q Hymns 51 — 53 *ee Macdonell, J. R. A. S., January, 1894, pp. 11—22. 



fl\SS\0N If 


1 The Gods speak. Courses : or portions. 

2 % being seated : * by his seat (at the altar).’— Wilson, 



THE HYMNS OP 


m 


[BOOR x, 


3 Now hath he made the feast of Gods effective : now have we 

found the secret tongue of worship. 

Now hath he come, sweet, robed iu vital vigour, and made our 
calling on the Gods effective. 

4 This prelude of my speech I now will utter, whereby we Gods 

may quell our Asura foemen. 

Eaters of strengthening food who merit worship, 0 ye Five 
Tribes, bo ploaood. mir>a oblation. 

5 May the Five Tribes be pleased with mine omaim.., Qn <i the 

Cow’s Sons and all who merit worship. 

From earthly trouble may the earth protect us, and air’s mid 
realm from woe that comes from heaven. 

6 Spinning the thread, follow the region’s splendid light : guard 

thou the pathways well which wisdom hath prepared. 
Weave ye the knotless labour of the bards who sing : be Manu 
thou, and bring the Heavenly People forth. 

7 Lovers ef Soma, bind the chariot traces fast : set ye the reins 

iu order and embellish them. 

Bring hitherward the car with seats where eight may sit, 
whereon the Gods have brought the treasure that we love. 

8 Here flows Asmanvatl ; hold fast each other, keep yourselves 

up, and pass, my friends, the river. 

There let us leave the Powers that brought no profit, and 
cross the flood to Powers that are auspicious. 

9 Tvashfcar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic art, bring- 

ing most blessed bowls that hold the drin^ of Gods. 

His axe, wrought of good metal, he is sharpening now, where- 
with the radiant Brahmanaspati will cut. _____ 

3 Tongue of worship • Agni, by whose fiery tongues the Gods drink libations, 

4 Agni speaks. Asura foemen : the Asuras in the later hymns of the Veda 

are evil ^oirits in perpetual hostility with the Gods, not to be confounded v.i 
the great ecu atia i Asuras, the chiefs of the Gods, nor with the K&kshasas, (le- 
mons or ogres, ,.v. 0 disturb the saciifices of men. , 

5 The Five Tribe., according to some, says Yftska, 4 the Gandharvas, gods. 

Fathers, Asuras, and h^ s j la8ag » g ee Muir, O. S. Texts, I. 177. But the nv 
Aryan tribes may be intend. The Cow's Sons: the Maruts, children ox 
Piisni. Yon lioth explains as ^ orn j n the starry heaven.’ See vn. 

35. 14. 

fi The Gods speak. The region's splena-.j fyM . the Sun. Weave ye : fla® 6 ® 
of Agni. Assist the singer in his holy taan an d let there be no difficultie 
in his way. . _j. 

7 This stanza appears to begin a new hymn, made 0 f fragments. Accor 

ing to Sftynna it is spoken by the Gods to one another. , 

8 A smanvatt : or, the stony stream, S ee The Hymns of the Atharva-w > 

XII 2* 26 

9 Will cut : perhaps, will cut and destroy demons ; but the meaning 1 
uncertain. 



yyiMY 54.] THE RIQVEDA. 4 BY 

0 Now, 0 ye Sapient Ones, make ye the axes sharp wherewith 
ye fashion bowls to hold the Amrita. 

Knowing the secret places make ye ready that whereby the 
Gods have gotten immortality. 

H Ye with a secret tongue and dark intention laid the maiden 
deep within, the calf within the mouth. 

They evermore are near us with their gracious help : successful 
is the song that strives for victory. 

HYMN LIV. Indra. 

I sing thy fame that, Maghavan, through thy greatness the 
I'AovArw and earth invoked thee in th^ir 
Thou, aiding Gods, didst quell the power of Dasas, what time 
thou holpest many a race, 0 Indra. 

2 When thou wast roaming, waxen strong in body, telling thy 

might, Indra, among the people, 

All that men called thy battles was illusion : no foe hast thou 
to-day, nor erst hast found one. 

3 Who are the Bishis, then, who comprehended before our time 

the bounds of all thy greatness ? 

For from thy body thou hast generated at the same time the 
Mother and the Father. 

4 Thou, Mighty Steer, hast four supremest natures, Asura 

natures that may ne’er be injured. 

All these, 0 Maghavan, thou surely knowest, wherewith thou 
hast performed thy great achievements. 

5 Thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession, treasures made 

manifest and treasures hidden. 


10 0 ye Sapient Ones : ye llibhus. That : perhaps Amrita or celestial Soma 
]uice. Cf. 1. 20. 6; 110. 3. 

. 11 The first line is obscure. ‘(The Maruta) placed a female in the envelop, 
ing hide (of a dead cow), and a calf in the mouth (of a dead cow).’ — Wilson. 
According to this interpretation the miracle ascribed to them would somewhat 
resemble that mentioned in I. 110. 8. See Bergaigue, La Religion V6dique t 
!• 27. The first half of these jnd line is hard to construe. Wilson para- 
P uases i the line : — ‘daily the generous (fraternity of the Ribhus) offers suita- 
le praises (to the gods), granting victory over our foes.’ Prof. Geldner takes 
tiw Jpinst the Pada text, as a locative, and renders the last half-line to 
e following effect ‘ ‘May he (the Bacrificer), when he wishes to win, gaiu 
the victory in the race/ 

con c l ues ^' 011 is rhetorical. The great Pish is of the olden time could not 
m? re ' lenc i thy greatness, much less can we comprehend it. 

| e Mother and the Father : Earth and Heaven, parents of all. See M. 

1 u 4 ller > India, What can it Teach us f, p. 1(51. 

sura: diviue, with a vague sense of supreme grandeur. 



458 


THE HYMNS OP 


6 


[POOR x. 


Defer not thou, 0 Maghavan, my longing : thou art Direct™ 
Indra, thou art Giver. * 


To him who set the light in things of splendour, and with all 
sweetness blent essential sweetness, 

To Indra hath this welcome hymn that strengthens been 
uttered by the votary Brihaduktha. 


HYMN LY. Indra. 

Far is that secret name by which, in terror, the worlds invoked 
thee and thou gavest vigour. 

The earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and, Ma- 
ghavan, madest bright thy Brother’s Children. 

2 Great is that secroo mime c*uvi f... >,«iv U atug, wuureDy thou 
madest all that is and shall be. 

The Five Tribes whom he loveth well have entered the light 
he loveth that was made aforetime. 


3 He filled the heavens and earth and all between them, Gods 

five times sevenfold in their proper seasons. 

With four-and-thirty lights he looks around him, lights of one 
colour though their ways are divers. 

4 As first among the lights, 0 Dawn, thou shonest, whereby thou 

broughtest forth the Stay of Increase, 

Great art thou, matchless is thine Asura nature, who, high 
above, art kin to those beneath thee. 

5 The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who 

runs his circling course with many round him. 

6 Who set the light : the first essential light. 


1 Far is that secret name : thou art not present with us now. In tenor : 
terrified by Vritra. Thy Brother's Children: according to SAyana, Indru’s 
brother is Parjanya, the God of the rain-cloud, and his children are the gath- 
ered waters. Varuna and his stars are probably intended. — Ludwig. 

3 Gods five times sevenfold: ‘It cannot be doubted that the original Gods 
were the constellations.’— Ludwig. According to SAyana, the five orders of 
beings Rnd the classes of seven ; that is, Gods, men, Fathers and RAkshasas, 
and the Beven troops of Maruta, the seveu rays of the Sun, the seven souses, 
etc. The four-and-thirty lights : are probably the sun, moon, and five plauets, 
and the twenty-seven lunar asterisms or mansions of the moon. According 
to SAyana, the four and thirty are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, 
PrajApati, VashatkAra, and VirAj. 

4 The Stay of Increase: that which is the foundation and support of all sub- 

sistence; according to SAyana, the Sun. Art kin to those beneath thee: art 
allied and connected with men as provider of their food. The second line w 
difficult, and is differently interpreted by otherB. . . 

5 SAyana explains this stanza differently, making Indra, identified wit 
Time, the subject. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation (Commentary, II. P- 
which seems to be nearer to the sense of the words, aud is simpler and wor 
rational. With many round him : stars of the asterisms through which he p* 980 * 



THE RIGVEDA. 


450 


tftfN 56*] 

Behold the Gods’ high wisdom in its greatness : he who died 
yesterday to-day is living. 

6 Strong is the Red Bird in his strength, great Hero, who from 

of old hath had no nest to dwell in. 

That which he knows is truth and never idle : he wins and 
gives the wealth desired of many. 

7 Through these the Thunderer gained strong manly vigour, 

through whom he waxed in power to smite down Vritra, — 
Who through the might of Indra’s operation came forth as 
Gods in course of Law and Order. 

8 All-strong, performing works with his companion, AU-marking, 

rapid Victor, Curse-averter, 

The Hero, waxing, after draughts of Soma, blew far from heav- 
en the Dasyus with his weapon. 

HYMN LVI. Visvedevas. 

Here is one light for thee, another yonder : enter the third and 
be therewith united. 

Uniting with a body be thou welcome, dear to the Gods in their 
sublimest birth-place. 

2 Bearing thy body, Vajin, may thy body afford us blessing and 

thyself protection. 

Unswerving, stablish as it were in heaven thine own light as 
the mighty Gods’ supporter. 

3 Strong Steed art thou : go to the yearning Maidens with vigour, 

happily go to heaven and praises : 

6 The Red Bird : the Sun, with whom Indra is identified. 

7 Through these: probably the stars are iuteutbd, ‘(Accompanied) by 
these Maruts.'— Wilson. 

8 His companion : the thunderbolt. 

‘The mystical union of the Fathers with the rays of light is the funda- 
mental idea underlying the abstruse allusions * of this funeral hymn. ‘ The 
poet bids the deceased man unite himself with the beams of the heavenly 
light ; he takes occasion to celebrate the power and greatness of the Fathers, 
to wham the spirit of the depan ed is journeying ; and ends with a statement 
of the success of the journey for which he has prayed.’ See Wallis, Cos • 
oology of the Rigveda, pp. 72, 73. 

1 One light: the earthly, fire of the funeral pile. Another: in the firma- 
® e ut. The third : the light in the highest region above the firmament. A 

•' a new body after cremation. Their sublimest birth-place • the Sun. 

2 Vdjin : apparently the name of the deceased, the son of Brihaduktha 
uie Rishi of the hymn. The word means originally * strong, strong Bteed 

j 48 in stanza 3. 

1 . ° The yearning Maidens : perhaps the Dawns ; but the meaning of suvenih 
18 uncertain. To heaven and praises : ' to the (land of) praise, and to the 
•V— Wallis. 



* 0 U Tills MXMJMS UJf l BOOK X 

Fly happily to the Gods with easy passage, according to the 
first and faithful statutes. 

4 Part of their grandeur have the Fathers also gained : the 

Gods have seated mental power in them as Gods. 

They have embraced within themselves all energies, which 
issuing forth, again into their bodies pass. 

5 They strode through all the region with victorious might, es- 

tablishing the old immeasurable laws. 

They compassed in their bodies all existing things, and stream- 
ed forth offspring in many successive forms. 

6 In two ways have the sons established in his place the Aaura 

who finds the light; by the third act, 

As fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, their off- 
spring, as a thread continuously spun out. 

7 As in a ship through billows, so through regions of air, with 

blessiugs, through all toils and troubles 

Hath Brihaduktha brought his seed with glory, and placed it 
here and in the realms beyond us. 

HYMN LVH. Viavedevas. 

Let us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser’s sacrifice: 

Let no malignity dwell with us. 

2 May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun out to 
reach the Gods, 

That perfectcth the sacrifice. ^ 

4 Of their grandeur : ff the greatness of the Gods. 

5 Establishing the old immeasurable laws : or, in accordance with the more 
generally received interpretation of dfuXmdni here, ‘measuring aucient 
stations never measured out.* 

6 In two ways : in heaven and on earth. The sons : explained by Sfiyana 
as the Augirases, sons of Aditya. The Fathers in general appear to be in- 
tended. The A sura: Agi.i. The third act: or third sacred duty, that of 
continuing their family ; religious Btudy and sacrifice being the first ana 
second. — Silyana. 

7 Placed it here and in the realm beyond us : established his offspring in 
heavenly regions as well as here upon earth. 

Mr Wallis, from whuse translation I .have borrowed, remarks: — ‘The in- 
terpretation of one or two expressions is uncertain ; the general sense iff 
clear. The rays of light are hero the bodies of the fathers, which emanate 
from the sun, assume the forms of all things on the earth and of the later 
sacrificers, the descendants of the fathers, and again return to their birtn* 
place in the sky from which they had extended themselves.’ — Cosmology 
the Rigveda , pp. 74, 75. 

For 1 Prof. Max M tiller’s translation of Hymns 57 — 60, with the legend fmindj 
ed upon them, and ample elucidative matter, se£ Journal R. A. S., VoL II- 
II., 1866, pp. 426—465, 



THE RIOVEDA . 


461 


UMH 58.] 


3 ’i T e call the spirit hither with the Soma of our parted sirea, 

Yea, the Fathers’ holy hymns. 

4 Thy spnvv come to thee again for wisdom, energy, and life, 

That thou murjgt long behold the sun ! 

5 01 athers, may thv Heavenly Folk give ns our spirit once again, 
That we may be with ^ ose w ho live. 

6 0 Soma, with the spirit stm within us, blest with progeny, 

May we be busied in thy law. 

HYMN LVII1. Manas or Spirit. 

Tiiy spirit, that went far away to Yama, to Yivasvan’s Son, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

2 Thy spirit, that went far away, that passed away to earth and 

heaven, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

3 Thy spirit, that went faraway, away to the four-cornered earth, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

4 Thy spirit, that went far away to the four quarters of the world, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

5 Thy spirit, that went far away, away unto the billowy soa, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

6 Thy spirit, that went far away to beams of lights 

flow, 

We cause lu uoim? tu oii^ oiiau tnou mayst live aud so- 

journ here. 

7 Thy spirit-, that went far away, went to the waters and the 

plants, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

8 Thy spirit, that went far away, that visited the Sun and Dawn, 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so- 
journ here. 

3 The spirit : of the deceased whose obsequies are performed. Of our sires : 
!rVn*4na; explained as meaning, suited to man; that is to deified men, 
e Fathers or Spirits of the Blest. 

death 6 ^ mn * a ftn a ddress to recall the fleeting spirit of a man at the point of 
7 w «teri .plant! of. X, 16, S. 



THE HYMNS OF 


462 


[BOOK 1 


9 Thy spirit, that went far away, away to lofty mountain A0I ghts 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst A ' ve and sc 
journ here. 

10 Thy spirit, that went far away into tb~ A11 that llves aai 

We cause to some to thee again <;na ^ thou ma y s ^ ^ ve an ^ s< 
journ iiere. 

1 1 Thy spirit, that went faraway to distant realms beyond our kei 
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live ■and s< 

journ here. 

12 Thy spirit, that went far away to all that is and is to be, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live an 

sojourn here. 

LIX. Nirriti and Other 


His life hath been renewed and carried forward as two mei 
car-borne, by the skilful driver. . 

One falls, then seeks the goal with quickened vigour. Le 
Nirriti depart to distant places. 

2 Here is the psalm for wealth, and food, in plenty : let us c 

many deeds to bring ns glory. . 

All these our doings shall delight the singer. Let Nnri 
depart to distant places. 

3 May we o’ercome our foes with acts of valour, as heaven 

over earth, hills over lowlands. . 

All these our deeds the singer hath considered. Let JNiifi 
aepait to diwtuut places. 

4 Give us not u P r *. QJT +n O Soma • still let us lo( 

upon the Sun arising. 

Let our old age with passing days be kindly. Let Nirri 
depart to distant places. 


5 0 Asuntti, keep the soul within us, and make the days ' 
have to live yet longer. 

Grant that we still may look upon the sunlight : strength 
thy body with the oil we bring thee. 


1 HU life : the life of Subandhu one of the Rishis of the hymn. Accor 
ing to S&yana the first line is a prayer : — ‘ May the life of Subandhu^ 
augmented so as to be more lasting and newer.’ — Wilson. Subandhu 
mentioned in the text. Two men : the warrior and the charioteer. UwJ . 
S&yana explains differently : — ‘he who falls (from life) increases (his; 
to live.’ — Wilson. Nirriti : the Goddess of death and destruction. a 

6 Asn,nUi : apparently the personification of a deity presiding <J ver to ^ 
It may be a name for Yama, or it may mean ‘ guide to life, or way 
See Muir, 0 S, Texts , V. 297, and Bergaigne, La Religion Vcdtque, i. 



THE RIQVEDA . 


463 


ffYAfN 1 60.] 

6 Give us our sight again, O Asuniti, give us again our breath 

and our enjoyment. 

Long may we look upon the Sun uprising : 0 Anumati, 

. favour thou and bless us. 

7 May Earth restore to us our vital spirit, may- Heaven the 

Goddess and mid-air restore it. 

May Soma give us once again our body, and Pushan show 
the Path of peace and comfort. 

8 May both Worlds bless Subandhu, young Mothers of ever- 

lasting Law. 

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame 
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. ** 

9 Health-giving medicines descend sent down from heaven in 

twos and threes, 

Or wandering singly on the earth. May Heaven and Earth 
uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away : nor sin nor 
sorrow trouble thee. 

10 Drive forward thou the wagon-ox, 0 Indra, which brought 

UsiuaianPs wagon hither. 

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame 
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. 

HYxMN LX. Asam&ti and Others. 

Bringing our homage we have come to one maguificent in 
look. 

Glorified of the mighty Gods ; 

Q T'* Asamati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, a radiant car, 
The conqueror of Bhajeratha ; _ 

„ , I - x nTDTrr-w nn winch the Gods regard 

the sacrifices and prayers of the pious. ‘Gracious (goddess).’— -Wilson. 

8 Iniquity and shame : rdpas, according to Williams’s Dictionary means, 
defect, fault, sin ; hurt, iujuiy. In Ris Commentaiy on I. .69. 4, Sftyana 
paraphrases rdpdnsi, the plural of the word, by bddhakdni rdkshasddhii, dis- 
tuibing K&kshasas, etc. 

9 In twos and threes : according to Srlyana, in the persons of the two 
Asvins and of the three Godder^es lift, Sarasvat!, and Bh&ratl. 

10 Uftnardnl must mean the wife of Usfnara, chief of the Ustnaras who 
® re mentioned in later times as living iu Madhyadesa or the Midland country. 
The meaning of the line is not obvious. 

Stanzas 8, 9, 10, which Prof. Grassmann places in his Appendix, are of a 
different character from that of the preceding part of the hymn, and seem 
! he a separate song or fragment of a song. 

^ Asamdti ; according to S&yana, the name of a King. But the won! is 
J 10re probably an adjective, as m stanza 5, qualifying rdtham, car, and sigui- 
yi n g unequalled. Bhajeratha : it is unceitaiu whether this is the name of a 
P r mce or of a country. 



464 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l 

3 Who, when the spear hath armed his hand, or even weaponless 

o’erthrows 

Men strong as buffaloes in fight ; 

4 Him in whose service flourishes Ikshvaku, rich and dazzling. 

bright 

As the Five Tribes that are in heaven. 

5 Iudra, support the princely power of Rathaproshthas matched 

by none, 

Even as the Sun for all to see. 

6 Thou for Agastya’s sister’s sons yokest thy pair of ruddy 

steeds. 

Thou troddest niggards under foot, all those, 0 King, who 
brought no gifts. 

7 This is the mother, this the sire, this one hath come to bo 

thy life. 

What brings thee forth is even this. Now come, Subandhu, 
get thee forth. 

8 As with the leather thong they bind the chariot yoke to hold 

it fast, 

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not for 
death, held it for thy security. 

9 Even as this earth, the mighty earth, holds fast the monarehs 

of the wood, 

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life^and not for death, 
held it for thy security. __ 


4 YfJtftim Agamati, according to Sftyana. 

Rigveda. The Five Tribes : the deities repfarrtetrftS cojbuu 

iiig to the five tribes on earth, in the same manner as the seven rivers of the 
laud of the Aryans have their counterparts in heaven. See Muir, 0 S. Texts, 
I. p. 177 Sftyana explains differently : — ‘(so that) the five orders of men 
(are as happy) as if they were in heaven.’— Wilson. 

5 Batftaproshlhas : the family of the prince, AsamAti or another, whose praises 
the poet celebrates. 

6 Agastya's sister's sons : Bandhu and his brothers, the Rishis of the hymn. 
Stanzas 1 — 6 have no apparent connexion with the six stanzas that follow. 

7 This: Agni, according to Sdyana. The speaker probably raean3 him- 
self. — Ludwig. Subandhu seems to have been in a trance and apparen y 
dead. * It is supposed that the brothers of Subandhu have addressed t e 
supplications to Agni, to restore him to life, and that he has come acco 
ingly, being, as it were, his parent and begetter. Another interpre ■ 
explains the terms literally as, Subandhu, your father, mother, an » 
have come to mourn your decease ’ — Wilson. 

8 So ftavc I held : 1 so has Agni placed/ according to SAyana. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


465 


flYMN 61.] 

10 Subaudhu’s spirit I have brought from Yama, from Vivas- 
vaii's Son, 

Brought it for life and not for death, yea, brought it for 
security. 

H The wind blows downward from on high, downward the Sun- 
God sends his heat, 

Downward the milch-cow pours her milk : so downward go thy 
pain and grief. 

12 Felicitous is this mine hand, yet more felicitous is this. 

This hand contains all healing balms, aud this makes wholo 
with gentle touch. 

HYMN LX I. Visvedevaa. 

Thk welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with 
might this prayer to win the Asvins, 

When the most liberal God, for Paktha, rescued his parents, 
and assailed tho seven Ilotars. 

2 Chyavana, purposing deceptive presents, with all ingredients, 
made the altar ready. 

Most sweet-voiced Turvayana poured oblations like floods of 
widely fertilizing water. 


11 Thy pain and grief: * thy sitt ’ — 

12 More felicitous is this ■ my other ’‘and, probably the right. With gentle 
touch, with light friotiou, layiug-on ** hands, or hypnotizing passes. 


This Hymn, as Ludwig obse ,vres > belongs to the most difficult, one might 
almost say most hopeless, p<* tions of the Rigveda. It is made up of several 
parts which are in no inte^’K’ble connexion with one another. 

1 According to the v>^ w taken by Pischel who has most carefully studied 
and elaborately discu^d the first three stanzas ( Vedische Studien, I. pp. 71 — 
77), they contain i* brief the ancient story of Turvayftna, the young King 
<>f the Pakthas. « 11( 1 Chyav&na. Chyav&nu, a favourite of the Asvins who 
had restored Ik 01 to youth (l. 116. 10, and 117. 13), intended to sacrifice to 
them, hoping with their aid to conquer TOrvay&na and his parents. But 
Iudra stay* the sacrifice, drives the priests away, and enables Turvay4na who 
had poured rich libations to him jo gain the victory over his opponent. 

The welcome speaker : TQrvayAua, whose words were welcome to the Gods. 
To y/n the Asvins : raUdram: not ‘ addressed to Rudra,’ but to the AsVtns 
^ are called raiidrau in stanza 15, and, elsewhere, rudrd and rudrdvartant, 
m mst liberal God : Indra. Paktha : King of the Pakthas (see Vll. 18. 7), 
that in, apparently, T&rvayftna, who has been mentioned in I. 53. 10, and VI. 
j8- 13, as especially aided by Indra. Stven Ilotars: tho usual number of 
hotar priests employed at important sacrifices. 

2 Deceptive presents : his intended sacrifice was displeasing to Indra, whom, 
possibly, Chyav&na falsely pretended that he was about to worship. With 
«« ingredients : required for the preparation of the Soma juice. Poured 
dtomt: to Indra. 

30 



466 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l 

3 To his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and welcomed 

eagerly the prayers he offered. 

With arrows in his hand the Very Mighty forced from him all 
obedience of a servant. 

4 I call on you the Sons of Dyans, the Asvins, that a dark cow 

to rny red kine be added. 

Enjoy my sacrifice, come to my viands, contented, not deceiv- 
ing expectation. 

10 Uttering praise to suit the rite Navagvas came speedily to 

win the damsel's friendship. 

They who approached the twice-strong stable's keeper, meed- 
less, would milk the rocks that naught had shaken. 

11 Swift was new friendship with the maid : they quickly accept- 

ed it as genuine seed and bounty. 

Milk which the cow Sabardugha had yielded was the bright 
heritage which to thee they offered. 

12 When afterwards they woke and missed the cattle, the speaker 

thus in joyful mood addressed them : 

Matchless are singers through the Vasu’s nature ; he bringeth 
them all food and all possessions. 

13 His followers then who dwelt in sundry places came and desired 

to slay the son of Ntishad. 

Resistless foe, he found tht hidden treasure of Sushna multi- 
plied m numerous offspring. 

3 To his oblations: to the offerings of Chy* v .lna. Ye 7 Asvins. The Very 
Mighty : Indra, who threatened Chyavdna, madp him his obedient 
servant. 

4 The Rishi now prays to the Asvins on lus own tecount, and a*ks for a 
dark-coloured cow as a reward. Sttyana, whom lipfessors Ludwig and 
Grassm.mn follow, explains the second half of the hist lim mor e poetically 

• When the dark night retires before the purple oxen (of tuj chaiiot of the 
dawn).’ — Wilson. * When the black sits among the red cows , that is, while 
it is still dark, but the grey of morning is beginning to appear.’— Ludwig 

5 I pa^s over stanzas 5 — 9, which contain an ancient legend, p’obably the 
germ of the later story of Brahmft or Pnjftpati and his daughter, toncernmg 
two deities or powers of natuie, male and female. See Appendix. 

10 Navagvas: ‘ the A ngirasas.' — Wilson. The damsel's : S&y ana say? that 
Prfeni may be meant. Perhaps Saramd is intended The twice-strong sttWi 
keeper : the Pani or Panis who kept the stolen cows or vanished rays of light 
concealed. Meedless • as the Panis refused to give up the cows. Would nut 
the rocks : would force from the rocky prison the meed or honorarium which 
they deserved in the shape of the cows. 

11 Sabardughd: ‘nectar-yielding;’ the general name of cows milked at 
sacrifices. Which to thee they offered : which the Angirases offered to Indra. 

12 The Vasu is India. 

13 The son of Nrishad: Ndrshada, usually a patronymic of Knflva, 

Vu. in this nlac.e the name of a ceibiin rlAnmn foe : Iudr®> 



THE RIGVEDA. 


467 


0MN 61.] 

[4 Thou, called Effulgence, in whose threefold dwelling, as in the 
light of heaven, the Gods are sitting, 

Thou who art called Agni or Jatavedas, Priest, hear us, guile- 
less Priest of holy worship. 

15 And, Indra, bringr, that I may laud and servo them, those 
Two resplendent glorious Nasatyas, 

Blithe, bounteous, man-like, to the sacrifices honoured among 
our men with offered viands. 

1G This King is praised and honoured as Ordainer ; himself the 
bridge, the Sage speeds o’er the waters. 

He hath stirred up Kakshivan, stirred up Agni, as the steed’s 
swift wheel drives the felly onward. 

17 Vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the cow who 

ne’er hath calved, Sabardhu, 

When I encompass Varuna and Mitra with lauds, and Arya 
man in safest shelter. 

18 Their kin, the Prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman, turning 

his thought to thee thus speaks in kindness : 

This is our highest bond : I am his offspring. How many 
others came ere I succeeded 7 

19 Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in : these are my 

Gods ; I in full strength am present. 

Twice-born am I, the first-born Son of Order : the Cow milked 
this when first she had her being. 


14 Here begins another part of tho hymn. Agni is addressed. Effulgence : 
identified with the Sun. Threefold dwelling : earth, firmament, and heaven. 

15 Man like: as men reward one who institutes a saciifice for their benefit. 

16 This King: Sflrya, the Sun-God. ‘This royal Soma.’ — Wilson. Him- 
itlf the bridge: the long beams of light foun the bridge by which Surya 
passes over the waters of the firmament or sea of air Kakshtvdn . the cele- 
brated Kishi. See Vo). I , Index. 

17 Vaitarana : ‘(Agni), the conveyer (of all).’ -Wilson. Agni is so called, 
probably, as sacrificer for a prince Vitarana. Doubly kinsman : closely allied 
to heaven and earth. Sabardhu : the Cow whose milk is used in sacrifice ; 
also called Sabaiduglifl, as in starza 11. According to Ludwig, the New Year 
which has not yet distributed its treasures is meant. 

18 Their kin : akin to Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman. The Prince : sdri : 
Shrya, the Sun God. Thy nearest kinsman: Sfirya. I adopt Ludwig’s inter- 
polation of nflbhdntdishthah, which appeals unintelligible as the name of the 
Jon of Manu who was deprived of his inheritance by his father according to 
P Yajur-vcda, and by his brothers according to the A itareya- Brdhmana. 
fiut seo Weber, Episches im V. Ritual, pp. 40f. This : Dyaus. How many 
whers: many Savitars (suns that introduce the new year) have been before 
“fc— Ludwig. 

I** These are my Gods: ‘these are my resplendent (rays).’— Wilson. Pro- 

b'y the priests are intended. —Ludwig. The Cow: Aditi. Milked this: 

hked foi th this universe,’— Wilson. Agni is the speaker of this stanza. 



469 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X I 

20 So mid these tribes he rests, the friendly envoy, borne on two 

paths, refulgent, Lord of fuel. 

When, like a lino, the Babe springs up erectly, his Mother 
straight hath borne him strong to bless us. 

21 Then went the milch-kine forth to plea«Pi the damsel, and for 

the good of every man that liveth. 

Hear us, O wealthy Lord; begin our worship. Thou j )a ^ 
grown mighty through Asvaghn&’s virtues. 

22 And tako thou notice of us also, Indra, for ample riches, King 

whose arm wields thunder ! b 

Protect our wealthy nobles, guard our princes unmenaced near 
thee, Lord of Tawny Coursers. 

23 When he goes forth, ye Pair of Kings, for booty, speeding to 

war and praise to please the singer, — 

I was the dearest sage of those about him, — let him lead those 
away and bring them safely. 

24 Now for this noble man’s support and comfort, singing with 

easy voice we thus implore thee : 

Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser : and may I be his 
priest to win him glory. 

25 If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win your friend- 

ship made the laud accepted, 

That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for every one to 
whom the songs are suited. ^ 

26 Glorified thus, with holy hymns and homage : — Of noble race, 

with Waters, God-attended— 

May he enrich us for our prayers and praises : now can the cow 
be milked ; the path is open. 


20 He Agni. Two paths ; from earth to heaven and from heaven to earth, 

21 The reference iu the first line is, apparently, to the imprisoned cows and 
Sararrift (see stanza 10); but all explanations of the allusions in this hymn are 
moie or less conjectural. Ludwig thinks that the reference may be to the act- 
ual milking of the sacrificial cows at the ceremony which this hymn accompa- 
nied. Wilson translates : — ‘ The words of a desirable praise. of,a certain tian 
quil person (N&bhluedishtha), attain the prototype (Indra)’ Aqvaghna: pro- 
bably the patronymic of Vitarana.— Ludwig. See note on Vaitarana iu stanza 

17. 

23 He : Asvaghna Vitarana. Ye Pair of Kings : Mitra and Varuna. 

26 Glorified, thus: that is, May Varuna glorified with song beginning, 
noble race, etc., ’ enrich us. Now can the cow be milked : it is now time 
the morning Agnihotram. — Ludwig. 

Prof. Grajwmann has banished this almost unintelligible hymn to hisApf e “ 



THE RIG VEDA. 


yLtfiV 62.] 


466 


27 Be to us, then, ye Gods who merit worship, be ye of one accord 
our strong protection, 

Who went on various ways and brought us vigour, ye who are 
undeceivable explorers. 

HYMN LXII. ^ Visvedevas, Etc. 

Ye who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, have won 
you Indra’s friendship and eternal life, 

Even to you be happiness, Angirases. Welcome the son of 
Manu, ye who are most wise. 

2 The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, have in the 

year’s course cleft Vala by Eternal Law : 

A lengthened life be yours, 0 ye Angirases. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

3 Ye raised the Sun to heaven by everlasting Law, and spread 

broad earth, the Mother, out on every side. 

Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Angirases. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

4 This kinsman in your dwelling-place speaks pleasant words : 

give ear to this, ye Rishis, children of the Gods. 

High Hrahrnan dignity be yours, Angirases. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

5 Distinguished bv their varied form, these Rishis have been 

deeply moved. 

These ar» the sons of Angiras : from Agni have they sprung 
to life. 

6 Distinguished by their varied form, they sprang from Agni, 

from the sky. 

Navagva and Dasagva, noblest Angiras, he givcth bounty 
with the Gods. 

7 With Indra for associate the priests have cleared the stable 

full of steeds and kine, 

Diving to me a thousand with their eight-marked ears, they 
gained renown among the Gods. 

1 The ton of Manu: N&bhflnedishtha Mtbuva. See X. 61. 18 note. 

2 JZ’/ic Fathers; the Angirases. Vala: the demon who stole the cows of 
lie GUIs. 6 

. l l? ^'lasting Law: ‘ by means of your sacrifice.’ — Wilson. 

1 This kinsman : or, this NftbhA, that is, Nabhauedishtha. 

UutUnguished by their varied form : or, Virfipas. See III. 53. 7. 
n the sky: or, from Dynus Noblest Angiras: Agni himself, accord - 

>r\ h * va ” a * R® i fl a l 80 called Navagva and Dasagva as these piiestiy names 
belong to or are closely connected with the Angirases. 
ton*. right-marked ears : having marks branded on their ears ; or per* 
r P', with slit ears. Cf. Hymns of the Athana-vcda, YI. 141. 2. 



470 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 

8 May this man’s sons be multiplied ; like springing corn niav 

Manu grow, ^ 

Who gives at once in bounteous gift a thousand kiue a 
hundred steeds. 

9 No one attains to him, as though am in would grasp the 

heights of heaven. * 

Savarnya’s sacrificial meed hath broadened like an ample flood. 

10 Yadu and Turva, too, have given two Dasas, well disposed, to 

serve, 

Together with great store of kine. 

1 1 Blest be the hamlet’s chief, most liberal Manu, and may hi s 

bounty rival that of Sui ya. 

May the Gods let Savarni’s life be lengthened, with whom, 
unwearied, we have lived and prospered. 

HYMN LX III. Visvedevas, 

May they who would assume kinship from far away, Vivasvan’s 
generations, dearly loved of men, 

Even the Gods who sit upon the sacred grass of Nahusha’s 
son Yayati, bless and comfovt us. 

2 For worthy of obeisance, Gods, are all your names, worthy of 

adoration and of sacrifice. 

Ye who were born from waters, and from Aditi, and from the 
earth, do ye here listen to my call. 

3 I will rejoice in these Adityas for my weal, lor whom the Mo- 

ther pours forth water rich in balm, 

And Dyaus the Infinite, firm as a rock, sweet milk, — Gods act- 
ive, strong through lauds, whose might the Bull upholds. 

8 Manu : here apparently the name of SAvarui the prince whose munificence 
is the subject of stanzas 8 — 11. A thousand kine, a hundred steeds : * kine’^ is 
conjecturally supplied. ‘A thousand and a hundred horses.’ — Wilson. ‘A 
thousand times a hundred horses. ’ — Ludwig. 

9 Sdvarnya here means SAvarni. 

10 Turva: equivalent to Turvasa ; a prince of the clan called after the 
eponymus Turva. Ddsas : enslaved natives. 

1 Kinship ; relationship with us, and the duties of protection and aid which 
relationship implies. Cf. I. 109. 7, note. V ivasvdn’s generations : SAyairieuP' 
plies a verb, and explains differently : — ‘(support) the generations of (Manu 
the son of) Yivasvat.’ — Wilson. Yaydti: see I. 81. 17, and 108. 8, note. ^ 

2 From toaters : the aerial waters, or intermediate region of air. Addi: w 
Roth understands Aditi here to mean ‘ infinity,’ the boundlessness 
heaven as opposed to the limitation of earth. See Muir, O. S. Texts, V. 
SAyana’s explanation is similar. 

3 The Mother: Earth. Dyaus: Heaven. Tht Bull: the Sun, . 
explains vrishabharftn as ‘ bringers of rain,’ 



THE RIO VEDA. 


471 


63.] 


a Looking on men, ne’er slumbering, they by their deserts at- 
tained as Gods to lofty immortality. 

Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents’ powers, they 
robe them, for our welfare, in the height of heaven. 

5 Great Kings who bless us, who have come to sacrifice, who, 

ne’er assailed, have set their mansion in the sky, — a 
T hese I invite with adoration and with hymns, mighty Adityas, 
Aditi, for happiness. 

6 Who offereth to you the laud that ye accept, 0 ye All-Gods of 

Manu, many as ye are ? 

Who, Mighty Ones, will prepare for you the sacrifice to bear 
us over trouble to felicity ) 

7 Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled fire, offered 

the first oblation with his heart and soul, 

Vouchsafe us, ye Adityas, shelter free from fear, and make us 
good and easy paths to happiness. 

8 Wise Deities, who have dominion o’er the world, ye thinkers 

over all that moves not and that moves, 

Save us from uncommitted and committed sin, preserve us 
from all sin to-day for happiness. 

9 In battles we invoke Iudra still swift to hear, and all the holy 

Host of Heaven who banish grief, 

Agni, Mitra, and Varuna that we may gain, Dyaus, Bhaga, 
Maruts, Prithivi for happiness : 

10 Mightily-caving Earth, incomparable Heaven, the good guide 

Aditi who gives secure defence. 

The well-oared heavenly Ship that lets no waters in, free from 
defect, will we ascend for happiness. 

H Bless us, all Holy Ones, that we may have your help, guard 
and protect us from malignant injury. 

With fruitful invocation may we call on you, Gods, who give 
ear to us for grace, for happiness. 

12 Keep all disease afar and sordid sacrifice, keep off the wicked 

man’s malicious enmity. 

Keep far away from us all hatred, 0 ye Gods, and give us 
ample shelter for our happiness. 

13 Untouched by any evil, every mortal thrives, and, following 

the Law, spreads in his progeny, 

Whom ye witli your good guidance, 0 Adityas, lead safely 
through all his pain and grief to happiness. 

f With serpents' powers : ‘of unsurpassable wisdom.’ — Wilson. 

^ heavenly Ship according to Slyana, a metaphorical expression for 



472 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK * 

14 That which ye guard and grace in battle, O ye Gods, y e M a . 

ruts, where the prize is wealth, where heroes win, 

That conquering Car, 0 India, that sets forth at dawn, that 
never breaks, may we ascend for happiness. 

15 Vouchsafe us blessing in our paths and desert tracts, blessing 

in waters and in battle for the light ; 

Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth, and 
blessing, 0 ye Maruts, for the gain of wealth. 

16 The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who comes to wbal 

is good by distant pathway, — 

May she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with ui 
under the Gods’ protection. 

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you, 

0 Aditi and all Adityas. 

Men are made rich by those who are Immortal : the Heavenlj 
Folk have been extolled by Gaya. 

HYMN LX IV. Viavedevai 

What God, of those who hear, is be whose well-praised name wi 
may record in this our sacrifice ; and how 1 
Who will be gracious? who of many give us bliss ? Who ou 
of all the Host will come to lend us aid? 

2 The will and thoughts within my breast exevt their power 

they yearn with love, and fly to all the regions round. 
None other Comforter is found save only these : my longing 
and my hopes are fixt upon the Gods. * 

3 To Narasansa and to Pushan I sing forth, to unconcealabl 

Agni kindled by the Gods; 

To Sun and Moon, two Moons, to Yama in the heavens, to Trit 
Vata, Dawn, Night, and the Asvins Twain. 

4 How is the Sage extolled whom the loud singers praise 

What voice, what hymn is used to laud Brihaspati ? 

May Aja-Ekaprtd with Rikvans swift to hear, and Ahi of tl 
Deep listen into our call. 

14 For happiness : svastrfye, for happiness or welfare, recurs at the end 
all the stanzas from 3 to 14 inclusive. 

16 Svasti : PathyA Svasti, According to the Index; the Goddess of prosperi 
and happiness. 

17 The son of Plati : Gaya, the Itishi of the hymn. 

3 Unconcealahle Agni : or, to the unconcealable (Savitar) and Agni- f 
Moons: New Moon and Full Moon. 

4 Aja-tikapdd: see VI. 50. 14. Rikvans • singers; minor deities v 
attend and sing the praises of some superior God. A hi of the Deep : the gr 
Diagon of the depths of the aerial oceau ; Ahibudhuya. See Yol. I-i 



BYXN 64.] THE RIO VEDA . 473 

5 Aditi, to the birth of Daksha and the vow thou summonest the 

Kings Mitra and Vanina. 

With course unchecked, with many chariots Aryaman comes 
with the seven priests to tribes of varied sort. 

6 May all those vigorous Coursers listen to our cry, hearers of 

invocation, speeding on their way ; 

Winners of thousands where the priestly meed is won, who 
gather of themselves great wealth in every race. 

7 Bring ye Purandhi, bring Vayu who yokes his steeds, for 

friendship bring ye Pushan with your songs of praise : 

They with one mind, one thought attend the sacrifice, urged 
by the favouring aid of Savitar the God. 

8 The thrico-seven wandering Rivers, yea, the mighty floods, 

the forest trees, the mountains, Agni to our aid, 

Krisinu, Tishya, archers to our gathering-place, and Rudra 
strong amid the Rudras, we invoke. 

9 Let the great Streams come hither with their mighty help, 

Sindlm, Sarasvati, and Sarayu with waves. 

Ye Goddess Floods, ye Mothers, animating all, promise us 
water rich in fatness and m balm. 

10 And let BrihaddivA, the Mother, hear our call, and Tvashtar, 

Father, with the Goddesses and Dames. 

Ribhukshan, Vaja, Bhnga, and Rathaspati, and the sweet 
speech of him who labours guard us well ! 

11 Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the blest 

favour of the Maruts, Rudra’s Sons. 

May we be famed among the folk for wealth in kine, and ever 
come to you, ye Gods, with sacred food. 


5 Dahlia : meaning here the Sun, according to S&yana. Ludwig thinks 
hat the sacrificer, regarded as Daksha or PrajApati, and said to be born again 
hrougli completion of his vow, is intended. In the second line also Aryaman 
i considered by SAyana to be the Sun: — ‘Ataman, whose course is not 
urnetl, the giver of delight to many, having seven ministering (lays) proceeds 
a hi.s multiform births.’ — Wilson. 

6 Coursers ; the horses which bring the Gods to men’s sacrifices. 

7 Purandhi: Plenty personified as a deity. Or purandhim may be an ad* 
Active ‘ the spirited, or liberal, Pushan ’ 

[ 8 Thrice- seven : the seven rivers of the land of the Aryans having their coun* 
Pats in heaven and in the firmament. Krishna: the archer who guaids 
e heavenly Soma. Tishya: an asterism regarded ns being in the form of 
a,Tow > and so here identified with KrisAnu. 

10 Brihaddivd: a Goddess associated with I1A, Sarasvati, and others. 
1>ne the consorts of the Gods. Rathaspati: the God who presides over 
'*nots of war. Sptech : or prayer. Who labours: at the sacnfice. 



474 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X. 

12 The thought which ye, 0 Maruts, Indra, find ye Gods have 

given to me, and ye Mitra and Varuna, — 

Cause this to grow and swell like a milch-cow with milk. Will 
ye not bear away my songs upon your car? 

13 0 Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again to mind 

this our relationship ? 

When next we meet together at the central point, even there 
shall Aditi confirm our brotheihood. 

14 The Mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty Goddesses 

worthy of sacrifice, come with the race of Gods. 

These Two with their support uphold both Gods and men, and 
with the Fathers pour the copious genial stream. 

15 This invocation wins all good that we desire: Brihaspati, highly- 

praised Aramati, are here, 

Even where the stone that presses meath rings loudly out, 
and where the sages make their voices heard with hymns. 

16 Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers’ duties, desiring 

riches, yearning after treasure, 

Gaya, the priestly singer, with his praises and hymns content- 
ed the Celestial People. 

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you, 

0 Aditi and all Adityas. 

Men are made rich by those who arc Immortal : the Heavenly 
Folk have been extolled by Gaya. ^ 

IlYMN LXV. Visvedevas. 

May Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna consent, Aryaman, V&yu, Tush- 
an, and Sarasvati, 

Adityas, Maruts, Vishnu, Soma, lofty Sky, Rudra, and Aditi, 
and Brahmanaspati. 

2 India and Agni, Hero-lords when Vritra fell, dwelling together, 

speeding emulously on, 

And Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, have 
with their power filled full the mighty firmament. 

3 Skilled in the Law I lift the hymn of praise to these, Law- 

strengtheners, unassailed, and great in majesty. 

13 At the central point : the place of sacrifice. 

14 With the Father s : 1 The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, ^fhich &j' e 
birth to gods and men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ See « 
Cosmology of the Rigvcda, p. 72. 

15 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion. 

17 The concluding stanza of Hymu 63 is repeated here. 




THE MOVED A. 


475 


BYliti 65.] 

These in their wondrous bounty send the watery sea : may 
they as kindly Friends send gifts to make us great. 

4 They with their might have stayed Heaven, Earth, and Prithi- 

vi, the Lord of Light, the firmament, the lustrous spheres. 
Even as fleet-foot steeds who make their masters glad, the 
princely Gods are praised, most bountiful to man. 

5 Bring gifts to Mitra and to Vanina who, Lords of all, in spirit 

never fail the worshipper, 

Whose statute shines on high through everlasting Law, whose 
places of sure refuge are the heavens and earth. 

6 The cow who yielding milk goes her appointed way hither to 

us as leader of our holy rites, 

Speaking aloud to Varuna and the worshipper, shall with 
oblation serve Vivasvan and the Gods. 

7 The Gods whose tongue is Agni dwell in heaven, and sit, aid- 

ers of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law. 

They propped up heaven and then brought waters with their 
might, got sacrifice and in a body made it fair. 

8 Born in the oldest time, the Parents dwelling round are shar- 

ers of one mansion in the home of Law. 

Bound by their common vow Dyaus, Prithivi stream forth the 
moisture rich in oil to Varuna the Steer. 

9 Parjanya, Vata, mighty, senders of the rain, Indra and Vayu, 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman : 

We call on Aditi, A lityas, and the Gods, those who are on 
the earth, in waters, and in heaven. 

10 Tvashtar and Vayu, those who count as Ribhus, both celestial 

Hotar-priests, and Dawn for happiness, 

Winners of wealth, we call, and wise Brihaspati, destroyer of 
our foes, and Soma Indra’ s Friend. 

11 They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, the 

forest trees, the earth, the waters, and the hills. 


3 The watery tea : the clouds aud rain. 

4 Prithivi : meaniug here the region of raid-air. 

^ Maces of sure refuge: SAyaua explains nddhasi differently upon whom 
e ^ Wo solicitous worlds remain dependent.’ 

6 The cow : who is milked at sacrifice. According to S4yana, thunder may 
)e nieant, and by ‘milk’ strength may be intended. 

1 In a body : that is, personified. Of. X. 66. 9, note. 

8 The Parents : Heaven and Earth. 

19 Celestial Hotar-priests: see I. 13. 8. 



476 


THE HYMNS OF 


t BOOK x. 

These very bounteous Gods made the Sun mount to heaven 
and spread the righteous laws of Aryas o’er the land. 

12 0 Asvins, ye delivered Bhujyu from distress, ye animated 

Syava, Vadhrimati’s son. 

To Vimada ye brought his consort KamadyG, and gave his 
lost Vishnapd back to Visvaka. 

13 Thunder, the lightning’s daughter, Aja-Ekapad, heaven’s bear- 

er, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea : 

Hear all the Gods my words, Sarasvati give ear together with 
Purandhi and with Holy Thoughts. 

14 With Holy Thoughts and with Purandhi may all Gods, know- 

ing the Law immortal, Manu’s Holy Ones, 

Boon-givers, favourers, finders of light, and Heaven, with gra- 
cious love accept my songs, my prayer, my hymn. 

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high 

above all other beings. 

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN LXYI. Yisvedem 

I call the Gods of lofty glory for our weal, the makers of the 
light, well-skilled in sacrifice ; 

Those who have waxen mightily, Masters of all wealth, Im- 
mortal, strengthening Law, the Gods whom Indra leads. 

2 For the strong band of Maruts will we frame ajiymn: the chiefs 

shall bring forth sacrifice for Indra’s troop, 

Who, sent by Indra and advised by Varuna, have gotten for 
themselves a share of Surya’s light. 

3 May Indra with the Yasus keep our dwelling safe, and Aditi 

with Adityas lend us sure defence. 

May the God Rudra with the Rudras favour us, and Tvashtar 
with the Dames further us to success. 

4 Aditi, Heaven and Earth, the great eternal Law, Indra, Vishnu, 

the Maruts, A and the lofty Sky. 

We call upon Adityas, on the Gods, for help, on Vasus, Rudras, 
Savitar of wondrous deeds. 


12 These deeds of the Asvins are told in I. 16 and 17. 

13 Aja-Ekapdd : see VI. 50, 14. Holy Thoughts: Devotions personified. 

14 Mann's Holy Ones : deities whom Manu worshipped. 

15 Vasishtha: that is, a descendant of the great Rishi Vasishtha. 

4 The names in the first line are in the nominative case and without a verb ; 
‘ are invoked/ may be understood. 



THE R1QVEDA. 


ill 


JIYMH 66 .] 

5 With Holy Thoughts Sarasv&n, firm-lawed Varuna, great V&yu, 

Pushan, Vishnu, and the Asvins Twain, 

Lords of all wealth, Immortal, furtherers of prayer, grant us 
a triply-guarding refuge from distress. 

6 Strong be the sacrifice, strong be the Holy Ones, strong the 

preparers of oblation, strong the Gods. 

Mighty be Heaven and Earth, true to eternal Law, strong be 
Parjanya, strong bo they who laud the Strong. 

7 To wm us strength I glorify the Mighty Twain, Agni and 

Soma, Mighty Ones whom many laud. 

May these vouchsafe us shelter with a triple guard, these 
whom the strong have served in worship of the Gods. 

8 Potent, with firm-fixt laws, arranging sacrifice, visiting solemn 

rites in splendour of the day, 

Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from falsehood, 
poured the waters out when Vritra died. 

9 The Holy Ones engendered, for their several laws, the heavens 

and earth, the waters, and the plants and trees. 

They filled the firmament with heavenly light for help : the 
Clods embodied Wish and made it beautiful. 

10 May they who bear up heaven, the Riblms deft of hand, and 

Vata and Parjanya of the thundering Bull, 

The waters and the plants, promote the songs we sing: come 
Bhaga, Rati, and the Vajins to my call. 

11 Sindhu, the soa, the region, and the firmament, the thunder, 

and the ocean, Aja-Ek.ipad, 

The Dragon of the Deep, shall listen to my words, and all 
the Deities and Princes shall give ear. 

12 May we be yours, we men, to entertain the Gods : further 

our sacrifice and give it full success. 

Adityas, Rndras, Vasus, givers of good gifts, quicken the holy 
hymns which wo are singing now. 

t ^ Strong: vrishan repeated in the way loved by some of the Vcdic poets ; 
showerer of benefits,’ according to SAyana. The Gods : meaning, says S&yana, 
ll >e priests. 

: , 9 Jjflm : courses of action. Embodied Wish : gave a body to the wishes and 
j wpes of worshippers, and personified them in the same manner as sacrifice is 
ai! to have been embodied and beautified in X. 65. 7. 

tj? an d ^ ar J an y a °fthe thundering Bull : meaning the wind and storm 
\ attend the thundorous lain-cloud. Rdti : divine Favour or Bounty. 
tjm ; a bl^s of divinities according to S&yana. See VII, 88. 7. 

Ekapid : see VI. 50. 14. Dragon of the Deep: Ahibudhnya. See 



478 • THE IIYMN3 OF [BOOK l 

13 1 follow with success upon the path of Law the two celestial 

Hotars, Priests of oldest time. 

We pray to him who dwelleth near, Guard of the Field, to all 
Immortal Gods who never are remiss. 

14 Vasishtha’s sons have raised their voices, like their sire, Ilishi- 

like praying to the Gods for happiness. 

Like f»iendly-minded kinsmen, come at our desire, 0 Gods, and 
shake down treasures on us from above. 

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high 

above all other beings. 

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN LXVIL Brihaspati. 

This holy hymn, sublime and seven-headed, sprung from eter- 
nal Law, our sire discovered. 

Ayasya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth hymn 
as he sang his laud to Indra. 

2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyausthe 

A sura, those heroes, 

Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice’s 
holy statute. 

3 Giit by his friends who cried with swan-like voices, bursting 

the stony barrieis of the prison , 

Brihaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, Aid uttered praise 
and song when he had found them. 

4 Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave the kine 

that stood in bonds of falsehood. 

Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, drave forth the 
bright cows : three he made apparent. 


13 Two celestial Hotars: Agni and Aditya, according to Silyana. Guard o) 
the Field: probably Indra. 

15 Repeated from the preceding hymn. 


1 Seven headed : having seven divisions. Accompanied by seven bands o! 
the Maruts, or having seven metres, according to S&yara. Our sire : Angna« 
Fourth : or, extending to all four sides, mighty. 

3 The cattle : the lost cows of the Angirases, representing metaphorical 
the rays of light which had been stolen by the fiends of darkness. See I. #2. 

4 Apart from one , away from two : the meaning is uncertain. Perhaps, & 
a distance from the earth, down from heaven and the firmament. FalseM 0 
the wickedness of the treacherous Pams. Three : heaven, firmament, 
earth. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


470 


UrMX 07 .] 

5 When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he cut off three 

from him who held the waters. 

Brihaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, the 
dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning. 

6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through, 

the guardian of the cattle. 

Seoking the milk-draught with sweat-shining comrades he stole 
the Pani’s kine and left him weeping. 

7 He with bright faithful Friends, winners of booty, hath rent 

the milker of the cows asunder. 

Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty, sweating with 
heat, hath gained a rich possession. 

8 They, longing for the kine, with faithful spiiit incited with 

their hymns the Lord of cattle. 

Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked, 
averting shame from one another. 

9 In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who 

roareth like a lion, 

May we, in every fight where heroes conquer, rejoice in strong 
Brihaspati the Victor. 

10 When he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven 

and its most lofty mansions, 

Men praised Brihaspati the Mighty, bringing the light within 
their mouths from sundry places. 

11 Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour : aid in your wont- 

ed manner even the humble. 

Let all our foes be turned an l driven backward. Hear this, 
0 Heaven and Earth, ye All-producers. 

12 Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the head of 

Arbuda the watery monster, 

i Slain Ahi, and sot free the Seven Rivers. 0 Heaven and Earth, 
with all the Gods, protect us. 

5 Western castle : this is obscure. Ludwig suggests that rf pdchlm may mean 
inutile * or ‘ detested.’ Three: heaven, firmament, and earth. Him who held 
« waters: the demon Vala, who kept the rain, as well as the cows or rays of 
?ht, imprisoned. The cow - the cattle ; the beams of light. 

*1 Comrades : his faithful friends tho Maruts. Wild boars: the strong fierce 
Lruts ; according to Sdyana, ‘ bearers of excellent water.’ 

8 The Lord of cattle : Brihaspati, so called because he had released them. 

10 The lUfht : that is, the hj mns of praise which will bring them the light 
help, The stanza is difficult 

H The watery monster • the fiend who dominated the ocean of air. Ahi : 
,r >the Dragon, Vritra or his brother. 



480 THE IIYMNS OF [BOOR % 

HYMN LXVIII. Biihwpau. 

Like birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, like the 
loud voices of the thundering rain-cloud, 

Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to 
Brihaspati our hymns have sounded. 

2 The Son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bhaga, brought in 

Arvaman among us. 

As Friend of men ho decks the wife and husband : as for the 
race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers. 

3 Brihaspati. having won them from the mountains, strewed 

down, like barley out of winnowing-baskets, 

The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, desired of 
all, of blameless form, well-coloured. 

4 As the Sun dews with mcath the seat of Order, and casts a 

flaming meteor down from heaven, 

So from the rock Brihaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the 
earth’s skin as it were with water. 

5 Forth from mid-air with light he drave the darkness, as the 

gale blows a lily from the river. 

Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Brihaspati ga- 
thered to himself the cattle. 

€ Brihaspati, when he witli fiery lightnings cleft through the 
weapon of reviling Vala, 

Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth have compassed: he 
threw the prisons of the red cows open. 

7 That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave 
Brihaspati discovered, 

And dravo, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like a 
bird’s young after the eggs’ disclosure. 

2 The Son of Angiras : Brihaspati, especially worshipped and cherished b; 
Angiras. Aryaman : the institution of marriage, represented by Aryaman 
one meaning of the name being groomsman or matchmaker. 

3 Out of winnowing-baskets : sthivibhyah : the exact meaning of the word 
is somewhat uncertain, but it is evidently a measure, basket, or iustrumea 
connected with corn. Sthivimdntah , ‘ armed with sthivis ,’ occurs in X. 
and is said by Sflyana to mean ‘occupants of stations.’ Wilson render 
sthivibhyah in this place by ‘ from the granaries.’ The cows bestowed > 
Biihaspati* are countless as grains of barley on the threshing-floor or wtnno 
ing- place. 

4 Cleft the earth's skin : or surface, with the hoofs of many cattle. 

5 A lily : $pdla : according to S&yana the same as (jlaivala, the Vftllwner 

Octandra, a common aquatic plant. # . • y *13 

6 Weapon : I adopt S&yana’a explanation of jasum , although in a. • 
the same word means ‘ exhaustion.’ 



THE RIO VEDA. 


481 


TVV M.1 

g He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who 
eyes a fish in scanty water. 

Brihaspati, oleaving through with varied clamour, brought it 
forth like a bowl from out the timber. 

9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning : with 
lucid rays he forced apart the darkness. 

As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of Vala as he 
gloried in his cattle. 

0 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the 

cows Brihaspati had taken. 

He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, whereby the 
Sun and Moon ascend alternate. 

1 Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers have deco- 

rated heaven with constellations. 

They set the light in day, in night the darkness. Brihaspati 
cleft the rock and found the cattle. 

i This homage have we offered to the Cloud-God who thunders 
out to many in succession. 

May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and 
horses, men, and heroes. 


HYMN LX IX. Agni. 

Auspicious is the aspect of Vadhryasva’a fire ; good is its 
guidance, pleasant are its visitings. 

When first the people of Sumitra kindle it, with butter pour- 
ed thereon it crackles and shines bright. 

2 Butter is that which makes V idhryasva’s fire grow strong : 
the butter is its food, the butter m ikes it fat. 

It spreads abroad when butter h ith been offered it, and balm- 
ed with streams of butter shines forth like the Sun. 


5 Sweetness: the sweet milk ; that is, the cows who pioduced it. 

Like a bo ml : which already exists potentially in the wood from which it is 
educed by cutting. 

* Wilson, following S4yana, paraphrases the second line ‘ he seized (the 
Me from the rock) of Vala surrounded by the kine as (one extracts) mar- 

* from a bone.’ 

B The Fathers : 1 The connection of the fathers with the light, of which 
7 are both the embodiments and the guardians, is alone sufficient to ex- 
mo their action in placing the stars iu the sky.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the 
a r g ’ P* Or, as Ludwig remarks, the Fathers themselves may he the 


12 To many : *oows ' is, apparently, understood. Slyaua supplies rtcAai 
v 0 recitsa in order many (sacred stanzas).’ — Wilson. 


itt V l dfi, 'y a i va has been mentioned, in VI. 61. 1, as a worshipper of Saras- 
■ here he appears as a special worshipper of Agni. • 

31 



482 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X, 

3 Still newest is this face of thine, 0 Agni, which Mauu and Su- 

mitra have enkindled. 

So richly shine, accept our songs with favour, so give us strength, 
ening food, so send us glory. 

4 Accept this offering, A^ni, whom aforetime Vadhryasva hath 

entreated and enkindled. 

Guard well our homes and people, gnard our bodies, protect 
thy gift to us which thou hast granted. 

5 Be splendid, guard us, Kinsman of Vadhryasva : let not the 

eumity of men o’ercome thee. 

Like the bold heroChyavana, I Sumitra tell forth the title of 
Vadhryasva’s Kinsman. 

6 All treasures hast thou won, of plains and mountains, and 

quelled the Dasas’ and the Aryas’ hatred. 

Like the bold hero Chyavana, O Agni, mayst thou subdue the 
men who long for battle. 

7 Deft Agni hath a lengthened thread, tall oxen, a thousand 

heifers, numberless devices. 

Decked by the men, splendid among the splendid, shine 
brightly forth amid devout Smnitras. 

8 Thine is the teeming cow, 0 Jatavedas, who pours at once her 

ceaseless flow, Sabardhuk. 

Thou art lit up by men enriched with guerdon, 0 Agni, by 
the pious-souled Sumitias. 

9 Even Immortal Gods, 0 Jafatvedas, Vadhiyasva's Kinsman, 

have declared thy grandeur. 

When human tribes drew near with supplication thou conquer 
edst with men whom thou hadst strengthened. 

10 Like as a father hears his son, 0 Agni, Vadhryasva bare the< 

in his lap and served thee. 

Thou, Youngest God, having enjoyed his fuel, didst vanquisl 
those of old though they were mighty. 

11 Vadhryasva’s Agni evermore hath vanquished his foes will 

heroes who had pressed the Soma. 

Lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, subduing 
as our help, e’en mighty foemeu. 

3 Sumitra : sou of Vadhryasva and RLhi of the hymn. , f f 

6 Chyavana: a son of Bhiigu. Or tlie word may mean * conquerirg» 

SAyana interprets it. Vadhryasva' t Kinsman : as having been espeoa 
worshipped and cheiished by that Bishi. See stanza 10.1 .. 

7 A lengthened thread : continual facrifices, from ancient to present 1 
Devices: ways of attaining his object. Or fatdnUha may baV L; 
hundred or many musical modes or sacred song* ; ' or ‘ praised by ' 

» the leader of hundreds (of burnt offerings).’ — Wilsba. 



THE RIQVEDA, 


481 


rryzv 70.] 

2 This Agni of Vadhryasva, Vritra-slayer, lit from of old, must 
be invoked with homage. 

As such aBsail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether the foes be 
strangers or be kinsmen. 

HYMN LXX. Xprt*. 

Enjoy, 0 Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled ladle wheie 
we pour libation. 

Rise up for worship of the Gods, wise Agni, on the earth's 
height, while days are bright with beauty. 

2 May he who goes before the Gods come hither with steeds 

whose shapes are varied, Nurasansa. 

May he, most Godlike, speed our offered viands with homage 
God-ward on the path of Order. 

3 Men with oblations laud most constant Agni, and pray him to 

perform an envoy’s duty. 

With lightly-rolling car and best draught-horses, bring the 
Gods hither and sit dowui as Hotar. 

4 May the delight of Gods spread out transversely : may it be 

with us long in length and fragrant. 

0 Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou the wil- 
ling Gods whose Chief is Indra. 

5 Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven, or spring apart 

to suit the wide earth’s measure. 

Yearning, ye Doors, with those sublime in greatness, seize 
eagerly the heavenly Car that cometh. 

6 Here in this shrine may Dawn and Night, the Daughters of 

Heaven, the skilful Goddesses, be seated. 

In your wide lap, auspicious, willing Ladies, mtfy the Gods seat 
them with a willing spirit. 

7 Up stands the stone, high burns the fire enkindled : Aditi’s lap 

contains the Friendly Natures. 

Ye Two Chief Priests who serve at this our worship, may ye, 
more skilled, win for us rich possessions. 

Other Apr! hymns may be compared ; I. 13, 142, and 188 ; II. 3 ; IH. 4 ; 
Vi 6 ; VII. 2, aud IX. 5. The usual deities and deified objects, with the ex* 
Option of Tanllnap&t, are invoked. 

a m* ^°^ ar •’ * M ministrant priest.’ — Wilson. 

■ T&e delight of Ood» : the sacred grass. 

® The heavenly Car : which brings the Gods. * 

7 Tfoitone: with which the Soma juice is expressed. Aditi't lap: the 
wrface of the earth. The Friendly Nature t: the Gods. According to 
7^,‘the acceptable sacrificial vessels.* Tuo Chief Priertt: pvrdhftau : 
Pwxap* Agni and Aditya. More ikilUd : than human priests. 



484 


THE HYMNS OP 


[hook X, 


8 On our wide grasps, Three Goddesses be seated : for you have 

we prepaid and made it pleasant. 

May I1&, she whose foot drops oil, the Goddess, taste, man-like 
sacrifice and well-set presents. ’ 

9 Since thou, God Tvashtar, hast made beauty perfect, since 

thou hast been the Augirases’ Companion, 

Willing, most wealthy, Giver of possessions, grant us the Gods’ 
assembly, thou who knowest. 

10 Well knowing, binding with thy cord, bring hither, Lord of 

the Wood, the Deities’ assembly. 

The God prepare and season our oblations : may Heaven and 
Earth be gracious to my calling. 

11 Agni, bring hither Varuna to help us, Indra from heaven, 

from air’s mid-realm the M a ruts. 

On sacred grass all Holy Ones be seated, and let the Immortal 
Gods rejoice in Svaha. 


HYMN LXXI. JMnara, 

When men, Brihaspati, giving names to objects, sent out V&k's 
first and earliest utterances, 

All that was excellent and spotless, treasured within them, was 
disclosed through their affection. 

2 Where, like men cleansing corn-flour in a cribble, the wise in 
spirit have created language, 

Friends see and recognize the marks of friendship : their speech 
retains the blessed sign imprinted. 


8 Three Goddesses : 114, Sarasvati, and BhAratt. Taste • the verb is pluul 
meaning, may 114 and the others taste. Man-like: as at the sacrifice of Manu 
according to Siyana. 

9 Grant us the Gods' assembly : the Commentators explain pflthas some 
'times as ‘ place,’ sometimes as ‘ food ’ or ‘air ’ or 1 water.’ Here Wilson, follow 
ing SAyana, translates : — ‘ offer the food of the gods (to them).’ 

10 Binding with thy cord : it is not clear what is to be bound, or ra»g^ 
in order. According to SAyana, the pftthns, which he explains ns an nan i 
devdndm, food of the Gods, is to be fastened with a rope. Lord of the Wood, 
vanaspati : the yOtpa or Sacrificial Post. 

11 Svdhd : that is, in the sacrificial offerings presented with the exclamafcior 
SvAhA, Ave, or Hail. 

JfiAnam or Knowledge, the subject of this very difficult hymn, is 
SAyana to mean Paramabrahm «jfiAn un, knowledge of the higher truths o 
Religion, which teaches man lus own nature and how he may be reunited 
the Supreme Spirit. . , 

1 Vdk : Voice or Speech, the Sacred Word. Here specially the voice 
the hymn regarded as the means of communication between men end 1 
Set Vedic India (Story of the. Nations Seiies), pp 269 — 27b 



THE MOVED A, 


485 


ttSlS 7t] 

3 With sacrifice the trace of Vak they followed, and found her 

harbouring within the Rishis. 

They brought her, dealt her forth in many places : seven 
singers make her tones resound in concert. 

4 One man hath ne’er seen Vak, and yet he seeth : one man 

hath hearing but hath never heaid her. 

But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well- 
dressed woman to her husband. 

5 One man they call a laggard, dull in friendship: they never 

urge him on to deeds of valour. 

He wanders on in profitless illusion : the Voice he heard yields 
neither fruit nor blossom. 

6 No part in Vak hath he who hath abandoned his own dear 

friend who knows the truth of friendship. 

Even if he hears her still in vain he listens : naught knows 
i he of the path of righteous action. 

7 Unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends endowed 

alike with eyes and hearing. 

Some look like tanks that leach the mouth or shoulder, others 
like pools of water fit to bathe in. 

8 When friendly Brahmans sacrifice together with mental im- 

pulse which the heart hath fashioned, 

They leave one far behind through their attainments, and some 
who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere. 

9 Those meu who step not back and move not forward, nor 

Brahmans nor preparers of libations, 

Having attained to Vak in sinful fashion spin out their thread 
in ignorance like spinsters. 

10 All friends are joyful in the friend who cometh in triumph, 

having conquered in assembly. 

He is their blame-averter, food-provider : prepared is he and 
fit for deed of vigour. 

3 Harbouring within the Rishi* : they discovered, in the course of sacrifice, 

that the inspiied Rishis nloue understood Speech as required for religious 

purposes, /n many places : among the Hotar-priests. Seven singers : * the 

® even n °i 3 * * * * 8 y (birds) meet together.’ — Wilson : referring, says S&yaya, to the 

»eveu metres, the G&yatri, etc. 

8 Some who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere : ( others walk about 
jjsting to be brahmans'— Muir, 

Step not back and move not forward : take no active part in religious 
«««* * Those who do not walk (with the Brdhmans) in this lower 
toxfk-° r (with the gods) in the upper world,’ is Wilson’s paraphrase of the 
Such • lC ^ * k Rve rendered literally. Like spinsters: ‘(like) female weaver*. 
^ sense which Prof. Aufrecht thinks may, with probability, be 
iwa to *irls, a word which occurs only here.’— Muir. 



486 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK X 

11 One plies his constant task reciting verses: one sings the holy 
psalm in Sakvari measures. 

One more, the Brahman, tells the lore of being, and one lays 
down the rules of sacrificing. 


HYMN LXXII. The God®. 

Lbt us with tuneful skill proclaim these generations of the Gods 
That one may see them when these hymus are chanted in a 
future age. 

2 These Brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelting, like 

a smith. 

Existence, in an earlier age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang, 

3 Existence, in the earliest age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang, 
Thereafter were the regions born. This sprang from the Pro- 
ductive Power. 


4 Earth sprang from the Productive Power ; the regions from 

the earth were born. 

Daksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi was Daksha’s Child. 

5 For Aditi, 0 Daksha, she who is thy Daughter, was bronghl 

forth. 

After her were the blessed Gods born Bharers of immortal life, 

6 When ye, 0 Gods, in yonder deep close-clasping one anothei 

stood, 

11 Reciting verses : repeating richas or verses of thejligveda. This if» tin 
duty of the Hotar. The holy psalm : the Gftyatra or Smraan. The Udg&ta 
or Chanter, one of the four chief priests is intended. The lore of being •' thi 
knowledge of all that exists. Lays down the rules : 1 prescribes the order, 

Muir. * Measures the materials.'— Wilson. This is the duty of the Adh 

▼arvu another of the chief priests. The hymn has been transliterate! 
and translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts, I. pp. 254 -256. It has also beei 
metrically rendered by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder des Rtgveaa, wn 
have endeavoured, by transposing some of the stanzas, to bring them in 
closer connexion. According to SAyana, the subject of the who e hymn J 
1 the eulogy of tho understanding of the Veda as essential to divme knowledge 

2 These : all beings. Like a smith : as a blacksmith blows up his fire an' 

The regions: ‘the quarters (of the horizon).’— Wilson. This: 
earth. Productive Power : the meaning of uttdnapadah is uncertain. ™ 
renders it by ‘the begetter (the sky)’; Wilson by ‘ the upwaH-growwg WJ ^ 

4 And Aditi was Daksha' s Child: ‘Yaska remarks, .....How can th^t 
possible ? They may have had the same origin ; or, according to the nw 
the gods, they may have been born from each other,— have derived tne 
teuce from one another.’- 0. 5. Texts, IV. 13. Aditi ia Infinity or the Infinite 
and Daksha is Force or Power personified. See Vedic Hymns, L. p _ ,’ gtor 

6 4 The two verses 6 and 7 are interesting as containing an mdepena 
of the origin of the world : the gods are said to have kicked up 4S 
the atoms which formed the earth.’— Wallis, Cosmology of the Riyvcda, p 



THE R10VEH1 . 


487 


73 .] 

Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening cloud of dust 
arose. 

7 When, 0 ye Gods, like Yatis, ye caused all existing things to 

grow, 

Then ye brought S&rya forward who was lying hidden in 
the sea. 

8 Eight are the Sons of Aditi who from her body sprang to life. 
With seven she went to meet the Gods : she cast Martanda 

far away. 

9 So with her Seven Sons Aditi went forth to meet the earlier 

age- 

She brought Martanda thitherward to spring to life and die 
again! 

HYMN LXXI1I. Indra. 

Tnou wast born mighty for victorious valour, exalting, strong- 
est, full of pride and conrigo. 

There, even there, the Maruts strengthened Indra when his 
most rapid Mother stirred the Hero. 

2 There with fiend’s ways e’en Prismi was seated : with much 

laudation they exalted Indra. 

As if encompassed hy the Mighty-footed, from darkness, near 
at hand, forth came the Children. 

3 High are thy feet when on thy way thou gocst : the strength 

thou foundest here hath lent thee vigour. 

Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou boldest. O Indra, mayst 
thou turn the Asvins hither. 


7 Yatis : devotees. 

8 Eight are the Sons: according to the Commentator, Mitra, Varurm, Dh&tar, 
Iryanun, Ansa, Bluga, Vivasv&n, and Adilya {the Sun). Mdrtlndn: Surya, 
'he Sun. His exposure probably refers to his sweeping through the sky, — 
judwig. But see Bergaigne, La Religion Vddique, III. 107. 


1 Mother: Aditi. Stirred Hero: gave him free motion ns soon as lie was 
joru, or incited him to action by telling him of his future opponent See VIII 

l5 - 5, and 66. 2. 

, 2 This stanza is unintelligible to mo PrUant ■ meaning perh p* Vn?tn m 
■ jiKlwig conjectures. The On ughty- footed . Indra. The ChtUit en * tin i i 
aruta. Wilson translates, aft^r Siya.ia : — 1 Tlie m.iriial roopofluir- he 
“Jurer encamped around Indra (accompanied) by the swift-moving i^Alarute) : 

. e T ^tuiated him with abundant piaise; like (cattle) penned up within a great 
, > the embryonic (waters) issued from the ( V vitro.) who had arrived in the 
rm of darkness.’ 

iacf w a e : M travelling through the heavens. Hyena* : tdluvriUtn : 



438 


TUF HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X, 

4 Speeding at once to sacrifice thou comest : fur friendshin 

thou art bringing both N&satyas. ^ 

Thou hitdst a thousand treasures in possession. The Asvins 
0 thou Hero, gave thee riches. ‘ 1 

5 Glad, for the race that rests on holy Order, with friends whc 

hasten to their gonl, hath Indra 
With these his rnngic powers assailed the Dasyu : he cast 
away the gloomy mists, the darkness. 

6 Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as Indra strik 

ing down the car of Ushas. 

With thy beloved lofty Friends thou earnest, and with th< 
assurance of thine heart thou slowest. 


7 War-loving Namuchi thou smotest, robbing the T)&sa of hit 

magic for the Rishi. 

For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, paths lead 
ing as it were directly God-ward. 

8 These names of thine thou hast fulfilled completely : as Lord 

thou boldest in thine arm, 0 Indra. 

In thee, through thy great might, the Gods are joyful : thi 
roots of trees hast thou directed upward. 

9 May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit 

that lies in depth of waters. 

Thou from the udder which o’er earth is fastened hast pourec 
the milk into the kine and herbage. 

10 When others call him offspring of the Courier, my meaning i 
that Mighty Power produced him. 

He came from Manyu and remained in houses : whence h 
hath sprung is known to Indra only. 


6 Two of like name : or, of similar nature; gloomy mists and darkness, Th 

ear of Ushas ; see IV. 30. 8—11. The assurance of thy heart: thy trusts 
thunderbolt. 

8 Thou hast fulfilled : hast acted in full accordance with the names tho 
bedrest, such as Vritra-slayer, Sakra, etc. Thou boldest: the thuuderb 1 
The roots of trees ■ the clouds are often compared to trees. Th ® ™ in , 
fruit, and when they pour it down their roots are supposed to be um 
ward. 

9 Quoit : chaJcrdm : meaning the thunderbolt. The udder : the 

10 The Courser: meaning Heaven. Manyu : wrath, P aBB1 J D ,°?^5 
personified, My meaning is : the speaker declares that h ^ 6 * 8 9 10 ™ ls ™ ve 8prliu 
common mytl ol<»gical explanations. He considers the God to 

from a transcendental Power.— Ludwig. obgcu , 

Grassmanu banishes this hymn to his Appendix as being g« ncraI y f V v ve 
and in parts absolutely unintcliigiole. I ha\e, for the most pa > 
Ludwig’s interpretation. 



Tm RlGVEDA. 


nru A r 74.] 


489 


11 Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, Rishis, im- 
ploring, have come nigh to Indra : 

Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision : deliver us as men 
whom snares entangle. 


HYMN LXXIV. In(lra< 

I \m prepared to laud with song or worship the Noble Ones 
who are in earth and heaven, 

Or Coursers who have triumphed in the contest, or those who, 
famed, have won the prize with glory. 

2 Their call, the call of Gods, went up to heaven : they kissed 

the ground with glory-seeking spirit, 

There where the Gods look on for happy fortune, and like 
the kindly heavens bestow their bounties. 

3 This is the song of those Immortal Beings who long for trea- 

sures in their full perfection. 

May these, completing prayers and sacrifices, bestow upon us 
wealth where naught is wanting. 

4 Those living men extolled thy deed, 0 Indra, those who would 

fain burst through the stall of cattle, 

Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose Sons 
are many and her streams past number. 

5 Sachivan, win to your assistance Indra who never bends, who 

overcomes his focmen, 

Ribhukshan, Maghavan, the hymn’s upholder, who, rich in 
food, beais man’s kind friend, the thunder. 

6 Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, India hath 

earned his name of Yntra-slayer. 

Ho hath appeared, the mighty Lord of Conquest. What we 
would have him do let him accomplish. 


The Rubjeot of the hymn is a coming horse-race, and the Rishi invokes in 
ivour of the Yaj.tmftna, the Vasus, racers who have won the prize in former 
imes, and the men who owned diem. Indra also is appealed to for help. 
)ee VedUchc Studien , I. p. 129. 

2 The call of Gods : the Gods are imagined as present and interested in the 
,^ e * ^kty kissed the ground : the horses lightly touched the earth as they 


^ Those living men: the Angirases. Her who hare hut once: Heaven, accord* 
8 ■o bAyaua ; Earth, according toGiassmann. Prisni, the mother of the 
ruts ^ wust be meant. — Ludwig. See VI. 48. 22. ’ ' 

8'tthtmn; apparently a man’s name. 4 Celebrator of holy rites.’ — Wilson. 

wtl ° won of old : the YajnmAua. lie hath appeared : the poet ima* 
glUe « bidra himself to be present. 



490 


[BOOK J 


THE HYMNS OP 

HYMN LXXV. The River, 

Thk singer, 0 ye Waters, in Vivasv&n’s place, shall tell you 
grandeur forth that is beyond compare. 

The Rivera have come forward triply, seven and seven. Sindhi 
in might surpasses all the streams that flow. 

2 Varuria cut the channels for thy forward course, 0 Sindhu, 

when thou rannest on to win the race. 

Thou speedest o’er precipitous ridges of the earth, when thoi 
art Lord and Leader of these moving floods. 

3 His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth : he puts foitl 

endless vigour with a flash of light. 

Like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the cloud, so Sin 
dhu rushes on bellowing like a bull. 

4 Like mothers to their calves, like milch-kine with their milk 

so, Sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers run. 

Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army’s wings what tinu 
thou comest in the van of these swift streams. 

6 Favour ye this my laud, 0 Gang i, Yamun&, 0 Sutudrl, Paru 
shin, and Sarasvati : A 

With Asikni, Vitasta, 0 Marudviidha, 0 Arjikiyjk with Su 
shorn. i hear my call. 

6 First with Trishtama thou art eager to flow forth, with Rasa, 
and Susartu, and with Svetya here, 

With Kubh& ; and with these, Sindhu! ar^l Mehatnu, thou 
seekest in thy course Krumu and Gomat?. 

1 0 ye Waters : apparently the Rivera are addressed as representing all the 
divine Waters. Vivasvdns place : where the singers stand when th«y sing 
hymns. 7’riply , seven and seven : twenty-one rivers ; two other sets of seven 
each being added to the seven chief rivers of the Panj&b. SAyapa explains 
differently: — ‘ they flowed by sevens through the three (worlds),’— Wilson. 
1 Each set of seven [streams] has followed a threefold course.’ — Muir. By 
seven and seven iu three courses.’ — M. Muller. 

5 The poet addresses first the most distant rivers. Oangd : the Ganges is 

mentioned, indirectly, in only one other verse of the Rigveda, and even A qf’ 
the word is said by some to be the name of a woman. See VI 45 > 

Yamund: the Jumna. S ttudri : the Sutlej or Satlaj. Parushnl : the K * ■ 
Sarasvati: see VI. 61. 2. Asikni: the ancient Acesines : the Vedic name 
the ChandrabhAgA, the present ChenAb. Vitastd: probably the Jhelum, 
Hydaspes of the ^Greeks. Marudvridhd : meaning, increased by the Mai u • 
not identified. Arjtktyd and Sushomd are said by YAska to be the Vip •» 
the Sindhu ; but this is not possible, and it is uncertain what river 
meant. 

6 Kubhd, Krumu , and Oomati have been mentioned in previous Boo ^ 
The other streams whose names oocur in this stanza are probably unl ' n P , 
affluents of the Indus. All that is known regarding the rivers naeni 10 
stanzas 5 and 6 may be found in Zimmer’s AltinUischet Leben , pp- 



THE JUG VEDA. 


m 


hymn 7«.] 

7 Flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, she moves 

along her ample volumes through the realms, 

Most active of the active, Sindhu unrestrained, like to a dap- 
pled mare, beautiful, fair to see. 

8 Rich in good steeds is Siudhu, rioh in cars and robes, rich in 

gold, nobly-fashioned, rich in ample wealth. 

B^st Silam&vati and young Ornavati invest themselves with 
raiment rich in store of sweets. 

9 Sindhu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by steeds, 

and with that car shall she win booty in this fight. 

So have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, of 
independent glory, roaring as it runs. 

HYMN LXXVL Press-stones. 

I grasp at you when power and strength begin to dawn : 

bedew ye, Indra and the Maruts, Heaven and Earth, 

That Day and Night, in every hall of sacrifice, may wait on us 
and bless us when they first spring forth. 

2 Press the libation out, m >st excellent of all : the Pressing- 

stone is grasped like a hand-guided steed. 

So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and the fleet 
courser’s might that speeds to ample wealth. 

3 Juice that this Stone pours out removes defect of ours, as in 

old time it brought prosperity to man. 

1 In her mightiness : in the preceding stanzas Sindhu appears to be a River- 
God, but in this and following verses the epithets are feminine. 

8 Stlamdvatt and ftrn tvati appear to be names of rivers. According to 
S&yana, the words are epithets of Siudhu and mean respectively ‘ abounding 
hSllanui plants,’ said to be used for cordage, and ‘rich in wool.’ The 
meaning of the second half of the second line is uncertain : — ‘ wears [as only 
one river is supposed to be the subject] honey-growing (flowers).’ — Wilson. 

9 In this fight: the hymn may, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, be a prayer 
for aid in a battle that is to be fought on the banks of the Sindhu or Indus. 
The hymn has been transliterated and translated by Dr. J Muir, 0. S. Texts , 
V - 343—345, and a version of st. uzas 1 — 8 is given by Prof. Zimmer, Altindis- 
. Itben, p. 4. A complete translation, with full explanatory notes, is given 

10 Max Mailer’s India , What can it Teach us pp. 164—168. 

1 1 grasp at you: 'I propitiate you ’ — Wilson. Power and strength: the 
orn *] 1 8 beams which bring new vigour. Day and Night : or, ‘ both day-halves.* 
^ J 0 man •' or > 10 Manu. Tvasktar’s milk-blent juice : the Soma juice brewed 
y ivashtar for the year, which represents the life-sustaining power of Nature. 
diff U B^ht with the hue of steeds : tawny-coloured. SAyaua interprets 

^erently ‘when the son of Twashtri, hidden by the (stoleu) cows, and 
T v !T n S the of a horse, (was to be 'slain).’— Wilson. Trisiras the son of 

r r was regarded as an euemy of the Clods. Indra slew him and took 
P°^esB, on of the Soma> 



492 THE HYMNS OF [SO OK X, 

At sacrifices they established holy rites on Tvash tar’s milk, 
blent juice bright with the hue of steeds. 

4 Drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us: keep 

Nirriti afar and banish penury. 

Pour 1 iches forth for us with troops of hero sons, and bear ye 
up, 0 Stones, the song that visits Gods, 

5 To you who are more mighty than the heavens themselves, 

who, finishing your task with more than Vihhvan’s speed, 
More rapidly than Vayu seize the Soma juice, better than 
Agni give us food, to you I sing. 

6 Stirred be the glorious Stones: let it press out the juice, the 

Stone with heavenly song that reaches up to heaven, 
There where the men diaw fortji the rneath for which they 
long, sending their voice around in rivalry of speed. 

7 The Stones press out the Soma, swift as car-borne men, and, 

eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap thereof. 

To fill the beaker, they exhaust the udder’s store, as the men 
purify oblations with their lips. 

8 Yc, present men, have been most skilful in your work, even 

ye, 0 Stones who pressed Soma for lndra’s drink. 

May all ye have of fair go to the Heavenly Race, and all your 
treasure to the earthly worshipper. 

HYMN LXXVII. Manila. 

As with their voice fiom cloud they sprinkle (Measure so are the 
wise man’s liberal sacrifices. 

I praise their Company that merits worship as the good Maruts’ 
priest to pay them honour. 


4 Nirriti: the Goddess of Death and Destruction. 

5 Vibhvan: one of the three Ribhus. Vdyu: or, the wind. 

6 The men : meaning the press-stones. Cf. stanza 8. 

7 The udder's store : the juice contained in the milky Soma- plant. With 
their lips : with the praises that they utter. 

8 Worshipper : SAyana explains sunvaM by ynjamdnaya, to the Yajamina 
or sacrifioer. The more literal translation would be ‘ to the presser,’ the nian 
who pi esses out or effuses the Soma juice. 


1 This stanza is obscure. According to SAyana. vijdntishafy (the wise men «) 
is formed from jan, to generate, and not from jhd, to know : — ‘ they are tn« 
generators (of the world) like sacrifices abounding in libations.’ — Wil*o D > * t 
pood Maruts ’ priest : either the band of the Maruts themselves regarded m* 
Brahman, or a human priest specially skilled in propitiating them, Pr 0 *' ' 
Muller translates differently. Uymnt t I. p. 412, 



THE RIG VEDA. 


493 


HYMN 77.] 

2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through 

many nights, — this noble band of Maruts. 

Like stags the Sons of Dyaus have striven onward, the Sons 
of Aditi grown strong like pillars. 

3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own 

mass, as from the cloud spreads Surya ; 

Like mighty Heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly gallants 
who destroy the wicked. 

4 When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the earth is 

loosened, as it were, and shaken. 

This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : come all united, 
fraught, as ’twere, with viands. 

5 Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, luminous with 

your beams, with splendour as at dawn ; 

Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked mon, like hover- 
ing birds urged forward, scattering rain around. 

6 When ye come forth, 0 Maruts, from the distance, from the 

great treasury of rich possessions, 

Knowing, 0 Vasus, boons that should be granted, even from 
afar drive back the men who hate us. 

7 He who, engaged in the rite’s final duty, brings, as a man, 

oblation to the Maruts, 

Wins him life’s wealthy fulness, blest with heroes : he shall 
be present, too, where Gods drink Soma. 

8 For these are helps adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune 

by their name Adityas. 

Speeding on cars let them protect our praises, delighting iu 
our sacrifice and worship. 


2 This noble band of Maruts : Prof. Ludwig suggests that svrmlrutam 
means hero a festival held in honour of the Maruts at the end of the periodi- 
cal rains, and that, after many nights, the Maruts adorn themselves for this. 
Pillars . I follow Ludwig ; but I be meaning of ah' ft h is uncertain. Geldner 
taken it to mean ‘ horses,' a parallelism to stags, or autelopes. S&yana ma es 
mi, like, negative, and explains akrfth by dfcramana$d<1h : — the swif -goiug 
sons of Aditi do not increase in glory,’ — Wilson. 

4 This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : ‘ this manifold sacrifice cornea 
towards you.’ — Wilson. 

7 In the rite's final duty : Sftyana explains udrlchi yajHe by yajrle 
\ sampUrne sati . when the sacrifice has its praise peifected, when t 
j jacufice ie complete. As a man: according to Ludwig, ‘ no ,on £ er * . • * 

1 ^at U, not in hie human character but having b ^™ e _ dm “ e A £the 
the Gods drink Soma: he, a God himself, Bhall be admitted to the 
Gods’ — 


society. 



404 


THE HYMNS OF 


C book X, 


HYMN LXXVIII. Marnt,. 

Yb by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, skilful, 
inviting Gods w ith sacrifices ; 

Fair to behold, like Kings, with bright adornment, like spot- 
less gallants, leaders of the people : 

2 Like fire with flashing flame, breast-bound with chains of gold, 

like tempest-blasts, self-moving, svs ift to lend your aid; 

As best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, likeSomas, good 
to guard the man who follows Law. 

3 Shakers of all, like gales of wind they travel, like tongues ol 

burning fires in their effulgence. 

Mighty are they as Warriors clad in armour, and, like the 
Fathers’ piayeis, Most Bounteous Givers. 

4 Like spokes of car-wheels in one nave united, ever victorioui 

like heavenly Heroes, 

Shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors, they raise 
their voice and chant their psalm as singers. 

5 They who are fleet to travel like the noblest steeds, long tc 

obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers, 

Like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods, like 
omniform Angirases with S&nia-hymns. 

6 Bom from the stream, like preBS-stones are the Princes, foi 

ever like the stones that crush in pieces ; 

Sons of a beauteous Dame, like playful children, like a grea 
host upon the march with splendour. 6- 

7 Like ra\s of Dawn, the visitors of sacrifice, they shine witl 

ornaments as eager to be bright. 

Like rivers hasting on, glittering with their spears, from fa 
away they measure out the distances. 

8 Gods, send us happiness and make us wealthy, letting us sine 

ers prosper, 0 y e Maruts. 

Bethink you of our praise and of our friendship: ye from of ol 
have riches to vouchsafe us. 


HYMN LXXIX. ^ 

I have behold the might of this Great Being, Immortal in th 
midst of tribes of mortals. 

His jaws now opeu and now shut together : much they ae 
insatiately chewing. * ^ 

4 Shedding their precious halm : pouring out the fertilizing rain as liberal 

M young wooers give presents. . Ahl . the Indt 

6 Born from the stream : from the sea of air, or from Bin ’ 

7 They measure out the distances: ‘have traversed league*. 

‘They measure many miles/ — M. Miiller. 



TUB RIG VEDA. 


495 


ffYjftf 80.] 

2 His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden : unsated with 

his tongue he eats tlie fuel. 

With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses, for him 
they quickly bring his food together. 

3 Seeking, as ’twere, his Mother’s secret bosom, he, like a child, 

creeps on through wide spread bushes. 

One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing 
deep within the earth’s recesses. 

4 Tins holy Law I tell you, Karth and Heaven : the Infant at 

his birth devours his Parents. 

No knowledge of the God have I, a mortal. Yea, Agni know- 
eth best, for he hath wisdom. 

5 This man who quickly gives him food, who offers his gifts of 

oil and butter and supports him, — 

Him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on : thou showest 
him thy face from all sides, Agni. 

6 Agni, hast thou committed sin or treason among the Godst In 

ignorance I ask thee. 

Playing, not playimr, hegold-hued and toothless, hath cut his 
food up as the knife a victim. 

7 He, born in wood hath yoked his horses rushing in all direc- 

tions, held with reins that glitter. 

The well-born friend hath carved his food with Vasus: in all 
his limbs he hath increased and prospered. 

HYMN LXXX. Agni. 

Aqni bestows the fleet prize-winning courser; Agni, the hero 
famed and firm in duty. 

Agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven, and fills the 
fruitful dame who teems with heroes. 


2 His eye s : according to S&yana, the eyes of Agni are the distant Sun and 
Moon, aud his head is hidden in mens’ stomachs, in the shape of the heat 
which enables them to digest their food. His food : the sticks for fuel, which 
&re bound up into fagots. 

3 This stanza is very obscure. Agni, born from the wood of the fire-sticks, 
weins, as he creeps through the brushwood that he is burning, to seek 
Entrance again into his mother’s side. He then fmdB an old dry tree or log, 

diich had been deeply rooted in the earth, and feeds ou it as on food that 
li *8 been specially prepared for him. 

4 His Parents > the two fire-sticks from which he has been produoed. 

6 Hast thou committed sin t : Art thou as voracious and destructive in 
ie <wtn as th<»u art on earth ? Playing , not playing : playing about the fuel, 
U 5 Earnestly intent on devouiing his food. * Sporting (here), not sporting 
‘ 7 *' '“Wilson. A victim : p dm : ox or cow. 

* Jhe well-born Pnend : Agni. In all his limbs : parvabhih : * with logs of 
Wood , — . \v ilsota . 2 3 4 * 6 



2 Blest be the wood that feeds the active Agni : within the two 

great worlds hath Agni entered. * j 

Agni impels a single man to battle, and with him rends in 
pieces many a foeman. 

3 Agni rejoiced the ear of him who praised him, and from the 

waters burnt away Jarutha. 

Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavern, and made Nrimedha rich 
with troops of children. 

4 Agni hath granted woaUh that decks the hero, and sent the 

sage who wins a thousand cattle. 

Agni hath made oblations rise to heaven : to every place are 
Agni’s laws extended. 

5 With songs of praise the Rishis call on Agni ; on Agni, heroes 

worsted in the foray. 

Birds flying in the region call on Agni : around a thousand 
cattle Agni wanders. 

6 Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who have spruit 

from Naims’ line adore him. 

Stablished in holy oil is Agni’s pasture, on the Gandharva 
path of Law and Order. 

7 The Ribhus fabricated prayer for Agni, and we with mighty 

hymns h;ive called on Agni. 

Agni, Mist Youthful God, protect the singer : win us by wor- 
ship, Agni, great possessions. 

HYMN LX XX I. Viavakarman 

He who site down as Ilotar-priest, the H*shi, our Father, 
offering up all things existing. — 

He, seeking through his wish a great possession, came among 
men on earth as archetypal. 

3 Jar&tha : see VII 1. 7, and 9 6. Atri: his deliverance is ascribed tr 
the Aavins in I 112 7, Ud 8, 117. 3 and 118. 7. 

5 Around a thousand cattle : in the fires lighted to keep off wild beast* 
and demon* of darkness. 

6 Gandharva path : sublime ; that which the G-mdharvas in heaven 
to travel. 

7 The Ribhus : or Rishis skilful as the Ribhus. 

Visvakarman, the Omnific, is represented in this hymn as the univero 
Father and Generator, the Creator of all things and Architect of the woilds 

1 Ali things existing : regarded as being contained in the offerings pre^entei 
by Viavakarman. Through hi* wish: through his desire to create. Arche ^ 
pal : the meaning of prothnmachhdd is uncertain. In Wilson's Tr’ansm'^^ 1 
‘inventor’ is a misprint for ‘investor,’ that is, ‘first investing Agni with 
worlds,’ accoiding to SAyana s explanation. ‘First appearing.’— bud' » 

‘ The first worshipper.’— -Wallis. 



THE BIG VEDA. 


497 


0} (N 81 -1 

2 What was the place whereon he took his station ? What was 

it that supported him? How was it? 

Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, with 
mighty power disclosed the heavens. 

3 He who hath eyes on all sides round about him, a mouth on 

all sides, arms and feet on all sides, 

He, the Sole God, producing earth and heaven, weldeth them, 
with his arms as wings, together. 

4 What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which 

they fashioned out the earth and heaven ? 

Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit whereon he stood 
when he established all things. 

5 Thine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid- 

most here, 0 Visvakarman, 

Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, 0 Bless 6 d, and come thy- 
self, exalted, to our worship. 

6 Bring thou thyself, exalted with oblation, 0 Visvakarman, 

Earth and Heaven to worship. 

Let other men around us live in folly : here let us have a rich 
! and liberal patron. 

7 Let us invoke to day, to aid our labour, the Lord of Speech, 

the thought-swift Visvakarman. 

May he hear kindly all our invocations who gives all bliss for 
aid, whose works are righteous. 

3 Weldeth them: cp. IV. 2. 17, and X. 72. 2. With his arms as wings : 
lanniug the flame in which the matter is smelted. Ludwig thinks that 
whirlwinds, produced by the action of hands, feet, and wings, are intended. 

4 The first half-line occurs also in X. 31. 7. They: the makers of the 
world directed by Paramesvara — Sfiyana. 

5 Or the first half -line may be rendered ‘ Thy sacrificial forms, the 
highest, lowest ’ Come thyself , exalted, to our worship: 1 exhilarated, thyself 
offer up thyself.’— Muir. ‘ Do thou sacrifice to thyself delighting thyself.’ - 
Wallis. ‘According to Mahidhara the moaning is that man is incompetent 
to worship the creator, that is, in his forms, and it must be done by 
himself; -Wilson. I have adopted Prof. Ludwig’s explanation of the last clause. 

6 Briny to worship : or, sacrifice to Heaven and Earth. 

7 Oar labour: the arduous work of sacrificing. ‘In our conflict ’—Muir. 
The hymn has been translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts , IV. pp. 6, 7, by 
Mr. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 81—83, and, partly, by Prof. F. 
Max Muller in his Hibbert Lectu, es , p. 293f. 

See also Mme. Zdnaide Ragozin, Vedic India, pp. 263, 416. 



m 


THE HYMXS OF 


IBOOK X 


HYMN LXXXII. Vi ? vabrman 

The Father of the eye, the Wise in spirit, created both the^ 
worlds submerged in fatness. 

Then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened, the heaven 
aud the earth wete far extended. 

2 Mighty in mind and power is Visv.ikarman, Maker, Disposer 

and most lofty Presence. 

Their offerings joy in rich juico where they value One, onl; 
One, beyond the Seven Rishis. 

3 Father who mide us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth all race 

and all things existing, 

Even he alone, the Deities’ name-giver,— him other being 
seek for information. 

4 To him in sacrifice they offered treasures, — Rishis of old, n 

numerous troops, as singers, 

AY ho, in the distant, near, and lower region, made ready al 
these things that have existence. 

5 That which is earlier than this earth and heaven, before thi 

Asuras and Go Is had being, — 

AY hat was the germ primeval which the waters received when 
all the Gods were seen together'? 

6 The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein tin 

Gods were gathered all together. 

It rested set upon the Unbirn’s navel, that One wherein abut 
all things existing. 

7 Ye will not find him who produced these creatures: anothc 

thing hath risen up among )oa. 

En wrapt in rnKty cloud, with lips that stammer, hymi 
chanters wander and are discontented. 


1 The Father of the eye : Visvakarinau, who made the light which enabh 

the eve to see. Sagged U fames,: Sftyans explain, ghplam here b 
‘watei ‘engendered the water, (and theu) these two (heaven and eartb 
floating (on the waters).’— Wilson. , , . , . i e 

2 Mod lofty Presence: literally, the h.ghoat apparition ; the highest nn»6 

or object of spiritual contemplation. Their offering, : the offering, , or I 
l,a[M the wishes, of the Fathers, semi-person, fled. The ^ 

constellation Ursa Major, the seven stare of which are the ‘ tb 

Atri Aneiras Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and VaBishtha. The meaning is 

’enjoy tho. fulfilment of all their desire* beyond 
starry heavens where the One Being, the great Creator, dwe a. ge>( 

3 For information : to learn who is the bupieme God , or 

ral functions are. . Upavenlv. tb 

4 Distant, near . and loioer region : meaning, apparently, the heaie j» 

earthly, and the intermediate atmosphere vi« ft karman. S« 

6 The Unborn, Aia, seems here to be identified with Vifeva 


P*itc India , pp. 423, 424. 

7 Another thing : meaning, according to the Commentator, 


Visvakarma 



f tHX 83.] 


THE RIQVEDA. 
HYMN LXXXIII. 


499 


Manyu. 


gK who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt, breeds 
for himself forthwith all cotiqueiing energy. 

Irya and D&sa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the 
Conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped. 


2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the God was Manyu, Manyu was 
Hotar, Varuna, J&ta vedas. 

Tie tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accordant with 
thy fervour, Manyu, guard us. 


3 Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty ; chase, with 
thy feivour for ally, our foemen. 

Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou to us all 
kinds of wealth and treasure. 


4 For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, queller of 

the foe, and self-existent, 

Shared by all men, victorious, subduer : vouchsafe to us 
supeiior strength m buttles. 

5 I have departed, still without a portion, wise God ! according 

to thy will, the Mighty. 

I, feeble man, was wioth with thee, 0 Manyu : I am myself; 
come thou to give me vigour. 

6 Come hither, I am all thine own ; advancing turn thou to 

me, Victorious, All-suppoiter ! 


a a different entity from you wlio are sentient beings, who have individual 
xmsciousness, and so foith*— See Editor’s note in WiKou’s transition. 
Siyaua ‘gives the geueial sense of the la«t clause [of the stanza] as “You 
ire merely anxious fur enjoytneut in this world and in the next, therefore 
(Ton kuow nothing of Vifnakarman.” taking ukthuslsah as implying singing 
hymns with a view to gaming felicity in a future state Malildhara has a 
similar explanation : “you who ate engaged in the enjoyments of this world 
or the next, being subject to false knowledge or ignorance, Lave no knowledge 
of the Truth.” ’—Wilson. 

With legal d to this and the preceding hymn Mr. Wallis observes that 
they make no attempt to explain in what way the process of saciifice could 
bj regarded as an act of creation. We are told little more thau that Visva*. 
kirman was a primeval sacrifice)' and al&o a creator ; we huve no hint how to 
combine the two ideas into a harmonious unity. See Cosmology of the Rigveda, 
pp. 83, 84, and Muir, 0. S Texts, IV. 7, 8, where the hymn is tianslated aud 
some of ita difficulties are discussed. Prof Ludwig’s Commentary is especi- 
a v full and valuable, and should be consulted by all students of the Veda. 

\ ’* ^nger, Passion, personified. 

Wif/i thy fervour : tdpasd : tdpas means * heat/ 4 burning,’ and, secondly, 
rigorous abstraction. • 

, & Without a portion: without a share in thy favours. I am myself : I *m 
'jpwhat I am ; a weak mortal, for whose infirmity allowance should be made, 
eiQ g (incorporated with) my body, approach me.’— Wilsou. 


500 


THE HYMNS OF 


Wok x, 

Come to me, Manyu, Wielder of the Thunder : bethink thee oj 
thy friend, and slay the Dasyus. 

7 Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station : so shall w< 
slay a multitude of foemen. 

The best of meath I offer to suppoit thee : may we be first t< 
. drink thereof in quiet. 

HYMN LXXXIY. Ma nyi 

Borne on with thee, 0 Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brav 
men, impetuous, bursting forward, 

March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointei 
arrows, sharpening their weapons. 

2 Flashing like fire, be thou, 0 conquering Manyu, invoked, ( 

Victor, as our aimy’a leader. 

Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions : show fort 
thy vigour, scatter those who hate us. 

3 0 Manyu, overcome thou our assailant : on ! breaking, slaj 

ing, crushing down the foemen. 

They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour : Might] 
Solo born ! thou makest them thy subjects. 

4 Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu : sharpen th 

spirit of each clan for battle. 

With thee to aid, 0 thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift th 
glorious shout for conquest. 

5 Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, 6 Manyu, be tho 

here our Sovran Ruler. 

To thy dear name, 0 Victor, wo sing praises : we know tl 
spriug from which thou art come hither. 

6 Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highe 

conquering might is thine, Subduer ! 

Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu, 0 Much-invoked, i 
shock of mighty battle. 

7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth of bo! 

sides gathered and collected ; 

And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed wi 
terror, slink away defeated. 

1 Like flames of fire inform: agnirUpdh- Homer’s Si flag nvpog alifoptvoi 
3 Sole born : ‘ 0 thou who art without companion — Wilson. 

5 The spring : the source. _„: 7ur0 

7 For spoil : the preservation of their own property and tne b 
their enemies’ goods being regarded as a double conquest, ur 
ubhdyam may mean wealth of both kinds, horses and cows. orifices 

This hymn and the preceding are to be lepeated, S&yaya says, atsa 
ensure the destruction of enemies. 



S YMN 85.] the MQVEDA. 501 

HYMN LXXXV. Sfiryft’s Bridal. 

Truth is the base that bears the earth ; by S&rya are the heav- 
ens sustained. 

By Law the Adityas stand secure, and Soma holds his place in 
heaven. 

2 By Joma are the Adityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth. 
Thus Soma in tho midst of all these constellations hath his place. 

3 One thinks, when they have brayed the plant, that he hath 

drunk the Soma’s juice ; 

Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma no one ever tastes. 

4 Soma, secured by sheltering rules, guarded by hymns inBrihati, 
Tbou standost listening to the stones : none tastes of thee who 

dwells on earth. 

5 When they begin to drink thee, then, 0 God, thou swellest out 

again. 

Vayu is Soma’s guardian God. The Moon is that which shapes 
tho years. 

6 Raibhi was her dear bridal friend, and Narasansi led her home. 
Lovely was Sftrya’s robe : she came to that which G&tha, had 

adorned. 

7 Thought was the pillow of her couch, sight was the unguent 

for her eyes : 

Her treasury was earth and heaven when Surya went unto 
her Lord. 


The main sublet of this composite hymn, which is one of the latest in the 
tigveda, is the ceremony of marriage in general and more especially the wed* 
mg of StiryA, the Daughter of the Sun, another form of Dawn, who is re- 
dded as the typical bride. 

1 Truth : or reality ; sdlyam, used interchangeably with rltam , the Law 
nd Order of the universe. 

2 By Soma ; by the power of the deified Soma whoso influence pervades, 
[uickens, and supports all existence. In the second line Soma is the Moon, 

pei haps there is an allusion to the other sense also of the word. These 
'ontfellatiom : the nakshatras or lunar mansions. ‘In the centre of these 
itara.’ — Muir. 

3 Know as Soma : know to be the Moon, regarded as the food of Gods only. 
* By hymns in Brihatt ; that is by hymns in that metre. But the meaning 
bhhataih is uncertain. According to SAyana, the BArhatas are the seven 

Suaidians of the Soma, SvAna, BhrAja, AnghA ri, aud otheis. 

5 They: the Gods. Thee: the ambrosia contained in thee, which the 
bods drink during the waning of the Moou. 0 Qod : Soma, the Moom 
^ Soma is the deity of tho preceding five stanzas. SuryA’s Bridal i6 the 
subject of 6—17. Raibhi, Ndrdfansi, aud Qdthd are ritual verse, eulogistic 
an d non*Vedic song personified. 

. ' Treasury • hdfafx : meaning, probably, trousseau or bridal outfit. Accoru- 
in S th$ or body of the chariot is intended. 



502 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X, 

8 Hymns were the cross bars of the pole, Kurira-metre decked 

the car : 

The bridesmen were the Asvin Pair : Agni was leader of the 
train. 

9 Soma was he who wooed the maid : the groomsmen were both 

Asvins, when 

The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing SftryA on her Lord 

10 Her spirit was the bridal car ; the covering thereof wai 

heaven : 

Bright were both Stceis that drew it, when S&rya approaches 
her husband’s home. 

11 Tfry Steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse auc 

Sama hymn : 

All ear were thy two chariot wheels : thy path was tremuloui 
in the sky. 

12 Clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels; wind was the ash 

fastened there. 

Surya, proceeding to her Lord, mounted a spirit-fashioned car 

13 The bridal pomp of Surya, which Savitar started, movee 

along. 

In Mag ha days are oxen slain, in Arjunis they wed the bride 

14 When on your three-wheeled chariot, 0 Asvins, ye came a 

wooers unto Surya’s bridal, 

Then all the Gods agreed to your proposal: F&shan as So 1 
elected you as Fathers. 

15 0 ye Two Lords of lustre, then when ye to Surya’s wooing came 
Where was one chariot-wheel of yours? Where stood ye fo 

the Sire’s command ? 

8 Decked her car : formed its canopy. But the meaning of opotrih here i 
uncertain. 1 Kurira metre was the thong of the whip’ — Wilson. Th 
bridesmen : in I. 119. 7 and elsewheie the Asvins are said to be the husband 
of S&ryft. Here they are represented as the frieuds who had asked her i 
marriage for Soma. 

11 All ear : the text has srdtram, an ear, which SAyana says, means srotri 
two ears. ‘The two wheels were thy e;irs ' — Wilson 

13 In Maghd days : or in stricter accordance with the text, ‘ In AghA days 
when the Moon is iu the lunar mansion MaghA See Jacobi, Festgruss an 1 
von Roth, p. 69, and Weber, Vedische Btitrdge, p 32 f. Slain : only o 
especially festive occasions, weddings for instance ‘Are whipped along - 
Wilson. In Arjunts : two asterisms or lunar mansions, more commonly calie 
Phalgunis. They wed the bride • she is escorted to her husband’s home. 

14 As wooers: on behalf of Soma. Pdshan : here meaning Savitar. 

and Fathers: intended to express close relationship and Savitar ’s obhgft 10 
to the Asvins who had arranged the marriage. # , . 

15 For the Sire's command : to receive Savitar* s invitation to take patt i 
the bridal procession. According to SAyana, ‘ to offer your gift.’ 



THE RIQVEDA. 


503 


*f|%V 85.] 

6 The Brahmans, by their seasons, know, 0 Sury&, those two 

wheels of thine : 

One, kept concealed, those only who are skilled in highest 
truths have learned. 

7 To Surya and the Deities, to Mitra and to Varnna, 

Who know aright the thing that i^, this adoration have I paid. 

$ By their own power these Twain in close succession move ; 

They go as playing children round the sacrifice. 

One of the Pair beholdeth all existing things ; the other 
ordereth seasons and is born again. 

[9 He, born afresh, is new and new for ever: ensign of days be 
goes before the Mornings. 

Coming, he orders for the Gods their portion. The Moon pro* 
longs the days of our existence. 

M Mount this, all-shaped, gold hued, with stiong wheels, fash- 
ioned of Kinauka and S.tlmali, light-rolling, 

Bound for the world of life immortal, Surya : make for thy lord 
a happy bridal journey. 

21 Riso up from hence : this m ddcn hath a husband. I laud 

Visvavasu with hymns and homage. 

Seek in her father’s homo another fair one, and find the 
portion from of old assigned thee. 

22 Rise up from hence, Visvavasu : with reverence we worship thee. 
Seek thou another willing maid, and with her husband leave 

the bride. 

23 Straight in direction be the pa‘hs, and thornless, whereon 

our fellows travel to the wooing. 

Let Aryamati and Bhaga lead us : perfect, 0 Gods, the union 
of the wife and husband. 


13 The two wheels are probably heaven and earth, and the thiid, one lept 
cwcealed, is the mysterious invbible world beyond them. 

18 In this stanza and the following one, which arc but loosely connected 
; with the rest of the hymn, Surya represents the Sun, and Soma is the j>Iaon. 

| 20 Stanzas 20—33 contain a collection of formula repeated when the bride 
mounts her chariot, while she is tiavelling to her husband s house, when she 
Arrives there, and on the following nv-rniug. Thit, - eh. tr ot. Kintula • the 
*or»d of the Butea frondosa. Stimuli : the dlk cotton tree ; Salmaha mala- 
b trica. SHryd: the girl is addressed by the name of S try.1, the typical 
bride. 

21 Vwfousu: one of the Gandharvas, the protector of viigina. He is told 
to leave the bride who no lougm needs his care, and to transfer his guardian- 
to some marriageable maiden who has not yet found a husband. Fair 
0ne: vyhktdm : ‘decorated with ornaments.’ - Wilson 
P To the wooing : to the- father, to whom the intei e ders are to apply for 
111 daughter’s hand on behalf of their friend, according t<> £ Ay ana. 



504 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X 

2i Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, wherewith Mo* 
Blessed Savitar hath bound thee. 

Iu Law’s seat, to the world of virtuous action, I give thee tit 
uninjured with thy consort. 

25 Hence, and not thence, I send thee free. I make thee softh 

fettered there, 

That, Bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her fortuue anc 
her sons. 

26 Let Pushan take thy hand and hence conduct thee ; may th< 

two Asvins on their car transport thee. 

Go to the house to he the household’s mistress and speak as 
lady to thy gatheied people. 

27 Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here: be vigi 

lant to rule thy household in this home. 

Closely unite thy body with this man, thy lord. So shall ye 
full of years, address your company. 

28 Her hue is blue and red : the fiend who clingeth close is 

driven off. 

Well thrive the kinsmen of this brido : the husband is bound 
fast in bonds. 

29 Give thou the woollen robe away : deal treasure to the Brah 

man priests. 

This female fiend hath got her feet, and as a wife attend? 
her lord. * 

30 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this wicked fiend, 
What time the husband wraps about his limbs the g'armenl 

of his wife. 


24 The noose of Varuna : the girdle with which the bride is girded aftei 
she has been bathed, combed, and dressed for the marriage ceremony Se< 
Prof Max Muller’s Rigveda - San hit *1, Vol. VI, Preface, p 14. Or, as Lanmar 
suggests, the noose may mean the tie by which a girl is bound to her fathei 
till mairiage. Law's seat . the place of saciifice, the altar. 

Stanzas 24 —26 and 32, 33 are spoken just before the biide’s depaiturt 
from her father’s house. 

25 Hence and not thence : from thy father’s house and not from thy 
husband’s. 

27 Be vigilant to mile thy household: this is S&yana’s explanation. & 
watchful over the domestic hie.’ — Wilson. The verse is addressed to if 
bride, and to the newly- wedded pair on arrival at the bridegtoom’s house. 

28 Her hue : the colour of Kiity.1, Magic personified, a female deity & 
fiend. 

29 The woollen robe : ‘ the garment soiled by the body.’ — Wilson. Atfen J 
her lord: the magic, or evil spell, returns to its oiigiua tor. —Ludwig. 



TUB RIQVBDA. 


805 


n'.i/.v 85-1 

SI Consumptions, from her people, which follow the hide's re- 
splendent train, — 

These let the Holy Gods again bear to the place from which 
they came. 

J2 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wed- 
ded pair. 

By pleasant ways let them escape the danger, and let foes 
depart. 

Signs of good fortune mark the bride : come all of you and 
look at her. 

Wish her prosperity, and then return unto your homes again. 

J4 Pungent is this, and bitter this, filled, as it were, with arrow- 
barbs, Empoisoned and not fit for use. 

The Brahman who knows Suiya well deserves the garment of 
the bride. 

15 The fiinge, the cloth that decks her head, and then the triply 

parted robe, — 

Behold the hues which Surya wears : these doth the Brahman 
purify. 

16 I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou mayst 

reach old age with me thy husband. 

Bods, Anaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have given thee to 
be my household’s mistress. 

17 0 Pushnn, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the 

sharer of my pleasures ; 

Hor who shall twine her loving arms about me, and welcome all 
my love aud mine embraces. 

38 For thee, with bridal train, they, first, escorted Suiya to her 
home. 

Bive to the husband in return, Agni, the wife with progeny. 


her people : ‘ a most remarkable and direct assumption of “here- 
of as a lurking danger/ — Mmc. Zduaide ltagoziii, Vedic India, p. 371. 

?, er j la l >s spoken, on the way, to the spectators of the procession. 

Biklal US Lode’s garment. Sdnjd: meaning here the song of SftryA’a 

Prof wV neaning ^^ 8aiiavi i risosanam , and adhivikdrtanam is uncertain. 
*kirt ’ P * 6,0,1 ron< ^ era these words by ‘ border-cloth/ ‘ head-cloth,’ and ‘divided 
r ; ‘ 1() ^ Weber and the St. Petersburg Lexicon explain the passage as refer- 

fortl °f le .P re P ara tion of the carcass of the animal that has l et-n slaughtered 
'Tkel According to this view the first line might be rendered 

, Bering, the cutting up, the severing of limb and joint’ ; and for 
36 r r . ,0llnH ' In, fibt be substituted, 
m ° ^ l '^ e 8 rooin addt esses the bride. 
lfe •’ Agni. 1'hey : the Gaudhaiv&s, accoiding to SAyana. 



50(5 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK x 

3S Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and with 
ample life. 

Long-lived be he who is her lord ; a hundred autumns let hm 
live. 

40 Soma obtained her first of all ; next the Gandharva was hei 

lord. 

Agni was thy third husband : now one born of woman is thi 
fourth. 

41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave : 
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this nr 

spouse. 

42 Be ye not parted ; dwell ye here ; reach the full time of huraai 

life. 

With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing in you 
own abode. 

43 So may Prajapati bring children forth to us; may Aryama 

adorn us till old age come nigh. 

Not inauspicious enter thou thy husband’s house : bring bless 
ing to our bipeds and our quadrupeds. 

44 Not evil-eyed, no slayer of thy husband, bring weal to cattli 

radiant, gentle hearted ; 

Loving the Gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing t 
our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

45 0 Bounteous India, make this bride blest Hi her sons and fo 

t unate. . , 

Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband the elevent 


man. 

46 Over thy husband’s father and thy husband’s mother bear fu 

sway. . 

Over the sister of thy lord, over his brothers rule supreme. 

47 So may the Universal Gods, so may the Wateis join our heart 
May Matarisvan, Dhatar, and Dcshtri together bind us cios 


40 As the typical brute Si.rjft was first mairied to “^""rgi™ 

originally belong* to him, then to the Gandliat va, as g Ultirr iage cei 
then to Agni as the sacred fire .ound winch she walks m the uiair b 
inony, and fourthly to her human husband — Orassmann. b,« 

48 The formula! contained in stanzas 42-47 a.e '«P“ te< ™ e mth 6 
gn>om has returned with hi* biide to his home, and . exhorted a 

The wedded pair aie addressed first, and then the . j f 

blessed. Stanza 47 is spoken by the bridegroom for his wife and ^ ( 

47 DethtA: Instructress, a female deity, not mentioned ,, 

lligveda. 'According to SAyana, ddtrt phuldadm ,ara,vatt » mea 

bountiful (Saraswati).’— Wilson. . , ,i,- Hindis, derived b 

For a full account of the marriage ceremonies of the 



ri'j/y 


THE ft IQ VEDA, 


507 


HYMN LXXXVI. 


Indra. 


Men have abstained from pouring juice : they count not Indra 
as a God 

Where at the votary's store my friend Vrishakapi hath drunk 
his fill. Supreme is Indra over all. 

2 Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishakapi hath wrought; 
Yet nowhere else thou tindest place wherein to drink the Soma 

juice. Supreme is Indra over all. 

3 What hath he done to injure thoe, this tawny beast Vrishakapi, 
With whom thou art so nngiy now ? What is the votary’s food- 
ful store? Supreme is Indra over all. 

4 Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him and bite 

him in the ear, 

0 Indra, that Vrishakapi whom thou protectest as a fiiend. 
Supreme is Indra over all. 


5 Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly wrought, 

that were my joy. 

In pieces will I rend his head ; the sinner’s portion shall be 
woe. Supreme iB Indra over all. 

6 No Dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater wealth of 

love’s delights. 

None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her loid’s em- 
brace. Supreme is Indra over all. 


be ritual of Brahmans who use the SAina-veda, see Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous 
wap, No. Ill , and Weber and Haas, Ivdigcke Studien, V. pp, 177 ft*. See 
Iso Hymns of the Atharva-vcda, Book XIV., and Dr. J. Ehni’s paper, Zeits- 
wft der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Qescllschaft, XXXIII. pp. 166 ft' I 
iave relied mainly on Ludwig’s Commentary. Pi of. Grassmauu has banished 
he hymn to his Appendix. 

1 SAyana ascribes this stanza to Indra ; otheis make Indian! the speaker. 
pshAkapi is said to have monopolized the offeiings that should have been 
resented to Indra. Vrishd.capi— literally ‘ the stiong ape,’ or ‘ the male ape’ 
-appears to be a sort of intermediate being between a demigod and a demon ; 
M it is not easy to determine his nature S Ay ana calls him the son of Indra. 

. 16 said to be the setting sun, and the sun who diaws up vapour and 
n igatea with mist. According to M. Bergaigue, La Religion Vtdique, II. 270, 
6 *js a mythical saerifleer. 

»dWtnf blames Indra for his apathy. 

riat' ^ B P ea ^ 8, What is the votary's food fnl store i ; why should his appto* 

4 I a ^. e wors hipp®v , s offerings make thee so angry ? 

5 V,? is the speaker of this stanza and of the two, or three, that follow, 
fliu th^’ ‘‘ a P e > Bn abbreviation of VrishAkapi. Hath maned the heuu- 
Vui m ^ 8 ! , RCCOI 'ding to S&ya a, bath sp-dled the oblations piepared foi me 
1 Ind !°! fclli PP erR « But it seejns more probable that VrisbAkapi lias assault- 
g j ? ' an d inflicted injuries on her person. 

ibi t l • 8 P cak 8 with pride of her voluptuous charms which incited VribhA- 
1)1 amoiouB assault. 



508 


THE HYMXS OP 


l&OOR x, 

7 Mother whose love is quickly won, I say what verily will bo, 
My breast, 0 Mother, and my head and both my hips seen 

quivering. Supreme is Indra over all. 

8 Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad hair-plait 

add ample hips, 

Why, 0 thou Hero’s wife, art thou angry with our Vrishakapi 
Supreme is Indra over all. 

9 This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of hero’s love 
Yet Heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts’ Friend and Indra’ 

Queen. Supreme is Indra over all. 

10 From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice 
Mother of Heroes, Indra’s Queen, the rite’s ordainer is extolled 

Supreme is Indra over all. 

11 So have I heard Indrant called most fortunate among these Dames 

For never shall her Consoit die in future time through lengt 
of days. Supreme is Indra over all. 

12 Never, Inchani, have I joyed without my friend Vribhakapi, 
Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth t 

the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all. 

13 Wealthy Vpshakap&yi, blest with sons and consorts of thy son. 5 
Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effecteth much 

Supreme is Indra overall. 

14 Fifteen in number, then, for mo a score of bullocks they prepare 
And I devour the fat thereof : they fill my nelly full with foot 

Supreme is Indra over all. 

15 Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing amid the herds 
Sweet to thine heart, 0 Indra, is the brow which she 'vh< 

tends thee pours. Supremo is Indra over all. 

7 This stanza is ascribed by SAyana to VrisbAkapi. It is hardly intelligible 
but, as Ludwig says, it seems to be spoken by IndiAni, expressing her in ign 
tion at VrishAknpi’s audacity which makes all her body quiver with rage. 

8 Iudra speaks. , . . i 

9 Indr Ant speaks this and the following stanza. Bereft of hero 8 love. 

has no brave husband to protect her. _ . ^ 

10 The matron goes to feast: IndrAnt means that VrisbAkapi assau e ^ 
when she was on her way to a festival', which women were accustoine o • 
tend ; and that her rank as Indra’s consort did not preserve her from ms 

11 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. p Me r 

13 Spoken by Vrishftkapi to his wife V i iwhAkapA) i who is said to r P 
the dawn, or, by others, the gloaming which follows the setting snn vri 

14 Indra speaks. Fifteen: sacrificers ; probably YrishAkapi an 

and their sons and daughters-in-law. SAyana explains differently . 
worshippers dress for me fifteen (and) twenty bulls. —Wilson. • te8 

15 IndrAnt speaks, endeavouring to attract him to her own liba 

of the offerings of VrishAkapi. . j^ntEngli* 1 

I pass over stanzas 10 and 17, which I cannot translate into ae ^ 



THE MOVED A. 


509 


HYMN 86.] 

18 0 Indra this Vyish&kapi bath found a slain wild animal, 
Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load 

of wood. Supreme is Indra over all. 

19 Distinguishing the Dasa and the Arya, viewing all, I go. 

I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary*® Soma juice. 
Supreme is Indra over all. 

20 The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in 

length they spread ! 

Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, Vrishakapi. 
Supreme is Indra over all. 

21 Turn thee again Vrishakapi ; we twain will bring thee happiness. 
Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path winch leads 

to sleep. Supreme is India over all. 

22 When, Indra and Vrishakapi, ye travelled upward to your home, 
Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the beast 

that troubles man ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

23 Daughter of Mann, Parsu bare a score of children at a birth. 
Her portion verily was bliss although her burtheu caused her 

grief. 


18 I nd r A .i speaks, but her speech is difficult to understand. Wild ani- 
mal: vou Roth conjectures ‘wild ass’ as the meaning of parasvantam 
here Dresser: or slaughter-bench. ‘A fiie-pl.ice (to cook it).’ -Wilson. 
Indrani seems to speak depreciatingly of a sacuiice otfeied by Vtishftkapi as 
consisting of an unsuitable victim, prepared with instruments and means 
which chance has thrown in his way. Ludwig thinks that Vnsli&kapi may 
represent the Moon whose spots are fancifully cousideied to be the objects 
mentioned by Indrdnl. 

19 I look : with favour. The simple votary is the worshipper who offers his 
libation in a sincere spirit of devotion. The stanza and the two following 
a,e spoken by Indra. 

20 Viishdkapi appears to meditate flight into distant deserts to escape 
from the wrathful Indrdnt. Indra dissuades him, and promises to reconcile 
Indr.lnS to him. 

22 The two concluding stanzas seem to be spoken by Indr&ni. Stanza 22 is 
obscure, and stanza 23 has no disc verable connexion with the lost of the hymn. 

23 Daughter of Manu : that is, of the progenitor of men. Nothing more 
js known of Parsu, which means a rib Much of this hymn appears to be 
^explicable. M.‘ Bergaigne thinks that Vrishakapi, India’s f-riend, represents 
feoma - and Infant the wife of Indra represents Prayer. ‘ This bizarre mj th 
would symbolize the frequently expressed idea that Indra loves neither the 
^cred beverage without prayer nor prayer without the sacred beverage. He 
p lshes therefore his union with Prayer to be accompanied by the union of 

' a ' er w kh Soma, and he neglects sacrifice as long as this union of the two 
1 ^‘al elements of worship remains unaccomplished/ — See La Religion 
pVe, II 270,271. * 

‘ ( j f ' Geldner gives a different interpretation of the hymn, whieh he has 

f, V lte ^ an fl exhaustively discussed in Vrdincke Studicn, II. pp. 22-4-. 

80 Oldenberg, Religion da Veda , 172—174. 



510 


THE HYMNS OF 


[book x 


I1.YMN LXXXVII. Agai 

I balm with oil the mighty Rakshas-slayer j to the n l0s 
famous Friend I come for shelter. 

Enkindled, sharpened hy our rites, may Agni protect us h 
the day and night from evd. 

2 0 Jatavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flam 

attack the demons. 

Seize with thy tongue the foolish gods* adorers : rend, pu 
within thy mouth the raw-flesh eaters. 

3 Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who has 

both, enkindled and destroying. 

Roam also in the nir, 0 King, around us, and with th.y jaw 
assail the wicked spirits. 

4 Bending thy shafts through sacritices, Agni^whetting the 

points with song as if with whetstones, 

Pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudhanas, and break the 
arms uplifted to attack thee. 

5 Pierce through the Yatudhana’s skin, 0 Agni ; let the destro 

ing dart with lire consume him. 

Rend his joints, Jatavedas, let the eater of flesh, flesh-seekin 
track his mangled body. 

6 Where now thou seest Agni J&tavedas, one of these demo: 

standing still or roaming, 

Or flying on those paths in air's mid-regiotf, sharpen the shs 
and as an archer pierce him. 

7 Tear from the evil spirit, Jatavedas, what he hath seized a 

with his spears hath captured. 

Blazing before him strike him down, 0 Agni ; let spott 
camon-eating kites devour him. 

8 Here tell this forth, 0 Agni : whesoever is, he himself, or act< 

as, a demon, 

Him giasp, 0 thou Most Youthful, with thy fuel : to the Mi 
seer’s eye give him as booty. 

9 With keen glance guard the sacrifice, 0 Agni : thou Sa 

conduct it onward to the Vasus. 

Let not the fiends, 0 Man-beholder, harm thee burning agai 
the Rak'-hasas to slay them. 

'I The demons : Y&tudh&naa, explained by S&yana as = R&k e ha8a*. See 
104.15 Foolish gods' adorers: mitradevdn: according to S4y«P a > a e r 
class of evil spiiits called Mflnulevaa because they make destruction t ieir 
5 The eater of flesh : the wolf or other carnivorous animal. 

8 The Man-seer here is either Agni himself or Sfbya the Sun. 

9 To the Yams . to the Gods to whom the oblations are made, o 7 • 



Tin: RIO VEDA. 


511 


n'M .v 87 ] 

0 Look on the fieuil mid men, as Man-beholder: rend thou his 

three extremities in pieces. 

Demolish with thy flume his ribs, 0 Agni; the Y&tudiiana’s 
root destroy thou triply. 

1 Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who with his 

falsehood injures Holy Order. 

Loud roaring with thy flame, 0 Jatavedas, crush him and 
cast him down before the singer. 

[2 Lend thou the worshipper that eye, 0 Agni, wherewith thou 
lookest on the hoof-armed demon. 

With light celestial in Atharvan’s manner burn up the fool 
who ruins truth with falsehood. 

3 Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, what heated 
word the worshippers have spoken, 

Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit, — pierce to the 
heart therewith the Yatudhanas. 

I With fervent heat exterminate the demons ; destroy the fiends 

with burning flame, 0 Agni. 

Destroy with file the foolish gods’ adorers; blaze and destroy 
the insatiable monsters. 

5 May Cods destroy this day the evil-doer: may each hot curse 
of his return and blast him. 

Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva's net enclose 
the Yatudhana. 

16 The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, with flesh 
of horses and of human bodies, 

Who steals the nnloh-cow’s milk away, 0 Agni, — tear off the 
heads of such with fiery fury. 

7 The cow gives milk each year, 0 Man-regarder : let not the 
Yatudhana ever taste it. 

If one would glut him with the biestings, Agni, pierce with 
! thy flame his vitals as he meets thee. 

vasubhyaK here by vastinimarthdya : — ‘ to (the acquisition of) riches.’ — 
ilson. 

tO His three extremities : his three heads, according to S&yana. * Kopf 
k ‘. kchultern,’ head and shoulders. — Grassmann. Root : meaning hie feet. 

■ used vaguely, to correspond with the three upper extremities. 
°/T ^ ie f°°t of the Ydtndhan a.’— Wilson. 

II iwf-M'mcd : striking with the hoof. According to S&yapa, ‘having 
_ hoofs.’ In Atharvan’s manner : like Atharvau, the ancient priest 

^ ave been the first who obtained fire, 
sin ^ r ’ married pair ; perhaps the sacrificer and his wife. The 
( ^.P r ays that every hasty word that nuy have been uttered by pious people 
nia . v be used aa a weapon to wound the Y&tudhAaa. 

IJlCl 3 net : thr* nnnaa nf oll.narvftdint? Affni. 



512 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK j 


18 Let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle; may Aditi cas 

oft’ the evil-doers. 

May the God Savitar give them np to ruin, and bo their sliar 
of plants and herbs denied them. 

19 A<mi, from days of old thon slayest demons: never sha 

°Rfikshasas in fight o’ercome thee. 

Burn np the foolish one*, the flesh-devourers : let none of tliei 
escape thine heavenly arrow. 

20 Guard us, 0 Agni, from above and under, protect us froi 

behind us and before us ; . 

And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, glowii 
with fervent heat, consume the sinner. 

21 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, 0 Kinj 

protect us as a Sage with wisdom. . 

Guard to old age thy friend, 0 Friend, Eternal : 0 Agm, 
Immortal, guard us mortals. 

22 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sag 
Of hero lineage, day by day, destroyer of our treacherous foe 

23 Burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood 

Rakehasas, , ... 

0 Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with lances armed with pom 


of flame. A 

24 Burn thou the paired Kimidins, burn, Agni, the Yatudhanapai 
I sharpen thee, Infallible, with hymns. <7 Sage, be vigihui 

25 Shoot forth, 0 Agni, with thy flame : demolish them on every sii 
Break thou the Yatudhina’s strength, the vigour of the IU 


shasa. Ac 

IIYMN LXXXVUI. Af 

Dear, ageless sacrificial driuk is offered in light-discovcni 

heaven-pervading Agni. f 

The Gods spread forth through his Celestial Nature, 
might bear the world up and sustain it. 

2 The world was swallowed and concealed in darkness . c 
was born, and light became apparent. . 

The Deities, the broad earth, and tho heavens, a P 
and waters gloried in his friendship. - 

18 The poison of the cattle : if they /l. ink '(which is k 

According to S&yana, let them drink the poison f use d for extci 

in the house), meaning pei haps some poisonous oiutmen 

application only. , , , . . • Se e VII. 104. % not 

24 Kimidins : treacherous and malevolent spirits. » 

1 Sacrificial drink : ‘ swelling oblation/ according to Prof. r,8che1 ' ^ 



THE RIO VEDA. 


YMN 88 -] 


513 


Inspired by Gods who claim our adoration, I now will laud 
Eternal Lofty Agui, 

Him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre, this heaven, 
and both the worlds, and air’s mid-region. 

: Earliest Priest whom all the Gods accepted, and chose him, 
ami anointed him with butter, 

He sivifty made all things that fly, stand, travel, all that hath 
motion, Agni J&tavedas. 

, Because thou, Agni, Jata vedas, stoodest at the world’s head 
with thy refulgent splendour, 

We sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises : thou 
filledst heaven and earth, God meet for worship. 

i Head of the world is Agni in the night-time ; then, as the 
Sun, at morn spriugs up and rises. 

Then to his task goes the prompt Priest foreknowing the 
wondrous power of Gods who must be honoured. 

' Lovely is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath shone forth, 
seated in the heavens, refulgent. 

With resouant hymns all Gods who guard our bodies have 
offered up oblation in this Agni. 

1 First the Gods brought the hymnal into being; then they 
engendered Agni, then oblation. 

He was their sacrifice that guards our bodies : him the heav- 
ens kuow, the earth, the waters know him. 

I He, Agni, whom the Gods have generated, in whom they 
offered up all worlds and creatures, 

He with his bright glow heated earth and heaven, urging him- 
self right onward in his grandeur. 

) Then by the laud the Gods engendered Agni in heaven, who 
fills both worlds through strength and vigour. 

They made him to appear in threefold essence : he ripens 
plants of every form and nature. 

Mfe sent thee forth : the Rishi glorifies the power of the priests who 
Ue their messenger to the Gods. 

® ^?ni, who is the Moon by night, at dawn becomes Siirya or the Sun-God 
io when he sets again becomes Agni. 

* in Wor Ms and creatures : proleptically : meaning that the oblation 
-I’ea by the gods was destined to produce the universe. — Ludwig. Accord- 
L n ' y a ? a ;— ‘ in whom all beings have offered oblations but it is clear 
10 f oblationf » of the Gods are intended. 

* tren & 1 th and vigour: qiJctbhih: ‘by his functions Wilson, 
^rretiri/ Ce '* ° r * n t ^ iree conditions, or places, as the Sun, lightning, 

33 



514 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOR] 

1 1 What time the Gods, whose due is worship, set him as Stay- 

Son of Aditi, in heaven, ^ 

When the Pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, all create 
that existed looked upon them. 

12 For all the world of life the Gods made Agni Vaisvanara 

be the days’ bright Banner, — 

Him who hath spread abroad the radiant Mornings, and, coi 
mg with his light, unveils the darkness. 

13 The wise and holy Deities engendered Agni Vaisvanara who 

age ne’er touches, 

The Ancient Star that wanders on for ever, lofty and stroi 
Lord of the Living Being. 

14 We call upon the Sage with holy verses, Agni Vnisvauara t 

ever-beaming, 

Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatness 
is a God below, a God above us. 

15 I have heard mention of two several pathways, ways of i 

Fathers and of Gods and mortals. 

On those two paths each moving creature travels, each thi 
between the Father and the Mother. 

16 These two united paths bear him who journeys born from 

head and pondered with the spirit. 

He stands directed to all things existing, hasting, unrest 
in his fiery splendour. 

17 Which of us twain knows where they ^oeak together, up 

and lower of the two rite-leaders ? 

Our friends have helped to gather our assembly. They cf 
to sacrifice; who will announce it? 

18 How many are the Fires and Suns in number ? What is 

number of the Dawns and Wateis? 

Not jestingly I speak to you, 0 Fathers. Sages, I ask 
this for information. 


11 The Pair : tho Sun and Moon. Accruing to SAyana, Ushas and Sil 

13 Lord of the Living Being: the meaning of yaleshdsya ia uncer 
S&yana explains it by pdjyasya devasya, of the adorable Qod. ‘The obsi 
of what ia fum.' — Ludwig. ‘Tho lord of meteors.' — Grassmaun. ‘Sui 
lant du Yaksha.’— Bcrgaigue. 

14 Below: on earth. 

15 Two several pathways : the way to the other world and the way ha 

the earth. The Father and the Mother : heaven and earth. * 

1G Him who journeys : Agni. From, the head : of the world. From Ac 
the he~td or chief of all exintence, according to S&yana. , 

Il Us twain ; Agni and the Rishi. Upper and lower : according to 
the upper tire is VAyu aud the lower is terrestrial Agni. Who ww 
it * : Agni alone will make the sacrifice known to the Gods. 



WE RIO VEDA. 


515 


VtMir 39.1 

19 As great as is the fair-winged Morning's presence to him who 
dwells beside us, Matarisvan ! 

Is what the Brahman does when he approaches to sacrifice 
and sits below the Hotar. 

HYMN LXXXIX. India. 

I wmn extol the most heroic Indra who with his might forced 
earth aud sky asunder ; 

Who hath filled all with width as man's Upholder, surpassing 
floods and rivers in his greatness. 55 

2 Sirya is he : throughout the wide expanses shall Indra turn 

him, swift as car-wheels, hither, 

Like a stream resting not but ever active : he hath destroyed, 
with light, the black-hued darkness. 

3 To him I sing a holy prayer, incessant, new, matchless, common 

to the earth and heaven, 

Who marks, as they were backs, all living creatures : ne'er 
doth he fail a friend, the noble Indra. 

4 I will send forth my somrs in flow unceasing, like water from 

the ocean’s depth, to Indra 

Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth 
and heaven as with an axle. 

5 Rousing with droughts, the Shaker, rushing onward, im- 

petuous, very strong, armed as with arrows 
Is Soma; forest trees and all the bushes deceive not Indra 
with their offered likened* 


1? Morning's presence : the light of Dawn which spreads over heaven and 
eaith. Him who dwells bes^e us the Yajamftna, or iustitutor of the 
satin fice —Ludwig Belo°o the Hotar below the legular Hotar-priest. 
%ana explains this st» ,iza differently ‘ As long, M.ttamvan, as the swiftly- 
moving (uights) co»0«* the face of the dawn, (so long) the Brahman, the 
Nifeuor sitting down (to perform the work) of the llotri , approaching the 
sacrifice supports (the ceremony).' — Wilson. 

1 With width: with his own extended magnitude. ‘With radiance. 
Wilson 

2 Sthya is he: Indra is identified with the Sun whose course he directs. 
Wording to S4yana, s&ryah here •= suviryah, heroic. 

3 Incessant: or unerring* that is, in strict accordance with the rules of 
he ritual. As they were backs : as if they were horses or oxen, the length 
nid tihape of whose backs must be carefully considered in forming a judgment 

'Wr worth. 

5 Pi of. Wilson observes 'This verse is obscure, partly because the words 
1* u . DU8 nal, partly because there is a confusion between Indra and Soma.' 
biTir n0t fodra : he will not accept any substitutes : he will have nothing 
I 1 2 3 * 5 genuine Soma-plant and its juice. 



516 THE nYMNS OF [HOOK X. 

6 Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, the earth, 

the heavens, the firmament, the mountains, — 

When heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm 
and breaks the strong in pieces. 

7 As an axe fells the tree so he slew Vritra, brake down tin 

strongholds and dug out the rivers. 

He cleft the mountain like a new-made pitcher. Indra brouglr 
forth the kine with his Companions. 

8 Wise art thou, Punisher of guilt, 0 Indra The sword lops 

limbs, thou smitest down the sinner, 

The men who injure, as it were a comrade, the lofty Law of Ya 
runa and Mitra. 

9 Men who lead evil lives, who break agreements, and injun 

Varuna, Aryaman, and Mitra, — 

Against these foes, O Mighty Indra, sharpen, as furious death 
thy Bull of fiery colour. 

10 Indra is Sovran Lord of Earth and Heaven, Indra is Lord o 

waters and of mountains. 

Indra is Lord of prosperers and sages : Indra must be invoke( 
in rest and effort. 

11 Vaster than days and nights, Giver of increase, vaster tha 

firmament and flood of ocean, 

Vaster than bounds of earth and wind’s^extension, vasto 
than rivers and our lands is Tndra. 

12 Forward, as herald of refulgent Morning, let thine insatiat 

arrow fly, 0 Indra, 

And pierce, as ’twere a stone launched forth from heaven, wit 
hottest blaze the men who love deception. 

13 Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed, the talltrei 

followed and the plants and herbage. 

Yearning with love both Worlds approached, the Watois wai 
ed on Indra when he first had being. 

7 His Companions : the Maruts, who assisted him in performing his exploil 

8 Punisher of guilt : here Indra is said to discharge the duties whic 
more ancient hymns are ascribed to Agni and to Mitra and Varuna. ^ 

0 Thy Bull: thy thunderbolt. ‘The heavy strong red weapon. -J 
Muller. . 

10 In rest and effort : ‘for the acquirement and preservation of w 
Wilson. * , ij 

18 The moons: or, the months. Waited on Indra: as the ropresen 
of the Sun, the originator of all life.— Ludwig. 



THE niGVEDA, 


517 


HYMN 90.] 


14 Where was the vengeful dart when thou, 0 Indra, clavest the 

demon ever bent on outrage ? 

When fiends lay there upon the ground extended like cattle in 
the place of immolation ? 

15 Those who are set in enmity against us, the Ogapas, 0 Indra, 

waxen mighty,— 

Let blinding darkness follow those our foemen, while these 
shall have bright shining nights to light them. 

16 May plentiful libations of the people, and singing Rishis’ holy 

prayers rejoice thee. 

Hearing with love this common invocation, come unto us, pass 
by all those who praise thee. 

17 0 Indra, thus may we be made partakers of thy new favours 

that shall bring us profit. 

Singing with love, may we the Visvamitras win daylight even 
now through thee, 0 Iudra. 

18 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight 

where spoil is gathered, 

The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays 
j the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 


HYMN XC. Parasha. 


A thousand heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a thousand 
feet. 

On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide. 

2 This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that is to be ; 
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still by food. 


H Fiends ,* mitrakruvafa : the exact meaning of the word is uncertain. 
Prof. Ludwig takes it as a geuitive case : ‘ What time they lay there on the 
earth extended like oxen in a demou’s place of slaughter.’ 

15 Oganas : probably the name of some hostile clan. According to SAyana, 
enemies assembled in numbers. These • us and our friends here, 

16 All those who praise thee : all other worshippers. 

18 This is the concluding stu.iza of several hymns of the VisvAmitras. 
66 HI. 30. 22 ; 31. 22 ; 32. 17 j 34. 11 ; 35. 11 ; 36. 11. 


Pitruska, embodied spirit, or Man personified and regarded as the soul 
jr source of the universe, the personal and life-giving principle in 

animated beings, is said to have a thousand, that is, innumerable, heads, 
W, and feet, as being one with all created life. A space ten fingers wide : 

of the heart of man, wherein the soul was supposed to reside. 
JW aa the Universal Soul he pervades the universe, as the Individual 
he is enclosed in a space of narrow dimensions. See Hymns of the 
l f^-veda, XIX. 6. I, note, 

Ntna ® econ d line is explained in various ways. The meaning of the words 
kj e i 0 : he is lord of immortality or the immortal world of the Gods, 

f u grows greater by food, that is, by the sacrificial offerings of men. 



518 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK j 


3 So mighty is his greatness ; yea, greater than this is Puruslu 
All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths eternal hf 

in heaven. 

4 With three-fourths Purusha went up : ono-fourth of him agai 

was here. 

Thence he strodo out to every side over what eats not and wht 


eats. 

5 From him Viraj was born ; again Purusha from Viraj was bon 
As soon as he was born he spread eastward and westward o’i 

the earth. 

6 When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha as the 

offering, 

Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn ; summer w 
the wood. 

7 They balmed as victim on the grass Pnrushaborn in earliest tim 
With him the Deities and all Sadhyas and Rishis sacrificed. 


According to Sfryana : he is the lord or distributer of immortality becau 
he becomes the visible world in order that living beings may obtain the frui 
of their actions and gam moks/ui or final liberation from their bonds, he 
also the lord of immortality ; for he mounts beyond (lus own conditio 
r r. food (of living beings).’ —Wilson. Oolebrooke translates the line: 
^e^i^thatf whichgrowsby^ nourishment, and he is the dist.ibuter of immo 
talitv’ Di- Muir renders it by lie is also the lord of immortality, Bin 
by food he expands 1 According to the paraphrase in the Dhigavata-P iml< 
the meaning of the last clause is: ‘since he ha*b tranaceuded moi' 
» Prof Ludwisr’s version is: ‘auch uber die unsterbhchb 
Bebietend [da er.] was durch speise [ist,] weit uberragt,’ ruling also ov 
fmmortaHty, [since he] far transcends what [exists] through food i ' but m 
Commentary a somewhat different explanation is given. Ruling 
mortality, he was all that grows by food. —1 eterson. 

3 Eternal life: amrUam: immoitality, or the immortal Qoda. 

me°.U oTgooVlnd ^evU^io^s^ suchas aod^men, »»d lowe^animsM 

those who are incapable thereof, such as mountains and rivers 
conscious, achetanam, or unconscious, creation. ^ Kansas 3 a 

5 From him : or, from that, the onc-f.ni. th mentioned . m ^ fo 
4. VirAjy or, in the nominative form, Virftt, is said to h ®L ® h ’ or presid 
of the mundane egg, from Adi- Purusha, the primeval P ’ ima t e s as 

TnXs passage V. pp. 369, 370; a^Wallis.CoJvioyy • 

ing to Siyana. Summer : grtshmd does not ocour in any 
Spring : vasantd occurs in only one other R. V. ; a «1 

7 On the grass : on the sacred grass used in sacrifices. 
oi celestial beings, probably ancient divine sacrifices, 



THE RIO VEDA. 


519 


iWtf 90.] 

8 From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat wasgither- 

ed up. 

He formed the creatures of the air, and animals both wild and 
tame. 

9 From that great general sacrifice Richas and Sama-hymns 

were born : 

Therefrom were spells and charms produced; the Taj us had 
its birth from it. 

0 From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of 

teeth : 

From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were 
born. 

1 When they divided Purusha how many portions did they make ? 
What do they call his mouth, his arms ? What do they call his 

thighs and feet ? 

2 The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rajanya 

made. 

His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sfrdra was 
produced. 

3 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the 

Sun had birth ; 

Iudra and Agui from his mouth were born, and Vayu from 
his breath. 

1 Forth from his navel came mid-air ; the sky was fashioned 
from his head ; 

Earth from his feet, and from bi<* ear the regions. Thus they 
formed the worlds. 


8 The dripping fat ; * the mixture of curds and butter.* Wilson. He : 
r, it ; the sacrificed victim Purusha, or the sacred clarified butter. The ere a 
tow of the air: 1 those animals over whom VAvu piesides.’ — Wilson. 

9 Spells and charms : probably those of the latei collection of the Atharva- 
e( la. The Yajus. the Yajur-veda. 

12 Rijanyn: the second or Kshatriya caste, the regal and military class. 
hisi/a • the husbandman ; lie whose business is agriculture and trade. SiHra : 
he labourer. The BrAhmau is called the mouth of Purusha, as having the 
special privilege, as a ptiest, of addressing the Gods in prayer. The anus of 
urusha became the RAjanya, the prince and soldier who wields the sword 
l 'd spear. His thighs, the strongst parts of his body, became the agricul- 
u'lst and tradesman, the chief support of society ; and his feet, the emblems 
>»* vigour and activity, became the S idra or labouring man on whose toil and 
, u U3tr y a h ultimately rests. This is the only passage in the Rigveda which 
""iTr? te8 * our C) wte8. 

: the creation myth 6f the world-giant Yrnir or Hymir in old Northern 

f? e f The hills are his bones, the vault of the sky his skull, the sea his 
00( *j aud the clouds his brains. — Corpus Poeticum Borea\e , Vol. II. P- 468. 



520 


THE HYMNS OF 


[bOOK} 


15 Seven fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers o! fuel w ei 

prepared, 

When the Gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their victin 
Purusha. 

16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim: these were the earliei 

holy ordinances. 

The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there whei 
the Sadhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling. 


HYMN XCI. Ag. 

Brisk, nt the place of Ila, hymned by men who wake, oi 
own familiar Friend is kindled in the house; 

Hotar of all oblation, worthy of our choice, Lord, beaming 
trusty friend to one who loveth him. 

2 He, excellent in glory, guest in every house, finds like aswif 

winged bird a home in every tree. 

Benevolent to men, he scorns no living man: Friend to th 
tribes of men he dwells with every tribe. 

3 Most sage with insight, passing skilful with thy powers at 

thou, O Agni, wise with wisdom, knowing all. 

As Vasii, thou alone art Lord of all good things, of all th 
treasures that the heavens and earth produce. 

4 Foreknowing well, 0 Agni, thou in I]a’s place hast occopie 

thy regular station balmed with oil. 

Marked are thy comings like the coming* of the Dawns, tl 
rays of him who ahineth spotless as the Sun. 


15 Fencing-sticks : guards, or pieoes of wood laid round the sacrificial f 
to enclose it. Sftyana explains paridhdiyih as the seven metres, or as six slialk 
trenches dug round the fire, and an imaginary one round the Sun. Mahidha 
says that the seven oceans may be intended. 

This pantheistic hymn, which is generally called the Purushasfikta, is 
comparatively recent origin, and appeats to be an attempt to harmonize t 

two ideas of sacrifice aud creation. For further information regarding it, s 

Muir, 0 S. Texts, I. pp 6 — 11, and Y. 368—377, Prof. Max Muller, Ancu 
Sanskrit Literature, pp. 570f, and Dr. Scherman, Philosophische Hymnen a 
der Rig-und Atharva-veda-Sunhitd f pp. 11-23. The hymn has also been trai 
lated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays , pp, 167, 168; by Wains, ^ 
mology of the JRigveda, pp. 87, 88; and by Peterson, Hymns from the Kvf M 
pp. 289, 290; also by liurnouf, Bhdgavata Purdna , Preface to Vol. 1., auu 
Weber, Indische Studicn, IX. p. 5. Qrassmann’s Translation m his Appem 
to Vol. II., and Ludwig’s Translation aud Commentary should be cousu 
See also Hymns of the Atfuirva-veda , XIX. 6, which is ft re proa u 
this hymn with transpositions and variations. 


1 The place of lid: the shrine where clarified butter is poured upon 

fire. Our own familiar Friend: Agni, the Friend of the house. . 

2 Swift-winged bird: or, bird of prey. ‘ Hunter/ according to Luaw * 

3 Vasu ■ the word meaning abo good and treasure. 



521 


i/n/iV 91.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


5 Thy glories are, as lfehtnings from the rainy cloud, marked, 

mauy-hued, like heralds of the Dawns’ approach, 

When, loosed to winder over plants and forest trees, thou 
cnimmest by thyself thy food into thy mouth. 

6 Him, duly comingas their germ, have plants received: this 

Agni have maternal Waters brought to life. 

So in like manne* do the forest trees and plants bear him 
within them aid produce him evermore. 

7 When, sped and urged by wind, thou spreadest thee abroad, 

swift piercingthrough thy food according to thy will, 

Thy never-ceasng blazes, longing to consume, like men on 
chariots, Agii, strive on every side. 

8 A <>' ni, the Hotir-priest who fills the assembly full, Waker of 

"knowledge, Hiief Controller of the thought, — 

Him, yea, noie other than thyself, doth man elect at sacri- 
ficial offeriigs great and small alike. 

9 Hero, Agni, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee 

as thcT P’iest in sacred gatherings, 

When men with strewn dipt grass and sacrificial gifts offer 
thee entertainment, piously inclined. 

10 Thine is tlie Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed; Leader 

art thou, and Kindler for the pious man. 

Thou art Director, thou the ministering Priest : thou art the 
1 Brahman, Lord and Master in our homo. 

When mortal man presents to thee Immortal God, Agni, his 
fuel or his sacrificial gift, 

Then thou art his Adhvaryu, Hotar, messsenger, callest the 
Gods and orderest the sacrifice. 

From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him, these 
holy words, these Richas, songs and eulogies, 

Eager for wealth, to Jatavedas fain for wealth : when they 
have waxen strong they please their Strengthened 


6 is produced in the form of lightning by the waters of the firma- 
B11 t, O! the cloud and descends with the rain into plants and > 
e wood of which he ia brought forth by attrition, 

^ and small : with Soma or without it. 

9 The o 


fr : wn-n oorna or wii/uwiiu ,w. 

Grangers ; priests who order and conduct the sacrificial ceremonies. 
t 1 } Agni discharges the duties of the seven chief priest*, officiating as 

Potav a ».iu r»-« e A Q far> Adhvarvu. and Biahuiau. been. 


scharges the dutiw of the seven ctnet priest*. ,, 

„ Nesh^ar, Agntdh, Pras&star, Adhvaryu, and Biahuiau. bee u. 

inhere this stanza originally occurs. 

the Gods: ‘Bavest the formula.’ — Ludwig. 


-- -■•-V urn*., ‘sayest the fwwulw. 
^ Richat : veiBes of praise, 



522 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X. 

13 This newest eulogy will I speak forth to him, the Ancient One 

who loves it. May he heat* our vohe. 

May it come near his heart and maki it stir with love, as a 
fond well-dressed matron clings abort her lord. 

14 He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and barren cows, and rami 

wheu duly set apart, are offered up, — 

To Agni, Soma-sprinkled, drinker of swed; juice, Disposer, witl 
my heart I bnug a fair hymn forth. 

15 Into thy mouth is poured the offering, Agui, as Soma int 

cup, oil into ladle. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, strength-winning, blest with heroe 
wealth lofty, praised by men, and full ofsplendour. 

HYMN XCII. VisveJeva 

I praise your Charioteer of sacrifice, the Lo*d of men, Pne 
of the tribes, refulgent, Guest of night. 

Blazing amid dry plants, snatching amid the gieen, the Stronj 
the Holy Herald hath attained to heaven. 

2 Him, Agui, Gods and men have male their chiff support, w\ 

drinks the fatness and completes the sacrifice 
With kisses they caress the Grandson of the Red, like t 
swift ray of light, the Household Priest of Dt-wn. 

3 Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard’s ways: his brand 

evermore are sent forth to consume. 

When his terrific flames have reached the I nrnortals’ wor 
then men remember and extol the Heavenly Folk. 

4 For then the net of Law, Dyaus, and the wide expanse, Ear 

Worship, and Devotion meet, for highest praise, 

Varuna, Indra, Mitra were of one accord, and Savitar i 
Bhaga, Lords of holy might. 

5 Onward, with ever-roaming liudra, speed the floods: ovei i 

mati the Mighty have they run. 

With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, 1 
bellowing, bedews all things that are within. 

2 Completes the sacrifice: or, fills the assembly full. Grandson of the 
* son of the brilliant V\y a.’ -Wilson. Sprung from his own red gl^. 
being kindled fiom another. 

3 Men remember : because then their prayers are granted. 

5 Aramati : the earth. — SAyana. Armaiti, of the Avesta, 
personified as well as Devotion or Piety, Parijman: ‘the circumambie 
— Wilson. 

6 The Asura ; Dyaus himself. 



THE RIQ VEDA . 


623 


nYMS 92 .] 

6 Straightway the Rudras, Maruts visiting all men, Falcons of 

Dyaus, home-dwellers with the Asura, — 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and the swift- 
moving Indra with swift-moving Gods. 

7 With Indra have they found enjoyment, they who toil, in the 

light’s beauty, in the veiy Strong One’s strength ; 

The singers who in men’s assemblies forged for him, according 
to his due, his friend the thunderbolt. 

8 Even the Sun’s Bay Coursers hath he held in check : each oue 

fears Imjra as the mightiest of all. 

Unhindered, from the air’s vault thunders day by day the loud 
triumphant breathing of the fearful Bull. 

9 With humble adoration show this day your song of praise to 

mighty Rudra, Ruler of the brave : 

With whom, the Eager Ones, going their ordered course, he 
comes from heaven Self-bright, auspicious, strong to guard. 

10 For these have spread abroad the fame of human kind, the 

Bull Brihaspati and Soma’s brotherhood. 

Atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure : through skill the 
Bhrigus were esteemed of all as Gods. 

11 For those, the Earth and Heaven with their abundant seed, 

four-bodied NaiAsansa, Yairia, Aditi, 

God Tvashtar Wealth-bestower, the Ribhukshanas, Rodasi 
Maruts, Vishnu, claim and merit praise. 

12 And may he too give ear, the Sage, from far away, the Dragon 

of the Deep, to this our yearning call. 

Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and 
with your thought, 0 Earth and Sky, observe this well, 
f 3 Dear to all Gods, may Pushan guard the ways we go, the 
' Waters’ Child and Vayu help us to success. 

Sing lauds for your great bliss to Wind, the breath of all : ye 
Asvins prompt to hear, hear this upon your way. 

7 Worshippers are rewarded in heaven for the hymns and prayers with 
!ch they have strengthened aud armed Indra for his great deeds. 

9 whom : the Maruts. 

^Soma's brotherhood: all Gods who are entitled to drink Soma juice. 
a sure : gave them assurance of obtaining what they asked. 

If Pour-bodied Nardsansa : Agni provided with four fires, or complete in 
18 parfcH. Ribhukshanas .•* Ribhus. Rodasi : consort of the Maruts. 

12 The &ra gon of the Deep : Ahibudhnya, regent of the sea of air. 

® ^'* e Waters' Child : Asrni. born as lightniug from the clouds. 



524 


THE HYMNS OF 


Wok i 

14 With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as Lor 

over these fearless tribes, the Self-resplendent One. 

We praise Night’s youthful Lord benevolent to men, the foelee 
One, the free, with all celestial Dames. 

15 By reason of his birth here Angiras first sang: the pressing 

stones upraised beheld the sacrifice — 

The stones through which the Sage became exceeding vast, an 
the sharp axe obtains in fight the beauteous place. 

HYMN XCI1I. Vi.vedeva 

Mighty are ye, and far-extended, Heaven and Earth : bot 
Worlds are evermore to us like two young Dames. 

Guard us thereby from stronger foe ; guard us hereby to giv 
us strength. 

2 In each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth the God: 
He who, most widely known and famed for happiness, invitet 
them. 


3 Ye who are Rulers overall, great is your sovran power as God 
Ye all possess all majesty : all must be served in sacrifice. 

4 These are the joyous Kings of Immortality, Parijman, Mitn 

Aryaman, and Vanina. 

What else is Rudra, praised of men ? the Maruts, Bhag; 
Pdshana? 

5 Come also to our dwelling, Lords of amp^s wealth, comrno 

partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon, 

When the great Dragon of the Deep hath settled down upo 
their floors. 

6 And let the Asvins, Lords of splendour, set us free, —bot 

Gods, and, with their Laws, Mitra and Varuna. 

Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to ample opulenc 

14 The Self- resplendent One: Agni. Night's youthful Lord: the Moo 

Celestial Dames : the lunar asterisma. . 

15 The Sage: Indra, according to SAyapa. Sharp axe; the tbunderoo, 
The meaning of this stanza is obscure. 


1 Thereby... . hereby : literally * by those . ‘by these.’ SAyapa snppl 
pAlanaih , protections, iu loth cases. The former may refer to the Maghava 
and the* latter to the people in general. , . V4v 

4 Immortality : or, the immoi tal world. Parijman : Roamer round ’ . * 

What else : that is, Rudra is also one of these Kings. PAshana : a lengt 
form of the usual Piishan. . ... * r A tr t 

5 Waters : libations of Soma juice. SAyana explains 

‘by night.’ It is, as Prof. Ludwig has pointed out, a shorten firiu 

nakshtam, ‘come ye.’ Upon their floors : ‘in their company 1U 
mental (clouds).’— Wilson. The meaning is obscure. 

6 He : the sacri&cer whom these Gods protect, 



THE RIG VEDA. 


525 


YA1N 93.] 

j Yea, let the Asvins Twain he gracious unto us, even Rudras, 
and all Gods, Bhaga, Rathaspati ; 

Pan j man, Ribhu, V&ja, 0 Lords of all wealth Ribhukshanas. 

5 Prompt is Ribhukshan, prompt the worshipper’s strong dnnk : 
may thy fleet Bay Steeds, thine who speedest on, approach. 

Not man’s but God’s is sacrifice whose psalm is unassailable. 

9 o God Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us a place among 
wealthy princes. 

With his Car-steeds at once hath our Indra guided the reins 
and the car of these men. 

0 To these men present here, 0 Heaven and Earth, to us grant 

lofty fame extending over all mankind. 

Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with wealth for 
victory. 

[1 This speaker, Indra— for thou art our Friend — wherever he 
may he, guard thou, Victor ! for help, ever for help : 

Thy wisdom, Vasu ! prosper him. 

|2 So have they strengthened this mine hymn which seems to 

1 tike its bright path to the Sun, and reconciles the men : 

Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced. 

Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and 
bright with gold, 

Lightly, with pierciug ends, as ’twere two ranks of heroes 
ranged for fight. 

This to Duhsima Prithavana have I sung, to Vena, Rama, to 
the nobles, and the King. 

They yoked five hundred, and their love of us was famed 
upon their way. 

> Besides, they showed us seven-and-seventy horses here. 

T&nva at once displayed his gift, Parthya at once displayed 
his gift, and straightway Mayava showed his. 

7 Rathaspati: the guardian of war-chariots. Cf. X. 64. 10. Ribhukshanas: 

•ibhus. 

I KMiukshan : ‘ the mighty (Indra).’— Wilson. 

* his Car-steeds : with ua priests, who draw the chariot of sacrifice. 

So have they strengthened : « May (the priests) strengthen.’— Wilson. 

t yoke: as the yoke keeps a pair of horses together so the hymn addressed 

>vol' recol iciles worshippers and fills them with like feelmgs of 

u ; of the axle, \ hich pa^ through the naves. 

" Ppithavdna , Vena , and Rdma were Maghavans or wealthy 

t'ltorsof sacrifices. TotheJCing: dsure : to the Asura, lord or chief. 

.• horseB or chariots. . 

Worses : there is no substantive in the text. SAyaya supplies gavam, 



52$ 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK l 


HYMN XCIV\ Preston* 

Let these speak loudly forth ; let us speak out aloud : to t\ 
loud speaking Pressing-stones address the speech ; 

When, rich with Soma juico, Stones of the mountain, y 
united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise. 

2 They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men : tin 

cry aloud to us with their green-tinted mouths, 

While, pious Stones, they ply their task with piety, and, evi 
before the Hotar, taste the offered food. 

3 Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meatl 

they make a humming sound over the meat prepared. 

As they devour the branch of the Red-coloured Tree, the< 
the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered bellowings. 

4 They cry aloud, with strong exhilarating drink, calling i 

Indra now, for they have found the meath. 

Bold, with the sisters they have danced, embraced by thei 
making the earth reecho with their ringing sound. 

5 The Eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven; in t 

skys^vault the dark impetuous ones have danced. 

Then downward to the nether stone’s fixt place they sin 
and, splendid ns the Sun, effuse their copious stream. 

6 Like strong ones drawing, they have put forth all tb 

strength : the Bulls, hat ne*scd together, bear the ehariot-pol 
When they have bellowed, panting, swallowing their fo< 
the sound of their loud snorting is like that of steeds. 

7 To these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth, to tin 

who have ten yoke-strups and ten binding thongs, 

To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye praise, 
these who bear ten car-poles, ten when they are yoked. 

cows. These horses, or cows, were presented to the priests. Tnnva,Vdrt ) 
and Mdyava are patronymics which do not occur again in the Rigveda. 

Ludwig thinks that a quanel had arisen between the Maghavans on 
(stanza 14) and the Visas or people (stanza 9), »nd that the priests, w o 
reconciled the two parties, were piescuted with the chanots which 
prepared for battle. See stanza 13, in which, accoiding to this explan. 
nd should be lendered by ‘and not’ instead of ‘as ’twere. The y > 
is difficult and in parts almost unintelligible, is placed by Grassmann 

* Hotar: 1 (Agni) the invoker (of the gods).’— Wilson. Or the human Ho 
priest may be intended. 

V 3 Red-coloured Tree: the Soma-plant. WeU-pavtured : the m 
stibharrd is obscure. See Hillebrandt, V, I. 18. 

4 The sisters : the fingers. 

5 The Eagles : the rapidly moving celestial press-stones, 

7 Ten workers ; the fingers of both bands. 



THE 110 VEDA. 


527 


HYMN 95 ] 

8 These Stones with ten concuctors, rapid in their course, with 

lovely revolution travel nund and round. 

They have been first to driik the flowing Soma juice, first to 
enjoy the milky fluid of tin stalk. 

9 These Soma-eaters kiss Indrds Bay-coloured Steeds : draining 

the stalk they sit upon theox’s hide. 

1 idra, when he hath drunk Sona meath drawn by them, waxes 
in strength, is famed, is mighty as a Bull. 

10 Strong is your stalk ; ye, verib, never shall be harmed : yc 

have refreshment, ye are eve- satisfied. 

Fair aie ye, as it were, througl splendour of his wealth, his 
in whose sacrifice, 0 Stones, y? find delight. 

11 Bored deep, but not pierced though with holes, are ye ; 0 

Stones, not loosened, never wciry, and exempt from death, 
Eternal, undiseased, moving in smdry ways, unthirst mg, full 
of fatness, void of all desire. 

12 Your fathers, verily, stand fiim from age to age : they, loving 

rest, arc not dissevered from their scat. 

Untouched by time, ne’er lacking greeu pl.mts and green 
| tiees, they with their voice hav* caused the heavens and 
earth to hear. 

13 This, this the Stones proclaim, wha\ time they are disjoined, 

and when with 1 inging sounds they nove and di ink the balm. 
Like tillers of the ground when thej are sowing seed, they 
mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minsh it. 

14 They have raised high their voice for juice, for sacrifice, strik- 

ing the Mother Earth as though thc\ danced thereon. 

So loose thou too his thought who hath eifused the !*ap, and 
let the Stones which we arc honouring be disjoined. 

HYMN XCV. Uiv.Bi. Pururavas. 

Ho theie, mv consort! Stay, thou fierce-souled lady, and let 
us reason for a while together. 

Such thoughts as the e of ours, while yot unspoken in days 
gone by have never brought 11 s comfort. 

® The ox's hide: spreul underneath to c.iuh and hold tue droppings. 

12 lour fathers: the mountains from width aou came. 

14 Striking the Mother Euith ‘ Eaith ’ is not in the text ‘they made a 
p 01 ^ hke (children) at play, eti iking their mother.’ — Wilson. I have followed 
Iot Ludwig’s explanation. 

Hie hymn is a dialogue between Pururavas and Urvasi, and they are 
i ® evt ‘ rall y the Itishis of the stanzas which they speak. The dialogue, wic 1 
f, "irietim e8 almost unintelligible, contains the germs of a legend which is 
elal(Ki in the §atapatka-E)&}mana t reappears in the MuhMMa and 



628 THE HYRtfs OP [BOOR j 

2 What am I now to do with t/iis thy saying 1 I have gone 

from thee like the first of Mornings. 

Purdravas, return thou to thy dwelling : I, like the wind, am 
difficult to capture. 

3 Like a shaft sent for gloryfrom the quiver, or swift steed 

winning cattle, winning hundreds, 

The lightning seemed to flfsh, as cowards planned it. The 
minstrels bleated like a l<mb in trouble. 

4 Giving her husband’s father life and riches, from the near 

dwelling, when her love,' craved her, 

She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accept- 
ing day and night her jbrd’s embraces. 

5 Thrice in the day didst thou embrace thy consort, though 

coldly she received thy fond caresses. 

To thy desires, Purfiravis, I yielded: so wast thou king, 0 
hero, of my body. 

C The maids Sujurni, Snni, Sumne-api, Charanyu, Granthini, 
and Hradechakshus,'— 

These like red kine have hastened forth, the bright ones, and 
like milch-cows hav« lowed in emulation. 


Purdnas, and forms the plot d the well-known drama, Vih'amorvast, or The 
Hero and the Nymph. According to this legend, Urvari, an Apsaras or 
Nymph of heaven, has been panished to earth where she consents to live 
with King PurCiravas on coujhtion that ho takes care of her two pet rams, 
and that she never sees him unclothed. She lives witH Pururavas for four 
years, when the Gandbarvaf or heavenly minstrels resolve to bring her hack. 
They steal one of the ram? by night. Purflravas springs from his bed ; the 
Gandharvas send on him a flash of magic lightning, and Urvasi Rees her 
husband naked. One of the conditions of the continuance of their union u 
broken, and the nymph instantly vanishes. Purdravas meets her afterwards 
and in vain implores her to return. At last she relents, and in clue time a 
eon is born to them. These are the main outlines of a somewhat variously 
told story. 

1 Pururavas speak*, when he has met Urvasi again after her sudden 
departure. 

2 Urvasi replies. , 

3 Purflravas spetks, reminding her of the circumstances in which she 
vanished. ‘Yea,’ he says, ‘thou wentest from me with the speed of anarrw 
or a racer. The cowardly Gandharvas deluded us. They bleated like a lam 
to make us think that one of thy pets was in pain or danger, and then, by a 
flash of factitious lightning, made me visible to thee in my nakedness. 

4 Life and riches ; meaning, perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, 
future grandson. The near dwelling : her father-in-law’s house, where s 
spent much of her time. Her lover : her husband Purflravas. 

This stanza and the next are spoken by Urvsi. # s 

6 This stanza is ascribed by SAyana to Purflravas, who mentions the na ^ 
of the Apsarases who were the companions of Urvadl after her flight. ^ 
are compared to red kine, meaning, perhaps, bright flashes of lightning 
lowed by the lowing or bellowing of the thunder. 




WMN 95. J THE RIG VEDA. 


529 


7 While he was born the Dames sate down together, the Rivers 
with free kindness gave him nurture* ? 

And then, Purfiravas, the Gods increased thee for mighty 
battle, to destroy the Dasyus. 6 3 


8 When I, n mortal, wooed to mine embraces these heavenly 
lymphs who laid as-'de their raiment, J 

Like a scared snake they fled from ine in terror, like chariot 
horses when the (ar has touched them. 

i When, loving these Immortal Ones, the mortal hath converse 
with the nymphs as they allow him. 

Like swan’s they show the beauty of their bodies, like horses 
m their play they bite and nibble. 


0 She who flushed brilliant as the failing lightning brought me 

delicious pieseuts fmm the waters. 

Now from tie flood be bom a strung young hero ! May Urvasi 
probing l£r life for ever ! ’ * 

1 Thy birth hath made me drink from earthly miloh-kine : this 

power, Pururavas, hast thou vouchsafed me. 

I knew, And, warned thee, on that day. Thou wouldst not 
hear jAe. What sayest thou, when naught avails thee ? 

2 When Ml the son be born and seek his father? Mourner-like, 

will ho weep when brst he knows him? 

Who, shall divide the accordant wife and husband, while fire 
lsshining with thy consort’s parents? 


1 Ui» y usi speaks, reminding Purtiiavas of the favour shown him at his birth, 
y tbycelestial Dames who were present, the Rivers Who nursed him. and 
ie(/odsw hoga v e him strength. Another explanation is that in the first 
alymthe stanza Urvaal speaks, by anticipation, of the, son whom she will 
wt 0 Puriiravas. 

> Purfiravas complains of the shyness of the nymphs mentioned in stanza 6, 
h Taif 80C * e ^ h.id sought to console himself. A mortal : meaning that 
I® iac * keen :i God their behaviour would have been different. Raiment : 
g U, |l ex plained by Sfiyana as wu kiyam rtipam, their own proper form, 
rvasl replies, Tlie Apsarases, she says, as a rule only coquet with mor- 
As they allow him : kratuhhir nd ; see Geldner, V. 8., I. 276. Like 
m, .y a ? a explains nd here differently : —‘they (becoming) ducks do not 
19 p r bodies. ’--Wilson. 

k w?a<e, rLlra ^ a8 B P e , a ^ 8, Drvast, he says, did not treat him so coldly. From 
e Wa ? ,; °* fbe firmament. ’ From the flood: from Urvast who comes from 
hurl /•' re £' oa8 above. SAyana explains apdh differently : — ‘a sou able m 
\\ y nen dly to man has been boon/ — Wilson. 

fitter | 1 * * * V ip 8 P ea ks. According to SAyapa, whom Wilson, Grassmann, and 
e nbomV° W ’ translation of the first half-line would be : — ‘Thou hast 
ien \ , S lVe the earth protection.’ Warned thee on that dan : told, tb^, 
^menf ' ^ to w Rh thee what would happen if the conditions of 

u .. ^ere not. ..Um.j 



530 THE HYMNS OF [Bm , 

13 I will console him when his tears are falling: he shall 

weep and cry for care that blesses ° h 

That which is thine, between us, will I send thee. G 0 j, 0n 
again, thou fool ; thou hast not won me. ° 

14 Thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever, to seek, wilho 

return, the faithcst distance. 

Then let his bed be in Destrnct : on » bosom, am] there! 
fierce rapacious wolves devour him. 

15 Nay, do not die, Pururavas, nor vanish : «t not the evil-omen 

wolves devour thee. 

With women there can be no lasting friendship : hearts 
hyenas are the hearts of women. 

16 When amid men in altered shape I sojouried, and thron 

four autumns spent the nights among then, 

I tasted once a day a drop of butter ; and evej now with tli 
am 1 contented. 

17 1, her best love, call Urvasi to meet me, her win fills air ai 

measures out the region. 

Let the gift brought by piety approach thee. Wn thou 
me again : my heait is troubled. 

18 Thus speak these hods to thee, 0 son of la: As (oath ha 

verily got thee for his subject, 

Thy sons shall serve the Gods with thqjj' oblation, aid tli 
moreover, shalt rejoice in S.arga 


when he knows my story, know.-, how his father has been deserted. Wide 
it brining: so long as the father-in law’ and mother-in-law who sancUomd 
union live and maintain their household fire. 

13 Urvasi answers. That which is thine, between vt: our child, our i 
nion treasure. 

14 Pururavas threatens to destroy himself. 

36 UrvasI speaks this and the next hLmiz» 

16 A- drop of butter : oue of the conditions on which the contimianc 
their union depended was that she should e.it nothing but a small qua) 
of ghritu or clarified butter daily. See stanza 11. 

17 Pur. ravos speaks. Her best love : v muhlhoh here is evidently, ^8 
Scholiast siiys, an ejpithet and not a name, meaning ‘most excellent, 
precious/ Fills air : representing the morning mi-t, or the first Ah* 
light, that spreads over the heavens before the rising of the sun. 

18 There is an hiatus between this stanza and 17, au entire break ot 
tinuity. The fragment is ascribed t.» UrvasI, who consoles Fururava 
te’ling him of the promise of the deities that after his death bis sons 
offer sacrifice to the Gods, and lie himself shall he blest in heaven. 
lid: Purfiravas, called Aila or son of I|& who was the daughter of 

Some of the stanzas should be transposed, and their order should ot, 
5, 4 . 6, 16, 6. 7, 8. 9, 1!. 12 13, 14 15, 10. -Ludwig. . 

Of this very difficult hvmn there is a complete translation, witn 

- i -it- .f 1 am ml* 



fffjf.v 96.] 


THE MOVED A. 


531 


HYMN XOV[. 


Indra. 


i , , iuura. 

Is the g' eat ■y nod w,l > I laud thy two Bay Steeds • 1 orize 
the sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior-God ' 1 

His who pours lovely oil as ’twere with yellow drops Let 
my songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints ’ 

2 Ye who in concert sing .into the gold-hued place, like Bav 

Steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat, * 

For Indra laud ye strength allied with Tawny Steeds laud 
him whom cows content as ’twere with yellow drops. ’ 

3 His is that. thunderbolt, of iron, goldcn-hued, gold-coloured 

very dear, and yellow in his arms ; ’ 

Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage In 
indra are set fast all forms of golden line. b t 

4 As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden thunder- 

bolt spread out as in a race. 

That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A thousand 
flames had he who bore the tawiy-hued. 


5 Thou, thou, when praised by mer who sacrificed of old, hadst 
pleasure in their lauds, 0 IrnVa golden-haired. 

All that befits thy song of prabe thou welcomest, the perfect 
pleasant gift, 0 Golden-hue* from birth. 


6 These two dear Bays biing bther Indra on his car, Thunder- 
armed, joyous, meet for hud, to drink Ins fill. 

Many libations flow for bin who loveth them ■ to Indra have 
the gold-hued Soma juices run. 


r much assistance), by Prof. (»eldner, Vedwhe Studien, I pp 243—295. 
lie myth has beeu discussed by von Roth, Illustrations of the Nirnkta , and* 
wwhe Studies, l . 196; by Prof Max Muller, Oxford Essays (Chips, IV. 
p) I by T r > f- Adalbert Knhn, Dir Hmibhmft des Feuers, pp. 85 ff; and 
AM^ 8S ° rS Boltzmann and Oldenberg in more recent days. Professor 
Muller considers the stoiy to be ‘one of the myths of the Vedas which 
ipre8Bee the coi relation of the dawn and the sun.’ According to Dr. Gold- 
U q ia the morning mist which vanishes away as soon as Purtiravas 

U , n displays himself. See Chambers's Encyclopedia, 1st edition , under 

ur uhavas. 

Throughout the hymn the poet rings the changes on words said to be 
dr/h* 8 ^' e r0ut Ar*, to ta ke, as haryatd, delightsome, harydn, loving, 
Va bay or taw °y> hdrit, gieen, yellow, or gold -coloured Cp. Ill 44. 

are conjectuiaUy explained by the Commentate. and are 
of various renderings. 

2 ^ ‘ or fatness, fertilizing rain, 
g ‘ ^Bked for aaeriftciil purposes. 

•udwig W?n ^ ra 9 e: P er kap8 with reference to the effect of anger on the face..— 



THE HYMNS OP 


582 


WOK X 


7 The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish : tht 

yellow drops have urged the swift Bays to the Strong. 

He who speeds on with Bay Steeds even as he lists hath satis 
fled his longing for the golden drops. 

8 At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in might, th 

Iron One with yellow beard and yellow hair. 

He, Lord of Tawny Coursers, Lord of fleet-foot Mares, wi 1 
bear his Bay Steeds safely over all distress. 

9 His yellow-coloured jaws, like Indies, move apart, what timi 

for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted stir, 

When, while the howl stands there, he grooms his Tawn 
Steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, the sweet jui< 

* that he loves. 

10 Yea, to the Dear One’s seat in homes of heaven and earth tl 

Bay Steeds’ Lord hath whinnied like a horse for food. 
Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, and th 
Belovfed One hath gtmed high power of life. 

11 Thou, comprehending w'th thy might the earth and heavei 

acceptest the dear hynn for ever new and new. 

0 Asnra, disclose thou ard make visible the Cow’s belovi 
home to the bright goldei Sun. 

12 0 Indra, let the eager wishes the folk tying thee, delightf 

golden-visored, on thy car, 

That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, th 
mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered meath. 

13 Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest; and th 

especially is this libation. 

Gladden thee, Indra, with the meath-rich Soma: pour it dc 
ever, Mighty One ! within thee. 


7 To the Strong : to Indra ; that they may be harnessed and come to 
sacrifice. 

8 The Iron One: * iron*hearted Indra.’— Wilson. 

9 For ttrength : for strengthening food. The yellow-tinted : his yellow , 

10 The Dear One muBt be the Soma, found both in heaven and earth 
homes of Gods and men. According to SAyana, Indra himself is meant. 
Belovld One : Indra, whose vital vigour is increased by Soma-draughts. 

11 T><e Covti beMd home : the Cow may be the Sun whose home i 
universe which Indra will allow Surya to illumine. 

12 Sacrifite : according to S4yapa, the sacrificial Soma juice which i« 
aed and prepared by the fingers of the priest. 



HYMN 97.] 


TUB RIO FED A. 


533 


HYMN XCVII. Praise of Herbs. 

Herbs that sprang up in time of old, three ages earlier than 
the Gods, — 

Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the hundred 
powers and seven. 

2 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are 

your growths. 

Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from 
disease. * 4 

3 Be glad and joyful in the Plants, both blossoming and bearing 

fruit, 

Plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in 
the race. 

4 Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the 

Goddesses : 

Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self, 
0 man. 

5 The Holy Fig tree is your home, your mansion is the Parna tree : 
Winners of cattle shall ye be it ye regain for me this man. 

6 He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd 

of men, — 

Physician is that sage’s name, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease. 

1 Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishment, in strength- 
ening power, — 

All these have I provided here, that this man may be whole again. 

8 The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like cattle 
from the stall, — 

Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital 
breath, 0 man. 

$ Reliever is your mother’s name, and hence Restorers are ye 
called. 

1 Rivera are ye with wings that fly : keep far vshutever brings 
i disease. 

I® J^vsr all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold. 
Plants have driven fiom the frame whatever malady was 
there. 


\J kree *9** earlier than the Gods : ‘for the gods before the three ages.'— 
See Satapalka Brdhmajpi, VII. 2. 4. 26 ( S . B. E„ XLI. p. 339). 

5 nil’ n av ' an d ffwmenl: as my fee for curing you. 

utea V tree ; Aevattha, or Ficus Religiose. Parna tree : the Pal&ea, 

l 1 i r °ad08a SfLOnfiniol vnacolfl nrA mnrta nf the wood of ttl686 treCfl 



5S4 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X 

11 When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold these herb 

within my hand, 

The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life. 

12 He through whose frame, 0 Plants, ye creep member b 

member, joint by joint, — 

From him yednve away disease like somestrongarbiter of strif 

13 Flv, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and kingfkhe 
Fly with the wind’s impetuous speed, vanish together wit 

the storm. 

14 Help every one the other, lend assistance each of you to cacl 
All of you be accordant, give furtherance to this speech of nnn 

15 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, and tl; 

blossomless, 

Urged onward by Byihaspati, release us from our pain and grie 

16 Release me from the emse’s plague and woe that comes fro 

Varuna ; 

Free me from Yama’s fetter, fromsinand offence against the Got 

17 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew cart! 

ward, thus they spake : 

No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth wepervad 

18 Of all the many Plants whose King is Soma, Plants of hundr 

forms, 

Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompt to the wish, swe 
to the heart. 

19 0 all ye various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o ers pro 

the earth, 

Urged onward by Byihaspati, combine your virtue in this l la 

20 Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man 

whom I dig : 

And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours. 

21 All Plants that hear this speech, and those that have dep? 

ed far away, , 

Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon 
Herb. 

12 Like some strong arbiter of strife: ‘like a mighty (prince) »tati 

the midst of his Lost.’— Wibon. . b j, 

13 With the bine jay and kingfisher : with the speed of . 

Together with the storm : according to S4yana, ‘ perish along wi ^ ( 

15 Urged onward : Brihaspati, says S&yana, is the deity who prew 
mantras or spells and charms. . a ^ ou j 

19 This Plant : the medicinal herb which I, the physician, am 
make use of. 



gYMI* 38 ] THE RW VEDA. a3i 

22 With Soma as their Sovran Lord the Plants hold colloquy 
and say : ^ J 

0 King, we save from death the man whose cure a Brahman 
undertakes. 

«3 Most excellent of all art thou, 0 Plant : thy vassals are the trees. 
Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to in- 
jure us. 

HYMN XCVIII. The Gods. 

Comb, he thou Mitra, Varuna, or Pushan, come, 0 Brihasp&ti, 
to mine oblation : 

With Maruts, Vasus, or Adityas, make thou Parjanya pour 
for Santanu his rain-drops. 

2 The God, intelligent, the speedy envoy whom thou hast sent 

hath come to me, Devapi : 

Address thyself to me and turn thee hither ; within thy Ups 
will I put brilliant language. 

3 Within my mouth, Brihaspati, deposit speech lucid, vigorous, 

and fiee from weakness, 

Thereby to win for Santanu the rain-fall. The meath-nch 
drop from heaven hath passed within it. 

4 Let the sweet drops descend on us, 0 Indra : give us enough 

to lade a thousand wagons. 

Sit to thy Hotar task ; pay worship duly, and serve the God'*, 
Devdpi, with oblation. 

5 Knowing the Gods' good-will, Devapi, Rishi, the son of Rish- 

tiaheua, sate as Hotur. 

He hath brought down from heaven’s most lofty summit the 
ocean of the lain, celestial waters. 


‘This StikU is remarkable as representing one of two brothers, both of the 
Kshatiiya caste, becoming the Pu.ohita , or farnilv pnest, and Jlotri or sacrific- 
H Priest, of the other who is the ltdjA’— Wilson. 

1 Devlpi addresses Brihaspati, who is identifiable with Mitt a, Varuna, 
ushaa and otheig, in his special character of Purohita, or family Priest, «>f 
■ eOods, and as the prototype of all human Purohitas. With Maiutt: 
l e ^ ler fhou be attended by Maruts, Vasus, or, Adiryas. For Sxntanu: the 
br ^her of DevApi. 

)u ®r i haspati replies. Brilliant language * a * brilliant hymn.’ — Muir. 

3 Devftpi speaks, praying Brihaspati, as Lord of Speech (cp X 71. 1.), to 
Jhun with eloquence that he may address the G >«1 r efleetually. The 
U f ' nc ^ drop : the sweet eloquence for which he has pr ued. 

r * wtei drop* : of rain. This stanza is spoken by Santanu. 

•> A linn : . i 



53$ THE HYMHS OF [BOOK] 

6 Gathered together in that highest ocean, the waters stood, fc 

deities obstructed. 

They hurried down set free by Arshtishena, in gaping cleft 
urged onward by Devapi. 

7 When as chief priest for Santanu, Devapi, chosen for Hotai 

duty, prayed beseeching, 

Graciously pleased Brihaspati vouchsafed him a voice tin 
reached the Gods and won the waters. 

8 0 Agni whom Devapi Arshtishena, the mortal man, hal 

kindled in his glory, 

Joying in him with all the Gods together, urge on the send 
of the rain. Parjunya. 

9 All ancient Rishis with their songs approached thee, eve 

thee, 0 Much-invoked,* at sacrifices. 

We have provided wagon-loads in thousands : come to tl 
solemn rite, Lord of Red Horses. 

10 The wagm-loads, the nine-and-ninety thousand, these lm 

been offered un to thee, 0 Agni. 

Hero, with these increase thy many bodies, and, stimulate 
send us rain from heaven. 

11 Give thou these ninety thousand loads, 0 Agni, to Indra, 

the Bull, to be his portion. 

Knowing the paths which Deities duly tiavel, set mid tl 
Gods in heaven Aulana also. 

12 0 Ajni, drive afar our foes, our troubles ; chase malady aw 

and wick' d demons. 

From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, send down on 
a mighty flood of waters. 


Q Ai shtishenn ’ pationytmc, son of Rishnshcna ; DevApi. 

7 Chief priest <>r family or household p’iest ; PurohitA 
9 Wagon-loads: an exfci acid' nary quantity of fuel for the sacrifice, as 
occasion was one of the gieate*t iinpoitance 

1 1 A uldnn : Sin l ami, as a descendant, of TTla, nppenrs to l>e meant. Acer 
ing to some scholars, auHnhn means oMati<m or sacrificial offering, 
fact of D 3 v. 1 ni being reputed as the author of this hymn, and as tie p< >1*0 
and hotri of his brother *eei»s to have led the legendary writers to in 
the story of his becoming a Bifthman. which (as mentioned y 
Weber, Indische Studies, i p. 203) is lecorded in the * al y a ;p r \‘L iuci 
Mahftbharat 1 , verses 2281 ff, where he is said tp have attained this dr ^ 
at a certain place of pilgrimage called Piithadaka ; where ‘■"I „ 
VisvSmitra also were received into the higher caste. -Muir, v. ^ 
270 ff. For the legend on which the hymn is said to be base > H 
SAyana from the Nirukta, see Wilson’s Translation. 



rrtfy 99.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


537 


HYMN XCIX. 


ludra. 


What Splendid One, Loud-voiced, Far-striding, dost thou well 
knowing, urge us to exalt with praises? 

What give we him ? When his might dawned, he fashioned 
the Vritra-slaymg bolt, and sent us waters. 


2 He sroo- to end his work with lightning flashes : wide is the 
seat his Asura glory gives him. 

With his Companions, not without his Brother, he quells this 
Saptatha’s magic devices. 


! On most auspicious path he goes to battle; he toiled to win 
heaven’s light, full fain to gam it; 

He seized the hundred-gated cattle’s treasure by craft, un- 
checked, and slew the lustful demons. 


[ Fighting for kine, the prize of war, and roaming among the 
heid he biings the young streams hither, 

Where, footles, joined, without a car to bear them, with jar3 
i\)i .steeds, they pour their flood like butter. 

i Bold, unsolicited for wealth, with Itudras he came, the Blame- 
less, having left his dwelling, 

Caiue, seized the food of Yamra and his consoit, and left the 
couple weeping and unsheltered. 

• Lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who i oared aloud, 
fcix-eved and triple-headed. 

Tuta, mado stronger by the might ho lent him, struck down 
flie boar with shaft whose point was iron. 

He raised himself on high and shot his at row against the guileful 
and oppressive foeman. 

•String, glorious, manliest, for us he shattered the forts of 
Naims when lie slew the D.isyus. 

| Hie question m the first line is a ihetorical figure, the meaning being, 
t'liihd is he (Indra) whon thou (the Yaj uniiu ?) urgent us to exalt ! 

, ^'/i vewehim? what can we give linn in M'tuin for what he ha* done 

une^ 9 )W ' 0(7n?0,M •’ the Maruts II s Brother Vi-hnn, Who S> tpbttha was 
ceii-am. The word m. ans Septimus, tiie seventh, and probably some 
3 “y demon is intended. 

II demons ; the exact meaning of s’s la.levAii is uncertain. See 

5 6 and note. 

^1'ents) 1 no ^hig intelligible of the second line ‘I think of the two 
iod hrt . ii j mra » w ^° rtre free f ,om fever Having obtained (the enemy’s) 
1 i . jJ'iJ jg ^loud whilst stealing it.’ — Wilson. Vamra is mentioned in I. 

+ dwelling: or, with Ludwig, The Lord and Giver. The 

f 1 «i „Ha8ft Visvardpa. son of Tvashtar. See X. 8. 8. The boar ; Yritra. 





1 1J. Ld JJL 1 ill j>0 l/r 


1^00^ 


8 He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath found 

us the way to dwell in safety. 

When the Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed with 
iron claws he slays the Dasyus. 

9 He with his potent Friends gave up the mighty, gave Susl 

up to Kutsa for affliction. 

He led the lauded Kavi, he delivered Atka as prey to him i 
to his heroes. 

10 He, with his Gods who love mankind, the Wondrous, giv 

like Varuna who works with magic, 

Was known, yet young, as guardian of the seasons; and 
quelled Aiaru, four-footed demon. 

11 Through lands of him hath Ausija Rijisvan burst, with 

Mighty's aid, the stall ^f Pipru. 

When the >amt pressed the juice and shone as singer, he sei 
the forts and with Ins craft subdued them. 

12 S.\ swiftly Asma, for exaltation, hath the great Vamrakacc 

nigh to indra. 

Ho will, when supplic <ted, bring hnn blessing : he hath brouj 
ail, food, strength, a happy dwelling. 

HYMN C. ViBvedc 

Be, like thyself, O Indra, strong for our delight : here laud 
aid us, Maghavan, di inker of the juice# 

Savitar with the Gods protect us : hear ye Twain. We ask 
freedom and complete felicity. 


8 The H av'k the fierce and swift Indra. 

9 A Atci • according to SAyuna, Usanl KAvya or son of Kavi is intern 
Alia: see X 49. 8 

10 If is G\t<h : theMirnt* Aram 1 follow Sly arn. Cf. Satapatha -Bi 
mana , I. 2 4. 17 (8. B. R XII. 57) According to Prof Ludwig’s conject- 
explanation the translation would be: — ‘he measured out the year 111 
divisions ’ 

11 A»sijtt • son of U«ij. But as this patronymic does not properly be 
to Bijiflvan, the word here may perhaps mean, * vehement,’ ‘eagerly e8l, ° 
Pipru : one of the demons of drought. 

12 Asuvu • 0 divine and mighty Indra. For exaltation: of 1)1 

Vamraka: a lengtln-ued form of Vauira, the Rishi of the hymn, 
clause of the standi is borrowed from X. 20. 10. . 

This hymn, which is obscure and in some places unintelligible, in P 
Prof. Gra^smaim in Ids Appendix Dr Muir has translated stan 
O. 6*. Texts, IV. pp. 408, 409 (2nd edition). 

1 Ye Twain : Indra and Savitar. Freedom * aditim. Pj^*, 
translates diffciently : “ We implore Aditi for health and weal i. 



THE R1GVEDA . 


0MS 100 .] 


539 


2 Bring swift, for offering, the share that suits the time, to the 

pure-drinkcr Vayu, roaring as he goes, 

To him who hath approached the draught of shining milk. 
We ask for freedom and complete felicity. ~ 

3 May Savitar the God send us full life, to cacli who sacrifices, 

lives aiight and pours the juice; 
r l hat we with simple hearts may wait upon the Gods. We ask 
for freedom and complete felicity. 

1 May [mini evermore be gracious unto us, and may King Soma 
meditate our happiness, 

Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We ask for free- 
dom and complete felicity. 

5 Tndra hath given the body with its song and strength : Brihas- 

pati, thou art the lengthener of life. 

The sacrifice is Manu, Providence, our Sire. We ask for 
freedom and complete felicity. 

6 Indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed: the singer in 

the house is Agni, prudent Sage. 

He is the sacrifice in synod, fair, most near. We ask for free- 
dom and complete felicity. 

7 Not often have we sinned against \ou secretly, nor, Vasus, 

have we openly provoked the Gods. 

Notone of us, ye Gods, hath worn an alien shape. We ask 
for freedom and complete felicity. 

8 May Savitar remove from us our malady, and may the Moun- 

tains liecp it far away from where 
The pre$s-st>ne as it sheds the meath lings loudly forth. We 
ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

9 Ye Vasua, let the stone, the pressor, stand erect: avert all 

enmities and keep them far remote. 

Our guard to bo adored is Savitar this God. We ask for free- 
dom and complete felicity. 

10 Eat strength and fatness in the pasture, kine, who are balmed 

at the reservoir and at the seat of Law. 
ho let your body be our body’s medicine. We ask for freedom 
an( f complete felicity. 

5 ^ re ^ ^ er: drinker of pure Soma juice, 
whi h • 8UC) '$ ce u Manu : we o ve our existence ami preservation to sacrifiqe, 
c is to us another Manu, the fathor of Aryan men. 

1 . le sacrifice in synod : ‘ jyorthy of sacrifice at the altar.’ — YVilhOii. 

10 S , en 8 ^ a P e > sorcerers are accustomed to do. 

Plain# ^ at tfle reservoir: anointed befoie being milked. SAvana ex- 
'tani,,-. ? e ffoshlhe , ‘in the cow-stall.’ Ltt your body : may the milk, thy 



540 TIIE HYMNS OP [BOOK ; 

1 1 The singer fills the spirit : all mens’ love hath he. Indra taki 

kindly care of those who pour the juice. 

For his libation is the heavenly udder full. We ask for fre 
dom and complete felicity. 

12 Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, triumphant; thy hosts sa 

from decay and are resistless. 

The pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to possi 
the best of all the cattle. 

HYMN Cl. Visvedei 

Wake with one mind, my friends, and kindle Agni, ye w 
are many and who dwell together. 

Agni and Dadhikras and Dawn the Goddess, you, Gods w 
Indra, I call down to help us. 

2 Make pleasant hymns, spin out your songs and praises: bi 

ye a ship equipped with oars for transport. 

Prepare the implements, make all things ready, and let 
sacrifice, my friends, go forward. 

3 Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: formed is 

furi ow, sow the seed within it.. 

Through song may we find heating fraught with plenty : i 
to the ripened grain approach the sickle. 

4 Wise, through desire of bliss from Gods, the skilful l 

the traces fast, * 

And lay the yokes on either side. 

Arrange the buckets in their place: securely fasten on 
straps. 

We will pour forth the well that hath a copious stream, 
flowing well that never fails. 

* may the body of the cow offered in Baciifice be the expiation for the b< 
the saci ificer, enabling him to attain sivurya. Or may the milk be tl 
rective «>f the Soma ’--Wilson. 

11 The. heaienltj udder .* the clouds of the firmament 

12 Save from demy : thin i-s Piof. Ludwig’s inteipictotion of the o 
word jaiuniptffh, winch me.iii', necoiding to SAyana, replenishing the 
of thy worshippers The last line is explained differently by SAyana.— 
fore) Duvasyu hastens in front of ihe \ictim cow, (leading it) with a 8 
c<»rd.’ — WiLon. According to the same authority i he meauing of tie 
of stanzas 1 — 11 is : — ‘ We long for the universal Aditi.’ 

*1 Dadhikr&s : probably a personification of the Morning Sun. *■ 

20 1 ; IV. 38. 2 ; 40. 5 note. 

2 Ship: sacrifice, repiesented under this figure. . , 

3 In this and the follow ing stanzas sacrifice is figuratively *P° 

* ploughing, sowing and reaping. See Satapatha-Br^limuna, > It* 

n TC XLI. 320). 



TBE RIQVEDA. 


stun 101 .] 


m 


$ I pour the water from the well with pails prepared and goodly 
straps, 

Unfailing, fall, with plenteous stream. 

7 Refresh the horses, win tho prize before you : equip a chariot 

fraught with happy fortune. 

Pour forth the well with stone wheel, wooden buckets, the 
drink of heroes, with the trough for armour. 

8 Prepare the cow-stall, for there drink your heroes : stitch ye 

the coats of armour, wide and many. 

Make iron forts, secure fiom all assailants : let not your pit- 
cher leak : stay it securely. 

9 Hither, for help, I turn the holy heavenly mind of you the 

Holy Gods, that longs for sacrifice. 

May it pour milk for us, even as a stately cow who, having 
sought the pasture, yields a thousand streams. 

10 Pour golden juice within the wooden vessel ; with stone-made 

axes fashion ye and form it. 

Embrace and compass it with tenfold giidle, and to both 
chariot-poles attach the car-horse. 

11 Between both poles the car-horse goes pressed closely, as in 

his dwelling moves the doubly-wedded. 

Lay in the wood the Sovran of the Forest, and sink the well 
although yo do not dig it. 

10 Indra is he, 0 men, who gives us happiness : sport, urge the 
giver of delight to win us strength. 

Bring quickly down, 0 priests, hither to give us aid, to drink 
the Soma, Indra Son of Nishtigrt. 


f The sacrifice is a chariot ; and the ritual is a race. The well : the stream 
Soma juice. Stone wheel : with allusion to the pi ess-stones. 

8 The cow-stall : figuratively, for the place where the Swna is pressed. 
fits of armour; the filters for straining the juice. Iron forts: the 
guards obtained by sacrificing. 

& Milk: abundant blessing. 

with allusion to the press stones. Tenfold girdle : the fingers 
both hands. Both chariot- poles : the arms. The car-horse: the upper 
*>*8tone ; or the pestle. 

J 1 The doubly- wedded : the man who has two wives. The comparison is 
fear. The Sowan of the F<rrcst : the Soma plant. Sin* the well : ‘store 
1 juice.'— Wilson. 

J? J follow Siyana in hid interpretation of the first line. Von Roth, 
L & * n d Gra8smann explain it differently. Nishtigrt : meaning according 
M th*’ W ^° 8wa H° w 8 U P her rival wife Nisbti, i. e, Diti,’ is said to be 




542 TO# HYMNS OF [HOOK X 


HYMN HU. India 


For thee may Indra, boldly speed the car that works on eithei 
side. 

Favour us, Much-invoked ! in this most glorious fight ag.unsi 
the raiders of our wealth. 

2 Loose in the wind the woman’s robe was streaming what tiim 

she won a car-load worth a thousand. 

The charioteer in fight was Mudgalani : she, India’s dart, heap 
ed up the prize of battle. 

3 0 Indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughte 

us : 

The weapon both of Dasa and of Arya foe keep far away, ( 
Maghavan. 

4 The bull in joy had drunk a lake of water. His shattering 

horn encountered an opponent. 

Swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he stretched In 
forefeet, fain to win and triumph. 

5 They came anear the bull ; they made him thunder, made him 

pour rain down ere the fight was ended. * 

And MudgaU thereby won in the contest well-pastured kirn 
m hundreds and in thousands. 

6 In hope of victory that bull was harnessed : Kesi the drive 

urged him on with shouting. * 

As lie ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels presi 
ed close on Mudgalani. 


The deified subject of the hymn is said to be, alternatively, Drughana (Mac 
Club or Hammer. See stanza 9). The Rislii is Mudgala 
According to the legend quoted by Sftyuna, all Mudgala’. 

Helen except an old ox which he barneyed to hi. wagon and wnt in punu 
of the Jobbers He threw his club or mace before him, which showed him 
*ay to the thieves, and thus recovered his property. 

1 For thee : 0 Mudgala. That workt on either tide : mitlMAtam : accon 
ing to Siyana = aeahtljam, ‘ that has uo companion. The meaning 

t *2 > tiudgaWit . Mudgala’. wife. Indra' s dart : sped swiftly on her way 1 
I ndra. 

3 This stanza seems to be an interpolation. 

4 The bull . apparently one of the buffaloes which drew the cario 

gal Ant's chief opponent Had drunk : just before the fig ? hei 

Led an : meaning, perhaps, that fee ng uneaa.T he tung h^ ^ 

aod struck the ground with his horns. He cleft the tnou P 
against the enemy.' — Wilson. . • according 

* 6 In hope of victory : kaU>’dave : the meanmg ^ tlut the farth 

SAyana, ‘ for the destruction of the enemy. Ludwig think 



//r.v.v n/2 j 


THE MOVE I) A 


M 3 


■ Deftly for Mm lu* stretched the car-pole forward, guided the 
bull thereto and firmly yoked bun. 6 

Iudra vouchsafed the lo-d of cows his favour : with mighty 
steps tlie buffalo ran onward. ° 7 


8 Touched by the go id the shagjry beist went nobly, bound to 

the pole by the yoke's thong of leather. 

Performing deeds of might for many people, he, looking on the 
cows, gamed strengrh and vigour. ° 

9 Hire look upon this mace, this bull’s companion, now lying 

midway on the field of bitt’e. J 

Therewith hath Mndgala m ordered contest won for cattle fur 
himself, a hundred thousand 


:0 Far is the evil : who hath here beheld it* Hither they bi in* 
the bull whom they are yoking. * ° 

To this they gi ve not either food°or water Reaching beyond 
the pole it gives direct ions. 

I Like one forsaken, she hath found a husband, and teemed as 
if her breast were full and flowing. 

With swiftly-racmg chariot m ly we conquer, and rich and 
blessed be our gains in battle. 

i Thou, Iudra, art the mark whereon the eyes of all life rest, 
when thou, 

A Bull who drivest with thy bull, wilt win the race together 
with thy weakling friend. 


7 Mud^ala a better fortune is now reined j F or him fur bin own buffalo. 

!e: Hudgala. Car-pole • I full ow Ludwig's conjecture , but it is uncertain 
f " at P'Wt °f the chariot the pvadhl wis , * the periphery of the wheel,’ aceurd- 
w» the St. Petersbmg Lexicon; ‘the fiarnc of the waggon ’--Wilson. 

• 8 explanation is not very ch’ar, but he oecins to think that the linchpin 

'intended. Non* of these three explanations seems suitable here. Tne lord 
Uoin • the bull buffalo. 

mace; drxujhandm • according to Slyina, the club which MudgaU had 
! mc(1 w ith him on his expedition, and which, together with the ox that drew 
118 car had enabled him to recover hie cattle, /.y/717 midway after the vic- 
^f 18, had thrown down tna tmve upon the field of bbtile.- Ludwig 
' find tliie stanza unintelligiule l'erhup* the second line contains the 
S® r ui of that part of the legend which mentions the club throw u m front of 
jciariot to point out the way that the robber h id taken. 
nlktAii* 01 ‘- : P'lrirrUcUv a: ‘Apparently Mudgalftnt was a pari- 

ttiad** a hghtly esteemed in comparison with the favourite wife] who 
lirii) 6 aine, . , ^ M i° r her sterility by driving her husband’s chariot to battle and 
him buck victorious, with the booty which she had helped him to 
°f 'he child 1 on that she bid not borne him ’—Ludwig. 

1 , My bull : tby fierce and strong thunderbolt With thy weakling 

tlWnr. ^e mortal man whom thou protected, and who is weak and 



*44 


TEE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK } 


HYMN CIII. Indr , 

Swift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens his horn 
terrific, Stirling up tho people, 

With eyes that close not, bellowing, Sole Hero, Indra subdue 
at once a hundred armies. 

2 W 7 ith him loud-roaring, ever watchful, Victor, bold, hard 1 

overthrow’, Rouser ot‘ battle, 

Indra the Strong, whose hand bears arrows, conquer, i 
warriors, now, now vanquish in the combat. 

3 He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, Indra wl 

with his band brings hosts together, 

Foe conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, with mighi 
bow, shooting with well-laid arrows. 

4 Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demon 

driving off our focmen. 

Be thou protector of our cars, destroyer, victor in battl 
breaker-up of armies. 

5 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, might 

and fierce, victorious, all-subduing, 

The Son of Conquest, passing men and heroes, kino-winne 
mount thy conquering car, 0 Indra. 

6 Cleaver of stalls, kiuc winner, armed with^hunder, who que 

an army and with might destroys it, — 

Follow him, brothers! quit yourselves like heroes, and lii 
this Indra show your zeal and coinage. 

7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra, t 

pitiless Hero, wild with atiiier, 

Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless, — may he protect o 
armies in our battles. 

8 Indra guide these : Brihaspati precede them, the guerdc 

and the sacrifice, and Soma ; 

And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of heaver 
hosts that conquer and demolish. 

satisfactorily. I have followed in some stanzas tho interpretations of I 
authors of Vedixche Studien, I. pp. 124 and 138. But see the later tranBlat 
and exhaustive dir'cu^sion by Prof. Geldner in Part II. pp. 1—22, and Pi 
Ludwig’s remarks theieon ia Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten uuf dm Qebitle\ 

Fgveda-forsch u n g. 

The hymn is a prayer for aid and victory in battle. 

8 Guide thete : be the leader of our troops. The guerdon: ddktkind: 
reward of the nriesLs who oerfoim tho saciiftce offered before battle. 



THE RIO VEDA. 


UYXV 104 .] 


545 


9 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King Varuna, and 

Maruts, and Adityas. 

Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer high-minded Gods 
who cause the worlds to tremble. 

10 Bristle thou up, 0 Maghavan, our weapons : excite the spirits 

->f my warring heroes. 

Urge on the strong steeds’ might, 0 Vritra-slayer, and let the 
din of conquering cars go upward. 

11 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered : victorious be 

the arrows of our army. 

May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods, protect 
us in the shout of onset. 

12 Bewildering the senses of our foemcn, seize thou their bodies 

and depart, 0 Apva. 

Attack them, set their hearts on fire and burn them : so let 
our foes abide in utter darkness. 

13 Advance, 0 heroes, win the day. M;iy India be your sure 

defence. 

Exceeding mighty be your arms, that none may wound or in- 
jure you. 

HYMN CIV. Indra. 


Soma hath flowed for thee, Invoked of many ! Speed to our 
sacrifice with both thy Coursers. 

To thee have streamed the songs of mighty singers, imploring 
Indra, drink of our libation 

2 Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, and fill 

thee full, 0 Lord of Tawny Horses. 

0 Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stonos have 
mixed for thee enhance thy rapture. 

3 To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to thee, the 

Bull, 0 thou whom Bay Steeds carry. 

Here take delight, 0 Indra, in our voices while thou art 
hymned with power and all our spirit. 

4 0 Mighty Indra, through thine aid, thy prowess, obtaining 

life, zealous, and skilled in Order, 

}} When our flags are gathered: ‘apparently comparable with the signis 
C0, ktu of the Romans.— Ludwig. 

12 4pvd ; according to S&yana, a female deity who preside* over sin: 
cording to M'thtdhara, fiickn&s, or fear. Apparently Apvi waa a sort of 
l J»or dysentery, likely to attack Boldiers in the field. And depart : or, p<vs 

U, X^° not attack ui 



,546 


tu& nxuiva vr 


1 * 00 * , 


Men in the house who share the Bacred banquet stand aingi n 
praise that brings them store of children. 

5 Through thy directions, Lord of Tawny Coursers, thine wti 

art firm, splendid, and blest, the people 
Obtain most liberal aid for their salvation, and praise the 
Indra, through thine excellencies. 

6 Lord of the Bays, come with thy two Bay Horses, come 

our prayers, to drink the juice of Soma. 

To thee comes sacrifice which thou acceptest : thou, skilh 
in holy rites, art he who giveth. 

7 Him of a thousand powers, subduing foeioen, Maghavan pra 

cd with hymns and pleased with Soma, — 

Even him our songs approach, resistless Indra : the adoratio: 
of the singer laud him. 

8 The way to bliss for Gods and man thou foundest, Inch 

seven lovely floods, divine, untroubled, 

Wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, ai 
nine-and-ninety flowing streams of water. 

9 Thou from the curse didst free the mighty Waters, and: 

their only God didst watch and guard them. 

0 Indra, cherish evermore thy body with those which th( 
hast won in quelling Vritra. 

10 Heroic power and noble praise is Indra: ^rea, the song w< 

ships him invoked of nouny. 

Vritra he quelled, and g we men room and freedom : Saki 
victorious, hath conquered armies. 

11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in tl 

fight where spoil is gathered, 

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who sla 
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 

HYMN CV. I* 


When, Vasu, wilt thou love the laud? Now let the chani 
bring the stream. 

The juice is ready to ferment. __ 

8 Didst move the ocean : didst bring the sea of rain from heaven. 

9 Those: waters. W+rag 

11 This is the concluding verse of several hymns of the Visvamwr 

B °l°Va«it: Indra. Let the channel bring the stream .* to the Somajj 
which has stood long enough for fermentation —Ludwig. The P™*® 
is very obscure, and Sayana gives a totally different explanation* 
will he, (like) a dam, obstruct and let loose the long* protracted h 
the sake of wind-driven (lain). Wilson. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


547. 


jlYMN 105.] 

2 He whose two Bay Steeds harnessed well, swerving, pursue 

the Bird’s tail-plumes, 

With flowing manes, like heaven and earth, he is the Lord 
with power to give. 

3 Bereft of skill is Indra, if, like some out-wearied man he fears 
The sinner, when the Mighty hath prepared himself for victory. 

4 Indra with these drives round, until he meets with one to wor- 

ship him : 

Indra is Master of the pair who snort and swerve upon their way. 

5 Borne onward by the long-maned Steeds who stretch them- 

selves as ’twere for food, 

The God who wears the he^m defends them with his jaws. 

6 The Mighty sang with Lofty Ones : the Hero fashioned with 

his strength, 

Like skilful Matarisvan with his power and might, 

7 The bolt, vhich pierced at once the vitals of the Dasyu easy 

to be slain, 

With jaw uninjured like the wondrous firmament. 

8 Grird off our 9ins : with song will we conquer the men who 

sing no hymns : 

Not easily art thou pleased with prayerless sacrifice. 

9 When threefold flame burns high for thee, to rest on poles of 

sacrifice, 

Thou with the living joyest in the self-bright Ship. 

2 The Bird : the allusion seems to be to a race between the horses of Indra 
and those of Sfirya or the Sun who is the Bird of the heavens.— -Ludwig. Like 
heaven and earth : the meaning of rajf is unknown. SAyana explains the word 
by ‘heaven and earth,’ or ' sun and moon ; ’ but these are mere guesses. Prof. 
Ludwig thinks that two animals of some kind (‘ rajitiere,’ ‘ raj i -beasts’) are 
meant. In YI . 26 6, Raji is said by Sftyana to be the name of a maiden. 

3 The timers : Vritra, the chief of sinners, according to Sftyana. Or pffpaje 
may be a verb, and the stanza maj be rendered : — ‘ Without them Indra holds 
bin still, like a man weary and alarmed, Vf hen he hath made himself ready 
jbr noble deed.’ — See Pischel, Vedische Studien } I. p. 198. 

4 Is Master : literally ‘ hero.’ The meaning apparently is that when Indra 
meets with a worshipper he stops his horses and attends the sacrifice. 

5 Who wears the helm: fiprinivdn ; 1 possessing mighty jaws.’— Wilson. With 
his jaws : with his roar, the thunder. 

$ Lofty Ones: the Maruta. , . , . A , * .... 

7 The stanza is obscure. I follow Prof Ludwig’s interpretation of Atrf- 
^ hirim/in , which mean, according to Sftyana, * gold-bearded ’ and ‘ lord of 
horses.’ * 

J J l^nd off: remove them by whetting. * Comminute,’— Wilson. 

~~ Threefold fhrpo naored fires. The living: the sacnficer. 



548 


TEE HYMNS OP 


[BOOR i 


1 0 Thy glory waa the speckled cup, thy glory was the flawless scoon 
Wherewith thou pourest into thy receptacle. 

1 1 As hundreds, 0 Immortal God, have sung to thee, so hat! 

Sumitra, yea, Durmitra praised thee here, 

What time thou holpest Kutsa’s son, when Dasyus fell, ye; 
holpest Kutsa’s darling when the Dasyus died. 


o 


3 


HYMN CYI. 


Asvin 


This very thing ye Twain hold as your object : ye weave you 
songs as skilful men weave garments. 

That ye may come united have I waked you : ye spread on 
food like days of lovely weather. 

Like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, and seek lik 
eager guests your bidder’s banquet. 

Ye are like glorious envoys mid the people : like bulls, ai 
proach the place where ye are watered. * 1 

Like the two pinions of a bird, connected, like two choice an 
mals, ye have sought our worship. 

Bright as the fire the votary hath kindled, ye sacrifice i 
many a spot as roamers. 


4 Ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong, i 
your splendour and like kings for conquest ; 

Like rays for our enjoyment, Lords to feed us, ye, like quii 
hearers, have obeyed our calling. * 

9 Like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in dept! 
like feet for one who fords a shallow. 

Like ears ye will attend to him who orders : ye Two enj 
our wondrous work as sharers. 


Like toiling bees ye bring to us your honey, as bees into t 
hide that opens downward. 


10 Cup : upastchant: a ladle or cup used for sprinkling. Thy receptac 
drinking-yessel, or perhaps Agni, that is, the fire, may be intended. 

11 Svmitra and Durmitra are alternative names of the llishi of the hyr 
Kutsa's son: Durmitra himself, according to Sllyana. 

The metres in some places are Home what irregular, the meanings of bo 
words are uncertain, and the hymn generally is obscure. Prof. Grassim 
has placed the hymn in his Appendix. 

4 Like rays for our enjoyment : Mike brooms to sweep with,’ according 
Prof. Ludwig. 

I do not attempt the hopeless task of translating stansas 5, 6, 7, 8 
which nearly every word is a difficult riddle. See Appendix. 

10 The hide that opens downward : the honey*comb is compared to a 
akin inverted. I cannot translate intelligibly the second line ‘like 1 
labourers you are dripping with perspiratiou, like a tired cow eating a* 
herbage, you attend (the sacrifice!/ — Wil«nn 



THE RJQVEDA. 


549 


BYMS 107.] 

11 May we increase the laud and gain us vigour: come to our 
80 ng, ye whom one chariot carries. 

Filled be our kine with ripened meath like "glory : Bhutansa 
hath fulfilled the Asvins’ longing. 


HYMN CVII. Dakshiul 


Thbsb men’s great bounty hath been manifested, and the 
whole world of life set free from darkness. 

Great light hath come, vouchsafed ns by the Fathers: ap- 
parent is the spacious path of Guerdon. 

2 High up in heaven abide the Guerdon-givers : they who give 

steeds dwell with the Sun for ever. 

They who give gold are blest with life eternal : they who give 
robes prolong their lives, 0 Soma. 

3 Not from the niggards— for they give not freely— comes Meed 

at sacrifice, Gods’ satisfaction : 

Yea, many men with hands stretched out with Guerdon 
present their gifts because they dread dishonour. 

4 These who observe mankind regard oblation as streamy Vayu 

and light-finding Arka. 

They satisfy and give their gifts in synod, and pour in streams 
the seven-mothered Guerdon. 

b He who brings Guerdon comes as first invited : chief of the 
hamlet conics the Guerdon-hearer. 

Him I account the ruler of the people who was the first to 
introduce the Guerdon. 

6 They call him llishi, Brahman, Sima-chanter, reciter of the 
laud, leader of worship. 

The brightly-shining God’s three forms he knoweth who first 
bestowed the sacrificial Guerdon. 


The hymn eulogitee Dakshint, the largess, guerdon, or ''^^'“ZTere' 
'1 by the inatitutors of the sacrifices to the priests who p ,, xj j 
Mies. The yajamina, who give this guerdon liberally are alternatively 

he deified subjects of the hymu . 

1 Tutu men : the wealthy inatitutors of the sacrifice. Fatter • : who are 
the embodiments and guardiaus of the light. 

4 These toko obterve mankind . the Maghavans or weaH^Jio ^ 

ftot consider the coet of sacrifice, but regard it as an Wind-God 

to show their liberality? and to gain the avourofVJyuthe ms 

*ho brings counties, showers of rain, and Arka or the Sun ww g. 

SaiMwrtW; originating in, and accompanying, seven ««“• 

*«e;or. t- *« ’ 1 



560 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR l 

7 Guerdon bestows the horse, bestows the bullock, Guerdoi 

bestows, moreover, gold that glisters. 

Guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit. He who i 
wise takes Guerdon for his armour. 

8 The liberal die not, never are they ruined : the liberal sufFe 

neither harm nor trouble. 

The light of heaven, the universe about us, — all this dot] 
sacrificial Guerdon give them. 

9 First have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, and go 

themselves a bride in fair apparel. 

The liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, and cod 
quered those who, unprovoked, assailed them. 

10 They deck the fleet steed for the bounteous giver: the mai< 

adorns herself and waits to meet him. 

His home is like a lake with lotus-blossoms, like the Gods 
palaces adorned and splendid. 

11 Steeds good at draught convey the liberal giver, and light! 1 

rolling moves the car of Guerdon. 

Assist, ye Gods, tho liberal man in battles : the liberal give 
conquers foes in combat. 

HYMN CVIII. SaramA. Pani, 

What wish of Sarama hath brought her#hither ? The patl 
leads far away to distant places. 

What charge hast thou for us ? Where turns thy journey ? Ho\ 
hast thou made thy way o’er Rasa’s waters. 

2 I come appointed messenger of Indra, seeking your ampl 
stores of wealth, 0 Panis. 

This hath preserved me from the fear of crossing : thus hav 
I made my way o’er RasA’s waters. 

9 Draught of liquor: antahptyam stirdydh: ‘deep potations of wine.’— Wilsor 

10 The maid adorns hei sdf ; ‘ he obtains a brilliant damsel for his portioi 
— Muir. 

11 Car of Guerdon: ct I. 123. 1. 

The hymn ig a colloquy between SaramA, the messenger of the Gods or c 
Indra (see I. 62. 3, note ; 72. 8 ; III. 31. 6; V. 45. 8), and the Panis or enviou 
demons who have carried off the cows or rays of light which Indra wiBhes t 
recover. SaramA and the Panis are alternately subject and Riahi. 

1 The Papis address SaramA who has found her way to the rocky strong 
hold i» whioh the stolen cows are imprisoned. The Panis speak the uneve 
stanzas* with the exception of stanza 11, and SaramA the even. “ 
this place a mythical stream that flows round the atmosphere and the ear 
See V. 41. 16. In I. 112. 12, and V. 63. 9, Ras& appear® to be a river of tn 
Paniftb. nrobablv an affluent of the Indus. Sea Zimmer. Altinduehes l* 



THE R1QVEDA. 


551 


$YMX 108 .] 


3 What is that Indra like, what is his aspect whose envoy, Sarama, 
from afar thou comest 1 

Let him approach, and we will show him friendship : he shall 
be made the herdsman of our cattle. 


4 I know him safe from harm : but he can punish who sent me 

hither from afar as envoy. 

Him rivers flowing with deep waters hide not. Low will ye lie, 
0 Panis, slain by Indra. 

5 These are the kine which, Sarama, thou seekest, flying, 0 Blest 

One, to the ends of heaven. 

Who will loose these for thee without a battle 1 Yen, and sliai p- 
pointed are our warlike weapons, 
ti Even if your wicked bodies, 0 ye Panis, were arrow-proof, your 
words are weak for wounding ; 

And were the path to you as yet unmastered, Brihaspati in 
neither case will spare you. 

7 Paved with the rock is this our treasure-chamber ; filled full 

of precious things, of kine, and horses. 

These Panis who are watchful keepers guard it. In vain hast 
thou approached this lonely station. 

8 Ilishis will come inspirited with Soma, Angirases unwearied, 

and Navagvas. 

This stall of cattle will they part among them : then will the 
Panis wish these words unspoken. 

9 Even thus, 0 Sarama, hast thou come hither, forced by celest- 

ial might to make the journey. 

Turn thee not back, for thou shalt be our sister : 0 Blest One, 
we will give thee of the cattle. 

10 Brotherhood, sisterhood, I know not either: the dread Angi- 

rases and Indra know them. 

They seemed to long for kine when I departed. Hence, into 
distance, be ye gone, 0 Panis. 

H Hence, far away, ye Panis! Let the cattle lowing come forth 
as holy Law commandeth, 

Kine which Brihaspati, and Soma, Rishis, sages, and pressing- 
stones have found when hidden. 


6 Weak for wounding : 1 not in the place of armies,’— Wilson. Brihaspati .- 
48 M*’ 8 companion and ally in battle. . 

8 Navaga; members of a mythological family, forming a division the 
Angiraaea or closely connected with them. With Am words unspoken ; more 
7 all L reject them from th«ir mouths ; retract their threats, 
p f^ n . 0tc ; allied by such ties of kinship. 


SAvana assiens it 



552 Tllh HYMNS OF [BOOK 

HYMN CIX. Vwedev 

These first, the boundless Sea, and Matarisvan, fierce-glowi 
Fire, the Strong, the Bliss-bestower, 

And heavenly Floods, first-born hy holy Order, exclaiir 
against the outrage on a Brahman. 

2 King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made restitution 

the Brahman’s consort. 

Mitra and Varuna were the inviters : Agni as Hotar took 1 
hand and led her. 

3 The man, her pledge, must by her hand be taken when tl] 

have cried, She is a Brahman’s consort 
She stayed not for a herald to conduct her : thus is the kii 
dom of a ruler guarded. 

4 Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Rishis who si 

thorn down to their austere devotion : 

Dire is a Brahman’s wife led home by others : in the Bupre 
est heaven she plants confusion. 

5 The Brahmach&ri goes engaged in duty: he is a member 

the Gods’ own body. 

Through him Brihaspati obtained his consort, as the Gc 
gained the ladle brought by Soma. ^ 

6 So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the woman ba 

again. 

The Kings who kept their promises restored the Brahmai 
wedded wife. 

7 Having restored the Brahman’s wife, and freed them, withGui 

aid, from sin, 

, They shared the fulness of the earth, and won themseb 
extended sway. 

The hymn haa been translated by th rt author* of Sltbwzig Lieder den It 
i-da. See also Mme. ZiSnalde It.igozin, Vcdic India , p. 256. 

1 Outrage on a Brahman : ‘ BrahmA’s sin,’ according to SAyana. 

5 Rrah mac h 4 rt : a religious student. For his glorification, see Hymn* 
the Atharva veda. XI. 5 ' The ladle : juhvAm : Prof Ludwig takes it to b< 
} roper name : — * Juhd. 0 Gods, conducted home by Sotna.’ 

The wife of a Brahman appears to have been taken to his home by a 
triya, and then restored A legend quoted by SAyana says that Junu or 
t*ie wife of Brihaspati who is identifiod with Brahmft, had been deser 
her hush'nd. The Gods then consulted together rs to the means of expi 
his sin. and restored her to him. See Wilson's Translation. ^ 

fru- ktrmn ta an almrut uni n tallied hie fragment 4Ud of OODQpatatively 



553 


\ ff ygN 110.] THE E 10 VEDA. 

HYMN CX. Aprta. 

| Thou in the house of man this day enkindled worshippest 

1 GodB as God, 0 Jatavedas. 

Observant, bright as Mitra, bring them hither : thou art a 
sapient and foreknowing envoy. 

2 Tanflnap&t, fair-tongued, with sweet meath balming the paths 

and ways of Order, make them pleasant. 

Convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy thoughts 
our hymns of praise and worship. 

3 Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, 0 Agni, come ac- 

cordant with the Vasus. 

Thou art, 0 Youthful Lord, the Gods’ Invoker, so, best of 
Sacrifices, bring them quickly. 

4 By rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a robe to 

clothe this earth when dawns are breaking. 

Widely it spreads around and far-extended, fair for the Gods 
and bringing peace and freedom. 

5 Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like wives who 

deck their beauty for their husbands. 

Lofty, celestial, all-impelling Portals, admit the Gods and 
give them easy entrance. 

\ Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, each close 
to each, be seated at their station, — 

Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them, assuming all 
their fair and radiant beauty. 

i Come the two first celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, arranging 
sacrifice for man to worship, 

As singers who inspire us in assemblies, showing the eastward 
light with their direction. 

R Let Bharati come quickly to our worship, and I]a showing like 
a human being. 

•So let Saras vati and both her fellows, deft Goddesses, on this 
fair grass bo seated. 

9 Hotar more skilled in sacrifice, bring hither with speed to-day 
God Tvashtar, thou who knowest, 

Even hun who formed these two, the Earth and Heaven, the 
Parents, with their forms, and every creature. 

^®® preceding hymns addressed to the Bame deities and deifiod objects . 

1 8 1 142, 188 ; II. 8 ; III. 4 ; V. 5 ; VII. 2 ; and IX. 5. 

, 1 J 4tavtda$ aud Tan&nnnAt are names of A*ni The Door t of the sacrificial 



554 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK . 


10 Send to our offerings which thyself thou balmest the Cot 
panies of Gods in ordered season. Ui 

Agni, Vanaspati the Immolator sweeten our offered gift WI * 
meath and butter. * 11 


11 Agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacrifice an 
was the Gods’ preceder. ’ 

May the Gods eat our offering consecrated according to thi 
true Priest’s voice and guidance. 


HYMN CXI. Imlt . 

Bring forth your sacred song ye prudent singers, even as at 
the thoughts of human beings. 

Let us draw Indra with true deeds anear us : he loves ou 
songs, the Hero, and is potent. 

2 The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship : to tli 

kme came the Bull, the Heifer’s Offspring. 

With mighty bellowing hath he arisen, and hath pervadci 
even the spacious regions. 

3 Indra knows, verily, how to hear our singing, for he, victori 

ous, made a path for Sfirya. 

Ho made the Cow, and he became the Sovran of Heaven 
primeval, matchless, and unshaken. * 

4 Praised by Angirases, Indra demolished with might the work 

of the great watery monster. 

Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his trutl 
supported earth’s foundation. 

5 The counterpart of heaven and earth is Indra : he knowetl 

all libations, slayeth Sushna. 

The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended, and, best o 
pillars, stayed it with a pillar. 

6 The Vritra-slayer with his bolt felled Vritra: the magic of 

the godless, waxen mighty, 

Here hast thou, Bold Assailant, boldly conquered. Yea, thei 
thine arms, 0 Maghvan, were potent. 


2 The hint: who are milked for sacrificial purposes. The Bull : Indra. Th 
Heifer' t Offering : cp. IV. 18. 10 : ‘ The Heifer bath brought forth the strong 
the mighty, the unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra ’ The Heifer is Aditi. 

3 He made the Cow : the words mfruton gdh, the cow, ‘ the female oi 

the bull.’ — Huir; * Des Stieres Weib,’ — Grasamann, — are difficult. * r0 
Ludwig suggests that the earth may be intended. 



THE RIGVEDA. 


555 


HYMN 112 .] 

] When the Dawns come attendant upon S&rya their rays dis- 
cover wealth of divers colours. 

The Star of heaven is seen as ’twere approaching : none 
knoweth aught of it as it departeth. 

8 Far have they gone, the first of all these waters, the waters 
that flowed forth when Indra sent them. 

Where is their spring, and where is their foundation 1 Where 
now, ye Waters, is your inmost centre ] 

Q Thou didst free rivers swallowed by the Dragon ; and rapidly 
they set themselves in motion, 

Those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom. 
Excited now to speed they run unresting. 

10 Yearning together they have sped to Smdhu : the Fort-des- 
troyer, praised, of old, hath loved them. 

Indra, may thy terrestrial treasures reach us, and our full 
songs of joy approach thy dwelling. 

HYMN CXII Indra. 

Drink of the juice, 0 Indra, at thy pleasure, for thy first 
draught is early morn’s libation. 

Rejoice, that thou mayst slay our foes, 0 Hero, and we with 
lauds will tell thy mighty exploits. 

2 Thou hast a car more swift than thought, 0 Indra ; thereon 

come hither, come to drink the Soma. 

Let thy Bay Steeds, thy Stallions, hasten hither, with whom 
thou comest nigh and art delighted. 

3 Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splend- 

our of the Sun adorn it. 

0 Indra, turn thee hitherward invited by us thy friends ; be 
seated and be joyful. 

4 0 thou whose grandeur in thy festive transports not even these 

two great worlds have comprehended. 

Come, Indra, with thy dear Bay Horses harnessed, come to our 
dwelling and the food thou lovest. 

0 Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma whereof 
thou, Indra, ever drinking, 

Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, which prompts 
the mighty flow of thine abundance. 

Star of heaven; the Sun. Departeth: on its nightly journey from 
to e&at 



556 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK 


6 Found from of old is this thy cup, 0 Indra : 0 Satakrat 

drink therefrom the Soma. 

Filled is the beaker with the moath that gladdens, the beak 
which all Deities delight in. 

7 From many a side with proffered entertainment the folk a 

calling thee, 0 Mighty Indra. 

These our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meatl 
drink thereof and find them pleasant. 

8 I will declare thy deeds of old, 0 Indra, the mighty acts whic 

thou hast first accomplished. 

In genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that tl 
Brahman easily found the cattle. 

9 Lord of the hosts, amid our bands be seated : they call thi 

greatest Sage among the sages. 

Nothing is done, even far away, without thee : great, wondrou 
Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee. 

10 Aim of our eyes be thou, for we implore thee, 0 Maghavai 
Friend of friends and Lord of treasures. 

Fight, Warrior strong in truth, fight thou the battle: given 
our share of undivided riches. 

HYMN CXIII. Indr 


The Heavens and the Earth accordant with all Gods encou 
aged graciously that vigorous might of his. 

When he came showing forth his majesty and power, he (Iran 
of Sonia juice and waxed exceeding strong. 

2 This majesty of his Vishnu extols and lauds, making the stal 

that gives the meath flow forth with might. 

When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him had 
ten Vritra he deserved the choice of Gods. 

3 When, bearing warlike weapons, fain to win thee praise, t o 

mettest Vritra, yea, the Dragon, for the fight* , 

Then all the Maruts who were gathered with thee tne 
tolled, 0 Mighty One, thy poweiful majesty. 

4 Soon as ho sprang to life he forced asunder hosts : forwar 

Hero looked to manly deed and war. , 

He cleft the rock, he let concurrent streams flow ton ■ . 
with his skilful art stablished the heavens wi 

5 Indra hath evermore possessed surpassing P^ er * e 

far from each other, heaven and earth apart. . y avU 
He hurled impetuous down his iron thunderbolt, J j 

fla’s and Mitra’s worshipper. 

8 The Brahman : according to SAvana. BrahmA who is identic 



THE RIO VEDA . 


BYW 1H *J 


557 


« Th « n t0 the powers of Indra, to his wrath, his the fierce 

Stormer, loud of voice, they came with speed • 

What time the Potent One rent Vritra with his Strength, who 
held the waters back, whom darkness compassed round. 

1 Even in the first of those heroic acts which they who strove 
together came with might to execute, 

Deep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won bv victor* 
the right of being first invoked. ' ^ 


8 Then all the Gods extolled, with eloquence inspired by draughts 

of Soma juice, thy deeds of manly might. & 7 8 9 

As Agni eats the dry food with his teeth, he ate Vritra the 

Dragon, maimed by Imira’s deadly dart. 

9 Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, made 

with singers, with the skilful and the eloquent. 

Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Churnuri, lists to Dabhlti 
for his faithful spirit’s sake. 


10 Give riches manifold with noble horses, to be remembered 
while my songs address thee. 

May we by easy paths pass all our troubles : find us this day 
a ford wide and exteusive. 


HYMN CXIV. Visvedeva, 

Two perfect springs of heat pervade the Threefold, and come 
for their delight is Matarisvan. 

Craving the milk of heaven the Gods are present : well do 
they know the praise-song and the Saman. 

2 The priests heard far away, as they are ordered, serve the 
three Nirfitis, for well they know them. 

Sages have traced the cause that first produced them, dwelling 
in distant and mysterious chambers. 

6 They came : it is uncertain * aether the Gods, or the Maruts, or thr waters 
the understood subject. 

7 Deep darkness fell upon the slain: ‘ Vritra being slain, the thick darkness 
wm destroyed.’— Wilson. 

8 Ut ate: Indra utterly destroyed him. Sftyarm explains in a more matter* 
<>Mact way : people devoured Vritra, that is, the food produced by the waters 

o n Wer ? 00 l° n £ er obstructed by him. 

9 Dhuni and Chumuri were demons and enemies of Indra’s friend Dabhtti. 

S# ? Ml., Index. 

, 1 Springs of heat : gharmA : Agni and Sftrya. The Threefold : the universe, 
8 y« firmament, and earth. tyldtari$van : VAyu, according to SAyana. ‘ Thu* 
5 }, Vo here the well-known triad, Agni, Vftyu, Stirya.’— Ludwig. 

Three Nirpitis : according to S&yapa, heaven, mid-air, and earth, or the 
aeities that control them. Prof. Ludwig thinks that the Dawns are meant, 



553 


THE HYMNS OF 


[book 


3 The Youthful One, well-shaped, with four locks braided bm 

ened with oil, puts on the ordinances. * 

Two Birds of mighty power are seated near her, there wl 
the Deities receive their portion. 

4 One of these Birds hath passed into the sea of air : thence 

looks round and views this universal world. 

With simple heart I have beheld him from anear : his Mol 
kisses him and he returns her kiss. 


5 Him with fair wings though only One in nature, wise sin 1 
shape, with songs, in many figures. 

While they at sacrifices fix the metres, they measure 
twelve chalices of Soma. 

* 

fi While they arrange the four and six-and-thirty, and ( 
order, up to twelve, the measures, 

Having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful sages send* the 
forward with the Rich and Saman. 


7 The Chariot’s majesties are fourteen others : seven sages ] 
it onward with their voices. 

Who will declare to us the ford Apnana, the path whei 
they drink first draughts of Soma? 

S The fifteen lauds are in a thousand places: that is as vas 
heaven and earth in measure. 4 

A thousand spots contain the mighty tnousand. Yak spi 
eth forth as far as Prayer extendeth. 


3 The Youthful One • the altar, represented as a woman. With four 
braided quadrangular, according to Sftyana. Puts on the ordinandi 
dressed or arranged in the manner prescribed for sacrifice. Two B 
probably A"ni and Soma. According to Sftyana, the husband and his 
or the Yftjamfina and the Brahman. 

4 One : Agni as the Sun. His mother • perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig 
Dawn. 

*> Thirty-six fjrahas , chalices, or saucers for Soma juioe or other libs 
are to be used at the Agnishtoma, and four in addition at the Atyagniel 
sacrifice. The meysures • the proper metres for particular rites or pw 
the service. The, Car : the sacrifice. Rich : the holy verse that is re 
Siman : the psalm that is sung or chanted. 

7 Majesties : the abstract used for the concrete, the mighty ones, pro 
the priests. The ford Apndna : the passage leading to the place of sac 
They : the Gods. 

8 That : meaning the fifteen lauds regarded as a whole. Tht * 
thousand : the meaning is uncertain : ‘ the thousand great (functions! 
a thousand places.’ — Wilson. This mefcns, according to S&yanib tna 
function of the body has its appropriate object. Dr. Muir transJ 

‘ t’u.m a thousand times fifteen ukthas A thousand times 

a— Y 71 an 



THE RIGVEDA. 


ok/v 


(0 115 .] 

i What sage hath learned the metres’ application? Who hath 
gained VAk, the spirit’s aim and object? 

Which ministering priest is called eighth Hero ? Who then 
hath tracked the two Bay Steeds of Indra? 

I Yoked to his chariot-pole there stood the Coursers : they only 
travel round earth’s farthest limits. J J 

These, when their driver in his home is settled, receive the 
allotted meed of their exertion. 

HYMN CXV. Agni. 

Verily wondrous is the tender Youngling’s growth who never 
draweth nigh to drink his Mothers’ milk. 

As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his 
great errand, suddenly grew strong. 

! Then Agni was his name, most active to bestow, gathering up 
the trees with his consuming tooth ; b 

Skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, im- 
petuous as a bull that snort eth in the mead. 

1 Pr.iise him, your God who, bird-like, rests upon a tree, scatter- 
ing drops of juice and pouring forth his flood, 

Speaking aloud with flame as with his lips a priest, and broad- 
ening his paths like one of high command. 

1 Thou Everlasting, whom, far-striding fain to burn, the winds, 
uninterrupted, never overcome, 

They have approached, as warriors eager for the fight, heroic 
r rita, guiding him to gain his wish. 

') This Agni is the best of Kanvas, Kanvas’ Friend, Conqueror 
of the foe whether afar or near. 

May Agni guard the singers, guard the princes well : may 
Agni grant to us our princes’ gracious help. 

® thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself the lord of 
Jatavedas, mig htiest of all, 

^ Eighth Hero : Agni is meant, as presiding over the seven ritvijas or 
^mistering priests. * " 

. 1 Mother* are the two fire-sticks, the lower of which, in which the spark 
produced, being the who hath no udder. 

Fnta : according to S&yana, him who is stationed in the three fire- 
eceptaclea, that is, Agni 

o K p vas: a well-known family with which Upastuta was connected, 
f ' , ln 8 to S&yana, worshippers in general are meant : — ‘the most earnest 
the friend of those who praise him ’—Wilson. 
tj^rya (* who hast fair ancestors.’ — Wilson) seems to be an epithet of 
To h AS Pressed by himself. S&yana applies it to Agni. The con- 
* hin 0Ur \ the stapes is difficult, and the translation of the first half, which 
rtJj P? h f u dwig, is somewhat conjectural. Thirtty land : Agni by his 



560 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 

Who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land, most powerf 
prepared to aid us in the wilds. . 

7 Thus noble Agni with princes and mortal men is lauded 

cellent for conquering strength with chiefs, 

Men who are well-disposod as friends and true to Law, e\ 
as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind. 

8 0 Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upastuta’s m 

potent voico reveres thee. 

Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, and lengt 
out the days of our existence. 

9 Thus, Agni, have the sons of Vrishtihavya, the hiatus, 

Upastutas invoked thee. 

Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. V 
Vashat ! have they come, with hands uplifted, with t 
uplifted hands and cries of Glory ! 

HYMN CXVI. h 

Drink Soma juice for mighty power and vigour, drink, Strc 
est One, that thou mayst smito down Vritru. 

Drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches : drink thou 
fill of meath and pour it down, 0 fndra. 

2 Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what ! 

choosest of the flowing Soma. 

Giver of weal, be joyful in thy spirit, tAd turn thee hit 
ward to bless and prosper. 

3 Let heavenly Soma gladden thee, 0 Indra, let that efft 

among mankind delight thee. 

Rejoice in that whereby thougavest freedom, and that wher 
thou conquerest thy foemen. 

4 Let Indra come, impetuous, doubly mighty, to the po’ 

juice, the Bull, with two Bay Coursers. 

With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, gl ut 1 
more thy bolt, 0 Foe-destroyer. 

5 Dash down, outflaming their sharp flaming weapons, the 6ti 

holds of the men urged on by demons. 

I give thee, Mighty One, great strength and conquest 
meet thy foes and rend them in the battle. 

Prof. Grassmann observes : * Das Lied enthalt, namentlich in Vers 
manches Dunkle, godasa bier die Auslegung zwuifelhaft bleibt. 

1 Pour it down : Shower down (blessings).’— Wilson. oat e 

3 Qnvest freedom : by slaying Vritra : or, riches, according translate 
i. Pne.rUntrouer : a rittahft „• according to the 8t. Petersburg/times a t 

- * - *** ’«* y 71 and 



TUB niOVBDA. 


561 


J-W-V 117.] 


Extend afar the votary’s fame and glory, as the firm archer's 
strength drives off the foeman. 

Ranged on our side, grown strong in might that conquers, 
never defeated, still increase thy b*»dy. 

To thee have we presented this oblation : accept it, Sovran 
Ruler, free from anger. 

Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened : eat, Indra, 
drink of that which stirs to meet thee. 

Eat, Indra, these oblations which approach thee: be pleased 
with food made ready and with Soma. 

With entertainment we receive thee friendly : effectual he 
the sacrificer’s wishes. 

I send sweet speech to Indra and to Agni : with hymns I 
speed it like a boat through waters. 

Even thus, the Gods seem moving lound about me, the foun- 
tains and bestowers of our riches. 

HYMN CXVll. Liberality. 

The Gods have not ordained hunger to be our death : even to 
the well-fed man comes death in vaned shape. 

The riches of the liberal never waste away, while he who will 
not give finds none to comfort him. 

The man with food in store who, when the needy comes in 
miserable case begging for bread t.o eat, 

Hardens his heart against him— even when of old he did hint 
sorvico — finds not one to comfort him. 


Bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him 
in want of food and feeble. 

Success attends him in the shout of battle. lie makes a friend 
of him in future troubles. 


No friend is he who to his friend and comrade who comes im- 
ploring food, will offer nothing. 

Let him depart — no home is that to rest in — , and rather seek 
a stranger to support him. 

Let the rich satisfy the poor implorer, and bend his eye upon 
a longer pathway. 

the firm archet't strength: the construction is obscure ‘ (stretch 
% strength like strong bows against our enemies.’ — Wilson. 


eu,0 8 ?i5e8 Liberality or Bounty in the shape of gifts of wealth 

k our death : men must not attempt to justify their refusal of food 
S“ u ]‘^y by saying that the Gods send hunger as & punishment for sm ^ 



Niches come now to one, now to another, and like the wheels 
of cars are ever rolling. 

The foolish man wins food with fruitless labour: that food- 
1 speak the truth — shall be his ruin. 

He feeds no trusty friend, no man to love him. All guilt 1 
he who eats with no partaker. 

The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us, an 
with its feet cuts through the path it follows. 

Better the speaking than the silent Brahman : the liberal frien 
outvalues him who gives not. 

He with one foot hath far outran the biped, and the two-foot e 
catches the threc-footed. 

Four-footed creatures come when bipeds call them, and xtan 
aud look where five are met together. 

The hands are both alike : their Inbour differs. The yield < 
lister mileh-kine is unequal 

T v ins even differ in their strength and vigour : two, even km: 
men, differ in their bounty. 

HYMN CXVIII. Agi 

Aunt, refulgent among men thou slayest the devouring fitm 

Bright Ruler in thine own abode. 

> Thou springest up when woi shipped well : the drops of butt 
aie thy joy 

When ladles are brought near to thee. 

:$ Honoured with gifts he shines afar, Agni adorable with son 

Tike dripping ladle balms his face. 


6 Shull be hit rvLn: with reference to stanza I. 

7 Active exertion is necessary for success. The speakinff Brahman ' 
liest who duly discharges the task of recitation for which he is eug g 
A Brahman expounding (the Veda).’— Wilson. 

8 The victory is not always theirs who appear t© be more richly 

ban others. He vrith one foot ; tkapdd . the Sun appears to be m« 
Uo where called Aja-Ekapftd. See VI 50. 1 4. The biped is man. Jhe tn 
bated is the old man who walks with a staff’ and is overtaken by one 
|.»es not require such assistance Four-footed creatures : dogs. _ Fm: *& 
nen together ; the dogs being at first uncertain whether their ““Tl 
ktn0D cr them or not. Pahktth, sets of five, is apparently used with rei 
o the one, two, three, and four in the preceding competed words, 
xpl.iin nahktfh by ‘steps’ or ‘traces.’ ^ 

I have adopted the explanation given by the authors of the 

9^ All men should be liberal ; but we must not expect all to be equ 
The hymn has been translated' by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. no. 431 



THE RIO VEDA. 


fflfN 119.] 


563 


4 Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, is balmed 

with oil, ~ ' 

Refulgent in his wealth of light. 

5 Praised by our hymns thou kindlestthee, Oblation-bearer for 

the Gods : 5 

As such do mortals call on thee. 

6 To that Immortal Agni pay worship with oil, ye mortal men — 

Lord of the house, whom none deceive. ’ 

7 0 Agni, burn the IUkshasas with thine unconquerable flame ■ 
Shine guardian of Eternal Law. 

* So, Agni, with thy glowing face hum fierce against the female 
fiends, 

Shining among Urukshayas. 

(I Urukshayas have kindled thee, Oblation-bearer, thee, with 
hymns. 

Best Worshipper among mankind. 


HYMN CX1X. Indra. 

I HIS, even this was my resolve, to win a cow, to win a steed : 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

'I Like violent gusts of wind the draughts thai I have drunk 
have lifted me : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

3 The draughts I drank have borne me ap, as fleet-foot horses 
draw a car : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

* hymn hath reached me, lik- a cow who lows to meet her 
darling calf : 

Have I not drunk of Soma /trice? 

a wright bends a chaKot-seat so round my heart I bend the 
hymn : 

Wave l not drunk of *i>oma juice ? 

^ Not as a mote within the eye count the Five Tribes of men 
with me : 

^Have I not dr«nk of Soma juice ? 

8 Urukshay as • members of the Riahi’s family. 

i°&8 *- 8 ^ ra himself in£he form of Lava. He describes his sensa- 

ota r drinking Soma juice. But Bee Bergaigne, 1. 151, who considers it 
\ m 6 .iterance of an exhilarated mortal. 

°ov): to strengthen and inspirit himself for battle, and so to 
6 S&van h° r 8es for his worshippers. 

explains diffi»tAnHv •— .^THa fivo pastes have nnt eluded the plane® 



THE HYMNS OF 


564 


fBOOI X 


U The heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to one 
half of me : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? ! 

8 I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens aud all thi^ 

spacious earth : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

9 Aha ! this spacious earth will I deposit either here or there : 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

10 In one short moment will I smite the earth in fury here or 

there : 

Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

11 One of my flanks is in the sky ; I let the other trail below : 
Havo I not drunk of Soma juice ? 

12 I, greatest of the Mighty Ones, am lifted to the firmament: 
Have I not drunk of Soma juice? 

13 1 seek the worshipper’s abode ; oblation-bearer to the Gods : 

Have I not drunk ot Soma juice? j 

HYMN CXX. hidr&i 


In all tht worlds That was the Best and Highest whence sprang 
the Migf.ty Gods, of splendid valour. 

As soon as bu»*n he overcomes his foemen, he in whom all wlu 
lend him ail are joyful. ^ 

2 Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, he as a fix 

strikes fear into Fae Dasa, 

Eager to wm the breaking and the breathless. All sang th] 
praise at banquet anu oblation. 

3 All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these 

twice or thrice, are thine u^istunts. 


11 Cp. III. 32. 11. , 

13 This stanza is difficult. The word <7>i‘Ad is unintelligible, ana grmani 
as Prof. Ludwig suggests, should, perhaps, bo *ead instead. Oblation-bearer 
Indra, in his excitement, fancies that he is Agn\ p r of. Grasstnann, who wit 
Dr. Muir, considers grih6 to mean servant or minuter, places the stanea * 
his Appendix as a fragment fiom a hymu to Agni. 

The hymn has been tianslited by Dr. Muir. 0 8 T^xts, V. p. 9L by 
authors of the Siebeuzig Lieder, aud by Prof. Peterson, Hymns from the mp 
(Bombay Sanskrit Series). 

1 Th.it: meaning, according to SAyana, Brahma the original cause of 

**2 %*gertoiam: Prof. Ludwig makes sasni an infinitive. 
the correct reading. See Grasnmann, Wtirterbuch sum Rxgwta* 

4m and the breathless : the animate and the inanimate world. -- ^ u ioei 

8 Mental vigour: knitum: ‘ adoration.’ — Wilson. Tmu: ^ 

m. — . .Mitt MfaMinna nAfk&nu thn three daily UoW 



THE RIGVE DA. 


565 


f 0 120 *1 


Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness : win 
quickly with our meaththat meath in battle. 

I Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, at every ban- 
quet are the sages joyful. 

\yph mightier power, Bold God, extend thy firmness -. let not 
malignant Yatudhanas harm thee. 
i proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold 
great wealth the prize of combat. 

I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen 
with my prayer thy vital vigour. 

Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, most energetic, 
Aptya of the Aptyns : 

He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many 
who were deemed his equals. 

Tuou in that hous'e which thy protection guardeth bestowest 
wealth, the higher and the lower. 

Thou stablishest the two much-wandering Mothers, and bring- 
est many deeds to their completion. 

j Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats these holy 
prayers, this strength to India, 
lie rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and all the 
do »rs of light hath he thrown open. 

Thus hath Brihaddiva, tVie great Atharvan, spoken to Indra 
as himself in person. 

The spotless Sisters, they who are his Mothers, with power 
exalt him and impel him onward. 


meter than the sweet : thine own celestial Soma. SAyana explains the 
mza differently ‘To thee all (worshippers) offer adoration, whether those 
ipitiators be two or three. Combine that which is sweeter than the sweet 

tb sweetness, unite that honey with honey.’— Wilson. The 

sording to SAyana. are the sacrifi *3r and his wife and child, and the second 
If of the stanza contaius a reference to the propagation of children. 

I % a : the name of a class of deities, of which Trite Aptya is the chief . 
tat accessible of the accessible.’-Wilson. The first line is without a verb . 
wise him, may be understood. D&nus : a class of demons. 

1 Tkehigherandtkelower: heavenly and earthly. Mothers: Heaven and Earth. 
foremost of lujkt-mnners : according to SAyana, ‘chief of Xujja* 
m of heaven, or servant of Aditya, the Sun, Indra. / 

Region of light. 

Atharvan ; ‘the peat prieet’-Orassmaun. At Mmdftte 
“kSe* himself with the Ood whom he worships. The epotUu ^ 

“ « U. Mother, : according to Sftyans, tbs sisternvers which abide mth. 
**r earth. Von Roth adopts the reading of A£am-veda V.U™» 
of the mdtarttWtfr of Hw text Heaven and Bsrth »PP«« 



566 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X, 

HYMN CXXI. Ka 

In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, born Only Lord of all 
created beings. 

He fixed and holdeth up this earth and heaven. What God 
shall we adore with our oblation ? 


2 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose command 
ments all the Gods acknowledge : 

The Lord of death, whose ‘shade is life immortal. What Goo 
shall we adore with our oblation ? 


3 Who by his grandeur hath become Sole Ruler of all the 

moving world that breathes and slumbers ; 

He who is Lord of men and Lord of cattle. What God sliul 
we adore with our oblation ? 

4 His, through his might, are these snow-covered mountains 

and men call sea and Rasa his possession : 

His arms are these, his are these heavenly regions. What Got 
shall we adore with our oblation 1 

5 By him the heavens are strong and earth is stedfast, by hi ii 

light’s realm and sky-vault are supported : 

By him the regions in mid-air wore measured. What Gmi 
shall we adore with our oblation ? 


C To him, supported by his help, two arrffioa embattled loot 
while trembling in their spirit, , „ 

When over them the risen Sun is shining. What God shall w 


adore with our oblation ? 

7 What time the mighty waters came, containing the univcisi 
germ, producing Agni, _ w , . 

Thence sprang the Gods' one spirit into being, 
shall we adore with our oblation 1 


Ka, kah, (quis) meaning Who ? that is. the Unknown God, . tion 0 f tl 
aa a name to Praj&pau, and to other Gods, from a forced l P ‘ 
interrogative pronoun which occurs in the refrain of each v ,. ^ 

1 Hiranyagarbha: literally ‘the gold-germ ; * source o 8° er . c 
the Sun-god ‘ as the great power of the universe, from wb.ch all J* ^ „ 
and existences, divine aud earthly, are derived, a c ^“ ce P t u e crea tor 
nearest approach to the later mystical conception ofBrahm , ^ ot her 

the world.’— Wallis. What Qod : kdsmai derfya: cui de°? Acoorai g ^ ^ 
* Worship we Ka the God with our oblation.’ According ( ’ 

ing is ‘ What other God than Praj&pati shall we worship ^ 

P 3 Breathes and slumbers : that is of Gods aud men. Of men an 
literally, 4 of quadruped and biped.’ rf v 108 . !• 

4 Sea: air. Ilasd: the mythical river of the firmament. * iu t 

7 Thence : from the coming of the waters. One spirit : * . > 



567 


jl%Y 122.] THE RIQVEDl. 

8 He in his might surveyed the floods containing productive 
force and generating Worship. 

He is the God of gods, and none beside him. What God shall 
we adore with our oblat-iou ? 

g Ne’er may he harm us who is earth’s Begetter, nor he whose 
laws are sure, the heavens’ Creator, 

He who brought forth the great and lucid waters. What God 
shall we adore with our oblation? 

[0 Prajapati! thou only comprehendest all these created things, 
and none beside thee. 

Grant us our hearts’ desire when we invoke thee : may we 
have store of riches in possession. 

HYMN CXXIL AwiI . 

I praisb the God of wondrous might like Indra, the lovely 
pleasant Guest whom all must welcome. 

May Agni, Priest and Master of the household, give hero 
strength and all-sustaining riches. 

2 0 Agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou jmssi n- 

wise who knowest every oidmance. 

Enwrapped in holy oil further the course of prayer: the Gods 
bestow according to thy holy law. 

3 Immortal, wandering round the seven stations, give, a liberal 

Giver, to the pious worshipper, 

Wealth, Agni, with brave sons and ready for his use : welcome 
the man who comes with fuel unto thee. 

4 The seven who bring oblations worship thee, the Strong, the 

first, the Great Chief Priest, Ensign of sacrifice, 

The oil-anointed Bull, Agni who hears, who sends as God full 
hero strength to him who freely gives. 

8 Generating Worship: ‘giving biith to sacrifice.’— Wilson. 

10 Prajdpati : Lord of life, creatures or creation. Savitav the Sun God 
18 so called in 1Y. 53. 2, and Soma Pav.imdna iu IX. 5. 9. Prajdpati w^s&fter- 
wa ^ the name of a separate God, the bestower of progeny and caitle. and 
iometiuaes invoked as the Creator 

Tta hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0 S . Texts , IV., pp. 16, 17 ; 
p rof. Max Muller, A . 8. Lit., p. 569, and Vedic Hymn*, Part I. (Sacred 
°f the East. XXXII) p. 1.- by Mr. Wallis, Comolagy of the Riywl«, 
L v ’ *\ v Prof- Peterson, Hymns from theRigivda . and by Dr. L Scherm-n, 
1 QMphischt Hymnen Am Rig -and Atharva- vedu-Sankitd, p. 24. 

ini Indra : vdsnm na : like the Vasu, or chief Vasu. ‘ Like the sun — 
o^ n ' Riches: or viands. 

i rr» €H Motions: regions of the universe, according to Sftyana. 
fcAlAe seven • 



BC8 THE HYMNS OF [EOOK } 

5 First, messenger art thou, meet for election : drink thou th 
iil! invited to the Amiit. 

The Maiuta in the vot&rv’s bou86 adorned thoe; ^ ith laud 
the Bhrigus gave thee light and glory. 

t'> M .Iking the teeming Cow for all-sustaining food, 0 Wise One 
for the worship-loving worshipper, 

Toon, Agm, dropping oil, thrice lighting works of Law, show 
est thy wisdom circling home and sacrifice. 

7 They who at flushing of this dawn appointed thee their mee 

senger. these men have paid thee reverence. 

(h'ds strengthened thee for work that must be glorified, Agm 
while they made butter pure for sacrifice. 

8 Arrangers in our synods, Agni, while they sang, Vasishtha’i 

sons have called thee down, the Potent One. 

Maintain the growth of wealth with men who sacrifice. Y( 
Guds, preserve us. with your biosing.? eveimore. 

HYMN CXXIII. Ven» 

Sbk, Vena, born in light, hath driven hither, on chariot of the 
air, the Calve* of Pri ni. 

Singers with hymns caress him as an infant there where th( 
waters and the sunlight mingle. 

2 Vena draws up his wave from out the oisan : mist-born, the 

fair one’s hack is made apparent. 

Brightly he shone aloft on Order’s summit: the hosts Bang 
glory to their common birthplace. 

3 Full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling togethei 

stood the Darling’s Mothers. 

Ascending to the lofty height of Order, the bands of singer* 
sip the tueiU of Amrit. 

7 Uadi : here meaning piiesta 1 Verily there are two kinds of god9j for, 
indeed, the gods are the gods, and the BrAlimmia who have studied and teach 
holy lore are the human gods’ {8 itapatha- llrdhmana, II. 2 2. 6 ; S. B. K, 

XII. 802). * 

Vena, ‘the loving Sun ’ of I. 83. 5, Kdvta or 4 the beloved,' is said by the 
Scholiast in this place to be rrvidkyazthiino devaK ‘the God of the middle 

region.* He is, apparently, the Sun as he rises in the mist and dew of tue 

morning. 

1 Prifni, the Speckled Cow, is the variegated cloud, and her Calve* are the 

masses of mist which the Sun dispel*. , 

2 Ocean : the sea of air. On Order's summit : 1 on the summit of J 
course.* — Wallis. Order , here and in the following stanaa, is Kosmos, 
ordered or law- regulated universe. Common birthplace: the sky. 

3 Joint-possession : the child which they have produced in coaMM®* 
Darling's Mothers : the Dawns, or the Waters, or the songs. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


569 


flWV 123 .] 

4 Knowing his form, the sa^es yearned to'meet him : they have 

come nigh to hear the wild Bull’s bellow. 

Performing sacrifice they reached the river : for the Gandbarva 
found the immortal waters. 

5 The Apsaraa, the Lady, sweetly smiling, supports her Lover 

in aublimest heaven. 

Id his Friend’s dwelling as a Friend he wanders: he, Vena, 
rests him on his golden pinion. 

6 They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strong- 

winged bird that mounteth sky-ward ; 

On thee with winizs of gold, Vanina’s envoy, the Bird that 
hasteneth to the home of Yama. 

T Erect, to heaven hath the Gandlmrva mounted, pointing at 
us Ids many-coloured weapons ; 

Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light, 
produceth forms that please us. 

8 When as a spark he cometh near the ocean, still looking with 
a vulture’s eye to heaven, 

His lustre, joying in its own bright splendour, maketh dear 
glories in the lowest region. 


4 The wild Hull's bellow: the sound mile by the dropping Soma juice, 

% Gandhantu : Vena, the rising Sun. 

5 The Apsaras: the celesti.il nymph who symbolizes the waters of heaven. 

'fc Lover: Vena, the Gandhaiva, Surya ‘Ourhjmn illustrates the two 
enses in which the sun is bioueht into connection with t.lio waters , nrs , na 
minting with his beams the watery masses of the skv, and secondly m tne 
wiinilatiou of hn light to the waters, a* soma ot ambrosia, whence the deptns 
I light become the aerial ocean. This association is stereotyped in e un *° n 
i the Gandh irvus and the Apsarases.’— Wallis. H* 3 Friend s dwe mg. e 
fusion of his father Heaven. 

8 Varuna'8 envoy : the setting sun Cf VII 87 5 Yama . Cf. X. 1 
7 dad in sweet raiment : surabhi, sweet, may. as Mr Wallis conjecture, be 
phy on the word gundhtiy occurring in the nome Gandhaiva. 

J‘l 8 merely recapitulate, as Ludwig observes, the deeds o y\i . » , 

h e light of living men and then as the illuminator of the regions below 
»rtli 

The hymn is one of the obsourest in the whole Higveda. M a htdhara 
» by ckandra, the Moon. Wilton : • Thegeneral pu po>t of tb. 
I* 1 " "tales it [Venal equivalent to the tlmnd>r-doud Von Both, J™®” 
follows, identifies Vena Gandhsrv* with the Rainbow. According 
nd-wig Vena is the Moon and the Gandbarva is the Sun. • g, « 
aad explained the hymn in hiB Cosmoiooi/o/ tAe • [P' dwj _.j 

£ . d «*rent interpretation see Hiliebreodt, V. if ., I « “ X 

fe “n lhere, ' n *<* «««“« *«•■> *• * > P - 109f) ' 8 

11 88— an 



570 


TUB HYMNS OP 


[kook 


HYMN CXXIV. Agui, Kt 

Comb to this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni, threefold, with sevc 
threads and five divisions. 

Be our oblation-bearer and preceder: thou hast lain loi 
enough in during darkness, 

2 I come a God foreseeing from the godless to immortality \ 

secret pathways, 

While I, ungracious one, desert the gracious, leave mine ow 
friends and seek the kin of strangers. 

3 I, looking to the guest of other lineage, have founded many 

rule of Law and Order. 

I bid farewell to the Great God, the Father, aud, for neglec 
obtain my share of worship. 

4 I tarried many a year within this altar : I leave the Fathe: 

for my choice is Indra. 

Away pass Agni, Varuna, and Soma. Rule ever changes : tli 
I come to favour. 

5 These Asuras have lost their powers of magic. But thou, ' 

Varuna, if thou dost love me, 

0 King, discerning truth and right from falsehood, come an 
be Lord and Ruler of my kingdom. 

6 Here is the light of heaven, here all is ^ovely ; here there 

radiance, here is air’s wide region. 

Let us two slaughter Vritia. Forth, 0 Soma ! Thou art obi. 
tiou : we therewith will serve thee. 

1 Indra speaks. Threefold : performed with three daily libations ; or con 
prising the pdkayajfla , the haviryajila, and the somayajfla, the simple dome 
tic oblation, the oblation of claiified butter, etc., und the offering of Son 
juice. With seven threads : conducted by the seven chief priests. With in 
divisions: with five oblations, or regulated by the YajamAna and four of ti 
chief priests, according to SAyana. The exact meaning is uncertain 

2 A^ni speaks. He has left Varuna, originally the Supieme Deity, ww 

power was waning, aud associated hitnself with Indra who has superset f 1 
that God. From the godless : fiorn Varuna who iu the decline of his sup 
macy has neglected Agni and sacrifice. SAyana interprets the first m® ^ 
ferently : — ‘ From being no divinity I issue a divinity from the cave * , 0] 
solicitation (of the gods), aud being manifest I attain immortality. - 
Seek the kin of strangers : come to be born and domesticated m a ne\ I 
with Indra. , y rtrljn , 

3 Of other lineage : of the other branch ; terrestrial fire. Father. ■ 

4 Within this altar: or, close to this Varuna. This: the supr 

Indra. Onme uwd I 

5 Indra speaks. These Asuras: Agni, Varuna, and Soma. ~ 

Lord: Indra offers Varuna spiritual and moral sovereignty as <> p 

for Ins loss of general supremacy. Q VriW 

8 Let us two: the exhortation is addressed by Indra to ?° ‘f virus! 
. xr «nemv in tb« ab^ew 





Jin a kiuvh;da\ 


571 


1 The Sage hath fixed his form by wiadoh in the heavens • Va- 
runa with no violence let the waters (low 
Like women-folk, the floods that bring rosperity have caught 
his hue and colour as they gleamed nd shone. 

3 These wait upon his loftiest power am vigour: he dwells in 
these who triumph in their Godhead] 

And they, like people who elect their Viler, have in abhor- 
rence turned away from Vritra. 

) They call him Swan, the abhorrent flood’ Companion, moving 
in friendship with celestial Waters. I 
The poets in their thought have looked In Indra swiftly ap- 
proaching when Anushtup calls him. 

HYMN CXXY. Vtik. 

I travel with the Rudras and the Vasul with the Adityas 
and All-Gods I wander. 1 

I hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, Indrl and Agni, and the 
Pair of Asvins. 

I I cherisji and sustain high-swelling Soma, ;nd Tvashtar 1 sup- 
port, Pushan, and Bliaga. ' * 

I load with wealth the zealous sacrificer vfyo pours the juice 
aud offers his oblationi? 

3 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasureSjmost thoughtful, - 
first of those who merit worship.* 

Thus Gods have stablished me in many pbces with many 
homes to enter aud abide in. 

1 Through mo alone all eat the food that feeds them, — each 
man who sees, breathes, hears the word outspoken. 

They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one 
and all, the truth as I declare it. 


\ The Sage: perhaps Soma, in answer to Indra's appeal ; Mitra, according 
a S&yana. 

5 %!*. power : the supreme might of Indra. 

Inis stanza appears to have been added on account of the occurrence of 

6 btbkatsftndm (abhorrentium) which seems to connect it with the 

[receding stanza where btbhatsilvah (abhorrentes) occurs. Swan: kahsa • 
J[ lrya Sun-God is sometimes so called. Cf. IV. 40. 5 Swiftly approach- 
9 when Anushtup calls him : ‘or the ceaselessly moving Indra, who is worthy 
^• Prai9ed ’ with ^4 nushtabh. ' — Wilson. Or, ‘dancing the Anushtup, 

mg to Prof. Max Mtiller’s interpretation. . 

VmL,' S? T lgne haa translated and explained this hymn. See La Rclxjum 
)et2’v Lp P- U5 -l<9- See also Book IV. 42, for hints of the rivalry 
" eim v »nma and Indra. 


/alto 3 P«f<* personified, the Word, the first creation and representative 
ihfiinJ’i RDd t ^ e means of communication between men aud Gods. neie 



572 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK X 

5 I, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods ant 

men alike shall welcome. 

1 make the man Itove exceeding mighty, make him a sage, s 
Rishi, and' a Brhman. 

6 I bend the bow foi Uudra that his arrow may strike and slaj 

the hater of deotion. 

I rouse and order cattle for the people, and I have penetrate 
Earth and Hvaeti. 

7 On the world’s simmit I bring forth the Father: my home if 

in the waters, h the ocean. 

Thence I extend j’er all existing creatures, and touch ever 
yonder heavenwith toy forehead. 

8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the whili 

I hold togethc all existence. 

Beyond this wid« earth and beyond the heavens I have becomi 
so mighty in ny grandeur. 

HYMN CXXVI. Visvedevai 

No peril, no severe di^tres^, ye Gods, affects the mortal man 

Whom Aryamm and Mitra lead, and Varu^a, of one accord 
beyond his fees. 

2 This very tiling do we desire, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, 

Whereby ye giard the mortal man from s<yje distress, and lea 

him safe beyond his foes. . 

3 These are, ea«h one, our present helps, Varuna, Mitra, Arya 

man, 

Best leaders, best deliverers to lead us on and bear us sai 
beyond our foes. _____ 

7 The Father ■ Heaven or Sky, produced from VAk identified with Para 
tnA&niA, the supreme and univeisal Soul. .. 

The hymn has been translated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, 1* « 
by the authois of the Sitbenziy Lieder ; by Prof. Peterson, Hymn* from 
Rigvtda (Bombay Sxnskiit Senes); and by Prof. Whitney, Notes to to 
bi ooke’s Essay on the Vedas, p. 113. # . , 

Mr. Wallis observes: ‘Vac, ‘Speech* is celebrated alone in two wnoi 
hymns, X 71. and X. 125., of which the former shows that the pnW 
application of the name was to the voice of the hymn, the means o w 
munication between heaven and earth at the sacrifice. The t 

illustrates tli« constant assimilati-m of the varied phenomena of na 
the eaciifice; all that has a voice in nature, the thunder of tbesto ^ 
reawaking of life at dawn, with songs of rejoicing over the new ri L BWk ti 
world, are embodied in this Vac in the same way as it is said of n 
that he embraces all things that are. It is thus another expression 
idea of the unity of the world, which we have seen crowning t j y C 
speculations of all the more abstract hymna of the collection, u ^ 
the Rigveda, p. 85. See also Weber, V4o und \6yo C, MU At SI «««•> 

U.. Mull... TU* DkUrwnkv. 144—4*7. 



THE MOVED A. 


573 


0ME 127.] 

4 Ye compass round and guard each mai, Varuna, Mitra, Arya- 

mau : 

In your dear keeping may we be, ye vho are excellent as 
guides beyond our foes. 

5 iUityas are beyond all foes,— Varuna, Vitra, Aryaman : 

Strong Rudra with the Marut host, inda, Agni let us call for 

weal beyond our foes. 

6 These lead us safely over all, Varuna, Mtra, Aryaman, 

These who are Kings of living men, ov-r all troubles far away 

beyond our foes. 

1 May they give bliss to aid us well, Vauna, Mitra, Aryaman : 
May the Adityas, when we pray, grait us wide shelter and 

defence beyond our foes. 

8 As in this place, 0 Holy Ones, ye Vasts freed even the Gatiri 
when her feet were fettered, 

So free us now from trouble and affliclou : and let our life be 
lengthened still, 0 Agni. 

HYMN CXXVII. Night. 

With all her eyes the Goddess Night looks forth approaching 
many a spot : 

She hath put all her glories oo. 

2 Immortal* she hat.lt filled the waste the Goddess hath filled 
j height and depth : 

She conquers darkness with her ligb. 

3 The Goddess as she comes hath set -he Dawn her Sister in her 

place : 

' And then the darkness vanishes. 

1 So favour us this night, 0 thou wh*se pathways we have visited 
As birds their uest upon the tree 
5 The villagers have sought their homes, and all that walks 
and all that flies, 

Even the falcons fain for prey. 

® ^ ee P off the she- wolf and the waif ; 0 Ormya, keep the thief 
away : 

Easy be thou for us to pass. 


the wild-cow, the* female of the Gaura or Bos Gaunit. The 
^ *aid to have delivered her from Visvavneu the Gaadharva, 

) the expanded (firmament).’— Wttaen. 

Al/r n«4 t - - 


574 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 

7 Clearly, bath shecone nigh to me who decks the dark wii 

richest hues : 

0 Morning, caned it like debts. 

8 These have I brought to thee like kine. 0 Night, thou Chi 

of Heaven, nec^t 
Tins laud as for aconqueror. 

HYMN CXXVIII. Visvedev; 

Let me win glory, Agni, in our battles : enkindling thee, ni; 
we support our belies. 

May the four regiois bend and bow before me : with thee f 
guardian may \v» win in combat. 

2 May all the Gods b on my side in battle, the Maruts led 1 

ludra, Vishnu, .gni. 

Mine be the middh air’s extended region, and may the wii 
blow favouring tlese my wishes. 

3 May the Gods gram me riches; may the blessing and imoc 

tion of the Gods issist me. 

h oremost in fight bethe divine Invokers : may we, unwounde 
have brave heroesround us. 

4 For me let them preent all mine oblatioi^, and let my mine 

intention be accurrphshed. # 

May I be guiltless of ,he least transgression : and, all ye Goc 
do ye combine to Hess us. 

5 Ye six divine Expansei, grant us freedom: here, all ye Goc 

acquit yourselves lilie heroes. 

Let us not lose our chidren or our bodies : let us not bene; 
the foe, King Soma ! 

6 Baffling the wrath of oir opponents, Agni, guard us as o 

infallible Protector. 

Let these thy foes turn hack and seek their bouses, and 1 
their thought who w T atdi at home be ruined. 


8 These: verses. 

1 The four regions : the King who is praying for assistance is about to u 
Her take a Digvijaya , the subjugation of all neighbouring countries in 
directions. 

8 Divine Invokers : the Hotar-priests of the Gods. SAyana explains A 
Terentiy : — ‘ may my invokers of the gods be the first to propitiate them, 
Wilson. 

5 Six divine Expanset : the four cardinal points and upper and lower spacer 
or, according to S4yan». Heaven. Earth TW NtVht w»t*r 1 Plnnta^ 



THE MOVED A. 


675 


y1%V 129] 

7 Lord of the world, Creator of creators : the saviour God who 

overcomes the foeman. 

May Gods, Brihaspati, both Asvins shelter from ill this sacri- 
fice and sacrificer. 

8 Foodful, and much-invoked, at this our calling may the great 

Bull vouchsafe us wide protection. 

Lord of Bay Coursers, India, bless our children : harm us not, 
give us not as prey to others. 

9 Let those who are our foemen stay afar from us : with Indra 

and with Agm we will drive them off. 

Vagus, Adityas, Rudras have exalted me, made me far-reach- 
ing, mighty, thinker, sovran lord. 

HYMN CXXIX. Creation. 


Then was not non-existent nor existent : there was no realm 
ot air, no sky beyond it. 

What covered in, and where? and what gave shelter ? Was 
water there, unfathomed depth of water ? 

2 Death was not, then, nor was there aught immortal : no sign 
vas there, the days and night’s divider. 

That One Thing, breathless, breathed by its own nature : apart 
frtm it was nothing whatsoever. 

•j Darkness there was : at first concealed in darkness this All 
was indiscriminated chaos. 

All that existed then was void and formless : by the great 
powet of Warmth was born that Unit. 

1 Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the primal 
seed and germ of Spirit. 

Sages who searched with their heart’s thought discovered the 
existent’s kinship in tiie non-existent. 


- After Creator of creators Sftyana supplies tarn devamstaumi, ‘that Cod l 
pAisr ’ Indra or S.ivitar i» intended. 

Th* great Buff : Indra, , , . „ 

1 Then : in the beginning. Non-existent : dsat : that does not yet actually 
but which has in itself the latent potentiality of existence There whs 
unapparent condition,’ says an Indian Commentator, which, from 
: he absence ot distinctness, was not an ‘ entity,’ while from its being the 
of the world’s product" on, it was not a ‘ non entity, 
i “ T,l "t One Thing : the single primordial substance, the unit out of winch 
F lle umverue «*“» j-— i -j r S and 46. 


i 


s was developed. Op. I. 164* 6 and 46. 

L? .- pmf. Wilson, following Siyana, translates tdpamh by ‘austen- 

| "leaning the cntempl.tion of the things that were to be cr e at e d. 

" U Snence l, Religion*, pp. 207ff, has shown how mAw 
^ ^ *>y the Arjraj as the prineiple explaining movement, life, and tliougl t. 



576 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK'S 


5 Transversely was their severing line extended: what wa 

above it then, and what below it ? 

There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free action hen 
and energy up yonder. 

6 Who verily knows and who can here declare it, whence it wai 

born and whence comes this creation ? 

The Gods are later than this world’s production. Whoknowi 
then whence it first came into being ? 

7 He, the first origin of this creation, whether be formed it all o: 

did not form it, 

Whose eye controls this world in highest heaven, he verify 
knows it, or perhaps he knows not. 

HYMN CXXX. Creation 


The sacrifice drawn out with threads on every side, stretchec 
by a hundred sacred ministers and one, — 

This do these Fathers weave who hitherward are come: the) 
sit beside the warp and cry, Weave forth, weave back. 

2 The Man extends it and the Man unbinds it : even to this 

vault of heaven hath he out^pun it. 

These pegs are fastened to the seat of worship : they mad< 
the Sama-hym ns their weaving shuttles. 

3 What were the rule, the order and the fcodeH What wen 

the wooden fender and the butter? 

What were the hymn, the cn ant, the recitation, when to tm 
God all Deities paid worship ? . 


5 Line: a line drawn by the ancient lthhia to make a ^vwion 
upper world and the lower, and to bring duality out p at hera 

theFathera may be meant. Free action: the hi v ^ 8 . An io 
The stanza is obscure, and its connexion with stanza 4 is not 
tervening stanza may, perhaps, have been lost „ . Rssavs, I P! 1 

The hymn has b *eu translated by Cal ® b ™ oke ’ ore 0 f the Siebcn 

33, 34 ; by Dr. Muir, 0. 5. Texts , V 355, 357 ; by the autho » of ^ ^ 
zig Litder, and by Mr. Wallis Cosmology of the w ^ fcney in th- 

of the many Commentators on this hymn are Professor gjhennsn 

Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xi. p- c ' x ’ * .337 *__Walln 

Philoaophische Hyninen au* der K.g-und i Atharva-vedaSamh tft, i 559 _. 563 . 

See Prof. Max Miilier, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 1>P- 

AS the subject of the hymn is creation typified and 
terious primeval aacrihce (cp. X. 90), Prajftpati the Ct 

U> be th? deity. The R-shi is Yajtta (Simrifice) Prajftpati h crtfttioI 

1 The sacrifice: su.gdtmako yajhah ; the s* cnfice whw i * >” umber Fatkeri 
— SAyana. A hundred and one : meaning an indenmtely larg 
SAyana explains pitdryfr here Uy glMjtjroMtor*, the<h£* p j ^ tif **<*! 

I The Man : the first Man or Male ; Purusha, Adipurusha, rny t- 
ing toSAyana. ^ ^ 


-*UV. mA round the •acrific»LSi 



TEE RIG VEDA, 


577 




4 Closely was G&yatr! conjoined with Agni, and closely Savitar 

combined with Ushnih. 

Brilliant with Ukthas, Soma joined Anushtup: Brihaspatis 
voice by Bvihati was aided. 

5 Vid] adhered to Varuna and Mitra : here Trisbtup day by day 

was Indra’a portion. 

Jagati entered all the Gods together : so by this knowledge men 
were raised to Rishjs. 


$ So by this knowledge men were raised to Rishis, when ancient 
sacrifice sprang up, our Fathers. 

With the nund’s eye I think that I behold them who first per- 
formed this saciificial worship. 


7 They who were versed in ritual and metre, in hymns and rules, 
were the Seven Godlike Rishis 

Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up the 
reins like chariot-drivers. 

HYMN CXXXr. Indr*. 

Drive all our enemies away, 0 lndra, the western, mighty 
Conqueror, and the eastern. 

Hero, drive otF our northern foes and southern, that we in thy 
wide shelter may be joyful. 

2 What then ? As men whose fields are full of barley reap the 

ripe corn removing it in order, 

So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who went not 
to prepare the grass for worship. 

3 Men come not with oue horse at sacred seasons ; thus they 

obtain no honour in assemblies. 

Sage 3 desiring herds of kine and horses strengthen the mighty 
lndra for his friendship. 


UlriUiant with Ukthas: 'gladdening (us) through hymns (ukt/un).'-- 
Muir. Brikaspati’t voice: because tije duty was to speak as Priest. Accor 
hg to the Aitareya.Dr4hm.ana, Ul. 13, Pr.ij*pati ‘allotted to the deities 
their (different) parts in the sacrifice and metres ’ r , 

' 5 flay by day: was Indra’s portion of the mid-day (oblation). Wilson. 

* I behold them: or, according to Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation these 
uh the eyos of mind, I think, beheld them ’ ~ 

1 ‘Tun Sevan Hishis here ere not the Angirases, but Bharadvija, Kasyapo, 
Atri, Vasiehtha, VUvSmitra, and Jamadagni. Jte knowleclge .. 
Ritual is derived frJm the divine priests ; the sages or^shiahavefollowl 
in sacrificing, and moderu priests are only imitators of those wlm 

]Swt^Z..aas sa>V*«S'’' 

Nty p rof< Whitney, Notes to Golebrooke’s bmy on the Vedas , p. U4. 


D 


JJ ^ horse : it seem* to have been considered * nd . 

stable for a wealthy man to come to the sacrifice m a one-horse car , 
meaning../ u 



578 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK l 

4 Ye, Asvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts of grata 

ful Soma juice, 

Aud aided India in his work with Namuchi of Asura birth 

5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee with thei 

wondrous powers and wisdom. 

When tliou, with might, hadst drunk the draught that glad 
dens, Sarasvati, 0 Maghavan, refreshed thee. 

6 Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance : may he, possessing 

all, be kind and gracious. 

May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and may we bi 
the lords of hero vigour. 

7 May we enjoy his favour, his the Holy : may we enjoy hn 

blesshd loving-kmdness. 

May this rich Indra, as our good Protector, drive off and keej 
ijfar all those who hate us. 

HYMN CXXXII. Mitra. Varur 

May Dyaus the Lord of lauded wealth, and Earth stand l 
the man who offers sacrifice, 

And may the Asvins, both the Gods, strengthen the worshi 
per with bliss. 

t As such we honour you, Mitra and Vayjna, with hasty zea 
most blest, you who sustain the folk. 

So may we, through your frienship for the worshipper, subdu 
the fiends. 

3 And when we seek to win your love and friendship, we wh 

have precious wealth in our possession, 

Or when the worshipper augments his riches* let not his ties 
sures be shut up. 

4 That other, Asura ! too was bom of Heaven : thou art, 0 Vs 

runa, the King of all men. 

The chariot’s Lord was well content, forbearing to anger Deatl 
by sin so great. 


4 Hillebrandt, 7 if., 1. 146, and Eggeling, Sacred' Bookt of the Eiut.n 
135, interpret differently. The myth referred to in the following s twl “] 
not been preserved. See Weber, father den Rdjasdya, pp. 95, 10-1. 

4 That other: Mitra. The chariot' n Lord: literally, ‘ h8a< ’ °,P!'A cl “pS 
The meaning is uncertain. I find the rest of the hymn unintelUf? 1 • ^ 
I.udwig conjectures that two brothers, Nriraedhas and Sumedhas, t 
tended for sovereignty, and that the adherents of one had wished to p: 
other brother to death, but had not carried out their purpose* . 

- * — tit* firmin', and the brothers ere reconciled. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


m 


ffJfiV 1*3 1 

5 This sin bath Sakapfita here committed. Heroes who fled to 
° their dear friend he slayeth, 

When the Steed bringeth down your grace and favour in 
bodies dear and worshipful 

(j Your Mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water even as 
earth is purified from heaven. 

Show love and kindness here below : wash her in rays of 
heavenly light. 

1 Ye Twain have seated you as Lords of Wealth, as one who 
mounts a car to him who sits upon the pole, upon the wood. 
These our disheartenod tribes Nrimedhas saved from woe, 
Sumedhas saved from woe. 

HYMN CXXXIII. Indra. 

Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in the fore- 
most place. 

Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war, 
be thou our great encourager. Let the weak bowstrings 
break upon the bows of feeble enemies. 

2 Thou didst destroy the Dragon : thou sentest the rivers down 

to earth. 

Foeless, 0 Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendest well each 
choicest thing. Therefore we draw us close to thee. Let 
the weak bowstrings, etc. 

3 Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy’s designs. 

Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, 0 Indra, who would smite us 
dead : thy liberal bounty gives us wealth, 
jt The robber people round about, Indra, who watch and aim at 
' us,— 

Trample them down beneath thy foot ; a conquering scatterer 
art thou. 

Whoso assails us, Indra, be the man a stranger or akin, 
king down, thyself, his strength although it be as vast as are 
the heavens. 

Close to thy friendship do we cliug, 0 Indra, and depend on 
thee. * 

Lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of holy Law. 

I Tke Steed : the Sun.— Ludwig. Tour grace : Mitra’s and Yanina’s. 

Mother Aditi: p^rbapa the mother of the two brothers is intended.- 

% J***mk bowitrirun • IiTZm* « -** 1 **• 



580 TBE HYMNS OF [BOOK : 

7 Do thou bestow upon us her, 0 Indra, who yields according t 
the singer’s longing, 

That the great Cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring 
thousand streams, give milk to feed us. 

HYMN CXXXIV. Indr, 

As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, 0 Indra, both the eartl 
and heaven, 

So as the Mighty One. great King of all the mighty world o 
men, the Goddess Mother brought thee forth, the Bleask 
Mother gave thee life. 

2 Relax that mortal’s stubborn strength whose heart is bent oi 

wickedness. 

Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and ainj 
at us. The Goddess Mother brought thee forth, etc. 

3 Shake down, 0 Slayer of the foe, those great all-splendid energiei 
With all thy powers, 0 Sakra, all thiue helps, 0 Indra, ahak 

them down ; 1 

4 As thou, 0 Satakratu, thou, 0 Indra, shakest all things dov 
As wealth for him who sheds the juice, with thine assiatan 

thousandfold. 

5 Around, on every side like drops of sweatflet lightning-flash 

fall. 

Let all malevolence pass away from us like threads of Dur 
grass. 

6 Thou bearest in thine hand a lance like a long hook, gre 

Counsellor ! 

As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the branch, 
Maghavan. 

7 Never, 0 Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate : i 

walk as holy texts command. 

Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, bene' 
your arms. 


7 The great Caw : probably the Earth. 

1 Tkt Qoddest Mother : Aditi, The retrain is repeated in all the »tw 
except the \a»t. 

8 Bnergiet : influence* in the shape of rain and sunlight 
4 §atakratu ; or, Lord of Hundred Powers. 

8 D&rtd grate : Paniouro Daotylon ; a species of bent grass whose fils® 
stretch horizontally away from the stem. 




HYMN CXXXV. Tama. 

In the Tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama drinketh 
with the Gods, 

The Father, Master of the house, tendeth with love our an- 
cient Sires. 

I looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old, 

On him who treads that evil path, and then I yearned for 
this again. 

Thou mountest, though thou dost not see, 0 Child, the new 
and wheel-less car 

Which thou hast fashioned mentally, one-poled but turning 
every way* 

The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the 
Sages, Child ! 

This hath the Saman followed close, hence, laid together on a ship. 

Who was the father of the child ? Who made the chariot roll 
away? 

Who will this day declare to us how the funereal gift was made 1 

When the funereal gift was placed, straightway the point of 
flame appeared. 

A depth extended in the front : a passage out was made behind 

Here is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the 
Home of Gods : 

Here minstrels blow the flute for him : here he is glorified 
with songs. 


The Tree : where the spirits of the pious dead rest after their labours. 
i Father: Yama. 

' The spirit of the dead child speaks. 1 yearned for this : to return to 
> world of life. 

i Yama speaks. Fashioned mentally : figuratively prepared by being burnt 
the funeral pile. 

)Ship: meaning, apparently, the funeral pile. The funereal gift: the 
a ?ing of anudiyi is uncertain ‘ Restitution/— Wilson. ‘Surrender* or 
ilivery/ according to Prof. Zimmer. Stansas 5 — 7 are spoken by the poet. 

5 4 depth : the meaning is obscure. Postage out : probably for the removal 
the ashes. 

The subject of the hymn appears to be the funeral ceremony of a boy 
*2*'*«. said by some to be the name of a man). According to the legend 
** by S&yapa a youth named Nachiketaa was sent by his father to the 
of Yama who treated him kindly and allowed ,him to return to this 
j • 'The hymn is made throughout applicable to Aditya as well as to 
i if possible, a still greater degree of obscurity. It seems to have 
fotK o ***** of the discussion in the Taittirfya BrAhmana (III. 12. 8) and 
diii * Upanishad. respecting what becomes of the soul after death, m 
between Nachiketat and Yama.’-Wilaon, 




m THE HYMNS OP [BOOR jj 

HYMN CXXXVI. Kesind 

Hb with tbe long loose looks supports Agni, and moisture 
heaven, and earth : 

He is all sky to look upon : he with long hair is called thii 
light. 

2 The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments soiled o 

yellow hue. 

They, following the wind's swift course go where the Gods 
have gone before. 

3 Transported with our Munihood we have pressed on into th< 

winds : 

You therefore, mortal men, behold our natural bodies an»] 
no more. 

4 The Muni, made associate in the holy work of every God, 
Looking upon all varied forms flies through the region of the ail 

5 The Steed of Vata, Yayu’s friend, the Muni, by the Godi 

impelled, 

In both the oceans hath his home, in eastern and in western sea 

6 Treading the path of sylvan beasts, Gandharvas, and Ap 

sarases, 

He with long locks, who knows the wish, is a sweet moa 
delightful friend. ^ 

7 Vayu hath churned for him : for him he poundeth thin^ 

most hard to bend, 

When he with loOg loose locks hath drunk, with Rudra, wat( 
from the cup. 


The Resins, Iceflnah , wearers of long loose hair, are Agni, V&yu, and Sfirj 
Each stanza has for its Rishi one of the seven sons of VAtarasana. See lnct< 

° £ ?/^ n with the long loote loch : probably the ascetic, the Mum or Yoj 
According to S4yana, the radiant Sun. Moisture : visham, usually m 
‘poison’ is so explained in this place. , ... 

*2 Munis: ascetics inspired or in a state of ecstasy. Girdled vnth the 
exposed without girdles to the wind. According to Sftyana, sons oi 
rasana, or Wiud-Girdled. t j 

5 In both the oceans : everywhere in the firmament from its eastern 

Wt ^Tbe hymn^hows the conception that by a life of sanctity 
attain to the fellowship of the deities of the atr the V»yns, th. , ( 

Apsarasas, and the Gandharvas ; and, furnished like them with won 
powers, can travel along with them on their course •• •I^ti^Trf b fe austa 
the long-haired, that is to say, the Mum, who during the tame of "Lb. •> 
tiea doe# not akave his hair, upholda fire, moisture, heaven, an ^ Iy w 
resembles the World of light, ideas whiab the later htorature »1 ^rgj ^ 
tains.’— Von Roth, quoted by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Tcxti, IV. 310, the by 

&nd translated on nase 318. _ 



0 138.] 


THE MOVED A, 583 

HYMN CXXXVII. VisvedevM. 

Yb Gods, raise up once more the man whom y« have humbled 
and brought low. 

0 Gods, restore to life again the' man who hath committed sin. 
Two several winds are blowing here, from Sindhu/ fioui a 

distant land. 

May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow disease away. 
Hither, 0 Wind, blow healing balm, blow all disease away, 
thou Wind ; 

For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods. 

1 am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee real and keep 
thee safe. 

Ibringthee blessed strength, l drive thy weakening malady away. 
Here let the Gods deliver him, the Maruts’ band deliver him . 
AH things that be deliver him that he be freed from his disease. 
The Waters have their healing power, the Waters drive disease 
away. 

The Waters have a balm for all: let them make medicine for thee. 
The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our ten- 
fold branching hands, 

With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle 
touch, 

HYMN CXXXVIII. Judra. 

Allied with thee in friendship, Indra, these thy piiests, re- 
membering Holy Law, rent Vritra limb from limb, 

When they bestowed the Dawns aud let the waters flow, and 
wheu thou didst chastise dragous at Kntsa’s call. 

Thou seuteat forth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou 
dravest forth the kiue, thou d rankest pleasant meath. 

Thou gavest increase through this Tree’s surpassing might. 
The Sun shone by the hymn that sprang from Holy Law. 

^ach stanza ia ascribed to one of the seven great Rishis. See Index of 
mas. The hymn ia a charm to restore a sick man to health. Cf. Hymns of 
Atkarva-veda, IV. 13. 

WAo hath committed tin: aicknesa and death being regaided as the conse- 
eQ ce of Bin. 

2 Sindhu: or, ooean. 

1 The Wind speaka. Weakening malady : yakshna may he sickness in gene- 
i°r the name of a large class of diseases, probably of a consumptive nature. 
. The stanza ia importaut as showing that the Indians employed touches 
hyiog.on of hands to relieve suffering or to restore health. Cp. X. 60. 12. 

[Tty prieifc . the Angiraaes. But see Vedic Hymn s, I. p. 44. Didst 

2 this clause is very difficult. I adopt Prof. GrassmamTs interpretation. 
Aii Tret's surpassing miakt : the power of the juice of the Soma plaut. 



5&4 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK £ 


3 In the mid-way of heaven the Sun unyoked his oar : the Arya 
found a match to meet his Disa foe. 

Ay.^oeiate with RijiBvan Indra overthrew the solid forts of 
Piprii, conjuring Asura. • 


4 He boldly cast down forts which none had e’er assailed: un 

weaned ho destroyed the godless treasure-stores. 

Like Sun and Moon he took the stronghold’s wealth away, and 
praised in song, demolished foes with fhshing dart. 

5 Aimed witli resistless weopons, with vast power to cleave, the 

Vritra-slayer whets Ins darts and deals forth wounds. 
Blight Ushas was afraid of Indra’s slaughtering bolt : she weni 
upon her wav and left her chariot there. 

6 These are thy famous exploits, only thine, when thou alone 

hast left the other reft of sacrifice. 

Thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the Moons : the 
Father bears the feliv portioned out by tbee. 

HYMN CXXXIX. Sami 

Savitab, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright with the 
sunbeams, his eternal lustre; 

He in whose energy wise Pushau marchos, surveying all exist 
ence like a herdsman. 

2 Beholding men he sits amid the heavens, filling the two world 

halves and air’s wide region. 

He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between th 
eastern and the western limit. 

3 He, root of wealth, the gatherer-up of treasures, looks witl 

his might on every form and figure. 

Savitar, like a God whose Law is constant, stands in theb&tti 
for the spoil like India. 

4 Waters from sacnfico came to the Gandharva Visv&vasu, 

Soma, when they s-»w him. 

Indra, approaching quickly, marked their going, and looka 
around upon the Sun’s enclosures. _ 

3 Unyoled his car : the alluri »n is perhaps, u> an eclipse, or a detent 
of th« Sun to euaMn the Aryan < to complete the overthrow of their enem 
Rijuvan: & pious worshipper befriended by Indra. Pipt'u: a demon 
drought. See Vol. I., Index. _ v ** * 

5 Bright Uskas wan afraid: see II. 15. 6, IV. 30. 8 — 11, and X. 73. • # 

6 The other: thy foe, the demon or RAksh-iea. The Father : *7 j 
Heaven. The felly ’portioned out by thee : the course of the Moon 

the asterisms, which thou hast art anged. 


2 Pasture* : there is no substantive in the text. Sfcyan* supplies * q uW>tel 
of space Ludwig * ladles and Grassmann ‘ pastures.’ rt nm Aia* 

4 Waters: used in the preparation of the Soma juice. 
regarded as the custodian of the celestial Soma* Tht * endow 

*1— * — WtluAn 



TJf.V 140 J 


rzri? RIG VEDA. 


585 


5 This son^r Visvavasu ahull sing us, meter of air’s mid-realm, 

celestial Gandharva, 

That we may know aright both truth and falsehood : may he 
inspire our thoughts and help our piaises. 

6 In the floods’ track he found the booty-seeker: the rocky 

cow-pen’s doors he threw wide open. 

These, the Gandharva told him, flowed with Amrit. Indra 
knew well the puissance of the dragons. 

HYMN CXL. Agni. 

Agni, life-power and fame ore thine : thy fires blaze mightily, 
thou rich in wealth of beams ! 

Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with 
strength, the food that merits laud. 

2 With brilliant, purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest 

up thyself in light. 

Thou, visiting both thy Mothers, aidest them as Son : thou 
joinest close the earth and heaven. 

3 0 Jitavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our 

fair hymns and songs. 

In thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food, 
born nobly and of wondrous help. 

4 Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth 

to us, Immortal God. 

Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon : thou leadest 
us to conquering power. 

5 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great richeB 

under his control, 

Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest 
him wealth that conquers all. 

6 The men have set before !hem for their welfare Agni, strong, 

visible to all, the Holy. 

Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men’s 
generations magnify with praise-songs. 


5 bfwiiKwtt : the celestial Gandharva, here the Suu-God. Ht : Visvftvaeu. 
Pfo booty^seeker : Indi a who sought to win the waters. Of the dragon # * the 
^pent-demons who obstructed die floods of heaven. The last three ptanses 
| r ® very difficult and obscure. See Hillebrandt, V. M. t I. pp. 436, 487, and 
Lu( bdR, Ueberdie neweten A, * #. w., p. 101. 


Thy Mother t : Heaven and Earth. Join ext clote : or, fillest full. 

J To him : to the inetitutor of the sacrifice. 

the exposition of the hymn in tapatha BrdhtM ija, VII, 8, 1, -34 



m 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X 


HYMN CXLI. ViBvedevas 

Turn hither, Agni, speak to us : come to us with a gracious 
mind. # 

Enrich us, Master of the house : thou art the Giver of our 
wealth. 

3 Let Aryaman vouchsafe us wealth, and Bhaga, and Brihaspati, 
Let the Gods give their gifts, and let Sunrita, Goddess, grant 
us wealth. 

3 We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs and 

hymns, 

Adityas, Vishnu, Surya, and the Brahman Priest Brihaspati. 

4 Indra, Vayu, Brihaspati, Gods swift to listen, we invoke, 

That in the synod all the folk may be benevolent to us. 

5 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brihaspati, 
Vata, Vishnu, Sarasvati and the Strong Courser Savitar. 

6 Do thou, 0 Agni, with thy fires strengthen our prayer and 

sacrifice : 

Urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our service of the 
Gods. 

HYMN CXLI I. Agm 

With thee, 0 Agni, was this singer of th| laud : he hath no! 

other kinship, O thou Son of Strength. 

Thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard. Keep the 
destructive lightning far away from us. 

2 Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, Agni; ai 

Comrade thou win nest all living things. 

Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious : they of them 
selves advance like one who guards the herd. 

3 And thou, 0 Agni, thou of Godlike nature, sparest the stones, 

while eating up the brushwood. 

Then are thy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. Let us not 
stir to wrath thy mighty arrow. 

4 O’er hills, through vales devouring as thou goest,, thou partes* 

like an army fain for booty. 

As when a barber shaves a beard, thou shavest earth when 
the wind blows on thy flame and fans it. 

$ Apparent are his lines as he approaches : the course is singly 
hut the cars are many, 


2 S&nritA : Pleasantness ; Gladness, personified. Of. I. 40. 3. 

3 Sparest the stones : see ( Pischel, Veditche 8tudien, I, p. 180. Cp. Ill- ^ \ 



VN 143.] 


THE RIO FED A. 


587 


When, Agni, thou, making thine arms resplendent, advancest 
o’er the land spread out beneath thee. 

How let thy strength, thy burning flames fly upward, thine 
energies, 0 Agni, as thou toilest. 

Gape widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour: let all the 
Vasus sit this day beside thee. 

This is the waters’ reservoir, the great abode of gathered streams. 
Take thou another path th^n this, and as thou listest walk 
thereon. 

On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durva grass 
spring up. 

Let there be lakes with lotus blooms. These are the mansions 
of the flood. 

HYMN CXLIII. Asvin*. 

Yk made that Atri, worn with eld, free as a horse to win the goal. 
When ye restored to youth and strength Kakshivan like a car 
renewed, 

Ye freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him newly-born 
to earth. 

Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which Gods unsoiled by 
dust had bound. 

Heroes who showed most wondrous power to Atri, strive to 
win fair songs ; 

For then, 0 Heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise shall 
cease no more. 

This claims your notice, Bounteous Gods 1 — oblation, Asvins ! 
and our love, 

That ye, 0 Heroes, in the fight may briug us safe to ample room. 
Ye Twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region’s end, 
Nasatyas, with your wiugM steeds caine nigh, and gave him 
strength to win. 

Come with your joys', most liberal Gods, Lords of all treasures, 
bringing weal. 

Like fresh full waters to a well, so, Heroes, come and be with us. 

5 Stanzas 7 and 8 seem to belong to some other hymn, being a prayer to Agni 
»the may spare the speaker’s houie where, he says, there is nothing to invite 
e devouring God. See ffymns of the Atharva-veda, VI. 106. 

1 Atri: see 1. 112. 7. KahiKlvdn: the Scholiast says that this Rishi was 
finally dull of understanding and that the Aavins endowed him with know- 
^ Prof. Ludwig takes kakshKvantam to be an adjective agreeing with 
: ‘ Again ye made him youthful like a chariot that is braced with bauds. 
jjfttt/yw : see Vol. I., Index. 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X 


M8 


HYMN CXLIV. Indra 

This deathless Indu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality 
Belongs to thee, the Orderer. 

2 Here, by ns, for the worshipper, is the wise bolt that workj 

with skill. 

It brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man brings th< 
effectual strong drink. 

3 Impetuous Ahisuva, a bull among these cows of his, 

Looked down upon the restless Hawk. V 

4 That the strong-pinioned Bird hath brought, Child of the 

Falcon, from afar, 

What moves upon a hundred wheels along the female Dragon’s 
path. 

5 Which, fair, unrobbed, the Falcon brought thee in his foot, 

the red-hued dwelling of the juice ; 

Through this came vital power which lengthens out our days, 
and kinship through its help awoke. 

6 So Indra is by Indu’s power: e’en among Gods will it repel 

great treachery. 

Wisdom, Most Sapient One, brings force that lengthens life. 
May wisdom bring the juice to us. 

HYMN CXLV. 4 SapatnlbAdhanamj 

From out the earth I dig this plant, an herb of most effectua’ 
power, 

Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husban 
for oneself. 


1 Indu : Soma. The Orderer ; disposer and arranger of the universe. 

2 Bolt: the VashatkAra, or sacrificial exclamation, is to the priests whi 
the thunderbolt is to Indra. 

3 I find this and the following stanza unintelligible, Ahtfuva in oth< 
places is the name of a demon ; but the meaning here is uncertain. Gw* 
there is no substaative to dud srdsu, 1 these his own,’ in the feminine gender 

4 What mopes upon a hundred wheels: fatdehakran : ‘the bestower < 
many boons.'— Wilson. 

5 Dwelling of the juice: the Soma- plant, which the Falcon brought froi 
heaven. See IV. 26 and 27. 

6 It : or he ; Indu or the Soma juice. # . < 

Prof. Grassmatm places this hymn in his Appendix as being in hie op®* 

made up of fragments. He consider* Ahisuva (stanza 3) to be ‘the arc 
KrisAnu,’ of IV 27. 3 and other places, who guards the celestial Som*,*o<J> , 
stead of 4 cows ’ he understands ‘ wives.’ 

The hymn is a spell to rid a jealous wife of a more favoured 
Rishi is IndrAnt, the Consort of Indra. 

1 Thit plant : said to be the PAtA, probably identioal with P4|hA 1 Jr. 

H ,rn a.Tw4l fnli l 'I a nlim V\i n fw nlunf nnatoaiino MWAiia m OTOPW"*' 



S7MN 146.] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


2 Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious 

plant, 

Blow thou the rival wife away, and make my husband only mine. 

3 Stronger am I, 0 Stronger One, yea, mightier than the mightier; 
And she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames. 

4 Her very name I utter not : she takes no pleasure in this man. 
Far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away. 

5 I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also art victorious : 

As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellow-wife. 

6 I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a 

stronger spell. 

As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirit speed to me, 
hasten like water on its way. 

HYMN CXLVI. Aranyftnt. 

Goddess of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight. 
How is it that thou seekest not the village? Art thou uot afraid? 

2 What time the grasshopper replies and swells the shrill cicala’s 

voice, 

Seeming to sound with tinkling bells, the Lady of the Wood exults , 

3 And, yonder, cattle seem to graze, what seems a dwelling-place 

appears: 

Or else at eve the Lady of the Forest seems to free the wains. 

4 Here one is calling to his cow, another there hath felled a tree : 
At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath 

screamed. 

5 The Goddess never slays, unless some murderous enemy ap- 

proach. 

Maneatsof savoury fruit and then takes, even us he wills, his rest. 
® Thy spirit ; the husband'd. 


The deity, Aranyftnt, is the tutelary Goddess of the forest and wilderness. 

. Oftotohopper..,.., cicala ; the chichchikd is said to be a little creature that 
chichi: and the vrithiravd is said to be a sort of cricket. Others take 
wm to be birds of some unascertained kind. 

ZCuttlc teem to grate : deer feeding in the glades. What teems a dwelling 
***: 4 natural bower of branches and creepers, 

®°nndi are heard as of a cowmau calling bis cattle, or of a woodman at 
| JrV We must imagine the thousund strange sounds and delusions which 
t J® ncol npsss the solitary listener of an evening in the darkening forest.’— 
5 fogozin, Vedio India (Story of the Nations), p. 272. 

be tf qa’ 0 * 11 enm y ** text has only anydfr. ‘ another,’ by which, accord- 

K to aftyana, a tiger or robber is meant. Prof. Ludwig suggests that the 
should be kanyah, 1 one who is destined to be killed.’ The hymn has 
Muir, 0. 8 , Texts, V. p. 423 ; and by the authors >f 



590 


THE HYMNS OF 


l BOOK X 


6 Now have I praised the Forest Queen, sweet-scented, redolenl 
of balm, 

The Mother of all sylvan things, who tills not but hath store* 
of food. 

HYMN CXLVII. Indra 


I trust in thy first wrathful deed, 0 Indra, when thou slewes 
Vritra aud didst work to profit man ; 

What time the two world-halves fell short of thee in might 
and the earth trembled at thy force, 0 Thunder-armed. 

2 Thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer Vritrs 

0 Blameless One, with heart that longed for fame. 

Heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey, thee in al 
sacrifices worthy of renown. 

3 God Much-invoked, take pleasure in these princes here, wh( 

thine exalters, Maghavati, have come to wealth. 

In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the Strong fc 
sons and progeny and riches undisturbed. 

4 That man shall find delight in well-protected wealth who* 

care provides for him the quick-sought joyous draught. 
Bringing oblations, strengthened, Maghavan, by thee, he swif 
ly wins the spoil with heroes in the fight. 

5 Now for our band, 0 Maghavan, when jauded, make amplej 

room with might, and grant us riches. 

Magician thou, our Varuna and Mitra, deal food to us, 0 
Wondrous, as Dispenser. 

HYMN CXLVIII. lndr * 


2 


3 


When we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, and 
when, Most Valorous ! we have won the booty. 

Bring us prosperity, as each desires it : under thine own pro- 
tection may we conquer. 

Sublime from birth, mayst thou 0 Indra, Hero, with Sfirya 


overcome the Dasa races. . 

As by a fountain’s side, we bring the Soma that lay concealed, 
close-hidden in the waters. 

Answer the votary’s hymns, for these thou knowest, craving 
the Rishis’ prayer, thyself a Singer. j 

May we be they who take delight in Somas : these witn s 
food for thee, 0 Chariot-rider. 


3 Princes : the SQria, the wealthy insti tutors of the sacrifice., The Stion$ 
thee, the mighty Indra. 

3 These with sweet food : * these (praises are offered) with sacrificial viandf 
— Wilson. _ 



HYMN 149.] THE RIG VEDA. m 

4 These holy prayers, 0 Indra, have I sung thee : grant to the 

men the strength of men, thou Hero. 

Be of one mind with those in whom thou joyest : keep thou* 
the singers safe and their companions. 

5 Listen to Prithi s call, heroic Indra, and be thou lauded by 

the hymns of V enya, 

Him who hath sung thee to thine oil-rich dwelling, whose rob 
ling songs have sped thee like a torrent. 

HYMN CXLIX. Savitar. 

Savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and made heaven 
stedfast where no prop supported. 

Savitar milked, as 'twere a restless courser, air, sea bound fast 
to what no foot had trodden. 

2 Well knoweth Savitar, 0 Child of Waters, where ocean, firmly 
, fixt, overflowed its limit. 

Thence sprang the world, from that uprose the region : thence 
heaven spread out and the wide earth expanded. 

3 Then, with a full crowd of Immortal Beings, this other realm 

came later, high and holy. 

First, verily, Savitar’s strong-pinioned Eagle was born : and 
he obeys his law for ever. 

As warriors to their steeds, kine to their village, as fond milk- 
giving cows approach their youngling, 

As man to wife, let Savitar come downward to us, heaven's 
bearer, Loid of every blessing. 

Like the Angirasa Hiranyastilpa, I call thee, Savitar, to this 
achievement : 

So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch for thee 
as for the stalk of Soma. 


Companion » : or, dependent®. 

PrithVt call : the invocation of Prithu, the Risbi of the hymn, according 
toyaoa. Prof. Ludwig suggests that Prithu’s wife is intended. Venya: 
^1, son of Vena. 

To what no foot had trodden . at&rte : * to the indestructible (ether).’ — 
l>on, 

Btyk • identified by SAyanaVith TArkshya, brother of Garuda, who brought 
s oma from the Moon at Savitar’s command. 

A'lgiroia : a descendant of the Angirases. Achievement: vSje: food, 
3 [ ( ling to SAyaua, i. e. oblation. Lauding ; drehan : or, I, Arehan, honour- 

than al— * 



59a 


TUB HYMNS OP 


[BOOK J 


HYMN Cl. Agn 

Thou, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kindled for th 
Gods. 

With the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, come to us: to show us f 
vour come to us. 

2 Come hither and accept with joy this sacrifice and hymn of our 

0 kindled God, we mortals are invoking thee, calling oil the 
to show us grace. 

3 I laud thee Jatavedas, thee Lord of all blessings, with my son] 
Agni, bring hitherward the Gods whose Laws we love, wh<> t 

Laws we love, to show ua grace. 

4 Agni the God was made the great High-Priest of Gods, Rishi 

have kindlod Agni, men of mortal mould. 

Agni I invoeate for winning ample wealth, kindly disposed ft 
winning wealth. 

5 Atri and Bharadv&ja and Gavishthira, Kanva and Trasadaayi 

in our fight he helped. 

On Agni calls Vasishtha, even the household priest, the hous 
hold priest to win his grace. 

HYMN CLI. Fait 

By Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith ^ oblation offered u 
We celebrate with praises Faith upon the height of happmes 

2 Bless thou the man who gives, 0 Faith ; Faith, bless the mi 

who fain would give. 

Bless thou the liberal worshippers : bless thou the word th 
I have said. 

3 Even as the Deities maintained Fuith in the mighty Asuras 
So make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal Wl 

shippers. 

4 Guarded by V&yu, Gods and men who sacrifice draw near 

Faith. 

Man winneth Faith by yearnings of the heart, and opulen 
by Faith. _ 

1 Though kindled : although thou art already burning fresh fire is added 
thee. To ehow ut favour : mrdik/tya ; this play upon the Eishi's name 

is repeated in each stansa. 

The Risbi is Sraddhft (Faith) of the family of K&ma (Love). ( , 

1 Upon the height of happinees : ‘(who la seated) ou Bbaga* ft 
Wilson. . 

3 A*ura»: the primeval Aryan Gods, Dyaua, Varuna, and some ot,I \ ' 
were venerated by Indra and other Indo- Aryan deities of a later areaw 

4 Guarded by Vdyu : the meaning is nob clear. 



0\LV 154.] 


THE RIG V FA) A. 


5D3 


5 Faith in the early morning. Faith at noond »y will we invocate, 
Faith at the setting of the Sim. 0 Faith, endow us with belief. 

HYMN CL 1 1. Indra. 

A mighty Governor art thou, Wondrous, Destroyer of the foe, 
Whose frien l is never done to death, and nev er, never overcome. 

2 Lord of the dan, who brings us bliss, Strong, Warrior, Slayer 

of the fiend, 

May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who gives uspeace. 

3 Drive Bikshas.is and foes away, break l lmu in pieces Vritra’s jaws: 
0 Vritra-sUying Indra, quelf the foeman’s wrath who threat- 
ens us. 

4 0 Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge ns : 
Send down to nether darkness him who serks to do us injury. 

5 Baffle the foeman’s plan, ward off Ins weapon who would con- 

quer H8. 

Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his murdering 
dart afar. 

HYMN CLIIl. Indra. 

Swaying about, the Active Ones came nigh to Indra at his birth, 
And shared his great heroic might. 

2 Based upon strength and victory and power, 0 Indra is thy birth ; 
Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed. 

Thou art the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread the firma- 
ment : 

Thou hast with might upheld the heavens. 

Thou, Indra, bearest m thine arms the lightning that accords 
with thee, 

Whetting thy thunderbolt with might. 

Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in thy might : 
Thou hast pervaded every place. 

HYMN CUV. New Life. 

For some is Soma purified, some sit by sacrificial oil : 

To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to those let 
him depart. 

Tht Active Ones : the Water-Goddeases may be meant. The Consorts of 
according to SAynna. 

iAou, Mighty One : or, ‘0 Bull, thou art a Bull indeed.’ ‘Thou, 0 hero, 
l »deed a hero’.-MaX MUller * 

ty/Uning; or, prai*«-soug, hymn. Sltyana explains arkam hereby 
91 ‘ % laudable or adorable thunderbolt. 

talthhiof this funeral hymn is Yatnl, sister of Yama. 

- 0 Mo*# him liepart : let the spirit of the dead go to the realm of the 



594 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK 


2 Invincible through Fervour, those whom Fervour hath ad 

vanned to heaven, 

Who showed great Fervour in their lives, — even to those le 
him depart. 

3 The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away 
Or who give guerdon thousandfold, — even to those let bin 

depart. 

4 Yea, the first followers of Law, Law’s pureandholy strengthened 
The Fathers, Yama ! Fervour-moved, — even to those let bin 

depart. 

5 Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who protec 

the Sun, , . 

The Rishis, Yama l Fervour-moved, — even to those let hir 

depart. _ T . 

HYMN CLV. Vl '™ ! 

Arayi, one-eyed limping hag, fly, ever-screeching, to the hill 
We frighten thee away with these, the heroes ot Sinmbitha. 

2 Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of each gem 

fh, sharp-homed Brahmanaapati and drive Arayi far away. 

3 Yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the river 

SeSt’Thou thing with hideous jaws, tnd go thou far awa 

4 When, foul with secret stain and spot, ye hastened onward I 

Ah Indra’s enemies were slain ami passed away like frot 
and foam. — - 

to the Fathers who receive offerings of Soma juice am) clarM b. 
uLth • according to SAyana, honey, which is offered to the ot , 

IZZr^pas: literally, warmth, heat; religion, fervour, ascetic* 

* ** v ' p ' 

by Prof. Zimmer, Altindinhe 8 Ltbtn , p. 41o. 

The subject or object of the hymn ie the 
i »l .according to SAyana’. explanation of. oddnve; $ tb , bym» 

ed with DAnus, DAnavas, or demons. ?(nm6«tA<». tb A 

2 Skarp-horntd : aimed with piercing rays of and S" 1 
4 The meaning of this stanza » eot clear. MarydtraUMMK 9 
J/ t Zh are difficult word, that do not occur agau>. _ 



THE RIO VEDA. 


595 


lYMN 157.] 

5 These men have led about the cow, have duly carried Agni 
round, * 

And raised their glory to the God3. Who will attack them 
with success ? 

HYMN CLYI. Agni. 

Let songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race, 
And we will win each prize through him. 

2 Agni, the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves with help 

from thee, — 

That send us for the gain of wealth. 

3 0 Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine: 

| Oil thou the socket, turn the wheel. 

jiOAgni, thou hast made the Sun, Eternal Star, to mount the 

sky, 

Bestowing light on living men. 

5 Thou, Agni, art the people’s light, best, dearest, seated in 
thy shrine : 

Watch for the singer, give him life. 

j HYMN CLVII. Viavedevas. 

We will, with Indra and all Gods to aid us, bring these exist- 
ing worlds into subjection. 

2 Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra form to- 

gether with Adityas. 

3 With the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra be 

Protector of our bodies. 

As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered the 
Asuras, keeping safe their Godlike nature, 

Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked 
about them on their vigorous Godhead. 


5 Then men : the text had only inti, ‘ these.’ According to SAyana, the 
?vedevas are meant, who have brought back the stolen cattle. But the 
[er *nce is probably to the sacrifice which the priests are performing. 


The dart ; ‘ that army/— Wilson. 

3 Turn the wheel : I adopt the reading of the SAmaveda, pavim, instead of 
J ' lm - According to the text, the rendering would be : * Balm heaven and 
^thePani hence. * 

I first three verses of this hymn were recited at the Asyamedha or Horse- 

Fmee. 

ih u ya?a € *pl»»ns the second half of the stanza differently ‘ then (men) 
e <* around them the swift descending rain/ — Wilson. 



59$ 


[BOOK } 


THE HYMNS OF 

HYMN CLVItl. SQry; 

MAYSurya guard us out of heaven, and Vata from the firmamenl 
And Agni from terrestrial spots. 

2 Thou Savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations, be tho 

pleased : 

From falling lightning keep us safe. 

3 May Savitar the God, and may Parvata also give us sight : 
May the Creator give us sight. 

4 Give sight unto our eye, give thou our bodies sight that the' 

may see : 

May we survey, discern this world. 

5 Thus, Surya, may we look on thee, on thee most lovely to behold 
See clearly with the eyes of men. 

HYMN CLIX. Sachf Pauloml 

Yon Sun hath mounted up, and this my happy fate hath 
mounted high. 

I knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband for mine own. 

2 I am the banner and the head, a mighty arbitress am I : 

I am victorious, and my LorcT shall be submissive to my will. 

3 My Sons are slayers of the foe, my Daughter is a ruling Queen : 
I am victorious : o’er my Lord my song of^riumph is supreme. 

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and 

most high, — 

This have I offered, 0 ye Gods, and rid me of each rival wife. 

5 Destroyer of the rival wife, Sole Spouse, victorious, conqueror, 
The others’ glory have I seized as 'twere the wealth of weaker 

Dames. 

6 I have subdued as conqueror these rivals, these my fellow-wives, 
That I may hold imperial sway over this Hero and the folk. 

HYMN CLX. Indra. 

Taste this strong draught enriched with offered viands : with; 

all thy chariot here unyoke thy Coursers. 

Let not those other sacrificers stay thee, Indra : these juice 
shed for thee are ready. ' 

1 Out of heaven : ‘ from (foes dwelling in) Leaven.’ — Wilson. 

3 The Creator : Dh&tar. 

Sachl Pauloml, called also IndrAnl, the Consort of Indra, is also the 
of the hymn. ' Literally, this is a song of exultation by §*chi over her 
wives ; but faehi means also an " act,” “ exploit,” and this hymn is metyph 011 : 
cally the praise of Indra’i glorious acts.’ — Wilson. 




THE RIO VEDA. 


BY MX 161 ] 


597 


2 Thine is the juice effused, thine are the juices yet to be pressed : 

our resonant songs invite thee. * 

0 Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who 
knowest all and drink the Soma. 

3 Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him with yearn- 

ing heart and spirit, — 

Never doth Indra give away his cattle : for him he makes the 
lovely Soma famous. 

j He looks with loving favour on the mortal who, like a vich 
man, pours for him the Soma. 

Maghavan in his bended arm supports him : lie slays, unasked, 
the men who hate devotion. 

5 We call on thee to come to us, desirous of goods and spoil, of 
cattle, and of horses. 

For thy new love and favour are w r e present : let us invoke 
thee, Indra, as our welfare. 


HYMN CLXI. Indra . 

Fob life I set thee free by this oblation from the unknown 
decline and from Consumption ; 

Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from 
her, 0 Indra, thou and Agni. 

2 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought very 

near to death already, 

Out of Destruction’s lap again I bring him, save him for life 
to last a hundred autumns. 

3 With hundred-eyed oblation, himdred-autumned, bringing a 

hundred lives, have I restored him, 

That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe to the 
farther shore of all misfortune. 

* Live, waxing in thy strength, a hundred autumns, live through 
a hundred springs, a hundred winters. 

Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brihaspati, Savi- 
or yield him for a hundred ! 


4 fir. Qaedicke [Aceusativ im Veda , p. 127) translates P&das 1—3 of the 
[Muza differently : der wird von ihm erspaht, der, obvobl reich, ihm keinen 
otaa presat, den holt der machtige heraus aus dem Winkel (Versteck). 

According to the Index the subject of the hymn is the cure of the disease 
V^jayakshma (Consumption or Atrophy). 

‘eh ^ noww : some insidious disease, differing from ItAjayakBhma. 

lii* 8 ’ Pr °L zimm « r suggests, hypertrophy and atrophy are the two 

^tended. See AUindisches Leben, p. 377. The grasping demon; 
y from grah f to seize ; a female spirit who seizes men and kills them. 

I * « hundred ; years, understood. 



598 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK ; 

5 So have I found and rescued thee : thou haBt returned *it 
youth renewed. 

Whole in thy members ! I have found thy sight and all th 
life for thee. 

HYMN CLXIV. Dream-chart 

Avaunt, thou Master of the mind ! Depart, and vanish far awai 
Look on Destruction far from hence. The live man’s mind 
manifold. 

2 A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they obtain. 
Bliss with Vaivasvata they see. The live man’s mind seek 

many a place. 

3 If by address, by blame, by imprecation we have committe 

sin, awake or sleeping, 

All hateful acts of ours, all evil doings may Agni bear away t 
distant places. 

4 When, Indra, Brahmanaspati, our deeds are wrongful an<j 

unjust, . 

May provident Angirasa prevent our foes from troubling 

5 We have prevailed this day and wou : we are made free f 

sin and guilt. 

Ill thoughts, that visit us awake or sleeping, seize the i 
we hate, yea, seize the man who Kateth us. 

HYMN CLXV. * Visved 

Gods, whatsoe’er the Dove came hither seeking, sent to ui 
the envoy of Destruction, 

For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. Wei 
it with our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harm 
bird, ye Gods, within our dwelling. 

May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may 
Missile borne on wings avoid us. 

For Hymns CLXII., CLXIII., and CLXXXIV. see Appendix. 

1 Matter of the mind : the spirit of evil dreams is addressed. M 
tion : the Goddess Nirriti. Manifold : * attentive to various objects, 
soon diverted from any regard to evil dreams.’ — Wilson. 

2 Vaivasvata : Yams, the son of VivasvAn, who presides over evil area 
S&yan*. 

4 Angirasa : according to Siyana, Varuna, the wise God who is espjW 
connected with his worshippers the Angiraaes, may be intended. U. H 
of the Atharva-veda, VI. 45. 8. — — , - *u 

1 A dove, regarded as an ill-omened bird and the messenger of 
flown into the house. Similarly, in North* Lincolnshire, * If * 
sitting on a tree, or comes into the house, or from bein^f wild suaa j 
comes tame, it is a sign of death .’ — Notes and Queries, viii. p. ooA. 

2 Missile borne on wings : the ill-omened bird. 



JTHS 16«.] THE RIO VEDA. m 

3 Let not the Arrow that hath wings distract us: beside the 
fire-place, on the hearth it settles. 

May it bring welfare to o ur men and cattle: here let the 
Dove, ye Gods, forbear to harm us. 

i The screeching of the owl is ineffective; and when beside the 
tire the Dove hath settled, 

To him who sent it hither as an envoy, to him be reverence 
paid, to Death, to Yama. 

1 5 Diive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses i rejoicing 

I bring ye hither food and cattle, 

Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Let the swift 
bird fly forth aud leave us vigour. 

HYMN CLXVI/ SapatnanA sanam. 

Make me a bull among my peers, make me my rivals’ con- 
queror : 

Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord of kine. 

! I am ray rivals’ slayer, like Indra unwounded and unhurt, 

And all these enemies of mine are vanquished and beneath 
my feet. 

I Here, verily, I bind you fast, as the two bow-ends with the string. 

Press down these men, 0 Lord of Speech, that they may 
humbly speak to me. 

Hither I came as conqueror with mighty all-effecting power, 

Aud 1 have mastered all your thought, your synod, aud your 
holy work. 

> May I be highest, having gained your strength in war, your 
skill in peace : my feet have trodden on your heads. 

Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the 
water croak, as frogs from out the water croak. 

HYMN CLXYII. Indra. 

This pleasant meath, 0 iudra, is effused for thee : thou art 
the ruling Lord of beaker and of juice. 

Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons : thou, having 
glowed with Fervour, wonnest heavenly light. 

with it&yamAndh, understood 

object is the Destruction of Rivals. 

^is are VievAmifcra and Jamadagni. Stanzas 1—3 are spoken by the 

“JK and 4 by Indra. 

' o / lvia 9 9^ed with Fervour ; * performing arduous penance.’ — Wilson. 

4 Divine Favour personified. 

e prut : the wealth won for you. 


With holy vertet : SAyana takes richfL 
^ued) by our hymn (0 Gods). 



600 THE HYMX. S' OF [BOOK X. 

2 Let us call S ikra to libations here effused,- winner of light who 

joveth in the patent juice. 

Mark well tins sacrifice of ours end come to us : we pray to 
Maghavan the Vanquisher of hosts. 

3 By royal Soma’s and by Varuna’s decree, under Brihaspati’s 

:i nd An utna 1 1 ’s guard, 

Tins day by thine authority, 0 Maghavan, Maker, Disposer 
thou ! have I enjoyed the jars. 

' 4 I, t >o, urged on, have had my portion, in the howl, and as first 
Prince I drew forth this my hymn of praise, 

When with the prize I came unto the flowing juice, 0 Visva- 
initra, Jamadagui, to your home. 

HYMN CLXV11I. Vdyu. 

0 the Wind’s chariot, 0 its power and glory ! Crashing it goes: 
and hath a voice of thunder. i 

It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and as itmovci 
the dust of earth is scattered. 

2 Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come to him as 
dames to an assembly. 

Borne on his car with those for his attendants, the Godspeeds 
forth, the universe's Monarch. ^ 

3. 'fr.* veiling on the paths of air’s mid-region, no singlcday doff 

. lie take rest or slumber. 

Holy and earliest-born, Friend of the waters, where did he 
spring and fiom what region came he? 

4 Germ of the world, the Deities’ vital spirit, this God moves evei 
as his will inclines him. 

His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let us adore 
this Wind with our oblation. 

HYMN CT.XTX. Com 

May the wiml Mow upon our Cows with healing: may 
eat herbage full of vigorous juices. 

May they drink waters rich in life and fatness: to food that 
moves on feet he gracious, Rudra. 

2 Like-coloured, varions-hued, or single-coloured, whose name* 
through sacrifice are known to Agni, 

2 'They : the Waters Prof. Max Muller interprets differently. See to* 
translation, Vedic Hymns, I. 449. 

1 Pood that moves on feet : the wandering milch*cow8. But see Bergw'P^ 
III. 159. ^ 



tiie Riarr.hA. 


601 


fl\'M V 17M 

Whom the Vngirases produced by Fervour,— vouchsafe to 
these, Parjauya, great protection. 

3 Those who have offered to the Gods their bodies, whose varied 
forms are all well known to Soma, — 

Those grant us in our cattle-pen, 0 Indra, with their full streams 
of milk and plenteous offspring. 

1 Prajapati, bestowing these upon me, one minded with all Gods 

and with the Fathers, 

H.ith to our cow-pen brought auspicious cattle : so may we own 
the oflkpiiug they will bear us. 

HYMN CLXX. Surya. 

May the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled meath, 
giving the sacrifice’s lord uninjuied life; 

He who, wiud-nrged, in person guards our offspring well, hath 
nourished them with food and shines o’er many a laud. 

2 Radiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning strength, 

Truth based upon the statute that supports the heavens, 
lie rose, a light, that kills Vritras and enemies, best slayer 
of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes. 

3 This light, the best of lights, supreme, all-conquering, winner 

of riches, is exalted with high laud. 

All-lighting, radiant, mighty as the Sun to see, he spreadeth 
wide unfailing victory and strength. 

4 Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast attained 

heaven’s lustrous realm. 

By thee were brought together all existing things, possessor 
of all Godhead, All-effecting God. 

HYMN CLXXI. Indra. 

For Ita’s sake who pressed the juice, thou, Indra, didst protect 
his car, 

And hear the Soma-giver’s call. 

|2 Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving 
combatant, 

And sought the Soma-pourer’s home. 

"" " JL — — 

4 PTajdpati hath brought : ' may Prajfipati bring/ according to Sftyana 

[2 '%« ,• here meaning ‘body.’ Combatant: mabhdipa: according to the 
P" 1 cited by SAyana. Sacrifice personified, whose head, as he attempted to 
BffiLi! 1 human form from the Gods, was cut off by Indra. See 'Wilton. 



602 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

3 Venya, that mortal man, hast thou, for Astrabudhna the 

devout, 

0 Indra, many a time set free. 

4 Bring, Indra, to the east again that San who now is in the 

west, 

Even against the will of Gods. 

HYMN CLXXII. D awn 

With all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with ful] 
udders follow on thy path. 

2 Come with kind thoughts, most liberal, rousing the warrior's 

hymn of praise, with bounteous ones. 

3 As noumhers we tie the thread, aud, liberal with our bounty 

offer sacrifice. 

4 Dawn drives away her Sister’s gloom, and, through her ex 

cellence, makes her retrace her path. 

HYMN CLXXIII. The King 

Bk with us ; I have chosen thee : stand stedfast and im- 
movable. 

Let all the people wish for thee : let not thy kingship fall away. 

2 Be even here; fall not away ; be like a mountain unremoved. 
Stand stedfast here like Indra’s self, and Hold the kingship in 

thy grasp. 

3 This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by strong obla- 

tion’s power. 

May Soma speak a benison, and Brahmanaspati, on him. 

4 Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also are these 

hills. 

Stedfast is all this living world, and stedfast is this King of men. 

5 Stedfast, may Varuna the Kins:, stedfast, the God Brihaspati' 
Stedfast, may Indra, Btedfast, too, may Agui keep thy sted 

fast reign. 

3 Venya: Baid to be Prithu, the son of Vena. See X. 148. 5. Attrabudhna 
the name of a man not mentioned elsewhere, the son of Astrabudhna* "tt 
free : Cp. L 24. 15. 

2 Mott liberal : Sfirya appears to be meant. Routing the loamor’i h** 

of praite: jdraydn>mkhaK : the meaning is uncertain : — • briuging 1 
sacrifice to completion,’ according to S&yana. mo 

3 At nonrithert : because sacrifice brings the food that nourishes Uf©- 1 i 
thread: of sacrifice. 

4 Her Sitter's gloom : the darkness of Night. j 


The subject is the benediction of a newly*elected king. 



THE RIOVEDA. 


603 


IYMN 176.] 


6 On constant Soma let us think with constant sacrificial gift. 

And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee 
alone. 

HYMN CLXXIV, The King. 

With offering for success in fight whence Indra was victorious. 
With this, 0 Brahmanaspati, let us attain to royal sway. 

2 Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities, 
Withstand the man who menaces, withstand the man who 

angers us. 

3 Soma and Savitar the God have made thee a victorious King : 
All elements have aided thee, to make thee general conqueror. 

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and 

most high, — 

This have I offered, Gods ! and hence now, verily, am rivalless. 

5 Slajer of rivals, rivalless, victorious, with royal sway, 

Over these beings may I rule, may I be Sovran of the folk. 

HYMN CLXXV. Press*, stones. 

May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you according to the 
Law : 

Be harnessed to the shafts, and press. 

: Stones, drive calamity away, drive ye away malevolence : 

Make ye the Cows our medicine. 

] Of one accord the upper Stones, giving the Bull his bull-like 
strength, 

Look down with pride on those below. 

4 May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you as ‘Law commands 
for him 

Who sacrifices, pouring juice. 

HYMN CLXXVI. Agni. 

With hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Ribhus 

mighty deeds . ^ 

Who, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as twere a mo- 
ther cow. 

1 With offering for success : ‘ By the a Mvarta oblatioo.’-Wilson. 

< Cp. X. 169. 4. 

1 TktkafU: or chariot- pofes ; here meaning the guiding arms of the 

* 1 %e Corns ,* or, the rays of morning, at whoee approach robbers 
tolls fly, 

^ The Bull : Soma. 



604 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR X 

2 Bring: forth the God with song divine, bring Jatavedas hither 

ward, 

To bear our gifts at once to heaven. 

3 He here, a God-devoted Priest, led forward comes to sncrifice. 
Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himself 

the way. i 

4 ThisAgni rescuesfromdistre8s,as ’twere from the Immortal Race, 
A God yet mightier than strength, a God who hath been made 

for life. 

HYMN CLXXVII. MAyAbheda. 

The sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the Bird! 

adorned with all an Asura’s magic might. j 

Sages observe him in the ocean’s inmost depth : the wise disJ 
posers seek the station of his rays. 

2 The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit : erst the Gan 

dharva in the womb pronounced it : 

And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant 
heavenly-bright invention. 

3 I saw the Herdsman, him who never resteth, approaching anc 

departing on his pathways. 

He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, within tin 
worlds continually travels. * 

HYMN CLXXVIII. Tlrkshyi 

This very mighty one whom Gods commission, the Conquero 
of cars, ever triumphant, 

Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarkshy 
for our weal will we call hither. 

3 Like a car: perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, like ft chariot which, a 

the driver is concealed from sight by the canopy, Beema to find its way with 
out a guide. . 

4 As 'twere from the Immortal Race : ‘ as (well as) from peril caused by to 
immortals Wilson. Stanzas 2—4 are recited at the Agni-pranayana, to 
ceremony of cauying the sacrificial fire to the altar used for animal ai 
Soma sacrifices. See Haug’s Aitareya Brdhmanarn , II. 60, 61. 

The subject is MAyAbheda, ‘the discernment of Mdy&, or illusion (t! 
cause of material oreatiou).’ — Wilson. , . 

1 The Bird : the Sun, In the ocean's inmost depth: in tne solar ^ 
according to SAyana. Wise disposes : * ordainera (of solar worship). *- 

2 Speech : or song ; the morning song of the Sun-Bird. _ TheGan 
the breath of life, according to SAyana. The ray of the Sun is probabl ly 

3 This stanza has occurred before. See 1. 164. 31. The Herdsman: 

Resteth : or, stumbleth ; literally, sinks or falls down. 

1 Tdrkshya : a personification of the Sun, usually described w a ^ 
horse, Cp. I. 89. 6. — 



THE RIO VEDA. 


605 


0MS 180.] 

2 As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we asceud 
him as a ship for safety. 

Liko the two wide worlds, broad, deep, far-extended, may we 
be safe both when he comes and leaves you. 

He who with might the Five Lands hath pervaded, like Surya 
with his lustre, and the waters, — 

His strength wins hundreds, thousands ; none avert it, as the 
young maid repelleth not her lover. 

HYMN CLXXIX. Indra. 

Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra’s seasonable share. 

If it be ready, offer it ; unready, ye have been remiss. 

1 Oblation is prepared : come to us, Indra; the Sun hath travel- 

led over half his journey. 

Friends with their stores are sitting round thee waiting liko 
lords of clans for the tribe’s wandering chieftain. 

) Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy ; well-dressed, I 
fancy, is this recent present. 

Drink, Indra, of the curd of noon’s libation with favour, 
Thunderer, thou whose deeds are mighty. 

HYMN CLXXX. Indra. 

0 much-invoked, thou hast subdued thy foemen : thy might is 
loftiest ; here display thy bounty. 

In thy right hand, 0 Indra, bring us treasures : thou art the 
Lord of rivers filled with riches. 

2 Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast 

approached us from the farthest distance. 

Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, 0 Indra, crush thou 
the foe and scatter those who hate us. 

3 Thou, mighty Indra, spraugest into being as strength for 

lovely lordship o’er the people. 

Thou droveat off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the 
Gods thou gavest room and freedom. 

.• I adopt, with a modification, Professor Pisohel’s interpretation 
2 difficult words yavatim n& tdrydm. See Vedische Studien , I. p. 106. 

is twice cooked; first matured in the cow's udder and then 
rein ° n ' the hymn was employed in the Dadhigharma 

i|k on y when Soma jnio* was offered mixt with curd or *<our inspissated 
bL. Cf * VIII. 2. 9, and IX 11. 6. See Hillobrandt, F. .V, I. 221. 



60 S 


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X. 

HYMN CLXXXI. Viavedevas. 

Vasishtha mastered the Rathantava, took it from radiant 
Dh&tar, Savitar, and Vishnu, 

Oblation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by the names of 
Saprathas and Prathas. 

2 These sages found what lay remote and hidden, the sacrifice’s 

loftiest secret essence. 

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Agm, Bharad- 
vaja brought the Brihat. 

3 They found with mental eyes the earliest Yajus, a pathway to 

the Gods, that had descended. 

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Sfirya did 
these sages bring the Gharma. 


HYMN CLXXXII. 


Brihaspati. 


Brthaspati lead us safely over troubles, and turn his evil 
thought against the sinner \ 

Repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacri 
ticer peace and comfort ! 

2 May Na.asansa aid us at Prayfija : blest, be our Anuyaja a' 

invokings. . 

May he repel the curse, and chase ill-feeling, and give th 
sacrificer peace and comfort. 

3 May he whose head is flaming burn the demons, haters < 

prayer, so that the arrow slay them. 

May he repel the curse and chase ill-feeling, and give the sacr 
ficer peace and comfort. _ 

ts : rzsSTv*- »* 

warm libation of milk or other beverage. ,, 

«*• ►’ 

2 Narinanta : Agni. PrayAja: part of the introductory ceremony »' 

Soma sacrifice. Aauydj.: a aecondar, or finalsacnficm 

3 He whole head, i« flaming: taparmdrdhan . Bnhaapati 

Lightning. ^ 



a Xitx 187.J 


THE RIO VEDA. 


SOT 


HYMN CLXXXIII. The Sacrifice, Ete. 

1 saw the© meditating in thv spirit what sprang from Fervour 
and hath thence developed. 

Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread in thine off- 
spring, thou who cravest children. 

2 I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying that in due 

time thy body might be fruitful. 

Come as a youthful woman, rise to meet me : spread in thine 
offspring, thou who cravest children. 

3 In plants and herbs, in all existent beings I have deposited the 

germ of increase. 

All progeny on earth have I engendered, and sons in women 
who will be hereafter. 

HYMN CLXXXV. Aditi 

Great, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of Three Gods, 
Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman. 

2 O’er these, neither at home nor yet abroad on pathways* that 

are strange, 

The evil-minded foe hath power : 

3 Nor over him, the man on whom the Sons of Aditi bestow 
Eternal light that he may live. 

HYMN CLXXXVI. Vftyu. 

Filling our hearts with health and joy, may Vata breathe his 
balm on us : 

May he prolong our days of life. 

2 Thou art our Father, Vata. yea, thou art a Brother and a friend: 
So give us strength that we may live. 

1 1 The store of Amrit laid away yonder, 0 Vata, in thine home, — 
Give us thereof that we may live. 

HYMN CLXXXVII. Agni. 

To Agni send I forth my song, to him the Bull of all the folk : 
So may he bear us past our foes. 

lie deities are the Sacrificer, bis Wife, and the Hotar-priest. 

According to SAyaua, the wife is the speaker of the first stanza, 'the 
atnftna or sacrificer of the second, and the Hotar-priest of the third. 
I' v ig considers Agni to be the speaker of the whole hymn. Whai sprang 
Jj &n>our ; the results of ardent devotion or tdpas. 

The Hotar-priest regards himself as the procreator of all living beings 
°ugh the efficacy of the sacrifices which he performs : matsddhyena ydgcna 
m yotpatteraham iarvajanaheturbhavdmi.—i&jbn&. 

Ijk fl • chief and lord, as the indispensable household fire. 



608 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

2 Who from the distance far away shines brilliantly across the 

wastes : 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

3 The Bull with brightly-gleaming flame who utterly consumes 

the fiends : 

So may he bear us p*st our foes. 

4 Who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with 

his view : 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

5 Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region of the air 
So may he bear us past our foes. 

HYMN CLXXXVIII. Agni 

Now send ye Jativedas forth, send hitherward the vigorou 
Steed 

To seat him on our sacred grass. 

2 I raise the lofty eulogy of Jatavedas, raining boons, 

With sages for his hero band. 

3 With flames of Jatavedas which carry oblatiou to the Gods, 
May he promote our sacrifice. 

HYMN CLXXXIX. * Surya. 

This spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the Mothei in 
the east, 

Advancing to his Father heaven. 

2 Expiring when he draws his breath, she moves along the lucid 

spheres : 

The Bull shines out through all the sky. 

3 Song is bestowed upon the Bird : it rules stlpreme through 

thirty realms 

Throughout the days at break of morn. I 


2 Across the wattes : as the fire that burns the jungle and prepares tb«j 
ground for cultivation. 

5 In farthest region of the air : or beyond the firmament, as the Sun. 

The deity is alternatively SArpar&jfi!, the Serpent-Queen, Kadru, wlio 
also the Riehi of the hymn. 

1 This spotted Bull : the Sun. The Mother : Vann . f[t{ 

3 The Bird: the Sun. Hi* morning song, representing prayer, i« ® u P r *j g, 

through all the divisions of the world, the nuiabei thirty being used m 
witely. Of, I. 123. 8. * 

1 Fran Fervour : from the tapas. devotional ardour or asceticism of 
according to SAyana But the meaning heie may be ‘ from warmth 

220, ® !in 'l nnU ¥ht>n/i* • ft-/. it, tiiaf f>v«ntt« a* warmftl. 



i fl)XV 191.) 27/£ RIG VEDA. 609 

HYMN CXC. Creation. 

From Fervour kindled to its height Eternal Law and Truth 
were born : 

Thence was the Night produced, and thence the billowy flood 
of sea arose. J 


! From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was afterwards 
produced, 

Odainer of the days and nights, Lord over all who close the 
eye. 

! Dhatar, the great Creator, then formed in due order Sun and 
Moon. 

He formed in order Heaven and Earth, the regions of the air 
and light. ’ 


HYMN CXCI. Agn , 

Thou, mighty Agin, gatherest up all that is precious for thv 
friend. J 

Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libation’s place. 

! Assemble, speak together : let your minds be all of one accord, 
As ancient Gods unanimous sit down to their appointed share! 

I The place is common, common the assembly, common the 
mind, so be their thought united. 

A common purpose do I lay before you, and worship with 
your general oblation. 


l One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds of one 
accord. 

United be the thoughts of all that all may happily agree. 


The dteity or subject of stanzas 2 - 4 is SailijMuam, Agreement or Unani- 
>ty in assembly. * 

3 Common the assembly : this sdmiti appears to have been a general assem- 
y of the people on some import * it occasion, such as the election of a Kintr 
'■ Uynm of ike Atkarva-veda , VI. 64. K ' 




APPENDIX. 


Page 466, Hymn LXI. 

I subjoin a Latin version of stanzas 5 — 8, and borrow Wilson’s 
translation of stanza 9. 

5 Membrum suum virile, quod protentum fuerat, mas ille re- 

traxit. Itursus illud quod in juvenem filiam sublatum fuerat, 
non aggressurus, ad se retrahit. 

6 Quum jam in medio congressu, semiperfecto opere, amorem in 

puellam pater impleverat, ambo discedentes seminispaulum 
in terrae superficie in sacrorum sede effusum emiserunt. 
juum pater suam filiam adiverat, cum esi, congressus suum 
semen supra terram effudit. Turn Dii benigni precem 
(brahma) progenuerunt, et Vastosbpatim, legum sacrarum 
custodem, formaverunt. 

lie tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit ; tunc discedens 
pusillanimis hue profectus est. Quasi dextro pede claudus 
processit, “ inutiles fueruut illi mei complexus,” ita locutus. 
The fire, burning the people, does not approach quickly (by 
day): the naked ( Rdkshasas approach) not Agniby night; 
the giver of fuel, and the giver of food, he, the upholder 
( of the rite), is born, overcoming enemies by his might.’ 


lie whole passage is difficult and obscure, and stanza 9 is unintelligible, 
h regard to the myth of Prajfipati and his daughter, Prof. Max Muller 
i When Kumftrila is hard pressed by his opponents about the unmoral- 
i of his gods, he answers with all the freedom of a comparative my- 
logist : “ It is fabled that Prajftpati, the Lord of Creation, did violence to 
daughter. But what does it mean ? Praj&pati, the Lord of Creation, is 
wne of the sun, and he is called so, because he protects all creatures, 
'daughter Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he was in love 
Her, this only means that, at Bunrise, the sun runs after the dawD, the 
"a being at the same time called the daughter of the sun, because she 
when he approaches History of Anc. Sara. Literature, pp. 529, 530. 
e Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. pp. 46, 47, where stanzas 4—7 are translated. 

7 1 T Mtothpatim: VAstoshpati, the guardian of the houBe ; ‘ the ]ord of the 
art h (of sacrifice).’— Wilson. The word may be in apposition with brVma, 
tyer. 

tokte fn flATTJtnft RAkuhasas who consume like fire. 



612 


APPENDIX. 


Page 548, Hymn CVI. 

I borrow Wilson’s translation of the omitted stanzas. 

5 ‘You are like two pleasantly moving well-fed (hills) like Mitrn 

and Varuna, the two bestowers of felicity, veracious, p 0 * 
sessors of infinite wealth, happy, like two horses plump with 
fodder, abiding in the firmament, like two rams (are you) tc 
be nourished with sacrificial food, to be cherished (with 
oblations). 

6 ‘ You are like two mad elephants bending their forequarten 

and smiting the foe, like the two sons of Nitosa destroying 
(foes), and cherishing (friends) ; you are bright as two water 
born (jewels), do you, who are victorious, (render) my decay 
ing mortal body free from decay. 

7 ‘ Fierce (Aswins), like two powerful (heroes), you enable this 

moving, perishable mortal (frame) to cross over to the ob- 
jects (of its destination) as over water; extremely strong 
like the Ribhus, your chariot attained its destination swift 
as the wind, it pervaded (everywhere), it dispensed riches. 

8 ‘ With your bellies full of the Soma, like two saucepans, preserv- 

ers of wealth, destroyers of enemies, (you are) armed with 
hatchets, moving like two flying (birds^with forms like the 
moon, attaining success through the mind, like two laudable 
beings, (you are) approaching (the sacrifice).’ 

Page 598, Hymn CLXTI. 

May Agni, yielding to our prayer, the Rakshas-slayer, drive 
away . 

The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring wombj 

2 Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of thy fleshj 
The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe au 

womb. 

3 That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, roovw 

embryo, . . , • 

That which will kill the babe at birth,— oven this will we am 


far away. 

4 That which divides thy legs that it may lie between the 
ried pair, ... ter 

That penetrates and licks thy side, — tTen this will 


minate. __ . — - 

Th* subject is the Prevention of Abortion. The Rishi is Kakshobft (S J, 

of RAkshaaas), son of BrahmA. . . .» -rtirits wM 

Stanzas 1, 2 are directed against diseases, and S— 6 against evil' P ^ 
attack women who are about to become mothers. __ 



APPENDIX. 


613 


5 What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, or of lord, 
And would destroy thy progeny,-- even this will we exterminate. 

6 That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and 

lies down by thee, 

And will destroy thy progeny,— even this will we exterminate. 
Page 698, Hymn CLXIII. 

From both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both thine ears 
and from thy chin, 

Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive thy malady 
away. 

2 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones 

and from the spine, 

From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy malady away. 

3 From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, from the 

heart, 

From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy malady away. 

4 From thighs, from kuee-caps, and from heels, and from the 

forepart of the feet, 

From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive thy malady 
away. 

5 From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, and from 

thy nails, 

From all thyself from top to toe, I drive thy malady away. 

6 From every member, every hair, disease that comes in everyjoint, 
From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away. 

Page 607, Hymn CLXXXIV. 

May Vishnu form and mould the womb, may Tvashtar duly 
shape the forms, 

Praj&pati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay the germ for thee. 

2 0 Sinfvalt, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvati : 

May the Twain Gods bestow the germ, the Asvins crowned 
with lotuses. 

3 That which the Asvins Twain rub forth with the attrition- 

sticks of gold, — 

That germ of thine we invocate, that in the tenth month thou 
may st bear. 

The deity or subject is th^ cure of Yakshma or phthisis or consumption. 

2 Sinivdlt ; a lunar Goddess, who aids the birth of children. Cp. II. 32. 6. 
verses 1 and 2 are incorporated in Atharva*veda, V. 25, which is a charm 
10 accompany the GarbhAdWna ceremony to ensure or facilitate and bless 
Option. 




INDEX OF HYMNS. 
BOOK VII. 


s Rishi. Deity . Metre. 

1 Vasishtba Mai- Agni. Vir&j. 19-25 Trishtup. 

trAvaruni. 

2 The same Aprls. Trishtup. 

3 Agni. The same. 

4 The same. 

5 Vaisv&nara Agni. 

6 The same. 

7 Agni. 

8 The same. 


9 

10 
11 
12 


13 VaisvAnara Agni. 

U Agni. 1 Brihati. 2, 3 Trishtup. 

15 The same. GAyatri. 

16 Brihati and Satobrihatl 

alternately. 

17 DvipadA Trishtup. 

18 Indra. Munificence of Trishtup. 

SudAs (22-25). 

19 Indra. The same. 

*9 ' The same. 

11 

12 Viriij. 9 Trishtup. 

: Trishtup. 

1 The same. 


S 

7 

8 

!» 



IndrA, 

The tame. 


Trishtup. 

GAyatrl 10-12 VirAj. 



616 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


s 

Riski. 

Deity. 

Metre. 

32 

Vasishtha. Sakti Indra. 

Vasishtha. 

Brihatl and Satobrihatt 
alternately. 3 DvipadJt 
Virftj. 

33 

V.tsishtha. His 
sons (10-14). 

Vasishtha’s sons. 
Vasishtha (10-14). 

Trishtup. 

34 

Vasiahtha. 

Visvedevas. Ahi. Ahi- 
budhnya. 

DvipadA 22-25 Trishtup, 

35 The same. 

Visvedevas. 

Trishtup. 

36 

37 


The same. 

The Bame. 

38 


Savitar. Savitar or 

Bhaga. Vdjins (7-8). 


39 

40 


VisvedevaB. 

The same. 


41 


Various (1). Bhaga. Ushas. 

Trishtup. 1 Jagatl. 

42 


Visvedevas. 

Trishtup. 

43 


The same. 

The same. 

44 


Various (1). Dadhikr&s. 

Trishtup. 1 Jagatl. 

4i* 


Savitar. 

Trishtup. 

46 


Iiudra. 

Jajjpti. 4 Trishtup. 

47 


Waters. 

Trishtup. 

48 


Ribhus. Ribhus or 
Visvedevas. 

The same. 

49 


Waters. 


50 


Mitra and Varuna. Agni Jagatl. 4 Atijagati or 
Visvedevas. Praise of UiverB. Sakvart. 

51 


Aditya3. 

Trishtup. 

52 


The same. 

The same. 

53 


Heaven and Earth. 


54 


V&stoshpatL 


55 


Vistoshpati. Indra. 

1 Gftyatrf. 2-4 Upamhf> 
brihatl. 5-8 Anuehtup. 

56 


Maruts. 

1-11 DvipadA VirAj. 12-‘ 
Trishtup. 

57 


The same. 

Trishtup. 

58 



The same. 

59 


Maruts. Rudra (12). 

I, 8, 6 Brihatt. 2, l 6 s »' 
briliktl. 7, 8Tr»htui) 9-i 
Gftyatrl. 12 AnusUtup. 

60 


SCtrya Mitra and Varuna. 

Trishtup. 

61 


Mitra and Varuna. 

The same. 

62 . 


SOrya. Mitra and Varupa* 


63 


The tame. 




II t/mn. 


INDEX OP HYMNS. 


617 


Rishi. 

64 Vasishtha. 

65 The same. 

66 


68 

69 

70 

71 


73 

74 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 

81 

82 

83 

Isu 


S .. 

1 ... 

) 

1 ... 
>2 . 
•3 ... 
>4 ... 
to ... 
to 



Deity . 


Metre. 


Mitra and Vanina. 
The same. 

Mitra and Varuna. 
Adityas. Sdrya. 

Abvius. 

The same. 


Trishtup. 

The same. 

G&yatrt. 10-15 Brihati and 
Satobrihat! alternately. 
16 Pura-ushnih. 
Trishtup. ; 

VirAj. 8, 9 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 


Brihati and Satobrliatt 

alternately. 

Ushas or Dawn. Trishtup. 

The same. The same. 


Indra and Varuna. 
The same. 


Varuna. 
The Bame. 


Vi\yu. Indra and V&yu. 
The same. 


Indra and Agni. 
The same. 

Saraavatt. Saraavftn. 
The sam£ 


Brihati and Satobiihatt 
alternately. 

Jagatl. 

The same. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 


G&yatit, 5 Jagatt. 
Trishtup. 

The same. 


G&yatii. 12 Auuslitup. 
Trishtup. 

1 Brihati. 2 Satobrihati. 3 
PtastArapankti 4-6G4ytrt. 
Trishtup. 


Indra. Brihaspati. Indra 
andBrahraanaspati. Indra 
and Bfihaapati. 

Tnriyo onri RHhasnati. The same. 



618 


INDEX OP HYMNS. 


Deity. Metre. 

Vishnu. Indra and Vishnu. Trishtup. 

Vishnu. The same. 

Parjanya. 

The same. 1,3 GAyatri. 2 PAdanichrit. 

Frogs. Trishtup. 1 Anushtup. 

Indra and Soma. Indra. Trishtup. 1-6, 18, 21, 23 

Soma Agni. The Gods. Jagati. 7 Jagati or Tritfh 
Press-stones. Maruts. tup. 25 Anushtup. 
VasiBhtha’s Prayer. Earth 
and Firmament. 


BOOK VIII. 

1 PrajAtha K&nva Indra. Asanga’s Munifi- Brihati. 2, 4 Satobrihatl. 


(1,2), MedbAti- cence. Asanga. 
thi and Medh- 
yAtithi (3-29), 

Asinga (30-33), 

33, 34 Trishtup. 

Saarati (34). 

2 MedtAtithi and Indra. Vibhindhu’s 

GAyatri. 28 Anushtup. 

Priyamedha. 

Munificence. 

4 

MedhAtithi 

(41-42). 

3 MedhyAtithi. 

Indra. PAkasthAman's 
Munificence. 

Brihati and Satobrihatl 
alternately. 21 Anushtup. 
22,23 GAyatri. 24 Brihati. 

4 Devatithi. 

Indra. Indra or POshan. 
Kurunga’s Munificence. 

Brihati and Satobrihatl al- 
ternately. 21 Pura-ushnih. 

5 BrahmAtithi. 

Asvins. Kasu’s Munificence. GAyatri. 37, 38 Brihati. 35 
Anushtup. GAyatri. 

6 Vatsa. 

Indra. Tirindira’s 
Munificence. 

GAyatri. 

7 Punarvatsa, 

Maruts. 

The same. 

8 Sadhvansa. 

Asvins. 

Anushtup. 

9 Sasakarna. 

The same. 

1, 4, #, U, 16, Brihati. 2, 
3, 20, 21, Giyatrl. 5 
kup. 7,9,13,16.19. Ana- 
shtup. 10 Trishtup. B 
VirAj. 12 Jagati. 

10 PragAtha. 


1,5 Brihati. 2 Madhyejyotu- 

3 Anushtup. 4 Astara- 
pankti. 6 Satobfibatl. 

11 Vatsa. 

Agni. 

GAyatri. 1 PratishthA. 2Vtf 
dhamAnA. 10 Trishtup. 

12 Parvata. 

Indra. 

Ushnih. 

13 NArada. 

The same. 

The same. 


S Risk*. 
$ 

99 Vasishtha. 

100 The same. 

101 

102 

103 

104 



Hymn . 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


619 


Riihi. 


Deity. 


Metre. 


14 Goshfiktin and 

Asvasfiktin. 

15 The same. 

16 Irimbithi. 

17 The same. 

18 

19 Sobhari. 


20 The same. 

21 

22 


Visvamanas. 
The same. 


Indra. 
The same. 


Adityas. Asvins. Agni. 

Sfirya, Vdta or Wind. 
Agni. Adityas. Trasa- 
dasyu's Munificence. 


Maruts. 

Indra. Chitra’s Munificence, 
Asvins. 


Agni. 

Indra. A Prince’s 
Munificence. 


Gdyat 

Ushih. 

Gdy<ri. 

Gdyd. 14 Brihati. 

1 Satobrihati. 

Ush:h. 

1-26^8-33 Kakup and Sato- 
bhati alternately. 27 
Dipadd Virdj. 34 Ushnih. 
3Satobrihati. 36 Kakup. 
3<Pankti. 

Kakp and Satobrihati 
ahrnately. 

The ame. 

1-7 kihati and Satobrihati 
alternately. 8 Anushtup. 
9, D, 13-18 Kakup and 
Satobrihati alternately.il 
Kakip. 12 Madhyejyotis. 
Ushnih 

Ushnih.30 Anushtup. 


Mitra and Varuna. 

Visvedevas. 
Asvins. Vdyu. 

Manu VaivM- Visvedevas. 
vata. 

The same. The same. 

Manu, or Kas- 
yapa. 

Manu. 


The same. 

Medhdtithi. 

Medhydtithi. 


The Yajamftna and his 
Wife. Their Benediction. 
Indra. 

The same. 


Tje looi Vmu- 
r °chishas. 

?y4v(Uva. 


Ushnih. 23 Ushniggarbhd. 

Ushnih. 16,19, 21, 25 Gdya- 
tri, 20 Anushtup. 

Brihati and Satobrihati 
alternately. 

Gdyatri. 4 Pura-ushnih. 

Dvipadd Virdj. 

1 Gdyatri. 2 Pura-ushnih. 
3 Brihati. 4 Anushtup. 

Gdyatri. 9, 14 Anushtup. 10 
Pddanichpt. 15-18 Pankti. 

Gdyatri. 

Brihati. 36-18 Gdyatri. 19 
Anushtup. 

Anushtup. 16-18 Gdyatri. 


Asvins. 


UparishtAjjyotis. 22-24 
Pankti. 23 Mah&brihatt. 



620 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


§ Rlshi. 

> 2 * * 

k! 

36 SyAvAsva. 

37 .. 

38 

39 NAbhAka. 

40 The same. 


Indra. 

The same, 
ndra and Agni. 
Lgni. 

udra and Agni. 


42 ArchanAnaa, or aruna, Alvins. 
NAbhAka. 


Sakvarl. 7 MahApankti. 
MahApankti. 1 Atijagiti. 
GAyatri. 

MahApankti. 

MahApankti. 2 Sakvari. 

12 Trishtup. 
MahApankti. 

1-3 TriBh$up. 4-6 Anushtu 


43 Viriipa. 

44 The -same. 

45 Trisoka. 

46 Vasa Asvya. 


,gni. GAyatri. 

lie same The Bame. 

,gni and Indra. Indra 

ndra. Munificence of 1 PAdani$hrit. 2-4, 6, 10 


Prithuaravas. 


47 Trita Aptya. 

48 PragAtha. 
49* Bharga. 


51 PragAtha. 

52 The same. 


53 

54 

55 Kali. 


Adityas. Adityas and 
Ushas. 

Soma. 

Agni. 

Indra. 

The same. 

Indra. The Gods. 

Indra. 

The same. 


23, 29, 33, GAyatri. ! 
Kakup. 7,11,19,25,2; 
Brihatt. 8AnuBhtup. 9 
26, 28 Satobrihatl. 12 Vi 
paritA. 13 Chaturvinfla 
tikA DvipadA. 14 Pipili- 
bamadhyA Brjjhati. 15 Ki 
kip NyankusirA. 16 VirA 
17 Jagati. 18 Uparishtto 
brihati. 20 Vishamapjid 
21, 22, 24, 32 Pankti. i 
DvipadA VirAj. 31 U«h?i 
MahApankti. 


Trishtup. 5 Jagatt. 
Brihatt and Satobrihatl 
alternately. 

The same. 

Pankti. 7, 9 Brihati. 
Giyatrt. 1, 4, 5, 7 AnusM 0 ! 

12 Trishtup. 

GAyatri. 

The same. 

Brihatt and Satobrihatl 
'alternately. 15 Anushti 
GAyatri. 

GAystri. 1 , 4 , 7 , 10 Anush? 


66 MatayaorMAnya.Adityaa. GAyatri. 

57 Priyamedha. Indra. Munificence of GAyatri. M, 7,1° nus * 
two Princes. * _____ 

* Eleven must be added to the numbers of this and ft 

this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Prof. 
editions of the text. See note p. 267 . 




INDEX or HTMNB. 

. i 621 

| Ruki. 

Deity. 

Metre. 

58 The same. 

Indra. Visvedevas. Varung Anushtup. 2 Ushnih. 4-6 
Gdyatri. 11, 16*Paukti. 
17, 18 Brihati. 

59 Puruhanman. 

Indra. 

Brihati and Satobrihati 
alternately. 7*12 Brihati. 
13 Ushnih. 14 Anush tup. 
15 Pura-ushnih. 

60 Sadi fci and Puru 

- Agni. 
r 

Gdyatri. 10-15 Brihati and 

mil ha, or ei the: 

Satobrihati alternately. 

of them. 

61 H&ryata. 

The same. 

Gdyatit. 

62 Gopavana, or 

Asvins. 

The same. 

Saptavadhri, 

63 Gopavana. 

Agni-Srutarvan’s 

Munificence. 

Gdyatri. 1, 4, 7, 10, 13-15 
Anushtup. 

64 VirCipa. 

Agni. 

Gdyatri. 

! 66 Kurusuti. 

Indra. 

The same. 

66 The same. 

The same. 

Gldyatrl. 10 Brihati. 11 
Satobrihati. 

57 


Gdyatri. 10 Brihati. 

58 Kritnu. 

Soma. 

Gdyatri. 9 Anushtup 

59 Ekadyfi. 

Indra. The Gods. 

Gdyatri. 10 Trishtup. 

73 Kusidin. 

Indra. 

Gdyatri. 

(1 The same. 

The same. 

Tie same. 

n 

Visvedevas. 



73 Uflanft K&vya. 

Agni. 


74 Krishna. 

Asvins. 


75 Visvaka. 

The same. 

Jagatt 

76 Dyumnlka or 
Priyamedha 


Brihati and Satobrihati 
alternately. 

or Krishna. 

77 Nodhas. 

Tndra. 

The same. 

78 Nrimedha and 
Purumedha. 

The same. 

1, 3, 7 Brihati. 2, 4 Satobri- 
hati. 5, 6 Anushtup. 

79 The same. 


Pragdtha. 

*> Ap4U. 


Anushtup. 1, 2 Pankti. 

81 Srutakaksha, or ... rr 

Gdyatri. 1 Anushtup. 

Bukaksha. 

82 Sukaksha. 

Indra. Indra and Ribhus. 

Gdyatri. 

Vindu. or P4t»- M*rutg. • 

The same. 

dakaha. 

1 3* Tiraschl. 

Indra. 

Anushtup. 

i 85 DyutAna, or 
[ Tiraschl. 

Indra. Maruts. Indra 
and Buhasp&tl. 

Trishtup. 4 Virdj. 



622 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


I ^ 

tej 

86 Rebha. 


87 Nrfmedha. 

88 The same. 

89 Nema. Indra 

(45). 

90 Jamadagni. 


91 Prayoga, or 
Agni BArhas- 
patya, or Agni 
Grihapati, or 
Yavishtha. 


Indra. Brihati. 10, 13 Atijagatl. 11 

12 UparishtAdbrihati. 1 
Trishtup. 1*6 Jagati. 

The san. Ushnih. 7, 10, 11 Kakup. 9 

12 Para-ushnih. 

PragAtha. 

Indra. Vc. Trishtup. 6 Jagati. 7-9 

Anushtup. 

Mitra an<Varuna. Adi- 1, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13 Brihati. 2, < 
tyas. Alins. V&yu. Surya. 6, 8, 10, 12 Satobrihati. 
Ushas. ‘avamAna. Cow. Gayatri. 14-16 Trishtu] 
Agni. GAyatri. 


Agni. Agni \nd Maruts. 


vAlakhil^a HYMNS.* 

1 Praskanva. Indra Brihati and Satobrihati 

al^rnately. 

2 Pushtigu. The same. The same. 

3 Srushtigu. 

4 Ayu. 

5 Medhya. 

6 MAtarievan, Indra. Visvedevas. 

7 Krisa Praekanva’e Munificence. GAyatrt. 3-5 Anushtup. 

8 Prishadra. The Bame. Agni and Sfirya. QAyatri. 5 Pankti. 

9 Medhya. Asvins. Trishtup. 

10 The same. Visvedevas. The Priests . The same. 

11 Suparna. Indra and Varuna. Jagati. 


BOOK IX. 

1 Madhuchchhan* Soma PavamAna. GAyatri. 

das. 

2 MedhAtith^ The same. The same. 

3 $unahsepa. 

4 Hirnnyaatfipa 

5 Asita,orDevala. Apris. GAyatrl. 8-11 Anushtup. 

6 The same. Soma PavamAna. Gayatri. 

7-24 The same. The same. 

* These eleven hymns are numbered 49—59 in Prof. 
editions of the text. 



IWDEX OF HYMNS. 


623 


• Ddl V- Metre. 

'ii 

^ Jrilhachyuta. Soma PavamAua. GAyatrl. 

9^ IdhmavAha 

Nrimedha. 

? ,8 Priyamedha. 

h9 Nrimedha. 

30 Vindu. 

31 Gotama. 

32 SydvAsva. 

33 Trita Aptya 

34 The same. 

35 Prabhfivasu 

, 36 The same. 

3/ Rahtigana. 

38 The same. 

39 Brihanmati, 

40 The same. 

41 MedhyAtithi 

'2 The same. 

6 

4 AyAsya. 

The same. 

it * 

47 Ravi. 

48 The same. 

49 • 

50 Uchathya. 

*1 The same. 

i2 

'8-60 AvatsAra 

1 Amahiyu. 

^ Jamadagni. 1 

3 Nidhruvi. 

1 *%apa. 

J Bhrigu or 

Jamadagni, 

VaikhAnasas. Soma PavamAna. Agni. GAyatrt. 18 Anushtup. 
BharadvAja. PavamAna Soma. Pavam&na GAyatrl. 16-18 DvipadA GA- 
^wyapa. Gota- PAshan. Agni. Savitar. All- yatrl. 27, 31, 32 Anuah- 
m *Atri.VisvA- Gods. Praise of Students, tup. 30 Pura-ushnih. 
nntra. Jama- 
Jagnl Vaaish- 
l.U. Pavitra. 



Hymn . 


624 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


RUM. Deity. 


Metre . 


68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 

83 

84 

85 

86 


V&teaprt. Soma Pavamtaa. 

Hiranyaatftpa. The same. 

Renu 

Rishabha. 

Harimanta. 

Pavitra. 

Kakshiv&u. 

Kavi. 

The same. 


Vasu. 

The same. 


Pavitra. 

Praj&pati. 

V ena. 

The Akrwhta . ■ 
M5ahas. The 
Sikata Ni\&va- 
ris. The Pi is ’/ 1 
Ajas. Atri. 
Gritsamada. 


87 UsiiA. 

88 The same. 

89 

90 Vasishtha. 

91 Kasyapa. 

92 The same. 

93 Nodhas. 

94 Kanva. 

95 Praskanva. 

96 Pratardana. 

97 Vasishtha. In- 

drapramati. 

Manyu. Upa- 
raanyu. Vy4- 
ghrapftd. Sakti 
Karnaarnt. 

Mri]ika. Vasu* 
kra. Partora. 
KuUa. 


Jagati. 10 Trishtup. 
Jagatl. 9, 10 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 10 Trishtup. 
jagatl. 9 Trishtup. 
Jagatl. 

The same. 

Jagatl. 8 Trishtup 
Jagati. ( 

The same. 


Jagatl. 5 Trishtup. 

The same. 

Jagati. 

The same. 

Jagatl. 11, 12 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 

It 


Trishtup. 
The same. 



INDEX OF HYMNS. 


625 


^ Rishi. Deity. 

98 Ambarteha and Soma PavamAna. 
Rijisvan. 

9S TheRebhasdnus. The same. 

00 The same. 

01 Andhigu. YayA- 

ti. Nahusha. 

Manu. PrajApati. 

02 Trita Aptya 

03 Dvita Aptya 

04 Parvata and 

NArada, or the 

SikhandinK 

(Apsaras). 

105 Parvata and 

NArada. 

,Ut> Agni. Chakahus 

Manu. 

0? Seven Riahis 

■OS Gauriviti. Sak- 

ti. Oru. Uijis- 
I van. Ordhva- 
sadman. Kii- 
tayasl Rinau- 
chaya. 

9 Agnia of Sacr>- 

fice. 

0 Tryaruna and 

Trasadaayu. 

1 AnAnata. 

12 Sisu. 

12 Kasyapa. 

U The same. 


re. 

Anushtup, 11 Brihatt. 

Anushtup. 1 Brihatl. 
Anushtup. 

Anushtup. 2, 5 GAyatrl. 


Uahnih. 
The same. 


PrAgAtha. 3, 16 DvipadA Vi- 
rAj. 8, 10 Brihati. 

1*12 Kakup and Satobrihat! 
alternately. 13 GAyatrl 
YavainadhyA. 14,16 Sato- 
bnhati. lo Kakup. 


DvipadA VirAj. 

1-3 Anushtup Pipihkam&dh- 
yA. 4-9 Ordhvabrihnti. 
10-12 Viraj. 

Atyashti. 

Pankti. 

The same. t 


BOOK X. 

1 Trita Aptya. Agni. Trishtup. 

^ The same. The Bftzne. The same 



26 


index ok hymns. 


§ Risk? 

Deity. 

Metre. 

9 Trisirasor Sin- 

Waters. 

GAyatrl. 5 VardhamA_. 

dliudvipa. 


PratUhtUA. 8,9 Anuehtup 

10 Yaren. Yami. 

Yama. Yarn!. 

Trishtup. 

11 H.i%ird liana 

Agni. 

Jagati. 7-9 Trishtup. 

A up. 



12 The same 

'fiie Hatno 

Ti ishtup. 

13 Vivasvan. 

The Two CarK 

Trishtup. 5 Jagati. 

14 Yamu 

Yanm. The PciticH men- 

Trhhtup. 13, 14. 16 Anush 


turned The Fatheis. The 
Hound*. Minn of Sarnnui. 

tup. 15 Brihatl. 

15 Si'ikha. 

The Fathers. 

Trishtup. 11 J.igati 

16 Damana 

Agni 

Trishtup. 11-14 Anush tup 

17 De\a»r.ivas. 

Saranvu P mhan. Sarasvati. Trishtup 14 Anuahtup LJ 


Waters. Soma. 

Anush tup or PuraatAd 
blihati. 

18 Sankus-uka. 

Mritvu Dhatar. Tvnshtar. 

Trhhtup. 1 1 PrasUrapankti, 

The Pitnmedha. Praj.ipati 

i 13 Jagati. 14. Annshtup 

19 M.ithita.Bhrigu, Waters, oi Cows. Agni 

Anush tup. 6 GAyatii, 

or Chvavnna. 

and Soma. 


20 VimadaorYa- 

Agm. 

G&vftri. 1 EkapadA Vir4j. 

suhrit. 

2 Anush tup. 9 Vir&j. 10 
Trishtup. 


21 The same. 

Tiic same. 

Astarapankti. 

22 . 

Indra. 

PurastAdbrihati, 5,7,9 Auu 


shtup. 15 Trishtup. 

21 

The same 

Jng.it t. 1, 7 Trishtup. 5 



Abhis&rini. 

24 

Indra. Asvins. 

AstArapankti. 4-6 Anush tu 

25 

Soma. 

A-tArapankti. 

26 

Pushan. 

Amiehtup, 1, 4 Uehnih. 

27 Vanukra 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

2 S Ya^nkra’H^kYife Imlrn. Vasukra. 

The same. 

Indra. Vamkra. 


29 Va>ukr ». 

Indra. 


30 K-nrab'irt. 

Waters, or Child of Waters 

31 The .same. 

Visvedevas. 


32 

Indra. 

1-5 Jagati. 6*9 Trishtup- 

33 

Vi»vedevftR. Indra. Kuril- 

1 Trishtup. 2 Brihatl. 3 5 


uravana. Upamasravus. 

brihatl. 4-9 GAyatr . 

34 Ka vasln, or 

Dice. Agriculture. 

Trishtup. 7 Jagati. 

Aksha. 


35 Lusa. 

Vifvedevaa. 

Jagati. 13, 14 Trishtup- 

36 The same. 

The same. 

The same. 

37 AbhitapA. 

Suiya. 

t ii -t n T • 1 ( in wM 



INDSX OF UTMNS. 


627 


1 

Rishi. 

Deity. 

Metre. 

38 

Indra Mushka* 
via. 

Indra. 

Jagati. 

39 

Ghosh A. 

Asvina. 

Jagati. 14 Trishtup. 

40 

The aame. 

The same. 

Jagatt. 

41 

Suhaatya. 


The same. 

42 

Krishna. 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

43 

The same. 

The same. 

Jagatt. 10, 11 Trishtup. 

44 

45 

Vatsapri. 

Agni. 

Jagatt. 1*3, 10, 11 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

45 

The bame. 

The same. 

The same. 

47 

Saptagu. 

Indra Vaikuntha. 


48 

Indra Vaikun- 
tha. 

The same. 

Jagatt. 7, 10, 11 Trishtup. 

49 

The same. 


Jagati. 2, 11 Trishtup, 

50 


. 

1, 2, 6, 7 Jagati. 3, 4 Abhi* 
sArini. 5 Trishtup. 

51 

Agni Sauchfka. 

Agni. Gods. 

Trishtup. 

52 

The same. 

Gods. 

The same. 

53 

Agni Sauchika. 
Gods. 

Agni. Gods. 

Trishtup. 6, 7, 9-11 Jagati. 

54 

Brihaduktha. 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

55 

The same. 

The same. 

The same. 

56 


Viavedevas. 

Trishtup. 4, 6 Jagatt, 

57 

Bandhu, Sruta* 
bandhu, Vi- 
prabandhu. 

The Bame. 

GAyatrl. 


58 

The same. 

Tim Spit it. 

Anushtup. 

59 


Nirriti. Soma. Asuniti. The Trishtup. 8 Pankti. 9 Ma- 



Deities mentioned. Heav- 
en and rarth. Indra. 

hApankti. 1 OPankty uttarA 

60 

The GaupAya- 

AsamiUi. Indra. Subandhu’s Anushtup. 1-5 GAyatri. 8’ 


nas amt their 
Mother. 

Recall to Life. The Hands. 

9 Pankti. 


^ NAbbAuedishtha.Visvedevaa. Trishtup. 

82 The aame. Yisvedevaa, or Augirases, 1-4 Jagati. 5,8,9 Anush 
Viavedevas. S&varni’a tup. 6 Brihatt. 7 Sato- 
Liberality. brihatt. 10 GAyatrt. 11 

Trishtup. 

63 0*7*. VisTed»ya». Patliy# Svaati. Jagat!. 16, 17 Trishtup. 15 

Trishtup or Jagati. 

^ The same. Viavedevas. Jagatt. 12, 16, 17 Trishtup, 

f° ^ukarna. The same. Jagatt. 15 Trishtup. 

J The same. The aame. 


— BrihaiPftti. 


Trishtup. 



Hymn. 


623 


index of hymns- 


68 AyAsya. 

69 Sumitra. 

70 The same. 

71 Brihaspati. 

72 Brihaspati, or 

Aditi. 

73 GaurivTti. 

74 The same. 

75 Sindhukshit. 

76 Jaratkarna. 

77 Syumarasmi. 

78 The same. 

79 Agni, or Sapt 

80 Agni. 

81 Visvakarman 

82 The same. 

83 Manyu. 

84 The same. 

85 SuryA. 


Brihaspati. 

Agni. 

Aprls. 

JZttnam. 

Gods. 

Indra. 

The same. 

The Rivers 

The Press-stones 

Marut.s. 

The same. 


Agni. 

The same. 

Visvakarman. 
be same. The same, 

tlanvu Manyu. Tnshtup. 1 Jagat! 

7 Th „ 1 STiiahtup. 4-7 Jagait 

rh0 r me ' ^ B, nlal. Gods. An.htup, 1 4 ]M1 23 

Son.’* and Ark. ThrMoon. 24, 26 36 37. 44 Tr, 
Benedictions. S.irya. ^ 

Indra. IndrAnt. lndra. IndrA.l VribhAkapi. Pankti. 


Tiishtup. 

Trishtup. 1,2 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 9 Jagaii. 
Anush tup. 

Tiishtup. 

The same. 

.1 agati. 

The same 
Trishtup 5 .1 agatt. 

1, 3, 4, 8 Trishtup 2 
Jagati 

Tiishtup. 

The same. 


VrishAkapi. 
87 PAyu. 

gg MurdhanvAn. 

89 Kenn. 

90 HArAyana. 

91 Aruna. 

92 §AryAta. 

93 TAnva. 


94 Arbuda. 

95 Purftravaa. 

Urvasl. 

96 Barn, or 

garvahari. 

97 Bbishaj. 

98 DavApi. 


Agui Rakshohl. 

Surya and VaisvAnara. 
Indra and Soma. 
PuruBha. 

Agni 

Visvedevas 
The same 


The Press-stones. 
Urvafi. Pururavas. 

Indra’s Horses. 

Medicinal Herbs. 
Gods. 

Indra. 


Trishtup. 22,25 Amiebtu 
Trishtup. 

The same. 

Anushtup. 13 Trifhtup. 
Jagati. 15 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 

PraetArapankti. 2.3,13 Ai 

shtup. 9 Pankti. 11 Ny 
ku^rini. 15 PurasUdl 
hail. ’ 

Jagati. 5. 7, 14 Trishtup 
Trishtup. 

Jagati. 12, 13 TribhWP 

Anush^up. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 



INDEX OF HYMNS. 


629 


Rishi. 


Deity. 


Metre. 


100 Duvasyu. 
lljl Hudlu. 


M udgala. 
Apratiiatha. 

A ah taka. 
Durmitra or 
Sumitra. 
BhutAnra. 


ViswdevaB. 

Visvedevas, or Priests. 

Tndi a, or the Mace, 
lndra. Bnhaspati. Apwi. 

M aruts. 
lndra. 

The same. 

Alvins. 


Divya, or Dak- Guerdou. 
shir. A. 

SaramA. Panis. SaramA Pams 


H'8 

1(9 Juhfl. Visvedevas. 

Jamadagui or Apiis. 

Rama. 

A^htrAdanshtra. lndra. 
Nahhabprabhe- The same, 
dana. 

Sataprabhedana 

14 Sadhri or Ghar- Visvedevas. 
ma. 

Ppastuta. Agni. 


110 


13 


15 


1 ° 


Agniyuta or 
Aguiyupa. 
Bhikshu. 
Lrukshuya 
Lava. 

Brihaddiva. 

Hiranyagarbha. 

Phitrainaha. 

Vena. 

Agni. Agni, Va- 
runa, and Soma 
Vdk. 

Rulmalabarhi- 
•J'a, or Anho- 
much. 

Kusika or Ratri 

Vihavya. 
Pra j4pati Para* 
meshthin. 

Yajha. 


lndra. 

Libei ality. 

Agni RakshohA. 
lndra as Lava, 
lndra. 

Ka. 

Agni. 

Vena. 

Agni. lndra. 
VAk. 

Visvedevas. 


Night.* 

Visvedevas. 

Creation. 

The same. 


Jagati. 12 Trishtup. 
Tnshtup. 4, 6 GAyatri. 

5 Brihatl 9. 12 Jagati. 
Trishtup, 1, 3, 12 Brihatt. 
Trishtup. 13 Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

Ushnih. 2, 7 Pipilikamadh* 
V;l. 11 Tiishtup 
Tnshtup, 

TrUhtup. 4 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 6, 7 Anufhtup, 
Trishtup. 

The same. 


Jagati. 10 Trishtup. 
Trishtup 4 Jagati. 

Jagati. 8 Trishtup. 

Sakvari. 

Tnshtup. 

Trishtup 1, 2 Jagatt. 
UAyatii. 

The same. 

Trishtup. 

The same. 

Jagati. 1, 5 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 7 Jagati. 

Trishtup. 2 Jagati. 
UparishtAdbrihati. 

8 Trishtup. 

GAyatri. 

Trishtup. 9 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 1 Jagatt. 



630 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


I 

Riahi. Deity. 

Metre. 

131 

Suktrti. Indira. Asvins. 

Triahtup. 4 Anushtup. 

132 

Sakaputa. Heaven and Earth, Asvins. 

Mitra and Varu'ja. 

1 Nyankusdrini. 2, 6 Prag 
tdrapankti. 3-5 Virddru 
pA. 7 Mahdsatobrihat!. 

133 

Sudds. Indra. 

1-3 Sakvari. 4-6 Mahdpank 
ti. 7 Triahtup. 

134 

Mandhdtar. The same. 

Godhd. 

Mahdpankti. 7 Pankti. 

135 

Kumdra. Yama. 

Anushtup. 

136 

Seven Munis : The Kevins. 

Juti. Vdtajdti. 

ViprajQti. Vri- 
shinaka. Etasa. 
ltisyasringa. 

The same. 

137 

The Seven Visvedevaa. 

Risbis. 

Anushtup. 

138 

Anga. Indra. 

Jagati. 

139 

Visvdvasu. Sfirya. Visvdvasu. 

Triahtup. 

140 

Agni Pavaka. Agui. 

1 Vishtdrapankti. 2-4 Sa- 
tobrihati. 5 Uparisbtdj- 
jyotis. 6 Tritshtup. 

141 

Agni Tlpasa. Visvedevas. 

AnuAtup. 

142 

Jaritar. Drona. Agni. 

Sdriarikva. 

Stambamitra. 

Triahtup. 1, 2 Jagatt. 7, 8 
Anushtup. 

143 

Atri. Alvins. 

Anushtup. 

144 

Supar’a, Ordh- Iudra. 
vakriaana. 

1, 3, 4 Gdyatri. 2 Brihati. 
5 Satobrihati. 6 Viahtdra- 
pankti. 

145 

Indrdnt. Removal of Rival. 

Anushtup. 6 Pankti. 

U6 

Devamuni. Aranydni. 

Anushtup. 

147 

Suvedas. Indra. 

Jagatf. 5 Trishtup. 

148 

Prithu Vainya. The same. 

Trishtup. 

149 

Archan. Savitar. 

The same. 

150 

Mrillka. Agni, 

1-3 Brihatt. 4 Uparisht.1 
jyotia or Jagati,. 5 Up 
riahtdjjyotis. 

151 

Sraddhl Sraddhd (Faith). 

Anushtup. 

152 

SAaa. Indra, 

The same. 

153 

Indra’* Mothers. The same. 

Gdyatri. 

154 

Yamt. New Life. 

Anushtup. 

155 

Sirimbitha. Averting of Misfortune. 

Brahman&ipati. ViBve- 
devag. 

The »auoe. 

156 

Ketu. Agni. 

Gdyatri. 



INDEX OF HYMNS. 


7 Bhuvaua, or Visvedevas. 

Sadhana. 

8 Chakshua. Sftrya. 

9 Sachf Paulomi. Saclii Pauloint 

0 Purana. Indra. 

1 Yakshm.urisana. Removal of Phthisic 

2 Rakuhoha. Against Mihcamage 

J Vivriha. Removal of Phthisis. 

4 Piadieta*. Dissipation ot Bad Dreams 

5 Kapota. Visvedevas. 

t) Rishuhha. Removal of Rivals 

7 ViavAmitr.i and India. 

Jam.idagut. 

8 Anils. V.ivu. 


Anils. Y.iyu. 

Sahara. Cows. 

Vibhiiij. Surya. 

Ita. Indra. 

Samvarta. Ushas 
Dhrnva. The King 

Abhivarfa. The »>ame. 

Oidh vagi .Ivan. Tiie Pieas-shmes. 

Siinu. Hibhuit. Agn\ 

Pstanga. M iyabheda. 

Arishtauemi. T.iik»hya. 

Sibi. Pratarda- India, 

na. VdsuLmuias. 

Jay a. The same. 

Piacha. Sapia- Visvedevai. 
ilia, (ihanua. 

Tapunu irdliau. Brihaspati. 

PrujdvAu The SaentKvr. Hu Wife 

The Hotai. 

Tvaaht ir or Benediction of the Kanin }o 


Tvaaht ir or 
Vishnu. 

Sutyadhriti. Aditi. 

Ula. * Vayu. 

Vatsa. Agni. 

Hyena. Agni Jitavedas. 

bdipaidjfti. Silipardjhi, or S.uya. 

AgUamarshana. (J teat ion. 

Samvanana. Agni. Unanimity. 


Dvipidi Tihhtup. 

Gsyati i. 

\nushtup. 

Tiishtup. 

Tiiditup. j Anushtup. 

A mi'll tup. 

I lie f-ame. 

12 , 1 Anush tup. I? Tudi 
tup 5 IViukti. 

Tn-hiup. 

Auu dii up. 5 Malidpankti. 


Tiishtup. 

The same. 

Jagati. 4 Astarapanku. 
G.iy.itii. 

Iivip.uhi Viraj. 

Anush tup. 

The same. 
it t}atn. 

Anushtup 2 Gfiyatii. 
i Jagati 2 . J 7 h wlitujt, 
Tiishtup. 

1 Annshtup. 2, J Tiithtup. 

Ti ithtup. 

The uame. 


Anushtup. 

Gay alt 5. 
The same. 


Aniwhtup. 

Anushtup. 3 Tiishtup. 




GENERAL INDEX OF HYMNS. 

AU'ORDINU TO DEITIES AND SUBJECTS.* 


X 27. 
*7. 


I) KIT IKS OF DUVN. 


COSMIC DEITIES. 

Ribhm. 1.20.110.111 HI. 60. IV 


lap. Dawn. Morning — l 48.49. 92 
13 128 124 III. 61. IV. 51. 52 V. 

9 80. VI. 64.65. VIJ. 75-81. X 172 
■ Alvins. —I. 84 46. 47 112. 116- 
20. 157 158. 180-184. II 39. Ill 58 
V 43-45. V 73-77 VI. 62. 63 VI 1. 
17-74. VIII. 5 8-10 22. 26. 35 62. 
'4 76 V&lakhilya Hymns, at the 
wPof VIII 9 X 39-41. 106 143. 
dhikiivan, Dadlnkr.ia - IV. 38 40. 
HI 44 

m as a Clod of Morning.— IV. 13 14 

YA HUN A AND SUN-GODS 
nnin. — I. 21 25. II. 28. V. 85 VII 
36. 89 VIII 41.42. 
tr« - HI. 59 VII. 41. 
runa, Mitra, Aryaman -I. 41 
itra and Vanina. — 1.136 137 151- 
153. V. 62-72. VI. 67. VI l 60-66 
VIII. 25. X. 132. 185. 
lityas - U. 27. VII. 51. 52. VI II 
IS. 47. 56. 

irya.-l. 50 116. X. 37. 158. 
witar.-I.35. II. 38. IV. 53.54 V 81. 
vl VI. 71. VII 38 45 X 139. 149. 
(khan -I 42. 138. VI. 53-56 58. 
X 26. 

"•linn -I 154 156. VII 99 luO. 
w.nkannan. — X 81. 82. 

X. 1 23. 

’iklir/Lj.— X. 170. 

'bkshyn.-.-X. 178. 

^ r I.arAjfiU or Stirya X 189 


33-37 VII. 48 

Heaven and Earth.- -I 159 160. 185 
IV 56 VI 70. VII. 53. 

Pntlml -V. 84. 

Saras vat i VI. 61. VII 95-96 

Wateis— VII. 17. 49. X. 9 Waters 
or Cows. -X. 19 

Son of Waters. Ap&mnapsU -II 35 

Soma —I 91. VIII. 48. 68 X. 25 

COLLECTIVE AND MISCELLA- 
NEOUS DEITIES. 

Visvedevas, All Gods — 1.14.89 90 
106. 107 122. 139. 186. II. 29. 31 
III 54-57 IV. »5o. V. 41-51. VI. 
49 52 VII 34 36. 37. 39. 40. 42. 
43. VIII 27-30. 72. X. 31. 35 36 
63-66. 92 93 100. 

Asvm« Savitar, Agni. Heaven and 
E nth. Vishnu I 22 

Vitvu, India. MitVa, Vanina. Visve- 
devas P.^han, Wateis. Agni.— 1.23. 

Heaven and Earth, Indra, Tvashtar, 
fvilkft, Sinivali — II. 32 

Indra, Vftvu. Mitra. Varuna, Asvin*, 
Visvedevas, Sarasv.it.t, Dvans, Pii- 
thivi -II 41. 

Imlra. Varuna, Buhaspati. PiisImd, 
Sivitar Soma Miua. Vanina —III. 
62 

Mitra, Varuna Adit } as, Aavins, V:\yu, 
Siirva, PavimAna, the Cow. — X III. 
90. 


I follow tlie classification Hiid Hirangemenl adopted hy Professor Lud« 
iu !ii« Tianelntion The names of many of the deities are repeated in 
Sections in accordance with the subjects of the hymns addressed to 
. Plr ^ For instance, the great deeds of Imlra are i elated in hymns placed lu 
e ^ORUiogomcftl and Mythical Section. 



,NI {JATAVEDAS and 
VAISVANARA). 

I. 1. 12. 26. 27. 31. 36. 44. 45. 58-60. 
65-70. 94*99. 127. 128. 140. 141. 
143-150. 189. II. 1. 2. 4-10. III. 1- 
3. 5-7. 9-11. 13-28. IV. 1-12. 15. 
V. 1-4.6-11. 13-28. VI. 1-16. 48. 
VII. 1. 3. 4-17. VIII. 11. 19. 23. 
39, 43. 44. 49. 60. 61. 64. 64. 73. 
91. 92. X. 1-8. 11. 12. 20. 21. 45. 
46. 79. 80 87. 88. 91. 115. 118. 122. 
140. 142. 150. 156. 176. 187. 188. 


INDRA (SATAKRATU, SAKRA, 
MANYU.) 

I 4-11. 16. 30. 54-57. 61-63. 80-84. 
100-104. 121. 129 133. 135. 169. 
173-178. II 11-22. 30. III. 30-32. 
34-52. IV. 16. 17. 19. 25. 29. 31. 
32. 46 V. 29-39. VI. 17-26. 28-47. 
VII 19-32 VIII 1-4. 6, 12-17. 21. 
24 32-34. 36. 37. 45. 46. 50-55. 57. 
59 65 67. 69. 71. 77-79. 81. 82.84- 

88. VALkhilyft, 1-6. X 22-24. 29. 
32. 42-44. 47 50. 54. 55. 73. 74. 

89. 96. 104 105. 112. 113. 116. 120. 
131. 133. 134. 138. 144. 147. 148. 
152 153. 160. 171 179. 180. Manyu. 
X. 83 84 


GODS OF STORM, WIND, 
AND RAIN. 

Maruts — I. 37-39. 64. 85-88. 166-168. 
171 II 34. V. 52-60. 87. VI. 66. VII. 
56-59. VIII. 7. *20. 83. X. 77. 78. 
Rudra. — I. 43. 114. II. 33. VII. 46. 
VAyu. — 1. 2. 134. IV. 47. 48. VII. 

90-92. X. 168. 186. 

Parjanya.— V. 83. VII. 101. 102. 

LORD OF PRAYER. 
Br&hinanasp&ti or Brihaspati. — I. 18. 
40 190. II. 23-26. IV. 50. VI. 73. 
VII. 97. 98. X- 182. 

Indra and Brahmanaspati.— IV. 49. 


DUAL DEITIES. 
Indra-Varuna.— I. 17. IV. 41. VI. 68. 

VII. 82. 84. 85. V&Iakhilya, 11. 
Iudra-Pushan. — VI. 57. 
lndra-Vishnu. — VI. 69. • 

Indra- Agni — I. 21. 108. 109. III. ] 2. 
V. 86. VI. 59. 60. VII. 93. 94. VIII. 
88. 40. 

Agni-Maruts.— I. 19. 

Iudra-Soma — VI. 72. VII. 104. 
Agni-Soina. — I. 93. 

Soma-Rudm.- VI. 74. 

Soina-Pushan. — II. 40. 


LITURGICAL HYMNS. PRAYERS 
CHARMS. 


Visvedevas — X. 114. Sacred Metres- 
— X. 130. Praise of the Angina 
ses. — X. 62. The Sacrificer and hii 
Wife. — VIII. 31. The Sacrificer, 
Wife, and Hotar. — X. 183 Faith, i 
X. 151. Visvedevas. — X. 157. Staid 
of the Doad^-X. 154. DaksM 
(Priests’ Guerdon). — X. 107. Ilitvi- 
jas (Priests).— Vdlakhilya. 10. X 

101. Apris. — I 13. 142. 188. II. 3 
III. 4. V. 5. VII. 2. IX. 5- X. 70 
110. Production of Sacrificial 1’ ire 
—III. 29. Sacrificial Stake.— Ill 
8. Pestle and Mortar. -1. 28. Pre* 
stones. — X. 76. 94. 175. Havirdld 
mis.— X. 13. Ritus (Seasons).-! 


36. 37. Soma PavamAna — IX. !-■ 
1-114. Praise of the Horse- 
162. 163. Waters, or Son of Waten 
-X. 30. Saranyft, Sar * 

iratl, Waters, Soma.— X. 17. Sur) 
BridaL-X. 85 VAstoshpati (G«»> 
iian of the House).— VII. « • 

tshetrapati (Lord of < * 

rod S1U (Furrow).— IV. 67- ) 

af Food. I. 187. 

less of the Forest).— X . 1 - , 

—X. 127. Averting Misfort** J 
X. 165. Benediction of the Lm 



general index of hyhnb. 


X 187. Against Miscarriage.— 
162. Asvins. — V. 78. Maruts.— 
172. Soma Pavamdna. — IX. 114. 
isvedevas. — X. 137. Cows. — X. 
59. Water, Grass, Surya.-- I. 191. 
idra —VIII. 80. Mitra, Varuna, 
gni, Visvedevas, Praise of Rivers. 
-VII. 50. Visvedevas. — X. 126. 
harm against Phthisis.— X. 161. 
53. Charm against Evil Dreams.— 
164. Indra. — I. 29. The Bird 
f Good Omen.— II. 42. 43. The 
irdof 111 Omen. — X. 165. Charm 
gainst a rival Wife. — X. 145. SachS 
aulomi —X. 159. Visvedevas.— 
128. 141. Removal of a Rival — 
166 Benediction of the King.— 
i. 173. 174. Unanimity.— X. 191. 
aine, the Fathers, the Dogs. — X. 
4. The Fathers.— X. 15. Agni — 
L 16. Mrityu, Dhdtar, TvashUr, 
he Pitrimedha, Praj&pati.— X. 18. 
/isvedevas — X. 56. Pavamdua 
loma. — IX. 14. 6414. 

YMNS RELATING TO COSMO- 
10NY, MYTHS, HISTORY, AND 
CIVILIZATION 
cation of the World. — X. 129 190. 
I'reatiou by Sacrifice of Purusha — 
X. 90. Ka.— X. 121. The Gods. 

X 52 72. ViavedevaB. — I. 105 164 
181. Miyftbheda.— X. 177. Agni, 
Smya, Waters, the Cow, Ghrita — 
IV. 58. Rivalry of Indra and 
Varuna.— IV. 42. X. 124. India’s 
Birth.— IV. 18. Indra. Praise of 
die Falcon. — IV. 26. Praise of the 
falcon — IV. 27. Indra and Soma. 
"IV. 28. Indra and Usha*.— IV. 


30. Indra.— I. 32. 33. 51. 53. X 27. 
48. 49. 67.68.99. 102.111.119.167. 
Indra. Vaaukra. — X. 28. Indra. 
Maruts. Agastya. — X. 165. 170 
Maruts.— V. 61. Indra. Vdk — VIIL 
89. Agni. The Gods.— X. 51. Agni 
Sauchika. The Gods.— X. 53. Indra. 
Surya. Atii. — V. 40. Vrishdkapi. 
Indrdnt. Indra. — X. 86. Urvasi. 
Pururavaa — X 95. Saramd. Pams. 
—X 108. Visvedevas.— X. 57. Re- 
call of the Spirit. — X 58. Nirriti. 
Soma. Asuniti. Earth. Heaven and 
Earth.— X. 59. Asanviti. Iudra- 
Subandhu’s Recall to Life. The 
Hands — X. 60. Vak Ambhrini. — X. 
125. J&anacu— X 71. Yama. — X. 
135 Praise of the Rivers. — X 75. 
Vasishtha and the RiverB.— III. 33. 
Indra and Parvata, Indra, Vak Sa- 
sarpaii. Praise of the Chariot. — 
III. 53. India, Chdyatndnu’s Muni- 
ficence. — V. 27. Indra. Sudds’* 
Munificence. — VII. 18 Vasishlha’s 
Sons. Vasishtha. — VII. 33. Indra 
and Varuna. — V 1 1. 83 Dadhikrdv an. 
— IV. 38. Agni.— V, 12. Savanaya’s 
Munificence. — I. 125. Bhdvayavya 
and Romasd.— 1 126. Lopdmudrd 

and Agastya. — 1. 179 Asvins.— V 1 1 1 . 
75 Agui.-X 69. The Gods.— X. 
98. Visvedevas. Kurusravana’s Mu 
nificence — X.33. Praskanva’s Muni- 
ficence.— Vdlakhily a. 7. 8. Kesins. 
—X. 136. Visvedevas.— X. 109. 
The Frogs.— VII. 103. Weapons of 
War.— VI. 75. Indra.— X. 38. 103. 
Soma Pavamdna.- -IX 112. Medi- 
cinal Herbs.— X. 97. The Dice. - 
X. 34. Liberality.— X 117. 




INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 

hiflwa, a certain So- 486, 487, 493,512, 514, 182, 185-189, 199 202 

lift ceremony, 136, 400 523, 5 18, 5 10, 5 11, 55 1, 217-220, 222-224 23?' 

“ ,tes 579,607. 250,254-257, 266,267,’ 

hiv.u ta, a hymn or of Aditi = Agm, 145. 272,273,309 319 322, 

firing for success, 603 = the Earth, 288. 323,331, 349, 355,’ 383- 

^c. = the Cosmic Cow, 391,394,395,397,401- 

ortum, charm against, 357. 401,408 410,419 422 

>1 2, 613. Adit} a, son of Aditi, es- 423-427,432, 434,415- 

c-enes, Latin name of pccially Varuna and 448, 453 456, 460 464 

he Asiknt, the river the Sun, 4, 81, 219,253, 4‘>7-t69 471-4 7.5 477 

Hhen&b, 150, 490 note 263, 326,330, 405, 418, 478, 481-4, si, 192, 491- 

mn and Eve, the In- 453, 460, 478, 483,487, 496,502,505,506,510- 

hxn, 392 note. 514,565,581. 514,519-522,530,539, 

lhavaniya, one of the Adityas Gods, seven or 510, 549, 552-554, 557, 

three large Soma re- eight in number, 12, 559, 560-564, 566-568, 

1 epUcles, 108,124,347, 35,39,40,48, 52,60, 570,571,573,574, 577, 

370 notes. 6 1, 81 83. 130, 142-144, 582, 585-587, 592 595- 

Ihrigu, a Rishi o t a 147, 164. 165, 168, 1 75, 598, 600, 602-604, 606- 

prince, 132, 153. 3 76, 193, 196,197,210, 609, 611, 612 

ihvaryu(s) priest, 211, 230, 253, 306, 382, Agm, Lord of Heaven 
priests who perform 432,431,450,458,470- and Lai th, 8 ; Lord of 

the practical work of 472, 474-177. 487,501, Light, 144, 189 , idem 

sacrifice, 3, 97, 171, 535. 545, 571, 573, 575, titled with the Sun, 

219,277,278,302,350. 586, 592, 595. 9, 187, 386, 426, 467,' 

355, 362, 384, 405,406, the eight names of, 513, 51 1; the Moon at, 

111,423-425,440,454, 487. night. 513. identified 

4*6,521. Adoption of children, 6. with Varuna, 390; with 

fii-Purusha, the Prime- Agastye a great Vedic Varuna and Mi tra, 13 ; 

V *1 Presiding Male or Risht, 36, 118, 464. created by the G<>ds, 

Embodied Spirit, 518, Agh.l days, when the 513,514, Son of Dyaus, 
376 notes. moon is m the eonstel- 415, 4 16 ; son of Dawn, 

Infinity, Infinite lation Magh.-l, 502. 558 ; of Earth, 385 ; 

Nature, the Mother of Agni, God of Fiic and of Heaven and Earth, 
the Gods, 4, 12, 15, 22, Light, 1 10, 20, 30, 9, 3S3. 390, 395, 447, 

30, 43-45, 52, 60, 05, 35, 37-40, 43-48, 51. 585 ; of Heaven and 

:ri ' 80 > 83-85, 89, 131, 52, 56, 58, 61, 65, 72, Earth, Waters, Tvash- 

l43 > 160, 164, 190, 197, 7?, 76, 84, 88, 89, 94, tar, Brigus, 447 ; com- 

198 > 210, 253, 254, 288, 96,99.100,125, 126, prising other Gods, 

3l5 > 328, 332, 338, 357, 131 133,143 147, 154- 396 ; produced bv at- 

337, 894, 397,418, 156, 161, 163, 164, 166, tuition, 1, 201, 386, 

*■ 467 > 470-470, 483, 168, 109, 174, 175, 179- 389, 195, 559 ; man’s 



638 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


father & brother, 389; Agni’ a religious cere- Ajas, a non- Aryan tribe 

head and height of mony, 558. 20. 

heaven, 188; born from AgnishvAttaa, a class of Akhandala, Destroyer, a 
the mouth of Purusha, Manes, 401 note. name of Indra, 142. 

519; spiritual husband Agrayana, a certain Soma Aksha, said to be a man’s 
of maidens, 506 ; con- libation, 330 note. name, 195 note. 

secrator of marriage, Agriculture, 519 ; thebe- AksharA, Speech, V4k 
506 ; giver of children ginning of, 421 note ; 14,41. 

495 ; invoked in battle, ploughing, 150, 1 53, Al&yya, perhaps a name 
132, 222, 224, 482, 496 ; 548, 563 ; sowing, 527 ; of Indra, 323. 

jungle-clearing fire, reaping, 152, 577;sickle, All-God, Indra, 248; 
218,586,608; slayer 227; threshing, 450; Yama 400 note. 

of fiends, 510-512; winnowing, 419, 480; All-Gods, 51, 52, 410, 5/1 

punisher of sin, 3 ; barley, grain, 480,577. See Visvedeyas. 
ripener of plants, 513; Ahavanlya, one of the Amrit, Amrita, nectar 
his installation # as three sacrificial fires, ambrosia, rain, milk, 

Priest of Gods, 454, 186, 386 notes. 6, 57, 207, 253, 263, 

455; his flight from Ahi, the Dragon or Ser- 271,326,327,332,376, 
his duties, 446,453, pent-demon who with- 379,395,425,457,568, 

454; Piiest, Meseen- holds the rain, 113, 585,607. 

ger, oblation -bearer, 239, 240, 245, 449, 472, Anava, Anavas, descen- 

146, 447, 483; bis 479, 555. d^its of the epony- 

divine functions, 146, Ahibudhnya, the Dragon mous chief Anu. 

512; his three births, of the Deep, regent of Aucestral spirits, 74. Sr 

445 ; three forms, 513, of the sea of air, 37, Fathers. 

549 ; three homes, 467; 39,43,472,477,523. AnghAii, one of the guar 

three powers, 445; AhtBuva, a demon of the diansof Soma, 501 note 
three stations, 445. air, 169, 171, 225, 588. Angiras, a semi-diviu« 
4gn!dh, kindler, priest Ahnav&yy a, said to be a patriarchal Bishi ; als< 
who kindles, the sa- man’s name, 191 note. a name of Agni, 135, 

crificial fire, 384, 440, Ahura, Zend form of 174 , 186-188,200,222, 
521. Asura, High God, 366 2 23, 231,255,373, 398, 

ignihotra, daily oblation note. 448, 469, 478, 480, 498, 

to Agni and Gods, 455 Aija, Pururavas son of 524. 
note. 111. 530 note. Angiras«s, descendants 

ignimftruta, a ceremony Aindrav&yava, a libation of Angiras, 46, 48, 52, 
in which Agni is wor* to Indra and V&yu, 73, 76, 86, 121, 138, 

shipped first and then 106 note. 167, 176, 183, 205, 235 

the Maruts, 126 note. Aitareya-Br&hmana, 186. 309, 344, 376, 379, 898, 

gni pranayana, ceremo- 242, 484, 467, 577, 604. 399, 419, 460, 466, 469 

ny of carrying fire to Aja, the Unborn, the 478, 484, 489, 494, 5 
the altar, 604 note. Birthless, 498. 554, 583, 591, 598, 0 • 

gnis, Agni in various Aja Ekap&d, the Unborn Angirasa, a descen 
forms, 166, 337. Oue-footed, the Sud, of , or belongi ng to>^, 

• • . — iW«a a £_ nn * l lM 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


639 


mate, tame and wild, crifice, 558. Arjtkas, name of a people, 

orse, bull, cow, passim; ApnnvAna, an ancient , 317. 
oat, 19, 321,402, 418 ; Rishi, 254. Arjikiya, »= Arjika, 207, 

ss, 232, 286 ; dog, 53, Apif, Aprts, a class of 490. 

14, 101, 265, 368 ; lion propitiatory hymns, 3, Arjuna, a man’s name, 21. 

.9, 361, 421, 422,479; 272, 483, 553. Arjuneya, Kutsa descen 

‘lephant, 172, 190,304; Apsaras, a celestial dant of Arjuna r 21, 
mffalo, 119, 1*23, 176, nymph, 394, 528, 589. 104. 

292 ; Gaul'S, 114, 191, the, the chief, Ur- Arjunis, two lunar man 

573 ; antelope, 114 ; vast, 35, 38, 412. sions, 50*2. 

deer, 107, 291 ; ape, Apsarases, 335, 528, 529, Arks, the Sun, 549. 

r>07 ; wild-boar, 226, 582: Aiksha, patronymic, son 

421, 479 ; wolf, 174, names of six, 528. of RiUha, 213. 

‘209,211,281,530,573; Aptya, Aptyas, dwelling Armaiti, in the Areata— 4 
jackal, 4*21 ; hyena, in water, a class of earth, 522 note. 

487; fox, 421 ; serpent, deities, 134, 197, 198, Aimour. 31. 119, 197, 

99, 471 ; emmet, 403 ; 39<», 565. 343, 365, 368, 376, 494, 

vulture, 101, 355, 569 ; Apvd, colic personified, 541. 

owl, 100, 101; swan, 545. Arrian, 148. 

176, 291 ; dove, 593, Arodiosia, 175 note. Arrow, the stroke of dis- 

599 ; cuckoo, 101 ; Ara<Ju, a kind of tree, ease or death. 71, 143. 

starling, 176; king-fish- 195. the thunderbolt, 

er, 534 ; blue jay, 634. Aradva,said to bea man’s 226. 
tiisa, one of the Adityas, name, 195 note. Arshtishena, son of Rish- 

7,82, 487 note*. Aramati, the Goddess of tishena, 536. 

Ausu, a protect of the Devotion, 38, 41, 46, Artificer of Gods ; see 
Anvius, 118. 68, 474, 522. Tvaditar. 

Ansimiatf, a mystical =* Karth, 522. Arushah, the Red, Agni 

river of air, 246, 483. Aranis, fire-sticks, 186, or the thunderbolt, 
i Anu, the eponymits of 426 notes. 443 note. 

an Aryau tribe, 19, Arany Ant. Goddess of the Arushas, Agui’s horses, 
113, 131. ‘ Wood, 589, 599. ^ 48 note. 

l oumati, Divine Favour Ararn, name of a fiend, Arya, Aiyan, Aryas, 8, 
Personified, 699, 600 ; 538. 18, 72, 70, 91, 144, 153, 

* Lunar Goddess, 332. AiAyi, a witch or she- 159,256,262,352,395, 
to'wbtup, a Vedic and fiend, 594. 436, 442, 451, 464, 473, 

dttsical metre, 53,571, Arbuda, name of a de- 475,482,499,509,539, 
5 '7. mou, 113, 169,171,479, 584,592. 

*nuy4ja, after-sacrifioe, 554. Ary aman, one of the chief 

final sacrifice, 608. Ardihn, said to be a Ri* Adityas, 38, 40, 43-45, 
kpAlfc, a girl healed by ahi’s name, 591 note. 52, 58, 60-63, 65; 66 , 

hdra, 236. Architect of the worlds, 78, 80, 89, 143, 146, 

^ 507. 497 ^ 147, 160.162,164-366, 

JMna, the passage lead- Arjtka,a district in N.-W* 168, 193, 197, 210, 230, 

, ... .A. A1Q oeo O RQ Q1 ^ 338, 



640 


index of names, etc. 


349,377,382. 425, 433, AsvaUyana. a famous 
440, 407 , 473,474. 4S0, writer on ritual, 384, 

487, 503, 505, 506, 516, 407 notes. 

523 5° 4 572.573,586, Asvamedha, Horse-sacri- 
« 06 : “ ’ ' fice, 595 «o<e. 

Aaamkti, said to be the AmameOha, a man . 
name of a king, 468, name, 21b, .IS. 

46-1 now. Asvamedha, aon of Asva- 

Asanea, the name of a medha, ‘214. 

chieftain, 106,107,173. Asva.tha, a aaevnd tree 
Asikni, the liver Cheuib, 426, 4 j ., 


150, 490. 

Asmanvatl, Stony, the 
name of a stream, 456 
Ass, the steed of the As- 
vins, 232. 

Asses, presented to 
priests, *266. 

Asterism(s), 318, 458, 

473, 5*24 notes. 
Aatrabudhna, a man 8 
name, 602 note. 
Aatrabudhna, sou of As- 
trabudhna, 602 
Asunlti, Spirit- world ; 
deity of funeiala, 402, 
462, 463. 

Asura, High God, 3, 8, 30, 
56, 146, 149, 184, 236, 
330, 306,392,395, 426, 
457, 460, 478, 522, 523, 
532. 537,538,578,601. 

lord, king, 525 note. 

Aauras, 5, 8, 4»8, 670. 
592. 

Asura, a demon, 246, 456, 
578, 584 

AsUras, 40, 61,160, 245 


Asvins, the Horsemen, 
Twin heralds of Dawn, 
11, 39, 15, 48, 52, 67- 
73, 116-119, 126-131, 
143 111. U6, 152-154, 
166-164, 167, 175 177, 
195, 220, 221, 231-233, 
242, *261 , ‘266, 2*>7. 275, 

337,349,384,404.413, 

415, 422, 426, 432, 436- 
410.454,463, 405, 466, 
472, 176, 477,496,502, 
501,523-525,548, 549, 

; 571,575,578,587,613. 

their Consoi t, 69, 

438 , their character, 
487 ; their miracles, 
220, *221, 437-439 ; 

physicians, 129, 143 

232, 137 ; first teachers 
of agricultme, 153 ; 
their chariot, 67-69, 
71, 118, 152, 153,220, 
232, 267, 436, 438, 440, 
502. 

Asvya, a family name, 
195, 196. 


»th~ . 

A 8 ura »l»y«r, Agm, 13. 1». "" 1 

A»uri, » female fiend, 418 ^ m 

k tii,hi 158 A tharva- veda, The Hymns 

Asva, a ol tbe>86> 166, 199, 387, 

Aavaghna, the pair y ^ tQ() ^ 46t- 4C9^ 
mic of a prince, 468. 


507,519,520, 552,565, 
583, 587, 594. 598, 609, 
613. 

Atir&tra, a certain Soma 
ceremony, 97. 

Atitlugu, said to be a 
man’s name, 450 note. 
Atithigva, a name of Di- 
vod&sa. 22, 212, 213, 
263, 450. 

Atithyeshti, a certain re- 
ligious cetemony, 196 
note. 

Atka, a man’s name, 451, 
538. 

Atmospheres, three, 498. 
Atri, an ancient Hislii, 
68, 71, 118, 177-179, 
2 20, 221,3 52,437,496, 
498, 577, 587, 592. 
Atris, 167,178,180. 
At^trgnibhtoma, a religi- 
ous ceiemony, the 
cond part of the Jyo 
tibhtonia, 558 note. 
Aufrecht, Prof. Th., 54 
205, 237, 485. 
AnlAna, son of Ula, 53b 
AurnavAbha, son of Ui 
navabha, a demon < 
drought, 171, 225. 
Aurva, an ancient lhsli 
254. 

Auaija, Kakshlvftn son - 

Usij, 538. 

Automat, Vanina, 78. 
Autumn, 518. 
Autumns, 42, 61. 

Avabhritha, a bath 
cleansing Soma p a 

241. 

Axe, 5, 79, 100, 5221, 3. 

456, 467, 541- 

Agoi, 44 3 ; 

. i javVv 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


641 


AyAsya, a Rishi's name, Name, 463. 

278 note , 478. Bhal&nas, a non- Aryan 

Ayu, a Proper Name ; tribe, 18. 
man ; living being, 86 , Bharadv&ja, a great Rishi, 
139, 262, 203, 404, 451. 352, 577, 592, 606* 

Bharata, Warrior ; a name, 
Babb, the, Agni, 468. See 10. 

Infant. Bharatas, 10, 35. 

Babhru, a king or a Rishi, Bh&rati, a Goddess of 
153. Speech, 4, 273, 463, 

Balbaja, a kind of coarse 484, 553. 

grass, 265. Bheda,a non- Aryan king, 

Balbdtha, a non- Aryan 20 , 80. 

chief 190. BhrAja, a guard of Soma, 

Bandhu, a Rishi, 464. 501 note. 

Barber, 115, 586. Bhrigu, an ancient Rishi, 

B 4 rbatas, guards of Soma, 112, 186, 254, 482. 

501 note. Bhrigus, 17, 112, 121, 175, 

Barhis, altar or seat of 254, 369, 399, 419, 438, 
sacred grass, 323 note. 446, 447, 523, 568. 
Barley, 5, 107, 227, 237, Bhujyu, a prottgt of the 
4 ^ 577 . Asvins, 68 , 70, 113, 

Battle, 436, 465. 117, 171, 192, 223, 250 

Beard, 171, 530; of Indra, 437, 439, 476, 587. 

412, 413, 532. Bhutinsa, a Rishi, 549. 

Bee, 439, 548. Bird, Soma, 341. 357 

B <nfey, Prof., 19, 277, the, the Sun, 386, 459, 
278, 288, 301, 366, 393. 547, 557 , 569, 604, 608 ; 

Bergaigne, Prof. A., 95, the Moon, 338. 

98. 205, 287, 292, 314, Birds, Agni and Soma. 358. 

331, 338, 367, 390, 400, & -■ Animals. 

457,462, 487 , 507 , 509, Black Drop, the darken- 
514, 563, 571, 600. . ed Moon, 246. 

iBhaga, an Aditya, God of Black skin, aborigines, 296 
| Good Fortune, 14, 15, Bloomfield, Prof. M„ 404. 

; 38,41-46, 48, 05, 143, Boar, 54, 220, 537 ; - 
[ 146, 265, 275, 298,306, Soma, 358. 

338, 364,368,377,382, Boat, 64, 84, 245, 327, 
425, 432, 471, 473, 477, 384, 561. See Ship- 

480, 487, 503, 505,622, Body, parts of the, 613. 
524, 525, 571, 586. Boldness, personified, 38. 
^gmta-Pur4ua, 520. Bowls, the two, heaven 
a Proper and earth, 444. 


Bradke, P. von, 64. 

Brahma, 391, 564 notes. 

Brahma, 466, 552, 556, 
566 notes. 

Brahmaoh&ri, a religious 
student, 552. 

Brahman, 9, 25, 125, 140, 
167, 173, 207, 239,355, 
380, 384, 422, 454,469, 
486, 492,505,515, 521, 
549,552,556,558, 562, 
572, 586. 

Brahmans, 46, 65, 170, 
225, 245, 448, 485, 
501, 503 

BiAiman, 98, 244, 267, 
519, 535, 536. 

Brahmans, 96, 97, 191, 
391, 403, 485. 

Brahmanaspati, Lord of 
Prayer, 45, 48, 91, 92, 
163, 338, 456, 474, 
486, 594, 598, 602,603. 

Bridal, of Suryil, 501.502. 

ceremonies, 503-506. 

Bride, benediction on a, 
506. 

Bridge, 296. 

Brihaddiva, a Rishi, 565. 

Brihaddivd, a Goddess 
connected with 111 and 
Sarasvat!, 473. 

Brihadratha, name of a 

. chief, 45 1 . 

Brihaduktha, a Rishi, 
458-460. 

Brihaspati = Brahmanas- 
pati, 12, 91-93, 131, 
246, 273, 336, 337,340, 
355, 397, 398, 405, 
432, 433, 442-444, 472, 
474, 475, 478*481,523, 
534-536, 539, 544, 551, 



042 


INDEX OP NAMES, BTC. 


552, 575, 577, 586, 597, Varuna, 62 ; strong he* Children, prayer for , 
600, 602, 606. roes, 263. see Prayer. 

Brihaspati = the Cloud* Burial of ashes of the the gift of Agni, 2 r 

God, 481. dead, 407. 406 ; of the Asvina, 

Brihat, great, important Burnouf, Prof. E. 520, 67 ; of the Maruts, 56 r 

SI man, 606. 575. of Tvashtar, 38. 

Brihat- SAman, 235. Chitra, a liberal princ 

Brihatt, a Vedic metre, Calf, Agni, 219,389, 418. 152. 

263,501,577. Camels, 119, 123, 195, Chumuri, a fiend or sav- 

Buffalo = Cloud, 215. 196. age, 21, 557. 

Buffaloes, 119, 123, 176, Car - hymn or sacrifice, Chyavana, a bou of Bhri 
292. 64,310,558. gu, 482. 

= Clouds, 133, 226. Carpenter, 223, 380, 525, Chyavlna, a prottgi of 

Bull, strohg, mighty one, 563. the Aavins, 68, 71, 437, 

hero, Agni, 5, 7, 155, Cask = cloud, 332. 465, 466. 

219, 385-387, 389, 410, Castes, the four, 519. Circumambulation. 412 
507, 607, 608. Castles, 19,21,23,28,94, Clay, house of = grave, 85 

Indra, 22, 51, 122, 106, 249. Cleanser, Potar, one of 

149, 172, 173, 207, 348, Cattle — rays of light, 40, the priests, 15,384,521. 
372,375,378,418,421, 74, 76, 86, 110, 240, Clouds « trees, 488. 

4:36, 441, 443, 450, 523, 361, 478, 556. Colebrooke,391, 507,518, 

536, 543, 545, 554, 560, Cattle -raiders, 264. ^20, 672, 576, 577. 

575, 593. Cattle -stealing, 223. Coleridge, 308. 

Parjanya, 40, 95, 96. Centre of earth, the altar, Consorts of the Gods, 

Rain-cloud, 125,477. 342. 116,593. 

Brihaspati, 523. Chaidya,souof Chedi,119. Constellations, 501. 

vSoma, 206, 270, 272- Chambers’s Encyclopee- Consumption, 505, 597, 

274, 281, 284, 288, 289, dia, 531. 613. 

294,302,312,313,316, ChandrabhAgl, the river Corpus, Poetieum Bore 
325, 327, 329, 330, 332, ChenAb, 490 note. ale, 519. 

337-339, 341, 343,346- Chanter, Udgltar, one of Courser, the Sun, He* 
348, 350, 353-355, 357, the priests, 486 note. ven, 75, 488, 586. 
359.362,369,376,394, Charanyu, name of an - — Soma,276,340,350, 


603. 

the Sun, 58, 84, 267, 

470, 008. 

- — Dyaus, 22. 

Varuna, 394, 475. 

the thunderbolt, 5 1 6. 

Bulls, MaAta, 56,58,150, 
445; Press-stones, 5 26 ; 
Asvins, 71, 72; Indra- 
Soma, 98 ; Indra- 
Varuna, 78 ; Mitra- 


Apearaa, 528. 

Chariot = sacrifice, 558, 

Chariot-race, 228, 303, 
351, 360. 

Chayamlna, said to be a 
man’s name, 18 note. 

Chedi, the name of a 
prince, 119. 

Chedis, a tribe, 119. 

Chenlb, a river of the 
Pan jib, 150, 490 n otes. 


361. 

Coursers of the Gods, 473 
Cow, the Cosmic, 357 ; 
type of Aditi or Na- 
ture, 253 ; Aditi, 83, 
467 ; Pfifnl, 40, 83, 
149, 242,. 456, 568; 
Earth, 654, 680; hear 
to, 828, «8i tl,e 

Sunt 582;V4k, Spew*- 

ao OCO • nnfc 



643 


INDBX OP NAMES, ETC. 


ffended, 253; type 362 ; Maruts, 125, 243. Ddnajituti, eulogy of a 
tf munificence, 207 ; Creation myth, Scandi* prince’s liberality, 20 ; 
he priest’s guerdon, navian, 510 ; creation «€ Liberality to priests! 
28; « cloud, 446. connected with sacri- Dancer (in war), Indra, 

re, subject of hymns, fice, 513, 576. ]57 ) 212, 237. 

08, 000 ; as Heaven A Creator, the, Soma, 362; Dancers, the Maruts, 150. 
larth, 327; Waters of Visvakarnian, 497,498; Dancing, 406, 422, 486 
eaven, 348 ; rays of Dyaus, 149; Prajdpati, 487,526,527. 
g ht, 376, .480, 650, 566, 567, 576 ; Tvash- Ddnus, a class of fiends, 

51, 603 ; the Maruts, tor, 392 ; Dhdtar, 596, 565, 594. 

24, 150 ; streams of 609. Darbha grass, 424 note. 

iin, 192; hymns, 325; of Creators, Indra Dark One, the, Night, 71. 

siw, ripe milk set in, or Savitor, 575. Dark races, 7. 

71, 235 ;|black] and Cuckoo, 101. Ddsa, hostile native, sa- 

,hite, white milk set Cucumber, 59. vage, demon, 21, 79,94, 

i, 240. 159, 169, 182, 196,216,' 

pell, Prof. E. B., 92, DabhIti, a prottgi of In- 221,411,413,436,451, 
7,148, 186,192,200, dra, 21, 557. 488, 499, 537, 564, 

208, 212, 237, 241, Dadhigharma, an offering 584,590. 
42,245,246,249,251, of warm inspissated Ddsae,* 118, 147, 246, 
53, 256, 269, 260,263, milk, 605 note. 262, 457, 470, 482. 

64, 206-268, 276, 279, Dadhikrds, a famous ra- Dasagva, one of an anci- 
:85, 293, 294, 300, 305. cer or war-horse ; a ent priestly family, 

ation, 375, 376, 591, personification of the 132,469. 
i09. Sun, 48. 540. Dasasipra, a Proper Name, 

-origin unknown, 576. Dadhikrdvan = Dadhi- 262. 

- various accounts of, krds, 46, 48. DaBavraja, a Proper Name, 


wcribed to Indra, 111, Dadhyach, a son of 128, 260, 261. 
138,178,235,245,262, Atharvan, 376, 449, Dasonya, a man’s name, 
263, 458 ; to Visva- 450. 262. 

tarman, 497, 498 ; Daksba, Creative Power, Dasyave-vrika, Wolf -to- 

Agni, 513; Varupa, Strength, 65, 160, 206, the-Dasyu, name of a 

183, 184; Hiranya* 232, 382, 887, 394, man, 261, 265, 266. 


gvrbhft, 566 ; Brahma* 473, 486. 
naspati, 486 ; the Un* Dakshind, priests’ guer- 
b orn, the Sun, 184 ; don, 180, 544, 549. 
the Asvins, 414 ; Tvash* Dame, wife of a God, 50 7 . 

t»r, 553, 392 ; Gods Pfwni, 494. 

filing the cosmic duet ——the, Dawn, 385. 

dancing, 480, 487 ; Dame* of Trifca ; tee 
i°°da in general, 475. Trita's dames. 


W » the sacrifioe of —ten, the fingers of 
?uru »ha, 519 ; Indra- the priest, 304. 

78 ; Vi*pu, Dames, Celestial, lunar 
Serna, Mteriims, 524. 


Dasyu(s), savage foe(s), 
demon(s), 8, 21, 120, 
139,153,181,210,225, 
249, 201,265,266, 296, 
300, 352,411,448, 451, 
459, 488, 499, 500, 529, 
537,538, 547,548, 601. 

Dasyu-dayer, the, Indra, 
225. 

Dawn, 11, 35, 45, 48, 71, 
73*78,81,94,101,115, 
116, 130, 159, 175*177, 



644 


1HDBX OF NAMIB, fTC. 


197, 198, 221, 253, 267, Destructive powers, 158. Disposer, the, 186 49 c 

296, 329, 839, 385, 422, Deuteronomy, 438. 600. ' 

431, 438, 458, 472, 475, Devaka, afiend or savage, Disposers, priests, 249 
494,501,515,522,540, 20 . Diti, the antithesis 0 

558, 578, 602, 608. Devftpi, a Kshatriya who Aditi, 15, 641, 

Dawn and Night, 433, acted as Hotar, 535,536 Divoddsa, a liberal prince 
483. Devavdn, father or an- 20, 21, 256, 306, 450. 

Dawns, 11,20, 46, 72, 76, cestor of Sudds, 20. Dog, 101,368, 562; house 
84, 86 , 164, 185, 223, Devil, 435. dog, 54 ; boar-hound 

294, 351, 380, 390, Devotion, 168 ; Genius 64 ; hound of Imi ra 
425,431,445.459,514, of, 38, 46, 168, 474, 53 ; figurative, 100. 

520, 521, 555, 557. 522 ; blessiugs of, 168, Dogs, of Yama, 53 , 399 , 

husband of the, 169, 205. - — given to priests,265 

Agni or the Sun, 8 . Devout spirit makes hum- Doors, divine, of sacrif 
Day and Night, 393, 491. ble offering acceptable, cial enclosure, 4, 1( 

Deasil, the Gaelic, 412. 255. 273, 483, 557. * 

Death, 42, 58, 99, 158, Dharma, duty personi- Dove, 598, 599. 

406, 419, 462, 492, fied, 173. Dragon, the, great cloud 

578, 599. Dh&tar, Maker, Creator, serpent, 24, 113, 24( 

the punishment of 338, 382, 406, 487, 245, 449, 479, 555,55) 

sin, 583. 506, 606, 609, 613. 579. 

return to earthly Dhishani, a Goddess of 4 female, 68 8 . ] 

life after, 581. prosperity, 86 , 432. — — of the Deep, regeij 

Deer, 107, 294. Dhishnydh ( Agnayah ), of air-sea, 37, 39, 47 ] 

spotted, of the Ma- sacrificial Fires, 377. 477, 523, 524. 

ruts, 125. Dhuni, a demon, 21, 557. Dragons, serpent-demon: 

Demons, forms assumed Dhruva, a special Soma 583, 585. 
by, 100, 101. libation, 330 note. Dream, evil, 197, 19 

imprecation on, 98- Dhvasra, the name of a 445, 598. 

101. king, 305. Dronakalasa,a large Sot 

Demon-slayers, the As- Diabolua, 435 note, reservoir, 108,124,2! 

vine, 72. Dice, 429- 43 1 ; the stars ? 279, 282, 286, 293, 2 

Departed, home and bliss 419. 313,314,319,329,3 

of the, 381, 382, 498, Digvijaya, conquest of 870 notes. 

594. neighbouring count- Drop, the Moon, 2 > 

King of the, 381 ; riee, 574 note. Soma, 405. 

tee Yama. Director, one of the Drub(s), spirit(s) of r 

Deehtrl, Instructress, a priests, 355, 521. chief, 59, 450. 

Goddess, 506. Disease, the Spirit of, 534. Drtfhyu(s)eponymus 

Desire, 576 ; tee Kdma. Diseases, colic, 545 ; con- men of a Vedic ti 


Destroyer, the, Indr a, 
114; Death, 419 notet. 
Destruction, 42, 58, 99, 
158,393, 407,462, 492, 
***0 7 BUS. 


sumption, 683, 597, 37-19, 131, 

613 ; dropsy, 85 ; ph* Duljsdsu, the name 
thuds, 613 ; SimidA, prince, 428. 

52 ; Sipada, 52. DulisOtia, nsttie of » 
Dispenser, Ittdre, -^tlltiflT flffljjfljg 



ttfpBX OP NAMES, ETC. 


645 


lurg&ha, a chief, 208. Eggeling, Dr. J. , 2 13,578. Falcons, the Marute, 523. 
Durmitra, a ^tiahi, 548, Ehni, Dr. J., 394, 397, Falsehood, punishers of, 
pdrvfi grass, 580, fi87« 400,507. 60, 66, 81, 99. 

)utt, R. Ch., 408. Eight sons of Aditi, 487. False-swearing, prayer 

)uty, Right, Law, Virtue, Eight-footed metre, 225. for removal of sin of, 
personified, 170. EkadhanAb, waters in 391. 

)vita, Second, perhaps Soma ceremonies, 241, Famine, 143, 210, 442. 
a form of Agni, 197. 326, 424 notes. Father, the, Heaven, 96, 


mda§4ha, a twelve- Ekadhenus, sacrificial 
day sacrifice, 242 note. waters, 43. 
raus, Heaven, the an- Ekadyu, the name of a 
cient Aryan God— the Rishi, 229. 

Greek Zeua, 44,80,149, Elephant, 172, 190, 304, 
168,174,175,385,390, 612. 

426,433, 444,445,451, Eros, KAma, Desire, 575 
466,467, 469-471, 475, note. 

478, 479, 493, 522, 523, Etasa, the horse of the 
578, 584, 592. Sun ; a man’s name, 

yu=Dyaus, 44, 390 63, 66, 104, 122, 261, 

notes. 311, 315, 375, 376. 

Etasaa, 216, 434. 

AGL8, 101, 422- Evil-eyed, 506. 

|— the Moon, 423; Existence, sprung from 
Soma, 341 361; Savi- non-existence, 486. 
Vs^TArkshy*, 591. Expanses, the Bix, 400, 
;les, Celestial press- 574. 
tones, 526 ; Soma- Eye, of the dead goes to 
the Sun, 402 ; of Va- 


irops, 341. 

••ornaments, 227. 
rth, 38, 48, 164, 265, 
563, 383,385,387,407, 
126,433,447, 463, 470, 


rug* and Mitra, the 
Sun, 63, 484 ; of the 
Gods, 75; of Order, 
Agni, 890. 


514, 572, 584; Indra, 
343 ; Visvakarman, 496 ; 
Yama, 581 ; Manu,2Q5. 

Father, Agni, 450 ; In- 
dra, 250 ; Prajftpati, 
384 ; Soma or Agni, 
330 ; Tvashtar, 473 ; 
VAyu, 607 ; the Yaja- 
mAna, 384. 

Father and Mother, Heav- 
en and Earth, 331, 333, 
457. 

Fathers, Manes, Spirits Qf 
the Departed, 39, 74, 
83, 199, 339, 384, 

387, 398-405, 407, 458- 
461,469, 474, 481,494, 
498, 514, 549, 576, 577, 
581, 594, 601. 

— = Moon and stars ? 
326 ; stars? 481. 

three classes of, 

dwelling in heaven, 
firmament, lower fir- 
mament, 408 ; created 
light, 74 ; produce the 
fruitfulness of hegven 
and earth, 474 ; their 
home, 581. 


171,495,522,578,580. Eye, the, the Sun; the 
- son of, m*n, 262. single, the Moon, 276. 
p sprung from Puru- 

fha’s feet, 519, Faith, 269> 381, 592, 

kand Heaven, 38, 693. 

- 52, 66, 72, 88, 181, F»lcon («), 63, 149, 174, Fencing or enclosing 
5, 240, 8150, 8*4, 864, M0, 205, 304, 307, stick, round the racri 

5, 488, 448, 4#7, 513. 809,317, 388, 493,678. ficial fire, 620, 678. 

Iw, 216, Falcon, Agni, 14 ; Soms, Fervour, religious an- 

P«e, of Sun, 581 321, 389, 365. aterity, penance, 694, 

*i 172 note. — bringer of the Soma, 699, 601,, 606, 60S. 

■ the Mundane, 618 243, 251, 800, 821 Kell Lord or Protectee 

*4 834,844,848,396,588. of the, 89, 478. 



64$ 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


Fiends, prayer for des- Forest-Trees, 39. GangA, the river Gang? 

truction of, 98*101 ; Forests, Lord of, Van as- 490. 
forms assumed by, 100. pati, the sacrificial Ganges, 159, 490. 

See RAkshasas, YAtu- stake, 4. GarbhAdhAna, a cerenj 

‘ihfiaas. Fort-destroyer, Agni, 8, to facilitate and blto 

Fig-tree, the Holy, sec 447 ; Iudra, 103, 172, conception, 613 note. 

Asvattha. 190,202,203,263,555; Garuda, the name of a 

Filter, for Soma juice, Soma, 300, 349. mythical bird, 591 note. 

107, 171,269,275,278, Forte* cloud castles of GAthA, non-Yedic song, 
280, 285, 287, 289, fiends, 584 ; of abori- 501. 
302,331,335,338,340, gines, 256; of iron, Gaura, BosGavaeus, 114 
342, 348, 362, 426. 251, 540. 191, 573. 

Fire, 322, 552. Fortune, 368. Gaurt, 278, 572. 

Fire-sticks, 5, 180, 390, Fo ur, the, Lunar God dea- Gaviahthira, a Rishi, 592 
426. see, 332. Gaya, a man’s name, 472, 

Firmament, personified, Beauteous creatures, 474. 

,338 ; two divisions of 326 ; quarters of the GAyatra, a hymn, 305, 
the, 234 note. sky, 292 ; seas, 292, 480. 

Fish, 481. 448. GAyatri, a Vedic metre, 

Five races, tribes, 10, 14, Fox, 421. 53, 179, 305. 400, 577. 

72, 73, 76, 129, 171, Friend, the, Mitra, 390 Geldner, Prof. K., 36, 
205, 280, 317, 319, 352, note. 2*0, 436, 457, 509, 529, 

368, 445, 450, 458, 563; Friendship, 485 ; Rishi’s 531, 544. 
tribes of heaven, 464 ; with Varuna, 84. Gharrna, a warm libation, 

rivers, floods, 159, Frog, an emblem of cool- 70, 97, 219, 238, 235, 

183 ; courses or divi- ness, 403. 606. 

sions of sacrifice, 570 ; Froga, 90-98, 599. GhoshA, a woman's name, 

companies, 280 ; ele- Fruit, 580, 588. 436, 439. 

mentsof sacrifice, 397 Funeral hymns, 398-407, Ghrita(ra), clarified but* 
note ; lands or settle- 459-461, 581, 593,594. ter, 3, 694. 

ments, 605 ; regions Funerals, deity of, 462 GnAa, Consorts of Gods, 
of the world, 845. note. 166. 

Fivefold beings, 69 ; Funereal gift, 581. Goal, 293, 
people, 72. Goat (s), 19, 821; atfu- 

Flesh-eater, Agni, 403. Gaidicke, Prof., 318, 597. nerals, 402; team of 

Floods, rivers, 168, 175, Gambler, 429-431, 441, Pdshan, 321, 416. 

405, 433, 473, 552 ; 442. God, One Supreme, 498. 

waters of the air, 187. Gambling house, 430. — — of Gods, 567 ; the 

Floods' (waters' of air) Gamester, 430. Unknown, 560. 

offspring, Agni, 50. Gandharva, 104,225,339, Goddess, 43, 74-76. 78 
Force, personified, 486. 841, 345, 892, 496, 506, 91, 189, 148, 252, 253. 

Fonsst-Lord, 205 ; Forest* 569, 573, 584, 585, 604. 305, 468, 540, 573, 580 

Sovran, 88; Sovran of Gandharos, 381, 456, 586,588. 

the Forest, Soma, 541 ; 498, 595, 528, 582. Goddesses, 88, 48, 50, 

Forest-Queen, 589,590. Gandharvt, 394. 229^ 



wm cs» urns, ttc. 


«7 


565,W\,W5,«a,«4 ) ot S&ntor, «; Quest ot men, kgm, 5, 
555, M3. 0tttve\sVmB,U6,U6; 10, 11, 41, l&l, 2io 

iGoddesses, Three, 4, 484. reinB ol the Asvins, 257,383,520. 
l^ods, passim ; hymn to, 153 ; Hero, Agni, 11 ; Gumti, a river, 159 note. 
486 ; all invoked, 470- ornaments of the Ma- Gungfi, a lunar Goddess 
478 ; primeval Aryan, ruts, 57 ; sword of Bri- 332. 

592 ; number, 167,455; haspati, 92 ; thunder- Gungus, a non-Aryan 
origin, 52, 92, 395, 397, bolt, 211, 531. people, 450. 

470, 486 ; immortal, Goldstiicker, Prof. Th., 

4, 7, 12, 63, 92, 472, 531. Haas, Prof., 507. 

476-478,482, 486,522; Gomati, the name of a Hair, braided, 34, 80, 321. 
born immortal, 486 ; river, 159, 490. Hall, Dr, F., 407. 

made immortal by Good Works, 399. Hammer = lightning, 21 9. 


Agni, 13 ; by Soma, Gopavana, a Rishi, 222. Hands, joined in marri- 
372,376,457; by their Gosarya, a protege of the age, 407, 505. 

merits, 471 ; produced Asvins, 128, 260, 261. healing by touch of. 

after the world, 576 ; Gotama, an ancient Rishi, 465, 583. 
earlier, 24 ; General, 352, 579. Hansa, the Sun, 571 note. 

322; of heaven, waters, Grfthi, Grasper, a deadly Haray&na, a chief, 161. 
earth, 39, 475 ; omni- female fiend, 597 note. Hants, horses of Agni, 
potent, 166 ; reward GraDthini, the name of 46 ; of the Sun, 66, 
the pious, 165 ; punish an Apsaras, 528. 253,312; of Sonia, 346. 

sin, 516 ; punish the Grass, Sacred, 3, 16, 18, Harivahsa, 98. 
undevout, 32, 109, 169, 34, 39, 44, 47, 57, 74, Havirdhdnas, Soma carts. 

464; Priests of the, 117, 125, 137, 139, 142, 397, 398 notes. 

384; Queen of the, 251. 191, 205, 215, 233, 247, Haviryajiia, oblation of 

ods = priests, 3, 31 0,568. 273,303,305,348,430, clarified butter, 570 


old, 5, 30, 65, 166, 168, 
170,172,196,197,208, I 
226,296,312,330,346, 
380,449,525,531,549, 
550, 553; chariot 
wrought of or decked 
with, 69, 118, 195 ; on 
priest’s finger, 166,289, 
316, 347, 355, 358; 
gold-bearded, Agni, 
117 ; gold coursers of 
toe Sun, 60 ; gold 
talma of Maruts, 125; 
gold sword* of Maruts, 
126. 

tolen, Savitar, 68; arms 
Qf Savitar,87,48; hair 
435 1 hands 


483,553. 

Grasamaun, Prof., 20, 29, 
41, 45, 48, 49, 54, 57, 
66,79,81.107,142,152, 
226,232, 233,241,242, 
245, 253,264, 266, 268, 
290,299,302,305, 309, 
328,348,349,355,380, 
388, 393,410,419, 420, 
424,429,439,440,445, 

; 448,452, 463,489,511, 

514,520,529,538,541, 
560,564,565,569,583. 

, Great One, the, Yama, 
400. 

■ Grimm, Jacob, 172, 
r Guerdon, priests’ fee,247, 
i 323, 544, 549. 


note. 

Haug, Prof. M., 186,604. 
Hawk, 176, 230, 345,350, 
588. See Falcon. 

Indra, 538 ; Soma, 

357. 

Hawks, the Maruts, 54. 
Healer, Rudra, 39, 49 : 

Vdstoshpati, 53. 
Heaven, a Goddess, 463. 

Dyaus, 5, 33, 66, 

67,73,78,96, 125,197, 
433, 438, 445,470,471 
, 476, 483, 514, 569, 

572, 578. 

— home of the Blest, 
, 381,382,399, 402,404, 

498 . 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


64tr 

Heaven and Earth, 9, 
31, 38, 39, 48, 62, 53, 
62, 64, 91,92,133,139, 
143, 161, 175,219,246, 
275, 326,331*333, 338, 
362, 365, 370, 377, 334, 
386, 390, 395,424,431, 
433, 435, 447, 449,452, 
463,474,477, 479,484, 
491,524,525,556,565, 
585, 609. 

separated by the 

Aavins, 414; by Indra 
179,515, 556, 593 ; by 
Savitar, 591 ; by Va- 
runa, 82, 184; by Vish- 
nu, 94. 

Heaven's Daughter, Ushaa. 
Datorn, 67, 73, 75, 76, 
197, 433. 

Heaven’s Child, Soma, 
292, 295; Night, 574. 

Heifer, the, Aditi, 554. 

Hell, 315 note. 

Herald, Hotar, Invoker, 
Agni. 15, 30, 174, 384, 
395, 521, 522, tt patsim. 

Heralds.two celestial, 273. 

Herbert, George, 180. 

Herbs, 38, 39, 533-535. 

Herd, the, the Maruts, 
427. 

Herdsman, the, Indra, 
450; the Sun, 604. 

Hesiod, 184. 

Hillebrandt, Prof. A., 36, 
84.91, 108, 163, 219, 
251,269, 279,296,301, 
30M18, 326,332, 341, 
342,379,382, 390, 394, 
406; 423, 424, 450, 526, 
569, 578, 585, 605. 

Hill*, 168, 431. 

Hinva. Benefactor, a title 
of Indra, 182. 


Hiranyagarbha, Gold* 
germ, Sun-God, 566. 

Hiranyastupa, a Rishi, 
591. 

Holtzmann, Prof., 531. 

Holy Ladies, the Rivers, 
90. 

Homer, 500. 

Homestead, Guardian of 
the, 53. 

Hoof -armed demons, 511. 

Horace, 59. 

Horse Sacrifice, 595. 

Horses — flames of Agni, 
2 ; = hymns, 7 ; of the 
Alvins, 69, 70,73, 116; 
of Brihaspati, 92 ; of 

, Dawn, 74, 76 ? of the 
Sun, 216,312, 451,523. 

Hotar, 9, 201, 355, 384; 
395, 465, 483, 485,486, 
499, 515, 620, 526,535, 
552, 607. 

Hotars, the Celestial, 4, 
475, 478, 483, 553,574. 

Hound, 507. 

Hounds = clouds, 196. 

Household Lord, Agni, 
201 ;— Priest, Agni, 522. 

Hradechakshus, the name 
of an Apsar&s, 528. 

Humble offering, 255. 

Hundred autumns, na- 
tural duration of hu- 
man life, 66, 96, 406, 
506, 597 ; springs, dit- 
to, 597 ; winters, ditto, 
333, 597. 

Hundred Chiefs, the 
Maruts?, 422. 

Hundred Powers, Lord 
of, 170, 173 ; tee $ata- 
kratu. 

Hunger, deprecated, 2, 

202 . 


Hunter, 192. 

Hunting, deer, 107 ; ele 
phants, 489; boar, 507; 
wild bull, 454. 

Husband and wife, hap- 
piness of the pious, 168. 

Husbandman, 519 ; ue 
Vaisya. 

Hydaspes, Greek name 
of the Jhelum, 490. 

Hyena, 487. 

Hymir, Scandinavian 
World-giant, 519. 

Hymn = car, 64 ; gene- 
rated or begotten by 
the bard, 10, 13, 25 ; 
new, 18, 27, 40, 62, 
133, 150, 155, 222,244, 
261, 296, 352, 386; 
made, formed, fashion- 
ed, 33, 37,40, 120,122; 
fought with skill, 9 ; 
thought out, 129, 235, 
244. 

Hymns = milk-streams, 
135." 

Hypnotism, 583 note. 

IkshvAko, the name of 
a prince, 464. 

Ill, a Goddess of Prayer, 
4, 16, 48,273,309 463, 
484, 520, 553. 

I1A?b place, where butter is 
poured on the Are, 520. 

Immolator, the, Agni, 4, 
554. 

Immortality, afterdeft* 5, 
69, 168, 253 ; in one'* 
children, 168 ; pray* 
for, W; the gift ° f 
Some, 872 ; Lord of. 
Puruoha, 817 ! Sioij 
of, 824; the world o' 
the Oode, _2»- 



Incantation, against an 
ill-omened bird, 598 ; 
against miscarriage, 
612.613; against phthi- 
sis, 61 3; against poison, 
51 ; against a rival 
wife, 588. 

Indigence, 3, 438. 

Indigenous races, see D4- 
saa, Dasyus, Dark races, 
nrfra, 4, 8, 12, 17-35, 
37-40, 44, 47, 48, 50- 
54, 56, 76, 78, 80, 81, 
85-89, 91-94, 98-101, 
103-115, 119-123, 125, 
126, 130,132-142,140, 
151,152, 157-160, 104, 
167-175, 178-180, 189- 
196, 198, 199, 202-209, 
211-216, 219, 220, 224, 
231, 234-252, 259,265, 
209, 270, 273-275, 278, 
279,281,282, 286, 287, 
292,296,297-299, 301- 
308, 310-316,318-321, 
323,325, 327, 329,* 330, 
333-335, 387, 339, 340, 
342-346, 348, 350, 351, 
355-363, 365 369, 371, 
372,374, 375, 377-382, 
388,390, 391,398, 408, 
<11-413, 418, 417, 420, 
<23, 425, 427.431-488, 
441 444, 4 48-453, 457, 
453,460, 463, 464-467, 
469,471,474, 476,478, 
<19,483, 484, 487, 489, 
491,408,600,501,604, 
607-500, 516-617, 688 , 
527,531, 632,636,637- 
547,550,664-667,660, 
561,563-666,670, 671, 
! 573-680, 883-586, 6»8, 
590,581, 698-607, 599, 
LAWS, 608- 


INDEX OP NAMES, BTC. 649 

Indra, his parents, Heaven Indra-Agni, 88, 89, 178- 
and Earth, 202. 215 ; 180 ; Indra-Soma, 98 ; 

his father, 22; his mo- Indra- Varuna, 78-81, 
ther, 22, 190, 225, 487, 267, 268 ; Indra- Vdyu, 

580 ; born from Puru- 85-89. 
sha’s month, 519 ; his Indr&ni, Indra’s Consort, 
wife, 507-509 ; his 507-509, 588, 596. 
greatness, 120, 134, Indrota,aprince,212,213. 
234,249,417,423,449, Indu, drop, = Soma, 198, 
515, 516, 554, 590 ; his 199, 213, 236, and 
battles with demons, Book IX. passim. 

120, 134,138, 171,516, Indus, the river, 90,159, 
517 ; Lord of Heaven, 160, 183,491,494,550. 
248, 554 ; Chief of Infant, the, Agni as 

Gods, 134, 204 ; Ma- lightning, 95, 439; 

ker of all things, 452, Agni, 386, 387, 468, 
458 ; identified with 495 ; the young Sun, 
Sun, 133, 240,419,422. 419. 

426, 451, 515, 510 ; Infinity, 470, 486. 
supersedes Varuna, Inspiration, 92, 231, 397. 
570; punisher of sin, Inspirer(B', 3, 13, 261, 
516 ; Warrior God, 298, 349, 354, 447. 

21, 22, 34, 103, 141, Instructress, the, Deshtri, 
190,202,203,216,237, 506. 

250, 265, 417, 441, 531, Invoker, 355, 395. 

544 ; tutelary God of Invokers, Hotar=t, the two 
Aryans, 18, 144, 190; Celestial, 4, 574. 
his attributes and I«on, or other metal, 5, 
deeds, 120, 449-452 ; 15, 90, 244, 251, 269, 

his love of Soma, 122, 337, 449, 510, 531, 532, 

202 ; hie rapture after 537, 540. 
drinllng, 132, 133, lavara, Lord, Supreme 

139, 171, 563, 564 ; Deity of post-Vedic 
aided by the Maruts, time, 877 note. 

120, 245 ; priest, 140 ; Ita, a Rinhi, 601. 
his chariot, 172, 413, 

* 423 ; his horses, see Jackal, 421. 

Horses ; his existence Jacobi, Dr. H., 602. 
doubted, 250. Jagatl, a Vedic metre, 

^and Agni, 38, 88, 89; 577 

—and POehan, 38 ; J&husha, a protigi of the 

and Soma, 88, 98, Asms, 71. 

99, 101, 284 ; and Jamadagni, a famous 

Varuna, 88 ; — and ancient Hishi, 91, 253, 
Viyu, 106. 317, 352, 577, 599, 600- 



INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


$50 

Jamadagnis, 309, 310, 363. 

Jarfitha, name of a fiend 
or Ravage, 1, 11, 496. 

JAtavedas, the Omnis- 
cient, Agni, 5, 8, 11, 
18, 16, 100, 132, 154- 
156,185,187, 217,218, 
222,322, 386, 388, ,390, 
401-403, 445,453, 454, 
467,482, 499,510,513, 
521, 553, 559, 585, 592, 
604, 608. 

Jhelum, the river, 490 note 

JftAnam, knowledge, 484. 

J uhd, a sacrificial ladle ; 
possibly aProperName, 
552 note. 

Jumna, the modern name 
of the river YamunA, 
20, 246, 490. 

Ka, Who?, the God Pra- 
jApati, 566 note. 

K5bul, the river, 148 
note. 

Kadrft, apparently a Ri- 
shi, 191 ; Queen of Ser- 
pents, 608 note. 

Kadruka days, days of the 
Abhiplava festival, 400. 

KakshlvAn, an ancient 
sage, 129, 333, 415, 
486, 467, 687. 

Kakuha, the name of a 
prince, 123, 

Kalasa, of uncertain 
meaning, 428. 

Kali, a Rishi, 210, 437, 

KAli, name of a flame of 
Agni, 387 note. 

KalmAshapAda, name of 
a King, 100 note. 

K&ma, Lore, Desire, 575 
note; said to be a Ri* 

*W'« name. 592. 


Kamadyd, the wife of Kine, rays of light, 74, 


Vimada, 476 
Kanita, the name of a 
chief, 195. 

Kanva, an ancient Rishi, 
103,110,112,117,118, 
120,124,127,128,130, 


75, 208, 348, 376, 516, 
583 ; heavens A earths, 
216; waters, 449; milk, 
284, 344, 359, S65 ; 
rain-clouds, 291, 452 ; 
sacrificial waters, 371. 


131,174,259,261,263, King, benediction of a, 


266, 426, 466, 592. 

Kanvas, 108-110, 112, 

114-116, 119-122, 126, 
169, 172,174, 265,559. 

j.K&nva, a descendant of 
Kanva, 103, 115, 125, 
128, 129. 

KAnvAy anas, descendants 
of Kanva, 266. 

Kapardiu, wearing braid- 
ed hair, 321 note. 

Kapi, an ape, 607 note. 


602,603 ; Indra,3l, 

140,229,243,248,442, 
443,464,468,580; — 
Agui, 10, 187, 383- 

385,445,510,512; 

Soma, 198, 199, 228, 

Book IX. passim ; 

the Sun, 467 ; — Va- 
runa, 37, 51, 82, 83, 184, 

396, 545, 602 ; Ya- 

ma, 381, 398-400 ; 

of Kings, Varuna, 37. 


Kapila, a famous Rishi, Kings, the, Vanina, Arya 


419. 

KarAli, name of a flame 
of Agui, 387 nofe. 
Karanja, a demon, 450. 
Kasu, a prince, 119. 
Kasyapa, a famous Rishi, 
22, 352, 382, 577. 
KathA Upanishad, 681. 


mpi, Mitra, 45, 66;- 

the Ten, 36, 79, 80; 

Varuna, and Mitra, 68- 
65, 167,252, 468,473; 

Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryamau, 147, 573 ; 
the Asvins, 488. 

Kinsuka, a tree, 503. 


KaurayAna, patronymic K6phAn, Greek name of 
of a prince, 113. the Kabul river, 148. 

Kavasha, the name of a Kratu, one of the Seven 
priest, 19, 429. Rid»«, ***- 

Kavi,tbe father of Usa- Kripa, a prince, 112,1 ■ 
nA, 18, 451, 538. Krisa, aKUhi,264,268,439. 

Kavis, 403 note. Krirtnu, a guardian of 

Kavyas, a class of Manes, the Celestial Soma, 

398,401,403. 473, 588. 

Resins, long- haired, Agni Krishna, a Rishi, 232 , a 
VAyu, Sfirya, 582. demon, 246. 

Khela, a king, 118 note. KrityA, Magic person^ * 
Kimldini, mischievous 505 note. 

fiends, 98, 101, 512. Krivi, the eponymus 
Kindler,Agnldh, lighter of » warlike tnbe, ’ 

sacrificial f " 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


651 


Krumu, the name of a 
river, 490. 

Ksbatram, the Ruling 
power, the military 
and princely order, 
177 note. 

j Kshatriya, 99, 177, 407, 
519,552. 

Kshatriyas, 

Brihman 
note. 

— Adityas, 210. 

(ubhA, a river, 159, 183, 
490. 

Kuhn, Prof. A., 531. 

KuhO, a luuar Goddess, 
332. 

Kumdra, said to be a 
Proper Name, 581 note. 
Kumdrila, a celebrated 
philosopher, 011 note. 
iundap&yya, a Proper 
Name, 142. 

Kuraylna, a Proper Name, 
113 note. 

Kurlra, a kind of metre, 
502. 


73 ; Lady of the world Life, duration of human, 
—73 ; Lady of sweet see Hundred Autumns; 
strains— 78, 130; Lady appointed by Gods, 429. 
of the Wood, Aranyd- Light, 48. 


ni, 589 

Lakes, Soma receptacles 
124. 

Lances, 149, 166. 
raised to Langlois, Prof., 98. 
rank, 536 Language, 484. 

Lanman, Prof. C. R., 
54, 55, 139, 391, 408, 
428, 429, 439, 504. 
Law, Moral and Cosmic, 


Lightning, 252 ; Vasishtha 
an embodiment of, 36. 

Lion, 19, 361, 421, 422, 
479 ; trap for, 422 ; 
Soma, 350. 

Lord of Heaven, Indra, 
248, 219; of Light, 
Indra, 241, 247, 248. 

Lotus, 36, 107, 550, 587, 
613. 


43, 45, 55, 60, 65, 66, Ludwig, Prof. A , Der 
71, 73, 74, 79-81, 112, Rigveda, 5 Vols., and 


119,120,128,132.134, Ueber die neuesten 

155,156,159,160,165, Arbeiten im Gebiete 

108, 220, 221, 230, 233, der Rgveda-forschung, 

248, 274 276, 293, 297, passim. 

300, 304, 313, 320, 324, Lusa, a favourite of Indra, 
3 7,344.345,370, 377, 436 note. 

379, 381, 396, 403, 432, Lying, prayer for remov- 
433, 445,447. 459, 469, al of sin of, 391. 
474-478,494, 496, 522, 

551, 500,563, 579, 583, Macdonbll, Prof. A. A., 
609. 197,226,369,370,392, 

|Kuru-krivi«, the name of , sacrifice, 155, 225, 447, 455. 

a tribe, 19 note. 251,314,331,345,373, Madhyadesa, Midland 

[Kimikshetra, a district 504, 539, 568, 570, 594, country, 463 note. 
in N.-W. India, 122, 603. 

207, 317, 381 notes. Leader, Neahtar, one of 
Kurungi, a prince, 115. the priests, 521 
turusrava ia, a prince. Leather, 63. 

Kutua, a favourite of Leech, physician, 380 ; . 

Indra, 21, 104, 159,283, see Physician. Maghavans, nobles, ins 

436, 439, 451, Liberal Ones, Hods, 80. titutore of i eMnfice.21, 

638, 548, 583. Liberality, 56 1 ; to priests, 32, l2o, 267, 524, 526, 


M&ghd, a lunar mansion, 
502. 

Maghavan, Lord of Boun- 
ty, a title of Indra, 
passim. 


Ntsas, 27. 

Nava, a demon 
bought, 21. 


of 


20,106,107,111,113, 549. 

ltf, 119,123, 147, 148, Magic, personified, 504 
159 * 181, 175, 195.196, note ; of Gods, 183,224, 


the Holy, Rivers, 

90, 

ths Light. Dawn, 


208, 212, 213, 223,265, 
266 , 305, 429 , 470,5-5; 
heavenly end earthly 
rewards of, 549, 550, 


436;590, 604; of fiends, 
1, 2, 93, 94, 101, 139, 
184, 202, 554,534 ; of 
men, 155, 



652 


INDEX OF NAUBft, ETC. 


MahAbhSrata, 99, 527, Mann, Man, father of 450, 456-458, 471-474, 
536. mankind, 3, 12, 181, 476,479, 484,487,491- 

MahA\ Ira, a sacrificial cal- 139, 153, 155, 167, 174, 494,500,508,516, 523, 

dron, 219 note. 205, 261, 262, 352, 356, 524, 535, 537, 538, 544, 

Mabldhara, a celebrated 471, 476, 482, 484, 509, 545, 547, 556, 557, 568, 

Commentator on the 530, 539. 573, 574, 583, 595. 

VAjasaneyi-SanhitA,43, Laws of, 36, 438. as healers, 150 ; 

241,249,445,447,497, the father of NA- their number, 245 note. 

499, 518, 520, 545,569. bhineduihtha, 456,467, MAtali, the charioteer of 
Maiden, the, StiryA, 69 ; 469, 470. Indra, 398 note. 

earth or the oblation, Manus =■ Manu, 146, 164, MAtalt, said to be Indra, 
386. 186, 187, 260. 398. 

Maidens, the Dawns, 459. Manyamlna, a Proper MAtari$van, VAyu, or Ag- 
Maids, the Dawns, 8 ; Name, 20. ni, or the bringer of 

fingers of the priest, Manyu, Passiou personi- Agni from heaven, 323, 
316. fied, 488-500. 447, 449, 506, 515, 547, 

Maker, 38. Mares, swift rivers, 83 ; 552, 557 ; the name of 

Makba, apparently a de* waters of the firma- a Rishi, 262. 

mon, 369. ment, 386. Match-makerB, 418, 502, 

Male, the presiding, 518 Marichi, one of the Seven 503 notes, 
note ; the first, 576 Rishis, 498. Matrons, Heaven and 

note. Marriage and marriage Ea^h, 385. 

Man, the first, 676 ;per- ceremonies, 501-506. Matsyas, fishes ; said to 
sonified, the Soul of — presiding deities of, be the name of a tribe, 
the univeiBe, 517 note ; 505, 506. 17. 

son of Heaven and MArtAnda, a name of the MAyA, Illusion, the cause 
Earth, 62; akin to Sun, 487. of material creation, 

Gods, 71, 131, 144, MarudvridhA, name or 604 note. 

364, 186, 206,231,247, epithet of a river, 490. MAyAbheda, Discernment 
264, 470, 474, 548, Marutg, Storm-Gods, 11, of MAyA or Illusion, 
607. 18, 21, 31, 32, 34, 37- 604. 

MAna, said to be a name 41, 44, 47, 52, 54-59, MAyava, the name of a 

<>t Agastya, 36. 78, 89. 91,100, 110, liberal noble, 525, 526. 

ManA,two chains or rings?, 113, 123-126, 134, 185, MedhAtithi, a Rishi, 10? 

226 note. 137,139,144,148-150, 107,128. 

Manas, Spirit, 461. 160, 163, 164, 166, 175, Medhya, a Rishi, 262. 

MAnava, son of Manu, 176, 178, 183, 193, 194, MedhyAtithi,aRishi,10f 
469 note. 206, 214, 224, 225, 231, 106, 107, 110, 172, 260 

MandhAtar, MAndhAtar, 234, 242, 243, 245, 246, 261, 297. 

names of a Rishi, 181, 265, 268, 287, 292, 302, Medicine, Soma, 220 ; o 

188. ’ 307, 315-317, 320, 382, the Maruts, 150, 583 

Manes, 398, 401; see Fa- 387, 341, 345, 349, 351, of Rudra, 49, 167 i : « 

there, 357,362,371,374,375, the Water., 891, 58 

Maneion. of the Moon, 377,398,411,419,421, of Wind, 683. 

AM nnu. 427, 432, 483, 435, 445, Mehatnu, ‘ jilli 



INDEX OF NAMES, Vtt. 


653 


Merit, rewarded in hea- Monotheism, 498. and cloud, Genius 

ven, 399. Moon, Moon-God, 166, of, 42. 

Metal, see Gold, Iron. 199, 219, 230, 246,269, Mountains, 38, 39, 175, 
Metres, 558, 559 ; allot- 271,272, 279, 281, 2s2, 265, 433, 539. 

ted to various Gods, 289, 306, 308, 3$4, 325, Mrigaya, a fiend or hos- 

577. 332,336,338, 341,345, tile savage, 113, 451. 

Milch cow, Indra, 104; 347,357, 359,382,419, Mnlika, the name of a 

thetypeof beueficence, 423,450,458,501,503, Riahi, 592. 

153 ; Agni, 387. 519,523, 560,584,591. Mrityu, Death, 406. 

Milch kine, clouds, 46 ; the food of Gods, Mudgala, a Hishi, 542, 

rivers, 326, 344. 501 note ; sprung from 543. 

Milk, rain, 149, 291,452; Purusha’s mind, 519. Mudgal&ni, Mudgala’s 
sap, vigour, 105 ; of Moon and stars, 326. wife, 542, 543. 
heaven, Soma juice, Moons, two, New and Muir, Dr. J.. 22, 34, 36, 
394, 557 ; white in Full, 472. 40, 41, 49, 81-83, 85, 

coloured cows, 452. = months, 516. 94 98,100, 142, 152, 

Milton, 366, 422. Morning, personified, 35, 161, 179, 192, 198,205, 

Jliti a, 8, 13, 36, 38-40, 45, 48, 67, 73-76, 86, 244, 269, 307, 380, 

43-45. 47, 52, 60-66, 305, 384, 394, 431, 382, 390, 392, 394, 

78 80, 88, 89, 139,143, 515, 580 ; see Dawn. 400,403, 430, 439,462, 

144, 146,147,156,159 and Night, 4. 464, 470, 485,486, 490, 

162, 164-168, 176, 188, Mornings, 11, 39, 46, 491,497,499,501,518, 

193,196,197,200,2:0, 63, 72, 74, 77, 147, 520, 535, 536,538,550, 

220,222,230,243,245, 244, 339, 344, 401, 558, 562, 564,567,576, 

352,255,257,263,270, 432, 502. 577,582, 589, 594, 611. 

306,315,335,337,340, Mother, Aditi, 4, 93, Mfijavau, a mountain fam- 
342,349,351,362-364, 159, 231 ; Dawn, 78, ed for Soma plants, 429. 

i 367,371,374,377,382, 418, 608 ; Earth, 96, Muller, Prof. F. Max, 6, 

384,390,393,396,397, 407, 469, 514, 527; 15, 31, 32, 34, 36, 

411,423,426, 432-435, of Floods, Sarasvati, 46, 49, 54, 57, 74, 82, 

453,467,468,471, 473- 41 ; of kine (rays of 85, 90, 96, 97, 100, 

475,487,503,516, 522- light), Dawn, 75. 131,136,144, 152, 181, 

524,535,552,553, 556, Mothers, Rivers, 24 4, 184,200,226,226,237, 

571-573,578, 590,607, 345, 370, 405, 431, 245, 259, 269,305,355, 

612. 473; the Waters, 235, 382, 392, 404, 407,408, 

Mitra-Varuna, 51, 6065, 425 ; Heaveu A Earth, 443, 457, 460, 490-492, 

159, 252, 275. 431, 463, 474, 565 ; 494, 497,504, 516,520, 

MitrAtithi, the name of Plante, 383, 533 ; of 531,538, 567, 571, 572, 

* prince, 429. Law (Heaven A Earth), 576, 593, 600. 

Moksha, final liberation, -T53; of Agni (Dawns), Mundane Egg, the, 518 
Ovation, 518 note. 380. note. 

i Mole, 323. midmost, clouds ? Muni, Munis, inspired 

Wch, Indra, 78. 326. aaint(sj, 55, 142, 582. 

Monogamy, indications Mountain, 38 cloud, Mfiradevaa, mpious,men 
8, 77,123,125,328,362. or demoae 101,510. 



654 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 


Music, 214, >269, 581 ; 252, 266,267,349,414, Nodhas, a Rishi, 853 note.. 

of the Maruts, 55. 437, 440, 447, 448,587. Noose (for catching sin- 

Myiiantheus, Prof., 221. Nature, 263 note. ners), of Agni, 6li • 0 f 

Navogva, member of a Rudra, 49; of Varnna, 
Na BHA = N&bb4uedifih* mythical priestly 604 ; of ViBva, 511 

tha, 469. family, 376, 469. Nooses of Indra-Varuna, 

Nabh8ka, a llishi, 182. Navav&stva, the name of 80 ; of Mitra and Va- 
N&bh&ka, the son of Na- a chief, 451. r una, 64. 

bh&ka, 182, 183. Nectar, 253, 269, 271. North altar, 137, 163 

N&bh&nedishtha, son of Nema, said to be a Jti- notes . 

Manu, 467, 468. shi, 250 note. Notes and Queries, 598. 

Nachiketas, a Proper Neeh tar, one of the priests, Nrimedha, a prottg6 of 
Name, 581 note. 521 note. Agni, 496. 

Nahus, aPioper Name, New Year, 467 note. Nrimedhas, a man’a 
8, 9, 349, 452, 496, 537. Night, 1 64, 384, 385, name, 578, 579. 
Nahusha, a Proper Name, 419, 438, 472, 573, 574, Nrishad, aProper Name, 
195, 470. 602, 609. 426, 466. 

N4husha, said to be the — and dawn or morn- 
name of a king, 90. ing, 44, 47, 273, 553. Ocean, 39, 51, 70, 84, 
Nahuahas, a people, 90, — and day, 438. 111,122,184,249,569, 

* 121, 126, 351. — Lord of, the Moon, 583, 591. 

Nahushyas, ape<»ple,351. 524. Af air, 251, 855, 391, 

Nakahatras, lunar man* Nights, 244. 477,536,568,572,604. 

aions, 501 note. Nine, the Bhrigus? 419. Varu^ia, 184 ;Soma, 

Names, four, of a deity, Ninety, indefinite for 362. 

22 h many, 536. Oceans, seven, 520 note. 

Naml, a friend of Indra, Ninety-nine, ditto, Oganas, men of some 
450 # rivers, 546; castles, hostile tribe, 517. 

Namucbi, a demon of 21, 94, 239, 306 ; Old age, 406, 462. 

drought, 21, 139, 246, fiends, 452 ; loads Oldeuberg, Prof. H., 96, 

488, 578. of fuel, 536. 269, 509, 531. 

Narieansa, a title of Nlpltithi, a Rishi, 174, Om, 95. 

Agni, 3, 4, 72, 483, 260, 261. Omen, bird of ill, 598, 

523, 606. Nirriti, Goddess of des- 599. 

NaiAf ansi, eulogistic song, traction, 42, 58, 99, Omnific, Vimkarnian, 
501. 158, 393, 407, 433, 496 note. 

Nkrshada, said to be the 462, 492, 598. Omniscient, Soma, 288, 

name of a fiend, 466 Nirritis, destructive 289. 
note. pow ere, 557. On*, 498 ; One All, 267; j 

N4rya, a liberal prince, Nirukta, 49. One Supreme, 498. j 

159. Nishti, said to be Diti, 0»e*horae car, 577 ; One - , 

Nksatyas, a name of the 541 note. footed, the Sun > tee 

Aavins, 44, 67, 70-73, Niahtigrl, Indra'i mother, Aja*ekapAd. 

117, 118, 127*130, 153, 541. Op!, i mplement tot y^ 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


655 


Ordainer, the, DhAtar, PAkayajfta, simple domes- Parna, the PalAsa tree, 

406 • the Sun, 467, tic oblation, 57<> note . Butea Frondosa, 533. 

Order, Cosmic and Mo- Paktha, a king, 153,260, Parnaya,atree-demon,450. 
ral, 48, 63, 64, 384, 465. . Parsu, Rib, daughter of 

386, 390, 395, 459, Pakthas, 18, 465. Manu, 509, 

467* 478, 480, 488, PalAsa, a tree, Butea name of a chief, 123, 

496,552. SeeLaw. Frondosa, 533 note. Parsus, 79. 

sacrifice, 40, 47, 90, PanchAlas, a tribe in the PArthya, a liberal chief, 

119, 350, 354, 360, PanjAb, 150 note. 525,526. 

361 387, 390, 397, Pani, a demon of dark- Farushnt, the river RAvi, 

425, 511, 545, 553, uess, 466, 479, 595. 17, 18, 223, 490. 

570. &c Law. Panis, 11, 162, 235, 286, Parvata, the Genius of 

Kosmoa, the Uni- 344, 380, 466, 478, Mountain and Cloud, 

verse, 568. 550, 551, 556. 42, 596. 

Orderer, disposer of the PanjAb, 20, 150, 159, PAsadyumna, a king, 34 
Universe, Indra, 588, 490, 550 notes. PAtA, PAthA, a medicinal 

Ornameuts, of the Ma- Pantheism, 517-520. plant, 588 note, 
ruts, 148-150, 494 ; of Paramabrahmaj&Anam, Paulomi, IndrAnl, 59 . 
women, 196 ; of men, knowledge of the hi- Paura, son of King Puru, 

208, 226 ; of cows, gher truths of religion, 112,260. 

208 4 8 4 note Pauras, 264. 

inranos = Varuna, 184 Paramajyi, a liberal chief, Pautakratu, son ofPuU- 
, ' krati or POtakratu, 

note. iU0 * 

)wl, 100, 101; owlet, 101. ParamAtmA, the supreme 266 note. 

k hide, 278, 317, 320, soul or self, 572 note. PavamAna, 269, 273; 

336, 369. Paramesvara, the sup- Agm, 2 ^° 7i0 ^ ’ 

reme God, 497 note. ‘272, and Book IX. pas- 

PadqribH!, a demon or ParAsara, a Hishi, 20. * tm Pushau, 33 
| savage, 451. PArAvata (n\ name of a PavamAuas Soma juices 

i&v&na, patronymic of distant tribe, 175 or ro P 8 ’ 

1 -SL- 

r, the,Karth and Hea- 415 note. „ 

m, 38, 283, 386, 396; Parents, the, Heaven of Soma. • 

Bay and Night, 393 ; and Earth, 62, 63, 62, Paviru, chief 
Niglit and Dawn, 273, 92, 824, 841, 396, J s0 , 481. 

433; Sun and Moon, 475, 553. Pe » rl - , o{ the 

514. Parijman, the Reamer Pedu. a 

>ir4, a woman's name ? round, Indra as the Aarms, , ’ 

333. gun, 522;Viyu, Wind, Penury, prayer against, 

'i™. a Proper Name, 5*4, 625. 71, 492. 

115,123. Parjanya, God of the Peterson Prof. P. 79, 

N™, a priestly family, Rain-cloud, 39, 95, 96, *4, 85, , . 

115 119, 152, 254,270,285, 564,567, 572. 

‘WUnum, a liberal 338, 381, 458,475,477. Phelgunte, » double ta- 
^ fins. 536. 601. narmanaion, 502nofs. 



656 


INDEX OP NAUES, ETC. 


Phthisis, 613 note. Potar, Cleanser, one of 
Physician, 380, 533 ; his the priests, 15, 384, 
fee, 533. 421 - 

Physicians, Waters, 143, Poverty, deprecated, 2, 

437. 89 ’ 192 - 


the blessings of, Praise of Men, Narisanaa, 
a title of Agai, 3. 

father or an- Prajilpati, Lord of Crea- 
tion or Creatures, 52, 


Piety, 

165, 522 ; see Devotion. 
Pijavana, 

cestor of KingSudfts,20. 
Pillar of the Universe 
Agni, 387. 

Pillars, sacrificial, 39. 


240, 242, 253, 273, 
318, 387, 419, 421, 
425, 445, 458, 466, 
473, 506, 566, 567, 
576, 611, 613. 

Destroyer, 


Pipru, a demon < 
ught, 538, 584. 

Pisichas, demons, 399 Pramara, 


note . ucau1 ’ 

Pischel, Prof. R , 25, 48, Prapathi, a liberal chief, 

82, 15*2, 163, 168, 193, 106. 

213, 257, 277, 288, Pias&star, one of the 

318', 394, 421, 465, chief priests, 521 note. 

512, 547, 586, 605. Praskanva, a Rishi, 112, 

Pitaras, Pitns, 199 ; tee 261, 265, 266. 

Fathers. Prastotar, one of the 


Pitriyajfta, sacrifice to priests, 229 note. 

the Fathers, 455 note. Prathas, extending, the 
Planets, 458 note. aarne of an oblation, 

Plants, 56 ; descended 606. 

from heaven, 534 ; me- Pratiprasth4tar, the de- 
diciuai, 533-535; po signatiou of one of the 

* isonous, 51; king of, assistant priests, 219 

Soma, 382, 534, 535. note. 

Plati, a Rishi, 472, 474. Pratridas, a name of the 
Playoga, the father of Tritsus, 36. 

King Asanga, 107, 173. Pravargya, an introduc- 
Pleasantness, personified, tory Soma ceremony, 

586. 219 

Plenty, personified, 33, Prayfija, fore-offering, 606. 

38, 353, 473. Prayer, peraonified, 38, 

Plough, 153, 563. , 558 ; Lord of, 91, 92 ; 

Poiaon, charm against, 51. made, inspired, by Gods, 

Poisonous reptiles, charm 92 ; lor health, wealth 

acainat, 5. and happineaa, 3, 53, 

Polygamy, 17, 28, 428, 73, 75, 143, 340, 361, 

112 541. 688, 689 ; 391, 481, 432 471. 


homes, 231, 431; for 
long life, 59, 66, 

75, 96,144, 189, 198, 
199, 211, 268, 272, 
352, 406, 435, 462, 
607 ; for safety, 37, 
79, 89, 110, 117, 154- 
160, 164, 165, 196, 

197, 200, 210, 341, 
361, 471; for goodness, 

198, 271, 272 ; for in- 
nocence, 143, 431,435, 
471, 574 ; for mercy, 
85, 192 ; for purification, 
322, 391; for forgive- 
ness of sins, 37, 58, 
82, 84, 85, 89, 199 , 
for freedom from sin, 
431, 435, 471, 598, 
for immortal life m 


heaven, 381, 382,399; 
fir wisdom, 1, 5, 34, 
198, 291, 367, 378, 
414, 434 ; for fanip, 

27, 80, 156, 276, 284, 
291, 302, 308, 311, 
312, 432, 434, 462 
525 ; for wives, 321 
for children, 1, 2, 6, 


, 87, 91, 92, 121 
176, 268, 306 
3 52, 361, 391 
>67 ; for aid i> 
24, 27, 30, 56 
93, HI. 140 
151, 190- 20l < 
>4, 364, 364,436 
>90; for victor; 
•ace, 228, 6® 
othes, 863 ; W 

is, 64 , n. * 

1«°, 275, * 
316, 317, 

372, 376, 53 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETO. 


657 


turage, 341, 352 ; for 58, 433, 471, 475. Purohita, a family or 
eloquence, 535; against Prithu, a Rishi, 591,602. tribal priest, 10, 11, 
penury and sickness, Pritlius, 79. 163, 535. 

71, H3, 210, 432,471; Prithusravas, a liberal — of Gods, Briha&pati, 

for freedom from evil prince, 195, 196. 535. 

dreams, 445, for re- Priyamedha, a famous Puru, a King, 112. 

,uval of the sin of Kishi, 112, 118, 171, Puru, the eponymus of 
ing aud false swear- 233. a Vedic tribe, 7, 10, 

ig, 391 ; for the de- Priyamedhas, 110, 115, 19, 21, 385. 

ruction of fiends, 90, 123, 128, 215,233,489. Purus, 10, 91, 449. 

5-101, 352. Productive Power, 486. Puruhanman, a Rishi, 

?oga, a poor Rishi, Professions, crafts, trades, 215. 

»5 note. indications of, agricul- Purukutsa, a prince, 21, 

s-atones, 43, 46,491, ture, 150, 153, 157, 147. 

'2, 526, 527, 603. 519, 563 ; barber, 115, Purumdyya, a Rishi, 212. 

&kus4nu, a Proper 586; bard, 380; boat* Purumilha, a Rishi, 218, 

arne, 142. builder, 230, 327 ; 305. 

ithood, a profession, caq>enter, wright, 285, Purumitra, a Rishi, 437. 

0 note. 380 ; currier, 63, 265; Purfiravas, au ancient 

>t’s daughters, fingers, rope-making, 80; phy- King, 139, 412, 527- 

0. sician. 380, 523; smelt- 531. 

sts, modern, imita- er, 486, 497 ; smith, Purus, men of a Vedic 

ps of divine, 577. 380, 486 ; trafficker, tribe, 207. 

of the Gods, 483; merchant, 190, 209 ; Purusha, Embodied Spirit, 
Hotars, Celestial. usurer, 209; weaver, Man, 397, 517-520, 
called Gods, 3, 144, 416. 576. 

0, 568. Protecting Goddesses, Purushanti, a liberal 

liberality to, see 38 ; see Varfi tils. prince, 305. 

berality to Priests. Protectress, the, 43 ; sec Pushan, a Sun-God, 39, 
i&dhra, a Rishi, 262. Varfitri. 41, 44, 45, 48, 115, 

indv&na, a Proper Providence, 30, 147, 539. 164, 167, 168, 265, 

Line, 261. Ptolemy 175. 306, 321, 337, 349, 

na, the name of a Pulaha, one of the Seven 368, 377, 387, 404, 

tec? 364. Itishis, 498 note. 405, 415, 416, 428, 

ai = Prisni, 487. Pulastya, ditto, 498 note. 432, 463, 472-474, 

>i, mother of the Punarvatsa, a Rishi, 125. 502, 504, 523, 535, 

ruts, 18, 40, 55,83, Purftnas, 95, 528. 571, 534. 

\ 124, 149, 150,242, Purandhi, Plenty or Bold- Pushana= Pfishan, 524. 
M27, 456, 466, 487, ness personified, 38, Pushtigu.a Proper Name, 

&, 568. 41 n 44, 473, 476, 505. 261. 

Mina, the name of Purifying, the, 253. Putabhrit, a Soma reser- 
i°ble, 525. Purod&s, a Proper Name? voir, 108, 124, 243, 

the first anoint- 17. 

129, 591. Puroddsa, Bacrificiulcake, POtakratd, a Proper Name, 
ill) Earth. Mid-air. 397 note. 266*. 



658 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


PQtakratu, a Proper 201,247, 296,301,313, Ribhus, three deities of 
Name, 218, 266. 331,347,868,375,419, mid-air, 39, 41, 50, 52 

433,456,458,463, 510, 111, 130, 176,192,226’ 

QUAiD = Dawn, 438. 512, 563, 593. 242,247,413, 438, 457 ’ 

Quarters of the sky, 39. RAhshasi, a female fiend, 475, 477, 492,496,523, 
Queen, the, VAk, 571 ; 100. 603, 612. 

of Gods, VAk, 251. Ham, the Warrior Indra, Rich, richas, sacred 
Queens, the Waters, 391, 110,248. verse(s) for recitation, 

424, 425. RAma, the name of a 586, 519, 521, 558. 

Questionings regarding noble, 525. Riches personified, 38 ; 

Nature, Gods, and RAmAyana, 166. like chariot- wheels, 

Man, 497, 514, 555, R&sA, a semi-mythical 562. 

600. river, 297, 490,550, 566. ltijika?, name of a people,] 

Quintus Curtius, 150. Rathantara, an import- 381 note. 

Quoit, 245, 436, 488. ant SAman, 606. Rijisvau, a protigi of 

Rathaprosht.has, men of Indra, 200, 538, 584. 
Race, 291, 300, 480, 489. a regal family, 464. Rijunas, a man's name, 

Kace-course, 88. Rathaspati, God of war- 262. 

Racers, 46, 282 note. chariots, 473, 525. Riksha, a prince, 212, 

Ragozin, Mme. Z., 408, RAti, Divine Favour or 213, 222, 223. 
497,505,552,589,606; Bounty, 477. Rikvana, divine singers, 

see Vedic India. RAvI, a river in the Tan- 398, 472. 

Raibhi, ritual verse, 501. jAb, 17, 223, 490 notes. Rishi, 84, 112, 572; 

Rain, 89 ; produced by Razor, 115, 421. Indra, 122, 140. 

the Moon, 423, 424 Rebha, a proUgt of the Rishis, 70, 74, 111, 120, 
notes ; Lords of, 160 ; Asvina, 437. 127, 218, 235, 268, 323, 

prayer for, 63, 64, 160, Red, the, the Sun, 76; 352, 469,385,518,594: 

275. Red Bird, the Sun, 459 ; old and recent, 25 ; aiv 

Rains, the, 97, 98, 148. Red Treasure, the, the cient, 400, 577 ; raisec 
RAjanya, a Kshatriya, Sun, 252. to their rank by know 

519. Regal Class, the, 519; ledge, 577 ; childlik* 

Rajas, the firmament, see Kshatriya.-?. questions of, 514 

234. Resuscitation of Subau- childlike address to ! 

RAjayakshma, Conaump- dhu, 401-465. God, 33, 138 , 146, 147 

tion, 597. Revelation, 268. 189 ; the Seven, 498 

Raji, a word of unknown Ribhu, the eldest of the 552, 677, 588. 

meaning, 547. Ribhus, 41, 242, 413, Rishtishena, a prince 

RAkA, a lunar Goddess, 525. 635, 530. 

332. Ribhukshan — Ribhu ; a Rivers, 4, 39, 490, 529 

Rakshas, the demon race, title of Indra ; 41, 42, the Seven, 20, 4l, 

154. 50, 192, 247, 413, 473, 214 ; twenty-one, 49(1 

RAkshasa, a nocturnal 489, 525. Lords of, 63. j 

fiend, 1, 11, 100. Ribhukshans, Ribhuk- Robber, 53, 99; m TW 

RAkehaws, 14, 43, 72, ’ sh&naa = Ribhus, 41, 42, Kodatl, the Consort 
98,100, 155, 177 137, 60, 124, 148, 523, 525. the Maruts, 38, W 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


659 


Rohitas, the horses of 43, 57, 213, 405, 567, 
Agni, 46 note. 578, 585. 

Roth, Prof, von, 8, 34, Sacred Grass, see Grass, 
40, 48, 54, 57, 68, 84, Sacred. 

91, 105, 116, 118, 147, Sacred syllable, 397. 
184,214,218,256,259, Sacrifice, 219, 540, 541 ; 


109, 115,134,136,168, 
170, 190, 227,236,238, 
239, 241,247, 248,262, 
441, 442,546, 580,600. 
Sakti, a son of Vasishtha, 
’ 20 . 


260, 264, 266,304,382, 
391,392,404, 408, 452, 
456, 470,509,531, 541, 
565, 569, 582. 

Rudra, the Tempest- 
God, 12, 39, 41, 46, 
49,54,56.58, 137,149, 
167,331,450,473,474, 

522-525, 572, 573, 582, 
600. 

Rudras, sons of Rudra, 
the Maruts, 8, 12, 35, 
39, 40, 124, 137, 148, 
206,253,265, 427, 458, 
473,476, 477,525,537, 
571,575,582,592; the 
Asvins, 154, 162. 
Rudriyas = Rudras, 450. 
Ruma, a favourite of 
Indra, 114. 

Rusama, a prince, 112, 
114, 262. 

Rusamas, a people, 262. 


personified, 576, 601 Sakvarl, a Vedic metre, 
no/e$;asan actofcrea- 35, 486. 
tion, 499,513,520,576; Salmali, the silk-cotton 
morning and evening, tree, 51, 503. 

14, 15; morning, noon, Salt, not mentioned, 
and evening, 165, 345, S&ma, S&man, song, chant 
376; priest of, Agni, ed hymn, 36, 123, 141, 


156, 167, 229, 235, 244, 
248, 433, 486, 494, 502, 
519, 557, 558,576, 581, 
606. 


13,16 ; herald of, Agni, 

’passim ; a web, woven, 

11, 268, 370, 575; 
a thread, spun, 136, 

186, 238, 345, 456, 482, SAma-chanter, one of the 
602 ; a ship, 444, 540, priests, 486, 549. 

547 ; a chariot, 525, Sdmaveda, 594, 595, 60 
540; ploughing, sow- note s. 
ing, reaping, 540 ; with Sambara, a demon or 
the heart, 255 ; head savage, 20, 94, 239, 
of, Soma, 283 ; the 246, 306. 

Gods’ first, 421 ; three- Sami, a tree, Acacia Su- 
fold, 455, 570 ; seven- ma, 426, 453. 
threaded, 455, 570 ; SamjMuam, Agreement, 
with five divisions, 570; 609. 

unpleasing without Samvarana, a Rishi, 261. 
prayer, 547 ; sordid, SAmvarani, son of Samva- 
prayer against, 471. rana, 261. 

Sacriiicer, the, 607 ; tee Samvarta, a man’s name, 
Yajam&na. 

the first, Atharvan, ?ausa, Prayer, Wish, per- 

523 ; wife of, associat- sonified, 38. 
ed in worship, 168, Santanu, a prince, 535, 

415,607. 636t ^ . , 

Sadhyaa, a class of Gods, Saprathaa, Far-eitend- 
. 518, 520. ing, tb. -me of au 

B'S'),.", ’VS.-- >» *- 

tir • jiST- 4^ • “ •* *' 

of Indra, 22, 100, 105, haspati, 443, 


Sxbakdhu, name of the 
cow milked at sacrifice, 
467. 

Snbardhuk, ditto, 482. 
SabardughA, ditto, 104, 
466, 467. 

Sacbi, power, Indra’s 
Consort, 140, 596. 
?Hchigo, of uncertain 



660 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


Saptavadhri, a protegi of Sauchika, a title of Agui, Serpents, 99, 471. 

the Asvins, 221, 437. 455. Seven, the, the Maruta, 

Sara, the name of a man, Sdvarni, a liberal prince, 166. 

216, 217. 470. Seven, Adityas, 382 ; 

Sarabha, the name of a Sdvarnya = Sdvarni, 470. castles, 19 ; cowunu- 

ltishi, 251. Savasi, the Mighty Dame, nities, 238; fiends, 

Saramd, Indra’s messen- Aditi, 190, 225. 246; ftamea of Agui, 

ger, 53, 399, 466, 468, Savishtha, a liberal prince, 370, 387 ; glories, 166, 
550, 551. 223. Guards of Soma, 5ui ; 

Sararaeyas, Yama’s watch Savitar, the Sun as Im- heavenly singers, 261 ; 
dogs, sous of Saramd, peller, Vivifier, 15, 37, heroes, 419 ; horses of 
53 note. 39, 42-44, 48, 49, 52, the Sun, 60, 66; hotars 

Saranyu, the mother of 63, 65, 74, 76, 79, 80, 427; 465; lights of 

Yama, 163, 404. 143, 165, 233,254,322, sacrifice, 370 ; metres, 

Sarasvdn, the Consort of 337,368,379, 397,404, 370, 427, 478, 520 

Sarasvati, 90, 477. 419, 425,430-432, 434, notes; mothers (rivers), 

Sarasvati, River an d God- 467, 472, 473, 476, 244, 345, 370 ; obla 

dess, 4, 11, 39, 41, 44, 502, 505, 512,522,525, tions, 405 ; oceans, 

45,90, 91,152, 180, 538,539,567,575,584, 520 note; priests, 181, 

265, 273, 323,337,405, 586, 591, 597, 603,606. 201, 219, 238,268,275, 

425,463,473,474,476, Savitri = Savitar, 242 note. 27J, 281, 310, 352, 

484,490,553,575,586, Sdyana, Achdrya, the great 37(f 882, 415, 432, 

613. Commentator, passim. 455,471, 473, 559,567, 

Sarayu, a river, 473. Sayu, a proUge of the 570 ; regions; 382,567, 
Sdrpaidjfli, Kadrd, Ser- Asvins, 69, 438, 439. ridges of mountains, 

pent-Queen, 608. Schermao, Dr. 520, 567, 211 ; Rishis 498, 552 ; 

Saryandvdn, a lake and 576. see Rishis, Seven ; ri- 

district, 122, 125,207, Scorpion ?, 5 i . vers, 20, 41, 67, 159, 

317,381,431. Sea, 9,35, 51, 117,119,120, 183, 184, 214, 265, 

Sasakarna, a $ishi, 128. 149, 239, 307, 345, 303, 318, 344, 345, 

Sasvati/the wife of 386, 476, 4 7 7,552,566, , 352, 370, 4 4 2, 452, 

Asanga, 107. 582; of air, 9, 131, 132, 479; 546; rivers of 

Satakratu, Lord of a 134, 136, 162, 207, air, 303 ; singers, 485, 

Hundred Powers, I ndra, 224, 247, 254, 279, sisters, 183, 268, 318, 

137, 170,173,178,203, 307, 311, 331, 374, 345, 387 ; sons of Adi 

224,225,228,234,236- 375, 487, 494, 609; a ti, 487; spea/s of the 

238,241,242,249,250, Soma reservoir, 121, Maruts, 166; splen ■ 

263, 284, 423, 556, 580. 289, 293; water into dours, 166; statious, 

Satapatha-Brdhmana,43, which the S<>ma juice 567 ; Sun’s rays, 220, 

* 95, 253, 269, 405,527, falls, 279 ; cloud and 458 ; threads of sacri- 

533, 538, 540, 568,585. rain, 475. fice, 570; tones, 427 , 

Sataydtu=Sakti,Vasish- Seas, four, 292, 448. troops of Maruts, 458, 
tha’sson, 20. Serpent, the, 90, 113; 478. 

Sdtydyana Brdhmana,35, assassin, 43 ; Serpent- Sevenfold Race of mb, 
Queen, 608. 101 — ■ 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


661 


Seven-beaded, hymn,261; to Brahman rank, 536 154,257. 

sacrifice, 478. note. Sobharis, 147, 149. 

Seventy Hymns, the, 62 ; Singers, Rikvans, 12. Sole bom, Manyu, 500. 

sec Siebenzig Lieder. Siniv&ll, a lunar Goddess, Sole God, 497. 

Shadvinsa Br&hinana,110. 332,613. Soma, the God, 38, 45, 

Ship, 143, 224, 230,330, Sinjflra, a proUg6 of the 53,98-101, 166, 269, 
359, 605 ; hymn, 185; Asvins, 118, 439. 325, 391, 414, 415,474, 

sacrifice, 185,350, 444, Sipada, a kind of disease, 52. 477, 501, 515, 534,535, 


471, 540, 547, = funeral Sipivishta, a title of Vishnu, 539, 570, 571, 574,577, 
pile, 581. 94, 95. 586, 600-603; the plant, 

Sickle, 227, 540. Sirimbitha, a ltishi, 594. habitat of, 283, 309, 

Sickness, 71; sec Disease. Slshtas, an unimportant 310, 354, preparation 

iebenzig Lieder des Rig- tribe, 264 of, 107, 270,309; rap- 

veda (Geldner and SisnSt = RAkshasas, etc., tare produced by, 169, 

Kaegi), 7, 62, 84, 85, 419 note. 194, 198; powers of, 

394, 400, 408, 431, Sisnadevdh, lewd savages, 193, 198, 199; elo- 
486, 552, 562, 572, 24, 537 notes. quence produced by, 

576,589. Sisters, fingers, 283,289, 259,288,293,315,321, 


iigrus, a non- Aryan tribe 316, 324, 323, 329, 350, 

20. 351, 353, 365, 526 ; 

silam&vati, name or epi- rivers, 345; plants, 410; 

thet of a river, 491. Heaven and Earth, 565; 
Siraidii, a kind of disease, Dawns, 294 ; flames of 
52. Agni, 387. 

Simyus, a savage tribe, Sivas,anon-Ary an tribe, 

* 11 ' 18 ’ 

Sin, the bonds of, 82,85, Six Expanses, 400, 574. 
210, 211 ; prayer for Skambha, Pillar of the 
removal or forgiveness Universe, 38/ note, 
of, 82, 89, 210, 211, Sky, personified, 76,77, 
431 ; of others, prayer 433, 474, 476 ; sprung 
for freedom from, 52, from Puruslia’s head, 
82; punisher of, 64,82, 519. 

362, 493. 516 ; punish* Slaves, 147, 266. 
ment of, 583; sinless, Sleep song, 54. 

60, 62, 65, 82, 210; Smadibha, a Proper Name, 
dinner, 576. 451. 

Siodhu, the Indus, river, Smelting of metals, 4S6, 
^ 83, 90, 132, 150, 497. 

160,163, 364, 473,477, Smith, 380,486,497. 

490, 494, 555, 583, Snowy Mountains, 566. 
chief of rivers, 490; Soastos, Arrian’s name 
feminine, 491. ^pf SuvAstu, 148. 

Sindhudvlpa, the name ofehari, a Vedic Rishi, 
MkjlfltlltTT' -- ; - J 118,144,148.160, 152 


325, 333, 351 356,308; 
Pavam&na (in course 
of purification), 269- 
382, 567 ; deified, 198, 
199, 227, 269, 271,273, 
374, 376, 501 ; celes- 
tial, 134, 206, 207,292, 
296, 369, 381, 560 ; 
Guard of,Krisdnu,473; 
guards of, 501 ; Father 
of Gods, 342, 347, 355, 
377 ; Father of Heaven 
and Earth, 350, 355 ; 
identified with the Sun, 
311 ; with the Moon, 

306, 601; omnisqent, 
288, 289 ; producer of 
the Gods, 297 ; maker 
of the firmament, 310; 
giver of rain, 295, 301; 
8 la yer of sinners, 289, 
300 ; healer of the sick 
and giver of sight, 227. 
Somayajha, an offering 
of Soma juice, 570 note. 
Son of Strength, «« 
Strength, Son of. 



662 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


Sorcererfa), sorcery, 100, Stallions, flames of the Sumne-iipl, the name of 
101. Sun, 386. an Apsaras, 528. 

Soul, Individual, 517no*e ; Star, the Sun, 77, 82, 555,Sun, Sun-God, 8, 9,35,39, 
Universal, 517, 572 notes, 595 ; the ancient, Agni 60, 68, 74, 77, 78, 82, 

Soul of the Universe, as the Sun, 514. 111,113,124,133,146, 

Man, Embodied Spirit, Starlings, 176. 221, 234, 239,244, 270, 

517 note. Steed, the, the Sun, 579. 286, 289, 297,311, 322, 

Speech, 130, 251, 484, Steeds’ Lord, Agui, 2. 339,378, 386,387,390, 

485, 458, 571, 604 ; Steer, Steers, see Bull, 392,405,418-420,431, 
Lord of, Bfihaspati, Bulls. 434,451,458,465,467, 

535 note ; Soma, 288, Stega, a word of uncertain 473,487,501,502,514, 
368; Viavakarman, 497. meaning, 426 519, 520,525, 547, 554, 

Spies of Varuna, 83; of Stotar, a praising priest, 562,565.566, 569,571, 
the Gods, 392, 393. 237. 584,585,601,604,608, 

Spinsters, 485. Streams, 50, 431, 472 ; sprung from Purushi's 

Spirit, Boldness, personi- see Rivera. eye, 519; the daughter 

fled, 38. Strength, Son of, Agni, of, Sur)&, 501 ; protec* 

the Supreme, 484 2, 3, 5, 10, 14, 15, 188, tors of, 594. 

note ;— sprung from 200, 201, 217, 218, 223, Sun and Moon, 182, 242, 
Desire or Love, 575 ; 231,395, 409, 445, 585, 419, 472, 481, 495,503, 

the Embodied, Purusha, 586; Indra, 235, 238. 5*4, 523, 524, 584,609, 

517 ; the presiding, Stuti, Praise, 427 note. the eyes of Agni, 495 

518 ; human, goes to Subandhu, a Rishi, 462- note. 

the wind at death. 402 ; 465. Suuritd, Pleasantness, 586. 

recall of the departed, Sueha, Suchd, Proper Supttrya, epithet of a 
461,462. Names, 416. Rishi, 559. 

Spirits, the world of, 402. Sudaksha, a Rishi, 237. Supporter, Indra, 249. 
Spring, 518, 597. Sudds, King of the Trit- Supieme Deity, original- 

SraddhA, Faith, 528. au», 17-22, 27, 34, 35, ly Varuna, 570;— God, 

Srent, the name of an 53, 60,61,64,79, 80. 377 note Soul, 572. 

Apsaras, 528. Sudeva, a Proper Name, Sflra, the Sun, 49, 104, 

Sribinda, a demon of 116. 316, 319, 821,345,351, 

drought, 169. Sudlti, said to be a Pro- 379. 

Srinjavrish, a Proper per Name, 218. Surabhi, the daughter of 

Name, 142. S,.dra, a man of the Daksha, 394. 

Srutakakaba, a Vedic fourth class, 519. S tirade va, a prince, 21 7. 

Rishi, 239. Sujflrnl, the name of an Surgery, 104. 

Srutarvan, a prince, 222, Apsaras, 528. Sir is, princes, institu tors 

223, 451, SumUrutam, the band of of sacrifice, 161, 590. 

St. Petersburg Lexicon, Maruts, 493. Surya, the Sun, 3, ^ 

40, 49, 101, 156, 187, Sumedhas, a ProperName, 48, 50, 60*63, 66, OS 
191, 223,226, 240, 259, 578 , 579. 74, 83, 86, 93, 94, 10' 

285, 287,288, 299, 323, Sumitra, a Rishi, 482, 5$ 121, 126,148, 152, 

338, 856, 366, 393,436, Sumitraa, 482, 171, 175*177, 187, 19 



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


663 


253, 266, 267, 269,278, SvAna, the name of a Ten, the, the fingers, 329; 
289, 290, 303, 306,311, guard of Soma, 501 arm b = regions, 253 ; 
312,314,320, 322,325, note. confederate kings, 35, 

329, 331, 333, 334,339, Svanadratha, a prince, 106, 79, 80; dames, women, 
344, 345, 351, 353.355, Svarga, heaven, 530. the fingers, 274, 304, 
361, 362, 373, 375,381, Svarnara, a prince, 112, 324, 326; fingers’ space, 

389, 393, 420, 422,423, Svasti, Prosperity, 472. the region of the heart, 

426, 431, 434, 435,446, SvetyA, a river, 490. 617; horses of the Sun, 

451, 467, 470,476, 487, Swan, 176, 291 ; the Sun, 312 ; priests, 219 ; 

493,501, 510,514.515, .571. regious, 253 ; Bisters, 

547, 554, 555, 557,569, Swans, bards, 359 ; the the fingers, 269 ; 289; 
571, 682, 586, 590,596, Maruts, 59. Angirases, 419. 

601, 605, 606, 608 ; Swarthy skin, the abori- Tenfold dwelling of Agni, 
High Priest of Gods, gines, 331. 453. 

253. Swat, 148 note. Thief, thieves, 53, 82, 99, 

urya’s Daughter, Faith, Swing, boat, 84; golden, 223, 386, 505. 

381. the Sun, 83. Thiity-four lights, 458. 

\ryA,Sunlight,Daughter Sword, or knife, of Agni, Thirty-three Gods, 166, 
of Surya, 68, 69, 127, flame, 400. 167, 175, 181, 265,352. 

152, 167, 232,438,501- SyAva, a protigt of the Thirty-Bix chalices for 
505; the typical bride, Asvins, 476. Soma libations, 558. 

501-505. SyAvaka, a favourite of Thousand, branches, of 

urya’s Bridal, 501-503. ' Iudra, 112, 114. the Sun-God or the 

usartu, a river, 490. SyAvAsva,a Proper Name, World-Tree, 35; eyes 

neliAman, the name of 177-180. of Varuna, 37. 

a prince, 156, 161. Syumarastni, a favourite ThOrr, 172 note. 
ishna, a demon of of the Asvins, 262. Thread of sacrifice, 136, 

drought, 21, 106, 120, 286, 345, 482, 485,482, 

182, 246, 262, 41 1, 412, Taittir! y a Brahman a, 485, 576, 602. 

451, 406, 538, 554. 581. Three, the, heaven, air, 

aslioma, a district fam- Tanfina pAt, Son of Him- earth, 252 ; Viiyu, 

ed for Soma, 125. self, Agui, 272, 483, 553. Parjanya, Aditya, 420; 

udiomA, a river, 207, TAnva, a liberal noble, attendants on Dawn, 

490. 525, 526. 35 ; backs or ridges, 

Stainer, 38, 56. Tapas, Austerity, Fervour, 310 ; beakers, 108, 136; 

aitlej, 493 note. Penance, 499, 594, 607. daily libations, 12, 376, 

utudrl, the Sutlej, 490. Tapurmdrdhin, Flame- 570 ; Dawns, 183, dis- 

'uvlstu, the name of a headed, Brihaspati or tauces,l 16,171; earths, 

district, 148. Agni, 606! 83, 99, 184; fertilizing 

Wad, 148. Tfranta, a liberal prince, deities, 35; filters, 364; 

iv adhA, oblation to 305. receptacles, 12, 559 ; 

Manes, 398, 401. TArkshy a, a personification friends of Indra, 42; 

5vl H Ave 1 HaU l 59, of the Sun, 591, 604. gatherings, 66; gather- 
177,273, 884. 898, Taruksha, a non-A^an ing* places, 181; gene- 

chief. 190. rations, 263; Goddei* 



664 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


ses, 4 ; Gods, 607 ; Time, 458 note. Tritsu, SudAs, king of 

heights, 380 ; holy Times (watches) of night, Tritsus. 
words, 292, 301 ; lumi- 116, Tritsus, a tribe, 17-21, 3Z 

nous realms of heaven, Tiraschi, a Rudd, 243. 36, 79, 80, 

213, 282 ; noble crea- Tirindira, a liberal prince, Troop, the, the Maruts, 
tures, 35 ; places of the 123. 371 ; a, stars, 419. 

Asviua, 128 ; plaees of Tishya, an asterism, 473. Truth, the Law of the 
Soma, 243 ; Purifiers, Trafficker, 190, 209. Universe, 501, 601, 

331; reservoirs, 96, 108, Trap, for lions, 422 ; for 609; Lords of, the 
370 ; sacrificial fires, wild bulls, 422. Gods, 39. 

547 ;8eats, 310; spheres Trasadasyu, Terror of Tryambaka, a name of 
of light, 282 ; steps of Dasyus, the name of a Rudra, 59. 

Vishnu, 93, 95, 130, prince, 21, 128,147, 153, Tugra, a prince, 104, 113, 
134, 167, 263; sublim- 178, 179, 260, 428, 592. 117, 192, 223, 250, 437, 

eet forms, 322 ; times Tree, the Soma plant, 451. 

(watches) of night, 583 ; the home of the Tugrya, Bhujyu son of 
116 ; tones, 362 ; Ve- Blest, 581. Tugra, 113, 171, 250. 

das, 310 note; voices, Trees, 38,56; clouds, 488. Tugryas, 104. 

361 ; wheels of SOryA's Trikadrukus, three Soma Tuji, a prince aided by 
car, 503; Worlds, 109, vessels, or first three Indra, 451. 

478. days of the Abhiplava Turva4= Turvasa, 

Threefold, the, the Uni- ceremony, 136, 238, Turvasa, thi eponymus 

verse, 557; the three 400. of a Vedic tribe, 17, 22, 

daily sacrifices, 376 ; — Trikshi, a prince, 153, 113, 114, 124, 130,131 ; 

light, 95; grass (in Triocular, Rudra 59 note. 191, 306, 452. 

three layers), 255 ; Tuple, height, 329, 333, Turvasas, 115, 
wealth, 33. 351, 372; splendour, TOrvayAna, a King aided 

Three-footed, old man 422. by Indra, 465. 

with staff, 562. TrishtAmd, a river, 490. Tvashtar, the Divine Ar- 

Thrice, in connexion Triahtup, one of the chief tificer, 4, 38, 39, 163, 
with the Asvins, 176. Vedic metres, 123, 362, 166, 254, 273, 337, 384, 

Thrice-Eleven, Gods, 400, 577. 390-392, 404, 406, 447, 

352; tee Thirty-three Trisiras, Three-headed, 449, 452, 456, 473, 475, 

Goite. son of Tvashtar, 390, 476,484,491,492,523, 

Thrice-seven, Maruts, 83, 491 notes. 537, 553, 571, 613; giver 

214, 268; metres, 83; Trisoka,apro%^of Indra, of children, 38. 
rivers, 326, 344, 473, 490; 192. Twain, the, HeaveD and 

sorts of sacrifice, 83. Trita, a Vedic deity, 125, Earth, 424. 
Thunderbolt, of iron, 244, 184, 183, 197, 262,292, Twins, the, Heaven and 

449, 531 ; of gold, 211, 294, 295, 343, 355,369, Earth, 823, 324 ; day 

413, 531 ; = sacrifice, 37u, 390, 446, 447,449, and night, 390. 

211 ; 5ss priest’s fee, 472, 537, 559, 585. 

420 ; m the sacrificial Trita’s maidens, dames, Uddir, the Soma plant, 
exclamation, 588 ; the priest’s fingers, 492 ; the heavenly, So- 

- ■- «"> onl OQ* mu ftTfti rtU 



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


665 


Odgfttar, the Chanter of Ushas, Dawn, 45, 74-77, 41, 42, 50, 242, 413, 

SAmans, 1 29, 486. 159, 197, 253, 267, 329, 473, 525. 

UkshanyAyana, a Proper 385,438,488,514,584, VAjas, VAja and hia bro- 
Naine, 161. 611; see Dawn; her thers, the Rtbhua, 41, 

Hktha, a hymn of praise, chariot shattered by 50, 176. 

163, 577. Indra, 488, 584 Vajina, a class of divine 

Ukthya, the name of a Ushnih, a Vedic metre, beings, 43, 477. 

Soma libation, 330 note. 577. Vak, Speech, the Word 

Fla, a Proper Name, 536 Usij , mother of Kakshi- personified, 41, 83,130, 
jiote. vAn, 538 note 250-252, 484, 485, 552, 

Unborn, Birthless, the, Uainara, Usinaras, names 558,559,571. 
the Sun, 184; Visva- of a chief and his peo* Vala, the imprisoning 
karman, 498. pie, 463 note. cloud, a demon of 

Unit, the, whence the uni- UsinarAni,wifeof Usinara, drought, 138, 159,469, 
verse was evolved, 575. 463. 479,481. 

Universal Gods, 52, see Usurers, 209. Villakhilya, the title of 

Visvedevas. eleven hymns of Book 

Upamasravas, a prince, VadhrimatI, a woman VIII, 199, 259-268. 

429. aided by the Asvins, VAlakhilyas, a race of 

U parish tAdbrihati, a Ve- 476. pygmies, 419 note. 

die metre, 53 note. Vadhryasva, a famous Vamra, a Rislii, 537,538. 
Upaatuta, a Ilislii, 118, Rishi, 481-483. Vamraka = Vamra, 538. 

560. Vaikarna, the name of a Vanaspati, the Sacrificial 

Upastutas, singers, wor- tribe, 18, 19. Post, 265, 273, 553,554. 

shippers, 256. Vaikhftuasas, a race of Vandana, a protfye of the 

Upavaktar (upavaktA), hermits, 318. Asvins, 437. 

Director, one of the Vaikuntha, a title of V archin, a non- Aryan 
priests, 355, 384 notes. Indra, 448-450, 452. prince regarded as a 

frrmyft, a name of Night, Vainya, son of Vena, 129. fieud, 94. 

573. Vairftpas, a prievStly f.uni- VarosushAman, a Proper 

OrnavAbha, a demon of ly, °93 note. Name, 156, 159, 161. 

drought, 171, 225 notes. Vaisanta, probably the Varuna, the Encompasser, 
OrnAvatl, Fleecy, name name of a river, 34. God of the Starry 

or epithet of a river, VaisvAnara, Dea* to All Heaven, 4, 13, 29*35- 

491. Meu, Agui, 7-9, 13, 51, 40, 43-45, 47, 48, 51, 

Ursa Major, 493. 181,307,386,446,514. 52,54,56, 58, 60-66, 

Urukshay as, members of Vaisya, a man of the 78-85, 88, 139, 143, 

i & Rishi’s family, 563. agricultural and mer- 144, 146, 147, 156, 

I Urvast, a celebrated Ap- (jautile class, 177, 519. 159-162,164-168,175, 

R aras,36, 139, 412,527- Vaitarana, a title of Agui, 176, 183-185, 196, 197, 
531. 467. * 210, 214, 220, 230, 243 

JsftnA KAvya, a Riahi, Vftivasvata, Yaraa, son 252, 263, 292, 306, 307, 

8onof Kavi and friend of VivasvAn, 261, 397, 315, 817, 327, 331,335, 

of Indra, 155 , 847 , 358 , 598 . 337,839, 840, 849, 351, 

fcm in I I in * oa tn:. DiU.ii S6K 862-384. 867. 371, 



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


666 


374, 377, 382, 393, 394, 
423, 426, 432-434, 445, 
451,453,454, 458,467, 
468, 471, 473-477, 484, 
437, 490, 499, 500, 503, 
504, 516, 522, 524,534, 
535, 538,545, 552,556, 
569-573, 577, 590, 592, 
598,600, 602, 607,612; 
the Supreme Deity, 
570; discoverer of sin, 
29 ; discriminator of 
truth and falsehood, 


100,352, 476. 478, 498, 
568,577,592,606; the 
embodiment of light- 
ning, 36 ; the birth of, 
36. 

Vasishthas, 10, 13, 26, 
34, 35, 42, 44, 45, 75, 
77, 79, 86, 357, 478. 

VAstoshpati, the Genius 
of Home, 53, 611 note . 

Vasu, Good Lord, 106, 
107,145,147, 151, 163, 
172, 200, 209,217, 218, 


195, 196, 203, 273,275, 
279, 287, 288, 290,292, 
298, 299, 306, 311*313, 
317, 322, 323,327,331, 
337,339, 340,343,349, 
350, 357, 360-363,377, 
404, 420, 422, 453,473- 
475, 477, 492, 501,514 
519, 522, 523, 539,557 
582, 586, 592, 600,607 
sprung from Purusha’ 
navel, 519 ; Tvashtar’t 
son-in-law, 163. 


51 ; forgiver of sin, 29, 256, 257, 390, 436, 466, VAyus, 582 note. 

83, 84; type of royalty, 520, 525, 546. Veda, 144 note ; the bum 

61 ; ruler of the depths Vasus, a class of Gods, of grass used as sacrific 

of the sea, 83 ; identi- 1, 8, 12, 35, 39, 40, 43, 144 note. 

fied with Soma, 355 ; 47, 48, 50, 52, 56, 59, Vedas, three, 95 note. 

brother of man, 394 ; 74, 75, 143, 164, 165, Vedic Hymns (Part I), 

founder of society, 394 1 75, 180, 253, 265, 322, 90, 136, 205, 395, 480, 

note ; superseded by 435,450,458,476,477, 492,^67, 683 ; see Mill 

Indra, 570. ’ 493, 510, 535, 539, 553, ler, Prof. Max. 

VarunAni, Consort of 571, 573 , 575 , 581 , 592. Vedic India (Mme. Z 
Varuna, 38. Vasukra, a son of Indra, Ragozin), 17, 408, 484, 

Varuna-p&sa, dropsy, 85 420,421. 497, 498, 522,589,606 

note. Vasurochis, a Proper Vedische Studien (Geld 


Varfitri, Protectress, a 
Goddess, 43, 45. 

Varfitrls, 38. 

Vasativari waters, used 
in preparing Soma, 241 , 
274, 230,284, 303,309, 
326, 327, 331,370,380, 
rtf note*. 

Vashat, a sacrificial ex- 
clamation, 14, 94, 166, 
405, 460. 

VashatkAra, the exclama- 
tion deified, 458, 488 

nolei, 

Vasishtha, a famous Ri* 
ahi, seer of Book VII., 
1,10,11,17, 20,25,28, 
34, 36, 47,52,54,58,69, 


Name, 175. 

Vasurochisas, 174, 175. 
Vasuruch, Vasuruchas, 
said to be Proper 
Names, 379 note. 

VAta, the Wind-God, 39, 
45, 104. 472, 475, 477, 
582, 586, 596, 607. 


ner and Pischel), 36 
48, 62, 82, 103, 105 
114, 152,168. 193,213 
257, 277, 280, 283 
304, 318, 323,332,380 
421,465, 489, 531, 54^ 
547, 586, 605. 

Vena, the loving Sun 


VAtarasaual Wind-girdled, 568, 669 ; aProperNam 
the name of a hermit, 129, 625, 591, 602. 
582 note. Venas, the Gods, or tin 

VaUa, a Vedic Rishi,119, Maruts, 341, 345. 

127-1 30, 1 32. Venya, son of Vena* 59 

VfivAtar, said to be a 602. 

King, 103 note. Vesa, a demon or savage, 

Vavata. a prince, 34. 451. 

VAyu, the Wind-God,26, Vetasu, Vetasus, fWP* 
35, 39, 44, 62, 64, 85- Names, . ^ 

1A4I 1<2K ISO. lftfl. VihhldaksJjmAttiiM 



index ok names, etc. 


667 


ec whose nuts were Vishnu, Pervader, 


jdd as dice, 429 note. 
hindu, a prince, 111. 
litis, a uatne of the 
,ibhus, 50. 

luivas, father of Trita, 
46. 

huvasu, the very 
eal thy, perhaps Soma, 
47 note. 

bit van, one of the 
tihhus, 41, 50, 492. 
ladasva, a Rishi, 305 

i ote. 

llidtar, the Disposer, 
38. 


Active Worker ; a per- 
sonification of the Sun, 
39, 41, 44. 45, 48, 89, 
93-95, 130, 131, 134, 
139, 148, 160, 164,167, 


52, 163, 166, 167, 230, 
234, 267,410, 425,431, 
433, 459, 460, 465, 468, 
470, 472, 476, 522, 524 
538, 540, 552. 557, 574 
583, 586, 595, 593,606. 


168, 175, 176, 226,231, Vitarana, the name of 
252, 263, 265, 292,304, priuce, 467, m notes. 
311, 317,351,355,367, Vitastd, a river, prohab- 
383, 400, 474, 476,477, ly the Jhelum, 490. 
523, 537, 556, 574,586, Vivasvln, the Sun; a sa 
606, 613; Guardian of crificer, 163,211,219. 


221, 262, 277,288,318, 
381, 391, 392,398,404, 
410, 438, 461,465,475, 
437, 490, 598. 


the unborn babe, 41 ; 
three strides of, 93, 

167, 263 ; Vishnu’s 
baud, the Maruts, 148. 
iivramorvast, the title Vispalii, a woman warrior Voice, Speech, Sacred 
tft x celebrated drama, aided by the Asvins, Word, 434, 485 ; see 

;28 note. 437. VAk. 

.kunthft, an Aaurt, In- Visva, Dyaus, 168; Agni, Vrika, wolf, probably a 
Ira’s second mother, 511. man’s name, 69. 

U8 note. Visvddevah, All-God, 248 Vrishck, strong, male, Bulb 

Itge, 589, 591. note. 137, 172, 313 notes. 

m^da, a proteyc of the Visvaka,a Rishi, 232,233, Viisbagana, VrUhag&nas, 
.bvins, 130, 409, 413, 476. a Rishi and ln» family, 

114, 437, 476. Viavakarman, Omnific, the 359. 

imadas, 413. Creator of the Uni verse, Vrish&kapiyi, the wife of 

inunlb, said to be a 496-499. Vrishakapi, 508. 

jRishi, 432. Visvamanas, a Rishi, 154, Vrishakapi, Strong Ape, 

is, a river, the Beds, 157, 158. a being between a denri- 

iO note. ' Visv&raitr-, 100, 352,419, god and a demon, 507- 

ij,a divine being, 357, 536, 577, 599, 600. 509. 

*8, 519; a metre, 577. VisvAmitraa. 517. Vrishau, stroug, play on, 

5ms, priest's fingers, Visvarupa, Omuiform,son or repetition of'jhe 
'19 ; see Maids. of Tvashtar, 390, 537. word, 477. 

"jpa, a Rishi, 223, 898.Visvdvasu, the chief Gan- Vrishanvati, the name of 
■upas, 469 note. dharva, 503, 573,584, a mare, 213. 

M, the people, as dis- 585. Vrishaaipra, Bull- jawed, 

^nct from the priestly Visvdyu, said to be the a savage, 94. 

M princely classes, name of Umars son, Vrishtihavya,a Rishi, 560. 

526 nofes. 412 note. Vritra, Encloser, the chief 

^dninuj a non- Aryan Visvedevas, All -Gods, cloud-demon, 21, 22, 

18. Universal Gods; a class 24, 110, 113, 120, 125, 

a Proper Name, of deities, 36, 38, 40, 126, 134, 139, 157, 164 

n AS 11 Ifl 17 SK 171i 178. 190. 204.206, 



668 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


224, 226,235,239,240, Waters, 11.38,39, 43,48, 1 14, 191, 233, 422 

245-247, 250-252, 307, 50, 51, 56, 81,265, 384, 454 ; trap for, 422 ; = 

308, 359, 412, 421,449, 391, 405, 423, 433,435, Soma juice, 569. 

450, 452, 459, 474, 477, 417, 490,506, 514, 516, Williams, Prof. Sir M ,465 

479, 516, 537, 546,554- 521, 546, 571, 583, 600; Wilson, Prof. H.H ,pa$M 

557,560, 570, 571 , 583, Mothers, Queens, 424, Wind, 143, 265, 322,523, 

590, 593 ; said to have 426; their healing 583, 600 see Vd,yu,V; v t! 

been a Br&hman, 244 ]>ower, 391 ; removers Wind-girdled, 582 m tt. 
note. <>f sin, 391 ; 405; cere- Wine, 108, 550. 

Vritras, fiends, enemies, mouy of fetching the Winter, 481 ; demons o ; 

*80.113,122, 139-141, sacrificial, 423; Dame 241 note. 

166, 234, 235, 238, of, Saranyu, 392 ; Son Winters, hundred, » 

244,246, 270, 282,349, of the, 11, 37, 40, 50, Hundred winters. 

37, S, 517, 546, 601. 181, 362, 390. 523,591. Wish, personified, 38,4 ?J 

A ntra- slayer (s) ; Indra, Watery monster, Arbu- Wizard, 100. 

31,32,104, 109,113, da, 554. Wolf, wolves, 174,209, 

115, 122, 136, 141,157, Wealth, lowest, midmost, 211, 261, 530, 573. 

164,170,171,173,178, highest, of earth, air, Wolf- robber. 43, 209 
190, 191, 194, 203,205, heaven, 33. -Night, 438. 

207, 209, 215,225,227, Weaver’s web, 485. Women, censured, 173 

229,234,235, 239-242, Weaving, 416, 576. 5J0, prize of war, 196 

246, 247, 265,365,3.81, Weber, Prof. A., 123,190, attend festivals, 508, 

451, 458, 489, 499,545, 226, 430, 467, 502,505, 600 ; take part in sa 

584, 593; Agni, 222, 507,520,536,572,578. orifice, 168, 415, 553 

482; Soma, 269, 287, Webster, W.F., 393, 407, 607. 

2^4, 350, 365; Manyu, 421, 424, 499. Wood, Lord of the, tin 

499; Asvius, 127 ; In* Wheel, the Sun, 206. Sacrificial Post, 481 

dra-Agni, 179. Whip, Indra' a golden, see Vanaspati. 

Vyasra, a Rishi, 12S, lightning, 173. Lady of the, Arany 

154-156,158,159,162, Whitney, Prof. W. D., ftnl, 589. 

31G. 408, 572, 576, 677. Word, the Sacred, 484 

Widow, 407; re-marriage Vfik, 571 note . 
Wallis, H. W , 93, 234, of, 438. Words, play upon, 541 

386, 387, 423, 428, Wife, her position in the Worship, personified, 52 
435,450,459,460,474 household, 504, 506; Wright, 380; «« C-i 
431, 486, 496, 497,499, chosen for her goodness peuter, Smith, 
518.520, 566*569,572, and beauty, 418; pa- 

576. tient and gentle, 506; Yadavas, descendants 


Warmth, creative, 575, adorns herself for her Yadu. 

809. husband, 553 ; takes Yadu, the eponymus ' 

Warrior oKshatriya, 99. partin sacrifice, 164, a Vedic tribe, 22, ’ 

Warriors, the Marut*,18. 415, 658 , 607. 114, 123, 124, M 

Watches of night, 3 16. Wild ass, 509 boar, 191, 306, 452, 4 
Water, first of created 421 ; —boars, the Ma- Yadus, 123. 


-•*- 4 70*— bull. 93. Y 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


669 


ivnuiia, sacrifieer, 461,462, 465, 472,523, Year, the, 609. 

litiiseholder, 237, 322, 534, 569, 5S1, 593,594, Ymir, a mythic Scandi- 

’,28, 362, 415, 489, 492, 598, 599 ; his dogs, 53, navian World-giant, 

>15, 549. 558, 607; 399. 519. 

iif, wife, 415. Yitmas, night-watches of Yogi, a devotee, 582 note, 

jim (Sacrifice), said to about three hours each, Young, youthfulleat, Agtii 
bp a Rishi’s name, 576. 116 note. 1, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 13,’ 

ijiii’veda, the Veda of Y.irni, Yama’s sister, 391- 16, 156, 223, 255, 384, 

Mcrificial texts and for- 394, 104, 593. 385, 409, 446, 482,496, 

nnikis 59, 467, 519,606 Yamunil, the river now 510,553. 

[ihin sacrificial text and called Jumua, 20, 35, Youthful One, the altar, 
'■iiiuula, 396, 519,606. 216,490. 558. 

->ha, meaning uncer- Y,i*ka, an ancient Com- Y udhy&madhi, a Proper 
un, 51 1 note. mentator, 24, 241,315, Name, 20, 

slima, consumptive 441, 456, 486, 490. Yupa, 190, 484 , m Sa - 

583 note, 613. Yati% an ancient race of crificial Post. 
liliU', a non* Ary an hermit-,,112,121, 487. Yuvanasva, a Rishi, 131 

Jibe, 20. YatudLauas, sorcerers, note. 

:n, King of the Dead, demons, 93, 100, 414, 

o, 36, 53, 381, 391- 510-512, 565. Zimmer, Prof. 11 , 18, 19, 

'91. 396*401, 403,404, Y.iyati, an aneieut patri* 125, 207, 226, 408,490, 
|6, -K, 110,453, 455, arch, 470. 491, 550, 581, 594, 597. 




CORRIGENDA. 


VOL. I. (Additional). 

Page 239 line 7 read honours (i. e. song honours) for honour 
» 370 * 9 from below read Here, Indra, girt by Maruts, drink thou 

Soma, for Here, Indra, drink thou Soma with the Maruts, 
■ 684 » 17 from below of middle column read Hotar, chief priest for 

Hotar, thief priest 

VOL. II. 

ge 3 line 2 from below read 2 for 1 

48 - 2 read HYMN for HYMN 

72 » 8 from below read a comma after you for the broken stop 

76 • 5 from below read pathya for patky'd 

89 « 6 read blessings for blesssngs 

97 • 7 from below read performing for performin 

i 105 • 18 read ecstasy for ectstasy 

• 114 » 2 of verse 9 read radiant for radian 

» 121 » 3 of verse 22 read soon for suoo 

« 131 " 3 of verse 5 read Turvasa for Turvna 

« 135 ■ 1 of verse 4 insert a full stop after flows 

» 245 » last of notes read of for o 

» 256 ■ 2 from below read in for n 

*• 302 • 16 from below read us. for us 

» 303 n 2 of note 1 read i comma for the broken stop after here 

» 327 s 2 from below insert a hyphen after foe 

. 328 ■ 3 of note 1 read sprinkled for sprinkled 

• 333 t 3 of notes insert a comma after is 

• 369 • last of uotea read sacrifice for sacrifices 

" 375 * 2 of verse 25 read Indra’s for Iura's 

" 377 t 4 of notes read sacrificial for sacrifical 

1 - 402 i 1 of notes insert a hyphen after some 

403 ■ 9 of notes re$d aquatic for acquatie 

406 » 4 of verse 5 insert a full stop after Ordainer 

467 • 3 of verse 17 insert a hyphen after Arya 

468 r 1 of note 23 read Asvaghna for ABvagbna 

469 ■ last of notes read The Hymns for Hymns 

- 1 insert a comma after Goddesses 


AQ i 



672 


CORRIGENDA. 


Page 490 line 7 from below read Vipfa for Vip&u 
m 508 ■ 5 read and for add 

« 520 • 0 read The Hymns for Hymns 

» ...» 9 from below read Purdna for Purdna 

a 538 i* 1 of verse 12 insert a coming after swiftly 

H 545 * 8 insert a comma after conquer 

» 543 «* last but one of text prefix the numeral 10 

■ 549 • 1 of verse 4 read VUyu for V&yu 

« 550 • 4 of verse 1 read waters ? for waters. 

» 552 » 4 of verse 1 The Hymns for Hymns 

it 557 • 1 of notes read the for thr 

* 5S3 ■» 2 of notes read The Hymns for Hymns 

0 587 * 3 of notes make the same correction 

■ 597 • 2 of notes read obwobl for obvohl 

* 598 • 2 of note load The Hymns for Hymns 

0 602 • 2 of veise 5 insert a hyphen after sted 

* 609 » last of uotU'> lead The Hymns for Uynm* 








<«» IdA'i'iW 




