3  182201941  7914

LINIVERSIT

•  LIFORNIA   SAN  DIEGO

3  182201941  7914

Central  University  Library

University  of  California,  San  Diego 
Please  Note:  This  item  is  subject  to  recall.

Date  Due

FEB  Q  9  1995 
JAN  2  a  1995

Cl  39  (7/93)

UCSD  Lib.

\

THE

MAKING    OF    KELIGION

By  the  same  Author.

MODERN  MYTHOLOGY :  a  Reply  to  Professor  Max  Miiller.

8vo.  9s.

CUSTOM  AND  MYTH,:  Studies  of  Early  Usage  and  Belief.

With  15  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.  3s.  6rl. 
HOMER  AND  THE  EPIC.     Crown  8vo.  9s.  net.

ST.  ANDREWS.     With  8  Plates  and  24  Illustrations  in  the 
Text  by  T.  HODGE.    8vo.  15s.  net.

PICKLE  THE  SPY;   or,  The  Incognito  of  Prince  Charles.

With  6  Portraits.    8vo.  18s.

THE  BOOK  OF  DREAMS  AND  GHOSTS.  Crown  8vo.  fi.y. 
COCK  LANE  AND  COMMON  SENSE.  Crown  8vo.  3s.  6cZ. 
LETTERS  TO  DEAD  AUTHORS.  Fcp.  8vo.  2s.  Gd.  net.

BOOKS  AND  BOOKMEN.     With  2  Coloured  Plates  and  17

Illustrations.    Fcp.  8vo.  2s.  6il.  net.

OLD  FRIENDS.     Fcp.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  net. 
LETTERS  ON  LITERATURE.     Fcp.  8vo.  2s.  Qd.  net. 
GRASS  OF  PARNASSUS.     Fcp.  8vo.  2s.  6rZ.  net. 
BALLADS    OF    BOOKS.     Edited  by  ANDREW   LANG.    Fcp.

8vo.  6*.

ESSAYS  IN  LITTLE.     With  Portrait.     Crown  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
ANGLING  SKETCHES.    With  20  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.

3?.  6</.

A  MONK  OF  FIFE  :  a  Story  of  the  Days  of  Joan  of  Arc.

With  13  Illustrations  by  SEIAVY.V  I.MAGK.    Crown  8vo.  3s.  6<l.

THE    WORLD'S    DESIRE.      By    H.  RIDER  HAGGARD   and 
AXDUKW  LANG.    With  27  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.  3*.  6</.

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.,  89  Paternoster  Row,  London 
Now  York  ami  Bombay.

THE

MAKING    OF    RELIGION

BY

ANDEEW     LANG

M.A.,  LL.D.  ST  ANDREWS

HONORARY  FELLOW   OF    MERTON    COLLEGE,   OXFORD 
SOMETIME   GIFFORD   LECTURER  IN    THE   UNIVERSITY   OF    ST   ANDREWSBY

ANDEEW     LANG

M.A.,  LL.D.  ST  ANDREWS

HONORARY  FELLOW   OF    MERTON    COLLEGE,   OXFORD 
SOMETIME   GIFFORD   LECTURER  IN    THE   UNIVERSITY   OF    ST   ANDREWS

LONGMANS,     GEEEN,     AND     CO.

39     PATERNOSTER     ROW,     LONDON 
NEW    YORK    AND    BOMBAY

1898

All     rights    reserved

TO    THE    PRINCIPAL

OF   THE

UNIVERSITY    OF    ST.    ANDREWS

DEAR  PRINCIPAL  DONALDSON,

I  hope  you  will  permit  me  to  lay  at  the  feet  of  the 
University  of  St.  Andrews,  in  acknowledgment  of  her  life-long 
kindnesses  to  her  old  pupil,  these  chapters  on  the  early 
History  of  Religion.  They  may  be  taken  as  representing  the 
Gifford  Lectures  delivered  by  me,  though  in  fact  they  contain 
very  little  that  was  spoken  from  Lord  Gifford's  chair.  I 
wish  they  were  more  worthy  of  an  Alma  Mater  which  fostered 
in  the  past  the  leaders  of  forlorn  hopes  that  were  destined  to 
triumph;  and  the  friends  of  lost  causes  who  fought  bravely 
against  Fate — Patrick  Hamilton,  Cargill,  and  Argyll,  Beaton 
and  Montrose,  and  Dundee.

Believe  me

Very  sincerely  yours,

ANDREW    LANG.

PBEFACE

'  THE  ONLY  BEGETTER  '  of  this  work  is  Monsieur  Le- 
febure,  author  of  '  Les  Yeux  d'Horus,'  and  other  studies 
in  Egyptology.  He  suggested  the  writing  of  the  book, 
but  is  in  no  way  responsible  for  the  opinions  expressed.The  author  cannot  omit  the  opportunity  of  thanking 
Mr.  Frederic  Myers  for  his  kindness  in  reading  the  proof 
sheets  of  the  earlier  chapters  and  suggesting  some  cor- 
rections of  statement.  Mr.  Myers,  however,  is  probably 
not  in  agreement  with  the  author  on  certain  points ;  for 
example,  in  the  chapter  on  '  Possession.'  As  the  second 
part  of  the  book  differs  considerably  from  the  opinions 
which  have  recommended  themselves  to  most  anthro- 
pological writers  on  early  Eeligion,  the  author  must  say 
here,  as  he  says  later,  that  no  harm  can  come  of  trying 
how  facts  look  from  a  new  point  of  view,  and  that  he  cer- 
tainly did  not  expect  them  to  fall  into  the  shape  which  he 
now  presents  for  criticism.

ST.  ANDREWS  :  April  3,  1898.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER  PAGE

I.    INTRODUCTORY  CHAPTER 1

II.    SCIENCE  AND  '  MIRACLES  ' 15

III.  ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  KELIGION 43

IV.  '  OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE  '          ....  72 
V.    CRYSTAL  VISIONS,  SAVAGE  AND  CIVILISED      ...  90

VI.     ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  HALLUCINATIONS         .         .        .     .  113

VII.     DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION 138

VIII.     FETISHISM  AND  SPIRITUALISM 159

IX.     EVOLUTION  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  GOD 173

X.     HIGH  GODS  OF  Low  RACES 187

XI.     SUPREME   GODS   NOT   NECESSARILY   DEVELOPED  OUT   OF

'  SPIRITS '  .                                                 ...  201

XII.     SAVAGE  SUPREME  BEINGS 210

XIII.     MORE  SAVAGE  SUPREME  BEINGS 230

XIV.    AHONE.     TI-RA-WA.     NA-PI.     PACHACAMAC.     Tui   LAGA.

TAA-BOA 251

XV.     THE  OLD  DEGENERATION  THEORY 278

XVI.    THEORIES  OF  JEHOVAH 294

XVII.     CONCLUSION 317

APPENDICES.

A.  OPPOSITIONS  OF  SCIENCE 337

B.  THE  POLTERGEIST  AND  HIS  EXPLAINERS  ....  352

C.  CRYSTAL-GAZING 367

D.  CHIEFS  IN  AUSTRALIA 370

INDEX    .  371

THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

iA.  OPPOSITIONS  OF  SCIENCE 337

B.  THE  POLTERGEIST  AND  HIS  EXPLAINERS  ....  352

C.  CRYSTAL-GAZING 367

D.  CHIEFS  IN  AUSTRALIA 370

INDEX    .  371

THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

i

INTRODUCTORY  CHAPTER

THE  modern  Science  of  the  History  of  Religion  has 
attained  conclusions  which  already  possess  an  air  of  being 
firmly  established.  These  conclusions  may  be  briefly 
stated  thus  :  Man  derived  the  conception  of  '  spirit '  or 
'  soul '  from  his  reflections  on  the  phenomena  of  sleep, 
dreams,  death,  shadow,  and  from  the  experiences  of  trance 
and  hallucination.  Worshipping  first  the  departed  souls 
of  his  kindred,  man  later  extended  the  doctrine  of  spiritual 
beings  in  many  directions.  Ghosts,  or  other  spiritual 
existences  fashioned  on  the  same  lines,  prospered  till  they 
became  gods.  Finally,  as  the  result  of  a  variety  of  pro- 
cesses, one  of  these  gods  became  supreme,  and,  at  last, 
was  regarded  as  the  one  only  God.  Meanwhile  man 
retained  his  belief  in  the  existence  of  his  own  soul,  surviv- 
ing after  the  death  of  the  body,  and  so  reached  the  concep- 
tion of  immortality.  Thus  the  ideas  of  God  and  of  the 
soul  are  the  result  of  early  fallacious  reasonings  about 
misunderstood  experiences.

It  may  seem  almost  wanton  to  suggest  the  desirable- 
ness of  revising  a  system  at  once  so  simple,  so  logical, 
and  apparently  so  well  bottomed  on  facts.  But  there  can

B

y  THE   MAKING  OF  EELIGIONB

y  THE   MAKING  OF  EELIGION

never  be  any  real  harm  in  studying  masses  of  evidence 
from  fresh  points  of  view.  At  worst,  the  failure  of  adverse 
criticism  must  help  to  establish  the  doctrines  assailed. 
"Now,  as  we  shall  show,  there  are  two  points  of  view  from 
which  the  evidence  as  to  religion  in  its  early  stages  has  not 
been  steadily  contemplated.  Therefore  we  intend  to  ask, 
first,  what,  if  anything,  can  be  ascertained  as  to  the  nature 
of  the  '  visions '  and  hallucinations  which,  according  to 
Mr.  Tylor  in  his  celebrated  work  '  Primitive  Culture,' 
lent  their  aid  to  the  formation  of  the  idea  of  '  spirit.' 
Secondly,  we  shall  collect  and  compare  the  accounts 
which  we  possess  of  the  High  Gods  and  creative  beings 
worshipped  or  believed  in,  by  the  most  backward  races. 
We  shall  then  ask  whether  these  relatively  Supreme 
Beings,  so  conceived  of  by  men  in  very  rudimentary 
social  conditions,  can  be,  as  anthropology  declares,  mere 
developments  from  the  belief  in  ghosts  of  the  dead.

We  shall  end  by  venturing  to  suggest  that  the  savage 
theory  of  the  soul  may  be  based,  at  least  in  part,  on  expe- 
riences which  cannot,  at  present,  be  made  to  fit  into  any 
purely  materialistic  system  of  the  universe.  We  shall 
also  bring  evidence  tending  to  prove  that  the  idea  of  God, 
in  its  earliest  known  shape,  need  not  logically  be  derived 
from  the  idea  of  spirit,  however  that  idea  itself  may  have 
been  attained  or  evolved.  The  conception  of  God,  then,  need 
not  be  evolved  out  of  reflections  on  dreams  and  '  ghosts.'If  these  two  positions  can  be  defended  with  any  suc- 
cess, it  is  obvious  that  the  whole  theory  of  the  Science  of 
Eeligion  will  need  to  be  reconsidered.  But  it  is  no  less 
evident  that  our  two  positions  do  not  depend  on  each  other. 
The  first  may  be  regarded  as  fantastic,  or  improbable,  or 
may  be  '  masked  '  and  left  on  one  side.  But  the  strength 
of  the  second  position,  derived  from  evidence  of  a  different 
character,  will  not,  therefore,  be  in  any  way  impaired

INTRODUCTORY  3INTRODUCTORY  3

Our  first  position  can  only  be  argued  for  by  dint  of  evi- 
dence highly  unpopular  in  character,  and,  as  a  general 
rule,  condemned  by  modern  science.  The  evidence  is 
obtained  by  what  is,  at  all  events,  a  legitimate  anthropo- 
logical proceeding.  We  may  follow  Mr.  Tylor's  example, 
and  collect  savage  beliefs  about  visions,  hallucinations, 
'clairvoyance,'  and  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  appa- 
rently not  attainable  through  the  normal  channels  of 
sense.  We  may  then  compare  these  savage  beliefs  with 
attested  records  of  similar  experiences  among  living  and 
educated  civilised  men.  Even  if  we  attain  to  no  conclu- 
sion, or  a  negative  conclusion,  as  to  the  actuality  and 
supernormal  character  of  the  alleged  experiences,  still  to 
compare  data  of  savage  and  civilised  psychology,  or  even 
of  savage  and  civilised  illusions  and  fables,  is  decidedly 
part,  though  a  neglected  part,  of  the  function  of  anthropo- 
logical science.  The  results,  whether  they  do  or  do  not 
strengthen  our  first  position,  must  be  curious  and  instruc- 
tive, if  only  as  a  chapter  in  the  history  of  human  error. 
That  chapter,  too,  is  concerned  with  no  mean  topic,  but 
with  what  we  may  call  the  X  region  of  our  nature.  Out 
of  that  region,  out  of  miracle,  prophecy,  vision,  have  cer- 
tainly come  forth  the  great  religions,  Christianity  and 
Islam ;  and  the  great  religious  innovators  and  leaders,  our 
Lord  Himself,  St.  Francis,  John  Knox,  Jeanne  d'Arc, 
down  to  the  founder  of  the  new  faith  of  the  Sioux  and 
Arapahoe.  It  cannot,  then,  be  unscientific  to  compare 
the  barbaric  with  the  civilised  beliefs  and  experiences  about 
a  region  so  dimly  understood,  and  so  fertile  in  potent 
influences.  Here  the  topic  will  be  examined  rather  by 
the  method  of  anthropology  than  of  psychology.  We 
may  conceivably  have  something  to  learn  (as  has  been 
the  case  before)  from  the  rough  observations  and  hasty 
inferences  of  the  most  backward  races.4  THE  MAKING  OF  .RELIGION

We  may  illustrate  this  by  an  anecdote  :

'  The  Northern  Indians  call  the  Aurora  Borealis  "  Ed- 
thin,"  that  is  "Deer."  Their  ideas  in  this  respect  are 
founded  on  a  principle  one  would  not  imagine.  Experience 
has  shown  them  that  when  a  hairy  deer-skin  is  briskly 
stroked  with  the  hand  on  a  dark  night,  it  will  emit  many 
sparks  of  electrical  fire.'

So  says  Hearne  in  his  '  Journey,'  published  in  1795 
(p.  346).

This  observation  of  the  Red  Men  is  a  kind  of  parable 
representing  a  part  of  the  purport  of  the  following  treatise. 
The  Indians,  making  a  hasty  inference  from  a  trivial 
phenomenon,  arrived  unawares  at  a  probably  correct  con- 
clusion, long  unknown  to  civilised  science.  They  con- 
nected the  Aurora  Borealis  with  electricity,  supposing 
that  multitudes  of  deer  in  the  sky  rubbed  the  sparks  out 
of  each  other  !  Meanwhile,  even  in  the  last  century,  a 
puzzled  populace  spoke  of  the  phenomenon  as  '  Lord 
Derwentwater's  Lights.'  The  cosmic  pomp  and  splendour 
shone  to  welcome  the  loyal  Derwentwater  into  heaven, 
when  he  had  given  his  life  for  his  exiled  king.Now,  my  purpose  in  the  earlier  portion  of  this  essay 
is  to  suggest  that  certain  phenomena  of  human  nature, 
apparently  as  trivial  as  the  sparks  rubbed  out  of  a  deer's 
hide  in  a  dark  night,  may  indicate,  and  may  be  allied  to  a 
force  or  forces,  which,  like  the  Aurora  Borealis,  may  shine 
from  one  end  of  the  heavens  to  the  other,  strangely 
illumining  the  darkness  of  our  destiny.  Such  phenomena 
science  has  ignored,  as  it  so  long  ignored  the  sparks  from 
the  stroked  deer-skin,  and  the  attractive  power  of  rubbed 
amber.  These  trivial  things  were  not  known  to  be  allied 
to  the  lightning,  or  to  indicate  a  force  which  man  could 
tame  and  use.  But  just  as  the  Indians,  by  a  rapid  careless 
inference,  attributed  the  Aurora  Borealis  to  electric  in-

INTRODUCTORY  5

fluences,so  (as  anthropology  assures  us)  savages  everywhere 
have  inferred  the  existence  of  soul  or  spirit,  intelligence  that

'  Does  not  know  the  bond  of  Time, 
Nor  wear  the  manacles  of  Space,''  Does  not  know  the  bond  of  Time, 
Nor  wear  the  manacles  of  Space,'

in  part  from  certain  apparently  trivial  phenomena  of  human 
faculty.  These  phenomena,  as  Mr.  Tylor  says, '  the  great 
intellectual  movement  of  the  last  two  centuries  has 
simply  thrown  aside  as  worthless.' l  I  refer  to  alleged 
experiences,  merely  odd,  sporadic,  and,  for  commercial  pur- 
poses, useless,  such  as  the  transference  of  thought  from  one 
mind  to  another  by  no  known  channel  of  sense,  the  occur- 
rence of  hallucinations  which,  priina  facie,  correspond 
coincidentally  with  unknown  events  at  a  distance,  all 
that  is  called  '  second  sight,'  or  '  clairvoyance,'  and  other 
things  even  more  obscure.  Reasoning  on  these  realtor 
alleged  phenomena,  and  on  other  quite  normal  and  accepted 
facts  of  dream,  shadow,  sleep,  trance,  and  death,  savages 
have  inferred  the  existence  of  spirit  or  soul,  exactly  as  the 
Indians  arrived  at  the  notion  of  electricity  (not  so  called 
by  them,  of  course)  as  the  cause  of  the  Aurora  Borealis. 
But,  just  as  the  Indians  thought  that  the  cosmic  lights 
were  caused  by  the  rubbing  together  of  crowded  deer  in 
the  heavens  (a  theory  quite  childishly  absurd),  so  the 
savage  has  expressed,  in  rude  fantastic  ways,  his  conclusion 
as  to  the  existence  of  spirit.  He  believes  in  wandering 
separable  souls  of  men,  surviving  death,  and  he  has 
peopled  with  his  dreams  the  whole  inanimate  universe.

My  suggestion  is  that,  in  spite  of  his  fantasies,  the 
savage  had  possibly  drawn  from  his  premises  an  inference 
not  wholly,  or  not  demonstrably  erroneous.  As  the  sparks 
of  the  deer-skin  indicated  electricity,  so  the  strange  lights 
in  the  night  of  human  nature  may  indicate  faculties

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  ISO.     London,  1801.1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  ISO.     London,  1801.

6  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

which  science,  till  of  late  and  in  a  few  instances,  has 
laughed  at,  ignored,  '  thrown  aside  as  worthless.'

It  should  be  observed  that  I  am  not  speaking  of 
'  spiritualism,'  a  word  of  the  worst  associations,  inex- 
tricably entangled  with  fraud,  bad  logic,  and  the  blindest 
credulity.  Some  of  the  phenomena  alluded  to  have, 
however,  been  claimed  as  their  own  province  by  '  spiritists,' 
and  need  to  be  rescued  from  them.  Mr.  Tylor  writes  :

'  The  issue  raised  by  the  comparison  of  savage,  barbaric, 
and  civilised  spiritualism  is  this  :  Do  the  Bed  Indian 
medicine-man,  the  Tatar  necromancer,  the  Highland 
ghost-seer,  and  the  Boston  medium,  share  the  posses- 
sion of  belief  and  knowledge  of  the  highest  truth  and 
import,  which,  nevertheless,  the  great  intellectual  move- 
ment of  the  last  two  centuries  has  simply  thrown  aside  as 
worthless  ?'

Distinguo !  That  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  the  issue. 
In  my  opinion  the  issue  is :  '  Have  the  Ked  Indian,  the 
Tatar,  the  Highland  seer,  and  the  Boston  medium  (the 
least  reputable  of  the  menagerie)  observed,  and  reasoned 
wildly  from,  and  counterfeited,  and  darkened  with  im- 
posture, certain  genuine  by-products  of  human  faculty, 
which  do  uot prima  facie  deserve  to  be  thrown  aside?  'That,  I  venture  to  think,  is  the  real  issue.  That 
science  may  toss  aside  as  worthless  some  valuable  observa- 
tions of  savages  is  now  universally  admitted  by  people 
who  know  the  facts.  Among  these  observations  is  the 
whole  topic  of  Hypnotism,  with  the  use  of  suggestion  for 
healing  purposes,  and  the  phenomena,  no  longer  denied, 
of  '  alternating  personalities.'  For  the  truth  of  this  state- 
ment we  may  appeal  to  one  of  the  greatest  of  Continental 
anthropologists,  Adolf  Bastian.1  The  missionaries,  like 
Livingstone,  usually  supposed  that  the  savage  seer's

1   Ueber    psycliische      Beobaclitimgcn     bci     Naturvolkern.       Leipzig 
Gunther,  1890.

INTRODUCTORY  7

declared  ignorance — after  his  so-called  fit  of  inspiration — 
of  what  occurred  in  that  state,  was  an  imposture.  But 
nobody  now  doubts  the  similar  oblivion  of  what  has 
passed  that  sometimes  follows  the  analogous  hypnotic 
sleep.  Of  a  remarkable  cure,  which  the  school  of  the 
Salpetriere  or  Nancy  would  ascribe,  with  probable  justice, 
to  '  suggestion,'  a  savage  example  will  be  given  later.Savage  hypnotism  and  '  suggestion,'  among  the  Sioux 
and  Arapahoe,  has  been  thought  worthy  of  a  whole 
volume  in  the  Eeports  of  the  Ethnological  Bureau  of 
the  Smithsonian  Institute  ("Washington,  U.S.,  1892-93). 
Republican  Governments  publish  scientific  matter  '  re- 
gardless of  expense,'  and  the  essential  points  might  have 
been  put  more  shortly.  They  illustrate  the  fact  that  only 
certain  persons  can  hypnotise  others,  and  throw  light  on 
some  peculiarities  of  rapport.1  In  brief,  savages  antici- 
pated us  in  the  modern  science  of  experimental  psychology, 
as  is  frankly  acknowledged  by  the  Society  for  Experimental 
Psychology  of  Berlin.  '  That  many  of  the  so-called 
mystical  phenomena  are  much  more  common  and  pro- 
minent among  savages  than  among  ourselves  is  familiar  to 
everyone  acquainted  with  the  subject.  The  ethnological 
side  of  our  inquiry  demands  penetrative  study.' 2

That  study  I  am  about  to  try  to  sketch.  My  object 
is  to  examine  some  '  superstitious  practices  '  and  beliefs  of 
savages  by  aid  of  the  comparative  method.  I  shall  com- 
pare, as  I  have  already  said,  the  ethnological  evidence 
for  savage  usages  and  beliefs  analogous  to  thought- 
transference,  coincidental  hallucinations,  alternating  per- 
sonality, and  so  forth,  with  the  best  attested  modern 
examples,  experimental  or  spontaneous.  This  raises  the

1  See  especially  pp.  922-926.  The  book  is  interesting  in  other  ways, 
and,  indeed,  touching,  as  it  describes  the  founding  of  a  new  Red  Indian 
religion,  on  a  basis  of  Hypnotism  and  Christianity.

'-'  Programme  of  the  Society,  p.  iv.

8  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION'-'  Programme  of  the  Society,  p.  iv.

8  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

question  of  our  evidence,  which  is  all-important.  We 
proceed  to  defend  it.  The  savage  accounts  are  on  the 
level  of  much  anthropological  evidence;  they  may,  that 
is,  be  dismissed  by  adversaries  as  '  travellers'  tales.'  But 
the  best  testimony  for  the  truth  of  the  reports  as  to 
actual  belief  in  the  facts  is  the  undesigned  coincidence  of 
evidence  from  all  ages  and  quarters.1  When  the  stories 
brought  by  travellers,  ancient  and  modern,  learned  and 
unlearned,  pious  or  sceptical,  agree  in  the  main,  we  have 
all  the  certainty  that  anthropology  can  offer.  Again,  when 
we  find  practically  the  same  strange  neglected  sparks,  not 
only  rumoured  of  in  European  popular  superstition,  but 
attested  in  many  hundreds  of  depositions  made  at  first 
hand  by  respectable  modern  witnesses,  educated  and  re- 
sponsible, we  cannot  honestly  or  safely  dismiss  the  coinci- 
dence of  report  as  indicating  a  mere  '  survival '  of  savage 
superstitious  belief,  and  nothing  more.We  can  no  longer  do  so,  it  is  agreed,  in  the  case  of 
hypnotic  phenomena.  I  hope  to  make  it  seem  possible 
that  we  should  not  do  so  in  the  matter  of  the  hallucinations 
provoked  by  gazing  in  a  smooth  deep,  usually  styled 
'  crystal-gazing.'  Ethnologically,  this  practice  is  at  least 
as  old  as  classical  times,  and  is  of  practically  world-wide 
distribution.  I  shall  prove  its  existence  in  Australia, 
New  Zealand,  North  America,  South  America,  Asia, 
Africa,  Polynesia,  and  among  the  Incas,  not  to  speak  of 
the  middle  and  recent  European  ages.  The  universal  idea 
is  that  such  visions  may  be  '  clairvoyant.'  To  take  a 
Polynesian  case,  *  resembling  the  Hawaiian  wai  harm.' 
When  anyone  has  been  robbed,  the  priest,  after  praying, 
has  a  hole  dug  in  the  floor  of  the  house,  and  filled  with 
water.  Then  he  gazes  into  the  water,  '  over  which  the 
god  is  supposed  to  place  the  spirit  of  the  thief.  .  .  .  The

1  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  i.  9,  10.

INTRODUCTORY  91  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  i.  9,  10.

INTRODUCTORY  9

image  of  the  thief  was,  according  to  their  account,  re- 
flected in  the  water,  and  being  perceived  by  the  priest,  he 
named  the  individual,  or  the  parties.'1  Here  the  state- 
ment about  the  '  spirit '  is  a  mere  savage  philosophical 
explanation.  But  the  fact  that  hallucinatory  pictures 
can  really  be  seen  by  a  fair  percentage  of  educated 
Europeans,  in  water,  glass  balls,  and  so  forth,  is  now 
confirmed  by  frequent  experiment,  and  accepted  by 
opponents,  'non-mystical  writers,'  like  Dr.  Parish  of 
Munich.2  I  shall  bring  evidence  to  suggest  that  the 
visions  may  correctly  reflect,  as  it  were,  persons  and  places 
absolutely  unknown  to  the  gazer,  and  that  they  may 
even  reveal  details  unknown  to  every  one  present.  Such 
results  among  savages,  or  among  the  superstitious,  would 
be,  and  are,  explained  by  the  theory  of  '  spirits.'  Modern 
science  has  still  to  find  an  explanation  consistent  with 
recognised  laws  of  nature,  but  '  spirits '  we  shall  not 
invoke.In  the  same  way  I  mean  to  examine  all  or  most  of 
the  '  so-called  mystical  phenomena  of  savage  life.'  I 
then  compare  them  with  the  better  vouched  for  modern 
examples.  To  return  to  the  question  of  evidence,  I  con- 
fess that  I  do  not  see  how  the  adverse  anthropologist, 
psychologist,  or  popular  agnostic  is  to  evade  the  following 
dilemma :  To  the  anthropologist  we  say,  '  The  evidence 
we  adduce  is  your  own  evidence,  that  of  books  of  travel 
in  all  lands  and  countries.  If  you  may  argue  from  it,  so 
may  we.  Some  of  it  is  evidence  to  unusual  facts,  more  of 
it  is  evidence  to  singular  beliefs,  which  we  think  not 
necessarily  without  foundation.  As  raising  a  presump- 
tion in  favour  of  that  opinion,  we  cite  examples  in  which 
savage  observations  of  abnormal  and  once  rejected  facts,

1  Ellis,  Polynesian  Researches,  ii.  p.  240.

2  Hallucinations  and  Illusions.    English  edition,  pp.  C3-70,  297.

10  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

are  now  admitted  by  science  to  have  a  large  residuum  of 
truth,  we  argue  that  what  is  admitted  in  some  cases  may 
come  to  be  admitted  in  more.  No  a  priori  line  can  here 
be  drawn.'To  the  psychologist  who  objects  that  our  modern 
instances  are  mere  anecdotes,  we  reply  by  asking,  '  Dear 
sir,  what  are  your  modern  instances  ?  What  do  you 
know  of  "  Mrs.  A.,"  whom  you  still  persistently  cite  as 
an  example  of  morbid  recurrent  hallucinations  ?  Name 
the  German  servant  girl  who,  in  a  fever,  talked  several 
learned  languages,  which  she  had  heard  her  former 
master,  a  scholar,  declaim !  Where  did  she  live  ?  who 
vouches  for  her,  who  heard  her,  who  understood  her  ? 
There  is,  you  know,  no  evidence  at  all ;  the  anecdote  is 
told  by  Coleridge :  the  phenomena  are  said  by  him  to 
have  been  observed  "  in  a  Eoman  Catholic  town  in 
Germany,  a  year  or  two  before  my  arrival  at  Gottingen.  .  .  . 
Many  eminent  physiologists  and  psychologists  visited  the 
town."  Why  do  you  not  name  a  few  out  of  the  distin- 
guished crowd  ?  ' l  This  anecdote,  a  rumour  of  a  rumour 
of  a  Protestant  explanation  of  a  Catholic  marvel,  was  told 
by  Coleridge  at  least  twenty  years  after  the  possible  date. 
The  psychologists  copy  it,2  one  after  the  other,  as  a 
flock  of  sheep  jump  where  their  leader  has  jumped.  An 
example  by  way  of  anecdote  may  be  permitted.

According  to  the  current  anthropological  theory,  the 
idea  of  soul  or  spirit  was  suggested  to  early  men  by  their 
experiences  in  dreams.  They  seemed,  in  sleep,  to  visit 
remote  places ;  therefore,  they  argued,  something  within 
them  was  capable  of  leaving  the  body  and  wandering 
about.  This  something  was  the  soul  or  spirit.  Now  it 
is  obvious  that  this  opinion  of  early  men  would  be  con-

1  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Lectures,  i.  345.

2  Maudsley,  Kerner,  Carpenter,  Du  Prel,  Zangwill.

INTRODUCTORY  111  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Lectures,  i.  345.

2  Maudsley,  Kerner,  Carpenter,  Du  Prel,  Zangwill.

INTRODUCTORY  11

firmed  if  they  ever  chanced  to  acquire,  in  dreams,  know- 
ledge of  places  which  they  had  never  visited,  and  of  facts 
as  to  which,  in  their  waking  state,  they  could  have  no 
information.  This  experience,  indeed,  would  suggest 
problems  even  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  if  it  occurred 
to  him.

Conversing  on  this  topic  with  a  friend  of  acknowledged 
philosophical  eminence,  I  illustrated  my  meaning  by  a 
story  of  a  dream.  It  was  reported  to  me  by  the  dreamer, 
with  whom  I  am  well  acquainted,  was  of  very  recent  occur- 
rence, and  was  corroborated  by  the  evidence  of  another 
person,  to  whom  the  dream  was  narrated,  before  its  fulfil- 
ment was  discovered.  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  publish  the 
details,  for  good  reasons,  but  the  essence  of  the  matter 
was  this  :  A.  and  B.  (the  dreamer)  had  common  interests. 
A.  had  taken  certain  steps  about  which  B.  had  only  a 
surmise,  and  a  vague  one,  that  steps  had  probably  been 
taken.  A.  then  died,  and  B.  in  an  extremely  vivid  dream 
(a  thing  unfamiliar  to  him)  seemed  to  read  a  mass  of  un- 
known facts,  culminating  in  two  definite  results,  capable 
of  being  stated  in  figures.  These  results,  by  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  could  not  be  known  to  A.,  so  that, 
before  he  was  placed  out  of  B.'s  reach  by  death,  he  could 
not  have  stated  them  to  him,  and,  afterwards,  had  assuredly 
no  means  of  doing  so.

The  dream,  two  days  after  its  occurrence,  and  after  it 
had  been  told  to  C.,  proved  to  be  literally  correct.The  dream,  two  days  after  its  occurrence,  and  after  it 
had  been  told  to  C.,  proved  to  be  literally  correct.

Now  I  am  not  asking  the  reader's  belief  for  this  anec- 
dote (for  that  could  only  be  yielded  in  virtue  of  knowledge 
of  the  veracity  of  B.  and  C.),  but  I  invite  his  attention  to 
the  psychological  explanation.  My  friend  suggested  that 
A.  had  told  B.  all  about  the  affair,  that  B.  had  not  listened 
(though  his  interests  were  vitally  concerned),  and  that  the 
crowd  of  curious  details,  naturally  unfamiliar  to  B.,  had

12  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

reposed  in  his  subconscious  memory,  and  had  been  revived 
in  the  dream.

Now  B.'s  dream  was  a  dream  of  reading  a  mass  of 
minute  details,  including  names  of  places  entirely  unknown 
to  him.  It  may  be  admitted,  in  accordance  with  the 
psychological  theory,  that  B.  might  have  received  all  this 
information  from  A.,  but,  by  dint  of  inattention — '  the 
malady  of  not  marking ' — might  never  have  been  con- 
sciously aware  of  what  he  heard.  Then  B.'s  subconscious 
memory  of  what  he  did  not  consciously  know  might  break 
upon  him  in  his  dream.  Instances  of  similar  mental 
phenomena  are  not  uncommon.  But  the  general  result 
of  the  combined  details  was  one  which  could  not  possibly 
be  known  to  A.  before  his  death ;  nor  to  B.  could  it  be 
known  at  all.  Yet  B.'s  dream  represented  this  general 
result  with  perfect  accuracy,  which  cannot  be  accounted 
for  by  the  revival  of  subconscious  memory  in  sleep. 
Neither  asleep  nor  awake  can  a  man  remember  what  it  is 
impossible  for  him  to  have  known.  The  dream  contained 
no  prediction,  for  the  results  were  now  fixed ;  but  (grant- 
ing the  good  faith  of  the  narrator)  the  dream  did  contain 
information  not  normally  accessible.However,  by  way  of  psychological  explanation  of  the 
dream,  my  friend  cited  Coleridge's  legend,  as  to  the 
German  girl  and  her  unconscious  knowledge  of  certain 
learned  languages.  '  And  what  is  the  evidence  for  the 
truth  of  Coleridge's  legend  ?  '  Of  course,  there  is  none,  or 
none  known  to  all  the  psychologists  who  quote  it  from 
Coleridge.  Neither,  if  true,  was  the  legend  to  the  point. 
However,  psychology  will  accept  such  un authenticated 
narratives,  and  yet  will  scoff  at  first  hand,  duly  corrobo- 
rated testimony  from  living  and  honourable  people,  about 
recent  events.

Only  a  great  force  of  prejudice  can  explain  this  accept-

INTRODUCTORY  13

ance,  by  psychologists,  of  one  kind  of  marvellous  tale 
on  no  evidence,  and  this  rejection  of  another  class  of 
marvellous  tale,  when  supported  by  first  hand,  signed  and 
corroborated  evidence,  of  living  witnesses.  I  see  only  one 
escape  for  psychologists  from  this  dilemma.  Their  marvel- 
lous tales  are  possible,  though  unvouched  for,  because  they 
have  always  heard  them  and  repeated  them  in  lectures, 
and  read  and  repeated  them  in  books.  Our  marvellous 
tales  are  impossible,  because  the  psychologists  know 
that  they  are  impossible,  which  means  that  they  have 
not  been  familiar  with  them,  from  youth  upwards,  in 
lectures  and  manuals.  But  man  has  no  right  to  have 
'  clear  ideas  of  the  possible  and  impossible,'  like  Faraday, 
a  priori,  except  in  the  exact  sciences.  There  are  other 
instances  of  weak  evidence  which  satisfies  psychologists.Hamilton  has  an  anecdote,  borrowed  from  Monboddo, 
who  got  it  from  Mr.  Hans  Stanley,  who,  '  about  twenty-six 
years  ago,'  heard  it  from  the  subject  of  the  story,  Madame 
de  Laval.  '  I  have  the  memorandum  somewhere  in  my 
papers,'  says  Mr.  Stanley,  vaguely.  Then  we  have  two 
American  anecdotes  by  Dr.  Flint  and  Mr.  Rush ;  and 
such  is  Sir  William  Hamilton's  equipment  of  odd  facts 
for  discussing  the  unconscious  or  subconscious.  The 
least  credible  and  worst  attested  of  these  narratives  still 
appears  in  popular  works  on  psychology.  Moreover,  all 
psychology,  except  experimental  psychology,  is  based  on 
anecdotes  which  people  tell  about  their  own  subjective  ex- 
periences. Mr.  Galton,  whose  original  researches  are  well 
known,  even  offered  rewards  in  money  for  such  narratives 
about  visualised  rows  of  coloured  figures,  and  so  on.

Clearly  the  psychologist,  then,  has  no  prima  facie  right 
to  object  to  our  anecdotes  of  experiences,  which  he  regards 
as  purely  subjective.  As  evidence,  we  only  accept  them 
at  first  hand,  and,  when  possible,  the  witnesses  have  been

14  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION14  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

cross-examined  personally.  Our  evidence  then,  where  it 
consists  of  travellers'  tales,  is  on  a  level  with  that  which 
satisfies  the  anthropologist.  Where  it  consists  of  modern 
statements  of  personal  experience,  our  evidence  is  often 
infinitely  better  than  much  which  is  accepted  by  the  non- 
experimental  psychologist.  As  for  the  agnostic  writer 
on  the  Non-Keligion  of  the  Future,  M.  Guyau  actually 
illustrates  the  Resurrection  of  our  Lord  by  an  American 
myth  about  a  criminal,  of  whom  a  hallucinatory  phantasm 
appeared  to  each  of  his  gaol  companions,  separately  and 
successively,  on  a  day  after  his  execution !  For  this 
prodigious  fable  no  hint  of  reference  to  authority  is 
given.1  Yet  the  evidence  appears  to  satisfy  M.  Guyau,  and 
is  used  by  him  to  reinforce  his  argument.

The  anthropologist  and  psychologist,  then,  must  either 
admit  that  their  evidence  is  no  better  than  ours,  if  as 
good,  or  must  say  that  they  only  believe  evidence  as  to 
'  possible  '  facts.  They  thus  constitute  themselves  judges 
of  what  is  possible,  and  practically  regard  themselves  as 
omniscient.  Science  has  had  to  accept  so  many  things 
once  scoffed  at  as '  impossible,'  that  this  attitude  of  hers,  as 
we  shall  show  in  chapter  ii.,  ceases  to  command  respect.

My  suggestion  is  that  the  trivial,  rejected,  or  unheeded 
phenomena  vouched  for  by  the  evidence  here  defended 
may,  not  inconceivably,  be  of  considerable  importance. 
But,  stating  the  case  at  the  lowest,  if  we  are  only  con- 
cerned with  illusions  and  fables,  it  cannot  but  be  curious  to 
note  their  persistent  uniformity  in  savage  and  civilised  life.To  make  the  first  of  our  two  main  positions  clear,  and 
in  part  to  justify  ourselves  in  asking  any  attention  for 
such  matters,  we  now  offer  an  historical  sketch  of  the 
relations  between  Science  and  the  so-called  '  Miraculous  ' 
in  the  past.

1  Tlic  Non-Religion  of  the  Future,  p.  92,  1897.

15

II

SCIENCE  AND  'MIRACLES'

Historical  Sketch

BE  SEARCH  in  the  X  region  is  not  a  new  thing  under  the 
sun.  When  Saul  disguised  himself  before  his  conference 
with  the  Witch  of  Endor,  he  made  an  elementary  attempt 
at  a  scientific  test  of  the  supernormal.  Croasus,  the  king, 
went  much  further,  when  he  tested  the  clairvoyance  of 
the  oracles  of  Greece,  by  sending  an  embassy  to  ask  what 
he  was  doing  at  a  given  hour  on  a  given  day,  and  by  then 
doing  something  very  bizarre.  We  do  not  know  how  the 
Delphic  oracle  found  out  the  right  answer,  but  various 
easy  methods  of  fraud  at  once  occur  to  the  mind.  How- 
ever, the  procedure  of  Croasus,  if  he  took  certain  precau- 
tions, was  relatively  scientific.  Relatively  scientific  also 
was  the  inquiry  of  Porphyry,  with  whose  position  our 
own  is  not  unlikely  to  be  compared.  Unable,  or  reluctant, 
to  accept  Christianity,  Porphyry  '  sought  after  a  sign  '  of 
an  element  of  supernormal  truth  in  Paganism.  But  he 
began  at  the  wrong  end,  namely  at  Pagan  spiritualistic 
seances,  with  the  usual  accompaniments  of  darkness  and 
fraud.  His  perplexed  letter  to  Anebo,  with  the  reply 
attributed  to  lamblichus,  reveal  Porphyry  wandering 
puzzled  among  mediums,  floating  lights,  odd  noises, 
queer  dubious  '  physical  phenomena.'  He  did  not  begin 
with  accurate  experiments  as  to  the  existence  of  rare,  and 
apparently  supernormal  human  faculties,  and  he  seems  to

16  THE  MAKING  OF  EELIGION16  THE  MAKING  OF  EELIGION

have   attained   no   conclusion   except   that    '  spirits '    are 
'  deceitful.' l16  THE  MAKING  OF  EELIGION

have   attained   no   conclusion   except   that    '  spirits '    are 
'  deceitful.' l

Something  more  akin  to  modern  research  began 
about  the  time  of  the  Keformation,  and  lasted  till  about 
1680.  The  fury  for  burning  witches  led  men  of  sense, 
learning,  and  humanity  to  ask  whether  there  was  any 
reality  in  witchcraft,  and,  generally,  in  the  marvels  of 
popular  belief.  The  inquiries  of  Thyrseus,  Lavaterus, 
Bodinus,  Wierus,  Le  Loyer,  Reginald  Scot,  and  many 
others,  tended  on  the  whole  to  the  negative  side  as 
regards  the  wilder  fables  about  witches,  but  left  the 
problems  of  ghosts  and  haunted  houses  pretty  much 
where  they  were  before.  It  may  be  observed  that 
Lavaterus  (circ.  1580)  already  put  forth  a  form  of  the 
hypothesis  of  telepathy  (that  '  ghosts  '  are  hallucinations 
produced  by  the  direct  action  of  one  mind,  or  brain,  upon 
another),  while  Thyrseus  doubted  whether  the  noises 
heard  in  '  haunted  houses '  were  not  mere  hallucinations 
of  the  sense  of  hearing.  But  all  these  early  writers,  like 
Cardan,  were  very  careless  of  first-hand  evidence,  and, 
indeed,  preferred  ghosts  vouched  for  by  classical  authority, 
Pliny,  Plutarch,  or  Suetonius.  With  the  Kev.  Joseph 
Glanvil,  F.R.S.  (circ.  1666),  a  more  careful  examination 
of  evidence  came  into  use.  Among  the  marvels  of 
Glanvil's  and  other  tracts  usually  published  together  in 
his  '  Sadducismus  Triumphatus '  will  be  found  letters 
which  show  that  he  and  his  friends,  like  Henry  More  and 
Boyle,  laboured  to  collect  first-hand  evidence  for  second 
sight,  haunted  houses,  ghosts,  and  wraiths.  The  con- 
fessed object  was  to  procure  a  '  Whip  for  the  Droll/  a 
reply  to  the  laughing  scepticism  of  the  Restoration.  The 
result  was  to  bring  on  Glanvil  a  throng  of  bores — he  was1  See  Mr.  Myers's  paper  on  the  '  Ancient  Oracles,'  in  Classical  Essays, 
and  the  author's  '  Ancient  Spiritualism,'  in  Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense.

SCIENCE   AND   'MIRACLES'  17

'  worse  haunted  than  Mr.  Mornpesson's  house,'  he  says — 
and  Mr.  Pepys  found  his  arguments  '  not  very  convincing.' 
Mr.  Pepys,  however,  was  alarmed  by  '  our  young  gib-cat,' 
which  he  mistook  for  a  'spright.'  With  Henry  More, 
Baxter,  and  Glanvil  practically  died,  for  the  time,  the 
attempt  to  investigate  these  topics  scientifically,  though 
an  impression  of  doubt  was  left  on  the  mind  of  Addison. 
Witchcraft  ceased  to  win  belief,  and  was  abolished,  as  a 
crime,  in  1736.  Some  of  the  Scottish  clergy,  and  John 
Wesley,  clung  fondly  to  the  old  faith,  but  Wodrow,  and 
Cotton  Mather  (about  1710-1730)  were  singularly  careless 
and  unlucky  in  producing  anything  like  evidence  for  their 
narratives.  Ghost  stories  continued  to  be  told,  but  not  to 
be  investigated.Then  one  of  the  most  acute  of  philosophers  decided 
that  investigation  ought  never  to  be  attempted.  This 
scientific  attitude  towards  X  phenomena,  that  of  refusing 
to  examine  them,  and  denying  them  without  examina- 
tion, was  fixed  by  David  Hume  in  his  celebrated  essay 
on  '  Miracles.'  Hume  derided  the  observation  and  study 
of  what  he  called  '  Miracles,'  in  the  field  of  experience, 
and  he  looked  for  an  a  priori  argument  which  would  for 
ever  settle  the  question  without  examination  of  facts.  In 
an  age  of  experimental  philosophy,  which  derided  a  priori 
methods,  this  was  Hume's  great  contribution  to  know- 
ledge. His  famous  argument,  the  joy  of  many  an  honest 
breast,  is  a  tissue  of  fallacies  which  might  be  given  for 
exposure  to  beginners  in  logic,  as  an  elementary  exercise. 
In  announcing  his  discovery,  Hume  amusingly  displays 
the  self-complacency  and  the  want  of  humour  with  which 
we  Scots  are  commonly  charged  by  our  critics  :

'  I  flatter  myself  that  I  have  discovered  an  argument 
which,  if  just,  will,  with  the  wise  and  learned,  be  an 
everlasting  check  to  all  kinds  of  superstitious  delusions,

18  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

and  consequently  will  be  useful   as   long   as   the   world 
endures.'18  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

and  consequently  will  be  useful   as   long   as   the   world 
endures.'

He  does  not  expect,  however,  to  convince  the  multitude. 
Till  the  end  of  the  world,  '  accounts  of  miracles  and  pro- 
digies, I  suppose,  will  be  found  in  all  histories,  sacred 
and  profane.'  Without  saying  here  what  he  means  by  a 
miracle,  Hume  argues  that  '  experience  is  our  only  guide 
in  reasoning.'  He  then  defines  a  miracle  as  '  a  violation 
of  the  laws  of  nature.'  By  a  '  law  of  nature  '  he  means  a 
uniformity,  not  of  all  experience,  but  of  such  experience 
as  he  will  deign  to  admit ;  while  he  excludes,  without 
examination,  all  evidence  for  experience  of  the  absence 
of  such  uniformity.  That  kind  of  experience  cannot 
be  considered.  '  There  must  be  a  uniform  experience 
against  every  miraculous  event,  otherwise  the  event  would 
not  merit  that  appellation.'  If  there  be  any  experience 
in  favour  of  the  event,  that  experience  does  not  count. 
A  miracle  is  counter  to  universal  experience,  no  event  is 
counter  to  universal  experience,  therefore  no  event  is  a 
miracle.  If  you  produce  evidence  to  what  Hume  calls  a 
miracle  (we  shall  see  examples)  he  replies  that  the 
evidence  is  not  valid,  unless  its  falsehood  would  be  more 
miraculous  than  the  fact.  Now  no  error  of  human 
evidence  can  be  more  miraculous  than  a  'miracle.' 
Therefore  there  can  be  no  valid  evidence  for  'miracles.' 
Fortunately,  Hume  now  gives  an  example  of  what  he 
means  by  '  miracles.'  He  says  :—'  For,  first,  there  is  not  to  be  found,  in  all  history,  any 
miracle  attested  by  a  sufficient  number  of  men,  of  such 
unquestioned  good  sense,  education,  and  learning,  as  to 
secure  us  against  all  delusion  in  themselves ;  of  such 
undoubted  integrity,  as  to  place  them  beyond  all  suspicion 
of  any  design  to  deceive  others  ;  of  such  credit  and  reputa- 
tion in  the  eyes  of  mankind,  as  to  have  a  great  deal  to  lose 
in  case  of  their  being  detected  in  any  falsehood ;  and  at

SCIENCE   AND   'MIRACLES'  19

the  same  time  attesting  facts  performed  in  such  a  public 
manner,  and  in  so  celebrated  a  part  of  the  world,  as 
to  render  the  detection  unavoidable ;  all  which  circum- 
stances are  requisite  to  give  us  a  full  assurance  in  the 
testimony  of  men.' l

Hume  added  a  note  at  the  end  of  his  book,  in  which 
he  contradicted  every  assertion  which  he  had  made  in  the 
passage  just  cited ;  indeed,  he  contradicted  himself  before 
he  had  written  six  pages.'  There  surely  never  was  a  greater  number  of  miracles 
ascribed  to  one  person  than  those  which  were  lately  said 
to  have  been  wrought  in  France  upon  the  tomb  of  Abbe 
Paris,  the  famous  Jansenist,  with  whose  sanctity  the 
people  were  so  long  deluded.  The  curing  of  the  sick, 
giving  hearing  to  the  deaf,  and  sight  to  the  blind,  were 
everywhere  talked  of  as  the  usual  effects  of  that  holy 
sepulchre.  But  what  is  more  extraordinary,  many  of  the 
miracles  were  immediately  proved  upon  the  spot,  before 
judges  of  unquestioned  integrity,  attested  by  witnesses  of 
credit  and  distinction,  in  a  learned  age,  and  on  the  most 
eminent  theatre  that  is  now  in  the  world.  Nor  is  this  all. 
A  relation  of  them  was  published  and  dispersed  every- 
where ;  nor  were  the  Jesuits,  though  a  learned  body, 
supported  by  the  civil  magistrate,  and  determined  enemies 
to  those  opinions,  in  whose  favour  the  miracles  were  said 
to  have  been  wrought,  ever  able  distinctly  to  refute  or 
detect  them.  Where  shall  we  find  such  a  number  of  cir- 
cumstances, agreeing  to  the  corroboration  of  one  fact? 
And  what  have  we  to  oppose  to  such  a  cloud  of  witnesses, 
but  the  absolute  impossibility,  or  miraculous  nature  of  the 
events  which  they  relate  ?  And  this,  surely,  in  the  eyes 
of  all  reasonable  people,  will  alone  be  regarded  as  a  suffi- 
cient refutation.'

Thus  Hume  first  denies  the  existence  of  such  evidence, 
given  in  such  circumstances  as  he  demands,  and  then  he

1  The  italics  here  are  those  of  Mr.  Alfred  Russell  Wallace,  in  his  Miracles 
aiul  Modern  Science.  Mr.  Huxley,  in  his  exposure  of  Hume's  fallacies  (in 
his  Life  of  Hume),  did  not  examine  the  Jansenist  '  miracles  '  which  Huni3 
was  criticising.

20  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION20  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

produces  an  example  of  that  very  kind  of  evidence. 
Having  done  this,  he  abandons  (as  Mr.  Wallace  observes) 
his  original  assertion  that  the  evidence  does  not  exist,  and 
takes  refuge  in  alleging  '  the  absolute  impossibility  '  of  the 
events  which  the  evidence  supports.  Thus  Hume  poses  as 
a  perfect  judge  of  the  possible,  in  a  kind  of  omniscience. 
He  takes  his  stand  on  the  uniformity  of  all  experience 
that  is  not  hostile  to  his  idea  of  the  possible,  and  dismisses 
all  testimony  to  other  experience,  even  when  it  reaches  his 
standard  of  evidence.  He  is  remote  indeed  from  Virchow's 
position  '  that  what  we  call  the  laws  of  nature  must  vary 
according  to  our  frequent  new  experiences.'  '  In  his  note, 
Hume  buttresses  and  confirms  his  evidence  for  the  Jansenist 
miracles.  They  have  even  a  martyr,  M.  Montgeron,  who 
wrote  an  account  of  the  events,  and,  says  Hume  lightly, 
'  is  now  said  to  be  somewhere  in  a  dungeon  on  account  of 
his  book.'  Many  of  the  miracles  of  the  Abbe  Paris  were 
proved  immediately  by  witnesses  before  the  Bishop's 
court  at  Paris,  under  the  eye  of  Cardinal  Noailles.  .  .  . 
'  His  successor  was  an  enemy  to  the  Jansenists,  yet 
twenty-two  cures  of  Paris  .  .  .  pressed  him  to  examine 
these  miracles  .  .  .  But  he  wisely  forbore.'  Hume  adds 
his  testimony  to  the  character  of  these  cures.  Thus  it  is 
wisdom,  according  to  Hume,  to  dismiss  the  most  public 
and  well-attested  '  miracles  '  without  examination.  This 
is  experimental  science  of  an  odd  kind.The  phenomena  were  cases  of  healing,  many  of  them 
surprising,  of  cataleptic  rigidity,  and  of  insensibility  to 
pain,  among  visitors  to  the  tomb  of  the  Abbe  Paris  (1731). 
Had  the  cases  been  judicially  examined  (all  medical  evi- 
dence was  in  their  favour),  and  had  they  been  proved 
false,  the  cause  of  Hume  would  have  profited  enormously. 
A  strong  presumption  would  have  been  raised  against  the 
'  Moll,  Hypnotism,  p.  357.

SCIENCE  AND   'MIRACLES'  21

miracles  of  Christianity.  But  Hume  applauds  the  wisdom 
of  not  giving  his  own  theory  this  chance  of  a  triumph. 
The  cataleptic  seizures  were  of  the  sort  now  familiar  to 
science.  These  have,  therefore,  emerged  from  the  miraculous. 
In  fact,  the  phenomena  which  occurred  at  the  tomb  of  the 
Abbe  Paris  have  emerged  almost  too  far,  and  now  seem 
in  danger  of  being  too  readily  and  too  easily  accepted.  In 
1887  MM.  Binet  and  Fere,  of  the  school  of  the  Salpetriere, 
published  in  English  a  popular  manual  styled  '  Animal 
Magnetism.'  These  authors  write  with  great  caution 
about  such  alleged  phenomena  as  the  reading,  by  the 
hypnotised  patient,  of  the  thoughts  in  the  mind  of  the 
hypnotiser.  But  as  to  the  phenomena  at  the  tomb  of  the 
Abbe  Paris,  they  say  that  '  suggestion  explains  them.'  l 
That  is,  in  the  opinion  of  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  the  so- 
called  '  miracles  '  really  occurred,  and  were  worked  by 
'the  imagination,'  by  '  self-suggestion.'

The  most  famous  case — that  of  Mile.  Coirin — has 
been  carefully  examined  by  Dr.  Charcot.2The  most  famous  case — that  of  Mile.  Coirin — has 
been  carefully  examined  by  Dr.  Charcot.2

Mile.  Coirin  had  a  dangerous  fall  from  her  horse,  in 
September  1716,  in  her  thirty-first  year.  The  medical 
details  may  be  looked  for  in  Dr.  Charcot's  essay  or  in 
Montgeron.3  '  Her  disease  was  diagnosed  as  cancer  of  the 
left  breast,'  the  nipple  '  fell  off  bodily.'  Amputation  of 
the  breast  was  proposed,  but  Madame  Coirin,  believing 
the  disease  to  be  radically  incurable,  refused  her  consent. 
Paralysis  of  the  left  side  set  in  (1718),  the  left  leg  shrivel- 
ling up.  On  August  9,  1731,  Mile.  Coirin  'tried  the  off 
chance '  of  a  miracle,  put  on  a  shift  that  had  touched  the 
tomb  of  Paris,  and  used  some  earth  from  the  grave. 
On  August  11,  Mile.  Coirin  could  turn  herself  in  bed ;  on

1  Animal  Magnetism,  p.  355.

*  A  translation  of  his  work  was  published  in  the  New  Review,  January  1893.

-1  La  Veritt  dcs  Miracles,  Cologne,  1747,  Septieme  D6mon strati  on.

22  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  12th  the  horrible  wound  '  was  staunched,  and  began 
to  close  up  and  heal.'  The  paralysed  side  recovered  life 
and  its  natural  proportions.  By  September  3,  Mile.  Coirin 
could  go  out  for  a  drive.

All  her  malady,  says  Dr.  Charcot,  paralysis,  'cancer,' 
and  all,  was  '  hysterical ; '  '  hysterical  oedema,'  for  which 
he  quotes  many  French  authorities  and  one  American. 
'  Under  the  physical  [psychical  ?]  influence  brought  to

bear  by  the  application  of  the  shift the  oedema,

which  was  due  to  vaso-motor  trouble,  disappeared  almost 
instantaneously.  The  breast  regained  its  normal  size.'bear  by  the  application  of  the  shift the  oedema,

which  was  due  to  vaso-motor  trouble,  disappeared  almost 
instantaneously.  The  breast  regained  its  normal  size.'

Dr.  Charcot  generously  adds  that  shrines,  like  Lourdes, 
have  cured  patients  in  whom  he  could  not  '  inspire  the 
operation  of  the  faith  cure.'  He  '  certainly  cannot  explain 
everything  which  claims  to  be  of  supernatural  origin  in 
the  faith  cure.  We  have  to  learn  the  lesson  of  patience. 
I  am  among  the  first  to  recognise  that  Shakespeare's 
words  hold  good  to-day  :

"  There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  Horatio, 
Than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  philosophy."

If  Dr.  Charcot  had  believed  in  what  the  French  call 
suggestion  mentale — suggestion  by  thought-transference 
(which  I  think  he  did  not) — he  could  have  explained  the 
healing  of  the  Centurion's  servant,  '  Say  the  word,  Lord, 
and  my  servant  shall  be  healed,'  by  suggestion  a  distance 
(telepathy),  and  by  premising  that  the  servant's  palsy 
was  '  hysterical.'  But  what  do  we  mean  by  '  hysterical '  ? 
Nobody  knows.  The  '  mind,'  somehow,  causes  gan- 
grenes, if  not  cancers,  paralysis,  shrinking  of  tissues ; 
the  mind,  somehow,  cures  them.  And  what  is  the 
'mind'?

As  my  object  is  to  give  savage  parallels  to  modern 
instances  better  vouched  for,  I  quote  a  singular  Red

SCIENCE  AND  'MIRACLES  23As  my  object  is  to  give  savage  parallels  to  modern 
instances  better  vouched  for,  I  quote  a  singular  Red

SCIENCE  AND  'MIRACLES  23

Indian  cure  by  '  suggestion.'  Hearne,  travelling  in 
Canada  in  1770,  met  a  native  who  had  '  dead  palsy,' 
affecting  the  whole  of  one  side.  He  was  dragged  on  a 
sledge,  '  reduced  to  a  mere  skeleton,'  and  so  was  placed  in 
the  magic  lodge.  The  first  step  in  his  cure  was  the 
public  swallowing  by  a  conjurer  of  a  board  of  wood, 
'  about  the  size  of  a  barrel-stave,'  twice  as  wide  across  as 
his  mouth.  Hearne  stood  beside  the  man,  '  naked  as  he 
was  born,'  '  and,  notwithstanding  I  was  all  attention,  I 
could  not  detect  the  deceit.'  Of  course,  Hearne  believes 
that  this  was  mere  legerdemain,  and  (p.  216)  mentions 
a  most  suspicious  circumstance.  The  account  is  amusing, 
and  deserves  the  attention  of  Mr.  Neville  Maskelyne.  The 
same  conjurer  had  previously  swallowed  a  cradle !  Now 
bayonet  swallowing,  which  he  also  did,  is  possible,  though 
Hearne  denies  it  (p.  217).

The  real  object  of  these  preliminary  feats,  how- 
ever performed,  is,  probably,  to  inspire  faith,  which  Dr. 
Charcot  might  have  done  by  swallowing  a  cradle.  The 
Indians  explain  that  the  barrel  staves  apparently  swallowed 
are  merely  dematerialised  by  '  spirits,'  leaving  only  the 
forked  end  sticking  out  of  the  conjurer's  mouth.  In  fact, 
Hearne  caught  the  conjurer  in  the  act  of  making  a  sepa- 
rate forked  end.Faith  being  thus  inspired,  the  conjurer,  for  three 
entire  days,  blew,  sang,  and  danced  round  '  the  poor 
paralytic,'  fasting.  '  And  it  is  truly  wonderful,  though 
the  strictest  truth,  that  when  the  poor  man  was  taken 
from  the  conjuring  house  ...  he  was  able  to  move  all 
the  fingers  and  toes  of  the  side  that  had  been  so  long- 
dead.  ...  At  the  end  of  six  weeks  he  went  a-hunting  for 
his  family  '  (p.  219).  Hearne  kept  up  his  acquaintance, 
and  adds,  what  is  very  curious,  that  he  developed  almost 
a  secondary  personality.  '  Before  that  dreadful  paralytic

24  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

stroke,  he  had  been  distinguished  for  his  good  nature  and 
benevolent  disposition,  was  entirely  free  from  every  appear- 
ance of  avarice,  .  .  .  but  after  this  event  he  was  the  most 
fractious,  quarrelsome,  discontented,  and  covetous  wretch 
alive'  (p.  220).

Dr.  Charcot,  if  he  had  been  acquainted  with  this  case, 
would  probably  have  said  that  it  '  is  of  the  nature  of  those 
which  Professor  Kussell  Reynolds  has  classified  under  the 
head  of  "  paralysis  dependent  on  idea."  ' l  Unluckily, 
Hearne  does  not  tell  us  how  his  hunter,  an  untutored 
Indian,  became  '  paralysed  by  idea.'

Dr.  Charcot  adds  :  '  In  every  case,  science  is  a  foe  to 
systematic  negation,  which  the  morrow  may  cause  to  melt 
away  in  the  light  of  its  new  triumphs.'  The  present 
'  new  triumph  '  is  a  mere  coincidence  with  the  dicta  of 
our  Lord,  '  Thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole.  ...  I  have 
not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel.'  There  are 
cures,  as  there  are  maladies,  caused  '  by  idea.'  So,  in  fact, 
we  had  always  understood.  But  the  point  is  that  science, 
wherever  it  agrees  with  David  Hume,  is  not  a  foe,  but  a 
friend  to  '  systematic  negation.'A  parallel  case  of  a  '  miracle,'  the  stigmata  of  St. 
Francis,  was,  of  course,  regarded  by  science  as  a  fable  or 
a  fraud.  But,  now  that  blisters  and  other  lesions  can  be 
produced  by  suggestion,  the  fable  has  become  a  probable 
fact,  and,  therefore,  not  a  miracle  at  all.2  Mr.  James  re- 
marks :  '  As  so  often  happens,  a  fact  is  denied  till  a 
welcome  interpretation  comes  with  it.  Then  it  is  admitted 
readily  enough,  and  evidence  quite  insufficient  to  back  a 
claim,  so  long  as  the  Church  had  an  interest  in  making  it, 
proves  to  be  quite  sufficient  for  modern  scientific  enlighten-

1  See  Dr.  Russell    Reynolds's    paper    in   British    Medical    Journal, 
November  1869.

2  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii.  612.     Charcot,  op.  cit.

SCIENCE   AND  'MIRACLES'  25

ment  the  moment  it  appears  that  a  reputed  saint  can 
thereby  be  claimed  as  a  case  of  "  hystero-epilepsy."  '  lSCIENCE   AND  'MIRACLES'  25

ment  the  moment  it  appears  that  a  reputed  saint  can 
thereby  be  claimed  as  a  case  of  "  hystero-epilepsy."  '  l

But  the  Church  continues  to  have  an  interest  in  the 
matter.  As  the  class  of  facts  which  Hume  declined  to 
examine  begins  to  be  gradually  admitted  by  science,  the 
thing  becomes  clear.  The  evidence  which  could  safely 
convey  these  now  admittedly  possible  facts,  say  from  the 
time  of  Christ,  is  so  far  proved  to  be  not  necessarily 
mythical — proved  to  be  not  incapable  of  carrying  state- 
ments probably  correct,  which  once  seemed  absolutely 
false.  If  so,  where,  precisely,  ends  its  power  of  carrying 
facts?  Thus  considered,  the  kinds  of  marvellous  events 
recorded  in  the  Gospels,  for  example,  are  no  longer  to  be 
dismissed  on  a  priori  grounds  as  '  mythical.'  We  cannot 
now  discard  evidence  as  necessarily  false  because  it  clashes 
with  our  present  ideas  of  the  possible,  when  we  have  to 
acknowledge  that  the  very  same  evidence  may  safely 
convey  to  us  facts  which  clashed  with  our  fathers'  notions 
of  what  is  possible,  but  which  are  now  accepted.  Our 
notions  of  the  possible  cease  to  be  a  criterion  of  truth  or 
falsehood,  and  our  contempt  for  the  Gospels  as  myths 
must  slowly  die,  as  '  miracle  '  after  '  miracle  '  is  brought 
within  the  realm  of  acknowledged  law.  With  each  such 
admission  the  hypothesis  that  the  Gospel  evidence  is 
mythical  must  grow  weaker,  and  weaker  must  grow  the 
negative  certainty  of  popular  science.The  occurrences  which  took  place  at  and  near  the 
tomb  of  Paris  were  attested,  as  Hume  truly  avers,  by  a 
great  body  of  excellent  evidence.  But  the  wisdom  which 
declined  to  make  a  judicial  examination  has  deprived  us 
of  the  best  kind  of  record.  Analogous  if  not  exactly

1  I  do  not  need  to  be  told  that  Dr.  Maudsley  denied  the  fact  in  1880. 
I  am  prepared  with  the  evidence,  if  it  is  asked  for  by  some  savant  who 
happens  not  to  know  it.

as  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

similar  events  now  confessedly  take  place,  and  are  no 
longer  looked  upon  as  miraculous.  But  as  long  as  they 
were  held  to  be  miraculous,  not  to  examine  the  evidence, 
t,aid  Hume,  was  the  policy  of  '  all  reasonable  people.' 
The  result  was  to  deprive  Science  of  the  best  sort  of  record 
of  facts  which  she  welcomes  as  soon  as  she  thinks  she  can 
explain  them.1  Examples  of  the  folly  of  a  priori  negation 
are  common.  The  British  Association  refused  to  hear  the 
essay  which  Braid,  the  inventor  of  the  word  'hypnotism,' 
had  written  upon  the  subject.  Braid,  Elliotson,  and  other 
English  inquirers  of  the  mid-century,  were  subjected  to 
such  persecutions  as  official  science  could  inflict.  We  read 
of  M.  Deslon,  a  disciple  of  Mesmer,  about  1783,  that  he 
was  'condemned  by  the  Faculty  of  Medicine,  without 
any  examination  of  the  facts.'  The  Inquisition  proceeded 
more  fairly  than  these  scientific  obscurantists.Another  curious  example  may  be  cited.  M.  Guyau, 
in  his  work  '  The  Non-Religion  of  the  Future,'  argues 
that  Religion  is  doomed.  '  Poetic  genius  has  withdrawn 
its  services,'  witness  Tennyson  and  Browning  !  'Among 
orthodox  Protestant  nations  miracles  do  not  happen.' 2 
But  '  marvellous  facts  '  do  happen.3  These  '  marvellous 
facts,'  accepted  by  M.  Guyau,  are  what  Hume  called 
'  miracles,'  and  advised  the  '  wise  and  learned  '  to  laugh 
at,  without  examination.  They  were  not  facts,  and  could 
not  be,  he  said.  Now  to  M.  Guyau's  mind  they  are  facts, 
and  therefore  are  not  miracles.  He  includes  '  mental  sug- 
gestion taking  place  even  at  a  distance.'  A  man  '  can

1  I  am  not  responsible,  of  course,  for  the  scientific  validity  of  Dr. 
Charcot's  theory  of  healing  '  by  idea.'  My  point  merely  is  that  certain 
experts  of  no  slight  experience  or  mean  reputation  do  now  admit,  as  im- 
portant certainties  within  their  personal  knowledge,  exactly  the  phenomena 
which  Hume  asks  the  wise  and  learned  to  laugh  at,  indeed,  but  never  to 
investigate.

-  Pp.  353-355.  5  P.  !)3.

SCIENCE   AND   'MIRACLES'  27-  Pp.  353-355.  5  P.  !)3.

SCIENCE   AND   'MIRACLES'  27

transmit  an  almost  compulsive  command,  it  appears  now- 
adays, by  a  simple  tension  of  his  will.'  If  this  be  so, 
if  '  will '  can  affect  matter  from  a  distance,  obviously  the 
relations  of  will  and  matter  are  not  what  popular  science 
tells  us  that  they  are.  Again,  if  this  truth  is  now  estab- 
lished, and  won  from  that  region  which  Hume  and  popular 
science  forbid  us  to  investigate,  who  knows  what  other 
facts  may  be  redeemed  from  that  limbo,  or  how  far  they 
may  affect  our  views  of  possibilities?  The  admission  of 
mental  action,  operative  a  distance,  is,  of  course,  personal 
only  to  M.  Guyau,  among  friends  of  the  new  negative 
tradition.

We  return  to  Hume.  He  next  argues  that  the  plea- 
sures of  wonder  make  all  accounts  of '  miracles  '  worthless. 
He  has  just  given  an  example  of  the  equivalent  pleasures 
of  dogmatic  disbelief.  Then  Religion  is  a  disturbing  force ; 
but  so,  manifestly,  is  irreligion.  '  The  wise  and  learned 
are  content  to  deride  the  absurdity,  without  informing 
themselves  of  the  particular  facts.'  The  wise  and  learned 
are  applauded  for  their  scientific  attitude.  Again,  miracles 
destroy  each  other,  for  all  religions,  have  their  miracles, 
but  all  religions  cannot  be  true.  This  argument  is  no 
longer  of  force  with  people  who  look  on  'miracles'  as= 
'  X  phenomena,'  not  as  divine  evidences  to  the  truth  of 
this  or  that  creed.  '  The  gazing  populace  receives,  without 
examination,  whatever  soothes  superstition,'  and  Hume's 
whole  purpose  is  to  make  the  wise  and  learned  imitate  the 
gazing  populace  by  rejecting  alleged  facts  '  without  exami- 
nation.' The  populace  investigated  more  than  did  the 
wise  and  learned.Hume  has  an  alternative  definition  of  a  miracle — '  a 
miracle  is  a  transgression  of  a  law  of  nature  by  a  parti- 
cular volition  of  the  Deity,  or  by  the  interposition  of 
some  invisible  agent.'  We  reply  that  what  Hume  calls  a

28  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

'  miracle  '  may  result  from  the  operation  of  some  as  yet 
unascertained  law  of  nature  (say  self-suggestion),  and  that 
our  business,  at  present,  is  to  examine  such  events,  not  to 
account  for  them.

It  may  fairly  be  said  that  Hume  is  arguing  against 
men  who  wished  to  make  so-called  'miracles'  a  test  of 
the  truth  of  Jansenism,  for  example,  and  that  he  could 
not  be  expected  to  answer,  by  anticipation,  ideas  not 
current  in  his  day.  But  he  remains  guilty  of  denouncing 
the  investigation  of  apparent  facts.  No  attitude  can  be 
less  scientific  than  his,  or  more  common  among  many 
men  of  science.According  to  the  humorous  wont  of  things  in  this 
world,  the  whole  question  of  the  marvellous  had  no  sooner 
been  settled  for  ever  by  David  Hume  than  it  was 
reopened  by  Emanuel  Swedenborg.  Now,  Kant  was 
familiar  with  certain  of  the  works  of  Hume,  whether  he 
had  read  his  '  Essay  on  Miracles '  or  not.  Far  from  declining 
to  examine  the  portentous  '  visions  '  of  Swedenborg,  Kant 
interested  himself  deeply  in  the  topic.  As  early  as  1758 
he  wrote  his  first  remarks  on  the  seer,  containing  some 
reports  of  stories  or  legends  about  Swedenborg's  '  clair- 
voyance.' In  the  true  spirit  of  psychical  research,  Kant 
wrote  a  letter  to  Swedenborg,  asking  for  information  at 
first  hand.  The  seer  got  the  letter,  but  he  never  answered 
it.  Kant,  however,  prints  one  or  two  examples  of 
Swedenborg's  successes.  Madame  Harteville,  widow  of 
the  Dutch  envoy  in  Stockholm,  was  dunned  by  a  silver- 
smith for  a  debt  of  her  late  husband's.  She  believed  that 
it  had  been  paid,  but  could  not  find  the  receipt.  She 
therefore  asked  Swedenborg  to  use  his  renowned  gifts. 
He  promised  to  see  what  he  could  do,  and,  three  days 
later,  arrived  at  the  lady's  house  while  she  was  giving  a 
tea,  or  rather  a  coffee,  party.  To  the  assembled  society

SCIENCE   AND  'MIRACLES'  29SCIENCE   AND  'MIRACLES'  29

Swedenborg  remarked,  '  in  a  cold-blooded  way,  that  he  had 
seen  her  man,  and  spoken  to  him.'  The  late  M.  Harteville 
declared  to  Swedenborg  that  he  had  paid  the  bill,  seven 
months  before  his  decease  :  the  receipt  was  in  a  cupboard 
upstairs.  Madame  Harteville  replied  that  the  cupboard 
had  been  thoroughly  searched  to  no  purpose.  Swedenborg 
answered  that,  as  he  learned  from  the  ghost,  there  was  a 
secret  drawer  behind  the  side-plank  within  the  cupboard. 
The  drawer  contained  diplomatic  correspondence,  and  the 
missing  receipt.  The  whole  company  then  went  upstairs, 
found  the  secret  drawer,  and  the  receipt  among  the  other 
papers.  Kant  adds  Swedenborg's  clairvoyant  vision,  from 
Gothenburg,  of  a  great  fire  at  Stockholm  (dated  Septem- 
ber 1756).  Kant  pined  to  see  Swedenborg  himself,  and 
waited  eagerly  for  his  book,  '  Arcana  Ccelestia.'  At  last 
he  obtained  this  work,  at  the  ransom,  ruinous  to  Kant  at 
that  time,  of  11.  But  he  was  disappointed  with  what  he 
read,  and  in  '  Traume  eines  Geistersehers,'  made  a  some- 
what sarcastic  attempt  at  a  metaphysical  theory  of 
apparitions.

'  Velut  aegri  somnia  vanse 
Finguntur  species  '

is  his  motto.'  Velut  aegri  somnia  vanse 
Finguntur  species  '

is  his  motto.

Kant's  real  position  about  all  these  matters  is,  I 
venture  to  say,  almost  identical  with  that  of  Sir  Walter 
Scott.  A  Scot  himself,  by  descent,  Kant  may  have  heard 
tales  of  second-sight  and  bogles.  Like  Scott,  he  dearly 
loved  a  ghost-story ;  like  Scott  he  was  canny  enough  to 
laugh,  publicly,  at  them  and  at  himself  for  his  interest  in 
them.  Yet  both  would  take  trouble  to  inquire.  As  Kant 
vainly  wrote  to  Swedenborg  and  others — as  he  vainly 
spent  11.  on  'Arcana  Coalestia,'  so  Sir  Walter  was  anxious 
to  go  to  Egypt  to  examine  the  facts  of  ink-gazing  clair- 
voyance. Kant  confesses  that  each  individual  ghost-story

30  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

found  him  sceptical,  whereas  the  cumulative  mass  made  a 
considerable  impression.1

The  first  seventy  pages  of  the  '  Traume  '  are  devoted 
to  a  perfectly  serious  discussion  of  the  metaphysics  of 
'  Spirits.'  On  page  73  he  pleasantly  remarks,  '  Now  we 
shall  understand  that  all  said  hitherto  is  superfluous,'  and 
he  will  not  reproach  the  reader  who  regards  seers  not  as 
citizens  of  two  worlds  (Plotinus),  but  as  candidates  for 
Bedlam.Kant's  irony  is  peculiarly  Scottish.  He  does  not  him- 
self know  how  far  he  is  in  earnest,  and,  to  save  his 
self-respect  and  character  for  canniness,  he  '  jocks  wi' 
deeficulty.'  He  amuses  himself  with  trying  how  far  he 
can  carry  speculations  on  metaphysics  (not  yet  reformed 
by  himself)  into  the  realm  of  the  ghostly.  He  makes 
admissions  about  his  own  tendency  to  think  that  he  has 
an  immaterial  soul,  and  that  these  points  are,  or  may  be, 
or  some  day  will  be,  scientifically  solved.  These  admis- 
sions are  eagerly  welcomed  by  Du  Prel  in  his  '  Philosophy 
of  Mysticism ; '  but  they  are  only  part  of  Kant's  joke, 
and  how  far  they  are  serious,  Kant  himself  does  not  know. 
If  spiritualists  knew  their  own  business,  they  would  trans- 
late and  publish  Kant's  first  seventy  pages  of  '  Traume.' 
Something  like  telepathy,  action  of  spirit,  even  discar- 
nate,  on  spirit,  is  alluded  to,  but  the  idea  is  as  old  as 
Lavaterus  at  least  (p.  52).  Kant  has  a  good  deal  to  say, 
like  Scott  in  his  '  Demonology,'  on  the  physics  of  Halluci- 
nation, but  it  is  antiquated  matter.  He  thinks  the  whole 
topic  of  spiritual  being  only  important  as  bearing  on 
hopes  of  a  future  life.  As  speculation,  all  is  '  in  the  air,' 
and  as  in  such  matters  the  learned  and  unlearned  are  on  a 
level  of  ignorance,  science  will  not  discuss  them.  He  then 
repeats  the  Swedenborg  stories,  and  thinks  it  would  be

1   Traume,  p.  70.

SCIENCE   AND   'MIRACLES'  31

useful  to  posterity  if  some  one  would  investigate  them 
while  witnesses  are  alive  and  memories  are  fresh.

In  fact,  Kant  asks  for  psychical  research.useful  to  posterity  if  some  one  would  investigate  them 
while  witnesses  are  alive  and  memories  are  fresh.

In  fact,  Kant  asks  for  psychical  research.

As  for  Swedenborg's  so  costly  book,  Kant  laughs  at  it. 
There  is  in  it  no  evidence,  only  assertion.  Kant  ends, 
having  pleased  nobody,  he  says,  and  as  ignorant  as  when 
he  began,  by  citing  cultivons  noire  jar  din.

Kant  returned  to  the  theme  in  '  Anthropologische 
Didaktik.'  He  discusses  the  unconscious,  or  sub-conscious, 
which,  till  Sir  William  Hamilton  lectured,  seems  to  have 
been  an  absolutely  unknown  topic  to  British  psychologists. 
*  So  ist  das  Feld  dunkler  Vorstellungen  das  grosste  in 
Menschen.'  He  has  a  chapter  on  '  The  Divining  Faculty  ' 
(pp.  89-93).  He  will  not  hear  of  presentiments,  and, 
unlike  Hegel,  he  scouts  the  Highland  second-sight.  The 
'  possessed  '  of  anthropology  are  epileptic  patients.  Mystic? 
(Swedenborg)  are  victims  of  Schwdrmerei.

This  reference  to  Swedenborg  is  remarked  upon  by 
Schubert  in  his  preface  to  the  essay  of  Kant.  He  points 
out  that  '  it  is  interesting  to  compare  the  circumspection, 
the  almost  uncertainty  of  Kant  when  he  had  to  deliver  a 
judgment  on  the  phenomena  described  by  himself  and  as 
to  which  he  had  made  inquiry  [i.e.  in  his  letter  re  Sweden- 
borg to  Mile,  de  Knobloch],  and  the  very  decided  opinions 
he  expressed  forty  years  later  on  Swedenborg  and  his 
companions '  [in  the  work  cited,  sections  35-37.  The 
opinion  in  paragraph  35  is  a  general  one  as  to  mystics. 
There  is  no  other  mention  of  Swedenborg].On  the  whole  Kant  is  interested,  but  despairing.  He 
wants  facts,  and  no  facts  are  given  to  him  but  the  book 
of  the  Prophet  Emanuel.  But,  as  it  happened,  a  new,  or  ;-, 
revived,  order  of  facts  was  just  about  to  solicit  scientific 
attention.  Kant  had  (1766)  heard  rumours  of  healing  by 
magnetism,  and  of  the  alleged  effect  of  the  magnet  on  the

32  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION32  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

human  frame.  The  subject  was  in  the  air,  and  had  already 
won  the  attention  of  Mesmer,  about  whom  Kant  had 
information.  It  were  superfluous  to  tell  again  the  familiar 
story  of  Mesmer's  performances  at  Paris.  While  Mesmer's 
theory  of  '  magnetism '  was  denounced  by  contemporary 
science,  the  discovery  of  the  hypnotic  sleep  was  made  by 
his  pupil,  Puysegur.  This  gentleman  was  persuaded  that 
instances  of  '  thought-transference '  (not  through  known 
channels  of  sense)  occurred  between  the  patient  and  the 
magnetiser,  and  he  also  believed  that  he  had  witnessed 
cases  of  '  clairvoyance,'  '  lucidity,'  vue  a  distance,  in  which 
the  patient  apparently  beheld  places  and  events  remote  in 
space.  These  things  would  now  be  explained  by  'un- 
conscious suggestion  '  in  the  more  sceptical  schools  of 
pyschological  science.  The  Eevolution  interrupted  scien- 
tific study  in  France  to  a  great  degree,  but  '  somnambu- 
lism '  (the  hypnotic  sleep)  and  '  magnetism '  were  eagerly 
examined  in  Germany.  Modern  manuals,  for  some  reason, 
are  apt  to  overlook  these  German  researches  and  specula- 
tions. (Compare  Mr.  Vincent's  '  Elements  of  Hypnotism,' 
p.  34.)  The  Schellings  were  interested  ;  Eitter  thought  he 
had  detected  a  new  force,  '  Siderism.'  Mr.  Wallace,  in  his 
preface  to  Hegel's  '  Philosophie  des  Geistes,'  speaks  as  if 
Eitter  had  made  experiments  in  telepathy.  He  may 
have  done  so,  but  his  '  Siderismus '  (Tubingen,  1808)  is  a 
Eeport  undertaken  for  the  Academy  of  Munich,  on  the 
doings  of  an  Italian  water-finder,  or  'dowser.'  Eitter 
gives  details  of  seventy-four  experiments  in  '  dowsing  '  for 
water,  metals,  or  coal.  He  believes  in  the  faculty,  but 
not  in  '  psychic '  explanations,  or  the  Devil.  He  talks 
about  'electricity'  (pp.  170,190).  He  describes  his  pre- 
cautions to  avoid  vulgar  fraud,  but  he  took  no  precautions 
against  unconscious  thought-transference.  He  reckoned 
the  faculty  '  temperamental '  and  useful.SCIENCE  AND  '  MIKACLES  '  33

Amoretti,  at  Milan,  examined  hundreds  of  cases  of  the 
so-called  Divining  Kod,  and  Jung  Stilling  became  an  early 
spiritualist  and  '  full-welling  fountain  head '  of  ghost  stories.

Probably  the  most,  important  philosophical  result  of 
the  early  German  researches  into  the  hypnotic  slumber 
is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Hegel.  Owing  to  his 
peculiar  use  of  a  terminology,  or  scientific  language,  all 
his  own,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  make  Hegel's  meaning 
even  moderately  clear.  Perhaps  we  may  partly  elucidate 
it  by  a  similitude  of  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.  Suppose  we 
compare  the  ordinarj^  everyday  consciousness  of  each  of 
us  to  a  spectrum,  whose  ends  towards  each  extremity 
fade  out  of  our  view.

Beyond  the  range  of  sight  there  may  be  imagined  a 
lower  or  physiological  end  :  for  our  ordinary  consciousness, 
of  course,  is  unaware  of  many  physiological  processes  which 
are  eternally  going  on  within  us.  Digestion,  so  long  as  it 
is  healthy,  is  an  obvious  example.  But  hypnotic  experi- 
ment makes  it  certain  that  a  patient,  in  the  hypnotic 
condition,  can  consciously,  or  at  least  purposefully,  affect 
physiological  processes  to  which  the  ordinary  consciousness 
is  blind — for  example,  by  raising  a  blister,  when  it  is  sug- 
gested that  a  blister  must  be  raised.  Again  (granting  the 
facts  hypothetically  and  merely  for  the  sake  of  argument), 
at  the  upper  end  of  the  spectrum,  beyond  the  view  of  ordi- 
nary everyday  consciousness,  knowledge  may  be  acquired 
of  things  which  are  out  of  the  view  of  the  consciousness 
of  every  day.  For  example  (for  the  sake  of  argument  let 
us  admit  it),  unknown  and  remote  people  and  places  may 
be  seen  and  described  by  clairvoyance,  or  vue  a  distance.•  Now  Hegel  accepted  as  genuine  the  facts  which  we 
here  adduce  merely  for  the  sake  of  argument,  and  by  way 
of  illustrations.  But  he  did  not  regard  the  clairvoyant 
consciousness  (or  whatever  we  call  it)  which,  ex  Jiypothesi,

D

34  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGIOND

34  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

is  untrammelled  by  space,  or  even  by  time,  as  occupying 
what  we  style  the  upper  end  of  the  psychical  spectrum.  On 
the  contrary,  he  placed  it  at  the  lower  end.  Hegel's  upper 
end  '  loses  itself  in  light ; '  the  lower  end,  qu i  voit  tant 
de  choses,  as  La  Fontaine's  shepherd  says,  is  not  '  a 
sublime  mental  phase,  and  capable  of  conveying  general 
truths.'  Time  and  space  do  not  thwart  the  consciousness 
at  Hegel's  lower  end,  which  springs  from  '  the  great  soul 
of  nature.'  But  that  lower  end,  though  it  may  see  for 
Jeanne  d'Arc  at  Valcouleurs  a  battle  at  Rouvray,  a  hundred 
leagues  away,  does  not  communicate  any  lofty  philo- 
sophic truths.1  The  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,  in  Hegel's 
opinion,  merely  indicate  that  the  '  material '  is  really 
'  ideal,'  which,  perhaps,  is  as  much  as  we  can  ask  from 
them.  '  The  somnambulist  and  clairvoyant  see  with- 
out eyes,  and  carry  their  visions  directly  into  regions 
where  the  waking  consciousness  of  orderly  intelligence 
cannot  enter  '  (Wallace).  Hegel  admits,  however,  that 
'  in  ordinary  self-possessed  conscious  life '  there  are 
traces  of  the  '  magic  tie,'  '  especially  between  female 
friends  of  delicate  nerves,'  to  whom  he  adds  husband  and 
wife,  and  members  of  the  same  family.  He  gives  (with- 
out date  or  source)  a  case  of  a  girl  in  Germany  who  saw 
her  brother  lying  dead  in  a  hospital  at  Valladolid.  Her 
brother  was  at  the  time  in  the  hospital,  but  it  was  another 
man  in  the  next  bed  who  was  dead.  '  It  is  thus  impossible 
to  make  out  whether  what  the  clairvoyants  really  see 
preponderates  over  what  they  deceive  themselves  in.'As  long  as  the  facts  which  Hegel  accepted  are  not 
officially  welcomed  by  science,  it  may  seem  superfluous  to 
dispute  as  to  whether  they  are  attained  by  the  lower  or 
the  higher  stratum  of  our  consciousness.  But  perhaps 
the  question  here  at  issue  may  be  elucidated  by  some

1  Hegel  accepts  the  clairvoyance  of  the  Pucelle.

SCIENCE   AND   'MIRACLES'  35

remarks  of  Dr.  Max  Dessoir.  Psychology,  he  says,  has 
proved  that  in  every  conception  and  idea  an  image  or 
group  of  images  must  be  present.  These  mental  images 
are  the  recrudescence  or  recurrence  of  perceptions.  We 
see  a  tree,  or  a  man,  or  a  dog,  and  whenever  we  have 
before  our  minds  the  conception  or  idea  of  any  of  these 
things  the  original  perception  of  them  returns,  though  of 
course  more  faintly.  But  in  Dr.  Dessoir's  opinion  these 
revived  mental  images  would  reach  the  height  of  actual 
hallucinations  (so  that  the  man,  dog,  or  tree  would  seem 
visibly  present)  if  other  memories  and  new  sensations  did 
not  compete  with  them  and  check  their  development.

Suppose,  to  use  Mile.  Ferrand's  metaphor,  a  human 
body,  living,  but  with  all  its  channels  of  sensation  hitherto 
unopened.  Open  the  sense  of  sight  to  receive  a  flash  of 
green  colour,  and  close  it  again.  Apparently,  whenever 
the  mind  informing  this  body  had  the  conception  of  green 
(and  it  could  have  no  other)  it  would  also  have  an  halluci- 
nation of  green,  thus

'  Annihilating  all  that's  made, 
To  a  green  thought  in  a  green  shade.''  Annihilating  all  that's  made, 
To  a  green  thought  in  a  green  shade.'

Now,  in  sleep  or  hypnotic  trance  the  competition  of  new 
sensations  and  other  memories  is  removed  or  diminished, 
and  therefore  the  idea  of  a  man,  dog,  or  tree  once  sug- 
gested to  the  hypnotised  patient,  does  become  an  actual 
hallucination.  The  hypnotised  patient  sees  the  absent 
object  which  he  is  told  to  see,  the  sleeper  sees  things  not 
really  present.

Our  primitive  state,  before  the  enormous  competition 
of  other  memories  and  new  sensations  set  in,  would  thus 
be  a  state  of  hallucination.  Our  normal  present  condition, 
in  which  hallucination  is  checked  by  competing  memories 
and  new  sensations,  is  a  suppression  of  our  original, 
primitive,  natural  tendencies.  Hallucination  represents

n  2

36  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

'  the  main  trunk  of  our  psychical  existence.' l  In  Dr. 
Dessoir's  theory  this  condition  of  hallucination  is  man's 
original  and  most  primitive  condition,  but  it  is  not  a 
higher,  rather  a  lower  state  of  spiritual  activity  than 
the  everyday  practical  unhallucinated  consciousness.This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Hegel,  who  supposes 
our  primitive  mental  condition  to  be  capable  of  descrying 
objects  remote  in  space  and  time.  Mr.  Myers,  as  we  saw, 
is  of  the  opposite  opinion,  as  to  the  relative  dignity  and 
relative  reality  of  the  present  everyday  self,  and  the  old 
original  fundamental  Self.  Dr.  Dessoir  refrains  from  pro- 
nouncing a  decided  opinion  as  to  whether  the  original, 
primitive,  hallucinated  self  within  us  does  '  preside  over 
powers  and  actions  at  a  distance,'  such  as  clairvoyance ; 
but  he  believes  in  hypnotisation  at  a  distance.  His  theory, 
like  Hegel's,  is  that  of  'atavism,'  or  'throwing  back'  to 
some  very  remote  ancestral  condition.  This  will  prove  of 
interest  later.

Hegel,  at  all  events,  believed  in  the  fact  of  clair- 
voyance (though  deeming  it  of  little  practical  use)  ;  he 
accepted  telepathy  ('  the  magic  tie ')  ;  he  accepted  inter- 
change of  sensations  between  the  hypnotiser  and  the 
hypnotised  ;  he  believed  in  the  divining  rod,  and,  unlike 
Kant,  even  in  '  Scottish  second-sight.'  '  The  intuitive  soul 
oversteps  the  conditions  of  time  and  space ;  it  beholds 
things  remote,  things  long  past,  and  things  to  come.' 2

The  pendulum  of  thought  has  swung  back  a  long  way 
from  the  point  whither  it  was  urged  by  David  Hume. 
Hegel  remarks  :  '  The  facts,  it  might  seem,  first  of  all  call 
for  verification.  But  such  verification  would  be  super-

1  See  Dr.  Dessoir,  in  Das  Doppcl  Icii,  as  quoted  by  Mr.  Myers,  Proceed- 
ings, vol.  vi.  213.

-  Pliilosopkie  des  Gcistcs,  Werke,  vol.  vii.  179.  Berlin,  1845.  The 
examples  and  much  of  the  philosophising  are  in  the  Zusatzc,  not  translated 
in  Mr.  Wallace's  version,  Oxford,  1894.

SCIENCE  AND   'MIRACLES'  37SCIENCE  AND   'MIRACLES'  37

fluous  to  those  on  whose  account  it  was  called  for,  since 
they  facilitate  the  inquiry  for  themselves  by  declaring  the 
narratives,  infinitely  numerous  though  they  be,  and  accre- 
dited by  the  education  and  character  of  the  witnesses, 
to  be  mere  deception  and  imposture.  Their  a  priori 
conceptions  are  so  rooted  that  no  testimony  can  avail 
against  them,  and  they  have  even  denied  what  they  have 
seen  with  their  own  eyes,'  and  reported  under  their  own 
hands,  like  Sir  David  Brewster.  Hegel,  it  will  be 
observed,  takes  the  facts  as  given,  and  works  them  into 
his  general  theory  of  the  Sensitive  Soul  (fuMende  Seele). 
He  does  not  try  to  establish  the  facts  ;  but  to  establish,  or 
at  least  to  examine  them,  is  the  first  business  of  Psychical 
Research.  Theorising  comes  later.

The  years  which  have  passed  between  the  date  of 
Hegel's  '  Philosophy  of  Mind '  and  our  own  time  have 
witnessed  the  long  dispute  over  the  existence,  the  nature, 
and  the  causes  of  the  hypnotic  condition,  and  over  the 
reality  and  limitations  of  the  phenomena.  Thus  the 
Academy  of  Medicine  in  Paris  appointed  a  Committee  to 
examine  the  subject  in  1825.  The  Report  on  '  Animal 
Magnetism,'  as  it  was  then  styled,  was  presented  in  1831. 
The  Academy  lacked  the  courage  to  publish  it,  for  the 
Report  was  favourable  even  to  certain  of  the  still  disputed 
phenomena.  At  that  time,  in  accordance  with  a  survival 
of  the  theory  of  Mesmer,  the  agent  in  hypnotic  cases  was 
believed  to  be  a  kind  of  efflux  of  a  cosmic  fluid  from  the 
'  magnetiser  '  to  the  patient.  There  was  '  a  magnetic 
connection.'Though  no  distinction  between  mesmerism  and  hyp- 
notism is  taken  in  popular  language,  '  mesmerism '  is 
a  word  implying  this  theory  of  '  magnetic '  or  other 
unknown  personal  influence.  '  Hypnotism,'  as  will  pre- 
sently be  seen,  implies  no  such  theory.  The  Academy's

38  THE   MAKING  OF  KELIGION

Report  (1831)  attested  the  development,  under  'mag- 
netism,' of  '  new  faculties,'  such  as  clairvoyance  and  intui- 
tion, also  the  production  of  '  great  changes  in  the  physical 
economy,'  such  as  insensibility,  and  sudden  increase  of 
strength.  The  Report  declared  it  to  be  '  demonstrated  ' 
that  sleep  could  be  produced  '  without  suggestion,'  as  we 
say  now,  though  the  term  was  not  then  in  use.  '  Sleep 
has  been  produced  in  circumstances  in  which  the  persons 
could  not  see  or  were  ignorant  of  the  means  employed  to 
produce  it.'

The  Academy  did  its  best  to  suppress  this  Report,  which 
attests  the  phenomena  that  Hegel  accepted,  phenomena 
still  disputed.  Six  years  later  (1837),  a  Committee  reported 
against  the  pretensions  of  a  certain  Berna,  a  '  magnetiser.' 
No  person  acted  on  both  Committees,  and  this  Report  was 
accepted.  Later,  a  number  of  people  tried  to  read  a  letter 
in  a  box,  and  failed.  '  This,'  says  Mr.  Vincent,  '  settled 
the  question  with  regard  to  clairvoyance ; '  though  it 
might  be  more  logical  to  say  that  it  settled  the  preten- 
sions of  the  competitors  on  that  occasion.  The  Academy 
now  decided  that,  because  certain  persons  did  not  satisfy 
the  expectations  raised  by  their  preliminary  advertise- 
ments, therefore  the  question  of  magnetism  was  definitely 
closed.We  have  often  to  regret  that  scientific  eminence 
is  not  always  accompanied  by  scientific  logic.  Where 
science  neglects  a  subject,  charlatans  and  dupes  take  it  up. 
In  England  '  animal  magnetism '  had  been  abandoned 
to  this  class  of  enthusiasts,  till  Thackeray's  friend,  Dr. 
Elliotson,  devoted  himself  to  the  topic.  He  was  persecuted 
as  doctors  know  how  to  persecute  ;  but  in  1841,  Braid, 
of  Manchester,  discovered  that  the  so-called  '  magnetic 
sleep  '  could  be  produced  without  any  '  magnetism.'  He 
made  his  patients  stare  fixedly  at  an  object,  and  encouraged

SCIENCE  AND  'MIRACLES  39SCIENCE  AND  'MIRACLES  39

them  to  expect  to  go  to  sleep.  He  called  his  method 
'  Hypnotism,'  a  term  which  begs  no  question.  Seeming 
to  cease  to  be  mysterious,  hypnotism  became  all  but 
respectable,  and  was  being  used  in  surgical  operations, 
till  it  was  superseded  by  chloroform.  In  England,  the 
study  has  been,  and  remains,  rather  suspect,  while  on  the 
Continent  hypnotism  is  used  both  for  healing  purposes  and 
in  the  inquiries  of  experimental  psychology.  Wide  differ- 
ences of  opinion  still  exist,  as  to  the  nature  of  the  hypnotic 
sleep,  as  to  its  physiological  concomitants,  and  as  to  the 
limits  of  the  faculties  exercised  in  or  out  of  the  slumber.  It  is 
not  even  absolutely  certain  that  the  exercise  of  the  stranger 
faculties — for  instance,  that  the  production  of  anaesthesia 
and  rigidity — are  the  results  merely  of  '  suggestion '  and 
expectancy.  A  hypnotised  patient  is  told  that  the  middle 
finger  of  his  left  hand  will  become  rigid  and  incapable  of 
sensation.  This  occurs,  and  is  explained  by  '  suggestion,' 
though  how  '  suggestion '  produces  the  astonishing  effect 
is  another  problem.  The  late  Mr.  Gurney,  however, 
made  a  number  of  experiments  in  which  no  suggestion 
was  pronounced,  nor  did  the  patients  know  which  of  their 
fingers  was  to  become  rigid  and  incapable  of  pain.  The 
patient's  hands  were  thrust  through  a  screen,  on  the  other 
side  of  which  the  hypnotist  made  passes  above  the  finger 
which  was  to  become  rigid.  The  lookers-on  selected  the 
finger,  and  the  insensibility  was  tested  by  a  strong  electric 
current.  The  effect  was  also  produced  without  passes, 
the  operator  merely  pointing  at  the  selected  finger,  and 
'  willing  '  the  result.  If  he  did  not  '  will '  it,  nothing 
occurred,  nor  did  anything  occur  if  he  willed  without 
pointing.  The  proximity  of  the  operator's  hand  produced 
no  effect  if  he  did  not  '  will,'  nor  was  his  '  willing '  success- 
ful if  he  did  not  bring  his  hand  near  that  of  the  patient. 
Other  people's  hands,  similarly  situated,  produced  no  effect.40  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Experiments  in  transferring  taste,  as  of  salt,  sugar, 
cayenne  pepper,  from  operator  to  subject,  were  also  suc- 
cessful. Drs.  Janet  and  Gibert  also  produced  sleep  in  a 
woman  at  a  distance,  by  '  willing  '  it,  at  hours  which  were 
selected  by  a  system  of  drawing  lots.1  These  facts,  of 
course,  rather  point  to  an  element  of  truth  in  the  old 
mesmeric  hypothesis  of  some  specific  influence  in  the 
operator.  They  cannot  very  well  be  explained  by  sug- 
gestion and  expectancy.  But  these  facts  and  facts  of 
clairvoyance  and  thought-transference  will  be  rejected  as 
superstitious  delusions  by  people  who  have  not  met  them 
in  their  own  experience.  This  need  not  prevent  us  from 
examining  them,  because  all  the  facts,  including  those 
now  universally  accepted  by  Continental  and  scarcely 
impeached  by  British  science,  have  been  noisily  rejected 
again  and  again  on  Hume's  principles.The  rarer  facts,  as  Mr.  Gurney  remarks,  '  still  go 
through  the  hollow  form  of  taking  place.'  Here  is  an 
example  of  the  mode  in  which  these  phenomena  are 
treated  by  popular  science.  Mr.  Vincent  says  that  '  clair- 
voyance and  phrenology  were  Elliotson's  constant  stock 
in  trade.'  (Phrenology  was  also  Braid's  stock  in  trade.) 
'  It  is  a  matter  of  congratulation  to  have  been  so  soon 
delivered  from  what  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey  has  well  called 
"  a  mass  of  superincumbent  rubbish."  ' 2  Clairvoyance  is 
part  of  a  mass  of  rubbish,  on  page  57.  On  page  67, 
Mr.  Vincent  says  :  '  There  are  many  interesting  questions, 
such  as  telepathy,  thought-reading,  clairvoyance,  upon 
which  it  would  be  perhaps  rash  to  give  any  decided 
opinion.  .  .  .  All  these  strange  psychical  conditions  pre- 
sent problems  of  great  interest,'  and  are  only  omitted 
because  '  they  have  not  a  sufficient  bearing  on  the  normal

1  Proceeding*,  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  201-207,  390-392.

-    Elements  of  Hypnotism,  p.  57.

SCIENCE  AND   'MIKACLES'  41

states  of  hypnosis.  .  .  .'  Thus  what  was  '  rubbish  '  in 
one  page  '  presents  problems  of  great  interest '  ten  pages 
later,  and,  after  offering  a  decided  opinion  that  clairvoy- 
ance is  rubbish,  Mr.  Vincent  thinks  it  rash  to  give  any 
decided  opinion.  It  is  rather  rash  to  give  a  decided 
opinion,  and  then  to  say  that  it  is  rash  to  do  so.1This  brief  sketch  shows  that  science  is  confronted  by 
certain  facts,  which,  in  his  time,  Hume  dismissed  as 
incredible  miracles,  beneath  the  contempt  of  the  wise  and 
learned.  We  also  see  that  the  stranger  and  rarer  pheno- 
mena which  Hegel  accepted  as  facts,  and  interwove  with 
his  general  philosophy,  are  still  matters  of  dispute. 
Admitted  by  some  men  of  science,  they  are  doubted  by 
others ;  by  others,  again,  are  denied,  while  most  of  the 
journalists  and  authors  of  cheap  primers,  who  inspire 
popular  tradition,  regard  the  phenomena  as  frauds  or 
fables  of  superstition.  But  it  is  plain  that  these  pheno- 
mena, like  the  more  ordinary  facts  of  hypnotism,  may 
finally  be  admitted  by  science.  The  scientific  world 
laughed,  not  so  long  ago,  at  Ogham  inscriptions,  meteor- 
ites, and  at  pal£eolithic  weapons  as  impostures,  or  freaks 
of  nature.  Now  nobody  has  any  doubt  on  these  matters, 
and  clairvoyance,  thought-transference,  and  telepathy  may, 
not  inconceivably,  be  as  fortunate  in  the  long  run  as 
meteorites,  or  as  the  more  usual  phenomena  of  hypnotism.

It  is  only  Lord  Kelvin  who  now  maintains,  or  lately 
maintained,  that  in  hypnotism  there  is  nothing  at  all  but 
fraud  and  malobservation.  In  years  to  come  it  may  be  that 
only  some  similar  belated  voice  will  cry  that  in  thought- 
transference  there  is  nothing  but  malobservation  and  fraud. 
At  present  the  serious  attention  and  careful  experiment

1  Possibly  Mr.  Vincent  only  means  that  Elliotson's  experiments,  '  little 
more  than  sober  fooling  '  (p.  57),  with  the  sisters  Okey,  were  rubbish.  But 
whether  the  sisters  Okey  were  or  were  not  honest  is  a  question  on  which 
we  cannot  enter  here.

42  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION42  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

needed  for  the  establishment  of  the  facts  are  more  com- 
mon among  French  than  among  English  men  of  science. 
When  published,  these  experiments,  if  they  contain  any 
affirmative  instances,  are  denounced  as  '  superstitious,'  or 
criticised  after  what  we  must  charitably  deem  to  be  a  very 
hasty  glance,  by  the  guides  of  popular  opinion.  Examples 
of  this  method  will  be  later  quoted.  Meanwhile  the 
disputes  as  to  these  alleged  facts  are  noticed  here,  because 
of  their  supposed  relation  to  the  Origin  of  Eeligion.

4343

AMONG  the  various  forms  of  science  which  are  reaching 
and  affecting  the  new  popular  tradition,  we  have  reckoned 
Anthropology.  Pleasantly  enough,  Anthropology  has  her- 
self but  recently  emerged  from  that  limbo  of  the  un- 
recognised in  which  Psychical  Research  is  pining.  The 
British  Association  used  to  reject  anthropological  papers 
as  'vain  dreams  based  on  travellers'  tales.'  No  doubt  the 
British  Association  would  reject  a  paper  on  clairvoyance 
as  a  vain  dream  based  on  old  wives'  fables,  or  on  hyste- 
rical imposture.  Undeniably  the  study  of  such  themes  is 
hampered  by  fable  and  fraud,  just  as  anthropology  has  to 
be  ceaselessly  on  its  guard  against '  travellers'  tales,'  against 
European  misunderstandings  of  savage  ideas,  and  against 
civilised  notions  and  scientific  theories  unconsciously  read 
into  barbaric  customs,  rites,  traditions,  and  usages.  Man, 
ondoyant  et  divers,  is  the  subject  alike  of  anthropo- 
logy and  of  psychical  research.  Man  (especially  savage 
man)  cannot  be  secluded  from  disturbing  influences,  and 
watched,  like  the  materials  of  a  chemical  experiment  in  a 
laboratory.  Nor  can  man  be  caught  in  a  '  primitive ' 
state :  his  intellectual  beginnings  lie  very  far  behind  the 
stage  of  culture  in  which  we  find  the  lowest  known  races. 
Consequently  the  matter  on  which  anthropology  works  is 
fluctuating ;  the  evidence  on  which  it  rests  needs  the  most 
sceptical  criticism,  and  many  of  its  conclusions,  in  the

44  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

necessary  absence  of  historical  testimony  as  to  times  far 
behind  the  lowest  known  savages,  must  be  hypothetical.44  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

necessary  absence  of  historical  testimony  as  to  times  far 
behind  the  lowest  known  savages,  must  be  hypothetical.

For  these  sound  reasons  official  science  long  looked 
askance  on  Anthropology.  Her  followers  were  not  re- 
garded as  genuine  scholars,  and,  perhaps  as  a  result  of 
this  contempt,  they  were  often  '  broken  men,'  intellectual 
outlaws,  people  of  one  wild  idea.  To  the  scientific  mind, 
anthropologists  or  ethnologists  were  a  horde  who  darkly 
muttered  of  serpent  worship,  phallus  worship,  Arkite 
doctrines,  and  the  Ten  Lost  Tribes  that  kept  turning  up 
in  the  most  unexpected  places.  Anthropologists  were  said 
to  gloat  over  dirty  rites  of  dirty  savages,  and  to  seek  reason 
where  there  was  none.  The  exiled,  the  outcast,  the  pariah 
of  Science,  is,  indeed,  apt  to  find  himself  in  odd  company. 
Round  the  camp-fire  of  Psychical  Research  too,  in  the 
unofficial,  unstaked  waste  of  Science,  hover  odd,  mena- 
cing figures  of  Esoteric  Buddhists,  Satanistes,  Occultists, 
Christian  Scientists,  Spiritualists,  and  Astrologers,  as  the 
Arkites  and  Lost  Tribesmen  haunted  the  cradle  of 
anthropology.But  there  was  found  at  last  to  be  reason  in  the 
thing,  and  method  in  the  madness.  Evolution  was  in 
it.  The  acceptance,  after  long  ridicule,  of  palaeolithic 
weapons  as  relics  of  human  culture,  probably  helped  to 
bring  Anthropology  within  the  sacred  circle  of  permitted 
knowledge.  Her  topic  was  full  of  illustrations  of  the 
doctrine  of  Mr.  Darwin.  Modern  writers  on  the  theme 
had  been  anticipated  by  the  less  systematic  students  of 
the  eighteenth  century — Goguet,  de  Brosses,  Millar, 
Fontenelle,  Lafitau,  Boulanger,  or  even  Hume  and  Voltaire. 
As  pioneers  these  writers  answer  to  the  early  mesmerists  and 
magnetists,  Puysegur,  Amoretti,  Ritter,  Elliotson,  Mayo, 
Gregory,  in  the  history  of  Psychical  Research.  They 
were  on  the  same  track,  in  each  case,  as  Lubbock,  Tylor,

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  45

Spencer,  Bastian,  and  Frazer,  or  as  Gurney,  Eichet, 
Myers,  Janet,  Dessoir,  and  Von  Schrenck-Notzing.  But 
the  earlier  students  were  less  careful  of  method  and 
evidence.Spencer,  Bastian,  and  Frazer,  or  as  Gurney,  Eichet, 
Myers,  Janet,  Dessoir,  and  Von  Schrenck-Notzing.  But 
the  earlier  students  were  less  careful  of  method  and 
evidence.

Evidence  !  that  was  the  stumbling  block  of  anthro- 
pology. We  still  hear,  in  the  later  works  of  Mr.  Max 
Miiller,  the  echo  of  the  old  complaints.  Anything  you 
please,  Mr.  Max  Miiller  says,  you  may  find  among  your 
useful  savages,  and  (in  regard  to  some  anthropologists)  his 
criticism  is  just.  You  have  but  to  skim  a  few  books  of 
travel,  pencil  in  hand,  and  pick  out  what  suits  your  case. 
Suppose,  as  regards  our  present  theme,  your  theory  is  that 
savages  possess  broken  lights  of  the  belief  in  a  Supreme 
Being.  You  can  find  evidence  for  that.  Or  suppose  you 
want  to  show  that  they  have  no  religious  ideas  at  all ;  you 
can  find  evidence  for  that  also.  Your  testimony  is  often 
derived  from  observers  ignorant  of  the  language  of  the 
people  whom  they  talk  about,  or  who  are  themselves 
prejudiced  by  one  or  other  theory  or  bias.  How  can  you 
pretend  to  raise  a  science  on  such  foundations,  especially 
as  the  savage  informants  wish  to  please  or  to  mystify 
inquirers,  or  they  answer  at  random,  or  deliberately  con- 
ceal their  most  sacred  institutions,  or  have  never  paid  any 
attention  to  the  subject  ?To  all  these  perfectly  natural  objections  Mr.  Tylor  has 
replied.1  Evidence  must  be  collected,  sifted,  tested,  as 
in  any  other  branch  of  inquiry.  A  writer,  '  of  course,  is 
bound  to  use  his  best  judgment  as  to  the  trustworthi- 
ness of  all  authors  he  quotes,  and,  if  possible,  to  obtain 
several  accounts  to  certify  each  point  in  each  locality.' 
Mr.  Tylor  then  adduces  '  the  test  of  recurrence,'  of  un- 
designed coincidence  in  testimony,  as  Millar  had  already

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  9,  10

46  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

argued  in  the  last  century.1  If  a  mediaeval  Mahommedan 
in  Tartary,  a  Jesuit  in  Brazil,  a  Wesleyan  in  Fiji,  one 
may  add  a  police  magistrate  in  Australia,  a  Presbyterian 
in  Central  Africa,  a  trapper  in  Canada,  agree  in  describing 
some  analogous  rite  or  myth  in  these  diverse  lands  and 
ages,  we  cannot  set  down  the  coincidence  to  chance  or 
fraud.  '  Now,  the  most  important  facts  of  ethnography 
are  vouched  for  in  this  way.'

We  may  add  that  even  when  the  ideas  of  savages  are 
obscure,  we  can  often  detect  them  by  analysis  of  the 
institutions  in  which  they  are  expressed.2We  may  add  that  even  when  the  ideas  of  savages  are 
obscure,  we  can  often  detect  them  by  analysis  of  the 
institutions  in  which  they  are  expressed.2

Thus  anthropological,  like  psychical  or  any  other 
evidence,  must  be  submitted  to  conscientious  processes 
of  testing  and  sifting.  Contradictory  instances  must  be 
hunted  for  sedulously.  Nothing  can  be  less  scientific 
than  to  snatch  up  any  traveller's  tale  which  makes  for  our 
theory,  and  to  ignore  evidence,  perhaps  earlier,  or  later,  or 
better  observed,  which  makes  against  it.  Yet  this,  un- 
fortunately, in  certain  instances  (which  will  be  adduced)  has 
been  the  occasional  error  of  Mr.  Huxley  and  Mr.  Spencer.3 
Mr.  Spencer  opens  his  '  Ecclesiastical  Institutions  '  by  the 
remark  that  '  the  implication  [from  the  reported  absence 
of  the  ideas  of  belief  in  persons  born  deaf  and  dumb]  is 
that  the  religious  ideas  of  civilised  men  are  not  innate  ' 
(who  says  they  are?),  and  this  implication  Mr.  Spencer 
supports  by  '  proofs  that  among  various  savages  religious 
ideas  do  not  exist.'  '  Sir  John  Lubbock  has  given  many 
of  these.'  But  it  would  be  well  to  advise  the  reader  to 
consult  Roskoff's  confutation  of  Sir  John  Lubbock,  and 
Mr.  Tylor's  masterly  statement.4  Mr.  Spencer  cited  Sir

1  Origin  of  Ranks.

-  I  may  be  permitted  to  refer  to  '  Reply  to  Objections  '   in  the  appendix 
to  my  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion,  vol.  ii.

3  Spencer,  Ecclesiastical  Institutions,  pp.  672,  673.

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  417-425.     Cf.  however  Princip.  of  Social,  p.  304.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  473  Spencer,  Ecclesiastical  Institutions,  pp.  672,  673.

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  417-425.     Cf.  however  Princip.  of  Social,  p.  304.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  47

Samuel  Baker  for  savages  without  even  '  a  ray  of  super- 
stition '  or  a  trace  of  worship.  Mr.  Tylor,  twelve  years 
before  Mr.  Spencer  wrote,  had  demolished  Sir  Samuel 
Baker's  assertion,1  as  regards  many  tribes,  and  so  shaken 
it  as  regards  the  Latukas,  quoted  by  Mr.  Spencer.  The 
godless  Dinkas  have  '  a  good  deity  and  heaven-dwelling 
creator,'  carefully  recorded  years  before  Sir  Samuel's  'rash 
denial.'  We  show  later  that  Mr.  Spencer,  relying  on  a 
single  isolated  sentence  in  Brough  Smyth,  omits  all  his 
essential  information  about  the  Australian  Supreme 
Being ;  while  Mr.  Huxley — overlooking  the  copious  and 
conclusive  evidence  as  to  their  ethical  religion — charges 
the  Australians  with  having  merely  a  non-moral  belief  in 
casual  spirits.  We  have  also  to  show  that  Mr.  Huxley, 
under  the  dominance  of  his  theory,  and  inadvertently, 
quotes  a  good  authority  as  saying  the  precise  reverse  of 
what  he  really  does  say.

If  the  facts  not  fitting  their  theories  are  little  observed 
by  authorities  so  popular  as  Mr.  Huxley  and  Mr.  Spencer  ; 
if  instantice,  contradictor  ice,  are  ignored  by  them,  or  left 
vague ;  if  these  things  are  done  in  the  green  tree,  we  may 
easily  imagine  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry.  But  we  need 
not  war  with  hasty  vulgarisateurs  and  headlong  theorists.Enough  has  been  said  to  show  the  position  of  an- 
thropology as  regards  evidence,  and  to  prove  that,  if  he 
confines  his  observations  to  certain  anthropologists,  the 
censures  of  Mr.  Max  Miiller  are  justified.  It  is  mainly 
for  this  reason  that  the  arguments  presently  to  follow 
are  strung  on  the  thread  of  Mr.  Tylor's  truly  learned  and 
accurate  book,  'Primitive  Culture.'

Though  but  recently  crept  forth,  vix  aut  ne  vix 
quidem,  from  the  chill  shade  of  scientific  disdain,  An- 
thropology adopts  the  airs  of  her  elder  sisters  among  the

1  Op.  cit.  i.  423,  424.

481  Op.  cit.  i.  423,  424.

48

sciences,  and  is  as  severe  as  they  to  the  Cinderella  of  the 
family,  Psychical  Research.  She  must  murmur  of  her 
fairies  among  the  cinders  of  the  hearth,  while  they  go 
forth  to  the  ball,  and  dance  with  provincial  mayors  at  the 
festivities  of  the  British  Association.  This  is  ungenerous, 
and  unfortunate,  as  the  records  of  anthropology  are  rich 
in  unexamined  materials  of  psychical  research.  I  am  un- 
acquainted with  any  work  devoted  by  an  anthropologist 
of  renown  to  the  hypnotic  and  kindred  practices  of  the 
lower  races,  except  Herr  Bastian's  very  meagre  tract, 
'  Uber  psychische  Beobachtungen  bei  Naturvolkern.' l 
We  possess,  none  the  less,  a  mass  of  scattered  information 
on  this  topic,  the  savage  side  of  psychical  phenomena,  in 
works  of  travel,  and  in  Mr.  Tylor's  monumental  '  Primitive 
Culture.'  Mr.  Tylor,  however,  as  we  shall  see,  regards  it 
as  a  matter  of  indifference,  or,  at  least,  as  a  matter  beyond 
the  scope  of  his  essay,  to  decide  whether  the  parallel 
supernormal  phenomena  believed  in  by  savages,  and  said  to 
recur  in  civilisation,  are  facts  of  actual  experience,  or  not. 
Now,  this  question  is  not  otiose.  Mr.  Tylor,  like 
other  anthropologists,  Mr.  Huxley,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer, 
and  their  followers  and  popularisers,  constructs,  on  an- 
thropological grounds,  a  theory  of  the  Origin  of  Eeligion. 
That  origin  anthropology  explains  as  the  result  of  early 
and  fallacious  reasonings  on  a  number  of  biological  and 
psychological  phenomena,  both  normal  and  (as  is  alleged 
by  savages)  supernormal.  These  reasonings  led  to  the 
belief  in  souls  and  spirits.  Now,  first,  anthropology  has 
taken  for  granted  that  the  Supreme  Deities  of  savages 
are  envisaged  by  them  as  '  spirits.'  This,  paradoxical  as 
the  statement  may  appear,  is  just  what  does  not  seem 
to  be  proved,  as  we  shall  show.  Next,  if  ,the  super  -1  Published  for  the  Berlin  Society  of  Experimental  Psychology,  Giinther. 
Leipzig,  1890.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND  RELIGION  49

normal  phenomena  (clairvoyance,  thought-transference, 
phantasms  of  the  dead,  phantasms  of  the  dying,  and 
others)  be  real  matters  of  experience,  the  inferences  drawn 
from  them  by  early  savage  philosophy  may  be,  in  some 
degree,  erroneous.  But  the  inferences  drawn  by  mate- 
rialists who  reject  the  supernormal  phenomena  will  also, 
perhaps,  be,  let  us  say,  incomplete.  Religion  will  have 
been,  in  part,  developed  out  of  facts,  perhaps  inconsistent 
with  materialism  in  its  present  dogmatic  form.  To  put  it 
less  trenchantly,  and  perhaps  more  accurately,  the  alleged 
facts  '  are  not  merely  dramatically  strange,  they  are  not 
merely  extraordinary  and  striking,  but  they  are  "  odd  "  in 
the  sense  that  they  will  not  easily  fit  in  with  the  views 
which  physicists  and  men  of  science  generally  give  us  of  the 
universe  in  which  we  live '  (Mr.  A.  J.  Balfour^ President's 
Address,  'Proceedings,'  S.P.E.  vol.  x.  p.  8,  1894).

As  this  is  the  case,  it  might  seem  to  be  the  business 
of  Anthropology,  the  Science  of  Man,  to  examine,  among 
other  things,  the  evidence  for  the  actual  existence  of  those 
alleged  unusual  and  supernormal  phenomena,  belief  in 
which  is  given  as  one  of  the  origins  of  religion.To  make  this  examination,  in  the  ethnographic  field, 
is  almost  a  new  labour.  As  we  shall  see,  anthropolo- 
gists have  not  hitherto  investigated  such  things  as  the 
'  Fire- walk  '  of  savages,  uninjured  in  the  flames,  like  the 
Three  Holy  Children.  The  world-wide  savage  practice  of 
divining  by  hallucinations  induced  through  gazing  into  a 
smooth  deep  (crystal-gazing)  has  been  studied,  I  think,  by 
no  anthropologist.  The  veracity  of  '  messages  '  uttered 
by  savage  seers  when  (as  they  suppose)  '  possessed  '  or 
'  inspired '  has  not  been  criticised,  and  probably  cannot 
be,  for  lack  of  detailed  information.  The  '  physical  phe- 
nomena '  which  answer  among  savages  to  the  use  of  the 
'  divining  rod,'  and  to  '  spiritist '  marvels  in  modern  times,

E

50  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

have  only  been  glanced  at.  In  short,  all  the  savage  paral- 
lels to  the  so-called  '  psychical  phenomena '  now  under 
discussion  in  England,  America,  Germany,  Italy,  and 
France,  have  escaped  critical  analysis  and  comparison 
with  their  civilised  counterparts.An  exception  among  anthropologists  is  Mr.  Tylor.  He 
has  not  suppressed  the  existence  of  these  barbaric  parallels 
to  our  modern  problems  of  this  kind.  But  his  interest 
in  them  practically  ends  when  he  has  shown  that  the 
phenomena  helped  to  originate  the  savage  belief  in 
*  spirits,'  and  when  he  has  displayed  the  '  survival '  of  that 
belief  in  later  culture.  He  does  not  ask  '  Are  the  phe- 
nomena real  ?  '  he  is  concerned  only  with  the  savage 
philosophy  of  the  phenomena  and  with  its  relics  in 
modern  spiritism  and  religion.  My  purpose  is  to  do,  by 
way  only  of  ebauche,  what  neither  anthropology  nor 
psychical  research  nor  psychology  has  done  :  to  put  the 
savage  and  modern  phenomena  side  by  side.  Such 
evidence  as  we  can  give  for  the  actuality  of  the  modern 
experiences  will,  so  far  as  it  goes,  raise  a  presumption 
that  the  savage  beliefs,  however  erroneous,  however 
darkened  by  fraud  and  fancy,  repose  on  a  basis  of  real 
observation  of  actual  phenomena.

Anthropology  is  concerned  with  man  and  what  is  in  man 
— humani  nihil  a  se  alienum  putat.  These  researches, 
therefore,  are  within  the  anthropological  province,  espe- 
cially as  they  bear  on  the  prevalent  anthropological 
theory  of  the  Origin  of  Keligion.  By  '  religion  '  we  mean, 
for  the  purpose  of  this  argument,  the  belief  in  the 
existence  of  an  Intelligence,  or  Intelligences  not  human, 
and  not  dependent  on  a  material  mechanism  of  brain  and 
nerves,  which  may,  or  may  not,  powerfully  control  men's 
fortunes  and  the  nature  of  things.  We  also  mean  the 
additional  belief  that  there  is,  in  man,  an  element  so  far

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  51ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  51

kindred  to  these  Intelligences  that  it  can  transcend  the 
knowledge  obtained  through  the  known  bodily  senses,  and 
may  possibly  survive  the  death  of  the  body.  These  two 
beliefs  at  present  (though  not  necessarily  in  their  origin) 
appear  chiefly  as  the  faith  in  God  and  in  the  Immortality 
of  the  Soul.

It  is  important,  then,  to  trace,  if  possible,  the  origin  of 
these  two  beliefs.  If  they  arose  in  actual  communion 
with  Deity  (as  the  first  at  least  did,  in  the  theory  of  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures),  or  if  they  could  be  proved  to  arise  in 
an  unanalysable  sensus  numinis,  or  even  in  '  a  perception 
of  the  Infinite '  (Max  Miiller) ,  religion  would  have  a 
divine,  or  at  least  a  necessary  source.  To  the  Theist, 
what  is  inevitable  cannot  but  be  divinely  ordained,  there- 
fore religion  is  divinely  preordained,  therefore,  in  essentials, 
though  not  in  accidental  details,  religion  is  true.  The 
atheist,  or  non-theist,  of  course  draws  no  such  inferences.But  if  religion,  as  now  understood  among  men,  be  the 
latest  evolutionary  form  of  a  series  of  mistakes,  fallacies, 
and  illusions,  if  its  germ  be  a  blunder,  and  its  present 
form  only  the  result  of  progressive  but  unessential  refine- 
ments on  that  blunder,  the  inference  that  religion  is 
untrue — that  nothing  actual  corresponds  to  its  hypothesis 
—is  very  easily  drawn.  The  inference  is  not,  perhaps, 
logical,  for  all  our  science  itself  is  the  result  of  progres- 
sive refinements  upon  hypotheses  originally  erroneous, 
fashioned' to  explain  facts  misconceived.  Yet  our  science 
is  true,  within  its  limits,  though  very  far  from  being  ex- 
haustive of  the  truth.  In  the  same  way,  it  might  be  argued, 
our  religion,  even  granting  that  it  arose  out  of  primitive 
fallacies  and  false  hypotheses,  may  yet  have  been  refined, 
as  science  has  been,  through  a  multitude  of  causes,  into 
an  approximate  truth.

Frequently  as  I  am  compelled  to  differ  from  Mr.  Spencer

E    2

52Frequently  as  I  am  compelled  to  differ  from  Mr.  Spencer

E    2

52

both  as  to  facts  and  their  interpretation,  I  arn  happy  to 
find  that  he  has  anticipated  me  here.  Opponents  will 
urge,  he  says,  that  'if  the  primitive  belief  (in  ghosts) 
'  was  absolutely  false,  all  derived  beliefs  from  it  must  be 
absolutely  false.'  Mr.  Spencer  replies  :  '  A  germ  of  truth 
was  contained  in  the  primitive  conception —the  truth, 
namely,  that  the  power  which  manifests  itself  in  con- 
sciousness is  but  a  differently  conditioned  form  of  the 
power  which  manifests  itself  beyond  consciousness.'  In 
fact,  we  find  Mr.  Spencer,  like  Faust  as  described  by 
Marguerite,  saying  much  the  same  thing  as  the  priests, 
but  not  quite  in  the  same  way.  Of  course,  I  allow  for  a 
much  larger  '  germ  of  truth  '  in  the  origin  of  the  ghost 
theory  than  Mr.  Spencer  does.  But  we  can  both  say 
'  the  ultimate  form  of  the  religious  consciousness  is  '  (will 
be  ?)  '  the  final  development  of  a  consciousness  which  at 
the  outset  contained  a  germ  of  truth  obscured  by  multi- 
tudinous errors.'  '

'  One  God,  one  law,  one  element, 
And  one  far-off  divine  event, 
To  which  the  whole  creation  moves.''  One  God,  one  law,  one  element, 
And  one  far-off  divine  event, 
To  which  the  whole  creation  moves.'

Coming  at  last  to  Mr.  Tylor,  we  find  that  he  begins  by 
dismissing  the  idea  that  any  known  race  of  men  is  devoid 
of  religious  conceptions.  He  disproves,  out  of  their  own 
mouths,  the  allegations  of  several  writers  who  have  made 
this  exploded  assertion  about  '  godless  tribes.'  He  says : 
'The  thoughts  and  principles  of  modern  Christianity  are 
attached  to  intellectual  clues  which  run  back  through  far 
prae-Christian  ages  to  the  very  origin  of  human  civilisation, 
perhaps  even  of  human  existence.'  ~  So  far  we  abound  in 
Mr.  Tylor's  sense.  '  As  a  minimum  definition  of  religion  f 
he  gives  'the  belief  in  spiritual  beings,'  which  appears

1  Ecclesiastical  Institutions,  837-839. 
•  Primitive  Culture,  i.  421,  chapter  xi.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  53

'  among  all  low  races  with  whom  we  have  attained  to 
thoroughly  intimate   relations.'      The   existence   of   this 
belief  at  present  does  not  prove  that  no  races  were  ever, 
at  any  time,  destitute  of  all  belief.     But  it  prevents  us 
from  positing  the  existence  of  such  creedless  races,  in  any 
age,  as  a  demonstrated  fact.     We  have  thus,  in  short,  no 
opportunity  of  observing,  historically,  man's  development 
from  blank  unbelief  into  even  the  minimum  or  most  rudi- 
mentary form  of  belief.     We  can  only  theorise  and  make  , , 
more  or  less  plausible  conjectures  as  to  the  first  rudiments  /      '• '/ 
of  human  faith  in  God  and  in  spiritual  beings.     We  find  x,  • 
no  race  whose  mind,  as  to  faith,  is  a  tabula  rasa.

*'*'

To  the  earliest  faith  Mr.  Tylor  gives  the  name  of  * 
Animism,  a  term  not  wholly  free  from  objection,  though 
'  Spiritualism '  is  still  less  desirable,  having  been  usurped 
by  a  form  of  modern  superstitiousness.  This  Animism,  'in 
its  full  development,  includes  the  belief  in  souls  and  in  a 
future  state,  in  controlling  deities  and  subordinate  spirits.' 
In  Mr.  Tylor's  opinion,  as  in  Mr.  Huxley's,  Animism,  in 
its  lower  (and  earlier)  forms,  has  scarcely  any  connection 
with  ethics.  Its  '  spirits  '  do  not  '  make  for  righteousness.' 
This  is  a  side  issue  to  be  examined  later,  but  we  may 
provisionally  observe,  in  passing,  that  the  ethical  ideas, 
such  as  they  are,  even  of  Australian  blacks  are  reported 
to  be  inculcated  at  the  religious  mysteries  (Bora)  of  the 
tribes,  which  were  instituted  by  and  are  performed  in 
honour  of  the  gods  of  their  native  belief.  But  this  topic 
must  be  reserved  for  our  closing  chapters.

Mr.  Tylor,  however,  is  chiefly  concerned  with  Animism 
as  '  an  ancient  and  world- wide  philosophy,  of  which  be- 
lief is  the  theory,  and  worship  is  the  practice.'  Given 
Animism,  then,  or  the  belief  in  spiritual  beings,  as  the 
earliest  form  and  minimum  of  religious  faith,  what  is  the 
origin  of  Animism '?  It  will  be  seen  that,  by  Animism,  Mr.

54  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION54  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION

Tylor  does  not  mean  the  alleged  early  theory,  implicitly  if 
not  explicitly  and  consciously  held,  that  all  things  whatso- 
ever are  animated  and  are  personalities.1  Judging  from 
the  behaviour  of  little  children,  and  from  the  myths  of 
savages,  early  man  may  have  half-consciously  extended 
his  own  sense  of  personal  and  potent  and  animated 
existence  to  the  whole  of  nature  as  known  to  him.  Not 
only  animals,  but  vegetables  and  inorganic  objects,  may 
have  been  looked  on  by  him  as  persons,  like  what  he  felt 
himself  to  be.  The  child  (perhaps  merely  because  taught 
to  do  so)  beats  the  naughty  chair,  and  all  objects  are  persons 
in  early  mythology.  But  this  feeling,  rather  than  theory, 
may  conceivably  have  existed  among  early  men,  before 
they  developed  the  hypothesis  of  'spirits,'  'ghosts,'  or 
souls.  It  is  the  origin  of  that  hypothesis,  'Animism,' 
which  Mr.  Tylor  investigates.

What,  then,  is  the  origin  of  Animism  ?  It  arose  in  the 
earliest  traceable  speculations  on  '  two  groups  of  biological 
problems.'

(1)  '  What  is  it  that  makes  the  difference  between  a 
living  body  and  a  dead  one  ;  what  causes  waking,  sleep, 
trance,  disease,  and  death  ?  '

(2)  '  What  are  those  human  shapes  which  appear  in 
dreams  and  visions  ?  ' 2

Here  it  should  be  noted  that  Mr.  Tylor  most  properly 
takes  a  distinction  between  sleeping  '  dreams  '  and  waking 
'  visions,'  or  '  clear  vision.'  The  distinction  is  made  even 
by  the  blacks  of  Australia.  Thus  one  of  the  Kurnai  an- 
nounced that  his  Yambo,  or  soul,  could  '  go  out '  during 
sleep,  and  see  the  distant  and  the  dead.  But  '  while  any 
one  might  be  able  to  communicate  with  the  ghosts,  during1  This  theory  is  what  Mr.  Spencer  calls  '  Animism,'  and  does  not 
believe  in.  What  Mr.  Tylor  calls  '  Animism  '  Mr.  Spencer  believes  in,  but 
he  calls  it  the  '  Ghost  Theory."

-  Primitive  Culture,  i.  428.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  65

sleep,  it  was  only  the  wizards  who  were  able  to  do  so  in 
waking  hours.'  A  wizard,  in  fact,  is  a  person  susceptible 
(or  feigning  to  be  susceptible)  when  awake  to  hallucina- 
tory perceptions  of  phantasms  of  the  dead.  '  Among  the 
Kulin  of  Wimmera  Kiver  a  man  became  a  wizard  who, 
as  a  boy,  had  seen  his  mother's  ghost  sitting  at  her  grave.' ! 
These  facts  prove  that  a  race  of  savages  at  the  bottom 
of  the  scale  of  culture  do  take  a  formal  distinction  between 
normal  dreams  in  sleep  and  waking  hallucinations — a 
thing  apt  to  be  denied.

Thus  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  offers  the  massive  generali- 
sation that  savages  do  not  possess  a  language  enabling  a 
man  to  say  '  I  dreamed  that  I  saw/  instead  of  '  I  saw ' 
('Principles  of  Sociology,  p.  150).  This  could  only  be 
proved  by  giving  examples  of  such  highly  deficient 
languages,  which  Mr.  Spencer  does  not  do.2  In  many 
savage  speculations  there  occur  ideas  as  subtly  meta- 
physical as  those  of  Hegel.  Moreover,  even  the  Australian 
languages  have  the  verb  '  to  see,'  and  the  substantive 
'  sleep.'  Nothing,  then,  prevents  a  man  from  saying  '  I 
saw  in  sleep  '  (insomnium,  evvirviov).

We   have   shown   too,  that   the  Australians  take  an 
essential  distinction  between  waking  hallucinations  (ghosts 
seen   by  a   man  when  awake)  and  the  common  halluci- 
nations of  slumber.      Anybody  can  have  these ;  the  man  t 
who    sees   ghosts   when    awake   is    marked    out    for    a  ] 
wizard.At  the  same  time  the  vividness  of  dreams  among 
certain  savages,  as  recorded  in  Mr.  Im  Thurn's  '  Indians 
of  Guiana,'  and  the  consequent  confusion  of  dreaming

1  Howitt,  Journal  of  Anthropological  Institute,  xiii.  191-195.

-  The  curious  may  consult,  for  savage  words  for  '  dreams,'  Mr.  Scott's 
Dictionary  of  the  Mang'anja  Language,  s.v.  '  Lota,'  or  any  glossary  of  any 
savage  language.

56  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

and  waking  experiences,  are  certain  facts.  Wilson  says 
the  same  of  some  negroes,  and  Mr.  Spencer  illustrates 
from  the  confusion  of  mind  in  dreamy  children.  They, 
we  know,  are  much  more  addicted  to  somnambulism  than 
grown-up  people.  I  am  unaware  that  spontaneous  som- 
nambulism among  savages  has  been  studied  as  it  ought 
to  be.  I  have  demonstrated,  however,  that  very  low 
savages  can  and  do  draw  an  essential  distinction  between 
sleeping  and  waking  hallucinations.

Again,  the  crystal-gazer,  whose  apparently  telepathic 
crystal  pictures  are  discussed  later  (chap,  v.),  was  intro- 
duced to  a  crystal  just  because  she  had  previously  been 
known  to  be  susceptible  to  waking  and  occasionally 
veracious  hallucinations.

It  was  not  only  on  the  dreams  of  sleep,  so  easily 
forgotten  as  they  are,  that  the  savage  pondered,  in  his 
early  speculations  about  the  life  and  the  soul.  He 
included  in  his  materials  the  much  more  striking  and 
memorable  experiences  of  waking  hours,  as  we  and 
Mr.  Tylor  agree  in  holding.Reflecting  on  these  things,  the  earliest  savage  reasoners 
would  decide :  (1)  that  man  has  a  '  life '  (which  leaves 
him  temporarily  in  sleep,  finally  in  death)  ;  (2)  that  man 
also  possesses  a  '  phantom '  (which  appears  to  other  people 
in  their  visions  and  dreams).  The  savage  philosopher 
would  then  '  combine  his  information,'  like  a  celebrated 
writer  on  Chinese  metaphysics.  He  would  merely  '  com- 
bine the  life  and  the  phantom,'  as  '  manifestations  of  one 
and  the  same  soul.'  The  result  would  be  '  an  apparitional 
soul,'  or  '  ghost-soul.'

This  ghost-soul  would  be  a  highly  accomplished 
creature,  '  a  vapour,  film,  or  shadow,'  yet  conscious, 
capable  of  leaving  the  body,  mostly  invisible  and  impal- 
pable, '  yet  also  manifesting  physical  power,'  existing  and

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  57

appearing  after  the  death  of  the  body,  able  to  act  on  the 
bodies  of  other  men,  beasts,  and  things.1

When  the  earliest  reasoners,  in  an  age  and  in  mental 
conditions  of  which  we  know  nothing  historically,  had 
evolved  the  hypothesis  of  this  conscious,  powerful,  sepa- 
rable soul,  capable  of  surviving  the  death  of  the  body,  it 
was  not  difficult  for  them  to  develop  the  rest  of  Eeligion, 
as  Mr.  Tylor  thinks.  A  powerful  ghost  of  a  dead  man 
might  thrive  till,  its  original  owner  being  long  forgotten,  it 
became  a  God.  Again  (souls  once  given)  it  would  not  be 
a  very  difficult  logical  leap,  perhaps,  to  conceive  of  souls, 
or  spirits,  that  had  never  been  human  at  all.  It  is,  we 
may  say,  only  le  premier  pas  qui  coute,  the  step  to  the  be- 
lief in  a  surviving  separable  soul.  Nevertheless,  when  we 
remember  that  Mr.  Tylor  is  theorising  about  savages  in

«/  o«/  o

the  dim  background  of  human  evolution,  savages  whom 
we  know  nothing  of  by  experience,  savages  far  behind 
Australians  and  Bushmen  (who  possess  Gods),  we  must 
admit  that  he  credits  them  with  great  ingenuity,  and 
strong  powers  of  abstract  reasoning.  He  may  be  right  in 
his  opinion.  In  the  same  way,  just  as  primitive  men 
were  keen  reasoners,  so  early  bees,  more  clever  than 
modern  bees,  may  have  evolved  the  system  of  hexagonal 
cells,  and  only  an  early  fish  of  genius  could  first  have  hit 
on  the  plan,  now  hereditary,  of  killing  a  fly  by  blowing 
water  at  it.

To  this  theory  of  metaphysical  genius  in  very  low 
savages  I  have  no  objection  to  offer.  We  shall  find, 
later,  astonishing  examples  of  savage  abstract  speculation, 
certainly  not  derived  from  missionary  sources,  because 
wholly  out  of  the  missionary's  line  of  duty  and  reflection.

As  early  beasts  had  genius,  so  the  earliest  reasoners 
appear  to  have  been  as  logically  gifted  as  the  lowest

1  Prim.  Cult.  i.  429.

58  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

savages  now  known  to  us,  or  even  as  some  Biblical 
critics.  By  Mr.  Tylor's  hypothesis,  they  first  conceived  the 
extremely  abstract  idea  of  Life,  'that  which  makes  the 
difference  between  a  living  body  and  a  dead  one.' 1  This 
highly  abstract  conception  must  have  been,  however,  the 
more  difficult  to  early  man,  as,  to  him,  all  things, 
universally,  are  'animated.'2  Mr.  Tylor  illustrates  this 
theory  of  early  man  by  the  little  child's  idea  that  '  chairs, 
sticks,  and  wooden  horses  are  actuated  by  the  same  sort 
of  personal  will  as  nurses  and  children  and  kittens.  .  .  . 
In  such  matters  the  savage  mind  well  represents  the 
childish  stage.' 3Now,  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that,  if 
children  think  sticks  are  animated,  they  don't  think  so 
because  they  have  heard,  or  discovered,  that  they  possess 
souls,  and  then  transfer  souls  to  sticks.  We  may  doubt, 
then,  if  primitive  man  came,  in  this  way,  by  reasoning 
on  souls,  to  suppose  that  all  things,  universally,  were 
animated.  But  if  he  did  think  all  things  animated — a 
corpse,  to  his  mind,  was  just  as  much  animated  as  any- 
thing else.  Did  he  reason  :  '  All  things  are  animated.  A 
corpse  is  not  animated.  Therefore  a  corpse  is  not  a 
thing  (within  the  meaning  of  my  General  Law)'  ?

How,  again,  did  early  man  conceive  of  Life,  before  he 
identified  Life  (1)  with  '  that  which  makes  the  differ- 
ence between  a  living  body  and  a  dead  one '  (a  difference 
which,  ex  hypothesi,  he  did  not  draw,  all  things  being 
animated  to  his  mind)  and  (2)  with  '  those  human  shapes 
which  appear  in  dreams  and  visions '  ?  '  The  ancient 
savage  philosophers  probably  reached  the  obvious  inference 
that  every  man  had  two  things  belonging  to  him,  a  life 
and  a  phantom.'  But  everything  was  supposed  to  have

1  Prim.  Cult.  i.  428.  -  Ibid.  i.  285.  3  Ibid.  i.  285,  286.

ANTHROPOLOGY    AND   RELIGION  09

'a  life,'  as  far  as  one  makes  out,  before  the  idea  of 
separable  soul  was  developed,  at  least  if  savages  arrived  at 
the  theory  of  universal  animation  as  children  are  said 
to  do.

We  are  dealing  here  quite  conjecturally  with  facts 
beyond  our  experience.We  are  dealing  here  quite  conjecturally  with  facts 
beyond  our  experience.

In  any  case,  early  man  excogitated  (by  the  hypothesis) 
the  abstract  idea  of  Life,  before  he  first  '  envisaged '  it  in 
material  terms  as  '  breath,'  or  '  shadow.'  He  next  decided 
that  mere  breath  or  shadow  was  not  only  identical  with 
the  more  abstract  conception  of  Life,  but  could  also  take 
on  forms  as  real  and  full-bodied  as,  to  him,  are  the  hallu- 
cinations of  dream  or  waking  vision.  His  reasoning 
appears  to  have  proceeded  from  the  more  abstract  (the 
idea  of  Life)  to  the  more  concrete,  to  the  life  first  shadowy 
and  vaporous,  then  clothed  in  the  very  aspect  of  the  real 
man.

Mr.  Tylor  has  thus  (whether  we  follow  his  logic 
or  not)  provided  man  with  a  theory  of  active,  intelligent, 
separable  souls,  which  can  survive  the  death  of  the  body. 
At  this  theory  early  man  arrived  by  speculations  on  the 
nature  of  life,  and  on  the  causes  of  phantasms  of  the  dead 
or  living  beheld  in  'dreams  and  visions.'  But  our  author 
by  no  means  leaves  oat  of  sight  the  effects  of  alleged 
supernormal  phenomena  believed  in  by  savages,  with 
their  parallels  in  modern  civilisation.  These  supernormal 
phenomena,  whether  real  or  illusory,  are,  he  conceives, 
facts  in  that  mass  of  experiences  from  which  savages 
constructed  their  belief  in  separable,  enduring,  intelligent 
souls  or  ghosts,  the  foundation  of  religion.

While  we  are,  perhaps  owing  to  our  own  want  of  capa- 
city, puzzled  by  what  seem  to  be  two  kinds  of  early  philo- 
sophy— (1)  a  sort  of  instinctive  or  unreasoned  belief  in 
universal  animation,  which  Mr.  Spencer  calls  '  Animism '

60  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION60  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION

and  does  not  believe  in,  (2)  the  reasoned  belief  in  sepa- 
rable and  surviving  souls  of  men  (and  in  things),  which 
Mr.  Spencer  believes  in,  and  Mr.  Tylor  call  '  Animism  '- 
we  must  also  note  another  difficulty.  Mr.  Tylor  may 
seem  to  be  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  earliest,  remote, 
unknown  thinkers  on  life  and  the  soul  were  existing  on 
the  same  psychical  plane  as  we  ourselves,  or,  at  least,  as 
modern  savages.  Between  modern  savages  and  ourselves, 
in  this  regard,  he  takes  certain  differences,  but  takes  none 
between  modern  savages  and  the  remote  founders  of 
religion.

Thus  Mr.  Tylor  observes  :

'  The  condition  of  the  modern  ghost-seer,  whose  imagi- 
nation passes  on  such  slight  excitement  into  positive 
hallucination,  is  rather  the  rule  than  the  exception  among 
uncultured  and  intensely  imaginative  tribes,  whose  minds 
may  be  thrown  off  their  balance  by  a  touch,  a  word,  a 
gesture,  an  unaccustomed  noise.'  l

I  find  evidence  that  low  contemporary  savages  are 
not  great  ghost-seers,  and,  again,  I  cannot  quite  accept 
Mr.  Tylor 's  psychology  of  the  '  modern  ghost-seer.'  Most 
such  favoured  persons  whom  I  have  known  were  steady, 
unimaginative,  unexcitable  people,  with  just  one  odd 
experience.  Lord  Tennyson,  too,  after  sleeping  in  the 
bed  of  his  recently  lost  father  on  purpose  to  see  his  ghost, 
decided  that  ghosts  '  are  not  seen  by  imaginative  people.'We  now  examine,  at  greater  length,  the  psychical 
conditions  in  which,  according  to  Mr.  Tylor,  contemporary 
savages  differ  from  civilised  men.  Later  we  shall  ask 
what  may  be  said  as  to  possible  or  presumable  psychical 
differences  between  modern  savages  and  the  datelessly 
distant  founders  of  the  belief  in  souls.  Mr.  Tylor 
attributes  to  the  lower  races,  and  even  to  races  high

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  446.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  61

above  their  level,  '  morbid  ecstasy,  brought  on  by  medita- 
tion, fasting,  narcotics,  excitement,  or  disease.'  Now,  we 
may  still  '  meditate  ' — and  how  far  the  result  is  '  morbid  ' 
is  a  matter  for  psychologists  and  pathologists  to  deter- 
mine. Fasting  we  do  not  practise  voluntarily,  nor  would 
we  easily  accept  evidence  from  an  Englishman  as  to 
the  veracity  of  voluntary  fasting  visions,  like  those  of 
Cotton  Mather.  The  visions  of  disease  we  should  set 
aside,  as  a  rule,  with  those  of  '  excitement,'  produced, 
for  instance,  by  '  devil-dances.'  Narcotic  and  alcoholic 
visions  are  not  in  question.1  For  our  purpose  the  induced 
trances  of  savages  (in  whatever  way  voluntarily  brought 
on)  are  analogous  to  the  modern  induced  hypnotic  trance. 
Any  supernormal  acquisitions  of  knowledge  in  these 
induced  conditions,  among  savages,  would  be  on  a 
par  with  similar  alleged  experiences  of  persons  under 
hypnotism.

We  do  not  differ  from  known  savages  in  being  able  to 
bring  on  non-normal  psychological  conditions,  but  we  pro- 
duce these,  as  a  rule,  by  other  methods  than  theirs,  and  such 
experiments  are  not  made  on  all  of  us,  as  they  were 
on  all  Bed  Indian  boys  and  girls  in  the  '  medicine-fast,'  at 
the  age  of  puberty.Further,  in  their  normal  state,  known  savages,  or 
some  of  them,  are  more  '  suggestible '  than  educated 
Europeans  at  least.2  They  can  be  more  easily  halluci- 
nated in  their  normal  waking  state  by  suggestion.  Once 
more,  their  intervals  of  hunger,  followed  by  gorges  of 
food,  and  their  lack  of  artificial  light,  combine  to  make 
savages  more  apt  to  see  what  is  not  there  than  are 
comfortable  educated  white  men.  But  Mr.  Tylor  goes

1  See,  however,  Dr.  Von  Schrenck-Notzing,  Die  Beobaclitung  narcotiscJier 
Mittel  fiir  den  Hypnotismus,  and  S.P.E.  Proceedings,  x.  292-299. 
-  Primitive  Culture,  i.  306-315.

62  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

too  far  when  he  says  '  where  the  savage  could  see 
phantasms,  the  civilised  man  has  come  to  amuse  himself 
with  fancies.' l  The  civilised  man,  beyond  all  doubt,  is 
capable  of  being  enfantosme.In  all  that  he  says  on  this  point,  the  point  of  psychical 
condition,  Mr.  Tylor  is  writing  about  known  savages  as  they 
differ  from  ourselves.  But  the  savages  who  ex  hypothesi 
evolved  the  doctrine  of  souls  lie  beyond  our  ken,  far 
behind  the  modern  savages,  among  whom  we  find  belief 
not  only  in  souls  and  ghosts,  but  in  moral  gods.  About 
the  psychical  condition  of  the  savages  who  worked  out 
the  theory  of  souls  and  founded  religion  we  necessarily 
know  nothing.  If  there  be  such  experiences  as  clairvoy- 
ance, telepathy,  and  so  on,  these  unknown  ancestors  of 
ours  may  (for  all  that  we  can  tell)  have  been  peculiarly 
open  to  them,  and  therefore  peculiarly  apt  to  believe  in 
separable  souls.  In  fact,  when  we  write  about  these  far- 
off  founders  of  religion,  we  guess  in  the  dark,  or  by 
the  flickering  light  of  analogy.  The  lower  animals  have 
faculties  (as  in  their  power  of  finding  their  way  home 
through  new  unknown  regions,  and  in  the  ants'  modes  of 
acquiring  and  communicating  knowledge  to  each  other) 
which  are  mysteries  to  us.  The  terror  of  dogs  in  '  haunted 
houses '  and  of  horses  in  passing  '  haunted '  scenes  has 
often  been  reported,  and  is  alluded  to  briefly  by  Mr.  Tylor. 
Balaam's  ass,  and  the  dogs  which  crouched  and  whined 
before  Athene,  whom  Eumseus  could  not  see,  are  '  classical ' 
instances.

The  weakness  of  the  anthropological  argument  here 
is,  we  must  repeat,  that  we  know  little  more  about  the 
mental  condition  and  experiences  of  the  early  thinkers 
who  developed  the  doctrine  of  Souls  than  we  know  about 
the  mental  condition  and  experiences  of  the  lower  animals.

1  i.  315.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND   RELIGION  631  i.  315.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND   RELIGION  63

And  the  more  firmly  a  philosopher  believes  in  the  Dar- 
winian hypothesis,  the  less,  he  must  admit,  can  he  suppose 
himself  to  know  about  the  twilight  ages,  between  the 
lower  animal  and  the  fully  evolved  man.  What  kind  of 
creature  was  man  when  he  first  conceived  the  germs,  or 
received  the  light,  of  Religion  ?  All  is  guess-work  here  ! 
We  may  just  allude  to  Hegel's  theory  that  clairvoyance 
and  hypnotic  phenomena  are  produced  in  a  kind  of  tem- 
porary atavism,  or  '  throwing  back '  to  a  remotely  ancient 
condition  of  the  '  sensitive  soul '  (Fiihlende  Seele) .  The 
'  sensitive '  [unconditioned,  clairvoyant]  faculty  or  '  soul '  is 
'  a  disease  when  it  becomes  a  state  of  the  self-conscious, 
educated,  self-possessed  human  being  of  civilisation.' l 
1  Second  sight,'  Hegel  thinks,  was  a  product  of  an  earlier 
day  and  earlier  mental  condition  than  ours.

Approaching  this  almost  untouched  subject — the  early 
psychical  condition  of  man — not  from  the  side  of  meta- 
physical speculations  like  Hegel,  but  with  the  instruments 
of  modern  psychology  and  physiology,  Dr.  Max  Dessoir, 
of  Berlin,  following,  indeed,  M.  Taine,  has  arrived,  as  we 
saw,  at  somewhat  similar  conclusions.  '  This  fully  con- 
scious life  of  the  spirit,'  in  which  we  moderns  now  live, 
'  seems  to  rest  upon  a  substratum  of  reflex  action  of  a 
hallucinatory  type.'  Our  actual  modern  condition  is  not 
'  fundamental,'  and  '  hallucination  represents,  at  least  in 
its  nascent  condition,  the  main  trunk  of  our  psychical 
existence.' 2Now,  suppose  that  the  remote  and  unknown  ancestors 
of  ours  who  first  developed  the  doctrine  of  souls  had  not 
yet  spread  far  from  '  the  main  trunk  of  our  psychical 
existence,'  far  from  constant  hallucination.  In  that  case

1  Phil,  des  Geistes,  pp.  406,  408.

2  See  also  Mr.  A.  J.  Balfour's  Presidential  Address  to  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research,  Proceedings,  vol.  x.     See,  too,  Taine,  DC,  V Intelligence, 
i.  78,  100,  139.

64  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

(at  least,  according  to  Dr.  Dessoir's  theory)  their  psychical 
experiences  would  be  such  as  we  cannot  estimate,  yet 
cannot  leave,  as  a  possibility  influencing  religion,  out  of 
our  calculations.If  early  men  were  ever  in  a  condition  in  which 
telepathy  and  clairvoyance  (granting  their  possibility) 
were  prevalent,  one  might  expect  that  faculties  so  useful 
would  be  developed  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  That 
they  are  deliberately  cultivated  by  modern  savages  we 
know.  The  Indian  foster-mother  of  John  Tanner  used, 
when  food  was  needed,  to  suggest  herself  into  an  hypnotic 
condition,  so  that  she  became  clairvoyante  as  to  the 
whereabouts  of  game.  Tanner,  an  English  boy,  caught 
early  by  the  Indians,  was  sceptical,  but  came  to  practise 
the  same  art,  not  unsuccessfully,  himself.1  His  reminis- 
cences, which  he  dictated  on  his  return  to  civilisation, 
were  certainly  not  feigned  in  the  interests  of  any  theories. 
But  the  most  telepathic  human  stocks,  it  may  be  said, 
ought,  ceteris  paribus,  to  have  been  the  most  successful 
in  the  struggle  for  existence.  We  may  infer  that  the 
cetera  were  not  paria,  the  clairvoyant  state  not  being 
precisely  the  best  for  the  practical  business  of  life.  But 
really  we  know  nothing  of  the  psychical  state  of  the 
earliest  men.  They  may  have  had  experiences  tend- 
ing towards  a  belief  in  '  spirits,'  of  which  we  can  tell 
nothing.  'We  are  obliged  to  guess,  in  considerable 
ignorance  of  the  actual  conditions,  and  this  historical 
ignorance  inevitably  besets  all  anthropological  speculation 
about  the  origin  of  religion.

The  knowledge  of  our  nescience  as  to  the  psychical 
condition  of  our  first  thinking  ancestors  may  suggest 
hesitation  as  to  taking  it  for  granted  that  early  man  was 
on  our  own  or  on  the  modern  savage  level  in  '  psychical  *

1  Tanner's  Narrative,  New  York,  1830.

9

'I

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  651  Tanner's  Narrative,  New  York,  1830.

9

'I

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   RELIGION  65

experience.  Even  savage  races,  as  Mr.  Tylor  justly  says, 
attribute  superior  psychical  knowledge  to  neighbouring 
tribes  on  a  yet  lower  level  of  culture  than  themselves. 
The  Finn  esteems  the  Lapp  sorcerers  above  his  own ;  the 
Lapp  yields  to  the  superior  pretensions  of  the  Samoyeds. 
There  may  be  more  ways  than  one  of  explaining  this 
relative  humility :  there  is  Hegel's  way  and  there  is 
Mr.  Tylor' s  way.  We  cannot  be  certain,  a  priori,  that 
the  earliest  man  knew  no  more  of  supernormal  or  ap 
parently  supernormal  experiences  than  we  commonly  do, 
or  that  these  did  not  influence  his  thoughts  on  religion.

It  is  an  example  of  the  chameleon-like  changes  of 
science  (even  of  '  science  falsely  so  called  '  if  you  please) 
that  when  he  wrote  his  book,  in  1871,  Mr.  Tylor  could 
not  possibly  have  anticipated  this  line  of  argument. 
'  Psychical  planes '  had  not  been  invented  ;  hypnotism, 
with  its  problems,  had  not  been  much  noticed  in  England. 
But  '  Spiritualism  '  was  flourishing.  Mr.  Tylor  did  not 
ignore  this  revival  of  savage  philosophy.  He  saw  very 
well  that  the  end  of  the  century  was  beholding  the  partial 
rehabilitation  of  beliefs  which  were  scouted  from  1660  to 
1850.  Seventy  years  ago,  as  Mr.  Tylor  says,  Dr.  Mac- 
culloch,  in  his  'Description  of  the  Western  Islands  of 
Scotland,'  wrote  of  '  the  famous  Highland  second  sight ' 
that  '  ceasing  to  be  believed  it  has  ceased  to  exist.'1Dr.  Macculloch  was  mistaken  in  his  facts.  '  Second 
sight '  has  never  ceased  to  exist  (or  to  be  believed  to 
exist),  and  it  has  recently  been  investigated  in  the 
'  Journal '  of  the  Caledonian  Medical  Society.  Mr.  Tylor 
himself  says  that  it  has  been  '  reinstated  in  a  far  larger 
range  of  society,  and  under  far  better  circumstances  of 
learning  and  prosperity.'  This  fact  he  ascribes  generally 
to  '  a  direct  revival  from  the  regions  of  savage  philosophy 
1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  143.

F

66  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

and  peasant  folklore,'  a  revival  brought  about  in  great 
part  by  the  writings  of  Swedenborg.  To-day  things  have 
altered.  The  students  now  interested  in  this  whole  class 
of  alleged  supernormal  phenomena  are  seldom  believers 
in  the  philosophy  of  Spiritualism  in  the  American  sense 
of  the  word.1

Mr.  Tylor,  as  we  have  seen,  attributes  the  revival  of 
interest  in  this  obscure  class  of  subjects  to  the  influence 
of  Swedenborg.  It  is  true,  as  has  been  shown,  that 
Swedenborg  attracted  the  attention  of  Kant.  But  modern 
interest  has  chiefly  been  aroused  and  kept  alive  by  the 
phenomena  of  hypnotism.  The  interest  is  now,  among 
educated  students,  really  scientific.

Thus  Mr.  William  James,  Professor  of  Psychology  in 
the  University  of  Harvard,  writes  :

'  I  was  attracted  to  this  subject  (Psychical  Research) 
some  years  ago  by  my  love  of  fair  play  in  Science.' 2

Mr.  Tylor  is  not  incapable  of  appreciating  this  atti- 
tude. Even  the  so-called  '  spirit  manifestations,'  he  says, 
'  should  be  discussed  on  their  merits,'  and  the  investigation 
'  would  seem  apt  to  throw  light  on  some  most  interesting 
psychological  questions.'  Nothing  can  be  more  remote 
from  the  logic  of  Hume.The  ideas  of  Mr.  Tylor  on  the  causes  of  the  origin  of 
religion  are  now  criticised,  not  from  the  point  of  view  of 
spiritualism,  but  of  experimental  psychology.  We  hold 
that  very  probably  there  exist  human  faculties  of  un- 
known scope ;  that  these  conceivably  were  more  powerful 
and  prevalent  among  our  very  remote  ancestors  who 
founded  religion  ;  that  they  may  still  exist  in  savage  as  in

1  As  '  spiritualism '  is  often  used  in  opposition  to  '  materialism,'  and 
with  no  reference  to  rapping  '  spirits,'  the  modern  belief  in  that  class  of 
intelligences  may  here  be  called  spiritism.

2  The  Will  to  Believe,  preface,  p.  xiv

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  67

•civilised  races,  and  that  they  may  have  confirmed,  if  they 
did  not  originate,  the  doctrine  of  separable  souls.  If  they 
do  exist,  the  circumstance  is  important,  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  modern  ideas  rest  on  a  denial  of  their  existence.Mr.  Tylor  next  examines  the  savage  and  other  names 
for  the  ghost-soul,  such  as  shadow  (umbra),  breath 
(spiritus),  and  he  gives  cases  in  which  the  shadow  of  a 
man  is  regarded  as  equivalent  to  his  life.  Of  course,  the 
shadow  in  the  sunlight  does  not  resemble  the  phantasm 
in  a  dream.  The  two,  however,  were  combined  and 
identified  by  early  thinkers,  while  breath  and  heart  were 
used  as  symbols  of  'that  in  men  which  makes  them  live/ 
a  phrase  found  among  the  natives  of  Nicaragua  in  1528. 
The  confessedly  symbolical  character  of  the  phrase,  '  it  is 
not  precisely  the  heart,  but  that  in  them  which  makes 
them  live,'  proves  that  to  the  speaker  life  was  not 
'  heart '  or  '  breath,'  but  that  these  terms  were  known 
to  be  material  word-counters  for  the  conception  of  life.1 
"Whether  the  earliest  thinkers  identified  heart,  breath, 
shadow,  with  life,  or  whether  they  consciously  used  words 
of  material  origin  to  denote  an  immaterial  conception,  of 
course  we  do  not  know.  But  the  word  in  the  latter  case 
would  react  on  the  thought,  till  the  Roman  inhaled  (as 
his  life?)  the  last  breath  of  his  dying  kinsman,  he  well 
knowing  that  the  Manes  of  the  said  kinsman  were 
elsewhere,  and  not  to  be  inhaled.

Subdivisions  and  distinctions  were  then  recognised,  as 
of  the  Egyptian  Ka,  the  '  double,'  the  Karen  Jcelah,  or 
'  personal  life-phantom  '  (wraith),  on  one  side,  and  the 
Karen  thah,  'the  responsible  moral  soul,'  on  the  other. 
The  Roman  umbra  hovers  about  the  grave,  the  manes  go 
to  Orcus,  the  spiritus  seeks  the  stars.

>  Primitive  Culture,  i.  432,  433.      Citing  Oviedo,  Hist,  dc  Nicaragua, 
pp.  21-51.

F  2

68  THE  MAKING  OF   RELIGION>  Primitive  Culture,  i.  432,  433.      Citing  Oviedo,  Hist,  dc  Nicaragua, 
pp.  21-51.

F  2

68  THE  MAKING  OF   RELIGION

We  are  next  presented  with  a  crowd  of  cases  in  which 
sickness  or  lethargy  is  ascribed  by  savages  to  the  absence 
of  the  patient's  spirit,  or  of  one  of  his  spirits.  This  idea 
of  migratory  spirit  is  next  used  by  savages  to  explain 
certain  proceedings  of  the  sorcerer,  priest,  or  seer.  His 
soul,  or  one  of  his  souls  is  thought  to  go  forth  to  distant 
places  in  quest  of  information,  while  the  seer,  perhaps, 
remains  lethargic.  Probably,  in  the  struggle  for  existence, 
he  lost  more  by  being  lethargic  than  he  gained  by  being 
clairvoyant !Now,  here  we  touch  the  first  point  in  Mr.  Tylor's 
theory,  where  a  critic  may  ask,  Was  this  belief  in  the 
wandering  abroad  of  the  seer's  spirit  a  theory  not  only 
false  in  its  form  (as  probably  it  is),  but  also  wholly 
unbased  on  experiences  which  might  raise  a  presumption 
in  favour  of  the  existence  of  phenomena  really  super- 
normal ?  By  '  supernormal '  experiences  I  here  mean 
such  as  the  acquisition  by  a  human  mind  of  knowledge 
which  could  not  be  obtained  by  it  through  the  recognised 
channels  of  sensation.  Say,  for  the  sake  of  argument,, 
that  a  person,  savage  or  civilised,  obtains  in  trance  infor- 
mation about  distant  places  or  events,  to  him  unknown,, 
and,  through  channels  of  sense,  unknowable.  The  savage 
will  explain  this  by  saying  that  the  seer's  soul,  shadow,  or 
spirit,  wandered  out  of  the  body  to  the  distant  scene. 
This  is,  at  present,  an  unverified  theory.  But  still,  for  the 
sake  of  argument,  suppose  that  the  seer  did  honestly 
obtain  this  information  in  trance,  lethargy,  or  hypnotic 
sleep,  or  any  other  condition.  If  so,  the  modern  savage 
(or  his  more  gifted  ancestors)  would  have  other  grounds  for 
his  theory  of  the  wandering  soul  than  any  ground  presented 
by  normal  occurrences,  ordinary  dreams,  shadows,  and  so 
forth.  Again,  in  human  nature  there  would  be  (if  such 
tilings  occur)  a  potentiality  of  experiences  other  and  stranger

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  69ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  69

than  materialism  will  admit  as  possible.  It  will  (granting 
the  facts)  be  impossible  to  aver  that  there  is  nihil  in 
intellectu  quod  non  prius  in  sensu.  The  soul  will  be  not 
ce  qu'un  vain  peuple  pense  under  the  new  popular  tra- 
dition, and  the  savage's  theory  of  the  spirit  will  be,  at 
least  in  part,  based  on  other  than  normal  and  every-day 
facts.  That  condition  in  which  the  seer  acquires  in- 
formation, not  otherwise  accessible,  about  events  remote  in 
space,  is  what  the  mesmerists  of  the  mid-century  called 
'  travelling  clairvoyance.'

If  such  an  experience  be  in  rerum  natura,  it  will  not, 
of  course,  justify  the  savage's  theory  that  the  soul  is  a 
separable  entity,  capable  of  voyaging,  and  also  capable  of 
existing  after  the  death  of  the  body.  But  it  will  give  the 
savage  a  better  excuse  for  his  theory  than  normal  ex- 
periences provide ;  and  will  even  raise  a  presumption  that 
reflection  on  mere  ordinary  experiences — death,  shadow, 
trance — is  not  the  sole  origin  of  his  theory.  For  a  savage 
so  acute  as  Mr.  Tylor's  hypothetical  early  reasoner  might 
decline  to  believe  that  his  own  or  a  friend's  soul  had  been 
absent  on  an  expedition,  unless  it  brought  back  informa- 
tion not  normally  to  be  acquired.  However,  we  cannot 
reason,  a  priori,  as  to  how  far  the  logic  of  a  savage  might 
or  might  not  go  on  occasion.In  any  case,  a  scientific  reasoner  might  be  expected 
to  ask :  '  Is  this  alleged  acquisition  of  knowledge,  not 
through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense,  a  thing  in  rerum 
natura  ? '  Because,  if  it  is,  we  must  obviously  increase 
our  list  of  the  savage's  reasons  for  believing  in  a  soul  : 
we  must  make  his  reasons  include  '  psychical '  experiences, 
and  there  must  be  an  X  region  to  investigate.

These  considerations  did  not  fail  to  present  themselves 
to  Mr.  Tylor.  But  his  manner  of  dealing  with  them  is 
peculiar.  With  his  unequalled  knowledge  of  the  lower

70  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

races,  it  was  easy  for  him  to  examine  travellers'  tale& 
about  savage  seers  who  beheld  distant  events  in  vision, 
and  to  allow  them  what  weight  he  thought  proper,  after 
discounting  possibilities  of  falsehood  and  collusion.  He 
might  then  have  examined  modern  narratives  of  similar 
performances  among  the  civilised,  which  are  abundant. 
It  is  obvious  and  undeniable  that  if  the  supernormal 
acquisition  of  knowledge  in  trance  is  a  vera  causa,  a  real 
process,  however  rare,  Mr.  Tylor's  theory  needs  modi- 
fications ;  while  the  character  of  the  savage's  reasoning 
becomes  more  creditable  to  the  savage,  and  appears  as 
better  bottomed  than  we  had  been  asked  to  suppose.  But 
Mr.  Tylor  does  not  examine  this  large  body  of  evidence 
at  all,  or,  at  least,  does  not  offer  us  the  details  of  his 
examination.  He  merely  writes  in  this  place  :

'  A  typical  spiritualistic  instance  may  be  quoted  from 
Jung-Stilling,  who  says  that  examples  have  come  to  his 
knowledge  of  sick  persons  who,  longing  to  see  absent 
friends,  have  fallen  into  a  swoon,  during  which  they  have 
appeared  to  the  distant  objects  of  their  affection.' 'Jung- Stilling  (though  he  wrote  before  modern  '  Spiri- 
tualism '  came  in)  is  not  a  very  valid  authority ;  there  is 
plenty  of  better  evidence  than  his,  but  Mr.  Tylor  passes 
it  by,  merely  remarking  that  '  modern  Europe  has  kept 
closely  enough  to  the  lines  of  early  philosophy.'  Modern 
Europe  has  indeed  done  so,  if  it  explains  the  supernormal 
acquisition  of  knowledge,  or  the  hallucinatory  appearance 
of  a  distant  person  to  his  friend  by  a  theory  of  wandering 
'  spirits.'  But  facts  do  not  cease  to  be  facts  because 
wrong  interpretations  have  been  put  upon  them  by 
savages,  by  Jung-Stilling,  or  by  anyone  else.  The  real

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  440.  Citing  Stilling  after  Dale  Owen,  and 
quoting  Mr.  Alfred  Russel  Wallace's  Scientific  Aspect  of  tlie  Supernatural, 
p.  43.  Mr.  Tylor  also  adds  folk-lore  practices  of  ghost-seeing,  as  on  St.  John's 
Eve.  St.  Mark's  Eve,  too,  is  in  point,  as  far  as  folk-lore  goes.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  71ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  RELIGION  71

question  is,  Do  such  events  occur  among  lower  and  higher 
races,  beyond  explanation  by  fraud  and  fortuitous  co- 
incidence ?  We  gladly  grant  that  the  belief  in  Animism, 
when  it  takes  the  form  of  a  theory  of  '  wandering  spirits,' 
is  probably  untenable,  as  it  is  assuredly  of  savage  origin. 
But  we  are  not  absolutely  so  sure  that  in  this  aspect  the 
theory  is  not  based  on  actual  experiences,  not  of  a  normal 
and  ordinary  kind.  If  so,  the  savage  philosophy  and  its 
supposed  survivals  in  belief  will  appear  in  a  new  light. 
And  we  are  inclined  to  hold  that  an  examination  of  the 
mass  of  evidence  to  which  Mr.  Tylor  offers  here  so  slight 
an  allusion  will  at  least  make  it  wise  to  suspend  our 
judgment,  not  only  as  to  the  origins  of  the  savage  theory 
of  spirits,  but  as  to  the  materialistic  hypothesis  of  the 
absence  of  a  psychical  element  in  man.

I  may  seem  to  have  outrun  already  the  limits  of 
permissible  hypothesis.  It  may  appear  absurd  to  surmise 
that  there  can  exist  in  man,  savage  or  civilised,  a  faculty 
for  acquiring  information  not  accessible  by  the  known 
channels  of  sense,  a  faculty  attributed  by  savage  philo- 
sophers to  the  wandering  soul.  But  one  may  be  permitted 
to  quote  the  opinion  of  M.  Charles  Eichet,  Professor  of 
Physiology  in  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  in  Paris.  It  is 
not  cited  because  M.  Richet  is  a  professor  of  physiology, 
but  because  he  reached  his  conclusion  after  six  years  of 
minute  experiment.  He  says  :  '  There  exists  in  certain 
persons,  at  certain  moments,  a  faculty  of  acquiring 
knowledge  which  has  no  rapport  with  our  normal 
faculties  of  that  kind.'1Instances  tending  to  raise  a  presumption  in  favour 
of  M.  Richet's  idea  may  now  be  sought  in  savage  and 
civilised  life.

Proceedings,  S.P.B.  v.  167.

72  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

IV

1  OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE  '

'To  open  the  Gates  of  Distance'  is  the  poetical  Zulu 
phrase  for  what  is  called  clairvoyance,  or  vue  a  distance. 
This,  if  it  exists',  is  the  result  of  a  faculty  of  undetermined 
nature,  whereby  knowledge  of  remote  events  may  be 
acquired,  not  through  normal  channels  of  sense.  As  the 
Zulus  say :  '  Isiyezi  is  a  state  in  which  a  man  becomes 
slightly  insensible.  He  is  awake,  but  still  sees  things 
which  he  would  not  see  if  he  were  not  in  a  state  of 
ecstasy  (nasiyesi).' l  The  Zulu  description  of  isiyezi 
includes  what  is  technically  styled  '  dissociation.'  No 
psychologist  or  pathologist  will  deny  that  visions  of  an 
hallucinatory  sort  may  occur  in  dissociated  states,  say 
in  the  petit  mat  of  epilepsy.  The  question,  however,  is 
whether  any  such  visions  convey  actual  information  not 
otherwise  to  be  acquired,  beyond  the  reach  of  chance  co- 
incidence to  explain.

A  Scottish  example,  from  the  records  of  a  court  of 
law,  exactly  illustrates  the  Zulu  theory.  At  the  moment 
when  the  husband  of  Jonka  Dyneis  was  in  danger  six 
miles  from  her  house  in  his  boat,  Jonka  '  was  found,  and 
seen  standing  at  her  own  house  wall  in  a  trance,  and 
being  taken,  she  could  not  give  answer,  but  stood  as 
bereft  of  her  senses,  and  when  she  was  asked  why  she

1  Callaway,  Religion  of  tlie  Zulus,  p.  232.

'OPENING  THE  GATES  OF   DISTANCE'  73

was  so  moved,  she  answered,  "  If  our  boat  be  not  lost,  she 
was  in  great  hazard."  '  (October  2,  1616.) l'OPENING  THE  GATES  OF   DISTANCE'  73

was  so  moved,  she  answered,  "  If  our  boat  be  not  lost,  she 
was  in  great  hazard."  '  (October  2,  1616.) l

The  belief  in  opening  the  Gates  of  Distance  is,  of 
course,  very  widely  diffused.  The  gift  is  attributed  to 
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  to  Plotinus,  to  many  Saints,  to 
Catherine  de'  Medici,  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Peden,2  and  to 
Jeanne  d'Arc,  while  the  faculty  is  the  stock  in  trade  of 
savage  seers  in  all  regions.3

The  question,  however,  on  which  Mr.  Tylor  does  not 
touch,  is,  Are  any  of  the  stories  true  ?  If  so,  of  course 
they  would  confirm  in  the  mind  of  the  savage  his  theory 
of  the  wandering  soul.  Now,  to  find  anything  like 
attested  cases  of  successful  clairvoyance  among  savages  is 
a  difficult  task.  White  men  either  scout  the  idea,  or  are 
afraid  of  seeming  superstitious  if  they  give  examples,  or,  if 
they  do  give  examples,  are  accused  of  having  sunk  to  the 
degraded  level  of  Zulus  or  Eed  Indians.  Even  where 
travellers,  like  Scheffer,  have  told  about  their  own  ex- 
periences, the  narratives  are  omitted  by  modern  writers 
on  savage  divination.4  We  must  therefore  make  our  own 
researches,  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  stories  of  suc- 
cessful savage  clairvoyance  are  given  as  illustrations 
merely,  not  as  evidence  to  facts,  for  we  cannot  cross- 
examine  the  witnesses.

Mr.  Tylor  dismisses  the  topic  in  a  manner  rather 
cavalier :

'Without  discussing  on  their  merits  the  accounts  of 
what  is  called  "  second  sight,"5  it  may  be  pointed  out  that

1  Graham  Dalzell,  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  p.  481.

2  See  good  evidence  in  Ker  of  Kersland's  Memoirs.

3  Aulus  Gellius,  xv.  18,  Dio   Cassius,  Ixvii.,  Crespet,  De  la  Haine  du 
Diable,  Proces  de  Jeanne  d'Arc.2  See  good  evidence  in  Ker  of  Kersland's  Memoirs.

3  Aulus  Gellius,  xv.  18,  Dio   Cassius,  Ixvii.,  Crespet,  De  la  Haine  du 
Diable,  Proces  de  Jeanne  d'Arc.

4  See  '  Shamanism  in  Siberia,'  J.A.I.,  November  1894,  pp.  147-149,  and 
compare  Scheffer.    The  article  is  very  learned  and  interesting.

5  Williams  mentions  second  sight  in  Fiji,  but  gives  no  examples.

74  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

they  are  related  among  savage  tribes,  as  when  Captain 
Jonathan  Carver  obtained  from  a  Cree  medicine-man  a 
true  prophecy  of  the  arrival  of  a  canoe  with  news  next 
day  at  noon  ;  or  when  Mr.  J.  Mason  Brown,  travelling 
with  two  voyageurs  on  the  Copper  Mine  River,  was  met 
by  Indians  of  the  very  band  he  was  seeking,  these  having 
been  sent  by  their  medicine-man,  who,  on  enquiry,  stated 
that  "  he  saw  them  coming,  and  heard  them  talk  on  their 
journey."  ' l

Now,  in  our  opinion,  the  '  merits  '  of  stories  of  second 
sight  need  discussion,  because  they  may,  if  well  attested, 
raise  a  presumption  that  the  savage's  theory  has  a  better 
foundation  than  Mr.  Tylor  supposes.  Oddly  enough, 
though  Mr.  Tylor  does  not  say  so,  Dr.  Brinton  (from 
whom  he  borrows  his  two  anecdotes)  is  more  or  less  of 
our  opinion.

'  There  are,'  says  Dr.  Brinton, '  statements  supported  by 
unquestionable  testimony,  which  ought  not  to  be  passed 
over  in  silence,  and  yet  I  cannot  but  approach  them  with 
hesitation.  They  are  so  revolting  to  the  laws  of  exact 
science,  so  alien,  I  had  almost  said,  to  the  experience  of 
our  lives.  Yet  is  this  true,  or  are  such  experiences  only 
ignored  and  put  aside  without  serious  consideration  ?  '

That  is  exactly  what  we  complain  of :  the  alleged 
facts  are  '  put  aside  without  serious  consideration.'That  is  exactly  what  we  complain  of :  the  alleged 
facts  are  '  put  aside  without  serious  consideration.'

We,  at  least,  are  not  slaves  to  the  idea  that  '  the  laws 
of  exact  science '  must  be  the  only  laws  at  work  in  the 
world.  Science,  however  exact,  does  not  pretend  to  have 
discovered  all  'laws.'

To  return  to  actual  examples  of  the  alleged  super- 
normal acquisition  of  knowledge  by  savages  :  Dr.  Brinton 
gives  an  example  from  Charlevoix  and  General  Mason 
Brown's  anecdote.2  In  General  Mason  Brown's  instance

1  Primitive  Culture,  i.  447.     Mr.  Tylor  cites  Dr.  Brinton's  MytJis  of  the 
New  World,  p.  269.    The  reference  in  the  recent  edition  is  p.  289.    Carver's 
case  is  given  under  the  head  '  Possession  '  later.

2  Journal  Historique,  p.  302  ;  Atlantic  Monthly,  July  1866.

'OPENING   THE   GATES  OF  DISTANCE'  75

the  medicine-man,  at  a  great  distance,  bade  his  emissaries 
'  seek  three  whites,  whose  horses,  arms,  attire,  and  personal 
appearance  he  minutely  described,  which  description  was 
repeated  to  General  Brown  by  the  warriors  before  they 
saw  his  tiuo  companions.''  General  Brown  assured  Dr. 
Brinton  of  '  the  accuracy  of  this  in  every  particular.' 
Mr.  Tylor  has  certainly  not  improved  the  story  in  his 
condensed  version.  Dr.  Brinton  refers  to  '  many  '  tales 
such  as  these,  and  some  will  be  found  in  'Among  the 
Zulus,'  by  Mr.  David  Leslie  (1875).

Mr.  Leslie  was  a  Scottish  sportsman,  brought  up  from 
boyhood  in  familiarity  with  the  Zulus.  His  knowledge 
of  their  language  and  customs  was  minute,  and  his  book, 
privately  printed,  contains  much  interesting  matter.  He 
writes :'  I  was  obliged  to  proceed  to  the  Zulu  country  to  meet 
my  Kaffir  elephant-hunters,  the  time  for  their  return 
having  arrived.  They  were  hunting  in  a  very  unhealthy 
country,  and  I  had  agreed  to  wait  for  them  on  the  North- 
East  border,  the  nearest  point  I  could  go  to  with  safety. 
I  reached  the  appointed  rendezvous,  but  could  not  gain 
the  slightest  intelligence  of  my  people  at  the  kraal.

'  After  waiting  some  time,  and  becoming  very  uneasy 
about  them,  one  of  my  servants  recommended  me  to  go  to 
the  doctor,  and  at  last,  out  of  curiosity  and  pour  passer  le 
temps,  I  did  go.

'  I  stated  what  I  wanted — information  about  my 
hunters — and  I  was  met  by  a  stern  refusal.  "I  cannot 
tell  anything  about  white  men,"  said  he,  "  and  I  know 
nothing  of  their  ways."  However,  after  some  persuasion 
and  promise  of  liberal  payment,  impressing  upon  him  the 
fact  that  it  was  not  white  men  but  Kaffirs  I  wanted  to 
know  about,  he  at  last  consented,  saying  "  he  would  open 
the  Gate  of  Distance,  and  would  travel  through  it,  even 
although  his  body  should  lie  before  me."

'  His  first  proceeding  was  to  ask  me  the  number  and 
names  of  my  hunters.  To  this  I  demurred,  telling  him 
that  if  he  obtained  that  information  from  me  he  might 
easily  substitute  some  news  which  he  may  have  heard

76  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

from  others,  instead  of  the  "  spiritual  telegraphic  news  " 
which  I  expected  him  to  get  from  his  "  familiar."76  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

from  others,  instead  of  the  "  spiritual  telegraphic  news  " 
which  I  expected  him  to  get  from  his  "  familiar."

'  To  this  he  answered  :  "  I  told  you  I  did  not  understand 
white  men's  ways  ;  but  if  I  am  to  do  anything  for  you  it 
must  be  done  in  my  way — not  yours."  On  receiving  this 
fillip  I  felt  inclined  to  give  it  up,  as  I  thought  I  might 
receive  some  rambling  statement  with  a  considerable  dash 
of  truth,  it  being  easy  for  anyone  who  knew  anything  of 
hunting  to  give  a  tolerably  correct  idea  of  their  motions. 
However,  I  conceded  this  point  also,  and  otherwise  satis- 
fied him.

'  The  doctor  then  made  eight  little  fires — that  being 
the  number  of  my  hunters ;  on  each  he  cast  some  roots,1 
which  emitted  a  curious'  sickly  odour  and  thick  smoke ; 
into  each  he  cast  a  small  stone,  shouting,  as  he  did  so,  the 
name  to  which  the  stone  was  dedicated ;  then  he  ate  some 
"  medicine,"  and  fell  over  in  what  appeared  to  be  a  trance 
for  about  ten  minutes,  during  all  which  time  his  limbs 
kept  moving.  Then  he  seemed  to  wake,  went  to  one  of 
the  fires,  raked  the  ashes  about,  looked  at  the  stone 
attentively,  described  the  man  faithfully,  and  said  :  "  This 
man  has  died  of  the  fever,  and  your  gun  is  lost."'To  the  next  fire  as  before:  "This  man"  (correctly 
described)  "  has  killed  four  elephants,"  and  then  he 
described  the  tusks.  The  next :  "  This  man  "  (again  de- 
scribing him)  "  has  been  killed  by  an  elephant,  but  your 
gun  is  coming  home,"  and  so  on  through  the  whole,  the 
men  being  minutely  and  correctly  described ;  their  success 
or  non-success  being  equally  so.  I  was  told  where  the 
survivors  were,  and  what  they  were  doing,  and  that  in 
three  months  they  would  come  out,  but  as  they  would  not 
expect  to  find  me  waiting  on  them  there  so  long  after  the 
time  appointed,  they  would  not  pass  that  way.

'  I  took  a  particular  note  of  all  this  information  at  the 
time,  and  to  my  utter  amazement  it  turned  out  correct  in 
every  particular.

'  It  was  scarcely  within  the  bounds  of  possibility  that 
this  man  could  have  had  ordinary  intelligence  of  the 
hunters ;  they  were  scattered  about  in  a  country  two 
hundred  miles  away.'

Mr.  Leslie  could  discover  no  explanation,  nor  was  any

1  Probably  impepo,  eaten  by  seers,  according  to  Callaway.

'OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE'  77

suggested  by  friends  familiar  with  the  country  and  the 
natives  whom  he  consulted.  He  gives  another  example, 
which  may  be  explained  by  'suggestion.'  A  parallel 
case  from  Central  Africa  will  be  found  in  the  '  Journal  of 
the  Anthropological  Institute,'  November  1897,  p.  320, 
where  'private  information,'  as  usual,  would  explain  the 
singular  facts.

The  Zulus  themselves  lay  claim  to  a  kind  of  clair- 
voyance which  looks  like  the  result  of  intense  visualising 
power,  combined  with  the  awakening  of  the  subconscious 
memory.1The  Zulus  themselves  lay  claim  to  a  kind  of  clair- 
voyance which  looks  like  the  result  of  intense  visualising 
power,  combined  with  the  awakening  of  the  subconscious 
memory.1

'  There  is  among  black  men  a  something  which  is 
divination  within  them.  When  anything  valuable  is  lost, 
they  look  for  it  at  once ;  when  they  cannot  find  it,  each 
one  begins  to  practise  this  inner  divination,  trying  to  feel 
where  the  thing  is  ;  for,  not  being  able  to  see  it,  he  feels 
internally  a  pointing,  which  tells  him  if  he  will  go  down 
to  such  a  place  it  is  there,  and  he  will  find  it.  At  length 
it  says  he  will  find  it ;  at  length  he  sees  it,  and  himself 
approaching  it ;  before  he  begins  to  move  from  where 
he  is,  he  sees  it  very  clearly  indeed,  and  there  is  an  end  of 
doubt.  That  sight  is  so  clear  that  it  is  as  though  it  was 
not  an  inner  sight,  but  as  if  he  saw  the  very  thing  itself, 
and  the  place  where  it  is ;  so  he  quickly  arises  and  goes 
to  the  place.  If  it  is  a  hidden  place  he  throws  himself 
into  it,  as  though  there  was  something  that  impelled  him 
to  go  as  swiftly  as  the  wind  ;  and,  in  fact,  he  finds  the 
thing,  if  he  has  not  acted  by  mere  head-guessing.  If  it 
has  been  done  by  real  inner  divination,  he  really  sees  it. 
But  if  it  is  done  by  mere  head-guessing  and  knowledge 
that  he  has  not  gone  to  such  a  place  and  such  a  place, 
and  that  therefore  it  must  be  in  such  another  place,  he 
generally  misses  the  mark.'

Other  Zulu  instances  will  be  given  under  the  heads 
'  Possession  '  and  '  Fetishism.'

To  take  a  Northern  people  :  In  his  '  History  of  the 
Lapps  ' 2  Scheffer  describes  mechanical  modes  of  divina-

1  Callaway's  Religion  of  the  Amazulu,  p.  358.  •  Oxford,  1674.1  Callaway's  Religion  of  the  Amazulu,  p.  358.  •  Oxford,  1674.

78  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

tion  practised  by  that  race,  who  use  a  drum  and  other 
objects  for  the  purpose.  These  modes  depend  on  mere 
traditional  rules  for  interpreting  the  accidental  combina- 
tions of  lots.  But  a  Lapp  confessed  to  Scheffer,  with 
tears,  that  he  could  not  help  seeing  visions,  as  he  proved 
by  giving  Scheffer  a  minute  relation  'of  whatever  par- 
ticulars had  happened  to  me  in  my  journey  to  Lapland. 
And  he  further  complained  that  he  knew  not  how  to 
make  use  of  his  eyes,  since  things  altogether  distant  were 
presented  to  them.'  This  Lapp  was  anxious  to  become  a 
Christian,  hence  his  regret  at  being  a  '  rare  and  valuable ' 
example  of  clairvoyance.  Torfoeus  also  was  posed  by 
the  clairvoyance  of  a  Samoyed,  as  was  Regnard  by  a  Lapp 
seer.1

The  next  case  is  of  old  date,  and,  like  the  other  savage 
examples,  is  merely  given  for  purposes  of  illustration.

'  25e  Lettre.2 
'  "Suite  des  Traditions  des  Sauvages."

'  Au  Fort  de  la  Riviere  de  St.  Joseph, 
ce  14  Septembre  1721.

'  "Des  Jongleurs  " — .  .  .  Vous  avez  vu  a  Paris  Madame 
de  Marson,  &  elle  y  est  encore  ;  voici  ce  que  M.  le  Marquis 
de  Vaudreuil  son  Gendre,  actuellement  notre  Gouverneur 
General,  me  raconta  cet  Hyver,  &  qu'il  a  5911  de  cette 
Dame,  qui  n'est  rien  moins  qu'un  esprit  foible.  Elle 
etoit  un  jour  fort  inquiette  au  sujet  de  M.  de  Marson,  son 
Mari,  lequel  commandoit  dans  un  Poste,  que  nous  avions 
en  Accadie ;  et  etoit  absent,  &  le  terns  qu'il  avoit  marque 
pour  son  retour,  etoit  passe.'  Une  Femme  Sauvage,  qui  vit  Madame  de  Marson  en 
peine,  lui  en  demanda  la  cause,  &  1'ayant  apprise,  lui  dit, 
apres  y  avoir  un  peu  reve,  de  ne  plus  se  chagriner,  que 
son  Epoux  reviendroit  tel  jour  et  a  telle  heure,  qu'elle  lui 
marqua,  avec  un  chapeau  gris  sur  la  tete.  Comme  elle 
s'apper9ut  que  la  Dame  n'ajoutoit  point  foi  a  sa  predic- 
tion, au  jour  &  a  1'heure,  qu'elle  avoit  assignee,  elle

1  Voyages.  -  From  Charlevoix,  Journal  Historiquc,  p.  362.

'OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE  79

retourna  chez  elle,  lui  demanda  si  elle  ne  vouloit  pas  venir 
voir  arriver  son  Mari,  &  la  pressa  de  telle  sorte  de  la 
suivre,  qu'elle  1'entralna  au  bord  de  la  Riviere.

'A  peine  y  etoient-elles  arrivees,  que  M.  de  Marson 
parut  dans  un  Canot,  un  chapeau  gris  sur  la  t§te ;  & 
ayant  appris  ce  qui  s'etoit  passe,  assura  qu'il  ne  pouvoit 
pas  comprendre  comment  la  Sauvagesse  avoit  pu  S9avoir 
1'heure  &  le  jour  de  son  arrivee.'It  is  unusual  for  European  travellers  and  missionaries 
to  give  anecdotes  which  might  seem  to  '  confirm  the 
delusions  of  benighted  savages.'  Such  anecdotes,  again, 
are  among  the  arcana  of  these  wild  philosophers,  and  are 
not  readily  communicated  to  strangers.  When  successful 
cases  are  reported,  it  is  natural  to  assert  that  they  come 
through  Europeans  who  have  sunk  into  barbarous  super- 
stition, or  that  they  may  be  explained  by  fraud  and 
collusion.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  savage  proficients 
believe  in  their  own  powers,  though  no  less  certainly 
they  will  eke  them  out  by  imposture.  Seers  are  chosen 
in  Zululand,  as  among  Eskimos  and  Samoyeds,  from  the 
class  which  in  Europe  supplies  the  persons  who  used  to 
be,  but  are  no  longer  the  most  favourite  hypnotic  subjects, 
'  abnormal  children,'  epileptic  and  hysterical.  These  are 
subjected  to  '  a  long  and  methodical  course  of  training.' l 
Stoll,  speaking  of  Guatemala,  says  that  '  certainly  most  of 
the  induced  and  spontaneous  phenomena  with  which  we 
are  familiar  occur  among  savages,'  and  appeals  to  travellers 
for  observations.2  Information  is  likely  to  come  in,  as 
educated  travellers  devote  attention  to  the  topic.

Dr.  Callaway  translates  some  Zulu  communications 
which  indicate  the  amount  of  belief  in  this  very  prac- 
tical and  sceptical  people.  Amusing  illustrations  of  their 
scepticism  will  be  quoted  later,  under  'Possession,'  but 
they  do  accept  as  seers  certain  hysterical  patients.  These

1  Bastian,  Ueber  psycli.  Beobacht.  p.  24.  -  Op.  cit.  p.  26.

80  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Bastian,  Ueber  psycli.  Beobacht.  p.  24.  -  Op.  cit.  p.  26.

80  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

are  tested  by  their  skill  in  finding  objects  which  have 
been  hidden  without  their  knowledge.  They  then  behave 
much  like  Mr.  Stuart  Cumberland,  but  have  not  the 
advantage  of  muscular  contact  with  the  person  who  knows 
where  the  hidden  objects  are  concealed.  The  neighbours 
even  deny  that  they  have  hidden  anything  at  all.  '  When 
they  persist  in  their  denial  ...  he  finds  all  the  things  that 
they  have  hidden.  They  see  that  he  is  a  great  inyanga 
(seer)  when  he  has  found  all  the  things  they  have  con- 
cealed.' No  doubt  he  is  guided,  perhaps  in  a  super- 
sensitive  condition,  by  the  unconscious  indications  of  the 
excited  spectators.

The  point  is  that,  while  the  savage  conjurer  will  doubt- 
less use  fraud  wherever  he  can,  still  the  experience  of  low 
races  is  in  favour  of  employing  as  seers  the  class  of 
people  who  in  Europe  were,  till  recently,  supposed  to  make 
the  best  hypnotic  subjects.  Thus,  in  West  Africa,  '  the 
presiding  elders,  during  your  initiation  to  the  secret  society 
of  your  tribe,  discover  this  gift  [of  Ebumtupism,  or  second 
sight],  and  so  select  you  as  "  a  witch  doctor."  '  l  Among 
the  Karens,  the  '  Wees,'  or  prophets,  '  are  nervous  excitable 
men,  such  as  would  become  mediums,' 2  as  mediums  are 
diagnosed  by  Mr.  Tylor.In  short,  not  to  multiply  examples,  there  is  an  element 
of  actual  observation  and  of  bona  fides  entangled  in  the 
trickery  of  savage  practice.  Though  the  subjects  may  be 
selected  partly  because  of  the  physical  phenomena  of 
convulsions  which  they  exhibit,  and  which  favourably 
impress  their  clients,  they  are  also  such  subjects  as 
occasionally  yield  that  evidence  of  supernormal  faculty 
which  is  investigated  by  modern  psychologists,  like  Richet, 
Janet,  and  William  James.

1  Miss  Kingsley,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  460.

2  Primitive  Culture,  ii.  131 ;  Mason's  Burmah,  p.  107.

'OPENING   THE   GATES  OF  DISTANCE'  811  Miss  Kingsley,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  460.

2  Primitive  Culture,  ii.  131 ;  Mason's  Burmah,  p.  107.

'OPENING   THE   GATES  OF  DISTANCE'  81

The  following  example,  by  no  means  unique,  shows  the 
view  taken  by  savages  of  their  own  magic,  after  they  have 
become  Christians.  Catherine  Wabose,  a  converted  Bed 
Indian  seeress,  described  her  preliminary  fast,  at  the  age  of 
puberty.  After  six  days  of  abstention  from  food  she  was 
rapt  away  to  an  unknown  place,  where  a  radiant  being 
welcomed  her.  Later  a  dark  round  object  promised  her 
the  gift  of  prophecy.  She  found  her  natural  senses 
greatly  sharpened  by  lack  of  food.  She  first  exercised  her 
powers  when  her  kinsfolk  in  large  numbers  were  starving. 
A  medicine-lodge,  or  '  tabernacle  '  as  Lafitau  calls  it,  was 
built  for  her,  and  she  crawled  in.  As  is  well  known,  these 
lodges  are  violently  shaken  during  the  magician's  stay 
within  them,  which  the  early  Jesuits  at  first  attributed  to 
muscular  efforts  by  the  seers.  In  1637  Pere  Lejeune 
was  astonished  by  the  violent  motions  of  a  large  lodge, 
tenanted  by  a  small  man.  One  sorcerer,  with  an  appear- 
ance of  candour,  vowed  that  '  a  great  wind  entered  bois- 
terously,' and  the  Father  was  assured  that,  if  he  wrent 
in  himself,  he  would  become  clairvoyant.  He  did  not 
make  the  experiment.  The  Methodist  convert,  Catherine, 
gave  the  same  description  of  her  own  experience  :  '  The 
lodge  began  shaking  violently  by  supernatural  means. 
I  knew  this  by  the  compressed  current  of  air  above, 
and  the  noise  of  motion.'  She  had  been  beating  a 
small  drum  and  singing,  now  she  lay  quiet.  The  radiant 
'  orbicular  '  spirit  then  informed  her  that  they  '  must  go 
westwards  for  game ;  how  short-sighted  you  are  ! '  '  The 
advice  was  taken  and  crowned  by  instant  success.'  This 
established  her  reputation.1  Catherine's  conversion  was 
led  up  to  by  a  dream  of  her  dying  son,  who  beheld  a 
Sacred  Figure,  and  received  from  Him  white  raiment.1  Schoolcraft,  i.  394.

G

82  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Her  magical  songs  tell  how  unseen  hands  shake  the  magic 
lodge.  They  invoke  the  Great  Spirit  that

'  Illumines  earth 
Illumines  heaven  !

Ah,  say  what  Spirit,  or  Body,  is  this  Body, 
That  fills  the  world  around, 
Speak,  man,  ah  say 
What  Spirit,  or  Body,  is  this  Body  ?  '

It  is  like  a  savage  hymn  to  Hegel's  fulilende  Seele  :  the 
all-pervading  Sensitive  Soul.  We  are  reminded,  too,  of 
'  the  doctrine  of  the  Sanscrit  Upanishads  :  There  is  no  limit 
to  the  knowing  of  the  Self  that  knows.'  *

Unluckily  Catherine  was  not  asked  to  give  other 
examples  of  what  she  considered  her  successes.

Acosta,  who  has  not  the  best  possible  repute  as  an 
authority,  informs  us  that  Peruvian  clairvoyants  '  tell 
what  hath  passed  in  the  furthest  parts  before  news  can 
come.  In  the  distance  of  two  or  three  hundred  leagues 
they  would  tell  what  the  Spaniards  did  or  suffered  in  their 
civil  wars.'  To  Du  Pont,  in  1606,  a  sorcerer  'rendered  a 
true  oracle  of  the  coming  of  Poutrincourt,  saying  his 
Devil  had  told  him  so.' 2

We  now  give  a  modern  case,  from  a  scientific  labora- 
tory, of  knowledge  apparently  acquired  in  no  normal  way, 
by  a  person  of  the  sort  usually  chosen  to  be  a  prophet,  or 
wizard,  by  savages.

Professor  Richet  writes  : 3

'  On  Monday,  July  2,  1888,  after  having  passed  all  the 
day  in  my  laboratory,  I  hypnotised  Leonie  at  8  P.M.,  and 
while  she  tried  to  make  out  a  diagram  concealed  in 
an  envelope  I  said  to  her  quite  suddenly  :  "  What  has 
happened  to  M.  Langlois?"  Leonie  knows  M.  Langlois 
from  having  seen  him  two  or  three  times  some  time  ago  in 
my  physiological  laboratory,  where  he  acts  as  my  assistant.1  Brinton's  Religions  of  Primitive  Peoples,  p.  57.

*  Purchas,  p.  629.  3  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  vol.  vi.  69.

'OPENING  THE  GATES   OF  DISTANCE'  83

— "  He  has  burnt  himself,"  Leonie  replied. — "  Good,"  I 
said,  "  and  where  has  he  burnt  himself  ?  " — "  On  the  left 
hand.  It  is  not  fire  :  it  is — I  don't  know  its  name.  Why 
does  he  not  take  care  when  he  pours  it  out?  " — "  Of  what 
colour,"  I  asked,  "  is  the  stuff  which  he  pours  out  ?  " — "  It 
is  not  red,  it  is  brown ;  he  has  hurt  himself  very  much — 
the  skin  puffed  up  directly."

'  Now,  this  description  is  admirably  exact.  At  4  P.M. 
that  day  M.  Langlois  had  wished  to  pour  some  bromine 
into  a  bottle.  He  had  done  this  clumsily,  so  that  some  of 
the  bromine  flowed  on  to  his  left  hand,  which  held  the 
funnel,  and  at  once  burnt  him  severely.  Although  he  at 
once  put  his  hand  into  water,  wherever  the  bromine  had 
touched  it  a  blister  was  formed  in  a  few  seconds — a  blister 
which  one  could  not  better  describe  than  by  saying,  "  the 
skin  puffed  up."  I  need  not  say  that  Leonie  had  not  left 
my  house,  nor  seen  anyone  from  my  laboratory.  Of  this  I 
am  absolutely  certain,  and  I  am  certain  that  I  had  not 
mentioned  the  incident  of  the  burn  to  anyone.  Moreover, 
this  was  the  first  time  for  nearly  a  year  that  M.  Langlois 
had  handled  bromine,  and  when  Leonie  saw  him  six 
months  before  at  the  laboratory  he  was  engaged  in  experi- 
ments of  quite  another  kind.'Here  the  savage  reasoner  would  infer  that  Leonie 's 
spirit  had  visited  M.  Langlois.  The  modern  inquirer  will 
probably  say  that  Leonie  became  aware  of  what  was 
passing  in  the  mind  of  M.  Richet.  This  supranormal 
way  of  acquiring  knowledge  was  observed  in  the  last 
century  by  M.  de  Puysegur  in  one  of  his  earliest  cases 
of  somnambulism.  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  say  :  '  It  is  not 
yet  admitted  that  the  subject  is  able  to  divine  the  thoughts 
of  the  magnetiser  without  any  material  communication  ; ' 
while  they  grant,  as  a  minimum,  that  '  research  should 
be  continued  in  this  direction.'  l  They  appear  to  think 
that  Leonie  may  have  read  '  involuntary  signs '  in  the 
aspect  of  M.  Richet.  This  is  a  difficult  hypothesis.

Here   follows    a   case   recorded   in   his  diary  by  Mr.

1  Binet  and  Fere,  Animal  Magnetism,  p.  64.

o  2

84  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Dobbie,  of   Adelaide,  Australia,    who  has  practised  hyp- 
notism  for   curative   purposes.      He   explains   (June  10,

1884)    that    he    had    mesmerised   Miss  on   several

occasions    to    relieve    rheumatic    pain    and    sore   throat. 
He  found  her  to  be  clairvoyant.

'  The  following  is  a  verbatim  account  of  the  second 
time  I  tested  her  powers  in  this  respect,  April  12,  1884. 
There  were  four  persons  present  during  the  stance.  One 
of  the  company  wrote  down  the  replies  as  they  were 
spoken.'  Her  father  was  at  the  time  over  fifty  miles  away,  but 
we  did  not  know  exactly  where,  so  I  questioned  her  as 
follows :  "  Can  you  find  your  father  at  the  present 
moment?"  At  first  she  replied  that  she  could  not  see 
him,  but  in  a  minute  or  two  she  said,  "  Oh,  yes ;  now  I 
can  see  him,  Mr.  Dobbie."  "Where  is  he?"  "Sitting 
at  a  large  table  in  a  large  room,  and  there  are  a  lot  of 
people  going  in  and  out."  "  What  is  he  doing  ?  "  "  Writing 
a  letter,  and  there  is  a  book  in  front  of  him."  "  Whom  is 
he  writing  to  ?  "  "To  the  newspaper."  Here  she  paused 
and  laughingly  said,  "  Well,  I  declare,  he  is  writing  to  the 
A  B  "  (naming  a  newspaper).  "  You  said  there  was  a  book 
there.  Can  you  tell  me  what  book  it  is  ?"  "It  has  gilt 
letters  on  it."  "  Can  you  read  them,  or  tell  me  the  name 
of  the  author  ?"  She  read,  or  pronounced  slowly,  "  W. 
L.  W."  (giving  the  full  surname  of  the  author).  She 
answered  several  minor  questions  re  the  furniture  in  the 
room,  and  I  then  said  to  her,  "Is  it  any  effort  or  trouble 
to  you  to  travel  in  this  way  ?  "  "  Yes,  a  little ;  I  have 
to  think."

'  I  now  stood  behind  her,  holding  a  half-crown  in  my 
hand,  and  asked  her  if  she  could  tell  me  what  I  had 
in  my  hand,  to  which  she  replied,  "It  is  a  shilling."  It 
seemed  as  though  she  could  see  what  was  happening 
miles  away  easier  than  she  could  see  what  was  going  on 
in  the  room.

'  Her  father  returned  home  nearly  a  week  afterwards, 
and  was  perfectly  astounded  when  told  by  his  wife  and 
family  what  he  had  been  doing  on  that  particular 
evening  ;  and,  although  previous  to  that  date  he  was  a

'  OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE  '  85'  OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE  '  85

thorough  sceptic  as  to  clairvoyance,  he  frankly  admitted 
that  my  clairvoyant  was  perfectly  correct  in  every  par- 
ticular. He  also  informed  us  that  the  book  referred  to 
was  a  new  one,  which  he  had  purchased  after  he  had 
left  his  home,  so  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  his 
daughter  guessing  that  he  had  the  book  before  him.  I 
may  add  that  the  letter  in  due  course  appeared  in  the 
paper ;  and  I  saw  and  handled  the  book.'

A  number  of  cases  of  so-called  '  clairvoyance '  will  be 
found  in  the  '  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research.' '  As  the  authors  of  these  essays  remark,  even 
after  discounting,  in  each  case,  fraud,  malobservation, 
and  misreporting,  the  residue  of  cases  can  seldom  justify 
either  the  savage  theory  of  the  wandering  soul  (which  is 
not  here  seriously  proposed)  or  Hegel's  theory  that  the 
fiihlende  Seele  is  unconditioned  by  space.  For,  if  thought 
transference  be  a  fact,  the  apparent  clairvoyant  may  only 
be  reading  the  mind  of  a  person  at  a  distance.  The 
results,  however,  when  successful,  would  naturally  suggest 
to  the  savage  thinker  the  belief  in  the  wandering  soul,  or 
corroborate  it  if  it  had  already  been  suggested  by  the 
common  phenomena  of  dreaming.To  these  instances  of  knowledge  acquired  otherwise 
than  by  the  recognised  channels  of  sense  we  might  add 
the  Scottish  tales  of  'second  sight.'  That  phrase  is 
merely  a  local  term  covering  examples  of  what  is  called 
'  clairvoyance ' — views  of  things  remote  in  space,  hallu- 
cinations of  sight  that  coincide  with  some  notable  event, 
premonitions  of  things  future,  and  so  on.  The  belief  and 
hallucinatory  experiences  are  still  very  common  in  the 
Highlands,  where  I  have  myself  collected  many  recent 
instances.  Mr.  Tyler  observes  that  the  examples  '  prove 
a  little  too  much ;  they  vouch  not  only  for  human 
apparitions,  but  for  such  phantoms  as  demon  dogs,  and

1  Vol.  vii.  Mrs.  Sidgwiek,  pp.  30,  356  ;  vol.  vi.  p.  CG,  Professor  Kichet ; 
p.  407,  Drs.  Dufay  and  Azam.

86  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

for  still  more  fanciful  symbolic  omens.'  This  is  perfectly 
true.  I  have  found  no  cases  of  demon  dogs ;  but  wander- 
ing lights,  probably  of  meteoric  or  miasmatic  origin,  are 
certainly  regarded  as  tokens  of  death.  This  is  obviously 
a  superstitious  hypothesis,  the  lights  being  real  phenomena 
misconstrued.  Again,  funerals  are  not  uncommonly  seen 
where  no  funeral  is  taking  place ;  it  is  then  alleged  that 
a  real  funeral,  similar  and  similarly  situated,  soon  after- 
wards occurred.  On  the  hypothesis  of  believers,  the 
percipients  somehow  behold

'  Such  refraction  of  events 
As  often  rises  ere  they  rise.''  Such  refraction  of  events 
As  often  rises  ere  they  rise.'

Even  the  savage  cannot  account  for  this  experience  by 
the  wandering  of  the  soul  in  space ;  nor  do  I  suggest  any 
explanation.  I  give,  however,  one  or  two  instances.  They 
are  published  in  the  '  Journal  of  the  Caledonian  Medical 
Society,'  1897,  by  Dr.  Alastair  Macgregor,  on  the  authority 
of  the  MSS.  of  his  father,  a  minister  in  the  island  of  Skye.

'  He  once  told  me  that  when  he  first  went  to  Skye  he 
scoffed  at  the  idea  of  such  a  power  as  second  sight  being 
genuine;  but  he  said  that,  after  having  been  there  for 
some  years  as  a  clergyman,  he  had  been  so  often  con- 
sulted beforehand  by  people  who  said  they  had  seen 
visions  of  events  which  subsequently  occurred,  to  my 
father's  knowledge,  in  exact  accordance  with  the  form  and 
details  of  the  vision  as  foretold,  that  he  was  compelled  to 
confess  that  some  folks  had,  apparently  at  least,  the  un- 
fortunate faculty.

'  As  my  father  expressed  it,  this  faculty  was  "  neither 
voluntary  nor  constant,  and  was  considered  rather  annoying 
than  agreeable  to  the  possessors  of  it.  The  gift  was 
possessed  by  individuals  of  both  sexes,  and  its  fits  came 
on  within  doors  and  without,  sitting  and  standing,  at 
night  and  by  day,  and  at  whatever  employment  the  votary 
might  chance  to  be  engaged."

Here  follows  a  typical  example  of  the  vision  of  a 
funeral :

'OPENING  THE   GATES  OF  DISTANCE'  87Here  follows  a  typical  example  of  the  vision  of  a 
funeral :

'OPENING  THE   GATES  OF  DISTANCE'  87

'  The  session  clerk  at  Dull,  a  small  village  in  Perth- 
shire, was  ill,  and  my  grandfather,  clergyman  there  at 
the  time,  had  to  do  duty  for  him.  One  fine  summer 
evening,  ahout  7  o'clock,  a  young  man  and  woman  came 
to  get  some  papers  filled  up,  as  they  were  going  to  be 
married.  My  grandfather  was  with  the  couple  in  the 
session  clerk's  room,  no  doubt  attending  to  the  papers, 
when  suddenly  all  three  saw  through  the  window  a 
funeral  procession  passing  along  the  road.  From  their 
dress  the  bulk  of  the  mourners  seemed  to  be  farm  labourers 
—indeed  the  young  woman  recognised  some  of  them 
as  natives  of  Dull,  who  had  gone  to  live  and  work  near 
Dunkeld.  Kemarks  were  naturally  made  by  my  grand- 
father and  the  young  couple  about  the  untimely  hour  for 
a  funeral,  and,  hastily  filling  in  the  papers,  my  grand- 
father went  out  to  get  the  key  of  the  churchyard,  which 
was  kept  in  the  manse,  as,  without  the  key,  the  procession 
could  not  get  into  God's  acre.  Wondering  how  it  was 
that  he  had  received  no  intimation  of  the  funeral,  he  went 
to  the  manse  by  a  short  cut,  got  the  key,  and  hurried 
down  to  the  churchyard  gate,  where,  of  course,  he  ex- 
pected to  find  the  cortege  waiting.  Not  a  soul  was  there 
except  the  young  couple,  who  were  as  amazed  as  my 
grandfather !'  Well,  at  the  same  hour  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day 
in  the  following  week  the  funeral,  this  time  in  reality, 
arrived  quite  unexpectedly.  The  facts  were  that  a  boy,  a 
native  of  Dull,  had  got  gored  by  a  bull  at  Dunkeld,  and 
was  so  shockingly  mangled  that  his  remains  were  picked 
up  and  put  into  a  coffin  and  taken  without  delay  to  Dull. 
A  grave  was  dug  as  quickly  as  possible — the  poor  lad 
having  no  relatives — and  the  remains  were  interred.  My 
grandfather  and  the  young  couple  recognised  several  of 
the  mourners  as  being  among  those  whom  they  had  seen 
out  of  the  session  clerk's  room,  exactly  a  week  previously, 
in  the  phantom  cortege.  The  young  woman  knew  some 
of  them  personally,  and  related  to  them  what  she  had 
seen,  but  they  of  course  denied  all  knowledge  of  the  affair, 
having  been  then  in  Dunkeld.'

I  give  another  example,  because  the  experience  was 
auditory,  as  well  as  visual,  and  the  prediction  was  an- 
nounced before  the  event.

88  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGIONI  give  another  example,  because  the  experience  was 
auditory,  as  well  as  visual,  and  the  prediction  was  an- 
nounced before  the  event.

88  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

'  The  parishioners  in  Skye  were  evidently  largely  imbued 
with  the  Eomanist-like  belief  in  the  powers  of  intercession 
vested  in  their  clergyman  ;  so  when  they  had  a  "  warning  " 
or  "vision  "  they  usually  consulted  my  father  as  to  what 
they  could  do  to  prevent  the  coming  disaster  befalling 
their  relatives  or  friends.  In  this  way  my  father  had  the 
opportunity  of  noting  down  the  minutiae  of  the  "  warning  " 
or  "vision"  directly  it  was  told  him.  Having  had  the 
advantage  of  a  medical,  previous  to  his  theological, 
training,  he  was  able  to  note  down  sound  facts,  unern- 
bellished  by  superadded  imagination.  Entering  into  this 
method  of  case-taking  with  a  mind  perfectly  open,  except 
for  a  slight  touch  of  scepticism,  he  was  greatly  surprised 
to  discover  how  very  frequently  realisations  occurred 
exactly  in  conformance  with  the  minutiae  of  the  vision  as 
detailed  in  his  note-book.  Finally,  he  was  compelled  to 
discard  his  scepticism,  and  to  admit  that  some  people  had 
undoubtedly  the  uncanny  gift.  Almost  the  first  case  he 
took  (Case  X.)  was  that  of  a  woman  who  had  one  day  a 
vision  of  her  son  falling  over  a  high  rock  at  Uig,  in  Skye, 
with  a  sheep  or  lamb.'  CASE  X. — She  heard  her  son  exclaim  in  Gaelic,  "  This  is 
a  fatal  lamb  for  me."  As  her  son  lived  several  miles  from 
Uig,  and  was  a  fisherman,  realisation  seemed  to  my  father 
very  unlikely,  but  one  month  afterwards  the  realisation 
occurred  only  too  true.  Unknown  to  his  mother,  who 
had  warned  him  against  having  anything  to  do  with 
sheep  or  lambs,  the  son  one  day,  instead  of  going  out  in 
his  boat,  thought  he  would  take  a  holiday  inland,  and 
wrent  off  to  Uig,  where  a  farmer  enlisted  his  services  in 
separating  some  lambs  from  the  ewes.  One  of  the  lambs 
ran  away,  and  the  fisher  lad  ran  headlong  after  it,  and  not 
looking  where  he  was  going,  on  catching  the  lamb  was 
pulled  by  it  to  the  edge  of  one  of  the  very  picturesque  but 
exceedingly  dangerous  rocks  at  Uig.  Too  late  realising 
his  critical  position,  he  exclaimed,  "  This  is  a  fatal  lamb 
for  me,"  but  going  with  such  an  impetus  he  was  unable  to 
bring  himself  up  in  time,  and,  along  with  the  lamb,  fell 
over  into  the  ravine  below,  and  was,  of  course,  killed  on 
the  spot.  The  farmer,  when  he  saw  the  lad's  danger, 
ran  to  his  assistance,  but  was  only  in  time  to  hear  him 
cry  out  in  Gaelic  before  disappearing  over  the  brink  of  the 
precipice.  This  was  predicted  by  the  mother  a  month 
before.  Was  this  simply  a  coincidence?  '

'  OPENING  THE  GATES  OF  DISTANCE '  89

Dr.  Macgregor's  remarks  on  the  involuntary  and 
unwelcome  nature  of  the  visions  is  borne  out  by  what 
Scheffer,  as  already  quoted,  says  concerning  the  Lapps.Dr.  Macgregor's  remarks  on  the  involuntary  and 
unwelcome  nature  of  the  visions  is  borne  out  by  what 
Scheffer,  as  already  quoted,  says  concerning  the  Lapps.

In  addition  to  visions  which  thus  come  unsought, 
contributing  knowledge  of  things  remote  or  even  future, 
we  may  glance  at  visions  which  are  provoked  by  various 
methods.  Drugs  (impepd)  are  used,  seers  whirl  in  a  wild 
dance  till  they  fall  senseless,  or  trance  is  induced  by 
various  kinds  of  self-suggestion  or  '  auto-hypnotism.' 
Fasting  is  also  practised.  In  modern  life  the  self-induced 
trance  is  common  among  '  mediums  ' — a  subject  to  which 
we  recur  later.

So  far,  it  will  be  observed,  our  evidence  proves  that 
precisely  similar  beliefs  as  to  man's  occasional  power  of 
opening  the  gates  of  distance  have  been  entertained  in  a 
great  variety  of  lands  and  ages,  and  by  races  in  every 
condition  of  culture.1  The  alleged  experiences  are  still 
said  to  occur,  and  have  been  investigated  by  physiologists 
of  the  eminence  of  M.  Richet.  The  question  cannot  but 
arise  as  to  the  residuum  of  fact  in  these  narrations,  and  it 
keeps  on  arising.

In  the  following  chapter  we  discuss  a  mode  of 
inducing  hallucinations  which  has  for  anthropologists  the 
interest  of  universal  diffusion.  The  width  of  its  range 
in  savage  races  has  not,  we  believe,  been  previously 
observed.  We  then  add  facts  of  modern  experience, 
about  the  authenticity  of  which  we,  personally,  entertain 
no  doubt ;  and  the  provisional  conclusion  appears  to  be 
that  savages  have  observed  a  psychological  circumstance 
which  has  been  ignored  by  professed  psychologists,  and 
which,  certainly,  does  not  fit  into  the  ordinary  materialistic 
hypothesis.1  The  examples  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  the  Life  of  St.  Columba  by 
Adamnan,  need  only  be  alluded  to  as  too  familiar  for  quotation.

90  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

V

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,  SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED

AMONG  savage  methods  of  provoking  hallucinations 
whence  knowledge  may  be  supernormally  obtained, 
various  forms  of  '  crystal-gazing  '  are  the  most  curious. 
We  find  the  habit  of  looking  into  water,  usually  in  a 
vessel,  preferably  a  glass  vessel,  among  Bed  Indians 
(Lejeune),  Romans  (Varro,  cited  in  Civitas  Dei,  iii.  457), 
Africans  of  Fez  (Leo  Africanus) ;  while  Maoris  use  a 
drop  of  blood  (Taylor),  Egyptians  use  ink  (Lane),  and 
Australian  savages  employ  a  ball  of  polished  stone,  into 
which  the  seer  '  puts  himself  '  to  descry  the  results  of  an 
expedition.1

I  have  already  given,  in  the  Introduction,  Ellis's 
record  of  the  Polynesian  case.  A  hole  being  dug  in  the 
floor  of  his  house,  and  filled  with  water,  the  priest  looks 
for  a  vision  of  the  thief  who  has  carried  off  stolen  goods. 
The  Polynesian  theory  is  that  the  god  carries  the  spirit 
of  the  thief  over  the  water,  in  which  it  is  reflected. 
Lejeune's  Bed  Indians  make  their  patients  gaze  into  the 
water,  in  which  they  will  see  the  pictures  of  the  things  in 
the  way  of  food  or  medicine  that  will  do  them  good.  In 
modern  language,  the  instinctive  knowledge  existing  im- 
plicitly in  the  patient's  subconsciousness  is  thus  brought 
into  the  range  of  his  ordinary  consciousness.

In  1887  the   late  Captain  J.  T.  Bourke,  of  the  U.S.

1  Information,  with  a  photograph  of  the  stones,  from  a  correspondent  in 
West  Maitland,  Australia.

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE   AND   CIVILISED        911  Information,  with  a  photograph  of  the  stones,  from  a  correspondent  in 
West  Maitland,  Australia.

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE   AND   CIVILISED        91

Cavalry,  an  original  and  careful  observer,  visited  the 
Apaches  in  the  interests  of  the  Ethnological  Bureau. 
He  learned  that  one  of  the  chief  duties  of  the  medicine- 
men was  to  find  out  the  whereabouts  of  lost  or  stolen 
property.  Na-a-cha,  one  of  these  jossaJceeds,  possessed 
a  magic  quartz  crystal,  which  he  greatly  valued.  Captain 
Bourke  presented  him  with  a  still  finer  crystal.  '  He 
could  not  give  me  an  explanation  of  its  magical  use, 
except  that  by  looking  into  it  he  could  see  everything 
he  wanted  to  see.'  Captain  Bourke  appears  never  to 
have  heard  of  the  modern  experiments  in  crystal-gazing. 
Captain  Bourke  also  discovered  that  the  Apaches,  like  the 
Greeks,  Australians,  Africans,  Maoris,  and  many  other 
races,  use  the  bull-roarer,  turndun,  or  rliotnbos — a  piece 
of  wood  which,  being  whirled  round,  causes  a  strange 
windy  roar — in  their  mystic  ceremonies.  The  wide  use 
of  the  rhombos  was  known  to  Captain  Bourke ;  that  of 
the  crystal  was  not.

For  the  Iroquois,  Mrs.  Erminie  Smith  supplies  infor- 
mation about  the  crystal.  '  Placed  in  a  gourd  of  water, 
it  could  render  visible  the  apparition  of  a  person  who  has 
bewitched  another.'  She  gives  a  case  in  European  times 
of  a  medicine-man  who  found  the  witch's  habitat,  but  got 
only  an  indistinct  view  of  her  face.  On  a  second  trial 
he  was  successful.1  One  may  add  that  treasure-seekers 
among  the  Huille-che  '  look  earnestly '.  for  what  they 
want  to  find  '  into  a  smooth  slab  of  black  stone,  which 
I  suppose  to  be  basalt.' 2The  kindness  of  Monsieur  Lefebure  enables  me  to  give 
another  example  from  Madagascar.3  Flacourt,  describing

1  Eeport  Ethnol.   Bureau,   1887-88,   p.   460;    vol.  ii.  p.  C9.     Captain 
Bourke's   volume   on   The  Medicine   Men  of  the   Apaches    may    also    be 
consulted.

2  Fitzroy,  Adventure,  vol.  ii.  p.  389.

3L'Histoire  de   la  grand  lie  Madagascar,   par  le  Sieur  de  Flacourt.

92  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  Malagasies,  says  that  they  squillent  (a  word  not 
in  Littre),  that  is,  divine  by  crystals,  which  '  fall  from 
heaven  when  it  thunders.'  Of  course  the  rain  reveals  the 
crystals,  as  it  does  the  flint  instruments  called  '  thunder- 
bolts '  in  many  countries.  '  Lorsqu'ils  squillent,  ils  ont 
une  de  ces  pierres  au  coing  de  leurs  tablettes,  disans 
qu'elle  a  la  vertu  de  faire  faire  operation  a  leur  figure 
de  geomance.'  Probably  they  used  the  crystals  as  do 
the  Apaches.  On  July  15  a  Malagasy  woman  viewed, 
whether  in  her  crystal  or  otherwise,  two  French  vessels 
which,  like  the  Spanish  fleet,  were  'not  in  sight,'  also 
officers,  and  doctors,  and  others  aboard,  whom  she  had 
seen,  before  their  return  to  France,  in  Madagascar.  The 
earliest  of  the  ships  did  not  arrive  till  August  11.Dr.  Callaway  gives  the  Zulu  practice,  where  the  chief 
'  sees  what  will  happen  by  looking  into  the  vessel.'  l  The 
Shamans  of  Siberia  and  Eastern  Russia  employ  the 
same  method.2  The  case  of  the  Inca,  Yupanqui,  is 
very  curious.  '  As  he  came  up  to  a  fountain  he  saw  a 
piece  of  crystal  fall  into  it,  within  which  he  beheld  a  figure 
of  an  Indian  in  the  following  shape.  .  .  .  The  apparition 
then  vanished,  while  the  crystal  remained.  The  Inca 
took  care  of  it,  and  they  say  that  he  afterwards  saw 
everything  he  wanted  in  it.'  3

Here,  then,  we  find  the  belief  that  hallucinations  can 
be  induced  by  one  or  other  form  of  crystal-gazing,  in 
ancient  Peru,  on  the  other  side  of  the  continent  among 
the  Huille-che,  in  Fez,  in  Madagascar,  in  Siberia,  among 
Apaches,  Hurons,  Iroquois,  Australian  black  fellows, 
Maoris,  and  in  Polynesia.  This  is  assuredly  a  wide  range

Paris,  1661,  ch.  76.  Veue  de  deux  Navires  de  France  predite  par  les 
Negres,  avant  que  1'on  en  peust  s<;avoir  des  Nouvelles,  &c.

1  Religion  of  the  Amazulu,  p.  341.

'-'  J.A.I.,  November  1894,  p.  155.     Ryckov  is  cited  ;  Zhurnal,  p.  86.

3  Rites  and  Laws  of  tlie  Yncas,  Christoval  de  Molina,  p.  12.

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE   AND  CIVILISED        93

of  geographical  distribution.  We  also  find  the  practice 
in  Greece  (Pausanias,  VII.  xxi.  12),  in  Home  (Varro),  in 
Egypt,  and  in  India.of  geographical  distribution.  We  also  find  the  practice 
in  Greece  (Pausanias,  VII.  xxi.  12),  in  Home  (Varro),  in 
Egypt,  and  in  India.

Though  anthropologists  have  paid  no  attention  to  the 
subject,  it  was  of  course  familiar  to  later  Europe.  '  Miss  X  ' 
has  traced  it  among  early  Christians,  in  early  Councils,  in 
episcopal  condemnations  of  specularii,  and  so  to  Dr.  Dee, 
under  James  VI.;  Aubrey;  the  Kegent  d'Orleans  in  St.- 
Simon's  Memoirs ;  the  modern  mesmerists  (Gregory,  Mayo) 
and  the  mid-Victorian  spiritualists,  who,  as  usual,  explained 
the  phenomena,  in  their  prehistoric  way,  by  '  spirits.'  ' 
Till  this  lady  examined  the  subject,  nobody  had  thought 
of  remarking  that  a  belief  so  universal  had  probably  some 
basis  of  facts,  or  nobody  if  we  except  two  professors 
of  chemistry  and  physiology,  Drs.  Gregory  and  Mayo. 
Miss  X  made  experiments,  beginning  by  accident,  like 
George  Sand,  when  a  child.

The  hallucinations  which  appear  to  her  eyes  in  ink,  or 
crystal,  are :

1.  Revived  memories  '  arising  thus,  and  thus  only,  from 
the  subconscious  strata  ;  '

'  2.  Objectivation  of  ideas  or  images — (a)  consciously 
or  (b)  unconsciously — in  the  mind  of  the  percipient ;

'  3.  Visions,  possibly  telepathic  or  clairvoyant,  implying 
acquirement  of  knowledge  by  supernormal  means.' 2

The  examples  given  of  the  last  class,  the  class  which 
would  be  so  useful  to  a  priest  or  medicine-man  asked  to 
discover  things  lost,  are  of  very  slight  interest.3

Since  Miss  X  drew  attention  to  this  subject,  experi- 
ments have  proved  beyond  doubt  that  a  fair  percentage

1  See  Miss  X's  article,  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  v.  486.         -  Op.  cit.  v.  505.1  See  Miss  X's  article,  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  v.  486.         -  Op.  cit.  v.  505.

3  If  any  reader  wishes  to  make  experiments,  he,  or  she,  should  not  be 
astonished  if  the  first  crystal  figure  represents  '  the  sheeted  dead,'  or  a 
person  ill  in  bed.  For  some  reason,  or  no  reason,  this  is  rather  a  usual 
prelude,  signifying  nothing.

94  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

of  people,  sane  and  healthy,  can  see  vivid  landscapes,  and 
figures  of  persons  in  motion,  in  glass  balls  and  other 
vehicles.  This  faculty  Dr.  Parish  attributes  to '  dissociation/ 
practically  to  drowsiness.  But  he  speaks  by  conjecture, 
and  without  having  witnessed  experiments,  as  will  be 
shown  later.  I  now  offer  a  series  of  experiments  with  a 
glass  ball,  coming  under  my  own  observation,  in  which 
knowledge  was  apparently  acquired  in  no  ordinary  way. 
Of  the  absence  of  fraud  I  am  personally  convinced,  not 
only  by  the  characters  of  all  concerned,  but  by  the  nature 
of  the  circumstances.  That  adaptive  memory  did  not  later 
alter  the  narratives,  as  originally  told,  I  feel  certain,  be- 
cause they  were  reported  to  me,  when  I  was  not  present, 
within  less  than  a  week,  precisely  as  they  are  now  given, 
except  in  cases  specially  noted.Early  in  the  present  year  (1897)  I  met  a  young  lady 
who  told  me  of  three  or  four  curious  hallucinatory  ex- 
periences of  her  own,  which  were  sufficiently  corroborated. 
She  was  innocent  of  psychical  studies,  and  personally 
was,  and  is,  in  perfect  health ;  the  pale  cast  of  thought 
being  remote  from  her.  I  got  a  glass  ball,  and  was  -pre- 
sent when  she  first  looked  into  it.  She  saw,  I  remember, 
the  interior  of  a  house,  with  a  full-length  portrait  of  a 
person  unknown.  There  were,  I  think,  one  or  two  other 
fancy  pictures  of  the  familiar  kind.  But  she  presently 
(living  as  she  was,  among  strangers)  developed  a  power  of 
'  seeing '  persons  and  places  unknown  to  her,  but  familiar 
to  them.  These  experiences  do  seem  to  me  to  be  good 
examples  of  what  is  called  '  thought  transference  ; '  indeed, 
I  never  before  could  get  out  of  a  level  balance  of  doubt  on 
that  subject,  a  balance  which  now  leans  considerably  to 
the  affirmative  side.  There  may  be  abundance  of  better 
evidence,  but,  knowing  the  persons  and  circumstances, 
and  being  present  once  at  what  seemed  to  me  a  crucial

CRYSTAL  VISIONS,   SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        95

example,  I  was  more  inclined  to  be  convinced.  This 
attitude  appears,  to  myself,  illogical,  but  it  is  natural  and 
usual.CRYSTAL  VISIONS,   SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        95

example,  I  was  more  inclined  to  be  convinced.  This 
attitude  appears,  to  myself,  illogical,  but  it  is  natural  and 
usual.

We  cannot  tell  what  indications  may  be  accidentally 
given  in  experiments  in  thought  transference.  But,  in  these 
cases  of  crystal-gazing,  the  detail  was  too  copious  to  be  con- 
veyed, by  a  looker-on,  in  a  wink  or  a  cough.  I  do  not  mean 
to  say  that  success  was  invariable.  I  thought  of  Dr.  W.  G. 
Grace,  and  the  scryer  saw  an  old  man  crawling  along  with 
a  stick.  But  I  doubt  if  Dr.  Grace  is  very  deeply  seated 
in  that  mystic  entity,  nay  subconscious  self.  The  '  scries  ' 
which  came  right  were  sometimes,  but  not  always,  those  of 
which  the  '  agent '  (or  person  scried  for)  was  consciously 
thinking.  But  the  examples  will  illustrate  the  various 
kinds  of  occurrences.Here  one  should  first  consider  the  arguments  against 
accepting  recognition  of  objects  merely  described  by  an- 
other person.  The  crystal-gazer  may  know  the  inquirer 
so  intimately  as  to  have  a  very  good  guess  at  the  subject 
of  his  meditation.  Again,  a  man  is  likely  to  be  thinking 
of  a  woman,  and  a  woman  of  a  man,  so  the  field  of 
conjecture  is  limited.  In  answer  to  the  first  objection 
I  may  say  that  the  crystal-gazer  was  among  strangers, 
all  of  whom,  myself  included,  she  now  saw  for  the 
first  time.  Nor  could  she  have  studied  their  histories 
beforehand,  for  she  could  not  know  (normally)  when  she 
left  home,  that  she  was  about  to  be  shown  a  glass  ball, 
or  whom  she  would  meet.  The  second  objection  is  met 
by  the  circumstance  that  ladies  were  not  usually  picked 
out  for  men,  nor  men  for  women.  Indeed,  these  choices 
were  the  exceptions,  and  in  each  case  were  marked  by 
minutely  particular  details.  A  third  objection  is  that 
credulity,  or  the  love  of  strange  novelties,  or  desire  to 
oblige,  biases  the  inquirers,  and  makes  them  anxious  to

96  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION96  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

recognise  something  familiar  in  the  scryer's  descriptions. 
In  the  same  way  we  know  how  people  recognise  faces  in 
the  most  blurred  and  vague  of  spiritist  photographs,  or 
see  family  resemblances  in  the  most  rudimentary  dough- 
faced  babies.  Take  descriptions  of  persons  in  a  passport, 
or  in  a  proclamation  sketching  the  personal  appearance  of 
a  criminal.  These  fit  the  men  or  women  intended,  but 
they  also  fit  a  crowd  of  other  people.  The  descrip- 
tion given  by  the  scryer  then  may  come  right  by  a  for- 
tuitous coincidence,  or  may  be  too  credulously  recognised. 
The  complex  of  coincidences,  however,  could  not  be 
attributed  to  chance  selection  out  of  the  whole  possible 
field  of  conjecture.  We  must  remember,  too,  that  a  series 
of  such  hits  increases,  at  an  enormous  rate,  the  odds 
against  accidental  conjecture.  Of  such  mere  luck  I 
may  give  an  example.  I  was  writing  a  story  of  which 
the  hero  was  George  Kelly,  one  of  the  '  Seven  Men  of 
Moidart.'  A  year  after  composing  my  tale,  I  found 
the  Government  description  of  Mr.  Kelly  (1736).  It 
exactly  tallied  with  my  purely  fanciful  sketch,  down  to 
eyes,  and  teeth,  and  face,  except  that  I  made  my  hero 
'  about  six  feet,'  whereas  the  Government  gave  him  five 
'feet  ten.  But  I  knew  beforehand  that  Mr.  Kelly  was  a 
clergyman  ;  his  curious  career  proved  him  to  be  a  person 
of  great  activity  and  geniality — and  he  was  of  Irish  birth. 
Even  a  dozen  such  guesses,  equally  correct,  could  not 
suggest  any  powers  of  '  vision,'  when  so  much  was  known 
beforehand  about  the  person  guessed  at.  I  now  give 
cases  in  the  experience  of  Miss  Angus,  as  one  may  call 
the  crystal-gazer.  The  first  occurred  the  day  after  she 
got  the  glass  ball  for  the  first  time.  She  writes  :'I. — A  lady  one  day  asked  me  to  scry  out  a  friend  of  whom 
she  would  think.  Almost  immediately  I  exclaimed  "Here 
is  an  old,  old  lady  looking  at  me  with  a  triumphant  smile

CRYSTAL  VISIONS,   SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        97

on  her  face.  She  has  a  prominent  nose  and  nut-cracker 
chin.  Her  face  is  very  much  wrinkled,  especially  at  the 
sides  of  her  eyes,  as  if  she  were  always  smiling.  She  is 
wearing  a  little  white  shawl  with  a  black  edge.  But ! .  .  . 
she  can't  be  old  as  her  hair  is  quite  brown !  although  her 
face  looks  so  very  very  old."  The  picture  then  vanished, 
and  the  lady  said  that  I  had  accurately  described  her 
friend's  mother  instead  of  himself  ;  that  it  was  a  family 
joke  that  the  mother  must  dye  her  hair,  it  was  so  brown, 
and  she  was  eighty-two  years  old.  The  lady  asked  me  if 
the  vision  were  distinct  enough  for  me  to  recognise  a  like- 
ness in  the  son's  photograph ;  next  day  she  laid  several 
photographs  before  me,  and  in  a  moment,  without  the 
slightest  hesitation  I  picked  him  out  from  his  wonderful 
likeness  to  my  vision  !  '

The  inquirer  verbally  corroborated  all  the  facts  to  me, 
within  a  week,  but  leaned  to  a  theory  of  '  electricity.'  She 
hasTead  and  confirms  this  account.The  inquirer  verbally  corroborated  all  the  facts  to  me, 
within  a  week,  but  leaned  to  a  theory  of  '  electricity.'  She 
hasTead  and  confirms  this  account.

'  II. — One  afternoon  I  was  sitting  beside  a  young  lady 
whom  I  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  before.  She  asked 
if  she  might  look  into  my  crystal,  and  while  she  did  so  I 
happened  to  look  over  her  shoulder  and  saw  a  ship 
tossing  on  a  very  heavy  choppy  sea,  although  land  was 
still  visible  in  the  dim  distance.  That  vanished,  and,  as 
suddenly,  a  little  house  appeared  with  five  or  six  (I  forget 
now  the  exact  number  I  then  counted)  steps  leading  up  to 
the  door.  On  the  second  step  stood  an  old  man  reading  a 
newspaper.  In  front  of  the  house  was  a  field  of  thick 
stubbly  grass  where  some  lambs,  I  was  going  to  say,  but 
they  were  more  like  very  small  sheep  .  .  .  were  grazing.

'  When  the  scene  vanished,  the  young  lady  told  me  I 
had  vividly  described  a  spot  in  Shetland  where  she  and 
her  mother  were  soon  going  to  spend  a  few  weeks.'

I  heard  of  this  case  from  Miss  Angus  within  a  day  or  two 
of  its  occurrence,  and  it  was  then  confirmed  to  me,  verbally, 
by  the  other  lady.  She  again  confirms  it  (December  21, 
1897).  Both  ladies  had  hitherto  been  perfect  strangers  to 
each  other.  The  old  man  was  the  schoolmaster,  appa- 
rently. In  her  MS.,  Miss  Angus  writes  '  Skye,'  but  at  the

H

98  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

time  both  she  and  the  other  lady  said  Shetland  (which  I 
have  restored).  In  Shetland  the  sheep,  like  the  ponies,  are 
small.  Fortuitous  coincidence,  of  course,  may  be  invoked. 
The  next  account  is  by  another  lady,  say  Miss  Rose.'  III. — Writes  Miss  Eose — My  first  experience  of  crystal 
gazing  was  not  a  pleasant  one,  as  will  be  seen  from  the 
following  which  I  now  relate  as  exactly  as  I  can  remem- 
ber. I  asked  my  friend,  Miss  Angus,  to  allow  me  to 
look  in  her  crystal,  and,  after  doing  so  for  a  short  time, 
gave  up,  saying  it  was  very  unsatisfactory,  as,  although  I 
saw  a  room  with  a  bright  fire  in  it  and  a  bed  all  curtained 
and  people  coming  and  going,  I  could  not  make  out  who 
they  were,  so  I  returned  the  crystal  to  Miss  Angus,  with 
the  request  that  she  might  look  for  me.  She  said  at  once, 
"  I  see  a  bed  with  a  man  in  it  looking  very  ill  and  a  lady 
in  black  beside  it."  Without  saying  any  more  Miss 
Angus  still  kept  looking,  and,  after  some  time,  I  asked  to 
have  one  more  look,  and  on  her  passing  the  ball  back  to 
me,  I  received  quite  a  shock,  for  there,  perfectly  clearly  in 
a  bright  light,  I  saw  stretched  out  in  bed  an  old  man 
apparently  dead  ;  for  a  few  minutes  I  could  not  look,  and 
on  doing  so  once  more  there  appeared  a  lady  in  black  and 
out  of  dense  darkness  a  long  black  object  was  being  carried 
and  it  stopped  before  a  dark  opening  overhung  with 
rocks.  At  the  time  I  saw  this  I  was  staying  with 
cousins,  and  it  was  a  Friday  evening.  On  Sunday  we 
heard  of  the  death  of  the  father-in-law  of  one  of  my 
cousins ;  of  course  I  knew  the  old  gentleman  was  very  ill, 
but  my  thoughts  were  not  in  the  least  about  him  when 
looking  in  the  crystal.  I  may  also  say  I  did  not  recognise 
in  the  features  of  the  dead  man  those  of  the  old  gentleman 
whose  death  I  mention.  On  looking  again  on  Sunday,  I 
once  more  saw  the  curtained  bed  and  some  people.'I  now  give  Miss  Angus's  version  of  this  case,  as 
originally  received  from  her  (December  1897).  I  had 
previously  received  an  oral  version,  from  a  person  present 
at  the  scrying.  It  differed,  in  one  respect,  from  what 
Miss  Angus  writes.  Her  version  is  offered  because  it  is 
made  independently,  without  consultation,  or  attempt  to 
reconcile  recollections.

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,  SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        99CRYSTAL   VISIONS,  SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        99

'  At  a  recent  experience  of  gazing,  for  the  first  time 
I  was  able  to  make  another  see  what  I  saw  in  the  crystal. 
Miss  Rose  called  one  afternoon,  and  begged  me  to  look  in 
the  ball  for  her.  I  did  so,  and  immediately  exclaimed, 
4'  Oh  !  here  is  a  bed,  with  a  man  in  it  looking  very  ill  [I 
saw  he  was  dead,  but  refrained  from  saying  so],  and  there 
is  a  lady  dressed  in  black  sitting  beside  the  bed."  I  did 
not  recognise  the  man  to  be  anyone  I  knew,  so  I  told  her 
to  look.  In  a  very  short  time  she  called  out,  "  Oh  !  I  see 
the  bed  too  !  But,  oh  !  take  it  away,  the  man  is  dead  \  " 
She  got  quite  a  shock,  and  said  she  would  never  look  in  it 
again.  Soon,  however,  curiosity  prompted  her  to  have 
one  more  look,  and  the  scene  at  once  came  back  again, 
and  slowly,  from  a  misty  object  at  the  side  of  the  bed,  the 
lady  in  black  became  quite  distinct.  Then  she  described 
several  people  in  the  room,  and  said  they  were  carrying 
something  all  draped  in  black.  When  she  saw  this,  she 
put  the  ball  down  and  would  not  look  at  it  again.  She 
called  again  on  Sunday  (this  had  been  on  Friday)  with 
her  cousin,  and  we  teased  her  about  being  afraid  of  the 
crystal,  so  she  said  she  would  just  look  in  it  once  more. 
She  took  the  ball,  but  immediately  laid  it  down  again, 
saying,  "  No,  I  won't  look,  as  the  bed  with  the  awful  man 
in  it  is  there  again  !  "

'  When  they  went  home,  they  heard  that  the  cousin's 
father-in-law  had  died  that  afternoon,1  but  to  show  he  had 
never  been  in  our  thoughts,  although  we  all  knew  he  had 
not  been  well,  no  one  suggested  him  ;  his  name  was  never 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  vision.''  Clairvoyance,'  of  course,  is  not  illustrated  here,  the 
corpse  being  unrecognised,  and  the  coincidence,  doubtless, 
accidental.

The  next  case  is  attested  by  a  civilian,  a  slight 
acquaintance  of  Miss  Angus's,  who  now  saw  him  for  the 
second  time  only,  but  better  known  to  her  family.

'  IV.— On  Thursday,  March  —  ?  1897,  I  was  lunching 
with  my  friends  the  Anguses,  and  during  luncheon  the

1  Sunday  afternoon.  It  is  not  implied  that  the  pictures  on  Friday  were 
prophets.  Probably  Miss  Rose  saw  what  Miss  Angus  had  seen  by  aid  of 
'  suggestion.'

100  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

conversation  turned  upon  crystal  balls  and  the  visions 
that,  by  some  people,  can  be  seen  in  them.  The  subject 
arose  owing  to  Miss  Angus  having  just  been  presented 
with  a  crystal  ball  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.  I  asked  her  to 
let  me  see  it,  and  then  to  try  and  see  if  she  could  conjure 
up  a  vision  of  any  person  of  whom  I  might  think,  ...  I 
fixed  my  mind  upon  a  friend,  a  young  trooper  in  the 
[regiment  named],  as  I  thought  his  would  be  a  striking 
and  peculiar  personality,  owing  to  his  uniform,  and  also 
because  I  felt  sure  that  Miss  Angus  could  not  possibly 
know  of  his  existence.  I  fixed  my  mind  steadily  upon 
my  friend,  and  presently  Miss  Angus,  who  had  already 
seen  two  cloudy  visions  of  faces  and  people,  called  out, 
"  Now  I  see  a  man  on  a  horse  most  distinctly  ;  he  is 
dressed  most  queerly,  and  glitters  all  over — why,  it's  a 
soldier  !  a  soldier  in  uniform,  but  it's  not  an  officer."  My 
excitement  on  hearing  this  was  so  great  that  I  ceased  to 
concentrate  my  attention  upon  the  thought  of  my  friend, 
and  the  vision  faded  away  and  could  not  afterwards  be 
recalled. — December  2,  1897.'The  witness  gives  the  name  of  the  trooper,  whom  he 
had  befriended  in  a  severe  illness.  Miss  Angus's  own 
account  follows  :  she  had  told  me  the  story  in  June  1897.

'  Shortly  after  I  became  the  happy  possessor  of  a 
"  crystal "  I  managed  to  convert  several  very  decided 
"sceptics,"  and  I  will  here  give  a  short  account  of  my 
experiences  with  two  or  three  of  them.

'  One  was  with  a  Mr. ,  who  was  so  determined

to  baffle  me,  he  said  he  would  think  of  a  friend  it  would 
not  be  possible  for  me  to  describe  !

'  I  had  only  met  Mr.  the  day  before,  and  knew

almost  nothing  about  him  or  his  personal  friends.

'  I  took  up  the  ball,  which  immediately  became  misty, 
and  out  of  this  mist  gradually  a  crowd  of  people  appeared, 
but  too  indistinctly  for  me  to  recognise  anyone,  until 
suddenly  a  man  on  horseback  came  galloping  along.  I 
remember  saying,  "  I  can't  describe  what  he  is  like,  but  he 
is  dressed  in  a  very  queer  way — in  something  so  bright 
that  the  sun  shining  on  him  quite  dazzles  me,  and  I  can- 
not make  him  out  !  "  As  he  came  nearer  I  exclaimed. 
"  Why,  it's  a  soldier  in  shining  armour,  but  it's  not  an

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE   AND   CIVILISED        101

officer,  only  a  soldier !  "     Two  friends  who  were  in  the

room   said   Mr.  's   excitement  was  intense,  and  my

attention  was  drawn  from  the  ball  by  hearing  him  call 
out,  "  It's  wonderful !  it's  perfectly  true  !  I  was  thinking 
of  a  young  boy,  a  son  of  a  crofter,  in  whom  I  am  deeply

interested,  and  who  is  a  trooper  in  the in  London,

which  would  account  for  the  crowd  of  people  round  him 
in  the  street !  "interested,  and  who  is  a  trooper  in  the in  London,

which  would  account  for  the  crowd  of  people  round  him 
in  the  street !  "

The  next  case  is  given,  first  in  the  version  of  the  lady 
who  was  unconsciously  scried  for,  and  next  in  that  of 
Miss  Angus.  The  other  lady  writes  :

'  V. — I  met  Miss  A.  for  the  first  time  in  a  friend's  house 
in  the  south  of  England,  and  one  evening  mention  was 
made  of  a  crystal  ball,  and  our  hostess  asked  Miss  A.  to 
look  in  it,  and,  if  possible,  tell  her  what  was  happening 
to  a  friend  of  hers.  Miss  A.  took  the  crystal,  and  our 
hostess  put  her  hand  on  Miss  A.'s  forehead  to  "will  her." 
I,  not  believing  in  this,  took  up  a  book  and  went  to  the 
other  side  of  the  room.  I  was  suddenly  very  much 
startled  to  hear  Miss  A.,  in  quite  an  agitated  way,  describe 
a  scene  that  had  most  certainly  been  very  often  in  my 
thoughts,  but  of  which  I  had  never  mentioned  a  word. 
She  accurately  described  a  race-course  in  Scotland,  and 
an  accident  which  happened  to  a  friend  of  mine  only  a 
week  or  two  before,  and  she  was  evidently  going  through 
the  same  doubt  and  anxiety  that  I  did  at  the  time  as  to 
whether  he  was  actually  killed  or  only  very  much  hurt. 
It  really  was  a  most  wonderful  revelation  to  me,  as  it  was 
the  very  first  time  I  had  seen  a  crystal.  Our  hostess, 
of  course,  was  very  much  annoyed  that  she  had  not  been 
able  to  influence  Miss  A.,  while  I,  who  had  appeared  so 
very  indifferent,  should  have  affected  her. — November  23, 
1897.'

Miss  Angus  herself  writes  :

'  Another  case  was  a  rather  interesting  one,  as  I  some- 
how got  inside  the  thoughts  of  one  lady  while  another 
was  doing  her  best  to  influence  me  !'  Another  case  was  a  rather  interesting  one,  as  I  some- 
how got  inside  the  thoughts  of  one  lady  while  another 
was  doing  her  best  to  influence  me  !

'Miss  -  — ,  a  friend  in  Brighton,  has  strange  "mag- 
netic" powers,  and  felt  quite  sure  of  success  with  me  and 
the  ball.

102  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

'  Another  lady,  Miss  H.,  who  was  present,  laughed  at 
the  whole  thing,  especially  when  Miss  -  -  insisted  on 
holding  my  hand  and  putting  her  other  hand  on  my  fore- 
head !  Miss  H.  in  a  scornful  manner  took  up  a  book,  and, 
crossing  to  the  other  side  of  the  room,  left  us  to  our  folly.

'  In  a  very  short  time  I  felt  myself  getting  excited, 
which  had  never  happened  before,  when  I  looked  in  the 
crystal.  I  saw  a  crowd  of  people,  and  in  some  strange 
way  I  felt  I  was  in  it,  and  we  all  seemed  to  be  waiting 
for  something.  Soon  a  rider  came  past,  young,  dressed 
for  racing.  His  horse  ambled  past,  and  he  smiled  and 
nodded  to  those  he  knew  in  the  crowd,  and  then  was  lost 
to  sight.

'In  a  moment  we  all  seemed  to  feel  as  if  something 
had  happened,  and  I  went  through  great  agony  of  sus- 
pense trying  to  see  what  seemed  just  beyond  my  view. 
Soon,  however,  two  or  three  men  approached,  and  carried 
him  past  before  my  eyes,  and  again  my  anxiety  was 
intense  to  discover  if  he  were  only  very  badly  hurt  or  if 
life  were  really  extinct.  All  this  happened  in  a  few 
moments,  but  long  enough  to  have  left  me  so  agitated 
that  I  could  not  realise  it  had  only  been  a  vision  in  a 
glass  ball.'  By  this  time  Miss  H.  had  laid  aside  her  book,  and 
came  forward  quite  startled,  and  told  me  that  I  had 
accurately  described  a  scene  on  a  race-course  in  Scotland 
which  she  had  witnessed  just  a  week  or  two  before — a 
scene  that  had  very  often  been  in  her  thoughts,  but,  as  we 
were  strangers  to  each  other,  she  had  never  mentioned. 
She  also  said  I  had  exactly  described  her  own  feelings  at 
the  time,  and  had  brought  it  all  back  in  a  most  vivid 
manner.

'  The  other  lady  was  rather  disappointed  that,  after  she 
had  concentrated  her  thoughts  so  hard,  I  should  have 
been  influenced  instead  by  one  who  had  jeered  at  the 
whole  affair.'

[This  anecdote  was  also  told  to  me,  within  a  few  days 
of  the  occurrence,  by  Miss  Angus.  Her  version  was  that 
she  first  saw  a  gentleman  rider  going  to  the  post  and 
nodding  to  his  friends.  Then  she  saw  him  carried  on  a 
stretcher  through  the  crowd.  She  seemed,  she  said,  to  be 
actually  present,  and  felt  somewhat  agitated.  The  fact 
of  the  accident  was,  later,  mentioned  to  me  in  Scotland 
by  another  lady,  a  stranger  to  all  the  persons. — A.  L.]

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        103CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        103

VI. — I  may  briefly  add  an  experiment  of  December  21, 
1897.  A  gentleman  had  recently  come  from  England  to 
the  Scottish  town  where  Miss  Angus  lives.  He  dined 
with  her  family,  and  about  10.15  to  10.30  P.M.  she 
proposed  to  look  in  the  glass  for  a  scene  or  person  of 
whom  he  was  to  think.  He  called  up  a  mental  picture 
of  a  ball  at  which  he  had  recently  been,  and  of  a  young 
lady  to  whom  he  had  there  been  introduced.  The  lady's 
face,  however,  he  could  not  clearly  visualise,  and  Miss 
Angus  reported  nothing  but  a  view  of  an  empty  ball-room, 
with  polished  floor  and  many  lights.  The  gentleman 
made  another  effort,  and  remembered  his  partner  with 
some  distinctness.  Miss  Angus  then  described  another 
room,  not  a  ball-room,  comfortably  furnished,  in  which 
a  girl  with  brown  hair  drawn  back  from  her  forehead,  and 
attired  in  a  high-necked  white  blouse,  was  reading,  or 
writing  letters,  under  a  bright  light  in  an  unshaded  glass 
globe.  The  description  of  the  features,  figure,  and  height 
tallied  with  Mr.  -  — 's  recollection  ;  but  he  had  never 
seen  this  Geraldine  of  an  hour  except  in  ball  dress.  He 
and  Miss  Angus  noted  the  time  by  their  watches  (it  was 
10.30),  and  Mr.  -  -  said  that  on  the  first  opportunity  he 
would  ask  the  young  lady  how  she  had  been  dressed 
and  how  employed  at  that  hour  on  December  21.  On 
December  22  he  met  her  at  another  dance,  and  her  reply 
corroborated  the  crystal  picture.  She  had  been  writing 
letters,  in  a  high-necked  white  blouse,  under  an  incan- 
descent gas  lamp  with  an  unshaded  glass  globe.  She  was 
entirely  unknown  to  Miss  Angus,  and  had  only  been  seen 
once  by  Mr.  -  — .  Mr.  -  -  and  the  lady  of  the  crystal 
picture  corroborated  all  this  in  writing.I  now  suggested  an  experiment  to  Miss  Angus,  which , 
after  all,  was  clearly  not  of  a  nature  to  establish  a  '  test ' 
for  sceptics.  The  inquirer  was  to  write  down,  and

inclose  in  an  envelope,  a  statement  of  his  thoughts ;  Miss 
Angus  was  to  do  the  same  with  her  description  of  the 
picture  seen  by  her ;  and  these  documents  were  to  be 
sent  to  me,  without  communication  between  the  inquirer 
and  the  crystal-gazer.  Of  course,  this  could  in  no  way 
prove  absence  of  collusion,  as  the  two  parties  might 
arrange  privately  beforehand  what  the  vision  was  to  be.

Indeed,  nobody  is  apt  to  be  convinced,  or  shaken, 
unless  he  is  himself  the  inquirer  and  a  stranger  to  the 
seeress,  as  the  people  in  these  experiments  were.  Evi- 
dence interesting  to  them — and,  in  a  secondary  degree,  to 
others  who  know  them — can  thus  be  procured ;  but 
strangers  are  left  to  the  same  choice  of  doubts  as  in 
all  reports  of  psychological  experiences,  '  chromatic  audi- 
tion,' views  of  coloured  numerals,  and  the  other  topics 
illustrated  by  Mr.  Galton's  interesting  researches.

In  this  affair  of  the  envelopes  the  inquirer  was  a 
Mr.  Pembroke,  who  had  just  made  Miss  Angus's  ac- 
quaintance, and  was  but  a  sojourner  in  the  land.  He 
wrote,  before  knowing  what  Miss  Angus  had  seen  in  the 
ball:

'VII. — On  Sunday,  January  23,  1898,  whilst  Miss 
Angus  was  looking  in  the  crystal  ball,  I  was  thinking  of 
my  brother,  who  was,  I  believe,  at  that  time,  somewhere 
between  Sabathu  (Punjab,  India)  and  Egypt.  I  was 
anxious  to  know  what  stage  of  his  journey  he  had 
reached.'

Miss  Angus  saw,  and  wrote,  before  telling  Mr. 
Pembroke  :Miss  Angus  saw,  and  wrote,  before  telling  Mr. 
Pembroke  :

'  A  long  and  very  white  road,  with  tall  trees  at  one 
side  ;  on  the  other,  a  river  or  lake  of  greyish  water. 
Blue  sky,  with  a  crimson  sunset.  A  great  black  ship  is 
anchored  near,  and  on  the  deck  I  see  a  man  lying, 
apparently  very  ill.  He  is  a  powerful-looking  man,  fair, 
and  very  much  bronzed.  Seven  or  eight  Englishmen,  in

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE   AND   CIVILISED        105

very  light  clothes,  are  standing  on  the  road  beside  the 
boat.

'  January  23,  1898.'

'  A  great  black  ship/  anchored  in  '  a  river  or  lake,' 
naturally  suggests  the  Suez  Canal,  where,  in  fact,  Mr. 
Pembroke's  brother  was  just  arriving,  as  was  proved  by  a 
letter  received  from  him  eight  days  after  the  experiment 
was  recorded,  on  January  31.  At  that  date  Mr.  Pem- 
broke had  not  yet  been  told  the  nature  of  Miss  Angus's 
crystal  picture,  nor  had  she  any  knowledge  of  his  brother's 
whereabouts.In  February  1898,  Miss  Angus  again  came  to  the  place 
where  I  was  residing.      We  visited  together   the  scene 
of  an  historical  crime,  and  Miss  Angus  looked  into  the 
glass  ball.     It  was  easy  for  her  to  '  visualise '  the  inci- 
dents of  the  crime  (the  murder  of  Cardinal  Beaton),  for 
they  are  familiar  enough  to  many  people.     What  she  did  ft 
see  in  the  ball  was  a  tall,  pale  lady,  '  about  forty,  but  &£,<- 
looking  thirty-five,'  with  hair  drawn  back  from  the  brows,  . 
standing  beside  a  high  chair,  dressed  in  a  wide  farthingale  ' 
of  stiff  grey  brocade,  without  a  ruff.     The  costume  corre-  ;:/,. 
spends  well  (as  we  found)  with  that  of  1546,  and  I  said, 
'  I  suppose  it  is  Mariotte  Ogilvy  ' — to  whom  Miss  Angus's 
historical  knowledge  (and  perhaps  that  of  the  general  pub- 
lic) did  not  extend.    Mariotte  was  the  Cardinal's  lady-love, 
and  was  in  the  Castle  on  the  night  before  the  murder, 
according  to  Knox.     She  had  been  in  my  mind,  whence 
(on  the  theory  of  thought   transference)  she  may  have 
passed  to  Miss  Angus's  mind ;  but  I  had  never  speculated 
on  Mariotte's  costume.    Nothing  but  conjecture,  of  course, 
comes  of  these  apparently  '  retrospective '  pictures ;  though 
a   most   singular   and   picturesque   coincidence  occurred, 
which  may  be  told  in  a  very  different  connection.

The  next  example  was  noted  at  the  same  town.     The

106  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

lady  who  furnishes  it  is  well  known  to  me,  and  it  was 
verbally  corroborated  by  Miss  Angus,  to  whom  the  lady, 
her  absent  nephew,  and  all  about  her,  were  entirely 
strange.lady  who  furnishes  it  is  well  known  to  me,  and  it  was 
verbally  corroborated  by  Miss  Angus,  to  whom  the  lady, 
her  absent  nephew,  and  all  about  her,  were  entirely 
strange.

'  VIII. — I  was  very  anxious  to  know  whether  my 
nephew  would  be  sent  to  India  this  year,  so  I  told  Miss 
Angus  that  I  had  thought  of  something,  and  asked  her  to 
look  in  the  glass  ball.  She  did  so,  but  almost  immediately 
turned  round  and  looked  out  of  the  window  at  the  sea, 
and  said,  "  I  saw  a  ship  so  distinctly  I  thought  it  must  be 
a  reflection."  She  looked  in  the  ball  again,  and  said,  "It 
is  a  large  ship,  and  it  is  passing  a  huge  rock  with  a  light- 
house on  it.  I  can't  see  who  are  on  the  ship,  but  the 
sky  is  very  clear  and  blue.  Now  I  see  a  large  building, 
something  like  a  club,  and  in  front  there  are  a  great  many 
people  sitting  and  walking  about.  I  think  it  must  be 
some  place  abroad,  for  the  people  are  all  dressed  in  very 
light  clothes,  and  it  seems  to  be  very  sunny  and  warm. 
I  see  a  young  man  sitting  on  a  chair,  with  his  feet 
straight  out  before  him.  He  is  not  talking  to  anyone, 
but  seems  to  be  listening  to  something.  He  is  dark  and 
slight,  and  not  very  tall ;  and  his  eyebrows  are  dark  and 
very  distinctly  marked."

'  I  had  not  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  Miss  Angus 
before,  and  she  knew  nothing  whatever  about  my  nephew  ; 
but  the  young  man  described  was  exactly  like  him,  both 
in  his  appearance  and  in  the  way  he  was  sitting.'

In  this  case  thought  transference  may  be  appealed  to. 
The  lady  was  thinking  of  her  nephew  in  connection  with 
India.  It  is  not  maintained,  of  course,  that  the  picture 
was  of  a  prophetic  character.The  following  examples  have  some  curious  and 
unusual  features.  On  Wednesday,  February  2,  1897, 
Miss  Angus  was  looking  in  the  crystal,  to  amuse  six  or 
seven  people  whose  acquaintance  she  had  that  day  made. 
A  gentleman,  Mr.  Bissett,  asked  her  'what  letter  was  in 
his  pocket.'  She  then  saw,  under  a  bright  sky,  and,  as  it 
were,  a  long  way  off,  a  large  building,  in  and  out  of  which

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,  SAVAGE   AND   CIVILISED        107

many  men  were  coming  and  going.  Her  impression  was 
that  the  scene  must  be  abroad.  In  the  little  company 
present,  it  should  be  added,  was  a  lady,  Mrs.  Cockburn, 
who  had  considerable  reason  to  think  of  her  young 
married  daughter,  then  at  a  place  about  fifty  miles  away. 
After  Miss  Angus  had  described  the  large  building  and 
crowds  of  men,  some  one  asked,  '  Is  it  an  exchange  ? ' 
'  It  might  be,'  she  said.  '  Now  comes  a  man  in  a  great 
hurry.  He  has  a  broad  brow,  and  short,  curly  hair ; 1 
hat  pressed  low  down  on  his  eyes.  The  face  is  very 
serious  ;  but  he  has  a  delightful  smile.'  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bissett  now  both  recognised  their  friend  and  stockbroker, 
whose  letter  was  in  Mr.  Bissett's  pocket.The  vision,  which  interested  Miss  Angus,  passed  away, 
and  was  interrupted  by  that  of  a  hospital  nurse,  and  of  a 
lady  in  a  peignoir,  lying  on  a  sofa,  with  bare  feet?  Miss 
Angus  mentioned  this  vision  as  a  bore,  she  being  more 
interested  in  the  stockbroker,  wrho  seems  to  have  inherited 
what  was  once  in  the  possession  of  another  stockbroker — 
'  the  smile  of  Charles  Lamb.'  Mrs.  Cockburn,  for  whom 
no  pictures  appeared,  was  rather  vexed,  and  privately 
expressed  with  freedom  a  very  sceptical  opinion  about  the 
whole  affair.  But,  on  Saturday,  February  5,  1897,  Miss 
Angus  was  again  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bissett.  When 
Mrs.  Bissett  announced  that  she  had  '  thought  of  some- 
thing,' Miss  Angus  saw  a  walk  in  a  wood  or  garden,  beside 
a  river,  under  a  brilliant  blue  sky.  Here  was  a  lady,  very 
well  dressed,  twirling  a  white  parasol  on  her  shoulder  as 
she  walked,  in  a  curious  '  stumpy  '  way,  beside  a  gentle- 
man in  light  clothes,  such  as  are  worn  in  India.  He  was 
broad-shouldered,  had  a  short  neck  and  a  straight  nose,

1  Miss  Angus  could  not  be  sure  of  the  colour  of  the  hair. 
-  The  position  was  such  that  Miss  Anyus  could  not  see  the  face  of  the 
lady.

108  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION1  Miss  Angus  could  not  be  sure  of  the  colour  of  the  hair. 
-  The  position  was  such  that  Miss  Anyus  could  not  see  the  face  of  the 
lady.

108  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION

and  seemed  to  listen,  laughing,  but  indifferent,  to  his 
obviously  vivacious  companion.  The  lady  had  a  '  drawn ' 
face,  indicative  of  ill  health.  Then  followed  a  scene  in 
which  the  man,  without  the  lady,  was  looking  on  at 
a  number  of  Orientals  busy  in  the  felling  of  trees. 
Mrs.  Bissett  recognised,  in  the  lady,  her  sister,  Mrs. 
Clifton,  in  India — above  all,  when  Miss  Angus  gave  a 
realistic  imitation  of  Mrs.  Clifton's  walk,  the  peculiarity 
of  which  was  caused  by  an  illness  some  years  ago.  Mrs. 
and  Mr.  Bissett  also  recognised  their  brother-in-law  in 
the  gentleman  seen  in  both  pictures.  On  being  shown  a 
portrait  of  Mrs.  Clifton  as  a  girl,  Miss  Angus  said  it  was 
'  like,  but  too  pretty.'  A  photograph  done  recently, 
however,  showed  her  '  the  drawn  face '  of  the  crystal 
picture. l-Next  day,  Sunday,  February  6,  Mrs.  Bissett  received, 
what  was  not  usual — a  letter  from  her  sister  in  India, 
Mrs.  Clifton,  dated  January  20.  Mrs.  Clifton  described 
a  place  in  a  native  State,  where  she  had  been  at  a  great 
'  function,'  in  certain  gardens  beside  a  river.  She  added 
that  they  were  going  to  another  place  for  a  certain 
purpose,  '  and  then  we  go  into  camp  till  the  end  of 
February.'  One  of  Mr.  Clifton's  duties  is  to  direct  the 
clearing  of  wood  preparatory  to  the  formation  of  the 
camp,  as  in  Miss  Angus's  crystal  picture.2  The  sceptical 
Mrs.  Cockburn  heard  of  these  coincidences,  and  an  idea 
occurred  to  her.  She  wrote  to  her  daughter,  who  has 
been  mentioned,  and  asked  whether,  on  Wednesday, 
February  2,  she  had  been  lying  on  a  sofa  in  her  bed-room, 
with  bare  feet.  The  young  lady  confessed  that  it  was

1  I  saw  the  photographs.

2  I   have   been  shown  the  letter  of  January  20,  which  confirmed  the 
evidence  of  the  crystal  pictures.    The  camp  was  formed  for  official  purposes 
in  which  Mr.  Clifton  was  concerned.     A  letter  of  February  9  unconsciously 
corroborates.

109

indeed  so ; l  and,  when  she  heard  how  the  fact  came  to  be 
known,  expressed  herself  with  some  warmth  on  the  abuse 
of  glass  balls,  which  tend  to  rob  life  of  its  privacy.indeed  so ; l  and,  when  she  heard  how  the  fact  came  to  be 
known,  expressed  herself  with  some  warmth  on  the  abuse 
of  glass  balls,  which  tend  to  rob  life  of  its  privacy.

In  this  case  the  prima  facie  aspect  of  things  is  that 
a  thought  of  Mr.  Bissett's  about  his  stockbroker,  dulce 
ridentem,  somehow  reflected  itself  into  Miss  Angus's  mind 
by  way  of  the  glass  ball,  and  was  interrupted  by  a 
thought  of  Mrs.  Cockburn's,  as  to  her  daughter.  But  how 
these  thoughts  came  to  display  the  unknown  facts  con- 
cerning the  garden  by  the  river,  the  felling  of  trees  for 
a  camp,  and  the  bare  feet,  is  a  question  about  which  it  is 
vain  to  theorise.2

On  the  vanishing  of  the  jungle  scene  there  appeared 
a  picture  of  a  man  in  a  dark  undress  uniform,  beside  a 
great  bay,  in  which  were  ships  of  war.  Wooden  huts,  as 
in  a  plague  district,  wrere  on  shore.  Mr.  Bissett  asked, 
'  What  is  the  man's  expression  ?  '  '  He  looks  as  if  he  had 
been  giving  a  lot  of  last  orders.'  Then  appeared  '  a  place 
like  a  hospital,  with  five  or  six  beds — no,  berths  :  it  is 
a  ship.  Here  is  the  man  again.'  He  was  minutely 
described,  one  peculiarity  being  the  way  in  which  his  hair 
grew — or,  rather,  did  not  grow— on  his  temples.

Miss  Angus  now  asked,  '  Where  is  my  little  lady  ?  '- 
meaning  the  lady  of  the  twirling  parasol  and  staccato 
walk.  '  Oh,  I've  left  off  thinking  of  her,'  said  Mrs. 
Bissett,  who  had  been  thinking  of,  and  recognised  in  the 
officer  in  undress  uniform,  her  brother,  the  man  with  the 
singular  hair,  whose  face,  in  fact,  had  been  scarred  in  that 
way  by  an  encounter  with  a  tiger.  He  was  expected  to 
sail  from  Bombay,  but  news  of  his  setting  forth  has  not1  The  incident  of  the  feet  occurred  at  4.30  to  7.30  P.M.  The  crystal 
picture  was  about  10  P.M.

'-'  Miss  Angus  had  only  within  the  week  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mrs. 
Cockburn  and  the  Bissetts.  Of  these  relations  of  theirs  at  a  distance  she 
had  no  knowledge.

110  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

been  received  (February  10)  at  the  moment  when  this  is 
written.1

In  these  Indian  cases,  '  thought  transference '  may 
account  for  the  correspondence  between  the  figures  seen 
by  Miss  Angus  and  the  ideas  in  the  mind  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bissett.  But  the  hypothesis  of  thought  transference, 
while  it  would  cover  the  wooden  huts  at  Bombay  (Mrs. 
Bissett  knowing  that  her  brother  was  about  to  leave  that 
place),  can  scarcely  explain  the  scene  in  the  garden  by  the 
river  and  the  scene  with  the  trees.  The  incident  of  the 
bare  feet  may  be  regarded  as  a  fortuitous  coincidence, 
since  Miss  Angus  saw  the  young  lady  foreshortened,  and 
could  not  describe  her  face.

In  the  Introductory  Chapter  it  was  observed  that  the 
phenomena  which  apparently  point  to  some  unaccount- 
able supernormal  faculty  of  acquiring  knowledge  are 
4  trivial.'  These  anecdotes  illustrate  the  triviality ;  but 
the  facts  certainly  left  a  number  of  people,  wholly  un- 
familiar with  such  experiments,  under  the  impression  that 
Miss  Angus's  glass  ball  was  like  Prince  Ali's  magical 
telescope  in  the  '  Arabian  Nights.' 2  These  experiments, 
however,  occasionally  touch  on  intimate  personal  matters, 
and  cannot  be  reported  in  such  instances.

It  will  be  remarked  that  the  faculty  is  freakish,  and 
does  not  always  respond  to  conscious  exertion  of  thoughtIt  will  be  remarked  that  the  faculty  is  freakish,  and 
does  not  always  respond  to  conscious  exertion  of  thought

1  I  have  seen  a  photograph  of  this  gentleman,  Major  Hamilton,  which 
tallies  with  the  full  description  given  by  Miss  Angus,  as  reported  by  Mrs. 
Bissett.  All  the  proper  names  here,  as  throughout,  are  altered.

This  account  I  wrote  from  the  verbal  statement  of  Mrs.  Bissett.  It 
was  then  read  and  corroborated  by  herself,  Mr.  Bissett,  Mr.  Cockburn,  Mrs. 
Cockburn,  and  Miss  Angus,  who  added  dates  and  signatures.

z  The  letters  attesting  each  of  these  experiments  are  in  my  possession. 
The  real  names  are  in  no  case  given  in  this  account,  by  my  own  desire, 
but  (with  permission  of  the  persons  concerned)  can  be  communicated 
privately.

CRYSTAL   VISIONS,   SAVAGE  AND   CIVILISED        111

in  the  mind  of  the  inquirer.  Thus,  in  Case  I.  a  connection 
of  the  person  thought  of  is  discerned;  in  another  the 
mind  of  a  stranger  present  seems  to  be  read.  In  another 
case  (not  given  here)  the  inquirer  tried  to  visualise  a  card 
for  a  person  present  to  guess,  while  Miss  Angus  was  asked 
to  describe  an  object  much  present  to  the  inquirer's  mind, 
but,  for  the  moment,  in  the  background — behind  the 
thought  of  the  card.  The  double  experiment  was  a  double- 
barrelled  success.It  seems  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  chance 
coincidence  will  not  cover  this  set  of  cases,  where  in  each 
'  guess '  the  field  of  conjecture  is  boundless,  and  is  not 
even  narrowed  by  the  crystal-gazer's  knowledge  of  the 
persons  for  whose  diversion  she  makes  the  experiment. 
As  '  muscle-reading '  is  not  in  question  (in  the  one  case 
of  contact  between  inquirer  and  crystal-gazer  the  results 
were  unexpected),  and  as  no  unconsciously  made  signs 
could  convey,  for  example,  the  idea  of  a  cavalry  soldier 
in  uniform,  or  an  accident  on  a  race-course  in  two 
tableaux,  I  do  not  at  present  see  any  more  plausible  ex- 
planation than  that  of  thought  transference,  though  how 
that  is  to  account  for  some  of  the  cases  given  I  do  not 
precisely  understand.

Any  one  who  can  accept  the  assurance  of  my  personal 
belief  in  the  good  faith  of  all  concerned  will  see  how  very 
useful  this  faculty  of  crystal-gazing  must  be  to  the 
Apache  or  Australian  medicine-man  or  Polynesian  priest. 
Freakish  as  the  faculty  is,  a  few  real  successes,  well 
exploited  and  eked  out  by  fraud,  would  set  up  a  wizard's 
reputation.  That  a  faculty  of  being  thus  affected  is 
genuine  seems  proved,  apart  from  modern  evidence,  by 
the  world-wide  prevalence  of  crystal-gazing  in  the  ethno- 
graphic region.  But  the  discovery  of  this  prevalence

112  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

had  not  been  made,  to  my  knowledge,  before  modern 
instances  induced  me  to  notice  the  circumstances,  sporadi- 
cally recorded  in  books  of  travel.112  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

had  not  been  made,  to  my  knowledge,  before  modern 
instances  induced  me  to  notice  the  circumstances,  sporadi- 
cally recorded  in  books  of  travel.

The  phenomena  are  certainly  of  a  kind  to  encourage  the 
savage  theory  of  the  wandering  soul.  How  else,  thinkers 
would  say,  can  the  seer  visit  the  distant  place  or  person, 
and  correctly  describe  men  and  scenes  which,  in  the  body, 
he  never  saw  ?  Or  they  would  encourage  the  Polynesian 
belief  that  the  '  spirit '  of  the  thing  or  person  looked  for  is 
suspended  by  a  god  over  the  water,  crystal,  blood,  ink,  or 
whatever  it  may  be.  Thus,  to  anthropologists,  the  dis- 
covery of  crystal-gazing  as  a  thing  widely  diffused  and 
still  flourishing  ought  to  be  grateful,  however  much  they 
may  blame  my  childish  credulity.  I  may  add  that  I  have 
no  ground  to  suppose  that  crystal-gazing  will  ever  be 
of  practical  service  to  the  police  or  to  persons  who  have 
lost  articles  of  portable  property.  But  I  have  no  objection 
to  experiments  being  made  at  Scotland  Yard.1

1  The  faculty  of  seeing  '  fancy  pictures '  in  the  glass  is  far  from 
uncommon.  I  have  only  met  with  three  other  persons  besides  Miss  Angus, 
two  of  them  men,  who  had  any  success  in  '  telepathic  '  crystal-gazing.  In 
correcting  '  revises  '  (March  16),  I  learn  that  the  brother  of  Mr.  Pembroke 
(p.  105)  wrote  from  Cairo  on  January  27.  The  '  scry  '  of  January  23  repre- 
sented his  ship  in  the  Suez  Canal.  He  was,  as  his  letter  shows,  in  quarantine 
at  Suez,  at  Moses's  Wells,  from  January  25  to  January  26.  Major  Hamilton 
(pp.  109, 110),  on  the  other  hand,  left  Bombay,  indeed,  but  not  by  sea,  as  in 
the  crystal-picture.  See  Appendix  C.

113

VI

ANTHBOPOLOGY  AND  HALLUCINATIONS113

VI

ANTHBOPOLOGY  AND  HALLUCINATIONS

WE  have  been  examining  cases,  savage  or  civilised,  in 
which  knowledge  is  believed  to  be  acquired  through  no 
known  channel  of  sense.  All  such  instances  among 
savages,  whether  of  the  nature  of  clairvoyance  simple, 
or  by  aid  of  gazing  in  a  smooth  surface,  or  in  dreams, 
or  in  trance,  or  through  second  sight,  would  confirm 
if  they  did  not  originate  the  belief  in  the  separable 
soul.  The  soul,  if  it  is  to  visit  distant  places  and 
collect  information,  must  leave  the  body,  it  would  be 
argued,  and  must  so  far  be  capable  of  leading  an  in- 
dependent life.  Perhaps  we  ought  next  to  study  cases 
of  'possession,'  when  knowledge  is  supposed  to  be  con- 
veyed by  an  alien  soul,  ghost,  spirit,  or  god,  taking 
up  its  abode  in  a  man,  and  speaking  out  of  his  lips. 
But  it  seems  better  first  to  consider  the  alleged  super- 
normal phenomena  which  may  have  led  the  savage 
reasoner  to  believe  that  he  was  not  the  only  owner  of  a 
separable  soul :  that  other  people  were  equally  gifted.

The  sense,  as  of  separation,  which  a  savage  dreamer 
or  seer  would  feel  after  a  dream  or  vision  in  which  he 
visited  remote  places,  would  satisfy  him  that  his  soul, 
at  least,  was  volatile.  But  some  experience  of  what 
he  would  take  to  be  visits  from  the  spirits  of  others, 
would  be  needed  before  he  recognised  that  other  men, 
as  well  as  he,  had  the  faculty  of  sending  their  souls  a 
journeying.

I

114  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGIONI

114  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Now,  ordinary  dreams,  in  which  the  dreamer  seemed 
to  see  persons  who  were  really  remote,  would  supply 
to  the  savage  reasoner  a  certain  amount  of  affirmative 
evidence.  It  is  part  of  Mr.  Tylor's  contention  that 
savages  (like  some  children)  are  subject  to  the  difficulty 
which  most  of  us  may  have  occasionally  felt  in  deciding 
'  Did  this  really  happen,  or  did  I  dream  it  ? '  Thus, 
ordinary  dreams  would  offer  to  the  early  thinker  some 
evidence  that  other  men's  souls  could  visit  his,  as  he 
believes  that  his  can  visit  them.But  men,  we  may  assume,  were  not,  at  the  assumed 
stage  of  thought,  so  besotted  as  not  to  take  a  great 
practical  distinction  between  sleeping  and  waking  expe- 
rience on  the  whole.  As  has  been  shown,  the  distinction 
is  made  by  the  lowest  savages  of  our  acquaintance.  One 
clear  waking  hallucination,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the 
presence  of  a  person  really  absent,  could  not  but  tell  more 
with  the  early  philosopher  than  a  score  of  dreams,  for  to 
be  easily  forgotten  is  of  the  essence  of  a  dream.  Savages, 
indeed,  oddly  enough,  have  hit  on  our  theory,  '  dreams 
go  by  contraries.'  Dr.  Callaway  illustrates  this  for  the 
Zulus,  and  Mr.  Scott  for  the  Mang'anza.  Thus  they  do 
discriminate  between  sleeping  and  waking.  We  must 
therefore  examine  waking  hallucinations  in  the  field  of 
actual  experience,  and  on  such  recent  evidence  as  may  be 
accessible.  If  these  hallucinations  agree,  in  a  certain  ratio, 
beyond  what  fortuitous  coincidence  can  explain,  with  real 
but  unknown  events,  then  such  hallucinations  would  greatly 
strengthen,  in  the  mind  of  an  early  thinker,  the  savage 
theory  that  a  man  at  a  distance  may,  voluntarily  or 
involuntarily,  project  his  spirit  on  a  journey,  and  be  seen 
where  he  is  not  present.

When  Mr.  Tylor  wrote  his  book,  the  study  of  the 
occasional  waking  hallucinations  of  the  sane  and  healthy

ANTHKOPOLOGY   AND  HALLUCINATIONS  115When  Mr.  Tylor  wrote  his  book,  the  study  of  the 
occasional  waking  hallucinations  of  the  sane  and  healthy

ANTHKOPOLOGY   AND  HALLUCINATIONS  115

was  in  its  infancy.  Much,  indeed,  had  been  written  about 
hallucinations,  but  these  were  mainly  the  chronic  false 
perceptions  of  maniacs,  of  drunkards,  and  of  persons  in 
bad  health  such  as  Nicolai  and  Mrs.  A.  The  hallucina- 
tions of  persons  of  genius — Jeanne  d'Arc,  Luther,  Socrates, 
Pascal,  were  by  some  attributed  to  lunacy  in  these  famous 
people.  Scarcely  any  writers  before  Mr.  Galton  had 
recognised  the  occurrence  of  hallucinations  once  in  a 
life,  perhaps,  among  healthy,  sober,  and  mentally  sound 
people.  If  these  were  known  to  occur,  they  were  dis- 
missed as  dreams  of  an  unconscious  sleep.  This  is  still 
practically  the  hypothesis  of  Dr.  Parish,  as  we  shall  see 
later.  But  in  the  last  twenty  years  the  infrequent 
hallucinations  of  the  sane  have  been  recognised  by  Mr. 
Galton,  and  discussed  by  Professor  James,  Mr.  Gurney, 
Dr.  Parish,  and  many  other  writers.Two  results  have  followed.  First, '  ghosts '  are  shown  to 
be,  when  not  illusions  caused  by  mistaking  one  object  for 
another,  then  hallucinations.  As  these  most  frequently 
represent  a  living  person  who  is  not  present,  by  parity  of 
reason  the  appearance  of  a  dead  person  is  on  the  same  level, 
is  not  a  space-filling  '  ghost,'  but  merely  an  hallucination. 
Such  an  appearance  can,  prima  facie,  suggest  no  reason- 
able inference  as  to  the  continued  existence  of  the  dead. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  new  studies  have  raised  the 
perhaps  insoluble  question,  '  Do  not  hallucinations  of  the 
sane,  representing  the  living,  coincide  more  frequently 
than  mere  luck  can  account  for,  with  the  death  or  other 
crisis  of  the  person  apparently  seen  ? '  If  this  could  be 
proved,  then  there  would  seem  to  be  a  causal  nexus,  a 
relation  of  cause  and  effect  between  the  hallucination  and 
the  coincident  crisis.  That  connection  would  be  pro- 
visionally explained  by  some  not  understood  action  of  the 
mind  or  brain  of  the  person  in  the  crisis,  on  that  of  the

i  2

116  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

person  who  has  the  hallucination.  This  is  no  new  idea ; 
only  the  name,  Telepathy,  is  modern.  Of  course,  if  all 
this  were  accepted,  it  would  be  the  next  step  to  ask 
whether  hallucinations  representing  the  dead  show  any 
signs  of  being  caused  by  some  action  on  the  side  of  the 
departed.  That  is  a  topic  on  which  the  little  that  we 
have  to  say  must  be  said  later.In  the  meantime  the  reader  who  has  persevered  so  far 
is  apt  to  go  no  further.  The  prejudice  against  '  wraiths  ' 
and  '  ghosts '  is  very  strong ;  but,  then,  our  innocent 
phantasms  are  neither  (as  we  understand  their  nature) 
ghosts  nor  wraiths.  Kant  broke  the  edges  of  his  meta- 
physical tools  against,  not  these  phantasms,  but  the  logically 
inconceivable  entities  which  were  at  once  material  and 
non-material,  at  once  '  spiritual '  and '  space-filling.'  There 
is  no  such  difficulty  about  hallucinations,  which,  whatever 
else  may  be  said  about  them,  are  familiar  facts  of  experience. 
The  only  real  objections  are  the  statements  that  hallucina- 
tions are  always  morbid  (which  is  no  longer  the  universal 
belief  of  physiologists  and  psychologists),  and  that  the 
alleged  coincidences  of  a  phantasm  of  a  person  with  the 
unknown  death  of  that  person  at  a  distance  are  '  pure 
flukes.'  That  is  the  question  to  which  we  recur  later.

In  the  meantime,  the  defenders  of  the  theory,  that  there 
is  some  not  understood  connection  of  cause  and  effect, 
between  the  death  or  other  crisis  at  one  end  and  the  per- 
ception representing  the  person  affected  by  the  crisis  at 
the  other  end,  point  out  that  such  hallucinations,  or  other 
effects  on  the  percipient,  exist  in  a  regular  rising  scale  of 
potency  and  perceptibility.  Suppose  that  '  A's  '  death  in 
Yorkshire  is  to  affect  the  consciousness  of  '  B  '  in  Surrey 
before  he  knows  anything  about  the  fact  (suppose  it  for  the 
sake  of  argument),  then  the  effect  may  take  place  (1)  on 
'  B's '  emotions,  producing  a  vague  malaise  and  gloom  ;

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  117ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  117

.-(2)  on  his  motor  nerves,  urging  him  to  some  act ;  (3)  or 
may  translate  itself  into  his  senses,  as  a  touch  felt,  a  voice 
heard,  a  figure  seen ;  or  (4)  may  render  itself  as  a  phrase 
or  an  idea.

Of  these,  (1)  the  emotional  effect  is,  of  course,  the 
vaguest.  We  may  all  have  had  a  sudden  fit  of  gloom 
which  we  could  not  explain.  People  rarely  act  on  such 
impressions,  and,  when  they  do,  are  often  wrong.  Thus  a 
friend  of  my  own  was  suddenly  so  overwhelmed,  at  golf, 
with  inexplicable  misery  (though  winning  his  match)  that 
he  apologised  to  his  opponent  and  walked  home  from  the 
ninth  hole.  Nothing  was  wrong  at  home.  Probably 
some  real  ground  of  apprehension  had  obscurely  occurred 
to  his  mind  and  expressed  itself  in  his  emotion.But  one  may  illustrate  what  did  look  like  a  coincidence 
by  the  experience  of  the  same  friend.  He  inhabited,  as  a 
young  married  man,  a  flat  in  a  house  belonging  to  an 
acquaintance.  The  hall  was  covered  by  a  kind  of  glass 
roof,  over  part  of  its  extent.  He  was  staying  in  the 
country  with  his  wife,  and  as  they  travelled  home  the 
lady  was  beset  with  an  irresistible  conviction  that  some- 
thing terrible  had  occurred,  not  to  her  children.  On 
reaching  their  house  they  found  that  one  of  their  maids 
had  fallen  through  the  glass  roof  and  killed  herself.  They 
also  learned  that  the  girl's  sister  had  arrived  at  the  house, 
immediately  after  the  accident,  explaining  that  she  was 
driven  to  come  by  a  sense  that  something  dreadful  had 
happened.  The  lawyer,  too,  who  represented  the  owner  of 
the  house,  had  appeared,  unsummoned,  from  a  conviction, 
which  he  could  not  resist,  that  for  some  reason  unknown 
he  was  wanted  there.1  Here,  then,  was  not  an  hallucina- 
tion, but  an  emotional  effect  simultaneously  reaching  the

1  The  lady,  her  husband,  and  the  lawyer,  all  known  to  me,  gave  me  the 
story  in  writing  ;  the  servant's  sister  has  been  lost  sight  of.

118  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

consciousness  of  three  persons,  and  coinciding  with  an 
unknown  crisis.1118  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

consciousness  of  three  persons,  and  coinciding  with  an 
unknown  crisis.1

Cases  in  which  a  person  feels  urged  to  an  act  (2)  are 
also  recorded.  Indeed,  the  lawyer's  in  our  anecdote  is  such 
an  instance.  Not  to  trouble  ourselves  (3)  with  '  voices,' 
hallucinations  of  sight,  coinciding  with  a  distant  unknown 
crisis,  are  traced  from  a  mere  feeling  that  somebody  is  in 
the  room,  followed  by  a  mental,  or  mind's  eye  picture  of 
a  person  dying  at  a  distance,  up  to  a  kind  of  '  vision '  of  a 
person  or  scene,  and  so  on  to  hallucinations  appealing,  at 
once,  to  touch,  sight,  and  hearing.  As  some  hundreds  of 
these  narratives  of  coincidental  hallucinations  in  every 
degree  have  been  collected  from  witnesses  at  first  hand, 
often  personally  known,  and  usually  personally  cross- 
questioned,  by  the  student,  it  is  difficult  to  deny  that  there 
is  a,primafacie  case  for  inquiry.2

There  is  here  no  question  of  'spirits,'  with  all  their 
physical  and  metaphysical  difficulties.  Nor  is  there  any 
desire  to  shirk  the  fact  that  many  '  presentiments  '  and 
hallucinations  of  the  sane  coincide  with  no  ascertainable 
fact.  We  only  provisionally  posit  the  possibility  of  an 
influence,  in  its  nature  unknown,  of  one  mind  on  another 
at  a  distance,  such  influence  translating  itself  into  an 
hallucination.  An  inquiry  into  this  subject,  in  the  ethno- 
graphic and  modern  fields,  may  be  new  but  involves  no 
'  superstition.'

We  now  return  to  Mr.  Tylor,  who  treats  of  hallucina- 
tions among  other  experiences  which  led  early  savage 
thinkers  to  believe  in  ghosts  or  separable  souls,  the  origin 
of  religion.1  See  three  other  cases  in  Proceedings,  S.P.E.,  ii.  122,  123.  Two  others 
are  offered  by  Mr.  Henry  James  and  Mr.  J.  Neville  Maskelyne  of  the 
Egyptian  Hall.

-  See  '  Phantasms   of   the   Living '   and    '  A    Theory    of    Apparitions,' ' 
Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.,  by  Messrs.  Gurney  and  Myers.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND  HALLUCINATIONS  119

As  to  the  causes  of  hallucinations  in  general,  Mr.  Tylor 
has  something  to  say,  but  it  is  nothing  systematic. 
'  Sickness,  exhaustion,  and  excitement '  cause  savages  to 
behold  '  human  spectres,'  in  '  the  objective  reality '  of 
which  they  believe.  But  if  an  educated  modern,  not  sick, 
nor  exhausted,  nor  excited,  has  an  hallucination  of  a  friend's 
presence,  he,  too,  believes  that  it  is  '  objective,'  is  his 
friend  in  flesh  and  blood,  till  he  finds  out  his  mistake,  by 
examination  or  reflection.  As  Professor  William  James 
remarks,  in  his  '  Principles  of  Psychology,'  such  solitary 
hallucinations  of  the  sane  and  healthy,  once  in  a  life-time, 
are  difficult  to  account  for,  and  are  by  no  means  rare. 
'  Sometimes,'  Mr.  Tylor  observes,  '  the  phantom  has  the 
characteristic  quality  of  not  being  visible  to  all  of  an 
assembled  company,'  and  he  adds  '  to  assert  or  imply  that 
they  are  visible  sometimes,  and  to  some  persons,  but  not 
always,  or  to  everyone,  is  to  lay  down  an  explanation  of 
facts  which  is  not,  indeed,  our  usual  modern  explanation, 
but  which  is  a  perfectly  rational  and  intelligible  product 
of  early  science.'It  is,  indeed,  nor  has  later  science  produced  any 
rational  and  intelligible  explanation  of  collective  hallucina- 
tions, shared  by  several  persons  at  once,  and  perhaps  not 
perceived  by  others  who  are  present.  Mr.  Tylor,  it  is 
true,  asserts  that  '  in  civilised  countries  a  rumour  of  some 
one  having  seen  a  phantom  is  enough  to  bring  a  sight  of 
it  to  others  whose  minds  are  in  a  properly  receptive 
state.'  But  this  is  arguing  in  a  circle.  What  is  '  a 
properly  receptive  state '  ?  If  illness,  overwork,  '  ex- 
pectant attention,'  make  '  a  properly  receptive  state,'  I 
should  have  seen  several  phantoms  in  several  '  haunted 
houses.'  But  the  only  thing  of  the  sort  I  ever 
saw  occurred  when  I  was  thinking  of  nothing  less, 
when  I  was  in  good  health,  and  when  I  did  not  know

120  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

(nor  did  I  learn  till  long  after)  that  it  was  the  right  and 
usual  phantom  to  see.  Mr.  Podmore  remarks  that  various 
members  of  the  Psychical  Society  have  sojourned  in 
various  '  haunted  houses,'  '  some  of  them  in  a  state  of 
expectancy  and  nervous  excitement,'  which  never  caused 
them  to  see  phantoms,  for  they  saw  none.1Mr.  Tylor  treats  of  waking  hallucinations  in  much  the 
same  manner  as  he  deals  with  '  travelling  clairvoyance.' 
He  does  not  study  them  '  in  the  field  of  experience.'  He 
is  not  concerned  with  the  truth  of  the  facts,  important  as 
we  think  it  would  be,  but  with  his  theory  that  hallucina- 
tions, among  other  causes,  would  naturally  give  rise  to 
the  belief  in  spirits,  and  thus  to  the  early  philosophy 
of  Animism.  Now,  certainly,  the  hallucination  of  a 
person's  presence,  say  at  the  moment  of  his  death  at  a 
distance,  would  suggest  to  a  savage  that  something  of  the 
dying  man's,  something  symbolised  in  the  word  '  shadow,' 
or  'breath'  (apiritus),  had  come  to  say  farewell.  The 
modern  '  spiritualistic  '  theory,  again,  that  the  dead  man's 
'  spirit '  is  actually  present  to  the  percipient,  in  space, 
corresponds  to,  and  is  derived  from,  the  animistic  philo- 
sophy of  the  savage.  But  we  may  believe  in  such  '  death- 
wraiths,'  or  hallucinatory  appearances  of  the  dying,  with- 
out being  either  savages  or  spiritualists.  We  may  believe 
without  pretending  to  explain,  or  we  may  advance  the 
theory  of  '  Telepathy,'  Hegel's  '  magical  tie,'  according  to 
which  the  distant  mind  somehow  impresses  itself,  in  a 
more  or  less  perfect  hallucination,  on  the  mind  of  the 
person  who  perceives  the  wraith.  If  this  be  so,  or  even 
if  no  explanation  be  offered,  the  truth  of  the  stories  of 
coincidental  apparitions  becomes  important,  as  pointing 
to  a  new  region  of  psychical  inquiry.  Then  the  evidence 
of  savages  as  to  hallucinations  of  their  own,  coincident 
1  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  p.  333.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND  HALLUCINATIONS  121ANTHROPOLOGY   AND  HALLUCINATIONS  121

with  the  death  of  their  absent  friends,  will  confirm, 
quantum  valeat,  the  evidence  of  many  modern  observers 
in  all  ranks  of  life,  and  all  degrees  of  culture,  from  Lord 
Brougham  to  an  old  nurse.1

As  to  hallucinations  coincident  with  the  death  of  the 
person  apparently  seen,  Mr.  Tylor  says  :  '  Narratives  of  this 
class  I  can  here  only  specify  without  arguing  on  them, 
they  are  abundantly  in  circulation.' 2  Now,  the  modern 
hallucinations  themselves  can  scarcely,  perhaps,  be  called 
'  survivals  from  savagery,'  though  the  opinion  that  an 
hallucination  of  a  person  must  be  his  '  spirit '  is  really 
such  a  survival.  It  is  with  that  opinion,  with  Animism  in 
its  hallucinatory  origins,  that  Mr.  Tylor  is  concerned,  not 
with  the  hallucinations  themselves  or  with  the  evidence 
for  their  veridical  existence.

Mr.  Tylor  gives  three  anecdotes,  narrated  to  him,  in 
two  cases,  by  the  seers,  of  phantasms  of  the  living  beheld 
by  them  (and  in  one  case  by  a  companion  also)  when  the 
real  person  was  dying  at  a  distance.  He  adds  :  '  My  own 
view  is  that  nothing  but  dreams  and  visions  could  have 
ever  put  into  men's  minds  such  an  idea  as  that  of  souls 
being  ethereal  images  of  bodies.' 3  The  idea  may  be  per- 
fectly erroneous ;  but  if  the  occurrence  of  such  coincidental 
appearances  as  Mr.  Tylor  tells  us  about  could  be  shown 
to  be  too  frequent  for  mere  chance  to  produce,  then  there 
would  be  a  presumption  in  favour  of  some  unknown1  This,  at  least,  seems  to  myself  a  not  illogical  argument.  Mr.  Leaf 
has  argued  on  the  other  side,  that  '  Darwinism  may  have  done  something 
for  Totemism,  by  proving  the  existence  of  a  great  monkey  kinship.  But 
Totemism  can  hardly  be  quoted  as  evidence  for  Darwinism.'  True,  but 
Darwinism  and  Totemism  are  matters  of  opinion,  not  facts  of  personal 
experience.  To  a  believer  in  coincidental  hallucinations,  at  least,  the 
alleged  parallel  experiences  of  savages  must  yield  some  confirmation  to  his 
own.  His  belief,  he  thinks,  is  warranted  by  human  experience.  On  what 
does  he  suppose  that  the  belief  of  the  savage  is  based  ?  Do  his  experience 
and  their  belief  coincide  by  pure  chance  ?

-  Prim.  Cult.  i.  449.  :i  Ibid.  i.  450.

122  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

faculties  in   our   nature  —  a   proper    theme   for   anthro- 
pology.

The  hallucinations  of  which  we  hear  most  are  those 
in  which  a  person  sees  the  phantom  of  another  person, 
who,  unknown  to  him,  is  in  or  near  the  hour  of  death. 
Mr.  Tylor,  in  addition  to  his  three  instances  in  civilised 
life,  alludes  to  one  in  savage  life,  with  references  to  other 
cases.1  We  turn  to  his  savage  instance,  offering  it  at  full 
length  from  the  original.2

'  Among  the  Maoris '  (says  Mr.  Shortland)  '  it  is  always 
ominous  to  see  the  figure  of  an  absent  person.  If  the 
figure  is  very  shadowy,  and  its  face  is  not  seen,  death, 
although  he  may  ere  long  be  expected,  has  not  seized  his 
prey.  If  the  face  of  the  absent  person  is  seen,  the  omen 
forewarns  the  beholder  that  he  is  already  dead.'

The  following  statement  is  from  the  mouth  of  an  eye- 
witness :The  following  statement  is  from  the  mouth  of  an  eye- 
witness :

'  A  party  of  natives  left  their  village,  with  the  inten- 
tion of  being  absent  some  time,  on  a  pig -hunting 
expedition.  One  night,  while  they  were  seated  in  the 
open  air  around  a  blazing  fire,  the  figure  of  a  relative 
who  had  been  left  ill  at  home  was  seen  to  approach. 
The  apparition  appeared  to  two  of  the  party  only,  and 
vanished  immediately  on  their  making  an  exclamation 
of  surprise.  When  they  returned  to  the  village  they 
inquired  for  the  sick  man,  and  then  learnt  that  he  had 
died  about  the  time  he  was  said  to  have  been  seen.'

I  now  give  Maori  cases,  communicated  to  me  by 
Mr.  Tregear,  F.K.G.S.,  author  of  a  '  Maori  Comparative 
Dictionary.'

A  very  intelligent  Maori  chief  said  to  me,  '  I  have 
seen  but  two  ghosts.  I  was  a  boy  at  school  in  Auckland, 
and  one  morning  was  asleep  in  bed  when  I  found  myself 
aroused  by  some  one  shaking  me  by  the  shoulder.  I 
looked  up,  and  saw  bending  over  me  the  well-known  form 
of  my  uncle,  whom  I  supposed  to  be  at  the  Bay  of

1  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  i.  p.  450.

'-'  From  Shortland's  Traditions  of  New  Zealand,  p.  140.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  1231  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  i.  p.  450.

'-'  From  Shortland's  Traditions  of  New  Zealand,  p.  140.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  123

Islands.  I  spoke  to  him,  but  the  form  became  dim  and 
vanished.  The  next  mail  brought  me  the  news  of  his 
death.  Years  passed  away,  and  I  saw  no  ghost  or  spirit — 
not  even  when  my  father  and  mother  died,  and  I  was 
absent  in  each  case.  Then  one  day  I  was  sitting  reading, 
when  a  dark  shadow  fell  across  my  book.  I  looked  up, 
and  saw  a  man  standing  between  me  and  the  window. 
His  back  was  turned  towards  me.  I  saw  from  his  figure 
that  he  was  a  Maori,  and  I  called  out  to  him,  "  Oh 
friend  !  "  He  turned  round,  and  I  saw  my  other  uncle, 
Ihaka.  The  form  faded  away  as  the  other  had  done. 
I  had  not  expected  to  hear  of  my  uncle's  death,  for  I  had 
seen  him  hale  and  strong  a  few  hours  before.  However, 
he  had  gone  into  the  house  of  a  missionary,  and  he  (with 
several  white  people)  was  poisoned  by  eating  of  a  pie 
made  from  tinned  meat,  the  tin  having  been  opened  and 
the  meat  left  in  it  all  night.  That  is  all  I  myself  had 
seen  of  spirits.'

One  more  Maori  example  may  be  offered  :  l

From  Mr.  Francis  Dart  Fenton,  formerly  in  the 
Native  Department  of  the  Government,  Auckland,  New 
Zealand.  He  gave  the  account  in  writing  to  his  friend, 
Captain  J.  H.  Crosse,  of  Monkstown,  Cork,  from  whom 
we  received  it.  In  1852,  when  the  incident  occurred, 
Mr.  Fenton  was  '  engaged  in  forming  a  settlement  on  the 
banks  of  the  Waikato.'

'  March  25,  1860.'  March  25,  1860.

'  Two  sawyers,  Frank  Philps  and  Jack  Mulholland, 
were  engaged  cutting  timber  for  the  Eev.  B.  Maunsell  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Awaroa  creek — a  very  lonely  place,  a 
vast  swamp,  no  people  within  miles  of  them.  As  usual, 
they  had  a  Maori  with  them  to  assist  in  felling  trees.  He 
came  from  Tihorewam,  a  village  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river,  about  six  miles  off.  As  Frank  and  the  native  were 
cross-cutting  a  tree,  the  native  stopped  suddenly,  and  said. 
"What  are  you  come  for?"  looking  in  the  direction  of 
Frank.  Frank  replied,  "What  do  you  mean?"  He 
said,  "  I  am  not  speaking  to  you  ;  I  am  speaking  to  my 
brother."  Frank  said,  "Where  is  he?"  The  native 
replied,  "Behind  you.  What  do  you  want?"  (to  the

1  Gurney  and  Myers,  '  Phantasms  of  the  Living,'  vol.  ii.  ch.  v.  p.  557.

J24  THE   MAKING  OF  EELIGION

other  Maori).  Frank  looked  round  and  saw  nobody.  The 
native  no  longer  saw  anyone,  but  laid  down  the  saw  and 
said,  "  I  shall  go  across  the  river  ;  my  brother  is  dead."

'  Frank  laughed  at  him,  and  reminded  him  that  he 
had  left  him  quite  well  on  Sunday  (five  days  before),  and 
there  had  been  no  communication  since.  The  Maori 
spoke  no  more,  but  got  into  his  canoe  and  pulled  across. 
When  he  arrived  at  the  landing-place,  he  met  people 
coming  to  fetch  him.  His  brother  had  just  died.  I  knew 
him  well.'

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  his  authority  for  this

narrative,  Mr.  Fenton  writes  :

'  December  18,  1883.

'  I  knew  all  the  parties  concerned  well,  and  it  is  quite 
true,  valeat  quantum,  as  the  lawyers  say.  Incidents  of 
this  sort  are  not  infrequent  among  the  Maoris.

'F.  D.  FENTON,

'  Late  Chief  Judge,  Native  Law-Court  of  N.Z.''F.  D.  FENTON,

'  Late  Chief  Judge,  Native  Law-Court  of  N.Z.'

Here  is  a  somewhat  analogous  example  from  Tierra 
del  Fuego :

'  Jemmy  Button  was  very  superstitious  '  (says  Admiral 
Fitzroy,  speaking  of  a  Fuegian  brought  to  England). 
'  While  at  sea,  on  board  the  "  Beagle,"  he  said  one  morning 
to  Mr.  Bynoe  that  in  the  night  some  man  came  to  the 
side  of  his  hammock  and  whispered  in  his  ear  that  his 
father  was  dead.  He  fully  believed  that  such  was  the 
case,'  and  he  was  perfectly  right.  .  .  .  'He  reminded 
Bennett  of  the  dream.'  *

Mr.  Darwin  also  mentions  this  case,  a  coincidental  audi- 
tory hallucination.

I  have  found  no  other  savage  cases  quite  to  the  point. 
This  is,  undeniably,  '  a  puir  show  for  Kirkintilloch,'  a 
meagre  collection  of  savage  death-wraiths,  but  it  may  be 
so  meagre  by  reason  of  want  of  research,  or  of  lack  of 
records,  travellers  usually  pooh-poohing  the  benighted 
superstitions  of  the  heathen,  or  fearing  to  seem  super-

1  The  '  Adventure '  and  '  Beagle,'  iii.  181,  cf.  204.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND   HALLUCINATIONS  125

stitious  if  they  chronicle  instances.  However  few  the 
instances,  they  are,  undeniably,  exact  parallels  to  those 
recorded  in  civilise^  life.ANTHROPOLOGY  AND   HALLUCINATIONS  125

stitious  if  they  chronicle  instances.  However  few  the 
instances,  they  are,  undeniably,  exact  parallels  to  those 
recorded  in  civilise^  life.

In  filling  up  the  lacuna  in  Mr.  Tylor's  anthropological 
work,  in  asking  questions  as  to  the  proportion  between 
phantasms  of  the  living  which  coincide  with  a  crisis  in  the 
experience  of  the  person  seen,  and  those  which  do  not,  it 
is  obviously  necessary  to  reject  all  evidence  of  people  who 
were  ill,  or  anxious,  or  overworked,  or  in  poignant  grief  at 
the  time  of  the  hallucination.  It  will  be  seen  later  that 
neither  grief  nor  amatory  passion  (dominating  the  associa- 
tion of  our  ideas  as  they  do)  beget  many  phantasms.  Our 
business,  however,  is  with  the  false  perceptions  of  persons 
trustworthy,  as  far  as  we  know,  sane,  healthy,  not  usually 
visionary,  and  in  an  unperturbed  state  of  mind.There  remains  a  normal  cause  of  subjective  hallucina- 
tions, expectancy.  This  appears  to  be  a  real  cause  of 
hallucination  or,  at  least,  of  illusion.  Waiting  for  the  sound 
of  a  carriage  you  may  hear  it  often  before  it  comes,  you 
taking  other  sounds  for  that  which  you  desire.  Again,  in 
an  inquiry  embracing  17,000  people,  the  S.P.E.  collected 
thirteen  cases  of  an  hallucinatory  appearance  of  one  person 
to  another  who  was  expecting  his  arrival.  Once  more,  it 
is  very  conceivable  that  a  trifle,  the  accidental  opening  of 
a  door,  a  noise  of  a  familiar  kind  in  an  unfamiliar  place, 
may  touch  the  brain  into  originating  an  hallucination  of  a 
person  passing  through  the  door,  or  of  the  place  where  the 
sound  now  heard  used  once  to  be  familiar.  Expectancy, 
again,  and  nervousness,  might  doubtless  cause  an  hallucina- 
tion to  a  person  who  felt  uncomfortable  in  a  house  with  a 
name  to  be  '  haunted,'  though,  as  wre  have  seen,  the  effect 
is  far  less  common  than  the  cause.  All  these  sorts  of 
causes  are  undoubtedly  more  apt  to  be  prevalent  among 
superstitious  savages  than  among  educated  Europeans

126  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION126  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

And  it  stands  to  reason  that  savages,  where  one  man 
'  thinks  he  sees  something,'  will  be  readier  than  we  are  to 
think  they  '  see  something  '  too.  Yet  Collective  hallucina- 
tions, which  are  shared  by  several  persons  at  once,  are 
especially  puzzling.  Even  if  they  occur  when  all  are  in  a 
strained  condition  of  expectancy,  it  is  odd  that  all  see 
them  in  the  same  way.1  Examples  will  occur  later. 
When  there  is  no  excitement,  the  mystery  is  increased. 
We  may  note  that,  among  the  expectant  multitudes  who 
looked  on  while  Bernadette  was  viewing  the  Blessed 
Virgin  at  Lourdes,  not  one  person,  however  superstitious 
or  hysterical,  pretended  to  share  the  vision.  Again,  only 
one  person,  and  he  on  doubtful  evidence,  is  asserted  to  have 
shared,  once,  the  visions  of  Jeanne  d'Arc.  In  both  cases  all 
the  conditions  said  to  produce  collective  hallucination 
were  present  in  the  highest  degree.  Yet  no  collective 
hallucination  occurred.Narratives  about  hallucinations  coincident  with  a 
death,  narratives  well  attested,  are  abundant  in  modern 
times,  so  abundant  that  one  need  only  refer  the  curious  to 
Messrs.  Gurney  and  Myers's  two  large  volumes, '  Phantasms 
of  the  Living,'  and  to  the  S.P.R.  '  Report  of  Census  of 
Hallucinations'  (1894).  Mr.  Tylor  says  :  'The  spiritual- 
istic theory  specially  insists  on  cases  of  apparitions,  where 
the  person's  death  corresponds  more  or  less  nearly  with 
the  time  when  some  friend  perceives  his  phantom.' 
But  visionaries,  he  remarks  truly,  often  see  phantoms  of 
living  persons  when  nothing  occurs.  That  is  the  case, 
and  the  question  arises  whether  more  such  phantoms 
are  viewed  (not  by  '  visionaries ')  in  connection  with  the 
death  or  other  crisis  of  the  person  whose  hallucinatory 
appearance  is  perceived,  than  ought  to  occur,  if  there  be 
no  connection  of  some  unknown  cause  between  deaths  and

1  It  will,  of  course,  be  said  that  they  worked  their  stories  into  conformity.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  HALLUCINATIONS  1271  It  will,  of  course,  be  said  that  they  worked  their  stories  into  conformity.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  HALLUCINATIONS  127

appearances.  As  Mr.  Tylor  observes, '  Man,  as  yet  in  a  low 
intellectual  condition,  came  to  associate  in  thought  those 
things  which  he  found  by  experience  to  be  connected 
in  fact.'  l  Did  early  man,  then,  find  in  experience  that 
apparitions  of  his  friends  were  '  connected  in  fact '  with 
their  deaths  ?  And,  if  so,  was  that  discovered  connection 
in  fact  the  origin  of  his  belief  that  an  hallucinatory  appear- 
ance of  an  absent  person  sometimes  announced  his  death  ? 
That  the  belief  exists  in  New  Zealand  we  saw,  and  find 
confirmed  by  this  instance,  one  of  '  many  such  relations,' 
says  the  author.  A  Maori  chief  was  long  absent  on  the 
war-path.  One  day  he  entered  his  wife's  hut,  and  sat  mute 
by  the  hearth.  She  ran  to  bring  witnesses,  but  on  her 
return  the  phantasm  was  no  longer  visible.  The  woman 
soon  afterwards  married  again.  Her  husband  then  re- 
turned in  perfect  health,  and  pardoned  the  lady,  as  she 
had  acted  on  what,  to  a  Maori  mind,  seemed  good  legal 
evidence  of  his  decease.  Of  course,  even  if  she  fabled,  the 
story  is  evidence  to  the  existence  of  the  belief.2What,  then,  is  the  cause  of  the  belief  that  a  phantom 
of  a  man  is  a  token  of  his  death?  On  the  theory  of 
savage  philosophy,  as  explained  by  Mr.  Tylor  himself,  a 
man's  soul  may  leave  his  body  ^and  become  visible  to 
others,  not  at  death  only,  but  on  many  other  occasions, 
in  dream,  trance,  lethargy.  All  these  are  much  more 
frequent  conditions,  in  every  man's  career,  than  the  fact 
of  dying.  Why,  then,  is  the  phantasm  supposed  by  savages 
to  announce  death  ?  Is  it  because,  in  a  sufficient  ratio  of 
cases  to  provoke  remark,  early  man  has  found  the  ap- 
pearance and  the  death  to  be  '  things  connected  in  fact '  ?

I  give  an  instance  in  which  the  philosophy  of  savages 
would  lead  them  not  to  connect  a  phantasm  of  a  living 
man  with  his  death. 
1  Prim.  Cult.  i.  116.        -  Polack's  Manners  of  the  Neiv  Zcalandcrs,  i.  268.

128  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

The  Woi  Worung,  an  Australian  tribe,  hold  that  '  the 
Murup  [wraith]  of  an  individual  could  be  sent  from  him  by 
magic,  as,  for  instance,  when  a  hunter  incautiously  went  to 
sleep  when  out  hunting.' l  In  this  case  the  hunter  is 
exposed  to  the  magic  of  his  enemies.  But  the  Murup,  or 
detached  soul,  would  be  visible  to  people  at  a  distance 
when  its  owner  is  only  asleep — according  to  the  savage 
philosophy.  Why,  then,  when  the  wraith  is  seen,  is  the 
owner  believed  to  be  dying  ?  Are  the  things  bound  to  be 
'  connected  in  fact '  ?As  is  well  known,  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research 
has  attempted  a  little  census,  for  the  purpose  of  discover- 
ing whether  hallucinations  representing  persons  at  a 
distance  coincided,  within  twelve  hours,  with  their  deaths, 
in  a  larger  ratio  than  the  laws  of  chance  allow  as  possible. 
If  it  be  so,  the  Maori  might  have  some  ground  for  his 
theory  that  such  hallucinations  betoken  a  decease.  I  do 
not  believe  that  any  such  census  can  enable  us  to  reach 
an  affirmative  conclusion  which  science  will  accept.  In 
spite  of  all  precautions  taken,  all  warnings  before,  and 
'  allowances '  made  later,  collectors  of  evidence  will 
'  select '  affirmative  cases  already  known,  or  (which  is- 
equally  fatal)  will  be  t  suspected  of  doing  so.  Again, 
illusions  of  memory,  increasing  the  closeness  of  the 
coincidence,  will  come  in — or  it  will  be  easy  to  say  that 
they  came  in.  '  Allowances  '  for  them  will  not  be  accepted.

Once  more,  17,000  cases,  though  a  larger  number  than 
is  usual  in  biological  inquiries,  are  decidedly  not  enough  for 
a  popular  argument  on  probabilities ;  a  million,  it  will  be 
said,  would  not  be  too  many.  Finally,  granting  honesty, 
accurate  memory,  and  non-selection  (none  of  which  will 
be  granted  by  opponents),  it  is  easy  to  say  that  odd  things 
must  occur,  and  that  the  large  proportion  of  affirmative

1   Howitt,  op.  cit.  p.  186.

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND   HALLUCINATIONS  129

answers  as  to  coincidental  hallucinations  is  just  a  speci- 
men of  these  odd  things.

Other  objections  are  put  forward  by  teachers  of  popular 
science  who  have  not  examined — or,  having  examined, 
misreport — the  results  of  the  Census  in  detail.  I  may  give 
an  example  of  their  method.Mr.  Edward  Clodd  is  the  author  of  several  handbooks 
of  science — 'The  Story  of  Creation,'  'A  Manual  of 
Evolution,'  and  others.  Now,  in  a  signed  review  of  a 
book,  a  critique  published  in  '  The  Sketch '  (October  13, 
1897),  Mr.  Clodd  wrote  about  the  Census  :  '  Thousands 
of  persons  were  asked  whether  they  had  ever  seen  appa- 
ritions, and  out  of  these  some  hundreds,  mostly  un- 
intelligent foreigners,  replied  in  the  affirmative.  Some 
eight  or  ten  of  the  number — envied  mortals — had  seen 
"angels,"  but  the  majority,  like  the  American  in  the 
mongoose  story,  had  seen  only  "  snakes."  ...  In  weigh- 
ing evidence  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  competency 
as  well  as  the  integrity  of  the  witnesses.'  Mr.  Clodd 
has  most  frankly  and  good-humouredly  acknowledged 
the  erroneousness  of  his  remark.  Otherwise  we  might 
ask :  Does  Mr.  Clodd  prefer  to  be  considered  not 
'  competent '  or  not  '  veracious '  ?  He  cannot  be  both  on 
this  occasion,  for  his  signed  and  published  remarks  were 
absolutely  inaccurate.  First,  thousands  of  persons  were 
not  asked  '  whether  they  had  seen  apparitions.'  They 
were  asked :  '  Have  you  ever,  when  believing  yourself 
to  be  perfectly  awake,  had  a  vivid  impression  of  seeing, 
or  being  touched  by  a  living  being  or  inanimate  object, 
or  of  hearing  a  voice  ;  which  impression,  so  far  as  you 
could  discover,  was  not  due  to  any  external  physical 
cause  ?  '  Secondly,  it  is  not  the  fact  that  '  some  hun- 
dreds, mostly  unintelligent  foreigners,  replied  in  the 
affirmative.'  Of  English-speaking  men  and  women,

K

130  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGIONK

130  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

1,499  answered  the  question  quoted  above  in  the  affirma- 
tive. Of  foreigners  (naturally  '  unintelligent '),  185  re- 
turned affirmative  answers.  Thirdly,  when  Mr.  Clodd 
says,  'The  majority  had  seen  only  "snakes,"'  it  is  not 
easy  to  know  what  precise  sense  '  snakes  '  bears  in  the 
terminology  of  popular  science.  If  Mr.  Clodd  means, 
by  'snakes,'  fantastic  hallucinations  of  animals,  these 
amounted  to  25,  as  against  830  representing  human 
forms  of  persons  recognised,  unrecognised,  living  or  dead. 
But,  if  by  '  snakes '  Mr.  Clodd  means  purely  subjective 
hallucinations,  not  known  to  coincide  with  any  event — and 
this  is  his  meaning — his  statement  agrees  with  that  of  the 
Census.  His  observations,  of  course,  were  purely  accidental 
errors.

The  number  of  hallucinations  representing  living  or 
dying  recognised  persons  in  the  answers  received,  was 
352.  Of  first-hand  cases,  in  which  coincidence  of  the 
hallucination  with  the  death  of  the  person  apparently 
seen  was  affirmed,  there  were  80,  of  which  26  are  given.

The  non-coincidental  hallucinations  were  multiplied  by 
four,  to  allow  for  forgetfulness  of '  misses.'  The  results  being 
compared,  it  was  decided  that  the  hallucinations  collected 
coincided  with  death  440  more  often  than  ought  to  be  the 
case  by  the  law  of  probabilities.  Therefore  there  was 
proof,  or  presumption,  in  favour  of  some  relation  of  cause 
and  effect  between  A's  death  and  B's  hallucination.If  we  were  to  attack  the  opinion  of  the  Committee  on 
Hallucinations,  that  '  Between  deaths  and  apparitions  of 
the  dying  a  connection  exists  which  is  not  due  to  chance 
alone,'  the  assault  should  be  made  not  only  on  the 
method,  but  on  the  details.  The  events  were  never  of 
very  recent,  and  often  were  of  remote  occurrence.  The 
remoteness  was  less  than  it  seems,  however,  as  the 
questions  were  often  answered  several  years  before

ANTHROPOLOGY  AND   HALLUCINATIONS  131

the  publication  of  the  Report  (1894).  There  was 
scarcely  any  documentary  evidence,  any  note  or  letter 
written  between  the  hallucination  and  the  arrival  of  news 
of  the  death.  Such  letters,  the  evidence  alleged,  had  in 
some  cases  existed,  but  had  been  lost,  burnt,  eaten  by 
white  ants,  or  written  on  a  sheet  of  blotting  paper  or  the 
whitewashed  wall  of  a  barrack  room.  If  I  may  judge 
by  my  own  lifelong  success  in  mislaying,  losing,  and 
casually  destroying  papers,  from  cheques  to  notes  made 
for  literary  purposes,  from  interesting  letters  of  friends  to 
the  manuscripts  of  novelists,  or  if  I  may  judge  by  Sir 
Walter  Scott's  triumphs  of  the  same  kind,  I  should  not 
think  much  of  the  disappearance  of  documentary  evidence 
to  death-wraiths.  Nobody  supposed,  when  these  notes 
were  written,  that  Science  would  ask  for  their  production  ; 
and  even  if  people  had  guessed  at  this,  it  is  human  to  lose 
or  destroy  old  papers.The  remoteness  of  the  occurrences  is  more  remark- 
able, for,  if  these  things  happen,  why  were  so  few  recent 
cases  discovered '?  Again,  the  seers  were  sometimes 
under  anxiety,  though  such  cases  were  excluded  from 
the  final  computation :  they  frequently  knew  that  the 
person  seen  was  in  bad  health  :  they  were  often  very 
familiar  with  his  personal  aspect.  Now  what  are  called 
'  subjective  hallucinations,'  non-coincidental  hallucina- 
tions, usually  represent  persons  very  familiar  to  us, 
persons  much  in  our  minds.  I  know  seven  cases  in  which 
such  hallucinations  occurred.  1,  2,  of  husband  to  wife  ; 
3,  son  to  mother  ;  4,  brother  to  sister  ;  5,  sister  to  sister ; 
6,  cousin  (living  in  the  same  house)  to  cousin ;  7,  friend 
(living  a  mile  away)  to  two  friends.  In  no  case  was  there 
a  death-coincidence.  Only  in  case  4  was  there  any  kind 
of  coincidence,  the  brother  having  intended  to  do  (un- 
known to  the  sister)  what  he  was  seen  doing — driving  in  a

K    2

132  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

dog-cart  with  a  lady.  But  he  had  not  driven.  We  cannot,, 
of  course, prove  that  these  seven  cases  were  not  telepathic,, 
but  there  is  no  proof  that  they  were.  Now  most  of  the 
coincidental  cases,  on  which  the  Committee  relied  as  their 
choicest  examples,  represented  persons  familiarly  known  to 
the  seers.  This  looks  as  if  they  were  casual ;  but,  of  course, 
if  telepathy  does  exist,  it  is  most  likely  (as  Hegel  says)  to 
exist  between  kinsfolk  and  friends.1

The  dates  might  be  fresher  !

In  case  1,  percipient  knew  that  his  aunt  in  England 
(he  being  in  Australia)  was  not  very  well.  No  anxiety.

2.  Casual   acquaintance.     No  anxiety.     Case  of  acci- 
dent or  suicide.2.  Casual   acquaintance.     No  anxiety.     Case  of  acci- 
dent or  suicide.

3.  Acquaintance   who  feared  to  die  in  childbed,  and 
did.     Percipient  not  much  interested,  nor  at  all  anxious.

4.  Father  in  England  to  son  in  India.     No  anxiety.

5.  Uncle  to  niece.     Sudden  death.     No  anxiety.     No 
knowledge  of  illness.

6.  Brother-in-law  to  sister-in-law,  and  her  maid.     No 
anxiety  reported.     Russian.

7.  Father  to  son.     No  anxiety  reported.     Russian.

8.  Friend   to   friend.      No   knowledge    of    illness    or 
anxiety  reported.

9.  Grandmother  !to  grandson.     No  anxiety.     No  know- 
ledge of  illness.

10.  Casual  acquaintance,  to  seven  people,   and   appa- 
rently to  a  dog.     Illness  known.     Russian.

11.  Step-brother   to   step-brother.     No   anxiety.     No 
knowledge  of  illness.

12.  Friend   to    friend.     No   anxiety  or  knowledge  of 
illness.

1  On  examining  Jthe  cases,  [we?  find,  in  1894,  these  dates  of  reported 
occurrences,  in  twenty-eight  cases:  1890,  1882,  1879,  1876,  1863,  1861, 
1888,  1885,  1881,  1880,  1878,  1874,  1869,  1869,  1845,  1887,  1881,  1877, 
1874,  1873,  1860  (?),  1864  (?),  1855,  1830  (?!),  1867,  1862,  1888,  1879.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  133

13.  Casual  acquaintance.     No  anxiety.

14.  Aunt  to  nephew  and  to  his  wife.     Illness  known. 
No  anxiety.

15.  Sister  to  brother.     Illness  known.     No  anxiety.

16.  Father   to   daughter.     No   knowledge   of    illness. 
No  anxiety.

17.  Father  to  son.     Much  anxiety.     (Uncounted.)

18.  Sister  to  sister.     Illness  known.     '  No  immediate 
danger  '  surmised.

19.  Father  to  son.      Much  anxiety.      Russian.     (Un- 
•  counted.)

20.  Friend  to  friend.     Illness  known.     Percipient  had 
been  nursing  patient.     Brazilian.     (Very  bad  case  !)20.  Friend  to  friend.     Illness  known.     Percipient  had 
been  nursing  patient.     Brazilian.     (Very  bad  case  !)

21.  Friend  to  friend.     Illness  known.     No  anxiety.

22.  Brother  to  brother.     Illness  known.     No  anxiety.

23.  Grandfather  to  grand-daughter.      Illness  known. 
No  pressing  anxiety.

24.  Grandfather   to  grandson.      Illness  known.      No 
\anxiety.

25.  Father's   hand.      Illness    chronic.      No   anxiety. 
Percipient  a  daughter.     Russian.

26.  Husband  to  wife.     Anxiety  in  time  of  war.

27.  Brother  to  sister.     Slightly  anxious  from  receiving 
no  letter.

28.  Friend  to  friend.     No  anxiety.

Anxiety  is  only  reported,  or  to  be  surmised,  in  two  or 
three  cases.  In  a  dozen  the  existence  of  illness  was  known. 
It  may  therefore  be  argued,  adversely,  that  in  the  selected 
coincidental  hallucinations,  the  persons  seen  were  in  the 
class  most  usually  beheld  in  non-coincidental  and,  probably, 
purely  subjective  hallucinations  representing  real  persons  ; 
also,  that  knowledge  of  their  illness,  even  when  no  anxiety 
existed,  kept  them  in  some  cases  before  the  mind ;  also, 
that  several  cases  are  foreign,  and  that  '  most  foreigners

134  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

are  fools.'  On  the  other  hand,  affection,  familiarity,  and 
knowledge  of  illness  had  not  produced  hallucinations  even 
in  the  case  of  these  percipients,  till  within  the  twelve 
hours  (often  much  less)  of  the  event  of  death.

It  would  have  been  desirable,  of  course,  to  publish  all 
the  wow-coincidental  cases,  and  show  how  far,  in  these  not 
veridical  cases,  the  recognised  phantasms  were  those  of 
kindred,  dear  friends,  known  to  be  ill,  and  subjects  of 
anxiety.1The  Census,  in  fact,  does  contain  a  chapter  on  '  Mental 
and  Nervous  Conditions  in  connection  with  Hallucinations,' 
such  as  anxiety,  grief,  and  overwork.  Do  these  produce, 
or  probably  produce,  many  empty  hallucinations  not  co- 
incident with  death  or  any  great  crisis  ?  If  they  do,  then 
all  cases  in  which  a  coincidental  hallucination  occurred 
to  a  person  in  anxiety,  or  overstrained,  will  seem  to  be,, 
probably,  fortuitous  coincidences  like  the  others.  All 
percipients,  of  all  sorts  of  hallucinations,  hits  or  misses, 
were  asked  if  they  were  in  grief  or  anxiety.  Now,  out 
of  1,622  cases  of  hallucination  of  all  known  kinds 
(coincidental  or  not),  mental  strain  was  reported  in 
220  instances  ;  of  which  131  were  cases  of  grief  about 
known  deaths  or  anxiety.  These  mental  conditions,  there- 
fore, occur  only  in  twelve  per  cent,  of  the  instances.  On 
the  whole,  it  does  not  seem  fair  to  argue  that  anxiety 
produces  so  much  hallucination  that  it  will  account  by 
itself  for  those  which  we  have  analysed  as  coincidental.

The  impression  left  on  my  own  mind  by  the  Census 
does  not  wholly  agree  with  that  of  its  authors.  Fairly 
well  persuaded  of  the  possibility  of  telepathy,  on  other 
grounds,  and  even  inclined  to  believe  that  it  does

1  On  this  point  see  Report,  p.  250.  Fifty  phantasms  out  of  the  whole 
occurred  during  anxiety  or  presumable  anxiety.  Of  these,  thirty-one 
coincided  (within  twelve  hours)  with  the  death  of  the  person  apparently 
seen.  In  the  remaining  nineteen,  the  person  seen  recovered  in  eight  cases.

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  135ANTHROPOLOGY   AND   HALLUCINATIONS  135

produce  coincidental  hallucinations,  the  evidence  of  the 
Census,  by  itself,  assuredly  would  not  convince  me.  We 
want  better  records;  we  want  documentary  evidence 
recording  cases  before  the  arrival  of  news  of  the  co- 
incidence. Memories  are  very  adaptive.  The  authors, 
however,  made  a  gallant  effort,  at  the  cost  of  much  labour, 
and  largely  allowed  for  all  conceivable  drawbacks.

I  am,  personally,  illogical  enough  to  agree  with  Kant, 
and  to  be  more  convinced  by  the  cumulative  weight  of  the 
hundreds  of  cases  in  '  Phantasms  of  the  Living,'  in  other 
sources,  in  my  own  circle  of  acquaintance,  and  even  by 
the  coincident  traditions  of  European  and  savage  peoples, 
than  by  the  statistics  of  the  Census.  The  whole  mass, 
Census  and  all,  is  of  very  considerable  weight,  and  there 
exist  individual  cases  which  one  feels  unable  to  dispute. 
Thus  while  I  would  never  regard  the  hallucinatory  figure 
of  a  friend,  perceived  by  myself,  as  proof  of  his  death,  I 
would  entertain  some  slight  anxiety  till  I  heard  of  his 
well-being.

On  this  topic  I  will  offer,  in  a  Kantian  spirit,  an 
anecdote  of  the  kind  wrhich,  occurring  in  great  quantities, 
disposes  the  mind  to  a  sort  of  belief.  It  is  not  given  as 
evidence  to  go  to  a  jury,  for  I  only  received  it  from  the 
lips  of  a  very  gallant  and  distinguished  officer  and  V.C., 
whose  own  part  in  the  affair  will  be  described.This  gentleman  was  in  command  of  a  small  British 
force  in  one  of  the  remotest  and  least  accessible  of  our 
dependencies,  not  connected  by  telegraph,  at  the  time  of 
the  incident,  with  the  distant  mainland.  In  the  force  was 
a  particularly  jolly  young  captain.  One  night  he  went 
to  a  dance,  and,  as  the  sleeping  accommodation  was 
exhausted,  he  passed  the  night,  like  a  Homeric  hero,  on 
a  couch  beneath  the  echoing  loggia.  Next  day,  contrary 
to  his  wont,  he  was  in  the  worst  of  spirits,  and,  after

136  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

moping  for  some  time,  asked  leave  to  go  a  three  days' 
voyage  to  the  nearest  telegraph  station.  His  commanding 
officer,  my  informant,  was  good-natured,  and  gave  leave. 
At  the  end  of  a  week  Captain  -  -  returned,  in  his  usual 
high  spirits.  He  now  admitted  that,  while  lying  awake 
in  the  verandah,  after  the  ball,  he  had  seen  a  favourite 
brother  of  his,  then  in,  say,  Peru.  He  could  not  shake 
off  the  impression  ;  he  had  made  the  long  voyage  to  the 
nearest  telegraph  station,  and  thence  had  telegraphed  to 
another  brother  in,  let  us  say,  Hong  Kong,  '  Is  all  well 
with  John  ? '  He  received  a  reply,  '  All  well  by  last 
mail,'  and  so  returned,  relieved  in  mind,  to  his  duties. 
But  the  next  mail  bringing  letters  from  Peru  brought 
news  of  his  Peruvian  brother's  death  on  the  night  of  the 
vision  in  the  verandah.

This,  of  coarse,  is  not  offered  as  evidence.  For  evi- 
dence we  need  Captain  's  account,  his  Hong  KongThis,  of  coarse,  is  not  offered  as  evidence.  For  evi- 
dence we  need  Captain  's  account,  his  Hong  Kong

brother's  account,  date  of  the  dance,  official  date  of  the 
Peruvian  brother's  death,  and  so  on.  But  the  character 
of  my  informant  indisposes  me  to  disbelief.  The  names 
of  places  are  intentionally  changed,  but  the  places  were 
as  remote  from  each  other  as  those  given  in  the  text.

We  find  ourselves  able  to  understand  the  Master  of 
Kavenswood's  cogitations  after  he  saw  the  best  wraith 
in  fiction :

'  She  died  expressing  her  eager  desire  to  see  me.  Can 
it  be,  then — can  strong  and  earnest  wishes,  formed  during 
the  last  agony  of  nature,  survive  its  catastrophe,  surmount 
the  awful  bounds  of  the  spiritual  world,  and  place  before 
us  its  inhabitants  in  the  hues  and  colouring  of  life  ? 
And  why  was  that  manifested  to  the  eye,  which  could  not 
unfold  its  tale  to  the  ear  ?  '  ('  Her  withered  lips  moved 
fast,  although  no  sound  issued  from  them.')  '  And  where- 
fore should  a  breach  be  made  in  the  laws  of  nature,  yet 
its  purpose  remain  unknown?'

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND  HALLUCINATIONS  137

The  Master's  reasonings  are  such  as,  in  hearing  similar 
anecdotes,  must  have  occurred  to  Scott.  They  no  longer 
represent  our  views.  The  death  and  apparition  were 
coincidental  almost  to  the  minute :  it  would  be  impossible 
to  prove  that  life  was  utterly  extinct,  when  Alice  seemed 
to  die,  'as  the  clock  in  the  distant  village  tolled  one, 
just  before  '  Kavenswood's  experience.  We  do  not,  like 
him,  postulate  '  a  breach  in  the  laws  of  nature,'  only  a 
possible  example  of  a  law.  The  tale  was  not  '  unfolded  to 
the  ear,'  as  the  telepathic  impact  only  affected  the  sense 
of  sight.Here,  perhaps,  ought  to  follow  a  reply  to  certain 
scientific  criticisms  of  the  theory  that  telepathy,  or  the 
action  of  one  distant  mind,  or  brain,  upon  another,  may  be 
the  cause  of  '  coincidental  hallucinations,'  whether  among 
savage  or  civilised  races.  But,  not  to  delay  the  argument 
by  controversy,  the  Reply  to  Objections  has  been  relegated 
to  the  Appendix.1

Appendix  A.

138  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

VII

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSIONAppendix  A.

138  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

VII

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION

THEEE  is  a  kind  of  hallucinations — namely,  Phantasms 
of  the  Dead — about  which  it  seems  better  to  say  nothing 
in  this  place.  If  such  phantasms  are  seen  by  savages 
when  awake,  they  will  doubtless  greatly  corroborate  that 
belief  in  the  endurance  of  the  soul  after  death,  which 
is  undeniably  suggested  to  the  early  reasoner  by  the 
phenomena  of  dreaming.  But,  while  it  is  easy  enough 
to  produce  evidence  to  recognised  phantasms  of  the  dead 
in  civilised  life,  it  would  be  very  difficult  indeed  to 
discover  many  good  examples  in  what  we  know  about 
savages.  Some  Fijian  instances  are  given  by  Mr.  Fison 
in  his  and  Mr.  Howitt's  '  Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai.'  Others 
occur  in  the  narrative  of  John  Tanner,  a  captive  from 
childhood  among  the  Ked  Indians.  But  the  circumstance, 
already  noted,  that  an  Australian  lad  became  a  wizard  on 
the  strength  of  having  seen  a  phantasm  of  his  dead 
mother,  proves  that  such  experiences  are  not  common ; 
and  Australian  black  fellows  have  admitted  that  they,  for 
their  part,  never  did  see  a  ghost,  but  only  heard  of  ghosts 
from  their  old  men.  Mr.  David  Leslie,  previously  cited, 
gives  some  first-hand  Zulu  evidence  about  a  haunted 
wood,  where  the  Esemkofu,  or  ghosts  of  persons  killed  by 
a  tyrannical  chief,  were  heard  and  felt  by  his  native 
informant ;  the  percipient  was  also  pelted  with  stones,  as 
by  the  European  Poltergeist.  The  Zulu  who  dies  com- 
monly becomes  an  Ihlozi,  and  receives  his  share  of

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  139

sacrifice.  The  Esemkofu,  on  the  other  hand,  are  disturbed 
and  haunting  spirits.1DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  139

sacrifice.  The  Esemkofu,  on  the  other  hand,  are  disturbed 
and  haunting  spirits.1

As  a  rule,  so  far  as  our  information  goes,  it  is  not 
recognised  phantasms  of  the  dead,  in  waking  vision, 
which  corroborate  the  savage  belief  in  the  persistence  of 
the  spirit  of  the  departed.  The  savage  reasoner  rather 
rests  his  faith  on  the  alleged  phenomena  of  noises  and 
physical  movements  of  objects  apparently  untouched, 
which  cause  so  many  houses  in  civilised  society  to  be 
shut  up,  or  shunned,  as  '  haunted.'  Such  disturbances 
the  savage  naturally  ascribes  to  '  spirits.'  Our  evidence, 
therefore,  for  recognised  phantasms  of  the  savage  dead 
is  very  meagre,  so  it  is  unnecessary  to  examine  the  much 
more  copious  civilised  evidence.  The  facts  attested  may, 
of  course,  be  theoretically  explained  as  the  result  of 
telepathy  from  a  mind  no  longer  incarnate  ;  and,  were 
the  evidence  as  copious  as  that  for  coincidental  hallucina- 
tions of  the  living,  or  dying,  it  would  be  of  extreme 
importance.  But  it  is  not  so  copious,  and,  granting  even 
that  it  is  accurate,  various  explanations  not  involving 
anything  so  distasteful  to  science  as  the  action  of  a  dis- 
carnate  intelligence  may  be,  and  have  been,  put  forward.

We  turn,  therefore,  from  a  theme  in  which  civilised 
testimony  is  more  bulky  than  that  derived  from  savage 
life,  to  a  topic  in  which  savage  evidence  is  much  more  full 
than  modern  civilised  records.  This  topic  is  the  so-called 
Demoniacal  Possession.In  the  philosophy  of  Animism,  and  in  the  belief  of 
many  peoples,  savage  and  civilised,  spirits  of  the  dead, 
or  spirits  at  large,  can  take  up  their  homes  in  the  bodies 
of  living  men.  Such  men,  or  women,  are  spoken  of  as 
'  inspired,'  or  '  possessed.'  They  speak  in  voices  not  their 
own,  they  act  in  a  manner  alien  to  their  natural  character, 
1  Among  the  Zulus,  p.  120.

140  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

they  are  said  to  utter  prophecies,  and  to  display  knowledge 
which  they  could  not  have  normally  acquired,  and,  in 
fact,  do  not  consciously  possess,  in  their  normal  con- 
dition. All  these  and  similar  phenomena  the  savage 
explains  by  the  hypothesis  that  an  alien  spirit — perhaps 
a  demon,  perhaps  a  ghost,  or  a  god — has  taken  posses- 
sion of  the  patient.  The  possessed,  being  full  of  the 
spirit,  delivers  sermons,  oracles,  prophecies,  and  what  the 
Americans  call  '  inspirational  addresses,'  before  he  returns 
to  his  normal  consciousness.  Though  many  such  prophets 
are  conscious  impostors,  others  are  sincere.  Dr.  Mason 
mentions  a  prophet  who  became  converted  to  Christianity. 
'  He  could  not  account  for  his  former  exercises,  but  said 
that  it  certainly  appeared  to  him  as  though  a  spirit  spoke, 
and  he  must  tell  what  it  communicated.'  Dr.  Mason  also 
gives  the  following  anecdote  :' .  .  .  Another  individual  had  a  familiar  spirit  that  he 
consulted  and  with  which  he  conversed ;  but,  on  hearing 
the  Gospel,  he  professed  to  become  converted,  and  had  no 
more  communication  with  his  spirit.  It  had  left  him,  he 
said ;  it  spoke  to  him  no  more.  After  a  protracted  trial 
I  baptised  him.  I  watched  his  case  with  interest,  and 
for  several  years  he  led  an  unimpeachable  Christian  life  ; 
but,  on  losing  his  religious  zeal,  and  disagreeing  with 
some  of  the  church  members,  he  removed  to  a  distant 
village,  where  he  could  not  attend  the  services  of  the 
Sabbath,  and  it  was  soon  after  reported  that  he  had  com- 
munications with  his  familiar  spirit  again.  I  sent  a 
native  preacher  to  visit  him.  The  man  said  he  heard 
the  voice  which  had  conversed  with  him  formerly,  but 
it  spoke  very  differently.  Its  language  was  exceedingly 
pleasant  to  hear,  and  produced  great  brokenness  of  heart. 
It  said,  "  Love  each  other ;  act  righteously — act  uprightly," 
with  other  exhortations  such  as  he  had  heard  from  the 
teachers.  An  assistant  was  placed  in  the  village  near 
him,  when  the  spirit  left  him  again ;  and  ever  since  he  has 
maintained  the  character  of  a  consistent  Christian.'  '

1  Burmah,  p.  107.

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  141

This  anecdote  illustrates  what  is  called  by  spiritists 
'  change  of  control.'  After  receiving,  and  deserting,  Chris- 
tian doctrine,  the  patient  again  spoke  unconsciously,  but 
under  the  influence  of  the  faith  which  he  had  abandoned. 
In  the  same  way  we  shall  find  that  a  modern  American 
'  Medium,'  after  being  for  a  time  constantly  in  the  society 
of  educated  and  psychological  observers,  obtained  new 
'  controls  '  of  a  character  more  urbane  and  civilised  than 
her  old  '  familiar  spirit.' lIt  is  admitted  that  the  possessed  sometimes  display  an 
eloquence  which  they  are  incapable  of  in  their  normal 
condition.2  In  China,  possessed  women,  who  never  com- 
posed a  line  of  poetry  in  their  normal  lives,  utter  their 
thoughts  in  verse,  and  are  said  to  give  evidence  of  clair- 
voyant powers.3

The  book — Demon  Possessionin  China — of  Dr.  Nevius, 
for  forty  years  a  missionary,  was  violently  attacked  by 
the  medical  journals  of  his  native  country,  the  United 
States.  The  doctor  had  the  audacity  to  declare  that  lit 
could  find  no  better  explanation  of  the  phenomena  than 
the  theory  of  the  Apostles — namely,  that  the  patients 
were  possessed.  Not  having  the  fear  of  man  before  hi& 
eyes,  he  also  remarked  that  the  current  scientific  explana- 
tions had  the  fault  of  not  explaining  anything.

For  example,  '  Mr.  Tylor  intimates  that  all  cases  of 
supposed  demoniacal  possession  are  identical  with  hysteria, 
delirium,  and  mania,  and  suchlike  bodily  and  mental 
derangements.'  Dr.  Nevius,  however,  gave  what  he  con- 
ceived to  be  the  notes  of  possession,  and,  in  his  diagnosis,

1  Hodgson,  Proceedings,  S.P.E.,  vol.  xiii.  pt.  xxxiii.  Dr.  Hodgson  by  no 
means  agrees  with  this  view  of  the  case — the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper.

-  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  134.

•'  Nevius's  Demon  Possession  in  China,  a  curious  collection  of  examples 
by  an  American  missionary.  The  reports  of  Catholic  missionaries  abound 
in  cases.

142  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION142  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

distinguished  them  from  hysteria  (whatever  that  may 
mean),  delirium,  and  mania.  Nor  can  it  honestly  be 
denied  that,  if  the  special  notes  of  possession  actually 
exist,  they  do  mark  quite  a  distinct  species  of  mental 
affection.  Dr.  Nevius  then  observed  that,  according  to 
Mr.  Tylor,  '  scientific  physicians  now  explain  the  facts  on 
a  different  principle,'  but,  says  Dr.  Nevius,  '  we  search  in 
vain  to  discover  what  this  principle  is.' l  Dr.  Nevius, 
who  had  the  courage  of  his  opinions,  then  consulted  a 
work  styled  '  Nervous  Derangement,'  by  Dr.  Hammond,  a 
Professor  in  the  Medical  School  of  the  University  of  New 
York.2  He  found  this  scientific  physician  admitting  that 
we  know  very  little  about  the  matter.  He  knew,  what  is 
very  gratifying,  that  '  mind  is  the  result  of  nervous  action,' 
and  that  so-called  '  possession  '  is  the  result  of  '  material 
derangements  of  the  organs  or  functions  of  the  system.'Dr.  Nevius  was  ready  to  admit  this  latter  doctrine  in 
cases  of  idiocy,  insanity,  epilepsy,  and  hysteria ;  but  then, 
said  he,  these  are  not  what  I  call  possession.  The  Chinese 
have  names  for  all  these  maladies,  '  which  they  ascribe  to 
physical  causes,'  but  for  possession  they  have  a  different 
name.  He  expected  Dr.  Hammond  to  account  for  the 
abnormal  conditions  in  so-called  possession,  but  '  he  has 
hardly  even  attempted  to  do  this.'  Dr.  Nevius  next 
perused  the  works  of  Dr.  Griesinger,  Dr.  Baelz,  Professor 
William  James,  M.  Eibot,  and,  generally,  the  literature  of 
'alternating  personality.'  He  found  Mr.  James  profess- 
ing his  conviction  that  the  '  alternating  personality '  (in 
popular  phrase,  the  demon,  or  familiar  spirit)  of  Mrs.  Piper 
knew  a  great  deal  about  things  which  Mrs.  Piper,  in  her 
normal  state,  did  not,  and  could  not  know.  Thus,  after 
consulting  many  physicians,  Dr.  Nevius  was  none  the 
better,  and  came  back  to  his  faith  in  Diabolical  Possession.

1  Op.  cit.  p.  If.  '-'  Putnam,  1*81.

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  143

He  was  therefore  informed  that  he  had  written  '  one  of 
the  most  extraordinarily  perverted  books  of  the  present 
day  '  on  the  evidence  of  '  transparent  ghost  stories ' — 
which  do  not  occur  in  his  book.

The  attitude  of  Dr.  Nevius  cannot  be  called  strictly 
scientific.  Because  pathologists  and  psychologists  are 
unable  to  explain,  or  give  the  modus  of  a  set  of  pheno- 
mena, it  does  not  follow  that  the  devil,  or  a  god,  or  a  ghost, 
is  in  it.

But  this,  of  course,  was  precisely  the  natural  inference 
of  savages.

Dr.  Nevius  catalogues  the  symptoms  of  possession 
thus  :But  this,  of  course,  was  precisely  the  natural  inference 
of  savages.

Dr.  Nevius  catalogues  the  symptoms  of  possession 
thus  :

1.  The  automatic,  persistent  and  consistent  acting  out 
of  a  new  personality,  which  calls  himself  shieng  (genius) 
and  calls  the  patient  liiang  to  (incense  burner,  '  medium ').

2.  Possession  of  knowledge  and  intellectual  power  not 
owned  by  the  patient  '(in  his  normal  state),  nor  explainable 
on  the  pathological  hypothesis.

3.  Complete  change  of  moral  character  in  the  patient. 
Of  these  notes,  the  second  would,   of   course,    most

confirm  the  savage  belief  that  a  new  intelligence  had 
entered  into  the  patient.  If  he  displayed  knowledge  of 
the  future,  or  of  the  remote,  the  inference  that  a  novel  and 
wiser  intelligence  had  taken  possession  of  the  patient's 
body  would  be,  to  the  savage,  irresistible.  But  the  more 
cautious  modern,  even  if  he  accepted  the  facts,  would  be 
reduced  to  no  such  extreme  conclusion.  He  would  say 
that  knowledge  of  the  remote  in  space,  or  in  the  past,  might 
be  telepathically  communicated  to  the  brain  of  some  living 
person ;  while,  for  knowledge  of  the  future,  he  could  fly, 
with  Hartmann,  to  contact  with  the  Absolute.

But  the  question  of  evidence  for  the  facts  is,  of  course, 
the  only  real  question.  Now,  in  Dr.  Nevius's  book,  this

144  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGIONBut  the  question  of  evidence  for  the  facts  is,  of  course, 
the  only  real  question.  Now,  in  Dr.  Nevius's  book,  this

144  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

evidence  rests  almost  entirely  on  the  written  reports  of 
native  Christian  teachers,  for  the  Chinese  were  strictly 
reticent  when  questioned  by  Europeans.  'My  heathen 
brother,  you  have  a  sister  who  is  a  demoniac  ? '  asks  the 
intelligent  European.  The  reply  of  the  heathen  brother 
is  best  left  in  the  obscurity  of  a  remarkably  difficult  and 
copious  Oriental  language.  We  are  thus  obliged  to  fall 
back  on  the  reports  of  Mr.  Leng  and  other  native  Christian 
teachers.  They  are  perfectly  modest  and  rational  in  style. 
We  learn  that  Mrs.  Sen,  a  lady  in  her  normal  state 
incapable  of  lyrical  efforts,  lisped  in  numbers  in  her 
secondary  personality,  and  detected  the  circumstance  that 
Mr.  Leng  was  on  his  way  to  see  her,  when  she  could  not 
have  learned  the  fact  in  any  normal  way.1  '  They  are 
now  crossing  the  stream,  and  will  be  here  when  the  sun  is 
about  so  high ; '  which  was  correct.  The  other  witnesses 
were  examined,  and  corroborated.2  Dr.  Nevius  himself 
examined  Mrs.  Kwo,  when  possessed,  talking  in  verse, 
and,  physically,  limp.3

The  narratives  are  of  this  type ;  the  patient,  on 
recovering  consciousness,  knows  nothing  of  what  has 
occurred ;  Christian  prayers  are  often  efficacious,  and 
there  are  many  anecdotes  of  movements  of  objects 
untouched.4

By  a  happy  accident,  as  this  chapter  was  passing 
through  the  press,  a  scientific  account  of  a  demoniac  and 
his  cure  was  published  by  Dr.  Pierre  Janet.5  Dr.  Janet 
has  explained,  with  complete  success,  everything  in  the 
matter  of  possession,  except  the  facts  which,  in  the 
opinion  of  Dr.  Nevius,  were  in  need  of  explanation.1  Nevius,  p.  33.  2  Ibid.  p.  35.  3  Op.  cit.  p.  38.

*  See  '  Fetishism  and  Spiritualism.'

5  Ndvroscs  ct  IcUes  Fixes.  Alcan,  Paris,  1898.  This  is  the  first  of  a  series 
of  works  connected  with  the  Laboratoire  de  Psychologic,  at  the  Salpetri^re,  in 
Paris.

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  145

These  facts  did  not  occur  in  the  case  of  the  demoniac 
'  exorcised '  by  Dr.  Janet.  Thus  the  learned  essay  of 
that  eminent  authority  would  not  have  satisfied  Dr. 
Nevius.  The  facts  in  which  he  was  interested  did  not 
present  themselves  in  Dr.  Janet's  patient,  and  so  Dr.  Janet 
does  not  explain  them.

The  simplest  plan,  here,  is  to  deny  that  the  facts  in 
which  Dr.  Nevius  believes  ever  present  themselves  at  all ; 
but,  if  they  ever  do,  Dr.  Janet's  explanation  does  not 
explain  them.

1.  His  patient,  Achille,  did  not  act  out  a  new  per- 
sonality.

2.  Achille  displayed  wo  knowledge  or  intellectual  power 
which  he  did  not  possess  in  his  normal  state.

3.  His  moral  character  was  not  completely  changed ; 
he  was  only  more  hypochondriacal  and  hysterical  than 
usual.

Achille  was  a  poor  devil  of  a  French  tradesman  who, 
like  Captain  Booth,  had  infringed  the  laws  of  strict 
chastity  and  virtue.  He  brooded  on  this  till  he  became 
deranged,  and  thought  that  Satan  had  him.  He  was  con- 
vulsed, anaesthetic,  suicidal,  involuntarily  blasphemous. 
He  was  not  '  exorcised  '  by  a  prayer  or  by  a  command, 
but  after  a  long  course  of  mental  and  physical  treatment. 
His  cure  does  not  explain  the  cures  in  which  Dr.  Nevius 
believed.  His  case  did  not  present  the  features  of  which 
Dr.  Nevius  asked  science  for  an  explanation.  Dr.  Janet's 
essay  is  the  dernier  cri  of  science,  and  leaves  Dr.  Nevius 
just  where  it  found  him.Science,  therefore,  can,  and  does,  tell  Dr.  Nevius  that 
his  evidence  for  his  facts  is  worthless,  through  the  lips 
of  Professor  W.  Komaine  Newbold,  in  '  Proceedings, 
S.P.E.,'  February  1898  (pp.  602-604).  And  the  same 
number  of  the  same  periodical  shows  us  Dr.  Hodgson

L

146  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

accepting  facts  similar  to  those  of  Dr.  Nevius,  and  ex- 
plaining them  by — possession  !  (p.  406).

Dr.  Nevius's  observations  practically  cover  the  whole 
field  of  '  possession  '  in  non-European  peoples.  But  other 
examples  from  other  areas  are  here  included.

A  rather  impressive  example  of  possession  may  be 
selected  from  Livingstone's  'Missionary  Travels  '  (p.  86). 
The  adventurous  Sebituane  was  harried  by  the  Matabele 
in  a  new  land  of  his  choice.  He  thought  of  descending  the 
Zambesi  till  he  was  in  touch  with  white  men ;  but  Tlapane, 
'  who  held  intercourse  with  gods,'  turned  his  face  west- 
wards. Tlapane  used  to  retire,  '  perhaps  into  some  cave,  to 
remain  in  a  hypnotic  or  mesmeric  state '  until  the  moon 
was  full.  Then  he  would  return  en  prophete.  '  Stamping, 
leaping,  and  shouting  in  a  peculiarly  violent  manner,  or 
beating  the  ground  with  a  club  '  (to  summon  those  under 
earth),  'they  induce  a  kind  of  fit,  and  while  in  it  pretend 
that  their  utterances  are  unknown  to  themselves,'  as  they 
probably  are,  when  the  condition  is  genuine.  Tlapane, 
after  inducing  the  '  possessed  '  state,  pointed  east :  '  There, 
Sebituane,  I  behold  a  fire  ;  shun  it,  it  may  scorch  thee. 
The  gods  say,  Go  not  thither !  '  Then,  pointing  west, 
he  said,  '  I  see  a  city  and  a  nation  of  black  men,  men 
of  the  water,  their  cattle  are  red,  thine  own  tribe  are 
perishing,  thou  wilt  govern  black  men,  spare  thy  future 
tribe.'So  far,  mere  advice  ;  then,

'  Thou,  Ramosinii,  thy  village  will  perish  utterly.  If 
Mokari  moves  first  from  the  village,  he  will  perish  first ; 
and  thou,  Ramosinii,  wilt  be  the  last  to  die.'

Then,

'  Like  some  bold  seer  in  a  trance, 
Seeing  all  his  own  mischance,'

1  The   gods   have   given    other  men   water  to  drink,  but

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  147

to  me  they  have  given  bitter  water.    They  call  me  away. 
I  go.'  '

Tlapane  died,  Mokari  died,  Ramosinii  died,  their  vil- 
lage was  destroyed  soon  after,  and  so  Sebituane  wandered 
westward,  not  disobedient  to  the  voice,  was  attacked  by 
the  Baloiana,  conquered,  and  spared  them.Such  is  '  possession  '  among  savages.  It  is  superfluous 
to  multiply  instances  of  this  world-wide  belief,  so  freely 
illustrated  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  trials  for  witch- 
craft. The  scientific  study  of  the  phenomena,  as  Littre 
complained,  '  had  hardly  been  sketched  '  forty  years  ago. 
In  the  intervening  years,  psychologists  and  hypnotists 
have  devoted  much  attention  to  the  theme  of  these 
'  secondary  personalities,'  which  Animism  explains  by  the 
theory  of  possession.  The  explanations  of-  modern  philo- 
sophers differ,  and  it  is  not  our  business  to  discuss  their 
physiological  and  pathological  ideas.2  Our  affair  is  to  ask 
whether,  in  the  field  of  experience,  there  is  any  evidence 
that  persons  thus  '  possessed  '  really  evince  knowledge 
which  they  could  not  have  acquired  through  normal 
channels  ?  If  such  evidence  exists,  the  facts  would 
naturally  strengthen  the  conviction  that  the  possessed 
person  was  inspired  by  an  intelligence  not  his  own,  that 
is,  by  a  spirit.  Now  it  is  the  firm  conviction  of  several 
men  of  science  that  a  certain  Mrs.  Piper,  an  American, 
does  display,  in  her  possessed  condition,  knowledge  which 
she  could  not  normally  acquire.  The  case  of  this  lady  is 
precisely  on  a  level  with  that  of  certain  savage  or  barbaric 
seers.  Thus  :  '  The  Fijian  priest  sits  looking  steadily  at  a 
whale's  tooth  ornament,  amid  dead  silence.  In  a  few  minutes

1  '  Macleort  shall  return,  but  Macrimmon  shall  never  !  ' 
-  See  Ribot,  Lcs  Maladies  de  la  P&rsonnaliU;  Bourru  et  Burot,  Variations 
de  laPcrsonnalit?,;  Janet,  &  Automatism?.  Psyclioloyiquc;  James,  Principles 
of  Psycholor/i; ;  Myers,  in  Proceeding.,  of  H.P.B.,  '  The  Mechanism  of  Genius,' 
'The  Subliminal  Self.'

i,  2

148  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGIONi,  2

148  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

he  trembles,  slight  twitchings  of  face  and  limbs  come  on, 
which  increase  to  strong  convulsions.  .  .  .  Now  the  god 
has  entered.'  l

In  China,  '  the  professional  woman  sits  at  a  table  in 
contemplation,  till  the  soul  of  a  deceased  person  from 
whom  communication  is  desired  enters  her  body  and  talks 
through  her  to  the  living.  .  .  .'  -

The  latter  account  exactly  describes  Mrs.  Piper.  When 
consulted  she  passes  through  convulsions  into  a  trance, 
after  which  she  talks  in  a  new  voice,  assumes  a  fresh 
personality,  and  affects  to  be  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  a 
French  doctor  (who  does  not  know  French) — Dr.  Phinuit. 
She  then  displays  a  varying  amount  of  knowledge  of  dead 
and  living  people  connected  with  her  clients,  who  are 
usually  strangers,  often  introduced  under  feigned  names. 
Mrs.  Piper  and  her  husband  have  been  watched  by 
detectives,  and  have  not  been  discovered  in  any  attempts 
to  procure  information.  She  was  for  some  months  in 
England  under  the  charge  of  the  S.P.K.  Other  ghosts, 
besides  Dr.  Phinuit,  ghosts  more  civilised  than  he,  now 
influence  her,  and  her  latest  performances  are  said  to 
exceed  her  former  efforts.3

Volumes  of  evidence  about  Mrs.  Piper  have  been 
published  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  who  unmasked  Madame 
Blavatsky  and  Eusapia  Paladino.4  He  was  at  first  con- 
vinced that  Mrs.  Piper,  in  her  condition  of  trance,  obtains 
knowledge  not  otherwise  and  normally  accessible  to  her. 
It  was  admitted  that  her  familiar  spirit  guesses,  attempts 
to  extract  information  from  the  people  who  sit  with  her, 
and  tries  sophistically  to  conceal  his  failures.  Here  follow 
the  statements  of  Professor  James  of  Harvard.1  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  133.  -  Doolittle's  Chinese,  i.  143  ;  ii.  110,  320.

3  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  pt.  xxxiii.

4  Proceedings,  S.P.B.,  vi.  430-650  ;  viii.  1-1G7  ;  xiii.  284-582.

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  1493  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  pt.  xxxiii.

4  Proceedings,  S.P.B.,  vi.  430-650  ;  viii.  1-1G7  ;  xiii.  284-582.

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  149

'  The  most  convincing  things  said  about  my  own 
immediate  household  were  either  very  intimate  or  very 
trivial.  Unfortunately  the  former  things  cannot  well  be 
published.  Of  the  trivial  things  I  have  forgotten  the 
greater  number,  but  the  following,  rarce  nantes,  may 
serve  as  samples  of  their  class.  She  said  that  we  had  lost 
recently  a  rug,  and  I  a  waistcoat.  (She  wrongly  accused 
a  person  of  stealing  the  rug,  which  was  afterwards  found 
in  the  house.)  She  told  of  my  killing  a  grey-and-white 
•cat  with  ether,  and  described  how  it  had  "  spun  round  and 
round  "  before  dying.  She  told  how  my  New  York  aunt 
had  written  a  letter  to  my  wife,  warning  her  against  all 
mediums,  and  then  went  off  on  a  most  amusing  criticism, 
full  of  traits  vifs,  of  the  excellent  woman's  character. 
(Of  course,  no  one  but  my  wife  and  I  knew  the  existence 
of  the  letter  in  question.)  She  was  strong  on  the  events 
in  our  nursery,  and  gave  striking  advice  during  our  first 
visit  to  her  about  the  way  to  deal  with  certain  "  tantrums  " 
of  our  second  child — "little  Billy-boy,"  as  she  called  him, 
reproducing  his  nursery  name.  She  told  how  the  crib 
creaked  at  night,  how  a  certain  rocking-chair  creaked 
mysteriously,  how  my  wife  had  heard  footsteps  on  a  stair, 
&c.  &c.  Insignificant  as  these  things  sound  when  read, 
the  accumulation  of  them  has  an  irresistible  effect ;  and  I 
repeat  again  what  I  said  before,  that,  taking  everything 
that  I  know  of  Mrs.  Piper  into  account,  the  result  is  to 
make  me  feel  as  absolutely  certain  as  I  am  of  any  personal 
fact  in  the  world  that  she  knows  things  in  her  trances 
which  she  cannot  possibly  have  heard  in  her  waking 
state,  and  that  the  definitive  philosophy  of  her  trances 
is  yet  to  be  found.  The  limitations  of  her  trance  infor- 
mation, its  discontinuity  and  fitfulness,  and  its  apparent 
inability  to  develop  beyond  a  certain  point,  although  they 
end  by  arousing  one's  moral  and  human  impatience  with 
the  phenomenon,  yet  are,  from  a  scientific  point  of  view, 
amongst  its  most  interesting  peculiarities,  since  where 
there  are  limits  there  are  conditions,  and  the  discovery  of 
them  is  always  the  beginning  of  an  explanation.'  This  is  all  I  can  tell  you  of  Mrs.  Piper.  I  wish  it 
were  more  "scientific."  But  valeat  quantum!  it  is  the 
best  I  can  do.'

Elsewhere  Mr.  James  writes  :

'  Mr.  Hodgson  and  others  have  made  prolonged  study

150  THE  MAKING   OF  RELIGION

of  this  lady's  trances,  and  are  all  convinced  that  super- 
normal powers  of  cognition  are  displayed  therein.  They 
are,  prima  facie,  due  to  "  spirit  control."  But  the  con- 
ditions are  so  complex  that  a  dogmatic  decision  either  for 
or  against  the  hypothesis  must  as  yet  be  postponed.'  '

Again—

'  In  the  trances  of  this  medium  I  cannot  resist  the 
conviction  that  knowledge  appears  which  she  has  never 
gained  by  the  ordinary  waking  use  of  her  eyes,  ears, 
and  wits.

'  The  trances  have  broken  down,  for  my  own  mind,  the 
limits  of  the  admitted  order  of  nature.'

M.  Paul  Bourget  (who  is  not  superstitious),  after 
consulting  Mrs.  Piper,  concludes  :

'  L'esprit  a  des  procedes  de  connaitre  non  soup9onnes 
par  notre  analyse.'  -

In  this  treatise  I  may  have  shown  '  the  will  to  believe ' 
in  an  unusual  degree  ;  but,  for  me,  the  interest  of  Mrs. 
Piper  is  purely  anthropological.  She  exhibits  a  survival 
or  recrudescence  of  savage  phenomena,  real  or  feigned,  of 
convulsion  and  of  secondary  personality,  and  entertains 
a  survival  of  the  animistic  explanation.Mrs.  Piper's  honesty  and  excellent  character,  in  her 
normal  condition,  are  vouched  for  by  her  friends  and 
observers  in  England  and  America ;  nor  do  I  impeach  her 
normal  character.  But  'secondary  personalities '  have  often 
more  of  Mr.  Hyde  than  of  Dr.  Jekyll  in  their  composition. 
It  used  to  be  admitted  that,  when  '  possessed,'  Mrs.  Piper 
would  cheat  when  she  could — -that  is  to  say,  she  would 
make  guesses,  try  to  worm  information  out  of  her  sitter, 
describe  a  friend  of  his,  alive  or  dead,  as  '  Ed.,'  who  may  be 
Edgar,  Edmund,  Edward,  Edith,  or  anybody.  She  would 
shuffle,  and  repeat  what  she  had  picked  up  in  a  former

1   TJie  Wilt  to  Believe,  p.  314.  2  Figaro,  January  14,  1895.

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  151

sitting  with  the  same  person  ;  and  the  vast  majority  of  her 
answers  started  from  vague  references  to  probable  facts 
(as  that  an  elderly  man  is  an  orphan),  and  so  worked  on 
to  more  precise  statements.  Professor  Macalister  wrote  :

'  She  is  quite  wide-awake  enough  all  through  to  profit 
by  suggestions.  I  let  her  see  a  blotch  of  ink  on  my 
finger,  and  she  said  that  I  was  a  writer.  .  .  .  Except 
the  guess  about  my  sister  Helen,  who  is  alive,  there  was 
not  a  single  guess  which  was  nearly  right.  Mrs.  Piper  is 
not  anaesthetic  during  the  so-called  trance,  and  if  you  ask 
my  private  opinion,  it  is  that  the  whole  thing  is  an 
imposture,  and  a  poor  one.'  'Mr.  Barkworth  said  that,  as  far  as  his  experience 
went,  '  Mrs.  Piper's  powers  are  of  the  ordinary  thought- 
reading  [i.e.  muscle-reading]  kind,  dependent  on  her  hold 
of  the  visitor's  hand.'  Each  of  these  gentlemen  had  only 
one  '  sitting.'  M.  Paul  Bourget  also  informed  me,  in 
conversation,  that  Mrs.  Piper  held  his  hand  while  she 
told  the  melancholy  tale  connected  with  a  key  in  his 
possession,  and  that  she  did  not  tell  the  story  promptly 
and  fluently,  but  very  slowly  and  hesitatingly.  Even  so, 
he  declared  that  he  did  not  feel  able  to  account  for  her 
performance.

As  these  pages  were  passing  through  the  press,  Dr. 
Hodgson's  last  report  on  Mrs.  Piper  was  published.2  It 
is  quite  impossible,  within  the  space  allotted,  to  criticise 
this  work.  It  would  be  necessary  to  examine  minutely 
scores  of  statements,  in  which  many  facts  are  suppressed 
as  too  intimate,  while  others  are  remarkably  incoherent. 
Dr.  Hodgson  deserves  the  praise  of  extraordinary  patience 
and  industry,  displayed  in  the  very  distasteful  task  of 
watching  an  unfortunate  lady  in  the  vagaries  of  'trance.' 
His  reasonings  are  perfectly  calm,  perfectly  unimpassioned,

1  Proceedings,  vi.  605,  GOG. 
Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  part  xxxiii.  vol.  xiii.

152  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

and  his  bias  has  not  hitherto  seemed  to  make  for  cre- 
dulity. We  must,  in  fact,  regard  him  as  an  expert  in  this 
branch  of  psychology.  But  he  himself  makes  it  clear 
that,  in  his  opinion,  no  written  reports  can  convey 
the  impressions  produced  by  several  years  of  personal 
experience.  The  results  of  that  experience  he  sums  up 
in  these  words  :'At  the  present  time  I  cannot  profess  to  have  any 
doubt  but  that  the  chief  "communicators"  to  whom  I 
have  referred  in  the  foregoing  pages  are  veritably  the 
personalities  that  they  claim  to  be,  that  they  have  sur- 
vived the  change  we  call  death,  and  that  they  have 
directly  communicated  with  us,  whom  we  call  living, 
through  Mrs.  Piper's  entranced  organism.'  l

This  means  that  Dr.  Hodgson,  at  present,  in  this  case, 
accepts  the  hypothesis  of  '  possession  '  as  understood  by 
Maoris  and  Fijians,  Chinese  and  Karens.

The  published  reports  do  not  produce  on  me  any  such 
impression.  As  a  personal  matter  of  opinion,  I  am  con- 
vinced that  those  whom  I  have  honoured  in  this  life 
would  no  more  avail  themselves  of  Mrs.  Piper's  '  en- 
tranced organism '  (if  they  had  the  chance)  than  I  would 
voluntarily  find  myself  in  a  '  sitting '  with  that  lady. 
It  is  unnecessary  to  wax  eloquent  on  this  head  ;  and 
the  curious  can  consult  the  writings  of  Dr.  Hodgson  for 
themselves.  Meanwhile  we  have  only  to  notice  that  an 
American  '  possessed  '  woman  produces  on  a  highly  edu- 
cated and  sceptical  modern  intelligence  the  same  impres- 
sion as  the  Zulu  '  possessed '  produce  on  some  Zulu 
intelligences.

The  Zulus  admit  '  possession  '  and  divination,  but  are 
not  the  most  credulous  of  mankind.  The  ordinary  pos- 
sessed person  is  usually  consulted  as  to  the  disease  of  an

1  Op,  cit.  part  xxxiii.  p.  406.

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  1531  Op,  cit.  part  xxxiii.  p.  406.

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  153

absent  patient.  The  inquirers  do  not  assist  the  diviner 
by  holding  his  hand,  but  are  expected  to  smite  the  ground 
violently  if  the  guess  made  by  the  diviner  is  right ;  gently 
if  it  is  wrong.  A  sceptical  Zulu,  named  John,  having  a 
shilling  to  expend  on  psychical  research,  smote  violently 
at  every  guess.  The  diviner  was  hopelessly  puzzled ; 
John  kept  his  shilling,  and  laid  it  out  on  a  much  more 
meritorious  exhibition  of  animated  sticks.1

Uguise  gave  Dr.  Callaway  an  account  of  a  female 
possessed  person  with  whom  Mrs.  Piper  could  not  compete. 
Her  spirit  spoke,  not  from  her  mouth,  but  from  high  in 
the  roof.  It  gave  forth  a  kind  of  questioning  remarks 
which  were  always  correct.  It  then  reported  correctly  a 
number  of  singular  circumstances,  ordered  some  remedies 
for  a  diseased  child,  and  offered  to  return  the  fee,  if  ample 
satisfaction  was  not  given.2

In  China  and  Zululand,  as  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  the 
spirits  are  fond  of  diagnosing  and  prescribing  for  absent 
patients.

A  good  example  of  savage  possession  is  given  in  his 
travels  by  Captain  Jonathan  Carver  (1763).A  good  example  of  savage  possession  is  given  in  his 
travels  by  Captain  Jonathan  Carver  (1763).

Carver  was  waiting  impatiently  for  the  arrival  of 
traders  with  provisions,  near  the  Thousand  Lakes.  A 
priest,  or  jossakeed,  offered  to  interview  the  Great  Spirit, 
and  obtain  information.  A  large  lodge  was  arranged,  and 
the  covering  drawn  up  (which  is  unusual),  so  that  what 
went  on  within  might  be  observed.  In  the  centre  was  a 
chest-shaped  arrangement  of  stakes,  so  far  apart  from  each 
other  '  that  whatever  lay  within  them  was  readily  to  be 
discerned.'  The  tent  was  illuminated  '  by  a  great  number 
of  torches.'  The  priest  came  in,  and  was  first  wrapped  in 
an  elk's  skin,  as  Highland  seers  were  wrapped  in  a  black

1   See  '  Fetishism.'     Compare  Callaway,  p.  328. 
Callaway,  pp.  361-374.

164  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

bull's  hide.  Forty  yards  of  rope  made  of  elk's  hide  were 
then  coiled  about  him,  till  he  '  was  wound  up  like  an 
Egyptian  mummy.'

I  have  elsewhere  shown  l  that  this  custom  of  binding 
with  bonds  the  seer  who  is  to  be  inspired,  existed  in 
Grseco-Egyptian  spiritualism,  among  Samoyeds,  Eskimo, 
Canadian  Hareskin  Indians,  and  among  Australian  blacks,'  The  head,  body,  and  limbs  are  wound  round  with 
stringy  bark  cords.' 2  This  is  an  extraordinary  range  of 
diffusion  of  a  ceremony  apparently  meaningless.  Is  the 
idea  that,  by  loosing  the  bonds,  the  seer  demonstrates  the 
agency  of  spirits,  after  the  manner  of  the  Davenport 
Brothers  ?  3  But  the  Grseco-Egyptian  medium  did  not 
undo  the  swathings  of  linen,  in  which  he  was  rolled,  like 
a  mummy.  They  had  to  be  unswathed  for  him,  by  others. ' 
Again,  a  dead  body,  among  the  Australians,  is  corded 
up  tight,  as  soon  as  the  breath  is  out  of  it,  if  it  is  to  be 
buried,  or  before  being  exposed  on  a  platform,  if  that  is 
the  custom.5  Again,  in  the  Highlands  second-sight  was 
thus  acquired  :  the  would-be  seer  '  must  run  a  Tedder 
(tether)  of  Hair,  which  bound  a  corpse  to  the  Bier,  about 
his  Middle  from  end  to  end,'  and  then  look  between  his 
legs  till  he  sees  a  funeral  cross  two  marches.6  The  Green- 
land seer  is  bound  '  with  his  head  between  his  legs.' 7

Can  it  be  possible,  judging  from  Australia,  Scotland, 
Egypt,  that  the  binding,  as  of  a  corpse  or  mummy,  is  a 
symbolical  way  of  putting  the  seer  on  a  level  with  the 
dead,  who  will  then  communicate  with  him?  In  three 
remote  points,  we  find  seer-binding  and  corpse-binding  ;

1   Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense,  p.  55.

-  Brough  Smyth,  i.  475.     This  point  is  disputed,  but  I  did  not  invent  it, 
and  a  case  appears  in  Mr.  Curr's  work  on  the  natives.

3  Prim.  Cult.  i.  152.  4  Eusebius,  Prcep,  Evany,  v.  9.

»    Brough  Smyth,  i.  100,  113.

"•    Kirk,  Secret  Commonwealth  1691.         '    Crantz,  p.  209.

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  156»    Brough  Smyth,  i.  100,  113.

"•    Kirk,  Secret  Commonwealth  1691.         '    Crantz,  p.  209.

DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION  156

but  we  need  to  prove  that  corpses  are,  or  have  been, 
bound  at  the  other  points  where  the  seer  is  tied  up — in  a 
reindeer  skin  among  the  Samoyeds,  an  elk  skin  in  North 
America,  a  bull's  hide  in  the  Highlands.

Binding  the  seer  is  not  a  universal  Bed  Indian 
custom ;  it  seems  to  cease  in  Labrador,  and  elsewhere, 
southwards,  where  the  prophet  enters  a  magic  lodge, 
unbound.  Among  the  Narquapees,  he  sits  cross-legged, 
and  the  lodge  begins  to  answer  questions  by  leaping 
about.1  The  Eskimo  bounds,  though  he  is  tied  up.

It  would  be  decisive,  if  we  could  find  that,  wherever 
the  sorcerer  is  bound,  the  dead  are  bound  also.  I  note 
the  following  examples,  but  the  Creeks  do  not,  I  think, 
bind  the  magician.

Among  the  Creeks,

'  The  corpse  is  placed  in  a  hole,  with  a  blanket  wrapped 
about  it,  and  the  legs  bent  under  it  and  tied  together.'' 2

The  dead  Greenlanders  were  '  wrapped  and  sewed  up 
in  their  best  deer-skins.'3

Carver  could  only  learn  that,  among  the  Indians  he 
knew,  dead  bodies  were  '  wrapped  in  skins  ;  '  that  they 
were  also  swathed  with  cords  he  does  not  allege,  but  he 
was  not  permitted  to  see  all  the  ceremonies.

My  theory  is,  at  least,  plausible,  for  this  manner  of 
burying  the  dead,  tied  tightly  up,  with  the  head  between 
the  legs  (as  in  the  practice  of  Scottish  and  Green- 
land seers),  is  very  old  and  widely  diffused.  Ellis 
says,  of  the  Tahitians,  '  the  body  of  the  dead  man 
was  .  .  .  placed  in  a  sitting  posture,  with  the  knees 
elevated,  the  face  pressed  down  between  the  knees,  .  .  .

1  Pere  Arnaud,  in  Hind's  Labrador,  ii.  102.1  Pere  Arnaud,  in  Hind's  Labrador,  ii.  102.

2  Major  Swan,  1791,  official  letter  on  the  Creek  Indians,  Schoolcraft. 
v270.

3  Crantz,  p.  237.

156  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

and  the  whole   body   tied    with   cord    or   cinet,   wound 
repeatedly  round.' l

The  binding  may  originally  have  been  meant  to 
keep  the  corpse,  or  ghost,  from  'walking.'  I  do  not 
know  that  Tahitian  prophets  were  ever  tied  up,  to  await 
inspiration.  But  I  submit  that  the  frequency  of  the 
savage  form  of  burial  with  the  corpse  tied  up,  or  swathed, 
sometimes  with  the  head  between  the  legs ;  and  the 
recurrence  of  the  savage  practice  of  similarly  binding  the 
sorcerer,  probably  points  to  a  purpose  of  introducing  the 
seer  to  the  society  of  the  dead.  The  custom,  as  applied  to 
prophets,  might  survive,  even  where  the  burial  rite  had 
altered,  or  cannot  be  ascertained,  and  might  survive,  for 
corpses,  where  it  had  gone  out  of  use,  for  seers.  The 
Scotch  used  to  justify  their  practice  of  putting  the  head 
between  the  knees  when,  bound  with  a  corpse's  hair 
tether,  they  learned  to  be  second-sighted,  by  what  Elijah 
did.  The  prophet,  on  the  peak  of  Carmel,  '  cast  himself 
down  upon  the  earth,  and  put  his  face  bet  ween  his  knees.' 2 
But  the  cases  are  not  analogous.  Elijah  had  been  hearing 
a  premonitory  '  sound  of  abundance  of  rain  '  in  a  cloudless 
sky.  He  was  probably  engaged  in  prayer,  not  in  prophecy.

Kirk,  by  the  way,  notes  that  if  the  wind  changes, 
while  the  Scottish  seer  is  bound,  he  is  in  peril  of  his  life. 
So  children  are  told,  in  Scotland,  that,  if  the  wind  changes 
while  they  are  making  faces,  the  grimace  will  be  perma- 
nent. The  seer  will,  in  the  same  way,  become  what  he 
pretends  to  be,  a  corpse.This  desertion  of  Carver's  tale  may  be  pardoned  for 
the  curiosity  of  the  topic.  He  goes  on  :

'  Being  thus  bound  up  like  an  Egyptian  mummy ' 
(Carver  unconsciously  making  my  point) ,  '  the  seer  was 
lifted  into  the  chest-like  enclosure.  I  could  now  also

1  Polynesian  Researches,  i.  519.  2  1  Kings  xviii.  42.

DEMONIACAL   POSSESSION  157

discern  him  as  plain  as  I  had  ever  done,  and  I  took  care 
not  to  turn  my  eyes  away  a  moment ' — in  which  effort  he 
probably  failed.

The  priest  now  began  to  mutter,  and  finally  spoke 
in  a  mixed  jargon  of  scarcely  intelligible  dialects.  He 
now  yelled,  prayed,  and  foamed  at  the  mouth,  till  in 
about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  he  was  exhausted  and 
speechless.  '  But  in  an  instant  he  sprang  upon  his  feet, 
notwithstanding  at  the  time  he  was  put  in  it  appeared 
impossible  for  him  to  move  either  his  legs  or  arms,  and 
shaking  off  his  covering,  as  quick  as  if  the  bands  with 
which  it  had  been  bound  were  burst  asunder,'  he  pro- 
phesied. The  Great  Spirit  did  not  say  when  the  traders 
would  arrive,  but,  just  after  high  noon,  next  day,  a  canoe 
would  arrive,  and  the  people  in  it  would  tell  when  the 
traders  were  to  appear.

Next  day,  just  after  high  noon,  a  canoe  came  round  a 
point  of  land  about  a  league  away,  and  the  men  in  it,  who 
had  met  the  traders,  said  they  would  come  in  two  days, 
which  they  did.  Carver,  professing  freedom  from  any 
tincture  of  credulity,  leaves  us  '  to  draw  what  conclusions 
we  please.'The  natural  inference  is  '  private  information,'  about 
which  the  only  difficulty  is  that  Carver,  who  knew  the 
topography  and  the  chances  of  a  secret  messenger  arriving 
to  prompt  the  Jossakeed,  does  not  allude  to  this  theory.1 
He  seems  to  think  such  successes  not  uncommon.

All  that  psychology  can  teach  anthropology,  on  this 
whole  topic  of  '  possession,'  is  that  secondary  or  alter- 
nating personalities  are  facts  in  rerum  natura,  that  the 
man  or  woman  in  one  personality  may  have  no  conscious 
memory  of  what  was  done  or  said  in  the  other,  and  that 
cases  of  knowledge  said  to  be  supernormally  gained  in  the 
secondary  state  are  worth  inquiring  about,  if  there  be  a 
chance  of  getting  good  evidence.

A  few  fairly  respectable  savage  instances  are  given 
in  Dr.  Gibier's  '  Le  Fakirisme  Occidental '  and  in  Mr.

1  Carver,  pp.  123,  184.

158  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Manning's  '  Old  New  Zealand ;  '  but,  while  modem 
civilised  parallels  depend  on  the  solitary  case  of  Mrs. 
Piper  (for  no  other  case  has  been  well  observed),  no 
affirmative  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  Chinese,  Maori, 
Zulu,  or  Red  Indian  practice.

159

VIII

FETISHISM  AND  SPIRITUALISM159

VIII

FETISHISM  AND  SPIRITUALISM

IT  has  been  shown  how  the  doctrine  of  souls  was  developed 
according  to  the  anthropological  theory.  The  hypothesis 
as  to  how  souls  of  the  dead  were  later  elevated  to  the  rank 
of  gods,  or  supplied  models  after  which  such  gods  might 
be  inventively  fashioned,  will  be  criticised  in  a  later 
chapter.  Here  it  must  suffice  to  say  that  the  conception 
of  a  separable  surviving  soul  of  a  dead  man  was  not  only 
not  essential  to  the  savage's  idea  of  his  supreme  god,  as  it 
seems  to  me,  but  would  have  been  wholly  inconsistent 
with  that  conception.  There  exist,  however,  numerous 
forms  of  savage  religion  in  addition  to  the  creed  in  a 
Supreme  Being,  and  these  contribute  their  streams  to  the 
ocean  of  faith.  Thus  among  the  kinds  of  belief  which 
served  in  the  development  of  Polytheism,  was  Fetishism, 
itself  an  adaptation  and  extension  of  the  idea  of  separable 
souls.  In  this  regard,  like  ancestor-worship,  it  differs 
from  the  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being,  which,  as  we  shall  try 
to  demonstrate,  is  not  derived  from  the  theory  of  ghosts 
or  souls  at  all.

Fetish  (fetiche)  seems  to  come  from  Portuguese  fei tigo, 
a  talisman  or  amulet,  applied  by  the  Portuguese  to  various 
material  objects  regarded  by  the  negroes  of  the  west  coast 
with  more  or  less  of  religious  reverence.  These  objects 
may  be  held  sacred  in  some  degree  for  a  number  of 
incongruous  reasons.  They  may  be  tokens,  or  may  be  of 
value  in  sympathetic  magic,  or  merely  odd,  and  therefore

160  THE   MAKING  OF  EELIG10N160  THE   MAKING  OF  EELIG10N

probably  endowed  with  unknown  mystic  qualities.  Or 
they  may  have  been  pointed  out  in  a  dream,  or  met  in  a 
lucky  hour  and  associated  with  good  fortune,  or  they  may 
(like  a  tree  with  an  unexplained  stir  in  its  branches,  as 
reported  by  Kohl)  have  seemed  to  show  signs  of  life  by 
spontaneous  movements  ;  in  fact,  a  thing  may  be  what 
Europeans  call  a  fetish  for  scores  of  reasons.  For  our 
present  purpose,  as  Mr.  Tylor  says,  '  to  class  an  object  as 
a  fetish  demands  explicit  statement  that  a  spirit  is  con- 
sidered as  embodied  in  it,  or  acting  through  it,  or  communi- 
cating by  it,  or,  at  least,  that  the  people  it  belongs  to  do 
habitually  think  this  of  such  objects ;  or  it  must  be  shown 
that  the  object  is  treated  as  having  personal  consciousness 
or  power,  is  talked  with,  worshipped  .  .  .  '  and  so  forth. 
The  in-dwelling  spirit  may  be  human,  as  when  a  fetish  is 
made  out  of  a  friend's  skull,  the  spirit  in  which  may  even 
be  asked  for  oracles,  like  the  Head  of  Bran  in  Welsh 
legend.We  have  tried  to  show  that  the  belief  in  human  souls 
may  be,  in  part  at  least,  based  on  supernormal  phenomena 
which  Materialism  disregards.  We  shall  now  endeavour 
to  make  it  probable  that  Fetishism  (the  belief  in  the  souls 
tenanting  inanimate  objects)  may  also  have  sources  which 
perhaps  are  not  normal,  or  which  at  all  events  seemed 
supernormal  to  savages.  We  say  '  perhaps  not  normal ' 
because  the  phenomena  now  to  be  discussed  are  of  the 
most  puzzling  character.  We  may  lean  to  the  belief  in  a 
supernormal  cause  of  certain  hallucinations,  but  the  alleged 
movements  of  inanimate  objects  which  probably  supply 
one  origin  of  Fetishism,  one  suggestion  of  the  presence  of 
a  spirit  in  things  dead,  leave  the  inquiring  mind  in 
perplexity.  In  following  Mr.  Tylor's  discussion  of  the 
subject,  it  is  necessary  to  combine  what  he  says  about 
Spiritualism  in  his  fourth  with  what  he  says  about

FETISHISM   AND   SPIRITUALISM  161

[Fetishism  in  his  fourteenth  and  later  chapters.  For 
some  reason  his  book  is  so  arranged  that  he  criticises 
'  Spiritualism '  long  before  he  puts  forward  his  doctrine  of 
the  origin  and  development  of  the  belief  in  spirits.We  have  seen  a  savage  reason  for  supposing  that 
human  spirits  inhabit  certain  lifeless  things,  such  as  skulls 
and  other  relics  of  the  dead.  But  how  did  it  come  to  be 
thought  that  a  spirit  dwelt  in  a  lifeless  and  motionless 
piece  of  stone  or  stick  ?  Mr.  Tylor,  perhaps,  leads  us  to  a 
plausible  conjecture  by  writing  :  '  Mr.  Darwin  saw  two 
Malay  women  in  Keeling  Island,  who  held  a  wooden  spoon 
dressed  in  clothes  like  a  doll :  this  spoon  had  been  carried  to 
the  grave  of  a  dead  man,  and  becoming  inspired  at  full  moon, 
in  fact  lunatic,  it  danced  about  convulsively,  like  a  table 
or  a  hat  at  a  modern  spirit  seance.' l  Now  M.  Lefebure 
has  pointed  out  (in  '  Melusine ')  that,  according  to  De 
Brosses,  the  African  conjurers  gave  an  appearance  of 
independent  motion  to  small  objects,  which  were  then 
accepted  as  fetishes,  being  visibly  animated.  M.  Lefebure 
next  compares,  like  Mr.  Tylor,  the  alleged  physical  phe- 
nomena of  spiritualism,  the  flights  and  movements  of 
inanimate  objects  apparently  untouched.

The  question  thus  arises,  Is  there  any  truth  whatever 
in  these  world-wide  and  world-old  stones  of  inanimate 
objects  acting  like  animated  things  ?  Has  fetishism  one  of 
its  origins  in  the  actual  field  of  supernormal  experience  in 
the  X  region  ?  This  question  we  do  not  propose  to  answer, 
as  the  evidence,  though  practically  universal,  may  be  said 
to  rest  on  imposture  and  illusion.  But  we  can,  at  least,  give 
a  sketch  of  the  nature  of  the  evidence,  beginning  with  that 
as  to  the  apparently  voluntary  movements  of  objects,  not 
untouched.  Mr.  Tylor  quotes  from  John  Bell's  '  Journey

1  Darwin,  Journal,  p.  458 ;  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  152.  The  spoon  was 
not  untouched.

M

162  THE  MAKING   OF  RELIGION1  Darwin,  Journal,  p.  458 ;  Tylor,  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  152.  The  spoon  was 
not  untouched.

M

162  THE  MAKING   OF  RELIGION

in  Asia '  (1719)  an  account  of  a  Mongol  Lama  who  wished 
to  discover  certain  stolen  pieces  of  damask.  His  method 
was  to  sit  on  a  bench,  when  'he  carried  it,  or,  as  was 
commonly  believed,  it  carried  him,  to  the  very  tent '  of  the 
thief.  Here  the  bench  is  innocently  believed  to  be  self- 
moving.  Again,  Mr.  Rowley  tells  how  in  Manganjah  the 
sorcerer,  to  find  out  a  criminal,  placed,  with  magical 
ceremonies,  two  staffs  of  wood  in  the  hands  of  some  young 
men.  '  The  sticks  whirled  and  dragged  the  men  round 
like  mad,'  and  finally  escaped  and  rolled  to  the  feet  of  the 
wife  of  a  chief,  who  was  then  denounced  as  the  guilty 
person.1

Mr.  Duff  Macdonald  describes  the  same  practice 
among  the  Yaos  : 2

'  The  sorcerer  occasionally  makes  men  take  hold  of  a 
stick,  which,  after  a  time,  begins  to  move  as  if  endowed 
with  life,  and  ultimately  carries  them  off  bodily  and  with 
great  speed  to  the  house  of  the  thief.'

The  process  is  just  that  of  Jacques  Ayrnard  in  the 
celebrated  story  of  the  detection  of  the  Lyons  murderer.3The  process  is  just  that  of  Jacques  Ayrnard  in  the 
celebrated  story  of  the  detection  of  the  Lyons  murderer.3

In  Melanesia,  far  enough  away,  Dr.  Codrington  found 
a  similar  practice,  and  here  the  sticks  are  explicitly  said 
by  the  natives  to  be  moved  by  spirits.4  The  wizard  and 
a  friend  hold  a  bamboo  stick  by  each  end,  and  ask  what 
man's  ghost  is  afflicting  a  patient.  At  the  mention  of  the 
right  ghost  '  the  stick  becomes  violently  agitated.'  In 
the  same  way,  the  bamboo  '  would  run  about '  with  a 
man  holding  it  only  on  the  palms  of  his  hands.  Again, 
a  hut  is  built  with  a  partition  down  the  middle.  Men  sit 
there  with  their  hands  under  one  end  of  the  bamboo, 
while  the  other  end  is  extended  into  the  empty  half  of  the

1  Rowley,  Universities'  Mission,  p.  217.  "  Africana,  vol.  i.  p.  161.

3  In  the  author's  Custom  and  Myth,  '  The  Divining  Rod.' 
'  Codrington's  Melanesia,  p.  210.

FETISHISM   AND   SPIRITUALISM  163

hut.  They  then  call  over  the  names  of  the  recently  dead, 
till  'they  feel  the  bamboo  moving  in  their  hands.'  A 
bamboo  placed  on  a  sacred  tree,  '  when  the  name  of  a 
ghost  is  called,  moves  of  itself,  and  will  lift  and  drag 
people  about.'  Put  up  into  a  tree,  it  would  lift  them 
from  the  ground.  In  other  cases  the  holding  of  the  sticks 
produces  convulsions  and  trance.1  The  divining  sticks  of 
the  Maori  are  also  '  guided  by  spirits,' 2  and  those  of  the 
Zulu  sorcerers  rise,  fall,  and  jump  about.3These  Zulu  performances  must  be  really  very  curious. 
In  the  last  chapter  we  told  how  a  Zulu  named  John, 
having  a  shilling  to  lay  out  in  the  interests  of  psychical 
research,  declined  to  pay  a  perplexed  diviner,  and  reserved 
his  capital  for  a  more  meritorious  performance.  He 
tried  a  medium  named  Unomantshintshi,  who  divined  by 
Umabakula,  or  dancing  sticks —

'  If  they  say  "  no,"  they  fall  suddenly ;  if  they  say  "  yes," 
they  arise  and  jump  about  very  much,  and  leap  on  the 
person  who  has  come  to  inquire.  They  "  fix  themselves 
on  the  place  where  the  sick  man  is  affected ;  ...  if  the 
head,  they  leap  on  his  head.  .  .  .  Many  believe  in  Uma- 
bakula more  than  in  the  diviner.  But  there  are  not 
many  who  have  the  Umabakula."

Dr.  Callaway's  informant  only  knew  two  Umabakulists. 
John  was  quite  satisfied,  paid  his  shilling,  and  went 
home.4

The  sticks  are  about  a  foot  long.  It  is  not  reported 
that  they  are  moved  by  spirits,  nor  do  they  seem  to  be 
regarded  as  fetishes.

Mr.  Tylor  also  cites  a  form  of  the  familiar  pendulum 
experiment.  Among  the  Karens  a  ring  is  suspended  by  a 
thread  over  a  metal  basin.  The  relations  of  the  dead 
strike  the  basin,  and  when  he  who  was  dearest  to  the

Op.  cit.  pp.  223-225.  -  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  i.  p.  125.

:Callaway,  Amasuhi,  p.  330.  4  Ibid.  p.  353.

M  2

164  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGIONOp.  cit.  pp.  223-225.  -  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  i.  p.  125.

:Callaway,  Amasuhi,  p.  330.  4  Ibid.  p.  353.

M  2

164  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

ghost  touches  it  the  spirit  twists  the  thread  till  it  breaks,, 
and  the  ring  falls  into  the  basin.  With  us  a  ring  is  held 
by  a  thread  over  a  tumbler,  and  our  unconscious  move- 
ments swing  it  till  it  strikes  the  hour.  How  the  Karens 
manage  it  is  less  obvious.  These  savage  devices  with 
animated  sticks  clearly  correspond  to  the  more  modern 
'  table-turning.'  Here,  when  the  players  are  honest,  the 
pushing  is  certainly  unconscious.I  have  tested  this  in  two  ways — first  by  trying  the 
minimum  of  conscious  muscular  action  that  would  stir  a 
table  at  which  I  was  alone,  and  by  comparing  the  absolute 
unconsciousness  of  muscular  action  when  the  table  began 
to  move  in  response  to  no  voluntary  push.  Again,  I  tried 
with  a  friend,  who  said,  '  You  are  pushing,'  when  I  gently 
removed  my  hands  altogether,  though  they  seemed  to 
rest  on  the  table,  which  still  revolved.  My  friend  was 
himself  unconsciously  pushing.  It  is  undeniable  that,  to 
a  solitary  experimenter,  the  table  seems  to  make  little 
darts  of  its  own  will  in  a  curious  way.  Thus,  the  uncon- 
sciousness of  muscular  action  on  the  part  of  savages- 
engaged  in  the  experiment  with  sticks  would  lead  them 
to  believe  that  spirits  were  animating  the  wood.  The 
same  fallacy  beset  the  table-turners  of  1855-65,  and  was, 
to  some  extent,  exposed  by  Faraday.  Of  course,  savages 
would  be  even  more  convinced  by  the  dancing  spoon  of 
Mr.  Darwin's  tale,  by  the  dancing  sticks  of  the  Zulus, 
and  the  rest,  whether  the  phenomena  were  supernormal 
or  merely  worked  by  unseen  strings.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  modern  experimenters,  when,  as  they  declare, 
various  objects  move  untouched,  without  physical  contact. 
Still  more  analogous  than  turning  tables  to  the  savage 
use  of  inspired  sticks  for  directing  the  inquirer  to  a  lost 
object  or  to  a  criminal,  is  the  modern  employment  of  the 
divining-rod — a  forked  twig  which,  held  by  the  ends,

FETISHISM   AND    SPIRITUALISM  165FETISHISM   AND    SPIRITUALISM  165

revolves  in  the  hands  of  the  performer  when  he  reaches 
the  object  of  his  quest.  He,  like  the  savage  cited,  is 
occasionally  agitated  in  a  convulsive  manner;  and  cases 
are  quoted  in  which  the  twig  writhes  when  held  in  a  pair 
of  tongs!  The  best -known  modern  treatise  on  the 
divining  -  rod  is  that  of  M.  Chevreul,  '  La  Baguette 
Divinatoire '  (1854).  We  have  also  '  L'Histoire  du 
Merveilleux  dans  les  Temps  Modernes,'  by  M.  Figuier 
(1860).  In  1781  Thouvenel  published  his  600  experi- 
ments with  Bleton  and  others ;  and  Hegel  refers  to 
Amoretti's  collection  of  hundreds  of  cases.  The  case 
of  Jacques  Aymard,  who  in  the  seventeenth  century 
discovered  a  murderer  by  the  use  of  the  rod  in  true 
savage  fashion,  is  well  known.  In  modern  England  the 
rod  is  used  in  the  interests  of  private  individuals  and 
public  bodies  (such  as  Trinity  College,  Cambridge)  for  the 
discovery  of  water.Professor  Barrett  has  lately  published  a  book  of  280 
pages,  in  which  evidence  of  failures  and  successes  is 
collected.1  Professor  Barrett  gives  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  cases,  in  which  he  was  only  able  to  discover,  on  good 
authority,  twelve  failures.  He  gives  a  variety  of  tests 
calculated  to  check  frauds  and  chance  coincidence,  and 
he  publishes  opinions,  hostile  or  agnostic,  by  geologists. 
The  evidence,  as  a  general  rule,  is  what  is  called  first- 
hand in  other  inquiries.  The  actual  spectators,  and  often 
the  owners  of  the  land,  or  the  persons  in  whose  interest 
water  was  wanted,  having  been  present,  give  their  testi- 
mony ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  '  diviner '  is  called  in  by 
people  of  sense  and  education,  commonly  too  practical 
to  have  a  theory,  and  content  with  getting  what  they 
want,  especially  where  scientific  experts  have  failed.-

1   Tfic  So-called  Divining-Rod,  S.P.K.  1897.

'J  See  especially  The  V/aterfotd  Experiments,  p.  10(i.

166  THE   MAKING  OF   RELIGION

In  Mr.  Barrett's  opinion,  the  subconscious  perception 
of  indications  of  the  presence  of  water  produces  an  equally 
unconscious  muscular  '  spasm,'  which  twirls  the  rod  till  it 
often  breaks.  Yet  'it  is  almost  impossible  to  imitate 
its  characteristic  movement  by  any  voluntary  effort.'  I 
have  myself  held  the  hands  of  an  amateur  performer  when 
the  twig  was  moving,  and  neither  by  sight  nor  touch  could 
I  detect  any  muscular  movement  on  his  part,  much  less  a 
spasm.  The  person  was  bailiff  on  a  large  estate,  and, 
having  accidentally  discovered  that  he  possessed  the  gift, 
used  it  when  he  wanted  wells  dug  for  the  tenants  on 
the  property.The  whole  topic  is  obscure ;  nor  am  I  concerned  here 
with  the  successes  or  failures  of  the  divining-rod.  But 
the  movements  of  the  twig  have  never,  to  my  knowledge, 
been  attributed  by  modern  English  performers  to  the 
operation  of  spirits.  They  say  'electricity.'  Mr.  Tylor 
merely  writes :

'The  action  of  the  famous  divining-rod,  with  its 
curiously  versatile  sensibility  to  water,  ore,  treasure,  and 
thieves,  seems  to  belong  partly  to  trickery  and  partly  to 
more  or  less  conscious  direction  by  honester  operators.'

As  the  divining-rod  is  the  only  instance  in  which 
automatism,  whatever  its  nature  and  causes,  has  been 
found  of  practical  value  by  practical  men,  and  as  it  is 
obviously  associated  with  a  number  of  analogous  pheno- 
mena, both  in  civilised  and  savage  life,  it  certainly 
deserves  the  attention  of  science.  But  no  advance  will 
be  made  till  scientifically  trained  inquiier.s  themselves 
arrange  and  test  a  large  number  of  experiments.  Know- 
ledge of  the  geological  ignorance  of  the  dowsers,  examples 
of  fraud  on  their  part,  and  cases  of  failure  or  reported 
failure,  with  a  general  hostile  bias,  may  prevent  such 
experiments  from  being  made  by  scientific  experts  on  an

FETISHISM   AND   SPIKITUALISM  167

adequate  scale.  Such  experts  ought,  of  course,  to  avoid 
working  the  dowsers  into  a  state  of  irritation.FETISHISM   AND   SPIKITUALISM  167

adequate  scale.  Such  experts  ought,  of  course,  to  avoid 
working  the  dowsers  into  a  state  of  irritation.

It  is  just  worth  while  to  notice  cases  in  which  the  rod 
acts  like  those  of  the  Melanesians,  Africans,  and  other 
savages.  A  Mr.  Thomas  Welton  published  an  English 
translation  of  'La  Verge  de  Jacob'  (Lyon,  1693).  In 
1851  he  asked  his  servant  to  bring  into  the  garden  '  a 
stick  that  stood  behind  the  parlour  door.  In  great  terror 
she  brought  it  to  the  garden,  her  hand  firmly  clutched  on 
it,  nor  could  she  let  it  go.'  When  Mrs.  Welton  took  the 
stick,  '  it  drew  her  with  very  considerable  velocity  to 
nearly  the  centre  of  the  garden,'  where  a  well  was  found. 
Mr.  Welton  is  not  likely  to  have  known  of  the  lately 
published  savage  examples.  The  coincidence  with  the 
African  and  Melanesian  cases  is,  therefore,  probably 
undesigned.Again,  in  1694,  the  rod  was  used  by  le  Pere  Menestrier 
and  others,  just  as  it  is  by  savages,  to  indicate  by  its 
movements  answers  to  all  sorts  of  questions.  Experiments 
of  this  kind  have  not  been  made  by  Professor  Barrett,  and 
other  irfodern  inquirers,  except  by  M.  Eichet,  as  a  mode  of 
detecting  automatic  action.  But  it  would  be  just  as 
sensible  to  use  the  twig  as  to  use  planchette  or  any  other 
'  autoscopic  '  apparatus.  If  these  elicit  knowledge  uncon- 
sciously present  to  the  mind,  mere  water- finding  ought  not 
to  be  the  sole  province  of  the  rod.  In  the  same  class  as 
these  rods  is  the  forked  twig  which,  in  China,  is  held  at 
each  end  by  two  persons,  and  made  to  write  in  the  sand. 
The  little  apparatus  called  planchette,  or  the  other,  the 
ouija,  is  of  course,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  pushed  by 
the  performers.  In  the  case  of  the  twig,  as  held  by  water- 
seekers,  the  difficulty  of  consciously  moving  it  so  as  to 
escape  close  observation  is  considerable.

In  the  case  of  the  ouija  (a  little  tripod,  which,  under

168  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGIONIn  the  case  of  the  ouija  (a  little  tripod,  which,  under

168  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  operators'  hands,  runs  about  a  table  inscribed  with 
letters  at  which  it  points),  I  have  known  curious  successes 
to  be  achieved  by  amateurs.  Thus,  in  the  house  of  a  lady 
who  owned  an  old  chateau  in  another  county,  the  ouija, 
operated  on  by  two  ladies  known  to  myself,  wrote  a  number 
of  details  about  a  visit  paid  to  the  chateau  for  a  certain 
purpose  by  Mary  Stuart.  That  visit,  and  its  object,  a 
purely  personal  one,  are  unknown  to  history,  and  the 
chateau  is  not  spoken  of  in  Mr.  Hay  Fleming's  careful, 
but  unavoidably  incomplete,  itinerary  of  the  Queen's  re- 
sidence in  Scotland.  After  the  communication  had  been 
made,  the  owner  of  the  chateau  explained  that  she  was 
already  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  described,  as 
she  had  recently  read  them  in  documents  in  her  charter 
chest,  where  they  remain.

Of  course,  the  belief  we  extend  to  such  narratives  is 
entirely  conditioned  by  our  knowledge  of  the  personal 
character  of  the  performers.  The  point  here  is  merely  the 
civilised  and  savage  practice  of  automatism,  the  apparent 
eliciting  of  knowledge  not  otherwise  accessible,  by  the 
movements  of  a  stick,  or  a  bit  of  wood.  These  movements, 
made  without  conscious  exertion  or  direction,  seem,  to 
savage  philosophy,  to  be  caused  by  in-dwelling  spirits,  the 
sources  of  Fetishism.These  examples,  then,  demonstrating  unconscious 
movement  of  objects  by  the  operators,  make  it  clear  that 
movements  even  of  touched  objects,  may  be  attributed,  by 
some  civilised  and  by  savage  amateurs,  to  '  spirits.'  The 
objects  so  moved  may,  by  savages,  be  regarded  in  some 
cases  as  fetishes,  and  their  movements  may  have  helped  to 
originate  the  belief  that  spirits  can  inhabit  inanimate  objects. 
When  objects  apparently  quite  untouched  become  vola- 
tile, the  mystery  is  deeper.  This  apparent  animation  and 
frolicsome  behaviour  of  inanimate  objects  is  reported  all

FETISHISM   AND    SPIRITUALISM  169

through  history,  and  attested  by  immense  quantities  of 
evidence  of  every  degree.  It  would  be  tedious  to  give  a 
full  account  of  the  antiquity  and  diffusion  of  reports  about 
such  occurrences.  We  find  them  among  Neo-Platonists, 
in  the  English  and  Continental  Middle  Ages,  among 
Eskimo,  Hurons,  Algonkins,  Tartars,  Zulus,  Malays, 
Nasquapees,  Maoris,  in  witch  trials,  in  ancient  Peru 
(immediately  after  the  Spanish  Conquest),  in  China,  in 
modern  Russia,  in  New  England  (1680),  all  through  the 
career  of  modern  spiritualism,  in  Hayti  (where  they  are 
attributed  to  '  Obeah '),  and,  sporadically,  everywhere.1Among  all  these  cases,  \ve  must  dismiss  whatever  the 
modern  paid  medium  does  in  the  dark.  The  only  thing 
to  be  done  with  the  ethnographic  and  modern  accounts 
of  such  marvels  is  to  '  file  them  for  reference.'  If  a  spon- 
taneous example  occurs,  under  proper  inspection,  we  can 
then  compare  our  old  tales.  Professor  James  says  :  '  Their 
mutual  resemblances  suggest  a  natural  type,  and  I  confess 
that  till  these  records,  or  others  like  them,  are  positively 
explained  away,  I  cannot  feel  (in  spite  of  such  vast 
amounts  of  detected  frauds)  as  if  the  case  of  physical 
mediumship  itself,  as  a  freak  of  nature,  were  definitely 
closed.  ...  So  long  as  the  stories  multiply  in  various 
lands,  and  so  few  are  positively  explained  away,  it  is  bad 
method  to  ignore  them.' 2  Here  they  are  not  ignored, 
because,  whatever  the  cause  or  causes  of  the  phenomena, 
they  would  buttress,  if  they  did  not  originate,  the  savage 
belief  in  spirits  tenanting  inanimate  matter,  whence  came 
Fetishism.  As  to  facts,  we  cannot,  of  course,  '  explain 
away  '  events  of  this  kind,  which  we  know  only  through 
report.  A  conjurer  cannot  explain  a  trick  merely  from  a

1  Authorities  and  examples  are  collected  in  the  author's  Cock  Lane  and 
Common  Sense.

-  Proceedings,  xii.  7,  8.

170  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

description,  especially  a  description  by  a  non-conjurer. 
But,  as  a  rule,  nothing  so  much  leads  to  doubt  on  this 
theme  as  the  '  explanation  '  given — except,  of  course,  in 
the  case  of  '  dark  seances '  got  up  and  prepared  by  paid 
mediums.  We  know,  sometimes,  how  the  '  explanation  r 
arose.Thus,  the  house  of  a  certain  M.  Zoller,  a  lawyer 
and  member  of  the  Swiss  Federal  Council,  a  house  at 
Stans,  in  Unterwalden,  was  made  simply  uninhabitable  in 
1860-1862.  The  disturbances,  including  movements  of 
objects,  were  of  a  truly  odious  description,  and  occurred 
in  full  daylight.  M.  Zoller,  deeply  attached  to  his  home, 
which  had  many  interesting  associations  with  the  part  his 
family  played  in  the  struggle  against  revolutionary  France, 
was  obliged  to  abandon  the  place.  He  had  made  every 
conceivable  sort  of  research,  and  had  called  in  the  local 
police  and  savants,  to  no  purpose.

But  the  affair  was  explained  away  thus  :  While  the 
phenomena  could  still  be  concealed  from  public  curiosity, 
a  client  called  to  see  M.  Zoller,  who  was  out.  The 
client,  therefore,  remained  in  the  drawing-room.  Loud 
and  heavy  blows  resounded  through  the  room.  The 
client,  as  it  chanced,  had  once  felt  the  effects  of  an 
electric  battery,  for  some  medical  reason,  apparently.  M. 
Zoller  writes :  '  My  eldest  son  was  present  at  the  time, 
and,  when  my  client  asked  whether  there  was  such  a 
thing  as  an  electrical  machine  in  the  house  (the  family 
having  been  enjoined  to  keep  the  disturbances  as  secret  as 
possible),  he  allowed  S.  to  think  that  there  was.'  Con- 
sequently, the  phenomena  were  set  down  to  M.  Zoller's 
singular  idea  of  making  his  house  untenantable  with 
an  '  electric  machine ' — which  he  did  not  possess.1  A 
number  of  the  most  respected  citizens,  including  the

1  Personal  Narrative,  by  M.  Zoller.     Hanke,  Zurich,  18G3.

FETISHISM   AND   SPIRITUALISM  1711  Personal  Narrative,  by  M.  Zoller.     Hanke,  Zurich,  18G3.

FETISHISM   AND   SPIRITUALISM  171

Superintendent  of  Police,  and  the  chief  magistrate  for  law, 
published  a  statement  that  neither  Zoller,  nor  any  of  his 
family,  nor  any  of  themselves,  produced  or  could  have 
produced  the  phenomena  witnessed  by  them  in  August  1862. 
This  declaration  they  put  forth  in  the  '  Schwytzer  Zeitung,' 
October  5,  1863. !  No  electric  machine  known  to  mortals 
could  have  produced  the  vast  variety  of  alleged  effects, 
none  was  ever  found ;  and  as  M.  Zoller  changed  his 
servants  without  escaping  his  tribulations,  they  can 
hardly  be  blamed  for  what,  prima  facie,  it  seems  that 
they  could  not  possibly  do.  However,  'electricity,'  like 
Mesopotamia,  is  'a  blessed  word.' *

My  own  position  in  this  matter  of  '  physical  phe- 
nomena '  is,  I  hope,  clear.  They  interest  me,  for  my 
present  purpose,  as  being,  whatever  their  real  nature  and 
origin,  things  which  would  suggest  to  a  savage  his  theory 
of  Fetishism.  '  An  inanimate  object  may  be  tenanted  by 
a  spirit,  as  is  proved  by  its  extraordinary  movements.' 
Thus  the  early  thinker  might  reason,  and  go  on  to  revere 
the  object.  It  is  to  be  wished  that  competent  observers 
would  pay  more  attention  to  such  savage  practices  as 
crystal-gazing  and  automatism  as  illustrated  by  the  sticks 
of  the  Melanesians,  Zulus,  and  Yaos.  Our  scanty  in- 
formation we  pick  up  out  of  stray  allusions,  but  it  has 
the  advantage  of  being  uncontaminated  by  theory,  the 
European  spectator  not  knowing  the  wide  range  of  such 
practices  and  their  value  in  experimental  psychology.We  have  now  finished  our  study  of  the  less  normal 
and  usual  phenomena,  which  gave  rise  to  belief  in 
separable,  self-existing,  conscious,  and  powerful  souls. 
We  have  shown  that  the  supernormal  factors  which,

1  Daumer,  ReicJi  des  Wumlcrsamcn,  Eegensburg,  1872,  pp.  26-j,  2G6. 
-  A  criticism  of  modern  explanations  of  the  phenomena  here  touched 
upon  will  be  found  in  Appendix  B.

172  THE  MAKING   OF  RELIGION

when  reflected  on,  probably  supported  this  belief,  are 
represented  in  civilised  as  well  as  in  savage  life,  while  as 
to  their  existence  among  the  founders  of  religion  we  can 
historically  know  nothing  at  all.  If  we  may  infer  from 
certain  considerations,  the  supernormal  experiences  were 
possibly  more  prevalent  among  the  remote  ancestors  of 
known  savage  races  than  among  their  modern  descendants. 
We  have  suggested  that  clairvoyance,  thought  transference, 
and  telepathy  cannot  be  dismissed  as  mere  fables,  by  a 
cautious  inquirer,  while  even  the  far  more  obscure  stories 
of  '  physical  manifestations '  are  but  poorly  explained 
away  by  those  who  cannot  explain  them.1  Again,  these 
faculties  have  presented — in  the  acquisition  of  otherwise 
unattainable  knowledge,  in  coincidental  hallucinations, 
and  in  other  ways — just  the  kind  of  facts  on  which  the 
savage  doctrine  of  souls  might  be  based,  or  by  which  it 
might  be  buttressed.  Thus,  while  the  actuality  of  the 
supernormal  facts  and  faculties  remains  at  least  an  open 
question,  the  prevalent  theory  of  Materialism  cannot  be 
admitted  as  dogmatically  certain  in  its  present  shape. 
No  more  than  any  other  theory,  nay,  less  than  some  other 
theories,  can  it  account  for  the  psychical  facts  which, 
at  the  lowest,  we  may  not  honestly  leave  out  of  the 
reckoning.We  have  therefore  no  more  to  say  about  the  super- 
normal aspects  of  the  origins  of  religion.  We  are 
henceforth  concerned  with  matters  of  verifiable  belief 
and  practice.  We  have  to  ask  whether,  when  once  the 
doctrine  of  souls  was  conceived  by  early  men,  it  took 
precisely  the  course  of  development  usually  indicated  by 
anthropological  science.

1  See  Appendix  B.

173

IX

EVOLUTION  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  GOD

To  the  anthropological  philosopher  '  a  plain  man  '  would 
naturally  put  the  question :  '  Having  got  your  idea  of 
spirit  or  soul — your  theory  of  Animism— out  of  the  idea 
of  ghosts,  and  having  got  your  idea  of  ghosts  out  of 
dreams  and  visions,  how  do  you  get  at  the  Idea  of  God  ? ' 
Now  by  '  God  '  the  proverbial  '  plain  man  '  of  controversy 
means  a  primal  eternal  Being,  author  of  all  things, 
the  father  and  friend  of  man,  the  invisible,  omniscient 
guardian  of  morality.

The  usual  though  not  invariable  reply  of  the  anthro- 
pologist might  be  given  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Im  Thurn, 
author  of  a  most  interesting  work  on  the  Indians  of 
British  Guiana  :

'  From  the  notion  of  ghosts,'  says  Mr.  Im  Thurn,  '  a 
belief  has  arisen,  but  very  gradually,  in  higher  spirits,  and 
eventually  in  a  Highest  Spirit,  and,  keeping  pace  with  the 
growth  of  these  beliefs,  a  habit  of  reverence  for,  and 
worship  of  spirits.  .  .  .  The  Indians  of  Guiana  know 
no  God.' l

As  another  example  of  Mr.  Im  Thurn's  hypothesis 
that  God  is  a  late  development  from  the  idea  of  spirit 
may  be  cited  Mr.  Payne's  learned  '  History  of  the  New 
World,'  a  work  of  much  research  :  2

'  The  lowest  savages  not  only  have  no  gods,  but  do  not 
even  recognise  those  lower  beings  usually  called  spirits,'  The  lowest  savages  not  only  have  no  gods,  but  do  not 
even  recognise  those  lower  beings  usually  called  spirits,

1  Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.  xi.  374.    We  shall  return  to  this  passage.

2  Vol.  i.  p.  389,  1892.

174  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  conception  of  which  has  invariably  preceded  that  of 
gods  in  the  human  mind.'

Mr.  Payne  here  differs,  toto  ccelo,  from  Mr.  Tylor, 
who  finds  no  sufficient  proof  for  wholly  non-religious 
savages,  and  from  Boskoff,  who  has  disposed  of  the 
arguments  of  Sir  John  Lubbock.  Mr.  Payne,  then,  for 
ethnological  purposes,  defines  a  god  as  '  a  benevolent 
spirit,  permanently  embodied  in  some  tangible  object, 
usually  an  image,  and  to  whom  food,  drink,'  and  so  on, 
'  are  regularly  offered  for  the  purpose  of  securing  assistance 
in  the  affairs  of  life.'

On  this  theory  '  the  lowest  savages '  are  devoid  of 
the  idea  of  god  or  of  spirit.  Later  they  develop  the  idea 
of  spirit,  and  when  they  have  secured  the  spirit,  as  it  were, 
in  a  tangible  object,  and  kept  it  on  board  wages,  then  the 
spirit  has  attained  to  the  dignity  and  the  savage  to  the 
conception  of  a  god.  But  while  a  god  of  this  kind  is,  in 
Mr.  Payne's  opinion,  relatively  a  late  flower  of  culture, 
for  the  hunting  races  generally  (with  some  exceptions) 
have  no  gods,  yet  '  the  conception  of  a  creator  or  maker  of 
all  things  .  .  .  obviously  a  great  spirit'  is  'one  of  the 
earliest  efforts  of  primitive  logic.'1Mr.  Payne's  own  logic  is  not  very  clear.  The 
'  primitive  logic  '  of  the  savage  leads  him  to  seek  for  a 
cause  or  maker  of  things,  which  he  finds  in  a  great 
creative  spirit.  Yet  the  lowest  savages  have  no  idea  even 
of  spirit,  and  the  hunting  races,  as  a  rule,  have  no  god. 
Does  Mr.  Payne  mean  that  a  great  creative  spirit  is  not 
a  god,  while  a  spirit  kept  on  board  wages  in  a  tangible 
object  is  a  god  ?  We  are  unable,  by  reason  of  evidence 
later  to  be  given,  to  agree  with  Mr.  Payne's  view  of 
the  facts,  while  his  reasoning  appears  somewhat  incon- 
sistent, the  lowest  savages  having,  in  his  opinion,  no  idea 
1  Payne,  i.  458.

EVOLUTION   OF  THE   IDEA   OF  GOD  175

of  spirit,  though  the  idea  of  a  creative  spirit  is,  for  all  that, 
one  of  the  earliest  efforts  of  primitive  logic.EVOLUTION   OF  THE   IDEA   OF  GOD  175

of  spirit,  though  the  idea  of  a  creative  spirit  is,  for  all  that, 
one  of  the  earliest  efforts  of  primitive  logic.

On  any  such  theories  as  these  the  belief  in  a  moral 
Supreme  Being  is  a  very  late  (or  a  very  early?)  result 
of  evolution,  due  to  the  action  of  advancing  thought  upon 
the  original  conception  of  ghosts.  This  opinion  of  Mr. 
Im  Thurn's  is,  roughly  stated,  the  usual  theory  of  anthro- 
pologists. We  wish,  on  the  other  hand,  to  show  that  the 
idea  of  God,  as  he  is  conceived  of  by  our  inquiring  plain 
man,  occurs  rudely,  but  recognisably,  in  the  lowest-known 
grades  of  savagery,  and  therefore  cannot  arise  from  the 
later  speculation  of  men,  comparatively  civilised  and 
advanced,  on  the  original  datum  of  ghosts.  We  shall 
demonstrate,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Spencer, 
Mr.  Huxley,  and  even  Mr.  Tylor,  that  the  Supreme  Being, 
and,  in  one  case  at  least,  the  casual  sprites  of  savage 
faith,  are  active  moral  influences.  What  is  even  more 
important,  we  shall  make  it  undeniable  that  Anthropology 
has  simplified  her  problem  by  neglecting  or  ignoring  her 
facts.  While  the  real  problem  is  to  account  for  the 
evolution  out  of  ghosts  of  the  eternal,  creative  moral  god 
of  the  '  plain  man,'  the  existence  of  such  a  god  or  being 
in  the  creeds  of  the  lowest  savages  is  by  anthropologists 
denied,  or  left  out  of  sight,  or  accounted  for  by  theories 
contradicted  by  facts,  or,  at  best,  is  explained  away  as  a 
result  of  European  or  Islamite  influences.  Now,  as  the 
problem  is  to  account  for  the  evolution  of  the  highest 
conception  of  God,  as  far  as  that  conception  exists  among 
the  most  backward  races,  the  problem  can  never  be  solved 
while  that  highest  conception  of  God  is  practically 
ignored.Thus,  anthropologists,  as  a  rule,  in  place  of  facing  and 
solving  their  problem,  have  merely  evaded  it — doubtless 
unwittingly.  This,  of  course,  is  not  the  practice  of

176  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Mr.  Tylor,  though  even  his  great  work  is  professedly 
much  more  concerned  with  the  development  of  the  idea 
of  spirit  and  with  the  lower  forms  of  animism  than  with 
the  real  crux — the  evolution  of  the  idea  (often  obscured 
by  mythology)  of  a  moral,  uncreated,  undying  God  among 
the  lowest  savages.  This  negligence  of  anthropologists 
has  arisen  from  a  single  circumstance.  They  take  it  for 
granted  that  God  is  always  (except  where  the  word  for 
God  is  applied  to  a  living  human  being)  regarded  as  a 
Spirit.  Thus,  having  accounted  for  the  development 
of  the  idea  of  spirit,  they  regard  God  as  that  idea  carried 
to  its  highest  power,  and  as  the  final  step  in  its  evolution. 
But,  if  we  can  show  that  the  early  idea  of  an  eternal, 
moral,  creative  being  does  not  necessarily  or  logically 
imply  the  doctrine  of  spirit,  then  this  idea  of  an  eternal, 
moral,  creative  being  may  have  existed  even  before  the 
doctrine  of  spirit  was  evolved.

We  may  admit  that  Mr.  Tylor's  account  of  the  process 
by  which  Gods  were  evolved  out  of  ghosts  is  a  little  touffu 
— rather  buried  in  facts.  We  '  can  scarcely  see  the  wood 
for  the  trees.'  We  want  to  know  how  Gods,  makers 
of  things  (or  of  most  things),  fathers  in  heaven,  and 
friends,  guardians  of  morality,  seeing  what  is  good  or  bad 
in  the  hearts  of  men,  were  evolved,  as  is  supposed,  out 
of  ghosts  or  surviving  souls  of  the  dead.  That  such 
moral,  practically  omniscient  Gods  are  known  to  the  very 
lowest  savages  —  Bushmen,  Fuegians,  Australians — we 
shall  demonstrate.Here  the  inquirer  must  be  careful  not  to  adopt  the 
common  opinion  that  Gods  improve,  morally  and  other- 
wise, in  direct  ratio  to  the  rising  grades  in  the  evolution 
of  culture  and  civilisation.  That  is  not  necessarily  the 
case  ;  usually  the  reverse  occurs.  Still  less  must  we  take 
it  for  granted,  following  Mr.  Tylor  and  Mr.  Huxley,  that

177

the  '  alliance  [of  religion  and  morality]  belongs  almost,  or 
wholly,  to  religions  above  the  savage  level — not  to  the 
earlier  and  lower  creeds  ; '  or  that  '  among  the  Australian 
savages,'  and  '  in  its  simplest  condition,'  '  theology  is 
wholly  independent  of  ethics.' '  These  statements  can  be 
proved  (by  such  evidence  as  anthropology  is  obliged  to 
rely  upon)  to  be  erroneous.  And,  just  because  these 
statements  are  put  forward,  Anthropology  has  an  easier 
task  in  explaining  the  origin  of  religion  ;  while,  just 
because  these  statements  are  incorrect,  her  conclusion, 
being  deduced  from  premises  so  far  false,  is  invalidated.

Given  souls,  acquired  by  thinking  on  the  lines  already 
described,  Mr.  Tylor  develops  Gods  out  of  them.  But  he 
is  not  one  of  the  writers  who  is  certain  about  every  detail. 
He  '  scarcely  attempts  to  clear  away  the  haze  that  covers 
great  parts  of  the  subject.' 2

The  human  soul,  he  says,  has  been  the  model  on 
which  man  'framed  his  ideas  of  spiritual  beings  in 
general,  from  the  tiniest  elf  that  sports  in  the  grass 
up  to  the  heavenly  creator  and  ruler  of  the  world,  the 
Great  Spirit.'  Here  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the 
Heavenly  Euler  was  from  the  first  envisaged  as  a 
'  spiritual  being ' — which  is  just  the  difficulty.  Was  He  ? 3The  process  of  framing  these  ideas  is  rather  obscure. 
The  savage  '  lives  in  terror  of  the  souls  of  the  dead  as 
harmful  spirits.'  This  might  yield  a  Devil ;  it  would  not 
yield  a  God  who  'makes  for  righteousness.'  Happily, 
'  deified  ancestors  are  regarded,  on  the  whole,  as  kindly 
spirits.'  The  dead  ancestor  is  '  now  passed  into  a  deity.' 4 
Examples  of  ancestor-worship  follow.  But  we  are  no 
nearer  home.  For  among  the  Zulus  many  Amatongo

1  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  p.  381 ;   Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  pp.  340, 
372.  -  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  p.  109.

3  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  110.  4  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  113.

N

178  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

(ancestral  spirits)  are  sacred.  '  Yet  their  father  [i.e.  the 
father  of  each  actual  family]  is  far  before  all  others  when 
they  worship  the  Amatongo.  .  .  .  They  do  not  know  the 
ancients  who  are  dead,  nor  their  laud-giving  names,  nor 
their  names.'  '  Thus,  each  new  generation  of  Zulus 
must  have  a  new  first  worshipful  object — its  own  father's 
Itongo.  This  father,  and  his  very  name,  are,  in  a  genera- 
tion or  two,  forgotten.  The  name  of  such  a  man,  there- 
fore, cannot  survive  as  that  of  the  God  or  Supreme  Being 
from  age  to  age ;  and,  obviously,  such  a  real  dead  man, 
while  known  at  all,  is  much  too  well  known  to  be  taken 
for  the  creator  and  ruler  of  the  world,  despite  some 
African  nattering  titles  and  superstitions  about  kings 
who  control  the  weather.  The  Zulus,  about  as  '  godless  ' 
a  people  as  possible,  have  a  mythical  first  ancestor, 
Unkulunkulu,  but  he  is  '  beyond  the  reach  of  rites,'  and  is 
a  centre  of  myths  rather  than  of  worship  or  of  moral  ideas. '-After  other  examples  of  ancestor-worship,  Mr.  Tylor 
branches  off  into  a  long  discussion  of  the  theory  of 
'  possession  '  or  inspiration,3  which  does  not  assist  the 
argument  at  the  present  point.  Thence  he  passes  to 
fetishism  (already  discussed  by  us),  and  the  transitions 
from  the  fetish — (1)  to  the  idol;  (2)  to  the  guardian 
angel  ('  subliminal  self ') ;  (3)  to  tree  and  river  spirits, 
and  local  spirits  which  cause  volcanoes ;  and  (4)  to 
polytheism.  A  fetish  may  inhabit  a  tree  ;  trees  being 
generalised,  the  fetish  of  one  oak  becomes  the  god  of  the 
forest.  Or,  again,  fetishes  rise  into  '  species  gods  ; '  the 
gods  of  all  bees,  owls,  or  rabbits  are  thus  evolved.

Next,4

'  As  chiefs  and  kings  are  among  men,  so  are  the  great

1  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  pp.  115,  116,  citing  Callaway  and  others.

'-'  The  Zulu  religion  will  be  analysed  later.

:<  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  pp.  130-144.  «  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  248.

EVOLUTION   OF   THE   IDEA   OF   GOD  179

gods  among  the  lesser  spirits.  .  .  .  With  little  exception, 
wherever  a  savage  or  barbaric  system  of  religion  is  tho- 
roughly described,  great  gods  make  their  appearance  in  the 
spiritual  world  as  distinctly  as  chiefs  in  the  human  tribe.'Very  good  ;  but  whence  comes  the  great  God  among 
tribes  which  have  neither  chief  nor  king  nor  any  dis- 
tinction of  rank,  as  among  the  Fuegians,  Bushmen,  and 
Australians '?  The  maker  and  ruler  of  the  world  known 
to  these  races  cannot  be  the  shadow  of  king  or  chief, 
reflected  and  magnified  on  the  mist  of  thought ;  for  chief 
or  king  these  peoples  have  none.  This  theory  (Hume's) 
will  not  work  where  people  have  a  great  God  but  no  king 
or  chief  ;  nor  where  they  have  a  king  but  no  Zeus  or 
other  supreme  King-god,  as  among  the  Aztecs.

We  now  reach,  in  Mr.  Tylor's  theory,  great  fetish 
deities,  such  as  Heaven  and  Earth,  Sun  and  Moon,  and 
'  departmental  deities,'  gods  of  Agriculture,  War,  and  so 
forth,  unknown  to  low  savages.

Next  Mr.  Tylor  introduces  an  important  personage. 
'  The  theory  of  family  Manes,  carried  back  to  tribal  Gods, 
leads  to  the  recognition  of  superior  deities  of  the  nature  of 
Divine  Ancestor,  or  First  Man,'  who  sometimes  ranks  as 
Lord  of  the  Dead.  As  an  instance,  Mr.  Tylor  gives  the 
Maori  Maui,  who,  like  the  Indian  Yama,  trod  first  of  men 
the  path  of  death.  But  whether  Maui  and  Yama  are  the 
Sun,  or  not,  both  Maori  and  Sanskrit  religion  regard  these 
heroes  as  much  later  than  the  Original  Gods.  In  Kam- 
schatka  the  First  Man  is  the  '  son  '  of  the  Creator,  and  it  is 
about  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  the  Creator,  not  of  the 
First  Man,  that  we  are  inquiring.  Adam  is  called  '  the 
son  of  God '  in  a  Biblical  genealogy,  but,  of  course,  Adam 
was  made,  not  begotten.  The  case  of  the  Zulu  belief 
will  be  analysed  later.  On  the  whole,  we  cannot  explain 
away  the  conception  of  the  Creator  as  a  form  of  the

N    2

180  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGIONN    2

180  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

conception  of  an  idealised  divine  First  Ancestor,  because 
the  conception  of  a  Creator  occurs  where  ancestor- worship 
does  not  occur ;  and  again,  because,  supposing  that  the  idea 
of  a  Creator  came  first,  and  that  ancestor-worship  later 
grew  more  popular,  the  popular  idea  of  Ancestor  might  be 
transferred  to  the  waning  idea  of  Creator.  The  Creator 
might  be  recognised  as  the  First  Ancestor,  apres  coup.

Mr.  Tylor  next  approaches  Dualism,  the  idea  of 
hostile  Good  and  Bad  Beings.  We  must,  as  he  says, 
be  careful  to  discount  European  teaching,  still,  he  admits, 
the  savage  has  this  dualistic  belief  in  a  '  primitive  '  form. 
But  the  savage  conception  is  not  merely  that  of  '  good  = 
friendly  to  me,'  'bad=hostile  to  me.'  Ethics,  as  we 
shall  show,  already  come  into  play  in  his  theology.

Mr.  Tylor  arrives,  at  last,  at  the  Supreme  Being  of 
savage  creeds.  His  words,  well  weighed,  must  be  cited 
textually  :-—Mr.  Tylor  arrives,  at  last,  at  the  Supreme  Being  of 
savage  creeds.  His  words,  well  weighed,  must  be  cited 
textually  :-—

'  To  mark  off  the  doctrines  of  monotheism,  closer 
definition  is  required  [than  the  bare  idea  of  a  Supreme 
Creator],  assigning  the  distinctive  attributes  of  Deity  to 
none  save  the  Almighty  Creator.  It  may  be  declared 
that,  in  this  strict  sense,  no  savage  tribe  of  monotheists 
has  been  ever  known.1  Nor  are  any  fair  representatives 
of  the  lower  culture  in  a  strict  sense  pantheists.  The 
doctrine  which  they  do  widely  hold,  and  which  opens  to 
them  a  course  tending  in  one  or  other  of  these  directions, 
is  polytheism  culminating  in  the  rule  of  one  supreme 
divinity.  High  above  the  doctrine  of  souls,  of  divine 
Manes,  of  local  nature  gods,  of  the  great  gods  of  class  and 
element,  there  are  to  be  discerned  in  barbaric  theology, 
shadowings,  quaint  or  majestic,  of  the  conception  of  a 
Supreme  Deity,  henceforth  to  be  traced  onward  in  ex- 
panding power  and  brightening  glory  along  the  history  of 
Keligion.  It  is  no  unimportant  task,  partial  as  it  is,  to 
select  and  group  the  typical  data  which  show  the  nature

1  And    very    few   civilised   populations,    if   any,  are   monotheistic    in 
this  sense.

EVOLUTION   OF   THE   IDEA   OF   GOD  181

and  position  of  the  doctrine  of  supremacy,  as  it  comes 
into  view  within  the  lower  culture.'1

We  shall  show  that  certain  low  savages  are  as 
monotheistic  as  some  Christians.  They  have  a  Supreme 
Being,  and  the  '  distinctive  attributes  of  Deity  '  are  not 
by  them  assigned  to  other  beings,  further  than  as 
Christianity  assigns  them  to  Angels,  Saints,  the  Devil, 
and,  strange  as  it  appears,  among  savages,  to  mediating 
4  Sons.'It  is  not  known  that,  among  the  Andamanese  and 
other  tribes,  this  last  notion  is  due  to  missionary 
influence.  But,  in  regard  to  the  whole  chapter  of  savage 
Supreme  Beings,  we  must,  as  Mr.  Tylor  advises,  keep 
watching  for  Christian  and  Islamite  contamination.  The 
savage  notions,  as  Mr.  Tylor  says,  even  when  thus  con- 
taminated, may  have '  to  some  extent,  a  native  substratum.' 
We  shall  select  such  savage  examples  of  the  idea  of  a 
Supreme  Being  as  are  attested  by  ancient  native  hymns, 
or  are  inculcated  in  the  most  sacred  and  secret  savage 
institutions,  the  religious  Mysteries  (manifestly  the  last 
things  to  be  touched  by  missionary  influence),  or  are 
found  among  low  insular  races  defended  from  European 
contact  by  the  jealous  ferocity  and  poisonous  jungles  of 
people  and  soil.  We  also  note  cases  in  which  mis- 
sionaries found  such  native  names  as  '  Father,'  '  Ancient 
of  Heaven,' '  Master  of  Earth,'  '  Maker  of  All,'  ready-made 
to  their  hands.

It  is  to  be  remarked  that,  while  this  branch  of  the 
inquiry  is  practically  omitted  by  Mr.  Spencer,  Mr.  Tylor 
can  spare  for  it  but  some  twenty  pages  out  of  his  large 
work.  He  arranges  the  probable  germs  of  the  savage 
idea  of  a  Supreme  Being  thus  :  A  god  of  the  polytheistic 
crowd  is  simply  raised  to  the  primacy,  which,  of  course,

1  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  pp.  332,  333.

182  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  pp.  332,  333.

182  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

cannot  occur  where  there  is  no  polytheism.  Or  the 
principle  of  Manes  worship  may  make  a  Supreme  Deity 
out  of  '  a  primeval  ancestor,'  say  Unkulunkulu,  who  is  so 
far  from  being  supreme,  that  he  is  abject.  Or,  again,  a 
great  phenomenon  or  force  in  Nature-worship,  say  Sun, 
or  Heaven,  is  raised  to  supremacy.  Or  speculative  philo- 
sophy ascends  from  the  Many  to  the  One  by  trying  to 
discern  through  and  beyond  the  universe  a  First  Cause. 
Animistic  conceptions  thus  reach  their  utmost  limit  in 
the  notion  of  the  Anima  Mundi.  He  may  accumulate  all 
powers  of  all  polytheistic  gods,  or  he  may  'loom  vastr 
shadowy,  and  calm  ....  too  benevolent  to  need  human 
worship  ....  too  merely  existent  to  concern  himself 
with  the  petty  race  of  men.'1  But  he  is  always 
animistic.

Now,  in  addition  to  the  objections  already  noted  in 
passing,  how  can  we  tell  that  the  Supreme  Being  of  low 
savages  was,  in  original  conception,  animistic  at  all  ? 
How  can  we  know  that  he  was  envisaged,  originally,  as 
Spirit  ?  We  shall  show  that  he  probably  was  not,  that

the  question  '  spirit  or  not  spirit '  was  not  raised  at  all,

^the  question  '  spirit  or  not  spirit '  was  not  raised  at  all,

^

that  the  Maker  and  Father  in  Heaven,  prior  to  Death, 
was  merely  regarded  as  a  deathless  Being,  no  question  of 
'  spirit '  being  raised.  If  so,  Animism  was  not  needed  for 
the  earliest  idea  of  a  moral  Eternal.  This  hypothesis 
will  be  found  to  lead  to  some  very  singular  conclusions. 
It  will  be  more  fully  stated  and  illustrated,  presently,  but 
I  find  that  it  had  already  occurred  to  Dr.  Brinton.2  He 
is  talking  specially  of  a  heaven-god ;  he  says  '  it  came  to 
pass  that  the  idea  of  God  was  linked  to  the  heavens  long 
ere  man  asked  himself,  Are  the  heavens  material  and  God 
spiritual  ?  '  Dr.  Brinton,  however,  does  not  develop  his

1  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  pp.  335,  33(5.

"  M>/t1is  of  the  New  World,  18158,  p.  47.

EVOLUTION   OF  THE    IDEA   OF   GOD  183

idea,  nor  am  I  aware  that  it  has  been  developed  pre- 
viously.

The  notion  of  a  God  about  whose  spirituality  nobody 
has  inquired  is  new  to  us.  To  ourselves,  and  doubtless 
or  probably  to  barbarians  on  a  certain  level  of  culture, 
such  a  Divine  Being  must  be  animistic,  must  be  a  'spirit.' 
To  take  only  one  case,  to  which  we  shall  return,  the 
Banks  Islanders  (Melanesia)  believe  in  ghosts,  '  and  in 
the  existence  of  Beings  who  were  not,  and  never  had 
been,  human.  All  alike  might  be  called  spirits,'  says 
Dr.  Codrington,  but,  ex  hypothesi,  the  Beings  '  who 
never  were  human '  are  only  called  '  spirits,'  by  us, 
because  our  habits  of  thought  do  not  enable  us  to  en- 
visage them  except  as  '  spirits.'  They  never  were  men, 
'  the  natives  will  always  maintain  that  he  (the  Vui)  was 
something  different,  and  deny  to  him  the  fleshly  body  of 
a  man,'  while  resolute  that  he  was  not  a  ghost.1This  point  will  be  amply  illustrated  later,  as  we  study 
that  strangely  neglected  chapter,  that  essential  chapter, 
the  Higher  beliefs  of  the  Lowest  savages.  Of  the  exist- 
ence of  a  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being,  not  as  merely 
'  alleged,'  there  is  as  good  evidence  as  we  possess  for  any 
fact  in  the  ethnographic  region.

It  is  certain  that  savages,  when  first  approached  by 
curious  travellers,  and  missionaries,  have  again  and  again 
recognised  our  God  in  theirs.

The  mythical  details  and  fables  about  the  savage  God 
are,  indeed,  different ;  the  ethical,  benevolent,  admonish- 
ing, rewarding,  and  creative  aspects  of  the  Gods  are  apt 
to  be  the  same.'2

1  I  observed  this  point  in  My{h,  Ritual,  and  Religion,  while  I  did  not 
see  the  implication,  that  the  idea  of  '  spirit '  was  not  necessarily  present 
in  the  savage  conception  of  the  primal  Beings,  Creators,  or  Makers.

-  See  one  or  two  cases  in  Prim.  Cult.  vol.  ii.  p.  340.

184  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION

'  There  is  no  necessity  for  beginning  to  tell  even  the 
most  degraded  of  these  people  of  the  existence  of  God,  or 
of  a  future  state,  the  facts  being  universally  admitted.' l

'  Intelligent  men  among  the  Bakwains  have  scouted 
the  idea  of  any  of  them  ever  having  been  without  a 
tolerably  clear  conception  of  good  and  evil,  God  and  the 
future  state.  Nothing  we  indicate  as  sin  ever  appeared 
to  them  as  otherwise,'  except  polygamy,  says  Livingstone.Now  we  may  agree  with  Mr.  Tylor  that  modern 
theologians,  familiar  with  savage  creeds,  will  scarcely 
argue  that  '  they  are  direct  or  nearly  direct  products  of 
revelation  '  (vol.  ii.  p.  356).  But  we  may  argue  that,  con- 
sidering their  ethical  factors  (denied  or  minimised  by  many 
anthropologists)  and  the  distance  which  separates  the 
high  gods  of  savagery  from  the  ghosts  out  of  which  they 
are  said  to  have  sprung  ;  considering  too,  that  the  rela- 
tively pure  and  lofty  element  which,  ex  hypothesi,  is  most 
recent  in  evolution,  is  also,  not  the  most  honoured,  but 
often  just  the  reverse ;  remembering,  above  all,  that  we 
know  nothing  historically  of  the  mental  condition  of  the 
founders  of  religion,  we  may  hesitate  to  accept  the  anthro- 
pological hypothesis  en  masse.  At  best  it  is  conjectural, 
and  the  facts  are  such  that  opponents  have  more  justifica- 
tion than  is  commonly  admitted  for  regarding  the  bulk  of 
savage  religion  as  degenerate,  or  corrupted,  from  its  own 
highest  elements.  I  am  by  no  means,  as  yet,  arguing 
positively  in  favour  of  that  hypothesis,  but  I  see  what  its 
advocates  mean,  or  ought  to  mean,  and  the  strength  of 
their  position.  Mr.  Tylor,  with  his  unique  fairness,  says 
'  the  degeneration  theory,  no  doubt  in  some  instances 
with  justice,  may  claim  such  beliefs  as  mutilated  and  per- 
verted remains  of  higher  religion  '  (vol.  ii.  p.  336).

I  do  not  pretend  to  know  how  the  lowest  savages

1  Livingstone,  speaking  of  the  Bakwain,  Missionary  Travels,  p.  158.

EVOLUTION   OF  THE   IDEA  OF   GOD  186I  do  not  pretend  to  know  how  the  lowest  savages

1  Livingstone,  speaking  of  the  Bakwain,  Missionary  Travels,  p.  158.

EVOLUTION   OF  THE   IDEA  OF   GOD  186

evolved  the  theory  of  a  God  who  reads  the  heart  and 
'  makes  for  righteousness.'  It  is  as  easy,  almost,  for  me 
to  believe  that  they  '  were  not  left  without  a  witness,' 
as  to  believe  that  this  God  of  theirs  was  evolved  out  of 
the  maleficent  ghost  of  a  dirty  mischievous  medicine- 
man.

Here  one  may  repeat  that  while  the  '  quaint  or  majes- 
tic foreshadowings '  of  a  Supreme  Being,  among  very 
low  savages,  are  only  sketched  lightly  by  Mr.  Tylor ;  in 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  system  they  seem  to  be  almost 
omitted.  In  his  '  Principles  of  Sociology '  and  '  Eccle- 
siastical Institutions  '  one  looks  in  vain  for  an  adequate 
notice  ;  in  vain  for  almost  any  notice,  of  this  part  of  his 
topic.  The  moral,  heart-reading,  friendly,  creative  being 
of  low  savage  faith,  whence  was  he  evolved  ?  The  cir- 
cumstance of  his  existence,  as  far  as  I  can  see ;  the 
chastity,  the  unselfishness,  the  pitifulness,  the  loyalty 
to  plighted  word,  the  prohibition  of  even  extra-tribal 
homicide,  enjoined  in  various  places  on  his  worshippers, 
are  problems  that  appear  somehow  to  have  escaped 
Mr.  Spencer's  notice.  We  are  puzzled  by  endless  diffi- 
culties in  his  system :  for  example  as  to  how  savages 
can  forget  their  great-grandfathers'  very  names,  and  yet 
remember  '  traditional  persons  from  generation  to  gene- 
ration,' so  that  '  in  time  any  amount  of  expansion  and 
idealisation  can  be  reached.'  'Again,  Mr.  Spencer  will  argue  that  it  is  a  strange 
thing  if  '  primitive  men  had,  as  some  think,  the  conscious- 
ness of  a  Universal  Power  whence  they  and  all  other 
things  proceeded,'  and  yet  '  spontaneously  performed  to 
that  Power  an  act  like  that  performed  by  them  to  the 
dead  body  of  a  fellow  savage ' — by  offerings  of  food.2

1  Principles  of  Sociology,  vol.  i.  p.  450. 
*  Op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  302.

186  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Now,  first,  there  would  be  nothing  strange  in  the 
matter  if  the  crude  idea  of  '  Universal  Power '  came 
earliest,  and  was  superseded,  in  part,  by  a  later  propitia- 
tion of  the  dead  and  ghosts.  The  new  religious  idea 
would  soon  refract  back  on,  and  influence  by  its  ritual, 
the  older  conception.  And,  secondly,  it  is  precisely  this 
'  Universal  Power '  that  is  not  propitiated  by  offerings  of 
food,  in  Tonga,  (despite  Mr.  Huxley)  Australia,  and  Africa, 
for  example.  We  cannot  escape  the  difficulty  by  saying 
that  there  the  old  ghost  of  Universal  Power  is  regarded  as 
dead,  decrepit,  or  as  a  roi  faineant  not  worth  propitiating, 
for  that  is  not  true  of  the  punisher  of  sin,  the  teacher 
of  disregard  of  self,  and  the  solitary  sanction  of  faith 
between  men  and  peoples.It  would  appear  then,  on  the  whole,  that  the  question 
of  the  plain  man  to  the  anthropologist,  '  Having  got  your 
idea  of  spirit  into  the  savage's  mind,  how  does  he  develop 
out  of  it  what  I  call  God  ?  '  has  not  been  answered.  God 
cannot  be  a  reflection  from  human  kings  where  there  are 
no  kings ;  nor  a  president  elected  out  of  a  polytheistic 
society  of  gods  where  there  is  as  yet  no  polytheism  ;  nor 
an  ideal  first  ancestor  where  men  do  not  worship  their 
ancestors  ;  while,  again,  the  spirit  of  a  man  who  died,  real 
or  ideal,  does  not  answer  to  the  usual  savage  conception 
of  the  Creator.  All  this  will  become  much  more  obvious 
as  we  study  in  detail  the  highest  gods  of  the  lowest  races.

Our  study,  of  course,  does  not  pretend  to  embrace  the 
religion  of  all  the  savages  in  the  world.  We  are  content 
with  typical,  and,  as  a  rule,  well-observed  examples.  We 
range  from  the  creeds  of  the  most  backward  and  worst- 
equipped  nomad  races,  to  those  of  peoples  with  an 
aristocracy,  hereditary  kings,  houses  and  agriculture, 
ending  with  the  Supreme  Being  of  the  highly  civilised 
Incas,  and  with  the  Jehovah  of  the  Hebrews.

8787

To  avoid  misconception  we  must  repeat  the  necessary 
cautions  about  accepting  evidence  as  to  high  gods  of  low 
races.  The  missionary  who  does  not  see  in  every  alien 
god  a  devil  is  apt  to  welcome  traces  of  an  original  super- 
natural revelation,  darkened  by  all  peoples  but  the  Jews. 
We  shall  not,  however,  rely  much  on  missionary  evidence, 
and,  when  we  do,  we  must  now  be  equally  on  our  guard 
against  the  anthropological  bias  in  the  missionary  himself. 
Having  read  Mr.  Spencer  and  Mr.  Tylor,  and  finding 
himself  among  ancestor-worshippers  (as  he  sometimes 
does),  he  is  apt  to  think  that  ancestor- worship  explains 
any  traces  of  a  belief  in  the  Supreme  Being.  Against  each 
and  every  bias  of  observers  we  must  be  watchful.

It  may  be  needful,  too,  to  point  out  once  again  another 
weak  point  in  all  reasoning  about  savage  religion,  namely 
that  we  cannot  always  tell  what  may  have  been  borrowed 
from  Europeans.  Thus,  the  Fuegians,  in  1830-1840, 
were  far  out  of  the  way,  but  one  tribe,  near  Magellan's 
Straits,  worshipped  an  image  called  Cristo.  Fitzroy 
attributes  this  obvious  trace  of  Catholicism  to  a  Captain 
Pelippa,  who  visited  the  district  some  time  before  his  own 
expedition.  It  is  less  probable  that  Spaniards  established 
a  belief  in  a  moral  Deity  in  regions  where  they  left  no 
material  traces  of  their  faith.  The  Fuegians  are  not 
easily  proselytised.  '  When  discovered  by  strangers,  the 
instant  impulse  of  a  Fuegian  family  is  to  run  off  into  the

188  THE   MAKING   OF   EELIGION188  THE   MAKING   OF   EELIGION

woods.'  Occasionally  they  will  emerge  to  barter,  but 
•'  sometimes  nothing  will  induce  a  single  individual  of  the 
family  to  appear.'  Fitzroy  thought  they  had  no  idea  of  a 
future  state,  because,  among  other  reasons  not  given,  'the 
evil  spirit  torments  them  in  this  world,  if  they  do  wrong, 
by  storms,  hail,  snow,  &c.'  Why  the  evil  spirit  should 
punish  evil  deeds  is  not  evident.  '  A  great  black  man  is 
supposed  to  be  always  wandering  about  the  woods  and 
mountains,  who  is  certain  of  knowing  every  word  and 
every  action,  who  cannot  be  escaped  and  who  influences 
the  weather  according  to  men's  conduct.' l

There  are  no  traces  of  propitiation  by  food,  or  sacrifice, 
or  anything  but  conduct.  To  regard  the  Deity  as  '  a 
magnified  non-natural  man '  is  not  peculiar  to  Fuegian 
theologians,  and  does  not  imply  Animism,  but  the  reverse. 
But  the  point  is  that  this  ethical  judge  of  perhaps  the 
lowest  savages  '  makes  for  righteousness  '  and  searches  the 
heart.  His  morality  is  so  much  above  the  ordinary  savage 
standard  that  he  regards  the  slaying  of  a  stranger  and  an 
enemy,  caught  redhanded  in  robbery,  as  a  sin.  York's 
brother  (York  was  a  Fuegian  brought  to  England  by 
Fitzroy)  killed  a  '  wild  man  '  who  was  stealing  his  birds. 
'  Rain  come  down,  snow  come  down,  hail  come  down, 
wind  blow,  blow,  very  much  blow.  Very  bad  to  kill  man. 
Big  man  in  woods  no  like  it,  he  very  angry.'  Here  be 
ethics  in  savage  religion.  The  sixth  commandment  is  in 
force.  The  Being  also  prohibits  the  slaying  of  flappers 
before  they  can  fly.  '  Very  bad  to  shoot  little  duck,  come 
wind,  come  rain,  blow,  very  much  blow.'  -Now  this  big  man  is  not  a  deified  chief,  for  the 
Fuegians  '  have  no  superiority  of  one  over  another

1  Fitzroy,  ii.  180.

2  Ibid.     We  seem  to  have  little  information  about  Fuegian  religion  either 
before  or  after  the  cruise  of  the  Beagle.

HIGH   GODS   OF   LOW   RACES  1891  Fitzroy,  ii.  180.

2  Ibid.     We  seem  to  have  little  information  about  Fuegian  religion  either 
before  or  after  the  cruise  of  the  Beagle.

HIGH   GODS   OF   LOW   RACES  189

.  .  .  but  the  doctor-wizard  of  each  party  has  much 
influence.'  Mr.  Spencer  disposes  of  this  moral  'big  man' 
of  the  Fuegians  as  '  evidently  a  deceased  weather-doctor.' ' 
But,  first,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  being  is  regarded 
as  ever  having  died.  Again,  it  is  not  shown  that  Fuegians 
are  ancestor-worshippers.  Next,  Fitzroy  did  not  think 
that  the  Fuegians  believed  in  a  future  life.  Lastly,  when 
were  medicine-men  such  notable  moralists  ?  The  worst 
spirits  among  the  neighbouring  Patagonians  are  those  of 
dead  medicine-men.  As  a  rule  everywhere  the  ghost  of  a 
'  doctor-wizard,'  shaman,  or  whatever  he  may  be  called, 
is  the  worst  and  wickedest  of  all  ghosts.  How,  then,  the 
Fuegians,  who  are  not  proved  to  be  ancestor-worshippers, 
evolved  out  of  the  malignant  ghost  of  an  ancestor  a  being 
whose  strong  point  is  morality,  one  does  not  easily  con- 
ceive. The  adjacent  Chonos  '  have  great  faith  in  a  good 
spirit,  whom  they  call  Yerri  Yuppon,  and  consider  to  be 
the  author  of  all  good  ;  him  they  invoke  in  distress  or 
danger.'  However  starved  they  do  not  touch  food  till  a 
short  prayer  has  been  muttered  over  each  portion,  '  the 
praying  man  looking  upward.' 2  They  have  magicians, 
but  no  details  are  given  as  to  spirits  or  ghosts.  If 
Fuegian  and  Chono  religion  is  on  this  level,  and  if  this 
be  the  earliest,  then  the  theology  of  many  other  higher 
savages  (as  of  the  Zulus)  is  decidedly  degenerate.  '  The 
Bantu  gives  one  accustomed  to  the  negro  the  impression 
that  he  once  had  the  same  set  of  ideas,  bid  haft  forgotten 
half  of  them,'  says  Miss  Kingsley.:$Of  all  races  now  extant,  the  Australians  are  probably 
lowest  in  culture,  and,  like  the  fauna  of  the  continent, 
are  nearest  to  the  primitive  model.  They  have  neither 
metals,  bows,  pottery,  agriculture,  nor  fixed  habitations  ;

1  Principles  of  Sociology,  i.  422.  '-'  Fitzroy,  ii.  190,  191,

s  Travels  in  Went  Africa,  p.  442.

190  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

and  no  traces  of  higher  culture  have  anywhere  been  found 
above  or  in  the  soil  of  the  continent.  This  is  important, 
for  in  some  respects  their  religious  conceptions  are  so 
lofty  that  it  would  be  natural  to  explain  them  as  the 
result  either  of  European  influence,  or  as  relics  of  a  higher 
•civilisation  in  the  past.  The  former  notion  is  discredited 
by  the  fact  that  their  best  religious  ideas  are  imparted  in 
connection  with  their  ancient  and  secret  mysteries,  while 
for  the  second  idea,  that  they  are  degenerate  from  a  loftier 
civilisation,  there  is  absolutely  no  evidence.It  has  been  suggested,  indeed,  by  Mr.  Spencer  that  the 
singularly  complex  marriage  customs  of  the  Australian 
blacks  point  to  a  more  polite  condition  in  their  past 
history.  Of  this  stage,  as  we  said,  no  material  traces 
have  ever  been  discovered,  nor  can  degeneration  be  recent. 
Our  earliest  account  of  the  Australians  is  that  of  Dampier, 
who  visited  New  Holland  in  the  unhappy  year  1688.  He 
found  the  natives  '  the  miserablest  people  in  the  world. 
The  Hodmadods,  of  Monomatapa,  though  a  nasty  people, 
yet  for  wealth  are  gentlemen  to  these :  who  have  no 
houses,  sheep,  poultry,  and  fruits  of  the  earth.  .  .  .  They 
have  no  houses,  but  lie  in  the  open  air.'  Curiously 
enough,  Dampier  attests  their  unselfishness  :  the  main 
ethical  feature  in  their  religious  teaching.  '  Be  it  little  or 
be  it  much  they  get,  every  one  has  his  part,  as  well  the 
young  and  tender  as  the  old  and  feeble,  who  are  not  able 
to  go  abroad,  as  the  strong  and  lusty.'  Dampier  saw  no 
metals  used,  nor  any  bows,  merely  boomerangs  ('  wooden 
cutlasses'),  and  lances  with  points  hardened  in  the  fire. 
'  Their  place  of  dwelling  was  only  a  fire  with  a  few  boughs 
before  it '  (the  gunyeh).

This  description  remains  accurate  for  most  of  the 
unsophisticated  Australian  tribes,  but  Dampier  appears 
only  to  have  seen  ichthyophagous  coast  blacks.

HIGH   GODS   OF  LOW  KACES  191HIGH   GODS   OF  LOW  KACES  191

There  is  one  more  important  point.  In  the  Bora,  or 
Australian  mysteries,  at  which  knowledge  of  '  The  Maker  ' 
and  of  his  commandments  is  imparted,  the  front  teeth 
of  the  initiated  are  still  knocked  out.  Now,  Dampier 
observed  '  the  two  fore-teeth  of  their  upper  jaw  are  want- 
ing in  all  of  them,  men  and  women,  old  and  young.'  If 
this  is  to  be  taken  quite  literally,  the  Bora  rite,  in  1688, 
must  have  included  the  women,  at  least  locally.  Dampier 
was  on  the  north-west  coast  in  latitude  16  degrees, 
longitude  122£  degrees  east  (Dampier  Land,  West  Aus- 
tralia). The  natives  had  neither  boats,  canoes,  nor  bark 
logs  ;  but  it  seems  that  they  had  their  religious  mysteries 
and  their  unselfishness,  two  hundred  years  ago.1

The  Australians  have  been  very  carefully  studied  by 
many  observers,  and  the  results  entirely  overthrow  Mr. 
Huxley's  bold  statement  that  '  in  its  simplest  condition, 
such  as  may  be  met  with  among  the  Australian  savages, 
theology  is  a  mere  belief  in  the  existence,  powers,  and 
dispositions  (usually  malignant)  of  ghost-like  entities  who 
may  be  propitiated  or  scared  away ;  but  no  cult  can 
properly  be  said  to  exist.  And  in  this  stage  theology  is 
wholly  independent  of  ethics.'Remarks  more  crudely  in  defiance  of  known  facts 
could  not  be  made.  The  Australians,  assuredly,  believe 
in  '  spirits,'  often  malicious,  and  probably  in  most  cases 
regarded  as  ghosts  of  men.  These  aid  the  wizard, 
and  occasionally  inspire  him.  That  these  ghosts  are 
worshipped  does  not  appear,  and  is  denied  by  Waitz. 
Again,  in  the  matter  of  cult,  '  there  is  none  '  in  the  way 
of  sacrifice  to  higher  gods,  as  there  should  be  if  these 
gods  were  hungry  ghosts.  The  cult  among  the  Austra- 
lians is  the  worship  of  the  heart,  expressed  in  moral 
teaching,  supposed  to  be  in  conformity  with  the  institutes 
1  Early  Voyages  to  Australia,  102-111  (Hakluyt  Society).

192  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

of  their  God.  Worship  takes  the  form,  as  at  Eleusis,  of 
tribal  mysteries,  originally  instituted,  as  at  Eleusis,  by 
the  God.  The  young  men  are  initiated  with  many 
ceremonies,  some  of  which  are  cruel  and  farcical,  but 
the  initiation  includes  ethical  instruction,  in  conformity 
with  the  supposed  commands  of  a  God  who  reads  the 
heart.  As  among  ourselves,  the  ethical  ideal,  with  its 
theological  sanction,  is  probably  rather  above  the  moral 
standard  of  ordinary  practice.  What  conclusion  we 
should  draw  from  these  facts  is  uncertain,  but  the  facts, 
at  least,  cannot  be  disputed,  and  precisely  contradict  the 
statement  of  Mr.  Huxley.  He  was  wholly  in  the  wrong 
when  he  said  :  '  The  moral  code,  such  as  is  implied 
by  public  opinion,  derives  no  sanction  from  theological 
dogmas.'1  It  reposes,  for  its  origin  and  sanction,  on  such 
dogmas.

The  evidence  as  to  Australian  religion  is  abundant, 
and  is  being  added  to  yearly.  I  shall  here  content 
myself  with  Mr.  Howitt's  accounts.2The  evidence  as  to  Australian  religion  is  abundant, 
and  is  being  added  to  yearly.  I  shall  here  content 
myself  with  Mr.  Howitt's  accounts.2

As  regards  the  possible  evolution  of  the  Australian 
God  from  ancestor-worship,  it  must  be  noted  that  Mr. 
Howitt  credits  the  groups  with  possessing  '  headmen,' 
a  kind  of  chiefs,  whereas  some  inquirers,  in  Brough 
Smyth's  collection,  disbelieve  in  regular  chiefs.  Mr. 
Howitt  writes  :—

'  The  Supreme  Spirit,  who  is  believed  in  by  all  the 
tribes  I  refer  to  here  [in  South-Eastern  Australia],  either 
as  a  benevolent,  or  more  frequently  as  a  malevolent 
being,  it  seems  to  me  represents  the  defunct  headman.'

Now,  the  traces  of  '  headmanship  '  among  the  tribes 
are  extremely  faint ;  no  such  headman  rules  large  areas 
of  country,  none  is  known  to  be  worshipped  after  death,

1   Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  p.  346. 
-  Journal  of  flic  Anthrop.  Institute,  1884.

HIGH  GODS  OF  LOW  EACES          193

and  the  malevolence  of  the  Supreme  Spirit  is  not  illus- 
trated by  the  details  of  Mr.  Howitt's  own  statement,  but 
the  reverse.  Indeed,  he  goes  on  at  once  to  remark  that 
'  Darumulun  was  not,  it  seems  to  me,  everywhere  thought 
a  malevolent  being,  but  he  was  dreaded  as  one  who  could 
severely  punish  the  trespasses  committed  against  these 
tribal  ordinances  and  customs  whose  first  institution  is 
ascribed  to  him.'To  punish  transgressions  of  his  law  is  not  the  essence 
of  a  malevolent  being.  Darumulun  '  watched  the  youths 
from  the  sky,  prompt  to  punish,  by  disease  or  death,  the 
breach  of  his  ordinances,'  moral  or  ritual.  His  name  is 
too  sacred  to  be  spoken  except  in  whispers,  and  the 
anthropologist  will  observe  that  the  names  of  the  human 
dead  are  also  often  tabooed.  But  the  divine  name  is  not 
thus  tabooed  and  sacred  when  the  mere  folklore  about 
him  is  narrated.  The  informants  of  Mr.  Howitt  in- 
stinctively distinguished  between  the  mythology  and  the 
religion  of  Darumulun.1  This  distinction — the  secrecy 
about  the  religion,  the  candour  about  the  mythology — 
is  essential,  and  accounts  for  our  ignorance  about  the 
inner  religious  beliefs  of  early  races.  Mr.  Howitt  him- 
self knew  little  till  he  was  initiated.  The  grandfather 
of  Mr.  Howitt's  friend,  before  the  white  men  came  to 
Melbourne,  took  him  out  at  night,  and,  pointing  to  a 
star,  said  :  '  You  will  soon  be  a  man ;  you  see  Bunjil 
[Supreme  Being  of  certain  tribes]  up  there,  and  he  can  see 
you,  and  all  you  do  down  here.'  Mr.  Palmer,  speaking  of 
the  Mysteries  of  Northern  Australians  (mysteries  under 
divine  sanction),  mentions  the  nature  of  the  moral  in- 
struction. Each  lad  is  given,  'by  one  of  the  elders, 
advice  so  kindly,  fatherly,  and  impressive,  as  often  to 
soften  the  heart,  and  draw  tears  from  the  youth.'  He

1  Journal,  xiii.  193.

O

194  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

is  to  avoid  adultery,  not  to  take  advantage  of  a  woman 
if  he  finds  her  alone,  he  is  not  to  be  quarrelsome.1

At  the  Mysteries  Darumulun's  real  name  may  be 
uttered,  at  other  times  he  is  '  Master '  (Biamban)  or 
'  Father '  (Papang),  exactly  as  we  say  '  Lord '  and 
'  Father.'At  the  Mysteries  Darumulun's  real  name  may  be 
uttered,  at  other  times  he  is  '  Master '  (Biamban)  or 
'  Father '  (Papang),  exactly  as  we  say  '  Lord '  and 
'  Father.'

It  is  known  that  all  these  things  are  not  due  to 
missionaries,  whose  instructions  would  certainly  not  be 
conveyed  in  the  Bora,  or  tribal  mysteries,  which,  again, 
are  partly  described  by  Collins  as  early  as  1798,  and  must 
have  been  practised  in  1688.  Mr.  Howitt  mentions, 
among  moral  lessons  divinely  sanctioned,  respect  for  old 
age,  abstinence  from  lawless  love,  and  avoidance  of  the 
sins  so  popular,  poetic,  and  sanctioned  by  the  example  of 
Gods,  in  classical  Greece.2  A  representation  is  made  of 
the  Master,  Biamban ;  and  to  make  such  idols,  except  at 
the  Mysteries,  is  forbidden  '  under  pain  of  death.'  Those 
which  are  made  are  destroyed  as  soon  as  the  rites  are 
ended.3  The  future  life  (apparently)  is  then  illustrated 
by  the  burial  of  a  living  elder,  who  rises  from  a  grave. 
This  may,  however,  symbolise  the  '  new  life '  of  the 
Mystae,  '  Worse  have  I  fled  ;  better  have  I  found,'  as  was 
sung  in  an  Athenian  rite.  The  whole  result  is,  by  what 
Mr.  Howitt  calls  '  a  quasi-religious  element,'  to  '  impress 
upon  the  mind  of  the  youth,  in  an  indelible  manner,  those 
rules  of  conduct  which  form  the  moral  law  of  the  tribe.' 4

Many  other  authorities  could  be  adduced  for  the 
religious  sanction  of  morals  in  Australia.  An  all-knowing 
being  observes  and  rewards  the  conduct  of  men  ;  he  is 
named  with  reverence,  if  named  at  all ;  his  abode  is  the 
heavens  ;  he  is  the  Maker  and  Lord  of  things  ;  his  lessons 
'  soften  the  heart.' 5

1   Journal,  xiii.  296.          2  Op.  cit.  p.  450.         3  P.  453.         4  P.  457.1   Journal,  xiii.  296.          2  Op.  cit.  p.  450.         3  P.  453.         4  P.  457.

•'•  See   Brough    Smyth,    Aborigines,  i.   428  ;     Taplin,  Native  Races  of

HIGH  GODS   OF  LOW  RACES  195

'  What  wants  this  knave 
That  a  God  should  have  ? '

I  shall  now  demonstrate  that  the  religion  patronised 
by  the  Australian  Supreme  Being,  and  inculcated  in  his 
Mysteries,  is  actually  used  to  counteract  the  immoral 
character  which  natives  acquire  by  associating  with 
Anglo-Saxon  Christians.1

Mr.  Howitt2  gives  an  account  of  the  Jeraeil,  or 
Mysteries  of  the  Kurnai.  The  old  men  deemed  that 
through  intercourse  with  whites  '  the  lads  had  become 
selfish  and  no  longer  inclined  to  share  that  which  they 
obtained  by  their  own  exertions,  or  had  given  them, 
with  their  friends.'  One  need  not  say  that  selflessness 
is  the  very  essence  of  goodness,  and  the  central  moral 
doctrine  of  Christianity.  So  it  is  in  the  religious 
Mysteries  of  the  African  Yao  ;  a  selfish  man,  we  shall 
see,  is  spoken  of  as  '  uninitiated.'  So  it  is  with  the 
Australian  Kurnai,  whose  mysteries  and  ethical  teaching 
are  under  the  sanction  of  their  Supreme  Being.  So  much 
for  the  anthropological  dogma  that  early  theology  has  no 
ethics.

The    Kurnai   began    by   kneading    the   stomachs    of

Australia.    According  to  Taplin,  Nurrumdere  was  a  deified  black  fellow, 
who  died  on  earth.     This  is  not  the  case  of  Baiame  and  Daramulun.Australia.    According  to  Taplin,  Nurrumdere  was  a  deified  black  fellow, 
who  died  on  earth.     This  is  not  the  case  of  Baiame  and  Daramulun.

1  From  a  brief  account  of  the  Fire  Ceremony,  or  Engwurra  of  certain 
tribes  in  Central  Australia,  it  seems  that  religious  ceremonies  connected 
with  Totems  are  the  most  notable  performances.  Also  '  certain  mythical 
ancestors,'  of  the  '  alchcringa,  or  dream-times,'  were  celebrated;  these  real 
or  ideal  human  beings  appear  to  '  sink  their  identity  in  that  of  the  object 
with  which  they  are  associated,  and  from  which  they  are  supposed  to  have 
originated.'  There  appear  also  to  be  places  haunted  by  '  spirit  individuals,' 
in  some  way  mixed  up  with  Totems,  but  nothing  is  said  of  sacrifice  to 
these  Manes.  The  brief  account  is  by  Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  and 
Mr.  F.  J.  Gillen,  Proc.  Royal  Soc.  Victoria,  July  1897.  This  Fire  Ceremony 
is  not  for  lads — not  a  kind  of  confirmation  in  the  savage  church — but  is 
intended  for  adults.  Details  have  not  yet  been  published,  but,  as  far  as 
already  sketched,  the  rites  are  neither  moral  nor  theistic .

•  J.  Antlirop.  Inst.  1885,  p.  301.

o  2

196  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION•  J.  Antlirop.  Inst.  1885,  p.  301.

o  2

196  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

the  lads  about  to  be  initiated  (that  is,  if  they  have 
been  associating  with  Christians),  to  expel  selfishness 
and  greed.  The  chief  rite,  later,  is  to  blindfold  every 
lad,  with  a  blanket  closely  drawn  over  his  head,  to 
make  whirring  sounds  with  the  tundun,  or  Greek 
rkombos,  then  to  pluck  off  the  blankets,  and  bid  the 
initiate  raise  their  faces  to  the  sky.  The  initiator  points 
to  it,  calling  out,  '  Look  there,  look  there,  look  there  !  ' 
They  have  seen  in  this  solemn  way  the  home  of  the 
Supreme  Being, '  Our  Father,'  Mungun-ngaur  (Mungun  = 
'Father,'  ngaur=' our '),  whose  doctrine  is  then  unfolded 
by  the  old  initiator  ('  headman ')  '  in  an  impressive 
manner.' l  '  Long  ago  there  was  a  great  Being,  Mungun- 
ngaur,  who  lived  on  the  earth.'  His  son  Tundun  is 
direct  ancestor  of  the  Kurnai.  Mungun  initiated  the 
rites,  and  destroyed  earth  by  water  when  they  were  im- 
piously revealed.  '  Mungun  left  the  earth,  and  ascended 
to  the  sky,  where  he  still  remains.'

Here  Mungun-ngaur,  a  Being  not  denned  as  spirit, 
but  immortal,  and  dwelling  in  heaven,  is  Father,  or  rather 
grandfather,  not  maker,  of  the  Kurnai.  This  may  be 
interpreted  as  ancestor-worship,  but  the  opposite  myth, 
of  making  or  creating,  is  told  by  Narrinyeri,  Boonorong, 
the  Wolgal,  Ngarego,  Theddora,  Coast  Murring,  and 
Wiraijuri,  worshippers  of  Darumulun.  His  precepts  are  :

1.  To  obey  the  old.     (Fifth  Commandment.)

2.  To  share  all  with  their  friends.     (Do  to  others  as 
you  would  have  others  do  to  you.)

3.  To  live  peaceably  with  their  friends.

4.  Not    to   interfere   with    girls   or   married   women. 
(Seventh  Commandment.)3.  To  live  peaceably  with  their  friends.

4.  Not    to   interfere   with    girls   or   married   women. 
(Seventh  Commandment.)

5.  To  obey  the  food  restrictions.     (Leviticus,  passim.) 
Mr.  Howitt  concludes  :  '  I  venture  to  assert  that  it  can

1  J.  Antlirop.  Inst.  1885,  p.  313.

HIGH  GODS  OF  LOW   RACES  197

no  longer  be  maintained  that  the  Australians  have  no 
belief  which  can  be  called  religious,  that  is,  in  the  sense 
of  beliefs  which  govern  tribal  and  individual  morality 
under  a  supernatural  sanction.'  On  this  topic  Mr. 
Hewitt's  opinion  became  more  affirmative  the  more 
deeply  he  was  initiated.1

The  Australians  are  the  lowest,  most  primitive  savages, 
yet  no  propitiation  by  food  is  made  to  their  moral  Ruler, 
in  heaven,  as  if  he  were  a  ghost.

The  laws  of  these  Australian  divine  beings  apply  to 
ritual  as  well  as  to  ethics,  as  might  naturally  be  expected. 
But  the  moral  element  is  conspicuous,  the  reverence  is 
conspicuous :  we  have  here  no  mere  ghost,  propitiated  by 
food  or  sacrifice,  or  by  purely  magical  rites.  His  very 
image  (modelled  on  a  large  scale  in  earth)  is  no  vulgar 
idol :  to  make  such  a  thing,  except  on  the  rare  sacred 
occasions,  is  a  capital  offence.  Meanwhile  the  mythology 
of  the  God  is  a  kind  of  joke,  with  no  sacredness  about  it.On  the  whole  it  is  evident  that  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer, 
for  example,  underrates  the  nature  of  Australian  religion. 
He  cites  a  case  of  addressing  the  ghost  of  a  man  recently 
dead,  which  is  asked  not  to  bring  sickness,  '  or  make  loud 
noises  in  the  night,'  and  says  :  '  Here  we  may  recognise  the 
essential  elements  of  a  cult.'  But  Mr.  Spencer  does  not 
allude  to  the  much  more  essentially  religious  elements 
which  he  might  have  found  in  the  very  authority  whom 
he  cites,  Mr.  Brough  Smyth.2  This  appears,  as  far  as  my 
scrutiny  goes,  to  be  Mr.  Spencer's  solitary  reference  to 
Australia  in  the  work  on  'Ecclesiastical  Institutions.'  Yet 
the  facts  which  he  and  Mr.  Huxley  ignore  throw  a  light 
very  different  from  theirs  on  what  they  consider  '  the 
simplest  condition  of  theology.'

1  J.  Anthrop.  Inst.  xiii.  p.  459.     See  also  Joimuil,  May  1895,  pp.  423,  424. 
2  Ecclesiastical  Institutions,  p.  674.

198  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Among  the  causes  of  confusion  in  thought  upon 
religion,  Mr.  Tylor  mentions  '  the  partial  and  one-sided 
application  of  the  historical  method  of  inquiry  into 
theological  doctrines.' l  Here,  perhaps,  we  have  examples.In  its  highest  aspect  that  '  simplest  theology '  of 
Australia  is  free  from  the  faults  of  popular  theology  in 
Greece.  The  God  discourages  sin,  he  does  not  set  the 
example  of  sinning.  He  is  almost  too  sacred  to  be  named 
(except  in  mythology)  and  far  too  sacred  to  be  represented 
by  idols.  He  is  not  moved  by  sacrifice  ;  he  has  not  the 
chance ;  like  Death  in  Greece,  '  he  only,  of  all  Gods,  loves 
not  gifts.'  Thus  the  status  of  theology  does  not  corre- 
spond to  the  status  in  material  and  intellectual  culture. 
It  would  scarcely  be  a  paradox  to  say  that  the  popular 
Zeus,  or  Ares,  is  degenerate  from  Darumulun,  or  the 
Fuegian  being  who  forbids  the  slaying  of  an  enemy,  and 
almost  literally  '  marks  the  sparrow's  fall.'

If  we  knew  all  the  mythology  of  Darumulun,  we 
should  probably  find  it  (like  much  of  the  myth  of  Pundjel 
or  Bunjil)  on  a  very  different  level  from  the  theology. 
There  are  two  currents,  the  religious  and  the  mythical, 
flowing  together  through  religion.  The  former  current, 
religious,  even  among  very  low  savages,  is  pure  from  the 
magical  ghost-propitiating  habit.  The  latter  current, 
mythological,  is  full  of  magic,  mummery,  and  scandalous 
legend.  Sometimes  the  latter  stream  quite  pollutes  the 
former,  sometimes  they  flow  side  by  side,  perfectly  dis- 
tinguishable, as  in  Aztec  ethical  piety,  compared  with  the 
bloody  Aztec  ritualism.  Anthropology  has  mainly  kept 
her  eyes  fixed  on  the  impure  stream,  the  lusts,  mummeries, 
conjurings,  and  frauds  of  priesthoods,  while  relatively,  or 
altogether,  neglecting  (as  we  have  shown)  what  is  honest 
and  of  good  report.

1  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  450.

HIGH   GODS  OF  LOW  RACES  1991  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  450.

HIGH   GODS  OF  LOW  RACES  199

The  worse  side  of  religion  is  the  less  sacred,  and  there- 
fore the  more  conspicuous.  Both  elements  are  found 
co-existing,  in  almost  all  races,  and  nobody,  in  our  total 
lack  of  historical  information  about  the  beginnings,  can 
say  which,  if  either,  element  is  the  earlier,  or  which,  if 
either,  is  derived  from  the  other.  To  suppose  that  pro- 
pitiation of  corpses  and  then  of  ghosts  came  first  is 
agreeable,  and  seems  logical,  to  some  writers  who  are  not 
without  a  bias  against  all  religion  as  an  unscientific 
superstition.  But  we  know  so  little !  The  first  mission- 
aries in  Greenland  supposed  that  there  was  not,  there,  a 
trace  of  belief  in  a  Divine  Being.  '  But  when  they  came 
to  understand  their  language  better,  they  found  quite  the 
reverse  to  be  true  .  .  .  and  not  only  so,  but  they  could 
plainly  gather  from  a  free  dialogue  they  had  with  some 
perfectly  wild  Greenlanders  (at  that  time  avoiding  any 
direct  application  to  their  hearts)  that  their  ancestors 
must  have  believed  in  a  Supreme  Being,  and  did  render 
him  some  service,  which  their  posterity  neglected  little  by 
little  .  .  .'  !  Mr.  Tylor  does  not  refer  to  this  as  a  trace  of 
Christian  Scandinavian  influence  on  the  Eskimo.2That  line,  of  course,  may  be  taken.  But  an  Eskimo 
said  to  a  missionary,  '  Thou  must  not  imagine  that  no 
Greenlander  thinks  about  these  things  '  (theology) .  He 
then  stated  the  argument  from  design.  '  Certainly  there 
must  be  some  Being  who  made  all  these  things.  He  must 
be  very  good  too  .  .  .  Ah,  did  I  but  know  him,  how  I 
would  love  and  honour  him.'  As  St.  Paul  writes  :  '  That 
which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifest  in  them,  for  God 
hath  showed  it  unto  them  .  .  .  being  understood  by  the 
things  which  are  made  .  .  .  but  they  became  vain  in  their 
imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened.' 3  In

1  Cranz,  pp.  198,  199.  *  Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.  xiii.  348-356.

3  Rom.  i.  19.    Cranz,  i.  199.

200  THE   MAKING  OF  KELIGION

fact,  mythology  submerged  religion.  St.  Paul's  theory  of 
the  origin  of  religion  is  not  that  of  an  '  innate  idea,'  nor  of 
a  direct  revelation.  People,  he  says,  reached  the  belief  in 
a  God  from  the  Argument  for  Design.  Science  conceives 
herself  to  have  annihilated  teleological  ideas.  But  they 
are  among  the  probable  origins  of  religion,  and  would 
lead  to  the  belief  in  a  Creator,  whom  the  Greenlander 
thought  beneficent,  and  after  whom  he  yearned;  This  is 
a  very  different  initial  step  in  religious  development,  if 
initial  it  was,  from  the  feeding  of  a  corpse,  or  a  ghost.

From  all  this  evidence  it  does  not  appear  how  non- 
polytheistic,  non- monarchical,  non-Manes-worshipping 
savages  evolved  the  idea  of  a  relatively  supreme,  moral, 
and  benevolent  Creator,  unborn,  undying,  omniscient,  and 
omnipresent.  '  He  can  go  everywhere,  and  do  everything.' l1  In  Mr.  Curr's  work,  The  Australian  Race,  reports  of  'godless'  natives 
are  given,  for  instance,  in  the  Mary  Eiver  country  and  in  Gippsland. 
These  reports  are  usually  the  result  of  the  ignorance  or  contempt  of  white 
observers,  cf.  Tylor,  i.  419

201

XI

SUPREME   GODS  NOT   NECESSARILY  DEVELOPED 
OUT  OF  'SPIRITS'

BEFOKE  going  on  to  examine  the  high  gods  of  other 
low  savages,  I  must  here  again  insist  on  and  develop 
the  theory,  not  easily  conceived  by  us,  that  the  Supreme 
Being  of  savages  belongs  to  another  branch  of  faith  than 
ghosts,  or  ghost-gods,  or  fetishes,  or  Totems,  and  need 
not  be — probably  is  not — essentially  derived  from  these. 
We  must  try  to  get  rid  of  our  theory  that  a  powerful, 
moral,  eternal  Being  was,  from  the  first,  ex  officio,  con- 
ceived as  '  spirit ;  '  and  so  was  necessarily  derived  from  a 
ghost.

First,  what  was  the  process  of  development  ?

We  have  examined  Mr.  Tylor's  theory.  But,  to  take 
a  practical  case :  Here  are  the  Australians,  roaming  in 
small  bands,  without  more  formal  rulers  than  '  headmen  ' 
at  most ;  not  ancestor  worshippers  ;  not  polytheists ;  with 
no  departmental  deities  to  select  and  aggrandise ;  not  apt 
to  speculate  on  the  Anima  Mundi.  How,  then,  did  they 
bridge  the  gulf  between  the  ghost  of  a  soon-forgotten 
fighting  man,  and  that  conception  of  a  Father  in  Heaven, 
omniscient,  moral,  which,  under  various  names,  is  found 
all  over  a  huge  continent  ?  I  cannot  see  that  this  problem 
has  been  solved  or  frankly  faced.

The  distinction  between  the  creative,  all-seeing,  un- 
decaying  Australian  deity,  unpropitiated  by  sacrifice,  and 
the  ordinary,  waning,  easily  forgotten,  cheaply  propitiated

302  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION302  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

ghost  of  a  tribesman,  is  essential.  It  is  not  easy  to  show 
how,  in  '  the  dark  backward  '  of  Australian  life,  the  notion 
of  Darumulun  grew  from  the  idea  of  the  ghost  of  a 
warrior.  But  there  is  no  logical  necessity  for  the  belief 
in  the  evolution  of  this  god  out  of  that  ghost.  These  two 
factors  in  religion — ghost  and  god — seem  to  have  perfectly 
different  sources,  and  it  appears  extraordinary  that  an- 
thropologists have  not  (as  far  as  I  am  aware)  observed 
this  circumstance  before.

Mr.  Spencer,  indeed,  speaks  frequently  of  living 
human  beings  adored  as  gods.  I  do  not  know  that 
these  are  found  on  the  lowest  levels  of  savagery,  and 
Mr.  Jevons  has  pointed  out  that,  before  you  can  hail  a 
man  as  a  god,  you  must  have  the  idea  of  God.  The 
murder  of  Captain  Cook  notoriously  resulted  from 
a  scientific  experiment  in  theology.  'If  he  is  a  god, 
he  cannot  be  killed.'  So  they  tried  with  a  dagger, 
and  found  that  the  honest  captain  was  but  a  mortal 
British  mariner — no  god  at  all.  '  There  are  degrees.' 
Mr.  Spencer's  men-gods  become  real  gods — after  death.1

Now  the  Supreme  Being  of  savage  faith,  as  a  rule, 
never  died  at  all.  He  belonged  to  a  world  that  knew  not 
Death.

One  cause  of  our  blindness  to  the  point  appears  to 
be  this :  We  have  from  childhood  been  taught  that 
'  God  is  a  Spirit.'  We,  now,  can  only  conceive  of  an 
eternal  being  as  a  '  spirit.'  We  know  that  legions  of 
savage  gods  are  now  regarded  as  spirits.  And  therefore 
we  have  never  remarked  that  there  is  no  reason  why 
we  should  take  it  for  granted  that  the  earliest  deities 
of  the  earliest  men  were  supposed  by  them  to  be  '  spirits  ' 
at  all.  These  gods  might  most  judiciously  be  spoken  of,1  Principles  of  Sociology,  i.  417,  421.  '  The  medicine  men  are  treated 
as  gods The  medicine  man  becomes  a  god  after  death.'

SUPREME   GODS  203

not  as  '  spirits,'  but  as  '  undefined  eternal  beings.'  To  us, 
such  a  being  is  necessarily  a  spirit,  but  he  was  by  no 
means  necessarily  so  to  an  early  thinker,  who  may  not 
yet  have  reached  the  conception  of  a  ghost.

A  ghost  is  said,  by  anthropologists,  to  have  developed 
into  a  god.  Now,  the  very  idea  of  a  ghost  (apart  from  a 
wraith  or  fetch)  implies  the  previous  death  of  his  proprietor. 
A  ghost  is  the  phantasm  of  a  dead  man.  But  anthropo- 
logists continually  tell  us,  with  truth,  that  the  idea  of 
death  as  a  universal  ordinance  is  unknown  to  the  savage, 
Diseases  and  death  are  things  that  once  did  not  exist,  and 
that,  normally,  ought  not  to  occur,  the  savage  thinks. 
They  are,  in  his  opinion,  supernormally  caused  by  magi- 
cians and  spirits.  Death  came  into  the  world  by  a 
blunder,  an  accident,  an  error  in  ritual,  a  decision  of  a  god 
who  was  before  Death  was.  Scores  of  myths  are  told 
everywhere  on  this  subject.1The  savage  Supreme  Being,  with  added  power,  omni- 
science, and  morality,  is  the  idealisation  of  the  savage, 
as  conceived  of  by  himself,  minus  fleshly  body  (as  a  rule), 
and  minus  Death.  He  is  not  necessarily  a  '  spirit,'  though 
that  term  may  now  be  applied  to  him.  He  was  not  origi- 
nally differentiated  as  '  spirit '  or  '  not  spirit.'  He  is  a 
Being,  conceived  of  without  the  question  of  '  spirit,'  or  '  no 
spirit '  being  raised ;  perhaps  he  was  originally  conceived 
of  before  that  question  could  be  raised  by  men.  When  we 
call  the  Supreme  Being  of  savages  a  '  spirit '  we  introduce 
our  own  animistic  ideas  into  a  conception  where  it  may 
not  have  originally  existed.  The  Gippsland  tribes  '  have 
no  knowledge  of  God.  .  .  .  They  believe  the  Creator  was 
a  gigantic  black,  living  among  the  stars.'  2  Mr.  Matthew

1  I  have  published  a  chapter  on  Myths  on   the  Origin   of   Death   in 
Modern  Mythology.

2  Curr,  The.  Australian  Race.

204  THE   MAKING   OF   KELIGION1  I  have  published  a  chapter  on  Myths  on   the  Origin   of   Death   in 
Modern  Mythology.

2  Curr,  The.  Australian  Race.

204  THE   MAKING   OF   KELIGION

Arnold  might  as  well  have  said  :  '  The  British  Philistine 
has  no  knowledge  of  God.  He  believes  that  the  Creator 
is  a  magnified  non-natural  man,  living  in  the  sky.'  The 
Gippsland  or  Fuegian  or  Blackfoot  Supreme  Being  is  just 
a  Being,  anthropomorphic,  not  a  mrart,  or  '  spirit.'  The 
Supreme  Being  is  a  wesen,  Being,  Vui ;  we  have  hardly  a 
term  for  an  immortal  existence  so  undefined.  If  the  being 
is  an  idealised  first  ancestor  (as  among  the  Kurnai),  he  is 
not,  on  that  account,  either  man  or  ghost  of  man.  In  the 
original  conception  he  is  a  powerful  intelligence  who  was 
from  the  first  :  who  was  already  active  long  before,  by  a 
breach  of  his  laws,  an  error  in  the  delivery  of  a  message, 
a  breach  of  ritual,  or  what  not,  death  entered  the  world. 
He  was  not  affected  by  the  entry  of  death,  he  still  exists.

Modern  minds  need  to  become  familiar  with  this  in- 
determinate idea  of  the  savage  Supreme  Being,  which, 
logically,  may  be  prior  to  the  evolution  of  the  notion  of 
ghost  or  spirit.

But  how  does  it  apply  when,  as  by  the  Kurnai,  the 
Supreme  Being  is  reckoned  an  ancestor  ?

It  can  very  readily  be  shown  that,  when  the  Supreme 
Being  of  a  savage  people  is  thus  the  idealised  First 
Ancestor,  he  can  never  have  been  envisaged  by  his 
worshippers  as  at  any  time  a  ghost ;  or,  at  least,  can- 
not logically  have  been  so  envisaged  where  the  nearly 
universal  belief  occurs  that  death  came  into  the  world 
by  accident,  or  needlessly.Adam  is  the  mythical  first  ancestor  of  the  Hebrews, 
but  he  died,  vTrsp  popov,  and  was  not  worshipped. 
Yama,  the  first  of  Aryan  men  who  died,  was  worshipped 
by  Vedic  Aryans,  but  confessedly  as  a  ghost-god.  Mr. 
Tylor  gives  a  list  of  first  ancestors  deified.  The  Ancestor 
of  the  Mandans  did  not  die,  consequently  is  no  ghost ; 
emigravit,  he  '  moved  west.'  Where  the  First  Ancestor  is

SUPREME   GODS  205

also  the  Creator  (Dog-rib  Indians),  he  can  hardly  be,  and 
is  not,  regarded  as  a  mortal.  Tamoi,  of  the  Guaranis,  was 
'  the  ancient  of  heaven,'  clearly  no  mortal  man.  The 
Maori  Maui  was  the  first  who  died,  but  he  is  not  one  of 
the  original  Maori  gods.  Haetsh,  among  the  Kamchadals, 
precisely  answers  to  Yama.  Unkulunkulu  will  be 
described  later.1

This  is  the  list :  Where  the  First  Ancestor  is  equi- 
valent to  the  Creator,  and  is  supreme,  he  is — from  the 
first — deathless  and  immortal.  When  he  dies  he  is  a 
confessed  ghost-god.Now,  ghost-worship  and  dead  ancestor-worship  are 
impossible  before  the  ancestor  is  dead  and  is  a  ghost. 
But  the  essential  idea  of  Darumulun,  and  Baiame,  and 
most  of  the  high  gods  of  Australia,  and  of  other  low 
races,  is  that  they  never  died  at  all.  They  belong  to  the 
period  before  death  came  into  the  world,  like  Qat  among 
the  Melanesians.  They  arise  in  an  age  that  knew  not  death, 
and  had  not  reflected  on  phantasms  nor  evolved  ghosts. 
They  could  have  been  conceived  of,  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  by  a  race  of  immortals  who  never  dreamed  of  such 
a  thing  as  a  ghost.  For  these  gods,  the  ghost-theory  is 
not  required,  and  is  superfluous,  even  contradictory.  The 
early  thinkers  who  developed  these  beings  did  not  need  to 
know  that  men  die  (though,  of  course,  they  did  know  it  in 
practice),  still  less  did  they  need  to  have  conceived  by 
abstract  speculation  the  hypothesis  of  ghosts.  Baiame, 
Cagn,  Bunjil,  in  their  adorers'  belief,  were  there ;  death 
later  intruded  among  men,  but  did  not  affect  these  divine 
beings  in  any  way.

The  ghost-theory,  therefore,  by  the  evidence  of  anthro- 
pology itself,  is  not  needed  for  the  evolution  of  the  high 
gods  of  savages.  It  is  only  needed  for  the  evolution  of

1  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  311-310.

206  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

ghost -propitiation  and  genuine  dead -ancestor  worship. 
Therefore,  the  high  gods  described  were  not  necessarily 
once  ghosts — were  not  idealised  mortal  ancestors.  They 
were,  naturally,  from  the  beginning,  from  before  the  coming 
in  of  death,  immortal  Fathers  in  Heaven.  Between  them 
and  apotheosised  mortal  ancestors  there  is  a  great  gulf 
fixed — the  river  of  death.The  explicitly  stated  distinction  that  the  high  creative 
gods  never  were  mortal  men,  while  other  gods  are  spirits 
of  mortal  men,  is  made  in  every  quarter.  'Ancestors 
known  to  be  human  were  not  worshipped  as  [original] 
gods,  and  ancestors  worshipped  as  [original]  gods  were 
not  believed  to  have  been  human.'  l

Both  kinds  may  have  a  generic  name,  such  as  kalou, 
or  wakan,  but  the  specific  distinction  is  universally  made 
by  low  savages.  On  one  hand,  original  gods ;  on  the  other, 
non-original  gods  that  were  once  ghosts.  Now,  this 
distinction  is  often  calmly  ignored ;  whereas,  when  any 
race  has  developed  (like  late  Scandinavians)  the  Euheme- 
ristic  hypothesis  ('all  gods  were  once  men'),  that  hypo- 
thesis is  accepted  as  an  historical  statement  of  fact  by 
some  writers.

It  is  part  of  my  theory  that  the  more  popular 
ghost-worship  of  souls  of  people  whom  men  have  loved, 
invaded  the  possibly  older  religion  of  the  Supreme 
Father.  Mighty  beings,  whether  originally  conceived  of 
as  '  spirits  '  or  not,  came,  later,  under  the  Animistic  theory, 
to  be  reckoned  as  spirits.  They  even  (but  not  among 
the  lowest  savages)  came  to  be  propitiated  by  food  and 
sacrifice.  The  alternative,  for  a  Supreme  Being,  when 
once  Animism  prevailed,  was  sacrifice  (as  to  more  popular 
ghost  deities)  or  neglect.  We  shall  find  examples  of  both 
alternatives.  But  sacrifice  does  not  prove  that  a  God  was,

1  Jcvons,  Introduction,  p.  107.

SUPREME  GODS  207

in  original  conception,  a  ghost,  or  even  a  spirit.  '  The 
common  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament  is  not  that  God  is 
spirit,  but  that  the  spirit  [ruah—1  wind,'  '  living  breath  '] 
of  Jehovah,  going  forth  from  him,  works  in  the  world  and 
among  men.' ]To  resume.  The  high  Gods  of  savagery — moral,  all- 
seeing  directors  of  things  and  of  men — are  not  explicitly 
envisaged  as  spirits  at  all  by  their  adorers.  The  notion 
of  soul  or  spirit  is  here  out  of  place.  We  can  best 
describe  Daruinulun  and  Napi  and  Baiame  as  '  magnified 
non-natural  men,'  or  undefined  beings  who  were  from 
the  beginning  and  are  eternal.  They  are,  like  the  easy 
Epicurean  Gods,  nikil  indiga  nostri.  Not  being  ghosts, 
they  crave  no  food  from  men,  and  receive  no  sacrifice,  as 
do  ghosts,  or  gods  developed  out  of  ghosts,  or  gods  to 
whom  the  ghost-ritual  has  been  transferred.  For  this 
very  reason,  apparently,  they  seem  to  be  spoken  of  by 
Mr.  Grant  Allen  as  '  gods  to  talk  about,  not  gods  to  adore ; 
mythological  conceptions  rather  than  religious  beings.'  2 
All  this  is  rather  hard  on  the  lowest  savages.  If  they 
sacrifice  to  a  god,  then  the  god  is  a  hungry  ghost ;  if  they 
don't,  then  the  god  is  '  a  god  to  talk  about,  not  to  adore.' 
Luckily,  the  facts  of  the  Bora  ritual  and  the  instruction 
given  there  prove  that  Darumulun  and  other  names  are 
gods  to  adore,  by  ethical  conformity  to  their  will  and  by 
solemn  ceremony,  not  merely  gods  to  talk  about.

Thus,  the  highest  element  in  the  religion  of  the  lowest 
savages  does  not  appear  to  be  derived  from  their  theory 
of  ghosts.  As  far  as  we  can  say,  in  the  inevitable  absence 
of  historical  evidence,  the  highest  gods  of  savages  may  have 
been  believed  in,  as  Makers  and  Fathers  and  Lords  of  an 
indeterminate  nature,  before  the  savage  had  developed  the

1  Robertson  Smith,  The  Prophets  of  Israel,  p.  61. 
-  Evolution  of  the  Idea  of  God,  p.  170.

208  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Robertson  Smith,  The  Prophets  of  Israel,  p.  61. 
-  Evolution  of  the  Idea  of  God,  p.  170.

208  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

idea  of  souls  out  of  dreams  and  phantasms.  It  is  logically 
conceivable  that  savages  may  have  worshipped  deities  like 
Baiame  and  Darumulun  before  they  had  evolved  the 
notion  that  Tom,  Dick,  or  Harry  has  a  separable  soul, 
capable  of  surviving  his  bodily  decease.  Deities  of  the 
higher  sort,  by  the  very  nature  of  savage  reflections  on 
death  and  on  its  non-original  casual  character,  are  prior, 
or  may  be  prior,  or  cannot  be  shown  not  to  be  prior,  to 
the  ghost  theory — the  alleged  origin  of  religion.  For 
their  evolution  the  ghost  theory  is  not  logically  demanded ; 
they  can  do  without  it.  Yet  they,  and  not  the  spirits, 
bogles,  Mrarts,  Brewin,  and  so  forth,  are  the  high  gods, 
the  gods  who  have  most  analogy — as  creators,  moral 
guides,  rewarders,  and  punishers  of  conduct  (though  that 
duty  is  also  occasionally  assumed  by  ancestral  spirits) — 
with  our  civilised  conception  of  the  divine.  Our  concep- 
tion of  God  descends  not  from  ghosts,  but  from  the 
Supreme  Beings  of  non-ancestor-worshipping  peoples.As  it  seems  impossible  to  point  out  any  method  by 
which  low,  chiefless,  non-polytheistic,  non-metaphysical 
savages  (if  any  such  there  be)  evolved  out  of  ghosts  the 
eternal  beings  who  made  the  world,  and  watch  over 
morality  :  as  the  people  themselves  unanimously  distin- 
guish such  beings  from  ghost-gods,  I  take  it  that  such 
beings  never  were  ghosts.  In  this  case  the  Animistic 
theory  seems  to  me  to  break  down  completely.  Yet  these 
high  gods  of  low  savages  preserve  from  dimmest  ages  of 
the  meanest  culture  the  sketch  of  a  God  which  our 
highest  religious  thought  can  but  fill  up  to  its  ideal. 
Come  from  what  germ  he  may,  Jehovah  or  Allah  does  not 
come  from  a  ghost.

It  may  be  retorted  that  this  makes  no  real  difference. 
If  savages  did  not  invent  gods  in  consequence  of  a  fal- 
lacious belief  in  spirit  and  soul,  still,  in  some  other  equally

SUPREME  GODS  209

illogical  way  they  came  to  indulge  the  hypothesis  that 
they  had  a  Judge  and  Father  in  heaven.  But,  if  the  ghost 
theory  of  the  high  Gods  is  wrong,  as  it  is  conspicuously 
superfluous,  that  does  make  some  difference.  It  proves 
that  a  widely  preached  scientific  conclusion  may  be  as 
spectral  as  Bathybius.  On  other  more  important  points, 
therefore,  we  may  differ  from  the  newest  scientific  opinion 
without  too  much  diffident  apprehensiveness.

210  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION210  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

IT  is  among  '  the  lowest  savages  '  that  the  Supreme  Beings 
are  most  regarded  as  eternal,  moral  (as  the  morality  of  the 
tribe  goes,  or  even  on  a  higher  level),  and  powerful.  I 
have  elsewhere  described  the  Bushman  god  Cagn,  as  he 
was  portrayed  to  Mr.  Orpen  by  Qing,  who  'had  never 
before  seen  a  white  man  except  fighting.'  Mr.  Orpen  got 
the  facts  from  Qing  .by  inducing  him  to  explain  the 
natives'  pictures  on  the  walls  of  caves.  '  Cagn  made  all 
things,  and  we  pray  to  him,'  thus  :  '  0  Cagn,  0  Cagn, 
are  we  not  thy  children  ?  Do  you  not  see  us  hunger  ? 
Give  us  food.'  As  to  ethics,  '  At  first  Cagn  was  very 
good,  but  he  got  spoilt  through  fighting  so  many  things.' 
'  How  came  he  into  the  world  ?  '  '  Perhaps  with  those 
who  brought  the  Sun :  only  the  initiated  know  these 
things.'  It  appears  that  Qing  was  not  yet  initiated  in  the 
dance  (answering  to  a  high  rite  of  the  Australian  Bora)  in 
which  the  most  esoteric  myths  were  unfolded.1

In  Mr.  Spencer's  '  Descriptive  Sociology '  the  religion 
of  the  Bushmen  is  thus  disposed  of.  '  Pray  to  an  insect 
of  the  caterpillar  kind  for  success  in  the  chase.'  That  is

1  When  I  wrote  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion  (ii.  11-13)  I  regarded  Cagn 
as '  only  a  successful  and  idealised  medicine  man.'  But  I  now  think  that 
I  confused  in  my  mind  the  religious  and  the  mythological  aspects  of  Cagn. 
One  of  unknown  origin,  existing  before  the  sun,  a  Maker  of  all  things, 
prayed  to,  but  not  in  receipt  of  sacrifice,  is  no  medicine  man,  except  in 
his  myth.

SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  211

rather  meagre.  They  make  arrow-poison  out  of  cater- 
pillars.1SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  211

rather  meagre.  They  make  arrow-poison  out  of  cater- 
pillars.1

The  case  of  the  Andaman  Islanders  may  be  espe- 
cially recommended  to  believers  in  the  anthropological 
science  of  religion.  For  long  these  natives  were  the  joy 
of  emancipated  inquirers  as  the  '  godless  Andamanese.' 
They  only  supply  Mr.  Spencer's  '  Ecclesiastical  Insti- 
tutions '  with  a  few  instances  of  the  ghost-belief.2  Yet 
when  the  Andamanese  are  scientifically  studied  in  situ  by  an 
educated  Englishman,  Mr.  Man,  who  knows  their  language, 
has  lived  with  them  for  eleven  years,  and  presided  over 
our  benevolent  efforts  '  to  reclaim  them  from  their  savage 
state,'  the  Andamanese  turn  out  to  be  quite  embarrassingly 
rich  in  the  higher  elements  of  faith.  They  have  not  only 
a  profoundly  philosophical  religion,  but  an  excessively 
absurd  mythology,  like  the  Australian  blacks,  the  Greeks, 
and  other  peoples.  If,  on  the  whole,  the  student  of  the 
Andamanese  despairs  of  the  possibility  of  an  ethnological 
theory  of  religion,  he  is  hardly  to  be  blamed.

The  people  are  probably  Negritos,  and  probably  '  the 
original  inhabitants,  whose  occupation  dates  from  pre- 
historic times.'3  They  use  the  bow,  they  make  pots,  and 
are  considerably  above  the  Australian  level.  They  have 
second-sighted  men,  who  obtain  status  '  by  relating  an1  The  omissions  in  Mr.  Spencer's  system  may  possibly  be  explained  by 
the  circumstance  that,  as  he  tells  us,  he  collected  his  facts  '  by  proxy.' 
While  we  find  Waitz  much  interested  in  and  amazed  by  the  benevolent 
Supreme  Being  of  many  African  tribes,  that  personage  is  only  alluded  to  as 
'  Alleged  Benevolent  Supreme  Being  '  in  Mr.  Spencer's  Descriptive  Sociology, 
and  is  usually  left  out  of  sight  altogether  in  his  Principles  of  Sociology  and 
Ecclesiastical  Institutions,  Yet  we  have  precisely  the  same  kind  of  evi- 
dence of  observers  for  this  '  alleged  '  benevolent  Supreme  Being  as  we  have 
for  the  catuiillc  of  ghosts  and  fetishes.  If  he  is  a  deity  of  a  rather  lofty 
philosophic  conception,  cf  course  he  cannot  be  propitiated  by  human 
sacrifices  or  cold  chickens.  Tliat  kind  of  material  evidence  to  the  faith  in 
him  must  be  absent  by  the  nature  of  the  case ;  but  the  coincident  testimony 
of  travellers  to  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being  cannot  be  dismissed  as  '  alleged.'

-  Pp.  670,  077.  3  Man,  J.  A.  I.  xii.  70.

r  o

212  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

extraordinary  dreain,  the  details  of  which  are  declared  to 
have  been  borne  out  subsequently  by  some  unforeseen 
event,  as,  for  instance,  a  sudden  death  or  accident.'  They 
have  to  produce  fresh  evidential  dreams  from  time  to  time. 
They  see  phantasms  of  the  dead,  and  coincidental  halluci- 
nations.1 All  this  is  as  we  should  expect  it  to  be.Their  religion  is  probably  not  due  to  missionaries,  as 
they  always  shot  all  foreigners,  and  have  no  traditions  of 
the  presence  of  aliens  on  the  islands  before  our  recent 
arrival.'2  Their  God,  Puluga,  is  '  like  fire,'  but  invisible. 
He  was  never  born,  and  is  immortal.  By  him  were  all 
things  created,  except  the  powers  of  evil.  He  knows  even 
the  thoughts  of  the  heart.  He  is  angered  by  yubda  = 
sin,  or  wrong-doing,  that  is  falsehood,  theft,  grave  assault, 
murder,  adultery,  bad  carving  of  meat,  and  (as  a  crime 
of  witchcraft)  by  burning  wax.3  '  To  those  in  pain  or 
distress  he  is  pitiful,  and  sometimes  deigns  to  afford  relief.' 
He  is  Judge  of  Souls,  and  the  dread  of  future  punishment 
'  to  some  extent  is  said  to  affect  their  course  of  action  in 
the  present  life.' 4

This  Being  could  not  be  evolved  out  of  the  ordinary 
ghost  of  a  second-sighted  man,  for  I  do  not  find  that 
ancestral  ghosts  are  worshipped,  nor  is  there  a  trace 
of  early  missionary  influence,  while  Mr.  Man  consulted 
elderly  and,  in  native  religion,  well-instructed  Andamanese 
for  his  facts.

Yet  Puluga  lives  in  a  large  stone  house  (clearly  derived 
from  ours  at  Port  Blair),  eats  and  drinks,  foraging  for 
himself,  and  is  married  to  a  green  shrimp.5  There  is  the 
usual  story  of  a  Deluge  caused  by  the  moral  wrath  of 
Puluga.  The  whole  theology  was  scrupulously  collected 
from  natives  unacquainted  with  other  races.

1  Man,  J.A.I,  xii.  96-98.  -  xii.  150,  157.

3  xii.  112.  4  xii.  158.  5  xii.  158.

SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS  2131  Man,  J.A.I,  xii.  96-98.  -  xii.  150,  157.

3  xii.  112.  4  xii.  158.  5  xii.  158.

SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS  213

The  account  of  Andamanese  religion  does  not  tally 
with  the  anthropological  hypothesis.  Foreign  influence 
seems  to  be  more  than  usually  excluded  by  insular  con- 
ditions and  the  jealousy  of  the  '  original  inhabitants.' 
The  evidence  ought  to  make  us  reflect  on  the  extreme 
obscurity  of  the  whole  problem.Anthropological  study  of  religion  has  hitherto  almost 
entirely  overlooked  the  mysteries  of  various  races,  except 
in  so  far  as  they  confirm  the  entry  of  the  young  people 
into  the  ranks  of  the  adult.  Their  esoteric  moral  and 
religious  teaching  is  nearly  unknown  to  us,  save  in  a 
few  instances.  It  is  certain  that  the  mysteries  of  Greece 
were  survivals  of  savage  ceremonies,  because  we  know 
that  they  included  specific  savage  rites,  such  as  the  use  of 
the  rhombos  to  make  a  whirring  noise,  and  the  custom  of 
ritual  daubing  with  dirt ;  and  the  sacred  ballets  d'action, 
in  which,  as  Lucian  and  Qing  say,  mystic  facts  are 
'  danced  out.'1  But,  while  Greece  retained  these  relics  of 
savagery,  there  was  something  taught  at  Eleusis  which 
filled  minds  like  Plato's  and  Pindar's  with  a  happy 
religious  awe.  Now,  similar  '  softening  of  the  heart '  was 
the  result  of  the  teaching  in  the  Australian  Bora  :  the 
Yao  mysteries  inculcate  the  victory  over  self ;  and,  till 
we  are  admitted  to  the  secrets  of  all  other  savage  mysteries 
throughout  the  world,  we  cannot  tell  whether,  among 
mummeries,  frivolities,  and  even  license,  high  ethical 
doctrines  are  not  presented  under  the  sanction  of  religion. 
The  New  Life,  and  perhaps  the  future  life,  are  undeniably 
indicated  in  the  Australian  mysteries  by  the  simulated 
Resurrection.

I  would  therefore  no  longer  say,  as  in  1887,  that 
the  Hellenic  genius  must  have  added  to  '  an  old  medicine 
dance '  all  that  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  possessed  of 
:  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion,  i.  281-28K.

214  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION214  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

beauty,  counsel,  and  consolation.1  These  elements,  as 
well  as  the  barbaric  factors  in  the  rites,  may  have  been 
developed  out  of  such  savage  doctrine  as  softens  the 
hearts  of  Australians  and  Yaos.  That  this  kind  of 
doctrine  receives  religious  sanction  is  certain,  where  we 
know  the  secret  of  savage  mysteries.  It  is  therefore  quite 
incorrect,  and  strangely  presumptuous,  to  deny,  with 
almost  all  anthropologists,  the  alliance  of  ethics  with 
religion  among  the  most  backward  races.  We  must 
always  remember  their  secrecy  about  their  inner  religion, 
their  frankness  about  their  mythological  tales.  These  we 
knowr  :  the  inner  religion  we  ought  to  begin  to  recognise 
that  we  do  not  know.

The  case  of  the  Andamanese  has  taught  us  how  vague, 
even  now,  is  our  knowledge,  and  how  obscure  is  our 
problem.  The  example  of  the  Melanesians  enforces  these 
lessons.  It  is  hard  to  bring  the  Melanesians  within  any 
theory.  Dr.  Codrington  has  made  them  the  subject  of  a 
careful  study,  and  reports  that  while  the  European  in- 
quirer can  communicate  pretty  freely  on  common  subjects 
'  the  vocabulary  of  ordinary  life  is  almost  useless  when 
the  region  of  mysteries  and  superstitions  is  approached.'  2 
The  Banks  Islanders  are  most  free  from  an  Asiatic,  element 
of  population  on  one  side,  and  a  Polynesian  element  on 
the  other.The  Banks  Islanders  '  believe  in  two  orders  of  intelli- 
gent beings  different  from  living  men.'  (1)  Ghosts  of  the 
dead,  (2)  '  Beings  who  were  not,  and  never  had  been, 
human.'  This,  as  we  have  shown,  and  will  continue  to 
show,  is  the  usual  savage  doctrine.  On  the  one  hand  are 
separable  souls  of  men,  surviving  the  death  of  the  body. 
On  the  other  are  beings,  creators,  who  were  before  men 
were,  and  before  death  entered  the  world.  It  is  impossible,. 
1  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  133.  -  J.  A.I.  x.  203.

SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  215

logically,  to  argue  that  these  beings  are  only  ghosts  of  real 
remote  ancestors,  or  of  ideal  ancestors.  These  higher 
beings  are  not  safely  to  be  defined  as  '  spirits,'  their 
essence  is  vague,  and,  we  repeat,  the  idea  of  their  existence 
might  have  been  evolved  before  the  ghost  theory  was 
attained  by  men.  Dr.  Codrington  says,  'the  conception 
can  hardly  be  that  of  a  purely  spiritual  being,  yet,  by 
whatever  name  the  natives  call  them,  they  are  such  as  in 
English  must  be  called  spirits.'

That  is  our  point.  '  God  is  a  spirit,'  these  beings  are 
Gods,  therefore  '  these  are  spirits.'  But  to  their  initial 
conception  our  idea  of  '  spirit '  is  lacking.  They  are 
beings  who  existed  before  death,  and  still  exist.The  beings  which  never  were  human,  never  died,  are1 
Vui,  the  ghosts  are  Tamate.  Dr.  Codrington  uses  '  ghosts  ' 
for  Tamate,  '  spirits '  for  Vui.  But  as  to  render  Vui 
1  spirits '  is  to  yield  the  essential  point,  we  shall  call  Vui 
1  beings,'  or,  simply,  Vui.  A  Vui  is  not  a  spirit  that  has 
been  a  ghost ;  the  story  may  represent  him  as  if  a  man, 
'  but  the  native  will  always  maintain  that  he  was  some- 
thing different,  and  deny  to  him  the  fleshly  body  of  a 
man.'  l

This  distinction,  ghost  on  one  side — eternal  being,  not 
a  man,  not  a  ghost  of  a  man,  on  the  other — is  radical  and 
nearly  universal  in  savage  religion.  Anthropology,  neglect- 
ing the  essential  distinction  insisted  on,  in  this  case,  by 
Dr.  Codrington,  confuses  both  kinds  under  the  style  of 
'  spirits,'  and  derives  both  from  ghosts  of  the  dead. 
Dr.  Codrington,  it  should  be  said,  does  not  generalise,  but 
confines  himself  to  the  savages  of  whom  he  has  made  a 
special  study.  But,  from  the  other  examples  of  the  same 
distinction  which  we  have  offered,  and  the  rest  which 
we  shall  offer,  we  think  ourselves  justified  in  regarding  the

1  J.A.I.  2(17.

216  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

distinction  between  a  primeval,  eternal,  being  or  beings, 
on  one  hand,  and  ghosts  or  spirits  exalted  from  ghost's 
estate,  on  the  other,  as  common,  if  not  universal.distinction  between  a  primeval,  eternal,  being  or  beings, 
on  one  hand,  and  ghosts  or  spirits  exalted  from  ghost's 
estate,  on  the  other,  as  common,  if  not  universal.

There  are  corporeal  and  incorporeal  Vuis,  but  the 
body  of  the  corporeal  Vui  is  '  not  a  human  body.' '  The 
chief  is  Qat,  '  still  at  hand  to  help  and  invoked  in  prayers.' 
'  Qat,  Marawa,  look  down  upon  me,  smooth  the  sea  for  us 
two,  that  I  may  go  safely  over  the  sea  ! '  Qat  '  created 
men  and  animals,'  though,  in  a  certain  district,  he  is 
claimed  as  an  ancestor  (p.  268).  Two  strata  of  belief 
have  here  been  confused.

The  myth  of  Qat  is  a  jungle  of  facetiae  and  frolic,  with 
one  or  two  serious  incidents,  such  as  the  beginning  of 
Death  and  the  coming  of  Night.  His  mother  was,  or 
became,  a  stone ;  stones  playing  a  considerable  part  in  the 
superstitions.

The  incorporeal  Vuis,  *  with  nothing  like  a  human  life, 
have  a  much  higher  place  than  Qat  and  his  brothers  in 
the  religious  system.'  They  have  neither  names,  nor 
shapes,  nor  legends,  they  receive  sacrifice,  and  are  in  some 
uncertain  way  connected  with  stones ;  these  stones  usually 
bear  a  fanciful  resemblance  to  fruits  or  animals  (p.  275). 
The  only  sacrifice,  in  Banks  Islands,  is  that  of  shell- 
money.  The  mischievous  spirits  are  Tamate,  ghosts  of 
men.  There  is  a  belief  in  mana  (magical  rapport). 
Dr.  Codrington  cannot  determine  the  connection  of  this 
belief  with  that  in  spirits.  Mana  is  the  uncanny,  is  X, 
the  unknown.  A  revived  impression  of  sense  is  nunuai, 
as  when  a  tired  fisher,  half  asleep  at  night,  feels  the 
'  draw '  of  a  salmon,  and  automatically  strikes.2  The 
common  ghost  is  a  bag  of  nunuai,  as  living  man,  in  the

1  J.A.I.  267.1  J.A.I.  267.

2  P.  281.     This  is  a  nunuai  with  which  I  am  familiar.     Flying  fish,  in 
Banks   Island,  take  the  rdle  of  salmon.     The  natives  think  it  real,  but 
without  form  or  substance.

SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  217

opinion  of  some  philosophers,  is  a  bag  of  '  sensations.' 
Ghosts  are  only  seen  as  spiritual  lights,  which  so  com- 
monly attend  hallucinations  among  the  civilised.  Except 
in  the  prayers  to  Qat  and  Marawa,  prayer  only  invokes 
the  dead  (p.  285) .  '  In  the  western  islands  the  offerings 
are  made  to  ghosts,  and  consumed  by  fire ;  in  the  eastern 
(Banks)  isles  they  are  made  to  spirits  (beings,  Vui),  and 
there  is  no  sacrificial  fire.'  Now,  the  worship  of  ghosts 
goes,  in  these  isles,  with  the  higher  culture,  '  a  more  con- 
siderable advance  in  the  arts  of  life  ;  '  the  worship  of  non- 
ghosts,  Vui,  goes  with  the  lower  material  culture.1  This 
is  rather  the  reverse  of  what  we  should  expect,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  anthropological  theory.  According,  how- 
ever, to  our  theory,  Animism  and  ghost- worship  may  be 
of  later  development,  and  belong  to  a  higher  level  of 
culture,  than  worship  of  a  being,  or  beings,  that  never 
were  ghosts.  In  Leper's  Isle,  '  ghosts  do  not  appear  to 
have  prayers  or  sacrifices  offered  to  them,'  but  cause 
disease,  and  work  magic.2

The  belief  in  the  soul,  in  Melanesia,  does  not  appear  to 
proceed  '  from  their  dreams  or  visions  in  which  deceased 
or  absent  persons  are  presented  to  them,  for  they  do  not 
appear  to  believe  that  the  soul  goes  out  from  the  dreamer, 
or  presents  itself  as  an  object  in  his  dreams,'  nor  does 
belief  in  other  spirits  seem  to  be  founded  on  '  the  appear- 
ance of  life  or  motion  in  inanimate  things.' :{To  myself  it  rather  looks  as  if  all  impressions  had 
their  nunuai,  real,  bodiless,  persistent,  after-images  ;  that 
the  soul  is  the  complex  of  all  of  these  nunuai  ;  that  there 
is  in  the  universe  a  kind  of  magical  ether,  called  mana, 
possessed,  in  different  proportions,  by  different  men,  Vui, 
tamate,  and  material  objects,  and  that  the  atai  or  ataro

'  Codrington,  Melanesia,  p.  122.  '•'  J.  A.  I.  x.  294.

*  Op.  cit.  x.  313.

2t8  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

of  a  man  dead,  his  ghost,  retains  its  old,  and  acquires  new 
mana.1  It  is  an  odd  kind  of  metaphysic  to  find  among 
very  backward  and  isolated  savages.  But  the  lesson  of 
Melanesia  teaches  us  how  very  little  we  really  know  of 
the  religion  of  low  races,  how  complex  it  is,  how  hardly 
it  can  be  forced  into  our  theories,  if  we  take  it  as  given 
in  our  knowledge,  allow  for  our  ignorance,  and  are  not 
content  to  select  facts  which  suit  our  hypothesis,  while 
ignoring  the  rest.  On  a  higher  level  of  material  culture 
than  the  Melanesians  are  the  Fijians.

Fijian  religion,  as  far  as  we  understand,  resembles  the 
others  in  drawing  an  impassable  line  between  ghosts  and 
eternal  gods.  The  word  Kalou  is  applied  to  all  supernal 
beings,  and  mystic  or  magical  things  alike.  It  seems  to 
answer  to  mana  in  New  Zealand  and  Melanesia,  to  loakan 
in  North  America,  and  to  fee  in  old  French,  as  when 
Perrault  says,  about  Bluebeard's  key,  '  now  the  key  was 
fee.'  All  Gods  are  Kalou,  but  all  things  that  are  Kalou 
are  not  Gods.  Gods  are  Kalou  vu ;  deified  ghosts  are 
Kalou  yalo.  The  former  are  eternal,  without  beginning 
of  days  or  end  of  years ;  the  latter  are  subject  to  infirmity 
and  even  to  death.2The  Supreme  Being,  if  we  can  apply  the  term  to  him, 
is  Ndengei,  or  Degei,  '  who  seems  to  be  an  impersonation 
of  the  abstract  idea  of  eternal  existence.'  This  idea  is  not 
easily  developed  out  of  the  conception  of  a  human  soul 
which  has  died  into  a  ghost  and  may  die  again.  His 
myth  represents  him  as  a  serpent,  emblem  of  eternity, 
or  a  body  of  stone  with  a  serpent's  head.  His  one 
manifestation  is  given  by  eating.  So  neglected  is  he  that 
a  song  exists  about  his  lack  of  worshippers  and  gifts. 
'  We  made  men,'  says  Ndengei,  '  placed  them  on  earth,

1  J.  A.  I.  x.  300.

-  Williams's  Fiji,  p.  218.     See  Mr.  Fison's  remarks  cited  later.

SAVAGE    SUPREME   BEINGS  219-

and  yet  they  share  to  us  only  the  under  shell.' l  Here  is 
an  extreme  case  of  the  self -existent  creative  Eternal, 
mythically  lodged  in  a  serpent's  body,  and  reduced  to  a 
jest.

It  is  not  easy  to  see  any  explanation,  if  we  reject  the 
hypothesis  that  this  is  an  old,  fallen  form  of  faith,  '  with 
scarcely  a  temple.'  The  other  unborn  immortals  are 
mythical  warriors  and  adulterers,  like  the  popular  deities 
of  Greece.  Yet  Ndengei  receives  prayers  through  two 
sons  of  his,  mediating  deities.  The  priests  are  possessed, 
or  inspired,  by  spirits  and  gods.  One  is  not  quite  clear 
as  to  whether  Ndengei  is  an  inspiring  god  or  not ;  but 
that  prayers  are  made  to  him  is  inconsistent  with  the 
belief  in  his  eternal  inaction.  A  priest  is  represented  as 
speaking  for  Ndengei,  probably  by  inspiration.  '  My  own 
mind  departs  from  me,  and  then,  when  it  is  truly  gone, 
my  god  speaks  by  me,'  is  the  account  of  this  '  alternating 
personality '  given  by  a  priest.2After  informing  us  that  Ndengei  is  starved,  Mr. 
Williams  next  tells  about  offerings  to.  him,  in  earlier  days, 
of  hundreds  of  hogs.3  He  sends  rain  on  earth.  Animals, 
men,  stones,  may  all  be  Kalou.  There  is  a  Hades  as 
fantastic  as  that  in  the  Egyptian  '  Book  of  the  Dead,'  and 
second  sight  flourishes.

The  mysteries  include  the  sham  raising  of  the  dead,, 
and  appear  to  be  directed  at  propitiatory  ghosts  rather 
than  to  Ndengei.  There  are  scenes  of  license  ;  '  particulars 
of  almost  incredible  indecency  have  been  privately  for- 
warded to  Dr.  Tylor. '  '

Suppose  a  religious  reformer  were  to  arise  in  one  of  the 
many  savage  tribes  who,  as  we  shall  show,  possess,  but 
neglect,  an  Eternal  Creator.  He  would  do  what,  in  the

1  Fiji,  p.  217.  -  Ib.  p.  -2-28.

'•'   Ib.  p.  230.  '  /.  .4.  /.  xiv.  30.

220  THE   MAKING    OF   RELIGION1  Fiji,  p.  217.  -  Ib.  p.  -2-28.

'•'   Ib.  p.  230.  '  /.  .4.  /.  xiv.  30.

220  THE   MAKING    OF   RELIGION

secular  sphere,  was  done  by  the  Mikado  of  Japan.  The 
Mikado  was  a  political  Dendid  or  Ndengei — an  awful,  with- 
drawn, impotent  potentate.  Power  was  wielded  by  the 
Tycoon.  A  Mikado  of  genius  asserted  himself ;  hence  arose 
modern  Japan.  In  the  same  way,  a  religious  reformer  like 
Khuen  Ahten  in  Egypt  would  preach  down  minor  gods, 
ghosts  and  sacred  beasts,  and  proclaim  the  Eternal  Creator, 
Ndengei,  Dendid,  Mtanga.  '  The  king  shall  hae  his  ain 
again.'  Had  it  not  been  for  the  Prophets,  Israel,  by  the 
time  that  Greece  and  Home  knew  Israel,  would  have  been 
worshipping  a  horde  of  little  gods,  and  even  beasts  and 
ghosts,  while  the  Eternal  would  have  become  a  mere  name 
—perhaps,  like  Ndengei  and  Atahocan  and  Unkulunkulu, 
a  jest.  The  Old  Testament  is  the  story  of  the  prolonged 
effort  to  keep  Jehovah  in  His  supreme  place.  To  make 
and  to  succeed  in  that  effort  was  the  differentia  of  Israel. 
Other  peoples,  even  the  lowest,  had,  as  we  prove,  the  ger- 
minal conception  of  a  God — assuredly  not  demonstrated  to 
be  derived  from  the  ghost  theory,  logically  in  no  need  of 
the  ghost  theory,  everywhere  explicitly  contrasted  with  the 
ghost  theory.  '  But  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened.'It  is  impossible  to  prove,  historically,  which  of  the 
two  main  elements  in  belief — the  idea  of  an  Eternal  Being 
or  Beings,  or  the  idea  of  surviving  ghosts — came  first  into 
the  minds  of  men.  The  idea  of  primeval  Eternal  Beings, 
as  understood  by  savages,  does  not  depend  on,  or  require, 
the  ghost  theory.  But,  as  we  almost  always  find  ghosts 
and  a  Supreme  Being  together,  where  we  find  either, 
among  the  lowest  savages,  we  have  no  historical  ground 
for  asserting  that  either  is  prior  to  the  other.  Where  we 
have  no  evidence  to  the  belief  in  the  Eternal,  we  must 
not  conclude  that  no  such  belief  exists.  Our  knowledge 
is  confused  and  scanty ;  often  it  is  derived  from  men  who 
do  not  know  the  native  language,  or  the  native  sacred

SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS  221

language,  or  have  not  been  trusted  with  what  the  savage 
treasures  as  his  secret.  Moreover,  if  anywhere  ghosts  are 
found  without  gods,  it  is  an  inference  from  the  argument 
that  an  idea  familiar  to  very  low  savage  tribes,  like  the 
Australians,  and  falling  more  and  more  into  the  back- 
ground elsewhere,  though  still  extant  and  traceable,  might, 
in  certain  cases,  be  lost  and  forgotten  altogether.To  take  an  example  of  -  half -forgotten  deity.  Mr.  Im 
Thurn,  a  good  observer,  has  written  on  '  The  Animism  of 
the  Indians  of  British  Guiana.'  Mr.  Im  Thurn  justly  says  : 
'  The  man  who  above  all  others  has  made  this  study 
possible  is  Mr.  Tylor.'  But  it  is  not  unfair  to  remark  that 
Mr.  Im  Thurn  naturally  sees  most  distinctly  that  which  Mr. 
Tylor  has  taught  him  to  see — namely,  Animism.  He  has 
also  been  persuaded,  by  Mr.  Dorman,  that  the  Great  Spirit 
of  North  American  tribes  is  '  almost  certainly  nothing 
more  than  a  figure  of  European  origin,  reflected  and 
transmitted  almost  beyond  recognition  on  the  mirror  of 
the  Indian  mind.'  That  is  not  my  opinion  :  I  conceive 
that  the  Red  Indians  had  their  native  Eternal,  like  the 
Australians,  Fijians,  Andamanese,  Dinkas,  Yao,  and  so

forth,  as  will  be  shown  later.

Mf

Mr.  Im  Thurn,  however,  dilares  on  the  dream  origin 
of  the  ghost  theory,  giving  examples  from  his  own  know- 
ledge of  the  difficulty  with  which  Guiana  Indians  discern 
the  hallucinations  of  dreams  from  the  facts  of  waking  life. 
Their  waking  hallucinations  are  also  so  vivid  as  to  be 
taken  for  realities.1  Mr.  Im  Thurn  adopts  the  hypothesis 
that,  from  ghosts,  '  a  belief  has  arisen,  but  very  gradually, 
in  higher  spirits,  and,  eventually,  in  a  Highest  Spirit ;  and, 
keeping  pace  with  the  growth  of  these  beliefs,  a  habit 
of  reverence  for  and  worship  of  spirits.'  On  this  hypo- 
thesis, the  spirit  latest  evolved,  and  most  worshipful,  ought,

1  J.  A.  I.  xi.  361-366.

•222  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION1  J.  A.  I.  xi.  361-366.

•222  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

of  course,  to  be  the  '  Highest  Spirit.'  But  the  reverse,  as 
usual,  is  the  case.  The  Guiana  Indians  believe  in  the 
continued,  but  not  in  the  everlasting,  existence  of  a  man's 
ghost.1  They  believe  in  no  spirits  which  were  not  once 
tenants  of  material  bodies.2

The  belief  in  a  Supreme  Spirit  is  only  attained  '  in  the 
highest  form  of  religion  ' — Andamanese,  for  instance — as 
Mr.  Im  Thurn  uses  '  spirit '  where  we  should  say  '  being.' 
'  The  Indians  of  Guiana  know  no  god.' 3

'  But  it  is  true  that  various  words  have  been  found  in 
all,  or  nearly  all,  the  languages  of  Guiana  which  have 
been  supposed  to  be  names  of  a  Supreme  Being,  God,  a 
Great  Spirit,  in  the  sense  which  those  phrases  bear  in  the 
language  of  the  higher  religions.'

Being  interpreted,  these  Guiana  names  mean —

The  Ancient  One,

The  Ancient  One  in  Sky -land,

Our  Maker,

Our  Father,

Our  Great  Father.

'  None  of  these  in  any  way  involves  the  attributes 
of  a  god.'

The  Ancient  of  Days',  Our  Father  in  Heaven,  Our 
Maker,  do  rather  convey  the  sense  of  God  to  a  European 
mind.  Mr.  Im  Thurn,  however,  decides  that  the  beings 
thus  designated  were  supposed  ancestors  who  came  into 
Guiana  from  some  other  country, '  sometimes  said  to  have 
been  that  entirely  natural  country  (?)  which  is  separated 
from  Guiana  by  the  ocean  of  the  air.' 4

Mr.  Im  Thurn  casually  observed  (having  said  nothing 
about  morals  in  alliance  with  Animism)  :

'  The  fear  of  unwittingly  offending  the  countless 
visible  and  invisible  beings  .  .  .  kept  the  Indians  very

1  J.  A.  I.  xi.  374.         2  Ib.  xi.  370.        s  Ib.  xi.  370.         «  Ib.  xi.  378.

SAVAGE   SUPREME  BEINGS  2231  J.  A.  I.  xi.  374.         2  Ib.  xi.  370.        s  Ib.  xi.  370.         «  Ib.  xi.  378.

SAVAGE   SUPREME  BEINGS  223

strictly   within    their    own    rights    and    from   offending 
against  the  rights  of  others.'

This  remark  dropped  out  at  a  discussion  of  Mr.  Im 
Thurn's  paper,  and  clearly  demonstrated  that  even  a  very 
low  creed  '  makes  for  righteousness.'  l

Probably  few  who  have  followed  the  facts  given  here 
will  agree  with  Mr.  Im  Thurn's  theory  that  '  Our  Maker,' 
'  Our  Father,'  '  The  Ancient  One  of  the  Heaven,'  is 
merely  an  idealised  human  ancestor.  He  falls  naturally 
into  his  place  with  the  other  high  gods  of  low  savages. 
But  we  need  much  more  information  on  the  subject  than 
Mr.  Im  Thurn  was  able  to  give.

His  evidence  is  all  the  better,  because  he  is  a  loyal 
follower  of  Mr.  Tylor.  And  Mr.  Tylor  says :  '  Savage 
Animism  is  almost  devoid  of  that  ethical  element  which 
to  the  educated  modern  mind  is  the  very  mainspring  of 
practical  religion.' 2  '  Yet  it  keeps  the  Indians  very  strictly 
within  their  own  rights  and  from  offending  the  rights  of 
others.'  Our  own  religion  is  rarely  so  successful.3

In  the  Indians  of  Guiana  we  have  an  alleged  case  of 
a  people  still  deep  in  the  animistic  or  ghost-worshipping 
case,  who,  by  the  hypothesis,  have  not  yet  evolved  the 
idea  of  a  god  at  all.

When  the  familiar  names  for  God,  such  as  Maker, 
Father,  Ancient  of  Days,  occur  in  the  Indian  language, 
Mr.  Im  Thurn  explains  the  neglected  Being  who  bears 
these  titles  as  a  remote  deified  ancestor.  Of  course,  when 
a  Being  with  similar  titles  occurs  where  ancestors  are  not 
worshipped,  as  in  Australia  and  the  Andaman  Islands,

1  J.A.I,  xi.  382.  *  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  360.1  J.A.I,  xi.  382.  *  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  360.

3  Conceivably,  however,  the  Guiana  spirits  who  have  so  much  moral 
influence,  exert  it  by  magical  charms.  '  The  belief  in  the  power  of  charms 
for  good  or  evil  produces  not  only  honesty,  but  a  great  amount  of  gentle 
dealing,'  says  Livingstone,  of  the  Africans.  However  they  work,  the  spirits 
work  for  righteousness.

224  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  explanation  suggested  by  Mr.  Im  Thurn  for  the 
problem  of  religion  in  Guiana,  will  not  fit  the  facts.224  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  explanation  suggested  by  Mr.  Im  Thurn  for  the 
problem  of  religion  in  Guiana,  will  not  fit  the  facts.

It  is  plain  that,  a  priori,  another  explanation  is  con- 
ceivable. If  a  people  like  the  Andamanese,  or  the 
Australian  tribes  whom  we  have  studied,  had  such  a 
conception  as  that  of  Puluga,  or  Baiame,  or  Darumulun, 
and  then,  later,  developed  ancestor- worship  with  its 
propitiatory  sacrifices  and  ceremonies,  ancestor-worship, 
as  the  newest  evolved  and  infinitely  the  most  practical 
form  of  cult,  would  gradually  thrust  the  belief  in  a 
Puluga,  or  Durumulun,  or  Cagn  into  the  shade.  The 
ancestral  spirit,  to  speak  quite  plainly,  can  be  '  squared ' 
by  the  people  in  whom  he  takes  a  special  interest  for 
family  reasons.  The  equal  Father  of  all  men  c&nnot 
be  '  squared,'  and  declines  (till  corrupted  by  the  bad 
example  of  ancestral  ghosts)  to  make  himself  useful  to 
one  man  rather  than  to  another.  For  these  very  intel- 
ligible, simple,  and  practical  reasons,  if  the  belief  in  a 
Darumulun  came  first  in  evolution,  and  the  belief  in 
a  practicable  bribable  family  ghost  came  second,  the 
ghost-cult  would  inevitably  crowd  out  the  God-cult.1 
The  name  of  the  Father  and  Maker  would  become  a 
mere  survival,  nominis  umbra,  worship  and  sacrifice  going 
to  the  ancestral  ghost.  That  explanation  would  fit  the 
state  of  religion  which  Mr.  Im  Thurn  has  found,  rightly 
or  wrongly,  in  British  Guiana.But,  if  the  idea  of  a  universal  Father  and  Maker 
came  last  in  evolution,  as  a  refinement,  then,  of  course, 
it  ought  to  be  the  newest,  and  therefore  the  most  fashion- 
able and  potent  of  Guianese  cults.  Precisely  the  reverse 
is  said  to  be  the  case.  Nor  can  the  belief  indicated  in 
such  names  as  Father  and  Maker  be  satisfactorily  ex-

1  Obviously  there  could  be  no  Family  God  before  there  was  the  institu- 
tion of  the  Family.

SAVAGE   SUPREME  BEINGS  225

plained  as  a  refinement  of  ancestor-worship,  because,  we 
repeat,  it  occurs  where  ancestors  are  not  worshipped.

These  considerations,  however  unpleasant  to  the 
devotees  of  Animism,  or  the  ghost  theory,  are  not,  in 
themselves,  illogical,  nor  contradictory  of  the  theory  of 
evolution,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  fits  them  perfectly 
well.  That  god  thrives  best  who  is  most  suited  to  his 
environment.  Whether  an  easy-going,  hungry  ghost-god 
with  a  liking  for  his  family,  or  a  moral  Creator  not  to  be 
bribed,  is  better  suited  to  an  environment  of  not  especially 
scrupulous  savages,  any  man  can  decide.  Whether  a  set 
of  not  particularly  scrupulous  savages  will  readily  evolve 
a  moral  unbribable  Creator,  when  they  have  a  serviceable 
family  ghost-god  eager  to  oblige,  is  a  question  as  easily 
resolved.Beyond  all  doubt,  savages  who  find  themselves  under 
the  watchful  eye  of  a  moral  deity  whom  they  cannot 
'  square '  will  desert  him  as  soon  as  they  have  evolved  a 
practicable  ghost-god,  useful  for  family  purposes,  whom 
they  can  square.  No  less  manifestly,  savages,  who  already 
possess  a  throng  of  serviceable  ghost-gods,  will  not  enthu- 
siastically evolve  a  moral  Creator  who  despises  gifts,  and 
only  cares  for  obedience.  '  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
human  nature  in  man,'  and,  if  Mr.  Im  Thurn's  descrip- 
tion of  the  Guianese  be  correct,  everything  we  know  of 
human  nature,  and  of  evolution,  assures  us  that  the 
Father,  or  Maker,  or  Ancient  of  Days  came  first ;  the 
ghost-gods,  last.  What  has  here  been  said  about  the 
Indians  of  Guiana  (namely,  that  they  are  now  mere  ghost 
and  spirit  worshippers,  with  only  a  name  surviving  to 
attest  a  knowledge  of  a  Father  and  Maker  in  Heaven) 
applies  equally  well  to  the  Zulus.  The  Zulus  are  the 
great  standing  type  of  an  animistic  or  ghost-worshipping 
race  without  a  God.  But,  had  they  a  God  (on  the

Q

226  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Australian  pattern)  whom  they  have  forgotten,  or  have 
they  not  yet  evolved  a  God  out  of  Animism  ?Q

226  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Australian  pattern)  whom  they  have  forgotten,  or  have 
they  not  yet  evolved  a  God  out  of  Animism  ?

The  evidence,  collected  by  Dr.  Callaway,  is  honest, 
but  confused.  One  native,  among  others,  put  forward 
the  very  theory  here  proposed  by  us  as  an  alternative  to 
that  of  Mr.  Im  Thurn.  '  Unkulunkulu  '  (the  idealised 
but  despised  First  Ancestor)  '  was  not  worshipped  [by 
men].  For  it  is  not  worship  when  people  see  things,  as 
rain,  or  food,  or  corn,  and  say,  "  Yes,  these  things  were 
made  by  Unkulunkulu  ....  Afterwards  they  [men]  had 
power  to  change  those  things,  that  they  might  become 
the  Amatongos  "  [might  belong  to  the  ancestral  spirits], 
They  took  them  away  from  Unkulunkulu.' lAnimism  supplanted  Theism.  Nothing  could  be 
more  explicit.  But,  though  we  have  found  an  authentic 
Zulu  text  to  suit  our  provisional  theory,  the  most  eminent 
philosophical  example  must  not  reduce  us  into  supposing 
that  this  text  settles  the  question.  Dr.  Callaway  collected 
great  masses  of  Zulu  answers  to  his  inquiries,  and  it  is 
plain  that  a  respondent,  like  the  native  theologian  whom 
we  have  cited,  may  have  adapted  his  reply  to  what  he 
had  learned  of  Christian  doctrine.  Having  now  the 
Christian  notion  of  a  Divine  Creator,  and  knowing,  too, 
that  Unkulunkulu  is  said  to  have  '  made  things,'  while 
only  Amatongos,  or  ancestral  spirits,  are  worshipped,  the 
native  may  have  inferred  that  worship  (by  Christians 
given  to  the  Creator)  was  at  some  time  transferred  by 
the  Zulus  from  Unkulunkulu  to  the  Amatongo.  The 
truth  is  that  both  the  anthropological  theory  (spirits  first, 
Gods  last),  and  our  theory  (Supreme  Being  first,  spirits 
next)  can  find  warrant  in  Dr.  Callaway's  valuable  collec- 
tions. For  that  reason,  the  problem  must  be  solved 
after  a  survey  of  the  whole  field  of  savage  and  barbaric 
1  Callaway,  Rcl.  of  Amazidu,  p.  17.

SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  227

religion  ;  it  cannot  be  settled  by  the  ambiguous  case  of 
the  Zulus  alone.SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  227

religion  ;  it  cannot  be  settled  by  the  ambiguous  case  of 
the  Zulus  alone.

Unkulunkulu  is  represented  as  '  the  First  Man,  who 
broke  off  in  the  beginning.'  '  They  are  ancestor- 
worshippers,'  says  Dr.  Callaway,  '  and  believe  that  their 
first  ancestor,  the  First  Man,  was  the  Creator.' l  But  they 
may,  like  many  other  peoples,  have  had  a  different  original 
tradition,  and  have  altered  it,  just  because  they  are  now 
such  fervent  ancestor-worshippers.  Unkulunkulu  was 
prior  to  Death,  which  came  among  men  in  the  usual 
mythical  way.2  Whether  TJnkuhmkulu  still  exists,  is 
rather  a  moot  question  :  Dr.  Callaway  thinks  that  he 
does  not.3  If  not,  he  is  an  exception  to  the  rule  in  Aus- 
tralia, Andaman,  among  the  Bushmen,  the  Fuegians,  and 
savages  in  general,  who  are  less  advanced  in  culture  than 
the  Zulus.  The  idea,  then,  of  a  Maker  of  things  who  has 
ceased  to  exist  occurs,  if  at  all,  not  in  a  relatively  primi- 
tive, but  in  a  relatively  late  religion.  On  the  analogy 
of  pottery,  agriculture,  the  use  of  iron,  villages,  hereditary 
kings,  and  so  on,  the  notion  of  a  dead  Maker  is  late,  not 
early.  It  occurs  where  men  have  iron,  cattle,  agriculture, 
kings,  houses,  a  disciplined  army,  not  where  men  have 
none  of  these  things.  The  Zulu  godless  ancestor-worship, 
then,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  is,  like  their  material  culture, 
not  an  early  but  a  late  development.  The  Zulus  '  hear  of 
a  King  which  is  above  ' — '  the  heavenly  King.' 4  '  We  did 
not  hear  of  him  first  from  white  men.  .  .  .  But  he  is  not 
like  Unkulunkulu,  who,  we  say,  made  all  things.'Here  may  be  dimly  descried  the  ideas  of  a  God,  and  a 
subordinate  demiurge.  '  The  King  is  above,  Unkulunkulu 
is  beneath.'  The  King  above  punishes  sin,  striking  the 
sinner  by  lightning.  Nor  do  th;;  Zulus  know  how  they

1  Callaway,  p.  1.  '  Op.  cit.  p.  3.

3  Op.  cit.  p.  7.  '  Op.  cit.  p.  19.

228  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

have  sinned.  '  There  remained  only  that  word  about  the 
heaven,'  '  which,'  says  Dr.  Callaway,  '  implies  that  there 
might  have  been  other  words  which  are  now  lost.'  There 
is  great  confusion  of  thought.  Unkulunkulu  made  the 
heaven,  where  the  unknown  King  reigns,  a  hard  task  for  a 
First  Man.1  '  In  process  of  time  we  have  come  to  worship 
the  Amadhlozi  (spirits)  only,  because  we  know  not  what 
to  say  about  Unkulunkulu.' 2  '  It  is  on  that  account, 
then,  that  we  seek  out  for  ourselves  the  Amadhlozi  (spirits), 
that  we  may  not  always  be  thinking  about  Unkulunkulu.'

All  this  attests  a  faint  lingering  shadow  of  a  belief 
too  ethereal,  too  remote,  for  a  practical  conquering  race, 
which  prefers  intelligible  serviceable  ghosts,  with  a  special 
regard  for  their  own  families.

Ukoto,  a  very  old  Zulu,  said :  '  When  we  were  children 
it  was  said  "  The  Lord  is  in  heaven."  .  .  .  They  used  to 
point  to  the  Lord  on  high  ;  we  did  not  hear  his  name.' 
Unkulunkulu  was  understood,  by  this  patriarch,  to  refer  to 
immediate  ancestors,  whose  names  and  genealogies  he 
gave.3  '  We  beard  it  said  that  the  Creator  of  the  world 
was  the  Lord  who  is  above  ;  people  used  always,  when  I 
was  growing  up,  to  point  towards  heaven.'A  very  old  woman  was  most  reluctant  to  speak  of 
Unkulunkulu  ;  at  last  she  said,  '  Ah,  it  is  he  in  fact  who  is 
the  Creator,  who  is  in  heaven,  of  whom  the  ancients  spoke.' 
Then  the  old  woman  began  to  babble  humorously  of  how 
tho  white  men  made  all  things.  Again,  Unkulunkulu  is 
said  to  have  been  created  by  Utilexo.  Utilexo  was  in- 
visible. Unkulunkulu  was  visible,  and  so  got  credit  not 
really  his  due.4  When  the  hoaven  is  said  to  be  the  Chief's 
(tho  chief  being  a  living  Zulu)  '  they  do  not  believe  what 
they  say,'  the  phrase  is  a  mere  hyperbolical  compliment.'

1  Callaway,  pp.  20,  21.  2  Pp.  26,  27.

3  !'p.  49,  50.  4  P.  07.  •  P.  122.

SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS  2291  Callaway,  pp.  20,  21.  2  Pp.  26,  27.

3  !'p.  49,  50.  4  P.  07.  •  P.  122.

SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS  229

On  this  examination  of  the  evidence,  it  certainly  seems 
as  logical  to  conjecture  that  the  Zulus  had  once  such  an 
idea  of  a  Supreme  Being  as  lower  races  entertain,  and  then 
nearly  lost  it ;  as  to  say  that  Zulus,  though  a  monarchical 
race,  have  not  yet  developed  a  King-God  out  of  the  throng 
of  spirits  (Amatongo).  The  Zulus,  the  Norsemen  of  the 
South,  so  to  speak,  are  a  highly  practical  military  race. 
A  Deity  at  all  abstract  was  not  to  their  liking.  Service- 
able family  spirits,  who  continually  provided  an  excuse 
for  a  dinner  of  roast  beef,  were  to  their  liking.  The  less 
developed  races  do  not  kill  their  flocks  commonly  for  food. 
A  sacrifice  is  needed  as  a  pretext.  To  the  gods  of 
Andamanese,  Bushmen,  Australians,  no  sacrifice  is  offered. 
To  the  Supreme  Being  of  most  African  peoples  no  sacrifice 
is  offered.  There  is  no  festivity  in  the  worship  of  these 
Supreme  Beings,  no  feasting,  at  all  events.  They  are  not 
to  be  '  got  at  '  by  gifts  or  sacrifices.  The  Amatongo  are 
to  be  '  got  at,'  are  bribable,  supply  an  excuse  for  a  good 
dinner,  and  thus  the  practical  Amatongo  are  honoured, 
while,  in  the  present  generation  of  Zulus,  Unkulunkulu  is 
a  joke,  and  the  Lord  in  Heaven  is  the  shadow  of  a  name. 
Clearly  this  does  not  point  to  the  recent  but  to  the  remote 
development  of  the  higher  ideas,  now  superseded  by 
spirit-worship.

We  shall  next  see  how  this  view,  the  opposite  of  the 
anthropological  theory,  works  when  applied  to  other  races, 
especially  to  other  African  races.

230  THE   MAKING   OF   FtELIGION

XIII

MORE    SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS230  THE   MAKING   OF   FtELIGION

XIII

MORE    SAVAGE    SUPREME    BEINGS

IF  many  of  the  lowest  savages  known  to  us  entertain 
ideas  of  a  Supreme  Being  such  as  we  find  among  Fue- 
gians,  Australians,  Bushmen,  and  Andamanese,  are  there 
examples,  besides  the  Zulus,  of  tribes  higher  in  material 
culture  who  seem  to  have  had  such  notions,  but  to  have 
partly  forgotten  or  neglected  them  ?  Miss  Kingsley,  a 
lively,  observant,  and  unprejudiced,  though  rambling 
writer,  gives  this  very  account  of  the  Bantu  races. 
Oblivion,  or  neglect,  will  show  itself  in  leaving  the 
Supreme  Being  alone,  as  he  needs  no  propitiation,  while 
devoting  sacrifice  and  ritual  to  fetishes  and  ghosts.  That 
chis  should  be  done  is  perfectly  natural  if  the  Supreme 
Being  (who  wants  no  sacrifice)  were  the  first  evolved  in 
thought,  while  venal  fetishes  and  spirits  came  in  as  a 
result  of  the  ghost  theory.  But  if,  as  a  result  of  the 
ghost  theory,  the  Supreme  Being  came  last  in  evolution, 
he  ought  to  be  the  most  fashionable  object  of  worship, 
the  latest  developed,  the  most  powerful,  and  most  to  be 
propitiated.  He  is  the  reverse.

To  take  an  example  :  the  Dinkas  of  the  Upper  Nile 
('  godless,'  says  Sir  Samuel  Baker)  '  pay  a  very  theoretical 
kind  of  homage  to  the  all-powerful  Being,  dwelling  in 
heaven,  whence  he  sees  all  things.  He  is  called  "  Dendid  " 
(great  rain,  that  is,  universal  benediction?).'  He  is  omni- 
potent, but,  being  all  beneficence,  can  do  no  evil  ;  so,  not 
being  feared,  he  is  not  addressed  in  prayer.  The  evil

MORE   SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  281

spirit,  on  the  other  hand,  receives  sacrifices.     The  Dinkas 
have  a  strange  old  chant :

'  At  the  beginning,  when  Dendid  made  all  things,MORE   SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  281

spirit,  on  the  other  hand,  receives  sacrifices.     The  Dinkas 
have  a  strange  old  chant :

'  At  the  beginning,  when  Dendid  made  all  things,

He  created  the  Sun, 
And  the  Sun  is  born,  and  dies,  and  comes  again  !

He  created  the  Stars, 
And  the  Stars  are  born,  and  die,  and  come  again  !

He  created  Man, 
And  Man  is  born,  and  dies,  and  returns  no  more  ! '

It  is  like  the  lament  of  Moschus.1

Bussegger  compares  the  Dinkas,  and  all  the  neigh- 
bouring peoples  who  hold  the  same  beliefs,  to  modern 
Deists.2  They  are  remote  from  Atheism  and  from  cult ! 
Suggestions  about  an  ancient  Egyptian  influence  are 
made,  but  popular  Egyptian  religion  was  not  monotheistic, 
and  priestly  thought  could  scarcely  influence  the  ancestors 
of  the  Dinkas.  M.  Lejean  says  these  peoples  are  so 
practical  and  utilitarian  that  missionary  religion  takes  no 
hold  on  them.  Mr.  Spencer  does  not  give  the  ideas  of  the 
Dinkas,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  too  beneficent 
Dendid  could  be  evolved  out  of  ghost-propitiation,  '  the 
origin  of  all  religions.'  Bather  the  Dinkas,  a  practical 
people,  seem  to  have  simply  forgotten  to  be  grateful  to 
their  Maker ;  or  have  decided,  more  to  the  credit  of  the 
clearness  of  their  heads  than  the  warmth  of  their  hearts, 
that  gratitude  he  does  not  want.  Like  the  French  philo- 
sopher they  cultivate  I' independence  du  coeur,  being  in 
this  matter  strikingly  unlike  the  Pawnees.

Let  us  now  take  a  case  in  which  ancestor- worship, 
and  no  other  form  of  religion  (beyond  mere  superstitions), 
has  been  declared  to  be  the  practice  of  an  African  people. 
Mr.  Spencer  gives  the  example  of  natives  of  the  south-1  Lejean,  Rev.  des  Deux  Mondes,  April  1862,  p.  760.     Citing  for  the 
chant,  Beltrame,  Dizionario  della  lingua  denka,  MS.

2  Waitz,  ii.  74.

232  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

eastern  district  of  Central  Africa  described  by  Mr.  Mac- 
donald  in  '  Africana.' l  The  dead  man  becomes  a  ghost-god, 
receives  prayer  and  sacrifice,  is  called  a  Mulungu  (= great 
ancestor  or  =sky  ?),  is  preferred  above  older  spirits,  now 
forgotten  ;  such  old  spirits  may,  however,  have  a  mountain 
top  for  home,  a  great  chief  being  better  remembered  ;  the 
mountain  god  is  prayed  to  for  rain  ;  higher  gods  were 
probably  similar  local  gods  in  an  older  habitat  of  the 
Yao.2

Such  is  in  the  main  Mr.  Spencer's  resume  of  Mr.  Duff 
Macdonald's  report.  He  omits  whatever  Mr.  Macdonald 
says  about  a  Being  among  the  Yaos,  analogous  to  the  Dendid 
of  the  Dinkas,  or  the  Darumulun  of  Australia,  or  the  Huron 
Ahone.  Yet  analysis  detects,  in  Mr.  Macdonald's  report, 
copious  traces  of  such  a  Being,  though  Mr.  Macdonald

himself  believes  in  ancestor-worship  as  the  Source  of  the

L

local  religion.  Thus,  Mulungu,  or  Mlungu,  used  as  a 
proper  name,  '  is  said  to  be  the  great  spirit,  msimu,  of  all 
men,  a  spirit  formed  by  adding  all  the  departed  spirits 
together.'3  This  is  a  singular  stretch  of  savage  philo- 
sophy, and  indicates  (says  Mr.  Macdonald)  '  a  grasping 
after  a  Being  who  is  the  totality  of  all  individual 
existence.  ...  If  it  fell  from  the  lips  of  civilised  men 
instead  of  savages,  it  would  be  regarded  as  philosophy. 
Expressions  of  this  kind  among  the  natives  are  partly 
traditional,  and  partly  dictated  by  the  big  thoughts 
of  the  moment.'  Philosophy  it  is,  but  a  philosophy 
dependent  on  the  ghost  theory.I  go  on  to  show  that  the  Wayao  have,  though  Mr. 
Spencer  omits  him,  a  Being  who  precisely  answers  to 
Uarumulun,  if  stripped  (perhaps)  of  his  ethical  aspect. 
On  this  point  we  are  left  in  uncertainty,  just  because 
Mr.  Macdonald  could  not  ascertain  the  secrets  of  his 
1  1882.  z  Ecclesiastical  Institutions,  681.  '  Africana,  i.  66.

MORE    SAVAGE    SUPREME   BEINGS  233

mysteries,  which,  in  Australia,  have  been  revealed  to  a 
few  Europeans.

Where  Mulungu  is  used  as  a  proper  name,  it '  certainly 
points  to  a  personal  Being,  by  the  Wayao  sometimes  said 
to  be  the  same  as  Mtanga.  At  other  times  he  is  a  Being 
that  possesses  many  powerful  servants,  but  is  himself 
kept  a  good  deal  beyond  the  scene  of  earthly  affairs,  like 
the  gods  of  Epicurus.'

This  is,  of  course,  precisely  the  feature  in  African 
theology  which  interests  us.  The  Supreme  Being,  in 
spite  of  the  potency  which  his  supposed  place  as  latest 
evolved  out  of  the  ghost-world  should  naturally  give  him, 
is  neglected,  either  as  half  forgotten,  or  for  philosophical 
reasons.  For  these  reasons  Epicurus  and  Lucretius  make 
their  gods  otiosi,  unconcerned,  and  the  Wayao,  with  their 
universal  collective  spirit,  are  no  mean  philosophers.

'  This  Mulungu  '  or  Mtanga,  '  in  the  world  beyond  the 
grave,  is  represented  as  assigning  to  spirits  their  proper 
places,'  whether  for  ethical  reasons  or  not  we  are  not 
informed.1  Santos  (1586)  says  '  they  acknowledge  a  God 
who,  both  in  this  world  and  the  next,  measures  retribution 
for  the  good  or  evil  done  in  this.'' In  the  native  hypothesis  about  creation  "the  people 
of  Mulungu"  play  a  very  important  part.'  These 
ministers  of  his  who  do  his  pleasure  are,  therefore,  as  is 
Mulungu  himself,  regarded  as  prior  to  the  existing  world. 
Therefore  they  cannot,  in  Wayao  opinion,  be  ghosts  of 
the  dead  at  all ;  nor  can  we  properly  call  them  '  spirits.' 
They  are  beings,  eternal,  creative,  but  undefined.  The 
word  Mulungu,  however,  is  now  applied  to  spirits  of 
individuals,  but  whether  it  means  '  sky  '  (Salt)  or  whether 
it  means  'ancestor'  (Bleek),  it  cannot  be  made  to  prove 
that  Mulungu  himself  was  originally  envisaged  as  '  spirit.'

1  Africana,  i.  07.

234  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

For,  manifestly,  suppose  that  the  idea  of  powerful  beings, 
undefined,  came  first  in  evolution,  and  was  followed  by 
the  ghost  idea,  that  idea  might  then  be  applied  to  ex- 
plaining the  pre-existent  creative  powers.

Mtanga  is  by  '  some '  localised  as  the  god  of  Mangochi, 
an  Olympus  left  behind  by  the  Yao  in  their  wanderings. 
Here,  some  hold,  his  voice  is  still, audible.  'Others  say 
that  Mtanga  never  was  a  man  ...  he  was  concerned  in 
the  first  introduction  of  men  into  the  world.  He  gets 
credit  for  ....  making  mountains  and  rivers.  He  is 
intimately  associated  with  a  year  of  plenty.  He  is  called 
Mchimwene  juene,  '  a  very  chief.'  He  has  a  kind  of  evil 
opposite,  Chitowe,  but  this  being,  the  Satan  of  the  creed, 
'is  a  child  or  subject  of  Mtanga,'  an  evil  angel,  in  fact.1

The  thunder  god,  Mpambe,  in  Yao,  Njasi  (lightning) 
is  also  a  minister  of  the  Supreme  Being.  '  He  is  sent 
by  Mtanga  with  rain.'  Europeans  are  cleverer  than 
natives,  because  we  '  stayed  longer  with  the  people  of 
God  (Mulungu).'I  do  not  gather  that,  though  associated  with  good 
crops,  Mtanga  or  Mulungu  receives  any  sacrifice  or  pro- 
pitiation. '  The  chief  addresses  his  own  god  ; ' 2  the  chief 
'  will  not  trouble  himself  about  his  great-great-grand- 
father ;  he  will  present  his  offering  to  his  own  immediate 
predecessor,  saying,  '  O  father,  I  do  not  know  all  your 
relatives ;  you  know  them  all :  invite  them  to  feast  with 
you.' 3

'  All  the  offerings  are  supposed  to  point  to  some  want 
of  the  spirit.'  Mtanga,  on  the  other  hand,  is  nihil  indiga 
nostri.

A  village  god  is  given  beer  to  drink,  as  Indra  got 
Soma.  A  dead  chief  is  propitiated  by  human  sacrifices. 
I  find  no  trace  of  any  gift  to  Mtanga.  His  mysteries  are

1  Africana,  i.  71,  72.  -  i.  88.  :1  i.  68.

MORE    SAVAGE    SUPIiEME   BEINGS  235

really  unknown  to  Mr.  Macdonald  :  they  were  laughed  at 
by  a  travelled  and  '  emancipated  '  Yao.1

'  These  rites  are  supposed  to  be  inviolably  concealed 
by  the  initiated,  who  often  say  that  they  would  die  if  they 
revealed  them.' 2

How  can  we  pretend  to  understand  a  religion  if  we  do- 
not  know  its  secret  ?  That  secret,  in  Australia,  yields  the 
certainty  of  the  ethical  character  of  the  Supreme  Being. 
Mr.  Macdonald  says  about  the  initiator  (a  grotesque 
figure)  :—

'  He  delivers  lectures,  and  is  said  to  give  much  good 
advice  .  .  .  the  lectures  condemn  selfishness,  and  a  selfish 
person  is  called  mwisicliana,  that  is,  "uninitiated."

There  could  not  be  better  evidence  of  the  presence  of  the 
ethical  element  in  the  religious  mysteries.  Among  the 
Yao,  as  among  the  Australian  Kurnai,  the  central  secret 
lesson  of  religion  is  the  lesson  of  Our  Lord.It  is  not  stated  that  Mtanga  instituted  or  presides  over 
the  mysteries.  Judging  from  the  analogy  of  Eleusis,  the 
Bora,  the  Bed  Indian  initiations,  and  so  on,  \ve  may 
expect  this  to  be  the  belief  ;  but  Mr.  Macdonald  knows 
very  little  about  the  matter.

The  legendary  tales  say  '  all  things  in  this  world 
were  made  by  "  God."  '  At  first  there  wrere  not 
people,  but  "  God  "  and  beasts.'  '  God  '  here,  is  Mlungu. 
The  other  statement  is  apparently  derived  from  exist- 
ing ancestor-worship,  people  who  died  became  '  God ' 
(Mlungu).  But  God  is  prior  to  death,  for  the  Y"ao< 
have  a  form  of  the  usual  myth  of  the  origin  of  death, 
also  of  sleep  :  '  death  and  sleep  are  one  word,  they  are 
of  one  family.'  God  dwells  on  high,  while  a  malevolent 
'  great  one,'  who  disturbed  the  mysteries  and  slew  the 
initiated,  was  turned  into  a  mountain/''

1  Africana,  i.  130.  -  Ilml.  :  i.  279-301.

236  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION1  Africana,  i.  130.  -  Ilml.  :  i.  279-301.

236  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

In  spite  of  information  confessedly  defective,  I  have 
extracted  from  Mr.  Spencer's  chosen  authority  a  mass  of 
facts,  pointing  to  a  Yao  belief  in  an  eternal  being,  maker 
of  mountains  and  rivers  ;  existent  before  men  were ;  not 
liable  to  death — which  came  late  among  them — beneficent ; 
not  propitiated  by  sacrifice  (as  far  as  the  evidence  goes)  ; 
moral  (if  we  may  judge  by  the  analogy  of  the  mysteries), 
and  yet  occupying  the  religious  background,  while  the 
foreground  is  held  by  the  most  recent  ghosts.  To  prove 
Mr.  Spencer's  theory,  he  ought  to  have  given  a  full 
account  of  this  being,  and  to  have  shown  how  he  was 
developed  out  of  ghosts  which  are  forgotten  in  inverse 
ratio  to  their  distance  from  the  actual  generation.  1 
conceive  that  Mr.  Spencer  would  find  a  mid-point  between 
a  common  ghost  and  Mtanga,  in  a  ghost  of  a  chief 
attached  to  a  mountain,  the  place  and  place-name 
preserving  the  ghost's  name  and  memory.  But  it  is,  I 
think,  a  far  cry  from  such  a  chief's  ghost  to  the  pre- 
human, angel-served  Mtanga.Of  ancestor  worship  and  ghost  worship,  we  have 
abundant  evidence.  But  the  position  of  Mtanga  raises 
one  of  these  delicate  and  crucial  questions  which  cannot 
be  solved  by  ignoring  their  existence.  Is  Mtanga  evolved 
out  of  an  ancestral  ghost  ?  If  so,  why,  as  greatest  of 
divine  beings,  '  Very  Chief,'  and  having  powerful  minis- 
ters under  him,  is  he  left  unpropitiated,  unless  it  be  by 
moral  discourses  at  the  mysteries?  As  a  much  more 
advanced  idea  than  that  of  a  real  father's  ghost,  he  ought 
to  be  much  later  in  evolution,  fresher  in  conception,  and 
more  adored.  How  do  we  explain  his  lack  of  adoration  ? 
Was  he  originally  envisaged  as  a  ghost  at  all,  and,  if  so, 
by  what  curious  but  uniform  freak  of  savage  logic  is  he 
regarded  as  prior  to  men,  and  though  a  ghost,  prior  to 
death  ?  Is  it  not  certain  that  such  a  being  could  be  con-

MORE   SA.VAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  237

ceived  of  by  men  who  had  never  dreamed  of  ghosts  ? 
Is  there  any  logical  reason  why  Mtanga  should  not  be 
regarded  as  originally  on  the  same  footing  as  Darumulun, 
but  now  half  forgotten  and  neglected,  for  practical  or 
philosophical  reasons  ?On  these  problems  light  is  thrown  by  a  successor  of 
Mr.  Spencer's  authority,  Mr.  Duff  Macdonald,  in  the 
Blantyre  Mission.  This  gentleman,  the  Rev.  David 
Clement  Scott,  has  published  '  A  Cyclopaedic  Dictionary 
of  the  Mang'anja  Language  in  British  Central  Africa.' ' 
Looking  at  ancestral  spirits  first,  we  find  Mzimu,  '  spirits 
of  the  departed,  supposed  to  come  in  dreams.'  Though 
abiding  in  the  spirit  world,  they  also  haunt  thickets, 
they  inspire  Mlauli,  prophets,  and  make  them  rave  and 
utter  predictions.  Offerings  are  made  to  them.  Here 
is  a  prayer :  '  Watch  over  me,  my  ancestor,  who  died  long 
ago ;  tell  the  great  spirit  at  the  head  of  my  race  from 
whom  my  mother  came.'  There  are  little  hut-temples,, 
and  the  chief  directs  the  sacrifices  of  food,  or  of  animals. 
There  are  religious  pilgrimages,  with  sacrifice,  to  moun- 
tains. God,  like  men  in  this  region,  has  various  names, 
as  Chiuta,  '  God  in  space  and  the  rainbow  sign  across  ; ' 
Mpambe,  '  God  Almighty  '  (or  rather  '  pro-excellent ')  ; 
Mlezi,  '  God  the  Sustainer,'  and  Mulungu,  '  God  who  is 
spirit.'  Mulungu=God,  'not  spirits  or  fetish.'  'You 
can't  put  the  plural,  as  God  is  One,'  say  the  natives. 
•  There  are  no  idols  called  gods,  and  spirits  are  spirits  of 
people  who  have  died,  not  gods.'  Idols  are  Zitunzi-zitunzi. 
'  Spirits  are  supposed  to  be  with  Mulungu.'  God  made 
the  world  and  man.  Our  author  says  '  when  the  chief  or 
people  sacrifice  it  is  to  God,'  but  he  also  says  that  they 
sacrifice  to  ancestral  spirits.  There  is  some  confusion  of

1  Edinburgh,  1892.

238  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

ideas  here  :  Mr.  Macdonald  says  nothing  of  sacrifice  to 
Mtanga.1  Edinburgh,  1892.

238  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

ideas  here  :  Mr.  Macdonald  says  nothing  of  sacrifice  to 
Mtanga.

Mr.  Scott  does  not  seeni  to.  know  more  about  the 
Mysteries  than  Mr.  Macdonald,  and  his  article  on 
Mulungu  does  not  much  enlighten  us.  Does  Mulungu,  as 
Creative  God,  receive  sacrifice,  or  not  ?  l  Mr.  Scott  gives 
no  instance  of  this,  under  Nsemle  (sacrifice),  where  ances- 
tors, or  hill-dwelling  ghosts  of  chiefs,  are  offered  food  ; 
yet,  as  we  have  seen,  under  Mulungu,  he  avers  that  the 
chiefs  and  people  do  sacrifice  to  God.  He  appears  to  be 
confusing  the  Creator  with  spirits,  and  no  reliance  can  be 
placed  on  this  part  of  his  evidence.  '  At  the  back  of  all 
this  '  (sacrifice  to  spirits)  '  there  is  God.'  If  I  understand 
Mr.  Scott,  sacrifices  are  really  made  only  to  spirits,  but  he 
is  trying  to  argue  that,  after  all,  the  theistic  conception 
is  at  the  back  of  the  animistic  practice,  thus  importing 
his  theory  into  his  facts.  His  theory  would,  really,  be  in 
a  better  way,  if  sacrifice  is  not  offered  to  the  Creator,  but 
this  had  not  occurred  to  Mr.  Scott.

It  is  plain,  in  any  case,  that  the  religion  of  the 
Africans  in  the  Blantyre  region  has  an  element  not 
easily  to  be  derived  from  ancestral  spirit-worship,  an 
element  not  observed  by  Mr.  Spencer.

Nobody  who  has  followed  the  examples  already 
adduced  will  be  amazed  by  what  Waitz  calls  the  '  sur- 
prising result '  of  recent  inquiries  among  the  great  negro 
race.  Among  the  branches  where  foreign  influence  is 
least  to  be  suspected,  we  discover,  behind  their  more  con- 
spicuous fetishisms  and  superstitions,  something  which 
we  cannot  exactly  call  Monotheism,  yet  which  tends  in1  Incidentally  Mr.  Macdonald  shows  that,  contrary  to  Mr.  Spencer's 
opinion,  these  savages  have  words  for  dreams  and  dreaming.  They  inter- 
pret dreams  by  a  system  of  symbols,  '  a  canoe  is  ill  luck,'  and  '  dreams  go 
by  contraries.'

MORE    SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  239

that  direction.1     Waitz  quotes  Wilson  for  the  fact  that, 
their  fetishism  apart,  they  adore  a  Supreme  Being  as  the 
Creator :  and  do  not  honour  him  with  sacrifice. 
The  remarks  of  Waitz  may  be  cited  in  full :

'  The  religion  of  the  negro  may  be  considered  by 
some  as  a  particularly  rude  form  of  polytheism  and  may 
be  branded  with  the  special  name  of  fetishism.  It  would 
follow,  from  a  minute  examination  of  it,  that — apart  from 
the  extravagant  and  fantastic  traits,  which  are  rooted  in 
the  character  of  the  negro,  and  which  radiate  therefrom 
over  all  his  creations — in  comparison  with  the  religions  of 
other  savages  it  is  neither  very  specially  differentiated  nor 
very  specially  crude  in  form.

'  But  this  opinion  can  be  held  to  be  quite  true  only 
while  we  look  at  the  outside  of  the  negro's  religion,  or 
estimate  its  significance  from  arbitrary  pre-suppositions, 
as  is  specially  the  case  with  Ad.  Wuttke.'  By  a  deeper  insight,  which  of  late  several  scientific 
investigators  have  succeeded  in  attaining,  we  reach, 
rather,  the  surprising  conclusion  that  several  of  the  negro 
races — on  whom  we  cannot  as  yet  prove,  and  can  hardly 
conjecture,  the  influence  of  a  more  civilised  people — in  the 
embodying  of  their  religious  conceptions  are  further  ad- 
vanced than  almost  all  other  savages,  so  far  that,  even  if 
we  do  not  call  them  monotheists,  we  may  still  think  of 
them  as  standing  on  the  boundary  of  monotheism,  seeing 
that  their  religion  is  also  mixed  with  a  great  mass  of  rude 
superstition  which,  in  turn,  among  other  peoples,  seems 
to  overrun  completely  the  purer  religious  conceptions.'

This  conclusion  as  to  an  element  of  pure  faith  in 
negro  religion  would  not  have  surprised  Waitz,  had  recent 
evidence  as  to  the  same  creed  among  lower  savages  lain 
before  him  as  he  worked.

This  volume  of  his  book  was  composed  in  1860.  In 
1872  he  had  become  well  aware  of  the  belief  in  a  good 
Creator  among  the  Australian  natives,  and  of  the  absence 
among  them  of  ancestor  worship.2

1  Waitz,  Anthropolotjie,  ii.  167.

2  Waitz  und  Gerland,  Anthropologie,  vi.  796-799  and  809.     In  1874

240  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Waitz's  remarks  on  the  Supreme  Being  of  the  Negro 
are  well  worth  noting,  from  his  unconcealed  astonishment 
at  the  discovery.240  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Waitz's  remarks  on  the  Supreme  Being  of  the  Negro 
are  well  worth  noting,  from  his  unconcealed  astonishment 
at  the  discovery.

Wilson's  observations  on  North  and  South  Guinea 
religion  were  published  in  1856.  After  commenting  on 
the  delicate  task  of  finding  out  what  a  savage  religion 
really  is,  he  writes  :  '  The  belief  in  one  great  Supreme  Being, 
who  made  and  upholds  all  things,  is  universal.' '  The 
names  of  the  being  are  translated  '  Maker,'  '  Preserver/ 
'Benefactor,'  'Great  Friend.'  Though  compact  of  all 
good  qualities,  the  being  has  allowed  the  world  to  '  come 
under  the  control  of  evil  spirits,'  who,  alone,  receive 
religious  worship.  Though  he  leaves  things  uncontrolled, 
yet  the  chief  being  (as  in  Homer)  ratifies  the  Oath,  at  a 
treaty,  and  is  invoked  to  punish  criminals  when  ordeal 
water  is  to  be  drunk.  So  far,  then,  he  has  an  ethical 
influence.  '  Grossly  wicked  people  '  are  buried  outside  of 
the  regular  place.  Fetishism  prevails,  with  spiritualism, 
and  Wilson  thinks  that  mediums  might  pick  up  some 
good  tricks  in  Guinea.  He  gives  no  examples.  Their 
inspired  men  do  things  '  that  cannot  be  accounted  for,'  by 
the  use  of  narcotics.

The  South  Guinea  Creator,  Anyambia  (  =  good  spirit?), 
is  good,  but  capricious.  He  has  a  good  deputy,  Ombwiri 
(spelled  '  Mbuiri '  by  Miss  Kingsley) ;  he  alone  has  no 
priests,  but  communicates  directly  with  men.  The 
neighbouring  Shekuni  have  mysteries  of  the  Great  Spirit. 
No  details  are  given.  This  great  being,  Mwetyi,  witnesses 
covenants  arid  punishes  perjury.  This  people  are  ancestor- 
worshippers,  but  their  Supreme  Being  is  not  said  to  receiveMr.  Hewitt's  evidence  on  the  moral  element  in  the  mysteries  was  not  pub- 
lished.    Waitz   scouts   the  idea  that  the  higher  Australian  beliefs  are  of 
European  origin.     '  Wir  sehen  vielmehr  uralte  Triimmer  iihnlicher  Mytho- 
logenie  in  ihnen,'  (vi.  798)  flotsam  from  ideas  of  immemorial  antiquity. 
'  Wilson,  p.  209.

MORE   SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  241

sacrifice,  as  ghosts  do,  while  he  is  so  far  from  being 
powerless,  like  Unkulunkulu,  that,  but  for  feaa:  of  his 
wrath,  '  their  national  treaties  would  have  little  or  no 
force.' '  Having  no  information  about  the  mysteries,  of 
course,  we  know  nothing  of  other  moral  influences  which 
are,  or  may  be,  exercised  by  these  great,  powerful,  and  not 
wholly  otiose  beings.

The  celebrated  traveller,  Mungo  Park,  who  visited 
Africa  in  1805,  had  good  opportunities  of  understanding 
the  natives.  He  did  not  hurry  through  the  land  with  a 
large  armed  force,  but  alone,  or  almost  alone,  paid  his 
way  with  his  brass  buttons.  '  I  have  conversed  with  all 
ranks  and  conditions  upon  the  subject  of  their  faith,'  he 
says,  '  and  can  pronounce,  without  the.  smallest  shadow 
of  doubt,  that  the  belief  in  one  God  and  in  a  future  state 
of  reward  and  punishment  is  entire  and  universal  among 
them.'  This  cannot  strictly  be  called  monotheism, 
as  there  are  many  subordinate  spirits  who  may  be 
influenced  by  *  magical  ceremonies.'  But  if  monotheism 
means  belief  in  One  Spirit  alone,  or  religious  regard  paid 
to  One  Spirit  alone,  it  exists  nowhere — no,  not  in  Islam.Park  thinks  it  remarkable  that  '  the  Almighty '  only 
receives  prayers  at  the  new  moon  (of  sacrifice  to  the 
Almighty  he  says  nothing),  and  that,  being  the  creator 
and  preserver  of  all  things,  he  is  '  of  so  exalted  a  nature 
that  it  is  idle  to  imagine  the  feeble  supplications  of 
wretched  mortals  can  reverse  the  decrees  and  change  the 
purpose  of  unerring  Wisdom.'  The  new  moon  prayers 
are  mere  matters  of  tradition ;  '  our  fathers  did  it  before 
us.'  '  Such  is  the  blindness  of  unassisted  nature,'  says 
Park,  who  is  not  satirising,  in  Swift's  manner,  the  prayers 
of  Presbyterians  at  home  on  Yarrow.

Thus,  the   African    Supreme  Being  is  unpropitiated,

'  Wilson,  p.  392.

242  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

while  inferior  spirits  are  constrained  by  magic  or  pro- 
pitiated with  food.

We  meet  our  old  problem :  How  has  this  God,  in 
the  conception  of  whom  there  is  so  much  philosophy, 
developed  out  of  these  hungry  ghosts  ?  The  influence  of 
Islam  can  scarcely  be  suspected,  Allah  being  addressed,  of 
course,  in  endless  prayers,  while  the  African  god  receives 
none.  Indeed,  it  would  be  more  plausible  to  say  that 
Mahomet  borrowed  Allah  from  the  widespread  belief  which 
we  are  studying,  than  that  the  negro's  Supreme  Being 
was  borrowed  from  Allah.

Park  had,  as  we  saw,  many  opportunities  of  familiar 
discussion  with  the  people  on  whose  mercies  he  threw 
himself.

'  But  it  is  not  often  that  the  negroes  make  their 
religious  opinions  the  subject  of  conversation ;  when 
interrogated,  in  particular,  concerning  their  ideas  of  a 
future  state,  they  express  themselves  with  great  reverence, 
but  endeavour  to  shorten  the  discussion  by  saying,  "Mo  o 
mo  inta  allo  "  ("  No  man  knows  anything  about  it  ").' !Park  himself,  in  extreme  distress,  and  almost  in 
despair,  chanced  to  observe  the  delicate  beauty  of  a  small 
moss-plant,  and,  reflecting  that  the  Creator  of  so  frail  a 
thing  could  not  be  indifferent  to  any  of  His  creatures, 
plucked  up  courage  and  reached  safety.2  He  was  not  of 
the  negro  philosophy,  and  is  the  less  likely  to  have 
invented  it.  The  new  moon  prayer,  said  in  a  whisper, 
was  reported  to  Park,  'by  many  different  people,'  to 
contain  '  thanks  to  God  for  his  kindness  during  the 
existence  of  the  past  moon,  and  to  solicit  a  continuation  of 
his  favour  during  the  new  one.'  This,  of  course,  may  prove 
Islamite  influence,  and  is  at  variance  with  the  general 
tendency  of  the  religious  philosophy  as  described.

1  Park's  Journey,  i.  274,  275,  1815.  a  P.  245.

MORE   SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  243

We  now  arrive  at  a  theory  of  the  Supreme  Being 
among  a  certain  African  race  which  would  be  entirely 
fatal  to  my  whole  hypothesis  on  this  topic,  if  it  could  be 
demonstrated  correct  in  fact,  and  if  it  could  be  stretched 
so  as  to  apply  to  the  Australians,  Fuegians,  Andamanese, 
and  other  very  backward  peoples.  It  is  the  hypothesis 
that  the  Supreme  Being  is  a  '  loan-god,'  borrowed  from 
Europeans.

The  theory  is  very  lucidly  set  forth  in  Major  Ellis's

*  Tshi-speaking   Peoples   of    the    Gold   Coast.' l      Major 
Ellis's   opinion   coincides    with   that   of    Waitz    in    his*  Tshi-speaking   Peoples   of    the    Gold   Coast.' l      Major 
Ellis's   opinion   coincides    with   that   of    Waitz    in    his

*  Introduction  to   Anthropology '    (an   opinion   to   which 
Waitz  does  not  seem  bigoted) — namely,  that  '  the  origi- 
nal form  of  all  religion  is  a  raw,  unsystematic  polytheism,' 
nature  being  peopled  by  inimical  powers  or  spirits,  and 
everyone  worshipping  what  he  thinks  most  dangerous  or 
most  serviceable.     There  are  few  general,  many  local  or 
personal,  objects  of  veneration.2     Major  Ellis  only  met 
this   passage    when   he   had   formed   his   own   ideas   by 
observation  of  the  Tshi  race.      We  do   not  pretend  to 
guess  what  '  the  original  form  of  all  religion  '  may  have 
been ;    but   we   have   given,    and    shall    give,    abundant 
evidence  for  the  existence  of   a   loftier  faith  than  this, 
among  peoples  much  lower  in  material  culture  than  the 
Tshi  races,  who  have  metals  and  an  organised  priesthood. 
They  occupy,  in  small  villages  (except    Coomassie   and 
Djuabin),  the   forests   of    the   Gold    Coast.      The   mere 
mention   of    Coomassie   shows    how   vastly   superior   in 
civilisation  the  Tshis  (Ashantis  and  Fantis)  are  to  the 
naked,  houseless  Australians.     Their  inland  communities, 
however,  are  '  mere  specks  in  a  vast  tract  of  impenetrable 
forest.'     The  coast  people  have  for  centuries  been  in  touch 
with  Europeans,  but  the   '  Tshi-speaking  races  are  now

1  London,  1887.  2  Ellis,  pp.  20,  21.

R  2

244  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

much  in  the  same  condition,  both  socially  and  morally r 
as  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  Portuguese  discovery.' lR  2

244  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

much  in  the  same  condition,  both  socially  and  morally r 
as  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  Portuguese  discovery.' l

Nevertheless,  Major  Ellis  explains  their  Supreme 
Being  as  the  result  of  European  influence  !  A  priori  this 
appears  highly  improbable.  That  a  belief  should  sweep 
over  all  these  specks  in  impenetrable  forest,  from  the 
coast-tribes  in  contact  with  Europeans,  and  that  this 
belief  should,  though  the  most  recent,  be  infinitely  the  least 
powerful,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  plausible  hypothesis. 
Moreover,  on  Major  Ellis's  theory  the  Supreme  Beings  of 
races  which  but  recently  came  for  the  first  time  in  contact 
with  Europeans,  Supreme  Beings  kept  jealously  apart 
from  European  ken,  and  revered  in  the  secrecy  of  ancient 
mysteries,  must  also,  by  parity  of  reason,  be  the  result  of 
European  influence.  Unfortunately,  Major  Ellis  gives  no 
evidence  for  his  statements  about  the  past  history  of  Tshi 
religion.  Authorities  he  must  have,  and  references  would 
he  welcome.•  With  people  in  the  condition  in  which  the  natives  of 
the  Gold  Coast  now  are,  religion  is  not  in  any  way  allied 
with  moral  ideas.'  2  We  have  given  abundant  evidence 
that  among  much  more  backward  tribes  morals  rest  on  a 
religious  sanction.  If  this  be  not  so  on  the  Gold  Coast 
we  cannot  accept  these  relatively  advanced  Fantis  and 
Ashantis  as  representing  the  '  original '  state  of  ethics  and 
religion,  any  more  than  those  people  with  cities,  a  king, 
a  priesthood,  iron,  and  gold,  represent  the  '  original ' 
material  condition  of  society.  Major  Ellis  also  shows 
that  the  Gods  exact  chastity  from  aspirants  to  the  priest- 
hood.:!  The  present  beliefs  of  the  Gold  Coast  are  kept  up 
by  organised  priesthoods  as  '  lucrative  business.' 4  Where 
there  is  no  lucre  and  no  priesthood,  as  among  more  back- 
ward races,  this  kind  of  business  cannot  be  done.  On  the

1   Kllis.  p.  4.  2  P.  10.  3  P.  120.  '  P.  15.

MORE    SAVAGE    SUPREME   BEINGS  245

Gold  Coast  men  can  only  approach  gods  through  priests.1 
This  is  degeneration.1   Kllis.  p.  4.  2  P.  10.  3  P.  120.  '  P.  15.

MORE    SAVAGE    SUPREME   BEINGS  245

Gold  Coast  men  can  only  approach  gods  through  priests.1 
This  is  degeneration.

Obviously,  if  religion  began  in  a  form  relatively  pure 
and  moral,  it  must  degenerate,  as  civilisation  advances, 
under  priests  who  '  exploit '  the  lucrative,  and  can  sec  no 
money  in  the  pure  elements  of  belief  and  practice.  That 
the  lucrative  elements  in  Christianity  were  exploited  by 
the  clergy,  to  the  neglect  of  ethics,  was  precisely  the 
complaint  of  the  Reformers.  From  these  lucrative 
elements  the  creed  of  the  Apostles  was  free,  and  a  similar 
freedom  marks  the  religion  of  Australia  or  of  the  Pawnees. 
We  cannot  possibly,  then,  expect  to  find  the  'original ?  state 
of  religion  among  a  people  subdued  to  a  money-grubbing 
priesthood,  like  the  Tshi  races.  Let  religion  begin  as 
pure  as  snow,  it  would  be  corrupted  by  priestly  trafficking 
in  its  lucrative  animistic  aspect.  And  priests  are  developed 
relatively  late.

Major  Ellis  discriminates  Tshi  gods  as —

1.  General,  worshipped  by  an  entire  tribe  or  more  tribes.

2.  Local  deities  of  river,  hill,  forest,  or  sea.

3.  Deities  of  families  or  corporations.

4.  Tutelary  deities  of  individuals.2.  Local  deities  of  river,  hill,  forest,  or  sea.

3.  Deities  of  families  or  corporations.

4.  Tutelary  deities  of  individuals.

The  second  class,  according  to  the  natives,  were 
appointed  by  the  first  class,  who  are  '  too  distant  or  in- 
different to  interfere  ordinarily  in  human  affairs.'  Thus, 
the  Huron  god,  Ahone,  punishes  nobody.  He  is  all 
sweetness  and  light,  but  '  has  a  partner,  Mr.  Jorkins,'  called 
Okeus.  On  our  hypothesis  this  indifference  of  high  gods 
suggests  the  crowding  out  of  the  great  disinterested  God 
by  venal  animistic  competition.  All  of  class  II.  '  appear 
to  have  been  originally  malignant.'  Though,  in  native 
belief,  class  I.  was  prior  to,  and  '  appointed  '  class  II., 
Major  Ellis  thinks  that  malignant  spirits  of  class  II.  were 
'  Ellis,  p.  125.

246  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

raised  to  class  I.  as  if  to  the  peerage,  while  classes  III. 
and  IV. '  are  clearly  the  product  of  priesthood ' — therefore 
late.

Major  Ellis  then  avers  that  when  Europeans  reached 
the  Gold  Coast,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  they  '  appear  to- 
have  found  '  a  Northern  God,  Tando,  and  a  Southern  Godr 
Bobowissi,  still  adored.  Bobowissi  makes  thunder  and 
rain,  lives  on  a  hill,  and  receives,  or  received,  human 
sacrifices.  But,  '  after  an  intercourse  of  some  years  with 
Europeans,'  the  villagers  near  European  forts  '  added  ta 
their  system  a  new  deity,  whom  they  termed  Nana  Nyan- 
kupon.  This  was  the  God  of  the  Christians,  borrowed 
from  them,  and  adapted  under  a  new  designation,  meaning 
'  Lord  of  the  sky.'  (This  is  conjectural.  Nyankum=ica,m. 
Nyansa  has  '  a  later  meaning,  "  craft."') lNow  Major  Ellis,  later,  has  to  contrast  Bosnian's, 
account  of  fetishism  (1700)  with  his  own  observations. 
According  to  Bosnian's  native  source  of  information,  men 
then  selected  their  own  fetishes.  These  are  now  selected 
by  priests.  Bosnian's  authority  was  wrong — or  priest- 
hood has  extended  its  field  of  business.  Major  Ellis 
argues  that  the  revolution  from  amateur  to  priestly 
selection  of  fetishes  could  not  occur  in  190  years,  '  over  a 
vast  tract  of  country,  amongst  peoples  living  in  semi- 
isolated  communities,  in  the  midst  of  pathless  forests, 
where  there  is  but  little  opportunity  for  the  exchange  of 
ideas,  and  where  ioe  know  they  have  been  uninfluenced  by 
any  higher  race.'

Yet  Major  Ellis's  theory  is  that  this  isolated  people 
were  influenced  by  a  higher  race,  to  the  extent  of  adopting 
a  totally  new  Supreme  Being,  from  Europeans,  a  being 
whom  they  in  no  way  sought  to  propitiate,  and  who  was 
of  no  practical  use.  And  this  they  did,  he  says,  not

1  Ellis,  pp.  24,  25.

MORE   SAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  247

under  priestly  influence,  but  in  the  face  of  priestly 
opposition.1

Major  Ellis's  logic  does  not  appear  to  be  consistent. 
In  any  case  we  ask  for  evidence  how,  in  the  '  impene- 
trable forests,'  did  a  new  Supreme  Deity  become  universally 
known?  Are  we  certain  that  travellers  (unquoted)  did 
not  discover  a  deity  with  no  priests,  or  ritual,  or  '  money 
in  the  concern,'  later  than  they  discovered  the  blood- 
stained, conspicuous,  lucrative  Bobowissi  ?  Why  was 
Nyankupon,  the  supposed  new  god  of  a  new  powerful  set 
of  strangers,  left  wholly  unpropitiated  ?  The  reverse  was 
to  be  expected.Major  Ellis  writes  :  '  Almost  certainly  the  addition  of 
one  more  to  an  already  numerous  family  '  of  gods,  '  was 
strenuously  resisted  by  the  priesthood,'  who,  confessedly, 
are  adding  new  lower  gods  every  day  !  Yet  Nyankupon  is 
universally  known,  in  spite  of  priestly  resistance.  Nyan- 
kupon, I  presume  =  Anzambi,  Anyarnbi,  Nyambi,  Nzambi, 
Anzam,  Nyam,  the  Nzam  of  the  Fans,  '  and  of  all 
Bantu  coast  races,  the  creator  of  man,  plants,  animals, 
and  the  earth ;  he  takes  no  further  interest  in  the  affair.' 2 
The  crowd  of  spirits  take  only  too  much  interest ;  and, 
therefore,  are  the  lucrative  element  in  religion.

It  is  not  very  easy  to  believe  that  Nyam,  under  all  his 
names,  was  picked  up  from  the  Portuguese,  and  passed 
apparently  from  negroes  to  Bantu  all  over  West  Africa, 
despite  the  isolation  of  the  groups,  and  the  resistance  of 
the  priesthood.

Nyam,  like  Major  Ellis's  class  I.,  appoints  a  sub- 
ordinate god  to  do  his  work  :  he  is  truly  good,  and  governs 
the  malevolent  spirits.3

The  spread  of  Nyankupon,  as  described  by  Major 
Ellis,  is  the  more  remarkable,  since  '  five  or  six  miles

1  Ellis,  p.  189.  -  Miss  Kingsley,  p.  442.  3  Ellis,  p.  229.

248  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

from  the  sea,  or  even  less,  the  country  was  a  terra 
incognita  to  Europeans.'  *  Nyankupon  was,  it  is  alleged, 
adopted,  because  our  superiority  proved  Europeans  to  be 
'  protected  by  a  deity  of  greater  power  than  any  of  those 
to  which  they  themselves '  (the  Tshi  races)  '  offered 
sacrifices.'Then,  of  course,  Nyankupon  would  receive  the  best 
sacrifices  of  all,  as  the  most  powerful  deity  ?  Far  from 
that,  Nyankupon  received  no  sacrifice,  and  had  no  priests. 
No  priest  would  have  a  traditional  way  of  serving  him. 
As  the  unlucky  man  in  Voltaire  says  to  his  guardian 
angel,  '  It  is  well  worth  while  to  have  a  presiding  genius,' 
so  the  Tshis  and  Bantu  might  ironically  remark,  '  A 
useful  thing,  a  new  Supreme  Being  ! '  A  quarter  of  a 
continent  or  so  adopts  a  new  foreign  god,  and  leaves  him 
plant e  la ;  unserved,  unhonoured,  and  unsung.  He  there- 
fore came  to  be  thought  too  remote,  or  too  indifferent,  '  to 
interfere  directly  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.'  '  This  idea 
was  probably  caused  by  the  fact  that  the  natives  had  not 
experienced  any  material  improvement  in  their  condition 
.  .  .  although  they  also  had  become  followers  of  the  god 
of  the  whites.' 2

But  that  was  just  what  they  had  not  done  !  Even  at 
Magellan's  Straits,  the  Fuegians  picked  up  from  a  casual 
Spanish  sea-captain  and  adored  an  image  of  Cristo. 
Name  and  effigy  they  accepted.  The  Tshi  people  took 
neither  effigy  nor  name  of  a  deity  from  the  Portuguese 
settled  among  them.  They  neither  imitated  Catholic 
rites  nor  adapted  their  own  ;  they  prayed  not,  nor  sacri- 
ficed to  the  '  new '  Nyankupon.  Only  his  name  and  the 
idea  of  his  nature  are  universally  diffused  in  West  African 
belief.  He  lives  in  no  definite  home,  or  hill,  but  '  in 
Nyankupon's  country.'  Nyankupon,  at  the  present  day,

1  Ellis,  p.  25.  *  Op.  cit.  p.  27.

MORE    RAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  249

is  '  ignored  rather  than  worshipped,'  while  Bobowissi  has 
priests  and  offerings.1  Ellis,  p.  25.  *  Op.  cit.  p.  27.

MORE    RAVAGE   SUPREME   BEINGS  249

is  '  ignored  rather  than  worshipped,'  while  Bobowissi  has 
priests  and  offerings.

It  is  clear  that  Major  Ellis  is  endeavouring  to  explain, 
by  a  singular  solution  (namely,  the  borrowing  of  a  God 
from  Europeans),  and  that  a  solution  improbable  and 
inadequate,  a  phenomenon  of  very  wide  distribution. 
Nyankupon  cannot  be  explained  apart  from  Taaroa, 
Puluga,  Ahone,  Ndengei,  Dendid,  and  Ta-li-y-Tooboo, 
Gods  to  be  later  described,  who  cannot,  by  any  stretch 
of  probabilities,  be  regarded  as  of  European  origin.  All 
of  these  represent  the  primeval  Supreme  Being,  more  or 
less  or  altogether  stripped,  under  advancing  conditions 
of  culture,  of  his  ethical  influence,  and  crowded  out  by 
the  horde  of  useful  greedy  ghosts  or  ghost  gods,  whose 
business  is  lucrative.  Nyankupon  has  no  pretensions  to 
be,  or  to  have  been  a  '  spirit.' l

Major  Ellis's  theory  is  a  natural  result  of  his  belief  in 
a  tangle  of  polytheism  as  '  the  original  state  of  religion.' 
If  so,  there  was  not  much  room  for  the  natural  develop- 
ment of  Nyankupon,  in  whom  '  the  missionaries  find  a 
parallel  to  the  Jahveh  of  the  Jews.' 2  On  our  theory 
Nyankupon  takes  his  place  in  the  regular  process  of  the 
corruption  of  theism  by  animism.

The  parallel  case  of  Nzambi  Mpungu,  the  Creator 
among  the  Fiorts  (a  Bantu  stock),  is  thus  stated  by 
Miss  Kingsley :The  parallel  case  of  Nzambi  Mpungu,  the  Creator 
among  the  Fiorts  (a  Bantu  stock),  is  thus  stated  by 
Miss  Kingsley :

'  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  I  fully  believe  Nzambi 
Mpungu  to  be  a  purely  native  god,  and  that  he  is  a  great 
god  over  all  things,  but  the  study  of  him  is  even  more 
difficult  than  the  study  of  Nzambi,  because  the  Jesuit 
missionaries  who  gained  so  great  an  influence  over  the 
Fiorts  in  the  sixteenth  century  identified  him  with 
Jehovah,  and  worked  on  the  native  mind  from  that 
stand-point.  Consequently  semi-mythical  traces  of  Jesuit

1  Ellis,  p.  '29.  2  Op.  cit.  y.  28.

250  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

teaching  linger,  even  now,  in  the  religious  ideas  of  the 
Fiorts.' l

Nzambi  Mpungu  lives  '  behind  the  firmament.'  '  He 
takes  next  to  no  interest  in  human  affairs ; '  which  is  not 
a  Jesuit  idea  of  God.Nzambi  Mpungu  lives  '  behind  the  firmament.'  '  He 
takes  next  to  no  interest  in  human  affairs ; '  which  is  not 
a  Jesuit  idea  of  God.

In  all  missionary  accounts  of  savage  religion,  we  have 
to  guard  against  two  kinds  of  bias.  One  is  the  bias 
which  makes  the  observer  deny  any  religion  to  the  native 
race,  except  devil-worship.  The  other  is  the  bias  which 
leads  him  to  look  for  traces  of  a  pure  primitive  religious 
tradition.  Yet  we  cannot  but  observe  this  reciprocal  phe- 
nomenon :  missionaries  often  find  a  native  name  and  idea 
which  answer  so  nearly  to  their  conception  of  God  that 
they  adopt  the  idea  and  the  name,  in  teaching.  Again, 
on  the  other  side,  the  savages,  when  first  they  hear  the 
missionaries'  account  of  God,  recognise  it,  as  do  the 
Hurons  and  Bakwain,  for  what  has  always  been  familiar 
to  them.  This  is  recorded  in  very  early  pre-missionary 
travels,  as  in  the  book  of  William  Strachey  on  Virginia 
(1612),  to  which  we  now  turn.  The  God  found  by 
Strachey  in  Virginia  cannot,  by  any  latitude  of  conjecture, 
be  regarded  as  the  result  of  contact  with  Europeans. 
Yet  he  almost  exactly  answers  to  the  African  Nyankupon, 
who  is  explained  away  as  a  '  loan-god.'  For  the  belief  in 
relatively  pure  creative  beings,  whether  they  are  morally 
adored,  without  sacrifice,  or  merely  neglected,  is  so  widely 
diffused,  that  Anthropology  must  ignore  them,  or  account 
for  them  as  '  loan-gods  ' — or  give  up  her  theory !

1  'African  Religion  and  Law,'  National  Reviciv,  September  1897,  p.  132.

251

XIV

AHONE.     TI-EA-WA.    NA-PL    PACHACAMAC. 
TUI  LAGA.     TAA-BOA1  'African  Religion  and  Law,'  National  Reviciv,  September  1897,  p.  132.

251

XIV

AHONE.     TI-EA-WA.    NA-PL    PACHACAMAC. 
TUI  LAGA.     TAA-BOA

IN  this  chapter  it  is  my  object  to  set  certain  American 
Creators  beside  the  African  beings  whom  we  have  been 
examining.  We  shall  range  from  Hurons  to  Pawnees 
and  Blackfeet,  and  end  with  Pachacamac,  the  supreme 
being  of  the  old  Inca  civilisation,  with  Tui  Laga  and 
Taa-roa.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  Hurons  have  been 
accidentally  deprived  of  their  benevolent  Creator  by  a 
bibliographical  accident,  while  that  Creator  corresponds 
very  well  with  the  Peruvian  Pachacamac,  often  regarded 
as  a  mere  philosophical  abstraction.  The  Pawnees  will 
show  us  a  Creator  involved  in  a  sacrificial  ritual,  which  is 
not  common,  while  the  Blackfeet  present  a  Creator  who  is 
not  envisaged  as  a  spirit  at  all,  and,  on  our  theory,  re- 
presents a  very  early  stage  of  the  theistic  conception.

To  continue  the  argument  from  analogy  against 
Major  Ellis's  theory  of  the  European  origin  of  Nyan- 
kupon,  it  seems  desirable  first  to  produce  a  parallel  to 
his  case,  and  to  that  of  his  blood-stained  subordinate 
deity,  Bobowissi,  from  a  quarter  where  European  in- 
fluence is  absolutely  out  of  the  question.  Virginia  was 
first  permanently  colonised  by  Englishmen  in  1607,  and 
the  '  Historic  of  Travaile  into  Virginia,'  by  William 
Strachey,  Gent.,  first  Secretary  of  the  Colony,  dates 
from  the  earliest  years  (1612-1616).  It  will  hardly  be

262  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION262  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION

suggested,  then,  that  the  natives  had  already  adopted 
our  Supreme  Being,  especially  as  Strachey  says  that  the 
native  priests  strenuously  opposed  the  Christian  God. 
Strachey  found  a  house-inhabiting,  agricultural,  and  settled 
population,  under  chiefs,  one  of  whom,  Powhattan,  was  a 
kind  of  Bretwalda.  The  temples  contained  the  dried 
bodies  of  the  weroances,  or  aristocracy,  beside  which  was 
their  Okeus,  or  Oki,  an  image  '  ill  favouredly  carved,'  all 
black  dressed,  '  who  doth  them  all  the  harm  they  suffer. 
He  is  propitiated  by  sacrifices  of  their  own  children  ' 
(probably  an  error)  '  and  of  strangers.'

Mr.  Tylor  quotes  a  description  of  this  Oki,  or  Okeus, 
with  his  idol  and  bloody  rites,  from  Smith's  '  History  of 
Virginia  '  (1632). }  The  two  books,  Strachey's  and  Smith's, 
are  here  slightly  varying  copies  of  one  original.  But, 
after  censuring  Smith's  (and  Strachey's)  hasty  theory 
that  Okeus  is  '  no  other  than  a  devil,'  Mr.  Tylor  did 
not  find  in  Smith  what  follows  in  Strachey.  Okeus 
has  human  sacrifices,  like  Bobowissi,  'whilst  the  great 
God  (the  priests  tell  them)  who  governes  all  the  world, 
and  makes  the  sun  to  shine,  creatyng  the  moone  and 
starrs  his  companyons  .  .  .  they  calling  (sic)  Ahone.2 
The  good  and  peaceable  God  requires  no  such  dutyes, 
nor  needs  to  be  sacrificed  unto,  for  he  intendeth  all  good 
unto  them.'  Okeus,  on  the  contrary,  '  looking  into  all 
men's  accions,  and  examining  the  same  according  to  the 
severe  scheme  of  justice,  punisheth  them.  .  .  .  Such  is 
the  misery  and  thraldome  under  which  Sathan  hath 
bound  these  wretched  miscreants.'

As  if,  in  Mr.  Strachey's  own  creed,  Satan  does  not 
punish,  in  hell,  the  offences  of  men  against  God !As  if,  in  Mr.  Strachey's  own  creed,  Satan  does  not 
punish,  in  hell,  the  offences  of  men  against  God !

Here,  then,  in  addition  to  a  devil  (or  rather  a  divine

1    hi  Pinkerton,  xiii.  pp.  13,  39 ;  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  342.

•  In  his  '  Dictionarip,"  Strachey  gives  God  =  Ahone,  not  God  =  Okeus.

AMERICAN  CREATORS  25$

police  magistrate),  and  general  fetishism  and  nature 
worship,  we  find  that  the  untutored  Virginian  is  equipped 
with  a  merciful  Creator,  without  idol,  temple,  or  sacrifice, 
as  needing  nought  of  ours.  It  is  by  the  merest  accident, 
the  use  of  Smith's  book  (1632)  instead  of  Strachey's  book 
(1.612),  that  Mr.  Tylor  is  unaware  of  these  essential 
facts.

Dr.  Brinton,  like  Mr.  Tylor,  cites  Smith  for  the 
nefarious  or  severe  Okeus,  and  omits  any  mention  of 
Ahone,  the  benevolent  Creator.1  Now,  Strachey's  evidence 
is  early  (1612),  is  that  of  a  well-educated  man,  fond  of 
airing  his  Greek,  and  not  prejudiced  in  favour  of  these 
worshippers  of  '  Sathan.'  In  Virginia  he  found  the  un- 
propitiated  loving  Supreme  Being,  beside  a  subordinate, 
like  Nyankupon  beside  Bobowissi  in  Africa.

Each  highest  deity,  in  Virginia  or  on  the  Gold  Coast, 
is  more  or  less  eclipsed  in  popular  esteem  by  nascent 
polytheism  and  nature  worship.  This  is  precisely  what 
we  should  expect  to  find,  if  Ahone,  the  Creator,  were 
earlier  in  evolution,  while  Okeus  and  the  rest  were  of  the 
usual  greedy  class  of  animistic  corruptible  deities,  useful 
to  priests.  This  could  not  be  understood  while  Ahone 
was  left  out  of  the  statement.2

Probably  Mr.  Strachey's  narrative  justifies,  by  analogy, 
our  suspicion  of  Major  Ellis's  theory  that  the  African 
Supreme  Being  is  of  European  origin.  The  purpose  in  the

1  Myths  of  the  New  World,  p.  47.1  Myths  of  the  New  World,  p.  47.

:  There  is  a  description  of  Virginia,  by  W.  Strachey,  including  Smith's 
remarks,  published  in  1612.  Strachey  interwove  some  of  this  work  with 
his  own  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  dedicated  to  Bacon  (Verulam).  This 
MS.  was  edited  by  Mr.  Major,  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  in  1849,  with  a 
glossary,  by  Strachey,  of  the  native  language.  The  remarks  on  religion  are 
in  Chapter  VII.  The  passage  on  Ahone  occurs  in  Strachey  (1612),  but  not 
in  Smith  (1632),  in  Pinkerton.  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Edmund 
Gosse  photographs  of  the  drawings  accompanying  the  MS.  Strachey's 
.story  of  sacrifice  of  children  (pp.  94,  95)  seems  to  refer  to  nothing  worse 
than  the  initiation  into  the  mysteries.

264  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION264  THE   MAKING   OF  EELIGION

Ahone-Okeus  creed  is  clear.  God  (Ahone)  is  omnipotent 
and  good,  yet  calamities  beset  mankind.  How  are  these 
to  be  explained?  Clearly  as  penalties  for  men's  sins, 
inflicted,  not  by  Ahone,  but  by  his  lieutenant,  Okeus. 
But  that  magistrate  can  be,  and  is,  appeased  by  sacrifices, 
which  it  would  be  impious,  or,  at  all  events,  useless,  to 
offer  to  the  Supreme  Being,  Ahone.  It  is  a  logical  creed, 
but  how  was  the  Supreme  Being  evolved  out  of  the  ghost 
of  a  '  people-devouring  king '  like  Powhattan  ?  The  facts, 
very  fairly  attested,  do  not  fit  the  anthropological  theory. 
It  is  to  be  remarked  that  Strachey's  Ahone  is  a  much 
less  mythological  conception  than  that  which,  on  very 
good  evidence,  he  attributes  to  the  Indians  of  the 
Patowemeck  River.  Their  Creator  is  spoken  of  as 
'  a  godly  Hare,'  who  receives  their  souls  into  Paradise, 
whence  they  are  reborn  on  earth  again,  as  in  Plato's 
myth.  They  also  regard  the  four  winds  as  four  Gods. 
How  the  god  took  the  mythological  form  of  a  hare  is 
diversely  explained.1

Meanwhile  the  Ahone-Okeus  creed  corresponds  to 
the  Nyankupon-Bobowissi  creed.  The  American  faith 
is  certainly  not  borrowed  from  Europe,  so  it  is  less  likely 
that  the  African  creed  is  borrowed.As  illustrations  of  the  general  theory  here  presented, 
we  may  now  take  two  tribal  religions  among  the  North 
American  Indians.  The  first  is  that  of  the  equestrian 
Pawnees,  who,  thirty  years  ago,  were  dwelling  on  the 
Loup  Fork  in  Nebraska.  The  buffaloes  have  since  been 
destroyed,  the  lands  seized,  and  the  Pawnees  driven  into 
a  '  Reservation,'  where  they  are,  or  lately  were,  cheated 
and  oppressed  in  the  usual  way.  They  were  originally 
known  to  Europeans  in  four  hordes,  the  fourth  being  the 
Skidi  or  Wolf  Pawnees.  They  seem  to  have  come  into

1  See  Brinton,  Myths  of  the  New  World,  for  a  philological  theory.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  255

Kansas  and  Nebraska,  at  a  date  relatively  remote,  from 
Mexico,  and  are  allied  with  the  Lipans  and  Tonkaways  of 
that  region.  The  Tonkaways  are  a  tribe  who,  in  a 
sacred  mystery,  are  admonished  to  '  live  like  the  wolves,' 
in  exactly  the  same  way  as  were  the  Hirpi  (wolf  tribe),  of 
Mount  Soracte,  who  practised  the  feat  of  walking  unhurt 
through  fire.1  The  Tonkaways  regard  the  Pawnees,  who 
also  have  a  wolf  tribe,  as  a  long-separated  branch  of  their 
race.  If,  then,  they  are  of  Mexican  origin,  we  might 
expect  to  find  traces  of  Aztec  ritual  among  the  Pawnees.Long  after  they  obtained  better  weapons  they  used 
flint-headed  arrows  for  slaying  the  only  two  beasts  which 
it  was  lawful  to  sacrifice,  the  deer  and  the  buffalo.  They 
have  long  been  a  hunting  and  also  an  agricultural  people. 
The  corn  was  given  to  them  originally  by  the  Ruler : 
their  god,  Ti-ra-ivd,  'the  Spirit  Father.'  They  offer  the 
sacrifice  of  a  deer  with  peculiar  solemnity,  and  are  a  very 
prayerful  people.  The  priest  '  held  a  relation  to  the 
Pawnees  and  their  deity  not  unlike  that  occupied  by 
Moses  to  Jehovah  and  the  Israelites.'  A  feature  in  ritual 
is  the  sacred  bundles  of  unknown  contents,  brought  from 
the  original  home  in  Mexico.  The  Pawnees  were  created 
by  Ti-ra-wa.  They  believe  in  a  happy  future  life,  while 
the  wicked  die,  and  there  is  an  end  of  them.  They  cite 
their  dreams  of  the  dead  as  an  argument  for  a  life  beyond 
the  tomb.  '  We  see  ourselves  living  with  Ti-ra-wa  ! '  An 
evil  earlier  race,  which  knew  not  Ti-ra-wa,  was  destroyed 
by  him  in  the  Deluge ;  evidence  is  found  in  large  fossil 
bones,  and  it  would  be  an  interesting  inquiry  whether 
such  fossils  are  always  found  where  the  story  of  a  '  sin- 
flood  '  occurs.  If  so,  fossils  must  be  universally  diffused.

As  is  common,  the  future  life  is  attested,  not  only  by 
dreams,  but  in  the  experience  of  men  who  '  have  died  '

1  Compare  '  The  Fire  Walk  '  in  Modern  Mythology.

256  THE  MAKING   OF  KELIGION1  Compare  '  The  Fire  Walk  '  in  Modern  Mythology.

256  THE  MAKING   OF  KELIGION

and  come  back  to  life,  like  Secret  Pipe  Chief,  who  told 
the  story  to  Mr.  Grinnell.  These  visions  in  a  state  of 
apparent  death  are  not  peculiar  to  savages,  and,  no  doubt, 
have  had  much  effect  on  beliefs  about  the  next  world.1 
Ghosts  are  rarely  seen,  but  auditory  hallucinations,  as  of  a 
voice  giving  good  advice  in  time  of  peril,  are  regarded  as  the 
speech  of  ghosts.  The  beasts  are  also  friendly,  as  fellow 
children  with  men  of  Ti-ra-wa.  To  the  Morning  Star 
the  Skidi  or  Wolf  Pawnees  offered  on  rare  occasions  a 
captive  man.  The  ceremony  was  not  unlike  that  of  the 
Aztecs,  though  less  cruel.  Curiously  enough,  the  slayer 
of  the  captive  had  instantly  to  make  a  mock  flight,  as  in 
the  Attic  Bouphonia.  This,  however,  was  a  rite  paid  to 
the  Morning  Star,  not  to  Ti-ra-wa,  '  the  power  above 
that  moves  the  universe  and  controls  all  things.'  Sacrifice 
to  Ti-ra-wa  was  made  on  rare  and  solemn  occasions 
out  of  his  two  chief  gifts,  deer  and  buffalo.  '  Through 
corn,  deer,  buffalo,  and  the  sacred  bundles,  we  worship 
Ti-ra-wd.1The  flesh  was  burned  in  the  fire,  while  prayers  were 
made  with  great  earnestness.  In  the  old  Skidi  rite  the 
women  told  the  fattened  captive  what  they  desired  to  gain 
from  the  Ruler.  It  is  occasionally  said  that  the  human 
sacrifice  was  made  to  Ti-ra-wd  himself.  The  sacrificer 
not  only  fled,  but  fasted  and  mourned.  It  is  possible 
that,  as  among  the  Aztecs,  the  victim  was  regarded  as 
also  an  embodiment  of  the  God,  but  this  is  not  certain, 
the  rite  having  long  been  disused.  Mr.  Grinnell  got  the 
description  from  a  very  old  Skidi.  There  was  also  a 
festival  of  thanks  to  Ti-ra-wa  for  corn.  During  a  sacred 
dance  and  hymn  the  corn  is  held  up  to  the  Ruler  by  a

1  Compare  St.  Augustine's  curious  anecdote  in  De  Cura  pro  Mortuis 
habenda  about  the  dead  and  revived  Curio.  The  founder  of  the  new  Sioux 
religion,  based  on  hypnotism,  '  died  '  and  recovered.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  257

woman.  Corn  is  ritually  called  *  The  Mother,'  as  in  Peru.1 
'  We  are  like  seed,  and  we  worship  through  the  Corn.'

Disease  is  caused  by  evil  spirits,  and  many  American 
soldiers  were  healed  by  Pawnee  doctors,  though  their 
hurts  had  refused  to  yield  to  the  treatment  of  the  United 
States  Army  Surgeons.2The  miracles  wrought  by  Pawnee  medicine  men, 
under  the  eyes  of  Major  North,  far  surpass  what  is  told 
of  Indian  jugglery.  But  this  was  forty  years  ago,  and  it 
is  probably  too  late  to  learn  anything  of  these  astounding 
performances  of  naked  men  on  the  hard  floor  of  a  lodge. 
'  Major  North  told  me  '  (Mr.  Grinnell)  '  that  he  saw  with 
his  own  eyes  the  doctors  make  the  corn  grow,'  the  doctor 
not  manipulating  the  plant,  as  in  the  Mango  trick,  but 
standing  apart  and  singing.  Mr.  Grinnell  says  :  '  I  have 
never  found  any  one  who  could  even  suggest  an  explana- 
tion.'

This  art  places  great  power  in  the  hands  of  the 
doctors,  who  exhibit  many  other  prodigies.  It  is  notable 
that  in  this  religion  we  hear  nothing  of  ancestor- worship  ; 
all  that  is  stated  as  to  ghosts  has  been  reported.  We  find 
the  cult  of  an  all-powerful  being,  in  whose  ritual  sacri- 
fice is  the  only  feature  that  suggests  ghost-worship.  The 
popular  tales  and  historical  reminiscences  of  the  last 
generation  entirely  bear  out  by  their  allusions  Mr.  Grin- 
nell's  account  of  the  Pawnee  faith,  in  which  the  ethical 
element  chiefly  consists  in  a  sense  of  dependence  on  and 
touching  gratitude  to  Ti-ra-wa,  as  shown  in  fervent 
prayer.  Theft  he  abhors,  he  applauds  valour,  he  punishes 
the  wicked  by  annihilation,  the  good  dwell  with  him  in 
his  heavenly  home.  He  is  addressed  as  A-ti-us  ta-kaw-a, 
'  Our  father  in  all  places.'

1  Cf.  Demeter.

-  Major  North,  for  long  the  U.S.  Superintendent  of  the  Pawnees.

258  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION1  Cf.  Demeter.

-  Major  North,  for  long  the  U.S.  Superintendent  of  the  Pawnees.

258  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

It  is  not  so  easy  to  see  how  this  Being  was  developed 
out  of  ancestor- worship,  of  which  we  find  no  traces  among 
Pawnees.  For  ancestor-worship  among  the  Sioux,  it  is 
usual  to  quote  a  remark  of  one  Prescott,  an  interpreter : 
'  Sometimes  an  Indian  will  say,  "  "Wah  negh  on  she  wan 
da,"  which  means,  "  Spirits  of  the  dead  have  mercy  on  me." 
Then  they  will  add  what  they  want.  That  is  about  the 
amount  of  an  Indian's  prayer.' '  Obviously,  when  we 
compare  Mr.  Grinnell's  account  of  Pawnee  religion,  based 
on  his  own  observations,  and  those  of  Major  North,  and 
Mr.  Dunbar,  who  has  written  on  the  language  of  the 
tribe,  we  are  on  much  safer  ground,  than  when  we  follow 
a  contemptuous,  half-educated  European.

The  religion  of  the  Blackfoot  Indians  appears  to  be  a 
ruder  form  of  the  Pawnee  faith.  Whether  the  differences 
arise  from  tribal  character,  or  from  decadence,  or  because 
the  Blackfoot  belief  is  in  an  earlier  and  more  backward 
condition  than  that  of  the  Pawnees,  it  is  not  easy  to  be 
certain.  As  in  China,  there  exists  a  difficulty  in  deciding 
whether  the  Supreme  Being  is  identical  with  the  great 
nature-god  ;  in  China  the  Heaven,  among  the  Blackfeet 
the  Sun  ;  or  is  prior  to  him  in  conception,  or  has  been, 
later,  substituted  for  him,  or  placed  beside  him.  The 
Blackfoot  mythology  is  low,  crude,  and,  except  in  tales 
of  Creation,  is  derisive.  As  in  Australia,  there  is  a 
specific  difference  of  tone  between  mythology  and 
religion.The  Blackfoot  country  runs  east  from  the  summit  of 
the  Kocky  Mountains,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yellowstone 
river  on  the  Missouri,  then  west  to  the  Yellowstone 
sources,  across  the  Rocky  Mountains  to  the  Beaverhead, 
thence  to  their  summit.

1  Schoolcraft,  iii.  237.

AMERICAN    CREATORS  259

As  to  spirits,  the  Blackfeet  believe  in,  or  at  least  tell 
stories  of,  ghosts,  which  conduct  themselves  much  as  in 
our  old-fashioned  ghost  stories.  -They  haunt  people  in  a 
rather  sportive  and  irresponsible  way.  The  souls  or 
shadows  of  respectable  persons  go  to  the  bleak  country 
called  the  Sand  Hills,  where  they  live,  in  a  dull,  mono- 
tonous kind  of  Sheol.  The  shades  of  the  wicked  are 
'  earth-bound  '  and  mischievous,  especially  ghosts  of  men 
slain  in  battle.  They  cause  paralysis  and  madness,  but 
dread  interiors  of  lodges ;  they  only  '  tap  on  the  lodge- 
skins.'  Like  many  Indian  tribes,  the  Blackfeet  have  the 
Eurydice  legend.  A  man  grieving  for  his  dead  wife  finds 
his  way  to  Hades,  is  pitied  by  the  dead,  and  allowed  to 
carry  the  woman  back  with  him,  under  certain  ritual 
prohibitions,  one  of  which  he  unhappily  infringes.  The 
range  of  this  deeply  touching  story  among  the  Eed  Men, 
and  its  close  resemblance  to  the  tale  of  Orpheus,  is  one  of 
the  most  curious  facts  in  mythology.  Mr.  Grinnell's 
friend  Young  Bear,  when  lost  with  his  wife  in  a  fog, 
heard  a  Voice,  'It  is  well.  Go  on,  you  are  going  right.' 
'  The  top  of  my  head  seemed  to  lift  up.  It  seemed  as  if 
a  lot  of  needles  were  running  into  it.  ...  This  must 
have  been  a  ghost.'  As  the  wife  also  heard  the  Voice  it 
was  probably  human,  not  hallucinatory.Animals  receive  the  usual  amount  of  friendly  respect 
from  the  Blackfeet.  They  have  also  an  inchoate  poly- 
theism, 'Above  Persons,  Ground  Persons,  and  Under 
Water  Persons.'  Of  the  first,  Thunder  is  most  important, 
and  is  worshipped.  There  is  the  Cold  Maker,  a  white 
figure  on  a  white  horse,  the  Wind,  and  so  on.

The  Creator  is  Na-pi,  Old  Man  ;  Dr.  Brinton  thinks 
he  is  a  personification  of  Light,  but  Mr.  Grinnell  reckons 
it  absurd  to  attribute  so  abstract  a  conception  to  the 
Blackfeet.  Nii-pi  is  simply  a  primal  Being,  an  Immortal

3   2

260  THE    MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Man,1  who  was  before  Death  came  into  the  world,  concern- 
ing which  one  of  the  usual  tales  of  the  Origin  of  Death  is 
told.  '  All  things  that  he  had  made  understood  him  when 
he  spoke  to  them — birds,  animals,  and  people,'  as  in  the 
first  chapters  of  Genesis.  With  Na-pi,  Creation  worked 
on  the  lines  of  adaptation  to  environment.  He  put  the 
bighorn  on  the  prairie.  There  it  was  awkward,  so  he  set 
it  on  rocky  places,  where  it  skipped  about  with  ease.  The 
antelope  fell  on  the  rocks,  so  he  removed  it  to  the  level 
prairie.  Na-pi  created  man  and  woman  out  of  clay,  but 
the  folly  of  the  woman  introduced  Death.  Na-pi,  as  a 
Prometheus,  gave  fire,  and  taught  the  forest  arts.  He 
inculcated  the  duty  of  prayer ;  his  will  should  be  done 
by  emissaries  in  the  shape  of  animals.  Then  he  went  to 
other  peoples.  The  misfortunes  of  the  Indians  arise  from 
disobedience  to  his  laws.

Chiefs  were  elective,  for  conduct,  courage,  and 
charity.Chiefs  were  elective,  for  conduct,  courage,  and 
charity.

Though  weapons  and  utensils  were  buried  with  the  dead, 
or  exposed  on  platforms,  and  though  great  men  were  left 
to  sleep  in  their  lodges,  henceforth  never  to  be  entered  by 
the  living,  there  is  no  trace  known  to  me  of  continued 
ancestor-worship.  As  many  Blackfeet  change  their  names 
yearly,  ancestral  names  are  not  likely  to  become  those  of 
gods.

The  Sun  is  by  many  believed  to  have  taken  the 
previous  place  of  Na-pi  in  religion;  or  perhaps  Na-pi  is

1  As  envisaged  here,  Na-pi  is  not  a  spirit.  The  question  of  spirit  or 
non-spirit  has  not  arisen.  So  far,  Ni\-pi  answers  to  Marrangarrah,  the 
Oiviitivo.  JJeing  of  the  Larrakeah  tribe  of  Australians.  '  A  very  good  Man 
called  Marrangarrah  lives  in  the  sky  ;  he  made  all  living  creatures,  except 
Mack  fellows.  Ho  made  everything.  .  .  .  He  never  dies,  and  likes  all  black 
lello'.vs.'  He  has  a  demiurge,  Dawed  (Mr.  Foelsche,  apud  Dr.  Stirling. 
-/.  .1.  /.,  Nov.  Is'Jl,  p.  191).  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  savage  creeds 
often  .shift  the  responsibility  for  evil  from  the  Supreme  Creator,  entirely 
fooiitticetu,  on  to  a  subordinate  deity.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  261AMERICAN   CREATORS  261

the  Sun.  However,  he  is  still  separately  addressed  in 
prayer.  The  Sun  receives  presents  of  furs  and  so  forth  ;  a 
finger,  when  the  prayer  is  for  life,  has  been  offered  to 
him.  Fetishism  probably  shows  itself  in  gifts  to  a  great 
rock.  There  is  daily  prayer,  both  to  the  Sun  and  to  Na-pi. 
Women  institute  Medicine  Lodges,  praying, '  Pity  me,  Sun. 
You  have  seen  my  life.  You  know  that  I  am  pure.'  '  We 
look  on  the  Medicine  Lodge  woman  as  you  white  people 
do  on  the  Roman  Catholic  Sisters.'  Being  'virtuous 
in  deed,  serious,  and  clean-minded,'  the  Medical  Lodge 
woman  is  in  spiritual  rapport  with  Na-pi  and  the  Sun. 
To  this  extent,  at  least,  Blackfoot  religion  is  an  ethical 
influence.

The  creed  seems  to  be  a  nascent  polytheism,  sub- 
ordinate to  Na-pi  as  supreme  Creator,  and  to  the  per- 
sonified Sun.  As  Blackfoot  ghosts  are  '  vaporous,  in- 
effectual '  for  good,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  like  ancestor 
worship.

These  two  cults  and  beliefs,  Pawnee  and  Blackfoot, 
may  be  regarded  as  fairly  well  authenticated  examples  of 
un-Christianised  American  religion  among  races  on  the 
borderland  of  agriculture  and  the  chase.  It  would  be 
difficult  to  maintain  that  ghost-worship  or  ancestor- 
worship  is  a  potent  factor  in  the  evolution  of  the  death- 
less Tir-a-wa  or  the  immortal  Creator  Na-pi,  who  has 
nothing  of  the  spirit  about  him,  especially  as  ghosts  are 
not  worshipped.1Let  us  now  look  at  the  Supreme  Being  of  a  civilised 
American  people.  There  are  few  more  interesting  accounts 
of  religion  than  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega's  description  of  faith 
in  Peru.  Garcilasso  was  of  Inca  parentage  on  the  spindle 
side ;  he  was  born  in  1540,  and  his  book,  taken  from  the 
traditions  of  an  uncle,  and  aided  by  the  fragmentary

1  GrinnelPs  Blackfoot  Lodge-Talcs  and  Pawnee  Hero  Stories.

262  THE    MAKING   OF   KELIGTON

collections  of  Father  Bias  Valera,  was  published  in  1609, 
In  Garcilasso's  theory  the  original  people  of  Peru, 
Totemists  and  worshippers  of  hills  and  streams,  Earth 
and  Sea,  were  converted  to  Sun  worship  by  the  first  Incar 
a  child  of  the  Sun.  Even  the  new  religion  included 
ancestor-worship  and  other  superstitions.  But  behind 
Sun  worship  was  the  faith  in  a  Being  who  '  advanced  the 
Sun  so  far  above  all  the  stars  of  heaven.' l  This  Being 
was  Pachacamac,  '  the  sustainer  of  the  world.'  The 
question  then  arises,  Is  Pachacamac  a  form  of  the  same 
creative  being  whom  we  find  among  the  lowest  savages, 
or  is  he  the  result  of  philosophical  reflection  ?  The  latter 
was  the  opinion  of  Garcilasso.  '  The  Incas  and  their 
Amautas  '  (learned  class)  '  were  philosophers.' 2'  Pacha,'  he  says,  =  universe,  and  '  cama '  =  soul. 
Pachacamac,  then,  is  Anima  Mundi.  '  They  did  not 
even  take  the  name  of  Pachacamac  into  their  mouths,' 
or  but  seldom  and  reverently,  as  the  Australians  will  not, 
in  religious  matters,  mention  Darumulun.  Pachacamac 
had  no  temple, '  but  they  worshipped  him  in  their  hearts.' 
That  he  was  the  Creator  appears  in  an  earlier  writer, 
cited  by  Garcilasso,  Agustin  de  Zarate  (ii.  ch.  5).  Garci- 
lasso, after  denying  the  existence  of  temples  to  Pacha- 
camac, mentions  one,  but  only  one.  He  insists,  at  length, 
and  with  much  logic,  that  He  whom,  as  a  Christian,  he 
worships,  is  in  Quichua  styled  Pachacamac.  Moreover, 
the  one  temple  to  Pachacamac  wras  not  built  by  an  Inca, 
but  by  a  race  which,  having  heard  of  the  Inca  god, 
borrowed  his  name,  without  understanding  his  nature,  that 
of  a  Being  who  dwells  not  in  temples  made  with  hands 
(ii.  186).  In  the  temple  this  people,  the  Yuncas,  offered 
even  human  sacrifices.  By  the  Incas  to  Pachacamac  no 
sacrifice  was  offered  (ii.  Id9).  This  negative  custom  they

1  Giu-cilasso,  i.  101.  2  Op.  cit.  i.  10(>.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  263

also  imposed  upon  the  Yuncas,  and  they  removed  idols 
from  the  Yunca  temple  of  Pachacamac  (ii.  190).  Yunca 
superstitions,  however,  infested  the  temple,  and  a  Voice 
gave  oracles  therein.1  The  Yuncas  also  had  a  talking 
idol,  which  the  Inca,  in  accordance  with  a  religious 
treaty,  occasionally  consulted.While  Pachacamac,  without  temple  or  rite,  was  rec- 
koned the  Creator,  we  must  understand  that  Sun-worship 
and  ancestor-worship  were  the  practical  elements  of  the 
Inca  cult.  This  appears  to  have  been  distasteful  to  the 
Inca  Huayna  Ccapac,  for  at  a  Sun  feast  he  gazed  hard  on 
the  Sun,  was  remonstrated  with  by  a  priest,  and  replied 
that  the  restless  Sun  '  must  have  another  Lord  more 
powerful  than  himself.' 2

This  remark  could  not  have  been  necessary  if  Pacha- 
camac were  really  an  article  of  living  and  universal  belief. 
Perhaps  we  are  to  understand  that  this  Inca,  like  his 
father,  who  seems  to  have  been  the  original  author  of  the 
saying,  meant  to  sneer  at  the  elaborate  worship  bestowed 
on  the  Sun,  while  Pachacamac  was  neglected,  as  far  as 
ritual  went.

In  Garcilasso's  book  we  have  to  allow  for  his  desire 
to  justify  the  creed  of  his  maternal  ancestors.  His 
criticism  of  Spanish  versions  is  acute,  and  he  often 
appeals  to  his  knowledge  of  Quichua,  and  to  the  direct 
traditions  received  by  him  from  his  uncle.  Against  his 
theory  of  Pachacamac  as  a  result  of  philosophical  thought, 
it  may  be  urged  that  similar  conceptions,  or  nearly  similar, 
exist  among  races  not  civilised  like  the  Incas,  and  not 
provided  with  colleges  of  learned  priests.  In  fact,  the

'  From  all  this  we  might  conjecture,  like  Mr.  Prescott,  that  the  Incas 
borrowed  Pachacamac  from  the  Yuncas,  and  etherealised  his  religion.  But 
Mr.  Clements  Markham  points  out  that  '  Pachacamac  is  a  pure  Quichua 
word.1

-  Garcilasso,  ii.  446,  447.

264  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION-  Garcilasso,  ii.  446,  447.

264  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

position  of  Pachacamac  and  the  Sun  is  very  nearly  that 
of  the  Blackfoot  Creator  Na-pi,  and  the  Sun,  or  of  Shang-ti 
and  the  Heaven,  in  China.  We  have  the  Creative  Being 
whose  creed  is  invaded  by  that  of  a  worshipped  aspect 
of  nature,  and  whose  cult,  quite  logically,  is  nil,  or  nearly 
nil.  There  are  also,  in  different  strata  of  the  Inca  empire, 
ancestor-worship,  or  mummy-worship,  Totemism  and 
polytheism,  with  a  vague  mass  of  huaca=Elohim,  kalou, 
wakan.

Perhaps  it  would  not  be  too  rash  to  conjecture  that 
Pachacamac  is  not  a  merely  philosophical  abstraction, 
but  a  survival  of  a  Being  like  Na-pi  or  Ahone.  Cieza 
de  Leon  calls  Pachacamac  '  a  devil,'  whose  name  means 
'  creator  of  the  world  ' !  l  The  name,  when  it  was  uttered, 
was  spoken  with  genuflexions  and  signs  of  reverence.  So 
closely  did  Pachacamac  resemble  the  Christian  Deity,  that 
Cieza  de  Leon  declares  the  devil  to  have  forged  and 
insisted  on  the  resemblance ! 2  It  was  open  to  Spanish 
missionaries  to  use  Pachacamac,  as  to  the  Jesuits  among 
the  Bantu  to  use  Mpungu,  as  a  fulcrum  for  the  introduction 
of  Christianity.  They  preferred  to  regard  Pachacamac 
as  a  fraudulent  fiend.  Now  Nzambi  Mpungu,  among  the 
Bantu,  is  assuredly  not  a  creation  of  a  learned  priesthood, 
for  the  Bantu  have  no  learned  priests,  and  Mpungu  would 
be  useless  to  the  greedy  conjurers  whom  they  do  consult, 
as  he  is  not  propitiated.  On  grounds  of  analogy,  then, 
Pachacamac  may  be  said  to  resemble  a  savage  Supremo 
Being,  somewhat  etherealised  either  by  Garcilasso  or  by 
the  Amautas,  the  learned  class  among  the  subjects  of 
the  Incas.  He  does  not  seem,  even  so,  much  superior  to 
the  Ahone  of  the  Virginians.We  possess,  however,  a  different  account  of  Inca 
religion,  from  which  Garcilasso  strongly  dissents.  The

1  Cieza  de  Leon,  p.  253.  *  Markham's  translation,  p.  253.

AMERICAN    CREATORS  266

best  version  is  that  of  Christoval  de  Molina,  who  was 
chaplain  of  the  hospital  for  natives,  and  wrote  between 
1570  and  1584. l  Christoval  assembled  a  number  of  old 
priests  and  other  natives  who  had  taken  part  in  the 
ancient  services,  and  collected  their  evidence.  He  calls 
the  Creator  ('not  born  of  woman,  unchangeable  and 
eternal ')  by  the  name  Pachayachachi,  '  Teacher  of  the 
world  '  and  '  Tecsiviracocha,'  which  Garcilasso  dismisses  as 
meaningless.2  He  also  tells  the  tale  of  the  Inca  Yupanqui 
and  the  Lord  of  the  Sun,  but  says  that  the  Incas  had 
already  knowledge  of  the  Creator.  To  Yupanqui  he 
attributes  the  erection  of  a  gold  image  of  the  Creator, 
utterly  denied  by  Garcilasso.3  Christoval  declares,  again 
contradicted  by  Garcilasso,  that  sacrifices  were  offered  to 
the  Creator.  Unlike  the  Sun,  Christoval  says,  the  Creator 
had  no  woman  assigned  to  him,  '  because,  as  he  created 
them,  they  all  belonged  to  him '  (p.  26),  which,  of  course, 
is  an  idea  that  would  also  make  sacrifice  superfluous.

Christoval  gives  prayers  in  Quichua,  wherein  the 
Creator  is  addressed  as  Uiracocha.

Christoval  assigns  images,  sacrifice,  and  even  human 
sacrifice,  to  the  Creator  Uiracocha.  Garcilasso  denies 
that  the  Creator  Pachacamac  had  any  of  these  things, 
he  denies  that  Uiracocha  was  the  name  of  the  Creator, 
and  he  denies  it,  knowing  that  the  Spaniards  made  the 
assertion.4  Who  is  right?  Uiracocha,  says  Garcilasso, 
is  one  thing,  with  his  sacrifices  ;  the  Creator,  Pachacamac, 
without  sacrifices,  is  another,  is  GOD.Mr.  Markham  thinks  that  Garcilasso,  writing  when  he 
did,  and  not  consciously  exaggerating,  was  yet  less  trust- 
worthy (though  'wonderfully  accurate')  than  Christoval.

1  Bites  and  Laivs  of  the  Yncas,  Markham's  translation,  p.  vii. 
-  Rites,  p.  G.     Garcilasso,  i.  109.  3  Rites,  p.  11.

1  Compare  Reports  on  Discovery  of  Peru,  Introduction.

-266  THE   MAKING   OF   EELIGION

Garcilasso,  however,  is  '  scrupulously  truthful.' l  '  The 
excellence  of  his  memory  is  perhaps  best  shown  in  hi& 
topographical  details.  .  .  .  He  does  not  make  a  single 
mistake,'  in  the  topography  of  three  hundred  and  twenty 
places  !  A  scrupulously  truthful  gentleman,  endowed  with 
an  amazing  memory,  and  a  master  of  his  native  language, 
flatly  contradicts  the  version  of  a  Spanish  priest,  who  also 
appears  to  have  been  careful  and  honourable.

I  shall  now  show  that  Christoval  and  Garcilasso  have 
different  versions  of  the  same  historical  events,  and  that 
Garcilasso  bases  his  confutation  of  the  Spanish  theory 
of  the  Inca  Creator  on  his  form  of  this  historical  tradi- 
tion, which  follows  :The  Inca  Yahuarhuaccac,  like  George  II.,  was  at  odds 
with  his  Prince  of  Wales.  He  therefore  banished  the 
Prince  to  Chita,  and  made  him  serve  as  shepherd  of  the 
llamas  of  the  Sun.  Three  years  later  the  disgraced 
Prince  came  to  Court,  with  what  the  Inca  regarded  as  a 
cock-and-bull  story  of  an  apparition  of  the  kind  technically 
styled  '  Borderland.'  Asleep  or  awake,  he  knew  not,  he 
saw  a  bearded  robed  man  holding  a  strange  animal.  The 
appearance  declared  himself  as  Uiracocha  (Christoval's 
name  for  the  Creator),  a  Child  of  the  Sun;  by  no  means  as 
Pachacamac,  the  Creator  of  the  Sun.  He  announced  a 
distant  rebellion,  and  promised  his  aid  to  the  Prince. 
The  Inca,  hearing  this  narrative,  replied  in  the  tones  of 
Charles  II.,  when  he  said  about  Monmouth,  '  Tell  James 
to  go  to  hell ! ' 2  The  predicted  rebellion,  however,  broke 
out,  the  Inca  fled,  the  Prince  saved  the  city,  dethroned 
his  father,  and  sent  him  into  the  country.  He  then 
adopted,  from  the  apparition,  the  throne-name  Uiracocha, 
grew  a  beard,  and  dressed  like  the  apparition,  to  whom  he 
erected  a  temple,  roofless,  and  unique  in  construction.

1  Rites,  p.  xv.  -  Lord  Ailesbury's  Memoirs.

AMERICAN    CREATORS  2671  Rites,  p.  xv.  -  Lord  Ailesbury's  Memoirs.

AMERICAN    CREATORS  267

Therein  he  had  an  image  of  the  god,  for  which  he  himself 
gave  frequent  sittings.  When  the  Spaniards  arrived, 
bearded  men,  the  Indians  called  them  Uiracochas  (as  all 
the  Spanish  historians  say),  and,  to  flatter  them,  declared 
falsely  that  Uiracocha  was  their  word  for  the  Creator. 
Garcilasso  explodes  the  Spanish  etymology  of  the  name, 
in  the  language  of  Cuzco,  which  he  '  sucked  in  with  his 
mother's  milk.'  '  The  Indians  said  that  the  chief  Spaniards 
were  children  of  the  Sun,  to  make  gods  of  them,  just  as 
they  said  they  were  children  of  the  apparition,  Uiracocha.' l 
Moreover,  Garcilasso  and  Cieza  de  Leon  agree  in  their 
descriptions  of  the  image  of  Uiracocha,  which,  both  assert, 
the  Spaniards  conceived  to  represent  a  Christian  early 
missionary,  perhaps  St.  Bartholomew.2  Garcilasso  had 
seen  the  mummy  of  the  Inca  Uiracocha,  and  relates  the 
whole  tale  from  the  oral  version  of  his  uncle,  adding  many 
native  comments  on  the  Court  revolution  described.

To  Garcilasso,  then,  the  invocations  of  Uiracocha,  in 
Christoval's  collection  of  prayers,  are  a  native  adaptation 
to  Spanish  prejudice :  even  in  them  Pachacamac  occurs.3

Now,  Christoval  has  got  hold  of  a  variant  of  Garci- 
lasso's  narrative,  which,  in  Garcilasso,  has  plenty  of 
humour  and  human  nature.  According  to  Christoval  it 
was  not  the  Prince,  later  Inca  Uiracocha,  who  beheld 
the  apparition,  but  the  Inca  Uiracocha's  son,  Prince  of 
Wales,  as  it  were,  of  the  period,  later  the  Inca  Yupanqui.Garcilasso  corrects  Christoval.  Uiracocha  saw  the 
apparition,  as  Pere  Acosta  rightly  says,  and  Yupanqui  was 
not  the  son  but  the  grandson  of  this  Inca  Uiracocha.4 
Uiracocha's  own  son  was  Pachacutec,  which  simply 
means  '  Revolution,'  '  they  say,  by  way  of  by-word 
Pachamcutin,  which  means  "  the  world  changes."

1  Garcilasso,  ii.  68.  '-'  Cieza  de  Loon,  p.  357.

:t  Rites,  pp.  28,  29.  '  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  eh.  21  ;  Garcilasso.  ii.  88,  89.

268  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Christoval's  form  of  the  story  is  peculiarly  gratifying 
in  one  way.  Yupanqui  saw  the  apparition  in  a  piece  of 
crystal, '  the  apparition  vanished,  while  the  piece  of  crystal 
remained.  The  Inca  took  care  of  it,  and  they  say  that  he 
afterwards  saw  everything  he  wanted  in  it.'  The  appari- 
tion, in  human  form  and  in  Inca  dress,  gave  itself  out  for 
the  Sun ;  and  Yupanqui,  when  he  came  to  the  throne, 
'  ordered  a  statue  of  the  Sun  to  be  made,  as  nearly  as 
possible  resembling  the  figure  he  had  seen  in  the  crystal.' 
He  bade  his  subjects  to  '  reverence  the  new  deity,  as  they 
had  heretofore  worshipped  the  Creator,' J  who,  therefore; 
was  prior  to  Uiracocha.

Interesting  as  a  proof  of  Inca  crystal-gazing,  this  legend 
of  Christoval's  cannot  compete  as  evidence  with  Acosta 
and  Garcilasso.  The  reader,  however,  must  decide  as  to 
whether  he  prefers  Garcilasso's  unpropitiated  Pachacamac, 
or  Christoval's  Uiracocha,  human  sacrifices,  and  all.2Mr.  Tylor  prefers  the  version  of  Christoval,  making 
Pachacamac  a  title  of  Uiracocha.3  He  thinks  that  we 
have,  in  Inca  religion,  an  example  of  '  a  subordinate  god  ' 
(the  Sun)  '  usurping  the  place  of  the  supreme  deity,'  '  the 
rivalry  between  the  Creator  and  the  divine  Sun.'  In 
China,  as  we  shall  see,  Mr.  Tylor  thinks,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  Heaven  is  the  elder  god,  and  that  Shang-ti, 
the  Supreme  Being,  is  the  usurper.

The  truth  in  the  Uiracocha  versus  Pachacamac  con- 
troversy is  difficult  to  ascertain.  I  confess  a  leaning 
toward  Garcilasso,  so  truthful  and  so  wonderfully  accurate, 
rather  than  to  the  Spanish  priest.  Christoval,  it  will 
be  remarked,  says  that  '  Chanca-Uiracocha  was  a  huaca 
(sacred  place)  in  Chuqui-chaca.' 4  Now  Chuqui-chaca  is 
the  very  place  where,  according  to  Garcilasso,  the  Inca

1  Kites,  p.  12.  *  Ib.  p.  54.

3  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  337,  338.  "  Rites,  p.  29.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  269

Uiracocha  erected  a  temple  to  '  his  Uncle,  the  Apparition.' l 
Uiracocha,  then,  the  deity  who  receives  human  sacrifice, 
would  be  a  late,  royally  introduced  ancestral  god,  no  real 
rival  of  the  Creator,  who  receives  no  sacrifice  at  all,  and, 
as  he  was  bearded,  his  name  would  be  easily  transferred  to 
the  bearded  Spaniards,  whose  arrival  the  Inca  Uiracocha 
was  said  to  have  predicted.  But  to  call  several  or  all 
Spaniards  by  the  name  given  to  the  Creator  would  be 
absurd.  Mr.  Tylor  and  Mr.  Markham  do  not  refer  to 
the  passage  in  which  Christoval  obviously  gets  hold  of  a 
wrong  version  of  the  story  of  the  apparition.There  is  yet  another  version  of  this  historical  legend, 
written  forty  years  after  Christoval's  date  by  Don  Juan 
de  Santa  Cruz  Pachacuti-yamqui  Salcamayhua.  He  ranks 
after  Garcilasso  and  Christoval,  but  before  earlier  Spanish 
writers,  such  as  Acosta,  who  knew  not  Quichua.  According 
to  Salcamayhua,  the  Inca  Uiracocha  was  like  James  III., 
fond  of  architecture  and  averse  to  war.  He  gave  the 
realm  to  his  bastard,  Urea,  who  was  defeated  and  killed 
by  the  Chancas.  Uiracocha  meant  to  abandon  the  con- 
test, but  his  legitimate  son,  Yupanqui,  saw  a  fair  youth 
on  a  rock,  who  promised  him  success  in  the  name  of  the 
Creator,  and  then  vanished.  The  Prince  was  victorious, 
and  the  Inca  Uiracocha  retired  into  private  life.  This 
appears  to  be  a  mixture  of  the  stories  of  Garcilasso  and 
Christoval.-

It  is  not,  in  itself,  a  point  of  much  importance  whether 
the  Creator  was  called  Uiracocha  (which,  if  it  means 
anything,  means  'sea  of  grease!'),  or  whether  he  wras 
called  Pachacamac,  maker  of  the  world,  or  by  both  names. 
The  important  question  is  as  to  whether  the  Creator 
received  even  human  sacrifices  (Christoval)  or  none  at 
all  (Garcilasso).  As  to  Pachacamac,  we  must  consult

1  Gavcilasso,  ii.  09.  2  .Rites  and  Laws,  p.  91  et  seq.

270  THE  MAKTNG   OF  RELIGION1  Gavcilasso,  ii.  09.  2  .Rites  and  Laws,  p.  91  et  seq.

270  THE  MAKTNG   OF  RELIGION

Mr.  Payne,  who  has  the  advantage  of  being  a  Quichua 
scholar.  He  considers  that  Pachacamac  combines  the 
conception  of  a  general  spirit  of  living  things  with  that 
of  a  Creator  or  maker  of  all  things.  '  Pachacamac  and 
the  Creator  are  one  and  the  same,'  but  the  conception  of 
Pachayachacic,  '  ruler  of  the  world,'  '  belongs  to  the  later 
period  of  the  Incas.' l  Mr.  Payne  appears  to  prefer 
Christoval's  legend  of  the  Inca  crystal-gazer,  to  the  rival 
version  of  Garcilasso.  The  Yunca  form  of  the  worship  of 
Pachacamac  Mr.  Payne  regards  as  an  example  of  de- 
gradation.2 He  disbelieves  Garcilasso's  statement  that 
human  sacrifices  were  not  made  to  the  Sun.  Garcilasso 
must,  if  Mr.  Payne  is  right,  have  been  a  deliberate  liar, 
unless,  indeed,  he  was  deceived  by  his  Inca  kinsfolk. 
The  reader  can  now  estimate  for  himself  the  difficulty  of 
knowing  much  about  Peruvian  religion,  or,  indeed,  of  any 
religion.  For,  if  Mr.  Payne  is  right  about  the  lowest 
savages  having  no  conception  of  God,  or  even  of  spirit, 
though  the  idea  of  a  great  Creator,  a  spirit,  is  one  of  the 
earliest  efforts  of  'primitive  logic,'  we,  of  course,  have 
been  merely  fabling  throughout.

Garcilasso's  evidence,  however,  seems  untainted  by 
Christian  attempts  to  find  a  primitive  divine  tradition. 
Garcilasso  may  possibly  be  refining  on  facts,  but  he  asks 
for  no  theory  of  divine  primitive  tradition  in  the  case  of 
Pachacamac,  whom  he  attributes  to  philosophical  reflec- 
tion.In  the  following  chapter  we  discuss '  the  old  Degenera- 
tion theory,'  and  contrast  it  with  the  scheme  provisionally 
offered  in  this  book.  We  have  already  observed  that  the 
Degeneration  theory  biasses  the  accounts  of  some  mis-

1  Payne  i.  459.

-  Op.  cit.  i.  463.    Mr.  Payne  absolutely  rejects  Ixtlilochitl's  story  of  the 
monotheism  of  Nezahualcoyotl     '  Torquemada  knows  nothing  of  it,'  i.  490.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  271

sionaries  who  are  obviously  anxious  to  find  traces  of  a 
Primitive  Tradition,  originally  revealed  to  all  men,  but 
only  preserved  in  a  pure  form  by  the  Jews.  To  avoid 
deception  by  means  of  this  bias  we  have  chosen  examples 
of  savage  creative  beings  from  wide  areas,  from  diverse 
ages,  from  non-missionary  statements,  from  the  least 
contaminated  backward  peoples,  and  from  their  secret 
mysteries  and  hymns.

Thus,  still  confining  ourselves  to  the  American  con- 
tinent, we  have  the  ancient  hymns  of  the  Zunis,  in  no 
way  Christianised,  and  never  chanted  in  the  presence  of 
the  Mexican  Spanish.  These  hymns  run  thus  :  '  Before 
the  beginning  of  the  New  Making,  Awonawilona,  the 
Maker  and  container  of  All,  the  All-Father,  solely  had 
being.'  He  then  evolved  all  things  '  by  thinking  himself 
outward  in  space.'  Hegelian  !  but  so  are  the  dateless 
hymns  of  the  Maoris,  despite  the  savage  mythology  which 
intrudes  into  both  sets  of  traditions.  The  old  fable  of 
Ouranos  and  Gaia  recurs  in  Zufii  as  in  Maori.1I  fail  to  see  how  Awonawilona  could  be  developed  out 
of  the  ghost  of  chief  or  conjurer.  That  in  which  all  things 
potentially  existed,  yet  who  was  more  than  all,  is  not  the 
ghost  of  a  conjurer  or  chief.  He  certainly  is  not  due  to 
missionary  influence.  No  authority  can  bo  better  than 
that  of  traditional  sacred  chants  found  among  a  populace 
which  will  not  sing  them  before  one  of  their  Mexican 
masters.

We  have  tried  to  escape  from  the  bias  of  belief  in  a 
primitive  divine  tradition,  but  bias  of  every  kind  exists, 
and  must  exist.  At  present  the  anthropological  hypo- 
thesis of  ancestor-worship  as  the  basis,  perhaps  (as  in 
Mr.  Spencer's  theory)  the  only  basis  of  religion,  affects 
observers.  Before  treating  the  theory  of  Degeneration 
1  Cashing,  Report,  EthnoL  Bureau,  1891-02,  p.  :-}7!).

272  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION272  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

let  us  examine  a  case  of  the  anthropological  bias.  The 
Fijians,  as  we  learned  from  Williams,  have  ancestral 
gods,  and  also  a  singular  form  of  the  creative  being, 
Ndengei,  or,  as  Mr.  Lorimer  Fison  calls  him,  Degei. 
Mr.  Fison  writes  :  '  It  is  clear  that  the  Fijians  humanised 
their  gods,  because  they  had  once  existed  on  earth  in  human 
form.  .  .  .  Like  other  primitive  people,  the  Fijians  deified 
their  ancestors.'  Yet  the  Fijians  '  may  have  forgotten  the 
names  of  their  ancestors  three  generations  back  '  !  How 
in  the  world  can  you  deify  a  person  whom  you  don't 
remember '?  Moreover,  only  malevolent  chiefs  were  dei- 
tied,  so  apparently  a  Fijian  god  is  really  a  well-born 
human  scoundrel,  so  considerable  that  he  for  one  is  not 
forgotten — just  as  if  we  worshipped  the  wicked  Lord 
Lyttelton  !  Of  course  a  god  like  Ahone  could  not  be 
made  out  of  such  materials  as  these,  and,  in  fact,  we 
learn  from  Mr.  Fison  that  there  are  other  Fijian  gods  of 
a  different  origin.

'  It  is  probable  that  there  were  here  and  there,  gods 
that  were  the  creation  of  the  priests  that  ministered  to  them, 
and  were  not  the  spirits  of  dead  chiefs.  Such  was  the  god 
of  the  Bure  Tribe  on  the  Ea  coast,  who  was  called  Tui 
Laga  or  "  Lord  of  Heaven."  When  the  missionaries  first 
went  to  convert  this  town  they  found  the  heathen  priest 
their  staunch  ally.  He  declared  that  they  had  come  to 
preach  the  same  god  that  he  had  been  preaching,  the  Tui 
Laga,  and  that  more  had  been  revealed  to  them  than  to 
him  of  the  mysteries  of  the  god.'

Mr.  Fison  is  reminded  of  St.  Paul  at  Athens,  '  whom 
then  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  declare  I  unto  you.'  lMr.  Fison  is  reminded  of  St.  Paul  at  Athens,  '  whom 
then  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  declare  I  unto  you.'  l

Mr.  Fison  has  clearly  no  bias  in  favour  of  a  God  like 
our  own,  known  to  savages,  and  not  derived  from  ghost- 
worship.  He  deduces  this  god,  Tui  Laga,  from  priestly 
reflection  and  speculation.  But  we  find  such  a  God  where

1  J.A.I.  May  1895,  pp.  341-344.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  273

we  find  no  priests,  where  a  priesthood  has  not  been  de- 
veloped. Such  a  God,  being  usually  unpropitiated  by  sacri- 
fice and  lucrative  private  practice,  is  precisely  the  kind  of 
deity  who  does  not  suit  a  priesthood.  For  these  reasons — 
that  a  priesthood  '  sees  no  money  in  '  a  God  of  this  kind, 
and  that  Gods  of  this  kind,  ethical  and  creative,  are  found 
where  there  are  no  priesthoods — we  cannot  look  on  the 
conception  as  a  late  one  of  priestly  origin,  as  Mr.  Fison 
does,  though  a  learned  caste,  like  the  Peruvian  Amautas, 
may  refine  on  the  idea.  Least  of  all  can  such  a  God  be 
'  the  creation  of  the  priests  that  minister  to  him,'  when, 
as  in  Peru,  the  Andaman  Isles,  and  much  of  Africa,  this 
God  is  ministered  to  by  no  priests.  Nor,  lastly,  can  we 
regard  the  absence  of  sacrifice  to  the  Creative  Being  as  a 
mere  proof  that  he  is  an  ancestral  ghost  who  '  had  lived 
on  earth  at  too  remote  a  time ;  '  for  this  absence  of 
sacrifice  occurs  where  ghosts  are  dreaded,  but  are  not 
propitiated  by  offerings  of  food  (as  among  Australians, 
Andamanese,  and  Blackfoot  Indians),  while  the  Creative 
Being  is  not  and  never  was  a  ghost,  according  to  his 
worshippers.At  this  point  criticism  may  naturally  remark  that 
whether  the  savage  Supreme  Being  is  feted,  as  by  the 
Comanches,  who  offer  puffs  of  smoke :  or  is  apparently 
half  forgotten,  as  by  the  Algonquins  and  Zulus  :  whether 
he  is  propitiated  by  sacrifice  (which  is  very  rare  indeed), 
or  only  by  conduct,  I  equally  claim  him  as  the  probable 
descendant  in  evolution  of  the  primitive,  undifferentiated, 
not  necessarily  '  spiritual  '  Being  of  such  creeds  as  the 
Australian.

One  must  reply  that  this  pedigree  cannot,  indeed, 
be  historically  traced,  but  that  it  presents  none  of  the 
logical  difficulties  inherent  in  the  animistic  pedigree — 
namely,  that  the  savage  Supreme  Being  is  the  last  and

T

274  THE    MAKING   OF   RELIGIONT

274  THE    MAKING   OF   RELIGION

highest  result  of  evolution  on  animistic  lines  out  of  ghosts, 
It  does  not  run  counter  to  the  evidence  universally  offered 
by  savages,  that  their  Supreme  Being  never  was  mortal 
man.  It  is  consistent,  whereas  the  animistic  hypothesis 
is,  in  this  case,  inconsistent,  with  the  universal  savage 
theory  of  Death.  Finally,  as  has  been  said  before,  grant- 
ing my  opinion  that  there  are  two  streams  of  religious 
thought,  one  rising  in  the  conception  of  an  undifferentiated 
Being,  eternal,  moral,  and  creative,  the  other  rising  in  the 
ghost-doctrine,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  latter,  as  best 
adapted  to  everyday  needs  and  experiences,  normal  and 
supernormal,  may  contaminate  the  former,  and  introduce 
sacrifice  and  food-propitiation  into  the  ritual  of  Beings 
who,  by  the  original  conception,  'need  nothing  of  ours.' 
At  the  same  time,  the  conception  of  '  spirit,'  once  attained, 
would  inevitably  come  to  be  attached  to  the  idea  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  even  though  he  was  not  at  first  conceived 
of  as  a  spirit.  We  know,  by  our  own  experience,  how 
difficult  it  has  become  for  us  to  think  of  an  eternal, 
powerful,  and  immortal  being,  except  as  a  spirit.  Yet 
this  way  of  looking  at  the  Supreme  Being,  merely  as 
being,  not  as  spirit,  must  have  existed,  granting  that  the 
idea  of  spirit  has  ghost  for  its  first  expression,  as,  by  their 
very  definition,  the  high  gods  of  savages  are  not  ghosts, 
and  never  were  ghosts,  but  are  prior  to  death.Here  let  me  introduce,  by  way  of  example,  a  Supreme 
Being  not  of  the  lowest  savage  level.  Metaphysically  he 
is  improved  on  in  statement,  morally  he  is  stained  with 
the  worst  crimes  of  the  hungry  ghost-god,  or  god  framed 
on  the  lines  of  animism.  This  very  interesting  Supreme 
Being,  in  a  middle  barbaric  race,  is  the  Polynesian  Taa-roa, 
as  described  by  Ellis  in  that  fascinating  book  '  Polynesian 
Researches.1  '  Several  of  their  taata-paari,  or  wrise  men,

1  ii.  191, 1829.

AMERICAN   CREATORS  275

pretend  that,  according  to  other  traditions,  Taa-roa  was 
only  a  man  who  was  deified  after  death.'  Euhemerism, 
in  fact,  is  a  natural  theory  of  men  acquainted  with 
ancestor-worship,  but  a  Euhemeristic  hypothesis  by  a 
Polynesian  thinker  is  not  a  statement  of  national  belief. 
Taa-roa  was  '  uncreated,  existing  from  the  beginning,  or 
from  the  time  he  emerges  from  the  po,  or  world  of  dark- 
ness.' In  the  Leeward  Isles  Taa-roa  was  Toivi,  fatherless 
and  motherless  from  all  eternity.  In  the  highest  heavens 
he  dwells  alone.  He  created  the  gods  of  polytheism,  the 
gods  of  war,  of  peace,  and  so  on.  Says  a  native  hymn, 
'  He  was :  he  abode  in  the  void.  No  earth,  no  sky,  no 
men !  He  became  the  universe.'  In  the  Windward 
Isles  he  has  a  wife,  Papa  the  rock = Papa,  Earth,  wife  of 
K-angi,  Heaven,  in  Maori  mythology.  Thus  it  may  be 
argued,  Taa-roa  is  no  '  primaeval  theistic  idea,'  but  merely 
the  Heaven-God  (Ouranos  in  Greece).  But  we  may  dis- 
tinguish :  in  the  Zuiii  hymn  we  have  the  myth  of  the 
marriage  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  but  Heaven  is  not  the 
Eternal,  Awonawilona,  who  '  thought  himself  out  into  the 
void,'  before  which,  as  in  the  Polynesian  hymn,  '  there 
was  no  sky.'  'Whence  came  the  idea  of  Taa-roa  ?  The  Euhemeristic 
theory  that  he  was  a  ghost  of  a  dead  man  is  absurd.  But 
as  we  are  now  among  polytheists  it  may  be  argued  that, 
given  a  crowd  of  gods  on  the  animistic  model,  an  origin 
had  to  be  found  for  them,  and  that  origin  was  Taa-roa. 
This  would  be  more  plausible  if  we  did  not  find  Supreme 
Beings  where  there  is  no  departmental  polytheism  to 
develop  them  out  of.  In  Tahiti,  Atuas  are  gods,  Oramutuas 
tiis  are  spirits ;  the  chief  of  the  spirits  were  ghosts  of 
warriors.  These  were  mischievous  ;  they,  their  images, 
and  the  skulls  of  the  dead  needed  propitiation,  and  these

1  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  845,  3-10.     Ellis,  ii.  193.

T  2

276  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION

ideas   (perhaps)   were  reflected  on  to  Taa-roa,  to  whom 
human  victims  were  sacrificed.1

Now  this  kind  of  horror,  human  sacrifice,  is  unknown, 
I  think,  in  early  savage  religions  of  Supreme  Beings,  as 
in  Australia,  among  the  Bushmen,  the  Andamanese,  and 
so  on.  I  therefore  suggest  that  in  an  advanced  poly- 
theism, such  as  that  of  Polynesia,  the  evil  sacrificial  rites 
unpractised  by  low  savages  come  to  be  attached  to  the 
worship  even  of  the  Supreme  Being.  Ghosts  and  ghost- 
gods  demanded  food,  and  food  was  therefore  also  offered 
to  the  Supreme  Being.It  was  found  difficult,  or  impossible,  to  induce  Christian 
converts,  in  Polynesia,  to  repeat  the  old  prayers.  They 
began,  trembled,  and  abstained.  They  had  a  ritual  '  for 
almost  every  act  of  their  lives,'  a  thing  unfamiliar  to  low 
savages.  In  fact,  beyond  all  doubt,  religious  criminal  acts, 
from  human  sacrifice  to  the  burning  of  Jeanne  d'Arc, 
increase  as  religion  and  culture  move  away  from  the  stage 
of  Bushmen  and  Andamanese  to  the  stage  of  Aztec  and 
Polynesian  culture.  The  Supreme  Being  is  succeeded 
in  advancing  civilisation,  and  under  the  influences  of 
animism,  by  ruthless  and  insatiable  ghost-gods,  full  of 
the  worst  human  qualities.  Thus  there  is  what  we  may 
really  call  degeneration,  moral  and  religious,  inevitably 
accompanying  early  progress.

That  this  is  the  case,  that  the  first  advances  in  culture 
necessarily  introduce  religious  degeneration,  we  shall  now 
try  to  demonstrate.  But  we  may  observe,  in  passing,  that 
our  array  of  moral  or  august  savage  supreme  beings  (the 
first  who  came  to  hand)  will,  for  some  reason,  not  be 
found  in  anthropological  treatises  on  the  Origin  of 
Religion.  They  appear,  somehow,  to  have  been  over-

1  Ellis,  ii.  221.

AMERICAN  CREATORS  2771  Ellis,  ii.  221.

AMERICAN  CREATORS  277

looked  by  philosophers.  Yet  the  evidence  for  them  is 
sufficiently  good.  Its  excellence  is  proved  by  its  very 
uniformity,  assuredly  undesigned.  An  old,  nay,  an  obso- 
lete theory — that  of  degeneration  in  religion — has  facts 
at  its  basis,  which  its  very  supporters  have  ignored, 
which  orthodoxy  has  overlooked.  Thus  the  Bev.  Pro- 
fessor Flint  informs  the  audience  in  the  Cathedral  of 
St.  Giles's,  that,  in  the  religions  '  at  the  bottom  of  the 
religious  scale,'  '  it  is  always  easy  to  see  how  wretchedly 
the  divine  is  conceived  of  ;  how  little  conscious  of  his 
own  true  wants  ...  is  the  poor  worshipper.'  The  poor 
worshipper  of  Baiame  wishes  to  obey  His  Law,  which 
makes  for  righteousness.1

1  The  Faiths  of  the  World,  p.  413.

278  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

XV

THE   OLD  DEGENERATION   THEORY

IF  any  partisan  of  the  anthropological  theory  has  read 
so  far  into  this  argument,  he  will  often  have  murmured 
to  himself,  '  The  old  degeneration  theory ! '  On  this 
Dr.  Brinton  remarked  in  1868  :

'  The  supposition  that  in  ancient  times  and  in  very 
unenlightened  conditions,  before  mythology  had  grown,  a 
monotheism  prevailed  which  afterwards,  at  various  times, 
was  revived  by  reformers,  is  a  belief  that  should  have 
passed  away  when  the  delights  of  savage  life  and  the 
praises  of  a  state  of  nature  ceased  to  be  the  theme  of 
philosophers.' l'  The  old  degeneration  theory  '  practically,  and  falla- 
ciously, resolved  itself,  as  Mr.  Tylor  says,  into  two 
assumptions — 'first,  that  the  history  of  culture  began 
with  the  appearance  on  earth  of  a  semi-civilised  race  of 
men ;  and  second,  that  from  this  stage  culture  has  pro- 
ceeded in  two  ways — backward  to  produce  savages,  and 
forward  to  produce  civilised  men.' 2  That  hypothesis  is 
false  to  all  our  knowledge  of  evolution.

The  hypothesis  here  provisionally  advocated  makes  no 
assumptions  at  all.  It  is  a  positive  fact  that  among  some 
of  the  lowest  savages  there  exists,  not  a  doctrinal  and 
abstract  Monotheism,  but  a  belief  in  a  moral,  powerful, 
kindly,  creative  Being,  while  this  faith  is  found  in  juxta- 
position with  belief  in  unworshipped  ghosts,  totems,

1  Myths  of  the  New  World,  p.  44.  2  Prim.  Cult.  i.  35.

THE   OLD   DEGENERATION   THEORY  279

fetishes,  and  so  on.  The  powerful  creative  Being  of  savage 
belief  sanctions  truth,  unselfishness,  loyalty,  chastity,  and 
other  virtues.  I  have  set  forth  the  difficulties  involved  in 
the  attempt  to  derive  this  Being  from  ghosts  and  other 
lower  forms  of  belief.

Now,  it  is  mere  matter  of  fact,  and  not  of  assumption, 
that  the  Supreme  Being  of  many  rather  higher  savages 
differs  from  the  Supreme  Being  of  certain  lower  savages 
by  the  neglect  in  which  he  is  left,  by  the  epicurean  repose 
with  which  he  is  credited,  and  by  his  comparative  lack  of 
moral  control  over  human  conduct.  In  his  place  a  mob 
of  ghosts  and  spirits,  supposed  to  be  potent  and  helpful 
in  everyday  life,  attract  men's  regard  and  adoration,  and 
get  paid  by  sacrifice — even  by  human  sacrifice.

Turning  to  races  yet  higher  in  material  culture,  we 
find  a  crowd  of  hungry  and  cruel  gods.Turning  to  races  yet  higher  in  material  culture,  we 
find  a  crowd  of  hungry  and  cruel  gods.

On  this  point  Mr.  Jevons  remarks,  in  accordance  with 
my  own  observation,  that  '  human  sacrifice  appears  at  a 
much  earlier  period  in  the  rites  for  the  dead  than  it  does 
in  the  ritual  of  the  gods.' l  The  dead  chief  needs  servants 
and  wives  in  Hades,  who  are  offered  to  him.  The 
Australians  have  some  elements  of  cannibalism,  but  do 
not,  as  a  general  rule,  offer  any  human  victims.  So  far, 
then,  ancestor- worship  introduced  a  sadly  '  degenerate  ' 
rite,  compared  with  the  moral  faith  in  unfed  gods.

To  gods  the  human  sacrifice  was  probably  extended 
(in  some  cases)  either  by  a  cannibal  civilised  race,  like  the 
Aztecs,  or  by  way  of  piacula,  the  god  being  conciliated 
for  man's  sin  by  the  offering  of  what  man  most  prized, 
the  '  jealousy  '  of  the  god  being  appeased  in  a  similar  way. 
But  these  are  relatively  advanced  conceptions,  not  to  be 
found,  to  my  knowledge,  among  the  lowest  and  most 
backward  races.  Therefore,  advance  to  the  idea  of  spirit 
1  Introduction,  p.  199  ;  also  p.  1C1.

280  THE   MAKING  OF   RELIGION

at  one  point,  meant  degeneration  at  another  point,  to  the 
extent  of  human  sacrifice.280  THE   MAKING  OF   RELIGION

at  one  point,  meant  degeneration  at  another  point,  to  the 
extent  of  human  sacrifice.

Thus,  on  looking  at  relatively  advanced  races,  we  find 
them  worshipping  polytheistic  deities  and  ghosts  of  the 
kings  just  dead,  who  are  often  propitiated  by  terrible 
massacres  of  human  victims,  while,  as  in  the  case  of 
Taa-roa,  the  blood  spurts  back  even  on  the  uncreated 
Creator,  who  was  before  earth  was,  or  sea,  sun,  or  sky. 
Undeniably  the  hungry,  cruel  gods  are  degenerate  from 
the  Australian  Father  in  Heaven,  who  receives  no  sacri- 
fice but  that  of  men's  lusts  and  selfishness ;  who  desires 
obedience,  not  the  fat  of  kangaroos  ;  who  needs  nothing  of 
ours  ;  is  unfed  and  unbribed.  Thus,  in  this  particular 
respect  the  degeneration  of  religion  from  the  Australian 
or  Andamanese  to  the  Dinka  standard — and  infinitely 
more  to  the  Polynesian,  or  Aztec,  or  popular  Greek 
standard — is  as  undeniable  as  any  fact  in  human  history.

Anthropology  has  only  escaped  the  knowledge  of  this 
circumstance  by  laying  down  the  rule,  demonstrably 
unbased  on  facts,  that  '  the  divine  sanction  of  ethical 
laws  .  .  .  belongs  almost  or  wholly  to  religions  above  the 
savage  level,  not  to  the  earlier  and  lower  creeds ;  '  that 
'  savage  Animism  is  almost  devoid  of  that  ethical  element 
which  to  the  educated  modern  mind  is  the  very  main- 
spring of  practical  religion.'  '

I  have  argued,  indeed,  that  the  God  of  low  savages 
who  imparts  the  divine  sanction  of  ethical  laws  is  not  of 
animistic  origin.  But  even  where  Mr.  Im  Thurn  finds,  in 
Guiana,  nothing  but  Animism  of  the  lowest  conceivable 
type,  he  also  finds  in  that  Animism  the  only  or  most 
potent  moral  restraint  on  the  conduct  of  men.While  Anthropology  holds  the  certainly  erroneous 
idea  that  the  religion  of  the  most  backward  races  is 
1  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  360,  361.

THE  OLD  DEGENERATION  THEOEY       281

always  non-moral,  of  course  she  cannot  know  that  there 
has,  in  fact,  been  great  degeneration  in  religion  (if  religion 
began  on  the  Australian  and  Andamanese  level,  or  even 
higher)  wherever  religion  is  non-moral  or  immoral.

Again,  Anthropology,  while  fixing  her  gaze  on  totems, 
on  worshipped  mummies,  adored  ghosts,  and  treasured 
fetishes,  has  not,  to  my  knowledge,  made  a  comparative 
study  of  the  higher  and  purer  religious  ideas  of  savages. 
These  have  been  passed  by,  with  a  word  about  credulous 
missionaries  and  Christian  influences,  except  in  the 
brief  summary  for  which  Mr.  Tylor  found  room.  In 
this  work  I  only  take  a  handful  of  cases  of  the  higher 
religious  opinions  of  savages,  and  set  them  side  by  side 
for  purposes  of  comparison.  Much  more  remains  to  be 
done  in  this  field.  But  the  area  covered  is  wide,  the 
evidence  is  the  best  attainable,  and  it  seems  proved  beyond 
doubt  that  savages  have  '  felt  after '  a  conception  of  a 
Creator  much  higher  than  that  for  which  they  commonly 
get  credit.  Now,  if  that  conception  is  original,  or  is  very 
early  (and  nothing  in  it  suggests  lateness  of  development) , 
then  the  other  elements  of  their  faith  and  practice  are 
degenerate.'  How,'  it  has  been  asked,  '  could  all  mankind  forget  a 
pure  religion  ? ' 1  That  is  what  I  now  try  to  explain. 
That  degeneration  I  would  account  for  by  the  attractions 
which  animism,  when  once  developed,  possessed  for  the 
naughty  natural  man,  '  the  old  Adam.'  A  moral  creator 
in  need  of  no  gifts,  and  opposed  to  lust  and  mischief, 
will  not  help  a  man  with  love-spells,  or  with  malevolent 
'  sendings  '  of  disease  by  witchcraft ;  will  not  favour  one 
man  above  his  neighbour,  or  one  tribe  above  its  rivals,  as 
a  reward  for  sacrifice  which  he  does  not  accept,  or  as 
constrained  by  charms  which  do  not  touch  his  omni-

1  Prof.  Menzies,  History  of  Religion,  p.  2.'5.

282  THE   MAKING    OF  RELIGION1  Prof.  Menzies,  History  of  Religion,  p.  2.'5.

282  THE   MAKING    OF  RELIGION

potence.  Ghosts  and  ghost-gods,  on  the  other  hand,  in 
need  of  food  and  blood,  afraid  of  spells  and  binding 
charms,1  are  a  corrupt,  but,  to  man,  a  useful  constituency. 
Man  being  what  he  is,  man  was  certain  to  'go  a 
whoring '  after  practically  useful  ghosts,  ghost-gods,  and 
fetishes  which  he  could  keep  in  his  wallet  or  medicine 
bag.  For  these  he  was  sure,  in  the  long  run,  first  to 
neglect  his  idea  of  his  Creator  ;  next,  perhaps,  to  reckon 
Him  as  only  one,  if  the  highest,  of  the  venal  rabble  of 
spirits  or  deities,  and  to  sacrifice  to  Him,  as  to  them.  And 
this  is  exactly  what  happened !  If  we  are  not  to  call  it 
'  degeneration,'  what  are  we  to  call  it  ?  It  may  be  an  old 
theory,  but  facts  '  winna  ding,'  and  are  on  the  side  of 
an  old  theory.  Meanwhile,  on  the  material  plane,  culture 
kept  advancing,  the  crafts  and  arts  arose ;  departments 
arose,  each  needing  a  god  ;  thought  grew  clearer ;  such 
admirable  ethics  as  those  of  the  Aztecs  were  developed, 
and  while  bleeding  human  hearts  smoked  on  every  altar, 
Nezahuatl  conceived  and  erected  a  bloodless  fane  to 
'  The  Unknown  God,  Cause  of  Causes,'  without  altar 
or  idol ;  and  the  Inca,  Yupanqui,  or  another,  declared 
that  '  Our  Father  and  Master,  the  Sun,  must  have  a 
Lord.' 2But,  at  this  stage  of  culture,  the  luck  of  the  state,  and 
the  interests  of  a  rich  and  powerful  clergy,  were  involved 
in  the  maintenance  of  the  old,  animistic,  relatively  non- 
moral  system,  as  in  Cuzco,  Greece,  and  Home.  That 
popular  and  political  regard  for  the  luck  of  the  state,  that 
priestly  self-interest  (quite  natural),  could  only  be  swept 
away  by  the  moral  monotheism  of  Christianity  or  of  Islam. 
Nothing  else  could  do  it.  In  the  case  of  Christianity,  the 
central  and  most  potent  of  many  combined  influences,

1  \fy6/j.fvai  6fwv  avdyKat.     Porphyry.

-  Ixtlilochitl.    Balboa,  Hist,  du  Pcrou,  p.  62.

THE  OLD  DEGENERATION   THEORY  283

.apart  from  the  Life  and  Death  of  Our  Lord,  was  the  moral 
monotheism  of  the  Hebrew  religion  of  Jehovah.

Now,  it  is  undeniable  that  Jehovah,  at  a  certain 
period  of  Hebrew  history,  had  become  degraded  and 
anthropomorphised,  far  below  Darumulun,  and  Puluga, 
and  Pachacamac,  and  Ahone,  as  conceived  of  in  their 
purest  form,  and  in  the  high  mood  of  savage  mysteries 
which  yet  contain  so  much  that  is  grotesque.  Even  the 
Big  Black  Man  of  the  Fuegians  is  on  a  higher  level  (as 
we  reckon  morals),  when  he  forbids  the  slaying  of  a  robber 
enemy,  than  Jehovah  is  when  He  commands  the  massacre 
of  Agag.  The  Black  Man  of  shivering  communistic 
savages  is  nearer  the  morality  of  our  Lord  than  the 
Jehovah  of  Judges.Again,  traces  of  human  sacrifice  appear  in  the  ritual 
of  Israel,  and  it  is  only  relatively  late  that  the  great 
prophets,  justly  declaring  Jehovah  to  be  indifferent  to 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  rams,  try  to  bring  back  his  service 
to  that  of  the  unpropitiated,  unbought  Dendid,  or  Ahone, 
or  Pundjel.  Here  is  degeneration,  even  in  Israel.  How 
the  conception  of  Jehovah  arose  in  Israel,  whether  it 
was  a  revival  of  a  half-obliterated  idea,  such  as  we  find 
among  low  savages  ;  or  whether  it  was  borrowed  from 
some  foreign  creed  ;  or  was  the  result  of  meditation  on 
the  philosophical  Supreme  Being  of  high  Egyptian 
theology,  is  another  question.  The  Biblical  statement 
leans  to  the  first  alternative.  Jehovah,  not  by  that  name, 
had  been  the  God  of  Israel's  fathers.  The  question  will 
be  discussed  later  ;  but,  unless  new  facts  are  discovered, 
we  must  accept  the  version  of  the  Pentateuch,  or  take 
refuge  in  conjecture.

Not  only  is  there  degeneration  from  the  Australian 
conception  of  Darumulun  to  the  conception  of  the  Semitic 
gods  in  general,  but,  '  humanly  speaking,'  if  religion

284Not  only  is  there  degeneration  from  the  Australian 
conception  of  Darumulun  to  the  conception  of  the  Semitic 
gods  in  general,  but,  '  humanly  speaking,'  if  religion

284

began  in  a  pure  form  among  low  savages,  degeneration 
was  inevitable.  Advancing  social  conditions  compelled 
men  into  degeneration.  Darumulun  is,  so  far,  in  line 
with  our  own  ideas  of  divinity  because  he  is  not  localised. 
He  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands ;  it  is  not 
likely  that  he  should,  when  his  worshippers  have  neither 
house,  tent,  nor  tabernacle.  As  Mr.  Robertson  Smith 
says,  '  where  the  God  had  a  house  or  a  temple,  we  recog- 
nise the  work  of  men  who  were  no  longer  pure  nomads, 
but  had  begun  to  form  fixed  homes.'  By  the  nature  of 
Australian  society,  Darumulun  could  not  be  tied  to  a 
temple,  and  temple-ritual,  and  consequent  myths  to 
explain  that  ritual,  could  not  arise.  Nor  could  Darumu- 
lun be  attached  to  a  district,  just  as  '  the  nomad  Arabs 
could  not  assimilate  the  conception  of  a  god  as  a  land- 
owner, and  apply  it  to  their  own  tribal  deities,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  in  the  desert  private  property  in  land 
was  unknown.'  l

Darumulun  is  thus  not  capable  of  degenerating  into 
'  a  local  god,  as  Baal,  or  lord  of  the  land,'  because  this 
'  involves  a  series  of  ideas  unknown  to  the  primitive  life 
of  the  savage  huntsman,'  like  the  widely  spread  Murring 
tribes.2

Nor  could  Darumulun  be  tied  down  to  a  place  in 
Semitic  fashion,  first  by  manifesting  himself  there,  there- 
fore by  receiving  an  altar  of  sacrifice  there,  and  in  the 
end  a  sanctuary,  for  Darumulun  receives  no  sacrifice  at  all.Again,  the  scene  of  the  Bora  could  not  become  a  per- 
manent home  of  Darumulun,  because,  when  the  rites  are 
over,  the  effigy  of  the  god  is  scrupulously  destroyed. 
Thus  Darumulun,  in  his  own  abode  '  beyond  the  sky,'  can 
'  go  everywhere  and  do  everything  '  (is  omnipresent  and

1  Eobertson  Smith,  Religion  of  tlie  Semites,  pp.  104,  105. 
-  Op.  cit.  p.  106.

THE   OLD   DEGENERATION   THEORY  285

omnipotent),  dwells  in  no  earthly  places,  has  no  temple, 
nor  tabernacle,  nor  sacred  mount,  nor,  like  Jehovah,  any 
limit  of  land.1

The  early  Hebrew  conception  of  Jehovah,  then,  is 
infinitely  more  conditioned,  practically,  by  space,  than 
the  Supreme  Being,  '  The  Master,'  in  the  conception  of 
some  Australian  blacks.

'  By  a  prophet  like  Isaiah  the  residence  of  Jehovah  in 
Zion  is  almost  wholly  dematerialised.  .  .  .  Conceiving 
Jehovah  as  the  King  of  Israel,  he  necessarily  conceives 
His  kingly  activity  as  going  forth  from  the  capital  of  the 
nation.' 2

But  nomad  hunter  tribes,  with  no  ancestor-worship, 
no  king  and  no  capital,  cannot  lower  their  deity  by  the 
conditions,  or  limit  him  by  the  limitations,  of  an  earthly 
monarchy.

In  precisely  the  same  way,  Major  Ellis  proves  the 
degeneration  of  deity  in  Africa,  so  far  as  being  localised 
in  place  of  being  the  Universal  God,  implies  degene- 
ration, as  it  certainly  does  to  our  minds.  By  being 
attached  to  a  given  hill  or  river  '  the  gods,  instead  of 
being  regarded  as  being  interested  in  the  whole  of  man- 
kind, would  eventually  come  to  be  regarded  as  being 
interested  in  separate  tribes  or  nations  alone.'To  us  Milton  seems  nobly  Chauvinistic  when  he  talks 
of  what  God  has  done  by  '  His  English.'  But  this  local- 
ised and  essentially  degenerate  conception  was  inevitable, 
as  soon  as,  in  advancing  civilisation,  the  god  who  had  been 
'  interested  in  the  whole  of  [known]  mankind  '  was  settled 
on  a  hill,  river,  or  lagoon,  amidst  a  nation  of  worshippers.

In  the  course  of  the  education  of  mankind,  this  form 
of  degeneration  (abstractly  so  considered)  was  to  work,

1  On  the  Glenelg  some  holy  caves  and  mountain  tops  are  haunted  or 
holy.     Waitz,  vi.  804.     No  authority  cited. 
-  Religion  of  Semites,  p.  110.

'286  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

as  nothing  else  could  have  worked,  towards  the  lofty  con- 
ception of  universal  Deity.  For  that  conception  was  only 
brought  into  practical  religion  (as  apart  from  philosophic 
speculation)  by  the  union  between  Israel  and  the  God  of 
Sinai  and  Zion.  The  Prophets,  recognising  in  the  God  of 
Sinai,  their  nation's  God — One  to  whom  righteousness 
was  infinitely  dearer  than  even  his  Chosen  People — freed 
the  conception  of  God  from  local  ties,  and  made  it  over- 
spread the  world.Mr.  Robertson  Smith  has  pointed  out,  again,  the 
manner  in  which  the  different  political  development  of 
East  and  West  affected  the  religion  of  Greece  and  of  the 
Semites.  In  Greece,  monarchy  fell,  at  an  early  period, 
before  the  aristocratic  houses.  The  result  was  '  a  divine 
aristocracy  of  many  gods,  only  modified  by  a  weak  remi- 
niscence of  the  old  kingship  in  the  not  very  effective 
sovereignty '  (or  prytany]  '  of  Zeus.  In  the  East  the 
national  god  tended  to  acquire  a  really  monarchic  sway.'  ! 
Australia  escaped  polytheistic  degeneracy  by  having  no 
aristocracy,  as  in  Polynesia,  where  aristocracy,  as  in  early 
Greece,  had  developed  polytheism.  Ghosts  and  spirits 
the  Australians  knew,  but  not  polytheistic  gods,  nor 
departmental  deities,  as  of  war,  agriculture,  art.  The 
savage  had  no  agriculture,  and  his  social  condition  was 
not  departmental.  In  yet  another  way,  political  advance 
produces  religious  degeneration,  if  polytheism  be  degenera- 
tion from  the  conception  of  one  relatively  supreme  moral 
being.  To  make  a  nation,  several  tribes  must  unite. 
Each  has  its  god,  and  the  nation  is  apt  to  receive  them 
all,  equally,  into  its  Pantheon.  Thus,  if  worshippers  of 
Baiame,  Pundjel,  and  Daruinulun  coalesced  into  a  nation, 
we  might  find  all  three  gods  living  together  in  a  new 
polytheism.  In  fact,  granting  a  relatively  pure  starting- 
1  Rcl.  Scm.  p.  74

THE   OLD   DEGENERATION   THEORY  287

point,  degeneration  from  it  must  accompany  every  step  of 
civilisation,  to  a  certain  distance.THE   OLD   DEGENERATION   THEORY  287

point,  degeneration  from  it  must  accompany  every  step  of 
civilisation,  to  a  certain  distance.

Unlike  Semitic  gods,  Darumulun  receives  no  sacrifice. 
As  we  have  said,  he  has  no  kin  with  ghosts,  and  their 
sacrifices  could  not  be  carried  on  into  his  cult,  if  Waitz- 
Gerland  (vi.  811)  are  right  in  saying  that  the  Australians 
have  no  ancestor- worship.  The  Kurnai  ghosts  '  were 
believed  to  live  upon  plants,' l  which  are  not  offered 
to  them.  Chill  ghosts,  unfed  by  men,  would  come  to 
waning  camp-fires  and  batten  on  the  broken  meats.  The 
Ngarego  and  Wolgal  held,  more  handsomely,  that  Thara- 
mulun  (Darumulun)  met  the  just  departed  spirit  '  and 
conducted  it  to  its  future  home  beyond  the  sky.'  '2  Ghosts 
might  also  accompany  relics  of  the  body,  such  as  the 
dead  hand,  carried  about  by  the  family,  who  would  wave 
the  black  fragment  at  the  dreaded  Aurora  Borealis, 
crying,  '  Send  it  away  !  '  I  am  unacquainted  with  any 
sacrifices  to  ancestral  ghosts  among  this  people  who  cannot 
long  remember  their  ancestors,  consequently  the  practice 
has  not  been  refracted  on  their  supreme  Master's  cult.3 
In  the  cult  of  Darumulun,  and  of  other  highest  gods  of 
lowrest  savages,  nothing  answers  to  the  Hebrew  technical 
priestly  word  for  sacrifice,  'food  of  the  deity.'*  Nobody 
feeds  Puluga,  nobody  fed  Ahone.  We  hear  of  no  Fuegian 
sacrifices.  Mr.  Robertson  Smith  says  :  '  In  all  religions 
in  which  the  gods  have  been  developed  out  of  totems 
[worshipped  animals  and  other  things  regarded  as  akin  to 
human  stocks]  the  ritual  act  of  laying  food  before  the 
deity  is  perfectly  intelligible.'  Pundjel,  an  Australian 
Supreme  Being,  is  mixed  up  with  animals  in  some  myths,  * 
but  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  such  Supreme  Beings  as  he1  Howitt,  J.  A.  I.  1884,  p.  187.  -'  Op.  cit.  p.  188.

a  There  is  a  story  of  sacritices  of  girls  biennially  in  Queensland.     Lang, 
Queensland,  pp.  374-380  ;  Keville,  i.  1S;J. 
4  Eel.  Sem.  p.  207.

288  THE   MAKING  OF   RELIGION

could  be  '  developed  out  of  totems '  !  I  am  not  aware, 
again,  that  any  Australian  tribe  feeds  the  animals  who 
are  its  totems,  so  Darumulun  could  not,  and  did  not 
inherit  sacrifice  through  them.  Mr.  Kobertson  Smith 
had  a  celebrated  theory  that  cereal  sacrifice  is  a  tribute 
to  a  god,  while  sacrifice  of  a  beast  or  man  is  an  act  of 
communion  with  the  god.1  Men  and  gods  dined  together.2 
'  The  god  himself  was  conceived  of  as  a  being  of  the  same 
stock  as  his  comrades.'  Beasts  were  also  of  the  same 
stock,  one  beast,  say  a  lobster,  was  of  the  same  blood  as  a 
lobster  kin,  and  its  god.3  Occasionally  the  sacred  beast 
of  the  kin  (say  the  lobster),  usually  not  to  be  slain  or  tasted, 
is  '  eaten  as  a  kind  of  mystic  sacrament.' 4Now,  there  is,  I  believe,  some  evidence,  lately  col- 
lected if  not  published,  which  makes  in  favour  of  the 
eating  of  totems  by  Australians,  at  a  certain  very  rare 
and  solemn  mystery.  It  would  not  even  surprise  me 
('  from  information  received ')  if  a  very  deeply  initiated 
person  were  occasionally  slain,  as  the  highest  degree 
of  initiation,  on  certain  most  unusual  occasions.  This 
remains  uncertain,  but  I  have  at  present  no  evidence  that, 
either  by  one  road  or  another,  either  from  ghost-feeding  or 
totem-feeding,  or  feeding  on  totems,  any  Australian  Supreme 
Being  receives  any  sacrifice  at  all.  Much  less,  as  among 
Pawnees  and  Semitic  peoples  (to  judge  from  certain  traces), 
is  the  Australian  Supreme  Being  a  cause  of  and  partaker  in 
human  sacrifice.''  The  horrible  idea  of  the  Man  who  is 
the  God,  and  is  eaten  in  the  God's  honour,  occurs  among 
polytheistic  Aztecs,  on  a  high  level  of  material  culture,  not 
among  Australians,  Andamanese,  Bushmen,  or  Fuegians.6

1  Bel.  Scm.  p.  225.  -  Op.  cit.  p.  247.

3  Op.  cit.  p.  209.  4  Op.  cit.  p.  277.

;>  Op.  cit.  p.  343.  Citing  Gen.  xxii.,  2  Kings  xxi.  G,  Micah  vi.  7, 
2  Kings  iii.  27.

Iy  I  mean,  does  not  occur  to  my  knowledge.  New  evidence  is  always 
upsetting  anthropological  theories.

THE   OLD   DEGENERATION  THEORY  289Iy  I  mean,  does  not  occur  to  my  knowledge.  New  evidence  is  always 
upsetting  anthropological  theories.

THE   OLD   DEGENERATION  THEORY  289

Thus,  on  the  whole,  the  Darumulun,  or  other  Supreme 
Being  of  the  lowest  known  savages,  men  roaming  wild, 
when  originally  met,  on  a  continent  peopled  by  older 
kinds  of  animals  than  ours,  was  (as  we  regard  purity)  on 
a  higher  plane  by  far  than  the  gods  of  Greeks  and 
Semites  in  their  earliest  known  characters.  Setting 
mythology  aside  and  looking  only  at  cult,  the  God  of 
the  Murring  or  the  Kurnai,  whose  precepts  soften  the 
heart,  who  knows  the  heart's  secrets,  who  inculcates 
chastity,  respect  of  age,  unselfishness,  who  is  not  bound 
by  conditions  of  space  or  place,  who  receives  no  blood  of 
slaughtered  man  or  beast,  is  a  conception  from  which  the 
ordinary  polytheistic  gods  of  infinitely  more  polite  peoples 
are  frankly  degenerate.  The  animistic  superstitions 
wildly  based  on  the  belief  in  the  soul  have  not  soiled 
him,  and  the  social  conditions  of  aristocracy,  agriculture, 
architecture,  have  not  made  him  one  in  a  polytheistic 
crowd  of  rapacious  gods,  nor  fettered  him  as  a  Baal  to 
his  estate,  nor  localised  him  in  a  temple  built  with  hands. 
He  cannot  appear  as  a  '  God  of  Battles  ; '  no  Te  Deum 
can  be  sung  to  him  for  victory  in  a  cause  perhaps  unjust, 
for  he  is  the  Supreme  Being  of  a  certain  group  of  allied 
local  tribes.  One  of  these  tribes  has  no  more  interest  with 
him  than  another,  and  the  whole  group  do  not,  as  a  body, 
wage  war  on  another  alien  group.  The  social  conditions 
of  his  worshippers,  then,  preserve  Darumulun  from  the 
patent  blots  on  the  scutcheon  of  gods  among  much  more 
advanced  races.Once  more,  the  idea  of  Animism  admits  of  endless 
expansion.  A  spirit  can  be  located  anywhere,  in  any 
stone,  stick,  bush,  person,  hill,  or  river.  A  god  made 
on  the  animistic  model  can  be  assigned  to  any  depart- 
ment of  human  activity,  down  to  sports,  or  lusts,  or  the 
province  of  Cloacina.  Thus  religion  becomes  a  mere

u

290  THE   MAKING    OF  RELIGION

haunted  and  pestilential  jungle  of  beliefs.  But  the  theistic 
conception,  when  not  yet  envisaged  as  spiritual,  cannot  be 
subdivided  and  eparpille.  Thus,  from  every  point  of  view, 
and  on  every  side,  Animism  is  full  of  the  seeds  of  religious 
degeneration,  which  do  not  and  cannot  exist  in  what  I 
take  to  be  the  earliest  known  form  of  the  theistic  con- 
ception :  that  of  a  Being  about  whose  metaphysical 
nature — spirit  or  not  spirit— no  questions  were  asked, 
as  Dr.  Brinton  long  ago  remarked.

That  conception  alone  could  neither  supply  the  moral 
motive  of  '  a  soul  to  be  saved,'  nor  satisfy  the  meta- 
physical instinct  of  advancing  mankind.  To  meet  these 
wants,  to  supply  '  soul,'  with  its  moral  stimulus,  and  to 
provide  a  phrase  or  idea  under  which  the  Deity  could 
be  envisaged  (i.e.  as  a  spirit)  by  advancing  thought, 
Animism  was  necessary.  The  blending  of  the  theistic 
and  the  animistic  beliefs  was  indispensable  to  religion. 
But,  in  the  process  of  animistic  development  under 
advancing  social  conditions,  degeneration  was  necessarily 
implied.  Degeneration  of  the  theistic  conception  for  a 
while,  therefore,  occurred.  The  facts  are  the  proofs ; 
and  only  contradictory  facts,  in  sufficient  quantity,  can 
annihilate  the  old  theory  of  Degeneration  when  it  is 
presented  in  this  form.It  must  be  repeated  that  on  this  theory  an  explanation 
is  given  of  what  the  old  Degeneration  hypothesis  does 
not  explain.  Granting  a  primal  religion  relatively  pure 
in  its  beginnings,  why  did  it  degenerate  ?

Mr.  Max  Miiller,  looking  on  religion  as  the  develop- 
ment of  the  sentiment  of  the  Infinite,  regards  fetishism 
as  a  secondary  and  comparatively  late  form  of  belief. 
We  find  it,  he  observes,  in  various  forms  of  Christianity ; 
Christianity,  therefore,  is  primary  there,  relic  worship  is 
secondary.  Keligion  beginning,  according  to  him,  in  the

THE   OLD  DEGENERATION  THEORY  291

sense  of  the  infinite,  as  awakened  in  man  by  tall  trees, 
high  hills,  and  so  on,  it  advances  to  the  infinite  of  space 
and  sky,  and  so  to  the  infinitely  divine.  This  is  primary : 
fetishism  is  secondary.  Arguing  elsewhere  against  this 
idea,  I  have  asked  :  What  was  the  modus  of  degeneration 
which  produced  similar  results  in  Christianity,  and  in 
African  and  other  religions  ?  How  did  it  work  ?  I  am  not 
aware  that  Mr.  Max  Miiller  has  answered  this  question. 
But  how  degeneration  worked — namely,  by  Animism  sup- 
planting Theism — is  conspicuously  plain  on  our  theory.Take  the  early  chapters  of  Genesis,  or  any  savage 
cosmogonic  myth  you  please.  Deathless  man  is  face  to 
face  with  the  Creator.  He  cannot  degenerate  in  religion. 
He  cannot  offer  sacrifice,  for  the  Creator  obviously  needs 
nothing,  and  again,  as  there  is  no  death,  he  cannot  slay 
animals  for  the  Creator.  But,  in  one  way  or  another, 
usually  by  breach  of  a  taboo,  Death  enters  the  world. 
Then  comes,  by  process  of  evolution,  belief  in  hungry 
spirits,  belief  in  spirits  who  may  inhabit  stones  or  sticks ; 
again  there  arise  priests  who  know  how  to  propitiate  spirits 
and  how  to  tempt  them  into  sticks  and  stones.  These 
arts  become  lucrative  and  are  backed  by  the  cleverest 
men,  and  by  the  apparent  evidence  of  prophecies  by  con- 
vulsionaries.  Thus  every  known  kind  of  degeneration  in 
religion  is  inevitably  introduced  as  a  result  of  the  theory  of 
Animism.  We  do  not  need  an  hypothesis  of  Original  Sin  as 
a  cause  of  degeneration,  and,  if  Mr.  Max  Miiller's  doctrine 
of  the  Infinite  were  viable,  we  have  supplied,  in  Animism, 
under  advancing  social  conditions,  what  he  does  not  seem 
to  provide,  a  cause  and  modus  of  degeneration.  Fetishism 
would  thus  be  really  '  secondary,'  ex  liypothesi,  but  as 
we  nowhere  find  Fetishism  alone,  without  the  other 
elements  of  religion,  we  cannot  say,  historically,  whether 
it  is  secondary  or  not.  Fetishism  logically  needs,  in

u  2

292  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGIONu  2

292  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

some  of  its  aspects,  the  doctrine  of  spirits,  and  Theism, 
in  what  we  take  to  be  its  earliest  known  form,  does  not 
logically  need  the  doctrine  of  spirits  as  given  matter.  So 
far  we  can  go,  but  not  farther,  as  to  the  fact  of  priority 
in  evolution.  Nevertheless  we  meet,  among  the  most 
backward  peoples  known  to  us,  among  men  just  emerged 
from  the  palaeolithic  stage  of  culture,  men  who  are  in- 
volved in  dread  of  ghosts,  a  religious  Idea  which  certainly 
is  not  born  of  ghost-worship,  for  by  these  men,  ancestral 
ghosts  are  not  worshipped.

In  their  hearts,  on  their  lips,  in  their  moral  training 
we  find  (however  blended  with  barbarous  absurdities,  and 
obscured  by  rites  of  another  origin)  the  faith  in  a 
Being  who  created  or  constructed  the  world ;  who  was 
from  time  beyond  memory  or  conjecture  ;  who  is  eternal, 
who  makes  for  righteousness,  and  who  loves  mankind. 
This  Being  has  not  the  notes  of  degeneration  ;  his  home 
is  '  among  the  stars,'  not  in  a  hill  or  in  a  house.  To  him 
no  altar  smokes,  and  for  him  no  blood  is  shed.

'  God,  that  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein, 
seeing  that  He  is  lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  dwelleth 
not  in  temples  made  with  hands ;  neither  is  worshipped 
with  men's  hands,  as  though  He  needed  any  thing  .  .  . 
and  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  .  .  . 
that  they  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel 
after  Him,  and  find  Him,  though  He  be  not  far  from  every 
one  of  us  :  for  in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our 
being.'That  the  words  of  St.  Paul  are  literally  true,  as  to 
the  feeling  after  a  God  who  needs  not  anything  at  man's 
hands,  the  study  of  anthropology  seems  to  us  to  demon- 
strate. That  in  this  God  '  we  have  our  being,'  in  so  far 
as  somewhat  of  ours  may  escape,  at  moments,  from  the 
bonds  of  Time  and  the  manacles  of  Space,  the  earlier 
part  of  this  treatise  is  intended  to  suggest,  as  a  thing  by

THE   OLD  DEGENERATION  THEORY  293

no  means  necessarily  beyond  a  reasonable  man's  power 
to  conceive.  That  these  two  beliefs,  however  attained 
(a  point  on  which  we  possess  no  positive  evidence),  have 
commonly  been  subject  to  degeneration  in  the  religions 
of  the  world,  is  only  too  obvious.

So  far,  then,  the  nature  of  things  and  of  the  reasoning 
faculty  does  not  seem  to  give  the  lie  to  the  old  Degenera- 
tion theory.

To  these  conclusions,  as  far  as  they  are  matters  of 
scientific  opinion,  we  have  been  led  by  nothing  but  the 
study  of  anthropology.

294  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

XVI

THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH294  THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

XVI

THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH

ALL  speculation  on  the  early  history  of  religion  is  apt 
to  end  in  the  endeavour  to  see  how  far  the  conclusions 
can  be  made  to  illustrate  the  faith  of  Israel.  Thus,  the 
theorist  who  believes  in  ancestor- worship  as  the  key  of  all 
the  creeds  will  see  in  Jehovah  a  developed  ancestral 
ghost,  or  a  kind  of  fetish-god,  attached  to  a  stone- 
perhaps  an  ancient  sepulchral  stele  of  some  desert  sheikh. 
The  exclusive  admirer  of  the  hypothesis  of  Totemism  will 
find  evidence  for  his  belief  in  worship  of  the  golden  calf  and 
the  bulls.  The  partisan  of  nature-worship  will  insist  on 
Jehovah's  connection  with  storm,  thunder,  and  the  fire  of 
Sinai.  On  the  other  hand,  whoever  accepts  our  sugges- 
tions will  incline  to  see,  in  the  early  forms  of  belief  in 
Jehovah,  a  shape  of  the  widely  diffused  conception  of  a 
Moral  Supreme  Being,  at  first  (or,  at  least,  when  our 
information  begins)  envisaged  in  anthropomorphic  form, 
but  gradually  purged  of  all  local  traits  by  the  unexampled 
and  unique  inspiration  of  the  great  Prophets.  They,  as 
far  as  our  knowledge  extends,  were  strangely  indifferent 
to  the  animistic  element  in  religion,  to  the  doctrine  of 
surviving  human  souls,  and  so,  of  course,  to  that  element 
of  Animism  which  is  priceless — the  purification  of  the 
soul  in  the  light  of  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  Just  as  the 
hunger  after  righteousness  of  the  Prophets  is  intense,  so 
their  hope  of  finally  sating  that  hunger  in  an  eternity 
of  sinless  bliss  and  enjoyment  of  God  is  confessedly

THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH  295THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH  295

inconspicuous.  In  short,  they  have  carried  Theism  to  its 
austere  extreme — '  though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in 
Him  '—while  unconcerned  about  the  rewards  of  Animism. 
This  is  certainly  a  strange  result  of  a  religion  which, 
according  to  the  anthropological  theory,  has  Animism  for 
its  basis.

We  therefore  examine  certain  forms  of  the  animistic 
hypothesis  as  applied  to  account  for  the  religion  of  Israel. 
The  topic  is  one  in  which  special  knowledge  of  Hebrew 
and  other  Oriental  languages  seems  absolutely  indispen- 
sable ;  but  anthropological  speculators  have  not  been 
Oriental  scholars  (with  rare  exceptions),  while  some 
Oriental  scholars  have  borrowed  from  popular  anthropo- 
logy without  much  critical  discrimination.  These  circum- 
stances must  be  our  excuse  for  venturing  on  to  this 
difficult  ground.It  is  probably  impossible  for  us  to  trace  with  accuracy 
the  rise  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah.  '  The  wise  and 
learned '  dispute  endlessly  over  dates  of  documents,  over 
the  amount  of  later  doctrine  interpolated  into  the  earlier 
texts,  over  the  nature,  source,  and  quantity  of  foreign 
influence  —  Chaldaean,  Accadian,  Egyptian,  or  Assyrian. 
We  know  that  Israel  had,  in  an  early  age,  the  conception 
of  the  moral  Eternal ;  we  know  that,  at  an  early  age,  that 
conception  was  contaminated  and  anthropomorphised ; 
and  we  know  that  it  was  rescued,  in  a  great  degree,  from 
this  corruption,  while  always  retaining  its  original  ethical 
aspect  and  sanction.  Why  matters  went  thus  in  Israel 
and  not  elsewhere  we  know  not,  except  that  such  was  the 
will  of  God  in  the  mysterious  education  of  the  world. 
How  mysterious  that  education  has  been  is  best  known 
to  all  who  have  studied  the  political  and  social  results  of 
Totemism.  On  the  face  of  it  a  perfectly  crazy  and 
degrading  belief — on  the  face  of  it  meant  for  nothing

296  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

but  to  make  the  family  a  hell  of  internecine  hatred — 
Totemism  rendered  possible — nay,  inevitable — the  union 
of  hostile  groups  into  large  and  relatively  peaceful  tribal 
societies.  Given  the  materials  as  we  know  them,  we 
never  should  have  educated  the  world  thus ;  and  we  do 
not  see  why  it  should  thus  have  been  done.  But  we  are 
very  anthropomorphic,  and  totally  ignorant  of  the  con- 
ditions of  the  problem.An  example  of  anthropological  theory  concerning 
Jehovah  was  put  forth  by  Mr.  Huxley.1  Mr.  Huxley's 
general  idea  of  religion  as  it  is  on  the  lowest  known  level 
of  material  culture — through  which  the  ancestors  of  Israel 
must  have  passed  like  other  people — has  already  been 
criticised.  He  denied  to  the  most  backward  races  both 
cult  and  religious  sanction  of  ethics.  He  was  demon- 
strably,  though  unconsciously,  in  error  as  to  the  facts, 
and  therefore  could  not  start  from  the  idea  that  Israel, 
in  the  lowest  historically  known  condition  of  savagery, 
possessed,  or,  like  other  races,  might  possess,  the  belief  in 
an  Eternal  making  for  righteousness.  '  For  my  part,'  he 
says,  '  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  like  the  rest  of  the 
world,  the  Israelites  had  passed  through  a  period  of  mere 
ghost  -  worship,  and  had  advanced  through  ancestor- 
worship  and  Fetishism  and  Totemism  to  the  theological 
level  at  which  we  find  them  in  the  Books  of  Judges  and 
Samuel.' 2

But  why  does  he  think  the  Israelites  did  all  this  ? 
The  Hebrew  ghosts,  abiding,  according  to  Mr.  Huxley,  in 
a  rather  torpid  condition  in  Sheol,  would  not  be  of  much 
practical  use  to  a  worshipper.  A  reference  in  Deuteronomy 
xxvi.  14  (Deuteronomy  being,  ex  hypothesi,  a  late  pious 
imposture)  does  not  prove  much.  The  Hebrew  is  there 
bidden  to  remind  himself  of  the  stay  of  his  ancestors  in 
1  Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition.  2  Op.  cit.  p.  361.

THEORIES  OF  JEHOVAH  297THEORIES  OF  JEHOVAH  297

Egypt,  and  to  say,  '  Of  the  hallowed  things  I  have  not 
given  aught  for  the  dead  ' — namely,  of  the  tithes  dedi- 
cated to  the  Levites  and  the  poor.  A  race  which  abode 
for  centuries  among  the  Egyptians,  as  Israel  did — among 
a  people  who  elaborately  fed  the  Jcas  of  the  departed — 
might  pick  up  a  trace  of  a  custom,  the  giving  of  food  for 
the  dead,  still  persevered  in  by  St.  Monica  till  St.  Ambrose 
admonished  her.  But  Mr.  Huxley  is  hard  put  to  it  for 
evidence  of  ancestor-worship  or  ghost-worship  in  Israel 
when  he  looks  for  indications  of  these  rites  in  '  the  singular 
weight  attached  to  the  veneration  of  parents  in  the  Fourth 
Commandment.' l  The  Fourth  Commandment,  of  course, 
is  a  slip  of  the  pen.  He  adds  :  '  The  Fifth  Commandment, 
as  it  stands,  would  be  an  excellent  compromise  between 
ancestor- worship  and  Monotheism.'  Long  may  children 
practise  this  excellent  compromise  !  It  is  really  too  far- 
fetched to  reason  thus  :  '  People  were  bidden  to  honour 
their  parents,  as  a  compromise  between  Monotheism  and 
ghost-worship.'  Hard,  hard  bestead  is  he  who  has  to 
reason  in  that  fashion !  This  comes  of  '  training  in  the 
use  of  the  weapons  of  precision  of  science.'

Mr.  Huxley  goes  on  :  '  The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  may 
have  been  a  relic  of  ancestor- worship  ; '  '  there  is  a  good 
deal  to  be  said  for  that  speculation.'  Possibly  there  is, 
by  way  of  the  valuable  hypothesis  that  Jehovah  was  a 
fetish  stone  which  had  been  a  grave-stone,  or  perhaps  a 
lingam,  and  was  kept  in  the  Ark  on  the  plausible  pretext 
that  it  was  the  two  Tables  of  the  Law  !However,  Mr.  Huxley  really  finds  it  safer  to  suppose 
that  references  to  ancestor-worship  in  the  Bible  were 
obliterated  by  late  monotheistic  editors,  who,  none  the  less, 
are  so  full  and  minute  in  their  descriptions  of  the  various 
heresies  into  which  Israel  was  eternally  lapsing,  and  must 
1  Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  p.  308.

298  THE   MAKING  OF  KEL1GION

not  be  allowed  to  lapse  again.  Had  ancestor-worship 
been  a  peche  mignon  of  Israel,  the  Prophets  would  have 
let  Israel  hear  their  mind  on  it.

The  Hebrews'  indifference  to  the  departed  soul  is, 
in  fact,  a  puzzle,  especially  when  we  consider  their 
Egyptian  education — so  important  an  element  in  Mr. 
Huxley's  theory.

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  is  not  more  successful  than 
Mr.  Huxley  in  finding  ancestor  -  worship  among  the 
Hebrews.  On  the  whole  subject  he  writes  :

'  Where  the  levels  of  mental  nature  and  social  pro- 
gress are  lowest,  we  usually  find,  along  with  an  absence 
of  religious  ideas  generally,  an  absence,  or  very  slight 
development,  of  ancestor -worship.  .  .  .  Cook  [Captain 
Cook],  telling  us  what  the  Fuegians  were  before  contact 
with  Europeans  had  introduced  foreign  ideas,  said  there 
were  no  appearances  of  religion  among  them ;  and  we  are 
not  told  by  him  or  others  that  they  were  ancestor- 
worshippers.'  *

Probably  they  are  not ;  but  they  do  possess  a  Being  who 
reads  their  hearts,  and  who  certainly  shows  no  traces 
of  European  ideas.  If  the  Fuegians  are  not  ancestor- 
worshippers,  this  Being  was  not  developed  out  of 
ancestor- worship .The  evidence  of  Captain  Cook,  no  anthropologist,  but 
a  mariner  who  saw  and  knew  little  of  the  Fuegians,  is 
precisely  of  the  sort  against  which  Major  Ellis  warns  us.2 
The  more  a  religion  consists  in  fear  of  a  moral  guardian 
of  conduct,  the  less  does  it  show  itself,  by  sacrifice  or 
rite,  to  the  eyes  of  Captain  Cook,  of  his  Majesty's  ship 
Endeavour.  Mr.  Spencer  places  the  Andamanese  on  the 
same  level  as  the  Fuegians,  '  so  far  as  the  scanty  evidence 
may  be  trusted.'  We  have  shown  that  (as  known  to

1  Prin.  Soc.  p.  306.  2  TJie  Tshi-spcaking  Races,  p.  182.

THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH  299

Mr.  Spencer  in  1876)  it  may  not  be  trusted  at  all;  the 
Andamanese  possessing  a  moral  Supreme  Being,  though 
they  are  not,  apparently,  ancestor-worshippers.  The 
Australians  '  show  us  not  much  persistence  in  ghost- 
propitiation,'  which,  if  it  exists,  ceases  when  the  corpses 
are  tied  up  and  buried,  or  after  they  are  burned,  or  after 
the  bones,  carried  about  for  a  while,  are  exposed  on 
platforms.  Yet  many  Australian  tribes  possess  a  moral 
Supreme  Being.

In  fact  ghost-worship,  in  Mr.  Spencer's  scheme, 
cannot  be  fairly  well  developed  till  society  reaches  the 
level  of  '  settled  groups  whose  burial-places  are  in  their 
midst.'  Hence  the  development  of  a  moral  Supreme 
Being  among  tribes  not  thus  settled,  is  inconceivable,  on 
Mr.  Spencer's  hypothesis.1  By  that  hypothesis,  '  wor- 
shipped ancestors,  according  to  their  remoteness,  were 
regarded  as  divine,  semi-divine,  and  human.' 2  Where  we 
find,  then,  the  Divine  Being  among  nomads  who  do  not 
remember  their  great-grandfathers,  the  Spencerian  theory 
is  refuted  by  facts.  We  have  the  effect,  the  Divine  Being, 
without  the  cause,  worship  of  ancestors.Coming  to  the  Hebrews,  Mr.  Spencer  argues  that 
'  the  silence  of  their  legends  (as  to  ancestor-worship)  is 
but  a  negative  fact,  which  may  be  as  misleading  as 
negative  facts  usually  are.'  They  are,  indeed ;  witness 
Mr.  Spencer's  own  silence  about  savage  Supreme  Beings. 
But  we  may  fairly  argue  that  if  Israel  had  been  given  to 
ancestor-worship  (as  might  partly  be  surmised  from  the 
mystery  about  the  grave  of  Moses)  the  Prophets  would

1  Some  Australian  tribes  have  cemeteries,  and  I  have  found  one  native 
witness,  King  Billy,  to  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries  near  one  of  these 
burying-places.     I  have  not  discovered  other  evidence  to  this  effect,  though 
I  have  looked  for  it.     The  spot  selected  is  usually  '  near  the  camp,'  and  the 
place  for  so  large  a  camp  is  chosen,  naturally,  where  the  supply  of  food  is 
adequate.

2  Cf.  the  Aryans.  Principles  of  Sociology,  p.  314.

300  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION2  Cf.  the  Aryans.  Principles  of  Sociology,  p.  314.

300  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

not  have  spared  them  for  their  crying.  The  Prophets 
were  unusually  outspoken  men,  and,  as  they  undeniably 
do  scold  Israel  for  every  other  kind  of  conceivable  heresy, 
they  were  not  likely  to  be  silent  about  ancestor-worship, 
if  ancestor-worship  existed.  Mr.  Spencer,  then,  rather 
heedlessly,  though  correctly,  argues  that  '  nomadic  habits 
are  unfavourable  to  evolution  of  the  ghost-theory.'  1  Alas, 
this  gives  away  the  whole  case  !  For,  if  all  men  began 
as  nomads,  and  nomadic  habits  are  unfavourable  even  to 
the  ordinary  ghost,  how  did  the  Australian  and  other 
nomads  develop  the  Supreme  Being,  who,  ex  hypothesi, 
is  the  final  fruit  of  the  ghost-flower  ?  If  you  cannot  have 
'  an  established  ancestor- worship '  till  you  abandon  nomadic 
habits,  how,  while  still  nomadic,  do  you  evolve  a  Supreme 
Being  ?  Obviously  not  out  of  ancestor- worship.

Mr.  Spencer  then  assigns,  as  evidence  for  ancestor- 
worship  in  Israel,  mourning  dresses,  fasting,  the  law 
against  self-bleeding  and  cutting  off  the  hair  for  the 
dead,  and  the  text  (Deut.  xxvi.  14)  about  '  I  have  not 
given  aught  thereof  for  the  dead.'  '  Hence,  the  conclusion 
must  be  that  ancestor-worship  had  developed  as  far  as 
nomadic  habits  allowed,  before  it  was  repressed  by  a 
higher  worship.' 2  But  whence  came  that  higher  worship 
which  seems  to  have  intervened  immediately  after  the 
cessation  of  nomadic  habits  ?There  are  obvious  traces  of  grief  expressed  in  a 
primitive  way  among  the  Hebrews.  'Ye  shall  not  cut 
yourselves,  nor  make  any  baldness  between  your  eyes  for 
the  dead  '  (Deut.  xiv.  1).  '  Neither  shall  men  lament  for 
them,  nor  cut  themselves,  nor  make  themselves  bald  for 
them  ;  neither  shall  men  tear  themselves  for  them  in 
mourning,  to  comfort  them  for  the  dead  '  (by  way  of 
counter-irritant  to  grief) ;  '  neither  shall  men  give  them  the

1  Principles,  p.  316.  2  Ibid.  p.  317.

THEORIES   OF   JEHOVAH  301

cup  of  consolation  to  drink  for  their  father  or  their 
mother,'  because  the  Jews  were  to  be  removed  from  their 
homes.1  '  Ye  shall  not  make  any  cuttings  in  your  flesh 
for  the  dead,  nor  print  any  marks  upon  you.' 2It  may  be  usual  to  regard  inflictions,  such  as  cutting, 
by  mourners,  as  sacrifices  to  the  ghost  of  the  dead.   But  one 
has  seen  a  man  strike  himself  a  heavy  blow  on  receiving 
news    of    a    loss    not  by  death,  and  I  venture  to  fancy 
that  cuttings  and  gashings  at  funerals  are  merely  a  more 
violent  form  of  appeal  to  a  counter-irritant  of  grief,  and, 
again,  a  token  of  recklessness  caused  by  a  sorrow  which 
makes  void  the  world.     One  of  John  Nicholson's  native 
adorers  killed  himself  on  news  of  that  warrior's  death, 
saying,  '  What  is  left  worth  living  for  ?  '     This  was  not  a 
sacrifice  to  the  Manes  of  Nicholson.     The  sacrifice  of  the 
mourner's  hair,  as  by  Achilles,  argues  a  similar  indifference 
to  personal  charm.     Once  more,  the  text  in  Psalm  cvi.  28, 
'  They  joined  themselves  unto  Baal-Peor,  and  ate  the  sacri- 
fices of  the  dead,'  is  usually  taken  by  commentators  as  a 
reference  to  the  ritual  of  gods  who  are  no  gods.     But  it 
rather  seems  to  indicate  an  acquiescence  in  foreign  burial 
rites.     All  this  additional  evidence  does  not  do  much  to 
prove  ancestor-worship  in  Israel,  though  the  secrecy  of  the 
burial  of  Moses,  '  in  a  valley  of  the  land  of  Moab,  over 
against  Beth-peor ;  but  no  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre 
to  this  day,'  may  indicate  a  dread  of  a  nascent  worship 
of   the   great   leader.3      The    scene   of   the   defection   in 
Psalm  cvi.,  Beth-peor,  is  indicated  in  Numbers  xxv.,  where 
Israel  runs  after  the  girls  and  the  gods  of  Moab  :  '  And 
Moab  called  the  people  unto  the  sacrifices  of  their  gods  ; 
and  the  people  did  eat,  and  bowed  down  to  their  gods. 
And  Israel  joined  himself  unto  Baal-peor.'     Psalm  cvi.  is

1  Jeremiah  xvi.  6,  7.  "  Leviticus  xix.  28.1  Jeremiah  xvi.  6,  7.  "  Leviticus  xix.  28.

3  Deuteronomy  xxxiv.  G.

302  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

obviously  a  later  restatement  of  this  addiction  to  the 
Moabite  gods,  and  the  Psalm  adds  '  they  ate  the  sacrifices 
of  the  dead.'

It  is  plain  that,  for  whatever  reason,  ancestor- worship 
among  the  Hebrews  was,  at  the  utmost,  rudimentary. 
Otherwise  it  must  have  been  clearly  denounced  by  the 
Prophets  among  the  other  heresies  of  Israel.  Therefore, 
as  being  at  the  most  rudimentary,  ancestor-worship  in 
Israel  could  not  be  developed  at  once  into  the  worship  of 
Jehovah.Though  ancestor-worship  among  the  Hebrews  could 
not  be  fully  developed,  according  to  Mr.  Spencer,  because 
of  their  nomadic  habits,  it  was  fully  developed,  according 
to  the  Eev.  A.  W.  Oxford.  '  Every  family,  like  every  old 
Roman  and  Greek  family,  was  firmly  held  together  by  the 
worship  of  its  ancestors,  the  hearth  was  the  altar,  the 
head  of  the  family  the  priest.  .  .  .  The  bond  which  kept 
together  the  families  of  a  tribe  was  its  common  religion, 
the  worship  of  its  reputed  ancestor.  The  chief  of  the 
tribe  was,  of  course,  the  priest  of  the  cult.'  Of  course  ; 
but  what  a  pity  that  Mr.  Huxley  and  Mr.  Spencer  omitted 
facts  so  invaluable  to  their  theory  !  And  how  does  the 
Eev.  Mr.  Oxford  know  ?  Well,  '  there  is  no  direct  proof,' 
oddly  enough,  of  so  marked  a  feature  in  Hebrew  religion, 
but  we  are  referred  to  1  Sam.  xx.  29  and  Judges  xviii.  19. 
1  Sam.  xx.  29  makes  Jonathan  say  that  David  wants 
to  go  to  a  family  sacrifice,  that  is,  a  family  dinner 
party.  This  hardly  covers  the  large  assertions  made  by 
Mr.  Oxford.  His  second  citation  is  so  unlucky  as  to  con- 
tradict his  observation  that  '  of  course  '  the  chief  of  the 
tribe  was  the  priest  of  the  cult.  Micah,  in  Judges  xvii., 
xviii.,  is  not  the  chief  of  his  tribe  (Ephraim),  neither  is  he 
even  the  priest  in  his  own  house.  He  '  consecrated  one 
of  his  own  sons  who  became  his  priest,'  till  he  got  hold  of

THEORIES  OF  JEHOVAH  303

a  casual  young  Levite,  and  said,  '  Be  unto  me  a  father  and 
a  priest,'  for  ten  shekels  per  annum,  a  suit  of  clothes,  and 
board  and  lodging.THEORIES  OF  JEHOVAH  303

a  casual  young  Levite,  and  said,  '  Be  unto  me  a  father  and 
a  priest,'  for  ten  shekels  per  annum,  a  suit  of  clothes,  and 
board  and  lodging.

In  place,  then,  of  any  remote  reference  to  a  chief's 
being  priest  of  his  ancestral  ghosts,  we  have  here  a 
man  of  one  tribe  who  is  paid  rather  handsomely  to  be 
family  chaplain  to  a  member  of  another  tribe.  Some 
moss-troopers  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  then  kidnapped  this 
valuable  young  Levite,  and  seized  a  few  idols  which 
Micah  had  permitted  himself  to  make.  And  all  this, 
according  to  our  clerical  authority,  is  evidence  for 
ancestor-worship  ! l

All  this  appears  to  be  derived  from  some  incoherent 
speculations  of  Stade.  For  example,  that  learned  German 
cites  the  story  of  Micah  as  a  proof  that  the  different 
tribes  or  clans  had  different  religions.  This  must  be  so, 
because  the  Danites  asked  the  young  Levite  whether  it 
was  not  better  to  be  priest  to  a  clan  than  to  an  individual  ? 
It  is  as  if  a  patron  offered  a  rich  living  to  somebody's 
private  chaplain,  saying  that  the  new  position  was  more 
creditable  and  lucrative.  This  would  hardly  prove  a 
difference  of  religion  between  the  individual  and  the 
parish.2

Mr.  Oxford  next  avers  that  '  the  earliest  form  of  the 
Israelite  religion  was  Fetishism  or  Totemism.'  This  is 
another  example  of  Stade's  logic.  Finding,  as  he  believes, 
names  suggestive  of  Totemism  in  Simeon,  Levi,  Rachel, 
and  so  on,  Stade  leaps  to  the  conclusion  that  Totemism  in 
Israel  was  prior  to  anything  resembling  monotheism. 
For  monotheism,  he  argues,  could  not  give  the  germs  of 
the  clan  or  tribal  organisation,  while  Totemism  could  do  so. 
Certainly  it  could,  but  as,  in  many  regions  (America,1  Slwrt  Introduction  to  History  of  Ancient  Israel,  pp.  83,  84.

2  Stade,  i.  403.

304  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Australia),  we  find  Totemism  and  the  belief  in  a  benevo- 
lent Supreme  Being  co-existing  among  savages,  when  first 
observed  by  Europeans,  we  cannot  possibly  say  dogmati- 
cally whether  a  rough  monotheism  or  whether  Totemism 
came  first  in  order  of  evolution.  This  holds  as  good  of 
Israel  (if  once  totemistic)  as  it  does  of  Pawnees  or 
Kurnai.  Stade  has  overlooked  these  well-known  facts, 
and  his  opinion  filters  into  a  cheap  hand-book,  and  is  set 
in  examinations ! l

We  also  learn  from  Mr.  Oxford's  popular  manual 
of  German  Biblical  conjecture  that  'Jehovah  was  not 
represented  as  a  loving  Father,  but  as  a  Being  easily 
roused  to  wrath,'  a  thing  most  incident  to  loving  fathers.

Again,  Mr.  Oxford  avers  that  '  the  old  Israelites  knew 
no  distinction  between  physical  and  moral  evil.  .  .  .  The 
conception  of  Jehovah's  holiness  had  nothing  moral  in  it ' 
(p.  90).  This  rather  contradicts  "VVellhausen  :  'In  all 
ancient  primitive  peoples  .  .  .  religion  furnishes  a  motive 
for  law  and  morals  ;  in  the  case  of  none  did  it  become 
so  with  such  purity  and  power  as  in  that  of  the 
Israelites.' 2

We  began  by  examining  Mr.  Huxley's  endeavours  to 
find  traces  of  ancestor-worship  (in  his  opinion  the  origin 
of  Jehovah-worship)  among  the  Israelites.  We  next 
criticised  Mr.  Spencer's  efforts  in  the  same  quest,  and  the 
more  dogmatic  assertions  of  Mr.  Oxford  and  Stade.  We 
now  return  to  Mr.  Huxley's  account  of  the  evolution  from 
ghost-cult  to  the  cult  of  Jehovah.

From  the  history  of  the  Witch  of  Endor,  which 
Mr.  Huxley  sees  no  reason  to  regard  as  other  than  a

1  Stade,  i.  406.From  the  history  of  the  Witch  of  Endor,  which 
Mr.  Huxley  sees  no  reason  to  regard  as  other  than  a

1  Stade,  i.  406.

2  Wellhausen,  History  of  Israel,  p.  437.     Mr.   Oxford's  book   is   only 
noticed  here  because  it  is  meant  for  a  popular  manual.     As  Mr.  Henry 
Foker  says,   '  it  seems  a  pity  that  the  clergy  should  interfere  in  these 
matters.'

THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH  305

sincere  statement  of  what  really  occurred,  he  gathers 
that  the  Witch  cried  out,  '  I  see  Elohim.'  These  Elohim 
proved  to  be  the  phantasm  of  the  dead  Samuel.  Moved 
by  this  hallucination  the  Witch  uttered  a  veridical  pre- 
monition, totally  adverse  to  her  own  interests,  and 
uncommonly  dangerous  to  her  life.  This  is,  psychically, 
interesting.  The  point,  however,  is  that  Elohim  is  a 
term  equivalent  to  Red  Indian  WaJcan,  Fijian  Kalou, 
Maori  or  Melanesian  Mana,  meaning  the  '  supernatural,' 
the  vaguely  powerful — in  fact  X.

This  particular  example  of  Elohim  was  a  phantasm  of 
the  dead,  but  Elohim  is  also  used  of  the  highest  Divine 
Being,  therefore  the  highest  Divine  Being  is  of  the  same 
genus  as  a  ghost — so  Mr.  Huxley  reasons.  '  The  difference 
which  was  supposed  to  exist  between  the  different  Elohim 
was  one  of  degree,  not  of  kind.' !'  If  Jehovah  was  thus  supposed  to  differ  only  in  degree 
from  the  undoubtedly  zoomorphic  or  anthropomorphic 
"  gods  of  the  nations,"  why  is  it  to  be  assumed  that  he 
also  was  not  thought  to  have  a  human  shape  ?  '  He  was 
thought  to  have  a  human  shape,  at  one  time,  by  some 
theorists  :  no  doubt  exists  on  that  head.  That,  however, 
is  not  where  we  demur.  We  demur  when,  because  an 
hallucination  of  the  Witch  of  Endor  (probably  still  in- 
completely developed)  is  called  by  her  Elohim,  therefore 
the  highest  Elohim  is  said  by  Mr.  Huxley  to  differ  from 
a  ghost  only  in  degree,  not  in  kind.  Elohim,  or  El,  the 
creative,  differs  from  a  ghost  in  hind,  because  he,  in 
Hebrew  belief,  never  was  a  ghost,  he  is  immortal  and 
without  beginning.

Mr.  Huxley  now  enforces  his  theory  by  a  parallel 
between  the  religion  of  Tonga  and  the  religion  of  Israel 
under  the  Judges.  He  quotes  Mariner,'-2  whose  statement

1   Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  p.  299.  "  ii.  127.

X

306  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION1   Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  p.  299.  "  ii.  127.

X

306  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

avers  that  there  is  a  supreme  Tongan  being :  '  of  his 
origin  they  had  no  idea,  rather  supposing  him  to  be 
eternal.  His  name  is  Ta-li-y-Tooboo ="  Wait-there- 
Toobqo."  '  He  is  a  great  chief  from  the  top  of  the  sky 
down  to  the  bottom  of  the  earth.'  He,  and  other  '  original 
gods  '  of  his  making,  are  carefully  and  absolutely  dis- 
criminated from  the  atua,  which  are  '  the  human  soul 
after  its  separation  from  the  body.'  All  Tongan  gods  are 
atua  (Elohim),  but  all  atua  are  not  'original  gods,' 
unserved  by  priests,  and  unpropitiated  by  food  or  liba- 
tion, like  the  highest  God,  Ta-li-y-Tooboo,  the  Eternal  of 
Tonga.  '  He  occasionally  inspires  the  How '  (elective 
King),  but  often  a  How  is  not  inspired  at  all  by  Ta-li-y- 
Tooboo,  any  more  than  Saul,  at  last,  was  inspired  by 
Jehovah.

Surely  there  is  a  difference  in  kind  between  an 
eternal,  immortal  God,  and  a  ghost,  though  both  are 
atua,  or  both  are  Elohim — the  unknown  X.

Many  people  call  a  ghost  '  supernatural ; '  they  also 
call  God  '  supernatural,'  but  the  difference  between  a 
phantasm  of  a  dead  man  and  the  Deity  they  would 
admit,  I  conceive,  to  be  a  difference  of  kind.  We  have 
shown,  or  tried  to  show,  that  the  conceptions  of  '  ghost ' 
and  '  Supreme  Being '  are  different,  not  only  in  kind,  but 
in  origin.  The  ghost  comes  from,  and  depends  on,  the 
animistic  theory ;  the  Supreme  Being,  as  originally  thought 
of,  does  not.  All  Gods  are  Elohim,  kalou,  wakan ;  all 
Elohim,  kalou,  wakan  are  not  Gods.A  ghost-god  should  receive  food  or  libation.  Mr. 
Huxley  says  that  Ta-li-y-Tooboo  did  so.  '  If  the  god, 
like  Ta-li-y-Tooboo,  had  no  priest,  then  the  chief  place 
was  left  vacant,  and  was  supposed  to  be  occupied  by  the 
god  himself.  When  the  first  cup  of  Kava  was  filled,  the 
mataboole  who  acted  as  master  of  the  ceremonies  said,

THEORIES  OF   JEHOVAH  307

*'  Give  it  to  your  god,"  and  it  was  offered,  though  only  as 
a  matter  of  form.' l

This  is  incorrect.  In  the  case  of  Ta-li-y-Tooboo 
•*  there  is  no  cup  filled  for  the  god."2  'Before  any  .cup  is 
filled  the  man  by  the  side  of  the  bowl  says :  "  The  Kava 
is  in  the  cup"'  (which  it  is  not),  'and  the  mafcaboole 
answers,  "  Give  it  to  your  god;"'  but  the  Kava  is  not 
in  the  cup,  and  the  Tongan  Eternal  receives  no  oblation. 
The  sacrifice,  says  Mr.  Huxley,  meant  '  that  the  god 
was  either  a  deified  ghost,  or,  at  any  rate,  a  being  of  like 
nature  to  these.' 3  But  as  Ta-li-y-Tooboo  had  no  sacrifice, 
contrary  to  Mr.  Huxley's  averment,  he  was  not  'a  deified 
ghost,  or  a  being  of  like  nature  to  these.'  To  the  lower, 
non-ghostly  Tongan  gods  the  animistic  habit  of  sacrifice 
had  been  extended,  but  not  yet  to  the  Supreme  Being.

Ah,  if  Mr.  Gladstone,  or  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  or  some 
bishop  had  made  a  misstatement  of  this  kind,  how  Mr. 
Huxley  would  have  crushed  him  !  But  it  is  a  mere  error 
of  careless  reading,  such  as  we  all  make  daily.It  is  manifest  that  we  cannot  prove  Jehovah  to  be  a 
ghost  by  the  parallel  of  a  Tongan  god,  who,  by  ritual  and 
by  definition,  was  not  a  ghost.  The  proof  therefore  rests 
on  the  anthropomorphised  pre-prophetic  accounts,  and  on 
the  ritual,  of  Jehovah.  But  man  naturally  '  anthropises  ' 
his  deities  :  he  does  not  thereby  demonstrate  that  they 
were  once  ghosts.

As  regards  the  sacrifices  to  Jehovah,  the  sweet  savour 
which  he  was  supposed  to  enjoy  (contrary  to  the  opinion 
of  the  Prophets),  these  sacrifices  afford  the  best  presump- 
tion that  Jehovah  was  a  ghost-god,  or  a  god  constructed 
on  ghostly  lines.

But  we  have    shown   that   among   the    lowest   races

1  Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  p.  331.

-  Mariner,  ii.  205.  3  Op.  cit.  p.  335.

x  2

308  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

neither  are  ghosts  worshipped  by  sacrifice,  nor  does  the 
Supreme  Being,  Darumulun  or  Puluga,  receive  food 
offerings.  We  have  also  instanced  many  Supreme  Beings 
of  more  advanced  races,  Ahone,  and  Dendid,  and  Nyan- 
kupon,  who  do  not  sniff  the  savour  of  any  offerings.  If 
then  (as  in  the  case  of  Taa-roa),  a  Supreme  Being  does 
receive  sacrifice,  we  may  argue  that  a  piece  of  animistic 
ritual,  not  connected  with  the  Supreme  Being  in  Australia 
or  Andaman,  not  connected  with  his  creed  in  Virginia  or 
Africa  (where  ghost-gods  do  receive  sacrifice)  may  in 
other  regions  be  transferred  from  ghost-gods  to  the 
Supreme  Being,  who  never  was  a  ghost.  There  seems  to 
be  nothing  incredible  or  illogical  in  the  theory  of  such 
transference.On  a  God  who  never  was  a  ghost  men  may  come  to 
confer  sacrifices  (which  are  not  made  to  Baiame  and 
the  rest)  because,  being  in  the  habit  of  thus  propitiating 
one  set  of  bodiless  powers,  men  may  not  think  it  civil 
or  safe  to  leave  another  set  of  powers  out.  By  his 
very  nature,  man  must  clothe  all  gods  with  some  human 
passions  and  attributes,  unless,  like  a  large  number  of 
savages,  he  leaves  his  high  God  severely  alone,  and  is  the 
slave  of  fetishes  and  spectres.  But  that  practice  makes 
against  the  ghost-theory.

In  the  attempt  to  account  thus,  namely  by  trans- 
ference, for  the  sacrifices  to  Jehovah,  we  are  met  by  a 
difficulty  of  our  own  making.  If  the  Israelites  did  not 
sacrifice  to  ancestors  (as  we  have  shown  that  there  is 
very  scant  reason  for  supposing  that  they  did),  how 
could  they  transfer  to  Jehovah  the  rite  which,  by  our 
hypothesis,  they  are  not  proved  to  have  offered  to 
ancestors  ?

This  is  certainly  a  hard  problem,  harder  (or  perhaps 
easier),  because  we  know  so  very  little  of  the  early  history

309

•of  the  Hebrews.  According  to  their  own  traditions, 
Israel  had  been  in  touch  with  all  manner  of  races  much 
more  advanced  than  themselves  in  material  culture,  and 
steeped  in  highly  developed  polytheistic  Animism.  Ac- 
cording to  their  history,  the  Israelites  '  went  a-whoring  ' 
incorrigibly  after  strange  gods.  It  is  impossible,  per- 
haps, to  disentangle  the  foreign  and  the  native  elements.It  may  therefore  be  tentatively  suggested  that  early 
Israel  had  its  Ahone  in  a  Being  perhaps  not  yet  named 
Jehovah.  Israel  entertained,  however,  perhaps  by  reason 
of  '  nomadic  habits,'  only  the  scantiest  concern  about 
ancestral  ghosts.  We  then  find  an  historical  tradition 
of  secular  contact  between  Israel  and  Egypt,  from  which 
Israel  emerges  with  Jehovah  for  God,  and  a  system  of 
sacrifices.  Kegarding  Jehovah  as  a  revived  memory  of 
the  moral  Supreme  Being  whom  Israel  must  have  known 
in  extremely  remote  ages  (unless  Israel  was  less  favoured 
than  Australians,  Bushmen,  or  Andamanese),  we  might 
look  on  the  sacrifices  to  him  as  an  adaptation  from  the 
practices  of  religion  among  races  more  settled  than  Israel, 
and  more  civilised.1

Speculation  on  subjects  so  remote  must  be  conjectural, 
but  our  suggestion  would,  perhaps,  account  for  sacrifices 
to  Jehovah,  paid  by  a  race  which,  by  reason  of  '  nomadic 
habits,'  was  never  much  given  to  ancestor-worship,  but 
had  been  in  contact  with  great  sacrificing,  polytheistic 
civilisations.  Mr.  Huxley,  however,  while  he  seems  to 
slur  the  essential  distinction  between  ghost-gods  and  the 
Eternal,  grants,  later,  that  '  there  are  very  few  people (s  ?) 
without  additional  gods,  which  cannot,  with  certainty,  be

1  Of  course,  it  is  understood  that  Israel  (in  the  dark  backward  and 
abysm  of  time)  may  also  have  been  totemistic,  like  the  Australians,  as 
texts  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Robertson  Smith  seem  to  hint.  There  was  also 
worship  of  terapliim,  respect  paid  to  stones  and  trees,  and  so  forth.

310  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION310  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

accounted  for  as  deified  ancestors.'  Ta-li-y-Tooboo,  of 
course,  is  one  of  these  gods,  as  is  Jehovah.  Mr.  Huxley 
gives  no  theory  of  liow  these  gods  came  into  belief,  except 
the  suggestion  that  '  the  polytheistic  theology  has  be- 
come modified  by  the  selection  of  the  cosmic  or  tribal 
god,  as  the  only  god  to  whom  worship  is  due  on  the  part 
of  that  nation,'  without  prejudice  to  the  right  of  other 
nations  to  worship  other  gods.1  This  is  'monolatry,'  and 
'  the  ethical  code,  often  of  a  very  high  order,  comes  into 
closer  relation  with  the  theological  creed,'  why,  we  are 
not  informed.  Nor  do  we  learn  out  of  what  polytheistic 
deities  Jehovah  was  selected,  nor  for  what  reason.  The 
hypothesis,  as  usual,  breaks  down  on  the  close  relation 
between  the  ethical  code  and  the  theological  creed,  among 
low  savages,  with -a  relatively  Supreme  Being,  but  without 
ancestor-worship,  and  without  polytheistic  gods  from 
whom  to  select  a  heavenly  chief.Whence  came  the  moral  element  in  the  idea  of 
Jehovah  ?  Mr.  Huxley  supposes  that,  during  their  resi- 
dence in  the  land  of  Goshen  (and  a  fortiori  before  it),  the 
Israelites  '  knew  nothing  of  Jehovah.' 2  They  were  poly- 
theistic idolaters.  This  follows,  apparently,  from  Ezekiel 
xx.  5  :  '  In  the  day  when  I  chose  Israel,  and  lifted  up  mine 
hand  unto  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  made  my- 
self known  unto  them  in  the  land  of  Egypt.'  The  Biblical 
account  is  that  the  God  of  Moses's  fathers,  the  God 
of  Abraham,  enlightened  Moses  in  Sinai,  giving  his  name 
as  '  I  am  that  I  am '  (Exodus  iii.  6,  14 ;  translation 
uncertain).  We  are  to  understand  that  Moses,  a  religious 
reformer,  revived  an  old,  and,  in  the  Egyptian  bondage, 
a  half-obliterated  creed  of  the  ancient  nomadic  Beni- 
Israel.  They  were  no  longer  to  '  defile  themselves  with 
the  idols  of  Egypt,'  as  they  had  obviously  done.  We

1   Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition,  p.  349.  -  P.  351.

THEORIES  OF  JEHOVAH  311

really  know  no  more  about  the  matter.  Wellhausen 
says  that  Jehovah  was  '  originally  a  family  or  tribal  god, 
either  of  the  family  of  Moses  or  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph.' 
How  a  family  could  develop  a  Supreme  Being  all  to  itself, 
we  are  not  informed,  and  we  know  of  no  such  analogous 
case  in  the  ethnographic  field.  Again,  Jehovah  was  '  only 
a  special  name  of  El,  current  within  a  powerful  circle.' 
And  who  was  El  ? l  '  Moses  was  not  the  first  dis- 
coverer of  the  faith.'  Probably  not,  but  Mr.  Huxley 
seems  to  think  that  he  was.Wellhausen's  and  other  German  ideas  filter  into 
popular  traditions,  as  we  saw,  through  'A  Short  Intro- 
duction to  the  History  of  Ancient  Israel '  (pp.  19,  20),  by 
the  Eev.  A.  W.  Oxford,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  St.  Luke's,  Soho. 
Here  follows  Mr.  Oxford's  undeniably  '  short  way  with 
Jehovah.'  '  Moses  was  the  founder  of  the  Israelite  reli- 
gion. Jehovah,  his  family  or  tribal  god,  perhaps  origi- 
nally the  God  of  the  Kenites,  was  taken  as  a  tribal  god 
by  all  the  Israelite  tribes  ....  That  Jehovah  was  not 
the  original  god  of  Israel '  (as  the  Bible  impudently 
alleges)  '  but  was  the  god  of  the  Kenites,  we  see  mainly 
from  Deut.  xxxiii.  2,  Judges  v.  4,  5,  and  from  the 
history  of  Jethro,  who,  according  to  Judges  i.  16,  was  a 
Kenite.'

The  first  text  says  that,  according  to  Moses,  '  the  Lord 
came  from  Sinai,'  rose  up  from  Seir,  and  shone  from 
Mount  Paran.  The  second  text  mentions  Jehovah's 
going  up  out  of  Seir  and  Sinai.  The  third  text  says 
that  Jethro,  Moses's  Kenite  (or  Midianite)  father-in-law, 
dwelt  among  the  people  of  Judah ;  Jethro  being  a  priest 
of  Midian.  How  all  this  proves  that  '  Moses  was  a  great 
impostor,'  as  the  poet  says,  and  that  Jehovah  was  not  '  the 
original  God  of  Israel,'  but  (1)  Moses's  family  or  tribal

1  History  of  Israel,  p.  443  note.

312  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

god,  or  (2)  '  the  god  of  the  Kenites,'  I  profess  my  inability 
to  comprehend.1  History  of  Israel,  p.  443  note.

312  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

god,  or  (2)  '  the  god  of  the  Kenites,'  I  profess  my  inability 
to  comprehend.

Wellhausen  himself  had  explained  Jehovah  as  '  a 
family  or  tribal  god,  either  of  the  family  of  Moses  '  (tribe 
of  Levi)  '  or  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph.'  It  seems  to  be  all 
one  to  Mr.  Oxford  whether  Jehovah  was  a  god  of  Moses's 
tribe  or  quite  the  reverse,  '  a  Kenite  god.'  Yet  it  really 
makes  a  good  deal  of  difference !  For  in  a  complex  of 
tribes,  speaking  one  language,  it  is  to  the  last  degree 
unexampled  (within  my  knowledge)  that  one  tribe,  or 
family,  possesses,  all  to  itself,  a  family  god  who  is  also 
the  Creator  and  is  later  accepted  as  such  by  all  the  other 
tribes.  One  may  ask  for  instances  of  such  a  thing  in  any 
known  race,  in  any  stage  of  culture.  Peru  will  not  help 
us — not  the  Creator,  Pachacamac,  but  the  Sun,  is  the 
god  of  the  Inca  family.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  Jehovah 
was  a  Kenite  god,  the  Kenites  were  a  half-Arab  Semitic 
people  connected  with  Israel,  and  may  very  well  have 
retained  traditions  of  a  Supreme  Being  which,  in  Egypt, 
were  likely  to  be  dimmed,  as  Exodus  asserts,  by  foreign 
religions.  The  learned  Stade,  to  be  sure,  may  disbelieve 
in  Israel's  sojourn  in  Egypt,  but  that  revolutionary 
opinion  is  not  necessarily  binding  on  us  and  involves  a 
few  difficulties.Have  critics  and  manual-makers  no  knowledge  of  the 
science  of  comparative  religion  ?  Are  they  unaware  that 
peoples  infinitely  more  backward  than  Israel  was  at 
the  date  supposed  have  already  moral  Supreme  Beings 
acknowledged  over  vast  tracts  of  territory  ?  Have  they  a 
tittle  of  positive  evidence  that  early  Israel  was  benighted 
beyond  the  darkness  of  Bushmen,  Andamanese,  Pawnees, 
Blackfeet,  Hurons,  Indians  of  British  Guiana,  Dinkas, 
Negroes,  and  so  forth  ?  Unless  Israel  had  this  rare  ill- 
luck  (which  Israel  denies)  of  course  Israel  must  have  had

THEORIES   OF  JEHOVAH  313

a  secular  tradition,  however  dim,  of  a  Supreme  Being. 
We  must  ask  for  a  single  instance  of  a  family  or  tribe,  in 
a  complex  of  semi-barbaric  but  not  savage  tribes  of  one 
speech,  owning  a  private  deity  who  happened  to  be  the 
Maker  and  Ruler  of  the  world,  and,  as  such,  was  accepted 
by  all  the  tribes.  Jehovah  came  out  from  Sinai,  because, 
there  having  been  a  Theophany  at  Sinai,  that  mountain 
was  regarded  as  one  of  his  seats.1

We  have  seen  that  it  seemed  to  make  no  difference  to 
Mr.  Oxford  whether  Jehovah  was  a  god  of  Moses's  family 
or  tribe  or  a  Kenite  god.  The  former  (with  the  alter- 
native of  Joseph's  family  or  tribal  god)  is  Wellhausen's 
theory.  The  latter  is  Stade's.2  Each  is  inconsistent 
with  the  other ;  Wellhausen's  fancy  is  inconsistent  with 
all  that  we  know  of  religious  development :  Stade's  is 
hopelessly  inconsistent  with  Exodus  iv.  24-26,  where 
Moses's  Kenite  wife  reproaches  him  for  a  ceremony  of 
his,  not  of  her,  religion.  Therefore  the  Kenite  differed 
from  the  Hebrew  sacra.The  passage  is  very  extraordinary,  and  is  said  by 
critics  to  be  very  archaic.  After  the  revelation  of  the 
Burning  Bush,  Jehovah  met  Moses  and  his  Kenite  wife, 
Zipporah,  and  their  child,  at  a  khan.  Jehovah  was 
anxious  to  slay  Moses,  nobody  ever  knew  why,  so  Zipporah 
appeased  Jehovah's  wrath  by  circumcising  her  boy  with  a 
flint.  'A  bloody  husband  art  thou  to  me,'  she  said, 
'  because  of  the  circumcision  ' — an  Egyptian,  but  clearly 
not  a  Kenite  practice.  Whatever  all  this  may  mean,  it 
does  not  look  as  if  Zipporah  expected  such  rites  as 
circumcision  in  the  faith  of  a  Kenite  husband,  nor  does 
it  favour  the  idea  that  the  sacra  of  Moses  were  of  Kenite 
origin.

Without  being  a  scholar,  or  an  expert  in  Biblical 
1  Rel.  of  Semites.  2  Gcscldclite  dcs  Volkcs  Israel,  i.  130.

314  THE   MAKING  OF  KELIGION

criticism,  one  may  protest  against  the  presentation  to 
the  manual  -  reading  intellectual  middle  classes  of  a 
theory  so  vague,  contradictory,  and  (by  all  analogy)  so 
impossible  as  Mr.  Oxford  collects  from  German  writers. 
Of  course,  the  whole  subject,  so  dogmatically  handled,  is 
mere  matter  of  dissentient  opinion  among  scholars.  Thus 
M.  Renan  derives  the  name  of  Jehovah  from  Assyria, 
from  '  Aramaised  Chaldseanism.' 1  In  that  case  the  name 
was  long  anterior  to  the  residence  in  Egypt.  But  again, 
perhaps  Jehovah  was  a  local  god  of  Sinai,  or  a  provincial 
deity  in  Palestine.2  He  was  known  to  very  ancient  sages, 
who  preferred  such  names  as  El  Shaddai  and  Elohim. 
In  short,  we  have  no  certainty  on  the  subject.3I  need  hardly  say,  perhaps,  that  I  have  no  antiquated 
prejudice  against  Biblical  criticism.  Assuredly  the  Bible 
must  be  studied  like  any  other  collection  of  documents, 
linguistically,  historically,  and  in  the  light  of  the  com- 
parative method.  The  leading  ideas  of  Wellhausen,  for 
example,  are  conspicuous  for  acumen  :  the  humblest  lay- 
man can  see  that.  But  one  may  protest  against  criti- 
cising the  Bible,  or  Homer,  by  methods  like  those  which 
prove  Shakspeare  to  have  been  Bacon.  One  must  protest, 
too,  against  the  presentation  of  inconsistent  and  probably 
baseless  critical  hypotheses  in  the  dogmatic  brevity  of 
cheap  handbooks.

Yet  again,  whence  comes  the  moral  element  in 
Jehovah  ?  Mr.  Huxley  thinks  that  it  possibly  came  from 
the  ethical  practice  and  theory  of  Egypt.  In  the  Egyp- 
tian Book  of  the  Dead,  '  a  sort  of  Guide  to  Spirit  Land,' 
there  are  moral  chapters ;  the  ghost  tells  his  judges  in 
Amenti  what  sins  he  has  not  committed.  Many  of

1  Histoirc  du  Peuple  d' Israel,  citing  Schrader,  p.  23.        2  Op.  cit.  p.  85.

*  See  Professor  Robertson's  Early  Religion  of  Israel  for  a  list  of  these 
conjectures,  and,  generally,  for  criticisms  of  the  occasional  vagaries  of 
critics.

THEORIES   OF   JEHOVAH  315

these  sins  are  forbidden  in  the  Ten  Commandments. 
They  are  just  as  much  forbidden  in  the  precepts  of 
Darumulun  or  Pundjel.  Moses  did  not  need  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  to  teach  him  elementary  morals.  From  the 
mysteries  of  Mtanga  or  Pundjel  he  might  have  learned, 
also,  had  he  been  present,  to  love  his  neighbour  as  him- 
self. If  the  creed  of  Jehovah,  or  of  El,  retained  only  as 
much  of  ethics  as  is  under  divine  sanction  among  the 
Kurnai,  adaptation  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead  was  super- 
fluous.The  care  for  the  departed,  the  ritual  of  the  Ka,  the 
intense  pre-occupation  with  the  future  life,  which,  far 
more  than  its  morality,  are  the  essential  characteristics  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead — Israel  cared  for  none  of  these 
animistic  things,  brought  none  of  these,  or  very  little  of 
these,  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  Moses  was  certainly 
very  eclectic ;  he  took  only  the  morality  of  Egypt. 
But  as  Mr.  Huxley  advances  this  opinion  tentatively,, 
as  having  no  secure  historical  authority  about  Moses, 
it  hardly  answers  our  question,  Whence  came  the  moral 
element  in  Jehovah  ?  One  may  surmise  that  it  was  the 
survival  of  the  primitive  divinely  sanctioned  ethics  of  the 
ancient  savage  ancestors  of  the  Israelite,  known  to  them, 
as  to  the  Kurnai,  before  they  had  a  pot,  or  a  bronze 
knife,  or  seed  to  sow,  or  sheep  to  herd,  or  even  a  tent 
over  their  heads.  In  the  counsels  of  eternity  Israel  was 
chosen  to  keep  burning,  however  obscured  with  smoke 
of  sacrifice,  that  flame  which  illumines  the  darkest  places 
of  the  earth,  '  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
glory  of  thy  people  Israel ' — a  flame  how  litten  a  light 
whence  shining,  history  cannot  inform  us,  and  anthro- 
pology can  but  conjecture.  Here  scientific  nescience  is 
wiser  than  the  cocksureness  of  popular  science,  with  her 
ghosts  and  fetish -stones,  and  gods  that  sprang  from

316  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

ghosts,  which  ghosts,  however,  could  not  be  developed, 
owing  to  nomadic  habits.316  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

ghosts,  which  ghosts,  however,  could  not  be  developed, 
owing  to  nomadic  habits.

It  appears,  then,  if  our  general  suggestion  meets  with 
any  acceptance,  that  what  occurred  in  the  development 
of  Hebrew  religion  was  precisely  what  the  Bible  tells  us 
did  occur.  This  must  necessarily  seem  highly  para- 
doxical to  our  generation ;  but  the  whole  trend  of  our 
provisional  system  makes  in  favour  of  the  paradox.  If 
savage  nomadic  Israel  had  the  higher  religious  concep- 
tions proved  to  exist  among  several  of  the  lowest  known 
races,  these  conceptions  might  be  revived  by  a  leader  of 
genius.  They  might,  in  a  crisis  of  tribal  fortunes,  become 
the  rallying  point  of  a  new  national  sentiment.  Ob- 
scured, in  some  degree,  by  acquaintance  with  '  the  idols 
of  Egypt,'  and  restricted  and  localised  by  the  very 
national  sentiment  which  they  fostered,  these  conceptions 
were  purified  and  widened  far  beyond  any  local,  tribal, 
or  national  restrictions — widened  far  as  the  flammantia 
mcenia  mundi — by  the  historically  unique  genius  of  the 
Prophets.  Blended  with  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord,  and 
recommended  by  the  addition  of  Animism  in  its  pure  and 
priceless  form — the  reward  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity  in 
eternal  life — the  faith  of  Israel  enlightened  the  world.All  this  is  precisely  what  occurred,  according  to  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments.  All  this  is  just  what,  on  our 
hypothesis,  might  be  expected  to  occur  if,  out  of  the 
many  races  which,  in  their  most  backward  culture,  had 
a  rude  conception  of  a  Moral  Creative  Being,  relatively 
supreme,  one  race  endured  the  education  of  Israel,  showed 
the  comparative  indifference  of  Israel  to  Animism  and 
ghost  gods,  listened  to  the  Prophets  of  Israel,  and  gave 
birth  to  a  greater  than  Moses  and  the  Prophets.

To  this  result  the  Logos,  as  Socrates  says,  has  led  us, 
by  the  path  of  anthropology.

317

XVII

CONCLUSION

WE  may  now  glance  backward  at  the  path  which  we 
have  tried  to  cut  through  the  jungles  of  early  religions. 
It  is  not  a  highway,  but  the  track  of  a  solitary  explorer ; 
and  this  essay  pretends  to  be  no  more  than  a  sketch — 
not  an  exhaustive  survey  of  creeds.  Its  limitations  are 
obvious,  but  may  here  be  stated.  The  higher  and  even 
the  lower  polytheisms  are  only  alluded  to  in  passing,  our 
object  being  to  keep  well  in  view  the  conception  of  a 
Supreme,  or  practically  Supreme,  Being,  from  the  lowest 
stages  of  human  culture  up  to  Christianity.  In  poly- 
theism that  conception  is  necessarily  obscured,  showing 
itself  dimly  either  in  the  Prytanis,  or  President  of  the 
Immortals,  such  as  Zeus ;  or  in  Fate,  behind  and  above 
the  Immortals ;  or  in  Mr.  Max  Muller's  Henotheism, 
where  the  god  addressed — Indra,  or  Sorna,  or  Agni — is, 
for  the  moment,  envisaged  as  supreme,  and  is  adored  in 
something  like  a  monotheistic  spirit ;  or,  finally,  in  the 
etherealised  deity  of  advanced  philosophic  speculation.It  has  not  been  necessary,  for  our  purpose,  to  dwell 
on  these  civilised  religions.  Granting  our  hypothesis  of 
an  early  Supreme  Being  among  savages,  obscured  later 
by  ancestor-worship  and  ghost-gods,  but  not  often 
absolutely  lost  to  religious  tradition,  the  barbaric  and  the 
civilised  polytheisms  easily  take  their  position  in  line, 
and  are  easily  intelligible.  Space  forbids  a  discussion  of 
all  known  religions;  only  typical  specimens  have  been

318  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

selected.  Thus,  nothing  has  been  said  of  the  religion 
of  the  great  Chinese  empire.  It  appears  to  consist,  on  its 
higher  plane,  of  the  worship  of  Heaven  as  a  great  fetish- 
god — a  worship  which  may  well  have  begun  in  days,  as 
Dr.  Brinton  says,  '  long  ere  man  had  asked  himself,  "  Are 
the  heavens  material  and  God  spiritual?"  —perhaps, 
for  all  we  know,  before  the  idea  of  '  spirit '  had  been 
evolved.  Thus,  if  it  contains  nothing  more  august,  the 
Chinese  religion  is,  so  far,  beneath  that  of  the  Zunis,  or 
the  creed  in  Taa-roa,  in  Beings  who  are  eternal,  who 
were  before  earth  was  or  sky  was.  The  Chinese  religion 
of  Heaven  is  also  coloured  by  Chinese  political  conditions  ; 
Heaven  (Tien)  corresponds  to  the  Emperor,  and  tends  to 
be  confounded  with  Shang-ti,  the  Emperor  above.  '  Dr. 
Legge  charges  Confucius,'  says  Mr.  Tylor,  '  with  an 
inclination  to  substitute,  in  his  religious  teaching,  the 
name  of  Tien,  Heaven,  for  that  known  to  more  ancient 
religion,  and  used  in  more  ancient  books — Shang-ti,  the 
personal  ruling  deity.'  If  so,  China  too  has  its  ancient 
Supreme  Being,  who  is  not  a  divinised  aspect  of  nature.

But  Mr.  Tylor's  reading,  in  harmony  with  his  general 
theory,  is  different :But  Mr.  Tylor's  reading,  in  harmony  with  his  general 
theory,  is  different :

'  It  seems,  rather,  that  the  sage  was,  in  fact,  uphold- 
ing the  tradition  of  the  ancient  faith,  thus  acting  according 
to  the  character  on  which  he  prided  himself — that  of  a 
transmitter,  not  a  maker,  a  preserver  of  old  knowledge, 
not  a  new  revealer.' l

This,  of  course,  is  purely  a  question  of  evidence,  to  be 
settled  by  Sinologists.  If  the  personal  Supreme  Being, 
Shang-ti,  occupies  in  older  documents  the  situation  held 
by  Tien  (Heaven)  in  Confucius's  later  system,  why  are 
we  to  say  that  Confucius,  by  putting  forward  Heaven  in 
place  of  Shang-ti,  was  restoring  an  older  conception?

1  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  352.

CONCLUSION  319

Mr.  Tylor's  affection  for  his  theory  leads  him,  perhaps,  to 
that  opinion  ;  while  my  affection  for  my  theory  leads  me 
to  prefer  documentary  evidence  in  its  favour.

The  question  can  only  be  settled  by  specialists.  As 
matters  stand,  it  seems  to  me  probable  that  ancient 
China  possessed  a  Supreme  Personal  Being,  more  remote 
and  original  than  Heaven,  just  as  the  Zunis  do.  On  the 
lower  plane,  Chinese  religion  is  overrun,  as  everyone 
knows,  by  Animism  and  ancestor-worship.  This  is  so 
powerful  that  it  has  given  rise  to  a  native  theory  of 
Euhemerism.  The  departmental  deities  of  Chinese  poly- 
theism are  explained  by  the  Chinese  on  Euhemeristic 
principles :

'  According  to  legend,  the  War  God,  or  Military  Sage, 
was  once,  in  human  life,  a  distinguished  soldier ;  the 
Swine  God  was  a  hog-breeder  who  lost  his  pigs  and  died 
of  sorrow ;  the  God  of  Gamblers  was  un  decave.'  lThese  are  not  statements  of  fact,  but  of  Chinese 
Euhemeristic  theory.  On  that  hypothesis,  Confucius 
should  now  be  a  god ;  but  of  course  he  is  not ;  his  spirit 
is  merely  localised  in  his  temple,  where  the  Emperor 
worships  him  twice  a  year  as  ancestral  spirits  are 
worshipped.

Every  theorist  will  force  facts  into  harmony  with  his 
system,  but  I  do  not  see  that  the  Chinese  facts  are 
contrary  to  mine.  On  the  highest  plane  is  either  a 
personal  Supreme  Being,  Shang-ti,  or  there  is  Tien,  Heaven 
(with  Earth,  parent  of  men),  neither  of  them  necessarily 
owing,  in  origin,  anything  to  Animism.  Then  there  is 
the  political  reflection  of  the  Emperor  on  Religion  (which 
cannot  exist  where  there  is  no  Emperor,  King,  or  Chief, 
and  therefore  must  be  late),  there  is  the  animistic  rabble 
of  spirits  ancestral  or  not,  and  there  is  departmental

1  Abridged  from  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  119.

320  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Abridged  from  Prim.  Cult.  ii.  119.

320  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

polytheism.  The  spirits  are,  of  course,  fed  and  furnished 
by  men  in  the  usual  symbolical  way.  Nothing  shows  or 
hints  that  Shang-ti  is  merely  an  imaginary  idealised  first 
ancestor.  Indeed,  about  all  such  explanations  of  the 
Supreme  Being  (say  among  the  Kurnai)  as  an  idealised 
imaginary  first  ancestor,  M.  Reville  justly  observes  as 
follows  :  '  Not  only  have  we  seen  that,  in  wide  regions  of 
the  uncivilised  world,  the  worship  of  ancestors  has  invaded 
a  domain  previously  occupied  by  "  Naturism  "  and  Animism 
properly  so  called,  that  it  is,  therefore,  posterior  to  these ; 
but,  further,  we  do  not  understand,  in  Mr.  Spencer's 
system,  why,  in  so  many  places,  the  first  ancestor  is  the 
Maker,  if  not  the  Creator  of  the  world,  Master  of  life  and 
death,  and  possessor  of  divine  powers,  not  held  by  any  of 
his  descendants.  This  proves  that  it  was  not  the  first 
ancestor  who  became  God,  in  the  belief  of  his  descendants, 
but  much  rather  the  Divine  Maker  and  Beginner  of  all, 
who,  in  the  creed  of  his  adorers,  became  the  first 
ancestor.'  l

Our  task  has  been  limited,  in  this  way,  mainly  to 
examination  of  the  religion  of  some  of  the  very  lowest 
races,  and  of  the  highest  world-religions,  such  as  Judaism. 
The  historical  aspect  of  Christianity,  as  arising  in  the  Life, 
Death,  and  Resurrection  of  our  Lord,  would  demand  a1  Histoire  des  Religions,  ii.  237,  note.  M.  Reville's  system,  it  will  be 
observed,  differs  from  mine  in  that  he  finds  the  first  essays  of  religion  in 
worship  of  aspects  of  nature  (naturisme)  and  in  '  animism  properly  so 
called,'  by  which  he  understands  the  instinctive,  perhaps  not  explicitly 
formulated,  sense  that  all  things  whatever  are  animated  and  personal.  I 
have  not  remarked  this  aspect  of  belief  as  much  prevalent  in  the  most 
backward  races,  and  I  do  not  try  to  look  behind  what  we  know  historically 
about  early  religion.  I  so  far  agree  with  M.  K£ville  as  to  think  the  belief  in 
ghosts  and  spirits  (Mr.  Tylor's  '  Animism ')  not  necessarily  postulated  in 
the  original  indeterminate  conception  of  the  Supreme  Being,  or  generally, 
in  '  Original  Gods.'  But  M.  Eeville  says,  '  L'objet  de  la  religion  humaine 
est  necessairement  un  esprit '  (ProUgomtnes,  107).  This  does  not  seem 
consistent  with  his  own  theory.

CONCLUSION  321

separate  treatise.  This  would,  in  part,  be  concerned  with 
the  attempts  to  find  in  the  narratives  concerning  our 
Lord,  a  large  admixture  of  the  mythology  and  ritual 
connected  with  the  sacrificed  Rex  Nemorensis,  and  what- 
ever else  survives  in  our  rural  Jack-in-the-Green.1After  these  apologies  for  the  limitations  of  this  essay, 
we  may  survey  the  backward  track.  We  began  by 
showing  that  savages  may  stumble,  and  have  stumbled, 
on  theories  not  inconsistent  with  science,  but  not  till 
recently  discovered  by  science.  The  electric  origin  of  the 
Aurora  Borealis  (whether  absolutely  certain  or  not)  was 
an  example ;  another  was  the  efficacy  of  '  suggestion,' 
especially  for  curative  purposes.  It  was,  therefore,  hinted 
that,  if  savages  blundered  (if  you  please)  into  a  belief  in 
God  and  the  Soul,  however  obscurely  envisaged,  these 
beliefs  were  not  therefore  necessarily  and  essentially 
false.  We  then  stated  our  purpose  of  examining  the 
alleged  supernormal  phenomena,  savage  or  civilised, 
which,  on  Mr.  Tylor's  hypothesis,  help  to  originate  the 
conception  of  '  spirits.'  We  defended  the  nature  of  our 
evidence,  as  before  anthropologists,  by  showing  that,  for 
the  savage  belief  in  the  supernormal  phenomena,  we  have 
exactly  the  kind  of  evidence  on  which  all  anthropological 
science  reposes.  The  relative  weakness  of  that  evidence, 
our  need  of  more  and  better  evidence,  we  would  be  the 
very  last  to  deny,  indeed  it  is  part  of  our  case.  Our 
existing  evidence  will  hardly  support  any  theory  of  religion. 
Anyone  who  is  in  doubt  on  that  head  has  only  to  read 
M.  Reville's  '  Les  Eeligions  des  Peuples  Non-Civilises,  ' 
under  the  heads  '  Melanesiens,'  '  Mincopies,'  'Les  Aus- 
traliens'  (ii.  116-143),  when  he  will  observe  that  this 
eminent  French  authority  is  ignorant  of  the  facts  about

1  Compare  Mr.  Frazer's  Golden  IJovgh  with  Mr.  Grant  Allen's  Evolution 
of  the  Idea  of  God.

Y

322  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Compare  Mr.  Frazer's  Golden  IJovgh  with  Mr.  Grant  Allen's  Evolution 
of  the  Idea  of  God.

Y

322  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

these  races  here  produced.  In  1883  they  had  not  come 
within  his  ken.  Such  minute  and  careful  inquiries  by 
men  closely  intimate  with  the  peoples  concerned,  as  Dr. 
Codrington's,  Mr.  Hewitt's,  Mr.  Man's,  and  the  authori- 
ties compiled  by  Mr.  Brough  Smyth,  were  unfamiliar  to 
M.  Keville.  Thus,  in  turn,  new  facts,  or  facts  unknown 
to  us,  may  upset  my  theory.  This  peril  is  of  the  essence 
of  scientific  theorising  on  the  history  of  religion.

Having  thus  justified  our  evidence  for  the  savage  belief 
in  supernormal  phenomena,  as  before  anthropologists, 
we  turned  to  a  court  of  psychologists  in  defence  of  our 
evidence  for  the  fact  of  exactly  the  same  supernormal 
phenomena  in  civilised  experience.  We  pointed  out  that 
for  subjective  psychological  experiences,  say  of  tele- 
pathy, we  had  precisely  the  same  evidence  as  all  non- 
experimental  psychology  must  and  does  rest  upon.  Nay, 
we  have  even  experimental  evidence,  in  experiments  in 
thought-transference.  We  have  chiefly,  however,  state- 
ments of  subjective  experience.  For  the  coincidence  of 
such  experience  with  unknown  events  we  have  such 
evidence  as,  in  practical  life,  is  admitted  by  courts  of 
law.Experimental  psychology,  of  course,  relies  on  experi- 
ments conducted  under  the  eyes  of  the  expert,  for 
example,  by  hypnotism  or  otherwise,  under  Dr.  Hack 
Tuke,  Professor  James,  M.  Eichet,  M.  Janet.  The  evi- 
dence is  the  conduct  rather  than  the  statements  of  the 
subject.  There  is  also  physiological  experiment,  by  vivi- 
section (I  regret  to  say)  and  post-mortem  dissection. 
But  non-experimental  psychology  reposes  on  the  self- 
examination  of  the  student,  and  on  the  statements  of 
psychological  experiences  made  to  him  by  persons  whom 
he  thinks  he  can  trust.  The  psychologist,  however,  if  he 
be,  as  Mr.  Galton  says,  '  unimaginative  in  the  strict  but

CONCLUSION  323

unusual  sense  of  that  ambiguous  word,'  needs  Mr.  Galton's 
•'word  of  warning.'  He  is  asked  'to  resist  a  too  frequent 
tendency  to  assume  that  the  minds  of  every  other  sane 
and  healthy  person  must  be  like  his  own.  The  psycho- 
logist should  inquire  into  the  minds  of  others  as  he  should 
into  those  of  animals  of  different  races,  and  be  prepared  to 
find  much  to  which  his  own  experience  can  afford  little 
if  any  clue.' '  Mr.  Galton  had  to  warn  the  unimaginative 
psychologist  in  this  way,  because  he  was  about  to  unfold 
his  discovery  of  the  faculty  which  presents  numbers  to 
some  minds  as  visualised  coloured  numerals,  '  so  vivid  as 
to  be  undistinguishable  from  reality,  except  by  the  aid 
of  accidental  circumstances.'Mr.  Galton  also  found  in  his  inquiries  that  occasional 
hallucinations  of  the  sane  are  much  more  prevalent  than 
he  had  supposed,  or  than  science  had  ever  taken  into 
account.  All  this  was  entirely  new  to  psychologists, 
many  of  whom  still  (at  least  many  popular  psychologists 
of  the  press)  appear  to  be  unacquainted  with  the  circum- 
stances. One  of  them  informed  me,  quite  gravely,  that 
'  he  never  had  an  hallucination,'  therefore — his  mind 
being  sane  and  healthy — the  inference  seemed  to  be  that 
no  sane  and  healthy  mind  was  ever  hallucinated.  Mr. 
Galton  has  replied  to  that  argument !  His  reply  covers, 
logically,  the  whole  field  of  psychological  faculties  little 
regarded,  for  example,  by  Mr.  Sully,  who  is  not  exactly 
an  imaginative  psychologist.

It  covers  the  whole  field  of  automatism  (as  in  auto- 
matic writing)  perhaps  of  the  divining  rod,  certainly  of 
crystal  visions  and  of  occasional  hallucinations,  as  Mr. 
Galton,  in  this  last  case,  expressly  declares.  Psychologists 
at  least  need  not  be  told  that  such  faculties  cannot,  any 
more  than  other  human  faculties,  be  always  evoked  for

1  J.A.  I.  x.  85.

Y    2

324  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  J.A.  I.  x.  85.

Y    2

324  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

study  and  experiment.  Our  evidence  for  these  faculties 
and  experiences,  then,  is  usually  of  the  class  on  which  the 
psychologist  relies.  But,  when  the  psychologist,  following 
Leibnitz,  Sir  William  Hamilton,  and  Kant,  discusses  the 
Subconscious  (for  example,  knowledge,  often  complex  and 
abundant,  unconsciously  acquired)  we  demonstrated  by 
examples  that  the  psychologist  will  contentedly  repose  on 
evidence  which  is  not  evidence  at  all.  He  will  swallow 
an  undated,  unlocalised  legend  of  Coleridge,  reaching 
Coleridge  on  the  testimony  of  rumour,  and  told  at  least 
twenty  years  after  the  unverified  occurrences.  Nay,  the 
psychologist  will  never  dream  of  procuring  contempo- 
rary evidence  for  such  a  monstrous  statement  as  that 
an  ignorant  German  wench  unconsciously  acquired  and 
afterwards  subconsciously  reproduced  huge  cantles  of 
dead  languages,  by  virtue  of  having  casually  heard  a 
former  master  recite  or  read  aloud  from  Hebrew  and  Greek 
books.  This  legend  do  psychologists  accept  on  no  evidence 
at  all,  because  it  illustrates  a  theory  which  is,  doubtless,  a 
very  good  theory,  though,  in  this  case,  carried  to  an  extent 
'  imagination  boggles  at.'Here  the  psychologist  may  reply  that  much  less 
evidence  will  content  him  for  a  fact  to  which  he 
possesses,  at  least,  analogies  in  accredited  experience, 
than  for  a  fact  (say  telepathic  crystal-gazing)  to  which 
he  knows,  in  experience,  nothing  analogous.  Thus,  for 
the  mythical  German  handmaid,  he  has  the  analogy  of 
languages  learned  in  childhood,  or  passages  got  up  by 
rote,  being  forgotten  and  brought  back  to  ordinary  con- 
scious memory,  or  delirious  memory,  during  an  illness, 
or  shortly  before  death.  Strong  in  these  analogies,  the 
psychologist  will  venture  to  accept  a  case  of  language 
not  learned,  but  reproduced  in  delirious  memory,  on  no 
evidence  at  all.  But,  not  possessing  analogies  for  tele-

CONCLUSION  325

pathic  crystal-gazing,  he  will  probably  decline  to  examine 
ours.

I  would  first  draw  his  attention  to  the  difference 
between  revived  memory  of  a  language  once  known 
(Breton  and  Welsh  in  known  examples),  or  learned  by 
rote  (as  Greek,  in  an  anecdote  of  Goethe's),  and  verbal 
reproduction  of  a  language  not  known  or  learned  by  rote, 
but  overheard — each  passage  probably  but  once — as  some- 
body recited  fragments.  In  this  instance  (that  of  the 
mythical  maid)  '  the  difficulty  ....  is  that  the  original 
impressions  had  not  the  strength — that  is,  the  distinct- 
ness—of the  reproduction.  An  unknown  language  over- 
heard is  a  mere  sound  .  .  .  .'  1

The  distinction  here  drawn  is  so  great  and  obvious 
that  for  proof  of  the  German  girl's  case  we  need  better 
evidence  than  Coleridge's  rumour  of  a  rumour,  cited,  as  it 
is,  by  Hamilton,  Maudsley,  Carpenter,  Du  Prel,  and  the 
common  run  of  manuals.Not  that  I  deny,  a  priori,  the  possibility  of  Coleridge's 
story.  As  Mr.  Huxley  says,  '  strictly  speaking,  I  am 
unaware  of  anything  that  has  a  right  to  the  title  of  an 
"  impossibility,"  except  a  contradiction  in  terms.' 2  To 
the  horror  of  some  of  his  admirers,  Mr.  Huxley  would  not 
call  the  existence  of  demons  and  demoniacal  possession 
'  impossible.' 3  Mr.  Huxley  was  no  blind  follower  of 
Hume.  I,  too,  do  not  call  Coleridge's  tale  '  impossible,' 
but,  unlike  the  psychologists,  I  refuse  to  accept  it  on 
'  Bardolph's  security.'  And  I  contrast  their  conduct, 
in  swallowing  Coleridge's  legend,  with  their  refusal  (if 
they  do  refuse)  to  accept  the  evidence  for  the  auto- 
matic writing  of  not-consciously-known  languages  (as 
of  eleventh -century  French  poetry  and  prose  by  Mr.

'  Massey.     Note  to  Du  Prel,  Philosophy  of  Mysticism,  ii.  19.

'L  Science  find  Christian  Tradition,  p.  197.  ;t  Op.  cit.  p.  195.

326  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Schiller),  or  their  refusal  (if  they  do  refuse)  to  look  at 
the  evidence  for  telepathic  crystal-gazing,  or  any  other 
supernormal  exhibitions  of  faculty,  attested  by  living 
and  honourable  persons.

I  wish  I  saw  a  way  for  orthodox  unimaginative  psycho- 
logy out  of  its  dilemma.

After  offering  to  anthropologists  and  psychologists 
these  considerations,  which  I  purposely  reiterate,  we 
examined  historically  the  relations  of  science  to  'the- 
marvellous,'  showing  for  example  how  Hume,  following 
his  a  priori  theory  of  the  impossible,  would  have  declined 
to  investigate,  because  they  were  '  miraculous,'  certain 
occurrences  which,  to  Charcot,  were  ordinary  incidents  in 
medical  experience.We  next  took  up  and  criticised  the  anthropological 
theory  of  religion  as  expounded  by  Mr.  Tylor.  "We  then 
collected  from  his  work  a  series  of  alleged  supernormal 
phenomena  in  savage  belief,  all  making  for  the  foundation 
of  animistic  religion.  Through  several  chapters  we 
pursued  the  study  of  these  phenomena,  choosing  savage 
instances,  and  setting  beside  them  civilised  testimony  to 
facts  of  experience.  Our  conclusion  was  that  such 
civilised  experiences,  if  they  occurred,  as  they  are 
universally  said  to  do,  among  savages,  would  help  to 
originate,  and  would  very  strongly  support  the  savage 
doctrine  of  souls,  the  base  of  religion  in  the  theory  of 
English  anthropologists.  But  apart  from  the  savage 
doctrine  of  'spirits'  (whether  they  exist  or  not),  the 
evidence  points  to  the  existence  of  human  faculties  not 
allowed  for  in  the  current  systems  of  materialism.

We  next  turned  from  the  subject  of  supernormal 
experiences  to  the  admitted  facts  about  early  religion. 
Granting  the  belief  in  souls  and  ghosts  and  spirits, 
however  attained,  how  was  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being

CONCLUSION  327

to  be  evolved  out  of  that  belief  ?  We  showed  that,  taking 
the  creed  as  found  in  the  lowest  races,  the  processes  put 
forward  by  anthropologists  could  not  account  for  its 
evolution.  The  facts  would  not  fit  into,  but  contradicted, 
the  anthropological  theory.  The  necessary  social  con- 
ditions postulated  were  not  found  in  places  where  the 
belief  is  found.  Nay,  the  necessary  social  conditions  for 
the  evolution  even  of  ancestor-worship  were  confessedly 
not  found  where  the  supposed  ultimate  result  of  ancestor- 
worship,  the  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being,  flourished  abun- 
dantly.Again,  the  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being,  ex  hypothesi 
the  latest  in  evolution,  therefore  the  most  potent,  was 
often  shelved  and  half  forgotten,  or  neglected,  or  ridiculed, 
where  the  belief  in  Animism  (ex  hypothesi  the  earlier) 
was  in  full  vigour.  We  demonstrated  by  facts  that 
Anthropology  had  simplified  her  task  by  ignoring  that 
essential  feature,  the  prevalent  alliance  of  ethics  with 
religion,  in  the  creed  of  the  lowest  and  least  developed 
races.  Here,  happily,  we  have  not  only  the  evidence  of 
an  earnest  animist,  Mr.  Im  Thurn,  on  our  side,  but  that 
of  a  distinguished  Semitic  scholar,  the  late  Mr.  Robertson 
Smith.  '  We  see  that  even  in  its  rudest  forms  Eeligion 
was  a  moral  force,  the  powers  that  man  reveres  were  on 
the  side  of  social  order  and  moral  law ;  and  the  fear  of 
the  gods  was  a  motive  to  enforce  the  laws  of  society, 
which  were  also  the  laws  of  morality.' '  Wellhausen  has 
already  been  cited  to  the  same  effect.

However,  the  facts  proving  that  much  of  the  Deca- 
logue and  a  large  element  of  Christian  ethics  are  divinely 
sanctioned  in  savage  religion  are  more  potent  than  the 
most  learned  opinion  on  that  side.

Our  next  step  was  to  examine  in  detail  several  reli- 
1  Religion  of  tlie  Semites,  p.  53.

328  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGIONOur  next  step  was  to  examine  in  detail  several  reli- 
1  Religion  of  tlie  Semites,  p.  53.

328  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

gions  of  the  most  remote  and  backward  races,  of  races 
least  contaminated  with  Christian  or  Islamite  teaching. 
Our  evidence,  when  possible,  was  derived  from  ancient 
and  secret  tribal  mysteries,  and  sacred  native  hymns. 
We  found  a  relatively  Supreme  Being,  a  Creator,  sanc- 
tioning morality,  and  unpropitiated  by  sacrifice,  among 
peoples  who  go  in  dread  of  ghosts  and  wizards,  but  do 
not  always  worship  ancestors.  We  showed  that  the 
anthropological  theory  of  the  evolution  of  God  out  of 
ghosts  in  no  way  explains  the  facts  in  the  savage  con- 
ception of  a  Supreme  Being.  We  then  argued  that  the 
notion  of  '  spirit,'  derived  from  ghost-belief,  was  not 
logically  needed  for  the  conception  of  a  Supreme  Being 
in  its  earliest  form,  was  detrimental  to  the  conception, 
and,  by  much  evidence,  was  denied  to  be  part  of  the 
conception.  The  Supreme  Being,  thus  regarded,  may  be 
(though  he  cannot  historically  be  shown  to  be)  prior  to 
the  first  notion  of  ghost  and  separable  souls.We  then  traced  the  idea  of  such  a  Supreme  Being 
through  the  creeds  of  races  rising  in  the  scale  of  material 
culture,  demonstrating  that  he  was  thrust  aside  by  the 
competition  of  ravenous  but  serviceable  ghosts,  ghost- 
gods,  and  shades  of  kingly  ancestors,  with  their  magic 
and  their  bloody  rites.  These  rites  and  the  animistic 
conception  behind  them  were  next,  in  rare  cases,  re- 
flected or  refracted  back  on  the  Supreme  Eternal.  Aris- 
tocratic institutions  fostered  polytheism  with  the  old 
Supreme  Being  obscured,  or  superseded,  or  enthroned  as 
Emperor-God,  or  King-God.  We  saw  how,  and  in  what 
sense,  the  old  degeneration  theory  could  be  defined  and 
defended.  We  observed  traces  of  degeneration  in  certain 
archaic  aspects  of  the  faith  in  Jehovah ;  and  we  proved 
that  (given  a  tolerably  pure  low  savage  belief  in  a  Supreme 
Being)  that  belief  must  degenerate,  under  social  condi-

CONCLUSION  329CONCLUSION  329

tions,  as  civilisation  advanced.  Next,  studying  what  we 
may  call  the  restoration  of  Jehovah,  under  the  great 
Prophets  of  Israel,  we  noted  that  they,  and  Israel  gene- 
rally, were  strangely  indifferent  to  that  priceless  aspect  of 
Animism,  the  care  for  the  future  happiness,  as  conditioned 
by  the  conduct  of  the  individual  soul.  That  aspect  had  been 
neglected  neither  by  the  popular  instinct  nor  the  priestly 
and  philosophic  reflection  of  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome.  '" 
Christianity,  last,  combined  what  was  good  in  Animism, 
the  care  for  the  individual  soul  as  an  immortal  spirit 
under  eternal  responsibilities,  with  the  One  righteous 
Eternal  of  prophetic  Israel,  and  so  ended  the  long,  intri- 
cate, and  mysterious  theological  education  of  humanity. 
Such  is  our  theory,  which  does  not,  to  us,  appear  to  lack 
evidence,  nor  to  be  inconsistent  (as  the  anthropological 
theory  is  apparently  inconsistent)  with  the  hypothesis  of 
evolution.

All  this,  it  must  be  emphatically  insisted  on,  is  pro- 
pounded '  under  all  reserves.'  While  these  four  stages, 
say  (1)  the  Australian  unpropitiated  Moral  Being,

(2)  the  African  neglected  Being,  still  somewhat  moral,(2)  the  African  neglected  Being,  still  somewhat  moral,

(3)  the   relatively    Supreme   Being   involved   in   human 
sacrifice,  as  in  Polynesia,  and  (4)  the  Moral  Being  rein- 
stated philosophically,  or  in  Israel,  do  suggest  steps  in 
evolution,  we  desire  to  base  no  hard-and-fast  system  of 
ascending  and  descending  degrees  upon  our  present  evi- 
dence.    The  real  object  is  to   show  that   facts  may   be 
regarded  in  this  light,  as  well  as  in  the  light  thrown  by 
the  anthropological  theory,  in  the  hands  whether  of  Mr. 
Tylor,  Mr.  Spencer,  M.    Beville,  or   Mr.  Jevons,  whose 
interesting  work  comes  nearest  to  our  provisional  hypo- 
thesis.    We  only  ask  for  suspense  of  judgment,  and  for 
hesitation  in  accepting  the  dogmas  of  modern  manual- 
makers.     An  exception  to  them  certainly  appears  to  be

330  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Mr.  Clodd,  if  we  may  safely  attribute  to  him  a  review 
(signed  C.)  of  Mr.  Grant  Allen's  '  Evolution  of  the  Idea  of 
God.'

'We  fear  that  all  our  speculations  will  remain  sum- 
maries of  probabilities.  No  documents  are  extant  to 
enlighten  us  ;  we  have  only  mobile,  complex  and  con- 
fused ideas,  incarnate  in  eccentric,  often  contradictory 
theories.  That  this  character  attaches  to  such  ideas 
should  keep  us  on  guard  against  framing  theories  whose 
symmetry  is  sometimes  their  condemnation'  ('Daily 
Chronicle,'  December  10,  1897).Nothing  excites  my  own  suspicion  of  my  provisional 
hypothesis  more  than  its  symmetry.  Jt  really  seems  to 
fit  the  facts,  as  they  appear  to  me,  too  neatly.  I  would 
suggest,  however,  that  ancient  savage  sacred  hymns,  and 
practices  in  the  mysteries,  are  really  rather  of  the  nature 
of  '  documents ;  '  more  so,  at  least,  than  the  casual 
observations  of  some  travellers,  or  the  gossip  extracted 
from  natives  much  in  contact  with  Europeans.

Supposing  that  the  arguments  in  this  essay  met  with 
some  acceptance,  what  effect  would  they  have,  if  any,  on 
our  thoughts  about  religion?  What  is  their  practical 
tendency  ?  The  least  dubious  effect  would,  be,  I  hope,  to 
prevent  us  from  accepting  the  anthropological  theory  of 
religion,  or  any  other  theory,  as  a  foregone  conclusion.  I 
have  tried  to  show  how  dim  is  our  knowledge,  how  weak, 
often,  is  our  evidence,  and  that,  finding  among  the  lowest 
savages  all  the  elements  of  all  religions  already  developed 
in  different  degrees,  we  cannot,  historically,  say  that  one 
is  earlier  than  another.  This  point  of  priority  we  can 
never  historically  settle.  If  we  met  savages  with  ghosts 
and  no  gods,  we  could  not  be  sure  but  that  they  once 
possessed  a  God,  and  forgot  him.  If  we  met  savages  with 
a  God  and  no  ghosts,  we  could  not  be  historically  certain 
that  a  higher  had  not  obliterated  a  lower  creed.  For

CONCLUSION  331CONCLUSION  331

these  reasons  dogmatic  decisions  about  the  origin  of 
religion  seem  unworthy  of  science.  They  will  appear  yet 
more  futile  to  any  student  who  goes  so  far  with  me  as  to 
doubt  whether  the  highest  gods  of  the  lowest  races  could 
be  developed,  or  can  be  shown  to  have  been  developed,  by 
way  of  the  ghost-theory.  To  him  who  reaches  this  point 
the  whole  animistic  doctrine  of  ghosts  as  the  one  germ  of 
religion  will  appear  to  be  imperilled.  The  main  practical 
result,  then,  will  be  hesitation  about  accepting  the  latest 
scientific  opinion,  even  when  backed  by  great  names,  and 
published  in  little  primers.On  the  hypothesis  here  offered  to  criticism  there  are 
two  chief  sources  of  Religion,  (1)  the  belief,  how  attained 
we  know  not,1  in  a  powerful,  moral,  eternal,  omniscient 
Father  and  Judge  of  men ;  (2)  the  belief  (probably 
developed  out  of  experiences  normal  and  supernormal)  in 
somewhat  of  man  which  may  survive  the  grave.  This 
second  belief  is  not,  logically,  needed  as  given  material 
for  the  first,  in  its  apparently  earliest  form.  It  may,  for 
all  we  know,  be  the  later  of  the  two  beliefs,  chrono- 
logically. But  this  belief,  too,  was  necessary  to  religion  ; 
first,  as  finally  supplying  a  formula  by  which  advancing 
intellects  could  conceive  of  the  Mighty  Being  involved  in 
the  former  creed  ;  next,  as  elevating  man's  conception  of 
his  own  nature.  By  the  second  belief  he  becomes  the 
child  of  the  God  in  whom,  perhaps,  he  already  trusted, 
and  in  whom  he  has  his  being,  a  being  not  destined  to 
perish  with  the  death  of  the  body.  Man  is  thus  not  only 
the  child  but  the  heir  of  God,  a  '  nurseling  of  immortality,' 
capable  of  entering  into  eternal  life.  On  the  moral  in- 
fluence of  this  belief  it  is  superfluous  to  dwell.

From  the  most  backward  races  historically  known  to 
us,  to  those  of  our  own  status,  all  have  been  more  or  less

1  The  hypothesis  of  St.  Paul  seems  not  the  most  unsatisfactory.

3321  The  hypothesis  of  St.  Paul  seems  not  the  most  unsatisfactory.

332

washed  by  the  waters  of  this  double  stream  of  religion. 
The  Hebrews,  as  far  as  our  information  goes,  were  chiefly 
influenced  by  the  first  belief,  the  faith  in  the  Eternal ; 
and  had  comparatively  slight  interest  in  whatever  pos- 
thumous fortunes  might  await  individual  souls.  Other 
civilised  peoples,  say  the  Greeks,  extended  the  second,  or 
animistic  theory,  into  forms  of  beautiful  fantasy,  the 
material  of  art.  Yet  both  in  Greece  and  Home,  as  we  learn 
from  the  '  Republic '  (Books  i.  iii.)  of  Plato,  and  from  the 
whole  scope  of  the  poem  of  Lucretius,  and  from  the 
Painted  Porch  at  Delphi,  answering  to  the  frescoes  of  the 
Pisan  Campo  Santo,  there  existed,  among  the  people,  what 
was  unknown  to  the  Hebrews,  an  extreme  anxiety  about 
the  posthumous  fortunes  and  possible  punishment  of  the 
individual  soul.  A  kind  of  pardoners  and  indulgence- 
sellers  made  a  living  out  of  that  anxiety  in  Greece.  For 
the  Greek  pardoners,  who  testify  to  an  interest  in  the 
future  happiness  of  the  soul  not  found  in  Israel,  Mr.  Jevons 
may  be  cited :

'  The  agyrtes  professed  by  means  of  his  rites  to  purify 
men  from  the  sins  they  had  themselves  committed  .  .  .  and 
so  to  secure  to  those  whom  he  purified  an  exemption  from 
the  evil  lot  in  the  next  world  which  awaited  those  who  were 
not  initiated.'  'A  magic  mirror'  (crystal-gazing)  'was 
among  his  properties.'  lIn  Egypt  a  moral  life  did  not  suffice  to  secure 
immortal  reward.  There  was  also  required  knowledge 
of  the  spells  that  baffle  the  demons  who,  in  Amenti,  as 
in  the  Eed  Indian  and  Polynesian  Hades,  lie  in  wait 
for  souls.  That  knowledge  was  contained  in  copies  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead — the  gagne-pain  of  priests  and 
scribes.

Early  Israel,  having,  as  far  as  we  know,  a  singular

1  Introd.  to  Hist,  of  Eel.  p.  333  ;  Aristoph.  Frogs,  159.

CONCLUSION  333

lack  of  interest  in  the  future  of  the  soul,  was  born  to  give 
himself  up  to  developing,  undisturbed,  the  theistic  con- 
ception, the  belief  in  a  righteous  Eternal.lack  of  interest  in  the  future  of  the  soul,  was  born  to  give 
himself  up  to  developing,  undisturbed,  the  theistic  con- 
ception, the  belief  in  a  righteous  Eternal.

Polytheism  everywhere — in  Greece  especially — held  of 
the  animistic  conception,  with  its  freakish,  corruptible 
deities.  Greek  philosophy  could  hardly  restore  that 
Eternal  for  whom  the  Prophets  battled  in  Israel ;  whom 
some  of  the  lowest  savages  know  and  fear;  whom  the 
animistic  theory  or  cult  everywhere  obscures  with  its 
crowd  of  hungry,  cruel,  interested,  food-propitiated  ghost- 
gods.  In  the  religion  of  our  Lord  and  the  Apostles  the 
two  currents  of  faith  in  one  righteous  God  and  care  for 
the  individual  soul  were  purified  and  combined.  '  God  is 
a  Spirit,  and  they  who  worship  Him  must  worship  Him 
in  spirit  and  in  truth.'  Man  also  is  a  spirit,  and,  as  such, 
is  in  the  hands  of  a  God  not  to  be  propitiated  by  man's 
sacrifice  or  monk's  ritual.  We  know  how  this  doctrine 
was  again  disturbed  by  the  Animism,  in  effect,  and  by 
the  sacrifice  and  ritual  of  the  Mediaeval  Church.  Too 
eager  '  to  be  all  things  to  all  men,'  the  august  and  bene- 
ficent Mother  of  Christendom  readmitted  the  earlier 
Animism  in  new  forms  of  saint-worship,  pilgrimage,  and 
popular  ceremonial — things  apart  from,  but  commonly 
supposed  to  be  substitutes  for,  righteousness  of  life  and 
the  selflessness  enjoined  in  savage  mysteries.  For  the 
softness,  no  less  than  for  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts, 
these  things  were  ordained :  such  as  masses  for  the 
beloved  dead.Modern  thought  has  deanthropomorphised  what  was 
left  of  anthropomorphic  in  religion,  and,  in  the  end,  has 
left  us  for  God,  at  most,  '  a  stream  of  tendency  making 
for  righteousness,'  or  an  energy  unknown  and  unknow- 
able— -the  ghost  of  a  ghost.  For  the  soul,  by  virtue  of  his 
belief  in  which  man  raised  himself  in  his  own  esteem,

334  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

and,  more  or  less,  in  ethical  standing,  is  left  to  us  a 
negation  or  a  wistful  doubt.

To  this  part  of  modern  scientific  teaching  the  earlier 
position  of  this  essay  suggests  a  demurrer.  By  aid  of  the 
tradition  of  and  belief  in  supernormal  phenomena  among 
the  low  races,  by  attested  phenomena  of  the  same  kinds 
of  experience  among  the  higher  races,  I  have  ventured  to 
try  to  suggest  that  '  we  are  not  merely  brain ; '  that  man 
has  his  part,  we  know  not  how,  in  we  know  not  what — 
has  faculties  and  vision  scarcely  conditioned  by  the  limits 
of  his  normal  purview.  The  evidence  of  all  this  deals 
with  matters  often  trivial,  like  the  electric  sparks  rubbed 
from  the  deer's  hide,  which  yet  are  cognate  with  an 
illimitable,  essential  potency  of  the  universe.  Not  being 
able  to  explain  away  these  facts,  or,  in  this  place,  to  offer 
what  would  necessarily  be  a  premature  theory  of  them, 
I  regard  them,  though  they  seem  shadowy,  as  grounds 
of  hope,  or,  at  least,  as  tokens  that  men  need  not  yet 
despair.  Not  now  for  the  first  time  have  weak  things 
of  the  earth  been  chosen  to  confound  things  strong.  Nor 
have  men  of  this  opinion  been  always  the  weakest ;  not 
among  the  feeblest  are  Socrates,  Pascal,  Napoleon, 
Cromwell,  Charles  Gordon,  St.  Theresa,  and  Jeanne 
d'Arc.I  am  perfectly  aware  that  the  '  superstitiousness ' 
of  the  earlier  part  of  this  essay  must  injure  any  effect 
which  the  argument  of  the  latter  part  might  possibly 
produce  on  critical  opinion.  Yet  that  argument  in  no 
way  depends  on  what  we  think  about  the  phenomena — 
normal,  supernormal,  or  illusory — on  which  the  theory  of 
ghost,  soul,  or  spirit  may  have  been  based.  It  exhibits 
religion  as  probably  beginning  in  a  kind  of  Theism,  which 
is  then  superseded,  in  some  degree,  or  even  corrupted, 
by  Animism  in  all  its  varieties.  Finally,  the  exclusive

CONCLUSION  335

Theism  of  Israel  receives  its  complement  in  a  purified 
Animism,  and  emerges  as  Christianity.

Quite  apart,  too,  from  any  favourable  conclusion 
which  may,  by  some,  be  drawn  from  the  phenomena,  and 
quite  apart  from  the  more  general  opinion  that  all  mo- 
dern instances  are  compact  of  imposture,  malobservation, 
mythoposic  memory,  and  superstitious  bias,  the  systematic 
comparison  of  civilised  and  savage  beliefs  and  alleged 
experiences  of  this  kind  cannot  wisely  be  neglected  by 
Anthropology.  Humani  nihil  a  se  alienum  putat.

APPENDICES

APPENDIX  A

OPPOSITIONS   OF  SCIENCE

THE  most  elaborate  reply  to  the  arguments  for  telepathy, 
based  on  the  Report  of  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  is 
that  of  Herr  Parish,  in  his '  Hallucinations  and  Illusions.' l

Herr  Parish  is,  at  present,  opposed  to  the  theory  that 
the  Census  establishes  a  telepathic  cause  in  the  so-called 
'  coincidental '  stories,  '  put  forward/  as  he  says, '  with  due 
reserve,  and  based  on  an  astonishing  mass  of  materials, 
to  some  extent  critically  handled.'He  first  demurs  to  an  allowance  of  twelve  hours 
for  the  coincidence  of  hallucination  and  death ;  but,  if 
we  reflect  that  twelve  hours  is  little  even  in  a  year, 
coincidences  within  twelve  hours,  it  may  be  admitted, 
donnent  a  penser,  even  if  we  reject  the  theory  that, 
granted  a  real  telepathic  impact,  it  may  need  time  and 
quiet  for  its  development  into  a  complete  hallucination. 
We  need  not  linger  over  the  very  queer  cases  from 
Munich,  as  these  are  not  in  the  selected  thirty  of  the 
Keport.  Herr  Parish  then  dwells  on  that  hallucination 
of  memory,  in  which  we  feel  as  if  everything  that  is  going 
on  had  happened  before.  It  may  have  occurred  to  most 
of  us  to  be  reminded  by  some  association  of  ideas  during 
the  day,  of  some  dream  of  the  previous  night,  which  we 
had  forgotten.  For  instance,  looking  at  a  brook  from  a 
bridge,  and  thinking  of  how  I  would  fish  it,  I  remem- 
bered that  I  had  dreamed,  on  the  previous  night,  of 
casting  a  fly  for  practice,  on  a  lawn.  Nobody  would 
think  of  disputing  the  fact  that  I  really  had  such  a  dream,

1  Walter  Scott.

338  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Walter  Scott.

338  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

forgot  it  and  remembered  it  when  reminded  of  it  by  asso- 
ciation of  ideas.  But  if  the  forgotten  dream  had  been '  ful- 
filled/ and  been  recalled  to  memory  only  in  the  moment 
of  fulfilment,  science  would  deny  that  I  ever  had  such  a 
dream  at  all.  The  alleged  dream  would  be  described  as 
an  '  hallucination  of  memory.'  Something  occurring,  it 
would  be  said,  I  had  the  not  very  unusual  sensation, '  This 
has  occurred  to  me  before,'  and  the  sensation  would  become 
a  false  memory  that  it  had  occurred — in  a  dream.  This 
theory  will  be  advanced,  I  think,  not  when  an  ordinary 
dream  is  recalled  by  a  waking  experience,  but  only  when 
the  dream  coincides  with  and  foreruns  that  experience, 
which  is  a  thing  that  dreams  have  no  business  to 
do.  Such  coincidental  dreams  are  necessarily  'false 
memories,'  scientifically  speaking.  Now,  how  does  this 
theory  of  false  memory  bear  on  coincidental  hallucina- 
tions ?The  insane,  it  seems,  are  apt  to  have  the  false 
memory  '  This  occurred  before,'  and  then  to  say  that  the 
event  was  revealed  to  them  in  a  vision.1  The  insane  may 
be  recommended  to  make  a  note  of  the  vision,  and  have  it 
properly  attested,  before  the  event.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  the  '  presentiments  '  of  the  sane.  But  it  does 
not  apply  if  Jones  tells  me  '  I  saw  my  great  aunt  last 
night,'  and  if  news  comes  after  this  remark  that  Jones's 
aunt  died,  on  that  night,  in  Timbuctoo.  Yet  Herr 
Parish  (p.  282)  seems  to  think  that  the  argument  of 
fallacious  memory  comes  in  pat,  even  when  an  hallucina- 
tion has  been  reported  to  another  person  before  its  fulfil- 
ment. Of  course  all  depends  on  the  veracity  of  the 
narrator  and  the  person  to  whom  he  told  his  tale.  To 
take  a  case  given :  2  Brown,  say,  travelling  with  his  wife, 
dreams  that  a  mad  dog  bit  his  boy  at  home  on  the  elbow. 
He  tells  his  wife.  Arriving  at  home  Brown  finds  that  it 
was  so.  Herr  Parish  appears  to  argue  thus  :

Brown  dreamed  nothing  at  all,  but  he  gets  excited 
when  he  hears  the  bad  news  at  home ;  he  thinks,  by  false 
memory,  that  he  has  a  recollection  of  it,  he  says  to  his 
wife, '  My  dear,  didn't  I  tell  you,  last  night,  I  had  dreamed 
all  this  ?  '  and  his  equally  excited  wife  replies,  '  True,  my 
Brown,  you  did,  and  I  said  it  was  only  one  of  your 
dreams.'  And  both  now  believe  that  the  dream  occurred.

1  Parish,  p.  278.  -  Ibid.  pp.  282,  283.

APPENDIX   A  3391  Parish,  p.  278.  -  Ibid.  pp.  282,  283.

APPENDIX   A  339

This  is  very  plausible,  is  it  not  ?  only  science  would  not 
say  anything  about  it  if  the  dream  had  not  been  fulfilled — 
if  Brown  had  remarked,  '  Egad,  my  dear,  seeing  that 
horse  reminds  me  that  I  was  dreaming  last  night  of 
driving  in  a  dog-cart.'  For  then  Brown  was  not  excited.

None  of  this  exquisite  reasoning  as  to  dreams  applies 
to  waking  hallucinations,  reported  before  the  alleged  co- 
incidence, unless  we  accept  a  collective  hallucination  of 
memory  in  seer  or  seers,  and  also  in  the  persons  to  whom 
their  story  was  told.

But,  it  is  obvious,  memory  is  apt  to  become  mytho- 
pceic,  so  far  as  to  exaggerate  closeness  of  coincidence, 
and  to  add  romantic  details.  We  do  not  need  Herr 
Parish  to  tell  us  that ;  we  meet  the  circumstance  in  all 
narratives  from  memory,  whatever  the  topic,  even  in  Herr 
Parish's  own  writings.

We  must  admit  that  the  public,  in  ghostly,  as  in  all 
narratives  on  all  topics,  is  given  to  '  fanciful  addenda.' 
Therefore,  as  Herr  Parish  justly  remarks,  we  should 
'  maintain  a  very  sceptical  attitude  to  all  accounts '  of 
veridical  hallucinations.  '  Not  that  we  should  dismiss 
them  as  old  wives'  fables — an  all  too  common  method — or 
even  doubt  the  narrator's  good  faith.'  We  should  treat 
them  like  tales  of  big  fish  that  get  away ;  sometimes  there 
is  good  corroborative  evidence  that  they  really  were  big 
fish,  sometimes  not.  We  shall  return  to  these  false 
memories.Was  there  a  coincidence  at  all  in  the  Society's  cases 
printed  in  the  Census  ?  Herr  Parish  thinks  three  of  the 
selected  twenty-six  cases  very  dubious.  In  one  case  is  a 
possible  margin  of  four  days,  another  (wrongly  numbered 
by  the  way)  does  not  occur  at  all  among  the  twenty- 
six.  In  the  third,  Herr  Parish  is  wrong  in  his  state- 
ment.1 This  is  a  lovely  example  of  the  sceptical  slipshod, 
and,  accompanied  by  the  miscitation  of  the  second  case, 
shows  that  inexactitude  is  not  all  on  the  side  of  the  seers. 
However  the  case  is  not  very  good,  the  two  percipients 
fancying  that  the  date  of  the  event  was  less  remote  than 
it  really  was.  Unluckily  Herr  Parish  only  criticises 
these  three  cases,  how  accurately  we  have  remarked.  He 
had  no  room  for  more.

Herr  Parish  next  censures  the  probable  selection  of

1  P.  287,  Mr.  Sims,  Proceedings,  \.  230.

7.  2

340  THE  MAKING  OF  EELIGIONHerr  Parish  next  censures  the  probable  selection  of

1  P.  287,  Mr.  Sims,  Proceedings,  \.  230.

7.  2

340  THE  MAKING  OF  EELIGION

good  cases  by  collectors,  on  which  the  editors  of  the 
Census  have  already  made  observations,  as  they  have  also- 
made  large  allowances  for  this  cause  of  error.  He  then 
offers  the  astonishing  statement  that,  '  in  the  view  of  the 
English  authors,  a  view  which  is,  of  course,  assumed  in 
all  calculations  of  the  kind,  an  hallucination  persists 
equally  long  in  the  memory  and  is  equally  readily  recalled 
in  reply  to  a  question,  whether  the  experience  made  but 
a  slight  impression  on  the  percipient,  or  affected  him 
deeply,  as  would  be  the  case,  for  instance,  if  the  hallu- 
cination had  been  found  to  coincide  with  the  death  of  a 
near  relative  or  friend.' '  This  assertion  of  Herr  Parish's 
is  so  erroneous  that  the  Report  expressly  says  '  as  years 
recede  into  the  distance,'  the  proportion  of  the  hallucina- 
tions that  are  remembered  in  them  to  those  which  are 
forgotten,  or  at  least  ignored,  'is  very  large.'  Again, 
'  Hallucinations  of  the  most  impressive  class  will  not 
only  be  better  remembered  than  others,  but  will,  we  may 
reasonably  suppose,  be  more  often  mentioned  by  the 
percipients  to  their  friends.' 2Yet  Herr  Parish  avers  that,  in  all  calculations,  it  is 
assumed  that  hallucinations  are  equally  readily  recalled 
whether  impressive  or  not !  Once  more,  the  Report  says 
(p.  246),  '  It  is  not  the  case '  that  coincidental  (and  im- 
pressive) hallucinations  are  as  easily  subject  to  oblivion 
as  non-coincidental,  and  non-impressive  ones.  The 
editors  therefore  multiply  the  non-coincidental  cases  by 
four,  arguing  that  no  coincidental  cases  (hits)  are  for- 
gotten, while  three  out  of  four  non-coincidentals  (misses) 
are  forgotten,  or  may  be  supposed  likely  to  be  forgotten. 
Immediately  after  declaring  that  the  English  authors 
suppose  all  hallucinations  to  be  equally  well  remembered 
(which  is  the  precise  reverse  of  what  they  do  say),  Herr 
Parish  admits  that  the  authors  multiply  the  misses  by 
four,  '  influenced  by  other  considerations'  (p.  289).  By 
what  other  considerations ?  They  give  their  reason  (that 
very  reason  which  they  decline  to  entertain,  says  Herr 
Parish),  namely,  that  misses  are  four  times  as  likely  to 
be  forgotten  as  hits.  '  To  go  into  the  reason  for  adopting 
this  plan  would  lead  us  too  far/  he  writes.  Why,  it  is 
the  very  reason  which,  he  says,  does  not  find  favour  with 
the  English  authors  !

1  Parish  pp.  288,  289.  -  Report,  p.  68.

APPENDIX   A  3411  Parish  pp.  288,  289.  -  Report,  p.  68.

APPENDIX   A  341

How  curiously  remote  from  being  '  coincidental '  with 
plain  facts,  or  '  veridical '  at  all,  is  this  scientific  criticism  ! 
Herr  Parish  says  that  a  '  view '  (which  does  not  exist)  is 
'  of  course  assumed  in  all  calculations  ; '  and,  on  the  very 
same  page,  he  says  that  it  is  not  assumed  !  '  The  witnesses 
of  the  report — influenced,  it  is  true,  by  other  considera- 
tions '  (which  is  not  the  case),  'have  sought  to  turn  the 
point  of  this  objection  by  multiplying  the  whole  number 
of  (non-coincidental)  cases  by  four.'  Then  the  '  view  '  is 
not  '  assumed  in  all  calculations,'  as  Herr  Parish  has  just 
asserted.

What  led  Herr  Parish,  an  honourable  and  clear- 
headed critic,  into  this  maze  of  incorrect  and  contradic- 
tory assertions?  It  is  interesting  to  try  to  trace  the 
causes  of  such  non-veridical  illusions,  to  find  the  points 
de  repere  of  these  literary  hallucinations.  One  may 
suggest  that  when  Herr  Parish  '  recast  the  chapters '  of 
his  German  edition,  as  he  says  in  his  preface  to  the 
English  version,  he  accidentally  left  in  a  passage  based 
on  an  earlier  paper  by  Mr.  Gurney,1  not  observing  that  it 
was  no  longer  accurate  or  appropriate.After  this  odd  passage,  Herr  Parish  argues  that  a 
'  veridical '  hallucination  is  regarded  by  the  English 
authors  as  '  coincidental,'  even  when  external  circum- 
stances have  made  that  very  hallucination  a  probable 
occurrence  by  producing  '  tension  of  the  corresponding 
nerve  element  groups.'  That  is  to  say,  a  person  is  in  a 
condition — a  nervous  condition — likely,  a  priori,  to  beget 
an  hallucination.  An  hallucination  is  begotten,  quite 
naturally ;  and  so,  if  it  happens  to  coincide  with  an 
event,  the  coincidence  should  not  count — it  is  purely 
fortuitous.2

Here  is  an  example.  A  lady,  facing  an  old  sideboard, 
saw  a  friend,  with  no  coat  on,  and  in  a  waistcoat  with  a 
back  of  shiny  material.  Within  an  hour  she  was  taken 
to  where  her  friend  lay  dying,  without  a  coat,  and  in  a 
waistcoat  with  a  shiny  back.3  Here  is  the  scientific 
explanation  of  Herr  Parish :  '  The  shimmer  of  a  reflect- 
ing surface  [the  sideboard  ?]  formed  the  occasion  for  the 
hallucinatory  emergence  of  a  subconsciously  perceived 
shiny  black  waistcoat  [quotation  incorrect,  of  course],  and 
.an  individual  subconsciously  associated  with  that  impres-

1  P.  271,  note  1.  a  Parish,  p.  290.  3  Report,  p.  297.

*

342  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION1  P.  271,  note  1.  a  Parish,  p.  290.  3  Report,  p.  297.

*

342  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION

sion.'  1  I  ask  any  lady  whether  she,  consciously  or 
subconsciously,  associates  the  men  she  knows  with  the 
backs  of  their  waistcoats.  Herr  Parish's  would  be  a 
brilliantly  satisfactory  explanation  if  it  were  only  true 
to  the  printed  words  that  lay  under  his  eyes  when  he 
wrote.  There  was  no  '  shiny  black  waistcoat '  in  the 
case,  but  a  waistcoat  with  a  shiny  back.  Gentlemen,  and 
especially  old  gentlemen  who  go  about  in  bath-chairs 
(like  the  man  in  this  story),  don't  habitually  take  off  their 
coats  and  show  the  backs  of  their  waistcoats  to  ladies  of 
nineteen  in  England.  And,  if  Herr  Parish  had  cared  to 
read  his  case,  he  would  have  found  it  expressly  stated 
that  the  lady  '  had  never  seen  the  man  without  his  coat ' 
(and  so  could  not  associate  him  with  an  impression  of  a 
shiny  back  to  his  waistcoat)  till  after  the  hallucination, 
when  she  saw  him  coatless  on  his  death-bed.  In  this 
instance  Herr  Parish  had  an  hallucinatory  memory,  all 
wrong,  of  the  page  under  his  eyes.  The  case  is  got  rid 
of,  then,  by  aid  of  the  'fanciful  addenda,'  to  which  Herr 
Parish  justly  objects.  He  first  gives  the  facts  incorrectly, 
and  then  explains  an  occurrence  which,  as  reported  by 
him,  did  not  occur,  and  was  not  asserted  to  occur.I  confess  that,  if  Herr  Parish's  version  were  as  correct 
as  it  is  essentially  inaccurate,  his  explanation  would  leave 
me  doubtful.  For  the  circumstances  were  that  the  old 
gentleman  of  the  story  lunched  daily  with  the  young 
lady's  mother.  Suppose  that  she  was  familiar  (which 
she  was  not)  with  the  shiny  back  of  his  waistcoat,  still, 
she  saw  him  daily,  and  daily,  too,  was  in  the  way  of 
seeing  the  (hypothetically)  shiny  surface  of  the  sideboard. 
That  being  the  case,  she  had,  every  day,  the  materials, 
subjective  and  objective,  of  the  hallucination.  Yet  it  only 
occurred  once,  and  then  it  precisely  coincided  with  the 
death  agony  of  the  old  gentleman,  and  with  his  coatless 
condition.  Why  only  that  once?  C'est  Id  le  miracle! 
'  How  much  for  this  little  veskit  ?  '  as  the  man  asked 
David  Copperfield.

Herr  Parish  next  invents  a  cause  for  an  hallucina- 
tion, which,  I  myself  think,  ought  not  to  have  been 
reckoned,  because  the  percipient  had  been  sitting  up  with 
the  sick  man.  This  he  would  class  as  a  '  suspicious  '  case. 
But,  even  granting  him  his  own  way  of  handling  the

1  Parish  p.  290.

APPENDIX  A  343

statistics,  he  would  still  have  far  too  large  a  proportion 
of  coincidences  for  the  laws  of  chance  to  allow,  if  we  are 
to  go  by  these  statistics  at  all.APPENDIX  A  343

statistics,  he  would  still  have  far  too  large  a  proportion 
of  coincidences  for  the  laws  of  chance  to  allow,  if  we  are 
to  go  by  these  statistics  at  all.

His  next  argument  practically  is  that  hallucinations 
are  always  only  a  kind  of  dreams.1  He  proves  this  by 
the  large  number  of  coincidental  hallucinations  which 
occurred  in  sleepy  circumstances.  One  man  went  to  bed 
early,  and  woke  up  early ;  another  was  '  roused  from 
sleep ; '  two  ladies  were  sitting  up  in  bed,  giving  their 
babies  nourishment ;  a  man  was  reading  a  newspaper  on 
a  sofa ;  a  lady  was  lying  awake  at  seven  in  the  morning ; 
and  there  are  eight  other  English  cases  of  people 
'  awake '  in  bed  during  an  hallucination.  Now,  in  Dr. 
Parish's  opinion,  we  must  argue  that  they  were  not  awake, 
or  not  much  ;  so  the  hallucinations  were  mere  dreams. 
Dreams  are  so  numerous  that  coincidences  in  dreams 
can  be  got  rid  of  as  pure  flukes.  People  may  say,  to  be 
sure,  '  I  am  used  to  dreams,  and  don't  regard  them ;  this 
was  something  solitary  in  my  experience.'  But  we  must 
not  mind  what  people  say.Yet  I  fear  we  must  mind  what  they  say.  At  least,  we 
must  remember  that  sleeping  dreams  are,  of  all  things, 
most  easily  forgotten ;  while  a  full-bodied  hallucination, 
when  we,  at  least,  believe  ourselves  awake,  seems  to  us 
on  a  perfectly  different  plane  of  impressiveness,  and 
(experto  crede)  is  really  very  difficult  to  forget.  Herr 
Parish  cannot  be  allowed,  therefore,  to  use  the  regular 
eighteenth-century  argument — '  All  dreams  !  '  For  the 
two  sorts  of  dreams,  in  sleep  and  in  apparent  wakefulness, 
seem,  to  the  subject,  to  differ  in  kind.  And  they  really 
do  differ  in  kind.  It  is  the  essence  of  the  every  night 
dream  that  we  are  unconscious  of  our  actual  surroundings 
and  conscious  of  a  fantastic  environment.  It  is  the 
essence  of  wideawakeness  to  be  conscious  of  our  actual 
surroundings.  In  the  ordinary  dream,  nothing  actual 
competes  with  its  visions.  When  we  are  conscious  of 
our  surroundings,  everything  actual  does  compete  with 
any  hallucination.  Therefore,  an  hallucination  which, 
when  we  are  conscious  of  our  material  environment,  does 
compete  with  it  in  reality,  is  different  in  kind  from  an 
ordinary  dream.  Science  gains  nothing  by  arbitrarily 
declaring  that  two  experiences  so  radically  different  are

1  Pp.  291,  292.

344  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

identical.  Anybody  would  see  this  if  he  were  not  arguing 
under  a  dominant  idea.1  Pp.  291,  292.

344  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

identical.  Anybody  would  see  this  if  he  were  not  arguing 
under  a  dominant  idea.

Herr  Parish  next  contends  that  people  who  see 
pictures  in  crystal  balls,  and  so  on,  are  not  so  wide  awake 
as  to  be  in  their  normal  consciousness.  There  is  '  dis- 
sociation '  (practically  drowsiness),  even  if  only  a  little. 
Herr  Moll  also  speaks  of  crystal-gazing  pictures  as 
'  hypnotic  phenomena.' l  Possibly  neither  of  these  learned 
men  has  ever  seen  a  person  attempt  crystal-gazing. 
Herr  Parish  never  asserts  any  such  personal  experience 
as  the  basis  of  his  opinion  about  the  non-normal  state  of 
the  gazer.  He  reaches  this  conclusion  from  an  anecdote 
reported,  as  a  not  unfamiliar  phenomenon,  by  a  friend  of 
Miss  X.  But  the  phenomenon  occurred  when  Miss  X. 
was  not  crystal-gazing  at  all !  She  was  looking  out  of  a 
window  in  a  brown  study.  This  is  a  noble  example 
of  logic.  Some  one  says  that  Miss  X.  was  not  in  her 
normal  consciousness  on  a  certain  occasion  when  she  was 
not  crystal-gazing,  and  that  this  condition  is  familiar  to 
the  observer.  Therefore,  argues  Herr  Parish,  nobody 
is  in  his  normal  consciousness  when  he  is  crystal-gazing.In  vain  may  '  so  good  an  observer  as  Miss  X.  think 
herself  fully  awake  '  (as  she  does  think  herself)  when 
crystal-gazing,  because  once,  when  she  happened  to  have 
'  her  eyes  fixed  on  the  windoio,'  her  expression  was 
'  associated '  by  a  friend  '  with  something  uncanny,'  and 
she  afterwards  spoke  'in  a  dreamy,  far-away  tone' 
(p.  297).  Miss  X.,  though  extremely  '  wide  awake,'  may 
have  looked  dreamily  at  a  window,  and  may  have  seen 
mountains  and  marvels.  But  the  point  is  that  she  was 
not  voluntarily  gazing  at  a  crystal  for  amusement  or 
experiment — perhaps  trying  to  see  how  a  microscope 
affected  the  pictures — or  to  divert  a  friend.

I  appeal  to  the  shades  of  Aristotle  and  Bacon  against 
scientific  logic  in  the  hands  of  Herr  Parish.  Here  is  his 
syllogism  :

A.  is  occasionally  dreamy  when  not  crystal-gazing. 
A.  is  human.

Therefore  every  human  being,  when  crystal-gazing,  is 
more  or  less  asleep.

He  infers  a  general  affirmative  from  a  single  affinna- 
1  Moll,  Hypnotism,  p.  1.

APPENDIX   A  345

tive  which  happens  not  to  be  to  the  point.     It  is  exactly 
as  if  Herr  Parish  argued  :

Mrs.  B.  spends  hours  in  shopping. 
Mrs.  B.  is  human.

Therefore  every  human  being  is  always  late  for 
dinner.

Miss  X.,  I  think,  uplifted  her  voice  in  some  review, 
and  maintained  that,  when  crystal-gazing,  she  was  quite 
in  her  normal  state,  dans  son  assiette.Miss  X.,  I  think,  uplifted  her  voice  in  some  review, 
and  maintained  that,  when  crystal-gazing,  she  was  quite 
in  her  normal  state,  dans  son  assiette.

Yet  Herr  Parish  would  probably  say  to  any  crystal- 
gazer  who  argued  thus,  '  Oh,  no ;  pardon  me,  you  were 
not  wholly  awake — you  were  a-dream.  I  know  better 
than  you.'  But,  as  he  has  not  seen  crystal-gazers,  while 
I  have,  many  scores  of  times,  I  prefer  my  own  opinion. 
And  so,  as  this  assertion  about  the  percipient's  being 
'  dissociated,'  or  asleep,  or  not  awake,  is  certainly  untrue 
of  all  crystal-gazers  in  my  considerable  experience,  I 
cannot  accept  it  on  the  authority  of  Herr  Parish,  who 
makes  no  claim  to  any  personal  experience  at  all.

As  to  crystal-gazing,  when  the  gazer  is  talking,  laugh- 
ing, chatting,  making  experiments  in  turning  the  ball, 
changing  the  light,  using  prisms  and  magnifying-glasses, 
dropping  matches  into  the  water-jug,  and  so  on,  how  can 
we  possibly  say  that  '  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish 
between  waking  hallucinations  and  those  of  sleep ' 
(p.  300)  ?  If  so,  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  between 
sleeping  and  waking  altogether.  We  are  all  like  the 
dormouse !  Herr  Parish  is  reasoning  here  a  priori, 
without  any  personal  knowledge  of  the  facts  ;  and,  above 
all,  he  is  under  the  '  dominant  idea  '  of  his  own  theory— 
that  of  dissociation.Herr  Parish  next  crushes  telepathy  by  an  argument 
which — like  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  bells  were  not 
rung  for  Queen  Elizabeth,  namely,  that  there  were  no 
bells  to  ring — might  have  come  first,  and  alone.  We  are 
told  (in  italics — very  impressive  to  the  popular  mind)  : 
4  No  matter  how  great  the  number  of  coincidences,  they 
afford  not  even  the  shadow  of  a  proof  for  telepathy ' 
(p.  301).  What,  not  even  if  all  hallucinations,  or  ninety- 
nine  per  cent.,  coincided  with  the  death  of  the  person 
seen  ?  In  heaven's  name,  why  not  ?  Why,  because  the 
'  weightiest '  cause  of  all  has  been  omitted  from  our

346  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

calculations,  namely,  our  good  old  friend,  the  association 
of  ideas  (p.  302).  Our  side  cannot  prove  the  absence 
(italics)  of  the  association  of  ideas.  Certainly  we  cannot ; 
but  ideas  in  endless  millions  are  being  associated  all  day 
long.  A  hundred  thousand  different,  unnoticed  associa- 
tions may  bring  Jones  to  my  mind,  or  Brown.  But  I 
don't  therefore  see  Brown,  or  Jones,  who  is  not  there. 
Still  less  do  I  see  Dr.  Parish,  or  Nebuchadnezzar,  or  a 
monkey,  or  a  salmon,  or  a  golf  ball,  or  Arthur's  Seat  (all 
of  which  may  be  brought  to  my  mind  by  association 
of  ideas),  when  they  are  not  present.

Suppose,  then,  that  once  in  my  life  I  see  the  absent 
Jones,  who  dies  in  that  hour  (or  within  twelve  hours). 
I  am  puzzled.  Why  did  Association  choose  that  day, 
of  all  days  in  my  life,  for  her  solitary  freak?  And, 
if  this  choice  of  freaks  by  Association  occurs  among 
other  people,  say  two  hundred  times  more  often  than 
chance  allows,  the  freak  begins  to  suggest  that  it  may 
have  a  cause.Not  even  the  circumstance  cited  by  Herr  Parish,  that 
a  drowsy  tailor,  '  sewing  on  in  a  dream,'  poor  fellow,  saw 
a  client  in  his  shop  while  the  client  was  dying,  solves  the 
problem.  The  tailor  is  not  said  even  once  to  have  seen 
a  customer  who  was  not  dying  ;  yet  he  writes,  '  I  was 
accustomed  to  work  all  night  frequently.'  The  tailor 
thinks  he  was  asleep,  because  he  had  been  making 
irregular  stitches,  and  perhaps  he  was.  But,  out  of  all 
his  vigils  and  all  his  customers,  association  only  formed 
one  hallucination,  and  that  was  of  a  dying  client  whom 
he  supposed  to  be  perfectly  well.  Why  on  earth  is 
association  so  fond  of  dying  people — granting  the  sta- 
tistics, which  are  '  another  story  '  ?  The  explanation 
explains  nothing.  Herr  Parish  only  moves  the  difficulty 
back  a  step,  and,  as  we  cannot  live  without  association 
of  ideas,  they  are  taken  for  granted  by  our  side.  Associa- 
tion of  ideas  does  not  cause  hallucinations,  as  Mrs.  Sidg- 
wick  remarks,  though  it  may  determine  their  contents.

The  difficult  theme  of  coincidental  collective  hallu- 
cinations, as  when  two  or  more  people  at  once  have,  or 
profess  to  have,  the  same  false  perception  of  a  person 
who  is  really  absent  and  dying,  is  next  disposed  of  by 
Herr  Parish.  The  same  points  de  repere,  the  same 
sound,  or  flicker  of  light,  or  arrangement  of  shadow,  may

APPENDIX  A  347APPENDIX  A  347

beget  the  same  or  a  similar  false  perception  in  two  or 
more  people  at  once.  Thus  two  girls,  in  different  rooms, 
are  looking  out  on  different  parts  of  the  hall  in  their 
house.  '  Both  heard,  at  the  same  time,  an  [objective  ?] 
noise'  (p.  313).  Then,  says  Herr  Parish,  '  the  one  sister 
saw  her  father  cross  the  hall  after  entering ;  the  other 
saw  the  dog  (the  usual  companion  of  his  walks)  run  past 
her  door.'  Father  and  dog  had  not  left  the  dining-room. 
Herr  Parish  decides  that  the  same  point  de  repere  (the 
apparent  noise  of  a  key  in  the  lock  of  the  front  door) 
'  acted  by  way  of  suggestion  on  both  sisters,'  producing, 
however,  different  hallucinations,  '  in  virtue  of  the  dif- 
ference of  the  connected  associations.'  One  girl  asso- 
ciated the  sound  with  her  honoured  sire,  the  other  with 
his  faithful  hound ;  so  one  saw  a  dog,  and  the  other  saw 
an  elderly  gentleman.  Now,  first,  if  so,  this  should 
always  be  occurring,  for  we  all  have  different  associations 
of  ideas.  Thus,  we  are  in  a  haunted  house ;  there  is  a 
noise  of  a  rattling  window  ;  I  associate  it  with  a  burglar, 
Brown  with  a  milkman,  Miss  Jones  with  a  lady  in  green, 
Miss  Smith  with  a  knight  in  armour.  That  collection 
of  phantasms  should  then  be  simultaneously  on  view, 
like  the  dog  and  old  gentleman  ;  all  our  reports  should 
vary.  But  this  does  not  occur.  Most  unluckily  for  Herr 
Parish,  he  illustrates  his  theory  by  telling  a  story  which 
happens  not  to  be  correctly  reported.  At  first  I  thought 
that  a  fallacy  of  memory,  or  an  optical  delusion,  had 
betrayed  him  again,  as  in  his  legend  of  the  waistcoat. 
But  I  am  now  inclined  to  believe  that  what  really 
occurred  was  this  :  Herr  Parish  brought  out  his  book  in 
German,  before  the  Report  of  the  Census  of  Hallucina- 
tions was  published.  In  his  German  edition  he  probably 
quoted  a  story  which  precisely  suited  his  theory  of  the 
origin  of  collective  hallucinations.  This  anecdote  he  had 
found  in  Prof.  Sidgwick's  Presidential  Address  of  July 
1890. *  As  stated  by  Prof.  Sidgwick,  the  case  just  fitted 
Herr  Parish,  who  refers  to  it  on  p.  190,  and  again  on 
p.  314.  He  gives  no  reference,  but  his  version  reads 
like  a  traditional  variant  of  Prof.  Sidgwick's.  Now 
Prof.  Sidgwick's  version  was  erroneous,  as  is  proved  by 
the  elaborate  account  of  the  case  in  the  Report  of  the 
Census,  which  Herr  Parish  had  before  him,  but  neglected1  Proceedings,  vol.  vi.  p.  433.

348  THE   MAKING   OF   KELIGION

when  he  prepared  his  English  edition.  The  story  was 
wrong,  alas !  in  the  very  point  where,  for  Herr  Parish's 
purpose,  it  ought  to  have  been  right.  The  hallucination 
is  believed  not  to  have  been  collective,  yet  Herr  Parish 
uses  it  to  explain  collective  hallucinations.  Doubtless  he 
overlooked  the  accurate  version  in  the  Report.1

The  facts,  as  there  reported,  were  not  what  he 
narrates,  but  as  follows  :The  facts,  as  there  reported,  were  not  what  he 
narrates,  but  as  follows  :

Miss  C.  E.  was  in  the  breakfast-room,  about  6.30  P.M., 
in  January  1883,  and  supposed  her  father  to  be  taking  a 
walk  with  his  dog.  She  heard  noises,  which  may  have 
had  any  other  cause,  but  which  she  took  to  be  the  sounds 
of  a  key  in  the  door  lock,  a  stick  tapping  the  tiles  of  the 
hall,  and  the  patter  of  the  dog's  feet  on  the  tiles.  She 
then  saw  the  dog  pass  the  door.  Miss  C.  E.  next  entered 
the  hall,  where  she  found  nobody ;  but  in  the  pantry  she 
met  her  sisters — Miss  E.,  Miss  H.  G.  E. — and  a  working- 
woman.  Miss  E.  and  the  working-woman  had  been  in 
the  hall,  and  there  had  heard  the  sound,  which  they,  like 
Miss  C.  E.,  took  for  that  of  a  key  in  the  lock.  They  were 
breaking  a  little  household  rule  in  the  hall,  so  they  '  ran 
straightway  into  the  pantry,  meeting  Miss  H.  G.  E.  on 
the  way.'  Miss  C.  E.  and  Miss  E.  and  the  working- 
woman  all  heard  the  noise  as  of  a  key  in  the  lock,  but 
nobody  is  said  to  have  '  seen  the  father  cross  the  hall '  (as 
Herr  Parish  asserts).  '  Miss  H.  G.  E.  was  of  opinion 
that  Miss  E.  (now  dead)  saw  nothing,  and  Miss  C.  E.  was 
inclined  to  agree  with  her.'  Miss  E.  and  the  work- woman 
(now  dead)  were  '  emphatic  as  to  the  father  having 
entered  the  house ;  '  but  this  the  two  only  inferred  from 
hearing  the  noise,  after  which  they  fled  to  the  pantry. 
Now,  granting  that  some  other  noise  was  mistaken  for 
that  of  the  key  in  the  lock,  we  have  here,  not  (as  Herr 
Parish  declares)  a  collective  yet  discrepant  hallucination— 
the  discrepancy  being  caused  '  by  the  difference  of  con- 
nected associations  ' — but  a  solitary  hallucination.  Herr 
Parish,  however,  inadvertently  converts  a  solitary  into  a 
collective  hallucination,  and  then  uses  the  example  to 
explain  collective  hallucinations  in  general.  He  asserts 
that  Miss  E.  '  saw  her  father  cross  the  hall.'  Miss  E.'s 
sisters  think  that  she  saw  no  such  matter.  Now,  suppose 
that  Mr.  E.  had  died  at  the  moment,  and  that  the  case1  Parish,  p.  313.

APPENDIX  A  349

was  claimed  on  our  part  as  a  'collective  coincidental 
hallucination.'  How  righteously  Herr  Parish  might 
exclaim  that  all  the  evidence  was  against  its  being 
collective  !  The  sound  in  the  lock,  heard  by  three  per- 
sons, would  be,  and  probably  was,  another  noise  mis- 
interpreted. And,  in  any  case,  there  is  no  evidence  for 
its  having  produced  two  hallucinations ;  the  evidence  is 
in  exactly  the  opposite  direction.

Here,  then,  Herr  Parish,  with  the  printed  story  under 
his  eyes,  once  more  illustrates  want  of  attention.  In  one 
way  his  errors  improve  his  case.  'If  I,  a  grave  man  of 
science,  go  on  telling  distorted  legends  out  of  my  own 
head,  while  the  facts  are  plain  in  print  before  me,'  Herr 
Parish  may  reason,  'how  much  more  are  the  popular 
tales  about  coincidental  hallucinations  likely  to  be  dis- 
torted ? '  It  is  really  a  very  strong  argument,  but  not 
exactly  the  argument  which  Herr  Parish  conceives 
himself  to  be  presenting.1

This  unlucky  inexactitude  is  chronic,  as  we  have 
shown,  in  Herr  Parish's  work,  and  is  probably  to  be 
explained  by  inattention  to  facts,  by  '  expectation '  of 
suitable  facts,  and  by  '  anxiety  '  to  prove  a  theory.  He 
explains  the  similar  or  identical  reports  of  witnesses  to  a 
collective  hallucination  by  '  the  ease  with  which  such 
appearances  adapt  themselves  in  recollection'  (p.  313), 
especially,  of  course,  after  lapse  of  time.  And  then  he 
unconsciously  illustrates  his  case  by  the  ease  with  which 
printed  facts  under  his  very  eyes  adapt  themselves,  quite 
erroneously,  to  his  own  memory  and  personal  bias  as  he 
copies  them  on  to  his  paper.Finally  he  argues  that  even  if  collective  hallucinations 
are  also  '  with  comparative  frequency  '  coincidental,  that 
is  to  be  explained  thus :  '  The  rarity  and  the  degree  of 
interest  compelled  by  it  '  (by  such  an  hallucination)  '  will 
naturally  tend  to  connect  itself  with  some  other  pro- 
minent event ;  and,  conversely,  the  occurrence  of  such 
an  event  as  the  death  or  mortal  danger  of  a  friend  is 
most  calculated  to  produce  memory  illusions  of  this  kind.'

In  the  second  case,  the  excitement  caused  by  the 
death  of  a  friend  is  likely,  it  seems,  to  make  two  or  more 
sane  people  say,  and  believe,  that  they  saw  him  some- 
where else,  when  he  was  really  dying.  The  only  evidence

1  Compare  Report,  pp.  181-83,  with  Parish,  pp.  1'JO  and  313,  314.

.350  THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

for  this  fact  is  that  such  illusions  occasionally  occur,  not 
collectively,  in  some  lunatic  asylums.  '  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, a  form  of  mnemonic  error  often  observed  among 
the  insane.'  '  Kraepelin  gives  two  cases.'  '  The  process 
occurs  sporadically  in  certain  sane  people,  under  certain 
exciting  conditions.'  No  examples  are  given  !  What  is 
rare  as  an  individual  folly  among  lunatics,  is  supposed  by 
Herr  Parish  to  explain  the  theoretically  '  false  memory  ' 
whereby  sane  people  persuade  themselves  that  they  had 
an  hallucination,  and  persuade  others  that  they  were  told 
of  it,  when  no  such  thing  occurred.To  return  to  our  old  example.  Jones  tells  me  that  he 
has  just  seen  his  aunt,  whom  he  knows  to  be  in  Tim- 
buctoo.  News  comes  that  the  lady  died  when  Jones 
beheld  her  in  his  smoking-room.  '  Oh,  nonsense,'  Herr 
Parish  would  argue,  '  you,  Jones,  saw  nothing  of  the  kind, 
nor  did  you  tell  Mr.  Lang,  who,  I  am  sorry  to  find,  agrees 
with  you.  "What  happened  was  this :  When  the  awful 
news  came  to-day  of  your  aunt's  death,  you  were  naturally, 
and  even  creditably,  excited,  especially  as  the  poor  lady  was 
killed  by  being  pegged  down  on  an  ant-heap.  This  ex- 
citement, rather  praiseworthy  than  otherwise,  made  you 
believe  you  had  seen  your  aunt,  and  believe  you  had  told 
Mr.  Lang.  He  also  is  a  most  excitable  person,  though  I 
admit  he  never  saw  your  dear  aunt  in  his  life.  He,  there- 
fore (by  virtue  of  his  excitement),  now  believes  you  told 
him  about  seeing  your  unhappy  kinswoman.  This  kind 
of  false  memory  is  very  common.  Two  cases  are  recorded 
by  Kraepelin,  among  the  insane.  Sure  you  quite  under- 
stand my  reasoning '?  '

I  quite  understand  it,  but  I  don't  see  how  it  comes  to 
seem  good  logic  to  Herr  Parish.

The  other  theory  is  funnier  still.  Jones  never  had  an 
hallucination  before.  '  The  rarity  and  the  degree  of 
interest  compelled  by  it '  made  Jones  '  connect  it  with 
some  other  prominent  event,'  say,  the  death  of  his  aunt, 
which,  really,  occurred,  say,  nine  months  afterwards.  But 
this  is  a  mere  case  of  evidence,  which  it  is  the  affair  of 
the  S.P.R.  to  criticise.

Herr  Parish  is  in  the  happy  position  called  in  American 
speculative  circles  '  a  straddle.'  If  a  man  has  an  hallu- 
cination when  alone,  he  was  in  circumstances  conducive 
to  the  sleeping  state.  So  the  hallucination  is  probably  aAPPENDIX   A  351

dream.  But,  if  the  seer  was  in  company,  who  all  had  the 
same  hallucination,  then  they  all  had  the  same  points  de 
repbre,  and  the  same  adaptive  memories.  So  Herr  Parish 
kills  with  both  barrels.

If  anything  extraneous  could  encourage  a  belief  in 
coincidental  and  veridical  hallucinations,  it  would  be 
these  '  Oppositions  of  Science.'  If  a  learned  and  fair 
opponent  can  find  no  better  proofs  than  logic  and  (un- 
conscious) perversions  of  facts  like  the  logic  and  the 
statements  of  Herr  Parish,  the  case  for  telepathic  hallu- 
cinations may  seem  strong  indeed.  But  we  must  grant 
him  the  existence  of  the  adaptive  and  mythopoaic  powers 
of  memory,  which  he  asserts,  and  also  illustrates.  I 
grant,  too,  that  a  census  of  17,000  inquiries  may  only 
have  'skimmed  the  cream  off'  (p.  87).  Another  dip  of 
the  net,  bringing  up  17,000  fresh  answers,  might  alter  the 
whole  aspect  of  the  case,  one  way  or  the  other.  More- 
over, we  cannot  get  scientific  evidence  in  this  way  of 
inquiry.  If  the  public  were  interested  in  the  question, 
and  understood  its  nature,  and  if  everybody  who  had  an 
hallucination  at  once  recorded  it  in  black  and  white,  duly 
attested  on  oath  before  a  magistrate,  by  persons  to  whom 
he  reported,  before  the  coincidence  was  known,  and  if  all 
such  records,  coincidental  or  not,  were  kept  in  the  British 
Museum  for  fifty  years,  then  an  examination  of  them 
might  teach  us  something.  But  all  this  is  quite  impossi- 
ble. We  may  form  a  belief,  on  this  point  of  veridical 
hallucinations,  for  ourselves,  but  beyond  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  advance.  Still,  Science  might  read  her  brief !

352

APPENDIX   B

THE  POLTERGEIST  AND  HIS  EXPLAINERS.352

APPENDIX   B

THE  POLTERGEIST  AND  HIS  EXPLAINERS.

IN  the  chapter  on  'Fetishism  and  Spiritualism'  it  was 
suggested  that  the  movements  of  inanimate  objects, 
apparently  without  contact,  may  have  been  one  of  the 
causes  leading  to  fetishism,  to  the  opinion  that  a  spirit 
may  inhabit  a  stick,  stone,  or  what  not.  We  added  that, 
whether  such  movements  were  caused  by  trickery  or  not, 
was  inessential  as  long  as  the  savage  did  not  discover  the 
imposture.

The  evidence  for  the  genuine  supernormal  character 
of  such  phenomena  was  not  discussed,  that  we  might 
preserve  the  continuity  of  the  general  argument.  The 
history  of  such  phenomena  is  too  long  for  statement  here. 
The  same  reports  are  found  '  from  China  to  Peru/  from 
Eskimo  to  the  Cape,  from  Egyptian  magical  papyri  to 
yesterday's  provincial  newspaper.1

About  1850-1870  phenomena,  which  had  previously 
been  reported  as  of  sporadic  and  spontaneous  occurrence, 
were  domesticated  and  organised  by  Mediums,  generally 
American.  These  were  imitators  of  the  enigmatic  David 
Dunglas  Home,  who  was  certainly  a  most  oddly  gifted 
man,  or  a  most  successful  impostor.  A  good  deal  of 
scientific  attention  was  given  to  the  occurrences  ;  Mr. 
Darwin,  Mr.  Tyndall,  Dr.  Carpenter,  Mr.  Huxley,  had  all 
glanced  at  the  phenomena,  and  been  present  at  seances. 
In  most  cases  the  exhibitions,  in  the  dark,  or  in  a  very 
bad  light,  were  impudent  impostures,  and  were  so  re- 
garded by  the  savants  who  looked  into  them.  A  series  of 
exposures  culminated  in  the  recent  detection  of  Eusapia 
Paladino  by  Dr.  Hodgson  and  other  members  of  the 
S.P.E.  at  Cambridge.

1  A  sketch  of  the  history  will  be  found  in  the  author's  Cock  Lane  and 
Common  Sense.

APPENDIX  B  3531  A  sketch  of  the  history  will  be  found  in  the  author's  Cock  Lane  and 
Common  Sense.

APPENDIX  B  353

There  was,  however,  an  apparent  exception.  The 
arch  mystagogue,  Home,  though  by  no  means  a  clever 
man,  was  never  detected  in  fraudulent  productions  of 
fetishistic  phenomena.  This  is  asserted  here  because 
several  third-hand  stories  of  detected  frauds  by  Home 
are  in  circulation,  and  it  is  hoped  that  a  well-attested 
first-hand  case  of  detection  may  be  elicited.

Of  Home's  successes  with  Sir  William  Crookes,  Lord 
Crawford,  and  others,  something  remains  to  be  said ;  but 
first  we  shall  look  into  attempted  explanations  of  alleged 
physical  phenomena  occurring  not  in  the  presence  of  a 
paid  or  even  of  a  recognised  '  Medium.'  It  will  appear, 
we  think,  that  the  explanations  of  evidence  so  widely 
diffused,  so  uniform,  so  old,  and  so  new,  are  far  from 
satisfactory.  Our  inference  would  be  no  more  than  that 
our  eyes  should  be  kept  on  such  phenomena,  if  they  are 
reported  to  recur.

Mr.  Tylor  says,  '  I  am  well  aware  that  the  problem 
[of  these  phenomena]  is  one  to  be  discussed  on  its  merits, 
in  order  to  arrive  at  a  distinct  opinion  how  far  it  may 
be  connected  with  facts  insufficiently  appreciated  and 
explained  by  science,  and  how  far  with  superstition, 
delusion,  and  sheer  knavery.  Such  investigation,  pursued 
by  careful  observation  in  a  scientific  spirit,  would  seem 
apt  to  throw  light  on  some  interesting  psychological 
questions.'

Acting  on  Mr.  Tylor's  hint,  Mr.  Podmore  puts  forward 
as  explanations  (1)  fraud ;  (2)  hallucinations  caused  by 
excited  expectation,  and  by  the  Schwarmerei  consequent 
on  sitting  in  hushed  hope  of  marvels.To  take  fraud  first :  Mr.  Podmore  has  collected,  and 
analyses,  eleven  recent  sporadic  cases  of  volatile  objects.1 
His  first  instance  (Worksop,  1883)  yields  no  proof  of 
fraud,  and  can  only  be  dismissed  by  reason  of  the  bad 
character  of  the  other  cases,  and  because  Mr.  Podmore 
took  the  evidence  five  weeks  after  the  events.  To  this 
example  we  confine  ourselves.  This  case  appears  to  have 
been  first  reported  in  the  '  Ketford  and  Gainsborough 
Times  '  '  early  in  March,'  1883  (really  March  9).  It  does 
not  seem  to  have  struck  Mr.  Podmore  that  he  should 
publish  these  contemporary  reports,  to  show  us  how  far

1  The   best  source  is   his   article    on    '  Poltergeists.'      Proceedings   xi. 
45-116.     See,  too,  his  '  Poltergeists  '  in  Studies  in  Psychical  Research.

A   A

354  THE  MAKING   OF  RELIGIONA   A

354  THE  MAKING   OF  RELIGION

they  agree  with  evidence  collected  by  him  on  the  spot 
five  weeks  later.  To  do  this  was  the  more  necessary,  as 
he  lays  so  much  stress  on  failure  of  memory.  I  have 
therefore  secured  the  original  newspaper  report,  by  the 
courtesy  of  the  editor.  To  be  brief,  the  phenomena  began 
on  February  20  or  21,  by  the  table  voluntarily  tipping  up, 
and  upsetting  a  candle,  while  Mrs.  White  only  saved  the 
wash  tub  by  alacrity  and  address.  '  The  whole  incident 
struck  her  as  very  extraordinary.'  It  is  not  in  the  news- 
paper report.  On  February  26,  Mr.  White  left  his  home, 
and  a  girl,  Eliza  Hose,  '  child  of  a  half -imbecile  mother,' 
was  admitted  by  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  White  to  share  her 
bed.  The  girl  was  eighteen  years  of  age,  was  looking  for 
a  place  as  servant,  and  nothing  is  said  in  the  newspaper 
about  her  mother.  Mr.  White  returned  on  Wednesday 
night,  but  left  on  Thursday  morning,  returning  on  Friday 
afternoon.  On  Thursday,  in  Mr.  White's  absence,  phe- 
nomena set  in.  On  Thursday  night,  in  Mr.  White's 
presence,  they  increased  in  vigour.  A  doctor  was  called 
in,  also  a  policeman.  On  Saturday,  at  8  A.M.,  the  row 
recommenced.  At  4  P.M.  Mr.  White  sent  Eliza  Rose 
away,  and  peace  returned.  We  now  offer  the

STATEMENT  OF  POLICE  CONSTABLE  HIGGS.  A  man 
of  good  intelligence,  and  believed  to  be  entirely 
honest.  .  .  .STATEMENT  OF  POLICE  CONSTABLE  HIGGS.  A  man 
of  good  intelligence,  and  believed  to  be  entirely 
honest.  .  .  .

'  On  the  night  of  Friday,  March  2nd,  I  heard  of  the 
disturbances  at  Joe  White's  house  from  his  young  brother, 
Tom.  I  went  round  to  the  house  at  11.55  P.M.,  as  near 
as  I  can  judge,  and  found  Joe  White  in  the  kitchen  of 
his  house.  There  was  one  candle  lighted  in  the  room, 
and  a  good  fire  burning,  so  that  one  could  see  things 
pretty  clearly.  The  cupboard  doors  were  open,  and  White 
went  and  shut  them,  and  then  came  and  stood  against  the 
chest  of  drawers.  I  stood  near  the  outer  door.  No  one 
else  was  in  the  room  at  the  time.  White  had  hardly 
shut  the  cupboard  doors  when  they  flew  open,  and  a  large 
glass  jar  came  out  past  me,  and  pitched  in  the  yard  out- 
side, smashing  itself.  I  didn't  see  the  jar  leave  the  cup- 
board, or  fly  through  the  air ;  it  went  too  quick.  But  I 
am  quite  sure  that  it  wasn't  thrown  by  White  or  any  one 
else.  White  couldn't  have  done  it  without  my  seeing

APPENDIX   B  355

him.    The  jar  couldn't  go  in  a  straight  line  from  the  cup- 
board out  of  the  door  ;  but  it  certainly  did  go.

'  Then  "White  asked  me  to  come  and  see  the  things 
which  had  been  smashed  in  the  inner  room.  He  led  the 
way  and  I  followed.  As  I  passed  the  chest  of  drawers  in 
the  kitchen  I  noticed  a  tumbler  standing  on  it.  Just 
after  I  passed  I  heard  a  crash,  and  looking  round,  I  saw 
that  the  tumbler  had  fallen  on  the  ground  in  the  direction 
of  the  fireplace,  and  was  broken.  I  don't  know  how  it 
happened.  There  was  no  one  else  in  the  room.'  I  went  into  the  inner  room,  and  saw  the  bits  of 
pots  and  things  on  the  floor,  and  then  I  came  back  with 
White  into  the  kitchen.  The  girl  Eose  had  come  into 
the  kitchen  during  our  absence.  She  was  standing  with 
her  back  against  the  bin  near  the  fire.  There  was  a  cup 
standing  on  the  bin,  rather  nearer  the  door.  She  said 
to  me,  "  Cup'll  go  soon ;  it  has  been  down  three  times 
already."  She  then  pushed  it  a  little  farther  on  the  bin, 
and  turned  round  and  stood  talking  to  me  by  the  fire. 
She  had  hardly  done  so,  when  the  cup  jumped  up  suddenly 
about  four  or  five  feet  into  the  air,  and  then  fell  on  the 
floor  and  smashed  itself.  White  was  sitting  on  the  other 
side  of  the  fire.

'  Then  Mrs.  White  came  in  with  Dr.  Lloyd  ;  also 
Tom  White  and  Solomon  Wass.  After  they  had  been  in 
two  or  three  minutes,  something  else  happened.  Tom 
White  and  Wass  were  standing  with  their  backs  to  the 
fire,  just  in  front  of  it.  Eliza  Eose  and  Dr.  Lloyd  were 
near  them,  with  their  backs  turned  towards  the  bin, 
the  doctor  nearer  to  the  door.  I  stood  by  the  drawers, 
and  Mrs.  White  was  by  me  near  the  inner  door.  Then 
suddenly  a  basin,  which  stood  on  the  end  of  the  bin  near 
the  door,  got  up  into  the  air,  turning  over  and  over  as  it 
went.  It  went  up  not  very  quickly,  not  as  quickly  as  if 
it  had  been  thrown.  When  it  reached  the  ceiling  it  fell 
plump  and  smashed.  I  called  Dr.  Lloyd's  attention  to  it, 
and  we  all  saw  it.  No  one  was  near  it,  and  I  don't  know 
how  it  happened.  I  stayed  about  ten  minutes  more,  but 
saw  nothing  else.  I  don't  know  what  to  make  of  it  all. 
I  don't  think  White  or  the  girl  could  possibly  have  done 
the  things  which  I  saw.'This  statement  was  made  five  weeks  after  date  to  Mr. 
Podmore.  We  compare  it  with  the  intelligent  constable's

356  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

statement  made  between  March  3  and  March  8,  that  isr 
immediately  after  the  events,  and  reported  in  the  local 
paper  of  March  9.356  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

statement  made  between  March  3  and  March  8,  that  isr 
immediately  after  the  events,  and  reported  in  the  local 
paper  of  March  9.

STATEMENT  BY  POLICE  CONSTABLE  HIGGS. — During 
Friday  night,  Police  Constable  Higgs  visited  the  house, 
and  concerning  the  visit  he  makes  the  following  state- 
ment. '  About  ten  minutes  past  [to  ?]  twelve  on  Friday 
night,  I  was  met  in  Bridge  Street  by  Buck  Ford,  and 
Joe's  brother,  Tom  "White  and  Dr.  Lloyd.  Tom  said  to 
me,  "  Will  you  go  with  us  to  Joe's,  and  you  will  see  some- 
thing you  have  never  seen  before?  "  I  went ;  and  when 
I  got  into  the  house  Joe  went  and  shut  the  cupboard 
doors.  No  sooner  had  he  done  so  than  the  doors  flew 
open  again,  and  an  ordinary  sized  glass  jar  flew  across  the 
kitchen,  out  of  the  door  into  the  yard.  A  sugar  jar  also 
flew  out  of  the  cupboard  unseen.  In  fact,  we  saw  nothing 
and  heard  nothing  until  we  heard  it  smash.  The  distance 
travelled  by  the  articles  was  about  seven  yards.  I  stood 
a  minute  or  two,  and  then  the  glass  which  I  noticed  on 
the  drawers  jumped  off  the  drawers  a  yard  away,  and 
broke  in  about  a  hundred  bits.  The  next  thing  was  a 
cup,  which  stood  on  the  flour-bin  just  beyond  the  yard 
door.  It  flew  upwards,  and  then  fell  to  the  ground  and 
broke.  The  girl  said  that  this  cup  had  been  on  the  floor 
three  times,  and  that  she  had  picked  it  up  just  before  it 
went  off  the  bench.  I  said,  "  I  suppose  the  cup  will  be 
the  next."  The  cup  fell  a  distance  of  two  yards  away 
from  the  flour-bin.  Dr.  Lloyd  had  been  in  the  next  house 
lancing  the  back  of  a  little  boy  who  had  been  removed 
there.  He  now  came  in,  and  we  began  talking,  the 
doctor  saying,  "It  is  a  most  mysterious  thing."  He 
turned  with  his  back  to  the  flour-bin,  on  which  stood  a 
basin.  The  basin  flew  up  into  the  air  obliquely,  went 
over  the  doctor's  head,  and  fell  at  his  feet  in  pieces.  The 
doctor  then  went  out.  I  stood  a  short  time  longer,  but 
saw  nothing  further.  There  were  six  persons  in  the  room 
while  these  things  were  going  on,  and  so  far  as  I  could 
see,  there  was  no  human  agency  at  work.  I  had  not  the 
slightest  belief  in  anything  appertaining  to  the  super- 
natural. I  left  just  before  one  o'clock,  having  been  in  the 
house  thirty  minutes.'As  the   policeman    says,    there  was   nothing   '  super-

APPENDIX   B  357

natural/  but  there  was  an  appearance  of  something  rather 
supernormal.  On  the  afternoon  of  Saturday  White  sent 
the  girl  Eose  away,  and  a  number  of  people  watched 
in  his  house  till  after  midnight.  Though  the  sceptical 
reporter  thought  that  objects  were  placed  where  they 
might  easily  be  upset,  none  were  upset.  The  ghost  was 
laid.  '  Excited  expectation  '  was  so  false  to  its  function 
as  to  beget  no  phenomena.

The  newspaper  reports  contain  no  theory  that  will 
account  for  White's  breaking  his  furniture  and  crockery, 
nor  for  Eose's  securing  her  own  dismissal  from  a  house 
where  she  was  kindly  received  by  wilfully  destroying  the 
property  of  her  hostess.  An  amateur  published  a  theory 
of  silken  threads  attached  to  light  articles,  and  thick  cords 
to  heavy  articles,  whereof  no  trace  was  found  by  witnesses 
who  examined  the  volatile  objects.  An  elaborate  ma- 
chinery of  pulleys  fixed  in  the  ceiling,  the  presence  of 
a  trickster  in  a  locked  pantry,  apparent  errors  in  the 
account  of  the  flight  of  the  objects,  and  a  number  of 
accomplices,  were  all  involved  in  this  local  explanation, 
the  explainer  admitting  that  he  could  not  imagine  why 
the  tricks  were  played.  Six  or  eight  pounds'  worth  of 
goods  were  destroyed,  nor  is  it  singular  that  poor  Mrs. 
White  wept  over  her  shattered  penates.

The  destruction  began,  of  course,  in  the  absence  of 
White.  The  girl  Eose  gave  to  the  newspaper  the  same 
account  as  the  other  witnesses,  but,  as  White  thought 
she  was  the  agent,  so  she  suspected  White,  though  she 
admitted  that  he  was  not  at  home  when  the  trouble 
arose.Mr.  Podmore,  reviewing  the  case,  says,  '  The  pheno- 
mena described  are  quite  inexplicable  by  ordinary  mecha- 
nical means.'1  Yet  he  elsewhere2  suggests  that  Eose 
herself,  '  as  the  instrument  of  mysterious  agencies,  or 
simply  as  a  half-witted  girl,  gifted  with  abnormal  cunning 
and  love  of  mischief,  may  have  been  directly  responsible 
for  all  that  took  place.'  That  is  to  say,  a  half-witted  girl 
could  do  (barring  '  mysterious  agencies  ')  '  what  is  quite 
inexplicable  by  ordinary  mechanical  means,'  while,  accord- 
ing to  the  policeman,  she  was  not  even  present  on  some 
occasions.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  make  out,  in  the  evidence

1  Studies  in  Psychical  Hi-search,  p.  140. 
-  Proceedings,  S.P.B.,  part  xxx.

358  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  Studies  in  Psychical  Hi-search,  p.  140. 
-  Proceedings,  S.P.B.,  part  xxx.

358  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

of  White,  the  other  witness,  whether  this  girl  Eose  was 
present  or  not  when  the  jar  flew  circuitously  out  of  the 
cupboard,  a  thing  easily  worked  by  a  half-witted  girl. 
Such  discrepancies  are  common  in  all  evidence  to  the  most 
ordinary  events.  In  any  case  a  half-witted  girl,  in  Mr. 
Podmore's  theory,  can  do  what  'is  quite  inexplicable  by 
ordinary  mechanical  means.'  There  is  not  the  shadow  of 
evidence  that  the  girl  Eose  had  the  inestimable  advantage 
of  being  '  half-witted  ; '  she  is  described  by  Mr.  Podmore 
as  'the  child  of  an  imbecile  mother.'  The  phenomena 
began,  in  an  isolated  case  (the  tilted  table),  before  Eose 
entered  the  house.  She  was  admitted  in  kindness,  acted 
as  a  maid,  and  her  interest  was  not  to  break  the  crockery 
and  upset  furniture.  The  troubles,  which  began  before  the 
girl's  arrival,  were  apparently  active  when  she  was  not 
present,  and,  if  she  was  present,  she  could  not  have  caused 
them  '  by  ordinary  mechanical  means,'  while  of  extraordi- 
nary mechanical  means  there  was  confessedly  no  trace. 
The  disturbances  ceased  after  she  was  dismissed — nothing 
else  connects  her  with  them.Mr.  Podmore's  attempt  at  a  normal  explanation  by 
fraud,  therefore,  is  of  no  weight.  He  has  to  exaggerate 
the  value,  as  disproof,  of  such  discrepancies  as  occur  in 
all  human  evidence  on  all  subjects.  He  has  to  lay  stress 
on  the  interval  of  five  weeks  between  the  events  and  the 
collection  of  testimony  by  himself.  But  contemporary 
accounts  appeared  in  the  local  newspapers,  and  he  does 
not  compare  the  contemporary  with  the  later  evidence,  as 
we  have  done.  There  is  one  discrepancy  which  looks  as 
if  a  witness,  not  here  cited,  came  to  think  he  had  seen 
what  he  heard  talked  about.  Finally,  after  abandoning  the 
idea  that  mechanical  means  can  possibly  have  produced 
the  effect,  Mr.  Podmore  falls  back  on  the  cunning  of  a  half- 
witted girl  whom  nothing  shows  to  have  been  half-witted. 
The  alternative  is  that  the  girl  was  '  the  instrument  of 
mysterious  agencies.'

So  much  for  the  hypothesis  of  a  fraud,  which  has  been 
identical  in  results  from  China  to  Peru  and  from  Green- 
land to  the  Cape.

We  now  turn  to  the  other,  and  concomitantly  active 
cause,  in  Mr.  Podmore's  theory,  hallucination.  '  Many 
of  the  witnesses  described  the  articles  as  moving  slowly 
through  the  air,  or  exhibiting  some  peculiarity  of  flight.'

APPENDIX   B  359

(See  e.g.  the  Worksop  case.)  Mr.  Podmore  adds  another 
English  case,  presently  to  be  noted,  and  a  German  one. 
'  In  default  of  any  experimental  evidence  '  (how  about  Mr. 
William  Crookes's  ?)  '  that  disturbances  of  this  kind  are 
ever  due  to  abnormal  agency,  I  am  disposed  to  explain 
the  appearance  of  moving  slowly  or  flying  as  a  sensory 
illusion,  conditioned  by  the  excited  state  of  the  percipient.' 
C  Studies,'  157,  158.)Before  criticising  this  explanation,  let  us  give  the 
English  affair,  alluded  to  by  Mr.  Podmore.

The  most  curious  modern  case  known  to  me  is  not  of 
recent  date,  but  it  occurred  in  full  daylight,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  many  witnesses,  and  the  phenomena  continued 
for  weeks.  The  events  were  of  1849,  and  the  record  is 
expanded,  by  Mr.  Bristow,  a  spectator,  from  an  account 
written  by  him  in  1854.  The  scene  was  Swanland,  near 
Hull,  in  a  carpenter's  shop,  where  Mr.  Bristow  was  em- 
ployed with  two  fellow  workmen.  To  be  brief,  they  were 
pelted  by  odds  and  ends  of  wood,  about  the  size  of  a 
common  matchbox.  Each  blamed  the  others,  till  this 
explanation  became  untenable.  The  workrooms  and  space 
above  were  searched  to  no  purpose.  The  bits  of  wood 
sometimes  danced  along  the  floor,  more  commonly  sailed 
gently  along,  or  "  moved  as  if  borne  on  gently  heaving 
waves."  This  sort  of  thing  was  repeated  during  six 
weeks.  One  piece  of  wood  "  came  from  a  distant  corner 
of  the  room  towards  me,  describing  what  may  be  likened 
to  a  geometrical  square,  or  corkscrew  of  about  eighteen 
inches  diameter.  .  .  .  Never  was  a  piece  seen  to  come  in 
at  the  doorway."  Mr.  Bristow  deems  this  period  'the 
most  remarkable  episode  in  my  life.'  (June  27,  1891.) 
The  phenomena  '  did  not  depend  on  the  presence  of  any 
one  person  or  number  of  persons.'Going  to  Swanland,  in  1891,  Mr.  Sidgwick  found  one 
surviving  witness  of  these  occurrences,  who  averred  that 
the  objects  could  not  have  been  thrown  because  of  the 
eccentricities  of  their  course,  which  he  described  in  the 
same  way  as  Mr.  Bristow.  The  thrower  must  certainly 
have  had  a  native  genius  for  '  pitching  '  at  base-ball.  This 
witness,  named  Andrews,  was  mentioned  by  Mr.  Bristow 
in  his  report,  but  not  referred  to  by  him  for  confirmation. 
Those  to  whom  he  referred  were  found  to  be  dead,  or 
had  emigrated.  The  villagers  had  a  superstitious  theory

360  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

about  the  phenomena  being  provoked  by  a  dead  man, 
whose  affairs  had  not  been  settled  to  his  liking.  So  Mr. 
Darwin's  spoon  danced — on  a  grave.1about  the  phenomena  being  provoked  by  a  dead  man, 
whose  affairs  had  not  been  settled  to  his  liking.  So  Mr. 
Darwin's  spoon  danced — on  a  grave.1

This  case  has  a  certain  interest  a  propos  of  Mr. 
Podmore's  surmise  that  all  such  phenomena  arise  in 
trickery,  which  produces  excitement  in  the  spectators, 
while  excitement  begets  hallucination,  and  hallucination 
takes  the  form  of  seeing  the  thrown  objects  move  in  a 
non-natural  way.  Thus,  I  keep  throwing  things  about. 
You,  not  detecting  this  stratagem,  get  excited,  consequently 
hallucinated,  and  you  believe  you  see  the  things  move  in 
spirals,  or  undulate  as  if  on  waves,  or  hop,  or  float,  or 
glide  in  an  impossible  way.  So  close  is  the  uniformity 
of  hallucination  that  these  phenomena  are  described, 
in  similar  terms,  by  witnesses  (hallucinated,  of  course) 
in  times  old  and  new,  as  in  cases  cited  by  Glanvil, 
Increase  Mather,  Telfer  (of  Berrick),  and,  generally,  in 
works  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Nor  is  this  uniform 
hallucination  confined  to  England.  Mr.  Podmore  quotes 
a  German  example,  and  I  received  a  similar  testimony  (to 
the  flight  of  an  object  round  a  corner)  from  a  gentleman 
who  employed  Esther  Teed, '  the  Amherst  Mystery,'  in  his 
service.  He  was  not  excited,  for  he  was  normally  engaged 
in  his  normal  stable,  when  the  incident  occurred  unex- 
pectedly as  he  was  looking  after  his  live  stock.  One  may 
add  the  case  of  Cideville  (1851)  and  Sir  W.  Crookes's 
evidence,  and  that  of  Mr.  Schhapoff.Mr.  Podmore  must,  therefore,  suppose  that,  in  states 
of  excitement,  the  same  peculiar  form  of  hallucination 
develops  itself  uniformly  in  America,  France,  Germany, 
and  England  (not  to  speak  of  Russia),  and  persists  through 
different  ages.  This  is  a  novel  and  valuable  psychological 
law.  Moreover,  Mr.  Podmore  must  hold  that  '  excite- 
ment '  lasted  for  six  weeks  among  the  carpenters  in  the 
shop  at  Swanland,  one  of  whom  writes  like  a  man  of  much 
intelligence,  and  has  thriven  to  be  a  master  in  his  craft. 
It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  he  was  excited  for  six  weeks, 
and  we  still  marvel  that  excitement  produces  the  same 
uniformity  of  hallucination,  affecting  policemen,  car- 
penters, marquises,  and  a  F.R.S.  We  allude  to  Sir  W. 
Crookes's  case.

Strictly  scientific  examination  of  these  prodigies  has

1  Proceeditigs,  S.P.R.  vii.  383-394.

APPENDIX   B  361Strictly  scientific  examination  of  these  prodigies  has

1  Proceeditigs,  S.P.R.  vii.  383-394.

APPENDIX   B  361

been  very  rare.  The  best  examples  are  the  experiments 
of  Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  with  Home.1  He  de- 
monstrated, by  means  of  a  machine  constructed  for  the 
purpose,  and  automatically  registering,  that,  in  Home's 
presence,  a  balance  was  affected  to  the  extent  of  two 
pounds  when  Home  was  not  in  contact  with  the  table  on 
which  the  machine  was  placed.  He  also  saw  objects  float 
in  air,  with  a  motion  like  that  of  a  piece  of  wood  on  small 
waves  of  the  sea  (clearly  excitement  producing  hallucina- 
tion), while  Home  was  at  a  distance,  other  spectators 
holding  his  hands,  and  his  feet  being  visibly  enclosed  in  a 
kind  of  cage.  All  present  held  each  other's  hands,  and  all 
witnessed  the  phenomena.  Sir  W.  Crookes  being,  pro- 
fessionally, celebrated  for  the  accuracy  of  his  observations, 
these  circumstances  are  difficult  to  explain,  and  these 
are  but  a  few  cases  among  multitudes.

I  venture  to  conceive  that,  on  reflection,  Mr.  Podmore 
will  doubt  whether  he  has  discovered  an  universal  law  of 
excited  mal-perception,  or  whether  the  remarkable,  and 
certainly  undesigned,  coincidence  of  testimony  to  the 
singular  flight  of  objects  does  not  rather  point  to  an 
4  abnormal  agency  '  uniform  in  its  effects.  Contagious 
hallucination  cannot  affect  witnesses  ignorant  of  each 
other's  existence  in  many  lands  and  ages,  nor  could  they 
cook  their  reports  to  suit  reports  of  which  they  never  heard.We  now  turn  to  peculiarities  in  the  so-called  Medium, 
such  as  floating  in  air,  change  of  bulk,  and  escape  from 
lesion  when  handling  or  treading  in  fire.  Mr.  Tylor  says 
nothing  of  Sir  William  Crookes's  cases  (1871),  but  speaks 
of  the  alleged  levitation,  or  floating  in  air,  of  savages  and 
civilised  men.  These  are  recorded  in  Buddhist  and  Neo- 
platonic  writings,  and  among  Red  Indians,  in  Tonquin 
(where  a  Jesuit  saw  and  described  the  phenomena,  1730), 
in  the  '  Acta  Sanctorum,'  and  among  modern  spiritualists. 
In  1760,  Lord  Elcho,  being  at  Eome,  was  present  at  the 
proces  for  canonising  a  Saint  (unnamed),  and  heard 
witnesses  swear  to  having  seen  the  holy  man  levitated. 
Sir  W.  Crookes  attests  having  seen  Home  float  in  air  on 
several  occasions.  In  1871,  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  now 
Lord  Crawford  and  Balcarres,  F.R.S.,  gave  the  follow- 
ing evidence,  which  was  corroborated  by  the  two  other 
spectators,  Lord  Adare  and  Captain  Wynne.

1  See  Sir  W.  Crookes's  RescarcJics  in  Spiritualism.

362  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION1  See  Sir  W.  Crookes's  RescarcJics  in  Spiritualism.

362  THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION

'  I  was  sitting  with  Mr.  Home  and  Lord  Adare  and  a 
cousin  of  his.  During  the  sitting,  Mr.  Home  went  into 
a  trance,  and  in  that  state  was  carried  out  of  the  window 
in  the  room  next  to  where  we  were,  and  was  brought  in 
at  our  window.  The  distance  between  the  windows  was 
about  seven  feet  six  inches,  and  there  was  not  the  slightest 
foothold  between  them,  nor  was  there  more  than  a  twelve- 
inch  projection  to  each  window,  which  served  as  a  ledge 
to  put  flowers  on.  We  heard  the  window  in  the  next 
room  lifted  up,  and  almost  immediately  after  we  saw 
Home  floating  in  the  air  outside  our  window.  The  moon 
was  shining  full  into  the  room ;  my  back  was  to  the  light, 
and  I  saw  the  shadow  on  the  wall  of  the  window  sill,  and 
Home's  feet  about  six  inches  above  it.  He  remained  in 
this  position  for  a  few  seconds,  then  raised  the  window 
and  glided  into  the  room  feet  foremost  and  sat  down.

'  Lord  Adare  then  went  into  the  next  room  to  look 
at  the  window  from  which  he  had  been  carried.  It  was 
raised  about  eighteen  inches,  and  he  expressed  his  wonder 
how  Mr.  Home  had  been  taken  through  so  narrow  an 
aperture.  Home  said,  still  entranced,  "I  will  show  you," 
and  then  with  his  back  to  the  window  he  leaned  back  and 
was  shot  out  of  the  aperture,  head  first,  with  the  body 
rigid,  and  then  returned  quite  quietly.  The  window  is 
about  seventy  feet  from  the  ground.'  The  hypothesis  of 
a  mechanical  arrangement  of  ropes  or  supports  outside 
has  been  suggested,  but  does  not  cover  the  facts  as 
described.Mr.  Podmore,  who  quotes  this,  offers  the  explanation 
that  the  witnesses  were  excited,  and  that  Home  '  thrust 
his  head  and  shoulders  out  of  the  window.'  But,  if  he 
did,  they  could  not  see  him  do  it,  for  he  was  in  the  next 
room.  A  brick  wall  was  between  them  and  him.  Their 
first  view  of  Home  was  '  floating  in  the  air  outside  our 
window.'  It  is  not  very  easy  to  hold  that  a  belief  to 
which  the  collective  evidence  is  so  large  and  universal, 
as  the  belief  in  levitation,  was  caused  by  a  series  of  saints, 
sorcerers,  and  others  thrusting  their  heads  and  shoulders 
out  of  windows  where  the  observers  could  not  see  them. 
Nor  in  Lord  Crawford's  case  is  it  easy  to  suppose  that 
three  educated  men,  if  hallucinated,  would  all  be  halluci- 
nated in  the  same  way.

The  argument  of  excited  expectation  and  consequent

APPENDIX  B  363

hallucination  does  not  apply  to  Mr.  Hamilton  Aide  and 
M.  Alphonse  Karr,  neither  of  whom  was  a  man  of  science. 
Both  were  extremely  prejudiced  against  Home,  and  at 
Nice  went  to  see,  and,  if  possible,  to  expose  him.  Home 
was  a  guest  at  a  large  villa  in  Nice,  M.  Karr  and  Mr. 
Aide  were  two  of  a  party  in  a  spacious  brilliantly  lighted 
salon,  where  Home  received  them.  A  large  heavy  table, 
remote  from  their  group,  moved  towards  them.  M.  Karr 
then  got  under  a  table  which  rose  in  air,  and  carefully 
examined  the  space  beneath,  while  Mr.  Aide  observed  it 
from  above.  Neither  of  them  could  discover  any  explana- 
tion of  the  phenomenon,  and  they  walked  away  together, 
disgusted,  disappointed,  and  reviling  Home.1In  this  case  there  was  neither  excitement  nor  desire 
to  believe,  but  a  strong  wish  to  disbelieve  and  to  expose 
Home.  If  two  such  witnesses  could  be  hallucinated, 
we  must  greatly  extend  our  notion  of  the  limits  of  the 
capacity  for  entertaining  hallucinations.

One  singular  phenomenon  was  reported  in  Home's 
case,  which  has,  however,  little  to  do  with  any  con- 
ceivable theory  of  spirits.  He  was  said  to  become 
elongated  in  trance.2  Mr.  Podmore  explains  that  'per- 
haps he  really  stretched  himself  to  his  full  height ' — one 
of  the  easiest  ways  conceivable  of  working  a  miracle, 
lamblichus  reports  the  same  phenomenon  in  his  possessed 
men.3  lamblichus  adds  that  they  were  sometimes 
broadened  as  well  as  lengthened.  Now,  M.  Fere  observes 
that  '  any  part  of  the  body  of  an  hysterical  patient  may 
change  in  volume,  simply  owing  to  the  fact  that  the 
patient's  attention  is  fixed  on  that  part.' 4  Conceivably 
the  elongation  of  Home  and  the  ancient  Egyptian 
mediums  may  have  been  an  extreme  case  of  this  '  change 
of  volume.'  Could  this  be  proved  by  examples,  Home's 
elongation  would  cease  to  be  a  '  miracle.'  But  it  would 
follow  that  in  this  case  observers  were  not  hallucinated, 
and  the  presumption  would  be  raised  that  they  were  not 
hallucinated  in  the  other  cases.  Indeed,  this  argument  is 
of  universal  application.

1  Mr.4  Aide  has  given  me  this  information.     Ho  recorded  the  circum- 
stances in  his  Diary  at  the  time.

2  Report  of  Dialectical  Society,  p.  209.

3  See  Porphyry,  in  Panthey's  edition  (Berlin,  1857),  iii.  4.

4  Bulletin  de  la  Societt  tie  Biologic,  1880,  p.  399.

364  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION3  See  Porphyry,  in  Panthey's  edition  (Berlin,  1857),  iii.  4.

4  Bulletin  de  la  Societt  tie  Biologic,  1880,  p.  399.

364  THE   MAKING   OF  KELIGION

There  is  another  class  of  '  physical  phenomena,'  which 
has  no  direct  bearing  on  our  subject.  Many  persons,  in 
many  ages,  are  said  to  have  handled  or  walked  through 
fire,  not  only  without  suffering  pain,  but  without  lesion 
of  the  skin.  lamblichus  mentions  this  as  among  the 
peculiarities  of  his  '  possessed '  men ;  and  in  '  Modern 
Mythology  '  (1897)  I  have  collected  first-hand  evidence 
for  the  feat  in  classical  times,  and  in  India,  Fiji,  Bulgaria, 
Trinidad,  the  Straits  Settlements,  and  many  other  places. 
The  evidence  is  that  of  travellers,  officials,  missionaries, 
and  others,  and  is  backed  (for  what  photographic  testi- 
mony is  worth)  by  photographs  of  the  performance.  To 
hold  glowing  coals  in  his  hand,  and  to  communicate  the 
power  of  doing  so  to  others,  was  in  Home's  repertoire. 
Lord  Crawford  saw  it  done  on  eight  occasions,  and 
himself  received  from  Home's  hand  the  glowing  coal 
unharmed.  A  friend  of  my  own,  however,  still  bears  the 
blister  of  the  hurt  received  in  the  process.  Sir  W. 
•Crookes's  evidence  follows :

'  At  Mr.  Home's   request,  whilst   he  was  entranced 
I  went  with  him  to  the  fireplace  in  the  back  drawing- 
room.     He  said,  "  We  want  you  to  notice  particularly 
what  Dan  is  doing."     Accordingly  I  stood  close  to  the 
fire,  and  stooped  down  to  it  when  he  put  his  hands  in.'  Mr.  Home  then  waved  the  handkerchief  about  in  the 
air  two  or  three  times,  held  it  above  his  head,  and  then 
folded  it  up  and  laid  it  on  his  hand  like  a  cushion. 
Putting  his  other  hand  into  the  fire,  he  took  out  a  large 
lump  of  cinder,  red-hot  at  the  lower  part,  and  placed  the 
red  part  on  the  handkerchief.  Under  ordinary  circum- 
stances it  would  have  been  in  a  blaze.  In  about  half  a 
minute  he  took  it  off  the  handkerchief  with  his  hand, 
saying,  "As  the  power  is  not  strong,  if  we  leave  the  coal 
longer  it  will  burn."  He  then  put  it  on  his  hand,  and 
brought  it  to  the  table  in  the  front  room,  where  all  but 
myself  had  remained  seated.'

Mr.  Podmore  explains  that  only  two  candles  and  the 
fire  gave  light  on  one  occasion,  and  that  'possibly'  Home's 
hands  were  protected  by  some  '  non-conducting  substance.' 
He  does  not  explain  how  this  substance  was  put  on  Lord 
Crawford's  hands,  nor  tell  us  what  this  valuable  substance 
may  be.  None  is  known  to  science,  though  it  seems  to

APPENDIX   B  365

be  known  to  Fijians,  Tongans,  Klings,  and  Bulgarians, 
who  walk  through  fire  unhurt.

It  is  not  necessary  to  believe  Sir  W.  Crookes's  asser- 
tions that  he  saw  Home  perform  the  fire-tricks,  for  we 
can  fall  back  on  the  lack  of  light  (only  two  candles  and 
the  fire-light),  as  also  on  the  law  of  hallucination  caused 
by  excitement.  But  it  is  necessary  to  believe  this  dis- 
tinguished authority's  statement  about  his  ignorance  of 
'  some  non-conducting  substance  :  ''  Schoolboys'  books  and  mediaeval  tales  describe  how 
this  can  be  done  with  alum  and  other  ingredients.  It  is 
possible  that  the  skin  may  be  so  hardened  and  thickened 
by  such  preparations  that  superficial  charring  might  take 
place  without  the  pain  becoming  great ;  but  the  surface 
of  the  skin  would  certainly  suffer  severely.  After  Home 
had  recovered  from  the  trance,  I  examined  his  hand  with 
care  to  see  if  there  wero  any  signs  of  burning  or  of 
previous  preparation.  I  could  detect  no  trace  of  injury 
to  the  skin,  which  was  soft  and  delicate,  like  a  woman's. 
Neither  were  there  signs  of  any  preparation  having  been 
previously  applied.  I  have  often  seen  conjurers  and  others 
handle  red-hot  coals  and  iron,  but  there  were  always 
palpable  signs  of  burning.' lIn  September  1897  a  crew  of  passengers  went  from 
New  Zealand  to  see  the  Fijian  rites,  which,  as  reported  in 
the  'Fiji  Times/  corresponded  exactly  with  the  descrip- 
tion published  by  Mr.  Basil  Thompson,  himself  a  witness. 
The  interesting  point,  historically,  is  the  combination  in 
Home  of  all  the  repertoire  of  the  possessed  men  in 
lamblichus.  We  certainly  cannot  get  rid  of  the  fire-trick 
by  aid  of  a  hypothetical  'non-conducting  substance.'  Till 
the  '  substance '  is  tested  experimentally  it  is  not  a  vera 
causa.  We  might  as  well  say  '  spirits  '  at  once.  Both 
that  '  substance  '  and  those  '  spirits  '  are  equally  '  in  the 
air.'  Yet  Mr.  Podmore's  'explanations  '  (not  satisfactory 
to  himself)  are  conceived  so  thoroughly  in  the  spirit  of 
popular  science — one  of  them  casually  discovering  a  new 
psychological  law,  a  second  contradicting  the  facts  it 
seeks  to  account  for,  a  third  generously  inventing  an 
unknown  substance — that  they  ought  to  be  welcomed 
by  reviewers  and  lecturers.

1  Crookes,  Proceedings,  ix.  308.

366  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

It  seems  wiser  to  admit  our  ignorance  and  suspend 
our  belief.

Here  closes  the  futile  chapter  of  explanations.  Fraud 
is  a  vera  causa,  but  an  hypothesis  difficult  of  application 
when  it  is  admitted  that  the  effects  could  not  be  caused 
by  ordinary  mechanical  means.  Hallucination,  through 
excitement,  is  a  vera  causa,  but  its  remarkable  uniformity, 
as  described  by  witnesses  from  different  lands  and  ages, 
knowing  nothing  of  each  other,  makes  us  hesitate  to 
accept  a  sweeping  hypothesis  of  hallucination.  The  case 
for  it  is  not  confirmed,  when  we  have  the  same  reports 
from  witnesses  certainly  not  excited.This  extraordinary  bundle,  then,  of  reports,  practically 
identical,  of  facts  paralysing  to  belief,  this  bundle  made 
up  of  statements  from  so  many  ages  and  countries,  can 
only  be  '  filed  for  reference.'  But  it  is  manifest  that  any 
savage  who  shared  the  experiences  of  Sir  W.  Crookes, 
Lord  Crawford,  Mr.  Hamilton  Ai'de,  M.  Kobert  de  St. 
Victor  at  Cideville,  and  Policeman  Higgs  at  Worksop, 
would  believe  that  a  spirit  might  tenant  a  stick  or  stone — 
so  believing  he  would  be  a  Fetishist.  Thus  even  of 
Fetishism  the  probable  origin  is  in  a  region  of  which  we 
know  nothing — the  x  region.

367

APPENDIX   C

CRYSTAL-GAZING

SINCE  the  chapter  on  crystal-gazing  was  in  type,  a  work 
by  Dr.  Pierre  Janet  has  appeared,  styled  '  Les  Nevroses 
et  les  Idees  Fixes.' '  It  contains  a  chapter  on  crystal- 
gazing.  The  opinion  of  Dr.  Janet,  as  that  of  a  savant 
familiar,  at  the  Salpetriere,  with  '  neurotic  '  visionaries, 
cannot  but  be  interesting.  Unluckily,  the  essay  must  be 
regarded  as  seriously  impaired  in  value  by  Dr.  Janet's 
singular  treatment  of  his  subject.  Nothing  is  more  ne- 
cessary in  these  researches  than  accuracy  of  statement. 
Now,  Dr.  Janet  has  taken  a  set  of  experiences,  or 
experiments,  of  Miss  X/s  from  that  lady's  interesting 
essay,  already  cited ;  has  attributed  them,  not  to  Miss  X., 
but  to  various  people — for  example,  to  une  jeune  fille, 
une  pauvre  voyante,  une  personne  un  pen  mystique  ;  has 
altered  the  facts  in  the  spirit  of  romance ;  and  has 
triumphantly  given  that  explanation,  revival  of  memory, 
which  was  assigned  by  Miss  X.  herself.Throughout  his  paper  Dr.  Janet  appears  as  the  calm 
man  of  science  pronouncing  judgment  on  the  visionary 
vagaries  of  '  haunted  '  young  girls  and  disappointed 
seeresses.  No  such  persons  were  concerned ;  no  such 
hauntings,  supposed  premonitions,  or  '  disillusions '  oc- 
curred ;  the  romantic  and  '  marvellous  '  circumstances  are 
rnythopoeic  accretions  due  to  Dr.  Janet's  own  memory  or 
fancy ;  his  scientific  explanation  is  that  given  by  his 
trinity  of  jeune  fille,  pauvre  voyantc,  and  personne  un  pen 
mystique.

Being  much  engaged  in  the  study  of  '  neurotic  '  and

hysterical  patients,  Dr.  Janet  thinks  that  they  are  most

apt  to  see  crystal  visions.     Perhaps  they  are  ;   and  one

doubts  if  their  descriptions  are  more  to  be  trusted  than

1  Alcan,  Paris,  1898.

368  THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

the  romantic  essay  of  their  medical  attendant.  In  citing 
Miss  X.'s  paper  (as  he  did),  Dr.  Janet  ought  to  have 
reported  her  experiments  correctly,  ought  to  have  attri- 
buted them  to  herself,  and  should,  decidedly,  have  re- 
marked that  the  explanation  he  offered  was  her  own 
hypothesis,  verified  by  her  own  exertions.Not  having  any  acquaintances  in  neurotic  circles,  I 
am  unable  to  say  whether  such  persons  supply  more 
cases  of  the  faculty  of  crystal  vision  than  ordinary  people ; 
while  their  word,  one  would  think,  is  much  less  to  be 
trusted  than  that  of  men  and  women  in  excellent  health. 
The  crystal  visions  which  I  have  cited  from  my  own 
knowledge  (and  I  could  cite  scores  of  others)  were  beheld 
by  men  and  women  engaged  in  the  ordinary  duties  of  life. 
Students,  barristers,  novelists,  lawyers,  school-masters, 
school-mistresses,  golfers — to  all  of  whom  the  topic  was 
perfectly  new — have  all  exhibited  the  faculty.  It  is 
curious  that  an  Arabian  author  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
Ibn  Khaldoun,  cited  by  M.  Lefebure,  offers  the  same 
account  of  how  the  visions  appear  as  that  given  by  Miss 
Angus  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  April  1898.  M. 
Lefebure's  citation  was  sent  to  me  in  a  letter.

I  append  M.  Lefebure's  quotation  from  Ibn  Khaldoun. 
The  original  is  translated  in  '  Notices  et  Extraits  des 
MSS.  de  la  Bibliotheque  Imperiale,'  I.  xix.  p.  643-645.

'  Ibn  Kaldoun  admet  que  certains  homines  ont  la  faculte 
de  deviner  1'avenir.'  Ibn  Kaldoun  admet  que  certains  homines  ont  la  faculte 
de  deviner  1'avenir.

' "  Ceux,  ajoute-t-il,  qui  regardent  dans  les  corps 
diaphanes,  tels  que  les  miroirs,  les  cuvettes  remplies  d'eau 
et  les  liquides ;  ceux  qui  inspectent  les  coeurs,  les  foies  et 
les  os  des  animaux,  ....  tous  ces  gens-la  appartiennent 
aussi  a  la  sategorie  des  devins,  mais,  a  cause  de  1'imperfec- 
tion  de  leur  nature,  ils  y  occupent  un  rang  inf  erieur.  Pour 
ecarter  le  voile  des  sens,  le  vrai  devin  n'a  pas  besoin  de 
grands  efforts  ;  quant  aux  autres,  ils  tachent  d'arriver  au 
but  en  essayant  de  concentrer  en  un  seul  sens  toutes  leurs 
perceptions.  Comme  la  vue  est  le  sens  le  plus  noble,  ils 
lui  donnent  la  preference  ;  fixant  leur  regard  sur  un  objet 
a  superficie  unie,  ils  le  considerent  avec  attention  jusqu'a 
ce  qu'ils  y  aper£oivent  la  chose  qu'ils  veulent  annoncer. 
Quelques  personnes  croient  que  1'image  apergue  de  cette 
maniere  se  dessine  sur  la  surface  du  miroir ;  mais  ils 
se  trompent.  Le  devin  regarde  fixement  cette  surface

369369

jusqu'a  ce  qu'elle  disparaisse  et  qu'un  rideau,  semblable 
a  un  brouillard,  s'interpose  entre  lui  et  le  miroir.  Sur 
ce  rideau  se  dessinent  les  choses  qu'il  desire  aper- 
cevoir,  et  cela  lui  permet  de  donner  des  indications 
soit  affirmatives,  soit  negatives,  sur  ce  que  Ton  desire 
savoir.  II  raconte  alors  les  perceptions  telles  qu'il  les 
re9oit.  Les  devins,  pendant  qu'ils  sont  dans  cet 
etat,  n'aper9oivent  pas  ce  qui  se  voit  reellement  dans  le 
miroir ;  c'est  un  autre  mode  de  perception  qui  nait  chez 
eux  et  qui  s'opere,  non  pas  au  moyen  de  la  vue,  mais  de 
1'ame.  II  est  vrai  que,  pour  eux,  les  perceptions  de  I'dme 
ressemblent  a  celles  des  sens  au  point  de  les  tromper  ; 
fait  qui,  du  reste,  est  bien  connu.  La  meme  chose 
arrive  a  ceux  qui  examinent  les  coeurs  et  les  foies 
d'animaux.  Nous  avons  vu  quelques-uns  de  ces  individus 
entraver  I' operation  des  sens  par  1'emploi  de  simples  fumi- 
gations, puis  se  servir  d' 'incantations1  afin  de  donner  a 
1'ame  la  disposition  requise  ;  ensuite  ils  racontent  ce  qu'ils 
ont  aper9u.  Ces  formes,  disent-ils,  se  rnontrent  dans  Fair 
et  representent  des  personnages :  elles  leur  apprennent, 
aft  moyen  d'emblemes  et  de  signes,  les  choses  qu'ils 
cherchent  a  savoir.  Les  individus  de  cette  classe  se 
detachent  moins  de  1'innuence  des  sens  que  ceux  de  la 
classe  precedente.

1  L'auteur  arabe  avait  deja  mentionne  (p.  209)  1'emploi  des  incantations 
et  indique  qu'elles  etaient  un  simple  adjuvant  physique  destine  a  donner  a 
certains  hommes  une  exaltation  dont  ils  se  servaient  pour  tacher  de 
decouvrir  1'avenir.'  Pour  arriver  au  plus  haut  degre  d'inspiration  dont  il  est  capable,  le 
devin  doit  avoir  recours  a  1'emploi  de  certaines  phrases  qui  se  distinguent 
par  une  cadence  et  un  parallelisms  particuliers.  II  essaye  ce  moyen  ajin  dc 
soustraire  son  dme  aux  influences  des  sens  et  de  lui  donner  assez  de  force 
pour  se  mettre  dans  un  contact  imparfait  avec  le  monde  spirituel."  Cette 
agitation  d'esprit,  jointe  a  1'emploi  des  moyens  intrinseques  dont  nous  avons 
paiie,  excite  dans  son  cceur  des  idees  que  cet  organe  exprime  par  le 
ministere  de  la  langue.  Les  paroles  qu'il  prononce  sont  tantot  vraies,  tantot 
iausses.  En  effet,  le  devin,  voulant  supplier  a  1'imperfection  de  son  naturel, 
se  sert  de  moyens  tout  a  fait  etrangers  a  sa  faculte  perceptive  et  qui  ne 
s'accordent  en  aucune  facon  avec  elle.  Done  la  verite  et  1'erreur  se 
presentent  a  lui  en  meme  temps,  aussi  ne  doit-on  mettre  aucune  confiance 
en  ses  paroles.  Quelquefois  meme  il  a  recours  a  des  suppositions  et  a  des 
conjectures  dans  1'espoir  de  rencontrer  la  v6rit6  et  de  tromper  ceux  qui 
1'interrogent.'

"  Compare  Tennyson's  way  of  attaining  a  state  of  trance  by  repeating  to  hiin- 
K«:lf  his  own  name.

B    B

370  THE   MAKING    OF   RELIGION

APPENDIX    D

CHIEFS  IN  AUSTRALIA"  Compare  Tennyson's  way  of  attaining  a  state  of  trance  by  repeating  to  hiin- 
K«:lf  his  own  name.

B    B

370  THE   MAKING    OF   RELIGION

APPENDIX    D

CHIEFS  IN  AUSTRALIA

IN  the  remarks  on  Australian  religion,  it  is  argued  that 
chiefs  in  Australia  are,  at  most,  very  inconspicuous,  and 
that  a  dead  chief  cannot  have  thriven  into  a  Supreme 
Being.  Attention  should  be  called,  however,  to  Mr. 
Howitt's  remarks  on  Australian  '  Head-men,'  in  his  tract 
on  '  The  Organisation  of  Australian  Tribes  '  (pp.  103-113). 
He  attaches  more  of  the  idea  of  power  to  '  Head-men  ' 
than  does  Mr.  Curr  in  his  work,  '  The  Australian  Race.' 
The  Head-men,  as  a  rule,  arrive  at  such  influence  as  they 
possess  by  seniority,  if  accompanied  by  courage,  wisdom, 
and,  in  some  cases,  by  magical  acquirements.  There  are 
traces  of  a  tendency  to  keep  the  office  (if  it  may  be  called 
one)  in  the  same  kinship.  '  But  Vich  Ian  Vohr  or  Chin- 
gahgook  are  not  to  be  found  in  Australian  tribes  '  (p.  113). 
I  do  not  observe  that  the  manes  or  ghost  of  a  dead  Head- 
man receives  any  worship  or  service  calculated  to  fix  him 
in  the  tribal  memory,  and  so  lead  to  the  evolution  of  a 
deity,  though  one  Head-man  was  potent  through  the 
whole  Dieyri  tribe  over  three  hundred  miles  of  country. 
Such  a  person,  if  propitiated  after  death,  might  conceivably 
develop  into  a  hero,  if  not  into  a  creative  being.  But  we 
must  await  evidence  to  the  effect  that  any  posthumous 
reverence  was  paid  to  this  man,  lalina  Piramurana  (New 
Moon).  Mr.  Howitt's  essay  is  in  the  'Transactions  of 
the  Royal  Society  of  Victoria  for  1889.'

INDEX

ACADEMY  of  Medicine,  Paris,  inquiry 
into  animal  magnetism,  37,  38

Achille,  the  case  of,  145

Acosta,  Pere.  cited,  82,  267,  269INDEX

ACADEMY  of  Medicine,  Paris,  inquiry 
into  animal  magnetism,  37,  38

Achille,  the  case  of,  145

Acosta,  Pere.  cited,  82,  267,  269

Adare,  Lord,  cited,  361

Addison,  cited.  17

Africans,  religious  faiths  of,  231, 
232,  241,  242.  See  under  separate 
tribal  names.

Ahone,  North  American  Indian  god, 
252,  253,  254,  264,  272,  283,  287, 
308

A'ide,  Hamilton,  cited,  363

Algonqnins,  the,  273

Allen,  Grant,  cited,  207

American  Creators,  251;  parallel  with 
African  gods,  251 ;  savage  gods  of 
Virginia,  252 ;  the  Ahone-Okeus 
creed,  253.  254;  Pawnee  tribal  re- 
ligions, 254-257  ;  Ti-ra-wa,  the 
Spirit  Father,  255,  256  ;  rite  to 
the  Morning  Star,  256  ;  religion 
of  the  Blackfeet,  258  ;  Na-pi,  259, 
260,  261  ;  one  account  of  the  Inca 
religion,  261-265;  Sun-worship, 
262,  263  ;  cult  of  Pachacamac,  the 
Inca  deity,  262-270 ;  another  ac- 
count of  the  Inca  religion,  265- 
270 ;  hymns  of  the  Zunis,  271 ; 
Awonawilona,  271

Amoretti,  Sig..  cited.  33,  165

Ancestor-worship,  177,  178,  179, 
180,  192,  224,  231,  232,  294,  297- 
390,  300-304

Andamanese,  the,  religious  beliefs  of, 
isl,  211-214,  223,  224,  227,  230, 
273,  276,  280,  281,  298

'  Angus.  Miss,'  cases  in  her  ex- 
perience of  crystal-gazing,  96-111, 
368

Animal  magnetism,  inquiry  into,  32, 
37,  38

Animism,  nature  and  influence  of, 
53,  54,  71,  139,  182,  206,  208,  225, 
280,281,  290,  291,  294,  295,  333Animal  magnetism,  inquiry  into,  32, 
37,  38

Animism,  nature  and  influence  of, 
53,  54,  71,  139,  182,  206,  208,  225, 
280,281,  290,  291,  294,  295,  333

Anthropology  and  hallucinations, 
113 ;  sleeping  and  waking  ex- 
perience, 114;  hallucinations  in 
mentally  sound  people,  115;  ghosts, 
115 ;  coincidence  of  hallucina- 
tions of  the  sane  with  death  or 
other  crisis  of  person  seen,  115 ; 
morbid  hallucinations  and  coinci- 
dental '  flukes,'  116  ;  connection 
of  cause  and  effect,  116 ;  the 
emotional  effect,  117  ;  illustrative 
coincidence,  117;  hallucinations 
of  sight,  118  ;  causes  of  hallucina- 
tions, 119 ;  collective  hallucina- 
tions, 119  ;  the  properly  receptive 
state,  119;  telepathy,  120;  phan- 
tasms of  the  living,  121 ;  Maori 
cases,  122-124 ;  evidence  to  be  re- 
jected, 125  ;  subjective  hallucina- 
tion caused  by  expectancy,  125  ; 
puzzling  nature  of  hallucinations 
shared  by  several  people  at  once, 
126 ;  hallucinations  coincident 
with  a  death,  126 ;  apparitions 
and  deaths  connected  in  fact,  127  ; 
Census  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research  thereupon,  128 ;  number 
and  character  of  the  instances, 
128  ;  weighing  evidence,  129  ; 
opinion  of  the  Committee  on 
Hallucinations,  130;  remoteness 
of  occurrence  of  instances,  130 ; 
want  of  documentary  evidence, 
131  ;  non-coincidental  hallucina- 
tions, 131  ;  telepathy  existing  be- 
tween kinsfolk  and  friends,  132 ; 
influence  of  anxiety,  133;  exist- 
ence of  illness  known,  133;  mental 
and  nervous  conditions  in  con-

372

THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

nection  with  hallucinations,  134  ; 
value  of  the  statistics  of  the  Cen- 
sus, 135  ;  anecdote  of  an  English 
officer,  135372

THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

nection  with  hallucinations,  134  ; 
value  of  the  statistics  of  the  Cen- 
sus, 135  ;  anecdote  of  an  English 
officer,  135

Anthropology  and  religion,  43 ; 
early  scientific  prejudice  against, 
44  ;  evolution,  44 ;  testing  of  evi- 
dence, 45-47 ;  psychical  research, 
48 ;  origin  of  religion,  48 ;  in- 
ferences drawn  from  supernormal 
phenomena,  49,  59 ;  savage  pa- 
rallels of  psychical  phenomena, 
50  ;  meanings  of  religion,  50,  51  ; 
disproof  of  godless  tribes,  52 ; 
Animism,  53,  54  ;  limits  of  savage 
tongues,  55  ;  waking  and  sleeping 
hallucinations,  55 ;  crystal-gazing, 
56  ;  the  ghost-soul,  56  ;  savage 
abstract  speculation,  57  ;  analogy 
of  the  ideas  of  children  and 
primitive  man,  58  ;  early  man's 
conception  of  life,  58  ;  ghost-seers, 
60  ;  psychical  conditions  in  which 
savages  differ  from  civilised  men, 
60 ;  power  of  producing  non- 
normal  psychological  conditions, 
61 ;  faculties  of  the  lower  animals, 
62 ;  man's  first  conception  of 
religion,  63 ;  the  suggested  hyp- 
notic state,  64  ;  second-sight,  65  ; 
savage  names  for  the  ghost-soul, 
67  ;  the  migratory  spirit,  68-71

Anyambia,  South  Guinea  Creator, 
240

Apaches,  crystal-gazing  by,  91,  92

Apollonius  of  Tyana,  73

Atua,  the  Tongan  Elohim,  306

Aurora  Borealis,  savage  ideas  of  the, 
4,  287,  321

Australians,  religious  beliefs  of,  55, 
90,  128,  138,  179,  189,  190-198, 
201,  205,  213,  223,  224,  227,  230, 
235,  239,  245,  262,  273,  279,  280,

281,  286,  287,  288,  289 
Automatism,  168

Awonawilona,  Zufii  deity,  271,  275 
Aymard,  Jacques,  case  of,  162,  165 
Aztecs,  creed  of,  198,  255,  256,  279,

282,  288

BAELZ,  Dr.,  cited,  142

Baiame,  deity,   205,    207,   208,  224,

286,  308282,  288

BAELZ,  Dr.,  cited,  142

Baiame,  deity,   205,    207,   208,  224,

286,  308

Baker,  Sir  Samuel,  cited,  47,  230 
Bakwains,  the,  184 
Balfour,  A.  J.,  quoted,  49  ;  63  note

Banks  Islanders,  their  gods,  183, 
214-217

Bantus,  religious  beliefs  of,  189,  230, 
264

Barkworth,  Mr.,  his  opinion  of  Mrs. 
Piper,  151

Barrett,  Professor,  on  the  divining- 
rod,  165,  166,  167

Bastian,  Adolf,  cited,  6,  48

Baxter,  cited,  17

Beaton,  Cardinal,  his  mistress  visual- 
ised, 105

Bell,  John,  cited,  161

Beni-Israel,  310

Berna,  magnetiser,  38

Bernadette,  case  of,  126

Big  Black  Man,  Fuegian  deity,  283

Binet  and  Fere,  quoted,  21,  83

Bissett,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  experiences 
of  crystal-gazing,  106-110

Blackfeet,  beliefs  of,  251,  258

Blantyre  region,  religion  in  the,  237, 
238

Bobowissi,  Gold  Coast  god,  246, 
247,  249,  251,  252,  253

Bodinus,  cited,  16

Book  of  the  Dead,  314,  315,  332

Bora,  Australian  mysteries,  191, 192, 
194,  207,  213,  284

Bosnian,  cited,  246

Bourget,  Paul,  his  opinion  of  Mrs. 
Piper,  150,  151

Bourke,  Captain  J.  G.,  cited,  91

Boyle,  cited,  16

Braid,  inventor  of  the  word  '  hypnot- 
ism,' 26,  38,  40

Brewster,  Sir  David,  cited,  37

Brinton,  Dr.,  cited,  74,  75,  182,  253, 
259,  278,  290,  318

Bristow,  Mr.,  cited,  259

British  Association,  decline  to  hear 
Braid's  essay,  26 ;  rejection  of 
anthropological  papers,  43

Brosses,  de,  cited,  161

Brown,  General  Mason,  cited,  74,  75

Bunjil,  deity,  205

Bushmen,  religious  beliefs  of,  179, 
210,  227,  230,  276

Button.  Jemmy,  the  Fuegian,  case 
of,  124

CAOX,  Bushman  deity,  205,  210,  224 
Callaway,  Dr.,  on  Zulu  beliefs,  79,

92,  114,  153,  163,  226,  227,  228 
Cardan,  cited,  16 
Carpenter,  Dr.,  cited,  352

INDEX

373CAOX,  Bushman  deity,  205,  210,  224 
Callaway,  Dr.,  on  Zulu  beliefs,  79,

92,  114,  153,  163,  226,  227,  228 
Cardan,  cited,  16 
Carpenter,  Dr.,  cited,  352

INDEX

373

Carver,  Captain   Jonathan,   his  in- 
stance of  savage  possession,  153  ; 
cited,  74,  155,  156,  157 
Charcot,  Dr.,  on  faith  cures,  21-24,

26  note 
Chevreul,  M.,  cited,  165

Chinese,  the,  demon  possession  in, 
141,  144 ;  divining-rod,  167 ; 
religious  beliefs,  258,  318,  319, 
320

Chonos,  the,  189

Circumcision,  313

Clairvoyance  (vtie  a  distance),  72 ; 
'opening  the  Gates  of  Distance,' 72, 
73 ;  attested  cases  among  savages, 
73  ;  conflict  with  the  laws  of  exact 
science,  74 ;  instances,  75  ;  among 
the  Zulus,  75-77 ;  among  the 
Lapps,  77  ;  the  Marson  case,  78  ; 
seers,  79  ;  the  element  of  trickery, 
80 ;  a  Red  Indian  seeress,  81 ; 
Peruvian  clairvoyants,  82 ;  Pro- 
fessor Bichet's  case,  82 ;  Mr. 
Dobbie's  case,  84  ;  Scottish  tales 
of  second-sight,  85-88 ;  visions 
provoked  by  various  methods,  89. 
See  Crystal  visions

Clodd,  Edward,  cited,  129,  130,  330

•  Cockburn,  Mrs.,'  test  of  crystal- 
gazing,  107,  108,  109

Codrington,  Dr.,  cited,  162,  183,  214, 
215,  216

Coirin,  Mile.,  her  miraculous  cure, 
21

Coleridge,  quoted,  10,  12,  324,  325

Collins,  cited,  194

Comanches,  the,  273

Confucius,  religious  teaching  of,  318, 
319

Cook,  Captain,  cited,  298

Corpse-binding,  155,  156

Crawford,  Lord,  cited,  353,  361,  362, 
364

Creeks,  the,  155

Crcesus,  tests  the  Delphic  Oracle,  15

Crookes,  Sir  William,  cited,  353, 
359,  360,  361,  364,  365

Crystal  visions,  90 ;  savage  instances, 
90,  91,  92 ;  in  later  Europe,  93 ; 
nature  of  '  Miss  X's  '  experiments,

93  ;    attributed   to    '  dissociation,'Crystal  visions,  90 ;  savage  instances, 
90,  91,  92 ;  in  later  Europe,  93 ; 
nature  of  '  Miss  X's  '  experiments,

93  ;    attributed   to    '  dissociation,'

94  ;  examples  of    '  thought-trans- 
ference,' 94;    arguments    against 
accepting   recognition   of    objects 
described  by  another  person,  95 ; 
coincidence  of  fact  and  fiction.  96  ; 
cases  in  the  experience  of  '  Miss

Angus,'    96-111;    'Miss   Rose's' 
experience,    98,   99 ;    phenomena 
suggest  the  savage  theory  of  the 
wandering  soul,  112;  cited,  8,  49, 
56,  344,  345,  367 
Cumberland,  Stuart,  80 
Cures  by  suggestion,  21,  22,  23 
Curr,  Mr.,  reports  'godless'  savages, 
200  noteDAMPIER,  cited,  190,  191 
Dancing  sticks,  162,  163,  164 
Darumulun,  Australian  Supreme 
Being,  193,  194,  198,  202,  205, 
207,  208,  224,  232,  237,  262,  283, 
284,  286,  287,  288,  289,  308 
Darwin,  cited,  124,  161,  352,  360 
Death,  savage  ideas  on,  203 
Degeneration  theory,  the,  278;  the 
powerful  creative  Being  of  lowest 
savages,  278  ;  differences  between 
the  Supreme  Being  of  higher  and 
lower  savages,  279 ;  human  sacri- 
fice, 279 ;  hungry,  cruel  gods 
degenerate  from  the  Australian 
Father  in  Heaven,  280 ;  savage 
Animism,  280 ;  a  pure  religion 
forgotten,  281 ;  an  inconvenient 
moral  Creator,  281 ;  hankering 
niter  useful  ghost-gods,  282 ;  lower- 
ing of  the  ideal  of  a  Creator,  282 ; 
maintenance  of  an  immoral  system 
in  the  interests  of  the  State  an 
the  clergy,  282  ;  moral  monotheism 
of  the  Hebrew  religion,  283 ; 
degradation  of  Jehovah,  283 ; 
human  sacrifice  in  ritual  of  Israel, 
283 ;  origin  of  conception  of  Je- 
hovah, 283;  Semitic  gods,  283; 
status  of  Darumulun,  284 ;  con- 
ception of  Jehovah  conditioned  by 
space,  285  ;  degeneration  of  deity 
in  Africa,  285 ;  political  advance 
produces  religious  degeneration, 
286;  sacrificial  ideas,  287,  288; 
the  savage  Supreme  Being  on  a 
higher  plane  than  the  Semitic  and 
Greek  gods,  289  ;  Animism  full  of 
the  seeds  of  religious  degeneration, 
290;  falling  off  in  the  thcistic 
conception,  290 ;  modus  of  de- 
generation by  Animism  supplant- 
ing Theism,  291 ;  fetishism,  290, 
291 ;  feeling  after  a  God  who  needs 
not  anything  at  man's  hands,  292 
Demoniacal  possession,  138;  the

THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGIONTHE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

'inspired'  or  'possessed,'  139; 
'change  of  control,'  141;  gift  of 
eloquence  and  poetry,  141 ;  in- 
stances in  China,  141 ;  attempted 
explanations  of  the  phenomena, 
141, 142;  'alternating personality,' 
142 ;  symptoms  of  possession, 
143 ;  evidence  for,  144 ;  scientific 
account  of  a  demoniac  and  his 
cure,  144,  145 ;  inducing  the 
'  possessed '  state,  146  ;  exhibition 
of  abnormal  knowledge  by  the 
possessed,  147  ;  scientific  study  of 
the  phenomena,  147 ;  details  of 
the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper,  147-152 ; 
diagnosing  and  prescribing  for 
patients,  153 ;  Carver's  example 
of  savage  possession,  153,  156, 
157 ;  custom  of  binding  the  seer 
with  bonds,  154 ;  corpse-binding, 
155,  156

Dendid,  Dinka  Supreme  Being,  230, 
231,  283,  308

Deslon,  M.,  disciple  of  Mesmer,  26

Dessoir,  Dr.  Max,  quoted,  35,  36,  63, 
64

Dinkas,  beliefs  of  the,  47,  230,  231, 
280

Divining-rod,  use  of  the,  33,  164, 
165,  166,  167,  168

Dobbie,  Mr.,  his  case  of  clairvoyance, 
84

Dorman,  Mr.,  cited,  221

Dunbar,  Mr.,  cited,  258

Du  Pont,  cited,  82

Du  Prel,  cited,  30

Dyneis,  Jonka,  trance  of,  72

EBUMTUPISM,  second  sight,  80 
Egyptians,  beliefs  of,  90,  332 
Elcho,  Lord,  cited,  361 
Eleusinian  mysteries,  213 
Elliotson,  Dr.,  cited,  26,  38,  40 
Ellis,    Major,    on    Polynesian    and

African  religious   ideas,  90,    155,

243-2 19,  253,  274,  285,  298 
Elohim,   savage  equivalents   to  the

term,  305

Esemkofu,  Zulu  ghosts,  138,  139 
Eskimo,  religious  beliefs  of,  79,  155,

199

FAITH-CURES,  19-24 
Fenton,    Francis    Dart,    on   Maori 
ghost-seeing,  123

Ferrand,   Mile.,   on  hallucinations,

85199

FAITH-CURES,  19-24 
Fenton,    Francis    Dart,    on   Maori 
ghost-seeing,  123

Ferrand,   Mile.,   on  hallucinations,

85

Fetishism  and  Spiritualism,  159 ; 
the  fetish,  159  ;  sources  super- 
normal to  savages,  160 ;  indepen- 
dent motion  in  inanimate  objects, 
161 ;  comparison  with  physical 
phenomena  of  spiritualism,  161 ; 
Melanesian  belief  in  sticks  moved 
by  spirits,  162,  163  ;  a  sceptical 
Zulu,  163  ;  a  form  of  the  pendu- 
lum experiment,  163  ;  table-turn- 
ing, 164  ;  the  divining-rod,  164- 
167  ;  the  civilised  and  savage 
practice  of  automatism,  168  ;  dark 
room  manifestations,  169  ;  the 
disturbances  in  the  house  of 
M.  Zoller,  170 ;  consideration  of 
physical  phenomena,  171 ;  in- 
stanced, 178,  246,  290,  291,  303, 
352-366

Figuier,  M.,  cited,  165 
Fijians,  religious  beliefs  of,  138, 147,

218,  272,  365 
Finns,  the,  65

Fire  ceremony,  the,  195  note 
Fison,  Lorimer,  cited,  138,  273 
Fitzroy,   Admiral,   cited,   124,    187.

188,  189

Flacourt,     Sieur     de,     on    crystal- 
gazing  in  Madagascar,  91 
Flint,  Professor,  cited,  277 
Francis,  St.,  Stigmata  of,  24 
Fuegians,   beliefs   and   customs   of, 
124,  179,  187,  188,  189, 198,  204, 
227,  230,  248,  283,  287,  298

GAI/TOX,  Mr.,  cited,  13,  104, 115,  322,

323 
Garcilasso    de    la    Vega,    on    Inca

beliefs,  261,  262,   263,  264,  265,

266,  267 
'  Gates  of   Distance,   Opening  the,'

72,  73,  75 
Ghost-seers,  60,  70 
Ghost-soul,  the,  56  ;  names  for  the,

67

Gibert,  Dr.,  on  '  wiling '  sleep,  40 
Gibier,  Dr.,  cited,  157 
Gippsland  tribes,  203,  204 
Glanvil,  Rev.  Joseph,  his  scientific

investigations,  16 
God,  evolution  of  the  idea  of,  173  ;

anthropological  hypothesis,  173  ;

primitive  logic  of  the  savage,  174  ;

regarded   as   a  spirit,  176  ;  idea

INDEX

375anthropological  hypothesis,  173  ;

primitive  logic  of  the  savage,  174  ;

regarded   as   a  spirit,  176  ;  idea

INDEX

375

of  spiritual  beings  framed  on 
the  human  soul,  177 ;  deified 
ancestors,  177 ;  the  Zulu  first 
ancestor,  178 ;  fetishes,  178 ; 
great  gods  in  savage  systems  of 
religion,  179 ;  the  Lord  of  the 
Dead,  179 ;  conception  of  an 
idealised  divine  First  Ancestor, 
180,  204 ;  hostile  Good  and  Bad 
Beings,  180  ;  the  Supreme  Being 
of  savage  creeds,  180 ;  media- 
ting '  Sons,'  181 ;  Christian  and 
Islamite  influence  on  savage  con- 
ceptions, 181  ;  probable  germs  of 
the  savage  idea  of  a  Supreme 
Being,  181 ;  animistic  concep- 
tions, 182 ;  ghosts,  and  Beings 
who  never  were  human,  183 ; 
recognition  by  savages  of  our  God 
in  theirs,  183 ;  the  hypothesis 
of  degeneracy,  184 ;  the  moral, 
friendly  creative  Being  of  low 
savage  faith,  185  ;  food  offerings 
to  a  Universal  Power,  185,  186  ; 
the  High  Gods  of  low  races,  187  ; 
intrusion  of  European  ideas  into 
savage  religions,  187 ;  the  Fuegian 
Big  Man,  188 ;  ghosts  of  dead 
medicine-men,  189  ;  the  Bora,  or 
Australian  tribal  mysteries,  191, 
192,  194  ;  possible  evolution  of  the 
Australian  god,  192  ;  mythology 
and  theology  of  Darumulun,  the 
highest  Australian  god,  193,  194, 
198  ;  religious  sanction  of  morals, 
194  ;  selflessness  the  very  essence 
of  goodness,  195 ;  precepts  of 
Darumulun,  196,  197 ;  argument 
from  design,  199 ;  Supreme  Gods 
not  necessarily  developed  out 
of  'spirits,'  201;  distinction  be- 
tween deities  and  ghosts,  201  ; 
human  beings  adored  as  gods,

202  ;  deathlessness  of  the  Supreme 
Being  of  savage  faith,  202,  205  ; 
idealisation  of  the  savage  himself,202  ;  deathlessness  of  the  Supreme 
Being  of  savage  faith,  202,  205  ; 
idealisation  of  the  savage  himself,

203  ;  negation  of  the  ghost-theory, 
204,    205 ;     high     creative    gods 
never  were  mortal  men,  206  ;  low 
savage  distinction   between  gods, 
206 ;    propitiation    by   food    and 
sacrifice,    206  ;     '  magnified    non- 
natural  men,'  207  ;   gods  to  talk 
about,  not  to  adore,  207  ;   higher 
gods   prior    to   the    ghost-theory, 
208.         See      Supreme      Beings  ; 
American  Creators ;  Jehovah

Greeks,  the,  beliefs  of,  332 
Greenlanders,  the,  155,  199 
Gregory,  Dr.,  cited,  93 
Griesinger,  Dr.,  cited,  142 
Grinnell,   Mr.,   on   Pawnee   beliefs,

256,  257,  258,  259 
Guiana  Indians,  religious  beliefs  of,

221,  222,  223,  224,  225,  280 
Guinea,  North  and  South,  religious

beliefs  in,  240 
Gurney,    Mr.,    his  experiments    in

hypnotism,    39,    40;  cited,    115,

123,  126 
Guyau,  M.,  cited,  14,  26,  27

HALLUCINATIONS.  See  Anthropology 
and  Hallucinations

Hamilton,  Sir  William,  cited,  13

Hammond,  Dr.,  on  demoniacal 
possession,  142

Harteville,  Madame,  case  of,  28

Hearne,  on  the  Aurora  Borealis,  4  ; 
on  cure  by  suggestion,  22,  23,  24

Hebrews.     See  Israelites

Hegel,  cited,  33,  34,  36,  55,  63,  65, 
85,  120,  165

Higgs,  Police  Constable,  statement 
of,  on  the  disturbances  at  Mr. 
White's  house,  354-356

Highland  second-sight,  154,  155, 
156

Hodgson,  Dr.,  report  on  Mrs.  Piper, 
148,  151,  152  ;  cited,  145,  352

Home,  David  Dunglas,  his  powers  as 
a  medium,  352,  353,  361,  362,  363, 
364,  365

Howitt,  Mr.,  cited,  138,  192,  193, 
194,  195,  196Home,  David  Dunglas,  his  powers  as 
a  medium,  352,  353,  361,  362,  363, 
364,  365

Howitt,  Mr.,  cited,  138,  192,  193, 
194,  195,  196

Hume,  David,  attitude  towards 
miracles,  17 ;  definition  of  a 
miracle,  18  ;  self-contradictions, 
19;  refuses  to  examine  miracles 
of  the  Abbe  Paris,  20,  24,  25,  26, 
27;  alternative  definition  of  a 
miracle,  27  ;  cited,  326

Huxley,  Professor,  on  savage  re- 
ligious cults,  46,  47,  53,  175,  176, 
186,  191,  192,  197;  on  the  evolu- 
tion of  Jehovah,  296,  297,  304, 
306,  307,  30!),  310,  314,  315  ;  citi'd, 
19,  325.  352

Hypnotism,  6,  7,  32,  33,  34,  35,  37, 
39,  41,  82,  S3,  84

IAMIJLICIU'S,  cited,  15,  3(53,  364,  3(>~> 
Ibn  Khaldoun,  cited,  3(58

376

THE   MAKING   OF   RELIGION

Im  Thurn,  on  the  religious  ideas  of 
the  Indians  of  Guiana,  55,  173, 
221,  222,  223,  224,  225,  226,  280, 
327

Incas,  the,  92,  262-270,  282

Iroquois,  the,  91,  92

Islam,  influence  of,  on  African  be- 
liefs, 242

Israelites,  development  of  their  re- 
ligious ideas,  283,  285,  294-312, 
332

JAMES,  Professor  William,  quoted, 
24,  66,  80,  115,  119,  142,  148, 169, 
322

Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  on  '  willing '  sleep, 
40;  on  demoniacal  possession,  144, 
145  ;  cited,  80,  322,  367,  368

Jeanne  d'Arc,  34,  73,  115,  126,  276Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  on  '  willing '  sleep, 
40;  on  demoniacal  possession,  144, 
145  ;  cited,  80,  322,  367,  368

Jeanne  d'Arc,  34,  73,  115,  126,  276

Jehovah,  theories  of,  283,  285,  294 ; 
as  a  Moral  Supreme  Being,  294 ; 
anthropological  theory  of  the 
origin  of  Jehovah- worship,  296  ; 
absence  of  ancestor-worship  from 
the  Hebrew  tradition,  297-300; 
alleged  evidence  for  ancestor-wor- 
ship in  Israel,  300-304  ;  evolution 
from  ghost-cult  to  the  cult  of 
Jehovah,  304  ;  the  term  Elohim, 
305  ;  human  shape  assumed,  305  ; 
considered  as  a  ghost-god,  307; 
sacrifices  to,  307,  308  ;  suggestion 
of  a  Being  not  yet  named  Jehovah, 
309 ;  traditional  emergence  of 
Jehovah  as  the  god  of  Israel,  309  ; 
as  a  deified  ancestor,  310 ;  moral 
element  in  the  idea  of  Jehovah, 
310,  314  ;  a  mere  tribal  god,  311 ; 
a  Kenite  god,  311,  312 ;  inconsis- 
tencies of  theorists  concerning, 
313,  314  ;  the  moral  element  a  sur- 
vival of  primitive  ethics  in  the 
savage  ancestors  of  the  Israelites, 
315;  verity  of  the  Biblical  account, 
316  ;  cited,  328,  329

Jeraeil,  mysteries  of  the  Kurnai,  195

Jevons,  Mr.,  cited,  202,  279,  329,  332

Jugglery,  Pawnee,  257

Jung-Stilling,  cited,  33,  70

KALOO,  Fijian  name  for  gods,  218, 
219

Kamschatkans,  179

Kant,  inquires  into  Swedenborg's 
visions,  28,66;  disappointed  with 
Swedenborg's  'Arcana  Ccclestia,'

29 ;  on  the  metaphysics  of  '  spirits,' 
30  ;  discusses  the  sub-conscious, 
31 ;  cited,  135

Karens,  beliefs  of,  67,  80,  163,  164

Karr,  Alphonse,  cited,  363

Kelvin,  Lord,  on  hypnotism,  41

Kenites,  the,  312

Kingsley,  Miss,  cited,  189,  230,  240, 
249

Kirk,  cited,  156

Kohl,  cited,  160

Kulin,  Australian  tribe,  55

Kurnai,  Australian  tribe,  their  re- 
ligious conceptions,  54,  195,  196, 
204,  235,  287,  289, 315,  320Kirk,  cited,  156

Kohl,  cited,  160

Kulin,  Australian  tribe,  55

Kurnai,  Australian  tribe,  their  re- 
ligious conceptions,  54,  195,  196, 
204,  235,  287,  289, 315,  320

LANGLOIS,  M.,  the  case  of,  82,  83

Lapps,  beliefs  of,  65,  78,  89

Latukas,  the,  47

Lavaterus,  telepathic  hypothesis  of, 
16

Le  Loyer,  cited,  16

Leaf,  Mr.,  cited,  121  note

Leeward  Isles,  ideas  of  a  god  in,  275

Lefebure,  M.,  cited,  91,  161,  368

Legge,  Dr.,  on  the  teaching  of  Con- 
fucius, 318

Lejean,  on  the  Dinkas,  231

Lejeune,  Pere,  cited,  81,  90

Leng,  Mr.,  cited,  144

Leon,  Cieza  de,  cited,  264,  267

Leonie,  the  case  of  her  hypnotisation, 
82,  83

Leslie,  David,  on  Zulu  clairvoyance, 
75  ;  on  ghosts,  1 38

Levitation,  361

Littre,  M.,  cited,  147

Livingstone,  Dr.,  cited,  6,  146,  184

Lloyd,  Dr.,  cited,  355,  356

Loan-god,  a,  Tshi  theory  of,  243-250

Lourdes,  cures  at,  22

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  cited,  46

MACALISTEB,  Professor,  his  opinion 
of  Mrs.  Piper,  151

MacCulloch,  Dr.,  on  second-sight,  65

Macdonald,  Duff,  cited,  162,  232,  235, 
238

Macgregor,  Dr.  Alastair,  gives  in- 
stances of  second-sight,  86,  87,  88

Madagascar,  91

Magnetism,  32,  37,  38

Malagasies,  beliefs  of,  92

Malays  of  Keeling  Island,  fetishism 
in,  161

INDEX

377

Man,  Mr.,  on  Andamanese  religion 
and  mythology,  211-214

Mana,  magical  rapport,  216,  218

Mandans,  the,  204

Manganjah,  practice  of  sorcery  in, 
162

Manning,  Mr.,  cited,  158

Maoris,  religious  beliefs  of,  90,  122, 
123,  127,  128,  163,  179, 205

Marawa,  Banks  Islands  deity,  216, 
217

Mariner,  cited,  304

Markham,  Mr.,  cited,  265,  269

Marson,  Madame,  case  of,  78

Mason,  Dr.,  on  familiar  spirits,  140

Mather,  Cotton,  cited,  17,  61

Maudsley,  Dr.,  cited,  25  note

Maui,  Maori  deity,  179,  205

Mayo,  Dr.,  cited,  93

Medici,  Catherine  de',  cited,  73Mather,  Cotton,  cited,  17,  61

Maudsley,  Dr.,  cited,  25  note

Maui,  Maori  deity,  179,  205

Mayo,  Dr.,  cited,  93

Medici,  Catherine  de',  cited,  73

Medicine-men,  91

Mediums,  352-366

Melanesians,  religious  beliefs  of,  102, 
183,  205,  214,  217,  218

Menestrier,  le  Pere,  uses  the  divin- 
ing-rod, 167

Menzies,  Professor,  cited,  281

Mesmer,  his  theory  of  magnetism, 
32,  37,  38

Millar,  cited,  44,  45

Miracles,  regarded  from  the  stand- 
point of  science,  15 ;  early  tests,

15  ;    and  more  modern    research,

16  ;   witchcraft,    16,  17  ;    Hume's 
essay  on,  17  ;  and  his  definitions 
of  a  miracle.  18,  27  ;  cures  at  the 
tomb  of  the  Abbe  Paris.  19-22,  25 ; 
Binet  and  Ft-re's    explanation   of 
these  cures,  21 ;  cures  by  sugges- 
tion,   21,    22,   23 ;    Dr.    Charcot's 
views,  22  ;  faith  cures,  22,  23,  24  ; 
science  opposed  to  systematic  ne- 
gation.   24 ;    refusal    to   examine 
evidence,  25,  26,  27,  28  ;  '  marvel- 
lous facts,'  '26  ;  suggestion  a  dis- 
tance, 27  ;  Kant's  researches,  28- 
32 ;     Swedenborg's    clairvoyance, 
28,  29  ;  thought-transference  and 
hypnotic  sleep,  32,  33,  34,  35,  39 ; 
water-finding,  32 ;  phenomena  of 
clairvoyance,    34;    Hrgel's    'ma- 
gic   tie,'    34;    Dr.  Max    Dessoir's 
views,  35,  36;  hallucinations,  35, 
36  ;    animal   magnetism,  37,    38 ; 
hypnotism,  3'.l  ;   '  willing,'  31),  40  ; 
facts  and  phenomena  confronting 
science,  41

'  Miss  X,'  on  crystal-gazing,  93,  344,

345,  367,  368 
Mlungu,  Central  African  deity,  232,

233,  234,  235,  237,  238 
Molina,  Christoval  de,  on  Inca  beliefs,

265,  266

Moll,  Herr,  cited,  344 
Mongeron,  M.,  cited,  20,  21 
More,  Henry,  cited,  16,  17 
Moses,  founder   of   the  Hebrew  re- 
ligion, 311,  312,  313,  314,  315 
Mtanga,  African  deity,  233,  234,  236,237 
Miiller,  Max,  cited,  45,  47,  51,  290,

291,  317 
Mungun-ngaur,     Kurnai     Supreme

Being,  196

Mwetyi,  Shekuni  Great  Spirit,  240 
Myers,  Frederic,  on  hypnotic  slumber,

33,  36  ;  cited,  16  note

NANA  NYAXKUPON,  Gold  Coast  Su- 
preme Being,  246,  247,  248,  249, 
253,  308

Na-pi,  American  Indian  deity,  255, 
259,  260,  261,  264

Ndengei,  Fijian  Supreme  Being,  218, 
219,  220,  249,  272

Nevius,  Dr.,  on  demoniacal  posses- 
sion, 141,  142,  143,  144,  145,  146

Newbold,  Professor  W.  Komaine, 
145

Nezahuatl,  erects  a  bloodless  fane 
to  the  Unknown  God,  282

Nicaraguans,  the,  67

North,  Major,  on  Pawnee  jugglery, 
257;  258

Nzambi  Mpungu,  Bantu  Supreme 
Being,  246,  247,  264

OKKUS  (Oki),  American  Indian  deity,

25-2,  253

Okey,  the  sisters,  case  of,  41  note 
Ombwiri,  South  Guinea  god,  240 
Orpen,  Mr.,  cited,  '210 
Oxford.  Rev.  A.  W.,  on  ancient  Israel,

302,  303,  304,  311,  312,  313,  314

PACHAC.'.MAC,    Inca    Supreme   Being.

251,  262,  263,  264,  265,  266,  267,

268,  269,  270,  283 
Pachayachachi,  Inca  god,  265 
Paladino.  Eusapia,  case  of,  352 
Palmer,  Mr.,  cited,  193

378

THE   MAKING   OF  RELIGION

Paris,  Abb6,  miracles  wrought  at  his 
tomb,  19,  20,  21,  25

Parish,  Herr,  criticism  of  his  reply 
to  the  arguments  for  telepathy, 
337-351  ;  cited,  9,  93,  115

Park,  Mungo,  on  African  beliefs,  241, 
242

Pawnees,  religious  beliefs  and  prac- 
tices of,  231,  245,  251,  254,  255, 
256,  257,  258,  289

Payne,  Mr.,  cited,  173,  174,  175,  270

Peden,  Rev.  Mr.,  cited,  73

Pelippa,  Captain,  cited,  187

Pendulum  experiment,  a  form  of  the, 
163

Pepys,  cited,  17

Peruvians,  religious  ideas  and  prac- 
tices of,  82,  261-270

Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  138

Phinuit,  Dr.     See  Mrs.  Piper

Piper,  Mrs.,  the  case  of,  142,  147- 
152

Pliny,  cited,  16

Plotinus,  cited,  73Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  138

Phinuit,  Dr.     See  Mrs.  Piper

Piper,  Mrs.,  the  case  of,  142,  147- 
152

Pliny,  cited,  16

Plotinus,  cited,  73

Plutarch,  cited,  16

Podmore,  Mr.,  on  psychical  research, 
120,  353,  355,  357,  358,  359,  360, 
361,  362,  363,  364,  365

Poltergeist,  the,  and  his  explainers, 
352-366

Polynesians,  religious  beliefs  of,  8, 
90,  274-276,  280

Polytheism,  317,  319,  333

Porphyry,  cited,  15

Powhattan,  Virginian  chief,  252, 
254

Puluga,  Andamanese  Supreme  Being, 
212,  224,  249,  283,  287

Pundjel,  Australian  god,  283,  286, 
287,  315

Puys6gur,  de,  his  discovery  of  hyp- 
notic sleep,  32  ;  cited,  83

QAT,  Banks  Islands  deity,  205,  216,

217 
Qing,  Bushman,  his  ideas  of  the  god

Gang,  210,  213

RAVENSWOOD,   Master   of,  instanced,

136 
Red  Indians,  beliefs  and   practices

of,  4,  6,  7,  21-24,  90,  138,  154,  155,

221

Regnard,  M.,  cited.  78 
Renan,  M.,  cited,  314

RSville,  M.,  cited,  320,  321

Reynolds,  Dr.  Russell,  cited,  24

Rhombos,  use  of  the,  91

Ribot,  M.,  cited,  142

Richet,  Professor  Charles,  hypnotises

Leonie,  82,  83  ;  cited,  71,  80,  89,

167,  322

Ritter,  Dr.,  believes  in  Siderism,  32 
Romans,  religious  ideas  of,  232 
'  Rose,    Miss,'    her    experience     of

crystal-gazing,  98,  99  ;  cited,  355,

357,  358

Roskoff,  cited,  46 
Rowley,  Mr.,  cited,  162 
Russegger,  cited,  231

SALCAMAYHUA,  cited,  269

Samoyeds,  65,  79

Sand,  George,  cited,  93

Santos,  cited,  233

Saul  and  the  Witch  of  Endor,  15

Scheffer,  cited,  73,  77,  78,  99

Schoolcraft,  Mr.,  cited,  258

Schrenck-Notzing,  von,  cited,  61 
note

Scot,  Reginald,  cited,  16

Scott,  Rev.  David  Clement,  cited,  55 
note,  114,  237,  238

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  his  attitude  towards 
clairvoyance,  29  ;  cited,  131,  137

Sebituane,  case  of,  146,  147

Second-sight,  63,  73,  85,  86,  87,  88Scott,  Sir  Walter,  his  attitude  towards 
clairvoyance,  29  ;  cited,  131,  137

Sebituane,  case  of,  146,  147

Second-sight,  63,  73,  85,  86,  87,  88

Seers,  79

Shang-ti,  Chinese  Supreme  Being, 
268,  318,  319

Sidgwick,  Professor,  cited,  347,  359

Shortland,  Mr.,  quoted,  122

Sioux,  the,  258

Skidi  or  Wolf  Pawnees,  the,  254,  256

Smith,  Mrs.  Erminie,  on  crystal- 
gazing,  91

Smith,  historian  of  Virginia,  cited, 
252,  253

Smith,  Robertson,  cited,  284,  286, 
287,  288,  309  note,  327

Smyth,  Brough,  cited,  47,  192,  197

Society  for  Psychical  Research,  125, 
128

Spencer,  Herbert,  on  early  religious 
ideas,  46,  47 ;  ghosts,  52 ;  Animism, 
54  note,  59,  60 ;  limits  of  savage 
language,  55 ;  the  Fuegian  Big 
Man,  189 ;  Australian  marriage 
customs,  190;  Australian  religion, 
197  ;  men-gods,  202  ;  religion  of

INDEX

379

Bushmen,  210 ;  ancestor-worship, 
231,  232,  298,  299,  300  ;  cited,  175, 
181,  185,  236,  238,  320

Spiritualism,  352-366.  See  Fetishism   |

Stade,  Herr,  cited,  303,  312,  313

Stanley,  Hans,  cited,  13

Strachey,  William,  cited,  250,  251,   i 
252,  253

Suetonius,  cited,  16

Sully,  Mr.,  cited,  323

Sun-worship,  261,  2G2,  263,  266,  268Stanley,  Hans,  cited,  13

Strachey,  William,  cited,  250,  251,   i 
252,  253

Suetonius,  cited,  16

Sully,  Mr.,  cited,  323

Sun-worship,  261,  2G2,  263,  266,  268

Supreme  Beings  of  savages,  regarded 
as  eternal,  moral,  and  powerful, 
210  ;  Cagn,  the  Bushman  god,  211; 
Puluga,  the  Andamanese  god,  212; 
savage  mysteries  and  rites,  213; 
alliance  of  ethics  with  religion, 
214 ;  the  Banks  Islanders'  belief  in 
Tamate  (ghosts)  and  Vui  (Beings 
who  never  had  been  human),  214, 
215 ;  corporeal  and  incorporeal 
Vuis,  216  ;  sacrificial  offerings  to 
ghosts  and  spirits,  217  ;  the  soul 
the  complex  of  real  bodiless  after- 
images, 217;  Fijian  belief,  218; 
Ndengei,  the  Fijian  chief  god,  218, 
219  ;  the  idea  of  primeval  Eternal 
Beings,  220 ;  the  Great  Spirit  of 
North  American  tribes,  221 ;  dream 
origin  of  the  ghost  theory,  221 ; 
Guiana  Indian  names  indicating 
a  belief  in  a  Great  Spirit,  222,  223, 
224  ;  the  God-cult  abandoned  for 
the  Ghost-cult,  224,  225;  Unku-  j 
lunkulu,  the  Zulu  Creator,  226- 
229  ;  the  notion  of  a  dead  Maker,  I 
227  ;  preference  for  serviceable 
family  spirits,  228,  229;  the  j 
Dinka  Creator.  230  ;  African  an- 
cestor-worship, 232 ;  Mlungu,  a  j 
deity  formed  by  aggregation  of  i 
departed  spirits,  232  ;  ethical  ele-  | 
ment  in  religious  mysteries,  235  ; 
the  position  of  Mtanga,  236 ; 
religious  beliefs  in  the  Blantyre 
region,  237,  238 ;  negro  tendency 
to  monotheism,  238,  239  ;  beliefs 
in  North  and  South  Guinea,  240  ; 
Mungo  Park's  observation  of 
African  beliefs,  241  ;  Islamic  in-  , 
Huence,  242  ;  the  Tshi  theory  of  a  1 
'  loan-god,'  borrowed  from  Euro- 
peans, 243-250  ;  varieties  of  Tshi 
gods,  245,  246 ;  fetishes,  246  ; 
Nana  Nyankupon,  the  'God  of  the 
Christians,'  246-250 ;  American 
Creators  (see  under),  251-277  ;  thePolynesian  cult,  274-276 ;  Chinese 
conceptions,  318-320 
Swedenborg,  Emanuel,  visions  of, 
28 ;  recovers  Mme.  Harteville's 
receipt,  28;  his  'Arcana  Ccelesti a,' 
29 ;  noticed  by  Kant,  31,  66

TAA-ROA,  Polynesian  deity,  274-276,

280,  308

Table-turning,  164 
Tahitians,  275 
Taine,  M.,  cited,  63 
Ta-li-y-Tooboo,  Tongan  deity,  306,

307,  310 
Tamate,  Banks  Islands  ghosts,  215,

216

Tamoi,  the  '  ancient  of  heaven,'  205 
Tando,  Gold  Coast  god,  246 
Tanner,  John,  case  of,  64,  138 
Teed,  Esther,  the  Amherst  mystery,

360

Telepathy,  oppositions  of  science 
to,  337-351 ;  hallucination  of 
memory,  337  ;  presentiments,  338  ; 
dreams,  338,  339,  343;  veridical 
hallucinations,  339,  341 ;  coin- 
cidence in  S.P.R.'s  Census  cases, 
339  ;  non-coincidental  cases,  340  ; 
condition  to  beget  hallucination, 
341 ;  hallucinations  mere  dreams, 
343;  crystal-gazing,  344,  345; 
number  of  coincidences  no  proof, 
345 ;  association  of  ideas,  346 ; 
coincidental  collective  hallucina- 
tions, 346-351.  See  Crystal 
visions

Thompson,  Basil,  cited,  365 
Thought-transference,  5,  32-35,  39,

94;  illustrative  cases,  96-111 
Thouvenel,  M.,  cited,  165 
Thyrsus  on  ghosts,  16 
Tien,  Chinese  heaven,  318,  319 
Ti-ra-wa,  American  Indian  god,  255.

250,  257,  261

Tlapanu, African  wizard,  146 
Tongans,   religious   beliefs   of,    304,

305,  306,  307

Tonkaways,  American  tribe,  255 
Torfscus,  "cited,  78 
Totemism,  262,  264,  287,  288,  295,

296,  303,  304 
Tregrar,  Mr.,  on  Maori  ghost-seeing,

122

Tshi  theory  of  a  loan-god,  243  249 
Tuckey,  Dr.  Lloyd,  cited,  40 
Tui  Laga,  Fijian  deity,  272

380

THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Tundun,  ancestor  of  the  Kurnai, 
196122

Tshi  theory  of  a  loan-god,  243  249 
Tuckey,  Dr.  Lloyd,  cited,  40 
Tui  Laga,  Fijian  deity,  272

380

THE   MAKING  OF  RELIGION

Tundun,  ancestor  of  the  Kurnai, 
196

Tylor,  Mr.,  his  test  of  recurrence,  45 ; 
on  anthropological  origin  of  reli- 
gion, 48  ;  on  savage  philosophy  of 
supernormal  phenomena,  50,  59  ; 
disproves  the  assertion  about '  god- 
less '  tribes,  52 ;  his  term  Anim- 
ism, 53,  54  ;  theory  of  metaphysi- 
cal genius  in  low  savages,  57 ; 
ghost-seers,  60  ;  on  psychical  con- 
ditions of  contemporary  savages, 
60-62;  on  the  influence  of 
Swedenborg,  66 ;  savage  names 
for  the  ghost-soul,  67 ;  second- 
sight,  73  ;  mediums,  80 ;  dreams, 
114  ;  hallucinations,  118-122, 126, 
127  ;  demoniacal  possession,  141, 
142;  fetishism,  160,  161,  178; 
divining-rod,  166 ;  evolution  of 
gods  from  ghosts,  176,  177 ;  fetish 
deities,  179  ;  dualistic  idea,  180  ; 
Supreme  Being  of  savage  creeds, 
180, 181 ;  the  degeneration  theory, 
184,  278 ;  confusion  of  thought 
upon  religion,  198 ;  list  of  first 
ancestors  deified,  204 ;  savage 
mysteries,  219 ;  savage  Animism, 
223;  Okeus  and  his  rites,  252; 
Pachacamac,  268 ;  Confucius's 
teaching,  318,  319 ;  the  mysta- 
gogue  Home,  353;  levitation,  361  ; 
cited,  56,  58,  65,  68,  69,  70,  71, 
85,  163,  174,  175,  185,  187,  199, 
201,  221,  253,  269,  281,  321, 
326

Tyndall,  Professor,  cited,  352

UIRACOCHA,  Inca  Creator,  265,  266,

267,  268,  269 
Umtibakulists,    diviners    by   sticks,

163 
Unkulunkulu,    Zulu    mythical    first

ancestor,  178,  182,  205,  220,  226,

241

VINCENT,  Mr.,  32 ;  on  clairvoyance, 
38,  40,  41

Virchow,  cited,  20

Vui,  non-ghost  gods,  183,  215,  216, 
217

WABOSE,  Catherine,  Red  Indian 
seeress,  experience  of,  81,  82

Waitz,  cited,  191,  211  note,  238, 
239,  240,  243Virchow,  cited,  20

Vui,  non-ghost  gods,  183,  215,  216, 
217

WABOSE,  Catherine,  Red  Indian 
seeress,  experience  of,  81,  82

Waitz,  cited,  191,  211  note,  238, 
239,  240,  243

Wallace,  Alfred  Bussel,  on  Hume's 
theory  of  '  miracles,'  19,  20 ;  on 
Hitter,  32  ;  on  clairvoyance,  34

Wayao,  Supreme  Being  of  the,  232, 
233

Wellhausen,  cited,  304,  311,  312, 
313,  314,  327

Welton,  Thomas,  on  the  divining- 
rod,  167

Wesley,  John,  cited,  17

White,  Joseph,  spirit  manifestations 
at  his  house,  354-358

Wierus,  cited,  16

Williams,  Mr.,  cited,  219,  272

Wilson,  Mr.,  cited,  56,  239,  240

Windward  Isles,  ideas  of  a  God  in, 
275

Witch  of  Endor,  the,  15,  304,  305

Witchcraft,  15,  16,  17

Wodrow,  Mr.,  cited,  17

Wolf  tribes,  255

Wynne,  Captain,  cited,  361

YAMA,  Vedic-Aryan  ghost-god,  204 
Yaos,  religious  beliefs  of,  162,  232,

234,  235,  236 
Yerri   Yuppon,   good    spirit   of   the

Chonos,  189

York,  a  Fuegian,  cited,  188 
Yuncas,  a  Peruvian  race,  worship  of.

262,  263,  270

ZARATE,  Augustin  de,  cited,  262 
Zoller,  M.,  disturbances  in  the  house

of,  170,  171 
Zulus,  religious  beliefs  and  customs

of,   72,  73,  75,  77,  79,   92,    138,

152,  153,  163,  164,  225,  226,  227,

228,  229 
Zulus,  hymns  of  the,  271,  275

-  d:  Co.  Printers,  New-street  Square,  London

H  Glassifieb    Catalogue

OF  WORKS   IN

GENERAL    LITERATURE

PUBLISHED    BY

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

39    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON,    E.G.

gi  AND  93  FIFTH  AVENUE    NEW  YORK,  AND  32  HORNBY  ROAD,  BOMBAY.

CONTENTS.

BADMINTON  LIBRARY  (THE)-     -     10 
BIOGRAPHY.        PERSONAL        ME- 
MOIRS,   &c.        -  7 
CHILDREN'S  BOOKS          -         -         -     26 
CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  TRANS- 
LATIONS, ETC.                                          18 
COOKERY,     DOMESTIC     MANAGE- 
MENT, &c. 28EVOLUTION,         ANTHROPOLOGY,

&c.  -         -  17

FICTION,  HUMOUR,  &c.   -  21

FUR.  FEATHER  AND  FIX  SERIES     12 
HISTORY,       POLITICS,        POLITY,

POLITICAL  MEMOIRS,  &c.    -  3

L  A  N  G  U  A  G  E,    HISTORY    A  N  D

SCIENCE  OF                                          -     16 
LONGMANS'    SERIES    OF    BOOKS 
FOR  GIRLS 26

MANUALS  OF  CATHOLIC  PHIL- 
OSOPHY -

MENTAL,  MORAL,  AND  POLITICAL 
PHILOSOPHY  -

MISCELLANEOUS  AND  CRITICAL 
WORKS  -

MISCELLANEOUS  THEOLOGICAL 
WORKS

POETRY  AND  THE   DRAMA     -

POLITICAL  ECONOMY  AND  ECO- 
NOMICS -

POPULAR  SCIENCE  -

SILVER  LIBRARY  (THE)

SPORT  AND  PASTIME

TRAVEL  AND  ADVENTURE,  THE 
COLONIES,  &c.

VETERINARY   MEDICINE,  &c.

WORKS  OF  REFERENCE  -

PAGE

16

29

18

16 
24

10

8

INDEX     OF    AUTHORS     AND

EDITORS.

fa

ge  '                                          Pa

a

/

\iKt-

I'age

Abbott  (Evelyn)        -     3,

ib     Bain  (Alexander)

•  1

Broadfoot  (Major  W.)

IO

Corder  (Annie)

"9

(T.  K.)

14

Baker  (Sir  S.  \V.)     -    S.

IO

Brugger  (W.  C.)        -

8

Coventry  (A.)    -

n

(E.  A.)

:  .

Baldwin  iC.  S.)

H

Brookinns  i\V.)

-9

Cox  (Harding)

10

Acland  (A.  H.  D.)     -

3

Balfour  (A.  ].)            -11,

31

Browning  iH.  Ellen)

9

Crake  (Rev.  A.  D.)

26

Acton  (Eliza)    -

28

BalMJ.T.)"      -

3

Buck  (H.  A.)     -

1  1

Creu'hton  (Bishop)

3.  4

Adeane  (j.  H.)  -

7

Baring-Gould    (Rev.

Buckle  (H.  T.)-

3

Cro/ier  ij.  B.>  -

U

/Eschvlus

18         S.)                              -  27,

29

Bull  (T.)    -

2b

Crump  i  A.)

21

Ainger  (A.  C.)  -

ii     Harriett  (Rev.  S.  A.  in

Burke  (U.  R.)   -

3

Cuningham  (G.  C.I  -

3

Albemarle  (Earl  ofi  -

II

Mrs.)      -

16

Burrosvs  (Montagu)

4

Cur/on  (Hon.  (i.  N.)

3

Allen  (Grant)    -

24

Baynes  (T.  S.)  -

29

Butler  (Ii.  A.)   -

24

Cutts  (Rev.  E.  L.)    -

4

Allmgham  (W.)         -   ib.

•16

Burrosvs  (Montagu)

4

Cur/on  (Hon.  (i.  N.)

3

Allen  (Grant)    -

24

Baynes  (T.  S.)  -

29

Butler  (Ii.  A.)   -

24

Cutts  (Rev.  E.  L.)    -

4

Allmgham  (W.)         -   ib.

•

Beaconsfield  (Earl  of)

21

—  (Samuel)   -

21)

nallingrr  d  .  \\  )     -

4

(E.)    -

21

Beaufort  (Duke  of")  -  10.

i  :

Davidson  t  \V  .  L.I  14,

16.  i-'

Andre  iR.)

12

Becker  (Prof.)  -

18

Cameron  of  Lochiel

IJ

Pavics  ij.  l-'.i   -

ib

Anstev  (E.)

21

Beeslv  (A.  H.)  -

'9

Camperdown  (Earl  of)

7

Deland  (Mrs  I    -

JI.  JO

Archer  (W.)      -

8

Bell  ("Mrs.  Hugh)

19

Cannan  (E.)

17

Denl  (C.  T.I       -

1  1

Aristophanes     -

18

-     (Mrs.  Arthur)    -

7

—  (E.  Laura)

i  i

Deploige    •

17

Aristotle   -                 -  14,

ib.

Bent  (J.  Theodore)  -

b

Chesnev  (Sir  (i.)

.i

De  Sabs  (Mrs.l

2S,  I,)

Armstrong     (G.     E.

Besant  (Sir  \Valtcr)-

3

Chisholm  (G.  G.)      -

25

De  TocquevilletA.)-

Savage)

'9

BickerdvkeiJ.)

U

Cholmondelev-I'cnnell

Dev.is  (C.  S.I     •

K)

(E.  1.  Savage)   7,  19

29

Bicknelf  (A.  C.)

8

(H.)

1  1

Dickinson  (G.  I.  )      -

4

Arnold  (Sir  Edwin)  -     b

19

Bird  (R.)    -

31

Churchill  (W.  Spencer)

9

Diderot

.  (Dr.  T.)      -

3

Black  (Clementina)  .

21

Cicero

18

Dougall  (L.)

.•1

Ashlev  (W.  J.)-

16

Blackwell  (Eli/abeth)

7

Clarke  (Rev.  R.  E.)  -

1  6

Douglas  iSir  G.i

19

Astor  (J.  J.I

21     BlandlMrs.  Hubert)

Jo

Clodd  (Edward)

17

Dowell  (S.I

K'.    i"

Atelier  ditLysi  Author

Boase  (Rev.  C.  \\  '.)  -

4

Clutter  buck  (\V.   J.)-

9

Dovlc  I.V  Ctniani      -

oft  -          -          -          -

26     Boedder  (Rev.  B.)     -

10

Cochrane  (A.)    •

l()

Drevlus  i  Irm.i)

-,,

Ayre  (Rev.  J.)   -

25     Bosanquet  (B.)

14

Coleridge  iS.  T.)

Dii  llois  i\V.  E.  B.I-

4

BosdfKev.A.K.  H.)7.2'i.

31

Comvn  (L.  N.)

26

Dullrr.n.M.uqrisoflDrevlus  i  Irm.i)

-,,

Ayre  (Rev.  J.)   -

25     Bosanquet  (B.)

14

Coleridge  iS.  T.)

Dii  llois  i\V.  E.  B.I-

4

BosdfKev.A.K.  H.)7.2'i.

31

Comvn  (L.  N.)

26

Dullrr.n.M.uqrisofl

Bacon                            -    7.

14     Brassey  (Lady)

')

Coninglon  (  lohn)     -

Ib

Dunb.tr  (M.ir\    1    i

Baden-I'owell  (B.  H.)

3     (Lord)            3,  8,  ii.

id

ConybeaielRev.W.  J.)

Bagehot  (W.)   -       7,  ifi, 
Bagwell  (R.)     -

29     Brav  (C.  and  Mrs.)  - 
3     Bright  (Rev.  J.  E.)  -

14

\  Ilnwson  (Dean) 
Cor!)et(  (Julian  S.I    -

27 
.1

Earulcv-  ^N  i.nit  >t   CA]

S.i'

"

INDEX     OF

AUTHORS

AND     EDITOR  S—  continued.

Page

Page

Page

Page

Ebrington  (Viscount)       12

ienery-Shee  (R.)      -        17

Moore  (T.)        -        -        25

Sprigge  (S.  Squire)  -          8

Egbert  (J.  C.)    -        -        18

erome  (Jerome  K.)  -        22

(Rev.  Edward)  -        14

Stanley  (Bishop)       -        24

Eggleston  (E.)  -        -          4

ohnson  (J.  &  J.  H.)         30

Morgan  (C.  Lloyd)  -         17

Steel  (A.  G.)     -        -        10

Ellis  (I.  H.)      -        -        12

ones  (H.  Bence)      -        25

Morris  (VV.)       -    20,  22,  31

(J.H.)        -        -        10

—  (R.  L.)       -        -        14

(Owen  G.)         -          9

(Mowbray)         -        ii

Stephen  (Leslie)       -          g

Evans  (Sir  John)      -        30

Jordan  (W.  L.)          -         16

Mulhall  (M.  G.)        -        17

Stephens  (H.  Morse)          6

Jowett  (Dr.  B.)         -        17

Munk(W.)        -        -          7

Stevens  (R.  W.)        -        31

Farrar  (Dean)   -        -  16,  21

Joyce  (P.  W.)    -        -          5

Stevenson  (R.  L.)     -  23,  26

Fitzwygram  (Sir  F.)         10

Justinian  -        -        -         14

Nansen  (F.)      -        -          9

Stock  (St.  George)   -        15Stevenson  (R.  L.)     -  23,  26

Fitzwygram  (Sir  F.)         10

Justinian  -        -        -         14

Nansen  (F.)      -        -          9

Stock  (St.  George)   -        15

Folkard  (H.  C.)         -        12

Nesbit  (E.)        -        -        20

'Stonehenge'   -        -        10

Ford  (H.)                             12

Kalisch  (M.  M.)        -        32

Nettleship  (R.  L.)    -        14

Storr  (F.)  -        -        -         14

Fowler  (Edith  H.)    -        21

Kant  (I.)    -        -        -        14

Newman  (Cardinal)  -        22

Stuart-Wortley(A.J.)  n.ia

Foxcrpft  (H.  C.)       -          7

Kaye  (Sir  J.  VV.)       -          5

Stubbs  (J.  W.)-        -          6

Francis  (Francis)      -         12

Kerr  (Rev.  J.)    -        -        n

Ogle(W.)-        -        -        18

Sturdy  (E.  T.)  -        -        30

Freeman  (Edward  A.)          4

Killick  (Rev.  A.  H.)  -        15

Oliphant  (Mrs.)         -        22

Suffolk  &  Berkshire

Froude  (James  A.)  4,  7,  9,  21

Kitchin  (Dr.  G.  W.)           4

Oliver  (W.  D.)          -          9

(Earl  of)     -        -        ii

Furneaux  (W.)           -        24

Knight  (E.  F.)  -         5,  9,  n

Onslow  (Earl  of)       -         n

Sullivan  (Sir  E.)       -         ii

K6stlin(J.)        -        -          7

Orchard  (T.  N.)        -        31

(J.  F.)        -        -        26

Gallon  (W.  F.)                  17

Osbourne  (L)    -        -        23

Sully  (James)    -        -        15

Gardiner  (Samuel  R.)          4

Ladd  (G.  T.)     -        -        15

Sutherland  (A.  and  G.)        6

Gathorne-Hardy  (Hon. 
A.  E.)         -        -        12 
Gerard  (Dorothea)   -        26

Lang  (Andrew)  5,  10,  u,  13, 
17,  18,  19.  20,  22,  26,  30 
Lascelles  (Hon.  G.)

Park  (  VV  .)                             13 
Parr  (Louisa)    -        -        26 
Payne-Gallwey    (SirPark  (  VV  .)                             13 
Parr  (Louisa)    -        -        26 
Payne-Gallwey    (Sir

\J     \                                                               T  T        T  ->

(Alex.)       -        -  15,  31 
Suttner  (B.  von)       -        23 
Swinburne  (A.  J.)     -        15

Gibbons  (J.  S.)          -  n,  12 
Gibson  (Hon.  H.)     -         13 
(C.  H.)       -        -        14 
(Hon.  W.)         -        32 
Gilkes  (A.  H.)  -        -        21

IO,  II,  12

Laughton  (J.  K.)       -          8 
Laurie  (S.  S.)    -        -          5 
Layard  (Nina  F.)      -         19 
Leaf  (Walter)   -        -        31

K.I                                    -11,13

Peek  (Hedley)  -        -        n 
Pembroke  (Earl  of)  -         ii 
Phillipps-Wollev(C.)  10,22 
Pleydell-Bouverle(E.O.)  n

Symes  (J.  E.)    -        -         17

Tacitus      -        -        -         18 
Tavlor  (Col.  Meadows)    17 
—  -  (Una)         -        -        23

GilKH.J.)        -        -        22 
Gleig  (Rev.  G.  R.)    -          8 
Goethe               -        -        19

Lear  (H.  L.  Sidnev)-        29 
Leckv  (W.  E.  H.)"    -    5,  19 
Lees  (J.  A.)       -        -          9

Pole  (W.)  -                          13 
Pollock  (W.  H.)        -         ii 
Poole(\V.H.andMrs.)     29

Tebbutt  (C.  G.)         -        n 
Thompson  (N.  G.)    -        13 
Thornhill  (VV.  J.)      -        18

Graham  (P.  A.)         -  13,  21

Lejeune  (Baron)       -          7

Poore  (G.  V.)                      31

Todd  (A.)  -                            6

—  (G.  F.)       -        -        16 
Granby  (Marquis  of)         12

Leslie  (T.  E.  Cliffe)  -        16 
Lester  (L.  V.)   -        -          7

Potter  (J.)          •        ~         Jo 
Praeger  (S.  Rosamond)    26

Toynbee  (A.)     -        -        17 
Trevelvan(SirG.O-)          7Potter  (J.)          •        ~         Jo 
Praeger  (S.  Rosamond)    26

Toynbee  (A.)     -        -        17 
Trevelvan(SirG.O-)          7

Grant  (Sir  A.)  -        -         14 
Graves  (R.  P.)  -        -          7 
Green  (T.  Hill)         -        14

Levett-  Yeats  (S.)      -        22 
Lewes  (G.  H.)  -        -        15 
Lillie  (A.)-                          13

Prevost  (C.)       -        •         ii 
Pritchett  (R.  T.)       -         n 
Proctor  (R.  A.)  13,  24,  28,  31

—  (C.  P.)        -        -         17 
Trollope  (Anthony)-        23 
Tupper  (J.  L.)  -        -        20

Greville  (C.  C.  F.)    -          4

Lindley  (J.)       -       -       25

Quill  (A.  W.)    -        -        18

Turner  (H.  G.)          -        31

Grev  (Maria)              -        26

Lodge  (H.  C.)   -        -          4

Quillinan  (Mrs.)        -          9

Tvndall  (J.)       -        -          9

Grose  (T.  H.)   -        -        14

Loftie  (Rev.  W.  J.)  -          4

Quintana  (A.)   -        -        22

Tyrrell  (K.  Y.)  -        -         18

Grove  (F.  C.)    -        -        ii 
(Mrs.  Lilly)       -        n 
Gurdon  (  Lady  Camilla)     21

Longman  (C.  J.)    10,  13,  30 
(F.  VV.)      -        -         13 
—  (G.  H.)       -        -11,12

Raine  (Rev.  James)  -          4 
Ransome  (Cyril)        -          3

Upton    (F.     K.    and 
Bertha)       -        -        26

Gurney  (Rev.  A.)      -         19

Lowell  (A.  L.)  -        -           5

Kawlmson         (Kev.

Gwilt  (J.)  -        -        -        25

Lubbock  (Sir  John)  -         17 
Lucan        -        -        -         18

Canon)        -        -           8 
Rhoades(J.)      -        -         18

Vaughan  (Cardinal)  -         17 
Verney   (Frances   P.

Haggard  (H.    Rider)  21,  22 
Hake  (O.)  -        -        -         n

Lutoslawski  (W.)     -         15 
Lyall  (Edna)     -        -        22Haggard  (H.    Rider)  21,  22 
Hake  (O.)  -        -        -         n

Lutoslawski  (W.)     -         15 
Lyall  (Edna)     -        -        22

Rhoscomyl  (O.)         -        23 
Ribblesdale  (Lord)   -         13

and  Margaret  M.)         8 
Vincent  (].  E.)-        -         17

Halliwell-Phillipps(J.)       8 
Hamlin  (A.  D.  F.)     -        30

Lyttelton  (Hon.  R.  H.)     10 
(Hon.  A.)  -        -         ii

Rich  (A.)  -                          18 
Richardson  (C.)         -         12

Virgil                                    18 
Vivekananda  (Swami)       32

Hammond  (Mrs.  1.  H.)        4 
Hamptcn  (Lady  Laura)   30 
Harding  (S.  B.)                    4 
Harte  (Bret)      -        -        22

Lytton  (Earl  of)        -         19

MacArthur  (Miss  E.  A.)  17 
Macaulav  (Lord)        5,  6,  20

Richman  (I.  B.)         -          6 
Rickaby  (Rev.  John)         16 
—  (Rev.  Joseph)    -         16 
Ridley  (Annie  E.)     -          7

Vivian  (Herbert)       -          9

Wakeman  (H.  O.)     -          6 
Walford  (L.  B.)        -        23

Harting  (J.  E.)-        -         12 
Hartwig  (G.)     -         -        24 
Hassall  (A.)       -        -          6 
Haweis  (Rev.  H.  R.)    7,  30 
Heath  (D.  D.)  -                  14 
Heathcote  (J.  M.and 
C.  G.)          -                  ii

MacColl'(Canon)       -          6 
Macdonald  (G.)          -          9 
—  (Dr.  G.)     -        -  20,  32 
Macfarren(Sir  G.  A.)         30 
Mackail  (J.  VV.)         -         18 
Mackinnon  (J.)          -          6 
Macleod  (H.  D.)        -         16

M~(?iir«;\     "        "         l8     Walker  (Jane  H.)      -        29 
RileylJ.W.)     -        -        20     Wallas  (Graham       -          8

loffsen  (NT        '       "      '  *!     WalP°le  (Sir  SPenCer)         6 
Rolfsen  (NO      -                    8     Walrond  (Col.  H.)    -         10loffsen  (NT        '       "      '  *!     WalP°le  (Sir  SPenCer)         6 
Rolfsen  (NO      -                    8     Walrond  (Col.  H.)    -         10

Romanes  (G.J.)                        Walsmgham  (Lord)-         n 
8,15.17.20,32    Walter  (J.)        -       -         8

R^aldsTl)      '                  i,     Warwick  (Countess  of)    31

Helmholtz  (Hermann

Macpherson  (Rev.  H.  A.)i2

Konaios  (t\.)      -         -         13 
Roosevelt  (T.)  -        -          4

Watson  (A.  E.T.)

von)    -         -        -        24 
Henderson      (Lieut-

Madden  (D.  H.)        -         13 
Maher  (Rev.  M.)       -         16

Rossetti  (Maria  Fran-

IO,  II,  12,  23

Waylen  (H.  S.  H.)   -        30

Col.  G.  F.)         -          7

Malleson  (Col.  G.B.)           5

cesca)      -        -        -        31

Webb  (Mr.  and  Mrs.

Henry  (W.)                -         n 
Herbert  (Col.  Kenney)      12

MandcllolJ.)     -        -         17 
Marbot  (Baron  de)    -          8

(VV.  M.)     -        -        20 
Russell  (Bertrand)    -         17

Sidney)       -        -        17 
—  (T.  E.)                -         19

Hewins  (W.  A.  S.)    -         17

Marshman  (J.  C.)      -           7

(Alys)         -        -         17

Weber  (A.)        -        -         15

Hill  (Svlvia  M.)         -        21

Martineau  (Dr.  James)     32

Saintsburv  (G.)          -         12

Weir  (Capt.  R.)         -         n

Hillier  (G.  Lacy)       -         10

Masktlyne  (J.  N.)     -         13

Sandars  (t.  C.)                   14

Wevman  (Stanley)  -        23

Hime  (Lieut.  -Col.  H.

Maunder  (S.)     -          -         25

Schreiner  (S.  C.  Cron-

Whatelv'Archbishop)  14,  15

VV.  L.)                          30

Max  Miiller  (F.)

wright)       -        -         10

(E.  Jane)  -                 16

Hodgson  (ShadworthH.)  14

S,  15,  1  6,  30,  32

Seebohm  (F.)    -        -      6,  8Max  Miiller  (F.)

wright)       -        -         10

(E.  Jane)  -                 16

Hodgson  (ShadworthH.)  14

S,  15,  1  6,  30,  32

Seebohm  (F.)    -        -      6,  8

Whishaw  (F.  J.)                23

Holroyd  (Maria  J.)  -          7

—  (Mrs.)                             9

Selous  (K.  C.)   -                  10

White  (VV.  Hale)      -        20

Hope  (Anthony)       -        22

May  (Sir  T.  Erskine)         6

Selss  (A.  M.)     -                  19

Whitelaw  (R.)  -                  18

Horace      -                           iS

Meade  (L.  T.)  -                 26

Sewell  (Elizabeth  M.)       23

Wilcocks  (J.  C.)        -         13

Hornung  (E.  W.)      -         22

Melville  (G.J.  Whyte)      22

Shakespeare      -        -        20

Wilkins  (G.)      •                  18

Houston  (I).  F.)        -           4

Merivale  (Dean)        -          6

Shand  (A    I.)     -        -         12

Willich  (C.  M.)         -        25

Howell  (G.)       -        -         16

Merriman  (H.  S.)      -         22

Sharpe  (R.  R.)  -                   6

Witham  (T.  M.)        -         ii

Howitt  (VV.)      -         -           9

Mill  (James)      -        -         15

Shearman  (M.)          -         10

Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.)    -        25

Hudson  (W.  H.)                24

—  (John  Stuart)     -  15,  i"

Sinclair  (A.)       -                   n

Woodgate  (VV.  B.)   -         10

Hueffer  (F.  M.)                    7

Milner  ((i.)        -        -        30

Smith  (R.  Bosworth)          6

Wood-Martin  (W.  G.)         6

Hume  (David)  -         -         14

Miss  Molly  (Atithorof)      26

—  (T.  C.)                           4

Woods  (Margaret  L.)       23

Hunt  (Rev.  W.)         -          4

Mofiat  (IX)                          13

—  (W.  P.  Haskett)          9

Wordsworth  (Elizabeth)  26

Hutchinson  (Horace  G.)  n

Molc-sworth  (Mrs.)   -        26Mofiat  (IX)                          13

—  (W.  P.  Haskett)          9

Wordsworth  (Elizabeth)  26

Hutchinson  (Horace  G.)  n

Molc-sworth  (Mrs.)   -        26

Soderini  (Count  E.)  -         17

—  (William)  -        -        20

Ingelow  (Jean            -  in,  26

Monck(W..H.  S.)     -         15 
Montague  (F.  C.)     -          6

Solovyoft  (V.  S.)        -         31 
Sophocles                            18

Wylie  (J.  H.)    -        -          6 
Youatt  (VV.)       -        -         10

James  (VV.)        -                  14

Montagu  (Hon.  John

Soulsby  (Lucy  H.)       26,31

efferies  (Richard)    -         30

Scott)                   -         12

Spudding  (J.)     -         -    7,  14

Zeller  (E.)                           15

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e.

Abbott. — A    HISTORY    OF    GREECE.  { 
By  EVELYN   ABBOTT,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
Part  I. — From    the    Earliest  Times  to  the

Ionian  Revolt.     Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d. 
Part  II. — 500-445  B.C.     Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Acland  and  Ransome.— A  HAND- 
BOOK IN  OUTLINE  OF  THE  POLITICAL  HIS- 
TORY OF  ENGLAND  TO  1896.  Chronologically 
Arranged.  By  the  Right  Hon.  A.  H.  DYKE 
ACLAND,  M.P.,  and  CYRIL  RANSOME,  M.A. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

ANNUAL  REGISTER  (THE}.     A

Review    of   Public    Events    at   Home    and 
Abroad,  for  the  year  1896.     Svo.,  i8s. 
Volumes  of  the  ANNUAL  REGISTER  for  the 
years  1863-1895  can  still  be  had.    i&s.  each.

Arnold. — INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES 
ON  MODERN  HISTORY.  By  THOMAS  AR- 
NOLD, D.D.,  formerly  Head  Master  of  Rugby 
School.  Svo.,  ~s.  bd.

Baden-Powell.  —  THE    INDIANArnold. — INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES 
ON  MODERN  HISTORY.  By  THOMAS  AR- 
NOLD, D.D.,  formerly  Head  Master  of  Rugby 
School.  Svo.,  ~s.  bd.

Baden-Powell.  —  THE    INDIAN

VILLAGE  COMMUNITY.  Examined  with 
Reference  to  the  Physical,  Ethnographic, 
and  Historical  Conditions  of  the  Provinces; 
chiefly  on  the  Basis  of  the  Revenue- 
Settlement  Records  and  District  Manuals. 
By  B.  H.  BADEN-POWELL,  M.A.,  C.I.E. 
With  Map.  Svo.,  ids.

Bagwell. — IRELAND       UNDER       THE

7\JDORS.        By    RlCHAKD     BAGWELL,     LL.D.

(3  vols.)  Yols.  I.  and  II.  From  the  first 
invasion  of  the  Northmen  to  the  year  1578. 
8vo..  325.  Vol.  III.  1578-1603.  Svo.,  iSs.

Ball. — HISTORICAL    REVIEW  OF  THE

LEGISLATIVE  SYSTEMS  OI'EKATIYE  IN  IKE- 
LAND,irom  the  Invasion  of  Henry  the  Second 
to  the  Union  1 1 172-18001.  B)' the  Rt.  Hon. 
].  T.  BALL.  Svo.,  fis.

Besant.  THE  HISTORY  01-'  LONDON. 
By  Sir  WALTER  BI-.SANT.  With  74  Illus- 
trations. Crown  Svo.,  i.s.  qd.  Or  bound 
as  a  School  Pri/e,  Boo!;,  j.<.  6<l.

Brassey  (LORD).-  PAIM-RS    AND    AD- 
DRESSES.

MERCANTILE  MARINE  AND  NAVIGA-

T/ON,  from  i87i-iS<j|.      Crown  Svo.,  5*.

/.]//'/•: A- /.;/.  FEDERATION  AND  Coiox-

/SAT10N  FKOM  iS'So-iSo.}.       Cr.  Svo.,  55.

Brassey  (LORD)    PAPERS    AND   AD- 
DRESSES— continued.

POLITICAL     AND     MISCELLANEOUS.

1861-1894.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

Bright. — A  H/STORY  OF  ENGLAND. 
By  the  Rev.  J.  FRANCK  BRIGHT,  D.  D.

Period    I.     MEDIEVAL  MONARCHY:    A.D. 
449-1485.     Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Period  II.     PERSONAL  MONARCHY.     1485- 
1688.     Crown  8vo.,  5$.

Period  III.     CONSTITUTIONAL  MONARCHY. 
1689-1837.     Crown  Svo.,  75.  6d.

Period  IV.     THE  GROWTH  OF  DEMOCRACY. 
1837-1880.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.Period  III.     CONSTITUTIONAL  MONARCHY. 
1689-1837.     Crown  Svo.,  75.  6d.

Period  IV.     THE  GROWTH  OF  DEMOCRACY. 
1837-1880.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Buckle. — HISTORY  OF  CIVILISATION 
IN  ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE,  SI'AI.V  AND 
SCOTLAND.  By  HENRY  THOMAS  BUCKLE. 
3  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  245.

Burke. — A  HISTORY  OF  SPAIN  from

the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of  Ferdinand 
the  Catholic.  By  ULICK  RALPH  BURKE, 
M.A.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325.

Chesney. — INDIAN  POLITY:  a  View  of

the  System  of  Administration  in  India.  By 
General  Sir  GEORGE  CHESNEY,  K.C.B. 
With  Map  showing  all  the  Administrative 
Divisions  of  British  India.  Svo.,  2is.

Corbett. — DRAKE  AND    THE   TUDOR

NA]'Y.  with  a  History  of  the  Rise  of  Eng- 
land as  a  Maritime  Power.  By  JULIAN  S. 
COKBKIT.  With  Portraits,  Illustrations  and 
Maps.  _>  vols.  Svo.,  ^fi-v.

Creighton.--.-l  ///\/<>AT  OF  THE 
PAI'ACY  FROM  THE  d /,•/•:  A  r  -SV///.v.u  TO  THE 
SACK  ('/••  A'c'.i//:,  i_<7S-is27.  By  M. 
CKKIGHTON,  !>.!>.,  lord  Bishop  of  London.

6  vuls.      Crown  Svo.,  (is.  e.icli.

Cuningham.  ---.-/    SCHEME   FDK  /.»/-

I'KRiAi.  ri-:Di-:K.'.  1'ii'N :  a  Senate  for  the 
Empire.  By  GRANVII.I  :.  C.  CTMNGHAM, 
of  Montreal,  Canada.  \\  itli  an  Introduc- 
tion by  Sir  I-'RI  ni  ;;H  K  YOUNG,  K.C.M.G. 
Cnnvii  S\o.,  j-s.  ()</.

Curzon.  /'/AW/.;  .-/.v/>  ////  J'FKSIA.V 
('r/-:.s  /v«).y.  By  the  Ki^ht  lion.  (ii:oi<GE 
X.  CUK/ON,  M.T.  \\'ith  (|  Maps,  o(>  Illus- 
tiativins,  Appnuiiccs,  and  an  Index.  2 
vol.s.  Svo.,  ,(.'.s.

De     Tocqueville.     />/.>/.'<     ICY    /.v

AMF.Kli   A.         liv     Al   I-.XIS     1>K     T«u  yUKVII.l  K.

2  vols.     Cro\\n  .^vo.,  ii>s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

History,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &c .—continued.2  vols.     Cro\\n  .^vo.,  ii>s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

History,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &c .—continued.

Dickinson.  —  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 
PARLIAMENT  DURING  THE  NINETEENTH 
CENTURY.  ByG.  LOWES  DICKINSON,  M.A. 
8vo.,  75.  6d.

Eggleston.  —  THE  BEGINNERS  OF  A 
NATION:  a  History  of  the  Source  and  Rise 
of  the  Earliest  English  Settlements  in 
America,  with  Special  Reference  to  the  Life 
and  Character  of  the  People.  By  EDWARD 
EGGLESTON.  With  8  Maps.  Cr.  8vo.,7s.  6d.

Froude  QAMES  A.).

THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the 
Fall  of  Wolsey  to  the  Defeat  of  the  Spanish 
Armada.

Popular  Edition.     12  vols.     Crown  8vo.,

35.  6d.  each.

'  Silver     Library  '      Edition.       12     vols. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

THE  DIVORCE  OF  CATHERINE  OF 
ARAGON.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  SPANISH  STORY  OF  THE  AR- 
MADA, and  other  Essays.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE   ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND  IN  THE 
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.   3  vols.   Cr.  8vo., 
105.  6d.

ENGLISH  SEAMEN  IN  THE  SIXTEENTH 
CENTURY.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.

THE    COUNCIL   OF   TRENT.     Crown

8vo.,  35.  6d.

SHORT  STUDIES  ONGREA  T  SUBJECTS. 
4  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

CMSAR  :  a  Sketch.     Cr.  8vo,  35.  6d. 
Gardiner  (SAMUEL  RAWSON,  D.C.L.,

LL.D.).

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the  Ac- 
cession of  James  I.  to  the  Outbreak  of  the 
Civil  War,  1603-1642.  10  vols.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.  each.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE    GREAT  CIVIL 
42-1649.  4  vols.  Cr.8vo.,6s.each.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  COMMONWEALTH 
AND  THE  PROTECTORATE.  1649-1660. 
Vol.  I.  1649-1651.  With  1  4  Maps.  8vo.,2is. 
Vol.  II.  1651-1654.  With  7  Maps. 
Nvo.,  215.

WHAT  Gr.\roii'iiEK  PLOT  Il'.is. 
With  8  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Gardiner  (SAMUEL  RAWSON,  D.C.L.,

LL.D.) — continued.WHAT  Gr.\roii'iiEK  PLOT  Il'.is. 
With  8  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Gardiner  (SAMUEL  RAWSON,  D.C.L.,

LL.D.) — continued.

CROMWELL'S  PLACE  IN  HISTORY. 
Founded  on  Six  Lectures  delivered  in  the 
University  of  Oxford.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  STUDENT'S  HISTORY  OF  ENG- 
LAND. With  378  Illustrations.  Crown

8VO.,    125.

Also  in  Three  Volumes,  price  45.  each. 
Vol.  I.  B.C.  55 — A.D.   1509.     173  Illustra- 
tions.

Vol.  II.  1509-1689.     96  Illustrations. 
Vol.  III.  1689-1885.     109  Illustrations.

Greville. — A  JOURNAL  OF  THE  REIGNS 
OF  KING  GEORGE  IV.,  KING  WILLIAM  IV., 
AND  QUEEX  VICTORIA.  By  CHARLES  C.  F. 
GREVILLE,  formerly  Clerk  of  the  Council. 
8  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

HARVARD  HISTORICAL  STUDIES.

THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  AFRICAN 
SLAVE  TRADE  TO  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF 
AMERICA,  1638-1870.  By  W.  E.  B.  Du 
Bois,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  js.  6d.

THE  CONTEST  OVER  THE  RATIFICATON 
OF  THE  FEDERAL  CONSTITUTION  IN  MASSA- 
CHUSETTS. By  S.  B.  HARDING,  A.M. 
8vo.,  6s.

A  CRITICAL  STUDY  OF  NULLIFICATION 
ix  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  By  D.  F.  HOUSTON, 
A.M.  8vo.,  6s.

NOMINATIONS  FOR  ELECTIVE  OFFICE 
IX  THE  UXITED  STATES.  By  FREDERICK 
W.  DALLINGER,  A.M.  8vo.,  js.  €>d.

A  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  BRITISH  MUNI- 
CIPAL HISTORY,  INCLUDING  GILDS  AND 
PARLIAMENTARY  REPRESENTATION.  By 
CHARLES  GROSS,  Ph.D.  Svo.,  i2s.

THE  LIBERTY  AND  FREE  SOIL  PARTIES 
IN  THE  NoRTini'EST.  By  THEODORE  C. 
SMITH,  Ph.D.  8vo.

*,*  Other  Volumes  are  in  preparation.

Hammond. — A  I1''o  MAN'S  PART  IN 
A  A'Kro/.L'T/o.v.  By  Mrs.  JOHN  HAYS 
HAMMOND.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Historic  Towns. — Edited  by  E.  A.

FREEMAN,  D.C.L., and  Rev.  WILLIAM  HUNT, 
M.A.  With  Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  Svo. , 
35.  6d.  each.

Bristol.    By  Rev.  W.  Hunt.

Carlisle.          By      Mandell 
Creighton,  D.D.

Cinque  Ports.       By  Mon- 
tague Burrows.Bristol.    By  Rev.  W.  Hunt.

Carlisle.          By      Mandell 
Creighton,  D.D.

Cinque  Ports.       By  Mon- 
tague Burrows.

Colchester.     By  Rev.  E.L. 
Cutts.

Kxeter.    By  E.  A.  Freeman.

By   Rev.  C.  W.

London. 
Loftie.

By  Rev.  W.  J.

Oxford.

Boase. 
Winchester.       By   G.    W.

Kitchin,  D.D. 
York.       By     Rev.     James

Raine. 
New  York.     By  Theodore

Roosevelt. 
Boston  (U.S.)     By  Henry

Cabot  Lodge.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND   GENERAL  WORKS.

History,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e. — continued.

Joyce  (P.  W.,  LL.D.).

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  IRELAND, 
from  the  Earliest  Times  to  1603.  Crown 
8vo.,  i  os.  6d.

A  CHILD'S  HISTORY  OF  IRELAND. 
From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death 
of  O'Connell.  With  specially  constructed 
Map  and  160  Illustrations,  including 
Facsimile  in  full  colours  of  an  illumi- 
nated page  of  the  Gospel  Book  of  Mac- 
Dnrnan,  A.D.  850.  Fcp.  8vo.,  3$.  6d.

Kaye  and  Malleson.—  HISTORY  OR

THE  INDIAN  MUTINY,  1857-1858.  By  Sir 
JOHN  W.  KAYE  and  Colonel  G.  B.  MALLE- 
SON. With  Analytical  Index  and  Maps  and 
Plans.  6  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each. 
Knight. — MADAGASCAR  IN  WAR 
TIME  :  7  HE  EXPERIENCES  OF'THETIMES' 
SPECIAL  CORRESPONDENT  WITH  THE 
HOY  AS  DURING  THE  FRENCH  INVASION 
OF  1895.  By  E.  F.  KNIGHT.  With 
16  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  8vo.,  125.  6d.

Lang  (ANDREW). 
PICKLE  THE  SPY :  or,  The  Incognito

of    Prince    Charles.       With    6    Portraits. 
8vo.,  1 8s.

ST.  ANDREWS.  With  8  Plates  and 
24  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by  T.  HODGE. 
8vo. ,  155.  net.

Laurie.  —  HISTORICAL  SURVEY  OF 
PRE-CHRISTIAN  EDUCATION.  By  S.  S. 
LAURIE,  A.M.,  LL.D.  8vo.,  I2s.

Lecky  (The  Rt.  Hon.  WILLIAM  E.  H.) 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGH- 
TEEN TH  CE.\  TURY.

Library  Edition.     8  vols.      8vo.,  £j  45.Lecky  (The  Rt.  Hon.  WILLIAM  E.  H.) 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  IN  THE  EIGH- 
TEEN TH  CE.\  TURY.

Library  Edition.     8  vols.      8vo.,  £j  45.

Cabinet  Edition.  ENGLAND.  7  vols. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each.  IRELAND.  5 
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  each.

HISTORY  OF  EUROPEAN  MORALS 
FROM  AUGUSTUS  TO  CHARLEMAGNE.  2 
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  165.

HISTORY  OF  THE  RISE  AND  INFLU- 
ENCE OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  NATIONALISM  AY 
EUROPE.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  ifis.

DEMOCRACY  AND  LIBERTY.  2  vols. 
8vo.,  365.

THE  EMPIRE  :  its  value  and  its 
Growth.  An  Inaugural  Address  delivered 
at  the  Imperial  Institute,  2oth  November, 
1893.  Cr.  8vo.,  is.  bd.

Lowell.     -  GOVERNMENTS     AND

J'AK'I/KS     IX     CONTINENTAL     EUROPE.       By

A.  LAWRENCE  LOWELL.     2  vols.     8vo.,  2is.

Macaulay  (LORD).

THE  LIFE   AND    WORKS   OF  LORD 
MACAULAY.      'Edinburgh'    Edition.     10 
vols.     8vo.,  6s.  each. 
Vols.  I. -IV.  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 
Vols.  V.-VII.    ESSAYS;    BIOGRAPHIES; 
INDIAN  PENAL  CODE  ;  CONTRIBUTIONS 
TO  KNIGHT'S  '  QUARTERLY  MAGAZINE''. 
Vol.  VIII.  SPEECHES;  LAYS  OF  ANCIENT

A'OME  ;  MISCELLANEOUS  POEMS. 
Vols.  IX.  and  X.  THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 
OF  LORD  MACAULAY.     By  the  Right 
Hon.  Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart. 
This  Edition  is  a  cheaper  reprint  of  the  Library 
Edition  of  LORD  MACAULAY'S  Life  and  Works.

COMPLETE  WORKS. 
Cabinet  Edition.       16  vols.      Post  8vo.,

/4  l6s-

Library  Edition.      8  vols.     Svo.,   £5   55. 
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition.     8  vols.     8vo.,  6s.

each.

If  IS  TORY     OF     ENGLAND     FROM    THE

ACCESSION  OF  JAMES  THE  SECOND. 
Popular  Edition.     2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  55. 
Student's  Edition.   2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  125. 
People's  Edition.    4  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  i6s. 
Cabinet  Edition.     8  vols.   Post  8vo.,  485. 
'  Edinburgh'  Edition.     4  vols.     8vo.,  6s.each. 
Library  Edition.     5  vols.     8vo.,  £4.

CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS, 
WITH  LAYS  OF  ANCIENT  A'OME,  etc.,  in  i 
volume.

Popular  Edition.     Crown  Svo.,  2S.  6d. 
Authorised  Edition.     Crown  Svo.,  2s.  6d.,

or  gilt  edges,  35.  6d. 
'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.     With  Portrait

and  4  Illustrations  to  the  '  Lays '.     Cr.

Svo.,  3s.  6d.

CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS.

Student's  Edition,    i  vol.    Cr.  Svo.,  6s. 
People's  Edition.     2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  8s. 
'  Trcvelyan  '  Edition.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  gs. 
Cabinet  Edition.    4  vols.   Post  Svo.,  245. 
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition.     3  vols.     Svo.,  6s.

each. 
Library  Edition.     3  vols.     Svo.,  365.

ESSAYS,  which  may  be  had  separately,

sewed,  6d.  each  ;  cloth,  is.  each. 
Addison  and  Walpole. 
Croker's  Boswell's  Johnson. 
Hallam's         Constitutional

History.

Warren   Hastings. 
The  Earl  of  Chatham  (Two

Essays). 
Frederick  the  Great.

Ranke  and  Gladstone.

Milton  and  Machiavelli.

Lord  Byron.

Lord  Clive.

Lord     Byron,     and      The

Comic     Dramatists    of

the   Restoration.

M ISC  EL  L  A  NEC  H'S    I  Vtt  I  TINGS

People's  Edition,    i  vol.  Cr.  Svo.,  45.  6d. 
Library  Edition.     2  vols.     Svo.,  2is.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

History,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &c.— continued.

Macaulay   (LORD) — continued. 
MISCELLANEOUS       WRITINGS, 
SPEECHES  AND  POEMS. 
Popular  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  2S.  6d. 
Cabinet  Edition.    4  vols.     Post  8vo.,  245.

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF 
LORD  MACAULAY.  Edited,  with  Occa- 
sional Notes,  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  O. 
Trevelyan,  Bart.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

MacColl. —  THE  SULTAN  AND  THE 
POWERS.  By  the  Rev.  MALCOLM  MACCOLL, 
M.A.,  Canon  of  Ripon.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.MacColl. —  THE  SULTAN  AND  THE 
POWERS.  By  the  Rev.  MALCOLM  MACCOLL, 
M.A.,  Canon  of  Ripon.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

Mackinnon. — THE  UNION  OF  ENG- 
LAND AND  SCOTLAND:  A  STUDY  OF 
INTERNATIONAL  HISTORY.  By  JAMES 
MACKINNON.  Ph.D.  Examiner  in  History 
to  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  8vo.,  i6s.

May. — THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HIS- 
TORY OF  ENGLAND  since  the  Accession 
of  George  III.  1760-1870.  By  Sir  THOMAS 
ERSKINE  MAY,  K.C.B.  (Lord  Farnborough). 
3  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  i8s.

Merivale  (CHARLES,  D.D.),  sometime

Dean  of  Ely.

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  UNDER  THE 
EMPIRE.  8  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

THE  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  REPUBLIC: 
a  Short  History  of  the  Last  Century  of  the 
Commonwealth.  lamo.,  75.  6d.

GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  from

the  Foundation  of  the  City  to  the  Fall  of 
Augustulus,  B.C.  753-A.o.  476.  With  5 
Maps.  Crown  8vo,  75.  6<f.

Montague.  —  THE  ELEMENTS  OF 
ENGLISH  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.  By 
F.  C.  MONTAGUE,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Richman. — APPENZELL  :  PURE  DE- 
MOCRACY AND  PASTORAL  LIFE  IN  LNNER- 
J\HOI)KN.  A  Swiss  Study.  By  IRVING  B. 
RICHMAN,  Consul-General  of  the  United 
States  to  Switzerland.  With  Maps.  Crown 
8vo.,  55.

Seebohm  (FREDERIC).

THE  ENGLISH  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY

Examined  in  its  Relations  to  the  Manorial 
and  Tribal  Systems,  etc.  With  13  Maps 
and  Plates.  8vo.,  i6s. 
THE  TK/HAL  SYSTEM  IN  WALES: 
Being  Part  of  an  Inquiry  into  the  Struc- 
ture and  Methods  of  Tribal  Society. 
With  3  Maps.  8vo.,  125.

Sharpe. — LONDON  AND  THE  KINGDOM:

a  History  derived  mainly  from  the  Archives 
at  Guildhall  in  the  custody  of  the  Corpora- 
tion of  the  City  of  London.  By  REGINALD 
R.  SHAKPE,  D.C.L.,  Records  Clerk  in  the 
Ofiice  of  the  Town  Clerk  of  the  City  of 
London.  3  vols.  8vo.  IDS.  6rf.  each.Smith. — CARTHAGE  AND  THE  CARTH- 
AGINIANS. By  R.  BOSWORTH  SMITH,  M.A., 
With  Maps,  Plans,  etc.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Stephens.  —  A  HISTORY  OF  THE 
FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  By  H.  MORSE 
STEPHENS.  3  vols.  8vo.  Vols.  I.  and  II. 
185.  each.

Stubbs. — HISTORY  OF  THE  UNIVER- 
SITY OF  DUBLIN,  from  its  Foundation  to 
the  End  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.  By  J. 
W.  STUBBS.  Svo.,  125.  6d.

Sutherland.  —  THE  HISTORY  OF  AUS- 
TRALIA AND  NEW  ZEALAND,  from  1606- 
1890.  By  ALEXANDER  SUTHERLAND,  M.  A., 
and  GEORGE  SUTHERLAND,  M.A.  Crown 
8vo.,  25.  6d.

Taylor. — A  STUDENT'S  MANUAL  OF 
THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIA.  By  Colonel  MEA- 
DOWS TAYLOR,  C.S.I.,  etc.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6<f.

TO  d  d .  —  PA  R  L I A  ME  NT  A  R  J "  Go  VERN- 
MENT  IN  THE  BRITISH  COLONIES.  By

ALPHEUS  TODD,  LL.D.     8vo.,  305.  net.

Wakeman  and   Hassall. — ESSAYS

INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  ENGLISH 
CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.  By  Resident 
Members  of  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Edited  by  HENRY  OKKLEY  WAKEMAN, 
M.A.,  and  ARTHUR  HASSALL,  M.A.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

Walpole. — HISTORY

FROM   THE    CONCLUSION 
WAR  IN  1815  TO  1858. 
WALPOLE,   K.C.B.      6  vols. 
6s.  each.

OF    ENGLAND 
OF   THE   GREAT 
By  Sir  SPENCER 
Crown  8vo.,

Wood-Martin. — PAGAN    IRELAND  :

AN  A  RCHAiOLOGlCAL  SKETCH.      A  Handbook

of  Irish  Pre-Christian  Antiquities.  By  W. 
G.  WOOD-MARTIN,  M.R.I. A.  With  512 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  155.

Wylie.  —  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND 
UNDER  HENRY  IV.  By  JAMES  HAMILTON 
WYLIE,  M.A.,  one  of  H.M.  Inspectors  of 
Schools.  3  vols.  Crown  Svo.  Vol.  I.,  1399- 
1404,  zos.  6J.  Vol.  II.,  1405-1406,  155.  Vol. 
III.,  1407-1411,  i5s.  [Vol.  IV.  In  the  press.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Biography,   Personal   Memoirs,  &e.MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Biography,   Personal   Memoirs,  &e.

Armstrong. — THELIFEANDLETTERS 
OF  EDMUND  J.  ARMSTRONG.  Edited  by 
G.  F.  SAVAGE  ARMSTRONG.  Fcp.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Bacon. — -THE  LETTERS  AND  LIFE  OF 
FRANCIS  BACON,  INCLUDING  ALL  HIS  OC- 
CASIONAL WORKS.  Edited  by  JAMES  SPED- 
DING.  7  vols.  Svo.,  £4  45.

Bagehot. — BIOGRAPHICAL  STUDIES. 
By  WALTER  BAGEHOT.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Blackwell.  —  PIONEER  WORK  IN- 
OPENING  THE  MEDICAL  PROFESSION  TO 
WOMEN:  Autobiographical  Sketches.  By 
Dr.  ELIZABETH  BLACKWELL.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.

Boyd(A.  K.  H.)  (<  A.K.H.B.').

TWENTY- FIUE  YEARS  OF  ST. 
ANDREWS.  1865-1890.  2  vols.  Svo.

Vol.     I.     125.       Vol.     II.     I55.

ST.    ANDREWS   AND    ELSEWHERE  :

Glimpses  of  Some  Gone  and  of  Things 
Left.     8vo.,  155.

THE  LAST  YEARS  OF  ST.  ANDREWS  : 
SEPTEMBER  1890  TO  SEPTEMBER  1895. 
8vo.,  155.

Brown. — FORD  MA  DON  BROWN:   A

Record  of  his  Life  and  Works.  By  FORD  M. 
HUEFFER.  With  45  Full-page  Plates  (22 
Autotypes)  and  7  Illustrations  in  the  Text.

8vo.,  425.

Buss. — FRANCES  MARY  Buss  AND 
HER  WORK  FOR  EDUCATION.  By  ANNIE 
E.  RIDLEY.  With  5  Portraits  and  4  Illus- 
trations. Crown  Svo,  75.  f>d.

Carlyle. —  THOMAS  CARLYLE:  A  His- 
tory of  his  Life.  By  JAMES  ANTHONY 
FROUDE.

1795-1835.     -z  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  75. 
1834-1881.      2  vols.     Crown  Svo.,  75.

Digby. —  THE  LIFE  OF  SIR  KENELM

DlGBY,  br  one  of  his  Descendants,  the 
Author  of  '  Falklands.'  etc.  With  7  Illus- 
trations. Svo..  i6s.

Duncan.--

Tm:   KAKI. 
traits.      Svo.

Erasmus. — LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
ERASMUS.  By  JAMKS  ANTHONY  FROUDE. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

FALKLANDS.      By   the    Author   of

'The  Life  of  Sir  Kendm  Digby,'  etc. 
With  6  Portraits  and  :>  other  Illustrations. 
Svo.,  1 05.  6il.

Faraday. — FARADAY     AS     .t     Dis-FALKLANDS.      By   the    Author   of

'The  Life  of  Sir  Kendm  Digby,'  etc. 
With  6  Portraits  and  :>  other  Illustrations. 
Svo.,  1 05.  6il.

Faraday. — FARADAY     AS     .t     Dis-

coi'KRKR.  By  JOHN  TYNDAI.I..  Crown 
Svo,  45.  6</.

A/'M.'RAl.     J)l'NCAN.          By 
>!    CAMPKKDOWN.     \\'ith  3  Por-

Fox. —  THE     EARLY    HISTORY    OF 
CHARLES  JAMES  Fox.     By  the  Right  Hon. 
Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart. 
Library  Edition.     8vo.,  i8s. 
Cabinet  Edition.     Crown  Svo.,  65.

Halifax. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
SIR  GEORGE  SAVILE,  BARONET,  FIRST 
MARQUIS  OF  HALIFAX.  With  a  New 
Edition  of  his  Works,  now  for  the  first  time 
collected  and  revised.  By  H.  C.  FOXCROFT. 
2  vols.  Svo.,  325.

Halford. — THE  LIFE  OF  SIR  HENRY 
HALFORD,  BART.,  G.C.H.,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
By  WILLIAM  MUNK,  M.D.,  F.S.A.  8vo.,

125.   6(/.

Hamilton. — LIFE  OF  SIR  WILLIAM- 
HAMILTON.  By  R.  P.  GRAVES.  Svo.  3  vols. 
155.  each.  ADDENDUM.  Svo.,  6d.  sewed.

Harper.  —  A  MEMOIR  OF  HUGO 
DANIEL  HARPER,  D.D.,  late  Principal  of 
Jesus  College,  Oxford,  and  for  many  years 
Head  Master  of  Sherborne  School.  By  L. 
V.  LESTER,  M.A.  Crown  Svo.,  55.

Havelock. — MEMOIRS  OF  SIR  HENRY 
HAVELOCK,  K.C.B.  By  JOHN  CLARK 
MARSHMAN.  Crown  Svo.,  35.  6ii.

Haweis. — MY  MUSICAL    LIFE.      By

the  Rev.  H.  R.  HAWEIS.  Writh  Portrait  of 
Richard  Wagner  and  3  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  75.  6(/.

Holroyd. —  THE  GIRLHOOD  OF  MARIA 
JOSEPH  A  HOLROYD  (Lady  Stanley  of 
Alderlcy).  Recorded  in  Letters  of  a  Hun- 
dred Years  Ago,  from  1776-1796.  Edited 
by  J.  H.  ADEANE.  With  6  Portraits. 
Svo.,  185.

Jackson.  —  STONEWALL     JACKSON.

By  Lieut. -Col.  G.  F.  HENDERSON,  York  and 
Lancaster  Regiment.  With  Portrait,  Maps 
and  Plans.  2  vols.  Svo.,  425.

Lejeune. — MEMOIRS  OF  13. IRON  LE-By  Lieut. -Col.  G.  F.  HENDERSON,  York  and 
Lancaster  Regiment.  With  Portrait,  Maps 
and  Plans.  2  vols.  Svo.,  425.

Lejeune. — MEMOIRS  OF  13. IRON  LE-

_IEU\E,  Aide-de-Camp  to  Marshals  Berthier, 
Davout,  and  Oudinot.  Translated  and 
Edited  from  the  Original  French  by  Mrs. 
ARTHUR  BELL  (X.  D'ANVERS).  With  a 
Preface  by  Major-General  MAURICE,  C.B. 
2  vols.  Svo.,  245.

OF  LUTHER.  By 
With  62  Illustrations 
of  MSS.  Translated 
Crown  Svo.,  \s.  6d.

Macaulay. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTER 
OF  J.ORD  MACAULAY.     By  the  Right  Hon. 
Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Hart.

Popular  Edition,     i  vol.     Cr.  Svo.,  2s.kd. 
Studt'tit's  Edition      i  vol.     Cr.  Svo.,  65. 
Cabinet  Edition.      2  vols.      Post  Svo. ,  125. 
'  Edinburgh  '  Edition.     2  vols.     Svo.,  6s.

each. 
Library  Edition.      2  vols.      Svo.,  365.

Luther.  —  LIFE 
JULIUS  KOSTLIN. 
and  4  Facsimilie 
from  the  German.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Biography,   Personal  Memoirs,   &e.— continued.

Marbot.  —  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  THE 
BARON  DB  MARBOT.  Translated  from  the 
French.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  75.

Max    Mtiller. — AULD   LANG   SYNE.

By  the  Right  Hon.  F.  MAX  MULLER. 
-^  With  Portrait.  8vo,  IDS.  6d.

CONTENTS. — Musical  Recollections — Literary  Recol- 
lections— Recollections  of  Royalties — Beggars.

Nansen. — FRIDTJOF  NANSEN,  1861- 
1893.  By  W.  C.  BROGGER  and  NORDAHL 
ROLFSEN.  Translated  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 
With  8  Plates,  48  Illustrations  in  the  Text, 
and  3  Maps.  8vo.,  125.  6d.

Place. — THE  LIFE  OF  FRANCIS  PLACE, 
1771-1854.  By  GRAHAM  WALLAS,  M.A. 
With  2  Portraits.  8vo.,  125.Place. — THE  LIFE  OF  FRANCIS  PLACE, 
1771-1854.  By  GRAHAM  WALLAS,  M.A. 
With  2  Portraits.  8vo.,  125.

Rawlinson. — A  MEMOIR  OF  MAJOR- 
GEXERAL  SIR  HENRY  CRESIVICK  RAIVLIX- 
SON,  BART.,  K.C.B.,  F.K.S.,  D.C.L., 
F.R.G.8.,  ETC.  By  GEORGE  RAWLINSON, 
M.A.,  F.R.G.S.,  Canon  of  Canterbury. 
With  Portraits  and  a  Map,  and  a  Preface 
by  Field- Marshal  Lord  ROBERTS  of  Kan- 
dahar, V.C.  8vo.

Reeve. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
HEXRY  REEVE,  C.B.,  late  Editor  of  the 
'  Edinburgh  Review,'  and  Registrar  of  the 
Privy  Council.  By  J.  K.  LAUGHTON,  M.A.

Romanes. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 
OF  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES,  ALA.,  LL.D., 
F.R.S.  Written  and  Edited  by  his  WIFE. 
With  Portrait  and  2  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

Seebohm. — THEOXFORD  REFORMERS 
— JOHN  COLET,  ERASMUS  AND  THOMAS 
MORE  :  a  History  of  their  Fellow- Work. 
By  FREDERIC  SEEBOHM.  8vo.,  145.

Shakespeare.  —  OUTLINES  OF  THE 
LIFE  OF  SHAKESPEARE.  By  J.  O.  HALLI- 
WELL-PHILLIPPS.  With  Illustrations  and 
Fac-similes.  2  vols.  Royal  8vo.,  £1  is.

Shakespeare's    TRUE   LIFE.       By

JAMES  WALTER.     With  500  Illustrations  by 
GERALD  E.  MOIRA.     Imp.  8vo.,  215.

Verney.  —MEMOIRS  OF  THE  VERNEY

FAMILY.

Vols.  I.  &  II.,  DURING  THE  CIVIL  WAR. 
By  FRANCES  PARTHENOPE  VERNEY.  With 
38  Portraits,  Woodcuts  and  Fac-simile. 
Royal  8vo.,  425.

Vol.  III.,  DURING  THE  COMMONWEALTH. 
1650-1660.  By  MARGARET  M.  VERNEY. 
With  10  Portraits,  etc.  Royal  8vo.,  215.

Wakley. — THE  LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF 
THOMAS  WAKLEY,  Founder  and  First  Editor 
of  the  '  Lancet,'  Member  of  Parliament  for 
Finsbury,  and  Coroner  for  West  Middlesex. 
By  S.  SQUIRE  SPRIGGE,  M.B.  Cantab. 
With  2  Portraits.  8vo.,  i8s.

Wellington. — LIFE  OF  THE  DUKE 
OF  WELLINGTON.  By  the  Rev.  G.  R. 
GLEIG,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e.Wellington. — LIFE  OF  THE  DUKE 
OF  WELLINGTON.  By  the  Rev.  G.  R. 
GLEIG,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e.

Arnold. — SEAS  AND  LANDS.  By  Sir 
EDWIN  ARNOLD.  With  71  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Baker  (SIR  S.  W.). 
EIGHT  YEARS  IN  CEYLON.     With  6

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    RIFLE   AND    THE   HOUND   IN

CEYLON.     With  6   Illustrations.      Crown 
8vo.,  35.  f)d.

Bent. —  THE  RUINED  CITIES  OF  MA-

SHOXALAXD  :  being  a  Record  of  Excavation 
and  Exploration  in  1891.  By  J.  THEODORE 
BENT.  With  117  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  f>d.

Bicknell. — TRA  i 'EL  AND  ADYENTURE 
ix  NORTHERN  QUEENSLAND.  BY  ARTHUR 
C.  BICKNKI.L.  With  24  Plates  and  22  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Svo.,  155.

Brassey. —  VOYAGES  AND  TRAVELS 
OF  LORD  BRASSEY,  K.C.B.,  D.C.L.,  1862- 
1894.  Arranged  and  Edited  by  Captain  S. 
EARDLEY-WILMOT.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  los.

Brassey  (THE  LATE  LADY).

A   Vo\  'AGE  IN  THE  '  Si  'XKF.AM  '  ;    OUR

HOME    ox    THE    OCEAX   FOR    ELEVEN

MON  77/5.

Cabinet    Edition.      With     Map    and    66 
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.    With  66  Illus- 
trations.    Crown  8vo.,  35.  6<f.

Popular  Edition.     With  60  Illustrations. 
410.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth.

School  Edition.      With    37    Illustrations. 
Fcp.,  2s.  cloth,  or  35.  white  parchment.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e. — continued.

Brassey  (THE  LATE  LADY)— continued.

SUNSHINE  AND  STORM  IN  THE  EAST. 
Cabinet  Edition.  With  2  Maps  and  114

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  fid. 
Popular  Edition.     With  103  Illustrations.

4to.,  fid.   sewed,   is.  cloth. 
IN  THE  TRADES,  THE  TROPICS,  AND

THE  '  fi  OARING  FORTIES  '.Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  fid. 
Popular  Edition.     With  103  Illustrations.

4to.,  fid.   sewed,   is.  cloth. 
IN  THE  TRADES,  THE  TROPICS,  AND

THE  '  fi  OARING  FORTIES  '.

Cabinet  Edition.  With  Map  and  220 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  fid.

Popular  Edition.  With  183  Illustrations. 
4to.,  6</.  sewed,  is.  cloth.

THREE  VOYAGES  IN  THE  '  SUNBEAM'. 
Popular  Ed.  With  346  Illust.  410.,  2s.  6d.

Browning. — A  GIRL'S  WANDERINGS 
ix  HUNGARY.  By  H.  ELLEN  BROWNING. 
With  Map  and  20  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  fid.

Churchill. — THE  STORY  OF  THE 
M.iLAK.ixn  FIELD  FORCE,  1897.  By 
WINSTON  SPENCER  CHURCHILL,  Lieut.,  4th 
Queen's  Own  Hussars.  With  Maps  and 
Plans.  Crown  8vo.

Froude  QAMES  A.).

OCEANA  :  or  England  and  her  Col- 
onies. With  9  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo., 
2s.  boards,  25.  fid.  cloth.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  THE  WEST  INDIES  :

or,  the  Bow  of  Ulysses.     With  9  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  Svo.,  25.  boards,  2s.  fid.  cloth.

Howitt. —  VISITS  TO  REMARKABLE 
PLACES.  Old  Halls,  Battle-Fields,  Scenes, 
illustrative  of  Striking  Passages  in  English 
History  and  Poetry.  By  WILLIAM  HOWITT. 
With  So  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.,  35.  fid.

Jones.  —  ROCK-  CLIMBING  IN  THE 
ENGLISH  LAKE  DISTRICT.  By  OWEN 
GLYN.-K  JONES,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  Member  of 
the  Alpine  Club.  With  30  Full-page  Illus- 
trations in  Collotype  and  9  Lithograph 
Plate  Diagrams  of  the  Chief  Routes.  8vo.. 
155.  net.

Knight  (E.  F.).

THE  CRUISE  OF  THE  '  ALERTE  '  :  the 
Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on  the 
Desert  Island  of  Trinidad.  With  2  Maps 
and  23  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  fid.

WHERE  THREE  EMPIRES  MEET:  a 
Narrative  of  Recent  Travel  in  Kashmir, 
Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Ladak,  Gilgit, 
and  the  adjoining  Countries.  With  a 
Map  and  54  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.THE  '  FALCON'  ON  THE  BALTIC:  a 
Voyage  from  London  to  Copenhagen  in 
a  Three-Tonner.  With  10  Full-page 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  t,s.  fid.

Lees  and  Clutterbuck.— B.C.  1887  : 
A  K AMBLE  IN  BRITISH  COLUMBIA.  By  J.  A. 
LEES  and  W.  J.  CLUTTERBUCK.  With  Map 
and  75  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  fid.

Macdonald. — THEGOLDCO  AST:  PAST 
AND  PRESENT.  By  GEORGE  MACDONALD, 
Director  of  Education  and  H.M.  Inspector 
of  Schools  for  the  Gold  Coast  Colony  and 
the  Protectorate.  With  Illustrations.

Max  Milller. — LETTERS  FROM  CON- 
STANTINOPLE. By  Mrs.  MAX  MULLER. 
With  12  Views  of  Constantinople  and  the 
neighbourhood.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Nansen  (FRIDTJOF). 
THE   FIRST    CROSSING   OF    GREEN- 
LAND.   With  143  Illustrations  and  a  Map, 
Crown  Svo.,  35.  fid.

ESKIMO  LIFE.   With  31  Illustrations. 
8vo.,  165.

Oliver. — CRAGS  A  ND  CRA  TERS  : 
Rambles  in  the  Island  of  Reunion.  By 
WILLIAM  DUDLEY  OLIVER,  M.A.  With 
27  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  Cr.  Svo.,  6s.

Quillinan. — JOURNAL  OF  A  FEW 
MONTHS'  RESIDE\CE  IN  PORTUGAL,  and 
Glimpses  of  the  South  of  Spain.  By  Mrs. 
QUILLINAN  (Dora  Wordsworth).  With 
Memoir  by  EDMUND  LEE.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Smith. — CLIMBING  IN  THE  BRITISH 
/SLES.  By  W.  P.  HASKETT  SMITH.  With 
Illustrations  by  ELLIS  CARR,  and  Numerous 
Plans.

Part  I.  ENGLAND.     i6mo.,  35.  fid.

Part  II.   WALES  AND  IRELAND.     i6mo.,

3s.  fid. 
Part  III.  SCOTLAND.          [In  preparation.

Stephen.  —  THE  PLAY-GROUND  OF 
EUROPE  (The  Alps).  By  LESLIE  STE- 
PHEN. With  4  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo., 
6s.  net.

THREE  IN  NOR  WA  Y.      By  Two

of  Them.  With  a  Map  and  59  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  25.  boards,  2s.  fid.  cloth.

Tyndall. — THE    GLACIERS    OF    THETHREE  IN  NOR  WA  Y.      By  Two

of  Them.  With  a  Map  and  59  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  25.  boards,  2s.  fid.  cloth.

Tyndall. — THE    GLACIERS    OF    THE

ALPS:  being  a  Narrative  of  Excursions 
and  Ascents.  An  Account  of  the  Origin 
and  Phenomena  of  Glaciers,  and  an  Ex- 
position of  the  Physical  Principles  to  which 
they  are  related.  By  JOHN  TYNDALL, 
F.R.S.  With  6  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo., 
6s.  fid.  net.

Vivian. — SF.KTIA  :    the    Poor    Man's

Paradise.  By  HERBERT  VIVIAN,  M.A., 
Officer  of  the  Royal  Order  of  Takovo. 
With  Map  and  Portrait  of  King  Alex- 
ander. 8vo.,  155.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Veterinary  Medicine,  &e.

Steel  GOHN  HENRY,  F.R.C.V.S., 
F.Z.S.,  A.V.D.),  late  Professor  of  Veterin- 
ary Science  and  Principal  of  Bombay 
Veterinary  College.

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  DISEASES  OF 
THE  DOG;  being  a  Manual  of  Canine 
Pathology.  Especially  adapted  for  the  use 
of  Veterinary  Practitioners  and  Students. 
With  88  Illustrations.  8vo.,  IDS.  bd. 
A  TREATISE  ON 'THE  DISEASES  OF

THE  Ox ;  being  a  Manual  of  Bovine 
Pathology.  Especially  adapted  for  the 
use  of  Veterinary  Practitioners  and 
Students.  With  2  Plates  and  117 
Woodcuts.  8vo.,  155. 
A  TREATISE  ON  THE  DISEASES  OF 
THE  SHEEP;  being  a  Manual  of  Ovine 
Pathology  for  the  use  of  Veterinary  Prac- 
titioners and  Students.  With  Coloured 
Plate  and  99  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  izs.

OUTLINES  OF  EQUINE  ANATOMY  :  a 
Manual  for  the  use  of  Veterinary  Students 
in  the  Dissecting  Room.  Cr.  8vo.,  js.  6d.

Fitzwygram. — HORSES    AND

STABLES.  By  Major-General  Sir  F.  FITZ- 
WYGRAM, Bart.  With  56  pages  of  Illustra- 
tions. 8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.

Schreiner.  —  THE     ANGORA     Go  A  TFitzwygram. — HORSES    AND

STABLES.  By  Major-General  Sir  F.  FITZ- 
WYGRAM, Bart.  With  56  pages  of  Illustra- 
tions. 8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.

Schreiner.  —  THE     ANGORA     Go  A  T

(published  under  the  auspices  of  the  South 
African  Angora  Goat  Breeders'  Association), 
and  a  Paper  on  the  Ostrich  (reprinted  from 
the  Zoologist  for  March,  1897).  By  S.  C. 
CRONWRIGHT  SCHREINER.  8vo.

'  Stonehenge.'  --  THE     DOG     IN

HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.  By  '  STONE- 
HENCE  '.  With  78  Wood  Engravings. 
8vo.,  js.  6d.

Youatt  (WILLIAM).

THE  HORSE.  Revised  and  Enlarged 
by  W.  WATSON,  M.R.C.V.S.  With  52 
Wood  Engravings.  8vo.,  ~s.  6d.

THE  DOG.  Revised  and  Enlarged. 
With  33  Wood  Engravings.  8vo.,  65.

Sport  and   Pastime. 
THE  BADMINTON  LIBRARY.

Edited  by  HIS  GRACE  THE  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,  and  A.  E.  T.  WATSON.

Complete  in  28  Volumes.      Crown  8vo.,  Price  los.  6d.  each  Volume,  Cloth. 
%*  The  Volumes  are  also  issued  half-bound  in  Leather,  with  gilt  top.     The  price  can  be  had

from  all  Booksellers.

ARCHERY.     By  C.  J.  LONGMAN  and    BOATING.     By  W.  B.  WOODGATE.

Col.  H.  WALROND.  With  Contributions  by 
Miss  LEGH,  Viscount  DILLON,  etc.  With 
2  Maps,  23  Plates  and  172  Illustrations  in 
the  Text.  Crown  8vo. ,  IDS.  6d.

ATHLETICS  AND    FOOTBALL.

By  MONTAGUE  SHEARMAN.    With  6  Plates 
and  52  Illust.  in  the  Text.    Cr.  8vo.,  105.  6d.

BIG  GAME  SHOOTING.  By 
CLIVE  PHILLIPPS-WOLLEY.

Vol.  I.  AFRICA  AND  AMERICA. 
With  Contributions  by  Sir  SAMUEL  W. 
BAKER,  W.  C.  OSWELL,  F.  C.  SELOUS, 
etc.  With  20  Plates  and  57  Illustrations 
in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo. ,  105.  6d.Vol.  II.  EUROPE,  ASIA,  AND  THE 
ARCTIC  REGIONS.  With  Contribu- 
tions by  Lieut. -Colonel  R.  HEBER 
PERCY,  Major  ALGERNON  C.  HEBER 
PERCY,  etc.  With  17  Plates  and  56  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  105.  6d.

With  10  Plates,  39  Illustrations  in  the  Text, 
and  4  Maps  of  Rowing  Courses.  Cr.  8vo.,

IO5.  £>d,

COURSING  AND  FALCONRY. 
By  HARDING  Cox  and  the  Hon.  GERALD 
LASCELLES.  With  20  Plates  and  56  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo. ,  IDS.  6d.

CRICKET.  By  A.  G.  STEEL  and 
the  Hon.  R.  H.  LYTTELTON.  With  Con- 
tributions by  ANDREW  LANG,  W.  G.  GRACE, 
F.  GALE,  etc.  With  12  Plates  and  52  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6<f.

CYCLING.  By  the  EARL  OF  ALBE- 
MARLE  and  G.  LACY  HILLIER.  With  19 
Plates  and  44  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6</.

DANCING.     By  Mrs.  LILLY  GROVE,

F.R.G.S.  With  Contributions  by  Miss 
MIDDLETON,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  ARMYTAGE, 
etc.  With  Musical  Examples,  and  38  Full- 
page  Plates  and  93  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

BILLIARDS.     By  Major  W.  BROAD-  DRIVING.     By  His  Grace  the  DUKE

FOOT,   R.E.     With  Contributions  by  A.  H.  of  BEAUFORT,  K.G.     With  Contributions  by

BOYD,  SYDENHAM  DIXON,  W.  J.  FORD,  etc.  A.  E.  T.  WATSON    the  EARL  OF   ONSLOW,

With  1 1  Plates,  19  Illustrations  in  the  Text,  etc.      With   12   Plates  and  54   Illustrations

and  numerous  Diagrams.     Cr.  8vo.,  los.  6d.  in  the  Text.     Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Sport  and  Pastime — continued.

THE  BADMINTON  LIBRARY— continued.

FENCING,  BOXING,  AND 
WRESTLING.  By  WALTER  H.  POLLOCK, 
F.  C.  GROVE,  C.  PREVOST,  E.  B.  MITCHELL, 
and  WALTER  ARMSTRONG.  With  18  Plates 
and  24  Illust.  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

Bv  H.  CHOLMONDELEY-Bv  H.  CHOLMONDELEY-

FISHING. 
PENNELL.

Vol.  I.  SALMON  AND  TROUT.  With 
Contributions  by  H.  R.  FRANCIS,  Major 
JOHN  P.  TRAHERNE,  etc.  With  9  Plates 
and  numerous  Illustrations  of  Tackle, 
etc.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

Vol.  II.  PIKE  AND  OTHER  COARSE 
FISH.  WTith  Contributions  by  the 
MARQUIS  OF  EXETER,  WILLIAM  SENIOR, 
G.  CHRISTOPHER  DAVIS,  etc.  With 
7  Plates  and  numerous  Illustrations  of 
Tackle,  etc.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

GOLF.  By  HORACE  G.  HUTCHINSON. 
With  Contributions  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  A.  J. 
BALFOUR,  M.P.,  Sir  WALTER  SIMPSON,  Bart., 
ANDREW  LANG,  etc.  With  25  Plates  and  65 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

HUNTING.  By  His  Grace  the  DUKE 
OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,  and  MOWBRAY  MORRIS. 
With  Contributions  by  the  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK 
AND  BERKSHIRE,  Rev.  E.  W.  L.  DAVIES, 
G.  H.  LONGMAN,  etc.  With  5  Plates  and  54 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

MOUNTAINEERING.      By  C.  T.

DENT.  With  Contributions  by  Sir  W.  M. 
CONWAY,  D.  W.  FRESHFIELD,  C.  E. 
MATTHEWS,  etc.  With  13  Plates  and  95 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

POETRY  OF  SPORT  (THE}.— 
Selected  by  HEDLEY  PEEK.  With  a 
Chapter  on  Classical  Allusions  to  Sport  by 
ANDREW  LANG,  and  a  Special  Preface  to 
the  BADMINTON  LIBRARY  by  A.  E.  T. 
WATSON.  With  32  Plates  and  74  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  105.  6</.

RACING  AND  STEEPLE-CHAS-

ING.  By  the  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  AND 
BERKSHIRE,  W.  G.  CRAVEN,  the  Hon.  F. 
LAWLEY,  ARTHUR  COVENTRY,  and  A.  E.  T. 
W'ATSON.  With  Frontispiece  and  56  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d.

RIDING  AND  POLO.  By  Captain 
ROBERT  WEIR,  THE  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT, 
THE  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  AND  BERKSHIRE, 
THE  EARL  OF  ONSLOW,  etc.  With  18 
Plates  and  41  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6</.SEA  FISHING.  By  JOHN  BICKER- 
DYKE,  Sir  H.  W.  GORE-BOOTH,  ALFRED 
C.  HARMSWORTH,  and  W.  SENIOR.  With 
22  Full-page  Plates  and  175  Illustrations  in 
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

SHOOTING.

Vol.  I.  FIELD  AND  COVERT.  By  LORD 
WALSINGHAM  and  Sir  RALPH  PAYNE- 
GALLWEY,  Bart.  With  Contributions  by 
the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES  and  A.  J. 
STUART-WORTLEY.  With  ii  Plates  and 
94  Illusts.  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

Vol.  II.  MOOR  AND  MARSH.  By 
LORD  WALSINGHAM  and  Sir  RALPH  PAYNE- 
GALLWEY,  Bart.  With  Contributions  by 
LORD  LOVAT  and  Lord  CHARLES  LENNOX 
KERR.  With  8  Plates  and  57  Illustrations 
in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

SKATING,  CURLING,  TOBOG- 
GANING. By  J.  M.  HEATHCOTE,  C.  G. 
TEBBUTT,  T.  MAXWELL  WITHAM,  Rev. 
JOHN  KERR,  ORMOND  HAKE,  HENRY  A. 
BUCK,  etc.  With  12  Plates  and  272  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6d.

SWIMMING.  By  ARCHIBALD  SIN- 
CLAIR and  WILLIAM  HENRY,  Hon.  Sees, 
of  the  Life-Saving  Society.  With  13  Plates 
and  106  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown 
8vo.,  105.  6d.

TENNIS,  LA  WN  TENNIS, 
RACKETS  AND  FIVES.  By  J.  M.  and 
C.  G.  HEATHCOTE,  E.  O.  PLEYDELL- 
BOUVERIE,  and  A.C.  AINGER.  With  Contri- 
butions by  the  Hon.  A.  LYTTELTON,  W.  C. 
MARSHALL,  Miss  L.  DOD,  etc.  With  12 
Plates  and  67  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6<f.

YACHTING.

Vol.  I.  CRUISING,  CONSTRUCTION 
OF  YACHTS,  YACHT  RACING 
RULES,  FITTING-OUT,  etc.  By  Sir 
EDWARD  SULLIVAN,  Bart.,  THE  EARL  OF 
PEMBROKE,  LORD  BRASSEY,  K.C.B.,  C. 
E.  SETH-SMITH,  C.B.,  G.  L.  WATSON,  R. 
T.  PRITCHETT,  E.  F.  KNIGHT,  etc.  With 
21  Plates  and  93  Illustration.;  in  the  Text. 
Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6</.

Vol.  II.  YACHT  CLUBS,  YACHT- 
ING IN  AMERICA  AND  THE 
COLONIES,  YACHT  RACING,  etc. 
By  R.  T.  PRITCHETT,  THE  MARQUIS  OFVol.  II.  YACHT  CLUBS,  YACHT- 
ING IN  AMERICA  AND  THE 
COLONIES,  YACHT  RACING,  etc. 
By  R.  T.  PRITCHETT,  THE  MARQUIS  OF

DUFFERIN  AND  AVA,  K.P.,  THE    EARL  OF

ONSLOW,  JAMES  MCFERRAN,  etc.  With 
35  Plates  and  160  Illustrations  in  the 
Text.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6</.

12        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Sport  and  Pastime — continued.

FUR,   FEATHER,   AND   FIN   SERIES.

Edited  by  A.  E.  T.  WATSON.

Crown  8vo.,  price  55.  each  Volume,  cloth.

The  Volumes  are  also  issued  half-bound  in  Leather,  with  gilt  top.

from  all  Booksellers.

The  price  can  be  had

THE  PARTRIDGE.  Natural  His- 
tory, by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ; 
Shooting,  by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY  ; 
Cookery,  by  GEORGE  SAINTSBURY.  With 
ii  Illustrations  and  various  Diagrams  in 
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  GROUSE.  Natural  History,  by 
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting, 
by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY;  Cookery,  by 
GEORGE  SAINTSBURY.  With  13  Illustrations 
and  various  Diagrams  in  the  Text.  Crown 
8vo.,  5$.

THE  PHEASANT.  Natural  History, 
by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting, 
by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY  ;  Cookery,  by 
ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND.  With  10  Illus- 
trations and  various  Diagrams.  Crown 
8vo.,  55.

THE  HARE.  Natural  History,  by 
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting, 
by  the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES  ;  Coursing, 
by  CHARLES  RICHARDSON  ;  Hunting,  by  J. 
S.  GIBBONS  and  G.  H.  LONGMAN  ;  Cookery, 
by  Col.  KENNEY  HERBERT.  With  9 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo,  55.

RED  DEER.— Natural  History,  by 
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Deer  Stalk- 
ing, by  CAMERON  OF  LOCHIEL  ;  Stag 
Hunting,  by  Viscount  EBRINGTON  ; 
Cookery,  by  ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND. 
With  10  Illustrations  by  J.  CHARLTON  and 
A.  THORBURN.  Crown  8vo.,  55.THE  SALMON.  By  the  Hon.  A.  E. 
GATHORNE-HARDY,  etc.  With  Illustrations, 
etc.  [In  the  press.

THE  TROUT.  By  the  MARQUIS  OF 
GRANBY,  etc.  With  Illustrations,  etc.

[In  preparation.

2 HE  RABBIT.     By  J.  E.  HARTING,

etc.     With  Illustrations.       [In  preparation.

WILDFOWL.  By  the  Hon.  JOHN 
.SCOTT  MONTAGU,  etc.  With  Illustrations, 
etc.  [In  preparation.

Andre. —  COLOXEL  BOGEY'S  SKETCH- 
BOOK. Comprising  an  Eccentric  Collection 
of  Scribbles  and  h-cratches  found  in  disused 
Lockers  and  swept  up  in  the  Pavilion,  to- 
gether with  sundry  After- Dinner  Sayings 
of  the  Colonel.  By  R.  ANDRK,  West  Herts 
Golf  Club.  Oblong  410.,  2s.  6d.

BADMINTON     MAGAZINE

(  THE]  OF  SPORTS  AND  PASTIMES.  Edited 
by  ALFRED  E.  T.  WATSON  ("Rapier"). 
With  numerous  Illustrations.  Price  is. 
monthly.

Vols.  I.-V.     6s.  each.

DEAD  SHOT  (Tin-:):  or,  Sportsman's 
Complete  Guide.  Being  a  Treatise  on  the  Use 
of  the  Gun,  with  Rudimentary  and  Finishing 
Lessons  in  the  Art  of  Shooting  Game  of  all 
kinds.  Also  Game-driving,  Wildfowl  and 
Pigeon-shooting,  Dog-breaking,  etc.  By 
MARKSMAN.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  105.  6rf.

Ellis. —  CHESS  SPARKS  ;  or,  Short  and 
Bright  Games  of  Chess.  Collected  and 
Arranged  by  J.  H.  ELLIS,  M.  A.  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Folkard.— THE    WILD-FOOLER  :    A

Treatise  on  Fowling,  Ancient  and  Modern, 
descriptive  also  of  Decoys  and  Flight-ponds, 
Wild-fowl  Shooting,  Gunning-punts,  Shoot- 
ing-yachts, etc.  Also  Fowling  in  the  Fens 
and  in  Foreign  Countries,  Rock-fowling, 
etc.,  etc.,  by  H.  C.  FOLKARD.  With  13  En- 
gravings on  Steel,  and  several  Woodcuts. 
8vo.,  125.  6d.

Ford. — THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE 
OF  ARCHERY.  By  HORACE  FORD.  New 
Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Re-written 
by  W.  BUTT,  M.A.  With  a  Preface  by  C. 
J.  LONGMAN,  M.A.  Svo.,  145.Francis. — A  BOOK  ON  AXGLINC,  :  or,

Treatise  on  the  Art  ot  Fishing  in  every 
Branch  ;  including  full  Illustrated  List  of  Sal- 
mon Flies.  By  FRANCIS  FRANCIS.  With  Por- 
trait and  Coloured  Plates.  Crown  Svo.,  155.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.          13'

Sport  and  Pastime — continued.

Gibson. —  TOBOGGANING  ON  CROOKED 
RUNS.  By  the  Hon.  HARRY  GIBSON.  With 
Contributions  by  F.  DE  B.  STRICKLAND  and 
'  LADY-TOBOGANNER  '.  With  40  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Graham. — COUNTRY  PASTIMES  FOR 
BOYS.  By  P.  ANDERSON  GRAHAM.  With 
252  Illustrations  from  Drawings  and 
Photographs.  Crown  8vo.,  y.  6d.

Lang. — ANGLING  SKETCHES.  By 
ANDREW  LANG.  With  20  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Lillie. — CROQUET:  its  History,  Rules 
and  Secrets.  By  ARTHUR  LILLIE,  Champion, 
Grand  National  Croquet  Club,  1872;  Winner 
of  the  'All-Comers'  Championship,'  Maid- 
stone,  1896.  With  4  Full-page  Illustrations 
by  LUCIEN  DAVIS,  15  Illustrations  in  the 
Text,  and  27  Diagrams.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Longman. — CHESS  OPENINGS.      By

FREDERICK  W.  LONGMAN.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Madden. — THE  DIARY  OF  MASTER 
WILLIAM  SILENCE  :  a  Study  of  Shakespeare 
and  of  Elizabethan  Sport.  By  the  Right 
Hon.  D.  H.  MADDEN,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the 
University  of  Dublin.  8vo.,  i6s.

Maskelyne. — SffAxrs  AND  FLATS  :  a 
Complete  Revelation  of  the  Secrets  of 
Cheating  at  Games  of  Chance  and  Skill.  By 
JOHN  NEVIL  MASKELYNE,  of  the  Egyptian 
Hall.  With  62  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Moffat. — CRICKETYCRICKET:  Rhymes 
and  Parodies.  By  DOUGLAS  MOFFAT,  with 
Frontispiece  by  Sir  FRANK  LOCKWOOD,  Q.C., 
M.P.,  and  53  Illustrations  by  the  Author. 
Crown  8vo,  2s.  6<1.Moffat. — CRICKETYCRICKET:  Rhymes 
and  Parodies.  By  DOUGLAS  MOFFAT,  with 
Frontispiece  by  Sir  FRANK  LOCKWOOD,  Q.C., 
M.P.,  and  53  Illustrations  by  the  Author. 
Crown  8vo,  2s.  6<1.

Park. —  THE  GAME  OF  GOLF.  By 
WILLIAM  PARK,  Jun.,  Champion  Golfer, 
1887-89.  With  17  Plates  and  26  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.

Payne-Gallwey  (Sir  RALPH,   Bart.).

LETTERS  TO  YOUNG  SHOOTERS  (First 
Series).  On  the  Choice  and  use  of  a  Gun. 
With  41  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.

LETTERS  TO  YOUNG  SMOOT£Ks(Second

Series).  On  the  Production,  Preservation, 
and  Killing  of  Game.  Witli  Directions 
in  Shooting  Wood-Pigeons  and  Breaking- 
in  Retrievers.  With  Portrait  and  103 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  I2s.  6d.

Payne-Gallwey  (Sir  RALPH,    Bart.)

— continued.

LETTERS  TO  YOUNG  SHOOTERS. 
(Third  Series.)  Comprising  a  Short 
Natural  History  of  the  Wildfowl  that 
are  Rare  or  Common  to  the  British 
Islands,  with  complete  directions  in 
Shooting  Wildfowl  on  the  Coast  and 
Inland.  With  200  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  185.

Pole  (WILLIAM).

THE  THEOR  Y  OF  THE  MODERN  SCIEN- 
TIFIC GAME  OF  WHIST.  Fcp.  8vo.,  25. 6d.

THEE^OL  UTIONOF  WHIST:  a  Study  of 
the  Progressive  Changes  which  the  Game 
has  undergone.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Proctor. — How    TO   PLAY    WHIST:

WITH     THE     LAWS     AND     ETIQUETTE    OF

WHIST.  By  RICHARD  A.  PROCTOR.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

Ribblesdale.— THE  Q UEEN'S Ho  L  \\DS 
AXD  STAG- HUNTING  RECOLLECTIONS.  By 
LORD  RIBBLESDALE,  Master  of  the  Buck- 
hounds,  1892-95.  With  Introductory 
Chapter  on  the  Hereditary  Mastership  by 
E.  BURROWS.  With  24  Plates  and  35  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Svo.,  255.

Ronalds. — THE  FLY-FISHER  s  ENTO- 
MOLOGY. By  ALFRED  RONALDS.  With  20 
coloured  Plates.  8vo.,  145.

Thompson  and  Cannan.     HAND-Ronalds. — THE  FLY-FISHER  s  ENTO- 
MOLOGY. By  ALFRED  RONALDS.  With  20 
coloured  Plates.  8vo.,  145.

Thompson  and  Cannan.     HAND-

ix-  HAND  FIGURE  SKA  TING.  By  NORCLIFFE 
G.  THOMPSON  and  F.  LAURA  CANNAN, 
Members  of  the  Skating  Club.  With  an 
Introduction  by  Captain  J.  H.  THOMSON, 
R.A.  With  Illustrations  and  Diagrams. 
i6mo.,  65.

Watson. — RACING  AND  'CHASING:  a

Collection  of  Sporting  Stories.  By  ALFRED 
E.  T.  WATSON,  Editor  of  the  'Badminton 
Maga/ine'.  With  16  Plates  and  }6  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo,  75.  6</.

Wilcocks. — THE   SEA    FISHERMAN:

Comprising  the  Chief  Methods  of  Hook  and 
Line  Fishing  in  the  British  and  other  Seas, 
and  Remarks  on  Nets,  Boats,  and  Boating. 
By  J.  C.  WILCOCKS.  Illustrated.  Cr.  Svo. ,6s.

i4         MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Mental,  Moral,  and  Political  Philosophy.

LOGIC,  RHETORIC,  PSYCHOLOGY,  &-C.

Abbott. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC. 
By  T.  K.  ABBOTT,  B.D.  i2mo.,  35.

Aristotle.

THE  ETHICS:  Greek  Text,  Illustrated 
with  Essay  and  Notes.  By  Sir  ALEXAN- 
DER GRANT,  Bart.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325.

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  ARISTOTLE'S 
ETHICS.  Books  I. -IV.  (Book  X.  c.vi.-ix. 
in  an  Appendix).  With  a  continuous 
Analysis  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  E. 
MOOKE,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  IDS.  6d. 
Bacon  (FRANCIS).

COMPLETE  WORKS.  Edited  by  R.  L. 
ELLIS,  JAMES  SPEDDING  and  D.  D. 
HEATH.  7  vols.  Svo.,  £3  135.  6d.

LETTERS  AND  LIFE,  including  all  his 
occasional  Works.  Edited  by  JAMES 
SPEDDING.  7  vols.  8vo.,  ^,"4  45.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Annotations.  By 
RICHARD  WHATELY,  D.D.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Notes.  By  F. 
STORR  and  C.  H.  GIBSON.  Cr.  Svo,  35.  6d.THE  ESSAYS:  with  Annotations.  By 
RICHARD  WHATELY,  D.D.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Notes.  By  F. 
STORR  and  C.  H.  GIBSON.  Cr.  Svo,  35.  6d.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Introduction, 
Notes,  and  Index.  By  E.  A.  ABBOTT,  D.D. 
2  Vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,6s.  The  Text  and  Index 
only,  without  Introduction  and  Notes,  in 
One  Volume.  Fcp.  Svo.,  2s.  6d. 
Bain  (ALEXANDER).

MENTAL  SCIENCE.     Cr.  8vo.,  65.  6d.

MORAL  SCIENCE.     Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6d.

The  two  works  as   above  can   be  had  in   one 
volume,  price  los.  6d.

SENSES  AND  THE!NTELLECT.  Svo. ,  155. 
EMOTIONS  AND  THE  WILL.  8vo.,  155. 
LOGIC,  DEDUCTIVE  AND  INDUCTIVE.

Part  I.  4s.     Part  II.  6s.  6d. 
PRACTICAL  ESSAYS.    Cr.  Svo.,  2s.

Baldwin. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  EX- 
POSITORY CONSTRUCTION.  By  Dr.  CHARLES 
SEARS  BALDWIN,  Instructor  in  Rhetoric  in 
Yale  University.

Bray. — THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  NECES- 
SITY: or,  Law  in  Mind  as  in  Matter.     By 
CHARLES  BRAY.     Crown  Svo.,  55. 
Crozier  (JOHN   BF.ATTIE).

CIVILISATION  AND  PROGRESS:  being 
the  Outlines  of  a  New  System  of  Political, 
Religious  and  Social  Philosophy.  8vo.,i4$. 
HISTORY  OF  INTELLECTUAL  DE- 
vi'.LOl'Mi'.xr :  on  the  Lines  of  Modern 
Evolution.

Vol.  I.  Greek  and  Hindoo  Thought ;  Graeco- 
Roman  Paganism  ;  Judaism  ;  and  Christi- 
anity down  to  the  Closing  of  the  Schools 
of  Athens  by  Justinian,  529  A. D.  Svo.,  145.

Davidson. — THE  LOGIC  OF  DEFINI- 
TION, Explained  and  Applied.  By  WILLIAM 
L.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  65.

Green  (THOMAS  HILL). — THE  WORKS 
OF.  Edited  by  R.  L.  NETTLESHIP.

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Philosophical  Works.  8vo., 
165.  each.

Vol.  III.  Miscellanies.  With  Index  to  the 
three  Volumes,  and  Memoir.  8vo.,  2  is.

LECTURES  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF 
POLITICAL  OBLIGATION.  With  Preface 
by  BERNARD  BOSANQUET.  Svo.,  55.

Hodgson  (SHADWORTH  H.).LECTURES  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF 
POLITICAL  OBLIGATION.  With  Preface 
by  BERNARD  BOSANQUET.  Svo.,  55.

Hodgson  (SHADWORTH  H.).

TIME  AND  SPACE  :  A  Metaphysical 
Essay.  Svo.,  165.

THE    THEORY    OF    PRACTICE:     an

Ethical  Inquiry.     2  vols.     Svo.,  245.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  REFLECTION.

2  vols.       SVO.,  2IS.

THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  EXPERIENCE. 
Book  I.  General  Analysis  of  Experience  ; 
Book  II.  Positive  Science;  Book  III. 
Analysis  of  Conscious  Action  ;  Book  IV. 
The  Real  Universe.  4  vols.  Svo.

Hume. — THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  WORKS 
OF  DAVID  HUME.  Edited  by  T.  H.  GREEN 
and  T.  H.  GROSE.  4  vols.  Svo.,  565.  Or 
separately,  Essays.  2  vols.  285.  Treatise 
of  Human  Nature.  2  vols.  285.

James.  —  THE  WILL  TO  BEL IEVE,  and

Other  Essays  in  Popular  Philosophy.  By 
WILLIAM  JAMES,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  etc.  Crown 
Svo.,  75.  6d.

Justinian. — THE      INSTITUTES      OF

JUSTINIAN:  Latin  Text,  chiefly  that  of 
Huschke,  with  English  Introduction,  Trans- 
lation, Notes,  and  Summary.  By  THOMAS 
C.  SANDARS,  M.A.  8vo.,  185.

Kant  (IMMANUEL). 
CRITIQUE   OF   PRACTICAL    REASON, 
AXD  OTHER  WORKS  ox  THE  '''HEORY  OP 
ETHICS.     Translated  by  T.  K.  ABBOTT, 
B.D.     With  Memoir.     8vo.,  125.  6d.

FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 
METAPHYSIC  OF  ETHICS.  Translated  by 
T.  K.  ABBOTT,  B.D.  Crown  svo,  35.

INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC,  AND  HIS 
ESSAY  ON  THE  MISTAKEN  SUBTILTY  OP 
THE  FOUR  FIGURES..  Translated  by  T. 
K.  ABBOTT.  Svo.,  6s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Mental,  Moral  and   Political   Philosophy

LOGIC,    RHETORIC,    PSYCHOLOGY,    &-C.

K  i  1 1  i  C  k. — HANDBOOK  TO  MILL'S 
SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.  By  Rev.  A.  H. 
KILLICK,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  3$.  6d.

Ladd  (GEORGE  TRUMBULL).

PHILOSOPHY   OF    KNOWLEDGE  :

Inquiry    into    the    Nature,     Limits

-continued.

an

andLadd  (GEORGE  TRUMBULL).

PHILOSOPHY   OF    KNOWLEDGE  :

Inquiry    into    the    Nature,     Limits

-continued.

an

and

Validity  of  Human  Cognitive  Faculty. 
8vo.,  1 8s.

PHILOSOPHY  OF  MIND  :  An  Essay  on 
the  Metaphysics  of  Psychology.  8vo.,  i6s.

ELEMENTS  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  PSY- 
CHOLOGY. SVO.,  215.

OUTLINES  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  PSY- 
CHOLOGY. SVO.,  I2S.

PSYCHOLOGY,  DESCRIPTIVE  AND  EX- 
PLANATORY. 8vO.,  215.

PRIMER  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.     Cr.  8vo.,

55.   6d.

Lewes.  —  THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSO- 
PHY, from  Thales  to  Comte.  By  GEORGE 
HENRY  LEWES.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325.

Lutoslawski. — THE  ORIGIN  AND 
GROWTH  OF  PLATO'S  LOGIC.  With  an 
Account  of  Plato's  Style  and  of  the  Chrono- 
logy of  his  Writings.  By  WINCENTY 
LUTOSLAWSKI.  8vo.,  215.

Max  Miiller  (F.). 
THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.  8vo.,  215. 
THREE  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON 
THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.     8vo.,  is.  6d. 
net.

Mill. — ANALYSIS  OF  THE  PHENOMENA 
OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.     By  JAMES  MILL. 
2  vols.     Svo.,  285. 
Mill  (JoHN7  STUART). 
A  SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.   Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d. 
ON  LIBERTY.     Crown  8vo.,  is.  4^. 
CONSIDERATIONS   ON   REPRESENTA- 
TIVE GOVERNMENT.     Crown  Svo..  2s. 
UTILITARIANISM.     8vo.,  25.  6d. 
EXAMINATION    OF    SIR      WILLIAM

HAMILTON'S  PHILOSOPHY.     8vo.,  i6s. 
NATURE,  THE  UTILITY  OF  RELIGION,

AND  THEISM.     Three  Essays.     8vo.,  55. 
Mo  nek.  —  AN    INTRODUCTION     TO 
LOGIC.       Hy  WILLIAM   HENRY  S.  MONCK, 
M.A.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

Romanes. — MIND  AND  MOTION  AND

MONISM.       By   GEORGE    JOHN    ROMANES, 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.     Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Stock  (ST.  GEORGE). 
DEDUCTIVE  LOGIC.    Fcp.  8vo.,  y.  6d. 
LECTURES    IN    THE   LYCEUM  :     or,

Aristotle's    Ethics    for    English    Readers.

Edited  hy   ST.   GEORGE   STOCK.     Crown

8vo.,  ~s.  6d.

Sully  QAMES).Aristotle's    Ethics    for    English    Readers.

Edited  hy   ST.   GEORGE   STOCK.     Crown

8vo.,  ~s.  6d.

Sully  QAMES).

THE  HUMAN  MIND  :  a  Text-book  of 
Psychology.  2  vols.  8vo.,  215.

OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.    Svo. ,  gs.

THE  TEACHER'S  HANDBOOK  6F  PSY- 
CHOLOGY. Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.

STUDIES  OF  CHILDHOOD.    8vo.,

ios.  6d.

CHILDREN'S  WAYS:  being  Selections

from  the  Author's  '  Studies  of  Childhood  '. 
With  25  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Sutherland.  — •  THE  ORIGIN  AND 
GROWTH  OF  THE  MORAL  INSTINCT.  By 
ALEXANDER  SUTHERLAND,  M.A.

Swinburne.  —  PICTURE  LOGIC  :  an 
Attempt  to  Popularise  the  Science  of 
Reasoning.  By  ALFRED  JAMES  SWINBURNE, 
M.A.  With  23  Woodcuts.  Crown  Svo.,  55.

Webb. — THE  VEIL  OF  Is  is  :  a  Series 
of  Essays  on  Idealism.  By  THOMAS  E. 
WEBB,  LL.D.,  Q.C.  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Weber. — HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY. 
By  ALFRED  WEBER,  Professor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Strasburg.  Translated  by  FRANK 
THILLY,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  i6s.

Whately  (ARCHBISHOP). 
BACON'S  ESSAYS.  With  Annotations.

8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC.  Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6^7. 
ELEMENTS  OF  RHETORIC.     Cr.  8vo.,

45.  6d.

LESSONS  ON  REASONING.     Fcp.  8vo.,

is.  6d.

Zeller  (Dr.  EDWARD).

THE  STOICS,  EPICUREANS,  AND 
SCEPTICS.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  O.  J. 
REICHEL,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  155.

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF 
GREEK  PHILOSOPHY.  Translated  by 
SARAH  F.  ALLEYNE  and  EVELYN  ABBOTT, 
M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  zos.  6d.

PLATO  AND  THE  OLDER  ACADEMY 
Translated  by  SARAH  F.  ALLEYNE  and 
ALFRED  GOODWIN,  B.A.  Crown  Svo., 
185.

SOCRATES  AND  THE  SOCRATIC 
SCHOOLS.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  O. 
J.  REICHEL,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  ios.  6</.

ARISTOTLE  AND  THE  EARLIER  PERI

I'ATKTICS.  Translated  by  B.  F.  C.  Cos- 
TELLOE,  M.A.,  and  J.  II.  MUIRHEAD, 
M.A.  2  vols.  Crown  Svo.,  245.ARISTOTLE  AND  THE  EARLIER  PERI

I'ATKTICS.  Translated  by  B.  F.  C.  Cos- 
TELLOE,  M.A.,  and  J.  II.  MUIRHEAD, 
M.A.  2  vols.  Crown  Svo.,  245.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Mental,  Moral,  and  Political  Philosophy — continued.

MANUALS   OF  CATHOLIC  PHILOSOPHY.

(Stonyhurst  Scries.)

A  MANUAL  Of  POLITICAL  ECONOMY. 
By  C.  S.  DEVAS,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.

FIRST   PRINCIPLES    OF    KNOWLEDGE. 
By  JOHN  RICKABY,  S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

GENERAL   METAPHYSICS.       By  JOHN 
RICKABY,    S.J.     Crown   8vo.,    55.

LOGIC.     By  RICHARD  F.  CLARKE,  S.J. 
Crown  Svo.,  55.

MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  (ETHICS  AND 
NATURAL  LAW).  By  JOSEPH  RICKABY,  S.J. 
Crown  8vo.,  55.

NATURAL  THEOLOGY.  By  BERNARD 
BOEDDER,  S.J.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.

PSYCHOLOGY.      BY  MICHAEL  MAKER,

S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.

History  and  Science  of  Language,  &c.

Davidson. — LEADING   AND    IMPORT-  \  Max  Miiller  (F.) — continued. 
ANT  ENGLISH  WORDS  :  Explained  and  Ex- 
emplified.       By   WILLIAM    L.    DAVIDSON, 
M.A.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Farrar.  — LA  NG  UA  GE  A  ND  LA  NG  UA  GES  : 
By  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canter- 
bury. Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Graham.  —  ENGLISH  SYNONYMS, 
Classified  and  Explained :  with  Practical 
Exercises.  By  G.  F.  GRAHAM.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

Max  Miiller  (F.).

THE  SCIENCE  OF  LANGUAGE. — Found- 
ed on  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  In- 
stitution in  1861  and  1863.  2  vols.  Crown 
8vo.,  2is.

BIOGRAPHIES  OF  WORDS,  AND  THE 
HOME  OF  THE  ARYAS.  Crown  Svo.,  ys.  6d.

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE 
OF  LANGUAGE,  AND  ITS  PLACE  IN 
GENERAL  EDUCATION,  delivered  at  Ox- 
ford, 1889.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  net.THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE 
OF  LANGUAGE,  AND  ITS  PLACE  IN 
GENERAL  EDUCATION,  delivered  at  Ox- 
ford, 1889.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  net.

Roget. —  THESAURUS  OF  ENGLISH 
WORDS  AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and 
Arranged  so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression 
of  Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composition. 
By  PETER  MARK  ROGET,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
With  full  Index.  Crown  Svo. ,  IDS.  6d.

Whately. — ENGLISH  SYNONYMS.    By 
E.  JANE  WHATELY.     Fcp.  8vo.,  3s.

Political  Economy  and  Economics.

Ashley. — ENGLISH    ECONOMIC    His-    Dowell. — A  HISTORI

TORY  AND  THEORY.  By  W.  J.  ASHLEY, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  Part  I.,  55.  Part  II., 
i  os.  6cf.

Bagehot. — ECONOMIC  STUDIES.  By 
WALTER  BAGEHOT.  Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.

Barnett. — PR  A  CTICA  KLE  SOCIA  i.  ISM. 
Essays  on  Social  Reform.  By  the  Rev.  S. 
A.  BARNETT,  M.A.,  Canon  of  Bristol,  and 
Mrs.  BARNETT.  Crown  8\-o.,  6s.

Brassey. — PAPERS  AND  ADDRESSES 
ON  WORK  AND  WAGES.  By  Lord  BRASSEY. 
Edited  by  J.  POTTER,  and  with  Introduction 
by  GEORGE  HOWELL,  M.P.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Charming".  —  THE    TR  u  TH    A  no  u  T

AGRICI  i/i I.RAL  DEI'KESSIOX :  an  Econo- 
mic Study  of  the  Evidence  of  the  Royal 
Commission.  By  FRANCIS  ALLSTON  CHAN- 
NING,  M.P.,  one  of  the  Commission.  Crown 
8vo..  6s.

Devas. — A  MANUAL  OF  POLITICAL 
ECONOMY.  By  C.  S.  DEVAS,  M.A.  Cr.  Svo., 
6s.  6d.  (Manuals  of  Catholic  Philosophy.)

OF  TAXATION

AND  7 AXES  IN  ENGLAND,  from  the  Earliest 
Times  to  the  Year  1885.  By  STEPHEN 
DOWELL,  (4  vols.  Svo).  Vols.  I.  and  II. 
The  History  of  Taxation,  2is.  Vols.  III. 
and  IV.  The  History  of  Taxes,  2is.

Jordan. —  THE  STANDARD  OF  VALUE. 
By  WILLIAM  LEIGHTON  JORDAN.  Cr. Svo. ,6s.

Leslie. — ESSAYS  ON  POLITICAL  Eco- 
XOMY.  By  T.  E.  CLIFFE  LESLIE,  Hon. 
LL.IX,  Dubl.  Svo,  IDS.  6d.Jordan. —  THE  STANDARD  OF  VALUE. 
By  WILLIAM  LEIGHTON  JORDAN.  Cr. Svo. ,6s.

Leslie. — ESSAYS  ON  POLITICAL  Eco- 
XOMY.  By  T.  E.  CLIFFE  LESLIE,  Hon. 
LL.IX,  Dubl.  Svo,  IDS.  6d.

Macleod  (HENRY  DUNNING). 
BIMETALISM.  8vo.,  55.  net. 
THE  ELEMENTS  OF  BANKING.  Cr.

Svo.,  35.  6d.

THE    THEORY    AND    PRACTICE    OF

BANKING.  Vol.  I.  8vo.,  i2s.  Vol.  II.  14*.

THE    THEORY    OF    CREDIT.      Svo.

In  i  Vol.,  305.  net ;  or  separately.  Vol. 
I.,  los.  net.  Vol.  II.,  Part  I.,  IDS.  net. 
Vol.  II.,  Part  II.,  IDS.  net.

A  DIGEST  OF  THE  LAW  OF  BILLS 
OF  EXCHANGE,  BANK-NOTES,  &c.  Svo., 
55.  net.

THE  BANKING  SYSTEM  OF  ENGLAND.

{In  preparation.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Political  Economy  and  Economies — continued.

M  i  1 1. — POLITICAL    ECONOMY.        By    Toynbee. — LECTURES

JOHN  STUART  MILL.

Popular  Edition.     Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d. 
Library  Edition.     2  vols.     Svo. ,  305. 
Mulhall. — INDUSTRIES  AND   WEALTH 
OF  A'r/vavs.     By  MICHAEL  G.  MULHALL, 
F.S.S.        With     32     full-page     Diagrams. 
Crown  Svo.,  8s.  6d.

Soderini. — SOC/AL/S.V  AND  CATHOLI- 
CISM. From  the  Italian  of  Count  EDWARD 
SODERINI.  By  RICHARD  JENERY-SHEE. 
With  a  Preface  by  Cardinal  VAUGHAN. 
Crown  Svo..  65.

Sy  m  es.  — POL  i  TIC  A  L     ECONOMY  :     a

Short  Text-book  of  Political  Economy. 
With  Problems  for  Solution,  and  Hints  for 
Supplementary  Reading ;  also  a  Supple- 
mentary Chapter  on  Socialism.  By  Pro- 
fessor J.  E.  SYMES,  M.A.,  of  University 
College,  Nottingham.  Crown  Svo.,  as.  6d.

ON  THE  IN- 
DUSTRIAL REVOLUTION  OF  THE  18rn  CEN- 
TURY IN  ENGLAND:  Popular  Addresses, 
Notes  and  other  Fragments.  By  ARNOLD 
TOYNBEE.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author 
by  BENJAMIN  JOWETT,  D. D.  8vo.,  IDS.  fid.Vincent. — THE  LAND  QUESTION  IN 
NORTH  WALES  :  being  a  Brief  Survey  of 
the  History,  Origin,  and  Character  of  the 
Agrarian  Agitation,  and  of  the  Nature  and 
Effect  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  W7elsh 
Land  Commission.  By  J.  E.  VINCENT. 
Svo.,  5s.

"Webb  (SIDNEY  and  BEATRICE). 
THE  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  UNIONISM.

Writh  Map  and  full    Bibliography  of  the 
Subject.     8vo.,  iSs.

INDUSTRIAL   DEMOCRACY:  a  Study 
in  Trade  Unionism.    2  vols.  Svo.,  255.  net.

STUDIES   IN    ECONOMICS  AND   POLITICAL  SCIENCE.

Issued  under  the  auspices  of  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science.

THE  HISTORY  OF  LOCAL  RATES  IN 
ENGLAND  :  Five  Lectures.  By  EDWIN 
CANNAN,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

GERMAN  SOCIAL  DEMOCRACY.  By 
BERTRAND  RUSSELL,  B.A.  With  an  Ap- 
pendix on  Social  Democracy  and  the 
Woman  Question  in  Germany  by  ALYS 
RUSSELL,  B.A.  Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.

SELECT  DOCUMENTS  ILLUSTRATING 
THE  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  UNIONISM.

i.  The  Tailoring  Trade.  Edited  by 
W.  F.  GALTON.  With  a  Preface  by 
SIDNEY  WEBB,  LL.B.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

DEPLOIGE'S  REFERENDUM  EN  SUISSE.

Translated,   with    Introduction    and   Notes, 
by  C.  P.  TREVELYAN,  M.A.  [In preparation.

SELECT  DOCUMENTS  ILLUSTRATING 
THE  STATE  REGULATION  OF  WAGES. 
Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 
W.  A.  S.  HEWINS,  M.A.  [In  preparation.

HUNGARIAN  GILD  RECORDS.  Edited 
by  Dr.  JULIUS  MANDELLO,  of  Budapest.

[/;:  preparation.

THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  ENGLAND 
AND  THE  HANSEAT/C  LEAGUE.  By  Miss 
E.  A.  MACARTHUR.  [In  preparation.

Evolution,    Anthropology,  &c.

Clodd  (EDWARD).

THE  STORY  OF  CREATION:  a  Plain 
Account  of  Evolution.  With  77  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  Svo  ,  35.  6d.

A  PRIMER  OF  EUOLUTION :  being  a

Popular  Abridged  Edition  of  '  The  Story 
of  Creation '.  With  Illustrations.  Fcp. 
Svo.,  is.  6d.A  PRIMER  OF  EUOLUTION :  being  a

Popular  Abridged  Edition  of  '  The  Story 
of  Creation '.  With  Illustrations.  Fcp. 
Svo.,  is.  6d.

Lang. — CUSTOM  AND  MYTH  :  Studies 
of  Early  Usage  and  Belief.  By  ANDREW 
LANG.  With  15  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.

Lubbock. —  THE  ORIGIN  OF  CIVILISA- 
TION, and  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man. 
By  Sir  J.  LUHHOCK,  Bart.,  M.P.  With  5 
Plates  and  20  Illustrations  in  the  Text. 
Svo.,  iSs.

Romanes   (GEORGE    JOHN). 
DARIVIN,  AND  AFTER  DARIUIN:  an

Exposition  of  the  Darwinian  Theory,  and  a 
Discussion  on  Post-Darwinian  Questions. 
Part  I.  THE  DARWINIAN  THEORY.  With

Portrait  of  Darwin  and  125  Illustrations.

Crown  Svo.,  los.  6d. 
Part    II.     POST-DARWINIAN    QUESTIONS:

Heredity  and  Utility.     With  Portrait  of

the  Author  and  5  Illustrations.    Cr.  Svo.,

los.  6d. 
Part     III.      Post-Darwinian     Questions:

Isolation   and   Physiological   Selection.

Crown  Svo.,  55.

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  WEISM ANN- 
ISM.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

ESSAYS.  Edited  by  C.  LLOYD 
MORGAN,  Principal  of  University  College, 
Bristol.  Crown  Svo.,  6s.

i8        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Classical  Literature,  Translations,  &e.

Abbott. — HELLENICA.  A  Collection 
of  Essays  on  Greek  Poetry,  Philosophy, 
History,  and  Religion.  Edited  by  EVELYN 
ABBOTT,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Svo,,  i6s,

ALschylus. — EUMENIDES  OF  S&SCHY-

LUS.     With   Metrical  English  Translation.

By  J.  F.  DAVIES.     8vo.,  75. 
Aristophanes.  —  THE    ACHARNIANS

OF  ARISTOPHANES,  translated  into  English

Verse.    By  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.    Crown  8vo.,  is. 
Aristotle. —  YOUTH  AND    OLD    AGE,

LIFE    AND    DEATH,    AND    RESPIRATION.

Translated,  with  Introduction   and    Notes,

by  W.  OGLE,  M.A.,  M.D.     8vo.,  ys.  6d.LIFE    AND    DEATH,    AND    RESPIRATION.

Translated,  with  Introduction   and    Notes,

by  W.  OGLE,  M.A.,  M.D.     8vo.,  ys.  6d.

Becker  (W.  A.),  Translated   by  the 
Rev.  F.  METCALFE,  B.D. 
GALLUS  :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the 
Time  of  Augustus.     With  Notes  and  Ex- 
cursuses.     With    26    Illustrations.     Post 
8vo. ,  35.  6d.

CHARICLES:  or,  Illustrations  of  the 
Private    Life     of    the    Ancient    Greeks. 
With  Notes  and  Excursuses.      With  26 
Illustrations.     Post  Svo.,  35.  6d. 
Butler. — THE    AUTHORESS    OF    THE 
ODYSSEY,  WHERE  AND  WHEN  SHE  WROTE, 
WHO  SHE  WAS,  THE  USE  SHE  MADE  OF 
•iHE  ILIAD,  AND  HOW  THE  POEM  GREW 
UNDER  HER  HANDS.    By  SAMUEL  BUTLER, 
Author  of  '  Erewhon,'  etc.     With  Illustra- 
tions and  4  Maps.     8vo.,  IDS.  6d. 
Cicero. — CICERO'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 
By  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.     Vols.  I.,  II.,  III.,  8vo., 
each  i2s.     Vol.  IV.,  155.     Vol.  V.,  145.

E  g  b  e  r  t. — INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 
^TUDY  OF  LATIN  INSCRIPTIONS.  By 
JAMES  C.  EGBERT,  Junr.,  Ph.D.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  and  Facsimiles. 
Square  crown  Svo.,  165.

Horace. — THE    WORKS   OF  HORACE,

RENDERED    INTO    ENGLISH    PROSE.         With

Lite,  Introduction  and  Notes.    By  WILLIAM 
COUTTS,  M.A.     Crown  ^vo.,  55.  net.

Lang. — HOMER  AND  THE  EPIC.  By 
ANDREW  LANG.  Crown  8vo.,  gs.  net.

Lucan. —  THE  PHARSALIA  OF  Luc  AN. 
Translated  into  Blank  Verse.  By  Sir 
EDWARD  RIDLEY.  8vo.,  145.

Mackail. — SELECT  EPIGRAMS  FROM 
THE  GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.  By  J.  W.  MAC- 
KAIL.  Edited  with  a  Revised  Text,  Intro- 
duction, Translation,  and  Notes.  8vo.,  i6s.

Rich. — A  DICTIONARY  OF  ROMAN  AND 
GREEK  ANTIQUITIES.  By  A.  RICH,  B.A. 
With  2000  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.Rich. — A  DICTIONARY  OF  ROMAN  AND 
GREEK  ANTIQUITIES.  By  A.  RICH,  B.A. 
With  2000  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Sophocles. — Translated  into  English 
Verse.  By  ROBERT  WHITELAW,  M.A., 
Assistant  Master  in  Rugby  School.  Cr.  8vo., 
8s.  6d.

Tacitus.  —  THE  HISTORY  OF  P. 
CORNELIUS  TACITUS.  Translated  into 
English,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes, 
Critical  and  Explanatory,  by  ALBERT 
WILLIAM  QUILL,  M.A.,  T.C.D.  2  vols. 
Vol.  I.  Svo.,  75.  6d.  Vol.  II.  8vo.,  I2S.  6d.

Tyrrell.  —  DUBLIN  TRANSLATIONS 
INTO  GREEK  AND  LATIN  VERSE.  Edited 
by  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.  8vo.,  6s.

Virgil.

THE  ALNEID  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated 
into  English  Verse  by  JOHN  CONINGTON. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  POEMS  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated 
into  English  Prose  by  JOHN  CONINGTON. 
Crown  Svo.,  6s.

THE  S£NEID  OF  VIRGIL,  freely  trans- 
lated into  English  Blank  Verse.  By 
W.  J.  THORNHILL.  Crown  Svo.,  js.  6d.

THE  SENEID  OF  VIRGIL.     Translated 
into  English  Verse  by  JAMES  RHOADES. 
Books  I. -VI.     Crown  Svo.,  5$. 
Books  VII. -XII.     Crown  Svo.,  55.

Wilkins. —  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE 
HOMERIC  POEMS.  By  G.  WILKINS.  Svo.,  6s.

Poetry  and  the  Drama.

Allingham  (WILLIAM).

IRISH   SONGS    AND   POEMS.       With

Frontispiece  of  the  Waterfall  of  Asaroe. 
Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.

LAURENCE  BLOOMFIELD.  With  Por- 
trait of  the  Author.  Fcp.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

FLOWER  PIECES ;  DAY  AND  NIGHT 
SONGS  ;  BALLADS.  With  2  Designs  by 
I).  G.  ROSSETTI.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.  large 
paper  edition,  I2s.

Allingham  (WILLIAM) — continued.

LIFE  AND  PHANTASY  :  with  Frontis- 
piece by  Sir  J.  E.  MILLAIS,  Bart.,  and 
Design  by  ARTHUR  HUGHES.  Fcp.  8vo., 
6s. ;  large  paper  edition,  i2s.

THOUGHT  AND  WORD,  AND  ASH  BY 
MANOR:  a  Play.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.;  large 
paper  edition,  12s.

BLACKBERRIES.    Imperial  i6mo.,  65.THOUGHT  AND  WORD,  AND  ASH  BY 
MANOR:  a  Play.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.;  large 
paper  edition,  12s.

BLACKBERRIES.    Imperial  i6mo.,  65.

Sets  of  the  above  6  vols.  may  be  had  in  uni- 
form Half -parchment  binding,  price  305.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL   WORKS.

Poetry  and  the  Drama — continued.

Armstrong  (G.  F.  SAVAGE).

POEMS  :  Lyrical  and  Dramatic.   Fcp. 
8vo.,  6s.

KING  SA  UL.    (The  Tragedy  of  I srael , 
Part  I.)     Fcp.  Svo.,  55.

KING  DA  VID.  (The  Tragedy  of  Israel, 
Part  II.)     Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

KING  SOLOMON.     (The  Tragedy  of 
Israel,  Part  III.)     Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.

UGONE  :  a  Tragedy.     Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

A  GARLAND  FROM  GREECE  :  Poems.

Fcp.  8vo.,  ys.  6d. 
STOX/ES  OF  WICKLOW:  Poems.  Fcp.

8vo.,  ys.  6d.

MEPHISTOPHELES  IN  BROADCLOTH  : 
a  Satire.     Fcp.  Svo.,  45.

ONE   IN   THE   INFINITE:    a    Poem. 
Crown  Svo.,  ys.  6<f.

Armstrong. — THE  POETICAL  WORKS 
OF  EDMUND  J.  ARMSTRONG.    Fcp.  Svo.,  55.

Arnold. —  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD  :

or,  The  Great  Consummation.  By  Sir 
EDWIN  ARNOLD.  With  14  Illustrations 
after  HOLMAN  HUNT.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Beesly  (A.  H.).

BALLADS      AND      OTHER       VERSE.

Fcp.  8vo.,  5s. 
DANTON,  AND  OTHER  VERSE.     Fcp.

8vo.,  4S.  6(/.

Bell  (MRS.  HUGH). 
CHAMBER   COMEDIES  :    a  Collection

of  Plays  and  Monologues  for  the  Drawing 
Room.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

FAIRY  TALE  PLAYS,  AND  How  TO  ' 
ACT  THEM.  With  91  Diagrams  and  52  j 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Cochrane  (ALFRED).

THE   KESTREL'S   NEST,    and    other 
Verses.     Fcp.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

LEI'IORE      PLECTKO  :       Occasional 
Verses.       Fcap.    Svo.,    35.    6d.

Douglas. — J}OF.MS  or  A  COUNTRY 
GKXTI.KMAN.  By  Sir  GEORGE  DOUGLAS, 
Bart.,  Author  of  '  The  Fireside  Tragedy  '. 
Crown  Svo.,  \s.  6</.

Goethe.Douglas. — J}OF.MS  or  A  COUNTRY 
GKXTI.KMAN.  By  Sir  GEORGE  DOUGLAS, 
Bart.,  Author  of  '  The  Fireside  Tragedy  '. 
Crown  Svo.,  \s.  6</.

Goethe.

FAUST,  Part  I.,  the  German  Text, 
with  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  ALBERT 
M.  SELSS,  Ph.D.,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  FIRST  PART  OF  THE  TRAGEDY 
OF  FAUST  IN  ENGLISH.  By  THOS.  E. 
WEBB,  LL.D.,  sometime  Fellow  of  Tri- 
nity College  ;  Professor  of  Moral  Philo- 
sophy in  the  University  of  Dublin,  etc. 
New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  with  THE 
DEATH  OF  FAUST,  from  the  Second  Part. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Gurney  (Rev.  ALFRED,  M.A.).

DAY-DREAMS:  Poems.  Crown  Svo., 
3s.  6rf.

Loi'E 's  FRUITION,  and  other  Poems.

Ingelow  QEAN).

POETICAL  WORKS.  Complete  in 
One  Volume.  Crown  8vo.,  ys.  6d.

POETICAL    Jl'oxA's.       2  vols.      Fcp.

Svo.,  I2s.

LYRICAL  AND  OTHER  POEMS.  Selec- 
ted from  the  Writings  of  JF.AN  INGELOW. 
Fcp.  Svo.,  2s.  6d.  cloth  plain,  35.  cloth  gilt.

Lang  (ANDREW).

GRASS  OF  PARNASSUS.  Fcp.  Svo., 
2s.  6d.  net.

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.  Edited 
by  ANDREW  LANG.  With  100  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Layard     and     Corder. — SONGS    IN

MANY  Moons.  By  NINA  F.  LAYARD  ;  THE 
WANDERING  ALBATROSS,  etc.  By  ANNIE 
CORDER.  In  One  Volume.  Crown  Svo.,  55.

Lecky. — POEMS.     By  the  Right  Hon. 
W.  E.  H.  LECKY.     Fcp.  Svo. ,  =,s.

Lytton    (THE     EARL     OF),     (OWEN 
MEREDITH).

MARAH.     Fcp.  8vo.,  6.v.  6d.

KING  POPPY  :  a  Fantasia.  With  i 
Plate  and  Design  on  Title-Page  by  Sir 
EDWARD  BURNE-JONES,  Bart.  Crown 
8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

THE  WANDERER.     Cr.  Svo.,  IDS.  6d. 
LUCILE.     Crown  Svo.,  io\.  6d. 
SELECTED  POEMS.    Cr.  Svo.,  105.  6d.

20         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Poetry  and   the  Drama — continued.

Macaulay. — LA  YS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME,

ETC.     By  Lord  MACAULAY.20         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Poetry  and   the  Drama — continued.

Macaulay. — LA  YS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME,

ETC.     By  Lord  MACAULAY.

Illustrated  by  G.  SCHARF.  Fcp.  410.,  IDS.  6d.

Bijou       Edition.

i8mo.,  2s.  6d.  gilt  top.

—    Popular  Edition.

Fcp.  410.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth. 
Illustrated   by  J.    R.    WEGUELIN.      Crown

8vo.,  35.  6d. 
Annotated  Edition.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed,

is.  6d.  cloth.

Macdonald  (GEORGE,  LL.D.).

A  BOOK  OF  STRIFE,  IN  THE  FORM  OF 
THE  DIARY  OF  AN  OLD  SOUL  :  Poems. 
i8mo.,  f-s.

RAMPOLLI  :  GROWTHS  FROM  A  LONG- 
PLAXTED  ROOT :  being  Translations,  New 
and  Old  (mainly  in  verse),  chiefly  from  the 
German ;  along  with  '  A  Year's  Diary  of 
an  Old  Soul '.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Moffat. —  CRICKETS-CRICKET:  Rhymes 
and  Parodies.  By  DOUGLAS  MOFFAT. 
With  Frontispiece  by  Sir  FRANK  LOCKWOOD, 
Q.C.,  M.P.,  and  53  Illustrations  by  the 
Author.  Crown  8vo,  as.  6J.

Morris  (WILLIAM). 
POETICAL  WORKS — LIBRARY  EDITION. 
Complete  in  Ten  Volumes.     Crown  8vo., 
price  6s.  each.

THE  EARTHLY  PARADISE.  4  vols. 
6s.  each.

THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  JASON.

6s.

THE  DEFENCE  OF  GUENEVERE,  and 
other  Poems.  6s.

THE  STOR  Y  OF  SIGURD  THE  VOLSUNG, 
AND  THE  FALL  OF  THE  NIBLUNGS.  6s.

LOVE  is  ENOUGH  ;  or,  the  Freeing  of 
Pharamond:  A  Morality;  and  POEMS 
BY  THE  WAY.  6s.

THE   ODYSSEY  OF  HOMER.       Done

into  English  Verse.      6s.

THE   S£NEIDS   OF    VIRGIL.       Done

into  English  Verse.     6s.

Certain  of  the  POETICAL  WORKS  may  also  be 
had  in  the  following  Editions  : —

THE  EA  R  THL  j '  PA  RA  DISK.

Popular    Edition.     5  vols.      I2mo.,  255.;

or  5s.  each,  sold  separately. 
The  same  in   Ten   Parts,  25S.;  or  2s.  6d.

each,  sold  separately. 
Cheap    Edition,    in   i   vol.     Crown   8vo.,

7s.  6d.or  5s.  each,  sold  separately. 
The  same  in   Ten   Parts,  25S.;  or  2s.  6d.

each,  sold  separately. 
Cheap    Edition,    in   i   vol.     Crown   8vo.,

7s.  6d.

Morris  (WILLIAM) — continued.

POEMS  BY  THE  WAY.    Square  crown

8vo.,  6s.

%*  For    Mr.    William    Morris's    Prose 
Works,  see  pp.  22  and  31.

Nesbit. — LA  YS  AND  LEGENDS.  By  E. 
NESBIT  (Mrs.  HUBERT  BLAND).  First 
Series.  Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.  Second  Series. 
With  Portrait.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Riley  QAMES  WHITCOMB).

OLD  FASHIONED  ROSES:  Poems. 
i2mo.,  55.

A  CHILD-  WORLD  :  POEMS.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  55.

POEMS:    HERE  AT  HOME.       i6mo,

6s.  net.

RusAiyA'r  OF  Doc  SIFERS.  With 
43  Illustrations  by  C.  M.  RELYEA.  Crown 
8vo.

Romanes. — A  SELECTION  FROM  THE 
POEMS  OF  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES,  M.A., 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.  With  an  Introduction^by 
T.  HERBERT  WARREN,  President  of  Mag- 
dalen College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Shakespeare. — BOWDLERS  FAMILY

SHAKESPEARE.  With  36  Woodcuts,  i  vol. 
8vo.,  145.  Or  in  6  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2is.

THE  SHA  KESPEA  RE  BIR  THDA  Y  BOOK. 
By  MARY  F.  DUNBAR.  32mo.,  is.  6d.

Tupper. — POEMS.  By  JOHN  LUCAS 
TUPPER.  Selected  and  Edited  by  WILLIAM 
MICHAEL  ROSSETTI.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Wordsworth.  —  SELECTED    POEMS.

By  ANDREW  LANG.  With  Photogravure 
Frontispiece  of  Rydal  Mount.  With  16 
Illustrations  and  numerous  Initial  Letters. 
By  ALFRED  PARSONS,  A.R.A.  Crown  8vo., 
gilt  edges,  6s.

Wordsworth   and   Coleridge. — A

DESCRH'TIOX    OF    THE    WORDSWORTH  AND

COLERIDGE  A-/A\USCKH'TS  i.\  THE  POS- 
SESSION OF  MR.  T.  A'OKTO.V  LONGMAN. 
Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  HALE  WHITE. 
With  3  Facsimile  Reproductions.  4to., 
i  os.  6d.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         21

Fiction,   Humour,   &c.

Allingham. — CROOKED   PATHS.     ByMESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         21

Fiction,   Humour,   &c.

Allingham. — CROOKED   PATHS.     By

FRANCIS  ALLINGHAM.     Crown  8vo.,  6s. 
Anstey  (F.,  Author  of  'Vice  Versa'). 
VOCES    POPULI.       Reprinted     from 
'  Punch  '.     First  Series.      With  20  Illus- 
trations   by    J.    BERNARD     PARTRIDGE. 
Crown   8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  MAN  FROM  BLANKLEY'S  :  a 
Story  in  Scenes,  and  other  Sketches. 
With  24  Illustrations  by  J.  BERNARD 
PARTRIDGE.  Post  410.,  6s.

Astor. — A  JOURNEY  IN  OTHER 
WORLDS  :  a  Romance  of  the  Future.  By 
JOHN  JACOB  ASTOR.  With  10  Illustrations. 
Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Beaconsfield  (THE   EARL   OF). 
NOVELS    AND     TALES.        Complete 
in  ii  vols.   Crown  Svo.,  is.  6d.  each.

Vivian  Grey. 
The  Young  Duke,  etc. 
Alroy,  Ixion,  etc. 
Contarini        Fleming,

etc. 
Tancred.

Sybil.

Henrietta  Temple.

Venetia.

Coningsby.

Lothair.

Endymion.

NOVELS  AND  TALES.  The  Hughen- 
den  Edition.  With  2  Portraits  and  n 
Vignettes,  n  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  425.

Black. — THE  PRINCESS  DESIREE. 
By  CLEMENTINA  BLACK.  With  8  Illustra- 
tions by  JOHN  WILLIAMSON.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Crump. —  WIDE  ASUNDER  AS  THE 
POLES.  By  ARTHUR  CRUMP.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

Deland  (MARGARET). 
PHILIP    AND    His    WIFE.       Crown

Svo.,    2s.    6d. 
THE    WISDOM  OF  FOOLS.       Stories.

Crown   Svo.,   55.

Diderot. — RAMEAU'S   NEPHEW:    a

Translation  from  Diderot's  Autographic 
Text.  By  SYLVIA  MARGARET  HILL.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

Dougall. — BEGGARS  ALL.  By  L. 
DOUGALL.  Crown  Svo.,  y.  6d.

Doyle  (A.  CONAN). 
MICAII   CLARKE:    A  Tale  of  Mon-

mouth's    Rebellion.       With    10    Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  POLESTAR, 
and  other  Tales.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    REFUGEES  :     A   Tale    of    the

Huguenots.     With  25   Illustrations.     Cr. 
Svo.,  35.  6d.THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  POLESTAR, 
and  other  Tales.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    REFUGEES  :     A   Tale    of    the

Huguenots.     With  25   Illustrations.     Cr. 
Svo.,  35.  6d.

THE  STARK  MUNKO  LETTERS.     Cr.

Svo,  3S.  6</.

Farrar  (F.  W.,  DEAN  OF  CANTER- 
BURY).

DARKNESS  AND  DAWN:  or,  Scenes 
in  the  Days  of  Nero.  An  Historic  Tale. 
Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

GATHERING  CLOUDS  :  a  Tale  of  the 
Days  of  St.  Chrysostom.  Cr.  8vo.,  js.  6d.

Fowler  (EDITH  H.).

THE  YOUNG  PRETENDERS.  A  Story 
of  Child  Life.  With  12  Illustrations  by 
PHILIP  BURNE-JONES.  Crown  Svo. ,  6s.

THE  PROFESSOR'S  CHILDREN.  With 
24  Illustrations  by  ETHEL  KATE  BURGESS. 
Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Froude. — THE  Two  CHIEFS  OF  DUN- 
BOY:  an  Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century. 
By  JAMES  A.  FROUDE.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Gilkes. — KALLISTR ATUS  :  an  Auto- 
biography. A  Story  of  Hannibal  and  the 
Second  Punic  War.  By  A.  H.  GILKES,  M.A., 
Master  of  Dulwich  College.  With  3  Illus- 
trations by  MAURICE  GREIFFENHAGEN. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Graham. — THE     RED      SCAUR:     A

Story  of  the  North  Country.  By  P. 
ANDERSON  GRAHAM.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Gurdon. — MEMORIES  AND  FANCIES  :

Suffolk  Tales  and  other  Stories ;  Fairy 
Legends  ;  Poems  ;  Miscellaneous  Articles. 
By  the  late  LADY  CAMILLA  GURDON,  Author 
of  '  Suffolk  Folk-Lore  '.  Crown  Svo.,  =,s.

Haggard  (H.  RIDER). 
HEART  OF  THE    WORLD.     With  15

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

JOAN  HASTE.  With  20  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  MIST.     With

16  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

MONTEZUMA'S  DAUGHTER.    With  24

Illustrations.     Crown  Svo. ,  35.  6d.

SHE,  With  32  Illustrations.  Crown 
Svo.,  3S.  6d.

ALLAN    QUATERMAIN.       With    31

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

MAIWA'  s  REI'ENGE  :  Cr.  Svo.,  is.  6<L 
COLONEL  QUARITCH,  I'.C.  WithALLAN    QUATERMAIN.       With    31

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

MAIWA'  s  REI'ENGE  :  Cr.  Svo.,  is.  6<L 
COLONEL  QUARITCH,  I'.C.  With

Frontispiece  and  Vignette.  Cr.  .Svo..  35.  6d.

CLEOPATRA.  With  29  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6</.

22        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Fiction,    Humour,   &c. — continued.

Haggard  (H.  RIDER) — continued. 
BEATRICE.     With  Frontispiece  and

Vignette.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

ERIC  BRIGHTEYES.  With  51  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

NADA  THE  LILY.  With  23  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

ALLANS  WIFE.  With  34  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    WITCH'S   HEAD.       With     16

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

MR.    MEESON 's    WILL.      With    16

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

DAWN.  With  16  Illustrations.  Cr. 
8vo.,  3S.  6d.

Haggard  and  Lang. — THE  WORLD'S 
DESIRE.  By  H.  RIDER  HAGGARD  and 
ANDREW  LANG.  With  27  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Harte. — IN  THE  CARQUINEZ  WOODS 
and  other  stories.  By  BRET  HARTE.  Cr. 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

Hope. — THE  HEART  OF  PRINCESS 
OSRA.  By  ANTHONY  HOPE.  With  9  Illus- 
trations by  JOHN  WILLIAMSON.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

Hornung. — THE  UNBIDDEN  GUEST. 
By  E.  W.  HORNUNG.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Jerome. — SKETCHES  IN  LAI~ENDEK  : 
BLUE  AND  GREEN.  By  JEROME  K.  JEROME, 
Author  of  •  Three  Men  in  a  Boat.'  etc. 
Crown  Svo.,  65.

Lang. — A  MONK  OF  FIFE  ;  a  Story 
of  the  Days  of  Joan  of  Arc.  By  ANDREW 
LANG.  With  13  Illustrations  by  SELWYN 
IMAGE.  Crown  8vo.,  3$.  6d.

Levett- Yeats  (S.). 
THE  CHEVALIER  D^AURIAC.    Crown

8vo.,  65.

A   GALAHAD  OF  THE   CRF.EKS,  and

other  Stories.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Lyall  (EDNA).

THE  A  UTOIUOGRAPHY  OF  A  SLANDER. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.,  sewed.8vo.,  65.

A   GALAHAD  OF  THE   CRF.EKS,  and

other  Stories.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Lyall  (EDNA).

THE  A  UTOIUOGRAPHY  OF  A  SLANDER. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.,  sewed.

Presentation  Edition.  With  20  Illustra- 
tions by  LANCELOT  SPEED.  Crown 
8vo.,  2s.  6</.  net.

THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A   TRUTH.

Fcp.  8vo.,  is.,  sewed  ;   is.  6d.,  cloth.

DOREF.N.  The  Stery  of  a  Singer. 
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

WAYFAKINC,  MF.N.     Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Melville  (G.  J.  WHYTE).

The  Gladiators. 
The  Interpreter. 
Good  for  Nothing. 
The  Queen's  Maries.

Holmby  House. 
Kate  Coventry. 
Digby  Grand. 
General  Bounce.

2rown  8vo.,  is.  6d.  each. 
Merriman. — FLOTSAM:  A  Story  of

the  Indian  Mutiny.  By  HENRY  SETON 
MERRIMAN.  With  Frontispiece  and  Vig- 
nette by  H.  G.  MASSEY,  A.R.E.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

Morris  (WILLIAM).

THE  SUNDERING  FLOOD.  .    Cr.  8yo.

THE  WATER  OF  THE  WONDROUS 
ISLES.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.

THE  WELL  A  r  THE  WORLD'S  END. 
2  vols.  8vo.,  28s.

THE  STORY  OF  THE  GLITTERING 
PLAIN,  which  has  been  also  called  The 
Land  of  the  Living  Men,  or  The  Acre  of 
the  Undying.  Square  post  Svo.,  5$.  net.

THE  ROOTS  OF  THE  MOUNTAINS, 
wherein  is  told  somewhat  of  the  Lives  of 
the  Men  of  Burgdale,  their  Friends,  their 
Neighbours,  their  Foemen,  and  their 
Fellows-in-Arms.  Written  in  Prose  and 
Verse.  Square  crown  8vo.,  85.

A  TALE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  THE 
WOLFINGS,  and  all  the  Kindreds  of  the 
Mark.  Written  in  Prose  and  Verse. 
Square  crown  Svo.,  6s.

A   DREAM  OF  JOHN  BALL,  AND  A

KING'S  LESSON.     lamo.,  is.  6d. 
NEWS   FROM    NOWHERE;     or,    An 
Epoch   of  Rest.      Being  some   Chapters 
from  an   Utopian   Romance.      Post  Svo., 
is.  6d.

%*  For  Mr.  William  Morris's  Poetical 
Works,  see  p.  20.

Newman  (CARDINAL). 
Loss  AND  GAIN  :    The    Story  of  a%*  For  Mr.  William  Morris's  Poetical 
Works,  see  p.  20.

Newman  (CARDINAL). 
Loss  AND  GAIN  :    The    Story  of  a

Convert.     Crown  Svo.      Cabinet  Edition, 
6s.  j  Popular  Edition,  35.  6d.

CALLISTA  :    A    Tale    of   the   Third

Century.     Crown  Svo.     Cabinet  Edition, 
6s. ;   Popular  Edition,  35.  6d.

Oliphant. — OLD      MR.      TREDGOLD.

By  Mrs.  OLIPHANT.     Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Phillipps-Wolley. — SNAP:  a  Legend 
of  the  Lone  Mountain.  By  C.  PHILLIPPS- 
WOLLEY.  With  13  Illustrations.  Crown 
Svo.,  3S.  6d.

Quintana. — THE   CID    CAMPEADOR  :

an  Historical  Romance.  By  D.  ANTONIO 
DE  TRUEBA  \  LA  QUINTANA.  Translated 
from  the  Spanish  by  HENRY  J.  GILL,  M.A., 
T.C.D.  Crown  Svo. ,  6s.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         23

Fiction,   Humour,   &e. — continued.

Rhoscomyl  (OWEN).

THE  JEWEL  OF  YNYS  GALON  :  being 
a  hitherto  imprinted  Chapter  in  the  History 
of  the  Sea  Rovers.  With  12  Illustrations 
by  LANCELOT  SPEED.  Cr.  8vo.,  3*.  6d.

BATTLEMENT  AND  TOWER  :  a 
Romance.  With  Frontispiece  by  R. 
CATON  WOODVILLE.  Crown  8vo.,  65.

FOR  THE  WHITE  ROSE  OF  ARNO: 
a  Story  of  the  Jacobite  Rising  of  1745. 
Crown  8vo.,  65.

Sewell  (ELIZABETH  M.). 
A  Glimpse  of  the  World,     Amy  Herbert. 
Laneton  Parsonage.  Cleve  Hall.

Margaret  Percival.  Gertrude.

Katharine  Ashton.  Home  Life.

The  Earl's  Daughter.  After  Life.

The  Experience  of  Life.        Ursula.     Ivors. 
Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6d.  each  cloth  plain.     2s.  6d. 
each  cloth  extra,  gilt  edges.

Stevenson  (ROBERT  Louis).

THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR.JEKYLL 
AND  MR.  HYDE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed, 
is.  6d.  cloth.

THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR. 
JEKYLL  AND  MR.  HYDE;  WITH  OTHER 
FABLES.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  €>d.THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR.JEKYLL 
AND  MR.  HYDE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed, 
is.  6d.  cloth.

THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR. 
JEKYLL  AND  MR.  HYDE;  WITH  OTHER 
FABLES.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  €>d.

MORE  NEW  ARABIAN  NIGHTS — THE 
DYNAMITER.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVEN- 
SON and  FANNY  VAN  DE  GRIFT  STEVEN- 
SON. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  WRONG  Box.  By  ROBERT 
Louis  STEVENSON  and  LLOYD  OSBOURNE. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Suttner. — LAY  DOWN    YOUR   ARMS

(Die  Waffen  Niedcr) :  The  Autobiography 
of  Martha  von  Tilling.  By  BERTHA  VON 
SUTTNER.  Translated  by  T.  HOLMES. 
Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

Taylor.- — -EARLY     ITALIAN     LOUE-

STORIES.  Edited  and  Retold  by  UNA 
TAYLOR.  With  12  Illustrations  by  H.  J. 
FORD.

Trollope  (ANTHONY).

THE  WARDEN.     Cr.  8vo.,  15.  6d.

B ARCH  ESTER  TOWERS.  Cr.  8\'O., 
is.  6d.

Walford  (L.  B.).

//v/  KILDARE  :  a  Matrimonial  Pro- 
blem. Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Life. 
Cr.

Cr.

6d.

Cr.

Cr.

Walford  (L.  B.)—  continued.

MR.    SMITH:   a    Part   of  his 
Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

THE  BABY'S    GRANDMOTHER. 
8vo.,  as.  6d.

COUSINS.     Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

TROUBLESOME    DAUGHTERS.

8vo.,  2s.  6d.

PAULINE.     Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
DICK  NETHERBY.     Cr.  8vo.,  25.

THE  HISTORY  OF  A    WEEK.

8vo.  2s.  6d.

A  STIFF-NECKED  GENERATION. 
8vo.  2S.  6d.

NAN,  and  other  Stories.     Cr.  8vo.,

as.  6d. 
THE   MISCHIEF   OF  MONICA.       Cr.

8vo.,  2s.  6d.

THE  ONE  GOOD   GUEST.     Cr.  8vo.

2s.  6d.

'  PLOUGHED]  and  other  Stories. 
Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

THE  MA  TCHMAKER.    Cr.  8vo.,  25.  6d.

W^atson. — RACING  AND 'CHASING:  a 
Collection  of  Sporting  Stories.  By  ALFRED 
E.  T.  WATSON,  Editor  of  the  '  Badminton 
Magazine  '.  With  16  Plates  and  36  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  Svo.,  ~s.  6d.

Weyman  (STANLEY).

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  WOLF.     With

Frontispiece  and  Vignette.     Crown  8vo., 
3s.  6d.Weyman  (STANLEY).

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  WOLF.     With

Frontispiece  and  Vignette.     Crown  8vo., 
3s.  6d.

A   GENTLEMAN  OF  FRANCE.     With

Frontispiece  and  Vignette.     Cr.  8vo.,  6s.

THE  RED  COCKADE.  With  Frontis- 
piece and  Vignette.  Crown  Svo.,  6s.

SHREWSBURY.  \Vith  24  Illustra- 
tions by  CLAUDE  A.  SHEPPEKSON.  Cr. 
Svo.,  6s.

Whishaw  (FRED.).

A  BOYAR  OF  THE  Tl-.R Rllil.E  :  a 
Romance  of  the  Court  of  Ivan  the  Cruel, 
First  Tzar  of  Russia.  With  12  Illustra- 
tions by  H.  G.  MASSEY,  A. R.E.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

A  TSARS  GRATITUDE:  A  Story  of 
Modern  Russia.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Woods.  —  Wj-:i-:riNC,  FERRY,  and  other 
Stories.  By  MARGARET  L.  WOODS,  Author 
of  •  A  Village  Tragedy  '.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

24         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Popular  Science  (Natural  History,  &e.).

Hartwig  (DR.  GEORGE) — continued.

Butler. — OUR  HOUSEHOLD  INSECTS. 
An  Account  of  the  Insect-Pests  found  in 
Dwelling-Houses.  By  EDWARD  A.  BUTLER, 
B.A.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.).  With  113  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Furneaux  (W.).

THE  OUTDOOR  WORLD;  or  The 
Young  Collector's  Handbook.  With  18 
Plates  (16  of  which  are  coloured),  and  549 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo., 
75.  6d.

BUTTERFLIES  AND  MOTHS  (British). 
With  12  coloured  Plates  and  241  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

LIFE  IN  PONDS  AND  STREAMS. 
With  8  coloured  Plates  and  331  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Hart-wig  (DR.  GEORGE).

THE  SEA  AND  ITS  LIVING  WONDERS. 
With  12  Plates  and  303  Woodcuts.  8vo., 
75.  net.

THE  TROPICAL  WORLD.  With  8 
Plates  and  172  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net.

THE  POLAR  WORLD.  With  3  Maps, 
8  Plates  and  85  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net.

THE  SUBTERRANEAN  WORLD.  With 
3  Maps  and  80  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net.THE  POLAR  WORLD.  With  3  Maps, 
8  Plates  and  85  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net.

THE  SUBTERRANEAN  WORLD.  With 
3  Maps  and  80  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  75.  net.

THE  AERIAL  WORLD.  With  Map,  8 
Plates  and  60  Woodcuts.  Svo.,  75.  net.

HEROES  OF  THE  POLAR  WORLD.  With

19  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  25.

WONDERS  OF  THE  TROPICAL  FORESTS. 
With  40  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s.

WORKERS  UNDER  THE  GROUND.VJ\\\\

29  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  25.

MAR i-' ELS  OVER  OUR  HEADS.    With

29  Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  2s.

SEA  MONSTERS  AND  SEA  BIRDS. 
With  75  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  25.  6d.

DENIZENS  OF  THE  DEEP.    With  117

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.,  25.  6d.

VOLCANOES  AND  EARTHQUAKES. 
With  30  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  25.  6d.

WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE  TROPICS. 
With  66  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Helmholtz. — POPULAR  LECTURES  ON 
SCIENTIFIC  SUBJECTS.  By  HERMANN  VON 
HELMHOLTZ.  With  68  Woodcuts.  2  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

Hudson  (W.  H.).

BRITISH  BIRDS.  With  a  Chapter 
on  Structure  and  Classification  by  FRANK 
E.  BEDDARD,  F.R.S.  With  16  Plates  (8 
of  which  are  Coloured),  and  over  100  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

BIRDS  IN  LONDON.    With  numerous

Illustrations  from   Drawings   and   Photo- 
graphs.

Proctor  (RICHARD  A.).

LIGHT  SCIENCE  FOR  LEISURE  HOURS. 
Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  3 
vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.  each.

ROUGH  WAYS  MADE  SMOOTH.  Fami- 
liar Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

PLEASANT  WAYS  IN  SCIENCE.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

NATURE  STUDIES.  By  R.  A.  PROC- 
TOR, GRANT  ALLEN,  A.  WILSON,  T. 
FOSTER  and  E.  CLODD.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.

LEISURE  READINGS.  By  R.  A.  PROC- 
TOR, E.  CLODD,  A.  WILSON,  T.  FOSTER 
and  A.  C.  RANYARD.  Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.LEISURE  READINGS.  By  R.  A.  PROC- 
TOR, E.  CLODD,  A.  WILSON,  T.  FOSTER 
and  A.  C.  RANYARD.  Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

%*  For  Mr.  Proctor's  other  books  sec  pp.  13, 
28  and  31,  and  Messrs.  Longmans  &•  Co.'s 
Catalogue  of  Scientific  Works.

Stanley.—  A  FAMILIAR  HISTORY  OF 
BIRDS.  By  E.  STANLEY,  D.D.,  formerly 
Bishop  of  Norwich.  With  160  Illustrations. 
Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6rf.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS

Popular    Science    (Natural  History,  &e.) — continued.

\  Wood  (REV.  J.  G.) — continued.

Wood  (REV.  J.  G.).

HOMES  WITHOUT  HANDS:  A  Descrip- 
tion of  the  Habitations  of  Animals,  classed 
according  to  the  Principle  of  Construc- 
tion. With  140  Illustrations.  8vo., 
75.  net.

INSECTS  AT  HOME  :  A  Popular  Ac- 
count of  British  Insects,  their  Structure, 
Habits  and  Transformations.  With  700 
Illustrations.  8vo. ,  75.  net.

INSECTS  ABROAD  :  a  Popular  Account 
of  Foreign  Insects,  their  Structure,  Habits 
and  Transformations.  With  600  Illustra- 
tions. 8vo.,  75.  net.

BIBLE  ANIMALS  :  a  Description  of

every  Living  Creature  mentioned  in  the 
Scriptures.  With  112  Illustrations.  8vo., 
75.  net.

PETLAND     REYISITED.       With     33

Illustrations.      Cr.  8vo. ,  35.  6d.

OUT    OF    DOORS;    a    Selection    of

Original  Articles  on  Practical  Natural 
History.  With  n  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo., 
35.  6d.

STRANGE  DWELLINGS:  a  Description 
of  the  Habitations  of  Animals,  abridged 
from  '  Homes  without  Hands  '.  With  60 
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

BIRD  LIFE  OF  THE  BIBLE.    With  32

Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo. ,  35.  6d.

WONDERFUL  NESTS.  With  30  Illus- 
trations. Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

HOMES  UNDER  THE  GROUND.    With

28  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE  BIBLE.  With

29  Illustrations.      Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.HOMES  UNDER  THE  GROUND.    With

28  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

WILD  ANIMALS  OF  THE  BIBLE.  With

29  Illustrations.      Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

DOMESTIC  ANIMALS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 
With  23  Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.,  35.  6d.

THE  BRANCH  BUILDERS.     With  28

Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

SOCIA  L  HA  BI TA  TIONS  A  ND  PA  RA  SI  TIC 
NESTS.  With  18  Illustrations.  Crown 
8vo.,  2s.

Works  of  Reference.

Gwilt. — AN  ENCYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AR- 
CHITECTURE. By  JOSEPH  GWILT,  F.S.A. 
Illustrated  with  more  than  noo  Engrav- 
ings on  Wood.  Revised  (1888),  with  Al- 
terations and  Considerable  Additions  by 
WVATT  PAPWORTH.  8vo,  £2  12$.  6d.

Longmans'  GAZETTEER  OF  THE 
WORLD.  Edited  by  GEORGE  G.  CHIS- 
HOLM,  M.A.,  B.Sc.  Imp.  Svo.,  £2  2s.  cloth, 
£2  I2s.  6d.  half-morocco.

Maunder  (Samuel).

BIOGRAPHICAL     TREASURY.       With

Supplement  brought  down  to   1889.     By 
Rev.  JAMES  WOOD.     Fcp.  Svo.,  6s.

TREASURY  OF  GEOGRAPHY,  Physical,

Historical,     Descriptive,     and     Political. 
With  7  Maps  and  16  Plates.   Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

THE  TREASURY  OF  BIBLE  KNOW- 
LEDGE. By  the  Rev.  J.  AYRE,  M.A.  With 
5  Maps,  15  Plates,  and  300  Woodcuts. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

TREASURY  OF  KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIB- 
RARY OF  KEFERENCE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

HISTORICAL  TREASURY.  Fcp. 8vo.,6.s.

Maunder  (Samuel)— continued.

SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY

SURY.     Fcp.   Svo.,    6s.

TREA  -

THE  TREASURY  OF  BOTANY.  Edited 
by  J.  LINDLEY,  F.R.S.,  and  T.  MOORE, 
F.L.S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel 
Plates.  2  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  125.TREA  -

THE  TREASURY  OF  BOTANY.  Edited 
by  J.  LINDLEY,  F.R.S.,  and  T.  MOORE, 
F.L.S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel 
Plates.  2  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  125.

Roget.  —  THESAURUS  OF  ENGLISH 
WORDS  AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and  Ar- 
ranged so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression  ot 
Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composition. 
By  PETER  MARK  ROGET,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
Recomposed  throughout,  enlarged  and  im- 
proved, partly  from  the  Author's  Notes,  and 
with  a  full  Index,  by  the  Author's  Son, 
JOHN  LEWIS  ROGET.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  M.

TABLES  forgiving

information  for  ascertaining  the  value  of 
Lifehold,  Leasehold,  and  Church  Property, 
the  Public  Funds,  etc.  By  CHARLES  M. 
WILLICH.  Edited  by  H.  HENCE  JONES. 
Crown  8vo.,  ios.  (id.

26        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Children

Crake  (Rev.  A.  D.). 
EDWY   THE   FAIR  ;    or,    The    First 
Chronicle  of  ^Escendune.   Cr.  8vo. ,  as.  6d. 
ALFGAR  THE  DANE  ;  or,  The  Second

Chronicle  of  jEscendune.     Cr.  8vo.  25.  6d.

THE  RIVAL  HEIRS  :  being  the  Third 
and  Last  Chronicle  of  ^Escendune.  Cr. 
8vo.,  2s.  6d.

THE  HOUSE  OF  WALDERNE.  A  Tale 
of  the  Cloister  and  the  Forest  in  the  Days 
of  the  Barons'  Wars.  Crown  8vo.,  25.  6<i.

BRIAN  Frrz- COUNT.  A  Story  of 
Wallingford  Castle  and  Dorchester 
Abbey.  Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Lang  (ANDREW). — EDITED  BY. 
THE  BLUE  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  138

Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.,  5s.

THE  RED  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  100

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  GREEN  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  99

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE   YELLOW  FAIRY  BOOK.     With

104  Illustrations.      Crown  Svo.,  6s.

THE  PINK  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  67

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  65.

THE  BL  UE  POETRY  BOOK.   With  i  oo

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.     SchoolTHE  PINK  FAIRY  BOOK.     With  67

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  65.

THE  BL  UE  POETRY  BOOK.   With  i  oo

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.     School

Edition,  without  Illustrations.     Fcp.  8vo.,

2S.     6d.

THE  TRUE  STORY  BOOK.     With  66

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  RED  TR  UE  STOR  Y BOOK.    With

zoo  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  ANIMAL  STORY  BOOK.     With

67   Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Molesworth — SIL  VER  THORNS.  By 
Mrs.  MOLESWORTH.  With  4  Illustrations. 
Cr.  8vo.,  5s.

's  Books.

!  Meade  (L.  T.).

DADDY'S  BOY.    With  8  Illustrations.

Crown    8vo.,   35.   6d.

DEB  AND  THE  DUCHESS.  With  7 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  BERESFORD  PRIZE.  With  7 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  HOUSE  OF  SURPRISES.    With  6

Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.     35.  6d.

'  Praeger. — THE  ADVENTURES  OF  THE 
THREE  BOLD  BABES  :  HECTOR,  HONORIA 
AND  ALISAXDER.  A  Story  in  Pictures.  By 
S.  ROSAMOND  PRAEGER.  With  24  Coloured 
Plates  and  24  Outline  Pictures.  Oblong 
410.,  35.  6d.

Stevenson. — A  CHILD'S  GARDEN  OF 
VERSES.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVENSON. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  55.

Sullivan. — -HERE  THEY  ARE  !    More

Stories.  Written  and  Illustrated  by  JAS.  F. 
SULLIVAN.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Upton  (FLORENCE  K.  AND  BERTHA). 
THE  ADVENTURES  OF  Tivo  DUTCH 
DOLLS  AND  A   '  GOLLIWOGG\    With  31 
Coloured    Plates   and  numerous  Illustra- 
tions in  the  Text.     Oblong  410.,  6s.

THE  GOLLIIVOGG'S  BICYCLE  CLUB. 
With  31  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous 
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Oblong  410., 
6s.

THE  VEGE- MEN'S  REVENGE.     With

31   Coloured   Plates  and  numerous  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.     Oblong  4to.,  6s.

Wordsworth. —  THE  SNOW  GARDEN,

AND  OTHER   FAIRY    TALES   FOR    CHILDREN.31   Coloured   Plates  and  numerous  Illus- 
trations in  the  Text.     Oblong  4to.,  6s.

Wordsworth. —  THE  SNOW  GARDEN,

AND  OTHER   FAIRY    TALES   FOR    CHILDREN.

By  ELIZABETH  WORDSWORTH.  With  10 
Illustrations  by  TREVOR  HADDON.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

Longmans'  Series

Price  2S.

ATELIER  (T///-;)  Du  LYS  :  or,  an  Art 
Student  in  the  Reign  ot  Terror.

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
MADEMOISELLE  A/OK/  :  a.    THA  T  CHILD.

Tale  of  Modern  Rome.     UNDER  A  CLOUD. 
INTHEOLDEX  TIME;  a    H 'ESTER 'SVENTURE 
Tale   of  the   Peasant     THE    FIDDLER    OF 
War  in  Germany.  LUC.AV.

A   YOUNGER  SISTER.         A    CHILD    OF    THE

REVOLUTION. 
ATHER STONE    ]>RIORY.        By    L.     N.

COMV.N.

THE  STORY  OF  A  SWING  MORNING, 
etc.  By  Mr.  MOLESWORTH.  Illustrated.

THE  PALACE  IN  THE  GARDEN.  By 
Mrs.  MOLESWORTH.  Illustrated.

/iorK.s.     By  Airs.  MOLESWORTH.

of  Books  for  Girls.

6d.  each.

j  THE  THIRD  Miss  ST.  QUENTIN.     By 
Mrs.  MOLESWORTH.

VERY  YOUNG;  AND  QUITE  ANOTHER

STORY.     Two  Stories.     By  JEAN  INGELOW.

CAN  THIS  iu-.  LOVE  ?    By  LOUISA  PARR.

KEITH  DERAMOKE.     By  the  Author  of

'  Miss  Molly  '.

SIDNEY.     By  MARGARET  DELANO.

AN     ARRANGED     MARRIAGE.        By

DOROTHEA  GERARD. 
LAST   IToRDs  TO  GIRLS  ON  LIFE  AT

SCHOOL  AND  AFTER  SCHOOL.     By  MARIA

GREY. 
STRAY    THOUGHTS   FOR    GIRLS.      By

LUCY  H.  M.  SOULSBY.     i6mo.,  is.  6d.  net.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        27

The  Silver  Library.

CROWN  8vo.     35.  6d.  EACH  VOLUME.

Arnold's  (Sir  Edwin)  Seas  and  Lands.    With

71  Illustrations.     3^.  6d.

Bagehoi's  (W.)  Biographical  Studies,     y.  &•'• 
Bagehofs  (W.)  Economic  Studies.     3.?.  6d. 
Bagehot's  ( W.)  I  iterary  Studies.  With  Portrait.

3  vols,  y.  6d.  each. 
Baker's  (Sir   S.   W.)  Eight   Years  in  Ceylon.3  vols,  y.  6d.  each. 
Baker's  (Sir   S.   W.)  Eight   Years  in  Ceylon.

With  6  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Baker's  (Sir  S.  W.)  Rifle  and  Hound  in  Ceylon.

With  6  Illustrations.     3.$.  6d. 
Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Curious  Myths  of  the

Middle  Ages.     y.   6d.

Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Origin  and  Develop- 
ment of  Religious  Belief.    2  vols.    y.  6d.  each. 
Becker's  ( W.  A.)  Gallus :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the

Time  of  Augustus.     With  26  Illus.     y.  6d. 
Backer's  (W.  A.)  Charicles:  or,  Illustrations  of

the    Private    Life    of    the    Ancient    Greeks.

With  26  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Bent's  (J.  T.)  The  Ruined  Cities  of  Mashona-

land.     With  117  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 
Brassey's  (Lady)  A  Voyage  in  the  '  Sunbeam  '.

With  66  Illustrations.     3.?.  6d. 
Butler's  (Edward  A.)    Our  Household  Insects.

With  7  Plates  and    113  Illustrations  in  the 
Text.     y.  6d. 
Clodd's  (E.)  Story  of  Creation:  a  Plain  Account

of  Evolution.     With  77  Illustrations.     3^.  6d. 
Conybeare  (Rev.  W.  J.)  and   Howson's  (Very

Rev.  J.  S.)  Lite  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.

With  46  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 
Dougall's  (L.)  Beggars  All :  a  Novel,     y.  6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  Micah  Clarke.      A  Tale  of

Monmoutn's  Rebellion.  With  10  Illusts.  y.6d. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  The  Captain  of  the  Polestar,

and  other  Tales,     y.  6d. 
Doyle's  i A.  Conan)  The  Refugees:  A  Tale  of

the  Huguenots.    With 25  Illustrations.    3-f6i/. 
Doyle's  (A.  Conan)  The  Stark  Munro  Letters.

y.  6J. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  History  of  England,  from

the    Fall  of  Wolsey    to    the    Defeat   of    the

Spanish  Armada.      12  vols.     y.  6d.  each. 
Froude's  I  J.  A.)  The  English  in  Ireland.     3  vols.

105.  6i/.

Froude's  ij.  A.I  The  Divorce  of  Catherine  of 
Aragon.  y.  6d.Spanish  Armada.      12  vols.     y.  6d.  each. 
Froude's  I  J.  A.)  The  English  in  Ireland.     3  vols.

105.  6i/.

Froude's  ij.  A.I  The  Divorce  of  Catherine  of 
Aragon.  y.  6d.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Spanish  Story  of  the 
Armada,  and  other  Essays,  y.  6J.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Short  Studies  on  Great  Sub- 
jects. 4  vols.  y.  6J.  each.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Council  of  Trent.     35.  6</.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Thomas  Carlyle :  a  History  of 
his  Life.

I795-l835-     2  vol-s.     7-f-

1834-1881.     2  vols.     7s. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  Caesar  :  a  Sketch.     3^.  6d. 
Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Two  Chiefs  of  Dunboy :  an

Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century,     y.  6d. 
Gleig's    (Rev.    G.    R.)    Life    of    the    Duke    of

Wellington.     With  Portrait,     y.  6d. 
Greville's  (C.  C.  F.I  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of

King   George    IV.,    King  William    IV.,  and

Queen  Victoria.     8  vols.,  y.  6</.  each. 
Haggard's  (H.  R.)  She  :  A  I  listory  of  Adventure.

With  32  Illustrations,     y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Allan  Quatermain.  With 
20  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Colonel  Quaritch,  V.C.  :  a 
Tale  of  Country  Life.  With  Erontispiece 
and  Vignette.  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Cleopatra.  With  29  Illustra- 
tions, y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Eric  Brighteyes.  With  51 
Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Beatrice.  With  Frontispiece 
and  Vignette,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Allan's  Wife.  With  34  Illus- 
trations, y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Montezuma's  Daughter.  With 
25  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  Witch's  Head.  With 
16  Illustrations.  35.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Mr.  Meeson's  Will.  With 
16  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Nada  the  Lily.  With  23 
Illustrations.  3^.6^.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Dawn.  With  16  Illusts.  y.  6d.Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Nada  the  Lily.  With  23 
Illustrations.  3^.6^.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Dawn.  With  16  Illusts.  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  People  of  the  Mist.  With 
16  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Joan  Haste.  With  20  Illus- 
trations, y.  6d.

Haggard  (H/R.)  and  Lang's  (A.)  The  World's 
Desire.  With  27  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Harte's  (Bret)  In  the  Carquinez  Woods  and 
other  Stories,  y.  6d.

Helmholtz's  (Hermann  von)  Popular  Lectures 
on  Scientific  Subjects.  With  68  Illustrations, 
2  vols.  y.  6d.  each.

Hornung's  (E.  W.)  The  Unbidden  Guest,    y.  6d

Howitt's  (W.)  Visits  to  Remarkable  Places. 
With  80  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Jefferies'  (R.)  The  Story  of  My  Heart :  My 
Autobiography.  With  Portrait.  y.  6d.

Jefferies'  (R.)  Field  and  Hedgerow.  With 
Portrait.  3^.  6</.

Jefferies' (R.)  Red  Deer.  With  17  Illusts.    y.  6d.

Jefferies'  (R.)  Wood  Magic:  a  Fable.  With 
Erontispiece  and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  H.  y.  6d.

Jefferies  (R.)  The  Toilers  of 'the  Field.  With 
Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury  Cathedral. 
y.  6u.

Kaye  (Sir  J.)  and  Malleson's  (Colonel)  History 
of  the  Indian  Mutiny  of  1857-8.  6  vols. 
y.  6d.  each.

Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  Cruise  of  the  'Alerte': 
the  Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on 
the  Desert  Inland  of  Trinidad.  With  2 
Maps  and  23  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Knight's  (E.  F.")  Where  Three  Empires  Meet:  a 
Narrative  of  Recent  Travel  in  Kashmir, 
Western  Tibet,  Pakistan,  (lilgit.  With  a  Map 
and  54  Illustrations,  y.  6</.

Knight's  iE.  F.I  The  'Falcon'  on  the  Baltic:  a 
Coasting  Voyage  from  Hammersmith  to 
Copenhagen  in  a  Three-Ton  Yacht.  With 
Map  and  n  Illustrations.  31.  o</.

Kostlin's  (J.i  Life  of  Luther.  With  02  Illustra- 
tions and  4  Facsimiles  of  MSS.  ^>.  6,/.Kostlin's  (J.i  Life  of  Luther.  With  02  Illustra- 
tions and  4  Facsimiles  of  MSS.  ^>.  6,/.

Lang's  (A.)  Angling  Sketches.  With'ao  Illustra- 
tions, y.  6i/.

Lang's  i  A.)  Custom  and  Myth  :  Studies  of  Early 
Usage  and  Belief.  3*.  6</.

28        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

The  Silver  Library— continued.

Lang's  (A.)  Cock  Lane  and  Common-Sense,  y.6.1.  I 
Lang's  (A.)  The  Monk  of  Fife :  a  Story  of  the  j

Days  of  Joan  of  Arc.  With  13  Illusts.  3^.  6d. 
Lees  (J.  A.)  and  Clutterbuck's  (W.  J.)  B.  C.

1887,  A  Ramble  in  British  Columbia.     With

Maps  and  75  Illustrations.     y.  6d. 
Macaulay's  (Lord)  Essays  and  Lays  of  Ancient 
Hacleod's  (H.  D.)  Elements  of  Banking,    y.  6d.

Rome,  etc.      With  Portrait  and  4  Illustrations

to  the  '  Lays  '.      y.  6d. 
Marbot's    (Baron   de)    Memoirs.      Translated.

2  VOls.       JS.

Marshman's    (J.    C.)    Memoirs   of    Sir   Henry

Havelock.     y.  6d. 
Max  Miiller's  (F.)  India,  what  can  it  teach  us?

35.  6d. 
Max  Miiller's  (F.)  Introduction  to  the  Science

of  Religion.     3^.  6d. 
Merivale's    (Dean)    History    of    the    Romans

under  the  Empire.     8  vols.     35.  6d.  each. 
Mill's  (J.  S.)  Political  Economy,     y.  6d. 
Mill's  (J.  S.)  System  of  Logic,     y.  6d. 
Milner's  (Geo.)  Country  Pleasures  :  the  Chroni- 
cle of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden.     y.  6d. 
Nansen's  (F.)  The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland.

With  142  Illustrations  and  a  Map.     35.  6d. 
Phillipps-Wolley's  (C.)  Snap :  a  Legend  of  the

Lone  Mountain  With  13  Illustrations.  y.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Orbs  Around  Us.  y.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Expanse  of  Heaven.

y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Moon.     3.5.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Worlds  than  Ours.  y.6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Our  Place  among  Infinities  :y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Moon.     3.5.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Worlds  than  Ours.  y.6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Our  Place  among  Infinities  :

a   Series    of    Essays    contrasting    our    Little 
Abode  in  Space  and  Time  with  the  Infinities

around  us.     35.  6d. 
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Suns  than  Ours.  y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Rough  Ways  made  Smooth.

y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Pleasant  Ways  in  Science.

y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Myths  and  Marvels  of  As- 
tronomy, y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Nature  Studies,     y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Leisure  Readings.  By  R.  A. 
PROCTOR,  EDWARD  CLODD,  ANDREW 
WILSON,  THOMAS  FOSTER,  and  A.  C. 
RANYARD.  With  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Rhoscomyl's  (Owen)  The  Jewel  of  Ynys  Galon. 
With  12  Illustrations.  35.  6d.

Rossetti's  (Maria  F.)  A  Shadow  of  Dante,  y.  6d.

Smith's  (R.  Bosworth)  Carthage  and  the  Cartha- 
ginians. With  Maps,  Plans,  etc.  3^.  6d.

Stanley's  (Bishop)  Familiar  History  of  Birds. 
With  160  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Stevenson's  (R.  L.)  The  Strange  Case  of  Dr. 
Jekyll  and  Mr.  Hyde;  with  other  Fables. 
y.  bd.

Stevenson   (R.   L.)   and   Osbourne's  (LI.)  The

Wrong  Box.     y.  6d. 
Stevenson    (Robert    Louis)    and   Stevenson's

(Fanny   van   de   Grift)  More    New  Arabian

Nights. — The  Dynamiter.     35.  6d. 
Weyman's    (Stanley   J.)    The    House   of    the

Wolf:  a  Romance,     y.  6d. 
Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Petland  Revisited.    With

33  Illustrations,     y.  6d. 
Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Strange  Dwellings.     With

60  Illustrations,     y.  6d.

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Out  of  Doors.  With  n 
Illustrations.  3^.  6d.

Cookery,   Domestic  Management,   &c.

De  Salis   (MRS.). — continued. 
DRINKS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  Svo. ,  is.6d. 
ENTREES  A  LA   MODE.     Fcp.  Svo.,Cookery,   Domestic  Management,   &c.

De  Salis   (MRS.). — continued. 
DRINKS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  Svo. ,  is.6d. 
ENTREES  A  LA   MODE.     Fcp.  Svo.,

Acton.  —  MODERN  COOKERY.  By 
ELIZA  ACTON.  With  150  Woodcuts.  Fcp. 
8vo.,  45.  6d.

Bull  (THOMAS,  M.D.). 
HINTS  TO  MOTHERS  ON  THE  MAN-

AC  EM  EN  T  OF  THEIR  HEALTH  DURING  THE

PERIOD  OF  PREGNANCY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

THE  MATERNAL  MANAGEMENT  OF 
CHILDREN  IN  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  f>(l.

De  Salis  (MRS.).

CAKES  AND  CONFECTIONS  A  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  td.

Docs  :  A  Manual  for  Amateurs. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

DRESSED  GAME  AND  POULTRY  A  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  Hvo.,  is.  6d.

DKF.SSED  VEGETABLES  A  LA  MODE. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  is  6</.

FLORAL  DECORATIONS.      Fcp.  8vo.,

is.  6d.

GARDENING  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  Svo. 
Part  I.,  Vegetables,  is.  6d.  Part  II., 
Fruits,  is.  6d.

NATIONAL  VIANDS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.

8vo.,  is.  6d.

NEH--LAID  EGGS.     Fcp.  8vo.,  15.  6d. 
O}'STEKS  A   LA   MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.,

is.  6d.

PUDDINGS  AND  PASTRY  A  LA  MODE.

Fcp.  Svo. ,  is.  6d.

SATOURI^S  A  LA  MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.,

is.6</.

Sours  AND  DRESSED  FISH  A  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  fid.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        29

Cookery,  Domestic  Management,  &e. — continued.

De  Sails   (MRS.) — continued.

SWEETS  AND  SUPPER  DISHES  A  LA 
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

TEMPTING  DISHES  FOR  SMALL  IN- 
COMES. Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

WRINKLES  AND  NOTIONS  FOR 
EVERY  HOUSEHOLD.  Crown  8vo. ,  is.  6d.

Lear. — MAIGRE  COOKERY.  By  H.  L. 
SIDNEY  LEAR.  i6mo.,  2s.

Poole. — COOKERY  FOR  THE  DIABETIC. 
By  W.  H.  and  Mrs.  POOLE.  With  Preface 
by  Dr.  PAVY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  as.  6d.

Walker  QANE  H.).

A  BOOK  FOR  EVERY  WOMAN. 
Part  I.,  The  Management  of  Children

in  Health  and  out  of  Health.      Crown

8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
Part    II.    Woman    in  Health  and  out  ofA  BOOK  FOR  EVERY  WOMAN. 
Part  I.,  The  Management  of  Children

in  Health  and  out  of  Health.      Crown

8vo.,  2s.  6d. 
Part    II.    Woman    in  Health  and  out  of

Health.     Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

A  HANDBOOK  FOR  MOTHERS  : 
being  Simple  Hints  to  Women  on  the 
Management  of  their  Health  during 
Pregnancy  and  Confinement,  together 
with  Plain  Directions  as  to  the  Care  of 
Infants.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works.

Allingham. —  VARIETIES  IN  PROSE. 
By  WILLIAM  ALLINGHAM.  3  vols.  Cr.  8vo., 
i8s.  (Vols.  i  and  2,  Rambles,  by  PATRICIUS 
WALKER.  Vol.  3,  Irish  Sketches,  etc.)

Armstrong. — ESSA  YSAND  SKETCHES. 
By  EDMUND  J.  ARMSTRONG.  Fcp.  Svo.,  55.

Bagehot. — LITERARY  STUDIES.  By 
WALTER  BAGEHOT.  With  Portrait.  3  vols. 
Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.  each.

Baring-Gould.  —  CURIO  us  MYTHS  OF 
THE  MIDDLE  AGES.  By  Rev.  S.  BARING- 
GOULD.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Baynes.  —  SHAKESPEARE  STUDIES, 
and  other  Essays.  By  the  late  THOMAS 
SPENCER  BAYNES,  LL.B.,  LL.D.  With  a 
Biographical  Preface  by  Professor  LEWIS 
CAMPBELL.  Crown  Svo.,  75.  6d.

Boyd  (A.  K.  H.)  ('  A.K.H.B.').

And  see  MISCELLA  XEOUS  THEOLOGICAL 
WORKS,  p.  32.

AUTUMN  HOLIDAYS  OF  A   COUNTRY

PARSON.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 
COMMONPLACE   PHILOSOPHER.      Cr.

8vo.,  35.  6d.

CRITICAL    ESSAYS   OF  A    COUNTRY

PARSON.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d. 
EAST  COAST  DAYS  AND  MEMORIES,  I

Crown   Svo.,    35.    f>d.

LANDSCAPES,  CHURCHES,  AND  MORA- 
LITIES. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

LEISURE  HOURS  IN  TOWN.     Crown

8vo.,  35.  6d.

LESSONS  OF  MIDDLE  AGE.     Crown

8vo.,  35.  6rf.

OUR  LITTLE  LIFE.  Two  Series. 
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

OUR  HOMELY  COMEDY:  AND  TRA- 
GEDY. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

RECK  E  A  TIONS  OF  A  Co  UNTR  Y  PAR  SON. 
Three  Series.  Crown  8vo.,  3$.  6d.  each.

Brookings  and  Ringwalt— BRIEFSOUR  HOMELY  COMEDY:  AND  TRA- 
GEDY. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

RECK  E  A  TIONS  OF  A  Co  UNTR  Y  PAR  SON. 
Three  Series.  Crown  8vo.,  3$.  6d.  each.

Brookings  and  Ringwalt— BRIEFS

AND  DEBATE  ON  CURRENT,  POLITICAL, 
ECONOMIC  A.\D  SOCIAL  TOPICS.  Edited 
by  W.  Du  Bois  BROOKINGS,  A.B.  of  the 
Harvard  Law  School,  and  RALPH  CURTIS 
RINGWALT,  A.B.  Assistant  in  Rhetoric  in 
Columbia  University,  New  York.  With  an 
Introduction  on  '  The  Art  of  Debate '  by 
ALBERT  BUSHNELL  HART,  Ph.D.  of  Har- 
vard University.  With  full  Index.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

Butler  (SAMUEL). 
EREWHON.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  FAIR  HAVEN.  A  Work  in  De- 
fence of  the  Miraculous  Element  in  our 
Lord's  Ministry.  Cr.  8vo.,  js.  6d.

LIFE  AND  HABIT.  An  Essay  after  a 
Completer  View  of  Evolution.  Cr.  8vo., 
75.  6d.

EVOLUTION,    OLD   AND  NEW.     Cr.

8vo.,  IDS.  6f/.

ALPS  AND  SANCTUARIES  OF  PIED- 
MONT AND  CANTON  Tic /NO.  Illustrated. 
Pott  410.,  IDS.  6d.

LUCK,  OR  CUNNING,  AS  THE  MAIN 
MEANS  OF  ORGANIC  MODIFICATION? 
Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Ex  VOTO.  An  Account  of  the  Sacro 
Monte  or  New  Jerusalem  at  Varallo-Sesia. 
Crown  Svo.  IDS.  6d.

SELECTIONS  /--ROM  H'ORKS,  with  Re- 
marks on  Mr.  G.  J.  Romanes'  -  Mental 
Evolution  in  Animals,'  and  a  Psalm  of 
Montreal.  Crown  Svo.,  ~s.  6</.

THE  AUTHORESS  OF  THE  ODYSSEY, 
WHERE  A\!>  ir///-;.v  S///-;  irwr/-:.  ii'/io 
SHE  ir.-ts,  THE  USE  S///-:  M.ini-:  OF  THE 
ILIAD,  A\D  iioir  i  UK  POK.M  C.RKH-  U.VDEP 
HER  IIA.\DS.  With  14  Illustrations. 
8vo.,  IO.V.  6(/.

30        MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Miscellaneous  and   Critical  Works— continued30        MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Miscellaneous  and   Critical  Works— continued

CHARITIES  REGISTER,  THE  ANNUAL, 
AND  DIGEST:  being  a  Classified  Register 
of  Charities  in  or  available  in  the  Metro- 
polis, together  with  a  Digest  of  Information 
respecting  the  Legal,  Voluntary,  and  other 
Means  for  the  Prevention  and  Relief  of 
Distress,  and  the  Improvement  of  the  Con- 
dition of  the  Poor,  and  an  Elaborate  Index. 
With  an  Introduction  by  C.  S.  LOCH,  Sec- 
retary to  the  Council  of  the  Charity  Organi- 
sation Society,  London.  8vo.,  45.

DOWCll. — -THOUGHTS  AND  WORDS. 
By  STEPHEN  DOWELL.  3  vols.  Crown 
8vo.,  315.  bd.

*+*  This  is  a  selection  of  passages  in  prose  and  verse 
from  authors,  ancient  and  modern,  arranged  according 
to  the  subject.

Dreyfus. — LECTURES  ON  FRENCH 
LITERATURE.  Delivered  in  Melbourne  by 
IRMA  DREYFUS.  With  Portrait  of  the 
Author.  Large  crown  8vo.,  125.  6d.

Evans. —  THE  ANCIENT  STONE  IM- 
PLEMENTS, WEAPONS  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF 
GREAT  BRITAIN.  By  Sir  JOHN  EVANS, 
K.C.B.,  D.C.L..  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  etc. 
With  537  Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.,  285.

Hamlin. — A  TEXT-BOOK  OF  THE 
HISTORY  OF  ARCHITECTURE.  By  A.  D.  F. 
HAMLIN,  A.M.  With  229  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Haweis. — Music  AND  MORALS.     By

the  Rev.  H.  R.  HAWEIS.  With  Portrait  of 
the  Author,  and  numerous  Illustrations, 
Facsimiles,  and  Diagrams.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Hime. — .SYA-.-n-    MILITARY    PAPERS.

By    Lieut. -Colonel    H.   W.    L.    HIME   (late

Royal  Artillery).     8vo,  js.  bd.

CONTK.NTS. —  Infantry  Fire  Formations  —  On 
Marking  at  Rifle  Matches — The  Progress  of  Field 
Artillery — The  Reconnoitering  Duties  of  Cavalry.

Hullah  (JOHN,  LL.D.). 
THE  HISTORY  OF  MODERN  Music ;  a

Course  of  Lectures.      Svo.,  8s.  Oil.Hullah  (JOHN,  LL.D.). 
THE  HISTORY  OF  MODERN  Music ;  a

Course  of  Lectures.      Svo.,  8s.  Oil.

THE  TRANSITION  J'ERIOD  or  MUSI- 
CAL HISTORY;  a  Course  of  Lectures. 
!Svo.,  i  os.  bd.

Jefferies  (RICHARD).

FIELD  AND  HEDC.EROU' :  With  Por- 
trait. C'.rown  Svo.,  35.  bd.

THE  STOKY  OF  MY  HEART:  my 
Autobiography.  Witli  Portrait  and  New 
Preface  by  C.  J.  LONGMAN.  Cr.  8vo.,  $s.bd.

RED  DEEK.  With  17  Illustrations 
by  1.  CHART. TON  and  II.  TUNALY.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  bd.

Jefferies  (RICHARD) — continued.

THE  TOILERS  OF  THE  FIELD.  With 
Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury 
Cathedral.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

WOOD  MAGIC  :  a  Fable.  With  Fron- 
tispiece and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  B.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

THOUGHTS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF 
RICHARD  JEFFERIES.  Selected  by  H.  S. 
HOOLE  WAYLEN.  i6mo.,  35.  bd.

Johnson. — -THE  PATENTEE'S  MAN- 
UAL :  a  Treatise  on  the  Law  and  Practice 
of  Letters  Patent.  ByJ.  &  J.  H.JOHNSON, 
Patent  Agents,  etc.  Svo.,  IDS.  bd.

Lang"  (ANDREW). 
THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION.     Svo. 
MODERN  MYTHOLOGY  :    a  Reply  to

Professor  Max  Miiller.     8vo.,  gs.

LETTERS  TO  DEAD  AUTHORS.     Fcp.

8vo.,    2s.    6d.   net.

BOOKS  AND  BOOKMEN.  With  2 
Coloured  Plates  and  17  Illustrations. 
Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  bd.  net.

OLD  FRIENDS.  Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net. 
LETTERS  ON  LITERATURE.  Fcp.

8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net.

ESSAYS  IN  LITTLE.  With  Portrait 
of  the  Author.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  bd.

COCK    LANE    AND    COMMON-SENSE.

Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  BOOK  OF  DREAMS  AND  GHOSTS.

Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Macfarren.  —  LECTURES  ON  HAR- 
MONY. By  Sir  GEORGE  A.  MACFARREN. 
8vo.,  i2s.

Madden. — THE  DIARY  OF  MASTER

W II. 1,1AM  SJLK.YC/'.  :  a  Study  of  Shake- 
speare and  Elizabethan  Sport.  By  the 
Right  Hon.  D.  H.  MADDEN,  Vice-Chancellor 
of  the  University  of  Dublin.  Svo.,  i6s.W II. 1,1AM  SJLK.YC/'.  :  a  Study  of  Shake- 
speare and  Elizabethan  Sport.  By  the 
Right  Hon.  D.  H.  MADDEN,  Vice-Chancellor 
of  the  University  of  Dublin.  Svo.,  i6s.

Max  Miiller  (The  Right  Hon.  F.).

INDIA:    WHAT  CAN  IT  TEACH   Us?

Crown  Svo.,  35.  (></. 
CHIPS  FROM  A  GERMAN  WORKSHOP.

Vol.    I.     Recent    Essays    and    Addresses. 
Crown   Svo.,  6s.  (id.  net.

Vol.    II.     Biographical    Essays.       Crown 
Svo.,  6s.  bd.  net.

Vol.  III.   Essays  on  Language  and  Litera- 
ture.    Crown  Svo.,  6s.  bd.  net.

Vol.  IV.   Essays  on  Mythology  and   Folk 
Lore.     Crown  Svo,  8s.  bd.  net.

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
MYTHOLOGY,  z  vols.  Svo.,  325.

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        31

Miscellaneous  and   Critical  Works — continued.

Milner. — COUNTRY  PLEASURES:  the 
Chronicle  of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden. 
By  GEORGE  MILNER.  Crown  8vo.,  3s.  t>d.

Morris  (WILLIAM). 
SSGNS  OF  CHANGE.     Seven  Lectures

delivered  on  various  Occasions.  Post 
8vo.,  45.  6d.

HOPES  AND  FEARS  FOR  ART.     Five

Lectures  delivered  in  Birmingham,  Lon- 
don, etc.,  in  1878-1881.  Crown  8vo., 
4s.  6d.

Orchard. —  THE  ASTRONOMY  OF 
' MILTON'S  PARADISE  LOST'.  By  THOMAS 
N.  ORCHARD,  M.D.,  Member  of  the  British 
Astronomical  Association.  With  13  Illus- 
trations. 8vo.,  155.

Poore  (GEORGE  VIVIAN),  M.D., 
F.R.C.P.

ESSAYS  ON  RURAL  HYGIENE.    WTith

13  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  fid.

THE  DWELLING  HOUSE.     With  36

Illustrations.     Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.

Proctor. — STRENGTH:  How  to  get 
Strong  and  keep  Strong,  with  Chapters  on 
Rowing  and  Swimming,  Fat,  Age,  and  the 
Waist.  By  R.  A.  PROCTOR.  With  9  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo.,  2s.

Rossetti.--^4    SHADOW  OF  DANTE:Rossetti.--^4    SHADOW  OF  DANTE:

being  an  Essay  towards  studying  Himself, 
his  World  and  his  Pilgrimage.  By  MARIA 
FRANCESCA  ROSSETTI.  With  Frontispiece 
by  DANTE  GABRIEL  ROSSETTI.  Crown 
Svo.,  35.  6rf.

Solovyoff. — A  MODERN  PRIESTESS 
OF  /sis  (MADAME  BLAVATSKY).  Abridged 
and  Translated  on  Behalf  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  from  the  Russian  of 
VSEVOLOD  SERGYEEVICH  SOLOVYOFF.  By 
WALTER  LEAF,  Liu.  D.  With  Appendices. 
Crown  Svo.,  6s.

Soulsby  (Lucv  H.  M.).

STRAY    THOUGHTS     ON    READING. 
Small  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net.

STRAY  THOUGHTS  FOR  GIRLS.   1 6mo.,

is.  6d.  net.

STRA  Y  THOUGHTS  FOR  MOTHERS  AND 
TEACHERS.     Fcp.   8vo.,  2s.  6d.   net.

STRAY    THOUGHTS    FOR    INVALIDS.

i6mo.,  2s.  net.

Southey. — THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 
RosER'i  SouTHEYjriTH  CAROLINE  BOWLES- 
Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  EDWARD 
DOWDEN,  LL.D.  8vo.,  145.

Stevens. — ON  THE  STOWAGE  OF  SHIPS

AND  THEIR  CARGOES.  With  Information  re- 
garding Freights,  Charter-Parties,  etc.  By 
ROBERT  WHITE  STEVENS,  Associate-Mem- 
ber of  the  Institute  of  Naval  Architects. 
Svo.,  2is.

Turner  and  Sutherland. — THE  DE-

VELOTMEXT  OF  AUSTRALIAN  LITERATURE.

By  HENRY  GYLES  TURNER  and  ALEXANDER 
SUTHERLAND.  With  Portraits  and  Illustra- 
tions. Crown  8vo.,  55.

Warwick. — PROGRESS  IN  U'OMEN'S 
EDUCATION  /N  THE  BRITISH  E.\ir/KE  :  being 
the  Report  of  Conferences  and  a  Congress 
held  in  connection  with  the  Educational 
Section,  Victorian  Era  Exhibition.  Edited 
by  the  COUNTESS  OF  WARWICK.  Crown 
8vo.,  6s.

White. — AN  E. \~AMWA  TION  OF  THE 
CII.IRC.K  or  AI-OSTACV  AC.AINST  \\'ORDS- 
}i'OK'i'ii.  By  W.  HALE  WHITE,  Editor  of 
the  '  Description  of  the  Wordsworth  and 
Coleridge  MSS.  in  the  Possession  of  Mr. 
T.  Norton  Longman  ' .

Miscellaneous  Theological  Works.Miscellaneous  Theological  Works.

%*  For  Church  of  England  and  Roman  Catholic   Woiks  see  MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  Co.'s

Special   Catalogues.

Balfour.  --  THE    FOUNDATIONS    OF    Bird  (ROBERT) — continued.

BELIEF:  being  Notes   Introductory  to  the

Stud}    of   Theology.     By    the    Right    Hon. 
ARTHUR  J.  BALFOUR,  M.P.     8vo.,  i2s.  6d.

Bird  (ROBERT).

A    CHILD'S  RELIGION.     Cr.  Svo.,  2s. 
JOSE  rii,     THE    DREAMER.       Crown

[ESUS,        THE        CARPENTER       OE

NA/..IRKTH.      Crown  Svo.,    55.

To  be  had  also  in   Two   Parts,  price  2s.  6</. 
each.

Part    I.    GALILEE    AND    THE    LAKE    OF 
GENNKSAKET.

Part    II.   JERUSALEM    A_NL>    THE    PER/KA.

32         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.

Miscellaneous  Theological  Works— continued.

Boyd(A.  K.  H.)     ('  A.K.H.B.').

OCCA  SJONA  L  A  NDlMMEMOR  I  A  L  DA  YS  : 
Discourses.  Crown  8vo.,  ~js.  6d.

COUNSEL  AND  COMFORT  FROM  A 
CITY  PULPIT.  Crown  Svo.,  35.  6d.

SUNDA  v  AFTERNOONS  IN  THE  PARISH 
CHURCH  OF  A  SCOTTISH  UNIVERSITY 
CITY.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

CHANGED  ASPECTS  OF  UNCHANGED 
TRUTHS.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

GRAVER  THOUGHTS  OF  A  COUNTRY 
PARSON.  Three  Series.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.  each.

PRESENT  DAY  THOUGHTS.  Crown 
8vo.,  35.  6d.

SEASIDE  MUSINGS.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

'  To  MEET  THE  DAY'  through  the 
Christian  Year  :  being  a  Text  of  Scripture, 
with  an  Original  Meditation  and  a  Short 
Selection  in  Verse  for  Every  Day.  Crown 
8vo.,  45.  6d.

Davidson. — THEISM,  as  Grounded  in

Human  Nature,  Historically  and  Critically 
Handled.  Being  the  Burnett  Lectures 
for  1892  and  1893,  delivered  at  Aberdeen. 
By  WILLIAM  L.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
8vo.,  155.Human  Nature,  Historically  and  Critically 
Handled.  Being  the  Burnett  Lectures 
for  1892  and  1893,  delivered  at  Aberdeen. 
By  WILLIAM  L.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
8vo.,  155.

Gibson. —  THE  ABBE  DE  LAMENNAIS. 
AND  THE  LIBERAL  CATHOLIC  MOVEMENT 
IN  FRANCE.  By  the  Hon.  W.  GIBSON. 
With  Portrait.  Svo.,  125.  6d.

Kalisch(M.  M.,  Ph.D.).

BIBLE  STUDIES.  Part  I.  Pro- 
phecies of  Balaam.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.  Part 
II.  The  Book  of  Jonah.  8vo.,  los.  6d.

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  OLD  TESTA- 
MENT: with  a  New  Translation.  Vol.  I. 
Genesis.  8vo. ,  i8s.  Or  adapted  for  the 
General  Reader.  125.  Vol.  II.  Exodus. 
155.  Or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader. 
I2s.  Vol.  III.  Leviticus,  Part  I.  155. 
Or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader.  8s. 
Vol.  IV.  Leviticus,  Part  II.  155.  Or 
adapted  for  the  General  Reader.  8s.

Macdonald  (GEORGE).

UNSPOKEN  SERMONS.    Three  Series.

Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

THE     MIRACLES     OF     OUR     LORD.

Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

10,000/2/98.

Martineau  (JAMES).

HOURS  OF  THOUGHT  ON  SACRED 
THINGS  :  Sermons,  2  vols.  Crown  8vo., 
35.  6d.  each.

ENDEAVOURS  AFTER  THE  CHRISTIAN 
LIFE.  Discourses.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.

THE  SEAT  OF  AUTHORITY  IN  RE- 
LIGION. 8vo.,  145.

ESSAYS,  REVIEWS,  AND  ADDRESSES. 
4  Vols.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.  each.

I.  Personal ;  Political.  II.  Ecclesiastical ;  Historical. 
III.  Theological;  Philosophical.  IV.  Academical; 
Religious.

HOME  PRAYERS,  with  Two  SERVICES

for  Public  Worship       Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Max  Muller  (F.).

HIBBERT  LECTURES  ON  THE  ORIGIN 
AND  GROWTH  OF  RELIGION,  as  illustrated 
by  the  Religions  of  India.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
RELIGION  :  Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  fid.INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
RELIGION  :  Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  fid.

NATURAL  RELIGION.  The  Gifford 
Lectures,  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Glasgow  in  1888.  Crown  Svo.,  IDS.  6d.

PHYSICAL  RELIGION.      The  Gifford

Lectures,  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Glasgow  in  1890.      Crown  8vo.,  IDS,  6d.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  RELIGION.  The 
Gifford  Lectures,  delivered  before  the  Uni- 
versity of  Glasgow  in  1891.  Cr.  Svo.,  ios.6d.

THEOSOPHY,  OR  PSYCHOLOGICAL  RE- 
LIGION. The  Gifford  Lectures,  delivered 
before  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1892. 
Crown  Svo.,  105.  6d.

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  VEDANTA 
PHILOSOPHY,  delivered  at  the  Royal 
Institution  in  March,  1894.  Svo.,  55.

Romanes. — THOUGHTS  ON  RELIGION. 
By  GEORGE  J.  ROMANES,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 
Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Vivekananda. —  YOGA  PHILOSOPHY:

Lectures  delivered  in  New  York,  Winter  of 
1895-96,  by  the  SWAMI  VIKEKANANDA, 
on  Raja  Yoga  ;  or.  Conquering  the  Internal 
Nature ;  also  Patanjali's  Yoga  Aphorisms, 
with  Commentaries.  Crown  8vo,  35.  6d.

University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.