Magick in Theory and Practice (1929 text)
=========================================
Aleister Crowley — Magick in Theory and Practice (Part III of Book Four); the text of the first edition (Paris: Lecram Press, 1929), public domain in the United States (95-year term expired 2025). Twenty-two chapters (0–XXI) with appendices; modern publisher front matter removed. Scan via Internet Archive.

MAGICK 
IN 
THEORY 
AND 
PRACTICE 


Part III of Book Four 


by 
T he M aster T herion 
(A leister C rowley) 


D o what thou wilt shall be the whole of the L aw 


HYMN TO PAN 


eohrix erdti periarchés d’ aneptoman 

id id pan pan 

0 pan pan aliplankte, kyllanias chionoktypoi 
petraias apo deirados phanéth, 6 

thedn choropoi anax 

SOPH. AJ. 


Thrill with lissome lust of the light, 

O man! My man! 

C ome careering out of the night 

Of Pan! lo Pan! 

lo Pan! lo Pan! C ome over the sea 

From Sicily and from Arcady! 

R oaming as Bacchus, with fauns and pards 
And nymphs and satyrs for thy guards, 
Ona milk-white ass, come over the sea 
To me, to me, 

Come with Apollo in bridal dress 
(Shepherdess and pythoness) 

Come with Artemis, silken shod, 

And wash thy white thigh, beautiful God, 
In the moon of the woods, on the marble mount, 
The dimpled dawn of the amber fount! 
Dip the purple of passionate prayer 

In the crimson shrine, the scarlet snare, 
The soul that startles in eyes of blue 

To watch thy wantonness weeping through 
The tangled grove, the gnarled bole 

Of the living tree that is spirit and soul 
And body and brain — come over the sea, 
(lo Pan! lo Pan!) 

Devil or god, to me, to me, 

My man! my man! 

C ome with trumpets sounding shrill 

O ver the hill! 

Come with drums low muttering 

From the spring! 

Come with flute and come with pipe! 

Am I not ripe? 

|, who wait and writhe and wrestle 

W ith air that hath no boughs to nestle 
My body, weary of empty clasp, 

Strong asa lion and sharp as an asp — 


Come, O come! 

| am numb 

W ith the lonely lust of devildom. 
Thrust the sword through the galling fetter, 
All-devourer, all- begetter; 

Give me the sign of the O pen Eye, 
And the token erect of thorny thigh, 
And the word of madness and mystery, 
O Pan! lo Pan! 

lo Pan! lo Pan Pan! Pan Pan! Pan, 

| am aman: 

Do as thou wilt, as a great god can, 

O Pan! lo Pan! 

lo Pan! lo Pan Pan! | am awake 

In the grip of the snake. 

T he eagle slashes with beak and claw; 
The gods withdraw: 

T he great beasts come, Io Pan! | am borne 
To death on the horn 

Of the U nicorn. 

| am Pan! lo Pan! lo Pan Pan! Pan! 

| am thy mate, | am thy man, 

Goat of thy flock, | am gold, | am god, 
Flesh to thy bone, flower to thy rod. 
W ith hoofs of steel | race on the rocks 
Through solstice stubborn to equinox. 
And | rave; and | rape and | rip and | rend 
Everlasting, world without end, 

M annikin, maiden, M aenad, man, 

In the might of Pan. 

lo Pan! lo Pan Pan! Pan! lo Pan! 


Earth: the god Set dghtleg. cro. The LF OX gas. 


oo eli ala he creek 


i. Water: the poddew Auremoth. ; 
a. Flrer the govddeas Theu-aeub-meith, BL ice mooring — ihe fvasiiice. 
ged, Sol: che ending ge V Trpben = the Tekleni_ 


ate) cloieng of the welll 6. 3. ‘Child fate — the Pentagram. 


INTRODUCTION 


E sseai athanatos theos, ambrotos, oyk eti thnétos 
Pythagoras. 


“M agic isthe Highest, most Absolute, and most Divine Knowledge of N atural Philosophy, advanced in its 
worksand wonderful operationsby aright understanding of the inward and occult virtue of things; so that true 
Agents being applied to proper Patients, strange and admirable effects will thereby be produced. W hence 
magicians are profound and diligent searchers into N ature; they, because of their skill, Know how to anticipate 
an effect, the which to the vulgar shall seem to be a miracle.” 


T he G oetia of the L enegeton of K ing Solomon. 


“Wherever sympathetic magic occurs in its pure unadulterated form, it is assumed that in nature one event 
follows another necessarily and invariably without the intervention of any spiritual or personal agency. 


Thus its fundamental conception is identical with that of modern science; underlying the 
whole system is a faith, implicit but real and firm, in the order and uniformity of nature. The 
magician does not doubt that the same causes will always produce the same effects, that the performance of 
the proper ceremony accompanied by the appropriate spell, will inevitably be attended by the desired results, 
unless, indeed, hisincantations hould chance to be thwarted and foiled by the more potent charms of another 
sorcerer. H e supplicatesno higher power: he suesthe favour of no fickle and wayward being: he abaseshimself 
before no awful deity. Y et his power, great ashe believesit to be, isby no meansarbitrary and unlimited. He 
can wield it only so long ashe strictly conforms to the rules of his art, or to what may be called the laws of 
nature as conceived by him. To neglect these rules, to break these lawsin the smallest particular is to incur 
failure, and may even expose the unskilful practitioner himself to the utmost peril. If he claims a sovereignty 
over nature, it isaconstitutional sovereignty rigorously limited in itsscope and exercised in exact conformity 
with ancient usage. T husthe analogy between the magical and the scientific conceptionsof the world isclose. 
In both of them the succession of eventsis perfectly regular and certain, being determined by immutable laws, 
the operation of which can be foreseen and calculated precisely; the elements of caprice, of chance, and of 
accident are banished from the course of nature. Both of them open up aseemingly boundless vista of possbilities 
to him who knowsthe causesof thingsand can touch the secret soringsthat set in motion the vast and intricate 
mechanism of the world. H ence the strong attraction which magic and science alike have exercised on the 
human mind; hence the powerful stimulus that both have given to the pursuit of knowledge. T hey lure the 
weary enquirer, the footsore seeker, on through the wilderness of disappointment in the present by their 
endless promises of the future: they take him up to he top of an exceeding high mountain and shew him, 
beyond the dark clouds and rolling mists at his feet, avision of the celestial city, far off, it may be, but radiant 
with unearthly splendour, bathed in the light of dreams.” 


Dr.J.G. FRAZER, “TheG olden Bough”. 


“So far, therefore, as the public profession of magic has been one of the roads by which men have 
passed to supreme power, it has contributed to emancipate mankind from the thraldom of 
tradition and to elevate them into a larger, freer life, with a broader outlook on the world. T his 
is no small service rendered to humanity. And when we remember further that in another direction 
magic has paved the way for science, we are forced to admit that if the black art hasdone much evil, it has also 
been the source of much good; that if it isthe child of error, it has yet been the mother of freedom and 
truth,” 


Ibid. 
“Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.” 
St. Paul. 


“Also the mantras and spells; the obeah and the wanga; the work of the wand and the work of the sword; these 
he shall learn and teach.” 


“He must teach; but he may make severe the ordeals.” 
“T he word of the Law is[in Greek] T helema.” 


LIBER AL vel xxxi: The Book of the Law. 


T his book is for 
ALL: 
for every man, woman, and child. 


M y former work has been misunderstood, and its scope limited, by my use of technical terms. It has attracted 
only too many dilettanti and eccentrics, weaklings seeking in “M agic” an escape from reality. | myself was 
first consciously drawn to the subject in this way. And it has repelled only too many scientific and practical 
minds, such as! most designed to influence. 


But 
MAGICK 
is for 
ALL. 


| have written this book to help the Banker, the Pugilist, the Biologist, the Poet, the N avvy, the Grocer, the 
Factory Girl, the M athematician, the Stenographer, the Golfer, the W ife, the C onsul — and all the ret — to 
fulfil themselves perfectly, each in his or her own proper function. 


Let me explain in a few words how it came about that | blazoned the word 
MAGICK 
upon the Banner that | have borne before me all my life. 


Before | touched my teens, | was already aware that | was THE BEAST whose number is 666. | did not 
understand in the least {X |} what that implied; it was a passionately ecstatic sense of identity. 


In my third year at C ambridge, | devoted myself consciousy to the Great W ork, understanding thereby the 
W ork of becoming a Spiritual Being, free from the constraints, accidents, and deceptionsof material existence. 


| found myself at alossfor anameto designate my work, just asH . P. Blavatsky some yearSsearlier. “T heosophy”, 
“Spiritualism”, “O ccultisn”, “M ysticisn”, all involved undesirable connotations. 


| chose therefore the name. 
“MAGICK” 
as essentially the most sublime, and actually the most discredited, of all the available terms. 
| swore to rehabilitate 
MAGICK, 


to identify it with my own career; and to compel mankind to respect, love, and trust that which they scorned, 
hated and feared. | have kept my W ord. 


But the time isnow come for me to carry my banner into the thick of the press of human life. 
| must make 
MAGICK 
the essential factor in the life of 
ALL. 


In presenting this book to the world, | must then explain and justify my position by formulating a definition 
of 


MAGICK 
and setting forth its main principles in such a way that 
ALL 


may understand instantly that their souls, their lives, in every relation with every other human being and 
every circumstance, depend upon 


MAGICK 
and the right comprehension and right application thereof. 
I)DEFINITION. 
Magick is the Science and Art of causing C hange to occur in conformity with Will. 


(Illustration: Itismy W ill to inform the W orld of certain facts within my knowledge. | therefore take “ magickal 
weapons’, pen, ink, and paper; | write “incantations’— these sentences— in the “magickal language” ie, that 
which isunderstood by the people! wish to instruct; | call forth “spirits”, such asprinters, publishers, booksellers 
and so forth and constrain them to convey my message to those people. The compostion and distribution of 
this book isthusan act of M agick by which | cause C hanges to take place in conformity with my Will.) 


In one sense M agick may be defined as the name given to Saene by the vulgar. 
1) POSTULATE. 
ANY required change may be effected by the application of the proper kind and degree of 


Force in the proper manner, through the proper medium to the proper object. 


(Illustration: | wish to prepare an ounce of Chloride of Gold. | must take the right kind of acid, nitro- hydrochloric 
and no other, in avessel which will not break, leak or corrode, in such amanner aswill not produce undesirable 
results, with the necessary quantity of Gold: and so forth. Every change hasits own conditions. 


In the present state of our knowledge and power some changes are not posable in practice; we cannot cause 
eclipses, for instance, or transform lead into tin, or create men from mushrooms. But it istheoretically possible 
to cause in any object any change of which that object is capable by nature; and the conditions are covered by 
the above postulate.) 


Il) THEOREMS. 
1) Every intentional act is a M agickal act. 
(I|lustration: See “Definition” above.) 


By “intentional” | mean “willed”. But even unintentional acts so seeming are not truly so. T hus, breathing is 
an ac of the W ill to Live 


2) Every successful act has conformed to the postulate. 
3) Every failure proves that one or more requirements of the postulate have not been fulfilled. 


(Illustrations: T here may be failure to understand the case, as when adoctor makesa wrong diagnoss, and his 
treatment injures the patient. T here may be a failure to apply the right kind of force, aswhen arustic tries to 
blow out an electric light. T here may be failure to apply the right degree of force, as when a wrestler has his 
hold broken, T here may be failure to apply the force in the right manner, aswhen one presentsa cheque at the 
wrong window of the Bank. T here may be failure to employ the correct medium, aswhen Leonardo daV inci 
saw hismasterpiece fade away. T he force may be applied to an unsuitable object, as when one tries to crack a 
gone, thinking it a nut.) 


4) T he first requisite for causing any change isthorough qualitative and quantitative understanding 
of the conditions. 


(Illustration: The most common cause of failure in life isignorance of one’sown T rue W ill, or of the means to 
fulfill that W ill. A man may fancy himself a painter, and waste his life trying to become one; or he may really 
be a painter, and yet fail to understand and to measure the difficulties peculiar to that career.) 


5) The second requisite of causing any change is the practical ability to set in right motion the 
necessary forces. 


(Illustration: A banker may have a perfect grasp of a given situation, yet lack the quality of decision, or the 
assets, necessary to take advantage of it.) 


6) “Every man and every woman is a star”. T hat is to say, every human being is intrindcally an 
independent individual with his own proper character and proper motion. 


7) Every man and every woman has a course, depending partly on the self, and partly on the 
environment which is natural and necessary for each. Anyone who is forced from his own 
course, either through not understanding himself, or through external opposition, comes into 
conflict with the order of the U niverse, and suffers accordingly. 


(Illustration: A man may think it ishis duty to act in acertain way, through having made a fancy picture of 
himself, instead of investigating his actual nature. For example, awoman may make herself miserable for life 
by thinking that she prefers love to social consderation, or vice versa. One woman may stay with an 
unsympathetic husband when she would really be happy in an attic with a lover, while another may fool 
herself into a romantic elopement when her only pleasures are those of presiding over fashionable functions. 
Again, a boy’sinstinct may tell him to go to sea, while his parents insist on his becoming a doctor. In such a 
case he will be both unsuccessful and unhappy in medicine.) 


8) A Man whose conscious will is at odds with his T rue W ill is wasting his strength. H e cannot 
hope to influence his environment efficiently. 


(Illustration: W hen Civil W ar ragesin anation, itisin no condition to undertake the invasion of other countries. 
A man with cancer employs his nourishment alike to hisown us and to that of the enemy which is part of 
himself. H e soon fails to redst the pressure of his environment. In practical life, aman who is doing what his 
conscience tellshim to be wrong will do it very clumsily. At first!) 


9) A Man who is doing his T rue Will has the inertia of the U niverse to assist him. 


(Illustration: T he first principle of successin evolution is that the individual should be true to hisown nature, 
and at the same time adapt himself to his environment.) 


10) N ature is a continuous phenomenon, though we may not know in all cases how things are 
connected. 


(Illustration: H uman comsciousness depends on the properties of protoplasm, the existence of which depends 
on innumerable physical conditions peculiar to this planet; and this planet is determined by the mechanical 
balance of the whole universe of matter. W e may then say that our consciousness is causally connected with 
the remotest galaxies, yet we do not even know how it arises from— or with— the molecular changesin the 
brain.) 


11) Science enables us to take advantage of the continuity of N ature by the empirical application 
of certain principles whose interplay involves different orders of idea connected with each 
other in a way beyond our present comprehension. 


(Illustration: W e are able to light cities by rule-of-thumb methods. W edo not know what consciousmessis, or 
how it isconnected with muscular action; what electricity isor how it is connected with the machines that 
generate it; and our methods depend on calculations involving mathematical ideas which have no 
correspondance in the U niverse as we know it.) 


F or instance “irrational”, “unreal” and “infinite” expressions. 


12) M an is ignorant of the nature of his own being and powers. Even his idea of his limitations 
is based on experience of the past, and every step in his progress extends his empire. There is 
therefore no reason to assign theoretical limits 


note: i.e., exceot— possibly— in the case of logically absurd questions such as the Schoolmen discussed in connection 
with “G od”. 


to what he may be, or what he may do. 


(Illustration: A generation ago it was supposed theoretically impossible that man should ever know the 


compostion of the fixed stars, It isknown that our senses are adapted to receive only afraction of the possible 
rates of vibration.M odern instruments have enabled us to detect some of these supra-sensibles by indirect 
methods, and even to use their peculiar qualities in the service of man, asin the case of the rays of H ertz and 
R oentgen. AST yndall said, man might at any moment learn to percieve and utilize vibrationsof all concievable 
and inconcievable kinds T he question of M agick isaquestion of discovering and employing hitherto unknown 
forcesin nature. W e know that they exist, and wecannot doubt the possbility of mental or physical instruments 
capable of bringing us into relation with them.) 


13) Every man is more or less aware that his individuality comprises several orders of existence, 
even when he maintains that his subtler principles are merely symptomatic of the changesin his 
gross vehicle. A similar order may be assumed to extend throughout nature. 


(Illustration: O ne does not confuse the pain of atoothache with the decay that causesit. |nanimate objects are 
sensitive to certain physical forces, such aselectrical and thermal conductivity; but neither in usnor in them— 
so far as we Know— is there any direct conscious perception of these forces. Imperceptible influences are 
therefore associated with all material phenomena; and there isno reason why we should not work upon matter 
through these subtle energies as we do through their material bases. In fact, we use magnetic force to move 
iron and solar radiation to reproduce images) 


14) Man is capable of being, and using, anything which he perceives, for everything which he 
perceives is in a certain sense a part of his being. He may thus subjugate the whole of the 
U niverse of which he is conscious to his individual W ill. 


(Illustration: M an has used the idea of God to dictate his personal conduct, to obtain power over hisfellows, to 
excuse hiscrimes, and for innumerable other purposes, including that of realizing himself as God. H e has used 
the irrational and unreal conceptions of mathematics to help him in the construction of mechanical devices. 
H e has used his moral force to influence the actions even of wild animals. H e has employed poetic genius for 
political purposes.) 


15) Every force in the U niverse is capable of being transformed into any other kind of force by 
using suitable means. T here is thus an inexhaustible supply of any particular kind of force that 
we may need. 


(Illustration: H eat may be transformed into light and power by using it to drive dynamos. T he vibrations of 
the air may be used to kill men by so ordering them in speech so as to inflame war-like passions. The 
hallucinations connected with the mysterious energies of sex result in the perpetuation of the species.) 


16) The application of any given force affects all the orders of being which exist in the object 
in the object to which it is applied, whichever of of those orders is directly affected. 


(IIlustration: If | strike a man with a dagger, his consciousness, not his body only, is affected by my act, 
although the dagger, as such, has no direct relation therewith. Similarly, the power of my thought may so 
work on the mind of another person as to produce far- reaching physical changesin him, or in others through 
him.) 


17) A man may learn to use any force so as to serve any purpose, by taking advantage of the 
above theorems. 


(Illustration: A man may us a razor to make himself vigilant over his speech, by using it to cut himself 
whenever he ungaurdedly utters a chosen word. He may serve the same purpose by resolving that every 


incident of his life shall remind him of a particular thing, making every impression the starting point of a 
connected series of thoughts ending in that thing. He might also devote his whole energies to some one 
particular object, by resolving to do nothing at variance therewith, and to make every act turn to the advantage 
of that object.) 


18) He may attract to himself any force of the U niverse by making himself a fit receptacle for 
it, and arranging conditions so that its nature compels it to flow toward him. 


(Illustration: If | want pure water to drink, | dig awell in a place where there is underground water; | prevent 
it from leaking away; and | arrange to take advantage of water’s accordance with the lawsof H ydrostaticsto fill 
it.) 


19) Man’s sense of himself as seperate from, and opposed to, the Universe is a bar to his 
conducting its currents. It insulates him. 


(Illustration: A popular leader is most successful when he forgets himself and remembers only “T he C ause”. 
Self- seeking engenders jealousies and schism. W hen the organs of the body assert their presence other by 
glent satisfaction, it isasign they are diseased. T he Single exception is the organ of reproduction. Y et even in 
this case its self- assertion bears witness to its dissatisfaction with itself, snce it cannot fulfil its function until 
completed by its counterpart in another organism.) 


20) Man can only attract and employ the forces for which he is really fitted. 


(Illustration: You cannot make a slik purse out of a sow’s ear. A true man of science learns from every 
phenomeneon. But N ature is dumb to the hypocrite; for in her there is nothing false.) 


It iS no objection that the hypocite is himself part of N ature. H eis an “endothermic” product, divided against 
himself, with a tendency to break up. He will see his own qualities everywhere, and thus obtain a radial 
misconception of phenomena. M ost religions of the past have failed by expecting nature to conform with their 
ideals of proper conduct. 


21) There is no limit to the extent of the relations of any man with the U niverse in essence; for 
as soon as man makes himself one with any idea the means of measurement cease to exist. But 
his power to utilize that force is limited by his mental power and capacity, and by the 
circumstances of his human environment. 


(Illustration: W hen a man falls in love, the whole world becomes, to him, nothing but love boundless and 
immanent; but hismystical state isnot contagious, hisfellow-men are either amused or annoyed. H ecan only 
extend to others the effect which hislove has had upon himself by means of his mental and physical qualities. 
T husCatullus, D ante and Swinburne made their love amighty mover of mankind by virtue of their power to 
put their thoughts on the subject in musical and eloquent language. Again, Cleopatra and other people in 
authority moulded the fortunesof many other people by allowing love to influence their political actions. The 
M agician, however well he succeed in making contact with the secret sources of energy in nature, can only 
use them to the extent permitted by his intellectual and moral qualities. Mohammed's intercourse with 
Gabriel was only effective because of his statesmanship, soldiership, and the sublimity of his command of 
Arabic. H ertz’s discovery of the rays which we now us for wireless telegraphy was sterile until it reflected 
through the minds and wills of the people who could take his truth and transmit it to the world of action by 
means of mechanical and economic instruments.) 


22) Every individual is essentially sufficient to himself. But he is unsatisfactory to himself until 


he has established himself in his right relation with the universe. 


(Illustration: A microscope, however perfect, is useless in the hands of savages. A poet, however sublime, 
must impose himself upon his generation if he isto enjoy (and even to understand) himself, as theoretically 
Should be the case.) 


23) M agick isthe Science of understanding oneself and one’sconditions. It isthe Art of applying 
that understanding in action. 


(Illustration: A golf club isintended to move a special ball in aspecial way in special circumstances. A N iblick 
Should rarely be used on the tee or a brassie under the bank of abunker. But also, the use of any club demands 
«ill and experience.) 


24) Every man has an indefeasible right to be what he is. 


(Illustration: T o insist that any one else should comply with one’s own standards isto outrage, not only him, 
but oneself, since both parties are equally born of necessity.) 


25) Every man must do Magick each time he acts or even thinks, since a thought is an internal 
act whose influence ultimately affects action, though it may not do so at the time. 


(Illustration: T he least gesture causes a change in aman’s own body and in the air around him; it disturbs the 
balance of the entire U niverse, and itseffects continue eternally throughout all space. Every thought, however 
swiftly suppressed, has its effect on the mind. It stands as one of the causes of every subsequent thought, and 
tends to influence every subsequent action. A golfer may lose a few yards on hisdrive, a few more with his 
second and third, he may lie on the green six bare inches too far from the hole, but the net result of these 
trifling mishaps isthe difference between halving and losing the hole.) 


26) Every man has a right, the right of self preservation, to fulfill himself to the utmost. 


M en of “qiminal nature’ are simply at issue with ther true W ills. T he murderer has the W ill to Live and his 
will to murder is a false will at variance with his true W ill, since he risks death at the hands of Sodety by obeying 
his ciminal impulse. 


(Illustration: A function imperfectly performed injures, not only itself, but everything associated with it. Ifthe 
heart is afraid to beat for fear of disturbing the liver, the liver isstarved for blood and avengesitself on the heart 
by upsetting digestion, which disorders respiration, on which cardiac welfare depends) 


27) Every man should make M agick the keystone of his life. He should learn its laws and live 
by them. 


(Illustration: The Banker should discover the real meaning of his existence, the real motive which led him to 
choose that profession. He should under- stand banking as a necessary factor in the economic existence of 
mankind instead of merely a business whose objects are independant of the general welfare. H e should learn to 
distinguish false values from real, and to act not on accidental fluctuations but on considerations of essential 
importance. Such a banker will prove himself superior to others, because he will not be an individual limited 
by transitory things, but a force of N ature, asimpersonal, impartial and eternal as gravitation, as patient and 
irresistable as the tides. His system will not be subject to panic, any more than the law of Inverse Squares is 
disturbed by elections. H e will not be anxious about his affairs because they will not be his; and for that reason 
he will be able to direct them with the calm, clear-headed confidence of an onlooker, with intelligence 
unclouded by self-interest, and power unimpaired by passion.) 


28) Every man has a right to fulfill his own will without being afraid that it may interfere with 
that of others; for if he isin his proper place, it is the fault of others if they interfere with him. 


(Illustration: If aman like N apoleon were actually appointed by destiny to control Europe, he should not be 
blamed for exercising his rights. To oppose him would be an error. Any one 90 doing would have made a 
mistake asto hisown destiny, except insofar asit mught be necessary for him to learn the lessons of defeat. T he 
sun movesin space without interference. the order of nature provides an orbit for each sar. A clash provesthat 
one or the other has strayed from its course. But asto each man that keeps his true course, the more firmly he 
acts, the less likely others are to get in hisway. H isexample will helpthem to find their own paths and pursue 
them. Every man that becomes a M agician helps others to do likewise. The more firmly and surely men 
move, and the more such action is accepted as the standard of morality, the less will conflict and confusion 
hamper humanity.) 


| hope that the above principles will demonstrate to 
ALL 
that their welfare, their very existence, is bound up in 
MAGICK. 


| trust that they will understand, not only the reasonableness, but the necessity of the fundamental truth which 
| wasthe means of giving to mankind: 


“Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.” | trust that they will assert themselvesas individually 
absolute, that they will grasp the fact that it is their right to assert themselves, and to accomplish the task for 
which their nature fits them. Y ea, more, that thisis their duty, and that not only to themselves but to others, 
a duty founded upon universal necessity, and not to be shirked on account of any casual circumstances of the 
moment which may seem to put such conduct in the light of inconvenience or even of cruelty. 


| hope that the principles outlined above will help them to understand this book, and prevent them from 
being deterred from its study by the more or less technical language in which it is written. 


T he essence of 
MAGICK 


issimple enough in all conscience. It isnot otherwise with the art of government. T he Aim issmply prosperity; 
but the theory istangled, and the practice beset with briars. 


In the same way 
MAGICK 


ismerely to be and to do. | should add: “to suffer”. For M agick isthe verb; and it ispart of the T raining to use 
the passive voice. T hisis, however, a matter of Initiation rather than of M agick in its ordinary sense. It isnot 
my fault if being is baffling, and doing desperate! 


Y et, once the above principles are firmly fixed in the mind, it is easy enough to sum up the situation very 
Shortly. O ne mus find out for oneself, and make sure beyond doubt, “who” oneis, “what” oneis, “why” one 


is. This done, one may put the will which isimplicit in the “Why” into words, or rather into O ne W ord. 
Being thus conscious of the proper course to pursue, the next thing isto understand the conditions necessary 
to following it out. After that, one must eliminate from oneself every element alien or hostile to success, and 
develop those parts of oneself which are specially needed to control the aforesaid conditions 


Let usmake an analogy. A nation must become aware of its own character before it can be said to exit. From 
that knowledge it must divine its destiny. It must then consider the political conditions of the world; how 
other countries may help it or hinder it. It must then destroy it itself any elements discordant with its destiny. 
Lastly, it must develop in itself those qualitieswhich will enable it to combat successfully the external conditions 
which threaten to oppose is purpose. W ehave had arecent example in the case of the young German Empire, 
which, Knowing itself and its will, disciplined and trained itself so that it conquered the neighbours which had 
oppressed it for so many centuries. But after 1866 and 1870, 1914! It mistook itself for superhuman, it willed 
a thing impossible, it failed to eliminate its own internal jealousies, it failed to understand the conditions of 
victory, 


At least, it allowed E ngland to discover its intentions, and so to combine the world against it. {WEH NOTE: 
This footnote in C rowley’s text belongs to this page, but it is not marked in the text. | have assigned it this 
tentative point, as following the general context. 


it did not train itself to hold the sea, and thus, having violated every principle of 
MAGICK, 


it waspulled down and broken into piecesby provincialisn and democracy, so that neither individual excellence 
nor civic virtue has yet availed to raise it again to that majestic unity which made so bold abid for the mastery 
of the race of man. 


T he sincere student will discover, behind the symbolic technicalitiesof hisbook, apractical method of making 
himself aM agician. T he processes described will enable him to discriminate between what he actually is, and 
what he has fondly imagined himself to be. 


Professor Sigmund F reud and his school have, in recent years, discovered a part of this body of T ruth, which has 
been taught for many centuriesin the Sanctuaries of Initiation. B ut failure to grasp the fullness of T ruth, espedally 
that implied in my Sixth Theorem (above) and its corollaries, has led him and his followers into the error of 
admitting that the avowedly suiddal “C ensor” is theproper arbiter of conduct. O ffidal psycho- analysis is therefore 
committed to upholdinga fraud, although the foundation of the sdence was the observation of the disastrous effects 
on the individual of being false to his U nconsdous Self, whose “ writing on the wall” in dream language is the 
record of the sum of the essential tendendes of the true nature of the individual. T he result has been that psycho- 
analysts have misinterpreted life. and announced the absurdity that every human being is essentially an anti- 
sodal, ciminal, and insane animal. It is evident that the errors of the U nconscous of which the psydho- analysts 
complain are neither more nor less than the’ original sin” of the theologians whom they despise so heartily. 


He must behold his soul in all its awful nakedness, he must not fear to look on that appalling actuality. He 
must discard the gaudy garments with which hisshame has screened him; he must accept the fact that nothing 
can make him anything but what he is. He may lie to himself, drug himself, hide himself; but he is always 
there. M agick will teach him that hismind is playing him traitor. It isasif aman were told that tailors’ fashion- 
plates were the canon of human beauty, so that he tried to make himself formless and featureless like them, and 
shuddered with horror at the idea of H olbein making a portrait of him. M agick will show him the beauty and 
majesty of the self which he has tried to suppress and disguise. 


H aving discovered his identity, he will soon perceive his purpose. Another process will show him how to 
make that purpose pure and powerful. He may then learn how to estimate his environment, learn how to 
make allies, how to make himself prevail against all powers whose error has caused them to wander acrosshis 
path. 


In the course of this T raining, he will learn to explore the H idden M ysteries of N ature, and to develop new 
senses and facultiesin himself, whereby he may communicate with, and control, Beings and Forces pertaining 
to orders of existence which have been hitherto inaccessible to profane research, and available only to that 
unscientific and empirical 


MAGICK 
(of tradition) which | came to destroy in order that | might fulfil. 


CHAPTER 0 
THE MAGICAL THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE 


T here are three main theories of the U niverse; D ualism, M onign and N ihilism. It isimpossible to enter into 
a discussion of their relative merits in a popular manual of this sort. They may be dudied in Erdmann’s 
“History of Philosophy” and similar treatises. 


All are reconciled and unified in the theory which we shall now set forth. T he basis of thisH armony is given 
in Crowley’s 


“Berashith” — to which reference should be made. 


Infinite space is called the goddess N UIT, while the infinitely small and atomic yet omnipresent point is 
called HADIT. 


| present this theory in avery simpleform. | cannot even explain (for instance) that an idea may not refer to B eing 
at all, but to G oing. T he Book of the Law demands spedal study and initiated apprehension. 


T hese are unmanifest. O ne conjunction of these infinites is called RA-HOOR-KHUIT, 
M ore corredly, HERU-RA-HA, toindudeHOOR-PAAR-KRAAT. 
a unity which includes and heads all things. 


T he basis of this theology is given in LiberC CX X,AL vel L egiswhich forms Part!V of thisB ook 4. H nel can 
only outline the matter in a very crude way; it would require a separate treatise to discuss even the true meaning 
of the terms employed, and to show how T heB ook of the L aw antidpates the recent discoveries of F rege, C antor, 
Poincare, R ussell, W hitehead, Einstein and others. 


(T hereisalso aparticular N ature of Him, in certain conditions, such as have obtained since the Spring of 1904, 
ev.) This profoundly mystical conception is based upon actual spiritual experience, but the trained reason 


All advance in understanding demands the aquisition of a new point-of-view. M odern conceptions of M athematic, 
Chemistry, and Physics are sheer paradox to the“ plain man” who thinks of M atter as something that one can 
knock up against. 


can reach a reflection of this idea by the method of logical contradiction which ends in reason transcending 
itself. T he reader hhould consult “T he Soldier and the H unchback” in Equinox I, |, and Konx Om Pax. 


“U nity” transcends “conscioumess’. It isabove all division. T he Father of thought — the W ord — iscalled 
Chaos — the dyad. The number Three, the M other, is called Babalon. In connection with this the reader 
Should study “The T emple of Solomon the King” in Equinox |, V, and Liber 418. 


This first triad is essentially unity, in a manner transcending reason. The comprehension of this Trinity isa 
matter of spiritual experience. All true gods are attributed to thisT rinity. 


C onsiderations of the C hristian T rinity are of a nature suited only to Initiates of the|X D egreeofO.T.O., as 
they endose the final secret of all practical M agick. 


An immeasurable abyss divides it from all manifestations of R eason or the lower qualities of man. In the 


ultimate analysis of R eason, we find all reason identified with this abyss. Y et this abyss is the crown of the 
mind. Purely intellectual faculties all obtain here. T his abyss hasno number, for in it all is confusion. 


Below this abyss we find the moral qualities of M an, of which there are sx. T he highest is symbolised by the 
number Four. Its nature is fatherly 


E ach conception is, however, balanced in itself. F our is also D aleth, the letter of V enus; so that the mothe idea 
is induded. A gain, the Sephira of 4 is C hesed, referred to W ater. 4 is ruled by Jupiter, L ord of the Lightning 
(Fire) yet ruler of A ir. Each Sephira is complete in its way. 


; Mercy and Authority are the attributes of its dignity. 


T he number Five is balanced against it. T he attributes of Five are Energy and Justice. Four and Five are again 
combined and harmonized in the number Six, whose nature isbeauty and harmony, mortality and immortality. 


In the number Seven the feminine nature is again predominant, but it is the masculine type of female, the 
Amazon, who is balanced in the number Eight by the feminine type of male. 


In the number N ine we reach the last of the purely mental qualities. It identifies change with stability. 
Pendant to this sixfold system is the number T en<< 

T he balance of the Sephiroth: 

K ether (1) “Kether isin M alkuth, and M alkuth isin K ether, but after another manner.” 

Chokmah (2) is Y od of T etragrammaton, and therefore also U nity. 

Binah (3) isH e of T etragrammaton, and therefore “T he 

Emperor.” 

Chesed (4) isDaleth, Venus the female. 

Geburah (5) isthe Sephira of M ars, the M ale. 

Tiphereth (6) isthe H exagram, harmonizing, and mediating between 

K ether and M alkuth. Also it reflects K ether. “T hat 

which is above, is like that which is below, and 

that which is below, is like that which is above.” 

N etzach (7) and Hod (8) balanced asin text. 

Jesod (9) see text. 

M alkuth (10) contains all the numbers.>> which includes the whole of M atter as we know it by the senses. 


It isimpossible here to explain thoroughly the complete conception; for it cannot be too clearly understood 
that this isa “classification” of the U niverse, that there isnothing which isnot comprehended therein. 


The Article on the Q abalah in Vol. 1, No. V of the Equinox isthe best which has been written on the subject. 


It should be deeply studied, in connection with the Q abalistic Diagramsin Nos. II and III: “The T emple of 
Solomon the King”. 


Such isacrude and elementary sketch of this system. 


T he formula of T etragrammaton isthe most important for the practical magician. H ere Y od = 2, He= 3, Vau 
= 4 to 9, Hefinal = 10. 


TheN umber T wo representsY od, the Divine or Archetypal W orld, and the N umber O neisonly attained by 
the destruction of the God and the M agician in Samadhi. T he world of Angels is under the numbers Four to 
N ine, and that of spirits under the number T en. 


It is not possible to give a full account of the twenty-two “paths” in this condensed sketch. T hey should be studied 
in view of all their attributes in 777, but more espedally that in which they are attributed to the planets, eements 
and signs, as also to the T arot T rumps, while their position on the T reeitself and their position as links between 
the particular Sephiroth which they join is the final key to their understanding. It will be noticed that each chapter 
of this book is attributed to one of them. T his was not intentional. T he book was originally but a collecion of 
haphazard dialogues between Fra. P. and Soror A.; but on arranging the MSS, they fell naturally and of 
necessity into this division. C onversely, my knowledge of the Schema pointed out to me numerous gaps in my 
original exposition; thanks to this, | have been able to make it a complete and systematic treatise T hat is, when 
my laziness had been jogged by the aitidsms and suggestions of various colleagues to whom | had submitted the 
early drafts. 


All these numbers are of course parts of the magician himself considered asthe microcosm. T he microcosm is 
an exact image of the M acrocosm; the Great W ork is the raising of the whole man in perfect balance to the 
power of Infinity. 


The reader will remark that all criticism directed against the M agical Hierarchy is futile. O ne cannot call it 
incorrect — the only line to take might be that it was inconvenient. In the same way one cannot say that the 
R oman alphabet is better or worse than the Greek, since all required sounds can be more or less satisfactorily 
represented by either; yet both these alphabets were found 50 little satisfactory when it came to an attempt at 
phonetic printing of O riental languages, that the alphabet had to be expanded by the use of italics and other 
diacritical marks. In the same way our magical alphabet of the Sephiroth and the Paths (thirty-two letters as it 
were) has been expanded into the four worlds corresponding to the four letters of the name Y od-H eh- V au- 
H eh; and each Sephirais supposed to contain aT ree of Life of itsown. T huswe obtain four hundred Sephiroth 
instead of the original ten, and the Paths being capable of similar multiplications, or rather of subdivision, the 
number is still further extended. O f course this process might be indefinitely continued without destroying 
the original system. 


TheApologiafor thisSystem isthat our purest conceptionsare symbolized in M athematics. “God isthe G reat 
Arithmetician.” “God isthe Grand G eometer.” It isbest therefore to prepare to apprehend H im by formulating 
our minds according to these measures. 


By “God” | here mean the Ideal Identity of a man’s inmost nature. “Something ourselves (| erase A rnold’s 
imbedle and guilty ‘not’) that makes for righteousness;” righteousness being rightly defined as internal coherence. 
(Internal C oherence implies that which is written “D etegitur Y od.” ) 


To return, each letter of this alphabet may have its special magical sigil. T he student must not expect to be 
given a cut-and- dried definition of what exactly is meant by any of all this On the contrary, he mus work 
backwards, putting the whole of his mental and moral outfit into these pigeon-holes. Y ou would not expect 


to be able to buy a filing cabinet with the names of all your past, present and future correspondents ready 
indexed: your cabinet has a system of letters and numbers meaningless in themselves, but ready to take on a 
meaning to you, asyou fill up the files. Asyour business increased, each letter and number would receive fresh 
accessions of meaning for you; and by adopting this orderly arrangement you would be able to have amuch 
more comprehensive grasp of your affairs than would otherwise be the case. By the use of this system the 
magician is able ultimately to unify the whole of his knowledge — to transmute, even on the Intellectual 
Plane, the M any into the One. 


The R eader can now understand that the sketch given above of the magical Hierarchy is hardly even an 
outline of the real theory of the U niverse. T histheory may indeed be studied in the article already referred to 
in No. V of the Equinox, and, more deeply in the Book of the Law and the Commentaries thereon: but the 
true understanding depends entirely upon the work of the M agician himself. W ithout magical experience it 
will be meaningless. 


In thisthere is nothing peculiar. It isso with all scientific knowledge. A blind man might cram up astronomy 
for the purpose of passing examinations, but hisknowledge would be almos entirely unrelated to hisexperience, 
and it would certainly not give him sght. A smilar phenomenon is observed when a gentleman who has 
taken an “honours degree” in modern languages at C ambridge arrives in Paris, and is unable to order his 
dinner. T 0 exclaim against the M aster T herion isto act like aperson who, observing this, should attack both 
the professors of French and the inhabitants of Paris, and perhaps go on to deny the existence of France. 


Let ussay, once again, that the magical language isnothing but a convenient system of classification to enable 
the magician to docket his experiences as he obtains them. 


Y et thisistrue also, that, once the language is mastered, one can divine the unknown by study of the known, 
just as one’s knowledge of Latin and Greek enables one to understand some unfamiliar English word derived 
from those sources. Also, there isthe similar case of the Periodic Law in Chemistry, which enables Science to 
prophesy, and so in the end to discover, the existence of certain previously unsuspected elements in nature. 
All discussions upon philosophy are necessarily sterile, snce truth is beyond language. T hey are, however, 
useful if carried far enough — if carried to the point when it become apparent that all arguments are arguments 
in acircle. 


See “T he Soldier and the H unchback,” Equinox |, |. T he apparatus of human reason is simply one particular 
system of coordinating impressions; its structure is determined by the course of the evolution of the spedes. It is no 
more absolute than the evolution of the spedes. It is no more absolute than the mechanism of our musdes is a 
complete type wherewith all other systems of transmitting F orce must conform. 


But discussons of the details of purely imaginary qualities are frivolous and may be deadly. For the great 
danger of this magical theory is that the student may mistake the alphabet for the things which the words 
represent. 


An excellent man of great intelligence, alearned Q abalist, once amazed the M aster T herion by stating that the 
T ree of Life was the framework of the U niverse. It was asif some one had seriously maintained that a cat was 
acreature constructed by placing the lettersC .A.T. in that order. It isno wonder that M agick has excited the 
ridicule of the unintelligent, snce even its educated students can be guilty of so gross a violation of the first 
principles of common sense.< The absurdity of any such disturbance of the arrangement of the Paths is 
evident to any sober student from such examples as the following. Binah, the Supernal U nderstanding, is 
connected with Tiphereth, the Human Conscioumess, by Zain, Gemini, the O racles of the Gods, or the 
Intuition. T hat is, the attribution represents a psychological fact: to replace it by The Devil is either humour 


or plain idiocy. Again, the card “Fortitude”, Leo, balances M ajesty and M ercy with Strength and Severity: 
what sense isthere in putting “Death”, the Scorpion, in itsstead? T here are twenty other mistakesin the new 
wonderful illuminated-from-on-high attribution; the tudent can therefore be sure of twenty more laughs if 
he cares to study it.>> A synopssof the gradesof theA.’. A.’. asillustrative of the M agical Hierarchy in M an 
is given in Appendix 2 “One Star in Sight.” T his should be read before proceeding with the chapter. T he 
Subject is very difficult. To deal with it in full is entirely beyond the limits of this small treatise. 


“FURTHER CONCERNING THE MAGICAL UNIVER SE” 


All these letters of the magical alphabet — referred to above — are like so many nameson amap. M an himself 
isacomplete microcosm. Few other beings have this balanced perfection. O f course every sun, every planet, 
may have beings similarly constituted. 


Equally, of course, wehaveno means of knowing what we really are. W earelimited to symbols. A nd it is certain 
that all our sense perceptions give only partial aspects of their objects. Sight, for instance, tells us very little about 
solidity, weight, @mposition, electrical cnaracer, thermal conductivity, etc, etc It says nothing at all about the 
very existence of such vitally important ideas as H eat, H ardness, and so on. T he impression which the mind 
combines from the senses can never daim to be acurate or complete. W ehave indeed learnt that nothing is in itself 
what it seems to be to us. 


But when we speak of dealing with the planetsin M agick, the reference isusually not to the actual planets, but 
to parts of the earth which are of the nature attributed to these planets. T hus, when we say that N akhiel isthe 
“Intelligence” of the Sun, we do not mean that he livesin the Sun, but only that he has a certain rank and 
character; and although we can invoke him, we do not necessarily mean that he existsin the same sense of the 
word in which our butcher exists. 


W hen we “conjureN akhiel to visble appearance,” it may be that our processresembles creation — or, rather 
imagination — more nearly than it does calling-forth. T he aura of aman is called the “magical mirror of the 
universe”; and, so far as any one can tell, nothing exists outside of this mirror. It is at least convenient to 
represent the whole asif it were subjective. It leads to less confusion. And, asaman isaperfect microcosm, 


He is this only by definition. T he universe may contain an infinite variety of worlds inaccessible to human 
apprehension. Y et, for this very reason, they do not exist for the purposes of the argument. M an has, however, 
some instruments of knowledge, we may, therefore, define the M acromsm as the totality of things possible to his 
perception. As evolution develops those instruments, the M acrocosm and the M icocosm extend; but they always 
maintain their mutual relation. N either can possess any meaning except in terms of the other. O ur “ discoveries” 
areexadly as much of ourselves as they areof N ature. A mevi@ and E lectridty did, in a sense, exist before we were 
aware of them; but they are even now no more than incomplete ideas, expressed in symbolic terms of a series of 
relations between two sets of inscrutable phenomena. 


it is perfectly easy to re- model one’s conception at any moment. 


N ow there isatraditional correspondence, which modern experiment has shown to be fairly reliable. T here is 
acertain natural connexion between certain letters, words, numbers, gestures, shapes, perfumes and so on, so 
that any idea or (aswe might call it) “spirit”, may be composed or called forth by the use of those thingswhich 
are harmoniouswith it, and express particular parts of its nature. T hese correspondences have been elaborately 
mapped in the Book 777 in avery convenient and compendious form. It will be necessary for the student to 
make a careful study of this book in connexion with some actual rituals of M agick, for example, that of the 
evocation of T aphtatharath printed in Equinox I, II|, pages 170-190, where he will see exactly why these 


thingsare to be used. O f course, asthe student advancesin knowledge by experience he will find aprogressive 
subtlety in the magical universe corresponding to his own; for let it be said yet again! not only is his auraa 
magical mirror of the universe, but the universe is a magical mirror of his aura. 


In this chapter we are only able to give avery thin outline of magical theory — faint pencilling by weak and 
wavering fingers — for this subject may almost be said to be co- extensive with one’s whole knowledge. 


T he knowledge of exoteric science is comically limited by the fact that we have no access, except in the most 
indirect way, to any other celestial body than our own. In the last few years, the semi- educated have got an 
idea that they know agreat deal about the universe, and the principal ground for their fine opinion of themselves 
isusually the telephone or the airship. It ispitiful to read the bombastic tw addle about progress, which journalists 
and others, who wish to prevent men from thinking, put out for consumption. W e know infinitesmally little 
of the material universe. O ur detailed knowledge isso contemptibly minute, that it ishardly worth reference, 
save that our shame may sour usto increased endeavour. Such knowledge 


K nowledge is, moreover, an impossible conception. A II propositions come ultimately back to“A isA”. 


as we have got isof avery general and abstruse, of aphilosophical and almost magical character. T his conssts 
principally of the conceptionsof pure mathematics Itis, therefore, almost legitimate to say that pure mathematics 
isour link with the rest of the universe and with “God”. 


N ow the conceptions of M agick are themselves profoundly mathematical. The whole basis of our theory is 
the Q abalah, which corresponds to mathematics and geometry. T he method of operation in M agick is based 
on this, in very much the same way asthe lawsof mechanicsare based on mathematics. So far, therefore aswe 
can be said to possess a magical theory of the universe, it must be a matter solely of fundamental law, with a 
few simple and comprehensive propostions stated in very general terms. 


| might expend alife-time in exploring the details of one plane, just as an explorer might give his life to one 
corner of Africa, or a chemist to one subgroup of compounds Each such detailed piece of work may be very 
valuable, but it doesnot asarule throw light on the main principles of the universe. Itstruth isthe truth of one 
angle. It might even lead to error, if some inferior person were to generalize from too few facts. 


Imagine an inhabitant of M ars who wished to philosophise about the earth, and had nothing to go by but the 
diary of some man at the N orth Pole! But the work of every explorer, on whatever branch of theT ree of Life 
the caterpillar he is after may happen to be crawling, is immensely helped by a grasp of general principles. 
Every magician, therefore, should study the H oly Q abalah. O nce he has mastered the main principles, he will 
find his work grow easy. 


“Solvitur ambulando” which does not mean: “C all the Ambulance!” 


CHAPTER | 
THE PRINCIPLES OF RITUAL. 


T here isasingle main definition of the object of all magical R itual. It isthe uniting of the Microcosm with the 
M acrocosm. T he Supreme and C omplete R itual is therefore the Invocation of the H oly Guardian Angel; 


See the “B ook of the Sacred M agic of A bramelin the M age”; and Liber 418, 8th A ethyr, Liber Samekh; see 
A ppendix 3. 


or, in the language of M ysticism, U nion with God. 
T he difference between these operations is more of theoretical than of practical importance. 


All other magical R ituals are particular cases of this general principle, and the only excuse for doing them is 
that it sometimes occurs that one particular portion of the microcosm is so weak that its imperfection of 
impurity would vitiate the M acrocosm of which it isthe image, Eidolon, or R eflexion. For example, God is 
above sex; and therefore neither man nor woman assuch can be said fully to understand, much lessto represent, 
God. Itistherefore incumbent on the male magician to cultivate those female virtuesin which he isdeficient, 
and this task he must of course accomplish without in any way impairing hisvirility. It will then be lawful for 
amagician to invoke Isis, and identify himself with her; if he fail to do this, his apprehension of the U niverse 
when he attains Samadhi will lack the conception of maternity. T he result will be a metaphysical and — by 
corollary — ethical limitation in the R eligion which he founds. Judaism and Islam are striking example of this 
failure. 


To take another example, the ascetic life which devotion to magick so often involves argues a poverty of 
nature, a narrowness, a lack of generosity. N ature is infinitely prodigal — not one in a million seeds ever 
comes to fruition. W hoso fails to recognise this, let him invoke Jupiter. 


T here are much deeper considerations in which it appears that “Everything that is, is right”. T hey are set forth 
elsewhere, we can only summarise then here by saying that the survival of the fittest is thar upshot. 


T he danger of ceremonial magick — the sublest and deepest danger — isthis: that the magician will naturally 
tend to invoke that partial being which most strongly appealsto him, so that hisnatural excessin that direction 
will be still further exaggerated. Let him, before beginning his W ork, endeavour to map out his own being, 
and arrange his invocations in such a way asto redress the balance. 


T he ideal method of doing this is given in Liber 913 (E quinox VII). See also Liber C XI A leph. 


This, of course, Should have been done in a preliminary fashion during the preparation of the weapons and 
furniture of the T emple. 


To consder in amore particular manner this question of the N ature of R itual, we may suppose that he finds 
himself lacking in that perception of the value of Life and Death, alike of individuals and of races, which is 
characteristic of N ature. H ehasperhapsatendency to perceive the “first noble truth” uttered by Buddha, that 
Everything issorrow. N ature, it seems, isatragedy. H e has perhaps even experienced the great trance called 
Sorrow. He should then consider whether there is not some D eity who expresses this C ycle, and yet whose 
nature is joy. He will find what he requires in Dionysus. 


T here are three main methods of invoking any Deity. 


The “First M ethod” consists of devotion to that Deity, and, being mainly mystical in character, need not be 
dealt with in this place, especially as a perfect instruction exists in Liber 175 (“See” Appendix). 


The “Second method” is the straight forward ceremonial invocation. It is the method which was usually 
employed in the M iddle Ages. Its advantage isits directness, its disadvantage its crudity. T he “Goetia” gives 
clear instruction in this method, and so do many other rituals, white and black. We shall presently devote 
some space to aclear exposition of this Art. 


In the case of Bacchus, however, we may roughly outline the procedure. We find that the symbolism of 
T iphareth expresses the nature of Bacchus. It isthen necessary to construct aR itual of T iphareth. Let usopen 
the Book 777; we shall find in line 6 of each column the various parts of our required apparatus. H aving 
ordered everything duly, we shall exalt the mind by repeated prayersor conjurationsto the highest conception 
of the God, until, in one sense or another of the word, H e appearsto us and floods our conscioumess with the 
light of H is divinity. 


The “Third M ethod is the Dramatic,” perhaps the most attractive of all; certainly it is so to the artist’s 
temperament, for it appeals to his imagination through his aesthetic sense. 


Its disadvantage lies principally in the difficulty of its performance by asingle person. But it hasthe sanction of 
the highest antiquity, and is probably the most useful for the foundation of a religion. It is the method of 
Catholic Christianity, and consists in the dramatization of the legend of the God. T he Bacchae of Euripidesis 
a magnificent example of such aR itual; so also, through in a less degree, isthe M ass. We may also mention 
many of the degrees in Freemasonry, particularly the third. The 5'=6' R itual published in No. III of the 
Equinox is another example. 


In the case of Bacchus, one commemorates firstly his birth of a mortal mother who has yielded her treasure- 
house to the Father of All, of the jealousy and rage excited by thisincarnation, and of the heavenly protection 
afforded to the infant. N ext should be commemorated the journeying westward upon an ass. N ow comesthe 
great scene of the drama: the gentle, exquisite youth with his following (chiefly composed of women) seems 
to threaten the established order of things, and that Established O rder takes steps to put an end to the upstart. 
We find Dionysus confronting the angry King, not with defiance, but with meekness; yet with a subtle 
confidence, an underlying laughter. H is forehead is wreathed with vine tendrils. He is an effeminate figure 
with those broad leaves clustered upon his brow? But those leaves hide horns. King Pentheus, representative 
of respectability, 


T hereisa much deeper interpretation in which P entheusis himself “T heD yingG od”. Seemy “G ood H unting!” 
and Dr. J.G .Frazer’s “G olden Bough”. 


is destroyed by his pride. H e goes out into the mountains to attack the women who have followed Bacchus, 
the youth whom he has mocked, scourged, and put in chains, yet who has only smiled; and by those women, 
in their divine madness, he is torn to pieces. 


It has already seemed impertinent to say so much when W alter Pater has told the story with such sympathy 
and insight. We will not further transgress by dwelling upon the identity of this legend with the course of 
N ature, its madness, its prodigality, its intoxication, itsjoy, and above all its sublime persistence through the 
cycles of Life and D eath. T he pagan reader must labour to understand thisin Pater’s “Greek Studies”, and the 
Christian reader will recogniseit, incident for incident, in the tory of Christ. T hislegend isbut the dramatization 
of Spring. 


T he magician who wishes to invoke Bacchus by this method must therefore arrange aceremony in which he 


takes the part of Bacchus, undergoes all H is trials, and emerges triumphant from beyond death. H e mug, 
however, be warned against mistaking the symbolism. In this case, for example, the doctrine of individual 
immortality has been dragged in, to the destruction of truth. It isnot that utterly worthless part of man, his 
individual consciousness asJohn Smith, which defies death — that consciousness which dies and is reborn in 
every thought. T hat which persists (if anything persis) ishis real John Smithiness, a quality of which he was 
probably never consciousin his life. 


See “T he Book of Lies”, Liber 333, for several sermons to this effect. C aps. Alpha, D eta, Eta, lota-E psilon, 
lota-Sigma, lota-E ta, K appa-A Ipha, K appa-E ta, in particular. T he rancarnation of the K hu or magia Self is 
another matter entirely, too abstruse to discuss in this elementary manual. {WEH NOTE: | have madea 
correction in the above list of chapters from Liber 333. T he published text dtes lota-D igamma, which does not 
exist. T he correct chapter is lota-Sigma, which does exist and discusses the subject}. 


Even that does not persist unchanged. It is always growing. T he Crossisabarren stick, and the petals of the 
R ose fall and decay; but in the union of the Cross and the R ose isa constant succession of new lives. 


See“ T heB ook of Lies’, Liber 333, for several sermons to this effect. T he whole theory of D eath must be sought 
in Liber C X1 Aleph. 


W ithout this union, and without this death of the individual, the cycle would be broken. 


A chapter will be consecrated to removing the practical difficulties of this method of Invocation. It will 
doubtless have been noted by the acumen of the reader that in the great essentials these three methods are one. 
In each case the magician identifies himself with the Deity invoked. To “invoke” isto “call in”, just as to 
“evoke” isto “call forth”. T hisisthe essential difference between the two branchesof M agick. In invocation, 
the macrocosm floods the consciousmess. In evocation, the magician, having become the macrocosm, creates 
a microcosm. Y ou “in” voke a God into the Circle. You “e”voke a Spirit into the Triangle. In the first 
method identity with the God is attained by love and by surrender, by giving up or suppressing all irrelevant 
(and illusionary) parts of yourself. It isthe weeding of a garden. 


In the second method identity is attained by paying special attention to the desred part of yourself: postive, 
as the first method is negative. It isthe potting- out and watering of a particular flower in the garden, and the 
exposure of it to the sun. 


In the third, identity isattained by sympathy. It isvery difficult for the ordinary man to lose himself completely 
in the subject of a play or of anovel; but for those who can do 90, this method is unquestionably the best. 


O bserve: each element in this cycle is of equal value. It is wrong to say triumphantly “M ors janua vitae”, 
unless you add, with equal triumph, “Vita janua mortis’. To one who understands this chain of the Aeons 
from the point of view alike of the sorrowing Isisand of the triumphant O sris, not forgetting their link in the 
destroyer Apophis, there remains no secret veiled in N ature. He cries that name of God which throughout 
H istory has been echoed by one religion to another, the infinite swelling paean |.A.0 .! 


This name, |.A .0. is qabalistically identical with that of THE BEAST and with H is number 666, so that he 
who invokes the former invokes also the latter. A Iso with AIW AZ and theN umber 93. SeeC hapter V . 


CHAPTER Il 
THE FORMULAE OF THE ELEMENTAL WEAPONS. 


Before discussing magical formulae in detail, one may observe that most rituals are composite, and contain 
many formulae which must be harmonized into one. 


T he first formula is that of the W and. In the sphere of the principle which the magician wishes to invoke, he 
rises from point to point in a perpendicular line, and then descends; or else, beginning at the top, he comes 
directly down, “invoking” first the god of that sohere by “devout supplication” 


Beware, O brother, lest thou bend theknee! Liber C C X X teaches theproper attitude. SeealsoLiberC CCLXX. 
Infra, furthermore, there is speaal instruction: C hapter XV and elsewhere. 


that H e may deign to send the appropriate Archangel. H e then “beseeches” the Archangel to send the Angel 
or Angelsof that sphere to his aid; he “conjures” thisAngel or Angelsto send the intelligence in question, and 
thisintelligence he will “conjure with authority” to compel the obedience of the spirit and his manifestation. 
To this spirit he “issues commands’. 


It will be seen that this is a formula rather of evocation than of invocation, and for the latter the procedure, 
though apparently the same, should be conceived of in a different manner, which brings it under another 
formula, that of T etragrammaton. T he essence of the force invoked isone, but the “God” representsthe germ 
or beginning of the force, the “Archangel” its development; and so on, until, with the “Spirit”, we have the 
completion and perfection of that force. 


T he formula of the Cup isnot so well suited for Evocations, and the magical Hierarchy isnot involved in the 
same way; for the Cup being passive rather than active, it isnot fitting for the magician to use it in respect of 
anything but the H ighest. In practical working it consequently means little but prayer, and that prayer the 
“orayer of slence”. 


C onsiderations which might lead to a contrary condusion are unsuited to this treatise. See Liber L X X XI. 


T he formula of the dagger is again unsuitable for either purpose, since the nature of the dagger isto criticise, to 
destroy, to disperse; and all true magical ceremonies tend to concentration. T he dagger will therefore appear 
principally in the banishings, preliminary to the ceremony proper. T he formula of the pantacle is again of no 
particular use; for the pantacle is inert. In fine, the formula of the wand is the only one with which we need 
more particularly concern ourselves. 


Later, these remarks are amplified, and to some extent modified. 


N ow in order to invoke any being, it issaid by H ermes T rismegistus that the magi employ three methods. 
The first, for the vulgar, is that of supplication. In this the crude objective theory is assumed astrue. T here is 
agod named A, whom you, B, proceed to petition, in exactly the same sense asa boy might ask his father for 
pocket- money. 


T hesecond method involvesalittle more subtlety, inasmuch asthe magician endeavoursto harmonize himself 
with the nature of the god, and to acertain extent exalts himself, in the course of the ceremony; but the third 
method isthe only one worthy of our consderation. 


T hisconssts of areal identification of the magician and the god. N ote that to do thisin perfection involvesthe 


attainment of a species of Samadhi: and this fact alone suffices to link irrefragably magick with mysticism. 


Let us describe the magical method of identification. The symbolic form of the god is first tudied with as 
much care as an artist would bestow upon his model, so that a perfectly clear and unshakeable mental picture 
of the god is presented to the mind. Similarly, the attributes of the god are enshrined in speech, and such 
speeches are committed perfectly to memory. The invocation will then begin with a prayer to the god, 
commemorating his physical attributes, always with profound understanding of their real meaning. In the 
“second part” of the invocation, the voice of the god isheard, and H is characteristic utterance is recited. 


In the “third portion” of the invocation the magician asserts the identity of himself with the god. In the 
“fourth portion” the god isagain invoked, but asif by Himself, asif it were the utterance of the will of the god 
that H e should manifest in the magician. At the conclusion of this, the original object of the invocation is 
sated. 


Thus, in the invocation of Thoth which isto be found in the rite of M ercury (Equinox I, VI) and in Liber 
LX IV, the first part begins with the words “M ajesty of Godhead, wisdom- crowned TAH UTI, T hee, T hee! 

invoke. Oh T hou of the Ibis head, T hee, Thee! invoke”; and so on. At the conclusion of thisa mental image 
of the God, infinitely vast and infinitely solendid, should be perceived, in just the same sense as aman might 
see the Sun. 


T he second part begins with the words: 
“Behold! | am yesterday, today, and the brother of tomorrow.” 


T he magician should imagine that he ishearing this voice, and at the same time that he is echoing it, that it is 
true also of himself. This thought should so exalt him that he is able at its conclusion to utter the sublime 
wordswhich open the third part: “Behold! heisin me, and! amin him.” At thismoment, he loses consciousness 
of hismortal being; he isthat mental image which he previously but saw. T hisconscioumessis only complete 
ashe goeson: “M ine isthe radiance wherein Ptah floateth over hisfirmament. | travel upon high. | tread upon 
the firmament of N u. | raise aflashing flame with the lightnings of mine eye: ever rushing on in the splendour 
of the daily glorified R a— giving my life to the treaders of Earth!” T histhought givesthe relation of God and 
M an from the divine point of view. 


The magician is only recalled to himself at the conclusion of the third part; in which occur, almost as if by 
accident, the words: “T herefore do all thingsobey my word.” Y etin the fourth part, which begins: “T herefore 
do thou come forth unto me”, it isnot really the magician who isaddressing the God; it isthe God who hears 
the far- off utterance of the magician. If thisinvocation has been correctly performed, the words of the fourth 
part will sound distant and strange. It issurprising that adummy (so the magusnow appears to H imself) should 
be able to speak! 


T he Egyptian G odsare so complete in their nature, so perfectly spiritual and yet so perfectly material, that this 
One invocation is sufficient. The God bethinks him that the spirit of Mercury should now appear to the 
magician; and it isso. T his Egyptian formula is therefore to be preferred to the Hierarchical formula of the 
H ebrews with its tedious prayers, conjurations, and curses. 


It will be noted, however, that in this invocation of Thoth which we have summarized, there is another 
formula contained, the R everberating or R eciprocating formula, which may be called the formula of H orus 
and H arpocrates. T he magician addresses the God with an active projection of his will, and then becomes 
passive while the God addresses the U niverse. In the fourth part he remains slent, listening, to the prayer 
which arises therefrom. 


T he formula of this invocation of Thoth may also be classed under T etragrammaton. T he first part isfire, the 
eager prayer of the magician, the second water, in which the magician listens to, or catches the reflection of, 
the god. T he third part isair, the marriage of fire and water; the god and the man have become one; while the 
fourth part corresponds to earth, the condensation or materialization of those three higher principles. 


W ith regard to the H ebrew formulae, it isdoubtful whether most magicianswho use them have ever properly 
grasped the principles underlying the method of identity. N o passage which impliesit occursto mind, and the 
extant rituals certainly give no hint of such aconception, or of any but the most personal and material views of 
the nature of things. T hey seem to have thought that there was an Archangel named R atziel in exactly the 
same sense as there was a tatesman named R ichelieu, an individual being living in a definite place. H e had 
possibly certain powers of a somewhat metaphysical order — he might be in two places at once, 


H equld do this provided that he can travel with a speed exceeding that of Light, as he does. See A .S.E ddington 
“Space, Time, and G ravitation”. A Iso: what means “ at once” ? 


for example, though even the possibility of so smple a feat (in the case of spirits) seemsto be denied by certain 
passages in extant conjurations which tell the spirit that if he happens to be in chains in a particular place in 
H ell, or if some other magician is conjuring him so that he cannot come, then let him send agpirit of Smilar 
nature, or otherwise avoid the difficultly. But of course so vulgar aconception would not occur to the student 
of the Q abalah. It is just possible that the magi wrote their conjurations on this crude hypothesis in order to 
avoid the clouding of the mind by doubt and metaphysical speculation. 


H ewho became the M aster T herion wasonce confronted by thisvery difficulty. Being determined to instruct 
mankind, H e sought asmple statement of his object. H iswill was sufficiently informed by common sense to 
decide him to teach man “The N ext Step”, the thing which was immediately above him. He might have 
called this “God”, or “The Higher Self”, or “T he Augoeides’, or “Adi-Buddha’”, or 61 other things— but 
H e had discovered that these were all one, yet that each one represented some theory of the U niverse which 
would ultimately be shattered by criticism — for He had already passed through the realm of R eason, and 
knew that every statement contained an absurdity. He therefore said: “Let me declare this W ork under this 
title: ‘T he obtaining of the K nowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel’”, because the theory 
implied in these wordsis so patently absurd that only simpletons would waste much time in analysing it. It 
would be accepted as a convention, and no one would incur the grave danger of building a philosophical 
system upon it. 


With this understanding, we may rehabilitate the H ebrew system of invocations. The mind is the great 
enemy; so, by invoking enthusiastically aperson whom we know not to exis, we are rebuking that mind. Y et 
we Should not refrain altogether from philosophising in the light of the H oly Q abalah. W e nould accept the 
M agical Hierarchy asamore or lessconvenient classification of the facts of the U niverse as they are known to 
us, and as our knowledge and understanding of those facts increase, so Should we endeavour to adjust our idea 
of what we mean by any symbol. 


At the same time let us reflect that there isacertain definite consensusof experience asto the correlation of the 
various beings of the hierarchy with the observed facts of M agick. In the smple matter of astral vision, for 
example, one striking case may be quoted. 


W ithout telling him what it was, the M aster T herion once recited asan invocation Sappho’s “O de to Venus’ 
before a Probationer of the A.’. A.’. who wasignorant of Greek, the language of the O de. T he disciple then 
went on an “astral journey,” and everything seen by him was without exception harmonious with Venus. 
T hiswastrue down to the smallest detail. H e even obtained all the four colour-scales of Venus with absolute 


correctness. C onsidering that he saw something like one hundred symbolsin all, the odds against coincidence 
are incalculably great. Such an experience (and the records of the A.’. A.’. contain dozens of smilar cases) 
affords proof as absolute as any proof can be in this world of Illusion that the correspondences in Liber 777 
really represent facts in N ature. 


It suggests itself that this “straightforward” system of magick was perhaps never really employed at all. One 
might maintain that the invocations which have come down to usare but the ruins of the T emple of M agick. 
The exorcisms might have been committed to writing for the purpose of memorising them, while it was 
forbidden to make any record of the really important parts of the ceremony. Such details of R itual as we 
possess are meagre and unconvincing, and though much success has been attained in the quite conventional 
exoteric way both by FRATER PERDURABO and by many of his colleagues, yet ceremonies of this 
character have always remained tedious and difficult. It has seemed as if the success were obtained almost in 
gpite of the ceremony. In any case, they are the more mysterious parts of the R itual which have evoked the 
divine force. Such conjurations as those of the “Goetia” leave one cold, although, notably in the second 
conjuration, there is a crude attempt to use that formula of Commemoration of which we spoke in the 
preceding C hapter. 


CHAPTER III 
THE FORMULA OF TETRAGRAMMATON. 


Yod, He, Vau, He thelneffable N ame (Jehovah) of the H ebrews. T he four letters refer respectively to the four 
“elements”, Fire W ater, Air, Earth, in the order named. 


T hisformulaisof most universal aspect, asall things are necessarily comprehended in it; but itsusein amagical 
ceremony is little understood. 


The climax of the formula isin one sense before even the formulation of the Y od. For the Y od isthe most 
divine aspect of the Force — the remaining letters are but a solidification of the same thing. It must be 
understood that we are here speaking of the whole ceremony considered asa unity, not merely of that formula 
in which “Y od” is the god invoked, “He” the Archangel, and so on. In order to understand the ceremony 
under this formula, we must take a more extended view of the functions of the four weapons than we have 
hitherto done. 


T he formation of the “Y od” is the formulation of the first creative force, of that father who is called “self- 
begotten”, and unto whom it is said: “Thou has formulated thy Father, and made fertile thy M other”. The 
adding of the “He” to the “Yod” is the marriage of that Father to the great co- equal M other, who isa 
reflection of N uit as He is of H adit. Their union brings forth the son “Vau” who is the heir. Finally the 
daughter “H e” is produced. She is both the twin sister and the daughter of “Vau”. 


T here is a further mystery herein, far deeper, for initiates. 


His mission is to redeem her by making her his bride; the result of this is to set her upon the throne of her 
mother, and it is only she whose youthful embrace can reawaken the eld of the All-Father. In this complex 
family relationship 


T he formula of T etragrammaton, as ordinarily understood, ending with the appearance of the daughter, is indeed 
a degradation. 


is symbolised the whole course of the U niverse. It will be seen that (after all) the C limax is at the end. It isthe 
second half of the formula which symbolises the Great W ork which we are pledged to accomplish. The first 
gep of thisisthe attainment of the K nowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel, which constitutes 
the Adept of the Inner Order. The re-entry of these twin spouses into the womb of the mother is that 
initiation described in Liber 418, which gives admission to the Inmost O rder of the A.’. A.’. Of the last tep 
we cannot speak. 


It will now be recognised that to devise a practical magical ceremony to correspond to T etragrammaton in 
this exalted sense might be difficult if not impossible. In such aceremony the R ituals of purification alone 
might occupy many incarnations. 


It will be necessary, therefore, to revert to the smpler view of T etragrammaton, remembering only that the 
“He” final isthe T hrone of the Spirit, of the Shin of Pentagrammaton. 


TheY od will represent aswift and violent creative energy; following thiswill be acalmer and more reflective 
but even more powerful flow of will, the irresistible force of a mighty river. This state of mind will be 
followed by an expansion of the consciousness, it will penetrate all space, and this will finally undergo a 
crystallization resplendent with interior light. Such modifications of the original W ill may be observed in the 


course of the invocations when they are properly performed. 


T he peculiar dangers of each are obvious— that of the first isa flash in the pan — amisfire; that of the second, 
afalling into dreaminess or reverie; that of the third, lossof concentration. A mistake in any of these points will 
prevent, or injure the proper formation of, the fourth. 


In the expression which will be used in C hapter X V: “Enflame thyself”, etc., only the first stage is specified; 


but if that is properly done the other stages will follow asif by necessity. So far is it written concerning the 
formula of T etragrammaton. 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE FORMULA OF ALHIM, AND THAT OF ALIM. 


“ALHIM”, (Elohim) is the exoteric word for Gods. 


“G ods” are the F orces of N ature their “N ames” are the L aws of N ature. T hus T hey are eternal, omnipotent, 
omnipresent and so on; and thus their “W ills” areimmutable and absolute. 


It isthe masculine plural of afeminine noun, but its nature is principally feminine. 


It represents Sakti, or T eh; femininity always means form, manifestation. T he masculine Siva, or T ao, is always 
a concealed force. 


It isa perfect hieroglyph of the number 5. T his should be studied in “A N ote on Genesis” (Equinox I, I). 


The Elements are all represented, as in T etragrammaton, but there is no development from one into the 
others. They are, as it were, thrown together — untamed, only sympathising by virtue of their wild and 
stormy but elastically resistless energy. The C entral letter is “He” — the letter of breath — and represents 
Spirit. T he first letter “Aleph” isthe natural letter of Air, and the Final “M em” isthe natural letter of W ater. 
Together, “Aleph” and “Mem” make “Am” — the mother within whose womb the C osmosis conceived. 
But “Y od” is not the natural letter of Fire. Its juxtaposition with “He” sanctifies that fire to the “Y od” of 
T etragrammaton. Similarly we find “Lamed” for Earth, where we Should expect T au — in order to emphasize 
the influence of Venus, who rules Libra. 


“ALHIM”, therefore, represents rather the formula of C onsecration than that of a complete ceremony. It is 
the breath of benediction, yet so potent that it can give life to clay and light to darkness. 


In consecrating aweapon, “Aleph” isthe whirling force of the thunderbolt, the lightning which flameth out 
of the East even into the W est. T hisisthe gift of the wielding of the thunderbolt of Zeus or Indra, the god of 
Air. “Lamed” isthe O x- goad, the driving force; and it is also the Balance, representing the truth and love of 
the M agician. It isthe loving care which he bestows upon perfecting hisinstruments, and the equilibration of 
that fierce force which initiates the ceremony. 


T heletters A leoh and L amed are infinitely important in this A eon of H orus; they are indeed theK ey of the B ook 
of the L aw. N o more can be said in this place than that A leh is H arpocrates, B acthus D iphues, the H oly G host, 
the“ PureF ool” or Innocent B abe who is also the W andering Singer who impregnates the K ing’s D aughter with 
H imself as H er C hild; L amed is theK ing'’s D aughtey, satisfied by H im, holding H is “Sword and Balances” in 
her lap. T hese weapons are the | udge, armed with power to execute H is W ill, and T wo W itnesses “in whom 
shall every T ruth be established” in accordance with whose testimony he gives judgment. 


“Y od” is the creative energy — the procreative power: and yet “Y od” is the solitude and sence of the 
hermitage into which the M agician has shut himself. “Mem” is the letter of water, and it isthe M em final, 
whose long flat lines suggest the Sea at Peace HB:M em-final ; not the ordinary (initial and medial) Mem 
whose hieroglyph isa wave H B:M em. 


In the symbolism above outlined, Y od is the M eraurial “Virgin W ord”, the Spermatoz oon concealing its light 
under a doke, and M em is the amniotic fluid, the flood wherein is the L ife bearing A rk. SeeA. C rowley “The 
Ship”, Equinox |, X. 


And then, in the C entre of all, broods Spirit, which combines the mildness of the Lamb with the horns of the 
R am, and isthe letter of Bacchus or “Christ”. 


T he letter H eis the formula of N uith, which makes possible the process described in the previous notes, But it is 
not permissible here to explain fully the exact matter or manner of this adjustment. | have preferred the exoteric 
attributions, which are suffidently informative for the beginner. 


After the magician hascreated hisinstrument, and balanced it truly, and filled it with the lightningsof hisW ill, 
then isthe weapon laid away to res; and in this Silence, a true Consecration comes. 


THE FORMULA OF ALIM 


It is extremely interesting to contrast with the above the formula of the elemental Gods deprived of the 
creative spirit. O ne might suppose that asALIM , isthe masculine plural of the masculine noun AL, itsformula 
would be more virile than that of ALHIM, which is the masculine plural of the feminine noun ALH. A 
moment’s investigation is sufficient to dissipate the illuson. The word masculine hasno meaning except in 
relation to some feminine correlative. 


Theword ALIM may in fact be consdered asneuter. By arather absurd convention, neuter objects are treated 
as feminine on account of their superficial resemblance in passivity and inertness with the unfertilized female. 
But the female produceslife by the intervention of the male, while the neuter doesso only when impregnated 
by Spirit. Thus we find the feminine AM A, becoming AIMA, 


AMA is 42, thenumber of sterility; AIM A, 52, that of fertility, of BN, theSON. 


through the operation of the phallic Y od, while ALIM , the congress of dead elements, only fructifies by the 
brooding of Spirit. 


T hisbeing so, how can we describe ALIM ascontaining aM agical Formula? Inquiry disclosesthe fact that this 
formula is of avery special kind. 


The word adds up to 81, which isanumber of the moon. It isthus the formula of witchcraft, which is under 
H ecate. 


See A. C rowley “O rpheus” for the Invocation of this G oddess. 


Itisonly the romantic mediaeval perversion of science that represents young women aspartaking in witchcraft, 
which is, properly speaking, restricted to the use of such women as are no longer women in the M agical sense 
of the word, because thy are no longer capable of corresponding to the formula of the male, and are therefore 
neuter rather than feminine. It isfor thisreason that their method hasalw ays been referred to the moon, in that 
sense of the term in which she appears, not as the feminine correlative of the sun, but asthe burnt- out, dead, 
airless satellite of earth. 


N o true M agical operation can be performed by the formulaof ALIM . All the worksof witchcraft are illusory; 
and their apparent effects depend on the idea that it is possible to alter things by the mere rearrangement of 
them. O ne must not rely upon the false analogy of the X ylenes to rebut this argument. It is quite true that 
geometrical isomers act in different manners towards the substance to which they are brought into relation. 
And it isof course necessary sometimes to rearrange the elements of amolecule before that molecule can form 
either the masculine or the feminine element in a true M agical combination with some other molecule. 


It is therefore occasionally inevitable for a M agician to reorganize the structure of certain elements before 


proceeding to his operation proper. Although such work istechnically witchcraft, it must not be regarded as 
undesrable on that ground, for all operations which do not transmute matter fall strictly speaking under this 
heading. 


The real objection to this formula is not inherent in its own nature. W itchcraft consists in treating it as the 
exclusive preoccupation of Magick, and especially in denying to the Holy Spirit his right to indwell His 
Temple. 


T he initiate of the XI Degree of O.T.O. will remark that there is a totally different formula of ALIM, 
complementary with that here discussed. 81 may be regarded as a number of Y esod rather than of Luna. The 
actual meaning of the word may be taken as indicating the formula. A leoh may be referred to H arpocrates, with 
allusion to the well-known poem of C atullus. Lamed may imply the exaltation of Saturn, and suggest the T hree 
of Swords in a particular manner. Y od will then recall H ermes, and M em the H anged M an. W ehave thus a 
T etragrammaton which contains no feninine amponent. T he initial F orce is here the H oly Spirit and its vehide 
or weapon the “Sword and Balances”. Justiceis then done upon the M ercurial “Virgin”, with the result that the 
M an is “H anged” or extended, and isslain in this manner. Such an operation makes creation impossible — as 
in the former case, but here there is no question of re arrangement; the creative force is employed deliberately for 
destruction, and is entirely absorbed in its own sphere (or cylinder, on E instein’s equations) of action. T his W ork 
is to be regarded as “H oliness to the L ord”. T he H ebrews, in fad, conferred the title of Q adosh (holy) upon its 
adepts. | ts effect is to consecrate the M agidans who perform it in a very spedal way. W emay take note also of the 
correspondence of N ine with T eth, X1, Leo, and the Serpent. T he great merits of this formula are that it avoids 
contact with the inferior planes, that it is self-suffident, that it involves no responsibilities, and that it leaves its 
masters not only stronger in themselves, but wholly free to fulfil their essential N atures. Its abuseis an abomination. 


CHAPTER V 
T he Formula of |.A.0. 


T hisformula is the principal and most characteristic formula of O sris, of the R edemption of M ankind. “I” is 
Isis, N ature, ruined by “A”, Apophis the D estroyer, and restored to life by the R edeemer O Sris. 


T hereis a quite different formula in which | isthe father, O theM other, A thechild— and yet another, in which 
|.A.0. areall fathers of different kinds balanced by H .H .H., 3 M others, to complete the U niverse. In a third, 
the true formula of the Beast 666, | andO are the opposites which form the field for the operation of A. But this 
isa higher matter unsuited for this aementary handbook. See, however, Liber Samekh, Point |I, Section J. 


T he same idea is expressed by the R osicrucian formula of the T rinity: 
“Ex Deo nascimur. In Jesu M orimur 
Per Spiritum Sanctum reviviscimus.” 


This is also identical with the W ord Lux, L.V.X., which is formed by the arms of across. It is this formula 
which isimplied in those ancient and modern monuments in which the phallus is worshipped as the Saviour 
of the W orld. 


The doctrine of resurrection as vulgarly understood is false and absurd. It is not even “Scriptural”. St. Paul 
doesnot identify the glorified body which riseswith the mortal body which dies O n the contrary, he repeatedly 
insists on the distinction. 


The same is true of a magical ceremony. T he magician who is destroyed by absorption in the Godhead is 
really destroyed. T he miserable mortal automaton remainsin the Circle. It isof no more consequence to Him 
that the dust of the floor. 


Itis, for all that, H isinstrument, acquired by H im as an astronomer buys a telescope. See L iber A leoh, for a full 
explanation of the objects attained by the stratagem of incarnation; also Part IV of this Book 4. 


But before entering into the details of “I.A.O.” asamagick formulait should be remarked that it is essentially 
the formula of Y oga or meditation; in fact, of elementary mysticism in all its branches. 


In beginning a meditation practice, there is always 
If not, one is not working properly. 


a quiet pleasure, a gentle natural growth; one takes a lively interest in the work; it seems easy; one is quite 
pleased to have started. T his stage represents Isis. Sooner or later it is succeeded by depression — the Dark 
Night of the Soul, an infinite weariness and detestation of the work. The smplest and easiest acts become 
almost impossible to perform. Such impotence fillsthe mind with apprehension and despair. T he intensity of 
thisloathing can hardly be understood by any person who hasnot experienced it. T hisisthe period of A pophis. 


It is followed by the arising not of Isis, but of O Sris. The ancient condition is not restored, but anew and 
superior condition is created, a condition only rendered possible by the process of death. 


The Alchemists themselves taught this same truth. The first matter of the work was base and primitive, 
though “natural”. After passing through various stages the “black dragon” appeared; but from this arose the 


pure and perfect gold. 


Even in the legend of Prometheus we find an identical formula concealed; and a smilar remark applies to 
those of Jesus Christ, and of many other mythical god- men worshipped in different countries. 


See}.G Frazer, “T heG olden Bough:” |.M .R obertson “Pagan C hrists;” A. C rowley “Jesus,” etc, etc 


A magical ceremony constructed on this formula is thus in close essential harmony with the natural mystic 
process. W e find it the basis of many important initiations, notably the Third Degree in M asonry, and the 5 
Degree = 6Square ceremony of theG.’. D.’. described in Equinox I, Ill. A ceremonial self- initiation may be 
constructed with advantage on this formula. The essence of it conssts in robing yourself as a king, then 
gripping and Saying yourself, and rising from that death to the Knowledge and C onversation of the H oly 
Guardian Angel 


This formula, although now superseded by that of HORUS, the C rowned and C onquering C hild, remains 
valid for those who have not yet assimilated the point of view of the L aw of T helema. But see A ppendix, Liber 
SAMEKH. C ompare also “T he Book of the Spirit of the Living G ods,” — where there is a ritual given “in 
extenso” on slightly different lines: Equinox |, Ill, pages 269-272. 


. There is an etymological identity between T etragrammaton and “I A 0”, but the magical formulae are 
entirely different, as the descriptions here given have schewn. 


Professor W illiam James, in his “Varieties of R eligious Experience,” has well classified religion as the “once- 
born” and the “twice born”; but the religion now proclaimed in Liber Legisharmonizesthese by transcending 
them. T here isno attempt to get rid of death by denying it, as among the once-born; nor to accept death as 
the gate of anew life, as among the twice-born. With the A.’. A.’. life and death are equally incidents in a 
career, very much like day and night in the history of aplanet. But, to pursue the smile, we regard this planet 
from afar. A Brother of A.’. A.’. looksat (what another person would call) “himself”, asone— or, rather, some 
— among a group of phenomena. He is that “nothing” whose consciousness is in one sense the universe 
congdered asasingle phenomenon in time and space, and in another sense isthe negation of that consciousness. 
The body and mind of the man are only important (if at all) as the telescope of the atronomer to him. If the 
telescope were destroyed it would make no appreciable difference to the U niverse which that telescope 
reveals. 


It will now be understood that thisformulaof! A O isaformula of T iphareth. The magician who employsit 
is conscious of himself asa man liable to suffering, and anxiousto transcend that state by becoming one with 
god. It will appear to him asthe Supreme R itual, asthe final step; but, ashas already been pointed out, it isbut 
apreliminary. For the normal man today, however, it represents considerable attainment; and there isamuch 
earlier formula whose investigation will occupy Chapter V1. 


THE MASTER THERION, in the Seventeenth year of the Aeon, has reconstructed the Word | A O to 
satisfy the new conditions of M agick imposed by progress. T he W ord of the Law being Thelema, whose 
number is 93, thisnumber should be the canon of acorresponding M ass. Accordingly, he has expanded | A O 
by treating the O asan Ayin, and then adding V au as prefix and affix. T he full word is then 


Vau Yod Aleph Ayin Vau 


whose number is 93. W e may analyse this new W ord in detail and demonstrate that it isa proper hieroglyph 
of the R itual of Self- Initiation in thisA eon of Horus. For the correspondence in the following note, see Liber 
777. The principal points are these: 


Atu No. H ebrew No. Correspondence O ther 
of of 
(T aot T rump) Atu letters letter in N ature C orrespondences 
The Hierophant (Osris} V |Vau (anal) English} 6 | Taurus(An eathy sgn | The Sun. The son in T eragranmadton. 


throned & crowned, 
with W and). 


Four Worshippers, the 
four elements 


V, W, or vowel 
between O and 
U ma'‘ajab and 
mdaruf. 


ruled by Venus; the 
Moon exdted therein 
but mde.) Liberty, i.e. 
free will. 


(See Cap. Ill). The Pentagram which 
shows Spirit master & reconciler of the 
Four Elements 


The H exagran which unites God and 
M a. The constioumes or R uach. 


Pazivd as the Child in his widowed 
mother'scare: H orus son of Idsand the 
dain Oris 


Pazivd asKing & Priet in M ontsalvat 
performing the miracle of redemption; 
H oruscrowned and conquering, taking 
the place of his father. 


Christ-Bacchus in H eaven-O lympus 
saving the world. 


The Hermit (Hermes} IX |Y od(ahand)j| 10 |Virgo (an earthy sgn| The root of the Alphabet. The 
with Lamp, W ings, English | or Y. ruled by M ercury | Spermatozoon. The youth setting out 
W and, Cloak, and exalted therein;| on his adventures after receiving the 
Serpent). sexually ambivalent) | W and. Parzival in the desert. Christ 
Light, i.e. of Wisdom, | taking refuge in Egypt, and on the 
the Inmos. Mount tempted by the Devil.The 

Unconscious W ill, or W ord. 
The Fool (The Babe in} O |Aleph(an ox); 1. [Air (The condition of] The free breath. The Svasika. The 
the Egg on the Lotus, English A, more or all Life, the impartial | H oly Ghost. The Virgin's Womb. 
Bacchus D iphues etc.) less, vehicle. Sexually | Pazivd as"der reine T hor" who knows 
undeveloped). Life; | nothing. Horus Chris-Bacchus as the 
i.e. the organ of] innocent babe, pursued by H erod- 
possible expresion. | Héré Hercules strangling the serpents 
The Unconscious Self not yet 

determined in any direction. 
The Devil (Baphomet] XV |Ayin(aneye)]| 70 |Capricornus(@ eathy | Parzival in Black Armour, ready to 


throned & adored by 
Male & Female. See 
Eliphas Levi's desgn.) 


English A, or O 
more or less: the 
bleat of a goat, A’a 


ggn ruled by Saturn; 
M ars exalted therein. 
Sexually male) Love: 
i.e. the instinct to 
Satisfy Godhead by 
uniting it with the 
Univers. 


return to M ontsalvat as R edeemer- 
King: Horus come to full growth. 
Christ-Bacchus with C alvary-C ross 
K itharon-T hyrsus 


lota- Alpha Digamma varies in sgnificance with successive A eons. 


“Aeon of Iss.” M atriarchal Age. The Great W ork conceived as a straightforward ample affair. We find the 
theory reflected in the customs of M atriarchy. Parthenogenesis is supposed to be true. The Virgin (Y od- 
Virgo) contains in herself the Principle of Growth — the epicene H ermetic seed. It becomes the Babe in the 
Egg (A — H arpocrates) by virtue of the Spirit (A = Air, impregnating the M other— V ulture) and thisbecomes 
the Sun or Son ( Digamma = the letter of Tiphareth, 6, even when spelt as O mega, in Coptic. See 777). 


“Aeon of O gris.” Patriarchal age. T wo sexes. | conceived asthe Father-W and. (Y od in T etragrammaton). A 
the Babe is pursued by the Dragon, who casts a flood from his mouth to swallow it. See “R ev.” VII. The 
Dragon isalso the M other — the “Evil M other” of Freud. ItisH arpocrates, threatened by the crocodilein the 
Nile. We find the symbolism of the Ark, the Coffin of Osiris, etc. The Lotus is the Y oni; the W ater the 
Amniotic Fluid. In order to live his own life, the child must leave the M other, and overcome the temptation 
to return to her for refuge. Kundry, Armida, Jocasta, Circe, etc., are symbols of this force which tempts the 
H ero. He may take her as his servant 


H er sole speech in the last A dt is “D ienen: D ienen”. 


when he hasmastered her, so asto heal hisfather (A mfortas), avenge him (0 siris), or pacify him (Jehovah). But 
in order to grow to manhood, he must cease to depend on her, earning the Lance (Parzival), claming hisarms 
(Achilles), or making his club (H ercules) 


N ote that all these three remain for a time as neuters among woman, prevented from living the male life. 


, and wander in the waterless wildernesslike K risnna, Jesus, O edipus, chi. tau. lambda. — until the hour when, 
asthe “King’sSon” or knight- errant, he must win the Princess, and set himself upon astrange throne. Almost 
all the legends of heroesimply this formula in strikingly Smilar symbols. Digamma. V au the Sun — Son. He 
is Supposed to be mortal; but how is this hewn? It seems an absolute perversion of truth: the sacred symbols 
have no hint of it. T hislie isthe essence of the G reat Sorcery. O sirian religion isa Freudian phantasy fashioned 
of man’s dread of death and ignorance of nature. T he parthenogenesis idea persists, but isnow the formula for 
incarnating demi- gods, or divine kings; these must be dain and raised from the dead in one way or another. 


All these ideas may be explained by referene to anthropology. But this is not their condemnation, but their 
justification; for the customs and legends of mankind reflect the true nature of the spedes. 


“Aeon of Horus.” T wo sexesin one person. 


Digamma lota Alpha O micron Digamma: 93, the full formula, recognizing the Sun as the Son (Star), as the 
pre- existent manifested U nit from which all springs and to which all returns. The Great W ork isto make the 
initial DigammaD igammaof Assiah (T he world of material illusion) into the final Digammal ota D igamma of 
Atziluth, 


F or these spellings see 777. 
the world of pure reality. 


Spelling the N ame in full, Digamma Digamma + lota Digamma D elta + Alpha Lambda Pi + O micron lota 
Nu + Digammalota= 309 = ShT = XX +X1 =31 the secret K ey of the Law. 


Digamma isthe manifested Star. lota isthe secret Life ..........0 Serpent 


— Liberty ........... W ings 

— Silence........... Cloak 

T hese symbols are all snewn in the Atu “The Hermit”. 

T hey are the powers of the Y od, whose extension is the V au. 

Y od isthe H and wherewith man does his Will. It is also 

The Virgin; his essence is inviolate. 

Alphaisthe Babe “who has formulated his Father, and made fertile 
his M other” — H arpocrates, etc., as before; but he develops 

to 

O micron T he exalted “Devil” (also the “other” secret Eye) by the 
formula of the Initiation of H orus elsewhere described in 


detail. This “Devil” is called Satan or Shaitan, and regarded with horror by people who are ignorant of his 
formula, and, imagining themselves to be evil, accuse N ature herself of their own phantasmal crime. Satan is 
Saturn, Set, Abrasax, Adad, Adonis, Attis, Adam, Adondi, etc. The most serious charge against him is that he 
isthe Sun in the South. T he Ancient Initiates, dwelling as they did in landswhose blood was the water of the 
N ile or the Euphrates, connected the South with life withering heat, and cursed that quarter where the solar 
darts were deadliest. Even in the legend of Hiram, it is at high noon that he is stricken down and sain. 
C apricornusis moreover the sgn which the sun entererswhen he reaches his extreme Southern declination at 
the W inter Solstice, the season of the death of vegetation, for the folk of the N orthern hemisphere. T his gave 
them asecond caus for cursing the south. A third; the tyranny of hot, dry, poisonous winds; the menace of 
deserts or oceans dreadful because mysterious and impassable; these also were connected in their minds with 
the South. But to us, aware of astronomical facts, this antagonism to the South isasily superstition which the 
accidents of their local conditions suggested to our animistic ancestors. W esee no enmity between R ight and 
Left, Up and Down, and similar pairs of opposites. T hese antitheses are real only as a statement of relation; 
they are the conventions of an arbitrary device for representing our ideas in a pluralistic symbolism based on 
duality. “Good” must be defined in terms of human ideals and instincts. “East” hasno meaning except with 
reference to the earth’s internal affairs, asan absolute direction in space it changes a degree every four minutes. 
“Up” isthe same for no two men, unless one chance to be in the line joining the other with the centre of the 
earth. “H ard” is the private opinion of our muscles. “True” is an utterly unintelligible epithet which has 
proved refractory to the analysis of our ablest philosophers. 


W ehave therefore no scruple in restoring the “devil-worship” of such ideas as those which the lawsof sound, 
and the phenomena of speech and hearing, compel usto connect with the group of “Gods” whose names are 
based upon Sht, or D, vocalized by the free breath A. For these N amesimply the qualities of courage, frankness, 
energy, pride, power and triumph; they are the words which express the creative and paternal will. 


Thus “the Devil” is Capricornus, the Goat who leaps upon the loftiest mountains, the Godhead which, if it 
become manifest in man, makes him Aegipan, the All. 


T he Sun enters thissign when he turnsto renew the year in the N orth. H eisalso the vowel O ,, proper to roar, 
to boom, and to command, being a forcible breath controlled by the firm circle of the mouth. 


H eisthe O pen Eye of the exalted Sun, before whom all shadowsflee away: also that Secret Eye which makes 
an image of its God, the Light, and gives it power to utter oracles, enlightening the mind. 


Thus, heisM an made God, exalted, eager; he hascome consciougy to hisfull stature, and so isready to set out 
on hisjourney to redeem the world. But he may not appear in this true form; the Vision of Pan would drive 
men mad with fear. He must conceal Himself in his original guise. 


H e therefore becomes apparently the man that he was at the beginning; he lives the life of aman; indeed, he 
is wholly man. But his initiation has made him master of the Event by giving him the understanding that 
whatever happens to him isthe execution of this true will. T hus the last stage of his initiation is expressed in 
our formula as the final: 


Digamma — The series of transformations has not affected his identity; but it has explained him to himself. 
Similarly, Copper is sill C opper after 


Cu+O =Cu0:+H SO =CuSO(H O):+K S=CuS(K SO ): 
2442224 + blowpipe and reducing agent = Cu(S). 


It isthe same copper, but we have learnt some of its properties. W e observe especially that it isindestructible, 
inviolably itself throughout all its adventures, and in all its disguises. W e see moreover that it can only make 
use of its powers, fulfill the possbilities of its nature, and satisfy its equations, by thus combining with its 
counterparts. Its existence as a separate substance is evidence of its subjection to stress; and this is felt as the 
ache of an incomprehensible yearning until it realises that every experience isa relief, an expression of itself; 
and that it cannot be injured by aught that may befall it. In the Aeon of O srisit was indeed realised that M an 
must die in order to live. But now in the Aeon of H orus we know that every event is a death; subject and 
object day each other in “love under will”; each such death is itself life, the means by which one realises 
oneself in a series of episodes. 


The second main point isthe completion of the A babe Bacchus by the O Pan (Parzival winsthe Lance, etc.). 


The first process is to find the | in the V — initiation, purification, finding the Secret R oot of oneself, the 
epicene Virgin who is 10 (M alkuth) but spelt in full 20 (Jupiter). 


This Y od in the “Virgin” expands to the Babe in the Egg by formulating the Secret W isdom of T ruth of 
H ermes in the Silence of the Fool. H e acquires the Eye W and, beholding the acting and being adored. T he 
Inverted Pentagram — Baphomet— theH ermaphrodite fully grown — begetshimself on himself asV again. 


N ote that there are now two sexesin one person throughout, so that each individual isself- procreative sexually, 
whereas |sis Knew only one sex, and O sris thought the two sexes opposed. Also the formulaisnow Love in 
all cases; and the end isthe beginning, on ahigher plane. 


Thel is formed from the V by removing its tail, the A by balancing 4 Y ods, the O by making an inverted 
triangle of Y ods, which suggeststhe formula of N uit — H adit— R @Hoor-Khuit. A isthe elementswhirling 
as a Svastika — the creative Energy in equilibrated action. 


CHAPTER VI 
THE FORMULA OF THE NEOPHYTE. 


See the N eophyteC eremony, Equinox 1,11. 


This formula has for its “first matter” the ordinary man entirely ignorant of everything and incapable of 
anything. H e is therefore represented as blindfolded and bound. Hisonly aid is his aspiration, represented by 
the officer who isto lead him into the Temple. Before entering, he must be purified and consecrated. O nce 
within the T emple, he is required to bind himself by an oath. His aspiration is now formulated as Will. He 
makesthe mystic circumambulation of theT emple for the reasonsto be described in theC hapter on “Gesture”. 
After further purification and consecration, he is allowed for one moment to see the Lord of the W est, and 
gains courage 


F ear is the source of all false perception. E ven F reud had a glimpse of this fact. 


to persist. For the third time he is purified and consecrated, and he sees the Lord of the Eas, who holds the 
balance, keeping him in astraight line. In the W est he gainsenergy. In the East he isprevented from dissipating 
the same. So fortified, he may be received into the O rder asa neophyte by the three principal officers, thus 
uniting the C rosswith theT riangle. H e may then be placed between the pillars of the T emple, to receive the 
fourth and final consecration. In this position the secrets of the grade are communicated to him, and the last of 
his fetters is removed. All thisis sealed by the sacrament of the Four Elements. 


It will be seen that the effect of this whole ceremony isto endow athing inert and impotent with balanced 
motion in agiven direction. N umerousexample of thisformulaare given in Equinox!, Nos. II and Ill. Itisthe 
formula of the Neophyte Ceremony of G.’. D.’. It hould be employed in the consecration of the actual 
weapons used by the magician, and may also be used as the first formula of initiation. 


In the book called Z 2 


T hose secions dealing with divination and alchemy are the most grotesque rubbish in the latter case, and in the 
former obsare and unpractical. 


(Equinox |, III) are given full details of this formula, which cannot be too carefully studied and practised. It is 
unfortunately, the most complex of all of them. But thisis the fault of the first matter of the work, which isso 
muddled that many operations are required to unify it. 


CHAPTER VII 
THE FORMULA OF THE HOLY GRAAL: 
OF ABRAHADABRA: 
“and of certain other W ords.” 
Also: THE MAGICAL MEMORY. 


The H ieroglyph shewn in the Seventh K ey of the T arot (described in the 12th Aethyr, Liber 418, Equinox I, 
V) isthe C harioteer of OUR LADY BABALON, whose Cup or Graal he hears. 


N ow thisisan important formula. It isthe First of the Formulae, in asense, for itisthe formulaof R enunciation. 
T here is no moral implication here. But to chooseA implies to refuse not-A : at least, that isso, below theA byss. 
It is also the Last! 


ThisCup issaid to be full of the Blood of the Saints, that is, every “saint” or magician must give the last drop 
of hislife’s blood to that cup. It isthe original price paid for magick power. And if by magick power we mean 
the true power, the assimilation of all force with the U Itimate Light, the true Bridal of the R osy Cross, then 
is that blood the offering of Virginity, the sole sacrifice well- pleasing to the M aster, the sacrifice whose only 
reward is the pain of child-bearing unto him. 


But “to sell one’s soul to the devil”, to renounce no matter what for an equivalent in personal gain, 
“Supposed” personal gain. T hereis really no person to gain; so the whole transaction is a swindle on both sides. 
is black magic. Y ou are no longer anoble giver of your all, but amean huckster. 


This formula is, however, alittle different in symbolism, since it isaW oman whose Cup mus be filled. It is 
rather the sacrifice of the M an, who transfers life to hisdescendants. For awoman doesnot carry in herself the 
principle of new life, except temporarily, when it isgiven her. But here the formula implies much more even 
than this. For itishiswhole life that the M agusofferstoO UR LADY .T heCrossisboth D eath and G eneration, 
and it ison the Cross that the R ose blooms. T he full significance of these symbols is so lofty that it is hardly 
fitted for an elementary treatise of thistype. One must be an Exempt Adept, and have become ready to pass 
on, before one can see the symbols even from the lower plane. Only a M aster of the T emple can fully 
understand them. 


(H owever, the reader may study Liber CLVI, in Equinox I, VI, the 12th and 2nd Aethyrs in Liber 418 in 
Equinox |, V, and the Symbolism of the V Degree and VI Degree in O.T.O.) 


Of the preservation of this blood which OUR LADY offersto theANCIENT ONE, CHAOS 


CHAOS isa general name for the totality of the U nits of Existence; it is thus a name feminine in form. Each 
unit of CHAOS is itself A II-F ather. 


the All- Father, to revive him, and of how hisdivine Essence fillsthe D aughter (the soul of M an) and placesher 
upon the T hrone of the M other, fulfilling the Economy of the U niverse, and thus ultimately rewarding the 


M agician (the Son) ten thousandfold, it would be still more improper to speak in this place. So holy amystery 
isthe Arcanum of the M asters of the T emple, that it ishere hinted at in order to blind the presumptuous who 
may, unworthy, seek to lift the veil, and at the same time to lighten the darkness of such as may be requiring 
only one ray of the Sun in order to spring into life and light. 


ABR AHADABRA isaword to be studied in Equinox |, V., “T heT emple of Solomon the King” . It represents 
the Great W ork complete, and it istherefore an archetype of all lesser magical operations It isin away too 
perfect to be applied in advance to any of them. But an example of such an operation may be studied in 
Equinox I, VII, “The Temple of Solomon the King”, where an invocation of H oruson this formula is given 
in full. N ote the reverberation of the ideas one against another. T he formula of H orushasnot yet been so fully 
worked out in details as to justify a treatise upon its exoteric theory and practice; but one may say that itis, to 
the formula of O sris, what the turbine is to the reciprocating engine. 


HI 
T here are many other sacred words which enshrine formulae of great efficacity in particular operations. 


For example, V.I.T.R .I.O.L. gives a certain R egimen of the Planets useful in Alchemical work. Ararita is a 
formula of the macrocosm potent in certain very lofty O perations of the M agick of the Inmost Light. (See 
Liber 813.) 


The formula of T helema may be summarized thus: T heta“ Babalon and the Beast conjoined” — epsilon unto 
N uith (CCX X,1, 51) — lambdaT he W ork accomplished in Justice— etaT heH oly Graal — mu T heW ater 
therein — alphaT he Babe in the Egg (H arpocrates on the Lotus.) 


T hat of “Agape” is as follows: 


Dionysus (C apital Alpha) — The Virgin Earth gamma — The Babe in the Egg (small alpha— the image of 
the Father) — The M assacre of the Innocents, pi (winepress) — The Draught of Ecstasy, eta. 


The student will find it well worth his while to seek out these ideas in detail, and develop the technique of 
their application. 


T here isalso the Gnostic N ame of the Seven V owels, which givesa musical formula most puissant in evocations 
of the Soul of N ature. T here ismoreover ABR AX AS; there isX N OU BIS; thereisM EIT HR AS; and indeed 
it may briefly be stated that every true name of God gives the formula of the invocation of that God. 


M embers of the IV D egree of the O .T .O. are well aware of a M agick W ord whose analysis contains all truth, 
human and D ivine, a word indeed potent for any group which dares to use it. 


It would therefore be impossible, even were it desirable, to analyse all such names. T he general method of 
doing so has been given, and the magician must himself work out hisown formula for particular cases. 


TheH oly Q abalah (seeLiberD in Equinox |, VIII, Supplement, and Liber 777) affords the means of analysis 
and application required. See also Equinox |, V, “TheT emple of Solomon T he K ing”. 


IV. 


It hould also be remarked that every grade hasits peculiar magical formula. T hus, the formula of A brahadabra 


concernsus, asmen, principally because each of usrepresentsthe pentagram or microcosm; and our equilibration 
must therefore be with the hexagram or macrocosm. In other words, 5 D egree = 6Square isthe formula of the 
Solar operation; but then 6 D egree = 5Square is the formula of the M artial operation, and this reversal of the 
figuresimpliesavery different W ork. In the former instance the problem wasto dissolve the microcosm in the 
macrocosm; but thisother problem isto separate a particular force from the macrocosm, just asa savage might 
hew out a flint axe from the depositsin achalk cliff. Similarly, an operation of Jupiter will be of the nature of 
the equilibration of him with Venus. Itsgraphic formula will be 7 D egree = 4Square, and there will be a word 
in which the character of this operation is described, just as A brahadabra describes the O peration of the Great 
W ork. 


It may be tated without unfairness, asa rough general principle, that the farther from original equality are the 
two Sides of the equation, the more difficult isthe operation to perform. 


T hus, to take the case of the personal operation symbolized by the grades, it isharder to become aN eophyte, 
1'=10', than to pass from that grade to Zelator, 2'=9'. 


Initiation is, therefore, progressively easier, in a certain sense, after the first step istaken. But (especially after 
the passing of T iphareth) the distance between grade and grade increases as it were by ageometrical progression 
with an enormously high factor, which itself progresses. 


A suggestion has recently been made that the H ierarchy of the G rades should be “ destroyed, and replaced by” — 

aring system of 13 grades all equal. T here is, of course, one sensein which every grade isa T hing-in-Itself. But 
theH ierarchy is only a convenient method of dassifying observed facts. O neis reninded of the D enogacy, who, 
on being informed by the M inister of the Interior that the scaraty of provisions was due to the L aw of Supply and 
Demand, passed a unanimous resolution calling for the immediate repeal of that iniquitous measure! 


E very person, whatever his grade in the O rder, has also a “natural” grade appropriate to his intrinsic virtue. H e 
may expect to be “ cast out” into that grade when he becomes 8'=3'. T hus one man, throughout his career, may 
be essentially of the type of N etzach; another, of H od. In the same way R embrandt and R aphad retained ther 
respective points of view in all stages of their art. T he practial aonsideration is that some aspirants may find it 
unusually difficult to attain certain grades; or, worse, allow their inherent predispositions to influence them to 
neglect antipathetic, and indulge sympathetic, types of work. T hey may thus become more unbalanced than ever, 
with disastrous results. Success in one’s favourite pursuit is a temptress; whose yields to her wiles limits his own 
growth. True, every W ill is partial; but, even so, it can only fulfill itself by symmetrical expansion. It must be 
adjusted to the U niverse, or fail of perfection. 


It is evidently impossible to give details of all these formulae. Before beginning any operation soever the 
magician must make athrough Q abalistic tudy of it so asto work out its theory in symmetry of perfection. 
Preparedness in M agick is asimportant as it isin W ar. 


V 


It should be profitable to make a somewhat detailed study of the strange-looking word AUMGN,, for its 
analygs affords an excellent illustration of the principleson which the Practicusmay construct hisown Sacred 
W ords. 


This word has been uttered by the MASTER THERION himself, asa means of declaring his own personal 
work asthe Beast, the Logosof the Aeon. T 0 understand it, we must make a preliminary consideration of the 
word which it replaces and from which it was developed: the word AUM. 


The word AU M isthe sacred H indu mantra which was the supreme hieroglyph of T ruth, a compendium of 
the Sacred Knowledge. M any volumes have been written with regard to it; but, for our present purpose, it 
will be necessary only to explain how it came to serve for the representation of the principal philosophical 
tenets of the R ishis. 


Firstly, it represents the complete course of sound. It ispronounced by forcing the breath from the back of the 
throat with the mouth wide open, through the buccal cavity with the lips so shaped as to modify the sound 
from A to O (or U ), to the closed lips, when it becomes M . Symbolically, thisannouncesthe course of N ature 
as proceeding from free and formless creation through controlled and formed preservation to the silence of 
destruction. T he three sounds are harmonized into one; and thus the word represents the H indu Trinity of 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva; and the operationsin the U niverse of their triune energy. It isthus the formula of 
a M anvantara, or period of manifested existence, which alternates with a Pralaya, during which creation is 
latent. 


Analysed Q abalistically, the word is found to possess Smilar properties. A isthe negative, and also the unity 
which concentrates it into a postive form. A isthe H oly Spirit who begets God in flesh upon the Virgin, 
according to the formula familiar to tudents of “The Golden Bough”. A isalso the “babe in the Egg” thus 
produced. T he quality of A isthus bisexual. It isthe original being — ZeusArrhenothelus, Bacchus D iphues, 
or Baphomet. 


U or V isthe manifested son himself. Its number is 6. It refers therefore, to the dual nature of the Logos as 
divine and human; the interlacing of the upright and averse trianglesin the hexagram. It isthe first number of 
the Sun, whose last number 


T heSun being 6, asquare6x6 contains 36 squares. W earrangethe numbers from 1 to 36 in this square, so that 
each line, file. and diagonal adds to the same number. T his number is 111; the total of all is 666. 


is 666, “the number of aman”. 


The letter M exhibitsthe termination of this process. It isthe H anged M an of the T arot; the formation of the 
individual from the absolute is closed by his death. 


W e see accordingly how AU M is, on either system, the expression of adogma which implies catastrophe in 
nature. It iscognate with the formula of the Slain God. T he “resurrection” and “ascension” are not implied in 
it. T hey are later inventions without basis in necessity; they may be described indeed as Freudian phantasms 
conjured up by the fear of facing reality. To the Hindu, indeed, they are ctill less respectable. in his view, 
existence is essentially objectionable 


T helemites agree that manifested existence implies Imperfection. But they understand why Perfection devises 
this disguise. T he T heory is developed fully in Liber Aleph, and in Part IV of this Book 4. See also C ap V 
Paragraph on D igamma final of D igamma-|ota-A Ipha-O miqon-D igamma. 


; and his principle concern isto invoke Shiva 
T he V aishnava theory, superfidally opposed to this, turns out on analysis to be pracically identical. 
to destroy the illuson whose thrall is the curse of the M anvantara. 


The cardinal revelation of the Great Aeon of Horusisthat thisformulaAUM doesnot represent the facts of 
nature. T he point of view isbased upon misapprehension of the character of existence. It soon became obvious 
to The M aster Therion that AUM wasan inadequate and misleading hieroglyph. It stated only part of the 


truth, and it implied a fundamental falschood. H e consequently determined to modify the word in such a 
manner as to fit it to represent the Arcana unveiled by the Aeon of which H e had attained to be the Logos. 


T he essential task wasto emphasize the fact that nature isnot catastrophic, but proceedsby meansof undulations. 
It might be suggested that M anvantara and Pralayaarein reality complementary curves; but the H indu doctrine 
inssts strongly on denying continuity to the successive phases. It wasneverthelessimportant to avoid disturbing 
the Trinitarian arrangement of the word, as would be done by the addition of other letters. It was equally 
desirable to make it clear that the letter M represents an operation which does not actually occur in nature 
except as the withdrawal of phenomena into the absolute; which process, even when so understood, isnot a 
true destruction, but, on the contrary, the emancipation of anything from the modifications which it had 
mistaken for itself. |t occurred to him that the true nature of Silence wasto permit the uninterrupted vibration 
of the undulatory energy, free from the false conceptions attached to it by the Ahamkara or Ego- making 
facility, whose assumption that consciousindividuality constitutes existence let it to consider itsown apparently 
catastrophic character as pertaining to the order of nature. 


T he undulatory formula of putrefaction isrepresented in the Q abalah by the letter N , which refersto Scorpio, 
whos triune nature combines the Eagle, Snake and Scorpion. T hese hieroglyphs themselves indicate the 
spiritual formulae of incarnation. H e was also anxious to use the letter G, another triune formula expressive of 
the aspects of the moon, which further declares the nature of human existence in the following manner. T he 
moon isin itself adark orb; but an appearance of light iscommunicated to it by the sun; and it is exactly in this 
way that successive incarnations create the appearance, just asthe individual tar, which every man is, remains 
itself, irrespective of whether earth perceives it or not. 


N ow it so happensthat the root GN signifiesboth knowledge and generation combined in asingle idea, in an 
absolute form independent of personality. The G isasilent letter, asin our word Gnosis, and the sound GN is 
nasal, Suggesting therefore the breath of life asopposed to that of speech. | mpelled by these considerations, the 
M aster T herion proposed to replace the M of AUM by acompound letter M GN, symbolizing thereby the 
subtle transformation of the apparent silence and death which terminates the manifested life of Vau by a 
continuous vibration of an impersonal energy of the nature of generation and knowledge, the Virgin M oon 
and the Serpent furthermore operating to include in the idea a commemoration of the legend so grosdy 
deformed in the H ebrew legend of the Garden of Eden, and itseven more malignantly debased falsification in 
that bitterly sectarian broadside, the Apocalypse. 


Sound work invariable vindicatesitself by furnishing confirmatory corollariesnot contemplated by the Q abalist. 
In the present instance, the M aster T herion wasdelighted to remark that hiscompound letter M GN , constructed 
on theoretical principles with the idea of incorporating the new knowledge of the Aeon, had the value of 93 
(M = 40,G =3,N =50). 93 isthe number of the word of the Law — Thelema— Will, and of Agape — 
Love, which indicates the nature of W ill. It is furthermore the number of the W ord which overcomes death, 
as members of the degree of M M of theO.T.O. are well aware; 


WEH NOTE: III D egreeO .T.0., a word never to be written, published or spoken without the rite 
and it is also that of the complete formula of existence as expressed in the T rue W ord of the N eophyte, 


WEH NOTE: Another unpublished word, this time beonging to theA.’. A.’. and not to0.T.0. Thetwo 
words are different, even to the number of letters. It was written down one, in a letter to F rank Bennett. 


where existence is taken to import that phase of the whole which is the finite resolution of the Q abalistic 
Zero. 


Finally, the total numeration of the W ord AUM GN is100, which, asinitiates of the Sanctuary of the Gnosis 
of theO.T.O. 


WEH NOTE: IX DegreeO.T.0. 


are taught, expresses the unity under the form of complete manifestation by the symbolism of pure number, 
being K ether by Aig Bkr 


A method of exegesis in which 1 = 10 = 100, 2 = 20 = 200, atc 
; also Malkuth multiplied by itself 
10 to the 2 power = 100. 


_ and thusestablished in the phenomenal universe. But, moreover, thisnumber 100 mysteriously indicatesthe 
M agical formula of the U niverse as a reverberatory engine for the extension of N othingness through the 
device of equilibrated opposites. 


K oph-Pehfinal = 100 (20 + 80). HB:K oph = chi = K appa-tau-epsilon-iota-sigma: H B:Pehfinal = phi = 
Phi-alpha-lambda-lambda-omicon-sigma; (by N otarigon). 


It is moreover the value of the letter Q oph, which means “the back of the head”, the cerebellum, where the 
creative or reproductive force is primarily situated. Qoph in the Tarot is “the Moon”, a card suggesting 
illusion, yet shewing counterpartal forces operating in darkness, and the W inged Beetle or M idnight Sun in 
his Bark travelling through theN adir. Its Y etziratic attribution is Pisces, symbolic of the positive and negative 
currents of fluidic energy, the male! chthus or “Pesce” and the female V esica, seeking respectively the anode 
and kathode. The number 100 is therefore a synthetic glyph of the subtle energies employed in creating the 
Illusion, or R eflection of R eality, which we call manifested existence. 


The above are the principal considerationsin the matter of AUM GN. T hey should suffice to illustrate to the 
student the methods employed in the construction of the hieroglyphics of M agick, and to arm him with a 
mantra of terrific power by virtue whereof he may apprehend the U niverse, and control in himself its K armic 
consequences. 


Vi 
THE MAGICAL MEMORY. 


WEH NOTE: This is not the same “M agical M emory” as that described by F. A. Y ates and used by the 
andent R oman orators for mnemonics. 


l 
There isno more important task than the exploration of one’s previous incarnations. 


It has been objected to reincarnation that the population of this planet has been increasing rapidly. W here do the 
new souls come from? It is not necessary to invent theories about other planets; it is enough to say that the earth is 
passing through a period when human units are being built up from the eements with increased frequency. T he 
evidence for this theory springs to the eye in what other age was there such puavility, such lack of race experience, 
such reliance upon incoherent formulas? (C ontrast the infantile enotionalism and credulity of the average “ well- 
educated” Anglo-Saxon with the shrewd common sense of the normal illiterate peasant.) A large proportion of 


mankind today is @mposed of “souls” who are living the human life for the first time. N ote espeaally the 
incredible spread of congenital homosexuality and other sexual defidendes in many forms. T hese are the people 
who have not understood, accepted, and used even the F ormula of O siris. K in to them are the “once-born” of 
W illiam James, who are incapable of philosophy, magick, or even religion, but seek instinctively a refuge from the 
horror of contemplating N ature, which they do not comprehend, in soothing-syrup affirmations such as those of 
Christian Sdence, Spiritualism, and all the sham ‘ocalt’ creeds, as well as the emasalated forms of so-called 
Christianity. 


As Zoroaster says: “Explore the river of the soul; whence and in what order thou hascome.” O ne cannot do 
one’sT rue Will intelligently unless one knows what it is. Liber T hisarb, Equinox |, VII, give instructions for 
determining this by calculating the resultant of the forces which have made one what oneis. But this practice 
is confined to one’s present incarnation. 


If one were to wake up in aboat on astrange river, it would be rash to conclude that the direction of the one 
reach visble was that of the whole stream. It would help very much if one remembered the bearings of 
previous reaches traversed before one’s nap. It would further relieve one’s anxiety when one became aware 
that a uniform and constant force was the single determinant of all the findings of the stream: gravitation. We 
could rejoice “that even the weariest river winds somewhere safe to sea.” 


Liber T hisarb describesamethod of obtaining the M agical M emory by learning to remember backwards. But 
the careful practice of D haranais perhaps more generally useful. ASone preventsthe more accessible thoughts 
from arising, we strike deeper strata— memories of childhood reawaken. Still deeper lies a class of thoughts 
whose origin puzzles us. Some of these apparently belong to former incarnations. By cultivating these 
departments of one’s mind we can develop them; we become expert; we form an organized coherence of 
these originally disconnected elements; the faculty grows with astonishing rapidity, once the knack of the 
business is mastered. 


It ismuch easier (for obvious reasons) to acquire the M agical M emory when one has been sworn for many 
lives to reincarnate immediately. T he great obstacle isthe phenomenon called Freudian forgetfulness, that is 
to say, that, though an unpleasant event may be recorded faithfully enough by the mechanism of the brain, we 
fail to recall it, or recall it wrong, because it is painful. “T he Psychopathology of Everyday Life” analyses and 
illustrates this phenomenon in detail. N ow, the King of T errors being D eath, it ishard indeed to look it in the 
face. M ankind has created a host of phantastic masks; people talk of “going to heaven”, “passing over”, and so 
on; banners flaunted from pasteboard towers of baseless theories. O ne instinctively flinches from remembering 


one’s last, as one does from imagining one’s next, death. 


T his later isa very valuable practice to perform. SeeL iber H H H ; also read up the B uddhist meditations of theT en 
Impurities. {WEH NOTE ADENDA:: Right, but it scares the dickens out of you! W hen | succeeded in the 
practice in my teens, | panicked out of using the related abilities for several years. T his was without benefit of 
initiation. } 

The point of view of the initiate helps one immensely. 


Assoon as one has passed this Pons ASnorum, the practice becomes much easier. It is much less trouble to 
reach the life before the last; familiarity with death breeds contempt for it. 


It isa very great assistance to the beginner if he happens to have some intellectual grounds for identifying 
himself with some definite person in the immediate past. A brief account of Aleister C rowley’s good fortune 
in this matter should be instructive. It will be seen that the points of contact vary greatly in character. 1. The 


date of EliphasLevi’sdeath wasabout sx monthspreviousto that of Aleister C rowley’sbirth. T he reincarnating 
ego is supposed to take possession of the foetus at about this stage of development. 


2. EliphasLevi had astriking personal resemblance to A leister C rowley’sfather. T hisof course merely suggests 
acertain degree of suitability from a physical point of view. 


3. Aleister C rowley wrote aplay called “T he Fatal Force” at atime when he had not read any of Eliphas Levi's 
works, T he motive of this play isa M agical O peration of a very peculiar kind. The formula which Aleister 
Crowley supposed to be his original idea is mentioned by Levi. We have not been able to trace it anywhere 
else with such exact correspondence in every detail. 


4, Aleister C rowley found acertain quarter of Parisincomprehensibly familiar and attractive to him. T his was 
not the ordinary phenomenon of the “deja vu”, it was chiefly asense of being at home again. H e discovered 
long after that Levi had lived in the neighbourhood for many years. 


5. There are many curious Smilarities between the events of Eliphas Levi's life and that of Aleister Crowley. 
The intention of the parents that their son should have a religious career; the inability to make use of very 
remarkable talents in any regular way; the inexplicable ostracism which afflicted him, and whose authors 
seemed somehow to be ashamed of themselves, the events relative to marriage: 


Levi, on her deliberately abandoning him, withdrew his protection from his wife; shelost her beauty and intelligence, 
and became the prey of an aged and hideous pithecoid. A lester C rowley’s wifeinsisted upon doing her own will, 
as she defined it; this compelled him to stand aside W hat happened to M me. C onstant happened to hey, 
although in a more violent and disastrous form. 


all these offer surprisingly close parallels. 


6. The characters of the two men present subtle identitiesin many points. Both seem to be constantly trying 
to reconcile insuperable antagonisms. Both find it hard to destroy the delusion that men’s fixed beliefs and 
customs may be radically altered by a few friendly explanations. Both show acurious fondness for out- the- 
way learning, preferring recondite sources of knowledge they adopt eccentric appearances. Both inspire what 
can only be called panic fear in absolute strangers, who can give no reason whatever for a repulsion which 
sometimes almost amounts to temporary insanity. T he ruling passion in each case isthat of helping humanity. 
Both show quixotic disregard of their personal prosperity, and even comfort, yet both display love of luxury 
and splendour. Both have the pride of Satan. 


7. W hen Aleister C rowley became Frater O micron-U psilon M u-Eta and had to write his thesis for the grade 
of AdeptusE xemptus, he had already collected hisideas when Levi's “C lef desGrandsM ysteres” fell into his 
hands. It wasremarkable that he, having admired Levi for many years, and even begun to suspect the identity, 
had not troubled (although an extravagant buyer of books) to get this particular work. He found, to his 
astonishment, that almost everything that he had himself intended to say was there written. T he result of this 


was that he abandoned writing his original work, and instead translated the masterpiece in question. 


8. The style of the two men isctrikingly similar in numerous subtle and deep-seated ways. T he general point 
of view is almost identical. The quality of the irony is the same. Both take a perverse pleasure in playing 
practical jokes on the reader. In one point, above all, the identity is absolute — there is no third name in 
literature which can be put in the same class. T he point isthis: In asingle sentence iscombined sublimity and 
enthusiasm with neering bitterness, scepticism, grossness and scorn. It isevidently the supreme enjoyment to 
¢rike achord composed of as many conflicting elements as possible. T he pleasure seems to be derived from 
gratifying the sense of power, the power to compel every possible element of thought to contribute to the 


spasm. 


If the theory of reincarnation were generally accepted, the above considerationswould make out astrong case. 
FRATER PERDURABO wasquite convinced in one part of his mind of this identity, long before he got 
any actual memories as such. 


Longsinc writing the above, the publication of the biography of E liphasL evi by M . Paul C hacrnat has confirmed 
the hypothesis in innumerable striking ways. 


U nless one has a groundwork of thissort to start with, one must get back to one’s life as best one can by the 
methods above indicated. It may be of some assistance to give afew characteristicsof genuine M agical M emory; 
to mention afew sources of error, and to lay down critical rules for the verification of one’s results. 


T he first great danger arisesfrom vanity. O ne should always beware of “remembering” that one wasC leopatra 
or Shakespeare. 


Again, superficial resemblances are usually midieading. 


O ne of the great tests of the genuineness of any recollection isthat one remembers the really important things 
in one’s life, not those which mankind commonly classes as such. For instance, Aleister C rowley does not 
remember any of the decisive events in the life of Eliphas Levi. H e recalls intimate trivialities of childhood. 
H ehasavivid recollection of certain spiritual crises; in particular, one which wasfought out ashe paced up and 
down alonely stretch of road in a flat and desolate district. H e remembers ridiculous incidents, such as often 
happen at suppers when the conversation takesaturn such that its gaiety somehow strikesto the soul, and one 
receives a supreme revelation which is yet perfectly inarticulate. H e has forgotten his marriage and its tragic 
results, 


It is perhaps significant that although the name of the woman has been familiar to him since 1898, hehas never 
been able to commit it to memory. 


although the plagiarism which Fate hasbeen shameless enough to perpetrate in this present life, would naturally, 
one might think, reopen the wound. 


T here isasense which assuresusintuitively when wearerunning on ascent breast high. T here isan “oddness” 
about the memory which issomehow annoying. It givesa feeling of shame and guiltiness. T here isatendency 
to blush. O ne feels like a schoolboy caught red-handed in the act of writing poetry. T here is the same sort of 
feeling asone haswhen one finds a faded photograph or alock of hair twenty years old among the rubbish in 
some forgotten cabinet. T his feeling is independent of the question whether the thing remembered was in 
itself a source of pleasure or of pain. Can it be that we resent the idea of our “previouscondition of servitude”? 
W e want to forget the past, however good reason we may have to be proud of it. It iswell Known that many 
men are embarrassed in the presence of a monkey. 


W hen the “loss of face” does not occur, distrust the accuracy of the item which you recall, The only reliable 
recollections which present themselves with serenity are invariably connected with what men call disasters. 
Instead of the feeling of being caught in the slips, one has that of being missed at the wicket. O ne has the dy 
satisfaction of having done an outrageously foolish thing and got off scot free. W hen one seeslifein perspective, 
it isan immense relief to discover that things like bankruptcy, wedlock, and the gallows made no particular 
difference. T hey were only accidents such as might happen to anybody; they had no real bearing on the point 


at issue. O ne consequently remembers having one’s ears cropped asa lucky escape, while the causal jest of a 
drunken skeinsmnate in an all-night cafe stingsone with the shame of the parvenu to whom apolite stranger has 
unsuspectingly mentioned “M ine Uncle”. 


The testimony of intuitions is, however, strictly subjective, and shrieks for collateral security. It would bea 
great error to ask too much. In consequence of the peculiar character of the recollections which are under the 
microscope, anything in the shape of gross confirmation almost presumes perjury. A pathologist would arouse 
suspicion if he said that his bacilli had arranged themselves on the side so as to spell Staphylococcus We 
distrust an arrangement of flowerswhich tellsusthat “Life isworth livingin Detroit, Michigan”. Suppose that 
Aleister C rowley remembers that he was Sir Edward K elly. It does not follow that he will be able to give us 
details of C racow in the time of James! of England. M aterial events are the wordsof an arbitrary language; the 
symbols of acipher previously agreed on. W hat happened to Kelly in Cracow may have meant something to 
him, but there is no reason to presume that it has any meaning for his successor. T here is an obvious line of 
criticism about any recollection. It must not clash with ascertained facts. For example — one cannot have two 
lives which overlap, unless there is reason to suppose that the earlier died spiritually before his body ceased to 
breathe. This might happen in certain cases, such as insanity. 


It isnot conclusve against a previousincarnation that the present should be inferior to the past. O ne’slife may 
represent the full possibilities of acertain partial K arma. O nemay have devoted one’sincarnation to discharging 
the liabilities of one part of one’s previous character. For instance, one might devote a lifetime to settling the 
bill run up by N apoleon for causing unnecessary suffering, with the object of starting afresh, clear of debt, in a 
life devoted to reaping the reward of the C orsican’s invaluable services to the race. 


TheM aster T herion, in fact, remembers several incarnations of almost uncompensated wretchedness, anguish 
and humiliation, voluntarily undertaken so that he might resume his work unhampered by spiritual creditors. 


T hese are the stigmata. M emory ishall- marked by its correspondence with the facts actually observed in the 
present. T hiscorrespondence may be of two kinds. It israre (and it isunimportant for the reasons stated above) 
that one’s memory should be confirmed by what may be called, contemptuousy, external evidence. It was 
indeed areliable contribution to psychology to remark that an evil and adulterous generation sought for asign. 


(Even so, the permanent value of the observation isto trace the genealogy of the Pharisee — from C aiaphasto 
the modern Christian.) 


Signs mislead, from “Painless D entistry” upwards. T he fact that anything isintelligible provesthat it isaddressed 
to the wrong quarter, because the very existence of language presupposes impotence to communicate directly. 
W hen W alter R aleigh flung hiscloak upon the muddy road, he merely expressed, in a cipher contrived by a 
combination of circumstances, his otherwise inexpressible wish to get on good terms with Q ueen Elizabeth. 
The significance of his action was determined by the concourse of circumstances. The reality can have no 
reason for reproducing itself exclusively in that especial form. It can have no reason for remembering that so 
extravagant a ritual happened to be necessary to worship. T herefore, however well aman might remember his 
incarnation as Julius C aesar, there isno necessity for his representing his power to set all upon the hazard of a 
die by imagining the R ubicon. Any spiritual state can be symbolized by an infinite variety of actionsin an 
infinite variety of circumstances. O ne should recollect only those events which happen to be immediately 
linked with one’s peculiar tendencies to imagine one thing rather than another. 


T he exception is when some whimsical draumstane ties a Knot in the corner of one’s mnemonic handkerchief. 


Genuine recollections almost invariably explain oneself to oneself. Suppose, for example, that you feel an 


instinctive aversion to some particular kind of wine. T ry asyou will, you can find no reason for your idiosyncrasy. 
Suppose, then, that when you explore some previous incarnation, you remember that you died by a poison 
administered in awine of that character, your aversion is explained by the proverb, “A burnt child dreads the 
fire.” It may be objected that in such a case your libido has created a phantasm of itself in the manner which 
Freud has explained. T he criticism isjust, but its value is reduced if it should happen that you were not aware 
of its existence until your M agical Memory attracted your attention to it. In fact, the essence of the test 
consists in this: that your memory notifies you of something which isthe logical conclusion of the premisses 
postulated by the past. 


Asan example, we may cite certain memories of the M aster T herion. He followed atrain of thought which 
led him to remember his life as a R oman named M arius de Aquila. It would be straining probability to 
presume aconnection between (alpha) thishieroglyphically recorded mode of self- analysisand (beta) ordinary 
introspection conducted on principlesintelligible to himself. He remembers directly various people and various 
events connected with this incarnation; and they are in themselves to all appearance actual. T here is no 
particular reason why they, rather than any others, should have entered his sphere. In the act of remembering 
them, they are absolute. He can find no reason for correlating them with anything in the present. But a 
subsequent examination of the record shows that the logical result of the W ork of M arius de Aquila did not 
occur to that romantic reprobate; in point of fact, he died before anything could happen. C an we suppose that 
any cause can be baulked of effect? The U niverse is unanimous in rebuttal. If then the exact effects which 
might be expected to result from these causes are manifested in the career of the M aster T herion, it isassuredly 
the easiest and most reasonable explanation to assume an identity between the two men. N obody is shocked 
to observe that the ambition of N apoleon has diminished the average stature of Frenchmen. We know that 
somehow or other every force must find its fulfilment; and those people who have grasped the fact that 
external events are merely symptoms of external ideas, cannot find any difficulty in attributing the 
correspondences of the one to the identities of the other. Far be it from any apologist for M agick to insst upon 
the objective validity of these concatenations! It would be childish to cling to the belief that M ariusde A quila 
actually existed; it matters no more that it matters to the mathematician whether the use of the symbol X to 
the 22 power involves the “reality” of 22 dimension of space. T he M aster T herion does not care a scrap of 
yesterday’s new spaper whether he wasM ariusde Aquila, or whether there ever wassuch aperson, or whether 
the U niverse itself isanything more than a nightmare created by hisown imprudence in the matter of rum and 
water. His memory of M arius de Aquila, of the adventures of that person in R ome and the Black Forest, 
matters nothing, either to him or to anybody else. W hat mattersisthis: T rue or false, he hasfound asymbolic 
form which has enabled him to govern himself to the best advantage. “Quantum nobis prodest hec fabula 
Christi!” The “falsity” of Aesop’s Fables does not diminish their value to mankind. 


The above reduction of the M agical M emory to adevice for externalizing one’s interior wisdom need not be 
regarded as sceptical, save only in the last resort. N o scientific hypothesis can adduce stronger evidence of its 
validity than the confirmation of its predictions by experimental evidence. The objective can always be 
expressed in subjective symbolsif necessary. T he controversy isultimately unmeaning. H owever we interpret 
the evidence, its relative truth depends in its internal coherence. We may therefore say that any magical 
recollection is genuine if it gives the explanation of our external or internal conditions. Anything which 
throwslight upon the U niverse, anything which reveals us to ourselves, should be welcome in this world of 
riddles. 


Asour record extendsinto the past, the evidence of itstruth iscumulative. Every incarnation that we remember 
must increase our comprehension of ourselves as we are, Each accession of knowledge must indicate with 
unmistakable accuracy the solution of some enigma which ispropounded by the Sphynx of our own unknown 
birth- city, Thebes. The complicated situation in which we find ourselves is composed of elements; and no 


element of it came out of nothing. N ewton’s First Law applies to every plane of thought. The theory of 
evolution isomniform. T here isa reason for one’s predisposition to gout, or the shape of one’s ear, in the past. 
The symbolism may change; the facts do not. In one form or another, everything that exists is derived from 
some previous manifestation. H ave it, if you will, that the memories of other incarnations are dreams; but 
dreams are determined by reality just as much as the events of the day. T he truth isto be apprehended by the 
correct translation of the symbolic language. T he last section of the O ath of the M aster of the Temple is: “| 
swear to interpret every phenomenon asa particular dealing of God with my soul.” The M agical M emory is 
(in the last analysis) one manner, and, aSexperience testifies, one of the mos important manners, of performing 


this vow. 


CHAPTER VIII 


OF EQUILIBRIUM, AND OF THE GENERAL AND 
PARTICULAR METHOD OF PREPARATION OF THE 
FURNITURE OF THE TEMPLE AND OF THE 
INSTRUMENTS OF ART. 


l 
“Before there was equilibrium, countenance beheld not countenance.” 


The full significance of this aphorism is an A rcanum of the grade of Ipsissimus. It may, however, be partially 
apprehended by study of Liber Aleph, and the Book of the Law and the C ommentaries thereon. It explains 
E xistence. 


So sayeth the holiest of the Books of the ancient Q abalah. (Siphra T zeniutha 1. 2.) O ne countenance here 
spoken of isthe M acrocosm, the other the M icrocosm. 


T his is the case because we happen ourselves to be M icocosms whose L aw is “love under will”. But it is also 
M agick for an unit which has attained Perfection (in absolute nothingness, 0 D egree), to become “ divided for 
love's sake, for the chance of union” . 


Assaid above, the object of any magick ceremony isto unite the M acrocosm and the Microcosm. 


Itisasin optics the angles of incidence and reflection are equal. Y ou must get your M acrocosm and M icrocogn 
exactly balanced, vertically and horizontally, or the images will not coincide. 


T hisequilibrium isaffirmed by the magician in arranging the T emple. N othing must be lop- sded. If you have 
anything in the N orth, you must put something equal and opposte to it in the South. T he importance of this 
isso great, and the truth of it so obvious, that no one with the most mediocre capacity for magick can tolerate 
any unbalanced object for a moment. H is instinct instantly revolts. 


T his is because the essence of his being a M agidan is his intuitive apprehension of the fundamental prinaples of 
the U niverse. H isinstinct is a subconsdous assertion of the structural identity of theM acocosm and theM icomsm. 
Equilibrium is the condition of manifested existence. 


. For this reason the weapons, altar, circle, and magus are all carefully proportioned one with another. It will 
not do to have acup like a thimble and a wand like a weaver’s beam. 


See B agh-i-M uattar, V, par. 2. 


Again, the arrangement of the weapons of the altar must be such that they “look” balanced. N or should the 
magician have any unbalanced ornament. If he have the wand in his right hand, let him have the R ing 


T he R ing has not been described in Part I! of this book, for reasons which may be or may not be apparent to the 
reader. It is the symbol of N uit, the totality of the possible ways in which he may represent himself and fulfill 
himself. 


on hisleft, or let him take the Ankh, or the Bell, or the C up. And however little he move to the right, let him 


balance it by an equivalent movement to the left; or if forwards, backwards; and let him correct each idea by 
implying the contradictory contained therein. If he invoke Severity, let him recount that Severity is the 
instrument of M ercy; 


For example, as when F irmness with one’s self or another is the truest kindness; or when amputation saves life. 


if Stability, let him show the basis of that Stability to be constant change, just as the stability of amolecule is 
secured by the momentum of the swift atoms contained in it. 


SeeLiber 418, 11th A ethyr. 


In thisway let every idea go forth as atriangle on the base of two opposttes, making an apex transcending their 
contradiction in ahigher harmony. 


It isnot safe to use any thought in M agick, unless that thought has been thus equilibrated and destroyed. 


T hus again with the instruments themselves, the W and must be ready to change into a Serpent, the Pantacle 
into the whirling Svastikaor Disk of Jove, asif to fulfil the functions of the Sword. T he Crossisboth the death 
of the “Saviour” 


It is the extension in matter of the Individual Self, the I ndivisible P oint determined by reference to the F our 
Quarters. T hisis the formula which enables it to express its Secret Self; its dew falling upon theR ose is developed 
into an Eidolon of Itself, in due season. 


and the Phallic symbol of R esurrection. W ill itself must be ready to culminate in the surrender of that W ill: 
SeeLiber LXV and Liber VII. 


the aspiration’s arrow that is shot against the H oly Dove must transmute itself into the wondering Virgin that 
receivesin her womb the quickening of that same Spirit of God. 


Any idea that isthusin itself positive and negative, active and passive, male and female, isfit to exist above the 
Abyss; any idea not so equilibrated is below the Abyss, containsin itself an unmitigated duality or falsehood, 
and isto that extent qliphotic 


See T he Q abalah for the use of this word, and study the doctrine concerning the K ings of E dom. 


and dangerous. Even an idea like “truth” is unsafe unless it is realized that all Truth isin one sense falsehood. 
For all T ruth is relative; and if it be supposed absolute, will mislead. 


See Poincare for the mathematical proof of this thesis. But Spiritual E xperience goes yet deeper, and destroys the 
C anon of the L aw of C ontradiction. T hereis an immense amount of work by the M aster T herion on this subject; 
it pertains espedally to H is grade of 9 D egree = 2Square. Such profundities are unsuited to the Student, and 
may unsettle him seriously. It will be best for him to consider (provisionally) T ruth in the sense in which it is 
taken by Physical Sane. 


“T he Book of Liesfalsely so called” (Liber 333) isworthy of close and careful study in thisrespect. T he reader 
Should also consult Konx Om Pax, “Introduction”, and “Thien T ao” in the same volume. 


All thisis to be expressed in the words of the ritual itself, and symbolised in every act performed. 


It is said in the ancient books of M agick that everything used by the M agician must be “virgin”. T hat is: it 
must never have been used by any other person or for any other purpose. The greatest importance was 
attached by the Adepts of old to this, and it made the task of the M agician no easy one. H ewanted awand; and 
in order to cut and trim it he needed aknife. It wasnot sufficient merely to buy anew knife; he felt that he had 
to make it himself. |In order to make the knife, he would require ahundred other things, the acquisition of each 
of which might require ahundred more; and so on. This hows the impossbility of disentangling one’s self 
from one’s environment. Even in M agick we cannot get on without the help of others. 


It is, and the fact is still more important, utterly fatal and demoralizing to acquire the habit of reliance on others. 
T heM agidan must know every detail of his work, and be able and willing to roll up his shirtsleeves and do it, no 
matter how trivial or menial it may seem. A bramelin (it is true) forbids the A spirant to perform any tasks of an 
humiliating type but he will never be able to command perfect service unless he has ex perience of such necessary 
work, mastered during his early training. 


T here was, however, a further object in this recommendation. T he more trouble and difficulty your weapon 
costs, the more useful you will find it. “If you want athing well done, do it yourself.” It would be quite useless 
to take this book to adepartment store, and instruct them to furnish you aT emple according to specification. 
It isreally worth the while of the Student who requiresa sword to go and dig out iron ore from the earth, to 
gnelt it himself with charcoal that he has himself prepared, to forge the weapon with hisown hand: and even 
to take the trouble of synthesizing the oil of virtiol with which it isengraved. H e will have learnt alot of useful 
thingsin his attempt to make a really virgin sword; he will understand how one thing depends upon another; 
he will begin to appreciate the meaning of the words“ the harmony of the U niverse”, so often used so stupidly 
and superficially by the ordinary apologist for N ature, and he will also perceive the true operation of the law of 
K arma. 


In this sense espedally: any one thing involves, and is involved in, others apparently altogether alien. 


Another notable injunction of the ancient M agick was that whatever appertained to the W ork should be 
“single”. The W and was to be cut with a single stroke of the knife. T here must be no boggling and hacking 
at things, no clumsiness and no hesitation. If you strike a blow at all, trike with your strength! “W hatsoever 
thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might!” If you are going to take up M agick, make no compromis.. 
Y ou cannot make revolutions with rose- water, or wrestle in asilk hat. Y ou will find very soon that you must 
either lose the hat or top wrestling. M ost people do both. T hey take up the magical path without sufficient 
reflection, without that determination of adamant which made the author of thisbook exclaim, ashe took the 
first oath, “PER DURABO” — “I will endure unto the end!” 


“For enduring unto the End, at the End was N aught to endure.” Liber 333, C ap Z eta. 


T hey start on it at a great pace, and then find that their boots are covered with mud. Instead of persisting, they 
go back to Piccadilly. Such persons have only themselves to thank if the very street- boys mock at them. 


Another recommendation was this: buy whatever may be necessary without haggling! 
Y ou must not try to trike a proportion between the values of incommensurable things. 


H owever dosely the square of any fraction approximates to 2, no fraction equals the square root of 2. T he square 
root of 2 is not in the series; it is a different kind of number altogether. 


T he least of the M agical Instruments is worth infinitely more than all that you possess, or if you like, than all 
that you tupidly suppose yourself to possess. Break thisrule, and the usual N emesisof the half- hearted awaits 
you. N ot only do you get inferior instruments, but you lose in some other way what you thought you were 
so clever to have saved. R emember Ananias! 


O bserve well that there is never any real equivalence or measurable relation between any two things, for each is 
impregnably Itself. T he exchange of property is not a mathematically accurate equation. T he W ant is meray a 
conventional expression of the W ill, just as a word is of a thought. It can never beanything else thus, though the 
process of making it, whether it involves time, money, or labour, is a spiritual and moral synthesis, it is not 
measurable in terms of its eements. 


On the other hand, if you purchase without haggling you will find that along with your purchase the vendor 
has thrown in the purse of Fortunatus. N o matter in what extremity you may seem to be, at the last moment 
your difficulties will be solved. For there isno power either of the firmament of the ether, or of the earth or 
under the earth, on dry land or in the water, of whirling air or of rushing fire, or any spell or scourge of God 
which isnot obedient to the necessity of the M agician! T hat which he has, he hasnot; but that which heis, he 
is, and that which he will be, he will be. And neither God nor M an, nor all the malice of Choronzon, can 
either check him, or cause him to waver for one instant upon the Path. T hiscommand and this promise have 
been given by all the M agi without exception. And where this command has been obeyed, this promise has 
been most certainly fulfilled. 


time and place, in the proper drcumstances. 


. It issaid that at the utterance of this name the U niverse crashes into dissolution. Let the M agician earnestly 
seek this Lost W ord, for its pronunciation is synonymous with the accomplishment of the Great W ork. 


E ach man has a different G reat W ork, just as no two points on the dramference of a drde are connected with the 
centre by the same radius. T he W ord will be arrespondingly unique 


In this matter of the efficacity of words there are again two formulae exactly opposite in nature. A word may 


CHAPTER IX 
OF SILENCE AND SECRECY: 
AND OF 
THE BARBAROUS NAMES OF EVOCATION. 


It isfound by experience (confirming the statement of Z oroaster) that the most potent conjurations are those 
in an ancient and perhapsforgotten language, or even those couched in acorrupt and possbly alwaysmeaningless 
jargon. O f these there are several main types T he “preliminary invocation” in the “Goetia” conssts principally 
of corruptions of Greek and Egyptian names. For example, we find “O sorronnophris’ for “Asor Un-N efer”. 


See appendix 4, Liber Samekh; thisisan edition of this! nvocation, with an elaborate R ubric, translation, scholia, 
and instruction. 


{WEH ADDENDUM.:Thisisthe“ Prdiminary Invocation” placed in the“ G oetia” in theM athers transciption 
(N ot “translation” ) by C rowley. T his invocation is not a part of the original text, but comes to us from the G rec- 
E gyptian period of perhaps the 6th century. T he G oetia is itself a small portion of the “L enegeton” or “L esser 
K ey of Solomon.” T his“ Preliminary E vocation” is altered in L iber Samekh over that published in the” G oetia” . 


The conjurations given by Dr. Dee (vide Equinox |, VIII) are in alanguage called Angelic, or Enochian. Its 
source has hitherto baffled research, but it isalanguage and not ajargon, for it possesses a structure of itsown, 
and there are traces of grammar and syntax. 


H owever thismay be, it “works”. Even the beginner findsthat “thingshappen” when he usesit: and thisisan 
advantage — or disadvantage! —— shared by no other type of language,. The rest need skill. T his needs 
Prudence! 


The Egyptian Invocations are much purer, but their meaning has not been sufficiently studied by persons 
magically competent. W e possess a number of Invocationsin Greek of every degree of excellence; in Latin 
but few, and those of inferior quality. It will be noticed that in every case the conjurations are very sonorous, 
and there isacertain magical voice in which they should be recited. T hisspecial voice wasa natural gift of the 
M aster Therion; but it can be easily taught — to the right people. 


Various considerations impelled Him to attempt conjurationsin the English language. T here already existed 
one example, the charm of the witchesin M acbeth; although thiswas perhaps not meant seriougy, its effect is 
indubitable. 


A true poet cannot help revealing himself and the truth of things in his art, whether he be aware of what he is 
writing, or no. 


H ehasfound iambic tetrameters enriched with many rimes both internal an external very useful. “T he W izard 
W ay” (Equinox I,|) givesa good idea of the sort of thing. So doesthe E vocation of Bartzabel in Equinox I,|X . 
T here are many extant invocations throughout hisworks, in many kindsof metre, of many kindsof being, and 
for many kinds of purposes. (See Appendix). 


O ther methods of incantation are on record asefficacious. For instance Frater |.A., when achild, wastold that 
he could invoke the devil by repeating the “Lord’s Prayer” backwards. H e went into the garden and did so. 


The Devil appeared, and almost scared him out of his life. 


It istherefore not quite certain in what the efficacy of conjurations really lies. T he peculiar mental excitement 
required may even be aroused by the perception of the absurdity of the process, and the persistence in it, as 
when onceFRATER PERDURABO (at the end of H is magical resources) recited “From Greenland’s|cy 
Mountains’, and obtained H is result. 


See“ E leusis”, A. C rowley, “Collected W orks”, Vol. III Epilogue. 


It may be conceded in any case that the long strings of formidable words which roar and moan through so 
many conjurations have a real effect in exalting the consciousness of the magician to the proper pitch — that 
they should do so isno more extraordinary than music of any kind should do so. 


M agicians have not confined themselves to the use of the human voice. T he Pan- pipe with its seven stops, 
corresponding to the seven planets, the bull-roarer, the tom-tom, and even the violin, have all been used, as 
well as many others, of which the most important is the bell 


See Part I. It should be said that in experience no bell save H is own T ibetan bell of E lecrum M agicum has ever 
sounded satisfactory to the M aster T herion. M ost bells jar and repd.. 


, though this is used not so much for actual conjuration as to mark stages in the ceremony. Of all these the 
tom-tom will be found to be the most generally useful. 


W hile on the subject of barbarous names of evocation we ould not omit the utterance of certain supreme 
words which enshrine (alpha) the complete formula of the God invoked, or (beta) the whole ceremony. 


Examples of the former kind are T etragrammaton, |.A.O ., and Abrahadabra. 


An example of the latter kind isthe great word StiBeT T ChePhM eFSHiSS, which isaline drawn on theT ree 
of Life (C optic attributions) in acertain manner. 


It represents the descent of a certain Influence SeetheE vocation of T aphtatharath, E quinox |, III. T heattributions 
are given in 777. T his W ord expresses the urrent K ether - Beth - Binah - C heth - G eburach - M em - Hod - 
Shin - M alkuth, the descent from 1 to 10 via the Pillar of Severity. 


With all such words it is of the utmost importance that they should never be spoken until the supreme 
moment, and even then they should burst from the magician almost despite himself — so great should be his 
reluctance 


T his reluctance is F reudian, due to the power of these words to awaken the suppressed subconsdous libido. 


to utter them. In fact, they should be the utterance of the God in him at the first onset of the divine possession. 
So uttered, they cannot fail of effect, for they have become the effect. 


Every wise magician will have constructed (according to the principles of the H oly Q abalah) many such 
words, and he ould have quintessentialised them all in one W ord, which last W ord, once he has formed it, 
he should never utter consciously even in thought, until perhaps with it he gives up the ghost. Such aW ord 
Should in fact be so potent that man cannot hear it and live. 


Such a word wasindeed the lost T etragrammaton 


T he M aster T herion has received this W ord; it is communicated by H im to the proper postulants, at the proper 


time and place, in the proper draumstances. 


. It issaid that at the utterance of thisname the U niverse crashes into dissolution. Let the M agician earnestly 
geek this Lost W ord, for its pronunciation is synonymous with the accomplishment of the Great W ork. 


E ach man has a different G reat W ork, just as no two points on the dramference of a drde are connected with the 
centre by the same radius. T he W ord will be @rrespondingly unique. 


In this matter of the efficacity of words there are again two formulae exactly opposite in nature. A word may 
become potent and terrible by virtue of constant repetition. It isin thisway that most religions gain strength. 
At first the statement “So and so isGod” excites no interest. Continue, and you meet scorn and scepticism: 
possibly persecution. C ontinue, and the controversy hasso far died out that no one troublesto contradict your 
assertion. 


N o superstition isso dangerous and so lively asan exploded superstition. T he newspapers of to- day (written 
and edited almost exclusively by men without aspark of either religion or morality) dare not hint that any one 
disbelievesin the ostensibly prevailing cult; they deplore Atheism — all but universal in practice and implicit 
in the theory of practically all intelligent people — as if it were the eccentricity of a few negligible or 
objectionable persons. T hisisthe ordinary story of advertisement; the sham hasexactly the same chance asthe 
real. Persistence is the only quality required for success. 


The opposte formula is that of secrecy. An idea is perpetuated because it must never be mentioned. A 
freemason never forgets the secret words entrusted to him, thought these words mean absolutely nothing to 
him, in the vast majority of cases; the only reason for this is that he has been forbidden to mention them, 
although they have been published again and again, and are as accessible to the profane as to the initiate. 


In such a work of practical M agick as the preaching of a new Law, these methods may be advantageously 
combined; on the one hand infinite frankness and readiness to communicate all secrets; on the other the 
sublime and terrible knowledge that all real secrets are incommunicable. 


If this were not the case, individuality would not be inviolable N o man cn communicate even the simplest 
thought to any other man in any full and acurate sense. F or that thought is sown in a different soil, and cannot 
produc an identical effec. | cannot put a spot of red upon two pictures without altering each in diverse ways. It 
might have little effec on a sunset by T urner, but much on a nocturne by W histler. T he identity of the two spots 
as spots would thus be falladous. 


It is, according to tradition, a certain advantage in conjurations to employ more than one language. In all 
probability the reason of thisisthan any change soursthe flagging attention. A man engaged in intense mental 
labour will frequently stop and walk up and down the room — one may suppose for this cause — butitisa 
ggn of weakness that this should be necessary. For the beginner in M agick, however, it is permissible 


T his is not to say that it is advisable. O how shameful is human weakness! B ut it does encourage one — itis 
useless to deny it — to be knocked down by a D emon of whose existence one was not really quite sure. 


to employ any device to secure the result. 
C onjurations should be recited, not read: 
E ven this is for the weaker brethern. T he really great M agus speaks and acts impromptu and extempore. 


and the entire ceremony should be so perfectly performed that one ishardly consciousof any effort of memory. 


T he ceremony should be constructed with such logical fatality that a mistake is impossible. 


F irst-rate poetry is easily memorized because the ideas and the musical values correspond to man’s mental and 
sensory structure. 


T he consciousego of the M agician isto be destroyed to be absorbed in that of the God whom he invokes, and 
the process should not interfere with the automation who is performing the ceremony. 


But this ego of which it is here spoken is the true ultimate ego. The automaton should possess will, energy, 
intelligence, reason, and resource. T hisautomaton should be the perfect man far more than any other man can 
be. It is only the divine self within the man, a self as far above the possession of will or any other qualities 
whatsoever asthe heavens are high above the earth, that should reabsorb itself into that illimitable radiance of 
which it is a spark. 


T his is said of the partial or lesser W orks of M agick. This is an elementary treatise, one cannot discuss higher 
W orks as for example those of “T he H ermit of A esopus Island”. 


T he great difficulty for the single M agician isso to perfect himself that these multifarious duties of the R itual 
are adequately performed. At first he will find that the exaltation destroys memory and paralyses muscle. T his 
isan essential difficulty of the magical process, and can only be overcome by practice and experience. 


See" T heB ook of Lies” ; there are several chapters on this subject. B ut R ight exaltation should produce spontaneously 
the proper mental and physical reactions. As soon as the development is secured, there will be automatic reflex 
“justesse” , exactly as in normal affairs mind and body respond with free unconsdous rightness to the W ill. 


In order to aid concentration, and to increase the supply of Energy, it hasbeen customary for the M agician to 
employ assistants or colleagues. It is doubtful whether the obvious advantages of this plan compensate the 
difficulty of procuring suitable persons 


T he organic development of M agick in the world due to the creative W ill of the M aster T herion makes it with 
every year that passes easier to find sdentifically trained co-workers. 


, and the chance of aconflict of will or a misunderstanding in the circle itself. On one occasion FRATER 
PER DURABO wasdisobeyed by an assistant, and had it not been for H is promptitude in using the physical 
compulsion of the sword, it is probable that the circle would have been broken. Asit was, the affair fortunately 
terminated in nothing more serious than the destruction of the culprit. 


H owever, there isno doubt that an assemblage of persons who really are in harmony can much more easily 
produce an effect than amagician working by himself. T he psychology of “R evival meetings” will be familiar 
to almost every one, and though such meetings 


See, for an account of properly-conduded congregational ceremonial, Equinox |, 1X. “Energized Enthusiasm” , 
and E quinox Ill, L. Liber XV, E cdesiaeG nosticae C atholicae C annon M issae. T he“ R evival meetings” here 
in question were deliberate ex ploitations of religious hysteria. 


are the foulest and most degraded rituals of black magic, the laws of M agick are not thereby suspended. T he 
laws of M agick are the laws of N ature. 


A Singular and world-famous example of this is of sufficiently recent date to be fresh in the memory of many 
people now living. At anigger camp meeting in the “U nited” States of America, devotees were worked up 
to such apitch of excitement that the whole assembly developed afuriousform of hysteria. T he comparatively 


intelligible cries of “Glory” and “Hallelujah” no longer expressed the stuation. Somebody screamed out 
“T araraboom-de ay!”, and thiswastaken up by the whole meeting and yelled continuougy, until reaction 
get in. The affair got into the papers, and some particularly bright disciple of John Stuart M ill, logician and 
economist, thought that these words, having set one set of foolscrazy, might do the same to all the other fools 
in the world. He accordingly wrote a song, and produced the desired result. This is the most notorious 
example of recent times of the power exerted by a barbarous name of evocation. 


A few words may be useful to reconcile the general notion of C ausality with that of M agick. How can we be 
sure that a person waving a stick and howling thereby produces thunderstorms? In no other way than that 
familiar to Science; we note that whenever we put a lighted match to dry gunpowder, an unintelligibly 
arbitrary phenomenon, that of sound, is observed; and so forth. 


W eneed not dwell upon this point; but it semsworth while to answer one of the objectionsto the possibility 
of M agick, chosing one which is at first sght of an obviousy “fatal” character. It is convenient to quote 
verbatim from the Diary 


In alater entry we read that the diarist has found a similar train of argument in “Space, T ime, and G ravitation” , 
page 51. H ewas much encourage by the confirmation of his thesis in so independent a system of thought. 


of adisttinguished M agician and philosopher. “| have noticed that the effect of aM agical W ork hasfollowed it 
so closely that it must have been started before the time of the W ork. E.g. | work to-night to make X in Paris 
write to me. | get the letter the next morning, so that it must have been written before the W ork. Doesthis 
deny that the W ork caused the effect? 


“If 1 strike a billiard-ball and it moves, both my will and its motion are due to causes long antecedent to the 
act. | may consider both my W ork and its reaction astwin effects of the eternal U niverse. The moved arm and 
ball are parts of a state of the Cosmos which resulted necessarily from its momentarily previous state, and so, 
back for ever. “Thus, my M agical W ork is only one of the cause- effects necessarily concomitant with the 
case- effects which set the ball in motion. | may therefore regard the act of striking as a cause-effect of my 
original W ill to move the ball, though necessarily previous to its motion. But the case of magical W ork isnot 
quite analogous. For my nature is such that | am compelled to perform M agick in order to make my will to 
prevail; so that the cause of my doing the W ork is also the cause of the ball’s motion, and there is no reason 
why one should precede the other. (CF. “Lewis Carroll,” where the R ed Q ueen screams before she pricks 
her finger.) 


“Let me illustrate the theory by an actual example. 


“| write from Italy to aman in France and another in Australiaon the same day, telling them to join me. Both 
arrive ten dayslater; the first in answer to my letter, which he received, the second on “hisown initiative’, as 
it would seem. But! summoned him because! wanted him; and! wanted him because he was my representative; 
and his intelligence made him resolve to join me because it judged rightly that the stuation (so far ashe knew 
it) was such as to make me desire his presence. 


“T he same cause, therefore, which made me write to him made him come to me; and though it would be 
improper to say that the writing of the letter was the direct cause of his arrival, it is evident that if | had not 
written | should have been different from what! actually am, and therefore my relationswith him would have 
been otherwise than they are. In this sense, therefore, the letter and the journey are causally connected. 


“Onecannot go farther, and say that in this case | ought to write the letter even if he had arrived before! did 
90; for it is part of the whole set of circumstance that | do not use a crowbar on an open door. “T he concluson 


isthat one should do one’s W ill ‘without lus of result’. If one isworking in accordance with the laws of one’s 
own nature, one is doing ‘right’; and no such work can be criticised as ‘useless’, even in cases of the character 
here discussed. So long as one’s W ill prevails, there isno cause for complaint. 


“To abandon one’sM agick would shew lack of self-confidence in one’spowers, and doubt asto one’sinmost 
faith in Self and in N ature. 


i.e. on the ground that one cannot understand how M agick can produe the desired effects. F or if one possesses the 
indination to do M agic, it is evidence of a tendengy in one’s N ature. N obody understands fully how the mind 
moves the musdes; but we know that lack of confidence on this point means paralysis. “If the Sun and M oon 
should doubt, T hey’d immediately go out”, as Blakesaid. A Iso, as! said myself. “W ho hath theH ow is qreless 
of the W hy”. 


Of course one changes one’s methods as experience indicates, but there isno need to change them on any 
such ground asthe above. 


“Further, the argument here set forth disposes of the need to explain the “modus operandi” of M agick. A 
successful operation does not involve any theory soever, not even that of the existence of causality itself. The 
whole set of phenomena may be conceived as single. 


“For instance, if | see a star (as it was years ago) | need not assume causal relations as existing between it, the 
earth, and myself. The connexion exists; | can predicate nothing beyond that. | cannot postulate purpos, or 
even determine the manner in which the event comes to be. Similarly, when | do Magick, it isin vain to 
inquire why | so act, or why the desired result doesor doesnot follow. N or can! know how the previous and 
subsequent conditions are connected. At most! can describe the conscioumess which | interpret asa picture 
of the facts, and make empirical generalizations of the superficial aspects of the case. 


“Thus, | have my own personal impressions of the act of telephoning; but | cannot be aware of what 
consciousness, electricity, mechanics, sound, etc., actually are in themselves. And although | can appeal to 
experience to lay down ‘laws as to what conditions accompany the act, | can never be sure that they have 
always been, or ever will again be, identical. (In fact, it is certain that an event can never occur twice in 
precisely the same circumstances.) 


If it did so, how could we call it duplex? 


“Further, my ‘laws; must always take nearly all the more important elements of knowledge for granted. | 
cannot say — finally — how an electric current is generated. | cannot be sure that some totally unsuspected 
force isnot at work in some entirely arbitrary way. For example, it was formerly supposed that H ydrogen and 
Chlorine would unite when an electric spark was passed through the mixture; now we ‘know’ that the 
presence of a minute quantity of aqueous vapour (or some tertium quid) is essential to the reaction. We 
formulated before the days of R ossthe ‘laws of malarial fever, without reference to the mosquito; we might 
discover one day that the germ is only active when certain events are transpiring in some nebula 


T he history of the E arth is induded in the period of some such relation; so that we cannot possibly be sure that we 
may deny: “M alarial fever is a function of the present precession of the E quinoxes” . 


, or when 90 apparently inert a substance as Argon is present in the air in certain proportions. 


“W emay therefore admit quite cheerfully that M agick isasmysterious as mathematics, asempirical as poetry, 
as uncertain as golf, and as dependent on the personal equation as Love. 


“T hat isno reason why we should not study, practice and enjoy it; for it isa Science in exactly the same sense 
as biology; it isno less an Art that Sculpture; and it isa Sport as much as M ountaineering. 


“Indeed, there seems to be no undue presumption in urging that no Science possesses equal possibilities of 
deep and important K nowledge; 


M agick is less liable to lead to error than any other Saence, because its terms are interchangeable, by definition, so 
that it is based on relativity from the start. W erun no risk of asserting absolute propositions. F urthermore we make 
our measurements in terms of the object measured, thus avoiding the absurdity of defining metaphysical ideas by 
mutable standards, (C f. Eddington “Space, Time, and G ravitation”.. Prologue.) of being forced to attribute the 
qualities of human consdousness to inanimate things (P oincare, “La mesure du temps” ), and of asserting that we 
know anything of the universe in itself, though the nature of our senses and our minds necessarily determines our 
observations, so that the limit of our knowledge is subjective, just as a thermometer can record nothing but its own 
reaction to one particular type of E nergy. 


M agick recognizes frankly (1) that truth is relative, subjective, and apparent; (2) that T ruth implies O mnisdence, 
which is unattainable by mind, being transfinite just as if one tried to make an exact map of England in 
England, that map must ontain a map of the map, and so on, ad infinitum; (3) that logical contradiction is 
inherent in reason, (Russell, “Introduction to M athemnatical Philosophy”, p. 136; C rowley, “Eleusis’, and 
elsewhere); (4) that a C ontinuum requires a C ontinuum to be commensurable with it: (5) that E mpiridsm is 
ineluctable, and therefore that adjustment is the only possible method of action; and (6) that error may be avoided 
by opposing no resistance to change, and registering observed phenomena in their own language. 


that no Art offers such opportunities to the ambition of the Soul to express its Truth, in Ecstasy, through 
Beauty; and that no Sport rivalsits fascinationsof danger and delight, so excites, exercises, and tests its devotees 
to the uttermost, or so rewards them by well-being, pride, and the passionate pleasures of personal triumph. 


“M agick takes every thought and act for its apparatus; it hasthe U niverse for itsLibrary and itsLaboratory; all 
N ature is its Subject; and its Game, free from close seasons and protective restrictions, always abounds in 
infinite variety, being all that exists. 


T he elastidty of M agick makes it equal to all possible kinds of environment, and therefore biologically perfect. 
“D owhat thou wilt...” implies self-adjustment, so that failure cannot ocaur. O ne’s true W ill is necessarily fitted 
to the whole U niverse with the utmost exactitude, because each term in the equation a+ b+c=0 must be equal and 
opposite to the sum of all the other terms. N o individual can ever be aught than himself, or do aught else than his 
W ill, which is his necessary relation with his environment, dynamically considered. A Il error isno more than an 
illusion proper to him to dissipate the mirage, and it is a general law that the method of acamplishing this 
operation is to realize, and to acquiescein, the order of the U niverse, and to refrain from attempting the impossible 
task of overcoming the inertia of the forces which oppose, and therefore are identical with, one’s self. Error in 
thought is therefore failure to understand, and in action to perform, one’s own true W ill. 


CHAPTER X 
OF THE GESTURES 


T his chapter may be divided into the following parts: 

1. Attitudes. 

2. Circumambulations (and smilar movements). 

3. Changes of postion (T his depends upon the theory of the construction of the circle). 
4. The Knocksor Knells 


Attitudes are of two Kinds: natural and artificial. O f the first kind, prostration isthe obvious example. It comes 
natural to man (poor creature!) to throw himself to the ground in the presence of the object of his adoration. 


The M agidan must eschew prostration, or even the “bending of the Knee in supplication”, as infamous and 
ignominious, an abdication of his sovereignty. 


Intermediate between this and the purely artificial form of geture comes a class which depends on acquired 
habit. Thus it is natural to an European officer to offer his sword in token of surrender. A Tibetan would, 
however, squat, put out histongue, and place hishand behind hisright ear. Purely artificial gestures comprehend 
in their classthe majority of definitely magick signs, though some of these smulate a natural action — e.g. the 
ggn of the R ending of the Veil. But the sgn of Auramoth (see Equinox I, II, Illustration “The Signs of the 
Grades’) merely imitates a hieroglyph which has only aremote connection with any fact in nature. All signs 
must of course be studied with infinite patience, and practised until the connection between them and the 
mental attitude which they represent appears “necessary.” 


ll 
The principal movement in the circle is circumambulation. 


In Part I! of this B ook 4 it was assumed that the M agidan went barefoot. T his would imply his intention to make 
intimate contac with his Cirde But he may wear sandals, for the Ankh is a sandal-strap; it is born by the 
E gyptian G ods to signify their power of G oing, that is their eternal energy. By shapetheA nkh (orC rux A nsata) 
suggests the formula by which this going is effected in actual pradice. 


This has a very definite result, but one which is very difficult to describe. An analogy is the dynamo. 
Circumambulation properly performed in combination with the Sign of H orus(or “T he Enterer”) on passing 
the East is one of the best methods of arousing the macrocosmic force in the Circle. It should never be 
omitted unless there be some special reason against it. 


A particular tread seems appropriate to it. T histread should be light and stealthy, almost furtive, and yet very 
purposeful. It isthe pace of the tiger who stalks the deer. The number of circumambulations should of course 
correspond to the nature of the ceremony. 


Another important movement isthe spiral, of which there are two principal forms, one inward, one outward. 
T hey can be performed in either direction; and, like the circumambulation, if performed deos| 


i.e In the same direction as the hands of a watch move. 
they invoke — if widdershins 

i.e. In the opposite direction. 
they banish 


Such, at least, is the traditional interpretation. But there is a deeper design which may be expressed through the 
direction of rotation. C ertain forces of the most formidable character may beinvoked by dramambulation W iddershins 
when it is executed with intent toward them, and the initiated technique. O f such forces T yphon isthe type, and 
the war of the T itans against the O lympians the legend. (T eitan, Titan, has in G reek the numerical value of 
666.) 


WEH Addenda: C rowley is using the spelling T au-epsilon-iota-tau-alpha-nu in place of the more usual T au- 
iota-tau-alpha-nu or T au-alpha-iota-tau-alpha-nu to obtain 666 in place of 661 or 662. 


. In the spiral the tread islight and tripping, almost approximating to adance: while performing it the magician 
will usually turn on his own axis, either in the same direction as the spiral, or in the opposte direction. Each 
combination involves a different symbolism. 


T here is also the dance proper; it has many different forms, each God having his special dance. O ne of the 
easiest and most effective dancesisthe ordinary waltz- step combined with the three signsof L.V.X .Itismuch 
easier to attain ecstasy in this way than is generally supposed. The essence of the process consists in the 
struggle of the W ill against giddiness; but this struggle must be prolonged and severe, and upon the degree of 
this the quality and intensty of ecstasy attained may depend. 


With practice, giddiness is altogether conquered; exhaustion then takes its place and the enemy of Will. It is 
through the mutual destruction of these antagonisms in the mental and moral being of the magician that 
Samadhi is begotten. 


Hl 
Good examples of the use of change of postion are given in the manuscripts Z.1 and Z.3; 
Equinox |, Il, pp. 244-260. 


explanatory of the N eophyte R itual of the G.’. D.’., where the candidate is taken to various stations in the 
Temple, each station having asymbolic meaning of itsown; but in pure invocation a better example is given 
in Liber 831 


Equinox I, VII, pp. 93 saq. 


. In the construction of aceremony an important thing to decide is whether you will or will not make such 
movements. For every Circle has its natural symbolism, and even if no use is to be made of these facts, one 
must be careful not to let anything be inharmonious with the natural attributions. 


The practical necessities of the work are likely to require certain movements. O ne should either exdude this 
symbolism altogether, or ese think out everything beforehand, and makeit significant. D o not let some actions be 
symbolic and others haphazard. 


For the senstive aura of the magician might be disturbed, and the value of the ceremony completely destroyed, 


by the embarrassment caused by the discovery of some such error, just asif a pre- occupied T -totaller found 
that he had strayed into aT emple of the Demon R um! It istherefore impossible to neglect the theory of the 
Circle. 


To take a sSmple example, suppose that, in an Evocation of Bartzabel, the planet M ars, whos sphere is 
Geburah (Severity) were situated (actually, in the heavens) opposite to the Square of C hesed (M ercy) of the 
T au in the Circle, and the triangle placed accordingly. It would be improper for the M agus to stand on that 
Square unless using this formula, “|, from Chesed, rule Geburah through the Path of the Lion”; while — 
taking an extreme case — to stand on the square of H od (which isnaturally dominated by Geburah) would be 
a madness which only aformula of the very highest M agick could counteract. 


Certain postions, however, such as T iphareth, 
T iphareth is hardly “dominated” even by K ether. It is the son rather than the servant. 


are so sympathetic to the M agushimself that he may use them without reference to the nature of the spirit, or 
of the operation; unlesshe requiresan exceptionally precise spirit free of all extraneouselements, or one whose 
nature is difficulty compatible with T iphareth. 


To show how these postions may be used in conjunction with the spirals, suppose that you are invoking 
H athor, Goddess of Love, to descend upon the Altar. Standing on the square of N etzach you will make your 
invocation to Her, and then dance an inward spiral deosil ending at the foot of the altar, where you sink on 
your knees with your arms raised above the altar as if inviting H er embrace. 


But NOT “in supplication”. 


To conclude, one may add that natural artistic ability, of you possess it, forms an excellent guide. All Art is 
M agick. 


|sadora Duncan hasthisgift of gesture in avery high degree. Let the reader study her dancing; if possible rather 
in private than in public, and learn the superb “unconscioumess” — which is magical consciousness — with 
which she suits the action to the melody. 


T his passage was written in 1911 ev. “W akeD unaan with thy K nocking? | would thou couldst!” 
There isno more potent means than Art of calling forth true Gods to visible appearance. 


IV. 


The knocks or Knells are all of the same character. They may be described collectively — the difference 
between them conssts only in this, that the instrument with which they are made seals them with its own 
goecial properties. It is of no great importance (even so) whether they are made by clapping the hands or 
stamping the feet, by strokes of one of the weapons, or by the theoretically appropriate instrument, the bell. It 
may nevertheless be admitted that they become more important in the ceremony if the M agician considersit 
worth while to take up 


Any action not purely rhythmical is a disturbance. 
an instrument whose angle purpose is to produce them. 


Let it first be laid down that a knock asserts a connection between the M agician and the object which he 


¢rikes. T husthe use of the bell, or of the hands, meansthat the M agician wishesto impress the atmosphere of 
the whole circle with what has been or is about to be done. H e wishes to formulate his will in sound, and 
radiate it in every direction; moreover, to influence that which lives by breath in the sense of his purpose, and 
to summon it to bear witness to his W ord. T he hands are used as symbols of his executive power, the bell to 
represent his consciousness exalted into music. T o trike with the wand isto utter the fiat of creation; the cup 
vibrates with his delight in receiving spiritual wine. A blow with the dagger is like the sgnal for battle. The 
disk isused to express the throwing down of the price of one’s purchase. T o tamp with the foot isto declare 
one’s mastery of the matter in hand. Similarly, any other form of giving knocks has its own virtue. From the 
above examples the intelligent student will have perceived the method of interpreting each individual case 
that may come in question. 


As above said, the object struck is the object impressed. Thus, a blow upon the altar affirms that he has 
complied with the laws of his operation. T o strike the lamp isto summon the Light divine. T husfor the rest. 


It must also be observed that many combinations of ideas are made possible by this convention. To gdrike the 
wand within the cup isto apply the creative will to its proper complement, and so perform the Great W ork by 
the formula of R egeneration. T o strike with the hand on the dagger declares that one demands the use of the 
dagger as a tool to extend one’s executive power. T he reader will recall how Siegfried smote N othung, the 
sword of N eed, upon the lance of W otan. By the action W agner, who was instructed how to apply magical 
formulae by one of the heads of our Order, intended his hearers to understand that the reign of authority and 
paternal power had come to an end; that the new master of the world was intellect. 


T he general object of aknock or aknell isto mark astage in the ceremony. Sasaki Shigetz tells usin his essay 
on Shinto that the Japanese are accustomed to clap their hands four times “to drive away evil spirits’. He 
explains that what really happens is that the sudden and sharp impact of the sound throws the mind into an 
alert activity which enables it to break loose from the obsession of its previous mood. It is aroused to apply 
itself aggressively to the ideals which had oppressed it. T here istherefore a perfectly rational interpretation of 
the psychological power of the knock. 


In aM agical ceremony the knock is employed for much the same purpose. The M agician uses it like the 
chorusin aGreek play. It helpshim to make a clean cut, to turn his attention from one part of hiswork to the 
next. 


So much for the general character of the knock or Knell. Even thislimited point of view offersgreat opportunities 
to the resourceful M agician. But further possibilities lie to our hand. It isnot usually desirable to attempt to 
convey anything except emphasis, and possbly mood, by varying the force of the blow. Itisobvious, moreover, 
that there is a natural correspondence between the hard loud knock of imperious command on the one hand, 
and the soft surred knock of sympathetic comprehension on the other. It is easy to distinguish between the 
bang of the outraged creditor at the front, and the hushed tap of the lover at the bedroom, door. M agical 
theory cannot here add instruction to instinct. 


But aknock need not be single; the possible combinations are evidently infinite. W e need only discuss the 
general principles of determining what number of strokes will be proper in any case, and how we may interrupt 
any series so aSto express our idea by means of structure. 


The general rule is that a single knock has no special significance as such, because unity is omniform. It 
represents K ether, which is the source of all things equally without partaking of any quality by which we 
discriminate one thing from another. Continuing on these lines, the number of knocks will refer to the 
Sephira or other idea Q abalistically cognate with that number. T hus, 7 Knocks will intimate Venus, 11 the 


Great W ork, 17 the Trinity of Fathers, and 19 the Feminine Principle in its most general sense. 


Analyzing the matter alittle further, we remark firstly that a battery of too many knocksis confusing, as well 
aS liable to overweight the other parts of the ritual. In practice, 11 is about the limit. It is usually not difficult 
to arrange to cover all necessary ground with that number. Secondly, each is so extensive in scope, and 
includes aspects so diverse from a practical standpoint that our danger liesin vagueness. A knock should be 
well defined; its meaning should be precise. T he very nature of knocks suggests smartness and accuracy. We 
must therefore devise some means of making the sequence significant of the special sense which may be 
appropriate. O ur only resource isin the us of intervals. 


It is evidently impossible to attain great variety in the smaller numbers. But this fact illustrates the excellence 
of our system. T here is only one way of striking 2 knocks, and this fact agrees with the nature of Chokmah; 
there isonly one way of creating. W e can express only ourselves, although we do so in duplex form. But there 
are three ways of striking 3 knocks, and these 3 wayscorrespond to the threefold manner in which Binah can 
receive the creative idea. T here are three possible types of triangle. W e may understand an idea either as an 
unity tripartite, asan unity dividing itself into a duality, or asa duality harmonized into an unity. Any of these 
methods may be indicated by 3 equal knocks; 1 followed, after a pause, by 2; and 2 followed, after a pause, by 
1, 


Asthe nature of the number becomes more complex, the possible varietiesincrease rapidly. T here are numerous 
ways of striking 6, each of which is suited to the nature of the several aspects of T iphareth. W e may leave the 
determination of these points to the ingenuity of the student. 


The most generally useful and adaptable battery iscomposed of 11 strokes. T he principal reasons for this are as 
follows: “Firstly”, 11 is the number of M agick in itself. It is therefore suitable to all types of operation. 
“Secondly”, it isthe sacred number par excellence of the new Aeon. Asit iswritten in the Book of the Law: 
“...11, as all their numbers who are of us.” “Thirdly”, it is the number of the letters of the word 
ABR AHADABRA, which isthe word of the Aeon. T he structure of this word is such that it expresses the 
great W ork, in every one of its aspects. “Lastly”, it is possible thereby to express all possible spheres of 
operation, whatever their nature. T hisis effected by making an equation between the number of the Sephira 
and the difference between that number and 11. For example, 2 D egree=9Square is the formula of the grade 
of initiation corresponding to Y esod. Y esod represents the instability of air, the sterility of the moon; but these 
qualities are balanced in it by the stability implied in its position as the Foundation, and by its function of 
generation. T his complex is further equilibrated by identifying it with the number 2 of Chokmah, which 
possesses the airy quality, being the W ord, and the lunar quality, being the reflection of the sun of K ether as 
Y esod isthe sun of T iphareth. It isthe wisdom which isthe foundation by being creation. T his entire cycle of 
ideas is expressed in the double formula 2 D egree = 9Square, 9 D egree = 2Square; and any of these ideas may 
be selected and articulated by a suitable battery. 


We may conclude with a single illustration of how the above principles may be put into practice. Let us 
suppose that the M agician contemplatesan operation for the purpose of helping hismind to resist the tendency 
to wander. T hiswill be awork of Y esod. But he must emphasize the stability of that Sephira as against the Airy 
quality which it possesses. H is first action will be to put the 9 under the protection of the 2; the battery at this 
point will be 1-9-1. But this 9 asit stands is suggestive of the changefulness of the moon. It may occur to him 
to divide thisinto 4 and 5, 4 being the number of fixity, law, and authoritative power; and 5 that of courage, 
energy, and triumph of the spirit over the elements. He will reflect, moreover, that 4 is symbolic of the 
tability of matter, while 5 expresses the same idea with regard to motion. At thisstage the battery will appear 
as 1-2-5-2-1. After due consideration he will probably conclude that to split up the central 5 would tend to 
destroy the simplicity of his formula, and decide to use it as it stands. T he possible alternative would be to 


make asingle knock the centre of his battery asif he appealed to the ultimate immutability of K ether, invoking 
that unity by placing afourfold knock on either side of it. In thiscase, hisbattery would be 1-4- 1-4-1. H ewill 
naturally have been careful to preserve the balance of each part of the battery against the corresponding part. 
T his would be particularly necessary in an operation such as we have chosen for our example. 


CHAPTER XI 


OF OUR LADY BABALON AND OF THE BEAST 
WHEREON SHE RIDETH. 


ALSO CONCERNING TRANSFORMATIONS. 
I 


The contents of this section, inasmuch asthey concern OUR LADY, are too important and too sacred to be 
printed. T hey are only communicated by the M aster Therion to chosen pupilsin private instruction. 


T he essential magical work, apart from any particular operation, isthe proper formation of the M agical Being 
or Body of Light. T his process will be discussed at some length in Chapter X VIII. 


We will here assume that the magician has succeeded in developing his Body of Light until it is able to go 
anywhere and do anything. T here will, however, be acertain limitation to hiswork, because he has formed his 
magical body from the fine matter of hisown element. Therefore, although he may be able to penetrate the 
utmost recesses of the heavens, or conduct vigorous combats with the most unpronounceable demons of the 
pit, it may be impossible for him to do as much as knock a vase from a mantelpiece. His magical body is 
composed of matter too tenuous to affect directly the gross matter of which illusions such astables and chairs 
are made. 


T he one really easy “physical” operation which the B ody of Light can perform is “C ongressus subtilis’. T he 
emanations of the “B ody of D esire’ of the material bang whom one visits are, if the visit be agreeable, so potent 
that one spontaneously gains substance in the embrace. T here are many cases on record of C hildren having been 
born as the result of such unions. Seethework of D eSinistrari on |ncubi and Succubi for a discussion of analogous 
phenomena. 


T here has been a good deal of discussion in the past within the C olleges of the H oly Ghost, asto whether it 
would be quite legitimate to seek to transcend this limitation. O ne need not presume to pass judgment. O ne 
can leave the decision to the will of each magician. 


T he Book of the D ead containsmany chaptersintended to enable the magical entity of aman who isdead, and 
gs deprived (according to the theory of death then current) of the material vehicle for executing his will, to 
take on the form of certain animals, such as a golden hawk or acrocodile, and in such form to go about the 
earth “taking his pleasure among the living.” 


See “T he Book of Lies’ Cap. 44, and T he C ollected W orks of Aleister C rowley, Vol. Ill, pp. 209-210, 
where ocur paraphrased translations of certain dassical E gyptian rituals. 


Asageneral rule, material was supplied out of which he could construct the party of the second part aforesaid, 
hereinafter referred to as the hawk. 


W eneed not, however, congder this question of death. It may often be convenient for the living to go about 
the world in some such incognito. Now, then, conceive of this magical body as creative force, seeking 
manifestation; asa God, seeking incarnation. 


T here are two ways by which this aim may be effected. T he first method isto build up an appropriate body 
from itselements. T hisis, generally speaking, avery hard thing to do, because the physical constitution of any 
material being with much power is, or at least should be, the outcome of ages of evolution. H owever, there is 
alawful method of producing an homunculus which is taught in a certain secret organization, perhaps known 
to some of thos who may read this, which could very readily be adapted to some such purpose aswe are now 
discussing. 


T he second method sounds very easy and amusing. Y ou take some organism already existing, which happens 
to be suitable to your purpose. Y ou drive out the magical being which inhabitsit, and take possesson. T o do 
this by force isneither easy nor justifiable, because the magical being of the other wasincarnated in accordance 
with its Will. And “... thou hast no right but to do thy will.” O ne should hardly strain thissentence to make 
one’s own will include the will to upset somebody else’s will! 


Y @ it might happen that the W ill of the other being was to invite the M agidan to indwell its instrument. 


M oreover, it isextremely difficult thusto expatriate another magical being; for though, unlessit isa complete 
microcosm like ahuman being, it cannot be called a star, it isalittle bit of astar, and part of the body of N uit. 


But there isno call for all this frightfulness. T here isno need to Knock the girl down, unless she refuses to do 
what you want, and she will always comply if you say a few nice things to her. 


E spedally on the subject of the W and or the D isk. 


Y ou can alwaysuse the body inhabited by an elemental, such asan eagle, hare, wolf, or any convenient animal, 
by making avery simple compact. Y ou take over the responsibility for the animal, thus building it up into 
your own magical hierarchy. T his represents a tremendous gain to the animal. 


This is the magical aspect of eating animal food, and its justification, or rather the reconaliation of the apparent 
contradiction between the carnivorous and humanitarian elements in the nature of “H omo Sapiens’ . 


It completely fulfils its ambition by an alliance of this extremely intimate sort with a Star. The magician, on 
the other hand, isable to transform and retransform himself in a thousand ways by accepting aretinue of such 
adherents. In this way the projection of the “astral” or Body of Light may be made absolutely tangible and 
practical. At the same time, the magician must realise that in undertaking the K arma of any elemental, he is 
assuming avery serious responsibility. The bond which unites him with that elemental islove; and, though it 
isonly asmall part of the outfit of amagician, it isthe whole of the outfit of the elemental. H e will, therefore, 
suffer intensely in case of any error or misfortune occurring to his protegee. T his feeling israther peculiar. It is 
quite instinctive with the best men. T hey hear of the destruction of acity of afew thousand inhabitants with 
entire callousness, but then they hear of a dog having hurt its paw, they feel W eltschmertz acutely. 


Itisnot necessary to say much more than thisconcerning transformations. T hose to whom the subject naturally 
appeals will readily understand the importance of what has been said. T hose who are otherwise inclined may 
reflect that anod isas good asa wink to a blind horse. 


CHAPTER XII 


OF THE BLOODY SACRIFICE: 
AND MATTERSCOGNATE. 


It isnecessary for usto consider carefully the problems connected with the bloody sacrifice, for this question 
isindeed traditionally important in M agick. N igh all ancient M agick revolves around this matter. In particular 
all the O sirian religions — the rites of the Dying God — refer to this. The Saying of O gris and Adonis, the 
mutilation of Attis, the cults of M exico and Peru; the story of H erculesor M elcarth; the legends of Dionysus 
and of M ithra, are all connected with this one idea. In the H ebrew religion we find the same thing inculcated. 
T he first ethical lesson in the Bible isthat the only sacrifice pleasing to the Lord isthe sacrifice of blood; Abel, 
who made this, finding favour with the Lord, while C ain, who offered cabbages, wasrather naturally conddered 
acheap sport. T he idea recurs again and again. W e have the sacrifice of the Passover, following on the story of 
Abraham's being commanded to sacrifice his firstborn son, with the idea of the substitution of animal for 
human life. The annual ceremony of the two goats carries out this in perpetuity. And we see again the 
domination of thisideain the romance of Esther, where H aman and M ordecai are the two goats or gods, and 
ultimately in the presentation of the rite of Purim in Palestine, where Jesus and Barabbas happened to be the 
Goatsin that particular year of which we hear so much, without agreement on the date. 


T his subject must be studied in the “Golden Bough”, where it is most learnedly set forth by Dr. J. G. Frazer. 
Enough hasnow been said to how that the bloody sacrifice hasfrom time immemorial been the mos consdered 
part of M agick. T he ethics of the thing appear to have concerned no one; nor, to tell the truth, need they do 
so. As St. Paul says “Without shedding of blood there isno remission”; and who are we to argue with St. 
Paul? But, after all that, it isopen to any one to have any opinion that he likes upon the subject, or any other 
subject, thank God! At the same time, it ismost necessary to study the business, whatever we may be going 
to do about it; for our ethics themselves will naturally depend upon our theory of the universe. If we were 
quite certain, for example, that everybody went to heaven when he died, there could be no serious objection 
to murder or suicide, as it is generally conceded — by those who know neither — that earth isnot such a 
pleasant place as heaven. 


H owever, there isa mystery concealed in this theory of the bloody sacrifice which is of great importance to 
the student, and we therefore make no further apology, W e should not have made even this apology for an 
apology, had it not been for the solicitude of a pious young friend of great austerity of character who insisted 
that the part of this chapter which now follows— the part which was originally written — might cause usto 
be misunderstood. T hismust not be. T he blood isthe life. T hissmple statement is explained by the H indus 
by saying that the blood is the principal vehicle of vital Prana. 


Prana or force” is often used as a genericterm for all kinds of subtle energy. T he prana of the body is only one of 
its “vayus”. V ayu means air or spirit. T he idea is that all bodily forces are manifestations of the finer forces of the 
more real body, this real body being a subtle and invisible thing. 


T here issome ground for the belief that there is a definite substance 


T his substance need not be conceived as “ material” in the ude sense of V ictorian sdence; wenow know that such 
phenomena as the rays and emanations of radioactive substances ocupy an intermediate position. F or instance, 
mass is not, as once supposed, necessarily impermeable to mass, and matter itself can be only interpreted in terms 
of motion. So, as to “ prana”, one might hypothesize a phenomenon in the ether analogous to isomerism. W e 
already know of bodies chemially identical whose molecular structure makes one active, another inactive, to certain 


reagents. M etals can be “tired” or even “killed” as to some of their properties, without discoverable chemical 
change. Oneaan “kill” sted, and “raise it from the dead”; and flies drowned in icewater can be resusdtated. 
T hat it should be impossible to ceate high organic life is sdentifically unthinkable, and the M aster T herion 
believes it to bea matter of few years indeed before this is done in thelaboratory. A lready we restore the apparently 
drowned. W hy not those dead from such causes as syncope? If we understood the ultimate physics and chemistry 
of the brief moment of death we would get hold of the forcein some say, supply the missing element, reverse the 
electrical conditions or what not. A lready we prevent certain kinds of death by supplying wants, as in the case of 
Thyroid. 


, not isolated as yet, whose presence makes all the difference between live and dead matter. W e pass by with 
deserved contempt the pseudo- scientific experiments of American charlatans who claim to have established 
that weight islost at the moment of death, and the unsupported statements of alleged clairvoyants that they 
have seen the soul issuing like a vapour from the mouth of persons “in articulo mortis’; but his experiences as 
an explorer have convinced the M aster T herion that meat loses a notable portion of its nutritive value within 
avery few minutes after the death of the animal, and that this loss proceeds with ever- diminishing rapidity as 
time goeson. It isfurther generally conceded that live food, such asoysters, isthe most rapidly assimilable and 
most concentrated form of energy. 


O n@ can become actually drunk on oysters, by chewing then completely. R igor seems to be a symptom of the loss 
of what | may all the A lpha-energy and makes a sharp break in the arve. T heB eta and other energies dissipate 
more slowly. Physiologists should makeit their first duty to measure these phenomena; for their study is evidently 
a direct line of research into the nature of Life. T he analogy between the living and @mplex molecules of the 
Uranium group of inorganic and the Protoplasm group of organic elements is extremely suggestive. T he faculties 
of growth, action, self-reaiperation, etc, must be ascibed to similar properties in both cases; and as we have 
detected, measured and partially explained radioactivity, it must be possible to contrive means of doing the same 
for L ife. 


Laboratory experiments in food- values seem to be almost worthless, for reasons which we cannot here enter 
into; the general testimony of mankind appears a safer guide. 


It would be unwise to condemn asirrational the practice of those savages who tear the heart and liver from an 
adversary, and devour them while yet warm. In any case it was the theory of the ancient M agicians, that any 
living being isa storehous of energy varying in quantity according to the ze and health of the animal, and in 
quality according to itsmental and moral character. At the death of the animal thisenergy isliberated suddenly. 


T he animal should therefore be killed 


It isa mistake to suppose that the victim is injured. O n the antrary, this is the most blessed and merdful of all 
deaths, for the elemental spirit is directly built up into G odhead — the exact goal of its efforts through countless 
incarnations. On the other hand, the practice of torturing animals to death in order to obtain the elemental as a 
slave is indefensible, utterly black magic of the very worst kind, involving as it does a metaphysical basis of 
dualism. T here is, however, no objection to dualism or black magic when they are properly understood. See the 
account of the M aster T herion’s G reat M agical Retirement by L ake P asquaney, where he “ cudfied a toad in the 
Basilisk abode” . 


within the Circle, or the T riangle, asthe case may be, so that its energy cannot escape. An animal should be 
selected whose nature accords with that of the ceremony — thus, by sacrificing a female lamb one would not 
obtain any appreciate quantity of the fierce energy useful to aM agician who wasinvoking M ars. In such acase 
aram 


A wolf would bestill better in the case of M ars. See 777 for the correspondences between various animals and the 
“32 Paths” of N ature. 


would be more suitable. And this ram should be virgin — the whole potential of its original total energy 
should not have been diminished in any way. 


T here is also the question of its magical freedom. Sexual intercourse creates a link between its exponents, and 
therefore a responsibility. 


For the highest spiritual working one must accordingly choose that victim which contains the greatest and 
purest force. A male child of perfect innocence and high intelligence 


It appears from the M agical R ecords of F rater P erdurabo that H e made this partiqular sacrifice on an average about 
150 times every year between 1912 ev. and 1928 ev. C ontrast}.K .H uyman’s “La-Bas”, wherea perverted 
form of M agic of an analogous order is described. 


“It is the sacrifice of oneself spiritually. And the intelligence and innocence of that male child are the perfect 
understanding of the M agidan, his one aim, without lust of result. And male he must be, because what he 
sacrifices is not the material blood, but his creative power.” This initiated interpretation of the texts was sent 
spontaneously by Soror!.W .E., for the sake of the younger B rethren. 


WEH ADDENDA: When C rowley speaks of sacifiang a male child, his diaries and other writings indicate 
that he thereby obfuscates the actual practic. C rowley did this by diversion of the act of sexual intercourse and other 
sexual actions. H e considered aontraception as human saqifice. T here is no indication in any of his writings that 
he ever performed infantidde. In fact, C rowley was even against abortion. 


isthe most satisfactory and suitable victim. 


For evocationsit would be more convenient to place the blood of the victim in the T riangle — theideabeing 
that the spirit might obtain from the blood this subtle but physical substance which wasthe quintessence of its 
life in such amanner as to enable it to take on a visble and tangible shape. 


See Equinox (1, V. Supplement: T enth A ethyr) for an A count of an O peration where this was done. M agical 
phenomena of the creative order are conceived and germinate in a peculiar thick velvet darkness, crimson, purple, 
or deep blue, approximating black: as if it were said, In the body of O ur L ady of the Stars. 


See 777 for the @rrespondences of the various forces of N ature with drugs, perfumes, etc 


Those magicians who abject to the use of blood have endeavored to replace it with incense. For such a 
purpose the incense of Abramelin may be burnt in large quantities. Dittany of C rete isalso avaluable medium. 
Both these incenses are very catholic in their nature, and suitable for almost any materialization. 


But the bloody sacrifice, though more dangerous, is more efficacious and for nearly all purposes human 
sacrifice isthe best. T he truly great M agician will be able to use his own blood, or possibly that of a disciple, 
and that without sacrificing the physical life irrevocably. 


Such details, however, may safely be left to the good sense of the Student. E xperience here as elsewhere is the best 
teacher. In the Saqifice during Invocation, however, it may be said without fear of contradicion that the death of 
the vidim should coindde with the supreme invocation. 


WEH addenda: A sworn testimony by C rowley dedares that he held actual human saqifice to physical death to 


be the most efficadous, but that he never did such a thing. On the matter concerning death of the vicim in 
invocation, C rowley elsewhere enlarges that this is the ebhemeral death of the E go. 


An example of this sacrifice is given in Chapter 44 of Liber 333. T hisM ass may be recommended generally 
for daily practice. 


One last word on this subject. T here isaM agical operation of maximum importance: the Initiation of aN ew 
Aeon. W hen it becomes necessary to utter a W ord, the whole Planet must be bathed in blood. Before man is 
ready to accept the Law of T helema, the Great W ar must be fought. T his Bloody Sacrifice isthe critical point 
of the W orld-C eremony of the Proclamation of H orus, the Crowned and conquering Child, as Lord of the 
Aeon. 


N ote: T his paragraph was written in the summer of 1911 ev., just three years before its fulfilment. 


T hiswhole matter is prophesied in the Book of the Law itself; let the student take note, and enter the ranks of 
the H ost of the Sun. 


T here is another sacrifice with regard to which the A depts have always maintained the most profound secrecy. 
It isthe supreme mystery of practical M agick. Its name is the Formula of the R osy Cross. In this case the 
victim is always — in a certain sense — the Magician himself, and the sacrifice must coincide with the 
utterance of the most sublime and secret name of the God whom he wishes to invoke. 


Properly performed, it never fails of its effect. But it is difficult for the beginner to do it satisfactorily, because 
it isa great effort for the mind to remain concentrated upon the purpose of the ceremony. T he overcoming of 
this difficulty lends most powerful aid to the M agician. 


It isunwise for him to attempt it until he has received regular initiation in the true 


It is here desirable to warn the reader against the numerous false orders which have impudently assumed thename 
of R osiudan. T he M asonic Sodetas R osiqudana is honest and harmless; and makes no false pretences; if its 
members happen as a rule to be pompous busy- bodies, enlarging the borders of their phylacteries, and scrupulous 
about deansing the outside of the aip and the platter; if the masks of the O fficers in their M ysteries suggest the 
Owl, theC at, the Parrot, and the C uckoo, while the R obe of their C hief M agus isa Lion’s Skin, that is thar 
affair. B ut those orders run by persons “ daiming” to represent the T rueA ndent F raternity are common swindles. 
T he representatives of the lateS. L. M athers (C ount M cG regor) are the phosphorescence of the rotten wood of a 
branch which was lopped off the tree at the end of the 19th century. T hose of Papus (D r. E ncausse), Stanislas de 
G uaita and Peladan, merit respect as serious, but lack full knowledge and authority. T he“ O rdo R osaeC ruds” 
isa mass of ignorance and falsehood, but this may be a deliberate device for masking itself. T he test of any O rder 
is its attitude towards the L aw of T helema. T heT rueO rder presents the T rue Symbols, but avoids attaching the 
T rueN ame thereto; itis only when the P ostulant has taken irrevocable O aths and been received formally, that he 
discovers what F raternity he has joined. If hehavetaken false symbols for true, and find himself magically pledged 
to a gang of rascals, so much the worse for him! 


Order of the R osy Cross, and he must have taken the vowswith the fullest comprehengon and experience of 
their meaning. It isalso extremely desrable that he should have attained an absolute degree of moral emancipation 


T his results from the full acceotane of the Law of THELEMA, persistently put into practic. 


, and that purity of spirit which results from a perfect understanding both of the differences and harmonies of 


the planes upon the T ree of Life. 


For thisreason FRATER PERDURABO hasnever dared to use this formula in a fully ceremonial manner, 
save once only, on an occasion of tremendousimport, when, indeed, it wasnot H e that made the offering, but 
ONE in Him. For he perceived a grave defect in his moral character which he has been able to overcome on 
the intellectual plane, but not hitherto upon higher planes. Before the conclusion of writing this book he will 
have done so. 


P.S. With the happiest results. P. 


T he practical details of the Bloody Sacrifice may be studied in various ethnological manuals, but the general 
conclusions are summed up in Frazer’s “Golden Bough”, which is strongly recommended to the reader. 
Actual ceremonial details likewise may be left to experiment. The method of killing is practically uniform. 
T he animal should be stabbed to the heart, or its throat severed, in either case by the knife. All other methods 
of killing are less efficacious; even in the case of Crucifixion death is given by stabbing. 


Ye one might devise methods of execution appropriate to the W eapons: Stabbing or dubbing for the L ance or 
W and, D rowning or poisoning for the C up, Beheading for the Sword, C rushing for the D isk, Burning for the 
Lamp, and so forth. 


One may remark that warm-blooded animals only are used as victims: with two principal exceptions. The 
first isthe serpent, which is only used in avery special R itual; 


T he Serpent is not really killed; it is seethed in an appropriate vessel; and it issues in due season refreshed and 
modified, but still essentially itself. T he idea is the transmission of life and wisdom from a vehide which has 
fulfilled its formula to one capable of further extension. T he development of a wild fruit by repeated plantings in 
Suitable soil is an analogous operation. 


WEH ADDENDA: Thesepent is the phallus. T he vessel and the seething are likewise sub rosa. 
the second the magical beetles of Liber Legis. (See Part IV.) 


One word of warning is perhaps necessary for the beginner. T he victim must be in perfect health — or its 
energy may be as it were poisoned. It must also not be too large: 


T he sacrifice (e.g.) of a bull is suffident for a large number of people; hence it is commonly made in public 
ceremonies, and in someinitiations, e.g, that of aK ing, who needs force for his whole kingdom. O r again, in the 
C onsecation of a T emple. 


SeeL ord D unsany, “T he Blessing of Pan” — anobleand most notable prophecy of L ife’s fair future. 


the amount of energy disengaged is almost unimaginably great, and out of all anticipated proportion to the 
strength of the animal. Consequently, the M agician may easily be overwhelmed and obsessed by the force 
which he has let loose; it will then probably manifest itself in its lowest and most objectionable form. The 
most intense spirituality of purpose 


T hisis a matter of oncntration, with no ethical implication. T he danger is that one may get something which one 
does not want. This is “bad” by definition. N othing is in itself good or evil. T he shields of the Sabines which 
qushed T arpeia were not murderous to them, but the contrary. H er aitidsm of them was simply that they were 
what she did not want in her O peration. 


is absolutely essential to safety. 


In evocationsthe danger isnot so great, asthe Circle formsa protection; but the circle in such acase must be 
protected, not only by the names of God and the Invocations used at the same time, but by along habit of 
successful defence. 


T he habitual use of the L esser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram (say, thrice daily) for months and years and 
constant assumption of the G od-form of H arpocrates (See Equinox, |, I! and Liber 333, cap. X XV for both of 
these) should make the “real drde”, i.e. the A ura of the M agus, impregnable. 


This A ura should be dean- aut, resilient, radiant, iridescent, brilliant, glittering. “A Soap-bubble of raz or-steel, 
streaming with light from within” is my first attempt at desciption; and is not bad, despite its incongruities: P. 


“FRATER PERDURABO, on the one oceasion on which | was able to see H im as H e really appears, was 
brighter than the Sun at noon. | fell instantly to the floor in swoon which lasted several hours, during which | was 
initiated.” SororA.’.. Cf. Rev. |, 12-17. 


If you are easily disturbed or alarmed, or if you have not yet overcome the tendency of the mind to wander, 
it isnot advisable for you to perform the “Bloody Sacrifice”. 


T he whole idea of the word Saqifice, as commonly understood, rests upon an error and superstition, and is 
unsdentific, besides being metaphysially false. T he L aw of T helema has totally changed the P oint of V iew as to 
this matter. U nless you have thoroughly assimilated the F ormula of H orus, it is absolutely unsafe to meddle with 
this type of M agick. Let the young M agidan reflect upon the C onservation of M atter and of Energy. 


Y et it Should not be forgotten that this, and that other art at which we have dared darkly to hint, are the 
supreme formulae of Practical M agick. 


Y ou are also likely to get into trouble over this chapter unless you truly comprehend its meaning. 


T here is a traditional saying that whenever an A dept seems to have made a straightforward, comprehensible 
statement, then is it most certain that H emeans something entirely different. T heT ruth is nevertheless dearly set 
forth in H is W ords: it is H is simplidty that baffles the unworthy. | have chosen the expressions in this C hapter 
in such a way that it is likely to mislead those magidans who allow selfish interests to doud their intelligence, but 
to give useful hints to such as are bound by the proper O aths to devote their powers to legitimate ends. “...thou 
hast no right but to do thy will.” “Itisalie, this folly against self.” T he radical error of all uninitiates is that they 
define “self” as irrecondlably opposed to “not-self.” Each element of oneself is, on the contrary, sterile and 
without meaning, until it fulfils itself, by “love under will”, in its counterpart in the M acrocsm. T o separate 
oneself from others is to destroy oneself; the way to realize and to extend oneself is to lose that self — its sense of 
separateness — in the other. Thus: C hild plus food: this does not preserve one at the expense of the othe; it 
“destroys” or rather changes both in order to fulfil both in the result of the operation — a grown man. It isin fact 
impossible to preserve anything as it is by positive action upon it. Its integrity demands inaction; and inadion, 
resistance to change, is stagnation, death and dissolution due to the internal putrefaction of the starved elements. 


CHAPTER XIIl 
OF THE BANISHINGS: 
AND OF THE PURIFICATIONS. 


Cleanliness is next to Godliness, and had better come first. Purity means singleness. God is one. T he wand is 
not awand if it hassomething sticking to it which isnot an essential part of itself. If you wish to invoke V enus, 
you do not succeed if there are traces of Saturn mixed up with it. 


T hat isa mere logical commonplace: in magick one must go much farther than this. O ne finds one’s analogy 
in electricity. If insulation is imperfect, the whole current goes back to earth. It is useless to plead that in all 
those miles of wire there is only one-hundredth of an inch unprotected. It isno good building a ship if the 
water can enter, through however small a hole. 


T hat first task of the M agician in every ceremony is therefore to render hisC ircle absolutely impregnable. 


See, however, theE ssay on T ruth in “K onx om Pax”. T heC irde(in one aspect) asserts D uality, and enphasiz es 
D ivision. 


If one littlest thought intrude upon the mind of the M ystic, hisconcentration is absolutely destroyed; and his 
consciousness remains on exactly the same level as the Stockbroker’s. Even the smallest baby isincompatible 
with the virginity of its mother. If you leave even a single spirit within the circle, the effect of the conjuration 
will be entirely absorbed by it. 


W hile one remains ex posed to the action of all sorts of forces they more or less counterbalance each other, so that the 
general equilibrium, produced by evolution, ison the whole maintained. B ut if we suppress all but one, its action 
becomes irresistible. T hus, the pressure of the atmosphere would cush us if we“ banished” that of our bodies; and 
we should qumble to dust if we rebelled successfully against cohesion. A man who is normally an “ allround good 
sort” often becomes intolerable when he gets rid of his collection of vices; he is swept into monomania by the 
spiritual pride which had been previously restrained by countervailing passions. A gain, there is a worse draught 
when an ill-fitting door is dosed than when it stands open. It is not as necessary to protect his mother and his attle 
from D on Juan as it was from the H ermits of the T hebaid. 


T he M agician must therefore take the utmost care in the matter of purification, “firstly”, of himself, “secondly”, 
of his instruments, “thirdly”, of the place of working. Ancient M agicians recommended a preliminary 
purification of from three days to many months. During this period of training they took the utmost pains 
with diet. T hey avoided animal food, lest the elemental spirit of the animal should get into their atmosphere. 
T hey practised sexual abstinence, lest they should be influenced in any way by the spirit of the wife. Even in 
regard to the excrements of the body they were equally careful; in trimming the hair and nails, they ceremonially 
destroyed 


Such destruction should be by burning or other means which produces a complete chemical change. |n so doing are 
should betaken to bless and liberate the native elemental of the thing burnt. T his maxim is of universal application. 


the severed portion. T hey fasted, so that the body itself might destroy anything extraneousto the bare necessity 
of its existence. T hey purified the mind by special prayers and conservations. T hey avoided the contamination 
of social intercourse, especially the conjugal kind; and their servitors were disciples specially chosen and 
consecrated for the work. 


In modern times our superior understanding of the essentials of this process enables us to dispense to some 
extent with its external rigours; but the internal purification must be even more carefully performed. W e may 
eat meat, provided that in doing so we affirm that we eat it in order to strengthen us for the special purpose of 
our proposed invocation. 


In an A bbey of T helema wesay “W ill” before a meal. T he formula is as follows. “D o what thou wilt shall bethe 
whole of theL aw.” “W hatisthy Will?” “Itis my will to eat and drink” “To what end?” “T hat my body may 
be fortified thereby.” “To what end?” “T hat! may accomplish the G reat W ork.” “Loveis the law, love under 
will.” “Fall to!” This may be adapted as a monologue. O ne may also add the inquiry “W hat is the G reat 
W ork?” and answer appropriately, when it seems useful to spedfy the nature of the O peration in progress at the 
time. T he point is to seize every occasion of bringing every available force to bear upon the objective of the assault. 
It does not matter what the force is (by any standard of judgment) so long as it plays its proper part in searing the 
success of the general purpose. T hus, even laziness may be used to increase our indifference to interfering impulses, 
or envy to counteract carelessness. SeeLiber CLX XV, Equinox I, Vl, p. 37. T hisis espeaally true, since the 
forces are destroyed by the process. T hat is, one destroys a complex which in itself is “evil” and puts its elements 
to the one right use. 


By thus avoiding those actions which might excite the comment of our neighbours we avoid the graver 
dangers of falling into spiritual pride. 


W ehave understood the saying: “T o the pure all things are pure”, and we have learnt how to act up to it. We 
can analyse the mind far more acutely than could the ancients, and we can therefore distinguish the real and 
right feeling from itsimitations. A man may eat meat from self-indulgence, or in order to avoid the dangers of 
asceticism. W e must constantly examine ourselves, and assure ourselvesthat every action isreally subservient 
to the O ne Purpose. 


It isceremonially desrable to seal and affirm this mental purity by R itual, and accordingly the first operation 
in any actual ceremony is bathing and robing, with appropriate words. The bath signifies the removal of all 
things extraneous to antagonistic to the one thought. T he putting on of the robe is the postive side of the 
same operation. It isthe assumption of the fame of mind suitable to that one thought. 


A similar operation takes place in the preparation of every instrument, ashas been seen in the C hapter devoted 
to that subject. In the preparation of the place of working, the same consderations apply. W e first remove 
from that place all objects; and we then put into it those objects, and only those objects, which are necessary. 
During many dayswe occupy ourselvesin this process of cleansing and consecration; and thisagain isconfirmed 
in the actual ceremony. 


T he cleansed and consecrated M agician takes his cleansed and consecrated instruments into that cleansed and 
consecrated place, and there proceeds to repeat that double ceremony in the ceremony itself, which has these 
same two main parts. T he first part of every ceremony isthe banishing; the second, the invoking. The same 
formula is repeated even in the ceremony of banishing itself, for in the banishing ritual of the pentagram we 
not only command the demonsto depart, but invoke the Archangels and their hosts to act as guardians of the 
Circle during our pre-occupation with the ceremony proper. In more elaborate ceremonies it is usual to 
banish everything by name. Each element, each planet, and each sign, perhapseven the Sephiroth themselves; 
all are removed, including the very one which we wished to invoke, for that forces as existing in N ature is 
alwaysimpure. But this process, being long and wearisome, isnot altogether advisable in actual working. It is 
usually sufficient to perform a general banishing, and to rely upon the aid of the guardians invoked. Let the 
banishing therefore be short, but in no wise Surred — for it isuseful asit tends to produce the proper attitude 
of mind for the invocations. “The Banishing R itual of the Pentagram” (as now rewritten, Liber 333, Cap. 


X XV) isthe best to use. 
See also the R itual called “T he M ark of the Beast” given in an A ppendix. But this is pantomorphous. 
Only the four elements are specifically mentioned, but these four elements contain the planets and the signs 


T he signs and the planets, of course, contain, the elements. It is important to ranember this fad, as it helps one 
to grasp what all these terms really mean. N one of the “Thirty-two Paths” is a simple idea; each one is a 
combination, differentiated from the others by its structure and proportions. T he chemical elements are similarly 
constituted, as the aitics of M agick have at last been compelled to admit. 


— the four elements are T etragrammaton; and T etragrammaton is the U niverse. T his special precaution is, 
however, necessary: make exceedingly sure that the ceremony of banishing is effective! Be alert and on your 
guard! W atch before you pray! T he feeling of successin banishing, once acquired, is unmistakable. 


At the conclusion, it isusually well to pause for afew moments, and to make sure once more that every thing 
necessary to the ceremony isin itsright place. TheM agician may then proceed to the final consecration of the 
furniture of the T emple. 


T hat is, of the spedal arrangement of that furniture. E ach object should have been separately consecrated beforehand. 
T he ritual herein question should summarize the situation, and devote the particular arrangement to its purpose 
by invoking the appropriate forces. L et it be well remembered that each object is bound by the O aths of its original 
consecration as such. T hus, if a pantade has been made sacred to V enus, it cannot be used in an operation of M ars; 
the Energy of the E xorast would be taken up in overcoming the opposition of the “K arma” or inertia therein 
inherent. 


CHAPTER XIV 
OF THE CONSECRATIONS: 


WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE NATURE AND 
NURTURE OF THE MAGICAL LINK. 


Consecration is the active dedication of a thing to asingle purpose. Banishing prevents its use for any other 
purpose, but it remainsinert until consecrated. Purification isperformed by water, and banishing by air, whose 
weapon is the sword. Consecration is performed by fire, usually symbolised by the holy lamp. 


T he general conception is that the three active elements co- operate to affect earth; but earth itself may be enployed 
as an instrument. Its function is solidification. T he use of the P entade is indeed very necessary in some types of 
operation, espedally those whose object involves manifestation in matter, and the fixation in (more or less) permanent 
form of the subtle forces of N ature. 


In most extant magical rituals the two operations are performed at once; or (at least) the banishing has the 
more important place, and greater painsseem to be taken with it; but asthe student advances to Adeptship the 
banishing will diminish in importance, for it will no longer be so necessary. T he Circle of the M agician will 
have been perfected by his habit of M agical work. In the truest sense of that word, he will never step outside 
the Circle during his whole life. But the consecration, being the application of apostive force, can alwaysbe 
raised to acloser approximation to perfection. C omplete successin banishing issoon attained; but there can be 
no completeness in the advance to holiness. 


The method of consecration is very Smple. T ake the wand, or the holy oil, and draw upon the object to be 
consecrated the supreme symbol of the force to which you dedicate it. Confirm this dedication in words, 
invoking the appropriate God to indwell that pure temple which you have prepared for Him. Do this with 
fervour and love, asif to balance the icy detachment which isthe proper mental attitude for banishing. 


T heH ebrew legends furnish us with the reason for the respective virtues of water and fire. T he world was purified 
by water at theD eluge, and will be consecrated by fire at the last J udgment. N ot until that is finished can the“ real 
ceremony” begin. 


The words of purification are: Asperges me, Therion, hyssopo, et mundabor; lavabis me, et super nivem 
dealbabor. 


T hose of consecration are: Accendat in nobisT herion ignem sui amoris et flanmam aeternae caritatis. 


T hese may now advantageously be replaced by (a) “... pure will, unassuaged of purpose, delivered from the lust 
of result, is every way perfec.” (CC XX, 1, 44) to banish; and (b) “I am uplifted in thine heart; and the kisses 
of the stars rain hard upon thy body.” (CC XX, Il, 62) to @nserate For the Book of the Law contains the 
Supreme Spells. 


T hese, asinitiates of the VII Degree of O .T .O. are aware, mean more than appears. 


It isa strange circumstance that no M agical writer has hitherto treated the immensely important subject of the 
M agical Link. It might almost be called the M issing Link. It has apparently always been taken for granted, 
only lay writerson M agick like Dr. J. G. Frazer have accorded the subject its full importance. 


Let ustry to make considerationsof the nature of M agick in astrictly scientific spirit, aswell as, deprived of the 
guidance of antiquity, we may. 


W hat isaM agical O peration? It may be defined as any event in nature which is brought to pass by Will. We 
must not exclude potato- growing or banking from our definition. 


Let ustake avery Smple example of aM agical Act: that of aman blowing his nose. W hat are the conditions 
of the success of the O peration? Firstly, that the man’s W ill should be to blow his nose; secondly, that he 
Should have anose capable of being blown; thirdly, that he should have at command an apparatus capable of 
expressing his spiritual W ill in terms of material force, and applying that force to the object which he degres 
to affect. His W ill may be as strong and concentrated as that of Jupiter, and his nose may be totally incapable 
of resistance; but unlessthe link ismade by the use of hisnervesand musclesin accordance with psychological, 
physiological, and physical law, the nose will remain unblown through all eternity. 


W riters of M agick have been unsparing in their efforts to instruct usin the preparation of the W ill, but they 
seem to have imagined that no further precaution wasnecessary. T here isa striking case of an epidemic of this 
error whose history isfamiliar to everybody. | refer to C hristian Science, and the cognate doctrines of “mental 
healing” and the like. T he theory of such people, stripped of dogmatic furbelows, is perfectly good M agic of 
itskind, itsnegroid kind. T he ideais correct enough: matter isan illuson created by W ill through mind, and 
consequently susceptible of alteration at the behest of itscreator. But the practice has been lacking. T hey have 
not developed a scientific technique for applying the W ill. It isasif they expected the steam of W atts’ kettle 
to convey people from place to place without the trouble of inventing and using locomotives. 


Let usapply these considerationsto M agick in itsrestricted sense, the sensein which it was always understood 
until the M aster T herion extended it to cover the entire operations of N ature. 


W hat is the theory implied in such rituals as those of the Goetia? W hat does the M agician do? He applies 
himself to invokeaGod, and thisG od compelsthe appearance of a spirit whose function isto perform the W ill 
of the magician at the moment. T here is no trace of what may be called machinery in the method. The 
exorcist hardly takes the pains of preparing a material bassfor the spirit to incarnate except the bare connection 
of himself with his sigil. It is apparently assumed that the spirit already possesses the means of working on 
matter. The conception seemsto be that of a schoolboy who askshis father to tell the butler to do something 
for him. In other words, the theory is grossly animistic. T he savage tribes described by Frazer had afar more 
scientific theory. T he same may be said of witches, who appear to have been wiser than the thaumaturgists 
who despised them. T hey at least made waxen images — identified by baptism — of the people they wished 
to control. T hey at least used appropriate bases for M agical manifestations, such as blood and other vehicles of 
animal force, with those of vegetable virtue such as herbs. T hey were also careful to put their bewitched 
productsinto actual contact — material or astral — with their victims. T he classical exorcists, on the contrary, 
for all their learning, were careless about this essential condition. T hey acted as stupidly as people who should 
write business letters and omit to post them. 


It isnot too much to say that this failure to understand the conditions of success accounts for the discredit into 
which M agick fell until Eliphas Levi undertook the task of re-habilitating it two generations ago. But even he 


(profoundly as he studied, and luminously as he expounded, the nature of M agick considered as a universal 
formula) paid no attention whatever to that question of the M agical Link, though he everywhere implies that 
it is essential to the W ork. H e evaded the question by making the “petitio principii” of assigning to the Astral 
Light the power of transmitting vibrations of all kinds. He nowhere enters into detail asto how its effects are 
produced. H e does not inform us as to the qualitative or quantitative laws of this light. (T he scientifically 
trained student will observe the analogy between Levi's postulate and that of ordinary science “in re” the 
luminiferous ether.) 


It is deplorable that nobody should have recorded in a systematic form the results of our investigations of the 
Astral Light. We have no account of its properties or of the laws which obtain in its sphere. Y et these are 
sufficiently remarkable. W e may briefly notice that, in the Astral Light, two or more objects can occupy the 
same space at the same time without interfering with each other or losing their outlines. 


In that Light, objects can change their appearance completely without suffering change of N ature. T he same 
thing can reveal itself in an infinite number of different aspects; in fact, it identifies itself by so doing, much as 
a writer or a painter reveals himself in a succession of novels or pictures, each of which iswholly himself and 
nothing else, but himself under varied conditions, though each appears utterly different from its fellows. In 
that Light one is “swift without feet and flying without wings”; one can travel without moving, and 
communicate without conventional means of expression. O ne is insensible to heat, cold, pain, and other 
forms of apprehenson, at least in the shapes which are familiar to usin our bodily vehicles. They exist, but 
they are appreciated by us, and they affect us, in adifferent manner. In the Actral Light we are bound by what 
is, superficially, an entirely different series of laws. W e meet with obstacles of a strange and subtle character; 
and we overcome them by an energy and cunning of an order entirely alien to that which serves us in earthly 
life. In that Light, symbols are not conventions but realities, yet (on the contrary) the beings whom we 
encounter are only symbols of the realities of our own nature. O ur operations in that Light are really the 
adventures of our own personified thoughts. T he universe is a projection of ourselves; an image as unreal as 
that of our facesin amirror, yet, like that face, the necessary form of expression thereof, not to be altered save 
as we alter ourselves. 


T his passage must not be understood as asserting that the U niverse is purely subjecive. On the contrary, the 
M agical T heory accepts the absolute reality of all things in the most objective sense. B ut all perceptions are nather 
the observer nor the observed; they are representations of the relation between them. W e cannot affirm any quality 
in an objec as being independent of our sensorium, or as being in itself that which it seems to us. N or can we 
assume that what we cognizeis more than a partial phantom of its cause. W e cannot even determine the meaning 
of such ideas as motion, or distinguish between time and spaw, except in relation to some partiaular observer. F or 
example, if! firea cannon twicat an interval of 3 hours, an observer on the Sun would notea difference of some 
200,000 milesin space between the shots, whileto me they seem “in thesame place.” M oreover, | am incapable 
of perceiving any phenomenon except by means of the arbitrary instruments of my senses; it is thus correct to say 
that the U niverse as | Know it is subjective, without denying its objectivity. 


The mirror may be distorted, dull, clouded, or cracked; and to this extent, the reflection of ourselves may be 
false even in respect of itssymbolic presentation. In that Light, therefore, all that we do isto discover ourselves 
by means of a sequence of hieroglyphics, and the changes which we apparently operate are in an objective 
sense illusons. 


But the Light serversusin this way. It enables us to see ourselves, and therefore to aid us to initiate ourselves 
by showing us what we are doing. In the same way a watchmaker uses a lens, though it exaggerates and thus 
falsfies the image of the system of wheels which he is trying to adjust. In the same way, a writer employs 
arbitrary characters according to ameaningless convention in order to enable his reader by retranslating them 


to obtain an approximation to his idea. 


Such are afew of the principal characteristics Astral Light. Its quantitative laws are much less dissimilar from 
those of material physics. M agicians have too often been foolish enough to suppose that all classes of M agical 
O perations were equally easy. T hey seem to have assumed that the “almighty power of God” wasan infinite 
quantity in presence of which all finites were equally insignificant. “O ne day is with the Lord as a thousand 
years” is their first law of M otion. “Faith can move mountains’ they say, and disdain to measure either the 
faith or the mountains. If you can kill achicken by M agick, why not destroy an army with equal exertion? 
“W ith God all things are possible.” 


T his absurdity is an error of the same class as that mentioned above. T he facts are wholly opposed. T wo and 
two make four in the Astral as rigorous as anywhere else. The distance of one’s M agical target and the 
accuracy of one’s M agical rifle are factors in the success of one’s M agical shooting in just the same way asat 
Bisdey. T he law of M agical gravitation isas rigid asthat of N ewton. T he law of Inverse Squares may not apply; 
but some such law doesapply. So it isfor everything. Y ou cannot produce athunderstorm unlessthe materials 
exist in the air at the time, and aM agician who could make rain in Cumberland might fail lamentably in the 
Sahara. O ne might make atalignan to win the love of ashop- girl and find it work, yet be baffled in the case of 
a countess; or vice versa. O ne might impose one’s Will on a farm, and be crushed by that of acity; or vice 
versa. TheMASTER THERION himself, with all his successesin every kind of M agick, sometimes appears 
utterly impotent to perform feats which almost any amateur might do, because He has matched his Will 
against that of the world, having undertaken the W ork of aM agusto establish the word of HisLaw on the 
whole of mankind. He will succeed, without doubt, but H e hardly expects to see more than asample of H is 
product during His present incarnation. But He refuses to waste the least fraction of His force on works 
foreign to HisW OR K, however obviousit may seem to the onlooker that H isadvantage liesin commanding 
stones to become bread, or otherwise making things easy for H imself. 


T hese considerations being thoroughly understood we may return to the question of making the M agical 
Link. In the case above cited FRATER PERDURABO composed His talisman by invoking His H oly 
Guardian Angel according to the Sacred M agick of Abramelin the M age. T hat Angel wrote on the lamen the 
Word of the Aeon. The Book of the Law is this writing. To this lamen the M aster Therion gave life by 
devoting H isown life thereto. W e may then regard thistalisman, the Law, asthe most powerful that has been 
made in the world’s history, for previous talismans of the same type have been limited in their scope by 
conditions of race and country. Mohammed's talisman, Allah, was good only from Persia to the Pillars of 
Hercules. The Buddha's, Anatta, operated only in the South and East of Asia. T he new talisman, T helema, is 
master of the planet. 


But now observe how the question of the M agical Link arises! N o matter how mighty the truth of T helema, 
it cannot prevail unless it is applied to any by mankind. Aslong asthe Book of the Law wasin M anuscript, it 
could only affect the small group amongst whom it was circulated. It had to be put into action by the M agical 
Operation of publishing it. W hen this was done, it was done without proper perfection. Its commands as to 
how the work ought to be done were not wholly obeyed. T here were doubt and repugnance in FRATER 
PER DURABO’'s mind, and they hampered His work. He was half-hearted. Y et, even so then intrinsic 
power of the truth of the Law and the impact of the publication were sufficient to shake the world so that a 
critical war broke out, and the minds of men were moved in a mysterious manner. T he second blow was 
gtruck by the re- publication of the Book in September 1913, and thistime the might of thisM agick burst out 
and caused a catastrophe to civilization. At thishour, the MASTER THERION isconcealed, collecting his 
forces for a final blow. When The Book of the Law and its Comment is published, with the forces of His 
whole W ill in perfect obedience to the instructions which have up to now been misunderstood or neglected, 


the result will beincalculably effective. T he event will establish the kingdom of the C rowned and C onquering 
Child over the whole earth, and all men shall bow to the Law, which is “love under will”. 


T hisisan extreme case; but there isone law only to govern the small asthe great. T he same laws describe and 
measure the motionsof the ant and the stars. T heir light isno swifter than that of aspark. In every operation of 
M agick the link must be properly made. T he first requisite is the acquisition of adequate force of the kind 
required for the purpose. W emus have electricity of acertain potential in sufficient amount if we wish to heat 
food in a furnace. W e shall need a more intense current and a greater supply to light a city than to charge a 
telephone wire. No other kind of force will do. We cannot use the force of team directly to impel an 
aeroplane, or to get drunk. We must apply it in adequate strength in an appropriate manner. 


It is therefore absurd to invoke the spirit of Venus to procure us the love of an Empress, unless we take 
measures to transmit the influence of our work to the lady. W emay for example consecrate a letter expressing 
our Will; or, if we Know how, we may use some object connected with the person whose acts we are 
attempting to control, such asalock of hair or ahandkerchief once belonging to her, and so in subtile connection 
with her aura. But for material endsit is better to have material means. W e must not rely on fine gut in trolling 
for salmon. O ur will to kill atiger is poorly conveyed by a charge of small shot fired at arange of one hundred 
yards. O ur talisman mug, therefore, be an object suitable to the nature of our O peration, and we must have 
some such means of applying its force to such a way as will naturally compel the obedience of the portion of 
N ature which we are trying to change. If one will the death of asinner, it isnot sufficient to hate him, even if 
we grant that the vibrations of thought, when sufficiently powerful and pure, may modify the Astral light 
sufficiently to impressitsintention to acertain extent on such people ashappen to be sensitive. It ismuch surer 
to use one’s mind and muscle in service of that hate by devisng and making a dagger, and then applying the 
dagger to the heart of one’s enemy. O ne must give one’s hate a bodily form of the same order as that which 
one’s enemy hastaken for his manifestation. Y our spirit can only come into contact with his by means of this 
magical manufacture of phantoms; in the same way, one can only measure one’s mind (a certain part of it) 
against another man’s by expressing them in some such form as the game of chess. O ne cannot use chessmen 
against another man unless he agree to use them in the same sense as you do. T he board and men form the 
M agical Link by which you can prove your power to constrain him to yield. T he game is a device by which 
you force him to turn down his king in surrender, a muscular act made in obedience to your will, thought he 
may be twice your weight and strength. 


T hese general principlesshould enable the tudent to understand the nature of the work of making the M agical 
Link. It is impossible to give detailed instructions, because every case demands separate consideration. It is 
sometimes exceedingly difficult to devise proper measures. 


R emember that M agick includes all acts soever. Anything may serve asa M agical weapon. To impose one’s 
Will on a nation, for instance, one’s talisman may be a newspaper, one’s triangle a church, or one’s circle a 
Club. To win a woman, one’s pantacle may be a necklace; to discover a treasure, one’s wand may be a 
dramatist’s pen, or one’s incantation a popular song. 


M any ends, many means: it is only important to remember the essence of the operation, which isto will its 
success with sufficiently pure intensity, and to incarnate that will in a body suitable to express it, a body such 
that its impact on the bodily expression of the idea one willsto change isto cause it to do so. For instance, is 
it my will to become a famous physician? | banish all “hostile spirits’ such as laziness, alien interests, and 
confliction pleasures, from my “circle” the hospital; | consecrate my “weapons’ (my various abilities) to the 
study of medicine; | invoke the “Gods” (medical authorities) by studying and obeying their laws in their 
books. | embody the “Formulae” (the ways in which causes and effects influence disease) in a“R itual” (my 
personal style of constraining sicknessto conform with my will). | persist in these conjurations year after year, 


making the M agical gestures of healing the sick, until | compel the visible appearance of the Spirit of Time, 
and make him acknowledge me his master. | have used the appropriate kind of means, in adequate measure, 
and applied them in ways pertinent to my purpose by projecting my incorporeal idea of ambition in a course 
of action such asto induce in othersthe incorporeal idea of satisfying mine. | made my W ill manifest to sense; 
sense swayed the W ills of my fellowmen; mind wrought on mind through matter. 


| did not “sit for” amedical baronetcy by wishing | had it, or by an “act of faith”, or by praying to God “to 
move Pharaoh’s heart”, as our modern mental, or our mediaeval, mystic, miracle- mongers were and are 
muddlers and maudlin enough to advise us to do. 


A few general observations on the M agical Link may not be amiss, in default of details: one cannot make a 
M anual of H ow to Go Courting, with an O pen- Sesame to each particular Brigand’s C avern, any more than 
one can furnish abudding burglar with adirectory containing the combination of every existing safe. But one 
can point out the broad distinctions between women who yield, some to flattery, some to eloquence, some to 
appearance, some to rank, some to wealth, some to ardour, and some to authority. We cannot exhaust the 
combinations of Lover’s C hess, but we may enumerate the principal gambits: the Bouquet, the C hocolates, 
the Little Dinner, the Cheque-Book, the Poem, the Motor by Moonlight, the M arriage Certificate, the 
W hip, and the Feigned Flight. 


The M agical Link may be classified under three main heads; as it involves (1) one plane and one person, (2) 
one plane and two or more persons, (3) two planes. 


In class (1) the machinery of M agick — the instrument — already exists. T hus, | may wish to heal my own 
body, increase my own energy; develop my own mental powers, or inspire my own imagination. H ere the 
Exorcist and the Demon are already connected, conscious or subconsciously, by an excellent system of 
symbols. T he W ill is furnished by N ature with an apparatus adequately equipped to convey and execute its 
orders. 


It is only necessary to inflame the Will to the proper pitch and to issue its commands, they are instantly 
obeyed, unless — asin the case of organic disease — the apparatus is damaged beyond the art of N ature to 
repair. It may be necessary in such acase to assist the internal “spirits” by the “purification” of medicines, the 
“banishing” of diet, or some other extraneous means. 


But at least there is no need of any special device “ad hoc” to effect contact between the Circle and the 
Triangle. O perations of this class are therefore often successful, even when the M agician has little or no 
technical knowledge of M agick. Almost any duffer can “pull himself together”, devote himself to study, 
break off abad habit, or conquer acowardice. T hisclassof work, although the easiest, isyet the mos important; 
for it includesinitiation itself in its highest sense. It extendsto the A bsolute in every dimension; itinvolvesthe 
most intimate analysis, and the most comprehensive synthesis. In asense, it isthe sole type of M agick either 
necessary or proper to the Adept; for it includes both the attainment of the K nowledge and C onversation of 
the H oly Guardian Angel, and the Adventure of the Abyss. 


T hesecond classincludesall operationsby which the M agician strivesto impose hisW ill upon objects outside 
hisown control, but within that of such other wills as are symbolised by meansof asystem smilar to hisown. 
T hat is, they can be compelled naturally by cognate consciousness. 


For instance, one may wish to obtain the knowledge put forth in this book. N ot Knowing that such a book 
exists, one might yet induce some one who knowsof it to offer acopy. T husone’s operation would const in 
inflaming one’s W ill to possess the Knowledge to the point of devoting one’slife to it, in expressing that will 


by seeking out people who seem likely to know what is needed, and in imposing it on them by exhibiting 
such enthusiastic earnestness that they will tell the enquirer that this book will meet his needs. 


Does this sound too smple? C an this obvious common-sense course be really that marvellous M agick that 
frightens folk so? Y es, even this triviality is one instance of how M agick works. 


But the above practical programme may be a fiasco. O ne might then resort to M agick in the conventional 
sense of the word, by constructing and charging aPantacle appropriate to the object; this Pantacle should then 
cause a train in the Astral Light such that the vibrations would compel some alien consciousness to restore 
equilibrium by bringing the book. 


Suppose a severer and more serious aim; suppose that | wish to win a woman who dislikes me and loves 
somebody else. In thiscase, not only her W ill, but her lover’s must be overcome by my own. | haveno direct 
control of either. But my Will isin touch with the woman’s by means of our minds; | have only to make my 
mind the master of hers by the existing means of communication; her mind will then present its recantation to 
her W ill, her W ill repeal its decision, and her body submit to mine as the seal of her surrender. 


H ere the M agical Link exists; only it iscomplex instead of simple asin the First C lass. 


There is opportunity for all kinds of error in the trangnission of the Will; misunderstanding may mar the 
matter; a mood may make mischief; external events may interfere; the lover may match me in M agick; the 
O peration itself may offend nature in many ways; for instance, if there is a subconscious incompatibility 
between myself and the woman, | deceive myself into thinking that | desire her. Such a flaw is enough to 
bring the whole operation to naught, just as no effort of Will can make oil mix with water. 


| may work “naturally” by wooing, of course. But, magically, | may attack her astrally so that her aura 
becomes uneasy, responding no longer to her lover. U nless they diagnose the cause, a quarrel may result, and 
the woman’s bewildered and hungry Body of Light may turn in its distress to that of the M agician who has 
mastered it. 


T ake a third case of this class 2. | wish to recover my watch, matched from me in acrowd. 


H ere | have no direct means of control over the muscles that could bring back my watch, or over the mind 
that moves these muscles. | am not even able to inform that mind of my Will, for! do not know where it is. 
But! know it to beamind fundamentally like my own, and | try to make aM agical Link with it by advertising 
my lossin the hope of reaching it, being careful to calm it by promising it immunity, and to appeal to itsown 
known motive by offering a reward. | also attempt to use the opposite formula; to reach it by sending my 
“familiar spirits’, the police, to hunt it, and compel its obedience by threats. 


T he eremonial method would be to transfer to the watch — linked naturally to me by possession and use— a 
thought calculated to terrify the thief, and induce him to get rid of it at once. O bserving dairsentiently this effect, 
Suggest relief and reward as the result of restoring it. 


Again, asorcerer might happen to possessan object belonging magically to arich man, such asacompromising 
letter, which isreally asmuch part of him ashisliver; he may then master the will of that man by intimidating 
his mind. His power to publish the letter is as effective as if he could injure the man’s body directly. 


T hese “natural” cases may be transposed into subtler terms; for instance, one might master another man, even 
a stranger, by sheer concentration of will, ceremonially or otherwise wrought up to the requisite potential. 
But in one way or another that will must be made to impinge on the man; by the normal means of contact if 


possible, if not, by attacking some sensitive spot in his subconscious sensorium. But the heaviest rod will not 
land the smallest fish unless there be a line of some sort fixed firmly to both. 


TheT hird Classis characterized by the absence of any existing link between the W ill of the M agician and that 
controlling the object to be affected. (The Second Class may approximate to the Third when there is no 
possibility of aoproaching the second mind by normal means, as sometimes happens). 


T his class of operations demands not only immense knowledge of the technique of M agick combined with 
tremendous vigour and kill, but a degree of M ystical attainment which is exceedingly rare, and when found 
is usually marked by an absolute apathy on the subject of any attempt to achieve any M agick at all. Suppose 
that | wish to produce a thunderstorm. T his event is beyond my control or that of any other man; it is as 
uselessto work on their mindsas my own. N ature isindependent of, and indifferent to, man’saffairs. A storm 
is caused by atmospheric conditionson ascale so enormous that the united efforts of all usEarth- vermin could 
scarcely disperse one cloud, even if we could get at it. H ow then can any M agician, he who isabove all things 
aknower of N ature, beso absurd asto attempt to throw the H ammer of T hor? U nlesshe be smply insane, he 
must be initiated in aT ruth which transcendsthe apparent facts. H e must be aware that all natureisacontinuum, 
go that hismind and body are consubstantial with the storm, are equally expressions of O ne Existence, all alike 
of the self- same order of artifices whereby the A bsolute appreciates itself. He must also have assimilated the 
fact that the Q uantity isjust as much a form as Q uality; that as all things are modes of O ne Substance, so their 
measures are modes of their relation. N ot only are gold and lead mere letters, meaningless in themselves yet 
appointed to spell the O ne N ame; but the difference between the bulk of amountain and that of amouseisno 
more than one method of differentiating them, just asthe letter “m” isnot bigger than the letter “i” in any real 
sense of the word. 


Professor R utherford thinks it not theoretically impracticable to construc a detonator which could destroy every atom 
of matter by releasing the energies of one, so that the vibrations would exate the rest to disintegrate explosively. 


Our M agician, with thisin hismind, will most probably leave thunderstorms to stew in their own juice; but, 
should he decide (after all) to enliven the afternoon, he will work in the manner following. 


First, what are the elements necessary for his torms? H e must have certain stores of electrical force, and the 
right kind of clouds to contain it. 


He must see that the force does not leak away to earth quietly and slyly. 
He must arrange a stress so severe aS to become at last so intolerable that it will disrupt explosively. 


N ow he, aSaman, cannot pray to God to cause them, for the Gods are but names for the forces of N ature 
themselves. 


But, “asa M ystic”, he knows that all things are phantoms of One Thing, and that they may be withdrawn 
therein to reissue in other attire. He knows that all things are in himself, and that he isAll-O ne with the All. 
T here is therefore no theoretical difficulty about converting the illusion of a clear sky into that of a tempest. 
On the other hand, he is aware, “asa M agician”, that illusions are governed by the laws of their nature. He 
knows that twice two is four, although both “two” and “four” are merely properties pertaining to One. He 
can only use the M ystical identity of all thingsin astrictly scientific sense. It istrue that his experience of clear 
sies and storms proves that his nature contains elements cognate with both; for it not, they could not affect 
him. H eisthe Microcosm of hisown M acrocosm, whether or no either one or the other extend beyond his 
knowledge of them. H emus therefore arouse in himself those ideas which are clansmen of the T hunderstorm, 
collect all available objects of the same nature for talismans, and proceed to excite all these to the utmost by a 


M agical ceremony; that is, by insisting on their godhead, so that they flame within and without him, hisideas 
vitalising the talismans. There is thus a vivid vibration of high potential in a certain group of sympathetic 
substances and forces, and thissoreadsasdo the wavesfrom astone thrown into alake, widening and weakening; 
till the disturbance is compensated. Just as a handful of fanatics, insane with one over- emphasised truth, may 
infect a whole country for a time by inflaming that thought in their neighbours, so the M agician creates a 
commotion by disturbing the balance of power. He transmits his particular vibration as aradio operator does 
with his ray; rate- relation determines exclusive selection. 


In practice, the M agician must “evoke the spirits of the torm” by identifying himself with the ideas of which 
atmospheric phenomena are the expressions as hishumanity isof him; thus achieved, he must impose his W ill 
upon them by virtue of the superiority of hisintelligence and the integration of his purpose to their undirected 
impulses and uncomprehending interplay. 


All such M agick demands the utmost precision in practice. It istrue that the best rituals give usinstructionsin 
selecting our vehicles of force. In 777 we find “correspondences” of many classes of being with the various 
types of operation, so that we know what weapons, jewels, figures, drugs, perfumes, names, etc. to employ in 
any particular work. But it has always been assumed that the invoked force is intelligent and competent, that 
it will direct itself as desired without further ado, by this method of sympathetic vibrations. 


The necessity of timing the force has been ignored; and so most operations, even when well performed as far 
as invocation goes, are as harmless as igniting loose gunpowder. 


But, even allowing that W ill is sufficient to determine the direction, and prevent the dispersion of the force, 
we can hardly be sure that it will act on its object, unless that object be properly prepared to receive it. The 
Link must be perfectly made. T he object must possess in itself a sufficiency of stuff sympathetic to our work. 
W e cannot make love to a brick, or set an oak to run errands. 


W e see, then, that we can never affect anything outside ourselves save only asit isalso within us. W hatever | 
do to another, | do also to myself. If | kill aman, | destroy my own life at the same time. T hat isthe magical 
meaning of the so-called “Golden R ule”, which should not be in the imperative but in the indicative mood. 
Every vibration awakens all others of its particular pitch. 


T here isthussome justification for the assumption of previouswriterson M agick that the Link isimplicit, and 
needs no special attention. Y et, in practice, there isnothing more certain than that one ought to confirm one’s 
will by all possible acts on all possible planes. The ceremony must not be confined to the formally magical 
rites. We must neglect no means to our end, neither despising our common sense, nor doubting our secret 
wisdom. 


W hen Frater |. A. wasin danger of death in 1899 ev. Frater V.N.andFRATER PERDURABO did indeed 
invoke the spirit Buer to visible manifestation that the might heal their brother; but also one of them furnished 
the money to send him to aclimate less cruel than England’s. H eisalive to day 


P.S. H edied some months after this passage was written: but he had been enabled to live and work for nearly a 
quarter of a century longer than he would otherwise have done. 


; who cares whether spirits or shekels wrought that which these M agicians willed? 


Let the M agical Link be made strong! It is “love under will”; it affirms the identity of the Equation of the 
work; it makes success N ecessity. 


CHAPTER XVI 
(Part I) 
OF THE OATH 


The third operation in any magical ceremony is the oath or proclamation. The M agician, armed and ready, 
gands in the centre of the Circle, and strikes once upon the bell asif to call the attention of the U niverse. He 
then declares“ who heis’, reciting hismagical history by the proclamation of the gradeswhich he hasattained, 
giving the Sgns and words of those grades. 


T his is not merely to prove himself a person in authority. It is to trace the chain of causes that have let to the present 
position, so that the operation is seen as karma. 


H e then states the purpose of the ceremony, and proves that it is necessary to perform it and to succeed in its 
performance. H e then takes an oath before the Lord of the U niverse (not before the particular Lord whom he 
isinvoking) asif to call Him to witnessto the act. H e swearssolemnly that he will perform it — that nothing 
Shall prevent him from performing it — that he will not leave the operation until it issuccessfully performed 
— and once again he strikes upon the bell. 


Y et, having demonstrated himself in that postion at once infinitely lofty and infinitely unimportant, the 
instrument of destiny, he balances this by the “Confession”, in which there is again an infinite exaltation 
harmonised with an infinite humility. He admits himself to be a weak human being humbly aspiring to 
something higher; a creature of circumstance utterly dependent — even for the breath of life— upon aseries 
of fortunate accidents. H e makes this confession prostrate 


C ompare the remarks in a previous chapter. But this is a particular case. W e leave its justification as a problem. 


before the altar in agony and bloody sweat. H e trembles at the thought of the operation which he has dared to 
undertake, saying, “Father, if it be T hy Will, let thiscup passfrom me! N evertheless not my will but T hine be 
done!” 


O f course this is for the beginner. As soon as it is assimilated as true, he will say: “M y will which is thine be 
done!” A nd ultimately no more distinguish “mine” from “ thine’. A sympathetic change of gesture will accompany 
the mental change. 


The dread answer comes that It M ust Be, and this answer so fortifies him with holy zeal that it will seem to 
him asif he were raised by divine handsfrom that prostrate position; with a thrill of holy exaltation he renews 
joyfully the O ath, feeling himself once again no longer the man but the M agician, yet not merely the M agician, 
but the chosen and appointed person to accomplish a task which, however apparently unimportant, is yet an 
integral part of universal destiny, so that if it were not accomplished the Kingdom of H eaven would be burst 
in pieces. 


He is now ready to commence the invocations. He consequently pauses to cast a last glance around the 
Temple to assure himself of the perfect readiness of all things necessary, and to light the incense. 


The O ath is the foundation of all Work in M agick, asit is an affirmation of the Will. An Oath binds the 
M agician for ever. In Part Il of Book 4 something has already been said on this subject; but its importance 
deserves some further elaboration. T hus, should one, loving awoman, make a Spell to compel her embraces, 


and tiring of her alittle later, evoke Z azel to kill her; he will find that the implications of his former O ath 
conflict with those proper to invoke the U nity of the Godhead of Saturn. Z azel will refuse to obey him in the 
case of the woman whom he has sworn that he loves. T o thissome may object that, since all acts are magical, 
every man who lovesawoman implicitly takes an O ath of love, and therefore would never be able to murder 
her later, aswe find to be the not uncommon case. T he explanation is as follows. It isperfectly true that when 
Bill Sykes desires to possess N ancy, he doesin fact evoke a spirit of the nature of V enus, constraining him by 
hisO ath of Love (and by his magical power asaman) to bring him the girl. So also, when he wantsto kill her, 
he evokes aM artial or Saturnian spirit, with an O ath of hate. But these are not pure planetary spirits, moving 
in well- defined spheres by rigidly righteouslaws. T hey are grossconcretions of confused impulses, “incapable 
of understanding the nature of an oath”. T hey are also such that the idea of murder isnowise offensive to the 
Spirit of Love. 


It is indeed the criterion of spiritual “caste” that conflicting elements should not coexist in the same 
consciousness. T he psalm-singing Puritan who persecutes publicans, and secretly soaks himself in fire- water; 
the bewhiskered philanthropist in broadcloth who swindles his customers and sweats his employees: these 
men must not be regarded as single- minded scoundrels, whose use of religion and respectability to cloke their 
villainies is a deliberate disguise dictated by their criminal cunning. Far from it, they are only too Sincere in 
their “virtues”; their terror of death and of supernatural vengeance is genuine; it proceeds from a section of 
themselves which isin irreconcilable conflict with their rascality. N either side can conciliate, suppress, or 
ignore the other; yet each isso craven asto endure its enemy’s presence. Such men are therefore without pure 
principles, they excuse themselves for every dirty trick that turns to their apparent advantage. 


The first step of the Aspirant toward the Gate of Initiation tells him that purity — unity of purpose — is 
essential above all else. “Do what thou W ilt” strikeson him, a ray of fierce white flame consuming all that is 
not utterly God. Very soon he is aware that he cannot consciously contradict himself. H e develops a subtle 
sense which warnshim that two trainsof thought which he had never conceived asconnected are incompatible. 
Y et deeper drives “Do what thou wilt”; subconscious oppostions are evoked to visible appearance. T he 
secret sanctuaries of the soul are cleansed. “Do W hat thou Wilt” purges his every part. He hasbecome O ne, 
one only. HisW ill isconsequently released from the interference of internal oppostion, and he isaM aster of 
Magick. But for that very reason he is now utterly impotent to achieve anything that is not in absolute 
accordance with his O riginal O ath, with his T rue Will, by virtue whereof he incarnated as aman. W ith Bill 
Sykeslove and murder are not mutually exclusive, asthey are with King Arthur. T he higher the type of man, 
the more sensitive he becomes, so that the noblest love divines intuitively when a careless word or gesture 
may wound, and, vigilant, shuns them as being of the family of murder. In M agick, likewise, the Adept who 
is sworn to attain to the Knowledge and Conversation of his H oly Guardian Angel may in his grosser days 
have been expert aS aH ealer, to find that he isnow incapable of any such work. He will probably be puzzled, 
and wonder whether he has log all his power. Y et the cause may be no more than that the W isdom of his 
Angel depreciates the interference of ignorant kindliness with diseases which may have been sent to the 
sufferer for a purpose profoundly important to his welfare. 


In the case of THE MASTER THERION, he had originally the capacity for all classes of O rgia. In the 
beginning, He cured the sick, bewitched the obstinate, allured the seductive, routed the aggressive, made 
himself invisible, and generally behaved like a Y oung-M an-A bout-town on every possble plane. He would 
afflict one vampire with a Sending of C ats, and appoint another his private Enchantress, neither aware of any 
moral oxymoron, nor hampered by the implicit incongruity of his oaths. 


But asH e advanced in Adeptship, thiscoltisnness found its mouth bitted; assoon asH e took seriousO athsand 
was admitted to the O rder which we name not, those O aths prevented him using H is powers as playthings. 


T rifling operations, such asH eonce could do with aturn of the wrist, became impossible to the most persistent 
endeavour. It was many years before He understood the cause of this. But little by little He became so 
absorbed in the W ork of H istrue W ill that it no longer occurred to H im to indulge in capricious amusements. 


Y et even at thishour, though H e be verily aM agusof A.’. A.’., though His W ord be the W ord of the Aeon, 
though He be the Beast 666, the Lord of the Scarlet Woman “in whom isall power given”, there are still 
certain O rgia beyond Him to perform, because to do so would be to affirm what He hath denied in those 
Oaths by whose virtue H eisT hat H eis. T hisisthe case, even when the spirit of such O rgiaisfully consonant 
with His Will. The literal sense of His original O ath insists that it shall be respected. 


T he case offers two instances of this principle. FRATER PERDURABO specifically swore that he would 
renounce H is personal possessions to the last penny; also that H e would allow no human affection to hinder 
Him. These terms were accepted; He was granted infinitely more than He had imagined possible to an 
incarnated M an. On the other hand, the price offered by Him wasexacted asstrictly asif it had been stipulated 
by Shylock. Every treasure that he had on earth was taken away, and that, usually, in so brutal or cruel a 
manner asto make the loss itself the least part of the pang. Every human affection that H e had in H isheart — 
and that heart aches for Love as few hearts can ever conceive — wastorn out and trampled with such infernal 
ingenuity in intensifying torture that His endurance is beyond belief. Inexplicable are the atrocities which 
accompanied every step in H isInitiation! Death dragged away H is children with slow savagery; the women 
He loved drank themselves into delirium and dementia before H is eyes, or repaid H is passionate devotion 
with toad-cold treachery at the moment when long years of loyalty had tempted Him to trust them. His 
friend, that bore the bag, stole that which was put therein, and betrayed his M aster as thoroughly as he was 
able. At the first distant rumour that the Pharisees were out, his disciples “all forsook Him and fled”. His 
mother nailed H im with her own handsto the cross, and reviled Him as nine years H e hung thereupon. 


N ow, having endured to the end, being M aster of M agick, He is mighty to W ork H istrue W ill; which W ill 
is, to establish on Earth H is W ord, the Law of T helema. H ehath none other W ill than this; so all that H e doth 
isunto thisend. All H isO rgia bear fruit; what wasthe work of amonth when H ewasafull M ajor Adept isto 
day wrought in afew minutes by the W ords of Will, uttered with the right vibrations into the prepared Ear. 


But neither by the natural use of H is abilities, though they have made H im famous through the whole world, 
nor by the utmost might of hisM agick, isH e able to acquire material wealth beyond the minimum necessary 
to keep H im alive and at work. It isin vain that H e protests that not H e but the W ork isin need of money; He 
is barred by the strict letter of HisO ath to give all that H e hath for His magical Attainment. 


Y et more awful isthe doom that H e hath invoked upon H imself in renouncing H isright asaman to enjoy the 
Love of those whom H e loves with passion so selfless, so pure, and so intense in return for the power 0 to love 
M ankind that H e be chosen to utter the W ord of the Aeon for their sake, His reward universal abhorrence, 
bodily torment, mental despair, and moral paralysis. 


Y et He, who hath power over Death, with breath to call back health, with a touch to beckon life, He must 
watch H isown child waste away month by month, aware that H isArt may not anywise avail, who hath sold 
the sgnet ring of his personal profit to buy him a plain gold band for the felon finger of his bride, that worn 
widow, the W orld! 


CHAPTER XV 
| 
OF THE INVOCATION 


In the straightforward or “Protestant” system of M agick there is very little to add to what has already been 
said. The M agician addresses a direct petition to the Being invoked. But the secret of successin invocation has 
not hitherto been disclosed. It isan exceedingly simple one. It is practically of no importance whatever that 
the invocation hhould be “right”. T here are a thousand different ways of compassing the end proposed, so far 
as external things are concerned. T he whole secret may be summarised in these four words: “Enflame thyself 
in praying.” 


Thisis Q abalistically expressed in the old F ormula: D omine noster, audi tuo servo! kyrieC hriste! O C hriste! 


The mind must be exalted until it losesconsciousness of self. The M agician must be carried forward blindly by 
a force which, though in him and of him, is by no means that which he in his normal state of consciousness 
calls|. Just as the poet, the lover, the artist, is carried out of himself in a creative frenzy, so must it be for the 
M agician. 


It isimpossible to lay down rules for the obtaining of this special stimulus. To one the mystery of the whole 
ceremony may appeal; another may be moved by the strangeness of the words, even by the fact that the 
“barbarous names” are unintelligible to him. Some times in the course of a ceremony the true meaning of 
some barbarous name that has hitherto baffled his analysis may flash upon him, luminousand splendid, so that 
he is caught up unto orgasm. The smell of a particular incense may excite him effectively, or perhaps the 
physical ecstasy of the magick dance. 


Every M agician must compose his ceremony in such a manner as to produce a dramatic cilmax. At the 
moment when the excitement becomes ungovernable, when then the whole consciousbeing of the M agician 
undergoes a spiritual soasm, at that moment must he utter the supreme adjuration. 


One very effective method isto stop short, by asupreme effort of will, again and again, on the very brink of 
that soasm, until atime arrives when the idea of exercising that will fails to occur 


T his forgetfulness must be complete; it is fatal to try to “let oneself go” consdously. 


. Inhibition isno longer possible or even thinkable, and the whole being of the M agician, no minutest atom 
saying nay, isirresistibly flung forth. In blinding light, amid the roar of ten thousand thunders, the U nion of 
God and man is consummated. 


If the M agician is still seen standing in the Circle, quietly pursuing his invocations, it is that all the conscious 
part of him has become detached from the true ego which lies behind that normal conscioumess. But the 
circle is wholly filled with that divine essence; all else is but an accident and an illusion. 


T he subsequent invocations, the gradual development and materialization of the force, require no effort. It is 
one great mistake of the beginner to concentrate his force upon the actual stated purpose of the ceremony. 
T his mistake isthe most frequent cause of failuresin invocation. 


A corollary of this Theorem is that the M agician soon discards evocation almost altogether — only rare 
circumstances demand any action what ever on the material plane. The M agician devotes himself entirely to 


the invocation of agod; and as soon ashis balance approaches perfection he ceases to invoke any partial god; 
only that god vertically above him isin hispath. And so aman who perhapstook up M agick merely with the 
idea of acquiring Knowledge, love, or wealth, finds himself irrevocably committed to the performance of T he 
G reat W ork. 


It will now be apparent that there is no distinction between magick and meditation except of the most 
arbitrary and accidental kind. 


T here is the general metaphysical antithesis that M agick is theA rt of the W ill-to-L ive, M ystidsm of the W ill-to- 
Die but— “Truth @mes bubbling to my brim; Life and D eath are one to H im!” 


Beside these open methods thee are also anumber of mental methods of Invocation, of which we may give 
three. 


T he first method concerns the so-called astral body. T he M agician should practise the formation of this body 
as recommended in Liber O,, and learn to rise on the planes according to the instruction given in the same 
book, though limiting his “rising” to the particular symbol whose God he wishes to invoke. 


The second isto recite a mantra suitable to the God. 


The third isthe assumption of the form of the God — by transmuting the astral body into H isshape. T hislast 
method is really essential to all proper invocation, and cannot be too sedulously practised. 


There are many other devices to aid invocation, so many that it is impossible to enumerate them; and the 
M agician will be wise to busy himself in inventing new ones. 


W e will give one example. 


Suppose the Supreme Invocation to consst of 20 to 30 barbarous names, let him imagine these names to 
occupy sections of a vertical column, each double the length of the preceding one; and let him imagine that 
hisconsciousness ascends the column with each name. T he mere multiplication will then produce a feeling of 
awe and bewilderment which isthe proper forerunner of exstasy. 


In the essay “Energized Enthusasn” in No. IX, Vol. | of the Equinox 


T he earliest and truest C hristians used what isin all essentials this method. See“ F ragments of a F aith F orgotten” 
by G.R.S.M ead, Esq. B. A., pp. 80-81. 


T hereis a real connexion between what the vulgar call blasphemy and what they call immorality, in the fac that 
theC hristian legend is an echo of a Phallicrite. T hereis also a true and positive connexion between the C reative 
force of the M aqocosm, and that of the M icocosm. F or this reason the latter must be made a pure and consecrated 
as the former. T he puzzle for most people is how to do this. T he study of N ature is the K ey to that G ate 


is given a concise account of one of the classical methods of arousing K undalini. T his essay should be studied 
with care and determination. 


CHAPTER XVI 
(Part 11) 
OF THE CHARGE TO THE SPIRIT 
WITH SOME ACCOUNT OFTHE 


CONSTRAINTS AND CURSES OCCASIONALLY 
NECESSARY 


On the appearance of the spirit, or the manifestation of the force in the talisman which is being consecrated, it 
isnecessary to bind it by an O ath or Charge. A spirit should be made to lay itshand visibly on the weapon by 
whose might it has been evoked, and to “swear obedience and faith to H im that liveth and triumpheth, that 
regneth above him in His palaces as the Balance of R ighteoumess and Truth” by the names used in the 
evocation. 


It isthen only necessary to formulate the O ath or Charge in language harmoniouswith the previoudy announced 
purpose of the operation. 


T he precaution indicated isnot to let oneself snk into one’shumanity while the weapon is extended beyond 
the Circle. W ere the force to flow from it to you instead of from you to it, you would be infallibly blasted, or, 
at the least, become the slave of the spirit. 


Atno moment isit more important that the Divine Force should not only fill, but radiate from, the aura of the 
M agician. 


II 
Occasionally it may happen that the spirit is recalcitrant, and refuses to appear. 
Let the M agician consider the cause of such disobedience! 


It may be that the place or time iswrong. O ne cannot easily evoke water- spirits in the Sahara, or salamanders 
in the English Lake District. H ismael will not readily appear when Jupiter is below the horizon. 


It is not possible in this eementary treatise to explain the exact nature of the connexion between the rays of the 
actual planet called Jupiter and the Jupiterian elements which exist in various degrees in terrestrial objects. 


In order to counteract a natural deficiency of this sort, one would have to supply a sufficient quantity of the 
proper kind of material. O ne cannot make bricks without straw. 


W ith regard to invocationsof the Gods, such consderationsdo not apply. The Godsare beyond most material 
conditions. It is necessary to fill the “heart” and “mind” with the proper basis for manifestation. T he higher 
the nature of the God, the more true this is. The H oly Guardian Angel has always the necessary basis. H is 
manifestation depends solely on the readiness of the Aspirant, and all magical ceremonies used in that invocation 
are merely intended to prepare that Aspirant; notin any way to attract or influence Him. ItisH isconstant and 


eternal W ill 


Since this K nowledge and C onversation is not universal, it seems at first as if an omnipotent will were being 
baulked. But H is W ill and your will together make up that one will, because you and H eareone. T hat one will 
is therefore divided against itself, so long as your will fails to aspire steadfastly. 


A Iso, H is will cannot constrain yours. H eis so much onewith you that even your will to separateis H is will. He 
is So certain of you that He delights in your perturbation and coquetry no less than in your surrender. T hese 
relations are fully explained in Liber LXV. Seealso Liber Aleph C XI. 


to become one with the Aspirant, and the moment the conditions of the latter make it possible, T hat Bridal is 
consummated. 


T he obstinacy of a spirit (or the inertial of a talisman) usually impliesa defect in invocation. T he spirit cannot 
resist even for amoment the constraint of his Intelligence, when that Intelligence is working in accordance 
with the W ill of the Angel, Archangel and God abovehim. It istherefore better to repeat the | nvocationsthan 
to proceed at once to curses. 


The M agician should also consider 


O f course this should have been done in preparing the R itual. But he renews this consideration from the new 
standpoint attained by the invocation. 


whether the evocation be in truth a necessary part of the K arma of the U niverse, as he has stated in hisown 
O ath (See Cap. X VI, I). For if this be adelusion, success isimpossible. It will then be best to go back to the 
beginning, and recapitulate with greater intensity and power of analysis the O ath and the Invocations. And 
this may be done thrice. 


But if this be satisfactorily accomplished, and the spirit be yet disobedient, the implication isthat some hostile 
force isat work to hinder the operation. It will then become advisable to discover the nature of that force, and 
to attack and destroy it. This makes the ceremony more useful than ever to the M agician, who may thereby 
be led to unveil a black magical gang whose existence he had not hitherto suspected. 


H isneed to check the vampiring of alady in Parisby asorceressonce led FRATER PERDUR ABO to the 
discovery of avery powerful body of black magicians, which whom he wasobliged to war for nearly 10 years 
before their ruin was complete and irremediable as it now is. 


Such a discovery will not necessarily impede the ceremony. A general curse may be pronounced against the 
forceshindering the operation (for “ex hypothes” no divine force can be interfering) and having thustemporarily 
didodged them — for the power of the God invoked will suffice for this purpose — one may proceed with a 
certain asperity to conjure the spirit, for that he has done ill to bend before the conjurations of the Black 
Brothers. 


Indeed, some demons are of a nature such that they only understand curses, are not amenable to courteous 
command: — 


“adave 


W hom stripes may move, not kindness.” 


Finally, as a last resource, one may burn the Sigil of the Spirit in a black box with stinking substances, all 
having been properly prepared beforehand, and the magical links properly made, so that he is really tortured 
by the O peration. 


T he predse meaning of these phrases is at first sight obscure. T he spirit is merely a recaldtrant part of one’s own 
organism. T 0 evoke him is therefore to become consdous of some part of one’s own character; to command and 
constrain him is to being that part into subjection. T his is best understood by the analogy of teaching oneself some 
mental- physical accomplishment (e.g. billiards), by persistent and patient study and practice, which often involves 
considerable pain as well as trouble. 


Thisisarare event, however. O nly once in the whole of his magical career wasFR ATER PERDURABO 
driven to so harsh a measure. 


IV 


In this connexion, beware of too ready acompliance on the part of the spirit. If some Black Lodge has got 
wind of your operation, it may send the spirit, full of hypocritical submission, to destroy you. Such agpirit will 
probably pronounce the oath amiss, or in some way seek to avoid his obligations. 


It isa dangeroustrick, though, for the Black Lodge to play; for if the spirit come properly under your control, 
it will be forced to disclose the transaction, and the current will return to the Black Lodge with fulminating 
force. T he liars will bein the power of their own lie; their own Slaves will rise up and put them into bondage. 
The wicked fall into the pit that they themselves digged. 


And s0 peri all the King’s enemies! 


V 


Thechargeto the spirit isusually embodied, except in worksof pure evocation, which after all are comparatively 
rare, in some kind of talisman. In a certain sense, the talisman is the C harge expressed in hieroglyphics. Y et, 
every object soever isatalisman, for the definition of a talisman is: something upon which an act of will (that 
is, of M agick) hasbeen performed in order to fit it for a purpose. R epeated acts of will in respect of any object 
consecrate it without further ado. O ne knowswhat miraclescan be done with one’sfavourite mashie! O ne has 
used the mashie again and again, one’s love for it growing in proportion to one’s success with it, and that 
success again made more certain and complete by the effect of this “love under will”, which one bestows 
upon it by using it. 


Itis, of course, very important to keep such an abject away from the contact of the profane. It isinstinctive not 
to let another person us one’s fishing rod or one’s gun. It is not that they could do any harm in a material 
sense. It isthe feeling that one’s use of these things has consecrated them to one’s self. 


Of course, the outstanding example of all such talismans is the wife. A wife may be defined as an object 
specially prepared for taking the stamp of one’screative will. T hisisan example of avery complicated magical 
operation, extending over centuries. But, theoretically, it isjust an ordinary case of talismanic magick. It isfor 
this reason that so much trouble has been taken to prevent a wife having contact with the profane; or, at least, 
to try to prevent her. 


R eaders of the Bible will remember that Absalom publicly adopted D avid’swivesand concubineson the roof 
of the palace, in order to signify that he had succeeded in breaking his father’s magical power. 


N ow, there are a great many talismansin this world which are being left lying about in amost reprehensbly 
careless manner. Such are the objects of popular adoration, as ikons, and idols. But, it is actually true that a 
great deal of real magical Force islocked up in such things; consequently, by destroying these sacred symbols, 
you can overcome magically the people who adore them. 


Itisnot at all irrational to fight for one’s flag, provided that the flag isan object which really meanssomething 
to somebody. Similarly, with the most widely spread and most devotedly worshipped talisman of all, money, 
you can evidently break the magical will of aworshipper of money by taking hismoney away from him, or by 
destroying its value in some way or another. But, in the case of money, general experience tells us that there 
isvery little of it lying about loose. In thiscase, above all, people have recognised its talismanic virtue, that is 
to say, its power as an instrument of the will. 


But with many ikonsand images, it is easy to steal their virtue. T hiscan be done sometimes on a tremendous 
scale, as, for example, when all the images of Isis and Horus, or smilar mother-child combinations, were 
appropriated wholesale by the Christians. T he miracle is, however, of asomewhat dangerous type, asin this 
case, where enlightenment has come through the researches of archaeologists. It has been shown that the so- 
called imagesof M ary and Jesusare really nothing but imitationsof those of ISsand H orus. H onesty isthe bet 
policy in M agick asin other lines of life. 


CHAPTER XVII 
OF THE LICENSE TO DEPART 


After a ceremony has reached its climax, anti- climax must inevitably follow. But if the ceremony has been 
successful this anti- climax is merely formal. The M agician should rest permanently on the higher plain to 
which he has aspired. 


T he rock-dimber who relaxes on the face of the predpic falls to earth; but once he has reached a safe ledge he may 
sit down. 


T he whole force of the operation should be absorbed; but there is almost certain to be a residuum, since no 
operation is perfect: and (even if it were so) there would be anumber of things, sympathetic to the operation, 
attracted to the Circle. These must be duly dispersed, or they will degenerate and become evil. It is always 
easy to do this where invocations are concerned; the mere removal of the strain imposed by the will of the 
magician will restore things to their normal aspects, in accordance with the great law of inertia. In a badly- 
managed evocation, however, this does not always obtain; the spirit may refuse to be controlled, and may 
refuse to depart — even after having sworn obedience. In such acase extreme danger may arise. 


In the ordinary way, the M agician dismisses the spirit with these words: “And now | say unto thee, depart in 
peace unto thine habitations and abodes— and may the blessing of the Highest be upon thee in the name of 
(here mention the divine name suitable to the operation, or aN ame appropriate to redeem that spirit); and let 
there be peace between thee and me; and be thou very ready to come, whensoever thou are invoked and 
called!” 


It is usual to add “either by a word, or by a will, or by this mighty C onjuration of M agic A rt.” 


Should he fail to disappear immediately, it isa sign that there is something very wrong. T heM agician should 
immediately reconsecrate the Circle with the utmost care. He should then repeat the dismissal; and if this 
doesnot suffice, he should then perform the banishing ritual suitable to the nature of the spirit and, if necessary, 
add conjurations to the same effect. In these circumstances, or if anything else suspicious should occur, he 
Should not be content with the apparent disappearance of the spirit, who might easily make himself invisible 
and lie in ambush to do the M agician a mischief when he stepped out of the Circle — or even months 
afterw ards. 


Any symbol which has once definitely entered your environment with your own consent is extremely 
dangerous, unless under absolute control. A man’s friends are more capable of working him harm than are 
grangers, and his greatest danger liesin his own habits. 


Of courseit isthe very condition of progress to build up ideasinto the subconscious. T he necessity of selection 
should therefore be obvious. 


True, there comes atime when all elements soever must be thus assimilated. Samadhi is, by definition, that 
very process. But, from the point of view of the young magician, there is aright way — strait and difficult — 
of performing all this. One cannot too frequently repeat that what is lawful and proper to one Path isalien to 
another. 


Immediately after the License to Depart, and the general closing up of the work, it is necessary that the 
M agician should sit down and write up his magical record. However much he may have been tired 


H e ought to be refreshed, more than after a full night’s deep sleep. T his forms one test of his skill. 


by the ceremony, he ought to force himself to do this until it becomesa habit. Verily, it is better to fail in the 
magical ceremony than to fail in writing down an accurate record of it. O ne need not doubt the propriety of 
this remark. Even if one is eaten alive by M alkah be-T arshishim ve-R uachoth ha Schehalim, it does not 
matter very much, for it is over so very quickly. But the record of the transactions is otherwise important. 
N obody cares about D uncan having been murdered by M acbeth. It isonly one of anumber of Smilar murders. 
But Shakespeare's account of the incident isa unique treasure of mankind. And, apart from the question of the 
value to others, there is that of the value to the magician himself. T he record of the magician is his best asset. 


It isas foolisn to do M agick without method, asif it were anything else. To do M agick without keeping a 
record is like trying to run a business without book-keeping. There are a great many people who quite 
misunderstand the nature of M agick. T hey have an idea that it issomething vague and unreal, instead of being, 
asitis, adirect means of coming into contact with reality. It isthese people who pay themselves with phrases, 
who are always using long words with no definite connotation, who plaster themselves with pompous titles 
and decorations which mean nothing whatever. W ith such people we have nothing to do. But to those who 
geek reality the K ey of M agick is offered, and they are hereby warned that the key to the treasure- house isno 
good without the combination; and the combination is the magical record. 


From one point of view, magical progress actually consists in deciphering one’s own record. 


Asoneisa Star in the Body of N uith, every successive incarnation is a V all, and the aquisition of the M agial 
M emory a gradual U nveiling of that Star, of that G od. 


For this reason it isthe most important thing to do, on strictly magical grounds. But apart from this, it is 
absolutely essential that the record should be clear, full and concise, because it is only by such a record that 
your teacher can judge how it is best to help you. Y our magical teacher has something else to do besides 
running around after you all the time, and the most important of all hisfunctionsisthat of auditor. N ow, if you 
call in an auditor to investigate a business, and when he asks for the books you tell him that you have not 
thought it worth while to keep any, you need not be surprised if he thinks you every kind of an ass. 


It is — at least, it was — perfectly incredible to THE MASTER THERION that people who exhibit 
ordinary common sense in the other affairs of life snould lose it completely when they tackle M agick. It goes 
far to justify the belief of the semi- educated that M agick is rather a crazy affair after all. However, there are 
none of these half- baked lunatics connected with the A.’. A.’., because the necessity for hard work, for passing 
examinations at stated intervals, and for keeping an intelligible account of what they are doing, frightens away 
the unintelligent, idle and hysterical. 


There are numerous models of magical and mystical records to be found in the various numbers of the 
“Equinox”, and the student will have no difficulty in acquiring the necessary technique, if he be diligent in 
practice. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
OF CLAIRVOYANCE AND THE BODY OF LIGHT 
ITS POWER AND ITS DEVELOPMENT 


ALSO CONCERNING DIVINATION 
I 


W ithin the human body is another body of approximately the same size and shape; 
i. aS a general rule. It can be altered very greatly in these respects. 


but made of a subtler and less illusory material. It isof course not “real”; but then no more is the other body! 
Before treating of clairvoyance one must discuss briefly this question of reality, for misapprehension on the 
subject has given rise to endless trouble. 


T here is the tory of the American in the train who saw another American carrying a basket of unusual shape. 
H iscuriosity mastered him, and he leant across and said: “Say, stranger, what you got in that bag?” T he other, 
lantern- jawed and taciturn, replied: “mongoose”. T he first man was rather baffled, as he had never heard of a 
mongoose. After a pause he pursued, at the risk of a rebuff: “But say, what isa M ongoose?” “M ongoose eats 
gakes’, replied the other. This was another poser, but he pursued: “W hat in hell do you want aM ongoose 
for?” “W ell, you see”, said the second man (in aconfidential whisper) “my brother sees makes”. T he first man 
was more puzzled than ever; but after along think, he continued rather pathetically: “But say, them ain’t real 
gakes’. “Sure”, said the man with the basket, “but thisM ongoose ain't real either”. 


Thisis a perfect parable of M agick. T here is no such thing as truth in the perceptible universe; every idea 
when analysed is found to contain a contradiction. It is quite useless (except as a temporary expedient) to set 
up one class of ideas against another as being “more real”. T he advance of man towards God is not necessarily 
an advance towards truth. All philosophical systems have crumbled. But each class of ideas possesses true 
relations within itself. It is possible, with Berkeley, 


T he real Berkeley did nothing of the sort: the reference here is to an imaginary animal invented by Dr. Johnson 
out of sturdy British ignorane. 


to deny the existence of water and of wood; but, for all that, wood floats on water. T he M agician becomes 
identical with the immortal O siris, yet the M agician dies. In this dilemma the facts must be restated. O ne 
Should preferably say that the M agician becomes conscious of that part of himself which he calls the immortal 
Osiris; and that Part does not “die”. 


N ow this interior body of the M agician, of which we spoke at the beginning of this chapter, does exist, and 
can exert certain powers which hisnatural body cannot do. It can, for example, passthrough “matter”, and it 
can move freely in every direction through space. But this is because “matter”, in the sense in which we 
commonly use the word, ison another plane 


W edo not call electrical resistance, or economic laws, unreal, on the ground that they are not directly perceived by 
the senses. O ur magical doctrine is universally accepted by sceptics — only they wish to make M agick itself an 
ex ception! 


N ow thisfine body perceivesa universe which we do not ordinarily perceive. It doesnot necessarily perceive 
the universe which we do normally perceive, so although in this body | can passthrough the roof, it doesnot 
follow that! shall be able to tell what the weather is like. | might do so, or | might not: but if | could not, it 
would not prove that | was deceiving myself in supposing that | had passed through the roof. T his body, 
which is called by various authors the Astral double, body of Light, body of fire, body of desire, fine body, 
gscin- laecaand numberless other names is naturally fitted to perceive objects of itsown class... in particular, the 
phantoms of the astral plane. 


T here issome sort of vague and indeterminate relation between the Astralsand the M aterials and it ispossble, 
with great experience, to deduce facts about material things from the astral aspect which they present to the 
eyes of the Body of Light. 


T hisis because there is a certain necessary correspondence between planes; asin the case of an A nglo-Indian’s liver 
and this temper. T he rdation appears “ vague and indeterminate” only in so far as one happens to be ignorant of 
the laws which state the ase. T he situation is analogous to that of the chemist before the discovery of the law of 
“Combining W eights”, etc 


T his astral plane isso varied and so changeable that several clairvoyants looking at the same thing might give 
totally different accounts of what they saw; yet they might each make correct deductions. In looking ataman 
the first clairvoyant might say: “The lines of force are all drooping”; the second: “It seems all dirty and 
spotty”; athird; “T heAuralooksvery ragged.” Y et all might agree in deducing that the man wasin ill- health. 
In any case all such deductions are rather unreliable. O ne must be a highly skilled man before one can trust 
one’s vision. A great many people think that they are extremely good at the business, when in fact they have 
only made some occasional shrewd guesses (which they naturally remember) in the course of hundreds of 
forgotten failures. 


T he only way to test clairvoyance isto keep acareful record of every experiment made. For example, FR AT ER 
O.M. once gave aclairvoyant a waistcoat to psychometrize. H e made 56 statements about the owner of the 
waistcoat; of these 4 were notably right; 17, though correct, were of that class of tatement which is true of 
almost everybody. T he remainder were wrong. It wasconcluded from thisthat he showed no evidence of any 
goecial power. In fact, hisbodily eyes, — if he could discern T ailoring — would have served him better, for he 
thought the owner of the vest was a corn-chandler, instead of an earl, as he is. 


T heM agician can hardly take too much trouble to develop thispower in himself. It isextremely useful to him 
in guarding himself against attack; in obtaining warnings, in judging character, and especially in watching the 
process of his C eremonies. 


T here are agreat many waysof acquiring the power. Gaze into acrystal, or into apool of ink in the palm of the 
hand, or into a mirror, or into a teacup. Just as with a microscope the expert operator keeps both eyes open, 
though seeing only through the one at the eye- piece of the instrument, so the natural eyes, ceasing to give any 
message to the brain, the attention is withdrawn from them, and the man begins to see through the Astral 
eyes. 


T hese methods appear to The MASTER THERION to be unsatisfactory. Very often they do not work at 
all. It is difficult to teach a person to use these methods, and, worst of all, they are purely passive! Y ou can see 
only what is shewn you, and you are probably shewn things perfectly pointless and irrelevant. 


The proper method isasfollows: — Develop the body of Light until it isjust asreal to you asyour other body, 
teach it to travel to any desired symbol, and enable it to perform all necessary R ites and Invocations. In short, 


educate it. U Itimately, the relation of that body with your own must be exceedingly intimate; but before this 
harmonizing takesplace, you should begin by acareful differentiation. T he first thing to do, therefore, isto get 
the body outside your own. T 0 avoid muddling the two, you begin by imagining ashape resembling yourself 
ganding in front of you. Do not say: “Oh, it’sonly imagination!” T he time to test that islater on, when you 
have secured afairly clear mental image of such abody. T ry to imagine how your own body would look if you 
were standing in its place; try to transfer your consciousnessto the Body of Light. Y our own body hasits eyes 
shut. U se the eyes of the Body of Light to describe the objects in the room behind you. Don't say. “It’s only 
an effort of subconscious memory” ... the time to test that is later on. 


Assoon as you feel more or less at home in the fine body, let it rise in the air. Keep on feeling the sense of 
rising; keep on looking about you as you rise until you see landscapes or beings of the astral plane. Such have 
a quality all their own. T hey are not like material things — they are not like mental pictures— they seem to 
lie between the two. 


After some practice has made you adept, so that in the course of any hour’sjourney you can reckon on having 
a fairly eventful time, turn your attention to reaching a definite place on the astral plane; invoke M ercury, for 
example, and examine carefully your record of the resulting vison — discover whether the symbols which 
you have seen correspond with the conventional symbols of M ercury. 


T his testing of the spirits isthe most important branch of the whole tree of M agick. W ithout it, one islost in 
the jungle of delusion. Every spirit, up to God himself, isready to deceive you if possible, to make himself out 
more important than he is, in short to lay in wait for your soul in 333 separate ways. R emember that after all 
the highest of all the Godsis only the M agus, 


See Liber 418, 3rd A ethyr. 

M ayan, the greatest of all the devils. 

Y ou may also try “rising on the planes’. 
See Infra and A ppendix. 


W ith alittle practice, especially if you have agood Guru, you ought to be able to dip in and out of your astral 
body as easily as you dip in and out of a dressing- gown. It will then no longer be so necessary for your astral 
body to be sent far off; without moving an inch you will be able to “turn on” itseyesand ears— assimply as 
the man with the microscope (mentioned above) can transfer his complete attention from one eye to the 
other. 


N ow, however unsuccessful your getting out the body may apparently have been, it is most necessary to use 
every effort to bring it properly back. M ake the Body of Light coincide in space with the physical body, 
assume the God-Form, and vibrate the name of H arpocrates with the utmost energy; then recover unity of 
consciousness. If you fail to do this properly you may find yourself in serioustrouble. Y our Body of Light may 
wander away uncontrolled, and be attacked and obsessed. Y ou will become aware of thisthrough the occurrence 
of headache, bad dreams, or even more serioussignssuch ashysteria, fainting fits, possibly madnessor paralysis. 
Even the worst of these attacks will probably wear off, but it may leave you permanently damaged to agreater 
or less extent. 


A great majority of “spiritualists’, “occultists”, “T oshosophists”, are pitiable examplesof repeated lossesfrom 
this cause. 


T he emotional type of religionist also suffersin this way. Devotion projectsthe fine body, which is seized and 
vampirized by the demon masquerading as “Christ” or “M ary”, or whoever may be the object of worship. 
Complete absence of all power to concentrate thought, to follow an argument, to formulate a W ill, to hold 
fast to an opinion or acourse of action, or even to keep asolemn oath, mark indelibly those who havethuslost 
parts of their souls. T hey wander from one new cult to another even crazier. O ccasionally such persons drift 
for amoment into the surrounding of The MASTER THERION, and are hot out by the smple process of 
making them try to do ahalf-hour’s honest work of any kind. 


In projecting the A¢tral, it isa valuable additional safeguard to perform the whole operation in a properly 
consecrated circle. 


Proceed with great caution, then, but proceed. In time your Body of Light will be as strong against spirits as 
your other body against the winds of H eaven. All depends upon the development of that Body of Light. It 
must be furnished with an organism as ramified and balanced as its shadowy brother, the material body. 


To recapitulate once more, then, the first task isto develop your own Body of light within your own circle 
without reference to any other inhabitants of the world to which it belongs. 


T hat which you have accomplished with the subject you may now proceed to do with the object. Y ou will 
learn to see the astral appearance of material things; and although this does not properly belong to pure 
clairvoyance, one may here again mention that you should endeavour to the utmost to develop and fortify this 
Body of Light. The best and smplest way to do this is to use it constantly, to exercise it in every way. In 
particular it may be employed in ceremonies of initiation or of invocation — while the physical body remains 
Slent and still. 


In doing thisit will often be necessary to create aT emple on the astral plane. It is excellent practice to create 
symbols. T his one precaution is needed: after using them, they should be reabsorbed. 


H aving learned to create astral forms, the next step will be at first very difficult. Phantasmal and fleeting asthe 
astral is in general, those forms which are definitely attached to the material possess enormous powers of 
regstance, and it consequently requiresvery high potential to influence them. T he material analoguesseem to 
serve as a fortress. Even where a temporary effect is produced, the inertia of matter draws it back to the 
normal; yet the power of the trained and consecrated will in a well-developed astral body is such that it can 
even produce a permanent change in the material upon whose Body of Light you are working, e.g.; one can 
heal the sick by restoring a healthy appearance to their astral forms. On the other hand, it is possble so to 
disintegrate the Body of Light even of a strong man that he will fall dead. 


Such operations demand not only power, but judgment. N othing can upset the sum total of destiny — 
everything must be paid for the uttermost farthing. For this reason a great many operations theoretically 
possible cannot be performed. Suppose, for example, you seetwo men of smilarly unhealthy astral aopearance. 
In one case the cause may be sight and temporary. Y our help suffices to restore him in afew minutes. T he 
other, who looksno worse, isreally oppressed by aforce incalculably greater than you could control, and you 
would only damage yourself by attempting to help him. T he diagnosis between the two cases could be made 
by an investigation of the deeper strata of the astral, such as compose the” causal body”. 


A body of black magicians under Anna Kingsford 
Anna K ingsford, so far as her good work is concerned, was only the rubber stamp of E dward M aitland. 


once attempted to kill a vivisector who was not particularly well Known; and they succeeded in making him 


serioudy ill. Butin attempting the same thing with Pasteur they produced no effect whatever, because Pasteur 
was a great genius — an adept in his own line far greater than she in hers — and because millions of people 
were daily blessing him. It cannot be too clearly understood that magical force is subject to the same laws of 
proportion as any other kind of force. It is useless for amere millionaire to try to bankrupt aman who hasthe 
Bank of England behind him. 


To sum up, the first task is to separate the astral form from the physical body, the second to develop the 
powers of the astral body, in particular those of sght, travel, and interpretation; third, to unify the two bodies 
without muddling them. 


This being accomplished, the magician is fitted to deal with the invisible. 


It isnow useful to contine with considerations of other planes, which have commonly been classed under the 
Astral. T here is some reason for this, as the delimitations are somewhat vague. J ust as the vegetable kingdom 
mergesinto the animal, and asthe material plane has beings which encroach upon the boundaries of the astral, 
so do we find it in the higher planes. 


T he mental images which appear during meditation are subjective, and pertain not at all to the astral plane. 
Only very rarely do astral images occur during meditation. It isa bad break in the circle, asarule, when they 
do. 


T here is also a M agical Plane. T his touches the material, and even includes a portion of it. It includes the 
Astral, chiefly a full- blooded type of the Astral. It reachesto and includesmos,, if not all, of the spiritual planes. 


The M agical plane isthus the most comprehensive of all. Egyptian Gods are typical inhabitants of this plane, 
and it isthe home of every Adept. 


T he spiritual planesare of several types, but are all distinguished by areality and intensity to be found nowhere 
else. Their inhabitants are formless, free of space and time, and distinguished by incomparable brilliance. 


There are also a number of sub-planes, as, for example, the Alchemical. T his plane will often appear in the 
practice of “R ising on the Planes’; itsimages are usually those of gardens curiously kept, mountains furnished 
with peculiar symbols, hieroglyphic animals, or such figures as that of the “H ermetic Arcanum”, and pictures 
like the “Goldseekers” and the “M assacre of the Innocents’ of Basil Valentine. T here isaunique quality about 
the alchemical Plane which renders its images immediately recognizable. 


T here are also planes corresponding to various religions past and present, all of which have their peculiar unity. 


Itisof the utmost importance to the “C lairvoyant” or “traveler in the fine body” to be able to find his way to 
any desired plane, and operate therein asits ruler. 


The Neophyte of A.’. A.’. is examined most strictly in this practice before he is passed to the degree of 
Zelator. 


In “R ising on the Planes” one must usually pass clear through the Astral to the Spiritual. Some will be unable 
to do this. The “fine body” which isgood enough to subst on lower planes, ashadow among shadows, will 
fail to penetrate the higher strata. It requires a great development of this body, and an intense infusion of the 
highest spiritual constituents of man, before he can pierce the veils. T he constant practice of M agick isthe best 
preparation possible. Even though the human conscioumessfail to reach the goal, the conscioumessof the fine 


body itself may do so, wherefore whoso travels in that body on asubsequent occasion may be found worthy; 
and its success will react favourably on the human consciousness, and increase its likelihood of success in its 
next magical operation. 


Similarly, the powers gained in this way will strengthen the magician in his mediation- practices. H is W ill 
becomes better able to assist the concentration, to destroy the mental images which disturb it, and to reject 
the lesser rewards of that practice which tempt, and too often stop the progress of, the mystic. 


Although it is said that the spiritual lies “beyond the astral”, this is theoretical; 


T heH on. Bertrand R ussall’s “P rindpia M athematica” may besaid to “liebeyond” C olenso’s“ School Arithmetic’ ; 
but one can take the former book from one’s shelves — as every oneshould — and read it without first going all 
through the latter again. 


the advanced M agician will not find it to be so in practice. H e will be able by suitable invocation to travel 
directly to any place desired. In Liber 418 an example of perfection is given. T he Adept who explored these 
Aethyrs did not have to pass through and beyond the U niverse, the whole of which yet lies within even the 
inmost (30th) Aethyr. He was able to summon the Aethyrs he wanted, and His chief difficulty was that 
sometimes H e was at first unable to pierce their veils. In fact, as the Book shows, it was only by virtue of 
successive and most exalted initiations undergone in the Aethyrs themselves that H e was able to penetrate 
beyond the 15th. T he Guardians of such fortresses know how to guard. 


TheM ASTER THERION haspublished the most important practical magical secretsin the plainest language. 
No one, by virtue of being clever or learned, has understood one word; and those unworthy who have 
profaned the sacrament have but eaten and drunken damnation to themselves. 


One may bring down stolen fire in ahollow tube from H eaven, aaThe MASTER THERION indeed has 
done in away that no other adept dared to do before him. But the thief, the T itan, must foreknow and consent 
to hisdoom to be chained upon alonely rock, the vulture devouring hisliver, for aseason, until H ercules, the 
gtrong man armed by virtue of that very fire, shall come and release him. 


TheTEITAN 
GR:T au-E psilon-lota-T au-A Ipha-N u = 300+5+10+300+1+50 = 666. 


— whosenumber isthe number of aman, 9x hundred and three score and sx — unsubdued, consoled by Asia 
and Panthea, must send forth constant showers of blessing not only upon M an whose incarnation he is, but 
upon the tyrant and the persecutor. H isinfinite pain must thrill hisheart with joy, Snce every pang isbut the 
echo of some new flame that leaps upon the earth lit by his crime. 


For the Gods are the enemies of M an; it isN ature that M an must overcome ere he enter into his kingdom.< 
“All elements must at one time have been separate, — that would be the case with great heat. N ow when 
atoms get to the sun, when we get to the sun, we get that immense, extreme heat, and all the elements are 
themselves again. Imagine that each atom of each element possesses the memory of all his adventures in 
combination. By the way, that atom (fortified with that memory) would not be the same atom; yet it is, 
because it has gained nothing from anywhere except this memory. Therefore, by the lapse of time, and by 
virtue of memory, athing could become something more than itself; and thusa real development is possible. 
One can then see a reason for any element deciding to go through this series of incarnations, because so, and 
only so, can he go; and he suffers the lapse of memory which he has during these incarnations, because he 
knowshe will come through unchanged. 


“T herefore you can have an infinite number of gods, individual and equal though diverse, each one supreme 
and utterly indestructible. T hisisalso the only explanation of how abeing could createawar {WEH NOTE: 
SIC, probably should be “world”} in which war, evil, etc. exist. Evil isonly an appearance, because, (like 
“good”) it cannot affect the substance itself, but only multiply its combinations. T hisissomething the same as 
mystic monotheism, but the objection to that theory is that God has to create things which are all parts of 
himself, so that their interplay is false. If we presuppose many elements, their interplay is natural. It is no 
objection to thistheory to ask who made the elements, — the elements are at least there, and God, when you 
look for him, is not there. Theism is “obscurum per obscurius.” A male star is built up from the centre 
outwards; a female from the circumference inwards. T his is what is meant when we say that woman has no 
soul. It explains fully the difference between the sexes.>> T he true God isman. In man are all things hidden. 
O f these the Gods, N ature, T ime, all the powers of the universe are rebellious slaves. It isthese that men must 
fight and conquer in the power and in the name of the Beast that hath availed them, the Titan, the M agus, the 
M an whose number is 3x hundred and three score and six. 


T he practice of R ising on the Planesis of such importance that special attention must be paid to it. It ispart of 
the essential technique of M agick. Instruction in this practice has been given with such conciseness in Liber 
O, that one cannot do better than quote verbatim (the “ previous experiment” referred to in the first sentence 
isthe ordinary astral journey.): 


“1. The previous experiment has little value, and leads to few results of importance. But it is susceptible of a 
development which merges into a form of Dharana — concentration — and as such may lead to the very 
highest ends. T he principal use of the practice in the last chapter is to familiarise the student with every kind 
of obstacle and every kind of delusion, so that he may be perfect master of every idea that may arise in his 
brain, to dismissit, to transmute it, to cause it instantly to obey his will. 


“2. Let him then begin exactly as before; but with the most intense solemnity and determination. 


“3. Let him be very careful to cause his imaginary body to rise in aline exactly perpendicular to the earth’s 
tangent at the point where his physical body is situated (or, to put it more Smply, straight upwards). 


“4, Instead of topping, let him continue to rise until fatigue almost overcomeshim. If he should find that he 
has topped without willing to do so, and that figures appear, let him at all costs rise above them. Y ea, though 
his very life tremble on hislips, let him force his way upward and onward! 


“5, Let him continue in this so long as the breath of life is in him. W hatever threatens, whatever allures, 
though it were T yphon and all hishostsloosed from the pit and leagued against him, though it were from the 
very T hrone of God himself that a voice issues bidding him stay and be content, let him struggle on, ever on. 


“6. At lat there must come amoment when hiswhole being is swallowed up in fatigue, overwhelmed by its 
own inertia. Let him sink (when no longer can he strive, though his tongue be bitten through with the effort 
and the blood gush from hisnostrils) into the blackness of unconsciousness; and then on coming to himself, let 
him write down soberly and accurately arecord of all that hath occurred: yea, arecord of all that hath occurred.” 


Of course, the R ising may be done from any starting pint. O ne can go (for example) into the circle of Jupiter, 
and the results, especially in the lower planes, will be very different to those obtained from a Saturnian starting 
point. 


T he student should undertake aregular series of such experiments, in order to familiarise himself not only with 


the nature of the different soheres, but with the inner meaning of each. Of course, it isnot necessary in every 
case to push the practice to exhaustion, as described in the instructions, but this is the proper thing to do 
whenever definitely practising, in order to acquire the power of R ising. But, having obtained this power, itis, 
of course, legitimate to rise to any particular plane that may be necessary for the purpose of exploration, asin 
the case of the visions recorded in Liber 418, where the method may be described as mixed. In such acase, it 
isnot enough to invoke the place you wish to visit, because you may not be able to endure its pressure, or to 
breathe its atmosphere. Several instances occur in that record where the seer was unable to pass through 
certain gateways, or to remain in certain contemplations. H e had to undergo certain Initiations before he was 
able to proceed. T hus, it is necessary that the technique of M agick should be perfected. T he Body of Light 
must be rendered capable of going everywhere and doing everything. It is, therefore, always the question of 
drill which is of importance. Y ou have got to go out R ising on the Planes every day of your life, year after 
year. Y ou are not to be disheartened by failure, or too much encouraged by success, in any one practice or set 
of practices. W hat you are doing is what will be of real value to you in the end; and that is, developing a 
character, creating aK arma, which will give you the power to do your will. 


IV 
Divination is so important a branch of M agick as almost to demand a separate treatise. 


Geniusis composed of two sides, the active and the passive. T he power to execute the W ill isbut blind force 
unless the W ill be enlightened. At every stage of a M agical O peration it is necessary to know what one is 
doing, and to be sure that one is acting wisely. Acute senstivenessis always associated with genius, the power 
to perceive the universe accurately, to analyse, coordinate, and judge impressionsisthe foundation of all great 
W ork. An army is but a blundering brute unless its intelligence department works as it should. 


The M agician obtains the transcendental knowledge necessary to an intelligent course of conduct directly in 
consciousness by clairvoyance and clairaudience; but communication with superior intelligences demands 
elaborate preparation, even after years of successful performance. 


It istherefore useful to possess an art by which one can obtain at amoment’s notice any information that may 
be necessary. T hisart isdivination. T he answersto one’s questionsin divination are not conveyed directly but 
through the medium of a suitable series of symbols. T hese symbols must be interpreted by the diviner in 
terms of his problem. It isnot practicable to construct a lexicon in which the solution of every difficulty is 
given in so many words. It would be unwieldy; besides, nature does not happen to work on those lines. 


The theory of any process of divination may be stated in afew sample terms. 


1. We postulate the existence of intelligences, either within or without the diviner, of which he is not 
immediately conscious, (It does not matter to the theory whether the communicating spirit so-called is an 
objective entity or a concealed portion of the diviner’s mind.) W e assume that such intelligences are able to 
reply correctly — within limits — to the questions asked. 


2. W e postulate that it is possible to construct acompendium of hieroglyphs sufficiently elastic in meaning to 
include every possible idea, and that one or more of these may always be taken to represent any idea. We 
assume that any of these hieroglyphics will be understood by the intelligences with whom we wish to 
communicate in the same sense asit is by ourselves. W e have therefore a sort of language. O ne may compare 
it to a “lingua franca” which is perhaps defective in expressing fine shades of meaning, and so is unsuitable for 
literature, but which yet serves for the conduct of daily affairs in places where many tongues are spoken. 
Hindustani is an example of this. But better still isthe analogy between the conventional signs and symbols 


employed by mathematicians, who can thus convey their ideas perfectly 


Asa matter of fad, they cannot. T he best qualified are the most diffident as to having grasped the meaning of their 
colleagues with exactitude; in qitidsing their writings they often make a point of apologising for possible 
misunderstanding. 


without speaking a word of each other’s languages. 


3. We postulate that the intelligences whom wish to consul are willing, or may be compelled, to answer us 
truthfully. 


Let us first consider the question of the compendium of symbols. T he alphabet of alanguage isa more or less 
arbitrary way of transcribing the sounds employed in speaking it. T he letters themselves have not necessarily 
any meaning assuch. Butin asystem of divination each symbol stands for adefinite idea. It would not interfere 
with the English language to add a few new letters. In fact, some systems of shorthand have done so. But a 
system of symbols suitable for divination must be a complete representation of the U niverse, so that each is 
absolute, and the whole insusceptible to increase or diminution. It is (in fact) technically a pantacle in the 
fullest sense of the word. 


Let usconsider some prominent examples of such system. W e may observe that acommon mode of divination 
isto inquire of booksby placing the thumb at random within the leaves. T he Booksof the Sybil, the works of 
Vergil, and the Bible have been used very frequently for this purpose. For theoretical justification, one must 
assume that the book employed isa perfect representation of the U niverse. But even if this were the case, it is 
an inferior form of construction, because the only reasonable conception of the C osmosis mathematical and 
hieroglyphic rather than literary. In the case of abook, such asthe Book of the Law which isthe supreme truth 
and the perfect rule of life, it isnot repugnant to good sense to derive an oracle from its pages It will of course 
be remarked that the Book of the Law is not merely a literary compilation but a complex mathematical 
¢ructure. It therefore fulfils the required conditions. 


T he principal meansof divination in history are astrology, geomancy, theT arot, the H oly Q abalah, and the i 
King. T here are hundredsof others; from pyromancy, oneiromancy, auguriesfrom sacrifices, and the spinning- 
top of some ancient oracles to the omens drawn from the flight of birds and the prophesying of tea-leaves. It 
will be sufficient for our present purpose to discuss only the five systems first enumerated. 


AST R OLOGY istheoretically aperfect method, since the symbolsemployed actually existin the macrocogn, 
and thus possess a natural correspondence with microcosmic affairs. But in practice the calculations involved 
are overwhelmingly complicated. A horoscope isnever complete. It needsto be supplemented by innumerable 
other horoscopes. For example, to obtain a judgment on the amplest question, one requires not only the 
nativities of the people involved, some of which are probably inaccessible, but secondary figuresfor directions 
and trangts, together with progressed horoscopes, to say nothing of prenatal, mundane, and even horary 
figures. T 0 appreciate the entire mass of data, to balance the elements of so vast a concourse of forces, and to 
draw aSdingle judgment therefrom, is a task practically beyond human capacity. Besides all this, the actual 
effects of the planetary positions and aspects are still almost entirely unknown. N o two astrologers agree on all 
points; and most of them are at odds on fundamental principles. 


N early all professional astrologers are ignorant of their own subject, as of all others. 


T his science had better be discarded unless the student chances to feel strongly drawn toward it. It isused by 
the MASTER THERION Himself with fairly satisfactory results, but only in special cases, in a strictly 
limited sohere, and with particular precautions. Even so, He feels great diffidence in baang His conduct on 


the result so obtained. 


GEOMANCY has the advantage of being rigorously mathematical. A hand-book of the science is to be 
found in Equinox |, Il. The objection to its use lies in the limited number of the symbols. T 0 represent the 
U niverse by no more than 16 combinationsthrowstoo much work upon them. T here isalso agreat restriction 
arising from the fact that although 15 symbols appear in the final figure, there are, in reality, but 4, the 
remaining 11 being drawn by an ineluctable process from the “M others’. It may be added that the tables 
given in the handbook for the interpretation of the figure are exceedingly vague on the one hand, and 
insufficiently comprehensve on the other. Some Adepts, however, appear to find this system admirable, and 
obtain great satisfaction from its use. O nce more, the personal equation must be allowed full weight. At one 
timethe MASTER THERION employed it extensively; but H e wasnever wholly at ease with it; He found 
the interpretation very difficult. M oreover, it seemed to Him that the geomantic intelligences themselves 
were of alow order, the scope of which was confined to a small section of the things which interested H im; 
also, they possessed a point of view of their own which was far from sympathetic with His, so that 
misunderstanding constantly interfered with the W ork. 


THE TAROT and THE HOLY QABALAH may be discussed together. T he theoretical basis of both is 
identical: T he T ree of Life. 


Both these subjects may be studied in the E quinox in several artides appearing in several numbers. 


The 78 symbols of the T arot are admirably balanced and combined. T hey are adequate to all demands made 
upon them; each symbol isnot only mathematically precise, but possesses an artistic significance which helps 
the diviner to understand them by stimulating his aesthetic perceptions. The MASTER THERION finds 
that the T arot is infallible in material questions. T he successive operations describe the course of events with 
astonishing wealth of detail, and the judgments are reliable in all respects. But a proper divination means at 
least two hours’ hard work, even by the improved method developed by H im from the traditions of initiates. 
Any attempt to shorten the proceedings leads to disappointment; furthermore, the symbols do not lend 
themselves readily to the solution of spiritual questions. 


TheH oly Q abalah, based asit ison pure number, evidently possesses an infinite number of symbols. Its scope 
isconterminouswith existence itself; and it lacksnothing in precision, purity, or indeed in any other perfection. 
But it cannot be taught; 


It is easy to teach the G eneral Prindples of exegesis, and the main doctrines. T here is a vast body of knowledge 
common to all cases; but this is no more than the basis on which the student must ere his original R esearch. 


each man must select for himself the materials for the main structure of hissystem. It requires years of work to 
erect a worthy building. Such a building is never finished; every day spent on it adds new ornaments. The 
Q abalah is therefore a living T emple of the H oly Ghost. It is the man himself and his universe expressed in 
terms of thought whose language isso rich that even the letters of its alphabet have no limit. T hissystem isso 
sublime that it is unsuited to the solution of the petty puzzles of our earthly existence. In the light of the 
Q abalah, the shadows of transitory things are instantly banished. 


TheY 1 KING isthe most satisfactory system for general work. The MASTER THERION isengaged in the 
preparation of a treatise on the subject, but the labour involved is so great that H e cannot pledge H imself to 
have it ready at any definite time. T he student must therefore make his own investigations into the meaning 
of the 64 hexagrams as best he can. 


The Yi King ismathematical and philosophical in form. Its structure is cognate with that of the Q abalah; the 


identity isso intimate that the existence of two such superficially different systems is transcendent testimony 
to the truth of both. It isin some waysthe most perfect hieroglyph ever constructed. It is austere and sublime, 
yet withal so adaptable to every possible emergency that its figures may be interpreted to suit all classes of 
questions. O ne may resolve the most obscure spiritual difficulties no less than the most mundane dilemmas; 
and the symbol which opens the gates of the most exalted palaces of initiation is equally effective when 
employed to advise one in the ordinary business of life. The MASTER THERION hasfound the Yi King 
entirely satisfactory in every respect. The intelligences which direct it show no inclination to evade the 
question or to mislead the querent. A further advantage is that the actual apparatus is ample. Also the system 
is easy to manipulate, and five minutes is sufficient to obtain a fairly detailed answer to any but the most 
obscure questions. 


With regard to the intelligences whose business it is to give information to the diviner, their natures differ 
widely, and correspond more or less to the character of the medium of divination. T hus, the geomantic 
intelligences are gnomes, spirits of an earthy nature, distinguished from each other by the modifications due to 
the various planetary and zodiacal influences which pertain to the several symbols. T he intelligence governing 
Puellais not to be confused with that of Venus or of Libra. It issimply a particular terrestrial daemon which 
partakes of those natures. 


TheT arot, on the other hand, being abook, isunder M ercury, and the intelligence of each card isftundamentally 
M ercurial. Such symbolsare therefore peculiarly proper to communicate thought. T hey are not gross, like the 
geomantic daemons; but, as against this, they are unscrupulousin deceiving the diviner. 


T his does not mean that they are malignant. T hey havea proper pridein their officeas O rades of T ruth; and they 
refuse to be profaned by the contamination of inferior and impure intelligences. A M agidan whose research is fully 
adapted to his N eschamah will find them ludd and reliable. 


The Yi King isserved by beings free from these defects. T he intense purity of the symbols prevent them from 
being usurped by intelligences with an axe of their own to grind. 


M alidous or pranksome elementals instindively avoid the austere sincerity of the Figures of Fu and K ing W an. 


It is always essential for the diviner to obtain absolute magical control over the intelligences of the system 
which he adopts. H e must not leave the smallest loop- hole for being tricked, befogged, or mocked. Hemust 
not allow them to use casuistry in the interpretation of his questions. It isa common knavery, especially in 
geomancy, to render an answer which isliterally true, and yet deceives. For instance, one might ask whether 
some business transaction would be profitable, and find, after getting an affirmative answer, that it really 
referred to the other party to the affair! 


There is, on the surface, no difficulty at all in getting replies. In fact, the process is mechanical; success is 
therefore assured, bar astroke of apoplexy. But, even suppose we are safe from deceit, how can we know that 
the question has really been put to another mind, understood rightly, and answered from knowledge? It is 
obviously possible to check one’s operations by clairvoyance, but this is rather like buying a safe to keep a 
brick in. Experience is the only teacher. O ne acquires what one may almost call a new sense. O ne feels in 
one’sself whether oneisright or not. T he diviner must develop this sense. It resemblesthe exquisite sens bility 
of touch which isfound in the great billiard player whose fingerscan estimate infinites mal degrees of force, or 
the smilar phenomenon in the professional taster of teaor wine who can disdtinguish fantastically subtle differences 
of flavour. 


Itisahard saying; but in the order to divine without error, one ought to be aM aster of the T emple. Divination 


affords excellent practice for those who aspire to that exalted eminence, for the faintest breath of personal 
preference will deflect the needle from the pole of truth in the answer. Unless the diviner have banished 
utterly from his mind the minutest atom of interest in the answer to his question, he is almost certain to 
influence that answer in favour of his personal inclinations. 


T he psycho- analyst will recall the fact that dreams are phantasmal representations of the unconscious W ill of 
the deeper, and that not only are they images of that W ill instead of representations of objective truth, but the 
image itself is confused by a thousand cross- currents set in motion by the variouscomplexes and inhibitions of 
his character. If therefore one consultsthe oracle, one mus take sure that one isnot consciousy or unconscioudy 
bringing pressure to bear upon it. It is just as when an Englisnman cross examines a Hindu, the ultimate 
answer will be what the H indu imagines will best please the inquirer. 


T hesame difficulty appearsin a grosser form when one receivesa perfectly true reply, but insistson interpreting 
it so asto suit one’s desires. T he vast majority of people who go to “fortunetellers’ have nothing else in mind 
but the wish to obtain supernatural sanction for their follies. Apart from O ccultism altogether, every one 
knowsthat when people ax for advice, they only want to be told how wise they are. H ardly any one acts on 
the most obviousy commonsense counsel if it happens to clash with his previous intentions. Indeed, who 
would take counsel unless he were warned by some little whisper in hisheart that he was about to make a foo! 
of himself, which he is determined to do, and only wants to be able to blame his best friend, or the oracle, 
when he is overtaken by the disaster which hisown interior mentor foresees? 


Those who embark on divination will be wise to consder the foregoing remarks very deeply. T hey will 
know when they are getting deep enough by the fact of the thought beginning to hurt them. It is essential to 
explore oneself to the utmost, to analyse one’s mind until one can be postive, beyond the possbility of error, 
that one is able to detach oneself entirely from the question. T he oracle isa judge; it must be beyond bribery 
and prejudice. 


Itisimpossiblein practice to lay down rulesfor the interpretation of symbols. T heir nature mus be investigated 
by intellectual methods such asthe Q abalah, but the precise shape of meaning in any one case, and the sphere 
and tendency of its application, must be acquired by experience, that is, but induction, by recording and 
classifying one’sexperimentsover along period; and — thisisthe better part — by refining one’sratiocination 
to the point where it becomes instinct or intuition, whichever one likes to call it. 


It is proper in cases where the sphere of the question is well marked to begin the divination by invocations of 
the forces thereto appropriate. An error of judgment as to the true character of the question would entail 
penalties proportionate to the extent of that error; and the delusions resulting from a divination fortified by 
invocation would be more serious than if one had not employed such heavy artillery. 


T he apparent high sanction for the error would fortify the obstinacy of the mule. 


T here can, however, be no objection to preparing oneself by a general purification and consecration devised 
with the object of detaching oneself from one’s personality and increasing the sensitiveness of one’s faculties. 


All divination comesunder the general type of the element Air. T he peculiar propertiesof air are in consequence 
its uniform characteristics. Divination is subtle and intangible. It moves with mysterious ease, expanding, 
contracting, flowing, responsive to the dightest stress. It receivesand transmits every vibration without retaining 
any. It becomes poisonous when its oxygen is defiled by passing through human lungs. 


T here isapeculiar frame of mind necessary to succesful divination. T he conditionsof the problem are difficult. 
It is obviously necessary for the mind of the diviner to be concentrated absolutely upon his question. Any 


intrusve thought will confuse the oracle as certainly as the reader of a newspaper is confused when he reads a 
paragraph into which a few lines have strayed from another column. It is equally necessary that the muscles 
with which he manipulates the apparatus of divination must be entirely independent of any volition of his He 
must lend them for the moment to the intelligence whom he is consulting, to be guided in their movement 
to make the necessary mechanical actions which determine the physical factor of the operation. It will be 
obvious that this is somewhat awkward for the diviner who is also a magician, for as a magician he has been 
constantly at work to keep all his forces under hisown control, and to prevent the sightest interference with 
them by any alien Will. It is, in fact, commonly the case, or so says the experience of The MASTER 

THERION, that the most promising M agicians are the most deplorable diviners, and vice versa. It is only 
when the aspirant approaches perfection that he becomes able to reconcile these two apparently opposing 
faculties. Indeed, there isno surer sgn of all-round successthan this ability to put the whole of one’s powers at 
the service of any type of task. 


W ith regard to the mind, again, it would seem that concentration on the question makes more difficult the 
necessary detachment from it. O nce again, the diviner tandsin need of a consderable degree of attainment in 
the practices of meditation. H e must have succeeded in destroying the tendency of the ego to interfere with 
the object of thought. He must be able to conceive of a thing out of all relation with anything else. The 
regular practice of concentration leads to this result; in fact, it destroys the thing itself as we have hitherto 
conceived it; for the nature of things is always veiled from us by our habit of regarding them as in essential 
relation without ourselves and our reactions toward them. 


One can hardly expect the diviner to make Samadhi with his question — that would be going too far, and 
destroy the character of the operation by removing the question from the class of concatenated ideas. It would 
mean interpreting the question in terms of “without limit”, and thisimply an equally formless answer. But he 
Should approximate to thisextreme sufficiently to allow the question entire freedom to make for itself itsown 
proper links with the intelligence directing the answer, preserving its postion on its own plane, and evoking 
the necessary counterpoise to its own deviation from the norm of nothingness. 


W e may recapitulate the above reflectionsin a practical form. W e will suppose that one wishes to divine by 
geomancy whether or no one should marry, it being assumed that one’s emotional impulses suggest so rash a 
course. The man takes his wand and his sand; the traces the question, makes the appropriate pentagram, and 
the sigil of the spirit. Before tracing the dashes which are to determine the four “M others’, he must strictly 
examine himself. H e must banish from his mind every thought which can possibly act as an attachment to his 
proposed partner. He must banish all thoughts which concern himself, those of apprehension no less than 
those of ardour. H e must carry hisintrospection as far as possible. H e must observe with all the subtlety at his 
command whether it pains him to abandon any of these thoughts. So long as his mind is stirred, however 
gightly, by one single aspect of the subject, he isnot fit to begin to form the figure. H emust sink hispersonality 
in that of the intelligence hearing the question propounded by astranger to whom he isindifferent, but whom 
it is his business to serve faithfully. He must now run over the whole affair in his mind, making sure of this 
utter aloofness therefrom. H e must also make sure that his muscles are perfectly free to respond to the touch 
of the W ill of that intelligence. (It isof course understood that he has not become so familiar with geomancy 
by dint of practice asto be able to calculate subconsciously what figureshe will form; for this would vitiate the 
experiment entirely. It is, in fact, one of the objections to geomancy that sooner or later one does become 
aware at the time of tracing them whether the dots are going to be even or odd. T hisneedsa special training 
to correct). 


Physio- psychological theory will probably maintain that the “automatic” action of the hand is controlled by 
the brain no less than in the case of conscious volition; but this isan additional argument for identifying the 


brain with the intelligence invoked. 


H aving thus identified himself as closely as possible with that intelligence, and concentrated on the question 
as if the “prophesying spirit” were giving its whole attention thereto, he must await the impulse to trace the 
markson the sand; and, assoon asit comes let it race to the finish. H ere arises another technical difficulty. O ne 
has to make 16 rowsof dots; and, especially for the beginner, the mind has to grapple with the apprehension 
lest the hand fail to execute the required number. It isalso troubled by fearing to exceed; but excess does not 
matter. Extra lines are simply null and void, so that the best plan isto banish that thought, and make sure only 
of not stopping too soon. 


Practice soon teaches one to count subconsdously ... yes, and that is the other diffialty again! 


The lines being traced, the operation is over as far as spiritual qualities are required, for atime. T he process of 
getting up the figure for judgment is purely mechanical. 


But, in the judgment, the diviner stands once more in need of hisinmost and utmost attainments. H e should 
exhaust the intellectual sources of information at his disposal, and form from them hisjudgment. But having 
done this, he should detach his mind from what it has just formulated, and proceed to concentrate it on the 
figure asa whole, almost asif it were the object of his meditation. O ne need hardly repeat that in both these 
Operations detachment from one’s personal partialities is as necessary asit wasin the first part of the work. In 
setting up the figure, bias would beget a Freudian phantasm to replace the image of truth which the figure 
ought to be; and it isnot too much to say that the entire subconscious machinery of the body and mind lends 
itself with horrid willingness to this ape- like antic of treason. But now that the figure stands for judgment, the 
same bias would tend to form its phantasm of wish- fulfilment in a different manner. It would act through the 
mind to bewray sound judgment. It might, for example, induce one to emphasgze the V enereal element in 
Puella at the expense of the Saturnian. It might lead one to underrate the influence of a hostile figure, or to 
neglect altogether some element of importance. The MASTER THERION has Known cases where the 
diver wasso afraid of an unfavourable answer that he made actual mistakesin the Smple mechanical construction 
of the figure! Finally, in the summing up; it is fatally easy to dur over unpleasantness, and to breathe on the 
tiniest spark that promises to kindle the tinder — the rotten rags! — of hope. 


The concluding operation is therefore to obtain a judgment of the figure, independent of all intellectual or 
moral restraint. O ne must endeavour to apprehend it asa thing absolute in itself. O ne must treat it, in short, 
very much the same as one did the question; as a mystical entity, till now unrelated with other phenomena. 
One must, so to speak, adore it as a god, uncritically: “Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth.” It must be 
allowed to impose its intrinsic individuality on the mind, to put its fingers independently on whatever notes 
it pleases, 


In this way one obtains an impression of the true purport of the answer; and one obtains it armed with a 
sanction superior to any sensble suggestions. It comesfrom and to apart of the individual which isindependent 
of the influence of environment; is adjusted to that environment by true necessity, and not by the artifices of 
such adaptations as our purblind conception of convenience induces us to fabricate. 


The student will observe from the above that divination isin one sense an art entirely separate from that of 
M agick; yet it interpenetrates M agick at every point. T he fundamental laws of both are identical. T he right 
use of divination has already been explained; but it must be added that proficiency therein, tremendousasisits 
importance in furnishing the M agician with the information necessary to hisstrategical and tactical plans, in no 
wise enables him to accomplish the impossible. It isnot within the scope of divination to predict the future 
(for example) with the certainty of an astronomer in calculating the return of acomet. 


T he astronomer himself has to enter a caveat. H ecan only calalate the probability on the observed fads. Some force 
might interfere with the antidpated movement. 


T here is always much virtue in divination; for (Shakespeare assures us!) there is “much virtue in IF”! 


In estimating the ultimate value of a divinatory judgment, one must allow for more than the numerous 
sources of error inherent in the process itself. The judgment can do no more than the facts presented to it 
warrant. It isnaturally impossible in most casesto make sure that some important factor has not been omitted. 
In asking, “shall | be wiseto marry?” one leavesit open for wisdom to be defined in diversways. O necan only 
expect an answer in the sense of the question. T he connotation of “wise” would then imply the limitations 
“in your private definition of wisdom”, “in reference to your present circumstances.” It would not involve 
guarantee against subsequent disaster, or pronounce a philosophical dictum asto wisdom in the abstract sense. 
One must not assume that the oracle is omniscient. By the nature of the case, on the contrary, it is the 
utterance of a being whose powers are partial and limited, though not to such an extent, or in the same 
directions, asone’sown. But aman who is advised to purchase acertain tock should not complain if a general 
panic knocksthe bottom out of it afew weeks later. T he advice only referred to the prospects of the stock in 
itself. T he divination must not be blamed any more than one would blame aman for buying ahouse at Y pres 


there years before the W orld-W ar. 


Asagainst this, one must insst that it is obviousy to the advantage of the diviner to obtain this information 
from beings of the most exalted essence available. An old witch who has a familiar spirit of merely local 
celebrity such asthe toad in her tree, can hardly expect him to tell her much more of private matters than her 
parish magazine does of public. It depends entirely on the M agician how he is served. T he greater the man, 
the greater must be his teacher. It follows that the highest forms of communicating daemons, those who 
know, SO to speak, the court secrets, disdain to concern themselves with matters which they regard as beneath 
them. O ne must not make the mistake of calling in a famous physician to one’ssick Pekinese. O ne must also 
beware of asking even the cleverest angel a question outside his ambit. A heart specialist should not prescribe 
for throat trouble. 


T heM agician ought therefore to make himself master of several methods of divination; using one or the other 
as the purpose of the moment dictates. He should make a point of organizing a staff of such spirits to suit 
various occasions. T hese should be “familiar” spirits, in the strict sense; members of his family. H e should deal 
with them congantly, avoiding whimsical or capriciouschanges. H e should choose them so that their capacities 
cover the whole ground of his work; but he should not multiply them unnecessarily, for he makes himself 
responsible for each one that he employs. Such spirits should be ceremonially evoked to visible or semi-visible 
appearance. A strict arrangement should be made and sworn. T hismust be kept punctiliousy by the M agician, 
and its infringement by the spirit severely punished. R elations with these spirits should be confirmed and 
encouraged by frequent intercourse. They should be treated with courtesy, consideration, and even affection. 
T hey should be taught to love and respect their master, and to take pride in being trusted by him. 


It issometimes better to act on the advice of a spirit even when one knowsit to be wrong, though in sucha 
case one must take the proper precautions against an undesirable result. T he reason for thisisthat spirits of this 
type are very sensitive. T hey suffer agonies of remorse on realising that they have injured their M aster; for he 
is their God; they know themselves to be part of him, their aim is to attain to absorption in him. T hey 
understand therefore that his interests are theirs. C are must be taken to employ none but spiritswho are fit for 
the purpose, not only by reason of their capacity to supply information, but for their sympathy with the 
personality of the M agician. Any attempt to coerce unwilling spiritsis dangerous. T hey obey from fear; their 
fear makes them flatter, and tell amiable falsehoods. It also creates phantasmal projections of themselves to 
personate them; and these phantasms, besides being worthless, become the prey of malicious daemons who 


use them to attack the M agician in various ways whose prospect of success is enhanced by the fact that he has 
himself created a link with them. 


One more observation seems desirable while on this subject. Divination of any kind isimproper in matters 
directly concerning the G reat W ork itself. In the Knowledge and C onversation of hisH oly Guardian Angel, 
the adept is possessed of all he can possibly need. T o consult any other isto insult one’sAngel. M oreover, it is 
to abandon the only person who really knows, and really cares, in favour of one who by the nature of the case, 
must be ignorant 


N 0 intelligence of the type that operates divination is a complete M icrocosm as M an is. H e Knows in perfection 
what lies within his own Sphere, and little or nothing beyond it. G raphiel knows all that is knowable about 
M arital matters, asno M an qn possibly do. F or even themost M arital man is limited as to M adim by the fac that 
M ars is only one dement in his moleale the other elements both inhibit concentration on their colleague, and 
veil him by insisting on his being interpreted in reference to themselves. N o entity whose structure does not 
indude the entire T ree of Life is capable of the F ormulae of Initiation. G raphiel, consulted by the A spirants to 
Adeptship, would be bound to regard the G reat W ork as purely a question of combat, and ignore all other 
considerations. H is advice would be absolute on technical points of this kind; but its very perfection would persuade 
theA spirant to an unbalance course of action which would entail failure and destruction. It is pertinent to mention 
in this connection that one must not expect absolute information as to what is going to happen. “F ortune-telling” 
is an abuse of divination. At the utmost one can only ascertain what may reasonably be expected. T he proper 
function of the process is to guide one’s judgment. D iagnosis is fairly reliable; advice may be trusted, generally 
speaking; but prognosis should always be cautious. T he essence of the business is the consultation of spedalists. 


of the essence of the matter — one whose interest in it isno more (at the best) than that of a well- meaning 
granger. It should go without saying that until the M agician has attained to the Knowledge and C onversation 
of hisH oly Guardian Angel he isliable to endless deceptions. H e doesnot know H imself; how can he explain 
his business to others? H ow can those others, though they do their best for him, aid in anything but trifles? 
One must therefore be prepared for disappointment at every stage until one attains to adeptship. 


T hisis especially true of divination, because the essence of the horror of not Knowing one’s Angel isthe utter 
bewilderment and anguish of the mind, complicated by the persecution of the body, and envenomed by the 
ache of the soul. O ne puts the wrong questions, and puts them wrong; gets the wrong answers, judges them 
wrong, and acts wrongly upon them. One must nevertheless persist, aspiring with ardour towards one’s 
Angel, and comforted by the assurance that H e is guiding one secretly towards Himself, and that all one’s 
mistakes are necessary preparations for the appointed hour of meeting Him. Each mistake isthe combing- out 
of some tangle in the hair of the bride as she is being coiffed for marriage. 


On the other hand, although the adept is in daily communication with his Angel, he ought to be careful to 
consult Him only on questions proper to the dignity of the relation. O ne should not consult one’s Angel on 
too many details, or indeed on any matterswhich come within the office of one’sfamiliar spirits. One doesnot 
go the the K ing about petty personal trifles. T he romance and rapture of the ineffable union which constitutes 
Adeptship must not be profaned by the introduction of commonplace cares. O ne must not appear with one’s 
hair in curl- papers, or complain of the cook’simpertinence, if one wantsto make the most of the honeymoon. 


Asthepoet putsit; “Psyche, beware how thou disdoseT hy tricks of toilet to E ros, O rlet him learn that those love 
breathing L yrical lips that whisper, wreathing H is brows with sense- bewitching gold, A re equally expert to scold; 
T hat those caressing hands will maybe Y et box his ears and slap the baby!” 


To the Adept divination becomes therefore a secondary consideration, although he can now employ it with 


absolute confidence, and probably use it with far greater frequency than before his attainment. Indeed, thisis 
likely in proportion as he learns that resort to divination (on every occasion when his W ill does not instantly 
instruct him) with implicit obedience to its counsels careless as to whether or no they may land him in 
disaster, isameansadmirably efficaciousof keeping hismind untroubled by external impressions, and therefore 
in the proper condition to receive the reiterant strokes of rapture with which the love of his Angel ravishes 
him. 


W e have now mapped out the boundaries of possibility and propriety which define the physical and political 
geography of divination. T he tudent must guard himself constantly against supposing that this art affords any 
absolute means of discovering “truth”, or indeed, of using that word as if it meant more than the relation of 
two ideas each of which is itself as subject to “change without notice” asa musical programme. 


Divination, in thenature of things, can do no morethan put the mind of the querent into consciousconnection 
with another mind whose knowledge of the subject at issue isto hisown asthat of an expert to alayman. The 
expert isnot infallible. T he client may put hisquestion in amideading manner, or even base it on acompletely 
erroneous conception of the facts. He may misunderstand the expert’s answer, and he may misinterpret its 
purport. A part from all this, excluding all error, both question and answer are limited in validity by their own 
conditions, and these conditions are such that truth may cease to be true, either as time goes on, or if it be 
flaw ed by the defect of failure to consider some circumstances whose concealed operation cancelsthe contract. 


In aword, divination, like any other science, is justified of its children. It would be extraordinary should so 
fertile amother be immune from still- births, monstrosties, and abortions. 


W enone of us dismiss our servant science with akick and acurse every time the telephone gets out of order. 
T he telephone people make no claim that it always works and always works right. 


E xcept in N ew Y ork C ity. 


Divination, with equal modesty, admits that “it often goes wrong; but it works well enough, all things 
considered. T he science isin itsinfancy. All wecan do isour bet. W eno more pretend to infallibility than the 
mining expert who consders himself in luck if he hits the bull’s eye four timesin ten.” 


The error of all dogmatists (from the oldest prophet with his “literally-inspired word of God” to the newest 
German professor with his single-track explanation of the U niverse) lies in trying to prove too much, in 
defending themselves against critics by stretching a probably excellent theory to include all the facts and the 
fables, until it bursts like the overblown bladder it is. 


Divination isno morethan arough and ready practical method which we understand hardly at all, and operate 
only asempirics. Successfor the best diviner alive isno more certain in any particular instance than along putt 
by achampion golfer. Its calculations are infinitely more complex than C hess, a C hess played on an infinite 
board with men whose moves are indeterminate, and made still more difficult by the interference of 
imponderable forces and unformulated laws, while its conduct demands not only the virtues, themselves rare 
enough, of intellectual and moral integrity, but intuition combining delicacy with strength in such perfection 
and to such extremes as to make its existence appear monstrous and miraculous against N ature. 


To admit this is not to discredit oracles. On the contrary, the oracles fell into disrepute just because they 
pretended to do more than they could. T o divine concerning amatter islittle more than to calculate probabilities. 
W e obtain the use of minds who have access to Knowledge beyond ours, but not to omniscience. HR U, the 
great angel set over the T arot, isbeyond usas we are beyond the ant; but, for all we know, the knowledge of 
HRU is excelled by some mightier mind in the same proportion. N or have we any warrant for accusing 


HRU of ignorance or error if we read the T arot to our own deluson. He may have known, he may have 
gooken truly; the fault may lie with our own insight. 


T he question of thesensein which an answer is true arises. One {WEH NOTE: sic interpolate “ should” } not 
mix up the planes. Y et as Mr. R ussell shows, “Op Cit. p”. 61, the worlds which lie behind phenomena must 
possess the same structure as our own. “E very proposition having a communicable significance must lie in just that 
essence of individuality which, for that very reason, is irrelevant to scence”. Just so: but this is to confess the 
impotence of scence to attain truth, and to admit the urgengy of developing a mental instrument of superior 
qapadty. 


The MASTER THERION has observed on innumerable occasions that divinations, made by him and 
dismissed as giving untrue answers, have justified themselves monthsor years later when he was able to revise 
his judgment in perspective, untroubled by his personal passion. 


It isindeed surprising how often the most careless divinations give accurate answers. W hen things go wrong, 
itisalmost always possble to trace the error to one’sown self- willed and insolent presumption in insisting that 
events shall accommodate themselvesto our egoism and vanity. It iscomically unscientific to adduce examples 
of the mistakes of the diviners as evidence that their art isfatuous. Every one knowsthat the smplest chemical 
experiments often go wrong. Every one knows the eccentricities of fountain pens; but nobody outside 
Evangelical circlesmakesfun of the C avendish experiment, or asserts that, if fountain pens undoubtedly work 
now and then, their doing so ismerely coincidence. 


T he fact of the case is that the laws of nature are incomparably more subtle than even science suspects. T he 
phenomena of every plane are intimately interwoven. The arguments of Aristotle were dependent on the 
atmospheric pressure which prevented his blood from boiling away. T here is nothing in the universe which 
does not influence every other thing in one way or another. T here isno reason in N ature why the apparently 
chance combination of half-a dozen sticks of tortoise- shell should not be so linked both with the human mind 
and with the entire structure of the U niverse that the observation of their fall should not enable us to measure 
all things in heaven and earth. 


W ith one piece of curved glass we have discovered uncounted galaxies of suns; with another, endless ordersof 
existence in the infinitesimal. W ith the prism we have analysed light so that matter and force have become 
intelligible only asformsof light. W ith arod we have summoned the invisible energies of electricity to be our 
familiar spirit serving usto do our Will, whether it be to outsoar the condor, or to dive deeper into the demon 
world of disease than any of our dreamers dared to dream. 


Since with four bits of common glass mankind haslearnt to know so much, achieved so much, who dare deny 
that the Book of T hoth, the quintessentialized wisdom of our ancestors whose civilizations, perished though 
they be, have left monuments which dwarf ours until we wonder whether we are degenerate from them, or 
evolved from Simians, who dare deny that such a book may be possessed of unimaginable powers? 


It isnot so long since the methods of modern science were scoffed at by the whole cultured world. In the 
sacred halls themselvesthe roofs rang loud with the scornful laughter of the high priests as each new postulant 
approached with his unorthodox offering. T here is hardly a scientific discovery in history which was not 
decried as quackery by the very men whose own achievements were scarce yet recognized by the world at 
large. 


Within the memory of the present generation, the possibility of aeroplanes was derisvely denied by those 
very engineers accounted most expert to give their opinions. 


The method of divination, the “ratio” of it, isas obscure to-day as was that of spectrum analysis a generation 
ago. T hat the chemical compostion of the fixed stars should become known to man seemed an insane imagining 
too ridiculousto discuss. T o- day it seems equally irrational to enquire of the desert sand concerning the fate of 
empires. Y et surely it, if any one knows, should know! 


T o- day it may sound impossible for inanimate objects to reveal the inmost secrets of mankind and nature. We 
cannot say why divination is valid. W e cannot trace the process by which it performs it marvels. 


T he main difference between a Scence and an Art is that the former admits mensuration. | ts processes must be 
susceptible of the application of quantitative standards. Its laws raec imponderable variables. S aence despises A rt 
for its refusal to conform with calalable conditions. But even to-day, in the boasted A ge of Sdence, man is still 
dependent on A rt as to most matters of practical importance to him; the arts of G overnment, of W ar, of Literature, 
atc aresupremely influential, and Sdence does little more than fadlitate then by making ther materials mechanially 
dodle. T heutmost extension of Sdencecan merely organiz ethe household of A rt. A rt thus progresses in perception 
and power by increased control or automatic acuracy of its details. The MASTER THERION has made an 
Epoch in the Art of M agick by applying the M ethod of Sdenee to its problems. H is W ork is a qontribution of 
unique value, comparable only to that of those men of genius who revolutionized the empirical guesswork of 
“natural philosophers”. T heM agidans of to-morrow will bearmed with mathematical theory, organized observation, 
and experimentally-verified practice. But their A rt will remain inscrutable as ever in essence, talent will never 
supplant genius. E ducation is impotent to produ a poet greater than R obet B urns; the perfection of laboratory 
apparatus prepares indeed the path of a Pasteur, but cannot make masters of mediocities. 


But the same objections apply equally well to the telephone. N o man knowswhat electricity is, or the nature 
of the forces which determine its action. W e know only that by doing certain things we get certain results, 
and that the least error on our part will bring our work to naught. T he same is exactly true of divination. The 
difference between the two sciences is not more than this: that, more minds having been at work on the 
former we have learnt to master its tricks with greater success than in the case of the latter. 


CHAPTER XIX 
OF DRAMATIC RITUALS. 


T he W heel turns to those effectual methods of invocation employed in the ancient M ysteries and by certain 
secret bodies of initiates to-day. T he object of them is almost invariably 


T he word is unwarrantably universal. It would not be impracticable to adopt this method to such operations as 
T alismanicM agick. F or example, one might consecrate and charge a Pantade by the ommuniation by AIW AZ 
to the Saibe of theBO OK of theL AW, theM agidan representing the A ngel, the P antade being the B ook, and 
the person on whom the P antade is intended to act taking the part of the Saibe. 


the invocation of aGod, that God conceived in amore or less material and personal fashion. T hese R itualsare 
therefore well suited for such persons as are capable of understanding the spirit of M agick as opposed to the 
letter. O ne of the great advantages of them is that a large number of persons may take part, so that there is 
consequently more force available; but it isimportant that they should all be initiates of the same mysteries, 
bound by the same oaths, and filled with the same aspirations T hey should be associated only for this one 
purpose. 


Such acompany being prepared, the story of the God should be dramatised by awell- skilled poet accustomed 
to thisform of compostion. Lengthy speeches and invocations should be avoided, but action should be very 
full. Such ceremonies should be carefully rehearsed; but in rehearsals care should be taken to omit the climax, 
which should be studied by the principal character in private. T he play should be so arranged that this climax 
depends on him alone. By this means one prevents the ceremony from becoming mechanical or hackneyed, 
and the element of surprise. assists the lesser characters to get out of themselves at the supreme moment. 
Following the climax there should alwaysbe an unrehearsed ceremony, an impromptu. T he most satisfactory 
form of this isthe dance. In such ceremonies appropriate libations may be freely used. 


The R ite of Luna (Equinox I. VI) isa good example of this use. H ere the climax isthe music of the goddess, 
the assistants remaining in silent ecstasy. 


In the rite of Jupiter the impromptu is the dance, in that of Saturn long periods of silence. 


It will be noticed that in these R ites poetry and music were largely employed — mostly published pieces by 
well-known authors and composers. It would be better 


“PERHAPS! 0 neaan think of certain A wful C onsequences”. “But, after all, they wouldn’t seem so to the 
authors!” “But— pity the poor G ods!” “Bother the G ods!” 


to write and compose specially for the ceremony. 


A body of skilled M agidans acustomed to work in concert may be competent to conduc impromptu O rgja. T o dte 
an actual instane in recent times; the blood of a Christian being required for some purpose, a young cock was 
proqred and baptized into the R oman C atholicC hurch by a man who, being the son of an ordained Priest, was 
magiaally an incarnation of the B eing of that Priest, and was therefore congenitally possessed of the powers thereto 
appurtenant. T he cok, “Peter P aul,” was consequently a baptized C hristian for all magical purposes. O rder was 
then taken to imprison the bird; which done, theM agidans assuming respectively the characters of H erod, H erodias, 
Salome, and the E xecutioner, acted out the scene of the dane and the beheading, on the lines of O scar W ilde’s 
drama, “Peter Paul” being cast for the part of John the B aptist. T his ceremony was devised and done on the spur 


of the moment, and its spontaneity and simpliaty were presumably potent factors in its success. 


On the point of theology, | doubt whether D om G orenflot sucessfully avoided eating meat in L ent by baptizing 
the pullet a carp. For as the sacrament — by its intention, despite its defects of form — could not fail of efficacy, 
the pullet must havebecomea C hristian, and therefore a human being. C arp was therefore only its baptized name 
— d. Polyarp — andD omG orenflot atehuman flesh in L ent, so that, for all he became a bishop, heis damned. 


CHAPTER XX 
OF THE EUCHARIST 


AND OF THE ART OF ALCHEMY 
I 


One of the smplest and most complete of M agick ceremonies is the Eucharist. 
It consstsin taking common things, transmuting them into things divine, and consuming them. 


So far, it isa type of every magick ceremony, for the reabsorption of the force isakind of consumption; but it 
has amore restricted application, as follows. 


T ake a substance 
T his may be of composite characte. 
symbolic of the whole course of nature, make it God, and consume it. 


T here are many waysof doing this; but they may easily be classified according to the number of the elements 
of which the sacrament is composed. 


The highest form of the Eucharist is that in which the Element consecrated is O ne. 


It isone substance and not two, not living and not dead, neither liquid nor solid, neither hot nor cold, neither 
male nor female. 


T his sacrament is secret in every respect. For those who may be worthy, although not officially recognized as 
such, this Eucharist has been described in detail and without concealment, “somewhere” in the published 
writingsof the MASTER THERION. ButHehastold no one where. It isreserved for the highest initiates, 
and is synonymous with the Accomplished W ork on the material plane. It is the M edicine of M etals, the 
Stone of the W ise, the Potable Gold, the Elixir of Life that isconsumed therein. T he altar isthe bosom of Ids, 
the eternal mother; the chalice isin effect the C up of our Lady Babalon H erself; the W and isthat which W as 
and IsandIsTo Come. 


T he Eucharist of two elements has its matter of the passives. The wafer (pantacle) is of corn, typical of earth; 
the wine (cup) represents water. (T here are certain other attributions. T he W afer isthe Sun, for instance: and 
the wine is appropriate to Bacchus). 


The wafer may, however, be more complex, the “C ake of Light” described in Liber Legis. 


T his is used in the exoteric M ass of the Phoenix (Liber 333, Cap: 44) mixed with the blood of the M agus. 
T his mass should be performed daily at sunset by every magician. 


Corn and wine are equivalent to flesh and blood; but it is easier to convert live substances into the body and 
blood of God, than to perform this miracle upon dead matter. 


T he Eucharist of three elements has for basisthe symbols of the three G unas. For T amas (darkness) take opium 
or nightshade or some sleepy medicine; for R ajas (activity) take strychnine or other excitant; for Sattvas 


(calm) the cakes of Light may again be suitable. 


T heC akesof Light areuniversally applicable, they contain meal, honey, and oil (carbohydrates, fats, and proteids, 
the three necessaries of human nutrition): also perfume of the three essential types of magical and qurative virtue; 
the subtle prinaple of animal life itself is fixed in them by the introduction of fresh living blood. 


T he Eucharist of four elements consists of fire, air, water, and earth. T hese are represented by aflame for fire, 
by incense or roses for air, by wine for water, and by bread and salt for earth. 


The Eucharist of five has for basswine for taste, arose for smell, aflame for sight, a bell for sound, and adagger 
for touch. T hissacrament isimplied in the M ass of the Phoenix in asightly different form. 


The Eucharist of six elements has Father, Son, and H oly Spirit above; breath, water, and blood beneath. It is 
a sacrament reserved for high initiates. 


T heL anceand theG raal are firstly dedicated to theH oly Spirit of Life, in Silence. T heB read and W inearethen 
fermented and manifested by vibration, and received by the Virgin M other. T he elements are then intermingled 
and consumed after the E piphany of |acchus, when “C ountenance beholdeth C ountenance). 


T he Eucharist of seven elements is mystically identical with that of one. 


O f the method of consecrating the elementsit isonly necessary to say that they should be treated as talismans. 
T hecircle and other furniture of the T emple should receive the usual benefit of the banishings and consecrations. 
The O ath should be taken and the Invocations made. W hen the divine force manifests in the elements, they 
Should be solemnly consumed. T here is also asmpler method of consecration reserved for initiates of high 
rank, of which it ishere unlawful to speak. 


According to the nature of the Sacrament, so will its results be. In some one may receive a mystic grace, 
culminating in Samadhi; in others asmpler and more material benefit may be obtained. 


The highest sacrament, that of O ne element, iSuniversal in its operation; according to the declared purpose of 
the work so will the result be. It isa universal K ey of all M agick. 


T hese secrets are of supreme practical importance, and are guarded in the Sanctuary with atwo- edged sword 
flaming every way 


].K .H usmans, who was afraid of them, and tried to betray the little he knew of them, became a Papist, and died 
of cancer of the tongue. 


; for this sacrament isthe T ree of Life itself, and whoso partaketh of the fruit thereof shall never die 


T he use of the Elixir of Life is only justifiable in peculiar draumstances. T 0 go counter to the course of natural 
C hange is to approximate perilously to the error of the “ Black Brothers” . 


Unless he so will. Who would not rather work through incarnation; a real renewal of body and brain, than 
content himself with a stagnant immortality upon this mote in the Sunlight of the U niverse which we call 
earth? 


With regard to the preparations for such Sacraments, the C atholic Church has maintained well enough the 
traditions of the true Gnostic Church in whose keeping the secrets are. 


Study, in the R oman M issal, the C anon of the M ass, and the chapter of “ defects” . 
Chastity 


T heW ord C hastity is used by initiates to signify a certain state of soul and of mind determinant of a certain habit 
of body which is nowise identical with what is commonly understood. C hastity in the true magical sense of the 
word is inconceivable to those who are not wholly emandpated from the obsession of sex. 


isacondition; fasting for some hours previous is acondition; an earnest and continual aspiration isacondition. 
W ithout these antecedents even the Eucharist of the O ne and Seven is partially — though such isitsintrinsic 
virtue that it can never be wholly — baulked of its effect. 


A Eucharist of some sort should most assuredly be consummated daily by every magician, and he should 
regard it asthe main sustenance of his magical life. It isof more importance than any other magical ceremony, 
because it isa complete circle. T he whole of the force expended is completely re- absorbed; yet the virtue is 
that vast gain represented by the abyss between M an and God. 


The magician becomes filled with God, fed upon God, intoxicated with God. Little by little his body will 
become purified by the internal lustration of God; day by day his mortal frame, shedding its earthly elements, 
will become in very truth the T emple of the H oly Ghost. D ay by day matter isreplaced by Spirit, the human 
by the divine; ultimately the change will be complete; God manifest in flesh will be his name. 


Thisisthe most important of all magical secrets that ever were or are or can be. To aM agician thusrenewed 
the attainment of the K nowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel becomes an inevitable task; 
every force of his nature, unhindered, tends to that aim and goal of whose nature neither man nor god may 
goeak, for that it isinfinitely beyond speech or thought or ecstasy or Slence. Samadhi and N ibbana are but its 
Shadows cast upon the universe. 


If the M aster T herion effects by this book nothing else but to demonstrate the continuity of nature and the 
uniformity of Law, H e will feel that H iswork has not been wasted. In hisoriginal design of Part III he did not 
contemplate any allusion to alchemy. It has somehow been taken for granted that this subject is entirely 
foreign to regular M agick, both in scope and method. It will be the main object of the following description 
to establish it as essentially abranch of the subject, and to show that it may be considered smply asa particular 
case of the general propostion — differing from evocatory and talismanic M agick only in the valueswhich are 
represented by the unknown quantitiesin the pantomorphous equations. 


T here isno need to make any systematized attempt to decipher the jargon of H ermetic treatises. W e need not 
enter upon an historical discussion. Let it suffice to say that the word alchemy isan Arabic term consisting of 
the article “al” and the adjective “khemi” which means “that which pertains to Egypt” 


T his etymology differs from that given by Skeat; | can do no more than present my submission. 


.A rough trangation would be“T heEgyptian matter”. T he assumption isthat the Mohammedan grammarians 
held traditionally that the art was derived from that wisdom of the Egyptians which was the boast of M oses, 
Plato, and Pythagoras, and the source of their illumination. 


M odern research (by profane scholars) leaves it still doubtful as to whether Alchemical treatises should be 
classified as mystical, magical, medical, or chemical. The most reasonable opinion is that all these objects 
formed the pre- occupation of the alchemists in varying proportions. H ermes is alike the god of Wisdom, 


Thaumaturgy, therapeutics, and physical science. All these may consequently claim the title H ermetic. It 
cannot be doubted that such writers as Fludd aspired to spiritual perfection. It is equally sure that Edward 
Kelly wrote primarily from the point of view of aM agician; that Paracelesus applied himself to the cure of 
disease and the prolongation of life as the first consideration, although his greatest achievements seem to 
modern thinkers to have been rather his discoveries of opium, zinc, and hydrogen; so that we tend to think of 
him asa chemist no less than we do of Van H elmont, whose conception of gas ranks him as one of those rare 
geniuses who have increased human knowledge by a fundamentally important idea. 


The literature of Alchemy is immense. Practically all of it is wholly or partially unintelligible. Its treatises, 
from the “Asch M etzareph” of the H ebrews to the “Chariot of Antimony” are deliberately couched in 
hieratic riddles. Ecclesiastical persecution, and the profanation of the secrets of power, were equally dreaded. 
W orse still, from our point of view, this motive induced writersto insert intentionally misleading statements, 
the more deeply to bedevil unworthy pretenders to their mysteries. 


We do not propose to discuss any of the actual processes. M ost readers will be already aware that the main 
objects of alchemy were the Philosopher’s Stone, the M edicine of M etals, and various tinctures and elixirs 
possessing divers virtues; in particular, those of healing disease, extending the span of life, increasing human 
abilities, perfecting the nature of man in every respect, conferring magical powers, and transmuting material 
substances, especially metals, into more valuable forms. 


T he subject is further complicated by the fact that many authors were unscrupulous quacks. | gnorant of the 
first elements of the art, they plagiarized without shame, and reaped a harvest of fraudulent gain. T hey took 
advantage of the general ignorance, and the convention of mystery, in just the same way as their modern 
Successors do in the matter of all O ccult sciences. 


But despite all this, one thing is abundantly clear; all serious writers, though they seem to speak of an infinity 
of different subjects, so much so that it has proved impossible for modern analytic research to ascertain the true 
nature of any single process, were agreed on the fundamental theory on which they based their practices. It 
appears at first ght as if hardly any two of them were in accord as to the nature of the “First M atter of the 
work”. They describe this in a bewildering multiplicity of unintelligible symbols. We have no reason to 
suppose that they were all talking of the same thing, or otherwise. T he same remarks apply to every reagent 
and every process, no less than to the final product or products. 


Y et beneath this diversity, we may perceive an obscure identity. T hey all begin with a substance in nature 
which isdescribed as existing almost everywhere, and as universally esteemed of no value. The alchemist isin 
all cases to take this substance, and subject it to a series of operations By so doing, he obtainshis product. T his 
product, however named or described, is always a substance which represents the truth or perfection of the 
original “First M atter”; and its qualities are invariably such as pertain to a living being, not to an inanimate 
mass. In aword, the alchemist isto take a dead thing, impure, valueless, and powerless, and transform it into 
alive thing, active, invaluable and thaumaturgic. 


T he reader of this book will surely find in thisa mos striking analogy with what we have already said of the 
processes of M agick. W hat, by our definition, isinitiation? T he First M atter isaman, that isto say, aperishable 
parasite, bred of the earth’s crus, crawling irritably upon it for aspan, and at last returning to the dirt whence 
he sprang. T he process of initiation conastsin removing hisimpurities, and finding in histrue self an immortal 
intelligence to whom matter isno more than the means of manifestation. T he initiate is eternally individual; 
he is ineffable, incorruptible, immune from everything. H e possesses infinite wisdom and infinite power in 
himself. T his equation is identical with that of atalisman. T he M agician takes an idea, purifiesit, intensifies it 
by invoking into it the inspiration of hissoul. It isno longer a scrawl! scratched on asheep- xin, but aword of 


Truth, imperishable, mighty to prevail throughout the sphere of its purport. The evocation of a spirit is 
precisely Smilar in essence. T he exorcist takes dead material substances of a nature sympathetic to the being 
whom he intends to invoke. He banishes all impurities therefrom, prevents all interference therewith, and 
proceeds to give life to the subtle substance thus prepared by instilling his soul. 


O nce again, there isnothing in thisexclusvely “magical”. R embrandt van R yn used to take anumber of ores 
and other crude objects. From these he banished the impurities, and consecrated them to his work, by the 
preparation of canvasses, brushes, and colours. This done, he compelled them to take the tamp of his soul; 
from those dull, valueless creatures of earth he created a vital and powerful being of truth and beauty. It would 
indeed be surprising to anybody who hascome to aclear comprehension of nature if there were any difference 
in the essence of these various formulas. T he laws of nature apply equally in every possible circumstance. 


W e are now in a postion to understand what alchemy is. We might even go further and say that even if we 
had never heard of it, we know what it must be. 


Let us emphasize the fact that the final product isin all cases a living thing. It has been the great stumbling 
block to modern research that the statements of alchemists cannot be explained away. From the chemical 
gtandpoint it has seemed not “apriori” impossible that lead should be turned into gold. O ur recent discovery 
of the periodicity of the elements has made it seem likely, at least in theory, that our apparently immutable 
elements hould be modifications of asingle one.< Aleister C rowley held this doctrine in histeens at a period 
when it was the grossest heresy.>> Organic Chemistry, with its metatheses and syntheses dependent on the 
conceptions of molecules as geometrical structures has demonstrated a praxis which gives this theory body; 
and the properties of R adium have driven the O Id Guard from the redoubt which flew the flag of the essential 
heterogeneity of the elements. T he doctrines of Evolution have brought the alchemical and monistic theory 
of matter into line with our conception of life; the collapse of the wall between the animal and vegetable 
kingdoms has shaken that which divided them from the mineral. 


But even though the advanced chemist might admit the possibility of transmuting lead into gold, he could 
not conceive of that gold as other than metallic, of the same order of nature asthe lead from which it had been 
made. T hat this gold should possess the power of multiplying itself, or of acting as a ferment upon other 
substances, seemed so absurd that he felt obliged to conclude that the alchemists who claimed these properties 
for their Gold mus, after all, have been referring not to Chemistry, but to some spiritual operations whose 
sanctity demanded some such symbolic veil asthe cryptographic use of the language of the laboratory. 


TheMASTER THERION issanguine that his present reduction of all cases of the art of M agick to asingle 
formula will both elucidate and vindicate Alchemy, while extending chemistry to cover all classes of C hange. 


T here isan obvious condition which limits our proposed operations. T hisisthat, asthe formula of any W ork 
effects the extraction and visualization of the Truth from any “First M atter”, the “Stone” or “Elixir” which 
resultsfrom our labourswill be the pure and perfect | ndividual originally inherent in the substance chosen, and 
nothing else. The most xkilful gardener cannot produce liliesfrom the wild rose; hisroseswill always be roses, 
however he have perfected the properties of this stock. 


T here is here no contradiction with our previous thesis of the ultimate unity of all substance. It is true that 
Hobbs and N obbs are both modifications of the Pleroma Both vanish in the Pleroma when they attain 
Samadhi. But they are not interchangeable to the extent that they are individual modifications, the initiate 
H obbsisnot the initiate N obbsany more than H obbsthe haberdasher is N obbsof “the nail an sarsoan business 
as he got hismoney by”. O ur xkill in producing aniline dyes does not enable us to dispense with the original 
aniline, and use sugar instead. T husthe Alchemists said: “T o make gold you must take gold”; their art wasto 


bring each substance to the perfection of itsown proper nature. 


No doubt, part of this process involved the withdrawal of the essence of the “First M atter” within the 
homogeneity of “H yle”, just asinitiation insstson the annihilation of the individual in the |mpersonal Infinity 
of Existence to emerge once more as a less confused and deformed Eidolon of the Truth of Himself. T hisis 
the guarantee that he isuncontaminated by alien elements. T he “Elixir” must possessthe activity of a “nascent” 
substance, just as “nascent” hydrogen combines with arsenic (in “M arsh’s test”) when the ordinary form of 
the gasisinert. Again, oxygen satisfied by sodium or diluted by nitrogen will not attack combustible materials 
with the vehemence proper to the pure gas. 


We may summarize this thesis by saying that Alchemy includes as many possible operations as there are 
original ideas inherent in nature. 


Alchemy resembles evocation in its selection of appropriate material bases for the manifestation of the W ill; 
but differs from it in proceeding without personification, or the intervention of alien planes. 


Some alchemists may object to this statement. | prefer to express no final opinion on the matter. 


It may be more closely compared with Initiation; for the effective element of the Product is of the essence of 
itsown nature, and inherent therein; the W ork similarly conssts in isolating it from its accretions. 


N ow just asthe A spirant, on theT hreshold of Initiation, finds himself assailed by the “complexes” which have 
corrupted him, their externalization excruciating him, and hisagonized reluctance to their elimination plunging 
him into such ordeals that he seems (both to himself and to others) to have turned from a noble and upright 
man into an unutterable scoundrel; so doesthe “First M atter” blacken and putrefy asthe Alchemist breaks up 
its coagulations of impurity. 


T he tudent may work out for himself the various analogies involved, and discover the “Black Dragon”, the 
“Green Lion”, the “Lunar W ater”, the “R aven’s H ead”, and 90 forth. T he indications above given should 
suffice all who possess aptitude for Alchemical R esearch. 


Only one further reflection appears necessary; namely, that the Eucharist, with which this chapter is properly 
preoccupied, must be conceived asone case — asthe critical case — of the Art of the Alchemist. 


The reader will have observed, perhaps with surprise, that The MASTER THERION describes several 
types of Eucharist. T he reason isthat given above; there isno substance incompetent to serve as an element in 
some Sacrament; also, each spiritual Grace should possess its peculiar form of M ass, and therefore its own 
“materia magica’. Itisutterly unscientific to treat “God” asauniversal homogeneity, and use the same means 
to prolong life as to bewitch cattle. O ne does not invoke “Electricity” indiscriminately to light one’s house 
and to propel one’s brougham; one works by measured application of one’s powers to intelligent analytical 
comprehension of the conditions of each separate case. 


There is a Eucharist for every Grace that we may need; we must apprehend the essential characters in each 
case, select suitable elements, and devise proper processes. 


To consider the classical problems of Alchemy: The M edicine of M etals must be the quintessence of some 
substance that serves to determine the structure (or rate of vibration) whose manifestation isin characteristic 
metallic qualities. Thisneed not be a chemical substance at all in the ordinary sense of the word. 


The Elixir of Life will Smilarly consist of aliving organism capable of growth, at the expens of itsenvironment; 
and of such anature that its “true W ill” isto cause that environment to serve it asits means of expression in the 


physical world of human life. 


The Universal M edicine will be a menstruum of such subtlety as to be able to penetrate all matter and 
transmute it in the sense of itsown tendency, while of such impartial purity asto accept perfectly the impression 
of the W ill of the Alchemist. T his substance, properly prepared, and properly charged, is able to perform all 
things soever that are physically possible, within the limits of the proportions of its momentum to the inertia 
of the object to which it is applied. 


It may be observed in conclusion that, in dealing with forms of M atter-M otion so subtle as these, it is not 
enough to pass the Pons Asnorum of intellectual knowledge. 


TheMASTER THERION has possessed the theory of these Powersfor many years; but H is practice is still 
in progress towards perfection. Even efficiency in the preparation isnot all; there isneed to be judiciousin the 
manipulation, and adroit in the administration, of the product. H e does not perform haphazard miracles, but 
applies H is science and xkill in conformity with the laws of nature. 


CHAPTER XXI 
OF BLACK MAGIC 


OF THE MAIN TYPES OF THE OPERATIONS OF 
MAGICK ART 


AND OF THE POWERS OF THE SPHINX 
l 


Aswassaid at the opening of the second chapter, the Single Supreme R itual isthe attainment of the Knowledge 
and Conversation of the H oly Guardian Angel. “It is the raising of the complete man in a vertical straight 
line.” 


Any deviation from this line tends to become black magic. Any other operation is black magic. 


In the T rue O peration the Exaltation is equilibrated by an expansion in the other three arms of the Cross. 
H ence the Angel immediately gives the Adept power over the Four Great Princes and their servitors. 


See the B ook of the Sacred M agic of A brameiin the M age. 


If the magician needs to perform any other operation than this, it is only lawful in so far as it is a necessary 
preliminary to T hat O ne W ork. 


T here are, however many shades of grey. It isnot every magician who iswell armed with theory. Perhapsone 
such may invoke Jupiter, with the wish to heal others of their physical ills. T his sort of thing is harmless, 


T here is nevertheless the general objection to the diversion of channels of Initiation to the Sea of A ttainment, into 
ditches of irrigation for the fields of material advantage. It is bad business to pay good ain for perishable products; 
like marrying for money, or prostituting poetic genius to political purposes. T he converse course, though equally 
objecionable as pollution of the purity of the planes, is at least respectable for its nobility. T he ascetic of the 
T hebaid or the T rappist M onastery is infinitely worthier than the health-peddler and success- monger of B oston or 
Los A ngeles; for the one offers temporal trash to gain eternal wealth, while the other values spiritual substance 
only as enabling him to get better bodily conditions, and a firmer grip on the dollars. 


or almost so. It is not evil in itself. It arises from a defect of understanding. U ntil the Great W ork has been 
performed, it is presumptuous for the magician to pretend to understand the universe, and dictate its policy. 
Only the M aster of the T emple can say whether any given act isacrime. “Slay that innocent child?” (I hear 
the ignorant say) “W hat ahorror!” “Ah!” replies the K nower, with foresight of history, “but that child will 
become N ero. H asten to strangle him!” 


There isa third, above these, who understands that N ero was as necessary as Julius C aesar. 


TheM aster of the T emple accordingly interferesnot with the scheme of things except just so far ashe isdoing 
the W ork which he is sent to do. W hy should he struggle against imprisonment, banishment, death? It is all 
part of the game in which he isapawn. “It wasnecessary for the Son of M an to suffer these things, and to enter 
into His glory.” 


The M aster of the Temple is so far from the man in whom He manifests that all these matters are of no 
importance to Him. It may be of importance to His W ork that man shall sit upon a throne, or be hanged. In 
such acase H einformshisM agus, who exertsthe power intrusted to H|m, and it happensaccordingly. Y et all 
happens naturally, and of necessity, and to all appearance without a word from Him. 


N or will the mere M aster of the T emple, aSarule, presume to act upon the U niverse, save asthe servant of his 
own destiny. It isonly the M agus, H e of the grade above, who has attained to Chokhmah, W isdom, and so 
dare act. He must dare act, although it like Him not. But He must assume the C urse of H is grade, as it is 
written in the Book of the M agus. 


Equinox |, VII, 5-9. 


T here are, of course, entirely black forms of magic. To him who hasnot given every drop of hisblood for the 
cup of BABALON all magic power is dangerous. T here are even more debased and evil forms, things in 
themselves black. Such is the use of spiritual force to material ends. Christian Scientists, M ental H ealers, 
Professional Diviners, Psychics and the like, are all “ipso facto” Black M agicians. 


T hey exchange gold for dross. T hey sell their higher powers for gross and temporary benefit. 


T hat the most crass ignorance of M agick istheir principal characteristic isno excuse, even if N ature accepted 
excuses, which he does not. If you drink poison in mistake for wine, your “mistake” will not save your life. 


Below these in one sense, yet far above them in another, are the Brothers of the Left Hand Path< 
Supplement.>>. T hese are they who “shut themselves up”, who refuse their blood to the Cup, who have 
trampled Love in the R ace for self- aggrandisment. 


Asfar asthe grade of Exempt A dept, they are on the same path asthe W hite Brotherhood; for until that grade 
is attained, the goal isnot disclosed. T hen only are the goats, the lonely leaping mountain- masters, separated 
from the gregarious huddling valley- bound sheep. T hen thos who have well learned the lessons of the Path 
are ready to be torn asunder, to give up their own life to the Babe of the Abyss which is— and isnot — they. 


The others, proud in their purple, refuse. They make themselves a false crown of the H orror of the Abyss; 
they set the Dispersion of Choronzon upon their brows; they clothe themselves in the poisoned robes of 
Form; they shut themselves up; and when the force that made them what they are is exhausted, their strong 
towers fall, they become the Eaters of Dung in the Day of Be with-us, and their shreds, strewn in the A byss, 
are lost. 


N ot so the M asters of the Temple, that sit as piles of dust in the City of the Pyramids, awaiting the Great 
Flame that shall consume that dust to ashes. For the blood that they have surrendered is treasured in the Cup 
of OUR LADY BABALON, amighty medicine to awake the Eld of the All- Father, and redeem the Virgin 
of the W orld from her virginity. 


Il 
Before leaving the subject of Black M agic, one may touch lightly on the question of Pacts with the Devil. 


The Devil doesnot exist. It isa false name invented by the Black Brothers to imply aU nity in their ignorant 
muddle of dispersions. A devil who had unity would be aGod 


“TheD evil” is, historially, theG od of any peoplethat one personally dislikes. T hishas led to so much confusion 
of thought that THE BEAST 666 has preferred to let names stand as they are, and to prodaim simply that 


AIW AZ — thesolar-phallic hermetic L udfer” isH isown H oly G uardian Angel, and “T heD evil” SATAN 

or H ADIT of our partialar unit of the Starry U niverse. T his serpent, SATAN, isnot the enemy of M an, but 
H ewho made G ods of our rae, Knowing G ood and E vil; H ebade“ K now T hyself!” and taught Initiation. He 
is “the D evil” of the Book of T hoth, and H is enblen isBA PHO MET, theA ndrogyne who is the hieroglyph 
of arcane perfecion. T he number of H isA tu isXV, which is Y od He, the M onogram of the E ternal, the F ather 
one with the M other, the Virgin Seed one with all-containing Space. H e is therefore Life, and Love. But 
moreover his letter is A yin, the E ye; heis Light, and his Z odiacal imageis C apricornus, that leaping goat whose 
attribute is Liberty. (N ote that the “Jehovah” of the H ebrews is etymologically connected with these. T he dassical 
example of such antinomy, one which has led to such disastrous misunderstandings, is that between NU and 
HAD, N orth and South, Jesus and John. T he subject is too abstruse and @mplicated to be discussed in detail 
here. T he student should consult the writings of SirR . PayneK night, G eneral F orlong, G erald M assey, F abre 
d’O livet; etc etc, for the data on which these considerations are ultimately based. ) 


It was said by the Sorcerer of the Jura that in order to invoke the Devil it is only necessary to call him with 
your whole will. 


T hisisan universal magical truth, and appliesto every other being asmuch asto the D evil. For the whole will 
of every man isin reality the whole will of the U niverse. 


Itis, however, always easy to call up the demons, for they are always calling you; and you have only to step 
down to their level and fraternize with them. T hey will tear you in pieces at their leisure. N ot at once; they 
will wait until you have wholly broken the link between you and your Holy Guardian Angel before they 
pounce, lest at the lat moment you escape. 


Anthony of Padua and (in our own times) “M acgregor” M athers are examples of such victims. 


N evertheless, every magician must firmly extend his empire to the depth of hell. “M y adepts stand upright, 
their heads above the heavens, their feet below the hells.” 


Liber XC, verse 40. SeeT he E quinox. 


This is the reason why the magician who performs the O peration of the “Sacred M agic of Abramelin the 
M age”, immediately after attaining to the Knowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel, must 
evoke the Four Great Princes of the Evil of the W orld. 


“Obedience and faith to Him that liveth and triumpheth, that reigneth above you in your palaces as the 
Balance of R ighteoumess and T ruth” isyour duty to your H oly Guardian Angel, and the duty of the demon 
world to you. 


T hese powers of “evil” nature are wild beasts; they must be tamed, trained to the saddle and the bridle; they 
will bear you well. T here isnothing useless in the U niverse: do not wrap up your T alent in anapkin, because 
itisonly “dirty money”! 


W ith regard to Pacts, they are rarely lawful. T here should be no bargain struck. M agick isnot atrade, and no 
huckstersneed apply. M aster everything, but give generougy to your servants, once they have unconditionally 
submitted. 


T here is also the questions of alliances with various Powers. T hese again are hardly ever allowable. 


N otwithstanding, there exist certain bodies of spiritual beings, in whose ranks are not only angelic forces, but 
elementals, and even daemons, who have attained to such R ight U nderstanding of the U niverse that they have 


banded themselves together with the object of becoming M icrocosms, and realize that their best means to this end 
is devotion to the service of the true interests of M ankind. Sodeties of spiritual forces, organized on these lines, 
dispose of enormous resources. T he M agidan who is himself sworn to the service of humanity may count upon the 
heartiest help of these O rders. T hair sincerity may always be assured by putting them to the test of the aceptance 
of the L aw of T helema. W hoso denies “D o what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law” confesses that he still 
dings to the conflict in his own nature: he is not, and does not want to be, true to himself. “A fortiori”, he will 
prove false to you. 


N o Power which isnot amicrocosm in itself — and even archangels reach rarely to this centre of balance — 
isfit to treat on an equality with M an. T he proper study of mankind isGod; with Him ishis business; and with 
Him alone. Some magicians have hired legions of spirits for some special purpose; but it has always proved a 
geriousmistake. T he whole idea of exchange isforeign to magick. T he dignity of the magician forbids compacts. 
“T he Earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof” . 


T he operations of M agick art are difficult to classify, as they merge into each other, owing to the essential 
unity of their method and result. W e may mention: 


1. O perations such as evocation, in which alive spirit is brought from dead matter. 
2. Consecrations of talismans in which alive spirit is bound into “dead” matter and vivifies the same. 


3. W orksof divination, in which alive spirit ismade to control operationsof the hand or brain of the M agician. 
Such worksare accordingly most dangerous, to be used only by advanced magicians, and then with great care. 


4, Works of fascination, such as operations of invisbility, and transformations of the apparent form of the 
person or thing concerned. This consists almost altogether in distracting the attention, or disturbing the 
judgment, of the person whom it is wished to deceive. T here are, however, “real” transformations of the 
adept himself which are very useful. See the Book of the Dead for methods. T he assumption of God- Forms 
can be carried to the point of actual transformation. 


5. W orksof Love and H ate, which are also performed (as arule) by fascination. T hese works are too easy; and 
rarely useful. T hey have a nasty trick of recoiling on the magician. 


6. W orksof destruction, which may bedonein many different ways. O ne may fascinate and bend to one’swill 
a person who has of his own right the power to destroy. One may employ spirits or talismans. The more 
powerful magicians of the last few centuries have employed books. 


In private matters these works are very easy, if they be necessary. An adept known to The MASTER 
THERION once found it necessary to day a Circe who was bewitching brethren. H e merely walked to the 
door of her room, and drew an Astral T (“traditore’, and the symbol of Saturn) with an astral dagger. W ithin 
48 hours she not herself. 


Asexplained above, in another connexion, hewho “ destroys” any being must accept it, with all the responsibilities 
attached, as part of himself. T he A dept herein question was therefore obliged to incorporate the elenental spirit of 
the girl — she was not human, the sheath of a Star, but an advanced planetary daemon, whose rash ambition had 
captured a body beyond its capadty to conduc — in his own magical vehide H e thereby pledged himself to 
subordinate all the sudden accession of qualities — passionate, capridous, impulsive, irrational, selfish, short- 
sightedness, sensual, fickle, crazy, and desperate, to hisT rue W ill; to disdpline, co-ordinate and employ them in 


the G reat W ork, under the penalty of being torn asunder by the wild horses which he had bound fast to his own 
body by the ac of “destroying” their independent consdousness and control of their chosen vehide. See H is 
M agical R ecord An X X, Sun in Libra and onward. 


7. W orks of creation and dissolution, and the higher invocations. 
T here are also hundreds of other operations; 
Examples of R ituals for several such purposes are given in the E quinox. 


to bring wanted objects — gold, books, women and the like; to open locked doors, to discover treasure; to 
swim under water; to have armed men at command — etc., etc. All these are really matters of detail; the 
Adeptus M ajor will easily understand how to perform them if necessary. 


M oral: become an A deptus M ajor! 
It should be added that all these things happen “naturally”. 


T he value of the evidence that your operations have influenced the course of events is only to be assessed by the 
application of the Laws of probability. The MASTER THERION would not accept any one single case as 
condusive, however improbable it might be. A man might makea correct guess at one chancein ten million, no less 
than at one in three. If one pick up a pebble, the chance was infinitely great against that particular pebble yet 
whichever one was chosen, the same chance “ came off”. It requires a series of events antecedently unlikely to 
deduce that design is a work, that the observed changes are causally, not casually, produced. T he prediction of 
events is further evidence that they are effected by will. Thus, any man may flukea ten shot at billiard, or even 
make a break of a few strokes. B ut chance cannot account for consistent success, even if moderate, when it extends 
over a long period of time. A nd the ability of the expert to “ name his shot” manifests a knowledge of the relations 
of cause and effect which confirms the testimony of his empirical skill that his success is not chance and coinddene. 


Perform an operation to bring gold — your rich uncle dies and leaves you his money; books— you see the 
book wanted in a catalogue that very day, although you have advertised in vain for a year; woman — but if 
you have made the spirits bring you enough gold, this operation will become unnecessary. 


T his cynical statement is an absurdity of Black M agic 


It must further be remarked that it isabsolute Black M agic to use any of these powers if the object can possibly 
be otherwise attained. If your child isdrowning, you mus jump and try to save him; it won't do to invoke the 
U ndines. 


N or is it lawful in all circumstances to invoke those U ndines even where the case is hopeless; maybe it is 
necessary to you and to the child that it should die. An Exempt Adept on the right road will make no error 
here — an Adept M gjor is only too likely to do so. A through apprehension of this book will arm adepts of 
every grade against all the more serious blunders incidental to their unfortunate postions. 


IV 
N ecromancy is of sufficient importance to demand a section to itself. 


It is justifiable in some exceptional cases. Suppose the magician fail to obtain access to living T eachers, or 
Should he need some especial piece of knowledge which he has reason to believe died with some teacher of 
the past, it may be useful to evoke the “shade” of such aone, or read the “Akasic record” of his mind. 


The only minds likely to be useful to the M agidan belong to A depts sworn to suffer reincarnation at short 
intervals, and the best elements of such minds are bound up in the “U nconsaous Sef” of theA dept, not left to 
wander idly about the A stral Plane. It will thus be more profitable to try to get into touch with the“ D ead T eacher” 
in his present avatar. M oreover, A depts are at pains to record their teaching in books, monuments, or pictures, and 
to appoint spiritual guardians to preserve such heirlooms throughout the generations. W henever these are destroyed 
or lost, the reason usually is that the A dept himself judges that their usefulness is over, and withdraws the forces 
which protected then. T he student is therefore advised to acquiesce: the sources of information available for him are 
probably selected by the W ardens of M ankind with a view to his real necessities. O ne must learn to trust one’s 
H oly Guardian Angel to shape one’s draumstances with skill. If one be but absorbed in the ardour of one’s 
aspiration toward H im, short indeed is the time before E x perience instils the certain convidion that H is works and 
H is ways are infinitely apt to one’s needs. 


If this be done it must be done properly very much on the lines of the evocation of Apollonius of T yana, 
which Eliphas Levi performed. 


See R ituel et D ogme dela H aute M agie; Ritud, ch. XIII. 


The utmost care must be taken to prevent personation of the “shade”. It is of course easy, but can rarely be 
advisable, to evoke the shade of a suicide, or of one violently dain or suddenly dead. O f what use is such an 
Operation, save to gratify curiosity or vanity? 


One mus add aword on gpiritism, which isa sort of indiscriminate necromancy — one might prefer the word 
necrophilia— by amateurs. T hey make themselves perfectly passive, and, so far from employing any methods 
of protection, deliberately invite all and sundry spirits, demons, shells of the dead, all the excrement and filth 
of earth and hell, to squirt their dime over them. T his invitation is readily accepted, unless a clean man be 
present with an aura good enough to frighten these foul denizens of the pit. 


N o Spiritualistic manifestation has ever taken place in the presence even of FRATER PER DUR ABO; how 
much lessin that of The MASTER THERION! 


Even the earliest Initiations confer protection. C ompare the fear fat by D. D. Home for Eliphas Levi. See 
Equinox |, X, “T heK ey of the M ysteries” . 


Of all the creatures H e ever met, the most prominent of English spiritists (ajournalist and pacifist of more than 
European fame) had the filthiet mind and the foulest mouth. H e would break off any conversation to tell a 
cupid smutty story, and could hardly conceive of any society assembling for any other purpose than “phallic 
orgies’, whatever they may be. U tterly incapable of keeping to a subject, he would drag the conversation 
down again and again to the sole subject of which he really thought — sex and sex- perversionsand sex and sex 
and sex and sex again. 


T his was the plain result of his spiritism. All spiritists are more or less Smilarly afflicted. T hey feel dirty even 
across the street; their auras are ragged, muddy and malodorous, they ooze the dime of putrefying corpses. 


No gpiritist, once he is wholly enmeshed in sentimentality and Freudian fear- phantasms, is capable of 
concentrated thought, of persistent will, or of moral character. D evoid of every spark of the divine light which 
washisbirthright, a prey before death to the ghastly tenants of the grave, the wretch, like the mesmerized and 
living corpse of Poe’s M onsieur Valdemar, isa “nearly liquid mass of loathsome, of detestable putrescence.” 


T he student of thisH oly M agick ismost earnestly warned against frequenting their seances, or even admitting 
them to his presence. 


T hey are contagious as Syphilis, and more deadly and disgusting. U nless your aurais strong enough to inhibit 
any manifestation of the loathly larvae that have taken up their habitation in them, shun them as you need not 
mere lepers! 


It occurs in certain rare cases that a very unusual degree of personal purity combined with integrity and force of 
character provides even the ignorant with a certain natural defence, and attracts into his aura only intelligent and 
beneficent entities. Such persons may perhaps practise spiritualism without obvious bad results, and even with 
good results, within limits. But such exceptions in no wise invalidate the general rule, or in any way serve as 
argument against the magical theory outlined above with such mild suasion. 


V 


Of the powers of the Sphinx much has been written. 
In Liber C X 1 (Aleph) the subject is treated with profound and all-comprehensive wisdom. 


W isely they have been kept in the forefront of true magical instruction. Even the tyro can always rattle off that 
he has to Know, to dare to will and to keep slence. It is difficult to write on this subject, for these powers are 
indeed comprehensive, and the interplay of one with the other becomes increasingly evident as one goes 
more deeply into the subject. 


But there isone general principle which seemsworthy of special emphassin thisplace. T hese four powersare 
thus complex because they are the powers of the Sphinx, that is, they are functions of asingle organism. 


N ow those who understand the growth of organisms are aware that evolution depends on adaptation to 
environment. If an animal which cannot swim is occasionally thrown into water, it may escape by some piece 
of good fortune, but if it is thrown into water continuougy it will drown sooner or later, unless it learns to 
swim. 


Organisms being to acertain extent elastic, they soon adapt themselves to anew environment, provided that 
the change is not so sudden as to destroy that elasticity. 


N ow achange in environment involves a repeated meeting of new conditions, and if you want to adapt 
yourself to any given set of conditions, the best thing you can do isto place yourself cautiously and persistently 
among them. T hat is the foundation of all education. 


The old-fashioned pedagogues were not all so tupid as some modern educators would have us think. T he 
principle of the system was to strike the brain a series of constantly repeated blows until the proper reaction 
became normal to the organisn. 


Itisnot degrable to use ideas which excite interest, or may come in handy later asweapons, in thisfundamental 
training of the mind. It ismuch better to compel the mind to busy itself with root ideas which do not mean 
very much to the child, because you are not trying to excite the brain, but to drill it. For this reason, all the 
best minds have been trained by preliminary study of classics and mathematics. 


T he same principle applies to the training of the body. T he original exercises should be of acharacter to train 
the muscles generally to perform any kind of work, rather than to train them for some special kind of work, 
concentration of which will unfit them for other tasks by depriving them of the elasticity which isthe proper 
condition of life. 


Some few forms of exerdse are exempt from these strictures. R ock-dimbing, in particular, trains every musde in 


an endless variety of ways. It moreover compels the learner to use his own judgment, to rely on himself, to develop 
resource, and to depend upon his own originality to attack each new problem that presents itself. T his prindple 
may be extended to all departments of the education of children. T hey should be put into contac with all kinds of 
truth, and allowed to make their own reflecions thereon and reactions thereto, without the least attempt to bias 
their judgment. M agical pupils should be trained on similar lines. T hey should be made to work alone from the 
first, to cover the whole ground impartially, to devise their own experiments and draw their own condusions. 


In M agick and meditation this principle applies with tremendous force. It isquite useless to teach people how 
to perform magical operations, when it may be that such operations, when they have learned to do them, are 
not in accordance with their wills. What must be done is to drill the Aspirant in the hard routine of the 
elements of the R oyal Art. 


So far as mysticism is concerned, the technique is extremely simple, and has been very simply described in 
Part | of this Book 4. It cannot be said too strongly that any amount of mystical success whatever is no 
compensation for Sackness with regard to the technique. T here may come atime when Samadhi itself is no 
part of the business of the mystic. But the character developed by the original training remains an asset. In 
other words, the person who hasmade himeelf afirst- class brain capable of elasticity iscompetent to attack any 
problem soever, when hewho hasmerely specialized has got into agroove, and can no longer adapt and adjust 
himself to new conditions 


T he principle is quite universal. Y ou do not train aviolinist to play the Beethoven C oncerto; you train him to 
play every conceivable consecution of notes with perfect ease, and you keep him at the most monotonous 
drill possible for years and years before you allow him to go on the platform. Y ou make of him an instrument 
perfectly able to adjust itself to any musical problem that may be set before him. T histechnique of Y ogaisthe 
most important detail of all our work. The MASTER THERION hasbeen himself somewhat to blame in 
representing thistechnique as of value Smply because it leads to the great rewards, such asSamadhi. H ewould 
have been wiser to base His teaching solely on the ground of evolution. But probably He thought of the 
words of the poet: 


“Y ou dangle a carrot in front of her nose, 
And she goes wherever the carrot goes.” 


For, after all, one cannot explain the necessity of the study of Latin either to imbecile children or to stupid 
educationalists; for, not having learned Latin, they have not developed the brains to learn anything. 


The Hindus, understanding these difficulties, have taken the God- Almighty attitude about the matter. If you 
go to aH indu teacher, he treats you asless than an earthworm. Y ou have to do this, and you have to do that, 
and you are not allowed to know why you are doing it. 


T his does not conflict with the “ go-as- you- please” plan put forward in the previous note. An autocatic A dept is 
indeed a blessing to the disaple, not because he is able to guide the pupil “aright” in the partiailar path which 
happens to suit his personality, but because he can compe the beginner to grind away at theweariest work and thus 
aquireall-round ability, and prevent him from picking out the plums which please him from the P ieof K nowledge, 
and making himself sick of a surfeit of sweets to the neglect of a balanced diet of wholesome nourishment. 


After years of experience in teaching, TheM ASTER THERION isnot altogether convinced that thisis not 
the right attitude. W hen people begin to argue about things instead of doing them, they become absolutely 
impossible. Their minds begin to work about it and about, and they come out by the same door asin they 
went. T hey remain brutish, voluble, and uncomprehending. 


The technique of M agick is just as important as that of mysticism, but here we have a very much more 
difficult problem, because the original unit of M agick, the Body of Light, is already something unfamiliar to 
the ordinary person. N evertheless, this body must be developed and trained with exactly the same rigid 
discipline as the brain in the case of mysticism. T he essence of the technique of M agick isthe development of 
the body of Light, which must be extended to include all membersof the organism, and indeed of the cosmos. 


The most important drill practices are: 


1. The fortification of the Body of Light by the constant use of rituals, by the assumption of god- forms, and by 
the right use of the Eucharist. 


2. The purification and consecration and exaltation of that Body by the use of rituals of invocation. 


3. The education of that Body by experience. It must learn to travel on every plane; to break down every 
obstacle which may confront it. T hisexperience must be as systematic and regular as possible; for it isof no use 
merely to travel to the soheresof Jupiter and V enus, or even to explore the 30 Aethyrs, neglecting unattractive 
meridians. 


T heA spirant should renember that he is a M iocosm. “U niversus sum et N ihil universi a me alienum puto” 
should be his motto. H e should make it his daily practice to travel on the A stral Plane, taking in turn each of the 
most synthetic sections, the Sephiroth and the Paths. T hese being thoroughly understood, and an A nga in each 
pledged to guard or to guide him at need, he should start on a new series of expeditions to explore the subordinate 
sections of each. H e may then pradice R ising on the Planes from these spheres, one after the other in rotation. 
W hen heis thoroughly conversant with the various methods of meeting unexpected emergendes, he may proceed 
to investigate the regions of the Q liphoth and the D emonicF orces. It should be his aim to obtain a comprehensive 
knowledge of the entire A stral Plane, with impartial love of truth for its own sake; just as a child learns the 
geography of the whole planet, though he may have no intention of ever leaving his native land. 


T he object isto possessa Body which iscapable of doing easily any particular task that may lie before it. T here 
must be no selection of special experience which appeals to one’s immediate desire. One must go steadily 
through all possible pylons. 


FRATER PERDRABO was very unfortunate in not having magical teachers to explain these things to 
Him. H ewasrather encouraged in unsystematic working. V ery fortunate, on the other hand, wasH e to have 
found aGuru who instructed H im in the proper principlesof the technique of Y oga, and H e, having sufficient 
sense to recognize the universal application of those principles, was able to some extent to repair H is original 
defects. But even to this day, despite the fact that H is original inclination ismuch stronger towards M agick 
than towards mysticism, he is much less competent in M agick. 


R econsideration of these remarks, at the request of a loyal colleague, compels H im to admit that this may not bethe 
ase, Itis truethat H ehas been granted all M ystical A ttainment that is theoretically possible, while H is powers in 
M agick seem to be uneven and imperfect. D espite this, it may yet be that H e has compassed the Possible. F or 
M ystial A ttainments are never mutually exdusive; the tranee of Sorrow (for example) is not incompatible with 
the Beatific Vision, or the “Universal Joke”. But in M agick any one O peration debars its performer from 
accomplishing some other. T he reason of this is that the O ath of any W ork bonds the M agidan one and for all to 
be the prindples implied therein. SeeC hapter X V1 Part!. Further, it is obviously possible to reach the essence of 
anything without interfering with other things which obstruct each other. C rosscountry journeys are often scarcely 
practicable. 


A trace of this can be seen even in His method of combining the two divisons of our science, for in that 


method H e makes concentration bear the C ross of the work. 


T hisis possibly an error, probably a defect, certainly an impurity of thought, and the root of it isto be found 
in His original bad discipline with regard to M agick. 


If the reader will turn to the account of his astral journeys in the Second N umber of the First Volume of the 
Equinox, he will find that these experiments were quite capricious. Even when, in M exico, He got the idea 
of exploring the 30 A ethyrs systematically, H e abandoned the vision after only 2 A ethyrshad been investigated. 


Very different isH isrecord after the training in 1901 e.v. had put Him in the way of discipline.< 
go that this Book (as now finally revised for the Press) may be considered 
practically free from serious defect in this particular.>> 


At the conclusion of this part of this book, one may sum up the whole matter in these words T here is no 
object whatever worthy of attainment but the regular development of the being of the Aspirant by steady 
scientific work; he should not attempt to run before he can walk; he should not wish to go somewhere until 
he knows for certain whither he wills to go. 


APPENDIX I. 


The reader will find excellent classical examples of rituals of M agick in The Equinox, Volume I, in the 
following places — 


N umber 1. — The supplement contains considerations for preparing a ritual of self- initiation. T he supplement 
is also aperfect model of what a magical record should be, in respect of the form. 


N umber Il. — Orn pages 244-288 are given several rituals of Initiation. 
Pages 302-317 give an account of certain astral visions. 
Pages 326-332 give a formula for R ising on the Planes. 
N umber I11. — Pages 151-169 give details of certain magical formulae. 


Pages 170-190 are avery perfect example — classical, old tyle— of amagical ritual for the evocation of the 
spirit of M ercury. 


Pages 190-197 — aritual for the consecration of a talisman. A very perfect example. 
Pages 198-205 — avery fine example of aritual to invoke the H igher Genius. 
Pages 208-233 — R itual of Initiation, with explanation of the same. 


Pages 269-272 — R itual of obtaining the K nowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel by the 
formula of 1.A.0. 


Pages 272-278 — Ritual to make one’s self invisible. 
N umber lV . — Pages43-196 — Treatise, with model R ecords, of M ental T raining appropriate to the M agician. 


N umber V. — T hesupplement isthe most perfect account of visjonsextant. T hey explore the farthest recesses 
of the magical universe. 


N umber VI. — the Supplement gives seven rituals of the dramatic order, as described in Chapter X 1X. 
Pages 29-32 — A highly important magical ritual for daily use and work. 

N umber VII. — Pages 21-27 — Classical ritual to invoke M ercury; for daily use and work. 

Pages 117-157 — Example of a dramatic ritual in modern style. 

Pages 229-243 — An elaborate magical map of the universe on particular principles. 

Pages 372-375 — Example of aseasonal ritual. 

Pages 376-383 — Ritual to invoke Horus. 

N umber VIII. — Pages 99-128 — The conjuration of the elemental spirits. 

N umber 1X. — Pages 117-136 — R itual for invoking the spirit of M ars. 


N umber X. — Pages 57-79 — Modern example of a magical ritual in dramatic form, commemorating the 
return of Spring. 


Pages 81-90 — Fragment of ritual of a very advanced character. 
VOL. III. 


No. 1. — This volume contains an immense number of articles of primary importance to every student of 
magick. 


T he rituals of T he Book of Lies and the Goetia are also to be studied. T he “preliminary invocation” of the 
Goetiaisin particular recommended for daily use and work. 


O rpheus, by Aleister C rowley, contains a large number of magical invocationsin verse. T here are also agood 
many othersin other parts of his poetical works. 


T he following isa complete curriculum of reading officially aoproved by theA.’. A.’. 


CURRICULUM OF A.,’.A.’, 


COURSE Il. 
GENERAL READING. 
SECTION 1. — Books for Serious Study: 
The Equinox. T he standard W ork of R eference in all occult matters. T he Encyclopaedia of Initiation. 


Collected W orks of A. C rowley. T hese works contain many mystical and magical secrets, both stated 
clearly in prose, and woven into the robe of sublimest poesy. 


The Yi King. (S.B.E. Series, O xford U niversty Press.) T he “C lassic of C hanges’; givesthe initiated C hinese 
system of M agick. 


The Tao Teh King. (S.B.E. Series.) gives the initiated C hinese system of M ysticism. 


T annhauser, by A. Crowley. An allegorical dramaconcerning the Progress of the soul; the T annhauser story 
dightly remodelled. 


T he U panishads. (S.B.E. Series.) T he C lasscal Basisof V edantism, the best-known form of Hindu M ysticisn. 
T he Bhagavad- Gita. A dialoguein which Krishna, the Hindu “Christ”, expoundsa system of Attainment. 
The Voice of the Silence, by H. P. Blavatsky, with an elaborate commentary by FraterO.M. 


T he Goetia. T he most intelligible of the mediaeval ritualsof Evocation. C ontainsalso the favorite! nvocation 
of the M aster T herion. 


T he Shiva Sanhita. A famous H indu treatise on certain physical practices. 
T he H athayoga Pradipika. Similar to T he Shiva Sanhita. 


Erdmann’s “History of Philosophy”. A compendious account of philosophy from the earliest times. 


M ost valuable as a general education of the mind. 

T he Spiritual G uide of Molinos. A smple manual of Christian mysticism. 

The Star of the W est. (C aptain Fuller.) An introduction to the study of the W orks of Aleister C rowley. 
T he D hammapadaa. (S.B.E. Series, O xford U niversity Press.) T he best of the Buddhist classics. 


The Questions of King Milinda. (S.B.E. Series.) Technical points of Buddhist dogma, illustrated by 
dialogues. 


Varieties of R eligious Experience. (james) V aluable as hhowing the uniformity of mystical attainment. 


K abbala D enudata, von R osenroth: also the K abbalah U nveiled, by S. L. M athers. T he text of the K abalah, 
with commentary. A good elementary introduction to the subject. 


Konx om Pax. Four invaluable treatises and a preface on M ysticism and M agick. 

T he Pistis Sophia. An admirable introduction to the tudy of Gnosticism. 

The Oracles of Z oroaster. An invaluable collection of precepts mystical and magical. 
The Dream of Scipio, by Cicero. Excellent for its Vision and its Philosophy. 


The Golden Verses of Pythagoras, by Fabre d’O livet. An interesting study of the exoteric doctrines of 
this M aster. 


The Divine Pymander, by H ermesT rismegistus. Invaluable as bearing on the Gnostic Philosophy. 
The Secret Symbols of the R osicrucians, reprint of Franz H artmann. An invaluable compendium. 
Scrutinium C hymicum, by Michael M aier. O ne of the best treatises on alchemy. 

Science and the Infinite, by Sidney Klein. O ne of the best essays written in recent years. 

Two Essays of the W orship of Priapus, by R ichard Payne K night. Invaluable to all students. 

The Golden Bough, by J. G. Frazer. The T ext-Book of folk Lore. Invaluable to all students. 

The Age of R eason, by T homas Paine. Excellent, though elementary, as a corrective to superstition. 
R ivers of Life, by General Forlong. An invaluable text- book of old systems of initiation. 

Three Dialogues, by Bishop Berkeley. T he Classic of subjective idealism. 

Essays of D avid H ume. T he Classic of Academic Scepticism. 

First Principles, by H erbert Spencer. T he Classic of Agnosticism. 

Prolegomena, by Emanuel K ant. T he best introduction to M etaphysics. 

The C anon. T he best text-book of Applied Q abalah. 

T he Fourth Dimension, by H. Hinton. T he text-book on this subject. 


T he Essays of T homas H enry H uxley. M asterpieces of philosophy, as of prose. 


T he object of this course of reading isto familiarize the tudent with all that has been said by the Great M asters 
in every time and country. He should make a critical examination of them; not so much with the idea of 
discovering where truth lies, for he cannot do this except by virtue of hisown spiritual experience, but rather 
to discover the essential harmony in those varied works. H e should be on his guard agains partisanship with a 
favourite author. H e should familiarize himself thoroughly with the method of mental equilibrium, endeavouring 
to contradict any statement soever, although it may be apparently axiomatic. 


T he general object of this course, besides that already stated, isto assure sound education in occult matters, so 
that when spiritual illumination comes it may find a well-built temple. W here the mind is strongly biased 
towards any Special theory, the result of an illumination is often to inflame that portion of the mind which is 
thus overdeveloped, with the result that the aspirant, instead of becoming an Adept, becomes a bigot and 
fanatic. 


TheA.’. A.’. does not offer examination in this course, but recommends these books as the foundation of a 
library. 


SECTION 2. — Other books, principally fiction, of a generally suggestive and helpful kind: 

Zanoni, by Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton. Valuable for its facts and suggestions about M ysticism. 

A Strange Story, by Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton. V aluable for its facts and suggestions about M agick. 
The Blossom and the Fruit, by M abel Collins. Valuable for its account of the Path. 

Petronius Arbiter. Valuable for those who have wit to understand it. 

The Golden Ass, by Apuleius. Valuable for those who have wit to understand it. 

Le C omte de Gabalis. Valuable for its hints of those things which it mocks. 

The R ape of the Lock, by Alexander Pope. V aluable for its account of elementals. 

U ndine, by delaM otte Fouque. Valuable as an account of elementals. 

Black Magic, by M arjorie Bowen. An intensely interesting story of sorcery. 

Le Peau de Chagrin, by Honore de Balzac. A magnificent magical allegory. 

N umber Nineteen, by Edgar Jepson. An excellent tale of modern magic. 

Dracula, by Bram Stoker. Valuable for its account of legends concerning vampires. 

Scientific R omances, by H. Hinton. Valuable as an introduction to the study of the Fourth Dimension. 
Alice in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll. Valuable to those who understand the Q abalah. 

Alice Through the Looking Glass, by LewisC arroll. V aluable to those who understand the Q abalah. 
The H unting of the Snark, by LewisC arroll. Valuable to those who understand the Q abalah. 


The Arabian N ights, transated by either Sir R ichard Burton or John Payne. Valuable as a storehouse of 


oriental magick-lore. 

M orte d’Arthur, by Sir Thomas allory. Valuable as a storehouse of occidental M agick- lore. 

T he W orks of Francois R abelais. |nvaluable for W isdom. 

T he Kasidah, by Sir R ichard Burton. V aluable asa summary of philosophy. 

T he Song C elestial, by Sir Edwin Arnold. “T he Bhagavad- Gita” in verse. 

T he Light of Asia, by Sir Edwin Arnold. An account of the attainment of Gotama Buddha. 

The R osicrucians, by H argrave Jennings. V aluable to those who can read between the lines. 

The R eal History of the R osicrucians, by A. E. Waite. A good vulgar piece of journalism on the subject. 
The W orks of Arthur Machen. M ost of these stories are of great magical interest. 

The Writings of William O’N eill (Blake). Invaluable to all students. 

The Shaving of Shagpat, by George M eredith. An excellent allegory. 

Lilith, by George M acDonald. A good introduction to the Astral. 

La-Bas, by J. K. Huysmans. An account of the extravagances caused by the Sin- complex. 

The Lore of Proserpine, by M aurice H ewlett. A suggestive enquiry into the H ermetic Arcanum. 
En R oute, by J. K. Huysmans. An account of the follies of C hristian mysticism. 

Sidonia the Sorceress, by W ilhelm M einhold. 

The Amber W itch, by Wilhelm M einhold. 

T hese two tales are highly informative. 


Macbeth; Midsummer N ight’s D ream; The T empest, by W. Shakespeare. Interesting for traditions 
treated. 


R edgauntlet, by Sir W alter Scott. Also one or two other novels. Interesting for traditions treated. 
R ob R oy, by JamesGrant. Interesting for traditions treated. 
The Magician, by W. Somerset M augham. An amusing hotchpot of stolen goods. 


T he Bible, by variousauthorsunknown. T heH ebrew and Greek O riginalsare of Q abalistic value. It contains 
also many magical apologues, and recounts many tales of folk-lore and magical rites. 


Kim, by R udyard Kipling. An admirable study of Eastern thought and life. M any other stories by this author 
are highly suggestive and informative. 


For M ythology, as teaching C orrespondences: 


Books of Fairy T ales generally. 


O riental C lassics generally. 

Sufi Poetry generally. 

Scandinavian and T eutonic Sagas generally. 
Celtic Folk-Lore generally. 


T hiscourse is of general value to the beginner. W hile it isnot to be taken, in all cases, too seriously, it will give 
him a general familiarity with the mystical and magical tradition, create a deep interest in the subject, and 
suggest many helpful lines of thought. 


It hasbeen impossible to do more, in thislist, than to suggest a fairly comprehensive course of reading. 
SECTION 3. — Official publicationsof theA.’. A.’. 

Liber |. 

Liber B vel M agi. 


An account of the Grade of M agus, the highest grade which it isever possible to manifest in any way whatever 
upon this plane. Or so it is said by the M asters of the T emple. Equinox VII, p. 5. 


Liber II. 


T he M essage of the M aster T herion. Explains the Essence of the new law in avery Smple manner. Equinox 
XI (Vol. HI, No. 1), p. 39. 


Liber III. 
Liber J ugorum. 


An instruction for the control of speech, action and thought. Equinox IV, p. 9 & Appendix VI of this book. 
Libe IV. ABA. 


A general account in elementary terms of magical and mystical powers. 
Part. 1. M ystidsm — published. 

2. M agik (Elementary Theory) — published. 

3. M agi in T heory and Practice (this book). 

4, TheLaw. N ot yet completed. 


[note by shawn: Part |V was subsequenty published asT he E quinox of the G ods (E quinox V olumeII|, N umber 
3h 


Liber VI. 
Liber O vel M anus et Sagittae. 


Instructionsgiven for elementary study of the Q abalah, Assumption of God forms, vibration of Divine N ames, 
the R ituals of Pentagram and H exagram, and their uses in protection and invocation, a method of attaining 


astral vigons so-called, and an instruction in the practice called R ising on the Planes. Equinox II, p. 11 and 
appendix VI in this book. 


Liber V II. 
Liber Liberi vel Lapis L azuli, A dumbratio K abbalae A egyptiorum. 
sub Figura VII. 


Being the Voluntary Emancipation of acertain exempt Adept from hisA deptship. T hese are the Birth W ords 
of aM aster of the T emple. 


Its 7 chapters are referred to the 7 planets in the following order: 

M ars, Saturn, Jupiter, Sol, Mercury, Luna, Venus. 

Liber VIII. 

See CCCCXVIII. 

[note by shawn: T his reference is a bit cryptic. Liber VIII isfrom the eighth Aethyr in Liber CC CCX VIII.] 
Liber IX. 

Liber E vel E xeratiorum. 


Instructs the aspirant in the necessity of keeping arecord. Suggests methods of testing physical clairvoyance. 
Gives instruction in Asana, Pranayama and D harana, and advises the application of tests to the physical body, 
in order that the student may thoroughly understand hisown limitations Equinox |, p. 25 & Appendix V1 of 
this Book. 


Liber X . 
Liber Porta L uas. 


An account of the sending forth of the M aster Therion by the A.’. A.’. and an explanation of His mission. 
Equinox VI, p. 3. 


Liber XI. 

Liber NV. 

An Instruction for attaining N uit. Equinox VII, p. 11. 

Liber X III. 

G raduum M ontis A biegni. 

An account of the task of the Aspirant from Probationer to Adept. Equinox III, p. 3. 
Liber XV. 


E cdesiae G nostic@aeC atholicae C annon M issae. 


R epresents the original and true pre-Christian Christianity. Equinox X | (vol. ili, part 1) And Appendix VI of 
this book. 


Liber X V1. 
Liber T urris vel D omus D a. 


An Instruction for attainment by the direct destruction of thoughts as they arise in the mind. Equinox VI, p. 
9. 


Liber X VII. 
Liber|.A.0. 


Gives three methods of attainment through a willed series of thoughts. U npublished. It is the active form of 
Liber CCCLXI. 


Liber X XI. 

The C lassic of Purity, by Ko H suen. 

A new translation from the Chinese by the M aster T herion. U npublished. 
Liber XXV. 

TheR itual of the Star R uby. 


An improved form of the lesser ritual of the Pentagram, Liber CCC X X XIII, The Book of Lies, pp. 34 & 35. 
Also Appendix VI of this book. 


Liber XX VII. 
Liber T rigrammaton, being a book of T rigrams of the M utations of the T ao with the Y in and Y ang. 


An account of the cosmic process: corresponding to the stanzas of Dzyan in another system. U npublished. 
[note by shawn: published in T he H oly Books of T hdema (E quinox V olumell!, N umber 9).] 


Liber XXX. 

Liber L ibrae. 

An elementary course of morality suitable for the average man. Equinox |, p. 17. 
Liber X X XIII. 


An account of A.’. A.’. first written in the Language of his period by the C ouncillor Von Eckartshausen and 
now revised and rewritten in the U niversal Cipher. Equinox |, p. 4. 


Liber XXXVI. 
T he Star Sapphire. 


An improved ritual of the H exagram. Liber CC CX X XIII (The Book of Lies), p.p. 46 & 7, and Appendix VI 
of this book. 


Liber X LI. 

Thien T ao. 

An Essay on Attainment by the W ay of Equilibrium. 

Knox Om Pax, p. 52 

Liber X LIV 

T he M ass of the Phoenix. 

A Ritual of the Law. Liber CC CX X XIII (The Book of Lies), pp. 57-7, and Appendix V1 in this book. 
Liber XLVI. 

T he K ey of the M ysteries. 


A Translation of “LaC lef desGrandsM ysteres’, by EliphasLevi. Specially adapted to the tax of the Attainment 
of Bhakta- Y oga. Equinox X , Supplement. 


Liber X LIX. 

Shi Yi Chien. 

An account of the divine perfection illustrated by the seven- fold permutation of the D yad. U npublished. 
Liber LI. 

T he L ost C ontinent. 


An account of the continent of Atlantis: the manners and customs, magical rites and opinions of its people, 
together with a true account of the catastrophe, so called, which ended in its disappearance. U npublished. 


Liber LV. 

T heC hymial J ousting of Brother P erardua with the seven L ances that he brake. 

An account of the M agical and M ystic Path in the language of Alchemy. Equinox |, p. 88. 
Liber LV III. 

An article on the Q abalah in Equinox V, p. 65. 

Liber LIX. 

A qoss the G ulf. 


A fantastic account of apreviousI! ncarnation. Itsprincipal interest liesin the fact that itsstory of the overthrowing 
of Issby O sirismay help the reader to understand the meaning of the overthrowing of O srisby H orusin the 
present Aeon. Equinox VII, p. 293. 


Liber L XI. 


Liber C ausae. 


Explains the actual history and origin of the present movement. Its statements are accurate in the ordinary 
sense of the word. T he object of the book isto discount M ythopeia. Equinox X1|, p. 55. 


Liber LX IV. 

Liber Israfel, formerly called A nubis. 

An instruction in a suitable method of preaching. U npublished. 

Liber LXV. 

Liber C ordis C inci Serpente. 

An account of the relations of the Aspirant with hisH oly Guardian Angel. Equinox XI (vol. tii, part 1), p. 65. 
Liber LX VI. 

Liber Stellae R ubeae. 


A secret ritual, the H eart of [AO-OAI, delivered unto V.V.V.V.V. for hisusein acertain matter of L iber L egis. 
See Liber CCC X X XIII (T he Book of Lies), pp. 34-5. Also Appendix VI in this book. 


Liber LX VII. 
T he Sword of Song. 


A critical tudy of various philosophies. An account of Buddhism. A. Crowley, Collected W orks, Vol. ii, pp. 
140-203. 


Liber LX X1. 

The V oie of the Silene, theT wo Paths, the Seven Portals, 

by H. P. Blavatsky, with an elaborate commentary by Frater O. M. Equinox III, |. Supplement. 
Liber LX XXII]. — TheUrm. 


T hisisthe sequel to T heT emple of Solomon theK ing, and isthe Diary of aM agus. T hisbook contains a detailed 
account of all the experiences passed through by the M aster T herion in hisattainment of this grade of Initiation, 
the highest possible to any manifested M an. Unpublished. 


Liber LX XVIII. 


A complete treatise on the T arot giving the correct designs of the cards with their attributions and symbolic 
meanings on all the planes. Part- published in Equinox VII, p.143. 


Liber LX X XI. 
T he Butterfly N et. 


An account of a magical operation, particularly concerning the planet Luna, written in the form of anovel. 
Published under the title “M oon-child” by the M andrake Press, 41, M useum St., London, W.C.1. 


Liber LX XXIV. 


Vel Chanokh. 


A brief abstraction of the Symbolic representation of the U niverse derived by Dr. John Dee through the 
Scrying of Sir Edward Kelly. Part- published in Equinox VII, p. 229 & VIII, p. 99. 


Liber XC. 

T zaddi vel H amus H ermeticus. 

An account of Initiation, and an indication asto those who are suitable for the same. Equinox VI, p. 17. 
Liber XCV. 

The W akeW orld. 

A poetical allegory of the relations of the soul and the H oly Guardian Angel. Konx Om Pax, p. 1. 
Liber XC VI. 

Liber G aias. 

A Handbook of Geomancy. Equinox II, p. 137. 

Liber CVI. 

A Treatise on the N ature of D eath, and the proper attitude to be taken towards it. 

Published in “T he International”, N ew Y ork, 1917. 

Liber C X| (Aleph). 

T he B ook of W isdom or F olly. 


An extended and elaborate commentary on the Book of the Law, in the form of a letter from the M aster 
Therion to his magical son. C ontains some of the deepest secrets of initiation, with a clear solution of many 
cosmic and ethical problems. Unpublished. [note by shawn: Since published asL iber A leph (E quinox V olume 
Il, N umber 6).] 


Libae CL. 
DeLege L ibellum. 


A further explanation of the Book of the Law, with special reference to the Powersand Privilegesconferred by 
its acceptance. 


Equinox III, part 1, p. 99. 
Liber CL VI. 
Liber C heth, vel V allum A biegni. 


A perfect account of the task of the Exempt Adept considered under the symbolsof a particular plane, not the 
intellectual. Equinox VI, p. 23. 


Liber CLVII. 

TheT aoT eh K ing. 

A new translation, with acommentary, by the M aster Therion. Unpublished. 

Liber C LXV. 

A Master of the T enple, Being an account of the attainment of Frater U nusIn O mnibus. 


The record of aman who actually attained by the system taught by theA.’. A.’. Part- published in Equinox III, 
1,0. 127: 


Liber CLXXV. 

A starte vel Liber B erylli. 

An instruction in attainment by the method of devotion, or Bhakta-Y ogi. Equinox VII, p. 37. 
Liber CLXXXV. 

Liber C ollegii Sandi. 


Being the tasks of the Grades and their O aths proper to Liber XIII. This is the official paper of the various 
grades. It includes the T ask and O ath of a Probationer. U npublished. [note by shawn: Since released in G ens 
from the E quinox, Israel R egardie, ed.] 


Liber CXCVII. 

TheH igh H istory of G ood Sir Palamedes the Saracen K night and of his following of the Q uesting B east. 

A poetic account of the Great W ork and enumeration of many obstacles. Equinox IV, Special Supplement. 
LiberCC. 

R esh vel H elios. 


An instruction for the adoration of the Sun four times daily, with the object of composing the mind to 
meditation, and of regularisng the practices. Equinox VI, p. 29. 


Liber C CVI, 

Liber R U vel Spiritus. 

Full instruction in Pranayama. Equinox VII, p. 59. 
Liber CC VII. 


Syllabus. An enumeration of the O fficial publications of A.’. A.’. with a brief description of the contents of 
each book. Equinox X| (vol. ili part 1), p. 11. This appendix is extracted therefrom. 


Liber CC XX (L ve Legis). 


T he Book of the Law, which isthe foundation of the whole work. T extin Equinox X , p. 9. Short commentary 


in Equinox VII, p. 378. Full commentary by the M aster Therion through whom it was given to the world, 
will be published shortly. [note by shawn: R etitled ‘AL vel Legis after the discoveries of Frater Achad.] 


Liber CC XVI. 

TheYi K ing. 

A new translation, with acommentary by the M aster Therion. U npublished. 
Liber CC XX XI. 


Liber Arcanorum tonATU touTAHUTI quasviditASAR inAMENNTI sub figuraC C XX XI. Liber C arcerorum 
tonQLIPHOTH qumsuisG eniis. A dduntur Sigilla et N omina E orum. 


An account of the cosmic process so far as it is indicated by the T arot Trumps. Equinox VII, p. 69. 
Liber CC XLII. AHA! 


An expostion in poetic language of several of the ways of attainment and the results obtained. Equinox III, p. 
9 


Liber CC LXV. 
T he Structure of the M ind. 


A Treatise on psychology from the mystic an magical standpoint. Its tudy will help the aspirant to make a 
detailed scientific analysis of his mind, and so learn to control it. U npublished. 


Liber C CC. K habs am P ekht. 


A special instruction for the Promulgation of the Law. This is the first and most important duty of every 
Aspirant of whatever grade. It buildsup in him the character and K arma which formsthe Spine of Attainment. 
Equinox Ill, 1, p. 171 


Libe CCCXXXIII. 
T he Book of Lies falsely so-called. 


Deals with many matters on all planes of the very highest importance. It isan official publication for Babes of 
the Abyss, but is recommended even to beginners as highly suggestive. Published. 


Liber C CCXXXV. Adonis. 


An account in poetic language of the struggle of the human and divine elements in the consciousness of man, 
giving their harmony following on the victory of the latter. Equinox VII, p. 117. 


Libe CCCLXI. 
Liber H.H.H. 
Gives three methods of attainment through a willed series of thoughts. 


Liber CCCLXV, vel CXX. 


T hePreiminary Invocation of theG oetia so-called, with acomplete explanation of the barbarousnamesof evocation 
used therein, and the secret rubric of the ritual, by the M aster Therion. T his is the most potent invocation 
extant, and was used by the M aster Himself in his attainment. See p. 265 of this book. 


Liber C D. 

Liber TAU vel K abbalaeT ruium Literarum sub figura D. 

A graphic interpretation of the T arot on the plane of initiation. Equinox VII, p. 75. 
Liber CCCCXII. 

A vel Armorum. 

An instruction for the preparation of the elemental Instruments. Equinox IV, p. 15. 
Liber CCCCXVIII. 

Liber XXX AERUM vel Saeaili. 


Being of the Angelsof the T hirty Aethyrs, the Vision and the Voice. Besides being the classical account of the 
thirty Aethyrs and a model of all visions, the cries of the Angels should be regarded as accurate, and the 
doctrine of the function of the Great W hite Brotherhood understood asthe foundation of the Aspiration of the 
Adept. The account of the M aster of the Temple should in particular be taken as authentic. Equinox V, 
Special Supplement. 


Libe CDLXXIV. OSA bysmi vel D a’ath. 
An instruction in a purely intellectual method of entering the Abyss. Equinox VII, p. 77. 
Liber D . Sepher Sephiroth. 


A dictionary of H ebrew words arranged according to their numerical value. T his is an Encyclopaedia of the 
H oly Qabalah, which isa M ap of the U niverse, and enables man to attain Perfect U nderstanding. Equinox 
VIII, Special Supplement. 


Liber D XXXVI. 
A complete T reatise on A strology. 


This is the only text book on astrology composed on scientific lines by classifying observed facts instead of 
deducting from a priori theories. U npublished. 


Liber D XXXVI. 

BATRACHOPHRENOBOOKOSMOMACHIA. 

An instruction in expansion of the field of the mind. Equinox X, p. 35. 
Libe DLV. LIBER HAD. 

An instruction for attaining H adit. Equinox VII, p. 83. 
Liber DC XXXII. 


D eT haumaturgia. 

A statement of certain ethical considerations concerning M agick. U npublished. 

Liber DCLXVI. 

T he B east. 

An account of the M agical Personality who isthe Logos of the present Aeon. U npublished. 
Liber DCCLXXVII. (777). 


Vel Prolegomena Symbolica Ad Systenam Sceptic-M ystiqe V iae E xplicandae, Fundamentum H ieroglyphicorum 
sandissimorum Saentae Summae. 


A complete Dictionary of the C orrespondences of all magical elements, reprinted with extensive additions, 
making it the only tandard comprehensve book of reference ever published. It isto the language of O ccultism 
what W ebster or M urray isto the English Language. T he reprint with additions will shortly be published. 


LiberDCCCXI. 
Energised Enthusiasm. 


Specially adapted to the task of Attainment of Control of the Body of Light, development of Intuition and 
H athayoga. Equinox IX, p. 17. 


Liber DCCC XIII. 

vl ARARITA. 

An account of the H exagram and the method of reducing it to the U nity, and Beyond. U npublished. 
Liber DCCCXXXI. 

Liber 10D, formerly called VESTA. 


Aninstruction giving three methodsof reducing the manifold consciousnessto the U nity. Adapted to facilitate 
the task of the Attainment of R aja Y oga and of the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian 
Angel. Equinox VII, p. 101. 


Libe DCCCXXXVII. 


T heL aw of Liberty. T hisisa further explanation of the Book of the Law in reference to certain Ethical problems. 
Equinox XI (vol. II], No. 1), p. 45. 


Liber DCCCLX. 
John St. John. 


TheR ecord of the M agical R etirement of G.H. FraterO.’.M .’. A model of what amagical record should be, 
so far as accurate analysis and fullness of description are concerned. Equinox |, Supplement. 


Libe DCCCLXVIII. 


Liber V iarum V iae. 

A graphical account of magical powers classified under the T arot Trumps. Equinox VII, p. 101. 
Libe DCCCLXXXVIII. 

A complete study of the origins of Christianity. U npublished. 

Liber C M XIII, 

Liber V iae M emoriae. 


Gives methods for attaining the magical memory, or memory of past lives, and an insight into the function of 
the Aspirant in this present life. Equinox VII, p. 105. 


Liber CMXXXIV. 
TheC adus. 


An elaborate study of the psychological effects produced by A nhalonium L ewinii (M escal Buttons), compiled 
from the actual records of some hundreds of experiments. U npublished. 


Liber DCCCCLXIII. 

T heT reasure H ouse of | mages. 

A superb collection of Litanies appropriate to the Signs of the Z odiac. Equinox II, Supplement. 
Liber MMCCMXI. 

A N ote on G enesis. 

A model of Q abalistic ratiocination. Specially adapted to GnanaY oga. 

Libe MCCLXIV. 

T he G reek Q abalah. 


A complete dictionary of all sacred and important words and phrases given in the Books of the Gnosis and 
other important writings both in the Greek and the C optic. U npublished. 


APPENDIX Il. 
ONE STAR IN SIGHT. 


T hy feet in mire, thine head in murk, 
O man, how piteous thy plight, 

T he doubts that daunt, the ills that irk, 
Thou hast nor wit nor will to fight — 

H ow hope in heart, or worth in work? 
No star in sight! 

Thy gods proved puppets of the priest. 
“Truth? All's relation!” science sighed. 
In bondage with thy brother beast, 
Love tortured thee, asLove’s hope died 
And Lover's faith rotted. Life no least 
Dim star descried. 

T hy cringing carrion cowered and crawled 
To find itself a chance- cast clod 

W hose Pain was purposeless; appalled 

T hat aimless accident thus trod 

Its agony, that void skies sprawled 

On the vain sod! 

All souls eternally exist, 

Each individual, ultimate, 

Perfect — each makes itself a mist 

Of mind and flesh to celebrate 

W ith some twin mask their tender tryst 
I nsatiate. 


Some drunkards, doting on the dream, 


Despair that it should die, mistake 
Themselves for their own shadow- scheme. 
One star can summon them to wake 
To self; sttar- souls serene that gleam 
On life’s calm lake. 

T hat shall end never that began. 

All things endure because they are. 
Do what thou wilt, for every man 
And every woman isa star. 

Pan isnot dead; he liveth, Pan! 
Break down the bar! 

To man! come, the number of 

A man my number, Lion of Light; 

| am T he Beast whose Law isLove. 
Love under will, hisroyal right — 
Behold within, and not above, 


One star in sight! 
ONE STAR IN SIGHT. 


A glimpse of the structure and system of the Great W hite Brotherhood. 

Ae Re 
T he N ame of the O rder and those of its three divisions are not disdosed to the profane C etain swindlers have 
recently stolen the initialsA.’. A.’. in order to profit by its reputation. 

Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. 


1. TheO rder of the Star called S. S. is, in respect of its existence upon the Earth, an organized body of men and 
women distinguished among their fellows by the qualities here enumerated. T hey exist in their own T ruth, 
which is both universal and unique. T hey move in accordance with their own W ills, which are each unique, 
yet coherent with the universal will. 


T hey perceive (that is, understand, know, and feel) in love, which is both unique and universal. 


2. The order consists of eleven grades or degrees, and isnumbered asfollows: these compose three groups, the 
Orders of theS. S., of theR.C., and of theG. D. respectively. 


TheO rder of theS. S. 


I PSISSIMUS .eseseeceseseeees 10 Degree = 1Square 
MW AQUS 3 vesteneunaiees 9 Degree = 2Square 
Magister Templi ............ 8 Degree = 3Square 


TheO rder of theR.C. 
(Babe of the Abyss— the link) 


Adeptus Exemptus............ 7 Degree = 4Square 
Adeptus M aor... 6 Degree = 5Square 
Adeptus Minoru... 5 Degree = 6Square 


TheOrder of theG. D. 


(Dominus Liminis— the link) 


PhiIOSOPNUS .......eeeeeee 4 Degree = 7Square 
PFOCHEUS 3 aunasecealvens 3 Degree = 8Square 
LEMON csscced saris deatecas 2 Degree = 9Square 
Neophyte oes 1 Degree = 10Square 
Probationer .....ccceceee 0 Degree = OSquare 


(T hese figures have special meanings to the initiated and are commonly employed to designate the grades.) 


T he general characteristics and attributions of these G radesare indicated by their correspondenceson theT ree 
of Life, as may be studied in detail in the Book 777. 


Student. — H isbusinessisto acquire a general intellectual knowledge of all sytemsof attainment, as declared 
in the prescribed books. (See curriculum in Appendix |.) 


Probationer. — H isprincipal businessisto begin such practices ashe my prefer, and to write acareful record 
of the same for one year. 


N eophyte. — Hasto acquire perfect control of the Astral Plane. 


Zelator. — Hismain work isto achieve complete success in Asana and Pranayama. H e also begins to study 
the formula of the R osy Cross. 


Practicus. — |sexpected to complete his intellectual training, and in particular to study the Q abalah. 
Philosophus. — Is expected to complete his moral training. H e istested in Devotion to the O rder. 
Dominus Liminis. — |s expected to show mastery of Pratyahara and D harana. 


Adeptus (without). — isexpected to perform the G reat W ork and to attain the Knowledge and C onversation 


of the H oly Guardian Angel. 


Adeptus (within). — Isadmitted to the practice of the formulaof the R osy Crosson entering the C ollege of 
the Holy Ghost. Adeptus (Major). — Obtains a general mastery of practical M agick, though without 
comprehenson. 


Adeptus (Exemptus). — Completesin perfection all these matters. H e then either (a) becomesa Brother of 
the Left H and Path or, (b) is stripped of all his attainments and of himself as well, even of his H oly Guardian 
Angel, and becomesa babe of the Abyss, who, having transcended the R eason, does nothing but grow in the 
womb of its mother. It then finds itself a 


M agister Templi. — (M aster of the T emple): whose functions are fully described in Liber 418, as is this 
whole initiation from Adeptus Exemptus. See also “Aha!”. His principal business is to tend his “garden” of 
disciples, and to obtain a perfect understanding of the U niverse. He isa M aster of Samadhi. 


M agus. — Attains to wisdom, declares his law (See Liber |, vel M agi) and isa M aster of all M agick in its 
greatest and highest sense. 


Ipsissimus. — |s beyond all thisand beyond all comprehension of those of lower degrees. 


But of these last three Grades see some further account in T heT emple of Solomon theK ing, Equinox | to X and 
elsewhere. 


It should be stated that these G rades are not necessarily attained fully, and in strict consecution, or manifested 
wholly on all planes. T he subject is very difficult, and entirely beyond the limits of this small treatise. 


W e append a more detailed account. 


3. TheO rder of theS. S. iscomposed of those who have crossed the A byss; the implications of this expression 
may be studied in Liber 418, the 14th, 13th, 12th, 11th, 10th, and 9th Aethyrsin particular. 


All members of the O rder are in full possession of the Formulae of Attainment, both mystical or inwardly- 
directed and M agical or outwardly- directed. T hey have full experience of attainment in both these paths. 


T hey are all, however, bound by the original and fundamental O ath of the O rder, to devote their energy to 
assisting the Progress of their Inferiors in the O rder. T hose who accept the rewards of their emancipation for 
themselves are no longer within the O rder. 


M embers of the O rder are each entitled to found O rders dependent on themselves on the linesof theR.C. 
and G. D. orders, to cover types of emancipation and illumination not contemplated by the original (or main) 
system. All such orders must, however, be constituted in harmony with theA.’. A.’. as regards the essential 
principles. 


All members of the O rder are in possession of the W ord of the existing Aeon, and govern themselves thereby. 


They are entitled to communicate directly with any and every member of the Order, as they may deem 
fitting. 


Every active M ember of the O rder has destroyed all that H eis and all that he has on crossing the Abyss; but 
a star is cat forth in the H eavens to enlighten the Earth, so that he may possess a vehicle wherein he may 
communicate with mankind. T he quality and position of this star, and its functions, are determined by the 
nature of the incarnations transcended by him. 


4. The Grade of | psissimusis not to be described fully; but its opening isindicated in Liber | vel M agi. 


T here is also an account in acertain secret document to be published when propriety permits. H ere it is only 
said this: The |psssmusis wholly free from all limitations soever, existing in the nature of all things without 
discriminations of quantity or quality between them. H e has identified Being and not-Being and Becoming, 
action and non-action and tendency to action, with all other such triplicities, not distinguishing between 
them in respect of any conditions, or between any one thing and any other thing as to whether it is with or 
without conditions. 


H eissworn to accept this Grade in the presence of a witness, and to express its nature in word and deed, but 
to withdraw H imself at once within the veils of his natural manifestation asa man, and to keep silence during 
his human life as to the fact of his attainment, even to the other members of the O rder. 


The | psssimus is pre- eminently the M aster of all modes of existence; that is, his being is entirely free from 
internal or external necessity. His work isto destroy all tendencies to construct or to cancel such necessities. 
H e isthe M aster of the Law of U nsubstantiality (Anatta). 


T helpsisimus has no relation as such with any Being: H ehasno will in any direction, and no Conscioumess 
of any kind involving duality, for in Him all isaccomplished; asit iswritten “beyond the W ord and the Fool, 
yea, beyond the W ord and the Fool”. 


5. The Grade of M agusis described in Liber | vel M agi, and there are accounts of its character in Liber 418 in 
the Higher Aethyrs. 


T here is also a full and precise description of the attainment of this Grade in the M agical R ecord of the Beast 
666. 


T he essential characteristic of the Grade is that its possessor uttersaC reative M agical W ord, which transforms 
the planet on which he lives by the installation of new officersto preside over itsinitiation. T hiscan take place 
only at an “Equinox of the Gods’ at the end of an “Aeon”; that is, when the secret formula which expresses 
the Law of its action becomes outworn and useless to its further development. 


(T hus “Suckling” is the formula of an infant: when teeth appear it marks a new “Aeon”, whose “W ord” is 
“Eating”). 


A M agus can therefore only appear as such to the world at intervals of some centuries; accounts of historical 
M agi, and their W ords, are given in Liber Aleph. 


T hisdoesnot mean that only one man can attain thisGradein any one Aeon, so far asthe O rder isconcerned. 
A man can make personal progress equivalent to that of a “Word of an Aeon”; but he will identify himself 
with the current word, and exert his will to establish it, lest he conflict with the work of the M agus who 
uttered the W ord of the Aeon in which H e isliving. 


The M agus is pre-eminently the M aster of M agick, that is, his will is entirely free from internal diversion or 
external opposition; H iswork isto create anew U niversein accordance with H isW ill. HeistheM aster of the 
Law of Change (Anicca). 


T o attain the Grade of | psssmushe must accomplish three tasks, destroying the T hree Guardians mentioned 
in Liber 418, the 3rd Aethyr; M adness, and Falsehood, and Glamour, that is, Duality in Act, Word and 
Thought. 


6. The Grade of M aster of the T emple is described in Liber 418 as above indicated. T here are full accountsin 
the M agical Diaries of the Beast 666, who was cast forth into the H eaven of Jupiter, and of O mniain Uno, 
U nusin Omnibus, who was cast forth into the sphere of the Elements. 


T he essential Attainment isthe perfect annihilation of that personality which limits and oppresses his true self. 


The M agister T empli is pre-eminently the M aster of M ysticism, that is, His U nderstanding is entirely free 
from internal contradiction or external obscurity; H isword isto comprehend the existing U niversein accordance 
with Hisown M ind. Heisthe M aster of the Law of Sorrow (Dukkha). 


To attain the grade of M agushe must accomplish T hree 235} T asks, the renunciation of H isenjoyment of the 
Infinite so that he may formulate H imself asthe Finite; the acquisition of the practical secrets alike of initiating 
and governing H is proposed new U niverse and the identification of himself with the impersonal idea of Love. 
Any neophyte of the Order (or, as some say, any person soever) possesses the right to claim the Grade of 
M aster of the T emple by taking the O ath of the Grade. It is hardly necessary to observe that to do so isthe 
most sublime and awful responsibility which it is possible to assume, and an unworthy person who does so 
incurs the most terrific penalties by his presumption. 


7. The O rder of theR. C. The Grade of the Babe of the Abyss isnot a Grade in the proper sense, being rather 
a passage between the two O rders. Its characteristics are wholly negative, asit isattained by the resolve of the 
AdeptusExemptusto surrender all that he hasand isfor ever. It isan annihilation of all the bondsthat compose 
the self or constitute the C osmos, aresolution of all complexitiesinto their elements, and these thereby cease 
to manifest, since things are only knowable in respect of their relation to, and reaction on, other things. 


8. The Grade of Adeptus Exemptus confers authority to govern the two lower OrdersofR.C.andG. D. 


The Adept must prepare and publish a thesis setting forth H is knowledge of the U niverse, and his proposals 
for its welfare and progress. H e will thus be known asthe leader of a school of thought. 


(Eliphas Levi'sC lef desG rands M ysteres, the worksof Swedenborg, von Eckarshausen, R obert Fludd, Paracelsus, 
N ewton, Bolyai, Hinton, Berkeley, Loyola, etc., etc., are examples of such essays.) 


H e will have attained all but the supreme summits of meditation, and should be already prepared to perceive 
that the only possible course for him isto devote himself utterly to helping his fellow creatures. 


To attain the Grade of Magister Templi, he must perform two tasks; the emancipation from thought by 
putting each idea against its opposite, and refusing to prefer either; and the consecration of himself as a pure 
vehicle for the influence of the order to which he aspires. 


He must then decide upon the critical adventure of our O rder; the absolute abandonment of himself and his 
attainments. He cannot remain indefinitely an Exempt Adept; he is pushed onward by the irresistible 
momentum that he has generated. 


Should he fail, by will or weakness, to make his self- annihilation absolute, he isnone the less thrust forth into 
the Abyss, but instead of being received and reconstructed in the T hird O rder, asaBabe in the womb of our 
Lady BABALON, under theN ight of Pan, to grow up to beH imself wholly and truly asH ewasnot previously, 
he remains in the Abyss, secreting his elements round his Ego asif isolated from the U niverse, and becomes 
what is called a “Black Brother”. Such a being is gradually disintegrated from lack of nourishment and the 
gow but certain action of the attraction of the rest of the U niverse, despite efforts to insulate and protect 
himself, and to aggrandise himself by predatory practices. H e may indeed prosper for awhile, but in the end 


he must perish, especially when with anew Aeon anew word is proclaimed which he cannot and will not 
hear, so that he ishandicapped by trying to use an obsolete method of M agick, like aman with aboomerang 
in a battle where every one else has a rifle. 


9. The Grade of Adeptus M ajor confers M agical Powers (strictly so-called) of the second rank. 


H iswork isto use these to support the authority of the Exempt Adept hissuperior. (T hisisnot to be understood 
asan obligation of personal subservience or even loyalty; but asanecessary part of hisduty to assist hisinferiors. 
For the authority of the T eaching and governing A dept is the basis of all orderly work.) 


To attain the Grade of Adeptus Exemptus, he must accomplish T hree T asks; the acquisition of absolute Self- 
R eliance, working in complete isolation, yet transmitting the word of his superior clearly, forcibly and subtly; 
and the comprehension and use of the R evolution of the wheel of force, under its three successive forms of 
R adiation, Conduction and Convection (Mercury, Sulphur, Salt; or Sattvas, R ajas, T amas), with their 
corresponding natures on other planes. Thirdly, he must exert his whole power and authority to govern the 
M embersof lower G radeswith balanced vigour and initiative in such away asto allow no dispute or complaint; 
he must employ to this end the formula called “T he Beast conjoined with the W oman” which establishes a 
new incarnation of deity; asin the legends of Leda, Semele, M iriam, Pasiphae, and others. H e must set up this 
ideal for the orders which he rules, so that they may possess a not too abstract rallying point suited to their 
undeveloped states. 


10. T he Grade of AdeptusM inor isthe main theme of the instructionsof theA.’. A.’. Itischaracterised by the 
Attainment of the K nowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel. (See the Equinox, T heT enple 
of Solomon the K ing; T heV ision and the V oice 8th Aethyr; also Liber Samekh, etc. etc.) T hisisthe essential work 
of every man; none other ranks with it either for personal progress or for power to help one’s fellows. This 
unachieved, man is no more than the unhappiest and blindest of animals. He is conscious of his own 
incomprehensible calamity, and clumsily incapable of repairing it. Achieved, he isno less than the co-heir of 
gods, aLord of Light. H e is conscious of hisown consecrated course, and confidently ready to run it. The 
Adeptus M inor needs little help or guidance even from his superiorsin our O rder. 


Hiswork is to manifest the Beauty of the Order to the world, in the way that his superiors enjoin, and his 
genius dictates. 


To attain the Grade Adeptus M ajor, he must accomplish two tasks; the equilibration of himself, especially as 
to his passions, so that he has no preference for any one course of conduct over another, and the fulfilment of 
every action by itscomplement, so that whatever he doesleaves him without temptation to wander from the 
way of hisT rue Will. 


Secondly, he must keep slence, while he nails his body to the tree of his creative will, in the shape of that 
Will, leaving his head and armsto form the symbol of Light, asif to make oath that his every thought, word 
and deed should express the Light derived from the God with which he hasidentified hislife, hislove and his 
liberty — symbolised by hisheart, his phallus, and hislegs. It isimpossible to lay down precise rules by which 
aman may attain to the knowledge and conversation of His H oly Guardian Angel; for that is the particular 
secret of each one of us; assecret not to be told or even divined by any other, whatever hisgrade. It isthe H oly 
of H olies, whereof each man ishisown H igh Priest, and none knoweth the N ame of hisbrother’sGod, or the 
R ite that invokes H im. 


TheM astersof theA.’. A.’. have therefore made no attempt to institute any regular ritual for thiscentral W ork 
of their Order, save the generalised instructions in Liber 418 (the 8th Aethyr) and the detailed C anon and 


R ubric of the M ass actually used with success by FRATER PERDURABO in His attainment. This has 
been written down by Himself in Liber Samekh. But they have published such accounts as those in The 
T emple of Solomon the K ing and in John St. John. T hey have taken the only proper course; to train aspirants to 
this attainment in the theory and practice of the whole of M agick and M ysticism, so that each man may be 
expert in the handling of all known weapons, and free to choose and to use those which his own experience 
and instinct dictate as proper when he essays the Great Experiment. 


He is furthermore trained to the one habit essential to M embership of the A.’. A.’.; he must regard all his 
attainments as primarily the property of those less advanced aspirants who are confided to his charge. 


No attainment soever is officially recognised by the A.’. A.’. unless the immediate inferior of the person in 
question has been fitted by him to take his place. 


The rule isnot rigidly applied in all cases, asit would lead to congestion, especially in the lower grades where 
the need is greatest, and the conditions most confused; but it isnever relaxed in the O rder of theR . C. or of 
the S. S.: save only in One Case. 


There is also a rule that the M embers of the A.’. A.’. shall not know each other officially, save only each 
M ember his superior who introduced him and his inferior whom he has himself introduced. 


T his rule has been relaxed, and a “Grand N eophyte” appointed to superintend all M embers of the O rder of 
the G. D. The real object of the rule was to prevent M embers of the same Grade working together and so 
blurring each other’s individuality; also to prevent work developing into social intercourse. 


T he Grades of the O rder of the G. D. are fully described in Liber 185 


T his book is published in the E quinox Vol. III No. 2— — Addenda by WEH:No, itisn’t. Vol. III, 2 didn’t 
get out of printer’s proofs and was not published. T he book in question was finally published in R egardie’s 
“G ems from the E quinox” . 


, and there isno need to amplify what is there stated. It must however, be carefully remarked that in each of 
these preliminary Grades there are appointed certain tasks appropriate, and that the ample accomplishment of 
each and every one of these isinssted upon with the most rigorous rigidity. 


Liber 185 need not be quoted at length. It is needful only to say that the A spirant is trained systematically and 
comprehensively in the various technical practices which form the basis of O ur W ork. O nemay become expert in 
any or all of these without necessarily making any real progress, just as a man might be first-rate at grammar, 
syntax, and prosody without being able to write a single line of good poetry, although the greatest poet in soul is 
unable to express himself without the aid of those three elements of literary composition. 


M embers of the A.’. A.’. of whatever grade are not bound or expected or even encouraged to work on any 
gated lines, or with any special object, save ashasbeen above set forth. T here ishowever an absolute prohibition 
to accept money or other material reward, directly or indirectly, in respect of any service connected with the 
O rder, for personal profit or advantage. T he penalty isimmediate expulsion, with no possibility of reinstatement 
on any terms soever. 


But all members must of necessity work in accordance with the facts of N ature, just asan architect must allow 
of the Law of Gravitation, or asailor reckon with currents. 


So must all M embers of the A.’. A.’. work by the M agical Formula of the Aeon. 


They must accept the Book of the Law asthe W ord and the Letter of Truth, and the sole R ule of Life. 


T his is not in oontradicion with the absolute right of every person to do his own trueW ill. But any T rueW ill is 
of necessity in harmony with the facts of E xistence; and to refuse to accept the B ook of the L aw is to ceate a conflic 
within N ature, asif a physiast insisted on using an incorrect formula of mechanics as the basis of an experiment. 


T hey must acknowledge the Authority of the Beast 666 and of the Scarlet W oman asin the book it isdefined, 
and accept T heir W ill 


“Their W ill” — not, of course, their wishes as individual human beings, but their will as officers of the N ew 
A eon. 


as concentrating the W ill of our W hole O rder. T hey must accept the C rowned and C onquering Child asthe 
Lord of the Aeon, and exert themselvesto establish H isreign upon Earth. T hey must acknowledge that “T he 
word of the Law is[in Greek] Thelema” and that “Love is the law, love under will.” 


Each member must make it his main work to discover for himself his own true will, and to do it, and do 
nothing else. 


It is not considered “ essential to right conduc” to bean active propagandist of the L aw, and soon; it may, or may 
not, be the T rue W ill of any partiailar person to do so. But since the fundamental purpose of the O rder is to 
further the A ttainment of humanity, membership implies, by definition, the W ill to help mankind by the means 
best adapted thereto. 


H e must accept those orders in the Book of the Law that apply to himself as being necessarily in accordance 
with hisown true will, and execute the same to the letter with all the energy, courage, and ability that he can 
command. T his applies especially to the work of extending the Law in the world, wherein hisproof ishisown 
success, the witness of his Life to the Law that hath given him light in his ways, and liberty to pursue them. 
Thus doing, he payeth his debt to the Law that hath freed him by working its will to free all men; and he 
proveth himself a true man in our O rder by willing to bring his fellows into freedom. 


By thus ordering his disposition, he will fit himself in the bet possible manner for the task of understanding 
and mastering the divers technical methods prescribed by the A.’. A.’. for M ystical and M agical attainment. 


H ewill thus prepare himself properly for the crisis of his career in the O rder, the attainment of the Knowledge 
and Conversation of hisH oly Guardian Angel. 


His Angel shall lead him anon to the summit of the Order of the R. C. and make him ready to face the 
unspeakable terror of the A byss which lies between M anhood and Godhead; teach him to K now that agony, 
to Dare that destiny, to Will that catastrophe, and to keep Silence for ever as he accomplishes the act of 
annihilation. 


From the Abyss comes N o M an forth, but a Star startles the Earth, and our O rder rejoices above that Abyss 
that the Beast hath begotten one more Babe in the W omb of O ur Lady, H isconcubine, the Scarlet W oman, 
BABALON. 


T here isnot need to instruct a Babe thus born, for in the Abyss it was purified of every poison of personality; 
its ascent to the highest is assured, in its season, and it hath no need of seasons for it is conscious that all 
conditions are no more than forms of its fancy. 


Such is a brief account, adapted as far as may be to the average aspirant to Adeptship, or Attainment, or 


Initiation, or M astership, or Union with God, or Spiritual Development, or M ahatmaship, or Freedom, or 
Occult Knowledge, or whatever he may call hisinmost need of T ruth, of our Order of A.’. A.’. 


It isdesgned principally to awake interest in the possibilitiesof human progress, and to proclaim the principles 
of theA.’.A.’. 


The outline given of the several successive steps is exact; the two crises— the Angel and the Abyss — are 
necessary features in every career. T he other tasks are not always accomplished in the order given here; one 
man, for example, may acquire many of the qualities peculiar to the Adeptus M ajor, and yet lack some of 
those proper to the Practicus. 


T he natural talents of individual differ very widely. T helate Sir R ichard Jeob, one of the greatest dassical scholars 
of modern times, was so inferior to the average medioaity in mathematic, that despite repeated efforts he could not 
pass the “little go” at C ambridge— which the dullest minds can usually do. H ewas so deeply esteemed for his 
dassics that a spedal “G race” was placeted so as to admit him to matriculation. Similarly a brilliant E xorast might 
be an incompetent D iviner. In such a case the A..’. A.’. would refuse to swerve from Its system; the A spirant 
would be compelled to remain at the Barrier until he succeeded in breaking it down, though a new incarnation 
were necessary to permit him to do so. But no technical failure of any kind soever could necessarily prevent him 
from accomplishing the T wo C ritical T asks, sincethe fact of his incarnation itself proves that hehas taken theO ath 
which entitled him to attain to theK nowledgeand C onversation of hisH oly G uardian A nga, and theannihilation 
of this Ego. O ne might therefore be an A deptus M inor or even a M agister T empli, in essence, though refused 
offidal recognition by the A.’. A.’. as a Z dator owing to (say) a nervous defect which prevented him from 
aquiring a Posture which was “ steady and easy” as required by theT ask of that grade. 


But the system here given shows the correct order of events, asthey are arranged in N ature; and in no case is 
it safe for aman to neglect to master any single detail, however dreary and distasteful it may seem. It often does 
so, indeed; that only insistson the necessity of dealing with it. The didike and contempt for it bear witness to 
aweakness and incompleteness in the nature which disownsit; that particular gap in one’sdefencesmay admit 
the enemy at the very turning- point of some battle. W orse, one were shamed for ever if one’sinferior should 
happen to ask for advice and aid on that subject and one were to fail in service to him! H isfailure— one’sown 
failure also! No tep, however well won for oneself, till he is ready for hisown advance! 


Every M ember of theA.’. A.’. must be armed at all points, and expert with every weapon. T he examinations 
in every Grade are strict and severe; no loose or vague answers are accepted. In intellectual questions, the 
candidate must display no less mastery of his subject than if he were entered in the “final” for Doctor of 
Science or Law at a first class U niversty. 


In examination of physical practices, there is a Standardised test. In Asana, for instance, the candidate must 
remain motionlessfor agiven time, his success being gauged by poising on hishead acup filled with water to 
the brim; if he spill one drop, he is rejected. 


H eistested in “the Spirit Vison” or “Astral Journeying” by giving him asymbol unknown and unintelligible 
to him, and he must interpret itsnature by meansof avision asexactly asif he had read itsname and description 
in the book when it was chosen. 


T he power to make and “charge” talismansistested asif they were scientific instruments of precision, asthey 
are, 


In the Q abalah, the candidate must discover for himself, and prove to the examiner beyond all doubt, the 
properties of anumber never previously examined by any student. 


In invocation the divine force must be made as manifest and unmistakable as the effects of chloroform; in 
evocation, the spirit called forth must be at least as visble and tangible as the heaviest vapours; in divination, 
the answer must be as precise as a scientific thesis, and as accurate as an audit; in meditation, the results must 
read like a specialist’s report of a classical case. 


But such methods, theA.’. A.’. intends to make occult science as systematic and scientific as chemistry; to 
rescue it from the ill repute which, thanks both to the ignorant and dishonest quacks that have prostituted its 
name, and to the fanatical and narrow- minded enthusiasts that have turned it into afetish, hasmade it an object 
of aversion to those very minds whos enthusiasm and integrity make them most in need of its benefits, and 
most fit to obtain them. 


It isthe one really important science, for it transcends the conditions of material existence and so isnot liable 
to perish with the planet, and it must be studied asascience, sceptically, with the utmost energy and patience. 


The A.’. A.’. possesses the secrets of success; it makes no secret of its knowledge, and if its secrets are not 
everywhere known and practised, it isbecause the abuses connected with the name of occult science disincline 
official investigators to examine the evidence at their disposal. 


T his paper has been written not only with the object of attracting individual seekers into the way of T ruth, 
but of affirming the propriety of the methodsof theA.’. A.’. asthe basis for the next great step in the advance 
of human knowledge. 


Love is the law, love under will. 
O.M.7Degree= 4SquareA.’. A.’. 
Praemonstrator of the 

Order of theR... C... 


Given from the Collegium ad Spiritum Sanctum, C efalu, Sicily, in the Seventeenth Y ear of the Aeon of 
H orus, the Sun being in 23 Degree Virgo and the M oon in 14 Degree Pisces. 


Appendix III 
N otes for an Astral Atlas 


[shawn note: T he above title is from the 1994 O .T .O. Book F our edition.] 
N otes on the nature of the “Astral Plane”. 


On consideration these notes have been left as they were originally written. In An XVII, Sol in Virgo, Soror 
R hodon, a probationer of A.’. A.’., at that time in enjoyment of the privilege of sojourning in a certain secret 
A bbey of T helema, asked H im to add to this book an outline of the uranography of the A stral Planes, in less 
technical language than that of Liber 777. T hese notes were acordingly jotted down by Him. T 0 elaborate then 
further would have been to make them disproportionate to the rest of this treatise. 


1) What are “Astral” and “Spiritual Beings?” 
M an is one: it isa case of any consciousness assuming a sensible form. 


M icrocosms and elementals. M aybe an elemental (e.g. a dog) has a cosmic conception in which he isa 
microcosm and man incomplete. N o means of deciding same, asin case of kinds of space. 


See Poincare, passages quoted infra. 


Similarly, our gross matter may appear unreal to Beings clad in fine matter. Thus, science thinks vulgar 
perceptions “error”. We cannot perceive at all except within our gamut; as, concentrated perfumes, which 
seem malodorous, and time- hidden facts, such as the vanes of arevolving fan, which flies can distinguish. 


H ence: no a priori reason to deny the existence of conscious intelligences with insensible bodies. Indeed we 
know of other orders of mind (flies, etc., possibly vegetables) thinking by meansof non-human brain- structures. 


But the fundamental problem of R eligion isthis: Is there any praeter-human Intelligence, of the same 
order as our own, which is not dependent on cerebral structures consisting of matter in the 
vulgar sense of the word? 


2) “Matter” includes all that is movable. T hus, electric waves are “matter”. There isno reason to deny the 
existence of Beingswho perceive by other meansthose subtle forceswhich we only perceive by our instruments. 


3) W ecan influence other Beings, consciousor no, aslion-tamers, gardeners, etc., and are influenced by them, 
as by storms, bacilli, etc. 


4) There isan apparent gap between our senses and their correspondences in conscioumess. T heory needs a 
medium to join matter and spirit, just as physics once needed an “ether” to transmit and transmute vibrations. 


5) We may consder all beings as parts of ourselves, but it ismore convenient to regard them as independent. 
M aximum C onvenience is our cannon of “T ruth”. 


T he passages referred to are as follows: 


“Les axiomes geometriques ne sont donc ni des jugements synthetiques a priori ni des faits experimentaux. C e 
sont des conventions ... 


D es lors, que doit-on penser de cette question: La geometrie E udidienne est- elle vraie? 


Ellen’a aucun sens. A utant demander si le systeme metrique est vrai et les andennes mesures fausses; si les 
coordonness cartesiennes sont vraies et les coordonnees polaires fausses. U ne geometrie ne peut pas etre plus vraie 
qu’ une autre; elle peut seulement etre “ plus commode.” 


On veut dire que par selection naturelle notre esprit s'est adapte aux conditions du monde exterieur, qu'il a 
adoptela geometriela plus avantageuse al’ espece; ou en d'autres termesla plus commode. C ela est conforme tout 
a fait a nos condusions; la geometrien’ est pas vraie: elle est avantageuse.” Poincare, “LaSdeneetl’H ypothese.” 


“N ous choisirons donc ces regles non parce qu’elles sont vraies, mais parce qu’ elles sont les plus commodes, et 
nous pourrions les resumer ainsi en disant: 


“Lasimultanate de dex evenements, ou !’ordredeleur succession, |’egalite de deux durees, doivent etre definies 
de tele sorte que |’enonce des lois naturelles soit aussi simple que possible. En d’ autres termes, toutes ces regles, 
toutes ces definitions ne sont pas que le fruit d’un opportunisme inconscent.” Poincare “La Valeur de la 
Sdene.” 


T he Student may consult H.H. Joachim’s“T heN atureofT ruth”, in rebuttal. B ut most of these subtleties miss 
the point. T ruth must be defined. It isa name, being a noun (nomen); and all names are human symbols of 
things. N ow Truth is the power to arouse a certain reaction (“assent”) in a man, under certain conditions: 
(“ greenness”, weight, all other qualities, are also powers). It exists in the object, whether latent or manifest; so 
experiendng both does and does not alter the facts. T hisis Solipsism, because we can only be consdous of our own 
consdousness; yet it isnot Solipsism, because our consdousness tells us that its changes are due to the impact of an 
external force. N ewton’s First Law makes this a matter of definition. 


“W hatistruth?”, beyond this, inquires into thenature of this power. It isinherent in all things, sinceall possible 
propositions, or their contradictories, can be affirmed as true. Its condition is identity of form (or structure) of the 
M onads involved. 


It requires a quality of mind beyond the “normal” to appredate 0 D egree = X, etc, diredly, just asH. H. 
Joachim’s reasoning demands a point-of-view beyond that of the Bushman. 


We may thus refer psychical phenomena to the intention of “Astral” Beings, without committing ourselves 
to any theory. Coherence isthe sole quality demanded of us. 


6) M agick enables usto receive sensible impressions of worlds other than the “physical” universe (as generally 
understood by profane science). T hese worlds have their own laws, their inhabitants are often of quas- human 
intelligence; there is a definite set of relations between certain “ideas’ of ours, and their expressions, and 
certain types of phenomena. (T hus symbols, the Q abalah, etc. enable us to communicate with whom we 
choose.) 


7) “Astral” Beingspossessknowledge and power of adifferent kind from our own; their “universe” is presumably 
of adifferent kind from ours, in some respects. (O ur idea“ bone” isnot the same asadog’s, ashort- sighted man 
sees things differently to one of normal vison.) It ismore convenient to assume the objective existence of 
an “Angel” who gives us new knowledge than to allege that our invocation has awakened a supernormal 
power in ourselves. Such incidents as “C alderazzo” 


See the story, infra, about the origin of Book 4. 


and “Jacob” 


See the story, infra, about A malantra. 
make this more cogent. 


8) The Q abalah maps ourselves by means of aconvention. Every aspect of every object may thus be referred 
to the T ree of Life, and evoked by using the proper keys. 


9) T ime and Space are forms by which we obtain (distorted) images of Ideas. O ur measures of T ime and Space 


See Poincare’s essay on the N ature of Space, as an idea invented by ourselves to measure the result of, and 
explain, our musaular movements. 


are crude conventions, and differ widely for different Beings. (H ashish showshow the same mind may vary.) 


10) We may admit that any aspect of any object or idea may be presented to usin a symbolic form, whose 
relation to its Being is irrational. (T hus, there is no rational link between seeing a bell struck and hearing its 
chime. O ur notion of “bell” isno more than a personification of itsimpressionson our senses. And our wit and 
power to make abell “to order” imply aseries of correspondences between various orders of nature precisely 
analogous to M agick, when we obtain a Vision of Beauty by the use of certain colours, forms, sounds, etc.) 


11) “Astral” Beingsmay thus be defined in the same way as“ material objects”; they are the U nknown C auses 
of various observed effects. T hey may be of any order of existence. W e give aphysical form and name to abell 
but not to its tone, though in each case we Know nothing but our own impressions. But we record musical 
sounds by a special convention. We may therefore call a certain set of qualities “R atziel”, or describe an 
impression as “Saturnian” without pretending to know what anything isin itself. All we need isto know how 
to cast abell that will please our ears, or how to evoke a “spirit” that will tell usthingsthat are hidden from our 
intellectual faculties. 


12) (a) Every object soever may be considered as possessed of an “Astral shape”, sensible to our subtle 
perceptions. T his“ astral shape” isto itsmaterial basisasour human character isto our physical appearance. W e 
may imagine this astral shape: e.g. we may “see” ajar of opium asa soft seductive woman with acruel smile, 
just as we see in the face of acunning and dishonest man the features of some animal, such asa fox. 


(b) We may select any particular property of any object, and give it an astral shape. T hus, we may take the 
tricky perils of a mountain, and personify them as “trolls’, or the destructive energies of the Smoom, as 
| inn” . 


(c) We may analyse any of these symbols, obtaining a finer form; thus the “spirit” contains an “angel”, the 
angel an “archangel”, etc. 


(d) W emay synthesize any set of symbols, obtaining amore general form. T hus we may group various types 
of earth- spirit as gnomes. 


(e) All these may be attributed to the T ree of Life, and dealt with accordingly. 
(f) The M agician may prepare a sensible body for any of these symbols, and evoke them by the proper rites. 


13) The “reality” or “objectivity” of these symbols is not pertinent to the discussion. T he ideas of X to the 
4th power and square root of -1 have proved useful to the progress of mathematical advance toward T ruth; it 
isno oddswhether aFourth Dimengon “exists”, or whether square root of -1 has“ meaning” in the sense that 
square root of 4 has, the number of units in the sde of a square of 4 units. 


TheAstral Plane— real or imaginary — isadanger to anybody who takesit without the grain of salt contained 
in the W isdom of the above point of view; who violates its laws either wilfully, carelessly, ignorantly, or by 
presuming that their psychological character differentiates them from physical lawsin the narrower sense; or 
who abdicates his autonomy, on the ground that the subtler nature of astral phenomena guarantees their 
authority and integrity. 


(14) The variety of the general character of the “planes” of being is indefinitely large. But there are several 
main typesof symbolism corresponding to the formsof plastic presentation established by the mindsof M ankind. 
Each such “plane” hasits special appearances, inhabitants, and laws— special casesof the general proposition. 
N otable among these are the “Egyptian” plane, which conforms with the ideas and methods of magick once 
in vogue in the N ile valley; the “Celtic” plane, close akin to “Fairyland”, with a Pagan Pantheism as its 
keynote, sometimes concealed by C hristian nomenclature: the “Alchemical” plane, where the G reat W ork is 
often presented under the form of symbolically constructed landscapes occupied by quasi- heraldic animalsand 
human types hieroglyphically distinguished, who carry on the mysterious operations of the H ermetic Art. 


T here are also “planes’ of Parable, of Fable, and of Folk-lore; in short, every country, creed, and literature has 
given its characteristic mode of presentation to some “plane” or other. 


But there are “planes’ proper to every clairvoyant who explores the Astral Light without prejudice; in such 
case, things assume the form of hisown mind, and his perception will be clear in proportion to his personal 


purity. 


On the higher planes, the diversity of form, due to grossness, tends to disappear. T hus, the Astral Vision of 
“gs” is utterly unlike that of “Kali”. The one is of Motherhood and Wisdom, ineffably candid, clear, and 
loving; the other of M urder and madness, blood- intoxicated, lust-befogged, and cruel. T he sole link is the 
W oman-symbol. But whoso makes Samadhi on Kali obtains the self-same Illumination asif it had been Isis; 
for in both cases he attainsidentity with the Q uintessence of the W oman-Idea, untrammelled by the qualities 
with which the dwellers by the N ile and the Ganges respectively disguised it. 


Thus, in low grades of initiation, dogmatic quarrels are inflamed by astral experience; as when Saint John 
distinguishes between the W horeBABALON and the W oman clothed with the Sun, between the Lamb that 
was Slain and the Beast 666 whose deadly wound was healed; nor understands that Satan, the O Id Serpent, in 
the Abyss, the Lake of Fire and Sulphur, is the Sun- Father, the vibration of Life, Lord of Infinite Space that 
flames with His Consuming Energy, and is also that throned Light whose Spirit is suffused throughout the 
City of Jewels. 


Each “plane” isa veil of the one above it; the original individual |deas become diversified asthey express their 
elements. Two men with almost identical ideas on a subject would write two totally different treatises upon 
it. 


15) T he general control of the Astral Plane, the ability to find one’s way about it, to penetrate such sanctuaries 
as are guarded from the profane, to make such relations with its inhabitants as may avail to acquire knowledge 
and power, or to command service; all thisis a question of the general M agical attainment of the student. 


He must be absolutely at ease in his Body of Light, and have made it invulnerable. He must be adept in 
assuming all God-forms, in using all weapons, sigils, gestures, words, and sgns. He must be familiar with the 
namesand numbers pertinent to the work in hand. H emust be alert, senstive, and ready to exert hisauthority; 
yet courteous, gracious, patient, and sympathetic. 


16) There are two opposite methods of exploring the Astral Plane. 


(a). One may take some actual object in N ature, and analyse it by evoking its astral form, thusbringing it into 
Knowledge and under control by applying the keys of the Q abalah and of M agick. 


(b). One may proceed by invoking the required idea, and giving body to the same by attracting to it the 
corresponding elements in N ature. 


17) Every M agician possesses an Astral U niverse peculiar to himself, just asno man’s experience of the world 
is coterminous with that of another. T here will be a general agreement on the main points, of course; and so 
the M aster Therion is able to describe the principal properties of these “planes”, and their laws, just as he 
might write a geography giving an account of the Five Continents, the O ceans and Seas, the most notable 
mountains and rivers; he could not pretend to put forth the whole knowledge that any one peasant possesses 
in respect of his district. But, to the peasant, these petty details are precisely the most important itemsin his 
daily life. Likewise, the M agician will be grateful to the M aster T herion for the C ompass that guides him at 
night, the M ap that extends his comprehension of his country, and showshim how best he may travel afield, 
the advice asto Sandals and Staff that make surer his feet, and the Book that tellshim how, splitting open his 
rockswith an H ammer, he may be master of their Virgin Gold. But he will understand that hisown career on 
earth ishiskingdom, that even the M aster T herion isno more than afellow man in another valley, and that he 
must explore and exploit his own inheritance with hisown eyes and hands. 


The M agician must not accept the M aster T herion’s account of the Astral Plane, H is Q abalistic discoveries, 
H isinstructionsin M agick. T hey may be correct in the main for most men; yet they cannot be wholly true for 
any save Him, even asno two artists can make identical pictures of the same subject. 


M ore, even in fundamentals, though these things be T ruth for all M ankind, as we carelessly say, any one 
particular M agician may be the one man for whom they are false. M ay not the flag that seems red to ten 
thousand seem green to some one other? T hen, every man and every woman being a Star, that which isgreen 
to him is verily green; if he consent to the crowd and call it red, hath he not broken the Staff of T ruth that he 
leaneth upon? 


Each and every man therefore that will be a M agician must explore the U niverse for himself. T his is pre- 
eminently the case in the matter of the Astral Plane, because the symbols are so sensitive. N othing is easier 
than to suggest visions, or to fashion phantasms to suit one’s ideas. It is obviously impossible to 
communicate with an independent intelligence — the one real object of astral research — if 
one allows one’s imagination to surround one with courtiers of one’s own creation. If one expects 
one’svisionsto resemble those of the M aster T herion, they are only too likely to do so; and if one’s respect for 
Him induces one to accept such visions as authentic, one is being false to one’s soul; the visions themselves 
will avenge it. T he true Guide being gone, the seer will stray into a wilderness of terror where he is tricked 
and tortured; he will invoke his idol the M aster T herion, and fashion in Hisimage a frightful phantasm who 
will mock him in hismisery, until hismind stagger and fall; and, M adness swooping upon his carrion, blast his 
eyes with the horror of seeing his M aster dissolve into that appalling hallucination, the “Vision of THE 
DEMON CROWLEY!” 


R emember, then, always, but especially when dealing with theA gral Plane, that man’sbreath stirsthe F eather 
of T ruth. W hat one sees and hears is “real” in its way, whether it be itself, or distorted by one’s desires, or 
created by one’s personality. There isno touchstone of truth: the authentic N akhiel is indistinguishable from 
the image of the M agician’s private idea of N akhiel, so far ashe isconcerned. T he tronger one isto create, the 
more readily the A stral Light responds, and coagulates creatures of thiskind. N ot that such creation isnecessarily 
an error; but it is another branch of one’s W ork. O ne cannot obtain outside help from inside sources. One 
must use precautions smilar to those recommended in the chapter of Divination. 


The M agician may go on for a long time being fooled and flattered by the Astrals that he has 
himself modified or manufactured. T heir natural subservience to himself will please him, poor 
ape! 


T hey will pretend to show him marvellous mysteries, pageants of beauty and wonder unspeakably 
splendid; he will incline to accept them as true, for the very reason that they are images of 
himself idealized by the imagination. 


But his real progress will stop dead. These phantasms will prevent him from coming into 
contact with independent intelligences, from whom alone he can learn anything new. 


H e will become increasingly interested in himself, imagine himself to be attaining one initiation 
after another. His Ego will expand unchecked, till he seem to himself to have heaven at his 
feet. Y et all this will be nothing but his fool’s face of N arcissus smirking up from the pool that 
will drown him. 


Error of thiskind on the Astral Plane — in quite ordinary visonswith no apparent moral import — may lead 
to the most serious mischief. Firstly, mistakes mislead; to pollute one’s view of Jupiter by permitting the 
influence of V enusto distort it may end in finding oneself at odds with Jupiter, later on, in some crisisof one’s 
work. 


Secondly, the habit of making mistakes and leaving them uncorrected grows upon one. He who begins by 
“spelling Jeheshua with a‘R esh’” may end by writing the name of the Dweller on the T hreshold by mistake 
for that of his Angel. 


Lastly, M agick isa Pyramid, built layer by layer. The work of the Body of Light — with the technique of 
Y oga— isthe foundation of the whole. O ne’s apprehension of the Astral Plane must be accurate, for Angels, 
Archangels, and Godsare derived therefrom by analysis O ne must have pure materials if one wishes to brew 
pure beer. 


If one have an incomplete and incorrect view of the universe, how can one find out its laws? 


T hus, original omission or error tendsto extend to the higher planes. Suppose aM agician, invoking Sol, were 
persuaded by a plausble spirit of Saturn that he was the Solar Intelligence required, and bade him eschew 
human love if he would attain to the Knowledge and C onversation of hisH oly Guardian Angel; and suppose 
that his will, and that Angel’s nature, were such that the Crux of their Formula was Lyrical Exaltation! 


Apart from the regular tests — made at the time — of the integrity of any spirit, the M agician must make a 
careful record of every vision, omitting no detail; he must then make sure that it talliesin every point with the 
correspondencesin Book 777 and in Liber D. Should he find (for instance) that, having invoked M ercury, his 
vison contains names whose numbers are M artial, or elements proper to Pisces, let him set himself most 
earnestly to discover the source of error, to correct it, and to prevent its recurrence. 


But these tests, as implied above, will not serve to detect personation by self- suggested phantasms. U nless 
one’saura be awelter of muddled symbols beyond recognition, the more autohypnotic the vision is, the more 
gnoothly it satisfiesthe seer’s standards. T here isnothing to puzzle him or oppose him; so he spinsout his story 
with careless contempt of criticism. H e can always prove himself right; the Q abalah can always be stretched; 
and R ed being so nearly O range, which is really ashade of Y ellow, and Y ellow acomponent of Green which 
merges into Blue, what harm if a Fiend in Vermilion appears instead of an Angel in Azure? 


T he true, the final test, of the T ruth of one’svigonsistheir Value. T he mog glorious experience on the Astral 
plane, let it dazzle and thrill asit may, isnot necessarily in accordance with the T rue W ill of the seer; if not, 
though it be never so true objectively, it isnot true for him, because not useful for him. (Said we not awhile 
ago that Truth was no more than the M ost Convenient M anner of Statement?) 


It may intoxicate and exalt the Seer, it may inspire and fortify him in every way, it may throw light upon most 
holy mysteries, yet withal be no more than an interpretation of the individual to himself, the formula not of 
Abraham but of O nan. 


These plastic “Portraits of the Artist asa Young M an” are well enough for those who have heard “Know 
Thyself”. They are necessary, even, to assist that analysis of one’s nature which the Probationer of A.’. A.’. is 
sworn to accomplish. But “Love is the law, love under will.” And Our Lady N uit is“... divided for love's 
sake, for the chance of union.” These mirror-mirages are therefore not W orks of M agick, according to the 
Law of Thelema: the true M agick of H orus requires the passonate union of opposites. 


N ow the proof that one isin contact with an independent entity depends on a sensation which ought to be 
unmistakeable if one isin good health. O ne ought not to be liable to mistake one’s own sengble impressions 
for somebody else’s! It isonly M an’sincurable vanity that makes the Astral “Strayed R eveller” or the mystic 
confuse his own drunken babble with the voice of the M ost H igh. 


The essence of the right sensation consists in recognition of the reality of the other Being. 
T here will be asa rule some element of hostility, even when the reaction is sympathetic. O ne’s 
“soul-mate” (even) is not thought of as oneself, at first contact. 


One must therefore insist that any real appearance of the Astral Plane givesthe sensation of meeting a stranger. 
One mug accept it as independent, be it Archangel or Elf, and measure one’s own reaction to it. One must 
learn from it, though one despise it; and love it, however one loathe it. 


One must realize, on writing up the record, that the meeting has effected a definite change in oneself. One 
must have known and felt something alien, and not merely tried on anew dress. 


There mus always be some Sight pang of pain in atrue Astral Vision; it hurts the Self to have to admit the 
existence of a not-Self; and it taxes the brain to register anew thought. Thisis true at the first touch, even 
when exaltation and stimulation result from the joy of making an agreeable contact. 


There is a deeper effect of right reaction to a strange Self: the impact invariable tends to break up some 
complex in the Seer. T he class of ideas concerned has always been tied up, labelled, and put away. It isnow 
necessary to unpack it, and rearrange its contents. At least, the annoyance islike that of aman who haslocked 
and strapped hisbag for ajourney, and then findsthat he hasforgotten hispyjamas. At most, it may revolutionise 
his ideas of the business, like an old bachelor with settled plans of life who meets a girl once too often. 


Any really first-class Astral Vision, even on low planes, should therefore both instruct the Seer, and prepare 
him for Initiation. T hose failing to pass this test are to be classed as “practice”. 


O ne last observation seems fit. We must not assert the “reality” or “objectivity” of an Astral 
Being on no better evidence than the subjective sensation of its independent existence. We 
must insist on proof patient to all qualified observers if we are to establish the major premiss of 
R eligion: that there exists aC onscious Intelligence independent of brain and nerve as we know 
them. If it have also Power, so much the better. But we already know of inorganic forces; we 
have no evidence of inorganic conscious M ind. 


How can the Astral Plane help us here? It is not enough to prove, as we easily do, the correspondences 
between Invocation and Apparition. 


T he M aster T herion’s regular test is to write the name of a Force on a card, and conceal it; invoke that F orce 
secretly, send H is pupil on the A stral Plane, and make him attribute his vision to some F orce. T he pupil then 
looks at the card; the F orce he has named is that written upon it. 


We must exclude coincidence, 


T he most famous novel of Fielding is called “T om Jones”. It happened that FRATER PERDURABO was 
staying in an hotel in London. H e telephoned a friend named Fielding at the latter's house, and was answered 
by Mr. Fielding’s seqetary, who said that his employer had left the house a few minutes previously, and could 
only be reached by telephoning a certain office in the C ity at between 11 o’dock and a quarter past. FRATER 
PERDURABO had an appointment at 11 o’dock with a musichall star, the place being the entrance to a 
theatre. In order to remind himself, hemadea mental note that as soon as hesaw thelady, hewould raisehis hand 
and say, before greeting her: “R emind me that | must teleohone at once to Fidding”, when he met her. H edid 
this, and she advanced toward H im with the same gesture, and said in the same breath, “R emind me that | have 
to teeohone to T om Jones” — thename of a musichall agent employed by her. 


It will beseen that there is here no question of any connection between the elements of the winddence. If a similar 
occurrence had taken place in the course of communication with an alleged spirit, it would have been regarded as 
furnishing a very high degree of proof of the existence of an independent intelligence. 


T o make this dear, let me substitute the terms of the equation. Suppose two independent mediums, A and B, 
were to receive respectively at the same moment two messages, the first; “A sk B who wrote H amlet”, the second: 
“Ask A thename of Shakespeare's most famous tragedy.” T he winddenceis here much simpler and less striking 
than the one recorded above, for there is no question of arriving at the identity by way of acddental synonyms 
conealing their rational connection. Y et most students of O cault phenomena would admit that there was a strong 
presumption that a single intelligence had deliberately devised the two messages as a means of proving his existence. 


telepathy, 


In “T helnternational” of N ovember, 1918, was published the concondusion of an artide called “T heR evival of 
M agick” by the M aster T herion. T he last sentence reads: “H erein is W isdom; let him that hath understanding 
count the number of the B east; for it is the number of a man; and his number is six hundred and three score and 
six.” [G reek:] To M egaT herion theG reat W ild Beast, has the value, according to the G reek system, of 666. It 
is, of course, the title of the M aster T herion. 


T heM aster T herion was, about thistime, in communication with an intelligence who gavethename of A malantrah. 
On Sunday, February 24, 1918, at 9.30 p. m., T he M aster T herion asked A malantrah if he could use the 
word [G reek:] T herion as if it wereH ebrew, with the idea of getting further information as to the mystic meaning 
of the W ord. T he answer was “Yes”. H ethen asked: “Am to take the word [G reek:] T hevion alone, or the 
three words [G reek:] T 0 M ega T herion?” T he answer was to take the word [G reek:] T herion alone. T he M aster 
T herion then asked what H ebrew letters should be used to transliterate the G reek. T he answer was: “T au, Y od, 
Resh, Yod, Ayin, Nun”, which adds to 740 or 1390, according as N un is given its ordinary value of 50, or its 
value as thefinal letter of a word, 700. N either of these numbers possessed any spedal significance to T he M aster 
T herion. H e became very annoyed at A malantrah’s failure to be of use’ so much so that the communications 
became confused, and the work had to be abandoned for that evening. H e tried various other H ebrew spellings for 
the word [G reek:] T herion, but was unable to obtain anything of interest. T hisis rather remarkable, asit is nearly 


always possible to get more or less good results by trying various possibilities. For example theO might be equally 
well A yin, V au or A leph. 


O nM onday morning, T heM aster T herion went to the offic of “T he International,” of which he was editor. A t 
this period there was a coal famine in N ew Y ork, and it was forbidden to heat office buildings on M ondays. He 
merely took away his mail and went home. 0 nT uesday morning H efound on his desk a letter which had arrived 
on M onday for the general editor, who had sent it across to H im for reply, as it concerned T he M aster T herion 
rather than himself. T his letter had been written and posted on Sunday evening, at about the same time as the 
communication from A malantrah. T he letter ends as follows: “Please inform your readers that |, Samual bar 
Aiwaz bieY ackou de Sherabad, have counted the number of the B east, and it is the number of a man. 


[H ebrew] N un final V au Y od R esh Tau 

N 0 | R Th 

(R ead from right to left) 50 6 10 200 400 
666 


Here, then, we see the most striking solution possible of the problem presented to A malantrah. O bserve that 
A malantrah had refused to give the correc solution diredly; asit would seem, in order to enphasiz e the renarkable 
character of the intervention of this A ssyrian correspondent. O bserve, too, that the latter was totally ignorant of the 
ordinary Q abalah, it being quite generally known that [G reek:] T o M ega T herion adds up to 666 in G reek. 
O bserve, moreover, that nearly four months had passed since the problen was propounded in “T he! nternational?” 
The Assyrian lived some distance outside N ew Y ork, and was an entire stranger to any of the staff of “The 
International.” T he evidence appears overwhelming for the existence of A malantrah, that he was more expert in 
the Q abalah than T he M aster T herion himself, and that he was (further) possessed with the power to recall this 
four-months- old problen to the mind of an entirely unconnected stranger, qusing him to ommuniate the wrrec 
answer at the same moment as the question was being asked many miles away. 


C oinddence, so mmpletely adequate to explain the F idding-T om J ones inadent, is utterly incompetent as an 
alternative theory. T he directly purposeful character of the draumstances is undeniable; but if we are resolutely 
determined to deny the possibility of the existence of A malantrah, which explains the whole affair so simply, we 
have still one resource. It involves difficulties which T he M aster T herion cannot conceive as less than those which 
encumber the other, butitis, atleast, not entirely beyond possibility. T his theory is telepathy. O nemay postulate 
that the solution of his problem existed in the subconsdous mind of the M aster T herion or in that of H is seer, and 
that this solution was telepathically impressed upon the consdousness of the A ssyrian so fordbly as to impel him 
to communicate it to the M aster T herion’s colleague on “T hel nternational.” A part from the general improbability 
of this hypothesis, it is strange that if “A malantrah” were really the subconsdous mind of the seer, he should have 
given a wrong orthography. H is doing so (if he knew the correc spelling) is only explicable by his wish not to take 
the edge off his plan for making the A ssyrian’s letter a fulminating revelation of his existence, as would have 
happened if the secret had been prematurely disdosed. 


T he case is here ated in order to illustrate the extreme care which ought to be taken in exduding all alternative 
hypotheses before admitting the existence of disembodied intelligences. It may be mentioned, however, that in 
this particular case there are numerous other inddents which make the telepathic theory untenable. 


and subconscious knowledge. 


T here is a well-known story quoted in several treatises of psychology in which the heroine is an ignorant E nglish 
servant girl of quite inferior intelligence, and unacquainted with any language, even her own. In the course of a 
fever, she became delirious, and proceeded to reel off long passages of scholarly H ebrew. Investigations showed that 
in her first youth she had been for a time in the service of a Jewish R abbi who had been accustomed to dedaim his 


sermons in the hearing of the girl. A Ithough attaching no meaning to the words, she had stored than mechanially 
in her subconsaous memory, to be reproduced when the action of the fever exdted the group of cells where they 
were recorded. 


Our praeter- human Intelligence must convey aT ruth not known to any human mind, past or present. Y et 
thisT ruth must be verifiable. 


T here is but one document in the world which presents evidence that fully satisfies these conditions. T hisis 
LIBER AL vel LEGIS 
the Book of the Law. 


of thisN ew Aeon of Horus, the Crowned and C onquering Child, the Aeon whose Logos is T HE BEAST 
666, whose name in the O uter Order wasaFRATER PERDURABO. 


T he nature of the proof of the separate existence of praeterhuman Intelligence, independent of bodily form, is 
extremely complicated. Its main divisions may be briefly enumerated. 


AIWAZ, the name of the Intelligence in question, proves: 


(a) His power to pre- arrange events unconnected with H is scribe so that they should fit in with that scribe’s 
private calculations. 


E.g. The Stele which revealsthe T heogony of the Book wasofficially numbered 666, in the Boulak M useum. 
T he scribe had adopted 666 asH ismagical number, many yearspreviousy. Again, the scribe’smagical H ouse, 
bought years earlier, had a name whos value was 418. T he scribe had calculated 418 as the number of the 
Great W ork, in 1901 ev. He only discovered that 418 was the number of his house in consequence of 
AIW AZ mentioning the fact. 


(b) Hispower to conceal acoherent system of numbers and lettersin the text of a rapidly- written document, 
containing riddles and ciphers opening to a M astter-Key unknown to the scribe, yet linked with his own 
system; this K ey and its subordinates being moreover acomment on the text. 


E.g. “The word of the Law is[Greek:] T heléma.” (Will); this word has the value of 93. 
“Love isthe law, love under will.” Love, [Greek:] Agapé, like 

[Greek:] T heléma, addsto 93. 

AIW AZ itself adds to 93. 


T his numeration was discovered years later. T he question then arose out of consideration of this discovery through 
S. Jacobs: “W hy is Aiwaz spelt A iwass, not Aiwaz, in the Book of the Law?” In G reek [G reek:] A ifass = 
418. T he author of the B ook had concealed in H is own name not one only but two numbers, those of supreme 
importane in the B ook. 


Thiswasall strange to the scribe; yet years later he discovered the “Lost W ord” of one of hisown Orders: it 
was 93 also. 


[WEH Note T his refers to the word of the I|Ird D egree of O .T .O., readers who may wish to acquire it may 
apply for initiation and work their way up through the D egrees. O rdo T empli O rientis, JAF Box 7666, N ew 


York, NY 10116, USA.] 
The W ord of Hismost holy O rder proved equally to count up to 93. 


T his list by no means exhausts the series. In partiqlar, Frater Perdurabo discovered in 1923 that the H ebrew 
word for “to will” is also of the value of 93: and its spedal technical meanings throw yet further light on the 
meaning of [G reek:] T heléma as used by A iwaz. 


{WEH NOTE: In this instane, C rowley refers not to the word of II! D egreeO .T.O., but to the N eophyte 
word of A.’. A.’.. 


N ow 93 is thrice 31; 31 isLA, “Not” and AL, “The” or “God”; these words run throughout the Book, 
giving adouble meaning to many passages. A third 31 isthe compound letter ShT , the two hieroglyphsof Sh 
and T (many centuriesold) being picturesof the “D ramatisPersonae” of the Book; and ShT being ahaphazard 
line scrawled on the MS. touch letters which added to 418, valuing “this circle squared in its failure” as pi 
correct to Sx places of decimals, etc. 


Again: “thou shalt know not”, 


[WEH N ote It is remarkable that C rowley succeeds in blowing every quotation of “Liber AL” on this page. 
T his despite the injunction of the B ook itself: AL 1,54: “C hange not as much as the style of a letter; for behold! 
thou, 0 prophet, shalt not behold all these mysteries hidden therein.” C rowley strongly resisted the idea that he 
could not understand all of the B ook. In later life, he came to grudgingly accept this limitation. Also, A chad did 
not work out as his successor. Several of these mis- quotes relate to that belief. T his particular mis- quote could come 
from as many as six points in the text, but there is no part of the text in which this quote appears exactly. ] 


meaning “thou shalt know LA”; and “he shall discover the K ey of it all” 


[W EH Note This misquote could be from AL 111,47: “... Let him not seek to try: but one cometh after him, 
whence! say not, who shall discover the K ey of itall....”.] 


id est, the Key AL. 


(c) His power to combine subsequent events beyond the control of the scribe or his associates, so that they 
confirmed statements in the Book. Or, per contra, to predict such events. 


E.g. The first Scarlet W oman proved unworthy, and suffered the exact penalties predicted. 
Again, “one cometh after thee; he shall discover the key.” 

[WEH N ote misquoted from AL I1,76: “...T here cometh one to follow thee: he shall expound it. ...”] 
This one wasto be the “child” of the scribe, “and that strangely”. 


[W EH N ote T histimethe misquoteis in the style of the letters: AL 111,47: “T his book shall be translated into 
all tongues: but always with the original in the writing of the B east; for in the chance shape of the letters and their 
position to one another: in these are mysteries that no B east shall divine. L et him not seek to try: but one cometh 
after him, whence! say not, who shall discover the K ey of it all. T hen this line drawn is a key: then this arde 
squared in its failure is a key also. And A brahadabra. It shall be his child & that strangely. L et him not seek after 
this; for thereby alone can he fall from it.” — interesting that these misquotes seem to hit verses that either appear 
to warn C rowley against misquoting or of his limits. ] 


N ine months after THE BEAST 666 had gotten aM agical “child” upon H isconcubine Jane Foster, a “Babe 
of the Abyss’ wasborn, Frater Achad asserting his right to that grade, and thus “coming after” THE BEAST 
666, who had been the last Adept to do so. And this“ child” wasdefinitely “one”, Snce “one” isthe meaning 
of his motto Achad. Finally, he did in fact “discover the key of it all” 


[W EH N ote: see the atation in an earlier note of mine This time C rowley missed the “ style of the letter” 
again. ] 


after TH E BEAST Himself had failed to do so in 14 years of study. 
(d) His power to conceive and express in concise terms true solutions of the main problems of the U niverse. 


E.g. T he formulaof N uith and H adith explain Existence in the terms of M athematical-Logical Philosophy, so 
asto satisfy the difficulties of reconciling D ualism, M onism and N ihilism; all antinomiesin all soheres, and the 
Original Perfection with the M anifest Imperfection of T hings. 


Again “Do that thou wilt...”, the most sublimely austere ethical precept ever uttered, despite its apparent 
licence, is seen on analysis to be indeed “...the whole of the Law.”, the sole and sufficient warrant for human 
action, the self-evident C ode of R ighteoumess, the identification of Fate with Freewill, and the end of the 
Civil War in M an’s nature by appointing the Canon of T ruth, the conformity of things with themselves, to 
determine hisevery act. “Do what thou wilt...” isto bid Starsto shine, Vinesto bear grapes, W ater to seek its 
level; man isthe only being in N ature that has striven to set himself at odds with himself. 


(e) His power to interpret the Spirit of the N ew Aeon, the relapse into ruthless savagery of the most civilized 
races, at atime when war was discredited by most responsible men. 


(f) His power to comprehend and control these various orders of ideas and events, demonstrating thereby a 
mind and ameansof action intelligible to, yet immensely above, all human capacity; to bind the whole into 
a compact cryptograph displaying mastery of English, of mathematical and philosophical conceptions, of 
poetic splendour and intense passion, while concealing in the letters and words a complex cipher involving 
the knowledge of facts never till than existing in any human mind, and depending on the control of the arm of 
the scribe, though H e thought H e was writing consciously from dictation; and to weave into asingle pattern 
go many threads of proof of different orders that every type of mind, so it be but open and just, may be sure of 
the existence of AlW AZ asabeing independent of body, consciousand individual, with amind mightier than 
man’s, and a power beyond man’s set in motion by will. 


In aword, the Book of the Law proves the prime postulate of R eligion. 


T heM agician may therefore be confident that Spiritual Beingsexist, and seek the Knowledge and conversation 
of His own Holy Guardian Angel with the same ardour as that of FRATER PERDURABO when He 
abandoned all: love, wealth, rank, fame, to seek Him. N ay, thishe must do or condemn himself to be torn 
asunder by the M aenads of his insensate impulses; he hath no safety save he himself be Bacchus! Bacchus, 
divine and human! Bacchus, begotten on Semele of Z eus, the adulterousLord of T hunder ravishing, brutally, 
his virginal victim! Bacchus, babe hidden from hate in the mos holy of holies, the secret of thy dre, in the 
Channel of the Star- Spate, W hereof one Serpent is thy soul! Bacchus, twy-formed, man- woman, Bacchus, 
whose innocence tamestheT iger, while yet thy hornsdrip blood upon thy mouth, and sharpen the merriment 
of wine to the madness of murder! Bacchus, T hy thyrsus oozes sap; thine ivy clings to it; thy Lion- skin dips 
from thy sleek shoulders, slips from thy lissome loins, drunk on delight of the godly grape, thou knowest no 
more the burden of the body and the vexation of the spirit. 


Come, Bacchus, come thou hither, come out of the East; come out of the East, astride the Ass of Priapus! 
Come with thy revel of dancers and singers! W ho followeth thee, forbearing to laugh and to leap? Come, in 
thy name Dionysus, that maidens be mated to God-head! Come, in thy name lacchus, with thy mystical fan 
to winnow the air, each gust of thy Spirit inspiring our Soul, that we bear to thee Sons in T hine Image! 


Verily and Amen! Let not the M agician forget for asingle second what ishis one sole business. H isuninitiated 
“self” (ashe absurdly thinksit) isamob of wild women, hysterical from uncomprehended and unstated animal 
instinct; they will tear Pentheus, the merely human king who presumes to repress them, into mere shreds of 
flesh; hisown mother, N ature, the first to claw at hiswindpipe! N one but Bacchus, the H oly Guardian Angel, 
hath grace to be God to this riot of maniacs, he alone can transform the disorderly rabble into a pageant of 
harmoniousmovements, tune their hyaenahowlsto the symphony of apaean, and their reasonless rage to self- 
controlled rapture. It is this Angel whose nature is doubly double, that H e may partake of every sacrament. 
H eisat once aGod who isdrunken with the wine of earth, and the mammal who quaffs the Blood of God to 
purge him of mortality. He isa woman as he accepts all impulses, are they not His? He isa man to stamp 
H imself upon whatever would hallow itself to Him. H ewieldsthe W and, with cone of pine and ivy tendrils; 
the Angel creates continually, wreathing H is W ill in clinging beauty, imperishably green. 


The Tiger, the symbol of the brutal passonsof man, gambols about its master’sheels; and H e bestridesthe Ass 
of Priapus, he makes his sexual force carry him whither H e wills to go. 


Let the M agician therefore adventure himself upon the Astral Plane with the declared design to penetrate to 
a sanctuary of discarnate Beings such as are able to instruct and fortify him, also to prove their identity by 
testimony beyond rebuttal. All explanations other than these are of value only as extending and equilibrating 
K nowledge, or possibly assupplying Energy to such M agiciansas may have found their way to the Sources of 
Strength. In all cases, naught is worth an obol save asit serve to help the O ne Great W ork. 


H ewho would reach Intelligences of the type under discussion may expect extreme difficulty. T he paths are 
guarded; there is a lion in the way. T echnical expertness will not serve here; it is necessary to satisfy the 
W arders of one’s right to enter the presence of the M aster. Particular pledges may be demanded, ordeals 
imposed, and initiations conferred. T hese are most serious matters, the Body of Light must be fully adult, 
irrevocably fixed, or it will be disintegrated at the outset. But, being fit to passthrough such experiences, it is 
bound utterly to its words and acts. It cannot even appear to break an oath, asits fleshly fellow may do. 


Such, then is a general description of the Astral Plane, and of the proper conduct of the M agician in his 
dealings therewith. 


Liber Samekh 
T heurgia G oetia Summa 
C ongressus C um D aemone) 
Sub FiguraDCCC 


being the R itual employed by the Beast 666 
for the Attainment of the Knowledge and C onversation of hisH oly Guardian Angel 


during the Semester of H is performance of the O peration of the Sacred M agick of ABRAMELIN THE 
MAGE. 


Prepared An XVII Sun in Virgo at the Abbey of T helemain C ephalaedium 
by the Beast 666 in serviceto FRATER PROGRADIOR 


OFFICIAL PUBLICATION of A..A.. 
Class D for the Grade of Adeptus Minor. 


POINT | 
E vangelli T extus R edactus 
THE INVOCATION 
M agically restored, with the significance of the 
BARBAROUSNAMES 
Etymologically or Q abalistically determined 


and paraphrased in English. 


Section A. 
TheOath 


1. Thee! invoke, the Bornless O ne. 


2. T hee, that didst create the Earth and the H eavens. 
3. Thee, that didst create the N ight and the Day. 
4. T hee, that didst create the darkness and the Light. 


5. Thou at ASAR UN-NEFER (“Myself made Perfect” ): 
W hom no man hath seen at any time. 


6. Thou art |A-BESZ (“the Truth in M atter”). 

7. Thou art |A-APO PHR ASZ (“the T ruth in M otion”). 

8. Thou hast distinguished between the Just and the U njust. 

9. Thou didst make the Female and the M ale. 

10. T hou didst produce the Seeds and the Fruit. 

11. Thou didst form M en to love one another, and to hate one another. 
Section Aa. 


1.1 am ANKH - F- N - KHONSU hy Prophet, unto Whom Thou didst commit Thy M ysteries, the 
Ceremoniesof KHEM. 


2. Thou didst produce the moist and the dry, and that which nourisheth all created Life. 


3. Hear Thou Me, for! am the Angel of PTAH - APO - PHRASZ - RA (videtheR ubric): thisisT hy T rue 
N ame, handed down to the Prophetsof KHEM. 


Section B. 

Air 

H ear M e: - 

AR “O breathing, flowing Sun!” 

ThIAF ? “O Sun IAF! O Lion-Serpent Sun, T he Beast that whirlest forth, athunder- bolt, 
begetter of Life!” 

R hEIBET “T hou that flowest! T hou that goest!” 


A-ThELE-BER-SET “Thou Satan-Sun H adith that goest without W ill!” 


A “Thou Air! Breath! Spirit! Thou without bound or bond!” 
BELAThA “Thou Essence, Air Swift- streaming, Elasticity!” 

ABEU “T hou W anderer, Father of All!” 

EBEU “T hou W anderer, Spirit of All!” 


Phi-ThETA-SOE “T hou Shining Force of Breath! T hou Lion- Serpent Sun! T hou Saviour, save!” 


IB “T hou Ibis, secret solitary Bird, inviolate W isdom, whose W ord in T ruth, creating 
the W orld by its M agick!” 


ThIAF “O SunlIAF!O Lion-Serpent Sun, T he Beasthat whirlest forth, athunder- bolt, begetter 
of Life!” 


T he @onception is of Air, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-PhallicBird, “the H oly G host”, of a M erarial N ature 


H ear me, and make all Spirits subject unto M e; so that every Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon 
the Earth and under the Earth, on dry land and in the water; of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire, and every 
Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. 


1 T he letter F is used to represent the H ebrew V au and the Greek Digamma; its sound lies between those of 
the English long 0 and long 00, asin R ope and T ooth. 


Section C. 
Fire 


| invoke T hee, the T errible and Invisble God: W ho dwellest in the V oid Place of the Spirit: - 


AR-O-GO-GO-RU-ABRAO “T hou spiritual Sun! Satan, Thou Eye, T hou Lust! Cry aloud! Cry 
aloud! W hirl the W heel, O my Father, O Satan, O Sun!” 

SOTOU “T hou, the Saviour!” 

MUDORIO “Silence! Give me T hy Secret!” 

PhALARThAO “Give me suck, Thou Phallus, Thou Sun!” 

000 “Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust!” Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust! Satan, thou 


Eye, thou Lust! 
AEPE “T hou self- caused, self- determined, exalted, M ost H igh!” 
The Bornless O ne. (Vide supra). 
T he conception is of Fire, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-P hallicLion of a U ranian nature. 


H ear M e, and make all Spirits subject unto M e: so that every Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon 
the Earth and under the Earth: on dry Land and in the W ater: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire, and every 
Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. 


Section D. 

W ater 

Hear M e: - 

RU-ABRA-IAF } “T hou the W heel, thou the W omb, that containeth the Father IAF!” 
MRIODOM “T hou the Sea, the A bode!” 


BABALON -BAL-BIN -ABAFT “Babalon! Thou W oman of W horedom. T hou, Gate of the Great God 


ON! Thou Lady of the U nderstanding of the W ays!” 


ASAL-ON-AI “Hail Thou, the unstirred! H ail, aster and bride of ON , of the God 
that is all and isnone, by the Power of Eleven!” 
APhEN-IAF “T hou T reasure of |AO !” 


| “T hou Virgin twin- sexed! T hou Secret Seed! T hou inviolate W isdom!” 


PhOTETh “Abode of the Light ............0. 

ABR ASAX “4. 0f the Father, the Sun, of H adith, of the spell of the Aeon of H orus!” 
AEOOU “O ur Lady of the W estern Gate of H eaven!” 

ISCHURE “Mighty art Thou!” 


M ighty and Bornless O ne! (Vide Supra) 
T he conception is of W ater, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-Phallic D ragon-Serpent, of a N eptunian nature. 


H ear M e: and make all Spirits subject unto M e: so that every Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon 
the Earth and under the Earth: on dry Land and in the W ater: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and every 
Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. 


1 See, for the formula of IAF, or rather FIAOF, Book 4 Part III, Chapter V. The form FIAOF will be found 
preferable in practice. 


Section E. 

Earth 

| invoke T hee: - 

MA “O Mother! O Truth!” 
BARRAIO “Thou M ass!” ? 

IOEL “H ail, Thou that art!” 
KOThA “T hou hollow one!” 


AThOR-e-BAL-O “Thou Goddess of Beauty and Love, whom Satan, beholding, desireth!” 
ABR AFT “T he Fathers, male-female, desire T hee!” 
T he oonceotion of of E arth, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-Phallic H ippopotamus? of a V enereal nature. 


H ear M e: and make all Spirits subject unto M e: so that every Spirit of the Firmament, and of the Ether: upon 
T he Earth and under the Earth: on dry land and in the W ater: of W hirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and every 
Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. 


1"M ass’, in the sense of the word which is used by physicists. The impossibility of defining it will not deter 
the intrepid initiate (in view of the fact that the fundamental conception is beyond the normal categories of 


reason.)*Sacred to AHAThOOR. The idea is that of the Female conceived as invulnerable, reposeful, of 
enormous swallowing capacity etc. 


Section F. 

Spirit 

H ear Me: 

AFT “M ale- Female Spirits!” 

ABAFT “M ale- Female Sires!” 

BAS-AUMGN “Y e that are Gods, going forth, uttering AU M GN. The Word that goeth from (A) 
Free Breath. (U ) through W illed Breath. (M ) and stopped Breath. (GN ) to Continuous 
Breath. thussymbolizing the whole course of spiritual life. A isthe formless H ero; U is 
the six-fold solar sound of physical life, the triangle of Soul being entwined with that of 
Body; M isthe slence of “death”; GN isthe nasal sound of generation & knowledge. 

ISAK “Identical Point!” 

SA-BA-FT “N uith! Hadith! R aH oor-K huit! H ail, Great W ild Beast! H ail, [AO !” 

Section Ff. 


Thisisthe Lord of the Gods: 
Thisis the Lord of the U niverse: 
ThisisH e whom the W inds fear. 


ThisisHe, Who having made V oice by H iscommandment is Lord of all Things, King, R uler and H elper. 
H ear M e, and make all Spirits subject unto M e: so that every Spirit of the Firmament and of the Ether: upon 
the Earth and under the Earth: on dry Land and in the W ater: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and every 
Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. 


Section G. 

Spirit 

H ear M e: - 

IEOU “Indwelling Sun of M yself” 

PUR “T hou Fire! T hou Sixfold Star initiator compassed about with Force and Fire!” 
lOU “Indwelling Soul of M yself” 

PUR (Vide Supra) 

IAFTh “Sun-lion Serpent, hail! All H ail, thou Great W ild Beast, thou! A 0!” 


IAEO “Breaths of my soul, breaths of mine Angel.” 


lOOU 
ABR ASAX 
SABR IAM 


00 
FF 
AD-ON-A-I? 


EDE 

EDU 

ANGELOSTON ThEON 
ANLALA 


LAI 


GAIA 


AEPE 


DIATHARNA THORON 


“Lust of my soul, lust of mine Angel!” 
(Vide Supra). 


“H 0 for the Sangraal! H o for the Cup of Babalon! Ho for mine Angel pouring 
Himself forth within my Soul!” 


“The Eye! Satan, my Lord! T he Lust of the goat!” 
“M ine Angel! M ine initiator! Thou one with me - the Sixfold Star!” 


“My Lord! M y secret self beyond self, H adith, All Father! H ail, ON, thou 
Sun, thou Life of M an, thou Fivefold Sword of Flame! T hou Goat exalted 
upon Earth in Lust, thou Snake extended upon Earth in Life! Spirit most holy! 
Seed most W ise! Innocent Babe. Inviolate M aid! Begetter of Being! Soul of all 
Souls! W ord of all W ords, Come forth, most hidden Light!” 


“Devour thou me!” 
“Thou dost devour M e!” 
“T hou Angel of the Gods!” 


“Arise thou in M e, free flowing, Thou who art N aught, who art N aught, and 
utter thy W ord!” 


“l also am N aught! | Will T hee! | behold T hee! M y nothingness!” 


“Leap up, thou Earth!” (T hisisalso an agonising appeal to the Earth, the M other; 
for at this point of the ceremony the Adept should be torn from his mortal 
attachments, and die to himself in the orgasm of his operation.) ? 


“T hou Exalted O ne! It (i.e. the spritual ‘semen’, the Adept’s secret ideas, drawn 
irresstibly from their ‘H ell’? by the love of his Angel) leaps up; it leaps forth! 


“Lo! the out- splashing of the seeds of |! mmortality” 


1n Hebrew, ADN I, 65. The Gnostic Initiates transliterated it to imply their own secret formulae; we follow 
so excellent an example. ON isan Arcanum of Arcana; itssignificance istaught, gradually, intheO .T.O.Also 
AD isthe paternal formula, H adit; ON isitscomplement N UIT; the final Y od signifies“ mine” etymologically 
and essentially the M ercurial (transmitted) hermaphroditic virginal seed - The H ermit of the T aro - The use 
of the name is therefore to invoke one’s own inmost secrecy, considered as the result of the conjunction of 
N uit and H adit. If the second A isincluded, itsimport is to affirm the operation of the H oly Ghost and the 
formulation of the Babein the Egg, which precedesthe appearance of the H ermit.2A thorough comprehenson 
of Psycho-analygs will contribute notably to the proper appreciation of this R itual.3It is said among men that 
the word H ell deriveth from the word “helan”, to hele or conceal, in the tongue of the Anglo-Saxons, T hat 
is, it isthe concealed place, which since all things are in thine own self, isthe unconscious, Liber C X | (A leoh) 
chap. D elta-Z eta*B ut compare the use of the same word in section C. 


Section Gg. 
The Attainment 


| am H e! the Bornless Spirit! having sight in the feet: Strong, and the Immortal Fire! 
| am He! the T ruth! 

| am H e! W ho hate that evil should be wrought in the W orld! 
| am He, that lighteneth and thundereth! 

| am He, from whom isthe Shower of the Life of Earth! 

| am He, whose mouth ever flameth! 

| am H e, the Begetter and M anifester unto the Light! 

| am He, The Grace of the W orlds! 

“T he Heart Girt with aSerpent” ismy name! 

Section H. 

The “Charge to the Spirit” 


Come thou forth, and follow me: and make all Spirits subject unto M e so that every Spirit of the Firmament, 
and of the Ether, upon the Earth and under the Earth: on dry Land, or in the Water: of Whirling Air or of 
rushing Fire, and every Spell and scourge of God, may be obedient unto me! 


Section J. 

T he Proclamation of the Beast 666 
IAF:SABAF } 

Such are the W ords! 


1See explanation in Point Il. 


POINT Il 
Ars C ongressus C um D aemone 
Section A 


Let the Adeptus M inor be standing in this circle on the square of T iphereth, armed with his W and and Cup; 
but let him perform the R itual throughout in his Body of Light. He may burn the Cakes of Light, or the 
Incense of Abramelin; he may be prepared by Liber CLX XV, the reading of Liber LX V, and by the practices 
of Y oga. He may invoke H adit by “... wine and strange drugs’ if he so will. 1 He prepares the circle by the 
usual formulae of Banishing and C onsecration, etc. H erecitesSection A asarehearsal before H isH oly Guardian 
Angel of the attributes of that Angel. Each phrase must be realized with full concentration of force, so as to 
make Samadhi as perfectly as possible upon the truth proclaimed. 


Line l 


H e identifies his Angel with the Ain Soph, and the K ether thereof; one formulation of H adit in the boundless 
Body of N uith. 


Line 2,3,4 


H e asserts that H is Angel has created (for the purpose of self- realization through projection in conditioned 
Form) three pairsof opposites: (a) T he Fixed and the Volatile; (b) The U nmanifested and the M anifest; and (c) 
the Unmoved and the M oved. O therwise, the N egative and the Postive in respect of M atter, Mind and 
Motion. 


Line5 


H eacclaimshisAngel as“H imself M ade Perfect”; adding that this| ndividuality isinscrutable in inviolable. In 
the N eophyte R itual of G: D: (As it is printed in Equinox |, II, for the old aeon) the Hierophant is the 
perfected O siris, who brings the candidate, the natural O gris, to identity with himself. But in the new Aeon 
the Hierophant is H orus (Liber CC X X , |, 49) therefore the C andidate will be H orus too. W hat then isthe 
formula of the initiation of H orus? It will no longer be that of the M an, through D eath. It will be the natural 
growth of the Child. H is experiences will no more be regarded as catastrophic. T heir hieroglyph is the Fool: 
the innocent and impotent H arpocrates B abe becomes the H orus Adult by obtaining the W and. “Der reine 
Thor” seizesthe Sacred Lance. BacchusbecomesPan. T heH oly Guardian Angel isthe U nconsciousC reature 
Self - the Spiritual Phallus. H isknowledge and conversation contributes occult puberty. It istherefore advisable 
to replace the name Asar- U n-N efer by that of R a-H oor-K huit at the outset, and by that of one’sown H oly 
Guardian Angel when it has been communicated. 


Line 6 


H ehailsHim asBESZ, the M atter that destroys and devours Godhead, for the purpose of the Incarnation of 
any God. 


Line 7 


He hails Him as APO PHR ASZ, the M otion that destroys and devours Godhead, for the purpose of the 
Incarnation of any God. The combined action of these two DEVILS isto allow the God upon whom they 
prey to enter into enjoyment of existence through the Sacrament of dividual “Life” (Bread - the flesh of 
BESZ) and “Love” (Wine - the blood or venom of AO PHRASZ). 


Line8 


H eacclaimsH isAngel as having “eaten of the Fruit of the T ree of Knowledge of Good and Evil”; otherwise, 
having become wise (in the Dyad, Chokmah) to apprehend the formula of Equilibrium which is now His 
own, being able to apply Himself accurately to H is self-appointed environment. 


Line 9 


H eacclaims H isAngel as having laid down the Law of Love asthe M agical formula of the U niverse, that He 
may resolve the phenomenal again into its noumenal phase by uniting any two opposites in ecstasic passion. 


Line 10 


H eacclaimsH isAngel ashaving appointed that this formulaof Love should effect not only the dissolution of 
the separateness of the Lovers into His own impersonal Godhead, but their co-ordination in a “Child” 


quintessentialized from its parents to constitute a higher order of Being than theirs, so that each generation is 
an alchemical progresstow ards perfection in the direction of successive complexities. AsLine 9 asserts! nvolution, 
Line 10 asserts Evolution. 


Line 11 


H eacclaimsH isAngel ashaving devised this method of self- realization; the object of Incarnation isto obtain 
its reactions to its relations with other incarnated Beings and to observe theirs with each other. 


tAny such formula should be used only when the adept has full knowledge based on experience of the 
management of such matters. 


Section Aa. 
Linel 


T he Adept asserts his right to enter into conscious communication with His Angel, on the ground that that 
Angel has H imself taught him the Secret M agick by which he may make the proper link. “M osheh” isM H, 
the formation in Jechidah, C hiah, N eshamah, R uach, - T he Sephiroth from K ether to Y esod - since 45 isSum 
1-9 while Sh, 300, isSum 1-24, which superaddsto these N ine an extra Fifteen numbers. (See in Liber D, the 
meanings and correspondences of 9, 15, 24, 45, 300, 345.) 45 ismoreoverA D M, MDA, man. “M osheh” is 
thusthe name of man asaGod- concealing form. But in the R itual let the Adept replace this “M osheh” by his 
own motto asAdeptusM inor. For “Ishrael” let him prefer hisown M agical R ace, according to the obligations 
of his Oaths to Our Holy Order! (The Beast 666 Himself used “Ankh-f-n-Khonsu” and “Khem” in this 
section.) 


Line 2 


The Adept reminds his Angel that H e has created T hat O ne Substance of which H ermes hath written in the 
T able of Emerald, whose virtue isto unite in itself all opposite modes of Being, thereby to serve asaT alisman 
charged with the Spiritual Energy of Existence, an Elixir or Stone composed of the physical basis of Life. T his 
Commemoration is placed between the two personal appeals to the Angel, as if to claim privilege to partake 
of this Eucharist which createth, sustaineth and redeemeth all things. 


Line 3 


H e now asserts that he is himself the “Angel” or messenger of his Angel; that is, that he isa mind and body 
whose office is to receive and transmit the W ord of hisAngel. He hailshis Angel not only as “un-nefer” the 
Perfection of “Asar” himself asaman, but as Ptah-A pophrasz-R a, the identity (H adit) wrapped in the D ragon 
(N uit) and thereby manifested as a Sun (R aH oor-Khuit). The “Egg” (or H eart) “girt with a Serpent” isa 
cognate symbol; the idea is thus expressed later in the ritual. (See Liber LX V which expands this to the 
uttermost.) 


Section B 


T he Adept passes from contemplation to action in the sectionsnow following B to Gg. H eisto travel astrally 
around the circle, making the appropriate pentagrams, sigils, and signs. H is direction is widdershins. H e thus 
makes three curves, each covering three-fourths of the circle. He should give the sign of the Enterer on 
passing the Kiblah, or Direction of Boleskine. T his picks up the force naturally radiating from that point? and 
projectsit in the direction of the path of the M agician. T he sgilsare those given in the Equinox Vol. 1, No. 7, 
Plate X outside the square; the sgns those hewn in Vol. 1, No. 2, Plate “T he Signs of the Grades’. In these 


invocationshe should expand hisgirth and hisstature to the utmost?, assuming the form and the conscioumess 
of the elemental god of the quarter. After this, he begins to vibrate the “Barbarous N ames’ of the R itual. 


N ow let him not only fill hiswhole being to the uttermost with the force of the N ames, but let him formulate 
his W ill, understood thoroughly as the dynamic aspect of his C reative Self, in an appearance symbolically apt, 
| say not in the form of aR ay of Light, of a Fiery Sword, or of aught save that bodily Vehicle of the H oly 
Ghost which issacred to BAPHO MET, by its virtue that concealeth the Lion and the Serpent that H is] mage 
may appear adorably upon the Earth for ever. 


Let then the Adept extend his W ill beyond the Circle in thisimagined Shape and let it radiate with the Light 
proper to the element invoked, and let each W ord issue along the Shaft with passionate impulse, asif its voice 
gave command thereto that it should thrust itself leapingly forward. Let also each W ord accumulate authority, 
go that the H ead of the Shaft may plunge twice asfar for the Second W ord asfor the First, and Four T imesfor 
the Third as the Second, and thus to the end. M oreover, let the Adept fling forth his whole consciousness 
thither. T hen at the final W ord, let him bring rushing back hisW ill within himself, steadily streaming, and let 
him offer himself to its point, as Artemisto PAN , that this perfectly pure concentration of the Element purge 
him thoroughly, and possess him with its passion. 


In this Sacrament being wholly at one with that Element, let the Adept utter the C harge “H ear me, and 
make”, etc. with strong sense that this unity with that quarter of the U niverse confers upon him the fullest 
freedom and privilege appurtenant thereto. 


Let the Adept take note of the wording of the C harge. T he “Firmament” isthe R uach, the “mental plane”; 
it is the realm of Shu, or Zeus, where revolves the W heel of the Gunas, the Three forms? of Being. The 
Aethyr is the “akasna’, the “Spirit”, the Aethyr or physics, which is the framework on which all forms are 
founded; it receives, records and transmits all impulses without itself suffering mutation thereby. T he “Earth” 
isthe sohere wherein the operation of these “fundamental” and aethyric forces appears to perception. “U nder 
the Earth” isthe world of those phenomena which inform those perceived projections, and determine their 
particular character. “D ry land” isthe place of dead “material things”, dry (i.e. unknowable) because unable to 
act on our minds. “W ater” isthe vehicle whereby we feel such things; “air” their menstruum wherein these 
feelings are mentally apprehended. It iscalled “whirling” because of the instability of thought, and the fatuity 
of reason, on which we are yet dependent for what we call “life”. “R ushing Fire” is the world in which 
wandering thought burns up to swift- darting W ill. T hese four stages explain how the non-Ego istransmuted 
into the Ego. A “Spell” of God is any form of conscioumess, and a “Scourge” any form of action. 


The Charge, asa whole, demands for the Adept the control of every detail of the U niverse which His Angel 
has created asa means of manifesting H imself to Himself. It coverscommand of the primary projection of the 
Possible in individuality, in the antithetical artifice which isthe device of M ind, and in abalanced triplicity of 
modes or states of being whose combinations constitute the characteristics of Cosmos. It includes also a 
standard of structure, arigidity to make reference possible. U pon these foundationsof condition which are not 
thingsin themselves, but the canon to which thingsconform, isbuilded the T emple of Being, whose materials 
are themselvesperfectly mysterious, inscrutable asthe Soul, and like the Soul imagining themselves by symbols 
which we may feel, perceive, and adapt to our use without ever knowing the whole T ruth about them. T he 
Adept sums up all these items by claiming authority over every form of expression possible to Existence, 
whether it be a “spell” (idea) or a“ scourge” (act) of “God”, that is, of himself. The Adept must accept every 
“spirit”, every “spell”, every “scourge”, as part of his environment, and make them all “subject to” himself; 
that is, consider them as contributory causes of himself. They have made him what he is. T hey correspond 
exactly to his own faculties. T hey are all - ultimately - of equal importance. T he fact that he is what he is 
proves that each item is equilibrated. The impact of each new impression affects the entire system in due 


measure. H e must therefore realize that every event is subject to him. It occurs because he had need of it. lron 
rusts because the moleculesdemand oxygen for the satisfaction of their tendencies. T hey do not crave hydrogen; 
therefore combination with that gasisan event which doesnot happen. All experiences contribute to make us 
complete in ourselves. W e feel ourselves subject to them so long as we fail to recognise this, when wedo, we 
perceive that they are subject to us. And whenever westrive to evade an experience, whatever it may be, we 
thereby do wrong to ourselves. W e thwart our own tendencies. To live isto change; and to oppose change is 
to revolt against the law which we have enacted to govern our lives. T o resent destiny isthus to abdicate our 
sovereignty, and to invoke death. Indeed, we have decreed the doom of death for every breach of the law of 
Life. And every failure to incorporate any impression starves that particular faculty which stood in need of it. 


T his Section B invokes Air in the East, with a shaft of golden glory. 


T hisisan assumption based on Liber LegisI|, 78 and III, 34.2H aving experience of success in the practices of 
Liber 536, BATRAXO-RENOBOOKOSMOMAXIA.3T hey correspond to the Sulphur, M ercury, and 
Salt of Alchemy; to Sattvas, R ajas, and T amasin the H indu system; and are rather modes of action than actual 
qualities even when conceived as latent. T hey are the apparatus of communication between the planes; as 
such, they are conventions. T here isno absolute validity in any means of mental apprehension; but unlesswe 
make these spirits of the Firmament subject unto us by establishing right relation (within the possible limits) 
with the U niverse, we shall fall into error when we develop our new instrument of direct understanding. It is 
vital that the Adept should train his intellectual faculties to tell him the truth, in the measure of their capacity. 
T o despise the mind on account of its limitationsisthe most disastrous blunder; it isthe common cause of the 
calamities which strew so many shores with the wreckage of the M ystic Armada. Bigotry, Arrogance, 
Bewilderment, all formsof mental and moral disorder, so often observed in people of great spiritual attainment, 
have brought the Path itself into discredit; almost all such catastrophes are due to trying to build the T emple 
of the Spirit without proper attention to the mental laws of structure and the physical necessities of foundation. 
The mind must be brought to its utmost pitch of perfection, but according to itsown internal properties; one 
cannot feed a microscope on mutton chops. It must be regarded as a mechanical instrument of knowledge, 
independent of the personality of its possessor. O ne must treat it exactly as one treats one’s electroscope or 
one’seyes; one influence of one’swishes. A physician callsin acolleague to attend to hisown family, knowing 
that personal anxiety may derange hisjudgment. A microscopist who trusts his eyes when hispet theory isat 
take may falsify the facts, and find too late that he has made a fool of himself.In the case of initiations itself, 
history is scarred with the wounds inflicted by this Dagger. It reminds us constantly of the danger of relying 
upon the intellectual faculties. A judge must know the law in every point, and be detached from personal 
prejudices, and incorruptible, or iniquity will triumph. Dogma, with persecution, delugon, paralyssof progress, 
and many another evil, as its satraps, has always established a tyranny when Genius has proclaimed it. Isam 
making a bonfire of written Wisdom, and Haeckel forging biological evidence; physicists ignorant of 
radioactivity disouting the conclusions of geology, and theologians impatient of truth struggling against the 
tide of thought; all such must perish at the hands of their own error in making their minds, internally defective 
or externally deflected, the measure of the U niverse. 


Section C 

T he adept now invokes Fire in the South; flame red are the rays that burst from his V erendum. 
Section D 

H e invokes W ater in the W es, his W and billowing forth blue radiance. 


Section E 


He goes to the N orth to invoke Earth; flowers of green flame flash from his weapon. As practice makes the 
Adept perfect in this W ork, it becomes automatic to attach all these complicated ideas and intentionsto their 
correlated words and acts. When this is attained he may go deeper into the formula by amplifying its 
correspondences. T hus, he may invoke water in the manner of water, extending his will with majestic and 
irredstible motion, mindful of its impulse gravitation, yet with a suave and tranquil appearance of weakness. 
Again, he may apply the formula of water to its peculiar purpose as it surges back into his sphere, using it with 
conscious xill for the cleansing and calming of the receptive and emotional elementsin his character, and for 
the solution or sweeping away of those tangled weeds of prejudice which hamper him from freedom to act as 
he will. Similar applications of the remaining invocations will occur to the Adept who is ready to use them. 


Section F 


T he Adept now returnsto the T iphereth square of hisT au, and invokes gpirit, facing toward Boleskine, by the 
active Pentagrams, the sgil called the M ark of the Beast, and the Signsof L.V .X . (See plate as before). H ethen 
vibrates the N ames extending his will in the same way as before, but vertically upward. At the same time he 
expandsthe Source of that W ill - the secret symbol of Self - both about him and below, asif to affirm that Self, 
duplex asisits form, reluctant to acquiesce in its failure to coincide with the Sphere of N uith. Let him now 
imagine, at the last W ord, that the H ead of his will, where his consciousness is fixed, opens its fissure (the 
Brahmarandra- C akkra, at the junction of the cranial sutures) and exudes a drop of clear crystalline dew, and 
that this pearl is his Soul, a virgin offering to his Angel, pressed forth from his being by the intensty of this 
Aspiration. 


Section Ff 


W ith these words the Adept does not withdraw his will within him asin the previous Sections. H e thinks of 
them as areflection of T ruth on the surface of the dew, where his Soul hidestrembling. H e takes them to be 
the first formulation in his consciousness of the nature of H is H oly Guardian Angel. 


Line 1 

The “Gods” include all the conscious elements of his nature. 

Line 2 

The “U niverse” includes all possible phenomena of which he can be aware. 

Line 3 

The “W inds’ are his thoughts, which have prevented him from attaining to his Angel. 
Line 4 


H isAngel has made “Voice”, the magical weapon which produces “W ords’, and these words have been the 
wisdom by which H e hath created all things. The “Voice” isnecessary asthe link between the A dept and his 
Angel. T he Angel is “King”, theO newho “can”, the “source of authority and the fount of honour”; also the 
King (or King’s Son) who delivers the Enchanted Princess, and makes her his Queen. He is “R uler”, the 
“unconscious W ill”; to be thwarted no more by the ignorant and capricious false will of the conscious man. 
And Heis “Helper”, the author of the infallible impulse that sends the Soul sweeping along the skies on its 
proper path with such impetus that the attraction of alien orbsisno longer sufficient to swerve it. The “H ear 
me” clause isnow uttered by the normal human consciousness, withdrawn to the physical body; the Adept 
must deliberately abandon his attainment, because it is not yet his whole being which burns up before the 


Beloved. 
Section G 


The Adept, though withdrawn, shall have maintained the Extension of hisSymbol. H e now repeats the signs 
as before, save that he makes the Passive Invoking Pentagram of Spirit. H e concentrates his consciousness 
within hisT win-Symbol of Self, and endeavoursto send it to deep. But if the operation be performed properly, 
hisAngel shall have accepted the offering of D ew, and seized with fervour upon the extended symbol of W ill 
towardsH imself. T histhen shall H e shake vehemently with vibrations of love reverberating with the W ords 
of the Section. Even in the physical ears of the adept there shall resound an echo thereof, yet he shall not be 
able to describe it. It shall seem both louder than thunder, and softer than the whisper of the night-wind. It 
Shall at once be inarticulate, and mean more than he hath ever heard. 


N ow let him strive with all the strength of his Soul to withstand the W ill of hisAngel, concealing himself in 
the closest cell of the citadel of conscioumess. Let him consecrate himself to resist the assault of the V oice and 
the Vibration until his consciousness faint away into N othing. For if there abide unabsorbed even one single 
atom of the false Ego, that atom should stain the virginity of the T rue Self and profane the O ath; then that 
atom should be so inflamed by the approach of the Angel that is should overwhelm the rest of the mind, 
tyrannize over it, and become an insane despot to the total ruin of the realm. 


But, all being dead to sense, who then is able to strive against the Angel? He shall intensify the stress of His 
Spirit so that His loyal legions of Lion- Serpents leap from the ambush, awakening the adept to witness their 
W ill and sweep him with them in their enthusiasm, so that he consciously partakesthis purpose, and seesin its 
gmplicity the solution of all his perplexities. Thus then shall the A dept be aware that he is being swept away 
through the column of his W ill Symbol. and that H isAngel isindeed himself, with intimacy so intense as to 
become identity, and that not in asingle Ego, but in every unconscious element that shares in that manifold 
uprugh. 


This rapture is accompanied by a tempest of brilliant light, almost always, and also in many cases by an 
outburst of sound, tupendous and sublime in all cases, though its character may vary within wide limits. 


T he spate of stars shoots from the head of the W ill- Symbol, and is scattered over the sky in glittering galaxies. 
T hisdispersion destroysthe concentration of the adept, whos mind cannot master such multiplicity of majesty; 
asarule, he amply sinks stunned into normality, to recall nothing of his experience but avague though vivid 
impression of complete release and ineffable rapture. R epetition fortifies him to realise the nature of his 
attainment; and hisAngel, the link once made, frequentshim, and trainshim subtly to be sensitive to hisH oly 
presence, and persuasion. But it may occur, especially after repeated success, that the Adept isnot flung back 
into his mortality by the explosion of the Star-spate, but identified with one particular “Lion-Serpent”, 
continuing consciousthereof until it findsits proper place in Space, when its secret self flowersforth asatruth, 
which the Adept may then take back to earth with him. 


T hisisbut aside issue. The main purpose of the R itual isto establish the relation of the subconscious self with 
the Angel in such a way that the Adept is aware that his Angel is the U nity which expresses the sum of the 
Elements of that Self, that his normal conscioumess contains alien enemies introduced by the accidents of 
environment, and that his Knowledge and C onversation of H isH oly Guardian Angel desttroysall doubts and 
delusions, confers all blessings, teaches all truth, and contains all delights. But it is important that the Adept 
Should not rest in mere inexpressible realization of hisrapture, but rouse himself to make the relation submit to 
analysis, to render it in rational terms, and thereby enlighten his mind and heart in a sense as superior to 
fanatical enthusiasm as Beethoven’s musc isto W est African war- drums. 


1T hese phenomena are not wholly subjective; they may be perceived, though often under other forms, by 
even the ordinary man. 


Section Gg 


T he adept should have realised that hisAct of U nion with the angel implies? the death of hisold mind save in 
go far as hisunconscious elements preserve its memory when they absorb it, and? the death of hisunconscious 
elements themselves. But their death is rather a going forth to renew their life through love. He then, by 
conscious comprehension of them separately and together, becomes the “Angel” of hisAngel, as H ermes is 
the W ord of Zeus, whose own voice is T hunder. T hus in this section the adept utters articulately so far as 
wordsmay, what hisAngel isto H imself. H esaysthis, with his Scin-Laecawholly withdrawn into hisphysical 
body, constraining H isAngel to indwell his heart. 


Line l 


“lam He” assertsthe destruction of the sense of separateness between self and Self. It affirms existence, but of 
the third person only. “The Bornless Spirit” is free of all space, “having sight in the feet”, that they may 
choos their own path. “Strong” isG BR, T heM agician escorted by the Sun and the M oon (See Liber D and 
Liber 777). The “Immortal Fire” isthe creative Self; impersonal energy cannot perish, no matter what forms 
it assumes. Combustion isLove. 


Line 2 


“Truth” is the necessary relation of any two things; therefore, although it implies duality, it enables us to 
conceive of two things as being one thing such that it demands to be defined by complementals. T hus, an 
hyperbola is a simple idea, but its construction exacts two curves. 


Line 3 


The Angel, asthe adept knows him, isabeing T iphereth, which obscures K ether. T he Adept is not officially 
aware of the higher Sephiroth. He cannot perceive, like the Ipsssmus, that all things soever are equally 
illusion and equally Absolute. H e isin Tiphereth, whose office is R edemption, and he deplores the events 
which have caused the apparent Sorrow from which he hasjust escaped. H e is also aware, even in the height 
of his ecstasy, of the limits and defects of his Attainment. 


Line 4 
T his refers to the phenomena which accompany his Attainment. 
Line 5 


This means the recognition of the Angel as the T rue Self of his subconscious self, the hidden Life of his 
physical life. 


Line 6 


T he Adept realises every breath, every word of hisAngel as charged with creative fire. T iphereth isthe Sun, 
and the Angel is the spiritual Sun of the Soul of the A dept. 


Line 7 


H ere issummed the entire process of bringing the conditioned U niverse to knowledge of itself through the 


formula of generation +; a soul implants itself in sense hoodwinked body and reason-fettered mind, makes 
them aware of their Inmate, and thus to partake of its own conscioumess of the Light. 


Line8 


“Grace” has here its proper sense of “Pleasantness’. The existence of the Angel is the justification of the 
device of creation. 2 


Line 9 
This line must be studied in the light of Liber LX V (Equinox XI. p. 65). 


1T hat is, Y od H erealizing T hemselvesW ill and U nderstanding in the twinsV au H e, M ind and body.?B ut see 
also the general solution of the R iddle of Existence in T he Book of the Law and its Comment - Part IV of 
Book 4. 


Section H. 


T his recapitulation demands the going forth together of the Adept and his Angel “to do their pleasure on the 
Earth among the living.” 


Section J. 


T he Beast 666 having devised the present method of using thisR itual, having proved it by hisown practice 
to be of infallible puissance when properly performed, and now having written it down for the world, it shall 
be an ornament for the Adept who adopts it to cry Hail to His name at the end of his work. This shall 
moreover encourage him in M agick, to recall that indeed there was One who attained by its use to the 
Knowledge and C onversation of H isH oly Guardian Angel, the which forsook him no more, but made Him 
aM agus, the W ord of the Aeon of Horus! 


For know this, that the N ame IAF in itsmost secret and mighty sense declareth the Formula of the M agick of 
the BEAST whereby he wrought many wonders. And because he doth will that the whole world shall attain 
to thisArt, He now hideth it herein so that the worthy may win to His Wisdom. 


Let! and F face all?; yet ward their A from attack. The H ermit to himself, the fool to foes, The H ierophant to 
friends, N ine by nature, N aught by attainment, Five by function. In speech swift, subtle and secret; in thought 
creative, unbiassed, unbounded; in act gentle, patient and persistent. 


H ermes to hear, Dionysus to touch, Pan to behold. 

A Virgin, A Babe, and a Beast! 

A Liar, an Idiot, and aM aster of M en! 

A kiss, a guffaw, and a bellow; he that hath ears to hear, let him hear! 

T ake ten that be one, and one that is one in three, to conceal them in six! 
Thy wand to all Cups, and thy Disk to all Swords, but betray not thine Egg! 


M oreover also is|AF verily 666 by virtue of N umber; and thisisaM ystery of M ysteries, W ho knoweth it, he 
is adept of adepts, and M ighty among M agicians! 


N ow this word SABAF, being by number T hree score and T en 2, isaname of Ayin, the Eye, and the Devil 
our Lord, and the Goat of M endes. H eisthe Lord of the Sabbath of the A depts, and is Satan, therefore also the 
Sun, whose number of M agick is 666, the seal of H is servant the BEAST. 


But again SA is61, AIN , the N aught of N uith; BA meansgo, for H adit; and F istheir Son the Sun who isR & 
H oor-K huit. 


So then let the Adept set his sigil upon all the words he hath writ in the Book of the W orks of his Will. 


And let him then end all, saying, Such are the W ords! 3 For by thishe maketh proclamation before all them 
that be about hisC ircle that these W ordsare true and puissant, binding what he would bind, and loosing what 
he would loose. 


Let the Adept perform thisR itual aright, perfect in every part thereof, once daily for one moon, then twice, 
at dawn and dusk, for two moons, next, thrice, noon added, for three moons, afterwards, midnight making up 
his course, for four moons four times every day. T hen let the Eleventh M oon be consecrated wholly to this 
W ork; let him be instant in continual ardour, dismissing all but hissheer needsto eat and deep. * For know that 
the true Formula® whose virtue sufficed the Beast in this Attainment, was thus: 


INVOKE OFTEN® 


So may all men comeat last to the K nowledge and C onversation of the H oly Guardian Angel: thussayeth the 
Beast, and prayeth H isown Angel that this book be asa burning Lamp, and asa living Spring, for Light and 
Life to them that read therein. 


666 


11f we adopt the new orthography VIAOV (Book 4 Part III Chap. V.) we must read “T he Sun-6-the Son” 
etc. for “all”; and elaborate thisinterpretation here given in other ways, accordingly. ThusO (of F) will not be 
“T he Fifteen by function” instead of “Five” etc., and “in act free, firm, aspiring, ecstatic”, rather than “gentle” 
etc. asin the present text.2T here isan alternative spelling T ZBA-F W here theR oot, (ABz) “an Host”, hasthe 
value of 93. T he Practicus should revive this R itual throughout in the Light of his personal researches in the 
Q abalah, and thus make it hisown peculiar property. T he spelling here suggested implies that he who utters 
the W ord affirmshisallegiance to the symbols 93 and 61 that he isawarrior in the army of Will and of the Sun. 
93 is also the number of AIW AZ and 6 of The Beast.3T he consonants of LOGOS, “Word”, add (H ebrew 
values: SGL) to 93. And EPH, “Words”, (whence “Epic”) has also that value: EIDE TA EPH might be the 
phrase here intended: its number is 418. T his would then assert the accomplishment of the Great W ork; this 
is the natural conclugon of the R itual. Cf. CCX X. Ill. 75.4T hese needs are modified during the process of 
Initiation both as to quantity and quality. One should not become anxious about one’s physical or mental 
health on apriori grounds, but pay attention only to indubitable symptoms of distress should such arise.5T he 
Oracles of Zoroaster utter this” And when, by often invoking, all the phantasms are vanished, thou shalt see 
that H oly and Formless Fire, that Fire which darts and flashes through all the D epths of the U niverse; hear 
thou the Voice of the Fire!”A smilar Fire flashingly extending through the rushings of Air, or a Fire formless 
whence cometh the Image of a voice, or even a flashing Light abounding, revolving, whirling forth, crying 
aloud. Also there isthe vision of the fire flashing C ourser of Light, or also aC hild, borne aloft on the hhoulders 
of the Celestial Steed, fiery, or clothed with gold, or naked, or shooting with the bow shafts or light, and 
standing on the shoulders of the horse, then if thy meditation prolongeth itself, thou shalt unite all these 
symbols into the form of aLion.”T his passage - combined with several others - is paraphased in poetry by 
Aleister Crowley in his“ T annhauser” .” And when, invoking often, thou shalt seeT hat formless Fire; when all 


the earth is shaken,T he Stars abide not, and the moon is gone,All Time crushed back into Eternity,T he 
U niverse by earthquake overtaken; Light isnot, and the thundersroll,T he W orld isdone:W hen in the darkness 
Chaosrollsagain|n the excited brain:T hen, O then call not to thy view that visiblel mage of N ature; fatal isher 
namellt fitteth not thy Body to beholdT hat living light of H ell, T he unluminous, dead flame,U ntil that body 
from the crucibleH ath passed, pure gold!For, from the confinesof material space, T hetwilight- moving place, T he 
gates of matter, and the dark threshold, Before the faces of the T hingsthat dwellln the A bodes of N ight,Spring 
into sghtD emons, dog- faced, that show no mortal sgnO f Truth, but desecrate the Light Divine,Seducing 
from the sacred mysteries.But, after all these Folk of Fear are drivenBefore the avenging levinT hat rives the 
Opening skies,Behold that formless and that H oly FlameT hat hath no name;T he Fire that darts and flashes, 
writhes and creepsSnake- wise in royal robeW ound round that vanished glory of the globe,U nto that xy 
beyond the starry deeps,Beyond the Toils of Time, - then formulateln thine own mind, luminous, 
concentrate,T he Lion of the Light, achild that standsO n the vast shoulders of the Steed of God:0 r winged, or 
hooting flying shafts, or shodW ith the flame sandals.T hen, lift up thine handsIC entre thee in thine heart one 
scarlet thoughtLimpid with brilliance of the Light above!D rawn into naughtAll life, death, hatred, love:Al 
self concentred in the sole desire -H ear thou the Voice of Fire!” ®See Equinox I, VIII, 22. 


POINT Ill 
Scholion on SectionsG & Gg 
“T he Seeds of Immortality!” 


T heAdept who has mastered thisR itual, successfully realising the full import of thiscontrolled rapture, ought 
not to allow his mind to loosen its grip on the astral imagery of the Star- spate, W ill-Symbol, or Soul- symbol, 
or even to forget its duty to the body and the sensible surroundings. N or should he omit to keep his Body of 
Light in close touch with the phenomena of its own plane, so that its privy consciousness may fulfil its proper 
functions of protecting his scattered ideals from obsession. 


But he should have acquired, by previous practice, the faculty of detaching these elements of hisconscioumess 
from their articulate centre, so that they become (temporarily) independent responsble units, capable of 
receiving communications from headquarters at will, but perfectly able + to take care of themselves without 
troubling their chief, and 2 to report to him at the proper time. In a figure, they must be like subordinate 
officers, expected to display self-reliance, initiative, and integrity in the execution of the O rders of the Day. 


The Adept should therefore be able to rely on these individual minds of his to control their own conditions 
without interference from himself for the time required, and to recall them in due course, receiving an accurate 
report of their adventures. 


This being so, the Adept will be free to concentrate his deepest self, that part of him which unconsciously 
orders his true W ill, upon the realization of his H oly Guardian Angel. T he absence of his bodily, mental and 
astral consciousness isindeed cardinal to success, for it istheir usurpation of his attention which has made him 
deaf to his Soul, and his preoccupation with their affairs that has prevented him from perceiving that Soul. 


T he effect of the R itual has been 
to keep them so busy with their own work that they cease to distract him; 
to separate them so completely that his soul is stripped of its sheaths; 


to arousein him an enthusiasm so intense asto intoxicate and anaesthetize him, that he may not feel and resent 


the agony of this spiritual vivisection, just as bashful lovers get drunk on the wedding night, in order to brazen 
out the intensity of shame which so mysteriously coexists with their desire; 


to concentrate the necessary spiritual forces from every element, and fling them smultaneougy into the 
aspiration towards the H oly Guardian Angel; and 


to attract the Angel by the vibration of the magical voice which invokes Him. 
The method of the R itual is thus manifold. 


T here is firstly an analysis of the Adept, which enables him to calculate his course of action. H e can decide 
what must be banished, what purified, what concentrated. He can then concentrate his will upon its one 
essential element, over-coming its resistance - which is automatic, like a physiological reflex - by destroying 
inhibitions through his ego- overwhelming enthusiasm. 2 T he other half of the work needs no such complex 
effort; for his Angel issimple and unperplexed, ready at all timesto respond to rightly ordered approach. 


It is impossible to overcome one’s inhibitions by conscious effort; their existence justifies them. God is on 
their side, as on that of the victim in Browning's Instans Tyrannus. A man cannot compel himself to love, 
however much he may want to, on various rational grounds. But on the other hand, when the true impulse 
comes, it overwhelmsall its critics; they are powerless either to make or break a genius; it can only testify to 
the fact that it has met its master. 


But the results of the R itual are too various to permit of rigid description. O ne may say that, presuming the 
union to be perfect, the Adept need not retain any memory soever of what has occurred. H e may be merely 
aware of a gap in his conscious life, and judge of its contents by observing that his nature has been subtly 
transfigured. Such an experience might indeed be the proof of perfection. 


If the Adept isto be any wise consciousof hisAngel it must be that some part of hismind is prepared to realise 
the rapture, and to express it to itself in one way or another. This involves the perfection of that part, its 
freedom from prejudice and the limitations of rationality so-called. For instance: one could not receive the 
illumination asto the nature of life which the doctrine of evolution hould shed, if oneispassionately persuaded 
that humanity is essentially not animal, or convinced that causality isrepugnant to reason. The Adept must be 
ready for the utter destruction of his point of view on any subject, and even that of hisinnate conception of the 
forms and laws of thought. 2 T hushe may find that hisAngel consider his“ business” or his“love” to be absurd 
trifles, also that human ideas of “time” are invalid, and human “laws” of logic applicable only to the relations 
between illusions. 


N ow the Angel will make contact with the Adept at any point that issensttive to H is influence. Such apoint 
will naturally be one that is salient in the Adept’s character, and also one that is, in the proper sense of the 
word, pure. 3 


Thus an artist, attuned to appreciate plastic beauty is likely to receive a visual impression of his Angel in a 
physical form which issublimely quintessential of hisideal. A musician may be rapt away by majestic melodies 
such ashe never hoped to hear. A philosopher may attain apprehension of tremendous truths, the solution of 
problems that had baffled him all his life. 


Conformably with this doctrine, we read of illuminations experienced by smple-minded men, such as a 
workman who “saw God” and likened Him to “a quantity of little pears’. Again, we know that ecstasy, 
impinging upon unbalanced minds, inflames the idolised idea, and produces fanatical faith fierce even to 
frenzy, with intolerance and insanely disordered energy which is yet so powerful as to effect the destinies of 


empires. 


But the phenomena of the Knowledge and Conversation of the H oly Guardian Angel are a Side issue; the 
essence of the U nion isthe intimacy. T heir intimacy (or rather identity) is independent of all partial forms of 
expression; at its best it is therefore as inarticulate as Love. 


The intensty of the consummation will more probably compel asob or acry, some natural physical gesture of 
animal sympathy with the spiritual spasm. T hisisto be criticised asincomplete self- control. Silence isnobler. 


In any case the Adept must be in communion with his Angel, so that his Soul is suffused with sublimity, 
whether intelligible or not in terms of intellect. It is evident that the stress of such spiritual possession must 
tend to overwhelm the soul, especially at first. It actually suffers from the excess of its ecstasy, just as extreme 
love produces vertigo. The soul snks and swoons. Such weakness is fatal alike to its enjoyment and its 
apprehenson. “Be strong! then canst thou bear more rapture!” sayeth T he Book of the Law. 4 


The Adept must therefore play the man, arousing himself to harden his soul. 


To this end, |, the Beast, have made trial and proof of divers devices. O f these the most potent is to set the 
body to strive with the soul. Let the musclestake grip on themselvesasif one were wrestling. Let the jaw and 
mouth, in particular, be tightened to the utmost. Breathe deeply, sowly, yet strongly. K eep mastery over the 
mind by muttering forcibly and audibly. But lest such muttering tend to disturb communion with the Angel, 
goeak only His N ame. Until the Adept have heard that N ame, therefore, he may not abide in the perfect 
possession of his Beloved. His most important task is thus to open his ears to the voice of his Angel, that he 
may know him, how he iscalled. For hearken! this N ame, understood rightly and fully, declareth the nature 
of the Angel in every point, wherefore also that N ame is the formula of the perfection to which the Adept 
must aspire, and also of the power of M agick by virtue whereof he must work. 


He then that is as yet ignorant of that N ame, let him repeat a word worthy of this particular R itual. Such are 
Abrahadabra, the W ord of the Aeon, which ggnifieth “T he Great W ork accomplished”; and Aumgn interpreted 
in Part II] of Book 45; and the name of TH E BEAST, for that H isnumber showeth forth thisU nion with the 
Angel, and His W ork isno other than to make all men partakers of thisM ystery of the M ysteries of M agick. 


So then saying this word or that, let the Adept wrestle with his Angel and withstand Him, that he may 
constrain Him to consent to continue in communion until the conscioumess becomes capable of clear 
comprehension, and of accurate transmission § of the transcendent T ruth of the Beloved to the heart that holds 
him. 


T hefirm repetition of one of these W ordsought to enable the A dept to maintain the state of U nion for several 
minutes, even at first. 


In any case he must rekindle his ardour, esteeming his success rather as an encouragement to more ardent 
aspiration than asa triumph. H e should increase his efforts. 


Let him beware of the “lust of result”, of expecting too much, of losing courage if his first success is followed 
by aseries of failures. 


For success makes success seem so incredible that one isapt to create an inhibition fatal to subsequent attempts. 
O ne fears to fail; the fear intrudes upon the concentration and so fulfilsitsown prophecy. W e know how too 
much pleasure in a love affair makes one afraid to disgrace oneself on the next few occasions, indeed, until 
familiarity has accustomed one to the idea that one’s lover has never supposed one to be more than human. 


Confidence returns gradually. Inarticulate ecstasy is replaced by a more sober enjoyment of the elements of 
the fascination. 


Just so one’s first dazzled delight in a new landscape turns, as one continues to gaze, to the appreciation of 
exquisite details of the view. At first they were blurred by the blinding rush of general beauty; they emerge 
one by one asthe shock subsides, and passionate rapture yields to intelligent interest. 


In the same way the Adept almost always begins by torrential lyrics painting out mystical extravagances about 
“ineffable love”, “unimaginable bliss”, “inexpressible infinities of illimitable utterness”. 7 H e usually loses his 
sense of proportion, of humour, of reality, and of sound judgment. H is ego is often inflated to the bursting 
point, till he would be abjectly ridiculous if he were not 90 pitifully dangerous to himself and others. H e also 
tendsto take hisnew- found “truthsof illumination” for the entire body of truth, and insists that they must be 


as valid an vital for all men as they happen to be for himself. 


It is wise to keep slence about those things “unlawful to utter” which one may have heard “in the seventh 
heaven”. This may not apply to the sixth. 


The Adept must keep himself in hand, however tempted to make anew heaven and anew earth in the next 
few days by trumpeting his triumphs. H e must give time a chance to redress his balance, sore shaken by the 
impact of the Infinite. 


Ashe becomes adjusted to intercourse with his Angel, he will find his passionate ecstasy develop a quality of 
peace and intelligibility which adds power, while it informs and fortifieshis mental and moral qualitiesinstead 
of obscuring and upsetting them. H e will by now have become able to converse with hisA ngel, impossible as 
it once seemed; for he now knows that the storm of sound which he supposed to be the Voice was only the 
clamour of hisown confusions. T he “infinity” nonsense wasborn of hisown inability to think clearly beyond 
his limits, just asa Bushman, confronted by numbers above five, can only call them “many”. 


The truth told by the Angel, immensely as it extends the horizon of the Adept, is perfectly definite and 
precise. It does not deal in ambiguities and abstractions. It possesses form, and confesses law, in exactly the 
same way and degree as any other body of truth. Itisto the truth of the material and intellectual soheresof man 
very much what the M athematics of Philosophy with its “infinite series’ and “C antorian continuity” is to 
schoolboy arithmetic. Each impliesthe other, though by that one may explore the essential nature of existence, 
and by this a pawnbroker’s profits. 


T histhen isthe true aim of the Adept in this whole operation, to assimilate himself to hisAngel by continual 
consciouscommunion. For hisAngel isan intelligible image of hisown true W ill, to do which isthe whole of 
the law of his Being. 


Also the Angel appeareth in T iphereth, which isthe heart of the R uach, and thusthe C entre of Gravity of the 
Mind. It is also directly inspired from K ether, the ultimate Self, through the Path of the High Priestess, or 
initiated intuition. H ence the Angel isin truth the Logos or articulate expression of the whole Being of the 
Adept, so that as he increases in the perfect understanding of His name, he approaches the solution of the 
ultimate problem, W ho he himself truly is. 


U nto this final statement the A dept may trust his Angel to lead him; for the T iphereth- consciousness alone is 
connected by paths with the various parts of his mind. ® N one therefore save H ehath the knowledge requisite 
for calculating the combinationsof conduct which will organise and equilibrate for forces of the A dept, against 
the moment when it becomes necessary to confront the Abyss. The Adept must control a compact and 
coherent massif he isto make sure of hurling it from him with a clean-cut gesture. 


|, The Beast 666, lift up my voice and swear that | myself have been brought hither by mine Angel. After that 
| had attained unto the K nowledge and C onversation of Him by virtue of mine ardour towards H im, and of 
thisR itual that! bestow upon men my fellows, and most of H isgreat Love that H e beareth to me, yea, verily, 
He led me to the Abyss, H e bade me fling away all that | had and all that | was; and He forsook me in that 
H our. But when | came beyond the A byss, to be reborn within the womb of BABALON, then came he unto 
me abiding in my virgin heart, its Lord and Lover! 


Also HemademeaM agus, speaking through H isLaw, the W ord of thenew Aeon, theAeon of the C rowned 
and Conquering Child. ? T hushe fulfilled my will to bring full freedom to the race of M en. 


Y ea, he wrought also in mea W ork of wonder beyond this, but in this matter | am sworn to hold my peace. 


1A high degree of initiation isrequired. T hismeansthat the process of analyss must have been carried out very 
thoroughly. T he Adept mus have become aware of hisdeepest impulses, and understood their true sgnificance. 
The “resistance” here mentioned is automatic; it increases indefinitely against direct pressure. It is useless to 
try to force oneself in these matters, the uninitiated Aspirant, however eager he may be, is sure to fail. One 
must know how to deal with each internal idea asit arises.2O f course, even false tenets and modes of the mind 
are in one sense true. It isonly their appearance which alters. C opernicusdid not destroy the facts of nature, or 
change the instruments of observation. H e merely effected a radical simplification of science. Error isreally a 
“fool’sknot”. M oreover, the very tendency responsible for the entanglement is one of the necessary elements 
of the situation. N othing is“wrong” in the end; and one cannot reach the “right” point of view without the 
aid of one’s particular “wrong” point. If we reject or alter the negative of a photograph we shall not get a 
perfect positive.3T his means, free from ideas, however excellent in themselves, which are foreign to it. For 
instance, literary interest hasno proper place in apicture.*Liber Al vel Legis, ||, 61-68, where the details of the 
proper technique are discussed.5T he essence of this matter isthat the word AUM, which expressesthe course 
of Breath (spiritual life) from free utterance through controlled concentration to Silence, istransnuted by the 
creation of the compound letter MGN to replace M: that is, Silence is realized as passing into continuous 
ecstatic vibration, of the nature of “Love” under “Will” asshewn by MGN = 40+ 3+ 50 = 93 AGAPH, 
ThELHMA etc., and the whole word has the value of 100, Perfection Perfected, the U nity in completion, 
and equivalent to KR the conjunction of the essential male and female principles.*T he “normal” intellect is 
incapable of these functions, a superior faculty must have been developed. As Zoroaster says: “Extend the 
void mind of thy soul to that Intelligible that thou mayst learn the Intelligible, because it subsisteth beyond 
Mind. Thou wilt not understand It as when understanding some common thing.”’T his corresponds to the 
emotional and metaphysical fog which is characteristic of the emergence of thought from homogeneity. T he 
clear and concise differentiation of ideas marks the adult mind.8See the maps “M inutum M undum” in the 
Equinox I, 1, 2, & 3 and the general relations detailed in Liber 777, of which the most important columns are 
reprinted in Appendix V .9For the account of these matters see T he Equinox, Vol. 1, “TheT emple of Solomon 
the King”, Liber 418, Liber Aleph, “John St. John”, “The Urn”, and Book 4, Part IV. 


APPENDIX V 


A FEW OFTHE PRINCIPAL 
CORRESPONDENCES 


OF THE QABALAH. 
REPRINTED WITH ADDITIONS FROM 
777 


TABLE | 
I : II : III 
EY SCALE : HEBREW NAMES OF NUMBERS : ENGLISH OF COLUMN II 
& LETTERS 
+ ———+—-——_—— 
:Aleph-Yod-Nunfinal : Nothing. 
0 :Aleph-Yod-Nunfinal : No Limit. 
:Samekh-Vau-Pehfinal 
:Aleph-Yod-Nunfinal : Limitless L.V.X. 
:Samekh-Vau-Pehfinal 
:Aleph-Vau-Resh 
1 :Koph-Taw-Resh : Crown. 
2 :Chet-Koph-—Mem-Heh : Wisdom. 
3 :Bet-Yod-Nun-Heh : Understanding. 
4 :Chet-Samekh-Dalet : Mercy. 
5 :Gemel-Bet-—Vau-Resh-Heh : Strength. 
6 : Taw-Peh-Aleph-Resh-Taw : Beauty. 
7 :Nun-Tzaddi-Chet : Victory. 
8 :Heh-Vau-Dalet : Splendour. 
9 :Yod-Samekh-Vau-—Dalet : Foundation. 
10 :Mem-—Lamed-Koph-Vau-Taw : Kingdom. 
11 :Aleph-Lamed-Pehfinal . ' JOX, 
12 :Bet-Yod-Taw : House. 
13 :Gemel-—Mem-Lamed : Camel. 
14 :Dalet-—Lamed-Taw : Door. 
15 :Heh-Heh : Window. 
16 :Vau-Vau : Nail. 
17 :Zain-Yod-Nunfinal : Sword. 
18 :Chet-Yod-Taw : Fence. 
19 :Tet-Yod-Taw : Serpent. 
20 :Yod-Vau-Dalet : Hand. 
21 :Koph-Pehfinal t- [Radin 
22 :Lamed-Mem-Dalet : Ox Goad. 
23 :Mem-Yod-Memfinal : Water. 
24 :Nun-Vau-Nunfinal : Fish. 


25 :Samekh-—Mem-Kophfinal : Prop. 


26 :Ayin-Yod-Nunfinal Eye. 
27 :Peh-Heh Mouth. 
28 :Tzaddi-Dalet-Yod Fish-hook. 
29 :Qof-Vau-Pehfinal Back of Head. 
30 :Resh-Yod-Shin Head. 
31 :Shin-Yod-Nunfinal Tooth. 
32 :Taw-Vau Tau (as Egyptian). 
32 “bis” :Taw-Vau = 
31 “bis” :Shin-Yod-Nunfinal = 
a VI VII 
KEY SCALE THE HEAVENS OF ASSIAH ENGLISH OF COLUMN VI 
+ — Ss 
1 :Resh-Aleph-Shin-Yod-Taw Sphere of the Primum Mobile 


Lamed-Yod-Memfinal 


2 


OoOMwoO @OA~A OD 


11 
12 


13 

14 
1:5 
16 
17 


18 

19 

20 
21 

22 


23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
32 “bis” 
Sd“ bas” 


: Heh-Gemel—Lamed-Gemel 


:Mem-Samekh-Lamed-Vau-Taw 


:Shin-Bet-Taw-Aleph-Yod 
:Tzaddi-Dalet-—Qof 
:Mem-Aleph-Dalet-Yod 
Memfinal 
:Shin-Mem-Shin 
:Nun-Vau-Gemel-Heh 
:Koph-Vau-Koph-Bet 
: Lamed-Bet-—Nun-Heh 
:Chet-—Lamed-Memfinal 
:Yod-Samekh-Vau-Dalet-— 
Vau-Taw 
:Resh-Vau-Chet 
(Planets following 


Sephiroth corresponding): 


: Tet-Lamed-Heh 

:Shin-Vau-Resh 

: Taw-Aleph-Vau-Mem-Yod 
Memfinal 

:Samekh—-Resh-Tet—-Nunfinal 

:Aleph-Resh-Yod-Heh 

:Bet-Taw-Vau-—Lamed-Heh 


:Mem-Aleph-Zain-Nun-Yod 
Memfinal 
:Mem—Yod-Memfinal 
:Ayin-Qof-Resh-Bet 
:Qof-Shin-Taw 
:Gemel-Dalet-Yod 


:Dalet-—Lamed-Yod 
:Dalet—Gemel-Yod-Memfinal 


:Aleph-Shin 


:Aleph-Resh-Tzaddifinal 
:Aleph-Taw 


Sphere of the Zodiac 
Fixed Stars 
Sphere of Saturn 
Sphere of Jupiter 
Sphere of Mars 


Sphere of Sol 
Sphere of Venus 
Sphere of Mercury 
Sphere of Luna 
Sphere of the 


Elements 


Air 
MERCURY 


Luna 
Venus 
Aries Fire 
Earth 
Gemini Air 


Taurus 


Cancer Water 
Leo Fire 
Earth 
Jupiter 
Libra Air 


Virgo 


Water 

Scorpio Water 
Sagittarius Fire 
Capricornus Earth 
Mars 

Aquarius Air 
Pisces Water 

Sol 

Fire 

Saturn 

Earth 

Spirit 


IX XI XII 
THE SWORD ; ELEMENTS 
AND : (WITH THEIR PLANE- THE TREE OF LIFE 
THE SERPENT ; TARY RULERS) 
:Do not confuse with: 
:rulers of Zodiac. 
+ ——+——— + 
QS, © hdeie eet fehitetie eyselsh le (abies Salata, ie ind eivae eteusalligiees se ues et ws vas ees Bs wyiaviarie hla elas. Ge wylale: en ldvien seat atone 
1 The Flaming Root of Air :lst Plane Middle Pillar: 
2 Sword follows x “ Fire :2nd - Right be 
3 the downward * “ Water :2nd x Left be 
4 course of the >) “ Water :3rd = Right : 
5 Sephiroth, and _ “ Fire :3rd ‘ Left mM 
6 is compared hy ™ “Aas 24th be Middle by 
7 to the Light- * “ Fire :5th ~ Right 
8 ning Flash. oi “ Water :5th Left - 
9 Its hilt is ” M.A :6th a Middle ‘ 
10 in Kether and 7 “ Earth 27th oS = 
its point in 
Malkuth. 
ped Bea :The Serpent of Hot and Moist Air :Path joins 1-2 
12 ®Wisdom'-LOlLOWS: sie. eed wkk CORY eke ae’ 5 2 1=3 
13 Sthe CoUrSe OF Sle iwalewa wie ee eae ele lt Se - 1-6 
14 :the paths or oe phil coxibbler Ber ere wakeele gener e amete ee ao * 2-3 
15 :letters upward, Sun Fire Jupiter * 2-6 
16 :its head being Venus Earth Moon % x 2-4 
17 :thus in Aleph, Saturn Air Mercury: ™ = 3-6 
18 :its tail in Taw.: Mars Water 7 x 3=5 
19 :Aleph, Mem, & Sun Fire Jupiter > Bs 4-5 
:Shin are 
20 :the Mother Venus Earth Moon ~ A 4-6 
21 SleECerS ; HES Bee dtl eee te Cae ele ees ‘ » 4-7 
: 22 :ferring to the Saturn Air Mercury: ™ - 5-6 
:23 :Elements; Bet, Cold & Moist Water: » » 5-8 
24 :Gemel, Dalet, Mars Water be ™ 6-7 
:Koph, Peh, Resh 
25 :and Taw, the Sun Fire Jupiter ‘ = 6-9 
26 :Double letters, Venus Earth Moon * x 6-8 
27 stOv LHS IP PANSES 3 store Wists iees te lye ace oie Wise 8 = _ 7-8 
28 :the rest, Saturn Air Mercury: ‘ » 7-9 
29 :Single letters, Mars Water * 7-10 
: 30 :to the Zodiac. SS te tones elated ives Torta ah Swett e Gets! 2 * 8-9 
23t Hot and Dry Fire ‘“ > 8-10 
: BAe ideecdaseul eh nceceaend debaee Gee Sue eeeth see ce ete e Saeed eet a - 9-10 
232 “bis” Cold and Dry BarctGhits. fs teaece eee eee ab Saas ene iS et 
HS SBS SL BE aie 5 cos ce ee ee eesti eee BaD, on eele Be Seen ad Gee ree Bote See es ee eee: Oe ete deci ht 
{WEH NOTE: Row 29 has been corrected, original had a typo of Mars Fire} 
XIV XV 
GENERAL ATTRIBUTION THE KING SCALE 
OF TAROT OF COLOUR 
+ + 


1 :The 4 Aces :Brilliance 
2 The 4 Twos — Kings or Knights :Pure Soft Blue 
3 The 4 Threes — Queens :Crimson 
4 :The 4 Fours :Deep violet 
5 The 4 Fives :Orange 
6 :The 4 Sixes — Emperors or Princes :Clear pink rose 
7 :The 4 Sevens :Amber 
8 :The 4 Eights :Violet purple 
9 The 4 Nines :Indigo 
10 :The 4 Tens — Empresses or : Yellow 
7 7 Princesses : 
ea Ba :The Fool — (Swords) Emperors or :Bright pale yellow 
Princes : 
12 :The Juggler :Yellow 
3 :The High Priestess :Blue 
14 :The Empress :Emerald Green 
15 :The Emperor :Scarlet 
16 :The Hierophant :Red Orange 
17 :The Lovers :Orange 
18 :The Chariot :Amber 
19 :Strength :Yellow, greenish 
20 :Hermit :Green yellowish 
21 :Wheel of Fortune :Violet 
: 22 :Justice :Emerald Green 
223 :The Hanged Man — (Cups) Queens :Deep blue 
24 :Death :Green blue 
25 :Temperance :Blue 
26 :The Devil :Indigo 
Zi] :The House of God :Scarlet 
28 :The Star :Violet 
29 :The Moon :Crimson (ultra violet) 
: 30 :The Sun :Orange 
231 The Angel or Last Judgment — :Glowing orange scarlet 
: (Wands) Kings or Knights : 
: 32 :The Universe :Indigo 
:32 “bis” :Empresses (Coins) :Citrine, olive, russet 
: : and black (1) 
:31 “bis” :All 22 trumps :White merging into grey: 
(1) The Pure Earth known to the Ancient Egyptians, during that 
Equinox of the Gods over which Isis presided (i.e. The Pagan Era) was: 
taken as Green. 
: : XIX XXII 
:KEY SCALE: SELECTION OF EGYPTIAN GODS SMALL SELECTION OF 
HINDU DEITIES 
+ ——+——— : 
0) :Harpocrates, Amoun, Nuith. :AUM. 
i :Ptah, Asar un Nefer, Hadith. :Parabrahm (or any other whom 
: one wishes to please). 
2 :Amoun, Thoth, Nuith (Zodiac).:Shiva, Vishnu (as Buddha ava-— 
: tara) .Akasa(as matter) .Lingam: 
3 :Maut, Isis, Nephthys. :Bhavani (all forms of Sakti), 
: Prana (as Force), Yoni. 
4 :Amoun, Isis. :Indra, Brahma. 
5 :Horus, Nephthys. :Vishnu, Varruna-Avatar. 


Ephesus (as phallic stone) 


6 :Asar, Ra. :Vishnu-Hari-Krishna-Rama. 
i, :Hathoor. :Bhavani (all forms of Sakti). 
: Prana (as Force), Yoni. 
8 :Anubis. :Hanuman. 
9 :Shu. :Ganesha Vishnu (Kurm Avatar). 
10 :Seb. Lower (i.e. unwedded), :Lakshmi, etc. (Kundalini) 
: Isis and Nephthys. : 
red Beal :Nu. :The Maruts (Vayu). 
12 :Thoth and Cynocephalus. :Hanuman, Vishnu (as Parasa- 
: Rama). 
1:3 :Chomse. :Chandra (as Moon). 
14 :Hathoor. :Lalita(sexual aspect of Sakti): 
15 :Men Thu. :Shiva. 
16 :Asar Ameshet Apis. :Shiva (Sacred Bull). 
17 :Various twin dieties, Rehkt :Various twin and hybrid 
Merti, etc. Deities. 
V8: #Kephras. ~ ia Sa dee ah eal Selcier Sa laendbe ces sale ey eae Ae Be ewe wee sient 
19 :Ra-Hoor-Khuit, Pasht, Sekhet,:Vishnu (Nara-Singh Avatar). 
Mau, Sekhmet. 7 
20 :Isis (as Virgin). :The Gopi Girls, the Lord of 
: Yoga. 
21 :Amoun-Ra. :Brahma, Indra. 
: 22 :Ma. :Yama. 
2:23 :Tum Athph Auramoth (as Water):Soma (apas). 
Asar (as Hanged Man), 
Hekar, Isis. : 
24 :Merti goddesses, Typhon, :Kundalini. 
Apep, Khephra. : 
20 Ped eu eiSya eres Shela Sle & claw lens seen EVELShhu, (Horse=Avatar):. 
26 :Khem (Set). :Lingam, Yoni. 
27 PHOTUSs) eaten ab elach cd  Satey eb 0 wee eapler ace ater e copier ele aehe: omens 
28 sAhepha,cAroueris.: Pa ee hie ManSee Sas Sleeve we: Piateae eles Saar’ 
29 :Khephra (as Scarab in Tarot :Vishnu (Matsya Avatar). 
Trump). 
: 30 :Ra and many others. :Surya (as Sun). 
3. :Thoum-—aesh-neith, Mau, Ka- :Agni (Tejas) Yama, (as God of 
beshunt, Horus, Tarpesheth.: last Judgment). 
32 :Sebek, Mako. :Brahama. 
2:32 “bis” :Satem, Ahapshi, Nephthys, > (Prithivi). 
: Ameshet. : 
2:31 “bis” :Asar. : (Akasa). 
s XXXIV XXXV 
EY SCALE: SOME GREEK GODS SOME ROMAN GODS 
+ ——-+ 
0 PAST 5: ceo eevee ete eter Bus ae bs oop tad ia. Wee ae ee Rieh ae Bers ey Jeh ee Aeke amet oR a lee Retard GAeuatS amet 8 Agr ep ements 
al :Zeus, Iacchus :Jupiter 
2 :Athena, Uranus :Janus 
3 :Cybele, Demeter, Rhea, Here Juno, Cybele, Saturn, Hecate 
4 :Poseidon :Jupiter 
5 :Ares, Hades :Mars 
6 :Iacchus, Apollo, Adonis :Apollo 
as :Aphrodite, Nike :Venus 
8 :Hermes :Mercury 
9 :Zeus (as Air), Diana of :Diana (as Moon) 


: 10 :Persephone (Adonis), Psyche :Ceres 
<1 :Zeus :Jupiter 
12 :Hermes :Mercury 
13 :Artemis, Hecate :Diana 
14 :Aphrodite :Venus 
15 :Athena :Mars, Minerva 
16 : (Here) :Venus 
17 :Castor & Pollux, Apollo the :Casto & Pollux (Janus) 
Diviner 7 
18 :Apollo the Charioteer :Mercury 
19 :Demeter (borne by lions) :Venus (repressing the fire of 
$ Vulcan) 
20 : (Attis) : (Attis) Ceres, Adonis 
21 :Zeus :Jupiter (Pluto) 
22 :Themis, Minos, AEacus, and :Vulcan 
: Rhadamanthus : 
223 :Poseidon :Neptune 
24 :Ares :Mars 
25 :Apollo, Artemis (hunters) :Diana (as Archer) 
26 :Pan, Priapus (Erect Hermes :Pan, Vesta, Bacchus, Priapus 
and Bacchus) 7 
27 :Ares :Mars 
28 : (Athena), Ganymede :Juno 
29 :Poseidon :Neptune 
: 30 :Helios, Apollo :Apollo 
oot :Hades :Vulcan, Pluto 
32 : (Athena) :Saturn 
2:32 “bis” : (Demeter) :Ceres 
2:31 “bis” :Iacchus : (Liber) 
: : XXXVIII XXXIX 
:KEY SCALE: ANIMALS, REAL AND PLANTS, REAL AND 
IMAGINARY IMAGINARY 
+ ——+——— 
0 Saf ia able ieccatsa. dee w dea SL aie arte eee eS ase cigs ene, BU UR SSE Mee al-dne mp arate hea ticmas erate ef feaelig setae 
1 God. Almond in flower. 
2 Man :Amaranth. 
3 :Woman. Cypress, Opium Poppy. 
4 :Unicorn. :Olive, Shamrock. 
5 :Basilisk. :Oak, Nux Vomica, Nettle. 
6 :Phoenix, Lion, Child. :Acacia, Bay, Laurel, Vine. 
7 :Lynx. :Rose. 
8 :Hermaphrodite, Jackal, Twin :Moly, Anhalonium Lewinii. 
Serpents. : 
9 :Elephant. : (Banyan) Mandrake, Damiana, 
: Yohimba. 
$ 10 :Sphinx. :Willow, Lily, Ivy. 
oe Bl :Eagle or Man (Cherub of Air).:Aspen. 
12 :Swallow, Ibis, Ape, Twin :Vervain, Herb Mercury, 
Serpents. Marjolane, Palm. 
13 :Dog. :Almond, Mugwort, Hazel, 
(as Moon). Moonworth, 
: Ranunculus. 
14 :Sparrow, Dove, Swan. :Myrtle, Rose, Clover. 
15 :Ram, Owl. :Tiger Lily, Geranium. 
16 :Bull (Cherub of Earth). :Mallow. 


17 :Magpie, Hybrids. :Hybrids, Orchids. 
18 :Crab, Turtle, Sphinx. :Lotus. 
19 :Lion (Cherub of Fire). :Sunflower. 
20 :Virgin, Anchorite, any :Snowdrop, Lily, Narcissus. 
solitary person or animal. : 
21 :Eagle. :Hyssop, Oak, Poplar, Fig. 
: 22 :Elephant. :Aloe. 
:23 :Eagle-snake-scorpion :Lotus, all Water Plants. 
(Cherub of Water). : 
24 :Scorpion, Beetle, Lobster or :Cactus. 
Crayfish, Wolf. : 
25 :Centaur, Horse, Hyppogriff, :Rush. 
Dog. : 
26 :Goat, Ass. :Indian Hemp, Orchis Root, 
: Thistle. 
27 :Horse, Bear, Wolf. :Absinthe, Rue. 
28 :Man or Eagle (Cherub of Air).: (Olive) Cocoanut. 
Peacock. : 
29 :Fish, Dolphin, Crayfish, :Unicellular Organisms, Opium. 
Beetle. : 
: 30 :Lion, Sparrowhawk. :Sunflower, Laurel, Heliotrope.: 
231 :Lion (Cherub of Fire). :Red Poppy, Hibiscus, Nettle. 
32 :Crocodile. :Ash, Cypress, Hellebore, Yew, 
‘ : Nightshade. 
:32 bis :Bull (Cherub of Earth). :Oak, Ivy. 
:31 bis :Sphinx (if Sworded and :Almond in flower. 
: Crowned). : 
{WEH NOTE: lines 11, 16, 28 & 32 bis corrected as to element; original 
had typos of Fire, Air, Fire and Water respectively. } 


: : XL XLI 
:KEY SCALE: PRECIOUS STONES MAGICAL WEAPONS 
+— —+ 
Qe. igen sse weit! caacag ee aeke econ tat w ce Astwp eeeried Oe eNae Seether oh SOSR Ueda a Ue GA Wettetlas “eden: <amertence Le -sghdl iceman Ase ea ae aoetan fe 
1 :Diamond. :Swastika or Fylfat Cross, 
: Crown. 
2 :Star Ruby, Turquoise. :Lingam, the Inner Robe of 
: Glory. 
3 :Star Sapphire, Pearl. :Yoni, the Outer Robe of 
: Concealment. 
4 :Amethyst, Sapphire. :The Wand, Sceptre, or Crook. 
5 :Ruby. :The Sword, Spear, Scourge or 
: Chain. 
6 :Topaz, Yellow Diamond. :The Lamen or Rosy Cross. 
7 :Emerald. :The Lamp and Girdle. 
8 :Opal, especially Fire Opal. :The Names and Versicles, 
: the Apron. 
9 :Quartz. The Perfumes and Sandals. 
: 10 :Rock Crystal. :The Magical Circle & Triangle 
ce ba :Topaz, Chalcedony. :The Dagger or Fan. 
12 :Opal, Agate. The Wand or Caducesus. 
13 :Moonstone, Pearl, Crystal. Bow and Arrow. 
14 :Emerald, Turquoise. :The Girdle. 
15 :Ruby. :The Horns, Energy, the Burin. 
16 :Topaz. The Labour of Preparation. 
17 :Alexandrite, Tourmaline, The Tripod. 


Iceland Spar. 


18 :Amber. :The Furnace. 
19 :Cat’s Eye. :The Discipline (Preliminary). 
20 :Peridot. :The Lamp and Wand (Virile 
: Force reserved), the Bread. 
21 :Amethyst, Lapis Lazuli. :The Sceptre. 
: 22 :Emerald. :The Cross of Equilibrium. 
223 :Beryl or Aquamarine. :The Cup and Cross of Suffer- 
: : ing, the Wine. 
24 :Snakestone. :The Pain of the Obligation. 
25 :Jacinth. :The Arrow (swift and straight 
: application of Force). 
26 :Black Diamond. :The Secret Force, Lamp. 
27 :Ruby, any red stone. :The Sword. 
28 :Artificial Glass. :The Censer or Aspergillus. 
29 :Pearl. :The Twilight of the Place, 
: : Magic Mirror. 
: 30 :Crysoleth. :The Lamen or Bow and Arrow. 
el :Fire Opal. The Wand, Lamp, Pyramid of Fire.: 
32 Onyx :The Sickle. 
2:32 “bis” :Salt The Pantacle, the Salt. 
SSulh Oe, ee Sieh Sk elie ick A Rete oe eh ah BL eae htt MT tht eats oe Madi oe te aerate terre 
: : XLII LIII XLIX 
:KEY SCALE: PERFUMES : THE GREEK LINEAL FIGURES OF THE 
: ALPHABET PLANETS AND GEOMANCY 
+— —+——_—— + ——— 
Ov! SSSA Bako fd neee ee ees The Circle. 
A :Ambergris. The Point. 
2 :Musk (sigma) The Line, also the Cross. 
3 :Myrrh, Civet The Plane, also the Diamond, 
: Oval, Circle and other Yoni 
s Symbols. 
4 :Cedar (iota) :The Solid Figure. 
iS) : Tobacco (phi) :The Tessaract. 
6 :Olibanum omega Sephirotic Geomantic Fi- 
7 :Benzoin, Rose, epsilon gures follow the Planets. 
Red Sandal Caput and Cauda Draconis 
8 :Storax are the Nodes of the Moon, 
9 :Jasmine, Jinseng, chi nearly = Herschel and 
all Odoriferous Neptune respectively. 
Roots They belong to Malkuth. 
‘ 10 :Dittany of Crete Sampi : 
72h :Galbanum alpha :Those of Airy Triplicity. 
12 :Mastic, White beta :Octagram. 
Sandal, Mace, 
Storax, all Fu- 
gitive Odours. 
13 :Menstrual Blood, gamma :Enneagram. 
Camphor, Aloes, 
all Sweet 
Virginal Odours. : 
14 :Sandalwood, Myrtle delta :Heptagram. 
all Soft Volup-— 
tuous Odours. 
15 :Dragon’s Blood. epsilon :Puer. 


16 :Storax. digamma 
17 :Wormwood. zeta 
18 :Onycha. eta 
19 :Olibanum. theta 
20 :White Sandal, iota 
Narcissus. 
21 :Saffron, all kappa 
Generous Odours. 
: 22 :Galbanum. lambda 
223 :Onycha, Myrrh. mu 
24 :Siamese Benzoin, nu 
Opoponax. 
25 :Lign-aloes. :xi (sigma) 
26 :Musk, Civet (also omicron 
:Saturnian perfumes): 
27 :Pepper, Dragon’s pi 
Blood, all Hot 
Pungent Odours. 
28 :Galbanum. psi 
29 :Ambergris. koppa 
30 :Olibanum, Cinamon, rho 
: :all Glorious Odours: 
Hie ll :Olibanum, all sampi 
Fiery Odours. 
32 :Assafoetida, tau 
Scammony, Indigo, 
Sulphur, all Evil 
: Odours. 
:32 bis :Storax, all Dull upsilon 
Heavy Odours. 
{WEH NOTE: on line 9, Chi was omitted; 


there by error. 


:Those of 


lines 21 & 32 bis, 
These have been restored from Liber 777} 


:Amissio. 

:Albus. 

:Populus and Via. 
:Fortuna Major & Fortuna Minor.: 
:Conjunctio. 


:Square and Rhombus. 
:Puella. 
:Those of Watery Triplicity. 


:Rubeus. 


:Acquisitio. 
:Carcer. 


:Pentagram. 

:Tristitia. 

:Laetitia. 

:Hexagram. 

:Those of Firey Triplicity. 


:Triangle. 


Earthy Triplicity. 


Chi and Tau 


TABLE Il 


:KEY SCALE: 


LV 
:THE ELEMENTS 


AND : TH 


LXIV 
:SECRET NAMES: 


:LETTERS OF: E FOUR WORLDS OF THE FOUR: 

THE NAME SENSES WORLDS 

+— +--+ : 
11 Vau Air, Smell. :Yetzirah, Formative :Mem-Heh Mah: 
World. : : 
23 Heh Water, Taste. :Briah, Creative :Samekh-Gemel: 
World. : Seg: 
31 Yod Fire, Sight. :Atziluth, Archetypal:Ayin-Bet Ob: 
: World. : : 
:32 “bis” Heh Earth, Touch. :Assiah, Material :Bet-Nunfinal: 
: World. Ben: 
$31 “bas” Shin SOELEEs - —«- pean aig eelbhacie cau die ay 2 ere ce a a ethie he Slaw oeeaste ce ade 
Hearing. 

=SSSSSSS = t=SSeSHa= 3=.S=====S5 == =SS= = = aod SS=S==== (=== 5 =F===S= 

LXVIII LXIX : LXX : LXXV LXXVI 
:THE PART: THE :ATTRIBUTION: THE FIVE ELEMENTS :THE FIVE: 
OF : ALCHEMICAL: OF (TATWAS ) : SKANDHAS: 


:THE SOUL: ELEMENTS PENTAGRAM 
+———— + ——— + + —+ : 
11 :HB:RVCh Mercury :Left Upper :Vayu - The Blue :Sankhara: 
:Ruach Point. Circle. : 
23 :HB:NShHMH: Salt :Right Upper:Aupas - The Silver :Vedana. 
:Neshamah: Point. Crescent : 
31 :HB:ChYH Sulphur :Right Lower:Agni or Tejas - :San~~-n~~a. 
: :Chiah Point. The Red Triangle.: 
2:32 “bis” :HB:NPSh Salt :Left Lower :Prithivi - The :Rupa 
: :Nephesh Point Yellow Square. 7 
:31 “bis” :H:YChYDH: :Topmost :Akasa -— The Black :Vin~~nanam: 
:ITechidah: Point Egg. 
TABLE III 
LXXVIT LXXXI LXXXIII 
THE PLANETS THE ATTRIBUTION OF 
AND THEIR NUMBERS METALS THE HEXAGRAM 
+ ———+— +— : 
2 Mercury 8 Mercury. Left Lower Point. 
13 Moon 9 Silver. Bottom Point. 
14 Venus 7 Copper. Right Lower Point. 
Zi Jupiter 4 Tin. Right Upper Point. 
27 Mars 5 Iron. Left Upper Point. 
30 Sun 6 Gold. Centre Point. 
31 Saturn 3 Lead. : Top Point. 
TABLE IV 
: :XCVIT CXVIT CXVIIT CXXIV CXXXIITI 
:KEY SCALE:PARTS THE THE CHAKKRAS OR : THE TITLES AND 
OF SOUL CENTRES OF : HEAVENLY ATTRIBUTIONS OF 
THE (HINDU) PRANA : HEXAGRAM THE WAND SUIT 
SOUL : (HINDUISM) (CLUBS) 
+———+———+ ++. : 
Qi) WSs owe eenln Spec aig es ahr cae es weuidsiae o Ban evesdoreaeus HOMERS Hawes Sidney area oa gcd Sees LE ere 
1 :YChYDH: Atma :Sahasrara (above Jupiter :The Root of the 
: Head). Powers of Fire. 
2 :ChYH Buddhi :Ajna (Pineal Mercury :Mars in Aries 
: Gland). Dominion. 
3 :NSHMH :Higher :Visuddhi Moon :Sun in Aries Esta- 
Manas (Larynx). : [Saturn blished Strength. 
Daath] 
Be FAB co tend op Saas ret, Gh dn eye docu Saeed weet Venus :Venus in Aries 
: Perfected Work. 
5 Lower -:Anahata (Heart) Mars :Saturn in Leo 
Strife. 
Manas 
6. “SR “Shaw dave Mes fieeddle Senko Mi kas, suet Sun :Jupiter in Leo 
Victory. 
7 :-RVCh :Kama :Manipura (Solar :Mars in Leo Valour.: 
Plexus). : 
8 Prana :Svadistthana :Mercury in Sagit- 


tarius Swiftness.: 


: (Navel). : : 
9 :Linga = = :Moon in Sagittarius: 
- .-Sharira: : Great Strength. 
: : —-:Muladhara (Lingam: : 
10 :NPSh :Sthula and Anus). :Saturn in Sagit-— 
: : tarius Oppression.: 
:Sharira: 
XCVIII — English of Col. XCVII 
The: (Seti ice & wile gard te 1 The Intellect. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 
The Life Force..... 2 The Animal soul which 
The: PAtuscl tons. ik. 3 perceives and feels.. 10 
: CXXXIV CXXXV CXXXVI 
EY SCALE: TITLES AND TITLES AND TITLES AND 
:ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE ATTRIBUTIONS OF ATTRIBUTIONS OF 
:CUP OR CHALICE SUIT THE SWORD SUIT :THE COIN, DISC OR 
(HEARTS) (SPADES) PANTACLE SUIT 
(DIAMONDS) 
+——-_——_—— + —_—_—_——+— ———— 
0 Sorte Wegrigoveh encd ede, Saooplids toe Teva bie Wa nk feet Stig) ONS! es Wg Soa ET ote. DOAN Bate andes Gores Bide wae eee ae 
1 :The Root of the :The Root of the The Root of the 
Powers of Water. Powers of Air. Powers of Earth. 
2 :Venus in Cancer Love. :Moon in Libra :Jupiter in Capricorn 
The Lord of The Lord of 
Peace restored. Harmonious Change 
3 :Mercury in Cancer :Saturn in Libra :Mars in Capricorn 
Abundance. Sorrow. Material Works. 
4 :Moon in Cancer :Jupiter in Libra :Sun in Capricorn 
Blended Pleasure. Rest from Strife. Earthly Power. 
5 :Mars in Scorpio :Venus in Aquarius :Mercury in Taurus 
Loss in Pleasure. Defeat. Material Trouble. 
6 :Sun in Scorpio :Mercury in Aquarius :Moon in Taurus 
Pleasure. Earned Success. Material Success. 
7 :Venus in Scorpio :Moon in Aquarius :Saturn in Taurus : 
Illusionary Success.: Unstable Effort. : Success Unfulfilled.: 
8 :Saturn in Pisces :Jupiter in Gemini :Sun in Virgo 
Abandoned Success. Shortened Force. : Prudence. 
9 :Jupiter in Pisces :Mars in Gemini :Venus in Virgo 
Material Happiness. Despair & Cruelty. Material Gain. 
10 :Mars in Pisces :Sun in Gemini :Mercury in Virgo 


Perfected Success. 


Ruin. 


Wealth. 


{WEH NOTE: 


Two typos have been corrected in column CXXXIV by Liber 


777: 4, Moon in place of Sun and 6, Sun in place of Moon. } 
‘ : CXXXVIT CXXXVIII CXXXIX ‘ 
:KEY SCALE: SIGNS OF THE PLANETS RULING IN : PLANETS EXALTED IN: 
ZODIAC COLUMN CCXXXVITI COLUMN CXXXVII 
+ +— ——+——— 
15 Aries Mars P. M. (Sun) 
16 Taurus Venus Uranus (Moon) 
Ly Gemini Mercury Neptune 
18 Cancer Moon P. M. (Jupiter) 
19 Leo Sun Uranus 
20 Virgo Mercury Neptune (Mercury): 
22 Libra Venus P. M. (Saturn) 
24 Scorpio Mars Uranus 
25 Sagittarius Jupiter Neptune 
26 Capricorn Saturn P. M. (Mars) 
28 Aquarius Saturn Uranus 
29 Pisces Jupiter Neptune (Venus) 
{WEH NOTE: Liber 777 gives different entries for column CXXXIX, and 
these have been added in parenthesis without deletion of original.} 
: CLXXV CLXXVI CLXXVII CLXXIX 
:KEY SCALE: HEBREW ENGLISH :NUMERICAL: YETZIRATIC :NUMBERS 
: LETTERS: VALUES OF VALUE :ATTRIBUTION :PRINTED 
HEBREW :OF COLUMN: OF COLUMN :ON TAROT: 
LETTERS CLXXV CLXXV 
: +———+— + +———_—_——-+ 
:11 Aleph A Aleph 1 Air 0 
12 Bet B Beth 2 Mercury 1 
3 Gemel G Gimel 3 Moon 2 
14 Dalet :D Daleth 4 Venus 3 
15 :Heh :H He 5 Aries 4 
16 :Vau V or W Vau 6 Taurus 5 
17 :Zain :Z Zain 7 Gemini 6 
18 :Chet :Ch Cheth 8 Cancer 7 
19 :Tet :T Teth 9 Leo 11 
20 :Yod 2¥ Yod 10 Virgo 9 
21 :Koph,Kf:K Kaph 20, 500 Jupiter 10 


: 22 :Lamed L Lamed 30 Libra 8 
<23 :Mem,M-£:M Mem 40, 600 Water 12 
24 :Nun,N-f:N Nun 50, 700 Scorpio 13 
25 :Samekh :S Samekh 60 Sagittarius: 14 
26 :Ayin O Ayin 70 Capricorn 15 
27 :Peh,P-f£:P Pe 80, 800 Mars 16 
28 :Tzaddi,:Tz Tzaddi 90, 900 Aquarius 17 
TZ £ $ 
29 :Qof :(K soft) Qoph: 100 Pisces 18 
: 30 :Resh :R Resh = +200 Sun 19 
23 :Shin :Sh Shin 300 Fire 20 
32 :Taw :(T soft) Tau 400 Saturn 21 
232) “brs eeTaw ° Sia a dh ex a eh wie’ 400 Barth _ 
S32 “bis” -sShan otis als kde ye wee 300 Spirit _ 
NOTE. “Ch” like “ch” in “loch”. 
{WEH NOTE: The English value in row 27 has been corrected, original 
had O.} 
: CLXXX 
:KEY SCALE 
TITLES OF TAROT TRUMPS 
+ ==: 
11 The Spirit of ‘GR:Alpha-iota-theta-eta-rho 
12 The Magus of Power. 
13 The Priestess of the Silver Star. 
14 :The Daughter of the Mighty Ones. 
15:Sun of the Morning, Chief among the Mighty. 
16:The Magus of the Eternal. : 
17:The Children of the voice: the Oracle of the Mighty Gods.: 
18:The Child of the Powers of the Waters: the Lord of the : 
s Triumph of Light. 
19:The Daughter of the Flaming Sword. 
20:The Prophet of the Eternal, the Magus of the Voice of 
Power. 
21 :The Lord of the Forces of Life. 
22:The Daughter of the Lords of Truth; The Ruler of the 
: Balance. 
223 :The Spirit of the Mighty Waters. 
24:The Child of the Great Transformers. The Lord of the 
7 Gate of Death. 
25:The Daughter of the Reconcilers, the Bringer-forth of 
: Life. 
26:The Lord of the Gates of Matter. The Child of the 
forces of Time. 
27 :The Lord of the Hosts of the Mighty. 
28:The Daughter of the Firmament; the Dweller between the 
E Waters. 
29:The Ruler of Flux & Reflux. The Child of the Sons of 
the Mighty. 
: 30 :The Lord of the Fire of the World. 
23 :The Spirit of the Primal Fire. 
32 :The Great One of the Night of Time. 
Sule Moa 4g ok Pieter dad auceue bo alionencas bios eoSeraaaay sueuderslas sole Mecsesd nd Geass ceoatne? ance wos wag sate Sea gouge re Geen 
BZ SMO SI ie Bese te acct Sak eens: Ste Site des Gt detente be dat wo eset CS elehns ten viet fecehe Gi eee ie eee: Rais 


Appendix VI 
A Few Principal R ituals 
Grimorium Sanctissmum. 


Arcanum Arcanorum Quod Continet N ondum R evelandum ipsis R egibus supremis O.T.O. Grimorium 
Quod Baphomet X Degree M ... suo fecit. 


DeTemplo. 

LO TENE und dive Altare 

2. O ccidente.............. T abula dei invocandi 

3. Septentrione.......... Sacerdos 

4, Meridione ........00 Igniscum thuribulo, k.tl. 
ofa O4= plu ce neem Lapis quadratus cum 
Imagine Dei 


M aximi Ingentis N efandi | neffabilis Sanctissimi 
et cum ferro, tintinnabulo, oleo. 


Virgo. Stet imago juxta librum T heléma. 
De ceremonio Principil. 


Fiat utin Libro DCLX X| dicitur, sed antea virgo lavata st cum verbis “Asperge me...” k.t.l., et habilimenta 
ponat cum verbis “Per sanctum M ysterium,” k.t.l. 


Ita Pyramis fiat. T unc virgo lavabit sacerdotem et vestimenta ponat ut supra ordinatur. 


(H ic dicat virgo orationes dei operis). 
De ceremonio T huribuli. 


M anibus accedat et ignem et sacerdotem virgo, dicens: 


“Accendat in nobisDominusignem sui amoris et flamman aeternae caritatis. 
De ceremonio D edicationis. 


Invocet virgo Imaginem Dei. M.I.N .I.S. his verbis. — Tu qui es prater omnia... k.t.l.” 


N ec relinquet alteram I maginem. 


De Sacrificio Summo. 
Deinde slentium frangat sacerdos cum verbis versiculi sancti dei particularitur invocandi. 
Ineat ad Sanctum Sanctorum. 
Caveat; caveat, caveat. 


Duo qui fiunt UN US sine intermissione verba versiculi sancti alta voce cantent. 
De Benedictione Benedicti. 
M issa ore, dicat mulier haec verba “Q uia patriset filii ss.” k.tl. 
De Ceremonio Finis. 


Fiat utin Libro DCLX X|I dicitur. [Greek:] AYMGN. 


LIBER XXV 
THE STAR RUBY 


Facing East, in the centre, draw deep deep deep thy breath closing thy mouth with thy right forefinger prest 
against thy lower lip. Then dashing down the hand with a great sweep back and out, expelling forcibly thy 
breath, cry APO PANTOSKAKODAIMON OS. W ith the same forefinger touch thy forehead, and say SOI, 
thy member, and say O PH ALLE, [T he secret sense of these wordsisto be sought in the numeration thereof. ], 
thy right shoulder, and say |SC HU R OS, thy left shoulder, and say EU CHAR IST OS; then clasp thine hands, 
locking the fingers, and cry |AO.. Advance to the East. Imagine strongly aPentagram, aright, in thy forehead. 
Drawing the hands to the eyes, fling it forth, making the sign of Horus and roar THERION. Retire thine 
hand in the agn of H oor- paar- K raat. 


Go round to the N orth and repeat; but say NUIT. 
Go round to the W est and repeat; but whisper BABALON. 
Go round to the South and repeat; but bellow HADIT. 


Completing the circle widdershins, retire to the centre and raise thy voice in the Paian, with these words |10 
PAN, with thesgnsofN.O.X. 


Extend the arms in the form of aT au and say low but clear: 


PRO MOU IUNGESOPICHO MOU TELETARCHAI EPI DEXIA CHUNOCHESEPARISTERA 
DAIMONOSPHEG EI GAR PERIMOU O ASTER TON PENTE KAI EN TEI STELEI O ASTER 
TON EX ESTEXE. 


R epeat the C ross Q abalistic, as above, and end as thou didst begin. 


LIBER XXXVI 


THE STAR SAPPHIRE 
Publication in C lass D 


Let the Adept be armed with his M agick R ood [and provided with his mystic rose]. 


In the centre, let him give the L.V.X. Signs; or if he Know them, if he will and dare do them, and can keep 
glent about them, the signsof N .O.X. being the sgnsof Puer, Vir, Puella, M ulier. O mit the sign. I.R. 


Then let him advance to the East and make the H oly H exagram, saying: Pater et M ater unus deus Ararita. 
Let him go round to the South, make the H oly H exagram and say: M ater et Filius unus deus A rarita. 
Let him go round to the N orth, make the H oly H exagram and then say: Filia et Pater unus deus A rarita. 


Let him then return to the C entre, and so to T he C entre of All (making the R osy Crossashe may know how) 
saying Ararita A rarita A rarita (In this the Signs shall be those of Set Triumphant and of Baphomet. Also shall 
Set appear in the Circle. Let him drink of the Sacrament and let him communicate the same.) T hen let him 
say: Omniain Duos Duo in Unum: U nusin Nihil: H aec nec Q uatuor nec O mnianec Duo nec U nus nec 
N ihil Sunt. 


Gloria Patri et M atri et Filio et Filiae et Spiritui Sancto externo et Spiritui Sancto interno ut erat est erit in 
saecula Saeculorum sex in uno per nomen Septem in uno Ararita. 


Let him then repeat the sgnsof L.V.X. but not the sgnsofN .O.X.: for it isnot he that shall arise in the Sign 
of IsisR ejoicing. 


LIBER XLIV 
THE MASS OF THE PHOENIX 


T he M agidan, his breast bare, stands before an altar on which are his Burin, Bell, T hurible, and two of the C akes of 
Light. In the Sign of the E nterer he reaches W est across the A Itar, and cies: 


H ail R a, that goest in thy bark 

Into the caverns of the D ark! 

H egives the sign of Silence, and takes the Bell, and Fire, in his hands. 
East of the Altar see me stand 

W ith light and musick in my hand! 

H e strikes E leven times upon the Bell 333 - 55555 - 333 and placesthe Fire in the T hurible. 
| strike the Bell: | light the Flame; 

| utter the mysterious N ame. 
ABRAHADABRA 

H e strikes eleven times upon the Bell. 

N ow | begin to pray: Thou Child, 

H oly T hy name and undefiled! 

T hy reign iscome; Thy will isdone. 

H ere isthe Bread; here isthe Blood. 

Bring me through midnight to the Sun! 

Save me from Evil and from Good! 

T hat T hy one crown of all the T en 

Even now and herebe mine AMEN. 

H e puts the first C ake on the Fire of the T hurible. 
| burn the Incense- cake, proclaim 

T hese adorations of T hy name. 


H emakes them asin Liber L egis, and strikes again E leven times upon the Bell. W ith the Burin he then makes upon his 
breast the proper sign. 


Behold this bleeding breast of mine 


Gashed with the sacramental sign! 

H e puts the second C ake to the wound. 

| stanch the Blood; the wafer soaks 

It up, and the high priest invokes! 

H e eats the second C ake. 

This Bread | eat. This O ath | swear 

As| enflame myself with prayer: 

“There isno grace: there isno guilt: 
Thisisthe Law: DO WHAT THOU WILT!” 
H estrikes E leven times upon the Bell, and qies 
ABRAHADABRA. 

| entered in with woe; with mirth 

| now go forth, and with thanksgiving, 

To do my pleasure on the earth 

Among the legions of the living. 


H e goeth forth. 


LIBER V 
vel 


REGULI 


A.:. A.*. publication in C lass D. 
Being the R itual of the M ark of the Beast: 


an incantation proper to invoke the Energies of the Aeon of 
H orus, 


adapted for the daily use of the M agician of whatever grade. 


[T he title is Latin and means Book 5 or Book of the Princ. R egulus is also the name of the star which marks the beginning or 0 
degree of the constellation L eo.] 


THE FIRST GESTURE 


The Oath of the Enchantment, which is called the Elevenfold Seal. 


T he A nimadversion towards the £ on. 


1. Let theM agician, robed and armed ashe may deem to be fit, turn to face towards Bolexxine,* that is 
the H ousse of the Beast 666. 


2. Let him strike the battery 1-3-3-3-1. 


3. Let him put the Thumb of his right hand between its index and medius, and make the gestures 
hereafter following. 


The V etical C omponent of the Enchantment. 
1. Let him describe a circle about his head, crying N UIT! 
2. Let him draw the Thumb vertically downward, and touch the muladhara ckra, crying HADIT! 


3. Lethim, retracing the line, touch the centre of his breast, and cry RA-HOOR-KHUIT! 
T heH orizontal C omponent of the E nchantment. 

1. Lethim touch the C entre of his Forehead, his mouth, and his larynx, crying AIW AZ! 

Let him draw hisT humb from right to left across his face at the level of the nostrils. 

Let him touch the C entre of his Breast, and his Solar Plexus, crying THERION ! 

Let him draw hisT humb from left to right across his breast at the level of the sternum. 


Let him touch the svadhisthana. and the muladhara @kra, crying BABALON! 


Oy 4 re A 


Let him draw hisT humb from right to left across his abdomen, at the level of the hips. 
(T hus shall he formulate the Sigil of the Grand Hierophant, but dependent from the Circle.) 


T he A sserveration of the Spells. 


1, Let the M agician clasp hishandsupon his W and, his fingers and thumbs interlaced, crying LAShT AL! 
THELEMA! FIAOF!AGAPE! AUMGN! 


(T hus shall be declared the W ords of Power whereby the Energies of the Zon of Horus 
work his W ill in the world.) 


T he Prodamation of the A complishment 


1. Let the M agician strike the Battery: 3-5-3, crying ABRAHADABRA. 


* Boleskine H ouse ison Loch N ess, 17 mile from Inverness, latitude 57.14N , longitude 4.28W . 


THE SECOND GESTURE 


T he Enchantment. 
1. Let theM agician, still facing Boleskine, advance to the circumference of his C ircle. 


2. Lethim turn himself towardsthe left, and pace with the stealth and swiftness of atiger the precincts of his 
circle, until he complete one revolution thereof. 


3: Let him give the sgn of H orus (or the Enterer) as he passeth, so to project the Force that radiateth 
from Boleskine before him. 


4, Let him pace his Path until he comes to the N orth; there let him halt, and turn his face to the N orth. 


5. Let him trace with his W and the Averse Pentagram proper to 
invoke Air (Aquarius). 


6. Let him bring the W and to the Centre of the Pentagram and 
call upon NUIT! 


7; Let him make the sgn called Puella, standing with his feet 
together, head bowed, his left hand shielding the muladhara a@kra, and 
his right hand shielding his breast (attitude of the Venus de M edici). 


8. Let him turn again to the Left, and pursue his Path as before, 
projecting the Force from Boleskine as he passeth; let him halt when he 
next cometh to the South, and face outward. 


9. Let him trace the A verse Pentagram that invoketh Fire (Leo). 


10. Let him point his W and to the Centre of the Pentagram, and 
cry HADIT! 


11. — Lethimgivethesign Puer, standing with feet together and head 
erect. Let his right hand (the thumb extended at right angles to the 
fingers) be raised, the forearm vertical at a right angle with the upper 
arm, which is horizontally extended in the line joining the shoulders. 
Let hisleft hand, the thumb extended forwards, and the fingersclenched, 
rest at the junction of the thighs (attitudes of the gods M entu, Khem, 
etc). 


12. Let him proceed as before; then in the East, let mim make the 
Averse Pentagram that invoketh Earth (T aurus). 


13. Let him point hisW and to theC entre of the Pentagram, and cry 
THERION! 


14. Let him give the sign called Vir, the feet being together. T he 
hands, with clenched fingers and thumbs thrust out forwards, are held to 
the temples; the head isthen bowed and pushed out, asif to symbolize 
the butting of an horned beast (attitude of Pan, Bacchus, etc.). 
(Frontispiece, Equinox 1(3)). 


15. Proceding as before, let him make in the West the Averse 
Pentagram whereby W ater is invoked. 


16. Pointing the W and to the Centre of the Pentagram, let him call 
upon BABALON! 


17. Let him give the sgn Mulier. The feet are widely separated, 
and the arms raised so as to suggest a crescent. T he head isthrown back 
(attitude of Baphomet, Isisin W elcome, the M icrocosm of Vitruvius). 
(See Book 4, Part II). 


1K KK HK 


18. Let him break into the dance, tracing a centripetal spiral 
widdershins, enriched by revolutions upon his axis as he passeth each 
Quarter, until he come to the centre of the Circle. T here let him halt, 
facing Boleskine. e 


19. Let him raise the Wand, trace the M ark of the Beast, and cry 
AIWAZ! 


20. Let him trace the Invoking H exagram of T he Beast. 
21. — Lethim lower theW and, striking the Earth therewith. 


22. —Lethimgivethesgn of M ater T riumphans. (T he feet are together; 
the left arm is curved asif it supported achild; the thumb and index finger 
of the right hand pinch the nipple of the left breast, as if offering it to that 
child.) Let him utter the word THELEMA!2 


23. Perform the Spiral Dance, moving deosil and whirling 
widdershins.Each time on passing th W est extend the W and to the Q uarter 
in question, and bow: 


a. “Before me the powers of LA!” (to W est.) 
b. “Behind me the powers of AL!” (to East.) 
Cc “On my right hand the powers of LA!” (to N orth.) 
d. “On my left hand the powers of AL!” (to South.) 
e, “Above me the powers of ShT !” (leaping in the air.) 
f. “Beneath me the power of ShT !” (striking the ground.) 
g. “Within me the Powers!” (in the attitude of Ptah erect, the feet together, the hands 
clasped upon the vertical W and.) 
h. “About me flames my Father's Face, the Star of Force and Fire!” 


L. “And in the Column stands his sx-rayed Splendour!” 
(T his dance may be omitted, and the whole utterance chanted in the attitude of Ptah.) 


THE FINAL GESTURE 


T hisis identical with the first gesture. 
(H ere followeth an impression of the ideas implied in this P ean) 


| also am aStar in Space, unique and self- existent, an individual essence incorruptible; | also am one Soul; | am 
identical with All and N one. | am in All and all in me; | am, apart from all and lord of all, and one with all. 


| am O mniciscient, for naught exists for me unless! know it. | an O mnipotents, for naught occurs save by 
N ecesity, my soul’sexpression through my W ill to be, to do, to suffer the symbolsof itself. | am O mnipresent, 
for naught exists where! am not, who fashioned Space asa condition of my conscioumess of myself, who am 
the centre of all, and my circumference the frame of mine own fancy. 


| am the All, for all that exists for me isanecessary expression in thought of some tendency of my nature, and 


all my thoughts are only the letters of my N ame. 


| am the One, for all that | am is not the absolute All, and all my all is mine and not another’s; mine, who 
conceive of others like myself in essence and truth, yet unlike in expression and illusion. 


| am the N one, for all that | am isthe imperfect image of the perfect; each partial phantom must perish in the 
flaso of its counterpart, each form fulfil itself by finding its equated opposite, and satisfying its need to be the 
Absolute by the attainment of annihilation. 


The World LASHT AL includes all this. 
LA—N aught. 
AL—Two. 


L is “Justice,” the K teis fulfilled by the Phallus, “N aught and Two” because the plus and the minus have 
united in “love under will.” 


A is“TheFool,” N aughtin T hought (Parzival), W ord (H arpocrates), and A ction (Bacchus). H eisthe boundless 
air, and the wandering Ghost, but with “possbilities.” He isthe N aught that the T wo have made by “love 
under will.” 


LA thus represents the Ecstasy of N uit and H adit conjoined, lost in love, and making themselves N aught 
thereby. Their child is begotten and conceived, but is in the phase of N aught also, as yet. LA is thus the 
U niverse in that phase, with its potentialities of manifestation. 


AL, on the contrary, though it is essentially identical with LA, shows “The Fool” manifested through the 
Equilibrium of Contraries. The wieght is still nothing, but it is expressed as it were two equal weights in 
opposite scales. The indicator still points to zero. 


ShT is equally 31 with LA and AL, but it expresses the secret nature which operates the M agick or the 
transmutations. 


ShT isthe formula of this particular Eon; another aon might have another way of saying 31. 


Sh isFire asT isForce; conjoined they express R a-H oor-K huit. 


“T he Angel”3 represents the Stéle 666, showing the Gods of the 4g;on, while “Strength” is a picture of 
Babalon and the Beast, the earthly emissaries of those Gods. 


ShT isthe dynamic equivalent of LA and AL. Sh shows the W ord of the Law, being triple, as 93 isthrice 31. 
T shows the formula of M agic declared in that W ord; the Lion, the Serpent, the Sun, C ourage and Sexual 
Love are all indicated by the card. 


In LA note that Saturn or Satan is exalted in the H ouse of Venus or Astarté and it isan airy sgn. ThusL is 
Father-M other, Two and N aught, and the Spirit (H oly Ghost) of their Love isalso N aught. LoveisAH BH, 
13, which isAChD. U nity, 1, aleoh. who is“T he Fool” who isN aught, but none the less an individual O ne, 
who (as such) isnot another, yet unconscious of himself until his O neness expresses itself as a duality. 


Any impression or idea is unknowable in itself. It can mean nothing until brought into relation with other 
things. T he first step is to distinguish one thought from another; this isthe condition of recognizingg it. T o 
define it, we must perceive its orientation to all our other ideas. T he extent of our knowledge of any one thing 
varies therefore with the number of ideas with which we can compare it. Every new fact not only adds itself 


to our universe, but increases the value of what we already possess. 


In AL this“T he” or “God” arranges for “C ountenance to behold countenance,” 4 by establishing itself as an 
equilibrium, A the One-N aught conceived as L the Two-N aught. This L is the Son-Daughter H orus 
H arpocrates just asthe other L wasthe Father- M other Set- Isis. H ere then isT etragrammaton once more, but 
expressed in identical equationsin which every term is perfect in itself asa mode of N aught. 


ShT suppliesthe last element; making the W ord of either five or 9x letters, according aswe regard ShT asone 
letter or two. Thus the W ord affirms the Great W ork accomplished: 5°=6°. 


ShT ismoreover anecessary resolution of the apparent oppostion of LA and AL; for one could hardly pass to 
the other without the catalytic action of a third identical expression whose function should be to transmute 
them. Such aterm must be in itself a mode of N aught, and its nature cannot encroach on the perfections of 
N ot-Being, LA, or of Being, AL. It must be purely N othing-M otion asthey are purely N othing-M atter, so as 
to create a M atter-in-M otion which isa function of “Something.” 


Thus ShT isM otion in its double phase, an inertia compose of two opposte current, and each current is also 
thus polarized. Sh is H eaven and Earth, T M ale and Female; ShT is Spirit and M atter; one is the word of 
Liberty and Love flashing its Light to restore Life to Earth, the other isthe act by which Life claimsthat Love 
isLight and Liberty. And these are T wo-in-O ne, the divine letter of Silence-in- Speech whose symbol isthe 
Sun in the Arms of the M oon.5 


But Sh and T are alike formuleof force in action as opposed to entities they are not states of existence, but 
modes of motion. T hey are verbs, not nouns. 


Sh isthe H oly Spirit asa “tongue of fire” manifest in triplicity, and isthe child of Set-Issastheirlogos or W ord 
uttered by their “Angel.” T he card isX X, and 20 isthe value of yod (the secret seed of all things, the Virgin, 
“TheHermit,” M ercury, the Angel or H erald) expressed in full asIVD. Sh isthe spiritual congress of H eaven 
and Earth. 


ButT istheH oly Spirit in action asa “roaringg Lion” or as“the old Serpent” instead of an “Angel of Light.” 
T he twinsof Set-Isis, harlot and beast, are busy with that sodomitic and incestuouslust which isthe traditional 
formula for producing demi-gods, asin the cases of M ary and the Dove, Leda and the Swan, etc. T he card is 
X1, the number of M agick AVD: aleph “T he Fool” impregnating the woman according to the W ord of yod, 
the Angel of the Lord! H issster has seduced her brother Beast, hhaming the Sun with her sin; she hasmastered 
the Lion, and enchanted the Serpent. N ature is outraged by M agick; man is bestialized and woman defiled. 
The conjunction produces a monster; it affirms regression of types. Instead of a man-God conceived of the 
Spirit of God by a virgin in innocence, we are asked to adore the bastard of awhore and abrute, begotten in 
Shamefullest sin and born in most blasohemous bliss. 


Thisisin fact the formulaof our M agick; weinsst that all acts must be equal; that existence asserts the right to 
exist; that unless evil isa mere term expressing some relation of haphazard hostility between forces equally 
gelf- justified, the universe isasinexplicable and impossible asuncompensated action; that the orgiesof Bacchus 
and Pan are no less sacramental than the M asses of Jesus; that the scars of syphilis are sacred and worthy of 
honour asmuch asthe wounds of the martyrs of M ary. 


It should be unnecessary to insist that the above ideas apply only to the Absolute. T oothache is still painful, 
and deceit degrading, to aman, relatively to hisstuation in the world of illusion; he does his W ill by avoiding 
them. But the existence of “Evil” isfatal to philosophy so long asit issupposed to be independent of conditions; 
and to accustom the mind to “make no difference” between any two ideas6 as such isto emancipate it from 
the thralldom of terror. 


W e affirm on our altars our faith in ourself and our wills, our love of all aspects of the A bsolute All. 


And we make the Spirit shin combine with the Flesh teth int asingle letter, whose value is 31 even as those of 
LA the N aught, and AL the All, to complete their N ot-Being and Being with its Becoming, to mediate 
between identical extremes as their mean— the secret that sunders and seals them. 


It declares that all somethings are equally shadows of Nothing, and justifies N othing in its futile folly of 
pretending that something isstable, by making us aware of amethod of M agick through the practice of which 
we may partake in the pleasure of the process. 


The M agician should devise for himself a definite technique for destroying “evil.” The essence of such a 
practice will consist in training the mind and the body to confront things which case fear, pain, disgust,* 
shame and the like. He must learn to endure them, then to become indifferent to them, then to become 
indifferent to them, then to analyze them until they give pleasure and instruction, and finally to appreciate 
them for their own sake, as aspects of T ruth. W hen this has been done, he should abandon them, if they are 
really harmful in relation to health and comfort. Also, our selction of “evils” is limited to those that cannot 
damage us irreparably. E.g., one ought to practice smelling assafoetida until one likes it; but not arsine or 
hydrocyanic acid. Again, one might have aliaison with an ugly old woman until one beheld and loved the star 
which she is, it would be too dangerous to overcome the distaste for dishonesty by forcing oneself to pick 
pockets. Acts which are essentially dishonourable must not be done; they should be justified only by calm 
contemplation of their correctness in abstract cases. 


Love isavirtue; it grows stronger and purer and less selfish by applying it to what it loathes; but theft isa vice 
involving the save-idea that one’s neighbour is superior to oneself. It is admirable only for its power to 
develop certain moral and mental qualitiesin primitive types, to prevent the atrophy of such faculties as our 
own vigilance, and for the interest which it adds to the “tragedy, M an.” 


Crime, folly, sckness and all such phenomena must be contemplated with complete freedom from fear, 
aversion, or shame. O therwise we shall fail to see accurately, and interpret intelligently; in which case we shall 
be unable to outwit and outfight them. Anatomists and physiologists, grappling in the dark with death, have 
won hygeine, surgery, prophylaxis and the rest for mankind. Anthropologists, archeologists, physicists and 
other men of science, risking thumbscrws, dake, infamy and ostracism, have torn the spider- mare of superstition 
to shreds and broken in pieces the monstrous idol of Morality, the murderous M oloch which has made 
mankind its meat throughout history. Each fragment of that coprolite it manifest as an image of some brute 
lust, some torpid dullness, some ignorant instinct, or some furtive fear shapen in his own savage mind. 


M an isindeed not wholly freed, even now. H eisstill trampled under the hoofs of the tampeding mules that 
nightmare bore to his wild ass, his creative forces that he had not mastered, the sterile ghosts that he called 
gods. T heir mystery cows men still; they fear, they flinch, they dare not face the phantoms. Still, too, the 
fallen fetich seems awful; it is frightful to them that there is no longer an idol to adore with anthems, and to 
appease with the flesh of their firstborn. Each scramblesin the bloody mire of the floor to match some scrap for 
arelic, that he may bow down to it and serve it. 


So, even today, amass of maggots swarm heaving over the carrion earth, abrotherhood bound by blind greed 
for rottenness. Science still hesitates to raise the T emple of R immon, though every year findsmore of her sons 
impatient of N aaman’s prudence. The Privy Council of the Kingdom of M ansoul sits in permenant scret 
session; it dares not declare what must follow its deed in shattering the monarch M orality into scraps of 
crumbling conglomerate of of climatic, tribal, and person prejudices, corrupted yet more by the action of 
crafy ambition, insane impulse, ignorant arrogance, superstitious hysteria, fear fashioning falsehoods on the 
tone that it sets on the grave of T ruth whom it has murdered and buried in the black earth O blivion. M oral 


philosophy, psychology, sociology, anthropology, mental pathology, physiology, and many another of the 
children of Wisdom, of whom he is justified, well know that the laws of Ethics are a chaos of confused 
conventions, based at best on customs convenient in certain conditions, more often on the craft or caprice of 
the biggest, the most savage, heartless, cunning and blood- thirsty brutes of the pack, to secure their power or 
pander to their pleasure in cruelty. T here isno principle, even a false one, to give coherence to the clamour of 
ethical propostions. Y et the very men that have snashed M oloch, and strewn the earth with shapeless rubble, 
grow pale when they so much as whisper among themselves: “W hile M oloch ruled all men were bound by 
one law, and by the oracles of them that, knowing the fraud, feared not, but were hispriests and wardens of his 
mystery. W hat now? H ow can any of us, though wise and strong as never was Known, prevail on men to act 
in concert, now that each praysto hisown chip of God, and yet knowsevery other chip to be aworthless ort, 
dream- dust, ape- dung, tradition- bone, or— what not else?” 


So Science begins to see that the Initiates were maybe not merely silly and selfish in making their rule of 
glence, and in protecting Philosophy from the profane. Y et still she hopes that the mischief may not prove 
mortal, and begs that things may go on much as usual until that secret session decide on some plan of action. 


It has always been fatal when somebody finds out too much too suddenly. If John H usshad cackled more like 
ahen, he might have survived M ichaelmas, and been esteemed for his eggs. T he last fifty years have laid the 
axe of analysisto the root of every axiom; they are triflerswho content themselveswith lopping the blossoming 
twigsof our beliefs, or the boughsof our intellectual intruments. W e can no longer assert any Sngle proposition, 
unless we guard ourselves by enumerating countelss conditions which must be assumed. 


T his digression has outstayed its welcome; it wasonly invited by W isdom that it might warn R ashness of the 
dangers that encompass even Sincerity, Energy and Intelligence when they happen not to contribute to 
Fitness- in-their-environment. 


The M agician must be wary in hisuse of hispowers, he must may every act not only accord with hisW ill, but 
with the properties of his postion at the time. It might be my Will to reach the foot of a cliff; but the easiest 
way— also the speediest, most direct least obstructed, the way of minimum effort— would be simply to jump. 
| should have destroyed my Will in the act of fulfilling it, or what | mistook for it; for the T rue Will has no 
goal; its nature being To Go. Similarly, a parabola is bound by one law which fixes its relations with two 
¢raight lines at every point; yet it hasno end ort of infinity, and it continually changes its direction. T he 
Initiate who isaware W ho heiscan alwayscheck isconduct by reference to the determinants of his curve, and 
calculate his past, hisfuture, hisbearings, and hisproper course at any assigned moment; he can even comprehend 
himself asasimple idea. H e may attain to measure fellow- parabolas, ellipsesthat crosshis path, hyperbolasthat 
span all space with their twin wings. Perhaps he may come at long last, leaping beyond the limits of hisown 
law, to conceive that sublimely tupendousoutrage to R eason, theC one! U tterly inscrutable to him, heisyet 
well aware that he existsin the nature thereof, that he isnecessary thereto, that he is ordered thereby, and that 
therefrom he is sprung, from the loins of so fearful a Father! H isown infinity becomes zero in relation to that 
of the least fragment of the solid. H e hardly existsat all. T rillions multiplies by trillions of trillionsof such ashe 
could not cross the frontier even of breadth, the idea which he came to guess at only becuase he felt himself 
bound by some mysterious power. Y et breadth is equally a nothing in the presence of the Cone. His first 
conception must evidently be afrantic soasm, formless, insane, not to be classed asan articulate thougght. Y et, 
if he develops the faculties of his mind, the more he knows of it the more he sees that its nature is identical 
with hisown whenever comparision is possible. 


The T rue Will is thus both determined by its equations, and free because those equation are smply itsown 
name, spelt out fully. H is sense of being under bondage comes from his inability to read it; his sense that evil 
exists to thwart him arises when he begins to learn to read, reads wrong, and is obstinate that his error is an 


improvement. 


We know one thing only. Absolute existence, absolute motion, absolute direction, absolute smultaneity, 
absolute truth, all such ideas: they have not, and never can have, any real meaning. If aman in delirium tremens 
fell into the H udson R iver, he might remember the proverb and clutch at an imaginary straw. W ordssuch as 
“truth” are like that straw. Confusion of thought is concealed, and its impotence denied, by the invention. 
T hisparagraph opened with “W eknow”: yet, quesitoned, “we” make haste to deny the possibility of possessing, 
or even of defining, knowledge. W hat could be more certain to a parabola philosopher that he could be 
approached in two ways, and two only? It would be indeed little less that the whole body of hisknowledge, 
implied in the theory of hisdefinition of himself, and confirmed by every single experience. H e could receive 
impressons only be meeting A, or being caught up by B. Y et he would be wrong in an infinite number of 
ways. T here are therefore Aleph-Zero7 possibilities that at any moment a man may find himself totally 
transformed. And it may be that our present dazzled bewilderment is due to our recognition of the existence 
of anew dimenson of thought, which seems so “inscrutably infinite’ and “absurd” and “immoral,” ec— 
because we have not studied it long enough to appreciate that its laws are identical with our own, though 
extended to new conceptions. The discovery of radioactivity created a momentary chaosin chemistry and 
physics; but it soon led to a fuller interpretation of the old ideas. It dispersed many difficulties, harmonized 
many discords, and— yea, more! It shewed the substance of U niverse asagmplicity of Light and Life, manners 
to compose atoms, themselves capable of deeper self- realization through fresh complexities and organizations, 
each with its own peculiar powers and pleasures, each pursuing its path througggh the world where all things 
are possible. It revealed the omnipresence of H adit, identical with Himself, yet fulfilling H imself by dividing 
H is interplay with N uit into episodes, each form of his energy isolated with each aspect of H er receptivity, 
delight developing delight continuous from complex to complex. It was the voice of N ature awakening at 
the dawn of the on, as Aiwaz uttered the W ord of the Law of Thelema. 


So also shall he who invoketh often behold the Formless Fire, with trembling and bewilderment; but if he 
prolong hismeditation, he shall resolve it into coherent and intelligibile symbols, and he shall hear the articulate 
utterance of that Fire, interpret the thunder thereof as a still small voice in his heart. And the Fire shall reveal 
to his eyes hisown image in its own true glory; and it shall speak in his ears the mystery that ishisown right 
N ame. 


This then in the virtue of the M agick of T he Beast 666, and the canon of its proper useage; to destroy the 
tendency to discriminate between any two things in theory, and in practice to pierce the veils of every 
sanctuary, pressing forward to embrace every image; for there is none that isnot very Iss. Thelnmostisone 
with the Inmost; yet the form of the O ne is not the form of the other; intimacy exacts fitness. H e therefore 
who liveth by air, let him not be bold to breathe water. But mastery cometh by measure: to him who with 
labour, courage, and caution giveth hislife to understand all that doth encompass him, and to prevail against it, 
Shall be increase. “T he word of Sin isR estriction” : seek therefore R ighteoumess, enquiring into Iniquity, and 
fortify thyself to overcome it. 


*: The people of England have made two revolutionsto free themselves from Popish fraud and tyranny. T hey 
are at their tricks again; and if we have to make aT hird R evolution, let us destroy the germ itself! 


N otes 
T hisritual wasfirst published in Appendix V1 of M agick in T heory and Practice. T he text above istaken from the 


version published in M agick: B ook 4 Parts|-1V which correctsafew errorsand omissonsin the original edition. 
Two earlier drafts of this ritual, with a measure of audience participation, are also extant. 


1: THELEMA, AGAPE, and AUMGN in Greek in the original. FIAOF or VIAOV (Hebrew, Vau-Y od- 
Aleph-Ayin-Y od = 93) isa variation of the formulaoflAO dicussed by Crowley in Chapter V of M agick in 
T heory and Pracie. AUMGN isan exention of AUM described in Chapter VII of M agik. 


2: THELEMA in Greek letters in the original. 


3: A name sometimes used for T arot T rump X X , more usually called “Judgement” or “the Last Judgement.” 
In Crowley’sT hoth deck it iscalled The Zon - T.S. 


4: The quote is from the “Sepher Dtznouthia” or “Book of Concealment,” a Q abalistic text translated by 
M athers from the Latin of Von R osenroth and published in K abbalah U nvelled. 


5: The double letter ShT is glyphed by writing the Greek equivalents of Shin-T eth, Sigma-T heta, using the 
variant form of the capital Sigma which looks the the Latin C. The result looks like Crowley’s “Sun and 
M oon conjoined” symbol. 


6: The allusion isto AL |. 22, which reads “Let there be no difference made among you between any one 
thing & any other thing; for thereby there cometh hurt.” 


7: Should probably be read Aleph-N ull, written asthe H ebrew letter Aleph followed by azero in subscript. 
T he reference isto the infinite set of cardinal numbers, the smallest infinite set; a set is said to have Aleph- null 
members if its members can be put into one to one correspondence with the set of natural numbers (0, 1, 2, 3, 
...). On thisdefinition, there are asmany agned integers (which includes negative numbers) asnatural numbers, 
and asmany rational numbers(i.e., numberswhich can be written asfractions, one integer divided by another) 
as natural numbers. T here are, however, more real numbers; the real numbers cannot be put in a one-to-one 
correspondence with the natural numbers, because they cannot be written in order; for whatever ordering 
principle you use, given any two real numbers it will alwaysbe possible to put onein between them. It is still 
amatter of debate whether there exist any infinite sets between aleph-null and the continuum (the latter being 
the set of real numbers). 


Liber X V 


O21 0; 
EcclesizeG nosticeeC atholicee 
Canon M issee 
E dited from the A ndent D oaiments in 


Assyrian and G reek by T he M aster T herion 
1: OF THE FURNISHINGS OF THE TEMPLE 


IN THE EAST, that is, in the direction of Boleskine, which is Stuated on the South-Eastern shore of Loch 
N essin Scotland, two miles east of Foyers, isashrine or H igh Altar. Itsdimensons should be 7 feet in length, 
3 feet in breadth, 44 inches in height. It should be covered with a crimson altar-cloth, on which may be 
embroidered fleur-de-lysin gold, or asunblaze, or other suitable emblem. 


On each side of it ould be a pillar or obelisk, with countercharges in black and white. 
Below it should be the dais of three steps, in black and white squares. 


Above it isthe super- altar, at whose toy isthe Stele of R evealing in reproduction, with four candles on each 
gde of it. Below the stele is a place for T he Book of the Law, with six candles on each side of it. Below this 
again isthe H oly Graal, with roses on each side of it. There isroom in front of the C up for the Paten. On each 
gde beyond the roses are two great candles. 


All this is enclosed within a great V eil. 


Forming the apex of an equilateral triangle whose base is a line drawn between the pillars, is a small black 
square altar, of superimposed cubes. 


T aking this altar asthe middle of the base of agmilar and equal triangle, at the apex of thissecond triangleisa 
gnall circular font. 


R epeating, the apex of a third triangle isan upright tomb. 
Il: OF THE OFFICERS OF THE MASS 


The PRIEST. Bears the Sacred Lance, and isclothed at first in a plain white robe. 


The PRIESTESS. Should be actually Virgo Intacta or specially dedicated to the service of the Great O rder. 
She is clothed in white, blue, and gold. She bears the Sword from a red girdle, and the Paten and H osts, or 
Cakes of Light. 


The DEACON. Heisclothed in white and yellow. He bearsT he Book of the Law. 


Two CHILDREN. T hey are clothed in white and black. O ne bearsa pitcher of water and a cellar of salt, the 
other acenser of fire and a casket of perfume. 


Il: OF THE CEREMONY OF THE INTROIT 


The DEACON, opening the door of the T emple, admits the congregation and takes his stand between the 
gnall altar and the font. (T here should be a doorkeeper to attend to the admisson.) The DEACON advances 
and bows before the open shrine where the G raal is exalted. H ekissesT he Book of the Law three times, opens 
it, and places it upon the super- altar. H e turns W est. 


The DEACON: Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. | proclaim the Law of Light, 
Life, Love, and Liberty in the name of IAQ. 


The CONGREGATION: Love is the law, love under will. 


TheDEACON goesto his place between the altar of incense and the font, faces East, and gives the step and 
ggn of aM an and aBrother. All imitate him. 


The DEACON and all the PE_PLE: 


| believe in one secret and ineffable LO R D; and in one Star in the C ompany of Stars of whose 
fire we are created, and to which we shall return; and in one Father of Life, M ystery of Mystery, 
in His name CHAOS, the sole viceregent of the Sun upon the Earth; and in one Air the 
nourisher of all that breathes. 


And | believe in one Earth, the Mother of us all, and in one Womb wherein all men are 
begotten, and wherein they shall rest, Mystery of Mystery, in Her name BABALON. 


And | believe in the Serpent and the Lion, Mystery of Mystery, in Hisname BAPHOMET. 


And | believe in one Gnostic and C atholic C hurch of Light, Life, Love and Liberty, the W ord 
of whose Law isTHELEMA. 


And | believe in the communion of Saints. 


And, forasmuch as meat and drink are transmuted in us daily into spiritual substance, | believe 
in the Miracle of the M ass, 


And | confess one Baptism of Wisdom whereby we accomplish the M iracle of Incarnation. 
And | confess my life one, individual, and eternal that was, and is, and is to come. 
AUMGN.AUMGN.AUMGN. 


M usic isnow played. T he child enters with the ewer and the salt. The VIR GIN enters with the Sword and 
the Paten. T he child enters with the censer and the perfume. T hey face the DEACON, deploying into line, 
from the space between the two altars. 


The VIR GIN: Greeting of Earth and H eaven! 
All give the H ailing sgn of aM agician, the DEACON leading. 


The PRIEST ESS, the negative child on her left, the postive child on her right, ascends the steps of the H igh 
Altar. They await her below. She places the Paten before the Graal. H aving adored it, she descends, and with 
the children following her, the postive next her, she movesin a serpentine manner involving 3 circles of the 


Temple. (D eos! about altar, widdershins about font, deosil about altar and font, widdershinsabout altar, and so 
to the Tomb in the W est.) She draws her Sword and pulls down the Veil therewith. 


The PRIESTESS: By the power of Iron, | say unto thee, Arise. In the name of our Lord the 
Sun, and of our Lord ... that thou mayst administer the virtues to the Brethren. 


She sheathes the Sword. 


The PRIEST, issuing from the T omb, holding the Lance erect with both hands, right over left, against his 
breast, takes the first three regular steps. He then gives the Lance to the PRIEST ESS, and gives the three 
penal signs. H e then kneels and worships the Lance with both hands. Penitential music. 


The PRIEST: | am aman among men. 

H e takes again the Lance, and lowersit. H e rises. 

The PRIEST: How should I be worthy to administer the virtues to the Brethren? 
The PRIEST ESS takes from the child the water and the salt, and mixes them in the font. 


The PR IEST ESS: Let the salt of Earth admonish the water to bear the virtue of the G reat Sea. 
(Genuflects.) Mother, be thou adored. 


She returns to the W est. on PRIEST with open hand doth she make, over his forehead, breast, and body. 
Be the PRIEST pure of body and soul! 

The PR IEST ESS takes the censer from the child, and placesit on the small altar. She puts incense therein. 
Let the Fire and the Air make sweet the world! (G enuflects.) 

Father, be thou adored. 

She returns W est, and makes with the censer before the PRIEST, thrice as before. 

Be the PRIEST fervent of body and soul! 

(T he children resume their weapons as they are done with.) 


TheDEACON now takesthe consecrated R obe from H igh Altar, and bringsit to her. She robesthe PR |EST 
in hisR obe of scarlet and gold. 


Be the flame of the Sun thine ambience, O thou PRIEST of the SUN! 


The DEACON brings the crown from the High Altar. (The crown may be of gold or platinum, or of 
electrum magicum; but with no other metals, save the small proportionsnecessary to aproper alloy. It may be 
adorned with divers jewels, at will But it must have the U raus serpent twined about it, and the cap of 
maintenance must match the scarlet of the R obe. Its texture should be velvet.) 


Be the Serpent thy crown, O thou PRIEST of the LOR D! 


Kneeling, she takes the Lance, between her open hands, and runs them up and down upon the shaft eleven 
times, very gently. 


Be the LORD present among us! 
All give the H ailing Sign. 
The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 


IV:OF THE CEREMONY OF THE OPENING OF THE VEIL 


The PRIEST: Thee therefore whom we adore we also invoke. By the power of the lifted 
Lance! 


H eraisesthe Lance. All repeat H ailing Sign. A phrase of triumphant music. The PRIEST takesthePR IEST ESS 
by her right hand with his left, keeping the Lance raised. 


I, PRIEST and KING, take thee, Virgin pure without spot; | upraise thee; | lead thee to the 
East; | set thee upon the summit of the Earth. 


He thrones the PR IEST ESS upon the altar. The DEACON and the children follow, they in rank, behind 
him. The PRIEST ESS takes T he Book of the Law, resumes her seat, and holds it &127;pen on her breast 
with her two hands, making a descending triangle with thumbsand forefingers. The PRIEST givesthe lance 
to the DEACON to hold, and takes the ewer from the child, and sprinkles the PR IEST ESS, making five 
crosses, forehead, shoulders, and thighs. The thumb of the PR IEST is always between hisindex and medius, 
whenever he isnot holding the Lance. The PRIEST takesthe censer from the child, and makes five crosses, 
as before. T he children replace their weapons on their respective altars The PRIEST kissesT he Book of the 
Law three times H e kneels for a space in adoration, with joined hands, knuckles closed, thumb in postion 
aforesaid. H e rises, and drawsthe veil over the whole altar. All rise and stand to order. The PRIEST takesthe 
lance from the DEACON, and holdsit as before, as O srisor Pthah. H e circumambulates the T emple three 
times, followed by the DEACON and the children as before. (T hese, when not using their hands, keep their 
arms crossed upon their breasts.) At the last circumambulation they leave him, and go to the place between 
the font and the small altar, where they kneel in adoration, their hands joined palm to palm, and raised above 
their heads. All imitate this motion. The PRIEST returnsto the East, and mounts the first step of the altar. 


The PRIEST: 


O circle of Stars whereof our Father is but the younger brother, marvel beyond imagination, 
soul of infinite space, before whom T ime is Ashamed, the mind bewildered, and the understanding 
dark, not unto T hee may we attain, unless T hine image be Love. T herefore by seed and root 
and stem and bud and leaf and flower and fruit do we invoke T hee. 


Then the priest answered & said unto the Q ueen of Space, kissing her lovely brows, and the 
dew of her light bathing his whole body in a sweet- smelling perfume of sweat; O N uit, continuous 
one of H eaven, let it be ever thus; that men speak not of thee as O ne but as N one; and let them 
speak not of thee at all, since thou art continuous. 


During this speech the PR IEST ESS must have divested herself completely of her robe. See CC X X 1:62. 
The PRIESTESS: 


But to love me is better than all things; if under the night- stars in the desert thou presently 
burnest mine incense before me, invoking me with a pure heart, and the serpent flame therein, 


thou shalt come a little to lie in my bosom. For one kiss wilt thou then be willing to give all; 
but whoso gives one particle of dust shall lose all in that hour. Ye shall gather goods and store 
of women and spices; ye shall wear rich jewels; ye shall exceed the nations of the earth in 
splendour and pride; but alwaysin the love of me, and so shall ye come to my joy. | charge you 
earnestly to come before me in a single robe, and covered with a rich head- dress. | love you! | 
yearn to you! Pale or purple, veiled or voluptuous, | who am all pleasure and purple, and 
drunkenness of the innermost sense, desire you. Put on the wings, and arouse the coiled splendour 
within you: come unto me! To me! To me! Sing the raptuous love-song unto me! Burn to me 
perfumes! W ear to me jewels! Drink to me, for | love you! | love you. | am the blue-lidded 
daughter of sunset; | am the naked brilliance of the voluptuous night-sky. To me! To me! 


The PRIEST mounts the second step. 
The PRIEST: 


O secret of secrets that art hidden in the being of all that lives, not T hee do we adore, for that 
which adoreth is also Thou. Thou art That, and That am I. 


| am the flame that burnsin every heart of man, and in the core of every star. | am Life, and the 
giver of Life; yet therefore is the knowledge of me the knowledge of death. | am alone; there 
isno God where | am. 


The DEACON and dll rise to their feet, with the H ailing sign. 

The DEACON: 

But ye, O my people rise up and awake. 

Let the rituals be rightly performed with joy and beauty. 

T here are rituals of the elements and feasts of the times. 

A feast for the first night of the Prophet and his Bride. 

A feast for the three days of the writing of the Book of the Law. 

A feast for T ahuti and the children of the Prophet-secret, O Prophet! 

A feast for the Supreme R itual, and a feast for the Equinox of the Gods. 
A feast for fire and a feast for water; a feast for life and a greater feast for death. 
A feast every day in your hearts in the joy of my rapture. 

A feast every night unto Nu, and the pleasure of uttermost delight. 

The PRIEST mountsthe third step. 

The PRIEST: 


Thou that art One, our Lord in the U niverse the Sun, our Lord in ourselves whose name is 
M ystery of M ystery, uttermost being whose radiance enlightening the worldsis also the breath 
that maketh every God even and D eath to tremble before T hee - By the Sign of Light appear 


Thou glorious upon the throne of the Sun. 


M ake open the path of creation and of intelligence between us and our minds. Enlighten our 
understanding. Encourage our hearts. Let thy light crystallize itself in our blood, fulfilling us of 
R esurrection. 


A kadua 

T uf ur biu 

bi a’a chefu 

Dudu nur af an nuteru. 

The PRIESTESS: There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt. 


ThePRIEST partsthe veil with hislance. D uring the previous speeches the PR IEST ESS has, if necessary, as 
in savage countries, resumed her robe. 


The PRIEST: 
10 10 10 [AO SABAO 
KURIE ABRASAX KURIE MEITHRAS KURIE PHALLE. 


10 PAN,10 PAN PAN 10 ISXURON,1IO ATHANATON IO ABROTON I0 IAO.XAIRE 
PHALLE KAIRE PAN PHAGE KAIRE PANGENETOR. 


HAGIOS, HAGIOS, HAGIOSIAO. 


The PRIEST ESS is seated with the Paten in her right hand and the cup in her left. The PRIEST presentsthe 
Lance, which she kisses eleven times. She then holdsit to her breast, while the PR IEST, falling at her knees, 
kissesthem, hisarmsstretched along her thighs. H eremainsin thisadoration whilethe DEACON intonesthe 
Collects. All stand to order, with the Dieu Garde, that is, feet square, hands, with linked thumbs, held loosely. 
T hisis the universal position when standing, unless other direction is given. 


V:OF THE OFFICE OF THE COLLECTS WHICH ARE ELEVEN IN 
NUMBER 
The Sun 


The DEACON: Lord visible and sensible of whom this earth is but afrozen spark turning about 
thee with annual and diurnal motion, source of light, source of life, let thy perpetual radiance 
hearten us to continual labour and enjoyment; so that as we are constant partakers of thy 
bounty we may in our particular orbit give out light and life, sustenance and joy to them that 
revolve about us without diminution of substance or effulgence for ever. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
The Lord 


The DEACON: Lord secret and most holy, source of life, source of love, source of liberty, be 


thou ever constant and mighty within us, force of energy, fire of motion; with diligence let us 
ever labour with thee, that we may remain in thine abundant joy. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
The Moon 


The DEACON: Lady of night, that turning ever about us art now visible and now invisible in 
thy season, be thou favourable to hunters, and lovers, and to all men that toil upon the earth, 
and to all mariners upon the sea. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
The Lady 


The DEACON: Giver and receiver of joy, gate of life and love, be thou ever ready, thou and 
thine handmaiden, in thine office of gladness. 


The PE_PLE: So mote it be. 
T he Saints 


The DEACON: Lord of Life and Joy, that art the might of man, that art the essence of every 
true god that is upon the surface of the Earth, continuing knowledge from generation unto 
generation, thou adored of us upon heaths and in woods, on mountains and in caves, oyenly in 
the marketplaces and secretly in the chambers of our houses, in temples of gold and ivory and 
marble as in these other temples of our bodies, we worthily commemorate them worthy that 
did of old adore thee and manifest they glory unto men, 


(At each name the DEACON agns with thumb between index and medius. At ordinary mass it is only 
necessary to commemorate those whose names are italicized, with wording asis shown.) 


Laotze and Siddartha and Krishna and T ahuti, Mosheh, Dionysus, Mohammed and To Mega 
Therion, with these also H ermes, Pan, Priapus, O sirisand M elchizedek, Khem and Amoun and 
Mentu, Heracles, Orpheus and Odysseus; with Vergilius, C atullus, M artialis, R abelais, 
Swinburne, and many an holy bard; Apollonius T yaneeus, Simon Magus, M anes, Pythagoras, 
Basilides, Valentinus, Bardesanes and H ippolytus, that transmitted the Light of the G nosis to us 
their successors and their heirs; with Merlin, Arthur, Kamuret, Parzival, and many another, 
pr&127;phet, priest and king, that bore the Lance and C up, the Sword and Disk, against the 
H eathen; and these also, C arolus M agnus and his paladins, with William of Schyren, Frederick 
of H ohenstaufen, R oger Bacon, Jacobus BurgundusM olensis the M artyr, C hristian R osencreutz, 
Ulrich von Hutten, Paracelsus, Michael Maier, R oderic Borgia Poye Alexander the Sixth, 
Jacob Boehme, Francis Bacon Lord Verulam, Andrea, R obertus de Fluctibus, Johannes D ee, Sir 
Edward Kelly, Thomas Vaughan, Elias Ashmole, Molinos, Adam W eishaupt, Wolfgang von 
Goethe, Ludovicus R ex Bavariz, Richard Wagner, Alphonse Louis C onstant, Friedrich 
Nietzsche, Hargrave Jennings, Carl Kellner, Forlong dux, Sir Richard Payne Knight, Paul 
Gaugin, Sir R ichard Francis Burton, D octor G aerard Encausse, D octor T heodor R euss, and Sir 
Aleister Crowley - Oh Sons of the Lion and the Snake! with all thy saints we worthily 
commemorate them worthy that were and are and are to come. 


M ay their Essence be hre present, potent, puissant and paternal to perfect this feast! 
The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
The Earth 


The DEACON: Mother of fertility on whose breast lieth water, whose cheek is caressed by air, 
and in whose heart is the sun’s fire, womb of all life, recurring grace of seasons, answer favorably 
the prayer of labour, and to pastors and husbandmen be thou propitious. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
T he Principles 


The DEACON: Mysterious Energy, triform, mysterious Matter, in fourfold and sevenfold 
division, the interplay of which things weave the dance of the Veil of Life upon the Face of the 
Spirit, let there be Harmony and Beauty in your mystic loves, that in us may be health and 
wealth and strength and divine pleasure according to the Law of Liberty; let each pursue his 
W ill asa strong man that rejoiceth in his way, as the course of a Star that blazeth for ever among 
the joyous company of H eaven. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
Birth 


The DEACON: Bethe hour auspicious, and the gate of life open in peace and in well-being, so 
that she that beareth children may rejoice, and the babe catch life with both hands, 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
M arriage 


The DEACON: U pon all that this day unite with love under will let fall success; may strength 
and skill unite to bring forth ecstasy, and beauty answer beauty. 


The PE_PLE: So mote it be. 
D eath 


The DEACON: Term of all that liveth, whose name is inscrutable, be favourable unto us in 
thine hour. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
The End 


The DEACON: Unto them from whose eyes the veil of life hath fallen may there be granted 
the accomplishment of their true W ills; whether they will absorption in the Infinite, or to be 
united with their chosen and preferred, or to be in contemplation, or to be at peace, or to 
achieve the labour and heroism of incarnation on this planet or another, or in any Star, or aught 
else, unto them may there be granted the accomplishment of their wills; yea, the accomplishment 
of their wills AUMGN.AUMGN.AUMGN. 


The PEOPLE: So mote it be. 
All st. 


TheDEACON and thechildren attend the PR IEST and PR IEST ESS, ready to hold any appropriate weapon 
as may be necessary. 


VI: OF THE CONSECRATION OF THE ELEMENTS 


The PRIEST makes the five crosses. 3 12 on paten and cup; 4 on paten alone; 5 on cup alone. 


The PRIEST: Life of man upon earth, fruit of labour, sustenance of endeavour, thus be thou 
nourishment of the Spirit! 


He touches the H ost with the Lance. 
By the virtue of the R od 

Be this bread the Body of God! 

H e takes the H ost. 

TOUTO ‘ESTITO SOMA MOU. 


He kneels, adores, rises, turnsshowsH os to the PEO PLE, turns, replaces H ost, and adores. M usic. He takes 
the Cup. 


Vehicle of the joy of Man upon earth, solace of labour, inspiration of endeavour, thus be thou 
ecstasy of the Spirit! 


He touches the C up with the Lance. 

By the virtue of the R od 

Be this wine the Blood of God! 

He takes the C up. 

TOUTO ‘ESTI TO POTHRION TOU ‘AIMATOSMOU. 

He kneels, adores, rises, turns, hhowsthe Cup to the PEO PLE, turns replaces the C up, and adores. M usic. 
For this is the C ovenant of R esurrection. 

H e makes the five crosses on the PR IEST ESS. 

Accept, O LORD, this sacrifice of life and joy, true warrants of the C ovenant of R esurrection. 


ThePRIEST offersthe Lance to the PR IEST ESS, who kissesit; he then touches her between the breasts and 
upon the body. H e then flings out his arms upward, as comprehending the whole shrine. 


Let this offering be borne upon the waves of Aethyr to our Lord and Father the Sun that 
travelleth over the H eavensin hisname ON. 


H ecloseshishands, kissesthe PR IEST ESS between the breasts, and makes three great crosses over the Paten, 
the Cup, and himself. H e strikes his breast. All repeat this action. 


H ear ye all, saints of the true church of old time now essentially present, that of ye we claim 
heirship, with ye we claim communion, from ye we claim benediction in the name of IAO. 


H emakes three crosses on Paten and C up together. H euncoversthe C up, genuflects, takesthe C up in hisleft 
hand and the H ost in his right. W ith the H ost he makes the five crosses on the C up. 


ik 
3 2 


Br 
H e elevates the H ost and the C up. T he Bell strikes. 


‘AGIOS ‘AGIOS ‘AGIOS IAO. 
H e replaces the H ost and the Cup, and adores. 


Vil: OF THE OFFICE OF THE ANTHEM 


The PRIEST: 

Thou who art I, beyond all | am, 

W ho hast no nature and no name, 

W ho art, when all but thou are gone, 
Thou, centre and secret of the Sun, 
Thou, hidden spring of all things known 
And unknown, Thou aloof, alone, 
Thou, the true fire within the reed 
Brooding and breeding, source and seed 
Of life, love, liberty, and light, 

Thou beyond speech and beyond sight, 
Thee | invoke, my faint fresh fire 
Kindling as mine intents aspire. 

Thee! invoke, abiding one, 

T hee, centre and secret of the Sun, 
And that most holy mystery 


Of which the vehicle am I. 


Appear, most awful and most mild, 
As it is lawful, in thy child! 
TheCHORUS: 

For of the Father and the Son 

The Holy Spirit is the norm; 

M ale- female, quintessential, one, 
M an-being veiled in woman-form. 
Glory and worship in the highest, 
Thou Dove, mankind that deifiest, 
Being that race, most royally run 
To spring sunshine through winter storm. 
Glory and worship be to T hee, 

Sap of the world- ash, wonder- tree! 
First Semichorus, MEN: 

Glory to thee from gilded tomb! 
Second Semichorus, WOMEN: 
Glory to thee from waiting womb! 
MEN: 

Glory to Thee from earth unploughed! 
WOMEN: 

Glory to Thee from virgin vowed! 
MEN: 

Glory to T hee, true U nity 

Of the eternal T rinity! 

WOMEN: 

Glory to Thee, thou sire and dam 
And self of | am that | am! 


MEN: 


Glory to Thee, beyond all term, 

Thy spring of sperm, thy seed and germ! 
WOMEN: 

Glory to Thee, eternal Sun, 

Thou One in Three, Thou Three in O ne! 
CHORUS: 

Glory and worship be to T hee, 

Sap of the world-ash, wonder- tree! 


(T hese wordsare to form the substance of the anthem; but the whole or any part thereof shall be set to music, 
which may be as elaborate as art can devise. But even should other anthems be authorized by the Father of the 
Church, this shall hold its place as the first of its kind, the father of all others.) 


Vill: OF THE MYSTIC MARRIAGE AND CONSUMMATION OFTHE 
ELEMENTS 


The PRIEST takes the Paten between the index and medius of the right hand. T he PR IEST ESS clasps the 
Cup in her right hand. 


The PRIEST: Lord most secret, bless this spiritual food unto our bodies, bestowing upon us 
health and wealth and strength and joy and peace, and that fulfilment of will and of love under 
will that is perpetual happiness. 


H e makes with Paten and kisses it. H e uncovers the Cup, genuflects, rises. M usic. He takes the H ost, and 
breaks it over the Cup. H e replaces the right-hand portion in the Paten. H e breaks off a particle of the left- 
hand portion. 


TOUTO ESTI TO SPERMA MOU.O PATHR ESTIN O HUIOS DIA TO PNEUMA 
‘AGION. AUMGN.AUMGN.AUMGN. 


H e replaces the left-hand part of the Host. The PR IEST ESS extends the Lance- point with her left hand to 
receive the particle. The PRIEST clasosthe Cup in his left hand. T ogether they depress the Lance- point in 
the Cup. 


The PRIEST and the PRIESTESS: HRILIU. 


The PRIEST takes the Lance. The PRIEST ESS coversthe Cup. The PRIEST genuflects, rises, bows, joins 
hands. H e strikes his breast. 


The PRIEST: 
O Lion and O Serpent that destroy the destroyer, be mighty among us. 
O Lion and O Serpent that destroy the destroyer, be mighty among us. 


O Lion and O Serpent that destroy the destroyer, be mighty among us. 


The PRIEST joins hands upon the breast of the PRIEST ESS, and takes back his Lance. He turns to the 
Peoyle, lowers and raises the Lance, and makes upon them. 


Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. 
The PEOPLE: Love is the law, love under will. 


H e lowers the Lance, and turns to East. The PR IEST ESS takes the Lance in her right hand. W ith her left 
hand she offers the Paten. The PRIEST kneels. 


The PRIEST: In my mouth be the essence of the life of the Sun! 


H etakesthe H ost with the right hand, makeswith it on the Paten, and consumesit. Silence. The PR IEST ESS 
takes, uncovers, and offers the Cup, as before. 


The PRIEST: In my mouth be the essence of the joy of the earth! 
H e takes the Cup, makes on the PR IEST ESS, drainsit and returns it. 
Silence. He rises, takes the Lance, and turnsto the PEO PLE. 

The PRIEST: There is no part of me that is not of the Gods. 


(T hose of the PEO PLE who intend to communicate, and none other should be present, having signified their 
intention, awholeC ake of Light, and awhole goblet of wine, have been prepared for each one. TheDEACON 
marshals them; they advance one by one to the altar. The children take the Elements and offer them. T he 
PEOPLE communicate as did the PR IEST, uttering the same wordsin an attitude of R esurrection: “There 
isno part of me that is not of the Gods.” T he exceptions to this part of the ceremony are when it is of the 
nature of acelebration, in which casenone but the PR IEST communicate; or part of the ceremony of marriage, 
when none other, save the two to be married, partake; part of the ceremony of baptism, when only the child 
baptised partakes; and of C onfirmation at puberty, when only the persons confirmed partake. T he Sacrament 
may be reserved by the PRIEST, for administration to the sick in their homes. 


The PRIEST closesall within the veil. W ith the Lance he makes crosses on the people thrice, thus. 
The PRIEST: 

The LORD bless you. 

The LORD enlighten your minds and comfort your hearts and sustain your bodies. 


TheLOR D bring you to the accomplishment of your true W ills, the G reat W ork, the Summum 
Bonum, True Wisdom and Perfect H appiness. 


He goes out, the DEACON and children following, into the T omb of the W est. 


M usc. (Voluntary.) 


Appendix VII 


A few of the principal instructions authorised by the 
A.’.A.’ 
Liber HHH sub figuraCCCXLl. 


CONTINET CAPITULA TRIA: MMM, AAA, 
ET SSS. 


LIBER HHH SUB FIGURA CCCXLI. 
CONTINET CAPITULA TRIA: MMM, AAA, 
ET SSS. 


Publication in C lass D 
I. 


MMM. “I remember a certain holy day in the dusk of the Y ear, in the dusk of the Equinox of 
Osiris, when first | beheld thee visibly; when first the dreadful issue was fought out; when the 
Ibis- headed O ne charmed away the strife. | remember thy first kiss, even as a maiden should. 
Nor in the dark byways was there another: thy kisses abide.” — LIBER LAPIDIS LAZULI. 
VII. 15, 16. 


0. Be seated in thine Asana, wearing the robe of aN eophyte, the hood drawn. 


Itisnight, heavy and hot, there areno stars. N ot one breath of wind stirsthe surface of the sea, that isthou. 
No fish play in thy depths. 


Let a Breath rise and ruffle the waters. T his also thou shalt feel playing upon thy skin. It will disturb thy 
meditation twice or thrice, after which thou shouldst have conquered this distraction. But unless thou 
first feel it, that Breath hath not arisen. 


N ext, the night is riven by the lightning flash. T his also shalt thou feel in thy body, which shall shiver and 
leap with the shock, and that also must both be suffered and overcome. 


After the lightning flash, resteth in the zenith a minute point of light. And that light shall radiate until a 
right cone be established upon the sea, and it is day. 


With this thy body shall be rigid, automatically; and this shalt thou let endure, withdrawing thyself into 
thine heart in the form of an upright Egg of blackness; and therein shalt thou abide for a space. 


W hen all thisis perfectly and easily performed at will, let the aspirant figure to himself a struggle with the 
whole force of the U niverse. In thishe isonly saved by hisminuteness. But in the end he isovercome 
by Death, who covers him with a black cross. 


Let his body fall supine with arms outstretched. 
So lying, let him aspire fervently unto the H oly Guardian Angel. 
N ow let him resume his former posture. 


T wo and twenty timesshall he figure to himself that he isbitten by aserpent, feeling even in hisbody the 
poison thereof. And let each bite be healed by an eagle or hawk, spreading its wings above his head, 
and dropping thereupon ahealing dew. But let the last bite be so terrible a pang at the nape of the neck 
that he seemeth to die, and let the healing dew be of such virtue that he leapeth to his feet. 


Let there be now placed within his egg a red cross, then a green cross, then a golden cross, then a silver 
cross; or those things which these shadow forth. H erein is sence; for he that hath rightly performed 
the meditation will understand the inner meaning hereof, and it shall serve as atest of himself and his 
fellows. 


Let him now remain in the Pyramid or Cone of Light, as an Egg, but no more of blackness. 


T hen let hisbody bein the postion of the H anged M an, and let him aspire with all hisforce unto the H oly 
Guardian Angel. 


T he grace having been granted unto him, let him partake mystically of the Eucharist of the Five Elements 
and let him proclaim Light in Extension; yea, let him proclaim Light in Extension. 


AAA “These loosen the swathings of the corpse; these unbind the feet of Osiris, so that the 
flaming God may rage through the firmament with his fantastic spear.” Liber L apidis Lazuli. 
VII. 3. 


0. Be seated in thine Asana, or recumbent in Shavasana, or in the postion of the dying Buddha. 


Think of thy death; imagine the various diseases that may attack thee, or accidents overtake thee. Picture 
the process of death, applying always to thyself. 


(A useful preliminary practice is to read textbooks of Pathology, and to vist museums and dissecting- 
rooms.) 


Continue thispractice until death iscomplete; follow the corpse through the stages of embalming, wrapping 
and burial. 


N ow imagine a divine breath entering thy nostrils. 
N ext, imagine a divine light enlightening the eyes. 
N ext, imagine the divine voice awakening the ears. 


N ext, imagine a divine kissimprinted on the lips. 


N ext, imagine the divine energy informing the nerves and muscles of the body, and concentrate on the 
phenomenon which will already have been observed in 3, the restoring of the circulation. 


Last, imagine the return of the reproductive power, and employ this to the impregnation of the Egg of 
light in which man is bathed. 


N ow represent to thyself that this Egg isthe Disk of the Sun, setting in the west. 


Let it sink into blackness, borne in the bark of heaven, upon the back of the holy cow H athor. And it may 
be that thou shalt hear the moaning thereof. 


Let it become blacker than all blackness. And in this meditation thou shalt be utterly without fear, for that 
the blankness that will appear unto thee isa thing dreadful beyond all thy comprehension. 


And it shall come to pass that if thou hast well and properly performed this meditation that on a sudden 
thou shalt hear the drone and booming of a Beetle. 


N ow then shall the Blackness pass, and with rose and gold shalt thou arise in the East, with the cry of an 
H awk resounding in thine ear. Shrill shall it be and harsh. 


At the end shalt thou rise and stand in the mid-heaven, a globe of glory. And therewith shall arise the 
mighty Sound that holy men have likened unto the roaring of aLion. 


T hen shalt thou withdraw thyself from the Vision, gathering thyself into the divine form of O Srisupon his 
throne. 


T hen shalt thou repeat audibly the cry of triumph of the god re- arisen, asit shall have been given unto thee 
by thy Superior. 


And this being accomplished, thou mayest enter again into the Vision, that thereby shall be perfected in 
Thee. 


After this shalt thou return into the Body, and give thanks unto the M ot High God IAIDA, yeaunto the 
Most High God IAIDA. 


M ark well that this operation should be performed if it be possible in a place set apart and consecrated to 
the W orks of the M agick of Light. Also that the T emple should be ceremonially open as thou hast 
knowledge and skill to perform, and that at the end thereof the closng should be most carefully 
accomplished. But in the preliminary practice it is enough to cleanse thyself by ablution, by robing, 
and by the rituals of the Pentagram and H exagram. 


0-2 should be practised at first, until some realisation isobtained; and the practice should alwaysbe followed 
by adivine invocation of Apollo or of ISsor of Jupiter or of Serapis. 


N ext, after a swift summary of 0-2 practice 3-7. 
This being mastered, add 8. 
Then add 9-13. 


Then being prepared and fortified, well fitted for the work, perform the whole meditation at one time. 
And let thisbe continued until perfect success be attained therein. For thisisa mighty meditation and 


holy, having power even upon Death, yea, having power even upon D eath. 


(N ote by Fra.O.M. Atany time during thismeditation the concentration may bring about Samadhi. T his 
isto be feared and shunned, more than any other breaking of control, for that it isthe most tremendous 
of the forces which threaten to obsess. T here is also some danger of acute delirious melancholia at 
point 1.) 


I 
SSS “Thou art a beautiful thing, whiter than a woman in the column of this vibration. 
“I shoot up vertically like an arrow, and become that Above. 
“But it is death, and the flame of the pyre. 
“Ascend in the flame of the pyre, O my Soul! 


“Thy God is like the cold emptiness of the utmost heaven, into which thou radiatest thy little 
light. 


“W hen T hou shalt know me, O empty God, my flame shall utterly expire in thy great N.O.X.” 
Liber Lapidis Lazuli. 1. 36-40. 


0. Be seated in thine Asana, preferably the T hunderbolt. 

It is essential that the spine be vertical. 

In this practice the cavity of the brain is the Y oni; the spinal cord isthe Lingam. 
Concentrate thy thought of adoration in the brain. 


N ow begin to awaken the spine in this manner. C oncentrate thy thought of thyself in the base of the 
spine, and move it gradually up alittle at atime. 


By this means thou wilt become conscious of the spine, feeling each vertebra as a separate entity. T his 
must be achieved most fully and perfectly before the further practice is begun. 


N ext, adore the brain as before, but figure to thyself its content as infinite. Deem it to be the womb of Iss, 
or the body of N uit. 


N ext, identify thyself with the base of the spine as before, but figure to thyself its energy asinfinite. Deem 
it to be the phallus of O srisor the being of H adit. 


T hese two concentrations4 and 5 may be pushed to the point of Samadhi. Y et lose not control of the will; 
let not Samadhi be thy master herein. 


N ow then, being conscious both of the brain and the spine, and unconscious of all else, do thou imagine 
the hunger of the one for the other; the emptiness of the brain, the ache of the spine, even as the 
emptiness of space and the aimlessness of M atter. 


And if thou hast experience of the Eucharist in both kinds, it shall aid thine imagination herein. 


Let this agony grow until it be insupportable, resisting by will every temptation. N ot until thine whole 


body is bathed in sweat, or it may bein sweat of blood, and until acry of intolerable anguish is forced 
from thy closed lips, shalt thou proceed. 


N ow let acurrent of light, deep azure flecked with scarlet, passup and down the spine, striking asit were 
upon thyself that art coiled at the base as a serpent. 


Let thisbe exceedingly Sow and subtle; and though it be accompanied with pleasure, resist; and though it 
be accompanied with pain, rest. 


T hisshalt thou continue until thou art exhausted, never relaxing the control. U ntil thou canst perform this 
one section 9 during awhole hour, proceed not. And withdraw from the meditation by an act of will, 
passing into agentle Pranayama without K umbhakham, and meditating on H arpocrates, the silent and 
virginal God. 


Then at last, being well-fitted in body and mind, fixed in peace, beneath a favourable heaven of stars, at 
night, in calm and warm weather, mayst thou quicken the movement of the light until it be taken up 
by the brain and the spine, independently of thy will. 


If in thishour thou shouldst die, isit not written, “Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord”? Y ea, Blessed 
are the dead that die in the Lord! 


Liber E vel Exercitiorum 
sub figura IX 


WEH NOTE: There are quite a few differences in text between this version and that published in EQUINOX I, 1. M ost of these appear to be 
typo’s or to be minor changes, espedally to modernize punctuation or usage. 


It is absolutely necessary that all experiments should be recorded in detail during, or immediately after, 
their performance. 


It ishighly important to note the physical and mental condition of the experimenter or experimenters. 


The time and place of all experiments must be noted; also the state of the weather, and generally all 
conditions which might conceivably have any result upon the experiment either as adjuvants to or 
causes of the result, or asinhibiting it, or as sources of error. 


TheA.:. A.:. will not take official notice of any experiments which are not thus properly recorded. 


It isnot necessary at this stage for usto declare fully the ultimate end of our researches; nor indeed would 
it be understood by those who have not become proficient in these elementary courses. 


T he experimenter is encouraged to use his own intelligence, and not to rely upon any other person or 
persons, however distinguished, even among ourselves. 


The written record should be intelligently (WEH NOTE: EQUINOX I, 1 has “intelligibly”.) prepared so that 
others may benefit from its study. 


The Book John St. John published in the first number of the “Equinox” is an example of this kind of 
record by avery advanced student. It isnot as dmply written as we could wish, but will show the 
method. 


The more scientific the record is, the better. Y et the emotions should be noted, as being some of the 
conditions 


Let then the record be written with sincerity and care; thus with practice it will be found more and more 
to approximate to the ideal. 


Physical clairvoyance 


T akea pack of (78) T arot playing cards. Shuffle; cut. Draw onecard. W ithout looking atit, try to nameit. 
W rite down the card you name, and the actual card. R epeat, and tabulate results. 


This experiment is probably easier with an old genuine pack of T arot cards, preferably a pack used for 
divination by some one who really understood the matter. 


R emember that one should expect to name the right card once in 78 times. Also be careful to exclude all 
possibilities of obtaining the knowledge through the ordinary senses of sght and touch, or even smell. 


T here was once aman whos fingertips were so senstive that he could feel the shape and postion of the 
pips and so judge the card correctly. 


It is better to try first the easier form of the experiment, by guessing only the suit. 


R emember that in 78 experiments you should obtain 22 trumpsand 14 of each other suit; so that without 
any clairvoyance at all, you can guess right twice in 7 times (roughly) by calling trumps each time. 


N ote that some cards are harmonious. 


T husit would not be a bad error to call the five of Swords (“T he Lord of Defeat”) instead of the ten of 
Swords(“TheLord of R uin”). But to call the Lord of Love (2 Cups) for the Lord of Strife (5 W ands) 
would show that you were getting nothing right. 


Similarly acard ruled by M ars would be harmonious with a5, acard of Gemini with “The Lovers’. 
T hese harmonies must be thoroughly learnt, according to the numerous tables given in 777. 


Asyou progress you will find that you are able to distinguish the suit correctly three timesin four and that 
very few indeed inharmonious errors occur, while in 78 experiments you are able to name the card 
aright as many as 15 or 20 times. 


W hen you have reached this stage, you may be admitted for examination; and in the event of your passing 
you will be given more complex and difficult exercises. 


Asana - Posture 
Y ou must learn to sit perfectly still with every muscle tense for long periods. 


Y ou must wear no garments that interfere with the posture in any of these experiments. 


The first postion: (T he God). Sit in achair; head up, back straight, knees together, hands on knees, eyes 
closed. 


The second postion: (The Dragon). K neel; buttocks resting on the heels, toesturned back, back and head 
¢raight, hands on thighs. 


The third postion: (The Ibis). Stand, hold left ankle with right hand, (WEH NOTE: The EQUINOX version 
adds: “(and alternately practise right ankle in left hand, &c)”.) free forefinger on lips. 


The fourth postion: (The T hunderbolt). Sit; left heel pressing up anus, right foot poised on its toes, the 
heel covering the phallus, arms stretched out over the knees; head and back straight. 


Variousthingswill happen to you while you are practisdng these postions, they must be carefully analysed 
and described. 


N ote down the duration of practice; the severity of the pain (if any) which accompaniesit, the degree of 


rigidity attained, and any other pertinent matters. 


W hen you have progressed up to the point that a saucer filled to the brim with water and poised upon the 
head does not spill one drop during awhole hour, and when you can no longer perceive the sightest 
tremor in any muscle; when, in short, you are perfectly steady and easy, you will be admitted for 
examination; and, should you pass, you will be instructed in more complex and difficult practices. 


IV 


Pranayama - R egularisation of the Breathing 


At rest in one of your postions, close the right nostril with the thumb of the right hand and breathe out 
gJowly and completely through the left nostril, while your watch marks 20 seconds. Breathein through 
the same nostril for 10 seconds. C hanging hands, repeat with the other nostril. Let this be continuous 
for one hour. 


W hen thisis quite easy to you, increase the periods to 30 and 15 seconds. 


W hen thisis quite easy to you, but not before, breathe out for 15 seconds, in for 15 seconds, and hold the 
breath for 15 seconds. 


W hen you can do thiswith perfect ease and comfort for awhole hour, practice breathing out for 40 and in 
for 20 seconds 


T his being attained, practice breathing out for 20, in for 10, holding the breath for 30 seconds. 


W hen this has become perfectly easy to you, you may be admitted for examination, and should you pass, 
you will be instructed in more complex and difficult practices. 


Y ou will find that the presence of food in the tomach, even in small quantities, makes the practices very 
difficult. 


Be very careful never to overstrain your powers, especially never get so short of breath that you are 
compelled to breathe out jerkily or rapidly. 


Strive after depth, fullness, and regularity of breathing. 


Various remarkable phenomena will very probably occur during these practices. They must be carefully 
analysed and recorded. 


V 


D harana - C ontrol of Thought 


Constrain the mind to concentrate itself upon a single smple object imagined. 


T he five tatwas are useful for this purpose; they are: a black oval; a blue disk; asilver crescent; a yellow 
square; a red triangle. 


Proceed to combinations of smple objects; e.g. a black oval within a yellow square, and so on. 


Proceed to Smple moving objects, such as a pendulum swinging, a wheel revolving, etc. Avoid living 
objects. 


Proceed to combinationsof moving objects, e.g. apiston rising and falling while a pendulum is swinging. 
The relation between the two movements should be varied in different experiments. 


Or even asystem of flywheels, eccentrics, and governor. 


During these practices the mind must be absolutely confined to the object determined upon; no other 
thought must be allowed to intrude upon the conscioumess. T he moving systtemsmust be regular and 
harmonious. 


N ote carefully the duration of the experiments, the number and nature of the intruding thoughts, the 
tendency of the object itself to depart from the course laid out for it, and any other phenomena which 
may present themselves. Avoid overstrain; this is very important. 


Proceed to imagine living objects; asa man, preferably some man known to, and respected by, yourself. 


In the intervals of these experiments you may try to imagine the objects of the other senses, and to 
concentrate upon them. 


For example, try to imagine the taste of chocolate, the smell of roses, the feeling of velvet, the sound of a 
waterfall or the ticking of a watch. 


Endeavour finally to shut out all objects of any of the senses, and prevent all thoughtsarising in your mind. 
W hen you feel you have attained some success in these practices, apply for examination, and should 
you pass, more complex and difficult practices will be prescribed for you. 


Vi 


Physical limitations 


It isdesirable that you should discover for yourself your physical limitations. 


To this end ascertain for how many hours you can subsist without food or drink before your working 
capacity is seriously interfered with. 


Ascertain how much alcohol you can take, and what forms of drunkenness assail you. 

Ascertain how far you can walk without once topping; likewise with dancing, swimming, running, etc. 
Ascertain for how many hours you can do without seep. 

T est your endurance with various gymnastic exercises, club swinging, and so on. 

Ascertain for how long you can keep silence. 

Investigate any other capacities and aptitudes which may occur to you. 


Let all these things be carefully and conscientiously recorded; for according to your powers will it be 
demanded of you. 


Vil 


A Course of R eading 


The object of most of the foregoing practices will not at first be clear to you; but at least (who will deny 
it?) they have trained you in determination, accuracy, introspection, and many other qualities which 
are valuable to all men in their ordinary avocations, so that in no case will your time have been wasted. 


T hat you may gain some insight into the nature of the Great W ork which lies beyond these elementary 
trifles, however, we should mention that an intelligent person may gather more than a hint of its 
nature from the following books, which are to be taken as serious and learned contributions to the 
study of N ature, though not necessarily to be implicitly relied upon. 


TheYi King (S.B.E. Series, O xford U niversity Press.) 
TheT ao T eh K ing (S.B.E. Series.) 

T annhauser, by A. Crowley. 

T he U panishads. 

T he Bhagavad-G ita. 

T he V oice of the Silence. 

R aja Y oga, by Swami Vivekananda. 

T he Shiva Sanhita. 

T heA phorisms of P atanjali. 

T he Sword of Song. 

T he B ook of the D ead. 

R ituel et D ogme dela H aute M agie. 

T he Book of the Saqed M agic of A bramelin the M age. 
The G oetia. 

T he H athayoga P radipika. 

T he Spiritual G uide of M olinos. 

Erdmann’sH istory of Philosophy. 

T he Star in the W est (C aptain Fuller). 

T he D hammapada (S.B.E. Series, O xford U niversity Press). 
T he Q uestions of K ing M ilinda (S.B.E. Series). 


777 vel Prolegomena, etc. 

V arieties of R eligious E xperience (James). 
K abbala D enudata. 

K onx Om Pax. 


Careful study of these books will enable the pupil to speak in the language of his master, and facilitate 
communications with him. 


The pupil should endeavour to discover the fundamental harmony of these very varied works; for this 
purpose he will find it best to study the most extreme divergencies side by side. 


H e may at any time that he wishes apply for examination in this course of reading. 


During the whole of thiselementary study and practice he will do wisely to seek out and attach himself to, 
amaster, one competent to correct him and advise him. N or should he be discouraged by the difficulty 
of finding such a person. 


Let him further remember that he must in no wise rely upon, or believe in, that master. He must rely 
entirely upon himself, and credit nothing whatever but that which lieswithin hisown knowledge and 
experience. 


Asin the beginning, so at the end, we here insist upon the vital importance of the written record as the 
only possible check upon error derived from the various qualities of the experimenter. 


T hus let the work be accomplished duly; yea, let it be accomplished duly. 


(If any really important or remarkable results should occur, or if any great difficulty presents itself, theA.:. 
A.-. hould be at once informed of the circumstances.) 


LIBER O 
VEL 
MANVSET SAGITTAE 
SVB FIGVR 


VI 
A.’. A.’. Publication in C lass B. 
Imprimatur: 
D .D .S.Praemonstrator 
0.S.V.Imperator 
N .S.F.C ancellarius 


T hese are all halftone photos of a single human in a black T au robe, barefoot with hood completely closed 
over the face. The hood displays a six- pointed figure on the forehead — presumably the radiant eye of H orus 
of theA.’. A.’., but the rendition is too poor in detail. T here isa cross pendant over the heart. T he ten panels 
are numbered in white in the upper left, but the numerals are very dim even in the |st edition (some blurred 
out entirely in the W eiser edition). 


T he panelsare identified by two columnsof numbered captions, 1 to 6 to the left and 7 to 10 to theright. T he 
description isbottom to top and left to right: 


“1. Earth: the god Set fighting.” Frontal figure. R t. foot pointed to the fore and angled dightly outward with 
weight on ball of foot. Lf. heel touching R t. heel and foot pointed left. Arms form adiagonal with body, right 
above head and in line with left at waist height. H andspalmer and open with fingers outstretched and together. 
H ead erect. 


“2. Air: The god Shu supporting the sky.” Frontal. H eels together and slightly angled apart to the front, flat 
on floor. H ead down. Armsangled up on either ade of head about head 1.5 ft. from head to wrist and crooked 
as if supporting a ceiling just at head height with the finger tips. T he palms face upward and the backs of the 
hands away from the head. Thumbs closed to sde of palms. Fingers straight and together. 


“3. Water: the goddess Auramoth.” Same body and foot position as #2, but head erect. Arms are brought 
down over the chest so that the thumbs touch above the heart and the backs of the handsare to the front. T he 
fingers meet below the heart, forming between thumbs and fingers the descending triangle of water. 


“4. Fire: the goddess T houm-aesh-neith.” Frontal. Head and body like #3. Arms are angled so that the 


thumbs meet in a line over the brow. Palmer 
gde facing. Fingers meet above head, forming 
between thumbs and fingers the ascending 
triangle of fire. 


“5,6. Spirit: the rending and closing of the veil.” 
Head erect in both. #5 has the same body 
posture as #1, except that the left and right feet 
are countercharged and flat on the floor. Arms 
and hands are crooked forward at shoulder level 
such that the hands appear to be clawing open a 
gplit veil — hands have progressed to a point 
that the forearms are invisible, being directly 
pointed at the front. U pper arms are flat and 
horizontal in the plain of the image. #6. has the 
same body posture as #1, feet in same postion 
as #1 but flat to the floor. The arms are elbow 
down against abdomen, with handsforward over 
heart in claws such that the knuckles are 
touching. Passing from #5 to #6 or vice versais 
done by motion of shoulders and rotation of 
wrists. This is different from the other sgn of 
opening the veil, the Sign of the Enterer, with 
is done with hands flat palm to palm and then 
goread without rotation of wrists. 


“7-10. TheL V X signs.” 


“7, + Osiris dain — the cross” Body and feet asin #2. Head bowed. Arms directly horizontal from the 
Shoulders in the plane of the image. H ands with fingers together, thumbs to side of palm and palmer side 
forward. T he tau shape of the robe dominates the image. 


“8. L Ids mourning — the Svastica.” The body isin semi-profile, head down slightly and facing right of 
photograph. T he arms, hands, legs and feet are positioned to define a swastika. Left foot flat, carrying weight 
and angled toward the right of the photo. R ight foot toe down behind the figure to the left in the photo. 
R ight upper arm due left in photo and forearm vertical with fingers closed and pointing upward. Left arm 
gnoothly canted down to the right of photo, with fingers closed and pointed down. 


“9. V Typhon — theT rident.” Figure frontal and standing on tip toe, toes forward and heals not touching. 
H ead back. Armsangled in a“V” with the body to the top and outward in the plain of the photo. Fingersand 
thumbs as #7, but continuing the lines of the arms. 


“10. X Osirisrisen — the Pentagram.” Body and feet asin #7. H ead directly frontal and level. Arms crossed 
over heart, right over left with hands extended, fingers closed and thumb on side such that the palms rest on 
the two opposite shoulders. } 


LIBER O 
VEL 
MANVS ET SAGITTAE 
SVB FIGVRA 
VI+ 
l. 


1. This book is very easy to misunderstand; readers are asked to use the most minute critical care in the study 
of it, even as we have done in its preparation. 


2. In this book it is spoken of the Sephiroth and the Paths, of Spirits and Conjurations of Gods, Spheres, 
Planes, and many other things which may or may not exist. 


It is immaterial whether these exist or not. By doing certain things certain results will follow; students are 
most earnestly warned against attributing objective reality or philosophic validity to any of them. 


3. The advantages to be gained from them are chiefly these: 
(“a”) A widening of the horizon of the mind. 
(“b”) An improvement of the control of the mind. 


4, T he student, if he attains any successin the following practices, will find himself confronted by things (ideas 
or {13} beings) too gloriousor too dreadful to be described. It is essential that he remain the master of all that 
he beholds, hears or conceives; otherwise he will be the slave of illusion, and the prey of madness. 


Before entering upon any of these practices, the student chould be in good health, and have attained a fair 
mastery of Asana, Pranayama and D harana. 


5. There is little danger that any student, however idle or stupid, will fail to get some result; but there is great 
danger that he will be led astray, obsessed and overwhelmed by hisresults, even though it be by those which 
it isnecessary that he should attain. T 00 often, moreover, he mistaketh the first resting- place for the goal, and 
taketh off his armour asif he were a victor ere the fight is well begun. 


It is desirable that the student should never attach to any result the importance which it at first seems to 
DOSSESS. 


6. First, then, let us consder the Book “777” and its use; the preparation of the Place; the use of the M agic 
Ceremonies, and finally the methods which follow in C hapter V. “Viator in R egnisArboris,” and in Chapter 
VI. “Sagitta trans Lunam.” 


(In another book will it be treated of the Expansion and C ontraction of C onsciousness; progress by slaying the 
Chakkrams; progress by slaying the Pairs of O pposites, the methods of Sabhapaty Swami, &c., &c.) 


1. The student must FIR ST obtain athorough knowledge of “Book 777”, especially of columnsi., il., ili., v., 


Vi., Vil., IX., XI., Xii., XIV., XV., XVI, XVII, XVIIL., XIX., XXXIV., XXXV., XXXVIIL., {14} xxxix., Xb, xli., xlii., xlv., 
liv., Iv., lix., [x., Ixi., [xiii., Ixx., Ixxv., Ixxvil., Ixvili., IXxxix., IXxx., IXxxi., IXxxiii., XCVIi., XCViii., XCIX., C., Ci., 
CXVil., CXVili., CXXXVii., CXXXViii., CXXXIX., CIXXV., CIXXVi., CIXXVii., CIXXXii. 


W hen these are committed to memory, he will begin to understand the nature of these correspondences. 
(“See” Illustrations “T he T emple of Solomon the King” in thisnumber. C ross references are given.) 


2. If we take an example, the use of the table will become clear. 
Let us suppose that you wish to obtain knowledge of some obscure science. 
In column x\lv., line 12, you will find “K nowledge of Sciences.” 


By now looking up line 12 in the other columns, you will find that the Planet corresponding isM ercury, its 
number eight, itslineal figuresthe octagon and octagram. The God who rulesthat planet T hoth, orin H ebrew 
symbolism T etragrammaton Adonai and Elohim T zabaoth, its Archangel R aphael, its C hoir of Angels Beni 
Elohim, its Intelligence T iriel, its Spirit T aphtatharath, its colours O range (for M ercury isthe Sphere of the 
Sephira H od, 8), Y ellow, Purple, Grey, and Indigo rayed with Violet; its M agical W eapon the W and or 
Caduceus, its Perfumes M astic and others, itssacred plants V ervain and others, itsjewel the O pal or Agate; its 
sacred animal the Snake, &c., &C. 


3. Y ou would then prepare your Place of W orking accordingly. In an orange circle you would draw an eight- 
pointed star of yellow, at whose points you would place eight lamps. T he Sigil of the Spirit (which is to be 
found in Cornelius {15} Agrippa and other books) you would draw in the four colours with such other 
devices as your experience may suggest. 


4, And so on. W ecannot here enter at length into all the necessary preparations; and the student will find them 
fully set forth in the proper books, of which the “Goetia” is perhaps the best example. 


T hese rituals need not be slavishly imitated; on the contrary the student should do nothing the object of 
which he does not understand; also, if he have any capacity whatever, he will find hisown crude rituals more 
effective than the highly polished ones of other people. 


T he general purpose of all this preparation is as follows: 


5. Since the student isaman surrounded by material objects, if it be hiswish to master one particular idea, he 
must make every material object about him directly suggest that idea. T husin the ritual quoted, if hisglance 
fall upon the lights, their number suggests M ercury; he smells the perfumes, and again M ercury is brought to 
his mind. In other words, the whole magical apparatus and ritual isa complex system of mnemonics. 


[T he importance of these lies principally in the fact that particular sets of images that the student may meet in 
hiswanderings correspond to particular lineal figures, divine names, &c. and are controlled by them. Asto the 
possibility of producing results external to the mind of the seer (“objective,” in the ordinary common sense 
acceptation of the term) we are here silent. ] 


6. T here are three important practices connected with all forms of ceremonial (and the two M ethods which 
later we shall describe). T hese are: {16} 


(1) Assumption of God-forms. 


(2) Vibration of Divine N ames. 


(3) R ituals of “Banishing” and “Invoking”. 


These, at least, should be completely mastered before the dangerous M ethods of Chapters V. and VI. are 
attempted. 


1. The M agical Images of the Gods of Egypt should be made thoroughly familiar. This can be done by 
studying them in any public museum, or in such books as may be accessible to the student. T hey should then 
be carefully painted by him, both from the model and from memory. 


2. The student, seated in the “God” postion, or in the characteristic attitude of the God desired, should then 
imagine H isimage as coinciding with hisown body, or asenveloping it. T hismust be practised until mastery 
of the image is attained, and an identity with it and with the God experienced. 


It isa matter for very great regret that no simple and certain test of success in this practice exists, 


3. The Vibration of God-names. Asa further means of identifying the human consciousness with that pure 
portion of it which man calls by the name of some God, let him act thus: 


4, (“a’) Stand with arms outstretched. (“See” illustration.) 
(“b”) Breathe in deeply through the nostrils, imagining the name of the God desired entering with the breath. 


(“c”) Let that name descend slowly from the lungs to the heart, the solar plexus, the navel, the generative 
organs, and so to the feet. {17} 


(“d") The moment that it appears to touch the feet, quickly advance the left foot about 12 inches, throw 
forward the body, and let the hands (drawn back to the side of the eyes) shoot out, so that you are standing in 
the typical postion of the God Horus “See” Illustration in Vol. 1. No. 1, “Blind Force.”] and at the same 
time imagine the N ame as rushing up and through the body, while you breathe it out through the nostrils 
with the air which hasbeen till then retained in the lungs. All thismust be done with all the force of which you 
are capable. 


(“e”) T hen withdraw the left foot, and place the right forefinger upon the lips, so that you are in the characteristic 
position of the God H arpocrates{“See” I Ilustration in Vol. 1. No. 1, “The Silent W atcher.” ] 


5. It isa sign that the student is performing this correctly when a single “Vibration” entirely exhausts his 
physcal strength. It should cause him to grow hot all over, or to perspire violently, and it should so weaken 
him that he will find it difficult to remain standing. 


6. |tisasign of success, though only by the tudent himself isit perceived, when he hearsthe name of the God 
vehemently roared forth, asif by the concourse of ten thousand thunders, and it should appear to him asif that 
Great V oice proceeded from the U niverse, and not from himself. 


In both the above practices all consciousness of anything but the God-form and name should be absolutely 
blotted out; and the longer it takes for normal perception to return, the better. {18} 


IV 


|. The R ituals of the Pentagram and H exagram must be committed to memory; they are as follows: 


T he Lesser R itual of the Pentagram 
(i) T ouching the forehead say Ateh (U nto T hee). 
(ii) Touching the breast say M alkuth (T he Kingdom). 
(iii) Touching the right shoulder, say ve-G eburah (and the Power). 
(iv) Touching the left shoulder, say ve- G edulah (and the Glory). 
(v) Clasping the hands upon the breast, say le-O lanm, Amen (To the Ages, Amen). 


(vi) Turning to the East make a pentagram (that of Earth) with the proper weapon (usually the W and). Say 
(“i.e.” vibrate) |H V H. 


(vii) Turning to the South, the same, but say A D N I. 
(vili) T urning to the W est, the same, but say AH IH. 
(ix) Turning to the N orth, the same, but sayA GLA. 
Pronounce: Y e-ho-wau, Adonai, Eheieh, Agla. 

(x) Extending the arms in the form of aC ross say: 

(xi) Before me R aphael; 

(xii) Behind me Gabriel; 

(xiii) On my right hand M ichael. 

(xiv) On my left hand Auriel; 

(xv) For about me flames the Pentagram, 

(xvi) And in the Column stands the six- rayed Star. 
(xvil-xxi) R epeat (i) to (v), the Q abalistic Cross. {19} 


T he Greater R itual of the Pentagram. 


T he Pentagrams are traced in the air with the sword or other weapon, the name 
gooken aloud, and the signs used, as illustrated. 


THE PENTAGRAMS OF SPIRIT 


T he Signs of the Portal (“see” Illustrations): Extend the handsin front of you, palms outwards, separate them 
as if in the act of rending asunder a veil or curtain (actives), and then bring them together as if closing it up 
again and let them fall to the side (passives). 


Tre Pentacrams cr Spm 


Equilibrium of Actives, 
« Name: A H I H (Eheieh). 


Invoking 
fusing 


Equilibrium of Passives, 
Name: A GL A (Agla). 


x“ 


(T he Grade of the “Portal” is particularly attributed to the element of Spirit; it refersto the Sun; the Paths of 
Samekh, N un and Ayin, are attributed to this degree.<> See “777” lines 6 and 31 bis). 


THE PENTAGRAMS OF FIRE. 


Tue PenraGraus ce Fire 


Name: ALHIM (Elchim). 


Invohrag 
Fury sine gy 


{20} The sgnsof 4 Degree = 7 Square: R aise the arms above the head and join the hands, so that the tips of 
the fingers and of the thumbs meet, formulating a triangle (“See” illustration). 


(T he Grade of 4 Degree = 7 Square is particularly attributed to the element Fire; it refersto the planet V enus, 
the paths of Q of, T zaddi and Peh are attributed to this degree. For other attributions “see” “777” lines 7 and 


31). 


THE PENTAGRAMS OF WATER. 


Tue Pentacrams or WatTER 


Name: A L (E)). 


Invoking 
Surysiung 


The signs of 3 Degree = 8 Square: R aise the armstill the elbows are on a level with the shoulders, bring the 
handsacrossthe chest, touching the thumbsand tipsof fingersso asto form atriangle apex downwards. (“See” 


illustration). 


(T he Grade of 3 Degree = 8 Square is particularly attributed to the element of W ater; it refers to the planet 
M ercury; the paths of R esh and Shin are attributed to thisdegree. For other attributions “see” “777”, lines8 


and 23). 


THE PENTAGRAMS OF AIR. 


Tre Pentacrams oF AiR 


Name: I H V H (Ye-ho- 
wal). 


Invoking 
Fayssuogy 


T he signs of 2 Degree = 9 Square: Stretch both arms upwards and outwards, the elbows bent at right angles, 
the hands bent back, the palms upwards as if supporting a weight. (“See” illustration). {21} 


(T he Grade of 2 D egree = 9 Square isparticularly attributed to the element Air; it refersto the M oon; the path 
of T aw is attributed to this degree. For other attributions “see” “777” lines 9 and 11). 


THE PENTAGRAMS OF EARTH 


Tse PexTacRams oF EartH 


Name: A DN I (Adonaii. 


Invoking 
Serysiww yy 


The Sign of 1 Degree = 10 Square: Advance the right foot, stretch out the right hand upwards and forwards, 
the left hand downwards and backwards, the palms open. 


(T he Grade of 1 D egree = 10 Square is particularly attributed to the element of Earth, “See” “777” lines 10 
and 32 bis). 


T he Lesser R itual of the H exagram. 


Thisritual isto be performed after the “Lesser R itual of the Pentagram”. 


(i) Stand upright, feet together, left arm at side, right across body, holding the wand or other weapon upright 
in the median line. T hen face East and say: 


(ii) LN.R I. 

Y od. Nun. R es. Y od. 

Virgo, Ids, Mighty M other. 

Scorpio, Apophis, D estroyer. 

Sol, Osiris, Slain and R isen. 

Iss, Apophis, Osiris, |AO. {22} 

(iii) Extend the armsin the form of across, and say: “T he Sign of Osiris Slain.” (“See” Illustration). 


(iv) R aisethe right arm to point upwards, keeping the elbow square, and lower the left arm to point downwards, 
keeping the elbow square, while turning the head over the left shoulder looking down so that the eyes follow 
the left forearm, and say, “T he Sign of the M ourning of Isis.” (“See” Illustration). 


(v) R aise the arms at an angle of sxty degrees to each other above the head, which is thrown back, and say, 
“T he Sign of Apophis and T yphon.” (“See” Illustration). 


(vi) Crossthe armson the breast, and bow the head and say, “T he Sign of O srisR isen.” (“See” Illustration). 


(vii) Extend the arms again as in (iii) and cross them again asin (vi) saying: “L.V.X., Lux, the Light of the 
Cross’. 


(viii) W ith the magical weapon trace the H exagram of Firein the East, saying, 
“Ararita’ (Aleph-R esh-Aleph-R esh-Y od-T aw-Aleph). This W ord consists 
of the initials of a sentence which means “O ne isHis Beginning: O neisHis 
Individuality: HisPermutation is One.” 


T hishexagram consists of two equilateral triangles, both apices pointed upwards. Begin at the top of the upper 
{23} triangle and trace it in a dextro- rotary direction. T he top of the lower triangle should coincide with the 
central point of the upper triangle. 


Py (ix) Trace the H exagram of Earth in the South, saying “ARARITA.” This 
H exagram has the apex of the lower triangle pointing downwards, and it should 
,. be capable of inscription in acircle. 
/\. (x) TracetheH exagram of Airin the W eg, saying“AR ARITA.” ThisH exagram 
is like that of Earth; but the bases of the triangles coincide, forming a diamond. 


. . 

2. 
(xi) Trace the hexagram of Water in the North, saying “ARARITA.” This 
hexagram has the lower triangle placed above the upper, so that their apices 


coincide. 


(xii) R epeat (i- vii) 


The Banishing R itual is identical, save that the direction of the H exagrams must be reversed. {24} 


Disvobing Banshing 


“The Greater R itual of the H exagram” 
To invoke or banish planets or zodiacal signs. 


T heH exagram of Earth aloneisused. Draw thehexagram, 
Jupiter beginning from the point which is attributed to the planet 
you are dealing with. (“See” “777” col. Ixxxili). 


T hus to invoke Jupiter begin from the M ars right-hand 
point of the lower triangle, dextro- rotary and complete; then trace 
the upper triangle from its left hand point and complete. 


T race the astrological si | of the planet in the centre of 
your hexagram. 


For the Zodiac use the hexagram of the planet which rules 
thesign you require (“777", col. cxxxviil); but draw the astrological 
dgil of the sgn, instead of that of the planet. 


For Caput and C auda D raconis use the lunar hexagram, with the sgil of C aput Draconis or C auda Draconis. 
To banish, reverse the hexagram. 


In all cases use a conjuration first with Ararita, and next with the name of the God corresponding to the planet 
or Sgn you are dealing with. 


The H exagrams pertaining to the planets are asin plate on preceding page. 


2. T hese rituals should be practised until the figures drawn appear in flame, in flame so near to physical flame 
that it would perhaps be visible to the eyes of a bystander, were one present. It is alleged that some persons 
have attained the power of actually kindling fire by these means. W hether this be so or not, the power isnot 
one to be aimed at. 


3. Success in “banishing” isknown by a “feeling of cleanliness’ in the atmosphere; successin “invoking” by 
a “feeling of holiness.” It is unfortunate that these terms are so vague. 


But at least make sure of this: that any imaginary figure or being shall instantly obey the will of the student, 


when he uses the appropriate figure. In obstinate cases, the form of the appropriate God may be assumed. 


4. T he banishing rituals hhould be used at the commencement of any ceremony whatever. N ext, the tudent 
Should use a general invocation, such as the “Preliminary Invocation” in the “Goetia” as well as a special 
invocation to suit the nature of his working. 


5. Successin these verbal invocationsisso subtle a {26} matter, and itsgradesso delicately shaded, that it must 
be left to the good sense of the student to decide whether or not he should be satisfied with his result. 


V 


1. Let the student be at rest in one of his prescribed postions, having bathed and robed with the proper 
decorum. Let the place of working be free from all disturbance, and let the preliminary purifications, banishings 
and invocations be duly accomplished, and, lastly, let the incense be kindled. 


2. Let him imagine his own figure (preferably robed in the proper magical garments and armed with the 
proper magical weapons) as enveloping his physical body, or standing near to and in front of him. 


3. Let him then transfer the seat of his conscioumess to that imagined figure; so that it may seem to him that 
he is seeing with its eyes, and hearing with its ears. 


T his will usually be the great difficulty of the operation. 

4, Let him then cause that imagined figure to rise in the air to a great height above the earth. 
5. Let him then stop and look about him. (It issometimes difficult to open the eyes.) 

6. Probably he will see figures approaching him, or become conscious of a landscape. 


Let him speak to such figures, and insist upon being answered, using the proper pentagrams and signs, as 
previously taught. 


7. Let him travel about at will, either with or without guidance from such figure or figures. {27} 


8. Let him further employ such special invocations as will cause to appear the particular places he may wish to 
visit. 

9. Let him beware of the thousand subtle attacks and deceptions that he will experience, carefully testing the 
truth of all with whom he speaks. 


T husa hostile being may appear clothed with glory; the appropriate pentagram will in such acase cause him 
to shrivel or decay. 


10. Practice will make the student infinitely wary in these matters. 


11. It isusually quite easy to return to the body, but should any difficulty arise, practice (again) will make the 
imagination fertile. For example, one may create in thought achariot of fire with white horses, and command 
the charioteer to drive earthwards. 


It might be dangerous to go too far, or to stay too long; for fatigue must be avoided. 


T he danger spoken of is that of fainting, or of obsession, or of lossof memory or other mental faculty. 


12. Finally, let the student cause his imagined body in which he supposes himself to have been travelling to 
coincide with the physical, tightening hismuscles, drawing in hisbreath, and putting hisforefinger to hislips. 
Then let him “awake” by a well-defined act of will, and soberly and accurately record his experiences. 


It may be added that this apparently complicated experiment is perfectly easy to perform. It isbest to learn by 
“travelling” with aperson already experienced in the matter. T wo or three experiments will suffice to render 
the student confident and even expert. See also “T he Seer”, pp. 295-333. 


Vi 


1. The previous experiment has little value, and leads to few results of importance. But it is susceptible of a 
development which merges into a form of Dharana — concentration — and as such may lead to the very 
highest ends. T he principal use of the practice in the last chapter is to familiarise the student with every kind 
of obstacle and every kind of delusion, so that he may be perfect master of every idea that may arise in his 
brain, to dismissit, to transmute it, to cause it instantly to obey his will. 


2. Let him then begin exactly as before, but with the most intense solemnity and determination. 


3. Let him be very careful to cause his imaginary body to rise in a line exactly perpendicular to the earth’s 
tangent at the point where his physical body is situated (or to put it more smply, straight upwards). 


4, Instead of topping, let him continue to rise until fatigue almost overcomeshim. If he should find that he has 
stopped without willing to do so, and that figures appear, let him at all costs rise above them. 


Y ea, though hisvery life tremble on hislips, let him force hisway upward and onward! 5. Let him continue in 
thisso long asthe breath of lifeisin him. W hatever threatens, whatever allures, though it wereT yphon and all 
his hosts loosed from the pit and leagued against him, though it were from the very T hrone of God Himself 
that a V oice issues bidding him stay and be content, let him struggle on, ever on. 


6. At last there must come amoment when his whole {29} being is swallowed up in fatigue, overwhelmed 
by its own inertia* 


* This in case of failure. The results of success are so many and wonderful that no effort is here made to 
describe them. T hey are classified, tentatively, in the “Herb Dangerious,” Partll., “infra”. 


Let him sink (when no longer can he strive, though histongue by bitten through with the effort and the blood 
gush from his nostrils) into the blackness of unconsciousness, and then, on coming to himself, let him write 
down soberly and accurately a record of all that hath occurred, yeaa record of all that hath occurred. 


EXPLICIT 


[A book of Elementary Invocationsisin preparation, and will be issued in N umber 3.] 


ASTARTE 
vel 
Liber BER YLLI 
sub figura CLX XV 
Aw. Aw, 
Publication in C lass B. 


Imprimatur: 
N. FradA.. Aw. 


0. Thisis the Book of U niting Himself to a particular D eity by devotion. 


lf 


C onsiderations before the T hreshold. First concerning the choice of aparticular D eity. T hismatter isof no 
import, sobeit that thou choose one wited to thine own highest nature. H owsoever, this method is 
not so suitable for gods austere as Saturn, or intellectual asT hoth. But for such deities asin themselves 
partake in anywise of love it isa perfect mode. 


C oncerning the prime method of this M agick A rt. Let the devotee consider well that although C hrist and 
Osiris be one, yet the former is to be worshipped with Christian, and the latter with Egyptian rites. 
And this although the rites themselves are ceremonially equivalent. T here should, however, be one 
symbol declaring the transcending of such limitations; and with regard to the D eity also, there should 
be some one affirmation of hisidentity both with all other smilar gods of other nations, and with the 
Supreme of whom all are but partial reflections. 


C onerning the chief place of devotion. This is the H eart of the Devotee, and should be symbolically 
represented by that room or spot which he loves best. And the dearest spot therein shall be the shrine 
of his temple. It is most convenient if this shrine and altar should be sequestered in woods, or in a 
private grove, or garden. But let it be protected from the profane. 


Concerning the | mage of the D eity. Let there be an image of the D eity; first because in meditation there 
ismindfulness induced thereby; and second because a certain power enters and inhabits it by virtue of 
the ceremonies, or so it issaid, and We deny it not. Let thisimage be the most beautiful and perfect 
which the devotee is able to procure; or if he be able to paint or to carve the same, it isall the better. 
Asfor Deities with whose nature no Image iscompatible, let them be worshipped in an empty shrine. 
Such are Brahma, and Allah. Also some postcaptivity conceptions of Jehovah. 


. Further concerning the shrine. Let this shrine be furnished approyriately asto itsornaments, according to 


the book 777. W ith ivy and pine- cones, that isto say, for Bacchus, and let lay before him both grapes 
and wine. So also for C eres let there be corn, and cakes; or for Diana moon-wort and pale herbs, and 


1 


1 


oO 


Re 


pure water. Further it is well to support the shrine with talismans of the planets, sgns and elements 
appropriate. But these should be made according to the right Ingenium of the Philosophus by the light 
of the Book 777 during the course of hisD evotion. It isalso well, nevertheless, if amagick circle with 
the right Sgns and names be made beforehand. 


C oncerning the C eremonies. Let the Philosophus prepare a powerful Invocation of the particular D eity 
according to hisIngenium. But let it consist of these several parts: 


First, an |mprecation, as of aSlave unto his Lord. 
Second, an O ath, as of a vassal to his Liege. 

Third, aM emorial, asof achild to his Parent. 
Fourth, an Orison, asof aPriest unto hisGod. 
Fifth, aC olloquy, as of a Brother with his Brother. 
Sixth, aC onjuration, asto a Friend with his Friend. 
Seventh, aM adrigal, as of a Lover to his M istress. 


And mark well that the first should be of awe, the second of fealty, the third of dependence, the fourth 
of adoration, the fifth of confidence, the sxth of comradeship, the seventh of passion. 


F urther concerning the ceremonies. Let then this] nvocation be the principal part of an ordered ceremony. 
And in this ceremony let the Philosophusin no wise neglect the service of a menial. Let him sweep 
and garnish the place, sprinkling it with water or with wine as is appropriate to the particular Deity, 
and consecrating it with oil, and with such ritual as may seem him best. And let all be done with 
intensity and minuteness. 


C onerning the period of devotion, and the hours thereof. Let a fixed period be set for the worship; and it is 
said that the least time is nine days by seven, and the greatest seven years by nine. And concerning the 
hours, let the Ceremony be performed every day thrice, or at least once, and let the deep of the 
Philosophus be broken for some purpose of devotion at least once in every night. 


N ow to someit may seem best to appoint fixed hoursfor the ceremony, to othersit may seem that the 
ceremony should be performed as the spirit moves them so to do: for this there isno rule. 


Concerning the R obes and Instruments. The Wand and Cup are to be chosen for this Art; never the 
Sword or Dagger, never the Pantacle, unless that Pantacle chance to be of anature harmonious. But 
even so it is best to keep the W and and Cup, and if one must choose, the Cup. 


For the R obes, that of a Philosoyhus, or that of an Adept Within is most suitable; or, the robe best 
fitted for the service of the particular D eity, asa bassara for Bacchus, awhite robe for V esta. So also, for 
Vesta, one might use for instrument the Lamp; or the sickle, for Chronos. 


C oncerning the | ncense and Libations. T he incense should follow the nature of the particular 
Deity; as, mastic for M ercury, dittany for Persephone. Also the libations, as, a decoction of 
nightshade for M elancholia, or of Indian hemp for U ranus. 


. Concerning the harmony of the ceremonies. Let all these things be rightly considered, and at length, in 


language of the utmost beauty at the command of the Philosophus, accompanied, if he has xkill, by 
music, and interwoven, if the particular D eity bejocund, with dancing. And all being carefully prepared 
and rehearsed, let it be practised daily until it be wholly rhythmical with his aspiration, and asit were, 
a part of his being. 


1 


RO 


1 


1SS) 


14, 


1 


o1 


1 


a 


ie 


18. 


. Concerning the variety of the ceremonies. N ow, seeing that every man differeth essentially from every 


other man, albeit in essence he is identical, let also these ceremonies assert their identity by their 
diversity. For this reason do W e leave much herein to the right Ingenium of the Philosophus. 


. Concerning the life of the devotee. First, let his way of life be such as is pleasing to the particular Deity. 


Thus to invoke N eptune, let him go afishing; but if H ades, let him not approach the water that is 
hateful to Him. 


Further, concerning the life of the devotee. Let him cut away from hislife any act, word, or thought, that 
is hateful to the particular Deity; as, unchastity in the case of Artemis, evasions in the case of Ares. 
Besides this, he should avoid all harshness or unkindness of any kind in thought, word, or deed, seeing 
that above the particular Deity is One in whom all is One. Y et also he may deliberately practise 
cruelties, where the particular D eity manifests H is Love in that manner, asin the case of K ali, and of 
Pan. And therefore, before the beginning of his period of devotion, let him practise according to the 
rules of Liber Jugorum. 


. Further concerning the life of the devotee. N ow, as many are fully occupied with their affairs, let it be 


known that this method is adaptable to the necessities of all. 
And W e bear witness that this which followeth is the C rux and Q uintessence of the whole M ethod. 


First, if he have no Image, let him take anything soever, and consecrate it as an Image of his God. 
Likewise with his robes and instruments, his suffumigations and libations: for his R obe hath he not a 
nightdress, for hisinstrument a walking stick; for his suffumigation a burning match; for hislibation a 
glass of water? 


But let him consecrate each thing that he useth to the service of that particular D eity, and not profane 
the same to any other use. 


. Continuation. N ext, concerning histime, if it be short. Let him labour mentally upon his! nvocation, 


concentrating it, and let him perform thisI nvocation in hisheart whenever he hath the leisure. And let 
him seize eagerly upon every opportunity for this. 


C ontinuation. Third, even if he have leisure and preparation, let him seek ever to bring inward the 
symbols, so that even in his well ordered shrine the whole ceremony revolve inwardly in his heart, 
that isto say in the temple of his body, of which the outer temple is but an image. For in the brain is 
the shrine, and there isno Image therein; and the breath of man is the incense and the libation. 


C ontinuation. Further concerning occupation. Let the devotee transmute within the alembic of his 
heart every thought, or word, or act into the spiritual gold of his devotion. 


Asthus: eating. Let him say: “I eat this food in gratitude to my Deity that hath sent it to me, 

in order to gain strength for my devotion to Him.” 

Or: deeping. Let him say: “I lie down to deep, giving thanks for this blessing from my Deity, 
in order that | may be refreshed for new devotion to Him.” 

Or: reading. Let him say: “| read this book that | may study the nature of my Deity, that 
further knowledge of Him may inspire me with deeper devotion to Him.” 

Or: working. Let him say: “I drive my spade into the earth that fresh flowers (fruit, or what 
not) may spring up to Hisglory, and that I, purified by toil, may give better devotion to Him.” 
Or: whatever it may be that he is doing, let him reason it out in hisown mind, drawing it 


1 


2 


2 


i<o) 


oO 


Re 


through circumstance and circumstance to that one end and conclusion of the matter. And 
let him not perform the act until he hath done this. 
Asit iswritten: Liber VII, cap. v. — 
22. Every breath, every word, every thought is an 
ac of love with thee 
23. The beat of my heart is the pendulum of love 
24.  Thesongs of me are the soft sighs: 
25.  Thethoughts of me are very rapture: 
26. | And my deeds are the myriads of T hy Children, 
the stars and the atoms. 


And R emember W ell, that if thou wert in truth alover, all this wouldst thou do of thine own nature 
without the sightest flaw or failure in the minutest part thereof. 


. Concerning the L ections. Let the Philosoyhus read solely in his copies of the holy books of Thelema, 


during the whole period of hisdevotion. But if he weary, then let him read books which have no part 
whatever in love, asfor recreation. 


But let him copy out each verse of Thelema which bears upon this matter, and ponder them, and 
comment thereupon. For therein isa wisdom and amagic too deep to utter in any other wise. 


. Concerning the M editations. H erein isthe most potent method of attaining unto the End, for him who 


isthoroughly prepared, being purified by the practice of the T ransmutation of deed into devotion, and 
consecrated by the right performance of the holy ceremonies. Y et herein is danger, for that the M ind 
isfluid asquickslver, and bordereth upon the Abyss, and is beset by many sirensand devils that seduce 
and attack it to destroy it. T herefore let the devotee beware, and precise accurately his meditations, 
even asaman should build acanal from sea to sea. 


. Continuation. Let then the Philosophus meditate upon all love that hath ever stirred him. T here isthe 


love of David and of Jonathan, and the love of Abraham and Isaac, and the love of Lear and C ordelia, 
and the love of Damon and Pythias, and the love of Sappho and Atthis, and the love of R omeo and 
Juliet, and the love of Dante and Beatrice, and the love of Paolo and Francesca, and the love of C aesar 
and Lucrezia Borgia, and the love of Aucassin and N icolette, and the love of Daphnis and Chloe, and 
the love of Corneliaand C aiusGracchus, and the love of Bacchusand Ariadne, and the love of C upid 
and Psyche, and the love of Endymion and Artemis, and the love of D emeter and Persephone, and the 
love of Venusand Adonis, and the love of Lakshmi and Vishnu, and the love of Siva and Bhavani, and 
the love of Buddha and Ananda, and the love of Jesus and John, and many more. 


Also there isthe love of many saintsfor their particular deity, asof St. Francis of Assis for Christ, of Sri 
Sabhapaty Swami for M aheswara, of Abdullah H aji Shirazi for Allah, of St |gnatius Loyola for M ary, 
and many more. 


N ow do thou take one such story every night, and enact it in thy mind, grasping each identity with 
infinite care and zest, and do thou figure thyself asone of the lovers and thy D eity asthe other. T husdo 
thou pass through all adventures of love, not omitting one; and to each do thou conclude: H ow pale 
areflection isthis of my love for this Deity! 


Y et from each shalt thou draw some knowledge of love, some intimacy with love, that shall aid thee 
to perfect thy love. T huslearn the humility of love from one, itsobedience from another, itsintensity 
from athird, its purity from a fourth, its peace from yet a fifth. 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


RO 


15S) 


AS 


ol 


6. 


—sl 


So then thy love being made perfect, it shall be worthy of that perfect love of His. 


. Further concerning meditation. M oreover let the Philosophus imagine to himself that he hath indeed 


succeeded in his devotion, and that his Lord hath appeared to him, and that they converse as may be 
fitting. 


. Concerning the M ysterious T riangle. N ow then asthree cordsseparately may be broken by achild, while 


those same cords duly twisted may bind a giant, let the Philosophus learn to entwine these three 
methods of M agic into a Spell. 


To this end let him understand that as they are O ne, because the end is one, so are they O ne because 
the method isO ne, even the method of turning the mind toward the particular D eity by love in every 
act. 


And les thy twine dip, here is a little cord that wrappeth tightly round and round dll, even the 
M antram or C ontinuous Prayer. 


. Concerning the M antram or C ontinuous Prayer. Let the Philosophus weave the N ame of the Particular 


Deity into asentence short and rhythmical, as, for Artemis: eoslon- pi- epslon-lambda-theta- omicron- 
nu, epslon- pi- epslon- lambda theta omicron- nu, Alpha-rho-tau- epsilon- mu-iota sigma; or, for Shiva: 
N amo Shivaya namaha Aum; or, for M ary: Ave M aria; or for Pan, chi- alpha iota rho- epsilon Sigma 
omega-tau- eta rho kappa omicron-sigma mu- omicron-upsilon, lota omega Pi-alpha-nu, lota omega 
Pi-alpha-nu; or, for Allan: H ua Allahu alazi lailaha illa H ua. 


Let him repeat this day and night without cessation mechanically in his brain, which is thus made 
ready for the advent of that Lord, and armed against all other. 


. Concerning the A ctive and the Passive. Let the Philosophus change from the active love of his particular 


Deity to astate of passive waiting, even almost arepulsion, the repulsion not of distaste, but of sublime 
modesty. 


Asit is written, Liber LX V.ii.59. | have called unto Thee, and | have journeyed unto T hee, and it 
availed me not. 60. | waited patiently, and T hou wast with me from the beginning. 


Then let him change back to the Active, until a veritable rhythm is established between the states, as 
it were the swinging of aPendulum. But let him reflect that a vast intelligence is required for this, for 
he must stand as it were almost without himself to watch those phases of himself, And to do thisisa 
high Art, and pertaineth not altogether to the grade of Philosoyhus. N either isit of itself helpful, but 
rather the reverse, in this especial practice. 


C oncerning silence. Now there may come a time in the course of this practice when the outward 
symbols of devotion cease, when the soul isasit were dumb in the presence of itsGod. M ark that this 
isnot a cessation, but a transmutation of the barren seed of prayer into the green shoot of yearning. 
T hisyearning isspontaneous, and it shall be left to grow, whether it be sweet or bitter. For often times 
it isas the torment of hell in which the soul burns and writhes unceasingly. Y et it ends, and at its end 
continue openly thy M ethod. 


. Concerning D ryness. Another state wherein at times the soul may fall is this dark night. And this is 


indeed purifying in such depthsthat the soul cannot fathom it. It islesslike pain than like death. But it 
is the necessary death that comes before the rising of a body glorified. 


2 


2 


3 


[oe] 


i<o) 


oO 


T his state must be endured with fortitude; and no means of alleviating it may be employed. It may be 
broken up by the breaking up of the whole M ethod, and areturn to the world without. T hiscowardice 
not only destroysthe value of all that has gone before, but destroysthe value of the O ath of Fealty that 
thou hast sworn, and makes thy W ill amockery to men and gods. 


. Concerning the D eceotions of the D evil. N ote well that in this state of dryness a thousand seductions will 


lure thee away; also a thousand means of breaking thine oath in spirit without breaking it in letter. 
Against thisthou mayst repeat the words of thine oath aloud again and again until the temptation be 
overcome. 


Also the devil will represent to thee that it were much better for this operation that thou do thus and 
thus, and seek to affright thee by fears for thy health or thy reason. 


Or he may send against thee visions worse than madness. 


Against all this there is but one remedy, the Discipline of thine O ath. So then thou shalt go through 
ceremonies meaningless and hideous to thee, and blasoheme shalt thou against thy Deity and curse 
Him. And thismattereth little, for it isnot thou, so be that thou adhere to the Letter of thine O bligation. 
For thy Spiritual Sight is closed, and to trust it isto be led unto the precipice, and hurled therefrom. 


. Further of this matter. N ow also subtler than all these terrors are the I lusjonsof Success. For one instant’s 


{WEH NOTE: Magick in Theory and Practice has “But one instant’s..”} self- satisfaction or Expansion of thy 
Spirit, especially in this state of dryness, and thou art lost. For thou mayst attain the False U nion with 
the Demon himself. Beware also of even the pride which rises from having resisted the temptations. 


But so many and so subtle are the wiles of C horonzon that the whole world could not contain their 
enumeration. 


The answer to one and all isthe persistence in the literal fulfilment of the routine. Beware, then, last, 
of that devil {49} who shall whisper in thine ear that the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life, and 
answer: Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abideth alone, but if it die, it bringeth 
forth much fruit. 


Y et halt thou also beware of disputation with the devil, and pride in the cleverness of thine answersto 
him. Therefore, if thou hast not lost the power of slence, let it be first and last employed against him. 


. Concerning the Enflaming of the H eart. N ow learn that thy methods are dry, one and all. Intellectual 


exercises, moral exercises, they are not Love. Y et asa man, rubbing two dry sticks together for long, 
suddenly found a spark, so also from time to time will true love leap unasked into thy mediation. Y et 
this shall die and be reborn again and again. It may be that thou hast no tinder near. 


In the end shall come suddenly a great flame and a devouring, and burn thee utterly. 


N ow of these sparks, and of these splutterings of flame, and of these beginnings of the Infinite Fire, 
thou shalt thus be aware. For the sparksthy heart shall leap up, and thy ceremony or meditation or toil 
Shall seem of a sudden to go of itsown will; and for the little flames this shall be increased in volume 
and intensity; and for the beginningsof the Infinite Fire thy ceremony shall be caught up unto ravishing 
song, and thy meditation shall be ecstasy, and thy toil shall be adelight exceeding all pleasure thou hast 
ever Known. 


And of the Great Flame that answereth thee it may not be spoken; for therein isthe End of thisM agick 


cpl 


33; 


34, 


Art of Devotion. 


C onsiderations with regard to the use of symbols. It isto be noted that persons of powerful imagination, 
will, and intelligence have no need of these material symbols. T here have been certain saints who are 
capable of love for an idea as such without it being otherwise than degraded by “idolising” it, to use 
thisword in its true sense. T husone may be impassioned of beauty, without even the need of so small 
a concretion of it as “The beauty of Apollo”, the “beauty of roses’, the “beauty of Attis’. Such 
persons are rare; it may be doubted whether Plato himself attained to any vision of absolute beauty 
without attaching to it material objects in the first place. A second class is able to contemplate ideals 
through this veil; a third class need a double veil, and cannot think of the beauty of a rose without a 
rose before them. For such is this M ethod of most use; yet let them know that there is this danger 
therein, that they may mistake the gross body of the symbol for the idea made concrete thereby. 


. Considerations of further danger to those not purged of material thought. Let it be remembered that in the 


nature of the love itself isdanger. T he lust of the satyr for the nymph isindeed of the same nature asthe 
affinity of Q uicklime for water on the one hand, and of love of Ab for Amaon the other; 50 also isthe 
triad O ris, Isis, H oruslike that of ahorse, mare, foal, and of red, blue, purple. And thisisthe foundation 
of C orresoondences. 


But it were false to say “H orusisafoal” or “H orusis purple”. O ne may say: “H orus resembles a foal 
in this respect, that he is the offspring of two complementary beings’. 


Further of this matter. So also many have said truly that all isone, and falsely that since earth isT hat O ne, 
and ocean is That One, therefore earth is ocean. Unto Him good is illusion, and evil is illusion; 
therefore good is evil. By this fallacy of logic are many men destroyed. 


M oreover, there are thos who take the image for the God; aswho should say, my heart isin T iphereth, 
and an Adeptusisin T iphereth; | am therefore an adept. 


And in thispractice the worst danger isthis, that the love which isitsweapon should fail in one of two 
ways. 


First, if the love lack any quality of love, so long is it not ideal love. For it is written of the Perfected 
One: “T hereisno member of my body which isnot the member of some god.” T herefore let not the 
Philosophus despise any form of love, but harmonise all. Asitiswritten: Liber LX V, 32. “So therefore 
Perfection abideth not in the Pinnacles or in the Foundation, but in the harmony of O ne with all.” 


Second, if any part of thislove exceed, there isdisease therein. As, in the love of O thello for D esdemona, 
love's jealousy overcame love’s tenderness, so may it be in this love of a particular Deity. And thisis 
more likely, Snce in this divine love no element may be omitted. 


Itisby virtue of thiscompletenessthat no human love may in any way attain to more than to foreshadow 
alittle part thereof. 


C onerning M ortifications. T hese are not necessary to this method. On the contrary, they may destroy 
the concentration, ascounter- irritants to, and so alleviationsof, the supreme mortification which isthe 
Absence of the Deity invoked. 


Y et asin mortal love arises a distaste for food, or a pleasure in things naturally painful, this perversion 
Should be endured and allowed to take its course. Y et not to the interference with natural bodily 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


4 


o1 


6. 


—s 


(oe) 


2, 


oO 


health, whereby the instrument of the soul might be impaired. 
And concerning sacrifices for love's sake, they are natural to this M ethod, and right. 


But concerning voluntary privations and tortures, without use save as against the devotee, they are 
generally not natural to healthy natures, and wrong. For they are selfish. To scourge one’s self serves 
not one’smaster; yet to deny one’sself bread that one’s child may have cake isthe act of atrue mother. 


. Further concerning M ortifications. If thy body, on which thou ridest, be so disobedient a beast that by no 


meanswill he travel in the desired direction, or if thy mind be baulkish and eloquent as Balaam’s fabled 
Ass, then let the practice be abandoned. Let the shrine be covered in sackcloth, and do thou put on 
habits of lamentation, and abide alone. And do thou return most austerely to the practice of Liber 
Jugorum, testing thyself by astandard higher than that hitherto accomplished, and punishing effractions 
with a heavier goad. Nor do thou return to thy devotion until that body and mind are tamed and 
trained to all manner of peaceable going. 


C oncening minor methods adjuvant in the ceremonies. |. R ising on the planes. By thismethod mayst thou 
assist the imagination at the time of concluding thine Invocation. Act astaught in Liber O , by the light 
of Liber 777. 


. C oncerning minor methods adjuvant in the ceremonies. ||. T alismanicM agic H aving made by thine |ngenium 


a talisman or pantacle to represent the particular Deity, and consecrated it with infinite love and care, 
do thou burn it ceremonially before the shrine, asif thereby giving up the shadow for the substance. 
But it is useless to do this unless thou do really in thine heart value the talisman beyond all else that 
thou hast. 


. C onerning minor methods adjuvant in the ceremonies. III. R ehearsal. It may assist if the traditional history 


of the particular Deity be rehearsed before him; perhaps this is best done in dramatic form. This 
method is the main one recommended in the “Exercitios Espirituales” of St Ignatius, whose work 
may be taken as a model. Let the Philosophus work out the legend of his own particular Deity, and 
apportioning daysto events, live that life in imagination, exercising the five sensesin turn, asoccasion 
arises. 


C oncerning minor matters adjuvant in the ceremonies. |V. D uresse. T hismethod consstsin cursing a deity 
recalcitrant; as, threatening ceremonially “to burn the blood of O siris, and to grind down hisbonesto 
power.” T hismethod is altogether contrary to the spirit of love unless the particular D eity be himself 
savage and relentless; as Jehovah or Kali. In such a case the desire to perform constraint and cursing 
may be the sgn of the assmilation of the spirit of the devotee with that of hisGod, and s0 an advance 
to the U nion with HIm. 


. C oncerning the value of this partiailar form of Union or Samadhi. All Samadhi is defined as the ecstatic 


union of a subject and object in consciousness, with the result that a third thing arises which partakes 
in no way of the nature of the two. 


It would seem at first Sght that it isof no importance whatever to choose an object of meditation. For 
example, the Samadhi called Atmadarshana might arise from smple concentration of the thought on 
an imagined triangle, or on the heart. 


But asthe union of two bodiesin chemistry may be endothermic or exothermic, the combination of 
O xygen with N itrogen isgentle, while that of O xygen with H ydrogen isexplosive; and asit isfound 


4 


Re 


4 


RO 


4 


1SS) 


44, 


that the most heat is disengaged as arule by the union of bodies most opposite in character, and that 
the compound resulting from such is most stable, so it seems reasonable to suggest that the most 
important and enduring Samadhi results from the contemplation of the O bject most npposite to the 
devotee. [O n other planes, it hasbeen suggested that the most opposed types make the best marriages 
and produce the healthiest children. T he greatest picturesand operasare those in which violent extremes 
are blended, and so generally in every field of activity. Even in mathematics, the greatest parallelogram 
is formed if the lines composing it are set at right angles. ED.] 


. C ondusions from the foregoing. It may then be suggested to the Philosophus, that although hiswork will 


be harder his reward will be greater if he choose a Deity most remote from his own nature. T his 
method isharder and higher than that of Liber E. For asmple object as there suggested is of the same 
nature as the commonest things of life, while even the meanest D eity is beyond uninitiated human 
understanding. On the same plane, too, Venus is nearer to man than Aphrodite, Aphrodite than Iss, 
Igsthan Babalon, Babalon than N uit. 


Let him decide therefore according to his discretion on the one hand and his aspiration on 
the other; and let not one outrun his fellow. 


. Further concerning the value of this M ethod. Certain objections arise. Firstly, in the nature of all human 


love isilluson, and acertain blindness. N or isthere any true love below the V ell of the Abyss. For this 
reason we give this method to the Philosoyhus, as the reflection of the Exempt Adept, who reflects 
the M agister T empli and the M agus. Let then the Philosophus attain this M ethod as a foundation of 
the higher M ethods to be given to him when he attains those higher grades. 


Another objection lies in the partiality of this M ethod. T his is equally a defect characteristic of the 
Grade. 


. C oncerning a notable danger of S uccess. It may occur that owing to the tremendous power of the Samadhi, 


overcoming all other memoriesasit should and doesdo, that the mind of the devotee may be obsessed, 
go that he declare his particular D eity to be sole God and Lord. T his error has been the foundation of 
all dogmatic religions, and so the cause of more misery than all other errors combined. 


T he Philosophus is peculiarly liable to this because from the nature of the M ethod he cannot remain 
sceptical; he must for the time believe in his particular Deity. But let him (1) consider that this belief 
isonly aweapon in hishands, (2) affirm sufficiently that his D eity isbut an emanation or reflection or 
eidolon of a Being beyond him, as was said in Paragraph 2. For if he fail herein, snce man cannot 
remain permanently in Samadhi, the memorised | mage in his mind will be degraded, and replaced by 
the corresponding Demon, to his utter ruin. 


Therefore, after Success, let him not delight overmuch in his Deity, but rather busy himself with his 
other work, not permitting that which is but a step to become a goal. As it is written also, Liber 
CLX XX V.: “remembering that Philosophy isthe Equilibrium of him that isin the H ouse of Love.” 


C onerning the secre and therites of Blood. D uring this practice it ismost wise that the Philosophusutter 
no word concerning his working, as if it were a Forbidden Love that consumeth him. But let him 
answer fools according to their folly; for nce he cannot conceal his love from his fellows, he must 
speak to them as they may understand. 


And asmany D eitiesdemand sacrifice, one of men, another of cattle, athird of doves, let these sacrifices 
be replaced by the true sacrifices in thine own heart. Y et if thou must symbolise them outwardly for 


4 


o1 


4 


a 


4 


—s 


4 


[oe] 


the hardness of thine heart, let thine own blood, and not another’s, be spilt before that altar. [The 
exceptions to thisrule pertain neither to this practice, nor to this grade. N. Fra A... A.-..] 


N evertheless, forget not that this practice isdangerous, and may cause the manifestation of evil things, 
hostile and malicious, to thy great hurt. 


. Concerning a further saqifice. Of this it shall be understood that nothing is to be spoken; nor need 


anything be spoken to him that hath wisdom to comprehend the number of the paragraph. And this 
sacrifice is fatal beyond all, unless it be a sacrifice indeed. Y et there are those who have dared and 
achieved thereby. 


. Concerning yet a further saqifice. H ere it is spoken of actual mutilation. Such acts are abominable; and 


while they may bring successin thisM ethod, form an absolute bar to all further progress. 


And they are in any case more likely to lead to madness than to Samadhi. H e indeed who purposeth 
them is already mad. 


. Concerning human affection. During this practice thou shalt in no wise withdraw thyself from human 


relations, only figuring to thyself that thy father or thy brother or thy wife isasit were an image of thy 
particular D eity. T hus shall they gain, and not lose, by thy working. O nly in the case of thy wife this 
is difficult, snce she is more to thee than all others, and in this case thou mayst act with temperance, 
lest her personality overcome and destroy that of thy Deity. 


. Concerning the H oly G uardian A ngel. Do thou in no wise confuse this invocation with that. 


49, 


T he Benedicion. And so may the love that passeth all Understanding keep your hearts and minds 
through lota Alpha O megaA |pha-D elta-O micron-N u-Alpha-lotaSigma Alpha Beta Alpha O mega 
and through BABALON of the City of the Pyramids, and through Astarte, the Starry O ne green- 
girdled, inthenaneARARITA.AMN. 


Liber R V vel Spiritus 
sub figura CC VI 


Publication in C lass B 


WEH NOTE: TheLiber omits secions 0 and 1 in earlier publication in EQUINOX I, 7 as well as herve 
T here are signs that this version has been edited, notably changes were made in punduation and qpitaliz ation. 
T he editing appears to be defective, with some material omitted inadvertently. T hereis one original footnote, and 
the others are mine. T here was also a photo pagein theEQUINOX version. 


2. Let the Zelator observe the current of his breath. 


3. Let him investigate the following statements, and prepare a careful record of research. 


a. 


Certain actionsinduce the flow of the breath through the right nostril (Pingala); and, conversely, 
the flow of the breath through Pingala induces certain actions. 


Certain other actionsinduce the flow of the breath through the left nostril (Ida), and conversely. 


Y et athird classof actionsinducethe flow of the breath through both nostrilsat once (Sushumna), 
and conversely. 


T he degree of mental and physical activity isinterdependent with the distance from the nostrils 
at which the breath can be felt by the back of the hand. 


4, First practice. — Let him concentrate his mind upon the act of breathing, saying mentally, “T he breath 
flows in”, “the breath flows out”, and record the results. [This practice may resolve itself into 
M ahasatipatthana (vide Liber X X V) or induce Samadhi. Whichever occurs ould be followed up as 
the right Ingenium of the Zelator, or the advice of his Practicus, may determine.] 


5. Second pracic Pranayama. — Thisis outlined in Liber E. Further, let the Zelator accomplished in 
those practices endeavour to master a cycle of 10, 20, 40 or even 16, 32, 64. But let this be done 
gradually and with due caution. And when he issteady and easy both in Asana and Pranayama, let him 
gill further increase the period. 


Thus let him investigate these statements which follow: — 


a. 


If Pranayama be properly performed, the body will first of all become covered with sweat. 
T hissweat is different in character from that customarily induced by exertion. If the Practitioner 
rub this sweat thoroughly into his body, he will greatly strengthen it. 


The tendency to perspiration will stoy as the practice is continued, and the body become 
automatically rigid. 


Describe this rigidity with minute accuracy. 


C. 


The state of automatic rigidity will develop into a state characterised by violent spasmodic 
movements of which the Practitioner is unconscious, but of whose result he is aware. T his 
result isthat the body hops gently from place to place. After the first two or three occurrences 


of this experience, Asana is not lost. The body appears (on another theory) to have lost its 
weight almost completely and to be moved by an unknown force. 


d. Asadevelopment of thisstage, the body risesinto the air, and remains there for an appreciably 
long period, from asecond to an hour or more. 


Let him further investigate any mental results which may occur. 


. Third Pracica — In order both to economise his time and to develoy his powers, let the Zelator 
practise the deep full breathing which hispreliminary exercises will have taught him during his walks. 
Let him repeat a sacred sentence (mantra) or let him count, in such a way that his footfall beats 
accurately with the rhythm thereof, asis done in dancing. Then let him practise Pranayama, at first 
without the K umbhakam, 


WEH NOTE: Equinox spells this “K umbakham” in this spot only. 


and paying no attention to the nostrilsotherwise than to keep them clear. Let him begin by an indrawing 
of the breath for 4 paces, and a breathing out for 4 paces. Let him increase this gradually to 6.6, 8.8, 
12.12, 16.16 and 24.24, or more if he be able. N ext let him practise in the proper prnportion 4.8, 
6.12, 8.16, 12.24 and so on. Then if he choose, let him recommence the series, adding a gradually 
increasing period of Kumbhakam. 


WEH NOTE: Equinox spells this “K umbhakham”. 


. Fourth pracica. — Following on this third practice, let him quicken his mantra and his pace until the 
walk developsinto adance. T his may also be practised with the ordinary waltz tep, using amantrain 
three-time, such asGR :epslon- pi- epsilon- lambda theta omicron-nu, GR :epslon- pi- epslon-lambda- 
theta omicron-nu, GR :Alpha-rho-tau- epslon-mu-iota dgma; or lao, |ao Sabao; in such cases the 
practice may be combined with devotion to a particular deity: see Liber CLX XV. For the dance as 
such it is better to use amantra of anon-committal character, such asGR :T au-omicron GR :epsilon- 
iota. nu-alpha-iota, GR :T au-omicron GR :K appa-alpha- lambda omicron-nu, GR :T au-omicron 
‘GR :Alpha gammea-alpha- delta omicron-nu, 


WEH NOTE: TheE quinox has this last word as:”’ G R :gamma-alpha-theta- alpha-nu” 
or the like. 


. Fifth pracica — Let him practice mental concentration during the dance, and investigate the following 
experiments: 


a. Thedance becomes independent of the will. 


b. Similar phenomena to those described in 5 (a), (b), (c), (d), occur. 


. A note concerning the depth and fullness of the breathing. In all prnper expiration the last possible 
portion of air should be expelled. In this the muscles of the throat, chest, ribs, and abdomen must be 
fully employed, and aided by the pressing of the upper arms into the flanks, and of the head into the 
thorax. 

In all proper inspiration the last possible portion of air must be drawn into the lungs. 


In all proper holding of the breath, the body must remain absolutely still. 


1 


oO 


1 


Re 


1 


1SS) 


14 


Ten minutes of such practice is ample to induce profuse sweating in any place of atemperature of 17 
Degree C or over. 


The progress of the Zelator in acquiring a depth and fullness of breath should be tested by the 
respirometer. 


T he exercises should be carefully graduated to avoid overstrain and possible damage to the lungs. 


T hisdepth and fullness of breath should be kept as much as possible, even in the rapid exercises, with 
the exception of the sxth practice following. 


. Sixth Pradica. — Let the Zelator breathe as shallowly and rapidly as possible. H e should assume the 


attitude of hismoment of greatest expiration, and breathe only with the muscles of histhroat. H e may 
also practice lengthening the period between each shallow breathing. 


T hismay be combined, when acquired, with concentration on the Visuddhi cakkra, i.e. let him fix his 
mind unwaveringly upon a point in the spine opposte the larynx.) 
WEH NOTE: In the E quinox this parenthetic paragraph is identified as an editorial comment. 


WEH NOTE: from this point, the text in the Equinox diverges from this text. T here is an 
additional step: “11. “Seventh practice.” L et the Z elator breathe as deeply and rapidly as possible.” 
T he step numbered here as “Seventh” is labeled “Eighth” in the E quinox. 


. Seventh practice. — Let the Z elator practise restraint of breathing in the following manner. At any stage 


of breathing let him suddenly hold the breath, enduring the need to breathe until it passes, returns, and 
passes again, and so on until conscioumess is lost, either rising to Samadhi or similar supernormal 
condition, or falling into oblivion. 


. Ninth pradica — Let him practice the usual forms of Pranayama, but let Kumbhakam be used after 


instead of before expiration. Let him gradually increase the period of thisK umbhakam asin the case of 
the other. 


. A note concerning the conditions of these experiments. 


The conditions favourable are dry, bracing air, a warm climate, absence of wind, absence of noise, 
insects and all other disturbing influences, 


N ote that in the early stages of concentration of the mind, such annoyances become negligible. 


aretired situation, Smple food eaten in great moderation at the conclusion of the practicesof morning 
and afternoon, and on no account before practising. Bodily health is almost essential, and should be 
most carefully guarded (See Liber CLX X XV, “T ask of aN eophyte”). A diligent and tractable disciple, 
or the Practicus of the Z elator, should aid him in hiswork. Such adisciple should be noiseless, patient, 
vigilant, prompt, cheerful, of gentle manner and reverent to his master, intelligent to anticipate his 
wants, cleanly and gracious, not given to speech, devoted and unselfish. W ith all this he should be 
fierce and terrible to strangersand all hostile influences, determined and vigorous, increasingly vigilant, 
the guardian of the threshold. 


It isnot desirable that the Zelator should employ any other creature than a man, save in cases of 
necessity. Y et for some of these purposes a dog will serve, for othersa woman. T here are also others 
appointed to serve, but these are not for the Z elator. 


iby 


1 


a 


T 


Tenth Practice. — Let the Zelator experiment if he will with inhalations of oxygen, nitrous oxide, 
carbon dioxide, and other gases mixed in small proportion with his air during his practices. T hese 
experiments are to be conducted with caution in the presence of a medical man of experience, and 
they are only useful as facilitating a Smulacrum of the results of the proper practices and thereby 
enheartening the Z elator. 


. Eleventh practice. — Let the Zelator at an time during the practices, especially during the periods of 


Kumbhakam, throw his will utterly towards his H oly Guardian Angel, directing his eyesinward and 
upward, and turning back histongue asif to swallow it. (T his latter operation is facilitated by severing 
the fraenum linguae, which, if done, should be done by acompetent surgeon. W edo not advise thisor 
any Smilar method of cheating difficulties. Thisis, however, harmless.) 


WEH NOTE: Harmless, that is, if you don’t mind the danger of choking to death in your sleep! 


In this manner the practice is to be raised from the physical to the spiritual- plane, even as the words 
R uh, R uach, Pneuma, Spiritus, Geist, Ghost, and indeed words of almost all languages, have been 
raised from their physical meanings of wind, 


WEH NOTE: TheE quinox adds “air,” to this list. 


breath, or movement, to the spiritual plane. (R V isthe old root meaning Y oni and hence W heel (Fr. 
roue, Lat. rota, wheel) and the corresponding Semitic root means“to go”. Similarly spirit isconnected 
with “spiral”. — Ed.) 


. Let the Zelator attach no credit to any statements that may have been made throughout the course of 


thisinstruction, and reflect that even the counsel which we have given as suitable to the average case 
may be entirely unsuitable to his own. 


Liber YOD 
Sub FiguraDCCCXXXI 


(This book was formerly called V esta. It isreferred to the path of Virgo and the letter Y od.) 
I. 
1. Thisisthe book of drawing all to a point. 


2. Herein are described three methods whereby the consciousness of the M any may be melted to that of the 
One. 


Il. 
FIRST METHOD 


0. Let amagical circle be constructed, and within it an upright T au drawn upon the ground. Let this T au be 
devised into 10 squares (See Liber CM LXIII., Illustration 1.) 


1. Let the magician be armed with the Sword of Art.1 
2. Let him wear the black robe of aN eophyte. 
3. Let asingle flame of camphor burn at the top of the T au, and let there be no other light or ornament. 


In Graumstances where this is inappropriate let him be armed with wand and lamp instead of as in 
text. — N. 


4,Lethim “open” the Temple asin DCLX XI or in any other convenient manner. 


5. Standing at the appropriate quarters, at the edge of the circle, let him banish the 5 elements by the appropriate 
rituals. 


6. Standing at the edge of the circle, let him banish the 7 planets by the appropriate rituals. Let him face the 
actual position of each planet in the heavens at the time of his working. 


7. Let him further banish the twelve signs of the Z odiac by the appropriate rituals, facing each gn in turn. 


8. Let him at each of these 24 banishings make three circumambulationswiddershins, with the agns of H orus 
and H arpocrates in the East as he passes it. 


9, Let him advance to the square of M alkuth in the T au, and perform a ritual of banishing M alkuth. But here 
let him not leave the square to circumambulate the circle, but use the formulaand God-form of H arpocrates. 


10. Let him advance in turn to the squares] esod, H od, N etzach, T iphereth, G eburah, C hesed and banish each 
by appropriate rituals. 


11. And let him know that such ritualsinclude the pronunciation of the appropriate names of G od backwards, 
and also acurse agains the Sephirain respect of all that which it is, for that which distinguishes and separates 
it from K ether. 


12. Advancing to the squares of Binah and C hokmah in turn, let him banish these also. And for that by now an 
awe and trembling shall have taken hold upon him, let him banish these by a supreme ritual of inestimable 
puissance; and let him beware exceedingly lest his will falter or his courage fail. 


13. Finally, let him, advancing to the square of K ether, banish that also by what means he may. At the end 
whereof let him set his foot upon the light, extinguishing it; 


If armed with wand and lamp let him extinguish the light with hishand. — N. 


and, as he falleth, let him fall within the circle. 
SECOND METHOD 


1. Let the H ermit be seated in his Asana, robed, and let him meditate in turn upon every several part of his 
body until that part is so unreal to him that he no longer includes it in his comprehension of himself . For 
example if it be his right foot, let him touch that foot, and be alarmed, thinking, “A foot! ... foot! W hat isthis 
foot? Surely | am not alone in the H ermitage!” And this practice should be carried out not only at the time of 
meditation, but during the day’s work. 


2. T hismeditation isto be assisted by reasoning; as“T hisfootisnot!. If! should lose my foot, | should still be 
|. Thisfoot isamassof changing and decaying flesh, bone, skin, blood, lymph, etc. while! am the U nchanging 
and Immortal Spirit, uniform, not made, unbegotten, formless, self- luminous,” etc. 


3. T hispractice being perfect for each part of the body, let him combine hisworkings until the whole body is 
thus understood as the non-Ego and as illuson. 


4, Let then the H ermit, seated in hisAsana, meditate upon the M uladharaC akkra and its correspondence asa 
power of the mind, and destroy itin the same manner as aforesaid. Also by reasoning: “T hisemotion (memory, 
imagination, intellect, will, asit may be) isnot!. T hisemotion istransient: | am immovable. T his emotion is 
passion. | am peace”, and so on. 


Let the other C akkrasin their turn be thus destroyed, each one with its mental or moral attribute. 


5. In thislet him be aided by hisown psychological analysis, so that no part of hisconscious being be thus left 
undestroyed. And on his thoroughness in this matter may turn his success. 


6. Lastly, having drawn all his being into the highest Sahasrara C akkra, let him remain eternally fixed in 
meditation thereupon. 


7.AUM. 
THIRD METHOD. 
1. Let the H ermit stimulate each of the senses in turn, concentrating upon each until it ceases to stimulate. 


(The senses of sght and touch are extremely difficult to conquer. In the end the Hermit must be utterly 
unable by any effort to see or feel the object of those senses, O .M .) 


2. This being perfected, let him combine them two at atime. For example, let him chew ginger (taste and 
touch), and watch a waterfall (ght and hearing) and watch incense (sight and smell) and crush sugar in his 
teeth (taste and hearing) and so on. 


3. T hese twenty-five practices being accomplished, let him combine them three at atime, then four at atime. 


4, Lastly, let him combine all the sensesin a single object. And herein may a sixth sense be included. H eis 
then to withdraw himself entirely from all the stimulations, perinde ac cadaver, in spite of his own efforts to 
attach himself to them. 


5. By this method it is said that the demons of the R uach, that is, thoughts and memories, are inhibited, and 
We deny it not. But if so be that they arise, let him build a wall between himself and them according to the 
method. 


6. Thus having stilled the voices of the Six, may he obtain in sense the subtlety of the Seventh. 
7.AUMGN. 


(W e add the following, contributed by a friend at that time without the A: A: and its dependent orders. He 
worked out the method himself, and we think it may prove useful to many. O .M.) 


(1) The beginner must first practise breathing regularly through the nose, at the same time trying hard to 
believe that the breath goes to the Ajna and not to the lungs. 


T he Pranayama exercises described in the Equinox Vol.1, No. 4, p. 101 must next be practised, alwayswith 
the idea that Ajna is breathing. 


T ry to realise that power, not air, isbeing drawn into the A jna, isbeing concentrated there during K umbhakam, 
and is vivifying the Ajna during expiration. T ry rather to increase the force of concentration in Ajna than to 
increase so excessively the length of K umbhakam as this is dangerous if rashly undertaken. 


(2) Walk dowly in a quiet place; realise that the legs are moving, and study their movements. U nderstand 
thoroughly that these movementsare due to nerve messages sent down from the brain, and that the controlling 
power liesin the Ajna. The legs are automatic, like those of a wooden monkey: the power in Ajna is that 
which doesthe work, isthat which walks. T hisisnot hard to realise, and should be grasped firmly, ignoring all 
other walking sensations. 


Apply this method to every other muscular movement. 


(3) Lie flat on the back with the feet under a heavy piece of furniture. K eeping the spine straight and the arms 
in aline with the body, rise Sowly to asitting posture, by means of the force residing in the Ajna(i.e. try to 
prevent the mind dwelling one any other exertion or sensation.) 


Then let the body sdowly down to its original position. R epeat this two or three times, every night and 
morning, and Sowly increase the number of repetitions. 


(4) T ry to transfer all bodily sensationsto the Ajna, e.g., “| am cold” should mean “I feel cold”, or better still, 
“lam aware of asensation of cold” — transfer this to the Ajna, “the Ajnais aware”, etc. 


(5) Pain if very sight may easily be transferred to the Ajnaafter alittle practice. T he best method for beginner 
isto imagine he has a pain in the body and then imagine that it passes directly into the Ajna. It does not pass 
through the intervening structures, but goesdirect. A fter continual practice even severe pain may be transferred 
to the Ajna. 


(6) Fix the mind on the base of the spine and then gradually move the thoughts upwards to the Ajna. 


(In this meditation AjnaisaH oly of Holies, but it isdark and empty.) 


Finally, strive hard to drive anger and other obsessing thoughts into the Ajna. T ry to develop atendency to 
think hard of Ajnawhen these thoughts attack the mind, and let Ajna conquer them. 


Beware of thinking of “M y Ajna”. In these meditationsand practices, Ajnadoesnot belong to you; Ajnaisthe 
master and worker, you are the wooden monkey. 


LIBER T aw-Y od-Shin-Aleph-R esh- Bet 
(ThIShAR B) 


VIAE MEMORIAE 


sub figura C M XIII 
Aw. As. 
Publication in C lass B. 
Imprimatur: 

N. FraA.. Aw. 


000. M ay be. 


[00. It has not been possible to construct this book on a basis of pure Scepticism. This matters less, as the 
practice leads to Scepticism, and it may be through it.] 


0. This book isnot intended to lead to the supreme attainment. O n the contrary, its results define the separate 
being of the Exempt Adept from the rest of the U niverse, and discover his relation to that U niverse. 


1. Itisofsuch importance to the Exempt A dept that W e cannot overrate it. Let him in no wise adventure 
the plunge into the A byss until he have accomplished thisto his most perfectest satisfaction. 


2. Forin the Abyssno effort is anywise possible. T he Abyssis passed by virtue of the mass of the Adept 
and his Karma. T wo forces impel him: (1) the attraction of Binah, (2) the impulse of his K arma; and 
the ease and even the safety of his passage depend on the strength and direction of the latter. 


3. Should one rashly dare the passage, and take the irrevocable O ath of the Abyss, he might be lost 
therein through AEons of incalculable agony; he might even be thrown back upon Chesed, with the 
terrible K arma of failure added to his original imperfection. 


4, I|tiseven said that in certain circumstancesit is possible to fall altogether from the T ree of Life, and to 
attain the T owers of the Black Brothers. But W e hold that this is not possible for any adept who has 
truly attained his grade, or even for any man who has really sought to help humanity even for asingle 
second,<<T hose in possession of Liber CLX X XV. will note that in every grade but one the aspirant is pledged to 
serve his inferiors in the O rder.>> and that although hisaspiration have been impure through vanity or any 
gmilar imperfection. 


5. Let then the Adept who finds the result of these meditations unsatisfactory refuse the O ath of the 
Abyss, and live so that hisK armagainsstrength and direction suitable to the task at some future period. 


6. Memory is essential to the individual conscioumess, otherwise the mind were but a blank sheet on 
which shadows are cast. But we see that not only does the mind retain impressions, but that it is so 


7. 


8. 


10. 


T., 


12: 


constituted that its tendency is to retain some more excellently than others. T hus the great classical 
scholar, Sir Richard Jebb, was unable to learn even the schoolboy mathematics required for the 
preliminary examination at C ambridge U niversity, and a special act of the authorities was required in 
order to admit him.{WEH NOTE: Normally this would be an exercise of M edieval privilege by a R oyal or other 
nobility. W ars have been lost over such “Grace” being given in the qualification of officers!} 


The first method to be described has been detailed in Bhikkhu Ananda M etteya’s “T raining of the 
Mind” (EQUINOX, |. 5, pp. 28-59, and especially pp. 48-56). We have little to alter or to add. Its 
most important result, as regards the O ath of the Abyss, isthe freedom from all desire or clinging to 
anything which it gives. Its second result is to aid the adept in the second method, by supplying him 
with further data for his investigation. 


T he stimulation of memory useful in both practicesisalso achieved by Smple meditation (Liber E ), in 
a certain stage of which old memories arise unbidden. T he adept may then practise this, topping at 
that stage, and encouraging instead of suppressing the flashes of memory. 


Zoroaster has said, “Explore the R iver of the Soul, whence or in what order you have come; so that 
although you have become aservant to the body, you may again rise to that O rder (the A.:. A.:.) from 
which you descended, joining W orks (K amma) to the Sacred R eason (the T ao).” 


The R esult of the Second M ethod isto show the Adept to what end his powers are destined. W hen 
he has passed the Abyss and become NEM O, the return of the current causes him “to appear in the 
H eaven of Jupiter asa morning star or as an evening star.” [T he formula of the Great W ork “Solve et 
Coagula” may be thus interpreted. Solve, the dissolution of the Self in the Infinite; C oagula, the 
presentation of the Infinite in aconcrete form to the outer. Both are necessary to the T ask of aM aster 
of the Temple.] In other words, he should discover what may be the nature of his work. Thus 
M ohammed wasa Brother reflected into N etzach, Buddha a Brother reflected into H od, or, assome 
say, Daath. T he present manifestation of Frater P. to the outer isin T iphereth, to the inner in the path 
of Leo. 


First M ethod. Let the Exempt Adept first train himself to think backwards by external means, as set 
forth here following. 


(“a”) Let him learn to write backwards, with either hand. 
(“b”) Let him learn to walk backwards. 


(“c”) Lethim constantly watch, if convenient, cinematograph films, and listen to phonograph records, 
reversed, and let him so accustom himself to these that they appear natural, and appreciable asa whole. 


(“d”) Let him practise speaking backwards, thusfor “I am He” let him say, “Eh mal”. 


(“e”) Let him learn to read backwards. In thisit is difficult to avoid cheating one’s self, as an expert 
reader sees a sentence at a glance. Let his disciple read aloud to him backwards, sowly at first, then 
more quickly. 


(“f") Of hisown ingenium, let him devise other methods. 


In thishis brain will at first be overwhelmed by asense of utter confusion; secondly, it will endeavour 
to evade the difficulty by a trick. The brain will pretend to be working backwards when it is really 
normal. It isdifficult to describe the nature of the trick, but it will be quite obviousto anyone who has 


13: 


14. 


15; 


16. 


17. 


ig: 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


done practices (“a”) and (“b”) for aday or two. T hey become quite easy, and he will think that he is 
making progress, an illusion which close analysis will dispel. 


H aving begun to train his brain in this manner, and obtained some little success, let the Exempt 
Adept, seated in his Asana, think first of his present attitude, next of the act of being seated, next of his 
entering the room, next of hisrobing, et cetera, exactly asit happened. And let him most strenuoudy 
endeavour to think each act as happening backwards It isnot enough to think: “I am seated here, and 
before that | wasstanding, and before that | entered the room,” etc. T hat seriesisthe trick detected in 
the preliminary practices. T he seriesmust not run “ghi-def- abc” but “ihgfedcba” : not “horse aisthis” 
but “esroh asi sht”. To obtain this thoroughly well, practice (“c”) is very useful. The brain will be 
found to struggle constantly to right itself, soon accustoming itself to accept “esroh” as merely another 
glyph for “horse.” T his tendency must be constantly combated. 


In the early stages of this practice the endeavour should be to meticulous minuteness of detail in 
remembering actions; for the brain’s habit of thinking forwards will at first be insuperable. T hinking of 
large and complex actions, then, will give aserieswhich we may symbolically write “opqrstu-hijklmn- 
abcdefg.” If these be split into detail, we shall have “stu- pqr-o— mn-kl-hij— fg-cde-ab,” which is 
much nearer to the ideal “utsrqponmlkjihgfedcba.” 


Capacities differ widely, but the Exempt Adept need have no reason to be discouraged if after a 
month’scontinuouslabour he find that now and again for afew secondshisbrain really worksbackw ards. 


The Exempt Adept should concentrate his efforts upon obtaining a perfect picture of five minutes 
backwards rather than upon extending the time covered by hismeditation. For thispreliminary training 
of the brain isthe PonsAsnorum of the whole process. 


Thisfive minutes exercise being satisfactory, the Exempt A dept may extend the same at hisdiscretion 
to cover an hour, aday, aweek, and so on. Difficulties vanish before him ashe advances, the extension 
from a day to the course of his whole life will not prove so difficult as the perfecting of the five 
minutes. 


This practice should be repeated at least four times daily, and progress is shown firstly by the ever 
easier running of the brain, secondly by the added memories which arise. 


It isuseful to reflect during this practice, which in time becomes almost mechanical, upon the way in 
which effects spring from causes. T his aids the mind to link its memories, and prepares the adept for 
the preliminary practice of the Second M ethod. 


H aving allowed the mind to return for some hundred timesto the hour of birth, it should be encouraged 
to endeavour to penetrate beyond that period. If it be properly trained to run backwards, there will be 
little difficulty in doing this, although it is one of the distinct steps in the practice. 


It may be then that the memory will persuade the adept of some previous existence. W here this is 
possible, let it be checked by an appeal to facts, as follows: 


It often occurs to men that on visting a place to which they have never been, it appears familiar. T his 
may arise from aconfuson of thought or a dipping of the memory, but it is conceivably a fact. 


If, then, the adept “remember” that he wasin a previouslifein some city, say Cracow, which he has 
in thislife never visted, let him describe from memory the appearance of C racow, and of itsinhabitants, 


23; 


24. 


25. 
26. 


2: 


28. 


29, 


30. 


a: 


getting down their names. Let him further enter into details of the city and its customs. And having 
done this with great minuteness, let him confirm the same by consultation with historians and 
geographers, or by apersonal visit, remembering (both to the credit of his memory and its discredit) 
that historians, geographers, and himself are alike fallible. But let him not trust hismemory to assert its 
conclugonsas fact, and act thereupon, without most adequate confirmation. 


T his process of checking hismemory should be practised with the earlier memories of childhood and 
youth by reference to the memoriesand recordsof others, alwaysreflecting upon the fallibility even of 
such safeguards. 


All this being perfected, so that the memory reaches back into aeons incalculably distant, let the 
Exempt Adept meditate upon the fruitlessness of all those years, and upon the fruit thereof, severing 
that which istranstory and worthless from that which is eternal. And it may be that he being but an 
Exempt Adept may hold all to be savourless and full of sorrow. 


This being so, without reluctance will he swear the O ath of the Abyss. 


Second M ethod. Let the Exempt Adept, fortified by the practice of the First M ethod, enter the 
preliminary practice of the Second M ethod. 


Second M ethod. Preliminary Practices. Let him, seated in his Asana, consider any event, and trace it 
to its immediate causes. And let this be done very fully and minutely. H ere, for example, is a body 
erect and motionless. Let the adept consider the many forces which maintain it; firstly, the attraction 
of the earth, of the sun, of the planets, of the farthest stars, nay, of every mote of dustin the room, one 
of which (could it be annihilated) would cause that body to move, although so imperceptibly. Also 
the regstance of the floor, the pressure of the air, and all other external conditions Secondly, the 
internal forces which sustain it, the vast and complex machinery of the skeleton, the muscles, the 
blood, the lymph, the marrow, all that makes up a man. Thirdly the moral and intellectual forces 
involved, the mind, the will, the conscioumess Let him continue thiswith unremitting ardour, searching 
N ature, leaving nothing out. 


N ext, let him take one of the immediate causes of his position, and trace out its equilibrium. For 
example, the will. W hat determines the will to aid in holding the body erect and motionless? 


T his being discovered, let him choose one of the forces which determined his will, and trace out that 
in similar fashion; and let this process be continued for many days until the interdependence of all 
thingsisatruth assimilated in hisinmost being. 


This being accomplished, let him trace his own history with special reference to the causes of each 
event. And in thispractice he may neglect to some extent the universal forces which at all timesact on 
all, asfor example the attraction of masses, and let him concentrate his attention upon the principal and 
determining or effective causes. 


For instance, he is seated, perhaps, in a country place in Spain. W hy? Because Spain is warm and 
suitable for meditation, and because cities are noisy and crowded. W hy isSpain warm? and why does 
he wish to meditate? W hy choose warm Spain rather than warm India? T o the last question: Because 
Spain isnearer to hishome. T hen why ishishome near Spain? B ecause his parents were Germans And 
why did they go to Germany? And so during the whole meditation. 


On another day, let him begin with a question of another kind, and every day devise new questions, 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


NO 


3; 


4, 


ol 


(o>) 


| 


[oe] 


not only concerning his present situation, but also abstract questions. Thus let him connect the 
prevalence of water upon the surface of the globe with its necessity to such life aswe know, with the 
specific gravity and other physical properties of water, and let him perceive ultimately through all this 
the necessity and concord of things, not concord asthe schoolmen of old believed, making all things 
for man’s benefit or convenience, but the essential mechanical concord whose final law is “inertia.” 
And in these meditationslet him avoid asif it were the plague any speculation sentimental or fantastic. 


. Second M ethod. T he Practice Proper. H aving then perfected in his mind these conceptions, let him 


apply them to his own career, forging the links of memory into the chain of necessity. 


And let thisbe hisfinal question: T o what purpose am | fitted? O f what service can my being prove to 
the Brothers of the A.:. A.-. if | crossthe Abyss, and am admitted to the City of the Pyramids? 


N ow that he may clearly understand the nature of this question, and the method of solution, let him 
study the reasoning of the anatomist who reconstructs an animal from asingle bone. T 0 take asmple 
example. 


Suppos, having lived all my life among savages, aship iscast upon the shore and wrecked. U ndamaged 
among the cargo isa “Victoria.” W hat isits use? T he wheels speak of roads, their dimness of snooth 
roads, the brake of hilly roads. T he shafts show that it wasmeant to be drawn by an animal, their height 
and length suggest an animal of the size of ahorse. T hat the carriage isopen suggestsa climate tolerable 
at any rate for part of the year. T he height of the box suggest crowded streets, or the spirited character 
of the animal employed to draw it. T he cushionsindicate itsuse to convey men rather than merchandise; 
its hood that rain sometimes falls, or that the sun is at times powerful. The springs would imply 
considerable skill in metals; the varnish much attainment in that craft. 


. Similarly, let the adept consider of his own case. N ow that he is on the point of plunging into the 


Abyssa giant W hy? confronts him with uplifted club. 


. There isno minutest atom of his compostion which can be withdrawn without making him some 


other than he is; no useless moment in his past. Then what is his future? The “Victoria” is not a 
waggon; it isnot intended for carting hay. It isnot a sulky; it is uselessin trotting races. 


. So the adept has military genius, or much knowledge of Greek; how do these attainments help his 


purpose, or the purpose of the Brothers? H e was put to death by Calvin, or stoned by H ezekiah; asa 
gake he was killed by a villager, or as an elephant dain in battle under H amilcar. How do such 
memories help him? U ntil he have thoroughly mastered the reason for every incident in his past, and 
found a purpose for every item of his present equipment, [A brother known to me was repeatedly 
baffled in this meditation. But one day being thrown with his horse over a sheer cliff of forty feet, and 
escaping without a scratch or abruse, he wasreminded of hismany narrow escapes from death. T hese 
proved to be the last factorsin his problem, which, thus completed, solved itself in amoment. O.M. 
{WEH NOTE ADDENDA: Here Crowley speaks of himself, the event being noted in his China walk account.}] he 
cannot truly answer even those T hree Q uestion what were first put to him, even theT hree Q uestions 
of the R itual of the Pyramid; he is not ready to swear the O ath of the Abyss. 


. But being thus enlightened, let him swear the O ath of the Abyss; yea, let him swear the O ath of the 


Abyss. 


Liber B 
vel M agi 
sub Figura | 


00. One isthe M agus: twain His forces, four His weapons. T hese are the seven Spirits of U nrighteousness, 
seven vultures of evil. T hisis the art and craft of the M agus but glamour. H ow shall H e destroy H imself? 


0. Y et the M agus hath power upon the M other both directly and through love. And the M agusis Love, and 
bindeth together T hat and T hisin H is C onjuration. 


1. In the beginning doth the M agusspeak T ruth, and send forth I Illusion and Falsehood to endave the soul. Y et 
therein isthe M ystery of R edemption. 


2. By his Wisdom made He the W orlds: the W orld that isGod is none other han He. 
3. N ow then shall H e end H is Speech with Silence? For H eis Speech. 
4, Heisthe First and the Last. H ow shall H e cease to number H imself? 


5. By aM agusisthiswriting made known through the mind of aM agister. The one uttereth clearly, and the 
other U nderstandeth; yet the W ord is falsehood, and the U nderstanding darkness. And this saying is of All 
Truth. 


6. N evertheless it is written; for there be times of darkness, and this as alamp therein. 

7. With the W and createth H e. 

8. W ith the Cup preserveth He. 

9. W ith the Dagger destroyeth H e. 

10. With the Coin redeemeth H e. 

11. His weapons fulfil the wheel; and on W hat Axle that turneth isnot known unto Him. 


12. From all these actions must H e cease before the curse of H isGrade is uplifted from Him. Before H e attain 
to that which existeth without Form. 


13. And if at this time H e be manifested upon earth asa M an, and therefore is this present writing, let this be 
H ismethod, that the curse of His grade, and the burden of H is attainment, be uplifted from H im. 


14, Let Him beware of abstinence from action. For the curse of H isgrade isthat he must speak T ruth, that the 
Falsehood thereof may enslave the souls of men. Let Him then utter that without Fear, that the Law may be 
fulfilled. And according to HisO riginal N ature will that law be shapen, so that one may declare gentleness and 
quietness, being an Hindu; and another fierceness and servility, being a Jew; and yet another ardour and 
manliness, being an Arab. Y et this matter toucheth the mystery of Incarnation, and isnot here to be declared. 


15. N ow the grade of aM agister teacheth the M ystery of Sorrow, and the grade of aM agus the M ystery of 


Change, and the grade of |psssimusthe M ystery of Selflessness, which is called also the M ystery of Pan. 


16. Let the M agusthen contemplate each in turn, raising it to the ultimate power of Infinity. W herein Sorrow 
isJoy, and Change is Stability, and Selflesmess is Self. For the interplay of the parts hath no action upon the 
whole. And thiscontemflation shall be performed not by smple meditation — how much lessthen by reason! 
— but by the method which shall have been given unto Him in Hisinitiation to the Grade. 


17. Following which method, it shall be easy for Him to combine that rinity from its elements, and further to 
combine Sat-C hit-Ananda, and Light, Love, Life, three by three into nine that are one, in which meditation 
success shall be T hat which was first adumbrated to Him in the grade of Practicus (which reflecteth M ercury 
into the lowest world) in Liber X X VII, “H ere is N othing under its three forms.” 


18. And thisis the O pening of the Grade of | psissimus, and by the Buddhists it is called the trance N erodha- 
Samapatti. 


19. And woe, woe, woe, yea woe, and again woe, woe, woe, unto seven times be H is that preacheth not H is 
law to men! 


20. And woe also be unto H im that refuseth the curse of the grade of aM agus, and the burden of theA ttainment 
thereof. 


21. And in the word CHAOS let the book be sealed, yea, let the Book be sealed. 


Liber R esh vel H elios 
sub figura C C 


Publication in class D 


. These are the adorationsto be performed by aspirants to the A.*. A." 
. Let him greet the Sun at dawn, facing East, giving the sign of his grade. And let him say in aloud 
voice: 


H ail unto Thee who art R ain T hy rising, even unto T hee who art R ain T hy strength, who travellest 
over the H eavensin T hy bark at the U prising of the Sun. 


T ahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and R aH oor abideth at the helm. 

H ail unto T hee from the Abodes of N ight! 

. Also at Noon, let him greet the Sun, facing South, giving the sign of his grade. And let him say ina 
loud voice: 


H ail unto Thee who art Ahathoor in Thy triumphing, even unto Thee who art Ahathoor in T hy 
beauty, who travellest over the heavens in thy bark at the M id- course of the Sun. 


T ahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and R a-H oor abideth at the helm. 

H ail unto T hee from the Abodes of M orning! 

. Also, at Sunset, let him greet the Sun, facing W est, giving the sgn of his grade. And let him say ina 
loud voice: 


H ail unto T heewho art T um in T hy setting, even unto T heewho art T um inT hy joy, who travellest 
over the H eavensin T hy bark at the Down-going of the Sun. 


T ahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and R aH oor abideth at the helm. 

H ail unto T hee from the Abodes of D ay! 

. Lastly, at Midnight, let him greet the Sun, facing N orth, giving the sgn of his grade, and let him say 
in aloud voice: 


H ail unto thee who art Khephrain T hy hiding, even unto T hee who art Khephrain T hy silence, who 
travellest over the heavensin T hy bark at the M idnight H our of the Sun. 


T ahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and R aH oor abideth at the helm. 
H ail unto T hee from the Abodes of Evening. 


. And after each of these invocationsthou shalt give the sgn of slence, and afterward thou shalt perform 
the adoration that istaught thee by thy Superior. And then do thou composeT hyself to holy meditation. 


. Also itisbetter if in these adorationsthou assume the God- form of W hom thou adores, asif thou didst 
unite with Him in the adoration of T hat which is beyond Him. 


. Thus shalt thou ever be mindful of the Great W ork which thou hast undertaken to perform, and thus 


Shalt thou be strengthened to pursue it unto the attainment of the Stone of the W ise, the Summum 
Bonum, T rue W isdom and Perfect H appiness. 


Liber Ill vel Jugorum 


0. 


0. Behold the Y oke upon the neck of the O xen! Isit not thereby that the Field shall be ploughed? T he Y oke 
is heavy, but joineth together them that are separate — Glory to Nuit and to Hadit, and to Him that hath 
given us the Symbol of the R osy C ross! 


Glory unto the Lord of the W ord Abrahadabra, and Glory unto Him that hath given us the Symbol of the 
Ankh, and of the Cross within the Circle! 


1. Three are the Beasts wherewith thou must plough the Field; the U nicorn, the H orse, and the Ox. And 
these shalt thou yoke in atriple yoke that is governed by O ne W hip. 


2. N ow these Beasts run wildly upon the earths and are not easly obedient to the M an. 


3. Nothing shall be said here of Cerberus, the great B east of H ell that is every one of these and all of these, 
even as A thanagus hath foreshadowed. For this matter 


(i.e. the matter of C eveberus). 
isnot of Tiphereth without, but T iphereth within. 
l. 


0. TheU nicorn isspeech. M an, rule thy Speech! H ow else shalt thou master the Son, and answer the M agician 
at the right hand gateway of the C rown? 


1. H ere are practices. Each may last for aweek or more. 
(a) Avoid using sme common word, such as “and” or “the” or “but”; use a paraphrase. 
(b) Avoid using some letter of the alphabet, such as“t”, or “s’. or “m”:; use a paraphrase. 
(c) Avoid using the pronouns and adjectives of the first person; use a paraphrase. 

Of thine own ingenium devise others. 


2. On each occasion that thou art betrayed into saying that thou art sworn to avoid, cut thyself sharply upon 
the writs or forearm with arazor; even as thou shouldst beat a disobedient dog. Feareth not the U nicorn the 
claws and teeth of the Lion? 


3. Thine arm then serveth thee both for awarning and for arecord. T hou shalt write down thy daily progress 
in these practices, until thou art perfectly vigilant at all times over the least word that dippeth from thy 
tongue. 


Thus bind thyself, and thou shalt be for ever free. 
ll. 


0. The Horse isAction. M an, rule thine Action. H ow else shalt thou master the Father, and answer the Fool 
at the Left H and Gateway of the Crown? 


1. Here are practices. Each may last for a week, or more. 
(a) Avoiding lifting the left arm above the waist. 
(b) Avoid crossing the legs. 

Of thine own ingenium devise others, 


2. On each occasion that thou art betrayed into doing that thou art sworn to avoid, cut thyself sharply upon 
the wrist or forearm with arazor; even asthou chouldst beat a disobedient dog. Feareth not the H orse the teeth 
of the Camel? 


3. Thine arm then serveth thee both for awarning and for arecord. T hou shalt write down thy daily progress 
in these practices, until thou art perfectly vigilant at all times over the least action that Sippeth from the least 
of thy fingers. 


Thus bind thyself, and thou shalt be for ever free. 
Hl. 


0. The Ox is Thought. M an, rule thy Thought! H ow else shalt thou master the H oly Spirit, and answer the 
H igh Priestessin the M iddle Gateway of the Crown? 


1. H ere are practices. Each may last for aweek or more. 


(a) Avoid thinking of adefinite subject and all things connected with it, and let that subject be one which 
commonly occupies much of thy thought, being frequently stimulated by sense- perceptions or the 
conversation of others. 


(b) By some device, such as the changing of thy ring from one finger to another, create in thyself two 

personalities, the thoughts of one being within entirely different limits from that of the other, the 
common ground being the necessities of life. 
For instance, let A be a man of strong passions, skilled in the H oly Q abalah, a vegetarian, and a keen 
“reacionary” politidan. Let B bea bloodless and asceticthinker, ocupied with business and family cares, an 
eater of meat, and a keen progressive politidan. L et no thought proper to “A” arise when the ringis on the 
“B” finger, and vice versa. 


Of thine own Ingenium devise others. 


2. On each occasion that thou art betrayed into thinking that thou art sworn to avoid, cut thyself sharply upon 
the wrist or forearm with a razor; even as thou shouldst beat a disobedient dog. Feareth not the O x the Goad 
of the Ploughman? 


3. Thine arm then serveth thee both for awarning and for arecord. T hou shalt write down thy daily progress 
in these practices, until thou art perfectly vigilant at all times over the least thought that ariseth in thy brain. 


Thus bind thyself, and thou shalt be for ever free. 


LIBER CHETH 
VEL 
VALLVM ABIEGNI 
SVB FIGVRA 


CLVI 
A.’. AL. 
Publication in C lass A. 
Imprimatur: 
N. FraA.’. Aw’, 


1. Thisis the secret of the H oly Graal, that is the sacred vessel of our Lady the Scarlet W oman, Babalon the 
M other of Abominations, the bride of C haos, that rideth upon our Lord the Beast. 


2. Thou shalt drain out thy blood that is thy life into the golden cup of her fornication. 
3. Thou shalt mingle thy life with the universal life. Thou shalt keep not back one drop. 


4. T hen shall thy brain be dumb, and thy heart beat no more, and all thy life shall go from thee; and thou shalt 
be cast out upon the midden, and the birds of the air shall feast upon thy flesh, and thy bonesshall whiten in the 
sun. 


5. Then shall the winds gather themselves together, and bear thee up asit were a little heap of dust in a sheet 
that hath four corners, and they shall give it unto the guardians of the abyss. 


6. And because there isno life therein, the guardians of the abyss shall bid the angels of the winds pass by. And 
the angels shall lay thy dust in the City of the Pyramids, and the name thereof shall be no more. {25} 


7. N ow therefore that thou mayest achieve thisritual of the H oly Graal, do thou divest thyself of all thy goods. 
8. Thou hast wealth; give it unto them that have need thereof, yet no desire toward it. 


9. Thou hast health; slay thyself in the fervour of thine abandonment unto O ur Lady. Let thy flesh hang loose 
upon thy bones, and thine eyes glare with thy quenchless lust unto the Infinite, with thy passon for the 
Unknown, for H er that is beyond K nowledge the accursed one. 


10. T hou hast love; tear thy mother from thine heart, and spit in the face of thy father. Let thy foot trample the 
belly of thy wife, and let the babe at her breast be the prey of dogs and vultures. 


11. For if thou dost not this with thy will, then shall We do this despite thy will. So that thou attain to the 
Sacrament of the Graal in the Chapel of A bominations. 


12. And behold! if by stealth thou keep unto thyself one thought of thine, then shalt thou be cast out into the 
abyss for ever; and thou shalt be the lonely one, the eater of dung, the afflicted in the Day of Be-with-Us. 


13. Y ea! verily thisisthe T ruth, thisisthe T ruth, thisisthe T ruth. U nto thee shall be granted joy and health 
and wealth and wisdom when thou art no longer thou. 


14. Then shall every gain be anew sacrament, and it shall not defile thee; thou shalt revel with the wanton in 
the market- place, and the virgins shall fling roses upon thee, and the merchants bend their knees and bring 
thee gold and spices. Also young boys shall pour wonderful wines for thee, and the singers and the dancers 
Shall sing and dance for thee. {26} 


15. Y et shalt thou not be therein, for thou shalt be forgotten, dust lost in dust. 


16. N or shall the aeon itself avail thee in this, for from the dust shall a white ash be prepared by H ermes the 
Invigble. 


17. And thisis the wrath of God, that these things hnould be thus. 
18. And thisisthe grace of God, that these things should be thus. 


19. W herefore| charge you that ye come unto mein the Beginning; for if ye take but one step in thisPath, ye 
must arrive inevitably at the end thereof. 


20. This Path is beyond Life and D eath; it isalso beyond Love; but that ye know not, for ye know not Love. 


21. And the end thereof isknown not even unto O ur Lady or to the Beast whereon She rideth; nor unto the 
Virgin her daughter nor unto Chaos her lawful Lord; but unto the Crowned Child is it known? It is not 
known if it be Known. 


22. T herefore unto H adit and unto N uit be the glory in the End and the Beginning; yea, in the End and the 
Beginning. 


OU Oe eg et I 


15; 


16. 


Liber A’ASH vel C apriconi Pneumatici 
sub figura CC CLX X 


Publication in C lass A 


Gnarled O ak of God! In thy branchesis the lightning nested! Above thee hangs the Eyeless H awk. 
Thou art blasted and black! Supremely solitary in that heath of scrub. 

U p! The R uddy clouds hang over thee! It isthe storm. 

T here is a flaming gash in the sky. 

Up. 


T hou art tossed about in the grip of the storm for an aeon and an aeon and an aeon. But thou givest not 
thy sap; thou fallest not. 


Only in the end shalt thou give up thy sap when the great God F.I.A.T . isenthroned on the day of Be- 
With-Us, 


For two thingsare done and athird thing isbegun. Issand O srrisare given over to incest and adultery. 
H orusleapsup thrice armed from the womb of hismother. H arpocrateshistwin ishidden within him. 
SET ishisholy covenant, that he shall display in the great day of M.A.A.T., that is being interpreted 
the M aster of the Temple of A.’. A.’., whose name isT ruth. 


N ow in thisisthe magical power known. 


. Itislike the oak that hardens itself and bears up against the storm. It isweather- beaten and scarred and 


confident like a sea captain. 


. Also it traineth like a hound in the leash. 
. It hath pride and great subtlety. Y ea, and glee also! 
. Let the M agus act thusin his conjuration. 


. Let him sit and conjure; let him draw himself together in that forcefulness; let him rise next swollen 


and straining; let him dash back the hood from his head and fix his basilisk eye upon the sigil of the 
demon. T hen let him sway the force of him to and fro like asatyr in sence, until the W ord burst from 
his throat. 


Then let him not fall exhausted, although he 
WEH NOTE: EQUINOX I, 6 has“...the might...” 


might have been ten thousandfold the human; but that which floodeth him isthe infinite mercy of the 
Genitor-G enitrix of the U niverse, whereof he is the V essel. 


N or do thou deceive thyself. It is easy to tell the live force from the dead matter. It isno easier to tell 


17; 


18. 


the live nake from the dead snake. 


Also concerning vows. Be obstinate, and be not obstinate. U nderstand that the yielding of the Y oni is 
one with the lengthening of the Lingam. T hou art both these; and thy vow is but the rustling of the 
wind on M ount M eru. 


How 


WEH NOTE: EQUINOX I, 6 has “N ow...” 


35. 


Shalt thou adore me who am the Eyeand theT ooth, the Goat of the Spirit, the Lord of Creation. | am 
the Eye in the T riangle, the Silver Star that ye adore. 


. | am Baphomet, that isthe Eightfold W ord that shall be equilibrated with the T hree. 
. There isno act or passion that shall not be an hymn in mine honour. 
. All holy things and all symbolic things shall be my sacraments. 


. These animals are sacred unto me; the goat, and the duck, and the ass, and the gazelle, the man, the 


woman and the child. 


. All corpses are sacred unto me; they shall not be touched save in mine eucharis. All lonely places are 


sacred unto me; where one man gathereth himself together in my name, there will | leap forth in the 
midst of him. 


. | am the hideous god, and who mastereth me is uglier than |. 
. Yet | give more than Bacchus and Apollo; my gifts exceed the olive and the horse. 
. Who worshippeth me must worship me with many rites. 


. | am concealed with all concealments; when the M ost Holy Ancient One is stripped and driven 


through the market place, | am still secret and apart. 


.Whom | love! chastise with many rods. 
. All things are sacred to me; no thing is sacred from me. 
. For there isno holiness where | am not. 


. Fear not when | fall in the fury of the torm; for mine acorns are blown afar by the wind; and verily | 


Shall rise again, and my children about me, so that we shall uplift our forest in Eternity. 


. Eternity isthe storm that covereth me. 


. | am Existence, the Existence that existeth not save through its own Existence, that is beyond the 


Existence of Existences, and rooted deeper than the N o-T hing-T ree in the Land of N o-T hing. 


. Now therefore thou knowest when | am within T hee, when my hood is spread over thy skull, when 


my might is more than the penned Indus, and resistless as the Giant Glacier. 


For as thou art before alewd woman in T hy nakedness in the bazaar, sucked up by her slyness and 


gniles, so art thou wholly and no more in part before the symbol of the beloved, though it be but a 
Pisacha or aY antraor aDeva. 


36. And in all shalt thou create the Infinite Bliss and the next link of the Infinite C hain. 


37. Thischain reaches from Eternity to Eternity, ever in triangles— isnot my symbol atriangle? — ever 
in circles— isnot the symbol of the Beloved a circle? T herein is all progress base illusion, for every 
circle is alike and every triangle alike! 


38. But the progress isprogress, and progressisrapture, constant, dazzling, showersof light, wavesof dew, 
flames of the hair of the Great Goddess, flowers of the roses that are about her neck, Amen! 


39. Therefore lift up thyself as! am lifted up. 
WEH NOTE: EQUINOX I, 6 makes this sentence the first of the following paragraph. 


H old thyself in as! am master to accomplish. At the end, be the end far distant as the stars that liein the 
navel of N uit, do thou day thyself as! at the end am dain, in the death that islife, in the peace that is 
mother of war, in the darkness that holds light in his hand, as an harlot that plucks a jewel from her 
nostrils. 


40. So therefore the beginning is delight, and the end is delight, and delight isin the midst, even asthe 
Indus is water in the cavern of the glacier, and water among the greater hills and the lesser hills and 
through the ramparts of the hills and through the plains, and water at the mouth thereof when it leaps 
forth into the mighty sea, yea, into the mighty sea. 


(T he Interpretation of this Book will be given to members of the Grade of Dominus Liminis on application, 
each to his Adeptus.) 


LIBER A 
vel 
ARMORUM 
SUB FIGURA CDXII 


“,., the obeah and the wanga; the work of the wand and the work of the sword; these he shall learn and teach.” 
Liber AL, I, 37. 


T he Pantacle. 


T ake pure wax, or aplate of gold, silver- gilt or Electrum M agicum. T he diameter shall be eight inches, and 
the thickness half an inch. 


Let the N eophyte by his understanding and ingenium devise a symbol to represent the U niverse. 

Let his Zelator approve thereof. 

Let the N eophyte engrave the same upon the plate with his own hand and weapon. 

Let it when finished be consecrated as he hath xkill to formform, and kept wrapped in silk of emerald green. 
T he D agger. 


Let the Zelator take a piece of pure steel, and beat it, grind it, sharpen it, and polish it, according to the art of 
the swordsmith. 


Let him further take a piece of oak wood, and carve ahilt. The length shall be eight inches. 

Let him by his understanding and ingenium devise a W ord to represent the U niverse. 

Let his Practicus approve thereof. 

Let the Z elator engrave the same upon his dagger with hisown hand and instruments. 

Let him further gild the wood of his hilt. 

Let it when finished be consecrated as he hath skill to formform, and kept wrapped in silk of golden yellow. 
The Cup. 


Let the Practicus take a piece of Silver and fashion therefrom a cup. The height shall be 8 inches, and the 
diameter 3 inches. 


Let him by his understanding and ingenium devise aN umber to represent the U niverse. 


Let his Philosophus approve thereof. 


Let the Practicus engrave the same upon his cup with hisown hand and instrument. 

Let it when finished be consecrated as he hath skill to formform, and kept wrapped in silk of azure blue. 
The Baculum. 

Let the Philosophus take a rod of copper, of length eight inches and diameter half an inch. 

Let him fashion about the top atriple flame of gold. 

Let him by his understanding and ingenium devise a D eed to represent the U niverse. 

Let hisDominusLiminis approve thereof. 

Let the Philosophus formform the same in such a way that the Baculum may be partaker therein. 

Let it when finished be consecrated ashe hath xkill to formform, and kept wrapped in silk of fiery scarlet. 

The Lamp. 
Let the Dominus Liminis take pure lead, tin, and quicksilver, with platinum, and, if need be, glass. 


Let him by hisunderstanding and ingenium devise aM agick Lamp that shall burn without wick or oil, being 
fed by the Aethyr. 


This shall he accomplish secretly and apart, without asking the advice or approval of hisAdeptus M inor. 
Let the Dominus Liminis keep it when consecrated in the secret chamber of Art. 


This then is that which is written: “Bring furnished with complete armour and armed, he is similar to the 
goddess.” 


And again, “I am armed, | am armed.”
