rot |

cove
Sar

ree
τὶ Se
te

EO

cant

ak

Se ν᾿ PE AE

at ae 5 ΕΝ

Ἶ
νὴ
ioeteh
7

INR στη
Ἵ Ϊὰ
ae Ne
ἢ 1

δ᾿

TEAPUSM

fates
Boe,

ve
ΣΤῊ ck’
tira

FES


a

s
c

n
n


δ
᾽

ἀ
ξ

m
i
s


A

DISQUISITION

UPON

ETRUSCAN  VASES;

DISPLAYING

THEIR  PROBABLE  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  SHOWS
AT  ELEUSIS,

<<

AND  THE

CHINESE  FEAST OF LANTERNS,

WITH  EXPLANATIONS  OF  A  FEW  OF

THE  PRINCIPAL  ALLEGORIES  DEPICTED  UPON  THEM.

᾿

᾿

Λαμωρὸν  ἄγων  φάος  ἀὐγνὸν.  Onomacritus,  H.  5, v.  8.
we
-
Οἷόν  ἐςι  καὶ  τὸ τῷ  λαμπηρος  (αἴνιγμα) ; ἔοικε  γὰρ  ὁ λαμπῆηρ  τῷ  περιέχοντι  τὴν  ψυχὴν  σώματι"

nd

.

,

¥
\

φῶς  γάρ ἐςιν  ἡ ἐντὸς  ψυχή.

Plutarch,  Rom.  Quast.

LONDON:

PRINTED  BY  WILLIAM  BULMER  AND  Co,  CLEVELAND  ROW,
ST.  JAMES’S;

FOR  T.  BECKET,  PALL-MALL,

1806.


\

ὁ


CONTENTS

-

—

--

Ps EFACE
--
Preliminary  Remarks  on  the  Cabiri
Nature  of the  Eleusinian  Mysteries—Use  and  Meaning  of Etruscan  Vases
Preparation  for  the  Mysteries.—Use  of  the  Intaglio.—Offices  of the  Priests. —
The  Descent  of Bacchus  under  various  characters  ad Inferos  ;  his Voyage  over
the  Styx,  and  Re-ascent  exhibited  as  a  mystical  Drama,  in  a  Succession  of
transparent  Scenes,  viz.  different  Vases  and  Gems

--

--

--

--

-

-

--

Eastern  I/luminations  and  the  Eleusinian  Shows  compared
Origin  of  the  Vase.—Of  the  Aigyptian  Canopus.—Symbol  of  Greation  from

-Ξ-

--

Water.—The  Vase  hence  selected  to  commemorate  the  Mysteries

-

Theology  of  the  Ancients  founded  on  Natural  Philosophy,—conyeyed  only  by

Enigma  and  Allegory.—Groupes  on  Vases  znigmatical

—

Explanation  of a  Sicilian  Vase,  illustrating  the  Mysteries  of the  Idzi  Dactyli
Harmonious  Arrangement  of the  Universe  by the  Deity
Attributes  of  the  Deity,  variously  personated  on  Vases,—Of  Shields,  and  their

--

=

Devices

=

=

Temporary  Repose  of  Nature.—OF  the  Egyptian  Horus  in  the  torpid  state.—
Mutes  on  the  reverse  of Vases.—Figures  draped  and  naked.—Errors of Passeri
noticed

=
Brief  Explanation  of Symbols  mentioned  by Clemens  Alexandrinus
Of  Fish,  and  the  Allegory  of  Angling
Teed
Of  Old  Age,  Wine,  Music  and  Rhetoric
Of  the  dotted  Chaplet,  Girdle  and  Scarf—the  Fate  of Cassandra,  and  Flight  of

--
Σες,

—_

--

ene

-

—

a

Agneas  mystically  treated

OF Solstitial  Fountains
Of  the  Window  and  Ladder.—Singular  Customs  of  the  Oriental  Buddhists  ex-

—

plained

Extinction  of  heathen  Rites  in  Greece  and  Italy.—Eleusinian  Mysteries  in-

adequate  to  the  end  proposed  in  them

-

=

ἘΞ

Page.
iii

1
19

28
38

42

47

48
51

54

57
65
69

73

ie
85

39

95

δ.  The  Chinese  board,  described  p. 4,  proves  to  be a table  for  divination  by the  pa  qua,  or  eight  lots—
‘This  subject  is  interesting,
the  number  of which  was  determined  after  the  sacred  Ogdoad  of  Fohi.
and  might  be  illustrated  with  no  great  difficulty  by the  means  of  paintings,  and  other  Chinese  monu-
ments,  both  of art  and  science,  in this  country.


ee  EF  ACE,

Tue  object  of  this  Tract  is  to  render  a  more  clear
and  satisfactory  account  than  has  been  hitherto
given,  of  the  nature,  use  and  meaning  of  those
painted  Vases,  usually  termed  Etruscan.
The  ob-
servations  comprised  in  it  chiefly  concern
the
antiquary;  but  some  persons  curious  in  painting,
have  supposed  that  if  these  vessels  were  properly
examined,  they would  furnish  valuable  materials  for
the  ancient  history  of the  art,  to  such,  therefore,  the
writer  addresses,  by way  of  Preface,  some  remarks
that  result  from  his  investigations.

In  this  work  he  has  ventured  to  assert,  and  he


ιν

PREFACE.

conceives  upon  very  sufficient  grounds,  what  15 per-
fectly  new,  viz.  that  the  paintings  upon  vases  were
If  this  conclusion
copied  from  transparent  scenes.
should  be  deemed  just,  it will  appear,  that  D’ Hancar-
ville was  mistaken,  when  he reasoned  upon the art  from
the paintings of Greek  vases.  At least, we may presume,
that  unless  better  specimens  existed  at  the  same  early
times,  upon  wood,  or  canvas,  or  in  fresco,  the  art  of
painting  in Greece  was  very  far  behind  that  of sculp-
ture,  and  we  must  be  compelled  to  admit,  that  the
Greek  painters  were  from  necessity  deficient  in  com-
position (1)  and  colouring;  at  the  same  time  that  we
acknowledge  they  excelled  in  character  and  design.
If  we  are  to  believe,  that  the  most  skilful  artists  (2)
of  Greece  were  engaged  in  the  service  of  religion,
to  copy  these  scenes  from  the  temple  at  Eleusis,  and
some  perhaps  will  be  induced  to  conclude  as  much,
from  the  spirit  and  taste  with  which  many  paintings
are  executed  upon  the  vases  of  Nola,  upon  which
the  names  of the  allegorical  personages  are  expressed
ἴῃ  Greek  characters  of the  very  latest  form  ;(3)  these
points  admitted,  we  should  still  be  left  to  regret,
that  those,  who  so  employed  their  pencils,  could
never  rise  to  a  higher  title  than  that  of 2x:aygagor,
The  credit  of  the  Greek  pain-
or  shadow-painters.
ters,  however,  has  been  ably  vindicated  by several


PREFACE.

Vv

writers,  particularly  by the  ingenious  Mr.  Webbe.
His  evidences  seem  to  prove,  that  (except,  at  least
as  to  mixed  compositions)  the  Greeks  were  perfect
in  every  department  of the  art.
The  writer  of  this
Tract  therefore  feels  inclined  to  discourage  any  fur-
ther  attempts  either  to  ascertain  the  progress  of  the

art,  or  the  perfection  of  it at  any  particular  period,
by  such  imperfect  documents  as  the  Greek  vases

afford;  and  he  trusts  the  reasonableness  of  his  con-

Jectures  respecting  their  use,  will  justify  his  dissent
from  the  opinions  of  D’Hancarville  on  this  head.
—He  dedicates  his  work  to  the  entertainment  and
candour  only  of  a  few  lovers  of  Greek  antiquities ;
but  he  designed  it more  particularly  as  an  acknow-

ledgment  to  those  friends,  whose  politeness  to  him
will  appear  in  these  pages.

(1)  Either  the  ground,  or  the figures,  in these  paintings  being  transparent,  it
became  necessary  that  the  latter  should  be detached  as  much  as  possible  from
each  other,  to  prevent  confusion:  hence  the  difficulty  of grouping,  otherwise,
than  by placing  the  figures  upon  different  elevations  in the  picture.
A  most
valuable  amphora,  now  in  the  possession  of Wm.  Chinnery,  Esq.  is  a  notable
This  vase  is cited  by Winckelmann,  and  is otherwise  well  known
instance.
from  its  subject,  usually  termed  the  death  of  Patroclus.
It  presents  a  com-
plicated  group  of  figures  designed  with  great  spirit.
These  are  placed  not
on  the  same  plane,  but  on  three  tiers  or  stages,  in  defiance  of  all  rules  of
perspective.

(2)  The  artists  who  executed  these  illumined  paintings,  certainly  upon  some
occasions  were  proud  of their  work.  Upon a vase  in  the  collection  of Thomas
Hope,  Esq.  is  inscribed  the  name  of  the  painter,  TALRIAES  EPoOlESEW.
This  vase  was  found  at  Agrigentum,  and  is of very  early  manufacture.


v1

PREFACE.

(3)  I write  this  with  particular  reference  to  a  lettered  Campana  vase,  (the
finest  I have  ever  seen),  now  in  the  possession  of  James  Edwards,  Esq.—
The  subject  of  it is the  mystical  descent  of  Theseus,  accompanied  by Castor
and  Tydeus,  to  bring  back  Actzon  from  the  shades.


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS

ON

THE  CABIRE


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

In  submitting  the  result  of  some  enquiries  made  at  different
times,  respecting  the  nature,  use,  and  meaning  of  Etruscan*
Vases,  I  shall  present  my  thoughts,  as  they  occurred,  in  a
progressive  course  of reading  and  observation.

Whoever,  in  the  moments  of  literary  relaxation,  will  occa-
sionally  pause,  to  mark  the  coincident  objects  of  his  amuse-
ment,  he  will  find  a  variety  of  conjectural  novelties  arise,
which  further  observation  and  comparison  will  confirm,  and

*  This word  is differently  written  by Horace,  accordingly  as  it suited  the  rhythm  of

his  verse:

and

Ver.  4.  “  Minacis  aut  Etrusca  Porsenz  manus,”

Ver.  40.  ““  Hetrusca  preter  et  volate  littora.”

In  the  same  Epode  (16),  and  in  Catullus,  we  have,

‘*  Aut  porcus  Umber,  aut  obesus  Hetruscus.”

It is indifferent  which  orthography  we  choose.

Od,  A0,  v.  11,


4

establish  little  short  of undoubted  truths:  a chain  of interesting

facts  will  thus  be  insensibly  extended,  and  to  such  a  degree,

that  the  two  extremes  of his  research  will,  in  the  end,  appear

highly  incongruous,  unless  the  intermediate  gradations  be

taken  into  consideration.

These  reflections  I  offer,  in  order  to  obviate  any  surprise

at  a  disquisition  upon  Etruscan  vases  being  opened  by ani-

madversions  upon  ancient  games.

But  I  find  reference  to

them  unavoidable,  from  the  insight  they  afford  me  into  the

character  and  offices  of  the  Curetes,  who  gave  rise  to  the

mysteries  which  this  Treatise  is  designed  to  illustrate.

The

reader  will  judge  whether  the  inferences  Τ shall  deduce  from

them  be  fairly  drawn.

In  a  Chinese  book  (that  by the  kindness  of  a  learned  friend
I  have  the  satisfaction  to  possess)  which  treats,  among  other
subjects,  the  Games  of  China,  I  have  discovered  the  board  of
the  Πετείχ  precisely  in  the  form  I  had  assigned  to  it  by con-
Towards  the  begin-
jectures  upon  the  text  of Julius  Pollux.*
ning  of  the  section  wherein  are  displayed  the  peculiarities  of
this  game,  I have  remarked  the  figure  of a  hand  uplifted,  upon
the  fingers  of which  are  noted  the  characters,  as  I presume,  of
It  has
the  pieces  with  which  the  game  is  to  be  played.

*  This  board  appears  to  be  constructed  by the  Chinese  compass.

The  characters
denoting  the  points  of the  compass  immediately  surround  the  sacred,  and  give  a  dis-
If  this  be  a  game  of  skill,  it
tinguishing,  name  to  each  of the  twelve  squares  below.
may  perhaps  be  a  game  of cireumnavigation,  and  it may  at  least  determine  for  us  the
nature  of  the  Greek  Ναυμαχία,  of which  Julius  Pollux  has  given  but  scanty  informa-
tion,  he  having  merely  observed,  that  the  sacred  had  a  place  upon  it,  as  it  also  had
I ground  my  conjecture  upon  a  riddle,  which  Athenzus  observed
upon  the  Merl.
Was  ταεριφερόμενον,  SO  common  in  the  mouth  of every  one,  that  he  has  neglected  to  favour
us  with  its  meaning.

Casaubon  adopting  the  opinion  of  some  anonymous  learned  man,  has  referred


5

occurred  to  me,  that  what  Mr.  Bailly  observed,*  upon  the

information  of Mr.  Court  de Gibelin,  respecting  the  characters

of  Persepolis+  (said  to  be  five  in  number),  and  of  the  art  of

computation,  must  be  true:  that  the  origin  of  them  must  be

looked  for  in  the  five  fingers,  the  number  of  which  seems

to  have  prompted  man  instinctively  with  the  knowledge  of

arithmetic.

I had  almost  said  the  same  of the  Greek  and  Chi-

nese  game.

But  as  this  appears  to  have  had  its  origin  near

Mount  Ida,  previous  to  the  siege  of Troy,  may I now  be  per-

mitted  to  enquire,  who  were  those  Idzi  Dactyli,  who  resided

at  the  foot  of  that  celebrated  mountain,  and  who  dancing,  in  a

double  set  of  five  and  five,  were  termed  Idzi  Dactyli,  as  repre-

senting  the  toes  of the  foot  of  Ida?  May not  these  priests  have

been  the  original  constructors  of  the  Petteia:{  at  least,  is  it

the  subject  of  the  enigma  to  a  boxing  match  (Animadvers.  in  Athenzum,  p.  770),
but  we  will  examine  whether  it  may  not  bear  a  different  explanation.

Tl?’ ἄνδρες  δέκα  ναυσὶ  κατέδραμον  εἰς ἕνα  χῶρον.

Ἐν  δὲ  λίϑοις  ἐμάχοντο,  λίϑον  δ᾽ ἐκ  εὖ  [ἦν]  ἀνελέσϑαι.
Δίψη δ᾽ ἐξώλλυντο,  ὕϑωρ δ᾽ ὑπερεῖχε  γενείε.

Athenzus,  lib.  x.  p. 457.
“  Five  men,  with  ten  ships  (with  allusion  to  the  number  of  men,  and  stations),
They  fought  with  stones
pushed  forward  to  one  spot  (perhaps  the  sacred).
They,
(i. 6.  pebbles),  but  it was  no  easy  matter  to  take  off  from  the  board  a  pebble.
With  regard  to  the  last
were  dying  from  thirst,  yet  water  was  above  their  chins.”
line,  I  had  concluded  with  the  anonymous  critic  cited  by  Casaubon,  that  they
played  in  hot  weather,  and  that  the  sweat  of  the  combatants  was  thus  obscurely
described,  in  order  to  increase  the  difficulty  of the  enigma;  but  it has  been  suggested
to  me  that  the  board  itself  might  probably  be  implied  by  dsp,  and  that  some  better
word  might  be  substituted  for  ὑπερεῖχε, τος their  chins  being  extended  over  the  water,
i.e.  over  the  board.”

*  Lettres  sur  l’Atlantide,  p.  457,  458.
+  We  now  possess  better,  though  not  complete,  information  on  this  subject.

See
Nevertheless,  the

the  Dissertation  of  Dr.  Hager  on  the  Babylonian  Bricks,  quarto.
latter  part  of the  remark  above  cited  may  be  allowed  to  be just.

+t Whence,  perhaps,  the  strange  anecdote  of  Palamedes  playing  at  this  game  ona

pavement  of large  dimensions,  with  living  men  instead  of pieces.


6

not  probable  that  they first  applied  it to  the  purposes  of astro-
nomy  ?—for  that  the  dances  of the  Idzxi  Dactyli were  allegorical,
and  had  reference  to  astronomy,  we  may  be  certain  ;*  and  if
this  be  admitted,  it  is  probable  that  the  application  of  the
Plinthion  to  astronomical  purposes  by the  Egyptians,  was  no

original  invention  of that  learned  people.

T am  well  aware  of  the  objection  that  will  be  raised  against
my  conjecture  from  the  authorities  of  numerous  writers,  who

refer  the  Idai  Dactyli  to  Ida  in  Crete,  instead  of the  mountain

of  the  same  name  in  Phrygia;  but  it will  scarcely  be  denied
me,  that  the  Idei  Dactyli  were  priests  of  Cybele,  who  was

properly  styled  the  Phrygian  Goddess  ;  so  that  I have  every

reason  to  think  that  a  similar  order  of  priests  was  established

in  Phrygia  and  Crete,  who  celebrated  the  same  orgies  to  the

same  goddess,  on  two  mountains  known  by  the  same  name.

This  difficulty  removed,  the  reader  will  expect  my  reasons  for

believing  that  the  Idzi  Dactyli,  who  invented  the

Πετείχ,  ap-

plied  it  to  the  purposes  of astronomy.

This  I  conclude  from  the  nature  of  the  game,  wherein  a

circumvention  effected  by  the  pebbles,  would,  if  properly

accepted,  have  illustrated  the  phenomenon  of  an  eclipse.

*  The  dances  of  the  Salian  priests,  who,  in  the  opinion  of  Dionysius  of  Halicar-

nassus,  corresponded  with  the  Grecian  Curetes,  were  certainly  astronomical.
Calli-
machus  says,  that  upon  the  birth  of  Jupiter—  Οὖλα  δὲ Kéenrés  σε  weg) ττρύλιν  ὠρχήσαντο᾽᾽
Or,—  They  danced
‘*  The  Curetes  danced  the  Yule  dance.”
Hymn.  in Joy.  ν.  52.
This  was  celebrated,  no  doubt,
the  Fire  dance  to  appease  the  All-healing  deity.”

at  the  opening  of  the  new  year,  upon  the  conversion  of  the  sun  from  the  lower

hemisphere.

The  reader  will  observe,  that  I consider  the  Idi  Dactyli  and  the Curetes  to  be  the

same ; in  this  I am  justified  by Onomacritus,  by whom  the  latter  are  styled—*  At-

tendants  upon  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  in  her  frantic  orgies  on  the  mountains  :”—

Μητρὸς  ὀρειομιωνᾷς  συνοπόονες.

Hymn.  ΧΧΧΟ  Melle


7

H τέχνη  τῆς  παιδιᾶς  ἔστι,  says  Julius  Pollux  (lib.  ix.  sec.  98)  of
the  MMuvrbiev,  (but  which  words  equally  apply  to  the  Mer%iz)
‘*  The  art

εριλήψει  τῶν  δύο  ψήφων  ὁμοχρόων  τὴν  ἑτερόχρουν  ἀναιρεῖν.

of the  game  is,  to  take  by a  circumvention  of  two  of  the  same

colour  any  pebble  of a different  one.”

gr

tee

88

Ae

oe  ge

The  astronomical  meaning  of  the  word  ‘Avageiv  may  be  col-

lected  from  the  Letters  of  Mr.  Rabaut  de  St.  Etienne,*  who

ingeniously  observes,  that  in  the  fabulous  annals  of  Greece,

when a star  set,  it was  figuratively  said  to  be  slain  —The  same

expression  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  adopted  when  a

planet  was  eclipsed  ;  accordingly  we  find  in  Plutarch,—

‘ov  μὴν  “ANAIPEITAL  σαντάσασι  τὸν  Ἥλιόν  (ἡ Xedqvn)—de  Iside  et

Osir.  sec.  44,  p.  111.  Ed.  Squire.‘  The  moon  having  the  sun

within  her  power,  and  on  the  point  of destroying  him,  yet  suffers

him  to  escape,  in  the  same  manner  as  Isis  released  Typho.”

A  notable  instance  of  a  circumvention,  or  eclipse,  occurs

in  the  early  Grecian  history.

The  Apaturia,  which  were

annually  held  for  the  purpose  of  enrolling  the  young  Athe-

nians  of  both  sexes  in  the  ®garsiz,  or  fraternities,  were  styled

Araroigia,  or  ‘Ararégia,  quasi  Ὁμοπατόρια,  because  their  country

then  first  acknowledged  them  as  Athenian  citizens.

But  Pro-

clus  derives  the  word  from  ᾿ἅπάτη,  ‘‘  deception,”  and  he  tells  us

of a  duel  which  was  fought  between  certain  personages,  who,

I  am  led  to  conclude,  from  the  preceding  observations,  were

purely  astronomical.  We  find  that  Melanthus  was  opposed  to

Xanthus  in  single  combat,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  latter

looked  back,  and  saw  an  imaginary  figure,  Celzenus,  in  a  black

*  Lettres  ἃ Mr.  Bailly  sur  Histoire  primitive  de  la  Gréce.  Octavo,


8

goat’s  skin  attacking  him  from  behind.  He  complained  of the

unfairness  of the  contest,  and  was  slain  in  the  moment  of turn-

ing  round  to  view  the  supposed  ally  of  his  enemy.

If  we

place  these  combatants  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  op-

posed  to  each  other,  we  shall  find  that  Xanthus,  yellow,  was

placed  between  Melanthus,  black,  and  Κελαινὸς,  a word  of similar

signification.  Now  Xanthus  is  the  sun,  that  same  Apollo  who

gave  the  name  to  his  favourite  river,

“  Phoebe,  qui  Xantho  lavis  amne  crines,”

and  the  whole  will  imply  an  eclipse,  where  one  luminous

body  ‘Avmésn,  was  obscured  by the  co-operation  of  two  planets.

Some  such  combat  appears  to  be  described  on  a  vase  in  Tisch-

bein’s  Collection,  (Vol.  I. last  plate),  where  the  escape,  or  rather

the  renovation,  of Xanthus  is expressed  in a  symbolical  manner,

which  will  be  explained  hereafter.

The  phenomena  of  eclipses,  I  believe,  were  understood,

though  very  imperfectly,  by the  Curetes,  who  expressed  them
by a  mystical  combat,  wherein  one  of  the  three  was  killed  by
the  other  two.*
Thus  Onomacritus,  in  his  Hymn  to  Cyrbas,
one  of the  three  Corybantes,  describes  him,  as

Φοίνιον,  χἡμαχθέντα  κασιγνήτων  ὑπὸ  δισσῶν.

Hymn.  38,  v.  6.

i.e.  ““  Covered  with  blood,  falling  by the  hands  of two  relative
planets  :”—-where  we  see  an  evident  allusion  to  the  bloody
And  this,  I  conceive,
appearance  of  the  moon  in  eclipse.

will  not  appear  a  forced  explanation  of  the  passage,  since,  in

*  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark  the  error  of  Julius  Firmicus,  in  charging  the
Corybantes  with  parricide,  but  it  may  be  seen  in  Gutberleth,  p.95  de  Myster.  Deor.
Cabiror.


9

the  30th  Hymn,  v.  2,  the  Curetes  are  termed  Evaornges,  ‘‘  faithful

representatives  of  the  stars.”.—Their  elucidating  the  pheno-

mena  of  eclipses  seems  to  be  beautifully  expressed  by  the

words  ‘  Κρουσολύρχι,  σαφάρυϑμοι.᾽᾿---““  Who  play  in  discords  on

your  sounding  lyres.”  Jbid,  v.3.

For  these  occasional  dis-

cords  in  the  harmony  of  the  spheres,  can  only  imply  the
defectus  lune,  solisque—This  subject  is  frequently  exhibited  on

vases.  I have  prefixed  a vignette  to  these  remarks,  taken  froma
small  Sicilian  vase  in  the  possession  of H. Tresham,  Esq.  R.A.

which  represents  the  mystical  combat  of the  Curetes.—Another

example  may be seen  among  Tischbein’s  engravings  from  Sir W.

Hamilton’s  Collection,  Vol.  I.  Plate  XXIII.  which  is rendered

further  curious  by an  inscription  in  Pelasgic  characters.

It is only from  a  train  of such  analogous  conclusions  as  these,

that  I can  affirm,  the  Greeks  in  the  earliest  ages  were  instructed

in  the  principles  of  astronomy,  by  means  of  their  games  of

pebbles.

The  Chinese  were  certainly  so  instructed,  as  will

be  evident  to  those,  who  have  considered  the  early  literature

οἵ  that  people.
It  is  true,  that  the  mysterious  uses  of  the
Ko-ua  and  the  Ho-tou,  by the  black  and  white  beads  of which
Fohi  is  said  to  have  expressed  the  motions  of  the  heavenly

bodies,  and  the  rules  of  arithmetic,  are  no  longer  understood

in  China.

Volumes  have  been  written,  and  printed,  in  that

country,  to  explain  the  uses  of  these  diagrams,  and  the  com-

binations  of  their  parti-coloured  beads,  but  to  no  effectual

purpose:  nevertheless  I venture  to  believe,  some  general  idea

may  be  formed  of  the  nature  of  these  lost  sciences  of  the

Chinese,  from  what  I have  suggested  of the  σετΖευτηρίον.

The  conjectural  remarks  already  submitted,  may  tend  to

throw  some  light  upon  what  has  hitherto  been  considered  a
c


10

question  of  much  difficulty ; namely,  who  were  those  persons
called  Curetes  and  Cabiri.
They  were  termed  Magni  Dit,  and
Auivoves,  it  is  true;  but  since  many  have  derived  them  from
Pheenicia,*  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  genealogical  table  of

the  gods  of  that  country,+  to  be  satisfied  that  the  Cabiri  were

not  deities,  unless  indeed  we  can  believe  that  the  huntsman,

the  fisherman,  the  mechanic,  and  the  husbandman,  were  also

such.

The  truth  is,  were  the  table  referred  to  adopted  for

authority,  the  Phoenicians  deified  events,  and  the  invention  of

the  useful  arts;  and  as  the  Cabiri  were  the  last  of  this  line,

they  could  be  no  more  than  priests  who  represented  deities,

or  the  depositaries  of  the  science  of  those  days,  and  of  the

useful  arts  which  are  enumerated  in  regular  succession  before

them.

The  Curetes  were  the  same  with  the  Cabiri:

the

number  of  them  was  originally  but  three,  but  it was  increased

according  as  their  mode  of illustrating  the  sciences  they taught,

required.  As  the  three  Curetes,  they  represented  the  sun,

moon,  and  earth;  when  their  number  was  increased

to

five,  they  were  charged  with  correcting  the  computation  of

time,  and  in  this  capacity  were  those  five  Idzi  Dactyli,

Hercules,  Peoneus,  Epimedes,  Jasius,  and  Ida,  who  instituted

*  They  were  not,  however,  originally  from  Pheenicia,  but  were  Pelasgi,  and  came

north-about  into  Greece,  and  first  settled  in  Samothrace.  In  the  same  way  the  Romans
learnt  their  Salian  rites  from  the  Umbri,  a  Pelasgic  people  in  the  north  of  Italy.
Acceperunt  (scil.  Samothraces)  mysteria  hec  a  Pelasgis,  si  fides  habenda  sit  Hero-

doto,  lib.  ii.  cap.  51,  scribenti  Τὴν  Σαμοθρηΐκην  οἴκεον  πρότερον  Πέλασγοι,  παρὰ  τάτων  Σαμοθρηΐκες

τὰ  (Καξείρων)  ὄργια  τταραλαμξάνεσι ; i.  6.  Samothraciam  quondam  incoluerunt  Pelasgi,  a
quibus  Cabirorum  orgia  Samothraces  acceperunt.  hoc  testatur  quoque  przstantissimus
Stillingfeetius  in  originibus  sacris,  p.  472,  ubi  contra  Bochartum  probat  Samothraces
orgia  Cabirica  a  Pelasgis  accepisse,  non  verd  a  Phcenicibus.  Gutberleth  de Myst.

Deor.  Cabirorum,  p.  58,  59.

+  It  is given  by Gutberleth,  p. 29,  from  Eusebius  de  Prep.  Evang.  lib.  i, cap.  10.


if

the  Olympiads,  each  Dactylus  presiding  over  a  separate  year.
Eight  in  number,  they  might  have  taught  the  ceconomy  of the

Solar  System,  and  in  their  double  complement  of five  and  five,
on  Mount  Ida,  whether  in  Phrygia  or  Crete,  they  invented

games;  and  probably  devised  that  useful  branch  of  science,

decimal  arithmetick.  The  researches  of  an  ingenious  mytho-

logist  have  further  led  me  to  believe  they  had  a  general

acquaintance  with  natural  philosophy.

Dr.  Blackwall  has

observed,  p.  276,*  that  the  primary  gods  of  the  ancients  were

not  understood  to  be  deified  mortals,  but  parts  of  the  mighty

self-moving  frame  created  by  the  First  Cause:  and  again,
speaking  of  the  mysteries,  p.  278,  upon  the  authority  of
Cicero,  ‘*  when  they  are  explained,  and  their  real  import
examined,  the  NATuRE  of  ΤΗΙΝΟΒ  (the  universe)  is  rather  laid

open  than  the  nature  of the  gods:  the  powers  and  parts  of the

universe  were  therefore  the  ancient  Cabir,  or  mighty  gods,  and

their  mutual  connections,  operations,  and  productions  were

typically  represented  in  their  mysteries.”  Ibid.  If this  opinion

of  Dr.  Blackwall  be  qualified,  by supposing  the  Cabiri  to  have

been  priests  who  personated  the  powers  he  speaks  of,  it will

approach,  I  think,  as  near  to  the  truth  as  can  be  expected

in  so  remote  a  question.

The  names  assumed  by the  Cabiri,  when  conducting  their

mysteries  in  Samothrace,  have  been  made  known  to  us  by the

Scholiast  upon  Apollonius  Rhodius.

They  were:  Axieros

Axiocersa,  Axiocersos,  and  Camillus.

The  first  of  these  was

compared  by the  Hellenistic  Greeks  to  the  Ceres  of  their  my-

thology,  the  second  to  Proserpine,  the  third  to  Hades,  and  the

fourth  to  Hermes,  the  agent  or  minister  of  the  other  three.

*  Letters  concerning  Mythology,  octavo,  1748.


12

The  derivations  of  these  names  by Bochart  are  well  known.

The  following  proposed  by Dr.  Blackwall  has  pleased  me

much  better,  and  I refer  the  reader  to  p.  281  of  his  Letters

for  the  rest—Axieros  from  the  Chaldee  ms  aaz,  succendit,

accendit,  calefecit,  denoting,  according  to  Dr.  Blackwall,  fer-

mentation,  and  xo»  erets,  Terra.

Dr.  Blackwall  therefore

concludes  that  the  Cabir  gods  were  the  powers  and  produce

of  fire,  impregnating  mother  earth  in  the  mysterious  work  of

vegetation,  p.  280.

Such  appears  to  have  been  the  principle

enforced  by certain  Idei  Dactyli,  whose  names  are  recorded

by the  Scholiast  of Apollonius  Rhodius.*  The  first  of  them,

Acmon,  or  heavenly  fire,  the  second  Damnameneus,  or  water,

which  allayeth  the  power  of  fire,  or  earth,  the  residuum  of

water,  and  Celmis,  the  agent  or  minister  of the  other  two  ;  as

I hope  to  shew  upon  the  authority  of  an  ancient  monument

hereafter.

The  principle  of  decay  and  reproduction  by fer-

mentation,  upon  which  the  ceconomy  of vegetation  depends,

appears  to  have  been  included  in  their  doctrines,  as  may  be

inferred  from  the  title  bestowed  upon  the  Curetes  by Onoma-

critus,  Teogéeo  καὶ  avr’  ὀλετῆρες.

ἐς  by  turns  who  cherish  and

destroy.”  Hymn.  87,  v.14.
And  if they were  the  depositaries
of the  useful  learning  of  their  time,  we  need  not  be  surprised
to  find  them  explaining  agriculture,  the  most  necessary  of  all

the  sciences,  upon  philosophical  principles.

If  Stillingfleet  and  Gutberleth  have  satisfactorily  shewn,

that,  with  respect  to  Greece,  the  Cabiri  were  solely of  Pelasgic
origin,  we  must  be  under  the  necessity  of  rejecting  the  Phee-
nician  table  of deities,  from  which  it  may  be  doubted  whether

*  Kauss,  Δαμναμενεύς  τε  μέγας  καὶ  ὑπέρξιος  "Αχμων.

,

ΕΝ

"

"

See  schol.  upon  Ψ.  1129,  lib.  i. Argonaut,


13

we  shall  be  able  to  trace  their  descent,  or  identify  their

persons.

For  I cannot  refrain  from  believing  that  the  Cabiri,

at  first,  were  actual  persons,  who  were  revived  and  repre-

sented  in  a  succession  of  priests,  their  descendants.  Hesychius

tells  us  they  were  sons  of  Sochus  (ays),  and  although  some

doubt  may  be  entertained,  whether  this  word  be  an  epithet  of

Hermes,*  yet  I scarcely  hesitate  to  consider  it  another  name

for  Dionysus,  particularly  as  Father  Giorgi  has  noticed  upon

the  authority  of  Clemens,  that  Dionysus  was  also  called

᾿Ἄμπελος,  ‘*  the  vine.’

Σωχὶς,  says  Hesychius,  is  a  species  of

vine ;{ and  Σωχὸς,  he  informs  us,  was  the  Father  of  the

Curetes  ;§  now  Dionysus  (the  Deo-Naush  of the  Hindus)  is no

other  than  Noah.—It  follows,  that  the  three  Curetes,  or  Cabiri,||

were  Japhet,  Shem,  and  Ham,  who,  it  may  be  readily  believed,
after  the  disappearance  of the  Patriarch  (who  probably  betook

himself  to  China},  were  the  depositaries  of  the  learning  and

science  of  the  Antediluvians.

Whatever  mysteries  were  de-

vised  by their  descendants,  must  have  been  designed  to  keep

alive  such  knowledge  by oral  discourse,  if  not  by scenic  ex-

hibition:  and  this  at  a  time  when  writing,  if  it were  known,

yet  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  been  very  generally  practised.

In  reviewing  the  authorities  of  writers  who  speak  of  the

Cabiri,  and  the  names  of  places  called  after  them,  it  appears

they journeyed  into  Samothrace  by the  way  of  Pontus,  and  the

northern  coast  of Asia  Minor;  and  a  learned  antiquary,  with
some  appearance  of  probability,  has  discovered  traces  of them

*  Σῶχος,  ἐπίθετον  τῷ Eguise  Lex.  MS.  See  note  on  the  word  Σῶκος.  Hesych.

Alphabet.  Tibetan.  p-  135.

t Σωχίς"  εἶδος  ἀμπέλε.  Hesych,

Σωχός"  ὁ τῶν  Κερήτων  warnp.  Hesych.

om +
|| The  founder  of  every  primitive  people  was  assimilated  to  Noah.

Hence  the

seven  sons  of Misr  were  termed  Cabiri  by the  Egyptians,


14

amongst  the Orthocorybantians  in  Bactria,  which  he  has  chosen

for  the  seat  of  the  arts,  in  the  most  primitive  times  after  the

flood.

The  memory  of  that  recent  catastrophe,  by which  the

human  race,  with  the  exception  of  one  family,  had  been

destroyed,  was  preserved  no  doubt,  with  the  learning  they

conveyed.

The  melancholy  impression  of this  event,  and  the

fear  of  its  recurrence,  are  eloquently  set  forth  by the  ingenious

Mr.  Boulanger  ; and  numerous  instances  may  be  collected  from

Greek  and  Roman  writers,  of  the  consequent  gloom  that  over-

hung  the  first  settlers  in  their  respective  countries.

This

gloom  appears  to  have  been  first  dissipated  in  Greece,  about

the  time  of  Orpheus,  who  by instituting  the  Eleusinian  mys-

teries,  or  rather,  by giving  a  new  turn  to  those  of  Samothrace,

introduced  consolatory  doctrines,  with  a  brighter  prospect  to

the  initiated,  and  “ἃ  better  hope  after  death.”—From  this

time  forward,  observations  upon  astronomical  phenomena,

and  computations  of  time,  became  essential  component  parts

of the  theology  of  the  ancients;  and  I refer  my  reader  to  the

very  curious  work  of Mr.  Boulanger,  for  the  ideas  of  destruc-

tion  and  renovation  attached  by the  ancients  to  the  appearance

of  eclipses,  for  their  religious  speculations  upon  the  demise

and  renewal  of  cycles  and  periods,  and  for  the  causes  from

which  he  has  deduced  them.

Mr.  Boulanger  has  taken  an

extensive  view  of  the  religion  of  the  ancients,  as  connected

with  astronomy,  which  might  also  have  been  extended  to

other  parts  of  natural  philosophy,  for  the  ancients  collected

examples  of  their  favourite  scheme  from  every  department  of

science,  and  from  every  quarter  of  the  physical  world.

To

enter  into  any  detail  respecting  the  physical  theology  of

Eleusis  in  this  place,  would  lead  me  too  far  from  the  immediate


15

object  of this  discourse  ;  besides,  it may  be  more  satisfactorily
collected  from  an  exposition  of  certain  ancient  monuments
Suffice  it  to  say,  that  RENOVATION  FROM  WATER  WaS
hereafter.
the  prevalent  doctrine—the  primary  event  of  creation  was
explained  by it,*  and  it  formed  the  basis  of  the  consolatory
hope  alluded  to.

In  what  manner  the  Cabiri  conducted  their  mysteries  in
Samothrace  it  would  be  difficult  to  determine,  but  it  is  pro-
bable  that  mimic  representations  might  there  have  occasionally
taken  place,  since  Olympias,  when  present  amongst  them,  is

said  to  have  seen  her  husband  Philip  then  in  Potidea,  by
which  we  must  understand  that  she  saw  him  in  some  scenic
exhibition.

These  mysteries  were  enlarged,  and  refined  upon  by  the

*  Even  in  the  Pheenician  table,  as  I  understand  it,  the  two  events  of  creation
I  scarcely  need  premise  that  many  terms  in
As  such  I understand  the  term

and  the  deluge  are  jointly  recorded.
this  table  must  be  considered  as  purely  figurative.
“  wife,”  denoting—  affinity,  alliance,  similarity.”,—I  would  thus  interpret  it :

As  Κολπία,  m—8—p  the  Spirit  of  God,  moved  on  the  waters  in  Chaos,  wxor
As  from  this  Spirit
ipsius,  in  the  same  way  floated  Béavr,+  the  ark,  in  the  deluge.
proceeded  αἰῶν,  life,  and  γένος,  the  animal  creation,  uxor  ipsius,  so  from  Βάαυτ  proceeded
Tgwréyovos,t  Noah,  and  ψενεῶ,  the  renewal  of the  human  race.
The  parallel  here  ends.
Two  eyents  are  jointly  recorded,  the  second  instanced  as  a  type  of the  first.

Alter  γένος  comes  the  falling  away  of the  human  race,  which  became  worshippers  of
φῶς,  we,  and  φλόξ,  light,  fire,  and  flame,  upon  the  high  places  Casius,  Libanus,  Anti-

libanus,  and  Brathi.
Cabiri,  his  children,  complete  the  table.

The  useful  arts  are  next  enumerated,  and  Syduc,  and  the

By way  of shewing  how  the  Greeks  combined  the  two  great  events,  see  the vignette
which  follows  these  preliminary  remarks,  representing  a  figure  on  the Lotus  with  the

head  of an  old  man,  and  the  body and  limbs  of  an  infant,  allusive  of  a  previous  state,
The  renovation  of  the  animal  and vegetable
and  enforcing  the  idea  of  regeneration.
Compare  this  with  other
kingdoms  is  expressed  by  the  Chimeras,  on  each  side.
terra  cottas  in  the  Townley  Collection,  which  only  imply  creation  from  water.

+  The  Bahitra  of  the  Hindis.

1 Διόνυσον  Πρωτογὄνον.

 Orph.


16

priests  at  Eleusis,  who  taught  the  immortality  of  the  soul,

though  imperfectly,  by analogous  reasoning  from  observations
upon  the  vicissitudes  of  nature.

Instructed  as  to  fairer  ex-
pectations  of  a  future  state,  the  priests  spared  neither  in-

genuity  nor  expense  to  establish  shews,  which  by  their

splendour  and  secrecy  should  charm  as  well  as  invite  the

curiosity  of  their  countrymen.

As  the  internal  ceconomy  of

these  mysteries  has  never  yet  been  properly  investigated,  and

as  they gave  rise  to  that  elegant  class  of ancient  vessels,  which

I ultimately  design  for  the  subject  of  this  disquisition,  I will

proceed,  as  far  as  my  observation  has  enabled  me,  to  develope

the  nature  of  them;  but  I  trust  the  foregoing  conjectures,

though  loosely  proposed,  will  not  be  thought  impertinent  to

my  general  plan:  they  concern  those  Cabiri  who  laid  the

foundation  for  the  mysteries  of Eleusis,  and  from  a  coincidence

that  will  be  noticed,  we  shall  perhaps  have  reason  to  conclude,

that  their  successors  imparted  to  Greece  and  China  both  their
mysteries  and  games.

pe

Hi

iis

rene  rn

i


NATURE

OF  THE

ELEUSINIAN  MYSTERIES,  &c.


[ 19  ]

Nature  of  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries  —Use  and  Meaning  of

Etruscan  Vases.

Waewn  we  consider  how  much  has  been  effected  by  the

learned  Meursius,  in  his  extensive  compilation  of  passages

from  ancient  writers,  referring  to  the  mysteries  of  Eleusis,  as

also  what  has  been  attempted  since  his  time,  it may  be  deemed

a  matter  of surprise,  that  so  little  has  hitherto  been  ascertained

respecting  this  obscure  and  difficult  subject.
In  Warburton
all  is darkness—éwuyhn  καὶ  νέφος  ἀθρόον.  The  work  of Mr.  Le  Clerc

de  Septchenes  furnishes  but  little  information.
The  Baron  de
Ste.  Croix,  indeed,  has  presented  us  with  useful  researches,
and  they  are  recommended  by numerous  authorities,  which  are
scrupulously  cited  for whatever is advanced,  whence  it happens,

that  the  reader  must  prize  the  work,  knowing  the  firmness  of

the  ground  he  treads.  In  that  part  of  it wherein  the  Eleusinian

mysteries  are  treated,  a  few  valuable  hints  are  thrown  out,
and  had  the Baronde  Ste.  Croix  pursued  them,  the writer  of this
Tract  had  been  spared  his  labour.—A  step  further,  and  all  had
been  disclosed.—But  the  subject  is  so  obscure,  and  comprises
within  itself  so  much  variety,  that  even  though  a  hope  may  be
indulged  of  something  new  to  be  adduced  in  these  pages,  yet
it would  be  presumptuous  to  suppose  that  these  disquisitions
will  be  deemed  conclusive,  or  that  some  future  enquirer  will
not  throw  a  clearer  light  upon  the  subject,  justifying  the
ancient  adage:  ‘*  Eleusis  servat,  quod ostendat  revisentibus.”


20

The  use  of Etruscan  vases,  and  the  meaning  of  the  paintings

with  which  they  are  ornamented,  are  questions  involved  in

no  less  difficulty.*

The  learned  Passeri  boasted  to  have  re-

covered  in  them  the  annals  of a lost  nation,  but  the  religious,

civil,  and  domestic  ceremonies  and  customs  of  his  favourite

Tuscans  are  not,  I think,  displayed  with  much  felicity  of con-

jecture.
The  historical  explanations  of  D’Hancarville  are
proposed  by  him  with  too  much  mistrust  to  be  warmly

adopted ; I am  compelled  to  add,  that  the  illustrations  of  the

accomplished  Italinski+  are  by no  means  satisfactory,  and  that

other  learned  Antiquaries  on  the  Continent  have  examined

these  ancient  monuments  in  a  mistaken  point  of  view,  I fear

there  is  room  to  suspect:  if these  have  erred,  it  is,  I conceive,

because  they  have  taken  up  the  enquiry  abstracted  from  other

investigations,  but  I trust  I shall  not  be  thought  to  assume  too

much,  if I look  for  success  by pursuing  a  different  course.

D’Hancarville,  who  carries  back  the  antiquity  of  certain

painted  vases{  to  an  earlier  date  than  even  the  foundation  of

Rome,  has  remarked  the  invention  of  the  potter’s-wheel  by

the  Athenians,  to  whom  he  also  refers  the  elegant  forms  of

*  From  the  representations  of  chariot  races  upon  vases,  some  persons  have  en-

tertained  a  mistaken  notion,  that  they  were  given  as  meeds  to  victors  in  such  contests,

whereas  the  flying  chariot  is  purely  a  mystical  emblem.

Passeri  has  even  thought

they  were  the  drinking  vessels  of  the  deceased,{  and  by an  indiscrete  admiration  of

whatever  is  Etruscan,  models  of  these  sepulchral  vessels,  with  their  gloomy  orna-

ments,  copied  in  black  and  red,  are  sometimes  applied  in  this  country  to  the  same
purpose.
It  is  time  that  these  false  opinions,  as  to  the  use  of  them,  should  be
exploded.

+  Published  with  the  last  collection  of  Wases  of  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton,  which  now

decorate  the  gallery  of Thomas  Hope,  Esq.

Ζ Vol.  II.  p.  109.

§ Vol.  II.  p. 3,  explanations  of the  plates.


21

those  vessels,  which  we  term  Etruscan.

This  remark  induces

me  to  suggest,  that  the  manufacture  of  these  urns  might  have

been  originally*  carried  on  in  that  street  in  Athens,  called

Κεραμεικὸς,  or  the  Potters-way,  and  from  this  circumstance  so
named.
It was  there,  perhaps,  that  the  Wedgewood  of  anti-
quity  resided,  and  it certainly  was  from  the  Temple  of Ceres,

at  Eleusis,  that  he  drew  the  various  designs  which  still  em-

bellish  his  works.

Upon  the  mysteries  of  this  temple  the

Baron  de  Ste.  Croix  has  thrown  some  light:  aided  by Meursius,

he  has  pointed  out  the  time  of  their  celebration;  he  has

enumerated  the  priests,  and  assigned  to  each  their  proper
office  and  attire.
He  has  prepared  the  great  temple,  or
theatre,  with  its  artificial  thunder,  lightning,  and  necessary
The  Myste,  introduced  in  the  dark,  have  taken
decorations.

their  seats,  and  wait  with  trembling  expectation  for  the  open-

ing of the  mysteries.

Of  these  he  has  even  given  a  glimpse,

by noticing,  though  briefly,  the  spectacle  which  succeeded.

‘«  L’aspirant  y entendoit  différentes  voix,  selon  Dion  Chry-

sostome;  la  lumiere  et  les  ténebres  affectoient  alternativement

ses  sens;

objets.

a  peine  pouvoit-il  considérer  la  multiplicite  des
Les  principaux  étoient  des  fantomes,  ayant  la  figure
de  chien,  et  diverses  formes  monstrueuses,  que  le  bruit  de  la
foudre  et  des  éclairs  rendoient  encore  plus  terribles.
De-la
naissoient  ces  frémissements,  ces  terreurs,  ces  saisissements,
ces  sueurs,  qui font  comparer,  par  Plutarque,  l’état  d’un  initié
a celui  d’un  mourant.”  p.  214.

And  further,  ‘‘  On  faisoit  alors  paroitre  la statue  de la Déesse,

*  I say originally,  because,  from  the  number  of vessels  found  in  Sicily  and  at  Nola,
it is  probable  that  hereafter,  we  shall  hear  of Agrigentine  mysteries,  and  Nolan  mys-
teries,  equal  in  point  of splendour  to  those  at  Eleusis.


22

frottée  avec  soin,  ornée  avec  gout,  et  revétue  de  ses  plus  beaux
habits.
Elle  paroissoit  resplendissante  d'une  clarté  divine,*
par  des  reflets  de  lumiere  qu’on  savoit  artistement  ménager.”

Ρ.  215.

‘Le  sanctuaire  d’Eleusis  étoit  l’endroit  que  la  Divinité

toute  entiere  remplissoit  dans  ce  moment;  les  ténebres  se
dissipoient  aussi-t6t;  l’ame  sortoit  de  l’abyme ; et  on  passoit

de  la  plus  grande  obscurité,  dans  une  clarté  douce,  et  sous  un

ciel  serein.

Des  prairies,  ou  l’on  entendoit  des  cheeurs  et  des

discours  sacrés,  et  ou  l’on  étoit  frappé  par  la  vue  de fantomes

saints,  recevoient  les  initiés.—IIs  étoient  déclarés  Epoptes  apres

ce  spectacle.”  Ibid.

The  foregoing  extracts  may  suffice  for  a

specimen  of what  has  been  adduced  from  ancient  authorities

in  illustration  of  the  mysteries.

It  is  hence  that  I  propose

to  take  up  the  subject.

These  shadows  flitting  across  the  stage,  the  monsters  half
man  half  beast,  the  brilliant  appearance  of  the  Goddess  illu-
mined  by  reflected  lights,+  the  holy  phantoms  which  suc-
ceeded,  induce  me  to  think  that  the  spectacle  could  not  have
differed  much  from  the  well-known  ombres  Chinotses,t  or  dare  I
name  a truly  noble  exhibition,  I would  add  the  Eidouranion

®  The  words  of  Themistius,  from  which  this  description  appears  to  have  been
cy
=
>
ὁπότε  δὲ  ὁ  WEOPNTNS  EKEWOS,  ἀναπετάσας  τῶ  τοροπυλαιὰ  τὰ

borrowed,  are  yet  more  forcible:
νεὼ,  καὶ  TES  χιτῶνας  περιςείλας  τοῦ  ἀγάλματος,  καλλύνας  τὲ  αὐτὸ,  καὶ  ἀποσμήξας  πανταχόθεν,  ἐπεδείκνυ
τῷ μνυεμένω  μαρμαρύσσον  τὲ  ἤδη,  καὶ  αὐγῇ  καταλαμπόμενον  ϑεσπεσία,  ἥτε  ὁμίχλη  ἐκείνη,  καὶ  τὸ  νέφος
ἀϑφόον  ὑπεῤῥήγνυτο,  καὶ  ἐξεφαίνετο  ὁ vag  ἐκ  τοῦ  Babes,  φέγγες  ἀνάπλεως  καὶ  ἀγλαΐας,  ἀντὶ  τοῦ  τρότερον
cxérz.

Themistii  Orat.  2,  in  Patrem.

oN

Ν

,

͵

ε

‘

¢  Thrown  perhaps  from  mirrors  ‘‘  qu'on  savoit  artistement  ménager.”
+ The  following  account  of  the  manner  in  which  these  exhibitions  are  conducted,
is collected  from  Beckmann’s  History  of Inventions,  Vol.  III.  p. 335.  This  ingenious
amusement  consists  in  moving,  by pegs  fastened  to  them,  small  figures  cut  of  paste-
board,  the  joints  of which  are  all  pliable,  behind  a  piece  of  fine  painted  gauze  placed
to  exhibit  various  scenes,
before  an  opening  in  a  curtain,  in  such  a  manner  as


23

of  our  scientific  countryman  Mr.  Walker,  since  it  is  highly

probable,  that  it  consisted  of  various  subjects  displayed  in

transparency.

This  appears  confirmed  by what  Clemens  of

Alexandria  has  asserted  of them,  when  he  termed  the  mysteries

—‘‘  worthy  of nightly  celebration,  by exhibitions  of firelight,
and  admirably  suited  for  the  spirited,  but  vain  and  foolish

minded  posterity  of  Erectheus.”

ἄξια  μὲν  οὖν  ΝΥΚΤΌΣ,  τὰ

τελέσματα,
᾿πρεχϑειδῶν  δήμου."

καὶ  ΠΥ͂ΡΟΣ,  καὶ  τοῦ  μεγαλήτορος,

μᾶλλον  δὲ  ματαιόφρονος
Although  by Nienr  and  Fire,  this  Father

likewise  meant  to  express  the  shamefulness  of  these  shews,

and  the  execration  in  which  he  held  them.

I find  even  Passeri  is  partly  inclined  to  this  opinion,  for,

struck  with  the  orphic  appellation  of  Bacchus,  ϑνητοῖσι  Φανεὶς,----

κε  appearing  in  splendour  to  mortals,”

he  has  remarked,

  quod  pracipue  Bacchus  ipse  totus  igneus,  et  fulgidus  ad-

pareret,  qui  nudis  oculis  tolerari  non  posset.’’  Vol.  III.  p.19.
And  he  has  elsewhere  suggested  of the  Bacchanalia—*‘  fortasse

impostores  illi  ope  machinarum,  artificiosis  splendoribus  ad-

hibitis,  cum  popellus  vino  zstuaret,  imaginem  aliquam  credulis
And  it is  far  from  improbable  that  some  such
objiciebant.+”

delirium  as  mentioned  by Passeri,  was  produced  by a  draught

of  the  xvxedy,  or  a  cup  of  mixed  liquors,  in  which  poppies
This  was  presented  to  each  mysta
were  a  chief  ingredient.

before  the  shews  began,  and  might  have  contributed  more  to

that  confusion  of  the  intellects,  than  the  awful  appearance  of

the  objects  exhibited.

according  to  pleasure;  while  the  opening  covered  with  gauze  is  illuminated,  towards
the  apartment  where  the  spectators  sit,  by means  of  light  reflected  back  by a  mirror ;

so  that  the  shadows  of the  pegs  are  concealed.

*  Protrept.  p.  18.
+  Passeri  de  Pict.  Hetruscor.  in  Vasc.  Vol.  11].  p. xxx11.


24

We  may  hence,  I  think,  collect  the  real  nature  of  these
shews:  they  probably  consisted  of  transparencies,  of  which
the  subjects  are  faithfully  preserved  upon  Etruscan  vases  to
the  present  day.  The  tradition  given  by  Pliny,  respecting
the  origin  of  the  latter,  I am  inclined  to  treat  as  fabulous,  and
to  conclude,  that  the  shadow  was  transferred  to  the  vase,  not
from  the  lamp  of  the  daughter  of  Dibutades,  but  from  the
scenes  of  the  theatre  at  Eleusis.
These,  it might  be  readily
supposed,  consisted,  either  of  a  dark  superficies,  in  which
transparent  figures  were  placed,  hence—the  Etruscan  vases
with  red  figures  upon  a  black  ground;  or,  of  opake  figures,
moved  behind  a  transparent  canvas  ;  and  hence—those  earlier
vases  with  black  figures  upon  a  red  ground.*

There  is  a  country,  widely  distant  from  Greece,  the  natives
of  which,  however,  retain  some  correspondent  marks  of  an-
tiquity,  where  the  vase  in  a  transparent  state  is  occasionally
exhibited  with  great  solemnity.
Such  is  the  exhibition  of

lanterns  among  the  Chinese,  in  their  festival  so  named.

The

purpose  of  that  ceremony,  and  of the  shews  at  Eleusis,  is  the
same.
At  the  time  of  the  Chinese  festival  the  manes  are  sup-
posed  to  revisit  the  earth;  the  lanterns  then  displayed  are  not
only  ornamented  with  paintings,  but  are  also  made  further

*  A  narrow  light  border  frequently  encompasses  the  outline  of  the  figures ; but
this  interval  only  occurs  between  some  part  of  the  body  (as the  hair,  &c.)  expressed
in  shadow,  and  the  ground  of  the  vase,  thus  serving  as  a  luminous  interval  to  mark
the  contour.
I cannot  forbear  noticing  the  eighty-second  plate  in  the  first  volume
of  D’Hancarville’s  collection,  wherein  a  female  touches  a  priest,  or  Pan,  with  a  lu-
minous  branch,  whilst  she  holds  another  behind  her;  the  priest  likewise  bearing
one  of  the  same,  and  a  calathus.
The  appearance  of  these  several  branches  is can-
descent  like  a  firework,  or  the  electric  spark,  and  it  might  have  been  produced  by
perforating  the  transparent  scene,  and  applying  the  flame  of lamps  immediately  behind
the  canvas  so  punctured.


25

interesting  by certain  small  figures  cut  out,  and  ingeniously

moved  upon  the  side.

The  object  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  was  to  inculcate  a

belief  in  a  future  state ; and  the  Chinese  feast  of  lanterns,  no

doubt,  was  equally  designed  to  enforce  the  immortality  of  the

soul;  by  the  ingenious  and  pleasing  medium  of  moving

transparencies.

We  may  readily  conceive  that  Aristophanes  was  serious,

when  he  hinted,  that  it  behoved  every  good  Greek  to  be

initiated  before  death.

Now  these  vessels  are  only  found

in  the  most  ancient  Greek  tombs,  and  they  seem  to  have  been

deposited  there,  as  a  tessera  or  mark,  that  the  deceased  had

been  initiated,  by  commemorating  the  particular  scenes  of

which  he might  have  been  ‘Exér%¢,  or  spectator.  These  painted

vases  then,  and  the  crepundia  of  diminutive  pottery,  we  may

conclude,  were  the  memorials  of  initiation  spoken  of  by

Apuleius,  which  he  received  from  the  priests,  and  preserved

with  devout  secrecy  in  the  penetralia  of  his  dwelling.

Vin’

dicam,  cujusmodi  illas  res  in  sudario  obvolutas,  laribus  Pon-

tiani  commendarim?  Mos  tibi  geretur.

Sacrorum  pleraque

Initia  in  Grecia  participavi.  Eorum  quedam  signa  et  monu-

menta  tradita  mihi  a  sacerdotibus  sedulo  conservo.

Nihil

insolitum,  nihil  incognitum  dico:  vel  unius  Liberi  Patris

Symmistz,  qui  adestis,  scitis,  quid  domi  conditum  celetis,  et

absque  omnibus  profanis  tacite  venereminii—And  again,—

Etiamne  cuiquam  mirum  videri  potest,  cui  sit  ulla  memoria

religionis,  hominem  tot  mysteriis  Deum  conscium,  quedam

sacrorum  crepundia  domi  adservare  ?—  Apologia.

The  certificate  of  initiation  was  probably  expressed  on

these  memorials  in  the  words  K4ANC,  or  KAAOC,  inscribed  in

E


26

transparent  characters  upon  the  vases  of Nola.  Thus  KAINIAC
““  Clinias  died  in  the  good  hope,”—
RAANC  sc.  ἐτελεύτησε,
upon  one  of  this  description  in  the  possession  of  Samuel
Rogers,  Esq.  KAITAPXOC  KAAOC  in  opaque  letters  upon  the
Agrigentine  vase  of  Thomas  Hope,  Esq.  KAAE  4OKEC,  de-
clared  of a  female,*  upon  a  vase  cited  by the  Abbe  Zarillo,  in
his  Two  Letters  to  Mr.  Millin,  wherein  the  Abbé  proves,
with  considerable  neatness  of  remark,  as  well  as  erudition,
that  δοκεῖς  does  not  so  much  imply—*  you  appear,’ —as,  ‘*  you
appear  in  the  judgment  of,””  ‘*  you  are  considered,”  —which
gives  fresh  colour  to  my  explanation  of  the  words  inscribed:
that  the  person  had  been  approved  by the  initiator,  and  by
him  pronounced  perfect.+

This  idea  may  be  illustrated  from  Plutarch.

The  mystic  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  being
allegorically  expressed  by  an  elegant  groupe  on  the  side  of
the  vase,  the  painting  itself  was  put  for  the  religious  opinion
of  the  person,  and  the  person  was  consequently  represented
A
by the  vase.
passage  in  the  tract  de Iside  et Osiride,  which,  to  my  knowledge,
has  never  yet  been  applied  to  the  present  subject,  furnishes  a
very  probable  account  of  the  manner  at  least,  in  which  these
scenic  shews  originated,  and  for  the  custom  of  depositing
vases  in  tombs  ;  I may therefore  properly  conclude  this  chapter
by adducing  it.

*  As  if for  KAAH  AOKEIC.
+  From  these  considerations  I  feel  inclined  to  disbelieve  that  anecdote  which
Clemens  has  reported,  (Protrept.  p.  47,  ed.  Potter,)  so  injurious  to  the  credit  of
Phidias,  that  the  artist  designed  to  celebrate  the  beauty  of  a  favourite  by the  words
I rather  apprehend,  that  proud  of
inscribed  on  the  finger  of his  Olympian  Jupiter.
his  performance,  Phidias  gave  the  challenge  to  criticism,  by declaring,  in the  language
of Eleusis,  MANTAPXHE  KAAOS,  that  his  figure  of the  all-sufficient  Deity  was  a  perfect
work.


27

It seems,  that  the  veils,  or  sacred  garments,  with  which  the
statues  of  the  Agyptian  deity  Isis  were  apparelled,  were
partly  black,  and  partly  white,  for  which  Plutarch  gives  the

following  reason:  Kal  περιστέλλοντες,  τὰ μὲν,  μέλανα  καὶ  σκίωδη,  τὰ δὲ,

φανερὰ  καὶ  λαμπρὰ"  τῆς  περὶ  ϑεῶν  ὑποδηλοῦντα  οἰήσεως,  ofa  καὶ  σερὶ  τὴν
ἐσθῆτα  τὴν Kody ἀποφαίνεται.  διὸ  καὶ  τὸ  κοσμεῖσθαι  τούτοις  τοὺς  ἀποθανόντας

᾿Ισιακοὺς,  σύμξολόν  ἐστι  τοῦτον  τὸν λόγον  εἶναι  μετ  αὐτῶν,  καὶ  τοῦτον  ἔχοντας,

ἄλλο  δὲ  μηδὲν,  ἐκεῖ  βαδίζειν.----ϑ6 οι. 111.-----  Moreover,  covering  the

statues  with  apparel  partly  black,  or  shady,  partly  light  and

brilliant,  thus  indicating  their  notions  of  the  Deity,  they pro-
fess  to  think  of  his  nature,  as  of  this  sacred  cloathing:  and
the  dressing  the  votaries  of  Isis  when  dead,  in  the  same  ap-

parel,  is  a  sign,  that  these  opinions  are  still  with  them,  and

that  they  departed  from  life,  in  the  full  persuasion  of  this,

rejecting  every  other  doctrine.”

*  The  first  scene  ever  used,  was,  perhaps,  the  sacred  Peplum.  The  mere  display  of

this  to  the  people,  by torchlight,  would  have  produced  the  effect  of a  transparency.


28

Preparation  for  the  Mysteries  —Use  of the  Intaglio—  Offices  of the

Priests  —The  Descent  of Bacchus  under  various  characters  ad

inferos ; his  Voyage  over  the  Styx,  and  Re-ascent  exhibited  as  a

mystical Drama,  in a  Succession  of transparent  Scenes,  viz.  different

Vases  and  Gems.

Arter  the  enchanting  glimpse  of  the  mysteries  already
quoted,  I despair  of  producing  a  spectacle  that  shall  equal  the

language  of  the  Baron  de  Ste.  Croix.

The  swelling  sym-

phony,  the  airy  strains  of  invisible  spirits,  I cannot  promise

to  the  stranger  who  shall  consult  these  pages;  and  even  the

κε  discours  sacrés,”’  if  by these  words  I may  understand  the  ex-

position  of  the  Hierophant,  will  be  but  imperfectly  given.

The  eloquent  Aristophanes,  indeed,  in  his  moments  of  sober

propriety,  will  supply  a  chorus  which  needs  not  the  aid  of  a

well-appointed  orchestra  to  give  it effect;  but  my  design  is

chiefly  to  render  the  lovers  of  Greek  antiquity  Exéa%zc,  or

spectators  in  these  shews,  by admitting  them  to  a  nearer  view

of  which  I  may,  at  least,  excite  their  curiosity  respecting  a

highly  interesting  department  of  the  antique,  for  which  a

taste  is  much  increased  of  late  in  this  country,  and  of which

we  now  possess  many  beautiful  specimens.

For  this  purpose

I have  compiled  a  short  drama,  which  may  illustrate  the  ge-

neral  subject  of  this  disquisition  ;  and  although  the  theatre  at

Eleusis  has  been  long  since  destroyed,  its  scenes  mutilated,


29

dispersed,  and  forgotten;  nevertheless,  from  the  remains  of

them,  I  have  attempted  to  collect  a  series  of  transparencies
that  I flattered  myself  would  appear  in  tolerable  regularity  of

succession.

In  selecting  these  from  Etruscan  vases,  I found

the  continuity  more  interrupted  than I at  first  expected,  and  I
have  been  obliged  to  supply  the  deficiency  from  ancient  gems,
which  liberty,  I trust,  will  be  conceded  to  me,  when  the  nature
of  the  intaglio  is  considered ; for  this,  executed  in  cornelian,
sardine,  or  other  diaphanous  stones,
a  solar
transparency,  and  such,  as  worn  on  the  finger  of  a  Greek  who
had  been  initiated,  must  have  recalled  in  a  very  pleasing  way
those  awful,  but  ravishing  spectacles,  of which  it furnished  an

is  of  itself

imitation  both  elegant  and  portable.

Thus  prepared  for  the  undertaking,  having  adapted  my

scenes,  although  it  may  be  no  very  creditable  employment  to

engage  as  mechanist  of a  theatre,  yet,  since  the  Greeks  deigned

to  receive  the  mysterious  doctrine  of  their  religion  from  pan-

tomimic  representations,  and  since  men  of  erudition  have  in

later  times  condescended  to  direct  their  researches  to  the  nature

of them,  I may,  surely,  be  permitted  to  ascend  the  stage,  and,

as  the  different  illumined  paintings  pass  before  the  reader’s

eye,  to  take  upon  myself,  (as far  as  may  be  allowable  for  the

immediate  purpose,)  the  office  of  hierophant,  or  expositor.

‘*  Kai  ἐγὼ  ποιήσω  ‘Iegogavry.”’

It  may  not,  however,  be  amiss,

first  to  drop  a  remark  respecting  the  character  of  the  person

who  anciently  officiated  under  that  title,  and  also  of  his

assistants.

We  learn  that,  on  these  occasions,  the  Hierophant  per-

sonated  the  δημιουργὸς,  or  Creator,  but  the  reason  of his  assuming

that  character  no  writer  has  disclosed  to  us.

The  genuine


30

meaning  of the  word  is artifex,  opifex,  and  it might  be  supposed

to  indicate,  merely  the  priest  who  set  the  mystic  fantoccini  in

motion,  and  who  explained  their  allegoric  meaning.  But  it  is

not  improbable,  that  in  the  Mysteries  of  Eleusis,  the  priests

were  originally  actors  in  a  drama,  wherein  the  Demiurgus  ex-

posed  the  notions  of  the  ancients  respecting  the  cosmogony,

while  the  representatives  of  the  sun  and  moon  enforced  the

system  of  decay  and  reproduction;  but  in  later  times,  when

the  shews  were  necessarily  celebrated  on  a  larger  scale,  the

mysteries  were  then  illustrated  by  scenery,  as

a  more  com-

pendious  and  striking  mode  of instructing  the  spectators.  The

torch-bearer  was  then  perhaps  appointed  to  purify  the  Myste

previous  to  initiation,  the  sacred  herald  announced  the  cere-

monies  to  be  complied  with  during  the  celebration  of  the

greater  mysteries,  whilst  the  assistant  at  the  altar  might  have

deduced  useful  conclusions  for  the  moral  conduct  of the  people.

The  priests,*  although  their  offices  were  changed,  nevertheless

retained  their  ancient  attire,  and  this  appears  to  be  recorded

in  the  words  of  Eusebius,  Ὁ μὲν Ἱεροφάντης  εἰς  εἰκόνα  τοῦ  Anuiovgyov

ἐνσχκευάζετχι,  that  the  Hierophant  was  attired  as  an  allegorical

image  of  the  Creating  Power,  in  like  manner,  the  Azéovyos  of

the  sun,  the  assistant

ἐσὶ βωμῷ  of  the  moon,  and  the  Ἱεροκήρυξ  of

Hermes.

*  Their  number  was  four,  corresponding  with  the  three  Cabiri  and  Camillus  in

Samothrace.


“7


&

|

X

᾿

\

:

p

)

a
t

|

ὃ

{

 i
)
e

;

 |

|

»


Plate

V.  p30


x


Plate

VIL.

ἢ


ὁ

Vil


51

ARGUMENT  OF  THE  FABLE.

PLATE  I.

Of the  Rotation,  or  Revolution  of Nature.

Tue  allegory  conveyed  in  this  first  painting  comprises  the

general  meaning  of  the  scenes  which  follow.

The  vicissitude

of decay  and  reproduction,  to  which,  according  to  the  notions

of  the  ancients,  nature  was  subject  in  perpetual  revolution,  is

expressed  by a  female  figure  tumbling.

The  order  of  nature

is  for  a  moment  inverted,  but,  by an  effort  of  the  limbs,  the

body  appears  on  the  point  of  being  returned  to  its  proper

attitude.

Ἵ.  These  tumblers  were  styled  xv€isnrnpes,  from  xv€isaw,  a  word  derived  from
xv6n,  caput,  that  is,  in  caput  deferor,  devolyérque  ;  but  which  may  also  signify

to  turn  over  as  a  die,  and  χυξιγάω  is  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of  taxillis

ludere,  to  play with  dice:  even  dice  were  anciently  viewed  in  the  same  mystical

sense  with  that  which  is  conveyed  by this  female  tumbler.

This  painting,  (copied  from  a  vase,  the  use  of  which,  and  of  the  inedited

monuments  that  follow,  I have  to  reckon  among  the  numerous  kindnesses  that
endear  to  me  the  memory  of Charles  Townley,  Esq.)  may  illustrate  some  lines

of  Homer,  who,  in  his  description  of  the  Cretan  dance  on  the  shield  of

Achilles,  introduces  two  tumblers  into  the  middle  of  the  circle,  which  per-
formed  their  feats  in  cadence,  whilst  the  young  men  and  women  danced

round  them;

δοιὼ  δὲ  κυξισητῆρε  κατ᾽  αὐτοὺς,

Μολπῆς  ἐξάρχοντος,  ἐδίνευον  κατὰ  μέσσους.

Iliad  Σ.  v.  604,5:

Should  the  foregoing  allegory  be  deemed  absurdly  applied,

I  readily  agree  in  the  charge;  but  these  are  the  absurdities


32

which  were  so  severely reproved  by the  Fathers  of the  Church,
such  as  might  be  expected  ματαιόφρονος  ᾿Ερεχθειδῶν  δήμου  from  the
vain  and  foolish-minded  posterity  of Erectheus.
It  is  no  part
of  my  design  to  restore  the  religion  of  the  ancients  to  its
original  dignity,*  nor  to  defend  those  who  formerly  professed
it,  from  the  injurious  charge  of  heathenism  or  paganism.+
Rather  let  its  absurdities  be  displayed.—By  discovering  how
much  was  required,  we  shall  be  sensible  how  much  we  have
gained,  for  one  of the  first  evidences  of the  truth  of Christianity
arises  from  the  necessity  of its  healing  intervention.

‘«  Nihil  enim  adversus  pietatem,  ac  bonos  mores  molimur :

nam

veterumn

superstitionum  ritibus

religionis
Christiane  veritas,  ac  majestas,  veluti  lux  in  tenebris  magis,
magisque  elucebit.  +
+

expositis,

99.

PLATE  11]:

Bacchus  in the  form  of a Vase,  carried  ad  inferos.

In  the  following  scenes  we  shall  be  made  acquainted  with
the  mythological  Bacchus,  in  whose  person  were  embodied
the  theological  notions  of  the  ancients.  We  shall  view  him,
who  by ancient  mystagogues  was  termed  ‘  the  firstborn  of  the
unknown  father,§’’  who  was  invested  with  the  power  of creat-
ing,  preserving,  and  destroying,  himself  subject  to  the  same

*  See  the  Preface  to  the  Essay  of Mr.  Le  Glerc  de  Septchenes  upon  the  Religion  of

the  Greeks.

I quote  from  the  English  edition  in  octavo.

+  Ibid.
¢ Adprobatio  Jo.  Baptiste  Vicecomitis  in  Passerii  de  Pict.  Hetrusc.  in  Vase.  V.  II.
Martianus  Capella,  l. 2,  p. 43.

*  Tgnoti  vis  celsa  Patris,  vel  prima  propago.”


33

vicissitudes::

In  him  we  shall.-see,  cause.  put  .for  effect,  and

vice  versa:  inert,  yet.  producing,  activity,  active  and  passive,

male  and  female,*  he  will  not  only  give  various  forms  to

matter,

“Ὕλην  ἀλλάσσων  ἱρὴν ἰδέαις  πολυμόρῴοις,᾿  +

44.

90,

'

’

but  we  shall  also  have  reason  to  concur  with  the  poet,  in  con-

sidering  him  αἰολόμορφον  dvaxra;{  the  power  who  could  assume

various  shapes  at  pleasure;  he  will  appear  alternately  ex-

tinguished  and  rekindled  σξζενγύμενος.  λάμπων  re,§  in  fine  we  shall

observe  in  him,  though  governor,  of  nature,  a  type  of  nature

itself,  and  all  the  successive  changes  to  which  it  is subject.

It  has  already  been  observed;  that  the  vase  is  the  Larva,

or  substitute  for  the  person,  it  may  therefore  be  admitted  that

the  descent  of  Bacchus  might,  be  implied  by the  deportation  of

the  vase  ad  inferos.

It  is  in  the  form  of  an  Amphora  that  we

now  discover  him  borne  to  the  lower  hemisphere  by  the  de-
is
stroying  Harpy,  in  whose  hand  the  emblematical  torch

depressed,  to  denote  suspended  animation.

The  same  might

be  further  proved  from  various  gems,  where  a  corpse  or  a

*  According  to  the  Orphic  invocation  Mpwroyéve—digun—Hymn.  5,  νι  1.  Thus  the
Demiurgic  Bacchus  was  named  both  Liber  and  Libera,  to  account  for  which  I  must
have  recourse  to  the  Agyptian  theology  :—according  to  this,  Osiris  was,  indeed,  the

representative  of  the  Deity;  nevertheless,  it appears  that  Isis,  or  the  moon,  was  the
The  cause  is  explained  by  Plutarch  de  Js.  et
more  immediate  object  of reverence.
Osir.  sect.  43,  p-110.
For,  though  the  sun  Osiris  impregnate  her,  yet  she  again  im-
pregnates  the  universe,  by scattering  over  it  the  principles  of  generation,  of  vege-
She  is  therefore  termed  male  and  female:  female,  as  receiving  from
tation  and  life.
the  sun;  male.  as  giving  to  the  universe.

+  Hymn.  24,  v.  3

t Hymn.  38,  v.5

See  Dr.  Blackwall,  p.  145.

ὁ Hymn.  55,  v.5


34

terminus  are  indifferently  carried,  as  in  the  present  scene,
but  it is needless  to  adduce  them  in  this  place.*

PLATE  III.

Descent  of the  Phanes  ad  inferos.

Tuts  beautiful  gem  exhibits  the  infant  Dioscurus  hooded,
and  bearing  the  Bacchus,  under  the  form  of  a  lantern,  to  the

lower  regions.—Similar  subjects  may  be seen  in the  Mus.  Florentin.

Vol.  I.  Plate  LXXX.  fig. 2,  3,  6.

PLATE  IV.

Bacchus  in the form  of a  Lantern  crosses  the  Styx.

Whence  is  it  that  the  vase  and  lantern  are

so  intimatel yy
connected  ?—that  Greece  and  China  partook  in  the  same  alle-
gories,  and  adopted  ceremonies  similar  in  spirit  and  meaning ?
I know  not  how  to  resolve  the  question,  but  I  consider  this
gem,  compared  with  that which  follows,  to  be  a  full  and  curious
confirmation  of  the  fact.
The  Dioscurus  here  appears  an
emaciated  elder  conducting  the  Phanes,  or  Bacchus,  over  the
Styx.

*  Such  gems  are  actually  in  the  Townley  collection.  Upona  painted  tazza,  in  the

collection  of Thomas  Hope,  Esq.  the  Dioscurus  appears  bending  under  the  weight  of

a  tortoise,  which,  as  the  emblem  of  sluggish,  inert  nature,  he  bears  ad  inferos.

The

tortoise  is  kept  steady  upon  his  back  bya  thong,  or  strap,  passed  over  one  end  of
the  shell.


PLATE  V.

Arrival  of the  Amphora  at  the  Cavern  of Hades.

Pursuinc  the  subject,  we  again  find  Bacchus  in  the  form  of

an  Amphora  completing  his  voyage*  to  the  Cavern  of  Hades,

where  Cerberus,  barking,  announces  his  approach.

The

Clepsydra  or  water-clock,  which  appears  in  the  form  of  an

hour-glass,  in  the  boat  of Charon,  has  an  allegorical  meaning  :

the  noise  made  by the  turning  of this,  when  the  pleadings  in

the  courts  of  justice  among  the  ancients  were  finished,  was

termed  pacsha,  a  word  implying  turn,  or  change,  as  we  are  in-

formed  by Capt.  Wilford.+

It  is  therefore  probable,  that  the

water-clock  in  the  present  gem  might  be  the  symbol  of  vicis-

situde,  whereby  a  promise  of return  is  made  to  Bacchus  in  his

visit  to  the  shades.

PLATE  VI.

Bacchus  as  a  Lantern  in  inferis.

We  here  observe  the  nearly  extinguished  Phanes  in  inferis

held  bya  skeleton,  which,  erect  and  motionless,  seems  to  par-

take  of  the  nature  of  a  Terminus,  designed  to  express  that

point  in  the  lower  hemisphere,  whence  nature  emerging  shall

resume  her  former  activity:  for  it  is  an  original  suggestion  of

my very  learned  and  excellent  friend,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Henley,  that

*  I find  this  subject  expressed  in  a  ludicrous  way  in  an  ancient  fresco  painting,
which  exhibits  the  Dioscuri  by two  grotesque  figures  conveying  a  boat-load  of  vases
See  Antich.  d’Ercolano  Pitture,  Vol.  V.  Pl.  LX VII.
over  the  Styx.

+  Asiat.  Researches,  Vol.  V.  p- 301,  octavo.


36

the  pillar  (to which  I would  also  compare  the  Terminus)  sym-
bolically  considered  denotes  the  solstice,  the  apparent  tem-
porary  resting  place  of  the  sun  at  the  furthest  extent  of  his
course,  whether  in  the  upper  or  lower  hemisphere.

PLATE  VII.

Return of the  Amphora.*

Tue  return  of  Bacchus  is  here  neatly  expressed  by a  winged
genius  upon  the  Amphora,  which  is wafted  along  by means  of
a  hoisted  sail.

PLATE  VIII.

Bacchus  having  again  assumed  the form  of a  Vase,  is brought  up from
the  Inferi.

Ar  length  the  various  characters  assumed  by this  changeable
deity  have  been  traced  through  their  mystic  revolutions,  ex-
cepting  that  it  remains  for  me  to  bring  up  the  vase  to  the
upper  hemisphere.
A  painting  from  an  inedited  vase  in  the
Townley  Collection,  may  serve  to  unravel  my  drama.
In  this
the  generative  power,  characterised  by  Priapeid  ears
and
horns,  emerges  from  the  marshy  shores  of  the  Styx,  bringing
up  the  Amphora  from  the  Infert.  The  broad  leaves  of  the  lotus
by which  he  is  surrounded,  have  their  peculiar  signification ;
and  this  will  more  plainly  appear  to  the  reader,  when  I shall
explain  the  emblematical  reference  of  this  aquatic  plant  to
creation.

*  From  the  Museum  Florentinum,  Vol.  I.  Pl.  LXXVII.  Rigs  te


oF

Before  I  dismiss  the  spectators,  I  cannot  refrain  from  ex-

pressing  my  pleasure,  that  a  satisfactory  explanation  has  at

length  been  found  by  that  learned  Asiatic  antiquary  Capt.

Francis  Wilford,*  for  those  mystic  words  Κὸγξ,  éurat,  Konx,

ompax,+  which  closed  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries,  by

him  proved  to  be  of  Indian  etymology.

Father  Paolinot  was

struck  with  the  apparent  correspondence  of  many  Indian  ce-

remonies  with  others  which  he  had  formerly  noticed  upon  the

Grecian  vases,  and  he  has  asserted,  that  a  satisfactory  explana-

tion  of the  latter  could  not  be  given,  until  they were  compared

with  the  manners  of  the  Orientals.  Although  1 do  not  appre-

hend  this  correspondence  can  be  traced  to  any  great  extent,

yet  I have  had  reason  to  be  satisfied  of  the  justness  of  tlie  re-

mark  upon  a  few  occasions,  and  I may  probably  adduce  some-

thing  in  favour  of  it  hereafter.

*  Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  V.  p. 300.

+  In  Sanscrit,  Canscha,  om,  pacsha.  The  first  of  these  signifying  ‘*  The  object

of our  most  ardent  wishes.”
clusion  of  a  prayer,  like  amen.
and  signifying,
Ibid.  p. 300.

‘  change,  course,

Om,  the  monosyllable  used  at  the  beginning  and  con-
Pacsha  answering  to  the  obsolete  Latin  word  vix,
stead,  place,  turn  of  work,  duty,  fortune.”

ᾧ Paolino’s  Travels,  p. 255.  English  ed.  octavo.


38

Eastern  Illuminations  and  the  Eleusinian  Shows  compared.

Tue  custom  of  illuminating  with  torches  or  lamps,  at  certain
times  of  the  year,  has  been  common  in  many  parts  of  the  East.
Tt  obtained  in  #¥gypt  and  Phoenicia,  in  which  countries  it was

designed  for  a  religious  ceremony.

It  likewise  constituted  a

particular  festival  at  Athens,  the  Lampadophoria,  which  were
celebrated  in  honour  of  Minerva,  Prometheus,  and  Hephestus.

They consisted  of a race,  on  foot  or  on  horse-back,  during which

v.78.

of  life:

the  lamp,  or  torch,  was  passed  from  youth  to  youth,  and  if  in
the  hand  of any  one  who  received  it,  the  flame  of  it were  ex-
tinguished,  such  a  one  lost  his  privilege  of  partaking  in  the
sport.
Lucretius  assures  us  that  this  torch  denoted  the  lamp
‘*  Et,  quasi  cursores,  vitai  lampada  tradunt,”  7.  2,
And  we  may  add,  that  the  passing  of  it  from  hand  to
hand  denoted  the  transition  of the  animating  principle  through
the  circle  of  various  bodies,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  the
Metempsychosis.*  The  vignette  given  above,  is copied  from  an
antique  bas-relief  to  be  seen  in  the  wall  of  a  temple  which
the  late  venerable  Earl  of  Besborough  erected  at  his  villa  at
Roehampton,  as  the  temple  of  Virtue  and  Honour,  to  receive

*  See  the  note  of Creech  upon  the  passage.


39

the  busts  of  different  worthies:  it is  a  funeral  monument,  ex-
hibiting  a  race  of  naked  youths*  towards  a  sepulchre,  and  the

infant  Dioscuri  behind  them,  one  of whom  inverts  his  torch

to  signify  that  the  competitors  in  this  race  are  thrown  out

from  the  circle.

Capt.  Turner  has  informed  us,+  that  in  those

illuminations  which  are  made  in  the  East  on  the  29th  of

October,  if  the  flame  be  extinguished,  it is considered  a  most

evil  omen,  the  cause  of  which  is  to  be  explained  from  the

Athenian  feast  of lamps,  which  was  held  in  the  Potter’s  Way,

where  similar  mismanagement  amongst  the  youths  who  ran,

was  deemed  equally  unfortunate.  We  now  discover  the  origin

and  meaning  of those  illuminations  so  frequent  in  the  East,  as

during  the  Dewali  in  Hindustan,  which  falls  soon  after  the

autumnal  equinox:  for  as  the  sun  about  that  time  goes  down
into  the  lower  hemisphere,  these  illuminations  anticipate  the

return  of  his  light,  and  this  festival  is  accordingly  held  in

honour  of  the  dead,{  to  whom,  as  at  Eleusis,  was  indicated  a

similar  return  from  the  shades.||

Even  that  autumnal  feast,

*  It  is  not  merely  by way  of  justifying  my  explanation  of  this  bas-relief,  which
exhibits  a  race  of  four  youths,  that  I dissent  from  the  conclusion  drawn  by Meursius
from  a  passage  in  Pausanias,  and  a  scholium  upon  Persius,  that  only  three  youths
For  though  the  former  authority  be  neither  way
contended  in  the  Lampadophoria.
decisive,  yet  it appears  to  me,  that  the  concluding  words  of  the  scholiast  give  the
question  against  the  learned  critic:  “  Qui  victor  esset,  primus  facem  tollebat,  deinde

sequenti  se  tradebat,  et  secundus  tertio:  similiter  omnes,  donec  currentium  numerus  im-

pleretur.”

Vide  Meursii  Grac.  Feriat.  p. 189.

+  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p. 318.

x The  Dussera  is celebrated  on  the  first  full  moon  after  the  autumnal  equinox:  the

Dewali  on  the  new  moon  following.  Turner’s  Tibet,  p.  163.

ὁ In  an  old  MS.  tract  on  the  Roman,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  Calendars,  I  find  it

expressed,  “  that  the  Pelasgi,  after  they  had  been  happily  taught  that  φῶς  signified  as
well  light  as  a  man,  they began  to  light  torches,  &c.  and  throw  about  lighted  tapers.

||  Thus  Dr.  Kempfer  informs  us  of  the  Japanese:  ‘  On  the  81}  of August,  there

was  another  festival  called  Bon.

People  on  that  occasion  attend  for  one  whole  night


40

the  Mullaum  in  Bootan,  and  the  correspondent  Durga  Poojah

of  the  Hindus,  though  now  appearing  to  present  a  moral

scenic  exhibition,  it  may  be  presumed,  had  once,  at  least,  a

different  meaning.

The  first  of  these,  we  are  informed,  is

celebrated  for  ten  days.*—What  then  forbids  our  comparing

its  spirit  and  meaning  with  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  which
The  Durga  Poojah,  we  are
lasted  nearly  an  equal  number.+

told,  consists  in  the  display  of a  gaudy  scene,  with  Durga,  and

various  figures  in  alto-relief,  loaded  with  tinsel  and  other  or-

naments.

At  the  close  of  the  exhibition,  it  is  conducted  to

the  Ganges,  to  the  waves  of which  it  is  committed  with  due

solemnity.  Who  does  not  here  discover  the  ornamented  statue

of  the  goddess  in  the  temple  at  Eleusis,  “Ὁ  frottée  avec  soin,

at  the  tombs  of their  ancestors  and  relations,  with  lights  and  lanthorns.  The  solemnity
of this  festival  began  upon  the  7th,  and  lasted  for  three  days  together.  They  believe,
that  the  souls  of deceased  persons,  whether  they  led  a  good  or  bad  life,  walk  about,

and  visit  the  places  of their  former  abode.”  History  of Japan,  p. 563.

*  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p-  162.

+  The  Eleusinian  mysteries,  which  began  on  the  15th  of  Boedromion  (about  the

month  of September),  were  celebrated  nine  days.

It  is  probable,  however,  that  the

scenic  exhibitions  only  took  place  on  the  first,  fifth,  and  eighth  day,  since  the  inter-
Meursius  has
mediate  ceremonies  partly  consisted  of  processions  in  the  open  air.
thus  enumerated  them:

1.  ᾿Αγυρμὸς,  the  general  meeting  for  initiation.

“Anade  μύσται,  a  procession  to  the  sea-side.
The  sacrifice  of a  mullet.

The  procession  with  the  cista  mystica.

A  procession  of  the  Myste,  with  torches,  by night.
From  the  following
line  of Aschylus,  however,  Λαμπραῖσιν  dorgawaics  λαμπάδων  σϑένει,  it  is  probable

that  transparent  scenes  strongly  illumined  with  lamps  from  behind,  were  then
exhibited.

a

.  The  procession  with  the  statue  of Jacchus  from  Athens  to  Eleusis.
.  An  athletic  contest.

on .  Epidauria,  a  renewal  of  the  ceremonies  of the  first  day,  for  the  sake  of those

who  were  prevented  attending  at  the  ἀγυρμός.

9.  The  ceremony  of pouring  wine  from  the  yessels  called  τλημοχόαι.


41

ornée  avec  gout,  et  revétue  de  ses  plus  beaux  habits,"  —as  de-

scribed  by the  Baron  de  Ste.  Croix?  Whence  we  may  pos-
sibly  be  furnished  with  a  solution  of  that  expression,  upon
which  the  learned  Meursius  exercised  his  ingenuity  with  much
felicity,  “4444E  MYSTAI,—‘‘  To  the  sea,  O  Myste!"—which
Transfer
gave  the  name  to  a  particular  day of  the  mysteries.

this  chain  of  reasoning  to  China,  where  similar  ceremonies
prevail  :*  the  Pelasgic  equivoque  is  equally  manifest  in  the
The  object  of  it  has  equally  re-
Chinese  feast  of  Lanterns.

ference  to  the  astronomical  descent  and  return  of  the  sun,  and
the  application  of this  allegory  to  the  resuscitation  of the  dead.
I have  shewn  this  (σροσσαίζων  indeed)  in  my  Eleusinian  drama,

but  I  now  appeal  to  the  discernment  of  my  reader,  whether

the  serious  and  instructive  moral,  inculcated  by these  trans-

parent  illuminations,  were  not  of  similar  tendency  in  Greece

and  China.

*  According  to  the  most  reasonable  accounts,  the  Chinese  derive  their  feast  of
Lanterns  from  a  Mandarin  (Peirun)  whose  daughter  perished  in  a  river,  and  from  his

seeking  her  by torchlight.

Mr.  Boulanger,  Tom.  II.  p. 51,  compares  this  Mandarin

and  his  daugh‘er  to  Ceres  and  Proserpine;  and  he  adds,  it  is  for  those  who  have  ac-
quaintance  with  the  Chinese  language  to  seek  in  the  etymology  of  their  names,
This  festival  is  held  in  February,  soon
whether  his  conjecture  be  well  founded.
The  sign  Aquarius  is accordingly  termed  in  the
after  the  opening  of  the  new  year.
Chinese  language,  ‘‘  The  Resurrection  of the  Spring.”  Boulanger,  Vol.  111.  p. 167.


Origin  of the  Vase.—Of  the  £gyptian  Canopus.—Symbol  of Creation

from  Water  —The  Vase  hence  selected  to commemorate  the Mysteries.

My  object  hitherto  has  been  rather  to  display  the  general

nature  of  the  shews  at  Eleusis,  and  their  connection  with
Etruscan  vases,  than  fully  to  elucidate  the  mysteries ; a  par-
ticular  acquaintance  with  which  will  be  best  obtained  from  an
examination  of symbols,  and  the  force  of them  when  employed
upon  these  ancient  works  of art.  It  is  probable  that  initiation,
whichw  as  anciently  preceded,  whether  at  Agra  or  Eleusis,  by
purification,  and  other  such  mysterious  ceremonies,  chiefly
consisted  in  a  knowledge  of  symbols,  which  knowledge  per-
haps  was  catechetically  imparted  by  the  priests  in  separate
chambers,  and  from  these  the  Myst  were  afterwards  admitted
The  audience,  already  acquainted  with  the
to  the  theatre.
symbols,  would  thus  anticipate  the  meaning  of  the  inferior
parts  of the  illumined  paintings,  and  much  trouble  would  con-
From  a  passage  of
sequently  be  saved  to  the  Hierophant.
Proclus,  however,  it  appears  that  even  certain  symbols,  of
more  myserious  signification,  were  also  reserved  for  explana-
tion  in  the  general  scenic  exhibition  ;  for  I cannot  agree  with
Meursius,  in  supposing  that  these  emblems,  which  were  only
(γνώριμα)  understood  by the  initiator,  were  ever  withholden  from
the  sight  or  knowledge  of  the  Epopte.  Proclus  observes  :—
Τῶν  ὑπὸ  τῆς τελεστικῆς  ἱδρυμένων  ἀγαλμάτων  τὰ  μέν  ἐστιν  ἐμῴανη,  τὰ δὲ ἔνδον
ἀποκρύπζεται,  σύμζολα  τῆς  Sedv  παρουσίας,  ἃ  καὶ  μόνοις  ἔστι  γνώριμα  τοῖς
Proclus  in  Timeum  Comm.  II.—<  Of  the  figures
τελεσταῖς.


43

which  are  devised  according  to  the  spirit  of  the  mysteries,  the

meaning  of  some  is evident,  but  others  have  a  secret  significa-

tion,  (such  as  symbols  of  the  attributes  of  the  deity  brought

before  the  spectator’s  eye),  with  which  those  who  initiate  the

Mystz  are  alone  acquainted.”

But  since  the  vase  itself  was  used  for  a  symbol,  the  origin

of  it,  and  the  cause  of  its  having  been  so  applied  become

proper  objects  for  early  investigation.

The  remarks  of  D’Hancarville  upon  the  invention  of  the

potter’s  wheel  by the  Athenians,  remove  our  enquiry  respect-

ing  the  vase  from  Italy,  and  conduct  us  to  the  spot,  where,  at

least,  the  allegorical  paintings  upon  it were  first  devised.

But

in  relying  wholly  upon  the  authority  cited  by this  judicious

antiquary,  do  we  not  ascribe  more  ingenuity  to  the  Athenians,

than  should  in  fairness  be  placed  to  their  credit

?—May  we

not  suppose  that  A’gypt  had  furnished  them  with  the  means

of turning  these  vessels,  since  the  A’gyptians  must  have  been

in  the  knowledge  and  use  of  the  potter's  wheel  for  the  manu-

facture  of  their  ancient  emblem  of  the  deity,  the  Canopus?

To  me  it  appears  probable  that  the  construction  of  the  Greek

vase  was  thus  suggested,  although  by the  embellishment  of

allegorical  paintings,  and  by the  further  mystic  application  of

it  by the  Athenians,  the  invention  became  as  it  were  their

own.

It is  indeed  scarcely  decided,  what  was  the  use  and  meaning
the  Abbé  Pluches  has  very

of  this  sacred  A'gyptian  vessel:

*  The  explanation  of  Meursius  to  which  I object,  is  as  follows:—‘  et  ecce,  ne

Epoptis  quidem,  atque  in  adyta  jam  admissis,  omnia  revelabantur;  sed  adservabantur
quedam,  non  adspicienda  ulli,  praterquam  ipsis  sacrorum  prefectis,  qui  Mystas,
Epoptasque  creabant.”  Meursii  Eleusinia,  p. 25.


44

unsatisfactorily  explained  it to  be  a  nilometer,  and  the  etymo-

logy  presented  us  by the  learned  Schlager,*  though  bearing

the  mark  of authenticity,  seems  to  involve  the  subject  in fresh

uncertainty.

I  had  formerly  thought,  that  the  Canopus  was

designed  to  answer  the  purpose  of  a  water  clock,  since  the

ancient  story  of  the  contest  between  certain  A®gyptian  and

Chaldzan  priests,  represents  it as  a  perforated  vessel,  through

the  bottom  of  which  water  was  suffered  to  drip,  after  the

manner  of  the  Clepsydra,  and  in  that  contest  it was  proposed

by the  Agyptians  as  the  symbol  of water  and  of  their  deity,

in  opposition  to  the  Chaldzan  divinity,  whose  attributes  were

emblematically  represented  by fire.

Certain  objections  are,  however,  opposed  to  this  idea  by

Schlichtegroll,  in  his  Illustrations  of  Baron  Stosch’s  Gems.

No  Canopus,  it  seems,  has  ever  yet  been  found  in  any  other

than  a solid  state,  although  Plutarch  declares  the  use  of  it  as  a

vessel  to  filter  the  muddy  water  of  the  Nile;  and  as  for  the

story  of  the  Egyptian  and  Chaldzan  contest,  it  is  only  re-

ported  by Rufinus,  who  lived  so  late  as  the  fourth  century.
Rufinus,  however,  had  visited  Aigypt,  and  probably  had  au-
Amidst  these  doubts,  I gladly  em-
thority  for  this  tradition.
brace  the  opinion  of  a  learned  and  excellent  friend,  who,
deeply  versed  in  most  matters  of  antiquity,  has  particularly
The
directed  his  attention  to  subjects  of  the  present  nature.
Canopus,  which  is  generally  surmounted  by a  head,  as  it were

*  In  his  tract  de  Nummo  Hadriani  et  de  Gemma  Isiaca  in  medicato  funere  Hgyp-
In  this  valuable  tract  he  observes  from  Aristides  that  the  Agyptian
tiaco  repertis.
word  for  the  Canopus  signifies  χρυσῶν  ἔδαφος,  golden  ground,  which  is actually  expressed
But
in  the  language  of  Lower  Aigypt  KA'HNNOTB  (cah  annoub),  golden  ground.
Schliger  goes  no  further  than  refer  this  epithet  to  the  fertility  of  soil  about  the  city
Canopus.


45

growing  out  from  it,  he  refers  to  the  renewal  of  vegetation,
and  to  the  reptiles  generated  from  the  slime  and  mud  deposited
after  the  decrease  of  the  Nile.
This  explanation  aptly  agrees
with  the  ‘‘  golden  ground”  of  Aristides,  and  the  etymology
given  by  Schlager;  nor  do  I  conceive,  it  will  be  deemed
violence  offered  to  these  opinions,  if  I  term  the  Canopus  a
symbol  of creation  from  water.
Upon  those  vases,  indeed,  of
a  globular  form,  which  are  distinguished  by narrow  and  per-
pendicular  ears  or  handles,  and  even  upon  those  of  larger
size,  which  are  found  in  the  ancient  Apulia,  may  be  observed
small  knobs,  which,  to  a  fanciful  eye,  might  represent  the
horns  of  the  young  Bacchus  just  sprouting,  but,  in  fact,  they
represent  those  buds,  which  the  swelling  mass,  or  clod,  preg-
nant  with  vegetation,  may  be  conceived  to  be  then  putting
forth ; and  in  these  instances  the  Greek  vase  differs  but  little
from  the  Aigyptian  Canopus  :—like  that,  it was  a  symbol  of
creation  from  water.—For  this  reason  the  Lotus  was  also  re-
ferred  to  as  a  model  for  its  elegant  form  :*  and  it was  used  with
great  propriety  as  the  Larva  of  Bacchus,  who  was  the  god  of

humid  nature.  The  religious  contest  beforementioned  seems
to  have  partaken  of  that  well  known  jealousy  which  has  from
early  time  existed  in  India,  where  the  favourite  deity  of  each
sect  is  distinguished  by  his  proper  symbol:  the  preserver
Vishnu  by water,  the  destroyer  Siva  by fire.  From  this fragment
of  their  religious  history,  it  would  appear  that  the  Agyptians
had  attached  themselves  to  the  milder  system ; and  if,  as  we

*  Thus  the  perfect  flower  of  the  plant  was  the  model  for  the  bell-shaped  vase ;

the  full  or  overblown  flower  is  represented  by the  tazza.
See  an  elegant  engraving
of  the  Chinese  Lotus  employed  as  a  tazza,  in  the  splendid  work  of  Dr.  Hager  on
Chinese  Coins,  recently  published  at  Paris


46

are  assured,  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  came  either  mediately
or  immediately  from  Aigypt  to  Greece,  the  doctrine  of  pre-
servation,  of  which  water  was  the  symbol,  must  have  been
the  basis  upon  which  they  were  founded ; and  they  would
naturally  have  held  out  ‘a  better  hope”  to  the  gloomy  Pelasgi
in  Greece,  who,  if we  except  the  single  instance  of  the  fate  of
Orpheus,  seem  to  have  otherwise  thankfully  admitted  the

salutary  doctrine.

These  remarks,  as  to  the  origin  of  the  vase,  I trust,  explain
why  this  class  of  ancient  vessels  was  chosen  to  commemorate
the  mysteries  in  preference  to  any  other  utensil.


Theology  of the  Ancients  founded  on  Natural  Philosophy,—conveyed

only by Ainigma  and  Allegory.—Groupes  on  Vases  enigmatical —

Explanation  of a  Sicilian  Vase,  illustrating  the  Mysteries  of the

Mei  Dactyli.

We  are  assured  by Plutarch,  that  ‘*  the  mysterious  theology

of  the  ancients,  both  Greeks  and  Barbarians,  consisted  of

natural  philosophy  wrapped  up  in  fable,  and  rendered  obscure

from  the  znigmatical  allusions  under  which  it was  conveyed.*”

Now,  it  is  evident  that  the  vases  termed  Etruscan  could  only

have  been  deposited  in  tombs  for  a  religious  purpose,  and  to

me  there  scarcely  appears  room  for  doubting,  that  the  groupes

depicted  upon  them  are  enigmatical,  and  have  intimate  con-

nection  with  that  theology,  the  spirit  of which  is  thus  briefly

explained  by Plutarch.—But  my  reader  waits  to  be  informed

of  the  import  of  symbols,  and  he  may  require  a  more  serious

exposition of these  illumined  scenes  than  I have  yet  produced.

I now  therefore  propose  to  satisfy  his  curiosity,  by submitting

a  few  of these  transparencies,  which  I  shall  explain  after  my

own  method:  I  shall  also  direct  the  application  of  a  few

striking  symbols  in  others  accordingly.

I  will  afterwards

notice,  how  those  admitted
to  the  mysteries  could  have
grounded  a  hope  of  bettering  their  condition  upon  such
speculations,  and  conclude  with  some  remarks  upon  the  pro-
bable  nature  of that  expectation.

*

5

Ἡ  μὲν  παλαιὰ  φυσιολογία,  καὶ  wag’ Ἕλλησι.  χαὶ  βαρξαροῖς,  λόγος  ἦν  φυσικὸς  ἐγκεκαλυμμένος
μύθοις,  τὰ  πολλὰ  δι’  αἰνιγματῶν  καὶ  ὑπονοιῶν  ἐπίκρυφος,  καὶ  μυρηριώδης  ϑεολογία.  Plutarch:  apud
Lusebium  de prap.  Evang.  1.3,  ¢.  1.

ahs

᾿

ν

᾿

eG

,

,

-


48

PLATE  IX,

Explanation  of a  Sicilian  Vase,  illustrating  the  Mysteries  of the  Ida
Dactyli.

Ix is observed  by the  author  of  the  Essay  upon  the  Mysteries
of Paganism,  that  the  first  inhabitants  of Greece  deified  heaven

and  earth,  and  paid  them  worship.  Thus  the  Chinese  imagined

those  principles  Yanc,  and  Yn,*  which  they  represented  by

an  entire  line  and  a  divided  one,  terming  them  the  perfect  and

imperfect,  heaven  and  earth,  male  and  female.

The  Japanese

doctrine  respecting  In,  and  Jo,+  was  grounded  upon  similar

principles.

I suspect  these  male  and  female  properties  to  be

no  other  than  the  elements  fire  and  earth,  if  not  rather  fire

and  water,  from  the  co-operation  of which  the  creation  of  all

things  was  supposed  to  have  proceeded.

I  hope  to  elucidate  this  matter  in  a  satisfactory  way,  by

means  of  a  painting  upon  an  ancient  Sicilian  vase,{  with  the

*  See  Dr.  Hager’s  Explanation  of  the  Elementary  Characters  of the  Chinese,  p.  5.

+  Dr.  Kempfer  observes  that  certain  of  the  Japanese  philosophers  admitted  an

intellectual,  or  incorporeal  being,  but  only  as  governor  and  director,  not  as  the

author  of nature;  nay,  they  pretended,  that  it is  an  effect  of  nature  produced  by In

and  Jo,  heaven  and  earth  ;  one  active,  the  other  passive;  one  the  principle  of genera-
These  opposite  principles
tion,  the  other  of  corruption:  History  of Fapan,  p.250.

are  elsewhere  reported,  . 601,  to  be  represented  before  the  Daibod’s  Temple,  near
Miaco,  by  two  images  of  giants,  called  A-wun,  or  In-Jo,  or  Ni-wo,  one  with  the
mouth  open  and  the  hand  extended,  the  other  with  the  mouth  shut  and  the  hand
brought  close  to  the  body.

$ It may  be  generally  remarked,  that  the  paintings  upon  the  vases  of Nola,  wherein
the  ground  is  opaque,  exhibit  allegorical  scenes  in  inferis.  The  middle-sized  and

small  Sicilian  vases,  on  the  contrary,  exhibit  such  as  refer  to  the  cosmogony ; and


49

use  of which  I have  been  obligingly  favoured  by J. Edwards,
Esq.  I had  not  long  examined  this  vessel,  before  I discovered
upon  it  certain  of  the  Idzi  Dactyli,  whose  names  had  been
selected  by the  Baron  de  Ste.  Croix,*  from  the  Scholiast  of
Apollonius  Rhodius,  lib.  1.  v.1129.  The  subject  I conceive
to  be  Acmon  and  Damnameneus  proceeding  to  animate  the
universe  by means  of  their  minister  Celmis;  illustrated  by

the  allegory  of  Pan,  in  a  sitting  posture,  waiting  for  his  torch

to  be  lighted  by them  at  the  furnace  of Hephastus.

I presume  that  I am  not  mistaken  in  my conjecture,  because
Axuov,  which  in  Greek  denotes  an  anvil,  (whence  the  word
συράκμων,  a  blacksmith,)  has  also  the  signification.  of  οὐρανὸς,
heaven.+
The  first  of  these  figures  then,  denotes  celestial
fire,  and  identifies  one  of  the  properties  beforementioned.
Damnameneus,  evidently  composed  of  the  words  δχμνάω,  domo,
reprimo,  and  μένος,  vis,  robur,  is  that  which  allayeth  the  power
of fire,  or  which  tempereth  metals  that  fire  hath  fused:  warer.
The  Baron  de  Ste.  Croix  would  explain  this  to  be  earth,  but
it was  an  anciently  received  opinion  that  earth  was  a  deposi-
tion,  or  sediment  from  water.
Kéwic  I  would  deduce  from
κδλομαι, jubeo,  one  who  receives  orders,  the  same  as  Camillus,
Hermes,  and  Mercury;  or  the  agent  who  executes  commands,
since  the  hand  stretched  forth  over  the  head  of  Pan,  rather
conveys  the  latter  meaning.
Pan  is  no  more  than  τὸ  aay,  the
Ptha,  or  Hephestus,  who,  according  to  figyptian

universe.

these  are  frequently  covered  with  very  whimsical  designs.  The  collector  who  may’
prefer  entertainment  and  information  to  mere  elegance  of shape  and  ornament,  might
do  well  to  confine  his  purchases  to  the  latter  class.

*  Sur  les  Mysteres  du  Paganisme,  p. 46,  7.
+  Hesychius  in  voce.

H


50

mythologists,  was  produced  from  the  egg  in  the  mouth  of  the
supreme  Cneph,  is  here  introduced  to  us  as  the  Demiurgic
deity,  conducting  the  process  of creation  in  the  great  workshop
The  animation  of the  universe  personated  by Pan,
of Nature.
may  also  be  collected  from  two  interesting  plates  in  the  Work
of  D’Hancarville,  the  first  of  these,  Vol.  III.  Plate  XCIV.
where  Pan  crouches  under  the  weight  of  the  sphere,  and
listens  to  the  instructions  of a  figure,  which  I venture  to  term
In  the  other,  Vol.  ΓΝ.  Plate  CXVIII.  Celmis  pre-
Celmis.
sents  two  eggs  as  a  vivifying  gift, influenced  by which,  Pan,
supporting  only  the  lower  portion  of a  sphere,  falls  a  dancing
with  the  most  absurd  and  ridiculous  gestures.

The  mystical  meaning  of  the  torch  is well  ascertained  by

that  line  of Lucretius:

«  Et,  quasi  cursores,  vitai  lampada  tradunt.”  1. 2, 0.78.

It  is  here,  neither  elevated  to  denote  life,  nor  depressed  to
denote  suspended  animation,  but  characteristically  held  in  a
horizontal  direction.  As  the  principle  of life  to  the  universe,
it  is  a  symbol  of  the  sun,  which  idea  occurs  to  me  upon  ad-
verting  to  a  passage  in  the  Ezour  Vedam;  in  which  pleasing
little  work,  (evidently  composed  by  some  European  mis-
sionary”  for  an  excellent  purpose.)  is the  following  apostrophe:
«*  Le  Soleil  que  tu  as  divinisé,  n'est  qu'un  corps  sans  vie  et
II  est  entre  les  mains  de  Dieu  comme  une
sans  connoissance.
chandelle  entre  les  mains  d'un  homme.  Creé  de  lui  pour
éclairer  le  monde,  il obéit  A sa  voix  et  répand  par-tout  sa  lu-

*  [ believe  it to  be  the  same  work  that  is  noticed  by  Father  Giorgi,  Alph.  Tibet.

Ρ- 94,  as  the  production  of the  Capuchin  Missionaries  in  India.


51

miere  comme  une  chandelle  qui  commence  ἃ  éclairer  dés
qu'on  l’allume.”  Vol.  I.  p-  226,7.  ‘*  The  sun,  which  you  have
elevated  to  the  rank  of  a  deity,  is  no  more  than  a lifeless  and
unintelligent  body.  It  is in  the  hands  of God,  as  a  candle  in
the  hand  of a  man;  created  by Him  for  the  purpose  of light-
ing  the  world,  it obeys  his  word  ;  and  disperses  every  where
its  light,  in  the  same  way  as  a  candle  throws  its  beams  the
moment  it is lighted.”

To  this  it  may  be  properly  added,  that  the  most  ancient
Osiris  of  the  “Egyptians,  for  there  were  many  of  the  name,
was  supposed  to  be  the  son  of Vulcan,  and  was  entitled  Tosor-
THRUS,”  a  word  that,  according  to  Father  Giorgi,+  signifies
“  Filius  Fornacis,”  ‘*  the  Son  of the  Furnace.”’

PLATE  X.

Harmonious  Arrangement  of the  Universe  by the  Deity.

Accorpine  to  Plutarch,  when  Osiris  had  settled  the  affairs
of  his  government  at  home,  he  set  out  to  civilise  the  rest  of
mankind,—zeibos  δὲ  rode  adelarove  καὶ  λόγῳ μετ’  wong πάσης  καὶ  μουσικῆς
Selyouévous  προσαγόμενον,  de Iside  et Osir.  5.  xirt.  p. 32:  ‘by persua-
sion  and  argument,  with  every  kind  of  song  and  music,  he

*  Plures  fuerunt  in  /Egypto  Reges  Osirides ; quorum  primus  a  Bonjurio  statuitur
Tosorthrus  filius  Necher-Ophis  Vulcani,  omniumque  Aigyptiorum  Regum anti-
quissimi.  Alph.  Tibet.  p. 71.

+  “«  Tosorthrus  hic  idem  esse  posset  tanquam  ~Joxuep-jspar,  Touser-thro,
et  Greca  terminatione  Tousorthros  filius  fornacis,  sive  Vulcani  filius—-tenim
articulus  foemineus  ideo  pre-figitur,  quia  Spar  fornax  generis  est  foeminei.”
Ibid. p. 75.


soothed  the  minds  of men,  and  brought  them  over.”  Now,  as
to  what  may  have  been  the  origin  of  this  tradition,  and  who,
the  person  shadowed  under  the  name  of  Osiris,  I  shall  not
But  I suspect,  that  the
here  make  it  my  business  to'enquire.
expedition  of Osiris,  and  the  manner  in which  the  object  of it
was  accomplished,  were  anciently  converted  into  a  religious
allegory,  by which  a  well-known  human  event  was  made  a
type  of  the  harmonious  arrangement  of  the  universe  by the
Deity.

I suspect  this,  because  Plato,  whose  philosophy  and  language
are  frequently  borrowed  by Plutarch,  had  before  said,  that  the
Deity  created  all  things  σειθοῖ  καὶ  λόγῳ,  ““  by  persuasion  and
reason.’  —The  representations  on  vases,  of a  figure  setting  out
in  a  quadriga,  preceded  by Camillus,  or  Mercury  petasated
and  booted,  and  bearing  the  Caduceus,  while  an  attendant  by
the  side  of  the  car  plays  upon  the  lyre,  or  beckons  with  the
arm  uplifted ; these  I venture  to  term,  the  expedition  of  the
Deity,  either  in  his  male  or  female  nature,  to  harmonise  the
universe.  An  example  of  the  former,  to  which  I would  apply
the  expression  of  Plutarch—wer  δῆς  σάσης  καὶ  wovorxns,—with
every  kind  of  song  and  music,”  may  be  seen  in  Tischbein’s
Collection;  Vol.  I.  Plate  XXIV.  Of  the  latter,  in  that  of
D’Hancarville,  Vol.  III.  Plate  LI.  where  an  inscription  ap-
pears  in  characters  scarcely  legible,  but  which  D’Hancarville
would  explain  to  be  040YC  for  OAYCCEYC,  Ulysses.  The  form
of  the  characters,  however,  is  as  follows  SVOS  Φ,  which,
unless  they be read  βουστροφηδὸν,  give  us  something  like  the  word
suoda  :—-but  to  wave  what  cannot  be  afhrmed  with  certainty,  I
beg  the  reader's  attention  to  a  painting  from  a  Sicilian  vase,  in
the  collection  of Wm.  Chinnery,  Esq.  which  exhibits  a  female


\  Coan  —  aM


53

representative  of  the  Deity,  or  Mind,  ascending  a  quadriga,
preceded  by Camillus,  or  Mercury,  and  accompanied  by a  male
and  female  figure,  the  former  with  the  hand  open  and  extended

in an  argumentative  attitude,  the  latter  with  the  arm  uplifted  and
the  fingers  bent  inward,  as  if persuading  or  inviting  her  com-

panion.*  These  figures  I conceive  to  be  the  λόγος  and  aso,  or
Argument  and  Persuasion,  which  powers  are  here  personated

under  the  different  sexes.

The  vine  tendrils  issuing  from  the

breast  of  the  female  in  the  car,  and  from  her  agent  the  Dios-

curus,  are  symbolical  of  the  genial  influence  of Bacchus,  who

was  differently  entitled  Osiris,  Dionysus,  and  Ampelus,  (ἀμπελοζὴ
‘*  the  vine,”  which  Osiris  was  supposed  to  have  first  planted.

The  fabled  expedition  of  this  personage  having  been  under-

taken  for  the  purpose  of  conferring  benefits  on  mankind,  the
vine  is  therefore  symbolically  made  to  accompany  the  Deity
in  his  course.

The  cherishing  power  of  the  Deity  is  thus  generally  ex-

pressed  on  vases  by a  vine  springing  from  the  breast,  or  from

between  the  shoulders  of  the  great  Pan,  from  which  the  ten-

drils,  diverging  in  thin  waved  and  budding  shoots,  light  upon

different  figures  that  appear  entangled  in  its  folds.

This  is

the  meaning  of  those  thin  knotted  lines  which  often  intersect

the  illumined  paintings  on  vases  of  the  more  ancient  class,

ornamented  with  black  figures  on  a  red  ground.  A  further

example  may  be  seen  in  Plate  XII.  of this  work.

The  painting  I  first  explained  made  us  acquainted  with
the  opinions  of the  ancients  respecting  the  demiurgic  powers,

from  whom  the  universe  was  supposed  to  have  received  ani-

*  A  youth  with  one  hand  extended,  in  the  act  of exhorting,  is designated  ΠΕΙΘΩ,

in  very  legible  characters,  on  a  Nola  vase  in  the  possession  of H. Tresham,  Esq.


54

mation,  and  the  sun  its  light.  This  second  Plate  has  repre-

sented  that  luminary  embodied,  and  setting  out  upon  his

course.

We  will  now  consider  his  influence  in  the  lower

world,  in  which  various  vicissitudes  were  accounted  for,  and
were  measured  by his  example.

PLATE  ΧΙ.

Attributes  of the  Deity,  variously  personated  on  Vases. —Of  Shields,

and  their  Devices.

Havine  formerly  resolved  the  mythological  Bacchus  into

his  attributes,  and  shewn  in  what  manner  he  represented  the

day and  the  night  sun,  accordingly  as  his  visit  was  paid  to

either  hemisphere ; having  likewise  noticed  his  ambiguity  of

sex,  whereby  he  comprehended  within  himself  both  the  active

and  passive  principles  of  creation,  I will  now  confirm  those

illustrations  by a  different  mode  of  proceeding.

I will  collect

the  scattered  members  of  the  Osiris,  and  synthetically  shew

how  groupes  were  admitted  upon  vases,  which  are  to  be  ac-

cepted  only  as  parts  of  one  mythic  personage.

The  opposite

engraving*  represents  a  male  and  female  figure,  both  draped,

standing  between  two  armed  warriors,  upon  the  shield  of  one

of whom  is  emblazoned  a  dove,  whilst  a  thigh,  leg  and  foot

are  bent,  and  comprised,  by way  of  device,  within  the  shield

of  the  other.

These  male  and  female  figures  are  personifica-

tions  of  the  double  sex  of  Bacchus,  διῴυὴς ; the  two  armed

attendants  are  his  agents,  the  Dioscuri.

The  shield  itself  is a

*  From a very  ancient  Sicilian  vase  in  the  collection  of William  Chinnery,  Esq.


55

symbol  of  the  Deity:  his  creating  power  is  typified  by the
dove  ;  the  well-known  emblem  of  life,  which  seeks  the  upper
part  of the  sphere,  and  the  lower  limbs  of  the  human  body,
having  allusion  to  the  lower  regions,  denote  the  influence
of  Bacchus  also  in  inferis.
Thus  the  groupe  expresses  the
Bacchus  in  his  several  natures,  as  male  and  female,  vivifer
and  destroyer :

-

race  γὰρ μέλη  ἐστὶ  τὰ Πχνός."

—*  For  these  are  the  members  of Pan,  or  the  integral  deity.” —

Thus  also  upon  a  very  interesting  vase,  which  is  engraved
in  the  collection  of  Passeri,+  we  notice  the  preserving  and
destroying  powers  of Bacchus  emblematically  personified.  A
man,  bound  hand  and  foot,  is  laid  obliquely  upon  a  couch,  or
chair,  and  his  feet  are  opposed  to  a  blazing  fire.  A draped
figure opposite,  looking  upward  as  if with  gratitude,  stretches
out  his  hands  in  the  act  of warming  them.  Behind,  is a  temple,
within  which a figure  of the  Deity supported  upon  a  pedestal  or
altar,  points  toward  these  figures,  as  if  superintending  or  di-
recting  what  passes  in  the  foreground  of  the  painting.  The
learned  antiquary  was  perplexed  with  the  appearance  of  tor-
ture,  thus  publickly  inflicted,  which  ill  accorded  with  the
celebration  of the  Bacchanalia,  to which  he referred  the  subject
of  the  vase:  but  the  meaning  is  evident;  that  the  same  ele-
ment  which  can  cherish  with  its  genial  warmth,  may  also  be
an.  instrument  of torture ; that  the  same  Deity  who  preserves,
can  also  destroy ; and  that  these  powers  are  united  in  the
integral  Bacchus.

*  Onomacritus  Hymn.  x.  y.  3.
+  De  Pict.  Hetruscor.  in  Vasculis,  Vol.  III.  last  plate.


56

The  attributes  of  Bacchus  are  sometimes  expressed  in  a

different  way.

Plate  LXXXVI.  Vol.  II.  of  the  Etruscan  An-

tiquities  of  D’Hancarville,  represents  in  succession,  a  tigress

and  a  boar,  a  lioness  and  a  goat,  a  harpy  and  a  stag;  which

are  thus  alternately  classed,

as  destroying  and  generating

animals:  and  further  to  evince  this  contrast  of  disposition,

allusive  to  the  opposite  powers  of  the  Deity,  and  the  continual

warfare  in  nature,  of  which  creation  and  harmony  were  the

result,”  we  lastly  observe  in  this  painting  a  pair  of  fighting

bulls,  which  confirm  the  explanation  given.

The  attributes  of  the  Deity  are  not  always  so  evidently

depicted:  they  are  frequently  conveyed:  by detached  symbols,

and  devices  upon  shields  are  significantly  used  for  this  pur-

pose  ;  such  as  a  human  arm  to  denote  the  upper,  or  an  anchor

the  lower  hemisphere  ;  the  kid,the  Hesperian  fruit,  and  wings,

expressive  of  life,  and  the  serpent  of renovation  ;  the  Pegasus

and  Salian  figures  allusive  to  the  pervading  power ; and  others,

which  do  not  so  readily  admit  of explanation.

ae  (τῶν  πάντων)  --ἰκ  μάχης  καὶ  ἀντιπαθείας  τὴν  γένεσιν  ἐχόντων.᾽᾿-- Ο] αἰλτοῖ  de  Iside  et

Osiride,  sect.  xlviil.  p.  121.


Temporary  Repose  of Nature.—Of  the  Egyptian  Horus  in the  torpid
State.-—Mutes  on  the Reverse  of Vases  —Figures  draped and  naked.

—FErrors  of Passeri  noticed.

As  yet,  however,  we  have  made  but  little  advancement

towards  a  general  understanding  of the  paintings  upon  vases:

it is  time  that  we  examine  the  operation  of the  attributes  lately

mentioned,  and  how  by their  influence  Nature  was  subjected

to  the  vicissitude  of  decay,  inertion,  and  resuscitation.

The

most  frequent  allusion  of  these  scenes  is  the  temporary  sus-

pension  of the  powers  of nature,  and  the  restoration  of the  same

by the  interference  of  some  vivifying  agent.  By far  the  most

numerous  class  of paintings  upon  Etruscan  vases  have  been  so

designed,  as  to  elucidate  this  subject  in  one  composition ; and

although a satisfactory  explanation  of  every  vase  is more  than

we  can  promise,  yet  the  reader  may  be  assured,  that  with  mo-

derate  attention  to  the  meaning  of  symbols,  and  the  manner
in  which  they  are  interchanged  in  order  to  produce  varieties,
many  of  these  subjects  may  be  understood  by  referring  them

to  this  general  allegory.

The  temporary  state  of rest  may  be  exemplified  ina  pleasing

instance  furnished  by Passeri,  the  genuine  meaning  of  which,
however,  escaped  that  learned  antiquary.  He  has  cited  a  vase

whereon  was  depicted  a  soldier  sleeping  on  his  post,  but  with
his  limbs  so  disposed,  as  that  upon  the  least  alarm,  he  might
I will  give  it  in
start  up  and  resume  his  station  in  the  ranks.

his  own  words:


58

‘«  In  ea  miles  clypeo  protectus,  sinistro  genu  et  crure  humi

dejecto,  super  illud  decumbit  ;  at  ne  proruat,  hinc  genu  dextero
sublato,  et  clypeo  subnixus  ita  dormit,  ut,  signo  dato,  promp-
tissime  exsiliat.’"*—The  solution  of  this  allegory  is  ready  at
our  hand;  it  represents  the  temporary  repose  of  nature  after
lassitude  or  decay,  and  its  promptitude  to  resume  its  functions.
The  same  explanation  may  also  be  applied  to  a  vignette  which
embellishes  an  early  part  of  Mr.  Tischbein’s  Illustrations  of
Homer ; where  a file  of  warriors  kneel,  their  helmets,  pikes,

and  greaves  only  appearing  beyond  the  orbs  of  their  shields.

The  fact  is,  they  rest  upon  their  arms,  but  are  nevertheless

ready  to  spring  up  from  their  temporary  state  of repose.

The  explanation  of  these  later  devices  will,  perhaps,  be

readily  admitted  ;  but  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  many  to  be  in-

formed,  whence  the  Greeks  derived  them,  and  what  was  their

original  meaning.  To  display  this,  I must  have  recourse  to  the

same  country  to  which  I referred  the  origin  of  the  vase.  The

doctrine  of  the  inert  state  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  more

recently  borrowed  from  a  very  simple  agricultural  painting

of  the  Aigyptians,  whereby  they  emblematically  warned  their

countrymen  of those  times  of annual  rest,  when  the  overflowing

of  the  Nile  caused  a  cessation  of  agricultural  labours,  until,

upon  the  entrance  of  the  sun  into  a  certain  sign,  the  waters

subsided,  and  vegetation  sprang  forth  with  renewed  vigour.+

An  etching  in  the  work  of  the  Abbé  Pluches  (Pl.  XZ.  Tom.  I.
p. 88.)  to  which  I refer  the  reader,  will  make  this  more  evi-

dent.  Horus,  an  emblem  of vegetable  nature,  there  appears  in

a  state  of  repose,  stretched  on  a  couch  or  bier,  and  embarrassed

*  Passeri,  Vol.  I.  p.  uxx1,
+  This  may  suffice  for  the  present,  but  the  allegory  was  of  more  ancient  origin.


59

with  swaddling  clothes,  to  denote  his  inaction  under  the  influ-

ence  of the  sun  in  Leo;  whilst  a  female  before  him  (probably

Virgo),  with  the  hand  uplifted,  calls  him  into  action.  The

gem,  given  as  a  vignette  to  the  Preface  of  this  work,  may  be

also  resorted  to,  and  compared  with  a  Plate  in  Kempfer’s  His-

tory  of Japan,  Tom.  I. Plate  V.  p. 33.  which  represents  Amida

seated  on  a  cippus,  with  five  small  figures  above,  and  the  same

number  of  figures  beneath  him.

In  these  several  plates,  the

fEgytian  Horus,  the  Grecian  Bacchus,  and  the  Indian  Buddha

appear  in  a  similar  state  of  rest,  and,  which  may  be  deemed

still  more  curious,  the  Canopi  below  the  Horus,  the  five  vases,

and  the  five  attendants  above  and  below  the  Greek  and  Indian

deities,  correspondently  denote  the  elements*  or  attributes  of

*  This  observation  requires  further  comment.

J  have  already  noticed,  that  the
element  water  was  characteristic  of  the  preserver  Bacchus,  who  was  accordingly

symbolised,  and  his  mysteries  were  commemorated,  by the  vase.

In  the  Egyptian

painting,  indeed,  the  symbols  are  somewhat  perverted.
Three  vessels  denoted
separately  the  elements,  earth,  water,  air,  and  collectively  the  overflowing  of  the

Nile,  as  I  am  instructed  by Horapollo,  (p. 38,  ed.  Pauyw,)  who  assigns  a  physical
But  the  Egyptian  painting,  having  also  to  notice  time,
reason  for  this  signification.

and  other  circumstances,  heads  of  certain  creatures,  are  superadded  to  the  vessels,

the  complex  meaning  of which  may  be  learnt  from  the  Abbé  Pluches:  and  a  fourth

vessel  is  introduced,  surmounted  by  the  head  of  a  Virgin,  with  allusion  to  that

particular  sign.  That  the  twice  five  figures  attendant  upon  Amida  represent  the  ele-

ments,  I conclude,  1.from  the  number  of  them  as  computed  by  the  Japanese,  viz.

1.  wood;  2.  fire;  3.  earth;  4.ore;  5.  water;  which  elements,  with  a  different  mono-

syllable  postfixed,  are  increased  to  ten,  (Kempfer,  p. 157):  2.  from  Kempfer  having

noticed  (p, 604)  an  idol  in  the  Temple  of  Sotoktais,  surrounded  with  the  idols  of
In  proof  that  these  relate  to  the  attributes  of  their  deity,  may  be
four  elements.

adduced  the  opinions  of  the  Japanese  philosophers,  who  somewhat  after  the  man-

ner  of  the  Brahmins,  (Asiat.  Researches,  Vol.  I.  p.  244,  octavo.)  maintain  that  the

animal  creation  was  produced  by In-Jo,  i.e.  Heaven,  and  five  terrestrial  elements,
Respecting  the  connection  between  Buddha  and  the  great  events
(Kemper,  p. 250).
of the  creation  and  the  deluge,  much  might  be  here  adduced,  did  not  that  subject

present  too  extensive  a  field
I  will  content  myself  with  suggest-
ing,  that  the  representatives  of  the  Deity,  Cenresi  in  Tibet,  and  Ravana  in  Ceylon,

for  enquiry.


60

each  personage:  and  these  monuments  illustrate  well  the

character  of  Buddha,  ‘‘  in  otio  plurimo  (to  use  the  words  of

Tertullian)  placide  stupentis  Diwvinitatis.”

But  we  will  transfer

the  scene  from  /Zgypt  to  Eleusis.

If  the  reader  will  open

the  work  of  Passeri,  (Vol.  111.  Plate  CCXCVHI)  he  will  ob-

serve  the  same  subject  expressed  upon  a  very  curious  vase  of

the  earlier  class,  which  may  possibly  be  yet  preserved  in  the

Vatican.  The  inert  Bacchus  is  there  exposed  upon  a  funeral

couch,  and  the  vivifying  agent,  like  the  Agyptian  Virgo,

awakens  him  into  energy  from  the  torpid  state.  On  the  re-
verse  of the  same  vase  (ibid.  Plate  CAXCIX.)  nature  seems  to  be

represented  under  the  form  of  a  dragon,  which  an  owl  draws
up  by a  string  from  the  shades.

The  appropriate  symbols  of the  inert  state,  therefore,  appear
to  be  sleep,  rest,  the  attitude  of  reclining,*  and  particularly
the  embarrassment  of  cloathing.  Under  this  last  head  may  be
classed  reverses  exhibiting  draped  figures,  which  Passeri  has
I  had
termed,  youths  newly  invested  with  the  toga  virilis.
long  doubted  the  propriety  of this  assertion  of Passeri  applied
to  vases  of  Greek  workmanship.  But  I yield  to  the  judicious
observations  of  Mr.  Béttiger,  who  has  properly  savoured  that

opinion  : +  I must,  however,  be  permitted  to  add  this  corollary:

are  exhibited,  the  one  with  a  human  head  and  ten  others,  Alph.  Tibet.  p.  166.  the

other  with  the  head  of  the  ass  and  ten  human  heads,  Systema  Brachman.  p. 299.

probably  with  allusion  to  the  creating  Deity  operating  upon  the  twice  five  elements.

*  To  these  may  be  added  bondage,  whether  expressed  by  the  hands  tied  behind

the  back  of  the  figure,  as  in  those  instances,  on  gems,  of  Cupid  and  Psyche,  bound,

Mus.  Florentin.  Vol.  I.  Plate

LX XIX.  fig. 4,  5,63  or  by Time,  in  fetters,  Ibid.  Vol.  I.

Plate  XCVII.  fig.  43  or,  Cupid  in  the  stocks,  Ibid,  Vol.  I.  Plate  LXXXI.  fig. 2, 3,4;

besides  many  others.

+  Mr.  Béttiger  cites  an  interesting  passage  in  Artemidorus,  where  allusion  is  meap
to  the  one  year’s  inaction  and  silence  of youths  with  the  right  hand  enveloped  in  their


61

—That  the  representation  of  youths  so  invested,  with  their

hands  beneath  the  chlamys,  and  hence  unentitled  to  a  voice

in  public  assemblies,  must  be  symbolically  accepted  as  merely

denoting  silence  with  respect  to  the  mysteries.

In  the  same

manner,  on  the  bottom  of  the  Barberini  Vase,  a  figure  draped

and  hooded,  with  the  finger  to  the  mouth,  implies,  that  the

mysterious  allegories  represented  on  the  side  of that  vessel  are

not  to  be  incautiously  revealed.*

Tt  may  therefore  be  observed,  with  regard  to  figures  draped

and  naked,  that  the  former  are  generally  to  be considered  in  the

inert,  the  latter  in  the  resuscitated  state ; and  many  instances

may  be  produced  where  figures  have  been  thus  purposely  con-

trasted.

Such  a  one  occurs  in  the  work  of  Passeri,  /Vol.  111.

Plate  CCXLVI)  where  two  naked  dancing  figures  in  front,  are

contrasted  with  two  draped  figures  on  the  reverse  of  the  same

vase,  Plate  CCXLVI[.  But  a  more  striking  instance  may  be

robes,  Oneirocrit:  Lib.  I.  cap.  li.  p. 48.  ed.  Rigaltii,  whence  he  remarks,—1.  That

the  investing  of  youths  with  the  chlamys  at  the  age  of  17  was  an  ancient  Athenian

custom,  and  transferred  to  the Grecian  colonies.  He  supposes  that  the  Etruscans  and
their  Roman  descendants  imitated  this  ancient  ceremony  in  their  custom  of presenting
the  toga.
2.  That  the  upper  garments  of  the  figures  so  represented  on  reverses
neither  resemble  the  Grecian  chlamys  nor  the  Roman  loga.  They  appear  to  him  to
be  of  a  mixed  fashion,  and  he  would  determine  them  to  be  the  toga  Gracanica  of

Suetonius  in Domitian,  c.  4.;  ‘and  wherefore,”  he  adds,  “"  might  not  the  scanty  upper

cloak  as  worn  in  the  mother  country,  have  taken  a broader  cast  when  used  by the  same

Greeks  in  Lower  Italy,  and  have  been  thus  accommodated  to  the  efleminate  manners

of that  voluptuous  people  ?”

Uber  den  Raub  der  Cassandra  auf  einem  alten  Gefisse  von  gebrannter  erde.—
Alo.  p.

Zwey  abhandlungen  von  H.  Meyer,  und  C.  A.  Boitiger.—  Weimar,  1794.

83,  84.

*  A  very  curious  Campana  vase,  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Earl  of Aberdeen,

confirms  what  I have  here  suggested.  Upon  the  reverse  of  this,  supported  by  two

such  draped  and  muffled  figures,  is  to  be  seen  Harpocrates  on  the  lotus,  and  a  water-

fowl  beneath  him,  This  painting  is  decisive.
of the  allegories  depicted  on  the  front  of the  vase.

The  youths  are  mule  as  to  the  meaning


62

noticed  on  a  vase,  Plate  XCIV.  in  the  3d Vol.  of D’Hancarville’s

Collection.  The  painting  of  this,  as  far  as  it concerns  Pan  and

Celmis,  I have  already  explained:  the  remaining  part  also  de-

serves  notice.  A  naked  male  there  approaches a tree,  the  trunk

of which  is  embraced  by two  serpents,  in  the  same  way  as  the

mundane  egg  is  embraced  by  the  Agathodemon.  The  three

Hesperian  apples  hang  above,  and  the  naked  male  figure  ap-

pears  to  be  kept  at  bay  by  one  of  the  serpents  which  guard

them.  A draped  female  advances  upon  the  other  side,  but  upon

that  no  fruit  is  to  be  seen.  Thus  fruitfulness  and  sterility,

and  the  draped  and  the  unembarrassed  states  appear  to  be

purposely  contrasted.  To  the  right  are  Pan,  with  the  globe,

and  Celmis.

I confess  that  I formerly  found  a  difficulty  in  be-

lieving,  with  Passeri,  that  many  Chaldean  traditions  had  found

their  way  among  his  Tuscan  ancestors;  but  the  more  I view

this  plate,  the  more  J am  led  to  think,  that  an  obscure  notion

of  the  objects  of  these  traditions  had  been  preserved  in  the

Mysteries:  nor  can  I  refrain  from  adducing  those  memorable

words  in  Gen.  ch.  zi.  ver.  11.—‘*  Who  told  thee  that  thou  wast

naked 2—hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree  whereof I commanded  thee

that  thou  shouldest  not  eat ἢ Ὁ

It  is  an  unpleasant  task  to  correct  the  errors  of  those  who

have  gone  before  us  in  any  particular  enquiry;  nevertheless,  to

notice  those  errors  may  prevent  others  who  follow,  from  wan-
dering.  The  mode  of solution  which  I propose  on  all  occasions,
in  place  of  the  unsatisfactory  reference  hitherto  made,  to  poetic

mythology  and  history,  will,  at  least,  rescue  the  credit  of  the

artists  who  executed  these  paintings,  from  the  charge  of  ana-

chronism,  and  of disregarding  unity  of  place  in  the  scenes  they
depicted.  Much  should  be  conceded  to  Passeri,  who  engaged


63

in  these  discussions  at  a  very  early  period,  relying  solely  upon
his  own  ingenuity  to  unravel  the  intricacies  of a  subject,  which
even  in  the  present  day  is  exceedingly  obscure ; and  freely
acknowledging  his  mistakes,  with  the  hope  that  others  might
profit  by  them.
It  is  with  every  respect,  therefore,  for  the
merit  of  this  learned  Antiquary,  that  I offer  a  remedy  for  the
apparent  incongruity  in  his  explanation  of  such  a  vase  as  the
following.
I allude  to  Plate  XII.  Vol.  I. where  he  has  felt  a
difficulty  to  reconcile  the  appearance  of  Clytemnestra  with
Iphigenia,  and  a  female  attendant  at  Sparta,  whilst  divided
from  them  only  by a pillar,  were  seen  Achilles  demanding
the  daughter  of  the  king  in  marriage,  and  Ulysses  interfering,
which  last  events  must  have  taken  place  at  Aulis.  The  diffi-
culty  seems  to  have  arisen  froma  wrong  interpretation  of  the
umbrella  borne  by  the  Iphigenia,  which  I  have  elsewhere
given  reason  to  believe,  (upon  vases  at  least),  does  not  denote
marriage.*  The  truth  is,  that  in  this  painting  the  three  females
form  a  groupe  in  inferis,  which  is  implied  by  the  umbrella
spread  over  them ; they  are  draped,  as  being  inert,  and  their
inactivity  is further  implied,  by two  of them  being  seated,  and
the  third  in  a  quiescent  (though  upright)  posture:  the  fancied
Clytemnestra  is indeed  in  the  act  of listening  with  appearance
of  expectation ; equally  with  her  companions  she  is  motion-
less  ; but  they are  ἐμ inferis,  where,  like  the  demon  in  his  glass
prison,  they  sit  enchanted,  waiting  until  some  more  powerful
magician  shall  come  to  their  assistance,  and  break  the  charm.

*  When  the  bride  walked  beneath  the  umbrella,  it was  to  denote  a  transition  from
the  shades  to  light,  from  barrenness  to  foecundity ; and  for  the  same  reason  the  bride
was  covered  with  the  hood  or  yeil,  as  in  the  celebrated  gem  which  represents  the
marriage  of Cupid  and  Psyche,


64

The  pillar,  beneath  which  they  are  seated,  is  the  boundary

between  motion  and  rest,  between  life  and  death:  the  small

figure  upon  the  summit  is  not  the  Tauric  Diana,  but  the  em-

blematical  Bacchus,  whose  powers  are  for  awhile  suspended.

The  hooded  Elder  resting  on  his  staff,  and  the  supposed  Achilles

leaning  on  his  spear,  are  engaged  in  conversation:  the  gross

appearance  of  the  latter  is  ill  suited  to  the  youthful  and  fiery

character  of  the  Grecian  hero;  and  I conceive,  they  are  both

designed  to  complete  the  view  of  that  intermediate  state,  to

which  all  ranks,  the  virgin  and  the  matron,  the  warrior  and

the  sage,  were  supposed  to  be  equally  obnoxious.

Their  ex-

pectation  of being  recalled  is  however  indicated,  by the  fingers

of  the  warrior  bent  backward,  and  on  the  reverse  of  the  vase,

the  animating  powers  advance  to  release  them,  with  the  torch,

the  tibizw,  and  the  tamborine,  to  the  sound  of which  instruments,

perhaps,  the  Clytemnestra  listens,  being  thereby  apprized  of

their  coming.


65

Brief Explanation  of Symbols  mentioned  by Clemens  Alexandrinus.

As many  detached  symbols  appear  on  vases,  which  form  but
supplementary  parts  in  the  illumined  paintings,  we  may  here
take  a hasty glance  at  them:  of these  the  Todvan,  a  ball  of wool,
mentioned  by Clemens,  is  discovered  as  a  crossed  ball  in  the
hand  of  females,  and  it  probably  implies  the  thread  of  life
which  is  not  yet  spun.
The  presentation  of  a  Gutta  may
denote  the  principle  of  fecundity  comprised  in  the  oil  vessel,
and  this  may  account  to  us  why  sesame  is  recorded  as  a  mys-
terious  seed,  from  the  oil  which  it  produces  ;  oil  being
accepted  as  a  principle  of fertility.

The  present  may  also  be  a  favourable  opportunity  for  dis-
cussing  those  symbols  mentioned  by the  same  venerable  Father.
ἐς  Sesame,  pyramids,  the  ball  of wool,  the  knobbed  cake,  pile
of  salt,  the  serpent,  pomegranate,  hearts,  fennel,  ivy,  cheese
and  corncake  and  poppy”  Tair  ἔστιν  αὐτῶν  τὰ  ἅγια.  The  pyra-
midal  cake,  from  its  shape,  was  a  similar  emblem  with  flame
and  the  Phallus.
The  knob  or  boss,  which  partakes  some-
what  of the  pyramidal  form,  has  a  similar  import.  It appears
particularly  in  the  center  of ancient  patere,  of which  many,  in
bronze,  are  preserved  in  the  cabinets  of  the  curious.
It  there
rises  out  of  the  lotus,  expressive  of  the  action  of flame  upon
water:  these  patere  are  therefore  surrounded  by  a  rim,  in
order  to  contain  water,  that  the  boss  in  the  center  might
appear  surrounded  by this  element.  Salt  was  presented  in  the
mysteries,  as  symbolical  of generation.*  The  serpent  is a  well

*

>

»

~

~
“ὁ  Ἐν  ταῖς  τελεταῖς  ταύτης...  τεχμήριον  τῆς  γονῆς,  ἄλων  “χόνδρος,  καὶ  φαλλὸς  τοῖς  μνουμένοις  so  oe

oan

~

\

,

2

~

imsdidoros.””

Clem.  Alex.  protrept.  p.  13,  Ed.  Potter.

K


66

known  emblem.  The  pomegranate  was  used  as  a  vivifying
gift,  because  its  contents  were  supposed  to  represent  the  seeds
of existence.  Kagéia,  or  hearts,  I believe  to  have  been  nothing
more  than  leaves  in  that  shape  ;  for  I find  upon  a  Vase  pub-
lished  by Passeri,  a  figure  bearing  a Thyrsus,  tipt with  the  pine
cone,  which  is composed  of heart-shaped  leaves,  some  of which
fall  from  it,  as  if  to  indicate  the  genial  influence  of  the  pine
cone  shed  upon  the  objects  below.  Upon a gem  of Dioscorides,
published  by Bracci,*  may  be  seen  an  Hermaphrodite  reclining
beneath  a  tree  in Inferis,  and  certain  infant  winged  genii,  one

of  whom  approaches  with  a  heart-shaped  leaf,  as  if  to  wake

him  from  his  state  of  inertion,  whilst  the  others  play  on  the

lyre  and  the  reed  pipe.  This  leaf  is  therefore  the  substitute

for  flame,  and  a  vivifying  symbol.

Fennel,  a  species  of  the

Anethum  or  Dill-plant,  is  one  of  that  class  termed  annual,  and

its  use  upon  the  couch  of  Adonis  is  evident.

Ivy  always

denotes  the  shades,  and  is  proper  to  Bacchus  in Inferis  ;  it had,

therefore,  a  place  in  the  Agrionia  and  Nyctelia,  which  were

night-festivals,  as  we  are  informed  by  Plutarch.+

It  appears

on  a  small  vase  of marble  in  the  collection  of Henry  Blundell,

Esq.  curiously  contrasted  with  the  vine.

The  front  of  this

oval  vase  is incrusted  with  the  latter,  and  the  other  half  of  it

with  the  ivy;  and  since  the  vase  is,  generally  speaking,  the

larva  of  Bacchus,  so  in  this  instance  we  view  him  in his  double
capacity,  designated  by appropriate  symbols,  as  the  day and  the

night  sun.  The  cheese  and  corn-cake,  noticed  by  Clemens,

*  Memorie  degli  antichi  Incisori,  Vol.  II.  plate  LX  VII.

+S  Καὶ  bre  ἐν Ἥρας  ᾿Αθήνησιν,  re  Θήξῃσιν  ἐν "Aggodirns,  ἴδοι  τις  ἄν  xitlove

᾿Αγριωνίοιςδε  (as the
passage  is  judiciously  restored  by  Meursius,  Grac.  feriala  p. $,)  καὶ  Νυχτελίοις,  ὧν τὰ
πολλὰ  διὰ σκότες  ὁρῶται,  waeesw.”  Plutarch.  Rom.  Quast.  p.  519.  Ed.  Steph.


67

among  the  mystic  symbols,  may  possibly  have  been  of  the
same  nature  with  that  which  is  known  in  this  country  by.the
name  of firmity,  in  which  the  grain  is  preserved  entire,  for
whatever  contained  seeds,  was  deemed  by the  ancients,  sym-
bolical  of  life  and  generation.  The  poppy,  the  last  upon  the
list  I have  quoted,  had  its  use  in  the  mysteries  for  the  same
reason.  The  somniferous  qualities  of  this  plant  enforced  the
idea  of  quiescence,  but  the  seeds  of  existence  which  it  was
emblematically  supposed  to  contain,*  seemed  to  shew,  that
Nature,  though  her  powers  were  suspended,  yet  possessed  the
capability  of being  called  into  existence.

Before  I  conclude,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  enumerate  the
implements  for  promoting  youthful  exercise,  such  as  the  cone
and  whipping-top  alluded  to  by Clemens,  “"  Kavoc,  καὶ  pouog
καὶ  παίγνια  καμπεσίγυια,"  and  others  which  he  has  noticed  in
these  words,  *  It  may  also  be  of  use  to  make  known  those
worthless  symbols  of  your  mysteries,  the  Astragalus,  the
sphere,  the  whirligig,  apples,  the  whipping-top,  the  mirror,
and  the  fleece.”  Page  15,  Ed.  Potter.

It were  fatiguing  the  patience  of the  reader  to  discuss  these
trifles  at  length,  nor  do  I feel  confident  that  I could  explain
them  to  my  entire  satisfaction.  The  dissimilar  casts  of  the
Astragali  might,  however,  express  the  alternate  operations  of
the  Dioscuri;+  the  sphere,  the  whirligig,  might  denote  a

*  «  Hrant  enim  (papayera)  ab  prodigiosam  seminum  copiam  symbolum  fzcunditatis
auctore  Porphyrio  apud  Euseb.  de  Prep.  Evang.  111.  2.  ex  quo  factum  est,  ut  Cereri
tribuerentur.”

Passeri  de  Pict.  Hetr.  in  Vasc.  Vol.  I.  Ρ-  72.

+  Priapeid  figures  in  diminutive  bronze,  punctured  with  the  numbers  of the  casts,
so  as  to  answer  the  purpose  of Astragali,  have  been  found  in tombs,  and  two  such  are
preserved  in  the  Townley  Collection.  Hence,  perhaps,  the  allusion  of Aischylus  to


68

revolution  ;*  the  mirror  might  present  the  semulachrum  anime,
for  which  Servius  may  be  consulted  upon  those  words  in  the
fineid.  lib.  4.u.  654,  “  sub  terras  ibit  Imago ;” + the  fleece  might
be  subjected  to  the  same  explanation  with  the  Tohvzn,  or  ball  of
wool;  nor  might  it be  deemed  too  wild  a  conjecture,  were  I to
suggest  that,  the  golden  apples  which  were  gathered  amongst
the  vocal  Hesperides,

“«  Μηλά  re  χῴῴσεα  καλὰ,  wag Ἑσπερίδων  λιγυφώνων,᾽"᾿
were  to  be  sought,  not  according  to  the  learned  Gesner,  among
the  orange  groves  of  Portugal,  but  in  the  interior  of  Asia,
from  which,  perhaps,  they  were  imported  with  those  Chaldea
miracula,  which  were  admitted  into  the  theology  of the  Greeks,
as,  I  believe,  is  somewhere  hinted  by  Martianus  Capella  :
Certain  it  is,  that  on  more  than  one  vase  published  in  the
Collections  of  Passeri  and  D’Hancarville,  appears  a  serpent
entwined  round  a  tree  loaded  with  such  fruit,  and  the  apple
is  accordingly  a  vivifying  symbol.

the  dice  of Jupiter.  See  also  my  remarks  upon  the  word  χυξιςητὴρ,  a  tumbler,  p,  31.  of
which  there  were  two  admitted  in the  Cretan  Dance,  a  singular  coincidence,  should
it be  supposed  that  that  dance  were  of sacred  institution.

*  The  intelligent  narrator  of  his  embassy  to  Thibet,  pleasantly  informs  us,  upon

a  certain  occasion,  that  he  slept  amongst  Gods  and  whirligigs.

+  See  the  story  of Narcissus  thus  applied  in  an  ancient  fresco  painting.

Δ᾽ Ercolano,  Pitture.  Tom.  V.  Plate  XXVIII;  also  Plates  XXX,  XXXI.

Antichita


69

Of Fish,  and  the  Allegory  of Angling.

Berore  I proceed  to  the  examination  of new  matter,  for  I have

other  subtleties  to  propose,  and  I shall  be  obliged  to  adopt  a

particular  jargon  in  expounding  the  sophisticated  ideas  which

were  embodied  and  expressed  on  vases,  I will  adduce  something

further  on  the  subject  of  resuscitation  ;  for  this  purpose,  I se-

lect  a  vase  in  the  Collection  of  D’Hancarville,  Vol.  II.  Plate

XXVII.  Upon  this  appear  the  Dioscuri,  who,  having  landed

the  female  Bacchus  zn  znferis,  are  in  the  act  of  heaving  their

anchor,  and  rowing  back  to  the  opposite  shore  of  the  Styx.

The  Libera  seated  on  the  bank  in  the  mystic  attitude  of  the

Harpocrates,  awaits  the  return  of  the  Genius  who  may  be

charged  with  calling  her  into  activity.

This  already  appears

in  the  upper  part  of  the  painting,  where  a  water-fowl  is  on

the  wing  towards  her,  bearing  in  its  mouth  a  fish,  which,  in

this  instance,  is  evidently  used  for  a  symbol  of resuscitation.

In  the  Museum  Florentinum*  is  a  gem,  which  exhibits  a

fisherman  in a boat,  angling  ;  beneath  the  water,  as  if {γι inferis,

with  one  foot  supported,  is  a  naked  figure,  bearing  a  trident

and  adolphin;  before  him  on  the  ground  is  a  prefericulum,

behind  him  an  anchor.+  Now  we  are  instructed  by the  vase

before  mentioned,  that  the  dolphin  uplifted  is  a  vivifying

symbol,  and  the  boatman,  who  floats  on  the  waters,  must  be

*  Mus.  Florentin.  Vol.  Il.  Plate  XLIX.  fig.  1.
+  The  anchor,  which  is  let  down  to  the  bottom  of the  sea, I apprehend  denotes  the
Inferi,  and  it has  this  signification,  expressed  as  a  device  on  the  shield  of a Dioscurus
on  a  vase  in  the  Collection  engraved  by Tishbein.

Wol.  I.  Pl.  XXIX.


70

considered  in the inert  state,  in order  to  benefit  from  it.  Angling
for  fish,  therefore,  became  an  appropriate  allegory  for  any  mo-
numental  stone,  and  upon  one  of  this  class  in  the  Townley
Collection,  a  fisherman,  seated  upon  a  rock,  angles  for  fish,
which  denote  the  principle  of  animation  required  by  inert
nature:  and  in  the  Collection  of Henry  Blundell,  Esq.  at  Ince,
near  Liverpool,  a  figure  of  an  angler  (in small  life)  seated  on
a  rock,  with  a  basket  of  fish  by his  side,  illustrates  the  same
idea.

The  reader,  prepared  by the  foregoing  observations,  will
probably  feel  himself  at  no  loss  if I introduce  him  to  a  fishing
party  composed  of  distinguished  ancient  personages,  for  an
acquaintance  with  which  I am  indebted  to  the  condescension
of Thomas  Hope,  Esq.  who  has  politely  permitted  an  engrav-
ing  to  be  taken  from  a  Sicilian  Vase  in  his  splendid  Collection,
whereon  this  subject  is preserved.  The  triad  of grisly  figures
exhibited  in  the  accompanying  Plate,  consists  of Hercules,  dis-
tinguishable  by the  lion’s  skin  and  quiver,  kneeling  on  a  rock
in  the  center,  Neptune  angling  on  a  rock  behind  him,  and
Hermes  seated  to  the  right,  reaching  forward  the  caduceus.
The  anxiety  and  attention  of  Hercules  is  well  expressed  by
his  attitude,  and  by the  hand  inverted,  as  if  this  deity  were
watching  the  expected  bite.  The  sovereign  of  the  waters  be-
hind  him,  grasps  a fish  that  he  has  just  hooked,  and  Hermes,
who  could  either  consign  to  the  deep,  or  resuscitate  with  equal
facility  by means  of  his  caduceus,  needs  no  better  implement

on  the  present  occasion.  Thus,  each  pursues  the  sport  with
equal  prospect  of success.  But  who  would  expect,  from  a  sub-
ject  so  grotesquely  detailed,  that  the  painter  had  designed  to
express  the  triple  power  of the  deity,  drawing  the  principle


71

of  life  from  the  primary  abyss  ?  Such,  however,  I presume
to  be  the  sophisticated  meaning  of this  painting:  for,  the  vine
springing  from  the  feet  of  Hercules,  identifies  him  with  the
creating  Bacchus,  who  has  assumed  the  lion’s  skin  and  quiver,
as  emblematical  of  power.  The  preserver  is  designated  by
Neptune,  who  presided  over  the  waters,  and  he  is here  opposed
In  confirmation  of
to  the  destroyer  and  Regenerator  Hermes.
this  exposition,  let  me  observe,  that  winged  genii  denote  the
animating  principle  ;  and  such  is  their  meaning  when  Psyche
angles  for  winged  infants  instead  of  fish,  on  a  gem  published
by Bracci.*

;

The  original  cause  for  the  acceptation  of fish  in this  sense  it
were  difficult  to  ascertain:  probably  it  arose  from  the  ready
and  excessive  degree  in  which  their  species  is propagated,  but

I have  met  with  a  curious  reason  assigned  for  it  in  Plutarch,

which  I will  venture  to  adduce.  The  priests  of  Neptune  at

Megara,  as  the  Syrians  also,  it  seems,  abstained  from  fish,  be-

cause  they  were  the  symbol  of  humid  nature,  from  which  all

But  the  opinion  of Anaximander  is  truly
things  were  created.
whimsical ; ‘‘  for  he  attempts  to  prove,  (says  Plutarch,+  or

Nestor  for  him),  not  that  fish  and  men  are  in  their  natures  the

same,  but  that  men  were  originally  generated  im fish,  and  being

bred  up  (as was  the  case  with  the  first  men)  until  such  time  as

they  were  equal  to  providing  for  themselves,  they  were  then

cast  out,  and  they caught  hold  of dry land.”  Those  who  do  not

fully  assent  to  the  system  of  Mr.  Bryant,  will  scarcely  permit

*  Bracci,  Vol.  I.  Tab.  XIX.  No.  1.
+  ᾿Αναξίμανδρος  τῶν  ἀνθρώπων  πατέρα  καὶ  μητέρα  κοινὸν  ἀπτοφήνας  τὸν  ἰχθύν.  Plutarch  Συμποσ,

προῦλ:  lib.  viii.  prob. 8.  Δια  τί μάλιςα  οἱ Πυθαγορικοὶ  ἐμψύχων  τοὺς  ἰχθῦς  τταρητοῦντο.


72

me  to  refer  this  tradition  to  the  Deluge  ;* but  the Indian  Vishnu,
the  Preserver,  is fabled  to  have  interfered  in  the  form  of a  fish
during  the  destruction  of  the  world  by water.  Those  Gentile
divinities,  which  are  reported  to  have  been  personated  by
figures ending  in the  form  of a fish,  were  consequently  represen-
tations  of  the  Deity,  in  his  generating  or  preserving  capacity,
and  we  may  plainly  discover,  that  it was  not  merely  from  the

exposition  of the  initial  letters  comprised  in  the  word  IX6Y3,+

that  the  title  of  the  Fish  was  given  to  Christ,  as  the  Saviour  or

Preserver,  by  the  early  converts  to  his  Church,  but  it  arose

from  a  laudable  zeal  in  his  followers  to  reclaim  the  Pagans

from  their  absurd  worship,  by speaking  to  them  ina  symbolical

and  sacred  language,  which  they  readily  understood.

*  See  many  ingenious  arguments  respecting  the  Ceto  indifferently  considered  as  a

fish  or  boat.

Analysis  of Ancient  Mythology.

+

"Ings,  Xpisds,  Θεξ  Ties,  Σωτήρ.᾽"


73

Of Old  Age,  Wine,  Music  and  Rhetoric.

T win  dismiss  the  subject  of  Angling,  by referring  to  some
pleasing  lines  upon  a  worn  out  sportsman,  who  hung  up  his
fishing  rods  and  lines,  and  other  implements  of the  chase,  to
Hermes  :  by  the  concluding
y

g

line  of  the  epi  rram,”
8
,

2
ἐκ  γηφῶς  ὁ xOgaVIN  OEOETAL,
5

δὶ ΠΣ  AU RE
"

ED)

5

ες

——""

I  am  reminded,  that  in  the  Greek  religious  allegories,  old
age  implies  a  state  of bondage  and  inertion.  To  figures  of this
class,  wine  is frequently  presented  as  the  invigorating  principle.
This  appears  in  the  Antichita  d’ Ercolano,  Pitture,  Vol.  V.  plate
XLV,  wherein  are  depicted,  a  Silenus  seated  beneath  a leafless
tree,  and  a  female  pouring  wine  to  him  from  an  uter.  Upon
an  ancient  terracotta,
in  the  Townley  Collection,  may  be
seen  two  Dioscuri,  hooded,  as  agents  im Inferts,  who  resting  on
one  knee,  their  backs  turned  to  each  other,  and  one  hand
uplifted,  pour  wine  into  a  dazza,  and  present  it  severally  to  a
couchant  griffin.
In  that  well  known  bass  relief,  of which  we
have  a  very  spirited  etching,  the  last  in  the  work  of  Bartoli
upon  ancient  sepulchres,  Ganymede  offers  wine  (for such  seems
really  to  have  been  that  liquor  which  poets  ennobled  by the
name  of nectar,)  to  the  eagle,  overshadowed  by a  tree.  The
avidity  of  the  bird,  and  his  longing  after  immortality,  are
well  described  by his  depressing  the  cup  with  his  talon,  as  if
to  procure  a  readier  draught  of the  liquor:  with  this  he  waits
to  be  refreshed,  before  he  wings  his  flight  to  the  upper  hemi-

*  It  is given  by Toup  on  Suidas,  Vol.  I.  Ὁ»  19.

L


74

sphere.  That  such  allegories  are  conformable  to  the  religious

notions  of  the  Greeks,  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  who  informs

us  that  the  Dorians  named  Bacchus  Psilas,  a  word  implying,

in  their  language,  wings,  and  with  great  propriety,  he  adds,  in

his  opinion,  for  wine  elevates  and  lightens  the  spirits  of man,

in  the  same  way  as  wings uplift  a  bird:  ‘*  ϑεῶν  δὲ σέξουσιν  of ταύτῃ
ΩΣ

τόν  te  Auvxdaiov  καὶ  Διόνυσον,  ogsorara  ἐμοὶ  δοκεῖν  Widay  ἐπονομάζοντες  Liha

ΤΣ

ae

=

Seats,

a

᾿

et

ἀξ

ee

ΟΣ

:

ak

ie

nits

γὰρ  καλοῦσιν  of  Δωριεῖς  τὰ  τπερα.  ἀνθρωποὺς  δὲ οἶνος  ἐπαίρει  τε  καὶ  ἀνακουφίζει
5

5

5

:

᾿

γνώμην,  ᾿οὐδέν  τι  ἧσσον  ἢ  ὄρνιθας  alegt.”

x

”

Pausan.  Lacon.  Lib.  III.

p.  258.—The  Bacchus  of  the  Poets,  young  and  sprightly,  is

never  represented  by them  indulging  in  wine  to  intoxication.

In  those  beautiful  lines  of  Nonnus,  which  might  furnish  sub-

ject  either  for  the  chissel  or  the  pencil,  he  is  appropriately

described  sipping  the  genial  liquor:

‘©  Καὶ  γλυκερὸν  σό7ον  εὗρε.  καὶ  οἰνοχύτου  Διονύσου

“ωκὰ  διαινομένων  ἐρυθαίνετο  δάκτυλα  χειρῶν.

Καὶ  δέπας  ἀγκύλον  εἶχε βοὸς  κέρας"  ἡδυπότου  δὲ

Χείλεσιν  ἀκφοτάτοισιν  ἐγεύσατο  βάκχος  ἐέρσης.᾿"

Lib.  XII.  v.  201.

Bacchus  the  Vine’s  sweet  bev’rage  foremost  found,
Its  foaming  juice  his  purpled  fingers  crown d,

Forth  from  the  cup’s  writhed  horn  the  drops  he  drew,
Bent  o’er  the  brim,  and  lightly  sipp’d  the  dew.*

The  reason  for  wine  being  sacred  to  Bacchus,  as  corn  and
tillage  were  favoured  by  Ceres,  arose  from  the  emblematical
allusion  of them  to  resuscitation.

When,  therefore,  we  observe  the  Grecian  Bacchus  mixing
sober  reflection  in  his  cups,  we  need  not  be  surprised,  if in
other  amusements  we  find  him  equally  intellectual  and  serious.

*  This  version  is from  the  elegant  pen  of William  Sotheby,  Esq.


The  comic  muse  placed  under  his  protection,  loses  a  part
of  her  gaiety ; and  although  she  steps  forward  with  an  air  of
mirth,  she  nevertheless  bears  the  destructive  pedum  and  funeral
larva,  from  which  emblems  we  collect  the  proper  use  of the
ancient  drama,  and  the  serious  moral  by which  this  refined
species  of poetry  was  distinguished  from  the  gross  productions
of the  ancient  mimes.

Music  and  musical  instruments  are  frequently  applied  on
The  trumpet
ancient  monuments,  with  a  similar  allusion.
used  in  this  sense,  in  a  plate  in  D’Hancarville’s  Collection,
would  be  worth  the  reader’s  notice;  but  he will  turn  from  it
with  disgust,  when  he  finds  it  accompanied  by an  indecent
emblem  that  is  further  illustrative  of  the  meaning  I assign
to  it.  The  lyre  and  tibia  are  less  offensively  introduced  on

vases,  and  likewise  on  gems;  and  in  the  work  of  Caylus,

especially,  may  be  noticed  the  three  Cabirs  on  the  deck  of  a

boat,  which  may  be  supposed  to  float  on  the  great  abyss,  while

Camillus  excites  them  to  dance  by blowing  the  tibia.

In  subjects  more  intellectually  conceived,  rhetoric  has  fur-

nished  many  elegant  groups  ;  upon  an  ancient  fresco  may  be

seen  an  elder  seated,  with  a  cista  of  volumes  at  his  feet,  and  a

female  addressing  him,  with  the  hand  extended  in  a  persuasive

attitude.

I  venture  to  deem  the  former  philosophy,  in  the

latter  I  recognise  eloquence  ;  for  it  may  be  suggested,  that

philosophy  when  inert,  is  little  more  than  meditation,  but

animated  by  eloquence,  it  assumes  a  different  nature,

it

benefits  and  enlightens ; and  it  is  from  this  union  of  soul

with  body,  that  we  derive  the  noble  productions  of  historic

composition.

In  this  class,  therefore,  I will  place  a  vase  already  noticed,


76

where  a  youth  in  the  act  of  pleading  is  entitled  ΠΕΊΘΩ,  and

a  seated  female  EYKAEA,  as  a  personification  of  eloquence

rousing  the  historic  Muse.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  an  imper-

fection  in  the  vase,  prevents  our  ascertaining  the  character  of

a  third  figure,  that  would  have  rendered  the  group  complete  ;
but  the  allegory  is  sufficiently  intelligible.


Plate  XUL  p:  70

VY  ΟΣ  ΟΠ ΟΝ


77

Of the Dotted  Chaplet,  Girdle  and  Scarf—the  Fate  of Cassandra,  and
Flight  of Aneas  mystically  treated.

I+ was  just  at  this  moment  that  I had  promised  to  myself  and

the  Myste  my  readers,  admission  to  the  very  adyta  of  Eleusis;

for  I  had  found  a  key,  not  indeed  that  golden  one  which

Sophocles  tells  us  was  hung  upon  the  tongue  of the  Eleusinian

priests,  it  was  of  baser  metal ; with  the  hope  of  obtaining

useful  information  I applied  it:  but  what  a  nauseous  spectacle

did  it disclose  !

To  see  the  internal  organization  of  nature  laid  open,  to

view  the  mysterious  ceconomy  of  her  womb,  (and  this  merely

to  shew  the  transition  from  sterility  to  foecundity,  and  to  prove

that  nature  is ever  reproductive,)  might  afford  entertainment  to

the  anatomist,  or  the  obstetrical  professor ; but  to  an  enquirer

into  the  principles  of Greek  theology,  it presented  nothing  but

horror  and  disgust.  Let  me  then  quickly  close  this  chamber,

where,  from  every  object  drips  uncleanness,  and  chase  its  con-

tents  from  my  memory.  It  is  now,  for  the  first  time,  that  I

applaud  the  prudence  of  those  who  forbad  the  disclosure  of the

mysteries.  The  Greek  writers  often  intimate  their  acquain-

tance  with  these  doctrines,  which  visions  and  other  warnings

deterred  them  from  exposing  ;  but,  independent  of their  fears,

and  the  punishment  that  awaited  whoever  revealed  them,  these

writers  might  also  have  convicted  themselves  of unmanly  con-

duct,  in  having  listened  to  such  discourses,  and  I  conceive,

notwithstanding  the  laxity  of  morals  in  Greece,  that  the


78

priests  who  adopted  these  gross  allusions  in  explaining  their
tenets,  would  scarcely  have  been  honoured  with  general  res-
pect,  but  for  the  consolatory  promises  also  held  out  by  them

to  the  initiated.

The  extent  of these  disquisitions  will  be somewhat  abridged,
from  the  disappointment  I have  experienced  :  of  some  things

which  it yet  remains  for  me  to  treat,  a part  must  be  taken  by my

reader  for  granted;  but  should  he  be  inclined  to  withhold  his

assent  to  certain  points,  I will  rather  court  his  incredulity,

than  be  compelled  to  assign  authority  for  what  I advance.  To

enter  upon  an  investigation,  merely  because  the  object  to  be

discussed  is  in  itself  curious,  were  a  waste  of  time  ;  nor  was

such  my  motive  for  undertaking  this  work ; but  to  collect

from  any  such  enquiry,  what  may  throw  light  upon  the  cus-

toms  and  ceremonies  of distant  nations,  or  tend  to  approximate

the  scattered  tribes  of the  μερόσων  ἀνθρώπων  towards  their  original

focus,  may  have  its  use,  as  well  as  rational  entertainment.

It  is

with  this  view,  therefore,  that  I proceed  in  my  disquisition.

The  object  of  these  nightly  shews,  was  chiefly  to  display

nature  resuscitated,  generally  by the  means  of  some  vivifying

gift ; but  this  present  was  supposed  to  be  first  impregnated,

in  a  manner  which,  for  obvious  reasons,  I forbear  to  explain.

Suffice  it  to  say,  that  certain  luminous  spots,  whether  disposed

in  a  circle,  or  expressed  upon  a leaf  or  chaplet,  a  girdle  or

scarf,  were  signs  of  such  impregnation.

Hence  I have  reason

for  dissenting  from  the  report  of.  Diodorus  Siculus,  respecting

the  veSgic,  or  fawn’s  hide,  which  that  writer  observes  was  said

to  be  worn  by Bacchus,  because  it  represented  the  starry  firma-

ment,  whereas,  the  spotted  appearance  of it  recommended  this

peculiar  clothing  to  Bacchus  for  the  reason  I  have  stated ;


79

it  was  a  symbol  of  foecundity:  It  was  therefore,  that  during
the  Lupercalia  at  Rome,  women  voluntarily  submitted  to
blows,  inflicted  by  those  who  ran  about  the  streets  with
thongs  of goat’s  hide:  from  the  nature  of that  animal,  the  blow
was  thought  to  promise  fruitfulness  and  easy  delivery :

“εἰ  Nupta,  quid  expectas  ?  non  tu  pollentibus  herbis,
Nec  prece,  nec  magico  carmine  mater  eris.

Excipe  foecunde  patienter  verbera  dextre :

Jam  socer  optati  nomen  habebit  avi.”

Ovid  Fast.  Lib.  IT.  425.

This  is  the  meaning  of  the  dotted  leaf  which  appears  upon

vases;  and  when  the  spotted  crown  or  girdle  (whether  tied

or  untied)  was  presented  to  a  seated  female,  it  denoted  the

re-admission  of inert  nature  into  the  circle  of existence.

This

may  be  seen  upon  a  vase  in  D’Hancarville,  Vol.  11.  Plate  LI.

where  the  female  is  seated  upon  a  terminus,  beneath  the  shade

of  an  umbrella:  with  her  left  hand  she  inverts  a  speculum,

referring,  as  I before  observed,  to  the  εἶδος  or  simulachrum  anime

at  that  moment  in  the  lower  regions,  whilst  the  vivifying

Dioscurus  presents  the  dotted  untied  girdle.  This  one  example

will  furnish  a  solution  for  numerous  others  that  might  be

adduced.

But  I am  here  presented  with  an  opportunity  of  turning  to

a  more  pleasing  subject,  and  at  the  same  time  of  doing  justice

to  a  very  well  judged  assertion  of  the  Missionary  Paolino,

which  I have  before  commended.

In  the  very  entertaining  narrative  of Capt. Turner’s  Embassy

to  Thibet,  we  are  informed  that,*  ““  between  people  of every

*  Page  233.  The  passage  is  so  interesting,  that  I  trust  I shall  be  pardoned  for

quoting  it at  length.


80

<<  They  are  commonly  damasked,

rank  and  station  in  life,  the  presenting  a silk  scarf,  constantly
forms  an  essential  part  of  the  ceremonial  of  salutation.
If
persons  of  equal  rank  meet,  an  exchange  takes  place:  if  a
Superior  is  approached,  he  holds  out  his  hand  to  receive  the
scarf,  and  a  similar  one  is  thrown  across  the  shoulders  of  the
inferior  by  the  hand  of  an  attendant,  at  the  moment  of  his
dismission.”
and  the
sacred  words,  oom  maunee  paimee  oom,*  are  usually  interwoven
near  both  ends;  and  again,  ‘*  trivial  and  unmeaning  as
this  custom  may  appear  to  Europeans,  long  and  general  prac-
tice  has  here  attached  to  it  the  highest  importance.  I could
obtain  no  determinate  information  as  to  its  meaning  or  origin,
but  I find  that  it has  indeed  a  most  extensive  prevalence.  It is
observed,  as  I have  before  noticed,  in  all  the  territory  of  the
Daeb  Raja;  it  obtains  throughout  Thibet ; it  extends  from
Turkestan  to  the  confines  of  the  great  Desert ; it  is  practised

*  Hom-mani-peme-hum,  in  Alphabet,  Tibetan:—These  words  I would  render:  ἐς  fiat,
Manes  loto  (insidens),  fiat’’—Mani,  of whom  and  of  his  parents,  Patecius  and  Carossa,
we  have  a  very  imperfect  account  in  the  work  of  Father  Giorgi,  I apprehend  to  have
been  originally  the  same  with  the  Indian  Menu,  the  /Egyptian  Menes,  and  our
patriarch  Noah:  since,  in  the  East,  the  same  personages  are  revived  at  different
periods,  agreeable  with  the  scheme  of  the  metempsychosis.  This,  the  Buddhists  of
Thibet  believe  to  be  carried  on  by  means  of the  lunar  ship,  which  ferries  over  the
souls  of  the  approved  to  the  pure  Regions.  Alph.  Tib.  p.  238,  372.
Hence  we
may  infer,  that  the  deluge,  and  the  subsequent  renewal  of the  human  race,  were  ac-
cepted  by early  nations,  asa  type  and  assurance  of a  future  state.  The  persons  of Mani
and  Pout  or  Buddha  are  essentially  different.  The  former  is  decidedly  the  patriarch
Noah.  An  original  and  happy  conjecture  of  Sir  Wm.  C.  Rouse  Boughton,  Bart.
seems  to  have  ascertained  the  person  of  the  latter.
This  respectable  Oriental  scholar
would  indentify  Pout  with  Phut,  the  third  son  of Ham;
in  illustration  of which  idea,
he  observes,  that,  as  Phut  was  third  in descent  from  Noah,  so  βουδύας,  Budyas  is named
in  Arrian,  as  a  king  in  India,  third  in  descent  from  Dionysus.
It  would  seem  that
the  scarf  with  its  legend  presented  in  Thibet,  were  an  appeal  to  the  patriarch  Mani,
accompanied  by a  solemn  wish,  that  the  person  greeted  may  be  admitted  into  the
circle  of renewed  existence,  in  the  same  way  as  Mani  had  anciently  been  favoured,


Plate  17]


81

in  China,  and  I doubt  not,  reaches  to  the  limits  of Mantchieux
Tartary.
I  view  it  merely  in  the  light  of  an  emblem  of

friendship,  and  a  pledge  of amity.  Ibid.

T have  been  much  gratified  by the  particular  attention  paid
by Capt.  Turner  to  this  ceremony,  and  it were  to  be  wished
that  every  traveller  would  be  equally  accurate  in  relating  even
the  most  trifling  customs  of  the  distant  nations  he  may  visit.
The  meaning  of  the  ceremony,  I conceive,  will  be  discovered
upon  what  are  termed  Etruscan  vases:
the  umbrella,
and  its  use  in  the  East,  may  be  understood  by a  reference  to
these  monuments  of  art,  and  records  of  ancient  religious
opinions,  so,  I conceive,  may  the  present  of  the  scarf,  with  its
mystic  legend,  in  Thibet.
It is  no  more  than  the  girdle  pre-
sented  by the  vivifying  agent,  who  calls  him  that  accepts  it
into  the  circle  of  life.
On  vases,  it  is  marked  with  what
denote  the  seeds  of  existence;  in  Thibet,  it  is  impregnated
with  the  mystic  words  Oom  maunee  paimee  oom,  which  are  sup-
posed  to  be  equally  efficacious,

as

The  entrance  into  the  regenerated  state  is  expressed  on  a
vase  in  the  collection  of Passeri,  by a  seated  female  in  the  act
of  putting  on  the  girdle.
In  the  same  work,  we  read  of  a
mystical  dance,  termed  Saltatio  ad  restim,  where  dancing  youths,
taking  hold  of  the  same  rope,  described  in  their  movements  a
circle.
When  we  hear  of Ceres  with  her  wheaten  crown,  we
are  reminded  of  that  goddess,  who,  instituting  the  mysteries,
taught  the  admission  of  decayed  nature  into  the  circle  of  ex-
istence,  of which  the  grain  in herchaplet  emblematically  repre-
sented  the  seeds;  and  when  a  Grecian  female  had  passed  the
pains  of labour,  a chaplet  was  suspended  at  her  portal,  to  signify
that  a  human  being  was  newly  admitted  into  the  circle  of life,

M


82

By way  of  concluding  these  remarks  upon  dotted  circles,  I
will  notice  a  singular  vase  of very  homely  workmanship  and
painting,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  and  published,
Plate  LVII.  in  the  third  Volume  of  D’Hancarville,  which  re-
presents  Cassandra  slain  by the  Dioscuri.  A  female  extends
her  arms  ready  to  receive  her  after  death,  and  another  holds  a
taper,  at  the  top  of which,  instead  of flame,  appears  a  circle  of
Ido  not  hesitate  to  explain  this  emblem,  as
luminous  spots.
the  circle  of existence,  into  which  the  slaughtered  Cassandra  is
To  the  left  above,  a  female  reaches
about  to  be  readmitted.
out  the  branch  of  conversion;  and  to  the  right,  at  top,  the
Other  cir-
owl  brings  a  hoop  illumined  with  mystic  spots.
cular  dotted  emblems  disposed  in  the  opaque  parts  of the  scene,
may  imply  future  circles  or  stages  of  existence,  in  different
Mr.  Bottiger  has  thought  this  painting  worth  notice
planets.
in  his  Dissertation  upon  another  vase,  whereon  the  story  of
I  presume,  the  torch
Cassandra  is  differently  represented.
surmounted  by  a  dotted  circle,  is  what  Mr.  Boéttiger  has
termed  a  key  in  the  hand  of  the  priestess,  the  warden  of
Nevertheless  the  engraving  given  by  D’Han-
the  temple.
carville  is correct,  and  the  symbol  cannot  be  mistaken.  Upon
But  with  regard
the  other  circular  emblems  Mr.  B.  is  silent.
to  that  vase,  which  has  given  occasion  to  the  elaborate  dis-
sertation  of  Mr.  Bottiger,  I  will  observe  by  the  way,  the
subject  of  it  is  of  similar  meaning  with  the  other  in  the
a  very  generally
British  Museum.
The  event  succeeds  to
recorded  destruction,—the  overthrow  of Troy.—The  violence
to  inert,  but  re-
offered  is  not  so  much  to  Cassandra,  as
pugnant  nature ; and  I  suspect,  the  embryo  figure  sketched
upon  the  discus,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  painting  commended


;  τότ  ἘΝῸ- ὲ

ea  δὴ

71


83

by  Mr.  Bottiger,  is  no  votive  tablet,  unless,  indeed,  it  be  to
Artemis  Lochia.

While  speaking  of  Trojan  history,  an  unpublished  vase  of
F.  Champernowne,  Esq.  occurs  to  me,  exhibiting  the  flight  of
Eneas  under  circumstances,  that  I  apprehend  no  poet  ever
detailed,  but  aptly  enough  conceived,  if we  refer  them  to  the
initiators  in  Lower  Italy—A®neas,  bearing  Anchises  on  his
back,  is  represented  wading  ancle  deep  through  shoal  water,
and  conducted  by Mercury  to  a  faun  as  the  generative,  or  re-
invigorating  principle,  but  hooded,  to  denote  his  position  zm
inferis.  Anchises  carries  off  a  cornucopia,  the  symbol  of fer-
Behind  is  a  seated  female,  her
tility,  instead  of  the  Penates.
head  and  arms  gracefully  turned,  and  designed  with  uncommon
From  her  retrospective  attitude,  and  the  affectionate
taste.
concern  expressed  in  her  countenance,  she  may  probably  per-
sonate  that  desiderium,  which  the  Trojan  hero  might  be  sup-
I would
posed  to  experience  at  quitting  his  ruined  country.
therefore  designate  her  ΠΌΘΟΣ  ;  but  in  this  I may  be  mistaken.
The  fishes  in  the  lower  part  of  the  painting  are  equally  sym-
It  may  be  said,  that  the  ex-
bols  of  water  and  generation.
pedition  of Atneas  to  the  Inferi  is no  more  than  his  voyage  to
Hesperia,  an  ancient  name  for  Italy,  which  was  occidental  with
But  I must  add,  that,  like  the  painting  dis-
respect  to  Greece.
serted  upon  by Mr.  Bottiger,  the  plate  before  us  illustrates  the
destruction  and  subsequent  renewal  of  things,  and  the  work
of  Mr.  Boulanger  will  shew,  that  subversion  in  the  political
as  well  as  in  the  physical  world  was  anciently  considered  the
prelude  as  it were  to  a  new  life,  and  order  and  general  hap-
In  the  same  way  would  I dispose  of all  those  subjects
piness.
on  vases,  which  antiquaries  have  lately  termed  Homeric.


84

These  remarks  I particularly  recommend  to  the  reader  who
may  be  acquainted  with  the  dissertation  of  the  learned  Pro-
fessor,  and  those  who  seek  new  subjects  of  mythology  upon
vases,  will  do  well  to  consider  the  painting  I first  cited.
The
strange  hieroglyphics  with  which  it  is  accompanied  justify  a
belief,  that  whenever  subjects  were  selected  from  history  or
mythology  to  adorn  these  funeral  vessels,  they  were  merely
designed  as  vehicles  for  theological  opinions.
Hence  facts
were  distorted,  or  gave  place  to  mystical  conceits,  devised  by
those  priests  by whom  the  Eleusinian  shews  were  conducted.


Plate  XVE.  p85


85

Of Solstitial  Fountains.

I now  present  my  reader  with  a  plate,  which  he  may  have
noticed  in  the  work  of D’Hancarville.*  The  meaning  of it has
never  been  explained.
The  antiquary  therefore,  who  looks
with  eagerness  for  inedited  works,  will  probably  be  not  less
gratified,  if  I  shall  succeed  in  rendering  intelligible  a  monu-
ment  that  is  already  familiar  to  him.
The  leading  object  in
this  scene  is  the  terminal  Bacchus  ;  but  other  figures  are  com-
prised  in  it  of  allegorical  import.
To  the  right  of  a  pillar
with  its  capital,  placed  upon  a  font,  a  transparent  opening
again  displays  the  terminal  Bacchus  in a fixed  state,  and  in  an
opening  to  the  left  is  a  naked  figure  whose  limbs  are  moved  as
if  he  were  in  the  act  of  dancing.
The  pillar  is  here  the
boundary  between  motion  and  rest;  and  it  seems  to  illustrate
the  inertness  of  Bacchus,  and  the  temporary  suspension  of  his
powers.
Thus  much  may  be  collected  from  the  painting,
which  I leave  for  the  present,  to  consider  what  is  suggested
to  me  respecting  it  by a  coin  of Thespiz.

The  reverse  of  this  coin  engraved  in  the  work  of  Pelerin,+
exhibits  a  lofty  Phallus  crossed  by three  horizontal  lines,  on
one  side  of which  is  a  bell,  and  on  the  other  a  Theta,  in  its

ΣΝ  οἷν  11  ἘΡΙα  ΤΟ ΧΙ
+  Medailles  des  Peuples  et  des  Villes,  Vol.  I.  Plate  ΧΧΥ.  fig. 26.


86

ancient  square  form  A,  as  the  initial  letter  of  Thespie  in

Boeotia,  where  it is supposed  the  coin  was  stricken.

Pausanias  informs  us,”  that  the  figure  of  Ἔφως,  or  Love,  at

Thespiz,  was  a  white  stone,  i.e.  a  phallus,  or  obelisk  ;  so  that

if  the  leading  emblem  upon  the  coin  had  reference  to  his

rites,  we  might  conclude  they  were  not  of  the  most  decent

But,  upon  perusing  the  tract  ascribed  to  Lucian,  de
nature.
Syria  Dea,  the  whole  was  explained  to  me.
The  ancient
Temple  at  Hierapolis,+  in  Syria,  is  there  reported  to  have

stood  upon  an  eminence  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  the  base  of

which  eminence  was  inclosed  by a  double  wall.

Near  the

gates  to  the  north,  were  erected  two  Phalli,  (of  the  enormous

height  of  thirty  fathoms{),  one  of which  a  man  ascended  twice

every  year,§  swarming  it  by a  chain,  as  was  practised  by the

a

é

oO

Arabs  in  climbing  the  palm  trees  of  their  country.

Arrived

at  the  top,  he  coiled  his  clothes  round  so  as  to  form  a  nest  or

seat,  and  having  let  down  another  chain,||  which  he  carried

with  him,  and  drawn  up by  the  means  of it food  and  necessaries  ;

he  remained  upon  the  Phallus  seven  days.

Seated  aloft,  he

prayed  for  all  Syria;  but  whilst  he  prayed,  he  ever  and  anon
rang  a  bell,  κροτέει  σοίεμα  χάλκεον,  τὸ  ἀείδει  μέγα,  καὶ  TONYD,  κινεόμενον.

*  Βαοῖϊο.  lib.  ix.  ο.  97,  p.761.
+  Hodiernum  ejus  nomen  Membig  a  primigenio  Mabog,  nam  a  Seleuco  Syriz  rege

Ed.  Kuhnii.

dicta  demum  Hierapolis.

Rasche  Rei  Numarie  T.  11.  par.  it.  p. 279.

+ [have  substituted  the  judicious  emendation  of  Palmerius,  for  the  extravagant

measure  τριηκοσίων  in  the  text.

§ Ἐς  τουτέων  τὸν  ἕνα  φαλλὸν,  ἀνὴρ  ἑκάφα  ἔτεος  dls ἀνέρχεται,  or  rather,  perhaps,  each  of which

he  ascended  once  annually.

|  I venture  to  read  καὶ μακρὴν  ταύτην,  which  words  1 suspect  formerly  crept  into the  text,

although  the  first  of  the  three  is  now  omitted.
I once  indeed  was  almost  tempted  to
offer  violence  to  the  word  ἑτέρην  by rendering  the  passage  ὁ"  /elling  down  one  end  of the
chain,”  because  the  identity  expressed  by ταύτην  appeared  to  me  at  that  time  insur-
mountable ; but  this  could  not  by  any  means  be  admitted.


87

Some  conceived  that  thus  being  nearer  to  the  Gods  he  was

heard  to  more  advantage,  whilst  others  referred  the  custom  to

the  deluge,  when  all  men  betook  themselves  to  the  high

places  for  safety.

The  Phallus,  the  sticks  projecting  from  it

to  assist  the  man  in  ascending,”  and  the  bell,  all  appear  in  the

Thespian  coin.+

The  Persian  Mithra,  who  was  supposed  to

intercede  with  Oromasdes,  the  deity,  is  represented  floating  in

air  upon  the  mystical  Tau;  the  man  therefore  upon  the  Phallus,

who  interceded  by  prayer  for  all  Syria,  might  have  been

designed  to  personate  the  Mithra;  but  says  the  Pseudo-

Lucian,  some  refer  this  ceremony  to  the  deluge ; and  by the

lucubrations  of  the  learned  Mr.  De  Sacy,  we  are  informed,

that  similar  Phalli  in  A'gypt  actually  did  refer  to  the  over-

flowings  of  the  Nile,  which  seem  to  have  served  as  a  national

record  of  that  greater  flood,  which  was  equally  commemorated

on  the  banks  of the  Euphrates.

By an  inedited  work  of a  Syriac writer,  from  whose  Tour  in
Aigypt  an  extract  has  been  given  by Mr.  De  Sacy,}  it appears
that  similar  Phalli  were  erected  before  the  Temple  at  Helio-
polis  in  Atgypt.  At  the  top  of  these  obeliscal  poles  were
bonnets  of  copper  of  many  quintals  weight : each  pole  was
-hollow,  and  being  filled  with  water,  when  the  river,  with
which  it  communicated  at  bottom,  rose,  the  water  issued  from
the  bonnet,  serving  as  a  signal  to  the  natives  of  the  annual
inundation.

We  read  in  Bishop  Pococke’s  account  of  the  East,§  of  a

*  Or  perhaps  to  mark  the  different  heights  to  which  the  water  rose.

+  If indeed  it be  really  a  coin  of Thespiz.
1 In  the  Magazin  Encyclopédique.
§ Vol.  II.  p.  107.


88

pillar  standing  at  Balbec,  in  the  capital  of which  was  a  bason

for  water,  from  which  a  semicircular  channel  descended  along

the  shaft ; and  of  another  pillar,  of  curious  formation,  nearer

to  Lebanon.

Bp.  Pococke  doubted  respecting  the  probable

use  of  these,  whether  they  had  been  designed  for  conduits,  or

for  any  superstitious  ceremonies  of the  heathens.

Applying  these  observations  to  my  immediate  purpose,  I

discover  from  them  the  precise  meaning  of  this  painting,

which  Mr.  Cardon,  sen.  who  furnished  both  the  drawings*

and  plates  for  the  work  of  D’Hancarville,  has  re-engraved.

for  me.

It  exhibits  a  solstitial  fountain.

The  bowl-shaped

capital  and  the  thin  tube  in  the  shaft  of  the  pillar,  must  be

supposed  to  have  connection  with  the  Terminus  near

it.

When  the  water  contained  in  the  pillar  was  increased  by the

commencement  of  solstitial  floods,  seeking  its  level,  it would

discharge  itself  through  the  perforated  breast  of  the  Bacchus.

It  is  here  that  the  illumined  paintings  in  the  back  ground

become  intelligible:  for,  as  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  sun

at  the  solstice,  vegetation  had  slackened,  so  upon  his  passing

it,  vegetation  was  restored  by these  inundations,

The  con-

trasted  figures  of  the  Terminus  and  the  dancing  satyr  imply

this  vicissitude  of  inertness  and  activity ; and  the  cherishing

effect  of  this  phenomenon  upon  nature  is  expressed  by  the

water  issuing  from  the  breast  of Bacchus.

*  These  are  preseryed  in  the  Townley  library,


89

Of the  Window  and  Ladder  —Singular  Customs  of the  Oriental
Buddhists  explained.

Or  a  few  points  yet  remaining  for  discussion,  the  window
and  ladder  may  be  noticed  as  interesting  symbols.  The  former
of  these  will  probably  admit  of  more  than  one  explanation:
in  the  following  instance  it  seems  connected  with  the  idea  of
emanation,  and  the  pervading  power  of  the  Deity.
In  a  bas-
relief  in  the  possession  of  Charles  Townley,  Esq.  certain
figures  at  a  banquet,  reclining  in a state  of  lassitude  and  sa-
tiety,  are  roused  by  the  animating  power,  which  suddenly
pervading  them,  is  bya whimsical  allusion,  represented  in  the
figure  of  a  horse,  looking  through  the  window.
For  the
origin  of  this  strange  conceit  I  am  at  a loss  to  account,
unless  it  have  connection  with  that  omen  referred  to  by the
Persian  monarch,  who  rested  his  claim  to  the  sovereignty  upon
the  neighing  of  his  horse  at  sunrise.*
This  bas-relief  will]
serve
those  representations  of  banquets  upon
vases,  where  figures  in  reclining  attitudes  are  roused  by
various  instruments  of music.

to  illustrate

Passeri  explains  the  square  windows  on  vases  to  be  rece p-
tacles  in  the  walls  for  images  of  the  domestic  Lares,  which

*  It may  be  pleasing  to  contrast  these  forced  conceits  of the  ancients,  with  the  pure

nature  of our  poet  Gray:

No  more  the  call  of incense  breathing  morn,

The  swallow  twittering  from  her  straw-built  shed,

The  cock’s  shrill  clarion  and  the  echoing  horn

No  more  shall  rouse  them  from  their  lowly  bed.

N


90

were  only opened  on  festive  days,  but  were  otherwise  closed
with  bolts,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  engravings  of  his  work.
But  this  opinion  I  must  be  permitted  to  class  with  the  errors
into  which  this  learned  antiquary  was  unavoidably  betrayed,
by placing  the  objects  of  his  researches,  amongst  a  people,
who  neither  invented  the  vessels  nor  the  allegories  he  de-
scribed.  From  the  engravings  of his  valuable  work,  however,
I  flatter  myself  the  meaning  of  these  symbols  may  be  eluci-
dated  ;  for  which  purpose  a  plate *  in  his  first  Volume  may  be
properly adduced,  where  a dove  looks  from  one  of these  square
receptacles,  and  a  genius  flying  downward  reaches  out  the
vivifying  scarf  toa  naked  male  figure.  From  this  painting  we
discover,  what  powers  were  supposed  to  issue  from  these
apertures,  and  what  was  the  object  of their  descent.

If  the  reader  be  not  fatigued  with  this  continued  jargon,
which  is  actually  necessary  for  the  exposition  of  my  subject,
and  which  I have  endeavoured  to  submit  in  as  intelligible  a
manner  as  the  nature  of  it will  allow,  I will  proceed  to  in-
vestigate  the  meaning  of  another  symbol,  which  I hope  will
better  repay  his  attention  than  what  I have  lately  discussed,
I allude  to  the  ladder:  but  here  I am  again  obliged  to  dissent
from  Passeri,  who  for  want  of  a  better  explanation  was  con-
Quis  fortune  ma-
tent  to  consider  it  an  emblem  of  fortune.
nentis  imaginem  apud  Etruscos  inveniri  reputasset  ? et  quidem
But  notwithstanding  the  authority
nacti  sumus,  Vol.  I.  p.7.
of  ΖΕ] απ,  which  is  ingeniously  attached  to  this  declaration  of
discovery,  I venture  to  affirm  that  the  antiquary  was  deceived
‘  Sustulit  tamen  hesitationem  (he  con-
in  his  conjecture.
tinues)  Atlianus  de  Var.  Hist.  11.  29,  hee  scribens,”  Ilir7ax0¢

*  Vol.  I. Plate  LXXXYI.


91

ἐν  Ἡιτυλήνῃ  κατεσχεύασε  τοῖς  ἱεροῖς κλίμακα,  εἰς  οὐδεμίαν  μὲν χρῆσιν  ἐσιτήδειον,

αὐτὸ  δὲ  τοῦτο  ἀνάθημα  εἰναι"  αἰνιττόμενος  τὴν  ἐκ  τῆς  τύχης  ἄνω,  καὶ  κάτω

μετάποσιν.

Tocaov  τινὰ  τῶν

μὲν  εὐτυχούντων  ἀνιόντων,  κατιόντων  δὲ  τῶν

δυστυχούντων.

““  Pittacus  of  Mitylene  introduced  a  ladder  into

the  temples  of his  country,  not  designing  it  for  any  particular

use,  but  simply  as  a  vote  or  offering.

Implying  thereby  the

rise  and  fall  in  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  according  to  which

the  prosperous  might  be  said  to  climb  upwards,  the  unfortunate

to  descend.”  All  this  may  be  very  true  of  Pittacus;  but  as  I
speak  of  allegories  which  were  not  devised  by the  celebrated

Lesbian  sage,  I  must  decline  accepting  this  emblem  in  the

sense  assigned  to  it  by Passeri.

Nor  will  that  country,  to

which  hitherto  I have  usually  betaken  myself  for  the  origin

of  symbols,  and  a  solution  of  such  difficulties  as  impeded  my

way,  avail  me  in  the  present  case ; the  meritorious  historio-

grapher  of  Hindustan  directs  me  to  Chaldea  for  the  genuine

sense  of  this  allegory,  ‘*  to  that  grand  theological  school  in

which  the  metempsychosis  was  first  divulged  ;  in  which  the

sidereal  ladder  and  gates  were  first  erected.”*

Mr.  Maurice

has  left  me  no  doubt  as  to  the  signification  of  the  ladder,  I

therefore  advance  with  confidence,  that  this  symbol  refers

to  the  metempsychosis,  of  which  the  different  stages  are  re-

presented  by its  steps.+  I am  further  inclined  to  suggest,  that
In
the  window  denotes  perfection,  or  the  highest  stage  of  it.

the  Monumenti  inediti  of Winckelmann,  is  inserted  a  grotesque

*  Dissertation  on  the  Oriental  Trinities,  p.  257.

+  D’Hancarville  was  mistaken  when  he  referred  that  gem  of  ancient  rude  sculp-

ture,  Antiq.  Etrusques,  Vol.  II.  p  195,  Plate  XXVIII.  Fig.  19,  to  the  potter  Chorcebus,

and  the  bee,  which,  as  he  supposed,  denoted  him  to  be  of  one  of  those  Athenian
It  represents  the  Dioscurus  with  a  vase  in
tribes  which  occupied  Mount  Hymettus.

each  hand,  ascending  the  ladder  of  the  metempsychosis,  above  the  upper  end  of
which  is the  Psyche,  or  butterfly.


92

illustration  of the  story  of Jupiter  and  Alemene.  She  is seated
at  a  window,  and  Jupiter,  conducted  by Mercury,  ascends  by
a  ladder  to  the  feigned  character,  who  perhaps  (might  I  be
pardoned  for  an  etymological  transgression)  was  originally  no
more  than  Axun-rn,  denoting  the  summit,  or  perfection.

Similar  with  the  preceding  is  a  vase,*  where  a  grotesque
figure,  attended  by an  agent  with  the  torch  and  situla,  and  the
emblematical  chaplet,  ascends  by  a  ladder  to  a  female  at  a
window,  to  whom  he  offers  the  Hesperian  fruit  and  the  mystic

girdle.  That  the  ladder  is  emblematical  of life,  we  are  assured
by its  being  occasionally  impregnated  by the  mysterious  dots,+
and  as  the  steps  denote  the  metempsychosis,  it is  fair  to  con-
clude  that  the  window  is  the  highest  stage.

But  what,  if  extending  our  view  beyond  the  limits  of
Chaldza,  we  enter  the  courts  of  the  Birman  and  other  Buddhis-
tical  kings,  and  witness  ceremonies  in  every  respect  similar
with  the  allegories  depicted  on  Etruscan  vases?  We  shall
scarcely  fear  to  incur  the  charge  of  rashness,  or  wanton  mis-
application  of  authorities,  if  we  presume  to  reduce  them  to
such  principles,  as  those  which  the  Chaldzan  theologicians
professed,  who  imparted  their  mystic  emblems  to  figypt  and
to  Greece.
Whoever  has  perused  the  account  of  La  Loubére
of  the  kingdom  of  Siam,  and  the  more  recent  narrative  of  our
accomplished  countryman  respecting  the  court  of Ava,  he  will

remember  that  the  kings  of  those  countries  appear  at  court
only  from  a  window  ;{  and  that  the  hall  of  audience  below,

*  Passeri,  Vol.  III.  Plate  CCVI.
+  Passeri,  Vol.  I.  Plate  XLVII.
+ Dr.  Kempfer  was  thus  received  by the  governors  of  Osacca,  and  Miaco  the  re-
sidence  of  the  ecclesiastical  Emperor  of  Japan,  appearing  to  him  from  an  adjoining
apartment,  after  the shutters  of lattice-windows  had  been  flung  open,  p. 479,  and  p. 483.


93

(for  this  opening  is  many  feet  from  the  ground)  is decorated
with  umbrellas.*  The  eminence  of the  prince  above  his  peo-
ple  is  hereby  implied,  he  thus  appearing  perfect,  or  in  the
highest  stage  of the  metempsychosis,  whilst  his courtiers  below
are  shaded  by the  umbrellas,  as  if  in  wferis,  unpurified,  or  to
suit  my  expression  to  the  vase  of Winckelmann,  at  the  bottom
of the  ladder.

The  palace  of the  king  of Siam  is covered  with  seven  roofs  :+
the  king  resides  under  the  seventh,  nor  dares  any  mortal  climb
or  walk  above  his  head.t  What  are  these  roofs  but  the  ladder
of the  metempsychosis,  with  its  seven  steps,  illustrated  by Mr.
Maurice,§  of which  the  king  of  Siam  flatters  himself  he  has
ascended  to  the  highest  round ? whilst,  to  shew  the  grovelling
impurity,  the  gross  and  abject  state  of  his  courtiers,  they  are
compelled  to  enter  beneath  the  lowest  roof,  creeping  upon  all-
fours.||
residing  on  the  highest  floor  of his  palace  or  dwelling,  and  the
English  ambassador  and  his  suite  were  obliged  to  mount  by
ladders  through  differen t floors  toarrive  in  his  presence.—
Other  singularities  which  occur  in  the  narrative  of  Capt.
Turner  may  be  referred  to  the  influence  of  the  same  religious
opinion,—such  as:  the  houses  at  Buxadewar  erected  on  props,

In  the  same  spirit  the  Rajah  of  Bootan  is  described {

*  See  the  Plate  in  the  work  of La  Loubére,  Vol.  I.  p- 418.
+  A  view  of this  is  given  by La  Loubére  in  a  Plate  to  Vol.  I.  p-  118.
+ Thus,  in  the  embassy  of Col.  Symes  to  Ava,  may  be  noticed  the  offence  given  to
boatmen,  upon  certain  of  our  countrymen  walking  over  their  heads  on  the  deck
beneath  which  they slept,  Ρ. 451.
§ “Enflacréps  σύρων  κατὰ  βαϑμίϑος.

The
course  of  lustration  by the  metempsychosis  was  supposed  to  be  through  the  seven
planets.

Dissertation  on  the  Oriental  Trinities,  p-  271.

||  La  Loubére  de  Siam,  Vol,  I.  ps  UL7:

Ἵ  Turner's  Embassy  to  Thibet,  p. 66.


94

although  in  a  hilly country,  above  the  danger  of  reptiles  or
torrents,  p. 28;  Capt.  Turner  being  conducted  to  the  upper
floor,  upon  his  visit  to  a  recluse,  p.  103;  and  particularly  in
p-91,  in  the  citadel  of Tassisudon,  the  seventh  ladder  leading
to  the  temple  of Mahamoonie.

I wish  the  coincidences  I have  brought  into  one  point  of
view,  might  prove  at  least  acceptable,  if  not  of  use,  to  those
who  have  the  opportunity  of mixing  with  the  different  Asiatic
nations,  whose  customs  afford  such  various  subject  for  admira-
I offer  them,  at  all  events,  as  the
tion  and  curious  enquiry.
profession  of  my  thanks,  for  the  infinite  pleasure  I have  re-
ceived  from  those,  who  to  the  benefit  of  their  country,  have
already  accomplished  such  visits,  and  who  have  communicated
them  with  so  much  elegance  to  the  improvement  of  their

countrymen  .


95

CONCLUSION.

Extinction  of heathen  Rites  in  Greece  and  Italy —Eleusinian
Mysteries  inadequate  to  the  end  proposed  in  them.

Tess  are  the  chief  observations  I have  made,  after  examin-
ing  the  paintings  upon  many  vases,  and  comparing  them  with
such  allegories  as  I have  found  upon  other  works  of  ancient
Excepting  that  examples  have  been  retrenched,  more
art.
there  scarcely  remained  for  me  to  say,  for  much  respecting
Etruscan  vases  is  yet  unintelligible ; but  to  have  exposed  more
of  what  I  have  discovered  than  has  been  submitted,  would
have  only  been  to  stir  a  filthy  pool.  The  grossness  of  pagan-
ism  we  may  be  pardoned  for  omitting  ;  the  attaching  ourselves
to  whatever,  connected  with  it,  may  prove  of  service  to  uni-
versal  history,  is  surely  laudable  and  infinitely  more  pleas-
ing.  Many  arcana  of  the  pagan  theology  may  never  be  as-
certained ; nevertheless,  we  have  been  permitted  to  recover
as  much  from  lost  antiquity  as  may  forward  the  useful,  and
even  the  polite  and  elegant  arts ; and  provided  the  architect,
who  is obliged  to  borrow  from  Grecian  mysteries  the  embel-

lishments  of his  work,  place  not  the  lotus  leaf  above,  and  the

pine-cone,  or  flame,  beneath  it,  he  may  be  excused  from  blame

should  he  err  in the  application  of more  sophisticated  symbols.

It  seems  as  though  a  veil  had  been  kindly  drawn  by pro-

vidence  for  ages  past  over  the  disgusting  errors  of  paganism,

which  having  answered  its  purpose,  may  now  perhaps  be  in-

nocently  removed,  provided  it  be  done  with  no  irreverent


96

hand.  The  most  polished  states  of Greece  have  been,  perhaps,
designedly  possessed  by  an  ignorant  people,  whose  ferocity
has  rendered  many  parts  inaccessible  to  the  curious  traveller,
or  whose  jealousy  has  prevented  his  search.
Not  to  mention
the  complete  destruction  of  Roman  grandeur  by the  northern
nations,  volcanos  kindled  by  a  Wise  Hand  have  produced  a
moral,  as  well  as  a  physical  change  in  many  parts  of  Italy,
and  burying  whole  tracts  of  country  in  oblivion  with  their
monuments  and  rites,  may  perhaps  have  in  some  measure  con-
tributed  to  furnish  smooth  footway  for  Christianity  to  advance
upon.

But,  as  no  impropriety  can  now  attend  discussions  of  the
present  nature,  if we  consider  the  result  of  our  discoveries,
and  the  object  to  which  the  enigmatical  allusions  of  this  mys-
terious  theology  seem  to  have  been  ultimately  directed,  it will
appear,  that  a  knowledge  of  the  relative  situation  of man,  with
regard  to  the  Deity,  was  attempted  through  an  exposition  of

the  ceconomy  of  the  universe,  that  renovation  from  water  first

brought  to  knowledge  by  ancient  tradition,  and  afterwards

traced  through  various  phenomena,  was  considered  as  a  pledge

of re-existence  and  a  future  state  ;  but  the  continual  succession
of decay  and  renoyation  observable  in  nature  was  blended  with
these  speculations.—How  often  these  revolutions  were  to  be
repeated,  at  what  time  they  were  to  cease,  were  a  point  not

easily  to  be  determined.

That  they  were  supposed  to  be  con-

tinued  after  the  nature  of  the  Indian  metempsychosis  we  are

instructed  by a  Roman  poet,  if  a  poet  may  be  admitted  as  au-

thority  in  such  a  case;  and  the  discovery  of  the  ladder  upon
Etruscan  vases  might  lead  us  to  compare  the  number  of  inter-
mediate  states  of  purification  and  trial,  with  the  different  stages


97

But  further,  what  shall  we  conclude
in  the  Indian  system.
respecting  the  eventual  state  ?—If  we  pay  attention  to  Plu-
tarch,  who  exposes  the  secret  object  of the  Isiac  mysteries  from
which  those  of Eleusis  appear  to  have  been  derived,  we  shall
learn,  that  the  highest  stage  in  the  scale  of  nature  was  as  the
garment  of  Osiris—¢oroeijs—*  shining  as  the  light,’’—that
‘‘  the  perception  of that  which  was  intelligent,  pure,  and  holy,
flashed  like  lightning  on  the  soul,  which  was  grasped  at  and
viewed  but  for  a  moment,  and  then  it  passed  away.’  —When
philosophy  was  employed  upon  such  speculations  it  was  termed
epoplic,  as  some  might  infer,  because  it  was  then  versed  on
such  doctrines  as  were  explained  epoptically,  or  by shews,  at
Eleusis.  And  this  was  to  be  effected  by the  exercise  and  im-
provement  of  the  mind,  by abstracting  it  from  all  considera-
Plutarch  further  explains,  that  the  Deity  was
tions  of  sense.
removed  far  from  earth,  not  liable  to  corruption  or  decay  :
that  the  eventual  state  was  a  participation  of  the  Divine
Nature,  termed  by him  μετουσίχ  τοῦ  Θεοῦ,  of which  the  soul,  whilst
encompassed  about  with  body and  passions,  had  only an  obscure
glimmering,  but  when  freed  from  these  impediments,  and  re-
moved  into  the  purer  regions,  it  was  then  that  God  was
to  become  its  leader  and  king;  upon  Him  would  it  then
wholly  depend,  still  beholding  without  satiety,  and  still  long-
ing  after  that  beauty,  which  it  was  not  possible  for  man  to
express.

These  indeed  are  noble  sentiments,  but  whether  the doctrine
of the  Hierophants  reached  so  far,  there  may be  some  reason  to
It must  at  least  be  confessed,  that  buffoonery  the  most
doubt.
stupid  and  absurd,*  frivolous  conceits,  and  gross  indecency,
*  See  the  collections  of Passeri,  D’Hancarville,  and  Tischbein  passim.
oO


98

curiously  sophisticated,  were  very  inadequate  to  so  sublime  an
end.  To  this  it  might  likewise  be  added,  if  such  were  the
doctrines  of  Eleusis,  by what  high  degree  of  novelty  and
merit  were  the  schools  of Greek  philosophy  recommended  ?—
and  wherefore  did  the  government  forbear  to  punish  the  pro-
fessors  in  them,  who  lectured  upon  subjects  which  we  are
given  to  understand  were  only  to  be  learnt  within  the  college
of Eleusis  ?

These  questions  can  only be  imperfectly  answered.—War-
burton  conceived  that  the  doctrine  of  Eleusis  differed  from  the
doctrine  of  the  schools:  Villoison  has  contended  they  were
the  same;  but  in  explaining  the  former,  he  has  done  no  more
than  adduce  the  opinions  of  the  Stoics,  (and  the  modern  Spi-
nosa,)  which  exclude  a  belief  in  future  rewards  and  punish-
ments,*  and  according  to  which  the  metempsychosis  must  also
be  rejected.—Plutarch,  cited  above,  has  evidently  Platonised  :
he  has,  perhaps,  exceeded  the  mark + by as  much  as  Villoison
may  be  supposed  to  have  fallen  short  of it.  Without  insisting
upon  the  reports  of  Plato,  Pausanias  and  Clement,  that  the
mysteries  were  instituted  by way  of  purification,  and  passing
by those  frequent  allusions  to  purification  which  are  evident
upon  the  Greek  vases,  it  were  better  to  enquire,—what  did
the  mysteries  decree  with  regard  to  those  who  omitted  to  avail
themselves  of the  benefit  of  initiation  >and  wherein  did  any
preference  consist  ?—A  fragment  of  Cicero,t  respecting  the

*  The  doctrine  of eternal  punishments  was  asserted  by the

Mystagogues,  if we  may
See  Warburton,  Vol.  I.  p-  139.  But  it  may  even  be  doubted,

give  credit  to  Celsus.
whether  this  writer  were  sincere.

+  I object  to  Mr.  Taylor's  attempt  to  explain  the  mysteries  solely  by the  P

latonic

philosophy,  for  the  same  reason.

t “Ut  interdum  veteres  illi,  sive  yates,  (Orpheus)  sive  in  sacris  initiisque  tradendis


99

metempsychosis  must  be  allowed  to  have  considerable  weight :

it  seems  to  imply,  that  the  uninitiated  entered  into  another

state  of  existence  after  the  present,  by way  of obtaining  that

lustration  which  the  mysteries  would  have  at  once  secured  to

them.—There  is  every  reason  to  believe,  that  the  paintings

upon  Greek  vases  are  the  only  volumes  in  which  Eleusinian

doctrines  respecting  a  future  state  are  correctly  detailed.  Much

may  be  brought  to  light  by their  means.

It  remains  that  we

consider,  whether  our  time  will  be  worthily  bestowed  in  pro-

secuting  the  enquiry.

divine  mentis  interpretes,  qui  nos  ob  aliqua  scelera  suscepta  in  vita  superiore,  pece-
narum  luendarum  causa  natos  esse  dixerunt,  aliquid  vidisse  videantur:’’—given  by

the  Baron  de  Ste.  Croix,  p.  348.

Printed  by  W. Bulmer  and Co.
Cleveland-row,  St.  James's,


S
e
n
a

e
e


ἔ Ε

i

EN  τυ  παν

ΔΑ

ἃ ἔν"

A
P
N
E
A

s
a
i

ἵ

t
e
s

D
d

:

B
a
i
t
,

efela

2)
id!

3.

Ἐ
Σ
Ο
Ὺ

Gu

gts
ry,
yin
east
